Albuquerque, New Mexico
Code of Ordinances
Contains 2025 S-95, current through
Ordinance 2025-032, passed 11-5-2025
 
Published by:
American Legal Publishing
525 Vine Street * Suite 310 * Cincinnati, Ohio 45202
1-800-445-5588 * www.amlegal.com
[City_of_Albuquerque,_NM_Home_Page]
ORDINANCE 27-1994
   ADOPTING AN UPDATED CODIFICATION OF CERTAIN GENERAL ORDINANCES PASSED PRIOR
TO JANUARY 1, 1994, AND ESTABLISHING A PLACE WHERE THE CODIFICATION AND ANY
REVISIONS THERETO MAY BE INSPECTED; DECLARING AN EMERGENCY.
   BE IT ORDAINED BY THE COUNCIL, THE GOVERNING BODY OF THE CITY OF
ALBUQUERQUE:
   Section 1. ADOPTION. The General Ordinances of the City of Albuquerque as
codified and compiled in book form are hereby adopted and shall be designated
as the Revised Ordinances of Albuquerque, New Mexico, 1994.
   Section 2. PUBLICATION AND LOCATION OF CODIFICATION. It shall not be
necessary to publish the entire Codification or any revisions thereto, but a
copy of same shall be available for inspection during normal and regular
business hours at the office of the Albuquerque City Clerk currently located at
One Civic Plaza, Albuquerque, New Mexico.
   Section 3. AMENDMENTS. Any addition or amendment to the Revised Ordinances
of Albuquerque, New Mexico, 1994, when passed in such form as to indicate the
intention of the City Council to make the same a part thereof, shall be deemed
to be incorporated in this compilation so that reference to the Revised
Ordinances of Albuquerque, New Mexico in 1994 shall be understood as including
them.
   PASSED AND ADOPTED THIS 1st DAY OF AUGUST, 1994.
   Alan B. Armijo /s/
   President, City Council
   APPROVED THIS 9th DAY OF AUGUST, 1994.
   Martin J. Chavez /s/
   Mayor, City of Albuquerque
ATTEST:
Millie Santillanes /s/
City Clerk
CHAPTER 1: GENERAL PROVISIONS
   Article
      
1:   GENERAL PROVISIONS
      
2:   CITY STANDARDS
ARTICLE 1: GENERAL PROVISIONS
Section
   
1-1-1   Title of code
   
1-1-2   Interpretation
   
1-1-3   Application to future ordinances
   
1-1-4   Captions
   
1-1-5   Definitions
   
1-1-6   Rules of interpretation
   
1-1-7   Severability
   
1-1-8   Reference to other sections
   
1-1-9   Reference to offices
   
1-1-10   Errors and omissions
   
1-1-11   Official time
   
1-1-12   Reasonable time, computation of time, and transmittal procedures
   
1-1-13   Ordinances repealed
   
1-1-14   Ordinances unaffected
   
1-1-15   Effective date of ordinances and resolutions
   
1-1-16   Repeal or modification of ordinance
   
1-1-17   Ordinances which amend or supplement code
   
1-1-18   Section histories; statutory references
   
1-1-19   Hearing and appeal process
   
1-1-98   Issuing citations
   
1-1-99   General penalty
§ 1-1-1 TITLE OF CODE.
   This 1994 codification of ordinances by and for the City of Albuquerque
shall be designated as the Revised Ordinances of Albuquerque, New Mexico, 1994,
and may be cited as ROA 1994.
§ 1-1-2 INTERPRETATION.
   Unless otherwise provided herein, or by law or implication required, the
same rules of construction, definition, and application shall govern the
interpretation of this code as those governing the interpretation of state law.
§ 1-1-3 APPLICATION TO FUTURE ORDINANCES.
   All provisions of
Chapter 1 compatible with future legislation, shall apply to ordinances
hereafter adopted amending or supplementing this code unless otherwise
specifically provided.
§ 1-1-4 CAPTIONS.
   Headings and captions used in this code other than the chapter, article and
section number are employed for reference purposes only and shall not be deemed
a part of the text of any section.
§ 1-1-5 DEFINITIONS.
   (A)   General rule. Words and phrases shall be taken in their plain, or
ordinary and usual sense. However, technical words and phrases having a
peculiar and appropriate meaning in law shall be understood according to their
technical import.
   (B)   For the purpose of this code, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ARTICLE. A division of a chapter designated in this code by a number and
heading in the chapter analysis, setting apart a group of sections related by
the subject matter of the heading.
   CITY, MUNICIPAL CORPORATION, or MUNICIPALITY. The City of Albuquerque, New
Mexico.
   CITY COUNCIL or COUNCIL. The legislative body of the city.
   CITY COUNCILLOR or COUNCILLOR. A member of the City Council of the city.
   CODE, CODE OF ORDINANCES or ROA 1994.   The City of Albuquerque Revised
Ordinances of 1994 as modified by amendment, revision, and adoption of new
chapters, articles or sections.
   COUNTY. Bernalillo County, New Mexico.
   MAY. The act referred to is permissive.
   MAYOR. The elected officer of the city who exercises administrative control
and supervision over the city and hires or appoints directors of all city
departments. Where applicable, the term MAYOR means those persons whose
authority has been granted by the Mayor. See Chart. Art. V. for a fuller
description of the Mayor's position and duties.
   MONTH. A calendar month.
   OATH. An affirmation in all cases in which, by law, an affirmation may be
substituted for an oath, and in such cases the words SWEAR and SWORN shall be
equivalent to the words AFFIRM and AFFIRMED.
   OFFICER, OFFICE, EMPLOYEE, COMMISSION, or DEPARTMENT. An officer, office,
employee, commission, or department of the city unless the context clearly
requires otherwise.
   PART. A division of an article designated in this code by a number and
heading in the chapter analysis and a number and a capitalized heading in the
body of the article, setting apart a group of sections related by the subject
matter of the heading.
   PERSON. Extends to and includes person, persons, firm, corporation,
copartnership, trustee, lessee, or receiver. Whenever used in any clause
prescribing and imposing a penalty, the terms PERSON or WHOEVER as applied to
any unincorporated entity shall mean the partners or members thereof, and as
applied to corporations, the officers or agents thereof.
   PRECEDING or FOLLOWING. Next before or next after, respectively.
   REVISED ORDINANCES OF 1994 or ROA 1994. See CODE.
   SHALL. The act referred to is mandatory.
   SIGNATURE or SUBSCRIPTION. Includes a mark when the person cannot write.
   STATE. The State of New Mexico.
   WRITTEN. Any representation of words, letters, or figures, whether by
printing or otherwise.
   YEAR. A calendar year, unless otherwise expressed; equivalent to the words
YEAR OF OUR LORD.
§ 1-1-6 RULES OF INTERPRETATION.
   The construction of all ordinances of the city shall be by the following
rules, unless such construction is plainly repugnant to the intent of the City
Council or of the context of the same ordinance:
   (A)   AND or OR. Either conjunction shall include the other as if written
"and/or," if the sense requires it.
   (B)   Acts by assistants. When a statute or ordinance requires an act to be
done which, by law, an agent or deputy as well may do as the principal, such
requirement shall be satisfied by the performance of such act by an authorized
agent or deputy.
   (C)   Gender; singular and plural; tenses. Words denoting the masculine
gender shall be deemed to include the feminine and neuter genders; words in the
singular shall include the plural, and words in the plural shall include the
singular; the use of a verb in the present tense shall include the future, if
applicable.
   (D)   General term. A general term following specific enumeration of terms
is not to be limited to the class enumerated unless expressly so limited.
§ 1-1-7 SEVERABILITY.
   The provisions of this code of ordinances are severable, and if any
provision, article, section, division, clause, sentence, or part thereof is
held to be illegal, invalid, unconstitutional, or inapplicable, to any person,
persons, circumstances, situation, or otherwise, the illegality, invalidity,
unconstitutionality or inapplicability shall not affect or impair any of the
remaining sentences, clauses, divisions, sections, articles, or parts of this
code of ordinances, or their applicability to other persons, circumstances or
situations.
§ 1-1-8 REFERENCE TO OTHER SECTIONS.
   Whenever in one section reference is made to another section hereof, such
reference shall extend and apply to the section referred to as subsequently
amended, revised, recodified, or renumbered unless the subject matter is
changed or materially altered by the amendment or revision.
§ 1-1-9 REFERENCE TO OFFICES.
   Reference to a public office or officer shall be deemed to apply to any
office, officer, or employee of the city exercising the powers, duties, or
functions contemplated in the provision, irrespective of any transfer of
functions or change in the official title of the functionary.
§ 1-1-10 ERRORS AND OMISSIONS.
   If a manifest error is discovered, consisting of the misspelling of any
words; the omission of any word or words necessary to express the intention of
the provisions affected; the use of a word or words to which no meaning can be
attached; or the use of a word or words when another word or words was clearly
intended to express such intent, such spelling shall be corrected and such word
or words supplied, omitted, or substituted as will conform with the manifest
intention, and the provisions shall have the same effect as though the correct
words were contained in the text as originally published. No alteration shall
be made or permitted if any question exists regarding the nature or extent of
such error.
§ 1-1-11 OFFICIAL TIME.
   The official time, as established by applicable state/federal laws, shall be
the official time within the city for the transaction of all city business.
§ 1-1-12 REASONABLE TIME, COMPUTATION OF TIME, AND TRANSMITTAL PROCEDURES.
   (A)   Reasonable Time. In all cases where an ordinance requires an act to be
done in a reasonable time or requires reasonable notice to be given, reasonable
time or notice shall be deemed to mean the time which is necessary for a prompt
performance of such act or the giving of such notice.
   (B)   Computation of Time. The time within which an act is to be done, as
herein provided, shall be computed by excluding the first day and including the
last. If the last day be a Saturday, Sunday, or City holiday, it shall be
excluded, and the period shall end on the next day that is not a Saturday,
Sunday, or City holiday. For the purpose of computing time, a day begins
immediately after 5:00 PM and ends at the next 5:00 PM.
   (C)   Transmittal Procedures. In all instances where an item, such as
legislation for introduction, a veto message, or other item that has a deadline
for submission to the City Council, is to be transmitted by the City
Administration to the City Council, the following procedures shall apply. For
the purpose of computing the deadline to transmit an item to the City Council,
unless otherwise stated, days shall be computed using calendar days.
      (1)   The City Administration shall deliver both a printed hard copy and
an electronic copy of the item to the Council Services Office. The printed hard
copy shall include a transmittal memo that lists all item(s) being submitted.
Council Services shall review the transmittal memo, sign and date to document
receipt of the item(s), and provide the City Administration with a copy of the
completed transmittal memo.
      (2)   Any items transmitted after the close of business (5:00 PM) on the
date on which they are due to the City Council shall be deemed untimely, unless
an after-hours transmittal is approved in writing by the City Council
President. Upon such written approval, the City Administration shall
immediately provide an electronic copy of the item via email to the City
Council President, Director of Council Services, and Clerk of the Council. Any
after-hours transmittals shall follow the procedures outlined in subsection (1)
above, except that the printed hard copy shall be delivered to the City Council
Services Office on the following business day.
(Am. Ord._2024-005)
§ 1-1-13 ORDINANCES REPEALED.
   This code, from and after its effective date, shall contain all of the
provisions of a general nature pertaining to the subjects herein enumerated and
embraced. All prior ordinances pertaining to the subjects treated by this code
shall be deemed repealed from and after the effective date of this code.
§ 1-1-14 ORDINANCES UNAFFECTED.
   All ordinances of a temporary or special nature and all other ordinances
pertaining to subjects not embraced in this code shall remain in full force and
effect unless herein repealed expressly or by necessary implication.
§ 1-1-15 EFFECTIVE DATE OF ORDINANCES AND RESOLUTIONS.
   An ordinance shall not become effective until five days after it has been
published, unless passed and approved as an emergency measure, in which event
it shall become effective immediately following publication or at a subsequent
date determined by Council. A resolution shall become effective immediately
upon the earliest of the following actions:
   (1)   The Mayor signs the resolution;
   (2)   After ten days, if the Mayor does not veto the resolution; or
   (3)   If the resolution is vetoed by the Mayor, at the conclusion of the
City Council meeting at which the veto is overridden.
(Chart. Art. XI, § 6(b)) (Am. Ord._2024-005)
§ 1-1-16 REPEAL OR MODIFICATION OF ORDINANCE.
   (A)   Whenever any ordinance or part of an ordinance shall be repealed or
modified by a subsequent ordinance, the ordinance or part of an ordinance thus
repealed or modified shall continue in force until the due publication of the
ordinance repealing or modifying it when publication is required to give effect
thereto, unless otherwise expressly provided.
   (B)   No suit, proceedings, right, fine, forfeiture, or penalty instituted,
created, given, secured, or accrued under any ordinance previous to its repeal
shall in any way be affected, released, or discharged, but may be prosecuted,
enjoyed, and recovered as fully as if the ordinance had continued in force
unless it is otherwise expressly provided.
   (C)   When any ordinance repealing a former ordinance, clause, or provision
shall be itself repealed, the repeal shall not be construed to revive the
former ordinance, clause, or provision, unless it is expressly provided.
§ 1-1-17 ORDINANCES WHICH AMEND OR SUPPLEMENT CODE.
   (A)   If the City Council shall desire to amend any existing chapter,
article or section of this code, the chapter, article or section shall be
specifically repealed and a new chapter, article or section, containing the
desired amendment, substituted in its place.
   (B)   Any ordinance which is proposed to add to the existing code a new
chapter, article or section shall indicate, with reference to the arrangement
of this code, the proper number of such chapter, article or section. In
addition to such indication thereof as may appear in the text of the proposed
ordinance, a caption or title shall be shown in concise form above the
ordinance.
Cross-reference:
   
For additional provisions affecting city ordinances, see Chart. Art. XI
§ 1-1-18 SECTION HISTORIES; STATUTORY REFERENCES.
   (A)   As histories for the code sections, the specific number of the
original ordinance, and the most recent three amending ordinances, if any, are
listed following the text of the code section. Example: (Ord. 40-1975; Am. Ord.
22-1990; Am. Ord. 69-1992; Am. Ord. 3-1993)
   (B)   (1)   If a statutory cite is included in the history, this indicates
that the text of the section reads substantially the same as the statute.
Example: (Section 3-8-9, NMSA 1978) (Ord. 40-1975; Am. Ord. 22-1990)
      (2)   If a statutory cite is set forth as a "statutory reference"
following the text of the section, this indicates that the reader should refer
to that statute for further information. Example:
   § 2-4-3 MUNICIPAL ELECTION CODE.
   The Municipal Election Code, Chapter 3, Articles 8 and 9, NMSA 1978, as
amended and as supplemented from time to time, shall govern the conduct of all
aspects of all municipal elections, except when the Municipal Election Code is
silent on a matter, then the State Election Code, Chapter 1, NMSA 1978, shall
govern, as appropriate; however, if any provision of either the Municipal
Election Code or the State Election Code is inconsistent with the terms of the
City Charter, the Charter shall control, or inconsistent with the terms of this
chapter, this chapter shall take precedence over the Municipal Election Code
and State Election Code and shall control.
(Ord. 18-1993)
   Statutory reference:
For the terms of the Municipal Election Code, see Sections 3-8-1 et seq. and 3-
9-1 et seq. NMSA 1978
For the terms of the State Election Code, see Ch. 1, NMSA 1978
§ 1-1-19 HEARING AND APPEAL PROCESS.
   All hearings and appeals shall be held in accordance with the provisions of
the IHO Ordinance, ROA 1994, Chapter 2, Article 8, Part 1, unless expressly
noted otherwise.
(Ord._2023-015)
§ 1-1-98 ISSUING CITATIONS.
   (A)   Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.
   BREACH OF THE PEACE. Any violation of any city ordinance which wholly or in
part proscribes conduct prohibited by Sections 30-21-1 et seq. NMSA 1978.
   MAYOR. The Mayor or his agent when used in this section.
   ORDINANCE. Any ordinance which has been legally passed, adopted, approved,
and published under the authority granted to the City Council by the Charter or
by state law.
   ORDINANCE VIOLATION CITATION. The form of citation specified and approved by
the Mayor.
   PERSON. Any person, individual, firm, partnership, corporation, company,
society, association, and every officer, agent, or employee thereof.
   POLICE OFFICER. Every officer of the Albuquerque Police Department, or other
person authorized by the Chief of Police or Mayor to make arrests and to issue
citations for violations of city ordinances.
   (B)   Procedures for Issuance of Ordinance Violation and Citation.
      (1)   Procedure for Police Officers.
         (a)   Whenever a person is arrested by a Police Officer for violating
any ordinance of the city not amounting to a breach of the peace, punishable by
fine and/or imprisonment, the arresting Police Officer may prepare in
triplicate using the Ordinance Violation Citation form provided by the city,
written notice to appear in Court, containing the name, address, and telephone
number of the person violating such city ordinance, the driver's license number
of such violator, if any, the offense or ordinance allegedly violated, and the
date and place when and where such person shall have allegedly committed the
acts complained of or violated the city ordinance and the time and place when
and where such person shall appear in Court.
         (b)   The arrested person in order to secure release, as provided for
in this ordinance, must give his written promise to so appear in Court by
signing at least one copy of the Ordinance Violation Citation prepared by the
arresting Police Officer. The officer shall deliver a copy of the Ordinance
Violation Citation to the person promising to appear. Thereupon, said officer
shall forthwith release the person arrested from his custody.
         (c)   Should the alleged violator refuse to give his written promise
to appear, the arresting Police Officer shall forthwith take the alleged
violator to the City Jail and cause him to be booked in the normal manner.
      (2)   Procedure for Mayor or His Agents.
         (a)   Whenever the Mayor or his designated agent has probable cause to
believe that a person has violated any ordinance of the city punishable by fine
and/or imprisonment, the Mayor or his designated agent may prepare in
triplicate using the Ordinance Violation Citation form provided by the city,
written notice to appear in Court, containing the name, address, and telephone
number of the person violating such city ordinance, the driver's license number
of such violator, if any, the offense or ordinance allegedly violated, and the
date and place when and where such person shall have allegedly committed the
acts complained of or violated the city ordinance and the time and place when
and where such person shall appear in Court. The Mayor or his designated agent
shall present the same to the person he has probable cause to believe violated
the ordinance as alleged in the Ordinance Violation Citation to secure the
alleged violator's written promise to appear in Court by having the alleged
violator sign at least one copy of the Ordinance Violation Citation. The Mayor
or his designated agent shall deliver a copy of the Ordinance Violation
Citation to the person promising to appear.
         (b)   Should the alleged violator refuse to give his written promise
to appear, the Mayor or his designated agent shall cause to be prepared a
written complaint against the alleged violator and present the same to a
Municipal Judge of the city requesting the Municipal Judge to cause an arrest
to be issued for the alleged violator.
   (C)   Failure to Obey Citation.  
      (1)   It shall be unlawful for any person to violate his written promise
to appear given to a Police Officer, the Mayor or his designated agent upon the
issuance of the Ordinance Violation Citation form regardless of the disposition
of the charge for which the citation was originally issued.
      (2)   A written promise to appear in Court may be complied with by an
appearance by counsel.
   (D)   Procedure Prescribed Herein Not Exclusive. The foregoing provisions of
this section shall govern all Police Officers in making arrests without a
warrant for violation of ordinances of the city, but the procedure prescribed
herein shall not otherwise be exclusive of any other method prescribed by law
for the arrest and prosecution of a person for an offense of any existing city
ordinance or violation of state code.
   (E)   Penalty. This section is a penal ordinance subject to the general
penalty provisions of this code set forth in §
1-1-99.
('74 Code, §§ 12-4-1 - 12-4-5) (Ord. 98-1970)
§ 1-1-99 GENERAL PENALTY.
   Any person who violates any provision of this code for which another penalty
is not specifically provided shall, upon conviction, be subject to a fine not
exceeding $500 or by imprisonment not exceeding 90 days or both unless a
different specific penalty is provided. Each separate violation shall
constitute a separate offense and, upon conviction, each day of violation shall
constitute a separate offense.
Statutory reference:
   Penalty for misdemeanor, see Section 3-17-1, NMSA 1978
ARTICLE 2: CITY STANDARDS
Section
   
1-2-1   City seal
§ 1-2-1 CITY SEAL.
   A new seal, which shall contain the word "seal" approximately in the center,
and the words "Albuquerque" and "New Mexico" approximately along the outer
edges, and the words "Founded 1706," such seal to be an adaptation of a drawing
submitted as the result of a public seal design contest, is adopted as the
official seal for the city.
[View the City Seal]
('74 Code, § 1-1-1) (Ord. 2046)
CHAPTER 2: GOVERNMENT
   Article
      
1:   MEETINGS OF THE COUNCIL
      
2:   INTERGOVERNMENTAL AND LEGISLATIVE RELATIONS
      
3:   LOBBYIST REGISTRATION
      
4:   MUNICIPAL ELECTIONS; PETITIONS
      
5:   PUBLIC INTEREST ORGANIZATIONS
      
6:   PUBLIC BOARDS, COMMISSIONS AND COMMITTEES
      
7:   CITY DEPARTMENTS AND OFFICIALS
      
8:   LEGAL SERVICES; LITIGATION
      
9:   CIVIL EMERGENCIES
      
10:   ACCOUNTABILITY IN GOVERNMENT
      
11:   CITY BUDGET
      
12:   CAPITAL IMPROVEMENTS
      
13:   COMPETITIVE ELECTRIC POWER
      
14:   
ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT
      
15:   
RULES AND REGULATIONS - SCOPE, NOTICE, HEARING, ACCESS AND REPEAL
      
16:   
INTRAGOVERNMENTAL CONFERENCE COMMITTEE
      
17:   
INSPECTOR GENERAL
      
18:   
FACILITIES MANAGEMENT AND MAINTENANCE
      
19:   
COMMUNITY ENERGY EFFICIENCY DEVELOPMENT (CEED) BLOCK GRANT
ARTICLE 1: MEETINGS OF THE COUNCIL
Section
   
2-1-1   Meetings
   
2-1-2   Special meetings
   
2-1-3   Emergency meetings
   
2-1-4   Notice of public meetings
   
2-1-5   Quorum
   
2-1-6   Rescinded action
   
2-1-7   Addressing meetings
   
2-1-8   Records
   
2-1-9   Presiding officer
   
2-1-10   Mayor
   
2-1-11   Disturbing meetings
   
2-1-12   Oath of office
   
2-1-13   Council judge of election and members
§ 2-1-1 MEETINGS.
   The regular meetings of the Council shall be held on the first and third
Monday of each month and as more specifically prescribed by the City Council
Rules of Procedure.
('74 Code, § 1-7-1) (Ord. 40- 1974; Am. Ord. 6-1990; Am. Ord. 47-2002; Am. Ord.
62-2004; Am. Ord. 14-2005; Am. Ord. 10-2006; Am. Ord._2022-003)
§ 2-1-2 SPECIAL MEETINGS.
   Special meetings of the Council may be called by the President or by three
Councillors; provided that a written notice of such meeting shall be given to
each member of the Council at least 48 hours before the time set for the
meetings, except as otherwise provided by this ordinance.
('74 Code, § 1-7-2) (Ord. 40-1974)
§ 2-1-3 EMERGENCY MEETINGS.
   (A)   Notwithstanding any provision contained herein, the president of the
City Council may, in the event of an emergency, call with whatever notice is
possible under the circumstances, a meeting of the City Council to consider any
matter.
   (B)   For the purposes of this section, EMERGENCY is defined to include an
unexpected occurrence or condition, or the state resulting therefrom, which may
require immediate consideration or action by the City Council.
('74 Code, § 1-7-3) (Ord. 40-1974)
§ 2-1-4 NOTICE OF PUBLIC MEETINGS.
   (A)   (1)   The Council shall adopt in its Rules of Procedure provisions to
give notice of public meetings of the Council and its committees, which rules
shall be in compliance with Section 10-15-1 NMSA 1978, a portion of the Open
Meetings Act.
      (2)   Meeting notices shall include an agenda containing a list of
specific items of business to be discussed or transacted at the meeting or
information on how the public may obtain a copy of such agenda. Except in the
case of emergency, the agenda shall be available to the public at least 24
hours prior to the meeting. Except for emergency matters, the Council shall
take action only on items appearing on the agenda. For purposes of this
division (2), an EMERGENCY refers to unforeseen circumstances that, if not
addressed immediately by the public body, will likely result in injury or
damage to persons or property or substantial financial loss to the public body.
(Section 10-15-1(F) NMSA 1978)
   (B)   The Council may recess and reconvene a meeting to a day subsequent to
that stated in the meeting notice if, prior to recessing, the Council specifies
the date, time and place for continuation of the meeting, and, immediately
following the recessed meeting, posts notice of the date, time and place for
the reconvened meeting on or near the door of the place where the original
meeting was held and in at least one other location appropriate to provide
public notice of the continuation of the meeting. Only matters appearing on the
agenda of the original meeting may be discussed at the reconvened meeting.
(Section 10-15-1(E) NMSA 1978)
('74 Code, § 1-7-4) (Ord. 40-1974; Am. Ord. 6-1990)
§ 2-1-5 QUORUM.
   A majority of the members of the Council shall constitute a quorum thereof.
('74 Code, § 1-7-5) (Ord. 40-1974; Am. Ord. 6-1990)
§ 2-1-6 RESCINDED ACTION.
   No vote or action of the Council shall be rescinded at any special meeting
unless there be present at such special meeting as many members of the Council
as were present at the meeting when such vote or action was taken.
('74 Code, § 1-7-6) (Ord. 40-1974; Am. Ord. 6-1990)
§ 2-1-7 ADDRESSING MEETINGS.
   The Council shall adopt rules or procedure which assure adequate access by
the public to the deliberations of the Council.
('74 Code, § 1-7-7) (Ord. 40-1974; Am. Ord. 6-1990)
§ 2-1-8 RECORDS.
   Unless otherwise provided by the Council the City Clerk shall serve as the
Clerk of the Council. The Clerk of the Council shall keep the minutes and
records of Council proceedings.
('74 Code, § 1-7-8) (Ord. 40-1974; Am. Ord. 6-1990)
§ 2-1-9 PRESIDING OFFICER.
   The Council shall elect one of its number to act as President of the
Council. The President shall serve at the pleasure of the Council until
December 1 of each odd-numbered year, or until his successor has been selected.
The Council shall elect a vice president, who shall serve in the absence of the
president.
('74 Code, § 1-7-9) (Ord. 40-1974; Am. Ord. 6-1990)
§ 2-1-10 MAYOR.
   (A)   The Mayor, or the Mayor’s representative, shall be present at the
hearings on the Mayor’s proposed budget to answer questions about the budget.
The City Attorney, or the City Attorney’s designated representative, shall be
present at all meetings of the City Council.
   (B)   Administration Question and Answer Period. The Mayor, or the Mayor’s
representative, shall respond to all questions asked by City Councilors during
the “Administration Question and Answer Period” during meetings of the City
Council.
      (1)   For questions submitted to the Administration at least one business
day prior to the City Council meeting, verbal answers shall be provided during
the City Council meeting. If a verbal answer to a pre-submitted question is not
provided during the City Council meeting, the Administration shall provide a
written response that shall be due to the Council one (1) business day
following the meeting at which the question is asked.
      (2)   For all other questions, including new questions asked during a
City Council meeting, if verbal answers are not provided during the meeting,
the Administration shall provide written responses that shall be due to the
Council 7 business days following the meeting at which the questions are asked.
      (3)   The Council Services Department shall make all questions and
answers accessible to the public on the City Council website.
      (4)   The written responses outlined in this ordinance are only required
when a Councilor asks a question that has a factual, objective answer, such as
a request for tangible information and/or data. Written responses are not
required when a Councilor asks a question that has only a subjective,
philosophical, or opinion-based answer.
('74 Code, § 1-7-10) (Ord. 40-1974; Am. Ord. 6-1990; Am. Ord. 2024-041)
§ 2-1-11 DISTURBING MEETINGS.
   It shall be unlawful to disturb any meeting of the City Council or of any
committee thereof, or to behave in a disorderly manner at such meeting.
('74 Code, § 1-7-11 (part)) (Ord. 40-1974; Am. Ord. 6-1990)
Penalty, see § 1-1-99
§ 2-1-12 OATH OF OFFICE.
   Before entering on the duties of the respective offices, persons certified
as elected to the office of the Mayor and City Councillors shall take the
following oath:
I,  (name of oath taker) , do solemnly swear to uphold the Constitution and the
Laws of the United States of America and the Constitution and the Laws of the
State of New Mexico; I furthermore do solemnly swear that I will faithfully,
impartially, and sincerely perform my duties as a public servant of the people
of the City of Albuquerque, New Mexico, to the best of my ability, so help me
God.
('74 Code, § 1-7-12) (Ord. 40-1974; Am. Ord. 6-1990; Am. Ord. 13-1990)
§ 2-1-13 COUNCIL JUDGE OF ELECTION AND MEMBERS.
   The Council shall be the judge of the election and qualification of its
members.
('74 Code, § 1-7-13) (Ord. 40-1974; Am. Ord. 6-1990; Am. Ord. 13-1990)
ARTICLE 2: INTERGOVERNMENTAL AND
LEGISLATIVE RELATIONS
Section
   
2-2-1   Creation of the joint committee
   
2-2-2   Definitions
   
2-2-3   Authorities and duties of the committee
   
2-2-4   Lobbying by city employees
   
2-2-5   Detailed lobbying policy
§ 2-2-1 CREATION OF THE JOINT COMMITTEE.
   There is hereby created a Joint Committee on Intergovernmental and
Legislative Relations that shall be comprised and convene as follows:
   (A)   The Committee shall be composed of six voting members. Three voting
members of the committee shall be members of the City Council. The remaining
three voting members shall be designated by the Mayor. The Chief Administrative
Officer shall chair the committee and two other members of the administration
shall occupy the remaining committee positions.
   (B)   The staff support to the committee shall be provided jointly by the
Chief Administrative Officer and the Director of Council Services.
   (C)   The committee shall meet monthly and may convene additional meetings
by request of the Chair of the Committee or by a joint request from the three
City Council Committee members.
('74 Code, § 1-13-2) (Ord. 50- 1976; Am. Ord. 19-1995; Am. Ord. 2023-001)
§ 2-2-2 DEFINITIONS.
   LEGISLATIVE PROGRAM: The list of federal or state requests for laws,
policies, programs, and projects for the City of Albuquerque’s federal and
state legislative programs as created through the provisions in Section
2-2-3 herein.
(Ord. 2024-042)
§ 2-2-3 AUTHORITIES AND DUTIES OF THE COMMITTEE.
   The Joint Committee on Intergovernmental and Legislative Relations shall
have the express authority to do the following:
   (A)   Promote cooperation and encourage coordination between the City, the
federal, and state and local governments;
   (B)   Attend such meetings of other governmental entities as may be
necessary to accomplish the purposes of this article;
   (C)   Prepare by September 1st of each calendar year, for approval by the
Joint Intergovernmental Relations Committee, a state legislative program that
includes an Executive Communication (EC) of the Mayor’s state legislative,
policy program and capital requests, and an Other Communication (OC) that
includes the City Council’s and City Councilors’ state legislative, policy
program and capital requests. The EC and the OC shall be introduced at the
first City Council meeting following the approval of the program by the IGR.
The City Council shall vote on the Executive Communication and the Other
Communication as Receipt Be Noted;
   (D)   The state program adopted pursuant to paragraph C of this section and
additional requests shall be submitted to the Governor’s Office and members of
the Legislature whose districts include the City of Albuquerque;
   (E)   From the state program, each Councilor may determine and submit to the
Director of Council Services three state capital requests and three state
legislative requests that are to be placed in a memorandum from the Director of
City Council Services and distributed to City staff and the lobbyists for the
City, that are assigned to advocate for the City of Albuquerque to the State
Legislature. The memorandum shall direct the lobbyists and City Staff to place
additional focus and effort on advocating for the requests listed in the
memorandum;
   (F)   The Mayor, Council, and individual Councilors may submit to the
Legislature and State Government policy, program, project, and capital outlay
project requests independent of the annual state legislative program;
   (G)   Represent the City and coordinate its legislative efforts at any
general or special session of the Legislature of the state;
   (H)   Prepare by November 1st of each calendar year, for approval by the
Joint Intergovernmental and Legislative Relations Committee, a federal program
that includes an Executive Communication (EC) of the Mayor’s federal
legislative policy program and capital requests, and an Other Communication
(OC) that includes the City Council’s and City Councilors’ federal legislative,
policy, program and capital requests. The EC and the OC shall be introduced at
the first City Council meeting following the approval of the program by the
IGR. The City Council shall vote on the EC and the OC as Receipt Be Noted;
   (I)   From the federal program, each Councilor may determine and submit to
the Director of Council Services three federal capital requests and three
federal legislative requests that are to be placed in a memorandum from the
Director of City Council Services and distributed to City staff and the
lobbyists for the City, that are assigned to advocate for the City of
Albuquerque to the Federal Government. The memorandum shall direct the
lobbyists and City Staff to place additional focus and effort on advocating for
the requests listed in the memorandum;
   (J)   The federal program adopted pursuant to paragraph (H) of this section
and additional requests shall be submitted to the members of the New Mexico
Congressional Delegation and agencies of the federal government, as needed;
   (K)   Congressional appropriation requests filed after the adoption of the
federal legislative program shall be submitted by the Joint Intergovernmental
and Legislative Relations Committee to the City Council for inclusion in the
most current federal program;
   (L)   The Mayor, the Council and/or individual Councilors may submit to the
Congressional Delegation and the federal government policy, program, grant and
congressional appropriations requests independent of the annual federal program
for the City of Albuquerque’s legislative program;
   (M)   Adopt and promulgate rules, regulations and orders necessary to
implement any authority delegated to the committee by this article;
   (N)   Represent the City and coordinate its federal and state legislative
programs in Washington, D.C. and at the State Capitol and with state agencies;
   (O)   Work with the New Mexico Municipal League to coordinate the activities
of the City with the programs and activities of other municipalities throughout
the state including reviewing and approving the City of Albuquerque’s annual
membership to the league and any initiatives proposed between the City of
Albuquerque and the Municipal League; and
   (P)   Engage and manage the services of representatives at the state and
federal level to assist the committee in carrying out its responsibilities
provided in this article including reviewing and submitting for approval to the
City Council proposed contracts and legal obligations between the City of
Albuquerque and such representatives.
(Ord. 2024-042)
§ 2-2-4 LOBBYING BY CITY EMPLOYEES.
   (A)   For the purposes of this section, LOBBYING shall be defined as
soliciting or seeking to influence the votes of members of a legislative body,
including testifying before a legislative body.
   (B)   Lobbying members of a legislative body in a government other than the
city by an employee of the city shall be allowed only under the following
circumstances:
      (1)   During an employee’s designated working hours, a city employee:
         (a)   May engage in lobbying with the permission and/or at the request
of the Intergovernmental and Legislative Relations Committee; or
         (b)   May appear before a meeting of a legislative body to testify at
the request of the Mayor, or the Chief Administrative Officer; or
      (2)   A city employee may engage in lobbying at times other than the
employee’s designated working hours or at times when the employee is on annual
leave or leave without pay, at which times the employee must inform those being
lobbied whether or not the adopted legislative policy of the City is being
represented; or
   (C)   A city employee shall not accept employment as a lobbyist for any
public or private entity other than the city except with the approval of the
Intergovernmental and Legislative Relations Committee.
   (D)   A city employee who violates the provisions of this section shall be
subject to disciplinary action as provided in
Chapter 3, Article 1, Merit System; Personnel Policy.
   (E)   Elected officials of the city are excluded from the provisions of this
section.
('74 Code, § 1-13-4) (Ord. 27-1987; Am. Ord. 19-1995; Am. Ord._2024-029)
§ 2-2-5 DETAILED LOBBYING POLICY.
   The Joint Intergovernmental and Legislative Relations Committee shall, in
addition to developing the general legislative program of the City, meet both
before and during the legislative session to take positions on particular areas
of legislative concern. The positions taken shall be determined in accordance
with the general legislative program adopted by resolution. No department of
the city, or individual speaking on behalf of such a department or the city,
shall take any position which has not been adopted by the city pursuant to this
article. When time does not permit a formal meeting of the Committee, a person
authorized to lobby on behalf of the city shall seek direction by polling
informally a majority of the Committee members. This section shall not limit
the activities of elected public officials, or the committee staff.
('74 Code, § 1-13-5) (Ord. 27-1987; Am. Ord. 19-1995; Am. Ord._2024-029)
ARTICLE 3: LOBBYIST REGISTRATION
Section
   
2-3-1   Short title
   
2-3-2   Intent
   
2-3-3   Definitions
   
2-3-4   Registration and activity statements to be filed; contents;
modification to statement
   
2-3-5   Enforcement of act; investigations by the city attorney; duties of the
city clerk
   
2-3-6   Registration statement; preservation as public record
   
2-3-7   Compliance; enforcement; hearing and appeal process
   
2-3-8   Lobbying campaign disclosure, bank account and expenditure requirements
and retention of records
§ 2-3-1 SHORT TITLE.
   This Ordinance may be cited as the "Lobbyist and Lobbyist Organization
Registration and Disclosure Ordinance."
(Ord. 62-2001; Am. Ord. 5-2003)
§ 2-3-2 INTENT.
   To declare and identify all professional lobbyists who represent entities
that attempt to influence and/or otherwise contribute to public or private
discussion with City of Albuquerque public officials including the Mayor and
the City Council as elected officials and to help ensure compliance with the
Lobbying and Lobbyist Organization Registration and Disclosure Ordinance to
promote transparency in government.
(Ord. 62-2001; Am. Ord. 5-2003; Am. Ord._2019-031)
§ 2-3-3 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this article, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   CITY. Means City of Albuquerque.
   CITY OFFICIAL. The Mayor or Mayor-Elect, all members of the Council or
Councilors-elect, all members of boards, commissions and committees; all
directors and the equivalent thereof for each department, division or section;
assistant, associate or deputy department, division or section directors and
the equivalent thereof; the Director of Council Services; the Chief
Administrative Officer; Deputy or Assistant Chief Administrative Officers and
the equivalent thereof and all other city employees appointed directly by the
Council, Mayor or Chief Administrative Officer.
   CLIENT. The real party in interest for whose benefit the services of a
lobbyist are actually performed. An individual member of a business,
association, or organization shall not be deemed to be a "client" solely by
reason of the fact that such member is individually represented by an employee
or agent of the same as a regular part of such employee's or agent's duties or
responsibilities as long as such member does not pay an amount of money or
other consideration specifically for the purpose of representation in a
lobbying capacity.
   COMMITTEE. A committee created by the Mayor or City Council, including all
standing committees of the City Council, and all City Boards, Committees and
Commissions created by City Charter, ordinance, or resolution or governed under
the provisions of the Public Boards, Commissions and Committee Ordinance, ROA
1994, §§
2-6-1-1 et seq.
   COMPENSATION.  Money, per diem, salary, fee or portion thereof or the
equivalent in services rendered or in-kind contributions received or to be
received directly or indirectly in return for lobbying services performed or to
be performed.
   CONTRIBUTION. A gift, subscription, loan, advance or deposit of any money or
other thing of value, including the fair market value of an in-kind
contribution, that is made or received for the purpose of influencing City
Officials regarding an official action.
   EXPENDITURE. A direct or indirect payment, transfer or distribution or
obligation or promise to pay, transfer or distribute any money or other thing
of value but does not include a lobbyist's own personal living expenses and the
expenses incidental to establishing and maintaining an office in connection
with lobbying activities or compensation paid to a lobbyist by a lobbyist's
employer.
   LOBBYING. Attempting to influence:
      (1)   A decision related to any matter to be considered or being
considered by the City Council, any Council Committee or any Council matter
requiring action by the Mayor or awaiting action by the Mayor; or
      (2)   An official action.
   LOBBYIST. Any individual who is directly or indirectly compensated for the
specific purpose of lobbying; is designated by an individual, interest group,
or organization or entity to represent it on a substantial or regular basis for
the purpose of lobbying; or in the course of his employment is engaged in
lobbying on a substantial or regular basis. "Lobbyist" does not include:
      (1)    An individual who appears on his own behalf in connection with an
official action.
      (2)   Any elected or appointed officer of the state or its political
subdivisions or an Indian tribe or pueblo acting in his official capacity.
      (3)   An employee of the state or its political subdivisions,
specifically designated by an elected or appointed officer of the state or its
political subdivision, who appears before the City Council, Council Committee,
or a rulemaking proceeding only to explain the effect of legislation or a rule
on his agency or political subdivision, provided the elected or appointed
officer of the state or its political subdivision keeps for public inspection,
and files with the secretary of state, such designation.
      (4)   Any designated member of the staff of the Mayor of the City of
Albuquerque, provided the Mayor keeps for public inspection and files with the
City Clerk such designation.
      (5)   A member of the City Council or the staff of the City Council when
addressing legislation.
      (6)   Any witness called by a Council Committee or administrative
department to appear before that committee or department in connection with
legislation or an official action.
      (7)   An individual who provides only oral or written public testimony in
connection with a City Council or Committee or in a rulemaking proceeding and
whose name and the interest on behalf of which he testifies have been clearly
and publicly identified.
      (8)   A publisher, owner or employee of the print media, radio or
television, while gathering or disseminating news or editorial comment to the
general public in the ordinary course of business.
      (9)   A representative or officer of an officially recognized Albuquerque
Neighborhood Association or Homeowners Association who speaks on behalf of that
Association.
   LOBBYIST CAMPAIGN  or  LOBBYIST CAMPAIGNING. The direct or indirect receipt
of contributions and/or expenditure of funds to influence the public and/or
City Officials regarding an official action by a lobbyist or a lobbyist
organization. Each official action the lobbyist or lobbyist organization
supports or opposes shall be a separate lobbyist campaign.
   LOBBYIST ORGANIZATION. A person who directly or indirectly receives
contributions and/or makes expenditures to influence the public and/or City
Officials regarding an official action.
   LOBBYIST'S EMPLOYER. The person whose interests are being represented and by
whom a lobbyist is directly or indirectly retained, compensated or employed.
   OFFICIAL ACTION. The action or non-action of a City Official related to any
legislative, policy making or rulemaking proceeding or any proposed ballot
measure as defined in the Charter of the City of Albuquerque.
   PERSON. An individual, partnership, association, committee, federal, state
or local governmental entity or agency, however constituted, public or private
corporation or any other organization or group of persons who are voluntarily
acting in concert, including both for profit and non-profit entities.
   PRESCRIBED FORM. A form prepared and prescribed by the City Clerk.
   RULEMAKING PROCEEDING. A formal process conducted by a City agency, board or
commission for the purpose of adopting a rule, regulation, standard, policy or
other requirement of general applicability and does not include adjudicatory
proceedings.
(Ord. 62-2001; Am. Ord. 5-2003; Am. Ord._2019-031)
§ 2-3-4 REGISTRATION AND ACTIVITY STATEMENTS TO BE FILED; CONTENTS;
MODIFICATION TO STATEMENT.
   (A)   Within 48 hours of any service or lobbyist campaigning covered by the
Lobbyist and Lobbyist Organization Registration and Disclosure Ordinance
commences, any individual who is initially employed or retained as a lobbyist
or any lobbyist organization shall register with the City Clerk filing a single
registration statement under oath on a prescribed form showing:
      (1)   The lobbyist's or lobbyist organization's full name, permanent
business address and business address while lobbying or conducting lobbyist
campaigning;
      (2)   The name and address of each of the lobbyist's employers;
      (3)   The name and address of each of the lobbyist's clients;
      (4)   The item(s) of official action, identifying for each item the name
and address of the client(s) on whose behalf the lobbyist is acting or
participating;
      (5)   The name, address and telephone number of the lobbyist
organization's chairperson and treasurer and all parties having signature
authorization for the lobbyist organization's business bank account, the name
and address of the bank where the lobbyist organization has its business bank
account; and
      (6)   The name and address of the bank where the lobbyist has his/her
business bank account for the checking account required in this ordinance when
the lobbyist campaigns for or against an official action. The name and address
of any person who has signature authorization for such checking account.
   (B)   The City Clerk may charge a reasonable registration fee for the
initial registration by a lobbyist or lobbyist organization. No additional fee
may be charged for amendments to the original registration or for the annual
statement required in this section. Lobbyist organizations that file a lobbyist
campaign registration concerning an official action different from that
designated in a previous registration shall pay the registration fee required
in this subsection for each such subsequent registration.
   (C)   For each succeeding year that an individual is employed or retained as
a lobbyist by the same employer, and for whom all the information disclosed in
the initial registration statement remains substantially the same, the lobbyist
shall file a simple annual registration renewal 12 months following initial
registration and every 12 months thereafter for each of the lobbyist's
employers together with a short, abbreviated prescribed form for renewal. The
annual statement shall be in addition to any lobbyist campaign registration and
disclosure statement that the lobbyist may be required to file under the
provisions of this Ordinance.
   (D)   Whenever there is a modification of the facts required to be set forth
by this section or there is a termination of the lobbyist's employment as a
lobbyist before the end of the year, the lobbyist shall notify the City Clerk
within one month of such occurrence.
   (E)   Lobbyists and lobbyist organizations shall file a separate
registration with the City Clerk for each official action the lobbyist or
lobbyist organization supports or opposes. When lobbyists or lobbyist
organizations support or oppose an official action other than the official
action identified in any previous registration they have filed with the City
Clerk, they shall file an additional separate registration for each such
official action supported or opposed.
   (F)   Each registrant shall file between the first and tenth day of April,
July, October, and January a report of the registrant's lobbying activities
during the previous calendar quarter. The report shall be on a prescribed form.
If a registrant has not engaged in any lobbying in 12 months the registrant may
file a Notice of Discontinuation of Lobbying with the City Clerk. Once such
notice is filed with the City Clerk the registrant will no longer be
responsible for filing quarterly reports. In the event that the registrant
seeks to resume lobbying, they will be required to re-register pursuant to
Subsection (A) of this Section.
(Ord. 62-2001; Am. Ord. 5-2003; Am. Ord._2019-031)
§ 2-3-5 ENFORCEMENT OF ACT; INVESTIGATIONS BY THE CITY ATTORNEY; DUTIES OF THE
CITY CLERK.
   (A)   The City Attorney shall adopt procedures for processing complaints and
notifications of violations, and for monitoring lobbyist registration and
reporting in order to identify potential violations.
   (B)   Upon notification from the City Clerk, or the sworn complaint of any
person who has reason to believe, and presents an affidavit listing the basis
for such complaint, that there is, or has been a violation of the Lobbyist and
Lobbyist Organization Registration and Disclosure Ordinance, the City Attorney
shall investigate the allegation when there is reason to believe such person,
lobbyist, lobbyist organization or lobbyist's employer is, or has been, acting
in violation of the Lobbyist and Lobbyist Organization Registration and
Disclosure Ordinance.
   (C)   When the City Attorney has reason to believe that any person,
lobbyist, lobbyist organization or lobbyist's employer has violated or is
violating any provision of the Lobbyist Registration Ordinance, he shall notify
the suspected violator of the alleged violation and hold an informal meeting
before initiating further action.
   (D)   In addition to any other powers and duties specified by law, the City
Clerk shall have the duty to administer the provisions of this subchapter,
prepare uniform forms for the statements and reports required by this
subchapter, and promulgate such rules as he or she deems necessary for the
proper administration of this subchapter. Any rules promulgated by the City
Clerk for the purposes of administering the Lobbyist and Lobbyist Organization
Registration and Disclosure Ordinance shall be submitted for receipt to the
City Council.
   (E)   The City Clerk shall work with city agencies and the city council to
develop notices and advertisements to be placed in print and electronic media
intended to reach persons and organizations doing business with the city that
will inform them of the requirements set forth in this subchapter.
   (F)   The City Clerk shall develop an online training program for lobbyists.
Such program shall include information and training regarding conduct that may
subject lobbyists and clients to the criminal and civil penalties set forth in
this subchapter. As soon as practicable, the City Clerk, in conjunction with
the City Attorney, shall incorporate an anti-corruption component in such
training.
   (G)   The City Clerk shall develop a protocol to review sources of
information that may assist the City Clerk in identifying lobbyists required to
file statements of registration pursuant to section
2-3-4 of this subchapter who have not filed. Such review shall include, but
need not be limited to, the following sources:
      (1)   Statements of registration filed with the Secretary of State
Lobbyist Regulation;
      (2)   Notices of appearances or meetings compiled by city departments,
the City Council, or other City Boards or Commissions; and
      (3)   Any other source the City Clerk determines appropriate to identify
lobbyists.
(Ord. 62-2001; Am. Ord. 5-2003; Am. Ord._2019-031)
§ 2-3-6 REGISTRATION STATEMENT; PRESERVATION AS PUBLIC RECORD.
   Each registration and disclosure statement as required by the Lobbyist and
Lobbyist Organization Registration and Disclosure Ordinance shall be preserved
by the City Clerk for a period of five years from the date of filing as a
public record, open to public inspection at any reasonable time. All such
reports filed with the City Clerk shall be listed on the City's website within
one week of submission and will be periodically updated. Unless an action or
prosecution is pending that requires preserving the report, it may be destroyed
five years after the date of filing.
(Ord. 62-2001; Am. Ord. 5-2003)
§ 2-3-7 COMPLIANCE; ENFORCEMENT; HEARING AND APPEAL PROCESS.
   (A)   The City Clerk shall advise and seek to educate all persons required
to perform duties pursuant to this Ordinance. This includes advising all
registered lobbyists and lobbyist organizations at least annually of the
Lobbyist and Lobbyist Organization Registration and Disclosure Ordinance's
deadlines for submitting registration. All prescribed forms shall be clear and
easy to complete.
   (B)   The City Attorney may conduct thorough examinations of reports and
conduct any investigations to determine whether this Ordinance has been
violated. Any person who believes that this Ordinance has been violated may
file a written complaint with the City Attorney pursuant to the requirements of
§
2-3-5 of this Ordinance. The City Clerk shall adopt procedures for processing
complaints and notifications of violations.
   (C)   The City Attorney shall seek first to ensure voluntary compliance with
the provisions of this Ordinance pursuant to § 2-3-5. A person who violates
this Ordinance shall be given fifteen (15) consecutive calendar days notice to
correct the matter or request a hearing before the Independent Hearing Officer
before fines are imposed. The fifteen day notice shall begin to run on the day
the notice is mailed or served in person. The request for hearing shall be
submitted to the City Clerk. The hearing shall use the procedures outlined in
the IHO Ordinance, ROA 1994, Chapter 2, Article 8, Part 1.
   (D)   Notices under this section shall be deemed properly served and
received when the notice has been personally served on the lobbyist or lobbyist
organization or sent by registered or certified mail return receipt requested
to the last known address of the lobbyist or lobbyist organization.
   (E)   Any person who files a statement required by this Ordinance, including
but not limited to registration and disclosure statements, after the deadline
imposed by this Ordinance or any person who files a false or incomplete
statement shall be liable for and shall pay the City at or from the time
initially required for the filing, fifty dollars ($50.00) per day for each
regular working day after the time required for the filing of the statement
until the complete report is filed up to a maximum of five hundred dollars
($500.00). Any person who knowingly and willfully violates any of the
provisions of this Ordinance shall be punished by a fine of up to five hundred
dollars ($500.00) and may have his lobbyist or lobbyist organization
registration revoked or his lobbying or lobbying campaigning activities
enjoined for up to three (3) years.
(Ord. 62-2001; Am. Ord. 38-2002; Am. Ord. 5-2003; Am. Ord._2023-015)
§ 2-3-8 LOBBYING CAMPAIGN DISCLOSURE, BANK ACCOUNT AND EXPENDITURE REQUIREMENTS
AND RETENTION OF RECORDS.
   (A)   Bank Accounts.  Each lobbyist organization shall establish one and
only one campaign bank checking account for each lobbyist campaign. Each
lobbyist campaign shall be for or against only one official action. Lobbyists
participating in lobbyist campaigning shall establish one and only one campaign
bank checking account for each lobbyist campaign when such lobbyist campaigning
activity is not reported by a lobbyist organization. All contributions received
for the benefit of lobbyist campaigning shall be deposited into the single
checking account required in this section and all disbursements shall be made
from that account. Each lobbyist participating in lobbyist campaigning and each
lobbyist organization shall file with the bank at which the lobbyist campaign
checking account has been established a letter authorizing the release of
information concerning that account to the City Attorney or his designee and
shall submit a copy of the letter of authorization to the City Clerk. Upon the
request of the City Attorney, the lobbyist or lobbyist organization shall
provide to the City Attorney all bank records, cancelled checks, and any other
financial information relating to the lobbyist campaign as may be requested by
the City Attorney. When a contribution is deposited in the single checking
account required by this Ordinance, the name of each contributor whose
contribution is being deposited shall be recorded on the bank deposit slip.
   (B)   Disclosure of Lobbyist Campaigning Activities.
      (1)   Each lobbyist or lobbyist organization that conducts any lobbyist
campaigning shall file with the City Clerk disclosure statements, each of which
shall be cumulative, signed under oath by the lobbyist or treasurer or
chairperson of the lobbyist organization, and set forth to 5:00 p.m. of the day
preceding the filing of each statement the following:
         (a)   The total of contributions, which shall include all
contributions received, regardless of whether the contribution has been
deposited in the bank checking account. This report shall show the amount of
each anonymous contribution received.
         (b)   The name and street address of each contributor, the
contributor's principal business or occupation, the name and address of the
contributor's employer, and the nature of the contributor's or the
contributor's employer's business, together with the total cumulative value
contributed by the contributor.
         (c)   All expenditures made on behalf of the lobbyist campaign,
including any reimbursements and the nature thereof, and the name and address
of the person or business to whom payment was made.
         (d)   In kind contributions shall be reported as to both contributions
to the lobbyist or lobbyist organization or any expenditure made on behalf of
the lobbyist or lobbyist organization. The fair market value of such goods or
services shall be reported.
         (e)   Lobbyist campaign loans as contributions and any subsequent
repayment of loans credited against contributions and returned contributions as
credits against contributions.
      (2)   The disclosure required in this statement shall be filed quarterly,
and as a component of the quarterly activity reports required in §
2-3-4. In the event that no expenditures have been made and no contributions
have been received, the lobbyist or lobbyist organization shall submit the
quarterly registration and affirm a statement of no activity.
      (3)   Anonymous Contributions. No anonymous contributions shall be
accepted by a lobbyist or lobbyist organization for purposes of conducting a
lobbyist campaign. Anonymous contributions accepted shall be given to a non-
profit charity or to the City's General Fund. The transfer of such funds to the
non-profit charity or the City's General Fund shall be reported in the
disclosure statement due after such transfer.
      (4)   Retention of Records. Each lobbyist and lobbyist organization shall
keep financial records of the lobbyist campaign for a period of one year
following the certification to the City Clerk that all lobbying campaigning has
ceased and shall make available to the City or its auditors for inspection the
records of all contributions and expenditures, cancelled checks, invoices,
receipts, bank statements, bills of sales, statements of accounts, leases,
rental agreement and all other financial records pertinent to the lobbyist
campaign.
(Ord. 5-2003; Am. Ord._2020-019)
ARTICLE 4: MUNICIPAL ELECTIONS; PETITIONS
Section
   
2-4-1   Short title
   
2-4-2   Purpose
   
2-4-3   Municipal election code laws
   
2-4-4   City clerk ­ duties
   
2-4-5   Dates of regular, special and runoff elections
   
2-4-6   Regular municipal election; taking office
   
2-4-7   Notice of intent
   
2-4-8   Filing of proposed measures and charter amendments
   
2-4-9   Form of petition, requirements for circulators and void petition
signatures
   
2-4-10   Filing of petitions
   
2-4-11   Validity of petition
   
2-4-12   Reinstatement of purged signatures
   
2-4-13   Recommendations
   
2-4-14   Absentee voting
   
2-4-15   [Reserved]
   
2-4-16   Limitations on use of seed money
§ 2-4-1 SHORT TITLE.
   This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the "Municipal Elections
Ordinance."
('74 Code, § 1-25-1) (Ord. 18- 1993; Am. Ord. 2022-041)
§ 2-4-2 PURPOSE.
   The purpose of this chapter is to prescribe certain rules of procedure
concerning municipal elections by implementing the Constitution of the State of
New Mexico and the Charter of the City of Albuquerque [i.e., Article XIII of
the Charter] and by supplementing and modifying the statutes of the state and
their application to the city. In the event any of the provisions of this
chapter conflict with the Constitution of the state or the Charter of the city,
the Constitution and Charter shall prevail, and if any provision of this
chapter conflicts with any otherwise applicable provision of the general
statutes of the state, the provisions of this chapter shall prevail.
('74 Code, § 1-25-2) (Ord. 18- 1993; Am. Ord. 2022-041)
§ 2-4-3 MUNICIPAL ELECTION CODE LAWS.
   The conduct of municipal elections is governed by this Chapter, the State
Election Code, the Local Election Act, and the City Charter, as any of them are
amended and supplemented from time to time.
('74 Code, § 1-25-3) (Ord. 18- 1993; Am. Ord. 2022-041)
§ 2-4-4 CITY CLERK ­ DUTIES.
   The City Clerk shall administer all municipal elections as provided herein.
The City Clerk may delegate to Deputy City Clerks and Assistant City Clerks any
of the duties of the City Clerk in the administration of municipal elections.
('74 Code, § 1-25-4) (Ord. 18- 1993; Am. Ord. 2022-041)
§ 2-4-5 DATES OF REGULAR, SPECIAL AND RUNOFF ELECTIONS.
   (A)   Regular municipal elections shall he held on the first Tuesday after
the first Monday in November of odd-numbered years.
   (B)   Any special election that may be called by the City Council shall be
held as provided by law.
   (C)   Any runoff election that may be called by the City Council shall be
held on any day designated by the Council by resolution consistent with
Section 8 of Article II of the City Charter. Upon informing the proper filing
officer of the offices to be filled at the next regular local election, the
governing body shall set the date of the runoff, not later than 120 days before
the election.
('74 Code, § 1-25-5) (Ord. 18-1993; Am. Ord._2018-034; Am. Ord._2022-041)
§ 2-4-6 REGULAR MUNICIPAL ELECTION; TAKING OFFICE.
   (A)   Each candidate, elected to the office of Mayor or Councillor, shall
personally appear before the City Clerk at a time and place specified by the
City Clerk, within ten days and after the candidate has received the
certificate of election and not later than the administration of the oath of
office. When the candidate appears, the candidate shall sign a written
statement acknowledging receipt of the certificate of election and
acknowledging that the candidate is legally qualified to hold office. The City
Clerk shall cause a copy of the certificate of election and the written receipt
and qualification statement to be filed in the Journal of the Council.
   (B)   The City Clerk or any other person allowed by law to administer oaths
shall administer the oath of office to each candidate who has provided the
written receipt and qualifications statement to the City Clerk. A public
ceremony repeating the swearing in shall also be conducted on or about January
1, following each election. Officials who have satisfied the requirements of
division (A) or (C) of this section shall be deemed to have taken office on
January 1, regardless of the date of the public swearing in ceremony.
   (C)   If a candidate fails to appear as required in division (A) of this
section, then the candidate or the candidate's authorized personal
representative shall file an affidavit with the City Clerk, not later than 5:00
p.m. on the fifth day after the time specified by the City Clerk pursuant to
division (A) of this section, stating that the candidate was unable to
personally appear before the City Clerk as required by division (A) of this
section. If such an affidavit is timely filed, the candidate shall appear
before the City Clerk not later than 5:00 p.m. on the 15th day following the
specified date for the commencement of the term of office to provide the
election certificate, file the receipt and qualifications statement and take
the oath of office.
   (D)   If a candidate fails to comply with division (A) of this section prior
to the specified date for the commencement of the term of office, then the
person holding the office shall remain in office until the candidate takes
office or the office is declared vacant.
   (E)   If a candidate fails to comply with division (A) and division (C) of
this section, then that office is deemed vacant.
('74 Code, § 1-25-8) (Ord. 18-1993; Am. Ord. 13-1998; Am. Ord._2018-034; Am.
Ord._2022-041; Am. Ord._2024-013)
§ 2-4-7 NOTICE OF INTENT.
   Prior to circulating a petition pursuant to Sections 1 or 3, Article III, or
Article VI of the City Charter, a notice of intent to circulate a petition,
containing the signatures of at least five qualified voters, must be filed with
the City Clerk. The City Clerk shall designate the form of the notice of
intent, which shall include sufficient information to determine if each signer
of the notice of intent to circulate a petition is a legally registered voter
and a person entitled to vote in city elections. A notice of intent to
circulate a petition to recall a Councillor, pursuant to Section 1, Article III
of the City Charter, shall be signed only by qualified voters registered as
residing in the District which the Councillor represents.
('74 Code, § 1-25-10) (Ord. 18-1993; Am. Ord._2022-041)
§ 2-4-8 FILING OF PROPOSED MEASURES AND CHARTER AMENDMENTS.
   (A)   Measures. Concurrently with the filing of a notice of intent to
circulate a petition, pursuant to Section 3, Article III of the City Charter,
the proposed measure shall be filed with the City Clerk. The proposed measure
shall be complete in all respects.
   (B)   Charter Amendments. Concurrently with the filing of a notice of intent
to circulate a petition, pursuant to Article VI, City Charter, the proposed
Charter amendment shall be filed with the City Clerk. The proposed Charter
amendment shall be complete in all respects.
('74 Code, § 1-25-11) (Ord. 18-1993; Am. Ord._2022-041)
§ 2-4-9 FORM OF PETITION, REQUIREMENTS FOR CIRCULATORS AND VOID PETITION
SIGNATURES.
   (A)   The form of petition submitted pursuant to Article II shall be in
accordance with the petition requirements in Section 1-8-30 NMSA 1978.
   (B)   The City Clerk shall designate the form of the petitions to be
followed in all petitions to be circulated in accordance with the provisions of
Articles Ill and VI of the City Charter. The form established shall Include
sufficient information to determine if the signer of the petition is a legally
registered voter and a person entitled to vote in city elections. Every
petition page shall contain (1) a heading which clearly conveys the purpose for
signing the petition; (2) columns for the voter's signature, printed name of
voter, residence of voter as shown on current voter registration rolls, and the
date the voter signed the petition; (3) in capital letters in the upper right-
hand corner of the face of the petition page the following: " __ Paid
Circulator" " __ Unpaid Volunteer". Each circulator submitting a petition or
group of petitions pursuant to City Charter Article Ill or VI shall attach a
signed and notarized affidavit containing the following: (1) the circulator's
actual residence address and if no street address exists, a description of the
residence location, city and zip code; (2) the printed or typed name of the
circulator; (3) the printed name, address and signature of the person or
representative of the organization or other entity that paid the circulator;
and (4) the following verification signed by the circulator: "I _____ (name of
circulator), under penalty of perjury, hereby verify that each of the names on
this petition page was signed in my presence and that in my belief each signer
was a qualified elector who was registered to vote at the address given as
their residence on the date indicated". The City Clerk shall place on the
affidavit the petition pages to which the affidavit applies, using the petition
page numbers that are designated by the City Clerk. The affidavit shall not be
part of the petition. The circulator shall not sign and complete the affidavit
at the time the petition is presented to voters for their signatures but shall
sign and complete the affidavit before it is submitted to the City Clerk. All
requirements for affidavits set forth in this section shall apply to affidavits
in support of petitions submitted pursuant to City Charter Article II, provided
that such affidavits need be signed only by the candidate or the candidate's
treasurer who is registered with the City Clerk, that no name, signature and
address of the person or organization that paid the circulator need be provided
and that the affidavit need not represent that the petition was signed in the
presence of the candidate or the candidate's treasurer. The signature of the
City Clerk and date of issuance of the petition shall appear on each petition
page. All print on the petition shall be in no less than 11 point type. The
circulator of the petition shall indicate whether he or she is a paid
circulator or a volunteer on each petition page prior to obtaining any
signatures. Petition pages submitted under City Charter Article Ill, Section 3,
Direct Legislation by Voter Initiative, or Article VI, Charter Amendments,
shall contain the full text of the measure proposed to be on the ballot or
shall attach the full text of the measure to the petition. The measure proposed
to be placed on the ballot shall be provided in writing to the voter by the
circulator prior to the voter signing the petition. The circulator shall
provide the voter the opportunity to read the entire measure to be placed on
the ballot or, if requested by the voter, shall read the entire measure to be
placed on the ballot to the voter prior to the voter signing the petition.
   (C)   Signatures obtained in violation of this section are void and shall
not be counted by the City Clerk in determining whether a sufficient number of
signatures were submitted to the City Clerk. All signatures on a petition page
shall be void if (1) the circulator fails to provide the affidavit required in
this section, (2) neither "Paid Circulator" nor "Unpaid Volunteer" is checked
on the petition page, or (3) the petition page does not contain all of the
information required by this section to be on or attached to a petition page.
When a petition page meets all of the requirements of this section, the
presence of a signature that is invalidated because the person signing the
petition cannot be identified by the City Clerk as currently registered to vote
in Albuquerque shall not invalidate other signatures on the petition that were
obtained as prescribed by this section.
   (D)   A "circulator" of a petition is any person who presents or otherwise
makes available to any person a petition required under the Albuquerque City
Charter or Ordinances of the City of Albuquerque for the purpose of requesting
or obtaining that person's signature on such petition.
   (E)   The City Clerk shall not approve the form of a petition proposing a
measure or a Charter amendment if the proposed measure or Charter amendment has
not been filed pursuant to this section.
('74 Code, § 1-25-12) (Ord. 18-1993; Am. Ord. 28-2006; Am. Ord. 45-2008; Am.
Ord._2022-041)
§ 2-4-10 FILING OF PETITIONS.
   (A)   The City Clerk shall accept a petition for filing only if the City
Clerk has approved the form of the petition prior to circulation of the
petition.
   (B)   Persons submitting petitions in accordance with
Article II, Section 4, of the City Charter shall collect all signatures on such
petitions during the following periods in the year of the election:
      (1)   For Mayoral candidates, starting at 8:00 a.m. 199 days before the
election, and ending at 5:00 p.m. 136 days before the election; and
      (2)   For Council candidates, starting at 8:00 a.m. 155 days before the
election, and ending at 5:00 p.m. 120 days before the election.
   (C)   Petitions gathered pursuant to the provisions of Subsection (B) shall
be submitted to the City Clerk for verification every Tuesday by 12:00 p.m.
during the petition gathering period.
      (1)   Petition signatures that have not been submitted to the City Clerk
within the timeframes set in Subsection (B) shall be deemed invalid and shall
not be considered in any determination of candidate qualification.
   (D)   Persons submitting petitions in accordance with
Article III, Section 1 or
3 of the City Charter, or
Article VI of the City Charter, shall do so within the 60-day limitation;
provided, that parts of the petition may be submitted in three stages:
      (1)   The first part not more than 20 days after the filing of the notice
of intent to circulate the petition;
      (2)   The second part not more than 40 days after the filing of the
notice of intent to circulate the petition; and
      (3)   The third and final part of the petition shall be filed no later
than 60 days after the filing of the notice of intent to circulate the
petition.
   (E)   Persons submitting petitions in accordance with
Article III, Section 2 of the City Charter, shall do so within the 35-day
limitation; provided, that parts of the petition shall be submitted in two
stages:
      (1)   The first part not more than 15 days after the filing of the notice
of intent to circulate a petition; and
      (2)   The second and final part of the petition shall be filed no later
than 35 days after the filing of the notice of intent to circulate the
petition.
   (F)   All such petitions shall be filed in the City Clerk's office during
the regular business hours of that office as determined by Rule promulgated by
the City Clerk.
   (G)   All candidates who submitted a petition in accordance with Section 4,
Article II of the City Charter shall file the results of the City Clerk's
petition signature verification and their Declaration of Candidacy with the
proper filing officer on the prescribed filing day in accordance with Section
1-22-3.2(D) NMSA 1978 or Section 1-22-7 NMSA 1978.
      (1)   Publicly Financed Candidates for Mayor shall submit their petitions
and Declaration of Candidacy to the City Clerk 122 days before the election in
accordance with Section 1-22-3.2(D) NMSA 1978.
      (2)   Publicly Financed Candidates for City Council shall submit their
petitions and Declaration of Candidacy to the City Clerk 106 days before the
election in accordance with Section 1-22-3.2(D) NMSA 1978.
      (3)   Privately Financed Candidates for Mayor and City Council shall
submit their petitions and Declaration of Candidacy to the County Clerk 70 days
before the election in accordance with Section 1-22-7 NMSA 1978. The Candidate
may store the original petitions In the City Clerk's Office vault until the
above-specified filing date for privately financed candidates.
('74 Code, § 1-25-13) (Ord. 18- 1993; Am. Ord. 46-2008; Am. Ord. 3-2009; Am.
Ord._2019-019; Am. Ord._2020-019; Am. Ord._2020-028 ; Am. Ord._2022-041)
§ 2-4-11 VALIDITY OF PETITION.
   When a petition is circulated pursuant to the procedures set forth in the
City Charter, the validity of the petition shall be determined by the City
Clerk in accordance with Section 3-1-5 NMSA 1978, as amended and as
supplemented from time to time. It shall be the duty of the City Clerk to begin
the verification process of the validity of the petition and any portion
thereof upon being filed in the City Clerk's Office. The results of the
validation process shall become a matter of public record and a list of the
names, addresses and signatures which were purged from the petition shall be
posted in the office of the City Clerk.
('74 Code, § 1-25-14) (Ord. 18-1993; Am. Ord._2022-041)
§ 2-4-12 REINSTATEMENT OF PURGED SIGNATURES.
   Any person whose signature has been purged from a petition shall have the
opportunity to have the person's signature reinstated in accordance with
Section 3-1-5 NMSA 1978. The widest latitude is to be given for the manner in
which a person whose signature is to be purged from a petition may have the
person's name reinstated.
('74 Code, § 1-25-15) (Ord. 18-1993; Am. Ord._2022-041)
§ 2-4-13 RECOMMENDATIONS.
   Within a reasonable time after the holding of a municipal election the City
Clerk shall make appropriate recommendations to the Mayor and the City Council
for modification of election procedures designed to insure fairness and
accuracy, protect the secrecy of the ballot and reduce the administration costs
and burdens of conducting elections.
('74 Code, § 1-25-16) (Ord. 18-1993; Am. Ord._2022-041)
§ 2-4-14 ABSENTEE VOTING.
   Absentee voting shall be conducted in accordance with Chapter 1, Article 6,
NMSA 1978.
(Ord. 13-1998; Am. Ord. 40-1999; Am. Ord._2022-041)
§ 2-4-15 [RESERVED.]
§ 2-4-16 LIMITATIONS ON USE OF SEED MONEY.
   (A)   Short title. This section may be referred to as the "Limitation on Use
of Seed Money Ordinance".
   (B)   Limitation on use of seed money. Seed money collected by applicant
candidates under the provisions of the Open and Ethical Elections Code, in
addition to the limitations contained in that Code, shall be subject to the
following limitations:
      (1)   All goods and services received prior to certification must be paid
for with seed money contributions, except for goods and services that are
excluded from the definition of contribution in
Article XIII, Section 2, subsection g. It is a violation of this ordinance for
a participating candidate to use fund revenues received after certification to
pay for goods and services received prior to certification.
      (2)   Prior to certification, an applicant candidate may obligate an
amount greater than the seed money collected, but may only receive that portion
of goods and services that has been paid for or will be paid for with seed
money. An applicant candidate who has accepted contributions or made
expenditures that do not comply with the seed money restrictions under this
chapter may petition the Clerk to remain eligible for certification as a
participating candidate if the failure to comply was unintentional and does not
constitute a significant infraction of these restrictions.
      (3)   An applicant candidate or participating candidate who receives a
contribution exceeding the seed money per donor restriction or the total amount
restriction must immediately return the contribution and may not otherwise use
the contribution.
(Ord. 2019-019; Am. Ord._2022-041)
ARTICLE 5: PUBLIC INTEREST ORGANIZATIONS
Section
   
2-5-1   Applicability
   
2-5-2   Open meetings
   
2-5-3   Notice
   
2-5-4   Exceptions
   
2-5-5   Invalid actions
§ 2-5-1 APPLICABILITY.
   Any nonprofit organization in the city which receives funds appropriated by
the city, or which has as a member of its governing body an elected official,
or appointed administrative official, as a representative of the city, is
hereby declared to be vested with a public interest and subject to the
provisions of this article.
('74 Code, § 12-8-1) (Ord. 51-1979)
§ 2-5-2 OPEN MEETINGS.
   All meetings of a quorum of members of the governing body of an organization
described in §
2-5-1 above are declared to be public meetings open to the public at all times,
except as otherwise provided by law or the provisions of this article.
('74 Code, § 12-8-2) (Ord. 51-1979)
§ 2-5-3 NOTICE.
   Any such meetings at which the discussion or adoption of any proposed
resolution for formal action occurs, and at which a majority or quorum of the
governing body of the organization is in attendance, shall be held only after
reasonable notice to the public. The organization shall determine at least
annually in a public meeting what notice shall be reasonable. Such minutes as
may reasonably be required by the organization shall be recorded and be open to
the public inspection.
('74 Code, § 12-8-3) (Ord. 51-1979)
§ 2-5-4 EXCEPTIONS.
   (A)   The provisions of this article shall not apply to adjudicatory or
personnel matters of the organization.
   (B)   (1)   Loan programs involving money appropriated by the city,
administered by an organization covered by §
2-5-1 above are exempt from the provisions of this article except that for any
loan in the amount of $30,000 or more, the organization shall convey the
following information to the Mayor within seven days after the organization's
approval of the loan:
         (a)   Name of recipient (including principals of any corporation);
         (b)   Address of the recipient;
         (c)   Amount of loan;
         (d)   Conditions and terms of loan; and
         (e)   Location of property affected by loan.
      (2)   The Mayor shall submit the information to the City Council for
review at its next regular meeting. Any organization covered by the provision
of §
2-5-1 above administering loan programs involving money appropriated by the
city shall submit the information described in this subsection for all loans in
the form of a semiannual report to the Mayor and City Council.
   (C)   An organization covered by the provisions of §
2-5-1 above which receives funds appropriated by the city, but which does not
include an elected official, or an appointed administrative official, as a
representative of the city, as a member of its governing body, may have its
meetings dealing with an agenda not involving funds appropriated by the city
exempted from the provisions of this article as follows:
      (1)   The agenda must be given public notice under the provisions of §
2-5-3 of this article;
      (2)   The agenda not involving funds appropriated by the city must be a
separate agenda from an agenda involving funds appropriated by the city;
      (3)   The decision of the governing body to close the meeting must be
made in an open meeting.
('74 Code, § 12-8-4) (Ord. 51-1979)
§ 2-5-5 INVALID ACTIONS.
   Any action or resolution of the organization involving funds appropriated by
the city, is invalid unless taken or made at a meeting held in accordance with
the requirements of this article.
('74 Code, § 12-8-5) (Ord. 51-1979)
ARTICLE 6: PUBLIC BOARDS,
COMMISSIONS AND COMMITTEES
Section
Part 1: General Provisions
   
2-6-1-1   Short title
   
2-6-1-2   Definition
   
2-6-1-3   Membership
   
2-6-1-4   Organization
   
2-6-1-5   Applicability
   
2-6-1-6   Political forums prohibited
   
2-6-1-7   Decorum, code of conduct, and social media
   
2-6-1-8   Task force
Part 2: Boards, Commissions and Committees
Defense and Indemnification
   
2-6-2-1   Short title
   
2-6-2-2   Purpose
   
2-6-2-3   Definition
   
2-6-2-4   Defense and indemnification
Part 3: Information Services Committee
   
2-6-3-1   Committee created
   
2-6-3-2   Duties, responsibilities, and powers
   
2-6-3-3   Process
Part 4:[Reserved]
Part 5: Americans with Disabilities Act Advisory Council
   
2-6-5-1   Short title
   
2-6-5-2   Findings
   
2-6-5-3   Membership and organization
   
2-6-5-4   Meetings
   
2-6-5-5   Duties, responsibilities, and powers
   
2-6-5-6   Training and technical assistance
Part 6: Commission on American Indian and Alaska Native Affairs
   
2-6-6-1   Intent
   
2-6-6-2   Creation
   
2-6-6-3   Terms and appointment
   
2-6-6-4   Powers and duties
Part 7: Youth Advisory Council
   
2-6-7-1   Intent
   
2-6-7-2   City of Albuquerque youth advisory council created
   
2-6-7-3   Membership
   
2-6-7-4   Duties
   
2-6-7-5   Organization
Part 8: Water Protection Advisory Board
   
2-6-8-1   Short title
   
2-6-8-2   Definitions
   
2-6-8-3   Purpose
   
2-6-8-4   Board created
   
2-6-8-5   Organization; meetings
   
2-6-8-6   Staff
   
2-6-8-7   Duties and powers of the Board
Part 9: Albuquerque Commission on Immigrant Affairs and Services
   
2-6-9-1   Purpose
   
2-6-9-2   Membership
   
2-6-9-3   Terms of office
   
2-6-9-4   Organization
   
2-6-9-5   Responsibilities, powers and duties
   
2-6-9-6   Assistance and staff support
Part 10: New Mexico Veterans Memorial Review Committee
   
2-6-10-1   Purpose
   
2-6-10-2   Definitions
   
2-6-10-3   Findings
   
2-6-10-4   The New Mexico Veterans Memorial Review Committee created
   
2-6-10-5   Authorization of other permanent memorials and policies for the
creation and installation of memorials at the New Mexico Veterans Memorial
Part 11: Public Safety Tax Advisory Board
   
2-6-11-1   Short title
   
2-6-11-2   Findings
   
2-6-11-3   Membership, terms and appointments
   
2-6-11-4   Duties
Part 12: Early Head Start Program Governance Advisory Committee
   
2-6-12-1   Definitions
   
2-6-12-2   Early Head Start Program Governance Advisory Committee created;
membership
   
2-6-12-3   Organization
   
2-6-12-4   Duties, responsibilities and powers
   
2-6-12-5   Reports by the committee
   
2-6-12-6   Training and technical assistance
Part 13. The Central Avenue Business Advisory Board
   
2-6-13-1   Establishment of Board
   
2-6-13-2   Appointment and assignment of districts
   
2-6-13-3   Duties, responsibilities and powers
   
2-6-13-4   Support
   
2-6-13-5   Board meetings
   
2-6-13-6   Coordination
   
2-6-13-7   Sunset clause
Part 14: Beautification Committee
   
2-6-14   Beautification Committee
Part 15: Active Transportation Committee
   
2-6-15   City of Albuquerque’s Greater Albuquerque active transportation
committee
Part 16: Open Space Advisory Board
   
2-6-16   Open space advisory board
Part 17: Recreational Trails Committee
   
2-6-17   City of Albuquerque’s Greater Albuquerque recreational trails
committee
Part 18: Commission on Domestic Violence and Sexual Assault
   
2-6-18-1   Short title
   
2-6-18-2   Composition
   
2-6-18-3   Meetings
   
2-6-18-4   Duties and powers
   
2-6-18-5   Initial terms
Part 19: Route 66 Visitors Center Commission
   
2-6-19-1   Short title
   
2-6-19-2   Mission and goals
   
2-6-19-3   Composition of the commission
   
2-6-19-4   Appointments
   
2-6-19-5   Organization and meetings
   
2-6-19-6   Duties and powers of the commission
[Part 20: Boundary Area Advisory Committee]
   
2-6-20-1   Short title
   
2-6-20-2   Definitions
   
2-6-20-3   Purpose, duties and powers
   
2-6-20-4   Committee created
   
2-6-20-5   Contracting authority
Cross-reference:
   
Accountability in Government Oversight Committee, see § 2-10-5
   
Administrative Real Property Review Board, see § 5-2-2(A)
   
Airport Advisory Board, see § 7-1-2-1 et seq.
   
Albuquerque Arts Board, see § 10-5-3 
   
Albuquerque Cable Television Advisory Board, see § 13-5-2-1
   
Albuquerque Sister-City Board, see § 10-7-1
   
Anderson/Abruzzo International Balloon Museum Board of Trustees, § 10-4-5-1
   
Biological Park Advisory Board, § 10-2-2-1 et seq.
   
City Labor-Management Relations Board, see § 3-2-16
   
Commission on Alcohol and Substance Abuse, see §§ 9-1-1-1 et seq.
   
Conference Committee on the Budget, see § 2-11-11
   
Debarment hearing procedures, see § 5-7-6
   
Development Commission, see § 14-8-6-1 et seq.
   
Energy Conservation Council, see § 14-8-5-1 et seq.
   
Environmental Planning Commission, see §§ 14-13-3-1 et seq.
   
Government Cable Channel Board of Directors, see § 13-5-2-2
   
Housing and Neighborhood Economic Development Committee, see § 4-2-2-4(A)
   
Human Rights Board, see §§ 11-3-4 - 11-3-6
   
Investment Committee, see § 4-1-9
   
Joint Air Quality Control Board, see § 9-5-1-3
   Landmarks and Urban Conservation Commission, see § 14-12-5
   
Library Advisory Board, see § 10-6-1
   
Lodgers' Tax Advisory Board, see § 4-4-13
   
Metropolitan Environmental Health Advisory Board, see §§ 9-5-6-1 et seq.
   
Metropolitan Parks and Recreation Advisory Board, see §§ 10-1-2-1 et seq.
   
Metropolitan Redevelopment Agency, see § 14-8-4-1 et seq.
   
Municipal Golf Advisory Board, see § 10-8-1
   
Neighborhood Associations, see § 14-8-2-1 et seq.
   
Old Town Portal Market Advisory Board, see § 13-3-2-7
   
Personnel Board, see § 3-1-4
   
Public Museum Board of Trustees, see § 10-4-1-3
   
Police Oversight Agency, see §§ 9-4-1-1 et seq.
   
Risk Management Claims Review Board, see § 2-8-2-6
   
Selection Advisory Committee for professional services, see §§ 14-7-2-1 et seq.
   
Supplemental Retirement Fund Committee, see § 3-6-3
   
Technical Standards Committee, see § 14-5-2-15
   
Urban Enhancement Trust Fund Citizens Committee, see § 4-2-1-3(D)
   
Urban Renewal Agency, see § 14-8-3-1 et seq.
   (Zoning) Board of Appeals for Special Zoning Exceptions, see §§ 14-8-7-1 et
seq.
PART 1: GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 2-6-1-1 SHORT TITLE.
   Sections
2-6-1-1 et seq. shall be known and may be cited as the "Public Boards,
Commissions and Committees Ordinance."
('74 Code, § 1-12-1) (Ord. 55-1992)
§ 2-6-1-2 DEFINITION.
   For the purpose of §§
2-6-1-1 et seq., the following definitions shall apply unless the context
clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   PUBLIC BOARDS, COMMISSIONS and COMMITTEES. Every board, commission,
committee and other similar body whose meetings are required by the Open
Meetings Act, Chapter 10, Article 15 NMSA 1978, as amended and as supplemented
from time to time, to be open to the public.
('74 Code, § 1-12-2) (Ord. 55-1992)
§ 2-6-1-3 MEMBERSHIP.
   The following shall govern the qualifications, appointment and conduct of
members of the public boards, commissions and committees of the city; provided
that the provisions relating to qualifications and appointment of members of
public boards, commissions and committees of the city shall apply only to
members who are appointed after the effective date of §§
2-6-1-1 et seq. and that any member of any public board, commission or
committee in existence on the effective date of §§
2-6-1-1 et seq. shall complete the term of office for which such member was
appointed, unless said member's conduct is in violation of §§
2-6-1-1 et seq.
   (A)   Qualifications.
      (1)   Each person appointed to any public board, commission or committee
shall normally be a resident of the city.
      (2)   No person regularly employed on a full-time basis by the city shall
be appointed to any public board, commission or committee; provided that the
Mayor, Councillors or administrative officers of the city may be appointed as
ex officio members.
      (3)   No member of the immediate family of any elected city official
shall be appointed to any public board, commission or committee.
      (4)   No person shall be a member of more than one public board,
commission or committee at any one time.
      (5)   No person shall serve more than two consecutive terms on any public
board, commission or committee; provided that if a person is appointed to fill
an unexpired term of another person, that term shall not be considered a term
for the purpose of this limitation if the time remaining in the term at the
time of the appointment is one year or less.
   (B)   Appointments.
      (1)   Except as otherwise provided by ordinance the Mayor, with the
advice and consent of the Council, shall appoint the members of the public
boards, commissions and committees. An appointment is not effective until
Council approves it.
      (2)   The members of each public board, commission or committee shall be
appointed from the broadest possible base of the community at large and, to the
fullest extent possible, the Mayor will seek information from interest groups
as to potential appointees.
      (3)   The Mayor shall send written notice of the appointment to the
appointee, which notice shall clearly state that such appointment is made
subject to all the provisions outlined herein, and the member so appointed may
be removed by the Mayor for violation of any of the provisions hereby
established.
      (4)   Each appointment shall be accepted in writing by the appointee
confirming that such appointee accepts the policies outlined herein as a
condition precedent to such appointee's appointment and holding office.
      (5)   Each appointment shall be for a term of three years unless the
appointment is to fill a vacancy. The initial terms of members of newly
established public boards, commissions and committees shall be staggered and
shall be for either one, two or three years.
      (6)   Every member, unless removed as provided herein, shall hold office
until a successor has been duly qualified unless the Council has voted not to
approve that member for a reappointment, in which case, the member shall not
serve beyond the date the member's current term expires or the date the Council
votes not to approve the member, whichever is later.
      (7)   For all public boards, commissions or committees, whose members are
not appointed based on recommendations of individual Councilors, the Council
President may notify the Mayor in writing that a term has expired or a position
is otherwise vacant and the Mayor shall have 60 days to submit a recommended
appointment to fill that position. If the Mayor fails to submit a name within
60 days of notification, the Council President shall have the right to make the
appointment subject to the advice and consent of the City Council.
      (8)   In all instances where the appointment provisions for any public
board, commission, or committee require that a City Councilor submit two
recommended appointees to the Mayor and the Mayor shall select one of those to
serve, the following shall apply:
         (a)   Prior to a vacancy or upon the resignation of a member, the
Mayor shall notify the City Councilor of the vacancy in writing.
         (b)   If the City Councilor receives at least two qualified applicants
for the vacant position, the Councilor shall submit two recommended appointees
to fill that position within 60 days following the Mayor’s notification of
vacancy. The Mayor shall then recommend one of the two individuals recommended
by the City Councilor for appointment with the advice and consent of the City
Council. The Mayor shall deliver to the City Council the Mayor’s recommendation
from the two names submitted within 30 calendar days of delivery of the two
names to the Mayor. If the Mayor fails to timely make a recommendation from the
two names submitted, the City Councilor who submitted the names may appoint one
of the two recommended members, subject to the advice and consent of the City
Council. If a Councilor fails to submit two names within 60 days of the Mayor’s
written notification of vacancy, the Mayor may make the appointment, subject to
the advice and consent of the City Council.
         (c)   In the event that the City Councilor receives only one qualified
applicant for a position within a 60-day period following the Mayor’s
notification of a vacancy, then a City Councilor may submit one recommended
appointee to the Mayor, and within 30 calendar days of delivery, the Mayor
shall submit the recommendation to the City Council for appointment with the
advice and consent of the City Council. If the Mayor fails to timely submit the
recommendation, the City Councilor who submitted the name may appoint the
member, subject to the advice and consent of the City Council.
   (C)   Conduct.
      (1)   Any member of a public board, commission or committee may be
removed from office by the Mayor or by an affirmative vote of two-thirds of all
Councillors after due notice and hearing if such member has missed three
consecutive meetings or has been absent from more than 50% of the meetings held
during any twelve consecutive months.
      (2)   Any member of a public board, commission or committee may be
removed from office by the majority of Mayor or by an affirmative vote of two-
thirds of all Councillors after due notice and hearing if such member has
violated any law, regulation or charter provision, or for other good cause such
as the intentional failure to carry out the duties of the board, commission or
committee.
   (D)   Number of Members. Except as may be expressly provided otherwise in
the ordinance or resolution establishing a specific public board, commission or
committee, each public board, commission and committee shall consist of five
members.
('74 Code, § 1-12-3) (Ord. 54-1975; Am. Ord. 60-1975; Am. Ord. 55-1992; Am.
Ord. 35-2003; Am. Ord. 57-2003; Am. Ord. 1-2008; Am. Ord. 2-2008; Am. Ord. 8-
2009; Am. Ord. 2025-010)
§ 2-6-1-4 ORGANIZATION.
   The following provisions shall govern the organizational structure of the
public boards, commissions and committees.
   (A)   Officers.
      (1)   The minimum number of officers of any public board, commission or
committee shall be not less than two officers (such as the Chairperson and
Vice-Chairperson) and such other officers as such public board, commission or
committee may deem necessary.
      (2)   All officers shall be elected by the members for a term of one year
and no officer shall serve more than two consecutive terms.
   (B)   Meetings.
      (1)   All meetings of any public board, commission or committee shall be
open to the public.
         (a)   When a meeting of any public board, commission or committee is
held in person, the meeting shall be held in a city owned facility.
         (b)   A meeting of a public board, commission or committee may be held
remotely or hybrid in-person with a remote option. Any meeting held remotely or
hybrid with a remote option is subject to the requirements of the Open Meetings
Act. Any hybrid in-person meeting with remote option shall also be subject to
subparagraph (a) of this provision of the code.
      (2)   Reasonable notice shall be given to the public prior to any meeting
of any public board, commission or committee. At least once a year, each public
board, commission or committee shall determine what is reasonable notice to the
public; provided that in no event shall notice be less than the notice required
for Council meetings. Each public board, commission and committee shall post on
the City Clerk's web site: its annual schedule of meetings upon adoption of its
annual schedule of meetings; all changes in the annual schedule of meetings;
notice of special meetings; and notice of emergency meetings, giving the time,
date and location of each meeting with a phone number of a contact person for
those disabled people needing assistance to attend and observe the meeting.
      (3)   Minutes shall be kept of each meeting and filed electronically with
the City Clerk by each public board, committee, and commission upon the
approval of such minutes by the public board, committee, or commission. The
City Clerk shall post all minutes received on the City Clerk's web site.
      (4)   Each public board, commission or committee shall meet at least
quarterly provided that hearings by a public body in connection with an
administrative adjudicatory proceeding need only occur as such cases are
brought before such board, commission or committee.
      (5)   A majority of all the members of a public board, commission or
committee shall constitute a quorum for the transaction of business. A motion
shall carry upon the affirmative vote of the majority of the members present at
any meeting. A member of a public board, commission or committee may
participate in a meeting of the public board, commission or committee by means
of a conference telephone or other similar communications equipment when it is
otherwise difficult or impossible for the member to attend the meeting in
person, provided that each member participating by conference telephone can be
identified when speaking, all participants are able to hear each other at the
same time, members of the public attending the meeting are able to hear any
member of the public body who speaks during the meeting and a quorum of the
public board, commission or committee is physically or remotely present at the
meeting.
   (C)   Rules and Regulations.
      (1)   Each public board, commission or committee may promulgate such
rules and regulations for its conduct as may be deemed necessary.
      (2)   If an ordinance or resolution establishing a public board,
commission or committee provides that the public board, commission or committee
may adopt rules and regulations pertaining to matters within its jurisdiction,
the public board, commission or committee shall comply with the following
procedures in adopting such rules and regulations.
         (a)   Notice of the public board, commission or committee's intention
to consider the adoption of a rule or regulation shall be given by posting in
the lobby of City Hall, posting notice electronically on the City Clerk's web
site dedicated to the schedule of rule making hearings and meetings of public
boards, commissions and committees and by giving written notice to the Mayor
and the Chief Administrative Officer. All such notices shall be given at least
14 days prior to the meeting at which the proposed rule or regulation will be
considered and shall be in addition to the notice to be given to the public
pursuant to division (B)(2) hereof. All such notices shall state the time and
location of the meeting and contain a brief description of the proposed rule or
regulation and a location where the full text of the proposed rule or
regulation may be obtained.
         (b)   The meeting, at which the proposed rule or regulation is
considered, shall be open to the public and any person may give testimony in
favor of or in opposition to the proposed rule or regulation, whether such
testimony is given orally or in writing. In considering the proposed rule or
regulation, the public board, commission or committee shall give due
consideration to all such testimony.
         (c)   Notwithstanding division (B)(5) hereof, a proposed rule or
regulation shall be deemed to have been adopted by the public board, committee
or commission upon the affirmative vote of a majority of the entire membership
of the public board, commission or committee plus one additional member
thereof. The rules or regulations shall not go into effect until filed with the
City Clerk as required in this section.
         (d)   All rules and regulations adopted by a public board, commission
or committee shall be promptly filed with the City Clerk and shall bear the
signature of the presiding officer. In addition to filing the signed rule or
regulation, the public board, commission or committee shall file the adopted
rule or regulation electronically on the City Clerk's web site.
         (e)   The electronic filing requirement contained in the previous
subparagraph shall also apply to all rules and regulations adopted by a public
board, commission or committee prior to the effective date of the requirement
in this section to file rules and regulations electronically.
   (D)   Report. At least once each year, every public board, commission or
committee shall present a written report to the Mayor and Council of its
activities for the past year and any recommendations as may be deemed
appropriate.
('74 Code, § 1-12-4) (Ord. 54-1975; Am. Ord. 60-1975; Am. Ord. 55-1992; Am.
Ord. 43-2007; Am. Ord._2023-008)
§ 2-6-1-5 APPLICABILITY.
   (A)   The provisions contained herein shall apply to every public board,
commission and committee of the city. In the event that any of the provisions
contained herein conflict with any specific provision of any ordinance or
resolution establishing a specific public board, commission or committee, such
specific provision shall control.
   (B)   The provisions contained herein shall not apply to those boards,
commissions, committees, task forces and other similar bodies established by
city officials or employees but not appointed or consented to by the City
Council, provided that such groups have no authority to make city policy,
including the power to make rules and regulations.
   (C)   The prohibition contained in §
2-6-1-3(A)(2) shall not apply to the appointment of city employees to those
public boards, commissions and committees which are established to perform a
specific task or tasks and submit a report and which have a duration of not
more than one year.
('74 Code, § 1-12-5) (Ord. 54-1975; Am. Ord. 60-1975; Am. Ord. 55-1992)
§ 2-6-1-6 POLITICAL FORUMS PROHIBITED.
   No public board, commission, or committee shall organize, sponsor, advertise
or host any political forum for candidates running for any elective office.
However, nothing in this Section is intended to restrict the members of boards,
commissions, or committees from engaging in any political activities outside of
the course and scope of their duties as a board, committee, or commission
members.
(Ord._2018-004)
§ 2-6-1-7 DECORUM, CODE OF CONDUCT, AND SOCIAL MEDIA.
   All members of Public Boards, Commissions, and Committees are expected to
follow the following guidelines for ethical conduct:
   (A)   Decorum.
      (1)   Discussions should stay focused on the topic at hand. Board members
and speakers should avoid personal attacks, side conversations, or
interruptions that distract from the business being addressed.
      (2)   The Chair may intervene (make a “point of order”) if the discussion
strays from the topic or lacks professionalism. The Chair will then provide
guidance to steer the conversation back on track.
   (B)   Code of Conduct.
      (1)   Integrity: We act honestly, ethically, and impartially in all our
decisions and actions. We take full responsibility for our conduct and hold
ourselves accountable as members of this board.
      (2)   Transparency: We strive for transparency and openness in all board
activities, including decision-making, stakeholder communication, and public
information dissemination. We foster trust and confidence through open and
honest engagement.
      (3)   Impartiality: We approach all matters with an open mind, free from
bias, prejudice, or favoritism. Our decisions and recommendations are based
solely on merit, evidence, and the principles of fairness.
      (4)   Confidentiality: We safeguard sensitive information obtained during
our board activities, strictly adhering to applicable laws and regulations
regarding data protection and confidentiality.
      (5)   Respect: We treat everyone with dignity, respect, and empathy,
recognizing and valuing the diversity of perspectives and experiences we
encounter.
      (6)   Independence: We think, judge, and act independently. We resist
undue influence, pressure, or interference from outside forces, maintaining our
autonomy and objectivity.
      (7)   Professionalism: We conduct ourselves with professionalism,
civility, and decorum in all board interactions, upholding the highest
standards of conduct and demonstrating respect for all involved.
   (C)   Social Media Personal Posts Policy.
      (1)   Be conscious when mixing your business and personal lives.
      (2)   Social media posts concerning board matters may be a matter of
public record.
      (3)   Do not post anything on social media regarding a pending matter of
the board.
      (4)   Social media posts on board matters may require the posting board
member to recuse themselves from future matters.
      (5)   Social media posts, depending on the content, may form the basis
for removal from the board if the posting brings into question the posting
member’s or the board’s integrity or impartiality.
      (6)   Clarify that your opinions are your own and not the official
position of either the board or the City of Albuquerque.
      (7)   Exercise good judgment in sharing only public information.
      (8)   Be aware that what you say is permanent.
      (9)   When in doubt, do not post/comment.
(Ord. 2025-010)
§ 2-6-1-8 TASK FORCE.
   The Public Boards, Commissions, and Committees Advisory Task Force (“Task
Force”) is hereby established to review the City’s Boards, Commissions, and
Committees annually. The Task Force is an advisory board and shall evaluate
their effectiveness, structure, and compliance with current policies and
recommend any necessary amendments to the City Council and the Mayor.
   (A)   The Task Force shall consist of four City employees with two-year
terms, appointed as follows:
      (1)   Two members appointed by the Council; and
      (2)   Two members appointed by the Mayor.
   (B)   The Task Force shall review one-third of the City’s Boards,
Commissions, and Committees each year to ensure that each entity undergoes
review once every three years. For each Board, Commission, and Council under
review, the Task Force shall:
      (1)   Conduct a thorough review of the delegation of powers and legal
authority for each of the City’s Public Boards, Commissions, and Committees
board;
      (2)   Assess the effectiveness, structure, and roles of the City’s
Boards, Commissions, and Councils;
      (3)   Evaluate whether any Boards, Commissions, or Councils should be
consolidated, eliminated, or modified;
      (4)   Solicit feedback from City support staff and current Board,
Commission, and Council members, as needed; and
      (5)   Prepare a report of its findings and recommendations, including any
proposed Ordinance amendments, and submit the report to the City Council and
Mayor by December 31 of each year.
   (C)   Meeting and Procedures:
      (1)   The Task Force shall convene its first meeting within forty-five
(45) days after all appointments have been made. Following its initial meeting,
the Task Force shall meet at least once annually.
      (2)   The Task Force shall elect a Chairperson at its first meeting.
      (3)   The Task Force shall meet at the call of the Chair or a majority of
its members.
      (4)   A quorum of the Task Force shall consist of a majority of its
members.
   (D)   The Office of the City Clerk shall provide the necessary
administrative support and resources for the Task Force to fulfill its duties.
At least fifteen (15) days before the first meeting of the Task Force, the City
Clerk’s Office shall provide the Task Force with:
      (1)   A list of all Boards, Commissions, and Councils;
      (2)   Known legal authority for their creation and legal duties;
      (3)   The name and contact information of each staff member for each
Board, Commission, or Councils; and
      (4)   Whether the Board, Commission, or Council is an adjudicatory body,
advisory council, quasi-judicial body, an intergovernmental body, or other
similar body.
(Ord. 2025-010)
PART 2: BOARDS, COMMISSIONS AND COMMITTEES DEFENSE AND INDEMNIFICATION
§ 2-6-2-1 SHORT TITLE.
   Sections
2-6-2-1 et seq. shall be known and may be cited as the "Boards, Commissions and
Committees Defense and Indemnification Ordinance."
('74 Code, § 1-23-1) (Ord. 7-1991)
§ 2-6-2-2 PURPOSE.
   The purpose of §§
2-6-2-1 et seq. is to establish a policy of the city that the city will defend
and indemnify members of the city's boards, commissions and committees from
claims brought against such members while acting within the scope of the
members' duties, responsibilities and service on city boards, commissions and
committees.
('74 Code, § 1-23-2) (Ord. 7-1991)
§ 2-6-2-3 DEFINITION.
   For the purpose of §§
2-6-2-1 et seq. the following definition shall apply unless the context clearly
indicates or requires a different meaning.
   MEMBER. A member of any of the city's boards, commissions and committees
established by Charter, ordinance or resolution.
('74 Code, § 1-23-3) (Ord. 7-1991)
§ 2-6-2-4 DEFENSE AND INDEMNIFICATION.
   (A)   The city shall provide a defense, including costs and attorneys' fees,
for a member when liability is sought for:
      (1)   Any tort alleged to have been committed by the member while acting
within the scope of the member's duties, responsibilities and service on a city
board, commission or committee; or
      (2)   Any violation of property rights or any rights, privileges or
immunities secured by the constitution and laws of the United States or the
constitution and laws of New Mexico when alleged to have been committed by the
member while acting within the scope of the member's duties, responsibilities
and service on a city board, commission or committee.
   (B)   The city shall pay any settlement or final judgment entered against a
member for:
      (1)   Any tort alleged to have been committed by the member while acting
within the scope of the member's duties, responsibilities and service on a city
board, commission or committee; or
      (2)   Any violation of property rights or any rights, privileges or
immunities secured by the constitution and laws of the Unites States or the
constitution and laws of New Mexico when alleged to have been committed by the
member while acting within the scope of the member's duties, responsibilities
and service on a city board, commission or committee.
   (C)   The city shall have the right to recover from a member of the city's
boards, commissions and committees the amount expended by the city to provide a
defense and pay a settlement agreed to by the member or to pay a final judgment
if it is shown that while acting within the scope of the member's duties,
responsibilities and service, the member acted fraudulently or with actual
intentional malice causing bodily injury, wrongful death or property damage
resulting in the settlement or final judgment.
('74 Code, § 1-23-4) (Ord. 7-1991)
PART 3: INFORMATION SERVICES COMMITTEE
§ 2-6-3-1 COMMITTEE CREATED.
   (A)   An Information Services Committee is hereby created.
   (B)   The Committee shall be composed of seven members serving staggered
terms; terms shall be three years, except the initial terms shall vary in
length so that at least one position of the Committee shall expire each year.
Four members shall be city employees, no two of whom shall be from the same
department; one shall be the Director of the Information Systems Division of
the Department of Finance and Management and one shall be from City Council
staff. Three members shall not be city officials or employees; they shall be
people knowledgeable in information systems, who would have no conflict of
interest or likely future conflict of interest in making recommendations and
decisions as members of the Committee.
   (C)   The chairmanship of the Committee shall annually rotate between the
two city members other than the Director of Information Systems Division, or
the City Council staff member.
   (D)   Matters concerning membership and organization shall be as set forth
in
§§ 2-6-1-1 et seq. unless otherwise provided herein.
   (E)   The Committee should report, administratively, to the Mayor. The Mayor
shall provide staff support to the Committee.
('74 Code, § 1-21-1) (Ord. 46-1990)
§ 2-6-3-2 DUTIES, RESPONSIBILITIES, AND POWERS.
   (A)   The Committee shall develop and recommend to the City Council for
adoption an Information Services Master Plan for the evaluation of information
technology within the city government; the Committee shall recommend amendments
of the Master Plan when appropriate. The Master Plan should be amended by the
City Council at appropriate intervals to keep it current, but no amendment may
be made without the evaluation of the Committee. The Master Plan should contain
city-wide objectives such as the following:
      (1)   Data and software within the city will be shared to the extent
possible; and
      (2)   The city will develop an integrated communications network for
delivery of data, voice, image, and video information.
   (B)   The Committee shall study and establish standards governing the city's
acquisition and use of information technology. These city-wide standards should
include but not be limited to the following:
      (1)   Methodologies for project management and system development;
      (2)   Centrally coordinated spending for equipment, software contracts,
and consultants, to assure consistency with the city's Information Services
Master Plan;
      (3)   Compatibility standards for equipment, software languages,
distributed-processing policy, security control, and data base management;
      (4)   Standards for all network services and interface requirement;
      (5)   Data base standards for compatibility, consistency, retrieval, and
consolidation;
      (6)   Standards for quality assurance governing consulting, advising,
monitoring, and auditing distributed processing activities;
      (7)   Standards for disaster recovery; and
      (8)   Standards for an information systems security program.
   (C)   The Committee shall review and, working with the Chief Administrative
Officer, assure that a data administration function is implemented and is
effectively being performed.
   (D)   Each city department shall prepare an information systems plan
annually and submit it to the Committee for approval. In addition to reviewing
these annual plans, the Committee shall also review, on an ongoing basis, all
proposed information services activities for adherence to the Information
Services Master Plan and to city-wide standards. No significant change in type
or level of information services activities and no significant information
services initiative shall occur without the approval of the Committee. The
Committee shall establish a minimum level of information services activities
which shall require review and approval by the Committee.
('74 Code, § 1-21-2) (Ord. 46-1990)
§ 2-6-3-3 PROCESS.
   (A)   Budgeting.  Information systems projects should come before the
Committee prior to presentation to the City Council as part of a proposal for
the operating budget or capital improvements program; this includes joint city-
county projects. While the Mayor has the right to make a proposal contrary to
the advice of the Committee, the action of the Committee shall be conveyed to
the Council along with each information systems project proposed for funding.
   (B)   Appeal. Binding decisions of the Committee may be appealed to the
Mayor by filing an appeal within 15 days of the Committee decision. The Mayor
shall decide the matter within 15 days.
('74 Code, § 1-21-3) (Ord. 46-1990)
PART 4: [RESERVED]
PART 5: AMERICANS WITH DISABILITIES ACT ADVISORY COUNCIL
§ 2-6-5-1 SHORT TITLE.
   Sections
2-6-5-1 et seq. may be cited as "Americans with Disabilities Act Advisory
Council Ordinance.".
(Ord._2015-018)
§ 2-6-5-2 FINDINGS.
   (A)   In accordance with the requirements of Title II of the Americans with
Disabilities Act of 1990 ("ADA"), the City of Albuquerque will not discriminate
against qualified individuals with disabilities in the provision of services,
programs or activities; and
   (B)   The City of Albuquerque does not discriminate on the basis of
disability in its hiring or employment practices and complies with all
regulations promulgated by the U.S. Equal Employment Opportunity Commission
under Title II of the Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA); and
   (C)   The City of Albuquerque will make reasonable modifications to ensure
that people with disabilities have an equal opportunity to enjoy all city
programs, services and activities; and
   (D)   The City of Albuquerque seeks: to enhance the community by the
contributions of persons with disabilities; to make a positive difference in
their relationship with the community by working toward providing full access
to facilities, programs, services, activities and employment; and to enable
persons with disabilities to equally participate in the social and economic
life of the city.
(Ord._2015-018)
§ 2-6-5-3 MEMBERSHIP AND ORGANIZATION.
   The ABQ ADA Council shall be comprised of seven members, who shall be
individuals with disabilities. All efforts will be made to ensure cross-
disability representation in the selection of ABQ ADA Council members.
   (A)   The mayor shall appoint the ABQ ADA Council members subject to the
advice and consent of the City Council. Both the Mayor and individual City
Councilors may recommend potential Board members to the Mayor.
   (B)   ABQ ADA Council members shall serve without compensation,
   (C)   The ABQ ADA Council shall select, by majority vote, two of the
appointees as the chairperson and vice-chairperson of the Council.
(Ord._2015-018; Am. Ord._2017-006)
§ 2-6-5-4 MEETINGS.
   (A)   The ABQ ADA Council shall meet monthly.
   (B)   Because of the special considerations of persons with disabilities, a
member of the Council may participate in the meeting by means of a conference
telephone, web based broadcast such as skype or other similar communications
equipment and/or software when it is otherwise difficult or impossible for the
member to attend in person, provided that each member participating by such
methods can be identified when speaking, all participants are able to hear each
other at the same time and members of the public attending the meeting are able
to hear any member of the Council who speaks during the meeting.
   (C)   The Council shall comply with all applicable policies, ordinances,
resolutions, rules and regulations of the city.
(Ord._2015-018; Am. Ord._2017-006)
§ 2-6-5-5 DUTIES, RESPONSIBILITIES AND POWERS.
   The mission of the ABQ ADA Advisory Council is to support the civil rights
of, and full integration into, Albuquerque community life for all people with
disabilities. The ABQ ADA Advisory Council shall:
   (A)   Advise the Mayor and City Council on issues affecting people with
disabilities.
   (B)   Provide a public forum to identify, discuss, and address issues
relevant to people with disabilities.
   (C)   Report on accessibility problems around the city.
   (D)   Provide information to the city's ADA Coordinator about disability
concerns expressed by the public.
   (E)   Provide information, educational opportunities and networking
opportunities to all citizens with disabilities.
   (F)   Establish criteria for prioritizing the remedial steps to address
access needs within the community.
   (G)   Develop operating procedures for the ABQ ADA Council.
   (H)   Review city government program services and activity access for
physical, sensory, or other impediments.
   (I)   Review city codes with the city's Office of Diversity & Human Rights
relating to disability rights and access.
   (J)   Make recommendations to the Mayor and City Council regarding a
community transition plan that addresses: barriers (non-structural) to city
programs, services and activities and barriers (structural) to city facilities
including parks and trails.
   (K)   Create an Advisory Committee comprised of at least three
developmentally disabled citizens, and/or their advocates, to provide input to
the ABQ ADA Council to ensure their issues are being addressed.
(Ord._2015-018; Am. Ord._2017-006)
§ 2-6-5-6 TRAINING AND TECHNICAL ASSISTANCE.
   The ABQ ADA Council will receive effective and ongoing training and
technical assistance from the city's Office of Diversity and Human Rights to
ensure that they understand the information they receive and are able to
provide effective oversight of and make appropriate decisions regarding the
City of Albuquerque's compliance with Title II of the Americans with
Disabilities Act of 1990.
(Ord._2015-018; Am. Ord._2017-006)
PART 6: COMMISSION ON AMERICAN INDIAN AND ALASKA NATIVE AFFAIRS
§ 2-6-6-1 INTENT.
   The City of Albuquerque acknowledges and affirms tribal sovereignty and
self- determination for tribal governments. It is the purpose of §§
2-6-6-1 et seq., to recognize and formalize the government-to- government
relationship between the City of Albuquerque and its adjacent tribal
communities and to promote the health, safety, and general welfare of its
citizenry through the creation of a Commission on American Indian and Alaska
Native Affairs. The Commission serves as the forum for government-to-government
relations and as an advocate for American Indian/Alaska Native affairs within
the City of Albuquerque and the surrounding area, including, but not limited
to, matters of employment, education, economy, health, environment,
homelessness, government, and access to services in the City.
(Ord. 20-1995; Am. Ord._2019-004)
§ 2-6-6-2 CREATION.
   There is hereby created the "Commission on American Indian and Alaska Native
Affairs" of the City, consisting of members as set forth below. Except as
provided in §§
2-6-6-1 et seq., the qualifications, appointment and conduct of the members of
the Commission and the organizational structure of the Commission shall be
governed by §§
2-6-1-1, et seq. ROA 1994.
(Ord. 20-1995; Am. Ord._2019-004)
§ 2-6-6-3 TERMS AND APPOINTMENT.
   The Mayor, with the advice and consent of the Council, shall appoint nine
members of the Commission. The Mayor shall endeavor to appoint one member
representing each of the following sectors of the City: education, health,
workforce/employment, environment, government and culture. The remaining three
positions shall be at-large positions, if a representative from a sector cannot
be identified, then a member shall be appointed from the broadest base of the
community at large.
   The Commission may create advisory sub-committees from the community to
provide input to the Commission to ensure that their issues are being
addressed.
   Recognizing the sovereignty and self-determination of the adjacent tribal
nations, the Commission shall also include one member from each of the
following: Sandia Pueblo, Isleta Pueblo, Santa Ana Pueblo, Laguna Pueblo, the
To’hajiilee chapter of the Navajo Nation, and the All Pueblo Council of
Governors, each of whom shall be chosen by the Pueblo, Chapter, or Council and
not subject to appointment by the Mayor or the advice and consent of Council.
The Mayor may choose to have any one or more of the tribally-selected members
serve in a dual role as one of the Mayor's nine appointments.
   The term of office of each member of the Commission shall be three years
from the date of appointment.
   The Commission will interact, collaborate, and engage with the City Native
American Liaison on a continuous basis to ensure American Indian/Alaska Native
concerns, challenges, and resolutions are being advocated and implemented.
(Ord. 20-1995; Am. Ord._2019-004)
§ 2-6-6-4 POWERS AND DUTIES.
   The Board shall:
   (A)   Consult with tribal governments prior to taking actions that affect
federally recognized tribal governments and shall assess the impact of City
programs on tribal communities.
   (B)   Take appropriate steps to remove impediments to working directly and
effectively with tribal governments.
   (C)   Bring American Indian/Alaska Native concerns to the City's attention
by educating the City on the challenges, concerns, and resolutions of American
Indian/Alaska Native citizens of Albuquerque; and by evaluating the social,
economic, environmental, health, educational, and governmental challenges
affecting American Indian/Alaska Native peoples.
   (D)   Encourage employment opportunities of Indians in the City's public and
private sectors.
   (E)   Work with the American Indian/Alaska Native community to increase
awareness of and access to services and programs in the City of Albuquerque;
and advise the Mayor regarding the number of American Indian/Alaska Native
citizens accessing City services.
   (F)   Support economic development for Indian entrepreneurs.
   (G)   Make recommendations to the Mayor for placement of American Indian/
Alaska Natives on City boards, committees, and commissions.
   (H)   Provide an opportunity for the presentation and exchange of ideas in
respect to American Indian/Alaska Native affairs of the City by all interested
persons.
   (I)   Submit annually a written report of its activities and an evaluation
of the effectiveness of §§
2-6-6-1 et seq. to the Mayor and the City Council with recommendations for
changes.
(Ord. 20-1995; Am. Ord._2019-004)
PART 7: YOUTH ADVISORY COUNCIL
§ 2-6-7-1 INTENT.
   The intent of §§
2-6-7-1 et seq. is to formalize the way the City collects information from
youth about City programs and policies that affect them by creating and
describing the powers of the City of Albuquerque Youth Advisory Council.
(Ord. 4-1997)
§ 2-6-7-2 CITY OF ALBUQUERQUE YOUTH ADVISORY COUNCIL CREATED.
   There is hereby created a Youth Advisory Council (Council) which shall be
composed of up to twenty-one (21) youth representatives, 13 to 20 years of age,
who reside within the Albuquerque City limits.
(Ord. 4-1997)
§ 2-6-7-3 MEMBERSHIP.
   The members of the City Youth Advisory Council shall be selected as follows:
   (A)   Once each year, an open call for youth volunteers to apply for the
Youth Advisory Council shall be publicized and promoted by the City.
   (B)   Youth responding to the open call shall submit a one-page essay
describing why they should be selected for the Council. A parent or guardian of
the responding youth shall be required to sign the essay, indicating their
support of the application.
   (C)   From the letters submitted from the open call, the Mayor, with the
advice and consent of the City Council, shall appoint youth to serve on the
Youth Advisory Council.
   (D)   Terms of office shall be three years. The initial group of members
shall have staggered terms, such that one-third of the original membership will
have a one-year term, one-third shall have a two-year term, and the remainder
shall have a three-year term. The Mayor shall determine which member is to
serve which term.
   (E)   Any vacancy occurring other than by expiration of term shall be filled
by appointment of the Mayor with the advice and consent of the City Council,
and such appointment shall be for the unexpired term of the member whom he/she
is to succeed.
(Ord. 4-1997)
§ 2-6-7-4 DUTIES.
   The powers and duties of the Youth Advisory Council shall be as follows:
   (A)   Advise the Mayor and City Council on City programs geared toward
youth, including the need for new or expanded programs.
   (B)   Facilitate at least two “Job Shadow” days each year to enable other
youth to learn more about City programs and possible career fields.
   (C)   Serve as the Mayor's liaison to other youth-oriented organizations.
   (D)   Annually develop and implement a public service project.
   (E)   Promote and assist in the establishment of effective programs for the
prevention of delinquency, youth crimes, crimes against youth, and neglect.
   (F)   Other duties requested by the City.
(Ord. 4-1997)
§ 2-6-7-5 ORGANIZATION.
   (A)   Officers.
      (1)   The minimum number of officers of the Council shall be not less
than two officers (such as the Chairperson and Vice Chairperson), plus such
other officers as the Council may deem necessary.
      (2)   All officers shall be elected by the members for a term of one
year, and no officer shall serve more than two consecutive terms in the same
office.
   (B)   Meetings.
      (1)   All meetings of the Council shall be open to the public and,
insofar as possible, shall be held at a City-owned facility.
      (2)   The Council shall meet at least quarterly.
      (3)   A majority of all the members of the Council shall constitute a
quorum for the transaction of business. A motion shall carry upon the
affirmative vote of the majority of the members present at any meeting at which
a quorum is present.
   (C)   Staff support. City staff support for the Council shall come from the
Department of Family and Community Services.
(Ord. 4-1997)
PART 8: WATER PROTECTION ADVISORY BOARD
§ 2-6-8-1 SHORT TITLE.
   This ordinance shall be known and may be cited as the “Water Protection
Advisory Board Ordinance.”
(Ord. 36-1997; Am. Ord. 39-2006)
§ 2-6-8-2 DEFINITIONS.
    For purposes of this ordinance, the following definitions shall apply:
   AUTHORITY. The Albuquerque Bernalillo County Water Utility Authority.
   AUTHORITY EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR. Executive Director of the Albuquerque
Bernalillo County Water Utility Authority or his or her authorized
representative.
   BOARD. The Water Protection Advisory Board created by this ordinance.
   CHIEF ADMINISTRATIVE OFFICER. Chief Administrative Officer of the City of
Albuquerque or his or her authorized representative.
   CITY. City of Albuquerque, New Mexico.
   CITY COUNCIL. Albuquerque City Council.
   COUNTY. County of Bernalillo, New Mexico.
   COUNTY COMMISSION. Board of County Commissioners of Bernalillo County.
   COUNTY MANAGER. County Manager of Bernalillo County or his or her authorized
representative.
   GROUND WATER PROTECTION POLICY AND ACTION PLAN or “GPPAP.” The Albuquerque/
Bernalillo County Ground-Water Protection Policy and Action Plan, adopted by
the County in Resolution No. AR 121-93 on November 23, 1993, and the City in
Resolution No. R-57, Enactment No. 81-1994, on August 12, 1994.
   MAYOR. Mayor of the City of Albuquerque or his or her authorized
representative.
   POLICY IMPLEMENTATION COMMITTEE. The joint City/Authority/County committee,
co-chaired by the County Manager, the Authority Executive Director, and the
Chief Administrative Officer or their designees, which is charged with
implementing GPPAP or other water quality protection programs at the
administrative level and providing oversight and policy direction.
(Ord. 36-1997; Am. Ord. 39-2006)
§ 2-6-8-3 PURPOSE.
   The purpose of the Water Protection Advisory Board Ordinance is to establish
a combined City, Authority, and County advisory board to:
   (A)   Study and advise the City, the Authority, and the County on surface
and ground water protection concerns, including policies necessary to enhance
protection of surface and ground water quality;
   (B)   Oversee implementation of the Ground Water Protection Policy and
Action Plan;
   (C)   Promote consistency in City, Authority, and County actions to protect
surface and ground water quality; and
   (D)   Advocate effective protection of surface and ground water quality.
(Ord. 36-1997; Am. Ord. 39-2006)
§ 2-6-8-4 BOARD CREATED.
   (A)   Creation. There is hereby created a Ground Water Protection Advisory
Board.
   (B)   Membership. The Board shall consist of nine members, three of whom
shall be appointed by the Mayor with the advice and consent of the City
Council, two of whom shall be appointed by the Authority, and three of whom
shall be appointed by the County Commission. One member shall be appointed
jointly by the County Commission and the Mayor with the advice and consent of
the City Council. Initial membership shall consist of existing Groundwater
Protection Advisory Board appointed members.
   (C)   Terms. Members shall be appointed for three year terms. No member
shall serve more than two consecutive terms at a time. Members whose terms
expire may continue to serve until a successor member is appointed. In such
case when a new member is appointed, the term shall relate back to the time of
expiration of the previous term. Service for a partial term of greater than two
years constitutes a term for the purpose of determining the consecutive number
of terms permissible. The terms of the members of the Board shall be staggered
so that three members' terms shall expire each calendar year. The jointly-
appointed member shall be appointed for a three-year term. Existing Groundwater
Protection Advisory Board members shall continue to serve on the Water
Protection Advisory Board until their terms expire.
   (D) Vacancies. Vacant positions occurring as a result of an expired term
shall be filled by the entity that appointed the outgoing member. Vacant
positions occurring for reasons other than an expired term shall be filled by
the entity that appointed the departing member, with the replacement member
serving for the remainder of the unexpired term.
   (E)   Qualifications.
      (1)   Board members shall represent the public interest and have a
commitment to surface or ground water protection. Due to the complexity of the
issues involved in surface and ground water protection, members preferably
should have some technical proficiency in surface or ground water matters.
Also, because surface and ground water protection concerns may vary by
geographic location and type of water and wastewater systems used, members
should be representative of the diverse geographic range of the City and the
County.
      (2)   City-appointed members shall be residents of the City and County-
appointed members shall be residents of the County. The jointly-appointed
member shall be a resident of the County. Authority-appointed members shall
reside within the Authority service area.
      (3)   No person employed on a full time basis by either the City or the
County shall be appointed to the Board. No elected City or County official, and
no member of the immediate family of an elected City or County official, shall
be appointed to the Board.
   (F)   Removal. A member of the Board may be removed from office by the
appointing entity for any one or more of the following reasons.
      (1)   The member has been absent from three consecutive meetings, unless
the absence was excused by the Chair. For this purpose, being absent is defined
as not being in attendance 75% or more of the duration of each officially
called meeting.
      (2)   The member has been absent, whether excused or not, from more than
50% of the meetings during any twelve consecutive months.
      (3)   The member is incapacitated, neglectful of duty, or commits
malfeasance in office, as deter- mined by the appointing entity.
(Ord. 36-1997; Am. Ord. 39-2006)
§ 2-6-8-5 ORGANIZATION; MEETINGS.
   (A)   Officers. Annually, in the first quarter of the calendar year, the
Board shall elect a Chair, Vice-Chair, and any other officers which the Board
deems appropriate. Officers shall be elected by vote of the majority of the
Board members. Officers shall be elected for one-year terms. No officer shall
serve in the same position for more than two consecutive terms at a time.
Existing Groundwater Protection Advisory Board officers shall continue to serve
on the Water Protection Advisory Board until their term expires.
   (B)   Meetings.
      (1)   The Board shall hold meetings at least once a month, unless a
quorum is unavailable despite best efforts to schedule a convenient meeting or
for other good reason, to meet workload demands during the initial
implementation of GPPAP. Should the work-load diminish sufficiently, as
determined by the Board, the Board may reduce its meeting schedule to no less
than quarterly. The Board shall meet a minimum of four times a year.
      (2)   All meetings shall be in compliance with the provisions of the Open
Meetings Act.
   (C)   Conduct of Business. Unless the Board adopts other written rules to
govern its proceedings, the Board shall conduct business according to Robert's
Rules of Order, which the Board may modify in writing as it deems appropriate.
A quorum of five members shall be necessary to transact business, adopt
motions, or conduct voting. Actions may be decided by a majority of the members
present.
   (D)   Records. A record shall be kept of all meetings of the Board,
including the vote of each member on each action. The records shall be filed
with the City and County Clerks and shall be made available for public
inspection at reasonable times.
   (E)   Conflict of Interest.
      (1)   Any member who has a conflict of interest regarding a policy,
decision, or determination before the Board or one of its committees or work
groups on which the member serves shall, as soon as possible after the conflict
of interest becomes apparent, disclose the nature of the conflict to each of
the other members voting on the matter. Disclosures shall be recorded.
Disclosure of a conflict of interest shall not disqualify a member from
participating in any discussion, debate, or vote on the matter unless:
         (a)   A majority of the remaining members voting on the matter
determines that, for reasons of propriety, the member should not participate or
vote on the matter; or
         (b)   The member voluntarily disqualifies himself or herself.
      (2)   For purposes of this ordinance, a CONFLICT OF INTEREST means that
the member, member's spouse, or member's minor child has an adverse or
financial interest in the outcome of any policy, decision, or determination
before the Board or one of its committees or work groups on which the member
serves.
(Ord. 36-1997; Am. Ord. 39-2006)
§ 2-6-8-6 STAFF.
   (A)   The Chief Administrative Officer, the Executive Director, and the
County Manager shall provide staff and resources, including the services of the
Policy Implementation Committee, as necessary and appropriate to assist the
Board.
   (B)   The City, the Authority, and the County may jointly fund a contract
for professional, technical, or administrative services to be supplied to the
Board or the Policy Implementation Committee as necessary to meet their
responsibilities. In the event of a jointly funded contract, each government's
ordinances and regulations on approval of contracts for these services shall
apply only to the amount of the contract that will be paid by the government,
after any reimbursement from the other government, and not to the total
contract amount.
(Ord. 36-1997; Am. Ord. 39-2006)
§ 2-6-8-7 DUTIES AND POWERS OF THE BOARD.
   (A)   There is hereby delegated to the Board the following power and
authority:
      (1)   Study. The Board shall study means of protecting and improving
ground water quality.
      (2)   Advisory Functions. The Board shall advise the Mayor and the City
Council, the Authority, the County Commission, the Environmental Planning
Commission and the County Planning Commission, and City, Authority, and County
staff on protection of the surface and ground water, including recommended
policies on surface and ground water protection measures; ordinances
appropriate for effecting such policies, based on GPPAP; the adequacy of
surface and ground water protection staffing, budgets and progress; and other
appropriate matters.
      (3)   Oversight Functions. The Board shall oversee the implementation of
GPPAP; monitor and review City, Authority, and County actions to protect the
surface and ground water; foster the continued cooperation of the City,
Authority, and County in surface and ground water protection; and promote
consistency in City, Authority, and County surface and ground water protection
measures.
      (4)   Public Education and Advocacy. The Board shall engage in public
education and advocacy for the effective protection of surface and ground water
quality by public officials as well as residents of the City, the Authority
service area, the County, and their environs.
      (5)   Reports. The Board shall report at least annually to the Authority,
County Commission and the Mayor and the City Council on its activities,
progress made in implementing GPPAP, and any recommendations for additional
policies or ordinances to protect surface and ground water quality. At least
every five years, the Board shall undertake a comprehensive review and
evaluation of the effectiveness of GPPAP and recommend any necessary changes to
it.
      (6)   Other Duties, Responsibilities, and Powers. The Board shall have
other duties, responsi- bilities, and powers as may be jointly delegated to it
by the City Council, the Authority, and the County Commission.
      (7)   Comprehensive Surface Water Quality Assessment and Implementation
Program. The Board shall work with City, County, and Authority staff in
outlining and developing programs for surface water in addition to existing
ground water protection programs. The Board shall work with staff in developing
a timeline for implementation of the activities including costs,
responsibilities and other issues related to surface water protection.
   (B)   Committees and Work Groups. The Board may form committees to assist
the Board with its assigned duties, responsibilities, and powers. Com- mittees
shall consist of members of the Board selected by the Board. The Board also may
form advisory work groups to carry out specific assignments that will assist
the Board in performing its duties and responsibilities. The Board may
establish the specific assignments and set guidelines and timetables for the
work group in performing its work. At least one Board member, selected by the
Board, shall serve on a work group. The Board may invite members of the general
public, City, Authority, or County staff, or elected officials to serve on its
work groups as it deems appropriate.
   (C)   Relationship of the Board to the Policy Implementation Committee. The
Board may take an advisory position on a matter that is different from the
advisory position of the Policy Implementation Commit- tee. The Board, however,
shall not convey its advice to another governmental body without also conveying
the different position of the Policy Implementation Committee on the same
matter.
(Ord. 36-1997; Am. Ord. 39-2006)
PART 9: ALBUQUERQUE COMMISSION ON
IMMIGRANT AFFAIRS AND SERVICES
§ 2-6-9-1 PURPOSE.
   The Albuquerque Commission on Immigrant Affairs and Services (ACIAS) will
serve an advocacy role for the immigrant communities living within the City of
Albuquerque and will act as a liaison between the City and the immigrant
communities. The ACIAS will recognize and inform the City on the contributions
of immigrant communities. The ACIAS will study and advise the City as to the
needs and problems of immigrant communities, including but not limited to those
in the areas of housing, human rights, criminal justice/law enforcement,
employment, education and healthcare. The ACIAS will make recommendations for
the implementation of R-151, Enactment Number 9-2001 and evaluate its impact on
Albuquerque's immigrant communities.
(Ord. 25-2001)
§ 2-6-9-2 MEMBERSHIP.
   The ACIAS shall consist of no fewer than nine and no more than thirteen
members appointed by the Mayor with the advice and consent of the Council. A
simple majority of the ACIAS shall be immigrants. The Mayor will solicit
recommendations for members from immigrant communities and from immigrant
service and advocacy agencies and organizations.
(Ord. 25-2001)
§ 2-6-9-3 TERMS OF OFFICE.
   The term of office of each member shall be three years. However, the initial
board will have three members with one-year terms and three members with two-
year terms. The remaining members will have three-year terms. The Mayor shall
determine which members are to serve which terms.
(Ord. 25-2001)
§ 2-6-9-4 ORGANIZATION.
   Matters concerning organization of the ACIAS shall be as set forth in
Article
2-6-1-4 ROA 1994.
(Ord. 25-2001)
§ 2-6-9-5 RESPONSIBILITIES, POWERS AND DUTIES.
   (A)   In consultation/collaboration with the Department of Family and
Community Services, recommend/propose a concrete plan for the creation and
implementation of the City's Immigrant Resource Program.
   (B)   Analyze immigrant access to and use of City services and programs.
Identify obstacles to access and recommend changes to overcome said obstacles.
Work with immigrant communities to increase awareness of and access to City
programs and services.
   (C)   Recommend objectives for a legislative agenda that encourages Congress
to enact just and humane immigration reforms that provide immigrants and their
families with rights in this country that are commensurate with human dignity
and their status as taxpayers and contributing members of our community, and
that the State of New Mexico Legislature revise its laws and policies for
health care, education and driver's licenses such that immigrants and their
families will have fair access to those services and privileges.
   (D)   Evaluate policies and practices of City departments for compliance
with R-151, Enactment Number 9-2001 and recommend specific changes if needed.
   (E)   Recognize, document and disseminate contributions made by
Albuquerque's immigrant communities.
(Ord. 25-2001)
§ 2-6-9-6 ASSISTANCE AND STAFF SUPPORT.
   Upon request, the Mayor shall provide assistance and staff support as is
feasible and within existing budget limitations.
(Ord. 25-2001)
PART 10: NEW MEXICO VETERANS MEMORIAL REVIEW COMMITTEE
§ 2-6-10-1 PURPOSE.
   Establish policies for the creation and installation of Veterans' Memorials
on City of Albuquerque property for wars and military actions and mementos
specific to individuals, groups or events and creating the New Mexico Veterans
Memorial Review Committee.
(Ord. 63-2001)
§ 2-6-10-2 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this ordinance, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning:
   MEMENTO. A commemorative device, object and/or descriptive plaque that
honors a New Mexico Veteran, group or event and his/her/their military
experience.
   MEMORIAL. A work of art, a memorial wall, a sculpture or statue or other
construction which honors veterans or military action by the United States
Government and includes an interpretative plaque.
   NEW MEXICO VETERANS MEMORIAL PARK. The Veterans Memorial Park which
identifies and honors the shared experiences of all New Mexico Veterans in all
U.S. Military actions and which has facilities needed for private and public
ceremonies and is the site for Memorials and Mementos related to New Mexico
veterans. The New Mexico Veterans Memorial is a "park" within Phil Chacon Park
and is located at 1100 Louisiana Blvd. SE.
   NEW MEXICO VETERANS MEMORIAL GARDEN. The area of the Memorial Grounds that
includes seven (7) specific venues designed to evoke memories of experiences
common to all veterans.
   NEW MEXICO VETERANS MEMORIAL REVIEW COMMITTEE. A five-member public
committee comprised of appropriate City boards and agencies, appropriate
veterans and Veterans Park related organizations, which meets for purpose of
review and approval of requests related to veterans memorials on the grounds of
the New Mexico Veterans Memorial Park.
   VETERANS AND MILITARY AFFAIRS ADVISORY BOARD. Advisory Board to the Mayor
for the identification of problems and needs faced by veterans and their
dependents residing in the City of Albuquerque; the Board shall assist the
Mayor in developing and implementing solutions where possible, that may
alleviate or remedy these problems and needs.
(Ord. 63-2001; Am. Ord._2015-004)
§ 2-6-10-3 FINDINGS.
   The City has considered relevant information including the input and
participation of various groups including veterans groups, civic groups and
military units in Albuquerque for the ongoing development and construction of
the New Mexico Veterans Memorial based on the following criteria:
   (A)   Represents all veterans regardless of when they served, whether in
peacetime or war;
   (B)   Represents all branches of military service, past, present and future;
   (C)   Honors men, women, groups and organizations that have served in or are
associated with the military;
   (D)   Respects the multi- cultural backgrounds of all New Mexico Veterans;
   (E)   Includes or will include a range of facilities for public and private
functions as well as for personal reflection; and
   (F)   Provides opportunities for the commemoration of both shared and
personal military experiences through the creation and installation of
complementary Memorials and Mementos.
(Ord. 63-2001; Am. Ord._2015-004)
§ 2-6-10-4 THE NEW MEXICO VETERANS MEMORIAL REVIEW COMMITTEE CREATED.
   A New Mexico Veterans Memorial Review Committee (VMRC) is hereby created.
   (A)   Membership. The Committee shall be composed of five (5) members as
designated by the group they represent: the United Veterans' Council of Greater
Albuquerque, the New Mexico Veterans Memorial Foundation, the Mayor's Liaison
to Veterans and Military Affairs, the Albuquerque Arts Board and the Architect
of Record for the New Mexico Veterans Park. Additionally, ex-officio members
shall include a New Mexico Licensed Engineer, a representative of the Parks and
Recreation Department and the Public Art Urban Enhancement Program Manager.
   (B)   Selection of Committee Members. A representative from the United
Veterans' Council of Greater Albuquerque, the New Mexico Veterans Memorial
Foundation, the Mayor's Liaison to Veterans and Military Affairs, the
Albuquerque Arts Board and the Architect of Record for the New Mexico Veterans
Park shall be selected by the respective organization through a process
established by each organization represented.
   (C)   Terms of Service. Each representative of the organizations listed
shall serve on the VMRC until the term expires with the respective
organization.
   (D)   Duties and Powers of the Committee. The VMRC shall develop criteria
with which to evaluate complementary Memorial and Memento proposals including
but not limited to who may submit requests for a Memorial or Memento and
guidelines relating to content, size, design, location, maintenance plans and
funding.
   (E)   Chairperson. The Chairperson of the Committee shall be selected
annually by a vote of the Committee.
   (F)   Staffing. The Public Art Urban Enhancement Program of the Cultural
Services Department shall provide staff support to the VMRC.
(Ord. 63-2001; Am. Ord._2015-004)
§ 2-6-10-5 AUTHORIZATION OF OTHER PERMANENT MEMORIALS AND POLICIES FOR THE
CREATION AND INSTALLATION OF MEMORIALS AT THE NEW MEXICO VETERANS MEMORIAL.
   (A)   Future Veterans Memorials. Memorials funded in whole or in part by the
City of Albuquerque to honor veterans of specific wars, branches of service,
etc. will only be planned for and installed on the grounds of the New Mexico
Veterans Memorial outside of the Garden, providing that the design,
installation and maintenance plans are approved by the VMRC and that they meet
the criteria described herein together with other such criteria that may be
developed by the VMRC.
   (B)   Military Hardware. No military hardware or equipment may be
permanently displayed out- of-doors on the New Mexico Veterans Memorial
grounds. Generally, memorials and mementos will be distributed throughout the
New Mexico Veterans Memorial grounds to emphasize the common experiences of all
veterans.
   (C)   Identifying Plaques. Each approved Memorial must include a plaque that
describes the Memorial, its designer or creator, source of funding and the year
dedicated. The VMRC will review the format for the plaque, including its design
and will stipulate media in which it will be fabricated. The sponsoring group
or unit must pay for the cost of fabricating and installing the plaque, as well
as a percentage based contribution to the memorial conservation and maintenance
fund, as set by the VMRC and managed by the City's designated contractor.
   (D)   Relocation of existing memorials and artwork.  Veterans Memorials,
which are located in the community at sites other than at the New Mexico
Veterans Memorial, are eligible to be moved to the New Mexico Veterans Memorial
at the request of stakeholders, but must be approved by the VMRC.
(Ord. 63-2001; Am. Ord._2015-004)
PART 11: PUBLIC SAFETY TAX ADVISORY BOARD
§ 2-6-11-1 SHORT TITLE.
   Sections
2-6-11-1 et seq. may be cited as the "Public Safety Tax Advisory Board
Ordinance".
(Ord._2019-028)
§ 2-6-11-2 FINDINGS.
   The City Council finds that an ongoing review is needed to ensure that the
use of the public safety tax most effectively meets the needs of the city and
its residents. The City Council also finds that an advisory board consisting of
key city and citizen public safety stakeholders is the most appropriate vehicle
to review the use of the tax, and suggest changes, if necessary, in the
distribution of public safety tax revenue.
(Ord._2019-028)
§ 2-6-11-3 MEMBERSHIP, TERMS AND APPOINTMENTS.
   There is hereby created a Public Safety Tax Advisory Board to review and
recommend to the Council the use and distribution of the public safety tax
imposed at §
4-3-8-1 et seq. ROA 1994.
   (A)   The Board shall consist of five members as follows: one member with
experience or financial expertise in crime prevention and intervention
appointed by the Mayor with the advice and consent of the Council, one member
with experience or financial expertise in law enforcement appointed by the
Mayor with the advice and consent of the Council, one member with experience or
financial expertise in emergency medical services appointed by the Mayor with
the advice and consent of the Council, and two at-large members appointed by
the City Council. The Board shall elect a chair from its members.
   (B)   The term of office for members of the Board shall be for three years
unless the appointment is to fill a vacancy. Each member may serve a maximum of
two terms.
(Ord._2019-028)
§ 2-6-11-4 DUTIES.
   The duties of the Board shall be as follows:
   (A)   Review the use of the public safety tax revenue for the previous
fiscal year.
   (B)   Review the distribution of revenue among the three funded city
departments and recommend changes, if necessary, to the percentage of revenue
distributed, based on community conditions.
   (C)   Provide recommendations to the Mayor and City Council by January 1 for
the proposed use of public safety tax revenues for the upcoming fiscal year.
(Ord._2019-028)
PART 12: EARLY HEAD START PROGRAM GOVERNANCE ADVISORY COMMITTEE
§ 2-6-12-1 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of §§
2-6-12-1 et seq., the following definitions shall apply unless the context
clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   COMMITTEE. The Early Head Start Program Governance Advisory Committee.
   EARLY HEAD START PROGRAM. A program that provides low-income pregnant women
and families with children from birth to age 3 with family-centered services
that facilitate child development, support parental roles, and promote self-
sufficiency.
   FAMILY. For the purposes of the Program, all persons:
      (i)   Living in the same household who are:
         (A)   Supported by the income of the parent(s) or guardian(s) of the
child enrolling or participating in the program; or
         (B)   Related to the child by blood, marriage, or adoption; or
         (C)   Related to the child enrolling or participating in the program
as parents or siblings, by blood, marriage, or adoption.
   GUARDIAN. A person legally responsible for a child.
   HEAD START ACT. The Federal Head Start Act 42 U.S.C. 9801 et seq., its
subsequent amendments and successor provisions.
   HEAD START REGULATIONS. The Federal regulations contained in the Code of
Federal Regulations at 45 C.F.R. 1301 et seq., its subsequent amendments and
successor provisions.
   HEALTH. Medical, dental, and mental well-being.
   INDEPENDENT AUDITOR. An individual accountant or an accounting firm, public
or private agency, association, corporation, or partnership, that is
sufficiently independent of the agency being audited to render objective and
unbiased opinions, conclusions, and judgments.
   POLICY COUNCIL. The formal group of parents and community representatives
required to be established by the agency to assist in decisions about the
planning and operation of the program.
   PROGRAM ATTENDANCE. The actual presence and participation in the program of
a child enrolled in an Early Head Start or Head Start program.
   SECRETARY. The Secretary of the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services
or the Secretary's designee.
   STAFF. Paid adults who have responsibilities related to children and their
families who are enrolled in Early Head Start or Head Start programs.
(Ord._2014-016; Am. Ord._2018-002)
§ 2-6-12-2 EARLY HEAD START PROGRAM GOVERNANCE ADVISORY COMMITTEE CREATED;
MEMBERSHIP.
   (A)   The "Early Head Start Program Governance Advisory Committee" is
created. The Committee shall consist of five members appointed by the Mayor
with the advice and consent of the Council.
      (1)   One member must have fiscal/ accounting background and expertise.
      (2)   One member must have early childhood education and development
background.
      (3)   One member must be a licensed attorney.
      (4)   The remaining members must reflect the community served and include
parents of children who are, or were formerly, enrolled in Head Start Programs.
   (B)   Members shall serve three-year terms. However, of the Committee
members first named upon committee formation, two members will have terms
ending July 1, 2019, two members will have terms ending July 1, 2020 and one
will have a term ending July 2021. A member shall not serve more than three
consecutive terms.
   (C)   The Committee shall meet at the call of the chairperson but not less
than once per quarter.
   (D)   The Committee is administratively attached to the Department of Family
and Community Services, and staff for the Committee shall be provided by the
Department.
   (E)   The Committee shall develop bylaws that will be provided to each
member and will include at a minimum:
      (1)   Qualification of members;
      (2)   Delineation of the roles and responsibilities of members;
      (3)   Establishment of a functional committee structure;
      (4)   Policies on committee attendance and conflict of interest;
      (5)   An annual calendar of activity;
      (6)   Such rules and regulations for its conduct as may be deemed
necessary; and
      (7)   Rules of committee procedures.
(Ord._2014-016; Am. Ord._2018-002)
§ 2-6-12-3 ORGANIZATION.
   (A)   Officers.
      (1)   The minimum number of officers of the Committee shall be not less
than two officers (such as the Chairperson and Vice-Chairperson), plus such
other officers as the Committee may deem necessary.
      (2)   All officers shall be elected by the members for a term of one
year, and no officer shall serve more than two consecutive terms.
   (B)   Meetings.
      (1)   All meetings of the Committee shall be open to the public and
insofar as possible shall be held at a facility owned either by the city or the
county.
      (2)   Reasonable notice shall be given to the public prior to any meeting
of the Committee. At least once a year, the Committee shall determine what is
reasonable notice to the public of its meetings; provided that in no event
shall notice be less than the notice required for Council meetings.
      (3)   Minutes shall be kept of each meeting.
      (4)   A majority of all the members of the Committee shall constitute a
quorum for the transaction of business. A motion shall carry upon the
alternative vote of the majority of the members present at any meeting.
(Ord._2014-016; Am. Ord._2018-002)
§ 2-6-12-4 DUTIES, RESPONSIBILITIES AND POWERS.
   The duties, responsibilities and powers of the Committee shall be as
follows:
   (A)   Review the development and implementation of Early Head Start Programs
goals, objectives and policies.
   (B)   Review organizational performance and program progress based on
aggregate performance data reports provided by program management and be
familiar with major programs, services, and initiatives.
   (C)   Be familiar with the Early Head Start Programs strategic direction and
strategic plan that includes an organization vision, short-term and long term
goals and operational and fiscal objectives.
   (D)   Be familiar with the procedures and criteria for recruiting, selecting
and enrolling children.
   (E)   Be familiar with the procedures for selecting Policy Council members.
   (F)   Review applications for funding and amendments to applications for
funding.
   (G)   Review the major financial expenditures and the operating budget of
the Program prior to the Program's submittal of the budget to City Council.
   (H)   Review all aspects of the independent financial audits of the Program,
including review of the draft findings; and track any necessary programmatic
actions or changes arising from the audit.
   (I)   Participate in program self-assessment reviews as scheduled by program
management.
   (J)   Be familiar with the Head Start Program Performance Standards.
(Ord._2014-016; Am. Ord._2018-002)
§ 2-6-12-5 REPORTS BY THE COMMITTEE.
   On a quarterly basis, the Committee shall review the quarterly report that
program staff provide to the Mayor and the City Council with Program
information summaries, including aggregate performance data summaries showing
Program progress in meeting school readiness, enrollment and attendance
reports, family engagement activities and financial information, including
subsidies to the Program from other federal and state and local government
sources.
(Ord._2014-016; Am. Ord._2018-002)
§ 2-6-12-6 TRAINING AND TECHNICAL ASSISTANCE.
   The Committee will receive effective and ongoing training and technical
assistance to ensure that they understand the information they receive and are
able to provide effective oversight of, make appropriate decisions for, and
participate in the functions of the Program.
(Ord._2014-016; Am. Ord._2018-002)
PART 13. THE CENTRAL AVENUE BUSINESS ADVISORY BOARD
§ 2-6-13-1 ESTABLISHMENT OF BOARD.
   (A)   There is hereby created an 11-member advisory board to be known as the
"Central Avenue Business Advisory Board.”
(Ord._2016-012)
§ 2-6-13-2 APPOINTMENT AND ASSIGNMENT OF DISTRICTS.
   (A)   The following positions and districts are hereby created for the
Board:
      (1)   One member to represent the segment of Central Avenue from the
Western city limits to Coors Boulevard.
      (2)   One member to represent the segment of Central Avenue from Coors
Boulevard to the Rio Grande.
      (3)   One member to represent the segment of Central Avenue from the Rio
Grande to 8th Street.
      (4)   One member to represent the segment of Central Avenue from 8th
Street to University Boulevard.
      (5)   One member to represent the segment of Central Avenue from
University Boulevard to Carlisle Boulevard.
      (6)   One member to represent the segment of Central Avenue from Carlisle
Boulevard to San Pedro Road.
      (7)   One member to represent the segment of Central Avenue from San
Pedro Road to Wyoming Boulevard.
      (8)   One member to represent the segment of Central Avenue from Wyoming
Boulevard to Elizabeth Street.
      (9)   One member to represent the segment of Central Avenue from
Elizabeth Street to Tramway Road.
      (10)   Two members to represent the segment of Louisiana Boulevard from
Central Avenue to Indian School Road and the area within the boundaries of the
Uptown Sector Development Plan Area for the purpose of issues relating to the
ART Transit Line.
   (B)   For the original appointments and to fill vacant positions, the
Councilor from the City Council District that overlays a particular Board
District will submit two nominees to the Mayor and the Mayor shall select one
of these to serve on the Board. Where two City Council Districts overlay a
particular Board District, each Councilor will submit one nominee to the Mayor
and the Mayor shall select one of those to serve on the Board. If the Mayor
fails to deliver his recommendation to the Council within 30 days of
submission, the Councilor of that District shall make the appointment with the
advice and consent of the Council.
   (C)   Each nominee must either own property or a business or manage a
property or an existing business within the District they are nominated to
represent. The nominee must reside within the boundaries of the Albuquerque
Metropolitan Statistical Area as designated by the United States Census Bureau.
   (D)   Each board member may only serve a maximum of two consecutive four
year terms.
   (E)   The two board members serving on the Advisory Board who represent the
segment of Louisiana Boulevard from Central Avenue to Indian School Road and
the area within the boundaries of the Uptown Sector Development Plan Area shall
only vote on matters relating to the ART Line.
(Ord._2016-012)
§ 2-6-13-3 DUTIES, RESPONSIBILITIES AND POWERS.
   The Board will:
   (A)   Advise the Transit Department and the City Council on coordinating the
construction, operation and any system improvements of transit lines on Central
with the land uses that adjoin Central Avenue.
   (B)   Advise the Transit Department, the Albuquerque Police Department, and
the City Council on security issues on transit vehicles and at transit stops
and stations.
   (C)   Advise the Albuquerque Police Department on public safety issues and
concerns on Central Avenue.
   (D)   Advise the Albuquerque Metropolitan Redevelopment Authority and the
City Council on the establishment and management of Metropolitan Redevelopment
Areas and the implementation of Metropolitan Redevelopment Area plans.
   (E)   Advise and coordinate with the Albuquerque Economic Development
Department and the City Council on the formation of improvement districts,
business assistance programs, and overall economic development of the Central
Avenue Corridor.
(Ord._2016-012)
§ 2-6-13-4 SUPPORT.
   The Transit Department and the Department of Economic Development shall
staff and provide meeting space for the Board. Other city departments shall
support the work of the Board by providing information and expertise.
(Ord._2016-012)
§ 2-6-13-5 BOARD MEETINGS.
   Board meetings will be held at a minimum of four times a year, or more often
as may be required upon the call of the Chair or a majority of members.
(Ord._2016-012)
§ 2-6-13-6 COORDINATION.
   The Board shall coordinate with the Transit Advisory Board in matters
pertaining to Transit and other committees of the city, and private groups
which may have overlapping responsibilities or interests to ensure consistency
and awareness with one another's issues, considerations, or initiatives.
(Ord._2016-012)
§ 2-6-13-7 SUNSET CLAUSE.
   These §§
2-6-13-1 through
2-6-13-7 shall sunset one year after completion of the A.R.T. project.
(Ord._2016-012)
PART 14: BEAUTIFICATION COMMITTEE
§ 2-6-14 BEAUTIFICATION COMMITTEE.
   (A)   Appointment. The Mayor, with the advice and consent of the Council,
shall appoint a ten-member advisory committee to the EPC to be known as the
Beautification Committee. One member of the Committee shall be a member of the
Metropolitan Parks and Recreation Advisory Board who has been appointed by the
Mayor, and the other members of the Committee shall be broadly representative
of such relevant institutions or organizations as commerce, education,
government, industry, art architecture, landscape architecture and the media.
Of the initial appointments, three members shall be appointed to terms expiring
June 1, 1977, four members shall be appointed to terms expiring June 1, 1978,
and four members shall be appointed to terms expiring June 1, 1979; thereafter,
the terms of all members shall be three years. The member of the Beautification
Committee who is also a member of the Metropolitan Parks and Recreation
Advisory Board shall not remain a member of the Committee when they cease being
a member of the Metropolitan Parks and Recreation Advisory Board.
   (B)   Officers. The Beautification Committee shall elect from its membership
a Chairperson and an assistant chairperson. The Chairperson shall appoint a
secretary. Terms of office shall be one year, with elections held in July. Any
member whose Committee term has not expired is eligible for office.
   (C)   Duties, Responsibilities, Powers.
      (1)   Advise the Environmental Planning Commission on the city plans,
programs, legislation, and needs relating to beautification and maintenance of
beautification.
      (2)   Provide recognition on a periodic basis for the excellence of
beautification programs, including special annual awards for the following
categories: residential, commercial, institutional and public projects.
      (3)   Review existing policies and ordinances affecting the public which
contribute directly or indirectly to the city's physical appearance and make
recommendations to the EPC for any changes that are deemed appropriate.
      (4)   Review policies and practices related to the design and
construction of the city's public facilities and recommend any changes which
would enhance their appearance, structures, garbage receptacles, arroyo systems
and the like.
      (5)   Coordinate with other committees which may have overlapping
responsibilities, with city and other public agency staff or committees and
private groups to ensure consistency and awareness of other efforts.
      (6)   Review applications for variance requests from city sign
regulations and make comments to the Zoning Hearing Examiner.
('74 Code, § 7-15-4) (Ord. 294- 1972; Am. Ord. 79-1981; Am. Ord. 90-1983; Am.
Ord. 50-1990; Am. Ord._2017-025)
PART 15: ACTIVE TRANSPORTATION COMMITTEE
§ 2-6-15 CITY OF ALBUQUERQUE’S GREATER ALBUQUERQUE ACTIVE TRANSPORTATION
COMMITTEE.
   (A)   Appointment.
      (1)   The Mayor, with the advice and consent of the Council, shall
appoint nine members of an advisory committee to be known as the City of
Albuquerque's Greater Albuquerque Active Transportation Committee (GAATC). The
members shall be appointed by the city in the following manner, with one of the
members also representing the Environmental Planning Commission:
         (a)   One member to represent active transportation users north of I-
40 and east of I-25.
         (b)   One member to represent active transportation users south of I-
40 and east of I-25.
         (c)   One member to represent active transportation users north of I-
40 and west of I-25.
         (d)   One member to represent active transportation users south of I-
40 and west of I-25.
         (e)   One member to represent older adults (over 60 years of age).
         (f)   One member to represent youth (under 24 years of age).
         (g)   One member to represent individuals with a disability.
         (h)   One member to represent pedestrians and transit users.
         (i)   One member to represent bicyclists.
      (2)   Each member shall understand and represent the needs of residents,
particularly active transportation users.
      (3)   For the purposes of the GAATC, ACTIVE TRANSPORTATION is defined as
any self-propelled, human-powered mode of transportation, such as walking,
bicycling, or using mobility devices.
      (4)   In voting, in the case of a tie, a motion shall be deemed defeated.
   (B)   Duties, Responsibilities, Powers. The Committee shall:
      (1)   Advise city departments and other governmental entities, including
but not limited to the City Departments of Municipal Development (DMD) and
Parks & Recreation, the Environmental Planning Commission (EPC), Bernalillo
County, the Mid-Region Council of Governments, and the New Mexico Department of
Transportation, concerning plans, projects, and programs in the greater
Albuquerque area for bikeways, sidewalks, street crossings, and on-street
multi- use trails, including but not limited to the Transportation Improvement
Program and the Capital Improvements Program; and
      (2)   Advise the city on Vision Zero and Complete Streets projects and
programs to support equitable, safe, and accessible Active Transportation
options; and
      (3)   Monitor all on-street pedestrian and bicycling facilities and
recommended implementation strategies for adopted plans for bikeways,
sidewalks, street crossings, and on-street multi-use trails; and
      (4)   Promote bicycling and other modes of active transportation in the
greater Albuquerque area for both transportation and recreation; and
      (5)   Promote safety and safety education for all active transportation
modes; and
      (6)   Promote facilities and amenities for bicycling and other modes of
active transportation in the greater Albuquerque area; and
      (7)   Except where modified by this section, the provisions §§
2-6-1-1 et seq. apply to all duties, powers, and procedures of the Committee.
   (C)   Ratification of Prior Actions and Continuation of Terms of Board
Members.
      (1)   The actions of the Committee established by the previous ordinance
are hereby ratified, and the Committee members appointed pursuant to the
previous ordinance shall continue to serve until their successors are appointed
and confirmed pursuant to §§
2-6-1-1 et seq. Any current Committee member eligible for re-appointment under
the previous constitution of the Committee may be appointed to the like
position constituted under this ordinance; the first of such appointments shall
count as a second term for such existing Committee member.
      (2)   The terms of the Committee members shall be for three years except
that for the first term after the enactment of this ordinance, the terms shall
expire as follows:
         (a)   Committee member representing active transportation users north
of I-40 and east of I-25, the term expires April 1, 2022;
         (b)   Committee member representing active transportation users south
of I-40 and east of I-25, the term expires April 1, 2022;
         (c)   Committee member representing active transportation users north
of I-40 and west of I-25, the term expires April 1, 2023;
         (d)   Committee member representing active transportation users south
of I-40 and west of I-25, the term expires April 1, 2023;
         (e)   Committee member representing older adults, the term expires
April 1, 2024;
         (f)   Committee member representing youth, the term expires April 1,
2024;
         (g)   Committee member representing individuals with a disability, the
term expires April 1, 2023;
         (h)   Committee member representing pedestrians and transit users, the
term expires April 1, 2024;
         (i)   Committee member representing bicyclists, the term expires April
1, 2022.
('74 Code, § 7-15-5) (Ord. 72-1976; Am. Ord. 90-1983; Am. Ord. 1-1988; Am. Ord.
2-1995; Am. Ord. 9-2008; Am. Ord._2017-025; Am. Ord._2021-015)
PART 16: OPEN SPACE ADVISORY BOARD
§ 2-6-16 OPEN SPACE ADVISORY BOARD.
   (A)   Appointment. There is created a seven member committee to be known as
the Open Space Advisory Board. As vacancies on the Board occur or as terms
expire, the City Council and Mayor shall alternatively appoint members with the
City Council making the first appointment. All appointments shall be subject to
City Council approval. The existing Board members may make recommendations to
the Mayor and City Council for candidates to fill vacancies on the Board. If
either the Mayor or City Council fails to name a replacement Board member
within 45 days of the vacancy, then the other body shall make the appointment.
The Board members shall be appointed for staggered terms of three years unless
an appointment is to fill a vacancy. An appointment to fill a vacancy shall be
for the unexpired term. Terms shall begin on the first day of September.
Members shall be residents of the city with a demonstrated commitment to the
accomplishment of the Albuquerque/Bernalillo County Comprehensive Plan. Members
shall be knowledgeable as to open space, ecology, the real estate market, urban
and regional planning and/or related law.
   (B)   Duties, Responsibilities, Powers.
      (1)   Study data, including ecological data, which should guide the
adoption and amendment of open space plans and programs, maintain liaison and
seek input from citizen interest groups including especially the Open Space
Task Force.
      (2)   Advise the EPC, the Mayor, and the City Council as to an
appropriate city open space program, which advice shall include:
         (a)    Implementation of adopted open space plans;
         (b)   Recommend to the City Council for its approval, a list of
priority properties suitable for acquisition through purchase, exchange, or any
other suitable mechanism, for purposes of "major public open space" or "public
easement or rights of way" for open space purposes, the locations of which are
consistent with the policies of the Albuquerque/Bernalillo County Comprehensive
Plan. Such recommendations shall be based upon policies or procedures for the
evaluation of open space priority properties as may be approved by resolution
of the City Council;
         (c)   Basic policies on management of city- owned open space; and
         (d)   Criteria for evaluating proposals for significant physical
changes and installations on and adjacent to open space lands;
         (e)   Evaluation of proposals to install extraordinary facilities on
city-owned open space; and
         (f)   Evaluation of proposals to sell, lease, exchange, or otherwise
dispose of open space exchange lands or other lands acquired with open space
funds.
      (3)   Advise the City Treasurer or designated trustee on the
administration and management of the Open Space Trust Fund.
      (4)   Annually make recommendations to the EPC, the Mayor, and the City
Council on updating the open space program, including land acquisition and
other open space capital improvements.
      (5)   Periodically review open space plans in consultation with citizen
interest groups, especially the Open Space Task Force. Advise the EPC, the
Mayor, and the City Council on needed new plans and plan amendments, ranging
from detailed project plans to the Albuquerque/Bernalillo County Comprehensive
Plan. Make recommendations for the annual proposed city planning program.
      (6)   Upon request, advise or assist the Mayor in negotiations for open
space land acquisition.
      (7)   The Board's recommendations shall be consistent with the conditions
imposed on expenditure of interest of the Permanent Fund for Open Space as
specified in §§
4-2-3-1 et seq. and the conditions imposed on the expenditure of monies from
the Quality of Life Fund as specified in Resolution 89-1987; the Board's
proposals shall also take into account all funding sources available for the
Open Space program.
      (8)   Approve the sale or lease of certain interests in Open Space
Exchange Lands, as provided in §
4-2-3-5.
('74 Code, § 7-15-6) (Ord. 10-1983; Am. Ord. 79-1989; Am. Ord. 39-1990; Am.
Ord._2015-029; Am. Ord._2016-008; Am. Ord._2017-025)
PART 17: RECREATIONAL TRAILS COMMITTEE
§ 2-6-17 CITY OF ALBUQUERQUE’S GREATER ALBUQUERQUE RECREATIONAL TRAILS
COMMITTEE.
   (A)   Appointment.
      (1)   The Mayor, with the advice and consent of the Council, shall
appoint a committee to be known as the City of Albuquerque’s Greater
Albuquerque Recreational Trails Committee. The eight members shall be appointed
by the city to represent the following interest groups:
         (a)   One member to represent equestrian interests.
         (b)   One member to represent the interests of the physically
challenged.
         (c)   One member to represent pedestrians and hikers.
         (d)   One member to represent off-road bicyclists (nonmotorized
mountain bicyclists).
         (e)   One member to represent runners and joggers.
         (f)   One member to represent the active elderly.
         (g)   One member to represent the public-at-large residing east of the
Rio Grande.
         (h)   One member to represent the public-at-large residing west of the
Rio Grande.
      (2)   In voting, in the case of a tie, a motion shall be deemed defeated.
      (3)   The governmental entities and organizations listed below are each
requested to name one non-voting advisory member to the Committee and to give
written notice to the Mayor of such appointment. Advisory members may have
indefinite terms and may be replaced when the appointing entity chooses.
Advisory members will be notified of the time and place of every meeting by the
staff liaison to the Committee. Advisory members shall not be officers or
voting members of the Committee. Advisory members shall be appointed from the
following groups:
      (a)   City of Albuquerque Environmental Planning Commission;
      (b)   Bernalillo County Planning Commission;
      (c)   City of Albuquerque Open Space Advisory Board;
      (d)   City of Albuquerque Greater Albuquerque Bicycling Advisory
Committee;
      (e)   City of Albuquerque Metropolitan Parks and Recreation Advisory
Board;
      (f)   City of Rio Rancho;
      (g)   Village of Los Ranchos;
      (h)   Village of Corrales;
      (i)   Village of Tijeras;
      (j)   Middle Rio Grande Conservancy District;
      (k)   National Forest Service;
      (l)   Albuquerque Metropolitan Arroyo Flood Control Authority.
   (B)   Duties, Responsibilities, Powers. The Committee shall:
      (1)   Advise the City of Albuquerque Environmental Planning Commission,
the County Planning Commission, the city, the county, the Urban Transportation
Planning Policy Board and other governmental entities concerning plans,
programs and standards for recreational trails that are predominantly off-
street facilities but which may cross, parallel or share street right-of-way
for limited lengths;
      (2)   Help develop and promote a recreational trails plan to:
         (a)   Create a network of off-road trail which link major open space,
parks, other public facilities and neighborhoods;
         (b)   Incorporate existing adopted city and county policies regarding
open space and trails; and
         (c)   Set priorities to optimize the use of public funds for
recreational trails;
      (3)   Help promote multi-use of public right-of-way for trails where
desirable and appropriate;
      (4)   Help coordinate joint use of recreational trail facilities by a
variety of users;
      (5)   Promote trail safety and safety education.
      (6)   Review and make recommendations to the City of Albuquerque
Environmental Planning Commission, the County Planning Commission, the city,
the county, the Mid Region Council of Governments, the Urban Transportation
Planning Policy Board and Planning staff and other governmental entities
concerning plans or actions which impact recreational trails or the proposed
recreational trail network;
      (7)   Cooperatively work with organized and non-organized constituent
groups to make recom- mendations which to the extent possible, meet the needs
of all recreational trail users;
      (8)   Advise and recommend appropriate levels of trail maintenance and
cooperatively work with organized and non-organized constituent groups on
development of volunteer maintenance programs as appropriate;
      (9)   Except where modified in this section, the provisions §§
2-6-1-1 et seq. apply to all duties, powers, and procedures of the Committee.
   (C)   Ratification of Prior Actions and Continuation of Terms of Board
Members.
      (1)   The actions of the Committee established by the previous ordinance
are hereby ratified, and the Committee members appointed pursuant to the
previous ordinance shall continue to serve until their successors are appointed
and confirmed pursuant to §§
2-6-1-1 et seq. Any current Committee member eligible for re-appointment under
the previous constitution of the Committee may be appointed to the like
position constituted under this ordinance; the first of such appointments shall
count as a second term for such existing Committee member.
      (2)   The terms of the Committee members shall be for three years except
that for the first term after the enactment of this ordinance, the terms shall
expire as follows:
         (a)   Equestrians representative, term expires June 30, 2009;
         (b)   Runners and Joggers representative, term expires June 30, 2010;
         (c)   Off-road Bicyclist representative, term expires June 30, 2009;
         (d)   Eastside at-large representative, term expires June 30, 2010;
         (e)   Pedestrians and Hikers representative, term expires June 30,
2009;
         (f)   Physically Challenged representative, term expires June 30,
2010;
         (g)   Westside at-large representative, term expires June 30, 2009;
         (h)   Active Elderly representative, term expires June 30, 2010.
('74 Code, § 7-15-8) (Ord. 56-1989; Am. Ord. 48-1990; Am. Ord. 8-2008; Am. Ord.
2017-025)
PART 18: COMMISSION ON DOMESTIC VIOLENCE AND SEXUAL ASSAULT
§ 2-6-18-1 SHORT TITLE.
   Sections
2-6-18-1 et seq. may be cited as the "Commission on Domestic Violence and
Sexual Assault Ordinance."
(Ord._2022-046)
§ 2-6-18-2 COMPOSITION.
   The Commission shall consist of seven voting members who are representative
of diverse communities and geographic regions of Albuquerque, along with 14
advisory members. The Commission shall not include any elected city officials.
Commission members shall be appointed as follows:
   (A)   Seven members shall be appointed by the Mayor with the advice and
consent of the City Council as follows:
      (1)   Five members representing local or statewide Domestic Violence and/
or Sexual Assault prevention organizations, including at least two that provide
services in multiple languages; and
      (2)   Two members who have lived experience shall represent the general
public.
   (B)   Fourteen non-voting ex officio members designated by agencies and
relevant branches of government as follows:
      (1)   One non-voting member from the Children, Youth & Families
Department of the State of New Mexico (CYFD), appointed by the Governors
Cabinet Secretary of CYFD;
      (2)   One non-voting member from the Bernalillo County government,
appointed by either the Bernalillo County Commission or County Manager;
      (3)   One non-voting member from the New Mexico State judiciary appointed
by the Chief Justice of the New Mexico Supreme Court;
      (4)   One non-voting member from the Bernalillo County District Attorneys
Office appointed by the Second Judicial District Attorney;
      (5)   One non-voting member from the Law Offices of the Public Defender
appointed by the Second District Public Defender;
      (6)   One non-voting member from the New Mexico Attorney Generals Office
appointed by the Attorney General;
      (7)   One non-voting member representing a local or statewide non-profit
organization that works to protect, promote, and expand the human rights of
people with intellectual and developmental disabilities and their families,
which provides services/programs that support the advocacy of domestic violence
and/or sexual assault survivors with disabilities;
      (8)   Four non-voting members, one from each of the following four City
of Albuquerque Departments and Offices to be designated by the respective
department directors or division manager: Albuquerque Community Safety
Department (ACS), Family and Community Services (FCS), Office of Policy (OP),
and Office of Equity and Inclusion (OEI);
      (9)   One non-voting member from the Albuquerque Fire Rescue Department
(AFR) as follows:
         (a)   The Fire Chief or their designee; and
      (10)   Two non-voting members from the Albuquerque Police Department
(APD) as follows:
         (a)   The Chief of Police or their designee; and
         (b)   An APD staff member or Officer within the Special Victims
Section appointed by the Chief of Police;
   (C)   A member with three unexcused absences in a calendar year shall be
excused from further service by the Commission. Vacancies shall be filled for
an unexpired term by the original appointing authority.
(Ord._2022-046; Am. Ord._2023-025)
§ 2-6-18-3 MEETINGS.
   (A)   The Commission shall meet quarterly unless otherwise determined by the
Chairperson or requested by four or more voting members.
   (B)   Decisions of the Commission shall be made by a majority vote of those
voting members present.
   (C)   Quorum shall consist of four voting members, with at least one city
staff ex officio member present.
(Ord._2022-046)
§ 2-6-18.4 DUTIES AND POWERS.
   The Commission on Domestic Violence and Sexual Assault shall:
   (A)   Facilitate an effective community-wide system of prevention and
intervention that is responsive to the needs of domestic violence and sexual
assault survivors;
   (B)   Advise the Mayor and the City Council concerning community domestic
violence and sexual assault issues, including the quality of effectiveness of
domestic violence and sexual assault services in Albuquerque;
   (C)   Act as a forum for communication, education, and dialogue with
Albuquerque residents and persons Involved with domestic violence and sexual
assault Issues;
   (D)   Assess and assure that the necessary services, policies, and programs
are funded and provided to those in need;
   (E)   Promote a clear understanding of domestic violence and sexual assault,
current laws, and resources available in the community;
   (F)   Develop a plan that ensures laws on domestic violence are properly
implemented and provide training to law enforcement and the judiciary;
   (G)   Support the execution of the recommendations of the Mayor's Domestic
Violence Task Force made in February 2021;
   (H)   Render an annual report to the Mayor and the City Council of the
Commission's work during the preceding year, including the prior year's
activities, voting actions, advisory recommendations, how often the Commission
met, and its current members;
   (I)   Identify gaps in prevention and intervention services and increase
coordination among public and private programs and include this information in
the annual report; and
   (J)   Evaluate the efficiency, participation, and structure of the
Commission every three years.
(Ord._2022-046)
§ 2-6-18-5 INITIAL TERMS.
   (A)   The Mayor shall appoint the first Chairperson and Vice Chairperson for
a two-year term. Subsequently, Commissioners shall elect their Chair and Vice
Chair annually in October.
   (B)   Commissioners shall serve three-year terms and Commissioners shall be
limited to two consecutive terms. The seven voting members shall serve
staggered terms. The Chair and the Vice Chair, as well as two other voting
members, shall serve an initial two-year term with their terms expiring on
December 31, 2024. The remaining members will serve three-year initial terms,
with their terms expiring on December 31, 2025. The terms of the non-voting ex
officio Commissioners representing City departments and partner governmental
agencies shall be determined by the appropriate department or governmental
agency.
(Ord._2022-046)
PART 19: ROUTE 66 VISITORS CENTER COMMISSION
§ 2-6-19-1 SHORT TITLE.
   This Ordinance may be cited as the “Route 66 Visitors Center Commission
Ordinance.”
(Ord._2024-024)
§ 2-6-19-2 MISSION AND GOALS.
   (A)   Route 66 Visitors Center Mission. The Route 66 Visitors Center, an
interactive cultural center, is a public-private partnership between the City
of Albuquerque and local non-profits and local businesses, managed by the City
of Albuquerque’s Arts and Culture Department, dedicated to preserving the
history of the country’s longest urban stretch of Route 66 that is the only
location where the route crosses itself and educating both the residents and
visitors of Albuquerque about the role that the Historic corridor plays in
economic and community development. The City shall carry out the original
vision of the community members who first conceptualized the Route 66 Visitors
Center in the 1990’s.
   (B)   Route 66 Visitors Center Goals.
      (1)   To provide a vibrant cultural hub and economic anchor for the Route
66 related events and celebrations, including the upcoming Route 66 Centennial
Celebration.
      (2)   To provide a culturally and historically relevant location for
launching programs and events to celebrate the legendary Route 66 corridor.
      (3)   To serve as a community workspace designed to inspire
collaboration, creativity, and productivity among freelancers, entrepreneurs,
startups, and remote workers who are producing products and services that
elevate Route 66 a history related to the development of the center.
      (4)   To serve as an archive of research and oral history materials
accessible to the public and Route 66 stakeholders for the purpose of
education, preservation, and management of the historic Route 66 corridor.
      (5)   To reflect the diversity and richness of the City and the State’s
culture and history related to Route 66.
      (6)   To serve as a catalyst for tourism-related business along West
Central, including helping stimulate private and public investment, create jobs
and bring greater prosperity to the West Side, and all of Albuquerque.
      (7)   To seek maximum support and cooperation from government, industry,
academia, and private institutions.
(Ord._2024-024)
§ 2-6-19-3 COMPOSITION OF THE COMMISSION.
   The Route 66 Visitors Center Commission shall consist of seven (7) voting
members and three (3) non-voting advisory members confirmed by the City
Council. The commission shall be composed of:
   (A)   The Mayor or his/her designee.
   (B)   Two City Councilors, one of which is the Councilor representing the
section of Albuquerque South of Central Avenue, west of the Rio Grande and East
of the Albuquerque City Limits. The other shall be a member of the City Council
appointed by the President of the City Council.
   (C)   Four representatives designated by the West Central Community
Development Group or its successor.
   (D)   An advisory member from Visit Albuquerque.
   (E)   An advisory member from the Hispano Chamber of Commerce.
   (F)   The Director of the Arts & Culture Department as an advisory member.
(Ord._2024-024)
§ 2-6-19-4 APPOINTMENTS.
   (A)   Term of Office. The initial Commission members shall serve an initial
term of five (5) years. After the expiration of the initial five (5) year term,
the term of office of each member of the Commission shall be three (3) years
from the date of appointment.
   (B)   Vacancies. Vacant positions occurring as a result of an expired term
shall be filled by the entity that appointed the outgoing member. Vacant
positions occurring for reasons other than an expired term shall be filled by
the entity that appointed the departing member, with the replacement member
serving for the remainder of the unexpired term.
(Ord._2024-024)
§ 2-6-19-5 ORGANIZATION AND MEETINGS.
   (A)   The Mayor and or their designee shall serve as the Chair of the
Committee. The Committee shall elect a Vice Chair to serve in place of the
Chair in their absence.
   (B)   The Commission shall meet monthly unless otherwise determined by the
Chairperson or requested by three (3) or more members.
   (C)   Decisions of the Commission shall be made by a majority vote of those
voting members present.
   (D)   Quorum shall consist of four (4) voting members, one of which shall be
the Chair or Vice Chair.
(Ord._2024-024)
§ 2-6-19-6 DUTIES AND POWERS OF THE COMMISSION.
   The Route 66 Visitors Center Commission shall:
   (A)   Authorize such policies as are deemed necessary for the operation of
the Route 66 Visitors Center. Policies are defined as broad operational
guidelines, within which programmatic and administrative decisions may be made
and implemented in accordance with accepted City administrative procedures;
   (B)   Recommend and authorize programming at the Route 66 Visitors Center,
including programming at the event space, taproom, museum, amphitheater, neon
sign park, gift shop, and co-working spaces;
   (C)   Review and recommend an annual fee schedule for renting the facilities
in the Route 66 Visitors Center; this includes developing a fee schedule that
offers meeting spaces for free to neighborhood associations and community
groups who might not have sufficient funding to access other meeting spaces;
   (D)   Review and ensure that Route 66 Visitors Center collections are
maintained and preserved in accordance with professional standards for museum
operations and the public interest; and authorize policies for the control,
acquisition, and disposal of Route 66 Visitors Center materials;
   (E)   Review and recommend appropriate contractual arrangements between the
City and contractors providing services to the Route 66 Visitors
Center; and
   (F)   Act as a forum for communication, education, and dialogue with
Albuquerque residents and visitors about Route 66 history and culture as well
as the role that Route 66 plays in economic development along Central Avenue in
Albuquerque.
(Ord._2024-024)
[PART 20: BOUNDARY AREA ADVISORY COMMITTEE]
§ 2-6-20-1 SHORT TITLE.
   This ordinance shall be known and may be cited as the “Boundary Area
Advisory Committee Ordinance.”
(Ord. 2024-040)
§ 2-6-20-2 DEFINITIONS.
   For purposes of this ordinance, the following definitions shall apply:
   ABCWUA. The Albuquerque Bernalillo County Water Utility Authority.
   AMAFCA. Albuquerque Metropolitan Flood Control Authority.
   BOUNDARY AREA. The infrastructure, lands and neighborhoods where the City of
Albuquerque and County of Bernalillo neighborhoods abut and parcels within one
jurisdiction abut, the right of way of the other.
   CITY. City of Albuquerque, New Mexico.
   COMMITTEE. The Boundary Area Advisory Committee.
   COUNTY. County of Bernalillo, New Mexico.
   INFRASTRUCTURE DEFICIENCIES. Inadequate facilities to deliver government
services, including, but not limited, to community centers, fire and rescue
facilities, hydrology, recreation and transportation.
   MEMBER AGENCY. An agency authorized by § 2-6-20-4 (B) to appoint a member to
the Boundary Area Advisory Committee.
   MRGCD. The Middle Rio Grande Conservancy District.
   SERVICE DELIVERY. Provision of government services, to provide for the
public’s health, safety, and welfare.
(Ord. 2024-040)
§ 2-6-20-3 PURPOSE, DUTIES AND POWERS.
   The purpose of the Boundary Area Advisory Committee Ordinance is to
establish a combined committee of staff from the City, County, Albuquerque
Bernalillo County, AMAFCA, ABCWUA, and MRGCD to:
   (A)   Study and advise member agencies on best practices to provide
coordinated and effective services for boundary areas.
   (B)   Receive and review testimony from residents of the boundary areas as
to the manner that infrastructure deficiencies and service delivery issues
impact their businesses, homes, neighborhoods and properties.
   (C)   Propose plans and processes to improve infrastructure and service
delivery to the boundary areas.
   (D)   Committee shall evaluate and recommend areas for possible land swaps
and annexations for the purposes of streamlining services.
(Ord. 2024-040)
§ 2-6-20-4 COMMITTEE CREATED.
   (A)   Creation. There is hereby created a Boundary Jurisdictional Area
Advisory Committee to enforce the provision established in § 2-6-20-3. It shall
be the responsibility of the Chief Administrative Officer or their designee to
seek the cooperation and participation of the member agencies assigned to this
committee through § 2-6-20-4 (B).
   (B)   Membership. Committee membership shall consist of staff members from
each of the following agencies, City, County, AMAFCA, ABCWUA, and MRGCD. The
staff members shall be appointed and serve at the discretion of the Chief
Administrative Officer for City Staff appointees, the County Manager for County
staff appointees, the AMAFCA Executive Director for the AMAFCA staff
appointees, the ABCWUA Executive Director for the ABCWUA staff appointees and
the Chief Engineer for the MRGCD for the MRGCD staff appointees.
   (C)   Qualifications. Committee members shall have expertise in the
provision of the infrastructure and services of the agency and/or department
they represent on the Committee.
   (D)   Committee Meetings. Meetings shall occur quarterly and shall be posted
as a public meeting. Agendas shall include public comment and adoption of the
minutes of the previous meeting.
   (E)   Records. A record shall be kept of the Committee’s meetings.
   (F)   Staff. The Chief Administrative Officer of the City and the County
Manager, if the Manager so chooses, will provide staff and resources, as
necessary and appropriate, to assist the Committee.
   (G)   Working Groups. The Committee may form working groups to assist with
its assigned duties and responsibilities. Working groups may be comprised of
Committee Members and staff from member agencies, that are not part of the
Committee, with expertise and or decision-making authority pertaining to the
subject the working group is formed to study and or address.
§ 2-6-20-5 CONTRACTING AUTHORITY.
   The Committee’s member agencies may individually or jointly fund a contract
for professional, technical, or administrative services to be supplied to the
Committee.
(Ord. 2024-040)
ARTICLE 7: CITY DEPARTMENTS AND OFFICIALS
Section
Part 1: Administration Department
   
2-7-1-1   Short title
   
2-7-1-2   Creation of administration department; director
   
2-7-1-3   Authority and duties of the director of administration
   
2-7-2-4   City Council performance review of the City Attorney
   
2-7-2-5   Contracting with attorneys to provide legal services
Part 2: Legal Department; City Attorney
   
2-7-2-1   Creation of the legal department; city attorney
   
2-7-2-2   Authority and duties of the city attorney
   
2-7-2-3   Appointment of the city attorney
Part 3: Department of Finance and Management
   
2-7-3-1   Department of finance and management
   
2-7-3-2   Financial responsibility
Part 4: Department of Human Services
   
2-7-4-1   Creation of department
   
2-7-4-2   Duties and responsibilities
Part 5: Department of Youth
   
2-7-5-1   Creation of department
   
2-7-5-2    Findings
   
2-7-5-3    Organization
Part 6: Open Records Ordinance
   
2-7-6-1   Intent
   
2-7-6-2   Findings
   
2-7-6-3   Processing public records requests
   
2-7-6-4   Agency records custodian and procedures
   
2-7-6-5   Process
   
2-7-6-6   Archives
   
2-7-6-7   Ensuring responsive open government
Part 7: [Reserved]
Part 8: Independent Office of Hearings
   
2-7-8-1   Short title
   
2-7-8-2   Independent Hearing office; created
   
2-7-8-3   City Clerk; powers and duties
   
2-7-8-4   Hearing Officer qualifications
   
2-7-8-5   Scope
   
2-7-8-6   Selection
   
2-7-8-7   Request for hearing and notice of setting
   
2-7-8-8   Disqualification
   
2-7-8-9   Hearing
   
2-7-8-10   Applicability
Part 9: City Clerk
   
2-7-9-1   Policy
   
2-7-9-2   Definitions
   
2-7-9-3   Process
   
2-7-9-4   Correlation
   
2-7-9-5   Inspection and survey of records
   
2-7-9-6   Archives
Cross-reference:
   
Office of Anti-Graffiti Coordination, see § 11-7-4
PART 1: ADMINISTRATION DEPARTMENT
§ 2-7-1-1 SHORT TITLE.
   Sections 2-7-1-1 et seq. may be cited as the "Administration Code."
('74 Code, § 1-8-1) (Ord. 64-1974)
§ 2-7-1-2 CREATION OF ADMINISTRATION DEPARTMENT; DIRECTOR.
   There is created as a department of city government an Administration
Department. The executive and administrative head of the Administration
Department shall be the Director of Administration who shall be appointed by
the Mayor. The Director shall hold office at the pleasure of the Mayor and
shall be qualified by experience and training in governmental administrative
and financial affairs.
('74 Code, § 1-8-2) (Ord. 64-1974)
§ 2-7-1-3 AUTHORITY AND DUTIES OF THE DIRECTOR OF ADMINISTRATION.
   The Director of Administration shall be ultimately responsible to the Mayor
for the performance of his duties and in exercising his authority, but he shall
be subject to the supervision of the Chief Administrative Officer in the daily
operations of the Department. The Director has all those duties imposed upon
him under the Administration Code, and when any provision of the code imposes a
duty upon the Administration Department, the Director is responsible for
fulfilling that duty. The Director has all authority necessary for carrying out
his duties and, without limiting that authority, has express authority to:
   (A)   Organize the Administration Department into those subordinate units
that he deems necessary to provide a capability for efficiently fulfilling the
Department's responsibilities and functions;
   (B)   Administer the Administration Department and supervise and direct its
employees;
   (C)   Delegate appropriate functions and authorities to subordinates; and
   (D)   Adopt and promulgate rules, regulations and orders necessary to
implement any authority delegated to him or duty imposed upon him under the
Administration Code.
('74 Code, § 1-8-3) (Ord. 64-1974)
PART 2: LEGAL DEPARTMENT; CITY ATTORNEY
§ 2-7-2-1 CREATION OF THE LEGAL DEPARTMENT; CITY ATTORNEY.
   There is created a department of the city, the Legal Department. The
executive and administrative head of the Legal Department shall be the City
Attorney.
('74 Code, § 1-20-1) (Ord. 64-1987)
§ 2-7-2-2 AUTHORITY AND DUTIES OF THE CITY ATTORNEY.
   The City Attorney, both personally and through his or her assistant city
attorneys, shall represent the city in the courts. He or she shall also advise
the Mayor and the Council as to legal matters. The City Attorney and assistant
city attorneys, while acting in the course and scope of their duties, are
prohibited from engaging in policy advocacy relating to matters upon which the
City Legal Department has or is likely to be called upon for advisement or
representation. Nothing herein shall prohibit the City Attorney or assistant
city attorneys from expressing their personal views on any issue while acting
outside the scope of their duties.
('74 Code, § 1-20-2) (Ord. 64- 1987; Am. Ord._2022-034)
§ 2-7-2-3 APPOINTMENT OF THE CITY ATTORNEY.
   The City Attorney shall be appointed by the Mayor with the advice and
consent of the Council.
('74 Code, § 1-20-3) (Ord. 64-1987)
§ 2-7-2-4 CITY COUNCIL PERFORMANCE REVIEW OF THE CITY ATTORNEY.
   The City Council shall conduct a performance evaluation of the City Attorney
within 90 days following every 18 month period of consecutive service as City
Attorney. The 18 month period shall begin after the Council's approval, the
City Attorney's appointment or after the prior performance evaluation,
whichever is more recent. The Council shall develop written evaluation criteria
for this purpose. The City Council shall present its findings in a public
written report to the Mayor and Chief Administrative Officer.
(Ord. 13-1994)
§ 2-7-2-5 CONTRACTING WITH ATTORNEYS TO PROVIDE LEGAL SERVICES.
   (A)   It is the policy of the city to use attorneys who are city employees
for litigation unless there are special reasons for using contract attorneys.
When the City Attorney weighs whether outside legal counsel should be retained
to handle litigation, the City Attorney shall elect to hire or propose such
outside counsel only when:
      (1)   There is a conflict of interest within the Legal Department that
ethically requires outside counsel to be used;
      (2)   The city has no staff attorney with both the expertise and the time
available to handle the needed work; or
      (3)   When the city has an insurance policy in which the insurer reserves
the right to select defense counsel.
   (B)   Contract attorneys paid by the city shall report to an overseeing
attorney who will evaluate and advise on the appropriateness of the litigation
strategy of the contract litigator and will also review and evaluate the
billing levels of the contract litigator.
      (1)   The overseeing attorney shall normally be the City Attorney or a
city staff attorney assigned by the City Attorney; the overseeing attorney
shall not be a person overseeing the legal case preparation for another party
who may have separate interests from those of the party represented by the
contract attorney.
      (2)   If the estimated cost of securing the services of contract
attorneys for a case, to be established at the initiation of the legal work,
exceeds $100,000, the City Attorney shall request the Director of the Office of
Internal Audit to retain a different contract attorney to review the work of
the contract litigator retained by the city. The contract attorney so retained
shall advise and consult with the overseeing attorney concerning his or her
conclusions.
      (3)   If the City Attorney believes that he or she may be named
personally as a defendant in the suit in question or a related suit, or if he
or she believes that the Mayor, the Chief Administrative Officer, or a Deputy
or Assistant Chief Administrative Officer may be similarly named in the
litigation and they are personally implicated based on the specific facts of
the lawsuit, the City Attorney shall request the Director of the Office of
Internal Audit to retain a different contract attorney to review the work of
the contract litigator retained by the city. The contract attorney so retained
shall advise and consult with the overseeing attorney concerning his or her
conclusions.
      (4)   If the overseeing attorney believes the contract litigator is not
acting in the best interests of the city but when so advised the contract
litigator elects not to alter his or her approach, the overseeing attorney
shall report this to the person who appointed him or her. Such report by the
overseeing attorney shall be at the conclusion of the litigation unless he/she
feels the problem is one that must be immediately addressed by the city.
Following receipt of such a report, the City Attorney shall share the concern
with the Mayor and the President of the City Council; the Director of the
Office of Internal Audit, after receipt of such report, shall share the report
with the Accountability in Government Oversight Committee. For cases in which
the city is the client, members of the City Council and authorized members of
the City Council staff shall have unrestricted access to the overseeing
attorney and the case record during the course of the legal work and after its
conclusion.
      (5)   In cases for which it has been estimated that the cost of securing
the services of contract attorneys exceeds $100,000, the overseeing attorney
shall forward for review all legal billings to the Risk Management Division of
the Department of Finance and Management. Staff of the Risk Management Division
shall work with the overseeing attorney to evaluate the reasonableness of
billings and to control contract attorney costs.
      (6)   The above provisions of division (B) do not apply to defense of
Workers' Compensation cases; in those cases, the City Risk Manager shall
provide oversight of contract litigators' litigation strategy and billing
levels.
(Ord. 14-1994; Am. Ord. 1-2005; Am. Ord. 30-2010)
PART 3: DEPARTMENT OF FINANCE AND MANAGEMENT
§ 2-7-3-1 DEPARTMENT OF FINANCE AND MANAGEMENT.
   Wherever the term DEPARTMENT OF ADMINISTRATION appears in this code, it
shall also mean "Department of Finance and Management," and wherever the term
DIRECTOR OF ADMINISTRATION appears in this code it shall also mean "Director of
Finance and Management."
('74 Code, § 1-8-14) (Ord. 19-1975; Am. Ord. 3-1992)
Cross-reference:
   City budget, see §§ 2-11-1 et seq.
   
Department of Administration; Director established, see § 2-7-1-1 et seq.
§ 2-7-3-2 FINANCIAL RESPONSIBILITY.
   Under the direction and authority of the Mayor and the Chief Administrative
Officer, the Department of Finance and Management shall be responsible for
administering and managing the financial affairs of the city.
('74 Code, § 1-8-15) (Ord. 19-1975; Am. Ord. 3-1992)
PART 4: DEPARTMENT OF HUMAN SERVICES
§ 2-7-4-1 CREATION.
   There is hereby created a Department of Human Services. The Mayor shall
organize the Department of Human Services and shall include within the
Department any city organization he deems proper. The Director of the
Department of Human Services shall be appointed by the Mayor.
('74 Code, § 1-18-1) (Ord. 75-1978)
§ 2-7-4-2 DUTIES AND RESPONSIBILITIES.
   The Director, subject to the authority of the Mayor and the Chief
Administrative Officer, shall administer the Department of Human Services. The
Department shall coordinate the human services programs of the city with all
city departments and organizations, and the Department shall coordinate the
city's human services programs with all non-city government organizations. The
Department shall require any organization applying for funds which have been
appropriated by the city to submit to the Department of Human Services a plan
of action detailing the goals and objectives of the program for which funding
is desired, and the means of implementing those plans to attain the stated
goals and objectives of the program. The Department shall be responsible for
preparing requests for proposals for delivery of services from various outside
agencies; and for negotiating contracts with outside agencies selected to
deliver human services. The Department shall monitor the performance of the
contracts with these outside agencies and prepare periodic evaluations of the
programs. The evaluations shall include an analysis of performance indicators
to determine the effectiveness of a program in attaining the desired goals and
objectives. In addition, the Department shall develop a long-range plan for the
delivery of human services and prepare an annual plan for the city's role in
human services programs. This annual plan should specify the recommended course
of action for the city in coordinating and providing human services to citizens
within the geographic confines of the city.
('74 Code, § 1-18-2) (Ord. 75-1978)
PART 5: DEPARTMENT OF YOUTH
§ 2-7-5-1 CREATION OF DEPARTMENT.
   There is established a department of the city, the Department of Youth. The
Mayor shall appoint a director of the Department of Youth.
(Ord. 64-2005)
§ 2-7-5-2 FINDINGS.
   The Council finds:
   (A)   The New Mexico Department of Health found that youth who feel
connected to family and to school, and who have a positive sense of themselves,
have a lower rate of serious risk-taking behaviors than teens without these
advantages;
   (B)   A focus on criminalizing youth behavior has proven to be ineffective
in creating positive outcomes for youth;
   (C)   Existing youth programs would benefit from the coordination and
collaboration created by a Department of Youth; and
   (D)   A new Department of Youth would elevate the critical importance of our
city’s young people and their needs, services and programs.
(Ord. 64-2005)
§ 2-7-5-3 ORGANIZATION.
   (A)   The Mayor shall organize the Department of Youth which shall include
the youth programs and activities currently offered by the Parks and Recreation
Department and the Department of Family and Community Services and any other
city programs and activities the Mayor deems appropriate.
   (B)   The Department of Youth shall also include the City Sports, Arts and
Music Initiative (SAMI) which shall be responsible for the following:
      (1)   Promoting youth events, including alcohol-free, all-age events, and
contests in the areas of sports, arts and music;
      (2)   Organizing and promoting positive activities for youth such as
poetry slams, 3-on-3 basketball tournaments, skateboarding tournaments, music
and dance contests, street art contests, and Junior Olympics; and
      (3)   Organizing and promoting special youth seminars that offer
opportunities for youth to work with local and visiting known sports figures,
artists and musicians.
(Ord. 64-2005)
PART 6: OPEN RECORDS ORDINANCE
§ 2-7-6-1 INTENT.
   The intent of §§
2-7-6-1 et seq., which may be cited as the Open Records Ordinance, is to
implement the State of New Mexico Inspection of Public Records Act set forth at
Section 14-2-1 et seq. NMSA 1978 (the "Act"). Recognizing that a representative
government is dependent upon an informed electorate, the intent of §§
2-7-6-1 et seq. is to ensure that all persons are provided the greatest
possible information regarding the affairs of government and the official acts
of public officers and employees by providing the public with a process for
obtaining public records. Providing persons with such information is an
essential function of a representative government and an integral part of the
routine duties of public officers and employees.
(Ord. 44-1994; Am. Ord. 20-2000; Am. Ord. 29-2007)
§ 2-7-6-2 FINDINGS.
   The New Mexico Inspection of Public Records Act, Section 14-2-1 et seq.,
NMSA 1978, provides that some classes of records are not subject to public
inspection "as otherwise provided by law." Federal law expresses a policy in
favor of protecting the privacy of individuals in their social security
numbers. 5 U.S.C. § 522a(b). City department heads, other employees and
officials have a legitimate and reasonable expectation of privacy in their
social security numbers. The legitimate and reasonable expectation of privacy
that City employees have in their social security numbers, outweighs the
interest in the public in the disclosure of such information. City employees
other than department heads and officials have a legitimate expectation of
privacy in their home addresses and home telephone numbers in order to protect
such information from use for illegal purposes. The legitimate and reasonable
expectation of privacy that City employees have in their social security
numbers, home addresses and home telephone numbers outweighs the interest in
the public in the disclosure of such information. In light of the Congressional
policy favoring nondisclosure of social security numbers and the constitutional
right to privacy in one's home address and home telephone numbers, the City is
justified in enacting legislation codifying such protections for its public
employees and officials. New Mexico state law expresses a policy in favor of
protecting individuals from non-consensual distribution of sensitive images of
their person. See Section 30-37A-1 NMSA 1978. Individuals have a legitimate and
reasonable expectation that to the extent sensitive images are evidence in a
criminal case or otherwise in the possession of the city, those images will be
exempt from disclosure in response to public records requests from the general
public. New Mexico state law expresses a policy in favor of government bodies
protecting sensitive information technology infrastructure and cybercrime is
becoming a growing concern. See Section 30-45-4 NMSA 1978. The city has a
legitimate need to protect its information technology infrastructure and
systems from intrusion and compromise.
(Ord. 20-2000; Am. Ord._2022-044)
§ 2-7-6-3 PROCESSING PUBLIC RECORDS REQUESTS.
   (A)   The Office of the City Clerk shall be the records custodian for the
purpose of processing of requests for public records and shall establish a
program for the application of efficient and economical management methods to
the processing of requests for public records under the New Mexico Inspection
of Public Records Act.
   (B)   The City Clerk shall receive and process requests to inspect public
records, and oversee compliance with the Act by the agency records custodian to
assure that the public is provided proper and reasonable opportunities to
inspect public records and reasonable facilities to make or furnish copies of
the public records during usual city business hours.
   (C)   All city employees, elected officials and any person who is a party
under a contract with the city or a subcontractor under a subcontract with a
party under a contract with the city shall provide public records to the agency
records custodian and the City Clerk in response to any request to inspect
public records.
   (D)   The City Clerk shall establish a fee schedule for public records
annually as provided by law. The fee schedule shall include procedures and
guidelines for determining when such fees should be waived or reduced. During
the process of establishing fees, the Clerk shall consider classes of records
which could be made available free of charge, classes of data, and quantities
of data.
(Ord. 44-1994; Am. Ord. 20-2000; Am. Ord. 29-2007; Am. Ord._2022-044)
§ 2-7-6-4 AGENCY RECORDS CUSTODIAN AND PROCEDURES.
   Each department of the city, the City Council, and each board, commission,
committee subject to the Public Boards, Commissions and Committees Ordinance
(the "Agencies") shall designate at least one person to be the agency records
custodian for said agency who shall cooperate and coordinate with the City
Clerk to respond to requests to inspect public records. Each agency shall
provide the City Clerk with the names, telephone, e-mail and mailing addresses
for the agency records custodian or custodians. Boards, commissions and
committees may designate city staff assigned to the board, commission or
committee as their agency records custodian. The City Clerk shall post the
information about each agency record custodian on the City Clerk's web site to
assure accessibility to the agency records custodian by the public and the
press.
(Ord. 44-1994; Am. Ord. 20-2000; Am. Ord. 29-2007; Am. Ord._2022-044)
§ 2-7-6-5 PROCESS.
   The City Clerk shall establish a procedure for responding to requests to
inspect public records which complies with the requirements of state law as set
forth in the Inspection of Public Records Act, Section 14-2-1 et seq. NMSA 1978
as currently enacted or hereinafter amended.
   (A)   The social security numbers, home addresses and home telephone numbers
of City employees are confidential and exempt from inspection, and shall not be
disclosed to any person, except with the express, written consent of the
employee or official. The social security numbers of City department heads and
officials are confidential and exempt from inspection and shall not be
disclosed to any person except with the express written consent of that person.
Home addresses and home telephone numbers of City officials and department
heads are public record.
   (B)   No inspection of records shall be allowed that, if disclosed, would
facilitate unauthorized access to an agency's electronic information systems or
clearly jeopardize or compromise information security. Record inspection and
copying shall be accomplished in a manner that does not allow the requesting
party to access the computer system where the integrity of the information of
the computer would be jeopardized.
   (C)   Images, photographs, videos or other likenesses depicting or
simulating an intimate act or depicting any portion of a person's genitals, or
of a woman's breast below the top of the areola, that is either uncovered or
visible through less-than-fully opaque clothing, which images may reasonably be
considered to be private, intimate or inappropriate for distribution are exempt
from disclosure.
   (D)   All videos, transcripts, and audio recordings of a child’s forensic or
investigatory interview conducted at a children’s safehouse organization,
requested by a law enforcement agency or the State of New Mexico Children Youth
and Families Department, are confidential and exempt from inspection and shall
not be disclosed to any person except as provided for in the Children’s Code,
Chapter 32A NMSA 1978.
(Ord. 44-1994; Am. Ord. 20-2000; Am. Ord. 29-2007; Am. Ord._2022-044; Am. Ord.
2025-006)
§ 2-7-6-6 ARCHIVES.
   There shall be established an archiving system which shall be accessible to
the public through requests to the City Clerk who shall be responsible for the
office of the archives.
(Ord. 44-1994; Am. Ord. 20-2000; Am. Ord. 29-2007)
§ 2-7-6-7 ENSURING RESPONSIVE OPEN GOVERNMENT.
   (A)   The city shall establish, through the office of the City Clerk, a
procedure to allow prompt telephone and direct access between city employees
and the public including members of the media.
   (B)   City employees shall be made available by telephone and direct access
to provide information to City Councilors and City Council staff. There shall
be no requirement that employees receive prior approval from any supervisor
prior to being made available. City Councilors and City Council staff shall not
be required to provide prior justification for any request for information.
(Ord. 29-2007)
PART 7: [RESERVED]
PART 8: INDEPENDENT OFFICE OF HEARINGS
§ 2-7-8-1 SHORT TITLE.
   This part may be cited as the IHO Ordinance.
(Ord._2023-015)
§ 2-7-8-2 INDEPENDENT HEARING OFFICE; CREATED.
   The Independent Hearing Office is created and is a division of the Office of
the City Clerk.
(Ord._2023-015)
§ 2-7-8-3 CITY CLERK; POWERS AND DUTIES.
   (A)   The City Clerk shall:
      (1)   Adopt and promulgate rules pertaining to administrative hearings;
      (2)   Adopt and promulgate a hearing officer code of conduct;
      (3)   Oversee the Independent Hearing Office;
      (4)   Assign and distribute the work of the Independent Hearing Office
after considering the knowledge and experience of particular hearing officers,
efficiency in the hearing process and potential conflicts of interest; and
      (5)   Reject appeals where the Independent Hearing Office or a board
staffed by the Independent Hearing Office lacks jurisdiction over the appeal or
hearings.
   (B)   The City Clerk may:
      (1)   Promulgate rules setting fees for filing of appeals or requests for
hearings under City ordinances or as otherwise provided by law;
      (2)   Allow the parties to settle matters prior to a hearing on the
merits; and
      (3)   Work with City departments, boards, or other governmental entities
to conduct hearings on their behalf pursuant to their procedures as provided
for by a memorandum of understanding.
(Ord._2023-015; Am. Ord. 2025-015)
§ 2-7-8-4 HEARING OFFICER QUALIFICATIONS.
   A hearing officer shall have a minimum of five years of actual working
experience as an attorney, be admitted to practice law in the State of New
Mexico, and understand administrative law.
(Ord._2023-015)
§ 2-7-8-5 SCOPE.
   (A)   A hearing officer authorized by this ordinance may conduct hearings
required by any city ordinance; administrative instruction; or otherwise to be
conducted by "a hearing officer," "a city hearing officer," "the hearing
officer," "the city hearing officer," or “the independent office of hearings,"
including hearings related to rule making.
   (B)   The hearing officers established by this ordinance shall not hear the
following matters:
      (1)   Land use, except for those that are governed by the Integrated
Development Ordinance;
      (2)   Liquor license;
      (3)   Wood Burning Ordinance, ROA 1994, §§ 9-5-4-1 to 9-5-4-99;
      (4)   Vehicle Pollution Abatement Ordinance, ROA 1994, §§ 7-12-1 to 7-12-
5; and
      (5)   Joint Air Quality Control Board Ordinance, ROA 1994, §§ 9-5-1-1 to
9-5-1-99.
   (C)   The hearing officers established by this ordinance may hear the
matters listed in the previous subsection through consent of all parties or if
no other hearing officers are available but shall not hear matters pursuant to
the Joint Air Quality Control Board Ordinance, ROA 1994, §§ 9-5-1-1 to 9-5-1-
99.
(Ord._2023-015)
§ 2-7-8-6 SELECTION.
   The Mayor may appoint a hearing officer to hear matters under this ordinance
as follows:
   (A)   Any hearing officer appointed prior to the effective date of this
ordinance shall be a classified employee in the Office of Administrative
Hearings, and;
   (B)   Any hearing officer appointed after the effective date of this
ordinance shall be appointed for a term of five years;
   (C)   In addition to or in the alternative, the Mayor may retain contract
hearing officers, subject to the approval of the City Council.
(Ord._2023-015)
§ 2-7-8-7 REQUEST FOR HEARING AND NOTICE OF SETTING.
   (A)   A party seeking a hearing or appeal in accordance with this Ordinance
shall file a request for a hearing or a notice of appeal with the City Clerk.
The party requesting the hearing or appeal shall provide the City Clerk with
their mailing address, telephone number, and, if available, an e-mail address.
   (B)   The request for hearing or notice of appeal shall be written and:
      (i)   identify the parties; identify the action being challenged; state
the remedy the person is seeking; and be signed under oath or affirmation
attesting to the truth of the information contained therein; and
      (ii)   the document citing the basis for the appeal shall be attached,
such as the citation.
   (C)   The request for hearing or notice of appeal shall be filed within 15
days of receipt of the notice advising a person of their right to a hearing or
appeal.
   (D)   A request for hearing or notice of appeal is not valid until received
by the City Clerk and any filing fee required by the Rules promulgated pursuant
to this Ordinance has been paid.
   (E)   Upon receipt of the request for hearing or notice of appeal, the City
Clerk shall designate a hearing officer and schedule the time and place for the
hearing. The City Clerk shall serve on the parties the notice of hearing and
underlying request for hearing or notice of appeal. Service of process of
notice shall be set by rules promulgated by the City Clerk.
(Ord._2023-015; Am. Ord. 2025-015)
§ 2-7-8-8 DISQUALIFICATION.
   (A)   Excusal for cause. Hearing officers are required to disclose on the
record to the parties any matter that could be considered a conflict of
interest with the hearing officer’s duty to render fair and impartial
decisions. Once such a disclosure has been made, a party to that proceeding
may, but are not obligated to, waive such a potential or apparent conflict If
the parties do not waive the potential or apparent conflict, the hearing
officer shall recuse themself unless the hearing officer rules that the
conflict will not prevent a fair hearing. If the hearing officer recuses
themself, the City Clerk shall select an alternate hearing officer and deliver
a notice of alternate assignment and resetting to the parties in accordance
with ROA 1994, § 2-7-8-7(E).
   (B)   Peremptory excusal. No hearing officer in any proceeding pursuant to
this ordinance may be peremptorily excused, except in the case of a personnel
hearing or as otherwise permitted by applicable law.
      (i)   Each party may peremptorily excuse one personnel hearing officer
within ten days after receiving notice of a personnel hearing by filing a
peremptory excusal with the IHO. The party requesting the excusal shall serve
notice of the peremptory excusal on all other parties. Upon receiving a
peremptory excusal, the IHO shall select an alternate hearing officer, deliver
a notice of alternate assignment, reset the personnel hearing, and serve notice
to all parties in accordance with ROA 1994, § 2-7-8-7(E). Except for non-
substantive communication regarding scheduling or procedure, a party shall not
excuse a hearing officer after the personnel hearing has begun or after the
personnel hearing officer has performed any discretionary act in the matter.
(Ord._2023-015; Am. Ord. 2025-015)
§ 2-7-8-9 HEARING.
   (A)   Applicability of rules of civil procedure and rules of evidence. In
the absence of a specific provision of applicable law governing an action, the
hearing officer may look to the New Mexico Rules of Civil Procedure, NMRA 1-001
et seq., and the New Mexico Rules of Evidence, NMRA 11-101 et seq., for
guidance. No provision of the rules of civil procedure shall be construed to
extend or otherwise modify the authority and jurisdiction of the IHO.
   (B)   Procedural rules. The City Clerk shall promulgate procedural rules for
hearings pursuant to this Ordinance.
   (C)   Final decision. The hearing officer shall issue a final written
decision within 30 days of the hearing, unless the City Clerk or hearing
officer provides additional notice of when a final written decision will be
issued. Failure to issue a written decision will not result in a default
judgment to either party.
   (D)   Record proper. The record in an administrative hearing shall include,
at a minimum:
      (1)   The notices, pleadings, motions and intermediate rulings;
      (2)   The documentary evidence offered and admitted;
      (3)   A final written decision; and
      (4)   The recording or transcript of the hearing.
   (E)   Transcript. Administrative hearings shall be electronically recorded.
A party may arrange for a stenographic recording of the hearing at their own
expense.
   (F)   Appeals. An appeal may be taken from any final order issued by the
hearing officer by filing a petition for a writ of certiorari to the District
Court of the Second Judicial District within 30 days.
(Ord._2023-015; Am. Ord. 2025-015)
§ 2-7-8-10 APPLICABILITY.
   In the event that any of the provisions contained herein conflict with any
specific provision of any ordinance or resolution establishing a hearing and
appeals process, such specific provision shall control.
(Ord._2023-015)
PART 9: CITY CLERK
§ 2-7-9-1 POLICY.
   The City Council recognizes its responsibility to encourage the
modernization and development of business methods in city government which
result in efficiency and improvement of service. The Council also recognizes
its responsibility to create policies for the retention of records and orderly
maintenance of records to mitigate against the harms disaster may inflict on
records and procedures processes.
(Ord._2022-044)
§ 2-7-9-2 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of §§
2-7-9-1 et seq., the following definitions shall apply unless the context
clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   AGENCY. Any city department, board, commission, independent agency, or
entity.
   CITY RECORD. All books, papers, maps, photographs or other documentary
materials, regardless of physical form or characteristics, made or received by
any agency in pursuance of law or in connection with the transaction of public
business and preserved, or appropriate for preservation, by the agency or its
legitimate successor as evidence of the organization, functions, policies,
decisions, procedures, operations or other activities of the government or
because of the informational and historical value of data contained therein.
Library or museum material of the state library, state institutions and state
museums, extra copies of documents preserved only for convenience of reference
and stocks of publications and processed documents are not included.
   PUBLIC RECORD. All documents, papers, letters, books, maps, tapes,
photographs, recordings and other materials, regardless of physical form or
characteristics, that are used, created, received, maintained or held by or on
behalf of any public body and relate to public business, whether or not the
records are required by law to be created or maintained.
(Ord._2022-044)
§ 2-7-9-3 PROCESS.
   The Clerk is hereby authorized and directed to study the retention and
disposal of city government records, papers and instruments of every kind and
nature.
(Ord._2022-044)
§ 2-7-9-4 CORRELATION.
   In the performance of this duty, the Clerk is directed to correlate this
program where possible with that of the State Commission of Public Records.
(Ord._2022-044)
§ 2-7-9-5 INSPECTION AND SURVEY OF RECORDS.
   The City Clerk is authorized to inspect or survey the records of any agency,
and to make surveys of records management and records disposal practices in the
various agencies, and the Clerk shall be given the full cooperation of
officials and employees of the agencies in such inspections and surveys.
Records, the use of which is restricted by or pursuant to law or for reasons of
security or the public interest, may be inspected or surveyed by the City
Clerk, subject to the same restrictions imposed upon employees of the agency
holding the records.
(Ord._2022-044)
§ 2-7-9-6 ARCHIVES.
   There shall be established an Office of the Archives which shall exist
within the Office of the City Clerk and the City Clerk shall be responsible for
it. The Office of the Archives shall create an archiving system to store and
preserve city records.
((Ord._2022-044))
ARTICLE 8: LEGAL SERVICES; LITIGATION
Section
Part 1: Settlement or Compromise of Litigation
   
2-8-1-1   Statement of purpose
   
2-8-1-2   Settlement authority
   
2-8-1-3   Procedure for settlement
   
2-8-1-4   Settlement Advisory Committee
   
2-8-1-5   Reports
Part 2: Risk Management
    
2-8-2-1   Authority
   
2-8-2-2   Short title
   
2-8-2-3   Council declaration
   
2-8-2-4   Incorporating provisions of the New Mexico Tort Claims Act
   
2-8-2-5   Risk management manual
   
2-8-2-6   Risk management claims review board
   
2-8-2-7   Risks to be self-insured or insured
   
2-8-2-8   Risk management fund
   
2-8-2-9   Tort liability program ­ claims
   
2-8-2-10   Other risk management programs ­ expenditures
   
2-8-2-11   Confidentiality of records
 
   
2-8-2-99   Penalty
PART 1: SETTLEMENT OR COMPROMISE OF LITIGATION
§ 2-8-1-1 STATEMENT OF PURPOSE.
   The City Council recognizes that, while the City Attorney must have maximum
freedom in dealing with ordinary cases involving the city, the City Council
must keep informed about the settlement of cases of a serious nature, whether
for financial or policy reasons. There are also cases of sufficient non-
monetary importance to the city, that they should not be settled without City
Council approval.
('74 Code, § 1-16-1) (Ord. 66-1977; Am. Ord. 13-2008)
§ 2-8-1-2 SETTLEMENT AUTHORITY.
   The city shall not settle or dismiss any suit alleging the invalidity or
unconstitutionality of any city ordinance, resolution or other Council action
where the effect of such settlement would be to compromise the terms of such
ordinance, resolution or other Council action, except in accordance with the
procedures set out in §
2-8-1-3 herein.
('74 Code, § 1-16-2) (Ord. 66-1977; Am. Ord. 45-1987; Am. Ord. 13-2008)
§ 2-8-1-3 PROCEDURE FOR SETTLEMENT.
   (A)   Where settlement of a case involves a decision made by the Council in
an appeal settlement of the case shall require a majority vote of the Council.
   (B)   Where settlement of a case involves a plan adopted by the Council for
urban development and conservation as specified in §§
14-13-2-1 et seq., Planning, and the Council has adopted that plan, settlement
of the case shall require a majority vote of the Council.
   (C)   Where settlement of a case involves making a special agreement to
delay or not enforce Council- adopted zoning or subdivision regulations,
settlement of the case shall require a majority vote of the Council.
   (D)   In cases of proposed settlement of a case if the policy of an
ordinance will be substantially affected by the proposed settlement, the City
Attorney shall confer with the Director of the Council Services Department or
his or her authorized representative prior to the finalization of any such
settlement.
('74 Code, § 1-16-3) (Ord. 66-1977; Am. Ord. 45-1987; Am. Ord. 8-1993; Am. Ord.
13-2008)
§ 2-8-1-4 SETTLEMENT ADVISORY COMMITTEE.
   (A)   The Settlement Advisory Committee shall be constituted on an ad hoc
basis for cases which, pursuant to §
2-8-1-3 require Council approval for settlement.
   (B)   The Settlement Advisory Committee shall consist of the City Attorney,
the Risk Manager, one Department Head or Senior Official appointed by the Mayor
to consider the particular case at issue and two City Councilors appointed by
the Council President. If the settlement under consideration involves property
or activity uniquely within a Council district, the councilor from that
district shall be considered for the Settlement Advisory Committee for that
matter.
   (C)   The Committee shall be strictly advisory to whoever is representing
the city in a particular matter. The Committee shall take no votes. Any
opinions expressed during a meeting of the Committee shall be the opinion of
that member.
   (D)   A settlement offer presented to the Settlement Advisory Committee
shall satisfy an attorney's obligation to the city to present settlement offers
to the city for consideration. Any individual member of the Committee may
request that a settlement offer be presented to the full City Council. If such
a request is made the offer shall be presented to the Council at the earliest
possible Council meeting.
(Ord. 13-2008)
§ 2-8-1-5 REPORTS.
   The City Attorney shall submit in writing to the Council a quarterly report
listing the amount of all settlements and judgments where the amount of the
settlement or judgment exceeds $10,000, designating each case by name and
number, if applicable, and describing the nature of the case and the reason for
the settlement.
('74 Code, § 1-16-4) (Ord. 66-1977; Am. Ord. 45-1987; Am. Ord. 13-2008)
PART 2: RISK MANAGEMENT
§ 2-8-2-1 AUTHORITY.
   The Council, pursuant to Article X, Section 6 of the Constitution of New
Mexico, in accordance with the New Mexico Tort Claims Act, Sections 41-4-1 et
seq. NMSA 1978, hereby enacts §§
2-8-2-1 et seq. to create a municipal public liability fund and for the purpose
of providing maximum local self-government.
('74 Code, § 1-15-1) (Ord. 95-1983; Am. Ord. 66-1986)
§ 2-8-2-2 SHORT TITLE.
   Sections
2-8-2-1 et seq. shall be referred to as the "City Risk Management Ordinance."
('74 Code, § 1-15-2) (Ord. 95-1983; Am. Ord. 66-1986)
§ 2-8-2-3 COUNCIL DECLARATION.
   (A)   The Council intends by §§
2-8-2-1 et seq. to provide for the establishment of a Risk Management Function,
a municipal public liability fund which shall be known as the Risk Management
Fund, and to provide for insurance or self-insurance in accordance with the
Tort Claims Act, Sections 41-4-1 et seq. NMSA 1978.
   (B)   Sections
2-8-2-1 et seq. shall be interpreted in a manner consistent with the express
requirements of the New Mexico Tort Claims Act applicable to home rule
municipalities electing to insure or self-insure through a municipal liability
fund.
   (C)   Nothing in §§
2-8-2-1 et seq. shall be construed as limiting the powers of the city as a home
rule municipality which has adopted a charter pursuant to Article X, Section 6
of the Constitution of New Mexico.
   (D)   Nothing in §§
2-8-2-1 et seq. shall be construed as a waiver of any sovereign governmental
immunity.
('74 Code, § 1-15-3) (Ord. 95-1983; Am. Ord. 66-1986)
§ 2-8-2-4 INCORPORATING PROVISIONS OF THE NEW MEXICO TORT CLAIMS ACT.
   The city hereby adopts and incorporates herein the New Mexico Tort Claims
Act as that Act may be amended or revised from time to time.
('74 Code, § 1-15-4) (Ord. 95-1983; Am. Ord. 66-1986)
§ 2-8-2-5 RISK MANAGEMENT MANUAL.
   The Chief Administrative Officer shall cause a Risk Management Manual to be
prepared and distributed to all departments and division heads.
   (A)   The Risk Management Manual shall set forth city policies and
procedures pertaining to loss prevention, accident reporting and the handling
and settling of claims against the city, its officers and employees.
   (B)   The Risk Management Manual shall set forth procedures governing the
Risk Management Claims Review Board.
('74 Code, § 1-15-5) (Ord. 95-1983; Am. Ord. 66-1986)
§ 2-8-2-6 RISK MANAGEMENT CLAIMS REVIEW BOARD.
   (A)   There is created a Risk Management Claims Review Board which shall not
be considered as a public board. The Board shall consist of:
      (1)   The Chief Administrative Officer of the city or designee of the
Chief Administrative Officer;
      (2)   The City Attorney or a designee of the City Attorney;
      (3)   The Director of Finance and Management or designee of the Director
of Finance and Management;
      (4)   The Director of the Personnel Services Department or a designee of
the Director of the Personnel Services Department;
      (5)   A department head or designee, appointed by the Chief
Administrative Officer;
      (6)   The Risk Management Director, Deputy Director or the Claims Manager
who shall be a non-voting member; and
      (7)   A member of the staff of the City Council designated by the
Director of Council Services who shall be a non-voting member.
   (B)   Three voting members of the Risk Management Claims Review Board shall
constitute a quorum.
   (C)   The Risk Management Claims Review Board shall review and approve or
disapprove the handling, payment and disposition of claims in accordance with
the Risk Management Manual approved by the Chief Administrative Officer of the
city. A decision of the Board shall not be the subject of a grievance as
defined in
Chapter 3, Article 1, Merit System; Personnel Policy
('74 Code, § 1-15-6) (Ord. 95-1983; Am. Ord. 66-1986)
§ 2-8-2-7 RISKS TO BE SELF-INSURED OR INSURED.
   The city shall provide for self-insurance or insurance for the following
risks:
   (A)   All risks for which immunity has been waived under the provisions of
the Tort Claims Act;
   (B)   All risks arising under the laws of jurisdictions other than New
Mexico, including but not limited to other states, territories and possessions,
and the United States of America; and
   (C)   For all other risks for which the Chief Administrative Officer deems
it reasonable to provide for insurance or reserves. These risks shall be set
forth in the Risk Management Manual and approved by the Chief Administrative
Officer.
('74 Code, § 1-15-7) (Ord. 95-1983; Am. Ord. 66-1986)
§ 2-8-2-8 RISK MANAGEMENT FUND.
   (A)   The city hereby elects to create and maintain a municipal public
liability fund as required by Section 41-4-25B NMSA 1978 of the New Mexico Tort
Claims Act which shall be called the Risk Management Fund.
   (B)   The Risk Management Fund shall be held in trust, deposited in a
segregated account and invested in accordance with law.
   (C)   Any money deposited in the Risk Management Fund may be expended to
purchase liability insurance; to pay costs and expenses incurred in carrying
out the provisions of this section; to defend, save harmless and indemnify any
officer or employee of the municipality for any liability covered by the Tort
Claims Act; and to create a retention fund adequate to cover all uninsured tort
liability or other liability covered by the provisions of the Tort Liability
Act. Except for insurance purchased through the State Risk Manager, insurance
shall be purchased through an Agent of Record selected pursuant to
Chapter 5, Article 5, Public Purchases.
   (D)   Each year the Council shall appropriate to the Risk Management Fund
such amounts as are necessary to purchase insurance or to provide adequate
reserves for self-insured risks for which immunity has been waived by the New
Mexico Tort Claims Act and liabilities of the city pursuant to the laws of New
Mexico, this code and any applicable ordinances of the city, and the laws of
the United States and other jurisdictions.
('74 Code, § 1-15-8) (Ord. 95-1983; Am. Ord. 66-1986)
§ 2-8-2-9 TORT LIABILITY PROGRAM ­ CLAIMS.
   (A)   There is hereby created a Tort Liability Claims Program within the
Risk Management Fund.
   (B)   Claims against the Tort Liability Claims Program shall be made in
accordance with the Tort Claims Act.
   (C)   All claims made pursuant to the New Mexico Tort Claims Act shall
comply with the requirements of the Act regarding notice or written notice of
the occurrence giving rise to claim, and that Act's statute of limitations;
   (D)   If the Director for the Risk Management Function has reason to believe
that the Risk Management Fund would be exhausted by payment of all claims
allowed during a particular fiscal year, the amounts paid to each claimant and
parties obtaining judgments shall be prorated, with each party receiving an
amount equal to the percentage their own payment bears to the total of claims
or judgments outstanding and payable from the fund. Any amounts due and unpaid
as a result of such proration shall be paid in the following fiscal year.
('74 Code, § 1-15-9) (Ord. 95-1983; Am. Ord. 66-1986)
§ 2-8-2-10 OTHER RISK MANAGEMENT PROGRAMS ­ EXPENDITURES.
   Each year the Council shall appropriate such funds as may be necessary to
other Risk Management Programs. Money appropriated to other Risk Management
Programs may be expended:
   (A)   To settle, defend, and pay claims and judgments for on-the-job
injuries to city employees as provided in the New Mexico Workmen's Compensation
Act. All claims made pursuant to the New Mexico Workmen's Compensation Act
shall comply with the requirements of that act with respect to notice or
written notice of the occurrence giving rise to the claim and that Act's
statute of limitations;
   (B)   To insure or self-insure all risks of loss of the city not insured or
self-insured by the Tort Liability Claims Program. Insurance shall be purchased
through one or more Agents of Record selected pursuant to
Chapter 5, Article 5, Public Purchases;
   (C)   To pay any claims, judgments, costs and expenses incurred in carrying
out the provisions of §§
2-8-2-1 et seq. and the provisions of the Risk Management Manual;
   (D)   To create a retention or reserve fund and/or provide excess insurance
coverage for unmatured risks and claims.
('74 Code, § 1-15-10) (Ord. 95-1983; Am. Ord. 66-1986)
§ 2-8-2-11 CONFIDENTIALITY OF RECORDS.
   (A)   Until the disposition of a claim or lawsuit becomes final, all claim
and litigation records shall be confidential and shall not be subject to any
right of inspection by any person not a city officer or employee acting within
the scope of their official duties.
   (B)   When the disposition of a claim or lawsuit becomes final, claim and
litigation records shall then be subject to public inspection, except for those
records, or portions thereof, that are exempt from disclosure under the state
Inspection of Public Records Act. For the purpose of this section, FINAL shall
mean when the settlement agreement has been signed by all the parties when the
final decree has been entered by the court, or, if the former events are not
applicable, when the city closes the case.
   (C)   Settlement agreements, final judgments and releases executed pursuant
to the final disposition of a claim or lawsuit shall not be confidential. No
settlement agreement entered into in order to settle claims or litigation
against the city may contain provisions providing for the confidentiality of
the settlement documents or provisions prohibiting disclosure of the reasons
for entering into the settlement.
   (D)   Records protected pursuant to division (A) or (B) of this section
shall be made available as necessary for purposes of audit or defense. Any
person performing such audit or providing such defense shall keep such records
confidential, except as required otherwise by law.
('74 Code, § 1-15-11A,B) (Ord. 95-1983; Am. Ord. 66-1986; Am. Ord. 53-1995)
Penalty, see § 2-8-2-99
§ 2-8-2-99 PENALTY.
   Any person who reveals records protected pursuant to § 2-8-2-11(A) to
another person in violation of this section is guilty of misdemeanor and shall,
upon conviction, be fined not more than $500. The city shall not employ any
person so convicted for a period of five years after the date of conviction.
('74 Code, § 1-15-11C) (Ord. 95-1983; Am. Ord. 66-1986)
ARTICLE 9: CIVIL EMERGENCIES
Section
Part 1: Civil Emergency Powers
   
2-9-1-1   Definitions
   
2-9-1-2   Bombs or missiles prohibited
   
2-9-1-3   Mayoral proclamation of civil emergency; emergency powers
   
2-9-1-4   Mayoral proclamation of public health emergency; emergency orders
   
2-9-1-5   Publication of orders
   
2-9-1-6   Duration and extension of emergency proclamation
   
2-9-1-7   Failure to obey
   
2-9-1-8   Anti-price gouging; findings and intent
   
2-9-1-9   Anti-price gouging; short title
   
2-9-1-10   Anti-price gouging; definitions
   
2-9-1-11   Price gouging prohibited
   
2-9-1-12   Exceptions
   
2-9-1-13   Civil investigative demand
   
2-9-1-14   Enforcement
   
2-9-1-15   Appeal/administrative hearing procedure
   
2-9-1-16   Restraint of prohibited acts; remedies for violations
   
2-9-1-17   Exclusions
   
2-9-1-18   Non limitation or interference with other authority
Part 2: Office of Emergency Management
   
2-9-2-1   Office of emergency  management
   
2-9-2-2   Director of emergency management
Part 3: Civil Defense
   
2-9-3-1   Short title
   
2-9-3-2   Definitions
   
2-9-3-3   Designation, status, qualifications and term of emergency interim
successors
   
2-9-3-4   Assumption of powers and duties of officer by emergency interim
successor
   
2-9-3-5   Recording and publication
   
2-9-3-6   Formalities of taking office
   
2-9-3-7   Quorum and vote requirements
   
2-9-3-8   Temporary disaster location for the city council
PART 1: CIVIL EMERGENCY POWERS
§ 2-9-1-1 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of §§
2-9-1-1 et seq. the following definitions shall apply unless the context
clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   BOMB. Any can, bottle, box or other container, having therein a chemical
agent or a combination of chemical agents or other substances with a means
installed to activate such substances which when activated will cause fire or
explosion.
   CIVIL EMERGENCY. 
      (1)   A riot. Any use of force or violence, or any threat to use force or
violence, if accompanied by the immediate power of execution, which threatens
to result in acts described in division (4) below by three or more persons
acting together, and without authority of law, which cannot be controlled or
stopped under existing conditions and authority, is a riot.
      (2)   Unlawful assembly consisting of three or more persons assembling
together with intent to do any unlawful act described in division (4) below
with force or violence against the person or property of another, and who make
any overt act to carry out such unlawful purpose, or who do a lawful act in an
unlawful, violent or tumultuous manner, which cannot be controlled or stopped
under existing conditions or authority.
      (3)   A natural disaster or a human-caused calamity, including but not
limited to flood, conflagration, cyclone, tornado, earthquake, technological
disruption, cyberattack or explosion occurring within or affecting property
within the city limits of the city which endangers life and property to such
extent that extraordinary measures must be taken to protect the public health,
safety and welfare.
      (4)   Unlawful activities, such as looting, arson, fire bombing, sniping,
interference with emergency vehicles, widespread criminal damage to property,
which in the opinion of the Mayor based upon consultation with the Chief of
Police cannot be controlled nor stopped under existing conditions and authority
without unduly further endangering life or property.
   CURFEW. That period of time as declared by the Mayor during which no person
or persons shall be upon the public streets, sidewalks, grounds or semi-public
property either on foot or in vehicles of any type within the city, except,
however, that persons authorized by the Mayor by administrative order shall not
be subject to the curfew.
   MAYOR. The Mayor of the city or his designated representative.
   MOLOTOV COCKTAIL.  A bottle or other type container, containing gasoline or
any other inflammable matter to which has been inserted or attached a fuse type
wick or any similar contrivance.
   PUBLIC HEALTH EMERGENCY. An actual or imminent outbreak, or reasonable
threat of an actual or imminent outbreak, of any infectious disease that
presents a threat to the health or safety of the residents of the city, or
threatens to unreasonably strain the medical or emergency service resources
available in the city.
('74 Code, § 1-3-1) (Ord. 58-1968; Am. Ord._2020-010)
§ 2-9-1-2 BOMBS OR MISSILES PROHIBITED.
   No person shall make, carry, possess or use any type of Molotov Cocktail,
gasoline or any other type of bomb within the corporate limits of the city.
('74 Code, § 1-3-2) (Ord. 58- 1968; Am. Ord._2020-010) Penalty, see §
1-1-99
§ 2-9-1-3 MAYORAL PROCLAMATION OF CIVIL EMERGENCY; EMERGENCY POWERS.
   Whenever the Mayor shall after consultation with the Director of the City
Office of Emergency Management, find that a civil emergency exists as defined
herein and that invocation of the extraordinary powers conferred herein is
necessary to ensure or to restore the public peace, he shall forthwith proclaim
in writing the existence of such emergency. Upon such determination the Mayor
is hereby empowered to invoke any or all of the following provisions:
   (A)   To declare hours of curfew upon all or any portion of the city thereby
requiring all persons in such designated curfew areas to forthwith remove
themselves from the public streets, alleys, parks or other public or semi-
public places. The curfew shall be declared by proclamation which shall be
delivered to the Chief of Police, who shall see that copies thereof are
delivered to all news media within the city and who shall also use public
address systems to notify the public of said proclamation and curfew hours and
warn the public that violation of said curfew constitutes a misdemeanor and
violators are subject to arrest.
   (B)   To close any and all streets, alleys and other public ways in the city
to the public whenever it is necessary for the preservation of life and
property and the maintenance of law and order.
   (C)   Order the closing of all retail package liquor stores and outlets.
   (D)   Order the closing of all bars and other establishments selling
intoxicating liquor or beer by the drink.
   (E)   Order the discontinuance of selling, distributing or giving away
gasoline or other liquid flammable or combustible products in any container
other than a gasoline tank properly affixed to a motor vehicle said sale to be
limited to not more than one gallon per motor vehicle, or in the alternative,
order the closing of gasoline stations and other establishments, the chief
activity of which is the sale, distribution or dispensing of liquid flammable
or combustible products.
   (F)   Order the discontinuance of selling, distributing, dispensing or
giving away of any firearms or ammunition of any character whatsoever, or in
the alternative, order the closing of all establishments or portions thereof
where arms and/or ammunition are kept for sale or distribution.
   (G)   Issue such other orders as are imminently necessary for the protection
of life and property.
('74 Code, § 1-3-3) (Ord. 58- 1968; Am. Ord._2020-010)
§ 2-9-1-4 MAYORAL PROCLAMATION OF PUBLIC HEALTH EMERGENCY; EMERGENCY ORDERS.
   Whenever the Mayor shall, after consultation with the Director of the City
Office of Emergency Management, find that a public health emergency exists as
defined herein and that invocation of the extraordinary powers conferred herein
is necessary to help preserve and maintain the health, safety, and welfare of
the general public, he shall forthwith proclaim in writing the existence of
such emergency. Upon such determination the Mayor is hereby empowered to invoke
any or all of the following provisions:
   (A)   To close any and all streets, alleys and other public ways in the city
to the public whenever it is necessary for the preservation of life and public
health and safety.
   (B)   Order retailers to limit the kinds and quantities of medical, health
and sanitation items that a business may sell per customer per day.
   (C)   Order the closing of places of mass assembly, including but not
limited to theaters, clubs, or performances intended for a public audience, and
athletic venues.
   (D)   Order the closing of places of institutional childcare or education
such as daycares, preschools, and private educational institutions.
   (E)   Order that places of private employment take reasonable measures (as
determined by each employer) to minimize any exposures to infectious diseases
or health risks to employees and customers by, for example, partial or full
closures, or authorizing non- essential employees to work from home or take
leave, or deploying social distancing protocols.
   (F)   Cancel city sponsored events and gatherings, cancel or impose
limitations or special protocols for the provision of city services and the use
of city facilities, and authorize the redistribution or rededication of city
resources and budgetary appropriations, not to exceed $1,000,000 unless
otherwise approved by the City Council, as necessary to help address or combat
the proclaimed emergency.
   (G)   Enter any agreements authorizing the use of city owned property by
third parties, or agreements for the city's use of non-city owned property,
outside of the usual requirements for city real property transactions
prescribed by ROA 1994 § 5-2-1 et seq. as necessary to help address or combat
the proclaimed emergency.
   (H)   Issue such other orders as are imminently necessary for the protection
of life and property throughout the duration of the emergency, including any
provisions above that have not been previously invoked.
(Ord._2020-010)
§ 2-9-1-5 PUBLICATION OF ORDERS.
   The Mayor shall immediately deliver a copy of the declaration and all orders
issued pursuant to authority contained in §
2-9-1-3 or §
2-9-1-4 to the Albuquerque Police Department, Albuquerque Fire and Rescue, all
major media outlets serving the city, and the City Councilors. The Mayor shall
also post a copy of such orders to the city's website, distribute them through
the city's primary social media accounts, and take such additional reasonable
measures necessary to inform impacted persons and businesses of the emergency
declaration and associated emergency orders.
('74 Code, § 1-3-4) (Ord. 58- 1968; Am. Ord._2020-010)
§ 2-9-1-6 DURATION AND EXTENSION OF EMERGENCY PROCLAMATION.
   (A)   Any emergency proclaimed in accordance with the provisions of §§
2-9-1-1 et seq. shall take effect immediately, and terminate after 48 hours
from the issuance thereof, or may terminate sooner upon the issuance of a
proclamation by the Mayor determining an emergency no longer exists, whichever
occurs first; provided, however, that any emergency proclamation may be sooner
terminated by resolution of the City Council prior to the termination of 48
hours or may be extended by resolution of the Council as originally proclaimed
or with amendments for any such additional periods of time as deemed necessary
by the City Council up to a maximum of 90 days per proclamation.
   (B)   Any public health emergency proclaimed in accordance with the
provisions of §§
2-9-1-1 et seq. shall take effect immediately, and terminate upon the date set
forth by the proclamation, not to exceed 30 days from the issuance thereof, or
may terminate sooner upon the issuance of a proclamation by the Mayor
determining an emergency no longer exists, whichever occurs first; provided,
however, that any emergency proclamation may be sooner terminated or amended by
resolution of the City Council prior to the termination of 30 days or may be
extended by any resolution of the Council as originally proclaimed or with
amendments for any such additional periods of time as deemed necessary by the
City Council up to a maximum of 90 days per proclamation.
('74 Code, § 1-3-5) (Ord. 58- 1968; Am. Ord._2020-010)
§ 2-9-1-7 FAILURE TO OBEY.
   Every person remaining present at the place of any riot or unlawful assembly
after they have been ordered to disperse by the police or any other lawful
authority, or who fails to comply with any order or directive set forth
pursuant to §§
2-9-1-1 et seq., except those public officers and persons assisting them in
attempting to disperse the same or comply with an order or directive or
administer emergency services, shall be deemed guilty of a violation of §§
2-9-1-1 et seq.
('74 Code, § 1-3-6) (Ord. 58- 1968; Am. Ord._2020-010) Penalty, see §
1-1-99
§ 2-9-1-8 ANTI-PRICE GOUGING; FINDINGS AND INTENT.
   The City Council finds that, pursuant to Chapter 2, Article 9 ROA 1994 et
seq., during a declared state of emergency, it is in the public interest to
prohibit price gouging in the conduct of any trade or commerce in the city.
During times of emergency, some sellers may take unfair advantage of consumers
by greatly increasing prices for vital goods and services. The City Council
also finds that, during times of emergency, the public health, safety, and
welfare are best served when the community unites to protect and serve all
Albuquerque residents, including our most vulnerable populations. Price gouging
during an emergency must not put vital goods and services, such as food,
medicine, and emergency supplies, out of the reach of the Albuquerque residents
who need them.
   While under ordinary conditions the pricing of consumer goods and services
is generally best left to the marketplace, when abnormal disruptions of the
market result from a declared state of emergency, the public interest requires
that excessive and unjustified increases in the prices of vital goods and
services be prohibited, pursuant to Chapter 2, Article 9 ROA 1994 et seq.
   The City Council finds that an anti-price gouging ordinance will protect the
City of Albuquerque and its residents from excessive and unjustified increases
in the prices charged for goods and services that are vital and necessary to
the health, safety, or welfare of consumers during or shortly after a declared
state of emergency.
(Ord._2020-020)
§ 2-9-1-9 ANTI-PRICE GOUGING; SHORT TITLE.
   These §§
2-9-1-8 -
2-9-1-18 shall be referred to as the "Albuquerque Emergency Anti-Price Gouging
Ordinance" and may sometimes be referred to herein as "the anti-price gouging
ordinance."
(Ord._2020-020)
§ 2-9-1-10 ANTI-PRICE GOUGING; DEFINITIONS.
   For purposes of the anti-price gouging ordinance, the following terms shall
have the stated meaning unless the context clearly requires a different
meaning:
   CITY ATTORNEY. The City Attorney or their attorney designee.
   ENFORCEMENT AUTHORITY. A Zoning Enforcement Officer, as defined under
Chapter 14, Article 16, Part 6, Section 2(B)(1)(c) ROA 1994, other City
Planning Department personnel, including, but not limited to, Building Safety
personnel; Environmental Health Department personnel; the Fire Marshal or their
authorized personnel; and other city personnel designated by the City Attorney
to conduct inspections and related duties pursuant to the anti-price gouging
ordinance.
   PERSON. Any person, agent, firm, partnership, association, corporation,
company, organization, or entity of any kind, except a governmental body or
entity.
   TRADE or COMMERCE.  Has the meaning it has under NMSA 1978, § 57-12-2 and as
New Mexico regulation or case law has interpreted the term(s) under NMSA 1978,
Chapter 57 and includes the advertising, offering for sale or distribution of
any services and any property and any other article, commodity, or thing of
value, including any trade or commerce directly or indirectly affecting the
people of the City of Albuquerque.
(Ord._2020-020)
§ 2-9-1-11 PRICE GOUGING PROHIBITED.
   Upon the declaration of a state of emergency by the federal government, the
Governor of New Mexico, or the Mayor of the City of Albuquerque, or any
extension thereof, and for a period of 30 days following the last date of
termination of any such declared state of emergency, it is unlawful for any
person to sell or offer to sell any consumer good, or provide any service,
including, but not limited to, food items or goods, goods or services used for
emergency cleanup, emergency supplies, medicine, medical supplies, sanitation
supplies, personal hygiene products, home heating oil, firewood, heating or
cooling device or related energy source material, building materials, radios
and other communication devices, batteries, generators, housing,
transportation, freight, storage services, gasoline, or other motor fuels:
   (A)   For a price of more than 20% greater than the price charged by that
person for those goods or services immediately prior to the first declaration
of emergency; or
   (B)   If the person did not sell such goods or provide such services within
the 60-day period immediately preceding the date of the first declaration of
emergency, for a price of more than 20% greater than the average price in the
local Albuquerque market immediately prior to the first declaration of
emergency.
(Ord._2020-020)
§ 2-9-1-12 EXCEPTIONS.
   A price increase otherwise barred by §
2-9-1-11 is not unlawful if that person can prove by a preponderance of the
evidence that the increase in price is no more than 20% greater than the total
of the cost to such person selling, plus the markup customarily applied by such
person selling that good or service in the usual course of business,
immediately prior to the first state of emergency declaration:
   (A)   And was directly attributable to:
      (1)   Additional costs imposed on it by the supply chain;
      (2)   Additional costs for labor and materials used to provide the
services;
      (3)   Another market force over which the person does not exercise
control; or
      (4)   Any combination thereof; or
   (B)   The City Economist or their designee documents their finding that, for
reasons of public health, safety, or welfare, it is in the best interests of
the City of Albuquerque and its residents to pay the price currently offered by
the seller.
(Ord._2020-020)
§ 2-9-1-13 CIVIL INVESTIGATIVE DEMAND.
   (A)   Whenever the City Attorney believes that any person may be in
possession, custody, or control of any document that the City Attorney believes
to be relevant to the investigation of a probable violation of the anti- price
gouging ordinance, the City Attorney may execute in writing and cause to be
served upon the person a civil investigative demand. A "document" includes, but
is not limited to, an original or copy of any book, record, recording, report,
memorandum, paper, communication, tabulation, map, chart, photograph,
mechanical transcription, or any other tangible or electronic document or
recording.
   (B)   At the City Attorney's sole discretion, the City Attorney may serve a
civil investigative demand prior to issuance of a warning letter or notice of
violation, in conjunction with issuance of a warning letter or notice of
violation, or prior to the institution of a civil proceeding.
   (C)   A civil investigative demand requires the person to produce
documentary or electronic material and permit the inspection and copying of the
material. The demand of the City Attorney shall not be a matter of public
record and shall not be published except by order of the court.
   (D)   Each demand shall:
      (1)   State the general subject matter of the investigation;
      (2)   Describe the classes of documentary and electronic material to be
produced with reasonable certainty;
      (3)   Prescribe the return date within which the documentary and
electronic material is to be produced, which in no case shall be less than ten
days after the date of service; and
      (4)   Identify the members of the City Attorney's staff to whom such
documentary and electronic material is to be made available for inspection and
copying.
   (E)   No demand shall:
      (1)   Contain any requirement that would be unreasonable or improper if
contained in a subpoena duces tecum issued by a court of this state;
      (2)   Require the disclosure of any documentary or electronic material
that would be privileged, or that for any other reason would not be required by
a subpoena duces tecum issued by a court of this state; or
      (3)   Require the removal of any documentary or electronic material from
the custody of the person upon whom the demand is served except in accordance
with the provisions of subsection (E).
   (F)   Service of demand may be made by:
      (1)   Delivering a duly executed copy thereof to the person to be served,
or if the person is not a natural person, to the statutory agent for the person
or to any officer of the person to be served;
      (2)   Delivering a duly executed copy thereof to the principal place of
business in this state of the person to be served; or
      (3)   Mailing by registered or certified mall a duly executed copy of the
demand addressed to the person to be served at their principal place of
business in this state, or, if the person has no place of business in this
state, to their principal office or place of business.
   (G)   Documentary and electronic material demanded pursuant to the
provisions of this §
2-9-1-13 shall be produced for inspection and copying during normal business
hours at the principal office or place of business of the person served or may
be inspected and copied at such other times and places as may be agreed upon by
the person served and the City Attorney.
   (H)   No documentary or electronic material produced pursuant to a demand,
or copies thereof, shall, unless otherwise ordered by the district court in the
county in which the person resides or has his principal place of business, or
is about to perform or is performing the trade or commerce method, act, or
practice that is alleged to be unlawful under the anti-price gouging ordinance,
for good cause shown, be produced for inspection or copying by anyone other
than an authorized employee of the City Attorney, nor shall the contents
thereof be disclosed to anyone other than an authorized employee of the City
Attorney, or in court in an action relating to a violation of the anti-price
gouging ordinance.
   (I)   At any time before the return date of the demand, a petition to set
aside the demand, modify the demand, or extend the return date thereon may be
filed in the district court in the county in which the person resides or has
their principal place of business, or is about to perform or is performing the
trade or commerce method, act, or practice that is alleged to be unlawful under
the anti-price gouging ordinance, and the court upon a showing of good cause
may set aside the demand, modify it, or extend the return date of the demand.
   (J)   After service of the investigative demand upon them, if any person
neglects or refuses to comply with the demand, the City Attorney may invoke the
aid of the court in the enforcement of the demand. In appropriate cases, the
court shall issue its order requiring the person to appear and produce the
documentary and electronic material required in the demand and may upon failure
of the person to comply with the order punish the person for contempt.
   (K)   This section shall not be applicable to criminal prosecutions.
(Ord._2020-020)
§ 2-9-1-14 ENFORCEMENT.
   (A)   Police powers. Any person violating the anti-price gouging ordinance
is subject to the home rule and police powers of the city to adopt and enforce
ordinances necessary to the safety, health, and welfare of the public. Any
conflict between the provisions of the anti-price gouging ordinance and any
other present or future lawful exercise of the city's police powers shall be
resolved in favor of the latter.
   (B)   In addition to issuance of a civil investigative demand, as set forth
in §
2-9-1-13, the City Attorney is authorized to undertake such activities as are
reasonable and necessary to enforce the anti-price gouging ordinance. At the
option of the City Attorney, the City Attorney may initiate enforcement with a
civil investigative demand, Notice of Violation, or in a court of competent
jurisdiction.
   (C)   Compliance inspections. The City Attorney shall designate the
Enforcement Authority to conduct compliance inspections and related duties
pursuant to the anti-price gouging ordinance as follows:
      (1)   Undisclosed inspections. The Enforcement Authority may conduct an
undisclosed inspectorial search of the public areas of a building, premises, or
vehicle(s) at all reasonable times, including during business hours.
      (2)   Consensual inspections.
         (a)   The Enforcement Authority may conduct an inspectorial search,
with the voluntary consent of an occupant or custodian of the building,
premises, or vehicle(s) to be inspected, who reasonably appears to the
Enforcement Authority to be in control of the building, premises, or vehicle(s)
to be inspected, or who is otherwise authorized to give such consent.
         (b)   Before requesting consent for an inspectorial search, the
Enforcement Authority shall inform the person to whom the request is directed
of the authority under and purposes for which the inspection is to be made and
shall, upon demand, exhibit an identification card or official city document
evidencing their authority to make such inspections.
         (c)   Inspections undertaken pursuant to this subsection shall be
carried out with due regard for the convenience and privacy of the occupants,
and during the daytime unless, because of the nature of the premises, the
convenience of the occupants, the nature of the possible violation or other
circumstances, there is a reasonable basis for carrying out the inspection at
night.
         (d)   Unless advance notice would be likely to cause the suspected
violation to be temporarily eliminated so as to frustrate enforcement, notice
of the purpose and approximate time of an inspectorial search of an area not
open to the general public shall be sent to the occupants or custodians of the
building, premises, or vehicle(s).
      (3)   Nonconsensual inspections.
         (a)   Upon sufficient showing that required consent to an inspectorial
search has been refused or is otherwise unobtainable within a reasonable period
of time, the City Attorney may make application to the applicable district
court for an inspection order/ search warrant. Such application shall be made
to a district court having jurisdiction over the building, premises or vehicle
(s) to be searched. Such application shall set forth the following information:
            1.   The particular building, premises, vehicle(s), or portion of a
building, premises, or vehicle(s) sought to be inspected.
            2.   That the owner or occupant of the building, premises, or
vehicle(s) has refused entry.
            3.   That inspection of the building, premises, or vehicle(s) is
necessary to determine whether they comply with the requirements of the anti-
price gouging ordinance.
            4.   Any other reason necessitating the inspection, including
knowledge or belief that a particular method, act, or practice is occurring in
the building or vehicle(s) or on the premises that is a violation of the anti-
price gouging ordinance.
            5.   That the Enforcement Authority is authorized by the city to
make the inspection.
         (b)   The application shall be granted and the inspection order/search
warrant issued upon a sufficient showing that inspection in the area where the
building, premises, or vehicle(s) in question are located, or inspection of the
particular building, premises, or vehicle(s), is in accordance with reasonable
legislative or administrative standards, and that the circumstances of the
particular inspection for which application is made are otherwise reasonable.
The district court shall make and keep a record of the proceedings on the
application and enter thereon its finding in accordance with the requirements
of the anti-price gouging ordinance.
         (c)   After execution of the inspection order/search warrant or after
unsuccessful efforts, as the case may be, the City Attorney shall return the
inspection order/search warrant to the district court with a sworn report of
the circumstances of execution or failure to execute.
      (4)   Disclaimer. The anti-price gouging ordinance shall not be construed
to hold the city or its authorized representatives responsible for any damage
to persons or property by reason of the inspection or reinspection authorized
hereunder, or failure to inspect or reinspect, or the issuance of any
registration, license, or permit, or other adopted city instructions, rules, or
regulations.
   (D)   Warning letter. In the interests of efficiency, prompt compliance, and
settlement, in the sole discretion of the City Attorney, if the City Attorney
has reason to believe any person has violated or is violating any provision of
the anti-price gouging ordinance, the City Attorney may issue a warning letter
to such person(s). No person is entitled to a warning letter, and warning
letters are not subject to appeal.
   (E)   Notice of Violation. The City Attorney may issue a Notice of Violation
to any person who violates any provision of the anti-price gouging ordinance.
The person may be given an opportunity to respond to the notice and correct the
violation within 15 working days.
      (1)   Any person having any title or legal interest in the person the
City Attorney found violated the anti-price gouging ordinance may appeal from
the Notice of Violation, or any action of the City Attorney or Enforcement
Authority, other than a warning letter, to the Independent Office of Hearings,
pursuant to Chapter 2, Article 7, Part 8 ROA 1994 et seq., provided that the
appeal is made in writing and filed within 15 days of service of the Notice of
Violation. Failure to timely appeal the Notice of Violation makes the Notice
effective.
   (F)   Civil fines and business license.
      (1)   The City Attorney, in their sole discretion, may impose civil
fines, civil penalties, and other remedies.
      (2)   Civil fine. Any person(s) violating the anti- price gouging
ordinance shall be subject the following provisions:
         (a)   Each sale or offer in violation of the anti-price gouging
ordinance is considered a separate offense;
         (b)   Any person who violates any provision of the anti-price gouging
ordinance shall be subject to a civil fine not exceeding $500;
      (3)   Business registration, license, and permit.
         (a)   The city will not grant or renew a business registration,
business license, or business permit for a person engaged in trade or commerce
in violation of the anti-price gouging ordinance.
         (b)   The City Attorney may revoke the business registration, business
license, or business permit of a person the City Attorney, Hearing Officer, or
court has previously found to be in violation of the anti-price gouging
ordinance and who has failed to comply with such order of the City Attorney,
Hearing Officer, or Court.
         (c)   Exception: If a person has come into compliance with the anti-
price gouging ordinance, then the city may grant, renew, or restore the
requested business registration, business license, or business permit, so long
as the person meets all other business registration, business license, and
business permit requirements.
   (G)   Civil proceeding. Violation of the anti-price gouging ordinance will
not result in criminal prosecution.
(Ord._2020-020; Am. Ord._2023-015)
§ 2-9-1-15 APPEAL/ADMINISTRATIVE HEARING PROCEDURE.
   (A)   General.
      (1)   Any person seeking an appeal under the anti-price gouging ordinance
shall do so by adhering to the procedures established for the Independent
Office of Hearings at Chapter 2, Article 7, Part 8 ROA 1994 et seq.
   (B)   Enforcement of the Order of the City Attorney or the Hearing Officer.
      (1)   Compliance.
         (a)   General. After any order of the City Attorney or Hearing Officer
made pursuant to the anti-price gouging ordinance shall have become final, no
person to whom an order is directed shall fail, neglect, or refuse to obey such
order.
         (b)   Any person who fails to comply with any such order is subject to
a civil penalty of $500.
         (c)   Failure to obey order. If, after any order of the City Attorney
or Hearing Officer made pursuant to the anti-price gouging ordinance has become
final, the person to whom such order is directed shall fail, neglect, or refuse
to obey such order, the City Attorney may:
            1.   File a motion to show cause before the Independent Office of
Hearings within 60 calendar days. If the Hearing Officer determines that there
is good cause, the Hearing Officer shall notice a show cause hearing and
convene all parties. The show cause hearing will be conducted in substantially
the same manner as an appeal hearing. If the Hearing Officer determines that
there is substantial evidence that the person(s) to whom the order is directed
has failed, neglected, or refused to obey such order, then the Hearing Officer
shall order that such person must pay a civil penalty not to exceed $500 plus
an additional $100 for each month after the date of the original order that
such person failed, neglected, or refused to obey. The total civil penalty
shall be paid to the City of Albuquerque in the manner required by the Hearing
Officer.
            2.   Remedies in Court. The city, acting through the City Attorney,
may file an action in a court of competent jurisdiction to enforce an order of
the City Attorney or Hearing Officer. Remedies may include, but are not limited
to:
               A.    Enjoinment of any person violating the provisions of the
anti-price gouging ordinance;
               B.    Other temporary or permanent injunctive relief;
               C.    Recovery of civil fines and civil penalties; and
               D.    Restitution on behalf of persons who have been harmed by
the price gouging method, act, or practice.
(Ord._2020-020)
§ 2-9-1-16 RESTRAINT OF PROHIBITED ACTS; REMEDIES FOR VIOLATIONS.
   (A)   Whenever the City Attorney has reasonable belief that any person is
using or has used any trade or commerce method, act, or practice that is
unlawful under the anti-price gouging ordinance, and that proceedings would be
in the public interest, they may bring an action in the name of the city
alleging violations of the anti-price gouging ordinance. The action may be
brought in the district court of the county in which the person resides or has
their principal place of business or in the district court in any county in
which the person is using or has used the trade or commerce method, act, or
practice alleged to be unlawful under the anti-price gouging ordinance. The
City Attorney acting on behalf of the City of Albuquerque shall not be required
to post bond when seeking a temporary or permanent injunction in such action.
   (B)   In any action filed pursuant to the anti-price gouging ordinance, the
City Attorney may petition the district court for temporary or permanent
injunctive relief, civil fines, civil penalties, restitution, and all other
remedies provided by law or equity.
(Ord._2020-020)
§ 2-9-1-17 EXCLUSIONS.
   (A)   No private right of action or interference. Nothing in the anti-price
gouging ordinance shall be construed to create a private right of action or
preempt, otherwise limit, or affect a private right of action not arising from
the anti-price gouging ordinance. Nothing in the anti-price gouging ordinance
shall be construed to preempt, otherwise limit, or affect the applicability of
any other law, regulation, rule, requirement, policy, or standard.
   (B)   Non-limitation of authority. The remedies provided under the anti-
price gouging ordinance are not exclusive but are supplemental to all other
remedies provided by law or equity.
   (C)   Severability clause. If any section, paragraph, sentence, clause,
word, or phrase of the anti-price gouging ordinance is for any reason held to
be invalid or unenforceable by any court of competent jurisdiction, such
decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining provisions of the anti-
price gouging ordinance. The Council hereby declares that it would have passed
this ordinance and each section, paragraph, sentence, clause, word, or phrase
thereof irrespective of any provision being declared unconstitutional or
otherwise invalid.
   (D)   Compilation. This ordinance shall amend, be incorporated in and
compiled as part of the Revised Ordinances of Albuquerque, New Mexico, 1994.
   (E)   Effective date. This ordinance shall take effect seven days after
publication by title and general summary.
(Ord._2020-020)
§ 2-9-1-18 NON LIMITATION OR INTERFERENCE WITH OTHER AUTHORITY.
   Nothing herein is intended to limit the power or authority of the Mayor with
respect to the control and management of the city resources and facilities that
generally exist even outside the existence of an emergency. However,
notwithstanding the emergency powers authorized herein, closures or limitations
for any office or place of gathering or meeting necessary for carrying out the
business of the City Council may occur only by order of the City Council.
(Ord._2020-010; Am. Ord. 2020-20)
PART 2: OFFICE OF EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT
§ 2-9-2-1 OFFICE OF EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT.
   (A)   There is hereby established under the executive branch of the
government of the city in accordance with Section 12-10-5 NMSA 1978, an Office
of Emergency Management consisting of:
      (1)   A Director of Emergency Management, appointed by and responsible to
the Mayor of the city.
      (2)   Such additional professional and administrative staff as may be
required to effectively carry out the city's emergency management programs.
      (3)   During periods of emergency, all other city officers and employees,
together with those forces enrolled to aid the Office of Emergency Management,
shall be considered as part of the Office of Emergency Management.
   (B)   The purpose of the Office of Emergency Management is to coordinate the
efforts of all city agencies and employees, and non-governmental agencies in
the preparation of contingency plans for any emergency endangering the lives
and property of the residents of the city. It shall be the duty of the Office
of Emergency Management to coordinate the development of plans for the
effective employment of municipal resources to protect the lives and health of
the residents of the city, and the private and public property therein from the
effects of natural or human-caused disasters, including any “civil emergency”
as defined within §
2-9-1-1, above, and any acts of war, and to coordinate the implementation of
said plans during periods of emergency. Such plans shall be coordinated with
those of Bernalillo County and the State Office of Emergency Preparedness.
('74 Code, § 1-9-1) (Ord. 9-1975; Am. Ord._2020-010)
§ 2-9-2-2 DIRECTOR OF EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT.
   (A)   The Director shall be the executive head of the Office of Emergency
Management and shall be responsible to the Mayor for the organization,
administration, and operation of the Office of Emergency Management and all of
the city's emergency management programs. The Director shall coordinate the
city's emergency management programs with programs of like kind placed into
effect by the County of Bernalillo, private persons, and all nongovernmental
agencies, and shall act as a liaison and fully cooperate with the emergency
management agencies of the federal government and the State of New Mexico and
its political subdivisions.
   (B)   Subject to approval by the Mayor, the Director shall act for the
government of the city in all matters pertaining to emergency management,
including the obligation of such municipal funds as may be appropriated for
emergency management purposes.
   (C)   The Director shall prepare and submit an annual proposed budget for
the Office of Emergency Management expenditures to the Mayor.
   (D)    The Director shall perform such other duties as the Mayor shall
prescribe.
('74 Code, § 1-9-2) (Ord. 9- 1975; Am. Ord._2020-010)
PART 3: CIVIL DEFENSE
§ 2-9-3-1 SHORT TITLE.
   Sections
2-9-3-1 et seq. shall be known and cited as the "Continuity and Disaster
Location of Government Ordinance of the City of Albuquerque."
('74 Code, § 1-2-1) (Ord. 2167)
§ 2-9-3-2 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of §§
2-9-3-1 et seq. the following definitions shall apply unless the context
clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ATTACK. Any hostile action by an enemy of the United States which is
intended to and does physically damage citizens or property in the United
States.
   DISASTER. The damage, or injury, caused by enemy attack to persons or
property in this state of such magnitude that a state of martial law is
declared to exist in New Mexico and a disaster emergency is declared by the
Chief Executive Officer of the United States and the Chief Executive Officer of
New Mexico.
   DULY AUTHORIZED DEPUTY. A person who is presently authorized to perform all
of the functions, exercise all of the powers and discharge all of the duties of
an office in the event the office is vacant or at such times as it lacks
administration due to the death, absence or disability of the incumbent
officer.
   EMERGENCY INTERIM SUCCESSOR.  A person designated pursuant to §§ 2-9-3-1 et
seq. for possible temporary succession to the powers and duties, but not the
office, of a city officer in the event that such officer or any duly authorized
deputy is unavailable to exercise the powers and discharge the duties of the
office.
   UNAVAILABLE. A vacancy in office exists and there is no deputy authorized to
exercise all of the powers and discharge the duties of the office, or that the
lawful incumbent of the office (including any deputy exercising the powers and
discharging the duties of an office because of a vacancy) and his duly
authorized deputy are absent or unable, for physical, mental, or legal reasons,
to exercise the powers and discharge the duties of the office.
('74 Code, § 1-2-2) (Ord. 2167)
§ 2-9-3-3 DESIGNATION, STATUS, QUALIFICATIONS AND TERM OF EMERGENCY INTERIM
SUCCESSORS.
   (A)   Elective Officers.
      (1)   Vacancy in the office of City Councillor should be filled as
provided in Article IV, Section 9 of the City Charter. Vacancy in the office of
Mayor should be filled as provided in Article V, Section 5 of the City Charter.
      (2)   Within 30 days after first entering upon the duties of his office,
the Mayor shall, in addition to any duly authorized deputy, designate such
number of emergency interim successors to his duties as chief executive officer
(but not his veto power) and specify their rank in order of succession after
any duly authorized deputy so that there will be not less than three duly
authorized deputies or emergency interim successors or combination thereof.
However, these provisions have effect only if the vacancy provisions of the
City Charter, referenced in division (A)(1) of this section, do not apply or
cannot fill the office of Mayor.
   (B)   Appointive Officers. The Mayor shall within the time specified in
division (A)(2), in addition to any duly authorized deputy, designate for
appointive officers including the Chief Administrative Office and all city
department heads, such number of emergency interim successors to these officers
and specify their rank in order of succession after any duly authorized deputy
so that there will be not less than three duly authorized deputies or emergency
interim successors or combination thereof for each officer.
   (C)   Review of Designation. The Mayor shall review and, as necessary or
appropriate, promptly revise the designations of emergency interim successors
to insure that at all times there are at least three appropriate and qualified
emergency interim successors or duly authorized deputies or any combination
thereof for each officer specified.
   (D)   Qualifications. No person shall be designated or serve as an emergency
interim successor unless he may under the constitution and statutes of this
state and the charter or ordinances of this city, hold the office of the person
to whose powers and duties he is designated to succeed, but no provision of any
ordinance prohibiting an officer or employee of this city from holding another
office shall be applicable to an emergency interim successor.
   (E)   Status of Emergency Interim Successor. A person designated as an
emergency interim successor holds that designation at the pleasure of the
designator; provided, that he must be replaced if removed. He retains this
designation as emergency interim successor until replaced by another appointed
by the authorized designator.
('74 Code, § 1-2-3) (Ord. 2167; Am. Ord. 67-1988)
§ 2-9-3-4 ASSUMPTION OF POWERS AND DUTIES OF OFFICER BY EMERGENCY INTERIM
SUCCESSOR.
   If in the event of an attack, any officer named in §
2-9-3-3(A) and (B) and any duly authorized deputy is unavailable, his emergency
interim successor highest in rank in order of succession who is available
shall, except for the power and duty to appoint emergency interim successors,
exercise the powers and discharge the duties of such officer. An emergency
interim successor shall exercise these powers and discharge these duties only
until such time as the lawful incumbent officer or any duly authorized deputy
or an emergency interim successor higher in rank in order of succession
exercises, or resumes the exercise of, the powers and discharge of the duties
of the office, or until, where an actual vacancy exists, a successor is
appointed to fill such vacancy or is elected and qualified as provided by law.
('74 Code, § 1-2-4) (Ord. 2167)
§ 2-9-3-5 RECORDING AND PUBLICATION.
   The name, address and rank in order of succession of each duly authorized
deputy shall be filed with the City Clerk and each designation, replacement, or
change in order of succession of an emergency interim successor shall become
effective when the designator files with the City Clerk the successor's name,
address and rank in order of succession. The City Clerk shall keep on file all
such data regarding duly authorized deputies and emergency interim successors
and it shall be open to public inspection.
('74 Code, § 1-2-5) (Ord. 2167)
§ 2-9-3-6 FORMALITIES OF TAKING OFFICE.
   At the time of their designation, emergency interim successors shall take
such oath and do such other things, if any, as may be required to qualify them
to exercise the powers and discharge the duties of the office to which they may
succeed.
('74 Code, § 1-2-6) (Ord. 2167)
§ 2-9-3-7 QUORUM AND VOTE REQUIREMENTS.
   In the event of an attack:
   (A)   Quorum requirements for the City Council shall be suspended; and
   (B)   Where the affirmative vote of a specified proportion of Council
members for the approval of an ordinance, resolution or other action would
otherwise be required, the same proportion of those voting thereon shall be
sufficient.
('74 Code, § 1-2-7) (Ord. 2167)
§ 2-9-3-8 TEMPORARY DISASTER LOCATION FOR THE CITY COUNCIL.
   (A)   Whenever a disaster makes it imprudent or impossible to conduct the
affairs of city government at its regular location, the City Council may meet
at any place, inside or outside the city limits, at the call of the presiding
officer or any two members of the City Council, and designate by ordinance a
temporary disaster location of the city government, which place shall remain
the seat of city government until the City Council establishes a new location
or until the disaster is declared ended by the legislature of the state and the
seat is returned to its normal location.
   (B)   Any official act or meeting required to be performed at the seat of
the City Council is valid when performed at a temporary disaster location.
('74 Code, § 1-2-8) (Ord. 2167)
ARTICLE 10: ACCOUNTABILITY IN GOVERNMENT
Section
   
2-10-1   Short title
   
2-10-2   Findings; purpose; goals
   
2-10-3   Definitions
   
2-10-4   Creation of the Office of Internal Audit; resources; staff
   
2-10-5   Creation of Committee; duties; powers; membership
   
2-10-6   Selection and retention of City Auditor
   
2-10-7   City Auditor’s duties; responsibilities; authority; administrative
subpoena power
   
2-10-8   Professional audit standards
   
2-10-9   Office of Internal Audit; public records; confidentiality
   
2-10-10   Office of Internal Audit; scope of audits
   
2-10-11   Annual audit plan
   
2-10-12   Special requests; audit reports
   
2-10-13   Office of Internal Audit reports to the Committee
   
2-10-14   Office of Internal Audit annual reporting
   
2-10-15   Contract auditors, consultants, and experts
   
2-10-16   Penalty; cooperation; retaliation prohibited
§ 2-10-1 SHORT TITLE.
   Sections
2-10-1 through
2-10-16 may be cited as the “Accountability in Government Ordinance”.
(Ord. 1-2005; Am. Ord._2016-018; Am. Ord._2023-020)
§ 2-10-2 FINDINGS; PURPOSE; GOALS.
   (A)   The City Council finds that good governance, transparency and
accountability are critical in the public sector for the effective and credible
functioning of a healthy democracy, and in fulfilling the government’s
responsibility to citizens and taxpayers. Transparent and reliable reporting
and effective audit services in government promote accountability, enhance the
effectiveness and efficiency of government services to its citizens, and
increase the public’s confidence in their government.
   (B)   The Mayor and City Council share a duty to ensure that the actions of
public officials, employees, community-based organizations, and contractors of
the city are carried out in the most responsible manner possible and that city
policies, budgets, goals and objectives are fully implemented. To accomplish
this end, the city requires the services of independent organizations to
perform audits, investigations, and other activities.
   (C)   The Committee shall oversee the City Auditor and the Inspector
General, whose goals are to:
      (1)   Conduct audits, investigations, and other activities in an
efficient, impartial, equitable and objective manner;
      (2)   Prevent, deter, and detect fraud, waste and abuse in city
activities including all city contracts and partnerships;
      (3)   Propose ways to increase the city’s legal, fiscal and ethical
accountability through the use of audit and non-audit activities to ensure that
tax payers’ dollars are spent in a manner that improves the economy and
transparency of operations; and
      (4)   Deter criminal activity through independence in fact and
appearance, audit, review, investigation and interdiction.
(Ord. 1-2005; Am. Ord. 45-2006; Am. Ord. 30-2010; Am. Ord._2016-018; Am. Ord.
2023-020)
§ 2-10-3 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this article, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   AUDIT SERVICES. Include audit and non-audit activities, such as strategic
reviews and advisory services.
   AUDITEES.   Auditees are the city related departments, programs, activities,
agencies, vendors, contractors or other city related entities affected by an
audit or investigation.
   BOARD OF ETHICS AND CAMPAIGN PRACTICES. The Board of Ethics and Campaign
Practices created pursuant to the City Charter, Article XII, Code of Ethics.
   CITIZENS' INDEPENDENT SALARY COMMISSION. The Citizens' Independent Salary
Commission created pursuant to the City Charter, Article XVIII, Citizens'
Independent Salary Commission.
   CITY AUDITOR. The Director of the Office of Internal Audit.
   COMMITTEE. The Accountability in Government Oversight Committee.
   CONTRACTORS. All city contractors, including community-based organizations.
   EMPLOYEE. All city employees, including appointed employees.
   INSPECTOR GENERAL. The Inspector General created pursuant to the Inspector
General Ordinance (§§
2-17-1 et seq.).
   OFFICIAL. The Mayor, City Councilors, and appointed members of city boards,
commissions, or committees.
   PUBLISHED REPORT. A report that unless otherwise prohibited, has been
presented to the Committee, distributed in final form to the Mayor and Chief
Administrative Officer, and to the City Council and is available to the public.
   SPECIAL REQUESTS. Exigent engagements not included in the annual audit plan,
because the need for audit service was not foreseen when the audit plan was
adopted. Special requests for audit services may include audits, strategic
reviews, and advisory services such as benchmarking and best practices analyses
requested by an official or the City Auditor, which are initiated at the
discretion of the City Auditor.
   STRATEGIC REVIEWS. Reportable non-audit work including but not limited to
assessments, agreed-upon procedures, compliance reviews, follow-up, and
monitoring activities.
(Ord. 1-2005; Am. Ord. 30-2010; Am. Ord._2016-018; Am. Ord._2023-020)
§ 2-10-4 CREATION OF THE OFFICE OF INTERNAL AUDIT; RESOURCES; STAFF.
   (A)   The Office of Internal Audit is created as an independent office of
city government. The Office of Internal Audit is not part of the city's
executive branch or the City Council. The City Auditor shall report to the
Committee.
   (B)   The Office of Internal Audit shall independently administer its own
budget, and supervise its own staff in compliance with the city's Merit
Ordinance and contractual services policies and procedures.
   (C)   The Office of the City Attorney shall advise and represent the Office
of Internal Audit, except that the Office of Internal Audit may, in
consultation with the City Attorney, select an independent legal counsel to
advise and represent the Office as needed in the event of a conflict of
interest that the City Attorney determines cannot otherwise be cured
internally.
   (D)   The Office of Internal Audit shall comply with all city ordinances and
policies dealing with administrative functions including but not limited to
those dealing with personnel, the merit system, and procurements.
   (E)   The Office of Internal Audit shall employ such staff as necessary to
carry out its functions as prescribed by this article, including but not
limited to the City Auditor, professional audit staff and other staff as may be
necessary, subject to budget sufficiency and city personnel policies and
procedures. The City Auditor has sole authority to hire, promote, set
compensation for, discipline or discharge the staff of the Office of Internal
Audit in a manner consistent with the Merit System Ordinance and the Grade
Series Pay Plan.
   (F)   The Office of Internal Audit shall provide staff support to the
Committee and administrative staff support to the Office of the Inspector
General.
   (G)   Neither the City Auditor nor any employee of the Office of Internal
Audit shall engage in any partisan political activities or the political
affairs of the city during work hours.
(Ord. 1-2005; Am. Ord. 30-2010; Am. Ord._2016-018; Am. Ord._2023-020)
§ 2-10-5 CREATION OF COMMITTEE; DUTIES; POWERS; MEMBERSHIP.
   (A)   The "Accountability in Government Oversight Committee" is created and
shall oversee the City Auditor and the Inspector General. The independent
Committee shall consist of five members who are residents of the city. To be
independent in fact and appearance, the Committee must be free from conflicts
of interest and not employed by the city, or in a direct contractual
relationship or similar business relationship with the city. No member of the
immediate family of the Office of Internal Audit or the Office of Inspector
General personnel shall be a member of the Committee. At least one Committee
member shall be a Certified Public Accountant or Certified Internal Auditor, at
least one Committee member shall have a law enforcement or law background and
at least one Committee member shall be a professional management consultant.
The Mayor and one City Councilor appointed annually by the City Council
President shall be nonvoting ex officio members and may attend or send a
designee to the Committee meetings where reports for publication are discussed.
The Committee may request the attendance of other city personnel, auditees, or
investigated parties.
   (B)   As vacancies on the Committee occur, the City Council and Mayor shall
alternatively appoint new members with the City Council making the first
appointment. All appointments shall be subject to City Council approval. The
existing Committee members may make recommendations to the Mayor and City
Council for candidates to fill vacancies on the Committee. If either the Mayor
or City Council fails to name a replacement Committee member within 45 days of
the vacancy, then the other body shall make the appointment. The Committee
members shall be appointed for staggered terms of three years unless an
appointment is to fill a vacancy. An appointment to fill a vacancy shall be for
the unexpired term. Terms shall begin on the first day of September. The
Committee members shall elect the Committee Chair annually.
   (C)   Any Committee member may be removed from office by an affirmative vote
of two-thirds of the Committee after due notice if such member has missed three
consecutive meetings or has been absent from more than 50% of the meetings held
during any 12 consecutive months.
   (D)   Any Committee member may be removed from office by an affirmative vote
of two-thirds of the Committee after due notice if such member has violated any
law, regulation or charter provision, or for other good cause such as the
intentional failure to carry out the duties of the Committee.
   (E)   The Committee shall meet at least four times per year, but may also
meet monthly or upon the call of the Committee Chair or a majority of its
members.
   (F)   Committee members shall not receive compensation for their service.
Voting members of the Committee shall not serve on any other city board,
commission or task force.
   (G)   The Chief Administrative Officer and the Director of Council Services
or their respective designee may attend all Committee meetings where reports
for publication are discussed.
   (H)   If an Official is the subject of an investigation, then the ex officio
members or their designees shall be recused from all meetings where that
particular investigation is being discussed and they shall not have access to
the investigative file during the pending investigation.
   (I)   The Committee is a management committee and not a public board,
commission or committee as specified by §§
2-6-1-1 et seq. and not subject to the Open Meetings Act. The Committee is not
formed to formulate public policy nor has authority to formulate public policy
been delegated to the Committee. The Committee and its members are subject to
the City Charter, Article XII Code of Ethics.
   (J)   The Committee shall annually review salaries for the City Auditor and
the Inspector General. If after such review the Committee determines that a
salary adjustment is warranted, the Committee shall notify the Department of
Finance and Administrative Services and the Human Resources Department of any
salary adjustment, which will be subject to budget sufficiency and city
personnel rules and regulations.
   (K)   The Committee may provide the City Auditor and the Inspector General
with guidance, priorities and potential areas for investigations and audits.
The Committee may also lend advice to the City Auditor and the Inspector
General regarding technical issues that may arise.
   (L)   The Committee shall review all reports presented at each meeting. If
the committee approves a report then the City Auditor or Inspector General
shall cause the report to become a published report. If the committee does not
approve a report, then the City Auditor or Inspector General shall cause the
report to become a published report no sooner than 15 business days from the
date of the committee's review or consideration. The committee may draft a
cautionary statement for inclusion with the report during this 15 day period
which, if provided to the City Auditor or Inspector General within this
timeframe, will be made part of the published report. The Committee shall not
prohibit the City Auditor or the Inspector General from initiating, carrying
out or completing and reporting on the activities of their offices. The
Committee may elect to defer taking action on the reports presented for up to
one Committee meeting, after which, the City Auditor or Inspector General shall
cause the report to become a published report no sooner than 15 business days
from the date of the Committee's last review or consideration. When activities
are provided at the request of the Citizens' Independent Salary Commission, the
Board of Ethics and Campaign Practices, or the City Attorney's Office, the
usual requirements concerning Committee review of reports should not be
followed to maintain the rights and duties of these entities to direct and
limit the work performed. The City Auditor or the Inspector General may
informally brief the Committee as to the commitment of resources to any work
assigned by the Citizens' Independent Salary Commission or the Board of Ethics
and Campaign Practices and the progress being made toward the completion of the
work conducted.
   (M)   The Committee shall prepare a job description, specify qualifications
for applicants, work with the Director of the Human Resources Department to
advertise for the position and develop the applicant search procedure and make
recommendations to the City Council on the selection of the City Auditor and
the Inspector General. The committee shall apply human resources best practices
to its applicant search relating to advertisement periods, job posting
locations including with national industry-oriented groups or associations,
application review processes, interview processes, and contacting of references
and prior employers as may be recommended by the Director of Human Resources or
other reliable sources.
   (N)   Any discipline of the City Auditor or the Inspector General, as
provided by § 3-1-6 ROA 1994, shall be by the Committee. The City Auditor and
the Inspector General shall report to the Committee for approval of vacation,
sick, emergency and city business leave.
(Ord. 1-2005; Am. Ord. 30-2010; Am. Ord._2013-003; Am. Ord._2015-026; Am. Ord.
2016-018; Am. Ord._2023-020)
§ 2-10-6 SELECTION AND RETENTION OF CITY AUDITOR.
   (A)   (1)   The Committee, through its staff, shall accept applications from
candidates, interview candidates, and shall submit to the City Council the
names of the three candidates (or more in the event that candidates are tied in
ranking) that it finds to be the best qualified to be City Auditor indicating
its ranking, together with a general description of its selection process, and
the City Council shall appoint the City Auditor from the three. The Committee's
recommendation to the City Council shall be based on the candidates' integrity,
capability for strong management and demonstrated ability in accounting,
auditing, financial analysis, law, management analysis, public administration,
investigation, criminal justice administration or other closely related fields.
Experience, performance, certifications, and advanced degrees may also be
considered.
      (2)   Upon the expiration of four years from the date of the City
Auditor's last appointment by the City Council, the Committee shall submit
three candidates to the City Council for its consideration for appointment to
the position of City Auditor, or in lieu of recommending three candidates to
the City Council, the Committee may recommend to the City Council the
reappointment of the incumbent City Auditor. Should the City Council decline to
reconfirm the incumbent City Auditor, the City Council President will notify
the Committee that it needs to provide the City Council with three alternate
candidates pursuant to the provisions of subsection (A)(1).
   (B)   If a current or prior city employee or official is appointed to the
position of City Auditor, such person shall not audit or assist in the audit of
the department or agency where such person previously served or was employed
for a period of four years from the last day of such prior employment or
service. Any audits of such department or agency shall be referred by the City
Auditor to an independent third party auditor who shall serve as an independent
proxy for the City Auditor, vested with the full authority of the City Auditor
only for the purposes of the specific audit(s) so assigned, and who shall
report to the Committee relating to the audit in the same manner as the City
Auditor would under this article. If a current or prior city official,
contractor, or employee is one of the three recommended to the City Council for
possible appointment, the Committee shall submit to the City Council a
statement describing its assessment of possible conflicts or appearances of
conflicts, if any, that may result during the fulfillment of duties as City
Auditor if that candidate is appointed.
   (C)   As a condition of retention, the City Auditor must obtain
certification as a Certified Public Accountant or Certified Internal Auditor
through the appropriate entity within two years of appointment. Other
professional certifications, such as certified fraud examiner and certified
information systems auditor are recommended.
   (D)   Prior to submission of the final three candidates to the City Council,
the three City Auditor candidates shall be fingerprinted and shall provide two
fingerprint cards or the equivalent electronic fingerprints to the Committee to
obtain the candidate's Federal Bureau of Investigation record. Records and
related information shall be privileged and shall not be disclosed to anyone
other than Committee members. The city shall pay for the cost of obtaining the
Federal Bureau of Investigation records.
   (E)   The City Auditor may be removed from office for cause upon an
affirmative vote of two-thirds (2/3) of the members of the Committee; upon an
affirmative vote of two-thirds (2/3) of the members of the City Council; or
upon the City Council's decision to not reconfirm the City Auditor pursuant to
subsection (A)(2) of this section. For purposes of this section, cause may
include, but is not limited to, conduct that is inconsistent with obligations
under this article, or otherwise inconsistent with responsibilities to the
Committee. Within five days of removal of the City Auditor the Committee shall
report the reasons for that removal to the Mayor and the City Council.
   (F)   If the City Auditor position is vacated, the City Auditor's first
assistant shall serve as Acting City Auditor during the vacancy, subject to
Committee discretion.
(Ord. 1-2005; Am. Ord. 39-2007; Am. Ord. 30-2010; Am. Ord._2013-003; Am. Ord.
2016-018; Am. Ord._2023-020)
§ 2-10-7 CITY AUDITOR’S DUTIES; RESPONSIBILITIES; AUTHORITY; ADMINISTRATIVE
SUBPOENA POWER.
   (A)   If the City Auditor detects apparent or potential violations of law or
apparent instances of misfeasance or nonfeasance by an official or auditee, the
City Auditor shall report the irregularities in writing to the Committee. If
the irregularity is criminal in nature, the City Auditor shall immediately
refer the irregularity to the appropriate prosecuting authority and notify the
Inspector General. The City Auditor shall not accept complaints related to
discrimination or labor law matters, or other matters that are the subject of
pending litigation.
   (B)   Upon request of the Mayor or City Council, the City Auditor shall
assist or provide resources to assist city departments in the review of state
and federal legislation, city ordinances, resolutions, rules, regulations and
policies pertaining to that particular city department or office.
   (C)   The City Auditor shall promulgate regulations to establish procedures
for the Office of Internal Audit.
   (D)   The City Auditor shall have the power to subpoena witnesses,
administer oaths and require the production of records subject to the New
Mexico Rules of Civil Procedure. In the case of a refusal to obey a subpoena
issued to any person, the City Auditor may make application to any District
Court in the state that shall have the jurisdiction to order the witness to
appear before the City Auditor and to produce evidence if so ordered, or to
give testimony touching on the matter in question.
   (E)   The City Auditor shall maintain a complete record of each published
report made under legislative or special Committee authority for the retention
period required by the city beginning the date that the report is published, or
longer if required by law. The record should include work papers and other
supportive material directly pertaining to the published report.
   (F)   In cases where the City Auditor deems it appropriate because of audit
activities, the City Auditor may refer opportunities for increased efficiency
to the Department of Finance and Administrative Services to work with
respective departments on management and process improvement.
(Ord. 1-2005; Am. Ord. 45-2006; Am. Ord. 30-2010; Am. Ord._2016-018; Am. Ord.
2023-020)
§ 2-10-8 PROFESSIONAL AUDIT STANDARDS.
   (A)   The City Auditor shall adhere to generally accepted government
auditing standards in conducting its work and will be considered independent as
defined by those standards.
   (B)   The activities of the Office of Internal Audit are subject to quality
assurance reviews in accordance with Government Auditing Standards by an
appropriate professional non-partisan objective group. A copy of the written
report resulting from this review shall be furnished to the Committee.
(Ord. 1-2005; Am. Ord. 30-2010; Am. Ord._2016-018; Am. Ord._2023-020)
§ 2-10-9 OFFICE OF INTERNAL AUDIT; PUBLIC RECORDS; CONFIDENTIALITY.
   (A)   The City Auditor shall maintain the confidentiality of any public
records that are made confidential by law and is subject to the same penalties
as the custodian of those public records for violating confidentiality
statutes.
   (B)   During the course of audit activities, all workpapers that support
audit findings become public after the audit report is published, except for
information that is confidential or privileged by law.
   (C)   Prior to publishing a report, the City Auditor may share selected
information with other city departments if the information is needed for
decision-making purposes; otherwise, reports remain confidential until
published, at which time they become public record.
   (D)   The names and identities of persons making complaints and providing
information shall not be disclosed without the written consent of the person
unless otherwise required by law or judicial processes.
   (E)   Published reports are public records except that the City Auditor
shall delay the publication of reports when criminal conduct is found and the
Inspector General or appropriate law enforcement authority is pursuing an
investigation and release of the report might jeopardize further investigation.
An audit report that has been delayed pursuant to this section shall be
published promptly at the end of the condition giving rise to the delay.
   (F)   The City Auditor may release a preliminary draft of an audit of anyone
other than a city department or agency to the auditee for review and comment if
the auditee agrees to restrict its use and to maintain the confidentiality of
the information.
(Ord. 1-2005; Am. Ord. 30-2010; Am. Ord._2016-018; Am. Ord._2023-020)
§ 2-10-10 OFFICE OF INTERNAL AUDIT; SCOPE OF AUDITS.
   (A)   The scope of internal audit activities encompasses, but is not limited
to, objective examinations of evidence for the purpose of providing independent
assessments on the adequacy, quality, efficiency, and effectiveness of
governance, risk management, and control processes for the city.
   (B)   At an official's special request, the City Auditor may initiate audit
services subject to the provisions of §
2-10-12.
(Ord. 1-2005; Am. Ord. 39-2007; Am. Ord._2016-018; Am. Ord._2023-020)
§ 2-10-11 ANNUAL AUDIT PLAN.
   (A)   Prior to the beginning of each fiscal year, the City Auditor shall
submit an annual audit plan to the Committee for review and comment. As part of
these deliberations, the officials shall be invited to recommend areas for
inclusion in the plan. The plan shall include the auditees scheduled for audit
during the year, a statement of the scope of the audit and the estimated time
required to complete the audit.
   (B)   The annual audit plan shall be transmitted to the City Council for
final approval as a resolution.
   (C)   This plan may be amended during the year after review with the
Committee.
   (D)   In the selection of audit areas, the determination of audit scope and
the timing of audit work, the City Auditor should consult with federal and
state auditors and independent auditors so that the desirable audit coverage is
provided and audit effort may be properly coordinated.
   (E)   The City Auditor shall make reports at least quarterly to the
Committee on the status of the work plan.
(Ord. 1-2005; Am. Ord. 45-2006; Am. Ord. 30-2010; Am. Ord._2016-018; Am. Ord.
2023-020)
§ 2-10-12 SPECIAL REQUESTS; AUDIT REPORTS.
   (A)   In all cases, the City Auditor shall, within 48 hours of
implementation, notify the Committee when a special request is being
undertaken.
   (B)   A draft of the report shall be forwarded to the auditees and the Chief
Administrative Officer or their designee for review and comment before it is
provided to the Committee for pre-publication review. The auditees, including
departments whose assistance is needed in order to accomplish any audit
recommendation, shall respond to the City Auditor, in writing, within 14 days
of receipt of the audit report.
   (C)   The auditees’ written response shall specify agreement with each of
the audit findings and recommendations or reasons for disagreement with
findings or recommendations. The auditees’ written responses shall include
auditees’ plans for implementing solutions to identified problems including
timetables to complete such activities.
   (D)   Auditees’ comments to the preliminary draft may be utilized to amend
the report if appropriate. If the preliminary audit report is amended, the
auditees will be given a copy of the amended draft, and the auditees will be
given up to 14 days, as determined by the City Auditor and the auditees, to
respond to the amended draft of the audit report.
   (E)   The City Auditor shall include the auditees' responses in the audit
report.
(Ord. 1-2005; Am. Ord._2016-018; Am. Ord._2023-020)
§ 2-10-13 OFFICE OF INTERNAL AUDIT REPORTS TO THE COMMITTEE.
   (A)   All assurance activities, unless otherwise provided for under this
article, shall result in a written final report.
   (B)   The City Auditor shall submit a copy of each report to each member of
the Committee and shall retain a copy as a permanent record for the retention
period required by the city, beginning the date it became a published report or
longer if required by law.
   (C)   If appropriate, the report shall contain the professional opinion or
conclusions of the City Auditor.
   (D)   The City Auditor's audit reports shall comply with reporting
requirements as defined by Government Auditing Standards.
(Ord. 1-2005; Am. Ord. 30-2010; Am. Ord._2016-018; Am. Ord._2023-020)
§ 2-10-14 OFFICE OF INTERNAL AUDIT ANNUAL REPORTING.
   (A)   The City Auditor shall annually report to the City Council and the
Mayor regarding the activities of the Office of Internal Audit.
   (B)   Within 60 days of the end of each fiscal year, the City Auditor shall
issue an annual report to the Committee that separately lists all published
reports and other assistance efforts completed during the fiscal year.
   (C)   The Office of Internal Audit shall provide copies of the annual report
upon request.
(Ord. 1-2005; Am. Ord. 30-2010; Am. Ord._2016-018; Am. Ord._2023-020)
§ 2-10-15 CONTRACT AUDITORS, CONSULTANTS, AND EXPERTS.
   The City Auditor may obtain the services of certified public accountants,
qualified management consultants, certified fraud examiners, forensic auditors
or other professional experts necessary to perform the functions of the Office
of Internal Audit. Contractors performing such services shall not have any
financial interest in the affairs of the auditees, officials or employees. The
City Auditor shall coordinate and monitor auditing performed by persons under
contract to the City Auditor.
(Ord. 1-2005; Am. Ord. 30-2010; Am. Ord._2016-018; Am. Ord._2023-020)
§ 2-10-16 PENALTY; COOPERATION; RETALIATION PROHIBITED.
   (A)   All city officials, employees and contractors shall provide the City
Auditor full and unrestricted access to all city offices, employees, records,
information, data, reports, plans, projections, matters, contracts, memoranda,
correspondence, electronic data, property, equipment and facilities and any
other materials within their custody. At the City Auditor’s request, an
official, employee or contractor shall prepare reports and provide interviews.
If an official, employee, vendor or contractor fails to produce the requested
information, the City Auditor shall notify the Committee and make written
request to the Chief Administrative Officer for their assistance in causing a
search to be made and germane exhibits to be taken from any book, paper or
record excepting personal property. The Chief Administrative Officer shall
require the officials, employees, vendors or contractors to produce the
requested information.
   (B)   Every city contract, bid, proposal, application or solicitation for a
city contract and every application for certification of eligibility for a city
contract or program shall contain a provision stating that the contracting
parties will be subject to provisions of the Accountability in Government
Ordinance.
   (C)   No person shall retaliate against, punish or penalize any other person
for complaining to, cooperating with or assisting the City Auditor in the
performance of their office.
   (D)   Each and every violation of this article is a criminal violation
subject to the provisions of §
1-1-99 ROA 1994.
   (E)   Any official or employee who violates the Accountability in Government
Ordinance may be subject to discipline as specified in city rules and
regulations or any applicable collective bargaining agreement.
(Ord. 1-2005; Am. Ord. 30-2010; Am. Ord._2016-018; Am. Ord._2023-020)
ARTICLE 11: CITY BUDGET
Section
   
2-11-1   Intent
   
2-11-2   Definitions
   
2-11-3   Process and sequence for establishing goals and objectives
   
2-11-4   Program reviews by the City Council
   
2-11-5   Participation of the Council in public presentations on budget-related
matters
   
2-11-6   Preparation of city budget; departmental requests; budget proposal
   
2-11-7   Budget — contents and format
   
2-11-8   Budget review committee
   
2-11-9   Budget proposal — printing and indexing
   
2-11-10   Consideration of budget proposal by the Council
   
2-11-11   Conference Committee on the Budget
   
2-11-12   Approval constitutes proposal as budget; expenditures must be
authorized
   
2-11-13   Council Committee of the Whole
   
2-11-14   Fiscal year
   
2-11-15   Budget amendments by Council during fiscal year
   
2-11-16   Transfer of funds and expenditure authority within budget
   
2-11-17   Application for federal and state grants; budgeting federal funds
   
2-11-18   Financial and management reports
   
2-11-19   Budget modifications in fiscal year outside adoption of annual budget
   
2-11-20   [Program strategies]
§ 2-11-1 INTENT.
   (A)   Article IV, Section 10(b) of the City Charter specifies that the
Council shall establish and adopt five-year goals and one-year objectives for
the city, which goals and objectives shall be reviewed and revised annually by
the Council. Article IV, Section 10(d), Article V, Section 4(f), and Article
VII, Section 1 of the Charter specify that the city operating budget should be
formulated by the Mayor, in consultation with the Council and consistent with
the goals and objectives of the City. The Charter indicates that other
legislation and policies of the City are to be consistent with these goals and
objectives as well. Article VII, Section 3 of the Charter requires the Mayor to
propose the budget to the Council by April 1 each year and the Council to
approve the budget as proposed or amend and approve it within sixty days after
it is proposed by the Mayor.
   (B)   To implement these City Charter provisions, §§
2-11-1 et seq. a process for adopting goals and objectives which will be
valuable in themselves and also will be major factors in determining funding
for City programs and improvements in the operating budget and the capital
improvements budget.
   (C)   To adopt a goals and objectives process that encourages active citizen
participation, that is linked to the budget process, and that encourages
performance measurement.
(Ord. 16-2001)
§ 2-11-2 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this article, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   COMMUNITY PLANNING AREAS. To the extent practicable, goals, strategies, and
objective should vary depending on conditions within the different Community
Planning Areas.
   FIVE-YEAR GOALS. A concise statement that summarizes a set of related
results or outcomes as defined by desired community or customer conditions. A
goal can be a description of what Albuquerque would be like if the goal were
achieved. It is achievable and  lends itself to measurement. A goal represents
a long-term purpose and direction that addresses the big picture. A goal is
broad, but not vague. Goal measurement is based on tracking the changes in
specific desired conditions.
   ONE-YEAR OBJECTIVES.  Objectives are specific steps taken by the City for
achieving goals. For the most part, objectives should be tangible products
rather than the activities that produce the products. Objectives are the
results of explicit strategies to achieve the goals. An objective describes in
specific and measurable terms the results a program is expected to achieve
toward a certain goal. Each objective should be attainable within a specified
period of time, preferably within a fiscal year or two consecutive fiscal
years.
   PERFORMANCE MEASUREMENT. Performance measurement is a systematic approach to
quantify and analyze activities to determine the amount of service delivered
and/or work performed, as well as how effective, efficient, and responsive
services are and what impact they have on the community and customer. Goal
Progress Indicators quantify the progress made towards achieving goals.
   VISION. A short description of the future which is sought for the community.
(Ord. 16-2001)
§ 2-11-3 PROCESS AND SEQUENCE FOR ESTABLISHING GOALS AND OBJECTIVES.
   (A)   Criteria for selection. Five-year goals should be selected only if
they are of priority importance to the welfare of the city. The five-year goals
address improving the physical characteristics of the City, guiding the City’s
growth and meeting human needs. The Albuquerque Progress Report and the City/
County Comprehensive Plan are guiding documents for developing the five year
goals. The fact that an outcome directly addressed by city government service
is not mentioned in the five-year goals does not imply that the service or
function will not continue as usual; it means only that there is not a special
effort to reach some goal-related outcome in that area during the coming five
years. The Mayor and City Council will collaborate to establish the five-year
goals. The City Council staff shall direct the goals and objectives review,
formulation, and adoption process consistent with the City Charter, however,
these tasks may be delegated to the Mayor’s staff.
   (B)   Process to develop community perceptions/ expectations. The purpose of
this phase is to obtain citizen involvement in setting long-term direction in
the vision and goals process.
      (1)   A goals forum to present progress reports, revisit the vision, and
review/develop goals shall be held every four years in July beginning in 1998.
The outcome of the goals forum shall be utilized as input into the revision of
the vision, five-year goals, and other City plans and policies, as they are
developed or revised.
      (2)   A report shall be produced and presented to the Mayor and City
Council within three months of the goals forum. This report shall recommend a
vision and goals.
      (3)   This process shall be facilitated by Shared Vision, Inc. or other
not-for-profit organization with a similar mission in partnership with the City
and shall include the Indicators Progress Commission, Environmental Planning
Commission and other City commissions which influence or track important
community and customer conditions.
      (4)   Adoption of an objective by the City Council carries with it an
obligation to carry out this objective in the referenced fiscal year or years
and for the Administration to incorporate this objective into the Mayor’s
proposed budgets.
   (C)   Process to develop and adopt five-year goals.  The purpose of this
phase is to review the vision and goals, recommend revisions reflecting
community consensus and conditions, and act on these recommendations.
      (1)   Every four years, the Mayor and City Council shall review the goals
forum report, conduct a public hearing, and adopt a vision and goals within six
months of the goals forum.
   (D)   Process to determine one-year objectives. The purpose of this phase is
to establish measurable objectives to carry out the five-year goals by
integrating such objectives into the annual City budget.
      (1)   The City Council and the Mayor shall develop annual objectives
consistent with the five-year goals. These objectives may have up to a two year
implementation cycle. New objectives will be contained in a biennial new
priority objectives resolution beginning for Fiscal Year 2003. Regarding the
resolution for Fiscal Year 2004 and biennially thereafter, objectives will be
updated based on progress made in the first year and contained in a revised
priority objectives resolution.
      (2)   The City Council shall hold at least one public hearing, meeting as
the Committee of the Whole, at which the public can propose objectives and
comment on proposed or revised objectives respectively for the coming year.
      (3)   The City Council shall annually adopt or revise and adopt
objectives aimed to accomplish each of the goals and objectives to be reflected
in the operating and capital budgets of the city.
   (E)   Timing. In sufficient time for consideration in the formulation of the
Mayor's proposed budget and, in any case, prior to November 30 of each year,
except in years in which there is a Mayoral election, in which case prior to
December 31, the Council shall review existing goals and objectives and
proposals for revisions of objectives and shall adopt objectives for the
following year. The purpose of this phase is to enable the Mayor and City
Council to integrate the five-year goals and one-year objectives into the
City's budgeting process.
   (F)   Progress reports. The purpose of this phase is to have a mechanism for
accountability and monitoring of the Goals and Objectives Process. It is
intended that such progress reports will include performance measurements of
the Goals and Objectives Process as well as the budget process.
      (1)   By September 1 of each year, a status report on the prior year's
one-year objectives will be presented to the Mayor and City Council. Each year
a status report on the current one-year objectives will be prepared and
presented by the Mayor to the City Council at a Committee of the Whole meeting
held each year as required in §
2-11-6(B) ROA 1994.
      (2)   Biennially in January of even numbered years, a roundtable
discussion shall be held among the City Administration, City Council,
Indicators Progress Commission, the Environmental Planning Commission and other
appropriate commissions to review progress on achieving the five-year goals.
      (3)   The roundtable meeting held immediately prior to the conduct of the
goals forum will discuss the structure of the forum.
      (4)   Shared Vision, Inc. or similar not-for-profit organization as
determined by the Mayor and City Council shall provide the leadership to
schedule and facilitate the roundtable meetings.
      (5)   On an annual basis, the City shall conduct a “Citizens’ Perception
of Conditions Survey” to poll the residents on the perception of City
governmental services and community conditions related to the Goals.
      (6)   At least every two years, a progress report shall be generated.
This report will provide measurements of desired community conditions related
to the goals data through a review of census data, locally generated
socioeconomic data, citizen survey information, goal progress indicators, and
other information indicating the current situation and progress towards the
goals to date. For each measurement, the report shall include historical data
for at least ten years, if such data are available and reliable.
      (7)   The Indicators Progress Commission shall have the lead
responsibility to facilitate the production of this report for presentation to
the Mayor and City Council every two years and to the goals forum participants
every four years.
      (8)   On an annual basis, during the month of September, City
Administration including key departmental staff and City Council shall meet to
review the five-year goals, community conditions, strategies, programs, and
one-year objectives.
   (G)   Staffing. Both the Mayor and City Council shall identify appropriate
staff to collaborate in the development and implementation of the Goals and
Objectives Process.
(Ord. 16-2001)
§ 2-11-4 PROGRAM REVIEWS BY THE CITY COUNCIL.
   The City Council, meeting as a Committee of the Whole, may hold up to three
public hearings which shall be programmatic reviews of city operations or
departments which are Council priorities, especially as identified in the
adopted city goals and objectives. Since these reviews shall focus in part on
city goals, they may be cross departmental and involve public agencies external
to city government. These hearings shall be held between September 15 and
January 15. The subjects of these Council reviews shall be determined by the
Chairperson of the Committee of the Whole, the Council President, and other
members of the Council. This group and the Mayor shall provide input on the
topics of the program reviews to the Council President.
(Ord. 35-1994; Am. Ord. 16-2001)
§ 2-11-5 PARTICIPATION OF THE COUNCIL IN PUBLIC PRESENTATIONS ON BUDGET-RELATED
MATTERS.
   The public shall be encouraged to participate in the city budget review and
adoption process. The Council and the Mayor are encouraged to discuss budget
and budget-related policy issues at community forums. Whenever the Mayor
expends public funds to inform the public about his proposed budget or budget-
related programs, the Council shall be invited to participate in such forum.
The Mayor shall extend the invitation to the City Council through the President
of the Council.
(Ord. 35-1994)
§ 2-11-6 PREPARATION OF CITY BUDGET; DEPARTMENTAL REQUESTS; BUDGET PROPOSAL.
   (A)   The Mayor shall prepare a proposed city operating budget from the
departmental requests, taking into consideration the requests of the
departments, and the resources anticipated to be available to the city for the
fiscal year for which the budget is prepared.
   (B)   Each year, between the first day of December and the first City
Council meeting in January, the Mayor, or his appointed representative, shall
hold a series of meetings, not less than two in number, with the City Council
to discuss the preparation of the budget for the next fiscal year.
   (C)   During the preparation of the proposed City Budget by the Mayor, he
shall furnish any requested information on departmental requests to the staff
of the City Council and shall cooperate with City Council staff so that it may
monitor the budget process and prepare preliminary analyses and other
information for the City Council.
   (D)   The Mayor shall propose an operating budget to the Council no later
than April 1 of each year.
('74 Code, § 1-8-4) (Ord. 64-1974; Am. Ord. 7-1988; Am. Ord. 54-1988; Am. Ord.
1-1991; Am. Ord. 35-1994; Am. Ord. 40-1995; Am. Ord. 16-2001; Am. Ord. 9-2005;
Am. Ord. 5-2007)
§ 2-11-7 BUDGET — CONTENTS AND FORMAT.
   (A)   The Mayor's operating budget proposal submitted to the Council shall
include:
      (1)   The Mayor's budget message;
      (2)   An annual appropriation resolution recommended by the Mayor;
      (3)   A complete statement of the non-capital project financial operation
of the city for the fiscal year last completed;
      (4)   A comparable statement for the current fiscal year including
expenditures to date and anticipated expenditures to the end of that year;
      (5)   A financial plan in comparable form for the fiscal year commencing
on July 1 of the year in which the budget proposal is submitted. Except as
otherwise provided by §
2-11-11, the Non-Capital Project Financial Plan for the ensuing fiscal year
shall include:
         (a)   All proposed expenditures for the administration, operation and
maintenance of all departments of city government;
         (b)   All interest and debt redemption charges;
         (c)   All anticipated revenues and other available resources by source
and amount;
         (d)   The proposed means of financing all proposed expenditures.
      (6)   A performance plan in comparable form for the fiscal year
commencing on July 1 of the year in which the budget proposal is submitted to
include:
         (a)   Descriptions of all programs, services, and activities to
include strategies, missions, customers, key initiatives, and desired results,
organized by Five Year Goal, that are proposed in the Mayor’s Budget;
         (b)   Performance measures, as defined in §
2-11-2, associated with all programs, services, and activities;
         (c)   Consistent with the Financial Plan defined in §
2-11-7(A)(5), all proposed expenditures for the administration, operation, and
maintenance of all programs, services, and activities, organized by Five Year
Goal and identified by Fund.
   (B)   A full-program budget will be prepared for all city departments each
year. The program budget shall clearly identify each program that is proposed
to be implemented or continued in the ensuing fiscal year and shall include the
projected costs of each program.
   (C)   The budget proposal shall not propose expenditures in excess of
resources anticipated to be available to the city for the fiscal year for which
the budget is proposed. If new programs are proposed, a detailed recommendation
and justification of the program shall be provided which must include the
estimated annual costs of the program and the source of revenues and other
resources for financing the program. All new programs must be identified as
such in the budget proposal.
   (D)   Along with publication of the proposed budget, the Office of
Management and Budget shall produce a separate document to serve as a citizen’s
guide to understanding the budget process and the financial plan for the
upcoming fiscal year. This guide shall explain how the budget is organized,
justify significant expenditures that are included in the proposed budget, and
outline revenue sources. This document shall be made available to the general
public in an effort to encourage public awareness and citizen involvement in
the budget process.
('74 Code, §1-8-5) (Ord. 64-1974; Am. Ord. 17-1975; Am. Ord. 22-1977; Am. Ord.
35-1994; Am. Ord. 40-1995; Am. Ord. 16-2001)
§ 2-11-8 BUDGET REVIEW COMMITTEE.
   The Mayor, the Chief Administrative Officer, the Chairperson of the Council
Committee of the Whole, and the Council President shall constitute a joint
review committee of the Budget. This committee shall meet at least quarterly or
at the call of either the Mayor or the Council President. The committee shall
review preliminary year end reports, summary financial and management reports,
revenue forecasts, status of the current year budget and budget issues, and
discuss all matters concerning the contents and format of the city annual
operating budget and the city's goals and objectives, prior to introduction to
the City Council.
(Ord. 40-1995; Am. Ord. 16-2001)
§ 2-11-9 BUDGET PROPOSAL — PRINTING AND INDEXING.
   The budget proposal shall be printed and indexed prior to its submittal to
the Council. Sufficient copies of the budget proposal shall be prepared to
allow for distribution to members of the Council, city department heads, and
other interested parties as may be deemed reasonable by the Chief
Administrative Officer or his designee.
('74 Code, § 1-8-6) (Ord. 64-1974; Am. Ord. 22-1977; Am. Ord. 35-1994; Am. Ord.
40-1995; Am. Ord. 16-2001)
§ 2-11-10 CONSIDERATION OF BUDGET PROPOSAL BY THE COUNCIL.
   (A)   After receiving the budget proposal from the Mayor the Council shall
schedule at least three public hearings on it. Any fee or rate adjustment
proposal for the upcoming fiscal year and projected revenue requirements for
the following two fiscal years shall be submitted to the Council at the same
time as the budget proposal. As a result of its deliberations and the
information gathered at the public hearings, the Council may amend the budget
proposal at any time prior to May 31. If the Council fails to approve a budget
within that time limit, the budget proposal as submitted by the Mayor is deemed
approved.
   (B)   The Mayor or his representative shall be present at all public
hearings on the budget proposal and fee or rate adjustment proposals. The Chief
Administrative Officer, or his representative, shall be available to the
Council at its request during any of its deliberations on the budget proposal.
   (C)   Definition. As used in this section AMEND includes complete revision
or substitution.
('74 Code, § 1-8-7) (Ord. 64-1974; Am. Ord. 35-1994; Am. Ord. 40-1995; Am. Ord.
16-2001; Am. Ord. 5-2007)
§ 2-11-11 CONFERENCE COMMITTEE ON THE BUDGET.
   (A)   A Conference Committee on the Budget shall meet to help resolve any
disagreements between the Mayor and the Council concerning the city budget. The
Conference Committee on the Budget shall consist of the members of the Budget
Review Committee.
   (B)   In the period from March 1 through the adoption of the annual
operating budget, the Conference Committee on the Budget shall meet at the
request of the Mayor or any Councillor. The following procedures shall govern
this process:
      (1)   Issues presented to the Conference Committee on the Budget should
be of a significant or critical nature concerning the City Budget;
      (2)   Issues presented to the Conference Committee on the Budget should
be issues about which the development or clarification of performance
measurement data or other information can contribute significantly to the
formation of options or recommendations;
      (3)   After consideration of the issues, the Council-designated members
of the Conference Committee on the Budget may present recommendations or
options to the City Council for action;
      (4)   A meeting of the Conference Committee shall occur prior to final
adoption of both the operating and enterprise budgets;
      (5)   The Conference Committee on the Budget shall be chaired by one of
the Council-designated members.
('74 Code, §1-8-8) (Ord. 3-1992; Am. Ord. 35-1994; Am. Ord. 40-1995; Am. Ord.
16-2001)
§ 2-11-12 APPROVAL CONSTITUTES PROPOSAL AS BUDGET; EXPENDITURES MUST BE
AUTHORIZED.
   (A)   The annual operating budget appropriation resolution, as approved, in
addition to other approved appropriations for operating purposes shall
constitute the city's operating budget for the ensuing fiscal year. The city
shall not expend any public funds, except for capital project expenditures,
special assessment district expenditures, and trust and agency fund
expenditures, unless the expenditure is authorized in the budget and is made or
encumbered in the fiscal year covered by the budget.
   (B)   The amount encumbered but not expended at the end of this fiscal year
is appropriated to the subsequent fiscal year without further action by the
Council. A report of the amounts and individual purchase orders will be
reported to the Council by October 1.
('74 Code, § 1-8-9) (Ord. 64-1974; Am. Ord. 55-1979; Am. Ord. 51-1990; Am. Ord.
3-1992; Am. Ord. 35-1994; Am. Ord. 40-1995)
§ 2-11-13 COUNCIL COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE.
   The City Council shall meet as a Committee of the Whole to hold public
hearings for the following purposes:
   (A)   Review and adopt five-year goals and one- year objectives.
   (B)   Conduct program reviews of city operations or departments.
   (C)   Review the cleanup of the annual operating budget.
   (D)   Review the midyear report for the current fiscal year and the midyear
budget appropriation resolution.
   (E)   Review all components of the Mayor's proposed annual operating budget.
(Ord. 35-1994; Am. Ord. 40-1995)
§ 2-11-14 FISCAL YEAR.
   The fiscal year of the city begins on July 1 of each calendar year and ends
on June 30 of the following calendar year.
('74 Code, § 1-8-10) (Ord. 64-1974; Am. Ord. 3-1992; Am. Ord. 35-1994; Am. Ord.
40-1995)
§ 2-11-15 BUDGET AMENDMENTS BY COUNCIL DURING FISCAL YEAR.
   Upon its own initiative or upon a recommendation by the Mayor, the Council
may amend the budget during the fiscal year to which it applies. No amendment
to the budget shall be made without a public hearing prior to the meeting at
which action is taken on the proposed amendment. Amendments to the budget
effect the pertinent fiscal year’s Performance Plan, which effect shall be
estimated by Administration staff and incorporated into the Plan. No amendment
to the budget shall result in total authorized expenditures that exceed
resources to be available for the fiscal year to which the budget is
applicable.
('74 Code, § 1-8-11) (Ord. 64-1974; Am. Ord. 17-1975; Am. Ord. 3-1992; Am. Ord.
35-1994; Am. Ord. 40-1995; Am. Ord. 16-2001)
§ 2-11-16 TRANSFER OF FUNDS AND EXPENDITURE AUTHORITY WITHIN BUDGET.
   (A)   (1)   During the fiscal year, the Mayor is authorized to transfer
funds or change expenditure authority within and among line-item authority, as
established by the annual appropriation resolution and other approved
appropriations for operating purposes, if the transfer or change does not
result in the increase or decrease in that line-item expenditure authority in
excess of the cumulative amount of $100,000 or 5% of the line-item authority,
whichever is lower.
      (2)   LINE-ITEM AUTHORITY refers to the line in the budget appropriation
resolution approved by the Council. The lines of the budget appropriation
resolution shall include the title and cost of each program of the city's
operating budget. The transfer of funds or change in expenditure authority
“among” line-item authority refers to such transfers or changes between lines
in the budget appropriation resolution which contain dollar amounts. The
transfer of funds or change in expenditure authority “within” line-item
authority shall be defined as transfers or changes between budget activities
within programs in instances where the budget of an activity is $500,000 or
more. A decrease in line-item expenditure authority means preventing resources
appropriated by Council to a budget program or allocated to an activity as
specified above from being spent. RESERVED APPROPRIATIONS, and other similar
techniques, are reductions in expenditure authority.
      (3)   No actions are authorized which would result in exceeding the total
expenditures authorized in the operating budget for the city government as a
whole. Actions taken by the Mayor under this division (A) shall be reported in
detail to the City Council within ten days of the approval of transfer or
change by the Mayor or his designated representative.
   (B)   The transfer of funds or changes in expenditure authority in the
operation budget, other than those authorized by division (A) of this section,
may be made only by amendment of the budget by the City Council under §
2-11-15. No new program not already authorized in the budget shall be
implemented by actions authorized under division (A) of this section, nor shall
any existing program authorized in the budget be terminated by such actions.
   (C)   The Mayor shall provide a written report on all reorganization plans
with an annual budgetary impact in excess of a cumulative amount of $100,000 or
5% of the line-item authority, whichever is lower. The report shall provide
justification for the reorganization which contains its rationale, financial
and service benefits, the method for determining these benefits, a work plan
for the newly reorganized unit, and an organization chart of the affected
department or departments showing the results of the proposed reorganization.
The Mayor also shall specify the affected positions and appropriations. Such
report shall be provided prior to any necessary approval by Council.
('74 Code, § 1-8-12) (Ord. 64-1974; Am. Ord. 19-1991; Am. Ord. 3-1992; Am. Ord.
6-1992; Am. Ord. 35-1994; Am. Ord. 40-1995)
§ 2-11-17 APPLICATION FOR FEDERAL AND STATE GRANTS; BUDGETING FEDERAL FUNDS.
   (A)   Any application or proposal for a grant with a matching requirement
shall be submitted to the City Council in the form of an Executive
Communication for review and approval at the same time as the submittal of such
application or proposal to any grantor. Executive Communications shall include
an interoffice memorandum and a copy of the executive summary of the grant
application or a copy of the grant application. The total City obligation shall
be included in the interoffice memorandum. A fiscal impact analysis is not
required to be submitted with the Executive Communication for a grant
application.
      (1)   The Council may approve, take no action, reject the proposed
agreement, or recommend revisions thereof with or without conditioning approval
on the adoption of such revisions.
      (2)   If the Council rejects the application, the application shall be
withdrawn by the Department that submitted the application.
      (3)   If the Council rejects the application, the Department shall not
enter into a grant agreement with the grantor.
      (4)   The Mayor may withdraw the proposed agreement at any time from the
Council and may present revisions thereof. In the event of withdrawal, the
proposed agreement shall be a nullity. In the event of revision, the provisions
set forth in divisions (A) and (B) of this section shall apply to the same
extent as if a new proposal were being made.
   (B)   If, after Council approval of the application, conditions are added to
the grant award, which have not been approved by the Council and which have
major financial or policy implications for the City, the final grant agreement
shall be submitted to the Council for approval in accordance with the
procedures set forth in division (A) above.
   (C)   The Mayor, upon receiving notification that the City has been awarded
a grant, shall submit a Resolution to Council to appropriate the funds.
   (D)   Twice yearly, in July and January, the Administration shall submit an
Executive Communication detailing all grant applications for the previous six
months. This report shall include total project cost, grant funding requests,
local match funding/in-kind contributions, and any grant awards received.
('74 Code, § 1-8-13) (Ord. 17- 1975; Am. Ord. 87-1978; Am. Ord. 13-1980; Am.
Ord. 3-1992; Am. Ord. 35-1994; Am. Ord. 40-1995; Am. Ord. 16-2001; Am. Ord.
2024-009)
§ 2-11-18 FINANCIAL AND MANAGEMENT REPORTS.
   (A)   The Mayor shall submit on a quarterly basis summary financial and
management status reports of all operating funds to the City Council. These
reports shall include:
      (1)   Current annual revenue estimates for each fund;
      (2)   Brief analysis explaining revenue trends for each fund;
      (3)   A midyear programmatic review of each program and department and
the progress made year- to-date in achieving its goals and objectives.
   (B)   Reports shall be received by the Council on a timely basis according
to the following schedule:
      (1)   The preliminary year-end report shall be received for introduction
at the first City Council meeting in October following the close of the fiscal
year;
      (2)   The final year-end report shall be received for introduction at the
first City Council meeting in December;
      (3)   The midyear report shall be received for introduction at the first
City Council meeting in February. The midyear report shall be accompanied by a
midyear appropriation resolution for those programs that are projected to be
overspent and which the Mayor determines that expenditure controls cannot bring
the programs within the limits of administration expenditure authority as
defined by §§
2-7-1-1 et seq., the Administrative Code. Mid-year appropriation adjustments
shall be proposed only when caused by unexpected circumstances such as a
natural disaster, unforeseen shifts in the national economy, and other events
that constitute an emergency. Except as otherwise provided, the Mayor and
Council shall confine budget adjustments to the midyear resolution. The midyear
report and midyear appropriation resolution shall be reviewed by the City
Council at a minimum of one public hearing by a Committee of the Whole.
('74 Code, § 1-8-16) (Ord. 70-1977; Am. Ord. 18-1981; Am. Ord. 51-1990; Am.
Ord. 3-1992; Am. Ord. 35-1994; Am. Ord. 40-1995; Am. Ord. 16-2001; Am. Ord. 1-
2005; Am. Ord. 45-2006; Am. Ord. 30-2010)
§ 2-11-19 BUDGET MODIFICATIONS IN FISCAL YEAR OUTSIDE ADOPTION OF ANNUAL
BUDGET.
   (A)   The Mayor shall be responsible for identifying and proposing
expenditure reductions or revenue enhancements to the operating budget of the
city when it is determined, in the period between adoption of the annual
operating budget [i.e., the fiscal year], that city revenues are not expected
to equal city expenditures.
   (B)   When the Mayor engages in planned mid- fiscal year reductions of the
annual operating budget in excess of $250,000 cumulative for the fiscal year,
the Mayor shall cooperate with the Council staff so that it may monitor this
budget process and prepare analyses and other information required by the City
Council. A representative of the Council shall be allowed to participate in all
meetings and have access to all information related to the formulation of this
budget reduction program.
   (C)   When the Mayor engages in a planned mid- fiscal year reduction of the
annual operating budget in excess of $250,000 cumulative in the fiscal year,
this effort shall be consistent with Ordinance No. 51-1990. Any redirection or
reclassification of appropriations into sequestered or reserved budget
categories by the Mayor shall be considered a transfer of funds between budget
line-items. Such transfers shall be subject to the regulations contained in §
2-11-16.
('74 Code, § 1-8-18) (Ord. 19-1991; Am. Ord. 3-1992; Am. Ord. 35-1994; Am. Ord.
40-1995)
§ 2-11-20 [PROGRAM STRATEGIES.]
   A separate program strategy for motor coach and para-transit operators,
mechanics, vehicle cleaners, transit operations personnel, and security
officers salaries and benefits shall be created within the Transit Enterprise
fund to be used to fund salaries and benefits for transit motor coach and para-
transit operators. The program strategy shall be funded with general fund
revenues and any fare revenues, and other sources as is applicable.
(Ord._2023-005)
ARTICLE 12: CAPITAL IMPROVEMENTS
Section
   
2-12-1   Capital improvements program intent; scope
   
2-12-2   Definitions
   
2-12-3   Adopting the capital improvements program; publication
   
2-12-4   City council participation
   
2-12-5   Amending the capital improvements program
   
2-12-6   Progress reports
   
2-12-7   Trails and bikeways set aside
   
2-12-8   Metropolitan Transportation Plan and Transportation Improvement
Program submittals
   
2-12-9   Infrastructure Capital Improvement Plan (ICIP)
§ 2-12-1 CAPITAL IMPROVEMENTS PROGRAM INTENT; SCOPE.
   (A)   The Capital Improvement Program (CIP) plan shall include, and take as
a starting point, an inclusive perspective of all capital expenditures
regardless of fund source (including, but not limited to City, State, Federal
funds, and private contributions-in-aid) including those expended by the City
directly and those undertaken by other public agencies within the city limits
that are related to the City’s adopted goals. The City-funded public purposes
capital improvements shall be considered as a component of this over-all
perspective.
   (B)   The Capital Improvement Program shall be linked to the City’s adopted
Five Year Goals, Program Strategies, and to the Performance Plan of city
departments.
   (C)   The Capital Improvement Program shall be consistent with and carry out
the policies contained in the City/County Comprehensive Plan.
   (D)   The first priority of the City’s Capital Improvement Program shall be
to rehabilitate, replace, and maintain in good condition the capital assets of
the City. Pursuant to this priority, facility plans shall be developed and
maintained by all City departments, coordinated according to a common set of
standards by the CIP office. These plans shall include the condition of the
City’s major capital assets and a program of necessary annual capital
expenditures to restore, replace, and maintain the facilities, vehicles and
equipment in good condition. These inventories and plans shall be completed by
the 2003 CIP. The plan for streets and hydrology shall be based on the Planned
Growth Strategy findings.
   (E)   City-funded public-purpose capital improvements are undertaken in
order to implement the city's adopted goals and objectives: normally, these
have been adopted in city plans for urban development and conservation. In
order to maximize the effectiveness of capital improvements in advancing such
goals and objectives in a coordinated manner, and in order to efficiently use
public funds, the Mayor shall develop and submit to the Council a proposed
Capital Improvements Program, which shall include all city-funded public-
purpose capital projects proposed to be built within ten years. The program
shall include but is not limited to all projects financed by general obligation
bonds, revenue bonds, Urban Enhancement Fund monies, Tax Increment Fund monies,
Consolidated Plan monies, tax and rate revenues, Federal and State grants,
metropolitan redevelopment bonds and special assessment districts. Projects
built with industrial development bonds are not normally included.
   (F)   The proposed Capital Improvements Program shall consist of a ten-year
plan of capital expenditures, including a more detailed two-year Capital
Improvements Budget. The proposed Capital Improvements Program shall include a
listing of projects in order of priority and proposed year of construction or
acquisition. Data on each project shall include:
      (1)   The anticipated capital cost of each project;
      (2)   The anticipated source of capital funds for each project;
      (3)   The estimated annual operating cost or savings for each project;
      (4)   The estimated completion date of each project;
      (5)   The adopted plan or policy, if any, which each project would help
to implement;
      (6)   The viable alternatives that were considered for each project and
the reasons the proposed project is the most cost-effective and practical
alternative for meeting the stated objective;
      (7)   The project's ranking in whatever sequencing/priority-setting
system is used as a basis for proposed programming; and
      (8)   The impacts of proposed capital improvements on user rates (for
enterprise fund projects); and
      (9)   The percentage allocations of each project as “growth”,
“rehabilitation”, “deficiency”, and “mandate”, which categories are defined in
Bill No. F/S R-37 (Enactment 118-2000), establishing priorities for the 2001
Capital Improvement Plan; and
      (10)   The capital projects of the enterprise funds shall be evaluated by
the Capital Improvements Program staff in a similar manner as those for the
General Fund.
   (G)   All assets included in projects to be funded in part or in total from
proceeds of general obligation bond issues or revenue bond issues shall have a
minimum service life expectancy at least equal to the term of the relevant bond
issue.
   (H)   All CIP project items with a two year programmed amount in the General
Fund and a one year programmed amount in the Enterprise Funds of $100,000 or
more shall be included in the CIP bill as a separate line item.
   (I)   Separate bond issues shall be sold to fund vehicles and equipment, the
term of which bonds shall not exceed five years.
   (J)   Three percent of each biennial Capital Improvements Program shall be
reserved to fund the design, installation, purchase, user training and
monitoring of Energy Conservation and/or Renewable Energy projects that reduce
fossil fuel based energy costs for General Fund and Enterprise Fund Programs
and that will demonstrably reduce energy consumption. This fund shall be known
as the 3% for Energy Conservation and Renewable Energy Set-A-Side for Capital
Improvements. The Planning for the fund shall be consistent with the
requirements set forth in Article 2-12 ROA 1994.
   (K)   The Department of Finance and Administrative Services will budget 3%
of the General Obligation Bond Program for the 3% for Energy Conservation and
Renewable Energy Set-A-Side for Capital Improvements.
   (L)   Departmental applications for the 3% for the Energy Conservation and
Renewable Energy Set-A-Side for Capital Improvements shall be submitted to the
Facility, Energy & Security Management Division. A committee of City fiscal and
technical staff shall approve selected projects based on established criteria.
The committee may consult with subject matter experts outside of the City
Government in the selection of projects. Criteria shall include but are not
limited to:
      (1)   The capital expenses of a project should be regained from energy
savings generated from the project within the expected life of the equipment,
provided that an amount, not to exceed ten percent (10%) of the 3% for Energy
Conservation and Renewable Energy Set-A-Side for Capital Improvements fund, may
be utilized for solar or wind renewable energy projects not otherwise meeting
that life cycle criteria, if at least eighty-five percent (85%) of the capital
expenses for such solar or wind projects are reasonably expected to be regained
within the expected life cycle of the project. Projects using renewable energy
shall, subject to the foregoing allowance for solar or wind projects, have a
lower life cycle cost than a project using conventional energy based on the
projected cost per unit by year for an energy resource as published in the
United States Department of Energy, Energy Information Administration, Annual
Energy Outlook Report or other sources identified by the committee. Preference
shall be given to alternatives that meet the energy cost criteria.
      (2)   If a proposal is for construction or installation, the scope of the
project shall only be for Energy Conservation and/or Renewable Energy in
existing facilities.
      (3)   The monetary amount allocated to any one project shall not exceed
40% of the funding allocated to the 3% Energy Conservation and Renewable Energy
Set-A-Side, during any one bond cycle unless approved by the City Council.
      (4)   The project shall be consistent with the requirements set forth in
Paragraph (D) of this Section.
   (M)   The Mayor shall obtain a Certificate of No Effect or a Certificate of
Approval for each project that meets the applicability criteria of Ordinance
25-2007 and that is part of the Capital Improvements Program or the Component
Capital Improvements Program prior to construction of the project.
   (N)   Applications for funding for street projects proposed on those streets
to which Part 6-5-6 ROA 1994 applies shall comply with Part 6-5-6 ROA 1994.
Additional costs incurred due to required compliance with § 6-5-6 ROA 1994
shall be detailed.
   (O)   Three percent of the General Obligation Bond Program shall be reserved
for the acquisition of lands identified for Open Space and capital renovation
of Open Space.
   (P)   (1)   $13.5 million of the 2025 General Obligation Bond Program is
reserved for a Council district set-aside to be divided equally amongst the
nine City Councilors;
      (2)   $15.75 million of the 2027 General Obligation Bond Program is
reserved for a Council district set-aside to be divided equally amongst the
nine City Councilors; and
      (3)   $18 million of the 2029 General Obligation Bond Program, and all
subsequent programs, is reserved for a Council district set-aside to be divided
equally amongst the nine City Councilors.
('74 Code, § 1-10-1) (Ord. 34-1975; Am. Ord. 8-1986; Am. Ord. 56-1988; Am. Ord.
23-1992; Am. Ord. 16-2001; Am. Ord. 52-2002; Am. Ord. 9-2005; Am. Ord. 35-2006;
Am. Ord. 25-2007; Am. Ord. 2012-002; Am. Ord._2015-003; Am. Ord._2015-022; Am.
Ord._2016-014; Am. Ord._2023-022; Am. Ord. 2023-026)
§ 2-12-2 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this article, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   BEST ENERGY PRACTICES. Management of energy production and consumption to
reduce energy use and costs, implement renewable energy, promote clean energy
sources and the efficiency and maintenance of the City's energy infrastructure.
   ENERGY CONSERVATION. Building materials, equipment and machinery and
supplies that reduce energy costs for Enterprise and General Fund Programs by
demonstrably reducing energy consumption or by furthering the implementation of
renewable energy sources.
   INFRASTRUCTURE CAPITAL IMPROVEMENT PLAN (ICIP). A plan established under the
provisions of Section 6-4-1 (A) and (B) NMSA 1978 and the Governor’s Executive
Order 2012-023 that identifies the City of Albuquerque’s capital projects
submitted to the State of New Mexico for funding.
   RENEWABLE ENERGY. Any energy resource that is naturally regenerated over a
short time scale and is generated by use of low- or zero-emissions technology
with substantial long-term production potential or generated by renewable
energy sources that may include (1) solar, wind, hydropower and geothermal
resources; (2) fuel cells that are not fossil fueled; and (3) biomass
resources, such as agricultural or animal waste, small diameter timber, salt
cedar and other phreatophyte or woody vegetation, landfill gas and
anaerobically digested waste biomass and new technologies as they emerge.
RENEWABLE ENERGY does not include electric energy generated using fossil fuel,
waste products from fossil sources or nuclear energy.
(Ord. 2024-045)
§ 2-12-3 ADOPTING THE CAPITAL IMPROVEMENTS PROGRAM; PUBLICATION.
   (A)   The Mayor shall submit by November 21 of each even- numbered year,
except as provided by division (C) of this section, the proposed Capital
Improvements Program to the Environmental Planning Commission. The
Environmental Planning Commission shall conduct at least one public hearing on
responsibilities of the Commission for plans and policies on development and on
protection of the environment as delineated in §§
14-13-3-1 et seq. The Environmental Planning Commission shall submit its
recommendations on the proposed program to the Mayor by December 1 of each
even-numbered year. The Mayor is not required to revise the proposed Capital
Improvements Program to incorporate the recommendations of the Environmental
Planning Commission but may do so.
   (B)   The Mayor shall submit the proposed Capital Improvements Program,
including any recommen dations of the Environmental Planning Commission, to the
Council by January 3 of each odd- numbered year, except as provided by division
(C) of this section.
   (C)   The Capital Improvements Programs for the Air Quality, Aviation
Enterprise, Parking Enterprise, Refuse Disposal, and Golf Enterprise Funds
shall be developed in accordance with the following procedure:
      (1)   The capital improvements appropriations for the above referenced
funds shall be developed by the Mayor in conjunction with operating budgets and
supporting rate proposals, if any, and shall be submitted to the Council no
later than April 1 of each year.
      (2)   The Mayor shall submit to the Council any proposed rate increases
required for the proposed Capital Improvements Programs of the above referenced
funds along with the operating budget no later than April 1 of each year. These
Capital Improvement Program budgets shall be fully integrated into the proposed
ten year program by the CIP Office.
   (D)   The Council shall approve the Capital Improvements Program as
proposed, or shall amend and approve it, by the first scheduled City Council
meeting in April of the year submitted. The Council shall hold at least one
public hearing on the proposed program.
   (E)   The city shall promptly publish the Capital Improvements Program as
approved.
('74 Code, § 1-10-2) (Ord. 34-1975; Am. Ord. 8-1986; Am. Ord. 56-1988; Am. Ord.
35-1994; Am. Ord. 40-1995; Am. Ord. 16-2001; Am. Ord. 9-2005; Am. Ord. 35-2006;
Am. Ord. 5-2007; Am. Ord._2019-002)
§ 2-12-4 CITY COUNCIL PARTICIPATION.
   (A)   Prior to the first City Council meeting in November of odd numbered
years, the Mayor shall submit a resolution to the City Council with proposed
policy guidelines for the upcoming Capital Improvements Program. The City
Council shall adopt the resolution as submitted, or as amended by the City
Council, on or before January 31 of even numbered years. Should the Council
fail to provide policy guidelines on or before January 31, the Mayor's
guidelines shall direct the development of the Capital Improvements Program.
   (B)   During the preparation of the proposed Capital Improvements Program by
the Mayor, he shall furnish any requested information on departmental requests
to the staff of the City Council and shall cooperate with City Council staff so
that it may monitor the program development process and prepare preliminary
analyses and other information for the City Council.
   (C)   A representative of the Council shall be allowed to attend the
meetings during which the Mayor and CAO formally review the program
recommendations by the CIP Review Group or other similar body.
(Ord. 26-1993; Am. Ord. 40-1995; Am. Ord. 16-2001; Am. Ord. 35-2006; Am. Ord.
2014-014)
§ 2-12-5 AMENDING THE CAPITAL IMPROVEMENTS PROGRAM.
   (A)   When it appears to the Mayor that sound Capital Improvements Planning
requires amending that part of the Capital Improvements Program which is
included in the two-year Capital Improvements Budget before presentation of a
new program is due, he may change the amount designated for a specific project
without Council approval under any of the following circumstances. For purposes
of this section, a "project" is defined as a capital-related activity for which
there is a specific and unique Council appropriation.
      (1)   The change does not significantly alter the project's scope and the
total change:
         (a)   Does not exceed 20% of the amount appropriated for that project
in the Capital Improvements Program as approved if the appropriated amount for
the project is less than one million dollars, and
         (b)   Does not exceed 10% of the amount appropriated for that project
in the Capital Improvements Program as approved if the appropriated amount for
the project is between one million dollars and five million dollars, and
         (c)   If the amount appropriated for the project is greater than five
million dollars or the total increase or reduction will exceed the applicable
percentage in subsections a and b herein of the amount designated for that
project in the Capital Improvements Program, the Mayor shall submit his
proposed change to the Council for approval.
      (2)   The change combines parallel projects, usually in succeeding
bonding years, and does not change the nature of any project involved in the
combination. The Mayor shall notify the Council of the change in writing at the
next regularly scheduled Council meeting after the change takes place.
      (3)   The change combines all or parts of several projects into an
approved or new project and does not change the nature of any project involved
in the combination. The Mayor shall notify the Council of the change in writing
at the next regularly scheduled Council meeting after the change takes place.
   (B)   When it appears to the Mayor that sound Capital Improvements Planning
requires amending that part of the Capital Improvements Program which is
included in the two-year Capital Improvements Budget before presentation of a
new program is due, and the Mayor is not permitted to make the change under the
terms of division (A) of this section, he shall act as follows:
      (1)   Before submitting an amendment to the Council the Mayor shall
submit it to the Environmental Planning Commission for its evaluation; this
need not involve a public hearing. However, this evaluation by the
Environmental Planning Commission is not required in the following situations:
         (a)   The project is not contrary to adopted city plans, and would not
significantly affect city public utility systems, neighborhood land use,
transportation, or the environment; or
         (b)   The Environmental Planning Commission could not or does not
provide an evaluation within the time that the Mayor feels is available in
order for the city to respond to the special opportunity or need.
      (2)   The Mayor shall submit to the Council for approval his proposed
amendment, including any recommendations of the Environmental Planning
Commission, according to the following schedule:
         (a)   In March, he shall submit amendments to the Council.
         (b)   In October, he shall submit amendments to the Council which
could not be foreseen when either the previous Capital Improvements Program or
the previous March's amendments were presented to the Council, and in addition
he finds that the amendments cannot prudently be delayed until the next Capital
Improvements Program or March amendments.
         (c)   At other times, he shall submit amendments only in unforeseen
emergency or opportunity situations which cannot prudently be delayed until the
following regularly scheduled submissions of changes.
   (C)   Unless an amendment falls within division (A) or (B) above, the
Capital Improvements Program shall not be amended until the next Capital
Improvements Program is adopted.
   (D)   In no case shall funds be designated or transferred under the
provisions of this section without said funds having been previously
appropriated by the City Council, either to a project or to the contingency
activity within the respective purpose.
('74 Code, § 1-10-6) (Ord. 76-1975; Am. Ord. 47-1981; Am. Ord. 12-1983; Am.
Ord. 84-1985; Am. Ord. 40-1995; Am. Ord. 52-1999; Am. Ord. 16-2001; Am. Ord.
35-2006)
§ 2-12-6 PROGRESS REPORTS.
   The Mayor shall submit a status report to the Council summarizing the
implementation of each Capital Improvements Program at annual intervals until
all projects in the approved Capital Improvements Program are completed. The
annual report shall be submitted by the first Council meeting in September of
each year.
   (A)   The annual report shall contain the following information for each
current project in the Capital Improvements Program: (These requirements shall
be included first in the September 2002 annual report.)
      (1)   Project name.
      (2)   Total estimate project cost.
      (3)   Total funding appropriated to project and also itemized as to
source.
      (4)   Status, e.g. feasibility study completed, design completed, date
construction began or is anticipated to begin.
      (5)    Estimated completion date of project.
   (B)   The status report shall also list every change made pursuant to §
2-12-5 and shall include the following information about each change:
      (1)   The specific project that was changed;
      (2)   The total amount originally approved by the Council for the
project;
      (3)   The amount of the increase or decrease that was authorized without
prior Council approval;
      (4)   The reason(s) for the change; and
      (5)   If the amount designated for a project was increased, the account
(s) and project(s) from which the funds were transferred, or if the amount
designated for a project was decreased, the account(s) and project(s) to which
the funds were transferred.
      (6)   If a change combines all or parts of projects, the individual
account(s) and project(s) which were combined and the amount of funds involved
from each.
   (C)   An updated status report on Capital Projects shall be published on a
quarterly basis on the city's website. Such report shall be user-friendly,
accessible to the general public and contain graphic representation of Capital
Projects in progress.
('74 Code, § 1-10-7) (Ord. 12-1983; Am. Ord. 11-1991; Am. Ord. 52-1999; Am.
Ord. 16-2001; Am. Ord. 35-2006; Am. Ord. 18-2007)
§ 2-12-7 TRAILS AND BIKEWAYS SET ASIDE.
   An amount not less than five percent of funding for the Public Works -
Street purpose of the Public Works Department in the Capital Improvement
Program shall be dedicated to trails and bikeways. The projects funded through
this set aside shall be consistent with the adopted 1993 Rank II Trails and
Bikeways Facility Plan or any subsequent updates to the plan. The funds shall
be administered by the Capital Improvements Division of the Office of
Management and Budget. A memorandum of understanding shall be developed between
the Public Works Department, the Parks and Recreation Department, and the
Planning Department for the purpose of administering the funds. The trails and
bikeways set aside shall not be used as a justification to decrease funding for
this purpose from other sources.
(Ord. 20-1994; Am. Ord. 16-2001; Am. Ord. 35-2006)
§ 2-12-8 METROPOLITAN TRANSPORTATION PLAN AND TRANSPORTATION IMPROVEMENT
PROGRAM SUBMITTALS.
   (A)   The Mayor shall submit a proposed resolution to the City Council
setting forth projects recommended for inclusion in the Metropolitan
Transportation Plan (MTP) and the Transportation Improvement Program (TIP) of
the Albuquerque Metropolitan Planning Area at least 30 days prior to the
deadline for project submittals as established by the Metropolitan Planning
Organization (MPO). Projects shall only be submitted to the MPO for inclusion
in the MTP and/or the TIP by City Council resolution.
   (B)   The city in preparing the projects to be included in the MTP and the
TIP shall adhere to the rules set forth in the Mid Region Council of
Governments Manual on Policies and Procedures of the Transportation Improvement
Program for the Albuquerque Metropolitan Area.
   (C)   The City Council may amend the recommended projects contained in the
proposed resolution prior to adoption of the resolution and submission to the
MPO.
   (D)   Except for adjusting Federal Transit Administration Grant amounts to
reflect the Federal Register, amendments to the City of Albuquerque's adopted
MTP or TIP project list shall be submitted to the City Council for approval
before submittal to the Metropolitan Transportation Board if the change meets
one or more of the following criteria:
      (1)   A project is added to or deleted from the MTP or TIP.
      (2)   There is a substantive change to a project scope.
      (3)   A funding timeline for the project is moved forward or backward by
more than three years.
      (4)   Funding is removed or added that increases or decreases the dollar
value of the federal funding for the project by more than 40%.
      (5)   Funding is removed or added that increases or decreases the dollar
value of the federal funding for the project by more than two million dollars.
   (E)   A resolution adopting a project, or an amendment to an adopted
project, shall include the following information about each project:
      (1)   The title.
      (2)   The geographic boundaries.
      (3)   The council district(s) the project is within.
      (4)   The transportation mode(s) the project supports.
      (5)   Whether the project procures rolling stock, capital facilities or
planning and programming support.
      (6)   The project purpose including: does it add capacity to a facility,
rehabilitate a facility, convert a facility from one mode to another or provide
infrastructure for an additional transportation mode.
      (7)   Whether the project will reduce congestion and improve air quality.
      (8)   The city policies, plans or land use assumptions that authorize
development of such a project.
      (9)   Identification of land use measure(s) (LUM(S)) the project
furthers, how it furthers the LUM(S) and how the project supports the LUM(S).
      (10)   Goals and objectives established under the procedures of § 2-11-
3 ROA 1994, that the project accomplishes or furthers.
      (11)   Whether the project is included in the Capital Improvement Program
Decade Plan and also the Component Capital Improvement Plan.
      (12)   Total dollar value of the project.
      (13)   The value of federal funds requested for the project and the type
of Federal Highway Administration or Federal Transit Administration funding
category from which the funds are obtained.
      (14)   The value of state funds supplied to the project and the funding
source within the state government from which they are provided.
      (15)   The value of city funds supplied to the project and the funding
source.
      (16)   The value of private funds supplied to the project and the funding
source.
      (17)   A schedule of the funding to be acquired by year.
      (18)   Other information the Mayor or City Council deems appropriate.
      (19)   All capacity and rehabilitation projects located within the
Central and Established Urban Areas as designated by Albuquerque Bernalillo
County Comprehensive Plan (excluding those located on the Interstate system)
shall comply with Part 6-5-6 ROA 1994.
   (F)   The City Council may issue a request to the Mayor for "other
information" pertaining to a project no later than five days before the first
public hearing of the resolution.
(Ord. 26-2007; Am. Ord._2015-003)
§ 2-12-9 INFRASTRUCTURE CAPITAL IMPROVEMENT PLAN (ICIP).
   The Mayor shall annually submit by Resolution to the City Council the City
of Albuquerque’s ICIP List for review and adoption by March 1st, of each
calendar year. Projects included in the ICIP List shall be ranked by urgency
and need to comply with Section 6-4-1 NMSA 1978 (A) and (B) and State Executive
Order 2012-023. The Council may amend the list if such amendments comply with
the provisions of Section 6-4-1 NMSA 1978 (A) and (B) and State Executive Order
2012-023. The ICIP List approved by the City Council shall be submitted to the
State of New Mexico Department of Finance and Administration.
(Ord. 2024-045)
ARTICLE 13: COMPETITIVE ELECTRIC POWER
Section
   
2-13-1   Authority
   
2-13-2   Short title
   
2-13-3   Purpose
   
2-13-4   Albuquerque electric utility
   
2-13-5   Powers and duties of the AEU
   
2-13-6   Regulations and amendments
Cross-reference:
   
Electricity franchise, see §§ 13-4-2-1 et seq.
§ 2-13-1 AUTHORITY.
   The City Council, pursuant to Section 3-24-1 NMSA 1978, Article XV of the
City Charter adopted June 29, 1921, and Article X, § 6 of the Constitution of
New Mexico enacts this article relating to the establishment of an electric
public utility as authorized by such sections.
('74 Code, § 1-22-1) (Ord. 60-1990)
§ 2-13-2 SHORT TITLE.
   This article shall be known and may be cited as the "Albuquerque Competitive
Electric Power Ordinance."
('74 Code, § 1-22-2) (Ord. 60-1990)
§ 2-13-3 PURPOSE.
   The purpose of this article is to provide for the efficient delivery of
reliable electric power service to the public or to wholesalers at the lowest
cost and, where feasible, at a competitively determined price.
('74 Code, § 1-22-3) (Ord. 60-1990)
§ 2-13-4 ALBUQUERQUE ELECTRIC UTILITY.
   There shall be an Albuquerque Electric Utility, hereinafter "AEU," which
shall be responsible for the planning, development, production, purchase, sale,
transmission and distribution of electricity and related services by the city.
('74 Code, § 1-22-4) (Ord. 60-1990)
§ 2-13-5 POWERS AND DUTIES OF THE AEU.
   (A)   Property and contracts. The AEU may:
      (1)   Sell its products and services to public and private corporations
and to other consumers;
      (2)   Construct and operate generating plants, transmission,
distribution, and other facilities;
      (3)   Set rates and service policies and regulations;
      (4)   Purchase real property and personal property; and
      (5)   Enter into contracts, leases, and agreements in furtherance of its
powers and duties.
   (B)   Extensions of services. The AEU may adopt regulations governing
extensions of services of the AEU. The regulations shall provide the conditions
under which the extensions shall be made to render them compensatory and shall
provide that each extension project shall, when completed, become the property
of the city whether on public or private property. The AEU may provide for
refunds where advances by the person benefitted are necessary to make
extensions compensatory.
   (C)   Joint operations with others. The AEU may enter into contracts and
agreements with any public or private corporation or any individual, both
inside and outside the boundaries of the city and state:
      (1)   For the joint use of property belonging either to the AEU or to the
other contracting party or jointly to both parties;
      (2)   For the joint acquisition of real and personal property, rights and
franchises and the joint financing, construction, and operation of plants,
buildings, transmission, distribution, and other facilities; or
      (3)   For the operation and management of the electric system of AEU or
any part thereof.
   (D)   Eminent domain. The AEU may enter upon any land or water for the
purpose of making surveys and may exercise the right of eminent domain as
provided by law when the AEU determines that public necessity or convenience
requires such action.
   (E)   Use of thoroughfares and easements for utility installations. The AEU
may use the ground over, under, or along any road, railway, highway, street,
sidewalk, thoroughfare, alley, or waterway in the operations of the AEU
including the easements granted by Section 3-24-4 NMSA 1978 but shall in all
cases, subject to the applicable general regulations of the city, cause the
surface of the public way to be restored to its usual condition.
   (F)   Bond issues and other indebtedness. Subject to applicable state laws,
the AEU may authorize the issuance and sale of revenue bonds or other types of
indebtedness necessary to finance the acquisition, construction, improvement,
and extension of the utility facilities owned by the AEU, including facilities
owned or operated jointly with others.
   (G)   Public information expenditures. The AEU may authorize reasonable
expenditures to inform the public of the policies, operations, programs and
plans of the AEU.
   (H)   Existing obligations.  Contracts and obligations relating to the
utility systems of the city incurred prior to the effective date of this
charter shall not be impaired and shall be binding upon the AEU insofar as they
apply to the AEU.
('74 Code, § 1-22-5) (Ord. 60-1990)
§ 2-13-6 REGULATIONS AND AMENDMENTS.
   (A)   The city may amend any provision of this article and may adopt the
regulations it finds necessary in the exercise of the police power as adjunct
to or in corollary with the regulations.
   (B)   The city may amend this article when necessary to enable the AEU to
pursue developments in the electric supply market which will afford the
opportunity to provide more efficient and economical services.
('74 Code, § 1-22-6) (Ord. 60-1990)
ARTICLE 14: ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT
Section
Part 1: Local Economic Development Act Plan
   
2-14-1-1   Short title
   
2-14-1-2   Purpose
   
2-14-1-3   Definitions
   
2-14-1-4   Economic development plan
   
2-14-1-5   Local Economic Development Act Plan Review Committee
   
2-14-1-6   Application requirements
   
2-14-1-7   Application review process
   
2-14-1-8   Application review criteria
   
2-14-1-9   Public safeguards
   
2-14-1-10   Project participation agreement
   
2-14-1-11   Project monies
   
2-14-1-12   Termination
   
2-14-1-13   Joint or regional projects
Part 2: Community Development Incentive
   
2-14-2-1   Findings
   
2-14-2-2   Short title
   
2-14-2-3   Purpose
   
2-14-2-4   Definitions
   
2-14-2-5   General policies
   
2-14-2-6   Pre-application discussion with staff
   
2-14-2-7   Content of application
   
2-14-2-8   Application procedures
   
2-14-2-9   Community development incentives
PART 1: LOCAL ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT ACT PLAN
§ 2-14-1-1 SHORT TITLE.
   This article may be cited as the "Local Economic Development Act Plan
Ordinance."
(Ord. 33-2004)
§ 2-14-1-2 PURPOSE.
   Sections
2-14-1-1 et seq. are adopted as part of the city's economic development plan.
In accordance with Sections 5-10-1 et seq. NMSA 1978 (the "Local Economic
Development Act"), the purpose of the Economic Development Plan Ordinance is to
allow public support of economic development projects to foster, promote and
enhance local economic development efforts while continuing to protect against
the unauthorized use of public money and other public resources. Further, the
purpose of §§
2-14-1-1 et seq. is to allow the city to enter into one or more joint powers
agreements with other local governments to plan and support regional economic
development projects, including investments in arts and cultural districts
created pursuant to Sections 15-5A-1 NMSA et seq. 1978 (the "Arts and Cultural
District Act"). Sections
2-14-1-1 et seq. are not intended to restrict projects or assistance otherwise
allowed by law.
(Ord. 33-2004; Am. Ord._2017-026)
§ 2-14-1-3 DEFINITIONS.
   The following definitions apply to the Economic Development Plan Ordinance:
   ALBUQUERQUE LEGACY COMPANY. A company that has been determined by the
Albuquerque Development Commission to be culturally significant and vested in
Albuquerque such that there is little risk of the company leaving Albuquerque.
   CULTURAL FACILITY. A facility that is owned by the state, a county, a
municipality or a qualifying entity that serves the public through preserving,
educating and promoting the arts and culture of a particular locale, including
theaters, museums, libraries, galleries, cultural compounds, educational
organizations, performing arts venues and organizations, fine arts
organizations, studios and media laboratories and live-work housing facilities.
   ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT PROJECT. The provision of direct or indirect assistance
pursuant to the Local Economic Development Act to a qualifying business and
includes the purchase, lease, grant, construction, reconstruction, improvement
or other acquisition or conveyance of land, buildings or other infrastructure;
public works improvements essential to the location or expansion of a
qualifying business; payments for professional services contracts necessary for
local or regional governments to implement a plan or project; and payments to a
qualifying business pursuant to §
2-14-1-4(C).
   PROJECT PARTICIPATION AGREEMENT. An agreement between a qualifying entity
and the city whereby the city provides assistance to an economic development
project in exchange for the benefits received as set forth in §§
2-14-1-1 et seq.
   QUALIFYING ENTITY. A corporation, limited liability company, partnership,
joint venture, syndicate, association or other person that is one or a
combination of two or more of the following:
      (1)   An industry for the manufacturing, processing, or assembling of any
agricultural or manufactured products;
      (2)   A commercial enterprise for storing, warehousing, distributing or
selling products of agriculture, mining or industry, but not including any
enterprise for sale of goods or commodities at retail or for the distribution
to the public of electricity, gas, water or telephone or other services
commonly classified as public utilities, except as provided by subsection (5)
of this definition;
      (3)   A business in which all or part of the activities of the business
involves the supplying of services to the general public or to governmental
agencies or to a specific industry or customer, but, other than as provided in
subsection (5) of this definition, not including businesses primarily engaged
in the sale of goods or commodities at retail;
      (4)   An Indian tribe or pueblo or a federally chartered tribal
corporation;
      (5)   A telecommunications sales enterprise that makes the majority of
its sales to persons outside New Mexico;
      (6)   A facility for the direct sales by growers of agricultural
products, commonly known as farmer's markets;
      (7)   A business that is the developer of a metropolitan redevelopment
project; or
      (8)   A cultural facility.
(Ord. 33-2004; Am. Ord._2017-026; Am. Ord._2023-007)
§ 2-14-1-4 ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT PLAN.
   (A)   The Council may assist economic development projects in any legally
permissible manner including but not limited to provision of land, buildings
and infrastructure provided that all the requirements of §§
2-14-1-1 et seq. are met. The city may provide land, buildings or
infrastructure it already owns, or it may build, purchase or lease the
facilities needed for an economic development project. The city at its
discretion may bear the full cost or contribute a portion of the costs
including the waiver of applicable fees. The city, at its discretion, may also
contribute to the payment of costs for professional services contracts such as
industry feasibility studies and planning and design services needed to
implement a project.
   (B)   The Council may consider offering all forms of assistance allowed
under this section and any other legally permissible forms of assistance;
however, this does not establish any obligation on the city's part to offer any
specific type or level of assistance.
   (C)   The Council may provide for a local contribution of payments
reimbursing expenditures for land, building or infrastructure that is measured
based on an increment of gross receipts taxes received by the city as a result
of the construction of the Economic Development Project.
(Ord. 33-2004; Am. Ord._2017-026)
§ 2-14-1-5 LOCAL ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT ACT PLAN REVIEW COMMITTEE. 
   The Albuquerque Development Commission is hereby established as the Local
Economic Development Act Plan Review Committee and shall be responsible for
reviewing and making recommendations to the Council on applications for
assistance for Local Economic Development Act projects.
(Ord. 33-2004)
§ 2-14-1-6 APPLICATION REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   Any qualifying entity meeting the definition set forth in §§
2-14-1-1 et seq. may propose a Local Economic Development Act project to the
city. No obligation on the part of the city is created by an applicant meeting
the definition of a qualifying entity.
   (B)   Applications from qualifying entities shall be submitted to the Office
of Economic Development on forms provided by the city.
   (C)   An application shall, at a minimum, contain the following:
      (1)   A description of the project, including the nature of the business,
a legal description of its boundaries, identity and addresses of all persons or
entities with any interest in the facility and whether the facility is locally
owned or operated;
      (2)   The number and type of new jobs to be created and a detailed
description of the benefits provided;
      (3)   With regard to job characteristics, the number of jobs that benefit
low and moderate income residents, whether the jobs meet or exceed median wages
for the industry within the community, the percentage of jobs filled by current
residents versus relocated individuals, whether the wages of all positions
created are sufficient to eliminate the need for public assistance, whether the
applicant will train new employees to fill the positions, advancement
opportunities, and whether the applicant will use "in-plant" or other job
training incentive programs;
      (4)   The present use or condition of the project and any new
infrastructure needs including possible cost sharing arrangements;
      (5)   The present assessed value of the project property site, if
available;
      (6)   A proposed project schedule for the acquisition and installation of
the project, including the expected date(s) the project will be brought into
service;
      (7)   The total dollar amount of the project and financing arrangements;
      (8)   Information relating to the feasibility of the project including
information relating to the ability of the facility to generate revenues to
render the facility self-liquidating;
      (9)   The competition in the type of commerce or industry already
existing within the city;
      (10)   A proposed construction schedule for the project;
      (11)   Information regarding compliance with city planning and zoning
policies and compliance with all federal, state, and local environmental laws,
regulations and rules;
      (12)   The effect on existing industry and commerce in the city including
during and after the construction period, including the number of local
construction jobs created;
      (13)   Information about the project design, including conceptual site
plans and the impacts on the neighborhood such as area enhancement and positive
contribution to the neighborhood;
      (14)   Information about the applicant's good corporate citizenship, both
in terms of promoting donations and volunteerism, its willingness to commit to
make local purchases, water use and water conservation practices, and whether
facility emissions and/or waste is controlled and the facility has a
satisfactory plan for reduction/disposal;
      (15)   Resumes showing the experience of the applicant/business facility,
and the experience of the architect, contractor and leasing agent, if relevant;
      (16)   A statement of plans for project management; and
      (17)   Such other information as the city may reasonably require after
initial review of the application, including but not limited to preliminary
legal opinions, further information regarding the relationship of the
application to the city's development objectives, additional proof of financial
capability, business references, term sheets for financing and financial
commitment letters.
(Ord. 33-2004)
§ 2-14-1-7 APPLICATION REVIEW PROCESS.
   (A)   Economic development staff and such other city staff as are necessary
and appropriate shall review the application and advise the Albuquerque
Development Commission if the entity and the proposed project meet the
definitions of this section and the policies and objectives of the city's
economic development plan. The city may at its discretion engage independent
consultants to assist in the review of applications. The city may require the
applicant to pay for all or a portion of the cost of engaging the consultants.
   (B)   The economic development staff shall determine whether the entity and
the proposed project qualify under this section.
   (C)   City staff shall then coordinate with the qualifying entity to develop
a project participation agreement as set forth in §§
2-14-1-1 et seq.
   (D)   The Albuquerque Development Commission shall consider the economic
development project and the project participation agreement at a public meeting
in accordance with the criteria set forth in §§
2-14-1-1 et seq. The Commission shall recommend to the Council that the
proposal be adopted, conditionally adopted or not adopted.
   (E)   The recommendation will be forwarded with the project participation
agreement, minutes of the Albuquerque Development Commission meeting and any
other pertinent information to the Council for final consideration at a public
hearing.
(Ord. 33-2004)
§ 2-14-1-8 APPLICATION REVIEW CRITERIA.
   (A)   Applications for Local Economic Development Act projects requesting
economic assistance from the city which meet the policies and objectives of the
city's community economic development plan shall receive priority. Examples
include, but are not limited to:
      (1)   Organizations which assist business start-ups or bring small
companies together to increase their competitive abilities. This must involve a
tangible project which will create jobs and promote an industry. Examples
include, but are not limited to:
         (a)   Business incubators;
         (b)   Art incubators or coalitions (e.g., a performing arts coalition
seeking to construct rehearsal or performance facilities);
         (c)   Public markets for farmers, gardeners, crafts, etc.; and
         (d)   Organizations which foster economic development by promoting
work force development efforts such as apprenticeships or other job training
programs;
      (2)   Private companies seeking to build, expand or relocate facilities;
      (3)   Private companies which provide facilities or services which
enhance the ability of Albuquerque businesses to operate;
      (4)   Manufacturing firms (including intellectual property such as
computer software);
      (5)   Projects which enhance the exporting capacity of companies and/or
provide goods and services which currently have to be imported into
Albuquerque;
      (6)   Projects in industry clusters listed above are particularly
encouraged, but others are eligible to apply as well. The intention is to
retain flexibility in the use of incentives; and
      (7)   Qualifying entities with existing contracts or projects with the
city when this plan is adopted may propose a restructuring of their project as
an economic development project.
   (B)   All applications for Local Economic Development Act projects
requesting economic assistance from the city shall include a cost-benefit
analysis. The cost of preparation of the cost- benefit analysis shall be the
responsibility of the applicant. The city retains the right to specify a format
and methodology for the cost-benefit analysis. City staff shall review and
approve of the methodology used. The source and rationale for any multiplier
effects shall be identified. The cost- benefit analysis shall show that the
city will recoup the value of its donation within a period of ten years. The
analysis shall address the following:
      (1)   The number and types of jobs to be created, both temporary
construction jobs and permanent jobs (by New Mexico Department of Labor job
category);
      (2)   Pay scales of jobs;
      (3)   Determination of which jobs are expected to be filled locally and
which will be filled by transfers from other facilities or recruited from
outside the Albuquerque area;
      (4)   Total payroll expected at start-up and after one year;
      (5)   Anticipated impact of project on local tax base; and,
      (6)   If practicable, anticipated impact on local school system.
   (C)   All applications for Local Economic Development Act projects
requesting economic assistance from the city shall require the same review
required of industrial revenue bond applications. This review shall focus on
environmental and community impacts of the proposed project. Special attention
shall be given to job training and career advancement programs and policies.
Projects shall demonstrate a strong commitment to providing career
opportunities for Albuquerque area residents. Cultural impacts of projects
shall also be considered.
   (D)   Any qualifying entity seeking assistance shall prepare and make
available a job training and career development plan for its employees.
   (E)   All applications for economic development projects requesting economic
assistance from the city shall clearly demonstrate the benefits which will
accrue to the community as a result of the donation of public resources. The
city has considerable flexibility in determining what is considered as adequate
benefits. Benefits such as providing components or production capabilities
which enhance a targeted industry cluster or addressing critical deficiencies
in the regional economy may be recognized. The benefits claimed of any proposal
will receive careful scrutiny. However, it is the intent of this section to be
flexible in the evaluation of these benefits, and to recognize the qualitative
as well as quantitative impacts of a proposal. Applications for economic
development projects located within a metropolitan redevelopment district may
be granted additional flexibility in demonstrating the adequacy of benefits.
   (F)   All applications for economic development projects requesting economic
assistance from the city shall clearly demonstrate how the qualifying entity is
making a substantive contribution to the community. The city retains
flexibility in defining the "substantive contribution to the community."
Determination of what constitutes an acceptable contribution for a given
project shall be at the discretion of the governing body. Applications for
economic development projects located within a metropolitan redevelopment
district may be granted additional flexibility in demonstrating a substantive
contribution to the community.
(Ord. 33-2004; Am. Ord._2017-026)
§ 2-14-1-9 PUBLIC SAFEGUARDS.
   (A)   All Local Economic Development Act projects receiving assistance from
the city shall be subject to an annual performance review conducted by city
staff. This review shall evaluate whether the project is attaining the goals
and objectives set forth in the project participation agreement. This review
shall be presented to the Council. The Council at a public hearing may
terminate assistance to the Local Economic Development Act project by passage
of an ordinance which terminates the agreement and specifies the disposition of
all assets and obligations of the project as set forth in the termination
section of §§
2-14-1-1 et seq.
   (B)   The city shall retain a security interest which shall be specified in
the project participation agreement. The type of security given shall depend
upon the nature of the Local Economic Development Act project and assistance
provided by the city. Types of security may include, but are not limited to:
      (1)   Letter of credit in the city's name;
      (2)   Performance bond equal to the city's contribution;
      (3)   A mortgage or lien on property or equipment;
      (4)   Pro-rated reimbursement of donation if the qualifying entity
reduces its work force or leaves the community before the agreed term expires;
and
      (5)   Other security agreeable to both parties.
   (C)   Should a qualifying entity move, sell, lease or transfer a majority
interest in the Local Economic Development Act project before the expiration of
project participation agreement, the city retains the right to deny any and all
assignments, sales, leases or transfers of any interests in the Local Economic
Development Act project until adequate assurances are made that the transferee,
assignee or lessee is a qualifying entity and that the terms of the agreement
will be satisfied by the transferee, assignee or lessee. At its discretion, the
city may choose to deny said assignment, lease or transfer or may negotiate a
new agreement with the new operator, or the city may reclaim the facility and
enter into an agreement with a new qualifying entity.
   (D)   Any qualifying entity seeking assistance from public resources shall
commit to operate in accordance with its project participation agreement for a
period of time defined below from the date the ordinance adopting the project
participation agreement is passed by the Council:
      (1)   If the project is solely supported by state funds, the term shall
be set by the State Economic Impact Analysis (EIA);
      (2)   If city funds are included in the award and the total award for the
company is more than $500,000, the term shall be a minimum of ten years;
      (3)   If city funds are included in the award, the total award for the
company is no more than $500,000, and the pay-back period has been shown to be
less than ten years, the term shall be recommended by the Albuquerque Economic
Development Department in consultation with the Economic Impact Analysis;
      (4)   If city funds are included in the award, the company has been
determined to be an Albuquerque legacy company, and the pay-back period
has been shown to be less than ten years, the term shall be recommended by the
Albuquerque Economic Development Department in consultation with the State
Economic Impact Analysis.
(Ord. 33-2004; Am. Ord._2023-007)
§ 2-14-1-10 PROJECT PARTICIPATION AGREEMENT.
   (A)   The qualifying entity shall prepare with the city a project
participation agreement. This agreement is the formal document which states the
contributions and obligations of all parties in the Local Economic Development
Act project. The agreement must clearly state the following items:
      (1)   The economic development goals of the project;
      (2)   The contributions of the city and the qualifying entity;
      (3)   The specific measurable objectives upon which the performance
review will be based;
      (4)   A schedule for project development and goal attainment;
      (5)   The security being offered for the city's investment;
      (6)   The procedures by which a project may be terminated and the city's
investment recovered; and
      (7)   The time period for which the city shall retain an interest in the
project. Each project agreement shall have a "sunset" clause after which the
city shall relinquish interest in and oversight of the project.
   (B)   Each project participation agreement shall be adopted as an ordinance
and adopted by the Council at a public hearing.
(Ord. 33-2004)
§ 2-14-1-11 PROJECT MONIES.
   All project monies shall be kept in separate accounts by the qualifying
entity and the city, with such accounts clearly identified. These accounts
shall be subject to an annual independent audit.
(Ord. 33-2004)
§ 2-14-1-12 TERMINATION.
   The Council may repeal §§
2-14-1-1 et seq. and terminate the City's community economic development plan
and any or all project participation agreements undertaken under its authority.
Termination shall be by ordinance at a public hearing or in accordance with the
terms of the project participation agreement. If an ordinance or a project
participation agreement is repealed or terminated, all contract provisions of
the project participation agreement regarding termination shall be satisfied.
Upon termination of the ordinance or any project participation agreement, any
city monies remaining in city project accounts shall be transferred to the LEDA
parent account.
(Ord. 33-2004; Am. Ord. 2024-039)
§ 2-14-1-13 JOINT OR REGIONAL PROJECTS.
   The city may engage in Local Economic Development Act projects involving one
or more other governmental entities for projects which encompass more than one
municipality or county. In such instances, a joint powers agreement shall be
adopted by the relevant governing bodies. This agreement will establish the
application criteria and the terms of all project participation agreements.
Criteria established under a joint powers agreement shall be consistent with
the provisions of this section.
(Ord. 33-2004)
PART 2: COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT INCENTIVE
§ 2-14-2-1 FINDINGS.
   The Council finds:
   (A)   The city desires to benefit from the Community Development Incentive
Act, Sections 3-64-1 through 3-64-5 NMSA 1978, as amended (the “Act”), enacted
by the New Mexico Legislature; and
   (B)   The Act provides, in pertinent part, that the governing body of a
municipality may by a majority vote of the members elected to the governing
body adopt a resolution exempting commercial personal property of a new
business facility located in the municipality from the imposition of any
property tax on commercial personal property authorized to be imposed by the
governing body, subject to certain limitations; and
   (C)   In addition to an Industrial Revenue Bond Program Reform Proposal, the
Administration has recommended a Small Business Initiative Proposal
(“Proposal”) to create a small business economic development toolbox. The
Proposal recommends implementation of the Act; and
   (D)   In order to permit the city to make a reasonable judgment as to
whether or not to offer certain community development incentives permitted
under the Act and upon what terms, the city has established these policy
guidelines and application procedures.
(Ord. 35-2004)
§ 2-14-2-2 SHORT TITLE.
   Sections
2-14-2-1 et seq. may be cited as the “Community Development Incentive
Ordinance.”
(Ord. 35-2004)
§ 2-14-2-3 PURPOSE.
   The purpose of §§
2-14-2-1 et seq. is to permit the implementation of the Community Development
Incentive Act, Sections 3-64-1 through 3-64-5 NMSA 1978, as amended (the “Act”)
by authorizing the introduction of resolutions that would exempt specific
commercial personal property of a new business facility located within the
municipal limits from the imposition of any property tax on the commercial
personal property authorized to be imposed by the city subject to certain
limitations.
(Ord. 35-2004)
§ 2-14-2-4 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of §§
2-14-2-1 et seq., the following definitions shall apply unless the context
clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   COMMENCEMENT OF COMMERCIAL OPERATIONS. Occurs when the new business facility
is first available for use by the taxpayer or first capable of being used by
the taxpayer in the revenue-producing enterprise in which the taxpayer intends
to use the new business facility.
   FACILITY. Any factory, mill, plant, refinery, warehouse, dairy, feedlot,
building or complex of buildings located within the state, including the land
on which the facility is located and all machinery, equipment and other real
and tangible personal property located at or within the facility and used in
connection with the operation of the facility.
   NEW BUSINESS FACILITY. A facility that satisfies the following requirements:
      (1)   The facility is employed by the taxpayer in the operation of a
revenue- producing enterprise; the facility shall not be considered a "new
business facility" in the hands of the taxpayer if the taxpayer's only activity
with respect to the facility is to lease it to another person; if the taxpayer
employs only a portion of the facility in the operation of a revenue-producing
enterprise and leases another portion of the facility to another person or does
not otherwise use such other portions in the operation of a revenue-producing
enterprise, the portion employed by the taxpayer in the operation of a revenue-
producing enterprise shall be considered a "new business facility" if the
requirements of subparagraphs (2), (3) and (4) of this definition are
satisfied;
      (2)   The facility is acquired by or leased to the taxpayer on or after
July 1, 2003; provided, the facility shall be deemed to have been acquired by
or leased to the taxpayer on or after the specified date if the transfer of
title to the taxpayer, the transfer of possession pursuant to a binding
contract to transfer title to the taxpayer or the commencement of the term of
the lease to the taxpayer occurs on or after that date or if the facility is
constructed, erected or installed by or on behalf of the taxpayer, the
construction, erection or installation is completed on or after that date;
      (3)   If the facility was acquired by the taxpayer from another person
and the facility was employed, immediately prior to the transfer of title to
the facility to the taxpayer or to the commencement of the term of the lease of
the facility to the taxpayer, by any other person in the operation of a
revenue-producing enterprise, the taxpayer does not continue the operation of
the same or a substantially identical revenue-producing enterprise at the
facility; and
      (4)   The facility is not a replacement business facility.
   NEW BUSINESS FACILITY EMPLOYEE. A person employed by the taxpayer in the
operation of a new business facility during the taxable year for which the
exemption authorized by the Act is granted; a person shall be considered to
have been so employed if the person performs duties in connection with the
operation of the new business facility on:
      (1)   A regular, full-time basis;
      (2)   A part-time basis if the person is customarily performing the
described duties at least 20 hours per week throughout the taxable year; or
      (3)   A seasonal basis if the person performs the described duties for
substantially all of the season customary for the position in which the person
is employed.
The number of new business facility employees during any property tax year
shall be determined by dividing by 12 the sum of the number of new business
facility employees on the last business day of each month of that year. If the
new business facility is in operation for less than the entire property tax
year, the number of new business facility employees shall be determined by
dividing the sum of the number of new business facility employees on the last
business day of each full calendar month during the portion of the property tax
year during which the new business facility was in operation by the number of
full calendar months during that period.
   NEW BUSINESS FACILITY INVESTMENT. The value of the real and tangible
personal property, except inventory or property held for sale to customers in
the ordinary course of the taxpayer's business, that constitutes the new
business facility or that is used by the taxpayer in the operation of the new
business facility during the property tax year for which the exemption
authorized by the Act is granted and the value of that property during the year
shall be:
      (1)   Its original cost if owned by the taxpayer; or
      (2)   Eight times the net annual rental rate if leased by the taxpayer;
the "net annual rental rate" is the annual rental rate paid by the taxpayer,
less any annual rental rate received by the taxpayer from subrentals.
   RELATED TAXPAYER.
      (1)   A corporation, partnership, limited liability company, trust or
association controlled by the taxpayer;
      (2)   An individual, corporation, limited liability company, partnership,
trust or association under the control of the taxpayer; or
      (3)   A corporation, limited liability company, partnership, trust or
association controlled by an individual, corporation, limited liability
company, partnership, trust or association under the control of the taxpayer.
For the purposes of this definition, "control of a corporation" means
ownership, directly or indirectly, of stock possessing at least 80% of the
total combined voting power of all classes of stock entitled to vote and at
least 80% of all other classes of stock of the corporation; "control of a
partnership, limited liability company or association" means ownership of at
least 80% of the capital or profits interest in such partnership, limited
liability company or association; and "control of a trust" means ownership,
directly or indirectly, of at least 80% of the beneficial interest in the
principal or income of the trust.
   REPLACEMENT BUSINESS FACILITY. A facility as defined in “new business
facility” of this section and referred to in this definition as a "new
facility" that replaces another facility, referred to in this paragraph as an
"old facility", located within the state in which the taxpayer or a related
taxpayer previously operated but discontinued operating on or before the close
of the first property tax year in which the exemption authorized by the Act is
claimed; a new facility shall be deemed to replace an old facility if the
following conditions are met:
      (1)   The old facility was operated by the taxpayer or a related taxpayer
for more than three full property tax years out of the five property tax years
next preceding the property tax year in which commencement of commercial
operations occurs at the new facility; and
      (2)   The old facility was employed by the taxpayer or a related taxpayer
in the operation of a revenue-producing enterprise and the taxpayer continues
the operation of the same or a substantially identical revenue-producing
enterprise at the new facility.
Notwithstanding the provisions of paragraph (1) of this definition, a facility
shall not be considered a "replacement business facility" if the taxpayer's
investment in the new facility exceeds $3,000,000 or, if less, 300% of the
investment in the old facility by the taxpayer or related taxpayer. The
investment in the new facility and in the old facility shall be determined in
the manner provided in “new business facility investment” of this section.
   REVENUE-PRODUCING ENTERPRISE.
      (1)   The production, assembly, fabrication, manufacture or processing of
any agricultural, mineral or manufactured product;
      (2)   The storage, warehousing, distribution or sale of any products of
agriculture, mining or manufacturing;
      (3)   The feeding of livestock at a feedlot;
      (4)   The operation of laboratories or other facilities for scientific,
agricultural animal husbandry or industrial research development;
      (5)   The generation of electricity;
      (6)   The performance of services of any type;
      (7)   The administrative management of any of the activities listed in
subparagraphs (1) through (6) of this definition; or
      (8)   Any combination of any of the activities referred to in
subparagraphs (1) through (7) of this definition.
   SAME or SUBSTANTIALLY IDENTICAL REVENUE-PRODUCING ENTERPRISE. A revenue-
producing enterprise in which the products produced or sold, the services
performed or the activities conducted are the same in character and use and are
produced, sold, performed or conducted in the same manner and to or for the
same types of customers as the products, services or activities produced, sold,
performed or conducted in another revenue-producing enterprise.
(Ord. 35-2004)
§ 2-14-2-5 GENERAL POLICIES.
   (A)   The incentives provided for under §§
2-14-2-1 et seq. should be utilized primarily as a small business (defined by
the U.S. Small Business Administration as independent businesses having fewer
than 500 employees) economic development tool that is targeted toward start-up
companies, incubation of start-up companies and early stage companies, and
local companies attempting to expand in Albuquerque.
   (B)   All costs and expenses incurred by the city in connection with the
application and qualification process for community development incentives
shall be paid by the applicant/business facility. Costs and expenses incurred
by the city in connection with the application and qualification process shall
not be liabilities of the city. Advance payments shall include payments for
services rendered by city staff, services rendered by outside consultants who
may be retained by the city including, but not limited to, bond counsel and
other attorneys, financial advisors, appraisers, and tax consultants. If the
city uses outside consultants as “staff”, such as attorneys, those consultants
shall be paid their normal rate for services.
   (C)   This policy is adopted to provide ease of administration and the
largest tax/revenue base possible. The decision to grant an economic incentive
to a particular new business facility shall be a legislative enactment of the
City Council and Mayor exercised in accordance with law. The city shall
encourage economic development and small business support provided the fiscal
impact and return on investment is positive to the city.
   (D)   Existing city policies for development, growth management and
conservation shall remain in effect and shall not be waived or relaxed upon the
qualification of a new business facility for a development incentive.
   (E)   The city’s consent to any development incentive shall be conditioned
upon the applicant/business facility following the procedures set forth in §§
2-14-2-1 et seq.
(Ord. 35-2004)
§ 2-14-2-6 PRE-APPLICATION DISCUSSION WITH STAFF.
   Potential applicants/business facilities are encouraged to schedule and
conduct a pre- application meeting with city staff. Input provided by city
staff shall be of an advisory nature, for the purposes of assisting applicants/
business facilities in submitting completed applications with detail and
information required to enable meaningful consideration by the City Council.
The purpose of the pre-application meeting shall be to:
   (A)   Make an initial assessment whether the proposed application appears to
be consistent with the Act, §§
2-14-2-1 et seq., and the city’s land use and development policies, zoning and
other applicable regulation;
   (B)   To help identify any related city approvals that will be required to
permit the development incentive;
   (C)   To identify other issues specific to the new business facility that
should be addressed in the application, such as compliance with the city’s
growth policies, utility expansion policies, or other policies, rules or
regulations; and
   (D)   To establish a preliminary schedule for (i) the applicant’s/business
facility’s submittal of its application, (ii) city staff review of the
application for completeness, (iii) review by the Albuquerque Development
Commission (“Commission”), and (iv) City Council meeting(s) for its
consideration of and action on the application.
(Ord. 35-2004)
§ 2-14-2-7 CONTENT OF APPLICATION.
   All applications for development incentives shall be submitted to the city.
Each application shall, at a minimum, contain the following:
   (A)   A description of the new business facility, including the nature of
the business, a legal description of its boundaries, identity and addresses of
all persons or entities with any interest in the facility and whether the
facility is locally owned or operated;
   (B)   The number and type of new jobs to be created and a detailed
description of the benefits provided;
   (C)   With regard to job characteristics, the number of jobs that benefit
low and moderate income residents, whether the jobs meet or exceed median wages
for the industry within the community, the percentage of jobs filled by current
residents versus relocated individuals, whether the wages of all positions
created are sufficient to eliminate the need for public assistance, whether the
applicant will train new employees to fill the positions, advancement
opportunities, and whether the applicant will use “in-plant” or other job
training incentive programs;
   (D)   The present use or condition of the business facility and any new
infrastructure needs including possible cost sharing arrangements;
   (E)   The present assessed value of the business facility property site, if
available;
   (F)   The estimated value of the commercial personal property to be located
at the business facility;
   (G)   A proposed project schedule for the acquisition and installation of
the commercial personal property, including the expected date(s) the commercial
personal property will be brought into service;
   (H)   The total dollar amount of the new business facility and financing
arrangements;
   (I)   Information relating to the feasibility of the new business facility
including information relating to the ability of the facility to generate
revenues to render the facility self- liquidating;
   (J)   The competition in the type of commerce or industry already existing
within the city;
   (K)   A proposed construction schedule for the new business facility;
   (L)   Information regarding compliance with city planning and zoning
policies and compliance with all federal, state, and local environmental laws,
regulations and rules;
   (M)   The effect on existing industry and commerce in the city including
during and after the construction period, including the number of local
construction jobs created;
   (N)   Information about the project design, including conceptual site plans
and the impacts on the neighborhood such as area enhancement and positive
contribution to the neighborhood;
   (O)   Information about the applicant’s good corporate citizenship, both in
terms of promoting donations and volunteerism, its willingness to commit to
make local purchases, water use and water conservation practices, and whether
facility emissions and/or waste is controlled and the facility has a
satisfactory plan for reduction/disposal;
   (P)   Resumes showing the experience of the applicant/business facility, and
the experience of the architect, contractor and leasing agent, if relevant;
   (Q)   A statement of plans for project management; and
   (R)   Such other information as the city may reasonably require after
initial review of the application, including but not limited to preliminary
legal opinions, further information regarding the relationship of the
application to the city’s development objectives, additional proof of financial
capability, business references, term sheets for financing and financial
commitment letters.
(Ord. 35-2004)
§ 2-14-2-8 APPLICATION PROCEDURES.
   (A)   Ten copies of the application for development incentives shall be
submitted to the Mayor’s Office, which shall coordinate an interdepartmental
analysis of each application.
   (B)   At the time of submission of the application, the applicant shall pay
a $2,500 non-refundable application fee. If reasonably necessary, additional
funds may be requested by the city and must be paid by the applicant.
   (C)   After the application and fee are submitted, city staff shall arrange
an initial conference with the applicant and appropriate city staff, for the
purpose of reviewing the application for conformity with city policies. The
city staff shall use its best efforts to review the application and conduct the
initial conference within 30 days following payment of the application fee.
   (D)   If at any time during the application process city staff requests
additional information, the applicant shall provide any and all supplemental
information requested.
   (E)   After analysis of an application as supplemented, city staff, under
the direction of the Mayor’s office, may prepare a report including
recommendations relating to the development incentive and an analysis of the
fiscal impact of the business facility and its effects on the city. The report
may provide a recommended disposition of the application, including any
recommendation on the term of the commercial personal property tax exemption,
and any additional requirements that shall be placed on the applicant/business
facility. The report shall also make recommendations for community protection,
including the requirement for a “clawback”, i.e. a pro-rata repayment of the
abated/exempted personal property taxes, depending on the amount of time
elapsed from the date of passage of the implementing legislation to the date of
closure of the facility. The city shall use its best efforts to complete the
analysis and report concerning the application within 90 days following the
initial application conference.
   (F)   If the application meets the qualifications provided herein as
determined by city staff, the application, along with any report and
recommendations by city staff, shall be presented by the applicant/business
facility to the Commission, and thereafter to the City Council, along with
appropriate implementing legislation. The Commission shall recommend to the
Council approval, conditional approval or disapproval of a development
incentive submitted for its review.
(Ord. 35-2004)
§ 2-14-2-9 COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT INCENTIVES.
   (A)   The City Council, after review by the Commission, may by a majority
vote of the members elected adopt a resolution exempting commercial personal
property of a new business facility located within the city limits from the
imposition of any property tax on commercial personal property authorized to be
imposed by the city, subject to the limitations below.
   (B)   The exemption authorized in this section may be for up to 100% of the
value for property taxation purposes of the property exempted.
   (C)   The exemption authorized by this section may be for any period of time
between one year and 20 years as long as the exemption does not, under any
circumstances, exceed 20 years. The effective date of any exemption shall be
January 1 of the property tax year in which the new business facility commences
commercial operations.
   (D)   Any exemption granted hereunder shall automatically terminate on the
last day of the property tax year in which it expires pursuant to the exemption
resolution or on the last day of the property tax year in which a new business
facility ceases commercial operations, whichever occurs first.
   (E)   In addition, any exemption granted hereunder shall be subject to
“clawback” provisions inasmuch as the business facility will be required to
reimburse the city a pro-rata amount of economic development incentives,
including tax exemptions/abatements, received by the business facility in the
event the facility ceases operation prematurely. The exemption resolution shall
clearly define the terms of the clawback and the applicant/business facility
will be required to acknowledge receipt, understanding and a willingness to
comply with the terms of the clawback.
   (F)   The new business facility investment shall be determined by dividing
by 12 the sum of the total value of such property on the last business day of
each calendar month of the property tax year. If the new business facility is
in operation for less than an entire property tax year, the new business
facility investment shall be determined by dividing the sum of the total value
of the property on the last business day of each full calendar month during the
portion of the property tax year during which the new business facility was in
operation by the number of full calendar months during that period.
   (G)   If a facility that does not constitute a new business facility is
expanded by the taxpayer, the expansion shall be considered a separate facility
eligible or the exemption authorized by the Act if:
      (1)   The taxpayer’s investment in the expansion exceeds $1,000,000 or,
if less, 100% of its investment in the original facility prior to expansion;
and
      (2)   The expansion otherwise constitutes a new business facility.
The taxpayer’s investment in the expansion and in the original facility prior
to expansion shall be determined in the manner provided in §
2-14-2-3 under the definition of “new business facility investment”.
   (H)   If a facility that does not constitute a new business facility is
expanded by the taxpayer, the expansion shall be considered a separate facility
for purposes of the exemption granted by the Act if:
      (1)   The expansion results in the employment of ten or more new business
facility employees over and above the average number of employees employed by
the taxpayer during the twelve months immediately prior to the expansion,
computed pursuant to §
2-14-2-3 under the definition of “new business facility employee”; and
   (2)   The expansion otherwise constitutes a new business facility.
(Ord. 35-2004)
ARTICLE 15: RULES AND REGULATIONS - SCOPE, NOTICE, HEARING, ACCESS AND REPEAL
Section
   
2-15-1   Scope
   
2-15-2   Procedures
   
2-15-3   Notice and hearing
   
2-15-4   Filing and public access
   
2-15-5   Modification or repeal
§ 2-15-1 SCOPE.
   This article shall apply to all divisions, subdivisions and agencies of the
city, (the "city agency"). Executive orders of the Mayor and administrative
instructions of the Chief Administrative Officer, if otherwise lawfully
permitted and enacted, shall only be subject to the filing and public access
provisions of §
2-15-4 and only if the order or instruction in any manner regulates the conduct
of the public.
(Ord. 43-2007)
§ 2-15-2 PROCEDURES.
   When the city agency proposes rules or regulations pertaining to matters
within its jurisdiction that in any manner regulate the conduct of the public,
it shall follow the procedures set forth in this article.
   (A)   When the city agency proposes to adopt rules or regulations, it shall
first have the Chief Administrative Officer appoint a city employee to serve as
a hearing officer to conduct the public hearings required in this article.
   (B)   The hearing officer shall submit a report to the head of the city
agency that will administer the proposed rules or regulations and to the Chief
Administrative Officer. The report shall describe in general terms the public
comment received, the city agency response to that public comment, if any, and
shall contain recommendations for changes to the proposed regulations when
appropriate.
   (C)   The rules or regulations shall not go into effect until signed by the
Chief Administrative Officer and filed with the City Clerk.
(Ord. 43-2007)
§ 2-15-3 NOTICE AND HEARING.
   (A)   Notice of the intention to consider the adoption of a rule or
regulation shall be given by posting in the lobby of City Hall, posting notice
electronically on the City Clerk's web site dedicated to the schedule rule
making hearings and meetings of public boards, commissions and committees and
by giving written notice to the Mayor and the Chief Administrative Officer. All
such notices shall be given at least 14 days prior to the hearing at which the
proposed rule or regulation will be considered. All such notices shall state
the time and location of the hearing and contain a brief description of the
proposed rule or regulation and a location where the full text of the proposed
rule or regulation may be obtained.
   (B)   The hearing at which the proposed rule or regulation is considered,
shall be open to the public and any person may give testimony in favor of or in
opposition to the proposed rule or regulation, whether such testimony is given
orally or in writing. In considering the proposed rule or regulation, the
hearing officer shall give due consideration to all such testimony.
(Ord. 43-2007)
§ 2-15-4 FILING AND PUBLIC ACCESS.
   (A)   All rules and regulations adopted by a city agency shall be promptly
filed with the City Clerk and shall bear the signature of the Chief
Administrative Officer. In addition to filing the signed rule or regulation,
the city agency shall file the adopted rule or regulation electronically on the
City Clerk's web site.
   (B)   The city agency that implements and administers such rule or
regulation shall provide the rule or regulation on its web site.
   (C)   Rules and regulations adopted by a city agency prior to the effective
date of this article shall not be subject to the procedures for adopting rules
and regulations required in this article but such rules and regulations shall
be posted on the City Clerk's web site as required in this section for those
rules and regulations promulgated pursuant to this article.
(Ord. 43-2007)
§ 2-15-5 MODIFICATION OR REPEAL.
   Rules and regulations of city agencies shall be modified or repealed only by
following the procedures of this article. This requirement shall apply to both
rules and regulations passed before and after the effective date of this
article.
(Ord. 43-2007)
ARTICLE 16: INTRAGOVERNMENTAL CONFERENCE COMMITTEE
Section
   
2-16-1   Purpose
   
2-16-2   Short title
   
2-16-3   Definitions
   
2-16-4   Committee members
   
2-16-5   Committee process
§ 2-16-1 PURPOSE.
   (A)   Issues have arisen in the past and will arise in the future over the
respective duties and obligations of the City Council, the legislative branch
of city government, and the Mayor, the executive branch of city government.
   (B)   Litigation, while available to resolve these issues, does not serve
the best interests of the city in terms of ensuring an expeditious resolution
that minimizes adversity.
   (C)   The voters of the City of Albuquerque approved a City Charter
amendment directing that disputes over the respective duties and obligations of
the legislative and executive branches of city government be resolved by a
three person conference committee utilizing procedures to be adopted by
ordinance.
   (D)   This article is adopted in compliance with the City Charter to
establish the procedures for the Intragovernmental Conference Committee.
(Ord. 15-2010)
§ 2-16-2 SHORT TITLE.
   This article shall be known as the "Intragovernmental Conference Committee"
article.
(Ord. 15-2010)
§ 2-16-3 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this article, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   FORMAL DISPUTE: An issue raised by either the executive or legislative
branch of city government with respect to the existence of a duty, obligation
or authority of the executive or legislative branch as to which there is not
agreement between those branches of government.
   INTRAGOVERNMENTAL CONFERENCE COMMITTEE or COMMITTEE. That Committee provided
for in Article XIX of the City Charter and as further provided for in this
article to resolve formal disputes between the executive and legislative
branches of the city with respect to their respective duties and obligations
under the City Charter.
   STATEMENT OF THE ISSUE or STATEMENT. The written document used to initiate
action by the Intragovernmental Conference Committee. A Statement of the Issue
may only be filed by the Mayor or by the City Council. A decision by the City
Council to file a Statement of the Issue must be approved by a majority vote of
the City Council.
(Ord. 15-2010)
§ 2-16-4 COMMITTEE MEMBERS.
   (A)   The Intragovernmental Conference Committee shall be a standing
committee.
   (B)   The City Council shall by majority vote of the entire Council appoint
one member to the Committee. The term of the appointee, unless otherwise
provided for at the time of the appointment, shall be four years but the
appointee shall continue to serve until a replacement is named. Except at such
times as a dispute may be pending before the Committee, the City Council may
replace its appointee at any time by majority vote.
   (C)   The Mayor shall appoint one member to the Committee. The term of the
appointee, unless a shorter term is provided for at the time of the
appointment, shall expire at the end of the Mayor's term of office but the
appointee shall continue to serve until a replacement is named. Except at such
times as a dispute may be pending before the Committee, the Mayor may replace
his or her appointee at any time.
   (D)   The appointment of a committee member by one appointing authority
shall not be approved or disapproved by the other appointing authority.
   (E)   The third member of the Committee shall be selected by the other two
and shall serve as the chairperson of the Committee. The selection shall not be
subject to approval or disapproval by the Mayor or City Council. The term of
the third member shall expire with the term of the Mayor. If there is a formal
dispute pending as of the end of the term of the Mayor the third member shall
continue to serve with respect to that pending matter until that formal dispute
is resolved.
   (F)   There are no term limits for any appointee.
   (G)   There are no specific qualifications for Committee members. Members
will deal with complex issues related to municipal governance and
interpretation of legal documents. It is envisioned that the Committee will be
most effective if its members are not advocates for the Mayor or the City
Council but are independent public servants willing to try and find consensus
on complex issues.
(Ord. 15-2010)
§ 2-16-5 COMMITTEE PROCESS.
   (A)   The Committee process is initiated with the filing of a Statement of
the Issue with the City Clerk. Statements filed by the Mayor shall
simultaneously be provided to the Clerk of the Council. Statements filed by the
Council shall simultaneously be provided to the Mayor's office. The Statement
shall clearly set forth the issue that the Committee is being asked to resolve.
The Statement need not be in any particular form but should apprise the members
of the Committee of those facts that have given rise to the decision to file
the Statement and any legal or factual information that will assist the
Committee in understanding the issues and the position of the party filing the
Statement.
   (B)   For a Statement of the Issue filed by the City Council the Mayor shall
have ten business days to file a response. For a Statement of the Issue filed
by the Mayor the City Council shall have ten business days to file a response.
A response is not required. The Director of Council Services shall file the
response on behalf of the City Council and the City Council may approve,
disapprove or amend the response no later than the next Council meeting. Any
Councilor may file a separate response setting forth his or her position.
   (C)   The Chairperson of the Committee shall be responsible for scheduling
whatever meetings of the Committee are necessary to consider resolution of any
matter raised by the Statement of the Issue. The Chairperson shall have the
authority to make decisions with respect to procedural matters when the
Committee is not meeting. The Chairperson shall be responsible for controlling
the procedure utilized in Committee meetings, including argument and witnesses.
Decisions of the Chairperson on a procedural issue may only be reversed by a
vote of the other two Committee members.
   (D)   The City Clerk shall serve as staff to the Committee.
   (E)   The Committee is subject to the New Mexico Open Meetings Act, §§ 10-5-
1 through 10-5-4 NMSA 1978. The notice required for any meeting of the
Committee shall be the same as that which applies to notice for meetings of the
City Council. All activities of the Committee, other than deliberations, shall
be conducted in an open meeting and recorded. While it is preferred that
deliberations occur in an open meeting, a majority vote of the Committee may
close the meeting for purposes of deliberating. Any decision of the Committee
shall be announced in an open meeting.
   (F)   In resolving disputes the Committee shall conduct itself as an
adjudicatory body, shall not engage in ex-parte communications and shall use
such procedures as assure the City Council and the Mayor a fair hearing.
   (G)   The City Council shall designate a single individual who shall be
responsible for controlling the City Council's presentation before the
Committee. That single individual may be a Councilor, a city employee who is
not employed within the office of the City Attorney, or a third party. The fact
that a single individual is responsible for controlling the presentation does
not mean that the individual may not call on any Councilor or other person to
make a presentation. The Mayor shall designate a single individual who shall be
responsible for controlling the Mayor's presentation before the Committee. That
single individual may be the Mayor, a city employee who is not employed within
the office of the City Attorney, or a third party. The fact that a single
individual is responsible for controlling the presentation does not mean that
the individual may not call on the Mayor or other person to make a
presentation.
   (H)   The Committee may adopt such rules as it deems appropriate to ensure a
fair resolution of disputes brought before it. The adoption of such rules shall
not be subject to the requirements of Chapter 2, Article 15 of the Code of
Ordinances.
   (I)   Decisions of the Committee shall include Findings of Fact and
Conclusions of Law. Decisions of the Committee shall be the final
administrative process for resolving disputes within the city. Decisions shall
be available on line on the city's website.
(Ord. 15-2010)
ARTICLE 17: INSPECTOR GENERAL
Section
   
2-17-1   Short title
   
2-17-2   Findings; purpose; goals
   
2-17-3   Definitions
   
2-17-4   Creation of the Office of the Inspector General; resources; staff
   
2-17-5   Selection and retention of Inspector General
   
2-17-6   Director's duties; responsibilities; authority; administrative
subpoena power
   
2-17-7   Professional standards
   
2-17-8   Public records; confidentiality
   
2-17-9   Reports to the committee
   
2-17-10   Reporting
   
2-17-11   Contract investigators, consultants, and experts
   
2-17-12   Penalty; cooperation; retaliation prohibited
§ 2-17-1 SHORT TITLE.
   Sections 2-17-1 et seq. may be cited as the "Inspector General Ordinance".
(Ord. 30-2010; Am. Ord._2023-018)
§ 2-17-2 FINDINGS; PURPOSE; GOALS.
   (A)   The Council finds that good governance, transparency, and
accountability are critical in the public sector for the effective and credible
functioning of a healthy democracy, and in fulfilling the government's
responsibility to citizens and taxpayers. To accomplish this end, the city
finds the need for the services of an independent Inspector General. Effective
independent investigations, inspections, evaluations, and reviews along with
transparent and reliable reporting in government serves to promote
accountability, enhance the effectiveness of government services to its
citizens, and increase the public's confidence in their government.
   (B)   The Council finds that in order for the Inspector General to be
effective, the Inspector General must be authorized to maintain the
confidentiality of investigations resulting from an assignment by the Board of
Ethics and Campaign Practices until they are published.
   (C)   The organization and administration of the Office shall be
sufficiently independent to assure that no interference or influence external
to the Office adversely affects the independence and objectivity of the
Inspector General.
   (D)   The Inspector General's goals are to:
      (1)   Conduct investigations, inspections, evaluations, and reviews in an
efficient, impartial, equitable, and objective manner;
      (2)   Prevent and detect fraud, waste and abuse in city activities
including all city contracts and partnerships;
      (3)   Carry out the activities of the Office of Inspector General through
independence in both fact and appearance, investigation, and interdiction; and
      (4)   Propose recommendations to increase the city's legal, fiscal and
ethical accountability to ensure that taxpayers' dollars are spent in a manner
consistent with the highest standards of local governments.
(Ord. 30-2010; Am. Ord._2023-018)
§ 2-17-3 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this article, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ABUSE. The use of resources or exercise of authority that is contrary to
rule or policy, or knowingly inconsistent with any established mission or
objectives for the resource, or of the position held by the person exercising
the authority. Abuse does not necessarily involve fraud or illegal acts.
   COMMITTEE. The Accountability in Government Oversight Committee.
   CONTRACTORS. All city contractors, including community- based organizations.
   EMPLOYEE. All city employees, including appointed employees.
   FRAUD. A knowing misrepresentation of the truth, or concealment of a
material fact to induce another to act to his or her detriment.
   FRAUDULENT FINANCIAL REPORTING. Intentional misstatements or omissions of
amounts or disclosures in the financial statements to deceive financial
statement users which may include intentional alteration of accounting records,
misrepresentation of transactions, or intentional misapplication of accounting
principles.
   INVESTIGATED PARTY. A city- related department, program, activity, agency,
vendor, employee, contractor or other city-related entity affected by an
investigation.
   INVESTIGATION. A formal inquiry or systematic study conducted by the Office
of the Inspector General pursuant to this article. A formal systematic study
may include inspections, evaluations, and reviews which are analyses of
operations and programs for the purposes of providing information for decision-
making, and making recommendations to improve programs, policies, or
procedures.
   MISAPPROPRIATION OF ASSETS. Theft of an agency’s assets, including theft of
property, embezzlement, or fraudulent payments.
   OFFICE. The Office of the Inspector General.
   OFFICIAL. The Mayor, City Councilors, and appointed members of city boards,
commissions, or committees.
   PUBLISHED. A report that, unless otherwise prohibited, has been presented to
the Committee, distributed in final form to the Mayor and Chief Administrative
Officer, and to the City Council, and is available to the public.
   WASTE. The thoughtless or careless expenditure, mismanagement, or abuse of
resources to the detriment of the city.
(Ord. 30-2010; Am. Ord._2023-018)
§ 2-17-4 CREATION OF THE OFFICE OF THE INSPECTOR GENERAL; RESOURCES; STAFF.
   (A)   The Office of the Inspector General is created as an independent and
non-partisan office of city government. The Office is not part of the city's
executive branch or the City Council. The Inspector General shall report to the
Committee.
   (B)   The Inspector General shall manage a staff of professional
investigators, and others operating at the direction of the Inspector General
that may include evaluators, reviewers, inspectors, contract specialists.
   (C)   The Inspector General shall coordinate referrals deriving from
external sources and work planned based on internal assessments, wherever
appropriate and necessary with the City Auditor and other potentially relevant
regulatory, law enforcement, or prosecutorial authorities.
   (D)   The Office of the Inspector General shall be funded from the General
Fund. Adequate funding shall be provided to uphold the ability of the Office of
the Inspector General to carry out its duties and support its staff and
operating expenses.
   (E)   The Office of the City Attorney shall advise and represent the Office
of the Inspector General, except that the Office of the Inspector General may
select independent legal counsel from the conflict counsel list maintained by
the Office of the City Attorney, or other attorney selected with the assistance
of and through the City Attorney's office.
   (F)   The Inspector General shall establish the organizational structure
appropriate for carrying out the responsibilities and functions of the Office
of the Inspector General.
   (G)   The Inspector General shall have, subject to appropriation by the City
Council, and within the guidelines and criteria set by city personnel rules and
regulations, the power to recruit, hire, appoint, employ, set compensation for,
promote, discipline, and remove such assistants, employees, and personnel and
establish personnel procedures as deemed necessary for the efficient and
effective administration of the activities of the Office of the Inspector
General.
   (H)   The Office of the Inspector General shall provide staff support to the
Committee.
   (I)   Neither the Inspector General nor any employee of the Office of the
Inspector General shall engage in any partisan political activities or the
political affairs of the city during work hours.
   (J)   The Inspector General shall strive to adhere to the "Association of
Inspectors General Principles and Standards for Offices of Inspector General"
and participate in the Peer Review Process by seriously pursuing any
recommendations resulting from such a process.
(Ord. 30-2010; Am. Ord._2023-018)
§ 2-17-5 SELECTION AND RETENTION OF INSPECTOR GENERAL.
   (A)   (1)   The Committee, through its staff, shall accept applications from
candidates, interview candidates and shall submit to the City Council the names
of the three candidates that it finds to be the best qualified to be Inspector
General indicating its ranking, and the City Council shall appoint the
Inspector General from the three. The Committee's recommendation to Council
shall be based on the candidates' integrity, capability for strong management
and demonstrated ability in accounting, auditing, financial analysis, law,
management analysis, public administration, investigation, criminal justice
administration or other closely related fields.
      (2)   In lieu of recommending three candidates to the Council, the
Committee may recommend to the Council the reconfirmation of the incumbent
Inspector General whom the Council may choose to reconfirm. Should the Council
decline to reconfirm the incumbent Inspector General, the Council President
will notify the Committee that it needs to provide the Council with three
alternate candidates pursuant to the provisions of subsection (A)(1).
   (B)   If a current or prior city employee or official is appointed to the
position of Inspector General, such person shall not investigate or assist in
the investigation of the department or agency where such person previously
served or was employed for a period of four years from the last day of such
prior employment or service. Any investigations of such department or agency
shall be referred by the Inspector General to an independent third-party
investigator who shall serve as an independent proxy for the Inspector General,
vested with the full authority of the Inspector General only for the purposes
of the specific investigation(s) so assigned.
   (C)   As a condition of retention, the Inspector General must obtain
certification as a Certified Inspector General through the Association of
Inspectors General or appropriate successor entity within two years of
appointment. Other professional certifications, such as certified public
accountant, certified internal auditor and certified fraud examiner are
recommended.
   (D)   Prior to the final selection of the Inspector General, the candidate
shall be fingerprinted and shall provide two fingerprint cards or the
equivalent electronic fingerprints to the Committee to obtain the candidate's
Federal Bureau of Investigation record. Records and related information shall
be privileged and shall not be disclosed to anyone other than Committee
members. The city shall pay for the cost of obtaining the Federal Bureau of
Investigation records.
   (E)   The City Council shall consider whether the incumbent Inspector
General should be reconfirmed pursuant to the provisions of subsection (A)(2)
of this section no more than once every four years following the initial
appointment.
   (F)   The Committee shall review the salary of the Inspector General
annually and shall notify the Department of Finance and Administrative Services
and the Human Resources Department of any salary adjustment, which will be
subject to budget sufficiency and city personnel rules and regulations.
   (G)   The Inspector General may be removed from office for cause upon an
affirmative vote of two-thirds (2/3) of the members of the Committee; upon an
affirmative vote of two-thirds (2/3) of the members of the City Council; or
upon the City Council's decision to not reconfirm the Inspector General
pursuant to subsection (E) of this section. For purposes of this section, cause
may include, but is not limited to, conduct that is inconsistent with
obligations under this ordinance, or otherwise inconsistent with
responsibilities to the committee.
(Ord. 30-2010; Am. Ord._2013-003; Am. Ord._2015-027; Am. Ord._2023-018)
§ 2-17-6 DIRECTOR'S DUTIES; RESPONSIBILITIES; AUTHORITY; ADMINISTRATIVE
SUBPOENA POWER.
   (A)   If the Inspector General detects apparent or potential violations of
law or apparent instances of misfeasance or nonfeasance by an official or
investigated party, the Inspector General shall report the irregularities in
writing to the Committee. If the irregularity is criminal in nature, the
Inspector General shall immediately notify the appropriate prosecuting
authority. If the irregularity is found in response to a complaint filed under
the provisions of the Whistleblower Protection Act, the Inspector General shall
conduct an investigation in accordance with NMSA 1978, §§ 10-16C-1 et seq., the
Whistleblower Protection Act. If the irregularity warrants an audit, then the
Inspector General shall refer the matter to the Office of Internal Audit. The
Inspector General shall not accept complaints related to discrimination or
labor law matters, or other matters that are the subject of pending litigation.
   (B)   The Inspector General shall receive and investigate complaints
referred by the Board of Ethics and Campaign Practices. In addition, the
Inspector General shall receive and evaluate complaints referred by any
official, employee, contractor or the public and initiate an investigation when
deemed appropriate. The Inspector General may also initiate an investigation
when there is predication.
   (C)   The Inspector General shall promulgate regulations to establish
procedures for the Office of the Inspector General.
   (D)   The Inspector General shall have the power to subpoena witnesses,
administer oaths and require the production of records subject to the New
Mexico Rules of Civil Procedure. In the case of a refusal to obey a subpoena
issued to any person, the Director may make application to any District Court
in the state that shall have the jurisdiction to order the witness to appear
before the Inspector General and to produce evidence if so ordered, or to give
testimony touching on the matter in question.
   (E)   The Inspector General shall maintain a complete file of each
investigation made under legislative or special Committee authority for at
least six years. The file should include work papers and other supportive
material directly pertaining to the investigation. Records may be retained in
electronic format at the Inspector General's election.
   (F)   The Inspector General shall investigate any alleged violation of the
Code of Ethics or the Elections Code that the Board of Ethics and Campaign
Practices directs the Inspector General to investigate. When the Inspector
General is assigned an investigation by the Board of Ethics and Campaign
Practices, the usual requirements concerning approval of Inspector General
reports by the Accountability in Government Oversight Committee and the
publication of the reports is not followed so as to maintain the rights and
duties of the Board of Ethics and Campaign Practices to direct and limit the
investigation.
   (G)   The Inspector General shall not investigate complaints that are under
the jurisdiction of the Civilian Police Oversight Agency or the Internal
Affairs Division of the Albuquerque Police Department, nor access any Internal
Affairs' files.
   (H)   In cases where the Inspector General deems it appropriate because of
investigation activities, the Inspector General may refer opportunities for
increased efficiency to the Department of Finance and Administrative Services
to work with respective departments on management and process improvement.
   (I)   Reports of fraud, waste, and abuse made by employees, public
officials, contractors, or members of the public may be made telephonically or
in writing through the hotline or website established by the Inspector General
for the confidential reporting of financial fraud, waste, and abuse in
government. Reports received or created by the Inspector General are
investigatory information and investigatory documentation in connection with
the Inspector General's duty to inspect or investigate the financial affairs
and transactions of the city, its departments, contractors, or vendors in whole
or in part.
   (J)   The identity of a person making a report and associated allegations
made directly to the Inspector General orally or in writing, or telephonically
or in writing through the Inspector General's hotline or website, or through
any other means, alleging financial fraud, waste, or abuse in government is
confidential information and may not be disclosed except as required by §
2-17-6(A) ROA 1994 or other law.
   (K)   The Inspector General shall provide information that is either
confidential and/or related to an Office of Inspector General case that is not
otherwise public where required by law. The Office of Inspector General shall
work as collaboratively as possible in fulfilling the duties and functions
prescribed by this ordinance. Notwithstanding any of the foregoing, the
Inspector General shall comply with all requirements for information from
external audits or reviews regarding the management of the office from a
fiscal, management, or non-case- related request.
(Ord. 30-2010; Am. Ord._2023-018)
§ 2-17-7 PROFESSIONAL STANDARDS.
   (A)   The Inspector General's investigations and inspections shall conform
to the Association of Inspectors General professional standards.
   (B)   The Office of the Inspector General's published investigations shall
be subject to quality assurance peer reviews by an appropriate professional
non-partisan objective group every three to five years. A copy of the written
report resulting from this review shall be furnished to the Committee and
posted on the website of the Inspector General.
(Ord. 30-2010; Am. Ord._2023-018)
§ 2-17-8 PUBLIC RECORDS; CONFIDENTIALITY.
   (A)   The Inspector General shall maintain the confidentiality of any public
records that are made confidential by law and shall be subject to the same
penalties as the custodian of those public records for violating
confidentiality statutes.
   (B)   Confidentiality of the Investigation Files and Investigation Reports.
Pursuant to this ordinance, Investigation Files and Investigation Reports are
confidential and shall not be divulged to any person or agency, except to the
United States Attorney, the New Mexico Attorney General, or the Second Judicial
District Attorney's Office, or any other bona fide law enforcement or
investigatory agency, or as otherwise required by law, until the report is
published, unless it is necessary for the Inspector General to make such
records public in the performance of their duties.
   (C)   Sharing of Information with City Departments. The Inspector General
may share selected information not otherwise made confidential by law or this
ordinance with other city departments if the information is necessary to
prevent harm or loss to the city or its employees; otherwise, reports remain
confidential until published, at which time they become public record.
   (D)   The names and identities or other information that could reasonably
disclose the identity of persons making complaints and providing information
shall not be disclosed without the written consent of the person unless
otherwise required by law or judicial processes.
   (E)   Published reports shall be public records except that the Inspector
General shall delay the publication of reports when criminal conduct is found
and the Inspector General or appropriate law enforcement authority is pursuing
an investigation and release of the report might jeopardize further
investigation. An investigation release that has been delayed shall be
published promptly at the end of the condition giving rise to the delay.
(Ord. 30-2010; Am. Ord._2023-018)
§ 2-17-9 REPORTS TO THE COMMITTEE.
   (A)   Each investigation, other than those resulting from assignment by the
Board of Ethics and Campaign Practices, shall result in a written final report
to the Committee. The Inspector General shall submit copies of each report to
the Committee and shall retain a copy as a permanent record.
   (B)   For the purpose of review during the report presentation, the
Committee, at its sole discretion, may request and allow the attendance of city
personnel or investigated parties at an Accountability in Government Oversight
meeting.
   (C)   The Inspector General's investigation and inspection reports shall
conform to the Association of Inspectors General professional standards.
   (D)   The Inspector General may informally brief the Committee as to the
commitment of resources to any investigation assigned by the Board of Ethics
and Campaign Practices and the progress being made towards the completion of
the investigation.
(Ord. 30-2010; Am. Ord._2023-018)
§ 2-17-10 REPORTING.
   (A)   The Inspector General shall annually report to the Council and the
Mayor regarding their activities and investigations.
   (B)   Within 60 days of the end of each fiscal year, the Inspector General
shall issue a published report to the Committee that separately lists
investigations and other assistance efforts completed during the fiscal year.
   (C)   The Inspector General shall notify members of the media and the public
of the issuance of the published report. The Office of the Inspector General
shall publish the reports publicly on the website of the Office of the
Inspector General and provide copies of the published report upon request.
(Ord. 30-2010; Am. Ord._2023-018)
§ 2-17-11 CONTRACT INVESTIGATORS, CONSULTANTS, AND EXPERTS.
   Upon notification to the Committee, the Inspector General may obtain the
services of certified public accountants, qualified management consultants,
certified fraud examiners, forensic auditors or other professionals.
Contractors performing services for the Office of Inspector General shall not
have any financial interest in the affairs of the investigated party, officials
or employees. The Inspector General shall coordinate and monitor the work
performed by persons under contract to the Inspector General.
(Ord. 30-2010; Am. Ord._2023-018)
§ 2-17-12 PENALTY; COOPERATION; RETALIATION PROHIBITED.
   (A)   All city officials, employees and contractors shall promptly notify
the Inspector General of every instance of theft or other disappearance of
cash, check, or property, of misfeasance or nonfeasance, defalcation, improper
governmental actions and non-compliance with federal and state law, city
ordinances and city rules and regulations of which they are aware.
   (B)   All city officials, employees, contractors, and offerors in a city
procurement process shall provide the Inspector General full and unrestricted
access to all city offices, employees, records, information, data, reports,
plans, projections, matters, contracts, memoranda, correspondence, electronic
data, property, equipment and facilities and any other materials within their
custody. At the Inspector General's request, an official, employee or
contractor shall prepare reports and provide interviews. If an official,
employee, vendor or contractor fails to produce the requested information, the
Inspector General shall notify the Committee and make written request to the
Chief Administrative Officer for his assistance in causing a search to be made
and germane exhibits to be taken from any book, paper or record excepting
personal property. The Chief Administrative Officer shall require the
officials, employees, vendors or contractors to produce the requested
information.
   (C)   Every city contract, bid, proposal, application or solicitation for a
city contract and every application for certification of eligibility for a city
contract or program shall contain a statement that the contracting parties will
be subject to the provisions of the Inspector General Ordinance.
   (D)   No person shall retaliate against, punish or penalize any other person
for complaining to, cooperating with or assisting the Inspector General in the
performance of their office.
   (E)   Each and every violation of this article is a criminal violation
subject to the provisions of §
1-1-99 ROA 1994.
   (F)   Any official or employee who violates the Inspector General Ordinance
may be subject to discipline as may be specified in the city ordinance, rules
and regulations or any applicable collective bargaining agreement.
(Ord. 30-2010; Am. Ord._2023-018)
ARTICLE 18: FACILITIES MANAGEMENT AND MAINTENANCE
Section
   
2-18-1   Findings
   
2-18-2   Creation of Facilities Management and Maintenance Department; Director
   
2-18-3   Duties and responsibilities
   
2-18-4   Consolidation of facilities management and maintenance programs within
the city
   
2-18-5   Staffing
   
2-18-6   Funding
   
2-18-7   Vehicles and equipment
   
2-18-8   Capital projects
   
2-18-9   Energy efficiency and renewable energy projects
   
2-18-10   Structure
§ 2-18-1 FINDINGS.
   The Council finds:
   (A)   It is the responsibility of city government to provide, to the
greatest extent feasible, its employees and the public with buildings and
facilities that are safe, accessible, and able to withstand daily use and
weather events without endangering occupants or significantly disrupting the
performance of essential services.
   (B)   City government buildings are vulnerable to weather events, age based
decline, and equipment and building system obsolescence.
   (C)   The City of Albuquerque may experience moderate to severe city-owned
facility system failures in the foreseeable future, and increased efforts to
reduce these failures should be encouraged and supported.
   (D)   Existing Facilities Management programs will benefit from the
coordination and collaboration created by a Facilities Management and
Maintenance Department.
   (E)   A new Facilities Management and Maintenance Department will elevate
the critical importance of unified and standardized management, of the city
property portfolio.
   (F)   The creation of this new department will ensure that all processes
related to facilities management follow current industry standards for property
management and energy efficiency.
(Ord._2017-019; Am. Ord._2018-007)
§ 2-18-2 CREATION OF FACILITIES MANAGEMENT AND MAINTENANCE DEPARTMENT;
DIRECTOR.
   There is hereby created as a department of city government a Facilities
Management and Maintenance Department. The executive and administrative head of
the Facilities Management and Maintenance Department shall be the Director of
Facilities Management and Maintenance who shall be appointed by the Mayor. The
Director shall hold office at the pleasure of the Mayor and shall be qualified
by experience and training in property management, and facilities operation and
management. The Department shall be operational by July 1, 2018.
(Ord._2017-019; Am. Ord._2018-007)
§ 2-18-3 DUTIES AND RESPONSIBILITIES.
   In addition to those assigned by the Mayor, the Department of Facilities
Management and Maintenance shall have the following responsibilities and
duties:
   (A)   Implement and maintain an integrated, citywide facilities maintenance
program to manage data on all city-owned facilities outside of the public right
of way in a uniform and consistent manner while maximizing the use and value of
each property.
   (B)   Complete and continually update a space utilization study and the
development of new space standards for city offices that represent best asset
management practices and achieve optimal efficiencies.
   (C)   Develop a citywide space consolidation plan, based on the space
utilization study, which optimizes the use of existing city-owned facilities
and minimizes need for leased space.
   (D)   Proactively address space consolidation in order to achieve the best
outcomes for the city.
   (E)   Recommend disposal of all city-owned properties that are not being
utilized to their maximum potential.
   (F)   Prioritize capital investments in city buildings in a proactive manner
based on strategic requirements, informed by data and reports generated from
the asset management program, as opposed to allocating capital reactively to
deferred maintenance needs.
   (G)   Structure city-wide programs, processes, and agreements to reduce city
energy consumption through energy conservation and renewable energy projects in
both owned and leased space.
   (H)   Identify and recommend facility maintenance and capital improvement
projects through the Decade Plan to achieve a state of good repair across the
city's facility portfolio.
   (I)   Ensure that all building related construction, remodeling and
rehabilitation projects are fully permitted and conform to applicable city,
state, and federal codes, ordinances and regulations. All such projects shall
be reviewed and approved by the Facilities Management and Maintenance, Planning
and Municipal Development departments.
(Ord._2017-019; Am. Ord._2018-007)
§ 2-18-4 CONSOLIDATION OF FACILITIES MANAGEMENT AND MAINTENANCE PROGRAMS WITHIN
THE CITY.
   The Facilities Management and Maintenance Department shall include and
consolidate the Real Property and the Facilities & Energy Management Divisions
and all similar programs and activities within the Albuquerque Fire Department,
Albuquerque Police Department, Cultural Services Department, Family and
Community Services Department, Department of Municipal Development, Parks and
Recreation Department, Planning Department (excluding those functions related
to metropolitan redevelopment) and Transit Department and any other city
programs and activities the Mayor deems appropriate.
(Ord._2017-019; Am. Ord._2018-007)
§ 2-18-5 STAFFING.
   At the inception of the Facilities Management and Maintenance Department,
every effort shall be made to staff the Department with existing personnel and
by filling vacant positions related to facilities management in the Cultural
Services, Family and Community Services, Fire, Municipal Development, Parks and
Recreation, Planning, Police and Transit departments. Thereafter, staff shall
be hired and allocated to the Department at the direction of the Mayor subject
to appropriation.
(Ord._2017-019; Am. Ord._2018-007)
§ 2-18-6 FUNDING.
   Funding for the Facilities Management and Maintenance Department shall come
from existing funding for those purposes currently appropriated within the
Cultural Services, Family and Community Services, Fire, Municipal Development,
Parks and Recreation, Planning, Police and Transit departments and from any
additional funds allocated by the Council for these purposes.
(Ord._2017-019; Am. Ord._2018-007)
§ 2-18-7 VEHICLES AND EQUIPMENT.
   At the inception of the Department, fleet vehicles and equipment for the
Facilities Management and Maintenance Department shall come from existing
vehicles and equipment allocated for those purposes in the Cultural Services,
Family and Community Services, Fire, Municipal Development, Parks and
Recreation, Planning, Police and Transit departments.
(Ord._2017-019; Am. Ord._2018-007)
§ 2-18-8 CAPITAL PROJECTS.
   The Facilities Management and Maintenance Department shall review and
approve capital projects related to city owned buildings to ensure that such
projects conform to city standards.
(Ord._2017-019; Am. Ord._2018-007)
§ 2-18-9 ENERGY EFFICIENCY AND RENEWABLE ENERGY PROJECTS.
   The Facilities Management and Maintenance Department shall prioritize all
energy efficiency and renewable energy projects and shall coordinate and assist
all city departments in the creation and management of these projects.
(Ord._2017-019; Am. Ord._2018-007)
§ 2-18-10 STRUCTURE.
   The Facilities Management and Maintenance Department's property and
facilities management model shall be comprised of four geographically located
service areas each of which will have an experienced real property manager
overseeing the service area. These four service areas include:
   (A)   Those facilities which make up the Downtown Facilities Area;
   (B)   Those facilities which make up the Bio Park/ Zoo and Aquarium
Facilities Area;
   (C)   Those facilities which make up the West Outlying Facilities Area;
   (D)   Those facilities which make up the East Outlying Facilities Area.
(Ord._2017-019; Am. Ord._2018-007)
ARTICLE 19: COMMUNITY ENERGY EFFICIENCY DEVELOPMENT (CEED) BLOCK GRANT
Section
   
2-19-1   Short title
   
2-19-2   Purpose
   
2-19-3   Approval of grant
   
2-19-4   Authority
   
2-19-5   Definitions
   
2-19-6   Discrimination prohibited
   
2-19-7   General requirements/Terms and conditions
   
2-19-8   Administration
   
2-19-9   Termination
§ 2-19-1 SHORT TITLE.
   This Ordinance may be referred to as the CEED Block Grant Enabling
Ordinance.
(Ord._2025-012)
§ 2-19-2 PURPOSE.
   This Ordinance is adopted to implement the City of Albuquerque’s CEED
Program project. In accordance with N.M. Const., art. IX, § 14, H.; the
Community Energy Efficiency Development Block Grant Act (“Act”), § 62-17A-1, et
seq. NMSA 1978; NM Energy, Minerals and Natural Resources Department (“EMNRD”)
rule, 19.1.10 NMAC (“rule”), the purpose of the CEED Block Grant Ordinance is
to:
      (1)   Provide for the approval of the City of Albuquerque’s CEED Block
Grant;
      (2)   Provide for the acceptance of the CEED Block Grant from EMNRD;
      (3)   Provide for implementation of the CEED Program; and
      (4)   Provide for and adopt the Terms and Conditions of the Grant
approved by EMNRD pursuant to the act.
   Community energy efficiency projects are projects that provide improvements
to residential buildings in an underserved community that will, in the
aggregate, reduce energy consumption, energy-related operating costs, carbon
intensity of energy consumption, or a combination thereof. These projects will
target the adoption of energy-efficient consumer behavior, equipment, or
devices that result in a decrease in energy consumption without reducing the
amount or quality of energy services. This includes health and safety measures,
including those that use efficient equipment or devices to improve indoor air
or drinking water quality.
(Ord._2025-012)
§ 2-19-3 APPROVAL OF GRANT.
   That the CEED Block Grant for a CEED Program project is hereby approved, and
acceptance of its Terms and Conditions is approved.
(Ord._2025-012)
§ 2-19-4 AUTHORITY.
   The City of Albuquerque enacts this Ordinance pursuant to the authority set
forth in N.M. Const., art. IX and X; § 4-37-1 et seq./§ 3-17-1 et seq. NMSA
1978; § 3-18-1 et seq. NMSA 1978; § 3-45-1 et seq. NMSA 1978; § 60-13-1 et seq.
NMSA 1978; § 62-17A-1, et seq. NMSA 1978; and 19.1.10 NMAC.
   The Community Energy Efficiency Development (CEED) Block Grant Ordinance
constitutes an exercise of the City of Albuquerque’s independent and separate
but related law enforcement, zoning, planning, environmental, fiscal and public
nuisance powers for the health, safety and general welfare of the City of
Albuquerque and its residents.
(Ord._2025-012)
§ 2-19-5 DEFINITIONS.
   For purposes of this section, the following words and terms shall have the
following meanings:
   ACT. The Community Energy Efficiency Development Block Grant Act, NMSA 1978,
Ch. 62-17A-1, et seq.
   AFFORDABLE HOUSING. Residential housing primarily for low-income persons,
including housing currently occupied by low-income persons or housing that is
affordable to low-income persons based on assessed value, rent or estimated
mortgage.
   COMMUNITY ENERGY EFFICIENCY PROJECT. A project that provides improvements to
residential buildings in an underserved community that will in the aggregate
reduce energy consumption, energy-related operating costs or the carbon
intensity of energy consumption.
   COMMUNITY PARTNER. Means an organization that provides services or outreach
to an underserved community to implement a community energy efficiency project.
   DEPARTMENT. The New Mexico Energy, Minerals and Natural Resources
Department.
   DIVISION or ECAM. The Energy Conservation and Management Division.
   ENERGY BURDEN. Means the percentage of gross household income spent on
energy costs; calculated by dividing the average housing energy cost by the
average annual household income.
   ENERGY EFFICIENCY. Means measures that target efficient energy consumer
behavior, equipment or devices and result in a decrease in energy consumption
without reducing the amount or quality of energy services, including health and
safety measures that use efficient equipment or devices to improve indoor air
or drinking water quality.
   LOW-INCOME PERSON. Means an individual, couple or family whose annual
household adjusted gross income, as defined in Section 62 of the federal
Internal Revenue Code of 1986, as that section may be amended or renumbered,
does not exceed 200 percent of the federal poverty level.
   RESIDENTIAL HOUSING. Means:
      (1)   a building, structure or portion thereof that is primarily occupied
or designed for or intended primarily for occupancy as a residence by one or
more households, including congregate housing, manufactured homes and other
facilities; or
      (2)   real property that is offered for sale or lease for the
construction or location on that real property of a building, structure or
portion thereof that is intended primarily for occupancy as a residence by one
or more households.
   UNDERSERVED COMMUNITY or DISADVANTAGED COMMUNITY. An area in the state,
including a county, municipality or neighborhood, or subset of an area, where:
      (1)   the median adjusted gross income, as defined in Section 62 of the
Internal Revenue Code of 1986, as that section may be amended or renumbered,
does not exceed two hundred percent of the federal poverty level; or
      (2)   there is a high energy burden or limited access to energy
efficiency services as determined by Department rule.
(Ord._2025-012)
§ 2-19-6 DISCRIMINATION PROHIBITED.
   The development; construction, occupancy and operation of a CEED Program or
a CEED Program project financed or assisted under the act and this chapter
shall be undertaken in a manner consistent with principles of nondiscrimination
and equal opportunity, and the City of Albuquerque shall require compliance by
all qualifying grantees with all applicable Federal and State laws and
regulations relating to affirmative action, nondiscrimination and equal
opportunity.
(Ord._2025-012)
§ 2-19-7 GENERAL REQUIREMENTS/TERMS AND CONDITIONS.
   The City of Albuquerque shall administer any CEED Program project in
accordance with the terms and conditions of the grant agreement as depicted in
Exhibit A to this Ordinance and hereby formally adopts the terms and conditions
of the grant agreement contemplated therein.
(Ord._2025-012)
§ 2-19-8 ADMINISTRATION.
   The City of Albuquerque shall administer any CEED Program project in
accordance with provisions of the act, the rule, this chapter, any applicable
state and federal laws and regulations as each of which may be amended or
supplemented from time-to-time. The City of Albuquerque, in establishing,
funding and administering the CEED Program and by making, executing, delivering
and performing any award, contract, grant or any other activity or transaction
contemplated by the act, shall not violate any provision of law, rule or
regulation or any decree, writ, order, injunction, judgment, determination or
award and will not contravene the provisions of or otherwise cause a default
under any of its agreements, indentures, or other instruments to which it may
be bound.
(Ord._2025-012)
§ 2-19-9 TERMINATION.
   The Council may repeal this chapter and terminate the City of Albuquerque’s
CEED Program and any or all contracts undertaken in its authority. Termination
shall be by ordinance at a public hearing and in accordance with the terms of
the contract. If an ordinance or a contract is repealed or terminated, all
contract provisions of the contract regarding termination shall be satisfied.
(Ord._2025-012)
CHAPTER 3: CITY EMPLOYEES
   Article
      
1:   
MERIT SYSTEM; PERSONNEL POLICY
      
2:   
LABOR-MANAGEMENT RELATIONS
      
3:   
CONFLICT OF INTEREST
      
4:   
PER DIEM AND MILEAGE
      
5:   
RESERVED
      
6:   
RETIREMENT PLAN
      
7:   WHISTLEBLOWER POLICY
ARTICLE 1: MERIT SYSTEM; PERSONNEL POLICY
Section
   
3-1-1   The merit system
   
3-1-2   Responsibilities of the chief administrative officer for personnel
functions
   
3-1-3   Responsibilities of the director of human resources
   
3-1-4   Personnel board
   
3-1-5   Powers and duties of the personnel board
   
3-1-6   The classified and unclassified service
   
3-1-7   Employment by the city
   
3-1-8   Probationary period
   
3-1-9   Performance evaluations
   
3-1-10   Compensation
   
3-1-11   Work hours
   
3-1-12   Legal holidays
   
3-1-13   Vacation leave
   
3-1-14   Sick leave
   
3-1-15   Injuries in performance of duty
   
3-1-16   Leave with pay
   
3-1-17   Leave without pay
   
3-1-18   Layoff and furlough
   
3-1-19   Resignations
   
3-1-20   Disposition of awards
   
3-1-21   Political activity
   
3-1-22   Employee mediation
   
3-1-23   Disciplinary actions
   
3-1-24   The grievance resolution procedure
   
3-1-25   Appeal from suspension, demotion and discharge
   
3-1-26   Personnel hearing officer
   
3-1-27   Employee organization agreements
   
3-1-28   Transfers from Albuquerque Bernalillo County Water Utility Authority
§ 3-1-1    THE MERIT SYSTEM.
   In accordance with Article X of the Charter of the city, there is hereby
established a merit system governing the hiring, promotion and discharge of
employees and providing for the general regulation of employees. Pursuant to
the Charter, the Mayor designates the Chief Administrative Officer of the city
to be responsible for the administration of the merit system. The Chief
Administrative Officer is authorized to establish Rules and Regulations to
implement this article. If this article conflicts with any federal law, federal
law will control.
('74 Code, § 2-9-1) (Ord. 52-1978; Am. Ord. 29-1998)
§ 3-1-2 RESPONSIBILITIES OF THE CHIEF ADMINISTRATIVE OFFICER FOR PERSONNEL
FUNCTIONS.
   (A)   The Chief Administrative Officer shall have the following
responsibilities:
      (1)   To exercise leadership in and encourage the development of
effective personnel administration within the departments, agencies, and
special programs in the city service;
      (2)   To recommend changes to this article for consideration by the City
Council;
      (3)   To approve Personnel Rules and Regulations prior to their final
adoption and publication by the Director of Human Resources as provided in this
article;
      (4)   To issue administrative instructions to provide policy and guidance
in furtherance of and limited by the responsibilities of the Chief
Administrative Officer specifically granted by this article;
      (5)   To approve a compensation plan as recommended by the Director of
Human Resources for classified city employees consistent with other provisions
of this article; and
      (6)   To designate a Deputy Chief Administrative Officer or a department
head to assume the duties of the Chief Administrative Officer in the event of
his or her inability to act or absence from the city.
   (B)   The power of appointment or promotion to a position in the classified
or unclassified service of the city shall rest with the Chief Administrative
Officer; provided that, in the absence of a written directive to the contrary
signed by the Chief Administrative Officer, such power may be exercised by the
administrative head of a city department, agency or special program for the
positions within such department, agency or special program.
   (C)   Pursuant to and within the authority granted by the charter and this
article, the Chief Administrative Officer shall have the following authority:
      (1)   To direct the work of city employees;
      (2)   To hire, promote, evaluate, transfer, and assign employees;
      (3)   To reprimand, suspend, demote or discharge unclassified employees
and to reprimand, suspend, demote or discharge classified employees for just
cause;
      (4)   To determine staffing requirements;
      (5)   To maintain the efficiency of the city government and ensure the
carrying out of normal management functions;
      (6)   To take actions as may be necessary to carry out the mission of the
city government in emergencies; and
      (7)   To manage and to exercise judgment on all matters specifically
within his or her authority pursuant to the charter or this article and not
prohibited by a collective bargaining agreement in effect between the city
employer and an employee organization.
   (D)   The Chief Administrative Officer shall have no power or authority to
appoint the Director of Council Services or to hire, promote, discipline or
discharge the staff of the offices of the City Council, which shall be the
responsibility of the Director of Council Services.
('74 Code, § 2-9-2) (Ord. 52-1978; Am. Ord. 69-1988; Am. Ord. 29-1998; Am. Ord.
7-2010)
§ 3-1-3 RESPONSIBILITIES OF THE DIRECTOR OF HUMAN RESOURCES.
   The Director of Human Resources, under the general direction of the Chief
Administrative Officer, shall direct all of the administrative and technical
activities of the Human Resources Department and shall have the following
duties:
   (A)   To exercise leadership in and encourage the development of effective
personnel administration within the departments, agencies, and special programs
in the city service, and make available the resources of the Human Resources
Department to this end;
   (B)   To prepare and recommend to the Chief Administrative Officer or his or
her designated representative, such changes in this article as may be
considered necessary, appropriate, or desirable after investigating their
operation and the effects of the policies made thereunder;
   (C)   To prepare, install, and maintain a classification plan based on the
duties, authority, and responsibility of positions in the city service;
   (D)   To prepare and maintain a pay plan corresponding to the classification
plan, with the approval of the Chief Administrative Officer;
   (E)   To establish and maintain a roster of all persons in the city service
and records in which there shall be set forth for each employee his class,
title, pay, pay status, and other relevant data;
   (F)   To develop and establish training and educational programs for persons
in the city service;
   (G)   To propose Personnel Rules and Regulations and publish after approval
by the Chief Administrative Officer for the conducting of examinations for new
employees; for promotion of employees; and for such other procedures, policies,
and practices, including the evaluation of employees' work performance, with
reference to personnel administration as may be necessary and desirable;
   (H)   To administer programs, including trainee programs, designed to
attract persons with potential for career development to the city service;
   (I)   To coordinate recruitment, hiring and promotional practices to assist
in the implementation of the Affirmative Action Program of the city;
   (J)   To direct employee layoffs based on seniority principles and
collective bargaining agreements, as approved by the Chief Administrative
Officer; and
   (K)   To impose furloughs as provided in a plan approved by the Chief
Administrative Officer.
('74 Code, § 2-9-3) (Ord. 52-1978; Am. Ord. 69-1988; Am. Ord. 17-1990; Am. Ord.
29-1998; Am. Ord. 8-2010)
§ 3-1-4 PERSONNEL BOARD.
   (A)   There shall be a Personnel Board composed of five members. Two members
shall be appointed by the Mayor; they shall have significant management or
personnel experience. Two members shall be selected by the employees by
election and then appointed by the Mayor. The remaining member shall be
selected by the other four members. All board members shall be persons who have
resided in the city for a period of at least one year and shall not be elected
public officials. All selections shall be subject to the advice and consent of
the City Council. Board members shall serve two- year terms which expire
September 1.
   (B)   When a vacancy occurs among members selected by the employees, an
election by the employees of the city shall be held. Only persons who have
received the signatures of at least 20 employees on a nominating petition(s)
shall be eligible to be placed on the ballot in the election. When there is one
vacancy to be filled, the person who receives the most votes in the employee
election shall be appointed by the Mayor to fill the vacancy; where there are
two vacancies to be filled, the two candidates with the most votes shall be
appointed by the Mayor to fill the vacancies. In the event of a tie the Mayor
shall appoint the appropriate member out of the candidates with the most votes.
All appointments shall be sent to the Council for advice and consent. If a
member appointed by the Mayor pursuant to an employee election is not approved
by Council, the Mayor shall appoint the person who had a tie vote with the
first appointee; if there was not such a tie, a new election shall be held, and
the person with the most votes and who was not previously rejected by the
Council shall be appointed by the Mayor and submitted to the Council.
   (C)   Except as provided in this article, the qualifications, appointments,
and conduct of the members of the Board and the organizational structure of the
Board shall be governed by §§
2-6-1-1 et seq.
('74 Code, § 2-9-4) (Ord. 52-1978; Am. Ord. 6-1987; Am. Ord. 29-1998; Am. Ord.
7-2010)
§ 3-1-5 POWERS AND DUTIES OF THE PERSONNEL BOARD.
   (A)   The Personnel Board shall serve in an advisory capacity in the
administration of the city's Personnel Program and shall have the following
powers:
      (1)   To advise and assist the Chief Administrative Officer or his or her
designated representative and the Director of Human Resources in adopting such
Personnel Rules and Regulations as are considered necessary, appropriate or
desirable to carry out the provisions of this article;
      (2)   To advise and assist the Chief Administrative Officer or his or her
designated representative and the Director of Human Resources in the
improvement of personnel standards in the classified service;
      (3)   To advise the Chief Administrative Officer or his or her designated
representative and the Director of Human Resources upon problems concerning
personnel administration and recommend corrective action; and
      (4)   To inquire, after consultation with the Chief Administrative
Officer, into any matter which it may consider desirable concerning the
administration of affairs of personnel.
   (B)   The Personnel Board shall render a decision upon the appeal of
classified employees of the city who have been suspended without pay for more
than five days, demoted for disciplinary reasons or discharged, as provided in
§
3-1-25.
   (C)   Meetings of the Personnel Board, including hearings, shall comply with
the New Mexico Open Meetings Act, §§ 10-15-1 et seq. NMSA 1978.
   (D)   The Personnel Board shall establish rules and regulations governing
the conduct of its meetings and its grievance hearings.
('74 Code, § 2-9-5) (Ord. 52-1978; Am. Ord. 69-1988; Am. Ord. 29-1998)
§ 3-1-6 THE CLASSIFIED AND UNCLASSIFIED SERVICE.
   (A)   All employees in the city service shall be divided into unclassified
service and classified service. Elected officials and members of boards,
commissions and authorities that are not employees of the city shall not be
covered by the classified or unclassified service.
   (B)   The classified service shall be comprised of all employees except
those who are specifically placed in the unclassified service.
   (C)   The unclassified service shall be comprised of the following:
      (1)   The Chief Administrative Officer and Deputy Chief Administrative
Officers;
      (2)   Assistants to the Mayor, assistants to the Chief Administrative
Officer and the secretary to the Chief Administrative Officer;
      (3)   The city's Public Information Officer and the secretary to the
Mayor;
      (4)   The City Attorney, Assistant City Attorneys, City Clerk/Recorder,
administrative heads of departments as established in the city's organizational
structure, physicians, veterinarians, the Director of the Office of Internal
Audit, and the Inspector General;
      (5)   Temporary and seasonal employees employed as such;
      (6)   Part-time employees employed for less than 20 hours per week;
      (7)   Administrative heads of agencies or special programs sponsored by
the city and defined as unclassified by the Chief Administrative Officer;
      (8)   The Director of Council Services and the Attorney for the Council;
and
      (9)   Any position designated as unclassified by the Chief Administrative
Officer.
   (D)   Unclassified employees are employees at will and serve at the
discretion of the Chief Administrative Officer, except for unclassified City
Council staff, which serve at the discretion of the Director of Council
Services, and the Inspector General. Such employees shall have no property
interest in continued unclassified employment and may be dismissed for any or
no reason.
   (E)   All employees, except as otherwise provided herein, in the classified
service shall be entitled to all of the rights and benefits provided for by
this article. All employees in the unclassified service shall be entitled to
all of the rights and benefits to which classified employees are entitled
except the benefits provided for in §§
3-1-23,
3-1-24 and
3-1-25, and also such rights and benefits specifically contracted for in
writing between the Chief Administrative Officer and an unclassified employee.
      (1)   Temporary and seasonal employees are not entitled to any of the
rights and benefits of employment to which other employees are entitled under
this article.
      (2)   Permanent employees employed for a regular work week of 20 hours
shall be entitled to half the leave benefits authorized for full-time,
permanent employees of the city; leave benefits shall be prorated for employees
employed for a regular work week of more than 20 hours. Hours worked in
addition to a regular work week shall not entitle an employee to additional
leave benefits.
      (3)   Elected officials except as otherwise provided by this article or
law, shall be eligible to participate in the retirement, paid life and medical
insurance available to full-time, permanent employees of the city.
   (F)   The initial contract between the Mayor and the Chief Administrative
Officer, including salary and benefits, shall be presented to the City Council
for approval when the Mayor presents his selection for Chief Administrative
Officer to the Council for advice and consent pursuant to the City Charter. The
Mayor shall notify the Council of subsequent changes in the contract. The
Mayor's employment benefits shall be reviewed and approved by the City Council
annually as a part of the city budget.
('74 Code, § 2-9-6) (Ord. 52-1978; Am Ord. 54-1987; Am. Ord. 69-1988; Am. Ord.
30-1989; Am. Ord. 29-1998; Am. Ord. 1-2005; Am. Ord. 31-2007; Am. Ord. 7-2010;
Am. Ord. 30-2010)
§ 3-1-7 EMPLOYMENT BY THE CITY.
   (A)   Every effort shall be made to fill vacant positions in the city with
the best qualified candidate. All vacancies in classified positions will be
advertised to all city employees, except probationary police, fire and
corrections officers, but applications from persons outside of city employment
may be considered at the same time.
   (B)   Subject to preferences required by law, preference shall be given in
filling a vacant position of the same or lower grade for which an employee is
qualified according to the following order:
      (1)   Employees reinstated as a result of administrative board or
judicial action as ordered;
      (2)   Employees returning from active duty in the military;
      (3)   Employees transferred pursuant to §
3-1-2(C) of this article;
      (4)   Employees returning from physical layoff;
      (5)   Nonprobationary employees returning from layoff;
      (6)   Employees notified of layoffs; and
      (7)   Employees returning from authorized absence from work without pay.
   (C)   Employees who have held a classified position with the city for more
than ten years prior to serving in an unclassified position shall be allowed to
return to a classified position. The position and the compensation of the
employee returning to classified service shall not be determined prior to the
time the employee leaves unclassified service. The CAO shall place and
compensate the returning employee according to the classification and
compensation plan of the classified service in place at the time the employee
returns to the classified service.
   (D)   The Director of Human Resources, with the approval of the Chief
Administrative Officer, shall have the sole authority to place employees who
are granted a preference in this section in positions for which they are
qualified.
   (E)   Preference for placement, except for employees returning from active
duty in the military or placement resulting from administrative or judicial
action, shall end one year from the date that the preference was created.
('74 Code, § 2-9-8) (Ord. 52-1978; Am. Ord. 32-1987; Am. Ord. 29-1998; Am. Ord.
7-2010)
§ 3-1-8 PROBATIONARY PERIOD.
   (A)   Probationary employment is tentative and subject to a probationary
period. A probationary employee does not have a legitimate entitlement to
continued employment and may be terminated for any or no reason.
   (B)   A probationary period shall be utilized for closely evaluating the
employee's work and for securing the most effective adjustment of the new
employee to his or her position. Such probationary period shall be 12 months
immediately following the original appointment date for all police officers,
fire fighters, and correction officers. Original appointment as a police or
fire fighter shall be tentative and subject to a probationary period of 12
months from the date of graduation from the Police Academy or Fire Academy
whether or not such appointee has been previously employed by the city. All
other appointments to the classified service shall be tentative and subject to
a probationary period of six months immediately following the original
appointment date.
   (C)   At any time during the probationary period, an employee may be
dismissed for any reason which is not prohibited by law. The change from
probationary to non-probationary status shall require positive action by the
department head or his designee and failure to take positive action at the end
of the probationary period shall constitute dismissal of the employee. Upon the
supervisor's recommendation, the department head or his designee may extend the
probationary period for a maximum of 60 days.
   (D)   An employee on probationary status is not entitled to the rights and
benefits provided for in other sections of this article.
('74 Code, § 2-9-9) (Ord. 52-1978; Am. Ord. 30-1985; Am. Ord. 69-1988; Am. Ord.
29-1998)
§ 3-1-9 PERFORMANCE EVALUATIONS.
   (A)   The Chief Administrative Officer shall establish a system to evaluate
the work performance of city employees in the classified service. Performance
evaluations or ratings shall not be the subject of a grievance.
   (B)   The performance evaluation system will provide for:
      (1)   Performance standards that will, to the maximum extent feasible,
permit the accurate evaluation of job performance on the basis of objective
criteria related to the job in question for each employee or position in the
classified system;
      (2)   Communication with each employee as to the performance standards
and critical elements of the employee's position;
      (3)   An opportunity during a specified period of time for the employee
to demonstrate an improvement in performance; and
      (4)   Appropriate disciplinary action to be taken if performance is
inadequate including dismissal or demotion for an employee who continues to
have unacceptable performance after an opportunity to demonstrate acceptable
performance.
   (C)   The work performance of an employee shall be officially evaluated by
his or her immediate supervisor(s) at least once a year.
('74 Code, § 2-9-10) (Ord. 52-1978; Am. Ord. 30-1985; Am. Ord. 29-1998)
§ 3-1-10 COMPENSATION.
   (A)   Compensation of classified employees shall be based on a
classification plan. The classification plan shall be based on duties,
authority and responsibility of positions in the city service. A pay plan shall
be maintained corresponding to the classification plan.
   (B)   The City Council shall establish the compensation of the Director of
Council Services. In setting compensation or grades for personnel in the Office
of Internal Audit and Investigations, the Chief Administrative Officer should
give great weight to any recommendation by the Accountability in Government
Committee.
('74 Code, § 2-9-11) (Ord. 52-1978; Am. Ord. 48-1989; Am. Ord. 29-1998; Am.
Ord. 1-2005)
§ 3-1-11 WORK HOURS.
   The working time of employees in a department shall be specified from time
to time by the department head, with the approval of the Chief Administrative
Officer, or his designated representative. Full-time employment by the city
shall constitute the sole employment of any employee, unless additional outside
employment, to be performed at times other than hours when such employee is
required to perform city service, is approved in writing by the department
head. Overtime may be paid by the city for work performed outside of
established work hours in accordance with the Fair Labor Standards Act.
('74 Code, § 2-9-12) (Ord. 52-1978; Am. Ord. 29-1998)
§ 3-1-12 LEGAL HOLIDAYS.
   (A)   Except to the extent that a furlough plan adopted pursuant to §
3-1-18 may be inconsistent with respect to holidays, in which case the furlough
plan shall control over this section:
      (1)   The Chief Administrative Officer shall annually announce the legal
holidays for city employees which shall be generally consistent with United
States, New Mexico State, and Bernalillo County government holidays.
      (2)   Employees may take any holiday as a floating holiday at any time
during the year with the prior written approval of the department head.
   (B)   Departments which must furnish service on legal holidays shall have
formal arrangements for offering employees who must work on legal holidays
appropriate compensation. Holiday pay shall be computed in accordance with the
Personnel Rules and Regulations. If a designated legal holiday falls on a
Saturday, the day off will be observed on the previous Friday. If a designated
legal holiday falls on a Sunday, the day off will be observed the following
Monday.
('74 Code, § 2-9-13) (Ord. 52-1978; Am. Ord. 61-1988; Am. Ord. 30-1989; Am.
Ord. 29-1998; Am. Ord. 8-2010)
§ 3-1-13 VACATION LEAVE.
   (A)   Vacation leave will accrue on a biweekly basis from the day of a city
employee's current permanent employment. Vacation leave may be taken as
accrued, upon approval of the employee's department head or designee. Hours
worked in addition to a regular work week as given below, shall not entitle an
employee to additional vacation. The city shall not compensate employees and
officials for unused vacation time, except:
      (1)   Pursuant to a collective bargaining agreement; or
      (2)   Any permanent employee separating from the city service is eligible
to be compensated for accrued vacation leave as provided for in the Personnel
Rules and Regulations.
   (B)   Vacation leave will accrue as follows:
Continuous Service Reg. Work Week Biweekly Accruals Accrual
                                                    Year
Continuous Service                 Reg. Work Week Biweekly Accruals Accrual
                                                                    Year
Less than 5 years:                 40 hours       3.85 hours        100 hours
                                   56 hours       5.39 hours        140 hours
More than 5 years BUT less than 10 40 hours       4.62 hours        120 hours
years:                             56 hours       6.47 hours        168 hours
More than 10 years BUT less than   40 hours       5.54 hours        144 hours
15 years:                          56 hours       7.76 hours        201.6 hours
More than 15 years:                40 hours       6.16 hours        160 hours
                                   56 hours       8.62 hours        224 hours
   (C)   The Mayor and the City Councillors do not accrue vacation time. The
Mayor sets his or her own hours and days of work, consistent with his Charter
position as a full-time official. Similarly, Councillors set their own hours
and days of work, consistent with their duties to attend meetings and attend to
their other responsibilities.
   (D)   Vacation accumulation will be computed as of the pay period including
December 31 each year. The excess over 78 biweekly accruals shall be dropped
from the record.
   (E)   No vacation time may be accrued or accumulated by classified or
unclassified employees or officials except as provided by this section or as
provided by a collective bargaining agreement entered into consistent with §§
3-2-1 et seq., Labor- Management Relations.
('74 Code, § 2-9-14) (Ord. 52-1978; Am. Ord. 52-1988; Am. Ord. 30-1989; Am.
Ord. 29-1998; Am. Ord. 7-2010)
§ 3-1-14 SICK LEAVE.
   (A)   Permanent city employees on a regular work week of 40 hours will
accrue sick leave at the rate of 3.70 hours biweekly with a maximum
accumulation of 1,200 hours allowed. Employees on a regular work week of over
40 hours shall accumulate additional sick leave both biweekly and maximum
accumulation on a basis proportional to the 40-hour week. Permanent employees
employed for a regular work week of 20 hours shall be entitled to half the
leave benefits authorized for full-time, permanent employees of the city; leave
benefits shall be prorated for employees employed for a regular work week of
more than 20 hours.
   (B)   Sick leave will accrue on a biweekly basis from the date of current,
permanent, full-time, probationary or non-probationary employment. Hours worked
in addition to a regular work week as listed above shall not entitle an
employee to additional sick leave accumulation.
   (C)   Pro-rata conversion to cash payment or to vacation time of sick leave
exceeding certain accumulations will be provided for in the Personnel Rules and
Regulations. Pro-rata or full conversion of sick leave to early retirement will
be provided for in the Personnel Rules and Regulations. Personnel Rules and
Regulations providing for conversion to cash payment or to vacation time of
sick leave exceeding certain accumulations shall be the same for classified and
unclassified employees.
   (D)   Proper and reasonable provisions for controlling and verifying the use
of sick and emergency leave will be established in the Personnel Rules and
Regulations.
   (E)   In the event that collective bargaining agreements make reference to
sick leave benefits, the reference will be to the ordinance as it was in effect
at the time the agreement was ratified.
   (F)   No sick leave may be accrued or accumulated by classified or
unclassified employees or officials except as provided by this section or as
provided by a collective bargaining agreement entered into consistent with §§
3-2-1 et seq., Labor-Management Relations.
('74 Code, § 2-9-15) (Ord. 52-1978; Am. Ord. 29-1998; Am. Ord. 7-2010)
§ 3-1-15 INJURIES IN PERFORMANCE OF DUTY.
   (A)   Any employee who is injured or who suffers occupational disease in the
performance of his duties and who, as a result of such injuries or disease,
receives weekly benefits under the Workers' Compensation Act of New Mexico, §§
52-1-1 et seq. NMSA 1978, shall be granted injury time with full pay so long as
a qualified doctor of Medicine (M.D.), Osteopathy (D.O.), or Podiatry (D.P.M.)
designated by the city certifies that the injury required the employee's
absence from his or her work. The Chief Administrative Officer may withhold
payment of injury time to any employee if, upon investigation, the Chief
Administrative Officer desires that the payment of injury time be withheld
until such employee has settled his or her claim under the Workers'
Compensation Act of New Mexico, §§ 52-1-1 et seq. NMSA 1978, against the city.
   (B)   Injury time shall be in addition to the number of days sick leave
accumulated. An employee placed in physical layoff status shall return to the
first available position closest to his or her former grade or classification
as possible, for which he or she can qualify, when a qualified doctor of
Medicine (M.D.), Osteopathy (D.O.), or Podiatry (D.P.M.), selected by the Chief
Administrative Officer, certifies that such employee is physically able to
perform such duties according to the physical qualifications of the job.
   (C)   Injury time shall not exceed the following stated maximum hours for
any accidental injury, recurrence or aggravation of this injury or for any
occupational accidental injury, recurrence or aggravation of this injury; or
for any occupational disease, recurrence or aggravation of this disease.
 
Regular Work Week Working Hrs. Maximum Injury Time
40 hours                       960 hours
56 hours                       1,344 hours
 
   (D)   Subject to the deductions below, sums paid to employees under the
terms of this section shall constitute a lien against any amount collected
through settlement or court action by the employee against a third party
causing the injury. Upon such payment the city may proceed against such third
party in its own name or in the name of the injured employee to collect such
injury time pay, and failure of the employee to cooperate with the city in any
legal or other action will subject the employee to disciplinary action. As a
condition of employment, an employee who receives workmen's compensation or
injury time shall permit the city to bring an action against any responsible
party for recovery of all such benefits paid to the employee.
   (E)   Injury time pay shall not exceed the difference between Workmen's
Compensation benefits received and an employee's regular pay. There shall be
deducted from salary received for injury time or sick leave granted for injury
or occupational disease, any cash compensation benefits received under the
Workmen's Compensation Laws of the State of New Mexico. In the event a lump sum
settlement is made of the employee's claim under the New Mexico Workmen's
Compensation Laws, the percentage of his or her disability shall be agreed upon
at the time such lump settlement is made and deduction shall be made from his
or her injury time as a result of his or her disability under the Workmen's
Compensation Laws of the State of New Mexico; provided that in no event shall
the total amount deducted exceed the amount of the lump sum settlement made
with the employee.
('74 Code, § 2-9-16) (Ord. 52-1978; Am. Ord. 69-1988; Am. Ord. 29-1998)
§ 3-1-16 LEAVE WITH PAY.
   (A)   Leave with pay may be authorized in writing by the Chief
Administrative Officer for any employee to attend an official meeting where the
good of the city service is involved, or to serve required court-related duty,
or to attend an educational institution, or to secure special instruction, or
to testify on behalf of the city in Court. If an employee is required to serve
court-related duty, any compensation he or she receives for such duty shall be
paid to the city by the employee.
   (B)   Four bargaining unit members who are designated by a union as the
union's negotiating team pursuant to §
3-2-13, Labor-Management Relations, will receive leave with pay to attend
scheduled bargaining sessions with the city negotiating team which occur during
the employee's normal work hours. This benefit is limited to the bargaining
necessary to negotiate the collective bargaining agreement and does not include
ongoing negotiations during the term of a collective bargaining agreement.
Leave for collective bargaining may begin no earlier than 60 days prior to
expiration of an existing agreement and ends when tentative agreement is
reached on a successor agreement. This leave must be approved by the Chief
Administrative Officer upon the verification of the City's lead negotiator. The
Chief Administrative Officer shall promulgate rules of procedure concerning
leave for collective bargaining.
   (C)   Military leave with pay will be authorized for permanent employees who
are members of the National Guard or Air National Guard of New Mexico or any
organized reserve unit of the armed forces of the United States, including the
Public Health Service, for a period not to exceed 15 working days in each
federal fiscal year which begins October 1, in addition to other authorized
leave, when they are ordered to active duty training with such units. Permanent
employees who are members of an unorganized reserve component may be granted
military leave not to exceed 15 working days in each federal fiscal year which
begins October 1, for the purpose of attending organized courses of instruction
or training periods authorized such personnel. Permanent employees called to
active military duty in emergencies declared by the Governor or the President
for short periods of time not to exceed 15 days may be granted military leave.
Military leave with pay will be authorized for public safety employees covered
under the respective collective bargaining agreements for a period not to
exceed 420 hours for sworn, full-time police officers and full-time prisoner
transport officers, and 528 hours for sworn, full-time firefighters per
calendar year. To receive military leave benefits, an employee must file orders
or a letter from their military commander containing the details of the leave
with the City Human Resources Department, and their respective payroll
department(s).
   (D)   Upon the specific recommendation of the department director, the Chief
Administrative Officer may grant leave with pay for a period not to exceed six
calendar months to permanent employees having at least five years continuous
service and 12 calendar months to permanent employees having at least ten years
continuous service in the city upon demonstration of extreme hardship, due to
personal injury or sickness. No employee will be eligible for such leave unless
he has clearly exhibited exceptional performance of duties which have been
specifically so certified by the employee's department head. Leave with pay for
such purposes may be granted by the Chief Administrative Officer only after
usage of vacation leave, sick and emergency leave and injury time, and only if
the employee is not eligible for pension benefits under the city or state
retirement programs or under Federal Social Security. A decision of the Chief
Administrative Officer not to grant such leave with pay will not be the subject
of a grievance as defined in this article.
   (E)   Leave with pay for an employee's birthday is authorized for any
employee who is not represented by an employee organization as defined in §§
3-2-1 et seq., Labor-Management Relations, in collective bargaining. If the
employee's birthday falls on a day other than a normal working day, or if the
employee is required to work on the birthday, the employee may select an
alternate day, but such day must be approved by the division or department
head.
   (F)   An employee under investigation by the city for alleged misconduct may
be placed in leave with pay status during the investigation. Such leave shall
be limited to 30 working days. Leave in excess of 15 working days shall require
approval by a committee composed of the Director of the Human Resources
Department, the Director of the Office of Employee Relations and the City
Attorney, or their designees.
   (G)   The Chief Administrative Officer may develop a leave program for the
purpose of allowing city employees to act as loaned executives.
   (H)   Leave with pay may also be authorized by the Chief Administrative
Officer for services or activities of an employee outside of the scope of his
or her employment which can be reasonably anticipated to directly or indirectly
benefit the city.
   (I)   Parental leave with pay will be authorized for all employees qualified
for benefits as described in §
3-1-6(E), who have completed at least 12 months of continuous service and have
worked 1,250 hours within the 12 months preceding the date the parental leave
will begin.
      (1)   Parental leave will be available for any eligible employee who
experiences a qualifying event.
         (a)   A qualifying event includes a birth or the placement of a minor
child with the employee for adoption or foster care (excluding the adopting of
a stepchild or partner's child) experienced by the employee, the employee's
spouse, or domestic partner.
      (2)   Parental leave will consist of 12 standard work weeks at full pay
to be used within six months of the qualifying event. If an employee is
eligible for leave under the Family and Medical Leave Act (FMLA), parental
leave must be taken concurrently with leave under the FMLA.
('74 Code, § 2-9-17) (Ord. 52-1978; Am. Ord. 69-1988; Am. Ord. 30-1989; Am.
Ord. 47-1989; Am. Ord. 29-1998; Am. Ord._2017-022; Am. Ord._2018-036)
§ 3-1-17 LEAVE WITHOUT PAY.
   (A)   An employee may be granted leave without pay for a period not to
exceed one year as a result of sickness or disability when certified by a
qualified doctor of Medicine (M.D.), Osteopathy (D.O.), or Podiatry (D.P.M.),
or to run for public office, or for additional vacation time, or for good and
sufficient reason which the Chief Administrative Officer considers to be in the
best interests of the city.
   (B)   Leave without pay may be granted for the purpose of attending schools
for courses only when it is clearly demonstrated that the subject matter is
directly job related and will result in improved job effectiveness in the
organization.
   (C)   A permanent employee who has been elected or appointed to a public
office may be granted sufficient leave without pay to enable the employee to
hold the office.
   (D)   Except under unusual circumstances, voluntary separation to accept
employment not in the city service shall be considered by the Chief
Administrative Officer as insufficient reason for granting a leave of absence
without pay.
   (E)   Such leaves of over two calendar weeks shall require written approval
of the Chief Administrative Officer. Leaves of two calendar weeks or less may
be granted by the employee's department head.
   (F)   For good cause and under exceptional circumstances, a request for
extension of leave without pay may be approved by the Chief Administrative
Officer.
('74 Code, § 2-9-18) (Ord. 52-1978; Am. Ord. 69-1988; Am. Ord. 29-1998)
§ 3-1-18 LAYOFF AND FURLOUGH.
   (A)   Layoff is defined as the involuntary separation of classified,
nonprobationary employees from city service as a result of the abolishment of a
position, program elimination or a lack of funds. Probationary, unclassified,
temporary, seasonal and student employees are not eligible for layoff
privileges.
   (B)   The Chief Administrative Officer and the Director of the Human
Resources Department are responsible for approving all layoffs and offering
transfers or placement offers to employees who are or may be identified for
layoff. Prior to a layoff, the Chief Administrative Officer shall develop a
layoff plan which must be based on seniority principles and applicable
collective bargaining agreements.
   (C)   If practicable, prior to the implementation of the layoff plan, the
Chief Administrative Officer shall offer voluntary transfers to employees
affected by the plan to avoid placing employees in layoff status. These
voluntary transfers will be offered using seniority principles and respecting
any applicable collective bargaining agreements. If practicable, the layoff
plan shall provide for the retention of employees with more than five years of
continuous city service. Employees placed in layoff status will be terminated
two years from the effective date of layoff if they have not been placed or
upon refusal to accept an offer of transfer or placement of equal grade or
comparable pay.
   (D)   Furlough is defined as the temporary placement of an employee in a
non-duty, non-pay status for budgetary reasons. Furloughs may be voluntary or
mandatory.
   (E)   The Chief Administrative Officer and the Director of the Human
Resources Department are responsible for imposing furloughs subject to any
applicable collective bargaining agreements. Furloughs shall be implemented
pursuant to a plan approved by the Chief Administrative Officer which at a
minimum shall provide:
      (1)   The employees impacted and the furloughs to be imposed;
      (2)   Furloughed employees may not use annual leave, sick leave,
compensatory time or any other leave in place of any unpaid furlough;
      (3)   Furloughs shall not constitute a break in service and shall not
affect an employee's seniority status;
      (4)   Furloughs shall not affect the accrual of leave; and
      (5)   Medical, dental, vision and any other insured benefits coverage
shall not be impacted by the furloughs.
(Ord. 21-2002; Am. Ord. 8-2010)
§ 3-1-19 RESIGNATIONS.
   (A)   Any employee of the city wishing to leave the service in good standing
shall notify his or her immediate supervisor in writing at least two weeks
before leaving.
   (B)   Unauthorized absence from work for a period of three consecutive
regularly scheduled work shifts or three working days, whichever is greater,
may be considered as an automatic resignation. Such an automatic resignation is
not the subject of a grievance as defined in this article, but shall be subject
to the procedure in § 3-1-22(C) of this article.
('74 Code, § 2-9-19) (Ord. 52-1978; Am. Ord. 29-1998)
§ 3-1-20 DISPOSITION OF AWARDS.
   (A)   Nothing contained in this article shall prohibit the city from
developing methods of rewarding employees by the giving of a reward, bonus,
leave with pay or any other form of remuneration or extra compensation in
addition to the regular compensation and employee benefits to a classified or
unclassified employee so long as all of the following conditions are met:
      (1)   The employee renders service that is outside of and in addition to
the normal requirements and expectations of his or her employment;
      (2)   The city reasonably anticipates some tangible or intangible benefit
from such service; and
      (3)   The service rendered results from a pre-existing plan or program
authorized by the Chief Administrative Officer which sets up a specific
criteria for such extra compensation.
('74 Code, § 2-9-21) (Ord. 52-1978; Am. Ord. 29-1998)
§ 3-1-21 POLITICAL ACTIVITY.
   No employee shall participate in the following types of political activity:
   (A)   Using his or her position or employment with the city to influence
support of other officials or employees of the city for or against any
candidate or issue or political action committee or other similar organization
in any election or pre-election activity; provided, however, that nothing
herein shall deny the right of an official or employee of the city to express
his or her views on any issue.
   (B)   Being a candidate for or holding any elective city office.
   (C)   Accepting and/or soliciting campaign contributions for any candidate
or political action committee or other similar organization in any election or
pre-election activity, during working hours, at a City workplace, or in the
scope of their City employment.
   (D)   Accepting and/or soliciting contributions for the benefit of a city
employee or official for political purposes during working hours, at a city
workplace, or in the scope of his or her city employment.
('74 Code, § 2-9-23) (Ord. 52-1978; Am. Ord. 31-1985; Am. Ord. 29-1998; Am.
Ord. 47-2000; Am. Ord. 47-2004)
§ 3-1-22 EMPLOYEE MEDIATION.
   (A)   The Employee Mediation Program is established to:
      (1)   Encourage city employees to resolve work place conflicts early,
informally and with minimum intervention from administration;
      (2)   Address conflict in the work place constructively through
communication and collaboration whenever possible.
      (3)   Aid direct communication and problem solving between individuals;
      (4)   Provide neutral mediators to help informal, direct communication
and conflict resolution within each department of the city; and
      (5)   Provide a resource to each department to minimize the costs of
conflict.
   (B)   All city employees will be notified of and encouraged to use the
Employee Mediation Program to address work place conflict, including conflict
between employees and conflict between an employee and a supervisor.
Participation in the mediation program is voluntary. Participation in the
mediation will not affect access to other procedural remedies for employees.
   (C)   Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.
   CONFLICT. Any misunderstanding, miscommunication or difference of opinion
which could affect morale or productivity in the work place.
   COORDINATOR. The person in the city's Alternative Dispute Resolution (ADR)
office who administers the Employee Mediation Program.
   MEDIATION. A specific informal meeting process which aids communication and
problem solving, the goal of which is to enhance communication and promote a
"win-win" approach to conflict resolution among the participants.
   MEDIATORS. Individuals available through the city's ADR office who may be a
city employee from any classification who is trained and skilled in the
mediation process, or who may be someone other than a city employee who is
trained and skilled in the mediation process and has entered into a contract
with the city to provide mediation services.
   PARTICIPANTS. Individuals excluding the mediators who attend a mediation
meeting for the purpose of assisting in conflict resolution.
   (D)   Mediation Procedure.
      (1)   Mediation is initiated by any city employee by contacting the
Coordinator by telephone, in writing or in person. Mediation may be initiated
at any point during the conflict resolution process, but employees and
supervisors should attempt to use the mediation process at an early stage in
their conflict resolution efforts.
      (2)   During the intake process, the Coordinator will assist employees in
identifying the participants and the goals of the mediation.
      (3)   The mediation will take place during business hours in a neutral
site at a time mutually acceptable to the participants. The mediation shall be
conducted in accordance with the Employee Mediation Program Guidelines. Any
resolution resulting from the mediation must comply with all applicable laws,
policies, rules and procedures.
(Ord. 29-1998)
§ 3-1-23 DISCIPLINARY ACTIONS.
   (A)   (1)   Employees may be disciplined by written reprimand, suspension,
demotion or dismissal. Just cause for discipline is any behavior significant or
substantial in nature relating to the employee's work that is inconsistent with
the employee's obligation to the city. Just cause shall also include prohibited
retaliation as defined in the Whistleblower Ordinance and the Accountability in
Government Ordinance and the filing of frivolous complaints or complaints based
on false or confidential information pursuant to the Whistleblower Ordinance
and the Accountability in Government Ordinance. The Chief Administrative
Officer may enumerate in Personnel Rules and Regulations examples of behaviors
that constitute just cause.
      (2)   The Chief Administrative Officer, a Deputy Chief Administrative
Officer, a department director or an acting department director may impose any
discipline. Division heads may issue reprimands and suspend an employee for
five days or less after informing the department head. An employee's immediate
supervisor may issue a reprimand after informing the division head or
department head.
      (3)   Prior to passage of any year-end appropriation clean-up bill, the
Chief Administrative Officer shall review expenditures of each City program
strategy and determine which program strategies overspent their annual
appropriations in excess of five percent or $100,000, whichever is lower, prior
to Council appropriation of the amount overspent. This level of overexpenditure
constitutes a violation of §§
2-11-12 and
2-11-16 ROA 1994. Because management of program finances to conform to City
ordinances is a primary responsibility of all City program directors, the Chief
Administrative Officer shall place a written reprimand in the personnel file of
any program director whose program is overspent by five percent or $100,000,
whichever is lower, prior to Council appropriation. A program director who
receives three reprimands for overspending his or her budget prior to the
passage of any year-end appropriation clean-up bill by the Council during a
five-year period demonstrates a lack of financial management skills critical to
fulfilling the duties of a program director and, therefore, shall be demoted
one grade and transferred to a position without financial management
responsibility.
      (4)   As a requirement of assuming office, each department director shall
execute an employment contract with the City, one of the provisions of which
shall be that he or she will not allow their department to overspend their
appropriated budget nor allow any program strategy to overspend its
appropriated budget prior to the passage of any year-end appropriation clean-up
bill by the Council. Department directors responsible for departments that
overspend their budget prior to the passage of any year-end appropriation
clean-up bill in two years during a period of four years shall be terminated.
The Chief Administrative Officer shall place a written reprimand in the
personnel file of any department directors in the event that a program in the
department under the responsibility of the director similarly overspends its
budget appropriation.
   (B)   No person except the Chief Administrative Officer shall discipline
heads of departments. Only the Accountability in Government Committee may
discipline the Director of the Office of Internal Audit and Investigations. In
addition, only the Director of Council Services may discipline other employees
of the Department of Council Services, and only the Director of the Office of
Internal Audit and Investigations may discipline other employees of the Office
of Internal Audit and Investigations.
   (C)   Before discipline is imposed, the employee shall be notified of the
reasons for which discipline is contemplated, a summary of the evidence against
the employee, and the employee's right to respond to the proposed action. After
giving the employee the notice of contemplated action and before the employee
makes any written or oral response, the supervisor contemplating the discipline
shall request review by the City Employee Mediation Program Coordinator of the
circumstances on which the contemplated action is based in an effort to avoid
the discipline. Mediation shall occur if it is deemed appropriate by the
Coordinator. After this review or if mediation is unsuccessful, the supervisor
may continue with the contemplated disciplinary procedure by giving the
employee the right to respond to the notice of contemplated action.
   (D)   Suspensions shall not exceed 90 calendar days for any offense. The
Chief Administrative Officer or department head has the option on a suspension
of five days or less to prohibit the employee from attending the work place or
to allow the employee to work through the suspension with pay. Suspensions may
be held in abeyance for a stated period of no longer than six months.
   (E)   The Chief Administrative Officer shall promulgate rules of procedure
concerning disciplinary actions.
   (F)   Any disciplinary action shall be noted in the employee's personnel
file.
('74 Code, § 2-9-24) (Ord. 52-1978; Am. Ord. 48-1988; Am. Ord. 30-1989; Am.
Ord. 55-1989; Am. Ord. 29-1998; Am. Ord. 13-2001; Am. Ord. 9-2002; Am. Ord. 2-
2004; Am. Ord. 1-2005)
§ 3-1-24 THE GRIEVANCE RESOLUTION PROCEDURE.
   (A)   PURPOSE. The Grievance Resolution Procedure provides a means for
reconciling complaints concerning minor disciplinary actions and working
conditions or departmental rules. The purpose of this grievance procedure is to
promote harmonious relations among employees, supervisors and managers; to
encourage the settlement of disagreements informally at the employee-supervisor
level; to provide an orderly procedure to handle grievances through the various
supervisory levels when necessary; to resolve grievances as quickly as
possible; and to discourage the filing of unfounded grievances.
   (B)   SCOPE. This grievance procedure applies to all permanent classified
employees who are not covered by labor agreements providing an alternate
grievance procedure.
   (C)   DEFINITIONS. For purposes of this section, the following definitions
shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different
meaning.
      EMPLOYEE. Includes all permanent classified city employees.
      GRIEVANCE. A formal complaint regarding disciplinary suspensions of five
days or less, letters of reprimand and the application of existing rules,
regulations, or policies.
      GRIEVANCE COMMITTEE. A neutral ad hoc committee composed of four
permanent city employees (two supervisory and two nonsupervisory) randomly
selected by the Chief Administrative Officer to investigate and recommend
solutions to an employee grievance.
      GRIEVANT. The employee who files a grievance.
      REPRESENTATIVE. An individual duly authorized by an employee to act on
the employee's behalf.
   (D)   GRIEVABLE AND NONGRIEVABLE ISSUES.
      (1)   To be reviewable under the grievance procedure an issue must:
         (a)   Concern matters or specific incidents that have occurred, and
         (b)   Result from an act or omission by management regarding aspects
of employee-employer relations over which the department director has control,
and
         (c)   Arise out of a specific situation or act that has resulted in
inequity or damage to the employee.
      (2)   An issue is not reviewable under this grievance procedure if it is
a matter which:
         (a)   Is subject to those management rights (specified elsewhere in
this article and in the Labor-Management Relations Ordinance) which are
necessary to exercise control and discretion over the organization and
efficiency of the operations of the city;
         (b)   Would require modification of a policy established by the City
Council, State or Federal law;
         (c)   Has been reviewed via another grievance procedure (as authorized
in an agreement with a labor organization);
         (d)   Is reviewable under the Personnel Rules and Regulations or
another administrative procedure;
         (e)   Is subject to the provisions of the Labor-Management Relations
Ordinance.
      (3)   The Chief Administrative Officer or designee shall decide whether
the issue is grievable as defined in this article. This decision is final. The
Chief Administrative Officer or his designee may not determine that a claim of
retaliation pursuant to the Whistleblower Ordinance is not grievable.
   (E)   STEPS IN THE GRIEVANCE PROCEDURE. An employee must take the following
steps to submit a grievance pursuant to this policy. If at any step the
employee fails to take action within the allotted time, the grievance procedure
will be concluded. If at any step a city representative, the Chief
Administrative Officer or a grievance committee fails to take action within the
allotted time, the procedure shall move to the following step.
      (1)   Step One. The employee initiates the grievance by submitting a
written request for review of the dispute by the City Employee Mediation
Program within ten calendar days from the date of the act or from the point
that the employee became aware of the occurrence. It the 10th day is a weekend
or holiday, the following day of business becomes the "10th day". Within seven
calendar days, the Coordinator of the City Employee Mediation Program will
determine if mediation of the dispute is appropriate. If so, mediation will be
held according to the guidelines for the City Employee Mediation Program.
      (2)   Step Two. If the Coordinator determines that mediation would not be
appropriate or if mediation is conducted and the dispute is not resolved,
within seven calendar days after the mediation or the decision of the
Coordinator, the employee shall submit a written grievance to his or her
department director. The written grievance shall contain the employee's name,
department, position, and immediate supervisor; the date of the alleged
incident; a statement of the problem and the employee's suggested solution.
Either the employee or the director may request a meeting, but it is the
director's option to respond only in writing. Within seven calendar days from
receipt of the grievance or a meeting, whichever is later, the department
director must submit a written response to the employee.
      (3)   Step Three. If the employee is not satisfied with the Department
Director's decision, the employee may submit the written grievance described in
Step Two to the Chief Administrative Officer who will convene a grievance
committee to investigate the dispute and recommend a resolution. The committee
will recommend a resolution of the grievance to the Chief Administrative
Officer. The Chief Administrative Officer will review the Committee's
recommended resolution, provide a final written resolution to the grievance and
forward it to the employee and the Department Director. The Chief
Administrative Officer's decision is the final step in the administrative
process.
   (F)   GENERAL PROVISIONS.
      (1)   Grievances may be initiated only by the employee concerned and may
not be pursued without the affected employee's consent.
      (2)   Once a grievance has been investigated and denied, repeated filing
of grievances on the same issue will not be permitted.
      (3)   While the grievant may designate a representative at any step of
the grievance procedure, labor unions do not have representation rights for
nonbargaining unit employees. A grievance committee is not required to
recognize more than one representative for any grievance.
      (4)   If the grievance involves a group of employees or if several
employees file separate grievances on the same matter, the grievances may be
handled as a single grievance.
      (5)   The City Clerk's office will act as facilitator for the Grievance
Committee to ensure that the Committee has access to all information necessary
to conduct the investigation. The Committee will have the authority to call
witnesses and to review all necessary records and reports.
      (6)   Whenever possible, grievances will be handled during the regularly
scheduled working hours of the parties involved.
   (G)   ADDITIONAL GUIDELINES.
      (1)   Employees and supervisors are strongly encouraged to request
mediation at any step in this process.
      (2)   Any grievance will be considered resolved at the completion of any
step if all parties are satisfied or if the employee concerned chooses not to
present the matter to the next step of the procedure within the prescribed
period.
      (3)   As a condition of employment, employees shall be required to appear
as witnesses in grievance resolution hearings when requested by the grievant or
by the members of the city administrative staff. In addition, refusal to appear
or participate in the grievance resolution procedure at any stage by a grievant
shall result in forfeiture by the grievant of any further right to use of the
grievance resolution procedures to resolve the grievance.
      (4)   The Director of Human Resources shall develop written guidelines
for the operation of the Grievance Committee, addressing such issues as
confidentiality of information revealed to the Committee and bias or interest
of Committee members, and operating procedures.
      (5)   Following completion of the grievance process, department managers
shall ensure the grievant experiences no retaliation for having pursued the
grievance. Any Chief Administrative Officer direction associated with the
grievance resolution is to be carried out as quickly as possible.
('74 Code, § 2-9-25) (Ord. 52-1978; Am. Ord. 6-1987; Am. Ord. 48-1988; Am. Ord.
30-1989; Am. Ord. 46-1995; Am. Ord. 29-1998; Am. Ord. 2-2004)
§ 3-1-25 APPEAL FROM SUSPENSIONS, DEMOTION AND DISCHARGE.
   (A)   A nonprobationary employee who has been suspended without pay for more
than five days, demoted for disciplinary reasons, or discharged may appeal the
discipline to the Personnel Board within 15 days of the occurrence of the
disciplinary decision. The appeal shall be in writing and shall be submitted to
the City Clerk with a copy to the employee's department head.
   (B)   The written appeal shall include:
      (1)   The employee's name, department, position, and immediate
supervisor;
      (2)   The discipline imposed and a brief summary of the offense for which
the discipline was imposed; and
      (3)   The reason the employee disagrees with the discipline.
   (C)   The City Clerk shall refer the appeal to a Personnel Hearing Officer
who shall set the matter for an evidentiary hearing. The Hearing Officer shall
prepare and submit to the Board and the parties a report containing a summary
of the evidence taken at the hearing and proposed findings of fact. The city
and the employee may submit exceptions to the Hearings Officer's report and
written argument within the time allowed by the Board's procedural rules.
   (D)   The Board shall render a decision that shall include findings of fact
and conclusions of law consistent with the evidence. The proceedings before the
Personnel Board shall be limited to consideration of the Hearing Officer's
Report, any written submissions of the parties, and, at the Board's option,
oral argument by the parties concerning the evidence admitted at the hearing.
The Board shall not hear any testimony. A tie vote upholds the recommendation
of the Hearing Officer.
   (E)   The Board may take one of the following actions:
      (1)   Accept the recommendation of the Hearing Officer by accepting the
Hearing Officer's Proposed Findings of Fact and entering conclusions of law
consistent with the findings;
      (2)   Reverse or modify the recommendation of the Hearing Officer by
making its own Findings of Fact consistent with the evidence and entering
conclusions of law consistent with the findings; or
      (3)   Remand the matter to a Personnel Hearing Officer for further
hearing.
   (F)   The employee or the city may appeal the decision of the Personnel
Board to the District Court within 30 days after the date of the decision by
following the Rules of Civil Procedure for the District Courts. The decision
shall be affirmed unless the decision is found to be:
      (1)   Arbitrary or capricious and unsupported by substantial evidence;
      (2)   In violation of applicable constitutional provisions or otherwise
illegal; or
      (3)   In excess of the statutory authority or jurisdiction of the Board.
   (G)   The Personnel Board shall promulgate rules of procedure for hearings
before Personnel Hearing Officers and its own meetings.
   (H)   The Personnel Hearing Officers have the power to administer oaths,
subpoena witnesses and compel the production of documents pertinent to any
hearing authorized by this article. As a condition of employment, employees may
be required to appear as witnesses in hearings. Refusal to testify in an appeal
hearing under this article is grounds for disciplinary action. An employee who
files an appeal and refuses to appear or participate in the appeal process at
any formal stage forfeits any further right to continue that appeal.
   (I)   An employee who appeals a disciplinary action shall be free from
discrimination, restraint, coercion or reprisal by any supervisor or employee.
However, appealing or showing an intention to appeal does not relieve any
employee in any way of his or her responsibility to perform his or her assigned
duties promptly, efficiently and completely.
(Ord. 29-1998; Am. Ord._2023-015)
§ 3-1-26 PERSONNEL HEARING OFFICER.
   (A)   The Chief Administrative Officer shall determine how many Personnel
Hearing Officers are required for the efficient operation of the disciplinary
appeal procedure and initiate the selection procedure prescribed in this
article.
   (B)   Personnel Hearing Officers shall be selected based on competitive
sealed proposals that contain a statement of the applicant's qualifications for
the position and a writing sample. The city shall publish notice of requests
for proposals in a newspaper of general circulation not less than ten days
before the closing date for receipt of proposals. The Chief Administrative
Officer shall name an ad hoc advisory committee to evaluate the proposals and
submit a ranked list of applicants. The Chief Administrative Officer shall
select Hearing Officer(s) from the names submitted by the committee, subject to
the approval of the Council.
   (C)   A Personnel Hearing Officer shall be an attorney licensed to practice
in New Mexico or a person experienced in employer-employee relations or
personnel administration. Personnel Hearing Officers shall be subject to the
Code of Judicial Conduct, Rules 21-001, et seq., NMRA 1998, and as it might be
subsequently amended, as it applies to probate, part-time magistrate judges and
municipal judges.
   (D)   A Personnel Hearing Officer shall provide services under a contract
with the city and shall not be considered an employee of the city for any
purpose. The term of a contract shall be no more than two years. The contract
may provide for part-time services. The contract may not be terminated by the
city for any reason except violation of the Code of Judicial Conduct. In the
event the city does not have a contract with any Hearing Officer, the Personnel
Board may appoint or the parties may agree to a Hearing Officer to hear a
specific case.
   (E)   A Personnel Hearing Officer shall not be actively involved in the
political affairs of the city.
   (F)   No person shall attempt to influence a Personnel Hearing Officer's
findings and conclusions pursuant to this article except during a hearing or in
the presence of a representative of the opposing party.
('74 Code, § 2-9-27) (Ord. 6-1987; Am. Ord. 29-1998)
§ 3-1-27 EMPLOYEE ORGANIZATION AGREEMENTS.
   (A)   The provisions of this article shall apply to all city employees;
provided, however, that where a collective bargaining agreement, which has been
ratified and approved by the Mayor in accordance with §§
3-2-1 et seq., Labor-Management Relations, conflicts with a provision of this
article, the collective bargaining agreement shall, with respect to those
employees covered by the agreement, govern over such provision of this article
unless it is one establishing:
      (1)   Classified and unclassified service;
      (2)   Methods of service rating of unclassified employees; or
      (3)   Methods of initial employment, promotion recognizing efficiency and
ability as the applicable standards, and discharge of employees.
   (B)   In the case of a conflict between a collective bargaining agreement
and a provision establishing any of the above, this article shall govern.
('74 Code, § 2-9-26) (Ord. 52-1978; Am. Ord. 46-1995; Am. Ord. 29-1998)
§ 3-1-28 TRANSFERS FROM ALBUQUERQUE BERNALILLO COUNTY WATER UTILITY AUTHORITY.
   The accrued vacation leave, sick leave and longevity credit of any employee
who transfers from employment with the Albuquerque Bernalillo County Water
Utility Authority to the city shall be transferred to the city for the
employee's benefit, subject to the employee electing to transfer such benefits.
The city shall transfer the benefits and assume all liability for payment of
the benefits. Transfers between the Albuquerque Bernalillo County Water Utility
Authority and the city are not to be considered a break in service for
seniority purposes within either organization. The provisions of this section
shall not apply to the city unless the Albuquerque Bernalillo County Water
Utility Authority is following the same policy with respect to employees
transferring from the city to the Authority.
(Ord. 41-2007)
ARTICLE 2: LABOR -
MANAGEMENT RELATIONS
Section
   
3-2-1   Short title
   
3-2-2   Purpose
   
3-2-3   Definitions
   
3-2-4   Rights of city employees
   
3-2-5   Management rights
   
3-2-6   Exclusive representation
   
3-2-7   Determination of representation
   
3-2-8   Duty to bargain
   
3-2-9   Determination of bargaining units
   
3-2-10   Prohibited practices
   
3-2-11   Hearings and decisions
   
3-2-12   Penalties and sanctions
   
3-2-13   Collective bargaining agreements
   
3-2-14   Negotiating procedures
   
3-2-15   Impasse procedures
   
3-2-16   City labor-management relations board
   
3-2-17   Applicability
   
3-2-18   Guidelines committee
   
3-2-19   Consistency with City Budget Ordinance
§ 3-2-1 SHORT TITLE.
   This article may be cited as the "City of Albuquerque Labor-Management
Relations Ordinance."
('74 Code, § 2-2-1) (Ord. 153-1971; Am. Ord. 4-1977; Am. Ord._2020-045; Am.
Ord._2021-019)
§ 3-2-2 PURPOSE.
   The City Council declares that it is the public policy of the city, and
purpose of this article:
   (A)   To allow the city employees to organize and bargain collectively with
the city government;
   (B)   To promote harmonious and cooperative relationships between all
parties; and
   (C)   To protect the public interest by assuring, at all times, the orderly
and uninterrupted operations and functions of the city government.
('74 Code, § 2-2-2) (Ord. 153-1971; Am. Ord. 121-1972; Am. Ord. 4-1977; Am.
Ord._2020-045; Am. Ord._2021-019)
§ 3-2-3 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this article, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   APPROPRIATE BARGAINING UNIT. A group of employees designated by the Board
for the purpose of collective bargaining.
   BOARD. The City Labor-Management Relations Board.
   CERTIFICATION. The designation by the Board of a labor organization as the
exclusive representative for all public employees in an appropriate bargaining
unit.
   CITY EMPLOYEE. Any permanent, non-probationary employee of the city,
including employees whose work is funded in whole or in part by grants or other
third party sources, except officials elected by popular vote or appointed to
fill vacancies in elective offices; members of boards, commissions, and heads
of agencies appointed by the Mayor; heads of agencies appointed by boards and
commissions; supervisors; temporary or seasonal employees; and individuals
privy to confidential matters of the city government affecting the employer-
employee relationship, or any other individuals defined under §
3-2-9(D).
   CITY GOVERNMENT. The government of the city acting through and for its
agencies, departments, divisions and branches and bureaus.
   COLLECTIVE BARGAINING. A procedure whereby representatives of the city
government and an employee organization meet, confer, consult, and negotiate
with one another in a good-faith effort to reach agreement or otherwise resolve
differences relating, or with respect, to wages, hours and other terms and
conditions of employment.
   CONFIDENTIAL EMPLOYEE. An employee who devotes the majority of their working
time to assisting and acting in a confidential capacity with respect to a
person who formulates, determines, and effectuates management policies.
   EMERGENCY. A one-time crisis that was unforeseeable and unavoidable.
   EMPLOYEE ORGANIZATION or LABOR ORGANIZATION. Any organization or labor union
one of whose purposes is to represent city employees in collective bargaining,
on matters pertaining to wages, hours, terms and conditions of employment, but
it does not include any organization that:
      (1)   Advocates the overthrow of the constitutional form of government in
the United States by other than lawful means; or
      (2)   Discriminates with regard to the terms or conditions of membership
because of race, color, sex, creed, age, or national origin.
   EXCLUSIVE REPRESENTATIVE. A labor organization that, as a result of
certification, has the right to represent all public employees in an
appropriate bargaining unit for the purposes of collective bargaining.
   IMPASSE. The failure of the parties to agree with respect to any issue or
issues over which the parties have negotiated in good faith, and with respect
to which neither party is willing to make further concessions.
   LOCKOUT. An act by the employer to prevent its employees from going to work
for the purpose of resisting demands of the employees' exclusive representative
or for the purpose of gaining a concession from the exclusive representative.
   MANAGEMENT EMPLOYEE. An employee who is engaged primarily in executive and
management functions and is charged with the responsibility of developing,
administering or effectuating management policies. An employee shall not be
deemed a management employee solely because the employee participates in
cooperative decision-making programs or whose fiscal responsibilities are
routine, incidental or clerical.
   MEDIATION. Assistance by an impartial third party to resolve an impasse
between the city and an exclusive representative regarding employment relations
through interpretation, suggestion and advice.
   PROFESSIONAL EMPLOYEE.  Any city employee engaged in work that:
      (1)   Is predominately intellectual and varied in character as opposed to
routine mental, manual, mechanical or physical work;
      (2)   Involves the consistent exercise of discretion and judgment in its
performance;
      (3)   Is of such a character that the output produced or the result
accomplished cannot be standardized in relation to a given time period;
      (4)   Requires knowledge of an advanced type in a field of science or
learning customarily acquired by a prolonged course of a specialized
intellectual instruction and study in an institution of higher learning or
hospital, as distinguished from an apprenticeship or from training in the
performance of routine mental, manual, or physical processes.
   STRIKE. A public employee's refusal, in concerted action with other public
employees, to report for duty or the willful absence in whole or in part from
the full, faithful and proper performance of the duties of employment for the
purpose of inducing, influencing or coercing a change in the conditions,
compensation, rights, privileges or obligations of public employment.
   SUPERVISOR. An employee who devotes a majority of work time to supervisory
duties, who customarily and regularly directs the work of two or more other
employees and who has the authority in the interest of the employer to hire,
promote or discipline other employees or to recommend such actions effectively,
but SUPERVISOR does not include an individual who performs merely routine,
incidental or clerical duties or who occasionally assumes a supervisory or
directory role or whose duties are substantially similar to those of the
individual's subordinates and does not include a lead employee or an employee
who participates in peer review or occasional employee evaluation programs.
('74 Code, § 2-2-3) (Ord. 153-1971; Am. Ord. 4-1977; Am. Ord._2020-045; Am.
Ord._2021-019)
§ 3-2-4 RIGHTS OF CITY EMPLOYEES.
   (A)   City employees have the right to form, join and otherwise participate
in the activities of an employee organization of their own choosing for the
purpose of bargaining collectively with the city government, and for other
lawful reasons. City employees also have the right to refuse to join and
participate in the activities of employee organizations. An employee
organization which has been certified by the Mayor as the exclusive bargain
representative for an appropriate bargaining unit of the city employees may
bargain collectively with the city government concerning hours, salary, wages,
working conditions, and all terms and conditions of employment.
   (B)   Nothing contained in this article shall be construed to limit, impair,
or affect the rights of any individual city employee to the expression or
communication of a view, grievance, complaint, or opinion on any matter related
to the conditions or compensation of city employment or their betterment aside
from the method described herein, so long as the same is not designed to and
does not interfere with the full, faithful and proper performance of the duties
of his employment.
   (C)   City employees have the right to engage in other concerted activities
for mutual aid and benefit.
   (D)   The rights enumerated herein shall not be construed as modifying the
prohibition on strikes contained in this article.
('74 Code, § 2-2-4) (Ord. 153-1971; Am. Ord. 4-1977; Am. Ord._2020-045; Am.
Ord._2021-019)
§ 3-2-5 MANAGEMENT RIGHTS.
   Subject to existing law, the Mayor and his administrative staff shall have
the following rights:
   (A)   To direct the work of its employees;
   (B)   To hire, promote, evaluate, transfer and assign employees;
   (C)   To demote, suspend, discharge or terminate employees for just cause;
   (D)   To determine staffing requirements;
   (E)   To maintain the efficiency of the city government and ensure the
carrying out of normal management functions;
   (F)   To take actions as may be necessary to carry out the mission of the
city government in emergencies; and
   (G)   To manage and to exercise judgment on all matters not specifically
prohibited by this article or by a collective bargaining agreement in effect
between the city employer and an employee organization.
('74 Code, § 2-2-5) (Ord. 153-1971; Am. Ord. 4-1977; Am. Ord._2020-045; Am.
Ord._2021-019)
§ 3-2-6 EXCLUSIVE REPRESENTATION.
   (A)   A labor organization that has been certified by the Labor-Management
Relations Board as representing the city employees in the appropriate
bargaining unit shall be the exclusive representative of all city employees in
the appropriate bargaining unit. The exclusive representative shall act for all
city employees in the appropriate bargaining unit and negotiate a collective
bargaining agreement covering all employees in the appropriate bargaining unit.
The exclusive representative shall represent the interests of all city
employees in the appropriate bargaining unit without discrimination or regard
to membership in the labor organization. A claim by a city employee that the
exclusive representative has violated this duty of fair representation shall be
forever barred if not brought within six months of the date on which the city
employee knew, or reasonably should have known of the violation.
   (B)   This section does not prevent a city employee, acting individually,
from presenting a grievance without the intervention of the exclusive
representative. At a hearing on a grievance brought by a city employee
individually, the exclusive representative shall be afforded the opportunity to
be present and make its views known. An adjustment made shall not be
inconsistent with or in violation of the collective bargaining agreement then
in effect between the city and the exclusive representative.
   (C)   The city shall provide an exclusive representative of an appropriate
bargaining unit reasonable access to employees within the bargaining unit,
including the following:
      (1)   For purposes of newly hired employees in the bargaining unit,
reasonable access includes:
         (a)   The right to meet with new employees, without loss of employee
compensation or leave benefits; and
         (b)   The right to meet with new employees within 30 days from the
date of hire for a period of at least 30 minutes, but not more than 120
minutes, during new employee orientation.
      (2)   For purposes of employees in the bargaining unit who are not new
employees, reasonable access includes:
         (a)   The right to meet with employees during the employees' regular
work hours at the employees' regular work location to investigate and discuss
grievances, workplace-related complaints and other matters relating to
employment relations; and
         (b)   The right to conduct meetings at the employees' regular work
location before or after the employees' regular work hours, during meal periods
and during any other break periods.
   (D)   The city shall permit an exclusive representative to use the city's
facilities or property, whether owned or leased by the city, for purposes of
conducting meetings with the represented employees in the bargaining unit. An
exclusive representative may hold the meetings described in this section at a
time and place set by the exclusive representative. The exclusive
representative shall have the right to conduct the meetings without undue
interference and may establish reasonable rules regarding appropriate conduct
for meeting attendees.
   (E)   The meetings described in this section shall not interfere with the
city's operations.
   (F)   If the city has the information in its records, the city will provide,
in an editable digital file format agreed to by the exclusive representative,
the following information for each employee in an appropriate bargaining unit:
      (1)   The employee's name and date of hire;
      (2)   The employee's cellular, home, and work telephone numbers;
      (3)   The employee's work and personal electronic mail addresses;
      (4)   Home address or personal mailing address; and
      (5)   Employment information, including the employee's job title, salary,
and work site location.
   (G)   The city shall provide the information described in division (F) of
this section to the exclusive representative within ten days from the date of
hire for newly hired employees in an appropriate bargaining unit, and every 120
days for employees in the bargaining unit who are not newly hired employees.
The information shall be kept confidential by the labor organization and its
employees or officers.
   (H)   An exclusive representative shall have the right to use the city's
electronic mail system to communicate with the employees in the bargaining unit
regarding:
      (1)   Collective bargaining, including the administration of collective
bargaining agreement;
      (2)   The investigation of grievances or other disputes relating to
employment relations; and
      (3)   Matters involving the governance or business of the labor
organization.
(Ord._2020-045; Am. Ord._2021-019)
§ 3-2-7 DETERMINATION OF REPRESENTATION.
   (A)   Any employee organization may file a written request with the Board
asserting that a majority of the members of a bargaining unit of the city
desires to be represented by it for the purpose of collective bargaining and
asking to be recognized as the exclusive bargaining representative. The request
shall include a demonstration of support of at least 30% of the employees in
the bargaining unit by means of a dated membership list or signed and dated
membership cards of those employees desiring representation. Notice of the
request shall be posted on the next working day following the filing of the
request, by the City Human Resources Department in a place conspicuous to the
city employees in the bargaining unit.
   (B)   Other employee organizations may file with the Board a written claim,
within ten days after the posting of the notice of the request as specified in
division (A) above, showing a demonstration of support of at least 30% of the
employees in the bargaining unit by means of a dated membership list or signed
and dated membership cards of those employees desiring representation. Notice
of this claim shall also be posted on the next working day following the filing
of the claim, by the City Human Resources Department in a place conspicuous to
the city employees in the bargaining unit.
   (C)   If an employee organization wishes to solicit membership cards from
city employees who are not in an existing bargaining unit, upon request, the
Mayor shall provide a list of the requested employees to the employee
organization. If the Board finds that the employee organization subsequently
presents a valid demonstration of support from 50% of the employees, plus one
additional employee, in the proposed unit, and that no other employee
organization has filed a written claim under division (B) of this section, the
Board shall certify the employee organization as the exclusive representative
of the bargaining unit.
   (D)   If the Board does not certify the organization as the exclusive
representative under division (C) of this section, the Board shall take one of
the following actions:
      (1)   Review the employee organization's showing of interest and resolve
any disputes over whether the employee organization has presented a valid
demonstration of support from 50% of the employees, plus one additional
employee, in an appropriately constituted bargaining unit. If the Board finds
the employee organization's demonstration of support does not exceed 50% of the
employees in an appropriate bargaining unit, the employee organization shall
have five additional working days to submit supplemental demonstration of
support. If the Board determines that a majority of city employees in an
appropriately constituted bargaining unit support representation by the
employee organization for the purpose of collective bargaining as provided for
in this article, the Board shall certify that employee organization as the
exclusive representative for the bargaining unit; or
      (2)   If the employee organization has demonstrated support from at least
30% of the employees in the bargaining unit, but less than a majority of the
employees in the bargaining unit, the Board shall call and hold a
representation election within 45 days from the date of the posting of the
notice to determine whether an employee organization shall be the exclusive
representative for the unit.
      (3)   Neither an election nor certification by a showing of interest
shall occur if:
         (a)   There is currently in effect a lawful written agreement between
the city and an exclusive bargaining representative for the bargaining unit
involved; or
         (b)   Within the preceding 12 months there has been held a
representation election or a decertification election for the bargaining unit;
or
         (c)   In the opinion of the Board after holding such hearing as may be
appropriate, the bargaining unit described in the request for representation is
not an appropriate unit in accordance with this article, or that such
appropriateness has not yet been determined by the Board. If the Board
subsequently determines that the requested bargaining unit is appropriate, the
Board shall then certify the employee organization's showing of support or call
and hold a representation election as provided above.
      (4)   In the event an employee organization fails to be certified as the
exclusive bargaining representative after a showing of interest and/or
election, employees in that bargaining unit may be included in an alternate
bargaining unit for the purposes of a new organizational effort by that
employee organization. Each such alternate unit shall be in itself an
appropriate bargaining unit.
   (E)   The Board shall call and hold all elections within the time limits
established by this article. The ballot shall contain the name of any labor
organization submitting a petition containing signatures of at least 30% of the
city employees in the appropriate bargaining unit. The ballot shall also
contain a provision allowing city employees to indicate whether they do not
desire to be represented by a labor organization. An election shall only be
valid if 40% of the eligible employees in the bargaining unit vote in the
election.
   (F)   Election disputes shall be resolved by the Board.
      (1)   In the event of an election involving more than one employee
organization, wherein no choice on the ballot receives the vote of a majority
of the city employees voting, then and in such event a runoff election shall be
held within 30 days with a choice consisting of the two choices receiving the
largest number of votes cast. The determination of representative status in
such runoff election shall be governed by the provisions set forth in division
(D) above.
   (G)   The exclusive bargaining representative shall represent all employees
covered by the terms of the collective bargaining agreement.
   (H)   The decertification of any employee organization which has been
recognized as the exclusive bargaining representative of employees in an
appropriate bargaining unit may be affected by the filing of a written request
for decertification supported by a showing that 30% of the employees in the
bargaining unit seek to have a decertification election. If the showing of
interest in support of such a petition is sufficient, the Board shall call and
hold a decertification election within 45 days from the date of the receipt of
the request. If a majority of the city employees in the bargaining unit vote in
favor of decertification of an employee organization, the Board shall decertify
that employee organization as the exclusive bargaining representative for the
bargaining unit.
   (I)   No decertification election shall be held if within the preceding 12
months the Board has held a representation election or a decertification
election for the bargaining unit.
   (J)   No petition for representation or decertification shall be entertained
by the Board unless such petition and the requisite showing of support therefor
shall have been filed with the Board during the 30-day period between the 120th
day and the 90th day immediately preceding the expiration date of the contract.
   (K)   The existence of an exclusive bargaining representative shall not
prevent city employees in or out of the bargaining unit from taking their
grievances to their supervisor or the City Human Resources Department. Any
action by the city government in connection with grievance handling shall not
be inconsistent with this article or the terms and conditions of employment
established by an exclusive bargaining representative and the city for the
bargaining unit involved.
('74 Code, § 2-2-6) (Ord. 153-1971; Am. Ord. 69-1973; Am. Ord. 4-1977; Am. Ord.
4-2001; Am. Ord._2020-045; Am. Ord._2021-019)
§ 3-2-8 DUTY TO BARGAIN.
   The city government and any employee organization recognized as the
exclusive representative for a unit, through their designated agents, shall
bargain concerning hours, salary, wages, working conditions and other terms and
conditions of employment not in violation of law or local ordinance and not in
conflict with the provisions of §§
3-1-1 et seq., the Merit System establishing classified and unclassified
service, and methods of initial employment, provided, however, that the
provisions of a collective bargaining agreement which has been ratified and
approved by the Mayor shall, where in conflict with any other provision of §§
3-1-1 et seq. govern. This duty includes an obligation to confer in good faith
with respect to terms and conditions of employment.
('74 Code, § 2-2-7) (Ord. 153-1971; Am. Ord. 218-1972; Am. Ord. 4-1977; Am.
Ord. 54-1978; Am. Ord._2020-045; Am. Ord._2021-019)
§ 3-2-9 DETERMINATION OF BARGAINING UNITS.
   (A)   The appropriateness of the bargaining unit will be investigated and
determined by the Board.
   (B)   Appropriate bargaining units shall be established on the basis of
occupational groups or a clear and identifiable community of interest in
employment terms, employment conditions, and related personnel matters among
the employees involved. Occupational groups shall generally be identified as
blue collar, secretarial clerical, technical, paraprofessional, professional,
corrections, firefighters, and police officers. Department, craft, or trade
designations other than as specified above shall not determine bargaining
units. The parties, by mutual agreement and approval of the Board, may further
consolidate occupational groups.
   (C)   The essential factors in determining appropriate bargaining units
shall include the principles of efficient administration of government, the
history of collective bargaining, and the assurance to employees of their
rights guaranteed by the ordinance.
   (D)   A bargaining unit shall not include both professional and non-
professional city employees nor shall it include supervisors, or confidential
employees.
('74 Code, § 2-2-8) (Ord. 153-1971; Am. Ord. 69-1973; Am. Ord. 4-1977; Am. Ord.
2020-045; Am. Ord._2021-019)
§ 3-2-10 PROHIBITED PRACTICES.
   (A)   The city government is prohibited from:
      (1)   Discriminating against an employee in regard to the terms and
conditions of employment because of the employee's membership in a labor
organization.
      (2)   Interfering with, restraining or coercing city employees in the
exercise of their rights under this article or use public funds to influence
the decision of its employees regarding whether to support or oppose a labor
organization that represents or seeks to represent those employees, or whether
to become a member of any labor organization; provided however, that this
subsection does not apply to activities performed or expenses incurred:
         (a)   addressing a grievance or negotiating or administering a
collective bargaining agreement;
         (b)   allowing a labor organization or its representatives access to
the city's facilities or properties;
         (c)   performing an activity required by federal or state law or by a
collective bargaining agreement;
         (d)   negotiating, entering into or carrying out an agreement with a
labor organization;
         (e)   paying wages to a represented employee while the employee is
performing duties if the payment is permitted under a collective bargaining
agreement; or
         (f)   representing the city in a proceeding before the board or a
local board or in a judicial review of that proceeding;
      (3)   Interfering with or dominating the formation or administration of
any employee organization, interfering with the selection of an agent or
representative for bargaining or adjustment of grievances;
      (4)   Discrimination in regard to hiring or conditions of employment for
the purpose of encouraging or discouraging membership in any employee
organization;
      (5)   Refusing to negotiate in good faith with a certified exclusive
bargaining representative of an employee organization;
      (6)   Discharging or discriminating against a city employee because he
has signed or filed an affidavit, petition, grievance, complaint, or charges or
given testimony under the provisions of this article or because a city employee
is forming, joining, or choosing to be represented by a labor organization;
      (7)   Violating a written agreement in force which was negotiated under
the provisions of this article;
      (8)   Causing, instigating, or engaging in an employee lockout;
      (9)   Refusing or failing to comply with a provision of this article or
the Board’s Rules.
   (B)   An employee organization, a group of city employees, or a city
employee individually is prohibited from:
      (1)   Interfering with, restraining, or coercing employees in the
exercise of their designated duties or their rights under this article;
      (2)   Restraining, coercing, or interfering with the city in the
selection of its agent for bargaining or for adjustment of grievances;
      (3)   Causing or attempting to cause a city supervisor to discriminate
against a city employee because of membership or lack of membership in an
employee organization;
      (4)   Refusing to negotiate and/or conduct business in good faith with
the designated representative of the city government.
      (5)   Violating the provisions of any written agreement in force;
      (6)   Picketing the homes or private businesses of officials,
administrative officers, or representatives of city government;
      (7)   Engaging in, inducing, or encouraging any city employee or group of
employees to engage in a strike, a work stoppage, or work slowdown;
      (8)   Discriminating against a city employee with regard to labor
organization membership, race, color, religion, creed, age, sex, or national
origin;
      (9)   Refusing or failing to comply with a provision of this article or
the Board’s Rules.
   (C)   It shall be a prohibited practice for any elected or appointed
official of the city government or for any employee organization, group of city
employees or individual city employee to attempt to influence negotiations or
to interfere with the normal progress of negotiations between the duly
authorized negotiating teams of the city government and of the employee
organization.
   (D)   Any controversy concerning prohibited practices will be submitted to
the Board within the time period required by the Board's Rules. Proceedings
against the party alleged to have committed a prohibited practice shall be
commenced by service upon the accused party and the Board of a written notice
together with a copy of the charges. The accused party shall have ten work days
within which to serve on the opposing party and the Board a written answer to
such charges.
('74 Code, § 2-2-9) (Ord. 153-1971; Am. Ord. 4-1977; Am. Ord. 4-2001; Am. Ord.
2020-045; Am. Ord._2021-019)
§ 3-2-11 HEARINGS AND DECISIONS.
   (A)   The Board shall promulgate rules of procedure for the conduct of the
hearings and proceedings required by this article. The hearings shall be
conducted in an orderly and informal manner without adherence to the technical
rules of evidence. The Board's hearings and decisions shall be on the record.
The Board shall have the authority to administer oaths, subpoena witnesses and
compel the production of documents as it deems necessary to the conduct of its
proceeding and its subpoenas shall be enforceable in the District Court.
   (B)   An aggrieved party may appeal the decision of the Board by following
the Rules of Civil Procedure for the District Courts. The decision of the Board
shall be affirmed unless the decision is found to be: arbitrary, capricious or
an abuse of discretion; unsupported by evidence in the record taken as a whole;
or, otherwise not in accordance with law.
(Ord. 4-2001; Am. Ord._2020-045; Am. Ord._2021-019)
§ 3-2-12 PENALTIES AND SANCTIONS.
   (A)   If the Board determines that a strike, as defined by this article, has
occurred, the Board may terminate the collective bargaining agreement, order
decertification of the employee organization, and inform the employee
organization that it no longer represents employees in the bargaining unit
involved. The Board shall also notify the employees in the subject bargaining
unit of such action and advise them that they will not be privileged to bargain
with the city government through a collective bargaining agent for at least 12
months. In such a case, the employee organization that represented the
employees who went on strike shall be prohibited from participating in a
representation election for city employees for a minimum of 12 months.
   (B)   If the Board determines that a party has committed a violation of §
3-2-10, the appropriate District Court may, if requested:
      (1)   Issue an order restraining and enjoining such violation.
      (2)   In the case of a strike as defined by this article, the District
Court may impose on the employee organization a fine which will be set in
accordance with the damages and/or loss of revenue involved.
('74 Code, § 2-2-10) (Ord. 153-1971; Am. Ord. 4-1977; Am. Ord. 4-2001; Am. Ord.
2020-045; Am. Ord._2021-019)
§ 3-2-13 COLLECTIVE BARGAINING AGREEMENTS.
   (A)   All agreements reached between the city and an exclusive bargaining
representative as a result of collective bargaining will be reduced to writing
in the form of a contract between the parties.
   (B)   The cost of writing and reproducing copies of such agreements shall be
shared according to the number of copies desired by each party to negotiations.
('74 Code, § 2-2-11) (Ord. 153-1971; Am. Ord. 4-1977; Am. Ord. 12-1977; Am.
Ord. 4-2001; Am. Ord._2020-045; Am. Ord._2021-019)
§ 3-2-14 NEGOTIATING PROCEDURES.
   (A)   Tentative Agreement.
      (1)   Tentative agreements reached during negotiations will be reduced to
writing, dated, and initialed by each team spokesman.
      (2)   Such tentative agreement is conditional and may be withdrawn should
later discussion change either team's understanding of the section as it
relates to another part of the agreement.
   (B)   Ratification. Complete agreement on any matter in negotiations will be
reached when the employee organization membership and the Mayor have ratified
the agreement.
('74 Code, § 2-2-12) (Ord. 153-1971; Am. Ord. 4-1977; Am. Ord. 12-1977; Am.
Ord. 4-2001; Am. Ord._2020-045; Am. Ord._2021-019)
§ 3-2-15 IMPASSE PROCEDURES.
   (A)   If negotiations between the parties reach impasse, the following
procedures shall be followed unless the parties have agreed in writing to an
alternate procedure:
      (1)   Either party may request from the Board that a mediator with the
federal mediation and conciliation service be assigned to the negotiations,
unless the parties can agree on a mediator; and
      (2)   if the impasse continues after a 30-day mediation period, either
party may request a list of seven arbitrators from the federal mediation and
conciliation service. One arbitrator shall be chosen by the parties by
alternately striking names from such list. Who strikes first shall be
determined by coin toss. The arbitrator shall render a final, binding, written
decision resolving unresolved issues pursuant to Subsection H of Section 10-7E-
17 NMSA 1978 and the Uniform Arbitration Act no later than 30 days after the
arbitrator has been notified of selection by the parties. The arbitrator's
decision shall be limited to a selection of one of the two parties' complete,
last, best offer. The costs of an arbitrator and the arbitrator's related costs
conducted pursuant to this subsection shall be shared equally by the parties.
Each party shall be responsible for bearing the cost of presenting its case.
The decision shall be subject to judicial review pursuant to the standard set
forth in the Uniform Arbitration Act.
   (B)   In the event that an impasse continues after the expiration of a
contract, the existing contract will continue in full force and effect until it
is replaced by a subsequent written agreement. However, this shall not require
the public employer to increase any employees' levels, steps or grades of
compensation contained in the existing contract.
('74 Code, § 2-2-13) (Ord. 4-1977; Am. Ord. 4-2001; Am. Ord._2020-045; Am. Ord.
2021-019)
§ 3-2-16 CITY LABOR-MANAGEMENT RELATIONS BOARD.
   There shall be formed, to assist in the implementation and administration of
the article, a city Labor-Management Relations Board of three members. In view
of the legal work involved in the interpretation of this article, Board members
shall normally be members of the legal profession or individuals who possess
expertise in the field of employee relations or both. Board members shall serve
for a period of two years commencing October 1. The Board shall be selected as
follows:
   (A)   Each exclusive representative shall appoint one person to a committee
that will be charged with selecting one person to the Board. This committee
will meet once every two years in September and select the employees' member of
the Board for the following years.
   (B)   The Mayor of the city shall during the same month appoint the second
member of the Board.
   (C)   The third member and chairperson of the Board shall be appointed
mutually by the members appointed by the Mayor and the employee organizations
by September 15.
   (D)   In case the Board must meet in accordance with this article during the
absence of a member of the Board, upon request of the Board, the President of
the City Council may appoint an interim Board member from the public at large
with due regard to the representative character of the Board. In the event a
Board member cannot complete the two year term, a new member shall be selected
for the remainder of the term in accord with the selection process of this
article.
   (E)   The members of the Board shall be compensated at the rate determined
by the City Clerk's Office, not to exceed $300 per day, each for each day of
hearing or meeting.
('74 Code, § 2-2-14) (Ord. 153-1971; Am. Ord. 218-1972; Am. Ord. 4-1977; Am.
Ord. 4-2001; Am. Ord._2020-045; Am. Ord._2021-019)
§ 3-2-17 APPLICABILITY.
   This article shall preempt all contrary local ordinances, or executive
orders except those provisions of §§
3-1-1 et seq., Merit System; Personnel Regulations, establishing:
   (A)   Classified and unclassified service;
   (B)   Methods of initial employment; and
   (C)   Grievance and appeal procedures for classified employees. Classified
employees may utilize the grievance and appeal procedures as set forth by §§
3-1-1 et seq. provided a collective bargaining agreement does not explicitly
conflict with such use.
('74 Code, § 2-2-15) (Ord. 153-1971; Am. Ord. 4-1977; Am. Ord. 54-1978; Am.
Ord. 4-2001; Am. Ord._2020-045; Am. Ord._2021-019)
§ 3-2-18 GUIDELINES COMMITTEE.
   (A)   To facilitate communication and coordination between the Mayor and the
City Council concerning collective bargaining strategy, there is created a
Guidelines Committee composed of three City Councillors appointed by the
Council President and three members of the Mayor's staff, one of whom shall be
the Chief Administrative Officer. The Guidelines Committee shall, in accordance
with the New Mexico Open Meetings Act, promulgate rules to effectuate the
purposes of this section.
   (B)   The Guidelines Committee shall meet in closed session with appropriate
staff in accordance with the New Mexico Open Meetings Act as necessary to
discuss bargaining strategy preliminary to collective bargaining negotiations
between the city and employee organizations.
   (C)   At the time negotiations are opened, the Guidelines Committee shall
entertain a presentation from the employee organization involved in the subject
collective bargaining negotiations summarizing its positions and proposals in
the upcoming negotiations so the Guidelines Committee may be fully informed.
The Guidelines Committee shall not otherwise meet to hear or entertain
presentations by employee organizations of collective bargaining proposals,
counter proposals, grievances or any other issue related to employee/labor
relations except that the Mayor may ask the Guidelines Committee to convene
upon the Board entering a finding that a strike has occurred.
(Ord. 4-2001; Am. Ord._2020-045; Am. Ord._2021-019)
§ 3-2-19 CONSISTENCY WITH CITY BUDGET ORDINANCE.
   Any contract between the city and an employee organization, which contains
provisions that result in expenditures greater than the amount, appropriated
for wages and benefits in an adopted city budget for the initial fiscal year of
the contract or which contains a multi-year commitment shall require the review
and approval by the City Council. In order for any contract to be approved by
the City Council, the City Council must approve the economic components of the
contract through an executive communication and adopt a resolution providing an
appropriation or deappropriation or both to cover the cost of the contract,
such an appropriation must occur for each fiscal year covered by the contract.
If an appropriation cannot be made during any particular year of a multi-year
contract due to an economic downturn, the city and the effected bargaining unit
must reopen bargaining for that fiscal year.
(Ord. 20-2002; Am. Ord._2020-045; Am. Ord._2021-019)
ARTICLE 3: CONFLICT OF INTEREST
Section
   
3-3-1   Short title
   
3-3-2   Definitions
   
3-3-3   Employee conduct; standards
   
3-3-4   Gifts and donations prohibited
   
3-3-5   Conflict of interest; employees
   
3-3-6   Confidential information
   
3-3-7   Conflicts of interest; former employees
   
3-3-8   False statements prohibited
   
3-3-9   Nepotism prohibited
   
3-3-10   Outside employment
   
3-3-11   Code of conduct
   
3-3-12   Violation by employees
   
3-3-13   Violation by former employee
§ 3-3-1 SHORT TITLE.
   This article may be cited as the "Conflict of Interest Ordinance."
('74 Code, § 2-3-1) (Ord. 31-1985)
§ 3-3-2 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this article, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   BUSINESS. A corporation, partnership, sole proprietorship, firm,
organization or other legal entity carrying on business.
   CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION. Information which by law or practice is not
available to the public.
   CONTROLLING INTEREST. A financial interest in a business which is greater
than twenty percent.
   EMPLOYEE. Every appointed classified or unclassified officer or employee of
the city who receives compensation in the form of a salary or who is eligible
to receive per diem and mileage. The term employee shall not include elected
officials of the city.
   FINANCIAL INTEREST. Any interest which shall yield, directly or indirectly,
any monetary or other material benefit to a city employee or to the city
employee's spouse or minor children. The term "financial interest" shall not
include the employee's salary or other compensation authorized by law.
   OFFICER. All members of boards, commissions and committees, the Chief
Administrative Officer, and all department directors, division directors and
section chiefs.
   OFFICIAL ACT. An official decision, vote, approval, disapproval or other
action which involves the use of discretionary authority.
('74 Code, § 2-3-2) (Ord. 31-1985)
§ 3-3-3 EMPLOYEE CONDUCT; STANDARDS.
   Employees must in all instances maintain their conduct at the highest
standards. No employee shall continue in his or her city employment with pay
when he or she engages in activities which are found to more than likely lead
to the diminishing of the integrity, efficiency, or discipline of the city
service.
('74 Code, § 2-3-3) (Ord. 31-1985)
§ 3-3-4 GIFTS AND DONATIONS PROHIBITED.
   (A)   No reward, favor, gift, emolument, or other form of remuneration in
addition to regular compensation and employee benefits shall be received by any
employee for the performance or non-performance of his or her duties from any
vendor, contractor, individual or firm doing business with the city or who can
be reasonably anticipated to do business with the city in the future, or from
any other source having or proposing to have any relationship with the city.
   (B)   Nothing in this section shall be construed to prohibit an occasional,
non-pecuniary gift, insignificant in value; an award publicly presented in
recognition of public service, acts of heroism or for solving of crimes; a
commercially reasonable loan made in the ordinary course of business by an
institution authorized by the laws of the State to engage in the business of
making loans.
('74 Code, § 2-3-4) (Ord. 31-1985)
§ 3-3-5 CONFLICT OF INTEREST; EMPLOYEES.
   (A)   An employee shall disqualify himself or herself from participating in
any official act directly affecting a business in which he or she has a
financial interest. No employee shall acquire a financial interest at a time
when he or she believes or has reason to believe that it will be directly
affected by his or her official act.
   (B)   Every employee who has a financial interest which he or she believes
or has reason to believe may be affected by an official act taken within the
scope of his or her employment shall disclose the precise nature and value of
such interest. The disclosures shall be made in writing to the City Clerk at
the time the conflict occurs and during the month of January every year
thereafter. Additionally, it shall be the duty of an employee to inform his or
her department head of such a financial interest at the time he or she acquires
it. The information on the disclosures, except for the valuations attributed to
the reported interests, shall be made available by the City Clerk for
inspection to any citizen of this State; provided, however, the valuation shall
be confidential. The filing of disclosures pursuant to this section is a
condition of entering upon and continuing in city employment.
   (C)   The city shall not enter into any contract with a business in which an
employee has a controlling interest, involving services or property of a value
in excess of $1,000 unless the contract is made after public notice and
competitive bidding or the Chief Administrative Officer has made a written
waiver of this prohibition; provided that this subsection does not apply to a
contract of employment with the city.
   (D)   Any purchase order or contract entered into by the city with a
business in which an employee of the city has a controlling interest is void if
the employee failed to comply with the provisions of this Section prior to the
city entering into such contract or purchase order.
('74 Code, § 2-3-5) (Ord. 31-1985)
§ 3-3-6 CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION.
   No employee or former employee shall disclose or use confidential
information acquired by virtue of his or her municipal employment or office
without prior written approval of the Chief Administrative Officer. Nothing in
this subsection shall prohibit a former employee from entering into a contract
to represent the city in a confidential capacity.
('74 Code, § 2-3-6) (Ord. 31-1985)
§ 3-3-7 CONFLICTS OF INTEREST; FORMER EMPLOYEES.
   (A)   A former employee shall not within one year after the date of
termination from employment represent any person or business in connection with
a matter in which the former employee has performed an official act, unless the
Chief Administrative Officer consents to such representation. No person or
business with which a former employee is associated may knowingly undertake or
continue a private representation in such a matter unless:
      (1)   The disqualified former employee is screened from participation in
the matter and is apportioned no part of the compensation therefrom; and
      (2)   Written notice is promptly given to the Chief Administrative
Officer.
   (B)   Nothing in this section shall prohibit a former employee from entering
into a contract to represent the city in any matter.
('74 Code, § 2-3-7) (Ord. 31-1985)
§ 3-3-8 FALSE STATEMENTS PROHIBITED.
   (A)   No person shall willfully or corruptly make any false statement,
certificate, mark, rating, or report in regard to any test, certification,
appointment, or investigation, or in any manner commit any fraud, conceal any
wrong-doing or knowingly withhold information about wrongdoing in connection
with employment with the city or in connection with the work-related conduct of
any city employee.
   (B)   No person seeking appointment to, or promotion in the service of the
city, shall either directly or indirectly give, render, or pay any money,
service, or other valuable thing to any person for, or on account of, or in
connection with his or her test, appointment, proposed appointment, promotion
or proposed promotion; provided, however, that this provision shall not apply
to payments made to duly licensed employment agencies.
('74 Code, § 2-3-8) (Ord. 31-1985)
§ 3-3-9 NEPOTISM PROHIBITED.
   No relative of a city employee, by blood or marriage, may be employed in any
position with the city in which the employee may be able directly to supervise,
control or influence the work or employment status of the relative or the
affairs of the organizational unit in which the relative is employed.
('74 Code, § 2-3-9) (Ord. 31-1985)
§ 3-3-10 OUTSIDE EMPLOYMENT.
   No employee shall engage in outside employment without prior approval of the
Chief Administrative Officer, or a designee of the Chief Administrative
Officer. No employee shall continue outside employment if such employment has a
negative impact on his or her job performance. A determination that such
employment has a negative impact on an employee's job performance is not the
subject of a grievance as defined in
§ 3-1-24 of this chapter. No employee who is receiving Worker's Compensation
benefits shall engage in outside employment.
('74 Code, § 2-3-10) (Ord. 31-1985)
§ 3-3-11 CODE OF CONDUCT.
   (A)   The Director of the Personnel Services Department shall, subject to
the prior approval of the Chief Administrative Officer, promulgate a Code of
Conduct for all employees.
   (B)   In addition to the Code of Conduct promulgated by the Director of
Personnel Services, a city department director may promulgate a Code of Conduct
for all employees of his or her department which prescribes standards in
addition to those set forth in this article and the Code of Conduct promulgated
by the Director of Personnel Services which are peculiar and appropriate to the
function and purpose for which the department was created or exists. Such
codes, upon approval of the Chief Administrative Officer, shall further govern
the conduct of employees and if violated, shall constitute cause for dismissal,
demotion or suspension.
('74 Code, § 2-3-11) (Ord. 31-1985)
§ 3-3-12 VIOLATION BY EMPLOYEES.
   Violation of any of the provisions of this article by any employee is
grounds for disciplinary action, including dismissal, in accordance with the
provisions of §§
3-1-1 et seq., the Merit System Ordinance.
('74 Code, § 2-3-12) (Ord. 31-1985)
§ 3-3-13 VIOLATION BY FORMER EMPLOYEE.
   Violation of any of the provisions of this article by a former employee is a
misdemeanor, and, upon conviction the former employee shall be subject to the
penalty set forth in §
1-1-99.
('74 Code, § 2-3-13 (part)) (Ord. 31-1985)
ARTICLE 4: PER DIEM AND MILEAGE
Section
   
3-4-1   Authority
   
3-4-2   Short title
   
3-4-3   Purpose
   
3-4-4   Definitions
   
3-4-5   Restrictions; regulations; per diem and mileage rates; in lieu of
actual expenses
§ 3-4-1 AUTHORITY.
   The City Council, pursuant to the provisions of Article X, Section 6 of the
Constitution of New Mexico, hereby enacts this article relating to Per Diem and
Mileage of Public Officers and Employees of the city as authorized by such
section and for the purpose of providing maximum local self-government.
('74 Code, § 2-8-1) (Ord. 32-1975)
§ 3-4-2 SHORT TITLE.
   This article shall be known and may be cited as the "Per Diem and Mileage
Ordinance."
('74 Code, § 2-8-2) (Ord. 32-1975)
§ 3-4-3 PURPOSE.
   The purpose of this article is to establish standard rates for reimbursement
for travel for public officers and employees coming under this article.
('74 Code, § 2-8-3) (Ord. 32-1975)
§ 3-4-4 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this article, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   EMPLOYEE. Any person who is an officer or employee of the city and whose
salary is paid either completely or in part from public money.
   MAYOR. The Mayor or his authorized representative.
   PUBLIC OFFICER. Every elected or appointed officer of the city.
('74 Code, § 2-8-4) (Ord. 32-1975; Am. Ord. 46-1978)
§ 3-4-5 RESTRICTIONS; REGULATIONS; PER DIEM AND MILEAGE RATES; IN LIEU OF
ACTUAL EXPENSES.
   (A)   The use of city sponsored credit cards is specifically authorized for:
      (1)   Purchases of transportation by common carrier in connection with
authorized travel on official city business;
      (2)   Reservations for lodging, facilities, or rental cars in connection
with authorized travel on official city business; and
      (3)   Purchases necessary for the use of vehicles owned by the city.
   (B)   Per diem allowances for meals and incidental travel expenses may be
advanced to mitigate the financial burden placed on public officers or
employees required to travel on official city business.
   (C)   All travel on official city business shall be approved in advance of
the travel. Public funds shall not be expended to reimburse any public officer
or employee for expenses for out-of-state travel without written authorization
from the Mayor or his authorized representative. This written authorization
shall not be required of the Mayor, City Councilors or members of the City
Council staff.
   (D)   The Mayor shall promulgate regulations consistent with those issued by
the Internal Revenue Service establishing the amount of and method of payment
of per diem and mileage for authorized travel and transportation expenses
incurred in conducting official city business. The required accounting for all
travel and transportation expenses shall be in compliance with city travel
regulations and shall be accompanied by documentation or receipts acceptable to
the city.
   (E)   Unless provided to the contrary in the city travel regulations, the
per diem and mileage, or per diem and cost of tickets for common carriers, paid
to salaried public officers or employees is in lieu of actual expenses for
transportation, lodging, and subsistence. When city travel regulations permit
the payment of actual expenses for lodging, meals or incidental travel
expenses, no per diem shall be allowable or paid.
('74 Code, § 2-8-6) (Ord. 32-1975; Am. Ord. 46-1978; Am. Ord. 10-2005)
ARTICLE 5: RESERVED
ARTICLE 6: RETIREMENT PLAN
Section
   
3-6-1   Plan established
   
3-6-2   Definitions
   
3-6-3   Supplemental retirement fund committee
   
3-6-4   Retirement plan officers
   
3-6-5   Membership
   
3-6-6   Service credit
   
3-6-7   Service retirement
   
3-6-8   Albuquerque annuity
   
3-6-9   Total and permanent disability
   
3-6-10   Albuquerque annuity offset
   
3-6-11   Annuity reserve fund
   
3-6-12   Former plan transfer
   
3-6-13   Investment of funds
   
3-6-14   Administrative expenses
   
3-6-15   Payments from plan funds
   
3-6-16   Assignments prohibited
   
3-6-17   Effective date of plan
§ 3-6-1 PLAN ESTABLISHED.
   The city supplemental retirement plan is hereby established. The purpose of
the retirement plan is to provide benefits for certain periods of city service,
not covered by the Public Employees Retirement Association of New Mexico, to
employees of the city who entered the city's employ prior to the date the city
becomes an affiliated public employer in the said Public Employees Retirement
Association of New Mexico or said employee's widow/widower.
('74 Code, § 2-5-1) (Ord. 964; Am. Ord. 6-1988; Am. Ord. 52-1989)
§ 3-6-2 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this article, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   AFFILIATION DATE. September 1, 1954.
   ALBUQUERQUE ANNUITY. An annual amount paid from funds of the retirement
plan, in equal monthly installments, throughout the life of the person.
   ALBUQUERQUE SERVICE.  Service credited a member to the extent provided in §
3-6-6.
   ANNUITANT. Any retired member who is in receipt of an Albuquerque annuity
and a state annuity, or either of them.
   CITY MEMBER. Any member who exempts himself from membership in the state
system.
   COMMITTEE or SUPPLEMENTAL RETIREMENT FUND COMMITTEE. The committee provided
for in this article.
   COMPENSATION or SALARY. A member's annual rate of compensation paid by the
city for services rendered by him. In cases where a member's compensation is
not all paid in money, the Committee shall fix the value of that part of his
compensation not paid in money.
   CONTRIBUTING MEMBER. Any member who becomes a member of the state system.
   EFFECTIVE DATE.  September 2, 1954.
   FINAL AVERAGE SALARY. The average of the highest annual compensations
received by a member for a period of five consecutive but not necessarily
continuous, years of service contained within his 10 years of total service
immediately preceding his retirement.
   FISCAL YEAR. The 12 months period coinciding with the city's fiscal year.
   FORMER PLAN. The retirement system created and established by Ordinance No.
598 as amended by Ordinance No. 680 and Ordinance No. 907, and repealed by this
article.
   FRACTION OF A YEAR. The ratio of the number of days employed to 365 days.
   MEMBER. Any person included in the membership of the retirement plan.
   REGULAR INTEREST. Such rate or rates of interest per annum, compounded
annually, as the Committee shall from time to time determine.
   RETIREMENT PLAN.  The city supplemental retirement plan created and
established by this article.
   RETIREMENT.  Withdrawal from city service with an Albuquerque annuity and a
state annuity, or either of them.
   SERVICE. Service rendered to the city by an employee of the city.
   STATE SERVICE. Service credited a member by the state system.
   STATE SYSTEM.  The Public Employees Retirement Association of New Mexico,
established by Chapter 17, Laws of 1947, and as may from time to time be
amended.
   TOTAL SERVICE. The number of years, and fraction of a year, of service
rendered to the city by a member in the employ of the city. The term "total
service" shall include service rendered before and after September 1, 1954.
   VOLUNTARY RETIREMENT DATE.  A contributing member means the "voluntary
retirement date" provided for in the law governing the state system. For a city
member "voluntary retirement date" means the date he attained or attains age 60
years, or the date he acquired or acquires 30 years of total service, whichever
date occurs first.
   WIDOW/WIDOWER. The surviving spouse of a member, as defined herein, who has
not remarried.
('74 Code, § 2-5-2) (Ord. 964; Am. Ord. 1936; Am. Ord. 6-1988; Am. Ord. 52-
1989)
§ 3-6-3 SUPPLEMENTAL RETIREMENT FUND COMMITTEE.
   (A)   There is hereby created a Supplemental Retirement Fund Committee in
which is vested the authority and responsibility for the administration,
management and operation of the retirement plan, and of construing and carrying
into effect the provisions of this article.
   (B)   The Committee shall consist of five members from city government, who
shall be appointed by the Mayor and serve at the pleasure of the Mayor.
   (C)    Members of the former plan board of trustees serving as trustees, as
of the day preceding the effective date of the retirement plan, shall continue
to serve as trustees under the retirement plan until their respective terms
under the former plan shall expire.
   (D)   The Committee shall designate from its own number a chairman and a
vice-chairman.
   (E)   The Committee shall hold regular meetings, at least one in each year,
and shall designate the time and place thereof. It shall adopt its own rules of
procedure and shall keep a record of its proceedings. All meetings of the
Committee shall remain open to the public.
   (F)   Three Committee members shall constitute a quorum at any meeting of
the Committee. Each attending member shall be entitled to one vote in the
meeting of the Committee and at least three concurring votes shall be necessary
for a decision of the Committee at any one of its meetings.
   (G)   The Committee shall annually furnish the Mayor a report showing the
fiscal transactions of the retirement plan for the preceding fiscal year.
   (H)   The Committee shall from time to time adopt such mortality and other
tables of experience as are required for the proper operation of the retirement
plan on an actuarial basis. The plan shall be administered in a manner that is
actuarially sound.
('74 Code, § 2-5-3) (Ord. 964; Am. Ord. 6-1988)
§ 3-6-4 RETIREMENT PLAN OFFICERS.
   (A)   The City Treasurer shall be the administrative officer of the
retirement plan. In addition, he shall be treasurer of the retirement plan and
the custodian of its funds.
   (B)   The City Attorney shall be legal advisor to the Committee.
   (C)   The Committee may designate an actuary who shall be technical advisor
to the Committee and who shall perform such duties as are required in
connection therewith.
('74 Code, § 2-5-4) (Ord. 964; Am. Ord. 6-1988)
§ 3-6-5 MEMBERSHIP.
   (A)   Subject to division (B) of this section, the membership of the
retirement plan shall include all employees of the city who were regularly
employed by the city within a period of one year preceding September 2, 1954
and who are in the employ of the city, on a full time basis, within one year
from and after September 2, 1954.
   (B)   The membership of the retirement plan shall not include:
      (1)   Members of the City Council;
      (2)   Persons whose services are compensated in whole or in part on a fee
basis;
      (3)   City attorneys who are not employed by the city on a full time
basis;
      (4)   Members of boards and commissions of the city on account of their
service on such boards or commissions;
      (5)   Persons employed to make or conduct special surveys,
investigations, examinations, or installation, if the Chief Administrative
Officer, by written certification, classifies such persons as temporary
employees;
      (6)   Persons who first become employed by the city after September 1,
1954;
      (7)   Persons who reenter city employment following September 1, 1955;
and
      (8)   Persons who are seasonal, part-time, or temporary employees.
   (C)   Except as otherwise provided in this article, should any member
separate from city service for any reason, except his death or becoming an
annuitant, he shall thereupon cease to be a member and his Albuquerque service
credited to his service account shall be forfeited by him. In the event he re-
enters city service within a period of one year from and after the date he last
separated from city service he shall again become a member of the retirement
plan and the Albuquerque service credited to him at the time of his last
separation from city service shall be restored to his credit. In the event a
member becomes an annuitant or dies he shall thereupon cease to be a member.
   (D)   In any case of doubt as to who is a member of the retirement plan the
Committee shall decide the issue.
   (E)   Widows or Widowers of eligible members shall be entitled to receive a
maximum annuity of $125 per month.
('74 Code, § 2-5-5) (Ord. 964; Am. Ord. 1936; Am. Ord. 6-1988; Am. Ord. 52-
1989)
§ 3-6-6 SERVICE CREDIT.
   (A)   The service rendered by a member prior to September 1, 1954, to the
extent credited him under the former plan, shall be credited him under the
retirement plan as Albuquerque service; provided, that in no case shall such
Albuquerque service include:
      (1)   Any periods of service for which the said member is credited with
state service; nor
      (2)   Any periods of service rendered by him from and after September 1,
1954.
   (B)   In any case of doubt as to the Albuquerque service to be credited any
member, the Committee will have final power to determine the Albuquerque
service to be so credited.
('74 Code, § 2-5-6) (Ord. 964; Am. Ord. 1936; Am. Ord. 6-1988)
§ 3-6-7 SERVICE RETIREMENT.
   (A)   Any member may retire on or after his voluntary retirement date upon
his written application filed with the Committee setting forth at what time,
not less than 30 days nor more than 90 days subsequent to the execution and
filing thereof, he desires to be retired. Upon his retirement he shall be
entitled to an Albuquerque annuity provided for in §
3-6-8.
   (B)   Any member who has attained or attains age 70 years shall be separated
from city Service on the first day of the calendar month next following the
month in which he attains age 70 years. Upon his separation from service he
shall be entitled to an Albuquerque annuity provided he has five or more years
of total service.
('74 Code, § 2-5-7) (Ord. 964; Am. Ord. 6-1988)
§ 3-6-8 ALBUQUERQUE ANNUITY.
   (A)   Upon his retirement from service, as provided in §
3-6-7, a contributing member shall receive an Albuquerque annuity equal to 2%
of his final average salary multiplied by the number of years, and fraction of
a year, of his credited Albuquerque service: Provided, that his Albuquerque
annuity so computed shall be subject to the following:
      (1)    In no case shall a contributing member's Albuquerque annuity be
less than an amount which when added to his state annuity shall equal 3% of the
first $2,500 of his final average salary multiplied by his years, and fraction
of a year, of state service credited for service rendered prior to August 1,
1947 and his years, and fraction of a year, of his credited Albuquerque
service, not to exceed a total of 20 years of such state service and
Albuquerque service combined.
      (2)    In no case shall a contributing member's Albuquerque annuity
exceed the lesser of:
         (a)   An amount which is $75 per annum multiplied by the number of
years, and fraction of a year, of his credited Albuquerque service; or
         (b)   An amount which when added to his state annuity results in the
total of both annuities exceeding:
            1.   $2,400 per annum for a contributing member with less than 30
years of state service; or
            2.   $3,000 per annum for a contributing member with 30 or more
years of state service.
   (B)   Upon his retirement from service, as provided in §
3-6-7, a city member shall receive an Albuquerque annuity equal to 2% of his
final average salary multiplied by the number of years, and fraction of a year,
of his credited Albuquerque service, not to exceed 20 years.
   (C)   If a contributing member who is classified as a state police member in
the state system retires under the state system prior to his attainment of age
60 years with a superannuating retirement annuity, he shall be entitled to an
Albuquerque annuity, computed according to division (A) of this section.
Payment of his said Albuquerque annuity shall begin upon his application for
same filed with the Committee on or after his attainment of age 60 years.
   (D)   Widow/Widower of members who retired from active duty, on or before
August 31, 1954, due to total and permanent disability from injuries incurred
on duty or illnesses exaggerated by injury received or inflicted while on duty
shall be entitled to a maximum retirement benefit of $125 per month. Said
benefit shall terminate at the time of the widow/widower's remarriage or at
their death. Said benefit shall not extend beyond said surviving spouse.
   (E)   Upon the basis of such mortality and other tables of experience as the
Committee shall from time to time adopt and in keeping with sound actuarial and
fiscal practices, the Committee may provide for a lump sum payment in lieu of
regular payments for any annuity or retirement benefit payable under the
retirement plan.
('74 Code, § 2-5-8) (Ord. 964; Am. Ord. 6-1988; Am. Ord. 52-1989)
§ 3-6-9 TOTAL AND PERMANENT DISABILITY.
   (A)   (1)   Upon the application of a member, or his department head, a
member who:
         (a)   Is in the employ of the city; and
         (b)   Becomes totally and permanently physically or mentally
incapacitated for duty in the employ of the city, may be retired by the
Committee.
      (2)   Provided, that after a medical examination of the said member made
by or under the direction of a physician or physicians designated by the
Committee, the said physician or physicians certifies to the Committee:
         (a)   That the said member is physically or mentally totally
incapacitated for duty in the employ of the city;
         (b)   That such incapacity will probably be permanent; and
         (c)   That such member should be retired.
   (B)   A contributing member, who retires on or after his voluntary
retirement date, on account of disability as provided in division (A) of this
section, shall receive an Albuquerque annuity computed according to §
3-6-8(A), subject to §
3-6-10.
   (C)   A contributing member who retires prior to his voluntary retirement
date, on account of disability as provided in division (A) of this section,
shall receive an Albuquerque annuity equal to 2% of his final average salary
multiplied by the number of years, and fraction of a year, of his credited
Albuquerque service; provided, that his Albuquerque annuity shall not exceed
the less of:
      (1)   An amount which is $75 per annum multiplied by the number of years,
and fraction of a year, of his credited Albuquerque service; or
      (2)   An amount which when added to his state annuity results in the
total of both annuities exceeding $2,400 per annum. This division (C) shall be
subject to division (E) of this section and §
3-6-10.
   (D)   (1)   A city member, who retires on account of disability, as provided
in division (A) of this section, shall receive an Albuquerque annuity computed
according to §
3-6-8(B) and shall be subject to division (E) of this section.
      (2)   In the event a city member retires on account of disability, as
provided in division (A) of this section, prior to his voluntary retirement
date, and the Committee finds that the member has become incapacitated to such
extent by reason of a personal injury or disease which occurred as the natural
and proximate result of causes arising solely and exclusively out of and in the
course of his employment by the city and a physician selected by the Committee
upon examination of the member, has stated that as a medical probability such
personal injury or disease is a natural and proximate result of such causes,
the Albuquerque annuity of such member shall not be less than $600 dollars per
annum. At his voluntary retirement date the said disability retirant shall be
given Albuquerque service credit for the period he was in receipt of an
Albuquerque annuity, notwithstanding that such service credit includes service
rendered after September 1, 1954, and his Albuquerque annuity shall be
recomputed to include such additional service credit.
   (E)   (1)   At least once each year during the first five years following
the retirement of a city member on account of disability, and at least once in
each three-year period thereafter, the Committee may, and upon his application
shall, require the said disability annuitant, prior to his voluntary retirement
date or age 65 years, whichever occurs first, to undergo a medical examination
to be made by or under the direction of a physician designated by the
Committee. Should the said disability annuitant refuse to submit to such
medical examination in any such period his Albuquerque annuity may be
discontinued by the Committee until his withdrawal of such refusal. If upon
such medical examination of said disability annuitant, the said physician
reports to the Committee that the said disability annuitant is physically able
and capable of resuming employment with the city his Albuquerque annuity shall
be suspended to his voluntary retirement date or attainment of age 65 years,
whichever occurs first, and shall be resumed at the time provided the said
annuitant is not in the employ of a governmental agency in the state.
      (2)   In the event the state annuity payable to a contributing member is
suspended by the state system, the Albuquerque annuity, if any, payable to the
said contributing member shall likewise be suspended until payment of his state
annuity is resumed.
      (3)   In the event a disability annuitant, who was a member, is returned
to city service he shall again become a member of the retirement plan and his
Albuquerque service credited to him at the time of his disability retirement
shall be restored to his credit.
   (F)   The annuities granted under Commission Ordinance No. 1083 prior to
September 28, 1960 shall be obligations of the city supplemental retirement
plan and shall be continued subject to the provisions of the said Commission
Ordinance No. 1083 as it was in force January 17, 1956.
('74 Code, § 2-5-9) (Ord. 964; Am. Ord. 1936; Am. Ord. 1083; Am. Ord. 6-1988)
§ 3-6-10 ALBUQUERQUE ANNUITY OFFSET.
   If a contributing member retires from city service, pursuant to the
provisions of this article, before he has paid into the employees savings fund
of the state system an amount necessary to qualify for a state pension, the
Committee may authorize that there be paid, from retirement plan funds, to the
state system such amount as the state retirement board shall certify as
necessary to qualify the said member for a state annuity. The Committee may
authorize payment to the state system, if the employee had been a member of the
state system the entire time of the city employment, provided that the annuity
reserve fund has a surplus in accordance with a report of the city's actuary.
('74 Code, § 2-5-10) (Ord. 964; Am. Ord. 6-1988)
§ 3-6-11 ANNUITY RESERVE FUND.
   (A)   The annuity reserve fund is hereby created. It shall be the fund in
which shall be accumulated contributions by the city, and from which shall be
paid annuities and other payments as provided in this article. The city's
contributions to the retirement plan shall be determined and paid in accordance
with the provisions of §
3-6-11(B).
   (B)   (1)   Upon the basis of such mortality and other tables of experience
as the Committee shall from time to time adopt, and regular interest, the
Committee shall annually determine, by means of an actuarial valuation of the
retirement plan, the annuity reserve liabilities covering:
         (a)   Annuities to be paid members upon their retirements from
service; and
         (b)   Annuities being paid annuitants.
      (2)   The said annuity reserve fund shall be amortized over the future
natural lifetime of the said members and annuitants. The Committee shall
annually certify to the City Council the amortization payment so determined for
the ensuing fiscal year, and the City Council shall appropriate and the city
shall pay such amount into the annuity reserve fund in the ensuing fiscal year
in twelve equal monthly payments, beginning August 20 of each year and on or
before the 20th day of each month thereafter.
('74 Code, § 2-5-11) (Ord. 964; Am. Ord. 6-1988)
§ 3-6-12 FORMER PLAN TRANSFER.
   (A)   The City Treasurer shall transfer to the annuity reserve fund of the
retirement plan, established by the ordinance, all assets of every description
credited to the Albuquerque City Employees' Retirement Fund of the former plan.
   (B)   All annuities being paid from the Albuquerque City Employees'
Retirement Fund of the former plan; as of the effective date of the retirement
plan, shall become obligations of the retirement plan and shall be paid from
the annuity reserve fund. In no case shall such annuities being paid be
increased or diminished by reason of the adoption of the retirement plan.
('74 Code, § 2-5-12) (Ord. 964; Am. Ord. 6-1988)
§ 3-6-13 INVESTMENT OF FUNDS.
   (A)   The Committee shall be the trustees of the annuity reserve fund of the
retirement plan and it shall have full power to invest and reinvest same:
      (1)   In bonds or other obligations of the United States, and in any
obligations of any governmental agency in which both principal and interest are
guaranteed by the United States Government.
      (2)   In general obligation bonds of the State of New Mexico, or any
city, town, school district, or conservancy district in the State of New
Mexico.
      (3)   In obligations consisting of notes, bonds, or debentures, which are
the direct obligation of a railroad or industrial corporation, or a corporation
engaged directly and primarily in the production, transportation, distribution,
or sale, of electricity or gas, or the operation of telephone or telegraph
systems, or any combination of them; provided, the obligor corporation is
incorporated under the laws of the United States or any state thereof or the
District of Columbia, and the said obligations are rated, at the time of
purchase, in the highest or next highest classification established by at least
two nationally recognized standard rating services.
   (B)   Except as provided in this article, no member or other person
connected with the Committee shall have any interest direct or indirect in the
gains or profits of any investment made by the Committee, nor as such directly
or indirectly receive any pay or emolument for his services in making such
investments. No member or other persons connected with the Committee, directly
or indirectly for himself or as an agent or partner of others, shall borrow any
funds or deposits of the retirement plan, or in any manner use the same, except
to make such current and necessary payments as are authorized by the Committee.
No member or other person connected with the Committee shall become an endorser
or surety or become in any manner an obligor for moneys loaned or borrowed of
the retirement plan.
   (C)   All securities registered in the name of the Albuquerque City
Employees' Retirement Fund may continue to be so registered until disposed of.
   (D)   All income derived from the investment of moneys of the retirement
plan shall be credited to the annuity reserve fund.
('74 Code, § 2-5-13) (Ord. 964; Am. Ord. 1936; Am. Ord. 6-1988)
§ 3-6-14 ADMINISTRATIVE EXPENSES.
   The expenses of administering the retirement plan shall be paid by the city
in addition to the contributions made to the annuity reserve fund. The
administrative expenses shall be authorized by the Committee with the budget
approved by the City Council.
('74 Code, § 2-5-14) (Ord. 964; Am. Ord. 6-1988)
§ 3-6-15 PAYMENTS FROM PLAN FUNDS.
   All funds of the retirement plan shall be held for the sole purpose of
meeting disbursements as provided in this article and shall be used for no
other purpose. No payment shall be made from the funds of the retirement plan
unless same is authorized by resolution adopted by the Committee.
('74 Code, § 2-5-15) (Ord. 964; Am. Ord. 6-1988)
§ 3-6-16 ASSIGNMENTS PROHIBITED.
   None of the moneys, annuities, or other benefits mentioned in this article
shall be assignable either in law, or in equity or be subject to execution,
levy, attachment, garnishment, or other legal process, except as is
specifically provided in this article.
('74 Code, § 2-5-16) (Ord. 964; Am. Ord. 6-1988)
§ 3-6-17 EFFECTIVE DATE OF PLAN.
   The effective date of the retirement plan shall be the date the city becomes
an affiliated public employer in the Public Employees' Retirement Association
of New Mexico.
('74 Code, § 2-5-17) (Ord. 964; Am. Ord. 1936)
ARTICLE 7: WHISTLEBLOWER POLICY
Section
   
3-7-1   Short title
   
3-7-2   Findings and intent
   
3-7-3   Definitions
   
3-7-4   Procedures for reporting
   
3-7-5   Disclosure of information
   
3-7-6   Investigations
   
3-7-7   Confidentiality
   
3-7-8   Retaliation
   
3-7-9   Reservation of authority
   
3-7-10   Notice of whistleblower protections
   
3-7-11   Reports to the City Council
§ 3-7-1 SHORT TITLE.
   This article may be known and cited as the "Whistleblower Ordinance."
(Ord. 2-2004)
§ 3-7-2 FINDINGS AND INTENT.
   The public health, safety and welfare are better protected by instituting a
procedure for reporting improper governmental action, encouraging such
reporting and protecting those who properly report such action from
retaliation. Proper reporting will provide the opportunity to minimize any
adverse impacts of improper governmental actions.
(Ord. 2-2004)
§ 3-7-3 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this article, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ALLOWABLE COMPLAINT. A complaint that may be filed pursuant to this article
alleging an improper governmental action and meets all other requirements of
this article. An allowable complaint does not include a complaint that is
frivolous or that discloses information (1) that the complainant knows to be
false, (2) with disregard for the truth or falsity thereof or (3) that is a
confidential record.
   COMPLAINANT'S DEPARTMENT. The director of the department in which the city
employee filing a complaint is assigned. If the complainant works for an agency
of the city that is not designated as a department, then COMPLAINANT'S
DEPARTMENT shall mean the highest ranking official of such agency.
   CONFIDENTIAL RECORDS. Any record that is confidential under any provision of
law, any record that is closed to public inspection pursuant to law, and
records that are advisory in nature and preliminary to any final determination
of policy or action. CONFIDENTIAL RECORDS do not include records that are
purely factual materials and do not disclose the names of complainants or
witnesses.
   DIRECTOR. The Inspector General created by the Inspector General Ordinance,
or its successor agency, and any investigators designated by the Director.
   EMPLOYEE. Every appointed classified or unclassified employee of the city
who receives compensation in the form of a salary. EMPLOYEE shall not include
elected officials of the city.
   FRIVOLOUS COMPLAINT. Any complaint or portion of a complaint that has no
basis, or does not pertain to an improper governmental action, or is made for
some purpose other than identifying an improper governmental action, such as
complaints made for the purpose of retaliation or harassment.
   GRIEVABLE and GRIEVANCE. These terms shall have the same meaning as provided
in §
3-1-24 ROA 1994.
   GROSS WASTE OF PUBLIC FUNDS.  An unnecessary or unauthorized expenditure of
a substantial amount of money or a series of unnecessary or unauthorized
expenditures of smaller amounts of money cumulatively amounting to a
substantial amount of money.
   IMPROPER GOVERNMENTAL ACTION. Any action by a city employee, an appointed
member of a board, commission or committee or an elected official of the city
that is undertaken in the performance of such person's duties with the city
that is in violation of a federal, state or local government law or rule, an
abuse of authority, of substantial and specific danger to the public health or
safety, or a gross waste of public funds that is in violation of city policy or
rules. The action need not be within the scope of the employee's, elected
official's or board, commission or committee member's official duties to be
subject to a claim of improper governmental action. IMPROPER GOVERNMENTAL
ACTION does not include city personnel actions, including but not limited to
employee grievances, complaints, appointments, promotions, transfers,
assignments, reassignments, reinstatements, restorations, reemployments,
performance evaluations, reductions in pay, dismissals, suspensions, demotions,
reprimands, violations of collective bargaining agreements or the merit system
ordinance, §§
3-1-1 et seq. ROA 1994.
   INSPECTOR GENERAL. The Inspector General and the Office of the Inspector
General created by the Inspector General Ordinance, or its successor agency or
department, and any investigators designated by the Inspector General.
   INSPECTOR GENERAL INVESTIGATION. A special audit conducted by the Office of
the Inspector General based on a complaint filed pursuant to this article.
   RETALIATION or RETALIATORY ACTION.  Any disciplinary action taken because
(1) an employee lawfully disclosed information or filed an allowable complaint
pursuant to this article, (2) an employee testified or assisted or is scheduled
to testify or assist in any investigation, action or proceeding relating to the
lawful disclosure of information by another employee pursuant to this article,
or (3) the supervisor who imposed the disciplinary action believed the employee
receiving the disciplinary action was involved in the activities described in
parts (1) and (2) of this paragraph and such belief was the primary reason for
the disciplinary action.
(Ord. 2-2004; Am. Ord. 1-2005; Am. Ord. 30-2010)
§ 3-7-4 PROCEDURES FOR REPORTING.
   (A)   Complaints filed with the department. The complainant shall submit a
written report to the complainant's department stating in detail the factual
basis for the complainant's reasonable belief that an improper governmental
action has occurred. Upon receipt of a complaint, the complainant's department
shall take prompt action to investigate the report of improper governmental
action. Upon completion of the investigation, the complainant's department
shall provide to the complainant a summary of the results of the investigation.
Summaries of investigations shall not include personnel disciplinary actions
taken as a result of the investigation. Summaries shall be provided to the
complainant within 15 city business days of the receipt of the written
complaint by the complainant's department or at such additional time beyond 15
days, but only when the complainant's department has good cause for extending
the investigation and notifies the complainant when the summary of results will
be provided and the reason for the extension of time. No extension shall be
longer than an additional 15 city business days.
   (B)   Alternative filing. If the complainant's department director or the
highest ranking official of a city agency is the subject of the complaint, then
the complaint shall be filed with the Chief Administrative Officer or a member
of his staff designated to receive such complaints. If the office of the chief
administrative office is the subject of the complaint, the complaint shall be
filed with the Mayor or his designee.
   (C)   Complaints filed with the Inspector General.  If a complainant files a
complaint with the Inspector General but does not file a complaint with
complainant's department, the Inspector General shall determine whether the
complaint shall first be investigated by the complainant's department, pursuant
to the procedures required in subsections (A) or (B) of this section, or the
Office of the Inspector General.
   (D)   Complaints to be accepted by the Inspector General. The Inspector
General shall proceed with an investigation when (1) a complaint has been filed
pursuant to subsections (A) or (B) of this section and the summary of the
investigation is not provided to the complainant within 15 business days or the
extension thereof, (2) after receipt of the summary of the investigation the
complainant alleges that there is a reasonable basis for believing that
insufficient action has been taken by the city to address the improper
governmental action, (3) for other specified reasons, the improper governmental
action is likely to recur or (4) a complaint alleges immediate harm. When
applicable, a complaint filed with the Inspector General shall have attached to
it the written complaint submitted to the complainant’s department. The
complaint filed with the Inspector General shall contain a statement explaining
at least one of the following: (1) that the complainant’s department did not
provide a summary of the investigation, (2) the basis for the complainant’s
belief that the action taken by the city in response to the complaint is
insufficient or (3) the basis for the complainant’s belief that the improper
governmental action is likely to recur or (4) the nature of the immediate harm
and the basis for the complainant’s belief that immediate and substantial harm
may occur. When applicable, the complaint shall include a copy of all summaries
of investigation provided to the complainant by the complainant’s department.
The Director shall not accept complaints related to discrimination or labor law
matters, or other matters that are the subject of pending litigation.
   (E)   Immediate harm. Complainants shall file a complaint of improper
governmental action with the Inspector General if the complainant believes that
immediate and substantial harm to people or property will occur if immediate
action is not taken. The complainant shall notify the Inspector General in the
complaint as to whether the complainant has filed the same complaint with the
complainant’s department and, if applicable, attach a copy of such complaint.
If the complaint has not been filed with complainant’s department, the
Inspector General shall determine if the complaint shall first be investigated
by the complainant’s department, pursuant to the procedures required in
subsection (A) of this section, or the Inspector General. The Director shall
immediately notify the complainant’s department if the Inspector General
determines that a threat of immediate harm may exist.
   (F)   Employees who fail to follow the procedures in this article in
reporting improper governmental action shall not receive the protections
provided in this article.
   (G)   If the complaint of improper governmental action includes allegations
concerning the Inspector General, or anyone with supervisory authority over the
Inspector General pursuant to the Inspector General Ordinance, the complaint
shall be filed with the City Attorney.
   (H)   If the Department Director, the Chief Administrative Officer, the
Mayor or the Inspector General (the appropriate office conducting the
investigation) determines that the complaint involves allegations of criminal
activity, the complaint may be referred to a law enforcement agency of proper
jurisdiction. The party conducting the investigation may coordinate any further
investigation with such law enforcement agency. If criminal charges are
formally filed, the party conducting the investigation may suspend its
investigation until completion of criminal action.
(Ord. 2-2004; Am. Ord. 1-2005; Am. Ord. 30-2010)
§ 3-7-5 DISCLOSURE OF INFORMATION.
   (A)   Criminal activity. Nothing in this article shall be construed to
prohibit an employee from disclosing information to an appropriate law
enforcement agency.
   (B)   False information, frivolous complaints and confidential records. The
protections to employees provided by this article shall not apply to any
complainant who files a frivolous complaint or who discloses information (1)
that the complainant knows to be false, (2) with disregard for the truth or
falsity thereof or (3) that is a confidential record.
(Ord. 2-2004)
§ 3-7-6 INVESTIGATIONS.
   (A)   The Inspector General shall conduct a preliminary investigation based
on complaints filed pursuant to this article. Such preliminary investigation
shall begin within 30 days of the receipt of the complaint by the Inspector
General. The preliminary investigation shall determine if the complaint merits
further investigation. If the Inspector General finds that the complaint has no
merit or that proper corrective measures have been taken by the city, the
Inspector General shall notify the complainant and the complainant's department
of the decision and such decision shall be a final report. If the Inspector
General finds that a further investigation is required, the Inspector General
shall notify the complainant and the complainant's department of that decision.
Decisions made pursuant to this subsection shall be public record only upon
delivery of the decision to the complainant and the complainant's department.
   (B)   All employees, board, commission and committee members and elected
city officials shall assist the Inspector General in the investigation of
complaints filed pursuant to this article, including but not limited to
providing records and making statements. Interviews shall be outside the
presence of the complainant’s and the witness’ supervisor. Employees shall be
interviewed without loss of pay and may have an employee representative present
at the interview. The Inspector General shall give reasonable written notice to
the person being interviewed of the time for the interview. Except as otherwise
provided in this article, all records of interviews shall be kept confidential
until the Director issues a final report concerning the complaint.
   (C)   If the Inspector General determines that the complaint (1) was made in
bad faith, (2) is frivolous, (3) was made for purposes of harassment or in
retaliation, (4) contains information that the complainant knows to be false or
the complainant disclosed information with disregard for the truth or falsity
thereof, (5) contains information that is confidential by any provision of law
or (6) contains information from records which are closed to public inspection
pursuant to law, such determination shall be included in a report to the
complainant, the complainant’s department and the Chief Administrative Officer.
The report shall be a public record, state the basis for such determination and
be filed in complainant’s personnel file. The Chief Administrative Officer
shall determine if disciplinary action concerning the complainant is
appropriate based on the Inspector General’s report and notify the
complainant’s department.
   (D)   The Inspector General may decline to investigate a complaint or
portions of a complaint alleging improper governmental action if the same
allegations have previously been investigated or have been adjudicated in any
court. The Inspector General may consolidate investigations when complaints
allege the same or similar improper governmental action.
   (E)   Upon completion of a full investigation, a final written report
containing the findings and conclusions of the investigation shall be delivered
to the complainant and complainant’s department. The report shall be public
record upon delivery to the complainant and complainant’s department. If the
report concludes that improper governmental action occurred and that corrective
measures have not taken place or are insufficient to prevent reoccurrence of
the improper governmental action the report shall also be delivered to the
Mayor and the City Council president.
(Ord. 2-2004; Am. Ord. 1-2005; Am. Ord. 30-2010)
§ 3-7-7 CONFIDENTIALITY.
   The complainant’s identity shall be kept confidential when a complaint is
filed with the complainant’s department until such time that the summary of the
investigation is provided to the complainant. If a complaint is filed with the
Inspector General, the complainant’s identity shall be kept confidential until
such time that the Inspector General delivers a final report as provided in
this article. Nothing in this article shall preclude the Inspector General from
disclosing the identity of a complainant or witness or other information to the
extent necessary to conduct the Inspector General’s investigation or from
disclosing all information related to the complaint, including the identity of
the complainant, to law enforcement agencies of proper jurisdiction.
(Ord. 2-2004; Am. Ord. 1-2005; Am. Ord. 30-2010)
§ 3-7-8 RETALIATION.
   (A)   Retaliation prohibited. Elected city officials and city employees are
prohibited from taking retaliatory action against an employee because the
employee participated in an action protected under this article.
   (B)   Discipline.  It shall be a defense to any discipline that the
disciplinary action was initiated in retaliation of the employee having filed
an allowable complaint or participated in an action protected pursuant to this
article.
   (C)   Grievances. Complaints of retaliation not involving discipline shall
be submitted pursuant to the grievance resolution procedure provided in §
3-1-24 ROA 1994.
   (D)   Proof of retaliation. In order to establish retaliation as a defense
to a disciplinary action, the complainant must demonstrate that the
complainant's activity under this article was protected activity and was the
primary reason for the action the employee is grieving or appealing. The city
may rebut this defense if it demonstrates that it would have taken the same
action regardless of the complainant's participation in the activity protected
under this article, and that the disciplinary action was taken for legitimate
business reasons.
   (E)   Limitations. Retaliation shall not be a defense to a disciplinary
action unless the disciplinary action was initiated within two years of the
date the complainant filed the complaint with the complainant’s department or
the Inspector General. The failure to raise a claim of retaliation in a
grievance or an appeal shall bar any subsequent cause of action based on
retaliation prohibited by this article arising out of the same set of facts at
issue in the related grievance or appeal.
   (F)   Remedies. When retaliation is found to have occurred, either the
remedies allowed pursuant to §§
3-1-24 and
3-1-25 ROA 1994 of the Merit System Ordinance may apply or adverse materials
relating to the retaliatory action in the employee's personnel file may be
expunged, or both may apply.
   (G)   Retaliation. If a supervisor is found to have retaliated against an
employee in violation of this article, one or more of the following remedies
may be ordered by the supervisor's department: (1) placement of information
describing the violation of this article in the supervisor's personnel file,
(2) reprimand, (3) suspension without pay, (4) demotion or (5) termination of
employment.
   (H)   When there is no finding of retaliation, such record shall be placed
in the personnel file of each supervisor accused of retaliation and in the
personnel file of the employee who made a claim of retaliation pursuant to this
article.
   (I)   Retaliation shall not be a defense to a disciplinary action or grounds
for a grievance if the complainant's complaint is found (1) to have been made
in bad faith, (2) frivolous, (3) to have been made for purposes of harassment
or in retaliation, (4) to have contained information that the complainant knew
to be false, (5) to have disclosed information without regard for the truth or
falsity thereof, (6) to have contained confidential records.
(Ord. 2-2004; Am. Ord. 1-2005; Am. Ord. 30-2010)
§ 3-7-9 RESERVATION OF AUTHORITY.
   Nothing in this article shall interfere with the power of the city to take
action with respect to any employee, provided that such action is justified on
facts separate from activity protected under this article.
(Ord. 2-2004)
§ 3-7-10 NOTICE OF WHISTLEBLOWER PROTECTIONS.
   The Inspector General shall prepare and each city department shall post a
notice of allowable activities under this article.
(Ord. 2-2004; Am. Ord. 1-2005; Am. Ord. 30-2010)
§ 3-7-11 REPORTS TO THE CITY COUNCIL.
   The Inspector General shall provide an annual report to the City Council
which shall include (1) the number of complaints received, (2) the nature of
each complaint, (3) the number of full investigations conducted, (4) findings
or recommendations on policies or practices resulting from investigations, (5)
the number of complaints found as valid claims and (6) the number of complaints
found to be frivolous or without merit.
(Ord. 2-2004; Am. Ord. 1-2005; Am. Ord. 30-2010)
CHAPTER 4: REVENUE AND TAXATION
   Article
      
1:   
FISCAL AGENT
      
2:   
CITY FUNDS
      
3:   
MUNICIPAL GROSS RECEIPTS TAXES
      
4:   
LODGERS' TAX
      
5:   
ALCOHOLIC LIQUOR LICENSE TAX
      
6:   
DEBT MANAGEMENT POLICY AND DEBT COMMITTEE
      
7:   
STADIUM SURCHARGE
      
8:   HOSPITALITY FEE
      
9:   
ARENA SURCHARGE
      
10:   
TAX INCREMENT DEVELOPMENT DISTRICTS
      
11:   
RENEWABLE ENERGY FINANCING DISTRICT
      
12:   
MARIJUANA EQUITY AND COMMUNITY REINVESTMENT FUND
ARTICLE 1: FISCAL AGENT
Section
   
4-1-1   Authority
   
4-1-2   Definitions
   
4-1-3   Designation of fiscal agent
   
4-1-4   Required services of fiscal agent
   
4-1-5   Agreement with fiscal agent
   
4-1-6   Security for deposits of public money
   
4-1-7   City depositories
   
4-1-8   Other banking and financial services
   
4-1-9   Investment committee
   
4-1-10   Investment of cash not required for immediate disbursement
   
4-1-11   Investment of bond proceeds
   
4-1-12   Custody of securities
§ 4-1-1 AUTHORITY.
   The City Council, pursuant to the provisions of Article X, Section 6 of the
Constitution of New Mexico, hereby enacts this article as authorized by such
section and for the purpose of providing maximum local self-government.
('74 Code, § 4-5-1) (Ord. 73-1975; Am. Ord. 7-2001; Am. Ord._2020-001)
§ 4-1-2 DEFINITION.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   BANKING SERVICE PROVIDER.  Any of a group of banks or non-bank commercial
entities, which, independently or in alliance with a Depository Financial
Institution, provide intermediary, complementary, or end-to-end financial and
informational services, technical consulting or specialized banking products.
   DEPOSITORY FINANCIAL INSTITUTION.  Any of a group that includes commercial
banks, savings banks, savings & loan associations and credit unions which
conduct business by accepting public deposits which are insured by the federal
government against loss and channeling their depositor's monies into lending
activities.
   RATING CATEGORY.  A generic securities rating category of any nationally
recognized rating agency without regard, in the case of a long-term rating
category, to any refinement or gradation of such long-term rating category by a
numerical modifier or otherwise.
('74 Code, § 4-5-8 (part)) (Ord. 73-1975; Am. Ord. 44-1986; Am. Ord. 29-1992;
Am. Ord. 7-2001; Am. Ord._2020-001)
§ 4-1-3 DESIGNATION OF FISCAL AGENT.
   Depository Financial Institutions doing business in Bernalillo County and
having an unimpaired capital and surplus, or in the case of savings and loan
associations, regulatory net worth not including retained earnings and
subordinated debt, of at least $5,000,000 may bid for the agreement to be the
"fiscal agent of the City of Albuquerque." The bid and associated agreement
shall be in accordance with
Chapter 5, Article 5, Public Purchases.
('74 Code, § 4-5-2) (Ord. 73-1975; Am. Ord. 44-1986; Am. Ord. 7-2001; Am. Ord.
2020-001)
§ 4-1-4 REQUIRED SERVICES OF FISCAL AGENT.
   The Depository Financial Institution so designated shall enter into an
agreement with the city, acting through its Mayor, for:
   (A)   The collection and deposit credit for the city of all checks and other
bills of exchange received by the city and payable to its order or bearer.
   (B)   The handling of the city's fiscal depository checking account.
   (C)   The handling of transfers of money.
   (D)   Providing for the investment of funds not required for immediate
disbursement.
   (E)   Arranging for the safekeeping of bonds or other securities belonging
to, or held by, the city or any official thereof acting in his or her official
capacity.
   (F)   Other related commercial banking services beneficial to the city which
are requested in the bid specifications.
('74 Code, § 4-5-3) (Ord. 73-1975; Am. Ord. 44-1986; Am. Ord. 7-2001; Am. Ord.
2020-001)
§ 4-1-5 AGREEMENT WITH FISCAL AGENT.
   The agreement shall contain the terms and conditions which are necessary in
the opinion of the Mayor for the proper conduct of the fiscal affairs of the
city and the safekeeping of the money of the city.
('74 Code, § 4-5-4) (Ord. 73-1975; Am. Ord. 7-2001; Am. Ord._2020-001)
§ 4-1-6 SECURITY FOR DEPOSITS OF PUBLIC MONEY.
   (A)   Deposits of public money with the fiscal agent, other designated
depositories and investments in time deposits shall be secured by securities of
the United States, its agencies or instrumentalities, or by securities of the
State of New Mexico, its agencies, instrumentalities, counties, municipalities
or other subdivisions, or by securities, including student loans, that are
guaranteed by the United States or the State of New Mexico. Revenue bonds
qualify as security for the deposit of public money only if they are
underwritten by a member of the National Association of Securities Dealers,
known as "NASD," and are rated in any of the three highest major rating
categories defined in §
4-1-10 by any nationally recognized rating agency. No security is required for
the deposit of public money that is insured by the Federal Deposit Insurance
Corporation. All securities specified herein will be accepted as collateral for
public money deposits at their current market values subject to periodic review
and valuation at intervals determined by the Investment Committee. Minimum
collateral requirements as specified from time to time by Investment Committee
action must be maintained at all times.
   (B)   Any Depository Financial Institution designated as a depository of
public money or having time deposits shall deliver securities of the kind
specified in this section, or a joint safekeeping receipt thereof to the Mayor
or his designated representative in aggregate value equal to at least one-half
the amount of public money placed with such institution. The Investment
Committee may direct such institution to deliver securities having more than
one-half of the aggregate value of such public money. The Mayor or his
designated representative is not liable upon his official bond on account of
any funds deposited in the fiscal agency account, other designated depositories
or in time deposits when the funds are so secured.
('74 Code, § 4-5-5) (Ord. 73-1975; Am. Ord. 44-1986; Am. Ord. 29-1992; Am. Ord.
7-2001; Am. Ord._2020-001)
§ 4-1-7 CITY DEPOSITORIES.
   The Mayor may also designate, according to his adopted designation
procedure, other Depository Financial Institutions doing business as "city
depositories" in which money necessary to pay principal, interest, and exchange
fees on city notes and bonds may be deposited into trust and paying agent
accounts. City depository accounts may also be established in designated
financial institutions for the purpose of receiving city utilities payments
made at those institutions pending scheduled transfers to the City's Fiscal
Agent. Financial Institutions designated by the U.S. Treasury as "minority-
owned enterprises" may be designated as city depositories and receive monies
for those activities funded exclusively by federal grants-in-aid. No
institution shall be so designated unless it has an unimpaired capital and
surplus of at least $500,000.
('74 Code, § 4-5-6) (Ord. 73-1975; Am. Ord. 44-1986; Am. Ord. 7-2001; Am. Ord.
2020-001)
§ 4-1-8 OTHER BANKING AND FINANCIAL SERVICES.
   The city may from time to time request proposals for other general,
technical or specialized commercial banking and related financial services
which are beneficial to the city. Any Depository Financial Institution or Bank
Service Provider meeting the qualifications of the proposal may bid for the
opportunity to provide the services as specified in the proposal. The bid and
associated agreement shall be in accordance with
Chapter 5, Article 5, Public Purchases.
(Ord. 7-2001; Am. Ord._2020-001)
§ 4-1-9 INVESTMENT COMMITTEE.
   (A)   The Chief Administrative Officer of the city shall appoint an
Investment Committee of five members, which will include the Chief Financial
Officer, the Director of the Department of Finance and Administrative Services,
and the city's Treasury Officer. The remaining two members will be appointed
from anywhere within City Government. In addition, a City Council staff person
as designated by the Director of Council Services, the City Controller, the
City Economist, the Budget Officer, and the Investment Officer shall
participate in the Investment Committee meetings as non-voting members.
Committee members may designate an alternate person to serve in their absence
at specified committee meetings, and as such the alternate may vote the
member's proxy on any motions requiring committee approval.
   (B)   The Investment Committee will be responsible for:
      (1)   Establishing, maintaining and amending general policy and
procedures for investing city monies.
      (2)   Establishing collateral requirements for city deposits.
      (3)   Establishing specific parameters and/or limitations on particular
types of investments.
      (4)   Ensuring proper internal controls are established and maintained to
prohibit unauthorized investment activities.
('74 Code, § 4-5-7) (Ord. 73-1975; Am. Ord. 44-1986; Am. Ord. 7-2001; Am. Ord.
29-2008; Am. Ord._2015-010; Am. Ord._2020-001)
§ 4-1-10 INVESTMENT OF CASH NOT REQUIRED FOR IMMEDIATE DISBURSEMENT.
   The Mayor or his designated representative shall, to the extent practicable,
invest cash balances over the amount anticipated to be needed to meet operating
requirements in any of the following:
   (A)   Accounts with financial institutions located in Bernalillo County,
provided that the financial institutions, and the collateral securing the
investments permitted by this paragraph, satisfy the requirements for the
deposit of public money required by §
4-1-6.
   (B)   Securities that are issued by the United States government or by
certain of its agencies or instrumentalities and that are either direct
obligations of the United States or are backed by the full faith and credit of
the United States government or agencies guaranteed or sponsored by the United
States government. Only the following United States sponsored Agencies'
securities are permitted for investment:
      (1)   Federal Home Loan Banks
      (2)   Federal Home Loan Mortgage Corporation
      (3)   Federal National Mortgage Association
      (4)   Federal Farm Credit Banks Funding Corporation
      (5)   Federal Agricultural Mortgage Corporation
   All securities in this subsection must have a maturity of ten years or less
at time of purchase.
   (C)   Bonds or securities of the State of New Mexico, a New Mexico county or
municipality, or of any New Mexico school district which has a taxable
valuation of real property for the last year of at least $1,000,000 and has not
defaulted in the payment of interest or sinking fund obligation or failed to
pay any bonds at maturity at any time within five years preceding the date of
investment. All securities in this subsection must have a maturity date not
exceeding ten years at time of purchase.
   (D)   Brokered certificates of deposit (CD's) and CD's offered by the
Certificate of Deposit Account Registry Services (CDARS).
   (E)   Mutual funds and exchange-traded funds (ETF) that passively track a
broad market, fixed income securities index, provided that the mutual fund or
ETF sponsor is registered pursuant to the federal Investment Company Act of
1940 and has total assets under management of least one hundred million dollars
($100,000,000).
   (F)   The Local Government Investment Pool offered by the New Mexico State
Treasurer and described in Section 6-10-10.1 NMSA 1978.
   (G)   Shares of pooled investment funds managed by the state investment
officer, also known as the New Mexico State Investment Council, as provided in
Subsection (G) of Section 6-8-7 NMSA 1978.
   (H)   Securities issued by the following supranational issuers, that are
eligible for purchase and sale within the United States, that are denominated
in United States dollars, and that have a maturity date not exceeding five
years from the date of purchase:
      (1)   International Bank for Reconstruction & Development;
      (2)   International Finance Corporation;
      (3)   Inter-American Development Bank.
   (I)   Commercial paper issued by United States Corporations which are rated
A1/P1 and have a maturity date at purchase not exceeding 180 days.
   (J)   Shares of money market mutual funds registered with the United States
Securities And Exchange Commission (SEC), that are subject to SEC Rule 2a-7,
and that assess no SEC Rule 12b-1 sales charge or sales load, deferred sales
charge or sales load, or redemption fee. These shares are limited to
government, prime, and tax-exempt money market mutual funds.
   (K)   Repurchase agreements involving the purchase and sale of securities
described in subsection (B) of this section, which collateral or purchased
securities are held by the city, or for the benefit of the city by a party
other than the provider of the guaranteed investment contract or repurchase
agreement, with a collateralized value of at least 102% of the par value of
such repurchase agreement, valued at intervals of no less than daily and which
collateral is not subject to any other pledge or security interest.
   (L)   The "short-term investment fund," also known as the Local Government
Investment Pool, described in Section 6-10-10.1 NMSA 1978 or other similar
pooled fund maintained by the state for the investment of public funds of local
public bodies of the state.
   (M)   (1)   Any other investment permitted at the time of the investment by
any statute of the State of New Mexico for municipalities which have not
adopted a home rule charter.
      (2)   In the event of a conflict with the statutes of the State of New
Mexico and the provisions of this section, the provisions of this section,
having been adopted pursuant to the provisions of Article X, Section 6 of the
constitution of the state of New Mexico and the home rule Charter of the city
shall prevail.
('74 Code, § 4-5-8 (part)) (Ord. 73-1975; Am. Ord. 44-1986; Am. Ord. 55-1988;
Am. Ord. 29-1992; Am. Ord. 7-2001; Am. Ord._2020-001)
§ 4-1-11 INVESTMENT OF BOND PROCEEDS.
   (A)   The Mayor or his designated representative shall, as practicable,
invest the proceeds of all city bonds and other securities and all money set
aside for the payment of, or placed in a reserve fund for, such bonds and other
securities until the money is needed for the purposes designated in the
ordinance or resolution of the city authorizing the issuance of, or otherwise
relating to, such bonds or other securities. Income from these investments
shall be applied to the payment of principal of, premium, if any, and interest
on the bonds, for the purposes for which the bonds were issued, to fund any
debt service or other reserve account relating to the bonds or other
securities, to pay rebate, penalty, interest and other obligations of the city
relating to the bonds or other securities under the Internal Revenue Code of
1986, as amended, including any regulations applicable under the code, to pay
the costs and expenses of issuing and administration of the bonds or other
securities or for the other related purposes set forth in any resolution or
ordinance of the city relating to the bonds or other securities.
   (B)   Notwithstanding any other provision of law to the contrary, proceeds
of the bonds and other securities of the city and amounts set aside by the city
in a sinking fund or otherwise for the payment of city bonds and other
securities or in a reserve fund relating thereto may be invested in:
      (1)   The securities listed in §
4-1-10.
      (2)   Deposits which are fully insured by the Federal Deposit Insurance
Corporation or which are secured by obligations described in divisions (A) and
(B) of §
4-1-10.
      (3)   Any other investment specifically permitted by the ordinance
authorizing the issuance of the bonds or other securities or set forth in an
indenture, escrow agreement or trust agreement, approved by the Council,
relating to the bonds or other securities.
      (4)   Obligations, the interest on which is excluded from gross income of
the recipient for federal income tax purposes and in any other instrument which
does not constitute "investment property" under Section 148 of the Internal
Revenue Code, as amended from time to time, which is rated in any of its three
highest major rating categories by any nationally recognized rating agency.
   (C)   The terms of this section shall not be applicable to industrial
revenue or other conduit bonds or other securities which are payable solely
from:
      (1)   Funds other than funds of the city, its departments or agencies;
      (2)   The revenues of a project financed with the proceeds of industrial
revenue or other conduit bonds or other securities; or
      (3)   A combination of the funds and revenues described in divisions (1)
and (2) of this division (C).
('74 Code, § 4-5-9) (Ord. 29-1992; Am. Ord. 7-2001; Am. Ord._2020-001)
§ 4-1-12 CUSTODY OF SECURITIES.
   Securities purchased or held under the provisions of this article shall be
in the possession of the Mayor or his designated representative who may deposit
with a financial institution or trust company such securities as he shall
consider advisable to be held in safekeeping by such agent.
('74 Code, § 4-5-10) (Ord. 73-1975; Am. Ord. 44-1986; Am. Ord. 29-1992; Am.
Ord. 7-2001; Am. Ord._2020-001)
ARTICLE 2: CITY FUNDS
Section
Part 1: Urban Enhancement Trust Fund
   
4-2-1-1   Intent
   
4-2-1-2   Administration of the trust fund
   
4-2-1-3   Project definition and selection
Part 2: Pocket of Poverty Housing and Neighborhood Economic Development
   
4-2-2-1   Short title
   
4-2-2-2   Intent
   
4-2-2-3   Administration of the housing and neighborhood economic development
fund
   
4-2-2-4   Programming and selection
Part 3: Open Space Trust Fund and Land Administration
   
4-2-3-1   Short title
   
4-2-3-2   Robert M. White open space trust fund
   
4-2-3-3   Source of open space trust fund money
   
4-2-3-4   Use and administration of the Robert M. White open space trust fund
income
   
4-2-3-5   Disposition of open space exchange lands
   
4-2-3-6   Expiration
   
4-2-3-7   Administration of the Trust Fund
PART 1: URBAN ENHANCEMENT TRUST FUND
§ 4-2-1-1 INTENT.
   It is the intent of the city to create an Urban Enhancement Trust Fund
(UETF) to enhance and enrich the culture of the city. The principal of the
trust fund shall be maintained intact. The interest earned thereon shall be
utilized to enrich the city's cultural life.
('74 Code, § 4-1-1) (Ord. 65-1983; Am. Ord. 28-1994; Am. Ord. 24-2004; Am. Ord.
2023-021)
§ 4-2-1-2 ADMINISTRATION OF THE TRUST FUND.
   (A)   The Mayor with the advice of the City of Albuquerque Investment
Committee ("Investment Committee") is authorized and directed to convey any
funds appropriated to the Urban Enhancement Trust Fund to the City Treasurer or
a trustee, with instructions to administer such fund as the Urban Enhancement
Trust Fund for the uses and purposes set forth in §§
4-2-1-1 et seq. The trust fund shall be permanent and irrevocable. Funds
appropriated to the Urban Enhancement Trust Fund shall be invested in
securities permitted by §
4-1-10 and subject to the city's investment policy in effect at the time of
adoption of this section or as may be amended from time to time, and according
to the recommendations and oversight of the Investment Committee.
   (B)   If a trustee is selected, it shall be a qualified, responsible
financial institution which shall be selected by the Mayor, subject to Council
approval, for a term of up to five years after publication of a request for
sealed bid proposals.
   (C)   The administration of the trust fund shall be evaluated at least
annually by the Investment Committee to determine whether the administration of
the trust fund shall be undertaken by the City Treasurer, or a new trustee, who
shall be selected as provided in division (B).
   (D)   The fiscal year for the trust fund shall end on June 30 of each year.
Within 30 days after the end of each fiscal year, the City Treasurer shall
furnish the Mayor a report of all investment activity of the past year in
connection with the administration of the trust fund. The following
reinvestment procedures shall be used: 90% of the annual earnings generated by
investments shall be used for the purposes set forth in §
4-2-1-1 and in accordance with the Urban Enhancement Program adopted pursuant
to §
4-2-1-3. The remaining 10% of the earnings shall be added to the principal of
the trust fund and reinvested.
   (E)   In investing the principal of the trust fund, the trustee shall be
subject to the restrictions imposed on investment of city funds under §
4-1-9.
   (F)   The City Attorney shall prepare detailed instructions to the trustee
consistent with the terms of §§
4-2-1-1 et seq.
('74 Code, § 4-1-2) (Ord. 65-1983; Am. Ord. 28-1994; Am. Ord. 12-2000; Am. Ord.
2023-021)
§ 4-2-1-3 PROJECT DEFINITION AND SELECTION.
   The urban enhancement projects funded by the Urban Enhancement Trust Fund
shall be selected and programmed as provided below:
   (A)   Project Definition. 
      (1)   Trust Fund Projects for cultural services. Projects and activities,
including educational projects and activities, of non-profit organizations,
that enhance the arts in greater Albuquerque, including music, theater, dance,
creative writing, visual art, performance art, installation, photography, film,
teaching artists, arts education, culturally-based craft workers and culture
bearers. Priority will be given to projects which enhance cultural development
in, or are led by people from historically underserved communities.
      (2)   Anti-donation limitations. Trust fund expenditures shall not
violate Article IX, Section 14 of the New Mexico Constitution, which restricts
public donations to private entities.
   (B)   Two-Year Cycle. Each even-numbered year, the UETF Board shall develop
a proposed Urban Enhancement Program for use of the trust fund earnings
anticipated during the upcoming two fiscal years. Council has final authority
to make changes to the Urban Enhancement Trust Fund Two-Year Cycle as proposed
by the UETF Board .
   (C)   UETF Board.  The Mayor, with the advice and consent of the Council,
shall appoint an 11-member UETF Board who have working knowledge or experience
in arts and culture. At least one of these members shall reside in each of the
nine Council districts and two shall be members at large. All appointments
shall be for terms of three years, which may be renewed once. If the
appointment is to fill a vacancy, it may be renewed twice. The Council may,
individually or as a whole, recommend committee appointees to the Mayor. The
UETF Board shall establish such guidelines as are necessary to carry out the
purpose of the ordinance. The guidelines shall include but not be limited to
goals for selection of projects and procedures for selection. The guidelines
shall be promulgated by the Mayor.
('74 Code, § 4-1-3) (Ord. 65-1983; Am. Ord. 20-1984; Am. Ord. 28-1994; Am. Ord.
12-2000; Am. Ord. 16-2001; Am. Ord. 24-2004; Am. Ord._2023-021)
PART 2: POCKET OF POVERTY HOUSING AND
NEIGHBORHOOD ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT
§ 4-2-2-1 SHORT TITLE.
   Sections
4-2-2-1 et seq. may be cited as the "Pocket of Poverty Housing and Neighborhood
Economic Development Ordinance."
('74 Code, § 4-10-1) (Ord. 53-1987)
§ 4-2-2-2 INTENT.
   It is the intent of the city to utilize the proceeds from the repayment of
the city loan of Urban Development Action Grant (UDAG) funds to Albuquerque
Plaza Partners and El Encanto, Inc. to create a Housing and Neighborhood
Economic Development Fund. The Fund income shall be utilized to provide
maintenance, rehabilitation and expansion of the housing stock and neighborhood
economic development programs for the benefit of low and moderate income
residents of the Albuquerque Pocket of Poverty. The dedication of these funds
for housing and neighborhood economic development within the Pocket of Poverty
will serve to reduce blight and poverty, increase available housing, create
jobs and promote small business development to enhance the well-being of low
and moderate income residents. This ordinance [i.e., §§ 4-2-2-1 et seq.] is
intended to comply with the requirements of the Department of Housing and Urban
Development that the repayment of Action Grant funds be used for the direct
benefit of low and moderate income residents of the Pocket of Poverty.
('74 Code, § 4-10-2) (Ord. 53-1987)
§ 4-2-2-3 ADMINISTRATION OF THE HOUSING AND NEIGHBORHOOD ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT
FUND.
   (A)   The Mayor is authorized and directed to convey all funds received in
repayment of the city's loan of UDAG funds to Albuquerque Plaza Partners
pursuant to the UDAG Mortgage Note to a fund to be known as the Housing and
Neighborhood Economic Development Fund for the uses and purposes set forth in
§§
4-2-2-1 et seq.
   (B)   The Fund income and interest earnings shall be appropriated for the
purposes set forth in §§
4-2-2-1 et seq. after recommendation by the Mayor and approval of the Council.
('74 Code, § 4-10-3) (Ord. 53-1987)
§ 4-2-2-4 PROGRAMMING AND SELECTION.
   The projects funded by the Housing and Neighborhood Economic Development
Fund shall be selected and programmed as provided below:
   (A)   Housing and Neighborhood Economic Development Fund Committee (the
"Committee"). There is created a Committee which shall consist of eleven
members. The Mayor shall appoint the members of the Committee with the advice
and consent of the Council. The Council may, individually or as a whole,
recommend Committee appointees to the Mayor. The members shall include six
individuals who are residents of the Pocket of Poverty, at least one of whom
shall be a resident of the Barelas neighborhood, two representatives of
businesses located in the Pocket of Poverty, one representative of the private
housing industry, one architect, and one representative of a private lending
institution. Neighborhood associations within the Pocket of Poverty shall be
asked to provide the Mayor with their recommendations on the appointments of
the six members who are residents of the Pocket of Poverty. The Committee shall
elect a Chairperson from one of the six Pocket of Poverty resident members. The
Committee shall operate as set forth in §§
2-6-1-1 et seq.
   (B)   Comprehensive Neighborhood Development Plan. The Mayor, after an
opportunity for review and comment by the Committee, shall develop a Ten Year
Comprehensive Neighborhood Development Plan for the use of anticipated fund
income. The plan shall include an assessment of housing and economic
development currently existing within the Pocket of Poverty, resources
available to address the problems, a financial plan for use of fund income,
long range goals and objectives, recommended strategies for implementation and
standards for monitoring and evaluation of completed projects. The Committee
shall hold at least one public hearing on the Mayor's draft plan in the Pocket
of Poverty prior to making recommendations to the Mayor and the Council. The
Mayor's final draft plan shall be conveyed to the Council by a bill and shall
be adopted by the Council with or without amendments. The plan may be
subsequently amended at any time by the Council after an opportunity for review
and comment by the Committee. The plan shall be revised and readopted at least
every five years thereafter.
   (C)   Two Year Program. Each odd numbered year beginning in 1989, the Mayor,
after an opportunity for review and comment by the Committee, shall develop a
program for utilization of the Fund income anticipated during the upcoming two
fiscal years. The program shall substantially conform to the adopted Ten Year
Comprehensive Neighborhood Development Plan as adopted by the Council and any
amendments thereto.
   (D)   Priorities and Uses of Funds.
      (1)   Fifty percent of the available fund income in any two year program
shall be used for rehabilitation of existing private housing stock, maintenance
and rehabilitation of public housing located within the Pocket of Poverty and
for expansion of the housing stock to serve the needs of low and moderate
income persons residing within the Pocket of Poverty; provided that funds from
the repayment of the El Encanto, Inc. UDAG are utilized to the benefit of the
residents of the Barelas Community Development Area.
      (2)   Fifty percent of the available fund income in any two year program
shall be used for neighborhood economic development in the Pocket of Poverty;
provided that funds from the repayment of the El Encanto, Inc. UDAG are
utilized to the benefit of the residents of the Barelas Community Development
Area.
      (3)   The Mayor, with the recommendations of the Committee, shall develop
a priority ranking system so that proposed projects can be prioritized. The
system of ranking shall be included in the Comprehensive Neighborhood
Development Plan and in the Two Year Program. The ranking of each project
within the Program shall be included along with recommendations of the
Committee and the Mayor.
      (4)   Guidelines for Ranking of Projects. Priority shall be given to
financially sound proposals and which rank the highest according to the
following guidelines for desirable projects.
         (a)   Projects which promote pride of ownership by the participation
of prospective tenants of future owners in design, financing, construction and
management of the facilities.
         (b)   Projects which maximize the use of private funds in conjunction
with public funds to promote a public-private partnership so as to leverage
funds to best meet the needs of low and moderate income people in the Pocket of
Poverty.
         (c)   Projects which preserve the architecture and culture of
residents of existing neighborhoods.
         (d)   Projects which provide economic benefits in the Pocket of
Poverty through employment and promotion of neighborhood businesses.
         (e)   Projects which reduce the need for ongoing human services by
promoting self-sufficiency and independence.
         (f)   Projects which provide services and facilities which lie outside
the normal basic service delivery of the city.
   (E)   Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.
   POCKET OF POVERTY. A geographic area within the city which meets federal
standards for minimum physical and economic distress and has been approved as
such by the United States Department of Housing and Urban Development (HUD).
The map attached and made a part hereof indicates the Pocket of Poverty
boundary at this time; it is subject to change in accordance with HUD
regulations and with approval of the Council.
   NEIGHBORHOOD ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT. Those projects, programs and incentives
which encourage businesses to locate or expand in the neighborhoods of the
Pocket of Poverty, or which advance the ability of neighborhood entrepreneurs
to improve existing businesses as well as initiate new businesses in the Pocket
of Poverty and which promote permanent employment opportunities for low and
moderate income residents of the Pocket of Poverty.
('74 Code, § 4-10-4) (Ord. 53-1987; Am. Ord. 43-1993; Am. Ord. 48-1993)
PART 3: OPEN SPACE TRUST FUND AND
LAND ADMINISTRATION
§ 4-2-3-1 SHORT TITLE.
   Sections
4-2-3-1 et seq. shall be known and may be cited as the “Open Space Trust Fund
and Land Administration Ordinance.”
('74 Code, § 4-11-1) (Ord. 72-1988; Am. Ord._2015-028)
§ 4-2-3-2 ROBERT M. WHITE OPEN SPACE TRUST FUND.
   All balances in the Permanent Fund created by Resolution No. 41-1982, as
amended by Resolution No. 73-1986, are hereby perpetuated in §§
4-2-3-1 et seq., but the fund shall now be called the “Robert M. White Open
Space Trust Fund.”
('74 Code, § 4-11-2) (Ord. 72- 1988; Am. Ord._2015-028; Am. Ord. 2023-034)
§ 4-2-3-3 SOURCE OF OPEN SPACE TRUST FUND MONEY.
   (A)   Some land within the Elena Gallegos Grant acquired by the City was
traded by the City to the United States for inclusion in the Cibola National
Forest and the lands acquired in exchange (the “Open Space Exchange Lands”)
shall be sold, leased, or exchanged. The cash proceeds from any sales, leases,
or exchanges of Open Space Exchange Lands will be placed in the Robert M. White
Open Space Trust Fund perpetuated by §§
4-2-3-1 et seq. PROCEEDS shall mean the net purchase price paid to the City of
Albuquerque for the land after deduction of all costs incurred in the marketing
or sale of the land. Income derived from the proceeds and other consideration
not included in proceeds shall be utilized as provided for other income in §
4-2-3-4.
   (B)   If Open Space Exchange Lands are traded for land which is not Major
Public Open Space as defined by adopted City plans, but is intended for
ultimate sale or other disposal, no proceeds will be required to be deposited
into the Robert M. White Open Space Trust Fund or payment made to the
Albuquerque Academy pursuant to the purchase agreement approved by the City
Council on March 15,1982. To the extent that cash proceeds are received by the
City as part of such an exchange, the cash proceeds will be deposited into the
Robert M. White Open Space Trust Fund. When the land is ultimately sold,
leased, or exchanged for Major Public Open Space, the operative portions of §§
4-2-3-1 et seq. and the Academy Agreement regarding disposition of proceeds
will take effect.
   (C)   Money from sources such as grants, donations, and appropriations may
be placed in the Robert M. White Open Space Trust Fund created by §§
4-2-3-1 6 et seq.
   (D)   If Open Space Exchange Lands are exchanged for land designated as
Major Public Open Space by the Albuquerque/Bernalillo County Comprehensive Plan
or other adopted City plans, no proceeds will be required to be deposited into
the Robert M. White Open Space Trust Fund. Any payment to the Academy
necessitated by such an exchange may be paid from the Open Space Trust Fund or
from other available funds.
('74 Code, § 4-11-3) (Ord. 72- 1988; Am. Ord._2015-028; Am. Ord. 2023-034)
§ 4-2-3-4 USE AND ADMINISTRATION OF THE ROBERT M. WHITE OPEN SPACE TRUST FUND
INCOME.
   The principal of the Robert M. White Open Space Trust Fund shall be
maintained intact and interest earned thereon and other income will be utilized
for the following purposes:
   Up to 90% of the annual earnings generated by investments may be used for
the acquisition of land designated for Major Public Open Space or for public
easement or rights by the Albuquerque/Bernalillo County Comprehensive Plan or
other adopted City plans, and/or may be reinvested as part of the principal of
the Robert M. White Open Space Trust Fund, subject to the approval of the City
Council upon recommendation by the Open Space Advisory Board. The remaining 10%
of the earnings shall be added to the principal of the trust fund and
reinvested.
('74 Code, § 4-11-4) (Ord. 72- 1988; Am. Ord. 11-2004; Am. Ord._2015-028; Am.
Ord. 2023-034)
§ 4-2-3-5 DISPOSITION OF OPEN SPACE EXCHANGE LANDS.
   Pursuant to the powers granted to the City under Article X, Section 6, of
the New Mexico Constitution and the Charter of the City, the Council hereby
adopts the following procedure specifically for the disposition of the Open
Space Exchange Lands. The method set out herein is intended to be an
alternative to the provisions governing disposition provided for in §
5-2-1 et seq., or any other laws or ordinances governing disposition of real
property by the City.
   (A)   Methods of Disposition.
      (1)   The City may sell, lease, or exchange the Open Space Exchange Lands
by any reasonable means, including, but not limited to, the use of competitive
bidding, request for proposals or negotiation. The Mayor shall not make or
consider offers to dispose of land under this section until he has advertised
his offer to dispose or his willingness to consider offers in a public notice
in a daily newspaper of general circulation in the City, or if the land is not
located within Albuquerque, then in the County in which the land is located;
such notice shall give relevant information as to the City’s offer or the types
of offers which would be acceptable to the City. Open Space Exchange Lands may
be exchanged by private exchange:
         (a)   For lands designated as Major Public Open Space by the
Albuquerque/Bernalillo County Comprehensive Plan or other adopted City plans;
or
         (b)   For land that the City wishes to acquire for subsequent sale or
exchange for lands designated as Major Public Open Space by the Albuquerque/
Bernalillo County Comprehensive Plan or other adopted City plans.
      (2)   Land acquired by exchange for subsequent sale shall be deemed to be
Open Space Exchange Land subject to §§
4-2-3-1 et seq. and the Agreement with the Albuquerque Academy. The Mayor shall
obtain appraisals of each parcel of land to be acquired, traded or sold before
making or considering offers for disposal. Appropriate fees will be paid to any
outside professional service utilized to affect the disposition of land under
this section; such service includes, but is not limited to, title insurance,
engineering, surveying, legal, brokerage, and appraisal.
   (B)   Report by the Mayor and Approval by the Council or Its Designee.
      (1)   The Mayor shall report any final decision to dispose of any of the
Open Space Exchange Lands to the City Council for its approval, and no sale,
lease, exchange or other disposition of any of the Open Space Exchange Lands
shall occur without the notification of and an opportunity to comment by the
Open Space Advisory Board prior to final approval of the City Council.
      (2)   All proposals which are submitted to the Council in accordance with
the requirements of this section shall be supported by a message setting out
the circumstances, benefits, responsibilities and advantages relative thereto.
      (3)   All offers and related documentation received by the City as part
of the disposal of each parcel of the Exchange Lands shall be transmitted to
the Council along with the proposal.
      (4)   The Council’s approval power is delegated to the Open Space
Advisory Board in the following cases: any license, easement, grant of right-
of-way or leasehold interest of less than ten years in duration, including any
lease extensions or renewals, granted to any entity authorized to exercise the
power of eminent domain in the State, provided the value of the land so
encumbered does not exceed $100,000. An aggrieved person shall have the right
to appeal such decision to the City Council within 15 days of the decision.
('74 Code, § 4-11-5) (Ord. 72- 1988; Am. Ord. 39-1990; Am. Ord._2015-028; Am.
Ord. 2023-034)
§ 4-2-3-6 EXPIRATION.
   Section
4-2-3-4 shall expire upon acceptance by the City Council of a final report from
the Mayor to be submitted after the disposition of all Open Space Exchange
Lands has been completed.
('74 Code, § 4-11-6) (Ord. 72- 1988; Am. Ord._2015-028; Am. Ord. 2023-034)
§ 4-2-3-7 ADMINISTRATION OF THE TRUST FUND.
   (A)   The Mayor with the advice of the City of Albuquerque Investment
Committee (“Investment Committee”) is authorized and directed to convey any
funds appropriated to the Robert M. White Open Space Trust Fund to the City
Treasurer or a trustee, with instructions to administer such fund as the Robert
M. White Open Space Trust Fund for the uses and purposes set forth in this
Article. The trust fund shall be permanent and irrevocable. Funds appropriated
to the Robert M. White Open Space Trust Fund shall be invested in securities
permitted by §
4-1-10 and subject to the City’s investment policy in effect at the time of
adoption of this section or as may be amended from time to time, and according
to the recommendations and oversight of the Investment Committee.
   (B)   If a trustee is selected, it shall be a qualified, responsible
financial institution which shall be selected by the Mayor, subject to Council
approval, for a term of up to five years after publication of a request for
sealed bid proposals.
   (C)   The administration of the trust fund shall be evaluated at least
annually by the Investment Committee to determine whether the administration of
the trust fund shall be undertaken by the City Treasurer, or a new trustee, who
shall be selected as provided in division (B).
   (D)   The fiscal year for the trust fund shall end on June 30 of each year.
Within 30 days after the end of each fiscal year, the City Treasurer shall
present a report of all investment activity of the past year in connection with
the administration of the trust fund to the Open Space Advisory Board for its
review and comment. The Treasurer shall then furnish the report and any
comments from the Open Space Advisory Board to the Mayor and the City Council.
   (E)   In investing the principal of the trust fund, the trustee shall be
subject to the restrictions imposed on investment of City funds under §
4-1-9.
   (F)   The City Attorney shall prepare detailed instructions to the trustee
consistent with the terms of this Article.
(Ord._2015-028; Am. Ord. 2023-034)
ARTICLE 3: MUNICIPAL GROSS RECEIPTS TAXES
Section
Municipal Gross Receipts Taxes
Part 1
   
4-3-1-1   Imposition of tax
   
4-3-1-2   Specific exemptions
   
4-3-1-3   Dedication
Part 2
   
4-3-2-1   Imposition of tax
   
4-3-2-2   Specific exemptions
   
4-3-2-3   Dedication
Part 3
   
4-3-3-1   Imposition of tax
   
4-3-3-2   General provisions
   
4-3-3-3   Specific exemptions
   
4-3-3-4   Dedication
   
4-3-3-5   Effective date
   
4-3-3-6   Repeal to tax
   
4-3-3-7   Creation and administration of trust fund
Part 4
   
4-3-4-1   Imposition of tax
   
4-3-4-2   General provisions
   
4-3-4-3   Specific exemptions
   
4-3-4-4   Dedication
   
4-3-4-5   Effective date
Part 5: Municipal Infrastructure Gross Receipts Tax
   
4-3-5-1   Imposition of tax
   
4-3-5-2   General provisions
   
4-3-5-3   Specific exemptions
   
4-3-5-4   Dedication
Part 6: Parks and Open Space Tax
   
4-3-6-1   Name
   
4-3-6-2   Imposition of tax
   
4-3-6-3   General provisions
   
4-3-6-4   Specific exemptions
   
4-3-6-5   Dedication
   
4-3-6-6   Mandatory election
   
4-3-6-7   Effective date of §§ 4-3-6-1 et seq.
   
4-3-6-8   Effective date of tax
   
4-3-6-9   Expiration of tax
Part 7: Transportation Infrastructure Tax
   
4-3-7-1   Name
   
4-3-7-2   Imposition of tax
   
4-3-7-3   General provisions
   
4-3-7-4   Specific exemptions
   
4-3-7-5   Dedication
   
4-3-7-6   Effective date of tax
Part 8: Public Safety Tax
   
4-3-8-1   Name
   
4-3-8-2   Imposition of tax
   
4-3-8-3   General provisions
   
4-3-8-4   Specific exemptions
   
4-3-8-5   Dedication
   
4-3-8-6   Mandatory election
   
4-3-8-7   Effective date of tax
Part 9: Municipal Hold Harmless Gross Receipts Tax
   
4-3-9-1   Imposition of tax
   
4-3-9-2   General provisions
   
4-3-9-3   Specific exemptions
   
4-3-9-4   Dedication
   
4-3-9-5   Effective date
Part 10: Municipal Capital Outlay Gross Receipts Tax for the ABQ Biopark
   
4-3-10-1   Imposition of tax
   
4-3-10-2   General provisions
   
4-3-10-3   Specific exemptions
   
4-3-10-4   Dedication
   
4-3-10-5   Effective date
   
4-3-10-6   Delayed repeal
Editor's note:  Each increment of Municipal Gross Receipts Tax is a separate
tax, adopted by separate ordinance under differing versions of the enabling
legislation that authorizes the imposition of the taxes. Thus subsequent
increments do not amend the original tax ordinance and do not have any specific
relation to other increments. Each tax increment ordinance is codified in the
following parts of this article.
PART 1
§ 4-3-1-1 IMPOSITION OF TAX.
   There is imposed on any person engaging in business in this municipality,
for the privilege of engaging in business in this municipality, an excise tax
equal to 1/4 of 1% of the gross receipts reported or required to be reported by
the person pursuant to the New Mexico Gross Receipts and Compensating Tax Act
as it now exists or is amended. The tax imposed under this section is pursuant
to the Municipal Gross Receipts Tax Act, as it now exists or is amended, and
shall be known as the "municipal gross receipts tax."
('74 Code, § 4-7-1) (Ord. 49-1981)
§ 4-3-1-2 SPECIFIC EXEMPTIONS.
   No municipal gross receipts tax shall be imposed on the gross receipts
arising from:
   (A)   The transmission of messages by wire or other means from one point
within the municipality to another point outside the municipality;
   (B)   Transporting persons or property for hire by railroad, motor vehicle,
air transportation, or any other means from one point within the municipality
to another point outside the municipality; or
   (C)   A business located outside the boundaries of a municipality on land
owned by that municipality for which a gross receipts tax distribution is made
pursuant to Section 7-1-6(D)(3) NMSA 1978.
('74 Code, § 4-7-2) (Ord. 49-1981)
§ 4-3-1-3 DEDICATION.
   The municipal gross receipts tax is to be dedicated for a specific purpose
or area of municipal government services listed below as to purposes and amount
of dedication:
   (A)   Extending, enlarging, improving, bettering, purchasing, furnishing,
equipping and rehabilitating the city's municipal refuse disposal system,
including but not limited to, the acquisition of vehicles and equipment for the
collection, transportation and disposal of garbage, trash and other similar
waste and refuse and all costs incidental to the foregoing;
   (B)   Constructing, purchasing, furnishing, equipping, rehabilitating,
making additions or making improvements to a building or buildings (which may
be a joint city-county building) to be used by the city as a City Hall and for
city administrative purposes and for other similar purposes for and in the city
and the purchasing and improving of grounds therefor and facilities relating
thereto, including but not necessarily limited to, acquiring and improving
parking lots and garages therefor or for use, in whole or in part, in
connection therewith, and all costs incidental to the foregoing;
   (C)   The full amount of the municipal gross receipts tax is dedicated to
and may be pledged to the payment of that amount necessary to pay the principal
of, premium, if any, and interest (herein called "Debt Service Charges") on
bonds, notes, other evidences of borrowing and other obligations (herein the
"Obligations") whether now or hereafter issued and delivered to finance
projects relating to either or both of the purposes specified in divisions (A)
or (B) of this section and for the payment of which revenues from the municipal
gross receipts tax are pledged. All revenues from the municipal gross receipts
tax shall initially be deposited to a special trust fund created hereby and
designated the 1984 Gross Receipts Tax Debt Retirement Fund (the "Debt
Retirement Fund") in the custody of the City Treasurer, but separate and apart
from and not constituting part of the general treasury or general funds of the
city, which revenues, at the times and in the amounts required by any City
Council ordinance authorizing Obligations, shall first be applied to the
payment of the Debt Service Charges on outstanding obligations and any reserves
therefor, and second to the payment of any costs or expenses relating to the
issuance, carrying, redemption or retirement of such obligations, including
transfers to other funds for such purposes and the balance thereof shall be
deposited as provided in division (D) of this section. So long as any of the
obligations are outstanding and there is not sufficient moneys in the Debt
Retirement Fund to meet the full amount of Debt Service Charges on such
obligations, the city shall maintain the municipal gross receipts tax imposed
by §
4-3-1-1 and shall take all action necessary toward the collection, deposit, and
application of the municipal gross receipts taxes as required by §§
4-3-1-1 et seq. and ordinances of the city authorizing the obligations. At any
time that the amount of moneys held to the credit of the Debt Retirement Fund
exceeds the amounts required therein as set forth in any ordinance authorizing
obligations which are then outstanding, such excess shall be transferred as set
forth in division (D) of this section.
   (D)   The revenues of the municipal gross receipts tax which are not
required for the purposes and payments set forth in divisions (A), (B) and (C)
of this section and the ordinances authorizing such obligations to be held in
the Debt Retirement Fund or applied or transferred to the payments stated in
division (C) of this section shall, in the amounts and at the times so
available, be withdrawn from the Debt Retirement Fund and deposited in the
city's General Fund.
('74 Code, § 4-7-3) (Ord. 49-1981; Am. Ord. 73-1983)
PART 2
§ 4-3-2-1 IMPOSITION OF TAX.
   There is imposed on any person engaging in business in this municipality,
for the privilege of engaging in business in this municipality, an excise tax
equal to one-fourth of one percent of the gross receipts reported or required
to be reported by the person pursuant to the New Mexico Gross Receipts and
Compensating Tax Act as it now exists or is amended. The tax imposed under this
section is pursuant to the Municipal Gross Receipts Tax Act, as it now exists
or is amended, and shall be known as the "municipal gross receipts tax."
('74 Code, § 4-8-1) (Ord. 50-1981)
§ 4-3-2-2 SPECIFIC EXEMPTIONS.
   No municipal gross receipts tax shall be imposed on the gross receipts
arising from:
   (A)   The transmission of messages by wire or other means from one point
within the municipality to another point outside the municipality;
   (B)   Transporting persons or property for hire by railroad, motor vehicle,
air transportation, or any other means from one point within the municipality
to another point outside the municipality; or
   (C)   A business located outside the boundaries of a municipality on land
owned by that municipality for which a gross receipts tax distribution is made
pursuant to Section 7-1-6(D)(3) NMSA 1978.
('74 Code, § 4-8-2) (Ord. 50-1981)
§ 4-3-2-3 DEDICATION.
   The municipal gross receipts tax is to be dedicated for a specific purpose
or area of municipal government services listed below as to purposes and amount
of dedication:
   (A)   Extending, enlarging, improving, bettering, purchasing, furnishing,
equipping and rehabilitating the municipal refuse disposal system, including
but not limited to, the acquisition of vehicles and equipment for the
collection, transportation and disposal of garbage, trash and other similar
waste and refuse and all costs incidental to the foregoing;
   (B)   Constructing, purchasing, furnishing, equipping, rehabilitating,
making additions or making improvements to a building or buildings (which may
be a joint city-county building) to be used by the city as a City Hall and for
city administrative purposes and for other similar purposes for and in the city
and the purchasing and improving of grounds therefor and facilities relating
thereto, including but not necessarily limited to, acquiring and improving
parking lots and garages therefor or for use, in whole or in part, in
connection therewith, and all costs incidental to the foregoing;
   (C)   The full amount of the municipal gross receipts tax is dedicated to
and may be pledged to the payment of that amount necessary to pay the principal
of, premium, if any, and interest (herein called "Debt Service Charges") on
bonds, notes, other evidences of borrowing and other obligations (herein the
"obligations") whether now or hereafter issued and delivered to finance
projects relating to either or both of the purposes specified in divisions (A)
or (B) above and for the payment of which revenues from the municipal gross
receipts tax are pledged. All revenues from the municipal gross receipts tax
shall initially be deposited to the special trust fund created by §
4-3-1-3, being Section 3 of Ord. 73-1983 and designated the 1984 Gross Receipts
Tax Debt Retirement Fund (the "Debt Retirement Fund") in the custody of the
City Treasurer, but separate and apart from and not constituting part of the
general treasury or general funds of the city, which revenues, at the times and
in the amounts required by any City Council ordinance authorizing obligations,
shall first be applied to the payment of the Debt Service Charges on
outstanding obligations and any reserves therefor, and second to the payment of
any costs or expenses relating to the issuance, carrying, redemption or
retirement of such obligations, including transfers to other funds for such
purposes and the balance thereof shall be deposited as provided in division (D)
of this section. So long as any of the obligations are outstanding and there is
not sufficient moneys in the Debt Retirement Fund to meet the full amount of
Debt Service Charges on such obligations, the city shall maintain the municipal
gross receipts tax imposed by §
4-3-2-1 and shall take all action necessary toward the collection, deposit, and
application of the municipal gross receipts taxes as required by this §§
4-3-2-1 et seq. and ordinances of the city authorizing the obligations. At any
time that the amount of moneys held to the credit of the Debt Retirement Fund
exceeds the amounts required therein as set forth in any ordinance authorizing
obligations which are then outstanding, such excess shall be transferred as set
forth in division (D) of this section.
   (D)   The revenues of the municipal gross receipts tax which are not
required for the purposes and payments set forth in divisions (A), (B) and (C)
above and the ordinances authorizing obligations to be held in the Debt
Retirement Fund or applied or transferred to the payments stated in division
(C) of this section shall, in the amounts and at the times so available, be
withdrawn from the Debt Retirement Fund and deposited in the city's General
Fund.
('74 Code, § 4-8-3) (Ord. 50-1981; Am. Ord. 74-1983)
PART 3
§ 4-3-3-1 IMPOSITION OF TAX.
   There is imposed on any person engaging in business in this municipality,
for the privilege of engaging in business in this municipality, an excise tax
equal to 1/4 of 1% of the gross receipts reported or required to be reported by
the person pursuant to the New Mexico Gross Receipts and Compensating Tax Act
as it now exists or is amended. The tax imposed under this section is pursuant
to the Municipal Gross Receipts Tax Act, as it now exists or is amended, and
shall be known as the "municipal gross receipts tax."
('74 Code, § 4-3-1) (Ord. 46-1987)
§ 4-3-3-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS.
   This section hereby adopts by reference all definitions, exemptions and
deductions contained in the Gross Receipts and Compensating Tax Act as it now
exists or as it may be amended.
('74 Code, § 4-3-2) (Ord. 46-1987)
§ 4-3-3-3 SPECIFIC EXEMPTIONS.
   No municipal gross receipts tax shall be imposed on the gross receipts
arising from:
   (A)   The transmission of messages by wire or other means from one point
within the municipality to another point outside the municipality;
   (B)   Transporting persons or property for hire by railroad, motor vehicle,
air transportation, or any other means from one point within the municipality
to another point outside the municipality; or
   (C)   A business located outside the boundaries of a municipality on land
owned by that municipality for which a gross receipts tax distribution is made
pursuant to Section 7-1-6-4(C) NMSA 1978.
('74 Code, § 4-3-3) (Ord. 46-1987)
§ 4-3-3-4 DEDICATION.
   Revenue from the municipal gross receipts tax will be used for the purposes
listed below:
   (A)   Police Department expansion, to include capital and recurring costs
associated with additional officers;
   (B)   Open space purchase of critical areas as approved by the City Council;
improvement of the open space in the Rio Grande State Park;
   (C)   Transportation capital improvements for major arterials and associated
landscaping and bikeways as designated in the Long Range Major Street Plan, all
as approved by the City Council;
   (D)   Storm drainage capital improvements and associated maintenance as
approved by the City Council;
   (E)   Cultural and recreational facilities to include and limited to
acquisition of land, design, construction and associated roads, transit,
parking and infrastructure for a multi-use/hot air balloon park, balloon and
science museums, aquarium and associated aquatic park and botanical gardens,
all as approved by the City Council; and
   (F)   Debt service, endowment and trust funds and appropriations for the
purpose of implementing and operating projects and programs which support or
are initiated with revenues generated from this municipal gross receipts tax,
as specified above in this section.
('74 Code, § 4-3-4) (Ord. 46-1987; Am. Ord. 38-1990; Am. Ord. 11-1995)
§ 4-3-3-5 EFFECTIVE DATE.
   The effective date of municipal gross receipts tax shall be January 1, 1988
unless an election is held pursuant to Section 7-19-4(C)(2) NMSA 1978 on the
question of disapproving the ordinance [upon which §§
4-3-3-1 et seq. are based], in which case the effective date shall be on either
July 1 or January 1, whichever date occurs first after the expiration of three
months from the date when the results of the election are certified to be in
favor of the ordinance's adoption.
('74 Code, § 4-3-5) (Ord. 46-1987)
§ 4-3-3-6 REPEAL TO TAX.
   The excise tax imposed in §
4-3-3-1 is hereby repealed effective eight years after the effective date of
the tax. The administration shall prepare an appropriation request to be
submitted to the City Council concerning the use of the funds remaining after
the Quality of Life Plan, contained in Resolution Number 89-1987, has been
completed.
('74 Code, § 4-3-6) (Ord. 46-1987; Am. Ord. 47-1988)
§ 4-3-3-7 CREATION AND ADMINISTRATION OF TRUST FUND.
   (A)   There is hereby created a Quality of Life Tax Trust Fund pursuant to §
4-3-3-4(F) for the purpose of implementing and operating projects and programs
which support or are initiated with revenues generated from the municipal gross
receipts tax imposed by §
4-3-3-1, such tax being known as the Quality of Life Tax.
   (B)   The Mayor, with the advice of the City of Albuquerque Investment
Committee herewith known as the Investment Committee, is authorized and
directed to convey any funds appropriated to the Quality of Life Trust Fund to
the City Treasurer, with instructions to administer such fund as the Quality of
Life Trust Fund in order to support financially the operations of the
Biological Park, the Explora Science Center, and the Balloon Museum,
specifically to reduce entrance fees for New Mexico residents. The Trust Fund
shall be permanent and irrevocable. Funds appropriated shall be invested in
securities permitted by §
4-1-10, subject to the city's investment policy as currently adopted or as may
be amended from time to time by the Investment Committee and according to the
recommendations and oversight of the Investment Committee. Such funds shall be
conveyed to the Quality of Life Trust Fund as soon as feasible and in such
amount as shall create a minimum $10,000,000 endowment by the tenth year of the
Quality of Life Tax. The City Treasurer and the Investment Committee are
directed to invest these funds in securities permitted by the city's investment
policy in order to maximize returns and provide a stable income. The City
Treasurer and Investment Committee shall consider long-term investments to meet
these objectives.
   (C)   The fiscal year for the trust shall end on June 30 of each year.
Within 30 days after the end of each fiscal year, the City Treasurer shall
furnish the Mayor a report of all investment activity of the past year in
connection with the administration of the fund. The following reinvestment
procedures shall used: 90% of the annual earnings generated by investments
shall be used for the purpose set for in §
4-3-3-4(F); the remaining 10% of the earnings shall be added to the principal
of the trust.
   (D)   Effective date. This section shall become effective five days after
publication in full. Section
4-3-3-4 of this article shall become effective on July 1, 1995, unless an
election is held pursuant to Section 7-19D-9(D) NMSA 1978, on §
4-3-3-4, in which case the effective date shall be either July 1 or January 1,
whichever date occurs first after the expiration of three months from the date
when the results of the election are certified to be in favor of the
ordinance's adoption.
(Ord. 11-1995)
PART 4
§ 4-3-4-1 IMPOSITION OF TAX.
   There is imposed on any person engaging in business in this municipality,
for the privilege of engaging in business in this municipality, an excise tax
equal to 1/8 of 1% of the gross receipts reported or required to be reported by
the person pursuant to the New Mexico Gross Receipts and Compensating Tax Act
as it now exists or is amended. The tax imposed under this section is pursuant
to the Municipal Gross Receipts Tax Act, as it now exists or is amended, and
shall be known as the “municipal gross receipts tax.”
('74 Code, §4-12-1) (Ord. 20-1989; Am. Ord. 26-2006)
§ 4-3-4-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS.
   This section hereby adopts by reference all definitions, exemptions and
deductions contained in the Gross Receipts and Compensating Tax Act as it now
exists or as it may be amended.
('74 Code, § 4-12-2) (Ord. 20-1989)
§ 4-3-4-3 SPECIFIC EXEMPTIONS.
   No municipal gross receipts tax shall be imposed on the gross receipts
arising from:
   (A)   The transmission of messages by wire or other means from one point
within the municipality to another point outside the municipality;
   (B)   Transporting persons or property for hire by railroad, motor vehicle,
air transportation, or any other means from one point within the municipality
to another point outside the municipality; or
   (C)   A business located outside the boundaries of a municipality on land
owned by that municipality for which a gross receipts tax distribution is made
pursuant to Section 7-1-6-4(C) NMSA 1978.
('74 Code, § 4-12-3) (Ord. 20-1989)
§ 4-3-4-4 DEDICATION.
   Revenue from the municipal local option gross receipts tax will be used for
General Fund purposes as determined each fiscal year by Council and the
Administration.
('74 Code, § 4-12-4) (Ord. 20-1989; Am. Ord. 55-2005)
§ 4-3-4-5 EFFECTIVE DATE.
   The effective date of the municipal gross receipts tax shall be July 1, 1989
unless an election is held pursuant to Section 7-19-4(C)(2) NMSA 1978 on the
question of disapproving the ordinance [upon which §§
4-3-4-1 et seq. are based], in which case the effective date shall be on either
July 1 or January 1, whichever date occurs first after the expiration of three
months from the date when the results of the election are certified to be in
favor of this ordinance's adoption.
('74 Code, § 4-12-5) (Ord. 20-1989)
Editor's note:
   Pursuant to Ord. 15-2007, Ch. 4, Art. 3, Pt. 4 ROA 1994 is repealed
effective July 1, 2008.
PART 5: MUNICIPAL INFRASTRUCTURE
GROSS RECEIPTS TAX
§ 4-3-5-1 IMPOSITION OF TAX.
   There is imposed on any person engaging in business in this municipality,
for the privilege of engaging in business in this municipality, an excise tax
equal to .0625% of the gross receipts reported or required to be reported by
the person pursuant to the New Mexico Gross Receipts and Compensating Tax Act,
Chapter 7, Article 9 NMSA 1978, as it now exists or as amended. The tax imposed
under this section is pursuant to the Municipal Infrastructure Gross Receipts
Tax Act, Chapter 7, Article 9 NMSA 1978, as it now exists or as amended, and
shall be known as the "municipal infrastructure gross receipts tax."
('74 Code, § 4-13-1) (Ord. 14-1992)
§ 4-3-5-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS.
   This section hereby adopts by reference all definitions, exemptions and
deductions contained in the Gross Receipts and Compensating Tax Act as it now
exists or as it may be amended.
('74 Code, § 4-13-2) (Ord. 14-1992)
§ 4-3-5-3 SPECIFIC EXEMPTIONS.
   No municipal gross receipts tax shall be imposed on the gross receipts
arising from:
   (A)   The transmission of messages by wire or other means from one point
within the municipality to another point outside the municipality.
   (B)   Transporting persons or property for hire by railroad, motor vehicle,
air transportation, or any other means from one point within the municipality
to another point outside the municipality; or
   (C)   A business located outside the boundaries of a municipality on land
owned by that municipality for which a gross receipts tax distribution is made
pursuant to Section 7-1-6.4(C) NMSA 1978.
('74 Code, § 4-13-3) (Ord. 14-1992)
§ 4-3-5-4 DEDICATION.
   Revenue from the Municipal Infrastructure Gross Receipts Tax will be used
for municipal general purposes.
('74 Code, § 4-13-4) (Ord. 14-1992)
PART 6: PARKS AND OPEN SPACE TAX
§ 4-3-6-1 NAME.
   The municipal gross receipts tax shall be known popularly as the "Parks and
Open Space Tax."
(Ord. 43-1996)
Editor's note:
   Mandatory election held January 14, 1997, the outcome was favorable
§ 4-3-6-2 IMPOSITION OF TAX.
   There is imposed on any person engaging in business in this municipality,
for the privilege of engaging in business in this municipality, an excise tax
equal to one-fourth of one percent of the gross receipts reported or required
to be reported by the person pursuant to the New Mexico Gross Receipts and
Compensating Tax Act as it now exists or is amended. The tax imposed under this
section is pursuant to the Municipal Gross Receipts Tax Act, as it now exists
or is amended, and shall be known as the "municipal gross receipts tax."
(Ord. 43-1996)
§ 4-3-6-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS.
   This section hereby adopts by reference all definitions, exemptions and
deductions contained in the Gross Receipts and Compensating Tax Act as it now
exists or as it may be amended.
(Ord. 43-1996)
§ 4-3-6-4 SPECIFIC EXEMPTIONS.
   No municipal gross receipts tax shall be imposed on the gross receipts
arising from:
   (A)   Transporting persons or property for hire by railroad, motor vehicle,
air transportation, or any other means from one point within the municipality
to another point outside the municipality; or
   (B)   A business located outside the boundaries of a municipality on land
owned by that municipality for which a gross receipts tax distribution is made
pursuant to Section 7-1-6.4C NMSA 1978.
(Ord. 43-1996)
§ 4-3-6-5 DEDICATION.
   Revenue from the Parks and Open Space Municipal Gross Receipts Tax will be
used to fund the acquisition, development and maintenance of parks and open
space for the benefit of the city and as specified by resolution of the City
Council.
(Ord. 43-1996)
§ 4-3-6-6 MANDATORY ELECTION.
   The tax imposed pursuant to §§ 4-3-6-1 et seq. shall not be effective until
approved by the majority of registered voters voting on the question at a
special election to be held on a date set by the Council and pursuant to the
provisions of the City Charter and of the Municipal Election Code. The special
election shall be conducted by all-mailed ballot in accordance with the Mail
Ballot Election Act. (Sections 1-23-1 to 1-23-7 NMSA 1978.)
(Ord. 43-1996)
§ 4-3-6-7 EFFECTIVE DATE OF §§ 4-3-6-1 ET SEQ.
   The effective date of §§
4-3-6-1 et seq. shall be five days after publication in full.
(Ord. 43-1996)
§ 4-3-6-8 EFFECTIVE DATE OF TAX.
   The effective date of the Municipal Gross Receipts Tax imposed by §§
4-3-6-1 et seq. shall be July 1, 1997, pending the favorable outcome of a
mandatory election to be held pursuant to §
4-3-6-6 and acceptance of the effective date by the state Taxation and Revenue
Department.
(Ord. 43-1996)
§ 4-3-6-9 EXPIRATION OF TAX.
   The excise tax imposed by §§
4-3-6-1 et seq. shall expire two years after the effective date of this tax.
(Ord. 43-1996)
PART 7: TRANSPORTATION INFRASTRUCTURE TAX
§ 4-3-7-1 NAME.
   The municipal gross receipts tax imposed by §§
4-3-7-1 et seq. shall be popularly known as the "Transportation Infrastructure
Tax."
(Ord. 30-2009; Am. Ord._2020-016)
Editor's note:
   Mandatory election held October 6, 2009, the outcome was favorable.
§ 4-3-7-2 IMPOSITION OF TAX.
   There is imposed on any person engaging in business in this municipality,
for the privilege of engaging in business in this municipality, an excise tax
equal to one-fourth of one percent of the gross receipts reported or required
to be reported by such person pursuant to the New Mexico Gross Receipts and
Compensating Tax Act, Chapter 7, Article 9, NMSA 1978, as it now exists or as
it may be amended. The tax imposed by §§
4-3-7-1 et seq. is pursuant to the Municipal Local Option Gross Receipts Tax
Act, Section 7-19D-9 NMSA 1978, as it now exists or as it may be amended, and
shall be known as the "municipal gross receipts tax."
(Ord. 30-2009; Am. Ord._2020-016)
§ 4-3-7-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS.
   This section hereby adopts by reference all definitions, exceptions and
deductions contained in the Gross Receipts and Compensating Tax Act as it now
exists or as it may be amended.
(Ord. 30-2009; Am. Ord._2020-016)
§ 4-3-7-4 SPECIFIC EXEMPTIONS.
   The municipal gross receipts tax shall not be imposed on the gross receipts
arising from:
   (A)   Transporting persons or property for hire by railroad, motor vehicle,
air transportation, or any other means from one point within the municipality
to another point outside the municipality; or
   (B)   A business located outside the boundaries of the municipality on land
owned by the municipality for which a gross receipts tax distribution is made
pursuant to Section 7-1-6.4(C) NMSA 1978; or
   (C)   Direct broadcast satellite services.
(Ord. 30-2009; Am. Ord._2020-016)
§ 4-3-7-5 DEDICATION.
   (A)   Revenue from the Transportation Infrastructure Tax will be used to
fund the improvement of transportation systems for the benefit of the city. The
tax shall be dedicated to the following purposes in the specified percentages
of the revenues received from the Transportation Infrastructure Tax:
      (1)   Road Infrastructure Improvements      Not less than 57%
      (2)   Trails and Bikeways            5%
      (3)   Transit                  38%
The revenues dedicated to roads shall be used for the developed parts of the
city for existing infrastructures including interstate highways.
   (B)   Reporting. Along with each year's proposed appropriation of
Transportation Infrastructure Tax, the Administration shall provide the City
Council with a report on the collections and expenditures of the Tax which
shall include, at a minimum, the following information:
      (1)   An accounting of the total amount of tax collected life to date, as
well as an accounting of the tax projected to be collected during the current
fiscal year.
      (2)   A reconciliation of total tax collected life to date with actual
appropriations life to date, by category.
      (3)   A listing of all projects, by category and the amount of that
project paid for from Transportation Infrastructure Tax funds.
(Ord. 30-2009; Am. Ord._2015-003; Am. Res. R-2019-052; Am. Ord._2020-016)
§ 4-3-7-6 EFFECTIVE DATE OF TAX.
   The effective date of the municipal gross receipts tax imposed by §§
4-3-7-1 et seq. shall be July 1, 2020, pending acceptance of the effective date
by the State Taxation and Revenue Department.
(Ord. 30-2009; Am. Ord._2020-016)
Editor's note:
   Election held November 5, 2019, voters approved renewal of the
transportation infrastructure tax.
PART 8: PUBLIC SAFETY TAX
§ 4-3-8-1 NAME.
   The municipal gross receipts tax shall be known popularly as the "Public
Safety Tax."
(Ord. 6-2004)
§ 4-3-8-2 IMPOSITION OF TAX.
   There is imposed on any person engaging in business in this municipality,
for the privilege of engaging in business in this municipality, an excise tax
equal to one-fourth of one percent of the gross receipts reported or required
to be reported by the person pursuant to the New Mexico Gross Receipts and
Compensating Tax Act as it now exists or as it may be amended. The tax imposed
under this section is pursuant to the Municipal Gross Receipts Tax Act, as it
now exists or is amended, and shall be known as the "Municipal Gross Receipts
Tax."
(Ord. 6-2004)
§ 4-3-8-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS.
   This section hereby adopts by reference all definitions, exemptions and
deductions contained in the Gross Receipts and Compensating Tax Act as it now
exists or as it may be amended.
(Ord. 6-2004)
§ 4-3-8-4 SPECIFIC EXEMPTIONS.
   No municipal gross receipts tax shall be imposed on the gross receipts
arising from:
   (A)   Transporting persons or property for hire by railroad, motor vehicle,
air transportation, or any other means from one point within the municipality
to another point outside the municipality; or
   (B)   A business located outside the boundaries of a municipality on land
owned by that municipality for which a state gross receipts tax distribution is
made pursuant to Section 7-1-6.4C NMSA 1978; or
   (C)   Direct broadcast satellite services.
(Ord. 6-2004)
§ 4-3-8-5 DEDICATION.
   (A)   Revenue from the Public Safety Tax will be used for the purposes
listed below in the specified percentages:
      (1)   Police   34%
      (2)   Fire/Emergency Preparedness   34%
      (3)   Corrections   6%
      (4)   Crime Prevention and Intervention   26%
   (B)   Attachment A to Resolution Council Bill No. R-03-239, Enactment No.
67-2003, represents the intended use of the funding within the allocations to
each public safety purpose.
(Ord. 6-2004)
§ 4-3-8-6 MANDATORY ELECTION.
   The tax imposed pursuant to §§
4-3-8-1 et seq. was approved by the majority of registered voters voting on the
question at a special election held October 28, 2003, pursuant to the
provisions of the City Charter and the Municipal Election Code. The special
election was conducted by an all-mailed ballot in accordance with the Mail
Ballot Election Act (Sections 1-23-1 to 1-23-7 NMSA 1978) and the City of
Albuquerque Election Ordinances (
Chapter 2, Article 4 ROA 1994).
(Ord. 6-2004)
§ 4-3-8-7 EFFECTIVE DATE OF TAX.
   The effective date of the Municipal Gross Receipts Tax imposed by §§
4-3-8-1 et seq. shall be July 1, 2004.
(Ord. 6-2004)
PART 9: MUNICIPAL HOLD HARMLESS GROSS RECEIPTS TAX
§ 4-3-9-1 IMPOSITION OF TAX.
   There is imposed on any person engaging in business in this municipality for
the privilege of engaging in business in this municipality an excise tax equal
to three eighths of one percent (.375%) of the gross receipts reported or
required to be reported by the person pursuant to the New Mexico Gross Receipts
and Compensating Tax Act as it now exists or as it may be amended. The tax
imposed under this section is pursuant to the Municipal Local Option Gross
Receipts Taxes Act as it now exists or as it may be amended and shall be known
as the "municipal hold harmless gross receipts tax."
(Ord._2018-001)
§ 4-3-9-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS.
   This section hereby adopts by reference all definitions, exemptions and
deductions contained in the Gross Receipts and Compensating Tax Act as it now
exists or as it may be amended.
(Ord._2018-001)
§ 4-3-9-3 SPECIFIC EXEMPTIONS.
   No municipal hold harmless gross receipts tax shall be imposed on the gross
receipts arising from:
   (A)   Transporting persons or property for hire by railroad, motor vehicle,
air transportation or any other means from one point within the municipality to
another point outside the municipality;
   (B)   A business located outside the boundaries of a municipality on land
owned by that municipality for which a state gross receipts tax distribution is
made pursuant to Section 7-1-6.4(C) NMSA 1978; or
   (C)   Direct broadcast satellite services.
(Ord._2018-001)
§ 4-3-9-4 DEDICATION.
   Revenue from the municipal hold harmless gross receipts tax will be used for
the purposes listed below:
   (A)   In fiscal years 2019 and 2020, no less than 60% of the tax receipts
shall be used for the city's Public Safety Budget Goal Priorities.
   (B)   General municipal purposes.
(Ord._2018-001)
§ 4-3-9-5 EFFECTIVE DATE.
   The effective date of the municipal hold harmless gross receipts tax shall
be July 1, 2018.
(Ord._2018-001)
PART 10: MUNICIPAL CAPITAL OUTLAY GROSS RECEIPTS TAX FOR THE ABQ BIOPARK*
§ 4-3-10-1 IMPOSITION OF TAX.
   There is imposed on any person engaging in business in this municipality for
the privilege of engaging in business in this municipality an excise tax equal
to one-eighth of one percent (.125%) of the gross receipts reported or required
to be reported by the person pursuant to the New Mexico Gross Receipts and
Compensating Tax Act as it now exists or as it may be amended. The tax imposed
under this ordinance is pursuant to the Municipal Local Option Gross Receipts
Taxes Act as it now exists or as it may be amended and shall be known as the
“municipal capital outlay gross receipts tax.”
(Res._2015-071; Res._2016-071)
Editor's note:
   Mandatory election held October 6, 2015, the outcome was favorable.
§ 4-3-10-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS.
   This ordinance hereby adopts by reference all definitions, exemptions and
deductions contained in the Gross Receipts and Compensating Tax Act as it now
exists or as it may be amended.
(Res._2015-071; Res._2016-071)
§ 4-3-10-3 SPECIFIC EXEMPTIONS.
   No municipal capital outlay gross receipts tax shall be imposed on the gross
receipts arising from:
   A.   transporting persons or property for hire by railroad, motor vehicle,
air transportation or any other means from one point within the municipality to
another point outside the municipality;
   B.   a business located outside the boundaries of a municipality on land
owned by that municipality for which a state gross receipts tax distribution is
made pursuant to Subsection C of Section 7-1-6.4 NMSA 1978; or
   C.   direct broadcast satellite services.
(Res._2015-071; Res._2016-071)
§ 4-3-10-4 DEDICATION.
   Revenue from the municipal capital outlay gross receipts tax will be used
for the purpose(s) listed below:
   A.   the capital needs, including design, construction, acquisition,
improvement, renovation, rehabilitation and equipping or furnishing of the ABQ
BioPark in accord with the city’s ABQ BioPark Master Plan in effect at the time
each phase of the plan is undertaken.
(Res._2015-071; Res._2016-071)
§ 4-3-10-5 EFFECTIVE DATE.
   The effective date of the capital outlay municipal gross receipts tax shall
be July 1, 2016.
(Res._2015-071; Res._2016-071)
§ 4-3-10-6 DELAYED REPEAL.
   This ordinance is repealed effective July 1, 2031.
(Res._2015-071; Res._2016-071)
ARTICLE 4: LODGERS' TAX
Section
   
4-4-1   Short title
   
4-4-2   Authority
   
4-4-3   Purpose
   
4-4-4   Definitions
   
4-4-5   Lodgers' tax application
   
4-4-6   Imposition of tax, use of proceeds
   
4-4-7   Exemptions
   
4-4-8   Determination of exemption; appeal
   
4-4-9   Collection of the taxes; reporting change in ownership
   
4-4-10   Records of vendor
   
4-4-11   Failure to pay tax or make return; penalty; collection of
delinquencies; continuous surety bond; appeal
   
4-4-12   Lien for tax; payment; certificate of liens
   
4-4-13   Lodgers' tax advisory board
   
4-4-14   Marketplace provider responsibilities
 
   
4-4-99   Penalty
§ 4-4-1 SHORT TITLE.
   This article shall be known as and may be cited as “City of Albuquerque
Lodgers' Tax Ordinance.”
('74 Code, § 4-2-1) (Ord. 80- 1969; Am. Ord. 24-2001; Am. Ord._2019-024)
§ 4-4-2 AUTHORITY.
   This article is officially adopted by the City Council pursuant to the
provisions of Sections 3-38-13 through 3-38-24 NMSA 1978 as authorized by the
“Lodgers' Tax Act”.
(Ord. 24-2001; Am. Ord._2019-024)
§ 4-4-3 PURPOSE.
   The purpose of this article is to impose a tax which will be borne by
persons using commercial lodging accommodations which tax will provide revenues
for advertising, publicizing and promoting certain recreational and tourist
facilities as well as for the acquisition and construction of such facilities
as provided by law.
('74 Code, § 4-2-2) (Ord. 80- 1969; Am. Ord. 50-1982; Am. Ord. 24-2001; Am.
Ord._2019-024)
§ 4-4-4 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this article, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   GROSS TAXABLE RENT. The total amount of rent paid for lodging, not including
the state gross receipts tax or local sales taxes.
   LODGING. The transaction of furnishing rooms or sleeping accommodations by a
vendor to a vendee who for a rent, uses, possesses or has the right to use or
possess any room or rooms or other units of accommodations in or at a taxable
premises.
   LODGINGS. The rooms or sleeping accommodations furnished by a vendor to a
vendee by a taxable service of lodging.
   MARKETPLACE PROVIDER. A person who facilitates the rental of lodging by:
      (1)   Advertising the lodging by any means, whether physical or
electronic, including by internet website, online booking platform, catalog,
television or radio broadcast, and
      (2)   Collecting payment from the vendee and transmitting that payment to
the vendor either directly or indirectly through agreements or arrangements
with the vendor, regardless of whether the marketplace provider receives
compensation or consideration in exchange for the marketplace provider's
services.
   MAYOR. The Mayor of the city or his designated representative.
   OCCUPANCY TAX. The tax on lodging, authorized by this article.
   PERSON. A corporation, firm, other body corporate, partnership, association
or individual, includes an executor, administrator, trustee, receiver or other
representative appointed according to law and acting in a representative
capacity, but does not include the United States of America, the State of New
Mexico, any corporation, department, instrumentality or agency of the federal
government or the state government, or any political subdivision of the state.
   RENT. The consideration received by a vendor in money, credits, property or
other consideration valued in money for lodgings subject to an occupancy tax
authorized in this article.
   TAXABLE PREMISES. A hotel, apartment, apartment hotel, apartment house,
lodge, lodging house, rooming house, motor hotel, guest house, bed and
breakfast, guest ranch, ranch resort, mobile home, motor court, auto court,
auto camp, trailer court, trailer camp, trailer park, tourist camp, cabin or
other premises used for lodging.
   TOURIST. A person who travels for the purpose of business, pleasure or
culture to a municipality or county imposing an occupancy tax.
   TOURIST-RELATED EVENTS. Events that are planned for, promoted to and
attended by tourists.
   TOURIST-RELATED FACILITIES AND ATTRACTIONS. Facilities and attractions that
are intended to be used by or visited by tourists.
   TOURIST-RELATED TRANSPORTATION SYSTEMS. Transportation systems that provide
transportation for tourists to and from tourist-related facilities and
attractions and tourist-related events.
   VENDEE. A natural person to whom lodgings are furnished in the exercise of
the taxable service of lodging.
   VENDOR. A person furnishing lodgings in the exercise of the taxable service
of lodging.
('74 Code, § 4-2-3) (Ord. 80- 1969; Am. Ord. 50-1982; Am. Ord. 56-1993; Am.
Ord. 24-2001; Am. Ord._2019-024)
§ 4-4-5 LODGERS' TAX APPLICATION.
   Any person desiring an application pursuant to Section 3-38-23 through 3-38-
24 NMSA 1978 and the City of Albuquerque Lodgers' Tax ordinance shall file an
application with the Mayor upon a form to be provided by the Mayor. The
application shall include, but not be limited to, the following information:
   (A)   List the name, mailing address, telephone number, fax number and other
related necessary information to register Taxable Premises such as: Federal Tax
Identification Number, New Mexico State Gross Receipts Tax Identification
Number, New Mexico Public Regulation Commission (NMPRC) number on file, City of
Albuquerque Business Registration number on file with the city.
   (B)   List the name, mailing address, telephone number, fax number of
accounting firm or officer handling Tax Premises' financial records associated
with reporting lodgers' tax reports and payments.
(Ord. 24-2001; Am. Ord._2019-024)
§ 4-4-6 IMPOSITION OF TAX, USE OF PROCEEDS.
   (A)   There is hereby imposed an occupancy tax of 5% of gross taxable rent
for lodging paid to vendors after December, 1984.
   (B)   Not less than one-half of the proceeds of such occupancy tax shall be
used for the purpose of advertising, publicizing and promoting tourist-related
attractions, facilities and events. Notwithstanding the preceding sentence, the
payment of principal and interest on outstanding bonds issued prior to July 1,
1977 pursuant to Section 3-38-23 or 3-38-24 NMSA 1978, shall be in accordance
with the retirement schedules of the bonds established at the time of issuance.
   (C)   Any balance of the occupancy tax proceeds not used for the purpose set
forth above may be used to defray the costs of:
      (1)   Collecting and otherwise administering the tax, including the
performance of audits required by the Lodgers' Tax Act, Sections 3-38-13 to 3-
38-24 NMSA 1978, pursuant to guidelines issued by the State of New Mexico
Department of Finance and Administration;
      (2)   The Mayor's Office or designated representative will administer all
Lodger's Tax audits. Audits Schedule of Taxable Premises will be submitted for
review to the City's Lodgers' Tax Advisory Board at their monthly meeting in
August.
      (3)   Establishing, operating, purchasing constructing, otherwise
acquiring, reconstructing, extending, improving, equipping, furnishing or
acquiring real property or any interest in real property for the site or
grounds for tourist-related facilities, attractions or transportation systems
of the municipality, the county in which the municipality is located or the
county;
      (4)   The principal of and interest on any prior redemption premiums due
in connection with and any other charges pertaining to revenue bonds authorized
by Section 3-38-23 or 3-38-24 NMSA 1978;
      (5)   Advertising, publicizing, and promoting tourist-related facilities
and attractions and events of the municipality or county and tourist facilities
or attractions within the area;
      (6)   Providing police and fire protection and sanitation service for
tourist-related events, facilities and attractions located in the city or
county; or
      (7)   Any combination of the foregoing purposes or transactions stated in
this section but for no other municipal or county purpose.
   (D)   Every vendor who is furnishing any lodgings within a municipality or
county is exercising a taxable privilege.
('74 Code, § 4-2-4) (Ord. 80- 1969; Am. Ord. 68-1984; Am. Ord. 48-1991; Am.
Ord. 56-1993; Am. Ord. 24-2001; Am. Ord._2019-024)
Penalty, see §4-4-99
§ 4-4-7 EXEMPTIONS.
   The occupancy tax shall not apply:
   (A)   If a vendee:
      (1)   Has been a permanent resident of the taxable premises for a period
of at least thirty consecutive days; or
      (2)   Enters into or has entered into a written agreement for lodgings at
the taxable premises for a period of at least 30 consecutive days;
   (B)   If the rent paid by a vendee is less than $2 a day.
   (C)   To lodging accommodations at institutions of the federal government,
the state or any political subdivision thereof.
   (D)   To lodging accommodations at religious, charitable, educational or
philanthropic institutions, including without limitation such accommodations at
summer camps operated by such institutions.
   (E)   To clinics, hospitals or other medical facilities.
   (F)   To privately-owned and operated convalescent homes or homes for the
aged, infirm, indigent or chronically ill.
('74 Code, § 4-2-5) (Ord. 80- 1969; Am. Ord. 24-2001; Am. Ord._2019-024)
§ 4-4-8 DETERMINATION OF EXEMPTION; APPEAL.
   The Mayor shall make the determination of whether or not a vendor is exempt
from the occupancy tax. In the event the vendor is dissatisfied with any
decision of the Mayor with respect to this article, they may appeal the
decision to the Independent Hearing Officer pursuant to the provisions of the
IHO Ordinance, ROA 1994, Chapter 2, Article 7, Part 8.
('74 Code, § 4-2-6) (Ord. 80- 1969; Am. Ord. 50-1982; Am. Ord. 56-1993; Am.
Ord. 24-2001; Am. Ord._2019-024; Am. Ord._2023-015) Penalty, see §
4-4-99
§ 4-4-9 COLLECTION OF THE TAXES; REPORTING CHANGE IN OWNERSHIP.
   (A)   Every vendor providing lodgings within this city shall collect the
occupancy tax thereon on behalf of the city and shall act as a trustee
therefor.
   (B)   The occupancy tax shall be collected from vendees in accordance with
this section and shall be charged separately from the rent fixed by the vendor
for the lodgings.
   (C)   On and after June 1, 1969, each vendor shall be liable to the city for
the tax provided herein on the rent paid for lodging.
   (D)   (1)   Each vendor shall make a report by the 25th day of each month on
forms provided by the Mayor of the receipts for lodging paid to him in the
preceding calendar month and shall remit therewith payment of the total amount
of the occupancy tax due to the city. The report shall include sufficient
information to enable the city to audit the report and shall be verified on
oath by the vendor. Each vendor shall make the required report for each
reporting period whether or not any tax is due. If no gross taxable rent has
been collected for that reporting period, such information shall be reported.
Occupancy taxes not paid and posted to the city's Lodgers Subsidiary Ledger
Vendors' Account by the 25th of the month as provided herein shall be
considered delinquent.
      (2)   If the 25th day of the month falls on a weekend or holiday, the
return shall be due on the next business day.
   (E)   The Mayor shall select for annual random audits one or more vendors to
verify the amount of gross rent subject to the occupancy tax and to ensure that
the full amount of occupancy tax on that rent is collected. Copies of audits
completed shall be filed with the State of New Mexico local government division
of the Department of Finance and Administration.
   (F)   Failure to notify the Mayor within 30 working days of a change of
ownership on a taxable premises shall subject vendor to a $500 penalty.
   (G)   A nonrefundable hearing fee of $50.00 shall accompany each appeal to
the City Hearing Officer filed pursuant to §§
4-4-6 or
4-4-9 ROA 1994.
('74 Code, § 4-2-7) (Ord. 80- 1969; Am. Ord. 50-1982; Am. Ord. 56-1993; Am.
Ord. 24-2001; Am. Ord. 38-2002; Am. Ord._2019-024; Am. Ord._2021-022)
Penalty, see §4-4-99
§ 4-4-10 RECORDS OF VENDOR.
   Each vendor shall maintain adequate records of facilities subject to the
occupancy tax and of proceeds received for the use thereof. The records to be
maintained shall include but are not limited to: federal income tax returns,
State of New Mexico form CRS-1, financial statements, general and subsidiary
ledgers, sales journals, charts of accounts, daily summaries and reports,
monthly summaries, registration cards, bank statements, and year-end adjusting
entries. The records shall be maintained in Albuquerque and shall be open to
inspection by the city during reasonable hours and shall be retained for three
years.
('74 Code, § 4-2-8) (Ord. 80- 1969; Am. Ord. 56-1993; Am. Ord. 24-2001; Am.
Ord._2019-024)
Penalty, see §4-4-99
§ 4-4-11 FAILURE TO PAY TAX OR MAKE RETURN; PENALTY; COLLECTION OF
DELINQUENCIES; CONTINUOUS SURETY BOND; APPEAL.
   (A)   In addition to other penalties that may be applicable under this
article, if any vendor makes a return as required by this article without
paying the occupancy tax then due, he shall be liable for the tax and a penalty
equal to 10% thereof or $100, whichever is greater. Promptly after receipt of
such return, the city shall give the delinquent vendor written notice of the
tax and penalty.
   (B)   If any vendor neglects or refuses to make a return and pay the
occupancy tax as required by this article, the Mayor shall make an estimate
based upon an examination of the vendor's books and records, or upon any
information in its possession or that may come into its possession, of the
amount of the rent of the delinquent vendor for the period in respect to which
he has failed to make a return, and upon the basis of said estimated amount
shall compute and assess the tax payable by the delinquent vendor, adding to
this amount a penalty equal to 10% thereof or $100, whichever is greater.
Promptly thereafter the city shall give the delinquent vendor written notice of
the estimated tax and penalty.
   (C)   If payment is not made by the vendor within 15 days of the date of the
notice that the occupancy tax is delinquent, the Mayor may bring an action in
law or equity in the district court for the collection of any amounts due,
including without limitation penalties thereon, interest on the unpaid
principal at a rate of not exceeding 1% a month, the costs of collection and
reasonable attorneys' fees incurred in connection therewith.
   (D)   A Continuous Surety Bond naming the city as beneficiary in the amount
of $3,000 plus $60 per room or individual sleeping accommodation available for
use by the public shall be posted and filed with the City Clerk upon vendor's
failure to remit occupancy tax for two consecutive months. If payment or
posting Continuous Surety Bond is not made by the vendor within 15 days of the
date of notice that the occupancy tax is delinquent, the Mayor may bring an
action in law or equity in the district court for the collection of any amount
due, including without limitation penalties thereon, interest on the unpaid
principal at a rate not exceeding 1% a month, the costs of collection and
reasonable attorney's fees incurred in connection therewith. Continuous Surety
Bond shall remain in force three years from date of issuances per arrear
incident applicable. Surety Bond may be augmented or applied to any succeeding
arrear Lodger's Tax payments due the City of Albuquerque.
   (E)   A vendor who disputes the assessment of any occupancy tax or related
penalties and interest may, within 15 working days of the date of the notice
from the city that the tax is delinquent, appeal the Mayor's decision to the
Independent Hearing Officer as set forth in
Chapter 2, Article 7, Part 8.
   (F)   In addition to any other penalties provided under this article, if a
vendor files a return without remitting the occupancy tax owed, the City may
prohibit occupancy of the building, structure, or land where the business
operates until the full tax amount is paid.
('74 Code, § 4-2-9) (Ord. 80- 1969; Am. Ord. 50-1982; Am. Ord. 56-1993; Am.
Ord. 24-2001; Am. Ord._2019-024; Am. Ord._2023-015; Am. Ord. 2025-016)
Penalty, see §4-4-99
§ 4-4-12 LIEN FOR TAX; PAYMENT; CERTIFICATE OF LIENS.
   All delinquent occupancy taxes and penalty shall constitute a lien in favor
of the City on the personal and real property of the vendor providing the
lodging, and on the real property where the lodging is provided. This lien
shall run with the land, and may be enforced as provided in Sections 3-36-
1 through 3-36-7 NMSA 1978 or through any other provisions provided by law.
   (A)   Under process or order of the court, no person shall sell the property
of any vendor without first ascertaining from the Treasurer of the City the
amount of any occupancy tax due to the City. Any occupancy tax due the City
shall be paid from the proceeds of the sale before payment is made to the
judgment creditor or any other person with a claim on the sale proceeds.
   (B)   The Treasurer of the City shall furnish to any person applying for
such a certificate, a certificate showing the amount of all liens in the
records of the municipality against any vendor.
('74 Code, § 4-2-10) (Ord. 80- 1969; Am. Ord. 50-1982; Am. Ord. 56-1993; Am.
Ord. 24-2001; Am. Ord._2019-024; Am. Ord. 2025-016)
§ 4-4-13 LODGERS' TAX ADVISORY BOARD.
   (A)   There is created the Lodgers' Tax Advisory Board, which shall consist
of seven members all of whom shall be residents of the city; two of whom shall
represent the lodging industry, two of whom are directly involved in tourist-
related industries; one who shall represent the short term rental industry; and
two members at large who shall represent the public. The members of the
Lodgers' Tax Advisory Board shall be appointed by the Mayor with the advice and
consent of the City Council.
   (B)   The term of each member of the Lodgers' Tax Advisory Board shall be
three years.
   (C)   Except as provided in this article, the qualifications appointment and
conduct of the members of the Lodgers' Tax Advisory Board and the
organizational structure of the Lodgers' Tax Advisory Board shall be governed
by §§
2-6-1-1 et seq.
   (D)   The Lodgers' Tax Advisory Board shall advise the Mayor and City
Council on the expenditure of funds authorized by Section 3-38-15 NMSA 1978 for
advertising, publicizing and promoting tourist attractions and facilities in
the city. In addition, the Lodgers' Tax Advisory Board shall:
      (1)   Review past and current performance of any organization contracting
with the city to supply advertising, publicizing and promotion of tourist
attractions, conventions and tourist related activities;
      (2)   Advise the Mayor as to the performance of such contractors on a
quarterly basis, and make recommendations to the Mayor concerning whether such
contracts should be renewed or canceled.
('74 Code, § 4-2-12) (Ord. 54-1977; Am. Ord. 56-1993; Am. Ord. 24-2001; Am.
Ord._2019-024; Am. Ord._2020-038)
§ 4-4-14 MARKETPLACE PROVIDER RESPONSIBILITIES.
   (A)   Marketplace providers shall be responsible for collecting all
applicable occupancy taxes and remitting the same to the city. The marketplace
provider shall be considered an agent of the vendor for purposes of occupancy
tax collections and remittance responsibilities as set forth in this ordinance;
   (B)   Safe Harbor. A marketplace provider operating exclusively on the
internet, who operates in compliance with subsection (A) above, shall be
presumed to be in compliance with this ordinance, except that the marketplace
provider remains responsible for compliance with the administrative penalty
provision in §
4-4-99 of this ordinance.
(Ord._2019-024; Am. Ord._2021-022)
§ 4-4-99 PENALTY.
   A vendor shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and subject to the penalty
provisions set forth in §
1-1-99 of this code of ordinances for a violation of the provisions of this
article for a failure to pay the occupancy tax, to remit the proceeds thereof
to the city or to account properly for any lodging and the occupancy tax
proceeds pertaining thereto.
('74 Code, § 4-2-11) (Ord. 80- 1969; Am. Ord. 56-1993; Am. Ord. 24-2001; Am.
Ord._2019-024)
ARTICLE 5: ALCOHOLIC LIQUOR LICENSE TAX
Section
   
4-5-1   Authority
   
4-5-2   Definitions
   
4-5-3   License tax
   
4-5-4   Administrative procedures
§ 4-5-1 AUTHORITY.
   The City Council, pursuant to the provisions of Section 7-24-3 NMSA 1978 and
Article X, Section 6 of the New Mexico Constitution hereby enacts this
ordinance as authorized by such sections.
('74 Code, § 4-6-1) (Ord. 76-1979)
§ 4-5-2 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this article, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ALCOHOLIC LIQUORS. Any and all distilled or rectified spirits, potable
alcohol, brandy, whiskey, rum, gin, aromatic bitters bearing the Federal
Internal Revenue strip stamps or any similar alcoholic beverage, including all
blended or fermented beverages, dilutions or mixtures of one or more of the
foregoing containing more than .5% alcohol, but excluding medicinal bitters.
   BEER. Any alcoholic beverage obtained by the fermentation of any infusion or
decoction of barley, malt and hops and/or other cereals in water, and includes
such liquors as porter, beer, ale and stout.
   BUREAU. The Alcohol and Gaming Division of the Regulation and Licensing
Department of the State of New Mexico.
   CANOPY LICENSE. A license issued to a co-user to dispense alcoholic
beverages in the same manner as permitted pursuant to a dispenser's license
subject to the provisions contained in Sections 60-6B-14 through 60-6B-16 NMSA
1978, as amended.
   CLUB. 
      (1)   Any nonprofit group, including an auxiliary or subsidiary group,
organized and operated under the laws of this state, with a membership of not
less than 50 members who pay membership dues at the rate of not less than $5
per year and who under the constitution and bylaws of the club have all voting
rights and full membership privileges, and which group is the owner, lessee or
occupant of premises used exclusively for club purposes and which group the
director finds:
         (a)   Is operated solely for recreation, social, patriotic, political,
benevolent or athletic purposes; and
         (b)   The proposed licensee has been granted an exemption by the
United States from the payment of the federal income tax as a club under the
provisions of Section 501(a) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1954, as amended
or, if the applicant has not operated as a club for a sufficient time to be
eligible for the income tax exemption, it must execute and file with the
Director a sworn letter of intent declaring that it will, in good faith, apply
for such exemption as soon as it is eligible; or
      (2)   An airline passenger membership club operated by an air common
carrier which maintains or operates a clubroom at an international airport
terminal. For the purposes of this paragraph, AIR COMMON CARRIER is a person
engaged in regularly scheduled air transportation between fixed termini under a
certificate of public convenience and necessity issued by the Civil Aeronautics
Board.
   DIRECTOR. The Director of the Alcohol and Gaming Division of the Regulation
and Licensing Department of the state.
   DISPENSER. Any person selling, offering for sale or having in his possession
with intent to sell, alcoholic liquors by the drink or in packages.
   PACKAGE. Any immediate container of alcoholic liquors, beer or wine which is
filled or packed by the manufacturers, wholesalers, retailers, dispensers
and!or clubs;
   PERSON. Any male or female, corporation, firm, copartnership or association,
and includes both the singular and plural numbers.
   RESTAURANT. Any establishment having a New Mexico resident as a proprietor
or manager which is held out to the public as a place where meals are prepared
and served primarily for on-premise consumption to the general public in
consideration of payment and which has a dining room, a kitchen and the
employees necessary for preparing, cooking and serving meals; provided that
RESTAURANT does not include establishment as defined in regulations promulgated
by the Director serving only hamburgers, sandwiches, salads and other fast
foods.
   RESTAURANT LICENSE. A license for a restaurant to sell beer and wine for
consumption on the premises that is issued pursuant to Section 60-6A-4 NMSA
1978.
   RETAILER. Any person selling, offering for sale, or having in his possession
with the intent to sell, any alcoholic liquors for consumption off the premises
of the licensee and in unbroken packages.
   TRANSFER. The changing of ownership or location of any license.
   WINE. Includes the words "fruit juices" and means all alcoholic beverages
obtained by the fermentation of the natural sugar contained in fruit or other
agricultural products, with or without the addition of sugar or other products,
and which does not contain less than .5% nor more than 21% alcohol by volume.
('74 Code, § 4-6-2) (Ord. 45-1979; Am. Ord. 76-1979; Am. Ord. 25-1982; Am. Ord.
20-1993)
§ 4-5-3 LICENSE TAX.
   (A)   Dispenser's License Tax. All persons who have a valid dispenser's
license within the city, issued by the Bureau, shall pay a license tax to the
city in the amount of $250 per year payable on or before July 1 each year.
   (B)   Retailer's License Tax. All persons who have a valid retailer's
license within the city, issued by the Bureau, shall pay a license tax to the
city in the amount of $250 per year payable on or before July 1 each year.
   (C)   Canopy License Tax. All persons who have a valid canopy license within
the city, issued by the Bureau, shall pay a license tax to the city in the
amount of $250 per year payable on or before July 1 each year.
   (D)   Club License Tax. All persons who have a valid club license within the
city, issued by the Bureau, shall pay a license tax to the city in the amount
of $250 per year payable on or before July 1 each year.
   (E)   Restaurant License Tax. All persons who have a valid restaurant
license within the city, issued by the Bureau, shall pay a license tax to the
city in the amount of $250 per year payable on or before July 1 each year.
   (F)   Effective Date of Tax. The effective date of this tax shall be July 1,
1993.
   (G)   License Tax Period. The license tax period shall begin July 1, each
year and end June 30, the following year.
   (H)   Proration of Licenses. Proration of licenses issued prior to the first
day of October of any year shall be subject to the full amount of the annual
license tax. Licenses issued on or subsequent to October 1 and prior to January
1 shall be subject to 3/4 of the annual license tax; licenses issued on or
subsequent to January 1 and prior to April 1 shall be subject to 1/2 of the
annual license tax, licenses issued on or subsequent to April 1 shall be
subject to 1/4 of the annual license tax. The revocation or suspension of any
license shall not entitle the licensee to any refund of any portion of the
license tax or penalty, which subject licensee has paid.
   (I)   Penalty. The penalty for late payments shall be $10 per day for each
day that the payment is delinquent.
   (J)   Closing Establishment. In the event a licensee fails to pay the
license tax and/or penalty thereon, the Police Department shall provide to the
licensee a notice of intent to close establishment. Licensee may, within 15
days of the date of the notice, appeal the decision to the Independent Hearing
Officer. If a hearing is requested, it shall follow the procedures prescribed
in the IHO Ordinance, ROA 1994, Chapter 2, Article 7, Part 8. If no appeal is
filed, the Police Department shall forthwith close up the place of business of
the licensee.
   (K)   Lien. The city may file a lien against the personal and/or real
property of the licensee for any delinquent license tax and/or penalty.
   (L)   Assignment. In the event of an assignment and transfer of any license
no refund shall be made to the original licensee for the unexpired portion of
such license, but such assignment and transfer shall vest in the assignee and
transferee the right to operate under the license tax so paid by the original
licensee for the period covered by the licensee for the period covered by the
said license tax and to pay the balance of such license tax upon the same terms
and conditions as if such assignee or transferee were the original licensee.
Provided, however, there shall be no assignment and transfer of any license in
the event that there is delinquent license tax and/or penalty due.
('74 Code, § 4-6-3) (Ord. 45-1979; Am. Ord. 44-1981; Am. Ord. 25-1982; Am. Ord.
20-1993; Am. Ord._2023-015)
§ 4-5-4 ADMINISTRATIVE PROCEDURES.
   The Mayor shall establish administrative procedures for the implementation
and enforcement of this article.
('74 Code, § 4-6-5) (Ord. 45-1979; Am. Ord. 76-1979)
ARTICLE 6: DEBT MANAGEMENT POLICY AND DEBT COMMITTEE
Section
   
4-6-1   Short title
   
4-6-2   Legislative intent
   
4-6-3   Debt policy
   
4-6-4   Establishment and membership of the City Debt Committee
   
4-6-5   Duties of the City Debt Committee
§ 4-6-1 SHORT TITLE.
   This ordinance may be referred to as the City of Albuquerque Debt Management
Policy and Debt Committee.
(Ord. 20-2001)
§ 4-6-2 LEGISLATIVE INTENT.
   It is the intent of the city to establish a debt management policy and to
establish a Debt Committee to develop debt management guidelines to assure the
implementation of the city’s Debt Management Policy.
(Ord. 20-2001)
§ 4-6-3 DEBT POLICY.
   It is the intent of the city to: ensure high quality debt management
decisions, impose order and discipline in the debt issuance process, promote
consistency and continuity in decision making, demonstrate commitment to long
term financial planning objectives and ensure debt management decisions are
viewed positively by rating agencies, investment community and taxpayers. This
policy shall be implemented by the city’s Debt Committee when developing
comprehensive debt management guidelines that provides for the following:
   (A)   Full and timely payment of principal and interest on all outstanding
debt;
   (B)   Debt shall be incurred for those purposes as provided by state
statute;
   (C)   Capital improvements should be developed, approved and financed in
accordance with city ordinances and the capital improvement budgeting process;
   (D)   The payment of debt shall be secured by the full faith, credit and
taxing power of the city, in the case of general obligation bonds, and by the
pledge of specified, limited revenues in the case of revenue bonds. The city
shall not pledge any city revenues to its conduit bond financings. Furthermore,
the city has no moral obligation to repay bondholders of conduit financings
issued under its authority;
   (E)   Principal and interest retirement schedules shall be structured to:
(1) achieve a low borrowing cost for the city, (2) accommodate the debt service
payments of existing debt and (3) respond to perceptions of market demand.
Shorter maturities will always be encouraged to demonstrate to rating agencies
that debt is being retired at a sufficiently rapid pace;
   (F)    Debt incurred shall generally be limited to obligations with serial
or term maturities, but may be sold in the form of capital appreciation bonds
or other structures if circumstances warrant;
   (G)   The average life of the debt incurred should be no greater than the
projected average life of the assets being financed;
   (H)   The city shall select a method of sale that will maximize the
financial benefit to the city. Such sales can be competitive, negotiated or
privately placed, depending upon the project and market conditions. All methods
of sale shall be subject to Council approval;
   (I)   Underwriters shall be selected in accordance with the City Purchasing
Ordinance and the selection should maximize the quality of services received
while minimizing the cost to the city. Any additions to the underwriting teams
shall be subject to Council approval. Selected underwriters shall adhere to the
Municipal Securities Rule-making Board (“MSRB”) and the Securities and Exchange
Commission (“SEC”) rules and regulations;
   (J)   The city shall maintain good communications with bond rating agencies
to ensure complete and clear understanding of the creditworthiness of the city;
and
   (K)   Every financial report, bond prospectus and Annual Information
Statement shall follow a policy of full and complete disclosure of financial
conditions and operating results, in conformance with guidelines issued by the
Government Finance Officers Association (GFOA), Securities Exchange Commission
(SEC) and the Internal Revenue Service (IRS) to meet the disclosure needs of
rating agencies, underwriters, investors and taxpayers.
(Ord. 20-2001)
§ 4-6-4 ESTABLISHMENT AND MEMBERSHIP OF THE CITY DEBT COMMITTEE.
   A permanent committee composed of the Director of Finance and Administrative
Services; the Directors of the Aviation and Public Works Departments, the CIP
Officer, the City Treasurer, the Chief Administrative Officer or appointee, and
the Director of Council Services or appointee is hereby created. The City
Attorney and the City Economist shall serve on the committee in an ex-officio
status. Other ex-officio participation, as deemed appropriate by the committee
is encouraged. The committee shall be chaired by the Director of Finance and
Administrative Services.
(Ord. 20-2001)
§ 4-6-5 DUTIES OF THE CITY’S DEBT COMMITTEE.
   The City Debt Committee shall:
   (A)   Develop and maintain comprehensive debt management guidelines in
accordance with the debt policy stated in §
4-6-3;
   (B)   Review and evaluate results of debt financing operations including,
but not limited to:
      (1)   Issuance of long-term and short-term debt obligations;
      (2)   Selection of bond type, structure, methods of sale and marketing of
bonds, and
      (3)   Investor and rating agency communications;
   (C)   Review expenditures of bond proceeds and the status of various
projects being financed, including the Capital Improvement Program (CIP) for
timeliness;
   (D)   Review services provided by Bond Counsel, Disclosure Counsel, Tax
Counsel, Underwriters and other service providers for effectiveness and quality
of service;
   (E)   Annually review and revise, with the approval of the CAO, the debt
management guidelines based upon the debt committee’s review of operations;
   (F)   Prepare an annual report to Council on:
      (1)   Outcomes of previous year’s financings,
      (2)   Financings in progress or anticipated for the subsequent fiscal
year, and
      (3)   Any changes to the debt management guidelines; and
   (G)   Develop and maintain the selection criteria for underwriters, act as
the Ad-Hoc committee on all underwriting RFP’s and recommend to the Mayor the
underwriting teams for all city financings, pursuant to the City Purchasing
Ordinance.
(Ord. 20-2001)
ARTICLE 7: STADIUM SURCHARGE
Section
   
4-7-1   Short title
   
4-7-2   Definitions
   
4-7-3   Imposition of surcharge
   
4-7-4   Registration
   
4-7-5   Administration of the surcharge
   
4-7-6   Lien for payment of surcharge
   
4-7-7   Extension of time
   
4-7-8   Refund and credit
   
4-7-9   Confidentiality of return and audit
   
4-7-10   Dedication
§ 4-7-1 SHORT TITLE.
   This ordinance may be cited as the “Stadium Surcharge.”
(Ord. 60-2001)
§ 4-7-2 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this article, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   CITY. The City of Albuquerque, New Mexico.
   MINOR LEAGUE BASEBALL STADIUM. A stadium, including land, buildings and
improvements, designed and intended primarily for use by minor league baseball
teams, located within the City.
   STADIUM RECEIPTS. The total amount of money or the value of other
consideration paid to a Vendor by a user for property or services related to
the Minor League Baseball Stadium or related to activities occurring at the
Minor League Baseball Stadium, whether occurring at the Minor League Baseball
Stadium or not, including but not limited to, tickets, parking, souvenirs,
concessions, programs, advertising, merchandise, corporate suites or boxes, and
broadcast revenues, for Use by the purchaser of the property or service.
Stadium Receipts shall include interest and penalty related thereto. Stadium
Receipts shall not include:
      (1)   the total amount of money or the value of other consideration paid
by the City for constructing, renovating, equipping, operating, maintaining or
improving the Minor League Baseball Stadium or for administering the Stadium
Surcharge; or
      (2)   amounts paid by users and collected by Vendors as the Stadium
Surcharge.
   TREASURER. The City Treasurer or the Treasurer’s duly authorized delegate.
   USE. Includes use or storage or consumption. Use excludes subsequent sale or
resale by the purchaser of the property or service.
   VENDOR.  Every person, corporation, partnership or other entity including a
division or department of the City providing products or services sold at or
related to a Minor League Baseball Stadium within the City, whether occurring
at the Minor League Baseball Stadium or not, including but not limited to,
tickets, parking, souvenirs, concessions, programs, advertising, merchandise,
corporate suites or boxes, and broadcast revenues.
(Ord. 60-2001)
§ 4-7-3 IMPOSITION OF SURCHARGE.
   (A)   There is imposed a surcharge equal to ten percent (10%) of the Stadium
Receipts.
   (B)   To facilitate collection of the surcharge, Stadium Receipts paid to
Vendors are presumed to be Stadium Receipts from the sale of property or
performance of services for Use by the purchaser of the property or service.
Vendors or purchasers may overcome the presumption by presenting to the
Treasurer reasonable evidence that the receipts are receipts from a sale for
resale by the Vendor to the purchaser.
   (C)   No Vendor may claim before the Treasurer that his receipts are from a
sale for resale who has not first registered with the Treasurer as provided in
§
4-7-4.
(Ord. 60-2001)
§ 4-7-4 REGISTRATION.
   (A)   No Vendor shall sell any product or service at the Minor League
Baseball Stadium or related to the Minor League Baseball Stadium or related to
activities occurring at the Minor League Baseball Stadium who has not
registered with the Treasurer.
   (B)   Any Vendor who fails to register with the Treasurer shall be subject
to a fine not to exceed five hundred dollars ($500).
(Ord. 60-2001)
§ 4-7-5 ADMINISTRATION OF THE SURCHARGE.
   (A)   Every Vendor shall collect the surcharge on behalf of the City and
shall act as trustee therefor. Vendors are liable for payment to the City of
the surcharge, whether due to the Vendor’s failure to collect the surcharge or
otherwise.
   (B)   Receipts from the surcharge shall be remitted to the Treasurer no
later than the tenth calendar day of the month following the month of
collection of the surcharge. If any amount of the surcharge is not paid on or
before the day on which it becomes due, interest shall be paid to the City from
the first day following the day on which the surcharge becomes due, without
regard to any extensions, until paid. Interest due shall be at a rate of 12%
per annum and shall be computed on a daily basis.
   (C)   The Treasurer is authorized to require Vendors to separately state the
surcharge on any or all transactions subject to the surcharge, or to make such
returns or provide such other information as will reasonably allow the
Treasurer to determine the Vendor’s liability for collection of the surcharge.
   (D)   Every Vendor shall keep such records as will allow the Treasurer to
determine accurately the amount of the surcharge due to the City. Every Vendor
liable for the surcharge shall make his books and records available for
inspection by the Treasurer during regular business hours and shall retain such
records for three (3) years.
   (E)   The Treasurer may select for random audit(s) one or more Vendors to
verify the amount of Stadium Receipts subject to the surcharge and to ensure
that the full amount of the surcharge is collected from each Vendor thus
audited.
   (F)   The Treasurer may bring suit to enforce the imposition and collection
of the surcharge or enforce provisions of any Vendor contract entered into
pursuant to the Minor League Baseball Stadium Funding Act. The Treasurer is
authorized to seek all remedies available at law or in equity.
   (G)   The Treasurer is authorized to enter into agreements with state and
local governments and with Vendors to facilitate reporting, payment or
collection of the surcharge.
(Ord. 60-2001)
§ 4-7-6 LIEN FOR PAYMENT OF SURCHARGE.
   (A)   The surcharge imposed by the City constitutes a lien in favor of the
City upon the personal and real property of the Vendor. The lien may be
enforced as provided in Section 3-36-1 through 3-36-7 NMSA 1978. Priority of
the lien shall be determined from the date of filing.
   (B)   The City Clerk may release a lien against any specific property by
signing a receipt of payment upon the notice of lien filed in the office of the
county clerk after written verification of the amount due by the Treasurer
including actual amounts due from monthly reports from the Vendor plus accrued
interest and penalties. If payment is made by check, actual release of lien
will be available two (2) weeks after payment is made.
   (C)   In the event a suit to foreclose the lien has been instituted, such
suit shall be dismissed at any time before foreclosure sale upon receipt of all
payments and interest provided for herein and payment of all costs of the
foreclosure proceeding attributable to the property sought to be released,
including reasonable attorney’s fees.
   (D)   Under the process or order of court, no person shall sell the property
of a Vendor without first ascertaining from the Treasurer the amount of any
surcharge due to the City. Any surcharge due the City shall be paid from the
proceeds of the sale before payment is made to any judgment creditor or any
other person with a claim on the proceeds of the sale.
(Ord. 60-2001)
§ 4-7-7 EXTENSION OF TIME.
   The Treasurer may, for good cause shown, extend the date of payment of the
surcharge, or other time limitation imposed by the Stadium Surcharge, for a
total period not to exceed sixty (60) days. No extension of the time to remit
the surcharge shall prevent the accrual of interest.
(Ord. 60-2001)
§ 4-7-8 REFUND AND CREDIT.
   If any person believes he has made payment of the surcharge in excess of
that for which the person was liable, then that person may claim a refund
thereof by directing to the Treasurer, no later than ninety (90) days from the
date payment was made, a written claim for refund. Every claim for refund shall
identify the person claiming the refund, state the amount of the refund claimed
and the basis for the claim for refund. The Treasurer shall allow the claim in
whole or in part or may deny it.
(Ord. 60-2001)
§ 4-7-9 CONFIDENTIALITY OF RETURN AND AUDIT.
   It is unlawful for any employee of the City to reveal to any individual
other than another employee or elected official of the City any information
contained in that return or audit of any Vendors subject to the surcharge,
except to a court of competent jurisdiction in response to an order thereof in
an action relating to the Stadium Surcharge to which the City is a party, and
in which information sought is material to the inquiry; to the Vendor himself
or to his authorized representative; and in such manner, for statistical
purposes, the information revealed is not identified as applicable to any
individual Vendor.
(Ord. 60-2001)
§ 4-7-10 DEDICATION.
   (A)   Revenue from the surcharge shall be held in a separate Stadium
Surcharge fund to be established and maintained by the Treasurer.
   (B)   Revenue from the surcharge will be used for the following purposes:
      (1)   payments of principal, interest, premiums, charges, expenses or
other obligations required to be paid by the City to the New Mexico Finance
Authority;
      (2)   the direct or indirect costs of designing, constructing,
renovating, equipping, furnishing, operating, maintaining or otherwise
improving a Minor League Baseball Stadium or related parking facilities in the
City;
      (3)   the costs of collecting or administering the surcharge;
      (4)   payment of debts or other obligations related to the Minor League
Baseball Stadium; or
      (5)   establishing a fund for construction, renovation, operation,
maintenance and improvement of a Minor League Baseball Stadium.
(Ord. 60-2001)
ARTICLE 8: HOSPITALITY FEE
Section
   
4-8-1   Short title
   
4-8-2   Authority and purpose
   
4-8-3   Definitions
   
4-8-4   Imposition of fee, use of proceeds
   
4-8-5   Exemptions
   
4-8-6   Determination of exemption; appeal
   
4-8-7   Hospitality application
   
4-8-8   Collection of the fee; reporting change in ownership
   
4-8-9   Records of vendor
   
4-8-10   Failure to pay fee or make return; penalty; collection of
delinquencies; ontinuous surety bond; appeal
   
4-8-11   Lien; payment; certificate of liens
   
4-8-12   Financial reporting
   
4-8-13   Marketplace provider responsibilities
 
   
4-8-99   Penalty
§ 4-8-1 SHORT TITLE.
   This article may be cited as the “City of Albuquerque Hospitality Fee
Ordinance.”
(Ord. 19-2004; Am. Ord._2019-024)
§ 4-8-2 AUTHORITY AND PURPOSE.
   The fee imposed under this article is imposed pursuant to the Hospitality
Fee Act, Section 3-38A-1 to 3-38A-12 NMSA 1978. The City of Albuquerque is
located in a class A county with a population of more than 250,000 according to
the 2000 federal decennial census. The Albuquerque City Council desires to
equip and furnish the convention center and contract to purchase advertising
that publicizes and promotes tourist-related attractions, facilities and events
in the municipality.
(Ord. 19-2004; Am. Ord._2019-024)
§ 4-8-3 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this article, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   GROSS TAXABLE RENT. The total amount of rent paid for lodging, not including
the state gross receipts tax, lodgers’ tax or local sales taxes.
   LODGING. The transaction of furnishing rooms or sleeping accommodations by a
vendor to a vendee who for a rent, uses, possesses or has the right to use or
possess any room or rooms or other units of accommodations in or at a taxable
premises.
   LODGINGS. The rooms or sleeping accommodations furnished by a vendor to a
vendee by a taxable service of lodging.
   MARKETPLACE PROVIDER. A person who facilitates the rental of lodging by:
      (1)   Advertising the lodging by any means, whether physical or
electronic, including by internet website, online booking platform, catalog,
television or radio broadcast, and
      (2)   Collecting payment from the vendee and transmitting that payment to
the vendor either directly or indirectly through agreements or arrangements
with the vendor, regardless of whether the marketplace provider receives
compensation or consideration in exchange for the marketplace provider's
services.
   MAYOR. The Mayor of the city or his designated representative.
   PERSON. A corporation, firm, other body corporate, partnership, association
or individual, includes an executor, administrator, trustee, receiver or other
representative appointed according to law and acting in a representative
capacity, but does not include the United States of America, the State of New
Mexico, any corporation, department, instrumentality or agency of the federal
government or the state government, or any political subdivision of the state.
   PROPRIETOR. A person who furnishes tourist lodging.
   RENT. The consideration received by a vendor in money, credits, property or
other consideration valued in money for lodgings subject to an occupancy tax
authorized in this article.
   TAXABLE PREMISES. A hotel, apartment, apartment hotel, apartment house,
lodge, lodging house, rooming house, motor hotel, guest house, bed and
breakfast, guest ranch, ranch resort, mobile home, motor court, auto court,
auto camp, trailer court, trailer camp, trailer park, tourist camp, cabin or
other premises used for lodging.
   TOURIST. A person who travels for the purpose of business, pleasure or
culture to a municipality or county imposing an occupancy tax.
   TOURIST-RELATED ATTRACTIONS, FACILITIES AND EVENTS. Facilities and
attractions that are intended to be used by or visited by tourists.
   VENDEE. A natural person to whom lodgings are furnished in the exercise of
the taxable service of lodging.
   VENDOR. A person furnishing lodgings in the exercise of the taxable service
of lodging.
(Ord. 19-2004; Am. Ord._2019-024)
§ 4-8-4 IMPOSITION OF FEE, USE OF PROCEEDS.
   (A)   There is hereby imposed a hospitality fee of 1% of gross taxable rent
for lodging paid to vendors after the effective date of this article.
   (B)   Fifty percent of such hospitality fee shall be used for the purpose of
purchasing advertising to publicize and promote tourist-related attractions,
facilities and events.
   (C)   Fifty percent of such hospitality fee shall be used to equip and
furnish the City of Albuquerque Convention Center.
   (D)   Every vendor who is furnishing any lodgings within a municipality or
county is exercising a taxable privilege.
(Ord. 19-2004; Am. Ord._2019-024)
§ 4-8-5 EXEMPTIONS.
   The hospitality fee shall not apply:
   (A)   If a vendee:
      (1)   Has been a permanent resident of the taxable premises for a period
of at least 30 consecutive days; or
      (2)   Enters into or has entered into a written agreement for lodgings at
the taxable premises for a period of at least 30 consecutive days;
   (B)   If the rent paid by a vendee is less than $2 a day.
   (C)   To lodging accommodations at institutions of the federal government,
the state or any political subdivision thereof.
   (D)   To lodging accommodations at religious, charitable, educational or
philanthropic institutions, including without limitation such accommodations at
summer camps operated by such institutions.
   (E)   To clinics, hospitals or other medical facilities.
   (F)   To privately-owned and operated convalescent homes or homes for the
aged, infirm, indigent or chronically ill.
(Ord. 19-2004; Am. Ord._2019-024)
§ 4-8-6 DETERMINATION OF EXEMPTION; APPEAL.
   The Mayor shall make the determination of whether or not a vendor is exempt
from the hospitality fee. In the event the vendor is dissatisfied with any
decision of the Mayor with respect to this article, they may appeal the
decision to the Independent Hearing Officer pursuant to the provisions of the
IHO Ordinance, ROA 1994,
Chapter 2, Article 7, Part 8.
(Ord. 19-2004; Am. Ord._2019-024; Am. Ord._2023-015)
§ 4-8-7 HOSPITALITY APPLICATION.
   Any vendor that is required to remit the hospitality fee to the City of
Albuquerque shall register to pay with the Mayor upon a form to be provided by
the Mayor. The application shall include, but not be limited to, the following
information:
   (A)   The name, mailing address, telephone number, fax number and other
related necessary information to register taxable premises such as: Federal Tax
Identification Number, New Mexico State Gross Receipts Tax Identification
Number, New Mexico Public Regulation Commission (NMPRC) number on file, City of
Albuquerque Business Registration number on file with the city.
   (B)   The name, mailing address, telephone number, facsimile number of
accounting firm or officer handling tax premises' financial records associated
with reporting hospitality fee reports and payments.
(Ord. 19-2004; Am. Ord._2019-024)
§ 4-8-8 COLLECTION OF THE FEE; REPORTING CHANGE IN OWNERSHIP.
   (A)   Every vendor providing lodgings within this city shall collect the
hospitality fee thereon on behalf of the city and shall act as a trustee
therefor.
   (B)   The hospitality fee shall be collected from vendees in accordance with
this section and shall be charged separately from the rent fixed by the vendor
for the lodgings.
   (C)   After the effective date of this article, each vendor shall be liable
to the city for the hospitality fee provided herein on the rent paid for
lodging.
   (D)   (1)   Each vendor shall make a report by the 25th day of each month on
forms provided by the Mayor of the receipts for lodging paid to him in the
preceding calendar month and shall remit therewith payment of the total amount
of the hospitality fee due to the city. The report shall include sufficient
information to enable the city to audit the report and shall be verified on
oath by the vendor. Any hospitality fee not paid and posted to the city's
Lodgers Subsidiary Ledger Vendors' Account by the 25th of the month as provided
herein shall be considered delinquent.
      (2)   If the 25th day of the month falls on a weekend or holiday, the
return shall be due on the next business day.
   (E)   The Mayor shall select for annual random audits one or more vendors to
verify the amount of gross rent subject to the hospitality fee and to ensure
that the full amount of hospitality fee on that rent is collected. Copies of
audits completed shall be filed with the State of New Mexico local government
division of the Department of Finance and Administration.
   (F)   Failure to notify the Mayor within 30 working days of a change of
ownership on a taxable premises shall subject vendor to a $500 penalty.
   (G)   A nonrefundable hearing fee of $50 shall accompany each appeal to the
City Hearing Officer filed pursuant to §§
4-4-6 or
4-4-9, ROA 1994.
(Ord. 19-2004; Am. Ord._2019-024; Am. Ord._2021-021)
§ 4-8-9 RECORDS OF VENDOR.
   Each vendor shall maintain adequate records of facilities subject to the
hospitality fee and of proceeds received for the use thereof. The records to be
maintained shall include but are not limited to: federal income tax returns,
State of New Mexico form CRS-1, financial statements, general and subsidiary
ledgers, sales journals, charts of accounts, daily summaries and reports,
monthly summaries, registration cards, bank statements, and year-end adjusting
entries. The records shall be maintained in Albuquerque and shall be open to
inspection by the city during reasonable hours and shall be retained for three
years.
(Ord. 19-2004; Am. Ord._2019-024)
§ 4-8-10 FAILURE TO PAY FEE OR MAKE RETURN; PENALTY; COLLECTION OF
DELINQUENCIES; CONTINUOUS SURETY BOND; APPEAL.
   (A)   In addition to other penalties that may be applicable under this
article, if any vendor makes a return as required by this article without
paying the hospitality fee then due, he shall be liable for the fee and a
penalty equal to 10% thereof or $100, whichever is greater. Promptly after
receipt of such return, the city shall give the delinquent vendor written
notice of the fee and penalty.
   (B)   If any vendor neglects or refuses to make a return and pay the
hospitality fee as required by this article, the Mayor shall make an estimate
based upon an examination of the vendor's books and records, or upon any
information in its possession or that may come into its possession, of the
amount of the rent of the delinquent vendor for the period in respect to which
he has failed to make a return, and upon the basis of said estimated amount
shall compute and assess the fee payable by the delinquent vendor, adding to
this amount a penalty equal to 10% thereof or $100, whichever is greater.
Promptly thereafter the city shall give the delinquent vendor written notice of
the estimated fee and penalty.
   (C)   If payment is not made by the vendor within 15 days of the date of the
notice that the hospitality fee is delinquent, the Mayor may bring an action in
law or equity in the district court for the collection of any amounts due,
including without limitation penalties thereon, interest on the unpaid
principal at a rate of not exceeding 1% a month, the costs of collection and
reasonable attorneys' fees incurred in connection therewith.
   (D)   A Continuous Surety Bond naming the city as beneficiary in the amount
of $3,000 plus $60 per room or individual sleeping accommodation available for
use by the public shall be posted and filed with the City Clerk upon vendor's
failure to remit hospitality fee for two consecutive months. If payment or
posting Continuous Surety Bond is not made by the vendor within 15 days of the
date of notice that the hospitality fee is delinquent, the Mayor may bring an
action in law or equity in the district court for the collection of any amount
due, including without limitation penalties thereon, interest on the unpaid
principal at a rate not exceeding 1% a month, the costs of collection and
reasonable attorney's fees incurred in connection therewith. The Continuous
Surety Bond shall remain in force for three years from the date of issuance and
may be extended or augmented to cover succeeding delinquent hospitality fee
payments due the City of Albuquerque.
   (E)   A vendor who disputes the assessment of any hospitality fee or related
penalties and interest may, within 15 days of the date of the notice from the
city that the tax is delinquent, appeal the Mayor's decision to the Independent
Hearing Officer pursuant to the provisions of the IHO Ordinance, ROA 1994,
Chapter 2, Article 7, Part 8.
(Ord. 19-2004; Am. Ord._2019-024; Am. Ord._2023-015)
§ 4-8-11 LIEN; PAYMENT; CERTIFICATE OF LIENS.
   All delinquent hospitality fees and penalty shall constitute a lien in favor
of the city on the personal and real property of the vendor providing lodging.
The lien may be enforced as provided in Sections 3-36- 1 through 3-36-7 NMSA
1978.
   (A)   Under process or order of the court, no person shall sell the property
of any vendor without first ascertaining from the Treasurer of the city the
amount of any hospitality fee due to the city. Any hospitality fee due the city
shall be paid from the proceeds of the sale before payment is made to the
judgment creditor or any other person with a claim on the sale proceeds.
   (B)   The Treasurer of the city shall furnish to any person applying for
such a certificate, a certificate showing the amount of all liens in the
records of the municipality against any vendor.
(Ord. 19-2004; Am. Ord._2019-024)
§ 4-8-12 FINANCIAL REPORTING.
   The city will:
   (A)   Furnish to any municipal advisory board dealing with the occupancy,
lodging or accommodation taxes or fees information on that portion of a
proposed budget report or audit filed or received by the governing body
pursuant to either Chapter 6, Article 6 NMSA 1978 or the Audit Act [Sections
12-6-1 to 12-6-14 NMSA 1978] that relates to the expenditure of hospitality fee
proceeds within ten days of the filing or receipt of that proposed budget,
report or audit; and
   (B)   Report quarterly to the Local Government Division of the New Mexico
Department of Finance and Administration on the expenditure of hospitality fee
proceeds pursuant to Section 3-38-15 and 3-38-21 NMSA 1978.
(Ord. 19-2004; Am. Ord._2019-024)
§ 4-8-13 MARKETPLACE PROVIDER RESPONSIBILITIES.
   (A)   Marketplace providers shall be responsible for collecting all
applicable hospitality fees and remitting the same to the city. The marketplace
provider shall be considered an agent of the vendor for purposes of hospitality
fee collections and remittance responsibilities as set forth in this ordinance;
   (B)   Safe Harbor. A marketplace provider operating exclusively on the
internet, who operates in compliance with subsection (A) above, shall be
presumed to be in compliance with this ordinance, except that the marketplace
provider remains responsible for compliance with the administrative penalty
provision in §
4-8-99.
(Ord._2019-024; Am. Ord._2021-021)
§ 4-8-99 PENALTY.
   A vendor shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and subject to the penalty
provisions set forth in §
1-1-99 of this code of ordinances for a violation of the provisions of this
article for a failure to pay the hospitality fee, to remit the proceeds thereof
to the city or to account properly for any lodging and the hospitality fee
proceeds pertaining thereto.
(Ord. 19-2004; Am. Ord._2019-024)
ARTICLE 9: ARENA SURCHARGE
Section
   
4-9-1   Short title
   
4-9-2   Definitions
   
4-9-3   Imposition of surcharge
   
4-9-4   Registration
   
4-9-5   Administration of the surcharge
   
4-9-6   Lien for payment of surcharge
   
4-9-7   Extension of time
   
4-9-8   Refund and credit
   
4-9-9   Confidentiality of return and audit
   
4-9-10   Dedication
§ 4-9-1 SHORT TITLE.
   This article may be cited as the "Arena Surcharge Ordinance."
(Ord. 39-2004)
§ 4-9-2 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this article, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ARENA. An arena, including land, buildings and improvements, located within
or near the downtown area of the city constructed after July 1, 2004, and with
a seating capacity of at least 8,200 fixed and an additional 1,800 flexible
seats.
   ARENA RECEIPTS.  The total amount of money or the value of other
consideration paid to a vendor by a user for property or services related to
the Arena or related to activities occurring at the Arena, whether occurring at
the Arena or not, including but not limited to, tickets, parking, souvenirs,
concessions, programs, advertising, merchandise, corporate suites or boxes, and
broadcast revenues, for use by the purchaser of the property or service. ARENA
RECEIPTS shall include interest and penalty related thereto. ARENA RECEIPTS
shall not include:
      (1)   the total amount of money or the value of other consideration paid
for constructing, renovating, equipping, operating, maintaining or improving
the Arena or for administering the Arena Surcharge; or
      (2)   amounts paid by users and collected by vendors as the Arena
Surcharge.
   CITY. The City of Albuquerque, New Mexico.
   NON-PROFIT.  The non-profit entity or entities organized under the law of
New Mexico, proposing to construct, own and operate the Arena so as to lessen
the burdens on the city, which entity or entities may obtain a loan from the
New Mexico Finance Authority or elsewhere to finance the construction and
operation of the Arena and ownership of teams which will use the Arena.
   TREASURER.  The City Treasurer or the Treasurer's duly authorized delegate.
   USE.  Includes use or storage or consumption of property or a service.
Excludes subsequent sale or resale by the purchaser of the property or service.
   VENDOR. Every person, corporation, partnership or other entity, including a
division or department of the city, providing products or services sold at or
related to an arena within the city, whether occurring at the arena or not,
including but not limited to, tickets, parking, souvenirs, concessions,
programs, advertising, merchandise, corporate suites or boxes, and broadcast
revenues.
(Ord. 39-2004)
§ 4-9-3 IMPOSITION OF SURCHARGE.
   (A)   There is imposed a surcharge equal to 10% of the arena receipts.
   (B)   To facilitate collection of the surcharge, arena receipts paid to
vendors are presumed to be arena receipts from the sale of property or
performance of services for use by the purchaser of the property or service.
Vendors or purchasers may overcome the presumption by presenting to the
Treasurer reasonable evidence that the receipts are receipts from a sale for
resale by the vendor to the purchaser.
   (C)   No vendor may claim before the Treasurer that his receipts are from a
sale for resale who has not first registered with the Treasurer as provided in
§
4-9-4.
(Ord. 39-2004)
§ 4-9-4 REGISTRATION.
   (A)   No vendor shall sell any product or service at the Arena or related to
the Arena or related to activities occurring at the Arena who has not
registered with the Treasurer.
   (B)   Any vendor who fails to register with the Treasurer shall be subject
to a fine not to exceed $500.
(Ord. 39-2004)
§ 4-9-5 ADMINISTRATION OF THE SURCHARGE.
   (A)   Every vendor shall collect the surcharge on behalf of the city and
shall act as trustee therefor. Vendors are liable for payment to the city of
the surcharge, whether due to the vendor's failure to collect the surcharge or
otherwise.
   (B)   Receipts from the surcharge shall be remitted to the Treasurer no
later than the tenth calendar day of the month following the month of
collection of the surcharge. If any amount of the surcharge is not paid on or
before the day on which it becomes due, interest shall be paid to the city from
the first day following the day on which the surcharge becomes due, without
regard to any extensions, until paid. Interest due shall be at a rate of 12%
per annum and shall be computed on a daily basis.
   (C)   The Treasurer is authorized to require vendors to separately state the
surcharge on any or all transactions subject to the surcharge, or to make such
returns or provide such other information as will reasonably allow the
Treasurer to determine the vendor's liability for collection of the surcharge.
   (D)   Every vendor shall keep such records as will allow the Treasurer to
determine accurately the amount of the surcharge due to the city. Every vendor
liable for the surcharge shall make his books and records available for
inspection by the Treasurer during regular business hours and shall retain such
records for three years.
   (E)   The Treasurer may select for random audit(s) one or more vendors to
verify the amount of arena receipts subject to the surcharge and to ensure that
the full amount of the surcharge is collected from each vendor thus audited.
   (F)   The Treasurer may bring suit to enforce the imposition and collection
of the surcharge or enforce provisions of any vendor contract. The Treasurer is
authorized to seek all remedies available at law or in equity.
   (G)   The Treasurer is authorized to enter into agreements with state and
local governments and with vendors to facilitate reporting, payment or
collection of the surcharge.
(Ord. 39-2004)
§ 4-9-6 LIEN FOR PAYMENT OF SURCHARGE.
   (A)   The surcharge imposed by the city constitutes a lien in favor of the
city upon the personal and real property of the vendor. The lien may be
enforced as provided in Sections 3-36-1 through 3-36-7 NMSA 1978. Priority of
the lien shall be determined from the date of filing.
   (B)   The City Clerk may release a lien against any specific property by
signing a receipt of payment upon the notice of lien filed in the Office of the
County Clerk after written verification of the amount due by the Treasurer
including actual amounts due from monthly reports from the vendor plus accrued
interest and penalties. If payment is made by check, actual release of lien
will be available two weeks after payment is made.
   (C)   In the event a suit to foreclose the lien has been instituted, such
suit shall be dismissed at any time before foreclosure sale upon receipt of all
payments and interest provided for herein and payment of all costs of the
foreclosure proceeding attributable to the property sought to be released,
including reasonable attorney's fees.
   (D)   Under the process or order of court, no person shall sell the property
of a vendor without first ascertaining from the Treasurer the amount of any
surcharge due to the city. Any surcharge due the city shall be paid from the
proceeds of the sale before payment is made to any judgment creditor or any
other person with a claim on the proceeds of the sale.
(Ord. 39-2004)
§ 4-9-7 EXTENSION OF TIME.
   The Treasurer may, for good cause shown, extend the date of payment of the
surcharge, or other time limitation imposed by the Arena Surcharge Ordinance,
for a total period not to exceed 60 days. No extension of the time to remit the
surcharge shall prevent the accrual of interest.
(Ord. 39-2004)
§ 4-9-8 REFUND AND CREDIT.
   If any person believes he has made payment of the surcharge in excess of
that for which the person was liable, then that person may claim a refund
thereof by directing to the Treasurer, no later than 90 days from the date
payment was made, a written claim for refund. Every claim for refund shall
identify the person claiming the refund, state the amount of the refund claimed
and the basis for the claim for refund. The Treasurer shall allow the claim in
whole or in part or may deny it.
(Ord. 39-2004)
§ 4-9-9 CONFIDENTIALITY OF RETURN AND AUDIT.
   It is unlawful for any employee of the city to reveal to any individual
other than another employee or elected official of the city any information
contained in the return or audit of any vendors subject to the surcharge,
except to a court of competent jurisdiction in response to an order thereof in
an action relating to the Arena Surcharge to which the city is party; to the
vendor himself or to his authorized representative; and in such manner, for
statistical purposes, that the information revealed is not identified as
applicable to any individual vendor.
(Ord. 39-2004)
§ 4-9-10 DEDICATION.
   (A)   Revenue from the surcharge shall be held in a separate Arena Surcharge
fund to be established and maintained by the Treasurer.
   (B)   Revenue from the surcharge will be used for any of the following
purposes:
      (1)   Payments of principal, interest, premiums, charges, expenses or
other obligations required to be paid to the New Mexico Finance Authority or
other lender for the loan to the Non-Profit;
      (2)   The direct or indirect costs of designing, constructing,
renovating, equipping, furnishing, operating, maintaining or otherwise
improving the Arena or related parking facilities in the city;
      (3)   The costs of collecting or administering the surcharge;
      (4)   Payment of debts or other obligations related to the Arena; or
      (5)   Establishing a fund for construction, renovation, operation,
maintenance and improvement of an Arena.
(Ord. 39-2004)
ARTICLE 10: TAX INCREMENT DEVELOPMENT DISTRICTS
Section
   
4-10-1   Findings
   
4-10-2   Definitions
   
4-10-3   General policies
   
4-10-4   Pre-application discussion with city staff
   
4-10-5   Content of application
   
4-10-6   Application procedures
   
4-10-7   TIDD operations and debt financing
   
4-10-8   Financial considerations
§ 4-10-1 FINDINGS.
   The Council finds the following:
   (A)   The City of Albuquerque, New Mexico desires to benefit from the Tax
Increment for Development Act, Laws 2006, Chapter 75 (the "Act"); and
   (B)   A tax increment development district ("TIDD") provides a funding
mechanism to finance construction, operation, and maintenance of public
infrastructure within the boundaries of the TIDD, and to better enable the city
to provide municipal services within the boundaries of the TIDD; and
   (C)   In order to permit the city to make a reasonable judgment as to
whether or not to establish a TIDD and upon what terms, the city has
established these policy guidelines and application procedures.
(Ord. 36-2006)
§ 4-10-2 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this article, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   NO NET EXPENSE. Defined through the specific provisions in the Planned
Communities Criteria as adopted by the Albuquerque/Bernalillo County
Comprehensive Plan, the Planned Growth Strategy as contained in F/S O-02-39(2)
(Enactment No. 2002-034) and compiled in ROA 1994, and within other
legislation, agreements, and regulations of the City of Albuquerque. The NO NET
EXPENSE policy applies solely to development in the unserved area and the
reserve and rural areas.
   AREAS. The "unserved area", "partially served area" and "fully served area"
are defined initially in Bill No. F/S R-02-111. The "reserve area" and "rural
area" are defined in the Albuquerque/Bernalillo County Comprehensive Plan.
(Ord. 36-2006)
§ 4-10-3 GENERAL POLICIES.
   (A)   This article is intended to serve as guidelines for the purpose of
considering and, as appropriate, approving the establishment of tax increment
development districts and the issuance of bonds of such districts pursuant to
the Act. The purpose of this policy is to enable the city to make a reasoned
judgment concerning the terms and conditions upon which to approve the
formation of a TIDD and to provide procedures for the city to consider TIDD
applications. Capitalized terms not otherwise defined herein are as defined in
the Act.
   (B)   This policy is adopted to provide ease of administration and to assure
that the city's tax base is not compromised, taking into account the overall
economic benefits of the TIDD, which are demonstrated to the reasonable
satisfaction of the city. The decision to form a TIDD shall be a legislative
enactment of the City Council and Mayor exercised in accordance with law. The
city shall encourage an area to be governed by as few TIDDs as practicable,
taking into account however the need to finance discrete infrastructure
projects to serve separate but related land uses and the need to utilize
discrete financing approaches.
   (C)   TIDDs should be utilized for the financing of public infrastructure
for economic development or redevelopment that facilitates and supports
development and job creation. Public infrastructure financed by a TIDD shall
(i) enhance the sustainability of the local, regional or statewide economy,
(ii) support the creation of jobs, schools and workforce housing, (iii)
generate tax revenue for the provision of public improvements and (iv), if
located in a rural or reserve area, be consistent with the no net expense
policy set out in the Planned Communities Criteria including the provision that
interim revenue generation shortfall for public service costs shall be borne by
the development so as to prevent net expense to the city as required by policy
adopted by the Albuquerque/Bernalillo County Comprehensive Plan, and, if
located in an unserved area, be consistent with the no net expense policy set
out in Revised Ordinances of Albuquerque, New Mexico, 1994, including the
provision of §
14-13-2-3(C)(3) that developers of properties in the unserved area shall be
required to assure fiscal self- sufficiency.
   (D)   Public improvements financed by a TIDD should be in conformance with
applicable long-range city policies for development, including, but not limited
to, the Albuquerque/Bernalillo County Comprehensive Plan, the Integrated
Development Ordinance, the Ordinance adopting elements of a Planned Growth
Strategy; the current city enactment relating to the Capital Implementation
Program; the Impact Fee Component Capital Improvement Program; other ordinances
applicable to the affected land including annexation ordinances and any related
annexation agreements, if any; and all supplements and subsequent enactments
relating to these measures.
   (E)   All costs and expenses incurred by the city in connection with the
application, formation, and operation of a TIDD shall be paid by the applicant/
landowner through advance payments as provided in §§
4-10-6(B) and
4-10-7(A) hereof. Costs and expenses incurred by the city in connection with
the application and formation of a TIDD shall not be liabilities of the city.
Advance payments shall include payments for services rendered by city staff,
services rendered by outside consultants who may be retained by the city
including, but not limited to, bond counsel and other attorneys, financial
advisers, planners, urban designers, engineers, appraisers, and tax
consultants. If the city uses outside consultants as "staff," such as attorneys
or engineers, those consultants shall be paid their normal rate for services.
   (F)   Subsequent to the approval of an application for formation of a TIDD
by the city, and after authorization by the TIDD exercising its sole
discretion, all or part of such advance payments may be reimbursed to the
developer/landowner or to the TIDD to the extent permitted by state or federal
law, from the proceeds of bonds, tax increment revenues or other legally
available revenues of the TIDD. The city may, in its discretion, based on a
particular applicant's development plan and financing plan, authorize the TIDD
to reimburse 100% of the applicant's equity contribution based on a
demonstration satisfactory to the city that the goals served by the TIDD are
not compromised by such reimbursement. Section 20(B) of the Act requires
property owners to contribute a minimum of 20% of initial infrastructure cost
prior to the issuance of gross receipts or property tax increment bonds, unless
the project to be financed is a redevelopment project pursuant to the
Metropolitan Redevelopment Code.
   (G)   The TIDD shall be governed by a Board of Directors comprised of
members of the City Council, ex officio, or, at the option of the City Council,
five directors appointed by the City Council (the "TIDD Board"). The City
Council may, in accordance with law, delegate certain responsibilities of
governance of the TIDD to a committee as approved by the City Council. The day-
to- day responsibilities of the TIDD may be performed pursuant to an agreement
with outside personnel (including a development agreement entered into pursuant
to the Act), or city staff. Advisory committees may, at the option of the
Council or the TIDD Board, be utilized. An applicant may request the formation
of a single TIDD or multiple TIDDs which are designed to finance discrete
infrastructure projects to serve separate but related land uses, and which rely
on discrete tax increment financing approaches.
   (H)   The TIDD shall be self-supporting. Except as set forth in §
4-10-3(K), ROA 1994, no city funds shall be used for TIDD purposes including
financing, operations or maintenance. Notwithstanding anything to the contrary
which may be contained herein, neither the property, the full faith and credit
nor the taxing power of the city shall be pledged to the payment of any TIDD
obligation or indebtedness.
   (I)   The TIDD Board shall determine, in accordance with its policies and
procedures, the amount, timing and form of financing to be used by a TIDD after
review of the financial feasibility study required by §
4-10-5(E) and (F), ROA 1994. All bond proceeds generated by the financing must
be spent on project costs in accordance with the bond documents and the
policies and procedures of the TIDD Board. No water or wastewater utility
system, or any portion thereof, which is billed for separate and apart from the
City/County water and wastewater utility shall be financed. All financings
shall be subject to final review and approval by the City Council, provided,
however, that financings which contemplate the issuance of a multiple series of
bonds shall be approved at the time of the approval of the first issuance of
bonds and the TIDD Board shall not be required to receive further approvals
from City Council except when there is a material change affecting the
financial stability of the bond such as the amount and timing of issuance in
relation to the projected build-out of the TIDD project.
   (J)   Except as otherwise determined by the City Council, the TIDD shall
construct or finance improvements on such terms and with such persons as the
TIDD Board determines to be appropriate, in accordance with Section 12(B) of
the Act, as amended. The TIDD shall otherwise construct and finance
improvements in accordance with applicable public works acts excluding those
related to architecture/ engineering, professional/technical services, and
construction contractor selection. Construction, performance, and payment bonds
shall be furnished in accordance with the city policies and procedures
governing subdivision improvement agreements.
   (K)   Existing city policies for development, growth management and
conservation shall remain in effect and shall not be waived or relaxed upon the
creation of a TIDD. The TIDD may use bond proceeds or other TIDD funds to
purchase public rights-of-way or other real property to be used for public
infrastructure improvements, unless such real property would be required to be
dedicated and conveyed to the city by the developer/landowner upon development
of the developer's/landowner's property.
   (L)   Until the dedication of the infrastructure to the city, and acceptance
by the city, all costs of administration and operation of the TIDD and the
operation and maintenance of public infrastructure in the TIDD shall be the
responsibility of the TIDD, the developer/landowner, applicable homeowners'
association, or any combination of the foregoing, as may be acceptable to the
city and the TIDD. For developments located in reserve, rural, and unserved
areas, except as demonstrated to the city to be consistent with the
requirements that TIDD-financed improvements result in no net expense to the
city as defined herein, after dedication and acceptance, all costs of operating
and maintaining public infrastructure serving an area not otherwise served by
the city shall be borne by the TIDD, the developer/landowner or the applicable
homeowner's association, or any combination of the foregoing, until the area in
which the public infrastructure is located in a partially served or served
area.
   (M)   Notwithstanding any other provisions of this article, a TIDD may be
created in an area for which neither the city nor the Albuquerque Bernalillo
County Water Utility Authority provides water, wastewater, or storm drainage
utilities. Any TIDD created in an area not served by existing water, sewer or
storm drainage utilities shall be consistent with the parameters of the no net
expense policy set forth in §
14-13-2-3 ROA 1994, and §§
14-13-1-1 et seq., ROA 1994. For developments located in reserve, rural, and
unserved areas, except as demonstrated to the city to be consistent with the
requirements that TIDD-financed improvements result in no net expense to the
city as defined herein, developers shall be required to pay 100% of all on-site
charges associated with the TIDD- financed improvements. As provided in the
Development Agreement, developers of unserved areas shall be required to pay
off-site charges attributable to the development's impact.
(Ord. 36-2006; Am. Ord._2017-025)
§ 4-10-4 PRE-APPLICATION DISCUSSION WITH CITY STAFF.
   Potential applicants for a TIDD are encouraged to schedule and conduct a
pre-application meeting and discussion with city staff. Input provided by city
staff shall be of an advisory nature only, for the purposes of assisting
applicants in submitting completed applications with detail and information
required to enable meaningful consideration by the City Council. The purposes
of the pre-application meeting shall be to:
   (A)   Make an initial assessment whether the proposed TIDD appears to be
consistent with the city's land use and development policies, zoning and other
applicable regulations, including applicable policies relating to economic
development and job growth;
   (B)   Help identify any related city approvals that will be required to
permit the TIDD;
   (C)   Identify other issues specific to the applicant's proposed project
that should be addressed in its application in order for the city to make the
findings required by Section 1(C) of the Act, such as compliance with
applicable city policies, rules or regulations, and the proposed project's
facilitation or support of economic development, job growth and job creation,
work force housing, public school facility development and enhancement, mixed-
use transit-oriented development, traditional neighborhood design or
sustainable development;
   (D)   Identify the proposed improvement of the specific property within the
proposed TIDD, including the expectation of the future obligations of the owner
or developer and the city concerning the zoning, subdivisions, improvement,
impact fees, financial responsibilities and other matters relating to the
development, improvement and use of the real property within the proposed TIDD;
and
   (E)   Establish a preliminary schedule for (i) the applicant's submittal of
a TIDD application, (ii) city staff review of the application for completeness,
(iii) City Council meeting or meetings for its consideration of and action on
the application.
(Ord. 36-2006)
§ 4-10-5 CONTENT OF APPLICATION.
   All applications for the formation of a TIDD shall be submitted to the
city's Chief Administrative Officer. Each application shall, at a minimum,
contain the following:
   (A)   A description of the proposed TIDD, including a legal description of
its boundaries, identity and addresses of all persons or entities with any
interest in the property, and the names and addresses of any qualified electors
(as defined in Section 3-1-2(K) NMSA 1978) located within the proposed
boundaries. The description must contain an analysis of the appropriateness of
the TIDD boundaries.
   (B)   If the TIDD is proposed to be formed without an election through the
waiver of election provided for in the Act, evidence satisfactory to the city
of the unanimous consent of owners of real property within the proposed
boundaries of the TIDD to the creation of the TIDD. A current title report on
the property shall be submitted as evidence of the names of persons with any
interest in the land and qualified electors. In the event that any owner of
property within the proposed TIDD withdraws consent to the creation of a TIDD,
the applicant shall have the opportunity to submit a revised application and
shall not be required to submit a new application fee as provided in §
4-10-4, ROA 1994; provided, that the city may request that the applicant
deposit additional funds to pay costs reasonably incurred by the city in
reviewing an application which has been revised as a result of a property
owner's withdrawal of consent to the creation of a TIDD.
   (C)   If the TIDD is proposed to be formed by election, evidence
satisfactory to the city of the applicant's ability to pay for an election,
whether or not an all mail-in election, and a proposed election timetable.
   (D)   A detailed description of the types of public infrastructure to be
financed by the TIDD, including the estimated construction or acquisition costs
of the public infrastructure, projection of working capital needs, including
adequate funds for repair and replacement of infrastructure, the annual
operation and maintenance costs of the public infrastructure and the
governmental approvals and licenses that shall be required for both the public
and private improvements to be constructed and operated. The description shall
contain adequate information to establish financial parameters for the
operation and financing of the TIDD as set forth in §
4-10-7, ROA 1994. The description shall include a representation concerning the
future ownership and maintenance of the public infrastructure.
   (E)   A proposed project schedule for commencement and completion of (a) the
public infrastructure and (b) the private development, which shall include the
financial feasibility study required by §
4-10-5(G), ROA 1994, for the public infrastructure, including both capital and
operating/maintenance costs for all improvements undertaken by the TIDD. The
financial feasibility study shall include projections for a period which shall
be the longest of (i) the expected term of existence of the TIDD, (ii) the
anticipated period during which tax increment is to be collected by the TIDD,
or (iii) the proposed final maturity date of any bonds issued by the TIDD. The
financial feasibility study shall include at least: (a) estimated costs of
improvements; (b) projected costs of maintenance after construction; and (c) a
complete description of the improvements to be owned and maintained by the city
or the TIDD.
   (F)   A tax increment development plan that includes the following
information:
      (1)   Whether gross receipts tax increment bonds or property tax
increment bonds or both are proposed;
      (2)   The public improvements proposed to be financed by each type of
bond financing proposed along with a description of the public improvements and
an estimate of the costs of completion;
      (3)   The estimated annual gross receipts tax increment to be generated
by the TIDD project; and the portion of that gross receipts tax increment
proposed to be pledged as security for gross receipts tax increment bonds
(which portion may not exceed 75% of the gross receipts tax increment), if
applicable;
      (4)   The estimated annual property tax increment to be generated by the
TIDD project and the portion of that property tax increment proposed to be
pledged as security for property tax increment bonds (which portion may not
exceed 75% of the property tax increment), if applicable;
      (5)   Any proposed use of gross receipts tax increment revenues or
property tax increment revenues other than to secure the payment of bonds;
      (6)   The proposed land uses for the TIDD project including a map
depicting the geographic boundaries of the TIDD;
      (7)   The number and types of jobs expected to be created by the TIDD
project during build-out of the TIDD and after completion of the TIDD;
      (8)   The amount and characteristics of workforce housing expected to be
created by the TIDD project;
      (9)    The location and characteristics of public school facilities
expected to be created, improved, rehabilitated or constructed by the TIDD
project;
      (10)   A description of innovative planning techniques, including mixed-
use transit-oriented development, traditional neighborhood design or
sustainable development techniques, that the city should find to be beneficial
and that are proposed to be incorporated into the TIDD project; and
      (11)   The amount, type and source of private investment in the TIDD
project.
   (G)   A financial feasibility study (which shall be satisfactory to the city
and prepared by an independent professional with appropriate expertise) for the
entire project (or such phases of the project that are expected to be
constructed during the term of the TIDD) covering both the public
infrastructure and the private development and including appropriate cash flow
analysis addressing projected tax increment revenues. The financial feasibility
study shall include:
      (1)   An analysis of the financing and the estimated costs of the
improvements, services and benefits to result from the formation of the
proposed TIDD (including the time estimated to be necessary to complete the
TIDD improvements).
      (2)   A financing plan for any private development in the TIDD which is
not expected to be dedicated to the city.
      (3)   A market absorption study for the development in the TIDD prepared
by an independent consultant acceptable to the city. Such study shall include
estimates of the revenue to be generated by the development, an estimate of the
ability of the market to absorb the development, and a market absorption
projection for the private development including an identification of market
share for different land uses within competitive projects in the market area.
This study shall take into account the effect, if any, that the proposed debt
financing, operation and maintenance costs, and other TIDD costs are expected
to have on the marketability of the private development.
   (H)   A description of the proposed equity contribution from the applicant
and a calendar showing the anticipated timing and sources of such contribution.
An equity contribution shall be equal to a minimum of 20% of estimated initial
infrastructure cost prior to the issuance of gross receipts or property tax
increment bonds, unless the project to be financed is a redevelopment project
pursuant to the Metropolitan Redevelopment Code.
   (I)   A description of the applicant's professional experience and evidence
demonstrating its financial capacity to undertake the development associated
with the public infrastructure and private development. The application shall
also describe the direct and indirect benefits to all parties with financial
interest in the proposed development. Such information shall be accompanied by
three-year audited financial statements, if available, or comparable
information attesting to the financial strength and experience of the
development parties along with a description of past projects and disclosure of
any material litigation.
   (J)   An operating plan for the TIDD, describing the extent of the TIDD's
responsibilities for and anticipated costs of operation and maintenance, the
method of carrying out those responsibilities, and specifying whether the TIDD
or another entity will be responsible for operation and maintenance of specific
public infrastructure or improvements.
   (K)   A description of how the proposed TIDD meets the existing development
objectives of the city, including the degree to which the TIDD is (1)
consistent with the goals of promoting orderly development, (2) consistent with
the Albuquerque/Bernalillo County Comprehensive Plan; (3) consistent with
growth management policies, zoning requirements, and (4) the degree to which
the land use plan for the TIDD is consistent with the city's applicable long-
range policies for development, growth management and conservation set forth in
§
4-10-3(D) herein.
   (L)   Consistent with the policies set forth in this article, a description
of the proposed terms of a Development Agreement including the improvement of
the specific property within the proposed TIDD, including the expectation of
the future obligations of the owner or developer and the city concerning the
zoning, subdivisions, improvement, impact fees, financial responsibilities and
other matters relating to the development, improvement and use of the real
property within the proposed TIDD. The description of proposed development
agreement terms shall not be required to include the level of detail expected
to be included in the proposed development agreement itself and shall not be
binding on the city or the developer and shall not constitute a legal cause of
action or create vested rights.
   (M)   A proposed resolution which shall address those items set forth in
Section 4(C) and 7(C) of the Act.
   (N)   Such other information as the city may reasonably require after its
initial review of the application, including but not limited to preliminary
legal opinions, appraisals, further information regarding the relationship of
the application to the city's development objectives, additional proof of
financial capability, business references, term sheets for financing and
financial commitment letters.
(Ord. 36-2006)
§ 4-10-6 APPLICATION PROCEDURES.
   (A)   Ten copies of the application for the formation of a TIDD shall be
submitted to the city's Chief Administrative Officer, who shall coordinate an
interdepartmental analysis of each application.
   (B)   At the time of submission of the application, the applicant shall pay
a $20,000 non-refundable application fee and shall deposit an additional
$30,000 as an advance deposit on account to be applied by the city in its sole
discretion to the initial costs incurred in connection with the processing and
review of the application and the formation of the TIDD in accordance with the
provisions of §
4-10-3 ROA 1994. In calculating costs incurred by the city, the city may
include reasonable costs associated with the pre-application discussion
contained in §
4-10-4, ROA 1994. An accounting of all costs incurred by the city shall be made
to the applicant at its request and, if reasonably necessary, additional funds
may be requested by the city and must be paid by the applicant. If an applicant
withdraws its application, the city shall return the unexpended portion of the
advance deposit; provided, that the city shall retain from those funds the
amounts necessary to pay costs incurred by the city but not yet paid by the
city at the time the application is withdrawn.
   (C)   At the applicant's request, city staff may, in its discretion, present
to the City Council a non-binding resolution expressing the city's intent to
proceed with the formation of the TIDD. Such a resolution may be based upon a
preliminary application outline, containing, at a minimum, the following
information:
      (1)   Ownership of property proposed to be included in the TIDD;
      (2)   Location and boundaries of the proposed TIDD;
      (3)   General description of improvements to be constructed with TIDD
financing and estimated costs of construction;
      (4)   Estimated principal amount of TIDD bonds proposed to be issued;
      (5)   Estimated maximum annual debt service on TIDD bonds;
      (6)   Estimated annual gross receipts tax increment to be generated by
the TIDD project and the portion of such increment to be allocated during the
time necessary to complete the payment of the TIDD project;
      (7)   Estimated annual property tax increment to be generated by the TIDD
project and the portion of such increment to be allocated during the time
necessary to complete the payment of the TIDD project;
   Any resolution adopted pursuant to this section shall express the city's
non-binding intent to proceed with the formation of the TIDD, subject to such
conditions as may be set forth in the resolution. In the event that this
resolution is not passed by the Council, the applicant may receive a refund of
all of its advance deposit.
      (8)   No Net Expense Analysis. A no net expense analysis shall be
conducted if the TIDD is located in an area as defined in §
4-10-2(B) herein.
         (a)   Project Revenues. This part of the analysis will restate the
information provided in §
4-10-7(C)(6) and (7), ROA 1994, related to estimated TIDD revenues. The no net
expense analysis also may include estimated indirect rate and tax revenues
resulting from net new growth assumed to result from the development.
         (b)   Project Costs. Project development creates on-site and off-site
operating, capital, and debt service costs. Some of these costs are incurred on
a short-term and some on a long-term basis by the TIDD and some are incurred by
the City of Albuquerque. The no net expense analysis will provide a multi-year,
as specified in this article, annual financial analysis of the total on-site
and off-site public and private capital, operating, and debt service costs of
the development (identified separately); the distribution of the costs to the
City rate payers and taxpayers, the TIDD utilized gross receipts tax increment
revenues and property tax increment revenues, and to other parties and
agencies.
         (c)   No Net Expense Summary. This summary shall demonstrate and
identify the extent to which the development represents no net expense to city
rate payers and tax payers who live outside the development. The no net expense
analysis shall be produced by an individual or firm approved by the applicant
and the TIDD Board. The City Council shall consider whether an additional
independent professional analysis of no net expense is necessary.
   (D)   If the city approves the formation of a TIDD and there are existing
agreements with developers/ landowners for the provision of infrastructure
proposed to be furnished by the TIDD, then those agreements shall be deemed
amended to reflect the agreements and conditions pertaining to the TIDD. The
amendments shall reflect that either the developer/landowner or the TIDD shall
provide such infrastructure improvements. Any existing agreements with
developers/landowners for the provision of infrastructure proposed to be
furnished by the TIDD shall be identified in the application and how they will
be modified will be described.
   (E)   After the application fee and deposit are submitted, city staff shall
arrange an initial conference with the applicant and the appropriate city
staff, for the purpose of reviewing the application for conformity with city
policies. City staff shall use its best efforts to review the application and
conduct the initial conference within 30 business days following payment of the
application fee and advance deposit.
   (F)   If at any time during the application process city staff requests
additional information, the applicant shall provide any and all supplemental
information requested, in accordance with the provision of §
4-10-5(N), ROA 1994.
   (G)   After analysis of an application as supplemented, city staff under the
direction of the Chief Administrative Officer may prepare a report including
recommendations relating to the TIDD and an analysis of the impact of the
formation of the TIDD. The report may provide a recommended disposition of the
application and any additional requirements that shall be placed on the
developer/landowner and the TIDD. The city shall complete the analysis and
report concerning the application within 90 business days following the
submission of a fully complete application.
   (H)   If all costs billed to or incurred by the city have been paid by the
applicant by a date at least 14 calendar days prior to the date of the meeting
of the City Council at which the appropriate legislation approving the
application is to be introduced and, if the application meets the
qualifications provided herein as determined by city staff, the application,
along with any report and recommendations by city staff, shall be presented by
the applicant and city staff to the Debt Committee established by the City of
Albuquerque Debt Management Policy and Debt Committee Ordinance, §§
4-6-1 et seq., ROA 1994, and thereafter to the City Council, along with
appropriate implementing legislation. Implementing legislation shall consist of
the following:
      (1)   A resolution of intent to form the proposed TIDD (a) providing that
the tax increment development plan included with the application is approved
pursuant to Section 5-15-4(A) NMSA 1978, subject to the further proceedings of
the City Council in connection with the formation of the proposed TIDD, and (b)
directing publication of notice of a public hearing concerning the formation of
the TIDD shall be held no sooner than 30 days and no later than 60 days after
the adoption of the resolution of intent, in accordance with Sections 5-15-4(E)
and 5-15-6 NMSA 1978; and
      (2)   A resolution ordering that the TIDD be formed and setting the
matter for an election or declaring that the election is waived as provided in
Section 5-15-7 NMSA 1978. This formation resolution shall occur upon completion
of the public hearing referenced above. Final approval of the City Council
shall be conditioned on the City Council's conclusion that all matters
necessary to be completed prior to the formation of the TIDD have been
completed.
   (I)   If the City Council approves an application for formation of a TIDD,
the applicant/developer/landowner and the city staff shall coordinate a
schedule of events for formation of the TIDD including either the setting of an
election for the matter or declaring that the election is waived, and shall
negotiate an appropriate Development Agreement between the city and the
developer/landowner, which Development Agreement shall incorporate the
requirements of any report, recommendations of the city staff relating to such
TIDD, the requirements of this article and any other restrictions, provisions
and agreements required by the city in its discretion. The Development
Agreement shall be subject to approval by the City Council.
   (J)   All applications for the formation of a TIDD shall be submitted to the
city's Chief Administrative Officer on or before January 1 of the calendar year
in which the applicant requests formation of a TIDD. The application, together
with the interdepartmental analysis required in §
4-10-6(A) and the formation resolution required in §
4-10-6(H)(2), shall be submitted to the Council no later than the first
regularly scheduled City Council meeting in April of the year in which the
applicant requests formation of the TIDD. Failure to meet either of these
deadlines shall bar formation of the TIDD during that calendar year.
Notwithstanding the above, the deadlines in this §
4-10-6(J) will not apply to an application that does not seek the dedication of
state gross receipts tax and the financing plan does not contemplate the
issuance of tax increment bonds paid for by state gross receipt taxes; however,
if the deadlines in this §
4-10-6(J) do not apply to an application, all other application procedures set
forth in §§
4-10-1 et seq. ROA 1994 shall remain in effect in order to give the city
adequate time to review the application
(Ord. 36-2006; Am. Ord. 20-2009; Am. Ord._2013-010)
§ 4-10-7 TIDD OPERATIONS AND DEBT FINANCING.
   (A)   In addition to the amounts set forth in §
4-10-6(B), ROA 1994, upon formation of a TIDD the developer/landowner shall
deposit with the TIDD a nonrefundable administrative expense fee in the amount
of $15,000. The administrative expense fee shall be applied by the TIDD to the
costs and expenses incurred in connection with the formation, review of any
feasibility study, election costs, administration, operation and maintenance of
the TIDD or its public improvements. From time to time, upon depletion of the
administrative expense fee, the TIDD may request, and the developer/landowner
shall promptly deposit with the TIDD, additional amounts deemed by the city to
be necessary for the purposes contemplated in this section.
   (B)   In order to provide for the TIDD to be self-supporting for its
administrative, operation and maintenance expenses, and to finance services in
addition to those provided by the city, the city and the TIDD, unless otherwise
agreed, may require the imposition of up to $5.00 per $1,000 of net taxable
value ad valorem tax, not as a tax or charge of the city, but in accordance
with the provisions of Sections 12(A)(11) and 13(A) of the Act, as amended,
upon the TIDD taxable property, for the administration of the TIDD, and the
operation and maintenance of property which is not city-owned infrastructure
otherwise maintained by the city. Failure to impose such tax shall not impose
upon the city any obligations for operations.
   (C)   The amount and structure of debt of a TIDD shall not have a net
negative impact on the debt or financing capabilities of the city, taking into
account the basic purposes and operation of a TIDD as provided in the Act. Any
debt issued shall be in accordance with the provisions of §
4-10-3(H), ROA 1994. The specific terms of each debt financing shall be set
forth in the Development Agreement and shall include, but not be limited to,
the following:
      (1)   The maturities, principal amounts and maximum interest rate on the
bonds;
      (2)   Whether the bonds shall be publicly offered or privately placed;
      (3)   Whether the bonds will be issued, in whole or in part, in book-
entry form;
      (4)   Whether the bonds are subject to prior redemption;
      (5)   Those items listed in §
4-10-7(D) and (E), ROA 1994;
      (6)   The form of all material documents to be used in connection with
the issuance of the bonds, including, but not limited to, the TIDD Board bond
resolution and prior to the actual issuance, the bond indenture; and
      (7)   Such other additional terms and provisions as may be determined
necessary for inclusion by city staff.
   (D)   Gross receipts tax increment bonds shall be payable from the
authorized gross receipts tax increment from the gross receipts taxes generated
from taxable activities located within the TIDD. An applicant for gross
receipts tax revenue bonds shall describe in each financial feasibility study
required in §
4-10-5(E), ROA 1994, the following:
      (1)   The amount and timing of TIDD gross receipts tax increment bonds to
be issued.
      (2)   The expected production of gross receipts tax increment within the
TIDD, and its relationship to anticipated absorption of developed real
property.
      (3)   The sources of gross receipts taxes or portions thereof to be
pledged to the repayment of the gross receipts tax increment bonds.
      (4)   Whether the bonds shall be publicly offered or privately placed.
Publicly offered bonds shall either (i) be rated (either on their own merits or
by use of appropriate credit enhancement) in one of the four highest investment
grade ratings from Standard & Poor's Ratings Group, Moody's Investors Service,
Inc., Fitch Ratings, or other nationally recognized bond-rating services, or
(ii) be issued in connection with a transaction which meets all of the
following criteria: (a) the minimum equity contribution, excluding real
property, of the developer is at least 20% of the estimated initial cost of the
project; and (b) the developer and the TIDD shall enter into an appropriate
contribution agreement, which may require a letter of credit or other third-
party guarantee of the bonds by the developer.
   Privately placed bonds need not be rated; however, the purchasers of such
bonds must be "qualified institutional buyers" (as such term is defined in Rule
144A of the Securities Exchange Commission) and must agree not to resell the
bonds except to "qualified institutional buyers" or "accredited investors", as
such terms are defined by the SEC, in a private placement.
   If appropriate, the applicant shall enter into a "Continuing Disclosure
Undertaking" (as required by Rule 15c2-12 of the Securities Exchange
Commission) relating to the issuance of the bonds.
   (E)   Property tax increment bonds shall be payable from the authorized
property tax increment from taxable property located within the TIDD.
Applicants for property tax increment bonds shall describe in each financial
feasibility study as required by §
4-10-5(E), ROA 1994, the following:
      (1)   The amount and timing of TIDD property tax increment bonds to be
issued.
      (2)   The expected market absorption of development within the TIDD.
      (3)   The sources of the property taxes or portions thereof to be pledged
to the repayment of the property tax increment bonds.
   (4)   Whether the bonds shall be publicly offered or privately placed.
Publicly offered bonds shall either (i) be rated (either on their own merits or
by use of appropriate credit enhancement) in one of the four highest investment
grade ratings from Standard & Poor's Ratings Group, Moody's Investors Service,
Inc., Fitch Ratings, or other nationally recognized bond-rating services, or
(ii) be issued in connection with a transaction which meets all of the
following criteria: (a) the minimum equity contribution, excluding real
property, of the developer is at least 20% of the estimated initial cost of the
project; and (b) the developer and the TIDD shall enter into an appropriate
contribution agreement, which may require a letter of credit or other third-
party guarantee of the bonds by the developer.
   Privately placed bonds need not be rated; however, the purchasers of such
bonds must be "qualified institutional buyers" (as such term is defined in Rule
144A of the Securities Exchange Commission) and must agree not to resell the
bonds except to "qualified institutional buyers" or "accredited investors", as
such terms are defined by the SEC, in a private placement.
   If appropriate, the applicant shall enter into a "Continuing Disclosure
Undertaking" (as required by Rule 15c2-12 of the Securities Exchange
Commission) relating to the issuance of the bonds.
   (F)   Unless otherwise determined by the city, the city shall retain its own
counsel to advise it in connection with the formation of a TIDD and all
activities taken by a TIDD formed by the city, the cost of which shall be paid
by the TIDD and the city's bond counsel shall be bond counsel for the issuance
of TIDD bonds. From time to time the city may request from bond counsel such
opinions as it deems necessary in connection with the formation and activities
of the TIDD.
(Ord. 36-2006)
§ 4-10-8 FINANCIAL CONSIDERATIONS.
   (A)   If allowed by law (including any applicable federal laws relating to
the tax free status of bonds), all bond issues shall include a debt service
reserve fund in an amount acceptable to the TIDD Board.
   (B)   Until the improvements are accepted by the city and all warranty
periods have expired, the developer/landowner shall be solely responsible for
maintaining the premises upon which the improvements are being constructed in a
safe condition. The applicant or the developer/landowner (or such other third
party acceptable to the city and the TIDD), shall indemnify the city and the
TIDD and their agents and employees and shall hold the city and the TIDD and
their agents, officers and employees harmless for, from and against any and all
liabilities, claims, costs and expenses, including attorneys' fees, incurred in
any challenge or proceeding relevant to the formation, operation,
administration of the TIDD, the offer and sale of TIDD bonds, the levying by
the TIDD of any property tax or charge and the operation and maintenance of
public infrastructure owned by the TIDD.
   (C)   Unless otherwise provided to the city pursuant to other requirements
prior to TIDD financing and acquisition by the TIDD or city, the TIDD and city
shall require an independent environmental report or assessment of any real
property which shall be dedicated to or otherwise owned, leased or operated by
the city or the TIDD and a proposed form of indemnity agreement with respect to
all environmental liability.
   (D)   Refinancings and refundings of bonds issued on behalf of a TIDD shall
be considered utilizing the same criteria set forth in this article and in
particular §4-10-7(D) and (E), ROA 1994. Refinancings and refundings shall be
expected to either (i) generate industry accepted interest rate savings; (ii)
restructure payment of principal or (iii) eliminate burdensome covenants. If
the refinancing or refunding is intended to address a material adverse change
affecting the financial stability of the bonds or the intent of the original
Development Agreement, the refinancings and refundings shall be submitted to
the City Council for approval. Any refinancing or refunding shall be subject to
the final review and approval of the TIDD Board.
   (E)   The applicant shall be responsible for all costs and expenses incurred
in connection with proposed changes to a TIDD application after the city has
begun its review process pursuant to this article.
(Ord. 36-2006)
ARTICLE 11: RENEWABLE ENERGY FINANCING DISTRICT
Section
   
4-11-1   Title
   
4-11-2   Definitions
   
4-11-3   Formation of district
   
4-11-4   Inclusion of property within district
   
4-11-5   Agreement to include real property within district
   
4-11-6   Eligible renewable energy improvements
   
4-11-7   Special assessments; assessment resolution
   
4-11-8   Calculation and collection of special assessments
   
4-11-9   Standards for renewable energy improvements
   
4-11-10   Priority of lien created
   
4-11-11   Special assessment bonds
   
4-11-12   Direct lender financing of improvements
   
4-11-13   District governance and administration
§ 4-11-1 TITLE.
   This article may be referred to as the Renewable Energy Financing District
Ordinance.
(Ord._2018-028)
§ 4-11-2 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this article, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ACT.  The Renewable Energy Financing District Act, NMSA § 5-18-1 et seq.
   DISTRICT.  The Albuquerque Renewable Energy Financing District, formed
pursuant to Ord._2018-028.
   OWNER or PROPERTY OWNER. The person who is listed as the owner of real
property in the district on the current property tax assessment roll, and who
is in fact the legal owner of said real property.
   RENEWABLE ENERGY IMPROVEMENT. An eligible photovoltaic, solar thermal,
battery storage, geothermal or wind energy system permanently installed on real
property.
(Ord._2018-028)
§ 4-11-3 FORMATION OF DISTRICT.
   COMMERCIAL PROPERTY means all privately-owned property that is
nonresidential within the meaning of NMSA § 7-35-2(G), and also residential
property that is an apartment house under §
14-3-1-4 of Albuquerque ordinances with ten or more units, but shall not
include residential property that is a condominium.
   A renewable energy financing district, to be known as the Albuquerque
Renewable Energy Financing District, is formed in the City of Albuquerque with
the powers provided for such a district in the Act, except as specifically
limited by this article.
   The District shall serve the purpose of encouraging, accommodating and
financing renewable energy improvements pursuant to the Act and this article.
(Ord. 2018-028)
§ 4-11-4 INCLUSION OF PROPERTY WITHIN DISTRICT.
   The District shall include only commercial property located within the city
for which the owner thereof has submitted an application to the District and
has agreed to the inclusion of such real property in the District, and for
which the owner has submitted documentation, in a format approved by the
District, evidencing the written consent of each person holding a first
mortgage lien on the property. An owner may apply for and enter into agreements
for the inclusion of real property, as provided in §
4-11-4. Inclusion of property in the District may occur at any time subsequent
to the formation of the district. Real property shall be included in and
assessed by the District as described in §
4-11-6.
(Ord._2018-028)
§ 4-11-5 AGREEMENT TO INCLUDE REAL PROPERTY WITHIN DISTRICT.
   An owner wishing to have real property included in the District shall submit
an agreement for the inclusion of real property in the District, to the
District.
   (A)   Application. The District shall accept as an application for inclusion
of real property in the District, a form of Agreement to be established by the
district. Copies of the agreement to include real property within the District
may be obtained from the offices of the District, or as otherwise specified by
the District. Completed agreements, in the form specified by the District,
shall be submitted to the District at such location as the District may specify
from time to time. The District may provide for agreements to be submitted or
acknowledged by electronic means.
   (B)   Agreement. To include real property within the District, each owner
must submit an Agreement in a form prescribed by the District from time to
time, whereby such owner shall agree to the following:
      (1)   Inclusion of real property within the District.
      (2)   Imposition of a special assessment on real property to pay for the
renewable energy improvements (including any lease thereof) and related costs,
including installation, financing, administrative costs, program fees, and
capitalized interest.
      (3)   Recording of the lien of the special assessment upon the real
property to be included in the District.
      (4)   Waiver of any claims against the city, the District, and their
agents arising from inclusion of real property within the District,
(Ord._2018-028)
§ 4-11-6 ELIGIBLE RENEWABLE ENERGY IMPROVEMENTS.
   (A)   The following types of renewable energy improvements (including any
lease thereof) are eligible for financing under the Act and ordinance when
permanently installed on real property within the District:
      (1)   Photovoltaic systems;
      (2)   Solar thermal systems;
      (3)   Battery storage;
      (4)   Geothermal systems; and
      (5)   Wind energy systems.
   The financed systems may include the cost of labor, materials, accessories,
framing, and items necessary or incidental to the installation of the systems.
   (B)   The costs of energy efficiency improvements (including any lease
thereof) that are permanently installed on or affixed to property, which are
designed to reduce energy consumption, or energy related operating costs, and
installed or affixed to a property in conjunction with an eligible renewable
energy improvement for the purpose of making the renewable energy improvement
more cost effective, shall be eligible for financing through the District as
part of the costs of the renewable energy improvement, so long as the costs of
all improvements ancillary to the renewable energy improvement shall not exceed
49% of the total amount financed. The District may promulgate policies to
further identify eligible energy efficiency improvements.
   (C)   The District shall only finance renewable energy improvements
(including any lease thereof) for which the reasonably estimated economic
benefits, including, but not limited to, energy cost savings, maintenance cost
savings, and other property operating savings expected from the improvements,
including efficiency improvements pursuant to subsection
4-11-6(B), during the financing period, is equal to or greater than the
incremental principal cost of the improvement.
(Ord._2018-028)
§ 4-11-7 SPECIAL ASSESSMENTS; ASSESSMENT RESOLUTION.
   (A)   Inclusion of real property in the District will result in the
imposition of special assessments on such real property in amounts necessary to
pay the costs of permanently installing the approved renewable energy
improvements and ancillary costs, including permit and inspection fees, and
other ancillary costs required for an eligible improvement, the costs of
financing, interest, and administrative fees charged by the District, the city,
or their agents. The costs of such improvements will be amortized over a period
of time as determined by the District, not to exceed a maximum term of 20
years.
   (B)   At the request or election of the owner, the amount of the special
assessment may be less than the total cost for the renewable energy
improvements, as determined pursuant to subsection (A) of this section;
however, the renewable energy improvements shall still be required to meet all
of the relevant criteria in this article based on the total system costs. The
District shall not perfect a special assessment for a renewable energy
improvement that is requested to be partially financed and paid for by a means
other than a special assessment until it receives a certification that the
renewable energy improvements have been fully constructed and installed.
   (C)   Each owner shall acknowledge and consent to the assessment amount and
amortization schedule as a condition of inclusion of the real property in the
District.
   (D)   Following acknowledgement and consent by the owner of the real
property to be included in the District and satisfaction of the other
requirements of the Act, this article, and any policies or procedures
promulgated by the District, the District Board shall adopt a resolution that
includes the real property in the District and imposes the special assessment
(the "Assessment Resolution"). An Assessment Resolution may include one or
multiple parcels with separate ownership interests. That an Assessment
Resolution may be enacted subsequent to the filing of a Special Assessment lien
shall not invalidate such lien.
(Ord._2018-028)
§ 4-11-8 CALCULATION AND COLLECTION OF SPECIAL ASSESSMENTS.
   The amount of Special Assessments shall be calculated pursuant to §
4-11-7. District special assessments which have been financed by direct
financing shall be collected by the approved financing institution providing
such financing, in accordance with the terms of the financing agreement agreed
to by the property owner, and subject to any policies and procedures
established by the District Board. Special assessments may be prepaid pursuant
to procedures established by the District Board and identified in the
Assessment Resolutions.
(Ord._2018-028)
§ 4-11-9 STANDARDS FOR RENEWABLE ENERGY IMPROVEMENTS.
   The District Board shall set standards and requirements for the permanent
installation of renewable energy improvements on real property within the
District. Such standards and requirements shall be identified in a subsequent
resolution of the District Board and shall, at minimum, include compliance with
otherwise applicable state and local permitting requirements.
(Ord._2018-028)
§ 4-11-10 PRIORITY OF LIEN CREATED.
   (A)   A special assessment shall constitute a lien on the property, which
shall be effective during the period in which the assessment is imposed and
shall have priority over all other liens except liens for ad valorem property
taxes; provided that only the delinquent portion of such special assessment
shall have priority to liens for a first lien mortgage, as provided in §
4-11-10(B).
   (B)   In the event a scheduled payment of the special assessment is not paid
when due, the amount of the scheduled payment, late fees, and collection costs
for the payment, and only those amounts, shall have priority over a first lien
mortgage. Payment of an obligation created under the Renewable Energy Financing
District Act shall not accelerate for any reason, including late payments, and
the property shall not be subject to an enforceable accelerated claim or lien
superior to a first lien mortgage for the any portion of the obligation not yet
scheduled to be due and payable, except as provided in §
4-11-10(C). In the event of a foreclosure, only the amount of due and unpaid
scheduled payments, late fees, and collection costs for the due and unpaid
payment shall have priority, and the remaining balance of the special
assessment with all remaining interest and fees shall remain to be paid by
future assessments until paid in full. Future payment obligations associated
with a renewable energy improvement special assessment shall survive
foreclosure by a first lien holder or junior lien holder if the proceeds from
such foreclosure do not satisfy such future obligations. The amount of the
scheduled payment may be changed to provide for full collection of all amounts
within the term originally agreed upon.
   (C)   Notwithstanding anything to the contrary in §
4-11-10(A) and (B), in the event that a property encumbered by a special
assessment is condemned in whole or part for public purposes, or be
substantially damaged or destroyed by fire or other casualty, or should the
renewable energy improvements be substantially damaged or destroyed by fire or
other casualty, the remaining unpaid balance of the special assessment,
including interest accrued to date, shall be due and payable.
   (D)   There shall be no terms or conditions in the special assessment that
limit the right of the owner to transfer property encumbered by a special
assessment; provided, however, that property shall remain encumbered by the
special assessment until such time as the obligation related to the special
assessment is paid in full.
(Ord._2018-028)
§ 4-11-11 SPECIAL ASSESSMENT BONDS.
   (A)   The District may obtain funds to finance eligible improvements by
means of borrowing from the city or from a private lender, or through the
issuance of bonds. The District may also provide for direct private financing
to finance eligible improvements, pursuant to §
4-11-12.
   (B)   Should the District issue bonds, such issuance shall be in accordance
with the relevant provisions of the Act and state law. No holder of special
assessment bonds issued pursuant to the Act or the city's ordinance may compel
any exercise of the taxing power of the District or the city to pay the bonds
or the interest on the bonds. Any special assessment bonds issued pursuant to
the Act are not a debt or general obligation of the city, nor is the payment of
special assessment bonds enforceable out of any money other than the revenue
pledged to the payment of the bonds.
(Ord._2018-028)
§ 4-11-12 DIRECT LENDER FINANCING OF IMPROVEMENTS.
   The District may provide for direct private financing to property owners for
the purpose of financing eligible renewable energy improvements, as follows.
   (A)   Only entities which are certified by the financial institutions
division of the regulation and licensing department as a solar energy
improvement financing institutions shall be eligible to participate as direct
lenders under this §
4-11-12.
   (B)   An entity wishing to participate as a lender under this §
4-11-12 shall execute an agreement with the District specifying the procedures
by which the parties shall transfer any funds which are to be transferred
pursuant to the Ordinance. The agreement shall specify that neither the
District nor the city is liable in any way for the debt of the property owner,
neither is a third party obligor and neither is pledging or lending its credit
to the owner or the lender.
   (C)   If the District shall provide for direct private financing, an owner's
application and agreement for property to be included in a special assessment
shall specify the private entity lender, and all payment terms.
   (D)   Upon the District's approval of an application and agreement for a
special assessment with private financing and the lender's payment of any
applicable administrative fees to the District, the lender shall be authorized
to release funds to the property owner or the vendor of the eligible
improvements. Prior to the release of funds, the lender or District shall cause
to be filed a special assessment lien for the benefit of the financing entity
and District. Such lien shall be as otherwise provided in this article, and
shall be released upon the owner's repayment of all amounts financed, and any
additional interest or charges due to late payments. That the associated
special assessment resolution may be enacted subsequent to the filing of a
special assessment lien shall not invalidate such lien.
   (E)   The District shall promptly transfer monies received from an owner's
payments of a special assessment which are due to a private lender to that
private lender.
(Ord._2018-028)
§ 4-11-13 DISTRICT GOVERNANCE AND ADMINISTRATION.
   (A)   The District Board shall initially be the City Council.
   (B)   The District shall promulgate procedures for its operations, and those
policies expressly delegated to it in this article.
   (C)   The District may engage the services of a private entity to administer
its functions under the supervision of the District Board, with expenses of
administration to be a cost recovered through fees included in the special
assessments.
(Ord._2018-028)
ARTICLE 12: MARIJUANA EQUITY AND COMMUNITY REINVESTMENT FUND
Section
   
4-12-1   Short title
   
4-12-2   Definitions
   
4-12-3   Permanent Marijuana Equity and Community Reinvestment Fund
   
4-12-4   Dedication
§ 4-12-1 SHORT TITLE.
   This article may be referred to as the Albuquerque Marijuana Equity and
Community Reinvestment Fund Ordinance.
(Ord. 2023-027)
§ 4-12-2 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this article, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   COMMUNITY NEEDS AND SUPPORT . Supplemental support directed to vulnerable
communities and communities of interest.
   MARIJUANA . Cannabis flower and cannabis extracts, as defined in the New
Mexico Cannabis Regulation Act, NMSA § 26-2C-2(B).
   MARIJUANA SOCIAL EQUITY PROGRAM . Activities related to the use of marijuana
taxes to benefit those populations most adversely impacted by the historical
criminalization of marijuana.
   RECREATIONAL MARIJUANA TAX REVENUE . Includes all taxes and revenue
collected by or deposited to the City in connection with excise taxes from
recreational marijuana sales, except that recreational marijuana licensing fees
shall not be considered recreational marijuana tax revenue.
   VULNERABLE COMMUNITY . A community of interest that has historically been
targeted or victimized by the war on drugs.
(Ord. 2023-027)
§ 4-12-3 PERMANENT MARIJUANA EQUITY AND COMMUNITY REINVESTMENT FUND.
   (A)   The City shall establish a Marijuana Social Equity and Community
Reinvestment Fund wherein all recreational marijuana tax revenue shall be
deposited at least once per annum;
   (B)   The Department of Finance and Administrative Services shall oversee
and administer the Marijuana Equity and Community Reinvestment Fund,
coordinating with the Office of Equity and Inclusion to facilitate related
programs to ensure equitable community reinvestment and access.
   (C)   The Office of Equity and Inclusion shall develop and maintain a
process for broadly representative public input into the activities of the
Marijana Equity and Community Reinvestment Fund programs.
(Ord. 2023-027)
§ 4-12-4 DEDICATION.
   The Marijuana Equity and Community Reinvestment Fund may be used for the
administration and provision of any or all of the following purposes and
related programs:
   (A)   Evidence-based drug education, awareness, and prevention programs for
youth;
   (B)   Evidence-based substance use treatment for youth, including but not
limited to inpatient detoxification;
   (C)   Recovery Housing and supportive aftercare;
   (D)   Supplemental income programs;
   (E)   Workforce development and job training;
   (F)   Technical assistance for small marijuana business owners in impacted
communities;
   (G)   Programs for people re-entering society after incarceration;
   (H)   Programs operated by Equity and Inclusion for the benefit of
populations disproportionately impacted by the historical criminalization of
marijuana.
(Ord. 2023-027)
CHAPTER 5: CITY PROPERTY,
PURCHASES AND SALES
   Article
      
1:   
CITY PROPERTY
      
2:   
REAL PROPERTY TRANSACTIONS
      
3:   
LIFE CYCLE COST ANALYSES
      
4:   
UNCLAIMED PERSONAL PROPERTY
      
5:   
PUBLIC PURCHASES
      
6:   
MINORITY AND WOMEN'S BUSINESS ENTERPRISES
      
7:   
DEBARMENT
      
8:   
OPEN SPACE LANDS AND REGIONAL PRESERVES
      
9:   
DETENTION CENTER INMATE COPAYMENTS
      
10:   
SMALL WIRELESS FACILITIES
ARTICLE 1: CITY PROPERTY
Section
   
5-1-1   Finding of fact
   
5-1-2   Duties of the mayor; permits for use
   
5-1-3   Duties of mayor
   
5-1-4   Other provisions ­ effect
§ 5-1-1 FINDING OF FACT.
   (A)   The City Council finds that the city has acquired and already owns
parcels of land abutting or adjoining private property, city property or
streets, which parcels are not currently used for vehicular traffic or for foot
traffic and may from time to time have incidental uses.
   (B)   Such acquisition is consistent with good planning since it provides
space for enlarged traffic facilities, utility facilities and other
installations which will be required as needs develop. Acquisition by the city
permits owners of abutting properties to plan, design and use their properties
economically and avoids the costs of destruction, razing and rearrangement of
facilities from time to time. Maintenance of such property in a safe condition,
free of weeds and trash is a responsibility of the city expensive to discharge
and difficult to supervise and will so continue until the properties involved
are committed to more active public use.
('74 Code, § 5-1-1) (Ord. 13-1966)
§ 5-1-2 DUTIES OF THE MAYOR; PERMITS FOR USE.
   Whenever the Mayor determines that property so held is not then used for
such purposes he is authorized to permit the use of such land and parcels
thereof for surface parking areas and other uses if such areas can be applied
to such uses without impairment of public interests. Such permits may be
granted to the occupants, tenants or owners of private property abutting
thereto provided:
   (A)   Such permittees agree to indemnify and hold the city, its Councillors,
officers, agents and employees harmless from liability arising out of the
permittee's use of the property;
   (B)   They agree to restore the property to its original condition on demand
or at the city's option to relinquish to the city, any surfacing or other
improvements made thereon;
   (C)   They agree that there shall be no discrimination in the use of such
land by any person on account of his race, color, creed, or national origin.
Such permits shall be temporary in nature and shall contain provisions for
termination without cause in not more than 90 days upon notice by the Mayor and
may contain other provisions which the Mayor in his discretion may require
relative to the lighting, surfacing, drainage and other factors which affect
public safety and the use of the lands involved;
   (D)   They pay to the city a fee determined by the Mayor to defer the
administrative costs in considering and giving the permit and agree to pay
reasonable rental charges from time to time.
('74 Code, § 5-1-2) (Ord. 13-1966)
§ 5-1-3 DUTIES OF MAYOR.
   (A)   Courtesy benches. The Mayor may permit the installation of courtesy
benches at convenient locations along city streets or ways on city property
where the installation will not inconvenience the movement of vehicular or foot
traffic. In granting the permit for such purposes the Mayor may impose
reasonable requirements for the construction, installation, maintenance, use
and removal of such benches including the following:
      (1)   That the benches be built according to standards of safety and
according to plans first submitted to and approved by the Department of Public
Works and the Transit Department.
      (2)   That the permittee undertake to maintain the benches so installed
for a reasonable period of time to be specified in the permit.
      (3)   That the permittee be required to provide indemnification to the
city, its officers, agents and employees or insurance in which the city is
named insured to protect the city and its Councillors, officers, agents and
employees against liability arising out of the construction, maintenance and
use of such courtesy benches.
      (4)   Permits may allow the use of the benches and related shelter
structures, if any, for restrained public advertising limited solely to
informing the public that it is a city bus stop.
      (5)   Ownership of the installations on terms specified in the permit
shall be provided.
('74 Code, § 5-1-3) (Ord. 13-1966; Am. Ord. 39-1991)
   (B)   Transit benches and transit shelters. The Mayor may provide for or
contract for the installation of transit benches and transit shelters along
city streets or city right-of-way. The Mayor may also provide for or contract
for advertising services on transit shelters. Any contract for advertising
services on transit shelters shall be for a maximum term of five years with an
option to renew the contract for a second term of five years upon the
determination of the city that the services were satisfactory and upon a
determination of the City Council that the policy of allowing advertising on
transit shelters should be continued. No non-public advertising will be allowed
on transit benches. Any contract for installation of transit benches and
transit shelters shall require that they be built according to standards of
safety and that the plans be submitted to and approved by the City Transit
Department and the City Design Review Committee of the Public Works Department.
The Mayor shall require that any contract provide that effective either upon
the installation of the improvement or upon the expiration of the contract the
city shall be the owner of the improvement and shall be entitled to receive a
bill of sale to the improvement.
   (C)   Other uses. The Mayor may authorize the temporary incidental use of
city lands for the foregoing and for other purposes where he finds the proposed
use will not conflict with the principal purposes for which the lands were
acquired and will be useful to a substantial segment of the general public. All
such permits shall be temporary in nature, contain provisions for prohibiting
discrimination in the use of such facilities based upon race, color, creed, or
national origin, shall include reasonable charges imposed by the Mayor for the
purpose of protecting the public health and safety by assuring the condition of
the premises, and shall contain provisions for the termination of the same on
notice by the Mayor within a reasonable time. Charges for the permits shall be
determined by the Mayor on the basis of administrative costs involved and
reasonable value to the permittee and he shall report at regular intervals to
the City Council by appropriate summary the licenses or permits issued during
the preceding interval indicating the name of the person to whom issued and the
nature of the permit, and the consideration received. ('74 Code, § 5-1-4) (Ord.
13-1966; Am. Ord. 41-2001)
§ 5-1-4 OTHER PROVISIONS ­ EFFECT.
   This article does not dispense with provisions of the Integrated Development
Ordinance, building regulations, setback requirements, future street lines or
any other requirement having general application to the property affected, and
no permit may be issued which is contrary thereto.
('74 Code, § 5-1-5) (Ord. 13-1966; Am. Ord._2017-025)
ARTICLE 2: REAL PROPERTY TRANSACTIONS
Section
   
5-2-1   Disposal of real property not essential for a municipal purpose
   
5-2-2   Determination that real property is not essential for a municipal
purpose
   
5-2-3   Real property not essential for a municipal purpose to be properly
zoned prior to sale
   
5-2-4   Leasing of real property owned by the city
   
5-2-5   Acquisition of real property
   
5-2-6   Leasing of real property by the city
   
5-2-7   Home and business property protection
§ 5-2-1 DISPOSAL OF REAL PROPERTY NOT ESSENTIAL FOR A MUNICIPAL PURPOSE.
   Prior to the sale, exchange, or donation of real property belonging to the
city, such real property shall be determined to be not essential for a
municipal purpose as provided herein. After such a determination has been made,
the real property may be disposed of by the Mayor in the following manner:
   (A)   Prior to disposal of real property, the Mayor shall cause an appraisal
to be made by the Property Management Division or a qualified private
appraiser. No real property shall be sold or exchanged for less than 90% of its
appraised value.
   (B)   Real property having a value of not more than $500 may be sold for
cash at a public or private exchange without notice.
   (C)   Real property having a value of more than $500 may be:
      (1)   Sold at a public or private sale to the highest bidder meeting the
published terms and conditions of the sale after publishing a notice of such
sale in a local newspaper of general circulation once each week for two
consecutive weeks prior to the sale.
      (2)   Exchange at a public or private exchange after publishing a notice
of such exchange in a local newspaper of general circulation once each week for
two consecutive weeks prior to the exchange.
   (D)   Real property of any value may be sold to, exchanged with or donated
to the state, any of its political subdivisions or to the Federal government
after a determination by the Mayor or Council as provided herein that such
sale, exchange or donation is in the best interests of the city.
   (E)   Real property acquired by the city through lien or mortgage
foreclosure may not in the discretion of the Mayor or his designated
representative be subject to this article in the event the sale of the property
is to the foreclosure owner of same, and it is or was the owner's residence,
and provided further than any such sale shall be for not less than the
principal and interest due.
   (F)   Contracts for disposal of city real property pursuant to divisions (C)
and (D) of this section shall be submitted to the Council by the Mayor at the
first regularly scheduled Council meeting after their execution when the value
of the real property is more than $50,000. Procedure shall be as follows:
      (1)   All contracts which are submitted to the Council in accordance with
the requirements of this section shall be supported by the current appraisal
relied upon to determine the value of the city property, the Council's
determination that the property is not essential for a municipal purpose, and a
description of the disposal process and the other offers received.
      (2)   The Council may approve, take no action or disapprove the contract.
      (3)   If the Council disapproves by majority vote of the members present
and voting, the contract shall be void.
      (4)   The Mayor may withdraw the contract at any time from the Council or
may present revisions thereof. In the event of withdrawal, the contract shall
be a nullity. In the event of revision, the provisions of this section shall
apply to the same extent as if a new contract were being submitted.
('74 Code, §5-3-1) (Ord. 3-1975; Am. Ord. 36-1976; Am. Ord. 59-1979; Am. Ord.
23-1983; Am. Ord. 22-2007)
§ 5-2-2 DETERMINATION THAT REAL PROPERTY IS NOT ESSENTIAL FOR A MUNICIPAL
PURPOSE.
   (A)   Administrative Real Property Review Board. Prior to making the
determination that a piece of real property is not essential for a municipal
purpose, the Administrative Real Property Review Board shall analyze said
property and make a recommendation regarding whether the property is essential
for a municipal purpose to the person who shall make the determination, as
provided for in this article. The Administrative Real Property Review Board
shall be composed of the Director of the Department of Finance and Management
or his designated representative, the Property Manager, the City Attorney or
his designated representative, the Director of the Planning Department or his
designated representative and, if appropriate, a representative of the
department by which the property in question was to have been used. The Review
Board shall consider the adopted Albuquerque/Bernalillo County Comprehensive
Plan and related master plans and expected city development patterns as a basis
for their recommendation. The Review Board shall transmit a written analysis
with their recommendation.
   (B)   For real property owned by the city having a value of not more than
$10,000, the determination that the real property is not essential for a
municipal purpose shall be made by the Mayor.
   (C)   For real property owned by the city having a value of more than
$10,000, the determination that the real property is not essential for a
municipal purpose shall be made by the Council.
('74 Code, § 5-3-2) (Ord. 3-1975; Am. Ord. 36-1976)
§ 5-2-3 REAL PROPERTY NOT ESSENTIAL FOR A MUNICIPAL PURPOSE TO BE PROPERLY
ZONED PRIOR TO SALE.
   After real property belonging to the city has been determined not essential
for a municipal purpose and prior to its appraisal and disposal, the Planning
Department shall review its zoning to determine that the zoning is appropriate
in terms of the city's master plan, in particular the master plan documents
which comprise the Albuquerque/Bernalillo County Comprehensive Plan, and the
potential use of the property. If the Planning Department determines that the
zoning is appropriate, it shall so notify the Mayor. If the Planning Department
determines that the zoning is not appropriate, it shall initiate a zone change
to an appropriate zone, and it shall notify the Mayor of the final action taken
on this request. No real property shall be appraised or disposed of until the
Planning Department has notified the Mayor that it is appropriately zoned or
until the Planning Department has notified the Mayor of final action on its
request for a zone change.
('74 Code, § 5-3-3) (Ord. 36-1976)
§ 5-2-4 LEASING OF REAL PROPERTY OWNED BY THE CITY.
   (A)   Leases or other conveyances for a specified term of an interest in
real property owned by the city or amendments to such leases or other
conveyances shall be submitted to the Council by the Mayor after negotiation or
prior to bidding when:
      (1)   The term of the lease or other conveyance is proposed to be in
excess of two years. For the purposes of this division, TERM OF CONVEYANCE
shall include not only the initial term but also any option to renew where the
option is at the sole discretion of the lessee; or
      (2)   The term of the lease or other conveyance is proposed to be in
excess of one month and the income or other consideration to be received by the
city is proposed to be in excess of $500 per month. For purposes of this
section, an easement granted to a utility operating under a franchise granted
by the city shall not be considered as a lease or other conveyance.
   (B)   All proposals which are submitted to the Council in accordance with
the requirements of this section shall be supported by a message setting out
the circumstances, benefits, responsibilities and advantages relative thereto.
   (C)   The Council may approve, take no action or disapprove the proposal.
   (D)   If the Council disapproved by majority vote of the members present and
voting, the proposal may not be entered into.
   (E)   The Mayor may withdraw the proposal at any time from the Council and
may present revisions thereof. In the event of withdrawal, the proposed lease
or other such conveyance shall be a nullity. In the event of revision, the
provisions of this section shall apply to the same extent as if a new proposal
were being submitted.
('74 Code, § 5-3-4) (Ord. 71-1976; Am. Ord. 9-1987; Am. Ord. 58-1990; Am. Ord.
22-2007)
§ 5-2-5 ACQUISITION OF REAL PROPERTY.
   (A)   The Mayor is authorized to enter into contracts for the acquisition of
any interest in real property, subject to the approval of the Council as
outlined herein. Except in emergencies, the Mayor shall enter into such
contracts only when the Council has authorized purchase of the specific parcel
or a parcel of its type and location category; such Council authorization is
evidenced by the fact that:
      (1)   Sufficient money, designated for acquisition of the property, has
been previously appropriated by the Council; or
      (2)   Acquisition of such property is specified in the current two-year
Capital Improvements Budget; or
      (3)   The city-owned property to be utilized as consideration in an
exchange has previously been declared nonessential for municipal purposes,
pursuant to §§
5-2-1 and
5-2-2, and the Council resolution declaring the property nonessential
authorized the city property to be used as consideration to acquire the
specific parcel or a parcel of its type and location category.
   (B)   The contracts, including those accomplishing trades, shall be
submitted to the Council by the Mayor at the first regularly scheduled Council
meeting after their execution when:
      (1)   The value of the real property is more than $50,000; and
      (2)   Sufficient money to be used to acquire the real property has not
been previously appropriated by the Council.
   (C)   All contracts which are submitted to the Council in accordance with
the requirements of this section shall be supported by a message setting out
the circumstances, benefits, responsibilities and advantages relative thereto.
   (D)   The Council may approve, take no action or disapprove the contract.
   (E)   If the Council disapproves by majority vote of the members present and
voting, the contract shall be void.
   (F)   The Mayor may withdraw the contract at any time from the Council or
may present revisions thereof. In the event of withdrawal, the contract shall
be a nullity. In the event of revision, the provisions of this section shall
apply to the same extent as if a new contract were being submitted.
   (G)   Open Space Acquisitions. The Mayor may from time to time, or shall
upon request of the Council, issue solicitations seeking competitive offers to
sell the properties on the Council-approved city open space priority
acquisition list.
('74 Code, § 5-3-5) (Ord. 32-1980; Am. Ord. 9-1983; Am. Ord. 22-2007; Am. Ord.
2016-008)
§ 5-2-6 LEASING OF REAL PROPERTY BY THE CITY.
   (A)   Leases or other conveyances, except construction and utility
easements, for a specified term of an interest in real property to the city or
amendments to such leases or other conveyances shall be submitted to the
Council by the Mayor after negotiation when the term of the lease or other
conveyance is proposed to be in excess of six months and the income or other
consideration to be paid by the city is proposed to be in excess of $500 per
month.
   (B)   All proposals which are submitted to the Council in accordance with
the requirements of this section shall be supported by a message setting out
the circumstances, benefits, responsibilities and advantages relative thereto.
   (C)   The Council may approve, take no action or disapprove the proposal.
   (D)   If the Council disapproves by a majority vote of the members present
and voting, the proposal may not be entered into.
   (E)   The Mayor may withdraw the proposal at any time from the Council and
may present revisions thereof. In the event of withdrawal, the proposed lease
or other such conveyance shall be a nullity. In the event of revision, the
provisions of this section shall apply to the same extent as if a new proposal
were being submitted.
('74 Code, § 5-3-6) (Ord. 27-1990; Am. Ord. 22-2007)
§ 5-2-7 HOME AND BUSINESS PROPERTY PROTECTION.
   (A)   Title. This section shall be entitled the Home and Business Property
Protection Ordinance.
   (B)   Findings. The Council finds that:
      (1)   In the 2005 decision entitled Kelo, et al. vs. City of New London,
Connecticut, et al., 545 U.S. ___ (2005), the United States Supreme Court
upheld the taking of private property for uses that would promote job growth
and increase tax revenues.
      (2)   While the revitalization of urban areas, the elimination of blight,
and economic development are laudable goals, a municipality's actions to
achieve these goals should not result in taking occupied homes and property
occupied by a business from its citizens.
      (3)   The Kelo case expanded the purpose of eminent domain beyond the
purposes contemplated by the State Metropolitan Redevelopment Code, the State
Eminent Domain Code, and the city's Metropolitan Redevelopment Ordinance.
      (4)   The Council will not support the use of its powers of eminent
domain to take an occupied residence or property occupied by a business that is
not blighted or a public nuisance for a purpose that is justified only by
"economic development."
   (C)   Council approval required. Any eminent domain action initiated by the
city justified only by economic development that would result in the total
taking of an occupied residential property, or property occupied by a business,
under the Fifth Amendment of the United States Constitution and state law must
be approved by the City Council prior to its initiation.
   (D)   Conditions for approval. The Council shall not approve a taking of an
occupied residence or property occupied by a business unless it first finds
that the eminent domain action is for a public purpose as set forth in the
State Metropolitan Redevelopment Code or the State Eminent Domain Code.
(Ord. 60-2005; Am. Ord. 11-2006)
ARTICLE 3: LIFE CYCLE COST ANALYSES
Section
   
5-3-1   Intent
   
5-3-2   Definitions
   
5-3-3   Life-cycle cost analyses required
   
5-3-4   Procedures for life-cycle cost analyses
   
5-3-5   Selection of an energy system
§ 5-3-1 INTENT.
   This article is intended to assure that new city buildings and remodel and
retrofit projects for existing city buildings shall incorporate designs for
energy systems such that the total cost of constructing, owning and operating
the building will be minimized.
('74 Code, § 5-4-1) (Ord. 15-1980; Am. Ord. 23-1991)
§ 5-3-2 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this article, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   BUILDING. Any structure which requires an energy system.
   ENERGY SYSTEM. Any system utilizing electricity, natural gas, alternative,
or renewable energy sources and any energy conservation elements of the
building.
   LIFE-CYCLE COST ANALYSIS. An estimate of the total cost of any energy system
for a building for the estimated design life time of the building including,
but not limited to, the initial cost of the system, annual operating and
maintenance costs, site development, structural, architectural (including
finish materials), plumbing, mechanical and electrical systems.
   MAYOR. The Mayor or the Mayor's designated representative.
   REMODEL PROJECT. Any modification to the building which requires building
envelope modifications, interior functional changes, mechanical system
modifications and electrical system modifications.
   RETROFIT PROJECT. Any replacement or upgrade to the building's mechanical
and electrical systems.
('74 Code, § 5-4-2) (Ord. 19-1976; Am. Ord. 15-1980; Am. Ord. 23-1991)
§ 5-3-3 LIFE-CYCLE COST ANALYSES REQUIRED.
   (A)   The Mayor shall cause a life-cycle cost analysis to be prepared for
any new city building and any remodel or retrofit project greater than 5,000
square feet. This analysis shall also apply to lease or purchase option
considerations. The life-cycle analysis shall be made utilizing a city approved
method. Computer energy modeling shall be required (Refer to City Life-Cycle
Analysis Reference Manual for approved software programs and Life-Cycle
methodologies) for facilities 10,000 square feet or greater. Conservational
mechanical and electrical energy systems shall be considered. Considerations
shall be given to interior and exterior lighting and to the building envelope,
including but not limited to building orientation, shape, landscape to take
advantage of wind protection and sun shading of trees and other vegetation,
amount of glazing, shading, color, and insulating values of various building
materials. For all analysis options, the maintenance requirements and city
capabilities shall be a weighted factor in the final appraisal. Where several
different energy systems could accomplish a given function, a life-cycle cost
analysis of at least two systems shall be prepared. City contracts for
professional design services shall require the design professional to perform a
life-cycle cost analysis. The life-cycle cost analysis may include
recommendations by the design professional for an energy system. The life-cycle
analysis shall be submitted to the Mayor at the end of the schematic design
phase. As part of the review process the firm or person with the contract to
perform professional design services shall meet with the city to explain the
life-cycle analysis, and the various energy options available for the final
design.
   (B)   For buildings 10,000 square feet or greater, which the city is
considering purchasing or leasing, a life-cycle energy cost analysis,
acceptable to the city, shall be provided at no cost to the city, by the owner
of the premises at the time the building or portion thereof is presented to the
city.
('74 Code, § 5-4-3) (Ord. 19-1976; Am. Ord. 15-1980; Am. Ord. 23-1991)
§ 5-3-4 PROCEDURES FOR LIFE-CYCLE COST ANALYSES.
   (A)   At the time schematic design studies are presented to the city, the
design professional shall notify the Mayor in writing of the energy systems on
which life-cycle cost analysis is to be conducted and the computer program that
will be utilized for the analysis. The Mayor must accept in writing the choice
of energy systems for life-cycle cost analysis prior to preparation of such
analysis. Provided, however, that if professional design services have not been
retained, the person responsible for design of the structure shall notify the
Mayor in writing of the energy systems on which life-cycle cost analysis is to
be conducted.
   (B)   The procedures for complying with the provisions of this article shall
be as outlined in City Life-Cycle Analysis Reference Manual.
('74 Code, § 5-4-4) (Ord. 19-1976; Am. Ord. 15-1980; Am. Ord. 23-1991)
§ 5-3-5 SELECTION OF AN ENERGY SYSTEM.
   (A)   The Mayor shall determine whether the life-cost analysis prepared
provides an adequate basis for selecting an energy system. The Mayor shall
examine whether realistic life-cycle costs have been used for each proposed
energy system and whether such costs take full account of probable price
increases for fuels, labor and materials.
   (B)   The Mayor shall select the energy system on the basis of the life-
cycle cost analysis and any recommendation which was made included therein.
('74 Code, § 5-4-5) (Ord. 19-1976; Am. Ord. 15-1980; Am. Ord. 23-1991)
ARTICLE 4: UNCLAIMED PERSONAL PROPERTY
Section
   
5-4-1   Definitions
   
5-4-2   City procedures for property left in its possession by finders
   
5-4-3   Authority of the city to return unclaimed personal property to the
finder
   
5-4-4   Exclusion
§ 5-4-1 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this article, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   FINDER. Any person who discovers and takes possession of another's personal
property, after the true owner has lost such property. Provided, however, that
"finder" does not mean any law enforcement officer or employee of the city who
takes possession of such property under the authority of law.
   PROPERTY or PERSONAL PROPERTY. Every-thing that is subject to ownership
except real property. "Personal property" includes money. For the purposes of
this article, animals are not considered to be personal property.
('74 Code, § 5-5-1) (Ord. 3-1979)
§ 5-4-2 CITY PROCEDURES FOR PROPERTY LEFT IN ITS POSSESSION BY FINDERS.
   (A)   The Mayor or his designated representative shall immediately inventory
and record any unclaimed personal property which a finder leaves in the
possession of the city.
   (B)   The city shall attempt to return any unclaimed personal property in
its possession to the true owner. Public notice shall not be required, except
for notice of sale of property.
   (C)   If, prior to disposition of the property as provided for in this
article, the true owner identifies the personal property and offers strict
proof of identity and ownership of such property, the personal property shall
be returned to its true owner. The Mayor shall cause appropriate procedures to
be developed to assure that proper proof of identity and ownership of property
is required.
('74 Code, § 5-5-2) (Ord. 3-1979)
§ 5-4-3 AUTHORITY OF THE CITY TO RETURN UNCLAIMED PERSONAL PROPERTY TO THE
FINDER.
   (A)   Whenever any unclaimed personal property which a finder has left with
the city has been unclaimed by the true owner and has been in the possession of
the city for more than 90 days, the city shall send written notification to the
finder. The notification shall indicate that the finder may take possession of
the property if he claims it within 30 days of the date on the written
notification. The notification shall indicate where the property may be
claimed.
   (B)   If personal property is not claimed by the true owner or the finder,
as provided for in this article, it may be disposed of as provided for in
Sections 29-1-13 through 29-1-15 NMSA 1978.
('74 Code, § 5-5-3) (Ord. 3-1979)
§ 5-4-4 EXCLUSION.
   This article shall not apply to deadly weapons, poisons, narcotic and
dangerous drugs or other contraband.
('74 Code, § 5-5-4) (Ord. 3-1979)
ARTICLE 5: PUBLIC PURCHASES
Section
   
5-5-1   Authority
   
5-5-2   Short title
   
5-5-3   Definitions
   
5-5-4   Central purchasing office
   
5-5-5   Central purchasing required
   
5-5-6   Rules and regulations governing central purchasing
   
5-5-7   Responsibilities of the central purchasing office
   
5-5-8   [Reserved]
   
5-5-9   Procurement requirements
   
5-5-10   Rejection of offers; no responsive offers received
   
5-5-11   Capital projects
   
5-5-12   Notice of solicitations
   
5-5-13   Signature authority
   
5-5-14   Trade-in or exchange of used articles
   
5-5-15   Lease agreements and used goods
   
5-5-16   Disposition of city-owned surplus, salvage, scrap and unclaimed
property
   
5-5-17   Preferences
   
5-5-18   Request for qualifications
   
5-5-19   Approval of contracts
   
5-5-20   Exemptions
   
5-5-21   Utility franchises
   
5-5-22   Ethical conduct
   
5-5-23   Protest
   
5-5-24   Debarment
   
5-5-25   Determination of responsibility in construction and consultant
contracts
   
5-5-26   Small purchases
   
5-5-27   Request for quotes
   
5-5-28   Competitive sealed bids
   
5-5-29   Purchases of professional/technical services
   
5-5-30   Competitive sealed proposals
   
5-5-31   Pay equity reporting form and pay equity preference
   
5-5-32   Sole source purchases
   
5-5-33   Purchasing from government contracts
   
5-5-34   Rapid procurement
   
5-5-35   Emergency purchases
   
5-5-36   Insurance related purchases
   
5-5-37   Purchases of appraisal services
   
5-5-38   Purchases of attorney services
   
5-5-39   Purchases of social services
   
5-5-40   Intergovernmental agreements
   
5-5-41   Purchases of software licenses and software subscriptions
§ 5-5-1 AUTHORITY.
   The City Council, pursuant to Article 1 of the Charter of the city and
Article X, Section 6 of the Constitution of New Mexico, enacts this article as
authorized by such provisions and for the purpose of providing maximum local
self-government. To that end, it is intended that this article shall govern all
purchasing transactions of the city and shall serve to exempt the city from all
provisions of the New Mexico Procurement Code, as provided in Section 13-1-98K
NMSA 1978.
('74 Code, § 5-7-1) (Ord. 6-1991; Am. Ord. 30-1998)
§ 5-5-2 SHORT TITLE.
   This article may be cited as the “Public Purchases Ordinance.”
('74 Code, § 5-7-2) (Ord. 6-1991; Am. Ord. 30-1998)
§ 5-5-3 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this article, the following definitions shall apply
unless the Chief Procurement Officer determines that the context clearly
indicates or requires a different meaning.
   AWARD. The issuance of a purchase order or other validly executed contract.
   BUSINESS. A seller of goods and/or services and/or a provider of
construction services and materials; or a concessionaire. This term may refer
to an individual, partnership, corporation, trust or other legal entity and
does not include the subsidiaries, affiliates, parent companies, shareholders
or principals thereof.
   CAPITAL PROJECT. A construction or public works project.
   CENTRAL PURCHASING OFFICE. The Purchasing Division of the Department of
Finance and Administrative Services of the city, or any department or  division
of the city subsequently charged with the duty of purchasing.
   CHIEF PROCUREMENT OFFICER. That person charged with the responsibility of
administering the Central Purchasing Office, or its designee.
   CIP. The Capital Improvement Program of the city, or any department or
division of the city subsequently charged with the oversight of capital
construction projects.
   COMPETITIVE SOLICITATION. The procurement process the city uses to request
offers for the purchase, sale, lease, rental of goods, services or
construction; or another transaction. The request may be in the form of a
request for bids (RFB), a request for proposals (RFP), a request for quotes
(RFQ), or another procurement methodology established by the Chief Procurement
Officer.
   CONCESSION CONTRACT. A revenue-producing contract that licenses or permits
the use of city property except any kind of rights of way, by a business for
the sale of goods or services at a profit.
   CONSTRUCTION. The building, alteration, repair, improvement, installation,
or demolition of any public structure, building, pipeline, or other public
improvement of any kind on public real property. Construction does not include
routine repair or maintenance of public buildings or other public structures.
   CONTRACT or AGREEMENT. Any written agreement for the procurement of goods,
services or construction, or for the establishment of a concession, including,
but not limited to, a purchase order and incorporated documents.
   CONTRACTOR. An offeror who has been awarded a contract.
   COOPERATIVE PROCUREMENT AGENCY. Any public or private procurement
cooperative established for use primarily by public agencies.
   DESTINATION MARKETING ORGANIZATION (DMO). An organization which promotes a
location as an attractive travel destination and exists to provide information
to leisure travelers and to encourage event organizers to choose their location
for meetings, incentives, conferences and exhibitions; and is accredited as a
DMO through a globally recognized Destination Marketing Accreditation Program.
   GOODS. Items of tangible personal property.
   GREATER ALBUQUERQUE METROPOLITAN AREA. All locations within the city and
Bernalillo County.
   INTERGOVERNMENTAL AGREEMENT. An agreement between two or more public
agencies.
   LOCAL BUSINESS. A business that Is headquartered in and maintains its
principal office and place of business in the Greater Albuquerque Metropolitan
Area, as defined in §
5-5-3. Local business shall be verified on request by submittal of the
business's quarterly IRS Form 941 or other documentation acceptable to the
city.
   MANAGEMENT or OPERATION OF A CITY OWNED FACILITY. Services provided under an
approved professional/technical contract, concessions contract, or other
operating agreement with the city in which a contractor is responsible for the
daily management or operation of a city owned facility, including, but not
limited to, the scheduling of facility events and maintenance of a facility
event schedule.
   MAYOR. The Mayor of the city or the Mayor's designee(s).
   OFFER. A response to a competitive solicitation.
   OFFEROR. A business or individual that submits a response to a competitive
solicitation.
   PLACE OF BUSINESS. A business's location in the Greater Albuquerque
Metropolitan Area which is staffed and open to the public on a regular basis.
   PROFESSIONAL/TECHNICAL SERVICES. Services performed by or under the
direction of a licensed professional, a professional technician, or another
person with technical training, as more particularly defined by the Chief
Procurement Officer.
   PUBLIC AGENCY. Any public body, department, division, commission, council,
board, committee, institution, legislative body, agency, government
corporation, educational institution or official of the executive, legislative
or judicial branch of the United States, any state of the United States, any
Indian tribe or pueblo, any local government, or any foreign government.
   PURCHASING or PROCUREMENT. The buying, renting, leasing, lease-purchasing or
otherwise obtaining of any goods, services or construction or a concession
contract. It includes all functions that pertain to any city procurements,
including, but not limited to, the preparation of specifications, solicitation
and selection of sources, preparation and award of contracts, and contract
administration unless otherwise excepted in this article.
   RECOMMENDATION OF AWARD or ROA. The document approved by the Chief
Procurement Officer which summarizes the offers received in response to a
competitive solicitation and which designates the selected offeror and other
relevant information.
   REQUEST FOR QUALIFICATIONS. A request for submission used to evaluate a
potential contractor’s experience and qualifications that demonstrate their
ability to deliver the required product or service.
   RESPONSIBLE OFFEROR. A business which has the capability in all respects to
perform fully the contract requirements set out in the competitive solicitation
or existing contractas set forth in the Purchasing Rules and Regulations.
   RESPONSIVE OFFER. A written offer in response to a competitive solicitation
to furnish goods, services or construction in conformity with the standards,
specifications, terms and conditions, and all other requirements established In
the competitive solicitation. Responsiveness of offers shall be as more fully
set forth in the Purchasing Rules and Regulations.
   SERVICES. Labor, time or effort.
   SOCIAL SERVICES. The provision, primarily to low and moderate income
residents of the city, of human services such as health care, substance abuse
treatment and prevention, day care, emergency shelters, youth services, senior
services, employment services, and job training; housing intended primarily for
low and moderate income residents of the city; and economic development
activities designed primarily to benefit low to moderate income areas of the
city or to increase employment among low and moderate income residents. A
social services contract is a contract with a nonprofit organization or public
agency for social services in return for the city’s payment of costs associated
with the provision of social services, including, but not limited to, the costs
for labor, supplies, operating expenses, equipment, and the acquisition or
improvement of real property.
   SOFTWARE LICENSE or SOFTWARE SUBSCRIPTION. Software or technology services
hosted remotely by a third party.
   USER DEPARTMENT, USER, or DEPARTMENT. A city department, office, or division
for which procurement services are provided.
   WATER UTILITY AUTHORITY. The Albuquerque Bernalillo County Water Utility
Authority, a political subdivision of the State of New Mexico created by Laws
2003, Chapter 437 (Section 72-1-10 NMSA1978).
('74 Code, § 5-7-3) (Ord. 6-1991; Am. Ord. 30-1998; Am. Ord. 4-2003; Am. Ord.
13-2006; Am. Ord. 33-2007; Am. Ord. 26-2011; Am. Ord._2019-005; Am. Ord._2022-
045; Am. Ord._2023-003; Am. Ord._2025-025)
§ 5-5-4 CENTRAL PURCHASING OFFICE.
   The Central Purchasing Office is created and shall be the central purchasing
office for the city, except as otherwise provided by ordinance.
('74 Code, § 5-7-4) (Ord. 6-1991; Am. Ord. 30-1998)
§ 5-5-5 CENTRAL PURCHASING REQUIRED.
   All purchasing for users shall be performed by the Central Purchasing
Office, except as otherwise provided by this article.
('74 Code, § 5-7-5) (Ord. 6-1991; Am. Ord. 30-1998)
§ 5-5-6 RULES AND REGULATIONS GOVERNING CENTRAL PURCHASING.
   (A)   The Chief Procurement Officer shall have the authority and
responsibility to draft regulations related to administration of the Central
Purchasing Office and interpreting and implementing this article. Such
regulations shall be promulgated by the Mayor after providing notice through a
newspaper of general circulation to the general public requesting comments and
informing businesses of the regulations in a manner determined by the Chief
Procurement Officer.
   (B)   For administration of the Central Purchasing Office, regulations may
be promulgated to govern the issuance of purchase orders; receipt, inspection,
and acceptance of goods and services; payment for purchases; and the
maintenance and disclosure of records.
   (C)   Additional regulations may be promulgated to establish procedures for
the receipt of requisitions for goods and services from users, for creation of
specifications; for the issuing of solicitations; for the maintenance of vendor
lists; for the handling and opening of sealed offers; for determining the
responsibility and responsiveness of offerors; for determining and issuing a
recommendation of award; for review of procurement decisions; and for the
debarment and suspension of businesses.
   (D)   Regulations may also be promulgated on such other matters as the Chief
Procurement Officer deems desirable for the most efficient operation of the
purchasing function.
   (E)   Unless the regulations promulgated pursuant to this section provide
otherwise, they shall not apply to capital projects which are subject to the
regulations promulgated pursuant to §
5-5-11.
('74 Code, § 5-7-6) (Ord. 6-1991; Am. Ord. 30-1998; Am. Ord._2019-005) Penalty,
see §
1-1-99
§ 5-5-7 RESPONSIBILITIES OF THE CENTRAL PURCHASING OFFICE.
   (A)   It shall be the responsibility of the Central Purchasing Office:
      (1)   To reduce, to the maximum extent possible, the number of purchase
transactions by combining into bulk orders and contracts the requirements of
users for common-use items or items repetitively purchased.
      (2)   To develop, when possible, continuing contracts with vendors for
specific, standardized capital items and, when appropriate, direct city
departments to purchase through these contracts. Such procedures should be
designed to reduce acquisition and maintenance costs for the city.
      (3)   To develop and use those types of contracts, procurement
methodologies and purchase orders which will reduce to the minimum the
accompanying paper work and which in other respects will be most advantageous
to the city.
      (4)   To make contract awards for the acquisition of city equipment and
machinery to offerors which maintain an adequate supply and/or availability of
repair parts and qualified service personnel and facilities located in the
Greater Albuquerque Metropolitan Area, capable of providing timely and
responsive, major and minor service of the equipment and/or machinery being
purchased. This subsection is applicable in circumstances where a lack of such
capability could be detrimental to city service delivery.
      (5)   Participate as appropriate in an inter- departmental committee
which addresses problems related to the overall procurement process,
departmental requirements, awards, and payment process and make recommendations
to the Mayor and City Council.
   (B)   The Central Purchasing Office is authorized to prescribe by regulation
the use of various types of contracts and orders, including but not limited to
the following:
      (1)   Definite-quantity contracts, whereby the contractor agrees to
furnish a specified quantity of materials or services at a specified time or
times at specified unit prices;
      (2)    Indefinite-quantity contracts/price agreements, whereby the
Central Purchasing Office or the user agrees to obtain from the contractor part
or all of its requirements for specified materials or services in an estimated
but indeterminate amount during a prescribed period of time at a definite unit
price or at a specified discount from list or posted prices.
   (C)   The Central Purchasing Office may cooperate by agreement with any
cooperative procurement agency or any public agency in obtaining contracts or
price agreements and such contracts or agreed prices shall apply to purchase
orders subsequently issued under the agreement.
   (D)   The Chief Procurement Officer may annually adjust the monetary limits
contained in this article, other than the limits set out in §
5-5-19, if the changes are approved by the Chief Administrative Officer, as
confirmed by the issuing of an Administrative Instruction, and notification is
provided to City Council. The adjustments shall be determined using best
practices, including, but not limited to, comparisons to equivalent limits
established for municipalities and public agencies similar to Albuquerque, and/
or economic indicators such as changes in the Consumer Price Index.
   (E)   The Central Purchasing Office shall, upon request, provide information
to the City Council summarizing all transactions processed through the Central
Purchasing Office which are in excess of the limit currently established for
purchases by quotation. Information shall be provided through online reporting
and quarterly written reports.
('74 Code, § 5-7-7) (Ord. 6-1991; Am. Ord. 30-1998; Am. Ord. 26-2011; Am. Ord.
2019-005) Penalty, see §
1-1-99
§ 5-5-8 [RESERVED.]
§ 5-5-9 PROCUREMENT REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   General. All city purchasing shall be made by competitive sealed bids
as provided in §
5-5-28 of this article, except purchases made through the following procurement
methodologies or methodologies approved by the Chief Procurement Officer and
determined in writing to be in the best interest of the city.
      (1)   §
5-5-11, Capital Projects;
      (2)   §
5-5-26, Small Purchases;
      (3)   §
5-5-27, Request for Quotes;
      (4)   §
5-5-29, Purchases of Professional/ Technical Services;
      (5)   §
5-5-30, Competitive Sealed Proposals;
      (6)    §
5-5-32, Sole Source Purchases;
      (7)   §
5-5-33, Purchasing from Government Contracts;
      (8)   §
5-5-34, Rapid Procurement;
      (9)    §
5-5-35, Emergency Purchases;
      (10)   §
5-5-36, Insurance Related Purchases;
      (11)   §
5-5-37, Purchases of Appraisal Services;
      (12)   §
5-5-38, Purchases of Attorney Services;
      (13)   §
5-5-39, Purchases of Social Services;
      (14)   §
5-5-40, Intergovernmental Agreements.
   (B)   Cost plus contracts. The city shall not enter into any contract which
is a cost-plus-percentage of cost contract, unless the contract meets the
requirements in this article for an emergency purchase.
   (C)   Purchase splitting prohibited. Separate purchases of the same or
similar goods, services or construction, whether from the same or different
businesses, within a time frame established by the Chief Procurement Officer,
shall be considered a single purchase for purposes of this article.
   (D)   Federal funding. When a procurement involves the expenditure of
federal funds, the procurement shall be conducted in accordance with mandatory
applicable federal law and regulations. When mandatory applicable federal law
or regulations are inconsistent with the provisions of this article, the city
shall comply with the most restrictive requirement.
(Ord. 26-2011; Am. Ord._2019-005)
§ 5-5-10 REJECTION OF OFFERS; NO RESPONSIVE OFFERS RECEIVED.
   (A)   The Central Purchasing Office or CIP may reject any or all offers
received in response to a competitive solicitation, but the rejection shall be
accompanied by a written statement declaring the reasons for the rejection,
which shall be made part of the procurement file.
   (B)   If no responsive offers are received, then the Central Purchasing
Office or CIP may purchase the required goods or services, with no change in
the published specifications, in the open market at the best obtainable price.
If the specifications are changed, or if so required by the Chief Procurement
Officer or CIP Official, a purchase in the open market shall not be permitted
and the competitive solicitation may be reissued.
(Ord. 26-2011; Am. Ord._2019-005)
§ 5-5-11 CAPITAL PROJECTS.
   (A)   Unless otherwise agreed to by the Central Purchasing Office and CIP,
the purchase of goods, services and construction for capital projects not
procured through the Central Purchasing Office, shall be procured through CIP,
in accordance with the "Regulation Governing the Award and Rejection of Bids/
Offers and Debarment of Contractors for Public Works Projects of the City of
Albuquerque", effective July 25, 2008, or as hereafter amended.
   (B)   Goods, services and construction projects procured through CIP must
comply with the reporting and preference requirements of §
5-5-31 of the Public Purchases Ordinance, except when the preference creates a
conflict with federal laws relating to federally funded contracts.
   (C)   Unless otherwise exempted below, change orders for capital project
contracts awarded in accordance with the "Regulation Governing the Award and
Rejection of Bids/Offers and Debarment of Contractors for Public Works Projects
of the City of Albuquerque" shall not add additional scope that exceeds 35% of
the original contract amount. Any change order or combination of changes
ordered, or change orders that can be reasonably anticipated within 12 months
of the initial award, that exceed this limit may be awarded only through a
separate competitive solicitation unless the change was the result of:
      (1)   A previously unknown or unforeseen condition at the time of the
initial bid;
      (2)   Unanticipated claims related to the project;
      (3)   An emergency;
      (4)   Work that completes an additional segment or portion of the overall
project that is functionally consistent with the bid where a written
justification is prepared by the Director of the Department of Municipal
Development describing why the change is in the economic interests of the city
and otherwise not inconsistent with the purposes and benefits of separate
competitive solicitation. A copy of this justification shall be provided to the
City Attorney (or designee) and the Internal Auditor prior to execution of any
change order amendment(s) to the contract.
   (D)   Contractors must provide increased bonds to cover approved change
orders for capital projects.
   (E)   The Mayor may promulgate additional or revised rules and regulations
regarding the solicitation of offers for capital projects and the award or
rejection of offers therefor, including but not limited to establishing
procedures for the solicitation and consideration of offers, award or rejection
of offers, determining the responsibility of offerors, and such other matters
as the Mayor deems desirable for the efficient administration of capital
projects.
   (F)   It is the policy of the city to require local participation in capital
projects where possible. Major construction projects which can reasonably be
expected to exceed $5,000,000 in cost may require that a market analysis be
conducted to determine the percentage of local participation to be required for
the project. This determination of the need for a market analysis and the
appropriate local participation requirement shall be made on a case by case
basis by the user with advice from the city's legal department as needed.
   (G)   The purchase of goods, services or construction for capital projects
for the city shall not occur as part of a contract originally procured as a
concession contract or entered into as a lease unless the following applies:
      (1)   The capital project is included in the original competitive
solicitation for the concession contract or lease; or
      (2)   A city contractor is unable to complete a capital project, which
was awarded to that city contractor through a competitive bid process, which
will cause damage or harm to the concessionaire or lessee and the
concessionaire or lessee can quickly complete the project as determined in
writing by the CIP Official; or
      (3)   The purchase meets the requirements of an emergency purchase as set
out in this article.
   (H)   Project Labor Agreements.
      (1)   Definitions. For purposes of this subsection, certain words and
phrases used are defined as follows:
         CONTRACTOR. A person entering into or performing a public works
construction project.
         PROJECT LABOR AGREEMENT. A pre-hire collective bargaining agreement
with one or more labor organizations or with their representative(s) that
establishes the terms and conditions of employment for a specific public works
construction project.
         PUBLIC WORKS CONSTRUCTION PROJECT or PROJECT. A city project subject
to the New Mexico Public Works Minimum Wage Act.
         SUBCONTRACTOR. Any person with whom a construction contractor or other
subcontractor enters into a contract to perform a portion of any public works
construction project.
         TOTAL PROJECT COST. The total project cost of a project is the cost of
all construction and construction-related activities, excluding the cost of
real property acquisition. In a phased construction project, the total project
cost of each phase is cumulative, so that the total project cost includes the
costs of previous phases.
         UNION. The New Mexico Building and Construction Trades Council and its
affiliated unions and any other unions, which become a signatory to a project
labor agreement governing the construction of a public works construction
project.
      (2)   Use of a Project Labor Agreement. A project labor agreement shall
be utilized in each city public works construction project where the total
project cost is anticipated to exceed Ten Million Dollars ($10,000,000.00) and
where at least three crafts will be employed on the project. This subsection
shall apply to all public works construction projects unless the existence of a
project labor agreement will jeopardize state, federal or other public funding
sources. It shall be set forth in the construction bid documents for the public
works construction project, as a condition of the award, that the successful
bidder, including contractors and subcontractors at all tiers, shall be
required to execute and be bound by a project labor agreement. The awarded
general contractor shall execute a master project labor agreement, which will
be filed with the City Clerk, and the terms in that project labor agreement
shall govern all work on the construction of the project.
      (3)   Required articles in a project labor agreement. The city shall
provide the required project labor agreement. Each project labor agreement
shall contain, at a minimum, articles that address the following:
         (i)   Scope;
         (ii)   Wages and benefits;
         (iii)   Referral procedure;
         (iv)   No work stoppages;
         (v)   Management rights;
         (vi)    Jurisdictional disputes;
         (vii)   Union representation; and
         (viii)    Apprenticeship.
      (4)   Compliance with state and federal law. This subsection and the use
of the project labor agreement shall be enforced only to the extent that it is
consistent with the laws of the State of New Mexico and the United States.
      (5)   PLA required prior to project award being submitted to City
Council. The City Council shall not consider or approve any recommendation of
award for any project where a PLA is required, until a PLA has been executed.
   (I)   Any and all rules and regulations adopted or promulgated under this
provision shall be consistent with and subject to the provisions of this
article, and in the event of a conflict between such rules and regulations and
this article, this article shall control.
('74 Code, § 5-7-11) (Ord. 6-1991; Am. Ord. 30-1998; Am. Ord. 51-1999; Am. Ord.
26-2011; Am. Ord._2015-019; Am. Ord._2017-009; Am. Ord._2021-025) Penalty, see
§
1-1-99
§ 5-5-12 NOTICE OF SOLICITATIONS.
   All competitive sealed bids or proposals issued by the Central Purchasing
Office shall be made in accordance with the following provisions:
   (A)   Notice that sealed offers shall be received is furnished to the public
by means of publication on the city's public facing website or, if otherwise
required by law in a newspaper of at least weekly general and/or business
circulation, as established by the Chief Procurement Officer by regulation. The
notice shall specify the closing date and time for receipt of offers, and
notice shall be published not less than ten days before the deadline for
receipt of offers.
   (B)   This requirement of notice is in addition to any other procedure which
may be adopted by the Central Purchasing Office to notify prospective offerors
that offers are requested, such as direct mailing, electronic mailing and
posting through an electronic medium which is accessible by the general public.
('74 Code, § 5-7-12) (Ord. 6-1991; Am. Ord. 30-1998; Am. Ord. 26-2011; Am. Ord.
2019-005) Penalty, see §
1-1-99
§ 5-5-13 SIGNATURE AUTHORITY.
   (A)   Initiation by Mayor. Except as otherwise provided in this article or
these ordinances, and following approval by the City Council, if required, the
Mayor is authorized to enter into agreements of any type on behalf of the city.
This includes, but is not limited to, contracts and intergovernmental
agreements, as defined in this article, and real property agreements. The Mayor
may delegate this signature authority by executive instruction.
   (B)   Initiation by the City Council. The City Council may enter into
agreements pursuant to its legislative function as provided in this article and
its Rules of Procedure.
(Ord. 30-1998; Am. Ord. 26-2011)
§ 5-5-14 TRADE-IN OR EXCHANGE OF USED ARTICLES.
   Where it is desired to trade-in or exchange used articles as part payment on
the purchase price of new articles, the Central Purchasing Office shall, in
requesting offers, describe such used property, inform prospective offerors
where the used property can be examined, and notify prospective offerors that
the sale price of the new article and the allowance as credit for the trade-in
or exchange shall be stated separately. The difference between the sale price
of the new article and the trade-in allowance shall be deemed the offer of the
seller.
('74 Code, § 5-7-14) (Ord. 6-1991; Am. Ord. 30-1998)
Penalty, see § 1-1-99
§ 5-5-15 LEASE AGREEMENTS AND USED GOODS.
   Agreements for the lease of personal property and the purchase of used goods
shall be subject to the requirements of this article.
('74 Code, § 5-7-15) (Ord. 6-1991; Am. Ord. 30-1998; Am. Ord. 26-2011)
Penalty, see § 1-1-99
§ 5-5-16 DISPOSITION OF CITY-OWNED SURPLUS, SALVAGE, SCRAP, AND UNCLAIMED
PROPERTY.
   (A)   Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.
      CITY ASSET. Tangible personal property which is required pursuant to
Administrative Instruction to be recorded on the city's inventory of fixed
assets.
      IT EQUIPMENT. Computers, peripheral equipment, printers, radios,
telephones and the like.
      LIBRARY MATERIALS. Books, magazines, compact discs, videotapes, tapes and
the like purchased by the Library Division of the city, or any successor
agency, for lending to the public.
      SALVAGE PROPERTY. Tangible personal property of the city of any value
which has been determined, pursuant to Administrative Instruction 6-2, as
amended to no longer be functional in the state of its original intent, but
retains a value in the market place in its marginal use, by repair, resale,
scrap value in recyclable materials or other reasons that make it of value in
the proper market setting.
      SCRAP PROPERTY. Tangible personal property of the city which has been
determined, pursuant to Administrative Instruction 6-2, as amended to be
surplus property, but which has also been determined to be of no value or where
the cost to repair or maintain such property would exceed its value. SCRAP
PROPERTY does not include salvage property, including but not limited to any
material or equipment which retains a salvage value such as copper, aluminum or
other recyclable materials, as determined by the Chief Procurement Officer.
      SURPLUS PROPERTY. Tangible personal property of the city of any value
which has been determined, pursuant to Administrative Instruction 6-2, as
amended to be functional, but is no longer required or needed for use within or
by the user department or other city department and whose cost to retain may be
adverse to city interests based on space allocation, obsolescence or
depreciating market value.
      UNCLAIMED PROPERTY. Tangible personal property which has been left in the
possession of the city, as defined in § 5-4-1 ROA1994.
   (B)   Disposition of surplus, scrap, or salvage property. Surplus, scrap, or
salvage property shall be disposed of in accordance with procedures established
in Administrative Instruction 6-2, as amended.
   (C)   Unclaimed property shall be disposed of in accordance with the
provisions of § 5-4-1 et seq., ROA 1994.
('74 Code, § 5-7-16) (Ord. 6-1991; Am. Ord. 30-1998; Am. Ord. 22-2005; Am. Ord.
2019-005) Penalty, see §
1-1-99
Cross-reference:
   
Unclaimed personal property, see §§ 5-4-1 et seq.
§ 5-5-17 PREFERENCES.
   (A)   Application of preferences. Prior to making a recommendation of award
of a contract pursuant to a request for bids or request for proposals, the
Central Purchasing Office shall apply to any applicable procurement preferences
provided under state law to the amount of the bid or to the proposal score in
accordance with the applicable state law.
   (B)   Eligibility for preferences. To qualify for any state procurement
preference, an offeror shall meet any ellglbllity requirements provided in the
relevant state law, and shall submit with its bid or proposal, the
certification issued by the State of New Mexico that relates to the preference
sought.
('74 Code, § 5-7-17) (Ord. 6-1991; Am. Ord. 30-1998; Am. Ord. 33-2002; Am. Ord.
33-2007; Am. Ord. 26-2011; Am. Ord._2013-002; Am. Ord._2019-005; Am. Ord._2023-
003) Penalty, see §
1-1-99
§ 5-5-18 REQUEST FOR QUALIFICATIONS.
   A Request for Qualifications may be issued for the procurement of tangible
personal property, services, or construction to evaluate the qualifications of
prospective contractors. An award may then be made to the most qualified
contractor, based on the criteria established in the Request for
Qualifications. If the Chief Procurement Officer, Director of the Department of
Health, Housing, and Homelessness, or Director of the Department of Municipal
Development, as applicable, determines in writing that proceeding directly to
award without a subsequent Request for Bids or Request for Proposals is
appropriate and is in the best interest of the City, a two-step procurement
process shall not be required.
(Ord._2025-025)
§ 5-5-19 APPROVAL OF CONTRACTS.
   (A)   The following contracts must be approved by the City Council:
      (1)   All special assessment district construction contracts in
accordance with §§
6-8-1-1 et seq., Albuquerque Special Assessment District Policy Ordinance;
      (2)   Contracts for ambulance services and other emergency rescue
services;
      (3)   Contracts for professional/technical services, as follows:
         (a)   Any contract for professional/ technical services in an amount
exceeding $100,000, including, but not limited to, legal services contracts and
contracts entered into by the City Council to facilitate its legislative
function; and
         (b)   Any amendment to a professional/ technical services contract
which causes the amount of that contract to exceed $100,000, or changes the
scope of services related to the management or operations of a city facility.
         (c)   The application of this §
5-5-19(A)(3) shall be determined by the Chief Procurement Officer in the
Standard Operating Procedure interpreting §
5-5-9(C) Purchase Splitting Prohibited, as may be amended.
      (4)   Social services contracts as follows:
         (a)   Any social services contract in an amount exceeding $150,000;
and
         (b)   An amendment to a social services contract causes the amount of
that contract to exceed $150,000; or any amendment to a social services
contract exceeding $150,000 that increases the amount of the contract by 20% or
more; and
         (c)   Any social services with a single organization or agency where
the total amount in a single fiscal year for social services contracts with the
organization or agency exceeds $150,000; and
         (d)   Except that City Council approval shall not be required if the
goal, amount and contractor of any such contract or amendment is included in
the City of Albuquerque annual performance plan or has been previously approved
by the Council in an appropriating resolution; and
         (e)   The exception contained in §
5-5-19(A)(4)(d) shall not apply if a Councilor has requested a special report
on a particular contract from the Mayor, which report shall be due within 30
days of the request, and a Councilor has requested approval of said contract by
the full Council.
      (5)   Concession contracts expected to generate revenues to the
contractor in excess of $75,000, over a 12-month period.
      (6)   Sole source contracts for goods, services, or construction in
excess of $75,000 for a single project.
      (7)   If the City Council has previously approved a contract by approving
the selection of the contractor, the contract amount and the services or
subject matter of the contract, either through approval of a Performance Plan,
a recommendation of award, or other similar approval process, the final
contract will not require an additional approval pursuant to this section.
      (8)   Any supplement to a contract previously approved by the City
Council shall require additional approval by the City Council if the contract
is increased by over 20% of the amount previously identified, or the supplement
changes the scope of services related to the management or operations of a city
facility.
      (9)   Contracts procured under §
5-5-20(FF), as follows:
         (a)   Any contract procured under §
5-5-20(FF) in an amount exceeding $100,000 for a single project;
         (b)   Any amendment to a contract procured under §
5-5-20(FF) which causes the amount of that contract to exceed $100,000; and
         (c)   Any supplement to a contract procured under §
5-5-20(FF) previously approved by City Council shall require additional
approval by City Council if the contract is increased by over 20% of the amount
previously identified.
   (B)   The following purchases must be approved by the Mayor rather than City
Council:
      (1)   When the Mayor determines that urgent and compelling reasons
require an emergency procurement of professional/technical services exceeding
$100,000, or social services exceeding $150,000, the Mayor shall notify the
City Council, at its next regularly scheduled meeting, of the action and shall
give a full description of the urgent and compelling reasons, the scope of
work, the contract amount, and the name of the contractor;
      (2)   Award or rejection of offers and the execution of contracts for the
construction, demolition, alteration, improvement, or repair of public works;
and
      (3)   Contracts with the New Mexico State Auditor, or other contracts
required by law.
   (C)   All other purchases shall be approved by the Chief Procurement Officer
or designee, or as otherwise provided by ordinance.
   (D)   For all procurements and approval of contracts and purchases by or for
the Water Utility Authority pursuant to this article, approval by the Executive
Director of the Water Utility Authority shall substitute for approval by the
Mayor and approval by the Water Utility Authority Board shall substitute for
approval by the City Council.
('74 Code, § 5-7-19) (Ord. 6-1991; Am. Ord. 30-1998; Am. Ord. 51-1999; Am. Ord.
12-2001; Am. Ord. 14-2001; Am. Ord. 18-2004; Am. Ord. 58-2005; Am. Ord. 13-
2006; Am. Ord. 26-2011; Am. Ord._2016-005; Am. Ord._2019-005; Am. Ord._2025-
025) Penalty, see §
1-1-99
§ 5-5-20 EXEMPTIONS.
   The following purchases shall be exempt from the competitive requirements of
this article, unless otherwise determined by the Chief Procurement Officer:
   (A)   Agreements for services of professionals selected pursuant to §§
14-7-2-1 et seq., Selection Advisory Committee ordinance;
   (B)   Purchase of a software license or software subscription that does not
exceed $10,000 per fiscal year, including services required to build, install,
maintain or support the software, or that are otherwise associated with the
acquisition of the license or subscription;
   (C)   Leases, licenses, permits, exchanges, or purchases of real property
and all other real property transactions;
   (D)   Purchases from regulated utilities such as gas, electricity, water,
telephone, cable TV, sewer and refuse collection service, unless competition is
available and the annual cost will exceed $100,000;
   (E)   Purchases of books, periodicals, films, training materials,
subscriptions (excluding software subscriptions), on-line information services,
or advertising from the publishers and distributors or agents thereof;
   (F)   Purchases of travel by common carrier or by private conveyance and
related travel expenditures such as meals and lodging;
   (G)   Purchases, exchanges, sales, or transportation of:
      (1)   Animals for the BioPark/Zoo, APD, AFR and Animal Welfare
Department;
      (2)   Food, medications, medical testing, or medical supplies for animals
at the BioPark/Zoo and Animal Welfare Department.
   (H)   Purchases of surety bonds;
   (I)   Purchases of exotic plants which will be accessioned into a permanent
collection maintained by the city;
   (J)   Short-term contracts for purchases of parts and labor for equipment or
machinery if the machinery or equipment is in immediate danger of failure and
such a breakdown of this equipment or machinery could cause an emergency or
costly condition to exist;
   (K)   Purchases of parts and labor or maintenance agreements to repair
disabled equipment or machinery if the equipment or machinery is required to be
repaired by a franchised dealer or by a factory authorized repair shop to
retain warranty;
   (L)   Purchases of chemicals, drugs, and other controlled substances, the
distribution and use of which is controlled by law or requires licensing;
   (M)   Concession contracts expected to generate revenues to the contractor
in an amount of $75,000 or less, over a 12-month period;
   (N)   Purchases of software and ancillary services required to match other
software previously procured and in use. This includes licensing fees,
maintenance fees, and services required to update, modify or maintain
proprietary software;
   (O)   Purchase, lease, rental or any other financial arrangement for the
acquisition of works of art, artifacts, or other items for the purpose of
exhibition in a public facility or area;
   (P)   Payments for conference registrations, membership dues, offsite
training courses, or similar minor purchases where prepayments are required;
   (Q)   Purchases necessary for the investigation of criminal activities,
which, if purchased competitively, would compromise an investigation as
determined by the Chief of Police in writing. All funds expended as described
in this paragraph (Q) shall be properly receipted and accounted for with
supporting documentation maintained by the Police Department and are subject to
internal audit;
   (R)   Purchases of specialty goods, as defined by the Chief Procurement
Officer, for resale to the general public at a retail business operated by the
city;
   (S)   Agreements for the services of medical practitioners such as dentists,
doctors, psychiatrists, psychologists, veterinarians, nurses, technicians, and
the like, except that medical and mental health services for the Employee
Health Center, and similar group medical services, shall be competitively
obtained;
   (T)   Agreements for the services of attorneys, other than bond attorneys,
and for legal assistants, except as otherwise provided in this article;
   (U)   Contracts and expenditures in connection with court or administrative
proceedings, including, but not limited to, experts, mediators, interpreters,
translators, court reporters, process servers, witness fees, and printing and
duplicating of materials for filing;
   (V)   Agreements for the services of lobbyists;
   (W)   Agreements with a sports professional or team;
   (X)   Contracts with private, nonprofit, independent contractors whose
primary purpose is to provide services to persons with disabilities, and which
contracts provide employment opportunities for persons with disabilities;
   (Y)   Grant funded contracts with civic groups to provide community
services, as required by the terms of the grant;
   (Z)   Contracts for retirement and other benefits which are paid for
directly by city employees, except that employee health care insurance will be
obtained competitively as otherwise provided in this article;
   (AA)   Contracts with professional entertainers and expenditures associated
with those contracts;
   (BB)   Purchases of goods, and ancillary services such as installation or
training, where required to match equipment currently in use and where a
written standardization policy has been developed for such goods or ancillary
services. This Includes applicable purchases and services to obtain, modify, or
maintain equipment;
   (CC)   The purchase of goods or services for a reasonable trial period for
testing purposes as approved by the Chief Procurement Officer; provided that if
additional purchases are required after the trial period and testing, the
subsequent purchase of such goods or services shall be subject to the
requirements of this article;
   (DD)   The purchase of used items If available for a limited time, such as
by auction or public sale, and if determined to be at a cost advantage to the
city. A memorandom shall be submitted to the Chief Procurement Officer
describing the steps taken to determine that a cost advantage to the city
exists, and the Chief Procurement Officer's approval of the purchase is
required; and
   (EE)   Contracts for city tourism promotion and marketing services with
destination marketing organizations (DMOs) and associated expenditures.
   (FF)   Procurement of items of tangible personal property, services, and
construction utilizing funds appropriated from the State Department of Finance
and Administration Capital Outlay program and general appropriations for
affordable and transitional housing projects, which comply with a transparent
process developed in conjunction with the Purchasing Division, the Department
of Health, Housing, and Homelessness, or the Department of Municipal
Development, as applicable, in support of affordable and transitional housing
development. This process shall ensure the fair and equitable treatment of all
participants, maximize the efficient use of public funds, and include
appropriate safeguards to uphold the integrity, quality, and transparency of
the City’s procurement system.
('74 Code, § 5-7-20) (Ord. 6-1991; Am. Ord. 30-1998; Am. Ord. 4-2003; Am. Ord.
1-2005; Am. Ord. 30-2010; Am. Ord. 26-2011; Am. Ord._2019-005; Am. Ord._2022-
045; Am. Ord._2023-003; Am. Ord. 2025-005; Am. Ord._2025-025) Penalty, see §
1-1-99
§ 5-5-21 UTILITY FRANCHISES.
   This article does not apply to the city's grant or extension of any utility
franchise, license or other rights to provide utility services within the city.
('74 Code, § 5-7-21) (Ord. 6-1991; Am. Ord. 30-1998)
§ 5-5-22 ETHICAL CONDUCT.
   In the procurement of goods, services and construction for the city, all
city employees shall comply with the rules of ethical conduct set out in §§
3-3-1 et seq., Conflict of Interest. In addition, the following ethical
provisions shall also apply to all city procurements:
   (A)   Employee conflict of interest. It shall be unlawful for any city
employee to participate directly or indirectly in a procurement when the
employee knows that:
      (1)   The employee or any member of the employee's immediate family has a
financial interest pertaining to the procurement; or
      (2)   Any other person, business, or organization with whom the employee
or any member of an employee's immediate family is negotiating or has an
arrangement concerning prospective employment is involved in the procurement.
   (B)   Business conflict of interest. It shall be unlawful for any business
which knowingly has a conflict of interest or an employee with a conflict of
interest, which conflict of interest would allow it an unfair advantage in a
competitive process, or would prevent its being able to perform fully and
objectively under a contract with the city, to make an offer to the city or
enter into a contract with the city.
   (C)   Prohibition of unfair advancement of private financial interest by any
Person, Organization, Board, Committee, or Business. It shall be unlawful for
any member of a city board or commission; any director, officer, or employee of
a business; or any other individual or business by virtue of a personal or
corporate relationship with the city to use confidential or insider information
concerning the property, government, or affairs of the governmental body by
which that person or corporation entity possesses a confidential relationship,
for the purpose of real or potential advancement of private interest.
      (1)   Disclosure. Every member of a city board or commission; every
business, the directors, officers, and key employees of that business; and any
other individual who has an existing or potential financial interest or who has
an immediate family member who has a presently existing or potential financial
interest in any contract or other matter existing or pending before or within
the governmental body of which that person or business is affiliated with,
shall disclose that interest in writing to the City Clerk and to the City
Department Head with whom that person or business is negotiating, immediately
upon knowing that such a conflict exists or upon having knowledge that a
conflict may potentially come into being.
      (2)   The city shall not enter into any contract with a business in which
an employee has a controlling interest, involving services or property of a
value in excess of $1,000 unless the contract is made after public notice and
competitive bidding or the Chief Administrative Officer has made a written
waiver of this prohibition; provided that this subsection does not apply to a
contract of employment with the city.
      (3)   Any purchase order or contract entered into by the city with a
business in which an employee of the city has a controlling interest is void if
the employee failed to comply with the provisions of this section prior to the
city entering into such contract or purchase order.
      (4)   Enforcement. In each instance in which an individual member of a
board or committee, a business, or any other person knowingly uses confidential
or inside information for unfair advancement of private interest, or fails to
disclose real or potential financial conflict with the city, the city shall, if
the offending party is a business or person affiliated with that business,
cease all negotiations and contractual relationships with the offending party.
If the offending party is a member of a board or committee, that person shall
not be permitted to participate in continued negotiations or receive further
information regarding the matter in question. Nothing in this subsection (C)
shall preclude the implementation of any other remedy provided by law.
      (5)   Definitions. For the purposes of this subsection (C), the following
definitions apply:
         BUSINESS. Any corporation, LLC, partnership, sole proprietorship,
firm, enterprise, company, franchise, association, organization, self-employed
individual, holding company, joint-stock company, receivership, trust, whether
or not organized for profit.
         IMMEDIATE FAMILY. A person and his or her spouse, their children;
grandchildren; parents; siblings including step or half brothers and sisters;
aunts, uncles; or any natural person residing in the same household.
         UNFAIR ADVANCEMENT OF PRIVATE INTEREST. Any real or potential
financial gain sought or realized by use of confidential or inside information
that would not be readily available to individuals and/or businesses not
involved in negotiations, contracts, or other direct or indirect transactions
with the governmental entity.
   (D)   Gratuities and kickbacks.
      (1)   It shall be unlawful for any person to offer, give, or agree to
give any employee or former employee, or for any employee or former employee to
solicit, demand, accept, or agree to accept from another person, a gratuity or
an offer of employment in connection with any decision, approval, disapproval,
recommendation, preparation or any part of a program requirement or a purchase
request, influencing the content of any specification or procurement standard,
rendering of advice, investigation, auditing, or in any other advisory capacity
in any proceeding or application, request for ruling, determination, claim or
controversy, or other particular matter, pertaining to any program requirement
or a contract or subcontract, or to any solicitation or proposal therefor.
      (2)   It shall be unlawful for any payment, gratuity, or offer of
employment to be made by or on behalf of a subcontractor under a contract to
the prime contractor or higher tier subcontractor or any person associated
therewith, as an inducement for the award of a subcontract or order.
   (E)   Prohibition against contingent fees. It shall be unlawful for a person
to be retained, or to retain a person, to solicit or secure a city contract
upon an agreement or understanding for a commission, percentage, brokerage, or
contingent fee, except for retention of bona fide employees or bona fide
established commercial selling agencies for the purpose of securing business.
   (F)   Contemporaneous employment prohibited. It shall be unlawful for any
employee who is participating directly or indirectly in the procurement process
to become or to be, while such an employee, the employee of any person
contracting with the governmental body by whom the employee is employed.
   (G)   Waiver from contemporaneous employment prohibition and other conflicts
of interest. The City Council may grant a waiver from the employee conflict of
interest provision or the contemporaneous employment provision upon making a
written determination that:
      (1)   The contemporaneous employment or financial interest of the
employee has been publicly disclosed;
      (2)   The city employee will be able to perform his or her procurement
functions without actual or apparent bias or favoritism; and
      (3)   The award will be in the best interests of the city.
   (H)   Use of confidential information. It shall be unlawful for any employee
or former employee knowingly to use confidential information for actual or
anticipated personal gain, or for the actual or anticipated personal gain of
any other person.
   (I)   Recovery of value transferred or received in breach of ethical
standards.
      (1)   The value of anything transferred or received in breach of the
ethical standards of this section by an employee or a nonemployee may be
recovered from both employee and nonemployee.
      (2)   Upon a showing that a subcontractor made a kickback to a prime
contractor or a higher tier subcontractor in connection with the award of a
subcontract or order thereunder, it shall be conclusively presumed that the
amount thereof was included in the price of the subcontract or order and
ultimately borne by the city and will be recoverable hereunder from the
recipient. In addition, that amount may also be recovered from the
subcontractor making such kickbacks. Recovery from one offending party shall
not preclude recovery from other offending parties.
   (J)   Disclosure of travel expenses. Officials using taxpayer funded travel
in excess of $1,000 for any trip shall disclose that trip to the City Clerk
within one week after completion of the trip. All such travel expenses shall be
immediately posted on the city's website and shall itemize all expected expense
as well as the purpose of the trip.
   (K)   Penalties. To the extent that violation of the ethical standards of
conduct set forth in this section constitute violations of a city ordinance or
state statute, they shall be punishable as provided therein. The civil
penalties set forth in this section and available for the violation of
provisions of this article shall be in addition to such criminal penalties.
('74 Code, § 5-7-22) (Ord. 6-1991; Am. Ord. 30-1998; Am. Ord. 24-2000; Am. Ord.
34-2006; Am. Ord._2019-005) Penalty, see §
1-1-99
§ 5-5-23 PROTEST.
   (A)   Right to protest competitive solicitation. Any business may protest
the specifications of a competitive solicitation issued by the Central
Purchasing Office and any offeror may protest a recommendation of award
resulting from a competitive solicitation. Such protests must be submitted
within the time frame specified in the competitive solicitation or
recommendation of award, but in no event more than 15 calendar days after
knowledge of the facts or occurrences giving rise to the protest. Protests
shall be made to the Chief Procurement Officer.
   (B)   Right to protest sole source exceeding $75,000 or above. Any qualified
potential contractor may protest an intent to award a sole source procurement
exceeding $75,000 within 30 calendar days after the sole source procurement is
posted to the ABQ View Website. Protests shall be made to the Chief Procurement
Officer.
   (C)   Actions pending protest. In the event of a timely protest the Central
Purchasing Office shall not proceed further with the procurement unless the
Chief Procurement Officer makes a determination that the award of the contract
is necessary to protect substantial interests of the city.
   (D)   Protest authority. The Chief Procurement Officer shall have the
authority to take any action reasonably necessary to resolve a protest of an
aggrieved offeror. This authority shall be exercised in accordance with
regulations promulgated by the Chief Procurement Officer pursuant to its
authority granted in §
5-5-6 of this article.
   (E)   Applicability. This section shall not apply to the procurements made
pursuant to §
5-5-11, Capital Projects.
(Ord. 30-1998; Am. Ord. 26-2011; Am. Ord._2016-005; Am. Ord._2019-005)
§ 5-5-24 DEBARMENT.
   Debarment and suspension of a contractor, offeror or bidder is governed by
the city's Debarment Ordinance §§
5-7-1 et seq.
(Ord. 30-1998; Am. Ord. 26-2011; Am. Ord._2019-005; Am. Ord._2023-015)
§ 5-5-25 DETERMINATION OF RESPONSIBILITY IN CONSTRUCTION AND CONSULTANT
CONTRACTS.
   (A)   In all contracts related to capital projects procured through §
5-5-11 or §
14-7-2-1, the Director of the Department of Municipal Development, upon
receiving a recommendation by any City Councilor, the Deputy Director of the
Department of Municipal Development, or any other Department Director, may
evaluate the past performance of an entity doing business with the city
pursuant to the above-referenced sections and determine that the contractor is
not a responsible offeror. In the evaluation of the performance of a
contractor, the following factors shall be considered:
      (1)   Timeliness of performance;
      (2)   Quality of performance;
      (3)   Compliance with the Air Quality Control Act;
      (4)   Compliance with the Street Excavation and Barricading Ordinance;
      (5)   Compliance with the Noise Ordinance;
      (6)   Compliance with labor laws regarding payment of wage rates;
      (7)   Poor performance causing delays in performance by other
contractors;
      (8)   Failure to comply with safety laws, rules and regulations;
      (9)   Failure to accept responsibility for managing claims arising out of
the performance of their contracts;
      (10)   Or any other factor which, singly or in combination with the
above, results in a determination by the department director that the proposed
contracting entity is not a responsible offeror.
   (B)   Any such determination of non-responsibility made by the Director of
the Department of Municipal Development shall be sent to the contractor by
certified mail, return receipt requested. A determination of non-responsibility
shall continue until such time as the Director of the Department of Municipal
Development, based on contract performance occurring after the determination,
then determines that the offeror has improved its performance sufficient to be
deemed responsible. Any determination of non-responsibility may be protested
pursuant to §
5-5-23.
(Ord. 27-2005)
§ 5-5-26 SMALL PURCHASES.
   (A)   The Chief Procurement Officer shall establish regulations for the
purchase of goods, services and construction which shall be considered "small
purchases," allowable without prior authorization from the Central Purchasing
Office. The monetary limit of small purchases (the "small purchase limit")
shall be set by the Chief Procurement Officer by written notice to the user
departments. The small purchase limit shall not exceed $10,000.
   (B)   Petty cash purchases of $100 or less may be made without a purchase
order at the best obtainable price by authorized individuals in accordance with
regulations established by the City Treasurer.
(Ord. 26-2011; Am. Ord._2019-005)
§ 5-5-27 REQUEST FOR QUOTES.
   Purchases of goods, services and construction may be made by the Central
Purchasing Office by request for quotes in accordance with the following
provisions:
   (A)   A single purchase involving the expenditure of more than the small
purchase limit, but not more than $100,000, may be made after requesting
quotes. Departments are encouraged to obtain quotes first from local businesses
as defined in this article.
   (B)   Award of a contract may be made only to the responsible offeror(s)
submitting the lowest responsive offer(s).
(Ord. 26-2011; Am. Ord._2019-005; Am. Ord._2023-003)
§ 5-5-28 COMPETITIVE SEALED BIDS.
   (A)   All purchases of goods, services, and construction in excess of
$100,000 and the establishment of concession contracts expected to exceed
$75,000 in revenues to the contractor shall be made by competitive sealed bid
except as otherwise authorized by this article.
   (B)   Purchases by competitive sealed bid shall be made by a request for
bids. The following provisions shall apply.
      (1)   Offers shall be opened according to such procedures as may be
adopted by the Central Purchasing Office or CIP to ensure confidentiality of
offers prior to opening.
      (2)   Offers shall be evaluated based on the requirements set forth in
the request for bids, which may include criteria to determine acceptability
such as inspection, testing, quality, workmanship, delivery and suitability for
a particular purpose.
      (3)   A contract may be awarded only to the responsible offeror(s) with
the lowest cost or highest revenues or other best cost-related offer, as
established in the solicitation, considering all applicable preferences.
      (4)   The Central Purchasing Office or CIP may accept an improved total
offer from the awarded offeror to a request for bids, if said offer has
otherwise qualified, and if there is no change in the original terms and
conditions of the request for bids.
(Ord. 26-2011; Am. Ord._2019-005)
§ 5-5-29 PURCHASES OF PROFESSIONAL/TECHNICAL SERVICES.
   Purchases of professional/technical services of $100,000 or less may be made
by negotiation and execution of a contract signed by the Chief Procurement
Officer, and processed through the Central Purchasing Office. All contracts
shall be reviewed for legal sufficiency. The provisions in this article
applicable to professional/technical services do not apply to:
intergovernmental agreements; social services agreements; or agreements for
services that relate directly to a particular purchase of a software license or
software subscription. The application of this §
5-5-29 shall be determined by the Chief Procurement Officer in the Standard
Operating Procedure interpreting §
5-5-9(C) Purchase Splitting Prohibited, as may be amended.
(Ord. 26-2011; Am. Ord._2019-005; Am. Ord._2023-003)
§ 5-5-30 COMPETITIVE SEALED PROPOSALS.
   (A)   Competitive sealed proposals may be used for the purchase of goods,
services or construction, or to obtain concession contracts, particularly where
specifications cannot be adequately prepared that permit the award on the basis
of the lowest evaluated bid price; the use of proposals would promote
innovation, state of the art technology and overall efficiencies to the benefit
of the city; or the evaluation of responsive offers depends on levels of
performance, expertise, financial capability or other criteria and not price
alone.
   (B)   Purchases by competitive sealed proposals shall be made by a request
for proposals (RFP). The following provisions shall apply:
      (1)   The RFP shall include a weighted scale to indicate the relative
importance of evaluation factors to be used in the scoring of proposals.
      (2)   Pricing, revenues or other cost-related items will be a weighted
factor in scoring the proposals, unless the Chief Procurement Officer makes a
written determination that a cost factor is inappropriate.
      (3)   Evaluation factors shall be developed by the user departments
according to their needs in conjunction with the Central Purchasing Office or
CIP.
      (4)   The Mayor shall name an ad hoc advisory committee to evaluate
proposals. The committee shall include as one of its members a representative
from the department requesting the purchase.
      (5)   The contents of proposals may not be disclosed to any persons other
than the members of the ad hoc advisory committee or its advisors until
approval of the recommendation of award. If a request for proposals is canceled
and a similar RFP will be issued within six months, the contents of proposals
received in response to the first RFP may not be disclosed until after approval
of the recommendation of award for the second RFP, cancellation of the second
RFP, expiration of the six month period, or a written determination of the
Chief Procurement Officer that disclosure will not be detrimental to the
interests of the city and offerors.
      (6)   Additional information may be requested from and interviews may be
conducted with all offerors determined in writing by the ad hoc advisory
committee to be among the finalists considered for award. Revisions to
proposals may be permitted after the submission of proposals and prior to
approval of the ROA for the purpose of obtaining best and final offers. Any
discussions with finalists may not disclose any information derived from
proposals submitted by competing offerors.
      (7)   The committee shall submit to the Mayor the ROA containing a list
of the top three or more proposals in the order in which they are recommended
by the committee. The Central Purchasing Office shall retain as a public record
any committee notes which contain an explanation of the reasons for selection.
      (8)   The committee's list of recommended proposals shall be approved or
disapproved or revised by the Mayor. If the Mayor has disapproved the list, he
or she shall provide the committee with his or her reasons for revision or
disapproval of the list, in writing.
      (9)   If City Council approval is required, the Mayor shall submit the
ROA and an executive communication containing the term and dollar amount of the
contract, and a copy of the RFP to the City Council for approval. The executive
communication shall be approved or disapproved by Council. In the event of
disapproval, the City Council shall give its reasons therefor. The Mayor may
submit a revised ROA to the City Council if an ROA is not approved.
      (10)   If the ROA for an RFP has been approved by the City Council, the
contract resulting from that RFP and any supplements to that contract will not
require an additional approval by the City Council on the condition that the
amounts of the contract and contract scope were identified in the executive
communication or any related documents presented to City Council for approval.
Any supplement to a contract resulting from an RFP previously approved by the
City Council shall require additional approval by the City Council if the
contract is increased by over 20% of the amount previously identified, or the
supplement changes the scope of services related to the management or
operations of a city facility.
      (11)   Prior to City Council approval, but after the ROA has been
initially approved, negotiations may be conducted with the recommended offeror,
or offerors if multiple contracts will be awarded. If negotiations are
unsuccessful, as determined by the Chief Procurement Officer, negotiations may
be conducted with the next offeror or offerors identified in the ROA.
      (12)   An RFP for the City Council shall be subject to the provisions of
this article, with the exception that proposals submitted shall be evaluated
and recommended for award by an ad hoc advisory committee appointed by the
Director of Council Services, and the ROA shall be approved by the City Council
without the Mayor's approval.
(Ord. 26-2011; Am. Ord._2019-005)
§ 5-5-31 PAY EQUITY REPORTING FORM AND PAY EQUITY PREFERENCE.
   (A)   Reporting Form. The city requires that all responses to requests for
bids or requests for proposals include a completed City of Albuquerque Pay
Equity Reporting Form. The form calculates the deviation between salaries for
men and women and is designed to encourage compliance with the New Mexico State
Fair Pay for Women Act and federal gender pay equity laws. The Central
Purchasing Office or the CIP Official shall review all responses to bids and
proposals to determine whether the form is included. Any response that does not
include a completed form shall be deemed nonresponsive unless the form is
submitted within 24 hours of the response deadline. The Central Purchasing
Office and the CIP Official may allow the respondent to submit a revised Pay
Equity Reporting Form should, in their sole opinion, the originally submitted
form require a technical change.
   (B)   Pay Equity Preference. Prior to making a recommendation of award, the
Central Purchasing Office or CIP Official shall apply a 5% pay equity
preference to the amount bid or to the total score of any business that
includes with its response a valid form.
      (1)   Pay Equity Business. A business is eligible for a pay equity
preference if it maintains an overall deviation and position-specific
deviations between the salaries paid to men and the salaries paid to women for
comparable positions at the percentages provided by Administrative Instruction.
The Chief Administrative Officer may annually adjust the average and position-
specific deviations contained in this article by issuing an Administrative
Instruction and a notification to City Council. For purposes of this section,
comparable positions are those listed in the Job Classification Guide 2019 (or
as may be updated and amended from time to time) published by the federal Equal
Employment Opportunity Commission.
      (2)   Certification. The city shall certify any business that
demonstrates that it has satisfied the requirements of subsection (1) above as
a Pay Equity Business. The certification process shall be as provided by
Administrative Instruction. Certificates shall be valid for one year from the
date of issuance. The city will continue to honor existing certificates until
their dates of expiration.
   (C)   Limitation. The total amount of all preferences, including the pay
equity preference, is limited by §
5-5-17(E).
   (D)   Rules and Regulations. The Mayor or the Mayor’s designated
representative may prescribe reasonable rules and regulations to carry out the
intent and purpose of this section.
(Ord._2013-018; Am. Ord._2015-019; Am. Ord._2017-003; Am. Ord._2020-007; Am.
Ord._2023-003)
§ 5-5-32 SOLE SOURCE PURCHASES.
   A contract may be awarded without a competitive solicitation regardless of
the estimated cost when the Chief Procurement Officer makes a determination,
after conducting a good faith review of available sources and consulting the
user department, that there is only one source for the required goods,
services, or construction. The Chief Procurement Officer or designee shall
conduct negotiations, as appropriate, as to price, delivery and quantity in
order to obtain the price most advantageous to the city. Any qualified
potential contractor may protest an intent to award a sole source procurement
exceeding $75,000 within 30 calendar days after the sole source procurement is
posted to the ABQ View Website. Any sole source contract that exceeds $75,000
shall be subject to City Council approval.
(Ord. 26-2011; Am. Ord._2013-018; Am. Ord._2016-005; Am. Ord._2019-005)
§ 5-5-33 PURCHASING FROM GOVERNMENT CONTRACTS.
   Goods, services, including professional or technical services, or
construction may be purchased from a business, or its authorized
representative, under contract with a public agency or cooperative procurement
agency at prices which are equal to or less than the prices of goods, services
or construction meeting the same specifications or standards of those
purchases, if the following conditions are met:
   (A)   Prices are from:
      (1)   A nationally published federal price schedule or a "federal
government price schedule" published by the business under contract with the
federal government;
      (2)   A current contract which has been awarded after notice and
publication and in accordance with the requirements of the New Mexico
Procurement Code, §§ 13-1-28 et seq. NMSA1978; or
      (3)   A valid contract which has been awarded by any public agency or
cooperative procurement agency after notice and publication and in accordance
with the requirements of the procurement laws and regulations applicable to
that agency.
   (B)   The quantity purchased shall not exceed the quantity which may be
purchased under the applicable contract.
   (C)   The goods, services or construction shall be purchased at the best
obtainable price.
   (D)   The terms and conditions of the contract shall not be modified for the
city purchase, unless the change is agreed to by the contracting business and
is more favorable to the city than the original terms and conditions.
   (E)   The purchase order for the goods, services or construction purchased
shall adequately identify the contract relied upon.
   (F)   The Central Purchasing Office or CIP shall retain for public
inspection and internal use, official documentation, as required by the Chief
Procurement Officer or CIP Official, whichever applies.
(Ord. 26-2011; Am. Ord._2013-018; Am. Ord._2019-005)
§ 5-5-34 RAPID PROCUREMENT.
   Purchases of goods, services and construction for any amount where
advertising and the solicitation of offers would entail unnecessary and
detrimental delay and loss to the city, may be made by the Central Purchasing
Office, or CIP, at the best obtainable price in accordance with procedures
approved by the City Purchasing Officer or the CIP Official, whichever applies.
Complete documentation of all proposed prices submitted by offerors must be
maintained in the Central Purchasing Office, or CIP, for public inspection.
(Ord. 26-2011; Am. Ord._2013-018)
§ 5-5-35 EMERGENCY PURCHASES.
   In the event of an unforeseen and dangerous situation requiring immediate
action to preserve the peace, health, or safety of people or property within
the jurisdiction of the city or to prevent significant economic loss, the
Central Purchasing Office or a user department may purchase goods, services and
construction by order without a competitive solicitation. Documentation of all
proposed prices submitted by offerors must be maintained in the Central
Purchasing Office for public inspection.
(Ord. 26-2011; Am. Ord._2013-018)
§ 5-5-36 INSURANCE RELATED PURCHASES.
   (A)   Insurance coverage for the city, other than employee health care,
shall be remarketed by a controlled bidding process through an agent of record
under the direction of the city department responsible for risk management.
Rules of procedure for the controlled bidding process shall be established by
the Mayor and published in the appropriate internal procedure manual.
   (B)   Employee health care insurance will be obtained in accordance with the
procurement methods described in this article or otherwise approved by the
Chief Procurement Officer.
   (C)   The selection of the city's agent of record responsible for the
negotiation of insurance coverages for the city and who shall work with and
under the direction of the city department responsible for risk management will
be obtained in accordance with the procurement methods described in this
article or otherwise approved by the Chief Procurement Officer.
(Ord. 26-2011; Am. Ord._2013-018; Am. Ord._2019-005)
§ 5-5-37 PURCHASES OF APPRAISAL SERVICES.
   Contracts for the services of appraisers of real property shall be entered
into, as needed, following selection of a list of appraisers by competitive
solicitation. For each appraisal project, oral or written quotes must be
obtained from three or more of the appraisers, if possible, listed and the
project shall be awarded to the appraiser with the best quote as determined by
the user department in conjunction with the city's Real Property Division, or
its successor, in accordance with a procedure approved by the Chief Procurement
Officer. Oral quotes must be documented in writing and maintained by the Real
Property Division. The Real Property Division shall establish maximum hourly
charges for appraisal services. The quote process shall apply to updates for an
appraisal.
(Ord. 26-2011; Am. Ord._2013-018; Am. Ord._2019-005)
§ 5-5-38 PURCHASES OF ATTORNEY SERVICES.
   The Legal Department and the Risk Management Division, or their successors,
shall each use their best efforts to issue a request for letters of interest
every four years to select a list of attorneys available and qualified to
provide legal services in particular areas of law utilized by the city.
Attorneys may be added to the list at any time if they submit a proposal which
meets the minimum requirements of the most current request for letters of
interest and are approved by the City Attorney and the Risk Manager.
(Ord. 26-2011; Am. Ord._2013-018; Am. Ord._2019-005)
§ 5-5-39 PURCHASES OF SOCIAL SERVICES.
   Social services contracts shall be procured in accordance with written
regulations promulgated by the Family and Community Services Department, or a
successor department, and approved by the Chief Administrative Officer and the
Chief Procurement Officer. At a minimum, these department regulations shall
require social services contracts to include service performance standards
which shall be reviewed and revised on a regular basis. If these performance
standards are not met for two consecutive years, a request for proposals
pursuant to the department regulations shall be required. Contracts which meet
the definition of social services contracts shall not be subject to the
provisions in this article applicable to those professional/technical services
contracts and intergovernmental agreements, but shall be subject only to the
provisions in this article applicable to social services agreements. City
Council approval of social services contracts is required as set out in §
5-5-19 of this article.
(Ord. 26-2011; Am. Ord._2013-018; Am. Ord._2019-005)
§ 5-5-40 INTERGOVERNMENTAL AGREEMENTS.
   Intergovernmental agreements of any amount may be made by negotiation and
execution of a contract signed by the Chief Administrative Officer, or by a
city official designated by Administrative Instruction. All intergovernmental
agreements shall be reviewed for legal sufficiency. Intergovernmental
agreements for professional/technical services shall not be subject to the
provisions in this article applicable to professional/ technical agreements.
Intergovernmental agreements that meet the definition of social services
contracts shall be subject to the provisions in this article applicable to
social services contracts.
(Ord. 26-2011; Am. Ord._2013-018)
§ 5-5-41 PURCHASES OF SOFTWARE LICENSES AND SOFTWARE SUBSCRIPTIONS.
   Purchases of software licenses and software subscriptions of $100,000 or
less may be made by request for demonstrations. Each request for demonstrations
shall include a detailed specification and a weighted scale to indicate the
relative importance of evaluation factors in the scoring of proposals. The
process for procuring software licenses and software subscriptions under this §
5-5-41 shall be determined by the Chief Procurement Officer in the Standard
Operating Procedure interpreting §
5-5-41, as may be amended.
(Ord._2023-003)
ARTICLE 6: MINORITY AND WOMEN'S
BUSINESS ENTERPRISES
Section
   
5-6-1   Policy
   
5-6-2   Definitions
   
5-6-3   Inventory and classification of MBEs
   
5-6-4   Training programs
   
5-6-5   Review and improvement of city acquisition procedures
   
5-6-6   Active solicitation of MBEs
   
5-6-7   Responsibilities of private contractors
   
5-6-8   Annual budget
   
5-6-9   Regulations and procedures
   
5-6-10   Federal requirements
   
5-6-11   Quarterly report to council
§ 5-6-1 POLICY.
   It is the policy of the city to take affirmative action to assure that a
fair share of city purchases of goods and services, including construction
work, is made from enterprises owned and controlled by minorities and women. As
part of this policy the city undertakes to assure there are no undue or
unnecessary requirements imposed by the city that inhibit or prevent purchases
of goods and services from business that are otherwise qualified to provide
such goods and services. It is further city policy to impose similar
affirmative action upon prime contractors providing goods and services to the
city with regard to subcontractors involved in such work to assure a fair share
of business for minority and women's business enterprises. The Mayor shall
implement the policies and procedures set out in this article.
('74 Code, § 5-2-1) (Ord. 15-1984)
§ 5-6-2 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this article, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ECONOMICALLY DISADVANTAGED INDIVIDUALS.  Socially disadvantaged individuals
whose ability to compete in the free enterprise system has been impaired due to
diminished capital and credit opportunities, as compared to others in the same
line of business and competitive market area who are not socially
disadvantaged.
   MAYOR. The Mayor or designated representative.
   MINORITY.  A person who is a citizen or lawful permanent resident of the
United States and who is:
      (1)   Hispanic Americans (includes persons of Mexican, Puerto Rican,
Cuban, Central or South American, or other Spanish culture or origin,
regardless of race);
      (2)   Black Americans (includes persons having origins in any of the
Black racial groups of Africa);
      (3)   Native Americans (includes persons who are American Indians,
Eskimos, Aleuts, or Native Hawaiians);
      (4)   Asian-Pacific Americans (includes persons whose origins are from
Japan, China, Taiwan, Korea, Vietnam, Laos, Cambodia, the Philippines, Samoa,
Guam, the U.S. Trust Territories of the Pacific, and the Northern Marianas);
      (5)   Asian-Indian Americans (includes persons whose origins are from
India, Pakistan, and Bangladesh);
      (6)   Members of other groups, or other individuals, found to be
economically and socially disadvantaged by the Small Business Administration
under section 8(a) of the Small Business Act, as amended (15 U.S.C. 637(a)).
   MINORITY BUSINESS ENTERPRISE or MBE. A business which is owned and
controlled by one or more minorities or women. For the purposes of this
article, owned and controlled means a business:
      (1)   Which is at least 51% owned by one or more minorities or women or,
in the case of a publicly-owned business, at least 51% of the stock of which is
owned by one or more minorities or women; and
      (2)   Whose management and daily business operations are controlled by
one or more such individuals.
   SOCIALLY DISADVANTAGED INDIVIDUALS. Those who have been subjected to racial
or ethnic prejudice or cultural bias because of their identity as a member of a
group without regard to their individual qualities. The social disadvantage of
individuals must stem from circumstances beyond their control.
('74 Code, § 5-2-2) (Ord. 15-1984)
§ 5-6-3 INVENTORY AND CLASSIFICATION OF MBEs
   The city shall compile and keep current a listing of all MBEs in the local
area with whom the city might do business. MBEs on the list shall be classified
by size and types of goods and services offered. The city shall keep cumulative
records on city business done with MBEs, broken down by appropriate
classifications with comparison to total volumes of similar acquisitions of
goods and services by the city.
('74 Code, § 5-2-3) (Ord. 15-1984)
§ 5-6-4 TRAINING PROGRAMS.
   The city shall regularly and routinely conduct training sessions and
seminars or use other suitable means for informing MBEs and other interested
firms of opportunities and procedures for doing business with the city and
shall actively solicit information from such firms regarding unnecessary
problems, requirements, or barriers involved in doing business with the city
that might be ameliorated, such as the inability to obtain bonding, financing,
or technical assistance.
('74 Code, § 5-2-4) (Ord. 15-1984)
§ 5-6-5 REVIEW AND IMPROVEMENT OF CITY ACQUISITION PROCEDURES.
   The city shall undertake a review of all processes and procedures involved
with private firms doing business with the city with particular focus on input
derived from MBEs. Based upon these reviews the Mayor shall initiate
improvements or recommend for Council approval improvements that would remove
barriers to doing business with the city while at the same time protecting the
interests of the city and the public.
('74 Code, § 5-2-5) (Ord. 15-1984)
§ 5-6-6 ACTIVE SOLICITATION OF MBEs.
   In addition to following normal processes, the City shall directly solicit
bids and offers of goods and services for the city from MBEs to the extent
necessary to insure that MBEs are aware of the opportunities for such business
and of the city policy as set out in this article.
('74 Code, § 5-2-6) (Ord. 15-1984)
§ 5-6-7 RESPONSIBILITIES OF PRIVATE CONTRACTORS.
   In order for any prime contractor bidding for work with the city or
responding to an RFP from the city to be accepted for such work the contractor
must give assurances that it has actively encouraged the participation of MBEs
in subcontracts needed for such work in furtherance of the policy of this
article and regulations in implementation thereof.
('74 Code, § 5-2-7) (Ord. 15-1984)
§ 5-6-8 ANNUAL BUDGET.
   The Mayor shall present for approval by the Council a budget and staffing
level needed initially and annually thereafter, for the full and active
implementation of this article.
('74 Code, § 5-2-8) (Ord. 15-1984)
§ 5-6-9 REGULATIONS AND PROCEDURES.
   The Mayor shall promulgate regulations and procedures necessary to implement
this article.
('74 Code, § 5-2-9) (Ord. 15-1984)
§ 5-6-10 FEDERAL REQUIREMENTS.
   The city will implement and fulfill any Federal requirements applicable to
the city with regard to MBEs that might exist in addition to those set out in
this article.
('74 Code, § 5-2-10) (Ord. 15-1984)
§ 5-6-11 QUARTERLY REPORT TO COUNCIL.
   The Mayor shall submit quarterly reports to the Council regarding steps
taken and progress made in the implementation of this article.
('74 Code, § 5-2-11) (Ord. 15-1984)
ARTICLE 7: DEBARMENT
Section
   
5-7-1   Short title
   
5-7-2   Definitions
   
5-7-3   Authority to suspend or debar
   
5-7-4   Causes for debarment or suspension; time limit
   
5-7-5   Debarment or suspension; notice of determination
   
5-7-6   Hearing procedures
§ 5-7-1 SHORT TITLE.
   This article may be referred to as the "Debarment Ordinance."
(Ord._2023-015)
§ 5-7-2 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this article, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning. As used
in the Debarment Ordinance, the terms "person," "bidder,” "offeror,'' and
"contractor" include the principals, officers, directors, owners, partners and
managers of a person, bidder, offeror or contractor.
   CHIEF PROCUREMENT OFFICER. The city's Chief Procurement Officer, or their
designee.
   CONTRACTOR. Any person or business that is a party to a contract with the
city that is governed by the Public Purchases Ordinance, or that has obtained
or attempted to obtain a contract relating to a Public Works Project.
   DIRECTOR OF THE DEPARTMENT OF MUNICIPAL DEVELOPMENT. The director of the
city's Department of Municipal Development, or their designee.
   OFFEROR or BIDDER. A person or business that submits a response to a
competitive solicitation.
(Ord._2023-015)
§ 5-7-3 AUTHORITY TO SUSPEND OR DEBAR.
   The Chief Procurement Officer or the Director of the Department of Municipal
Development may suspend a person from consideration for award of contracts
under their authority if, after reasonable investigation, they find that a
person has engaged in conduct that constitutes cause for debarment pursuant to
§
5-7-4.
   (A)   The term of a suspension pursuant to this section shall not exceed
three months; however, if a person, including a bidder, offeror, or contractor,
has been charged with a criminal offense that would constitute cause for
debarment pursuant to §
5-7-4, the person's suspension shall remain in effect until the criminal charge
is resolved and the person is debarred or the reason for suspension no longer
exists.
   (B)   The Chief Procurement Officer or the Director of the Department of
Municipal Development, after reasonable notice to the person involved and for
cause, may recommend to the Mayor the debarment of the person from
consideration for award of contracts. The debarment shall not be for a period
of more than three years.
(Ord._2023-015)
§ 5-7-4 CAUSES FOR DEBARMENT OR SUSPENSION; TIME LIMIT.
   (A)   A person shall be debarred or suspended within three years of the date
the city knows of the facts that constitute cause for debarment or suspension.
Causes for debarment or suspension include, but are not limited to:
      (1)   Criminal conviction of a bidder, offeror, or contractor for
commission of a criminal offense related to:
         (a)   Obtaining unlawfully or attempting to obtain unlawfully a public
or private contract or subcontract; or
         (b)   Unlawful performance of a public or private contract or
subcontract;
      (2)   Civll judgment against a bidder, offeror, or contractor for a civil
violation related to:
         (a)   Obtaining unlawfully or attempting to obtain unlawfully a public
or private contract or subcontract; or
         (b)   Unlawful performance of a public or private contract or
subcontract;
      (3)   Conviction of a bidder, offeror, or contractor under a state or
federal statute related to embezzlement, theft, forgery, bribery, fraud,
falsification, or destruction of records, making false statements or receiving
stolen property or for violation of a state or federal tax law;
      (4)   Conviction of a bidder, offeror, or contractor under a state or
federal antitrust statute relating to the submission of offers or bids;
      (5)   Criminal conviction of a bidder, offeror, or contractor for any
other offense related to honesty, integrity, or business ethics;
      (6)   Civil judgment against a bidder, offeror, or contractor for a civil
violation related to honesty, integrity, or business ethics;
      (7)   Civil judgment against a bidder, offeror, or contractor pursuant to
the Unfair Practices Act NMSA 1978, Chapter 57, Article 12;
      (8)   Violation by a bidder, offeror, or contractor, of contract
provisions, as set forth in this paragraph, of a character that is reasonably
regarded by the state Chief Procurement Officer or Director of the Department
of Municipal Development, as applicable, to be so serious as to justify
suspension or debarment action, including:
         (a)   Willful failure to perform in accordance with one or more
contracts; or
         (b)   A history of failure to perform or of unsatisfactory performance
of one or more contracts; provided that this failure or unsatisfactory
performance has occurred within a reasonable time preceding the decision to
impose suspension or debarment; and provided further that failure to perform or
unsatisfactory performance caused by acts beyond the control of the bidder,
offeror, or contractor shall not be considered to be a basis for suspension or
debarment;
      (9)   Any other cause that the Chief Procurement Officer or the Director
of the Department of Municipal Development or his or her designee determines to
be so serious and compelling as to affect responsibility as a bidder, offeror,
or contractor;
      (10)   Willful violation by a bidder, offeror, or contractor of the
provisions of the Public Purchases Ordinance, Chapter 5, Article 5, ROA 1994;or
      (11)   Previous suspension or debarment or prior finding by any agency of
the federal government, the State of New Mexico, any state of the United
States, or any local public body of a state in the United States, that the
person is otherwise ineligible to receive funds from the agency or government.
(Ord._2023-015)
§ 5-7-5 DEBARMENT OR SUSPENSION; NOTICE OF DETERMINATION.
   (A)   The Chief Procurement Officer or the Director of the Department of
Municipal Development shall issue a written determination to debar or suspend a
person. There is no right to appeal a suspension pursuant to §
5-7-4. A determination to debar or suspend shall contain the following
statements or information:
      (1)   Whether the action contemplated is for debarment or suspension;
      (2)   That the maximum time period of a debarment is three years, and the
recommended time of the debarment, if less than three years;
      (3)   The reasons for the action, which shall include a summary of the
person's conduct to which the action relates and a listing of any contracts
related to such conduct;
      (4)   That the action is brought pursuant to the provisions of the
Debarment Ordinance and the regulations promulgated thereunder;
      (5)   That sufficient facts exist, unless rebutted, to support the
proposed suspension or debarment, and identification of such facts;
      (6)   If the proposed action is for debarment, notice that the Chief
Procurement Officer or the Director of Municipal Development shall proceed to
debar the person unless the person makes a written request for a hearing within
15 consecutive calendar days from the day the person receives the notice of the
proposed action;
      (7)   If the proposed action is for debarment, the address for the Office
of the City Clerk where the person's request for hearing shall be sent; and
      (8)   If the proposed action is for debarment, that the person may be
represented throughout the proceeding by an attorney licensed to practice law
in the state of New Mexico.
   (B)   A copy of the determination made pursuant to §
5-7-5 shall be:
      (1)   Mailed to the person's last known address on file with the city's
Purchasing Division, by first class mail, within three business days after
issuance of the written determination; or
      (2)   Transmitted electronically to the person's last known email address
on file within three business days after issuance of the written determination.
   (C)   Failure to request hearing on debarment: If the person fails to
deliver a timely written request for a hearing to the Office of the City Clerk
in accordance with the provisions of this section, a final determination shall
be made by the Chief Procurement Officer or the Director of Municipal
Development or their designee.
(Ord._2023-015)
§ 5-7-6 HEARING PROCEDURES.
   Hearings on debarment shall be conducted pursuant to the provisions of the
IHO Ordinance, ROA 1994,
Chapter 2, Article 7, Part 8.
(Ord._2023-015)
ARTICLE 8: OPEN SPACE LANDS AND
REGIONAL PRESERVES
Section
   
5-8-1   Short title
   
5-8-2   Purpose
   
5-8-3   Definitions
   
5-8-4   Vehicle trespass prohibited
   
5-8-5   Removal or destruction of barriers or signs prohibited
   
5-8-6   Prohibited activities
   
5-8-7   Administration
   
5-8-8   Use of bicycles, e-bikes, and powered micromobility devices in open
space lands
 
   
5-8-99   Penalty
§ 5-8-1 SHORT TITLE.
   This article shall be known and may be cited as the "Albuquerque Open Space
Management Ordinance."
('74 Code, § 5-6-1) (Ord. 23-1980)
§ 5-8-2 PURPOSE.
   (A)   Unrestricted access and use of Open Space Lands and Regional Preserves
by motorized vehicles has caused severe erosion, led to the creation of
excessive dust, noise, littering, dumping, shooting, and vandalism in violation
of city ordinances, and the deterioration of a publicly-owned resource. Such
unrestricted access is a public nuisance and this article is intended to stop
it.
   (B)   Unrestricted camping and unrestricted use of fire in Open Space Lands
and Regional Preserves are adding to the deterioration of this publicly-owned
resource and detracting from the general public's use and enjoyment of this
resource. Such camping and fires can be public nuisances, and this article is
intended to control them.
('74 Code, § 5-6-2) (Ord. 23-1980; Am. Ord. 35-1987)
§ 5-8-3 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this article, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   BARRIER. A fence, cable, chain, line berm, or solid obstruction marking the
boundary of any Open Space Lands or which has been placed across any trail,
road, or arroyo leading into or across Open Space Lands.
   CAMP or CAMPING. Presence on or use of Open Space Lands or Regional
Preserves by a person after 10:00 p.m. and before 5:00 a.m. or the setting up
of any tent, shack, or other permanent or temporary structure or shelter on
Open Space Lands or Regional Preserves.
   DEVELOPED FACILITIES or FACILITY. An area within Open Space that has
graveled, concrete or asphalt ground cover and signage that designates that
fires and smoking are allowed.
   DRIVER. The operator of a motorized vehicle.
   ELECTRIC-ASSISTED BICYCLE or E-BIKE. Shall have the meaning given in
Chapter 8, Article 1, Part 1, Section 2 of the Traffic Code.
   MAYOR. The Mayor or his designated representative.
   MOTORIZED VEHICLE. Any vehicle which is self-propelled by gas, diesel, or
electric motor, whether 2, 3, or 4 wheeled or carried on treads or tracks.
   OFFICIAL VEHICLE. Governmental or municipal vehicles used for patrol,
pursuit, maintenance, construction emergencies, or other officially authorized
purposes.
   OPEN SPACE. 
      (1)   Those lands so designated in the adopted Plan for Major Open Space
and acquired by the city;
      (2)   Any other lands so designated at the time of acquisition or
subsequently;
      (3)   Any lands for which the city has assumed control or management
responsibility by lease, easement, or legal agreement;
      (4)   Major named arroyos, lined or unlined drainageways, retention dams
and retention pond areas, and abutting rights-of-way or easements which have
been publicly acquired.
   POWERED MICROMOBILITY DEVICE. Shall have the meaning given in
Chapter 8, Article 1, Part 1, Section 2 of the Traffic Code.
   REGIONAL PRESERVE. Areas designated as Regional Preserves in the Open Space
Management Plan.
   RIO GRANDE VALLEY STATE PARK.  The park area established in the Rio Grande
Valley State Park Act that has its boundaries defined in Section 16-4-12 NMSA
1978 and is under the management of the City of Albuquerque pursuant to the Rio
Grande Valley State Park Act.
   SIGNED/POSTED. The placing of signs on trails, roads, barriers or boundaries
to identify City Open Space Lands or Regional Preserves and the activities that
are permitted or not permitted, including but not limited to fires, smoking or
the use of motorized vehicles.
   SMOKE or SMOKING. Inhaling, exhaling, or burning any lighted cigar,
cigarette, pipe or other combustible tobacco product.
   TRESPASS. The entry, operation, or use of motorized vehicles on "Open Space
Lands" as defined in herein.
('74 Code, § 5-6-3) (Ord. 23-1980; Am. Ord. 35-1987; Am. Ord. 63-2005; Am. Ord.
2024-021)
§ 5-8-4 VEHICLE TRESPASS PROHIBITED.
   After the effective date of this article, no person shall ride or operate a
motorized vehicle on Open Space Lands or Regional Preserves where boundaries
are clearly marked; or on any path, trail, or road on which a barrier or sign
has been erected or placed.
('74 Code, § 5-6-4) (Ord. 23-1980)
§ 5-8-5 REMOVAL OR DESTRUCTION OF BARRIERS OR SIGNS PROHIBITED.
   After the effective date of this article, no person shall remove, cut,
damage, or take down any barrier or sign placed across any trail, path, road,
or boundary of any Open Space Lands or Regional Preserves.
('74 Code, § 5-6-5) (Ord. 23-1980)
§ 5-8-6 PROHIBITED ACTIVITIES.
   The following activities are prohibited in any Open Space Lands or Regional
Preserves:
   (A)   Criminal Trespass. Criminal trespass consists of unlawfully entering
or remaining upon the land or property of another, knowing that any consent to
enter or remain has been denied or withdrawn by the person or persons lawfully
in possession of the premises or after the request or demand to leave the
premises by the authorized representative of the person or persons lawfully in
possession of the premises.
   (B)   Negligent Use of Weapons. Negligent use of weapons consists of:
      (1)   Discharging a weapon within the city limits without legal
justification; or
      (2)   Endangering the safety of another or his property by handling or
using a firearm or other deadly weapon in a negligent manner.
   (C)   Criminal Damage to Public Property. Criminal damage to public property
consists of intentionally damaging to a value of less than $1,000 any real or
personal property of the city, county, state or United States government
without the consent of the owner thereof.
   (D)   Operation of Motorcycles, Motorscooters, and Recreational Vehicles in
Certain Areas off the Public Way. No person shall ride or operate any
motorcycle, motorscooter, off-road vehicle or recreational vehicle on any
private property or public property within one-quarter of a mile of any school,
hospital, convalescent home or residence, except on a public way or parking
lot, or on a private road or driveway.
   (E)   Removal of Natural Resources. No person shall dig or remove any soil,
sand, gravel, rock, scoria, shrubs, trees, cacti, or other plants from Open
Space Lands or Regional Preserves.
   (F)   Wildlife. No person shall intentionally feed, harm, hunt, pursue,
molest, harass, trap, collect, or remove any mammal, bird, reptile, fish,
invertebrate, or amphibian animals or eggs or young of said animals on/from
Open Space Lands or Regional Preserves where prohibited without an authorized
scientific research permit from the Open Space Division, with the exception of
activities conducted by approved government entities. Species that are deemed a
public health concern are exempted from the protections of this prohibition.
   (G)   Weapons and Firearms. No person shall carry, possess, or discharge any
firearm, bow, crossbow, blowgun, or spring-driven, compressed air or CO2 
powered rifle or pistol on Open Space Lands or Regional Preserves.
   (H)   Dumping of Waste, Refuse, Trash, Oil. No person shall dump, deposit,
dispose, throw out, or leave behind any solid waste, plant waste or trimmings,
oil or grease, or any other form of rubbish or waste on Open Space Lands or
Regional Preserves in other than receptacles designated for that purpose.
   (I)   Vandalism, Protection of Ethno-Historical Resources. No person shall
mark or deface in any way any rock, wall, surface, petroglyph or sign on any
Open Space Lands or Regional Preserve, nor shall they remove or disturb any
archaeological site or artifact.
   (J)   Alcoholic Beverages. Drinking or consuming of alcoholic beverages on
Open Space Lands or Regional Preserves shall be considered "Drinking in Public"
and is hereby prohibited.
   (K)   Fires. No person shall smoke or attempt to smoke or build or attempt
to build a fire on Open Space Lands or Regional Preserves, except as provided
in Section 5-8-7(B)(6) of the Albuquerque Open Space Ordinance.
   (L)   Camping. No person shall camp, except as provided in §
5-8-7.
('74 Code, § 5-6-6) (Ord. 23-1980; Am. Ord. 35-1987; Am. Ord. 63-2005; Am. Ord.
2025-026)
§ 5-8-7 ADMINISTRATION.
   (A)   The Mayor shall be responsible for the enforcement of this article. He
may prescribe policies, rules, or regulations and vest designated city
personnel with citation authority to carry out the intent and purposes of this
article.
   (B)   Exemptions. Except as otherwise specifically provided or clearly
intended in this article, the other sections of the article do not apply to the
following categories:
      (1)   Official Vehicles. Municipal-, county-, and federally- owned
vehicles; or emergency vehicles being used for patrol, surveillance, search and
rescue, pursuit, construction, maintenance or other authorized purposes.
      (2)   Areas Designated for Vehicle Use. Such areas, trails, paths, roads,
or race courses designated for vehicle use and posted as such are exempt from
provisions of §
5-8-6(D) of this article but not from other provisions of this article.
      (3)   Alcoholic Beverages. Drinking may be permitted on certain Open
Space Lands, Regional Preserves, or portions thereof, at the discretion of the
Mayor and the City Council. Areas where drinking is permitted shall be posted
accordingly.
      (4)   Weapons and Firearms. Licensed hunters transporting encased or
taken-down firearms and bows only during an open season for game animals on the
Sandia State Game Refuge, as set by the New Mexico State Game Commission, are
exempt from the provisions of §
5-8-6(G) of this article but not from other provisions of this article.
      (5)   Wildlife, Plants. Collecting of plants or animals for scientific
research pursuant to written authorization by the Parks and Recreation
Department Director and concurrence by the State Heritage Program office.
      (6)   Fires and Smoking. Fire and smoking in any Open Space Lands or
Regional Preserves shall be limited to developed facilities where fires and
smoking is posted as allowed. Fire may be built only in developed facilities
where fire is designated as allowed and only in stoves or fireplaces provided
by the city or in enclosed containers for burning charcoal or liquefied
petroleum gas barbeque grills used for cooking purposes that are provided by
people using the facility. All fires must be attended at all times and fully
extinguished by the people using the campground prior to leaving the facility.
Smoking is also allowed within fully enclosed motorized vehicles, but only when
such vehicle is within an area designated for use by motorized vehicles. Open
Space Lands or Regional Preserves that have no developed areas shall be posted
as allowing no fire or smoking, except smoking in fully enclosed motorized
vehicles may be allowed. Whenever the Mayor determines that conditions are too
dry to be compatible with building fires or smoking, the Mayor may eliminate
the designation allowing smoking and fires. This paragraph shall not apply to
the Rio Grande Valley State Park. No fires or smoking shall be allowed at any
time in the Rio Grande Valley State Park.
      (7)   Camping. Camping pursuant to a permit and in areas designated by
the Mayor. Such a permit may be obtained from the Open Space Division, Parks
and Recreation Department, city. The following guidelines shall apply to
permits:
         (a)   Permits may be issued for not more than seven days.
         (b)   No person may camp for more than seven days within any
consecutive 30-day period.
         (c)   A permit may be revoked immediately if the campsite is not kept
clean and sanitary, or if this article or any other law is violated, or in an
emergency situation to protect public safety.
('74 Code, § 5-6-7) (Ord. 23-1980; Am. Ord. 35-1987; Am. Ord. 63-2005)
§ 5-8-8 USE OF BICYCLES, E-BIKES, AND POWERED MICROMOBILITY DEVICES IN OPEN
SPACE LANDS.
   (A)   Bicycles and Class 1, 2, and 3 E-Bikes are permitted on trails located
within Open Space lands, unless prohibited through a posted sign and or an on-
line map. The Mayor or Mayor’s designated representative may permit or prohibit
such use on trails based on safety, resource management, and other open space
management considerations.
   (B)   Operators of Bicycles, E-Bikes, and Powered Micromobility Devices are
not relieved of responsibility of using due care in the operation of their
vehicle and or device, and shall follow all posted signage regarding use,
speed, and required etiquette for the safety of all trail users.
   (C)   Powered Micromobility Devices are only permitted on paved trails
located within Open Space lands.
   (D)   Bicycles, Class 1, 2, and 3 E-Bikes and Powered Micromobility Devices
are not permitted in areas, trails, paths, roads, or racecourses that have
shared use agreements or co-management responsibilities without permission from
the partner organization(s) and unless a sign has been posted indicating such
use is allowed.
   (E)   ROA 1994, §
8-3-3-16 of the Traffic Code shall govern the lawful speed limit on trails
located in Open Space lands.
(Ord._2024-021)
§ 5-8-99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person who violates any of the provisions of this article shall be
deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof shall be subject to
the penalty provisions set forth in
§ 1-1-99 of this code of ordinances. Each violation shall be considered a
separate offense.
   (B)   Upon conviction of a violation of §
5-8-6(B), (1) and (3), (F) or (G), the weapon or firearm shall be forfeited to
the city by order of the Court.
('74 Code, § 5-6-8) (Ord. 23-1980)
ARTICLE 9: DETENTION CENTER INMATE COPAYMENTS
Section
   
5-9-1   Bernalillo County Detention Center inmate copayments for certain
medical and mental health care costs
   
5-9-2   Copayment charges to inmate account
   
5-9-3   Limitations on co-payments
   
5-9-4   Promulgation of regulations
   
5-9-5   Limitation on payment liability
§ 5-9-1 BERNALILLO COUNTY DETENTION CENTER INMATE COPAYMENTS FOR CERTAIN
MEDICAL AND MENTAL HEALTH CARE COSTS.
   The Chief of the Bernalillo County Detention Center (Chief of Corrections/
Detention) may charge at the time a medical health service is provided to each
inmate who is committed to the Bernalillo County Detention Center (BCDC) by a
competent authority, a reasonable fee or co-payment of not more than five
dollars for each inmate initiated non-emergency medical and mental health care
service and for each medical and mental health care service for injuries the
inmate inflicts upon himself or another, or for injuries incurred by an inmate
during voluntary recreational activities. Medical and mental health care
services include visits to BCDC or non-BCDC physicians, dentist, optometrists
and mental health care providers and providing medical supplies, including but
not limited to prosthetic devises and pharmaceutical items.
(Ord. 21-2001)
§ 5-9-2 COPAYMENT CHARGES TO INMATE ACCOUNT.
   The Chief of Corrections/Detention may maintain a negative balance on an
inmate’s account against which future collections may be made for medical and
mental health care service co-payments. Deposits to the inmate’s account made
subsequent to assessing a medical and mental health care service co-payment may
be applied toward the balance owed until the total amount owed is paid.
(Ord. 21-2001)
§ 5-9-3 LIMITATIONS ON CO-PAYMENTS.
   The Chief of Corrections/Detention shall not charge a co-payment for medical
and mental health care services for the following:
   (A)   Medical and mental health care services required by the Chief of
Corrections/Detention, including such services which are part of the inmate
intake process or the initial physical examination of an inmate.
   (B)   When an interstate corrections compact or agreement with another
government agency precludes assessing a co-payment.
(Ord. 21-2001)
§ 5-9-4 PROMULGATION OF REGULATIONS.
   The Chief of Corrections/Detention shall establish by regulation a schedule
of fees, procedures for the deduction of money credited to the account of an
inmate for medical and mental health care costs, disclosure of inmate medical
insurance and government medical assistance, and exemptions of inmates with
certain medical conditions from co-payments and such other matters necessary to
implement this ordinance. A public hearing shall be held to receive public
comment on the proposed regulations. Notice of the hearing shall be published
for two consecutive weeks in a newspaper of general circulation in Bernalillo
County, New Mexico and shall be posted at the BCDC for two consecutive weeks
prior to the hearing. The final regulation shall be filed with the City Clerk.
(Ord. 21-2001)
§ 5-9-5 LIMITATION ON PAYMENT LIABILITY.
   Liability for payment of medical or mental health care service co-payments
may not be construed as requiring payment by any person or entity except by an
inmate personally or through the coverage or benefits provided to the inmate by
health insurance and or any government medical assistance program.
(Ord. 21-2001)
ARTICLE 10: SMALL WIRELESS FACILITIES
Section
   
5-10-1   Short title
   
5-10-2   Purpose and intent
   
5-10-3   Definitions
   
5-10-4   Permitted use; application and application fees
   
5-10-5   Permit applications; conditions
   
5-10-6   Small wireless facilities in the ROW; maximum height; other
requirements
   
5-10-7   Effect of permit
   
5-10-8   Removal, relocation or modification of small wireless facility in the
ROW
   
5-10-9   ROW rates
   
5-10-10   Attachment to city utility poles in the ROW
   
5-10-11   Regulations and amendments; compliance with laws
§ 5-10-1 SHORT TITLE.
   This Article 10 of Chapter 5 of the Revised Ordinances of Albuquerque may be
cited as the "Small Wireless Facility Ordinance."
(Ord._2018-026)
§ 5-10-2 PURPOSE AND INTENT.
   (A)   Purpose. The purpose of this article is to establish policies and
procedures for the placement of small wireless facilities in rights-of-way
within the city's jurisdiction, which will provide public benefit consistent
with the preservation of the integrity, safe usage, and visual qualities of the
city rights-of-way and the city as a whole.
   (B)   Intent. In enacting this article, the city is establishing uniform
standards to address the placement of small wireless facilities in the rights-
of-way, including without limitation, to:
      (1)   Prevent interference with the use of streets, sidewalks, alleys,
parkways and other public ways and places;
      (2)   Prevent the creation of visual and physical obstructions and other
conditions that are hazardous to vehicular and pedestrian traffic;
      (3)   Prevent interference with the facilities and operations of
facilities lawfully located in rights-of-way or public property;
      (4)   Protect against environmental damage, including damage to trees;
      (5)   Preserve the character of the neighborhoods in which facilities are
installed; and
      (6)   Facilitate rapid deployment of small wireless facilities to provide
the benefits of advanced wireless services.
   (C)   Conflicts with Other Chapters. This article supersedes all chapters or
parts of chapters of the revised ordinances of Albuquerque adopted prior hereto
that are in conflict herewith, to the extent of such conflict.
(Ord._2018-026)
§ 5-10-3 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this article, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ANTENNA. Communications equipment that transmits or receives electromagnetic
radio frequency signals and that is used to provide wireless services and any
commingled information services;
   APPLICABLE CODES. Uniform building, fire, electrical, plumbing or mechanical
codes adopted by a recognized national code organization and enacted by the
city, including the local amendments to those codes enacted by the authority
solely to address imminent threats of destruction of property or injury to
persons, to the extent that those amendments are consistent with state and
federal law.
   APPLICANT. A wireless provider that submits an application.
   APPLICATION. A request submitted by an applicant to the city for a permit to
collocate one or more small wireless facilities on a pre-existing or modified
pole or structure or to approve the installation, modification or replacement
of a utility pole or wireless support structure for purposes of a small
wireless facility installation.
   AUTHORITY. The City of Albuquerque.
   AUTHORITY UTILITY POLE. A utility pole, owned or operated by the city in a
right of way.
   COLLOCATE.  To install, mount, maintain, modify, operate or replace one or
more wireless facilities on, in or adjacent to a pre-existing or modified
wireless support structure or utility pole.
   COMMUNICATIONS SERVICES. Cable service as defined in 47 U.S.C. Section 522
(6), information service as defined in 47 U.S.C. Section 153(24), mobile
service as defined in 47 U.S.C. Section 153(33), telecommunications services as
defined in 47 U.S.C. Section 153(53) or wireless service other than mobile
service.
   DESIGN DISTRICT.  An area zoned or otherwise designated by municipal
ordinance and for which a municipality maintains and uniformly enforces unique
design and aesthetic standards.
   FEE. A one-time charge.
   HISTORIC DISTRICT. A group of buildings, properties or sites that fall
within the category defined in 47 C.F.R. 1.1307(a)(4) and are:
      (1)   Listed in the National Register of Historic Places or formally
determined eligible for listing in that register by the keeper of the register
in accordance with the nationwide programmatic agreement found in 47 C.F.R.
Part 1 Appendix C; or
      (2)   Designated as a historic district by the city.
   LAW. Includes federal, state or local law.
   PERMIT. The written permission of the city for a wireless provider to
install, mount, maintain, modify,  operate or replace a utility pole for the
installation of a small wireless facility or to collocate a small wireless
facility on a pre-existing or modified utility pole or wireless support
structure.
   PERSON.
      (1)   An individual, corporation, limited liability company, partnership,
association, trust or other entity or organization; and
      (2)   Includes the city.
   PRIVATE EASEMENT. An easement or other real property right given for the
benefit of the grantee of the easement and the grantee's successors and
assigns.
   RATE. A recurring charge.
   RIGHT OF WAY.
      (1)   The area on, below or above a public roadway, highway, street,
sidewalk (only as defined by the Traffic Code), alley or utility easement; and
      (2)   Does not include the area on, below or above:
         (a)   A federal interstate highway;
         (b)   A state highway or route under the jurisdiction of the
Department of Transportation;
         (c)   A private easement;
          (d)   A utility easement that does not authorize the deployment
sought by a wireless provider; or
         (e)   Any other city owned property not expressly included in
subparagraph (1), above, such as but not limited to parks, open space, city
facilities, bike paths as defined by the Traffic Code or multi-use trails as
defined by the Integrated Development Ordinance (IDO).
   SMALL WIRELESS FACILITY.  A wireless facility that meets each of the
following conditions:
      (1)   Each antenna associated with the deployment is no more than three
cubic feet in volume, or could fit, inside an enclosure with a volume of three
or fewer cubic feet; and
      (2)   It is mounted on a structure 50 feet or less in height including
its antennas, or on structures no more than 10% taller than any adjacent
utility pole, wireless support structure, or electric transmission structure;
and
      (3)   Its deployment does not require the extension or replacement of any
existing structures to a height of more than 50 feet, or by more than 10%
taller than any adjacent utility pole, wireless support structure, or electric
transmission structure, whichever is greater; and
      (4)   Its ground or pole-mounted wireless equipment is 28 or fewer cubic
feet in volume; and
      (5)   It is in all respects in compliance with federal regulations
including those at 47 C.F.R. § 1.6002.
   TECHNICALLY FEASIBLE means that by virtue of engineering or spectrum usage
the proposed placement for a small wireless facility, its design, or site
location can be implemented without a reduction in the functionality of the
small wireless facility.
   UTILITY POLE.
      (1)   Means a pole or similar structure used in whole or in part for
communications services, electricity distribution, lighting or traffic signals;
and
      (2)   Does not include a wireless support structure or electric
transmission structure.
   WIRELESS FACILITY.
      (1)   Equipment at a fixed location that enables wireless communications
between user equipment and communications network, including:
         (a)   Equipment associated with wireless communications; and
         (b)   Radio transceivers, antennas, coaxial or fiber-optic cables,
regular and backup power supplies and comparable equipment, regardless of
technological configuration;
      (2)   Includes a small wireless facility; and
      (3)   Does not include:
         (a)   The structure or improvements on, under or within which the
equipment is collocated;
         (b)   A wireline backhaul facility, coaxial cable or fiber-optic cable
between wireless support structures or utility poles; or
         (c)   Coaxial or fiber-optic cable otherwise not immediately adjacent
to, or directly associated with, an antenna.
   WIRELESS INFRASTRUCTURE PROVIDER. A person, other than a wireless services
provider, that may provide telecommunications service in New Mexico and that
builds or installs wireless communications transmission equipment, wireless
facilities' utility poles or wireless support structures.
   WIRELESS PROVIDER. A wireless infrastructure provider or wireless services
provider.
   WIRELESS SERVICES. Services provided to the public that use licensed or
unlicensed spectrum, either mobile or at a fixed location, through wireless
facilities.
   WIRELESS SERVICES PROVIDER.  A person that provides wireless services.
   WIRELESS SUPPORT STRUCTURE. A freestanding structure, including a monopole
or guyed or self-supporting tower, but not including a utility pole.
   WIRELINE BACKHAUL FACILITY.  A facility used to transport services by wire
from a wireless facility to a network.
(Ord._2018-026)
§ 5-10-4 PERMITTED USE; APPLICATION AND APPLICATION FEES.
   (A)   Permitted use.  Collocation of a small wireless facility or
installation, modification or replacement of a utility pole for the collocation
of a small wireless facility, as defined herein, is permitted within all zoning
districts of the IDO, subject to all applicable use specific standards, and
within all rights- of-way as defined by this article, subject only to the
restrictions in §
5-10-5.
   (B)   Permit required. No person shall place a small wireless facility in
any right-of-way, without first filing a small wireless facility application
and obtaining a permit therefor, except as otherwise provided in this article.
An applicant may submit a consolidated application for up to 25 small wireless
facilities so long as they are all of substantially the same type, and on
substantially the same types of structures, however no more than one such
consolidated application may be filed within any five business-day period. The
city's denial of one or more small wireless facilities in a consolidated
application shall not delay the processing of any other small wireless
facilities submitted in the same application;
   (C)   Permit application form. All small wireless facility applications for
permits filed pursuant to this article shall be on a form, paper or electronic,
provided by the city.
   (D)   Permit application requirements. Applications submitted to the city
for a small wireless facility shall include the following:
      (1)   All relevant information otherwise required for a general wireless
telecommunications collocation permit administered under the IDO;
      (2)   A certification by the applicant that the small wireless facility
or facilities to be collocated conform with the Federal Communications
Commission's regulations concerning radio frequency emissions;
      (3)   A certification by the applicant that unless a delay is caused by
the lack of commercial power or fiber at the site, the collocation must begin
within 180 days of permit issuance, after which time the permit shall be void;
and
      (4)   A reasonably acceptable showing through the application materials
that the facility or facilities comply with all applicable codes.
   (E)   Routine Maintenance and Replacement. An application shall not be
required for:
      (1)   Routine maintenance; and
      (2)   The replacement of a small wireless facility with another small
wireless facility that is substantially similar to or the same size or smaller
in size and weight and height as long as the wireless provider that owns the
wireless facility notifies the authority and provides details of the proposed
replacement demonstrating the substantial similarity of the replacement at
least ten days before the replacement is made.
   (F)   Information updates. Any amendment to information contained in a
permit application shall be submitted in writing to the city within 30 days
after the change necessitating the amendment.
   (G)   Application fees. Application fees shall be subject to the following
requirements:
      (1)   All applications for permits pursuant to this article shall be
accompanied by a fee related to processing the application, but shall not
exceed $500 for non-recurring fees, including a single up-front application
that includes up to five small wireless facilities and an additional $100 for
each small wireless facility beyond five but not to exceed any application
limits from §
5-10-4(B).
      (2)   The application fee for the installation, modification or
replacement of a utility pole for the collocation of a small wireless facility
that is permitted in accordance with this article shall not exceed $750 for
non-recurring fees per utility pole in the rights-of-way. No additional
application fee shall be required for the small wireless facility to be
collocated on the newly installed, modified or replaced pole.
(Ord._2018-026)
§ 5-10-5 PERMIT APPLICATIONS; CONDITIONS.
   (A)   Review of small wireless facility applications.
      (1)   The city shall accept and process applications for small wireless
facility permits subject to the following:
         (a)   Within 30 days of receiving an application, the city shall
determine and notify the applicant whether the application is complete. If an
application is incomplete, the city shall specifically identify the missing
information in writing. For each item alleged to be missing, the city must
specify the code provision, ordinance, application instruction, or otherwise
publicly-stated procedure that requires the submission of the information. For
incomplete applications, the time for processing the application shall be
tolled by the number of days from the day after the date when the city properly
notifies applicant of the missing documents or information until the date on
which the applicant submits all required documents or information such as to
render the application complete. If the city fails to notify the applicant of
incompleteness within 30 days, the application is deemed complete.
         (b)   Make its final decision to approve or deny the application
within:
            1.   Sixty days of first receiving the complete application
material for collocation of a small wireless facility on an existing utility
pole, or
            2.   Ninety days of first receiving the complete application
material for the installation of a new utility pole or the replacement of an
existing utility pole with a new utility pole. In extraordinary circumstances
where a batch application causes legitimate overload on the city's resources,
the city and an applicant may agree to a reasonable extension of this period.
An applicant shall not unreasonably deny any city requests to extend this
period; and
         (c)   Advise the applicant in writing of its final decision, and in
the final decision document the basis for a denial, including the provisions in
the specific code or ordinance on which the denial was based, and send the
documentation to the applicant on or before the day the city denies the
application. The applicant may cure the deficiencies identified by the city and
resubmit the application within 30 days of the denial without paying an
additional application fee. The city shall approve or deny the revised
application within 30 days of receipt of the amended application. The
subsequent review by the city shall be limited to the deficiencies cited in the
original denial.
      (2)   If the city fails to act on an application within the review period
prescribed in subsection (1)(b) above, this inaction shall constitute a
"failure to act" under Section 332(c)(7)(B)(v) of the Federal
Telecommunications Act and presumptive prohibition of services within the
meaning of Section 332(c)(7)(B)(i)(ll) and applicant may seek remedies for
these violations.
      (3)   The city may deny a proposed collocation of a small wireless
facility on an existing or modified pole, the installation of a new utility
pole or the replacement of an existing utility pole for the collocation of a
small wireless facility, where the proposed small cell facility:
         (a)   Materially and demonstrably interferes with public safety, such
as the safe operation of traffic control equipment;
         (b)   Materially and demonstrably interferes with sight lines or clear
zones for transportation or pedestrians;
         (c)   Materially interferes with the Americans with Disabilities Act
of 1990 or similar federal or state standards regarding pedestrian access or
movement;
         (d)   Fails to comply with applicable codes; including requirements
imposed upon small wireless facilities located in design overlay zones and/or
historic districts;
         (e)   Does not comply with objective, reasonable and technically
feasible design, aesthetic, spacing, placement, and/or construction standards
for small wireless facilities as adopted, published, and administered by the
city in any form now or in the future;
         (f)   Does not comply with reasonable stealth or concealment standards
for utility poles as adopted, published and administered by the city in any
form now or in the future;
         (g)   Due to ground-mounted equipment, impedes pedestrian movement on
any sidewalk or walkway or otherwise diminishes a sidewalk's width;
         (h)   Is proposed within a right-of-way location along a roadway that
is 50-feet wide or less, as measured from curb to curb, and fronted on at least
one side by a residential use, or an IDO zone authorizing residential uses,
unless the applicant demonstrates that placement of the small wireless facility
at such a location is necessary to fill a significant gap in service and no
reasonable alternatives exist; and
         (i)   Is proposed on a new utility pole or wireless support structure
within a right-of-way where the applicant has not adequately explained why it
could not use an existing or replacement utility pole or wireless support
structure either owned by the city or by a third- party.
      (4)   Under its general authority the city may at any time, and otherwise
specifically reserves its right under federal law to, impose design, aesthetic,
spacing, placement, and/or construction standards for small wireless
deployments.
   (B)   Permit Notice; Conditions.
      (1)   The city may, at its discretion and prior to final approval
(subject to the shot clock limitations of subsection (A) above) provide, or
require the applicant to provide, public notice of the proposed small wireless
facility in accordance with the notice provisions of the IDO, notifying
interested persons of the opportunity to submit written comments on the
application to the city. The city shall forward such written comments to the
applicant within three days of their receipt, and the applicant shall respond
to any such comments. The applicant's failure to respond is grounds for the
application being deemed incomplete by the city.
      (2)   The city may condition its approval on a requirement that a utility
pole or wireless support structure be replaced before an application for a
collocation is approved if the city determines that such a replacement is
required by an applicable code or law.
(Ord._2018-026)
§ 5-10-6 SMALL WIRELESS FACILITIES IN THE ROW; MAXIMUM HEIGHT; OTHER
REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   Maximum Size. Small wireless facilities and new or modified utility
poles for the collocation of small wireless facilities may be placed in the
rights-of-way pursuant to this article subject to the following requirements:
      (1)   Each new or modified utility pole installed in the rights-of-way
shall not exceed the greater of:
         (a)   Ten percent in height above any existing utility pole in the
rights-of-way in place as of the effective date of this article located within
500 feet of the new pole in the same rights-of-way; or
         (b)   Fifty feet above ground level.
      (2)   New small wireless facilities in the rights-of-way may not extend
existing structures on which they are located to a height of more than 50 feet
or by more than 10%, whichever is greater:
   (B)   Zoning. Any wireless provider that seeks to install, modify, operate
or replace a utility pole in the rights-of-way that exceeds the height or size
limits contained in this section, shall be subject to any applicable zoning
requirements.
   (C)   Decorative Poles. A wireless provider shall be permitted to replace a
decorative pole when necessary to collocate a small wireless facility, but only
where the replacement pole conforms to the design aesthetics of the decorative
pole being replaced and any other design applicable design requirements for the
area.
   (D)   Underground District. The city may deny a request to install, replace
or modify a utility pole in areas requiring underground utilities. The wireless
provider is permitted to seek a waiver of the undergrounding requirements for
the placement of a new utility pole to support small wireless facilities.
Notwithstanding anything contained in this paragraph to the contrary, any city
requirement that all wireless facilities be deployed underground would amount
to an effective prohibition given the propagation characteristics of wireless
signals.
   (E)   Historic and Design Districts. The city may require reasonable,
technically feasible, non-discriminatory and technologically neutral design or
concealment measures and reasonable measures for conforming to the design
aesthetics of a design district or Historic District. Any such design or
concealment measures may not have the effect of prohibiting any provider's
technology; nor may any such measure be considered part of the small wireless
facility for purpose of the size restrictions in the definition of small
wireless facility.
(Ord._2018-026)
§ 5-10-7 EFFECT OF PERMIT.
   (A)   Authority Granted. No Property Right or Other Interest Created. A
permit from the city authorizes an applicant to undertake only certain
activities in accordance with this article, and does not create a property
right or grant authority to the applicant to impinge upon the rights of others
who may already have an interest in the rights-of-way.
   (B)   Permit Duration. Any work described in a permit granted pursuant to
this article shall be completed within 180 days of the permit issuance date
unless the city and applicant agree to extend this period due to delay caused
by the lack of commercial power or communications facilities. Subject to
applicable relocation requirements and applicant's right to terminate a permit
at any time, a permitted location is valid for a period of ten years, and must
be renewed for successive ten-year terms so long as the wireless provider is in
compliance with the other requirements in this article as of each extension
date.
(Ord._2018-026)
§ 5-10-8 REMOVAL, RELOCATION OR MODIFICATION OF SMALL WIRELESS FACILITY IN THE
ROW.
   (A)   Notice. Within 90 days following written notice from the city,
wireless provider shall, at its own expense, protect, support, temporarily or
permanently disconnect, remove, relocate, change or alter the position of any
small wireless facilities within the rights-of- way whenever the city has
determined that such removal, relocation, change or alteration, is reasonably
necessary for the construction, repair, maintenance, or installation of any
city improvement in or upon, or the operations of the city in or upon, the
rights-of-way.
   (B)   Emergency Removal or Relocation of Facilities. The city retains the
right and privilege to cut or move any small wireless facility located within
the rights-of-way of the city, as the city may determine to be necessary,
appropriate or useful in response to any public health or safety emergency. If
circumstances permit, the city shall notify the wireless provider and provide
the wireless provider an opportunity to move its own facilities prior to
cutting or removing a facility and shall notify the wireless provider after
cutting or removing a small wireless facility.
   (C)   Abandonment of Facilities. Upon abandonment of a small wireless
facility within the rights-of-way of the city, the wireless provider shall
notify the city of its intention to discontinue use of a small wireless
facility or utility pole. The notice shall inform the authority of the time and
the way in which the small wireless facility or utility will be removed. The
wireless provider is responsible for the costs of the removal. The authority
may require the wireless provider to return the property to its pre-
installation condition. If the wireless provider does not complete the removal
within 45 days after notice, the authority may complete the removal and assess
the costs of removal against the wireless provider.
   (D)   Damage and Repair. The city may require a wireless provider to repair
all damage to the rights-of-way caused by the activities of the wireless
provider and return the rights-of-way to its pre-damage condition according to
the city's requirements and specifications. If the wireless provider fails to
make the repairs within a reasonable period after written notice, the city may
affect those repairs and charge the applicable party the reasonable, documented
cost of such repairs.
(Ord._2018-026)
§ 5-10-9 ROW RATES.
   (A)   Annual Rate. A wireless provider authorized to place small wireless
facilities in the rights-of-way shall pay to the city compensation for use of
the rights-of-way in the amount of $270 annually per small wireless facility
for all recurring fees, including any right-of-way access fee and/or fee for
attachment to city-owned utility poles in the right-of-way.
   (B)   Cease Payment. A wireless provider is authorized to remove its
facilities at any time from the rights-of-way and cease paying the city
compensation for use of the rights-of-way.
   (C)   The city may adjust the fees and annual rate, but no more often than
once a year and by no more than an amount equal to one-half the annual change,
if any, in the most recent consumer price index for all urban consumers for New
Mexico, as published by the United States Department of Labor. The city shall
notify all wireless providers who are charged of the pre-adjusted rate and of
any prospective adjustments, and shall make the adjustment effective 60 days or
more following such notice. These limitations on the frequency and amount of
annual fee increases do not apply if the city seeks an amendment, pursuant to §
5-10-11 and to Federal Communications Order 18-01333, to adjust right-of-way
rates to recover the city's reasonable costs of maintaining and managing the
rights-of-way and the structures in the rights-of-way and any other costs of
administering this article,
(Ord._2018-026)
§ 5-10-10 ATTACHMENT TO CITY UTILITY POLES IN THE ROW.
   (A)   Collocation on City Poles. Small wireless facilities may be collocated
on city utility poles pursuant to this article. No person will be permitted an
exclusive arrangement to attach to city poles.
   (B)   Make-Ready. The rates, fees, terms and conditions for the make ready
work to collocate a small wireless facility on a city utility pole must be
nondiscriminatory, competitively neutral, comply with this article and be
subject to the following:
      (1)   The city or any person owning, managing, or controlling the city
poles shall provide a good faith estimate for any make-ready work necessary to
enable the pole to support the requested small wireless facility, including
pole replacement if necessary, within 60 days after receipt of a completed
request.
      (2)   The city or any person owning, managing, or controlling the city
poles shall not require more make-ready work than required to meet applicable
codes or industry standards. Fees for make-ready work shall not include costs
related to pre- existing for prior damage and non-compliance. Fees for make-
ready work including any pole replacement shall not exceed actual costs or the
amount charged to others for similar work and shall not include any consultant
fees or expenses.
(Ord._2018-026)
§ 5-10-11 REGULATIONS AND AMENDMENTS; COMPLIANCE WITH LAWS.
   The city may at any time under its general authority amend the provisions of
any ordinance, and will endeavor to so amend this article as necessary in order
to remain consistent with any federal laws, regulations, or orders now or in
the future, as well as to bring it into compliance with any court orders
related to the same; and will further endeavor to amend this article as may be
necessary in order to manage its rights-of-way or to recover the reasonable
costs of maintaining and managing its rights-of-way and the structures in the
rights-of-way and any other costs of administering this article.
(Ord._2018-026)
CHAPTER 6: WATER,
SEWERS AND STREETS
   Article
      
1:   
WATER
      
2:   [RESERVED]
      
3:   
SEWER USE AND WASTEWATER CONTROL
      
4:   
WATER AND SEWER RATES
      
5:   
STREETS AND SIDEWALKS
      
6:   
TREES, VEGETATION AND LANDSCAPING
      
7:   
NEWSRACKS
      
8:   
SPECIAL ASSESSMENT DISTRICT POLICY
      
9:   
PUBLIC IMPROVEMENT DISTRICTS
      
10:   
FIRE HYDRANT USE PERMIT; LIQUID WASTE HAULER PERMIT
      
11:   STORM WATER QUALITY
ARTICLE 1: WATER
Section
Part 1: Water Conservation Landscaping and Water Waste
      
6-1-1-1   Short title
      
6-1-1-2   Intent
      
6-1-1-3   Definitions
      
6-1-1-4   Applicability
      
6-1-1-5   Watering restrictions
      
6-1-1-6   Water waste
      
6-1-1-7   Special permits
   
6-1-1-8   Water budgets and planting restrictions
      
6-1-1-9   Design regulations
      
6-1-1-10   Irrigation system standards
      
6-1-1-11   Inspection procedures
      
6-1-1-12   Variances and appeals
      
6-1-1-13   Fees; assessment
      
6-1-1-99   Penalty
Part 2: Fluoridation of Water
   
6-1-2-1   Declaration of purpose of intent
   
6-1-2-2   Authority to proceed with fluoridation of water supply
Part 3: Public Use of Fire Hydrants
   
6-1-3-1   Permit required
   
6-1-3-2   Meter required
   
6-1-3-3   Cross-connections
Part 4: [Reserved]
Part 5: Water Conservation Water by Request
   
6-1-5-1   Intent
   
6-1-5-2   Short title
   
6-1-5-3   Definitions
   
6-1-5-4   Applicability
   
6-1-5-5   Drinking water service
   
6-1-5-6   Linen washing service
   
6-1-5-7   Educating employees, clients, and customers
   
6-1-5-8   Assessment of fees
Part 6: [Reserved]
Part 7: Plumbing Fixture Retrofit for City Owned Property
   
6-1-7-1   Short title
   
6-1-7-2   Definitions
   
6-1-7-3   Duty of city to retrofit
   
6-1-7-4   Retrofit exemptions
Cross-reference:
   
Ground Water Protection Advisory Board, see
§§ 2-6-8-1 et seq.
Editor's Note:
   Part 6 repealed by Ord. 2012-018, passed 4-2-2012.
PART 1: WATER CONSERVATION LANDSCAPING AND WATER WASTE
§ 6-1-1-1 SHORT TITLE.
   This article shall be known as the “Water Conservation Landscaping and Water
Waste Ordinance.”
(Ord. 18-1995)
§ 6-1-1-2 INTENT.
   (A)   To implement the outdoor water use recommendations of the Water
Conservation Task Force, as called for in Resolution Bill No. R-58, Enactment
No. 49-1992, adopted by the Council in May of 1992.
   (B)   To assist in reducing overall per capita water use in the city by 30%.
   (C)   To reduce yard irrigation and irrigation-related water waste, which
comprise over 40% of the city's total annual water usage. To reduce peak summer
usage, which is two to three times winter usage and determines the need for
capital facilities to adequately meet system demand. To reduce irrigation water
usage without sacrificing landscape quality by using lower water use plants,
improved design and planting practices, different watering practices, and
better irrigation system design and maintenance.
   (D)   To reduce water waste; i.e., overwatering, inefficient watering, or
release of excess water which generates fugitive water in the public right-of-
way. To reduce damage to publicly owned streets and the public expenditures
necessary to repair the damage caused by this wasted water. To increase street
safety by reducing the potential of frozen water on public right-of-way.
   (E)   To initially encourage voluntary water conservation for existing
single-family residences while requiring conservation on all other properties.
To apply more stringent requirements to city-owned facilities to set an
example.
(Ord. 18-1995)
§ 6-1-1-3 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this article, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ATHLETIC FIELD. A turf area used primarily for organized sports.
   AUTOMATIC CONTROLLER. A solid state timer capable of operating valve
stations to set the days and length of time water is applied.
   BUBBLERS. Irrigation heads which deliver water to the soil adjacent to the
heads.
   CITY OWNED. Property owned by the City of Albuquerque.
   COVENANTS. Agreements entered into by property owners, leaseholders, and
renters which set conditions for the use, maintenance, and/or sale of property.
   DEVELOPMENT. The construction, erection, or emplacement of one or more
buildings, structures, or surface improvements on land which is a premises in
order to establish or expand a principal residential or nonresidential use.
   DISTURBED SLOPES. Slopes that have been altered from their natural
configuration or vegetative cover by human activity.
   DRIP IRRIGATION. Low pressure, low volume irrigation applied slowly, near or
at ground level to minimize runoff and loss to evaporation.
   EVAPOTRANSPIRATION. The quantity of water evaporated from adjacent soil
surfaces and transpired by plants during a specific time.
   EVEN-NUMBERED PROPERTIES. Properties whose official address ends in an even
number, excluding city parks and golf courses. Landscaped areas associated with
a building will use the number of that building as their address. Only one
address shall be used for a large landscaped area associated with one building
or activity, even if the landscaped area is broken into many separate subareas.
   FLOW RESTRICTION DEVICE. Device applied by the water utility to the
customer's meter that restricts the volume of flow to the customer.
     FUGITIVE WATER. The pumping, flow, release, escape, or leakage of any
water from any pipe, valve, faucet, connection, diversion, well, or any
facility for the purposes of water supply, transport, storage, disposal, or
delivery onto adjacent property or the public right-of-way.
   HAND WATERING. The application of water for irrigation purposes through a
hand-held hose, including hoses moved into position by hand and left to flow
freely or through a shut-off nozzle.
   HARVESTED WATER. Precipitation or irrigation runoff collected, stored and
available for reuse for irrigation purposes.
   HIGH WATER USE TURF. A surface layer of earth containing regularly mowed
grass, with its roots, which requires large volumes and/or frequent application
of water throughout its life. High water use grasses include but are not
limited to varieties of Bluegrass, varieties of Ryegrass, varieties of Fescue,
and Bentgrass.
   INFILTRATION RATE. The amount of water absorbed by the soil per unit of
time, usually expressed in inches per hour.
   INSPECTION. An entry into and examination of premises for the purpose of
ascertaining the existence or nonexistence of violations of this article.
   LANDSCAPE AREA. The entire parcel less the building footprint, driveways,
non-irrigated portions of parking lots and required off-street parking.
Includes the public right-of-way.
   LOW WATER USE PLANTS. Plants which are able to survive without supplemental
water once established as specified in the “Albuquerque Plant List”, published
by the city.
   MAYOR. The Mayor of Albuquerque or his/her designated representative.
   MEDIUM AND LOW WATER USE TURF. A surface layer of earth containing regularly
mowed grass, with its roots, which requires moderate or low volumes and/or
frequency of application of water once established as specified in the
"Albuquerque Plant List" published by the city. Low and medium water use
grasses include but are not limited to Bermuda and Bermuda hybrids, Zoysia,
blue grama, and Buffalo grass.
   MEDIUM WATER USE PLANTS. Plants which require some supplemental watering
throughout the life of the plant as specified in the “Albuquerque Plant List”
published by the city.
   MISTER. A device that produces a cooling effect by emitting fine particles
of water into the air in the form of a mist.
   MULCH. Any material such as leaves, bark, straw, or other materials applied
to the soil surface to reduce evaporation.
   NEW DEVELOPMENT. Any development approved by the Albuquerque Planning
Department on or after October 1, 1995. For development for which landscaping
is required, which is all development except single family residential, only
that portion approved by the Albuquerque Planning Department on or after
October 1, 1995 shall be considered new development. Development approved by
the Albuquerque Planning Department prior to October 1, 1995, but not completed
by October 1, 1998 shall also be considered new development.
   NON-CITY OWNED. All property which is not owned by the City of Albuquerque.
   ODD-NUMBERED PROPERTIES. Properties whose official address ends in an odd
number, excluding city parks and golf courses. Large landscaped areas
associated with a building will use the number of that building as their
address. Only one address shall be used for a large landscaped area associated
with one building or activity, even if the landscaped area is broken into many
separate subareas.
   PRECIPITATION RATE. The amount of water applied per unit of time, usually
expressed in inches per hour.
   PROPERTY HOLDER. An owner or leaseholder, whose landscaping is governed in
whole or in part by rules applied to all property holders within a property
holders' association.
   PROPERTY HOLDERS ASSOCIATION. An association of property owners,
leaseholders, or renters whose landscaping is governed in whole or in part by
rules applied to all property holders within the development.
   PUBLIC RIGHT-OF-WAY. The area of land acquired or obtained by the city,
county, or state primarily for the use of the public for the movement of
people, goods, vehicles, or storm water. For the purposes of this article the
public right-of-way shall include curbs, streets, and storm water drainage
inlets.
   RESPONSIBLE PARTY. The owner, manager, supervisor, or person who receives
the water bill, or person in charge of the property, facility, or operation
during the period of time the violation(s) is observed.
   RESTRICTED PLANTS. Plants which, as specified in the "Albuquerque Plant
List" published by the city, are classified as restricted due to their high
water use requirements and their potential for extensive use in landscaping.
Restricted plants include high water use turf, clover, and Dichondra.
   RUNOFF. Water which is not absorbed by the soil or landscape to which it is
applied. Runoff occurs when water is applied too quickly (application rate
exceeds infiltration rate), particularly if there is a severe slope. This
article does not apply to stormwater runoff which is created by natural
precipitation rather than human-caused or applied water use.
   SHUT-OFF NOZZLE. Device attached to end of hose that completely shuts off
the flow, even if left unattended.
   SINGLE-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL. A lot or premises upon which is established one
dwelling only. Of the allowable principal uses, such use shall be the only use
on that lot or premises.
   SPRAY IRRIGATION. The application of water to landscaping by means of a
device that projects water through the air in the form of small particles or
droplets.
   SPRINKLER HEAD. A device that projects water through the air in the form of
small particles or droplets.
   STATIC WATER PRESSURE. The pipeline or municipal water supply pressure when
water is not flowing.
   TEMPORARY IRRIGATION SYSTEMS. Irrigation systems which are installed and
permanently disabled within a period of 36 contiguous months.
   VALVE. A device used to control the flow of water in the irrigation system.
   WATER WASTE. The nonbeneficial use of water. Nonbeneficial uses include but
are not restricted to:
      (1)   Landscape water applied in such a manner, rate and/or quantity that
it overflows the landscaped area being watered and runs onto adjacent property
or public right-of-way;
      (2)   Landscape water which leaves a sprinkler, sprinkler system, or
other application device in such a manner or direction as to spray onto
adjacent property or public right-of-way;
      (3)   Washing of vehicles, equipment, or hard surfaces such as parking
lots, aprons, pads, driveways, or other surfaced areas when water is applied in
sufficient quantity to flow from that surface onto adjacent property or the
public right-of-way;
      (4)   Water applied in sufficient quantity to cause ponding on impervious
surfaces on non-city owned property.
(Ord. 18-1995; Am. Ord. 24-1998; Am. Ord. 42-2001; Am. Ord. 13-2004)
§ 6-1-1-4 APPLICABILITY.
   (A)   Section
6-1-1-8, Water Budgets and Planting Restrictions, applies to all new
development and to existing golf courses, city owned parks, and city owned
athletic fields.
   (B)   Section
6-1-1-9, Design Regulations, applies to all new development and to major
renovations of existing golf courses, city owned parks, and city owned athletic
fields originally constructed after 1971.  
   (C)   Section
6-1-1-10, Irrigation System Standards, applies to all new development and to
expansions or major renovations of existing golf courses, city owned parks, and
city owned athletic fields originally constructed after 1971. Single family
residential shall be exempt from this section.
   (D)   Section
6-1-1-11, Inspection Requirements, applies to all new development.
   (E)   This article does not apply to water provided through the Middle Rio
Grande Conservancy District for irrigation purposes. Water obtained through
non-city water system sources, however, will be included in the calculation of
inches per year for the water budgets for golf courses and parks, as described
in Section
6-1-1-8.
   (F)   Certificates of occupancy for all new development except single family
residential shall depend upon compliance with all requirements of this article.
(Ord. 18-1995; Am. Ord. 24-1998)
§ 6-1-1-5 WATERING RESTRICTIONS.
   These restrictions apply to all properties within the city limits and/or
served by the municipal water utility.
   (A)   All spray irrigation during the period beginning on April 1 and ending
on October 1 of each year must occur between 6:00 p.m. and 10:00 a.m. beginning
April 1, 2000. This restriction serves as a guideline for landscape watering on
non-city owned property during 1999. This restriction shall not apply to drip
irrigation and low precipitation bubblers, hand watering, or watering of
containerized plants and plant stock.
   (B)   All spray irrigation on city owned property during the months of
December through March must occur between 10:00 a.m. and 2:00 p.m. This
restriction serves as a guideline for landscape watering on non-city owned
property. This restriction shall not apply to drip irrigation and low
precipitation bubblers, hand watering, or watering containerized plants and
plant stock. This restriction shall not apply to golf courses or parks that are
in regular use or in use for a special event during these hours.
   (C)   Shutoff nozzles are required on any hoses used for hand watering, car
washing or other outdoor uses, excepting hoses on single-family residential.
   (D)   All city owned properties other than parks and golf courses shall
water no more than every other day. All even-numbered properties shall water
only on even-numbered dates. All odd-numbered properties shall water only on
odd-numbered dates. This restriction serves as a guideline for landscape
watering on non-city owned property.
   (E)   Restrictions in divisions (A), (B) and (D) above do not apply to the
following:
      (1)   Outdoor irrigation necessary for the establishment of newly sodded
lawns and landscaping within the first 30 days of planting or watering of newly
seeded turf within the first year of planting;
      (2)   Irrigation necessary for one day only where treatment with an
application of chemicals requires immediate watering to preserve an existing
landscape or to establish a new landscape;
      (3)   Water used to control dust or compact soil;
      (4)   Visually supervised operation of watering systems for short periods
of time to check system condition and effectiveness.
   (F)   The city shall undertake an aggressive public information campaign to
address the requirements of the spray irrigation restrictions for the remainder
of 1999 and each year thereafter.
   (G)   
6-1-1-1 through
6-1-1-99 Water Conservation Landscaping and Water Waste shall be reviewed in
its entirety in FY/04 as to its effectiveness and for necessary revisions. This
evaluation will be incorporated into the FY/04 budget process.
(Ord. 18-1995; Am. Ord. 24-1998; Am. Ord. 54-1999) 
Penalty, see § 6-1-1-99
§ 6-1-1-6 WATER WASTE.
   These restrictions apply to all properties within the city limits and/or
served by the municipal water utility.
   (A)   No person, firm, corporation, or municipal or other government
facility or operation shall waste, cause or permit to be wasted any water.
   (B)   No person, firm, corporation, or municipal or other government
facility or operation shall cause or permit the flow of fugitive water onto
adjacent property or public right-of-way.
   (C)   The restrictions in divisions (A) and (B) of this section do not apply
to the following:
      (1)   Storm runoff allowed under provisions of the city's Drainage
Ordinance as currently adopted or subsequently amended;
      (2)   Flow resulting from temporary water supply system failures or
malfunctions. These failures or malfunctions shall be repaired as quickly as
possible;
      (3)   Flow resulting from firefighting or routine inspection of fire
hydrants or from fire training activities;
      (4)   Water applied as a dust control measure as may be required under
Chapter 9, Article 5 of this code;
      (5)   Water applied to abate spills of flammable or otherwise hazardous
materials, where water is the appropriate methodology;
      (6)   Water applied to prevent or abate health, safety, or accident
hazards when alternate methods are not available;
      (7)   Flow resulting from routine inspection, operation, or maintenance
of the municipal water supply system;
      (8)   Flow resulting from routine inspection or maintenance of irrigation
systems;
      (9)   Water used by the Traffic Engineering Division, City of
Albuquerque, in the course of installation or maintenance of traffic flow
control devices;
      (10)   Water used for construction or maintenance activities where the
application of water is the appropriate methodology and where no other
practical alternative exists.
(Ord. 18-1995; Am. Ord. 24-1998)  
Penalty, see § 6-1-1-99
§ 6-1-1-7 SPECIAL PERMITS
   These requirements apply to all properties within the city limits and/or
served by the municipal water utility.
   (A)   Use of Misters
      (1)   The use of misters shall require a special permit, issued by the
city. The Mayor shall develop regulations and administrative procedures for the
issuance and conditions of such permits. The Mayor shall have the authority to
limit the number of permits or revoke permits as deemed necessary to protect
the public interest.
      (2)   Effective April 1, 1999, the use of misters without a permit, or in
violation of permit conditions, shall constitute a violation of this article
and shall be subject to the fee assessment processes described in §§
6-1-1-13 and
6-1-1-99.
      (3)   Any person, firm, corporation, or municipal or other government
facility selling, leasing, renting, installing or otherwise making misters
available to any other person, firm, corporation, or municipal or other
government facility shall provide notification to their customers of the
special permit requirement for mister use. Notice may be delivered by
prominently posting a sign at the point of purchase or by providing a document
to each individual customer. The city shall provide approved language for such
notification.
(Ord. 24-1998)
§ 6-1-1-8 WATER BUDGETS AND PLANTING RESTRICTIONS
   Subsection (A) of this section applies to all city and non-city owned golf
courses, and to all city owned parks and athletic fields. Subsection (B) of
this section applies to all new development.
   (A)   Water Budgets for Parks and Golf Courses.
      (1)   Parks and golf courses shall use medium and low water use plants as
much as possible. High water use turf or other restricted plants shall be
allowed only in those areas with heavy usage or foot traffic, such as athletic
fields, playgrounds, and golf course tees, greens, and fairways.
      (2)   All golf courses existing prior to October 1, 1995 will be allowed
up to 40 inches of water per acre of landscape area per year. Golf courses
using wells must report well usage to the city on a monthly basis. Any usage
over the allowable amount will be subject to the excess use surcharge(s)
described in division (A)(6) of this section. Usage will be calculated on a per
individual golf course basis and shall include municipal and non-municipal
water supplies.
      (3)   All new golf courses or existing golf course expansions permitted
by the city after October 1, 1995 will be allowed up to 37 inches per acre of
landscape area per year. Any usage over the allowable amount will be subject to
the excess use surcharge(s) described in division (A)(6) of this section. Usage
will be calculated on a per individual golf course basis and shall include
municipal and non-municipal water supplies. The landscaped area for new golf
courses shall not exceed 90 acres per 18 holes or 45 acres per 9 holes.
      (4)   All parks will be allowed up to 35 inches of water per acre of
landscape area per year. Any usage over the allowable amount will be subject to
the excess use surcharge(s) described in division (A)(6) of this section. Usage
will be calculated on a per individual park basis and shall include municipal
and non-municipal water supplies.
      (5)   Athletic fields will be allowed up to 45 inches per acre of
landscape area per year. Any usage over the allowable amount will be subject to
the excess use surcharge(s) described in division (A)(6) of this section. Usage
will be calculated on a per individual athletic field basis and shall include
municipal and non-municipal water supplies.
      (6)   Any usage over the approved water budget will be subject to the
excess use surcharge(s) defined in the Water and Sewer Rate Ordinance as
currently adopted or subsequently amended (see
Ch. 6, Art. 4), and established by the Mayor's rules and regulations. This
surcharge(s) will be calculated on an annual basis and applied to the February
water bill for the property. If two different surcharges are defined in the
Water and Sewer Rate Ordinance or the Mayor's rules and regulations, the
surcharge for excess usage up to 10% of the water budget shall be the lower of
the surcharges. The surcharge for excess usage over 10% of the water budget
shall be the higher of the surcharges.
      (7)   For all parks, golf courses and other facilities with greater than
ten acres of restricted plants, and developed after the effective date of this
section, the owner or developer shall, when available and economically
feasible, use reclaimed wastewater, shallow groundwater or other alternative
water supplies, as specified by the policies of the Albuquerque Water Resources
Management Strategy.
   (B)    Planting Restrictions.
      (1)   All city owned new development other than parks, golf courses, and
housing shall use medium and low water use plants on 100% of the landscape
area.
      (2)   All city owned housing and all non-city owned properties other than
golf courses shall not use high water use turf or other restricted plants on
more than 20% of the landscape area, except that for single family residential
properties;
         (a)   In the event that 20% of the landscape area is greater than
3,000 square feet, high water use turf and other restricted plants shall not be
used on more than 3,000 square feet of the landscape area;
         (b)   In the event that 20% of the landscape area is less than 300
square feet, high water use turf and other restricted plants may be used on up
to 300 square feet of the landscape area.
   (C)   Certain Restrictive Covenants Prohibited.
      (1)   A property holders' association shall not enforce a provision in a
covenant that prohibits or restricts a property holder from:
         (a)   Removing turf grass and installing xeriscape landscaping in
compliance with the restrictions for new development in subsection (B) of this
section;
         (b)   Installing efficient irrigation systems, including underground
drip systems; or
         (c)   Using rain barrels or other water harvesting devices, provided
such devices adequately protect the public's health, safety, and welfare.
      (2)   A property holders' association may establish criteria for
relandscaping to improve water use efficiency but cannot require a higher
percentage of high water use turf than allowed in subsection (B) of this
section except that it may require that the maximum percentage of high water
use turf allowed in subsection (B) of this section be maintained.
      (3)   A property holders' association may establish criteria regarding
type and placement of rainwater collection/harvesting.
(Ord. 18-1995; Am. Ord. 1-1998; Am. Ord. 24-1998; Am. Ord. 13-2004; Am. Ord.
41-2004; Am. Ord. 41-2004)  
Penalty, see § 6-1-1-99
§ 6-1-1-9 DESIGN REGULATIONS
   The following regulations apply to all new development, and to expansions or
major renovations as existing city owned parks, city and non-city owned golf
courses, and city-owned athletic fields originally constructed after 1971.
   (A)   With the exception of temporary irrigation systems needed to establish
low water use plants, spray irrigation shall not be used on slopes greater than
four feet of horizontal distance per one foot vertical change (4:1).
   (B)   All existing disturbed slopes and all man-made slopes shall receive
erosion control from plantings and/or terracing. Concrete, asphalt, or any
other water and air impervious paving/cover will be allowed only where it is
the most appropriate methodology and where no other practical alternative
exists.
   (C)   Plants that require spray irrigation or a mowing frequency of more
than three times per year shall not be used in street medians, except that
spray irrigation may be used in street medians for up to 36 months where the
primary objective is to reclaim disturbed areas with low water use plants.
   (D)   Spray irrigation shall not be used to apply water to any area within
eight feet of a street curb or storm sewer inlet. These areas may be irrigated
by drip, bubbler, soaker, or sub-surface irrigation systems.
   (E)   Sprinkler heads shall be installed at least eight inches away from
impermeable surfaces.
   (F)   No spray irrigation shall be used in areas less than ten feet in any
dimension excepting within back or side yards of residential properties, or
where such an area is contiguous with adjacent property so that the dimension
totals ten feet minimum. Within parking lots no spray irrigation shall be used
on any area less than 15 feet in any dimension. These areas may be irrigated by
drip, bubbler, soaker, or sub-surface irrigation systems.
   (G)   Any existing features should be evaluated for incorporation in design
to include natural drainage, rock outcroppings, stands of native vegetation
which can be protected, or detention areas where vegetation has grown and is
being supported by nuisance flows or harvested water.
   (H)   The potential for using harvested water should be evaluated and, when
practical, incorporated into landscape design. Such design shall be consistent
with the requirements of the city's Flood Hazard Control Ordinance and the
Drainage Ordinance as currently adopted or subsequently amended.
   (I)   Ponds, fountains, wetlands, marshes, water features for wildlife
habitat, functional holding ponds or other reservoirs that are supplied in
whole or in part by the municipal water supply shall not exceed 500 square feet
or surface area unless approved by the Mayor. Multiple water features on the
same property will be considered together to determine surface area. Flowing
water used in fountains, waterfalls and similar features shall be recirculated.
(Ord. 18-1995; Am. Ord. 24-1998)  
Penalty, see § 6-1-1-99
§ 6-1-1-10 IRRIGATION SYSTEM STANDARDS
   The following standards apply to all expansions or major renovations at
existing parks, golf courses and athletic fields originally constructed after
1971, and to all new development except single family residential. The
standards serve as voluntary guidelines for single-family residential
development. In general, irrigation systems shall be designed to be site-
specific, reflecting plant type, soil type, infiltration rates, slopes, and
prevailing wind direction.
   (A)   Irrigation systems shall be designed to be in conformance with all
provisions of this article. Temporary irrigation systems shall not be required
to meet these standards.
   (B)   Application equipment for which the manufacturer specifies flow rates
in gallons per minute (gpm) shall not share a control valve with equipment for
which the manufacturer specifies flow rates in gallons per hour (gph).
Irrigation systems shall be controlled by an automatic controller equipped with
the following features:
      (1)   Two or more independent programming schedules;
      (2)   Capable of programming run times in one-minute increments and
displaying the programmed run time as a numeric display;
      (3)   Total program memory retention;
      (4)   Ability to be fitted with an external rain switch interrupter and
soil moisture sensor.
   (C)   No intentional overspray is allowed where it may obstruct pedestrian
traffic on a city-required pedestrian walkway, as defined by the city's
Sidewalk, Drive Pad, Curb and Gutter Ordinance as currently adopted or
subsequently amended.
   (D)   Irrigation systems shall be designed such that water pressure at the
sprinkler or emitter is not more than 20% in excess of the manufacturer's
maximum recommended pressure range for that device. Pressure may be regulated
by design or by the installation of a pressure regulating device or devices.
   (E)   Irrigation systems shall be designed to minimize low head line
drainage.
   (F)   All new development with new spray irrigated landscaped areas totaling
one-half acre or more shall have a Landscape Irrigation Audit performed by a
Certified Landscape Irrigation Auditor, certified by the Irrigation
Association. The auditor shall be independent of the property owner and of all
contractors associated with the property. The audits will be conducted in
accordance with the current edition of the Landscape Irrigation Auditor's
Handbook. The minimum efficiency requirements to meet in the audit are a 60%
distribution uniformity for all fixed spray systems and a 70% distribution
uniformity for all rotary systems. The results of the audit shall be provided
to the city in a letter or other form acceptable to the city and shall be
signed by the Auditor. Compliance with this provision is required before the
city will issue a Certificate of Occupancy or, in the case of park development,
a Letter of Final Acceptance.
   (G)   All new development with spray irrigated landscapes greater than ten
acres shall have the sprinkler heads tested for uniformity of performance using
the Center for Irrigation Technology's (CIT) Sprinkler Profile and Coverage
Evaluation (SPACE) program, or a comparable assessment acceptable to the city.
The sprinkler heads shall have a scheduling coefficient of 1.3 or less for full
circle heads and 1.5 or less for partial circle heads, with a rating of 1.0
being perfect. The sprinkler heads shall be installed in the spacing and
pressure range tested. The results of this test shall be provided to the city
in a form acceptable to the city. Compliance with this provision is required
before the city will issue a Certificate of Occupancy or, in the case of park
development, a Letter of Final Acceptance.
(Ord. 18-1995; Am. Ord. 24-1998)  
Penalty, see § 6-1-1-99
§ 6-1-1-11 INSPECTION PROCEDURES
   The following procedures apply to all new development:
   (A)   Inspection by Consent.
      (1)   Within the scope of his authority, the Mayor may conduct an
inspection, with the voluntary consent of an occupant or custodian of the
premises to be inspected who reasonably appears to be in control of the places
to be inspected or otherwise authorized to give such consent.
      (2)   Before requesting consent for an inspection, the Mayor shall inform
the person to whom the request is directed of the authority under and purposes
for which the inspection is to be made and shall exhibit an identification card
or document evidencing his authority to make such inspections.
      (3)   Inspections undertaken pursuant to this section shall be carried
out with due regard for the convenience and privacy of the occupants, and
during the daytime, unless, because of the nature of the premises, the
convenience of the occupants, the nature of the possible violation or other
circumstances, there is a reasonable basis for conducting the inspection at
night.
      (4)   Notice of the purpose and approximate time of an inspection of an
area not open to the general public shall be sent to the occupants or
custodians of premises to be inspected not less than seven days before the
inspection is undertaken.
   (B)   Inspection without Consent.
      (1)   Upon sufficient showing that consent to an inspection has been
refused or is otherwise unobtainable with a reasonable period of time, the
Mayor may make application for an inspection order/search warrant. Such
application shall be made to a court having jurisdiction over the premises to
be inspected. Such application shall set forth:
         (a)   The particular premises, or portion thereof sought to be
inspected;
         (b)   That the owner or occupant of the premises has refused entry;
         (c)   That inspection of the premises is necessary to determine
whether they comply with the requirements of this article;
         (d)   Any other reason necessitating the inspection, including
knowledge or belief that a particular condition exists on the premises which
constitutes a violation of this article; and
         (e)   That the Mayor is authorized by the city to make the inspection.
      (2)   The application shall be granted and the inspection order/search
warrant issued upon a sufficient showing that inspection in the area in which
the premises in question are located, or inspection of the particular premises,
is in accordance with reasonable legislative or administrative standards, and
that the circumstances of the particular inspection for which application is
made are otherwise reasonable. The court shall make and keep a record of the
proceedings on the application, and enter thereon its finding in accordance
with the requirements of this section.
      (3)   While executing the inspection order/search warrant the Mayor
shall, if the premises in question are unoccupied at the time of execution, be
authorized to use such force as is reasonably necessary to effect entry and
make the inspection.
      (4)   While conducting the inspection the Mayor shall, if authorized by
the court on proper showing, be accompanied by one or more law enforcement
officers authorized to serve search warrants who shall assist the Mayor in
executing the order at his direction.
      (5)   After execution of the order or after unsuccessful efforts to
execute the order, as the case may be, the Mayor shall return the order to the
court with a sworn report of the circumstances of execution or failure thereof.
(Ord. 18-1995; Am. Ord. 24-1998)
Penalty, see § 6-1-1-99
§ 6-1-1-12 VARIANCES AND APPEALS
   The Mayor shall be responsible for the enforcement of this article. The
Mayor may prescribe policies, rules, or regulations to carry out the intent and
purposes of this article.
   (A)   Variances to §
6-1-1-5 (Watering Restrictions) and §
6-1-1-6 (Water Waste), and §
6-1-1-7 (Special Permits).
      (1)   Administrative variances to the restrictions in §§
6-1-1-5,
6-1-1-6, and
6-1-1-7 may be issued by the Mayor or his/her designee, only for the purposes
of installing or retrofitting landscaping, provided that the general intent of
this article has been met, compliance with this article is proven to cause
practical difficulties and unnecessary hardship, and all options for abatement
through modified water management have been exhausted. The criteria to
determine hardship shall include level of capital outlay and time required to
be in compliance with this article.
      (2)   Variances may be issued for a period not to exceed one year and
shall stipulate both short-term corrective measures and a schedule for
completion of long-term corrective measures. Variances issued to accommodate
the installation or retrofitting of landscaping are only applicable to the site
where the construction that will increase the possibility of wasted water is to
occur. The variance shall apply only for the period of construction. As of the
date of this legislation any existing variances shall be subject to these
provisions. Variances must be renewed on an annual basis if long-term
corrective measures cannot be completed within one year.
   (B)   Appeal of §
6-1-1-5 (Watering Restrictions), §
6-1-1-6 (Water Waste), and §
6-1-1-7 (Special Permits). Any responsible party may appeal fees for violations
of §§
6-1-1-5,
6-1-1-6, and
6-1-1-7 to the Independent Hearing Officer pursuant to the provisions of the
IHO Ordinance, ROA 1994,
Chapter 2, Article 7, Part 8.
   (C)   Judicial Review. The exclusive remedy for parties dissatisfied with
the action of the City Hearing Officer on §§
6-1-1-5,
6-1-1-6, and
6-1-1-7 shall be the filing of a petition for a writ of certiorari with the
State District Court. The petition for review shall be limited to the record
made at the administrative hearing held pursuant to this article.
   (D)   Variances to §§
6-1-1-8 through
6-1-1-10 requirements. A variance to the regulations in §§
6-1-1-8 through
6-1-1-10 may be issued by the Mayor, through the Development Review Board,
provided that the general intent of this article has been met and compliance
with this article is proven to cause practical difficulties and unnecessary
hardship. The variance procedure for this article will comply with the variance
procedure in the
Integrated Development Ordinance as currently adopted or subsequently amended.
(This procedure is described in § 14-16-6-6.) Appeals of decisions of the
Development Review Board are to the City Council. Appeal procedures will comply
with those in the
Integrated Development Ordinance, § 14-16-6-4(U).
(Ord. 18-1995; Am. Ord. 24-1998; Am. Ord. 49-2003; Am. Ord._2017-025; Am. Ord.
2023-015)
§ 6-1-1-13 FEES; ASSESSMENT
   (A)   Fees and Restriction of Service. Any responsible party who violates
any of the provisions of §§
6-1-1-5,
6-1-1-6, and
6-1-1-7 shall be subject to progressively higher fees and flow restriction
until the violation ceases or a variance is granted. The assessment of fees and
application of flow restriction shall be consecutive for violations separated
by less than three calendar years. Fees and flow restriction shall be suspended
pending the outcome of an appeal or variance request.
   (B)   Assessment of Fees. Assessment of fees for violations of the
regulations in §§
6-1-1-5,
6-1-1-6, and
6-1-1-7 will be through the city utility bills for the responsible party's
billing account. Fees shall be assessed to the account within 15 days following
expiration of the appeal period or issuance of appeal findings and shall be
listed as separate line item on the utility bill. Responsible parties shall be
notified of the fee through certified mail within 15 days of the violation.
Fees must be paid within the normal payment period allowed by the city utility
billing system.
   (C)   In lieu of fees for violations of §§
6-1-1-5 and
6-1-1-6, the responsible party may have a landscape water audit performed by an
authorized landscape irrigation auditor, certified by the Irrigation
Association. The audit will be conducted in accordance with the current edition
of the Landscape Auditor's Handbook. The audit must be performed within 30 days
of notification of violation and the audit recommendation must be implemented
within 60 days of the audit. If these deadlines are not met, the fees for
violation will apply.
(Ord. 18-1995; Am. Ord. 24-1998)
Penalty, see § 6-1-1-99
§ 6-1-1-99 PENALTY.
   (A)   The schedule for assessment of fees and application of flow
restriction for a violation of §§
6-1-1-5,
6-1-1-6, and
6-1-1-7 shall be as follows:
      (1)   First observed violation – $20;
      (2)   Second observed violation – $50;
      (3)   Third observed violation - $100;
      (4)   Fourth observed violation - $300;
      (5)   Fifth observed violation - $400;
      (6)   Sixth observed violation - $600;
      (7)   Seventh observed violation - $800;
      (8)   Eighth observed violation - $1,000;
      (9)   Ninth or more observed violation: Either a $1,000 fee per violation
plus application of a flow restriction device at meter or a $2,000 fee per each
violation. The flow restriction device cannot be removed by the responsible
party and will not be removed by the utility until the responsible party
adequately demonstrates to the city that the violation has ceased or until a
variance is granted.
   (B)   For the purpose of assessing fees or flow restriction for violations
of §§
6-1-1-5,
6-1-1-6, and
6-1-1-7, any previous violation shall not be considered if:
      (1)   A period of five years has elapsed since the violation was
incurred; or
      (2)   The property is acquired by a new owner; or
      (3)   The violation occurred prior to July 1, 1998.
   (C)   Any responsible party who violates any provision of §§
6-1-1-8 through
6-1-1-10 shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction thereof,
shall be punished by a fine not to exceed $500 and/or imprisonment for a period
not to exceed 90 days. Application of fines for violations of the regulations
in §§
6-1-1-8 through
6-1-1-10 will comply with the
Integrated Development Ordinance as currently adopted or subsequently amended.
(See § 14-16-6-9).
   (D)   Any person who violates the provisions of this article for which no
other penalty is set forth, shall be subject to the general penalty provision
of this code set forth in §
1-1-99.
(Ord. 18-1995; Am. Ord. 24-1998; Am. Ord. 42-2001; Am. Ord. 49-2003; Am. Ord.
2017-025)
PART 2: FLUORIDATION OF WATER
§ 6-1-2-1 DECLARATION OF PURPOSE OF INTENT.
   The City Council, based on information supplied to it by various sources,
finds and declares that:
   (A)   The addition of fluorides to public water supplies is a process which
has been adopted and used in many parts of the United States as a measure for
improving the permanent condition of the teeth, in particular the teeth of
children, and is a means of benefitting the population generally at a minimal
cost and difficulty.
   (B)   The New Mexico Department of Public Health and the United States
Public Health Service recommend and encourage the addition of fluorides to
public water supplies so as to maintain an optimum fluoride level in such water
supplies of 0.9 parts of fluoride per million parts of water to 1.2 parts of
fluoride per million parts of water as public health measures.
   (C)   It has been found and determined on the basis of study and
investigation that the minimum optimum level of 0.9 parts of fluoride per
million parts of water does not exist in the present water supply of the city.
   (D)   Long term studies and the use of water fortified by addition of
fluorides to a point where the optimum level of 0.9 parts of fluoride per
million parts of water to 1.2 parts of fluoride per million parts of water has
been maintained in public water supplies have demonstrated that such process
does reduce the incidence of dental caries and tooth decay in the permanent
teeth of children and does not produce deleterious effects to any persons; and
also is of benefit to adults.
('74 Code, § 8-3-1) (Ord. 151-1970)
§ 6-1-2-2 AUTHORITY TO PROCEED WITH FLUORIDATION OF WATER SUPPLY.
   (A)   The Mayor is directed to acquire the necessary facilities and supplies
for the fluoridation of the city public water supply as soon as practicable to
the end that the fluoride content of the water supply can be raised to and
maintained at the optimum fluoride level of 0.9 parts of fluoride per million
parts of water to 1.2 parts of fluoride per million parts of water no later
than January 1, 1972.
   (B)   The Mayor is hereby authorized to cause the addition of fluorides to
the city public water supply in controlled amounts to reach and maintain the
optimum fluoride level as soon as the facilities and supplies have been
acquired and made operational.
('74 Code, § 8-3-2) (Ord. 151-1970)
PART 3: PUBLIC USE OF FIRE HYDRANTS
§ 6-1-3-1 PERMIT REQUIRED.
   (A)   No person, individual, firm, partnership or corporation (hereinafter
called "User") shall obtain water from any fire hydrant located within the city
for any purpose other than public emergency use without obtaining a permit from
the city as provided herein.
   (B)   A User may obtain such a permit upon application to the city as
provided in §
6-1-3-2. The permit shall designate the fire hydrants from which the User may
obtain water.
   (C)   A permit may be revoked at any time for cause, such as, but not
limited to:
      (1)   User's failure to pay for water at the specified time;
      (2)   User's interference with emergency use of designated fire hydrant;
      (3)   User obtaining water from other than designated fire hydrant;
      (4)   Conviction of the User for any violation of §§
6-1-3-1 et seq.;
      (5)   Compelling need of the city.
   (D)   The granting of a permit under this section does not grant any right
of privilege to the User to interfere with the city's duty to the public.
Emergency use for fire protection supersedes and takes precedence over all
other uses.
('74 Code, § 8-2-1) (Ord. 234-1972)
Penalty, see § 1-1-99
§ 6-1-3-2 METER REQUIRED.
   The user shall use a meter owned by the city in order to keep a record of
the water used. The User is required to deposit $300 for each meter. This
deposit shall be reimbursed to the User upon the return of the water meter in
good condition and certification by the Water Division that the fire hydrant
concerned is in good condition. The user is responsible for any damage incurred
to fire hydrant or water meter. The deposit shall be applied toward the payment
for any such damage and may be applied to any unpaid charges for water obtained
pursuant to the provisions of §
6-1-3-1 et seq.
('74 Code, § 8-2-2) (Ord. 234-1972)
Penalty, see § 1-1-99
§ 6-1-3-3 CROSS-CONNECTIONS.
   Unprotected cross-connections (as defined within the Cross-Connection
Prevention and Control Ordinance set forth in § 6-2-1 et seq.) are prohibited.
('74 Code, § 8-2-3) (Ord. 234-1972; Am. Ord. 26-1976; Am. Ord. 88-1978; Am.
Ord. 39-1987)
Penalty, see § 1-1-99
PART 4: [RESERVED]
PART 5: WATER CONSERVATION WATER BY REQUEST
§ 6-1-5-1 INTENT.
   The public purpose of this ordinance is to:
   (A)   Assist in reducing overall per capita water use in the city, thereby
helping to ensure a sustainable supply of water;
   (B)   Eliminate unnecessary use of water in restaurants by serving water to
customers only when requested, thereby reducing water served and water used to
wash glasses;
   (C)   Educate water system customers and hospitality industry clientele
about and eliminate the unnecessary use of water by reducing the frequency of
washing of sheets, towels, and other linens; and
   (D)   Encourage government facilities and businesses to eliminate waste and
use water efficiently.
(Ord. 2-2001)
§ 6-1-5-2 SHORT TITLE.
   This ordinance shall be known as the "Water Conservation Water by Request
Ordinance."
(Ord. 2-2001)
§ 6-1-5-3 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this article, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning:
   BUSINESS.  Retail facility, office, shopping center or other facility in the
commercial water billing class, other than multi-family or mobile home
residential facilities.
   GOVERNMENT FACILITY.  Facility operated by the City of Albuquerque,
Bernalillo County, State of New Mexico, United States, or other governmental
entity.
   LODGING ESTABLISHMENT.  A motel, hotel, or bed and breakfast establishment
which provides private rooms for overnight stay and provides towels and/or
sheets and/or other linens.
   RESTAURANT.  A food service facility which serves meals to customers,
including those food service facilities in lodging establishments and schools
and drive-in food facilities, and excluding health and frail elderly care
facilities.
(Ord. 2-2001)
§ 6-1-5-4 APPLICABILITY.
   All sections of this article apply to all restaurants, lodging
establishments, government facilities, and businesses within the city limits
and/or served by the municipal utility. Compliance with the ordinance is a
condition of service from the utility.
(Ord. 2-2001)
§ 6-1-5-5 DRINKING WATER SERVICE.
   All restaurants shall provide drinking water only as specifically requested
by the customer.
(Ord. 2-2001)
§ 6-1-5-6 LINEN WASHING SERVICE.
   All lodging establishments shall offer customers the option of not changing
sheets and towels in private rooms for stays of less than five days. Lodging
establishments shall encourage this practice, at a minimum, through posting of
signs in every room instructing customers how to avoid linen service for stays
less than five days. Lodging establishments with less than ten rooms may
encourage this practice through brochures or other general promotional
materials rather than signs in each room.
(Ord. 2-2001)
§ 6-1-5-7 EDUCATING EMPLOYEES, CLIENTS, AND CUSTOMERS.
   The city shall work cooperatively with government facilities and businesses
to post signage informing and educating employees, clients, and customers about
the need to and how to save water.
(Ord. 2-2001)
§ 6-1-5-8 ASSESSMENT OF FEES.
   Any responsible party who violates the provisions of this ordinance shall be
subject to progressively higher fees until the violation ceases. The schedule
for assessment of fees is as follows.
   First violation               $20
   Second violation            $50
   Third and additional violation         $100
   Assessment of fees for violations of this ordinance will be through city
utility bills and placed on the responsible party's billing account. The
responsible party may appeal fees for violation of this ordinance and the
appeal process shall follow the process set forth in § 6-1-1-12(B) of the Water
Conservation Landscaping and Water Waste Ordinance. Fees shall be assessed to
the responsible party's billing account within 15 days following expiration of
the appeal period or issuance of appeal findings and shall be listed as a
separate line item on the utility bill. Responsible parties shall be notified
of the fee through certified mail within 15 days of the violation. Fees must be
paid within the normal payment period allowed by the city utility billing
system. Fees shall be suspended pending the outcome of an appeal. Each day in
which a violation occurs shall constitute a separate offense. The responsible
party will be given seven days to comply with this ordinance before another fee
may be assessed.
(Ord. 2-2001)
PART 6: [RESERVED]
PART 7: PLUMBING FIXTURE RETROFIT FOR CITY OWNED PROPERTY
§ 6-1-7-1 SHORT TITLE.
   Sections
6-1-7-1 et seq. shall be cited as the "The Plumbing Fixture Retrofit Ordinance
for City Owned Property."
(Ord. 2-2009)
§ 6-1-7-2 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of §§
6-1-7-1 et seq., the following definitions shall apply unless the context
clearly indicates or requires a different meaning:
   EXISTING PLUMBING FIXTURE.
      (1)   Any toilet manufactured to use more than 1.6 gallons of water per
flush.
      (2)   Any urinal manufactured to use more than 1.0 gallon of water per
flush.
      (3)   Any showerhead manufactured to have flow capacity of more than 2.5
gallons of water per minute.
      (4)   Any faucet that emits more than 2.5 gallons of water per minute.
   FAUCET.  A fixture commonly known as a faucet but only when located at a
kitchen or bathroom sink.
   LOW WATER USE PLUMBING FIXTURE. Plumbing fixtures as follows: 1.6 gallons or
less per flush toilets, 1.0 gallon or less per flush urinals, 2.5 gallons or
less per minute shower heads, 2.5 gallons or less per minute faucets and/or
aerators.
   PLUMBING FIXTURE. A faucet, showerhead, urinal or toilet.
   RETROFIT. Means to replace any existing plumbing fixture with a low water
use plumbing fixture.
(Ord. 2-2009)
§ 6-1-7-3 DUTY OF CITY TO RETROFIT.
   All plumbing fixtures in all city owned property over which the city has
control shall be low water use plumbing fixtures no later than December 31,
2014. The City Council may, by Resolution, extend this deadline to complete the
installation of low water use fixtures.
(Ord. 2-2009)
§ 6-1-7-4 RETROFIT EXEMPTIONS.
   The following conditions and circumstances shall exempt property from the
provisions of this part:
   (A)   Where a low water use plumbing fixture would be installed in an
existing building that has been identified by a local, state, or federal
government entity as an historical site, and an historically accurate water-
conserving plumbing fixture is not available.
   (B)   Where installation of a low water use plumbing fixture would require
modifications to plumbing system components located beneath a finished wall,
floor or other surface.
   (C)   Where the unique configurations of a building drainage system or
portions of a public sewer, or both, require a greater quantity of water to
flush the system in a manner consistent with public health.
   (D)   Where the existing building will be demolished or rehabilitated within
90 days of the purchase of such existing building.
(Ord. 2-2009)
ARTICLE 2: [RESERVED]
ARTICLE 3: SEWER USE AND WASTEWATER CONTROL
EDITOR’S NOTE:
Pursuant to state statute, Sec. 72-1-10 NMSA 1978, the assets of the City of
Albuquerque’s water and sewer utility were transferred to the Albuquerque-
Bernalillo County Water Authority http://www.cabq.gov/wua/index.html. As a
result, the City of Albuquerque repealed its Sewer Use and Wastewater Control
Ordinance and the Water Authority adopted its own Sewer Use and Wastewater
Control Ordinance which may be found at its website http://www.cabq.gov/wua/
pdfs/Rate_Ordinance.pdf The Franchise Agreement through which the City of
Albuquerque has granted the Water Authority access to the City’s rights-of-way
is found at §§13-4-9-1 et seq. ROA 1994.
ARTICLE 4: WATER AND SEWER RATES
EDITOR'S NOTE:
Pursuant to state statute, Sec. 72-1-10 NMSA 1978, the assets of the City of
Albuquerque's water and sewer utility were transferred to the Albuquerque-
Bernalillo County Water Authority http://www.cabq.gov/wua/index.html. As a
result, the City of Albuquerque repealed its Water and Sewer Rate Ordinance and
the Water Authority adopted its own Water and Sewer Rate Ordinance which may be
found at its website http://www.cabq.gov/wua/pdfs/Rate_Ordinance.pdf The
Franchise Agreement through which the City of Albuquerque has granted the Water
Authority access to the City's rights-of-way is found at §§
13-4-9-1 et seq. ROA 1994.
ARTICLE 5: STREETS AND SIDEWALKS
Section
Part 1: Street Names
   
6-5-1-1   Method of naming
   
6-5-1-2   Inter-governmental cooperation policy
   
6-5-1-3   Policy on naming new streets
   
6-5-1-4   Changing names of streets
Part 2: Street Excavation and Barricading
   
6-5-2-1   Short title
   
6-5-2-2   Definitions
   
6-5-2-3   Pre-qualification required
   
6-5-2-4   Permits and approvals
   
6-5-2-5   Application
   
6-5-2-6   Liability insurance; self insured
   
6-5-2-7   Excavation administration and inspection fee
   
6-5-2-8   Excavation permit warranty and restrictions
   
6-5-2-9   Routing of traffic
   
6-5-2-10   Clearance of vital structures
   
6-5-2-11   Maintenance of traffic and pedestrian flow
   
6-5-2-12   Coordination of utilities
   
6-5-2-13   Protection of adjoining property
   
6-5-2-14   Care of excavated material
   
6-5-2-15   Cleanup
   
6-5-2-16   Protection of water course
   
6-5-2-17   Breaking through pavement
   
6-5-2-18   Backfilling
   
6-5-2-19   Restoration of pavement
   
6-5-2-20   Prompt completion of work
   
6-5-2-21   Critical work
   
6-5-2-22   Preservation of survey monuments
   
6-5-2-23   Inspection
   
6-5-2-24   Advance notice of improvements
   
6-5-2-25   Barricade companies
   
6-5-2-26   Trenchless excavation
   
6-5-2-27   Savings clause
   
6-5-2-28   Enforcement and abatement
   
6-5-2-29   Appeals
Part 3: Future Street Lines
   
6-5-3-1   Purpose
   
6-5-3-2   Street lines established
   
6-5-3-3   Street lines effective
   
6-5-3-4   Variance
   
6-5-3-5   Zoning conflicts
   
6-5-3-6   Issuance of permits
   
6-5-3-7   Other restrictions
 
   
6-5-3-99   Penalty
Part 4: Curb Cuts
   
6-5-4-1   Permits
   
6-5-4-2   Building permit prerequisite
   
6-5-4-3   Curb cut requirements
   
6-5-4-4   Appeals
   
6-5-4-5   Abandoned and nonconforming curb cuts
   
6-5-4-6   Conformance requirements
   
6-5-4-7   Crossings
Part 5: Sidewalks
   
6-5-5-1   Short title
   
6-5-5-2   Intent
   
6-5-5-3   Pedestrian sidewalk, drive pad, and curb and gutter required
   
6-5-5-4   Definitions
   
6-5-5-5   Construction permit required
   
6-5-5-6   Design required
   
6-5-5-7   Grade establishment required for curb and gutter
   
6-5-5-8   Bond required
   
6-5-5-9   Duty to repair and replace
   
6-5-5-10   Inspection and grade stake fee schedules and procedures
   
6-5-5-11   Special assessment districts
   
6-5-5-12   Landscape/buffer area use
   
6-5-5-13   Use standards
   
6-5-5-14   Design and construction standards and procedures
   
6-5-5-15   Development review board
   
6-5-5-16   Variances
   
6-5-5-17   Appeals
   
6-5-5-18   Sidewalks, drive pad, and curb ramp repair and maintenance;
permitting commercial advertising on transit shelters
   
6-5-5-19   Curb and gutter
   
6-5-5-20   Drive pad and curb ramp specifications
   
6-5-5-21   Drive pad crossing of sidewalks
   
6-5-5-22   Abandoned drive pad
   
6-5-5-23   Drive pad location and width
   
6-5-5-24   Curb, gutter, sidewalk and drive pad subgrade preparation
Part 6: Complete Streets Ordinance
   
6-5-6-1   Short title
   
6-5-6-2   Intent and purposes
   
6-5-6-3   [Reserved]
   
6-5-6-4   Applicability
   
6-5-6-5   Definitions
   
6-5-6-6   General policy
   
6-5-6-7   Project compliance
   
6-5-6-8   Implementation
Cross-reference:
   Cable television franchise, §§
13-5-3-1 et seq.
   
Electricity franchise, see §§ 13-4-2-1 et seq.
   
Gas franchise, see §§ 13-4-1-1 et seq.
   
Housemoving and other unusual use affecting telephone lines, see § 13-4-3-4
   
Telephone franchise, see 13-4-1-3 et seq.
PART 1: STREET NAMES
§ 6-5-1-1 METHOD OF NAMING.
   Streets shall be officially named or renamed by:
   (A)   A plat dedicating public right of way for an unnamed local or
collector street, or the continuation of a named principal or minor arterial;
or
   (B)   Action renaming a street pursuant to §
6-5-1-4; or
   (C)   Adoption of a surveyed street line with name pursuant to §§
6-5-3-1 et seq., Future Street Lines; or
   (D)   Adoption of a resolution by the City Council concerning the name of a
specific principal or minor arterial street.
('74 Code, § 8-1-1) (Ord. 99-1983)
§ 6-5-1-2 INTER-GOVERNMENTAL COOPERATION POLICY.
   The city shall rule on every new or changed name of a street within its
planning and platting jurisdiction. However, the city shall abide by the
desires of more directly concerned local governments where it appears unlikely
that any of the street will ever be within the city; where a street is or
clearly will be both within and outside the city, the city shall confer with
other concerned local governments and seek a mutually satisfactory name.
('74 Code, § 8-1-2) (Ord. 99-1983)
§ 6-5-1-3 POLICY ON NAMING NEW STREETS.
   (A)   New Street Designations. All new streets, except those within Planned
Communities, including but not limited to, principal and minor arterials, local
and collector streets, cul-de-sacs, and private streets, shall be designated in
accordance with divisions (A) and (C) herein.
      (1)   New principal and minor arterial streets, as defined by the Long
Range Roadway System Map, shall be designated “Boulevard.”
      (2)   New local and collector streets which run essentially north-south
shall be designated "Drive" or "Street." New local and collector streets which
run essentially east-west shall be designated "Road" or "Avenue." However, see
exceptions in divisions (3) and (4) of this division (A).
      (3)   New local street cul-de-sacs may be designated "Court" or "Place."
      (4)   New local streets which circle back on themselves may be designated
"Circle."
      (5)   New local and collector streets which change direction in a logical
semi-continuous and connected manner, but do not circle back on themselves, may
be designated "Loop."
      (6)   Divided collector streets which lead to, or partially or entirely
circumscribe, areas of relatively intense activity may be designated "Parkway."
      (7)   Private streets may only be designated "Trail", "Lane", "Way",
"Calle" or "Via."
      (8)   Alleys are permitted to be named. If named, they shall be
designated "Alley."
      (9)   In places where the appropriate street designation according to
this division (A) is not clear, or where the requested street designation is
not consistent with this division (A), the City Engineer and the City Surveyor
shall determine the designation.
   (B)   New Street Designations in Planned Communities. All streets in Planned
Communities (established pursuant to the Planned Communities Criteria,
Resolution No. 151-1990, as amended) shall be designated in accordance with a
hierarchy of street functional classifications specified in the individual
Level A and Level B Plans and as defined in this division (B). The terminology
used herein is for the purposes of street designation only and shall not be
used to construe right-of-way or geometric design requirements.
 
MRCOG Street                Planned Communities
Functional Classification   Level A and B Plan  Street Name Designation
                            Classification
Principal Arterial          Boulevard           Boulevard, Crossing
Minor Arterial              Avenue              Avenue, Crossing, Loop, Street
                                                Avenue, Circle, Court, Drive,
Collector                   Connector           Loop, Parkway, Place, Road,
                                                Street
Local (or Major Local per                       Avenue, Circle, Court,
City Subdivision Ordinance) Local               Crossing, Drive, Loop, Place,
                                                Road, Street
Private                     Private             Alley, Calle, Lane, Trail,
                                                Via, Way.
 
      (1)   New Boulevards, as defined by the Level A and Level B Planned
Community Master Plan, shall be designated "Boulevard" or "Crossing".
      (2)   New Avenues, as defined by the Level A and Level B Planned
Community Master Plan, shall be designated "Avenue", "Street", "Crossing" or
"Loop".
      (3)   New local and connector streets which run essentially north-south
shall be designated "Drive," "Street," or "Crossing".
      (4)   New local and connector streets which run essentially east-west
shall be designated "Road," "Avenue", or "Crossing". However, see exceptions in
divisions (5) and (6) of this division (B).
      (5)   New local street cul-de-sacs may be designated "Court" or "Place."
      (6)   New local streets which circle back on themselves may be designated
"Circle."
      (7)   New local and connector streets which change direction in a logical
semi-continuous and connected manner, but do not circle back on themselves, may
be designated "Loop".
      (8)   Divided connector streets which lead to, and partially or entirely
circumscribe, areas of relatively intense activity, may be designated
"Parkway".
      (9)   Private streets shall only be designated "Trail," "Lane," "Way,"
"Calle," or "Via".
      (10)   Alleys are permitted to be named. If named, they shall be
designated "Alley."
      (11)   In places where the appropriate street designation according to
this division (B) is not clear, or the requested street designation is not
consistent with this division (B) the City Engineer and the City Surveyor shall
determine the designation.
   (C)   New Street Names.
      (1)   The name of a new street should be the name of an existing, nearby
street which is essentially in line with it, unless the City Engineer finds
that such name continuation would clearly not be helpful to motorists searching
for an address.
      (2)   Where division (1) of this division (C) does not apply, the
following are basic city policies on public and private street naming:
         (a)   Alphabetic sequences of street names are desirable;
         (b)   Groupings of names with similar content are desirable;
         (c)   Names with double meanings are usually undesirable;
         (d)   Names of over 13 letters and spaces are usually unacceptable
(this limit does not apply to the street designation and quadrant);
         (e)   Names already in use for streets in the area covered by the Long
Range Roadway System Map are unacceptable unless the existing street is
essentially in line with the new street;
         (f)   Names shall conform to alpha- numeric style standards
established by the City Engineer;
         (g)   The city will normally accept developer proposals for street
names which are consistent with §§
6-5-1-1 et seq., but the city reserves the right to name streets where the city
finds that the developer's name proposals are not consistent with city policies
and the public welfare. The Council may also evaluate and redesignate a street
name if it finds that the developer’s name is not consistent with city policies
and the public welfare so long as the street has not been constructed or the
street has been constructed but no structures have been built on the street.
('74 Code, § 8-1-3) (Ord. 99-1983; Am. Ord. 26-2005; Am. Ord. 39-2008)
§ 6-5-1-4 CHANGING NAMES OF STREETS.
   (A)   Procedure.
      (1)   Any person may apply to the City Engineer to change the name of a
street segment which is within the city. (Application to change the name of a
street which is not in the city but is in its planning and platting
jurisdiction should be to the county.)
      (2)   The City Engineer shall mail letters to the owners of record of all
lots adjacent to a street segment which is within the city and is proposed for
name change, informing them of the nature of the proposed change and indicating
how a person may file comments. At least 30 days shall be allowed for such
comments before a decision is reached. Owner of record means the owner shown in
the records of the County Assessor.
      (3)   The City Engineer shall request interested city departments and
other agencies, including private utilities and the U.S. Postal Service, to
comment on the request.
      (4)   The City Engineer shall make the decision as to local and collector
streets in the following cases:
         (a)   An application or petition is signed by all owners of record of
property abutting the street segment in question; or
         (b)   No person files a timely written objection to the name change.
      (5)   In other cases involving local and collector streets, the Planning
Commission shall make the decision at a public hearing, after receiving a
report from the Development Review Board.
      (6)   In cases involving major or minor arterial streets, the City
Council shall rule on the request.
      (7)   Every person filing comments or receiving notification pursuant to
division (2) of this division (A) shall receive written notification of the
decision.
      (8)   In the event a proposed street name change is both within and
outside the city, the city's decision shall not become final until the county
rules, and in the event the county reaches a decision different than the city,
the city decision shall not be final until 15 working days after notice of a
reconsidered decision by the previous city decision maker.
      (9)   Appeal of the City Engineer's decision is to the Planning
Commission. Appeal of the Planning Commission's decision is to the City
Council. Appeals shall be filed within 15 working days of the postmark of the
letter giving notice of the decision.
   (B)   Criteria.
      (1)   A street name shall be changed only if the decision maker finds
that there will be a public benefit which clearly outweighs the public
confusion and cost which would be created by the name change.
      (2)   Continuous major or minor arterial streets should have the same
name throughout the urban area. However, the benefit of this clarity must be
weighed against the confusion of changing addresses which are in use.
   (C)   Fees.  The Mayor shall set a fee schedule to cover reasonable
administrative expenses based on approximate city costs of reviewing name
change proposals, holding public meetings and hearings, and other expenses
incidental to the processing of street name change proposals and appeals
thereof; successful applicants may also be charged a fee to cover the cost of
street sign replacement.
('74 Code, § 8-1-4) (Ord. 99-1983)
PART 2: STREET EXCAVATION AND BARRICADING
§ 6-5-2-1 SHORT TITLE.
   Sections
6-5-2-1 et seq. will be known and may be cited as the "Street Excavation and
Barricading Ordinance of the City of Albuquerque, New Mexico."
(Ord. 13-2005)
§ 6-5-2-2 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of §§
6-5-2-1 et seq., the following definitions shall apply unless the context
clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   APPLICANT. Any person required by §§
6-5-2-1 et seq. to apply for a permit to make an excavation or barricade a city
street, alley, or public right-of-way.
   BARRICADE(S). Any MUTCD approved obstruction within the public right-of-way
that impedes the traveling public, either vehicular or pedestrian.
   BARRICADING ONLY PERMIT. A permit issued by the Mayor allowing the temporary
barricade of the surface of the public right-of-way. Such permits shall not
include or allow excavation activities. Such permits shall include placement of
trash dumpsters; piles of gravel, dirt debris; placement of storage containers;
etc.
   BLASTING. Use of explosive devices.
   BLOCK. Measured along the same street in the same general direction, the
distance between two adjacent intersecting public roadways, not to exceed 660
linear feet.
   DIRECTIONAL DRILLING. Horizontal directional rotary drilling process.
   EMERGENCY REPAIR. The repair, restoration, or replacement of an existing
structure or infrastructure made necessary because of a sudden unexpected event
which has created a condition which is an immediate and continuing threat to
the safety of property or persons, including loss of any public utility
service.
   EXCAVATION. Any hole, trench, ditch or depression which penetrates through
or under paved or unpaved surface in a public place resulting from the removal
by a person of pavement, dirt, or other material, except a substructure
opening. EXCAVATION shall include removal of concrete, removal of asphalt, and
grading or blading.
   EXCAVATION PERMIT. A permit issued by the Mayor allowing an excavation in
the public right-of-way not to exceed one block.
   GRAFFITI. Unauthorized painting, writing or inscription.
   HOLE HOG. Horizontal pneumatic non-guided drilling process.
   INFRASTRUCTURE. Physical features, including overhead and underground
utilities, located within the public right-of-way used primarily for the
benefit and enjoyment of the general public.
   JACKING. Horizontal semi guided tunneling process.
   MAYOR. The Mayor or his designated representative.
   MUTCD. Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices, latest edition.
   PAVEMENT. Any improved traveling surface for vehicular, bicycle, or
pedestrian traffic; including asphalt, portland cement concrete, brick,
masonry, or other man-made materials.
   PERMIT. The revocable written authorization from the city to use, work in,
or otherwise occupy public right- of-way; detailing the specific time, place,
and other restrictions for the allowed use.
   PERSON. Any individual, estate, trust, receiver, cooperative association,
club, corporation, franchised  utility company, firm, partnership, joint
venture, syndicate, or other legal entity, including city and other
governmental agencies.
   POTHOLE. A vertical nondestructive excavation for the intent of verifying
the location of underground infrastructure.
   PUBLIC PLACE. All property owned, maintained, or controlled by the City of
Albuquerque, including, but not limited to, streets, highways, alleys, bicycle
paths, pedestrian or equestrian paths, ways, places, sidewalks, plazas, parks,
easements, and rights-of-way.
   PUBLIC RIGHT-OF-WAY. The total area of land deeded, reserved by plat, or
otherwise acquired by the city, the county, or the state, primarily for the use
of the public for the movement of people, goods, and vehicles.
   RESTORATION PERIOD. A period up to December 31st of the fifth year following
new construction, reconstruction, or major rehabilitation (including milling
and repaving) of a roadway pavement. A period up to December 31st of the third
year following preventative pavement maintenance; including heater- scarify,
heater-repave, micro-surfacing, or slurry seal application; of a roadway
pavement. A period up to December 31st of the fifth year following any pavement
preparation funded from federal funds.
   SUBSTRUCTURE. Any facility located below the surface of any public place.
   SUBSTRUCTURE OPENING. An opening into a lawful substructure, the top of
which is approximately flush with the adjoining surface of a public place and
which is so constructed as to permit frequent openings without injury or damage
to a public place and without removal of pavement, dirt, or other material.
   TRENCHLESS EXCAVATION. Utility line installation, replacement, or
rehabilitation through the use of boring, jacking, horizontal drilling or
tunneling.
(Ord. 13-2005)
§ 6-5-2-3 PRE-QUALIFICATION REQUIRED.
   (A)   No person may be issued an excavation permit until the following
requirements are completed:
      (1)   Evidence must be presented that insurance requirements have been
met in accordance with §
6-5-2-6, except for city agencies.
      (2)   A bond in the amount of $10,000 specifically designed and
designated by the City of Albuquerque for the type of work applicant is
performing must be posted by the applicant, except for city agencies and city
franchised utilities. This bond will be to insure satisfactory completion of
all phases of the work, payment of all costs by city agencies performing work
for the applicant in case of default, and to insure completion of corrective
work under the one year warranty provision of §§
6-5-2-1 et seq. Separate bonds, in addition to excavation bonds, are required
for concrete work and for water line tapping.
      (3)   Persons employed by the permit applicant, and who will be
responsible for work in compliance with §§
6-5-2-1 et seq., must be appropriately licensed by the New Mexico State
Construction Industries Division for the work.
      (4)   The applicant must certify in writing that he has read and
understands the contents of §§
6-5-2-1 et seq.
      (5)   The applicant must agree to the following:
         (a)   Complete all work required by §§
6-5-2-1 et seq., and all other city ordinances, rules, policies, regulations,
and construction standards and specifications pertaining to work in the city
right of way, covered by the permit.
         (b)   Complete any specific item within five days after written notice
is given by the city to do so.
         (c)   Should it not be completed within this period, the city will
complete the work and bill the applicant at actual costs incurred for such
work.
         (d)   To repair or correct incomplete work or defective materials and
workmanship which occur within a period of one year from the acceptance date by
the city of such work.
      (6)   A permit fee bond in the amount of $15,000 must be posted by the
applicant, except for city agencies. A permit fee bond shall not be required
for permits paid in advance.
   (B)   The requirements outlined above must be kept current. The above
requirements will be reviewed periodically and no permits will be issued when
requirements are not current. The qualification remains valid for as long as
bonds and insurance remain current or as otherwise provided for herein,
including §
6-5-2-3(C).
   (C)   If a contractor fails to abide by §§
6-5-2-1 et seq., or the rules and policies of the City of Albuquerque, the
qualification can be forfeited by the City of Albuquerque up to one year.
Qualification forfeiture must be made in writing by the City of Albuquerque to
the applicant by certified mail. The Mayor shall establish rules and policies
for determining qualification forfeiture.
   (D)   Any person attempting to obtain a permit must be an authorized agent
of the applicant. Applicant shall provide contact name to city for verification
of permit authorization, if requested. Subcontractors are not allowed to obtain
permits in the name of the prime contractor.
   (E)   In the event an applicant fails to comply with the requirements of
this section, the Mayor may cause notice to be given, conduct a hearing, refuse
to permit such applicant to thereafter engage in trenching or excavation work
in any public place. The Mayor is authorized and empowered after a hearing to
suspend, cancel or withdraw the qualifications for obtaining permits, and any
current permits in accordance with §§
6-5-2-1 et seq.
(Ord. 13-2005)
§ 6-5-2-4 PERMITS AND APPROVALS.
   (A)   No person may make any excavation without first obtaining a permit
from the Mayor to do so, except as otherwise provided in §§
6-5-2-1 et seq. An application in a form acceptable to the Mayor shall be
submitted to obtain an excavation permit. The fee for the excavation permit
shall be established pursuant to §
6-5-2-7. Such permit shall not be valid until signed by the applicant and all
fees have been paid and shall not be valid after the expiration date on this
permit. An excavation permit shall be required for the underground installation
in a public right-of-way of any facility by boring, jacking, or tunneling.
Excavations which are performed for projects under contracts funded by the city
or the New Mexico Department of Transportation and excavations by franchised
utilities made necessary by such projects are exempt from permit fees,
including restoration fee requirements of §§
6-5-2-1 et seq.
   (B)   Construction methods for installations in which trenchless excavation
under a public right-of-way is involved will require additional information
prior to approval by the Mayor.
   (C)   The Mayor may issue such rules, standard details and regulations as
are required to enforce §§
6-5-2-1 et seq. The city shall make available a list referencing such items
upon qualification.
   (D)   No entrance may be made into any substructure opening by any person
without compliance with the rules and regulations prescribed by the Mayor. An
excavation permit is not required for such action, but a barricade permit is
required.
   (E)   No person shall barricade the public right-of-way without first
obtaining a barricade permit issued by the Mayor. A separate barricade permit
shall not be required for barricade activities included within an excavation
permit, although additional barricade permit fees may be required for
additional days past the first day of barricading.
   (F)   Barricade permits for special events open to the general public for
participation shall require indemnification through the issuance of general
liability insurance in an amount no less than $1,000,000. The City of
Albuquerque shall be listed as an additional insured on the insurance policy.
   (G)   Permits shall be issued on a per project basis. When more than one
block of a street is included in the same permit application, additional permit
fees will be assessed for each block. Scope changes to original permit
application will require additional permitting. When more than one street is
included in the same permit application, additional permit fees will be
assessed for each street.
     (H)   In the event an applicant fails to comply with the requirements of
this section, the Mayor may cause notice to be given, conduct a hearing in
accordance with §
6-5-2-29.
   (I)   A permit may be revoked by the city at any time for any cause.
Applicant may be required to restore the public place to a safe condition
immediately upon request by the city. The city shall not be required to
reimburse the applicant for any additional costs associated with permit
revocation.
(Ord. 13-2005)
§ 6-5-2-5 APPLICATION.
   (A)   Every person required to obtain an excavation permit by §§
6-5-2-1 et seq. must meet the requirements of §
6-5-2-3, and make written application to the Mayor on forms provided by the
Mayor prior to the performance of any work. The written application must state
the name, telephone number, address, and principal place of business of the
applicant; the name of the barricading contractor; New Mexico One Call line
spot number, an estimate of the location and dimension of the installation or
removal for which the excavation is to be made; the purpose of the
infrastructure and the estimated length of time (calendar days) which will be
required to complete such work, including backfilling said excavation and
removing all obstructions, material, and debris, and the owner of the
Infrastructure to be installed. The approved permit shall be the authorization
for the applicant to occupy the public place for which the permit was sought.
Normally this permit will be issued within 48 hours.
   (B)   In the event of an emergency, excavations may be made without first
obtaining a permit provided that each person so making an excavation file his
application for permit during the first normal working day of the city
immediately following the date of the commencement of excavation.
   (C)   If the applicant intends to use explosives as part of the requested
activity, the applicant shall provide the Mayor with a copy of the blasting
permit and the blaster’s license prior to the permit issuance.
(Ord. 13-2005)
§ 6-5-2-6 LIABILITY INSURANCE; SELF INSURED.
   No person shall obtain a barricade or excavation permit until he/she has
provided a certificate of insurance satisfactory to the Mayor, and listing the
City of Albuquerque as additionally insured, indicating that such person is
insured against claims for damages for personal injury and for property damage
which may arise from or out of the performance of the work, whether such
performance be by himself, his/her subcontractor, or anyone directly or
indirectly employed by him/her or his/her subcontractor. Such insurance must
cover collapse, explosive hazard, damage to nearby utilities and underground
work by equipment on the street, and must include protection for a period of
one year from the date of completion of an excavation against liability arising
from completed operations. The liability insurance for bodily injury in effect
must be in an amount not less than $1,000,000 for each person and $2,000,000
for each occurrence, for property damage in an amount not less than $500,000
with an aggregate of $1,000,000 for each occurrence. Each such certificate must
provide that the Mayor be given ten days notice of cancellation in writing from
the insurance company. Any public utility company having a net worth in excess
of $10,000,000 is not required to comply with the insurance requirements of
this section, if it furnishes to the Mayor its written election to be self-
insured and satisfactory proof by the first day of each year that it does have
such net worth. It is further provided that the making of an excavation or
barricading by any public utility company which elects to be self-insured under
this provision, constitutes an agreement by such company to be responsible for
and to hold harmless the city against all claims and liabilities arising from
the making of an excavation or barricading by such company, or its
subcontractor, or anyone directly or indirectly employed by such company or
subcontractor for the same periods of time and types of acts or failure to act,
for which insurance coverage would otherwise be required by this section.
(Ord. 13-2005)
§ 6-5-2-7 EXCAVATION ADMINISTRATION AND INSPECTION FEE.
   The Mayor shall periodically adopt rules which set the fee for barricading,
road usage, excavation administration, and inspection. In setting fees the
Mayor shall publish notice of his proposed action and give interested persons
an opportunity to comment prior to action. The Mayor shall provide the revised
fee schedule to the Council through an Executive Communication. All excavation,
barricade, and road usage fees collected shall be made to an Excavation and
Barricade Capital Fund to be used to fund the operations of the permit issuance
and inspection staff. Excess funds collected shall be used to better inform
motorists of construction projects and to reduce traffic congestion caused by
construction projects.
(Ord. 13-2005)
§ 6-5-2-8 EXCAVATION PERMIT WARRANTY AND RESTRICTIONS.
   (A)   The applicant is required to correct incomplete or defective materials
and workmanship performed under each permit for a period of one year from the
date the work under such permit is completed and accepted by the city.
   (B)   During the restoration period following acceptance by the city of a
street or a portion of a street which has been newly constructed, has received
major reconstruction, has received major rehabitation, or has received
preventive maintenance, excavation permits other than those for emergency work
will not normally be issued for that street or section of street. Lines may be
placed by boring, jacking, or tunneling so long as major cuts in the streets
are not required and provided the permits and prior approval of the Mayor are
obtained as required in §
6-5-2-4. When work, other than emergencies, is absolutely necessary and a
surface excavation is required in such streets, including any such excavation
made prior to acceptance of the street for maintenance by the city, a payment
shall be made to a Street Surface Restoration Capital Fund prior to issuance of
an excavation permit in an amount computed according to regulations promulgated
herein. Such payment shall be made regardless of the funding source of the
original pavement. The Mayor shall promulgate regulations governing the amount
of any restoration fees, the duration of the restoration period for various
street conditions and the conditions under which a waiver of the payment of
restoration fees is appropriate.
(Ord. 13-2005)
§ 6-5-2-9 ROUTING OF TRAFFIC.
   (A)   The applicant must take appropriate measures to maintain safe traffic
conditions as near normal as practicable at all times so as to cause as little
inconvenience as possible to the occupants of the abutting property and to the
public. However, safety considerations shall be paramount to public
inconvenience.
   (B)   The Mayor at his sole discretion may require that any applicant notify
various public agencies and the public of proposed work in writing prior to
issuance of a permit. The Mayor may at his sole discretion require the
applicant to work specific time periods, including nights and weekends, to
enhance safety and/or minimize the inconvenience to the public.
   (C)   Traffic control devices must be placed near the permitted work area(s)
to give adequate warning to vehicular and pedestrian traffic all in accordance
with Part VI of the Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices (MUTCD), the City
of Albuquerque Standard Specifications for Public Works Construction, the
Traffic Code of this code of ordinances, and such regulations as may be adopted
by the Mayor.
   (D)   Non-compliance with any written or verbal notifications of violations
of this section will result in immediate permit revocation, including retention
of all permit fees paid.
(Ord. 13-2005)
§ 6-5-2-10 CLEARANCE OF VITAL STRUCTURES.
   Work under the provisions of §§
6-5-2-1 et seq. must be performed and conducted so as not to interfere with
access to fire hydrants, fire stations, fire escapes, and all other vital
structures or equipment designated by the Mayor.
(Ord. 13-2005)
§ 6-5-2-11 MAINTENANCE OF TRAFFIC AND PEDESTRIAN FLOW.
   (A)   The applicant must maintain safe and adequate passage of vehicle and
pedestrian traffic on all streets and at all street intersections as required
by the Mayor and in conformance with §
6-5-2-9(C). No more than 30 minutes following completion of the work or planned
event, the applicant shall open all closed roads to traffic, and shall remove
all barricades and traffic control devices.
   (B)   Two days following receipt of written notification to the applicant,
that the city considers on site traffic control devices abandoned, the city may
confiscate and dispose of all remaining traffic control devices.
   (C)   Traffic markings removed as a part of the excavation shall be replaced
by the applicant with materials similar to those originally in place and in a
manner satisfactory to the Traffic Engineer. If the applicant fails following
24 hour written notification to replace the removed traffic markings, the Mayor
may cause to have such work done, and the cost thereof charged to the
applicant.
(Ord. 13-2005)
§ 6-5-2-12 COORDINATION OF UTILITIES.
   (A)   Relocation of privately owned utilities which are covered by a city
franchise shall be governed by the provisions of that franchise. The applicant
must at his own expense, support and protect all utilities which may be in any
way affected by the excavation work and do everything necessary to support,
sustain, and protect them under, over, along or across said work. The applicant
is required to use the services of the New Mexico One-Call System, Inc. and any
other known underground infrastructure owner for location of existing
utilities. In the event said utilities are damaged (and for this purpose, pipe
coating or other encasement or devices are to be considered as part of the
utility), the owner must be notified immediately and the damage repaired as
soon as practicable. The applicant shall inform himself, before excavating, of
the location of all utilities in or near the area of the excavation. The
applicant must also protect the excavation from surface water flows by
appropriate diversion or ponding devices. The applicant is cautioned, however,
that care must be used to prevent damage to property or structures of others as
a result of the installation of such protection.
   (B)   If any excavation will result in an alteration to permanent grade, the
applicant shall notify the owner of the substructure to assure that the
substructure retains proper coverage. Failure to comply with these requirements
may result in revocation of the permit.
(Ord. 13-2005)
§ 6-5-2-13 PROTECTION OF ADJOINING PROPERTY.
   The applicant must at all times and at his own expense preserve and protect
from injury any adjoining property, by taking suitable measures for that
purpose. Where, in the protection of such property, it is necessary to enter
upon private property for the purpose of taking appropriate protection
measures, the applicant must make reasonable effort to (unless otherwise
provided by law) obtain permission from the owner of such private property. The
applicant may not remove, even temporarily, any trees or shrubs which exist in
any public place without first obtaining permits as required by §
6-6-1-4, except that a public utility shall have the right to trim or remove
such trees, shrubs and other vegetation in the public right-of-way as may be
necessary for the safe operation of its facilities without obtaining such a
permit.
(Ord. 13-2005)
§ 6-5-2-14 CARE OF EXCAVATED MATERIAL.
   (A)   All material excavated and piled adjacent to the excavation or in any
public place, must be piled and maintained so as not to endanger the public and
the workers in the excavation and so as to cause as little inconvenience as
possible to those persons using the public place and adjoining property.
Approved traffic controlled devices shall be used to protect the public from
any excavated material stored in or near the public right-of-way. Excavated
material may not be used as a barricade.
   (B)   Each applicant must conduct and carry out excavation work in such
manner as to avoid unwarranted inconvenience or annoyance to the public and
occupants of neighboring property.
(Ord. 13-2005)
§ 6-5-2-15 CLEANUP.
   (A)   Each applicant must thoroughly clean up all rubbish, excess earth,
rock and other debris resulting from excavation work, from the public place.
All cleanup operations at the location of such excavation are to be
accomplished at the expense of the applicant. During the progress of work or
following the completion of the work, the Mayor may order the applicant to
clean up and remove all refuse, dirt and unused materials of any kind resulting
from said work. Upon failure to do so within 24 hours after having been
notified in writing to do so by the Mayor, the Mayor may cause to have such
work done, and the cost thereof charged to the applicant.
   (B)   All work sites shall be maintained graffiti-free. Upon notification of
graffiti found on work site, including any and all barricading and signage
associated with the project, applicant shall have 60 minutes to begin removal
of all graffiti. Graffiti removal shall continue expeditiously until completed.
Failure to promptly remove graffiti may result in permit revocation, citation
to Metropolitan Court, or both.
(Ord. 13-2005)
§ 6-5-2-16 PROTECTION OF WATER COURSE.
   The applicant must maintain all gutters, drainage easements, crossings and
related drainage facilities, water free and unobstructed for the full depth and
width or provide adequate substitutes for any such water courses as are blocked
by the excavation.
(Ord. 13-2005)
§ 6-5-2-17 BREAKING THROUGH PAVEMENT.
   (A)   The use of pavement breakers which endanger existing structures or
other property, or which produce noise levels, which violate any ordinance, are
prohibited.
   (B)   Saw-cutting may be required by the Mayor when the nature of the job
warrants. The depth of any such cut must be at least 1/3 of the total thickness
of the pavement.
   (C)   Sections of sidewalks or curb and gutter are to be removed to the
nearest joint. Sidewalk cuts parallel to the street shall require removal of
the entire sidewalk section, unless other methods are approved in writing, in
advance, by the Mayor.
   (D)   Unstable pavement must be removed.
   (E)   Pavement edges must be trimmed to a vertical face and aligned with the
center line of the roadway. All cuts shall be parallel or perpendicular to the
street, unless other methods are approved in writing, in advance, by the Mayor.
   (F)   The applicant is not required to repair damage existing prior to
excavation.
   (G)   The applicant is required to repair damage caused by the applicant
outside of the work area.
   (H)   All excavations shall be accomplished in accordance with standard
specifications and details approved by the Mayor.
   (I)   Unless otherwise approved by the Mayor, the maximum length of pavement
removal permissible at any time must not exceed three blocks. One of such
blocks must at that time be ready for paving. One of such blocks must be in the
process of being backfilled. No pavement may be scored or otherwise marked for
removal in excess of the three-block limit provided hereinabove.
(Ord. 13-2005)
§ 6-5-2-18 BACKFILLING.
   (A)   Applicant shall backfill in compliance with standard city
specifications unless otherwise approved by the City Engineer. Testing for
moisture and density shall be required. Applicant shall be responsible to pay
for all required tests.
   (B)   In the event the completed backfill fails to meet the density
requirements of this section when tested, or otherwise fails as evidenced by
settlement of the trench or excavation, the Mayor may order the faulty backfill
material removed, replaced, and recompacted to the required density specified
herein and retest at the applicant's expense. He may also order the replacement
of all pavement destroyed or damaged as the result of the backfill failure
settlement.
   (C)   Applicant shall be responsible for correction of any excavation which
shows detrimental subsidence within one year of permit expiration date.
(Ord. 13-2005)
§ 6-5-2-19 RESTORATION OF PAVEMENT.
   (A)   Upon completion of the backfilling of any excavation, the applicant
must notify the Mayor. Pavement shall be placed by the applicant or its
qualified subcontractor. The cost of pavement will be borne by the applicant.
The applicant must begin resurfacing the excavation within a period of one day
after required compaction of backfill; temporary asphalt patch for a maximum of
30 days is allowed. Pavement placement shall continue expeditiously until
completed. Applicant shall be responsible for keeping the excavation safe for
pedestrian and vehicular traffic until barricading is no longer required.
   (B)   Acceptance or approval of excavation work or backfilling by the Mayor
does not prevent the city from asserting a claim against the applicant for
incomplete or defective workmanship or materials if discovered within one year
from the completion and city acceptance of the excavation work or backfilling.
The presence of the Mayor’s designee during the performance of the work does
not relieve the applicant of his responsibilities hereunder.
   (C)   When permits are issued for work on arterials, collectors, the
downtown area, or other important streets as may be designated by the Mayor,
such streets shall be patched with temporary asphalt or approved bridging
across the excavation at the end of each working day and opened to traffic,
unless other procedures are approved in advance by the Mayor.
   (D)   When the remaining asphalt pavement width resulting from an excavation
is less than six feet to the nearest curb or edge of pavement, the entire
remaining pavement must be removed and replaced with the excavation pavement
repair, and be replaced in a monolithic layer of asphalt, unless otherwise
approved by the city or the pavement repair must be performed using a T-type
pavement repair with no less than two feet of additional pavement removed and
replaced on either side of the excavation.
   (E)   Excavations within concrete pavement must be replaced with entire
slabs of concrete pavement placed to the nearest joints, and must be approved
by the City Street Maintenance Engineer.
(Ord. 13-2005)
§ 6-5-2-20 PROMPT COMPLETION OF WORK.
   The issuance of excavation permits is a privilege, not a right. All
excavation permits are date specific and location specific. The applicant must
only excavate in the permitted area on the permitted days. Applicant shall
begin work at the site indicated upon the permit, within seven days from the
date the permit is issued. If no work is started at the permitted site within
that period, the permit shall be closed, with no reimbursement of fees, unless
applicant has previously notified the city in writing of delay in the work. In
such cases, permit fees will be carried forward to a new permit. If applicant
did not notify the city, the applicant shall obtain a new permit, including
payment of required fees before any work is started.
(Ord. 13-2005)
§ 6-5-2-21 CRITICAL WORK.
   If, in the judgment of the city, traffic conditions, safety or convenience
of the traveling public, or the public interest require that excavation work be
performed at specified times, the Mayor may, at the time the permit is granted,
order that sufficient workers and adequate equipment and supplies be employed
by the applicant 24 hours a day or as otherwise directed by the Mayor for the
purpose of completing such excavation work safely with the least impact to the
public.
(Ord. 13-2005)
§ 6-5-2-22 PRESERVATION OF SURVEY MONUMENTS.
   Before any excavation, the applicant shall notify the City Surveyor to
locate any monuments that may be affected by the construction. The applicant
shall show due diligence in protecting any monument set for the purpose of
locating or preserving the lines of any street, property subdivision, precise
survey reference point, or a permanent survey benchmark within the city. Under
no circumstance shall the applicant remove or disturb any Albuquerque Control
Survey (ACS) or Albuquerque Geodetic Reference System (AGRS) monument without
first obtaining permission in writing from the City Surveyor. Any person
applying for permission to remove or disturb such monument shall pay all
expenses incident to the proper replacement of the monument. The monument shall
be replaced by or at the direction of the City Surveyor.
(Ord. 13-2005)
§ 6-5-2-23 INSPECTION.
   The Mayor may make such inspections as are reasonably necessary in the
enforcement of §§
6-5-2-1 et seq.
(Ord. 13-2005)
§ 6-5-2-24 ADVANCE NOTICE OF IMPROVEMENTS.
   Applicant must notify all residents and businesses directly affected by
permit activities that have a duration of longer than two days at least two
days prior to commencing permit activities. When working in a street or
sidewalk, applicant must notify all affected residents and business owners on
both sides of the block that work is to occur. Notification should be through a
flyer delivered to each residence or business or by the use of an electronic
message board near the work site one week in advance. Flyers shall include a
summary of work to be performed, traffic control set-up, dates and time of
activities, and name and telephone number of the applicant’s representative.
(Ord. 13-2005)
§ 6-5-2-25 BARRICADE COMPANIES.
   All companies that place barricades within any public place, and that do not
otherwise obtain either an excavation or barricade-only permit in their name,
shall register with the Mayor. Registration shall include posting a $5,000
compliance bond to ensure compliance with §§
6-5-2-1 et seq. and all other city rules, regulations, policies,
specifications, and instructions. No barricade shall be placed within any city
public right-of-way unless prior authorization from the city has been granted.
It shall be the responsibility of the barricade owner to insure that a valid
permit has been obtained, including any permit restrictions. Failure to comply
with permit restrictions, or lack of a proper permit, shall result in removal,
confiscation, and loss of all barricade equipment, as well as forfeiture of the
compliance bond.
(Ord. 13-2005)
§ 6-5-2-26 TRENCHLESS EXCAVATION.
   Unless specifically exempted in writing by the Mayor, any person who
conducts a trenchless excavation operation within a public right-of-way for any
purpose whatsoever shall meet the following requirements:
   (A)   All trenchless excavations shall have a locator place markings to
indicate the proposed route of the operation on the public place prior to
requesting utility locating.
   (B)   All underground utilities will be located horizontally utilizing
utility marks, or record drawings. All known or expected underground utilities
will be shown on a scaled drawing along the proposed trenchless excavation
route, which shall be submitted by the applicant with the excavation permit
request.
   (C)   All underground utilities within the route of the trenchless
excavation operation will be vertically located by pot holing prior and/or
during the excavation.
   (D)   There shall be a minimum of a 12 inch separation between all utilities
and the trenchless excavation tool, unless agreed to by the utility owner.
   (E)   The trenchless excavation shall have a locator place bore marks while
the bore is in progress. Locator shall place a mark at every twenty feet
indicating horizontal location.
   (F)   Backfilling all excavations bore pits, potholes, trenches or any other
holes shall be completed daily, unless other safety requirements are approved
by the city.
   (G)   Other methods of trenchless excavation such as use of a hole hog are
not allowed unless there are no underground utility conflicts within 36” in all
directions.
   (H)   The use of trenchless excavation, including potholing, does not
relieve the permittee from payment of any other required fees.
(Ord. 13-2005)
§ 6-5-2-27 SAVINGS CLAUSE.
   Nothing contained in §§
6-5-2-1 et seq. shall in any manner affect pending action for violation of
those ordinances repealed herein or sections or subsections thereof, as
prosecutions for prior violations shall be governed, prosecuted and punished
under the ordinances existing at the time such violations were committed.
(Ord. 13-2005)
§ 6-5-2-28 ENFORCEMENT AND ABATEMENT.
   (A)   Whenever the Mayor determines or has reasonable cause to believe that
an applicant or an agent of such applicant has violated the terms and
requirements of such permit or the provisions of §§
6-5-2-1 et seq. or other applicable law or regulation or rule, he shall notify
the applicant of such violation, whereupon the applicant shall immediately
cease such acts, errors, or omissions which are in violation of permit,
ordinance or other regulations, rules or laws. Failure of the Mayor to provide
notice to the applicant shall not in any way relieve the applicant from any
consequences resulting from the failure to comply with §§
6-5-2-1 et seq., the permit and all applicable regulations, rules and laws.
   (B)   Citation to Metropolitan Court. The Mayor may cite the applicant
operating pursuant to any permit for any violation of any provision of §§
6-5-2-1 et seq. A violation of any terms or conditions of any permit shall be
deemed and shall constitute a violation of §§
6-5-2-1 et seq. Such citations may also be issued to those excavating or
barricading within the public right-of-way without a valid permit issued
pursuant to §§
6-5-2-1 et seq. Excavating or barricading within the public right-of- way after
the expiration date of any such permit shall be deemed a violation of §§
6-5-2-1 et seq.
   (C)   Injunctive and other relief. As an additional means of enforcement,
the City Attorney's Department, in the name of the city, may file in the State
District Court of Bernalillo County or such other courts as may have
jurisdiction, a suit seeking the issuance of an injunction, and/or damages, or
other appropriate relief to enforce the provisions of §§
6-5-2-1 et seq. or other applicable regulation, rule or law. Suit may be
brought to recover any and all damages suffered by the city as a result of any
action or inaction of any applicant who causes or suffers damage to occur to
the public right- of-way or for any other expense, loss or damage of any kind
or nature suffered by the city, including, but not limited to cost of such suit
and attorney's fees of the City Attorney's Department incurred in pursuing such
action. In addition to the award of damages, injunctive relief and other
appropriate relief, the City Attorney's Office may petition the District Court
or such other courts as may have jurisdiction to find the violator guilty of a
misdemeanor and subject to the penalty provisions set forth in §
1-1-99.
   (D)   Immediate termination of violations and emergencies. Applicants
notified of their violation of §§
6-5-2-1 et seq., pursuant to §
6-5-2-3(A), shall cease all such violations no later than the same day the
notice is given, provided, however, that in the event said violation or
violations present an eminent and substantial endangerment to the health,
safety or welfare of persons or property, the Mayor shall give the applicant
notice of the violation and that eminent and substantial endangerment exists.
In such event, the applicant shall cease at the time the notice is given all
acts, errors, or omissions resulting in such violation. The Mayor shall issue a
citation or take action pursuant to division (C) above in the event that the
applicant fails to cease those errors, acts or omissions resulting in such
violation.
   (E)   Any applicant who violates any provision of this ordinance shall be
subject to suspension of the privilege of acquiring excavation permits pursuant
to this article as follows:
      2 violations: up to 7 day suspension
      3 violations: up to 60 day suspension
      4 violations: up to 365 day suspension
The suspensions shall be consecutive for violations separated by less than
three calendar years. Any such suspension shall be held in abeyance pending the
outcome of an appeal.
   (F)   In addition to the suspensions listed in §
6-5-2-28(E), the applicant will be assessed a $500 fee for failure to:
      (1)   Work in public right-of-way without an approved permit;
      (2)   Work outside the requirements of an approved permit;
         (a)   Work before the permit begins;
         (b)   Work after a permit expires;
         (c)   Work without prior notification to city, or approval by city,
for permit extension;
         (d)   Performing work outside the limits of the approved barricade
set-up (lane closures) without prior approval by the city;
         (e)   Work at a location other than within the limits of an approved
permit;
      (3)   Obey a direct order from a city official regarding a safety issue
or a permit restriction;
      (4)   Reimburse city for expenses incurred in completing prior work by
applicant, whether permit was lawfully obtained or not. Such fee is in addition
to the required costs of reimbursement.
      (5)   Reimburse city for expenses incurred in repairing damages caused by
applicant. Such fee is in addition to the required costs of reimbursement.
   (G)   All penalty fees shall be paid in full prior to applicant being issued
any subsequent permits.
(Ord. 13-2005)
§ 6-5-2-29 APPEALS.
   (A)   The Mayor shall be responsible for the enforcement of this article.
The Mayor may prescribe policies, rules, or regulations to carry out the intent
and purpose of this article.
   (B)   Appeal of §
6-5-2-28(E). Any applicant may appeal suspensions or fee assessments to the
City Hearing Officer by filing an appeal within 15 days of receiving a notice
of suspension. Procedures regarding the hearing shall be the procedures
outlined in the IHO Ordinance, ROA 1994,
Chapter 2, Article 7, Part 8.
   (C)   Judicial Review. The exclusive remedy for parties dissatisfied with
the action of the City Hearing Officer shall be the filing of a petition for a
writ of certiorari with the State District Court. The petition for review shall
be limited to the record made at the administrative hearing held pursuant to
this article.
(Ord. 13-2005; Am. Ord._2023-015)
PART 3: FUTURE STREET LINES
§ 6-5-3-1 PURPOSE.
   The City Council declares that the City Council and the City Planning
Commission have adopted a Master Plan of Highways within the City for the
purpose of assuring ample transportation facilities for the present and future.
('74 Code, § 8-8-1) (Ord. 728)
§ 6-5-3-2 STREET LINES ESTABLISHED.
   (A)   Future street lines (building setback lines) are hereby established
within which it shall be unlawful to erect buildings, or to make alterations to
buildings of any kind, such alterations amounting to 50% of the value of the
building, the value to be determined as of the date the alterations are made,
or to erect any structure, or to make alterations to any structure, such
alterations amounting to 50% of the structure, the value to be determined as of
the date the alterations are made, including, but not confined to derricks,
windmills, silos, motion picture screens, advertising structures or solid
walls, or any other structure, edifice, or building or any nature or kind
whatsoever; to establish any well, whether for water, oil or other hydrocarbon
products, or to make excavation or install any subsurface structure of any
kind.
   (B)   Such prohibition shall not apply to trees, agricultural crops, open
fences, or public utilities installed under authority of law, or any building,
structure, well, excavation or subsurface structure existing on the effective
date of §§
6-5-3-1 et seq.
('74 Code, § 8-8-2) (Ord. 728)
§ 6-5-3-3 STREET LINES EFFECTIVE.
   Future street lines (building setback lines) are made and become effective
upon any street, road or highway upon the date of approval by the City Council,
following recommendations by the City Planning Commission of maps showing such
lines.
('74 Code, § 8-8-3) (Ord. 728)
§ 6-5-3-4 VARIANCE.
   (A)   If unnecessary hardships or results inconsistent with the general
purpose of §§
6-5-3-1 et seq. result through the strict and literal interpretations and
enforcement hereof in relation to properties which, because of size, shape,
location or other special circumstances might be unreasonably or inconsistently
affected by the provisions of §§
6-5-3-1 et seq., the City Planning Commission, upon a written application from
the owner or owners of such property, shall have the authority, subject to the
approval of the City Council, to grant a variance from the provisions of §§
6-5-3-1 et seq. as may be in harmony with its general purpose and intent, so
that the spirit of this ordinance shall be observed, public safety, convenience
and welfare served and substantial justice done.
   (B)   If the granting of such a variance, in the opinion of the City
Planning Commission could not assure full justice to such property and at the
same time conserve the public safety, convenience and welfare, it shall be the
duty of the City Planning Commission to recommend to the City Council, such
alternative action as, in its opinion, is necessary to assure such ends.
   (C)   The granting of such variance or submitting such recommendation shall
be subject to the following provisions:
      (1)   A public hearing shall be held for the purpose of considering any
such application.
      (2)   Notice of such public hearing shall be given not less than ten days
prior to the date of such public hearing. Notice shall be published one time in
a newspaper of general circulation in Bernalillo County and such notice shall
also be by postal card and addressed to the following:
         (a)   New Mexico State Highway Department, Santa Fe, New Mexico.
         (b)   City Engineer, City Hall, Albuquerque, New Mexico.
         (c)   Owners of all property within a radius of 200 feet of the site
of the building, utility, or other installation involved in the application,
using for the purpose the name and address of the last known owners as shown on
the records of the County Assessor.
      (3)   Within, but not to exceed, 30 days following such public hearing,
the City Planning Commission, shall, by resolution, recite in full its findings
upon which it bases its approval or disapproval of such variance, or upon which
it bases its alternative recommendation.
      (4)   A copy of such resolution containing the recommendations of the
City Planning Commission shall be mailed to the applicant, using therefor, the
address shown upon the written application. One copy of the resolution shall be
delivered to the City Council. The City Council may approve or disapprove the
recommendations of the City Planning Commission, or refer the recommendations
back to the City Planning Commission for further consideration, the results of
which shall be submitted to the City Council within ten days after the next
regular meeting of the City Planning Commission.
('74 Code, § 8-8-4) (Ord. 728)
Cross-reference:
   
Environmental Planning Commission, see §§ 14-13-3-1 et seq.
§ 6-5-3-5 ZONING CONFLICTS.
   No zoning ordinance of the city [i.e., the Zoning regulations set forth in
Chapter 14, Article 16 and any other applicable amendment thereof] now in
effect, or subsequently passed, is to be construed as permitting future street
lines (building setback lines) less than that provided herein; nor are §§
6-5-3-1 et seq. to be construed as permitting a front yard setback line, or
side yard setback line, less than may be provided in the said zoning ordinance.
('74 Code, § 8-8-5) (Ord. 728)
§ 6-5-3-6 ISSUANCE OF PERMITS.
   All officers and employees of the city authorized or required by law to
issue permits, licenses, or other evidences of authority for the erection or
locating of any building, structure or installation within the meaning of §§
6-5-3-1 et seq. shall issue no such permit, license or other evidence contrary
to the provisions of §§
6-5-3-1 et seq. Any such permit, license, or evidence issued in conflict with
the provisions of §§
6-5-3-1 et seq. shall be null and void.
('74 Code, § 8-8-6) (Ord. 728)
§ 6-5-3-7 OTHER RESTRICTIONS.
   (A)   Except as herein otherwise provided, no water line or sewer line or
water or sewer service shall be by the city extended to any piece or parcel of
land upon which a building or structure is about to be erected or has been
erected, except upon a proper showing by the applicant for such service of
compliance with the provisions of §§
6-5-3-1 et seq.
   (B)   Except as herein otherwise provided, no public utility company or
public service company, person, firm or corporation shall, subsequent to the
enactment of §§
6-5-3-1 et seq., serve or service any parcel of land within the jurisdiction of
the City Planning Commission with telephone service, electric service, gas
service or other public utility service by extension of any line or facility to
such parcel of land from any public street, alley or thoroughfare used by such
public utility company, public service company, person, firm or corporation,
except upon a proper showing by the applicant for service of compliance with
the provisions of §§
6-5-3-1 et seq.
   (C)   As used in the divisions (A) and (B) of this section, the term PROPER
SHOWING shall be construed to mean either of the following:
      (1)   A written statement signed by the Chairperson or the Planning
Director of the City Planning Commission, to the effect that §§
6-5-3-1 et seq. have been complied with as to the parcel of land for which
service or building permit is sought, or else that §§
6-5-3-1 et seq. are not applicable to said parcel; or
      (2)   The affidavit of the applicant for service, stating in unqualified
terms either that §§
6-5-3-1 et seq. have been properly complied with or else that §§
6-5-3-1 et seq. are not applicable to the real estate for which service or
building permit is sought and the reasons why §§
6-5-3-1 et seq. are not applicable.
('74 Code, § 8-8-7) (Ord. 728)
§ 6-5-3-99 PENALTY.
   Any person, firm, association or corporation who shall erect, locate, or
install, or who shall cause to be erected, located or installed any building,
structure, excavation, well or sub-surface structure as herein defined contrary
to the provisions of §§
6-5-3-1 et seq., shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof,
shall be punishable by a fine of not less than $50 and not more than $200. Each
such person, firm, association or corporation shall be deemed guilty of a
separate offense for every day during any portion of which any violation of any
provision of §§
6-5-3-1 et seq. is permitted or continued by such person, firm, association or
corporation, and shall be punishable therefor as provided herein; provided that
any building, structure, well, excavation or subsurface structure, as defined
herein, existing on the effective date of §§
6-5-3-1 et seq. shall not be deemed to be a violation of said sections.
('74 Code, § 8-8-8) (Ord. 728)
PART 4: CURB CUTS
§ 6-5-4-1 PERMITS.
   (A)   The owner of any land desiring to construct a crossing of any
sidewalks or public right-of-way for use by animals, wagons, carts, carriages,
trucks, tractors, trailers, buses, automobiles or any other vehicles as defined
by this code or any other applicable city ordinance so as to enter any private
or other alley or way on such premises, or so as to give access to any entrance
or exit to any such premises, shall first make form application to the City
Traffic Engineer for approval of a permit to cut any curb or construct such
crossing and shall file with such form application a plan showing accurately
the extent and character of the crossing proposed to be constructed.
   (B)   Upon examination and consideration of the application and plan, and
examination of the premises, if he deem it necessary, the City Traffic Engineer
is expressly authorized and directed to approve a permit for the construction
and use of the right-of-way or crossing over the sidewalk or sidewalks, if the
use of the right-of-way or crossing of the same will not unreasonably interfere
with or unduly impair the proper and safe use of the portion of the sidewalk or
right-of-way to be crossed or the street or other public way to which ingress
and egress is to be made from the private premises.
   (C)   The City Traffic Engineer shall make his determination of the granting
or withholding of the approval on the factors hereinafter specified, and no
such construction shall be made until such permit has been granted.
('74 Code, § 8-13-1) (Ord. 1903)
Penalty, see § 1-1-99
§ 6-5-4-2 BUILDING PERMIT PREREQUISITE.
   Upon commencement of any new construction, it shall be mandatory for the
owner of the property upon which a structure is to be constructed and who
desires to construct a crossing of any sidewalk or public right-of-way for use
by a horse wagon, cart, carriage, truck, tractor, trailer, bus, automobile or
any vehicle as defined by this code or any other applicable city ordinance, so
as to enter any private or other alley on such premises or so as to give access
to any entrance or exit to any such premises, shall first obtain approval of
the construction of such crossing from the Traffic Engineer before he is issued
a building permit for such new construction.
('74 Code, § 8-13-2) (Ord. 1903)
Penalty, see § 1-1-99
§ 6-5-4-3 CURB CUT REQUIREMENTS.
   The following regulations shall apply to curb cuts:
   (A)   In all residential areas which shall include all dwelling units,
single family, apartments or otherwise, the following regulations shall apply:
      (1)   Measured from the gutter line the minimum width of curb cuts shall
be 12 feet and the maximum width shall be 22 feet.
      (2)   A minimum of 22 feet of standing curb must remain between any two
curb cuts on the same lot or single parcel of land or if more than one lot or
parcel of land is being put to a single land use, then the requirement shall
apply to said land use.
      (3)   The minimum setback for the building from the property line in an
apartment parking area shall be 30 feet.
      (4)   No double or circle drives shall be installed or maintained unless
the property shall have a minimum of 60 feet frontage on the street affected
thereby.
      (5)   No curb cuts shall be closer than 2½ feet from side property lines.
      (6)   Corner property curb cuts shall be no closer to the intersecting
street than either:
         (a)   Twenty-five feet from the curb face of the intersecting street;
or
         (b)   Ten feet from the property line of the intersecting street.
   (B)   In all light commercial areas, which shall include all office
buildings or other commercial buildings not more than two stories in height,
the gutter line width of curb cuts shall be a minimum of 12 feet and a maximum
of 25 feet. All other requirements shall be the same as in residential areas.
   (C)   In all heavy commercial areas which include, but are not limited to,
all drive-in type establishments, the gutter line width of curb cuts shall be a
minimum of 20 feet and a maximum of 35 feet, provided, however, the Traffic
Engineer may approve a curb cut over 35 feet in width when justified after a
complete study of:
      (1)   Traffic volume;
      (2)   Pedestrian volume;
      (3)   One-way streets;
      (4)   Type of business making request.
   (D)   All other requirements shall be the same as in residential areas.
   (E)   Curb-cut applications requesting access to a city right-of-way from a
public, private, or charter schools, will not be approved until the Planning
Director, or designee, has approved a Neighborhood Impact Assessment ("NIA").
      (1)   Definitions. For the purpose of this division, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.
         CHARTER SCHOOL. A public school established under the authority of §§
22-8B-1 to 22-8B-17.1 NMSA 1978.
         PRIVATE SCHOOL. A school established, conducted and primarily
supported by a non-governmental entity in which instruction is offered by one
or more teachers and is discernible as a building or group of buildings
generally recognized as an elementary, middle, junior high or high school or
any combination of those.
         PUBLIC SCHOOL. As defined at § 22-1-2 NMSA 1978 a part of a public
school district that is a single attendance center in which instruction is
offered by one or more teachers and is discernible as a building or group of
buildings generally recognized as either an elementary, middle, junior high or
high school or any combination of those and includes a charter school.
         SITE TRAFFIC ASSESSMENT (STA). Analysis of site access (driveways),
the need for turn lanes in advance of the site and impacts on signals
downstream and upstream of the site. A STA is a lower level of analysis than a
Traffic Impact Study.
         STUDENT DROP OFF AND PICK-UP QUEUING LANE. A drive-lane on the public
right of way or on private property reserved for motorists picking up or
dropping off a student at the school site.
      (2)   NIA Purpose; Scope. For purposes of this section, a NIA is a
process to evaluate the overall effects that may result from the approval of
curb-cut applications to allow access to public rights-of-way from public,
private or charter schools, and to identify methods to mitigate such impacts to
a reasonable level.
         (a)   The applicant shall cause the NIA to be performed at the
applicant's own expense, and shall provide at least three draft copies of the
NIA to the Planning Director, or designee.
         (b)   The permit applicant shall schedule a scoping meeting for the
NIA in advance with the Planning Director and City Engineer, or designees, and
any other necessary staff, as determined by the Planning Director and City
Engineer.
         (c)   Upon receipt of the NIA, the Planning Director, or designee,
shall route the STA or TIS required by subsection (3)(d) of this section to the
City Engineer for review, and if appropriate, approval. The City Engineer, or
designee, has sole review and approval authority over the STA or TIS component
of the NIA. No NIA may be approved without approval of an STA or TIS by the
City Engineer.
      (3)   NIA Minimum Requirements. At a minimum each NIA must include:
         (a)   A description of the project;
         (b)   The baseline community data that identifies existing conditions
with respect to adjacent land uses, traffic patterns, traffic turning movements
and volumes, nearby multimodal transportation options, area pedestrian
movements, and any other relevant information as determined at the time of
scoping;
         (c)   An analysis of the neighborhood impacts, if any, including but
not limited to:
            (i)   impacts on pedestrian and bicycle circulation, and pedestrian
and bicycle routes;
            (ii)    potential automobile and pedestrian conflict points;
            (iii)    potential noise and air quality impacts resulting from
stacking of idling vehicles or vehicle circulation;
            (iv)    consistency with existing or planned transit routes and
stops;
            (v)   other potential impacts as determined by the Planning
Director, City Engineer or designees;
         (d)   A Site Traffic Assessment (STA), unless a Traffic Impact Study
(TIS) is required under the Albuquerque Development Process Manual (the "DPM").
The STA or TIS shall be at the applicant's cost. Unless the City Engineer
determines otherwise, the STA or TIS shall be conducted by a Professional
Engineer licensed in the State of New Mexico with Traffic Engineering
experience. The STA or TIS shall include an appendix with support data for
analysis and capacity analysis and shall be signed and sealed in compliance
with city standards by the engineer that prepared the report. The City Engineer
shall provide written instructions to the preparer of the STA or TIS. If a TIS
is required, it is to be completed pursuant to the relevant requirements of the
DPM as determined by the City Engineer or designee. If an STA is required, at
minimum and as more fully defined at the time of scoping, it shall address:
            (i)   The impact that motorists arriving and departing from the
school site will generate on traffic operations in the general vicinity;
            (ii)   The site's total capacity for student enrollment;
            (iii)    Anticipated student enrollment;
            (iv)   Scope of required analysis;
            (v)   Need for a student drop off and pick-up queuing lane; and
         (e)   An evaluation of reasonable alternatives, if any, and their
anticipated effectiveness in mitigating potential impacts. The NIA shall
include a justification by the applicant for the selection of a particular
alternative or why no other reasonable alternatives existed.
      (4)   Planning Director Approval Required. After the scoping meeting, the
Planning Director, or designee, shall provide written instructions to the
preparer of the NIA, including any instructions by the City Engineer relating
to the STA or TIS. The Planning Director, or designee, shall review each NIA
and shall approve the NIA within 30 days of its receipt if all of the above
requirements have been reasonably satisfied.
('74 Code, § 8-13-3) (Ord. 1903; Am. Ord._2014-002) Penalty, see §
1-1-99
§ 6-5-4-4 APPEALS.
   In the event any applicant feels abused by the refusal of the Traffic
Engineer to grant any permit or in the event any owner or occupant shall be
aggrieved by receipt of the notice of proposed revocation provided for in §
6-5-4-5, the applicant, owner, or occupant may, within ten days after denial of
said application or receipt of said notice, appeal the decision of the Traffic
Engineer to the Mayor by filing written notice thereof with the City Clerk
within said time.
('74 Code, § 8-13-4) (Ord. 1903)
Penalty, see § 1-1-99
§ 6-5-4-5 ABANDONED AND NONCONFORMING CURB CUTS.
   Sections
6-5-4-1 et seq. shall not be retroactive as to any curb cuts or crossings in
existence and in actual use at the time of its adoption, except as provided in
(A) and (B) hereunder:
   (A)   After the adoption of §§
6-5-4-1 et seq., if any vehicular or other sidewalk crossing is clearly
abandoned as a crossing or no longer used for its intended purpose, any permit
heretofore or hereafter granted for the use of said crossing as such shall be
subject to revocation by the City Traffic Engineer only after 30-days written
notice of such proposed revocation has been given to the owner of the property
to which the crossing is appurtenant, if his name and address can be reasonably
ascertained from the Tax Rolls of Bernalillo County, and also by the giving of
a copy of the written notice to the occupant of the premises, if any, and if
such occupant is other than the owner. It shall be sufficient notice under the
provisions of this section and §
6-5-4-6 to make delivery of the notices by registered mail. In the event the
name and address of the owner cannot be reasonably ascertained from the current
Bernalillo County Tax Rolls and the premises are unoccupied, it shall be
sufficient notice under this section and §
6-5-4-6 to publish the notice in English in a newspaper of general circulation
in the city once a week for four consecutive weeks.
   (B)   All curb cuts on designated thoroughfares as shown on the city
thoroughfare plan, which are determined by the Traffic Engineer to constitute a
traffic hazard, and which become nonconforming upon passage of §§
6-5-4-1 et seq., shall be subject to revocation as provided in division (A)
above.
('74 Code, § 8-13-5) (Ord. 1903)
Penalty, see § 1-1-99
§ 6-5-4-6 CONFORMANCE REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   In the event the Traffic Engineer has revoked any permit for curb cut
or use of a sidewalk crossing under the provisions of §
6-5-4-5 such crossing shall be removed by and at the expense of the owner of
the property to which the curb cut or crossing is appurtenant and the curb and
sidewalk properly restored after the Traffic Engineer has given written notice
to the persons and in the manner specified in §
6-5-4-5, directing such removal and proper restoration of the curb and
sidewalk.
   (B)   The time allowed for removal and restoration by the owner or occupant
shall be:
      (1)   Thirty days after notice in the cases provided for in §
6-5-4-5(A); and
      (2)   Two years after notice in the cases provided for in §
6-5-4-5(B); provided, however, that upon resolution duly passed by the City
Council, that if a traffic hazard exists at a nonconforming curb cut which
causes immediate and imminent danger to life, safety or property, conformance
may be required within a lesser period of time set by the City Council, but in
no event less than 30 days.
   (C)   Each day's delay of the owner in complying with such notice after the
expiration of the time specified shall constitute a separate violation of §§
6-5-4-1 et seq. If conformance is not attained within said time allotted, the
city may make the necessary removal and restoration at the cost of the owner
and the cost thereof shall constitute a lien on the property affected.
('74 Code, § 8-13-6) (Ord. 1903)
Penalty, see § 1-1-99
§ 6-5-4-7 CROSSINGS.
   All construction of crossings as herein defined permitted under §§
6-5-4-1 et seq. shall be done in a manner and with such materials as is
prescribed by the specifications of the Department of Public Works of the city
existing at the time such construction is accomplished at the expense of the
owner of the abutting property.
('74 Code, § 8-13-7) (Ord. 1903)
Penalty, see § 1-1-99
PART 5: SIDEWALKS
§ 6-5-5-1 SHORT TITLE.
   Sections
6-5-5-1 et seq. may be known and cited as the "Sidewalk, Drive Pad, Curb and
Gutter Ordinance."
('74 Code, § 8-6-1) (Ord. 219-1972; Am. Ord. 39-1981; Am. Ord. 77-1989)
§ 6-5-5-2 INTENT.
   Sections
6-5-5-1 et seq. are hereby declared to be remedial and is intended to secure
the following objectives:
   (A)   Provision for safe, convenient, and unobstructed paths for
pedestrians;
   (B)   Provision for the necessary separation between pedestrians, vehicles,
utilities, and street furniture;
   (C)   Provision for safe and efficient driveways and street drainage;
   (D)   Clear delineation and protection of the public right-of-way;
   (E)   Provision for the use of suitable materials in the construction of
sidewalks, curb ramps, drive pads and curb and gutter.
   (F)   Authorization to permit property owners to engage their own contractor
or install sidewalks themselves so long as the requirements of §§
6-5-5-1 et seq. and other applicable provisions of this code and any other
ordinances of the city are met.
('74 Code, § 8-6-2) (Ord. 219-1972; Am. Ord. 39-1981; Am. Ord. 77-1989)
§ 6-5-5-3 PEDESTRIAN SIDEWALK, DRIVE PAD, AND CURB AND GUTTER REQUIRED.
   All properties within the city shall have sidewalk, drive pad, curb ramps,
curb and gutter in accordance with the standards set forth by §§
6-5-5-1 et seq., unless a variance from these standards is allowed through the
procedures established by §§
6-5-5-1 et seq. or unless such sidewalks, curb ramps, drive pads, curbs and
gutters were constructed under standards previously in force. Such previously
constructed improvements shall be considered non-conforming and as such may be
repaired and maintained but if and when replacement becomes necessary shall be
replaced according to the current standards or variance procedures of §§
6-5-5-1 et seq. Compliance with the provisions of §§
6-5-5-1 et seq. shall be the responsibility of the property owner. The cost of
installing sidewalk shall be borne by the abutting property. On property in
residential zones where only houses and townhouses are allowed, and where the
lot abuts public streets at both its front and the rear lot lines, the property
does not bear the cost of constructing missing sidewalk abutting the rear lot
line where the property does not have the legal right to vehicular access from
that street; this exception applies only to lots platted before June 29, 1983
(the effective date of the city's Subdivision Ordinance, set forth in § 14-16-
5-4).
('74 Code, § 8-6-3) (Ord. 219- 1972; Am. Ord. 39-1981; Am. Ord. 77-1989; Am.
Ord._2017-025)
§ 6-5-5-4 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of §§
6-5-5-1 et seq., the following definitions shall apply unless the context
clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   CONSTRUCTION PERMIT. The authorization issued to a contractor or property
owner permitting the construction of sidewalks, drive pads, curb ramps or curbs
and gutters in compliance with the provisions of §§
6-5-5-1 et seq.
   CROSSWALK. That part of the roadway at an intersection included within the
prolongation or connection of the lateral lines of the sidewalks on opposite
sides of the highway measured from the curbs, or in the absence of curbs, from
the edges of the traversable roadway, whether marked or unmarked; or any
portion of a roadway, at an intersection, multi-use trail crossing, or
elsewhere, distinctly indicated for vulnerable road user crossing by signage,
traffic control devices, or lines or other markings on the surface.
   CURB. The vertical or steeply sloping member which forms the stand-up part
of the curb and gutter combination or which may be constructed without a gutter
section as a header curb.
   CURB CUT. Any break in a curb which facilitates access to or from a street
or alley.
   CURB RAMP. A paved pedestrian way within the public right-of-way which
provides wheel chair access from a street to a sidewalk.
   DRB. The Development Review Board, an administrative board consisting of six
representatives of city departments and other agencies, including the Planning
Director as Chairperson, Zoning Enforcement Officer, City Engineer (who may
also function as the AMAFCA designee), Traffic Engineer, Parks & Recreation
Director, and Albuquerque-Bernalillo County Water Utility Authority Water
Resources Engineer.
   DRIVE PAD. A paved vehicular way which may be either part, all, or not at
all within the public right-of-way and which provides vehicular access from a
public right-of-way to property abutting the right-of-way.
   DRIVEWAY. A vehicular way which may be either part, all, or not at all
within the public right-of-way and which provides vehicular access from a
public right-of-way to property abutting the right-of-way.
   ENGINEERING AND TRAFFIC INVESTIGATION AND/OR STUDY. A traffic engineering
study, investigation, or analysis based on professional engineering judgment,
field observation, safety analysis, or other evidence-based best practices.
This approach will use data to include, but not limited to, HFIN crash rate,
roadway classification, surrounding land use, speed violations, warrant
studies, and other variables to justify safety changes.
   GUTTER. A horizontal or slightly sloping member which may form the base of
the curb and gutter combination and which may be constructed as an integral
part of the curb-gutter combination or may be constructed as a separate member
without curb section.
   LANDSCAPE/BUFFER AREA. The part of the public right-of-way which is not
occupied or planned to be occupied by street, curb, gutter, or sidewalk and
which may be used for street furniture, street trees and vegetation, and
utilities. Typically located between the back of curb and adjacent property
line.
   MAYOR. The Mayor or his or her designated representative.
   MOUNTABLE CURB.  A curb and gutter combination which is designed to be
transversible by a vehicle and which provides wheel chair access from a public
right-of-way to property abutting the right-of-way.
   PEDESTRIAN. Any person traveling by foot, wheelchair, or personal assistive
mobility device except for golf carts and all-terrain vehicles (ATV’s).
   PERSON.  An individual, co-partnership, joint venture, association,
corporation, social club, fraternal organization, estate, trust, business
trust, receiver syndicate, or other group or combination acting as a unit.
   PERSONAL ASSISTIVE MOBILITY DEVICE. Specialized equipment that assist
individuals with disabilities or mobility impairments in moving around safely
and effectively, including but not limited to aids like canes, walkers,
crutches, wheelchairs, and electric wheelchairs and scooters.
   POWERED MICROMOBILITY DEVICE. A wheeled device that is fully or partially
powered, has a curb weight of less than 100 lb., has an electric motor less
than 750 watts, and has a top speed of less than 30 mph. A powered
micromobility device includes a powered standing scooter, powered self-
balancing board, or powered skates but does not include electric-assisted
bicycles. Powered micromobility device does not include a PERSONAL ASSISTIVE
MOBILITY DEVICE as defined in this Chapter.
   PUBLIC RIGHT-OF-WAY. The total area of land deeded, reserved by plat or
otherwise acquired by the city primarily for the use of the public for purposes
of vehicular and/or pedestrian traffic.
   SIDEWALK. That portion of the public right-of-way which is primarily devoted
to pedestrian use.
   STREET.  That portion of the public right-of-way which is primarily devoted
to vehicular use.
   STREET FURNITURE. Any above grade appurtenance placed within the public
right-of-way for the general convenience and use of the public such as, but not
limited to, benches, litter baskets, utility poles, street lights, traffic
control devices, mail boxes, telephones, fire hydrants and the like.
   VARIANCE. A variation in the location, materials or other requirements of §§
6-5-5-1 et seq.
   VEHICLE. Any device in, upon, or by which any person or property is or may
be transported or drawn upon a roadway or street, but not including
wheelchairs.
   VULNERABLE ROAD USER. The term “vulnerable road user” includes:
      (a)   A pedestrian;
      (b)   A worker; or
      (c)   A person lawfully operating or riding any of the following on a
public way:
         (1)   Bicycle or tricycle;
         (2)   A skateboard;
         (3)   Roller skates;
         (4)   In-line skates;
         (5)   A scooter;
         (6)   An e-bike or powered micromobility device;
         (7)   A wheelchair or other personal assistive mobility device;
         (8)   Any device designed to be used on the roadway or sidewalk that
is not a motor vehicle.
('74 Code, § 8-6-4) (Ord. 219- 1972; Am. Ord. 39-1981; Am. Ord. 77-1989; Am.
Ord._2017-025; Am. Ord._2025-032)
§ 6-5-5-5 CONSTRUCTION PERMIT REQUIRED.
   It is unlawful for any person to lay, construct, or build any sidewalk,
drive pad, curb ramp, or curb and gutter within the city, without securing a
construction permit from the Mayor. Such permits are in addition to excavation
permits required by §§
6-5-2-1 et seq., Street Excavation and Barricading. Construction permits shall
be either issued or denied within ten working days of the date of application
for such construction permit. A denial shall be accompanied by reasons for such
denial. Except for subdivision development projects and any capital
construction projects of any governmental agency, permits shall be invalid if
construction is not commenced within ten days of the issuance of the permit and
construction shall be completed within 30 days from the issuance of the permit.
('74 Code, § 8-6-5) (Ord. 219-1972; Am. Ord. 39-1981; Am. Ord. 77-1989)
§ 6-5-5-6 DESIGN REQUIRED.
   Upon application for a construction permit, the applicant shall submit a
plan or sketch of the proposed construction which shall conform to the latest
edition of the City of Albuquerque Standard Details for Public Works
Construction. The plan or sketch shall be approved by the Mayor prior to the
issuance of a construction permit for sidewalk, drive pad, curb ramp or curb
and gutter.
('74 Code, § 8-6-6) (Ord. 219-1972; Am. Ord. 39-1981; Am. Ord. 77-1989)
§ 6-5-5-7 GRADE ESTABLISHMENT REQUIRED FOR CURB AND GUTTTER.
   The Mayor shall in no instance issue a construction permit for mountable
curb, curb, gutter, or curb and gutter until required grades have been
established or approved by the City Engineer.
('74 Code, § 8-6-7) (Ord. 219-1972; Am. Ord. 39-1981; Am. Ord. 77-1989)
§ 6-5-5-8 BOND REQUIRED.
   (A)   A construction permit may be granted for sidewalk, drive pad, curb
ramp, and/or curb and gutter construction to a contractor properly licensed
according to the laws of the state provided the person has on file with the
city a maintenance bond in the amount of at least $5,000 which bond guarantees
the completed project against defects or improper construction for one year
from the date of completion. These requirements are supplemental to the bond
requirements set forth in §§
6-5-2-1 et seq., Street Excavation and Barricading.
   (B)   A construction permit may be granted for curb ramps, sidewalk and/or
drive pad but not curb and gutter construction to any property owner wishing to
lay, construct or build his or her own sidewalk or drive pad or curb ramp on
any public right-of-way abutting his or her premises, provided said property
owner has on file with the city a maintenance bond in the amount of at least
$1,000 which bond guarantees the completed project against defects or improper
construction for one year from the date of construction and evidence of public
liability insurance in the amount of at least $500,000. These requirements are
in lieu of the bond requirements set forth in §§
6-5-2-1 et seq. Street Excavation and Barricading.
   (C)   When specific city construction projects under contract require a one
year performance bond, the maintenance bond prescribed herein will not be
required.
('74 Code, § 8-6-8) (Ord. 219-1972; Am. Ord. 39-1981; Am. Ord. 16-1988; Am.
Ord. 77-1989)
§ 6-5-5-9 DUTY TO REPAIR AND REPLACE.
   Upon detection of any defective sidewalk, curb and gutter, drive pad or curb
ramps, within one year from the date of construction, the Mayor shall cause a
notice to be served upon the bonded contractor or bonded property owner
directing that repairs and/or replacement shall be accomplished within a
designated period of time. Failure to comply with the terms of this notice
shall cause forfeiture of bond.
('74 Code, § 8-6-9) (Ord. 219-1972; Am. Ord. 39-1981; Am. Ord. 16-1988; Am.
Ord. 77-1989)
§ 6-5-5-10 INSPECTION AND GRADE STAKE FEE SCHEDULES AND PROCEDURES.
   (A)   The Mayor shall periodically set fees so that staking fees are at city
cost or at a level commonly charged by private enterprise, whichever is higher.
The fee schedule shall allow the builder an option as to whether the city
stakes the grades. In setting fees, the Mayor shall publish notice of his or
her proposed action and give interested persons an opportunity to comment prior
to action. Revised fee schedules enacted by the Mayor shall be brought to the
attention of the interested public. City projects and subdivision development
projects and where sidewalks are subject to design, engineering, inspection and
survey fees or costs shall be exempt from fees established in accordance with
§§
6-5-5-1 et seq., provided sidewalks are constructed simultaneously with street
construction and prior to acceptance of the completed project by the city.
   (B)   No grade stakes shall be furnished or permits for construction be
issued until the authorized inspection fees and/or staking fees have been paid.
   (C)   The request for an inspection shall be given to the Street Maintenance
Engineer one working day prior to placing of concrete or otherwise constructing
the sidewalk in order that necessary sub-grade and form inspections and the
like can be made.
('74 Code, § 8-6-10) (Ord. 219-1972; Am. Ord. 39-1981; Am. Ord. 83-1981; Am.
Ord. 77-1989)
§ 6-5-5-11 SPECIAL ASSESSMENT DISTRICTS.
   The provisions of §§
6-5-5-1 et seq. shall in no way preclude the city from establishing sidewalk
assessment districts as may be provided for by the law. The design and
placement of sidewalks, and/or streets, built in special assessment districts
shall be done in accordance with the provisions of §§
6-5-5-1 et seq. as shall all other sidewalks constructed by public agencies.
('74 Code, § 8-6-11) (Ord. 219-1972; Am. Ord. 39-1981; Am. Ord. 77-1989)
§ 6-5-5-12 LANDSCAPE/BUFFER AREA USE.
   The landscape/buffer area may be used for the following public purposes so
long as such uses are not in conflict with the provisions of §§ 6-5-5-1 et seq.
or any other applicable provision of this code or any other ordinance of the
city:
   (A)   Street furniture.
   (B)   Public and private communication or utility distribution systems.
   (C)   Planting of trees and/or other suitable types of vegetation as
described in §§
6-5-5-16(A)(6).
   (D)   Fences and walls, provided they are approved by the Mayor in a
contract.
   (E)   The above listed objects may not be installed in the normally required
sidewalk area, unless a sidewalk variance is given which covers the site and
specifically permits the class of object in question.
   (F)   Decorative paving or other ground cover not intended for vehicular
use.
   (G)   Drive pad and/or driveway.
   (H)   Bicycle Trails.
   (I)   Curb Ramps.
('74 Code, § 8-6-12) (Ord. 219- 1972; Am. Ord. 39-1981; Am. Ord. 77-1989; Am.
Ord._2017-025)
§ 6-5-5-13 USE STANDARDS.
   (A)   All sidewalk, and/or curb ramp design plans submitted must show
provision for the mobility, safety, and comfort of the pedestrian.
   (B)   All sidewalk design plans submitted must show provision for adequate
pedestrian access to abutting property.
   (C)   All sidewalk design plans submitted must show how connection to
abutting sidewalk, if any, will be accomplished.
('74 Code, § 8-6-13) (Ord. 219-1972; Am. Ord. 39-1981; Am. Ord. 77-1989)
§ 6-5-5-14 DESIGN AND CONSTRUCTION STANDARDS AND PROCEDURES.
   (A)   Street Classification. Sidewalk designs are partially set by street
classification. This classification is set by the Long Range Roadway System
Map, a map adopted by the Metropolitan Transportation Board of the Mid Region
Council of Governments.
   (B)   Sidewalk Width. The minimum clear path designated for pedestrians.
      (1)   Sidewalks shall be a minimum of six feet wide when adjacent to:
         (a)   An arterial street;
         (b)   A collector street;
         (c)   A major local street; or
         (d)   A local street that abuts:
            1.   The grounds of schools or churches; or
            2.   Land zoned for a residential density greater than allowed in
the R-T (Residential Townhouse) zone district.
      (2)   Sidewalks shall be four feet wide adjacent to a local street other
than those included in division (B)(1) above.
   (C)   Sidewalk Location.
      (1)   On arterial streets, sidewalks shall be located within the right-
of-way and the street side of the sidewalk shall be set back 12 feet from the
back of the curb.
      (2)   On collector, major local, and local streets, sidewalks shall be
placed within the right-of-way and the street side of the sidewalk shall be set
back a minimum of 6 feet from the back of the curb.
   (D)   Where sufficient right-of-way is not available, the Mayor may set a
special sidewalk location standard within the right-of-way.
   (E)   Transverse Slope. The transverse slope of the sidewalk and landscape/
buffer area shall be no greater than a ratio of 1:50 or 2%, sloping toward the
street.
   (F)   Materials. All sidewalk design plans submitted must specify the
materials to be used and any such material shall conform to the performance
standards for sidewalk materials as established by the Mayor.
   (G)   Site preparation and Inspection. The Street Maintenance Engineer shall
be given at least one work day notice before any material is placed in order
that an inspection may be made of the subgrade, the forms, and the spacing for
expansion-contraction joints. The excavating and grading shall be smoothly and
neatly done, and to the proper depth, all large stones, boulders, roots, other
vegetation, and rubbish of every description being removed from the subgrade
and the entire work made to conform to the profile and grade of the walk when
finished. Soft, spongy or loamy areas in the subgrade must be removed, and the
space refilled with stable material thoroughly compacted in accordance with the
requirements of §§
6-5-2-1 et seq., Street Excavation and Barricading.
   (H)   The person laying a sidewalk, drive pad, or curb ramp shall neatly and
permanently affix to the sidewalk the name of the contractor or property owner
laying the sidewalk and the month and year of the installation. Such
information shall be approximately one-fourth to one-half square foot in size.
The information shall be repeated every 50 running feet.
   (I)   The Mayor shall establish and promulgate other appropriate design and
construction standards, standard details, and regulations for sidewalk, curb
ramps, drive pads, curbs and gutters not inconsistent herewith or other
applicable ordinances.
('74 Code, § 8-6-14) (Ord. 219- 1972; Am. Ord. 39-1981; Am. Ord. 1-1982; Am.
Ord. 77-1989; Am. Ord. 12-2004; Am. Ord._2017-025)
§ 6-5-5-15 DEVELOPMENT REVIEW BOARD.
   The DRB as established by § 14-16-6-2(D) Development Review Board will have
responsibilities that may include but not be limited to the following:
   (A)   Issuance and review of sidewalk variance permits.
   (B)   Analysis of character and function of assigned rights-of-way,
concluding with specific recommendation of action programs.
   (C)   Review of sidewalk, curb ramp, drive pad, and curb and gutter permit
application as requested.
   (D)   Review of proposed street paving and/or sidewalk construction projects
as requested.
   (E)   Review of present and proposed street furniture designs of both public
and private agencies.
('74 Code, § 8-6-15) (Ord. 219- 1972; Am. Ord. 39-1981; Am. Ord. 77-1989; Am.
Ord._2017-025)
§ 6-5-5-16 VARIANCES.
Editor's Note: § 6-5-5-16 Variances was updated, incorporated into, and
replaced by the
Integrated Development Ordinance, Ord. 14-16, et seq., Council Bill O-17-49,
approved 11-13-17. See now ROA § 14-16-6-6.
§ 6-5-5-17 APPEALS.
Editor's Note: § 6-5-5-17 Appeals was updated, incorporated into, and replaced
by the
Integrated Development Ordinance, Ord. 14-16, et seq., Council Bill O-17-49,
approved 11-13-17. See now ROA § 14-16-6-4(U).
§ 6-5-5-18 SIDEWALKS, DRIVE PAD, AND CURB RAMP REPAIR AND MAINTENANCE;
PERMITTING COMMERCIAL ADVERTISING ON TRANSIT SHELTERS.
   (A)   All sidewalks, drive pads and curb ramps shall be kept clean from
rocks and other obstructions, including ice and snow, and in a state of good
repair by the owner, occupants, or agents in charge of the abutting property.
Sidewalks, drive pads and curb ramps in good repair shall be free of cracks,
floats, obstructions, depressions and/or any and all other defects and shall
have a uniform longitudinal and transverse gradient.
   (B)   Abutting property is relieved of responsibility to keep sidewalks and
wheel chair ramps at its rear lot line in good repair in the following
situation:
      (1)   The lot is in a residential zone where only houses and townhouses
are allowed;
      (2)   The lot abuts public streets at both its front and the rear lot
lines;
      (3)   The property does not have the legal right to vehicular access from
the street at its rear; and
      (4)   The lot was platted before June 29, 1983, the effective date of the
city's Subdivision Ordinance, set forth in§ 14-16-5-4.
   (C)   All areas directly over sidewalks, drive pads and curb ramps, to a
height of eight feet shall be maintained free of vegetative or other
obstruction by the owners, occupants or agents in charge of the adjoining
property. Transit benches, transit shelters and other street furniture and
utility installations may be placed in this area as long as they are free of
commercial advertising unless such advertising is placed pursuant to Section
5-1-3 ROA 1994; the maintenance of such installations is the responsibility of
the person installing them.
   (D)   The sidewalk landscape/buffer area and all plantings therein shall be
maintained by the owners, occupants, or agents in charge of the abutting
property. Transit benches, transit shelters and other street furniture and
utility installations may be placed in this area as long as they are free of
commercial advertising unless such advertising is placed pursuant to Section
5-1-3 ROA 1994; the maintenance of such installations is the responsibility of
the person installing them.
   (E)   No item of street furniture or other item which would obstruct
pedestrians or effectively reduce the width of a sidewalk below the dimensions
established in
§§ 6-5-5-14 may be placed in, on, or over the sidewalk unless a waiver allowing
such item is obtained from the DRB.
   (F)   Any owner, occupant, or agent in charge of abutting property or street
furniture shall be liable to the city for any claim or demand made upon the
city which arises from a direct or indirect violation of
§§ 6-5-5-1 et seq. and shall hold the city harmless and indemnify the city for
any such claim or demand. When the Mayor determines that there is a violation
of this section, he may cause a notice to be served upon the owners, occupants,
or agents in charge of the property or street furniture abutting said sidewalk
or drive pad or curb ramp or sidewalk landscape/buffer area directing that
repair or maintenance or removal of obstructions be made within a designated
period of time at the cost and expense of such owners, occupants, or agents in
charge of the property or street furniture. If the owners of street furniture
or the owners, occupants, or agents in charge of the abutting property fail to
comply with such notice of repair or maintenance or removal within the time
prescribed, the city will cause the repairing, maintenance or removal to be
accomplished and the cost of such repairs or maintenance or removal of
obstruction shall constitute a lien against such property and shall be
foreclosed in the same manner provided by law for the foreclosure of municipal
liens.
   (G)   Notwithstanding other provisions of this section, when the city
declares by legislation that there is an official emergency, the city assumes
responsibility for returning sidewalks at least to their state immediately
prior to the emergency-related damage. Where the emergency-related damage
creates a need to replace and compact soil in the public right-of-way, the city
will do this. The city does not absolve owners, occupants, or agents in charge
of adjoining property from their duty to make all reasonable efforts to keep
sidewalks clean and free from obstructions related to declared emergencies.
('74 Code, § 8-6-18) (Ord. 219- 1972; Am. Ord. 39-1981; Am. Ord. 45-1988; Am.
Ord. 77-1989; Am. Ord. 40-2001; Am. Ord._2017-025)
§ 6-5-5-19 CURB AND GUTTER.
   Curb and gutter shall conform in dimension, material and placement technique
to standards established by the Mayor.
('74 Code, § 8-6-19) (Ord. 219-1972; Am. Ord. 39-1981)
§ 6-5-5-20 DRIVE PAD AND CURB RAMP SPECIFICATION.
   The grading and excavating for drive pads, and curb ramps shall be done in
conformance with the provisions set forth herein and other applicable
ordinances. Drive pads and curb ramps within the public right-of-way shall be
constructed of materials and dimensions which shall conform to the performance
standards for drive pad and curb ramp specifications as established by the
Mayor. Drive pad and curb ramp designs shall be established and approved by the
Mayor prior to issuance of construction permits.
('74 Code, § 8-6-20) (Ord. 219-1972; Am. Ord. 39-1981; Am. Ord. 77-1989)
§ 6-5-5-21 DRIVE PAD CROSSING OF SIDEWALKS.
   Drive pad shall cross the sidewalk on the sidewalk grade line without
depression of the sidewalk where feasible, and in no case shall the sidewalk be
depressed at its property-line edge.
('74 Code, § 8-6-21) (Ord. 219-1972; Am. Ord. 39-1981; Am. Ord. 77-1989)
§ 6-5-5-22 ABANDONED DRIVE PAD.
   All drive pads abandoned or no longer being used shall have the curb and
gutter replaced and the sidewalk installed at the grade of the adjacent
sidewalk as provided in §§
6-5-4-1 et seq., Curb Cuts.
('74 Code, § 8-6-22) (Ord. 219-1972; Am. Ord. 39-1981)
§ 6-5-5-23 DRIVE PAD LOCATION AND WIDTH.
   The location and width of curb cuts for drive pads shall be approved by the
Mayor prior to issuance of a construction permit.
('74 Code, § 8-6-23) (Ord. 219-1972; Am. Ord. 39-1981)
§ 6-5-5-24 CURB, GUTTER, SIDEWALK AND DRIVE PAD SUBGRADE PREPARATION.
   All work of this type shall be performed in accordance with the requirements
of §§
6-5-2-1 et seq., Street Excavation and Barricading.
('74 Code, § 8-6-24) (Ord. 219-1972; Am. Ord. 39-1981)
PART 6: COMPLETE STREETS ORDINANCE
§ 6-5-6-1 SHORT TITLE.
   Ch. 6, Article 5, Part 6 ROA 1994 shall be known and cited as the "Complete
Streets Ordinance".
(Ord._2015-003; Am. Ord._2019-022)
§ 6-5-6-2 INTENT AND PURPOSES.
   (A)   The intent of Ch. 6, Article 5, Part 6 is as follows:
      (1)   To implement and be so interpreted to comply with the New Mexico
Municipal Code (§§ 3-60A-10 et seq. NMSA 1978) and the Constitution of the
State of New Mexico (Article 10, Section 6).
      (2)   To express the city's commitment to creating and maintaining
complete streets within areas of change and consistency and centers and
corridors as specified by the Albuquerque/Bernalillo County Comprehensive Plan.
      (3)   For residents and visitors, regardless of their age, ability,
gender, ethnicity, or financial resources, to comfortably and efficiently use
the public right-of-way within these corridors and meet their transportation
needs regardless of their preferred mode of travel.
      (4)   To establish the image and identity of street corridors and improve
economic activity on those corridors by providing a framework for current and
future development that integrates sidewalks, bike facilities, transit
amenities, and pedestrian and bicycle crossings into their design.
      (5)   To accommodate and complement improved streetscapes and pedestrian
facilities installed according to the provisions of the City Sidewalk, Drive
Pad, Curb and Gutter Ordinance (§
6-5-5-1 ROA 1994), the Street Tree Ordinance (§
6-6-2-1 ROA 1994) and the Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA).
   (B)   This article is adopted pursuant to the authority set forth in Article
1 of the Charter of the City of Albuquerque, which was adopted at a special
election on June 29, 1971, pursuant to Article 10, Section 6 of the
Constitution of the State of New Mexico and pursuant to the authority set forth
in Section 3-19-12 and Sections 3-20-1 to 3-20-16 NMSA 1978.
(Ord._2015-003; Am. Ord._2017-008; Am. Ord._2019-022)
§ 6-5-6-3 [RESERVED.]
§ 6-5-6-4 APPLICABILITY.
   This article shall apply to all roadways and/or segments of a roadway on
city right-of-way which meet the following criteria:
   (A)   Are located within the city limits and are listed on the Mid Region
Council of Governments Current Roadway Functional Classification Map; or
   (B)   Designated a complete street by resolution of the City Council or
action of the Mayor.
(Ord._2015-003; Am. Ord._2017-008; Am. Ord._2019-022)
§ 6-5-6-5 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of Ch. 6, Article 5, Part 6, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ARID ADAPTED GREEN STORMWATER INFRASTRUCTURE. A set of practices adapted to
arid and semi-arid climates that mimic natural processes to retain and use
stormwater. By promoting infiltration, evapotranspiration, and healthy soils
throughout the landscape, green stormwater infrastructure preserves and
restores the natural hydrologic cycle.
   COMPLETE STREETS. A roadway with cross-sections (including public right of
way and public or private easements abutting a public right of way that are
designated for a roadway) built at a human scale, designed and operated for
equal access by all users, including pedestrians, bicyclists, motorists and
transit riders of all ages and abilities, to allow comfortable and convenient
street crossings, and pedestrian access to adjacent land uses. Complete streets
components include, but are not limited to, sidewalks, bike lanes, dedicated
bus lanes, comfortable and accessible public transportation stops, frequent and
comfortable pedestrian crossing opportunities, median pedestrian islands,
accessible pedestrian signals, curb extensions and pedestrian bulb-outs,
reduced travel lane widths determined by the design speed of the roadway,
context- appropriate curb return radii, roundabouts, or other features that
accommodate efficient multimodal travel.
   CONNECTIVITY. Frequency by which streets or roadways intersect, or how
closely intersections are spaced.
   CONTEXT SENSITIVE DESIGN. Design that seeks to balance the need to move
vehicles efficiently with other outcomes specific to communities and
neighboring properties through which a street passes, such as placemaking,
pedestrian-friendliness, historic preservation and economic development.
   LOW-INCOME COMMUNITY. Any population census tract that meets one of the
following criteria, as reported in the most recent decennial census published
by the U.S. Bureau of the Census:
      (1)   The poverty rate for the census tract is at least 20 percent, or
      (2)   In the case of a low-income community located within a metropolitan
area, the MFI for such tract does not exceed 80 percent of statewide MFI or
metropolitan area MFI.
   MODERATE-INCOME COMMUNITY: Any population whose incomes are between 81
percent and 95 percent of the median income for the area.
   MULTIMODAL LEVEL OF SERVICE. A set of indicators published by the National
Academy of Sciences, National Highway Cooperative Research Board through
"Report 616 and any successor document" used to evaluate the convenience and
comfort of facilities for transit users, pedestrians, bicyclists and other non-
motorized users of the public right of way. These may include, but are not
limited to: the connectivity of sidewalks and paths throughout an area, the
availability and convenience of road crossings for pedestrians, the separation
of non-motorized traffic from motorized traffic, (e.g. sidewalk widths and
distance from traffic lanes, presences of separators like bollards or trees),
motorized traffic speed control (e.g. traffic calming features), way finding,
sense of security (e.g. visibility and lighting of sidewalks), transit
stations, and weather protection.
(Ord._2015-003; Am. Ord._2019-022; Am. Ord. 2024-008)
§ 6-5-6-6 GENERAL POLICY.
   The following complete streets principles shall apply to all projects on
streets that are within the jurisdiction of this ordinance. All applicable
provisions that further the concept of Complete Streets within the Development
Process Manual and the Capital Implementation Program must also be considered.
   (A)   The overarching goal of any project that affects street
configurations, signalizations, and all other design features shall be based on
improving Multimodal Level of Service (MLOS) as described in the National
Cooperative Highway Research Program's Report 616, Multimodal Level of Service
Analysis for Urban Streets and generally defined as comfortable and efficient
accommodations for all users.
   (B)   The city shall consider how the project will impact the surrounding
community and must work to avoid or mitigate any negative consequences. Any
mitigation efforts must be consistent with the Complete Streets Ordinance.
   (C)   On-street bicycle facilities shall be designed and implemented as
identified by the Mid-Region Council of Governments' Long Range Bikeway System
Map, and the Albuquerque Bikeways and Trails Facility Plan. All projects on any
roadway shall include appropriate measures to facilitate the crossing of
bicycle traffic wherever a designated bicycle facility crosses the street.
   (D)   On roadways that serve industrial and/or freight uses, complete
streets improvements that are consistent with freight mobility and support
other modes of travel shall be considered.
   (E)   Vehicle lane widths shall be governed by the tables for General
Parameters for Arterial Thoroughfares and Collector Thoroughfares as
established in the Manual for Context Sensitive Solutions in Designing Major
Urban Thoroughfares for Walkable Communities published by the Institute of
Transportation Engineers (ITE) and/or any successor documents or standards that
may result from amendments or replacements. Urban streets with vehicle lane
widths exceeding 12 feet are strongly discouraged, except where motor vehicles
and bicycles share lanes on bicycle routes designated by the Mid-Region Council
of Governments' Long Range Bikeway System Map.
   (F)   Mid-block pedestrian crossings are encouraged and may be installed as
necessary for a project to meet the intent of this ordinance under the criteria
established in the Manual on Traffic Control Devices (MUTCD) Chapter 3B-18, the
Urban Street Design Guide of the National Association of City Traffic Officials
(NACTO), and the Guide for the Planning Design and Operation of Pedestrian
Facilities by the American Association of State Highway and Transportation
Officials (AASHTO). Unsignalized mid-block crossings are permitted where
warranted and should be clearly marked by signs and other high- visibility
features. Where necessary, mid-block pedestrian crossings shall be controlled
by pedestrian-activated conventional traffic signals or pedestrian hybrid
beacons (PHB).
   (G)   Curb cuts serving access points blocked by walls, fences or other
structures that prohibit entry to a lot shall be replaced with curb, gutter and
sidewalk as part of any roadway project.
   (H)   Roadway projects, excluding routine maintenance projects, which are
only intended to maintain the current condition of the roadway, not including
the city's annual roadway rehabilitation program, shall be designed to mitigate
existing, insufficient multi-modal facilities including bicycle lanes which do
not meet minimum engineering criteria for width.
   (I)   The city shall provide accommodations, to the extent possible, for all
modes of transportation to continue during the construction or repair work.
   (J)   Roadway projects on arterial corridors shall prioritize the comfort of
multimodal users by using traffic calming techniques, such as narrowing traffic
lanes, and by providing buffers between vehicle traffic and pedestrian and
bicycle facilities where possible. This may include striped buffers, adding
parallel parking where it does not currently exist or installing parallel
stripes delineating existing parking lanes.
   (K)   Arid adapted “Green stormwater infrastructure” best practices shall be
designed and incorporated into road improvement, median, landscape buffer, and
bulb-out projects to the extent practicable to allow for stormwater
infiltration and landscape irrigation. Green stormwater infrastructure features
incorporated into Complete Streets Projects should include:
      (1)   Green stormwater features should be depressed to collect and filter
stormwater by biological processes and supply supplemental irrigation to
landscape plants.
      (2)   For new roadways and roadways undergoing rehabilitation and
rebuilding, the grade of the roadway cross-section shall, to the degree
feasible, direct stormwater to the green stormwater features.
      (3)   Excess stormwater not infiltrated should be directed into the
existing storm drain system overflow catchment.
      (4)   To allow for maximum stormwater infiltration into the soil, to
generate healthy soils that enable and improve the biological filtering
process, organic mulch should be used in areas that do not have high flow rates
and non-permeable fabric and other barriers that block infiltration should not
be included in green stormwater infrastructure.
      (5)   Green stormwater infrastructure shall be designed for ease of
maintenance by including a sediment trap or other best practice for the
collection and removal of debris, trash, and sediment.
      (6)   Other features, as needed, which meet the intent of Arid Adapted
Green Stormwater Infrastructure as defined in §
6-5-6-5.
(Ord._2015-003; Am. Ord._2019-022; Am. Ord. 2024-008)
§ 6-5-6-7 PROJECT COMPLIANCE.
   (A)   Any departments pursuing projects that alter or otherwise affect
streets shall work collaboratively on an annual basis to determine, identify
and include prioritization of projects in communities with low- to-moderate
income, high proportions of elderly citizens, high proportions of citizens with
disabilities. The low-to-moderate income community criteria is one of the many
factors that shall be taken into consideration when identifying and selecting
project prioritization under this ordinance and shall not be the sole
determinant. Other factors or criteria that shall be taken into consideration
include traffic fatalities, aging infrastructure, creating safe and efficient
access for older adults and people with disabilities, and any other factors
that enhance and improve public safety and health. The city shall develop a
process of data collection and analysis for such prioritization and
documentation. After such analysis, the city shall post the plan online for
public feedback, including information regarding projects that alter or
otherwise affect streets. This information shall include project scope,
schedule, funding, and an identifier for how those projects in low-to-moderate
income areas are prioritized. The report shall include how the process to
create the list was evaluated.
   (B)   All major projects involving streets under the authority of this
ordinance, including road construction, resurfacing, reconstruction of
sidewalks or restriping, shall be considered an opportunity to either retrofit
existing streets or construct new streets consistent with the principles of
this ordinance.
   (C)   The Department of Municipal Development shall annually submit a
memorandum to the City Council listing upcoming projects, to include scheduled
Street Maintenance Program projects such as resurfacing and other projects
including reconstruction, curb, gutter and sidewalk repair or capital
improvement projects. This memorandum shall detail how those projects will be
consistent with the principles of this ordinance and shall indicate:
      (1)   The location, scope and estimated cost of the project.
      (2)   Whether the project is to be implemented under the street
maintenance program or by the Engineering Division.
      (3)   How the project incorporates any existing policies for street
improvements established by corridor, neighborhood, or area land use plans, or
the reasons for which implementing such recommendations is not reasonable.
      (4)   How the project complies with the context- sensitive standards in
the Development Process Manual.
      (5)   All complete streets improvements recommended by the Department of
Municipal Development for inclusion as part of the project.
      (6)   Whether and when the improvements can be implemented through the
existing revenues available for maintenance projects or Capital Improvement
Program.
      (7)   Other potential funding sources that may be required.
   (D)   Projects may be exempted in part from the requirements of this
ordinance upon review by the Director of Municipal Development or his or her
designee, provided they meet one or more of the following criteria:
      (1)   Existing adopted ordinances and policies affecting the street
preclude a certain use (e.g. non-motorized vehicles).
      (2)   The project is a routine maintenance activity that does not involve
resurfacing, restriping or reconfiguring the street. Examples of exempt
projects include patching, sidewalk repair or cleaning.
      (3)   The project is limited by available publicly owned right-of-way.
      (4)   The project is located on state or federal right-of-way, the city
has made an effort to obtain permission for certain features compliant with the
provisions of §§
6-5-6-1 et seq., and the agency with control of the right of way has indicated
they will not permit requested features.
   (E)   All proposed exceptions must be justified in writing by the requestor
of the exception based on the criteria above, based upon engineering judgement,
and be made available to the public. The City Council may, by resolution,
designate certain corridors or street segments for complete streets
improvements. The resolution shall:
      (1)   Establish the transportation modes to be prioritized or
accommodated on the affected corridor.
      (2)   Provide an estimate of costs to plan, design, engineer and
construct the improvements; and funding sources for the project.
   (F)   Design and engineering of streets, sidewalks, bikeways and other
facilities shall follow the relevant standards set forth in the following
documents or any successor documents or standards that may result from their
amendment or replacement:
      (1)   Urban Street Design Guide of the National Association of City
Traffic Officials (NACTO).
      (2)   Urban Bikeway Design Guide of the National Association of City
Traffic Officials (NACTO).
      (3)   Guide for the Planning Design and Operation of Pedestrian
Facilities by the American Association of State Highway and Transportation
Officials (AASHTO).
      (4)   Guide for the Development of Bicycle Facilities by the American
Association of State Highway and Transportation Officials (AASHTO).
      (5)   Manual for Context Sensitive Solutions in Designing Major Urban
Thoroughfares for Walkable Communities published by the Institute of
Transportation Engineers (ITE).
      (6)   Report 616, Multi-Modal Level of Service Analysis for Urban
Streets, National Cooperative Highway Research Program (NCHRP).
      (7)   Proposed Rights-of-Way Guidelines (PROWAG) United States Access
Board.
   (G)   Engineering criteria. Deviations or alternatives from the Development
Process Manual for intersection spacing, geometry, alignment and other
characteristics shall be considered on a case-by-case basis, and as approved
may be implemented provided they meet the standards set forth in the documents
specified in §
6-5-6-7(F) or any successor documents or standards that may result from their
amendment or replacement.
(Ord._2019-022)
§ 6-5-6-8 IMPLEMENTATION.
   (A)   The Administration shall work with City Council to develop a process
for implementation of Complete Streets policy to include performance measures,
project evaluation, and staff training. This implementation plan shall also
consider an active transportation coordinator position and an active
transportation advisory committee. The committee may be an existing committee
or re-configuration of an existing committee, enabled to coordinate across
multiple departments.
   (B)   Within nine months of the adoption of this Complete Streets Ordinance,
the Administration shall present the process to the City Council.
(Ord._2019-022)
ARTICLE 6: TREES, VEGETATION
AND LANDSCAPING
Section
Part 1: City Forester
   
6-6-1-1   Creation of office
   
6-6-1-2   Definition
   
6-6-1-3   Duties of city forester
   
6-6-1-4   Permit required to plant or remove trees
   
6-6-1-5   Duty of owners to prune
   
6-6-1-6   Owner must treat trees when required
   
6-6-1-7   Removal or treatment of infected or infested trees
   
6-6-1-8   Regulations pertaining to spacing of trees
   
6-6-1-9   Responsibility for damaging trees on public property
 
   
6-6-1-99   Penalty
Part 2: Street Trees
   
6-6-2-1   Short title
   
6-6-2-2   Intent
   
6-6-2-3   Definitions
   
6-6-2-4   Required street trees
   
6-6-2-5   Street tree policies
   
6-6-2-6   Street tree programs
   
6-6-2-7   More detailed regulations
   
6-6-2-8   Waivers and variances
   
6-6-2-9   Appeals
Cross-reference:
   
Parks, see Ch. 10, Art. 1
   
Weed control, see Ch. 9, Art. 8
PART 1: CITY FORESTER
§ 6-6-1-1 CREATION OF OFFICE.
   The City Forester shall be certified by the International Society of
Arboriculture with a Municipal Specialization and possess a Bachelor’s Degree
in Forestry Science, Botany or Landscape Architecture or in a closely related
area.
('74 Code, § 11-1-1) (Ord. 957; Am. Ord. 40-2004; Am. Ord. 19-2008)
§ 6-6-1-2 DEFINITION.
   For the purpose of §§
6-6-1-1 et seq., the following definition shall apply unless the context
clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   LANDSCAPE/BUFFER AREA.  The part of the public right-of-way which is not
occupied or planned to be occupied by street, curb, gutter, or sidewalk and
which may be used for street furniture, street trees and vegetation, and
utilities. Typically located between the back of curb and adjacent property
line.
('74 Code, § 11-1-2) (Ord. 957; Am. Ord._2017-025)
§ 6-6-1-3 DUTIES OF CITY FORESTER.
   (A)   The City Forester is hereby authorized and empowered, and it shall be
his duty, to supervise the planning, maintenance and removal of all trees,
shrubbery and other vegetation within the city, and to formulate rules and
regulations for such planning, maintenance and removal under the supervision,
and subject to the consent and approval of the Mayor, and to issue permits for
such planning, maintenance and removal. In drawing such rules and regulations
and in issuing such permits, the City Forester shall be governed by the effect
on public health and the nature, kind and quality of the trees, shrubbery and
vegetation in the city as a whole, and in such particular sections of the city
as it is desired by the applicant for a permit to plant trees, shrubbery or
other vegetation in any particular section shall be in harmony with other
trees, shrubbery and vegetation in that vicinity.
   (B)   The City Forester shall implement and enforce the Albuquerque Pollen
Control Ordinance and the Street Tree Ordinance.
   (C)   The City Forester shall review all city ordinances, policies and
regulations that affect landscaping within the city limits and propose
suggested changes to the Mayor and members of Council when appropriate.
   (D)   The City Forester shall employ a variety of methods to educate the
public about the benefits, best use and maintenance of the urban forest
including producing and posting a poster that identifies the levels of pollen
emitted by each tree species commonly planted or sold in the city.
   (E)   The City Forester shall coordinate with the city's nursery industry to
develop and promote plants and trees that provide the highest benefit to the
public health, safety and welfare.
('74 Code, § 11-1-3) (Ord. 957; Am. Ord. 40-2004; Am. Ord. 19-2008)
§ 6-6-1-4 PERMIT REQUIRED TO PLANT OR REMOVE TREES.
   It shall be unlawful to cut, trim, spray, remove or plant any tree, vine,
shrub, hedge, or other plant within the limits of any streets, alley, sidewalk,
or other public place within the city without first having obtained a permit so
to do from the City Forester, and/or without complying in all respects with the
condition set forth in such written permit, save and except, nevertheless, that
trees and shrubbery may be trimmed by any person without securing such permit
in compliance with §
6-6-1-5.
('74 Code, § 11-1-4) (Ord. 957)
§ 6-6-1-5 DUTY OF OWNERS TO PRUNE.
   It shall be the duty of every owner of lot or lots situated within the city
to keep all shrubbery and trees situated on the parking strip between the
property line and the street line within the lines of his, her or its lot or
lots, trimmed so that free passage along said sidewalk and street will not be
interrupted or impeded, and so that shrubbery and trees in no way interfere
with the adjoining property, to remove any dead trees or dead, overhanging
boughs dangerous to life, limb, or property located on the premises of such
owner.
('74 Code, § 11-1-5) (Ord. 957)
§ 6-6-1-6 OWNER MUST TREAT TREES WHEN REQUIRED.
   (A)   The City Forester shall require any owner, or agent of any premises
within the city to treat, trim, spray, and otherwise care for trees or shrubs
within the parking strip parallel to his property.
   (B)   It shall be the duty of such owner, agent, or occupant of such
premises to comply with such requirements within 20 days after receiving
written notice so to do from the City Forester.
   (C)   In the event such owner fails to treat, trim, spray or otherwise care
for same within 20 days, the City Forester is authorized to do the job or cause
it to be done at the expense of such owner, and such expenses may be recovered
in a proper action at law.
   (D)   The City Forester shall notify the Housing Code Enforcement Team if
the property presents a danger to the public health, safety and welfare.
('74 Code, § 11-1-6) (Ord. 957; Am. Ord. 40-2004; Am. Ord. 19-2008)
§ 6-6-1-7 REMOVAL OR TREATMENT OF INFECTED OR INFESTED TREES.
   (A)   It shall be the duty of the City Forester, when required, to inspect
all trees, shrubs, vines, hedges, plants, and vegetation upon any property
within the limits of the city.
   (B)   Upon discovering any such trees, shrubs, vines, hedges, plants, or
other vegetation to be infested with any disease detrimental to the growth,
health, and life of such plants, the City Forester shall at once notify in
writing the owner, agent, or occupant of the premises whereon the same is
located, of the condition thereof, and direct such owner, agent or occupant to
eradicate, remove, and destroy such condition, or to remove and destroy such
vegetation specified.
   (C)   Should the owner, agent, or occupant of the premises fail to comply
with the directions of the City Forester within 20 days, the City Forester may
thereafter enter upon the premises and remove or treat the infected or infested
vegetation in order to eradicate a menacing and hazardous condition.
('74 Code, § 11-1-7) (Ord. 957; Am. Ord. 40-2004; Am. Ord. 19-2008)
§ 6-6-1-8 REGULATIONS PERTAINING TO SPACING OF TREES.
   It shall be unlawful to space trees in any street or other public place,
other than as prescribed in the specifications promulgated by the Parks and
Recreation Department.
('74 Code, §11-1-8) (Ord. 957; Am. Ord. 40-2004; Am. Ord. 19-2008)
§ 6-6-1-9 RESPONSIBILITY FOR DAMAGING TREES ON PUBLIC PROPERTY.
   (A)   Any person, firm, or corporation who shall injure, damage, or destroy
any tree, shrub, vine hedge, or other plant situate in any street, alley,
sidewalk, or other public place in the city shall promptly notify the City
Forester of such fact and shall, within such reasonable time as specified by
the City Forester, repair or replace the same to the satisfaction of the City
Forester.
   (B)   Should the person, firm, or corporation fail or refuse to repair or
replace the said damaged or destroyed plants within such reasonable time, the
City Forester shall do or cause to be done the necessary repairing or
replacement, and the costs of this work shall be recovered from the person,
firm, or corporation responsible for the damage or destruction by a proper
action at law.
('74 Code, § 11-1-9) (Ord. 957)
§ 6-6-1-99 PENALTY.
   Any violation of §§
6-6-1-1 et seq. shall be punished in accordance with Section
1-1-99, ROA 1994.
(Ord. 40-2004)
PART 2: STREET TREES
§ 6-6-2-1 SHORT TITLE.
   Sections
6-6-2-1 et seq. shall be known as the "Street Tree Ordinance."
('74 Code, § 8-5-1) (Ord. 54-1981; Am. Ord. 19-1986)
§ 6-6-2-2 INTENT.
   Sections
6-6-2-1 et seq. are intended to secure the following objectives, in accordance
with Policy 5.1.9, Policy 7.1.3, Policy 7.2.1, Policy 7.6.2, and other policies
of the Albuquerque/Bernalillo County Comprehensive Plan:
   (A)   To assist in control of water erosion and dust, absorb atmospheric
pollutants, and stabilize the soil;
   (B)   To provide summer shade and coolness but allow winter solar access;
and
   (C)   To enhance the appearance of the city's major streets; to enhance the
appearance of sidewalks and pedestrian ways within street corridors; to provide
physical and psychological buffering between pedestrians and automobile
traffic, and to improve the desirability of walking. These objectives are
intended to be met by providing evenly space lines of street trees, or when
otherwise approved informal groupings of street trees.
('74 Code, § 8-5-2) (Ord. 54- 1981; Am. Ord. 19-1986; Am. Ord._2017-025)
§ 6-6-2-3 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of §§
6-6-2-1 et seq., the following definitions shall apply unless the context
clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ACCENT TREE. A tree or shrub that reaches a height above 10 feet and has a
trunk with a caliper greater than 1.5 inches.
   CALIPER. The diameter of a tree trunk, six inches above grade on trees up to
four inches caliper and 54 inches above grade on trees greater than four inches
caliper.
   DEVELOPMENT REVIEW BOARD. An administrative board, consisting of six city
departments and other agencies. Membership consists of the Planning Director as
Chairperson, Zoning Enforcement Officer, City Engineer (who may also function
as the AMAFCA designee), Traffic Engineer, Parks and Recreation Director, and
Albuquerque-Bernalillo County Water Utility Authority Water Resources Engineer.
   LANDSCAPE/BUFFER AREA. The part of the public right-of-way which is not
occupied or planned to be occupied by street, curb, gutter, or sidewalk and
which may be used for street furniture, street trees and vegetation, and
utilities. Typically located between the back of curb and adjacent property
line.
   MAJOR STREET. A street which is shown in the adopted Long Range Major Street
Plan as a principal arterial, minor arterial, or collector street.
   PRIVATE WAY. A lot or easement which is not public right-of-way and which
contains a street providing access to or between public rights-of-way.
   PUBLIC RIGHT-OF-WAY. The area of land acquired by the city, county, or state
primarily for the use of the public for the movement of people, goods, and
vehicles.
   STREET. That portion of a public right-of-way or private way which is
primarily devoted to vehicular use; it is normally paved, and it normally
provides primary access to abutting property.
   STREET TREE. A tree growing within 20 feet of the edge of a street that
directly or indirectly affects public passage or safety and comprises a tree
pattern adjacent to a street.
   STREET TREE PLAN. An accurate plan which covers a portion of public right-
of-way or private way and the adjacent portion of one or more lots, which
portion is within 20 feet of the street; the plan shall show existing and
proposed street trees, major bushes and shrubs, ground cover, and the location
of pavement and structures, including tree grates where applicable; it shall
specify the common and botanical name of trees and their caliper or, in case of
multi-stem trees or evergreen trees, it shall designate the height of the tree.
All underground and overhead utility lines, both existing and proposed, that
are within 20 feet of a proposed street tree, shall be shown on the street tree
plan. The street tree plan may be a part of a more extensive landscaping or
site plan.
   STRUCTURE. Anything constructed or erected above ground level which requires
location on the ground or attached to something having a location on the
ground.
   TREE GRATE.  A barrier with parallel or crossed bars blocking a passage but
admitting that allows for tree trunk diameter growth.
   TREE PATTERN. The spacing of trees along the side of a roadway in a random
or regular arrangement.
   TREE WELL.  The basin where the root ball of the tree is planted.
   URBAN FOREST. An urban forest is the sum total of all vegetation growing in
urban areas.
('74 Code, § 8-5-3) (Ord. 54- 1981; Am. Ord. 19-1986; Am. Ord. 12-2004; Am.
Ord. 40-2004; Am. Ord._2017-025)
§ 6-6-2-4 REQUIRED STREET TREES.
   (A)   Required street trees.
      (1)   All applicants for building permits for construction of a new
building or building addition of 200 square feet or more shall submit a street
tree plan for those parts of the lot abutting a major street, a major local
street, or another street where street trees are required.
      (2)   Any person who constructs a new building addition of 200 square
feet or more or who paves a parking lot or required off-street parking area for
apartments and/or non-residential development on a lot abutting a major street,
a major local street, or another street where street trees are required shall
plant street trees according to a street tree plan approved by the Mayor. Such
planting shall occur no later than 60 calendar days after the completion of
construction and shall occur before final inspection as required in the
Building Code.
      (3)   Street trees shown on an approved street tree plan and required to
meet the requirements of § 14-16-5-6 shall be maintained alive and healthy.
Maintenance and trimming of street trees and replacement of dead trees are the
responsibility of the owner of the lot abutting or on which the tree is
located.
      (4)   The city shall maintain a list of trees, as part of the Official
Albuquerque Plant Palette and Sizing List, generally suitable for use as street
trees in Albuquerque. This list shall include a description of the physical
characteristics and cultural requirements of each species.
      (5)   City staff, in coordination with appropriate private sector input,
shall develop and make available information regarding the required soil volume
for trees of a given mature size, and the Planning Director shall make this
information available in the Development Process Manual. This soil volume
consists of un- compacted and irrigated soil. The root space may be long and
linear, to match a landscape/buffer area size, and/or the space may be created
through mechanical de-compaction, or the use of either structural soils under
pavements, or soil vault systems under pavements.
      (6)   Conflicts can occur with large trees near overhead electric utility
lines. The larger the tree, the farther it should be located from an electric
utility line. Small growth trees (those under 25 feet high at maturity) can be
near the electric utility lines. If possible, locate medium growth trees (those
under 40 feet high at maturity) at least 15 feet away from the electric utility
lines and locate large growth trees (those under 80 feet high at maturity) at
least 25 feet from electric utility lines. Trees that grow into or near
electric lines may be trimmed back to prevent any growth into the lines.
('74 Code, § 8-5-4) (Ord. 54- 1981; Am. Ord. 19-1986; Am. Ord. 12-2004; Am.
Ord. 40-2004; Am. Ord._2016-006; Am. Ord._2017-025) Penalty, see §
1-1-99
§ 6-6-2-5 STREET TREE POLICIES.
   The following city policies govern the placement of all street trees which
are planted on private property, abutting the public right-of-way, or which are
required to be planted near streets pursuant to city plans, policies and
ordinances; the policies are applicable for all street trees:
   (A)   Size of the trees at maturity should be in proportion to the planting
space provided for them. Spacing between evenly spaced street trees should be
no greater than the diameter of the tree canopy at maturity, per the Official
Albuquerque Plant Palette and Sizing List. Smaller species of trees will
require closer spacing, and larger trees will require greater spacing. Spacing
shall be approved as part of the plan approval process.
      (1)   Adequate room and spacing for Street Trees (subsection citation)
shall be accommodated/ provided pursuant to the details and specifications
developed by the city in the Development Process Manual.
      (2)   On sites where evenly-spaced street trees are not possible or do
not conform to the overall design objectives of the site, random clustering of
street trees may be acceptable, provided that the number of trees planted
equals or exceeds the number that would be required if the trees were evenly-
spaced.
   (B)   Street trees shall be placed between the curb and the public sidewalk
and in the landscape/buffer area, unless traffic safety requires different
locations of trees, as specified in division (2) of this division (B).
      (1)   The standard setback of trees located between the curb and the
public sidewalk depends on the relationship of the sidewalk to the curb.
         (a)   Where more than four feet of space exists between the back of
curb and the sidewalk, street trees shall be planted with their centerline two
feet from the sidewalk.
         (b)   Where less than three feet of space exists, street trees shall
not be planted into the landscape/buffer area. Any street trees required by the
city shall be planted within 20 feet of the back of curb of the abutting
street. In addition to fulfilling the street tree requirement, such trees can
be included in the calculation described in § 14-16-5-6(D). Furthermore, if an
off-street parking area is located along the frontage of the site, these trees
may also be used to fulfill the landscaping regulations for these areas, in
possible addition to the street tree and coverage requirements.
         (c)   Where the sidewalk is at the curb, two planting schemes are
possible:
            1.    Preferably, the tree shall be planted at least two feet
beyond the property-side edge of the sidewalk; or
            2.   If the sidewalk is six feet wide or wider, street trees may be
planted in cutouts in the sidewalk, and provide the minimum soil volume
requirement per the City Forester. The centerline of the tree shall be at least
two feet from the back of curb, and at least four feet from the property-side
edge of the sidewalk. If the remaining clear sidewalk space between the tree
well and the property-side edge of the sidewalk is less than four feet, a grate
shall be used to cover the planting hole. The grate shall be of a size and
design approved by the City Forester. In all cases, the minimum effective clear
sidewalk width (including grate overlap) shall be four feet to allow for
wheelchair access.
      (2)   Conflicts can occur with large trees near overhead electric utility
lines. The larger the tree, the farther it should be located from an electric
utility line. Small growth trees (those under 25 feet high at maturity) can be
near the electric utility lines. If possible, locate medium growth trees at
least 15 feet away from the electric utility lines and locate large growth
trees at least 25 feet from electric utility lines. Trees that grow into or
near electric lines may be trimmed back to prevent any growth into the lines.
   (C)   Notwithstanding the standards in division (1) above, the location of
street trees shall be determined by the Development Review Board if the
standards of division (1) above would result in a tree being located less than
eight feet from the face of the street curb. In making decisions on tree
location, the Development Review Board shall balance traffic safety with the
appearance of the streetscape. The Board shall consider the purposes of §§
6-6-2-1 et seq. as well as traffic speed and other relevant traffic aspects
which may impact public safety.
      (1)   Street trees shall be selected from the species in the Official
Albuquerque Plant Palette and Sizing List maintained by the City Forester. The
most appropriate species will depend upon the conditions of the particular
site.
      (2)   Street trees shall be at 2.0 inches in caliper at the time of
planting.
      (3)   Notwithstanding the other provisions of this section, trees planted
abutting the public right-of-way or in easements for underground utilities
should be located so as not to interfere, either at the time of installation or
later, with the function of overhead and underground utility lines. Where this
is not possible, street trees shall be planted near but off the public right-
of-way. Reasonable location is the responsibility of the person preparing the
street tree plan and the person planting the tree. Per criteria that is
acceptable to the City Forester, the Planning Director or his/her designee may
approve alternative planting schemes if it can be shown that the resulting tree
canopies will still provide adequate shading for the sidewalk.
      (4)   Property owners acknowledge that approved landscaping and trees
installed and maintained in public rights-of-way abutting private properties
are the property of the city, and that the city reserves the right to remove it
if necessary for a transportation project without compensation, but at no cost
to the property owner. Landscaping installed in the abutting public right-of-
way by property owners and later removed by the city shall not impact
previously approved net lot area calculations for required landscaping as
described in § 14-16-3-10(E)(2),
      (5)   Street trees should normally be deciduous. Adequate vertical
clearance below the branches must be maintained for pedestrians, cars, and
bicyclists. The minimum height to the lowest permanent branch overhanging a
sidewalk shall be seven feet; the lowest height of a permanent branch
overhanging a street shall be 14 feet. Coniferous trees may be used as street
trees only when the minimum required vertical clearance over streets and
sidewalks can be maintained throughout the life of the tree and only where they
will not at maturity block solar access to abutting buildings.
      (6)   As it is desirable to have a mix of species and genera represented
in the urban forest in order to protect against the loss of trees due to
disease, insects or environmental conditions, the following guidelines shall be
used:
         (a)   Plantings of ten or fewer trees may all be of the same genus;
         (b)   Plantings of more than ten trees must use at least two different
genera, with roughly equal numbers of each.
      (7)   One of every three street trees planted may be an accent tree per
the Official Albuquerque Plant Palette and Sizing List, provided the guidelines
in § 14-16-5-6(D) and the Development Process Manual are met.
('74 Code, § 8-5-5) (Ord. 54- 1981; Am. Ord. 19-1986; Am. Ord. 40-2004; Am.
Ord. 19-2008; Am. Ord._2016-006; Am. Ord._2017-025) Penalty, see §
1-1-99
§ 6-6-2-6 STREET TREE PROGRAMS.
   (A)   The Mayor shall prepare, distribute, and continue to keep available to
the public a booklet or other printed material encouraging street trees,
indicating recommended species, city regulations, appropriate street tree
locations, and tree care.
   (B)   The Mayor shall, through the Capital Improvements Program, cause
street trees to be planted near the street frontages of all city-owned lots, at
least meeting the requirements of §§
6-6-2-1 et seq.
   (C)   The Mayor shall propose to the City Council appropriate major streets
for special assessment districts for the planting and maintenance of street
trees. The Mayor shall designate appropriate city staff to administer such
supports.
   (D)   Whenever a city project on the public right of way removes or kills
one or more street trees, the Mayor shall replace each such tree with one of
the same species in approximately the same location, unless the species or
location is contrary to §§
6-6-2-1 et seq. or to related regulations or plans, in which event each such
tree shall be replaced with a tree of conforming species and location.
('74 Code, § 8-5-6) (Ord. 54- 1981; Am. Ord. 19-1986; Am. Ord. 44-1989; Am.
Ord._2016-006) Penalty, see §
1-1-99
§ 6-6-2-7 MORE DETAILED REGULATIONS.
   Regulations detailing the provisions of §§
6-6-2-1 et seq. should be enacted in coordination with Departments with
installation and maintenance responsibilities, and be amended by the
Environmental Planning Commission for regulations in the Integrated Development
Ordinance and DPM Executive Committee for technical standards in the
Development Process Manual at an advertised public hearing.
('74 Code, § 8-5-7) (Ord. 54- 1981; Am. Ord. 19-1986; Am. Ord._2016-006; Am.
Ord._2017-025)
§ 6-6-2-8 WAIVERS AND VARIANCES.
   The Mayor, upon application of land owners, may waive or modify requirements
§§
6-6-2-1 et seq., if it is found that:
   (A)   Street trees would necessarily contribute to unsafe conditions on the
public right-of-way;
   (B)   The lot frontage is sufficiently forested to be in general compliance
with the intent of §§
6-6-2-1 et seq.; or
   (C)   Alternative landscaping plans, in harmony with the surroundings and
meeting the intent of §§
6-6-2-1 et seq. are proposed.
('74 Code, § 8-5-8) (Ord. 54- 1981; Am. Ord. 19-1986; Am. Ord._2016-006)
§ 6-6-2-9 APPEALS.
   Appeals from the decision of the Mayor on requests for waivers or variances
may be taken to the City Council, through the Land Use Hearing Officer, by
filing written notice with the Planning Division within 15 days after the
request for variance has been decided.
('74 Code, § 8-5-9) (Ord. 54- 1981; Am. Ord. 19-1986; Am. Ord._2016-006; Am.
Ord._2017-025)
ARTICLE 7: NEWSRACKS
Section
   
6-7-1   Intent and purpose
   
6-7-2   Definitions
   
6-7-3   Standards for maintenance and installation
   
6-7-4   Location and placement of newsrack
   
6-7-5   Minimizing blowing papers
   
6-7-6   Administrative procedures and requirements
   
6-7-7   Violations of ordinance
   
6-7-8   Appeals
   
6-7-9   Abandonment
§ 6-7-1 INTENT AND PURPOSE.
   The City Council finds and declares that:
   (A)   The uncontrolled placement of newsracks in public rights-of-way
presents an inconvenience and danger to the safety and welfare of persons using
such rights-of-way, including pedestrians, persons entering and leaving
vehicles and buildings, and persons performing essential utility and traffic
control services.
   (B)   Newsracks so located as to cause an inconvenience or danger to persons
using public rights-of-way and unsightly newsracks located therein constitute
public nuisances.
   (C)   The provisions and prohibitions hereinafter contained and enacted are
in pursuance of and for the purpose of securing and promoting the public
health, morals and general welfare of persons in the city in their use of
public rights-of-way.
('74 Code, § 8-12-1) (Ord. 56-1991)
§ 6-7-2 DEFINITIONS.
   (A)   For the purpose of this article, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   DISTRIBUTOR. The person responsible for placing and maintaining a newsrack
in a public right-of-way.
   MAYOR. Includes his designated representative.
   NEWSRACK. Any self-service or coin-operated box, container, storage unit or
other dispenser installed used, or maintained for the display and sale of
newspapers, other periodicals or advertising material. A newsrack is a type of
street furniture.
   PUBLIC RIGHT-OF-WAY. The total area of land acquired by a public body within
the city and dedicated primarily to the use of the public for vehicular and/or
pedestrian travel. Public right-of-way does not include areas within the
University of New Mexico campus or similar public campuses where the right-of-
way is not owned by the city.
   ROADWAY. That portion of a street public right-of-way improved, designed or
ordinarily used for vehicular travel.
   SIDEWALK. That portion of the public right-of- way which is primarily
devoted to pedestrian use.
   (B)   Words not defined herein, but which are defined in § 14-16-7-1 of the
Integrated Development Ordinance, are to be construed as defined therein.
('74 Code, § 8-12-2) (Ord. 56- 1991; Am. Ord._2017-025)
§ 6-7-3 STANDARDS FOR MAINTENANCE AND INSTALLATION.
   Any newsrack which in whole or in part rests upon, in or over any public
sidewalk or parkway shall comply with the following standards:
   (A)   No newsrack for a given publication shall exceed five feet in height,
30 inches in width or two feet in thickness; however, a group of newsracks may
be constructed as one unit selling or distributing different publications side
by side if its location and length are consistent with what would be allowed
for a group of separate, side-by-side newsrack structures.
   (B)   No newsrack shall be used for advertising signs or publicity purposes
other than the display, advertising, sale, or distribution of the newspaper,
periodical or advertising publication sold or distributed therein. Such signs
shall be flush to the body of the newsrack.
   (C)   Each newsrack where payment is required shall be equipped with a coin-
return mechanism to permit a person using the machine to secure an immediate
refund in the event he is unable to receive the publication paid for. The coin-
return mechanisms shall be maintained in good working order.
   (D)   Each newsrack shall have affixed to it, in a readily visible place so
as to be seen by anyone using the newsrack, a notice setting forth the name and
address of the distributor and the telephone number of a working telephone
service to call to report a malfunction, or to secure a refund in the event of
a malfunction of the coin-return mechanism, or to give the notices provided for
in this article.
   (E)   Each newsrack shall be maintained in a neat and clean condition and in
good repair at all times. Specifically, but without limiting the generality of
the foregoing, each newsrack shall be serviced and maintained so that:
      (1)   It is reasonably free of dirt and grease.
      (2)   It is reasonably free of chipped, faded, peeling and cracked paint
in the visible painted areas thereof.
      (3)   It is reasonably free of rust and corrosion in the visible
unpainted metal areas thereon.
      (4)   The clear plastic or glass parts thereof, if any, through which the
publications therein are viewed are unbroken and reasonably free of cracks,
dents, blemishes and discoloration.
      (5)   The paper or cardboard parts or inserts thereof are reasonably free
of tears, peeling or fading.
      (6)   The structural parts thereof are not broken or unduly misshapen.
('74 Code, § 8-12-3) (Ord. 56-1991)
§ 6-7-4 LOCATION AND PLACEMENT OF NEWSRACK.
   Any newsrack, which rests in whole or in part upon or on any portion of a
public right-of-way or which projects onto, into or over any part of a public
right-of-way, shall be located in accordance with the provisions of this
section:
   (A)   No newsrack shall be used or maintained which projects onto, into or
over any part of the roadway of any public right-of-way, or which rests wholly
or in part upon or over any portion of the roadway of any public right-of-way.
   (B)   No newsrack shall be chained, bolted or otherwise attached to any
fixture located in the public right-of-way, except to other newsracks.
   (C)   Newsracks may be placed next to each other, provided that no group of
newsracks shall extend for a distance of more than eight feet along a curb, and
a space of not less than three feet shall separate each group of newsracks.
   (D)   Newsracks may be bolted to the sidewalk or they may be attached to the
ground where the public right-of-way is not used as either roadway or sidewalk.
However, such attachment shall not be such as to obstruct the public right-of-
way except under the newsrack, and the bolt or other attachment must be removed
and pavement or ground returned to original condition at such time as the
newsrack is removed. The Mayor shall set bolting standards by rule, which shall
be available to the public.
   (E)   No newsrack shall be placed, installed, used or maintained:
      (1)   Within three feet of any marked crosswalk or within five feet of
the curb return of any unmarked crosswalk;
      (2)   In violation of the city's clear sight triangle regulations, as
defined in other city ordinances;
      (3)   Within five feet of any fire hydrant, fire call box or other
emergency facility;
      (4)   Within 11 feet of where the side of a public sidewalk which is
farther from the street meets a driveway or alley, except in the Downtown SU-
3 zone the limit is within five feet of any such junction;
      (5)   Within three feet forward of or 15 feet to the rear of any sign
marking a designated bus stop;
      (6)   Within three feet of the outer end of any bus bench;
      (7)   At any location whereby the clear space for the passageway of
pedestrians is reduced to less than six feet;
      (8)   Within 100 feet of any other newsrack on the same side of the
street in the same block containing the same issue or edition of the same
publication; or
      (9)   On any handicap access ramp.
      (10)   Distributors may place newsracks in locations which are not
consistent with divisions (5) and (7) of this division (E) if all of the
following standards are met:
         (a)   The clear space for the passage of pedestrians traveling along
the sidewalk opposite the newsrack shall be at least four feet in width;
         (b)   Compliance with the regular provisions would prohibit the
placement of a newsrack for a distance of 150 feet on the same side of the
street in the same block;
         (c)   Placement of the newsrack would not cause significant damage to
the sidewalk segment's ability to carry the pedestrians and wheelchairs which
desire to pass there;
         (d)   If it is readily achievable, there shall be sidewalk passing
sections of at least 60 inches by 60 inches on either side of a newsrack, the
two passing areas being not more than 200 feet distant from each other; and
         (e)   The distributor certifies that it will remove the newsrack to a
place consistent with divisions (5) and (7) of this division (E) or to a
different, agreed upon place consistent with this division (10). Such removal
will be required when the city determines, upon the initiation of the head of
the city's Traffic Engineering Division, that the original placement of the
newsrack is causing significant damage to the sidewalk segment's ability to
carry the pedestrians and wheelchairs which desire to pass there. The Traffic
Engineering determination is subject to administrative appeal as provided in §
6-7-8.
   (F)   Newsracks abutting premises in residential zones shall meet the
following additional standards:
      (1)   They may be located only where they are adjacent to an arterial
street or a collector street.
      (2)   Newsrack signs are restricted to a display of the cover of the
publication and either four square feet or 20% of the newsrack's visible sides
and top, whichever is greater, as additional sign area. Instructions as to
paying shall not be counted when calculating sign area.
('74 Code, § 8-12-4) (Ord. 56-1991; Am. Ord. 8-1992)
§ 6-7-5 MINIMIZING BLOWING PAPERS.
   In order to minimize paper from newsracks blowing onto the public right-of-
way and becoming refuse, newsracks shall contain an effective system to prevent
the wind from blowing publications out of the newsrack. For newsracks hereafter
installed on the public right-of-way, they shall be constructed with solid
walls on all six sides and a door which is self closing.
('74 Code, § 8-12-5) (Ord. 56-1991)
§ 6-7-6 ADMINISTRATIVE PROCEDURES AND REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   Installation Submittal. A distributor shall promptly provide the head
of the City's Traffic Engineering Division with a street map indicating the
general location of each newsrack which it has installed on the public right-
of-way together with a certification satisfactory to the head of the Division
that the newsrack installation is in compliance with this article.
Certification may also be required as to agreeing to move newsracks per § 6-7-4
(E)(10) above.
   (B)   Insurance. No distributor shall install or maintain a newsrack in the
public right-of-way until it has provided a certificate of insurance
satisfactory to the Mayor indicating that such person is insured with a
commercial general liability policy in the amount of $1,000,000 combined single
limit for bodily injury and property damage. This policy shall provide coverage
for operations and products liability and name the city as an additional
insured.
   (C)   Other Ordinances Not Applicable. No part of §§
6-5-5-1 et seq., Sidewalks, or §§
6-5-2-1 et seq., Street Excavation and Barricading, shall be applied to actions
under-taken consistent with the provisions of this article.
   (D)   Grace Period as to Enforcement. No enforcement action shall be taken
pursuant to this article until 60 days after it takes effect.
('74 Code, § 8-12-6) (Ord. 56-1991)
§ 6-7-7 VIOLATIONS OF ORDINANCE.
   Upon determination by the Mayor that a newsrack has been installed, used or
maintained in violation of the provisions of this article, an order to correct
the offending condition will be issued to the distributor of the newsrack. Such
order shall be telephoned to the distributor and confirmed by mailing a copy of
the order by certified mail return receipt requested. The order shall
specifically describe the offending condition, suggest actions necessary to
correct the conditions and inform the newsrack distributor of the right to
appeal. Failure to properly correct the offending conditions within 10 days
(excluding Saturdays, Sundays and legal holidays) after the mailing date of the
order or to appeal the order within 15 days after its receipt shall result in
the offending newsrack being summarily removed and processed as unclaimed
property. If the offending newsrack is not properly identified as to owner
under provisions of §
6-7-3(D), it shall be removed immediately and processed as unclaimed property.
An impound fee, which shall be measured by the city's cost and expense of
impounding, shall be assessed against each newsrack summarily removed. The
Mayor shall set the impound-fee formula by rule, which shall be available to
the public. The Mayor shall cause inspection to be made of the corrected
condition of a newsrack reinstalled after removal under this section. The
distributor of the newsrack shall be charged a $10 inspection fee for each
newsrack so inspected. This charge shall be in addition to all other fees and
charges required under this article.
('74 Code, § 8-12-7) (Ord. 56-1991; Am. Ord._2023-015)
§ 6-7-8 APPEALS.
   Any person or entity aggrieved by a finding, determination, notice, order or
action taken under the provisions of this article may appeal and shall be
apprised of his right to appeal to the Independent Hearing Officer. An appeal
must be submitted to the City Clerk within 15 days after receipt of notice of
any protested decision or action. Procedures regarding the hearing shall be the
procedures outlined in the IHO Ordinance, ROA 1994,
Chapter 2, Article 7, Part 8.
('74 Code, § 8-12-8) (Ord. 56-1991; Am. Ord. 38-2002; Am. Ord._2023-015)
§ 6-7-9 ABANDONMENT.
   In the event a newsrack remains empty for a period of 30 continuous days,
the same shall be deemed abandoned, and may be treated in the manner as
provided in §
6-7-7 for newsracks in violation of the provisions of this article. The Mayor
shall send a certified letter to the owner of the newsrack if an address is
affixed to it; the letter shall indicate how the newsrack can be reclaimed and
the amount of the impound fee.
('74 Code, § 8-12-9) (Ord. 56-1991; Am. Ord. 8-1992)
ARTICLE 8: SPECIAL ASSESSMENT DISTRICT POLICY
Section
Part 1: General Provisions
   
6-8-1-1   Short title
   
6-8-1-2   Definitions
   
6-8-1-3   General provisions
Part 2: Factors for Consideration Prior to Creation of SAD
   
6-8-2-1   Factors for consideration prior to creation of SAD
   
6-8-2-2   Preparation of SAD engineer's report
   
6-8-2-3   Review of SAD engineer's report
Part 3: Proposal of SAD
   
6-8-3-1   Resolution No. 1—proposing SAD
   
6-8-3-2   Establishing estimated maximum benefits
   
6-8-3-3   Assessment methods and details
Part 4: Notification of Property Owners
   
6-8-4-1   Resolution No. 2—provisional order
   
6-8-4-2   Protest hearing
   
6-8-4-3   Resolution No. 3—creating SAD
Part 5: Assessment Process
   
6-8-5-1   Contract award
   
6-8-5-2   Resolution No. 4—notice of assessment roll hearing
   
6-8-5-3   Assessment hearing
   
6-8-5-4   Resolution No. 5—modifying and confirming assessment roll
   
6-8-5-5   Assessing ordinance
Part 6: Bonds to Finance Construction
   
6-8-6-1   Bond ordinance
   
6-8-6-2   City credit support
Part 7: Billing and Collection of Assessments
   
6-8-7-1   Initial billing
   
6-8-7-2   Collection of assessments
Part 8: Ratification and Adjustment of Assessments
   
6-8-8-1   Ratification and adjustment of assessments
Part 9: Review of SAD
   
6-8-9-1   Administrative review
   
6-8-9-2   Quarterly reports
PART 1: GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 6-8-1-1 SHORT TITLE.
   This article shall be known and cited as the "Albuquerque Special Assessment
District Policy Ordinance."
(Ord. 44-1996)
§ 6-8-1-2 DEFINITIONS.
   (A)   Word Forms. For the purpose of this policy, unless a contrary
intention clearly appears, the following words have meanings interpreted as
follows:
      (1)   Verbs used in the present tense include the future tense. Verbs
used in the future tense include the present tense.
      (2)   The singular includes the plural. The plural includes the singular.
      (3)   The word "may" is permissive; the words "shall" and "will" are
mandatory, subject to specific exceptions allowed by this policy.
      (4)   Any reference to particular governmental officials shall include
their authorized representatives, to the extent permitted by the Act.
   (B)   For the purpose of this article, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ACT. Sections 3-33-1 through 3-33-43, NMSA 1978, as amended and supplemented
from time to time.
   ACTIVE SPECIAL ASSESSMENT DISTRICT. Any proposed special assessment district
from the time of approval by the City Council of Resolution Number One until
approval of the final adjusting change order and the filing of liens.
   ADJUSTMENT OF ASSESSMENT. The adjustment in the estimated maximum benefit or
assessment resulting from the division of the property to be assessed or
assessed into smaller tracts or parcels or the combining of smaller parcels
into one or more larger parcels or the changing of the configuration or legal
description of such parcels. Adjustment of assessment may also include the
reallocation of the assessment lien, without loss of priority, among parcels
under single ownership that are subject to the assessment lien in order to
permit the removal of the lien from one or more parcels where adequate security
for the lien is demonstrated by the assessed parcels under such single
ownership or provided by the owner.
   ASSESSMENT ROLL. The list of all tracts or parcels of property within the
SAD, the name and address of the last known record owner and the amount to be
assessed against each tract or parcel.
   BOND ATTORNEY. An attorney or firm of attorneys under contract with the city
to review resolutions and ordinances pertinent to SADs and to opine as to the
legality and tax exempt status of bonds issued for financing SAD Improvements.
   CITY COUNCIL. The governing body of the City of Albuquerque.
   CONSTRUCT or CONSTRUCTION. The planning, designing, engineering,
constructing, reconstructing, installing, extending, bettering, altering,
building, rebuilding, improving, purchasing or otherwise acquiring any
improvement described in §
6-8-1-3.
   CONSULTING ENGINEER. A professional engineer or engineering firm duly
licensed under the laws of the state and under contract with the city to design
engineering works and perform such other engineering duties as requested on
behalf of the city for SADs.
   CREDIT ENHANCEMENT. Security provided by an independent third party
financial institution or surety company which is designed to ensure that
sufficient funds are available to pay SAD bonds, regardless of the adequacy of
payments received from special assessment liens, including but not limited to
municipal bond insurance, irrevocable letters of credit and bank guarantees.
   ESTIMATED MAXIMUM BENEFIT ROLL. The list containing a description of all
tracts or parcels of property within the SAD, the name and address of the last
known record owner and the estimated maximum benefit accruing to each tract or
parcel of property from the improvements proposed for the SAD and the estimated
cost of the SAD to each tract or parcel of property.
   IMPROVEMENT. Any one or combination of the projects set forth in §
6-8-1-3.
   INTEREST RATE DIFFERENTIAL. A portion of the interest rate borne by a
special assessment lien which exceeds the initial average rate of interest for
the combined or a particular series of bonds for an SAD.
   MAYOR. The chief executive officer of the city with all executive and
administrative powers of the city or a representative designated by the Mayor.
   OBSOLETE SUBDIVISION. A subdivision in which the platting is inconsistent
with modern planning practices and which also is a premature subdivision. Such
subdivisions are represented by a pattern of developmental inadequacies under
current city standards and requirements, especially including the following:
      (1)   Inadequate street right-of-way and street access control to prevent
high levels of traffic from outside of the subdivision;
      (2)   Lack of an overall grading and drainage plan which is compatible
with modern planning practices and the absence of drainage easements or rights-
of-way consistent with that plan.
   OWNER. The person or legal entities with legal or equitable title to the
property and exercising management and control responsibilities with respect to
the property.
   PREMATURE SUBDIVISION. A subdivision that has been platted and sold into
multiple private ownership prior to installation or financial guarantee of all
required improvements for land development.
   PUBLIC RIGHT-OF-WAY. That public area of land deeded, dedicated by plat, or
otherwise acquired by any unit of government and owned in fee simple for the
purposes of movement of vehicles, pedestrian traffic, and/or for provision of
public utility services and/or for conveyance of storm water (drainage).
   RATIFICATION. Consent to an increase in the estimated maximum benefits and/
or agreement to pay an additional assessment by the owner arising out of a
request for additional improvements, such as drivepads, curb cuts, median cuts,
water and sanitary sewer service lines or for the correction of errors in the
assessment procedure.
   RECORD OWNER. The owner of the tract or parcel of property to be assessed in
the SAD as shown on the records of the County Assessor or any other source the
City Clerk or Consulting Engineer deems reliable, including both the buyer and
seller of property that is being sold on a real estate contract.
   RESIDENTIAL PROPERTY. Residential zoned property that is either developed or
may be developed to a maximum of 12 dwelling units per acre.
   SAD ENGINEER. The Special Assessment District engineer of the Public Works
Department of the city.
   SAD REVIEW COMMITTEE (SRC). Individuals from the Public Works Department,
Department of Finance and Administrative Services, Capital Improvement Program,
Legal Department, and the Planning Department and such others designated by the
Mayor who collectively review and coordinate SADs. A representative of the City
Council Department shall be an ex-officio member of the SAD Review Committee.
   SPECIAL ASSESSMENTS. Assessments against tracts or parcels of property
specially benefited by improvements included in an SAD to defray a portion of
the costs of the improvements.
   SPECIAL ASSESSMENT LIENS. Liens imposed upon property specially benefited by
improvements included in an SAD after expiration of any designated period when
special assessments may be paid in full by an owner.
   SPECIAL ASSESSMENT DISTRICT (SAD). The combining of improvements specified
in §
6-8-1-3(C)(2) in one or more locations into one project for the purpose of
constructing such improvements in accordance with this Special Assessment
District Policy.
   SUPPLEMENTAL REVENUES. Revenues of the city, in addition to payments from
special assessment liens, which are legally available for pledging to the
payment of a particular series of SAD bonds, but consisting only of gasoline
tax revenues, surplus revenues derived from operation of the city's water and
sanitary sewer system, and franchise fees not to exceed $1,000,000 to be
pledged before the year 2005 imposed and collected by the city.
(Ord. 44-1996)
§ 6-8-1-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS.
   (A)   Purpose. The public health, safety, comfort, convenience, and general
welfare of the people of the city require harmonious, orderly, and coordinated
development of public works projects constructed and financed through the
Special Assessment District process. The purpose of this policy is to create
steps and standards for the initiation and implementation of Special Assessment
Districts (SADs) by:
      (1)   Providing an understanding of SADs.
      (2)   Identifying responsibilities of property owners and the city.
      (3)   Outlining steps to be followed in the technical and legal
development and construction of SADs.
   (B)   Legal Basis. The legal authority for SADs is Article 33, Chapter 3 of
the New Mexico Statutes Annotated 1978, as amended and as construed by the
courts of the State of New Mexico and as supplemented by the city's home rule
authority pursuant to Article X, Section 6 of the Constitution of the State of
New Mexico. These legal authorities govern the creation of SADs, and, while the
steps and standards set out in this article are to be followed by the city or
its agents, no failure by the city or its agents to comply with the provisions
of this article shall invalidate or make unlawful any SAD created in compliance
with governing legal authorities.
   (C)   Jurisdiction.
      (1) Territorial Jurisdiction. This policy shall govern SADs created by
the city within the boundaries of Bernalillo county. SADs which include
improvements or assessments outside the boundaries of the city, but within
Bernalillo county, shall be formed in accordance with the terms of the Act.
      (2) Subject Matter Jurisdiction. This policy applies whenever an SAD is
proposed to construct, acquire, repair, or maintain in one or more locations,
any one or any combination of the following projects, including without
limitation, any right of way, easement or privilege appurtenant or related
thereto as permitted by the Act:
         (a)   A street, road, bridge, walkway, overpass, underpass, storm
drainage project, pathway, alley, curb, gutter, or sidewalk project, including,
without limitation, median and divider strips, parkways and boulevards, ramps
and stairways, interchanges, alleys and intersections, storm sewers, drains,
catch basins, arches, support structures and pilings, and the grading,
regrading, oiling, surfacing, graveling, excavating, paving, repairing, laying,
backfilling, leveling, lighting, landscaping, beautifying or in any manner
improving all or any part of one or more streets, roads, bridges, walkways,
pathways, curbs, gutters or sidewalks or any combination of the foregoing;
         (b)   A storm sewer project, sanitary sewer project or water project,
including, without limitation, investigation, planning, constructing,
acquiring, excavating, laying, leveling, backfilling or in any manner improving
all or any part of one or more storm sewers, drains, sanitary sewers, water
lines, trunk lines, mains, laterals and property connections and acquiring or
improving hydrants, meters, valves, catch basins, inlets, outlets, lift or
pumping stations and machinery and equipment incidental thereto or any
combination of the foregoing;
         (c)   A flood control or storm drainage project, including, without
limitation, the investigation, planning, construction, improvement,
replacement, repair or acquisition of dams, dikes, levees, ditches, canals,
basins and appurtenances such as spillways, outlets, syphons and drop
structures, channel construction, diversions, rectification and protection with
appurtenant structures such as concrete lining, banks, revetments, culverts,
inlets, bridges, transitions and drop structures, rundowns and retaining walls,
storm sewers and related appurtenances such as inlets, outlets, manholes, catch
basins, syphons and pumping stations, appliances, machinery and equipment and
property rights connected therewith or incidental thereto convenient and
necessary to control floods or provide drainage and lessen their danger and
damages;
         (d)   A utility project providing gas, electricity or telephone
service;
         (e)   Construction, repair and maintenance of facilities designed for
the parking of motor vehicles off the public streets;
         (f)   Construction or acquisition, repair, operation and maintenance
of one or more of the following inadequacies necessary to bring an obsolete and
premature subdivision into compliance within an SAD within the boundaries of
the city:
            1.   Street right-of-way or street access control;
            2.   Drainage easements or right-of-way;
            3.   Park, recreation, or open space areas;
            4.   Overall grading and drainage plan; or
            5.   Adequate subdivision grading both on or off the public right-
of-way;
         (g)   Construction, repair or maintenance of improvements in one or
more locations as a means to stimulate manufacturing, industrial, commercial or
business development; or
         (h)   Any other projects now or hereafter authorized under the laws of
the state and the powers of the city.
   (D)   Administration of Policy. This policy shall be administered by the
Public Works Department, Planning Department, Department of Finance and
Administrative Services, the Legal Department, the Office of Management and
Budget and such other Departments designated by the Mayor, under the direction
of the Mayor.
   (E)   Applicability/Provisional Order Method. This policy shall, in its
entirety, be applicable to all SADs within the jurisdiction of this policy as
specified in division (C) of this section which are proposed and initiated
pursuant to the provisional order method as described in the Act.
   (F)   Applicability/Petition Method. This policy, except for the provisions
governing initial procedures for establishment of an SAD, shall be applicable
to all SADs within the jurisdiction of this policy as specified in division (C)
of this section which are proposed and initiated pursuant to the petition
method as described in the Act. SADs established pursuant to the petition
method shall be established in accordance with the provisions of the Act. Such
SADs shall further be subject to review by the SRC under this article prior to
approval by the City Council.
(Ord. 44-1996)
PART 2: FACTORS FOR CONSIDERATION PRIOR TO CREATION OF SAD
§ 6-8-2-1 FACTORS FOR CONSIDERATION PRIOR TO CREATION OF SAD.
   An SAD created by the provisional order method shall be initiated by a
resolution of the City Council directing the Consulting Engineer to prepare
preliminary plans and an estimate of costs for the proposed SAD in accordance
with the Act. Before the City Council takes this initial step in the creation
of an SAD, it desires to have certain information to aid in determining whether
to initiate the creation of the proposed SAD, and therefore directs the SAD
Engineer and the SRC, where appropriate, to undertake to determine the matters
and follow the procedures set forth in §§
6-8-2-1 et seq.
   (A)   Request for Improvements. Any owner or interested party may request
that a proposed improvement be placed in an SAD by submitting to the SAD
Engineer a request for construction of improvements through the special
assessment process on a form prescribed by the city.
   (B)   Evaluation of Requests for Improvements. The SAD Engineer shall
consider the following factors in evaluating the creation of an SAD:
      (1) The feasibility of aggregating the requests for improvements into a
legally and technically viable SAD.
      (2) The percentage of owners expected to support or protest the proposed
improvements in an SAD.
      (3) Current or anticipated need for constructing the proposed
improvements in an SAD, as evidenced by current or anticipated problems
involving:
         (a)   Drainage and storm sewers;
         (b)   Air and ground water pollution;
         (c)   Sanitation and sanitary sewers;
         (d)   Illegal solid waste disposal;
         (e)   Traffic;
         (f)   Excessive maintenance effort;
         (g)   Safety;
         (h)   Access;
         (i)   Development trends;
         (j)   Infill needs;
         (k)   Developmental inadequacies in an obsolete and premature
subdivision;
         (l)   Parking; or
         (m)   Absence of adequate gas, water, electric or telephone service.
      (4)   The feasibility of vacating, rather than improving, any unimproved
public right-of-way requested to be improved.
      (5)   The availability or attainability of sufficient public right-of-way
to accommodate the proposed improvements.
      (6)   Any and all other factors deemed pertinent by the SAD Engineer.
   (C)   Factors for Consideration in Recommending Creation of a Special
Assessment District. After the SAD Engineer determines that an SAD is
appropriate, the following factors shall be considered prior to recommending
initiation of an SAD to the City Council:
      (1)   The estimated cost of the proposed improvements is of sufficient
magnitude, either alone or in combination with other proposed improvements, to
obtain attractive bids on the construction and to obtain attractive financing
terms for the SAD.
      (2)   No foreseeable future improvements are contemplated that would
require or necessitate removal of a proposed improvement.
      (3)   The availability or attainability of adequate public right-of-way.
      (4)   The anticipated city participation expense for paving, water,
sewer, storm drainage, public right-of-way and miscellaneous costs will not
exceed the projected city funds available for the SAD.
      (5)   The existence of water, sanitary sewer, storm drainage, gas,
electric, and telephone facilities or the capability of or requirement for such
facilities being extended prior to or concurrently with the proposed
improvements.
      (6)   The proposed improvements must be consistent with the City/County
Comprehensive Plan, area plans, sector plans and other applicable plans and
appropriate land use approvals must be obtained from the city to allow for
implementation of development of the area.
      (7)   The probability that the tracts or parcels of property to be
assessed in the SAD will benefit by an amount at least commensurate to the
anticipated costs of the improvements and the anticipated financing costs
associated with the SAD.
      (8)   Possible need to construct the proposed improvements in order to
satisfy either:
         (a)   Provisions of city ordinances and policies; or
         (b)   Previous stipulations, prior decisions, or agreements made by
the city.
      (9)   Proximity of the proposed improvements to existing infrastructure.
      (10)   Availability of supplemental revenues to pledge to bonds
anticipated to be issued for the proposed SAD, taking into consideration prior
pledges of supplemental revenues to outstanding SAD bonds and other factors
affecting the use and availability of supplemental revenues.
      (11)   Any and all other factors deemed pertinent by the SRC.
   (D)   Preliminary Review of Proposed Special Districts by SRC. When the SAD
Engineer determines that creation of an SAD should be recommended to the City
Council data concerning the proposed SAD will be assembled and a meeting of the
SRC will be scheduled by the SAD Engineer. The date presented shall describe
the proposed improvements and their locations in general terms and shall
address the various factors stated in divisions (B) and (C) of this section. If
the SRC concurs with the SAD Engineer's recommendation the SRC shall direct
that the SAD Engineer proceed with preparation of the report described in §
6-8-2-2.
   (E)   Preliminary Review by Department of Finance and Administrative
Preliminary Services and Capital Implementation Division. Concurrently with the
preliminary review by the SRC, the Department of Finance and Administrative
Services and Office of Management and Budget will perform an independent review
of all proposed SAD financings and may make recommendations to the Mayor and
City Council regarding financial risk, impact on the city's bonding capacity,
economic feasibility and related issues. SAD proponents may be required to
provide current and two previous years financial statements, preferably
audited, and other pertinent credit information deemed necessary to assist the
Department of Finance and Administrative Services and Office of Management and
Budget in the fiscal review.
(Ord. 44-1996)
§ 6-8-2-2 PREPARATION OF SAD ENGINEER'S REPORT.
   Prior to transmittal of a final SRC recommendation to the Mayor, the SAD
Engineer will prepare a report that addresses and includes the following:
   (A)   A summary and general discussion of findings made in §
6-8-2-1, including names of persons or entities making requests for
improvements.
   (B)   Coordination that has occurred with the Department of Finance and
Administrative Services, Office of Management and Budget, the Planning
Department, and the Municipal Development Department for other applicable
requirements such as financing, funding, platting, zoning, street widths, water
and sanitary sewer line sizes, storm drainage needs, neighborhood or regional
parks, and the like.
   (C)   Tabulation of requested streets which shall include:
      (1)   Street, indicating from                    to                 .
      (2)   Improvements required:
         (a)   Paving;
         (b)   Sewer;
         (c)   Water;
         (d)   Sidewalks;
         (e)   Storm drainage improvements;
         (f)   Landscaping;
         (g)   Gas, electricity and telephone;
         (h)   Other necessary improvements;
      (3)   Public right-of-way requirements.
      (4)   Estimated cost by improvement type.
   (D)   Location map of requested improvements to be included in the SAD.
   (E)   Owners and neighborhood associations which may be affected by the SAD.
   (F)   Fiscal impact analysis to include an examination of the financial
strength and feasibility of property included within the SAD to support and pay
the special assessments as set forth in this article, the fiscal impacts of the
SAD on the city's Capital Improvement Program and the city's operating budget
including interest costs on estimated fund advances by the city in connection
with the SAD prior to delivery of the bonds to finance the SAD improvements.
   (G)   Financing plan to include proposed bond underwriter, bond structure
and credit enhancement requirements.
   (H)   An estimated timetable for establishing the SAD and constructing the
improvements including estimated timeframes for City Council approval of the
required resolutions and ordinances to create the SAD and to issue and deliver
the bonds to finance the SAD improvements.
(Ord. 44-1996; Am. Ord._2017-008)
§ 6-8-2-3 REVIEW OF SAD ENGINEER'S REPORT.
   (A)   The SRC shall review the SAD Engineer's Report and decide whether or
not to recommend creation of the SAD to the Mayor. The SRC shall direct the SAD
Engineer to prepare a transmittal letter to the Mayor setting forth its
recommendation and supporting rationale. The letter shall be signed by the SRC
members and shall be attached to the SAD Engineer's Report.
   (B)   The SAD Engineer's Report shall not be considered by the SRC unless
the funding for city contributions already has been appropriated. SAD capital
appropriations shall be project specific and shall be identified in the
appropriating resolution with regard to the SAD. Special assessment district
funding will become a part of the normal Capital Improvement Program budgetary
and planning process. Costs of the SAD improvements will be formally
appropriated as part of the Capital Improvement Program process.
   (C)   The SRC shall assign to every SAD which it supports, prior to
transmittal of the SAD Engineer's Report to the Mayor, a priority for
scheduling its progress relative to all approved SADs as well as those SADs for
which a "Request for Construction of Public Improvements by the Special
Assessment District Method" have been received. The SRC will report to the
Mayor its proposed revisions to SAD development schedules together with the SAD
Engineer's Report. The SRC report will include an analysis of the effect of any
revised prioritization of Active Special Assessment Districts and the
consequences of such revised prioritization on the schedule for completion of
Active Special Assessment Districts.
   (D)   The Mayor shall review the SRC recommendation and the SAD Engineer's
Report. At his discretion, the Mayor may call for additional information from
the SRC or the SAD Engineer. If the Mayor decides that creation of the SAD
should be recommended, the Mayor will direct the SAD Engineer to prepare a
transmittal memo to the City Council transmitting the SAD Engineer's Report for
review and approval. The memo will be prepared for the Mayor's signature. If
the Mayor decides that the creation of the SAD will not be recommended, the SAD
Engineer shall prepare a memorandum that will be attached to the SAD Engineer's
Report stating the reasons for the Mayor's decision not to recommend creation
of the SAD. The SAD Engineer shall then notify, in writing, all persons who
requested the improvements in the SAD, of the Mayor's decision.
   (E)   Subsequent to the Mayor's approval of recommending the creation of the
SAD, the SAD Engineer's Report, SRC Report and transmittal letter as signed by
the SRC shall be sent to the City Council for a decision as to the propriety of
initiating the proposed SAD as recommended by the Mayor. The SAD Engineer will
make a presentation to the City Council describing the need for the SAD and the
specific improvements therein. With City Council approval of the SAD Engineer's
Report, the SAD Engineer shall proceed to the selection of a Consulting
Engineer for the SAD. The selection of the Consulting Engineer shall be made
pursuant to and in accordance with the Selection Advisory Committee Ordinance.
   (F)   Expenditure of City Funds. The expenditure of city funds for an SAD
prior to adoption of the resolution modifying, confirming and approving the
Assessment Roll for such SAD (commonly known as Resolution No. 5) will be
limited to preliminary expenditures such as architectural, engineering,
surveying, soil testing, appraisal, real property record searches, and similar
preliminary expenditures and, until such time, no city funds will be spent on
costs of materials for the construction of SAD improvements. The city may
acquire public right-of-way and make other expenditures related to a particular
SAD which may be reimbursed from proceeds of bonds for the SAD only upon
satisfaction of the requirements of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986, as
amended, for declaring the intent of the city to reimburse such expenditures
from bond proceeds.
(Ord. 44-1996)
PART 3: PROPOSAL OF SAD
§ 6-8-3-1 RESOLUTION NO. 1—PROPOSING SAD.
   (A)   Content. Resolution No. 1 is prepared by the Consulting Engineer. It
expresses the Council's intent to create a Special Assessment District. It
instructs the Consulting Engineer to prepare preliminary plans, cost estimate,
assessment plats and estimated maximum benefit roll, a fiscal impact analysis
and a consulting engineer's report, including the method(s) to be used in
determining assessments and further provides an appropriation for design costs
associated with the SAD.
   (B)   Procedure. Resolution No. 1 is submitted by the Mayor to the City
Council for approval. In the transmittal letter to the Council President, the
Mayor provides estimates of the amounts (including both design and construction
costs) and nature of city funds that will be required by the SAD. Upon approval
by the City Council of Resolution No. 1, the SAD Engineer authorizes the
Consulting Engineer to proceed with the next items of work specified in the
engineering services agreement.
(Ord. 44-1996)
§ 6-8-3-2 ESTABLISHING ESTIMATED MAXIMUM BENEFITS.
   The basis for the legal authority to impose a special assessment for
improvements of any character is the special benefit which the improvement
confers on the tracts or parcels of property to be assessed. This special
benefit is different from the general benefit which the owners enjoy in common
with the other citizens of the city. Special benefit is to be distinguished
from general benefit in that a special benefit is realized directly by the
property being assessed as the result of the improvement(s) as opposed to a
general benefit which is received by all other citizens of the city.
(Ord. 44-1996)
§ 6-8-3-3 ASSESSMENT METHODS AND DETAILS.
   (A)   General Considerations. There are various possible methods of
assessing costs for SAD improvements. These include, but are not necessarily
limited to, the front-foot method, the land area method, valuation of property
method, benefit zone method and service unit method. The Consulting Engineer
shall determine which assessment method(s) to use (either these or any other
equitable methods) and shall provide the rationale for the selected method(s)
to the City Council as part of the consulting engineer's report.
   (B)   Assessment for Street Intersections.
      (1)   Intersections provide access to property by connecting one street
to another street. Benefits for egress and ingress are properly allocable to
properties in each direction from the intersection. The benefits cease upon
reaching a point halfway to the next intersection because the shortest distance
to an intersection normally provides the most rapid means of egress and ingress
to property.
      (2)   Assessments for the cost of constructing an intersection shall be
based upon a proration of that cost to properties half the distance in each
possible direction to the next intersection, provided that this proration is
equitable to all such properties in each possible direction.
   (C)   Assessment for Multi-Level Interchanges. Multi-level interchanges
provide indirect access to property by connecting one street to another street.
Benefits to property from multi-level interchanges are similar to those from
at-grade intersections, but may be more extensive geographically. Multi-level
interchange assessments shall be based on one of the following methods:
      (1) Normal street intersection assessment policy (see division (B) of
this section);
      (2) Area-wide assessment; or
      (3) Any other method determined to be equitable.
   (D)   Assessments for Paving.
      (1) Benefited property will be assessed the cost of half the width of
paving to be installed up to a half-width of 24 feet. For assessment purposes,
paving widths are measured from lip of gutter to lip of gutter. All paving
costs in excess of half-width of 24 feet will be paid by the city.
      (2) If arterial-type paving is to be installed, the city pays the
difference between the arterial paving section and a comparable residential
paving section for any residential property benefited by the street
improvements.
      (3) Payments for the cost of constructing the nearest intersection(s)
shall be based upon a proration of the intersection construction cost to
properties half the distance in each possible direction from the next
intersection, provided that this proration shall be equal to all such
properties. In any case where equal proration cannot be made, the city shall
pay the amount required to effect equal proration.
      (4)   Curb and gutter, and sidewalk and drivepads, if not existing, shall
be installed according to provisions of the City Sidewalk Ordinance. Benefited
property will be assessed the cost of these improvements.
      (5)   Double Frontage Property. Double frontage property is defined as
property that has streets on opposite sides. In order for such property to be
assessed for street improvements, it must have vehicular access to the street
being improved, unless there is some other direct benefit that accrues to the
property. If this access is not permitted, and no other direct benefit accrues
to the property from the street improvements, the city shall pay for the cost
of the street improvements abutting the property.
      (6)   Corner Property. Corner property is defined as property that has
streets on adjacent sides. In order for such property to be assessed for street
improvements vehicular access must be permitted to the street being improved,
unless there is some other direct benefit that accrues to the property. If this
access is not permitted, and no other direct benefit accrues to the property
from the street improvements, the city shall pay for the cost of the street
improvements abutting the property.
   (E)   Assessments for Water and Sanitary Sewers. The following requirements
are based upon the city's water and sewer extension and expansion policies
which are available at the City Clerk's Office, which policies may be modified,
amended, or repealed, in whole or in part, by subsequent City Council action.
      (1) Single-family detached residences, townhouses, duplexes or triplexes
served by common or individual meters, and mobile homes served by individual
meters or lands to be developed in this manner shall be responsible for the
equivalent cost of eight-inch water and/or sanitary sewer lines that are
accessible to and can serve the property. All other properties shall be
responsible for the equivalent cost of 12-inch water and/or sanitary sewer
lines that are accessible to and can serve the properties.
      (2)   In situations not covered by other policies or ordinances of the
city, the cost of water and sanitary sewer lines will be paid for by the
owners.
      (3)   Other Property that has Water and/or Sewer Lines on More than One
Side. Such property shall be charged for all adjoining lines as provided
herein.
      (4)   Loop Lines and Fire Protection. Notwithstanding the provisions
herein, if water loop lines or lines for fire protection are necessary to
provide adequate service and/or fire protection to the property, it shall be
charged for such lines.
   (F)   Assessments for Storm Sewer and Drainage.
      (1)   Special benefits (access, contribution, protection) are derived
from construction of storm drainage improvements. Properties to be assessed
utilizing a contribution method will receive a pro-rata Special Assessment
based on the total number of square feet included in the drainage basin served
by the storm drainage improvement. Properties to be assessed utilizing
protection or access methods will receive a Special Assessment determined on a
case-by-case basis by the Consulting Engineer for the SAD after consultation
with the SAD Engineer.
      (2)   Crossing of major arroyos by arterial and collector streets may be
at public expense. "Major arroyo" means any channel whose watershed exceeds 320
acres in a 100 year design storm whether such watershed is in its natural or
unaltered state or has been altered by development, runoff diversions, or
detention facilities.
      (3)   The city will be charged for storm sewer and storm drainage special
benefits to public property and its portion of right-of-way drainage on all
arterial streets.
   (G)   Assessments for Landscaping. If landscaping of medians and the setback
area between the back of the curb and the sidewalk is to be included in an SAD,
the city must agree to maintain the landscaping or the owner(s) must execute an
agreement running with the land that provides for maintenance of the
landscaping. Otherwise, landscaping will not be allowed to be included in the
SAD.
   (H)   Assessments for Other Improvements. Special Assessments for
improvements not specifically described in this section will be determined on a
case-by-case basis by the Consulting Engineer for the SAD after consultation
with the SAD Engineer.
   (I)   Costs and Expenses Included in a Special Assessment. The Consulting
Engineer shall include in each special assessment all costs and expenses deemed
necessary to pay for SAD improvements and for the issuance of bonds to finance
the SAD improvements, including but not limited to advertising, appraising, tax
reimbursement, capital improvement, expansion, construction period interest,
reserve fund, financing, interest on city fund advances for the SAD, bond
underwriting, legal, engineering, and printing expenses.
(Ord. 44-1996)
PART 4: NOTIFICATION OF PROPERTY OWNERS
§ 6-8-4-1 RESOLUTION NO. 2—PROVISIONAL ORDER.
   (A)   Content. Resolution No. 2 tentatively approves the preliminary plans,
cost estimates, assessment plats, consulting engineer's report, Estimated
Maximum Benefit Roll, estimated assessments and provisionally orders the
construction of the proposed improvements. Resolution No. 2 also provides for
notification of all affected record owners, and sets a date for a protest
hearing at which record owners and any interested persons may state their
objections to the proposed SAD.
   (B)   Action by Consulting Engineer. The Consulting Engineer will submit a
copy of the consulting engineer's report, the Estimated Maximum Benefit Roll,
the estimated assessments, the assessment plats and Resolution No. 2 to the
Bond Attorney, the Department of Finance and Administrative Services and the
City Legal Department for review and approval. Upon completion of any required
changes and approval by the Bond Attorney, the Department of Finance and
Administrative Services and the City Legal Department, the Consulting Engineer
will then submit the following material to the SAD Engineer:
      (1)   Consulting Engineer's Report;
      (2)   Estimated Maximum Benefit Roll;
      (3)   Assessment plats (including typical construction sections and
details);
      (4)   Resolution No. 2;
      (5)   Preliminary plans.
(Ord. 44-1996)
§ 6-8-4-2 PROTEST HEARING.
   (A)   (1)   Protest Hearing Notice. Subsequent to the passage of Resolution
No. 2, which establishes the date for the protest hearing, the SAD Engineer
will send out protest hearing notices to the record owners of benefited
property. A cover letter will be included with each hearing notice to further
explain the subject of the notice, the effect of the notice, and procedures for
objection to the proposed improvements. A separate notice for each tract or
parcel included in the proposed SAD will be prepared; however, multiple notices
may be sent in one envelope to Record Owners who own more than one tract or
parcel in the proposed SAD. The notices will be mailed by certified mail,
return receipt requested. Notices shall be mailed not more than 30 days nor
less than ten days prior to the hearing.
      (2)   The protest hearing notice shall also be published in a newspaper
of general circulation in the city once each week for three consecutive weeks.
The last publication shall be at least one week prior to the day of the
hearing. Verification of publication shall be made by an affidavit of the
publisher filed with the City Clerk.
   (B)   Protest Hearing. The SAD Engineer will obtain copies of all protests
that have been received by the City Clerk prior to the hearing and provide them
to the City Council and the Consulting Engineer. Any written protests received
by the City Council at the hearing will be turned over to the SAD Engineer for
deposit with the City Clerk and with the Consulting Engineer. The Consulting
Engineer will attend the protest hearing to record verbal protests and answer
questions pertinent to the SAD.
(Ord. 44-1996)
§ 6-8-4-3 RESOLUTION NO. 3—CREATING SAD.
   (A)   Disposition of Protests. After the protest hearing, the Consulting
Engineer will assemble a tabulation of the protest correspondence and the oral
protests given at the hearing. The tabulation shall include a recommendation
for disposition of each protest, after consultation with the SAD Engineer. (A
copy of the final recommendation shall be mailed to each protestor before City
Council action on Resolution No. 3.) The Consulting Engineer will also prepare
assessment plats identifying properties for which protests have been received
for City Council use.
   (B)   Preparation of Resolution No. 3. The Consulting Engineer will prepare
Resolution No. 3 based on the recommendations for disposition of the protests.
Resolution No. 3 will provide an appropriation for construction and other
necessary costs associated with the SAD.
   (C)   Action by Consulting Engineer. The Consulting Engineer will submit
Resolution No. 3 and the tabulation of protests to the Bond Attorney and the
City Legal Department for review and approval. Upon completion of any required
changes and approval by the Bond Attorney and the City Legal Department, the
Consulting Engineer will then submit Resolution No. 3 and the tabulation of
protests to the SAD Engineer for transmittal to the City Council. The City
Council will act on Resolution No. 3 at the time and date previously
established by the City Council.
   (D)   Upon the adoption of Resolution No. 3 by the City Council, the
Estimated Maximum Benefit Roll showing the legal description of the property to
be included in the SAD and the record owners thereof will be recorded with the
Bernalillo County Clerk, which recording shall constitute notice of the
pendency of the Special Assessments.
   (E)   Private Construction of Sidewalk and/or Drivepad. If the SAD contains
only sidewalk and/or drivepad improvements or if a portion of the SAD contains
only sidewalk and/or drivepad improvements, the owners so affected will be
given the opportunity to construct these improvements themselves or by private
contract. Subsequent to the passage of Resolution No. 3 by the City Council,
the Consulting Engineer will furnish the SAD Engineer with a listing of item
numbers, owner's name and address, and printed address labels for those types
of improvements. The SAD Engineer will send a letter to each affected owner
notifying them of their opportunity to construct the sidewalk and/or drivepad
improvements themselves or by private contract. A final date will be given when
owners must obtain a sidewalk and/or drivepad construction permit from the city
and pay all fees. The SAD Engineer will send the letters by certified mail not
later than 15 days before the final day established for obtaining a
construction permit. The letters will establish a deadline of 30 days after
obtaining the permit for completion of the sidewalk construction and approval
of the construction by the City Construction Engineer. All sidewalk and/or
drivepad improvements that have been constructed and approved within this time
limit shall be deleted from the SAD.
   (F)   New Curb Openings and Drivepads. During the final design phase, the
Consulting Engineer will prepare letters to all owners who will benefit from
street improvements (paving, curb/gutter and sidewalk) abutting their property,
notifying them of the procedure to follow if they want a drivepad constructed
on their vacant property or if they want the width or location of their new
drivepad changed. A cutoff date for making application for these additional
improvements will be given in the letter. The SAD Engineer shall send the
letters to the owners, by certified mail, not later than 15 days prior to the
cutoff date contained in the letter. The Consulting Engineer will incorporate
all approved applications for curb openings and drivepads into the final plans
and specifications for the SAD.
   (G)   Right-of-Way Certificate. Prior to advertisement for bids, the Real
Property Division shall certify that all public right-of-way, easements, or
right-of-entry have been acquired, as necessary for the particular SAD.
   (H)   Contract Documents, Advertising and Receipt of Bids. After the passage
of Resolution No. 3 the Consulting Engineer proceeds with preparation of the
final plans and specifications and contract documents. Subsequent to approval
of these items by the City Design Review Committee, the SAD is advertised for
receipt of construction bids.
(Ord. 44-1996)
PART 5: ASSESSMENT PROCESS
§ 6-8-5-1 CONTRACT AWARD.
   Once the recommendation of award for the construction contract has been made
by the Consulting Engineer and approved by appropriate personnel of the city
responsible for purchase of construction for capital projects under the Public
Purchases Ordinance, the SAD Engineer will prepare a resolution for City
Council approval which awards the construction contract to the selected
contractor. The contractor shall not be given notice to proceed under the
construction contract until passage by the City Council of Resolution No. 5.
(Ord. 44-1996)
§ 6-8-5-2 RESOLUTION NO. 4—NOTICE OF ASSESSMENT ROLL HEARING.
   Resolution No. 4, prepared by the Consulting Engineer, tentatively approves
the Assessment Roll and sets a date, time and place for a public hearing on the
Assessment Roll. It also establishes the format for and directs the giving of
the notice of the assessment hearing.
(Ord. 44-1996)
§ 6-8-5-3 ASSESSMENT HEARING.
   (A)   (1)   Assessment Hearing Notice. Subsequent to the passage of
Resolution No. 4, the SAD Engineer will send out assessment hearing notices to
the record owners of benefited property. A cover letter will be included with
each hearing notice to further explain the subject of the notice, the effect of
the notice, and procedures for objection to the assessments for the
Improvements. A separate notice for each lot or tract included in the SAD will
be prepared; however, multiple notices may be sent in one envelope to record
owners who own more than one lot or tract in the SAD. The notices will be
mailed by certified mail, return receipt requested. Notices shall be mailed not
more than 30 days nor less than ten days prior to the hearing.
      (2)   The assessment hearing notice shall also be published in a
newspaper of general circulation in the city once each week for three
consecutive weeks. The last publication shall be at least one week prior to the
day of the hearing. Verification of publication shall be made by an affidavit
of the publisher filed with the City Clerk.
   (B)   Assessment Hearing. Not later than three days before the day of the
assessment hearing on the assessment roll, any record owner of a lot or tract
listed on the assessment roll may file specific objections in writing with the
City Clerk. The SAD Engineer obtains copies of all objections that have been
received by the City Clerk and provides them to the City Council and the
Consulting Engineer. The Consulting Engineer will attend the assessment hearing
to answer questions pertinent to the Special Assessments.
(Ord. 44-1996)
§ 6-8-5-4 RESOLUTION NO. 5—MODIFYING AND CONFIRMING ASSESSMENT ROLL.
   (A)   Disposition of Objections. After the assessment hearing, the
Consulting Engineer will prepare a tabulation of objections filed with the City
Clerk. The Consulting Engineer will include in this tabulation a recommendation
for disposition of each objection, after consultation with the SAD Engineer. A
copy of the final recommendation shall be mailed to each objecting record owner
before Council action on Resolution No. 5.
   (B)   Preparation of Resolution No. 5. The Consulting Engineer will prepare
Resolution No. 5 based on the recommendations contained in the tabulation of
objections from the assessment hearing. Resolution No. 5 modifies (if
required), validates and confirms the Assessment Roll for the SAD.
(Ord. 44-1996)
§ 6-8-5-5 ASSESSING ORDINANCE.
   The Bond Attorney will prepare the Assessing Ordinance for the SAD with the
assistance of the Consulting Engineer, the SAD Engineer and the Department of
Finance and Administrative Services. After review of the Assessing Ordinance by
the City Legal Department, the Consulting Engineer and the SAD Engineer will be
responsible for introduction and approval of the assessing ordinance by the
City Council. The assessing ordinance ratifies the proceedings taken in the
creation of the SAD, provides for payment of the costs and expenses of the
improvements, provides for filing a claim of lien in the office of the County
Clerk, assesses the cost of the improvements against the tracts and parcels of
property benefited by the improvements and establishes a penalty for delinquent
payments. Terms of assessments may vary in different SADs depending on
circumstances, but shall not exceed 20 years in duration.
(Ord. 44-1996)
PART 6: BONDS TO FINANCE CONSTRUCTION
§ 6-8-6-1 BOND ORDINANCE.
   The Bond Attorney will prepare the bond ordinance for the SAD with the
assistance of the Department of Finance and Administrative Services. The bond
ordinance sets forth the terms and provisions of the bonds payable from special
assessment liens imposed on the tracts and parcels of property in the SAD and
from any supplemental revenues pledged for payment of the bonds. Terms of bonds
may vary in different SADs depending on circumstances, but shall not exceed a
maximum maturity of 20 years.
(Ord. 44-1996)
§ 6-8-6-2 CITY CREDIT SUPPORT.
   (A)   Public financing will be permitted for improvements that benefit the
tracts or parcels of property in the SAD if the useful life of the Improvements
will be equal to or greater than the term of the bonds.
   (B)   The city may pledge supplemental revenues to bonds only for SADs where
(a) the city owns the improvements; (b) the SAD is contiguous to existing urban
facilities or services (including improvements located in Bernalillo County);
and (c) the SAD is for the benefit of areas within the city limits.
Notwithstanding the condition set forth in clause (c) of the preceding
sentence, the city may pledge supplemental revenues to bonds for an SAD for the
benefit of the city, in the instance of an obsolete subdivision as defined in
this article and when the SAD will improve transportation, storm drainage,
water and sewer system or other infrastructure deficiencies, as certified by
the Mayor and recommended by the Environmental Planning Commission. The
Environmental Planning Commission review shall occur prior to preparation of
Resolution No. 1 and, in reviewing the SAD, the Environmental Planning
Commission shall consider the factors set forth in §
6-8-2-1. After completing the review, the Environmental Planning Commission
shall prepare and submit a written recommendation to the City Council on
whether the SAD should be approved. Bonds for a SAD not meeting the preceding
conditions of this subsection will be issued only to the extent that the owner
(s) of the improvements to be constructed or the owners of the benefitted
property provide credit enhancement for the bonds in an adequate amount to
obtain an investment grade bond rating from at least one national rating
agency.
   (C)   Each bond issue shall be structured to adequately protect bond owners
and to avoid a negative impact on the bonding capacity or credit rating of the
city. This shall be accomplished through the prudent requirement of a
combination of credit enhancement, minimum property value/lien ratios, special
reserve funds or deposits and/or contractual commitments by owners and their
successors. Specifically:
      (1) If an owner of property within the boundaries of a proposed SAD will
be responsible for payment of 20% or more of the proposed total special
assessment liens in the SAD, then such owner will be required to obtain, pay
for and submit to the city, an appraisal performed by a master appraisal
institute certified appraiser on the property of the owner to be assessed which
demonstrates a minimum property value/lien ratio of 3:1 (after installation of
the proposed improvements in the SAD, including overlapping assessments).
      (2) The city may require that credit enhancement be added to the
structure in order to insure underwriting by reasonably limiting the risks of
prospective bond holders. The cost of such credit enhancement shall be borne by
the owners in proportion to the fraction which their assessments contribute to
the total assessments for such series.
      (3) The city may require that capitalized interest on the bonds be funded
from the proceeds of the bonds. The term of capitalized interest shall not
exceed 24 months, or a shorter period at discretion of the city. Interest
earnings on capitalized interest deposits may at the city's discretion be
applied to pay either principal or interest on the bonds.
      (4) A reserve fund equal to the lesser of 10% of the original principal
amount of the bonds, maximum annual debt service, or 125% of average annual
debt service may be funded from the proceeds of each series of bonds and:
         (a)   Shall be subject to lien and included in the principal amounts
of special assessment liens;
         (b)   Shall be credited against special assessment liens on a pro rata
basis upon an event of a payment of special assessments prior to the maturity
of the bonds;
         (c)   Shall be used to liquidate final principal and interest payments
due on outstanding bonds;
         (d)   Interest earnings on reserve funds shall be credited to debt
service payments on the series of bonds for which the reserve was established.
   (D)   Multiple special assessment bond issues shall be structured with
approximate level aggregate principal payments. To the extent that bonds are
issued in series, some individual series of bonds may have an uneven debt
service due to structuring the combined debt service at such time as all series
of bonds are issued.
   (E)   The city may extend the billing date for the first installment of a
special assessment lien until construction of the improvements is substantially
completed; provided, however, that such billing date shall not be extended
beyond the period during which debt service on the SAD bonds is covered by
capitalized interest.
   (F)   The city will include provisions in the special assessment to allow a
rebate or credit, as appropriate, to owners if actual final construction and/or
financing costs are lower than the amounts provided by the special assessment.
   (G)   Commitments to new SADs will be approved only to the extent that the
amount of pledged supplemental revenues for any particular series of bonds for
any 12 consecutive month period ending no earlier than 45 days immediately
preceding the date of adoption of the ordinance authorizing additional bonds or
for the immediately preceding fiscal year of the city shall have been
sufficient to pay an amount representing 125% of the combined maximum annual
debt service requirements coming due in any subsequent fiscal year on the
proposed series of bonds and all outstanding bonds with a senior or parity lien
on the pledged supplemental revenues.
   (H)   All prepayments of special assessment liens shall be paid as if paid
on a semi-annual basis and shall include net interest payable at the next semi-
annual special assessment lien payment date.
   (I)   The interest rate on special assessment liens shall be determined by
adding an interest rate differential of 1.5% to the initial average rate of
interest for the combined series of SAD bonds issued for an individual SAD to
compensate the city for its indirect costs attributable to administration of
the overall city SAD program and the basis for the interest rate differential
need not be reconcilable to the specific cost associated with an individual
SAD.
   (J)   The interest rate differential, at the discretion of the city, may be
recovered over the life of a bond issue as part of the interest component of
the semi-annual payments of special assessment liens or included in the special
assessments or special assessment liens, or both, and in the principal amount
of a bond issue and payable to the city at closing in an amount calculated as
the present value of the stream of semi-annual payments discounted at the
arbitrage yield of the bond issue.
   (K)   The interest rate differential included in special assessment lien
payments attributable to a specific SAD bond series may, at the discretion of
the city, be pledged as credit support to the payment of those bonds. If such
credit support is utilized to pay debt service on the bonds because of a
shortfall in payment of the special assessment liens, the city shall be
reimbursed from future payments on the delinquent special assessment liens or,
after foreclosure, from proceeds of the sale of the property subject to the
special assessment liens.
   (L)   The city may impose a credit enhancement fee for a particular series
of bonds to which the city has pledged supplemental revenues which fee may be
in an amount approximately equivalent to fees charged by traditional providers
of similar credit enhancement. The fee may be included in the special
assessments or the special assessment liens, or both, at the discretion of the
city.
(Ord. 44-1996; Am. Ord._2017-008)
PART 7: BILLING AND COLLECTION OF ASSESSMENTS
§ 6-8-7-1 INITIAL BILLING.
   (A)   Thirty-Day Cash Pay Period. The assessing ordinance may establish a
30-day (or shorter) cash pay period that begins the day after the date of
publication of the assessing ordinance. The Department of Finance and
Administrative Services sends a bill to each record owner in the SAD giving the
assessed amounts for each improvement. Special assessments may be paid, in
whole or in part, without interest during the 30-day (or shorter) cash pay
period. Any unpaid assessments shall be payable in accordance with the
procedures established in the assessing ordinance.
   (B)   Sale of Bonds. After expiration of the established cash pay period,
the Department of Finance and Administrative Services, determines the amounts
of special assessments that are unpaid. A series of bonds for the SAD may then
be issued and sold. The actual rate of interest or method of determining the
actual rate of interest to be paid by the record owners or owners on the
special assessment liens is determined at the time of sale of the bonds.
(Ord. 44-1996)
§ 6-8-7-2 COLLECTION OF ASSESSMENTS.
   The Department of Finance and Administrative Services shall establish
appropriate accounts for each item number for each SAD and shall be responsible
for billing and collecting the semi-annual assessment installments as well as
final payments on each special assessment lien. Any modifications or
adjustments to the special assessment liens due to sale, division or transfer
of property affected by special assessment liens is also the responsibility of
the Department of Finance and Administrative Services.
(Ord. 44-1996)
PART 8: RATIFICATION AND
ADJUSTMENT OF ASSESSMENTS
§ 6-8-8-1 RATIFICATION AND ADJUSTMENT OF ASSESSMENTS.
   (A)   Ratification.
      (1)   Completed applications for ratification of additional improvements
must be received at least 15 days prior to the estimated date of adoption of
Resolution No. 4 by the City Council.
      (2)   An application for ratification must be submitted to the SAD
Engineer on prescribed forms containing at least the following information:
         (a)   Description of improvement to be added or deleted.
         (b)   Legal description, district and item number of property to be
assessed to which the improvement is to be added or deleted.
         (c)   The name and address of the record owner with evidence of
ownership such as warranty deed, title insurance policy, real estate contract,
title company certification, which evidence must be acceptable to the SAD
Engineer.
         (d)   The request and consent of the record owner (consent of a
contract seller may not be required at the discretion of the city) to adjust
the benefits or cost of the assessment, and an agreement not to protest or
contest same, and to be personally liable for any additional cost thereof in
the event that such expense cannot be successfully recovered by foreclosure of
the lien.
         (e)   Payment of engineering or other expenses necessitated by the
requested addition or deletion of improvements.
         (f)   Approval by applicable city departments and/or agencies.
         (g)   Other information that may be required by the Mayor.
      (3)   The Consulting Engineer, in conjunction with the SAD Engineer,
shall review and the SAD Engineer shall make a determination as to whether or
not the application shall be granted.
            (a)   Factors that may be taken into consideration in making this
decision are:
               1.   Completeness, sufficiency and timeliness of the
application.
               2.   Ownership verification.
               3.   Timing of construction bids.
               4.   Approval of applicable city departments and/or agencies.
               5.   Payment of all applicable consulting, engineering and other
fees and costs.
      (4)   No ratification shall be considered after the time limitation set
forth herein, and any request for such improvements must be handled in the same
manner as if no SAD was involved.
   (B)   Adjustment of Assessment Prior to the Adoption of Resolution No. 4.
      (1)   Completed applications for adjustment of assessment must be
received at least 15 days prior to the estimated date of adoption of Resolution
No. 4 by the City Council.
      (2)   Application for Adjustment of Assessment must be submitted to the
SAD Engineer on prescribed forms containing at least the following information:
         (a)   Names and addresses of the record owners.
         (b)   District, item number, and legal description.
         (c)   New legal description(s) and proposed plat should accompany
application.
         (d)   Names and addresses of all the record owners to be assessed
including any new record owners, with evidence of ownership, such as warranty
deed, title insurance policy, real estate contract, title company
certification, which evidence must be acceptable to the SAD Engineer.
         (e)   Request and consent of the record owners to the proposed
adjustment of the assessment and agreement to be personally liable for the
assessment in the event it cannot be successfully enforced by a lien
foreclosure.
         (f)   Payment of engineering or other expenses necessitated by the
requested adjustment or assessment.
         (g)   Approval of all applicable city departments and/or agencies.
         (h)   Other information that may be required by the Mayor.
      (3)   The Consulting Engineer, in conjunction with the SAD Engineer,
shall review and the SAD Engineer shall make a determination as to whether or
not the application shall be granted.
         (a)   Factors that may be taken into consideration in making this
decision are:
            1.   Completeness and sufficiency of application.
            2.   Ownership verification.
            3.   Timing of construction.
            4.   Approval of applicable city departments and/or agencies and
boards.
            5.   Approval of Legal Department and Bond Attorney.
            6.   Payment of all fees and costs.
      (4)   No adjustment of assessments under this section shall be considered
after the time limitation set forth herein.
      (5)   The method of assessment on the adjustment of assessments may vary
from the original assessment. For example, the original assessment may be on a
front foot basis and the adjustment of assessments on an area basis.
   (C) Adjustment of Assessment Subsequent to the Adoption of Resolution No. 4.
      (1)   There shall be no adjustment of assessments subsequent to the City
Council's adoption of Resolution No. 4 until the special assessment lien is
filed on the subject property.
      (2)   Completed applications for adjustment of assessment thereafter must
be submitted to the Department of Finance and Management on prescribed forms
containing at least the following information:
         (a)   Names and addresses of the assessed property owners.
         (b)   District, lien number, legal description and amount of the
assessment.
         (c)   New legal description and plat should accompany application.
         (d)   Names and addresses of the record owners with evidence of
ownership such as, warranty deed, title insurance policy, real estate contract,
title company certification, which evidence must be acceptable to the SAD
Engineer.
         (e)   Request and consent of the record owners to the proposed
adjustment of assessment, and agreement to be personally liable for the
assessment in the event it cannot be successfully enforced by a lien
foreclosure.
         (f)   Payment of a city non-refundable processing fee in the amount of
$100.
         (g)   Payment of consulting engineering or other expenses necessitated
by the requested adjustment of assessment shall be the responsibility of the
applicant.
         (h)   Approval of all applicable city departments and/or agencies and
boards as provided for in the Subdivision Ordinance.
         (i)   Other information that may be required by the Mayor.
      (3)   The SAD Engineer, in conjunction with the Department of Finance and
Administrative Services and the Legal Department, shall review and make a
determination as to whether or not the application shall be granted.
         (a)   Factors that may be taken into consideration in making this
decision are:
            1.   Completeness and sufficiency of application.
            2.   Ownership and encumbrance verification.
            3.   Approval of subordination agreements and/or other security.
            4.   Approval of applicable city departments and/or agencies.
            5.   Payment of all fees and costs.
      (4)   The method of assessment on the adjustment of assessment may vary
from the original assessment. For example, the original assessment may be on a
front foot basis and the adjustment of assessment on an area basis.
      (5)   Upon approval of the adjustment of assessment, new special
assessment liens shall be filed and they shall be entitled to the statutory
priority as provided for in 3-33-23 NMSA 1978.
   (D)   Plats and Replats.
      (1)   Prior to approval of all plats and replats by the city they shall
be submitted to the SAD Engineer to be reviewed in order to determine whether
or not such property is in an Active Special Assessment District.
      (2)   In the event such plat involves property in an Active Special
Assessment District, one of the following applicable procedures must be adhered
to prior to approval of the plat by the city.
         (a)   The special assessment or special assessment lien must be paid
in full.
         (b)   If Resolution No. 4 has not been adopted and the adjustment of
assessment can be accomplished as provided for in division (B) of this section,
such procedure may be followed.
         (c)   If neither of the above procedures is utilized, then the
procedure set forth in division (B) of this section must be followed.
      (3)   No plat or replat involving property which is subject to special
assessments in an active special assessment district shall be approved by the
city until the requirements of this policy have been met.
   (E)   Collection of New Assessments. Once a ratification or adjustment of
assessment has been completed and approved, a copy of the agreement containing
the new descriptions including, where applicable, a copy of the recorded plat
and assessments, shall be forwarded to the Department of Finance and
Administrative Services for processing and collection according to normal
procedures.
   (F)   Appeals. Appeals from the decisions of the SAD Engineer concerning
ratification and adjustment of assessments shall be to the Property Review
Board.
   (G)   Forms. Appropriate forms shall be adopted to implement this policy and
procedure.
(Ord. 44-1996)
PART 9: REVIEW OF SAD
§ 6-8-9-1 ADMINISTRATIVE REVIEW.
   All SAD legislation shall be subject to the normal administrative reviews.
(Ord. 44-1996)
§ 6-8-9-2 QUARTERLY REPORTS.
   The SAD Engineer shall provide quarterly SAD reports to the City Council.
(Ord. 44-1996)
ARTICLE 9: PUBLIC IMPROVEMENT DISTRICTS
Section
   
6-9-1   General policies
   
6-9-2   Pre-application discussion with city staff
   
6-9-3   Content of application
   
6-9-4   Application procedures
   
6-9-5   PID operations and debt financing
   
6-9-6   Financial considerations
   
6-9-7   PID Board election procedures
§ 6-9-1 GENERAL POLICIES.
   (A)   PIDs should be utilized primarily in connection with the financing of
infrastructure for development of residential projects, master planned
communities or substantial commercial development and redevelopment. PIDs may
also be utilized to provide an enhanced level of public infrastructure
amenities and/or municipal services. Public improvements financed by a PID
shall be in conformance with applicable long-range City policies for
development, including, but not limited to, the Albuquerque/Bernalillo County
Comprehensive Plan, the Subdivision Ordinance, the Integrated Development
Ordinance, City Ordinance Enactment No. 34-2002, the Ordinance adopting
elements of a Planned Growth Strategy; City Resolution No. F/S R-02-111(A)
relating to the Planned Growth Strategy Report, including the maps setting
forth the current service areas contained in Exhibit A thereto; the current
City enactment relating to the Capital Implementation Program; and all
supplements and subsequent enactments relating to these measures.
   (B)   All costs and expenses incurred by the City in connection with the
application, formation, and operation of a PID shall be paid by the applicant/
landowner through advance payments as provided in §
6-9-4(B) and §
6-9-5(A) hereof. Costs and expenses incurred by the City in connection with the
application and formation of a PID shall not be liabilities of the City.
Advance payments shall include payments for services rendered by City staff,
services rendered by outside consultants who may be retained by the City
including, but not limited to, bond counsel and other attorneys, financial
advisers, engineers, appraisers, and tax consultants. If the City uses outside
consultants as "staff," such as attorneys or engineers, those consultants shall
be paid their normal rate for services.
   (C)   Subsequent to the approval of an application for formation of a PID by
the City Council, and after authorization by the PID exercising its sole
discretion, all or part of such advance payments may be reimbursed to the
developer/landowner. Reimbursements from bond proceeds may be made to the
developer/landowner to the extent permitted by law, including federal tax law
providing for the issuance of tax exempt bonds. Reimbursement from PID bond
proceeds, PID levies, PID assessments, PID revenues or developer/landowner
equity contributions may be made to the developer/landowner, but in any event
the minimum equity contributions required in §
6-9-5(D)(5), (E)(5), (F)(6) and §
6-9-6(A) shall be maintained.
   (D)   This policy is adopted to provide ease of administration and the
largest tax/revenue base possible. The decision to form a PID shall be a
legislative enactment of the City Council and Mayor exercised in accordance
with law. The City shall encourage an area to be governed by as few PIDs as
possible, and a preference shall be given to one master PID.
   (E)   The PID shall be governed by a Board of Directors comprised of members
of the City Council, ex officio, or, at the option of the City Council, five
members appointed or elected pursuant to Sections 5-11-1 et seq. NMSA ("the
Act"). If the City Council is serving as the PID Board, the City Council may,
in accordance with law, delegate certain responsibilities of governance of the
PID to a committee as approved by the City Council. Advisory committees may, at
the option of the PID Board, be utilized.
   (F)   The PID must be self-supporting. Except as set forth in §
6-9-1(J), no City funds shall be used for PID purposes including financing,
operations or maintenance. Notwithstanding anything to the contrary which may
be contained herein, neither the property, the full faith and credit nor the
taxing power of the City shall be pledged to the payment of any PID obligation
or indebtedness.
   (G)   The PID Board shall determine, in accordance with its policies and
procedures, the amount, timing and form of financing to be used by a PID after
review of the financial feasibility study required by §
6-9-3(E) and (F) of this Ordinance. All bond proceeds generated by the
financing must be spent on project costs in accordance with the bond documents
and the policies and procedures of the PID Board. No financing shall be
undertaken in which any individual property owner shall be liable for more than
its equitable individual portion of the cost of the improvements. No water or
wastewater utility system, or any portion thereof, which is billed for separate
and apart from a City water or wastewater utility shall be financed. All
financings shall be subject to final review and approval by the City Council.
   (H)   Unless the City Council shall decide otherwise, the PID shall
construct or finance improvements on such terms and with such persons as the
PID Board determines to be appropriate, in accordance with Section 5-11-10(D)
NMSA 1978, as amended. The PID shall otherwise construct and finance
improvements in accordance with applicable public works acts. Construction,
performance, and payment bonds shall be furnished in accordance with the City
policies and procedures governing subdivision improvement agreements.
   (I)   Existing City policies for development, growth management and
conservation shall remain in effect and shall not be waived or relaxed upon the
creation of a PID. The PID may use bond proceeds or other PID funds to purchase
public rights-of-way or other real property to be used for public
infrastructure improvements, unless such real property would be required to be
dedicated and conveyed to the City by the developer/landowner upon development
of the developer's/landowner's property. Any agreements with the City regarding
the pro rata repayment of any charges shall require that such repayments be
used to reduce the principal of any financing.
   (J)   Until the dedication of the infrastructure to the City, and acceptance
by the City, all costs of administration and operation of the PID and the
operation and maintenance of public infrastructure in the PID shall be the
responsibility of the PID, the developer/landowner, applicable homeowners'
association, or any combination of the foregoing, as may be acceptable to the
City and the PID. After dedication, in any unserved areas, the developer/
landowner, applicable homeowners' association, or any combination of the
foregoing, shall continue to bear such costs until the PID is no longer within
an unserved area.
   (K)   Notwithstanding any other provisions of this Ordinance, a PID may be
created in an area not served by City water, wastewater, or storm drainage
utilities. Any PID created in an area not served by existing water, sewer or
storm drainage utilities shall be consistent with the parameters of the No Net
Expense Policy set forth in Section 6 of City Ordinance Enactment No. 34-2002,
and §
14-13-1-3 Revised Ordinances of Albuquerque, New Mexico, 1994. Developers in
unserved areas shall be required to pay 100% of all on-site and off-site
charges associated with the PID.
   (L)   The City's consent to any PID proposed to be formed in the City by
Bernalillo County shall be conditioned upon the PID following the procedures
set forth in this Ordinance. Any PID established by Bernalillo County outside
of the boundaries of the City but intending to rely upon City water, sewer or
storm drainage utilities shall be required to follow the procedures set forth
in this Ordinance in order to be served by City utilities. The provisions of
this Ordinance do not alter the line extension policy of the City.
(Ord. 12-2003; Am. Ord._2014-015; Am. Ord._2017-025)
§ 6-9-2 PRE-APPLICATION DISCUSSION WITH CITY STAFF.
   Potential applicants for a PID are encouraged to schedule and conduct a pre-
application meeting and discussion with City staff. Input provided by City
staff shall be of an advisory nature, for the purposes of assisting applicants
in submitting completed applications with detail and information required to
enable meaningful consideration by the City Council. The purposes of the pre-
application meeting shall be to:
   (A)   Make an initial assessment whether the proposed PID appears to be
consistent with the City's land use and development policies, zoning and other
applicable regulation;
   (B)   To help identify any related City approvals that will be required to
permit the PID.
   (C)   To identify other issues specific to the applicant's proposed project
that should be addressed in its application, such as compliance with the City's
growth policies, utility expansion policies, or other policies, rules or
regulations; and
   (D)   To establish a preliminary schedule for (i) the applicant's submittal
of a PID application, (ii) City PID staff review of the application for
completeness, (iii) City Council meeting or meetings for its consideration of
and action on the application.
(Ord. 12-2003)
§ 6-9-3 CONTENT OF APPLICATION.
   All applications for the formation of a PID shall be submitted to the City.
Each application shall, at a minimum, contain the following:
   (A)   A description of the proposed PID, including a legal description of
its boundaries, identity and addresses of all persons or entities with any
interest in the property, and the names and addresses of any qualified electors
(as defined in Section 3-1-2(K) NMSA 1978) located within the proposed
boundaries. The description must contain an analysis of the appropriateness of
the PID boundaries.
   (B)   Evidence satisfactory to the City of the unanimous consent of owners
of real property within the proposed boundaries of the PID to the creation of
the PID. A current title report on the property and a certificate from the
county clerk shall be submitted as evidence of the names of persons with any
interest in the land and qualified electors. In the event that any owner of
property with the proposed District withdraws consent to the creation of a PID,
the applicant shall have the opportunity to submit a revised application and
shall not be required to submit a new application fee as provided in §
6-9-4 ROA 1994; provided, that the City may request that the applicant deposit
additional funds to pay costs reasonably incurred by the City in reviewing an
application which has been revised as a result of a property owner's withdrawal
of consent to the creation of a PID.
   (C)   A detailed description of the types of public infrastructure to be
financed by the PID, including the estimated construction or acquisition costs
of the public infrastructure, projection of working capital needs, including
adequate funds for repair and replacement of infrastructure, the annual
operation and maintenance costs of the public infrastructure and the
governmental approvals and licenses that shall be required for both the public
and private improvements to be constructed and operated. The description shall
contain adequate information to establish financial parameters for the
operation and financing of the PID as set forth in §
6-9-5 ROA 1994. The description also shall contain information regarding the
future ownership and maintenance of infrastructure.
   (D)   A proposed project schedule for commencement and completion of (a) the
public infrastructure and (b) the private development, which shall include the
financial feasibility study required by §
6-9-3(E) ROA 1994 for the public infrastructure, including both capital and
operating/maintenance costs for all improvements undertaken by the PID. The
financial feasibility study shall include projections for a period which shall
be the longer of (i) the expected term of existence of the PID, (ii) thirty
years following the creation of a tax upon the PID taxable property, or (iii)
the final maturity date of any bonds issued by the PID. The financial
feasibility study shall include at least: (a) estimated costs of improvements;
(b) projected costs of maintenance after construction; and (c) a complete
description of the improvements to be owned and maintained by the City or the
PID.
   (E)   A financial feasibility study (which shall be satisfactory to the City
and prepared by an independent professional with appropriate expertise) for the
entire project (or such phases of the project that are expected to be
constructed during the term of the development) covering both the public
infrastructure and the private development. The financial feasibility study
shall include:
      (1)   An analysis of how the proposed debt financing, operation and
maintenance costs, user charges and other PID costs shall impact the ultimate
end users of the property, specifically projected property taxes, property tax
rates, special levies, special assessments, fees, charges and other costs that
would be borne by property in the PID. The analysis should also address the
impact these costs shall have on the marketability of the private development
and a comparison of proposed tax rates and charges in adjoining and similar
areas outside of the proposed PID.
      (2)   A financing plan for any private development in the PID which shall
not be dedicated to the City.
      (3)   A market absorption study for the private development in the PID
prepared by an independent consultant acceptable to the City. Such study shall
include estimates of the revenue to be generated by the development, an
estimate of the ability of the market to absorb the development, and a market
absorption calendar for the private development.
      (4)   An appraisal as described in §
6-9-5(C) ROA 1994 acceptable to the City. The City's acceptance of the
appraisal shall be conditioned upon a review and approval of the appraisal
prepared by a person who is designated as a Member Appraisal Institute ("MAI")
and a certified general real estate appraiser (such person hereafter referred
to as an "MAI Appraiser" chosen by the City at the cost of the developer). In
the event that the MAI Appraiser chosen by the City cannot approve the
appraisal, the appraisal shall be rejected and a new appraisal presented by the
MAI Appraiser chosen by the City shall be provided.
   (F)   A description of the proposed equity contribution from the applicant/
landowner and a calendar showing the timing and sources of such equity
contribution. The equity contributions shall be at least equal to those minimum
standards established in §§
6-9-5 and §
6-9-6 ROA 1994.
   (G)   A description of the applicant's professional experience and evidence
demonstrating its financial capacity to undertake the development associated
with the public infrastructure and private development. The application shall
also describe the direct and indirect benefits of all parties with financial
interest in the proposed development. If available, such information shall be
accompanied by three-year audited financial statements, along with a
description of past projects and disclosure of any material litigation.
   (H)   A disclosure form explaining the expected and possible tax, levy,
assessment and other financial burdens of the PID on prospective PID
landowners. Upon each sale of property in the PID, the applicant shall file and
record with the County Clerk a receipt, signed by the purchaser, that
acknowledges the purchaser's receipt of the disclosure form. The applicant
shall also supply the City with a copy of the receipt. Landowners/developers
are required to describe in their promotional material the financial and other
relative impacts on the development being included in a PID. Copies of the
disclosure form must be placed on file with the City. The City reserves the
right to reject any unacceptable version of the form. The disclosure form shall
inform all affected property owners that the PID will be fiscally self-
sufficient and will receive no direct or indirect financial support from the
City.
   (I)   An operating plan for the PID, i.e., what functions the PID shall
provide and how the operation and maintenance of the infrastructure and all
other services in the PID shall be provided.
   (J)   A description of how the proposed PID meets the existing development
objectives of the City, including the degree to which the PID is (1) consistent
with the goals of promoting orderly development, (2) consistent with the
Albuquerque/Bernalillo County Comprehensive Plan; (3) consistent with growth
management policies and zoning requirements, and (4) the degree to which the
land use plan for the PID is consistent with the City's applicable long-range
policies for development, growth management and conservation, including the
growth and infrastructure plan and zoning categories contained in City
Resolution No. F/S R-02-111(A).
   (K)   Such other information as the City may reasonably require after its
initial review of the application, including but not limited to preliminary
legal opinions, further information regarding the relationship of the
application to City's development objectives, additional proof of financial
capability, business references, term sheets for financing and financial
commitment letters.
(Ord. 12-2003)
§ 6-9-4 APPLICATION PROCEDURES.
   (A)   Ten (10) copies of the application for the formation of a PID shall be
submitted to the Mayor's Office, which shall coordinate an interdepartmental
analysis of each application.
   (B)   At the time of submission of the application, the applicant shall pay
a $20,000 non-refundable application fee and shall deposit an additional
$30,000 as an advance deposit on account to be applied by the City in its sole
discretion to the initial costs incurred in connection with the processing and
review of the application and the formation of the PID in accordance with the
provisions of §
6-9-1(B) ROA 1994. In calculating costs incurred by the City, the City may
include reasonable costs associated with the pre-application discussion
contained in §
6-9-2 ROA 1994. An accounting of all costs incurred by the City shall be made
to the applicant at its request and if reasonably necessary, additional funds
may be requested by the City and must be paid by the applicant. If an applicant
withdraws its application, the City shall return the unexpended portion of the
advance deposit; provided, that the City shall retain from those funds the
amounts necessary to pay costs incurred by the City but not yet paid by the
City at the time the application is withdrawn.
   (C)   At the applicant's request, the City staff shall present to the City
Council a non-binding resolution expressing the City's intent to proceed with
the formation of the PID. Such a resolution may be based upon a preliminary
application outline, containing, at a minimum, the following information: (i)
ownership of property proposed to be included in the PID; (ii) location and
boundaries of the proposed PID; (iii) general description of improvements to be
constructed with PID financing and estimated costs of construction; (iv)
estimated principal amount of PID bonds proposed to be issued; (v) estimated
maximum annual debt service on PID bonds, and (vi) estimated maximum annual PID
levy per parcel of real property located within the PID. The City Council may,
in its discretion and prior to the formation of the PID, adopt a resolution
expressing its intent to proceed with the formation of the PID, subject to such
conditions as may be set forth in the resolution. In the event that this
resolution is not passed by the Council, the applicant may receive a refund of
all of its advance deposit.
   (D)   If the City approves the formation of a PID and there are existing
agreements with developers/ landowners for the provision of infrastructure
proposed to be furnished by the PID, then those agreements shall be deemed
amended to reflect the agreements and conditions pertaining to the PID. The
amendments shall reflect that either the developer/landowner or the PID shall
provide such infrastructure improvements.
   (E)   After the application fee and deposit are submitted, City staff shall
arrange an initial conference with the applicant and the appropriate City
staff, for the purpose of reviewing the application for conformity with City
policies. The City staff shall use its best efforts to review the application
and conduct the initial conference within thirty days following payment of
application fee and deposit.
   (F)   If at any time during the application process City staff requests
additional information, the applicant shall provide any and all supplemental
information requested, in accordance with the provisions of §
6-9-3(K) ROA 1994.
   (G)   After analysis of an application as supplemented, City staff, under
the direction of the Mayor's Office, may prepare a report including
recommendations relating to the PID and an analysis of the impact of the
formation of the PID and its effects on the City. The report may provide a
recommended disposition of the application and any additional requirements that
shall be placed on the developer/landowner and the PID. The City shall use its
best efforts to complete the analysis and report concerning the application
within 90 days following the initial application conference.
   (H)   If all costs billed to or incurred by the City have been paid by the
applicant by a date at least fourteen (14) days prior to the date of the
meeting of the City Council at which the appropriate legislation approving the
application is to be introduced and if the application meets the qualifications
provided herein as determined by City staff, the application, along with any
report and recommendations by City staff, shall be presented by the Applicant
and City staff to the Debt Committee established by City Ordinance Enactment
No. 20-2001 and thereafter to the City Council, along with appropriate
implementing legislation. Final approval of the City Council shall be
conditioned on the City Council's conclusion that all matters necessary to be
completed prior to the formation of the PID have been completed.
   (I)   If the City Council approves an application for formation of a PID,
the applicant/developer/landowner and the City staff shall coordinate a
schedule of events for formation of the PID and shall negotiate an appropriate
development agreement between the City and the developer/landowner which shall
be entered into prior to formation of the PID, which development agreement
shall incorporate the requirements of any report, recommendations of the City
staff relating to such PID, the requirements of this Ordinance and any other
restrictions, provisions and agreements required by the City in its discretion.
(Ord. 12-2003)
§ 6-9-5 PID OPERATIONS AND DEBT FINANCING.
   (A)   In addition to the amounts set forth in §
6-9-4(B), upon formation of a PID the developer/ landowner shall deposit with
the PID a nonrefundable administrative expense fee in the amount of $15,000.
The administrative expense fee shall be applied by the PID to the costs and
expenses incurred in connection with the formation, review of any feasibility
study, election costs, administration, operation and maintenance of the PID or
its public improvements. From time to time, upon depletion of the
administrative expense fee, the PID may request, and the developer/landowner
shall promptly deposit with the PID, additional amounts deemed by the City to
be necessary for the purposes contemplated in this §
6-9-5(A).
   (B)   In order to provide for the PID to be self-supporting for its
administrative, operation and maintenance expenses, and to finance services in
addition to those provided by the City, the City and the PID, unless otherwise
agreed, may require the imposition of up to $3.00 per $1,000 of assessed value
ad valorem tax, not as a tax or charge of the City, but in accordance with the
provisions of Section 5-11-23 NMSA 1978, as amended, upon the PID taxable
property, for the administration of the PID, and the operation and maintenance
of property which is not City-owned infrastructure otherwise maintained by the
City. Failure to impose such tax shall not impose upon the City any obligations
for operations.
   (C)   The amount and structure of debt of a PID shall not have any direct or
indirect negative impacts on the debt or financing capabilities of the City.
The debt imposed on the PID shall not impose an unreasonably high financial
burden on any future property owners in the PID. Any debt issued shall be in
accordance with the provisions of §
6-9-1(G) ROA 1994. In connection with any request for debt financing the
applicant shall provide a current appraisal (subject to update to remain
current at the time of any debt financing) of the fair cash market value of the
property within the proposed PID which shall be taxed, assessed or levied upon,
prepared by an MAI Appraiser, such appraisal to be in form and substance
acceptable to the City, in its sole and absolute discretion. All requested debt
financings shall be reviewed by the City Debt Committee.
   (D)   General obligation bonds of the PID shall be payable from an ad
valorem tax on all taxable property located within the PID. An applicant for
general obligation bonds shall describe in each financial feasibility study
required in §
6-9-3(E) ROA 1994, the following:
      (1)   The current direct and overlapping tax and assessment burden on the
taxable property that is proposed to be taxed and the full cash value and
assessed valuation of the taxable property as shown on the most recent
assessment roll.
      (2)   The amount and timing of PID general obligation bonds to be issued.
      (3)   The expected market absorption of development within the PID.
      (4)   The effect of the PID bond issuance on PID tax rates, calculated at
the beginning, middle and end of the market absorption period or based on the
phasing of the project to be financed, as applicable.
      (5)   Whether the bonds shall be publicly offered or privately placed.
Publicly offered bonds shall either (i) be rated (either on their own merits or
by use of appropriate credit enhancement) in one of the four highest investment
grade ratings from Standard & Poor's Ratings Group, Moody's Investors Service,
Inc., Fitch Ratings, or other nationally recognized bond-rating services, or
(ii) be issued in connection with a transaction which meets all of the
following criteria unless otherwise determined by the City, in its discretion,
based upon recommendations made by underwriters or financial consultants
acceptable to the City:
         (a)   the minimum equity contribution, excluding real property, of the
developer is at least 20% of the initial cost of the project;
         (b)   the projected value to lien ratio, after the completion of the
improvements constructed with bond proceeds, shall be at least 4 to 1, but in
no event and notwithstanding any other provision of this section, less than 3
to 1; and
         (c)   the developer and the PID shall enter into an appropriate
contribution agreement, which may require a letter of credit or other third-
party guarantee of the bonds by the developer.
      Privately placed bonds need not be rated; however, the purchasers of such
bonds must be "qualified institutional buyers" (as such term is defined in Rule
144A of the Securities Exchange Commission) and must agree not to resell the
bonds except to "qualified institutional buyers" in a private placement.
      If appropriate, the applicant shall enter into a "Continuing Disclosure
Undertaking" (as required by Rule 15c2-12 of the Securities Exchange
Commission) or relating to the issuance of the bonds.
   (E)   Special levy bonds shall be secured by a tax lien on the property
benefitted. Applicants for special levy bonds shall describe in each financial
feasibility study as required by §
6-9-3(E) ROA 1994, the following:
      (1)   The current direct and overlapping tax assessment burdens and
special levy on real property to comprise the PID and the full cash value and
assessed valuation of that property as shown on the most recent assessment
roll.
      (2)   The amount and timing of PID special levy bonds to be issued.
      (3)   The expected market absorption of development within the PID.
      (4)   The special levy burden to be placed on the prospective assessed
parcels.
      (5)   Whether the bonds shall be publicly offered or privately placed.
Publicly offered bonds shall either (i) be rated (either on their own merits or
by use of appropriate credit enhancement) in one of the four highest investment
grade ratings from Standard & Poor's Ratings Group, Moody's Investors Service,
Inc., Fitch Ratings, or other nationally recognized bond-rating services, or
(ii) be issued in connection with a transaction which meets all of the
following criteria unless otherwise determined by the City, in its discretion,
based upon recommendations made by underwriters or financial consultants
acceptable to the City:
         (a)   the minimum equity contribution, excluding real property, of the
developer is at least 20% of the initial cost of the project;
         (b)   the projected value to lien ratio, after the completion of the
improvements constructed with bond proceeds, shall be at least 4 to 1, but in
no event and notwithstanding any other provision of this section, less than 3
to 1; and
         (c)   the developer and the PID shall enter into an appropriate
contribution agreement, which may require a letter of credit or other third-
party guarantee of the bonds by the developer.
      Privately placed bonds need not be rated; however, the purchasers of such
bonds must be "qualified institutional buyers" (as such term is defined in Rule
144A of the Securities Exchange Commission) and must agree not to resell the
bonds except to "qualified institutional buyers" in a private placement.
      If appropriate, the applicant shall enter into a "Continuing Disclosure
Undertaking" (as required by Rule 15c2-12 of the Securities Exchange
Commission) relating to the issuance of the bonds.
   (F)   Revenue bonds shall be payable from a PID revenue source. An applicant
for revenue bonds shall describe in each financial feasibility study as
required in §
6-9-3(E) ROA 1994, the following;
      (1)   The current direct and overlapping tax and assessment burdens on
the property within the PID and the full cash value and assessed valuation of
that taxable property as shown on the most recent assessment roll.
      (2)   The revenue source from which bonds shall be payable. The City
reserves the right to require the applicant to produce such independently
prepared feasibility studies or reports as it deems necessary to confirm the
amount and availability of revenues.
      (3)   The expected market absorption of development within the PID.
      (4)   The amount and timing of PID revenue bonds to be issued.
      (5)   The financial impact of the proposed issue(s) on prospective
property owners.
      (6)   Whether the bonds shall be publicly offered or privately placed.
Publicly offered bonds shall either (a) be rated (either on their own merits or
by use of appropriate credit enhancement) in one of the four highest investment
grade ratings from Standard & Poor's Ratings Group, Moody's Investors Service,
Inc., Fitch Ratings, or other nationally recognized bond-rating services, or
(b) be issued in connection with a transaction which meets all of the following
criteria unless otherwise determined by the City, in its discretion, based upon
recommendations made by underwriters or financial consultants acceptable to the
City:
         (a)   the minimum equity contribution, excluding real property, of the
developer is at least 20% of the initial cost of the project;
         (b)   the projected value to lien ratio, after the completion of the
improvements constructed with bond proceeds, shall be at least 4 to 1, but in
no event and notwithstanding any other provision of this section, less than 3
to 1; and
         (c)   the developer and the PID shall enter into an appropriate
contribution agreement, which may require a letter of credit or other third-
party guarantee of the bonds by the developer.
      Privately placed bonds need not be rated; however, the purchasers of such
bonds must be "qualified institutional buyers" (as such term is defined in Rule
144A of the Securities Exchange Commission) and must agree not to resell the
bonds except to "qualified institutional buyers" in a private placement.
      If appropriate, the applicant shall enter into a "Continuing Disclosure
Undertaking" (as required by Rule 15c2-12 of the Securities Exchange
Commission) relating to the issuance of the bonds.
   (G)   The special levies imposed on real property in the PID shall be
apportioned based on parcel size or front footage basis. The maximum allowable
rate of special levy for property, however, shall not cause the total tax and
assessment obligation for such property, including projected ad valorem taxes
and special assessments, to exceed one and ninety-five one hundredths percent
(1.95%) of the anticipated market value of property as determined by an MAI
Appraiser. The 1.95% shall include unissued debt and any other anticipated fees
or assessments which may be imposed by the City or special district on a
property within the PID - i.e., special assessment districts, including the
proposed maximum special levy, except service charges for utilities and refuse.
   (H)   Unless otherwise determined by the City, the City shall retain its own
bond counsel to act as bond counsel in connection with the issuance of any PID
bonds. From time to time the City may request from bond counsel such opinions
as it deems necessary in connection with the formation and activities of the
PID.
(Ord. 12-2003)
§ 6-9-6 FINANCIAL CONSIDERATIONS.
   (A)   The applicant shall independently provide at least $0.25 in additional
infrastructure or community improvements for each $1.00 of debt to be issued by
a PID to finance public infrastructure. The City may in its discretion impose
additional financing requirements, including the deposit of cash or a letter of
credit (or similar credit facility) as security for completion of the
infrastructure development. If agreed to by the PID Board, in its sole and
absolute discretion, prior infrastructure and community improvements
constructed or acquired by the applicant or the developer/landowner may be
included in calculating the applicant's or developer's/landowner's compliance
with this §
6-9-6(A).
   (B)   If allowed by law (including any applicable federal laws relating to
the tax free status of bonds), all bond issues shall include a debt service
reserve fund in an amount acceptable to the PID Board.
   (C)   The applicant or the developer/landowner (or such other third party
acceptable to the City and the PID), shall indemnify the City and the PID and
their agents and employees and shall hold the City and the PID and their
agents, officers and employees harmless for, from and against any and all
liabilities, claims, costs and expenses, including attorneys' fees, incurred in
any challenge or proceeding relevant to the formation, operation,
administration of the PID, the offer and sale of PID bonds, the levying by the
PID of any tax, assessment, special levy or charge and the operation and
maintenance of public infrastructure financed or owned by the PID.
   (D)   Unless otherwise provided to the City pursuant to other requirements
prior to PID financing and acquisition by the PID or City, the PID and City
shall require an independent environmental report or assessment of any real
property which shall be dedicated to or otherwise owned, leased or operated by
the City or the PID and a proposed form of indemnity agreement with respect to
all environmental liability.
   (E)   Refinancings and refundings of bonds issued on behalf of a PID shall
be considered utilizing the same criteria set forth in this Ordinance and in
particular §
6-9-5(D), (E) and (F). Refinancings and refundings shall be expected to either
(i) generate industry accepted interest rate savings; (ii) restructure payment
of principal or (iii) eliminate burdensome covenants. Any refinancing or
refunding shall be subject to the final review and approval of the City Council
and the PID Board.
   (F)   Developers shall be responsible for all costs and expenses incurred in
any special levy or property tax modifications resulting from changes to the
development not anticipated in the application.
(Ord. 12-2003)
§ 6-9-7 PID BOARD ELECTION PROCEDURES.
   (A)   Applicability; Delegation of Election; Administration to PID Board.
This section shall not apply if the City Council elects to resume governance of
the PID as its board to comply with the terms of a development agreement
entered into between the City, the PID, and the developer/landowner, or for
other reasons as determined by the City Council in its discretion as authorized
under Section 5-11-9(C) NMSA of the Act. With respect to elections of PID board
members, it is the policy of the City that all elections held pursuant to
Section 5-11-7 NMSA of the Act shall be conducted pursuant to the provisions of
this section on behalf of City Council, and the responsibility for the conduct
and administration of certain aspects of such board elections pursuant to the
provisions of this policy shall be delegated to the board of directors of each
PID formed by the City.
      (1)   After a PID is organized and the first board is appointed, the PID
board shall govern the conduct of all subsequent regular and special elections
of the PID, determine when all subsequent regular and special elections of the
PID are to be held, may consult with and obtain guidance and assistance from
the City Clerk concerning the conduct of such elections, and shall act as the
canvassing board for the purpose of interpreting procedures and deciding
controversies or other matters arising in the conduct of the elections.
      (2)   All powers and authority delegated to the board pertaining to the
conduct of regular or special elections may be exercised in the absence of the
board by the secretary or by an assistant secretary appointed by the board. The
person named by the board who is responsible for the conducting of the election
shall be the City Clerk.
   (B)   Call for Nominations.
      (1)   Not less than 70 days nor more than 90 days before a regular
special district election, the City Clerk shall provide notice of a call for
nominations for the election and such notice shall be posted in at least three
public places within the PID and shall be published in full, in English and
Spanish, once a week for at least two consecutive weeks before the 70th day
prior to the election in the Albuquerque Journal or another newspaper of
general circulation within the PID. The call shall state the date of the
election, the number of PID directors to be voted upon at the election, where a
nomination and acceptance form may be obtained, the deadline for submitting the
nomination and acceptance form to the City Clerk, information on obtaining a
ballot if the election will be by mail-ballot only, the name and address of the
City Clerk, and a brief summary of the information described in subsection (B)
(2) of this section.
      (2)   The call for nominations shall include either (i) a summary of the
basic annual and periodic responsibilities of the PID board, including items
(a) through (e), or (ii) the method by which interested persons may obtain the
summary. Annual and periodic board responsibilities include:
         (a)   Adoption of an open meetings resolution;
         (b)   Preliminary and final approval of an annual budget sufficient to
pay debt service on outstanding district bonds and annual administrative costs;
         (c)   Exercise of remedies to collect delinquent PID special levies;
         (d)   Approval of audited financial statements; and
         (e)   Approval of continuing disclosure reports prepared on behalf of
the PID.
      (3)   The City Clerk shall provide the information described in
subsection (B)(2) of this section promptly to all persons accepting nominations
for board positions.
   (C)   Nominations.
      (1)   Not less than 60 days before the date of the election, any resident
qualified elector or owner who desires to be or designate a candidate for the
office of a PID director shall file a nomination and acceptance form or letter
signed by the resident qualified elector or owner and, as applicable, the
designee for the office of PID Director.
      (2)   On the date of signing the nomination and acceptance form or
letter, the candidate for director shall be a resident qualified elector,
owner, or the designee of a resident qualified elector or owner.
      (3)   The nomination and acceptance form or letter shall state the name
of the PID in which the election will be held, the date of the election, the
full name of the candidate as it is to appear on the ballot, and a statement
that the candidate is a resident qualified elector, owner, or the designee of a
resident qualified elector or owner. Unless physically unable, all parties
submitting and identified on a nomination and acceptance form or letter shall
sign their own signature and shall print (a) their names, (b) their mailing
addresses, (c) their telephone number, (d) the address of the property owned,
resided, or represented, including the street number and name, and (e) the date
of signature on the nomination and acceptance form or letter. All signatures or
marks on the nomination and acceptance form or letter shall be acknowledged by
a notary public.
      (4)   The nomination and acceptance form or letter shall be filed with
the City Clerk of the PID in which the election will be held, and the City
Clerk shall verify the sufficiency of the information contained therein and
shall return any insufficient nomination form to the candidate with a written
description of the insufficiency. A nomination and acceptance form that is
insufficient may be amended at any time after filing but prior to 3 p.m. on the
30th day before the election.
      (5)   Notwithstanding the foregoing, the City Council, at its option, may
nominate one or more candidates. The City Council or its designee shall provide
a list of any candidate(s) nominated by the City Council to the City Clerk of
the PID in which the election will be held not less than 60 days before the
date of the election. The City Council shall have no duty to nominate any
candidate unless the PID has not delivered payment for all costs of the
improvements to be financed by the PID, as described in the implementing
legislation. If the City Council is required to nominate candidates, the list
of nominees shall consist of no less than three City employees.
   (D)   Time for Holding Elections; Manner of Election; Notice.
      (1)   Except as otherwise provided in subsection (D)(2) of this section,
regular PID elections shall be held on the first Tuesday after the first Monday
in August in every other even-numbered year.
      (2)   Special elections may be held on the first Tuesday after the first
Monday of the month in which held, but in no event on a date within 42 days
before any statewide election, as provided by Section 1-12-71 NMSA 1978.
      (3)   At least 60 days prior to a PID Board election, the City Clerk
shall request that the County Clerk provide to the City Clerk a list of the
names and addresses of registered electors of the city who are also registered
electors of the PID.
      (4)   At least 60 days prior to a PID Board election, the City Clerk
shall request that the County Assessor provide to the City Clerk a list of the
names and addresses of the owners of real property in the district on the
current property tax assessment roll.
      (5)   The City Clerk shall prepare a voter list of registered electors
residing within the PID and owners of property within the PID from the lists
provided by the County Clerk and County Assessor.
      (6)   The City Clerk shall prepare and provide to the City Clerk a form
of ballot containing the names of the eligible candidates.
      (7)   If the PID Election is conducted as regular municipal election, or
where as otherwise required by law, the City Clerk shall follow the early
voting and absentee voting procedures in Section 3-8-37.1 NMSA 1978. In the
event of a mail ballot only election, the following procedures shall be
followed:
         (a)   The City Clerk shall make available at the Office of the City
Clerk beginning no later than 20 days before the date of the election a regular
ballot to any person whose name appears on the voter list or who provides an
affidavit of ownership signed by that person. The City Clerk shall record the
names and mailing addresses of each person receiving a regular ballot.
         (b)   The City Clerk shall make available at the Office of the City
Clerk a provisional ballot to any person not appearing on the voter list, but
claiming eligibility to vote as either a qualified resident elector or owner of
property within the PID. The City Clerk shall record the name and mailing
address of any person to whom a provisional ballot is given, and shall keep
copies of any evidence presented by such person in support of the claim of
eligibility. If during the canvass the PID Board determines it has insufficient
information to determine whether a person given a provisional ballot is a
qualified elector, it shall provide written notification to such person that he
or she may present additional evidence of eligibility to the PID Board, and
shall describe the means by which such evidence may be presented and that the
evidence must be presented before the end of the canvassing period of 30 days,
as provided in Section 5-11-7(G) NMSA 1978.
         (c)   Ballots shall be available to prospective electors at the Office
of the City Clerk, or, upon written request, shall be mailed to the requesting
person, until the close of business on the Friday immediately preceding the
date of the election.
      (8)   At least one polling place shall be provided for a PID board
election that is not a mail ballot only election. The City Clerk shall select
the most convenient and suitable public building or public school building
within the PID that can be obtained. If no public building or public school
building is available, the City Clerk shall provide some other suitable place,
which shall be the most convenient and appropriate place obtainable within or
near the PID, considering the purpose for which it is to be used.
   (E)   Voter Eligibility.
      (1)   No person shall be permitted to vote in any election unless that
person is a resident qualified elector or property owner as defined in section
5-11-3 NMSA 1978.
      (2)   Each voter may cast the applicable number of votes authorized in
the Act. As provided in Section 5-11-7 NMSA 1978, a property owner who is also
a qualified resident elector shall not be entitled to an additional vote as a
result of residing within the PID. The following procedures shall be
implemented to prevent a single property owner and all persons related to a
property owner (i.e. a related person within the meaning of Treasury Regulation
1.150-1(b), Internal Revenue Code Sections 144(a), 267, 707(b) or 1563(a))
(collectively a "single property owner") from maintaining continued effective
control of the PID Board through the election of members that perpetuate such
control; notwithstanding any other provision of the Act or this section,
irrespective of the actual number of votes cast by a single property owner, and
in accordance with the City's home rule powers granted in Article X, Section 6
of the New Mexico Constitution:
         (a)   With respect to an election of new directors to seats initially
held by the two directors of a PID appointed to four-year terms by the City
Council (the "Class 4 Directors"), a single property owner shall be permitted
to cast votes sufficient in number to elect and fill no more than one of the
Class 4 Directors. The remaining Class 4 Directors' seat on the PID Board shall
be filled by a City Councilor whose district includes the PID boundaries.
         (b)   With respect to an election of new directors to seats initially
held by the three directors of a PID appointed to six-year terms by the City
Council (the "Class 6 Directors"), a single property owner shall be permitted
to cast votes sufficient in number to elect and fill no more than two of the
Class 6 Directors. The remaining Class 6 Directors' seat on the PID Board shall
be filled by the City Council's President.
         (c)   In the event that an election of the Class 4 Directors and the
Class 6 Directors occurs in a single election, Subsections
6-9-7(E)(2)(a) and (b) of this PID section shall apply and, subject to
subsections
6-9-7(E)(2)(d) and (e) of this PID section, a single property owner shall only
be permitted to elect one Class 4 Director and two Class 6 Directors.
         (d)   In the event that a Single Property Owner casts votes which
would otherwise be sufficient in number to elect more than one Class 4
Director, the candidates receiving the smallest number of votes cast by the
single property owner shall be eliminated. In the event that a single property
owner casts an equal number of votes for two or more of the Class 4 Directors,
the PID Board shall determine the candidate or candidates to be eliminated by
any method deemed fair and impartial by the PID Board, e.g. selecting names
from a hat, drawing playing cards, etc.
         (e)   In the event that a single property owner casts votes which
would otherwise be sufficient in number to elect more than two Class 6
Directors, the candidates receiving the smallest number of votes cast by the
single property owner shall be eliminated. In the event that a single property
owner casts an equal number of votes for three or more of the Class 6
Directors, the PID Board shall determine the candidate or candidates to be
eliminated by any method deemed fair and impartial by the PID Board, e.g.
selecting names from a hat, drawing playing cards, etc.
         (f)   If a single property owner does not cast a majority of the votes
in an election of new directors, the foregoing procedures described in
Subsections
6-9-7(E)(2)(a), (b), (c), (d), and (e) of this PID section shall not apply and
the members of the PID Board shall be elected by majority vote of the resident
qualified electors and property owners in accordance with the Act and the
remaining subsections of this PID section.
      (3)   Any person requesting a ballot by mail for any election as a
resident qualified elector or property owner shall sign an affidavit that the
person is an elector of the PID. The affidavit shall be on a form that contains
in substance the following:
   FORM OF AFFIDAVIT
                             does hereby declare and warrant that (s)he is
either (1) the owner of record title of                  acres of real property
located in the                      Public Improvement District known as lot
(s)/tracts          , located in                      Subdivision, within the
                     Public Improvement District or (2) is a resident qualified
elector (i.e. a person who resides within the boundaries of the
                     Public Improvement District and who is qualified to vote
in the general elections held in the state pursuant to Section 1-1-4 NMSA
1978). I,                           (printed name), reside at
                          (address), am an elector of this (name of PID) and
desire to vote at this election. I do solemnly swear (or affirm) that I am
qualified to vote in this PID election as:
                   A resident of the district or area to be included in the
district for not less than thirty days; or
                   The owner of taxable real property situated within the
boundaries of the PID.
   I have not voted previously at this election.
   Date                      
Signature of elector
                          
   (F)   Notice of Election. Pursuant to Section 5-11-7(A) NMSA 1978, a notice
of election shall be posted in at least three public places within the PID not
less than 20 days before the election and shall be published in full, in
English and Spanish, once a week for at least two consecutive weeks before the
election in the Albuquerque Journal or another newspaper of general circulation
within the PID. The notice shall indicate the following:
      (1)   Ballots may be obtained at the Office of the City Clerk or, upon
written request received not later than the close of business on the Friday
immediately preceding the election, will be mailed to the requesting person.
      (2)   Each elector may cast the applicable number of votes authorized in
the Act for up to five candidates listed on the ballot. A property owner shall
receive a ballot for each one-fifth of an acre owned, as identified in the
property owner's affidavit required by Section 5-11-7.D NMSA 1978. The PID
shall calculate the actual number of acres or portions of acres owned by a
property owner in accordance with Section 5-11-6.B NMSA 1978.
      (3)   Ballots must be returned to the Office of the City Clerk no later
than 7:00 p.m. on the date of the election. Mail-in ballots must be received in
the Office of the City Clerk by 7:00 p.m. on the date of the election.
      (4)   If voting will be in-person, the hours during the day, not less
than six, in which the polls will be open.
   (G)   Form of Ballot; Voting and Canvassing Results.
      (1)   The City Clerk will make ballots available to prospective voters at
the Office of the City Clerk. In addition, upon request, the City Clerk shall
mail a ballot to requesting persons upon the presentation of a title report or
other evidence establishing ownership of property within the PID, or the
presentation of evidence establishing that the person is eligible to vote under
the PID Act (i.e. the voter is a resident qualified elector who resides within
the boundaries of the PID and is qualified to vote in general elections held in
the state pursuant to Section 1-1-4 NMSA 1978). All property owners voting in
the election must execute an affidavit stating that they are the owner of land
in the PID and stating the area of land in acres owned within the PID.
Completed ballots, whether delivered by hand or U.S. Mail, must be received by
7:00 p.m. on the date of the election at the Office of the City Clerk. The form
of ballot shall contain in substance the following:
FORM OF BALLOT
                PUBLIC IMPROVEMENT DISTRICT
DISTRICT BOARD ELECTION
   Each owner of real property located in the                 Public
Improvement District (the "PID"), located in the City of Albuquerque, New
Mexico and each resident qualified elector, if any, residing in the PID
("Voters") may vote for up to five (5) candidates. To select a candidate,
follow arrow to the right of the candidate's name and fill in the oval that
corresponds with the candidate for whom you are voting. The                
candidates receiving the most affirmative (YES) votes will be elected as the
new PID board members of the PID. The polling place for the election will be
                    , and the polls will be open on                          ,
     , 20     , between the hours of            a.m. and            p.m. There
will be no polling place for the election, which will be conducted by mail
ballots only. Completed ballots must be received by 7:00 p.m. on
                    ,      , 20     , at the Office of the City Clerk, 600 2nd
NW, 7th floor, Albuquerque, New Mexico, 87102.
   (Voters may vote YES for up to five (5) candidates. Any ballot in which a
Voter votes for more than five (5) candidates will be held invalid and such
ballot will not be counted. Should a Voter inadvertently vote for more than
five (5) candidates, the Voter may request a replacement ballot prior to or on
the day of the Election, which replacement ballot must be completed and
submitted before 7:00 p.m. on the day of the Election.)
1.   [CANDIDATE NAME]    
2.   [CANDIDATE NAME]    
3.   [CANDIDATE NAME]    
4.   [CANDIDATE NAME]    
5.   [CANDIDATE NAME]    
6.   [CANDIDATE NAME]    
7.   [CANDIDATE NAME]    
8.   [CANDIDATE NAME]    
Etc.
      (2)   The place for the receipt of completed ballots for the election
shall be the Office of the City Clerk, 600 2nd NW, 7th floor, Albuquerque, New
Mexico, 87102.
      (3)   Completed ballots, whether delivered by hand or U.S. Mail, must be
received by 7:00 p.m. on                ,           , 20      at the Office of
the City Clerk.
      (4)   The            candidates receiving the most votes, as evidenced by
the certificate of canvassing prepared by the City Clerk, will be elected as
the new members of the PID board.
      (5)   The ballots are expected to be counted and the results tallied in
the Office of the City Clerk, 600 2nd NW, 7th floor, Albuquerque, New Mexico,
87102 by the close of business on                , 20     . In any event,
canvassing shall be completed within 30 days of the election and the City Clerk
shall prepare a certificate of canvassing for recording in the PID board's
minute book by the PID Clerk, which certificate will indicate the total number
of votes cast, the total number of votes cast for each candidate, and will
specify which five candidates received the most votes. The certificate of
canvassing shall be signed by a presiding judge of the election.
      (6)   Candidate names shall be placed on the ballot in the order in which
valid nominations were received.
   (H)   Transfer of Property Title to Qualify Electors. No person shall take
or place any interest in title to taxable property in the name of another,
whether a fractional undivided interest or otherwise, or enter into a contract
to purchase or sell taxable property, for the purpose of attempting to
influence the outcome of any PID election. Any ballot cast in violation of this
subsection as determined in an election contest conducted pursuant to Section
1-14-1 et seq. NMSA 1978, shall be void.
   (I)   Board Member Terms. Subsequent PID board members shall have six-year
terms.
   (J)   Quorum. A majority of the number of director positions filled at the
time of a PID board meeting shall constitute a quorum for the carrying out of
PID board duties.
   (K)   Definitions. The terms defined in Section 5-11-2 NMSA 1978 shall have
the same meaning when used herein unless otherwise indicated.
   (L)   Further Authorization. The City Clerk, the Chairperson of the PID
board and the PID Clerk of a PID are authorized and directed to take all action
necessary or appropriate to effectuate the provisions of this §
6-9-7. The PID Clerk shall consult with and seek the assistance of the City
Clerk as he or she deems necessary or convenient, but is authorized and
directed to take any and all steps necessary for the proper conduct of the
election, including giving timely notice of the election by proclamation by
publication and posting thereof and compliance with the Federal Voting Rights
Act and any other matters of federal or state election law.
(Ord._2014-015)
ARTICLE 10: FIRE HYDRANT USE PERMIT;
LIQUID WASTE HAULER PERMIT
Section
   
6-10-1   Private use of fire hydrants
   
6-10-2   Septic tank truck discharge
   
6-10-3   Violations
 
   
6-10-99   Penalty
§ 6-10-1 PRIVATE USE OF FIRE HYDRANTS.
   Connections to fire hydrants at any location are prohibited except by the
Albuquerque and Bernalillo County Fire Departments or by written permit issued
by the Albuquerque Bernalillo County Water Utility Authority ("Authority").
(Ord. 36-2005)
Penalty, see § 6-10-99
§ 6-10-2 SEPTIC TANK TRUCK DISCHARGE.
   No user owning vacuum or "cesspool" type pumping trucks or other liquid
waste transport trucks shall discharge such waste into the publicly owned
treatment works except at an authorized point and unless such person shall
first have applied for and received a Septic Tank Discharge or Chemical Toilet
Discharge Permit.
(Ord. 36-2005)
Penalty, see § 6-10-99
§ 6-10-3 VIOLATIONS.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful to use or cause to be used any water distributed
by the Authority without the consent of the Authority. Water distributed
through authorized meters or obtained by means authorized by Authority
ordinances or rules and regulations shall constitute Authority consent.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful to discharge or cause to be discharged any liquid
waste to the liquid waste collection or treatment system without the consent of
the Authority. Approved connections or permits shall constitute Authority
consent.
(Ord. 36-2005)
Penalty, see § 6-10-99
§ 6-10-99 PENALTY.
   Any person convicted of a violation of this article shall be subject to a
fine not exceeding $500 or by imprisonment not exceeding 90 days or both. Each
separate violation shall constitute a separate offense and, upon conviction,
each day of violation shall constitute a separate offense.
(Ord. 36-2005)
ARTICLE 11: STORM WATER QUALITY
Section
   
6-11-1   Short title
   
6-11-2   Definitions
   
6-11-3   Stormwater engineer
   
6-11-4   Applicability
   
6-11-5   Industrial activity certification
   
6-11-6   Illicit discharges and connections
   
6-11-7   Industrial activity discharge permit
   
6-11-8   Compliance and enforcement
   
6-11-9   Enforcement provisions
   
6-11-10   Private cause of action prohibited
   
6-11-11   Regulations and forms authorized
   
6-11-12   Cumulative effect
   
6-11-13   Remedies not exclusive
   
6-11-14   Access to facilities and records
§ 6-11-1 SHORT TITLE.
   This Article shall be known as the "Storm Water Quality Ordinance".
(Ord._2016-016)
§ 6-11-2 DEFINITIONS.
   As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
ascribed in this section unless the context of their usage clearly indicates
another meaning.
   DISCHARGE. The introduction or addition of any pollutant, stormwater, or
other substance into the MS4, or to allow, permit, or suffer any such
introduction or addition that is not specifically allowed by the City of
Albuquerque's current MS4 permit.
   DISCHARGER. A person who allows, causes, permits, suffers, or threatens to
cause a discharge.
   ILLICIT DISCHARGE. Any discharge to the MS4 that is not composed entirely of
stormwater except discharges pursuant to a NPDES permit or those allowed in §
6-11-6(C).
   IMPERVIOUS. Surfaces that are mainly artificial structures that are the
result of design, construction, and maintenance - such as pavements (roads,
sidewalks, driveways and parking lots) that are covered by impenetrable
materials such as asphalt, concrete, brick, and stone - and rooftops. Soils
compacted by urban development are also highly impervious.
   INDUSTRIAL ACTIVITY CERTIFICATION (IAC). A certification submitted to the
stormwater engineer showing compliance with EPA industrial activity
regulations.
   INDUSTRIAL FACILITY. A property that has discharges associated with
industrial activity as defined by federal regulations in 40 C.F.R. 122.26(b)
(14)l-XI).
   MS4 or MUNICIPAL SEPARATE STORM SEWER SYSTEM. The system of conveyances
owned or operated by the city or any co-permittee of the city under the permit
issued by the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, that is designed or used
for collecting, detention, storage, or conveying storm water.
   NPDES. The national pollutant discharge elimination system.
   NPDES PERMIT. A permit issued by the EPA under Title 33 of the United States
code that authorizes the discharge or pollutants to waters of the United
States, whether the permit is applicable on an individual, group, or general
basis.
   PARCEL. A contiguous piece of land that is under common ownership or control
or that is part of a larger common plan of development or sale.
   PERSON. An individual, corporation, organization, governmental entity,
business trust, partnership, association, or other legal entity, or an agent or
an employee thereof.
   POINT SOURCE. Any discernible and discrete conveyance, including but not
limited to, any pipe, ditch, channel, tunnel, conduit, well, discrete fissure,
container, rolling stock, concentrated animal feeding operation, landfill
leachate collection system, vessel or other floating craft from which
pollutants are or may be discharged. This term does not include return flows
from irrigated agriculture or agricultural stormwater runoff.
   POLLUTANT. The term POLLUTANT includes but is not limited to, dredged soil,
solid waste, incinerator residue, sewage, garbage, sewage sludge, filter
backwash, munitions, chemical wastes, biological materials, radioactive
materials, wrecked or discarded equipment, sediment, and other material, or any
combination thereof discharged into the MS4 or any water of the United States.
   POLLUTION. The alteration of the physical, chemical, or biological quality
of, or the contamination of, any waters of the United States that renders the
water harmful, detrimental or injurious to humans, animal life, vegetation, or
property or to public health, safety, or welfare, or otherwise impairs the
quality of the water.
   STORMWATER. Rainwater runoff, snow melt runoff, and surface runoff and
drainage.
   STORMWATER DISCHARGE ASSOCIATED WITH INDUSTRIAL ACTIVITY. The discharge from
any conveyance which is used for collecting and conveying stormwater and which
is directly related to manufacturing, processing, or raw materials storage
areas at an industrial plant. (See 40 CFR 122.26(b)(14) for specifics of this
definition.)
   STORMWATER ENGINEER. The person responsible for enforcement of this article
as designated through § 6-11-3 ROA 1994.
   STORMWATER CONTROL PERMIT FOR EROSION AND SEDIMENT CONTROL or SWP. The
permit issued pursuant to the drainage control ordinance.
   STRUCTURE. That which is built or constructed, an edifice or building of any
kind, or any piece of work, including, but not limited to, a paved surface,
that is artificially built up or composed of parts joined together in some
definite manner. The term does not include a street, a channel, or a public
utility.
   STRUCTURAL CONTROL. Any structure built and maintained to prevent, reduce,
or mitigate the potential of stormwater runoff contact with pollution-causing
activities.
   THREAT or THREATENS. A written or oral threat that is accompanied by a
specific action to introduce a pollutant into the MS4.
(Ord._2016-016)
§ 6-11-3 STORMWATER ENGINEER.
   The Director of the Department of Municipal Development shall appoint a
stormwater engineer who, once so appointed, is vested with the authority to
enforce this ordinance and all the other powers and duties as may be provided
in this Stormwater Quality Ordinance.
(Ord._2016-016)
§ 6-11-4 APPLICABILITY.
   (A)   A person who owns an industrial facility or causes a discharge is
governed by this ordinance.
   (B)   If a parcel is located outside the corporate boundaries of the city
and stormwater from any portion of the parcel drains into the MS4, then the
owner of such parcel is subject to this ordinance unless the owner elects not
to discharge any stormwater into the MS4.
(Ord._2016-016)
§ 6-11-5 INDUSTRIAL ACTIVITY CERTIFICATION.
   At any facility with activity covered by the EPA's standard industrial codes
that requires a multi-sector general permit, the operator shall submit to the
city an industrial activity certification (IAC) when requested by the
stormwater engineer. Upon reasonable notice, the stormwater engineer may
perform site inspections of these facilities. The IAC may include any one of
the following:
   (A)   A copy of the application for an individual permit from the EPA for
stormwater discharges from industrial activity at the facility;
   (B)   A copy of the permit issued by the EPA for stormwater discharges from
industrial activity at the facility;
   (C)   A copy of the notice of intent (NOI) for coverage under a multi-sector
general permit for stormwater discharges associated with industrial activity
issued by the EPA, or a copy of the "no exposure certification" submitted to
EPA;
   (D)   A statement of commitment to file an application for an individual
permit from the EPA for stormwater discharges from industrial activity at the
facility by a date certain agreed to by the stormwater engineer; or
   (E)   A statement of commitment to file a NOI for coverage under a general
permit for stormwater discharges associated with industrial activity regulating
the stormwater quality and prohibiting illicit discharges into the MS4 issued
by the EPA by a date certain agreed to by the stormwater engineer.
(Ord._2016-016)
§ 6-11-6 ILLICIT DISCHARGES AND CONNECTIONS.
   (A)   Illicit Discharge to MS4 Prohibited: A person who commits a violation
as prescribed under subsection (B) below is subject to the penalties set forth
in §
6-11-8 and §
6-11-9 of this article.
   (B)   Violations. No person shall:
      (1)   Attempt to introduce, introduce, or cause to be introduced into the
MS4 any discharge that is not composed entirely of pollutant-free storm water;
      (2)   Leave, accumulate, discharge, or allow animal waste on a publicly
owned property or on private property that will drain to the MS4;
      (3)   Allow any fluids from motor vehicles to drip or flow onto public
property or into the MS4;
      (4)   Blow or otherwise cause dirt, leaves or other organic or inorganic
material to move from any private property to any public property or into the
MS4;
      (5)   Allow sanitary sewer overflows from private property to enter
publicly owned property. Sanitary sewer overflows shall be contained to the
property of origin and the owner of the property shall bear the cost of proper
disposal and cleanup. Disposal and cleanup shall be initiated and completed as
expeditiously as possible, and in no case shall exceed 48 hours from the time
of detection;
      (6)   Allow sanitary sewer from private property to enter the MS4 through
an underground cross-connection of sanitary sewer pipe into storm sewer pipe.
Should such a cross-connection be detected, the owner of the property that is
the origin of the sanitary sewer discharge shall bear the cost of removing the
cross-connection. Proper permitting must be obtained prior to performing the
work;
      (7)   Allow any other non-authorized, non-stormwater discharge to enter
the MS4; or
      (8)   Continue a discharge if:
         (a)   The discharge or flow in question has been determined by the
City Engineer to be a source of a pollutant or pollutants to the MS4.
         (b)   Written notice of such determination has been provided to the
discharger; and,
         (c)   The discharge has continued after the expiration of the time
given in the notice to cease the discharge.
   (C)   Exceptions. Notwithstanding the activities proscribed under §
6-11-1(B) above, the following do not constitute violations:
      (1)   A discharge authorized by, and in compliance with, a current NPDES
permit (other than the City of Albuquerque's NPDES permit for discharges from
the MS4);
      (2)   Any discharge in compliance with a SWP if required in the Drainage
Ordinance;
      (3)   Any non-prohibited discharge from an exempt parcel;
      (4)   Any discharge or flow resulting from firefighting by the fire
department if that discharge is not reasonably expected to be a significant
source of pollutants to the MS4;
      (5)   Water line flushing, provided that the water is not significantly
chlorinated when reaching a receiving water;
      (6)   Rising ground waters;
      (7)   Ground water infiltration;
      (8)   Irrigation water from agricultural operations;
      (9)   Flows from riparian habitats and wetlands;
      (10)   Dechlorinated discharges of potable water; or
      (11)    Materials resulting from a spill where the discharge is necessary
to prevent loss of life; personal injury, or property damage provided that the
party responsible for the spill takes all reasonable steps to minimize or
prevent any adverse effects to human health or the environment.
      (12)   Any stormwater flows from property in a native undisturbed state.
(Ord._2016-016)
§ 6-11-7 INDUSTRIAL ACTIVITY DISCHARGE PERMIT.
   A person who is the owner or operator of an industrial facility that has
discharges associated with industrial activity as defined by federal
regulations must apply for and acquire an EPA Multi Sector General Permit. The
owner or operator shall notify the stormwater engineer of such application and
any federal notice of intent or notice of termination.
(Ord._2016-016)
§ 6-11-8 COMPLIANCE AND ENFORCEMENT.
   (A)   Compliance Monitoring Methods. At any facility that discharges
stormwater to the MS4, the stormwater engineer is authorized to execute the
following methods, or any other reasonable methods, to enforce compliance with
this stormwater ordinance:
      (1)   Install, or to require the installation of, such devices as are
necessary to conduct sampling or metering of the discharger's operations at the
expense of the City;
      (2)   Require any facility that is reasonably determined to have
discharged a pollutant or any substance that causes, continues to cause, or
will cause pollution, to conduct specified sampling, testing, analysis, and
other monitoring of its stormwater discharges. The stormwater engineer may
specify the frequency and parameters or any required sampling or monitoring;
      (3)   Require any facility that has been found to have violated this
ordinance to install monitoring equipment as necessary at the discharger's
expense. The discharger, at its own expense, shall at all times maintain the
facility's sampling and monitoring equipment in a safe and operating condition.
Each device used to measure storm water flow and quality must be calibrated
regularly to ensure accuracy;
      (4)   Require monitoring of non-storm water discharges if the stormwater
engineer reasonably believes that such discharges violate the city's MS4 permit
requirements;
      (5)   Upon request of the stormwater engineer, a facility shall submit in
writing the results of any sampling or monitoring undertaken pursuant to the
requirements of this article;
      (6)   Facility owners or operators shall maintain the results of any
monitoring and any supporting documentation undertaken pursuant to this
ordinance for three years; or
      (7)   All monitoring required by this ordinance must be performed in
accordance with the established methodologies and protocols of the EPA or New
Mexico Environmental Department.
(Ord._2016-016)
§ 6-11-9 ENFORCEMENT PROVISIONS.
   (A)   Enforcement.
      (1)   The stormwater engineer or any city police officer is hereby
authorized to undertake the enforcement activities authorized by this section.
      (2)   The city may issue a Notice of Violation to any person who violates
any provision of this article. The violator may be given an opportunity to
respond to the Notice and propose corrective actions in a reasonable amount of
time as determined by the stormwater engineer.
   (B)   Penalties.
      (1)   Criminal Penalties. Any person who violates any provision of this
article is guilty of a petty misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof, shall be
punished by a fine of not less than $250 nor more than $500 and up to 30 days
in jail for each violation. Each day in which any violation shall occur shall
constitute a separate offense. Prosecution or conviction under this section
shall not preclude any civil remedy or relief for a violation of this article.
Once cited for an offense, an additional citation may be issued for each day
the violation continues unless the violator has entered into an agreement with
the city for mitigation, correction, and any other necessary action and is
acting in conformity with the agreement and the schedule in the agreement.
      (2)   Civil Penalties. In addition to or instead of criminal prosecution,
where applicable, the city acting through the City Attorney, is hereby
authorized to file an action in a court of competent jurisdiction to:
         (a)   Enjoin any person from violating or threatening to violate the
terms, conditions and restrictions of this article;
         (b)   Enjoin the violation or threatened violation of the provisions
of this ordinance;
         (c)   Recover civil penalties for violation of the terms, conditions
and restrictions of this article;
         (d)   Recover civil penalties for violation of the provisions of this
ordinance; or
         (e)   Recover damages from the owner of a parcel in an amount adequate
for the city to undertake any construction remediation, cleanup, or other
activity necessary to bring about compliance with this chapter. In addition to
judicial remedies, such damages are recoverable through the imposition of a
municipal lien on the parcel under NMSA 1978, §§ 3-36-1 to 3-36-5.
   (C)   The city, acting through the City Attorney, is hereby authorized to
enter into agreements in lieu of litigation to achieve compliance with the
provisions of this article.
   (D)   The city's authority in §
6-11-8 (A) and (B) is in addition to all provisions of these ordinances
relative to the definition of offenses and the provision of penalties for
violations of such offenses.
(Ord._2016-016)
§ 6-11-10 PRIVATE CAUSE OF ACTION PROHIBITED.
   Nothing in this ordinance shall provide for a private cause of action.
(Ord._2016-016)
§ 6-11-11 REGULATIONS AND FORMS AUTHORIZED.
   The stormwater engineer shall promulgate regulations and forms regarding
compliance with the requirements of this article. Such regulations and forms
shall be available at the office of the city engineer, the office of the
stormwater engineer; and on the city website. The regulations and forms
established hereunder may be amended or supplemented from time to time.
(Ord._2016-016)
§ 6-11-12 CUMULATIVE EFFECT.
   (A)   This ordinance is cumulative of other requirements imposed by
ordinances and regulations of the city. To the extent of any inconsistency, the
more restrictive provision shall govern.
   (B)   Any authorization granted by this ordinance does not excuse compliance
with federal or state law or any other provisions of this Code or any other
city ordinance relating to the activities regulated by this article.
(Ord._2016-016)
§ 6-11-13 REMEDIES NOT EXCLUSIVE.
   The remedies listed in this article are not exclusive of any other remedies
available under any applicable federal, state, or local law. It is within
discretion of the city to seek cumulative remedies.
(Ord._2016-016)
§ 6-11-14 ACCESS TO FACILITIES AND RECORDS.
   (A)   When it is necessary to make an inspection to enforce the provisions
of this article or to inspect or investigate conditions related to water
quality, an authorized city official may enter a building or premises at
reasonable times to inspect or to perform the duties imposed by this article or
to inspect or review records, reports, data, plans, or other documents relating
to compliance with this article or with any NPDES storm water permit. If the
building or premises is occupied, credentials must be presented to the occupant
and entry requested. If the building or premises is unoccupied, the authorized
city official shall first make a reasonable effort to locate the owner or other
person having charge or control of the building or premises and request entry.
If refused, the authorized city official shall have recourse to the remedies
provided by law to secure entry.
   (B)   When, due to emergency, immediate entry is necessary to protect life
or property, or when the authorized city official shall have first obtained a
proper inspection warrant or other remedy provided by law to secure entry, no
owner, occupant or any other person having charge, care or control of any
building or premises shall fail or neglect, after proper request is made as
herein provided, to promptly permit entry therein by the authorized city
official for the purpose of inspection and investigation pursuant to this
article or other laws relating to storm water quality.
   (C)   Any temporary or permanent obstruction to safe and easy access to a
facility that is to be inspected or sampled must be promptly removed upon the
written request of the authorized city official or Stormwater Engineer and may
not be replaced. The cost of clearing access to the facility shall be borne by
the discharger.
(Ord._2016-016)
CHAPTER 7: TRANSPORTATION,
VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC
   Article
      
1:   AIRPORT
      
2:   TRANSIT SYSTEM
      
3:   ALBUQUERQUE FREE EXPRESSION AND SPECIAL EVENT PERMITTING
      
4:   INTERSTATE HIGHWAYS
      
5:   SALE OF MOTOR VEHICLES
      
6:   [RESERVED]
      
7:   WRECKERS
      
8:   MOTOR VEHICLE EMISSIONS CONTROL
      
9:   [RESERVED]
      
10:   
VEHICLE NUISANCE ORDINANCE
      
11:   
[RESERVED]
      
12:   
VEHICLE POLLUTION ABATEMENT
      
13:   
PRIVATE BOOTING OF MOTOR VEHICLES
      
14:   [RESERVED]
      
15:   
AUTOMATED SPEED ENFORCEMENT
ARTICLE 1: AIRPORT
Section
Part 1: General Provisions
   
7-1-1-1   Definitions
   
7-1-1-2   Applicability
   
7-1-1-3   Aircraft rules
   
7-1-1-4   Motor vehicle rules
   
7-1-1-5   General rules
   
7-1-1-6   Fire, fueling and other ground safety rules
   
7-1-1-7   Removal of persons or property
 
   
7-1-1-99   Penalty
Part 2: Airport Advisory Board
   
7-1-2-1   Creation of the board
   
7-1-2-2   Board members
   
7-1-2-3   Duties of the board
   
7-1-2-4   Function of the board
   
7-1-2-5   Meetings
   
7-1-2-6   Annual report
   
7-1-2-7   Action on reports
   
7-1-2-8   Duties of the director of aviation
Part 3: Albuquerque International Sunport
   
7-1-3-1   Real property legal description
   
7-1-3-2   Vacation
   
7-1-3-3   Easement
   
7-1-3-4   Commercial activity
   
7-1-3-5   Enforcement
Cross-reference:
   
Airport zoning, see Ch. 14, Art. 15
PART 1: GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 7-1-1-1 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this article, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   AIR CARRIER. Any aircraft operated for hire in which a pilot is provided,
either for training purposes or passenger or cargo purposes operated on
scheduled or nonscheduled flights, including any aircraft operated or owned by
an air transport line, air feeder line, air cargo line or charter service, and
excluding any resident aircraft or aircraft of an aircraft service operator
engaged only in student flying activities or sightseeing flights.
   AIRCRAFT. Any contrivance now known or hereafter invented, used or designed
for navigation of or flight in the air.
   AIRCRAFT SERVICE OPERATOR. Any person engaged in the demonstration of
aircraft and aircraft parts, the retail or wholesale distribution of aircraft
and aircraft parts, aircraft repairs, aircraft storage, aircraft servicing,
student flight training, sightseeing by aircraft, aircraft rentals other than
as an aircraft carrier, or any other activity connected with aircraft
maintenance, servicing, storage rentals, sales or instruction for which a fee
or service charge is assessed or received.
   AIRLINE PASSENGER CARRIER.  An air carrier other than an air carrier
operated for charter service or charter parties, which is operated for the
transportation of passengers only or passengers, airmail and air express.
   AIRPORT.  The area of land owned by the city whether inside or outside the
city limits that is used or intended to be used for the landing and takeoff of
aircraft, including all property owned by the city contiguous thereto which is
held or used for airport purposes and any purposes incidental thereto, and
further includes all areas, facilities and improvements on or within said
property regardless of the fact that they may be owned, controlled, leased or
occupied by persons or governmental agencies other than the city. The Airport
is located in Townships 9 and 10, Ranges 3 and 4 East, N.M.P.M., County of
Bernalillo, State of New Mexico.
   AVIATION DIRECTOR.  The administrative head of the Aviation Department of
the city, or in his absence, the Administrative Assistant to the Aviation
Director, or any acting Aviation Director designated by the Mayor.
   CONCESSIONAIRE.  Any person engaged in the operation of any restaurant,
newsstand, vending machine, shop or business or the sale of any goods, wares or
merchandise other than aircraft, aircraft fuel or oil, to other than the
business of an aircraft service operator.
   GASOLINE SERVICE OPERATOR.  Any person vending, handling, storing, servicing
or furnishing fuel or oil for use in such person's aircraft or the aircraft of
another, with or without a charge or profit, at wholesale or retail, or as
accommodation for himself or another.
   MAYOR. The Mayor or his duly authorized representative.
   MOTOR CARRIER.  Any taxi, bus, limousine, or any other vehicle operated for
hire, in which a driver is provided, either for passenger or cargo purposes.
   PERSON.  Any individual, firm, partnership, association, corporation or
entity, incorporated or otherwise, and the agents, employees or servants
thereof.
   PRIVATE AIRCRAFT. Any aircraft other than an air carrier.
   RESIDENT AIRCRAFT. Any aircraft, other than an air carrier or an aircraft
used for hire or student training in the business of an aircraft service
operator, that remains in operation at the airport and using same as a base for
a period of 30 days or longer.
   TOWER. The Airport Control Tower and the personnel who operate its
facilities.
('74 Code, § 9-2-1) (Ord. 2697)
§ 7-1-1-2 APPLICABILITY.
   This article shall apply to all persons while on or over the airport
regardless of the status or character of their use or occupancy of the airport.
('74 Code, § 9-2-2) (Ord. 2697)
§ 7-1-1-3 AIRCRAFT RULES.
   No person shall:
   (A)   Navigate any aircraft over, land upon, take off from, or service,
repair or maintain any aircraft other than in conformity with the rules and
regulations of the Federal Aviation Agency.
   (B)   Fail to taxi under full control and at reasonable speeds the aircraft
which he is operating. Following a landing or prior to take off and while
taxiing any pilot operation an aircraft shall assure himself that there is no
danger of collision with other aircraft which are taking off, landing or
taxiing.
   (C)   Taxi any aircraft on any ramp or apron at a speed in excess of 15
miles per hour; taxi any aircraft not equipped with adequate brakes on any ramp
or apron at any speed unless an attendant is at all times beside at least one
wing.
   (D)   Taxi any aircraft in the vicinity of aircraft landing or taking off;
fail to completely stop an aircraft being taxied in the vicinity of aircraft
landing or taking off.
   (E)   Taxi any aircraft on any apron or ramp so as to enter any area where
passengers are entering or leaving any aircraft.
   (F)   Taxi any aircraft upon a runway:
      (1)   Except as a necessary part of taking off or landing;
      (2)   Except when given permission by the tower; and
      (3)   Except when crossing a runway or runway intersection.
   (G)   Taxi any aircraft at night or after sunset unless the navigation
lights, and at least one landing light if the aircraft is equipped with landing
lights, are turned on and burning.
   (H)   Leave any aircraft standing or parked outside of an area designated
for parking of aircraft at night or after sunset unless the navigation lights,
and at least one landing light if the aircraft is equipped with landing lights,
are turned on and burning; if such aircraft lighting is not possible, proper
warning lights must immediately be lit and placed near the aircraft.
   (I)   Take off or land any aircraft except in case of emergency or accident,
on any apron, ramp, taxiway or any place other than a runway. This division
shall not apply to the take off or landing of a helicopter or other aircraft
which takes off or lands vertically.
   (J)   Take off or land any helicopter or other aircraft which takes off or
lands vertically except at places designated for such take offs and landings by
the Mayor or the tower.
   (K)   Leave any disabled or wrecked aircraft on any taxiway, runway or any
place other than a designated parking area, overnight or for any unreasonable
period, unless specific prior authority has been granted by the Mayor and the
aircraft is guarded and warning lights are displayed around it.
   (L)   Park any aircraft or vehicle within 25 feet of any fire hydrant.
   (M) Leave any aircraft unattended on any ramp, apron, taxiway, runway or
area other than a designated aircraft parking area.
   (N)   Fail to securely tie down any unattended aircraft.
   (O)   "Run-up," or operate at high revolutions per minute (r.p.m.'s) an
aircraft engine near any passenger terminal building, hangars or other
buildings. Areas for "running-up," operating at high r.p.m.'s, or checking
aircraft engines and aircraft have been designated by the Mayor, and the
location of these areas will be described upon request at the Office of the
Aviation Director. Aircraft brakes shall be set during such checks or
activities.
   (P)   Taxi any aircraft into any hangar.
   (Q)   Start or run any aircraft engine in any hangar.
   (R)   Start or run any aircraft engine without a competent operator or pilot
at the controls of the aircraft.
   (S)   Park any aircraft on any apron, or part thereof which is not
designated for the parking of aircraft; park any aircraft in any fire lane
designated by two red lines on airport pavement.
   (T)   Take off or land aircraft at the airport which aircraft is not
equipped with two-way radio equipment consisting of a functioning radio
transmitter and receiver capable of conducting two-way communications with the
airport control tower within a five-mile radius of said tower on radio
frequencies used by said control towers.
   (U)   Fail to immediately taxi or move any aircraft over which he has
control to the bomb or fire inspection area when so directed by the airport air
traffic control tower or the City Manager; said area is on the southwest side
of the ramp adjacent to taxiway T-8 and is identified by a large red circle 150
feet in diameter painted on the pavement with a solid red circle painted on the
pavement in the center of said large circle.
   (V)   In areas designated "T" hangar areas, place any aircraft in such
hangars or taxi any aircraft on "T" hangar area taxiways which weighs over
25,200 pounds.
   (W) Fail to follow directions or procedures given or required by the airport
air traffic control tower in the event of aircraft emergencies or accidents.
   (X)   (1)   Act as a crew member of any aircraft while:
         (a)   Under the influence of intoxicating beverage; or
         (b)   Using any drug that affects his faculties in any way contrary to
safety.
      (2)   Except in an emergency, no pilot of any aircraft shall allow a
person who is obviously under the influence of intoxicating beverages or drugs,
except a medical patient under proper care, to board or be carried in such
aircraft.
   (Y)   Repair any aircraft while located on loading aprons or ramps near the
passenger terminal building.
   (Z)   Operate aircraft unless he has available for use aircraft tow bars or
towing equipment for moving aircraft in the event of some failure or breakdown
of the aircraft, when such person is in Aircraft Service Operator or an Air
Carrier and is regularly engaged in operating aircraft on the ramps, taxiways
or runways of the Airport.
   (AA) Move or operate an aircraft in a careless or reckless manner.
   (BB) Run the engine of a parked aircraft in a manner that damages any other
property or aircraft, or that blows paper, dirt, or other material across
taxiways or runways so as to endanger the safety of persons or property.
   (CC) Start or taxi any aircraft in any place where the exhaust or engine
blast is likely to cause injury to persons or property. If the aircraft cannot
be started or taxied without violating the provisions of this division, the
operator shall have it towed to a location where such operations can be done
safely.
   (DD) Operate an aircraft so as to use any passenger gate position at the
passenger terminal building other than on an unassigned basis.
   (EE) Operate an aircraft so as to use any passenger gate position at the
passenger terminal building any longer than may be necessary to enplane and
deplane passengers, fuel the aircraft and perform minor cleaning of aircraft.
All other matters with respect to the operation and maintenance of the aircraft
shall be conducted at proper places away from said passenger gate positions. No
person shall use such passenger gate positions for aircraft parking under any
circumstances.
   (FF) Double park any aircraft at any passenger gate position of the
passenger terminal building or allow passengers to enplane or deplane when any
aircraft is so parked.
   (GG) Park any aircraft in such a manner or place so as to block or prevent
any other parked aircraft from free and unobstructed movement in the event that
it becomes necessary to move any one parked aircraft due to an emergency. The
intention of this division (GG) is to assure that any one parked aircraft may
be easily moved away from its position without first moving other parked
aircraft. This division shall not apply to the parking of aircraft in aircraft
hangar buildings.
('74 Code, § 9-2-3) (Ord. 2697)
§ 7-1-1-4 MOTOR VEHICLE RULES.
   No person shall:
   (A)   (1)   Operate any motor vehicle or mobile equipment, other than
aircraft, on any airport apron, ramp, taxiway, runway or any part of the
landing field:
         (a)   Unless the operator of said vehicle or equipment has airport
business thereon, or in the case of an employee has been assigned to duty by
his employer in such areas; and
         (b)   Unless the motor vehicle or equipment being used by such
operator bears or has attached to it a permit sticker issued by the Mayor which
authorizes such vehicle to be in said areas on the airport.
      (2)   The permit sticker shall state on its face in which of areas, or
parts thereof, the vehicle or equipment may be used, and no person shall
operate the vehicle or equipment outside the areas listed on the permit
sticker.
      (3)   (a)   No such permit sticker shall be issued until the prospective
permittee has provided the city with proof of insurance of the following kinds
and amounts:
            1.   Bodily injury liability in the amount of $100,000 for each
person and $300,000 per occurrence;
            2.   Property damage liability in the amount of $50,000 or more.
         (b)   These policies shall provide for 10 days advance written notice
of cancellation to the City. Vehicles operated by the United States of America
are excepted from this insurance requirement.
      (4)   No such permit sticker shall be issued for motor vehicles or mobile
equipment to be used in the landing field area until there is installed in such
vehicle or equipment two-way radio equipment capable of receiving and
transmitting on the airport control tower frequency used for such
communications. Exceptions to this radio equipment requirement may be made by
the Mayor with respect to individual vehicles when the safety of the landing
area is not impaired by such exceptions; the exceptions shall be cancelled when
the safety of the landing area requires radio communication.
   (B)   Operate any motor vehicle or mobile equipment on the landing area of
the airport unless the required two-way radio equipment is turned on, in good
working order and capable of communicating with the airport control tower at
all times. This rule shall not apply to the vehicles or equipment for while a
radio equipment exception has been made under the terms of this article.
   (C)   Fail to yield the right-of-way to any aircraft or pedestrian when
operating any motor vehicle or mobile equipment on, entering or leaving any
ramp, apron, taxiway or landing area or any other place on the airport.
Aircraft moving or being moved on an apron, ramp, taxiway or the landing area
shall always have right-of-way over all motor vehicles or mobile equipment.
   (D)   Operate at night any motor vehicle or motorized ground equipment on
any apron, ramp, taxiway or the landing area unless such vehicle or equipment
has lights turned on which are clearly visible from the front and rear.
   (E)   Drive or operate any motor vehicle or mobile equipment in such a
manner that it is not under complete and safe control at all times.
   (F)   Drive any vehicle, walk, be carried to or be present on any apron,
taxiway, runway or any part of the landing field for the purpose of being a
spectator, sightseer, or for the purpose of taking pictures unless specific
permission therefor has been granted by the Mayor. Permission shall not be
granted unless such activities can be conducted in a manner which will not
lessen or impair the safety of aircraft or the operators or occupants thereof.
   (G)   Park any motor vehicle for any purpose in any place on the airport
which has not been specifically established for motor vehicle parking and which
has not been marked or posted by signs, lines or other means for identifying
such parking.
   (H)   Abandon any motor vehicle on the airport; fail to pay any lawfully
established motor vehicle parking fees; park any motor vehicle so as to
obstruct any airport roadways, driveways, parking areas, pedestrian ways or
grassed areas.
   (I)   Operate any motor vehicle or mobile equipment on any part of the
airport in excess of posted speed limits; fail to obey all signs, signals or
devices on the airport regulating motor vehicles and mobile equipment traffic
unless otherwise directed by a person authorized to direct airport motor
vehicle traffic. On the airport the Mayor is authorized upon the basis of
engineering and traffic study and investigation to place and maintain motor
vehicle traffic-control signs, signals and devices, to regulate the speed,
stopping, parking, turning or standing of motor vehicles and to divide motor
vehicle traffic into one-way lanes. All such traffic control signs, signals and
devices shall conform to the manual and specifications approved by the State
Highway Commission or resolution of the City Council.
   (J)   Park a motor vehicle in any area marked-off and identified by signs as
an employee parking area unless there is attached to the lower left-hand corner
of the rear window of such motor vehicle a current employee motor vehicle
parking permit issued by the Mayor. The Mayor shall mark-off and identify such
employee parking areas by signs and other means and is further authorized to
issue said permits to persons employed on the airport. When in or near the
vicinity of the Passenger Terminal Building of the airport, operators of motor
vehicles bearing employee motor vehicles in an employee parking area and at no
other place except for places where fees are charged and collected for parking.
   (K)   Fail to effectively brake any motor vehicle or motorized or
nonmotorized mobile equipment when such vehicle or equipment is unattended or
an operator is not at the controls if any.
   (L)   While on any ramp or apron, operate any motor vehicle or mobile
equipment at a speed in excess of five miles per hour when immediately adjacent
to any aircraft or at a speed in excess of 15 miles per hour when not
immediately adjacent to aircraft. This division shall not apply to operators of
motor vehicles or mobile equipment attending emergencies concerning danger to
persons or property, but such operators shall not drive at a speed greater than
is reasonable under the circumstances.
   (M) Operate any motor vehicle or mobile equipment on any ramp or apron so as
to enter any area where passengers are entering or leaving any aircraft.
   (N)   Operate any motor vehicle or mobile equipment between the passenger
terminal building and any facility operated by an Aircraft Service operator or
an Air Carrier other than via roadways provided for such traffic.
   (O)   The provisions of the Traffic Code set forth in
Chapter 8 as amended, pertaining to the Traffic Violations Bureau being §§
8-1-2-46 and pertaining to procedure on arrest, being §§
8-1-3-1 et seq., may be applied and used in the enforcement of this section. As
a first process of enforcement a citation or summons may be issued in lieu of
taking a person into custody for a violation of a provision of this section of
this article; and, no person shall fail to appear personally or by counsel at
the time and place fixed in such citation or summons; upon failure of the party
charged to appear, a warrant for his arrest shall forthwith issue by the
municipal judge for the offense specified in the citation or summons.
   (P)   No action taken under the authority of this section nor any provision
of this section shall be interpreted as dedicating as a public street, road or
highway any of the land at the airport constructed or used for motor vehicle
traffic.
('74 Code, § 9-2-4) (Ord. 2697; Am. Ord. 2764)
Penalty, see § 7-1-1-99
§ 7-1-1-5 GENERAL RULES.
   (A)   With respect to all airport users not under written contract, permit,
license or lease with the city who have been granted rights or privileges under
this article, such rights and privileges may be cancelled for failure to comply
with federal, state, county, or city laws, rules, regulations or ordinances, as
the case may be, which apply to the airport and conduct or activities thereon.
Such cancellation shall be accomplished by the Mayor. Any aggrieved person may
apply to the City Council for reinstatement of such rights and privileges.
   (B)   No person shall:
      (1)   Solicit funds, alms or fares on the airport for any purpose unless
he has received a permit to do so issued by the Mayor.
      (2)   Post, distribute or display signs, advertisements, circulars,
printed or written matter on the airport unless he has received a permit to do
so issued by the Mayor.
      (3)   Take any still, motion or sound pictures on the airport for
commercial purposes unless he has received a permit to do so issued by the
Mayor; permission shall be denied if airport safety or national defense might
be lessened or impaired in any way.
      (4)   Allow any dog or other animal which they own, control or are
responsible for to run or be at large on the airport unless leashed or
otherwise so confined as to prohibit it from running or being at large.
      (5)   Allow any dog or other animal which they own, control or are
responsible for to enter any space on the airport used for the purpose of
preparation or consumption of food or beverages, except a blind person may
accompany a seeing-eye dog to a place where food or beverages are consumed.
      (6)   Fail to deposit lost articles at the office of the city's Aviation
Department at its office at the airport when such articles come into his
possession while at the airport.
      (7)   Commence any construction, improvement, or remodeling activity on
the airport without prior approval of the Mayor.
      (8)   (a)   Fail to report as soon as possible any damage, injury or
destruction caused by him of any property on the airport, including real
property, personal property, improvements, fixtures, or equipment which is
owned or controlled by the city, or which is owned or controlled by any other
person or governmental agency and used in connection with the landing, take-
off, control or safety of aircraft.
         (b)   Damage shall be paid for by the person responsible for its
occurrence.
      (9)   Sanitation. No person shall:
         (a)   Release, deposit, blow, or spread any bodily discharge on the
floor, wall, partition, furniture, or any other part of a public toilet,
comfort station, terminal building, hangar, or other building on the airport.
         (b)   Place any foreign object in any plumbing fixture of a public
toilet, comfort station, terminal building, hangar, or other building on the
airport.
         (c)   Dispose of sewage, garbage, refuse, paper or other material on
the airport except in a receptacle provided for that purpose.
      (10)   Walk in a picket line as a picket or take part in a labor or other
public demonstration on any part of the airport except at a place specifically
assigned by the Mayor for picket lines or other public demonstrations. Such
place shall be located in a part of the airport which is not congested, and
under no circumstances shall the place assigned be located inside the passenger
terminal building or on any ramp, apron, taxiway or the landing area.
('74 Code, § 9-2-5) (Ord. 2697)
§ 7-1-1-6 FIRE, FUELING AND OTHER GROUND SAFETY RULES.
   (A)   Fire ­ General. No person shall:
      (1)   Smoke on any airport apron or ramp, in any hangar or shop, in any
aircraft, or in any other place where smoking specifically is prohibited by
sign or signs.
      (2)   Keep or store lubricating or waste oils in or about hangars;
provided, that such material may be kept in aircraft in the proper receptacles
installed in the aircraft for such purposes, or in containers provided with
safe draw-off devices, or in rooms or areas specifically approved for such
storage by the Mayor or the City Fire Department.
      (3)   Keep or store oily waste, rags or other rubbish other than in a
safe, self-closing metal receptacle. The waste, rags and rubbish shall be
removed from the airport each day.
      (4)   Conduct any doping or painting process in any room or building
unless such room or building is properly ventilated and unless room or building
has been approved for such use by the Mayor.
      (5)   Use inflammable liquids in the cleaning of aircraft, aircraft
engines, or aircraft parts or appliances unless such cleaning operations are
con-ducted in open air, or in a room specifically set aside for that purpose
which room shall be properly ventilated, equipped by the user with adequate and
readily accessible fire extinguishing apparatus, and shall conform to the
requirements of
Chapter 14, Article 2, Fire Code.
      (6)   Conduct any open flame operations on the airport without specific
permission from the Mayor.
      (7)   Store, stock or keep any material or equipment in such a manner as
to constitute a fire hazard.
      (8)   Tamper with, injure or destroy, or remove or cause to be removed
from its holder, container, reel or bracket any equipment or device used in
fire prevention or for extinguishing fires except in case of emergency or fire.
Such equipment shall not be taken from such hanger or building by any person
except in case of fire or emergency, or by written permission from the Mayor.
      (9)   Obstruct, injure or render inoperable any fire door, hangar door,
sprinkler riser, hose box, fire hydrant or pit or any fire fighting equipment
at any time.
      (10)   Fail to keep all floors in space which is leased, assigned or
otherwise made available for use, free and clear of fuel, oil, grease or other
foreign materials that could cause a fire or a slippery or otherwise unsafe
condition.
      (11)   Fail to immediately clean up and remove any fuel, oil or grease
from any paved surface upon which such person has spilled or dropped such
substance.
      (12)   Store any fuel or lubricants or volatile flammable substance, or
perform any service maintenance or repair on aircraft, except his own aircraft,
in the area or areas of the airport set aside, designated and used for
hangaring aircraft in what is known as a "T" hanger or "unit" hanger.
   (B)   Fueling and Defueling Aircraft. No person shall:
      (1)   Run or start any aircraft engine while the aircraft is being fueled
or defueled.
      (2)   Fuel or defuel any aircraft in any hanger or enclosed space.
      (3)   Smoke within 50 feet of any aircraft being fueled or defueled.
      (4)   Operate any radio transmitter or receiver, or switch any electrical
appliances on or off in any aircraft while it is being fueled or defueled.
      (5)   Fail to ground all points of static electrical potential of the
aircraft and the fuel dispensing apparatus while the aircraft is being fueled
or defueled.
      (6)   While engaged in fueling or defueling aircraft, fail to exercise
the highest degree of care to prevent overflow or spillage of fuel.
      (7)   Fuel or defuel any aircraft wherein there are passengers unless
during said operation a passenger loading ramp is in place at the cabin door,
the door of the cabin is open and a cabin attendant is at or near the door.
      (8)   Be or remain within 50 feet of any aircraft being fueled or
defueled except passengers in the cabin as provided for in this article or
persons engaged in the fueling, defueling, maintenance or operation of such
aircraft.
      (9)   Use any material during the fueling or defueling of any aircraft
which is likely to cause a discharge of static electricity.
      (10)   Fail to have within ready reach adequate fire extinguishers while
he is engaged in fueling or defueling any aircraft.
      (11)   Start the engine of any aircraft when aircraft fuel or volatile
flammable liquid is on the ground under such aircraft.
      (12)   Fail to ground all hoses, funnels, or other fueling or defueling
apparatus to prevent ignition of volatile liquids while such person is engaged
in fueling or defueling any aircraft. All such equipment shall be equipped with
proper grounding devices.
      (13)   While engaged in fueling or defueling aircraft, fail to make a
complete electrical ground between the aircraft, the fuel dispensing vehicle,
apparatus or equipment and the ground in accordance with applicable regulations
of the Federal Aviation Agency.
      (14)   Fuel or defuel any aircraft when any part of said aircraft is
closer than 50 feet to the passenger terminal building or any place where
persons are congregated or likely to be congregated.
      (15)   Operate any motor vehicle in any hangar unless its exhaust is
protected by screens or baffles to prevent sparks from escaping and to prevent
the propagation of flame.
      (16)   Smoke within 50 feet of any fuel carrier when the carrier is not
in motion, or when it is being used to fuel or defuel any aircraft.
('74 Code, § 9-2-6) (Ord. 2697)
§ 7-1-1-7 REMOVAL OF PERSONS OR PROPERTY.
   Any property or person on the airport in violation of the terms of this
article may be moved or put off the airport by the Mayor.
('74 Code, § 9-2-7) (Ord. 2697)
§ 7-1-1-99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person who violates the provisions of this article for which no
other penalty is set forth, shall be subject to the general penalty provision
of this code set forth in §
1-1-99.
   (B)   Any person who violates airport parking regulations shall be subject
to the penalty set forth in §
8-1-3-99(B)(2)
('74 Code, § 9-2-8) (Ord. 2697)
PART 2: AIRPORT ADVISORY BOARD
§ 7-1-2-1 CREATION OF THE BOARD.
   There is hereby created a body to be designated as the Albuquerque Airport
Advisory Board, hereinafter referred to as the "Board."
('74 Code, § 9-6-1) (Ord. 152-1967)
§ 7-1-2-2 BOARD MEMBERS.
   The Board consists of nine members, one of which shall be a representative
of a neighborhood adjacent to the Albuquerque International Airport. All
matters not covered in this ordinance shall be governed by the provisions found
in §§
2-6-1-1 et seq. Members of the Board shall serve without compensation.
('74 Code, § 9-6-2) (Ord. 152-1967; Am. Ord. 8-1990)
§ 7-1-2-3 DUTIES OF THE BOARD.
   The City Council hereby charges the Board with the following duties:
   (A)   To recommend to the city actions, decisions, policies, modifications,
changes in operational methods or structures at the Albuquerque International
Sunport and Double Eagle II Airport, as in their opinion will further the
purposes of the city in providing useful air service centers for the state and
people of New Mexico.
   (B)   To advise the Director of Aviation in adopting rules and regulations
for the management, operation and control of the Albuquerque International
Sunport and Double Eagle II Airport.
('74 Code, § 9-6-3) (Ord. 152-1967; Am. Ord. 40-1989; Am. Ord. 39-1994)
§ 7-1-2-4 FUNCTION OF THE BOARD.
   The City Council recognizes that the laws of the state and the Charter of
the city do not allow the delegation of governmental authority; therefore, it
is asserted that the function of the Board hereby created shall be one of
investigation and advice to the Director of Aviation, the Mayor, the City
Council and other governmental offices of the city. To facilitate the
performance of this function, the Board is hereby authorized to conduct
hearings to confer with appropriate authorities, to discuss with existing and
prospective airport patrons, and to use every lawful means, inquire and study
in order to arrive at sound conclusions with relation to the problem of
aircraft, traffic, services and control. The Board may request staff,
stenographic and clerical assistance, which the Mayor is directed to furnish
insofar as possible, subject to existing statutory and budgeting limitations.
No architect, engineer, lawyer consultant or other person may be employed by
the Board on other than a volunteer basis without prior approval of the City
Council.
('74 Code, § 9-6-4) (Ord. 152-1967; Am. Ord. 40-1989)
§ 7-1-2-5 MEETINGS.
   The Board shall meet within a reasonable time after completing its
organization, fix a regular time and place for meetings and adjourn from time
to time as business a quorum of the Board shall consist of four regularly
appointed members. All meetings of the Board shall be public.
('74 Code, § 9-6-5) (Ord. 152-1967)
§ 7-1-2-6 ANNUAL REPORT.
   The Board shall file an annual report with the Mayor and City Council of its
activities, meetings and progress and shall submit reports on its progress with
the Master Air Center Plan as expeditiously as possible.
('74 Code, § 9-6-6) (Ord. 152-1967)
§ 7-1-2-7 ACTION ON REPORTS.
   All reports and recommendations of the Board shall be made to the City
Council through the office of the Mayor and all actions taken by the City
Council relating to airport management shall be communicated to the Airways
Board through the office of the Mayor.
('74 Code, § 9-6-7) (Ord. 152-1967)
§ 7-1-2-8 DUTIES OF THE DIRECTOR OF AVIATION.
   Among the duties of the Director of Aviation are:
   (A)   To provide the Board with any and all public documents, reports,
evaluations, recommendations and other information, in a timely manner.
   (B)   To in all matters, cooperate with and assist the Board in its efforts
to accomplish its duties as stated herein.
('74 Code, § 9-6-8) (Ord. 40-1989)
PART 3: ALBUQUERQUE INTERNATIONAL SUNPORT
§ 7-1-3-1 REAL PROPERTY LEGAL DESCRIPTION.
   All of the real property situate in Bernalillo County, New Mexico, and
described as follows is hereby officially designated and is hereinafter
referred to as the Albuquerque International Sunport:
   Tracts A-2, A-3, A-4, B, C, D, E, F, and G-1 of Municipal Addition Number
Nine as replatted in document 9216382, filed on February 25, 1992 and recorded
in Volume 92 C, Folio 27, and
   A six acre parcel in Section 4, T.9N., R.3 E., N.M.P.M., filed on April 25,
1972 in Volume 917, Folio 177, and
   Tract D-2, Lands of The City of Albuquerque, Albuquerque International
Airport, filed on August 7, 1991 in Volume 91 C, Folio 163, and
   Tract B, Lands of University of New Mexico, filed on August 29, 1991 in
Volume 91 C, Folio 187, and
   Parcel A, filed on April 27, 1984 in Book D210A, page 349, and
   Parcel B, filed on April 27, 1984 Book D210A, pages 350 and 351, and
   A portion of Parcel E, filed on November 22, 1985 in Book D 256, page 67,
and
   Lots 9 through 21, Airport Business Park, filed on May 25, 1983 in Volume C
21, Folio 82-2, and
   A portion of Tract A-1, Airport Park, filed on June 21, 1989 in Book D 365A,
page 178.
   The above described conveyances of real property were all filed in the
office of the Bernalillo County Clerk, and
   A tract of real property in the N½ of Section 1, T.9.N., R.3.E., N.M.P.M.,
Bernalillo County, New Mexico, conveyed by deed Number 84291, pages 437 through
440, conveyed from the United States of America to the City of Albuquerque,
approved June 29, 1970, containing 45.423 acres, and
   Parcel C a tract of land situate within Section 9, Township 9 North, Range 3
East, N.M.P.M., Bernalillo County, New Mexico, being more particularly
described as follows: Beginning at the Northeast corner of said Section 9,
thence S 0 Degrees 03'27"E a distance of 707.03 to the True Point of Beginning;
thence, S 0 Degrees 03'27"E a distance of 3522.56 feet; thence, N89 Degrees
28'32"W a distance of 3288.52 feet; thence, N 0 Degrees 03'27"W a distance of
1618.79 feet; thence, N44 Degrees 59'07"E a distance of 650.03 feet; thence,
S45 Degrees 00'53"E a distance of 1000.00 feet; thence, N44 Degrees 59'07"E a
distance of 2998.55 feet to the True Point of Beginning and containing 167.1088
acres.
(Ord. 39-1994)
§ 7-1-3-2 VACATION.
   All existing public streets, ways and roads within the area described in §
7-1-3-1 are hereby vacated and made a part of the Albuquerque International
Sunport, subject to an easement reserved by §
7-1-3-3.
(Ord. 39-1994)
§ 7-1-3-3 EASEMENT.
   The city hereby reserves all of the streets, roads, and ways vacated by §
7-1-3-2 as an easement for public utilities whether municipally or privately
owned, which may be necessary for public use and benefit at the present time or
in the future.
(Ord. 39-1994)
§ 7-1-3-4 COMMERCIAL ACTIVITY.
   It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, or corporation, while at or upon
the Albuquerque International Sunport, to perform, or offer to perform any
services, or to furnish, or offer to furnish any goods, wares, merchandise or
intangible property, or to engage, or offer to engage in any commercial
activity, or to solicit patronage by advertising or otherwise for any
commercial activity, except the following: Persons, firms, and corporations who
have entered into contracts or leases with the city which specifically permit
the use of the Albuquerque International Sunport, or designated portions
thereof, for the carrying on of specified commercial activities, may engage in
such specified activities.
   Specified commercial activities that are contemplated include, without
limitation, contracts or leases regarding use of the consolidated rental car
facility, use of the commercial lane at the terminal, provision of food and
beverages on airport property, sale of newspapers, books and sundries on
airport property, provision of a variety of customer services related to the
operation of the Sunport. With regard to all the specified commercial
activities, the city may assess reasonable fees and charges related to use of
the Sunport property.
(Ord. 39-1994; Am. Ord. 38-1999)
§ 7-1-3-5 ENFORCEMENT.
   The Mayor and his designated representatives are hereby authorized and
directed to deny entry upon any part of the Albuquerque International Sunport
to any person, firm or corporation violating any provision of §§
7-1-3-1 through
7-1-3-4.
(Ord. 39-1994)
Penalty, see § 7-1-1-99
ARTICLE 2: TRANSIT SYSTEM
Section
Part 1: Transit Fares
   
7-2-1-1    Definitions
   
7-2-1-2   Fares
   
7-2-1-3   Violation
Part 2: Transit Boarding
   
7-2-2-1   Boarding area restrictions
   
7-2-2-2   Violation
PART 1: TRANSIT FARES
§ 7-2-1-1 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this article, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   TRANSIT DEPENDENT PASSENGER. A person without an independent source of
transportation who relies on public transit for local movement access.
   ZERO-FARE. A transit fare fully funded by means other than collecting fares
from passengers, enabling a passenger to board transit vehicles without paying
a fare or presenting a pass.
(Ord. 2023-028)
§ 7-2-1-2 FARES.
   (A)   ABQ Ride or Regular Bus Route Service. Shall be Zero-Fare.
   (B)   Albuquerque Rapid Transit Service. Shall be Zero-Fare.
   (C)   Sun Van Paratransit Service. Shall be Zero-Fare.
   (D)   Event and Premium Service Fares. For the purpose of providing transit
service for special events or premium services, the Chief Administrative
Officer may establish, for a period of up to 180 days, fares for the specified
limited services as long as it does not adversely affect Transit Dependent
Populations as defined in §
7-2-1-1 of this article.
(Ord. files.amlegal.com/pdffiles/AlbuqOrds/O-2023-028.pdf">2023-028)
§ 7-2-1-3 VIOLATION.
   It shall be a violation of § 7-2-1-2(D) for any person using the transit
system to fail to pay an event or premium service fare. Any person in violation
of §
7-2-1-2(D) is guilty of a misdemeanor and subject to the penalty provisions set
forth in § 1-1-99 ROA 1994.
(Ord. 44-1995; Am. Ord._2017-030; Am. Ord._2021-023; Am. Ord._2023-005; Am.
Ord. 2023-028)
PART 2: TRANSIT BOARDING
§ 7-2-2-1 BOARDING AREA RESTRICTIONS.
   (A)   Public transit boarding areas, including bus stops, are reserved for
passengers only. It shall be a violation of this section for any person to be
present in these boarding areas except for:
      (1)   A passenger boarding or exiting the designated public transit.
      (2)   A passenger waiting in the designated boarding area with the intent
to board the next designated public transit vehicle to arrive in the direction
of travel.
      (3)   City-authorized persons.
      (4)   An individual passing through the boarding area.
   (B)   It shall be a violation of this section for any person to be present
in these boarding areas at times outside the designated public transit service
hours except for city-authorized persons, except for the designated crosswalk
areas in the median for a reasonable amount of time to continue crossing the
street, and individuals passing through a boarding area.
(Ord._2017-030; Am. Ord._2023-005)
§ 7-2-2-2 VIOLATION.
   Any person in violation of §
7-2-2-1 is guilty of a misdemeanor and subject to the penalty provisions set
forth in § 1-1-99 ROA 1994.
(Ord._2017-030)
ARTICLE 3: ALBUQUERQUE FREE EXPRESSION AND SPECIAL EVENT PERMITTING
Section
   
7-3-1   Findings and intent
   
7-3-2   Short title
   
7-3-3   Definitions
   
7-3-4   Permit required
   
7-3-5   Exceptions
   
7-3-6   Application
   
7-3-7   Fees and insurance
   
7-3-8   Police, fire, and EMS protection
   
7-3-9   Grounds for denying a permit
   
7-3-10   Non-discrimination
   
7-3-11   Waiver
   
7-3-12   Review and issuance of permit
   
7-3-13   Alternative permit
   
7-3-14   Appeal procedure
   
7-3-15   Applicant/permittee dutiest
   
7-3-16   Prohibitions
   
7-3-17   Public conduct during special events
   
7-3-18   Revocation of permit
 
   
7-3-99   Penalty
§ 7-3-1 FINDINGS AND INTENT.
   The City Council finds that the exercise of the right of public expression
is a fundamental right essential to the democratic process. The city encourages
public expression that preserves city property and resources and maintains the
public health, safety, and welfare. The City Council finds that, to facilitate
and encourage public expression, the city must sometimes take precautions to
protect city property and resources, ensure the free flow of pedestrian traffic
on public streets and sidewalks, coordinate multiple uses of limited space on
public property, and generally promote public health, safety, and welfare.
   It is the intent of the city to establish a permitting process for special
events that impact important or substantial city interests, such as city
facilities, services, or streets; public health, safety, or welfare; and public
expression.
(Ord._2023-019)
§ 7-3-2 SHORT TITLE.
   This article shall be referred to as the "Albuquerque Free Expression and
Parade Ordinance" or "AFEPO" and may sometimes be referred to herein as "this
article."
(Ord._2023-019)
§ 7-3-3 DEFINITIONS.
   For purposes of this article, the following terms shall have the stated
meaning unless the context clearly requires a different meaning:
   ADMINISTRATION. The Mayor of the City of Albuquerque or the Mayor's
designee.
   ADMINISTRATIVE HEARING OFFICER. The City Hearing Officer, as defined by the
Independent Office of Hearings Ordinance (§§
2-7-8-1 et seq. ROA 1994), who conducts hearings of the propriety of a denial
of a permit application under this article.
   APPLICANT. Any person or agent who submits an application for a special
event permit pursuant to this article.
   CITY. The City of Albuquerque.
   CIVIC PLAZA. The park more particularly described as the city property
within the area bounded on the east by Third Street, on the north by Marquette
Avenue, on the west by Fifth Street, and on the south by Tijeras Avenue.
   COMMERCIAL SOLICITATION. Selling, offering for sale, selling and delivering,
bartering, exchanging, peddling or hawking any goods, wares, food, merchandise,
property either real or personal, tangible or intangible, or services.
   COMPLETED APPLICATION. An application submitted by an applicant that
contains all of the information needed by the Administration to review and act
upon the application, including all special event information and applicant
acknowledgments and any permits or permissions, agreements, insurance or fees
required by city departments for conducting the special event.
   EMERGENCY MEDICAL SERVICES (EMS). The sanctioned services rendered by New
Mexico licensed providers in response to an individual's immediate need for
medical care to prevent loss of life or aggravation of  physical or
psychological illness or injury.
   NATIONAL FIRE PROTECTION ASSOCIATION (NFPA). The Association that develops,
publishes, and disseminates consensus codes and standards intended to minimize
the possibility and effects of fire and other risks.
   PARADE. Any march, procession, or similar activity consisting of persons,
animals, vehicles, or bicycles, or a combination thereof, upon the streets,
parks, or other public grounds.
   PARK OR OPEN SPACE.
      (1)   Lands and facilities owned or managed by the Parks and Recreation
Department.
      (2)   Lands and facilities designated in the adopted Plan for Major
Public Open Space and acquired by the city.
      (3)   Any other lands so designated as parks or major public open space
at the time of acquisition or subsequently.
   PERMIT. The document issued by the Administration that authorizes a person
to conduct a special event.
   PERMITTEE. An applicant who is issued a special event permit.
   PERSON. Any individual, agent, firm, partnership, association, corporation,
company, organization, or entity of any kind.
   PUBLIC ASSEMBLY. Any meeting, parade, protest, march, vigil, demonstration,
picket line, rally, or similar activity in a public forum for a common purpose,
the primary purpose of which is the communication or expression of views or
grievances.
   PUBLIC FORUM. Places which by long tradition, by government fiat, or by
policy and practice have been devoted to assembly and debate, including
streets, sidewalks, and parks, or the current definition under Supreme Court of
the United States precedent.
   PUBLIC GROUNDS. All public grounds owned and under the control of the city
or any other governmental agency that are open to the use of the public.
   PUBLIC SIDEWALK. Any area or way the city or other public body or entity has
set aside for the general public for purposes of pedestrian traffic.
   SPECIAL EVENT. A special event is any organized public gathering, parade,
public assembly, or similar activity that requires at least three prearranged
city services, permits or other approvals from city departments, including, but
not limited to, any of the following:
      (1)   Street closures;
      (2)   Barricades;
      (3)   Solid waste services;
      (4)   Structures;
      (5)   Public parking arrangements not part of regular, day-to-day city
operations;
      (6)   Electrical service arrangements not part of regular, day-to-day
city operations;
      (7)   Food license;
      (8)   Noise permit;
      (9)   Liquor license;
      (10)   Police protection;
      (11)   Emergency medical services and/or fire protection; or
      (12)   Any other approval or service required by law, ordinance, rule or
policy.
   SPECIAL EVENT PERMIT. A permit as required by this article.
   SPECIAL EVENT PERMIT AREA. The physical area within which a special event is
conducted.
   STREET. Any place or way set aside or open to the general public for
purposes of vehicular traffic, including any berm or shoulder parkway, right-
of-way, or median strip thereof.
   STRUCTURE. A structure shall mean and include props and displays (such as,
but not limited to: crates, theaters, cages, and statues); furniture and
furnishings (such as desks, chairs, tables, bookcases, cabinets, platforms,
podiums and lecterns); shelters (such as tents, boxes, inflatables, booths and
other enclosures); wagons and carts; and all other similar types of property
which might tend to harm city land or street areas.
(Ord. 35-2005; Am. Ord. 31-2007; Am. Ord._2013-001; Am. Ord._2023-019)
§ 7-3-4 PERMIT REQUIRED.
   No person shall conduct any special event without a permit.
(Ord._2023-019) Penalty, see §
7-3-99
§ 7-3-5 EXCEPTIONS.
   Special event permits are not required for the following activities:
   (A)   Activities for which the Administration issues a film permit;
   (B)   Funeral processions;
   (C)   Students going to and from school classes or participating in school
sanctioned educational activities;
   (D)   A governmental agency, public body, or public entity; a city
department acting within the scope of its functions; or a person acting within
the scope of the current, documented authority of a governmental agency, public
body, public entity, or city department;
   (E)   Public assemblies, unless it is expected that such activity will
require at least three prearranged city services, permits or other approvals
from city departments. If a public assembly begins on a sidewalk but attracts
an unexpected number of participants such that the public assembly begins to
occupy a portion of a street, the Albuquerque Police Department shall
accommodate the activity by closing a segment, lane, or portion of the street
if so doing will not jeopardize the participants or inhibit the flow of traffic
on a major traffic route; provided, however, that the Albuquerque Police
Department is authorized to limit the available portion of the street;
   (F)   The requirements of this article shall not obviate department
requirements found in separate laws, rules and policies for events that do not
qualify as special events, nor supersede city departmental requirements found
in separate laws, rules, and policies for events that qualify as special
events.
(Ord._2023-019)
§ 7-3-6 APPLICATION.
   Applicants shall complete and sign a permit application as directed on forms
provided by the Administration.
(Ord._2023-019)
§ 7-3-7 FEES AND INSURANCE.
   (A)   If the permit application is for the use of any city facility or
public grounds, or if any city services will be required for the special event,
the applicant shall pay, prior to the issuance of a permit, charges for the
facility, public grounds, or services in accordance with any applicable
schedule of fees provided by the affected department.
   (B)   The applicant shall be required to provide appropriate proof of
insurance acceptable to the city that will cover any loss or damage to persons
or property. Applicants may be required to demonstrate the city has been named
as an additional insured party.
   (C)   An applicant shall be exempted from the requirement to obtain or
provide proof of insurance if the applicant meets the criteria for an insurance
waiver adopted by the city's Risk Management Division.
(Ord._2023-019)
§ 7-3-8 POLICE PROTECTION.
   (A)   The Administration shall determine whether and to what extent
dedicated police, fire, and EMS protection is necessary for the special event
for traffic control and the public health, safety, and welfare. The
Administration shall base this decision on the size, location, duration, time,
and date of the event, the expected sale or service of alcoholic beverages, the
number of streets and intersections blocked, and the need to detour or preempt
public travel and use of the streets. The Administration, as advised by
Albuquerque Fire Rescue, will determine the minimum number of required fire and
EMS providers and their required service capabilities, including basic life
support (BLS), advanced life support (ALS), fire suppression, and transport
capabilities. The number of required fire and EMS providers and service
capabilities will be based on guidelines set forth in the Federal Emergency
Management Agency's IS:15 Special Events Contingency Planning, NFPA, and any
relevant New Mexico state statute or administrative code. Except with regard to
applications pertaining to public assembly special events or where unlawful, if
stand-by of dedicated police, fire, or EMS protection is deemed necessary by
the Administration, the Administration shall so inform the applicant. The
applicant then shall have the duty to pay for the necessary police, fire, and
EMS protection so long as the Administration determines it is possible for the
event to take place without endangering the public health, safety, or welfare
and that adequate police, fire, and EMS resources are available. The
Administration's assessment of the quantity of spectators may be independent of
representations by the applicant.
   (B)   Applicants wishing to engage in public assembly special events are not
required to pay for any police, fire or EMS protection provided by the city.
(Ord._2023-019)
§ 7-3-9 GROUNDS FOR DENYING A PERMIT.
   (A)   The following constitute grounds for denying a permit under this
article:
      (1)   The event does not comply with the law, including this article;
      (2)   The property sought to be used for the special event is closed or
partially closed for construction, renovations, or other reasons;
      (3)   The conduct of the special event will substantially interrupt the
safe and orderly movement of pedestrian, vehicular, or other traffic contiguous
to the special event's route or location;
      (4)   The conduct of the special event will require the diversion of so
great a number of city police officers, firefighters, and EMS services to
properly serve the line of movement and the areas contiguous thereto as to
prevent normal police, fire, and EMS protection in the city;
      (5)   The concentration of individuals, animals, and vehicles at assembly
points of the special event will interfere with proper fire and police
protection of, or EMS service to, areas contiguous to such assembly areas;
      (6)   Except a public assembly, the conduct of the special event is
likely to cause injury to persons or property or a public health threat, or the
public assembly special event poses a clear and present danger to public
health, safety, or welfare;
      (7)   The special event is not scheduled to move from its point of origin
to its point of termination expeditiously, unless the direction or movement of
a public assembly special event is inextricably intertwined with the purpose of
the public assembly;
      (8)   Adequate sanitation and other required health facilities are not or
will not be made available in or adjacent to any assembly areas;
      (9)   There are not sufficient parking places near the site of the
special event to accommodate the number of vehicles expected and alternative
parking arrangements have not been planned;
      (10)   The applicant has not secured any police, fire, security, and EMS
protection required under this article;
      (11)   A special event or other permit application for the same time and
location has already been granted or has been received and will be granted, and
the location cannot accommodate all submitted special events at the same time;
      (12)   A special event or other permit application has already been
granted or has been received and will be granted pertaining to the same or
approximate time frame such that the police, fire, and EMS resources required
for that prior special or other event are so great in combination with the
subsequent proposed application that the resulting deployment of police, fire,
and EMS services would have an immediate and adverse effect upon the
participants or the public health, safety, or welfare, or property;
      (13)   The applicant has a history of, or demonstrates an inability or
unwillingness to, conduct the special event pursuant to the terms and
conditions of this article or other city permits or laws;
      (14)   The special event will require the exclusive use of a park or open
space in a manner that will adversely impact upon the use or access to those
areas by the general public for a prolonged period of time;
      (15)   The applicant has not obtained the timely approval of any other
public body or entity within whose jurisdiction a portion of the special event
will occur; or
      (16)   The special event is incompatible with the nature and traditional
use of the city property requested.
   (B)   The Administration may give priority to special events sponsored by
the city. The Administration may give priority to annual, semiannual, or other
regularly scheduled or recurring special events. In deciding priority, the
Administration may consider applicant compliance and previous special events.
   (C)   The Administration may condition any permit with reasonable
requirements concerning the time, place or manner of holding such event as are
necessary to coordinate multiple uses of public property, assure preservation
of public property and public places, prevent dangerous, unlawful or
impermissible uses, protect the safety of persons and property, or control
vehicular and pedestrian traffic in and around the special event, provided that
such requirements shall not be imposed in a manner that will unreasonably
restrict expressive or other activity protected by the New Mexico or United
States Constitutions.
(Ord._2023-019)
§ 7-3-10 NON-DISCRIMINATION.
   The Administration shall consider each application upon its merits and shall
not discriminate in granting or denying permits under this article based upon
membership in protected class under federal or state anti-discrimination law or
regulation or the City Human Rights Ordinance, §§ 11-3-1 et seq. ROA 1994.
(Ord._2023-019)
§ 7-3-11 WAIVER.
   Only the Chief Administrative Officer has the authority to grant waivers or
partial waivers of the requirements of this article.
(Ord._2023-019)
§ 7-3-12 REVIEW AND ISSUANCE OF PERMIT.
   (A)   The Administration shall act promptly upon a timely completed
application, but in no event later than ten business days after a completed
application is submitted. Except as otherwise provided in §
7-3-11(D) of this article, if a completed application is not submitted at least
11 business days before the proposed special event, the permit application will
not be timely and the Administration shall be under no obligation to review and
act upon the application. The Administration shall, after due consideration of
the date, time, and place of the special event, anticipated number of
participants, and city services required in connection with the event, make the
determination whether to review and act upon such permit application.
   (B)   Upon review of an application, the Administration shall issue a permit
unless, from a consideration of the application and from such other information
as may otherwise be obtained, one or more of the grounds listed in §
7-3-9 of this article for denying a permit exists.
   (C)   The Administration shall notify the applicant of any denial of a
permit under this article and the reasons for the denial by email and either
personal delivery or certified mail.
   (D)   With regard to public assembly special events that are in response to
rapidly evolving news events, the Administration shall expedite review of
completed applications.
(Ord._2023-019)
§ 7-3-13 ALTERNATIVE PERMIT.
   (A)   The Administration, in denying an application for a particular special
event permit, may authorize the conduct of the special event at a date, time,
location, or route different from that named by the applicant. An applicant
desiring to accept an alternate permit shall, within five business days after
notice of the action of the Administration, submit a written notice of
acceptance.
   (B)   An alternate special event permit shall conform to the requirements
of, and shall have the effect of, a special event permit issued under this
article.
(Ord._2023-019)
§ 7-3-14 APPEAL PROCEDURE.
   Any applicant shall have the right to appeal the denial of a special event
permit to an Administrative Hearing Officer. Appeals will be held in accordance
with the provisions of the IHO Ordinance, ROA 1994,
Chapter 2, Article 7, Part 8.
(Ord._2023-019)
§ 7-3-15 APPLICANT/PERMITTEE DUTIES.
   (A)   A permittee hereunder shall comply with all city permit directions and
conditions and with all applicable laws, regulations, and city ordinances,
rules, and policies.
   (B)   An applicant or permittee shall notify the Administration immediately
of any changes made to the scope or characteristics of a special event.
   (C)   The permittee, permittee's agent, or other person designated by the
permittee to lead such special event shall be present at the special event at
all times.
   (D)   The permittee, permittee's agent or individual designated by the
permittee to conduct and be responsible for the special event shall produce the
special event permit immediately upon demand by an authorized city official at
the special event and shall carry the special event permit upon their person
during the special event or conspicuously display a copy of the permit at the
special event venue in a method prescribed by the Administration.
(Ord._2023-019)
§ 7-3-16 PROHIBITIONS.
   The following prohibitions shall apply to all special events:
   (A)   No person shall stage, present, or conduct any special event without
first having obtained a permit as herein provided.
   (B)   No person shall conduct commercial solicitations on public streets,
rights-of-way, or sidewalks within 150 feet of a special event area during a
special event unless authorized by the permittee in accordance with the terms
and conditions of a permit.
   (C)   No permittee, permittee agent, or other individual designated by the
permittee to lead such special event shall knowingly fail to comply with any
term or condition of a special event permit.
(Ord._2023-019) Penalty, see §
7-3-99
§ 7-3-17 PUBLIC CONDUCT DURING SPECIAL EVENTS.
   (A)   No person shall drive a vehicle between the vehicles or persons
comprising a special event when such vehicles or persons are in motion and are
conspicuously recognizable as a special event.
   (B)   The Administration shall have the authority to prohibit or restrict
the parking of vehicles along a street constituting a part of the route of a
special event. The Administration shall post signs to that effect, and it shall
be unlawful for any person to park or leave unattended any vehicle in such
designated areas.
(Ord._2023-019) Penalty, see §
7-3-99
§ 7-3-18 REVOCATION OF PERMIT.
   The Administration shall have the authority to revoke a special event permit
immediately upon breach of the permit terms or conditions or permittee duties,
or when any grounds for denying a permit as set forth in this article are found
to exist. Cause for revocation shall include, but not be limited to, the
failure to obtain, or the revocation of, other permits required for the special
event. The Administration may revoke a special event permit when a public
emergency arises and the police, fire, or EMS resources required for that
emergency are so great that the deployment of police, fire, and EMS services
for the special event would have an immediate and adverse effect upon the
participants or the public health, safety, or welfare. The Administration shall
state the reasons in writing for the revocation. Revocation or lack of a
special event permit, including a failure to show proof of a special event
permit, shall be cause for the Administration to order immediate termination
and dispersion of a special event.
(Ord._2023-019)
§ 7-3-99 PENALTY.
   Any person violating any provision of this article shall be subject to the
penalties provided in §
1-1-99 ROA 1994.
(Ord._2023-019)
ARTICLE 4: INTERSTATE HIGHWAYS
Section
   
7-4-1   Interstate routes subject of federal and state law
   
7-4-2   City not to sign state right-of-ways
   
7-4-3   City to regulate speed or traffic only with state approval
   
7-4-4   City to regulate pedestrians, animals and vehicles
§ 7-4-1 INTERSTATE ROUTES SUBJECT OF FEDERAL AND STATE LAW.
   Wherever any U.S. Interstate Route, including No. I-25 and No. I-40,
controlled access facilities, pass through the city or abuts upon the city
limits, the said U.S. Interstate Route, shall only be subject to the Federal
Highway Act, Title 23 U.S. Code, the Constitution and Statutes of the State of
New Mexico, and the rules, regulations and requirements of the State Highway
Commission.
('74 Code, § 9-3-1) (Ord. 1461; Am. Ord. 1462; Am. Ord. 1490)
§ 7-4-2 CITY NOT TO SIGN STATE RIGHT-OF-WAYS.
   The City Council does hereby agree not to authorize or permit by ordinance
or in any other manner whatsoever, the installation of any signs, semaphores or
signals upon the right-of-way; nor authorize or permit any construction or
encroachment whatsoever within the right-of-way as shown on the Right of Way
Map designated as New Mexico Projects No. I-040-3(8)169, and No. I-025-4
(10)721, which are on file in the office of the Chief Highway Engineer, Santa
Fe, New Mexico.
('74 Code, § 9-3-2) (Ord. 1461; Am. Ord. 1462; Am. Ord. 1490)
§ 7-4-3 CITY TO REGULATE SPEED OR TRAFFIC ONLY WITH STATE APPROVAL.
   The City Council shall not pass any ordinance or resolution regulating or
attempting to regulate the speed of vehicles or the conduct of traffic on
Interstate Routes; nor by any action attempt to authorize or permit the
installation of any stop light, traffic light or any other traffic control
device or markings of any nature whatsoever on the Interstate Route without the
full knowledge and express written consent of the State Highway Commission
endorsed thereon.
('74 Code, § 9-3-3) (Ord. 1461; Am. Ord. 1462; Am. Ord. 1490)
§ 7-4-4 CITY TO REGULATE PEDESTRIANS, ANIMALS AND VEHICLES.
   The City Council does hereby prohibit any pedestrian, mounted person or
vehicle from entering upon or traveling along or across said U.S. Interstate
Routes, except at those points and places expressly designed and designated for
such purposes and in the manner prescribed by law; and further does prohibit
any person from permitting any livestock to wander or graze upon such highway
right-of-way or drive any livestock along, across or upon such highway right-
of-way at any time.
('74 Code, § 9-3-4) (Ord. 1461; Am. Ord. 1462; Am. Ord. 1490)
ARTICLE 5: SALE OF MOTOR VEHICLES
Section
   
7-5-1   Authority
   
7-5-2   Findings
   
7-5-3   Display and sale of motor vehicles
   
7-5-4   Towing
 
   
7-5-99   Penalty
§ 7-5-1 AUTHORITY.
   This article is enacted pursuant to Articles I and IX of the Charter of the
city and Article X, Section 6, of the Constitution of New Mexico.
('74 Code, § 9-7-1) (Ord. 110-1981; Am. Ord. 26-1996)
§ 7-5-2 FINDINGS.
   The City Council finds that sales of motor vehicles between private
individuals within the city frequently occur under circumstances of the buyer
not being able to determine the validity of the title held by the seller; that
frequently such titles are void; encumbered by liens, or otherwise invalid,
particularly of out of state registered vehicles brought into the city for
sale; that such sales often lead to avoidance of full payment of the state
excise tax. The City Council further finds that undeveloped and vacant land
along major thoroughfares is frequently used by individuals as de facto used
car lots for displaying vehicles for sale; that such places are frequently used
by those sellers of vehicles with defective titles to unwary buyers; that such
use of undeveloped and vacant property is often in violation of the City
Integrated Development Ordinance, is unsightly, creates dust problems,
constitutes a traffic hazard, and is a nuisance to neighboring developed
properties.
('74 Code, § 9-7-2) (Ord. 110-1981; Am. Ord. 26-1996; Am. Ord._2017-025)
§ 7-5-3 DISPLAY AND SALE OF MOTOR VEHICLES.
   Any vehicle may be displayed for sale and actually sold by a private
individual not a dealer as described in Section 66-1-4B(11)(c) NMSA 1978 only
at the current home or work address of the buyer or seller, except that a
vehicle may be displayed for sale at another location which satisfies the
provisions of the Integrated Development Ordinance if permission is obtained
from the owner or lessee of such property. The owner of any vehicle cited in
violation of this section who claims to fit within this exception shall bear
the burden of so proving. This section is not intended to prohibit the routine
use of a vehicle to which a for sale sign is affixed. Any person who takes
motor vehicles on consignment for sale must have ownership of the vehicle
assigned to such person upon taking possession of any vehicle for such purpose.
Any such person must also be licensed as a dealer and bonded with the Motor
Vehicle Division of the New Mexico Transportation Department. Motor vehicle
shall mean motor vehicle as defined in Section 66-1-4B(39) NMSA 1978. No person
shall display a vehicle for sale in violation of this section with the license
plate removed or concealed and/or the vehicle identification number concealed.
('74 Code, § 9-7-3) (Ord. 110-1981; Am. Ord. 47-1983; Am. Ord. 26-1996; Am.
Ord._2017-025)
§ 7-5-4 TOWING.
   (A)   A vehicle displayed for sale in a location in violation of this
article may be towed no sooner than 24 hours after a warning sticker is placed
on the vehicle.
   (B)   The warning sticker shall contain the following information:
      (1)   The date and time the warning sticker was affixed to the vehicle;
      (2)   A statement that pursuant to this article, if the vehicle is not
removed within 24 hours of the time the sticker is affixed, it may be taken
into custody and stored at the owner's expense;
      (3)   A statement that, if the vehicle is towed pursuant to this article,
the owner will have the opportunity to appeal said action at a hearing, and a
written notice of the procedure for said hearing will be mailed to the owner's
address as provided by State Motor Vehicle Division files or the files of the
appropriate motor vehicle regulatory agency of another state;
      (4)   The location and telephone number where additional information may
be obtained; and
      (5)   The identity of the affixing person.
   (C)   After a vehicle is taken into custody and stored pursuant to this
article, the affixing department shall provide notice of possession to the
owner of the vehicle by written notice. The vehicle owner may, within 15 days
of the date of the notice, appeal the action to the Independent Hearing
Officer. If a hearing is requested, procedures outlined in the IHO Ordinance,
ROA 1994,
Chapter 2, Article 7, Part 8, apply.
('74 Code, § 9-7-4B) (Ord. 110-1981; Am. Ord. 47-1983; Am. Ord. 26-1996; Am.
Ord. 25-2003; Am. Ord._2023-015)
§ 7-5-99 PENALTY.
   Any person who violates any provision of this article shall have committed a
petty misdemeanor and be subject to § 8-1-3-99(B).
('74 Code, § 9-7-4A) (Ord. 110-1981; Am. Ord. 47-1983; Am. Ord. 26-1996)
ARTICLE 6: [RESERVED]
ARTICLE 7: WRECKERS
Section
   
7-7-1   Short title
   
7-7-2   Definitions
   
7-7-3   Rotation lists
   
7-7-4   Warrant and certificates
   
7-7-5   Response time
   
7-7-6   Backup
   
7-7-7   Equipment
   
7-7-8   Storage yard equipment and operation
   
7-7-9   Minimum truck requirements
   
7-7-10   Application
   
7-7-11   Fee
   
7-7-12   Insurance
   
7-7-13   Investigation
   
7-7-14   Placement on rotation
   
7-7-15   Duties of wreckers
   
7-7-16   Removal from rotation
   
7-7-17   Appeals other than those for removal
   
7-7-18   Notification of police and owner
   
7-7-19   Release
   
7-7-20   Police hold
   
7-7-21   Seized vehicles
   
7-7-22   Regulations
 
   
7-7-99   Penalty
§ 7-7-1 SHORT TITLE.
   This article shall be known and may be cited as the "City of Albuquerque
Wrecker Ordinance."
('74 Code, § 9-9-1) (Ord. 3-1983; Am. Ord. 14-2000)
§ 7-7-2 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this article, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   BUSINESS HOURS. While on City of Albuquerque wrecker rotation list, the
wrecker's office must be open a minimum of Monday through Friday 7:30 a.m.
until 5:30 p.m., Saturday 9:00 a.m. until 3:00 p.m., and Sunday 2:00 p.m. until
5:00 p.m. Saturday and Sunday hours shall be considered "extended hours" as
defined in the Public Regulation Commission Tariff. While not on rotation, the
wrecker must keep regular business hours, open 7:30 a.m. until 5:30 p.m.,
Monday through Friday, as a minimum, with the exception of legal holidays.
   CLASS A, B, C, or D. That classification of wrecker equipment and service as
has been adopted by the Public Regulation Commission in its most current rules,
regulations and tariffs.
   EFFECTIVE DATE. June 1, 2000, unless otherwise specified in this article.
   HEARING OFFICER.  The City Hearing Officer, as defined by the Independent
Office of Hearings Ordinance (§§
2-7-8-1 et seq. ROA 1994), who shall mediate disputes and hear appeals as per
the terms of this article.
   MAYOR. The Mayor or his authorized designee.
   MVD. The New Mexico State Motor Vehicle Department.
   PERSON. Any person, firm, partnership, association, corporation, company or
organization of any kind.
   WARRANT. Operating authority issued to wrecker services by the Public
Regulation Commission.
   WRECKER. A person engaged in the business of offering the services of a
vehicle wrecker or towing service whereby motor vehicles are towed by use of a
tow truck so designed for that purpose or by a truck, automobile, or other
vehicle so adapted to that purpose.
('74 Code, § 9-9-2) (Ord. 3-1983; Am. Ord. 14-2000; Am. Ord. 31-2007)
§ 7-7-3 ROTATION LISTS.
   (A)   Class A and B wrecker services.
      (1)   Unless the Mayor or his designee, acting pursuant to §
7-7-18(J), determines otherwise, the following boundaries shall apply. The
boundaries for the Sectors identified below shall only be within Bernalillo
County. For purposes of Class A and B wrecker services, the geographic area of
the city shall be divided into three sectors by means of the following
boundaries:
         (a)   Sector I (East) shall be comprised of that area lying to the
east of the median of San Mateo Boulevard, to I-25, and north to the city
limits.
         (b)   Sector II (West) shall be comprised of that area lying west of
the median of San Mateo Boulevard north of I-40 to the city limits.
         (c)   Sector III (South) shall be comprised of that area lying west of
the median of San Mateo Boulevard to I-40 and south of I-40 to the city limits.
   (B)   In addition to the powers vested in the Mayor by this article, the
Mayor may, from time to time, adjust the number of sectors and their boundaries
listed under §
7-7-3 by recommendations of the Police Department or those wreckers appearing
on the rotation list.
   (C)   For purposes of Class C and D wrecker services, there shall be a
single rotation list for the entire city, and the entire city shall constitute
a single sector.
   (D)   Wreckers desiring to be placed on the rotation list for one of the
sectors designated above or for the Class C and D rotation list shall make
application to the Mayor or his designee as provided herein.
   (E)   The storage yard for Class A and B wreckers must be located in the
sector to which the wrecker is assigned.
   (F)   In the event an Albuquerque Police Officer or a Public Safety Aide or
other city employee has cause to remove any vehicle or motor vehicle from any
location within the city, and the owner or person responsible for the vehicle
cannot be found, is incapacitated, or has no preference for a particular
wrecker, the police radio dispatcher shall so notify the wrecker on call for
the sector in which such vehicle or motor vehicle is located. The city may
initiate a tow if the wrecker preferred by the owner or responsible person is
unable to be at the scene within 30 minutes.
   (G)   Wreckers on the Class A and B rotation lists shall be on call for a
period of one week; wreckers on the Class C and D rotation list shall be on
call for a period of one month.
   (H)   (1)   Notwithstanding the above, the Mayor or the Mayor's designee may
enter into an agreement with a wrecker whose storage yard is located outside of
the City limits if such wrecker can demonstrate that:
         (a)   The wrecker meets all of the requirements of this article and
all rules and regulations adopted by the city regarding wreckers;
         (b)   The wrecker's storage yard is located no further than five miles
outside the City limits driving on paved roads and within the County of
Bernalillo; and
         (c)   The wrecker has made arrangements that are satisfactory to the
city to allow access and entry by city personnel or their agents, including law
enforcement officers, to the place of business and/ or storage area located
outside of the city.
      (2)   If the Mayor or the Mayor's designee determines that the wrecker
has met the criteria herein, the wrecker shall enter into a written agreement
that states that the wrecker will comply with the provisions of this ordinance
and all applicable city and state laws, rules and regulations. The wrecker
shall also agree to allow access and entry by city personnel or their agents to
the wrecker's place of business and/or storage area. Finally, the wrecker shall
agree not to charge the non-consensual tow vehicles for mileage beyond the city
limits to the storage yard. The Mayor or the Mayor's designee may terminate the
agreement if the Mayor or the Mayor's designee determines that the wrecker has
failed to meet the requirements of this article or the agreement.
('74 Code, §9-9-4) (Ord. 3-1983; Am. Ord.14-1997; Am. Ord. 14-2000)
§ 7-7-4 WARRANT AND CERTIFICATES.
   No wrecker shall be placed on any rotation list until such wrecker has:
   (A)   Obtained a Warrant and is in compliance with all rules, regulations,
and tariffs governing wrecker and towing services promulgated by the Public
Regulation Commission.
   (B)   Obtained a Tax Clearance Certificate from the New Mexico Taxation and
Revenue Department dated within 90 days of the application.
   (C)   Obtained a Certificate of Good Standing from the Corporations Bureau
of the New Mexico Public Regulation Commission.
   (D)   Obtained a copy of the vehicle inspection certificate which is
required by the Public Regulation Commission's Department of Transportation or
any other documentation of safety compliance required by the PRC.
('74 Code, § 9-9-5) (Ord. 3-1983; Am. Ord. 53-1983; Am. Ord. 6-1984; Am. Ord.
14-2000)
§ 7-7-5 RESPONSE TIME.
   No wrecker shall be placed on any Class A and B rotation list until such
wrecker shall affirmatively state in writing a response time of no longer than
30 minutes, under normal circumstances. Such response time shall be the elapsed
time between notification of need for wrecker services and arrival of equipment
on the scene. In the event such wrecker on call is notified and does not appear
on the scene after an elapsed time of 30 minutes, the police radio dispatcher
may cancel the wrecker on call and may request service from the wrecker next
appearing on the rotation list. In all events, wreckers appearing on the Class
C and D rotation list shall respond as promptly as possible after notification
of the need for services. Six delays in one week rotation period shall be
grounds for removal from the rotation list as provided herein.
('74 Code, § 9-9-6) (Ord. 3-1983; Am. Ord. 14-2000)
§ 7-7-6 BACKUP.
   In the event that the Class A and B wrecker on call determines that response
to a request for service cannot be made within 30 minutes, or the Class C and D
wrecker on call determines such response cannot be made within a reasonable
amount of time, it shall be his responsibility to dispatch a backup wrecker and
to so notify the police radio dispatcher. No backup wrecker shall be called
unless such wrecker is currently on the City of Albuquerque rotation list.
Failure to call for backup wrecker service as outlined above, or failure of the
wrecker on call to notify the police radio dispatcher, shall be grounds for
removal from the rotation list, as provided herein. Any vehicle removed by a
backup wrecker shall be delivered to the storage area of the wrecker on call,
without additional charges, unless otherwise directed by the owner. The wrecker
initiating the call for back-up is responsible for the back-up wrecker's
response time. If the back-up cannot respond within 30 minutes, then the
primary wrecker shall be charged with the delay.
('74 Code, § 9-9-7) (Ord. 3-1983; Am. Ord. 12-1987; Am. Ord. 14-2000)
§ 7-7-7 EQUIPMENT.
   (A)   No wrecker shall be placed on a rotation list until such wrecker is
equipped as required by the Public Regulation Commission and is further
equipped as follows:
      (1)   Name and address of the company, and only one company, must be
permanently lettered on the wrecker's doors in lettering not less than two
inches high. The wrecker's Public Regulation Commission number must also be
permanently lettered on the wrecker.
      (2)   Two-way radio for company use, licensed by the FCC to operate on
commercial or automotive emergency frequency, providing two-way communication
between wrecker base and each wrecker. C.B. not accepted. Any approved radio or
telephone shall have a range sufficient to reach between the location of any
call that the city might require and the wrecker's home base.
      (3)   Container for debris, broom and shovel.
   (B)   Of the three tow trucks required in §
7-7-9, all must be equipped with a hydraulic winch. No more than two of the
three tow trucks required in §
7-7-9 may be a flatbed vehicle.
   (C)   Class A & B wreckers shall be mounted on a chassis which is no more
than 15 years old during the application year. Wreckers on rotation at the
effective date of this article shall have two years from the date of this
revision to comply with this requirement. However, this shall only apply to
existing equipment. From the date of this article, any additional wreckers
purchased must meet the 10-year old chassis requirement.
   (D)   The city official initiating any tow and the wrecker shall insure, to
the extent possible, that an appropriate tow truck is sent for the job,
considering size, weight, configuration, condition, location of the vehicle to
be towed, and any other factors relevant to the given tow.
('74 Code, § 9-9-8) (Ord. 3-1983; Am. Ord. 35-1983; Am. Ord. 53-1983; Am. Ord.
14-2000)
§ 7-7-8 STORAGE YARD EQUIPMENT AND OPERATION.
   (A)   Each wrecker on the rotation list is required to have one storage area
capable of holding a minimum of 125 City of Albuquerque non-consensual tow
vehicles. All City of Albuquerque non-consensual towed vehicles must be stored
within the specified storage area and cannot be parked on the street or in
another yard. The storage area must be fenced to a minimum of six feet in
height around the entire perimeter of the storage area, with adequate lighting
and locking facilities. The fence must be of heavy gauge wire, metal, concrete
block or wood construction. Such fence must conform to the existing zoning
requirements of the city or county, whichever is applicable. All wrecker
services must also maintain a building large enough to store at least two full
size passenger cars on which a police hold has been placed. The building, when
used for such storage, must be kept locked and not accessible to the general
public.
   (B)   There shall be an on-call agent of the wrecker available to the
storage area 24 hours a day, while on City of Albuquerque rotation, and there
shall be prominently posted and visible from the street a sign located near the
entrance to the storage area on which the name of the wrecker company owning
the lot and the telephone number of the agent responsible for releasing
vehicles is listed in lettering not less than two inches high. During the
period the wrecker service is on call, the city shall have access to vehicles
in the storage yard 24 hours a day at no additional cost to the city and shall
be allowed to make unannounced inspections without prior notice.
   (C)   During the period the wrecker service is on the City of Albuquerque
rotation list, the wrecker shall be open for business and able to release
vehicles during business hours, as that term is defined herein. Wreckers shall
not charge any additional charges to the citizens who pick up their vehicles
during regular or extended business hours other than those charges allowed
under the Public Regulation Commission Tariff.
   (D)   Wreckers on rotation will not be allowed to pool insurance, trucks, or
facilities, in any manner whatsoever, to meet the requirements of this
Ordinance.
('74 Code, § 9-9-9) (Ord. 3-1983; Am. Ord. 12-1987; Am. Ord. 14-1997; Am. Ord.
14-2000)
§ 7-7-9 MINIMUM TRUCK REQUIREMENTS.
   Each wrecker performing services under the terms of this article shall be
equipped with a minimum of three tow trucks for Class A and B rotation lists
and a minimum of one truck for Class C and D rotation list with that truck
equipped as required herein. Wreckers on rotation at the Effective Date of this
article shall have two years from the Effective Date to comply with this
provision. Violation of this section shall be grounds for removal from the
rotation list as provided herein. The Mayor may, if he finds it necessary in
order to assure damage free towing capability or to provide service to the
public, require additional equipment. Any change in equipment required will be
made part of the regulations promulgated pursuant to this article. If,
following the application, any wrecker's equipment is replaced or if any
equipment is added by a wrecker, or if any personnel are changed, the wrecker
must notify the Mayor or his designee in writing within 10 calendar days of
said changes.
('74 Code, § 9-9-10) (Ord. 3-1983; Am. Ord. 35-1983; Am. Ord. 12-1987; Am. Ord.
14-2000)
§ 7-7-10 APPLICATION.
   Application for inclusion on a rotation list shall be for a period of one
year, from July 1 through June 30, or any portion thereof. Application made by
June 1 shall be eligible for inclusion as of the following July1. Applications
submitted at another time shall be eligible when the Mayor has approved the
application and will not interrupt any current published rotation schedule.
Application shall be made upon blank forms prepared and made available by the
Mayor and shall state:
   (A)   The name, home address, home phone, business phone, and proposed
business address of the applicant.
   (B) The type of ownership of the business, i.e., corporation, limited
liability company, sole proprietorship, etc., all officers and agents of the
business, and affirm that the applicant is the legal entity that will be owning
and operating the wrecker business.
   (C) The location and description of the towing equipment owned or leased
only by the applicant. If such equipment is not owned by the applicant, a copy
of the lease must be included.
   (D)   That the applicant has available space for properly accommodating and
protecting all motor vehicles to be towed, as required under section
7-7-8 of this ordinance.
   (E)   Such other information as the Mayor shall find reasonably necessary to
effectuate the purpose of this article and to arrive at a fair determination of
whether the terms of this article have been complied with.
   (F)   That the applicant is the owner of a Warrant, Tax Clearance
Certificate from the New Mexico Taxation and Revenue Department, Certificate of
Good Standing from the Corporations Bureau of the New Mexico Public Regulation
Commission, copy of the Public Regulation Commission's Department of
Transportation's vehicle inspection reports, and has registered with the City
of Albuquerque. A copy of these Certificates and vehicle inspection reports
shall be included with the application.
   (G)   If the application is approved, and if any of the information
contained therein changes, the application shall be updated by the applicant
within 10 calendar days of such change. Failure to comply with this provision
shall be grounds for removal from the rotation list.
('74 Code, § 9-9-11) (Ord. 3-1983; Am. Ord. 12-1987; Am. Ord. 14-2000)
§ 7-7-11 FEE.
   Each application hereunder shall be accompanied by a $3,000.00 application
fee; $100 of this fee shall be nonrefundable and the balance refundable only
when the applicant is refused placement on the rotation list, provided that a
wrecker service applying for the Class A and B rotation may apply for the Class
C and D rotation upon the payment of an additional nonrefundable $500
application fee. Application fees shall be used to carry out the purpose and
intent of this ordinance and to enforce its provisions.
('74 Code, § 9-9-12) (Ord. 3-1983; Am. Ord. 12-1987; Am. Ord. 14-2000)
§ 7-7-12 INSURANCE.
   (A)   No wrecker shall be placed on a rotation list until he shall have
deposited with the Mayor the following:
      (1)   Motor Vehicle Liability:
         (a)   Each vehicle must have a minimum of Bodily Injury (BI) limits of
$1,000,000 and Property Damage (PD) limits of $500,000; or
         (b)   A combined single limit of $1,000,000.
      (2)   Garage Keepers Legal Liability: minimum of $250,000 for classes A &
B, and $500,000 for class D.
      (3)   Garage Liability: minimum of $500,000.
      (4)   Motor Truck Cargo: Class D must have a minimum of $500,000.
   (B)   A certificate of insurance is to be filed with the City of Albuquerque
and each policy is to have the City of Albuquerque listed as an additional
insured.
   (C)   Workers' Compensation. Since this ordinance requires participating
wreckers to have three tow trucks and three drivers, each wrecker on the
rotation list is therefore required to have workers' compensation insurance
under the applicable state statute § 52-1-6 NMSA 1978, as amended. Proof of
said insurance must be filed with the City and attached to the application.
   (D)   Each policy required herein shall name the city as additional insured
and shall contain an endorsement providing for 30-days written notice to the
city by the insurer in the event of any material change or cancellation. Said
written notice must be sent to the City of Albuquerque Risk Management
Division, P.O. Box 470, Albuquerque, NM 87103, by certified mail, return
receipt. No policy shall meet the requirements of this section if it includes a
provision disclaiming liability for failure to give such notice. One copy of
each certificate of insurance for each policy shall be mailed to the City of
Albuquerque, Risk Management Division, P.O. Box 470, Albuquerque, NM 87103 by
certified mail, return receipt. A second copy, including all endorsements,
shall accompany any application submitted under the terms of this article.
Wreckers must state on the application who their agent is and provide the
agent's contact telephone number and address.
('74 Code, § 9-9-13) (Ord. 3-1983; Am. Ord. 12-1987; Am. Ord. 54-1993; Am. Ord.
14-1997; Am. Ord. 14-2000)
§ 7-7-13 INVESTIGATION.
   Within ten days after receipt of an application as provided for herein, the
Mayor shall cause an investigation to be made of the applicant and of his
proposed operation.
('74 Code, § 9-9-14) (Ord. 3-1983; Am. Ord. 14-2000)
§ 7-7-14 PLACEMENT ON ROTATION.
   The Mayor shall place a wrecker on a rotation list in the year for which the
wrecker has applied when the Mayor finds:
   (A)   That the applicant is the owner of a Warrant to provide wrecker
service;
   (B)   That insurance policies as required by this article have been
procured, and the appropriate certificates provided to the City of Albuquerque;
   (C)   That the applicant and all employees have a valid license from the
State of New Mexico, Motor Vehicle Division, and are fit and proper persons to
conduct or work for the proposed business, none of whom have ever been
convicted of a felony;
   (D)   That all the requirements of this article and regulations promulgated
pursuant to it and all other laws of the state and this code of ordinances and
any other applicable ordinances of the city have been met; and
   (E)   That applicants whose business location and/or storage area is outside
the city boundary have agreed in writing to comply with the provisions of this
article and all other applicable city and state laws, rules, and regulations,
and have made arrangements that are satisfactory to the city to allow access
and entry by city personnel to the business and/or storage area. Further, that
they have agreed not to charge City of Albuquerque non-consensual tow vehicles
any mileage in excess of that to the city limits.
('74 Code, § 9-9-15) (Ord. 3-1983; Am. Ord. 35-1983; Am. Ord. 12-1987; Am. Ord.
14-1997; Am. Ord. 14-2000)
§ 7-7-15 DUTIES OF WRECKERS.
   A wrecker placed on a rotation list hereunder shall be subject to the
following conditions:
   (A)   Wreckers shall keep and maintain towing equipment which is required
under this article and under the rules and regulations promulgated by the
Public Regulation Commission in a good operating condition.
   (B)   Wreckers shall charge for their services such rates as may be fixed by
tariff of the Public Regulation Commission. No fees other than those allowed by
said regulating agency will be permitted.
   (C)   Wreckers, when responding to police dispatch accident calls, shall
remain at the scene until the roadway has been swept and all major debris is
removed by the wrecker so that the roadway is driveable to the satisfaction of
the police officer or public safety aide directing traffic at the scene.
   (D)   The wrecker shall whenever possible give a business card with
pertinent information to the owner or agent of the vehicle being towed.
   (E)   Wreckers shall comply with all rules, regulations and tariffs
governing wrecker and towing services issued by the Public Regulation
Commission and shall satisfy due process requirements as required by law in the
impoundment of any vehicles, the assessment of charges for services rendered,
and the attachment and execution of any lien.
   (F)   Wreckers shall make full, detailed disclosure to the owner/agent, at
the time they release a vehicle, and at any time inquiry is made, of the fees
for towing and other allowed Public Regulation Commission costs and of the
available grievance procedures.
('74 Code, § 9-9-16) (Ord. 3-1983; Am. Ord. 35-1983; Am. Ord. 14-2000)
§ 7-7-16 REMOVAL FROM ROTATION.
   (A)   In addition to any other grounds for removal stated herein, the Mayor
may recommend suspension or removal of a wrecker from a rotation list whenever
he has probable cause to believe any of the following:
      (1)   The placement on the rotation list was procured by fraudulent
conduct or false statement of a material fact or that a fact concerning the
applicant was not disclosed at the time of application and such fact would have
constituted just cause for refusal to place the applicant on a rotation list.
Such fraudulent conduct or false statement shall not only remove the applicant
from rotation, but shall deny them the privilege of participating in the
rotation for a year from the date of removal.
      (2)   The wrecker employed a police band radio to obtain information as
to the location of the scene of an accident for a disabled vehicle.
      (3)   The wrecker paid in the form of a gratuity to any third person not
involved in an accident for information as to the location of that accident.
      (4)   The wrecker has violated a tariff by overcharge.
      (5)   The wrecker has violated any of the requirements of this article or
any of the rules and regulations as established by the Mayor or any of the
rules, regulations or tariffs of the Public Regulation Commission or any other
state law or city ordinance.
      (6)   The wrecker has received three or more consumer or APD complaints,
which the wrecker has received written notification of and to which they have
not responded in writing, and/or the wrecker has been the subject of two or
more enforcement actions by the Public Regulation Commission where the wrecker
has been found liable.
      (7)   The wrecker, if subject to §
7-7-3(G), has failed to comply with the provisions of this article or the
agreement with the city.
   (B)   (1)   A wrecker shall be granted a hearing by the hearing officer
after written notice by registered mail or by personal service before
suspension or removal from the rotation list may be undertaken. The hearing
shall be held within 14 working days of the notice which must contain a
statement of the facts upon which the Mayor has acted. At the hearing the
wrecker and any other interested person shall have the right to present
evidence.
      (2)   If, after such hearing, the hearing officer finds that this article
has been violated, he may suspend or remove the wrecker from the rotation list.
The hearing officer shall make written findings of facts upon which the
decision was made.
   (C)   A wrecker removed from rotation pursuant to this section shall not be
permitted to submit an application to be included on a rotation list for one
year from the date of its removal. If a wrecker decides to so reapply, it shall
follow all procedures for application as set out herein, including payment of
an application fee pursuant to §
7-7-11, as though the wrecker had never appeared on a rotation list.
   (D)   If any party, including the city, feels the hearing officer acted
improperly, or that such action as the hearing officer took is arbitrary,
capricious, or unlawful, said party shall have the right to appeal to the
Second Judicial District Court. The hearing officer shall maintain a record of
all appeals heard before it, and all appeals to the District Court shall be
from the record. Said record shall consist of a transcript or magnetic
recording of all testimony taken during the hearing, all exhibits offered, all
plans and specifications as may have been required and a copy of the hearing
officer's decision. The filing of an appeal in the District Court does not
itself stay enforcement of the decision of the hearing officer, but the hearing
officer may grant, or the District Court may order, such a stay upon
appropriate terms.
   (E)   Reasonable notice of the time, place, and nature of the hearing shall
be afforded to all parties. In conducting a hearing, the hearing officer shall
afford all parties an opportunity for a full and fair hearing, including right
to counsel and the right to call and examine witnesses, introduce exhibits and
cross-examine witnesses who testify. The hearing shall not be bound by the
technical rules of evidence. Notwithstanding the above, the hearing shall be
conducted in an orderly manner, and the hearing officer shall exclude all
irrelevant, immaterial, and unduly repetitious evidence.
   (F)   A nonrefundable hearing fee of $50.00 shall accompany each appeal to
the hearing officer filed pursuant to this Section.
('74 Code, § 9-9-17) (Ord. 3-1983; Am. Ord. 14-1997; Am. Ord. 14-2000; Am. Ord.
38-2002)
§ 7-7-17 APPEALS OTHER THAN THOSE FOR REMOVAL.
   (A)   Any party aggrieved by an order or decision of any official under this
article, except a decision of removal which has already been upheld by the
hearing officer, or aggrieved by any decision or practice of any wrecker
appearing on a rotation list, or aggrieved by any towing authorized by any city
employee pursuant to this article, may appeal such grievance to the Mayor to
hear such appeal.
   (B)   Written notice of such an appeal must be given to the Mayor within 30
calendar days after the order or notice of the decision is received by the
aggrieved party. The notice shall contain an enumeration of the order or
decision complained of, the date of said practice or of the issuance of such
order or decision, and a brief statement of the reasons why such practice,
order or decision is unlawful, unwarranted, or create an unnecessary hardship.
The 30-day period is jurisdictional and may not be waived.
   (C)   The hearing officer or his designated representative is authorized to
make efforts to secure an accord between the appellant and the official or
wrecker, if any, against whom the appeal is brought, and to make a written
record of such agreement. Such agreement shall be in lieu of the hearing and
decision provided for by this article.
   (D)   Hearing on Appeals shall be held within 30 calendar days after notice
of appeal is received. A hearing may be canceled by agreement of the appellant
and, if applicable, the wrecker or official who is the subject of an appeal.
   (E)   For the purposes of hearing appeals the hearing officer shall have the
power to make inspections and to require the submission of such plans and
specifications or other evidence as he deems necessary.
   (F)   On the hearing of an appeal the hearing officer shall have the power
to reverse, affirm or amend any order or decision of any official complained of
by the aggrieved party, require payment by the city for unauthorized or
unwarranted towing or storage, and to arbitrate disputes arising under
operation and enforcement of this article. Any decision of the hearing officer
pursuant to this section shall conform to all state and federal law, all rules
and regulations promulgated by the Public Regulation Commission, and the spirit
and intent of this article, and shall secure the public safety and convenience.
   (G)   In every appeal the hearing officer shall issue within five working
days a written decision amending, overturning, or granting variances as to each
grievance listed by the aggrieved party in his notice under division (B) above
or ordering such action as he deems appropriate in arbitrating a complaint or
dispute. Every decision or opinion of the hearing officer shall be made a part
of the official records of the city, and a copy of such decision or opinion
shall be given to the aggrieved party.
   (H)   If any party, including the city, feels the hearing officer acted
improperly, or that such action as the hearing officer took is arbitrary,
capricious, or unlawful, said party shall have the right to appeal to the
Second Judicial District Court. The hearing officer shall maintain a record of
all appeals heard before it, and all appeals to the District Court shall be
from the record. Said record shall consist of a transcript or magnetic
recording of all testimony taken during the hearing, all exhibits offered, all
plans and specifications as may have been required and a copy of the hearing
officer's decision. The filing of an appeal in the District Court does not
itself stay enforcement of the decision of the hearing officer, but the hearing
officer may grant, or the District Court may order, such a stay upon
appropriate terms.
   (I)   Reasonable notice of the time, place, and nature of the hearing shall
be afforded to all parties. In conducting a hearing, the hearing officer shall
afford all parties an opportunity for a full and fair hearing, including right
to counsel and the right to call and examine witnesses, introduce exhibits and
cross-examine witnesses who testify. The hearing shall not be bound by the
technical rules of evidence. Notwithstanding the above, the hearing shall be
conducted in an orderly manner, and the hearing officer shall exclude all
irrelevant, immaterial, and unduly repetitious evidence.
   (J)   A nonrefundable hearing fee of $50.00 shall accompany each appeal to
the hearing officer filed pursuant to this Section.
('74 Code, § 9-9-18) (Ord. 3-1983; Am. Ord. 14-2000; Am. Ord. 38-2002)
§ 7-7-18 NOTIFICATION OF POLICE AND OWNER.
   (A)   It shall be the duty of any wrecker performing services under the
terms of this article to deliver to the Auto Theft Unit of the Police
Department, within 72 hours after the removal of all vehicles, a completed tow
log form, which format has been approved by APD. Such form must be typed and
shall include a complete and accurate license plate number, a complete and
accurate vehicle identification number, and storage location of such vehicle.
   (B)   The wrecker shall further notify the owner of such vehicle in
accordance with the rules, regulations and tariffs of the Public Regulation
Commission, and shall provide the owner with notice consistent with the Motor
Vehicle Department regulations, prior to attachment and execution of any lien.
Failure to so notify either the Police Department or owner as outlined above
shall be grounds for removal from the rotation list as provided herein.
('74 Code, § 9-9-19) (Ord. 3-1983; Am. Ord. 14-2000)
§ 7-7-19 RELEASE.
   No vehicle removed pursuant to this article shall be released to anyone
unless such person shows proper personal identification, proof of ownership,
and in the case of an agent of the owner, proof of such agency.
   (A)   Proper personal identification shall be one of the following:
      (1)   Driver's license;
      (2)   Identification card with photo;
      (3)   Birth certificate;
      (4)   Military identification card; or
      (5)   Such other identification which the wrecker is willing to accept
and which reasonably identifies the claimant.
   (B)   Proof of ownership shall be one of the following:
      (1)   Current registration;
      (2)   Valid title in claimant's name;
      (3)   Title and bill of sale less than 30 days old; or
      (4)   MVD printout obtained from the County Sheriff's Office, the Police
Department, the State Police, or MVD field office.
      (5)   In the case of leased vehicles, the vehicle may be released to
lessee, lessor, or agent of either.
      (6)   Such other identification, which the wrecker is willing to accept
and which reasonably authenticates ownership.
   (C)   Proof of agency shall be either a signed power of attorney, signed and
notarized release from the owner, court order, or other proof commonly used in
the automotive towing trade.
('74 Code, § 9-9-20) (Ord. 3-1983; Am. Ord. 14-2000)
§ 7-7-20 POLICE HOLD.
   In the event a vehicle or motor vehicle removed pursuant to this article is
required to be impounded for evidentiary purposes or for other law enforcement
purposes pursuant to the laws of the United States or New Mexico or the
ordinances of the city, and pursuant to the Standard Operating Procedures of
the Police Department, a police officer may place a police hold on such
vehicle. The police hold may be oral initially; however, within 72 hours after
such impoundment, notification in writing of the police hold shall be
transmitted to the wrecker. If such notification is not transmitted, any oral
police hold shall be considered rescinded. No vehicle on which a police hold is
in effect shall be released to anyone except a law enforcement agency until a
notification in writing rescinding the police hold is transmitted to the
wrecker, or if APD has not taken any action on the vehicle within seven
calendar days, then the hold shall be deemed released. The notification of
police hold may also direct the wrecker to store the vehicle inside a locked
building. Violation of this section shall be grounds for removal from the
rotation list as provided herein.
('74 Code, § 9-9-21) (Ord. 3-1983; Am. Ord. 14-2000)
Cross-reference:
   
Authority to remove vehicles; impoundment,
see §§ 8-5-2-1 et seq.
§ 7-7-21 SEIZED VEHICLES.
   Notwithstanding the above, the Chief of Police or designee may enter into an
agreement with one or more wrecker services, outside the normal rotation list,
in accordance with Purchasing Procedures for the investigation of criminal
activity, for limited purpose of seizing vehicles which may contain drugs,
weapons, or evidence which if towed by a rotation wrecker performing services
under the term of this article would in the opinion of the Chief of Police or
designee compromise the investigation.
   The wrecker service who the Chief of Police contracts with will meet all of
the requirements of this article and all rules and regulations adopted by the
city regarding wreckers and must in addition have a separate secured storage
area, which is in addition to the storage area required by §
7-7-8(A) capable of holding a minimum of 75 non-consensual seized vehicles.
This storage area must be fenced, to a minimum of eight feet in height around
the entire perimeter of the storage area, with adequate lighting and a screened
heavy gauge wire, metal, concert block or wooden fence which prevents viewing
of the vehicles from outside of the storage area and which is kept locked at
all times. The location of this storage area may not be disclosed to the
public, and no vehicle shall be identified or released to any person without
expressed written consent by the Chief of Police or designee. All files on
procurement will be maintained for no less than 7 years and all sensitive
information shall be redacted prior to release of these files to the public.
The wrecker service shall also agree to provide security 24 hours a day, seven
days a week, 365 days a year. The wrecker service shall also agree to allow
access and entry by law enforcement officers or their agents 24 hours a day,
seven days a week, 365 days a year. All persons employed by a wrecker service
to tow seized vehicles shall receive a minimum of two hours training from the
Albuquerque Police Department prior to towing any vehicle and shall be
retrained as required by the Chief of Police.
   The Mayor or the Chief of Police may terminate the agreement if the Mayor or
Chief of Police determines that the wrecker has failed to meet the requirements
of this article or agreement.
(Ord. 14-2000)
§ 7-7-22 REGULATIONS.
   The Mayor shall, subject to the approval of the Council, adopt reasonable
rules and regulations necessary or proper to carry out the purposes and
provisions of this article.
('74 Code, § 9-9-22) (Ord. 3-1983; Am. Ord. 12-1987; Am. Ord. 14-2000)
§ 7-7-99 PENALTY.
   Any one who violates the provisions of this article shall be subject to the
general penalty provisions set forth in §
8-1-3-99(A).
('74 Code, § 9-9-24) (Ord. 3-1983; Am. Ord. 14-2000)
ARTICLE 8: MOTOR VEHICLE EMISSIONS CONTROL
Section
   
7-8-1   Short title
   
7-8-2   Legislative findings and purpose
   
7-8-3   Definitions
   
7-8-4   Creation of mandatory inspection-maintenance program
   
7-8-5   Duties and powers of the board
   
7-8-6   Duties and powers of the director
   
7-8-7   Fees and permits
   
7-8-8   Enforcement, penalties, improper representation
   
7-8-9   Federal vehicle fleet testing
   
7-8-10   Joint powers agreement
   
7-8-11   Voluntary out-of-county participation
   
7-8-12   State participation
   
7-8-13   Creation of a special inspection-maintenance program for diesel and
heavy governmental vehicles
   
7-8-14   Sunset date
§ 7-8-1 SHORT TITLE.
   This article may be cited as the "Motor Vehicle Emissions Control
Ordinance."
('74 Code, § 9-1-1) (Ord. 47-1987)
§ 7-8-2 LEGISLATIVE FINDINGS AND PURPOSE.
   (A)   The Council finds that:
      (1)   Air pollution constitutes a significant detriment to public health
and welfare; that exhaust emissions from motor vehicles are the major source of
air pollution in Albuquerque.
      (2)   An effective system of periodic motor vehicle inspection,
maintenance, and consumer education will reduce the level of vehicular air
pollution and provide motorists with objective maintenance information
regarding their vehicles.
      (3)   The federal government has mandated to the several states and
municipalities the primary responsibility for periodic motor vehicle inspection
and maintenance, and that a mandatory inspection and maintenance program must
be implemented to comply with the federal Clean Air Act, 42 U.S.C. 7401 through
7671, as it may be amended from time to time.
      (4)   The federal and state law accommodate special limited extensions of
time for compliance in cases of extensive cost or difficulty of repair, as
necessary in unusual cases to avoid unnecessarily burdensome regulations.
      (5)   Certain small or declining classes of motor vehicles may exist
which have designs, modifications, or special uses which may justify exclusion
of such classes from all or part of the operation of this article, consistent
with federal and state law.
   (B)   The purposes of this article are to:
      (1)   Protect the health and welfare of the citizens of Albuquerque and
Bernalillo County; and
      (2)   Provide for the control and regulation of carbon monoxide emissions
from motor vehicles above certain levels as determined by the Board; and
      (3)   Require biennial mandatory inspection of certain motor vehicles in
order to comply with the federal Clean Air Act, as amended; and
      (4)   Accomplish the other purposes of this article while allowing a
reasonable time for acquiring and paying for unusual motor vehicle repairs
which may be necessary to comply with the Board's regulatory requirements,
recognizing the serious economic impact that such repair expenses might
otherwise have on some persons when unusually expensive repairs are required;
and
      (5)   Accomplish the other purposes of this article while avoiding
unreasonable or overly burdensome regulation by excluding certain classes of
vehicles from the requirements of this article, which classes do not
significantly contribute collectively to the ambient air pollution levels in
Bernalillo County and which cannot comply with the regulatory requirements
except with unreasonable cost or difficulty; and
      (6)   Eliminate sanctions imposed by the federal government due to
noncompliance with federal requirements, and to avoid the imposition of
additional sanctions by the Environmental Protection Agency.
('74 Code, § 9-1-2) (Ord. 47-1987)
§ 7-8-3 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this article, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   APPROVED EXHAUST GAS ANALYZER. A device for sensing the amount of air
contaminants, including carbon monoxide and hydrocarbons, in the exhaust
emissions of a motor vehicle. For the purposes of this article, this shall mean
analyzing devices of the nondispersive infrared type or any other analyzing
devices that meet or exceed the specifications established by the Board.
   AUTHORIZED INSPECTION STATION. A private business authorized by certificate
in accordance with §
7-8-5 to inspect motor vehicles and issue certificates of inspection as
provided by this article; in addition, it means stations established by the
city and county for testing government owned or leased motor vehicles.
   BIENNIAL. Every other year.
   BOARD. The Albuquerque-Bernalillo County Air Quality Control Board.
   CERTIFICATE OF INSPECTION. A document signed by a certified emissions
inspector stating that the vehicle described therein is either in compliance
(pass) or has an approved time extension in order to achieve compliance through
additional repairs or adjustments (time-limit extension).
   CERTIFIED EMISSIONS INSPECTOR.  An individual authorized by certificate to
perform inspections of a motor vehicle's exhaust emission control devices and
has met the requirements of the Board.
   DIRECTOR. The classified city employee selected in accordance with the
provisions of the Joint Powers Agreement to perform for the Joint Air Quality
Control Board those duties required to enforce and administer the provisions of
this article.
   EXHAUST EMISSIONS.  Carbon monoxide and all other substances emitted through
a motor vehicle's exhaust system, after passing downstream of the engine block
exhaust ports and exhaust emissions control devices, if any.
   EXHAUST EMISSIONS CONTROL DEVICE. Equipment designed by the manufacturer of
the vehicle and installed on a motor vehicle for the purpose of reducing
pollutants emitted from the vehicle, or a system or engine modification
designed by the manufacturer of the motor vehicle which causes a reduction of
pollutants emitted from the vehicle, or equipment designed by the vehicle
manufacturer to prevent damage to or tampering with other exhaust emissions
control devices.
   LOW EMISSIONS TUNEUP. Adjustments and repairs which can reduce motor vehicle
emissions; it may include any or all of the following procedures to be
prescribed by regulations promulgated by the Board pursuant to this article:
      (1)   Checking and setting to manufacturer's specifications the idle
mixture, idle speed, ignition timing, and dwell;
      (2)   Checking for proper connection of vacuum lines, electrical wires,
and proper operation of pollution control devices;
      (3)   Checking and replacement of air filter and positive crankcase
ventilation valve as necessary;
      (4)   For all motor vehicles equipped with computer controlled closed-
loop feedback exhaust emission control devices and systems, inspection of the
operation of the emission control system according to the motor vehicle
manufacturer's specified procedures, new vehicle warranty, and repair or
replacement as necessary.
   MODEL YEAR. The year of manufacture of the vehicle based on the annual
production period of the vehicle as designated by the manufacturer and
indicated on the title and registration of the vehicle. If the manufacturer
does not designate a production period for the vehicle, then the model year
means the calendar year of manufacture.
   MOTOR VEHICLE. Any vehicle which:
      (1)   Is propelled by a spark ignition, internal combustion engine;
      (2)   Has four or more wheels in contact with the ground;
      (3)   Is registered with the New Mexico Motor Vehicle Division to an
owner of record who is domiciled within Bernalillo County;
      (4)   Has a weight of less than 26,000 pounds as defined by Board
regulation;
      (5)   Is not a vehicle excluded by Board regulation;
      (6)   Is for regular use upon public roads and highways; and
      (7)   Is a 1975 model year or newer.
   PASS-FAIL CRITERIA. Those standards adopted in regulations by the Board
which specify the maximum allowable motor vehicle exhaust emissions under
appropriate conditions.
   PERSON. Any individual, partnership, firm, public or private corporation,
association, trust, estate, political subdivision or agency, or any other legal
entity or legal representative, agent, or assign.
   REGISTRATION AND RE-REGISTRATION.  Both original registration and renewal of
registration of motor vehicles as provided in the New Mexico Motor Vehicle
Code, Chapter 66 Articles 1 through 8 NMSA 1978.
('74 Code, § 9-1-3) (Ord. 47-1987; Am. Ord. 33-1988; Am. Ord. 24-1989)
§ 7-8-4 CREATION OF MANDATORY INSPECTION-MAINTENANCE PROGRAM.
   (A)   The Board, with the cooperation of the city, the county and the
Director and staff, shall design and adopt regulations for a program for the
mandatory biennial exhaust emission inspection of motor vehicles.
   (B)   Inspection stations shall be authorized and approved by the Director
if they are in compliance with the Board's regulations pursuant to this
article. Emissions inspectors shall be certified by the Director if they are in
compliance with Board regulations pursuant to this article.
   (C)   Each certified station shall be required to place a sign suitable for
prominent display at a location closest to the nearest thoroughfare that is in
conformance with the Board's regulations and which includes the amount to be
charged for the inspection with said price being displayed by using a minimum
of three-inch letters.
   (D)   Inspections are required under this article and as specified by Board
regulation. Such inspections shall only be performed by certified emission
inspectors according to the following in order of precedence as established by
the Board:
      (1)   All motor vehicles covered by this article shall be subject to and
pass a visual inspection for the presence and operational condition of any fuel
filler neck restrictor, catalytic converter, oxygen sensor, air pump or air
aspiration system if originally installed on the motor vehicle by the
manufacturer, or which equipment has been subsequently replaced with equipment
of identical or superior quality, or manufacturer's aftermarket parts that have
been tested and approved according to EPA procedure.
      (2)   For all motor vehicles covered by this article, an analysis of tail
pipe exhaust emissions by means of an idle mode test as defined by the Board's
regulations, including the following as applicable to the type of engine which
propels the vehicle or class of vehicle being tested:
         (a)   A determination according to Board-established criteria that the
vehicle's engine is functioning correctly with respect to the level of carbon
monoxide and any other pollutant that may affect the carbon monoxide control
system efficiency, by analyzing and measuring the vehicle's exhaust emissions
using an exhaust gas analyzer. Such analyzer shall be of the nondispersive
infrared type for sensing the amount of air contaminants, including carbon
monoxide and hydrocarbons, in the exhaust emissions of the motor vehicle.
Approved equipment shall minimally include computer operation with a non-
maintenance and tampering lockout feature, restriction of operation until the
unit is fully warm, provision for automated gas span and leak checks,
acceptance of vehicle ID and other information including tampering inspection
results, automatic capability of pass-fail decisions, provision of a hard copy
printout (which can include diagnostic information), and storage capability of
pertinent data on magnetic tape for program analysis and enforcement purposes.
The Board shall issue an analyzer specification that meets EPA's definition of
a computerized emission analyzer.
      (3)   A determination according to Board-established criteria that the
vehicle's exhaust system is without significant leakage from the engine block
exhaust ports to the end opening of the tailpipe.
      (4)   For all motor vehicles which are designed for operation with
unleaded fuel only, a determination made by inspection criteria established by
Board Regulations that misfueling with leaded fuel has not contaminated the
catalytic exhaust emissions control device. This determination is commonly
referred to as a lead litmus test.
   (E)   A written explanation may be provided to the person submitting the
vehicle for inspection disclosing the probable cause of any malfunction or
misadjustment responsible for the vehicle's failure to comply with the Board's
regulations.
   (F)   The schedule of inspection and compliance extension shall be as
follows:
      (1)   Motor vehicles shall be tested biennially on a schedule established
by the Board for compliance of their exhaust emissions and all required
pollution control devices in accordance with the Board's regulations. This
provision notwithstanding, new motor vehicles shall be exempt from inspection
following registration for the first 12 months of a new vehicle's operation as
determined by the date of its manufacturer's certificate of origin.
      (2)   Upon a motor vehicle's failure to meet Board's regulations, the
vehicle owner may get a low emissions tuneup and/or replace required pollution
control devices and then reinspection of the vehicle.
      (3)   If the low emissions tuneup fails to bring that motor vehicle's
exhaust emissions into compliance with the Board's criteria providing that
required pollution control devices are properly installed and functioning, the
vehicle's owner may be eligible to receive a special time extension as
determined by the Director for that vehicle of up to 12 months to get necessary
repairs and reinspection of the vehicle which demonstrates compliance, provided
the extension is requested in writing from the Director within ten days of
reinspection. No vehicle may receive more than one time extension prior to re-
registration. If a vehicle is sold within the 12-month extension period, it
terminates the extension and the vehicle may not be issued a compliance
certificate in Bernalillo County until its exhaust emission control devices and
exhaust emissions comply with the Board's regulatory requirements.
   (G)   The biennial motor vehicle emissions inspection-maintenance program
herein created shall commence regular operation on December 1, 1987, or as soon
as possible thereafter. The Board in cooperation with the Motor Vehicle
Department shall determine the dates when proof of compliance will be required
for registration and re-registration.
('74 Code, § 9-1-4) (Ord. 47-1987; Am. Ord. 33-1988; Am. Ord. 24-1989; Am. Ord.
32-1989)
§ 7-8-5 DUTIES AND POWERS OF THE BOARD.
   (A)   The Board, after notice and public hearings in accordance with §
9-5-1-6 of the Joint Air Quality Control Board regulations, shall adopt such
rules and regulations as it deems necessary for the implementation,
administration, regulation, and enforcement of the provisions of this article,
consistent with this article, the Joint Air Quality Control Board regulations
set forth in §§
9-5-1-1 et seq. and the New Mexico Air Quality Control Act, Sections 74-2-
1 through 74-2-17 NMSA 1978.
   (B)   In developing regulations for the implementation and enforcement of
this article, the Board shall give the weight it deems appropriate to all
relevant facts and circumstances, including but not limited to:
      (1)   The make, model year, economic value and any special use of the
motor vehicle;
      (2)   The cost of repair and maintenance of motor vehicle engines in
respect to exhaust emissions control and reduction, and the cost of repair and
maintenance of exhaust emissions control devices;
      (3)   The ambient concentrations of carbon monoxide in the county;
      (4)   The character and degree of injury to, or interference with health,
welfare, visibility, and enjoyment of property caused by exhaust emissions;
      (5)   The public welfare, including social and economic costs of
controlling and of failing to control air pollutants;
      (6)   The requirements of the federal Clean Air Act, as amended, and any
regulations, guidelines, and policies promulgated pursuant to the federal act;
      (7)   The requirements of the New Mexico Air Quality Control Act;
      (8)   Consumer protection;
      (9)   Other exhaust contaminants that affect the efficiency of the carbon
monoxide controls on motor vehicles.
   (C)   The Board shall provide by regulation for a schedule of biennial
inspections of motor vehicles coordinated with the State of New Mexico's Motor
Vehicle Division re-registration schedule and process.
   (D)   The Board shall provide by regulation for pass-fail criteria. The
Board shall update the pass-fail criteria when and as it deems necessary to
meet the purposes of this article.
   (E)   The Board shall provide by regulation that enforcement of this article
is linked to the vehicle registration process of the New Mexico Motor Vehicle
Division.
   (F)   The Board shall promulgate regulations regarding certification of
authorized inspection stations, emission inspectors, and the inspections to be
performed by authorized inspection stations, including but not limited to:
      (1)   Criteria for determining the eligibility of an person applying for
authorization to perform inspections under this article, including but not
limited to the adequacy of the facility, availability of the required testing
equipment, and the competence of the personnel who will perform the tests for
the inspection.
      (2)   The terms of each authorization.
      (3)   Establish procedures for the operation of an authorized inspection
station.
      (4)   Provide for checking and setting criteria limits for the accuracy
of testing equipment and procedures used by authorized inspection stations.
   (G)   The Board, after notice and opportunity for hearing equivalent to that
provided under §
9-5-1-6 of the Joint Air Quality Control Board regulations, may deny, suspend,
or revoke a person's approval as an authorized inspection station, or certified
emission inspector, if the Board finds that a person or the person's authorized
inspection station has done any of the following:
      (1)   Committed fraud or misrepresentation in connection with the
inspection of a motor vehicle under this article or a regulation promulgated
under this article.
      (2)   Violated this article or a regulation promulgated under this
article.
   (H)   The Board shall provide by regulation for all exclusions, if any, from
the operation of this article for any class of motor vehicle otherwise subject
to this ordinance, but only upon notice and public hearing as set forth above,
establishing a record of the Board's considerations of such exclusions
including the Board's findings of fact in respect to the pertinent factors set
forth in division (B) of this section.
   (I)   The Board shall promulgate regulations on model year 1980 and older to
place a ceiling on the amount of money a person spends on any one vehicle in
order for that vehicle to come into compliance with §
7-8-4(D)(1) of this article. The spending ceiling shall be based on the retail
value of the vehicle as determined by current automobile valuation methods.
   (J)   The Board shall set criteria for the issuance of time extensions by
the Director. Such criteria shall be based on the cost of repairs needed to
bring the vehicle into compliance under §
7-8-4(D)(1).
('74 Code, § 9-1-5) (Ord. 47-1987; Am. Ord. 24-1989; Am. Ord. 36-1989)
Statutory reference:
   Air Quality Control Act, see Sections 74-2-1 through 74-2-17 NMSA
§ 7-8-6 DUTIES AND POWERS OF THE DIRECTOR.
   (A)   The Director shall establish a follow-up referee inspection station
with the following responsibilities and capabilities:
      (1)   It shall be available without cost to any person requesting a
verification test to resolve a question or dispute concerning the results of an
emissions test conducted at any other authorized inspection station.
      (2)   It shall be available without cost to any motor vehicle which has
failed an authorized emissions inspection and wishes, after tuneup or other
relevant repair, to be issued a "pass" certificate of inspection.
      (3)   It shall issue certificates of inspection in the limited situations
designated in this division (A).
      (4)   This facility shall have at least one lane equipped with an
approved computer-operated exhaust-gas analyzer, staffed and operated during
normal business hours.
   (B)   The Director will receive, investigate, and maintain records for
complaints regarding authorized inspection stations or inspectors, and will
forward such complaints and the written results of the Director's investigation
to the Board for its final determination.
   (C)   The Director shall refer complaints in regard to the work of certified
emissions inspectors and inspection stations to the Consumer Affairs Department
of the Bernalillo County District Attorney's Office or the Consumer Protection
and Economic Crimes Division of the New Mexico Attorney General's office.
   (D)   Certificates of Inspection shall be issued to owners of tested
vehicles which comply with Board regulations. Pass and Time Limit Extension
Certificates of Inspections shall be serially numbered with distinctive style.
   (E)   The Director shall enter into a binding agreement with the New Mexico
Motor Vehicle Division (MVD) whereby motor vehicles covered by this article and
registered with the MVD to an owner who resides within Bernalillo County will
only be eligible for re-registration if the owner presents a valid Certificate
of Inspection issued by the Director with the registration application.
   (F)   The Director shall approve all exhaust gas analyzers which meet Air
Quality Control Board criteria to be utilized for the testing of exhaust
emissions of a motor vehicle.
('74 Code, § 9-1-6) (Ord. 47-1987; Am. Ord. 24-1989)
§ 7-8-7 FEES AND PERMITS.
   (A)   Stations. No private vehicle emission inspection and maintenance
station shall be authorized to test vehicles unless the station possesses a
valid permit issued by the Director. Permit fees shall be $200 per year per
station.
   (B)   Inspectors. All vehicle emission inspectors shall obtain a permit as
required by the Director. A permit fee of $35 per year is required for each
vehicle emissions inspector.
('74 Code, § 9-1-7) (Ord. 47-1987; Am. Ord. 33-1988; Am. Ord. 24-1989)
§ 7-8-8 ENFORCEMENT, PENALTIES, IMPROPER REPRESENTATION.
   (A)   As provided in Section 66-3-7 NMSA 1978, the New Mexico Motor Vehicle
Division may refuse registration or issuance of a certificate of title or any
transfer or registration upon the ground that the vehicle has not
satisfactorily met the requirements of the Board's exhaust emissions inspection
regulations as applicable and adopted pursuant to this article. This shall be
the primary method of enforcing the emissions requirements of this article.
   (B)   Nothing in this article shall be construed to prevent the Board or the
Director from utilizing any other enforcement mechanisms granted to them
pursuant to § 9-5-1-11 of the Joint Air Quality Control Board regulations in
this code of ordinances or the New Mexico Air Quality Control Act, Sections 74-
2-1 through 74-2-17 NMSA 1978.
   (C)   Law enforcement officers shall check for satisfactory re-registration
whenever they have occasion to stop or inspect a motor vehicle for any
nonemergency law-enforcement purpose. In addition, surveys specifically for
enforcing this article may be undertaken. This subsection shall not limit any
other lawful procedure available to law enforcement officers.
   (D)   Any person representing any place to be an authorized inspection
station which is not currently approved as such by the Director shall be
subject to the penalty provisions set forth in §
1-1-99.
   (E)   Any person who knowingly and falsely advertises that he employs a
certified emissions inspector or any individual who falsely holds himself out
as a certified emissions inspector shall be subject to the penalty provisions
set forth in §
1-1-99.
   (F)   It shall be a misdemeanor for any person subject to this article to
fail to have a vehicle inspection test performed pursuant to the provisions of
this article and regulations adopted thereto.
('74 Code, § 9-1-8) (Ord. 47-1987; Am. Ord. 33-1988; Am. Ord. 24-1989)
Penalty, see § 1-1-99
§ 7-8-9 FEDERAL VEHICLE FLEET TESTING.
   All federal vehicle fleets garaged within Bernalillo County are required to
participate in this program pursuant to Section 118 of the Federal Clean Air
Act, being 42 U.S.C. 7418, which requires that all federal facilities meet the
requirements of state and local vehicle emissions programs.
('74 Code, § 9-1-9) (Ord. 47-1987; Am. Ord. 33-1988)
§ 7-8-10 JOINT POWERS AGREEMENT.
   In order to administer and fund this article, the city intends to enter into
a joint powers agreement with Bernalillo County.
('74 Code, § 9-1-10) (Ord. 47-1987; Am. Ord. 33-1988)
§ 7-8-11 VOLUNTARY OUT-OF-COUNTY PARTICIPATION.
   If the principle place of employment of an individual is within Bernalillo
County, but the employee's motor vehicle is registered outside of Bernalillo
County, the employer shall encourage the employee to voluntarily participate in
biennial inspections consistent with this article.
('74 Code, § 9-1-11) (Ord. 47-1987; Am. Ord. 33-1988)
§ 7-8-12 STATE PARTICIPATION.
   If an automobile is registered to the State of New Mexico, or any of its
agencies or subdivisions, and is garaged in Bernalillo County, the Governor of
the State of New Mexico is requested to require said automobiles to participate
in biennial inspections consistent with this article.
('74 Code, § 9-1-12) (Ord. 47-1987; Am. Ord. 33-1988)
§ 7-8-13 CREATION OF A SPECIAL INSPECTION-MAINTENANCE PROGRAM FOR DIESEL AND
HEAVY GOVERNMENTAL VEHICLES.
   (A)   The Board, in cooperation with the city and the county, shall design
and adopt guidelines for a voluntary program to biennially test and recommend
repairs and adjustments to minimize air pollutant emissions from government-
owned buses, trucks, refuse loaders, and diesel fueled vehicles used in
Bernalillo County.
   (B)   The Director may designate governmental facilities as locations for
conducting emission tests of diesel and heavy governmental vehicles. Such tests
shall be evaluated by inspectors authorized by the Director.
   (C)   While this will be a voluntary government program, it is city policy
to comply with such recommendations for its diesel and heavy motor vehicles.
('74 Code, § 9-1-13) (Ord. 47-1987; Am. Ord. 33-1988)
§ 7-8-14 SUNSET DATE.
   This program shall cease to exist when the carbon monoxide nonattainment
area has officially been approved by the Environmental Protection Agency (EPA)
as an attainment area and redesignated accordingly, and when the city and the
county can demonstrate to the EPA the continued maintenance of the carbon
monoxide air quality standard in the absence of the vehicle emission control
program.
('74 Code, § 9-1-14) (Ord. 47-1987; Am. Ord. 33-1988)
ARTICLE 9: [RESERVED]
ARTICLE 10: VEHICLE NUISANCE ORDINANCE
Section
   
7-10-1   Short title
   
7-10-2   Findings and intent
   
7-10-3   Vehicle nuisance - specific violations
 
   
7-10-99   Penalty
§ 7-10-1 SHORT TITLE.
   This article will be known and may be cited as the "Vehicle Nuisance
Ordinance."
(Ord. 42-2002)
§ 7-10-2 FINDINGS AND INTENT.
   (A)   The City Council finds that there is a significant risk to the health
and safety of the community caused by drivers who abuse their privilege to
operate vehicles on the public streets and thoroughfares of Albuquerque by
engaging in racing, drag racing, exhibition driving, road rage taunting and
other activities as defined and prohibited by this Article. The City Council
finds that the problems addressed by this Article are matters of unique local
concern which are not being adequately deterred by general statewide laws, in
part, because monetary penalties alone do not deter nuisance drivers. The
temporary seizure or forfeiture of the vehicle of a nuisance driver are
appropriate remedial measures that will provide safer streets in the City of
Albuquerque.
   (B)   The Council further finds that the vehicles of nuisance drivers cause
considerable property damage, bodily harm and loss of life in the City of
Albuquerque. The danger, noise, fear and distraction produced and caused by
nuisance drivers leads to immeasurable harm to the community. The noise and
distraction generated by nuisance vehicles interferes with drivers' ability to
detect and respond to dangerous or emergency driving conditions and
circumstances including but not limited to horn noise and the siren noise of
official emergency vehicles. The purpose of this Article is to abate the
nuisance caused by the use of vehicles by irresponsible drivers by employing
progressive sanctions including temporary loss or permanent forfeiture of the
vehicle.
(Ord. 42-2002)
§ 7-10-3 VEHICLE NUISANCE - SPECIFIC VIOLATIONS.
   A vehicle is hereby declared a nuisance subject to the penalty provisions of
this Article if it is operated by a person or persons engaged in any of the
following enumerated acts:
   (A)   Drag Racing and Other Competitive Racing. It shall be unlawful for any
person or persons to engage or participate in a drag race or race for speed
within the city limits unless otherwise excepted herein. For purposes of this
section, a drag race or competitive race for speed shall be and the terms shall
mean any situation or circumstance where two or more persons operate vehicles
in such a manner as to cause such vehicles to be side by side on the roadway,
or one slightly ahead of the other, and either from a stopped position or while
moving, to accelerate such vehicles rapidly with the intent to race or
otherwise out gain the other. The provisions of this section shall not apply to
authorized or licensed race courses, or other areas which are specifically set
aside and supervised by the police department for police training. In any
prosecution for a violation of this section, intent may be shown from the
surrounding circumstances, from admissions from the violators, from the
observations of a law enforcement officer or in any other manner in which
intent may be proven in any civil or criminal action under New Mexico law.
   (B)   Exhibition Driving. It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in
exhibition driving of any vehicle within the city limits. For purposes of this
section, exhibition driving shall be and the term shall mean driving a vehicle
in such a manner that it creates or causes unnecessary or excessive engine
noise, tire squeal, skid or slide upon acceleration, braking or stopping or by
operating a vehicle in a manner that willfully creates excessive engine noise
by revving the engine. Exhibition driving shall also mean driving a vehicle in
a manner that causes the vehicle to unnecessarily turn abruptly or sway and
driving and executing or attempting one or a series of unnecessarily abrupt
turns. Exhibition driving shall also mean carrying passengers on a part of the
structure of the vehicle not designed for that purpose including but not
limited to the hood. In any prosecution for a violation of this section, intent
may be shown from the surrounding circumstances, from admissions from the
violators, from the observations of a law enforcement officer or in any other
manner in which intent may be proven in any civil or criminal action under New
Mexico law.
   (C)   Using a Vehicle as an Instrument of Threat or Intimidation - Road
Rage. It shall be unlawful for any person or persons to use a vehicle as an
instrument of threat or intimidation in the city limits. For purposes of this
section, use of a vehicle as an instrument of threat or intimidation, or so-
called road rage driving, shall be and the terms shall mean driving a vehicle
dangerously or conspicuously close to or behind or near another vehicle or
suddenly stopping or accelerating and rapidly switching lanes or positions on
the roadway with the intent to taunt or retaliate against another driver for
any reason. The use of one or more vehicles to willfully prevent another
vehicle from lawfully passing shall also be a violation of this section. In any
prosecution for a violation of this section, intent may be shown from the
surrounding circumstances, from admissions from the violators, from the
observations of a law enforcement officer or in any other manner in which
intent may be proven in any civil or criminal action under New Mexico law.
   (D)   Excessively Loud Electronic Sound or Music. It shall be unlawful for
any person or persons to play or produce excessively loud sound or music in any
vehicle operated on any public street in the city limits. For purposes of this
section, excessively loud electronic sound or music shall be and the terms
shall mean the use of any machine or device for reproducing sound including any
magnifying sound instrument used in the production or replication of music,
spoken words or other sounds and designed to enlarge the volume of any
instrument, voice or other sound including but not limited to radios, stereos
or so called "boom boxes." It shall be a violation of this section if any such
sound is plainly audible twenty-five feet from the subject vehicle.
   (E)   Modification of Exhaust Systems. It shall be a violation of this
section for any person to operate any vehicle in the city limits with a
modified exhaust system. A modified exhaust system shall mean any change or
alteration to the exhaust system found on the vehicle when it was originally
manufactured when such change results in noise that exceeds the noise the
vehicle made when manufactured. Any violation of ROA 1994 §
8-6-13 shall also be a violation of this paragraph.
(Ord. 42-2002; Am. Ord. 21-2009)
Penalty, see § 7-10-99
§ 7-10-99 PENALTY.
   A person who violates any provision of this Article shall be subject to the
penalty provisions of §
1-1-99 ROA 1994.
(Ord. 42-2002; Am. Ord. 31-2007; Am. Ord. 11-2008; Am. Ord._2023-015)
ARTICLE 11: [RESERVED]
 
ARTICLE 12: VEHICLE POLLUTION ABATEMENT
Section
   
7-12-1   Findings and intent
   
7-12-2   Short title
   
7-12-3   Definitions
   
7-12-4   Violation
   
7-12-5   Enforcement
§ 7-12-1 FINDINGS AND INTENT.
   (A)   City Council finds that there is a significant risk to the health and
safety of the community from vehicles that emit excessive visible pollutants
resulting from defects or inadequate repairs and maintenance. City Council
finds that some of these vehicles enter the city from outlying areas that do
not sufficiently test vehicles or regulate vehicle pollution. Vehicle pollution
is a matter of unique local concern in Albuquerque, in part, because of the
high traffic volume in comparison with the rest of the State of New Mexico.
   (B)   Visible pollution from inadequately maintained vehicles and vehicles
that have not undergone emissions testing is a nuisance that must be abated.
Drivers who fail or refuse to repair or replace these vehicles exacerbate the
nuisance and will be deterred only by an incremental enforcement approach that
begins with warnings, progresses to fines and ends with immobilization or
forfeiture.
   (C)   City Council finds that a reasonable person can observe a vehicle and
determine if the vehicle is emitting excessive visible exhaust in comparison to
other vehicles on the road.
(Ord. 40-2005)
§ 7-12-2 SHORT TITLE.
   This article shall be referred to as the Vehicle Pollution Abatement
Ordinance and may sometimes be referred to herein as "this article."
(Ord. 40-2005)
§ 7-12-3 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this article, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   CITY. The City of Albuquerque.
   CITY CLERK. The City Clerk of the City of Albuquerque.
   DEFAULT. The failure to timely pay a fine or repair or disable a vehicle.
   DEPARTMENT OF MOTOR VEHICLES or DMV. The Motor Vehicle Division of the
Division of Taxation and Revenue Department of the State of New Mexico or its
successor agencies.
   DRIVER. The person operating a motor vehicle at the time of a violation.
   EFFECTIVE DATE. The date of a Warning and Notice of Delivery for Inspection
or Notice of Violation that triggers the running of other time periods under
this article.
   HEARING OFFICER. The City Hearing Officer, as defined by the Independent
Office of Hearings Ordinance (§§
2-7-8-1 et seq. ROA 1994).
   IMMOBILIZE. To prevent a vehicle from being driven by use of a boot or other
restraint device.
   MAYOR. The Mayor of the City of Albuquerque or any person to whom the Mayor
has given authority.
   NOTICE OF DEFAULT. A document delivered to the registered owner and stating
that the registered owner has an unpaid fine or other uncured condition.
   NOTICE OF VIOLATION AND FINE DUE or NVFD. A document delivered to the
registered owner of a vehicle informing them that they failed to deliver a
vehicle for inspection as required under this article.
   PERSON. Any individual, partnership, firm, public or private corporation,
association, trust, estate, political subdivision, or agency or any other legal
entity or legal representative, agent, or assign. Where the operator is not the
owner, the owner shall have primary responsibility for compliance.
   POLICE OFFICER. A sworn member the Albuquerque Police Department, the
Bernalillo County Sheriff's Office, the New Mexico State Police or any other
public official with authority to stop a vehicle for a traffic violation in
Albuquerque.
   REGISTERED OWNER. The owner or owners of a vehicle according to the license
plate number or information obtained from the Department of Motor Vehicles,
from similar motor vehicle agencies outside New Mexico, from information
obtained from the Metropolitan Court, from police records, or from any other
documentation or methods reasonably relied upon by Police Officers. The
singular includes the plural.
   SEIZE. To take a vehicle from the registered owner for a failure to cure a
default.
   TREASURY DIVISION. The Treasury Division of the City of Albuquerque.
   VIOLATION or OFFENSE. A violation of this article.
   VISIBLE AIR CONTAMINANT EMISSION or VACE. Any fume, smoke, particulate
matter, vapor, or gas emitted from a vehicle in an amount that would be deemed
substantially excessive according to the observations of any reasonable person.
   VPMD. The Vehicle Pollution Management Division of the Environmental Health
Department of the City of Albuquerque.
   WARNING AND NOTICE OF DELIVERY FOR INSPECTION or WNDI. Written notice from
VPMD to a registered owner that a possible VACE has been observed and that the
vehicle must be brought to VPMD for examination.
(Ord. 40-2005; Am. Ord. 31-2007)
§ 7-12-4 VIOLATION.
   No registered owner shall cause or allow visible air contaminant emission in
the City of Albuquerque. Every vehicle in the city shall be maintained in good
working order and equipped with properly adjusted factory installed devices and
equipment or their replacements designed to control or reduce exhaust emissions
or air pollution.
(Ord. 40-2005)
§ 7-12-5 ENFORCEMENT.
   (A)   Violation observed by Police Officer. If a Police Officer personally
and contemporaneously observes a violation, the Police Officer shall stop the
vehicle and issue a citation under this article or other applicable law.
   (B)   Observation by others. Any person who observes visible air contaminant
emission may report the license number of the vehicle to VPMD or the city. The
Mayor may establish and advertise a special phone number for citizen reporting
of violations of this article. In addition to the license plate number, the
person making the report shall state the location where the violation was
observed and, if possible, include the color, make and model of the vehicle and
the name of any company written on the vehicle.
   (C)   Warning and Notice of Delivery for Inspection. Upon receipt of a VACE
report from any person, VPMD shall forthwith mail a Warning and Notice of
Delivery for Inspection (WNDI) to the address of the registered owner(s) of the
vehicle according to the records of DMV. VPMD shall not send a WNDI to any
vehicle with a valid emissions test performed within 90 days of the VACE
report. VPMD may independently investigate any vehicle reported to be producing
VACE and take appropriate action without regard to whether the vehicle has
passed an emissions test.
      (1)   Form and contents. The WNDI shall conspicuously state the effective
date of the WNDI, the time and location of the alleged violation, the license
number of the vehicle and the date by which the vehicle must be delivered to
VPMD for inspection. The WNDI shall not contain the name of the person who
reported VACE.
      (2)   Remedial measures. The registered owner shall have 30 days from the
effective date of the WNDI to deliver the vehicle to VPMD for inspection. The
inspection shall be provided at no cost. The inspection shall determine only
whether the vehicle produces VACE. VPMD is not required to diagnose the problem
or advise about repairs. A registered owner who brings a vehicle to VPMD for
inspection under this paragraph shall not be cited for a violation at the time
of the inspection. Upon inspection, VPMD shall inform the registered owner
whether the vehicle is in violation. If the vehicle fails, VPMD shall give the
registered owner a reasonable time for repairs not to exceed 60 days. After the
repairs are made on a vehicle that failed, the vehicle must be returned to VPMD
for a re-inspection and not be producing VACE. Failure to return for a re-
inspection and approval by VPMD is a violation.
   (D)   Notice of Violation and Fine Due. If the registered owner does not
respond to or comply with the WNDI or otherwise fails to make and prove repairs
under the above paragraph, the VPMD shall cause a Notice of Violation to be
mailed to the registered owner. The NVFD shall conspicuously and in bold face
type state: "Failure to pay this fine on time will lead to serious legal
consequences including the loss of your vehicle. After you have received this
NVFD, it is a criminal violation to sell, transfer or otherwise convey title to
the subject motor vehicle to another person unless all applicable fines are
paid and the vehicle is repaired or taken out of commission." The NVFD shall be
delivered to the address of the registered owner according to the address
registered with the Department of Motor Vehicles or its successor agencies. The
registered owner has a duty to timely notify DMV of a change of address and the
failure to do so does not entitle the registered owner to assert the defense of
inadequate notice. The mailing of a NVFD to the address of the registered owner
of a vehicle according to the records of DMV is constructive notice of
violation.
   (E)   Response to Notice of Violation and Fine Due. Within 30 days from the
effective date of the NVFD, the registered owner shall pay the fine or request
a hearing. To pay the fine, the recipient shall hand deliver certified funds to
the Treasury Division. To request a hearing, the recipient shall appear in
person at the office of the City Clerk and complete and file a notice of
request for hearing on a form available at the Clerk's Office. The City Clerk
shall provide a copy of the notice of appeal to VPMD and the Hearing Officer.
If the fine has not been paid and a notice of request for hearing has not been
filed within 30 days from the effective date of the NVFD, the City Clerk shall
deliver a Notice of Default to the Registered Owner, VPMD and the Albuquerque
Police Department as further provided below.
      (1)   No contest payment of fine. Upon receipt of an NVFD, the recipient
may elect to admit the violation and pay the fine. To proceed under this
section, the recipient shall admit the violation by signing and dating the NVFD
on a space provided and returning same to the Treasury Division together with
certified funds for payment of the fine. The recipient of the NVFD has ten days
from the date of payment of the fine to deliver the vehicle to VPMD and prove
that the vehicle no longer produces VACE or that, to the satisfaction of VPMD
by written evidence or actual inspection, the vehicle has been destroyed or
legally taken out of commission. A registered owner who fails to comply with
the preceding sentence shall be cited under ROA 1994 §
1-1-99.
      (2)   Request for hearing. The recipient of the NVFD may request a
hearing by filing a notice of request for hearing with the City Clerk.
   (F)   Default. If the city does not timely receive payment of the fine or a
notice of request for hearing, the registered owner is in default. Default
automatically results in liability to the registered owner for the violation
and the registered owner is barred from requesting or obtaining any hearing on
the merits after the date of default. A default results in additional penalties
of twice the amount of the underlying fine. A Notice of Default and demand for
payment shall be mailed to the address of the registered owner. The Notice of
Default shall inform the recipient that they have 15 days from the date of
mailing of the Notice of Default to pay the fine due. If the default is not
cured, the city may pursue all remedies for collection of a debt and is
entitled to an award of reasonable attorney's fees incurred. An uncured Notice
of Default shall be entered into the records of the Albuquerque Police
Department and any Police Officer who discovers a vehicle in the city in the
course of a traffic stop or otherwise may seize the vehicle for unpaid fines.
   (G)   Hearing. In the event of a demand for hearing, the Hearing Officer
will hold a hearing within 90 days from the effective date of the notice of
appeal. The Hearing Officer is in charge of the proceedings and may exclude any
person for inappropriate conduct. The rules of evidence are relaxed. VPMD has
the burden to prove by a preponderance of the evidence that the violation
occurred. The person who observed VACE is not required to attend the hearing.
The issue at the hearing is whether the registered owner delivered the vehicle
to VPMD as herein required and complied with any WNDI. Any person who defaults
on payment of a fine under this article is not entitled to a hearing on the
underlying violation. The Hearing Officer shall render a decision in writing 30
days after the close of the hearing to VPMD, the Treasury Division and the City
Clerk. Failure to pay a fine as ordered by the Hearing Officer within ten
consecutive days from the date of the decision is a default.
   (H)   Fine. The fine for a violation of this article is $100. The fine
doubles upon default. In addition to fines, a registered owner who fails to
cure VACE as provided herein shall be charged under ROA 1994 §
1-1-99. A Police Officer may seize and immobilize a vehicle for 90 days upon
discovery of a vehicle in the city with unpaid fines under this article. If the
registered owner fails to cure the default and pay all impound and storage
fees, the vehicle is subject to forfeiture. If a non-Albuquerque resident
defaults, the Department shall boot the vehicle of the delinquent or defaulting
party for 90 days if said vehicle is found in the city limits any time within
ten years of any violation of this article.
   (I)   Administration. The Mayor may promulgate regulations pertaining to the
implementation and enforcement of this article. The Mayor may enter a contract
with any person to receive fines, mail notices, adjudicate grievances, keep
records, account for monies received or perform any function under this article
in lieu of the city departments referred to herein.
(Ord. 40-2005)
ARTICLE 13: PRIVATE BOOTING OF MOTOR VEHICLES
Section
   
7-13-1   Short title
   
7-13-2   Findings
   
7-13-3   Definitions
   
7-13-4   Authority to immobilize
   
7-13-5   Booting regulations and notice requirements
   
7-13-6   Additional requirement for booting of vehicles on a commercial parking
lot
 
   
7-13-99   Penalty
§ 7-13-1 SHORT TITLE.
   This article may be referred to as the "Private Booting of Motor Vehicle
Ordinance."
(Ord. 25-2011)
§ 7-13-2 FINDINGS.
   The Council finds that the practice of using vehicle immobilization
("booting") devices by private parking lot owners or operators is allowed
within the city provided that the booting practices provide adequate notice to,
and remedies for, members of the public in accordance with this article.
(Ord. 25-2011)
§ 7-13-3 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this article, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   BOOT. Any vehicle immobilization device that is attached to a vehicle that
prevents the vehicle from being driven, or the act of placing such a device on
a vehicle.
   BOOTING SERVICE. Any person or other entity who engages in or who owns or
operates a business which engages in whole or in part in the booting of
vehicles. A booting service includes the owner of property that engages in the
booting of vehicles on the owner's property. A governmental entity that
immobilizes a vehicle is not a booting service.
   COMMERCIAL PARKING LOT. A private parking lot that provides parking for a
fee separately charged each time that parking occurs.
   MAYOR. The Mayor of the City of Albuquerque or the Mayor's designee.
   PRIVATE PARKING LOT. Any parking lot or area owned by a private entity that
provides parking spaces for a fee or requires the permission of the owner,
lessee or agent before a person may park at that location. A private parking
lot includes vehicle parking spaces in an apartment complex.
   VEHICLE. Every device in, upon, or by which any person or property is or may
be transported or drawn upon a highway, whether or not operational.
   VEHICLE IMMOBILIZATION. The impounding, incapacitating or immobilizing of
any vehicle, whether motorized or not, without the permission of the owner or
agent of the owner of the vehicle by the use of any device, wheel clamp, object
barrel, boot, mechanism or method, either attached to the vehicle or not, by
the owner or agent of the property upon which the vehicle is parked, that does
not allow the owner of the vehicle, or his or her authorized agent, to freely
move the vehicle from the place where it is immobilized.
(Ord. 25-2011)
§ 7-13-4 AUTHORITY TO IMMOBILIZE.
   (A)   No booting service shall place a boot on a vehicle within the city
limits unless it does so in compliance with the provisions of this article.
   (B)   A booting service shall conduct booting operations exclusively on
private property.
   (C)   No boot shall be placed upon any occupied motor vehicle or upon any
motor vehicle parked in accordance with the terms of use for the subject
property.
   (D)   A fee may be charged by a booting service to remove a boot, but such
fee shall not exceed $75.
   (E)   This article shall not apply to any entity that is acting on behalf of
a governmental agency.
(Ord. 25-2011)
Penalty, see § 7-13-99
§ 7-13-5 BOOTING REGULATIONS AND NOTICE REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   No fewer than 14 days prior to the commencement of a booting operation
at each and every location where a booting operation is to be conducted, the
booting service or owner of a private or commercial parking lot shall post, and
maintain in a conspicuous and well-lit location, a minimum of two signs no
smaller than 24 inches in height and 36 inches in width, setting forth at a
minimum:
      (1)   the date upon which a booting operation shall commence and terms of
use of the subject property;
      (2)   the fee for removal of a boot; and
      (3)   the name, address, and a 24-hour telephone number for the booting
service as provided in subsection (B) herein.
   (B)   Each booting service shall have 24-hour service and access seven days
per week ("24-hour telephone number"). A booting service shall respond to all
calls for release of a vehicle within one hour of a request for response.
   (C)   Upon being contacted at the 24-hour telephone number, the booting
service shall arrive at the location of the immobilized vehicle within one hour
and shall be available to remove a boot within that time period. Prior to
removal the booting service may require payment of a fee in accordance with §
7-13-4.
   (D)   Notice. Immediately upon attaching a boot to the vehicle, the booting
service shall affix a written notice to the driver's side window containing the
following information:
      (1)   a warning that any attempt to move the vehicle may result in damage
to the vehicle;
      (2)   the name and 24-hour telephone number of the booting service
responsible for removing the device;
      (3)   the maximum fee, established by this article required to remove the
vehicle immobilization device; and
      (4)   the time and reason the vehicle was immobilized.    
(Ord. 25-2011)
Penalty, see § 7-13-99
§ 7-13-6 ADDITIONAL REQUIREMENT FOR BOOTING OF VEHICLES ON A COMMERCIAL PARKING
LOT.
   (A)   On any commercial parking lot where booting is used there shall be a
method by which any person who pays for parking receives a receipt showing the
date and time when payment was made for such parking. Such receipt shall either
be issued by a person stationed at the commercial parking lot, by a machine
that issues a paper receipt upon payment, or by a credit card payment method
which allows payment by mobile phone where the receipt is logged in four
different formats: text message, e-mail, bank statement, and the booting
service's database. If the receipt is placed inside the vehicle so that it is
visible from the outside, the vehicle shall not be booted or otherwise
immobilized.
   (B)   The booting service shall provide a receipt unless the booting service
demonstrates to the city that it meets the following requirements:
      (1)   The booting service provides the credit card payment method
described in subsection (A) above;
      (2)   The booting service implements and adheres to a policy of issuing a
warning to a vehicle for parking without payment, and does not attach a boot to
a vehicle unless and until three prior written warnings have been issued to
that vehicle on three separate occasions;
      (3)   The booting service maintains electronic records of all warnings
issued to vehicles, which shall include the date, time and location of the
warning for each license plate number;
      (4)   The booting service does not attach a boot to a vehicle unless the
booting service can demonstrate by the records it maintains that the vehicle
has received three prior written warnings for parking without payment; and
      (5)   The booting service provides a process for resolving a protest of a
warning or the attachment of a boot to a vehicle, which process is set forth in
writing and displayed in a conspicuous and well-lit location on the site of the
commercial parking lot.
(Ord. 25-2011)
Penalty, see § 7-13-99
§ 7-13-99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person or entity violating any provision of this article shall,
upon conviction, be guilty of a petty misdemeanor and shall be subject to the
penalty provisions set forth in §
1-1-99 ROA 1994. Each and every day such violation is committed shall
constitute a separate offense.
   (B)   Nothing in this penalty section shall preclude the city from seeking
any equitable relief including but not limited to an injunction. In the event
any person or entity defaults on any obligation to pay a fee or fine under this
article, the city may collect such unpaid amounts by any method provided by
law.
   (C)   Remedies not exclusive. This section does not limit the remedies
available to municipalities under New Mexico law. If a civil remedy does not
appear adequate to protect the public or if a civil remedy is otherwise
unavailable for any reason, the city may avail itself of any other remedies
available at law or equity. This article does not limit the rights of any
person harmed by the actions of a booting service from pursuing their own
remedies.
(Ord. 25-2011)
ARTICLE 14: [RESERVED]
ARTICLE 15: AUTOMATED SPEED ENFORCEMENT
Section
   
7-15-1   Short title
   
7-15-2   Definitions
   
7-15-3   Violation
   
7-15-4   Enforcement
   
7-15-5   Administration
§ 7-15-1 SHORT TITLE.
   This article may be referred to as the Albuquerque Automated Speed
Enforcement Ordinance or "ASE."
(Ord._2021-024)
§ 7-15-2 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purposes of the Albuquerque Automated Speed Enforcement Ordinance,
the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or
requires a different meaning:
   ASE SYSTEM FINE. The fine assessed for a violation, as set forth in §
7-15-3 or successor provision under this article (or successor article of the
city's codified ordinances).
   ASE SYSTEM FINE NOTICE. A written document mailed to the address of the
registered owner or nominee stating that a violation has occurred and payment
is due.
   CAMERA SPEED DEVICE or "CSD”. The instrument that detects a violation of
this article. The definition includes but is not limited to cameras and
electronic speed detection equipment reasonably relied upon by police officers.
   CONTRACTOR. A person or entity that enters into a contract with the City of
Albuquerque to provide photographic or electronic evidence of a speed violation
through a CSD.
   DEPARTMENT. The Albuquerque Police Department.
   DRIVER. The person operating a motor vehicle at the time of a violation.
   IDENTIFY. To submit information on the actual driver of a vehicle sufficient
to allow the city to locate and notify the driver in lieu of the registered
owner, including but not limited to the name and address of the driver.
   NOMINATE or NOMINATION. A written statement by the registered owner
identifying the actual driver of a car as the responsible party for a
violation.
   NOMINEE. The person or entity identified by the registered owner as the
driver or responsible party.
   NUISANCE. The act of operating a vehicle in violation of this article.
   OWNER'S AFFIDAVIT. A written statement signed under oath and submitted to
the city or the city's contractor under penalty of perjury by the registered
owner of a vehicle who asserts therein that the registered owner was not
driving the vehicle at the time of a violation.
   RESPONDENT. An accused violator who has received an ASE System Fine Notice
and requested a hearing.
(Ord._2021-024)
§ 7-15-3 VIOLATION.
   Any action or conduct constituting a violation under §
8-1-2-6 of this Code of Ordinances, Section 66-7-104 NMSA 1978 of the New
Mexico State Motor Vehicle Code, or any other city or state laws pertaining to
speeding is a violation. This article does not apply to emergency vehicles
responding to an emergency.
(Ord._2021-024)
§ 7-15-4 ENFORCEMENT.
   (A)   Violation recorded by CSD. The contractor shall provide all evidence
of a CSD-recorded violation to the Albuquerque Police Department. The
Albuquerque Police Department shall review all CSD evidence provided by the
contractor.
      (1)   If the Albuquerque Police Department determines that a violation
has occurred and that a citation is warranted, the Albuquerque Police
Department shall cause an ASE fine notice to be delivered to the registered
owner.
      (2)   The registered owner is strictly and vicariously liable for the
violation unless one of the defenses herein applies. If there is more than one
registered owner, all registered owners shall be jointly and severally liable
for the violation.
   (B)   ASE fine notice.
      (1)   The ASE fine notice shall state and contain the name of the
registered owner or nominee, the effective date of the ASE fine notice, the
type of violation, the date, time, and location of the violation, a picture of
the violation, the license plate number of the vehicle, the name and
identification of the issuing Albuquerque Police Department official, the
amount of the fine, the response due date and the return address. The ASE fine
notice shall inform the registered owner or the nominee of the option to
complete community service in lieu of payment of the ASE fine, and the right to
request a hearing. The ASE fine notice shall clearly explain the process for
requesting a hearing, explain the hearing options, provide the deadline to
request a hearing, and identify where the request shall be submitted.
      (2)   Delivery. The ASE fine notice shall be delivered to the address of
the registered owner according to the address registered with the Department of
Motor Vehicles, from information obtained from the Metropolitan Court, from
Department Records, or from any other documentation or records reasonably
relied upon by police officers, or it shall be delivered to the address of the
nominee according to the owner's affidavit.
   (C)   Response to an ASE fine notice. The registered owner shall pay the
fine, elect to complete community service, file an owner's affidavit making a
nomination, or request a hearing by the response due date as indicated by the
ASE fine notice.
   (D)   Nomination. A registered owner not driving the car at the time of the
violation may either accept the responsibility and pay the ASE fine, or
identify the driver so an ASE fine notice can be sent to the driver.
      (1)   If the registered owner claims that another person was driving the
vehicle at the time of the violation, the registered owner shall so indicate on
the owner's affidavit and identify the person who was driving the vehicle. Any
registered owner who submits an owner's affidavit does so under penalty of
perjury.
      (2)   A new ASE fine notice will be delivered to the nominee. If the
nominee successfully appeals the allegation that they were the driver, the city
may proceed against the registered owner. The registered owner is also
responsible for payment of the ASE fine if the city cannot assert jurisdiction
over the nominee, subject to the remaining defenses available in this article.
   (E)   Default. If the city does not receive payment of the ASE fine, an
election to complete community service, a nomination, or a request for a
hearing by the response due date as indicated by the ASE fine notice, the
registered owner is in default. If the default is not cured, the city may
pursue all remedies for collection of a debt and is entitled to an award of
reasonable attorney's fees incurred.
   (F)   Hearing. Pursuant to Section 3-18-17, NMSA 1978, an individual may
select a mail-in hearing or an in-person or remote hearing option to contest an
automated speed violation. In the event of a demand for an in-person or remote
hearing, the Hearing Officer shall hold a hearing pursuant to the procedures
outlined in the Independent Office of Hearings '"IHO" Ordinance, ROA 1994, §§
2-7-8-1 to
2-7-8-9. The hearing shall be conducted following the rules of evidence and
rules of civil procedure for the district courts. In either hearing option, a
mail-in hearing, or an in-person or remote hearing, the Department has the
burden to prove the violation by a preponderance of the evidence. The
respondent has the burden to prove any defenses by a preponderance of the
evidence. If the Department prevails, the respondent shall pay the fine within
30 consecutive days from the date of the decision. Following a hearing, the
respondent may appeal the decision of the Hearing Officer to the District Court
within 30 days of the decision and may recover the costs of filing the appeal
if successful.
   (G)   Defenses. At a timely requested hearing, the respondent may present
the following defenses:
      (1)   The vehicle was stolen or otherwise being driven without the
registered owner's knowledge or permission at the time of the alleged
violation. The registered owner shall have a police report pertaining to the
theft to avail the owner of this defense.
      (2)   The ownership of the vehicle had lawfully been transferred and
conveyed from the registered owner to another person before the time of the
alleged violation.
      (3)   The evidence does not show that a violation was committed involving
the subject vehicle.
      (4)   The respondent is the registered owner, but was not driving the
vehicle at the time of the violation. To assert this defense, the registered
owner shall identify the actual driver and comply with the nomination
provisions in subsection (D) of this section.
      (5)   The registered owner did not receive notice because the ASE fine
notice was not mailed to the address of record with the Department of Motor
Vehicles.
   (H)   Penalty.
      (1)   A violation constitutes a civil infraction punishable by a fine of
$100 or completion of four hours of community service.
      (2)   A violator may elect service to the city as an alternative to
payment of fines. A violator who elects the option of service to the city in
lieu of payment of a fine does so voluntarily and is entitled to none of the
benefits conferred upon city employees, including, without limitation, worker's
compensation or the payment of any wages or benefits. The city is not
responsible for damages incurred as a result of such service except as
otherwise provided by law. The person seeking relief hereunder shall timely
request the option of service to the city in lieu of payment of a fine.
Services shall be rendered in not less than full hour increments and shall be
credited against the fine payable at a rate of $25 per hour. The Mayor or the
Mayor's designee shall establish procedures for administering this paragraph
including, but not limited to, the nature of services that may be performed,
the timeframe in which a respondent must complete their community service, and
consequences for failure to complete community service.
   (I)   Effect of Multiple ASE System Fine Notices in Default.
      (1)   Jurisdiction. This section of the ASE ordinance shall be enforced
on all streets and roadways within the city; on or in any city-owned parking
facility; on or in any city-managed parking facility; or on any other city-
owned real property within the city limits. When a street is the boundary line
between the city and the county, the entire public way shall be deemed within
the city.
      (2)   Notice of Multiple Concurrent ASE System Fine Notices in Default.
If an alleged violator is concurrently in default on one or more ASE system
fines, a letter shall be sent to the registered owner of such vehicle setting
forth:
         (a)   The name of the registered owner;
         (b)   The dates of the ASE system fines were incurred;
         (c)   The type of violation;
         (d)   The dates, times, and locations of the violations;
         (e)   The license plate number(s) of the vehicle(s);
         (f)   The amount of the respective fines;
         (g)   The citation numbers associated with the unpaid fines;
         (h)   The response due date; and
         (i)   The return address;
         (j)   The notice shall furthermore recite the prescribed "Responses to
an ASE fine notice" as set forth in §
7-15-4(C). The notice shall also inform the registered owner that the time to
appeal the fine notice or elect to complete community service in lieu of
payment has expired; and that if the registered owner fails to resolve a
sufficient number of unpaid ASE fines within 20 calendar days, such that the
registered owner no longer has more than one unpaid ASE system fine notices
concurrently in default for any given vehicle, the registered owner may be
subject to a parking citation and immobilization and impoundment of their
vehicle, if their vehicle is found to be parked on any street or roadway within
the city; on or in any city-owned parking facility; on or in any city-managed
parking facility; or on any other city-owned real property within the city
limits. All notices must include verbiage describing how to receive additional
information in the top five non-English languages spoken in Albuquerque.
(Ord._2021-024; Am. Ord._2023-017)
§ 7-15-5 ADMINISTRATION.
   (A)   The Albuquerque Police Department and the Department of Municipal
Development shall be responsible for administration of this article. Reasonable
rules and regulations may be promulgated by the Mayor or the Mayor's designee
to carry out the intent and purpose of this article.
   (B)   The revenue generated through ASE shall be retained and distributed in
accordance with the provisions of Section 3-18-17(A)(2) NMSA 1978 (2009).
      (1)   The revenue generated to the City of Albuquerque through ASE shall
be used exclusively for Vision Zero Traffic Safety Initiatives.
      (2)   All revenue used for Vision Zero Safety Initiatives shall be
displayed on a publicly available Vision Zero Dashboard that shall be updated
at least quarterly. The Vision Zero Dashboard shall show, at a minimum, Vision
Zero funding levels and sources, planned, current, and completed projects,
overviews of each project, project locations, and project costs.
   (C)   The contractor hired to aid in the administration of this program will
not be compensated based on the number of citations issued. The contractor
shall be compensated by a flat fee.
   (D)   An independent third-party lab shall perform a calibration test on the
CSD instruments used for speed detection at least annually.
(Ord._2021-024; Am. Ord._2023-017; Am. Ord._2025-032)
CHAPTER 8: TRAFFIC CODE
   Article
      
1:   GENERAL PROVISIONS
      
2:   TRAFFIC REGULATIONS
      
3:   MOTORCYCLES, BICYCLES, SCOOTERS AND TOY VEHICLES
      
4:   ANIMALS
      
5:   STOPPING, STANDING AND PARKING
      
6:   EQUIPMENT
ARTICLE 1: GENERAL PROVISIONS
Section
Part 1
   
8-1-1-1   Obedience to code required
   
8-1-1-2   Definitions
Part 2: Administration
   
8-1-2-1   Mayor ­ responsibility for management
   
8-1-2-2   Authority to make emergency regulations; test traffic control devices
   
8-1-2-3   Agreements with landowners for enforcement of traffic regulations on
privately- or publicly-owned land
   
8-1-2-4   Authority to install traffic control devices
   
8-1-2-5   Manual and specifications for traffic control devices
   
8-1-2-6   Authority to determine speed limits
   
8-1-2-7   Minimum speed limits and restrictions on the use of streets
   
8-1-2-8   Traffic lanes
   
8-1-2-9   No lane changing zones
   
8-1-2-10   No passing zones
   
8-1-2-11   Signs by controlled access roadways
   
8-1-2-12   Turning markers
   
8-1-2-13   Restricted turn signs
   
8-1-2-14   Left turn on red light
   
8-1-2-15   Restrictions on certain streets
   
8-1-2-16   Lane for slow moving traffic
   
8-1-2-17   Intersections where stop required
   
8-1-2-18   Stop signs
   
8-1-2-19   Yield signs
   
8-1-2-20   Dangerous railroad crossings
   
8-1-2-21   School crossings
   
8-1-2-22   Crosswalks and safety zones
   
8-1-2-23   Foot, bicycle and bridle paths, lanes, streets and routes
   
8-1-2-24   Parking or standing of government vehicles in the Broadway/central
business district
   
8-1-2-25   Stopping or standing or parking ­ markings, signs or meters required
   
8-1-2-26   Angle parking
   
8-1-2-27   Parking or standing adjacent to schools
   
8-1-2-28   Parking or standing on narrow streets
   
8-1-2-29   One-way roadway
   
8-1-2-30   Standing or parking on one-way roadways
   
8-1-2-31   Stopping, standing or parking near hazardous or congested places
   
8-1-2-32   Parking meter zones
   
8-1-2-33   Bicycle stalls and bicycle racks within stalls
   
8-1-2-34   Curb loading zone
   
8-1-2-35   Public carrier stops and stands
   
8-1-2-36   Loading or unloading at an angle to the curb
   
8-1-2-37   Commercial vehicles parking in alleys
   
8-1-2-38   Emergency equipment on any vehicle other than official vehicle
   
8-1-2-39   Traffic engineer
   
8-1-2-40   Roadwork sites
   
8-1-2-41   Load of excessive size; movement; permit
   
8-1-2-42   Loads of excessive size
   
8-1-2-43   Police department
   
8-1-2-44   Police officers
   
8-1-2-45   Fire department
   
8-1-2-46   Enforcement by parking enforcement officers and security officers
Part 3: Enforcement
   
8-1-3-1   Violation
   
8-1-3-2   Jurisdiction
   
8-1-3-3   Public records and reports
   
8-1-3-4   Forms and records of traffic citations and arrests
   
8-1-3-5   Procedures on arrest; reports
   
8-1-3-6   Citation in lieu of arrest
   
8-1-3-7   Citations issued by uniformed, on-duty officers
   
8-1-3-8   Citations to give number and shortened caption of section
   
8-1-3-9   Failure to appear on citation other than parking citation
   
8-1-3-10   Citation of a parked vehicle
   
8-1-3-11   Failure to pay for parking citation
   
8-1-3-12   Immobilization of vehicle
   
8-1-3-13   Substitution of driver
   
8-1-3-14   Multiple charges, multiple defendants
   
8-1-3-15   Right to amend; surplusage; variance
   
8-1-3-16   Burden of proof; exceptions by defense
   
8-1-3-17   Appeals from municipal court
   
8-1-3-18   Disposition and records of traffic citations, warrants and
complaints
   
8-1-3-19   Illegal cancellation of traffic citations
   
8-1-3-20   Audit of records and reports
   
8-1-3-21   Record of traffic cases; report of convictions to state department
of motor vehicles
   
8-1-3-22   Savings clause
 
   
8-1-3-99   Penalty
Cross-reference:
   Airport motor vehicle rules, see §
7-1-1-4
PART 1
§ 8-1-1-1 OBEDIENCE TO CODE REQUIRED.
   It is a petty misdemeanor for any person to do any act forbidden or fail to
perform any act required in this Traffic Code.
('74 Code, § 9-5-4.1) (Ord. 65-1974)
§ 8-1-1-2 DEFINITIONS.
   (A)   For the purpose of this Traffic Code, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   (B)   Words and phrases defined in state statutes which regulate operation
of vehicles will be understood to have the same meaning ascribed to them as in
the state statutes, unless otherwise defined in this code.
   ACCIDENT.  An accident is the touching or scraping of a vehicle or a bicycle
against any other vehicle, bicycle, person or object, whether intentionally or
negligently.
   ACIDS. See CORROSIVE LIQUIDS.
   ALLEY. A public way within a block primarily intended for service and access
to abutting property by vehicles.
   ASTRIDE. With one leg on each side.
   AUTHORIZED EMERGENCY VEHICLE. Vehicles of the Fire Department, police
vehicles, ambulances and such emergency vehicles of municipal departments or
public service corporations as are authorized or designated by the Commissioner
of the Department of Motor Vehicles, Chief of the New Mexico State Police or by
the Mayor or his designated representative.
   BAIL BOND. A contract between a surety and the city to the effect that the
accused and the surety will comply with all the conditions of the bond which
subjects the bond to forfeiture if not followed.
   BICYCLE. Every pedal-powered device propelled by human power upon which no
more than two persons may ride.
   BICYCLE LANE. A portion of the roadway, designated by signs, markings,
physical separations, or reflectorized buttons, for the use of bicyclists only.
   BICYCLE PATH. A publicly owned and maintained path or way primarily used by
bicyclists which may be shared with pedestrians or, if designated by sign, for
the use of bicyclists only.
   BICYCLE ROUTE.  A street shared by bicycles and vehicles which is designated
as a "bicycle route" by sign or stencil on the pavement.
   BICYCLE REGISTRATION TAG.  A plate or any sticker, tag or other device to be
used instead of a plate, issued by a governmental organization and bearing a
registration number, date, and the name of the governmental organization from
which it was issued.
   BIKEWAY. A generic term for any road, street, path or way which in some
manner is specifically designated for bicycle travel, regardless of whether
such facilities are designed for the exclusive use of bicycles or are to be
shared with other transportation modes.
   BLOCK.  That portion of a roadway between two intersections.
   BRIDLE PATH. A publicly owned and maintained path, way or trail primarily
used by horseback riders and may either be shared with pedestrians or, if
designated by sign, for the use by horseback riders only.
   BROADWAY/CENTRAL BUSINESS DISTRICT. All streets and portions of streets
within the area described as follows: Beginning at a point on the north side of
Mountain Blvd. and the east edge of Broadway Blvd.; south along the east side
of Broadway, to south side of Coal Ave.; west along south side of Coal Avenue
to west side of Eighth Street; north along west side of Eighth Street to north
side of Mountain Blvd. east along north side of Mountain Blvd. to the east edge
of Broadway, the place of beginning.
   BUS. Every motor vehicle designated for carrying ten or more passengers and
used for transportation of persons and every motor vehicle, other than a
taxicab, designed and used for the transportation of persons for compensation.
   BUSINESS DISTRICT.  The territory contiguous to and including a roadway
when, within any 300 feet along such roadway, there are buildings in use for
business or industrial purposes, including but not limited to hotels, banks or
office buildings, and public buildings which occupy at least 50% of the
frontage collectively on both sides of the roadway.
   CARGO TANK. Any tank designed to be permanently attached to any motor
vehicle in which is to be transported any flammable liquid, corrosive liquid,
or compressed gas.
   CLASS 1 ELECTRIC-ASSISTED BICYCLE. An electric-assisted bicycle equipped
with a motor not exceeding seven hundred fifty watts of power that only
provides assistance when the rider is pedaling and that ceases to provide
assistance when the bicycle reaches a speed of twenty miles per hour.
   CLASS 2 ELECTRIC-ASSISTED BICYCLE. An electric-assisted bicycle equipped
with a motor not exceeding seven hundred fifty watts of power that provides
assistance regardless of whether the rider is pedaling but ceases to provide
assistance when the bicycle reaches a speed of twenty miles per hour.
   CLASS 3 ELECTRIC-ASSISTED BICYCLE. An electric-assisted bicycle equipped
with a motor not exceeding seven hundred fifty watts of power that provides
assistance only when the rider is pedaling and that ceases to provide
assistance when the bicycle reaches a speed of twenty-eight miles per hour.
   COMMERCIAL VEHICLE. Every vehicle designed, maintained or used primarily for
the transportation of property but not a one-half or three-quarter ton pick-up
truck.
   CONSTRUCTION ZONE. Any highway, street or roadway designated by appropriate
signs, barricades, markings, flagmen or traffic control device stating
“Construction Zone” for the general purpose of repair or reconstruction of the
highway, street or roadway.
   CONTROLLED ACCESS STREET.  Every highway, street or roadway in respect to
which owners or occupants of abutting property or lands and other persons have
no legal right of access to or from the same, except at such points and in such
manner as may be determined by the public authority having jurisdiction over
such highway, streets or roadway.
   CONVERTER GEAR.  Any assemblage of one or more axles with a fifth wheel
mounted thereon designed for use in combination to support the front end of a
semi-trailer but not permanently attached thereto.
   CORROSIVE LIQUIDS. Those acids, alkaline caustic liquids and other corrosive
liquids which, when in contact with living tissue, will cause severe damage of
such tissue by chemical action, or in case of leakage will materially damage or
destroy either other freight or a roadway by chemical action or are liable to
cause fire when in contact with organic matter or with certain chemicals.
   CROSSWALK. That part of the roadway at an intersection included within the
prolongation or connection of the lateral lines of the sidewalks on opposite
sides of the highway measured from the curbs, or in the absence of curbs, from
the edges of the traversable roadway, whether marked or unmarked; or any
portion of a roadway, at an intersection, multi-use trail crossing, or
elsewhere, distinctly indicated for vulnerable road user crossing by signage,
traffic control devices, or lines or other markings on the surface.
   CURB LOADING ZONE. A space adjacent to a curb for the exclusive use of
vehicles during the loading or unloading of freight or passengers.
   CURTILAGE ZONE. Any area surrounding a marked construction zone, that is
effected by increased traffic from a construction zone, which has been
designated by appropriate signs, barricades, markings, flagmen or traffic
control device as a “Double Fine Zone.”
   DAYTIME. Daytime means from a half hour before sunrise to a half hour after
sunset.
   DEALER. Any person who sells or delivers a product for compensation.
   DISABLED PERSON. Any person who has a valid handicap parking placard issued
by the State of New Mexico.
   DIVIDED STREET. A street which is either divided by a raised median or by
painted lines separated by more than four feet in width.
   DOUBLE FINE ZONE. Any construction zone or curtilage zone marked by
appropriate signs, barricade, markings, flagman or traffic control device which
mark the beginning and end of the Double Fine Zone for the general purpose of
repair or reconstruction of the highway, street or roadway.
   DRAFT ANIMAL. Any animal which is harnessed to pull a load.
   DRAG RACE. The operation of two or more vehicles from a point side by side
at accelerating speeds in a competitive attempt to outdistance each other, or
the operation of one or more vehicles over a common selected course from the
same point to the same point for the purpose of comparing the relative speed or
power of acceleration of a vehicle or vehicles within a certain distance or
time limit. (See also RACE.)
   DRIVER, MOTORIST, or OPERATOR. Every person who drives or is in actual
control of a vehicle.
   DWI. Driving or being in actual physical control of a motor vehicle while
under the influence of intoxicating liquor, narcotic drug, or other drug or any
combination thereof.
   ELECTRIC-ASSISTED BICYCLE OR E-BIKE. A bicycle having two or three wheels,
fully operable pedals, and an electric motor. Electric-assisted bicycles are
classified as Class 1, Class 2 or Class 3.
   ENGINEERING AND TRAFFIC INVESTIGATION AND/OR STUDY. A traffic engineering
study, investigation, or analysis based on professional engineering judgment,
field observation, safety analysis, or other evidence-based best practices.
This approach will use data to include, but not limited to, HFIN crash rate,
roadway classification, surrounding land use, speed violations, warrant
studies, and other variables to justify safety changes.
   EXPLOSIVES. Any chemical compound or mechanical mixture that is commonly
used or intended for the purpose of producing an explosion, or nitrogen
fertilizer.
   FARM TRACTOR. Every motor vehicle designed and used primarily as a farm
implement for drawing plows, mowing machines and other implements of husbandry.
   FLAMMABLE SOLID. A solid substance other than one classified as an explosive
which is liable, under conditions incident to transportation, to cause fires
through friction, absorption of moisture, spontaneous chemical changes or as a
result of retained heat from the manufacturing or processing.
   FLAT. An area having a grade of 8% or less throughout.
   FOOTPATH. A path, way or trail designated by sign for the use of pedestrians
only.
   FREEWAY. Interstate 25 or Interstate 40.
   FREIGHT CURB LOADING ZONE. A space adjacent to a curb for the exclusive use
of vehicles during the loading or unloading of freight or passengers.
   FUEL TANK. A fuel tank is one used to transport flammable liquid,
combustible liquid, or compressed gas solely for the purpose of supplying fuel
for the propulsion of a vehicle.
   GLOVE COMPARTMENT. Any storage compartment of any size, either with or
without a door, either in the cab of a truck or in the driver's or passenger's
areas of a vehicle.
   GREEN VEHICLE. A vehicle that is rated by the U.S. Environmental Protection
Agency, Green Vehicle Guide with minimum Environmental Performance Scores for
Greenhouse Gas and Air Pollution of 9 and a total combined score of 17 or
higher.
   GREEN VEHICLE GUIDE. A consumer guide developed by the U.S. Environmental
Protection Agency to provide information about the environmental performance of
vehicles.
   GROSS VEHICLE WEIGHT RATING (GVWR) LESS THAN 10,000 POUNDS. A vehicle with
the manufacturers gross weight rating less than 10,000 pounds.
   GROSS WEIGHT. The weight of a vehicle unloaded plus the weight of any load
thereon. The weight of the converter gear shall be added to the gross weight of
the pulling vehicle.
   HIGHWAY. Same as PUBLIC WAY.
   INTERSECTION. The area embraced within the prolongation or connection of the
lateral curb lines, or if none, then the lateral boundary lines of the roadways
of two highways which join one another at, or approximately at, right angles,
or the area within which vehicles traveling upon different highways joining at
any other angle may come in conflict.
   INTERSTATE. The roadways known as Interstate 25 or Interstate 40.
   LANDSCAPED AREA. The area located within a public way where natural ground
covers such as decorative gravel, wood chips or boulders, and living vegetative
materials such as trees, grasses, vines, shrubs or flowers have been installed.
LANDSCAPED AREA does not include concrete, brick or other equivalent hard
surface.
   LANED ROADWAY.  A roadway which is divided into two or more clearly marked
lanes for vehicular traffic.
   MEDIAN. The area of raised land that separates opposing lanes of traffic on
divided roadways.
   MOPEDS. A motor scooter or gasoline-powered motorized bicycle which has a
motor of less than 1.5 horsepower or a motor displacement of less than 50 cubic
centimeters.
   MOTORCYCLE. Every motor vehicle having a saddle for the use of the rider and
designated to travel on not more than three wheels in contact with the ground,
but excluding a tractor.
   MOTORIST. See Driver.
   MOTOR SCOOTER.  A motorcycle which has a motor of less than five horsepower
or a motor displacement of less than 125 cubic centimeters.
   MOTOR VEHICLE. Every vehicle which is either propelled by electric power
obtained from overhead trolley wires but not operated upon rails, or self-
propelled by an internal combustion engine or electric motor power and includes
any connected trailer or semi-trailer.
   MOTORIZED VEHICLE. Any vehicle which is self-propelled by gas, diesel, or
electric motor, whether 2, 3, or 4 wheeled or carried on treads or tracks
excluding electric-assisted bicycle or e-bike and powered micromobility devices
as defined in §
5-8-2 Definitions.
   MULTI-USE TRAIL. A separate pathway that is physically separated from motor
vehicle traffic by a buffer or barrier and either within the highway right-of-
way or within an independent right-of-way. Multi-use trails are designated by
signs for use by non-motorized traffic only, including pedestrians, bicyclists,
skaters, scooters, e-bikes or powered micromobility devices, wheelchair users,
joggers, other non-motorized users, and equestrians. Not all trails may
accommodate all of these uses. Most trails are designed for two-way travel.
Trails may be either hard-surface or soft-surface; or paved or unpaved.
   NIGHTTIME. Any time other than that designated as daytime.
   OFFICIAL TIME STANDARDS. Whenever certain hours are named herein, they shall
mean standard time or daylight saving time as may be in current use.
   OFFICIAL TRAFFIC CONTROL DEVICE.  Same as TRAFFIC CONTROL DEVICE.
   OFFICIAL TRAFFIC CONTROL SIGNAL. Same as TRAFFIC CONTROL SIGNAL.
   OPERATOR. See DRIVER.
   OWNER.  A person who holds any legal title or officer, manager, co-owner,
co-partner, trustee, receiver, member of association of any entity holding
legal title. In the event of an agreement for the conditional sale or lease
thereof with the right of purchase upon performance of conditions with an
immediate right of possession in the vendee or lessee, then such vendee or
lessee or mortgagor shall be deemed the owner.
   OXIDIZING MATERIALS. An oxidizing material is a substance such as chlorate,
permanganate, peroxide, or nitrate that yields oxygen readily to stimulate the
combustion of organic matter.
   PARK or PARKING. When prohibited means the standing of a vehicle, whether
occupied or not, otherwise than temporarily for the purpose of and while
actually engaged in loading or unloading.
   PARKING METER. Any mechanical device or meter placed or erected for the
regulation of parking by authority of this ordinance.
   PASSENGER CURB LOADING ZONE. A place adjacent to a curb for the exclusive
use of vehicles during the loading or unloading of passengers.
   PEDAL BUS. A four-wheeled device designed to transport multiple passengers
and powered by passengers pedaling together from bike-like seats and navigated
by a single person who controls steering, braking.
   PEDAL BUS OPERATOR. Any person who is in actual physical control over the
steering, navigation, braking, and any motorized assist for a pedal bus.
Passengers, whether pedaling or not pedaling to power the device, are not
operators.
   PEDESTRIAN HYBRID BEACON (PHB). A traffic control device designed to help
vulnerable road users safely cross higher-speed roadways at midblock crossings
and uncontrolled intersections. The beacon head consists of two red lenses
above a single yellow lens. The lenses remain ”dark“ until a vulnerable road
user desiring to cross the street pushes the call button to activate the
beacon, which then initiates a yellow to red lighting sequence consisting of
flashing and steady lights that directs motorists and bicyclists in the roadway
facing the vehicular signal to slow and come to a stop, and provides the right-
of-way to the vulnerable road user to safely cross the roadway in the crosswalk
before going dark again. Also known as a HAWK (High-intensity Activated
crossWalK) signal.
   PERSON. Every natural person including, but not limited to, any partner,
officer or trustee for any firm, co-partnership, co-operative, association,
corporation, estate, trust, receiver, club, company, joint venture, syndicate,
firm, or other entity.
   PERSONAL ASSISTIVE MOBILITY DEVICE. Specialized equipment that assist
individuals with disabilities or mobility impairments in moving around safely
and effectively, including but not limited to aids like canes, walkers,
crutches, wheelchairs, and electric wheelchairs and scooters.
   PETROLEUM.  Includes gasoline, diesel fuel or any other petroleum-derived
product.
   POLICE OFFICER. Every officer of the municipal police department or any
person authorized by the Chief of Police to direct or regulate traffic or to
make arrests for violations of traffic regulations or issue citations for
parking violations.
   POWERED MICROMOBILITY DEVICE. A wheeled device that is fully or partially
powered, has a curb weight of less than 100 lb., has an electric motor less
than 750 watts, and has a top speed of less than 30 mph. A powered
micromobility device includes a powered standing scooter, powered self-
balancing board or powered skates but does not include electric-assisted
bicycles. Powered micromobility device does not include a PERSONAL ASSISTIVE
MOBILITY DEVICE as defined in this Chapter.
   PRIVATE ROAD or PRIVATE DRIVEWAY.  Every way or place in private ownership
used for vehicular travel by the owner and those having express or implied
permission from the owner, but not by other persons.
   PUBLIC GROUNDS. All public grounds owned and under the control of the city
or any other governmental agency that are open to the use of the public.
   PUBLIC HOLIDAYS. New Year's Day, Memorial Day, Independence Day, Labor Day,
Veteran's Day, Thanksgiving Day and Christmas Day.
   PUBLIC PARKING LOT. A parking lot normally open to the public, whether
privately or publicly owned or maintained.
   PUBLIC WAY. The entire width between the property lines of every way
publicly maintained (including easements maintained for public use) when any
part thereof is open to the use of the public for purposes of vehicular or
pedestrian travel, notwithstanding that same may be temporarily closed for the
purpose of construction, reconstruction, maintenance, alteration or repair. The
public way shall include the unused right of way, publicly owned parking lots
normally open to the public and public grounds.
   RACE. The use of one or more vehicles in a manner to outgain or outdistance
another vehicle, prevent another vehicle from passing, arrive at a given
destination ahead of another vehicle or test the physical stamina or endurance
of drivers over long distance routes. (See also DRAG RACE.)
   RAILROAD. A carrier of persons or property upon cars, operated upon
stationary rails.
   RAILROAD SIGN or SIGNAL. Any sign, signal or device erected by authority of
a public body or official or by a railroad and intended to give notice of the
presence of railroad tracks or the approach of a railroad train.
   RAILROAD TRAIN. A steam, diesel, electric, or other motor engine with or
without cars coupled thereto, operated upon rails.
   RECOGNIZANCE. An obligation requiring the accused to appear at all
appropriate times and places or forfeit any bail and subject himself to
criminal penalty for failure to appear.
   RECTANGULAR RAPID FLASHING BEACONS (RRFB). A traffic control device designed
to enhance vulnerable road user conspicuity and increase driver awareness at
uncontrolled, marked crosswalks, used in combination with a pedestrian,
bicycle, school, or trail crossing warning sign. RRFBs consist of two
rectangular-shaped yellow lights that flash with an alternating high frequency
when activated.
   RELEASE ON PERSONAL RECOGNIZANCE or RELEASE ON OWN RECOGNIZANCE. The release
of a defendant without bail, bailbond or sureties upon his promise to appear at
all appropriate times and places, and which subjects him to criminal penalty
for failure to appear.
   RESIDENCE DISTRICT.  The territory contiguous to and including a highway not
comprising a business district when the property on such highway for a distance
of 300 feet or more is, in the main, improved with a residence or residences.
   RIGHT OF WAY. As between two or more vehicles and/or vulnerable road users,
the privilege of the immediate use of the roadway.
   ROADWAY. That portion of a street or highway improved, designed, or
ordinarily used for vehicular travel, exclusive of the berm or shoulder. In the
event a highway includes two or more separate roadways, the term "roadway" as
used herein shall refer to any such roadway separately, but not to all such
roadways collectively.
   ROADWORK SITE. Any place on a highway where construction, maintenance or
repair requires workers, vehicles or equipment to be in the roadway or on an
adjacent shoulder.
   SAFETY ZONE. The area or space officially set apart within a roadway for the
exclusive use of pedestrians, and which is protected, or so marked or indicated
by adequate signs as to be plainly visible at all times while set apart as a
safety zone.
   SCHOOL BUS. Any motor vehicle, whether privately owned and operated for
compensation or publicly owned, which is generally used to transport children,
students or teachers to and from school or school activities.
   SEMI-TRAILER. Every vehicle with or without motive power designed for
carrying persons or property and for being drawn by a motor vehicle and so
constructed that some part of its weight and that of its load rests upon or is
carried by another vehicle.
   SHARED ACTIVE TRANSPORTATION. A network or system of small vehicles, placed
in the public right-of-way and for rent in short time increments, that provides
increased mobility options over short distances in urban areas.
   SHARED ACTIVE TRANSPORTATION STATION. Permitted stations placed throughout
the right-of-way and adjacent public and private property where customers pick
up and return small vehicles.
   SIDEWALK.  That portion of the street between the curb lines or the lateral
lines of the roadway and the adjacent property lines intended for the use of
pedestrians.
   SLOW MOVING TRAFFIC. That traffic which is traveling at least ten miles per
hour less than the posted speed limit.
   SMALL VEHICLE. Bicycles, scooters, e-bikes, e-scooters, and other small,
wheeled vehicles designed specifically for shared-use by no more than two
individuals at a time and are deployed by private shared active transportation
entities. Operators of small vehicles have the same rights as operators of
bicycles in the use of streets, highways, roadways, municipal paved or dirt
paths, and sidewalks, except as otherwise specifically provided by provisions
of this Traffic Code.
   STOP. Complete cessation of movement.
   STOP INTERSECTION.  An intersection in which the traffic is controlled by
one or more stop signs.
   STOP, STOPPING or STANDING. When prohibited, means any stopping or standing
of a vehicle, whether occupied or not, except when necessary to avoid conflict
with other traffic or in compliance with the directions of a police officer or
traffic-control sign or signal, or other authority.
   STREET. Same as PUBLIC WAY.
   TAXICAB. A passenger automobile used in the transportation of persons for
hire.
   TIME STANDARDS. See OFFICIAL TIME STANDARDS.
   TOY. Any nonmotorized device intended to be used primarily as a toy, rather
than as a means of transportation.
   TRAFFIC. Pedestrians, ridden or herded animals, vehicles, and other
conveyances either singly or together while using any public way for purposes
of travel.
   TRAFFIC CONTROL DEVICES.  All signs, signals, markings, and devices placed
or erected by authority of a public body or official having jurisdiction, for
the purpose of regulating, warning or guiding traffic.
   TRAFFIC CONTROL SIGNAL. Any device, whether manually, electrically or
mechanically operated, by which traffic is alternately directed to stop and to
proceed.
   TRAILER. Every vehicle either with or without motive power designed for
carrying persons or property and for being drawn by a motor vehicle and which
includes house or camp trailers.
   TRAVEL LANE. The portion of the roadway dedicated to the movement of motor
vehicles traveling from one destination to another where a motor vehicle may
not remain stationary indefinitely without eventually obstructing the free flow
of traffic, and not including shoulders, bicycle lanes, or on-street parking.
   TRUCK. Every motor vehicle designed, used or maintained primarily for the
transportation of property.
   UNATTENDED VEHICLE.  Any vehicle is unattended whenever a driver is not in a
position or in adequate mental or physical condition to observe the vehicle at
all times or is not in adequate mental or physical condition to drive the
vehicle if necessary.
   U-TURN. A turn by which a vehicle initially travels in one direction, makes
a movement resembling the letter "U," and upon completion of such movement,
travels in the opposite direction to the direction of travel in which the
vehicle was traveling prior to the start of the turning movement.
   VEHICLE. Every device in, upon, or by which any person or property is or may
be transported or drawn upon a roadway, except devices used exclusively upon
stationary rails or tracks.
   VULNERABLE ROAD USER. The term “vulnerable road user” includes:
      (a)   A pedestrian;
      (b)   A worker; or
      (c)   A person lawfully operating or riding any of the following on a
public way:
         (1)   Bicycle or tricycle;
         (2)   A skateboard;
         (3)   Roller skates;
         (4)   In-line skates;
         (5)   A scooter;
         (6)   An e-bike or powered micromobility device;
         (7)   A wheelchair or other personal assistive mobility device; or
         (8)   Any device designed to be used on the roadway or sidewalk that
is not a motor vehicle.
   WORKER. Any person actually engaged in work upon a public way or utility
facilities along a roadway, or engaged in the provision of emergency services
within the right-of-way.
('74 Code, § 9-5-1) (Ord. 65-1974; Am. Ord. 4-1994; Am. Ord. 22-2000; Am. Ord.
61-2004; Am. Ord. 1-2006; Am. Ord. 4-2008; Am. Ord._2014-022; Am. Ord._2016-
011; Am. Ord._2017-010; Am. Ord._2018-021; Am. Ord._2019-017; Am. Ord._2022-
038; Am. Ord._2024-021; Am. Ord._2025-032)
PART 2: ADMINISTRATION
§ 8-1-2-1 MAYOR ­ RESPONSIBILITY FOR MANAGEMENT.
   The Mayor is responsible for coordination and management of an effective
traffic control program implemented by all city departments which provides for
efficient and safe movement of vehicular, bicycle, pedestrian and other
traffic.
('74 Code, § 9-5-2.1) (Ord. 65-1974)
§ 8-1-2-2 AUTHORITY TO MAKE EMERGENCY REGULATIONS; TEST TRAFFIC CONTROL
DEVICES.
   (A)   The Mayor, or his designated representative, is hereby empowered to
make and enforce temporary regulations to cover emergencies which threaten the
health, welfare or safety of the public provided that such temporary
regulations shall not be enforceable by citation after the emergency has passed
or subsided to a point where the health, welfare or safety of the public is no
longer threatened.
   (B)   The Mayor or his designated representative may test traffic control
devices under actual conditions of traffic.
('74 Code, § 9-5-2.2) (Ord. 65-1974)
§ 8-1-2-3 AGREEMENTS WITH LANDOWNERS FOR ENFORCEMENT OF TRAFFIC REGULATIONS ON
PRIVATELY- OR PUBLICLY-OWNED LAND.
   The Mayor, or his designated representative, may, upon application of an
owner or lessor of land, either publicly or privately owned, open to vehicular
traffic by the public, and used by the public as a thoroughfare with such
thoroughfare paved, marked and delineated, enter into an agreement with such
owner or lessor to extend the enforcement of traffic regulations to such
thoroughfare without requiring the owner to file a plat of the land and/or to
dedicate to the city such thoroughfare as a street; provided that the city
shall not be responsible for the maintenance or condition of such thoroughfare
and shall retain the power to terminate the agreement at will.
('74 Code, § 9-5-2.3) (Ord. 65-1974)
§ 8-1-2-4 AUTHORITY TO INSTALL TRAFFIC CONTROL DEVICES.
   The Mayor, or his designated representative, shall place and maintain
traffic control signs, signals and devices when and as required under this
Traffic Code to make effective its provisions and may place and maintain such
additional traffic control devices as are deemed necessary to regulate traffic
under this Traffic Code or state law, or to guide or warn traffic.
('74 Code, § 9-5-2.4) (Ord. 65-1974)
§ 8-1-2-5 MANUAL AND SPECIFICATIONS FOR TRAFFIC CONTROL DEVICES.
   All traffic control signs, signals, barricades and devices shall conform to
the specifications, design, use and visibility requirements of the manual of
Uniform System of Traffic Control Devices approved by the State Department of
Transportation. All signs and signals required hereunder for a particular
purpose shall be uniform as to type and location. All traffic control devices
so erected and not inconsistent with the provisions of state law or this
Traffic Code shall be official traffic control devices. This section also
applies to traffic control devices used to indicate road work sites.
('74 Code, § 9-5-2.5) (Ord. 65-1974; Am. Ord._2016-011)
§ 8-1-2-6 AUTHORITY TO DETERMINE SPEED LIMITS.
   (A)   The Mayor, or his designated representative, shall determine upon the
basis of an engineering and traffic investigation, the speed upon any street or
highway which is reasonable or safe under the conditions found to exist, and he
shall declare a speed limit thereat which shall be effective at all times or
during hours of daytime or nighttime or at such other times as may be
determined when appropriate signs giving notice of the authorized speed are
erected.
   (B)   Alteration of speed limits on state highways or extensions thereof in
the city by the Mayor or his designated representative shall not be effective
until such alteration has been approved by the State Department of
Transportation.
('74 Code, § 9-5-2.7) (Ord. 65-1974; Am. Ord._2016-011)
§ 8-1-2-7 MINIMUM SPEED LIMITS AND RESTRICTIONS ON THE USE OF STREETS.
   (A)   Whenever the Mayor or his designated representative determines upon
the basis of an engineering and traffic investigation, that slow speeds on any
street consistently impede the reasonable movement of traffic, he shall
determine and declare a minimum speed limit below which no person shall drive a
vehicle except when necessary for safe operation or in compliance with law; and
further, the Mayor or his designated representative may, upon the basis of an
engineering and traffic investigation, prohibit by posting appropriate signs,
vehicles which by virtue of weight, design, or operation are slow moving from
any local street during peak hours of traffic.
   (B)   The Mayor, or his designated representative, is hereby authorized upon
basic engineering and traffic study and investigation to determine and
designate construction and curtilage zones, designated by proper signs, placed
at adequate intervals to inform the motorist that any violation of a traffic
law, within a construction zone or on the surrounding commercial or residential
neighborhoods, will result in double the traffic fine.
('74 Code, § 9-5-2.8) (Ord. 65-1974; Am. Ord. 15-1976; Am. Ord. 22-2000)
§ 8-1-2-8 TRAFFIC LANES.
   The Mayor or his designated representative, upon the basis of engineering
and traffic study investigation, is hereby authorized to mark traffic lanes
upon the roadway of any public way where a regular alignment of traffic is
necessary.
('74 Code, § 9-5-2.10) (Ord. 65-1974)
§ 8-1-2-9 NO LANE CHANGING ZONES.
   The Mayor, or his designated representative, is hereby authorized to
determine those portions of any roadway, which is divided into two or more
lanes traveling in the same direction, where it would be especially hazardous
for vehicles traveling in the same direction to change lanes, and by
appropriate signs and/or markings on such roadway, to indicate the beginning
and end of a zone where the changing from one lane to another lane traveling in
the same direction is prohibited.
('74 Code, § 9-5-2.11) (Ord. 65-1974)
§ 8-1-2-10 NO PASSING ZONES.
   The Mayor, or his designated representative, is hereby authorized to
determine those portions of any roadway where overtaking and passing or driving
to the left of the roadway would be hazardous, and by appropriate signs and/or
markings on the roadway indicate the beginning and end of such zones.
('74 Code, § 9-5-2.12) (Ord. 65-1974)
§ 8-1-2-11 SIGNS BY CONTROLLED ACCESS ROADWAYS.
   The Mayor, or his designated representative, shall have authority to erect
and maintain official signs by the controlled access roadways. Such signs shall
include but not be limited to: signs prohibiting the use of such roadway or
ramp thereto to pedestrians, bicycles, animals, non-motorized traffic or motor
scooters, or signs giving maximum or minimum speeds for such roadway.
('74 Code, § 9-5-2.13) (Ord. 65-1974)
§ 8-1-2-12 TURNING MARKERS.
   The Mayor, or his designated representative, upon the basis of an
engineering and traffic investigation, is authorized to place markers, buttons
or signs within or adjacent to intersections indicating the course to be
traveled by vehicles turning at or proceeding through such intersection, and
such course to be traveled as so indicated may conform to or be other than as
prescribed by law or ordinance.
('74 Code, § 9-5-2.14) (Ord. 65-1974)
§ 8-1-2-13 RESTRICTED TURN SIGNS.
   The Mayor, or his designated representative, upon the basis of an
engineering and traffic study and investigation, is hereby authorized to
determine those intersections at which drivers of vehicles shall not make a
right, a left, a right turn on red or a U-turn, and shall place proper signs at
such intersections. The making of such turns may be prohibited between certain
hours of any day and permitted at other hours, in which event the same shall be
plainly indicated on the signs or they may be removed when such turns are
permitted.
('74 Code, § 9-5-2.15) (Ord. 65-1974)
§ 8-1-2-14 LEFT TURN ON RED LIGHT.
   The Mayor, or his designated representative, upon the basis of engineering
and traffic study and investigation, is hereby authorized to determine those
intersections at which a vehicle in the left lane may make a left turn on a red
light, and shall place proper signs at such intersections. The making of such
turns may be prohibited between certain hours of any day and permitted at other
hours, in which event the same shall be specified on the signs.
('74 Code, § 9-5-2.16) (Ord. 65-1974)
§ 8-1-2-15 RESTRICTIONS ON CERTAIN STREETS.
   (A)   The Mayor, or his designated representative, is hereby authorized,
upon the basis of engineering and traffic investigation, to establish load
restrictions upon streets, to prohibit commercial vehicles from certain
streets, to prohibit through traffic from using side residential streets, to
designate and restrict heavily traveled streets upon which motorscooters,
bicycles, animals or nonmotorized traffic are prohibited, to restrict the
movement of traffic on certain streets, alleys or public grounds to one way or
direction only, and to restrict the movement of traffic on certain streets and
alleys to one way or direction at certain times of the day and to another way
or direction at other times of the day, regardless of the center line of the
roadway; and to erect and maintain any and all necessary signs, markers,
barriers or other devices to give notice thereof.
   (B)   Signs indicating the direction of lawful traffic movement to one way,
or to one way at one time and another way at another time, shall be placed at
every intersection where such movement in the opposite direction is prohibited.
No such regulation shall be effective unless such signs are in place indicating
the direction of the flow of traffic.
('74 Code, § 9-5-2.18) (Ord. 65-1974)
§ 8-1-2-16 LANE FOR SLOW MOVING TRAFFIC.
   The Mayor, or his designated representative, is authorized upon the basis of
engineering and traffic study and investigation to erect signs requiring slow
moving traffic either to use the right-hand lane or any lane designated by sign
if the street is divided into two or more lanes moving in the same direction.
('74 Code, § 9-5-2.19) (Ord. 65-1974)
§ 8-1-2-17 INTERSECTIONS WHERE STOP REQUIRED.
   The Mayor, or his designated representative, is hereby authorized upon the
basis of traffic and engineering study and investigation to determine and
designate intersections where particular hazards exist upon other than through
streets, and to determine whether vehicles shall stop at one or more entrances
to any such stop intersection, and shall erect a stop sign at every such place
where a stop is required.
('74 Code, § 9-5-2.20) (Ord. 65-1974)
§ 8-1-2-18 STOP SIGNS.
   Whenever the Mayor, or his designated representative, has designated and
described a street as a through street, stop signs shall be placed and
maintained on every street intersecting such through street or intersecting any
portion thereof, unless traffic at any such intersection is controlled at all
times by traffic-control signals; provided, however, that at the intersection
of two such through streets or at the intersection of a through street and a
heavy traffic street not so designated, stop signs or traffic control devices
shall be erected at the approaches of either or both of the streets, as may be
determined by the Mayor or his designated representative.
('74 Code, § 9-5-2.21) (Ord. 65-1974)
§ 8-1-2-19 YIELD SIGNS.
   The Mayor, or his designated representative, is hereby authorized upon the
basis of engineering and traffic study and investigation to determine and
designate intersections where particular hazards exist upon other than through
streets and to determine whether vehicles shall yield the right-of-way at one
or more entrances to such intersection, and shall erect a yield sign at every
such place.
('74 Code, § 9-5-2.22) (Ord. 65-1974)
§ 8-1-2-20 DANGEROUS RAILROAD CROSSINGS.
   The Mayor, or his designated representative, with the approval of the State
Department of Transportation, is hereby authorized, upon the basis of
engineering and traffic study and investigation, to designate particularly
dangerous highway grade crossings of railroads and to erect stop signs there.
('74 Code, § 9-5-2.23) (Ord. 65-1974; Am. Ord._2016-011)
§ 8-1-2-21 SCHOOL CROSSINGS.
   (A)   The Mayor, or his designated representative, with respect to streets
in the city, with advice of the local superintendent of schools or his
designated representative, is hereby authorized to establish and mark, or cause
to be marked, crossings over or across streets or highways abutting a school or
the grounds adjacent thereto.
   (B)   The Mayor, or his designated representative, with respect to streets
in the city, with advice of the local superintendent of schools or his
designated representative, and after adequate assurance has been given that
proper safety precautions will be maintained at the crossings by the school
authorities to enforce their use by children, is hereby authorized to establish
and mark, or cause to be marked, crossings over or across streets or highways
not abutting on school grounds.
   (C)   At all school crossings except as provided in this section,
appropriate signs shall be provided as prescribed by the Mayor or his
designated representative indicating the crossings and regulating traffic
movement within the school zones.
   (D)   School crossings are not required to be specially posted when they are
located:
      (1)   At a signalized intersection;
      (2)   At an intersection where traffic is controlled by a stop sign; or
      (3)   At a point where a pedestrian tunnel or overhead crossing is
provided.
('74 Code, § 9-5-2.24) (Ord. 65-1974)
§ 8-1-2-22 CROSSWALKS AND SAFETY ZONES.
   The Mayor, or their designated representative, upon the basis of engineering
and traffic study and investigation, is hereby authorized to:
   (A)   Designate and maintain crosswalks by appropriate traffic control
devices, including but not limited to signs, marks, or lines upon the surface
of the roadway, where, in their opinion, there is particular danger to
vulnerable road users crossing the roadway; and
   (B)   Establish safety zones of such kind and character at such places as
they may deem necessary for the protection of vulnerable road users.
('74 Code, § 9-5-2.25) (Ord. 65-1974; Am. Ord._2025-032)
§ 8-1-2-23 FOOT, BICYCLE AND BRIDLE PATHS, LANES, STREETS AND ROUTES.
   The Mayor, or his designated representative, shall have authority to declare
any street or part thereof a foot path, bicycle lane or bridle path and to
place appropriate signs or devices indicating the same and limiting the use of
such street or part thereof to a foot path, bicycle lane or bridle path.
('74 Code, § 9-5-2.26) (Ord. 65-1974)
§ 8-1-2-24 PARKING OR STANDING OF GOVERNMENT VEHICLES IN THE BROADWAY/CENTRAL
BUSINESS DISTRICT.
   The Mayor, or his designated representative, upon the basis of engineering
and traffic investigation, may, in addition to authority otherwise granted in
this Traffic Code, restrict or prohibit parking or standing in the Broadway/
Central Business District of official vehicles of the United States Government,
the State of New Mexico, and any political subdivisions thereof, in areas where
parking or standing is normally allowed, by placing appropriate markings,
signs, or parking meters giving notice thereof. No such restriction or
prohibition shall be effective unless said markings, signs or meters are
erected and/or are in place at the time of any alleged offense.
('74 Code, § 9-5-2.27) (Ord. 48-1986; Am. Ord._2016-011)
§ 8-1-2-25 STOPPING OR STANDING OR PARKING ­ MARKINGS, SIGNS OR METERS
REQUIRED.
   The Mayor, or his designated representative, upon the basis of engineering
and traffic investigation, may, in addition to authority otherwise granted in
this Traffic Code, restrict or prohibit either stopping or standing or parking
in areas where either stopping or standing or parking is normally allowed by
placing appropriate markings, signs, or parking meters giving notice thereof,
and no such restriction or prohibition shall be effective unless said markings,
signs or meters are erected and/or in place at the time of any alleged offense.
('74 Code, § 9-5-2.28) (Ord. 65-1974; Am. Ord. 26-1989)
§ 8-1-2-26 ANGLE PARKING.
   The Mayor, or his designated representative, shall determine, upon the basis
of engineering and traffic study and investigation, on what streets angle
parking, or back in angle parking, shall be permitted and shall mark or sign
such streets.
('74 Code, § 9-5-2.29) (Ord. 65-1974; Am. Ord._2016-011)
§ 8-1-2-27 PARKING OR STANDING ADJACENT TO SCHOOLS.
   The Mayor, or his designated representative, is hereby authorized to erect
signs indicating no parking or no standing upon that side of any street
adjacent to school property when such parking would, in his opinion, interfere
with traffic or create a hazardous situation.
('74 Code, § 9-5-2.30) (Ord. 65-1974)
§ 8-1-2-28 PARKING OR STANDING ON NARROW STREETS.
   The Mayor, or his designated representative, is hereby authorized, but not
required, to erect signs indicating no parking or no standing upon any street
when the width of the roadway does not exceed 24 feet, or upon one side of a
street when the width of the roadway does not exceed 32 feet.
('74 Code, § 9-5-2.31) (Ord. 65-1974; Am. Ord._2016-011)
§ 8-1-2-29 ONE-WAY ROADWAY.
   The Mayor, or his designated representative, is authorized to erect signs
upon either side of any one-way street to prohibit the standing or parking of
vehicles.
('74 Code, § 9-5-2.32) (Ord. 65-1974)
§ 8-1-2-30 STANDING OR PARKING ON ONE-WAY ROADWAYS.
   In the event a highway includes two or more separate roadways and traffic is
restricted to one direction upon any such roadway, no person shall stand or
park a vehicle upon the left side of such one-way roadway unless signs are
erected to permit such standing or parking. The Mayor, or his designated
representative, is authorized, upon the basis of engineering and traffic study
and investigation, to determine when standing or parking may be permitted upon
the left side of any such one-way roadway and to erect signs giving notice
thereof. Parking on the right of such one-way roadway shall be permitted unless
prohibited by sign.
('74 Code, § 9-5-2.33) (Ord. 65-1974)
§ 8-1-2-31 STOPPING, STANDING OR PARKING NEAR HAZARDOUS OR CONGESTED PLACES.
   The Mayor, or his designated representative, is hereby authorized, upon the
basis of engineering and traffic study and investigation, to determine and
designate zones by proper signs, placed at adequate intervals to inform the
motorist, in which the stopping, standing or parking of vehicles will create an
especially hazardous condition or will cause unusual delay to traffic and no
person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle in any such designated place.
('74 Code, § 9-5-2.34) (Ord. 65-1974)
§ 8-1-2-32 PARKING METER ZONES.
   (A)   The Mayor, or his designated representative, is hereby authorized to
establish a parking meter zone based upon engineering and traffic
investigation. The zone may be diminished or extended and enlarged, or other
parking meter zones may be created.
   (B)   Installation of Parking Meters. In paid parking zones, parking meters
may be installed within or near the curb line, or on the block of such spaces
as may be designated by the Mayor or his designated representative, as is
deemed advisable or necessary for the proper regulation or parking of vehicles,
said installation to be placed appropriately.
   Meters shall accept payment in forms deemed appropriate and maximum parking
times shall be noted on the meters. Paid parking may be regulated by any other
approved means, e.g., paper or electronic permits or license recognition. On
street and other parking may also be managed through a Parking District in
conjunction with private parking owners.
('74 Code, § 9-5-2.35) (Ord. 65-1974; Am. Ord._2016-011)
§ 8-1-2-33 BICYCLE STALLS AND BICYCLE RACKS WITHIN STALLS.
   The Mayor, or his designated representative, is hereby authorized to
designate by sign any nonmetered parking stall for the use of bicycles only and
to permanently place bicycle racks within such stall.
('74 Code, § 9-5-2.36) (Ord. 65-1974; Am. Ord._2016-011)
§ 8-1-2-34 CURB LOADING ZONE.
   (A)   Permit.  
      (1)   Upon initial application and the tendering of the installation fee
the Mayor, or his designated representative, may grant a curb loading zone
permit, but only if the following conditions are met: a business or a
charitable or a health care organization is making the application; parking is
allowed on the same side of the street in the same block; parking in the area
is generally difficult to obtain; traffic conditions are congested during the
business hours of the day; a curb loading zone would not increase the
congestion; and the place of business or charitable or health care organization
has a genuine need for a curb loading zone.
      (2)   Need shall be determined by the nature of the business or
organization. If the business is one in which most of the business contacts are
brief pick-up and deliveries, then "need" is established. If most of the
contacts last for 20 minutes or more in time, "need" must be specifically
proven by the business making application to the Mayor or his designated
representative. However, it shall be determined that there is no "need" if the
business or charitable or health care organization applying for the permit has
a loading dock.
      (3)   Each permit shall expire at the end of each calendar year. Each re-
application and the conditions to be met shall be reconsidered annually, An
annual maintenance fee shall be tendered with each annual re-application.
      (4)   Every curb loading zone shall be subject to any regulations on
parking to which the parking stalls on the same street are subject.
      (5)   The Mayor, or his designated representative, may impose conditions
and general regulations for the use of the signs indicating the curb loading
zones, and he shall require reimbursement to the city for the value thereof in
the event of their loss or damage and their return in the event of misuse or
upon expiration of the permit.
   (B)   Fees. The Mayor shall set a fee schedule by rule to cover reasonable
administrative expenses based on approximate city costs in order to cover the
cost of application processing, loss of parking revenue, curb loading zone
installation, and periodic maintenance.
   (C)   Designation. Upon the basis of a traffic engineering study, the Mayor,
or his designated representative, is hereby authorized to determine the
location of curb loading zones and shall place and maintain appropriate signs
indicating the same and stating the hours during which the provisions of this
subsection are applicable.
('74 Code, §§ 9-5-2.37, 2.38) (Ord. 65-1974; Am. Ord._2016-011)
§ 8-1-2-35 PUBLIC CARRIER STOPS AND STANDS.
   The Mayor, or his designated representative, is hereby authorized to
establish bus stops, bus and taxicab stands and stands for other passenger
common-carrier motor vehicles on such public streets in such places and in such
number as he shall determine to be of the greatest benefit and convenience to
the public. Such stops and stands shall be designated by appropriate signs, and
shall require a fee of $100 per year. Such permit shall expire at the end of
each calendar year or upon the expiration of one year since the permit was
issued.
('74 Code, § 9-5-2.39) (Ord. 65-1974; Am. Ord._2016-011)
§ 8-1-2-36 LOADING OR UNLOADING AT AN ANGLE TO THE CURB.
   The Mayor, or his designated representative, is authorized to issue special
permits to permit the backing of a vehicle to a curb for the purpose of loading
or unloading merchandise or materials, subject to the terms and conditions of
such permit. Such permits may be issued either to the owner or lessee of real
property or to the owner of the vehicle, and shall grant to such person the
privilege as therein stated and authorized herein, and it shall be unlawful for
any permittee or other person to violate any of the special terms or conditions
of such permit.
('74 Code, § 9-5-2.40) (Ord. 65-1974)
§ 8-1-2-37 COMMERCIAL VEHICLES PARKING IN ALLEYS.
   The Mayor, or his designated representative, shall have authority to give
written consent to the operators of commercial vehicles to park the commercial
vehicles in alleys or other designated areas, for the purpose of making
deliveries or repairs.
('74 Code, § 9-5-2.41) (Ord. 65-1974; Am. Ord._2016-011)
§ 8-1-2-38 EMERGENCY EQUIPMENT ON ANY VEHICLE OTHER THAN OFFICIAL VEHICLE.
   The Mayor, or his designated representative, shall have authority to give
written consent for a vehicle other than official vehicle to be equipped with
any blue light mounted so as to project a beam in forward motion or a siren,
provided that the Mayor, or his designated representative, has investigated the
need for such equipment and is satisfied that such equipment on such vehicle
will be a benefit to public health, safety or welfare.
('74 Code, § 9-5-2.42) (Ord. 65-1974)
§ 8-1-2-39 TRAFFIC ENGINEER.
   (A)   Appointment. The Traffic Engineer shall be appointed by the Mayor and
he shall exercise the powers and duties as provided in this Traffic Code.
   (B)   Duties.  
      (1)   It shall be the general duty of the Traffic Engineer to determine
the installation and proper timing and maintenance of traffic-control devices;
conduct engineering analysis of traffic accidents and devise remedial measures;
conduct engineering investigation of traffic conditions; cooperate with other
city officials in the development of ways and means to improve traffic
conditions; and carry out such additional powers and duties as are imposed by
this code and other city ordinances.
      (2)   The Traffic Engineer shall be responsible to the Mayor to designate
such areas with special restrictions as authorized by this Traffic Code for the
safe and efficient control of traffic and for the encouragement of either
nonmotorized modes of travel or public transportation systems. Those areas
shall include but not be limited to: bicycle lanes and paths, foot paths and
paths or roads for other non-motorized modes of travel.
      (3)   The Traffic Engineer shall be responsible for management and review
of traffic management plans and programs as specified in §
14-8-2-7 ROA 1994 and shall also be responsible for those portions of § 14-16-
3-2 ROA 1994 pertaining to traffic management.
('74 Code, § 9-5-2.45) (Ord. 65-1974; Am. Ord. 23-2007)
§ 8-1-2-40 ROADWORK SITES.
   The Traffic Engineer is hereby authorized to adopt regulations necessary for
the safety of motorists, workers and others at roadwork sites, including, but
not limited to, procedures for securing permits, standards for materials to be
worn by workers, and regulations governing installations, conditions and
visibility of traffic control devices. The Traffic Engineer is authorized to
inspect any road work site and to order it closed if traffic control devices do
not comply with the New Mexico Manual and Specification for a Uniform System of
Traffic Control Devices for Streets and Highways — Part VI if workers do not
wear materials complying with the adopted standards or if the site presents a
hazard to workers or traffic or does not comply with the issued barricade
permit.
('74 Code, § 9-5-2.47B) (Ord. 65-1974; Am. Ord._2016-011)
§ 8-1-2-41 LOAD OF EXCESSIVE SIZE; MOVEMENT; PERMIT.
   (A)   The Traffic Engineer may, at his discretion, upon the application in
writing and good cause being shown, issue a special permit in writing
authorizing the applicant to operate or move a vehicle or load, on any street
other than Interstate highways, of a size or weight exceeding the maximum
specified in state statute. If such vehicle is solely on Interstate highways
within the city, such vehicle shall only need an appropriate permit from the
state. A permit may be granted for the transportation of loads on a certain
unit or combination of equipment during a period of time specified therein not
to exceed one year, and the permit shall contain the route or routes to be
traversed, that type of load or loads to be transported, and any other
restrictions or conditions deemed necessary.
   (B)   In every other case, such permit may be issued for a single trip and
shall designate the route to be traversed and the time such movement can be
made so that it will not interfere with normal traffic movement and such other
restrictions or conditions deemed necessary. Every such permit shall be carried
in the vehicle to which it refers and shall be open to inspection by any police
officer. Every such vehicle or load shall be escorted if required by the Chief
of Police.
   (C)   The applicant shall be responsible for any damage to public or private
property incurred as a result of such movement.
('74 Code, § 9-5-2.46) (Ord. 65-1974; Am. Ord._2016-011)
§ 8-1-2-42 LOADS OF EXCESSIVE SIZE.
   The Traffic Engineer may issue a permit to any person to operate a vehicle
or move a load on any street of a size or weight exceeding the maximum
specified in the state statute for a route and under conditions he specifies;
such conditions including but not limited to the requirement of a security bond
to cover possible minor damage to the roadway, to cover water sewer equipment,
connections, etc., or to private property; provided, however, the Traffic
Engineer in his discretion may refuse a permit if, due to the size or weight of
the vehicle or load, it seems relatively certain to him that damage will occur
and such damage cannot be adequately estimated for bond purposes, or that such
damage shall be so extensive that no security bond would be adequate to
compensate for the cost, time, inconvenience or hazards involved, or that the
movement of such a vehicle or load of such size or weight would be unduly
hazardous to motorists or other persons in the area of such movement.
('74 Code, § 9-5-2.47A) (Ord. 65-1974; Am. Ord._2016-011)
§ 8-1-2-43 POLICE DEPARTMENT.
   (A)   Responsibility of Enforcement. The Police Department shall enforce the
regulations of this Traffic Code and state vehicle laws, make arrests for
violations of such, investigate accidents, cooperate with the Traffic Engineer
and other city officials in administration of traffic laws and in developing
ways and means to improve traffic conditions, and carry out those duties
especially imposed upon it by this Traffic Code.
   (B)   Traffic Accident Studies.  Whenever accidents at any particular
location become numerous, the Police Department shall cooperate with the
Traffic Engineer in conducting studies of such accidents and determining
remedial measures.
   (C)   Police Department to Maintain Traffic Accident Reports. The Police
Department shall maintain a suitable system of filing traffic accident reports.
Accident reports or cards referring to them shall be filed alphabetically by
location. A record of each citation issued in connection with the accident
shall be forwarded to the Violations Bureau at the Police Department.
   (D)   Police Department to Submit Annual Traffic Safety Report. The Police
Department shall prepare an annual traffic report which shall be filed with the
Mayor. Such report shall contain but not be limited to the following
information:
      (1)   Number of traffic accidents, number of persons killed, number of
persons injured, and other pertinent traffic accident data;
      (2)   Number of traffic accidents investigated, and other pertinent data
on safety activities of the police; and
      (3)   Plans and recommendations of the Police Department for future
traffic safety activities.
('74 Code, §§ 9-5-2.50 - 2.52) (Ord. 65-1974)
§ 8-1-2-44 POLICE OFFICERS.
   (A)   All police officers shall have the authority, and those police
officers as are assigned by the Chief of Police shall have the duty, to enforce
all traffic laws of this city and all state vehicle laws applicable, to make
arrests for traffic violations, to investigate accidents, to make reports
concerning traffic accidents, to cooperate with the Traffic Engineer and other
city officials in administration of traffic laws and in developing ways and
means to improve traffic conditions, and to carry out those duties especially
imposed upon them by this Traffic Code.
   (B)   Police officers, or such officers as are assigned by the Chief of
Police, are hereby authorized to direct all traffic by voice, hand or signal in
conformance with traffic laws, provided that in the event of a fire or other
emergency to expedite traffic or to safeguard pedestrians, they may direct as
conditions require, notwithstanding provisions of the traffic laws.
('74 Code, § 9-5-2.58) (Ord. 65-1974)
§ 8-1-2-45 FIRE DEPARTMENT.
   Officers of the Fire Department, when at the scene of a fire, may direct
traffic or assist police in directing traffic either thereat or in the
immediate vicinity.
('74 Code, § 9-5-2.59) (Ord. 65-1974)
§ 8-1-2-46 ENFORCEMENT BY PARKING ENFORCEMENT OFFICERS AND SECURITY OFFICERS.
   Parking Enforcement Officers and Security Officers authorized by the Chief
of Police to issue citations shall only have the authority to issue citations
for violations of §§ 8-5-1-1 et seq.
('74 Code, §§ 9-5-2.54 - 2.57) (Ord. 65-1974; Am. Ord._2016-011)
PART 3: ENFORCEMENT
§ 8-1-3-1 VIOLATION.
   It shall be a violation of this Traffic Code to fail to perform any act
required by this Traffic Code or to do any act prohibited by this Traffic Code.
('74 Code, § 9-5-21.1) (Ord. 65-1974)
§ 8-1-3-2 JURISDICTION.
   The enforcement of this Traffic Code shall be limited to the streets and
roadways of the City, unless otherwise specified in a section, and which shall
be deemed to include those thoroughfares on private property used by the public
for purposes of vehicular travel by permission of the owner and not as a matter
of right; provided, that either the owner or lessor of such private property
shall have made application to the Mayor to have the Traffic Code and other
applicable ordinances of the City enforced on the thoroughfares on that
property and the Mayor shall have granted such application. However, §§
8-2-9-1 through
8-2-9-9,
8-2-1-12 and
8-2-1-13 shall not be so limited but also shall be enforced on all publicly or
privately owned property and those sections relating to parking regulations
shall not be so limited but also shall be enforced on all publicly owned
parking lots. When a street is the boundary line between the City and the
County, the entire public way shall be deemed within the City.
   (A)   Operators of bicycles have the same rights and responsibilities as
operators of automobiles in the use of streets, highways and roadways within
the City, except as otherwise specifically provided herein.
   (B)   Provisions listed in this Chapter 8 as applicable to bicycles are
equally applicable to e-bikes and powered micromobility devices.
('74 Code, § 9-5-21.2) (Ord. 65-1974; Am. Ord._2025-032)
§ 8-1-3-3 PUBLIC RECORDS AND REPORTS.
   All records or reports provided for in this Traffic Code shall be public
record unless provided herein or by law.
('74 Code, § 9-5-21.3) (Ord. 65-1974)
§ 8-1-3-4 FORMS AND RECORDS OF TRAFFIC CITATIONS AND ARRESTS.
   (A)   The city shall provide a paper or electronic traffic citation form for
notifying alleged violators to appear and answer to charges in the Metropolitan
Court in Bernalillo County.
   (B)   The Chief of Police or his duly authorized agent shall maintain a
record of every book so issued, and shall require a written receipt of every
such book, and shall maintain a record of every such book and each set of
citations contained therein.
('74 Code, § 9-5-21.4) (Ord. 65-1974; Am. Ord._2016-011)
§ 8-1-3-5 PROCEDURES ON ARREST; REPORTS.
   (A)   Telephone Calls. Following arrest, any person charged with a violation
of this Traffic Code is entitled to have reasonable opportunity to make three
telephone calls beginning not later than 20 minutes after the time of arrival
at the police station. Nothing in this section limits any right to make
telephone calls at any time later than 20 minutes after the time of arrival at
the police station or to make more than three telephone calls.
   (B)   Arresting Officer Reports. Within 24 hours after the arrest, the
arresting officer shall make a written report of the arrest and such report
shall include the name of the arrested person, and the location, time and
circumstances of the arrest.
('74 Code, § 9-5-21.5) (Ord. 65-1974; Am. Ord. 44-1977; Am. Ord._2016-011)
§ 8-1-3-6 CITATION IN LIEU OF ARREST.
   (A)   A law enforcement officer who arrests a person without a warrant for a
petty misdemeanor may offer the person arrested the option of accepting a
citation to appear in lieu of booking him at the police station.
   (B)   A police officer who halts a person for any violation of this code,
other than the purpose of giving him a warning and does not take such person
into custody, shall take the name, address and operator's license number of the
cited person, the license plate number of the motor vehicle involved, and such
other pertinent information as may be necessary, and shall issue to him in
writing a traffic citation containing notice to answer to the charge alleged in
Metropolitan Court within five days after the occurrence of the alleged
violation, or on a specific date and time which date shall not be sooner than
five days after the occurrence of the alleged violation. The alleged violator
must give his written promise to appear as provided in the citation and should
he refuse to do so, the officer shall take such person into custody.
   (C)   The person's signature on the citation constitutes a promise to appear
at the time and place stated in the citation, provided that, payment of a fine
within the time and in the manner specified in division (F) below shall be
deemed satisfaction of such promise to appear. In the case of multiple
violations, the total amount of fines must be paid in order to relieve a person
of his promise to appear.
   (D)   The uniform traffic citation used as a notice to appear is a valid
complaint, though not verified, in the event the person receiving it
voluntarily appears in court.
   (E)   At the time of citation the officer shall inform a person so entitled
under division (H) that he may pay a fine for the alleged violation in lieu of
appearing in court. If the person elects to pay the fine, the officer shall
prepare a notice indicating the alleged violation and the amount of the fine.
The notice of fine shall contain a statement that the person agrees to pay the
amount of the fine. The notice shall be signed by the person cited and his
signature shall constitute entry of a plea of nolo contendere to the offense(s)
stated in the notice and a promise to pay the amount prescribed. The person, by
signing the notice, does not fulfill his obligation to appear in court if he
fails to timely pay the full amount of the fine. If the person is cited for a
moving violation, he shall not be entitled to pay a fine in lieu of court
appearance if he has been convicted of or pled guilty or nolo contendere to a
moving traffic violation within the 12 months preceding the issuance of the
citation.
   (F)   No officer shall accept custody or payment of any fine. Payment of any
fine shall be made by mail or in person to the City Treasurer or
electronically, if allowed within five days from the date of the issuance of
the citation. Payments of fines are timely if postmarked within five days from
the date of the issuance of the citation. The City Treasurer shall issue a
receipt when a fine is paid by currency but checks tendered by the violator
upon which payment is received are sufficient receipt.
   (G)   Notwithstanding the provisions of division (E), a person may elect to
appear at the time and place stated in the citation, and in such case the
matter shall proceed as if no notice had been signed. All fines then shall be
paid to the Metropolitan Court.
   (H)   The provisions for payment of a fine in lieu of appearing in court
shall apply to any violation of this code except any case where court
appearance is mandatory, any case in which the violation caused or contributed
to the cause of an accident resulting in injury or death to any person, and any
case where the violation consists of speeding in excess of 25 miles an hour in
excess of the speed limit.
   (I)   The schedule of fines for violations of the traffic code shall be kept
at the Traffic Violations Bureau and shall be open to public inspection.
('74 Code, § 9-5-21.6) (Ord. 65-1974; Am. Ord._2016-011)
§ 8-1-3-7 CITATIONS ISSUED BY UNIFORMED, ON-DUTY OFFICERS.
   All citations issued under this Traffic Code shall be issued by a uniformed,
on-duty police officer. No form of complaint other than a citation shall be
issued.
('74 Code, § 9-5-21.7) (Ord. 65-1974)
§ 8-1-3-8 CITATIONS TO GIVE NUMBER AND SHORTENED CAPTION OF SECTION.
   Each citation issued by an officer shall give the number and the essence of
the caption of the section of the offense charged, and it will not be deemed
necessary to give the full caption of the number of the section. This section
shall not be construed to in any way alter, modify or limit the right to amend
as specified in §
8-1-3-15.
('74 Code, § 9-5-21.8) (Ord. 65-1974)
§ 8-1-3-9 FAILURE TO APPEAR ON CITATION OTHER THAN PARKING CITATION.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to violate his written promise to appear
at the time and place stated on the citation, regardless of the disposition of
the charge for which such citation was originally issued. However, by 5:00 p.m.
of the day prior to a defendant's court date, a defendant can contact the court
and plead guilty or no contest and pay a citation instead of going to traffic
arraignments. A written promise to appear in court may be complied with by an
appearance by counsel.
('74 Code, § 9-5-21.9) (Ord. 65-1974; Am. Ord._2016-011)
§ 8-1-3-10 CITATION OF A PARKED VEHICLE.
   (A)   Affixed Parking Citation. Whenever a motor vehicle without a driver is
found in violation of this code or state law or parked or stopped in violation
of any provision of
Article 5 of this Chapter 8 of the code of ordinances or state law, the
officer, parking enforcement officer, or security officer finding such vehicle
shall take its license plate number and any other information which may
identify its owner of use, and shall conspicuously affix to such vehicle a
parking citation for the driver to answer to the charge alleged within ten days
during the hours at the place, or by the method specified in the citation.
   (B)   Mailed Parking Citation. Automated enforcement technologies may be
used by the Albuquerque Police Department, parking enforcement officer or
security officer in determining violations of any provision of
Article 5 of this Chapter 8 of the code of ordinances. If an officer, parking
enforcement officer, or security officer determines through investigation of
evidence provided through automated enforcement technologies a motor vehicle to
be in violation of any provision of
Article 5 of this Chapter 8 of the code of ordinances, and the officer, parking
enforcement officer, or security officer through investigation determines that
such evidence can be shown to have been collected at the date and time of the
violation and show the license plate number or any other information which may
identify the violating vehicle’s owner of use, the investigating officer may
issue a parking citation by United States Postal Service mail to the address of
the registered owner of the violating vehicle for the registered owner to
answer to the charge alleged within twenty days of issuance of the citation
during the hours at the place or by the method specified in the citation.
“Issuance of the citation” shall mean the date on which the citation is mailed.
('74 Code, § 9-5-21.10) (Ord. 65-1974; Am. Ord. 91-1983; Am. Ord._2016-011; Am.
Ord. 2024-044)
§ 8-1-3-11 FAILURE TO PAY FOR PARKING CITATION.
   (A)   Affixed Parking Citation. If the alleged violator does not pay an
affixed parking citation within a period of ten days, a letter shall be sent to
the registered owner of such vehicle setting forth the time of the alleged
violation, listing the presumptions provided for in §
8-5-1-39, and informing the alleged violator of the violations and warning that
a complaint shall be delivered to the Metropolitan Court against the registered
owner of such vehicle, if there is no payment of the parking fine within 30
days of the date on which the violation occurred.
   (B)   Mailed Parking Citation. If the alleged violator does not pay a mailed
parking citation within a period of twenty days of issuance of the citation, a
letter shall be sent to the registered owner of such vehicle setting forth the
time of the alleged violation, listing the presumptions provided for in §
8-5-1-39, and informing them of the violations and warning that a complaint
shall be delivered to the Metropolitan Court against the registered owner of
such vehicle, if there is no payment of the parking fine within 45 days of the
date of issuance of the citation.
('74 Code, § 9-5-21.11) (Ord. 65-1974; Am. Ord._2016-011; Am. Ord. 2024-044)
§ 8-1-3-12 IMMOBILIZATION OF VEHICLE.
   An employee of the Police Department or Parking Enforcement Officer may, and
they are hereby authorized to temporarily and for a period of 72 hours,
immobilize subject vehicles by installing on, or attaching to such vehicle,
equipment such as a vehicle immobilization device designed to restrict the
normal movement of such vehicle, and if such vehicle is so immobilized the
officer so installing or attaching such device shall conspicuously affix to
such vehicle a notice, in writing, on a form provided by the Chief of Police,
advising the owner, driver or person in charge of such vehicle that such
vehicle has been immobilized by the city for violation of one or more of the
provisions of the Traffic Code, and that release from such immobilization may
be obtained at a designated place; that unless arrangements are made for the
release of such vehicle within 72 hours, the vehicle will be removed from the
streets at the direction of the Police Department, and that removing or
attempting to remove the device before a release is obtained is unlawful, and
containing such information as the Chief of Police shall deem necessary. It
shall be unlawful for any person to remove or attempt to remove any such device
before a release is obtained as herein provided or to move any such vehicle
before the same is released by the Police Department. Where such vehicle has
been properly immobilized in such manner, in addition to payment of all traffic
or parking citations, a fee of $100 shall be charged before releasing such
vehicle, and the parking restrictions, if any, otherwise applicable shall not
apply when such vehicle is so immobilized. If the vehicle has remained
immobilized for a period of 72 hours and release has not been obtained, the
police officer or employee of the city causing such immobilization shall have
the vehicle impounded until such time as the release has been obtained.
Immobilization of subject vehicles are authorized under the following
circumstances:
   (A)   If the alleged violator does not appear in response to a traffic or
parking citation and there are at least three or more outstanding violations
and further fails to respond to the notice informing the alleged violator of
the violations; or
   (B)   If the alleged violator does not appear in response to at least one or
more parking citations issued pursuant to §
8-5-1-43 and further fails to respond to the notice informing the alleged
violator of the violation.
(Ord. 29-1994; Am. Ord._2016-011; Am. Ord._2023-017)
§ 8-1-3-13 SUBSTITUTION OF DRIVER.
   In the event that the driver of the vehicle, who is not the registered
owner, agrees to submit to the jurisdiction of the Metropolitan Court and
agrees to plead guilty to the parking offense then existing against the
registered owner of the vehicle and pay any fines and court costs associated
with those offenses, then the city may cause a new complaint to be issued
against the driver for those same charges and upon complete disposition of the
charges, the complaint against the registered owner shall be dismissed with
prejudice by the city.
(Ord._2016-011)
§ 8-1-3-14 MULTIPLE CHARGES, MULTIPLE DEFENDANTS.
   Nothing in this Traffic Code shall be construed to limit the number of
charges or the number of defendants arising out of the same incident, and the
violation of this Traffic Code by one person shall not, per se, excuse
violation by any other person.
('74 Code, § 9-5-21.13) (Ord. 65-1974; Am. Ord. 29-1994)
§ 8-1-3-15 RIGHT TO AMEND; SURPLUSAGE; VARIANCE.
   (A)   Right to Amend the Charge. The right to amend to a different charge on
a citation shall be granted at any time prior to the completion of the city's
case. If the defendant is substantially prejudiced in the presentation of his
case as a result of the amendment, the Court, on its own motion, may order a
continuance of the trial or the balance of the trial to a later date. The right
to amend is not limited in number, provided the defendant is not substantially
prejudiced by the number of amendments.
   (B)   Defects, Errors and Omissions. A complaint or citation shall not be
deemed invalid, nor shall the trial, judgment or other proceedings thereon be
stayed, arrested or in any manner affected because of any defect, error,
omission, imperfection, or repugnancy therein which does not prejudice the
substantial rights of the defendant upon the merits.
   (C)   Surplusage. Any unnecessary allegation contained in a complaint,
information or indictment may be disregarded as surplusage.
   (D)   Variance. No variance between those allegations of a complaint,
indictment, information or any supplemental pleading which state the
particulars of the offense, whether amended or not, and for the evidence
offered in support thereof shall be ground for the acquittal of the defendant
unless such variance prejudices substantial rights of the defendant. The court
may at any time allow the indictment or information to be amended in respect to
any variance to conform to the evidence. If the court finds that the defendant
has been prejudiced by an amendment, the court may postpone the trial or grant
such other relief as may be proper under the circumstances.
   (E)   Effect. No appeal or motion made after verdict, based on any such
defect, error, omission, repugnancy, imperfection, variance or failure to prove
surplusage, shall be sustained unless it is affirmatively shown that the
defendant was in fact prejudiced thereby in his defense on the merits.
('74 Code, § 9-5-21.14) (Ord. 65-1974; Am. Ord. 29-1994)
§ 8-1-3-16 BURDEN OF PROOF; EXCEPTIONS BY DEFENSE.
   In all prosecutions under this Traffic Code in which the defense is based on
an exception or exemption, the burden shall be on the defendant to present
sufficient evidence to raise a reasonable doubt as to such defense, and then
the burden shall shift to the prosecution to prove the absence of the exception
or exemption just as any other element of the offense.
('74 Code, § 9-5-21.15) (Ord. 65-1974; Am. Ord. 29-1994)
§ 8-1-3-17 APPEALS FROM MUNICIPAL COURT.
   An appeal de novo from the Municipal Court may be taken by filing with the
District Court a notice of appeal and by posting an appeal bond within 15 days
after judgment and sentence are rendered in the Municipal Court.
('74 Code, § 9-5-21.17) (Ord. 65-1974; Am. Ord. 29-1994)
§ 8-1-3-18 DISPOSITION AND RECORDS OF TRAFFIC CITATIONS, WARRANTS AND
COMPLAINTS.
   (A)   The disposition of traffic citations issued by the city to an alleged
violator of any provision of this Traffic Code or the motor vehicle laws of
this state shall be as follows:
      (1)   Original or electronic original to Metropolitan Court.
      (2)   Copy to the Driver's License Branch of the Motor Vehicle Department
of the State of New Mexico.
      (3)   Copy to the Central Records Section of the Police Department.
      (4)   Copy to the violator.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful and official misconduct for any member of the
Police Department, or other officer or public employee, to dispose of, alter,
or deface a traffic citation or any copy thereof or the record of the issuance
or disposition of any traffic citation, complaint, or warrant, in a manner
other than as required in this section, or as otherwise authorized by law.
('74 Code, § 9-5-21.18) (Ord. 65-1974; Am. Ord. 29-1994; Am. Ord._2016-011)
§ 8-1-3-19 ILLEGAL CANCELLATION OF TRAFFIC CITATIONS.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to cancel or solicit the cancellation of
any traffic citation in any manner other than as provided by this Traffic Code.
The officer issuing the citation or the parking enforcement supervisor may
dismiss citations that are found to be unwarranted.
('74 Code, § 9-5-21.19) (Ord. 65-1974; Am. Ord. 29-1994; Am. Ord._2016-011)
§ 8-1-3-20 AUDIT OF RECORDS AND REPORTS.
   Every record of traffic citations, complaints thereon, and warrants issued
therefor required in this Traffic Code shall be audited at least annually by
the city. A report of such audit, together with a summary thereof, shall be
forwarded to the Mayor and the City Council.
('74 Code, § 9-5-21.20) (Ord. 65-1974; Am. Ord. 29-1994)
§ 8-1-3-21 RECORD OF TRAFFIC CASES; REPORT OF CONVICTIONS TO STATE DEPARTMENT
OF MOTOR VEHICLES.
   (A)   Every magistrate or judge of the Municipal Court shall keep, or cause
to be kept, a record of every traffic citation, or other legal form of traffic
charge deposited with, or presented to, the court or its Traffic Violations
Bureau, together with a record of every crime in the commission of which a
motor vehicle was used, and shall keep a record of every official action by the
court or its Traffic Violations Bureau in reference thereto, including but not
limited to a record of every conviction, forfeiture of bail, judgment of
acquittal, and the amount of fine or forfeiture resulting from every said
traffic complaint or citation deposited with or presented to said court or
Traffic Violations Bureau.
   (B)   Within ten days after the conviction or forfeiture of bail of a person
upon a charge of violating any provision of this Traffic Code or other law
regulating the operation of vehicles on highways, the Municipal Judge or the
clerk of the court of record in which such conviction was had or bail was
forfeited shall prepare and immediately forward to the State Department of
Motor Vehicles an abstract as required of the record of said court covering the
case in which the person was so convicted or forfeited bail, which abstract
must be certified by the person so required to prepare the same to be true and
correct. This procedure may be modified by state statute.
   (C)   The abstract must be made upon a form furnished by the State
Department of Motor Vehicles and shall include the name and address of the
party charged, his age or date of birth, the number, if any, of his operator's
or chauffeur's license, the registration number of the vehicle involved, the
nature of the offense, its location, the date of hearing, the plea, the
judgment, or whether bail was forfeited, and the amount of the fine or
forfeiture as the case may be. Report need not be made of any conviction
involving the illegal parking or standing of a vehicle.
   (D)   The failure, refusal, or neglect of any such judicial officer to
comply with any of the requirements of this section shall constitute misconduct
in office and shall be grounds for removal therefrom.
('74 Code, § 9-5-21.21) (Ord. 65-1974; Am. Ord. 29-1994)
§ 8-1-3-22 SAVINGS CLAUSE.
   If any of the sections, division, sentences, clauses or phrases of this
Traffic Code are for any reason held to be unconstitutional or invalid, the
validity of the remaining portions of this Traffic Code shall not thereby be
affected, since it is the express intent of the City Council to pass each
section, division, phrase, and word separately.
('74 Code, § 9-5-21.22) (Ord. 65-1974; Am. Ord. 29-1994)
§ 8-1-3-99 PENALTY.
   (A)   General penalty. Unless another penalty is expressly provided in this
Traffic Code or as otherwise provided by law, every person convicted of, or
pleading guilty or no contest to, a violation of any section and/or this
section of this Traffic Code shall be guilty of a petty misdemeanor and shall
be punished by a fine of not more than $500 or by imprisonment for not more
than 90 days or by both such fine and imprisonment.
   (B)   Parking violations. The schedule of fines for parking violations shall
be as follows:
      (1)   The fines for violations of the following sections of this Traffic
Code shall be:
      Section             Amount
      
8-5-1-1             $ 30
      
8-5-1-2             30
      
8-5-1-3             20
      
8-5-1-4             30
      
8-5-1-5             20
      
8-5-1-6             20
      
8-5-1-7             100
      
8-5-1-8             30
      
8-5-1-9             20
      
8-5-1-10 -
8-5-1-29         30
      
8-5-1-30            350
      
8-5-1-31 -
8-5-1-41         30
      (2)   Airport parking violation. Any person who violates the provisions
of §
7-1- 1-4(G) shall pay a fine of$30.
      (3)   Display and sale of motor vehicles. Any person who violates the
provisions of §
7-5-3 shall pay a fine of $50. If the owner of the vehicle has violated the
prohibition against concealment or removal of the license plate and/or
concealment of the vehicle identification number, or, within a three month
period, a vehicle has been cited two or more times for this offense, the
vehicle may be towed, taken into custody and stored. The department conducting
the tow shall initiate notification and hearing procedures as set forth in §
8-5-2-1 et seq. except that the decision of the hearing officer as set forth
therein shall be limited to whether the vehicle was lawfully impounded for
violation of this article. If it is determined at the hearing that the location
and status of the vehicle was not in violation of this article, the owner of
such vehicle shall not be liable for any expenses incurred as a result of the
taking and storage of such vehicle, and the department which authorized the
taking and storage of such vehicle shall be liable for such expenses, the
department which authorized the taking and storage of such vehicle shall be
liable to the owner for the amount paid by the owner.
      (4)   Fines for any affixed parking violation, including §
7-5-3 Display and Sale of Motor Vehicles, if not paid within ten days of the
occurrence of the violation, shall be two times the amount of the fine, and if
not paid within 20 days of the occurrence of the violation, shall be three
times the amount of the fine, unless the person cited has initiated court
proceedings to answer the charges within ten days of the issuance of the
citation. Fines for any mailed parking citation, if not paid within twenty days
of the issuance of the citation, shall be two times the amount of the fine, and
if not paid within thirty days of the issuance of the violation, shall be three
times the amount of the fine, unless the person cited has initiated court
proceedings to answer the charges within twenty days of the issuance of the
citation.
   (C)   Construction and Curtilage Zone Penalty. Any person who violates any
provision of any Traffic Code within this Code of Ordinances in an
appropriately marked construction zone or curtilage zone, shall receive double
any statutory fine or Court imposed fine. The total doubled fines combined may
not exceed $500.00 or imprisonment for more than 90 days or both.
   (D)   Driving in excess of speed limits. The schedule of fines for
violations of §§
8-2-4-1 through
8-2-4-3 ROA 1994 shall be as follows:
      (1)   Up to and including ten miles an hour over the speed limit: $100;
      (2)   From 11 up to and including 15 miles an hour over the speed limit:
$150;
      (3)   From 16 up to and including 20 miles an hour over the speed limit:
$200;
      (4)   From 21 up to and including 25 miles an hour over the speed limit:
$250;
      (5)   From 26 up to and including 30 miles an hour over the speed limit:
$300;
      (6)   From 31 up to and including 35 miles an hour over the speed limit:
$350;
      (7)   Over 35 miles an hour over the speed limit: $400.
('74 Code, § 9-5-21.16) (Ord. 65-1974; Am. Ord. 49-1989; Am. Ord. 52-1992; Am.
Ord. 7-1993; Am. Ord. 26-1996; Am. Ord. 15-1997; Am. Ord. 22-2000; Am. Ord. 25-
2003; Am. Ord. 43-2004; Am. Ord. 24-2007; Am. Ord._2016-011; Am. Ord._2017-010;
Am. Ord. 2024-044)
ARTICLE 2: TRAFFIC REGULATIONS
Section
Part 1: General Provisions
   
8-2-1-1   Obedience to Police and Fire Department
   
8-2-1-2   Public employees to obey traffic regulations
   
8-2-1-3   Aiding and abetting
   
8-2-1-4   Failure to make reports, records
   
8-2-1-5   False report to police, identity of driver
   
8-2-1-6   False report for citation
   
8-2-1-7   False report of theft or embezzlement
   
8-2-1-8   Driving while under the influence of a drug
   
8-2-1-9   Duties of owner (intoxicated driver); attempted DWI
   
8-2-1-10   Possession of open container
   
8-2-1-11   Minor ­ possession of alcohol while operating a motor vehicle
   
8-2-1-12   Reckless driving
   
8-2-1-13   Careless driving
   
8-2-1-14   Driver's license
   
8-2-1-15   Driving while license is suspended, revoked, canceled or denied
   
8-2-1-16   Unlawful use of license
   
8-2-1-17   Employing unlicensed chauffeur
   
8-2-1-18   Renting to unlicensed operators, minors
   
8-2-1-19   Permitting a violation
   
8-2-1-20   Fleeing or attempting to elude an officer
   
8-2-1-21   Following too close
   
8-2-1-22   Sliding or losing traction
   
8-2-1-23   Failure to keep a proper lookout
   
8-2-1-24   Driver's prohibited acts
   
8-2-1-25   Obstruction to driving
   
8-2-1-26   Interference with driver of vehicle
   
8-2-1-27   Unlawful riding
   
8-2-1-28   Driving while vision impaired by conditions
   
8-2-1-29   Wearing dark glasses at night prohibited
   
8-2-1-30   Motorcycles, motorscooters and recreational vehicles prohibited off
the public way in certain areas
   
8-2-1-31   Sudden stop or decrease in speed
   
8-2-1-32   Vehicles not to obstruct intersection
   
8-2-1-33   Vehicles, pedestrians not to obstruct streets
   
8-2-1-34   Yielding right-of-way
   
8-2-1-35   Drive on right side of roadway; exceptions
   
8-2-1-36   Drive to right of approaching vehicle
   
8-2-1-37   Drive to right of traffic island
   
8-2-1-38   Driving on left prohibited under certain conditions
   
8-2-1-39   Driving on roadways laned for traffic
   
8-2-1-40   Driving on divided highway
   
8-2-1-41   Driving on or across double yellow lines prohibited
   
8-2-1-42   Keep vehicle within traffic lane
   
8-2-1-43   Controlled access roadways ­ off-ramps, on-ramps
   
8-2-1-44   Restrictions on use of controlled access roadways
   
8-2-1-45   Vehicles entering or leaving an alley
   
8-2-1-46   Driving on sidewalk prohibited
   
8-2-1-47   Driving through safety zones prohibited
   
8-2-1-48   Limitations on backing
   
8-2-1-49   Coasting prohibited
   
8-2-1-50   Authorized emergency vehicles
   
8-2-1-51   Yield to, pull over and stop for emergency vehicles
   
8-2-1-52   Following fire apparatus prohibited
   
8-2-1-53   Fire areas
   
8-2-1-54   Crossing fire hose
   
8-2-1-55   Driving through a funeral or other procession
   
8-2-1-56   Drivers in a procession
   
8-2-1-57   Throwing substance at vehicle
   
8-2-1-58   Destructive or injurious material on street
   
8-2-1-59   Device against curb; temporary driveway
   
8-2-1-60   Littering
   
8-2-1-61   Object obstructing public way
   
8-2-1-62   Public utility obstructing traffic
   
8-2-1-63   Movement of hazardous vehicles; permit; violation
   
8-2-1-64   Roadwork sites
   
8-2-1-65   Occupied trailer
   
8-2-1-66   Towed vehicle swerving
   
8-2-1-67   Vehicle to tow only one
   
8-2-1-68   Prohibited riding in a truck
 
   
8-2-1-99   Penalty
Part 2: Traffic Control Devices, Signs Restricting Use of Streets
   
8-2-2-1   Obedience to traffic control devices
   
8-2-2-2   Traffic control legend
   
8-2-2-3   Pedestrian control signal, pedestrian hybrid beacon, and rectangular
rapid flashing beacon
   
8-2-2-4   Flashing signals
   
8-2-2-5   Stop signs
   
8-2-2-6   Yield signs
   
8-2-2-7   Directing vehicle to or away from a lane or direction
   
8-2-2-8   Crossing corner lot to avoid traffic device prohibited
   
8-2-2-9   Lane change
   
8-2-2-10   One-way street or alley
   
8-2-2-11   One-way at one time, another way at another time
   
8-2-2-12   Commercial vehicle or vehicles in excess of gross weight from
certain streets or bridges
   
8-2-2-13   Unauthorized signs, signals, markings or lights
   
8-2-2-14   Interference with official traffic control devices or railroad
signals
   
8-2-2-15   Clear sight triangle
Part 3: Special Stops
   
8-2-3-1   When dangerous to proceed forward
   
8-2-3-2   When emerging from alley, driveway, private road and the like
   
8-2-3-3   Keeping intersection unobstructed
   
8-2-3-4   Stop for visually impaired person
   
8-2-3-5   School zone
   
8-2-3-6   Vulnerable road user in crosswalk
Part 4: Speed
   
8-2-4-1   School zone speed limit
   
8-2-4-2   Residential or business district speed limit
   
8-2-4-3   Posted speed zones
   
8-2-4-4   Charging violation
   
8-2-4-5   Controlled speed
   
8-2-4-6   Racing on streets, drag racing
   
8-2-4-7   Minimum speed
   
8-2-4-8   Slow moving traffic keep to right
   
8-2-4-9   Slow moving vehicles prohibited on designated streets during peak
hours of traffic
Part 5: Overtaking and Passing
   
8-2-5-1   Overtake and pass to left
   
8-2-5-2   No passing without sufficient clearance
   
8-2-5-3   Overtaken vehicles to yield
   
8-2-5-4   Passing on grade or curve prohibited
   
8-2-5-5   Passing at intersection or railroad crossing prohibited
   
8-2-5-6   Passing near bridge, viaduct or tunnel prohibited
   
8-2-5-7   Passing on right
   
8-2-5-8   No passing zones
   
8-2-5-9   No passing in a school zone
   
8-2-5-10   Passing or approaching a school bus
Part 6: Turns, U-Turns
   
8-2-6-1   Yield before turning
   
8-2-6-2   Right turn from right lane into right lane
   
8-2-6-3   Left turn from left lane or left turn bay into left lane
   
8-2-6-4   Signs directing right turn only and the like
   
8-2-6-5   Signs prohibiting turns, U-turns
   
8-2-6-6   Turning movement, lane change, signal required
   
8-2-6-7   No turn into or U-turn near fire station
   
8-2-6-8   No turn or U-turn on curve, grade or behind obstruction
   
8-2-6-9   Signals required before turn
   
8-2-6-10   U-turn
   
8-2-6-11   Middle of three lanes at dead end
   
8-2-6-12   No driving in left-turn bay except to turn left
Part 7: Pedestrians
   
8-2-7-1   Soliciting of rides by or for minors prohibited
   
8-2-7-2   Occupying roadways, certain medians prohibited
   
8-2-7-3   Right-of-way in crosswalk
   
8-2-7-4   Pedestrian tunnel or overhead crossing
   
8-2-7-5   Subject to traffic control signals
   
8-2-7-6   Pedestrians to cross at right angles
   
8-2-7-7   Walking along roadway
   
8-2-7-8   Controlled access roadways restricted
   
8-2-7-9   Prohibited vulnerable road user crossings
   
8-2-7-10   School child to cross within marked crosswalk
   
8-2-7-11   Obedience to railroad signals
   
8-2-7-12   Drivers to exercise due care
   
8-2-7-13   Articles not to obstruct sidewalks
Part 8: Railroad Crossings; Trains
   
8-2-8-1   Obedience to signal
   
8-2-8-2   Railroad grade crossings
   
8-2-8-3   Certain vehicles to stop at railroad crossings
   
8-2-8-4   Exception to required stop
   
8-2-8-5   Automatic gate crossing
   
8-2-8-6   Moving heavy equipment at railroad grade crossings
   
8-2-8-7   Trains not to obstruct streets
Part 9: Accidents, Reports
   
8-2-9-1   Accidents involving death or personal injury
   
8-2-9-2   Accidents involving damage to vehicle
   
8-2-9-3   Duty upon striking unattended vehicle
   
8-2-9-4   Duty upon striking fixtures or other property upon a highway
   
8-2-9-5   Immediate notice of accidents
   
8-2-9-6   Written reports of accidents
   
8-2-9-7   When driver unable to report
   
8-2-9-8   Damaged vehicles; reports
   
8-2-9-9   Written accident reports confidential
Part 10: [Repealed]
PART 1: GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 8-2-1-1 OBEDIENCE TO POLICE AND FIRE DEPARTMENT.
   No person shall fail or refuse to comply with any lawful order or direction
of a police officer or fire department official.
('74 Code, § 9-5-4.2) (Ord. 65-1974)
§ 8-2-1-2 PUBLIC EMPLOYEES TO OBEY TRAFFIC REGULATIONS.
   (A)   The provisions of this title shall apply to the driver of any vehicle
owned by or used in the service of the United States Government, or the
government of any state, county or city, and it shall be unlawful for any such
driver to violate any of the provisions of this title, except as hereinafter
provided in this title.
   (B)   When not applicable. Unless specifically made applicable, the
provisions of this title shall not apply to persons, teams, motor vehicles or
other equipment actually engaged in work in the right-of-way, but shall apply
to such persons and vehicles when traveling to and from such work.
('74 Code, § 9-5-4.3) (Ord. 65-1974; Am. Ord. 48-1986; Am. Ord._2016-011)
§ 8-2-1-3 AIDING AND ABETTING.
   It shall be a violation of this title for any person to aid or abet in the
violation of any requirement or prohibition contained in this title.
('74 Code, § 9-5-4.4) (Ord. 65-1974)
§ 8-2-1-4 FAILURE TO MAKE REPORTS, RECORDS.
   No person required to make a report or to keep a record under this title
shall willfully fail, refuse, or neglect to make such report or to keep such
record.
('74 Code, § 9-5-4.5) (Ord. 65-1974)
§ 8-2-1-5 FALSE REPORT TO POLICE, IDENTITY OF DRIVER.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to represent to any officer either that
he was the driver of a motor vehicle when in fact he was not, or that he was
not the driver of a motor vehicle when in fact he was, or that the driver was
some person other than the actual driver for the purpose either of having the
actual driver avoid receiving or of having some other person receive a citation
under the provisions of either this title or the state statute relating to
offenses in the state motor vehicle code.
('74 Code, § 9-5-4.6) (Ord. 65-1974)
§ 8-2-1-6 FALSE REPORT FOR CITATION.
   It is unlawful for any person, while being issued a citation charging a
violation of this title, to give as his name any false or fictitious name or
any name other than either his legal name or the name that he is commonly known
by and is employed under, or to give a false or fictitious address or an
address other than the address of his permanent residence or to give any false
or fictitious information required to fill out the citation.
('74 Code, § 9-5-4.7) (Ord. 65-1974)
§ 8-2-1-7 FALSE REPORT OF THEFT OR EMBEZZLEMENT.
   It is unlawful for any person to knowingly make or file a false or
fraudulent report with the Police Department of the theft or the embezzlement
of either any vehicle required to be licensed or of any license plate or
license plate sticker with intent to avoid a citation under any other section
of this title.
('74 Code, § 9-5-4.8) (Ord. 65-1974)
§ 8-2-1-8 DRIVING WHILE UNDER THE INFLUENCE OF A DRUG.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to drive or be in actual physical
control of any motor vehicle while such person is under the influence of any
drug to a degree which impairs his ability, either mentally or physically or
both, to operate such motor vehicle. Such drug shall include intoxicating
liquor, narcotic drug, or other drug or any combination of intoxicating liquor,
narcotic drug or other drug. The fact that a person charged with a violation of
this section is or has been entitled to use such liquor or narcotic drug or
other drug or any combination thereof under the laws of this state shall not
constitute a defense against any charge of a violation of this section. The
gravamen of this offense is the mental and/or physical condition of the driver
which impairs the ability of such driver to safely operate such motor vehicle.
   (B)   Implied consent to submit to chemical test:
      (1)   Any person who operates a motor vehicle within the city shall be
deemed to have given consent, subject to the provisions of the Implied Consent
Act, Sections 66-8-105 through 66-8-112 NMSA 1978, to a chemical test or tests
of his breath or blood for the purpose of determining the alcoholic, narcotic
or drug content of his blood, if arrested while the person was driving or in
actual physical control of a motor vehicle while alleged to be under the
influence of an intoxicating liquor, narcotic drug, other drug, or any
combination thereof.
      (2)   A breath test for alcohol shall be administered at the direction of
a police officer of the city who has reasonable grounds to believe the person
to have been driving or in actual physical control of a motor vehicle within
this state, while under the influence of intoxicating liquor. If the person
comes under the provisions of division (3) below, the law enforcement officer
may designate the test or tests to be given. The city shall pay for the test.
      (3)   Any person who is dead, unconscious or otherwise in a condition
rendering him incapable of refusal, shall be deemed not to have withdrawn the
consent provided by division (1) above and the test or tests designated by the
law enforcement officer may be administered. (Section 66-8-108 NMSA 1978)
   (C)   Administration of chemical test; payment of costs; additional tests.
      (1)   (a)   Only a physician, licensed professional or practical nurse or
laboratory technician or technologist employed by a hospital or physician shall
withdraw blood from any person in the performance of a blood test. No such
physician, nurse, technician or technologist who withdraws blood from any
person in the performance of a blood test that has been directed by any police
officer, or by any judicial or probation officer shall be held liable in any
civil or criminal action for assault, battery, false imprisonment, or any
conduct of any police officer, except for negligence, nor shall any person
assisting in the performance of such a test, or any hospital wherein blood is
withdrawn or a urine sample is taken, in the performance of such a test, be
subject to civil or criminal liability for assault, battery, false
imprisonment, or any conduct of any police officer, except for negligence.
         (b)   This limitation upon who may withdraw blood does not apply to
the taking of samples of breath.
      (2)   The person tested shall be given an opportunity to arrange for a
physician, licensed professional or practical nurse, or laboratory technician
or technologist who is employed by a hospital, or physician, of his choosing to
perform a chemical test in addition to any test performed at the direction of a
law enforcement officer. The city shall pay for the test.
      (3)   Upon the request of the person tested, full information concerning
the test or tests performed shall be made available to him as soon as it is
available from the person performing the test.
      (4)   If a person exercises his right under division (2) above to have a
chemical test performed upon him by a person of his own choosing, then the cost
of that test shall be paid by the city.
   (D)   Use of chemical tests in criminal actions; presumptions of
intoxication.
      (1)   The results of a chemical test performed pursuant to the Implied
Consent Act may be introduced into evidence in any criminal action arising out
of the acts alleged to have been committed by the person tested while driving
or in actual physical control of a motor vehicle while under the influence of
intoxicating liquor.
      (2)   If the blood of the person tested contains:
         (a)   Five one-hundredths of one percent or less by weight of alcohol,
it shall be presumed that the person was not under the influence of
intoxicating liquor;
         (b)   More than five one-hundredths of one percent but less than one-
tenth of one percent by weight of alcohol, no presumption shall be made that
the person either was or was not under the influence of intoxicating liquor.
However, the amount of alcohol in the person's blood may be considered with
other competent evidence in determining whether or not the person was under the
influence of intoxicating liquor; or
         (c)   One-tenth of one percent or more by weight of alcohol, it shall
be presumed that the person was under the influence of intoxicating liquor.
      (3)   The percent by weight of alcohol shall be based on grams of alcohol
in one hundred cubic centimeters of blood.
      (4)   The presumptions in division (2) above do not limit the
introduction of other competent evidence concerning whether or not a person was
under the influence of intoxicating liquor, narcotics or other drugs.
   (E)   Refusal to submit to chemical test; revocation of license or privilege
to drive.
      (1)   If a person under arrest refused, upon request of the police
officer, to submit to chemical tests designated by this section, none shall be
administered.
      (2)   The police officer shall prepare in such event a sworn report, and
submit the report to the Commissioner of the Department of Motor Vehicles,
stating the facts and circumstances causing him to believe he had reasonable
grounds to believe the arrested person had been driving or was in actual
physical control of a motor vehicle within the city while under the influence
of intoxicating liquor, and further stating that, upon his request, the person
refused to submit to a chemical test, after being advised that failure to
submit could result in revocation of his privilege to drive.
('74 Code, § 9-5-4.9) (Ord. 65-1974)
§ 8-2-1-9 DUTIES OF OWNER (INTOXICATED DRIVER); ATTEMPTED DWI.
   (A)   Owner not to loan vehicle. It shall be unlawful for the owner or
person in control of a motor vehicle to permit same to be driven or operated by
any person who is under the influence of intoxicating liquor, narcotic drug,
other drug, or any combination thereof to a degree which renders him incapable
of safely driving such a vehicle.
   (B)   Attempted operation of vehicle while under the influence.  It shall be
unlawful for any person under the influence of intoxicating liquor, narcotic
drug, other drug or any combination thereof to a degree which renders him
incapable of driving safely, to start or attempt to start or operate a vehicle.
('74 Code, § 9-5-4.10) (Ord. 65-1974)
§ 8-2-1-10 POSSESSION OF OPEN CONTAINER.
   (A)   No person operating a motor vehicle upon the street shall have in his
immediate possession any bottle, can, glass or other receptacle containing any
alcoholic beverage which is open or has been opened or a seal broken or the
contents of which have been partially removed.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person to drink any intoxicating liquor
while in a motor vehicle on any public way.
('74 Code, § 9-5-4.11) (Ord. 65-1974)
§ 8-2-1-11 MINOR ­ POSSESSION OF ALCOHOL WHILE OPERATING A MOTOR VEHICLE.
   (A)   No person who is below the legal age to purchase alcoholic beverages
as specified in state statutes shall operate a motor vehicle while knowingly
having in his possession any alcoholic liquor, whether such liquor is in an
opened or unopened container.
   (B)   Any person under the age of 18 years of age who violates this section
shall be charged as a juvenile offender pursuant to the Delinquency Act,
Chapter 32A, Article 2 NMSA 1978.
('74 Code, § 9-5-4.12) (Ord. 65-1974)
§ 8-2-1-12 RECKLESS DRIVING.
   Any person who drives a vehicle carelessly and heedlessly in willful or
wanton disregard of the rights or safety of others, and without due caution and
circumspection, and at a speed or in a manner so as to endanger or be likely to
endanger any person or property, is guilty of reckless driving. Any person
charged under this section may be found guilty of the lesser offense of
careless driving [see §
8-2-1-13].
('74 Code, § 9-5-4.13A) (Ord. 65-1974)
§ 8-2-1-13 CARELESS DRIVING.
   (A)   Any person operating a vehicle on the roadway shall give his full and
entire attention to the operation of the vehicle.
   (B)   Any person who operates a vehicle in a careless, inattentive or
imprudent manner, without due regard for conditions of traffic, weather, and
roadway, grade, corners, width of roadway, and all other attendant
circumstances, so as to endanger life, limb, or property of any person, shall
be guilty of careless driving.
   (C)   This section shall be a lesser offense of §
8-2-1-12, Reckless Driving.
('74 Code, § 9-5-4.14) (Ord. 65-1974)
§ 8-2-1-14 DRIVER'S LICENSE.
   It shall be unlawful for any resident of the state to operate a motor
vehicle in the city unless such person has on his person a current motor
vehicle driver's license or chauffeur's license issued by the state. It shall
be unlawful for any resident of the state to operate a motorcycle, motor driven
cycle or motor scooter in the city unless he has on his person a current
license for such purpose issued by the state. It shall be unlawful for any
nonresident of the state Mexico to operate a motor vehicle in the city unless
such person has on his person a current driver's license or chauffeur's license
issued to him by the state of which he is a resident which would authorize him
to operate the type of motor vehicle he is operating in the city if he were in
the state of his residence.
('74 Code, § 9-5-4.16) (Ord. 65-1974)
§ 8-2-1-15 DRIVING WHILE LICENSE IS SUSPENDED, REVOKED, CANCELED OR DENIED.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to drive a motor vehicle on the public
ways of this city at a time when his privilege to do so is suspended, revoked,
canceled or denied.
('74 Code, § 9-5-4.17A) (Ord. 65-1974)
§ 8-2-1-16 UNLAWFUL USE OF LICENSE.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to:
   (A)   Display or cause or permit to be displayed or have in his possession a
canceled, revoked, suspended, forged, fictitious or fraudulently altered
operator's or chauffeur's license.
   (B)   Lend his operator's or chauffeur's license to any other person or
knowingly permit the use thereof by another.
   (C)   Display or present as one's own an operator's or chauffeur's license
not issued to him.
   (D)   Refuse to surrender to the court upon its lawful demand an operator's
or chauffeur's license which has been revoked or suspended.
   (E)   Violate any restriction or fail to perform any act or fail to observe
any condition of driving incumbent upon the holder of a driver's or chauffeur's
license or permit to drive which has been imposed by the licensing authority as
a restriction to driving or condition of licensing.
('74 Code, § 9-5-4.18) (Ord. 65-1974)
§ 8-2-1-17 EMPLOYING UNLICENSED CHAUFFEUR.
   No person shall employ as a chauffeur of a motor vehicle any person not then
licensed as a chauffeur by the state or other licensing state.
('74 Code, § 9-5-4.19) (Ord. 65-1974)
§ 8-2-1-18 RENTING TO UNLICENSED OPERATORS, MINORS.
   (A)   No person shall rent a motor vehicle to any other person unless the
latter person is then duly licensed hereunder or, in the case of nonresident,
then duly licensed under the laws of the state or country of his residence
except a nonresident whose home state or country does not require that an
operator be licensed.
   (B)   No person shall rent a motor vehicle to another until he has inspected
the operator's or chauffeur's license of the person to whom the vehicle is to
be rented and compared and verified the signature thereon with the signature of
such person written in his presence.
   (C)   Every person renting a motor vehicle to another shall keep a record of
the registration number of the motor vehicle so rented, the name and address of
the person to whom the vehicle is rented, the number of the license of said
latter person and the date and place when and where said license was issued.
Such record shall be open to inspection by any police officer or employee of
the Department.
   (D)   It is unlawful to rent a motor vehicle to any person who is under the
age of 18 years unless such person shall furnish and leave with the person
renting out the motor vehicle a statement in writing showing the consent of the
parent or guardian to the renting of a motor vehicle by the said minor.
('74 Code, § 9-5-4.20) (Ord. 65-1974)
§ 8-2-1-19 PERMITTING A VIOLATION.
   It shall be unlawful for any person knowingly to authorize or permit a motor
vehicle owned by him or under his control to be driven by any person in
violation of any of the provisions of this ordinance or any of the motor
vehicle laws of the state.
('74 Code, § 9-5-4.21) (Ord. 65-1974)
§ 8-2-1-20 FLEEING OR ATTEMPTING TO ELUDE AN OFFICER.
   No driver of a motor vehicle shall willfully fail or refuse to bring his
vehicle to a stop, or shall otherwise flee or attempt to elude a pursuing
police vehicle when given a visual or audible signal to stop, whether the
signal is by hand, voice, emergency light, flashing light, siren or other
signal. The officer giving such signal shall be in uniform, wearing his badge
of office, and his vehicle shall be appropriately marked as a police vehicle.
('74 Code, § 9-5-4.22A) (Ord. 65-1974)
§ 8-2-1-21 FOLLOWING TOO CLOSE.
   The driver of a motor vehicle shall not follow another vehicle more closely
than is reasonable and prudent, having due regard for the speed of such
vehicle, existing traffic conditions, and the condition of the roadway.
('74 Code, § 9-5-4.23) (Ord. 65-1974)
§ 8-2-1-22 SLIDING OR LOSING TRACTION.
   No person shall accelerate or change directions so rapidly as to allow
either his vehicle to slide to the side or his tires to lose traction with the
street under normal road conditions.
('74 Code, § 9-5-4.24) (Ord. 65-1974)
§ 8-2-1-23 FAILURE TO KEEP A PROPER LOOKOUT.
   No person driving a motor vehicle shall fail to give their full attention to
the task of driving and to keep a proper lookout through their windshield, side
windows, and rear mirror for any vehicles, motorcycles, motorscooters, farm
tractors, and vulnerable road users that they may be approaching or who may be
approaching them from any direction and from any street, alley, driveway,
bikeway, or multi-use trail.
('74 Code, § 9-5-4.25) (Ord. 65-1974; Am. Ord._2025-032)
§ 8-2-1-24 DRIVER'S PROHIBITED ACTS.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to:
   (A)   Drive while having in his lap any person, adult or minor, or any
animal, nor shall the driver of a vehicle be seated in the lap of any other
person.
   (B)   Drive a vehicle while having either arm around another person.
   (C)   Knowingly permit any other person to interfere with the steering
mechanism or the acceleration of the vehicle.
   (D)   Carry any animal in or upon any vehicle in a cruel, inhumane, or
unsafe manner. Animals carried in the bed of trucks must be crated or
restrained upon a non metal mat so that they cannot fall or jump from the
truck.
   (E)   Except as otherwise provided below, no person shall operate a motor
vehicle upon a public highway while using a mobile telephone to engage in a
call or create, send or read text messages.
      (1)   For purposes of this division, the following definitions apply:
         ENGAGE IN A CALL. Talking into, dialing or listening on a hand-held
mobile telephone, but shall not include holding a mobile telephone to activate,
deactivate or initiate a function of such telephone.
         HAND-HELD MOBILE TELEPHONE. A mobile telephone with which a user
engages in a call using at least one hand (or prosthetic device or aid in the
case of a physically disabled person).
         HANDS-FREE MOBILE TELEPHONE. A mobile telephone that has an internal
feature or function, or that is equipped with an attachment or addition,
whether or not permanently part of such mobile telephone, by which a user
engages in a call without the use of either hand (or prosthetic device or aid
in the case of a physically disabled person), whether  or not the use of either
hand (or prosthetic device) is necessary to activate, deactivate or initiate a
function of such telephone.
         MOBILE TELEPHONE. The device used by subscribers and other users of
wireless telephone service to access such service and shall include Personal
Digital Assistants.
         PERSONAL DIGITAL ASSISTANT. A device operated using a wireless
telecommunications service that provides for data communication other than by
voice.
         WIRELESS TELEPHONE SERVICE. Two-way real time voice telecommunications
service that is interconnected to a public switched telephone network and
commonly referred to as cellular service or personal communication service.
      (2)   An operator of a motor vehicle who holds a mobile telephone to, or
in the immediate proximity of, his or her ear is presumed to be engaging in a
call within the meaning of this section. The presumption established by this
subdivision is rebuttable by evidence tending to show that the operator was not
engaged in a call. IMMEDIATE PROXIMITY shall mean that distance as permits the
operator of a mobile telephone to hear telecommunications transmitted over such
mobile telephone, but shall not require physical contact with such operator's
ear.
      (3)   Division (E) shall not apply to:
         (a)   The use of a mobile telephone for the sole purpose of
communicating with any of the following regarding an emergency situation: an
emergency response operator; a hospital, physician's office or health clinic;
an ambulance company or corps; a fire department, district or company; or a
police department;
         (b)   Any law enforcement, public safety or police officers, emergency
services officials, first aid, emergency medical technicians and personnel, or
any fire safety officials in the performance of duties arising out of and in
the course of their employment as such; or
         (c)   The use of a hands-free mobile telephone when being used in a
hands free manner.
   (F)   The penalty for a first conviction or plea of nolo contendere for a
violation of division (E) shall be $100.00. The penalty for all subsequent
convictions or pleas of nolo contendere for violation of division (E) shall be
$200.00.
('74 Code, § 9-5-4.26) (Ord. 65-1974; Am. Ord. 42-1992; Am. Ord. 4-2007; Am.
Ord. 16-2010)
§ 8-2-1-25 OBSTRUCTION TO DRIVING.
   No person shall drive a vehicle when it is so loaded, or when there are in
the front seat such number of persons, exceeding three, as to obstruct his view
to the front, sides or rear of the vehicle or as to interfere with the driver's
control over the driving mechanism of the vehicle. A driver of a vehicle which
is equipped with extended side mirrors on each side of his vehicle which are so
located as to reflect to the driver a view of the roadway to the rear of such
vehicle shall be deemed to have an adequate view of the rear of his vehicle,
provided that there is no obstruction of his view to the side mirrors.
('74 Code, § 9-5-4.27) (Ord. 65-1974)
§ 8-2-1-26 INTERFERENCE WITH DRIVER OF VEHICLE.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to ride in such position as to interfere
in any way with the driver's view ahead, to the rear or to the sides of the
vehicle, or to interfere with his control over the driving mechanism of the
vehicle. The provisions of this section shall not apply to a driver's license
examiner when conducting the road or driving test of an applicant for a
driver's license, nor to a person giving instruction as a part of a course in
driver training conducted by a public school, educational institution or a
licensed driving school.
('74 Code, § 9-5-4.28) (Ord. 65-1974)
§ 8-2-1-27 UNLAWFUL RIDING.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to ride or to permit another person to
ride in or upon any portion of a vehicle not designated or intended for the use
of passengers. This provision shall not apply to any person riding within truck
bodies in space intended for merchandise.
('74 Code, § 9-5-4.29) (Ord. 65-1974)
§ 8-2-1-28 DRIVING WHILE VISION IMPAIRED BY CONDITIONS.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to drive a vehicle either during weather
conditions of heavy rain, heavy snow, fog, blowing dust or other adverse
conditions, if doing so substantially impairs his vision and such driving
contributes to an accident resulting in personal injury or property damage.
('74 Code, § 9-5-4.30) (Ord. 65-1974)
§ 8-2-1-29 WEARING DARK GLASSES AT NIGHT PROHIBITED.
   No person shall operate a motor vehicle while wearing dark or colored lenses
in his eyeglasses, whether prescription or nonprescription, in the nighttime.
Dark or colored lenses shall include those lenses which, when held above a
white surface either in daylight or in a well-lighted area, contrast
discernibly in color with the white surface below but which shall not include
those glasses with special lenses which change from clear to dark upon exposure
to light.
('74 Code, § 9-5-4.31) (Ord. 65-1974)
§ 8-2-1-30 MOTORCYCLES, MOTORSCOOTERS AND RECREATIONAL VEHICLES PROHIBITED OFF
THE PUBLIC WAY IN CERTAIN AREAS.
   (A)   No person shall ride or operate any motorcycle, motor scooter or off-
road motor vehicle on any private property or public property within one-
quarter of a mile of any school, hospital, convalescent home, or residence,
except on a public way or parking lot or on a private road or driveway. The
restrictions in this section shall apply to any motor vehicle operated or used
exclusively off the city roadways and that is not legally equipped for
operation on public ways. This section shall not apply to any property which
has been posted by the city as a motorcycle, motor scooter or off-road motor
vehicle race course. Nor shall this section apply on the premises of commercial
enterprises which are lawfully engaged in the repairs and maintenance of
motorcycles, motor scooters and off-road motor vehicles.
   (B)    Every person engaged in the business of selling new or second-hand
motorcycles, motor scooters and/or off-road vehicles shall be required to
provide to their purchasers a copy of §
8-2-1-30 ROA 1994 and §
8-1-3-99 ROA 1994, the general penalty pursuant to this section of the traffic
code.
('74 Code, § 9-5-4.32) (Ord. 62-1976; Am. Ord. 45-2002)
§ 8-2-1-31 SUDDEN STOP OR DECREASE IN SPEED.
   No person shall suddenly stop or suddenly decrease the speed of a vehicle
thereby endangering any other vehicle, person, or property without good cause.
('74 Code, § 9-5-4.33) (Ord. 65-1974)
§ 8-2-1-32 VEHICLES NOT TO OBSTRUCT INTERSECTION.
   No driver shall enter an intersection or a crosswalk unless there is
sufficient space on the other side of the intersection or crosswalk to
accommodate the vehicle they are operating without obstructing the passage of
other vehicles or vulnerable road users, notwithstanding any traffic control
signal indication to proceed.
('74 Code, § 9-5-4.34) (Ord. 65-1974; Am. Ord._2025-032)
§ 8-2-1-33 VEHICLES, PEDESTRIANS NOT TO OBSTRUCT STREETS.
   It shall be unlawful for any person either to operate or to stand a vehicle
on any public way in such a manner as to obstruct the free use of such public
way, or to place himself, to place or direct another or to place or direct the
placement of any material, object, or vehicle on any public way in such a
manner as to obstruct the free use of such public way. The term “public way”
shall include an intersection. This section shall not be interpreted to
prohibit the lawful parking of vehicles, trailers, or actions pursuant to a
Barricade Permit and the like.
('74 Code, § 9-5-4.35) (Ord. 65-1974; Am. Ord._2016-011)
§ 8-2-1-34 YIELDING RIGHT-OF-WAY.
   (A)   The driver of a vehicle approaching an intersection shall yield the
right-of-way to a vehicle or vulnerable road user which has entered the
intersection from a different roadway, multi-use trail, or sidewalk.
   (B)   When two vehicles approach an intersection from different roadways at
approximately the same time, the driver of the vehicle on the left shall yield
the right-of-way to the vehicle on the right.
   (C)   The right-of-way rules declared in divisions (A) and (B) are modified
at through roadways and as otherwise provided in this title.
('74 Code, § 9-5-4.36) (Ord. 65-1974; Am. Ord._2025-032)
§ 8-2-1-35 DRIVE ON RIGHT SIDE OF ROADWAY; EXCEPTIONS.
   Upon all roadways of sufficient width, a vehicle shall be driven upon the
right half of the roadway, except as follows:
   (A)   When overtaking and passing another vehicle proceeding in the same
direction under the rules governing such movement;
   (B)   When the right half of a roadway is closed to traffic while under
construction or repair or otherwise completely obstructed;
   (C)   Upon a roadway divided into three marked lanes for traffic under the
rules applicable thereto; or
   (D)   Upon a roadway designated and signposted for one-way traffic.
('74 Code, § 9-5-4.37) (Ord. 65-1974)
Cross-reference:
   
Slow moving traffic keep to right, see § 8-1-2-16
§ 8-2-1-36 DRIVE TO RIGHT OF APPROACHING VEHICLE.
   Drivers of vehicles proceeding in opposite directions shall pass each other
to the right, and upon roadways having width for not more than one lane of
traffic in each direction, each driver shall give to the other at least one-
half of the main-traveled portion of roadway as nearly as possible.
('74 Code, § 9-5-4.38) (Ord. 65-1974)
§ 8-2-1-37 DRIVE TO RIGHT OF TRAFFIC ISLAND.
   A vehicle passing around a rotary traffic island shall be driven only to the
right of such island.
('74 Code, § 9-5-4.39) (Ord. 65-1974)
§ 8-2-1-38 DRIVING ON LEFT PROHIBITED UNDER CERTAIN CONDITIONS.
   (A)   No vehicle shall at any time be driven to the left side of the roadway
under the following conditions:
      (1)   When approaching the crest of a grade or upon a curve in the
roadway where the driver's view is obstructed within such distance as to create
a hazard in the event another vehicle might approach from the opposite
direction;
      (2)   When approaching within 100 feet of or traversing any intersection
or railroad grade crossing;
      (3)   When the view is obstructed upon approaching within 100 feet of any
bridge, viaduct or tunnel; or
      (4)   When prohibited under any other section in this title.
   (B)   The foregoing limitations shall not apply upon a one-way roadway.
('74 Code, § 9-5-4.40) (Ord. 65-1974)
§ 8-2-1-39 DRIVING ON ROADWAYS LANED FOR TRAFFIC.
   Whenever any roadway has been divided into two or more clearly marked lanes
for traffic, the following rules, in addition to all other consistent herewith,
shall apply:
   (A)   A vehicle shall be driven as nearly as practicable entirely within a
single lane and shall not be moved from such lane until such movement can be
made with safety. Where other traffic may be affected, appropriate signals
shall be exhibited.
   (B)   Official signs may be erected directing slow-moving traffic to use a
designated lane or designating those lanes to be used by the traffic moving in
a particular direction regardless of the center of the roadway, and drivers of
vehicles shall obey the directions of every such sign.
('74 Code, § 9-5-4.41) (Ord. 65-1974)
§ 8-2-1-40 DRIVING ON DIVIDED HIGHWAY.
   Whenever any street is divided into two roadways by an intervening space or
physical barrier, or by a clearly indicated dividing section so constructed as
to impede vehicular traffic, every vehicle shall be driven only upon the right-
hand roadway and no vehicle shall be driven over, across, or within any such
dividing space, barrier, or section, except through an opening in such physical
barrier or dividing section or space or at a crossover or intersection
established by public authority.
('74 Code, § 9-5-4.42) (Ord. 65-1974)
§ 8-2-1-41 DRIVING ON OR ACROSS DOUBLE YELLOW LINES PROHIBITED.
   Where double yellow lines are painted on a pavement, it shall be unlawful to
drive any vehicle on or across such lines. This section does not apply when the
right half of a roadway is closed to traffic while under construction or
repair, or to the driver of a vehicle turning left into or from an alley,
private or public drive or onto open land provided that such turn shall be made
as perpendicularly as possible.
('74 Code, § 9-5-4.43) (Ord. 65-1974)
§ 8-2-1-42 KEEP VEHICLE WITHIN TRAFFIC LANE.
   No operator of a vehicle shall fail to keep such vehicle within the
boundaries of a marked traffic lane, except when lawfully passing another,
making a lawful turning movement or lawfully changing lanes.
('74 Code, § 9-5-4.44) (Ord. 65-1974)
§ 8-2-1-43 CONTROLLED ACCESS ROADWAYS ­ OFF-RAMPS, ON-RAMPS.
   (A)   Exit on Off-Ramp. It is unlawful for the driver of any vehicle to exit
from or to leave any controlled access roadways other than on a designated off-
ramp providing exit to such roadways.
   (B)   Enter on On-Ramp. It is unlawful for the driver of any vehicle to
enter any controlled access roadway other than on a designated on-ramp
providing entrance to such roadway.
('74 Code, § 9-5-4.46) (Ord. 65-1974)
§ 8-2-1-44 RESTRICTIONS ON USE OF CONTROLLED ACCESS ROADWAYS.
   (A)   No pedestrian shall use any controlled access roadway and no bicycle
or other nonmotorized traffic shall use any controlled access roadway where
signs have been erected which prohibit any such use of the roadway, but
notwithstanding this provision, drivers of vehicles using the controlled access
roadway are not relieved of responsibility for exercising due care.
   (B)   No driver shall stop a vehicle upon any controlled access roadway for
the purpose of taking on or discharging passengers, freight or merchandise.
('74 Code, § 9-5-4.47) (Ord. 65-1974; Am. Ord. 8-2011)
Cross-reference:
   
Interstate highways, see §§ 7-4-1 et seq.
§ 8-2-1-45 VEHICLES ENTERING OR LEAVING AN ALLEY.
   Vehicles entering or leaving an alley within the Broadway/Central Business
District shall so enter or leave only by making a right-hand turn into said
alley or a right-hand turn from the alley to the adjoining street as the case
may be. This section applies to all such alleys, except alleys entering one-way
streets. In such cases, turns made upon entering or leaving such alleys shall
be made to and from the lane of traffic legally available which is nearest such
alley entrance or exit.
('74 Code, § 9-5-4.48) (Ord. 65-1974; Am. Ord._2016-011)
§ 8-2-1-46 DRIVING ON SIDEWALK PROHIBITED.
   The driver of a vehicle shall not drive within any sidewalk area, except at
a permanent or temporary driveway, or as authorized by the Mayor or his
designated representative.
('74 Code, § 9-5-4.49) (Ord. 65-1974)
§ 8-2-1-47 DRIVING THROUGH SAFETY ZONES PROHIBITED.
   It shall be unlawful for any vehicle to be driven through or within a safety
zone.
('74 Code, § 9-5-4.50) (Ord. 65-1974)
§ 8-2-1-48 LIMITATIONS ON BACKING.
   (A)   The driver of a vehicle shall not back up unless such movement can be
made with reasonable safety and without interfering with other traffic or
vulnerable road users.
   (B)   No vehicle shall be backed into an intersection or around a corner
unless preceded by an observer to safely direct such movement.
   (C)   In no case shall a vehicle be backed more than 60 feet unless preceded
by an observer to safely direct such movement.
('74 Code, § 9-5-4.51) (Ord. 65-1974; Am. Ord._2025-032)
§ 8-2-1-49 COASTING PROHIBITED.
   The driver of a motor vehicle, when traveling upon a down grade, shall not
coast with the clutch disengaged or the automatic transmission selector in
"neutral" position.
('74 Code, § 9-5-4.52) (Ord. 65-1974)
§ 8-2-1-50 AUTHORIZED EMERGENCY VEHICLES.
   (A)   The driver of an authorized emergency vehicle, when responding to an
emergency call or when responding to but not upon returning from a fire alarm
or when transporting a patient in an ambulance, may exercise the privileges set
forth in this section, but subject to the conditions and limitations herein
stated.
   (B)   The driver of an authorized emergency vehicle may:
      (1)   Park or stand, irrespective of the provisions of this title, so
long as the lighted lamp, hereinafter defined, is displayed during such parking
or standing.
      (2)   Proceed past a red light or stop sign, but only after slowing down
as may be necessary for safe operation.
      (3)   Exceed the speed limits, provided that he does not endanger life
and property, and provided further than in no event shall ambulances be
operated at a rate of speed greater than the posted or legal speed limit on any
street other than on a controlled access roadway.
      (4)   Disregard regulations governing turning movements.
   (C)   The exemption herein granted to an authorized emergency vehicle shall
apply only when the driver of any said vehicle in motion sounds an audible
signal by bell, siren, electronic device, or exhaust whistle as necessary, and
when the vehicle is equipped with at least one lighted lamp displaying a red
light visible under normal atmospheric conditions from a distance of 500 feet
to the front of such vehicle; provided, however, that a police emergency
vehicle operated as an authorized vehicle need not be equipped with or display
a red light visible from in front of the vehicle, and provided further that
ambulance drivers, whether going to or returning from an emergency call, either
to or from a hospital or elsewhere, need not use any audible equipment, as
described above.
   (D)   The foregoing provisions shall not relieve the driver of an authorized
emergency vehicle from the duty to drive with due regard for the safety of all
persons nor shall such provisions protect the driver from the consequences if
driving in a careless manner.
('74 Code, § 9-5-4.53) (Ord. 65-1974)
§ 8-2-1-51 YIELD TO, PULL OVER AND STOP FOR EMERGENCY VEHICLES.
   Upon the approach of an authorized emergency vehicle equipped with at least
one lighted lamp exhibiting red light visible under normal atmospheric
conditions from a distance of 500 feet to the front of such vehicle, and when
the driver is giving audible signal by siren, exhaust whistle or bell, the
driver of every other vehicle shall yield right-of-way and immediately drive to
a position parallel to, and as close as possible to, the right-hand edge or
curb of the roadway clear of any intersection, and shall stop and remain in
such position until the authorized vehicle has passed, except when otherwise
directed by a police officer.
('74 Code, § 9-5-4.54) (Ord. 65-1974)
§ 8-2-1-52 FOLLOWING FIRE APPARATUS PROHIBITED.
   The driver of a vehicle other than an emergency vehicle shall not follow any
fire apparatus traveling in response to a fire alarm closer than 500 feet, or
drive into or park such vehicle within the block where fire apparatus has been
stopped in answer to a fire alarm.
('74 Code, § 9-5-4.55) (Ord. 65-1974)
§ 8-2-1-53 FIRE AREAS.
   (A)   No person shall drive or operate a motor vehicle on a roadway, except
an authorized emergency vehicle or a vehicle of a duly authorized member of a
fire, police or sheriff's department, within 400 feet of an emergency situation
which has been responded to by any fire department vehicle, unless directed to
so drive by a member of a fire department, a police department, a sheriff's
office, the state police, or the air police.
   (B)   The emergency shall be deemed to have ceased to exist when the
official of the fire department in charge at the scene of the emergency shall
so indicate. However, officials of the Fire Department or Police Department who
are present shall make every effort to prevent the closing off entirely of
congested arterials passing the scene in any such emergency.
('74 Code, § 9-5-4.56) (Ord. 65-1974)
§ 8-2-1-54 CROSSING FIRE HOSE.
   No vehicle shall be driven over any unprotected fire hose when laid down on
any street or private driveway to be used at a fire or alarm of fire, without
the consent of a Fire Department official or a police officer.
('74 Code, § 9-5-4.57) (Ord. 65-1974)
§ 8-2-1-55 DRIVING THROUGH A FUNERAL OR OTHER PROCESSION.
   No driver of a vehicle shall drive between the vehicles comprising a funeral
or other authorized procession while they are in motion and when such vehicles
are conspicuously designated as required in this title.
('74 Code, § 9-5-4.58) (Ord. 65-1974)
§ 8-2-1-56 DRIVERS IN A PROCESSION.
   Each driver in a funeral or other procession shall drive as near to the
right edge of the roadway as practicable and shall follow the vehicle ahead as
closely as practicable and safe, and shall have headlamps turned on.
('74 Code, § 9-5-4.59) (Ord. 65-1974)
§ 8-2-1-57 THROWING SUBSTANCE AT VEHICLE.
   (A)   No person shall maliciously and willfully throw or project any rock,
brick, bottle, metal or other missile, or project any substance which is
corrosive, highly inflammable or capable of causing damage or injury to any
vehicle or any occupant thereof.
   (B)   No person shall aid or abet any other person in the violation of
division (A) above.
('74 Code, § 9-5-4.61) (Ord. 65-1974)
§ 8-2-1-58 DESTRUCTIVE OR INJURIOUS MATERIAL ON STREET.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to throw or deposit upon any
public way any bottles, glass, nails, tacks, wire, cans, metal, metal scrap,
rocks, gravel, damaging liquids, or other substance or material, unless such is
done by street or maintenance crews.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person to remove a wrecked or damaged
vehicle from a street without removing any glass debris, or other injurious
substances dropped or spilled upon the street from such vehicle.
   (C)   It shall be unlawful for any person to drive or move any vehicle upon
any public way unless such vehicle is so constructed, loaded, or in such a
state of repair as to prevent its contents from dropping, sifting, leaking or
otherwise escaping therefrom, provided however, that sand or other abrasives
may be dropped for the purpose of securing traction; provided further that
water, salt, or other substance may be sprinkled upon a roadway in course of
cleaning, clearing or maintaining such roadway.
   (D)   It shall be unlawful for any person to drive or operate a vehicle with
any load unless such load and any covering thereon is suitably fastened and
secured according to the nature of the load, so as to prevent such covering or
load from becoming loose, detached, or in any manner a hazard.
('74 Code, § 9-5-4.62) (Ord. 65-1974)
§ 8-2-1-59 DEVICE AGAINST CURB; TEMPORARY DRIVEWAY.
   No person shall place or allow to remain any object, material, gravel, dirt,
sand or other substance next to the curb, on the curb, or on the roadway for
the purpose of creating a temporary driveway to allow vehicular traffic to
cross the curb at that point, if such object, material, gravel, dirt, sand or
other substance, alone or in conjunction with vehicles, would cause damage
either to the curb or to the roadway, or would create a hazard or an
obstruction to the traffic on the roadway. Such hazards shall include, but not
be limited to, loose sand, gravel or dirt placed on or washed onto the roadway.
Further, no such device, even though not a violation under the terms of this
section, shall be used other than on a temporary basis and shall be removed
promptly either by nighttime or whenever the temporary need for such device has
ended, whichever is sooner.
('74 Code, § 9-5-4.63) (Ord. 65-1974)
§ 8-2-1-60 LITTERING.
   It shall be unlawful for any occupant of any motor vehicle, bicyclist,
pedestrian or any other person on a roadway, to dispose or discard refuse on
any roadway in any manner other than by placing the refuse in a receptacle
provided for the purpose by responsible governmental authorities. Any person
who violates the provisions of this section shall be subject to the penalty
provisions of § 9-8-99.
('74 Code, § 9-5-4.64) (Ord. 65-1974; Am. Ord._2018-032)
§ 8-2-1-61 OBJECT OBSTRUCTING PUBLIC WAY.
   No person shall place, abandon, or otherwise permit to remain on a public
way, any machinery, equipment, material or object which obstructs or impedes
traffic or creates a traffic hazard, except as otherwise authorized. Any such
object placed or remaining on the public way may be removed and disposed of if
without apparent value, or if with apparent value, shall be moved by the Police
Department to any appropriate storage area and the removal and/or storage
thereof shall be at the owner's expense. Further, the city shall not be
financially responsible for any damage incurred in the removal or storage. When
the stored object remains unclaimed for 30 days after removal from the public
way, the object shall be deemed to be abandoned and may be sold at public
auction, with the proceeds of the sale being accredited to the city after all
just costs are paid. This section does not apply to motor vehicles.
('74 Code, § 9-5-4.65) (Ord. 65-1974; Am. Ord._2016-011)
§ 8-2-1-62 PUBLIC UTILITY OBSTRUCTING TRAFFIC.
   (A)   Any public utility, whether municipally, publicly or privately owned,
shall, prior to obstructing the flow of traffic in any lane on any street, make
application for permission from the Construction Services Division 24 hours in
advance, giving the location of the proposed work and listing the date or dates
and expected times of day when such work would obstruct the flow of traffic on
the street at that location, and shall receive written approval from the
Construction Services Division prior to the commencement of the work. The
Construction Services Division shall keep a log of the date of application, the
utility company making such application, the location of the proposed work, the
date and time of such work and whether or not such application was approved by
him. If approved, the log shall list the date of such approval and factors upon
which the approval was conditioned, if any. Such conditions may include the
requirement of a written request with a detour plan and/or a barricading
license submitted or obtained prior to the approval of such permit, if arterial
traffic is to be closed between the hours of 7:00 a.m. to 9:00 a.m. and 4:00
p.m. to 6:00 p.m. or for reasons which present other than routine problems. If
denied, the Construction Services Division shall give in the log the reason for
the denial. The Construction Services Division shall not arbitrarily deny such
application but shall base his denial on other obstructions to the flow of
traffic in the immediate area during the time requested, on normally heavy
traffic flow on the street at the time of day requested, on an anticipated but
unusually heavy flow of traffic on the street for that date or time, or on any
other condition or factor which, if the flow of traffic was obstructed, would
cause a substantial possibility of a hazard or a danger to the health, welfare,
or safety to the traffic on the street at that specified time.
   (B)   A public utility shall, when a choice is feasible, use methods of
conducting the construction or repair which would not cause an obstruction to
the flow of traffic or necessitate the closing of a street or streets.
   (C)   Nothing in this section shall be construed to prohibit a public
utility from making emergency repairs to protect the health, welfare or safety
of the citizens of Albuquerque.
   (D)   The Construction Services Division may, for good cause given by the
utility company, waive the 24-hour application requirements.
   (E)   All traffic control devices used under such permit shall conform to
The New Mexico Manual and Specifications for a Uniform System of Traffic
Control Devices for Streets and Highways.
   (F)   Any violation of this section by a utility company may result either
in a citation to any and all employees at the scene or to the company itself,
or in the removal of any and all equipment owned by the utility company, and
such removal being at the expense of the utility company.
   (G)   Presumption. It shall be presumed that the log is accurate and, if no
application is reported in the log, that none was made by the utility company.
   (H)   It shall not be necessary for an employee of the Construction Services
Division to testify in court as to any approval or denial of any application in
the prosecution of any citation arising out of a violation of this section. The
log or copy thereof may be introduced into evidence without qualifications,
provided that an employee of the Construction Services Division, by affidavit,
states that the log is true and accurate to the best of his knowledge and
belief, and if a copy is submitted, that the copy is a true and accurate copy
of the log. A copy may be a copy of only those portions of the log which cover
the time period in which the citation was issued.
('74 Code, § 9-5-4.66) (Ord. 65-1974; Am. Ord._2016-011)
§ 8-2-1-63 MOVEMENT OF HAZARDOUS VEHICLES; PERMIT; VIOLATION.
   (A)   No person shall operate a vehicle or move a load on any street other
than Interstate highways of a size or weight exceeding the maximum specified in
the state statute without having in the vehicle a permit from the City Traffic
Engineer or state authorizing the movement of such vehicle or load, and such
permit shall be open to inspection by any police officer.
   (B)   No person shall operate such vehicle or move such load in violation of
any terms or instructions of such permit.
   (C)   Violation of Terms of Permit. No person shall operate or park any
vehicle, any combination of vehicles, or any trailer on any roadway or
controlled access roadway in violation of any specific terms or instructions of
a permit issued for such vehicle, combination of vehicles or trailer by the
city or the state.
('74 Code, §§ 9-5-4.67, 4.68) (Ord. 65-1974; Am. Ord._2016-011)
§ 8-2-1-64 ROADWORK SITES.
   (A)   Permits for Roadwork Sites Required.
      (1)   No person, firm, association, corporation or governmental agency
shall engage in construction, maintenance or repair work on any roadway without
securing written permission of the Construction Services Division except in an
emergency of such nature that securing a permit is not consistent with
preservation of life or property.
      (2)   The contractor agency responsible for the work that necessitates
the closure of the street shall contact the Construction Services Division of
the Municipal Development Department of the city 48 hours prior to the closure
of the street. The Construction Services Division shall be notified of the
reopening of the street prior to removing the barricades. No work may be
started in the public right-of-way until approval has been given and all signs
and barricades are in place. The responsibility for all barricading, detouring
and signing is that of the contractor, with the exception of the regulatory
signs such as “Stop,” “No Parking,” “Speed Limit,” which shall be installed by
the city. It shall be the duty of the contractor to notify the city when any
such regulatory signs are not in place or must be removed due to construction.
In the event of any emergency closing of a street, the city shall be given as
much notice as possible.
   (B)   Driver Must Yield to Road Workers. The driver of a vehicle shall yield
the right of way to any worker on a road site indicated by official traffic
control devices.
   (C)   Workers to Wear Conspicuous Materials.
      (1)   Every worker shall wear retroreflective and fluorescent materials
complying with standards approved by the City Safety Division.
      (2)   The City Risk Management Division shall adopt standards for
materials to be worn by workers (and shall approve items for their use). These
standards shall, as a minimum, specify the following properties for materials,
whether wet or dry.
      (3)   Fluorescent material shall meet the color and luminance
requirements stated in “Federal Motor Vehicle Safety Standard No. 125” for
warning devices when the equipped worker is viewed at an entrance angle, as
defined by Standard 125, or zero degrees from his front or rear, that is, full
view forward or backward.
      (4)   Retroreflective material shall meet the color specification
contained in Standard 125 for warning devices.
      (5)   The retroreflective material shall meet the reflectivity
specification in total candlepower per incident foot candle as a function of
observation angle and entrance angle contained in Table 1 of Standard 125 for
entrance angles of 0, 10 up, 10 down, 20 left, 20 right, 30 left, and 30 right
as viewed from both the front and rear of the worker.
      (6)   The retroreflective material shall meet five percent of the
reflectivity specification of Standard 125 for all entrance angles greater than
30 degrees left or right as measured front or rear.
('74 Code, § 9-5-4.69) (Ord. 65-1974; Am. Ord._2016-011)
§ 8-2-1-65 OCCUPIED TRAILER.
   No person shall knowingly tow a trailer on a public way when the trailer is
occupied by any person.
('74 Code, § 9-5-4.70) (Ord. 65-1974)
§ 8-2-1-66 TOWED VEHICLE SWERVING.
   No person shall tow another vehicle, trailer, boat, and the like when such
vehicle being towed whips or swerves from side to side or fails to follow
substantially in the path of the towing vehicle.
('74 Code, § 9-5-4.71) (Ord. 65-1974)
§ 8-2-1-67 VEHICLE TO TOW ONLY ONE.
   No passenger vehicle, regardless of weight, or any other motor vehicle under
4,000 lbs., unladen, shall draw or tow more than one vehicle, trailer, boat,
and the like in combination.
('74 Code, § 9-5-4.72) (Ord. 65-1974)
§ 8-2-1-68 PROHIBITED RIDING IN A TRUCK.
   No person under 21 years of age shall ride in the bed or any other part of a
truck which is not enclosed by a rigid top or vehicle body. No motorist shall
allow a person under 21 years of age to ride in a part of a truck they are
driving if the location is not enclosed by a rigid top or vehicle body.
However, the following are exempted from this regulation: Persons riding in
trucks which are participating in a parade conducted consistent with the
provisions of
Chapter 7, Article 3 of this code of ordinances.
(Ord. 4-1994)
§ 8-2-1-99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person who violates any provision of this article for which no
other penalty is set forth shall be subject to the general penalty set forth in
§
8-1-3-99(A).
   (B)   Any person convicted of reckless driving [i.e., violating §
8-2-1-12] shall be punished upon a first conviction by imprisonment for not
less than five days nor more than 90 days and by a fine of not less than $100,
and upon a second or subsequent conviction by imprisonment for not less than
ten days nor more than 90 days and by a fine of not less than $300. ('74 Code,
§ 9-5-4.13B) (Ord. 65-1974)
   (C)   Every person convicted of a violation of §
8-2-1-15 shall be punished upon a first conviction by imprisonment for not less
than seven days nor more than 90 days and, in addition thereto, by a fine of
not less than $100 nor more than $300; and upon a second or subsequent
conviction by imprisonment for not less than 30 days nor more than 90 days and,
in addition thereto, by a fine of not less than $300. ('74 Code, § 9-5-4.17B)
(Ord. 65-1974)
   (D)   Every person convicted of a violation of §
8-2-1-20 shall be punished upon a first conviction by imprisonment for not less
than seven days, nor more than 90 days, and by a fine of not less than $100,
and on a second or subsequent conviction by imprisonment for not less than 15
days nor more than 90 days, and by a fine of not less than $300. ('74 Code, §
9-5-4.22B) (Ord. 65-1974)
PART 2: TRAFFIC CONTROL DEVICES, SIGNS RESTRICTING USE OF STREETS
§ 8-2-2-1 OBEDIENCE TO TRAFFIC CONTROL DEVICES.
   (A)   The driver of any vehicle shall obey instructions of any official
traffic control device applicable thereto placed in accordance with this title
unless otherwise directed by a police officer, subject to the exceptions
granted the driver of an authorized emergency vehicle.
   (B)   No provision of this title for which signs are required shall be
enforced against an alleged violator if at the time and place of the alleged
violation an official sign is not in proper position and sufficiently legible
to be seen by an ordinarily observant person.
('74 Code, § 9-5-10.1) (Ord. 65-1974)
§ 8-2-2-2 TRAFFIC CONTROL LEGEND.
   Whenever traffic is controlled by traffic control signals exhibiting colored
lights or colored lighted arrows, successively one at a time, or in
combination, only the colors green, yellow and red shall be used, except for
special pedestrian control signals carrying a word legend and the lights
indicate and apply to drivers of vehicles and pedestrians.
   (A)   Green Alone.
      (1)   Vehicular traffic facing the signal may proceed straight through or
turn right or left unless a sign at such place prohibits either turn. But
vehicular traffic, including vehicles turning right or left, shall yield the
right-of-way to other vehicles and to vulnerable road users lawfully within the
intersection at the time such signal is exhibited; and
      (2)   Unless otherwise directed by a pedestrian control signal,
vulnerable road users facing the signal may proceed across the street within
any marked or unmarked crosswalk and after entering the intersection shall
proceed to clear the intersection, and all drivers of vehicles shall yield to
any such vulnerable road user.
   (B)   Green with Green Arrow.
      (1)   Vehicular traffic facing the signal may proceed through the
intersection, make a right turn, or proceed in the direction indicated by the
green arrow, but shall not move in any other direction. Such vehicular traffic
shall yield the right-of-way to other vehicles and to vulnerable road users
legally within the intersection at the time the signal is exhibited; and
      (2)   Unless otherwise directed by a pedestrian control signal,
vulnerable road users facing the signal may proceed across the street within
any marked or unmarked crosswalk and after entering the intersection shall
proceed to clear the intersection, and all drivers of vehicles shall yield to
any such vulnerable road user.
   (C)   Green Arrow Alone.
      (1)   Traffic, except pedestrians, facing a green arrow, shown alone or
in combination with another indication, may cautiously enter the intersection
only to make the movement indicated by such arrow, or such other movement as is
permitted by other indications shown at the same time. Such vehicular traffic
shall yield the right-of-way to vulnerable road users lawfully within a
crosswalk and to other traffic lawfully using the intersection; and
      (2)   Unless otherwise directed by a pedestrian signal, vulnerable road
users facing a green arrow may not proceed across the roadway within any marked
or unmarked crosswalk until a steady green circular signal is again shown.
   (D)   Steady Yellow Arrow or Circular Yellow.
      (1)   Traffic facing a circular yellow or yellow arrow signal is thereby
warned that the related green movement is being terminated or that a red
indication will be exhibited immediately thereafter when vehicular traffic
shall not enter the intersection.
      (2)   No vulnerable road users facing the signal shall enter the roadway
until the green is again shown, unless otherwise directed by a pedestrian
signal, and except for bicyclists, operating under the provisions of ROA 1994,
Chapter 8, Article 3, Part 3 BICYCLES.
   (E)   Steady Red.
      (1)   Vehicular traffic facing the signal shall stop before entering the
marked or unmarked crosswalk, on the near side of the intersection, and shall
remain standing until green is shown. However, if there is no sign prohibiting
a right turn on a red light, such vehicle may turn right into the nearest right
lane as practicable after standing until the intersection may be entered
safely, provided that such vehicle shall yield the right-of-way to all
vulnerable road users and other vehicles lawfully in or approaching the
intersection.
      (2)   Left Turn on Red Light. When a sign is posted at the intersection
allowing a left turn on a red light, vehicular traffic in the lane closest to
the left curb may turn left into the nearest left lane as practicable after
standing until the intersection may be entered safely, provided that such
vehicular traffic shall yield the right-of-way to all vulnerable road users and
vehicles lawfully in or approaching the intersection.
      (3)   Vulnerable Road Users. No vulnerable road users facing the signal
shall enter the roadway until the green is shown alone unless authorized to do
so by a pedestrian "walk" signal, and except for bicyclists, operating under
the provisions of ROA 1994, Chapter 8, Article 3, Part 3 BICYCLES.
   (F)   Red with Green Arrow.
      (1)   Vehicular traffic facing the signal may cautiously enter the
intersection only to make the movement indicated by the arrow, but shall yield
the right-of-way to vulnerable road users lawfully within a crosswalk and to
other traffic lawfully using the intersection; and
      (2)   No vulnerable road user facing the signal shall enter the street
unless they can do so safely and without interfering with any vehicular
traffic, and upon entering the intersection, shall proceed to clear the
intersection, and all drivers of vehicles shall yield to any such vulnerable
road user.
   (G)   Traffic Control Signal not at Intersection. If an official traffic
control signal is erected and maintained at a place other than an intersection,
the provisions of this section shall apply, except as to those provisions which
by their nature can have no application. Any stop required shall be made at a
sign or marking on the pavement indicating where the stop shall be made, but in
the absence of any such sign or marking, the stop shall be made at the signal.
   (H)   (1)   The driver of any vehicle approaching an intersection which has
official traffic control signals that are inoperative shall stop at the
intersection, and may proceed with caution when it is safe to do so, yielding
the right-of-way to vulnerable road users in the roadway.
      (2)   When two vehicles stop at an intersection from different highways
at the same time, and the official traffic control signals for the intersection
are inoperative, the driver of the vehicle on the left shall yield the right-
of-way to the vehicle on their immediate right and to vulnerable road users in
the roadway.
('74 Code, § 9-5-10.2) (Ord. 65-1974; Am. Ord. 67-1999; Am. Ord._2025-032)
§ 8-2-2-3 PEDESTRIAN CONTROL SIGNAL, PEDESTRIAN HYBRID BEACON, AND RECTANGULAR
RAPID FLASHING BEACON.
   (A)   Whenever special pedestrian control signals exhibiting the words
"WALK" or "DON'T WALK" or images depicting “WALK” or “DON’T WALK” are in place,
such signals shall indicate as follows:
      (1)   Steady "WALK." Vulnerable road users facing such signal may proceed
across the roadway in the direction of the signal and shall be given the right-
of-way by the drivers of all vehicles even if the signal has changed to a
flashing "DON'T WALK" signal; and
      (2)   “DON’T WALK.” No vulnerable road users shall start to cross the
roadway in the direction of such signal, but any vulnerable road user who has
partially completed their crossing on the “WALK” signal shall proceed across
the roadway, and all drivers of vehicles shall yield to any such vulnerable
road user.
   (B)   PEDESTRIAN HYBRID BEACON (PHB), also known as a HAWK (High-intensity
Activated crossWalK) signal.
      (1)   Signal for vehicles.
         (a)   When not in use, the signal for vehicles is dark. Operators of
vehicles and bicycles traveling in the roadway facing the signal may proceed
straight through or turn right or left, unless a sign or physical barrier at
such place prohibits either turn. But vehicular and bicycle traffic, including
vehicles and bicycles turning right or left, shall yield the right-of-way to
vulnerable road users within the intersection at the time such signal is
exhibited.
         (b)   When the push-button has been activated, the signal for vehicles
will flash yellow for several seconds to alert drivers that the vehicular
signal will turn red soon, and a vulnerable road user is going to cross.
Motorists and bicyclists traveling in the roadway facing the signal may proceed
but should be prepared to stop in case the vulnerable road user begins crossing
prematurely, and shall stop to yield the right-of-way to any vulnerable road
user in the crosswalk.
         (c)   When the signal for vehicles is steady yellow, the signal is
about to change to red. Motorists and bicyclists traveling in the roadway
facing the signal shall slow and stop if able to do so safely.
         (d)   When the signal for vehicles is two steady red lights, all
vehicles and bicyclists traveling in the roadway facing the signal must stop
and remain stopped.
         (e)   When the signal for vehicles is two alternating flashing red
lights, vehicles must stop, then may proceed with caution if the crosswalk is
clear of vulnerable road users; bicyclists traveling in the roadway facing the
signal shall yield to vulnerable road users in the crosswalk.
      (2)   Signal for vulnerable road users using crosswalk.
         (a)   Steady "WALK." Vulnerable road users facing such signal may
proceed across the roadway in the direction of the signal and shall be given
the right-of-way by the operators of all vehicles and bicycles traveling in the
roadway, even if the signal has changed to a flashing "DON'T WALK" signal.
         (b)   “DON’T WALK.” No vulnerable road users shall start to cross the
roadway in the direction of such signal, but any vulnerable road user who has
partially completed their crossing on the “WALK” signal shall proceed across
the roadway, and all drivers of vehicles shall yield to any such vulnerable
road user.
   (C)   RECTANGULAR RAPID FLASHING BEACONS (RRFB).
      (1)   When the lights are flashing, the operator of a vehicle or bicycle
traveling in the roadway facing the signal shall stop to yield the right-of-way
to vulnerable road users in the crosswalk.
      (2)   No vulnerable road user shall suddenly leave a curb or other place
of safety and proceed into the path of a vehicle or bicyclist traveling in the
roadway which is so close that it is impossible for the operator to stop.
      (3)   Whenever a vehicle or other device that must comply with duties
applicable to the driver of a vehicle is stopped to permit a vulnerable road
user to cross the roadway in a crosswalk, the operator of the vehicle or device
traveling in the roadway approaching from the rear shall not overtake and pass
such vehicle or device.
('74 Code, § 9-5-10.3) (Ord. 65-1974; Am. Ord._2025-032)
§ 8-2-2-4 FLASHING SIGNALS.
   (A)   Whenever an illuminated flashing red or yellow signal is used in a
traffic sign or signal, it shall require obedience by vehicular traffic as
follows:
      (1)   Flashing Red (Stop Signal). When a red lens is illuminated with
intermittent flashes, drivers of vehicles shall stop before entering the
nearest crosswalk at an intersection or at a limit line when marked, or if
none, then before entering the intersection, and the right to proceed shall be
subject to the rule applicable after making a stop at a stop sign, yielding to
vulnerable road users;
      (2)   Flashing Yellow (Caution Signal). When a yellow lens is illuminated
with intermittent flashes, drivers of vehicles may proceed through the
intersection or past such signal with caution, yielding to vulnerable road
users.
   (B)   This section shall not apply at railroad grade crossings. Conduct of
drivers approaching railroad grade crossings shall be governed by the rules set
forth in Part 8 of this Article 2.
('74 Code, § 9-5-10.4) (Ord. 65-1974; Am. Ord._2025-032)
§ 8-2-2-5 STOP SIGNS.
   (A)   Stop. Except when directed to proceed by a police officer or other
individual with authority under law to direct, control, or regulate traffic,
every driver of a vehicle approaching a stop sign shall stop before entering
the crosswalk on the near side of the intersection, or, in the event there is
no crosswalk, shall stop at a clearly marked line, but if none, then at the
point nearest the intersecting roadway where the driver has a view of
approaching traffic before entering the intersection.
   (B)   Yield Right-of-Way After Stopping. Except when directed to proceed by
a police officer or other individual with authority under law to direct,
control, or regulate traffic, every driver of a vehicle approaching a stop
intersection indicated by a stop sign shall stop as required by division (A)
above and, after having stopped, shall yield the right-of-way to vulnerable
road users and to any vehicle which has entered the intersection from another
street or which is approaching so closely on the street as to constitute an
immediate hazard during the time when the driver is moving across or within the
intersection.
('74 Code, § 9-5-10.5) (Ord. 65-1974; Am. Ord._2025-032)
§ 8-2-2-6 YIELD SIGNS.
   The driver of a vehicle, approaching a "YIELD" sign, shall slow to a
reasonable speed for existing conditions of traffic, visibility and roadway
surface condition, yielding right-of-way to vulnerable road users and all
vehicles on the intersecting street which constitutes an immediate hazard. The
driver of a vehicle who proceeds past any "YIELD" sign facing such vulnerable
road user or vehicle and who collides with a vulnerable road user or vehicle
proceeding on the intersecting street shall be deemed prima facie to have
violated the provisions of this title.
('74 Code, § 9-5-10.6) (Ord. 65-1974; Am. Ord._2025-032)
§ 8-2-2-7 DIRECTING VEHICLE TO OR AWAY FROM A LANE OR DIRECTION.
It shall be unlawful for the operator of a vehicle traveling in a particular
traffic lane on a roadway divided and marked into lanes to disobey any sign,
signal, arrow or marker along the roadway which directs vehicles traveling in
such lane to move in a particular lane or direction or not to move into a
different lane or in a different direction.
('74 Code, § 9-5-10.7) (Ord. 65-1974)
§ 8-2-2-8 CROSSING CORNER LOT TO AVOID TRAFFIC DEVICE PROHIBITED.
   No person shall drive a vehicle across a corner lot, whether publicly or
privately owned, for the purpose of avoiding any traffic control device.
('74 Code, § 9-5-10.8) (Ord. 65-1974)
§ 8-2-2-9 LANE CHANGE.
   No person operating a vehicle on the roadway shall move from his lane into
any other lane of traffic moving in the same direction where appropriate signs
on the roadway indicate a no-lane-changing zone, and such signs are in place
and clearly visible.
('74 Code, § 9-5-10.9) (Ord. 65-1974)
§ 8-2-2-10 ONE-WAY STREET OR ALLEY.
   When appropriate signs are in place and give adequate notice of a one-way
street or alley by indicating the direction of lawful traffic on such street or
alley, it shall be unlawful to operate a vehicle traveling in any other
direction.
('74 Code, § 9-5-10.10) (Ord. 65-1974)
§ 8-2-2-11 ONE-WAY AT ONE TIME, ANOTHER WAY AT ANOTHER TIME.
   When appropriate signs, signals, markings, barriers or other devices are in
place giving adequate notice that a street, part of a street or specified lane
or lanes of a street on which vehicular traffic shall proceed in one direction
during one period of the day and the opposite direction during another period
of the day, regardless of the center line of the roadway, no person shall
disobey such sign by driving a vehicle in the opposite direction of the lawful
traffic movement for the lane in which he is traveling.
('74 Code, § 9-5-10.11) (Ord. 65-1974)
§ 8-2-2-12 COMMERCIAL VEHICLE OR VEHICLES IN EXCESS OF GROSS WEIGHT FROM
CERTAIN STREETS OR BRIDGES.
   (A)   Streets. When signs are erected prohibiting either commercial vehicles
or vehicles in excess of a specified weight from the use of a street, no person
shall operate a commercial vehicle or vehicle in excess of the gross weight
specified on said sign at any time upon any of the streets or parts of streets
so marked; except that such vehicles may be operated thereon for the purpose of
delivering or picking up materials or merchandise, and then only by entering
such streets at the intersection nearest the destination of the vehicle and
proceeding thereon no farther than the nearest intersection thereafter;
provided further, that the provisions of this section shall not apply to
vehicles owned or officially used by federal agencies, the state, the county,
the city or any other subdivision of government or agencies thereof.
   (B)   Bridges. When signs are erected by which a driver of a vehicle when
approaching a bridge is given notice that vehicles in excess of a specified
weight are prohibited the use of the bridge, no person shall drive any vehicle
in excess of the weight specified on said sign upon the bridge so marked by
sign.
('74 Code, § 9-5-10.12) (Ord. 65-1974)
§ 8-2-2-13 UNAUTHORIZED SIGNS, SIGNALS, MARKINGS OR LIGHTS.
   (A)   No person shall place, maintain, or display upon, or in view of, any
public way any unauthorized sign, signal, marking, light, device or combination
thereof which:
      (1)   Purports to be, is an imitation of, resembles, or could easily be
confused with an official traffic control device, a railroad sign or signal, or
the lights of an emergency vehicle;
      (2)   Attempts to direct the movement of traffic; or
      (3)   Hides from view or interferes with the effectiveness of any traffic
control device or any railroad sign or signal.
   (B)   No person shall place or maintain, nor shall any public authority
permit upon any public way, any unauthorized traffic signal or sign or any sign
bearing thereon any commercial advertising.
   (C)   The provisions of this section shall not be deemed to prohibit the
erection upon private property adjacent to public ways of signs giving useful
directional information and of a type that cannot be mistaken for official
signs and which do not create a hazard to a motorist traveling on the public
way.
   (D)   Every sign, signal, or marking prohibited by this section is hereby
declared to be a public nuisance, and the authority having jurisdiction over
the public way is hereby empowered to remove the same or cause it to be removed
without notice, assessing costs involved to the violator.
('74 Code, § 9-5-10.13) (Ord. 65-1974)
§ 8-2-2-14 INTERFERENCE WITH OFFICIAL TRAFFIC CONTROL DEVICES OR RAILROAD
SIGNALS.
   (A)   No person shall, without lawful authority, attempt to or in fact
alter, deface, injure, knock down or remove any official traffic control device
or any railroad sign or signal or any part thereof.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person to hide or obscure any official
traffic control, device, railroad sign or signal by the erection of any object,
or by allowing bushes, hedges, trees, or other vegetation to grow and obscure
the same.
('74 Code, § 9-5-10.14A,B) (Ord. 65-1974; Am. Ord. 69-1979)
§ 8-2-2-15 CLEAR SIGHT TRIANGLE.
   (A)   Unobstructed vision for traffic safety shall be strictly and solely
maintained by the property owner and occupant on all corner lots regardless of
the zone classification with reference to any vehicle, trailer, sign, fence,
ornament, hedge, shrub, tree, display, or any other obstruction, but not
including buildings. No such obstruction to view between three and eight feet
above the gutter line shall be placed or maintained within the clear sight
triangle which is a triangular area at the street corner, which area is bounded
by:
      (1)   The curb lines of a street intersection and a line extended to the
curb lines connecting points on the property lines 25-feet distant from the
intersection of the property lines of the corner lot in such street
intersection; or
      (2)   The curb lines of an intersection and line connecting points 35-
feet distant from the corner of the intersection and such corner is determined
by projecting the curb lines out to a specific point, whichever is lesser.
   (B)   It shall be the sole duty of the property owner and occupant of all
corner lots to comply with the provisions of this section, and the failure to
do so by the property owner or occupant shall constitute a misdemeanor,
punishable by the fine set forth in §
8-1-3-99(A).
   (C)   Any owner and occupant of all corner lots failing to comply with the
provisions of this section, shall be liable unto the city for any claim or
demand made upon the city which arises from, either directly or indirectly, the
erection of, or failure to maintain, any vehicle, trailer, sign, fence,
ornament, hedge, shrub, tree, or display which obstruct the clear sight
triangle, or which hides or obscures any official traffic control device,
railroad sign or signal.
   (D)   The section shall be enforced by Integrated Development Ordinance
Enforcement Officers.
('74 Code, § 9-5-10.14C-D) (Ord. 65-1974; Am. Ord. 69-1979; Am. Ord._2016-011;
Am. Ord._2017-025)
PART 3: SPECIAL STOPS
§ 8-2-3-1 WHEN DANGEROUS TO PROCEED FORWARD.
   The operator of any bicycle or motor vehicle shall stop their bicycle or
motor vehicle if possible when either a vulnerable road user is in the roadway
or motor vehicle is stopped in the roadway immediately ahead and a collision
would occur if the operator does not stop, or road and weather conditions are
such that the operator's safety, the safety of any other person, or any
property is endangered if the operator does not stop.
('74 Code, § 9-5-12.1) (Ord. 65-1974; Am. Ord._2025-032)
§ 8-2-3-2 WHEN EMERGING FROM ALLEY, DRIVEWAY, PRIVATE ROAD AND THE LIKE.
   The driver of a vehicle emerging from an alley, a driveway, a private road,
a building or open land shall stop such vehicle immediately prior to driving
either onto the sidewalk or any sidewalk area, yielding the right-of-way to any
vulnerable road user as may be necessary to avoid collision, and before and
upon entering the roadway shall yield the right-of-way to all vehicles,
vulnerable road users, or animals approaching on the roadway.
('74 Code, § 9-5-12.2) (Ord. 65-1974; Am. Ord._2025-032)
§ 8-2-3-3 KEEPING INTERSECTION UNOBSTRUCTED.
   No driver shall enter an intersection or a crosswalk unless there is
sufficient space on the outer side of the intersection or crosswalk to
accommodate the vehicle they are operating without obstructing the passage of
other vehicles or vulnerable road users even though a traffic control signal
indicates they may proceed.
('74 Code, § 9-5-12.3) (Ord. 65-1974; Am. Ord._2025-032)
§ 8-2-3-4 STOP FOR VISUALLY IMPAIRED PERSON.
   Whenever a pedestrian, guided by a guide dog or carrying in a raised or
extended position a cane or walking stick which is white in color or white
tipped with red, is crossing or attempting to cross a public way at a marked or
unmarked crosswalk, the driver of every vehicle approaching the intersection or
place where such pedestrian is attempting to cross, shall bring their vehicle
to a full stop before arriving at such intersection or place of crossing, and
before proceeding shall take such precautions as may be necessary to avoid
injuring such pedestrian.
('74 Code, § 9-5-12.4) (Ord. 65-1974; Am. Ord._2025-032)
§ 8-2-3-5 SCHOOL ZONE.
   It shall be unlawful for any operator of any bicycle or motor vehicle not to
stop at any time that a uniformed school crossing guard who is standing by a
crosswalk within an established school zone which is appropriately marked with
signs, clearly signals either by hand or verbal command for the operator to
stop, regardless of whether such operator can see any child or any other person
in the crosswalk, at the curb or approaching the curb or crosswalk; provided
that the signal to stop is given at a time the school crossing guard is
normally on duty. This duty to stop when signaled to stop in a school zone
crosswalk is in addition to the duty to stop for pedestrians as specified in §
8-2-3-6.
('74 Code, § 9-5-12.5) (Ord. 65-1974)
§ 8-2-3-6 VULNERABLE ROAD USER IN CROSSWALK.
   (A)   When traffic control devices are not in place or not in operation, the
operator of a bicycle traveling in the roadway or vehicle shall stop to yield
the right-of-way to a vulnerable road user in a marked or unmarked crosswalk.
However, no vulnerable road user shall suddenly leave a curb or other place of
safety and proceed into the path of a vehicle or bicycle traveling in the
roadway which is so close that it is impossible for the operator to stop.
   (B)   Whenever a vehicle or other device that must comply with duties
applicable to the driver of a vehicle is stopped at a marked or unmarked
crosswalk to permit a vulnerable road user to cross the roadway, the operator
of the vehicle or device approaching from the rear shall not overtake and pass
such vehicle or device.
   (C)   A person on a bicycle, tricycle, skateboard, skates, scooter, e-bike
or powered micromobility device upon or along a sidewalk or while crossing a
roadway in a crosswalk shall have the rights and duties applicable to a
pedestrian under the same circumstances, provided that:
      (1)   The cyclist, skater, scooter operator, e-bike or powered
micromobility device operator yields to pedestrians on the sidewalk or
crosswalk; and
      (2)   Use of a bicycle, tricycle, skateboard, skates, scooter, e-bike or
powered micromobility device on the sidewalk is permitted per §
8-3-3-15 and any other applicable provisions of ROA 1994, Chapter 8.
('74 Code, § 9-5-12.6) (Ord. 65-1974; Am. Ord._2025-032)
PART 4: SPEED
§ 8-2-4-1 SCHOOL ZONE SPEED LIMIT.
   No person shall drive a vehicle in excess of the posted speed limit in a
posted school zone.
('74 Code, § 9-5-6.1) (Ord. 65-1974)
§ 8-2-4-2 RESIDENTIAL OR BUSINESS DISTRICT SPEED LIMIT.
   No person shall drive a vehicle on a public way at a speed faster than 25
miles per hour in any residential or business district, unless otherwise
posted.
('74 Code, § 9-5-6.2) (Ord. 65-1974)
§ 8-2-4-3 POSTED SPEED ZONES.
   (A)   No person shall drive a vehicle on a public way at a speed in excess
of the lawfully posted speed limit.
   (B)   Speed zones may be marked by a sign containing a flashing yellow
light, and when the light is in operation, the speed limit, instructions or
regulations on the sign are in effect.
('74 Code, § 9-5-6.3) (Ord. 65-1974)
§ 8-2-4-4 CHARGING VIOLATION.
   In every charge of a speeding violation the citation, the complaint, the
summons or the notice to appear shall state the speed at which the defendant is
alleged to have driven and also the speed limit applicable at the location of
the alleged violation.
('74 Code, § 9-5-6.4) (Ord. 65-1974)
§ 8-2-4-5 CONTROLLED SPEED.
   In every event, speed shall be controlled as may be necessary to avoid
colliding with any person, vehicle, or other conveyance or on entering the
public way in compliance with legal requirements, and it shall be the duty of
all persons to use due care and drive at a safe and appropriate speed.
('74 Code, § 9-5-6.5) (Ord. 65-1974)
§ 8-2-4-6 RACING ON STREETS, DRAG RACING.
   (A)   Racing and drag racing prohibited. It is unlawful for any person to
engage or participate in a race or drag race on any city street.
   (B)   Spectating a race or drag race, or spectating preparations for a race
or drag race prohibited. It is unlawful for any person to knowingly be a
spectator of a race or drag race occurring on any city street, or to knowingly
be a spectator at a location where preparations are being made for such
activities.
      (1)   Spectator defined. For purposes of this section, a SPECTATOR
includes any individual within 200 feet of the location of the race or drag
race, or within 200 feet of the location where preparations for a race or drag
race are being made, for the purpose of viewing, observing, watching, or
witnessing the event as it progresses. SPECTATOR includes any individual
without regard to whether the individual arrived at the event by driving a
vehicle, riding as a passenger in a vehicle, walking, or arriving by some other
means.
      (2)   Preparations for a race or drag race defined. For purposes of this
section, preparations for a race or drag race include, but are not limited to,
situations in which: (1) a group of motor vehicles or individuals has arrived
at a location for the purpose of participating in or being spectators at the
event; (2) a group of individuals has lined one or both sides of a public
street or highway for the purpose of participating in or being a spectator at
the event; (3) a group of individuals has gathered on private property open to
the general public without the consent of the owner, operator, or agent thereof
for the purpose of participating in or being a spectator at the event; (4) one
or more individuals has impeded the free public use of a public street or
highway by actions, words, or physical barriers for the purpose of conducting
the event; (5) two or more vehicles have lined up with motors running for an
illegal motor vehicle speed contest or exhibition of speed; (6) one or more
drivers is revving his engine or spinning his tires in preparation for the
event; or (7) an individual is stationed at or near one or more motor vehicles
serving as a race starter.
   (C)   Exemptions. The provisions of this section shall not apply to
authorized or licensed race courses, or other areas which are specifically set
aside and supervised by the police department for police training. Nothing
herein prohibits law enforcement officers or their agents from being spectators
at a race or drag race in the course of their official duties.
('74 Code, § 9-5-6.7) (Ord. 65-1974; Am. Ord._2019-011)
§ 8-2-4-7 MINIMUM SPEED.
   (A)   No person shall drive a motor vehicle at such a slow speed as to
impede or block the normal and reasonable movement of traffic except when
reduced speed is necessary for safe operation or in compliance with law.
   (B)   No person shall drive a motor vehicle on a public way at a speed less
than the lawfully posted minimum speed limit.
('74 Code, § 9-5-6.8) (Ord. 65-1974)
§ 8-2-4-8 SLOW MOVING TRAFFIC KEEP TO RIGHT.
   No person operating a vehicle which is proceeding either at a speed 10
m.p.h. less than the speed limit; or, in light of the conditions then existing,
less than the normal speed of traffic if such traffic is, due to such
conditions, traveling less than the speed limit, shall drive such vehicle on
any street which has more than two lanes going in his direction in any lane
other than in the lane to the extreme right or in any position on a street
other than as close as practicable to the right curb or edge of the roadway,
except when overtaking and passing another vehicle proceeding in the same
direction, or when preparing for a left turn at an intersection or into a
private road or driveway, or when directed by an official sign which directs
slow moving traffic to use a designated lane and such sign is in place along
the roadway.
('74 Code, § 9-5-6.9) (Ord. 65-1974)
Cross-reference:
   
Drive on right side of roadway, see § 8-2-1-35
§ 8-2-4-9 SLOW MOVING VEHICLES PROHIBITED ON DESIGNATED STREETS DURING PEAK
HOURS OF TRAFFIC.
   (A)   No person shall operate a vehicle which by virtue of weight, design,
or operation, is slow moving during peak hours of traffic on any street
designated by the Mayor pursuant to §
8-1-2-7.
   (B)   Any vehicle required to display a slow moving vehicle emblem under
state statute shall be presumed to be a slow moving vehicle by virtue of
weight, design, or operation.
('74 Code, § 9-5-6.10) (Ord. 65-1974; Am. Ord. 15-1976)
PART 5: OVERTAKING AND PASSING
§ 8-2-5-1 OVERTAKE AND PASS TO LEFT.
   The driver of a vehicle overtaking another vehicle proceeding in the same
direction shall pass to the left at a safe distance without interfering with
the safe operation of the overtaken vehicle, subject to the limitations and
exceptions stated in this article.
('74 Code, § 9-5-7.1) (Ord. 65-1974)
§ 8-2-5-2 NO PASSING WITHOUT SUFFICIENT CLEARANCE.
No vehicle shall be driven to the left side of the center of the roadway in
overtaking and passing another vehicle proceeding in the same direction unless
the left side is clearly visible and free of oncoming traffic for a sufficient
distance ahead to permit such overtaking and passing to be completely made
without interfering with the safe operation of any vehicle approaching from the
opposite direction. In every event the overtaking vehicle shall return to the
right side of the roadway before coming within 200 feet of any vehicle
approaching from the opposite direction. This section shall not apply on a one-
way roadway.
('74 Code, § 9-5-7.2) (Ord. 65-1974)
§ 8-2-5-3 OVERTAKEN VEHICLES TO YIELD.
   Except when overtaking and passing on the right is permitted, the driver of
an overtaken vehicle shall give way to the right in favor of the overtaking
vehicle on audible signal and shall not increase the speed of his vehicle until
completely passed by the overtaking vehicle.
('74 Code, § 9-5-7.3) (Ord. 65-1974)
§ 8-2-5-4 PASSING ON GRADE OR CURVE PROHIBITED.
   No vehicle shall be driven so as to pass another vehicle on the left side of
the center of the roadway when approaching or upon the crest of a grade or
curve on the roadway where the driver's view is obstructed within such distance
as to create a hazard in the event another vehicle might approach from the
opposite direction. This section shall not apply upon a one-way roadway.
('74 Code, § 9-5-7.4) (Ord. 65-1974)
§ 8-2-5-5 PASSING AT INTERSECTION OR RAILROAD CROSSING PROHIBITED.
   No vehicle shall be driven so as to pass another vehicle on the left side of
the center of the roadway when within 100 feet of, or traversing an
intersection or railroad grade crossing. This section shall not apply upon a
one-way roadway.
('74 Code, § 9-5-7.5) (Ord. 65-1974)
§ 8-2-5-6 PASSING NEAR BRIDGE, VIADUCT OR TUNNEL PROHIBITED.
   No vehicle shall be driven so as to pass another vehicle on the left side of
the center of the roadway when either vehicle is approaching within 100 feet of
or upon any bridge, viaduct or tunnel. This section does not apply to one-way
roadways.
('74 Code, § 9-5-7.6) (Ord. 65-1974)
§ 8-2-5-7 PASSING ON RIGHT.
   A vehicle may be driven so as to overtake and pass to the right of another
vehicle only when such movement may be made in safety and without driving off
the pavement of the main-traveled portion of the roadway and only under the
following conditions:
   (A)   When the vehicle overtaken is making or about to make a left turn.
   (B)   Upon a street or roadway with unobstructed pavement, not occupied by
parked vehicles and of sufficient width for two or more lanes of moving
vehicles in each direction.
   (C)   Upon a one-way street, or upon any roadway on which traffic is
restricted to one direction of movement, where the roadway is free from
obstructions and of sufficient width for two or more lanes of moving vehicles.
('74 Code, § 9-5-7.7) (Ord. 65-1974)
§ 8-2-5-8 NO PASSING ZONES.
   No vehicle shall be driven so as to overtake and pass another where
appropriate signs and/or markings on the roadway indicate the beginning and end
of no passing zones and such signs and markings are in place and clearly
visible.
('74 Code, § 9-5-7.8) (Ord. 65-1974)
§ 8-2-5-9 NO PASSING IN A SCHOOL ZONE.
   No vehicle shall be driven so as to overtake and pass any other vehicle
proceeding in the same direction while driving either on a public way adjacent
to a school while children are going to or leaving school, or in a school zone
when the school zone signs are in place.
('74 Code, § 9-5-7.9) (Ord. 65-1974)
§ 8-2-5-10 PASSING OR APPROACHING A SCHOOL BUS.
   (A)   The driver of a vehicle upon approaching or overtaking from either
direction any school bus which has stopped on the roadway, with special school
bus signals in operation, for the purpose of receiving or discharging any
school children, shall stop the vehicle at least ten feet before reaching such
school bus and shall not proceed until such school bus resumes motion, or until
signaled by the bus driver to proceed.
   (B)   Every bus used for transportation of school children shall bear upon
the front and rear thereof a plainly visible sign containing the words "School
Bus" in letters not less than eight inches in height.
   (C)   The driver of a vehicle upon a street with separate roadways need not
stop upon meeting or passing a school bus which is on a different roadway. Such
streets shall include but not be limited to streets divided by raised medians.
However, such streets shall not include streets divided by painted medians.
('74 Code, § 9-5-7.10) (Ord. 65-1974)
PART 6: TURNS, U-TURNS
§ 8-2-6-1 YIELD BEFORE TURNING.
   A driver of a vehicle intending to turn at an intersection or into an alley
or a driveway or onto open land shall yield to all others with the right of way
and shall wait until such movement can be made in safety.
('74 Code, § 9-5-8.1) (Ord. 65-1974; Am. Ord. 1-1987)
§ 8-2-6-2 RIGHT TURN FROM RIGHT LANE INTO RIGHT LANE.
   The driver of a vehicle intending to turn right at any intersection or into
an alley or a driveway or onto open land shall, before turning, approach the
turn as close as practicable to the right edge of the extreme right lane or
portion of the roadway lawfully available to traffic moving in the direction of
travel of such vehicle. In turning at an intersection, the right turn shall be
made so as to leave the intersection in the lane closest to the right curb.
('74 Code, § 9-5-8.2) (Ord. 65-1974)
§ 8-2-6-3 LEFT TURN FROM LEFT LANE OR LEFT TURN BAY INTO LEFT LANE.
   (A)   The driver of any vehicle intending to turn left at any intersection
or into an alley or driveway or onto open land shall, before turning, approach
the turn as close as practicable to the left edge of the extreme left lane or
portion of the roadway lawfully available to traffic moving in the direction of
travel of such vehicle. In turning left at an intersection, the driver shall
turn from a left turn bay, if provided, or from such left lane, if no left turn
bay is provided, and shall turn so as to leave the intersection in the lane as
close as practicable to the extreme left lane or portion of the roadway
lawfully available to traffic moving in the direction of travel of such
vehicle.
   (B)   In making any left turn from a street, the driver shall make the turn
as perpendicularly as practicable across any lane of oncoming traffic without
traveling an unnecessary distance across such lane.
('74 Code, § 9-5-8.3) (Ord. 65-1974)
§ 8-2-6-4 SIGNS DIRECTING RIGHT TURN ONLY AND THE LIKE.
   No person shall disobey any arrow, whether painted on the pavement or
displayed on a sign, any sign or marker within, adjacent to, or approaching an
intersection directing any vehicle in his lane of traffic to either turn at the
intersection in a particular direction or to continue in the same course of
direction that he was traveling when approaching the intersection.
('74 Code, § 9-5-8.4) (Ord. 65-1974)
§ 8-2-6-5 SIGNS PROHIBITING TURNS, U-TURNS.
   Whenever authorized signs are erected indicating that no right turn or left
turn or U-turn is permitted, no driver of a vehicle shall disobey the direction
of any such sign.
('74 Code, § 9-5-8.5) (Ord. 65-1974)
§ 8-2-6-6 TURNING MOVEMENT, LANE CHANGE, SIGNAL REQUIRED.
   No person shall turn a vehicle at an intersection, into an alley, a
driveway, or a private road, or onto land, or otherwise turn a vehicle from a
direct course, or move right or left upon a roadway, or change from one lane to
another unless or until such movement can be made in reasonable safety. No
person shall change lanes or so turn a vehicle without giving an appropriate
signal in at least 100 feet in advance.
('74 Code, § 9-5-8.6) (Ord. 65-1974)
§ 8-2-6-7 NO TURN INTO OR U-TURN NEAR FIRE STATION.
   No vehicle shall be driven so as to make a U-turn in front of the driveway,
entrance or approach to a fire station. No person shall use the driveway,
entrances or approaches of a fire station for the purpose of turning a vehicle
so as to proceed in the opposite direction.
('74 Code, § 9-5-8.7) (Ord. 65-1974)
§ 8-2-6-8 NO TURN OR U-TURN ON CURVE, GRADE OR BEHIND OBSTRUCTION.
   No driver of a vehicle shall either make a left turn across any traffic lane
which permits vehicles to travel in an opposite direction to him or make a U-
turn, when upon any curve, grade, or behind any obstruction, whether such
obstruction is moving or not, where such vehicle cannot be seen by the driver
of any other vehicle approaching from either direction within 300 feet.
('74 Code, § 9-5-8.8) (Ord. 65-1974)
§ 8-2-6-9 SIGNALS REQUIRED BEFORE TURN.
   (A)   No person shall turn a vehicle at any intersection or into an alley or
a driveway or onto open land without first giving an appropriate signal for the
required distance.
   (B)   Right Turn. A signal to turn right shall be given continuously during
the last 100 feet traveled by the vehicle before turning right. Such signal
shall be given either by signal lamp, mechanical signal device, or by hand with
arm extended upward from the left side of the vehicle by the driver. However,
such signal shall be given only by signal lamp, lamps, or mechanical devices by
the driver of any vehicle if the distance from the center of the top of the
steering post to the left outside limit of the body, cab or load of such
vehicle exceeds 24 inches, or if the distance from the center of the top of the
steering post to other rear limit of the body or load of vehicle exceeds 14
feet, whether a single vehicle or a combination of vehicles.
   (B)   Left Turn. A signal to turn left shall be given continuously during
the last 100 feet traveled by the vehicle before turning left. Such signal
shall be given by signal lamp, lamps, mechanical signal device or by hand with
arm extended horizontally from the left side of the vehicle by the driver.
However, such signal shall be given only by signal lamp, lamps, or mechanical
signal device if the vehicle is one of such measurements that, if turning
right, the driver would be required to signal a right turn only by signal lamp,
lamps, or mechanical signal device under division (B) above.
('74 Code, § 9-5-8.9) (Ord. 65-1974)
§ 8-2-6-10 U-TURN.
   No vehicle shall be driven so as to make a U-turn, that is, turned so as to
proceed in the opposite direction, unless the U-turn can be made in safety and
without interfering with any other traffic or vulnerable road user, and there
is no sign so prohibiting a U-turn.
('74 Code, § 9-5-8.11) (Ord. 65-1974; Am. Ord._2025-032)
§ 8-2-6-11 MIDDLE OF THREE LANES AT DEAD END.
   Upon a street having marked lanes for traffic moving in one direction which
terminates at an intersecting street accommodating traffic in both directions,
the driver of a vehicle in the middle lane may turn right or left onto the
intersecting roadway, provided there is no official sign, arrow or marker which
limits turning in only one direction; and in making such turn, the driver in
the middle lane shall turn into a lane other than a lane that a driver in the
right or left lane should enter. The driver of a vehicle in the right lane
shall turn right and the driver in the left lane shall turn left provided there
is no official sign, arrow or marker which limits the turning to only one
direction.
('74 Code, § 9-5-8.12) (Ord. 65-1974)
§ 8-2-6-12 NO DRIVING IN LEFT-TURN BAY EXCEPT TO TURN LEFT.
   Where left-turn bays have been provided, no motorist shall drive his vehicle
within the turn bay except to make a lawful left turn.
('74 Code, § 9-5-8.13) (Ord. 65-1974)
PART 7: PEDESTRIANS
§ 8-2-7-1 SOLICITING OF RIDES BY OR FOR MINORS PROHIBITED.
   It is unlawful for any person to solicit a ride from the occupant of any
moving vehicle either for a person 17 years of age or younger or for himself if
he is 17 years of age or younger from any public place or public parking lot on
or in the proximity of any sidewalk, roadway, freeway or exit or entrance ramp
to such freeway. This section shall not apply to any such person soliciting a
ride from any licensed public carrier.
('74 Code, § 9-5-14.1) (Ord. 65-1974)
§ 8-2-7-2 OCCUPYING ROADWAYS, CERTAIN MEDIANS PROHIBITED.
   (A)   It is unlawful for any person to stand in any travel lane of a street,
highway, or controlled access roadway or in any travel lane of the exit or
entrance ramps thereto, or to otherwise enter a travel lane of a street,
highway, or controlled access roadway or in any travel lane of the exit or
entrance ramps thereto, except for the purpose of legally crossing;
   (B)   It is unlawful for any person to access, use, occupy, congregate or
assemble on any median that is located on any roadway with a posted speed limit
of 30 miles per hour or greater and that does not possess a flat area of at
least four feet in diameter.
   (C)   Nothing herein shall be construed as preventing maintenance, repair or
construction activities within medians or roadside areas by public agencies or
agents thereof, including law enforcement officers engaged in the performance
of their official duties, entering or exiting a bus or other form of public
transit at authorized pick up and drop off locations, or as preventing physical
interactions or exchanges between pedestrians and occupants of vehicles where
the vehicle is lawfully stopped or pulled over outside of a travel lane, or
parked at a location where on-street parking is permitted.
   (D)   A person who violates this provision shall be guilty of a petty
misdemeanor and is subject to a fine of up to $100; provided, however, that:
      (1)   When appropriate, the Albuquerque Community Safety Department shall
respond to a report of a person violating this provision; and
      (2)   The penalties set forth in § 12-1-99 shall apply for a violation of
this section; provided, however, that a law enforcement officer shall first
verify that a written warning has been issued, otherwise, the officer shall
issue a Criminal Trespass Notification to a person for violating this section
prior to the issuing of a citation or conducting an arrest. However, in the
event of an immediate danger, a verbal warning prior to a citation or arrest is
permitted.
('74 Code, § 9-5-14.2) (Ord. 65-1974; Am. Ord._2017-028; Am. Ord._2019-017; Am.
Ord._2022-038)
§ 8-2-7-3 RIGHT-OF-WAY IN CROSSWALK.
   (A)   When traffic control devices are not in place or not in operation the
operator of a vehicle or bicycle traveling in the roadway shall stop to yield
the right-of-way to a vulnerable road user crossing the roadway within a marked
or unmarked crosswalk when the vulnerable road user is upon the half of the
roadway upon which the vehicle is traveling, or when the vulnerable road user
is approaching so closely from the opposite half of the roadway as to be in
danger.
   (B)   No vulnerable road user shall suddenly leave a curb or other place of
safety and proceed into the path of a vehicle or bicycle traveling in the
roadway which is so close that it is impossible for the operator to stop.
   (C)   Whenever any vehicle or other device that must comply with duties
applicable to the driver of a vehicle is stopped at a crosswalk or at any
intersection to permit a vulnerable road user to cross the roadway, the
operator of any other vehicle or device approaching from the rear shall not
overtake and pass such stopped vehicle or device.
   (D)   A person on a bicycle, tricycle, skateboard, skates, scooter, e-bike
or powered micromobility device upon or along a sidewalk or while crossing a
roadway in a crosswalk shall have the rights and duties applicable to a
pedestrian under the same circumstances, provided that:
      (1)   The cyclist, skater, scooter operator, e-bike or powered
micromobility device operator yields to pedestrians on the sidewalk or
crosswalk; and
      (2)   Use of a bicycle, tricycle, skateboard, skates, scooter, e-bike or
powered micromobility device on the sidewalk is permitted per § 8-3-3-15 and
any other applicable provisions of ROA 1994, Chapter 8.
('74 Code, § 9-5-14.3) (Ord. 65-1974; Am. Ord._2025-032)
§ 8-2-7-4 PEDESTRIAN TUNNEL OR OVERHEAD CROSSING.
   A pedestrian crossing a roadway at a point where a pedestrian tunnel or
overhead crossing has been provided shall make use of such tunnel or overhead
crossing and shall not cross directly upon the roadway or on the railroad
tracks.
('74 Code, § 9-5-14.4) (Ord. 65-1974)
§ 8-2-7-5 SUBJECT TO TRAFFIC CONTROL SIGNALS.
   Pedestrians shall be subject to traffic control signals as stated in §§
8-2-2-2 and
8-2-2-3 and at all other places they shall be granted those rights and subject
to those restrictions stated in this section.
('74 Code, § 9-5-14.5) (Ord. 65-1974)
§ 8-2-7-6 PEDESTRIANS TO CROSS AT RIGHT ANGLES.
   No pedestrian shall cross a roadway other than by a route at right angles to
the curb or by the shortest route to the opposite curb, or in a marked
crosswalk.
('74 Code, § 9-5-14.6) (Ord. 65-1974)
§ 8-2-7-7 WALKING ALONG ROADWAY.
   (A)   Where sidewalks are provided, it shall be unlawful for a pedestrian to
travel along or upon an adjacent roadway, except as follows:
      (1)   Where existing sidewalks are obstructed, damaged, or otherwise
unsuitable for the pedestrian’s use, a pedestrian may travel along or upon the
adjacent roadway or its shoulder, so long as such travel can occur without
obstructing traffic.
      (2)   A pedestrian traveling along or upon a roadway shall, when
practicable, travel only on the left side of the roadway or its shoulder facing
oncoming traffic.
      (3)   A pedestrian traveling along or upon a roadway or its shoulder
shall exercise due care for their own safety.
   (B)   Where sidewalks are not provided, a pedestrian traveling along or upon
a roadway shall, when practicable, travel only on the left side of the roadway
or its shoulder facing oncoming traffic, and shall exercise due care for their
own safety.
('74 Code, § 9-5-14.7) (Ord. 65-1974; Am. Ord._2025-032)
§ 8-2-7-8 CONTROLLED ACCESS ROADWAYS RESTRICTED.
   No pedestrian shall use any freeway or controlled access roadway; but
notwithstanding this provision, drivers of vehicles using the freeway or
controlled access roadway are not relieved of responsibility for exercising due
care.
('74 Code, § 9-5-14.8) (Ord. 65-1974)
Cross-reference:
   
Interstate highways, see §§ 7-4-1 et seq.
§ 8-2-7-9 PROHIBITED VULNERABLE ROAD USER CROSSINGS.
   (A)   Vulnerable road users shall not cross a roadway at any place except in
a crosswalk, except for operators of bicycles, e-bikes, and powered
micromobility devices acting under the provisions of ROA 1994, Chapter 8,
Article 3, Part 3 BICYCLES.
   (B)   Vulnerable road users, except for operators of bicycles, e-bikes, and
powered micromobility devices acting under the provisions of ROA 1994, Chapter
8, Article 3, Part 3 BICYCLES, should not cross at an unmarked, uncontrolled,
unsigned crosswalk or intersection where, at one of the next two adjacent
crosswalks or intersections within 600 ft, traffic control signals are present.
('74 Code, § 9-5-14.9) (Ord. 65-1974; Am. Ord._2025-032)
§ 8-2-7-10 SCHOOL CHILD TO CROSS WITHIN MARKED CROSSWALK.
   Any child walking either to or from school while school is in session shall
be required to cross any street which has a marked school crossing crosswalk
within such crosswalk.
('74 Code, § 9-5-14.10) (Ord. 65-1974)
§ 8-2-7-11 OBEDIENCE TO RAILROAD SIGNALS.
   No vulnerable road user shall pass through, around, over or under any
crossing gate or barrier at a railroad grade crossing while such gate or
barrier is closed or being opened or closed.
('74 Code, § 9-5-14.11) (Ord. 65-1974; Am. Ord._2025-032)
§ 8-2-7-12 DRIVERS TO EXERCISE DUE CARE.
   Notwithstanding the foregoing provisions of this article, every driver of a
vehicle shall exercise due care to avoid colliding with a vulnerable road user
upon a roadway in all circumstances and shall give warning by sounding the horn
when necessary and shall exercise proper precaution upon observing any
vulnerable road user or a child or a confused or incapacitated person upon a
roadway.
('74 Code, § 9-5-14.13) (Ord. 65-1974; Am. Ord._2025-032)
§ 8-2-7-13 ARTICLES NOT TO OBSTRUCT SIDEWALKS.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to place articles, goods, wares or items
of any sort on a sidewalk or to allow vegetation to grow in such a manner as to
obstruct or restrict the free use of the sidewalk by pedestrians. This section
shall include but not be limited to newspaper stands, portable signs and
benches.
('74 Code, § 9-5-14.14) (Ord. 65-1974)
Cross-reference:
   
Newsracks, see Ch. 6, Art. 7
   
Sidewalks, see §§ 6-5-5-1 et seq.
PART 8: RAILROAD CROSSINGS; TRAINS
§ 8-2-8-1 OBEDIENCE TO SIGNAL.
   (A)   Whenever any person driving a vehicle approaches a railroad grade
crossing under any of the circumstances stated in this section, the driver of
such vehicle shall stop within 50 feet but not less than 15 feet from the
nearest rail of such railroad, and shall not proceed until he can do so safely.
The foregoing requirements shall apply when:
      (1)   A clearly visible electric or mechanical signal device gives
warning of the immediate approach of a railroad train;
      (2)   A crossing gate is lowered or when a human flagman gives a signal
of the approach or passage of a railroad train;
      (3)   A railroad train, approaching within approximately 1,500 feet of
the railroad crossing, emits an audible signal from such distance, and such
railroad train, by reason of its speed or nearness to such crossing, is an
immediate hazard; or
      (4)   An approaching railroad train is plainly visible and is in
hazardous proximity to such crossing.
   (B)   No person shall drive any vehicle through, around, or under any
crossing gate or barrier at a railroad grade crossing while such gate or
barrier is closed or is being opened or closed.
('74 Code, § 9-5-11.1) (Ord. 65-1974)
§ 8-2-8-2 RAILROAD GRADE CROSSINGS.
   When a stop sign is erected at a railroad grade crossing, the driver of any
vehicle shall stop within 50 feet but not less than 15 feet from the nearest
rail of such railroad and shall proceed only upon exercising due care.
('74 Code, § 9-5-11.2) (Ord. 65-1974)
§ 8-2-8-3 CERTAIN VEHICLES TO STOP AT RAILROAD CROSSINGS.
   The driver of a motor vehicle carrying passengers for hire, or of a school
bus carrying any school child, or of a vehicle carrying explosive substances,
compressed gas or flammable liquids as a cargo or part of a cargo, before
crossing at grade any track or tracks of a railroad, shall stop such vehicle
within 50 feet but not less than 15 feet from the nearest rail of such
railroad, and while so stopped shall listen and look in both directions along
such track for any approaching train, and for signals indicating the approach
of a train, except as hereinafter provided, and shall not proceed until he can
do so safely. After stopping as required herein and upon proceeding when it is
safe to do so, the driver shall cross using only such gear of the vehicle that
will not necessitate changing gears while traversing such crossing and shall
not shift gears while crossing the track or tracks.
('74 Code, § 9-5-11.3A) (Ord. 65-1974)
§ 8-2-8-4 EXCEPTION TO REQUIRED STOP.
   No stop need be made at any crossing where a human flagman, police officer
or a traffic control signal directs traffic to proceed.
('74 Code, § 9-5-11.3B) (Ord. 65-1974)
§ 8-2-8-5 AUTOMATIC GATE CROSSING.
   No person shall drive any vehicle through, around or under any crossing gate
or barrier at a railroad crossing while such gate or barrier is closed or is
being operated.
('74 Code, § 9-5-11.3C) (Ord. 65-1974)
§ 8-2-8-6 MOVING HEAVY EQUIPMENT AT RAILROAD GRADE CROSSINGS.
   (A)   No person shall operate or move any crawler-type tractor, steam
shovel, derrick, roller, or any equipment or structure having a normal
operating speed of ten or less miles per hour or a vertical body or load
clearance of less than one-half inch per foot of the distance between any two
adjacent axles or in any event of less than nine inches, measured above the
level surface of a roadway, upon or across any tracks at a railroad grade
crossing without first complying with this section.
   (B)   Notice of any such intended crossing shall be given to a station agent
of such railroad and a reasonable time be given to provide proper protection at
such crossing.
   (C)   Before making any such crossing, the person operating or moving such
vehicle or equipment shall first stop the same not less than 50 feet from the
nearest rail of such railroad and, while so stopped, shall listen and look in
both directions along such track for any approaching train and for signals
indicating the approach of a train and shall not proceed until the crossing can
be made safely.
   (D)   No such crossing shall be made when warning is given by automatic
signal, crossing gates, flagman or other warning of the immediate approach of a
railroad train or car. If a flagman is provided by the railroad, movement over
the crossing shall be under his direction.
   (E)   This section shall not apply to the normal movement of farm equipment
in the regular course of farm operation.
('74 Code, § 9-5-11.4) (Ord. 65-1974)
§ 8-2-8-7 TRAINS NOT TO OBSTRUCT STREETS.
   It shall be unlawful for any person, persons or corporation to direct the
operation of or to operate any railroad train or bus in such manner to prevent
the use of any street for purposes of travel for a period of time longer than
five minutes.
('74 Code, § 9-5-11.5) (Ord. 65-1974)
PART 9: ACCIDENTS, REPORTS
§ 8-2-9-1 ACCIDENTS INVOLVING DEATH OR PERSONAL INJURY.
   The driver of any vehicle involved in an accident resulting in injury to or
the death of any person shall immediately stop such vehicle at the scene of
such accident, or as close thereto as possible and without obstructing traffic
more than is necessary, and shall then return to and in every event remain at
the scene of the accident until he has given his name, address, registration
number of the vehicle he is driving, and upon request shall exhibit his
operator's or chauffeur's license to the person struck or the driver or
occupant of, or person attending any vehicle collided with, and shall render
aid, as may be necessary, and make arrangement for securing such aid if it is
apparent that such aid is necessary.
('74 Code, § 9-5-5.1) (Ord. 65-1974)
§ 8-2-9-2 ACCIDENTS INVOLVING DAMAGE TO VEHICLE.
   The driver of a vehicle which is involved in an accident resulting only in
damage of a vehicle which is attended by any person shall immediately stop his
vehicle at the scene of such accident, or as close thereto as possible without
obstructing traffic more than is necessary and shall forthwith return to, and
in every event remain at, the scene of such accident until he has given his
name, address, registration number of the vehicle he is driving, and upon
request shall exhibit his operator's or chauffeur's license to the driver or
occupant of or person attending any vehicle collided with.
('74 Code, § 9-5-5.2) (Ord. 65-1974)
§ 8-2-9-3 DUTY UPON STRIKING UNATTENDED VEHICLE.
   The driver of a vehicle which collides with any unattended vehicle shall
immediately stop and then and there either locate and notify the operator or
owner of such vehicle of the name and address of the driver and owner of the
vehicle striking the unattended vehicle, or shall leave in a conspicuous place
on the vehicle a written notice giving the name and address of the driver and
owner of the vehicle doing the striking and a statement of the circumstances
thereof.
('74 Code, § 9-5-5.3) (Ord. 65-1974)
§ 8-2-9-4 DUTY UPON STRIKING FIXTURES OR OTHER PROPERTY UPON A HIGHWAY.
   The driver of a vehicle involved in an accident resulting only in damage to
fixtures or other property legally upon or adjacent to a highway shall take
reasonable steps to locate and notify the owner or person in charge of such
property of such fact, giving his name and address and the registration number
of the vehicle he is driving; upon request shall exhibit his operator's or
chauffeur's license; and shall make a re-port of the accident when and as
required in this title.
('74 Code, § 9-5-5.4) (Ord. 65-1974)
§ 8-2-9-5 IMMEDIATE NOTICE OF ACCIDENTS.
   The driver of a vehicle involved in an accident, if the accident results in
death, injury or damage to any vehicle or property in apparent extent of $100
or more shall immediately, by the quickest means of communication, give notice
of such accident to the Police Department. The duty to report to the Police
Department is additional to and independent of the duty to stop and identify
himself and to render aid as required under §§ 8-2-11-1 et seq.
('74 Code, § 9-5-5.5) (Ord. 65-1974)
§ 8-2-9-6 WRITTEN REPORTS OF ACCIDENTS.
   Both the driver and the owner of a vehicle involved in an accident resulting
in injury to or death of any person or total property damage to an apparent
extent of $100 or more shall, within five days after such accident, forward a
written report of such accident to the Police Department. The provisions of
this section shall not be applicable when the accident has been investigated at
the scene by a police officer while such driver was present. The provisions of
this section may be met by submission to the Police Department of a copy of any
accident report required under state statute.
('74 Code, § 9-5-5.6) (Ord. 65-1974)
§ 8-2-9-7 WHEN DRIVER UNABLE TO REPORT.
   (A)   Whenever the driver of a vehicle is physically incapable of giving
immediate notice of an accident as required in this title and there was another
occupant in the vehicle at the time of the accident capable of doing so, such
occupant shall give or cause to be given the notice not given by the driver.
   (B)   Whenever the driver is physically incapable of making a written report
of an accident as required in this title and such driver is not the owner of
the vehicle, then the owner of the vehicle shall, within five days after
learning of the accident, make such report not made by the driver.
('74 Code, § 9-5-5.7) (Ord. 65-1974)
§ 8-2-9-8 DAMAGED VEHICLES; REPORTS.
   (A)   The person in charge of any garage or repair shop, or any dealer or
wrecker or vehicles to which is brought any motor vehicle exhibiting bullet
holes, blood stains, clothing fibers in the damaged area, or other signs either
on the vehicle or its contents indicating that acts of violence have occurred
involving such vehicle shall forthwith give immediate notice to the Police
Department.
   (B)   Written report of such incident shall be sent to the Police Department
within 48 hours.
('74 Code, § 9-5-5.8) (Ord. 65-1974)
§ 8-2-9-9 WRITTEN ACCIDENT REPORTS CONFIDENTIAL.
   All accident reports made by persons involved in accidents or by garages
shall be without prejudice to the individual so reporting, and shall be for the
confidential use of the Police Department or other governmental agencies having
use of the records for accident prevention purposes, except that the Police
Department may disclose the identity of a person involved in an accident when
such identity is not otherwise known or when such person denies his presence at
such accident. No such report shall be used as evidence in any trial, civil or
criminal, arising out of an accident except that the Department shall furnish
upon demand of any person who has made, or claims to have made such a report,
or upon demand of any court, a certificate showing that a specified accident
report has or has not been made to the Police Department, solely to prove a
compliance or a failure to comply with the requirements that such a report be
made.
('74 Code, § 9-5-5.9) (Ord. 65-1974)
PART 10: [REPEALED]
ARTICLE 3: MOTORCYCLES,
BICYCLES, SCOOTERS AND TOY VEHICLES
Section
Part 1: General Provisions
   
8-3-1-1   Toys, coasters, roller skates and the like restricted
Part 2: Motorcycles
   
8-3-2-1   Traffic regulations apply
   
8-3-2-2   Streets laned for traffic
   
8-3-2-3   Minimum size for streets
   
8-3-2-4   Minimum size for controlled access roadways
   
8-3-2-5   Restricted from certain streets, lanes and paths
   
8-3-2-6   Clinging to other vehicles
   
8-3-2-7   Hands on handlebars
   
8-3-2-8   Riding on seat, feet on footrests
   
8-3-2-9   One passenger limit
   
8-3-2-10   Maneuverability of motorcycle
   
8-3-2-11   Equipment
   
8-3-2-12   Windshield or glasses
   
8-3-2-13   Helmets
   
8-3-2-14   One or two headlamps
   
8-3-2-15   Parking
Part 3: Bicycles
   
8-3-3-1   Jurisdiction
   
8-3-3-2   Parent's responsibility
   
8-3-3-3   Bicycle serial number
   
8-3-3-4   Traffic regulations apply
   
8-3-3-5   Obedience to traffic control devices
   
8-3-3-6   Use of bicycles, e-bikes and powered micromobility devices on streets
or controlled access roadways
   
8-3-3-7   Operation in bikeway
   
8-3-3-8   Direction of travel in bicycle lane
   
8-3-3-9   Position on the roadway
   
8-3-3-10   Duty of motorist to vulnerable road user
   
8-3-3-11   Opening and closing vehicle doors
   
8-3-3-12   Motorist turning across bikeway or multi-use trail
   
8-3-3-13   Driving vehicle on or across bicycle lane or multi-use trail
   
8-3-3-14   Traveling in groups
   
8-3-3-15   Riding bicycle, e-bike, or powered micromobility device on sidewalk
   
8-3-3-16   Bicycle speed
   
8-3-3-17   Emerging from alley or driveway
   
8-3-3-18   Carrying articles on bicycle
   
8-3-3-19   Clinging to vehicles
   
8-3-3-20   Seated passenger
   
8-3-3-21   Turning and hand signals
   
8-3-3-22   Pushing a bicycle
   
8-3-3-23   Parking of bicycle
   
8-3-3-24   Bicycle equipment
Part 4: Pedal Buses
   
8-3-4-1   Jurisdiction
   
8-3-4-2   Pedal bus regulations and equipment
   
8-3-4-3   Pedal bus operators
   
8-3-4-4   Pedal buses prohibited on certain streets or controlled access
roadways
   
8-3-4-5   Driving on or across bicycle lane or path
   
8-3-4-6   Pedal bus speed
   
8-3-4-7   Pedal bus size
   
8-3-4-8   Insurance requirements
Part 5: Shared Active Transportation
   
8-3-5-1   Applicability
   
8-3-5-2   Registration required
   
8-3-5-3   Registration process
   
8-3-5-4   Operational requirements
PART 1: GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 8-3-1-1 TOYS, COASTERS, ROLLER SKATES AND THE LIKE RESTRICTED.
   No person shall use any toy, coaster, roller skates, skateboard or similar
device either upon any sidewalk in any business district or upon any street,
bicycle lane or bicycle path; provided, however, that any person riding a
pedal-powered two-wheeled toy, propelled by human power, with either the front
or rear wheel having a diameter of 16 inches or more and which is not supported
in any manner with side "training wheels" is not prohibited from riding on any
bicycle lane or bicycle path.
('74 Code, § 9-5-14.15) (Ord. 65-1974)
PART 2: MOTORCYCLES
§ 8-3-2-1 TRAFFIC REGULATIONS APPLY.
   Every person operating a motorcycle shall be granted all of the rights and
shall be subject to all of the duties applicable to the driver of any other
vehicle under the Traffic Code, except as to special exemptions listed in this
article, and except as to those provisions of the Traffic Code which by their
very nature can have no application.
('74 Code, § 9-5-15.1) (Ord. 65-1974)
Penalty, see § 8-1-3-99
§ 8-3-2-2 STREETS LANED FOR TRAFFIC.
   (A)   Full Use of Lane. A motorcycle is entitled to full use of a lane, and
no other motor vehicle shall be driven in such a manner as to deprive any
motorcycle of the full use of a lane.
   (B)   Passing. The operator of a motorcycle shall not overtake and pass in
the same lane occupied by the vehicle being overtaken, except that this
provision shall not apply to police officers in the performance of their
official duties.
   (C)   Between Lanes Prohibited. No person shall operate any motorcycle
between lanes of traffic or between adjacent lines or rows of vehicles except
that this provision shall not apply to police officers in the performance of
their official duties.
   (D)   No More Than Two Abreast. Motorcycles may be driven two abreast in a
single lane.
('74 Code, § 9-5-15.2) (Ord. 65-1974)
§ 8-3-2-3 MINIMUM SIZE FOR STREETS.
   It shall be unlawful to operate on any street, any motorcycle with a wheel
base between both axles of less than three feet, four inches, or a motor
displacement of less than 45 cubic centimeters.
('74 Code, § 9-5-15.3) (Ord. 65-1974; Am. Ord. 7-2003)
§ 8-3-2-4 MINIMUM SIZE FOR CONTROLLED ACCESS ROADWAYS.
   No person shall operate a motorcycle upon any controlled access roadways or
upon any exit or entrance ramp thereof which does not have all of the
following: a wheel base between both axles of three feet, four inches; a motor
displacement of 125 cubic centimeters or more; and a motor of at least five
horsepower or the equivalent thereof.
('74 Code, § 9-5-15.4) (Ord. 65-1974)
§ 8-3-2-5 RESTRICTED FROM CERTAIN STREETS, LANES AND PATHS.
   No motorcycle shall be driven upon any private street, bicycle or foot path
or lane on which there are appropriate signs in place giving adequate notice
that motorcycles are prohibited the use of that private street, bicycle or foot
path. Motorcycles shall not be restricted from any public roadway.
('74 Code, § 9-5-15.5) (Ord. 65-1974; Am. Ord. 7-2003)
§ 8-3-2-6 CLINGING TO OTHER VEHICLES.
   No person operating or riding upon a motorcycle shall attach himself or his
vehicle to any moving vehicle upon a street.
('74 Code, § 9-5-15.7) (Ord. 65-1974)
§ 8-3-2-7 HANDS ON HANDLEBARS.
   Persons shall maintain control of a motorcycle and should have both hands on
the handlebars, except to signal turns, or if needed, for the operation of the
vehicle.
('74 Code, § 9-5-15.8) (Ord. 65-1974; Am. Ord. 7-2003)
§ 8-3-2-8 RIDING ON SEAT, FEET ON FOOTRESTS.
   (A)   Operator. A person operating a motorcycle shall ride only upon the
permanent and regular seat attached thereto, and shall have his feet upon the
footrests provided on the machine.
   (B)   Passenger. No person operating a motorcycle shall carry any other
person as a passenger unless such vehicle is designed to carry more than one
person and such passenger is either seated upon the permanent and regular seat
if designed for two persons, or upon another seat firmly attached behind the
operator's seat, and the passenger has his feet upon the footrests provided on
the machine for a passenger.
   (C)   In any event, no operator of any motorcycle shall ride in a position
or carry any other person riding in a position that will interfere with the
operation or control of the motorcycle or with the view of the operator.
('74 Code, § 9-5-15.10) (Ord. 65-1974)
§ 8-3-2-9 ONE PASSENGER LIMIT.
   No operator of any motorcycle shall carry on his motorcycle any passenger
unless the motorcycle is designed to carry such passenger, nor shall the
operator of any motorcycle carry on his vehicle more than one passenger at a
time, regardless of the design of the motorcycle, except for motorcycles
equipped with sidecars. No operator of a motorcycle shall carry more passengers
in his sidecar than it was designed for.
('74 Code, § 9-5-15.11) (Ord. 65-1974)
§ 8-3-2-10 MANEUVERABILITY OF MOTORCYCLE.
   A motorcycle shall have the capability to be operated through a turn
initiated from a curb lane that is completed within an adjacent curb lane. For
the purposes of this section, a police officer may require the operator of a
motorcycle to demonstrate the ability of any such vehicle to be so ridden.
Failure or refusal of any operator to demonstrate the ability of any such
vehicle after such vehicle was being operated on the streets shall be prima
facie evidence of an unsafe vehicle.
('74 Code, § 9-5-15.12) (Ord. 65-1974; Am. Ord. 7-2003)
§ 8-3-2-11 EQUIPMENT.
   Every motorcycle shall be equipped as is required of any other motor
vehicle, unless specifically exempted from such requirements by §§ 8-3-2-1 et
seq., or such equipment in its very nature is inconsistent with the structure
and use of a motorcycle.
('74 Code, § 9-5-15.14) (Ord. 65-1974)
§ 8-3-2-12 WINDSHIELD OR GLASSES.
   (A)   Any person operating a motorcycle not having a fixed windshield of a
type approved by the Commissioner of the New Mexico Department of Motor
Vehicles shall wear an eye protective device which may be a face shield
attached to a safety helmet, goggles, or safety eyeglasses.
   (B)   All eye protective devices or windshields shall be of a type approved
by regulations promulgated by the Commissioner of the New Mexico Department of
Motor Vehicles.
('74 Code, § 9-5-15.15) (Ord. 65-1974)
§ 8-3-2-13 HELMETS.
   (A)   On operator.  No person under the age of 18 shall operate a motorcycle
unless he is wearing a safety helmet securely fastened on his head in a normal
manner as headgear and meeting the standards specified by the Commissioner of
Motor Vehicles of the State of New Mexico.
   (B)   On passenger. No person shall carry any passenger under the age of 18
on any motorcycle unless the passenger is wearing a safety helmet securely
fastened on his head in a normal manner as headgear and meeting the standards
specified above.
   (C)   Rental of Cycles. No dealer or person who leases or rents motorcycles
shall lease or rent a motorcycle to a person under the age of 18 unless the
lessee or renter possesses or rents a safety helmet meeting the standards
specified above.
   (D)   Sale of Helmets. No person shall sell, or offer for sale, for use by a
driver of a motorcycle, or passenger thereof, any safety helmet which is not of
a type approved by or meeting specifications of the Commissioner of Motor
Vehicles.
('74 Code, § 9-5-15.16) (Ord. 65-1974; Am. Ord. 65-1977)
§ 8-3-2-14 ONE OR TWO HEADLAMPS.
   Every motorcycle shall be equipped with at least one headlamp and not more
than two, and any headlamp shall be located at a height measured from the
center of the lamp of not more than 54 inches nor less than 20 inches to the
level ground upon which the vehicle stands.
('74 Code, § 9-5-15.18) (Ord. 65-1974
§ 8-3-2-15 PARKING.
   (A)   One wheel near curb. Any motorcycle with two wheels shall be parked
with either wheel within 12 inches of the curb, and the other wheel so
positioned that the motorcycle does not protrude into any traffic lane and such
motorcycle is exempted from any parallel parking requirements.
   (B)   Two or More Per Stall. Where parking stalls are indicated by the
painting on the pavement or by meter, it shall be permissible for more than one
motorcycle to occupy the same stall, provided that such vehicles are contained
completely within the stall, and that no such motorcycle is parked within 18
inches of any side of the stall. All motorcycles, whether parked singly or in
groups, must obey all other parking regulations.
('74 Code, § 9-5-15.19) (Ord. 65-1974; Am. Ord. 7-2003; Am. Ord._2016-011)
PART 3: BICYCLES
§ 8-3-3-1 JURISDICTION.
   The regulations in §§ 8-3-3-1 et seq. shall be applicable whenever a
bicycle, e-bikes, or powered micromobility devices is operated on any municipal
bikeway or multi-use trail set aside for the exclusive use of bicycles, e-
bikes, or powered micromobility devices or set aside for use of bicycles, e-
bikes, or powered micromobility devices with pedestrians, motorcycles and/or
horseback riders and shall also be applicable to all streets, parking lots and
the like, regardless of road surfaces covered by §
8-1-3-2. Provisions listed in this Article 3 as applicable to bicycles are
equally applicable to e-bikes and powered micromobility devices.
('74 Code, § 9-5-16.1) (Ord. 65-1974; Am. Ord. 37-2008; Am. Ord._2024-021; Am.
Ord._2025-032)
§ 8-3-3-2 PARENT'S RESPONSIBILITY.
   The parent of any child and the guardian of any ward shall not authorize or
knowingly permit such child or ward to violate any of the provisions of §§
8-3-3-1 et seq.
('74 Code, § 9-5-16.2) (Ord. 65-1974; Am. Ord. 37-2008)
§ 8-3-3-3 BICYCLE SERIAL NUMBER.
   (A)   No person shall alter, obliterate or change the serial number
imprinted on the frame of any bicycle.
   (B)   No person shall sell or rent a bicycle on which the serial number
imprinted on the frame has been altered, obliterated or changed.
   (C)   This section shall not prohibit the restoration by an owner of an
original serial number or mark.
('74 Code, § 9-5-16.4) (Ord. 65-1974; Am. Ord. 19-2007; Am. Ord. 37-2008)
§ 8-3-3-4 TRAFFIC REGULATIONS APPLY.
   (A)   Operators of bicycles have the same rights as operators of automobiles
in the use of streets, highways and roadways within the City, except as
otherwise specifically provided herein and in Chapter 8, Article 2.
   (B)   Every person riding a bicycle upon a roadway shall be subject to all
the duties applicable to the drivers of motor vehicles, except as otherwise
expressly provided in this Traffic Code and except as to those provisions of
laws and ordinances which by their nature can have no applications; and each
such person shall be subject to the same provisions and sections of this
Traffic Code to which a motorist is subject.
('74 Code, § 9-5-16.5) (Ord. 65-1974; Am. Ord. 19-2007; Am. Ord. 37-2008; Am.
Ord._2025-032)
§ 8-3-3-5 OBEDIENCE TO TRAFFIC CONTROL DEVICES.
   (A)   Any person operating a bicycle shall obey the instructions of official
traffic control signals, signs, and other control devices applicable to
vehicles, unless otherwise directed by a police officer or other individual
with authority under law to direct, control, or regulate traffic, or as
follows:
      (1)   Except when directed to proceed by a police officer or other
individual with authority under law to direct, control, or regulate traffic,
every person riding a bicycle and approaching a stop intersection indicated by
a red traffic control signal shall stop before entering the crosswalk on the
near side of the intersection or, in the event there is no crosswalk, shall
stop at a clearly marked stop line, but if none, then at the point nearest the
intersecting roadway before entering the intersection. After stopping, if there
is no approaching vulnerable road user or vehicle traffic with the right of
way, the person riding a bicycle may proceed through the intersection without
waiting for the traffic control signal to turn green.
      (2)   Except when directed to proceed by a police officer or other
individual with authority under law to direct, control, or regulate traffic,
every person riding a bicycle and approaching an intersection with a stop sign
or a yield sign, if there is no approaching vulnerable road user or vehicle
traffic with the right of way, the person riding a bicycle may proceed through
the intersection without stopping. If required for safety to stop, the person
riding a bicycle shall stop before entering the crosswalk on the near side of
the intersection or, in the event there is no crosswalk, at a clearly marked
stop line, but if none, then at the point nearest the intersecting roadway
where the person riding a bicycle has a view of approaching traffic on the
intersecting roadway.
   (B)   Whenever authorized signs are erected indicating that no right or left
or U-turn is permitted, no person operating a bicycle shall disobey the
direction of any such sign, except where such person dismounts from the bicycle
to make such turn, in which event such person shall then obey the regulations
applicable to pedestrians.
   (C)   Any person operating a bicycle, e-bike, or powered micromobility
device on a street or controlled access roadway is responsible for using due
care in the operation of their vehicle and or device.
('74 Code, § 9-5-16.6) (Ord. 65-1974; Am. Ord. 19-2007; Am. Ord. 37-2008; Am.
Ord._2024-021; Am. Ord._2025-032)
§ 8-3-3-6 USE OF BICYCLES, E-BIKES AND POWERED MICROMOBILITY DEVICES ON STREETS
OR CONTROLLED ACCESS ROADWAYS.
   (A)   Bicycles, Class 1, Class 2 or Class 3 e-bikes, and powered
micromobility devices are permitted on any street or path, unless prohibited in
accordance with the provisions in Subsection B below.
   (B)   No person shall ride a bicycle, e-bike, or powered micromobility
device on any street or path where signs have been erected by the Mayor or
Mayor’s designated representative which prohibit the use of the street or path
to bicycles, e-bikes, or powered micromobility devices.
   (C)   Notwithstanding this provision, drivers of vehicles using such streets
or controlled access roadways are not relieved of responsibility of using due
care.
   (D)   This Section 8-3-3-6 does not apply to the operation of e-bikes or
powered micromobility devices in City-Owned Open Space Lands, Regional
Preserves, and Open Space Lands where the City shares jurisdiction with a
local, state or federal agency, which is governed by
Chapter 5, Article 8 of the Revised Ordinances of Albuquerque, 1994.
('74 Code, § 9-5-16.7) (Ord. 65-1974; Am. Ord. 19-2007; Am. Ord. 37-2008; Am.
Ord. 8-2011; Am. Ord._2024-021)
§ 8-3-3-7 OPERATION IN BICYCLE LANE.
   Where the bicycle lane provides a minimum of four feet of ride-able space or
once a bicyclist has entered a bicycle lane, bicyclist shall endeavor to
maintain the lane except:
   (A)   At intersections;
   (B)   To pass a slower vulnerable road user, or to avoid parked cars or
obstacles;
   (C)   A bicyclist may leave the bicycle lane between intersections in order
to make a U-turn, or left hand turn where such a turn is permissible for
vehicular traffic, or to turn into driveways;
   (D)   When leaving a bicycle lane, the bicyclist shall use caution and yield
the right-of-way to vehicles and other vulnerable road users.
('74 Code, § 9-5-16.8) (Ord. 65-1974; Am. Ord. 19-2007; Am. Ord. 37-2008; Am.
Ord._2025-032)
§ 8-3-3-8 DIRECTION OF TRAVEL IN BIKEWAY.
   No person shall ride or operate a bicycle within a bikeway or on the roadway
in any direction except that permitted of vehicular traffic traveling on the
same side of the roadway; provided, that bicycles may proceed either way along
a lane where two-way bicycle traffic is so designated.
('74 Code, § 9-5-16.9) (Ord. 65-1974; Am. Ord. 19-2007; Am. Ord. 37-2008; Am.
Ord._2025-032)
§ 8-3-3-9 POSITION ON THE ROADWAY.
   (A)   If the right hand vehicle lane available for traffic is wide enough to
be safely shared with overtaking vehicles and no bike lane is present, a
bicycle shall be ridden far enough to the right in said lane to facilitate such
overtaking movements unless other conditions make it unsafe to do so.
   (B)   Exceptions to driving bicycles on the right:
      (1)   When and where road hazards exist.
      (2)   To overtake vehicles making right-hand turns at intersections.
      (3)   Bicycle may move out of their lane to overtake and pass another
vehicle/bicycle.
      (4)   When preparing for a left turn at an intersection, when making a U-
turn or turning into a private road or driveway.
      (5)   Upon a one-way road with two or more marked traffic lanes the
bicyclist may ride in the center of the most left hand lane for a reasonable
distance to complete a left hand turn.
      (6)   If the right-hand vehicle lane available for traffic is not wide
enough to be safely shared with overtaking vehicles or if passing is otherwise
unsafe, a bicycle may be ridden far enough to the left to temporarily control
the lane. Bicyclist must move to the right to allow vehicles to overtake at the
earliest and safest location. At no point is a bicyclist required to ride
within less than three feet of any objects or curb on the right.
(Ord. 37-2008)
§ 8-3-3-10 DUTY OF MOTORIST TO VULNERABLE ROAD USER.
   (A)   In approaching or passing a vulnerable road user, every person
operating a motor vehicle shall proceed with caution and shall pass such
vulnerable road user at a reasonable speed and keep a safe distance from them;
provided however, in no event shall a distance of less than five feet be
considered a safe distance within the meaning of this division.
   (B)   No person operating a motor vehicle shall harass or endanger a
vulnerable road user.
   (C)   The operator of a motor vehicle shall stop for a vulnerable road user
crossing the roadway within a marked or unmarked crosswalk when the vulnerable
road user is upon the half of the roadway upon which the vehicle is traveling,
or when the vulnerable road user is approaching so closely from the opposite
half of the roadway as to be in danger.
   (D)   Whenever any vehicle or other device that must comply with duties
applicable to the driver of a vehicle is stopped at a crosswalk or at any
intersection to permit a vulnerable road user to cross the roadway, the
operator of any other vehicle or device approaching from the rear shall not
overtake and pass such stopped vehicle or device.
('74 Code, § 9-5-16.11) (Ord. 65-1974; Am. Ord. 19-2007; Am. Ord. 37-2008; Am.
Ord._2025-032)
§ 8-3-3-11 OPENING AND CLOSING VEHICLE DOORS.
   No person shall open any door on a motor vehicle unless and until it is
reasonably safe to do so and can be done without interfering with the movement
of other traffic including bicycle traffic, nor shall any person leave a door
open on a side of a vehicle adjacent to moving traffic for a period of time
longer than is necessary to load or unload passengers.
(Ord. 37-2008)
§ 8-3-3-12 MOTORIST TURNING ACROSS BIKEWAY OR MULTI-USE TRAIL.
   (A)   Whenever a motorist is turning across a bikeway or multi-use trail,
such motorist shall maintain a proper lookout for vulnerable road users and
shall yield the right-of-way to any vulnerable road user traveling in a bikeway
or multi-use trail and, prior to turning right, shall merge, if practicable and
not otherwise prohibited by signage or pavement markings, into the bikeway to
their right, if any, before the start of the turning movement.
   (B)   Nothing in this section shall be deemed to relieve the motorist of
duties imposed by §
8-2-2-2, in particular, but not limited to, §
8-2-2-2(A)(1), (B)(1) and (E)(1).
('74 Code, § 9-5-16.12) (Ord. 65-1974; Am. Ord. 19-2007; Am. Ord. 37-2008; Am.
Ord._2025-032)
§ 8-3-3-13 DRIVING VEHICLE ON OR ACROSS BICYCLE LANE OR MULTI-USE TRAIL.
   No person shall drive or operate a motor vehicle upon or across a bicycle
lane or multi-use trail except to cross such lane or multi-use trail when
turning as permitted in §
8-3-3-12, to park such vehicle, where parking is permitted, or to leave a
parking space. No person shall drive upon or across a bicycle lane or multi-use
trail as permitted by this section except after giving the right-of-way to all
vulnerable road users within the lane or path.
('74 Code, § 9-5-16.13) (Ord. 65-1974; Am. Ord. 19-2007; Am. Ord. 37-2008; Am.
Ord._2025-032)
§ 8-3-3-14 TRAVELING IN GROUPS.
   Persons riding bicycles on a roadway shall not ride more than two abreast
except on paths or parts of roadways set aside for the exclusive use of
bicycles where more than two abreast may ride in safety and traffic is not
impeded. When riding more than two abreast is permitted on a roadway, the
bicyclist shall ride within a single lane.
('74 Code, § 9-5-16.15) (Ord. 65-1974; Am. Ord. 19-2007; Am. Ord. 37-2008)
§ 8-3-3-15 RIDING BICYCLE, E-BIKE, OR POWERED MICROMOBILITY DEVICE ON SIDEWALK.
   (A)   Bicyclists and operators of e-bikes and powered micromobility devices
shall not ride upon a sidewalk when there is a bikeway or multi-use trail
adjacent to the direction of travel, or when signs are posted prohibiting
bicycles e-bikes, or powered micromobility devices on the sidewalk, or when
within a business district. When riding on a sidewalk, a bicyclist is subject
to the laws that apply to pedestrians.
   (B)   If a bicyclist dismounts, the bicyclist is subject to the laws that
apply to pedestrians.
   (C)   Whenever a person must ride a bicycle, e-bike, or powered
micromobility device upon a sidewalk, such person shall ride slowly, shall
yield the right-of-way to any pedestrian, shall overtake on the left, and shall
give an audible signal before attempting to overtake and pass such pedestrian,
and shall only ride on the sidewalk on the right hand side of the street,
moving with the directional flow of the motor vehicle traffic.
('74 Code, § 9-5-16.16) (Ord. 65-1974; Am. Ord. 19-2007; Am. Ord. 37-2008; Am.
Ord._2025-032)
§ 8-3-3-16 BICYCLE SPEED.
   (A)   No person shall operate a bicycle at a speed either greater than the
lawful speed limit or than is reasonable and prudent under the conditions then
existing, whichever is the lesser.
   (B)   The lawful posted speed limit on any bicycle trail or path is twenty
(20) miles per hour, unless a lower speed is posted by the Mayor, or Mayor’s
designated representative.
('74 Code, § 9-5-16.17) (Ord. 65-1974; Am. Ord. 19-2007; Am. Ord. 37-2008; Am.
Ord._2024-021)
§ 8-3-3-17 EMERGING FROM ALLEY OR DRIVEWAY.
   The operator of a bicycle emerging from an alley, driveway, bicycle path or
building shall, upon approaching a sidewalk or the sidewalk area, yield the
right-of-way to all pedestrians, and, before entering the roadway, shall yield
the right-of-way to all vehicles approaching on said roadway.
('74 Code, § 9-5-16.18) (Ord. 65-1974; Am. Ord. 19-2007; Am. Ord. 37-2008)
§ 8-3-3-18 CARRYING ARTICLES ON BICYCLE.
   (A)   No person operating a bicycle shall carry any package, bundle or
article which prevents the rider from keeping at least one hand upon the
handlebars.
   (B)   No person operating a bicycle shall transport any package, bundle or
article, or any combination thereof, which interferes with the turning or
braking of such bicycle, or which extends more then two feet from the front,
back or sides of the frame of the bicycle, or which tends to impair the
operator's control or balance. Nothing in this division shall be deemed to
prohibit the use of trailers or side cars which are designed to be used with
bicycles.
('74 Code, § 9-5-16.19) (Ord. 65-1974; Am. Ord. 19-2007; Am. Ord. 37-2008)
§ 8-3-3-19 CLINGING TO VEHICLES.
   No person riding upon a bicycle shall attach the same or himself to any
moving vehicle.
('74 Code, § 9-5-16.20) (Ord. 65-1974; Am. Ord. 19-2007; Am. Ord. 37-2008)
§ 8-3-3-20 SEATED PASSENGER.
   (A)   No bicyclist shall carry a passenger on the bicycle unless the
passenger is seated upon an individual seat or other carrier designed for
carrying a passenger.
   (B)   No person shall ride upon a bicycle as a passenger unless he is seated
upon an individual seat or other carrier designed for carrying a passenger
separate from that intended to be used by the operator.
('74 Code, § 9-5-16.23) (Ord. 65-1974; Am. Ord. 19-2007; Am. Ord. 37-2008)
§ 8-3-3-21 TURNING AND HAND SIGNALS.
   (A)   Before turning and altering the course of a bicycle, the bicyclist
shall make sure that movement can be made safely and shall give a signal by
hand in the same manner as hand signals are given by motorists to indicate the
direction in which he intends to proceed.
   (B)   A signal by hand and arm need not be given if the hand is needed in
the control or operation of the bicycle.
('74 Code, § 9-5-16.24) (Ord. 65-1974; Am. Ord. 19-2007; Am. Ord. 37-2008)
§ 8-3-3-22 PUSHING A BICYCLE.
   Any person dismounted from and pushing a bicycle shall obey all regulations
applicable to pedestrians.
('74 Code, § 9-5-16.25) (Ord. 65-1974; Am. Ord. 19-2007; Am. Ord. 37-2008)
§ 8-3-3-23 PARKING OF BICYCLE.
   A bicycle may not be parked on a sidewalk or any other place if the parking
impedes normal and reasonable movement of pedestrian or other traffic.
('74 Code, § 9-5-16.26) (Ord. 65-1974; Am. Ord. 19-2007; Am. Ord. 37-2008; Am.
Ord._2016-011)
§ 8-3-3-24 BICYCLE EQUIPMENT.
   (A)   Lamp. No person shall operate a bicycle after sunset or prior to
sunrise or in low light conditions unless equipped with a lamp on the front
which emits a white light visible from a distance of at least 500 feet from the
front.
   (B)   Reflector. No person shall operate a bicycle at nighttime unless it is
equipped on the rear with a red reflector of a type which shall be visible from
at least 300 feet to the rear when directly in front of lawful upper beams of
headlamps on a motor vehicle.
   (C)   Brake. No person shall operate a bicycle unless it is equipped with a
brake which will enable the operator, when traveling at a speed of 15 mph, to
stop within 30 feet on a dry, level, clean pavement after the brake is applied.
('74 Code, § 9-5-16.29) (Ord. 65-1974; Am. Ord. 7-2003; Am. Ord. 19-2007; Am.
Ord. 37-2008)
PART 4: PEDAL BUSES
§ 8-3-4-1 JURISDICTION.
   The regulations in §§
8-3-4-1 et seq. shall be applicable whenever a pedal bus is operated on any
municipal streets or parking lots open to the public and the like.
(Ord._2014-022)
§ 8-3-4-2 PEDAL BUS REGULATIONS AND EQUIPMENT.
   (A)   Except as to those provisions which by their nature can have no
application to pedal buses, every pedal bus must comply with all provisions of
this Traffic Code and of the New Mexico Motor Vehicle Code, NMSA 1978 §§ 66-1-
1 et seq. (the "MVC") otherwise applicable to vehicles, and is subject to the
same penalties for violation thereof.
   (B)   Except as to those provisions which by their nature can have no
application, every pedal bus is required to satisfy the minimum equipment
requirements for motor vehicles as prescribed by NMSA 1978 §§ 66-3-801 through
66-3-887 and this Traffic Code, including but not limited to those requirements
for illumination, braking equipment, and demarcation as a slow moving vehicle.
In addition, every pedal bus must:
      (1)   Be equipped with a rear-view mirror accessible by the operator;
      (2)   Maintain a clean, sanitary interior free from torn upholstery or
floor covering and from damaged or broken seats;
      (3)   Maintain body panels, fenders, grills and all other finishes and
equipment free from cracks, breaks, and dents that would impair the safety or
appearance of the pedal bus;
      (4)   Maintain matching tires in good repair and free from damage or
excessive wear; and
      (5)   Maintain an operational parking brake.
   (C)   Every pedal bus must be equipped with a sign attached to the interior
of the pedal bus within view of passengers indicating the name of the pedal bus
business or operator, a pedal bus number which is unique, and a telephone
number that can be used by any person to complain about the operation of or
non-compliance of the pedal bus with these provisions or other laws.
   (D)   Every pedal bus must be equipped with an electrical assist system
minimally capable of moving the device to a safe location in case of emergency.
   (E)   The onus is upon the operator of a pedal bus to ensure that all
applicable requirements are satisfied.
(Ord._2014-022)
§ 8-3-4-3 PEDAL BUS OPERATORS.
   (A)   No pedal bus shall be operated except by a pedal bus operator who:
      (1)   Is licensed to drive a motor vehicle under the Laws of New Mexico,
or licensed to drive a commercial motor vehicle if the pedal bus is designed to
transport 16 or more passengers including the driver;
      (2)   Is at least 18 years of age;
      (3)   Has not had more than one moving violation in the last year, nor
more than three in the last three years; and
      (4)   Has never been convicted of careless or reckless driving or any
violation of driving while impaired.
   (B)   Every pedal bus operator is subject to all the duties applicable to
the drivers of motor vehicles, except as otherwise expressly provided in this
Traffic Code and except as to those provisions which by their nature can have
no application to pedal buses; and each such operator shall be subject to the
same provisions and sections of this Traffic Code to which a motorist is
subject.
   (C)   Every pedal bus operator shall operate a pedal bus only in compliance
with all applicable federal, state, and local laws, and only in a manner so as
to assure the safety of persons and property.
   (D)   Every pedal bus operator shall obey the instructions of official
traffic control signals, signs, and other control devices and parking
regulations applicable to vehicles, unless otherwise directed by a police
officer.
(Ord._2014-022)
§ 8-3-4-4 PEDAL BUSES PROHIBITED ON CERTAIN STREETS OR CONTROLLED ACCESS
ROADWAYS.
   Pedal buses may operate only upon those routes described on a map of routes
approved and maintained by the Department of Municipal Development. A map of
the approved routes shall be displayed on each pedal bus in a conspicuous
manner viewable by passengers.
(Ord._2014-022)
§ 8-3-4-5 DRIVING ON OR ACROSS BICYCLE LANE OR PATH.
   No pedal bus operator shall navigate or operate a pedal bus upon or across a
bicycle path or lane except to cross such path or lane when turning as
permitted in §
8-3-3-12, to park such vehicle, or to leave a parking space.
(Ord._2014-022)
§ 8-3-4-6 PEDAL BUS SPEED.
   No pedal bus operator shall operate a pedal bus at a speed that is greater
than the lawful speed limit, or other than at a speed reasonable and prudent
under the conditions then existing.
(Ord._2014-022)
§ 8-3-4-7 PEDAL BUS SIZE.
   It is unlawful to operate a pedal bus that is wider than 84 inches (7 feet),
longer than 240 inches (20 feet) or designed to carry more than 18 persons.
(Ord._2014-022)
§ 8-3-4-8 INSURANCE REQUIREMENTS.
   It is unlawful to operate a pedal bus unless currently insured by a
reputable insurance company with a policy providing coverage for each and every
pedal bus owned, leased, or operated; covering injury to or death of persons in
accidents resulting from any cause, and damage to the property of another. The
minimum insurance shall not be decreased below the flowing minimum limits: $1
million per person, $2 million aggregate for bodily and property damage per
accident.
(Ord._2014-022)
PART 5: SHARED ACTIVE TRANSPORTATION
§ 8-3-5-1 APPLICABILITY.
   When operating within the public right-of-way, every entity offering or
managing small vehicles as part of shared active transportation service,
including but not limited to bike-share and electric scooter-share programs,
must comply with the requirements outlined in this section. Equity-focused
programming options for vulnerable and underserved populations are required.
Twenty (20) percent of the fleet’s small vehicles must be deployed in Census
Tracts with a score of .6-1 in the City’s Social Vulnerability Index map.
(Ord._2018-021; Am. Ord._2024-022)
§ 8-3-5-2 REGISTRATION REQUIRED.
   The administration shall create a city-wide permitting process including,
but not limited to, the following provisions for shared active transportation
entities. Notwithstanding the requirements set forth in this section, the City
reserves the right to deny a permit request for any reason.
(Ord._2018-021; Am. Ord._2024-022)
§ 8-3-5-3 REGISTRATION PROCESS.
   (A)   Every entity operating a shared active transportation program within
the City limits must have an active City business license.
   (B)   Prior to offering any small vehicle service within any public right-
of-way, every entity operating a shared active transportation program within
the City limits must receive city approval to operate within the right-of-way.
In order to be eligible for approval, each entity must provide:
      (1)   Proof of liability insurance that names the city as an additional
insured, and demonstrating minimum coverage as required by the City.
      (2)   The contact information of a locally-based manager or operations
staff member who can respond to city requests, emergencies, or other issues at
any time.
      (3)   A listing of every location where the shared mobility stations are
to be placed, including scaled diagrams, if applicable. Approval from the City
must be obtained for each mobility station location. The City reserves the
right to deny a location for present and future municipal or safety reasons.
   (C)   For all non-publicly funded programs, the City shall charge a fee for
the following items. The City may reduce any applicable fees if the permit
applicant is able to verify they provide equity and inclusion programming to
offer low-income customers a reduced operating fee and alternative options for
payment and accessing the services:
      (1)   Each permit application shall be $4,000.00 annually.
      (2)   An annual fee for each station (if applicable), authorized by the
City within any city owned property, public space, or right-of-way shall be
$40.00.
      (3)   An annual fee per small vehicle in service shall be $75.00.
      (4)   An established $0.10 per trip fee.
      (5)   An annual application fee of $150.00.
   All funds collected from subsection
8-3-5-3(C) shall be use for infrastructure improvements related to pedestrian
and share active transportation movement and the City’s costs related to
maintenance and oversight of any shared active transportation.
   (D)   The following data and privacy standards shall be applicable:
      (1)   Each system shall provide new users an in-app, email, and text
notice upon initial user registration outlining that a variety of data,
including location data and individual trips taken, is collected and used for
service, operational, or marketing purposes if applicable. The notice shall
direct users to a full privacy policy.
      (2)   System data collected by each company shall be provided to the City
on a regular basis in a format and time schedule as agreed upon by the City.
      (3)   The City retains the right to request aggregate data on system use
and aspects of system operation including but not limited to parking
complaints, damaged or lost small vehicles, and reported crashes.
   (E)   Each City approval shall be valid for a period of five years, and,
upon approval of the City, may be renewed in one-year increments, unless
terminated by the City. The City shall conduct an annual review to ensure
compliance set forth in §
8-3-5-1. If any company is found to be in violation of the provisions set forth
in §
8-3-5-1, the City may take appropriate actions, including but not limited to
revocation of the operating permit.
   (F)   It is unlawful for any shared active transportation company to offer
or manage small vehicles except in conformance with the requirements of these
§§
8-3-5-1 et seq. Any violations of these §§
8-3-5-1 et seq. are subject to the penalty provisions of §
1-1-99, and further subject to any other penalties or remedies provided by law
or in equity.
   (G)   All shared active transportation companies will be required to cap all
small vehicles at 1,000 units within the boundaries of operation in the City.
(Ord._2018-021; Am. Ord._2024-022)
§ 8-3-5-4 OPERATIONAL REQUIREMENTS.
   Entities operating shared active transportation programs within the City
limits shall comply with the following regulations. Non-compliance with these
regulations may result in the revocation of their permit:
   (A)   Small vehicles shall not be parked on a sidewalk or any other place if
the parking impedes normal and reasonable movement of pedestrian or other
traffic and shall be placed at an existing, City-approved shared active
transportation station, a bicycle rack, an approved shared demarcated drop
zone, other permanent fixture meant for the placement of small vehicles, or in
the landscaping/buffer area (as defined in §
6-5-5-4).
   (B)   Damaged, abandoned, or improperly placed small vehicles in the public
right-of-way shall be removed within 24 hours of the local contact being
notified of the improper placement. Failure to remove damaged, abandoned, or
improperly placed small vehicles shall result in a fine, a minimum of $250 per
small vehicle per day. Every small vehicle must have the ability to be remotely
disabled in the case that it is reported to be damaged or unsafe for use.
   (C)   The City has the right to request the temporary removal of all small
vehicles from specific locations in the event of emergencies, special events,
or regular street maintenance. Removal under such conditions must take place
within 24 hours of the request.
   (D)   The City shall have the right, but no obligation, to remove any
abandoned, unattended or improperly placed small vehicle that is, in the sole
opinion of the City, a safety hazard or an impediment to access ensured by the
Americans with Disabilities Act. The City shall have the right to charge a
removal and storage fee for any vehicles removed for these reasons.
   (E)   All small vehicles must comply with safety standards established by
the Consumer Product Safety Commission or the American Society for Testing and
Materials, and all other applicable federal, state, and city safety standards.
   (F)   All small vehicles must have, and clearly display, a unique, permanent
identification number. Each small vehicle must have a visible customer service
phone number.
   (G)   For all electric-assist small vehicles, the maximum motor-assist speed
shall be 15 mph.
   (H)   Each entity must agree in writing to defend, save harmless and
indemnify the City and any officer or employee of the City relating to any
liabilities that may arise from the entity's operation of its shared active
transportation program within the municipal limits.
   (I)   The shared active transportation operator must provide the City with
the geofenced area of operation for approval.
      (1)   At the City’s request, operators must geofence special parking
zones, special events, and other locations within 48 hours of notice.
      (2)   Operators must comply with geofencing requests to prohibit vehicle
use in locations prohibited by the City.
      (3)   Operators shall include an in-app explanation of geofencing, both
area designations and the process that is initiated if a user enters a
restricted area.
   (J)   The shared active transportation operator shall provide contact
information for local, on the ground empioyee(s) who will be available 24 hours
per day, seven days a week to monitor the fleet on a daily basis, promptly
respond to any issues that may arise, and deal with overall management of the
fleet.
(Ord._2018-021; Am. Ord._2024-022)
ARTICLE 4: ANIMALS
Section
   
8-4-1   Traffic regulations apply
   
8-4-2   Parent's responsibility
   
8-4-3   No animals on controlled access roadways and prohibited streets
   
8-4-4   Riding animals on the right
   
8-4-5   Duty of motorist to animals
   
8-4-6   Endangering person with animal or exciting animal
   
8-4-7   Animals not permitted on sidewalk
   
8-4-8   Horses with bit and reins
   
8-4-9   Racing of animals prohibited
   
8-4-10   No animals on street after dark
   
8-4-11   Unattended animals
   
8-4-12   Grazing on street prohibited
§ 8-4-1 TRAFFIC REGULATIONS APPLY.
   Every person either riding, driving before a load or leading any horse or
other draft animal shall be granted all the rights and be subject to all the
duties applicable to the driver of a vehicle, except as to special regulations
in this section and except as to those provisions of law and ordinances which
by their very nature can have no application.
('74 Code, § 9-5-17.1) (Ord. 65-1974)
Penalty, see § 8-1-3-99
§ 8-4-2 PARENT'S RESPONSIBILITY.
   The parent of any child and/or the guardian of any ward shall not authorize
or knowingly permit any such child or ward to violate any of the provisions of
this chapter.
('74 Code, § 9-5-17.2) (Ord. 65-1974)
§ 8-4-3 NO ANIMALS ON CONTROLLED ACCESS ROADWAYS AND PROHIBITED STREETS.
   No person shall ride, lead, or drive before a load any horse, farm or draft
animal either on any street where signs have been erected by the Mayor or his
designated representative, and which prohibit the use of the road to such
animal or upon the controlled access roadways, except in performance of public
work or official duties, or upon paths adjacent to such controlled access
roadways or streets which are provided for other uses.
('74 Code, § 9-5-17.3) (Ord. 65-1974)
§ 8-4-4 RIDING ANIMALS ON THE RIGHT.
   Every person riding, leading or driving before a load any horse or other
draft animal, shall do so as near to the right side of the roadway as
practicable, exercising due care when passing or skirting around a standing
vehicle or obstruction.
('74 Code, § 9-5-17.4) (Ord. 65-1974)
§ 8-4-5 DUTY OF MOTORIST TO ANIMALS.
   In approaching or passing any horse, farm or draft animal, whether being
ridden, led, driven before a load or running loose, every person operating a
motor vehicle shall slow down, and in passing such animal, shall maintain a
reasonable speed and keep a safe distance, and further, he shall bring his
vehicle immediately to a stop when such animal appears to be frightened, and if
there is a person in charge, such person signals or requests the motorist to
stop.
('74 Code, § 9-5-17.5) (Ord. 65-1974)
§ 8-4-6 ENDANGERING PERSON WITH ANIMAL OR EXCITING ANIMAL.
   No person shall knowingly endanger any person riding, leading or driving a
horse, farm or other draft animal by intentionally exciting such animal by an
activity which includes but is not limited to the sounding of a horn, abrupt
startling movements, and the cracking of a whip.
('74 Code, § 9-5-17.6) (Ord. 65-1974)
§ 8-4-7 ANIMALS NOT PERMITTED ON SIDEWALK.
   No person in control of a horse or draft animal shall allow such animal to
travel on any sidewalk except to cross such sidewalk as necessary.
('74 Code, § 9-5-17.7) (Ord. 65-1974)
§ 8-4-8 HORSES WITH BIT AND REINS.
   No person shall ride or drive before a load a horse on, or adjacent to, any
street or on any bridle path unless such animal is bitted, nor shall he ride or
drive such animal without holding the reins to such animal in his hands.
('74 Code, § 9-5-17.8) (Ord. 65-1974)
§ 8-4-9 RACING OF ANIMALS PROHIBITED.
   No person shall allow a horse or draft animal in his control either to
gallop on a street, or adjacent to a street, or to race such animal whether
galloping or trotting for trial of speed.
('74 Code, § 9-5-17.9) (Ord. 65-1974)
§ 8-4-10 NO ANIMALS ON STREET AFTER DARK.
   No person during the hours of darkness shall ride or drive any horse or
draft animal upon the traveled portion of any roadway which is normally used by
a motor vehicle.
('74 Code, § 9-5-17.10) (Ord. 65-1974)
§ 8-4-11 UNATTENDED ANIMALS.
   No person shall leave unattended any horse, farm or draft animal on any
roadway or on any unfenced portion of land adjacent to such roadway, unless
securely fastened to a permanent object.
('74 Code, § 9-5-17.11) (Ord. 65-1974)
§ 8-4-12 GRAZING ON STREET PROHIBITED.
   No person shall permit any livestock to wander or graze upon any roadway or
unfenced portion adjacent to such street at any time.
('74 Code, § 9-5-17.12) (Ord. 65-1974)
ARTICLE 5: STOPPING, STANDING AND PARKING
Section
Part 1: General Provisions
   
8-5-1-1   Stopping, standing or parking prohibited ­ no signs required
   
8-5-1-2   Stopping, standing or parking prohibited by sign
   
8-5-1-3   Parking time limited by sign
   
8-5-1-4   Stopping, standing or parking within certain hours prohibited by
signs
   
8-5-1-5   Meter parking, expired meter
   
8-5-1-6   No extension of metered parking
   
8-5-1-7   Defacing meter, slugs
   
8-5-1-8   Close to curb ­ headed forward
   
8-5-1-9   Parking within stall
   
8-5-1-10   Angle parking
   
8-5-1-11   Loading or unloading at an angle to the curb
   
8-5-1-12   All night parking prohibited in a business district
   
8-5-1-13   Parking prohibited of vehicle 90 inches wide
   
8-5-1-14   Lamps on a parked vehicle
   
8-5-1-15   Parking not to obstruct traffic
   
8-5-1-16   Parking prohibited in fire lane
   
8-5-1-17   Parking in alleys
   
8-5-1-18   Standing or parking on one-way roadways
   
8-5-1-19   Parking without license plate
   
8-5-1-20   Controlled access roadways ­ stopping, standing or parking
   
8-5-1-21   Child or animal in locked vehicle
   
8-5-1-22   Opening and closing doors
   
8-5-1-23   Boarding or alighting from vehicles
   
8-5-1-24   Starting stopped, standing or parked vehicle
   
8-5-1-25   Unattended motor vehicle
   
8-5-1-26   Parking vehicle with explosives and the like
   
8-5-1-27   Authorized police and emergency vehicles excepted
   
8-5-1-28   Tow vehicles excepted
   
8-5-1-29   [Reserved]
   
8-5-1-30   Disabled parking
   
8-5-1-31   Parking on private property where prohibited by sign; authority to
remove vehicles
   
8-5-1-32   Passenger curb loading zone
   
8-5-1-33   [Reserved]
   
8-5-1-34   Stopping, standing and parking of buses and taxicabs regulated
   
8-5-1-35   Restricted use of bus and taxicab stands
   
8-5-1-36   Parking for certain purposes prohibited
   
8-5-1-37   Moving or pushing vehicle of another
   
8-5-1-38   Unhitched and hitched trailer on public way
   
8-5-1-39   Registered owner responsible
   
8-5-1-40   Moving or molesting unattended vehicles
   
8-5-1-41   Prohibiting unattended delivery vehicles from being left idling
   
8-5-1-42   Mobile food units on public streets
   
8-5-1-43   Repeated nonpayment of automated speed enforcement system fines
Part 2: Authority to Remove or Relocate Vehicles; Abandoned Vehicles;
Inoperable Vehicles
   
8-5-2-0   Purpose
   
8-5-2-1   Definitions
   
8-5-2-2   Prohibition of removal and relocation
   
8-5-2-3   Abandoned and inoperable vehicles
   
8-5-2-4   Circumstances permitting summary vehicle impoundment or relocation
   
8-5-2-5   Notice and procedure following summary impoundment
   
8-5-2-6   Impoundment for investigation evidence or forfeiture
   
8-5-2-7   Impoundment of vehicles generally
   
8-5-2-8   Release of vehicles; fees
   
8-5-2-9   Inoperable vehicle on private property
   
8-5-2-10   Hearing
   
8-5-2-11   Failure to claim vehicle
   
8-5-2-12   Disposition of motor vehicles
 
   
8-5-2-99   Misdemeanor and penalty
Part 3: Enforcement
   
8-5-3-1   Frequency of parking citations
Cross-reference:
   Citation on parked vehicle, see §
8-1-3-10
   Failure to pay for parking citation, see §
8-1-3-11
PART 1: GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 8-5-1-1 STOPPING, STANDING OR PARKING PROHIBITED ­ NO SIGNS REQUIRED.
   No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle except when necessary to avoid
conflict with other traffic or in compliance with law or the directions of a
police officer or other individual with authority under law to direct, control,
or regulate traffic, or traffic control device, in any of the following places:
   (A)   Next to a curb which is painted either yellow or red.
   (B)   On a sidewalk.
   (C)   Within three feet of a public or private driveway.
   (D)   Within an intersection.
   (E)   Within 15 feet of a fire hydrant.
   (F)   On a crosswalk or within 50 feet of a crosswalk unless the Mayor or
their designated representative has specifically, by markings, signs, or
parking meters, indicated parking to be permitted.
   (G)   Within 30 feet of the approach to any flashing beacon, stop sign,
yield sign, or traffic control signal located at the side of a roadway, unless
the Mayor or their designated representative has specifically, by markings or
by parking meters, indicated parking to be permitted.
   (H)   Between a safety zone and the adjacent curb, or within 30 feet of
points on the curb immediately opposite the ends of a safety zone, unless the
Mayor or their designated representative has indicated a different length by
signs or markings.
   (I)   Within 50 feet of the nearest rail of a railroad crossing.
   (J)   Within 20 feet of the driveway entrance to any fire station and on the
side of a street opposite the entrance to any fire station within 75 feet of
said entrance (when properly sign-posted).
   (K)   Alongside or opposite any street excavation or obstruction when
stopping, standing or parking would obstruct traffic.
   (L)   On the roadway side of any vehicle stopped or parked at the edge or
curb of a street.
   (M)   Upon any bridge or other elevated structure upon a roadway or within a
roadway tunnel.
   (N)   Between the curb or edge of the roadway and the sidewalk.
   (O)   In a bicycle lane.
   (P)   On a multi-use trail.
('74 Code, § 9-5-19.1) (Ord. 65-1974; Am. Ord._2018-012; Am. Ord._2025-032)
§ 8-5-1-2 STOPPING, STANDING OR PARKING PROHIBITED BY SIGN.
   No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle either in a street, on public
grounds or in a public parking lot, except when necessary to avoid conflict
with other traffic or in compliance with law or at the direction of a police
officer or traffic control device, where proper signs have been placed at
intervals adequate to inform the motorist prohibiting the stopping, standing or
parking of vehicles.
('74 Code, § 9-5-19.2) (Ord. 65-1974)
§ 8-5-1-3 PARKING TIME LIMITED BY SIGN.
   When signs are erected in each block giving notice thereof, no person shall
stop, stand, or park a vehicle on the posted side of the street in said block
for longer than the time allowed on such signs, on any day, except when it is
necessary to stop a vehicle to avoid conflict with other traffic, or in
compliance with the directions of a police officer or official traffic control
device. The provisions of this section shall not relieve any person from the
duty to observe other and more restrictive provisions prohibiting or limiting
the stopping, standing or parking of vehicles.
('74 Code, § 9-5-19.3) (Ord. 65-1974; Am. Ord._2016-011)
§ 8-5-1-4 STOPPING, STANDING OR PARKING WITHIN CERTAIN HOURS PROHIBITED BY
SIGNS.
   (A)   When signs are erected in each block or parking lot giving notice
thereof, no person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle between the hours and on
the days specified on the signs. If no days are specified, after sunrise on
Sundays and public holidays shall be excepted. This prohibition shall not apply
when it is necessary to stop a vehicle to avoid conflict with other traffic or
in compliance with a police officer or official traffic control device, or when
a vehicle has a valid permit issued in accordance with division (B).
   (B)   (1)   The Mayor, or Mayor's designee, may establish residential permit
parking areas and issue permits to residents of the area subject to regulations
established by the Mayor or Mayor's designee that, at a minimum, consider the
following:
         (a)   The demand for on-street parking on the affected streets
relative to the parking availability, and parking needs of the residents;
         (b)   The relative value of on-street parking for non-area residents
to allow access to community amenities and resources balanced against any
significant impacts on the area residents that may justify the need for parking
limitations or restrictions; and
         (c)   Economic Development, and support for community commerce.
      (2)   At least one community meeting shall be held for area residents and
members of the general public to voice concerns and considerations about a
proposed residential parking by permit area; and
      (3)   The Mayor shall submit an executive communication to the City
Council for its approval of each instance of the establishment of a new
residential parking by permit area designation. The proposed residential
parking permit area will become effective only upon the City Council's approval
of the respective executive communication.
      (4)   The residents or the entity or event which causes the need for such
on street parking, or the permitted residents may be required to pay for all
direct and indirect costs caused by, or associated with, permit parking.
   (C)   Permit parking may be created on a pilot basis or by the Department of
Municipal Development if permit parking may resolve special circumstances
affecting an area.
('74 Code, § 9-5-19.4) (Ord. 65-1974; Am. Ord. 64-1978; Am. Ord._2016-011; Am.
Ord._2021-010)
§ 8-5-1-5 METER PARKING, EXPIRED METER.
   (A)   Except in a period of emergency determined by an officer of the Fire
Department or Police Department, or except in compliance with a uniformed
police officer engaged in directing traffic, any vehicle parked or standing in
a space regulated by a parking meter between the hours and on the days
specified on the meter shall be lawfully parked or standing only when the
owner, operator or driver of such vehicle, upon parking or standing a vehicle
in the metered parking space, shall immediately deposit payment as specified on
the meter regulating such parking space. Failure to deposit the proper payment
as required shall constitute a violation of this section. When the “VIOLATION”
indicator is showing, it shall be presumptive evidence that any vehicle found
parked or standing in a regulated metered space is parked or standing in
violation of this section. The provisions of this section shall not relieve any
person from the duty to observe other and more restrictive provisions
prohibiting or limiting the stopping, standing or parking of vehicles.
('74 Code, § 9-5-19.5)
   (B)   In areas where on-street parking is regulated by parking meters, at
least three on-street parking spaces shall be designated as free motorcycle,
moped, or motorscooter parking for every three contiguous blocks of metered on-
street parking. This provision does not apply if it would require the removal
of any regular on-street metered parking space. This provision should not be
interpreted as exempting motorcycles, mopeds, or motoscooters from payment when
a meter is present.
   (C)   A green vehicle that is registered in the State of New Mexico to a New
Mexico resident or business is exempt from paying to park in an on-street space
regulated by a parking meter. A green vehicle parked in an on- street space
regulated by a meter shall have city issued identification posted on the left
rear bumper or the left rear window that authorizes the exemption set forth in
this paragraph. A green vehicle shall not be parked in an on-street space
regulated by a meter for more than two hours. After the free two-hour timeframe
has expired, the vehicle cannot park within a one block radius of that parking
space free of charge for 24 hours.
   (D)   Within 90 days of the adoption of these divisions (C) - (D), the Mayor
shall develop the following:
      (1)   a form of identification to post on the vehicles;
      (2)   the procedures to issue such identification;
      (3)   a training program for police officers and other City employees
authorized to issue parking citations; and
      (4)   a reasonable and nominal fee the City can impose for the issuance
of a green vehicle permit.
   (E)   To qualify for an exemption for a green vehicle, the owner must
present the vehicle to the city's Parking Division for verification of green
vehicle eligibility.
   (F)   This program shall be evaluated by the Department of Municipal
Development every two years. This evaluation will be brought before the City
Council with recommendations of alteration to the Green Vehicle Program, as
necessary.
(Ord. 65-1974; Am. Ord. 61-2004; Am. Ord. 1-2006; Am. Ord. 4-2008; Am. Ord. 11-
2011; Am. Ord._2016-011; Am. Ord._2017-010)
§ 8-5-1-6 NO EXTENSION OF METERED PARKING.
   Upon the expiration of the meter's specified time limit for legal parking,
whether coins have been previously deposited or not, the vehicle shall be moved
from the parking stall it has occupied. It shall be unlawful to deposit or
cause to be deposited any coin in the parking meter covering the parking stall
already occupied by the vehicle for the purpose of extending the parking time
beyond the total lawful parking period.
('74 Code, § 9-5-19.6) (Ord. 65-1974)
§ 8-5-1-7 DEFACING METER, SLUGS.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to deface, damage, tamper with,
willfully break, destroy or impair the usefulness of, or to open without lawful
authority, any parking meter installed in parking meter zones. It shall be
unlawful to deposit or cause to be deposited in any parking meter any slug,
device or substitute for a coin of the United States of America. It shall be
unlawful to attempt to avoid payment of any meter or pay station by any means.
('74 Code, § 9-5-19.7) (Ord. 65-1974; Am. Ord._2016-011)
§ 8-5-1-8 CLOSE TO CURB ­ HEADED FORWARD.
   Except as otherwise provided herein, no person shall stop or park a vehicle
upon a roadway other than parallel with the curb or edge of the roadway headed
in the direction of lawful traffic movement and with side wheels nearest the
curb or edge of the roadway within 18 inches of the curb or edge of the
roadway.
('74 Code, § 9-5-19.8) (Ord. 65-1974)
§ 8-5-1-9 PARKING WITHIN STALL.
   (A)   Where parking stalls have been marked by sign, meter, or painted lines
on the pavement, a vehicle shall be parked within the marked area.
   (B)   Where parking stalls on publicly owned parking lots are marked and
reserved for the exclusive use of particular vehicles, it shall be unlawful for
any person to park any vehicle in such a reserved stall without displaying on
the vehicle a current sticker issued for that particular stall by the
governmental body owning such parking lot.
('74 Code, § 9-5-19.9) (Ord. 65-1974)
§ 8-5-1-10 ANGLE PARKING.
   Upon those streets which have been signed or marked by the Mayor or his
designated representative for angle parking, no person shall park or stand a
vehicle other than at the angle to the curb or edge of the roadway indicated by
such signs or markings.
('74 Code, § 9-5-19.10) (Ord. 65-1974)
§ 8-5-1-11 LOADING OR UNLOADING AT AN ANGLE TO THE CURB.
   (A)   No person shall park any vehicle at an angle to the curb for the
purpose of loading or unloading merchandise, freight, objects or passengers
without a permit issued for the vehicle from the Mayor or his designated
representative, and such permit shall be open to inspection by any police
officer, except where allowed by signage.
   (B)   No person shall park such a vehicle in violation of any of the special
terms or conditions of such permit.
('74 Code, § 9-5-19.11) (Ord. 65-1974; Am. Ord._2016-011)
§ 8-5-1-12 ALL NIGHT PARKING PROHIBITED IN A BUSINESS DISTRICT.
   No person shall park a vehicle on any street in a business district during
the hours of 3:00 a.m. until 6:00 a.m. of any day, except physicians on
emergency calls.
('74 Code, § 9-5-19.12) (Ord. 65-1974; Am. Ord._2016-011)
§ 8-5-1-13 PARKING PROHIBITED OF VEHICLE 90 INCHES WIDE.
   No vehicle 90 inches or more in width shall be parked on any street except
for the purpose of loading or unloading merchandise, freight, or objects
provided that such vehicle shall not be unattended at any time during such
loading or unloading.
('74 Code, § 9-5-19.13) (Ord. 65-1974)
§ 8-5-1-14 LAMPS ON A PARKED VEHICLE.
   (A)   Whenever a vehicle is lawfully parked at nighttime upon any street
within a business or residence district, no lights need be displayed upon such
parked vehicle, except as provided in division (B) below.
   (B)   Whenever any vehicle 80 inches or more in overall width is parked upon
a public way during the hours between one-half hour after sunset and one-half
hour before sunrise, and there is not sufficient light to reveal to any person
or object within a distance of 500 feet upon such roadway, such vehicle so
parked shall be equipped with one or more lamps which shall exhibit a light on
the roadway side visible at a distance of 500 feet to the front of the vehicle,
and a red light visible from a distance of 500 feet to the rear.
   (C)   Lighted headlamps upon a parked vehicle shall be depressed or dimmed.
('74 Code, § 9-5-19.14) (Ord. 65-1974; Am. Ord._2016-011)
§ 8-5-1-15 PARKING NOT TO OBSTRUCT TRAFFIC.
   No person shall park a vehicle upon a street, other than an alley, in such a
manner or under such conditions as to leave available less than ten feet of the
width of the roadway for free movement of vehicular traffic. Bicycle lanes are
travel lanes, therefore, automobile parking or motor vehicle use of a bicycle
lane as a driving or passing lane is prohibited.
('74 Code, § 9-5-19.15) (Ord. 65-1974; Am. Ord._2018-012)
§ 8-5-1-16 PARKING PROHIBITED IN FIRE LANE.
   No persons shall either stop, stand or park a vehicle in a marked fire lane
or otherwise obstruct such lane, whether such lane is public property or on
private property which is devoted to public use. Such fire lane shall be marked
either with a sign or a red curb.
('74 Code, § 9-5-19.16) (Ord. 65-1974)
§ 8-5-1-17 PARKING IN ALLEYS.
   No vehicle shall be parked in any alley or left so parked temporarily,
except for such period of time as is reasonably necessary, for the purpose of
loading or unloading said vehicle. In the event commercial vehicles are
required to be parked in alleys for the purpose of making utility installation,
maintenance or repairs, said vehicles shall be so parked as not to block the
passage of other vehicles and shall not be so parked in alleys unless written
consent to do so is first obtained from the Mayor or his designated
representative.
('74 Code, § 9-5-19.17) (Ord. 65-1974)
§ 8-5-1-18 STANDING OR PARKING ON ONE-WAY ROADWAYS.
   In the event a street includes two or more separate roadways and traffic is
restricted to one direction upon any such roadway, no person shall stand or
park a vehicle upon the left side of such one-way roadway unless signs are
erected to permit such standing or parking. The Mayor, or his designated
representative, is authorized, upon the basis of engineering and traffic study
and investigation, to determine when standing or parking may be permitted upon
the left side of any such one-way roadway and to erect signs giving notice
thereof.
('74 Code, § 9-5-19.18) (Ord. 65-1974)
§ 8-5-1-19 PARKING WITHOUT LICENSE PLATE.
   No person shall park upon any street or upon any public property any motor
vehicle not bearing or displaying a license plate specifically issued for such
motor vehicle, except as may be authorized by law or regulation of any duly
authorized governmental agency issuing such license plate. The Police
Department shall have authority to impound such vehicle under §
8-5-2-3(A)(1).
('74 Code, § 9-5-19.19) (Ord. 65-1974; Am. Ord. 7-2003; Am. Ord._2016-011)
§ 8-5-1-20 CONTROLLED ACCESS ROADWAYS ­ STOPPING, STANDING OR PARKING.
   (A)   No person shall stop, park or leave standing any vehicle upon the
controlled access roadways or the entrance or exit ramps thereof except:
      (1)   When necessary to avoid injury or damage to persons or property;
      (2)   When required by law or in obedience to a peace officer or traffic
control device;
      (3)   When any person is actually engaged in maintenance or construction
on the controlled access roadway, or any employee of a public agency actually
engaged in the performance of official duties;
      (4)   When any vehicle is so disabled that it is impossible to avoid
stopping; or
      (5)   When any vehicle, whether commercial or private, stops to render
emergency assistance to a vehicle or person.
   (B)   In any event, no vehicle which is lawfully stopped or parked shall be
stopped or parked, if practicable, other than in a position parallel with the
edge of the controlled access roadway, headed in the direction of lawful
traffic movement and off the traffic lanes and onto the shoulder of the
controlled access roadway with emergency flashers operating if so equipped.
('74 Code, § 9-5-19.20) (Ord. 65-1974)
§ 8-5-1-21 CHILD OR ANIMAL IN LOCKED VEHICLE.
   No person shall leave any child or animal in any standing or parked, locked
vehicle. The Police Department or any officer or agent thereof is hereby
authorized to use whatever force is reasonably necessary to remove the child or
animal from the vehicle whenever it reasonably appears that such child or
animal's health, welfare or safety is or will be substantially endangered.
('74 Code, § 9-5-19.21) (Ord. 65-1974)
§ 8-5-1-22 OPENING AND CLOSING DOORS.
   No person shall open the door of, or enter or emerge from, any motor vehicle
on the side available to moving traffic unless and until it is clear of any
approaching vehicle or bicycle and it is reasonably safe to do so, nor shall
any person leave a door open on the side of the vehicle available to moving
traffic for a period of time longer than necessary to load or unload
passengers.
('74 Code, § 9-5-19.22) (Ord. 65-1974)
§ 8-5-1-23 BOARDING OR ALIGHTING FROM VEHICLES.
   No person shall board or alight from any moving vehicle or any vehicle which
is stopped in traffic, nor shall any person alight or enter a vehicle, except
when stopped at a curb or in a passenger loading zone.
('74 Code, § 9-5-19.23) (Ord. 65-1974)
§ 8-5-1-24 STARTING STOPPED, STANDING OR PARKED VEHICLE.
   No person shall start and put in motion a vehicle which is stopped, standing
or parked without giving appropriate signals, and unless and until such
movement can be made with reasonable safety.
('74 Code, § 9-5-19.24) (Ord. 65-1974)
§ 8-5-1-25 UNATTENDED MOTOR VEHICLE.
   No person shall park or permit a vehicle to stand unattended without first
stopping the engine, locking the ignition, removing the key, and effectively
setting the brake or placing the transmission in parking position; and when
parked or standing upon any grade, turning the front wheels in such a manner
that the vehicle will be held by the curb or will leave the roadway if the
brake fails or the transmission slips from parking position.
('74 Code, § 9-5-19.25) (Ord. 65-1974)
§ 8-5-1-26 PARKING VEHICLE WITH EXPLOSIVES AND THE LIKE.
   No motor vehicle transporting or containing explosives, flammable solids or
liquids, strong acids or corrosive liquids, oxidizers, combustible materials,
blasting caps or detonators shall be left unattended upon any street. Any
vehicle either designed to transport such materials or liquids or marked
"Explosives," "Dangerous" or "Compressed Gas" shall be presumed to be loaded
with such materials or liquids. See §
8-5-2-2.
('74 Code, § 9-5-19.26) (Ord. 65-1974)
§ 8-5-1-27 AUTHORIZED POLICE AND EMERGENCY VEHICLES EXCEPTED.
   Any authorized emergency vehicle being used in an official capacity may
stand or park irrespective of the provisions of this title, provided a lighted
lamp displaying a red light visible under normal atmospheric conditions from a
distance of 500 feet from the vehicle in all directions is displayed during
such standing or parking, and further, that such standing or parking shall not
be for a period of longer than necessary.
('74 Code, § 9-5-19.27) (Ord. 65-1974)
§ 8-5-1-28 TOW VEHICLES EXCEPTED.
   The owner or operator of a commercial tow vehicle may stop or park such
vehicle upon a street for the purpose of rendering assistance to a disabled
vehicle; provided a lighted lamp displaying a light visible under normal
atmospheric conditions from a distance of 500 feet from the vehicle in any
direction is displayed during such standing or parking, and further, that such
standing or parking shall not be for a period of longer than necessary.
('74 Code, § 9-5-19.28) (Ord. 65-1974)
§ 8-5-1-29 [RESERVED].
§ 8-5-1-30 DISABLED PARKING.
   It shall be unlawful for any vehicle to park in a designated disabled
parking space or any portion thereof unless the driver or occupant has, and is
displaying on the vehicle, a valid government issued parking placard or license
plate.
(Ord. 24-2007; Am. Ord. 15-2009; Am. Ord._2016-011; Am. Ord._2021-016)
§ 8-5-1-31 PARKING ON PRIVATE PROPERTY WHERE PROHIBITED BY SIGN; AUTHORITY TO
REMOVE VEHICLES.
   (A)   No person shall park a motor vehicle on any private property, or upon
property used for private parking purposes, without the consent of the owner of
said property, the person entitled to the possession thereof, or the authorized
agent of either, provided that signs specifying conditions under which parking
is permitted shall have been posted prominently upon such property. Such signs
shall also include the telephone number of the owner of the property, the
person entitled to the possession thereof, or the authorized agent of either,
who caused the signs to be prominently posted.
   (B)   Vehicles found on private property in violation of the property placed
signs as required in this section may be caused to be removed by the owner of
the property, the person entitled to the possession thereof, or the authorized
agent of either.
   (C)   The authorized person causing the removal of such vehicle in
accordance with this section shall do so by notifying a vehicle tow service
licensed by the state and the city.
   (D)   The vehicle tow service shall, within one hour of such removal, notify
the Police Department, giving the license or vehicle identification number,
location from where it was removed, name of the tow service that removed the
vehicle.
('74 Code, § 9-5-19.31) (Ord. 65-1974; Am. Ord. 12-1987)
§ 8-5-1-32 PASSENGER CURB LOADING ZONE.
   No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle for any purpose other than for
the expeditious loading or unloading of passengers or materials in any place
marked as a curb loading zone during hours when the regulations applicable to
such curb loading zone are effective, and then only for a period not to exceed
20 minutes or such other specified period.
('74 Code, § 9-5-19.32) (Ord. 65-1974; Am. Ord._2016-011)
§ 8-5-1-33 [RESERVED].
§ 8-5-1-34 STOPPING, STANDING AND PARKING OF BUSES AND TAXICABS REGULATED.
   (A)   The operator of a bus shall not stand or park such vehicle upon any
street at any place other than a bus stand so designated as provided herein.
   (B)   The operator of a bus shall not stop such vehicle upon any street at
any place for the purpose of loading or unloading passengers or their baggage
other than at a bus stop, bus stand, or passenger loading zone so designated as
provided herein, except in case of an emergency.
   (C)   The operator of a bus shall enter a bus stop, bus stand, or passenger
loading zone in such a manner that the bus, when stopped to load or unload
passengers or baggage, shall be in a position with the right front wheel not
further than 18 inches from the curb and approximately parallel to the curb, so
as not to unduly impede the movement of other vehicular traffic.
   (D)   The operator of a taxicab shall not stand such vehicle upon any street
at any place other than in a taxicab stand so designated as provided herein.
This division shall not prevent the operator of a taxicab from temporarily
stopping in accordance with other stopping or parking regulations at any place
for the purpose of, and while actually engaged in, the expeditious loading or
unloading of passengers. Further, a taxicab shall be subject to all other
parking regulations applicable to other vehicles.
('74 Code, § 9-5-19.34) (Ord. 65-1974)
§ 8-5-1-35 RESTRICTED USE OF BUS AND TAXICAB STANDS.
   No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle other than a bus in a bus
stop, or other than a taxicab in a taxicab stand, when such stop or stand has
been officially designated and appropriately signed.
('74 Code, § 9-5-19.35) (Ord. 65-1974; Am. Ord._2016-011)
§ 8-5-1-36 PARKING FOR CERTAIN PURPOSES PROHIBITED.
   No person shall stand, stop or park a vehicle on any street for the
principal purpose of:
   (A)   Displaying the vehicle for sale except that this prohibition shall not
apply to a display in front of a residence of a vehicle owned by the resident
when there is no private driveway or other off street parking in front of the
residence;
   (B)   Washing, greasing or repairing the vehicle except repairs necessitated
by an emergency;
   (C)   Selling any goods or products from the vehicle unless licensed to do
so; or
   (D)   Living within the vehicle.
('74 Code, § 9-5-19.36) (Ord. 65-1974; Am. Ord. 32-1991)
§ 8-5-1-37 MOVING OR PUSHING VEHICLE OF ANOTHER.
   No person shall move, push or propel a vehicle not lawfully under his
control into any area prohibited to parking or into any area where parking is
restricted as to time or to specific conditions or away from a curb such
distance as is unlawful.
('74 Code, § 9-5-19.37) (Ord. 65-1974)
§ 8-5-1-38 UNHITCHED AND HITCHED TRAILER ON PUBLIC WAY.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to leave any type of trailer
unhitched upon any public way.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person to leave any type of trailer
hitched to a vehicle upon any public way for a period which exceeds 24 hours.
('74 Code, § 9-5-19.38) (Ord. 65-1974; Am. Ord. 9-1996)
§ 8-5-1-39 REGISTERED OWNER RESPONSIBLE.
   In any prosecution charging a violation of any provision or this section of
this code governing or regulating the stopping, standing or parking of a
vehicle, proof that the particular vehicle described in the citation or
complaint was parked in violation of the code, together with proof that the
defendant named therein was at the time of such violation the registered owner
of such vehicle, shall constitute prima facie evidence that the defendant was
the registered owner and that the defendant was the person who parked or placed
the vehicle at the point where, and for the time during which the violation
occurred. It shall be proof that defendant was the registered owner if he was
so designated by the motor vehicle registration list.
('74 Code, § 9-5-19.39) (Ord. 65-1974)
§ 8-5-1-40 MOVING OR MOLESTING UNATTENDED VEHICLES.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person who is not the owner of any
vehicle or any person who does not have express permission of the owner thereof
to move, start or attempt to move or start any vehicle left unattended upon the
public way.
   (B)   The provisions of this section shall not apply to a police officer or
fire department or street maintenance employee who, in discharge of his duty,
legally moves or causes to be moved any such unattended vehicle, nor to any
person who moves such vehicle at the direction of, or in compliance with,
orders from a police officer or fire department or street maintenance employee
who, in the discharge of his duties, legally orders or directs the moving of
such unattended vehicle.
('74 Code, § 9-5-19.40) (Ord. 65-1974; Am. Ord._2016-011)
Cross-reference:
   Tampering with or injuring vehicles, see §
8-6-22
§ 8-5-1-41 PROHIBITING UNATTENDED DELIVERY VEHICLES FROM BEING LEFT IDLING.
   No delivery vehicle with a G.V.W. rating of less than 22,000 pounds which is
left unattended by its driver during pickup or delivery, whether on public
right-of-way or private property, shall be left with the motor running.
('74 Code, § 9-5-19.43) (Ord. 100-1983)
§ 8-5-1-42 MOBILE FOOD UNITS ON PUBLIC STREETS.
   Any vehicle classified as a Mobile Food Unit pursuant to §
9-6-5-2 ROA 1994 is permitted to operate from any public right-of-way where on-
street parking is permitted subject to the following:
   (A)   For the purposes of this section, "operation" of a Mobile Food Unit
includes any activity involved with food preparation or sales.
   (B)   No Mobile Food Unit shall operate from any street frontage immediately
abutting a single family residence, except that:
      (1)   When only one side of a street abuts a single family residence,
nothing in this section shall be construed as prohibiting a Mobile Food Unit
from operating from the opposite side of the street, provided that all other
relevant requirements and restrictions are met; and
      (2)   Mobile Food Units may operate from a street frontage immediately
abutting a single-family residence during neighborhood events for which a Block
Party Application has been filed with the Department of Municipal Development
and for which a Block Party Permit has been received; and
      (3)   Mobile Food Units that traditionally sell pre-packaged foods for
sale or delivery to the public in residential areas and that generally do not
remain stationary at any location for intervals exceeding a few minutes at a
time, such as ice-cream trucks, paleta carts, and frozen food trucks, may
operate from a street frontage immediately abutting a single-family residence.
   (C)   Every Mobile Food Unit is subject to, and must comply with, the
general noise restrictions prescribed by §
9-9-4 ROA 1994, and all other relevant requirements and restrictions of local,
state, and federal law.
   (D)   No Mobile Food Unit shall obstruct any sidewalk or pedestrian way
within a public right-of-way with the Mobile Food Unit or any associated
tables, chairs, displays, umbrellas, or the like.
   (E)   Every Mobile Food Unit shall maintain a minimum distance of 75 feet
from any publicly accessible building ingress or egress for any site-built food
service establishment during that establishment’s business hours, unless
written permission is granted by the owner(s) or operator(s) of each site-built
food service establishment within 75 feet to authorize mobile food unit
operation during business hours, a copy of which is kept at the Mobile Food
Unit and made available for review by any city inspector.
      (1)   For purposes of this section, the 75 foot separation requirement is
measured along the sidewalk or street edge beginning at the center point of the
nearest building ingress/egress of any site-built food service establishment,
and measured to the nearest edge of the Mobile Food Unit. Where Mobile Food
Units are located across one or more public rights-of-way, the 75 foot
separation requirement is measured so to include the width of the right(s)-of-
way.
   (F)   Every Mobile Food Unit shall maintain a distance of at least 10 feet
from any vehicular and pedestrian egress/ingress points to adjacent properties
and from intersections.
   (G)   Use of on-street spaces by Mobile Food Units is on a first come first
served basis, Mobile Food Unit operators shall not reserve spaces in advance of
arrival. Mobile Food Unit operators are responsible for paying all applicable
meter fees for on-street parking spaces.
   (H)   This section establishes traffic code regulations pertaining to Mobile
Food Units. Other aspects of Mobile Food Units are regulated in other parts of
the Municipal Code. Please refer to
Integrated Development Ordinance (Ch. 14, Art. 16) and Health, Safety &
Sanitation Code §§
9-6-5-1 et seq.
(Ord._2015-024; Am. Ord._2016-004; Am. Ord._2017-025)
§ 8-5-1-43 REPEATED NONPAYMENT OF AUTOMATED SPEED ENFORCEMENT SYSTEM FINES.
   (A)   Repeated nonpayment of automated speed enforcement ("ASE") system
fines consists of a vehicle owner who has accrued and defaulted upon two or
more ASE system fines, as described in §
7-15-4(I).
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any vehicle to park on any city streets or
roadways, on or in any city-owned parking facility; on or in any city-managed
parking facility; or on any other city-owned real property, if the vehicle has
two or more accrued and defaulted ASE system fines, as described in § 8-5-1-43
(A).
(Ord._2023-017)
PART 2: AUTHORITY TO REMOVE OR RELOCATE VEHICLES;
ABANDONED VEHICLES; INOPERABLE VEHICLES
§ 8-5-2-0 PURPOSE.
   Sections
8-5-2-1 et seq. are intended to promote the general health, safety and welfare
of the people of the city by preventing inoperable and abandoned vehicles from
littering property and creating health hazards. Sections
8-5-2-1 et seq. are also intended to protect the integrity and aesthetic
importance of neighborhoods in the city by preventing the use of private and
public property as a disposal area for inoperable and abandoned vehicles.
(Am. Ord. 25-2003)
§ 8-5-2-1 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of §§
8-5-2-1 et seq., the following definitions shall apply unless the context
clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   CHIEF. The Chief of Police of the Albuquerque Police Department or his
designated representative.
   DRIVEWAY.  Any concrete, asphalt aggregate-paved or dirt path used primarily
for vehicles, leading from a street or road to a garage or house.
   IMPOUND. The towing and/or storage of a vehicle by a wrecker service as
authorized by the city or other transport of a vehicle by the Police Department
or Parking Enforcement Officer for temporary storage pursuant to the execution
of lawful police purposes.
   IMPOUNDMENT CHARGES. Impoundment charges shall include costs for both towing
and storage of the abandoned and/or inoperable vehicle and administrative
impound fees which shall be paid in the amount of either: (1) the reasonable
expenses to the city, including without limitation, the costs of the search of
owners and lien holders, mailing, service of notice, appraisal, publication of
notice, sale, including advertising, and any other fees or penalties, including
without limitation, those on account of parking violations pursuant to
ordinance; or (2) $50, whichever is greater.
   INOPERABLE VEHICLE.  Any vehicle which, for a period of at least three
consecutive days, the engine, wheels, tires or other parts have been removed or
on which the engine, wheels, tires, or other parts have been altered, damaged
or otherwise so treated that the vehicle is incapable of being driven under its
own motor power. A vehicle that is not registered or does not display a current
valid license plate and validating sticker shall be deemed inoperable.
Inoperable vehicle shall include any parts of a vehicle located separately from
a vehicle. A vehicle shall be deemed inoperable when it has one or more flat
tires or has one or more missing windshield or window, or has one or more
windshield or window broken to the extent that visibility is limited so as to
make driving such vehicle unsafe. An INOPERABLE VEHICLE does not include any
motor vehicle that is kept within a building when not in use, nor a vehicle on
the premises of a business enterprise operated in a lawful place and manner
when necessary to the operation of such business enterprise. An inoperable
vehicle does not include a vehicle for which a temporary sticker has been
issued pursuant to §
8-5-2-3(B).
   LACK OF MOVEMENT. Proof that the vehicle's odometer shows movement of no
more than 2/10ths of a mile during any specified period of time shall
constitute prima facie evidence that the vehicle was left in one place.
   MAYOR. The Mayor of the city or his designated representative.
   OWNER. The registered owner or owners of a vehicle as recorded with the New
Mexico Department of Motor Vehicles or similar agency of a state outside New
Mexico. Where written notice to the owner is required by §§
8-5-2-1 et seq., such notice shall be given to each registered owner. Where
appearance of the owner is required by §§
8-5-2-1 et seq., appearance may be by a person authorized in writing by the
owner to appear on his behalf.
   PUBLIC PROPERTY.  Any real property owned by any governmental entity within
the municipal limits of the city, including but not limited to, the public way,
right-of-way, roads, streets and alleys.
   VALIDATING STICKER. A tab or sticker or similar identification affixed to
the vehicle, or to the license plate issued to that vehicle, which was issued
by the state in which the vehicle is registered for the purpose of showing that
the vehicle registration has been renewed and is current. A validating sticker
for vehicles registered in New Mexico shall include a sticker defined in § 66-
1-4.19 NMSA 1978.
   VEHICLE.  Any device, in, upon, or by which any person or property is or may
be transported or drawn upon a street or highway, propelled by a power other
than human power, designed to travel along the ground by use of wheels, treads,
runners, or slides, and shall include without limitations, automobiles, trucks,
trailers, motorcycles, tractors, buggies and wagon. VEHICLE includes all
devices regardless of the type of power, including but not limited to, electric
power and any type of gas or gasoline power or any combination thereof and any
connected trailer or semi-trailer.
   WRITTEN NOTICE. Notice sent by mail, to the owner's address as provided by
State Motor Vehicle Division files except as provided herein:
      (1)   When such notice is required under the terms of §§
8-5-2-1 et seq., weekends and holidays shall not be included when calculating
the time for mailing notice unless provided otherwise in §
8-5-2-1 et seq.
      (2)   When a vehicle is registered in a state outside New Mexico, the
Mayor or the Chief shall make all reasonable and diligent efforts to ascertain
from the appropriate motor vehicle regulatory agency the name and address of
all registered owners. If the name and address information for an in-state or
out-of-state registered vehicle is not available soon enough to meet the time
deadlines for mailing written notice, then the notice shall be mailed as soon
as possible after the information is received and any specific times to mail
notice shall not apply. If the license plate or vehicle identification number
is expired, altered, or missing the Mayor or the Chief shall send any notice
required under §
8-5-2-1 et seq. as soon as is reasonably practicable and any specific times to
mail notice shall not apply.
      (3)   In lieu of mailed notice, notice may be given by personal service
or in any other reasonable manner, so long as actual notice is given within the
time limits provided. Notice may be effected by verbal notice to an owner who
is present prior to or at the time of the towing of his vehicle, or to the
driver or passenger of a vehicle, if the driver or passenger reasonably appears
to have custody of the vehicle with the owner's knowledge and permission. Such
notice shall be valid, however, only if the person so notified is informed
inwriting of the location of the storage facility where the vehicle will be
stored and a phone number where the owner can obtain further information from a
municipal employee. When a vehicle owner's address cannot be obtained, the city
may publish notice.
('74 Code, § 9-5-19.41A) (Ord. 67-1982; Am. Ord. 25-2003; Am. Ord._2016-011)
§ 8-5-2-2 PROHIBITION OF REMOVAL AND RELOCATION.
   It is unlawful for a municipal police officer, or any municipal employee, to
remove or relocate, or cause to be removed or replaced, any unattended vehicle
from any street, alley or public way within the municipal corporate limits,
except as provided in §§
8-5-2-1 et seq. or §
8-1-3-12.
('74 Code, § 9-5-19.41B) (Ord. 67-1982; Am. Ord._2016-011)
§ 8-5-2-3 ABANDONED AND INOPERABLE VEHICLES.
   (A)   A vehicle is abandoned if:
      (1)   The vehicle is parked on or along any street, alley or public way
and the vehicle displays no current license plate and validating sticker; or
      (2)   The vehicle is left unattended on or along any public property,
street, alley or public way in the same place for a period of 36 hours without
a valid police sticker as defined in division (B) of this section;
      (3)   The vehicle is left on private property without the consent of the
property owner, tenant, or occupant for a period of 24 hours; or
      (4)   At a private residence, any vehicle which is not lawfully parked on
a driveway for a period of at least 36 hours.
   (B)   The Chief may issue a sticker temporarily permitting street storage,
upon application of any owner or agent of an owner for any vehicle which is
operable and has a current license plate. Stickers shall expire 15 days after
issuance. No owner, whether an individual, business, corporation, organization,
partnership or trust, is entitled to more than four stickers at any time.
   (C)   Any inoperable vehicle, or any part thereof, left on any public
property or on any private property, without the consent of the property owner,
tenant or occupant, is a public nuisance. Any abandoned vehicle, or any part
thereof, is a public nuisance.
   (D)   When a vehicle is abandoned or is an inoperable vehicle on or along
any public property, a street, alley or public way or is an abandoned or
inoperable vehicle on private property without the consent of the property
owner, tenant or occupant under circumstances which do not allow summary
removal or relocation pursuant to §
8-5-2-4, a notification tag shall be attached to the vehicle in a manner which
is readily visible containing the following information:
      (1)   The date and time the notification tag was affixed to the vehicle
and the nature of the violation;
      (2)   An order requiring the removal of the abandoned or inoperable
vehicle from the location within seven consecutive days of the day the
notification tag was affixed to the vehicle;
      (3)   A statement that, pursuant to this section, the vehicle may be
towed and stored at the owner's expense if it is not removed within seven
consecutive days of the day the notification tag was affixed to the vehicle;
      (4)   A statement that the owner has the opportunity to challenge the
proposed action at a hearing if a written request is submitted to the City
Clerk within seven consecutive days of the day the notification tag was affixed
to the vehicle;
      (5)   A phone number and name or title of a city employee from whom the
owner can obtain further information about requesting a hearing; and
      (6)   The identity of the affixing person.
   (E)   Written notice containing the same information specified in division
(D) of this section plus the location and description of the vehicle shall be
mailed by certified class mail to the registered owner of the vehicle within
one business day of affixing the notification tag pursuant to division (D) of
this section. The identity of the vehicle shall include the license plate
number, the vehicle identification number, and the make, type and color of the
vehicle. The notice shall also advise the registered owner of the vehicle that
if the vehicle is towed and is not claimed by the owner or the owner's
authorized agent and/or the amount of any accrued impoundment charges are not
paid within 30 days from the date the notification tag was affixed to the
vehicle, the vehicle will be sold or otherwise disposed. In the event the
vehicle is not registered in New Mexico, or if the license plate or vehicle
identification number is expired, altered, or missing, the Mayor or the Chief
shall send the notice required in this section as soon as is reasonably
practicable and the requirement of this subsection to mail notice within one
city business day of affixing the notification tag shall not apply. If the
vehicle has already been towed by the city, the notice shall also state that
the vehicle has been taken into custody and stored, the location from which the
vehicle was towed, the reason for the impoundment, the location and telephone
number of the storage facility where the vehicle is being kept, that daily
storage charges will be assessed in addition to a towing charge, and that the
owner may obtain release of the vehicle by paying impoundment charges in full
pursuant to §
8-5-2-8 or by posting bond pursuant to §
8-5-2-10(E).
   (F)   Upon timely receipt of a request for a hearing as defined in division
(D)(4) of this section, the Mayor shall order a delay of towing the vehicle
until after the hearing. The hearing shall be conducted pursuant to §
8-5-2-10.
   (G)   If no hearing is requested pursuant to division (D)(4) of this
section, and the vehicle is not removed within seven consecutive days of the
day the notification tag was affixed to the vehicle, the vehicle may be ordered
impounded by a municipal police officer or any municipal employee who is
authorized to direct traffic or enforce state or local parking or motor vehicle
laws.
('74 Code, § 9-5-19.41C) (Ord. 67-1982; Am. Ord. 25-2003; Am. Ord. 44-2003; Am.
Ord. 54-2003)
§ 8-5-2-4 CIRCUMSTANCES PERMITTING SUMMARY VEHICLE IMPOUNDMENT OR RELOCATION.
   (A)   Any municipal police officer, or any municipal employee who is
authorized to direct traffic or enforce state or local parking or motor vehicle
laws, may order the impoundment of any vehicle within the municipal corporate
limits, without prior notice to the owner or operator thereof, under the
following circumstances:
      (1)   When any vehicle is left unattended upon any bridge, viaduct, or
causeway or in any tube or tunnel where the vehicle constitutes an obstruction
or hazard to traffic;
      (2)   When any vehicle is parked or left standing upon a street, alley,
or public way in such a position as to obstruct the normal movement of traffic
or in such a condition as to create a hazard to other traffic;
      (3)   When any vehicle is found upon a street, alley, public way or
private property, and an offense report has previously been made that the
vehicle has been stolen or a complaint has been filed and a warrant thereon
issued charging that the vehicle has been stolen, and the owner is not
available to, or cannot, immediately provide for its custody or removal;
      (4)   When any vehicle is illegally parked so as to block the entrance to
a private driveway;
      (5)   When any vehicle is illegally parked so as to prevent access by
firefighting equipment to a fire hydrant, or is illegally parked in a properly
designated fire lane;
      (6)   When the person or persons in charge of a vehicle are by reason of
physical injuries, intoxication, or illness incapacitated to such an extent as
to be unable to provide for its custody or removal, and the vehicle is left as
described elsewhere in this division (A) of this section, or the location of
the vehicle is such that a reasonable person would believe that its owner would
desire its relocation or removal;
      (7)   When the driver or person in control of a vehicle is lawfully taken
into custody by a police officer, and the person is unable to immediately
provide for the custody or removal of the vehicle, and the vehicle is left as
described elsewhere in this division (A), or the location of the vehicle is
such that a reasonable person would believe that its owner would desire its
relocation or removal;
      (8)   When an abandoned, unattended, wrecked, burned or partially
dismantled vehicle is creating a traffic hazard because of its position in
relation to the street, alley or public way, or its physical appearance is
causing the impeding of traffic;
      (9)   Wherever the use of the street, alley or public way or any portion
thereof is authorized by the municipality for the purpose other than the normal
flow of traffic or the movement of equipment, articles, or structures of
unusual size, and the parking of any vehicle would prohibit or interfere with
such use of movement, and signs giving notice that such a vehicle may be
removed are erected or placed at least 24 hours prior to the removal;
      (10)   When any vehicle is parked or left standing where prohibited by
ordinance or other state or local law. No vehicle may be removed pursuant to
this division unless signs are posted giving notice of its removal at least 24
hours prior to the removal;
      (11)   When any vehicle is parked or standing in a manner so as to
obstruct necessary emergency services or the routing of traffic at the scene of
a disaster or removal is otherwise necessary in the interest of public safety
because of any emergency, and moving the vehicle to a legal parking location is
impractical. However, the owner or operator of a vehicle so relocated or
removed shall not be subject to any relocation, removal or storage charges, if
the vehicle is otherwise lawfully parked. Such charges shall be paid by the
municipality, except that in the case of emergency utility repairs such charges
shall be paid in advance by the utility company seeking removal;
      (12)   When a vehicle is parked, left unattended or abandoned during a
fire, flood, storm or other public emergency which is apt to cause substantial
damage to the vehicle, removal is in the best interest of the owner, and moving
the vehicle to a safe location is impractical; or
      (13)   When a vehicle is either unattended or disabled and loaded with
either a dangerous, flammable, combustible or explosive substance which, either
by its presence or load conditions is likely to harm the health or safety of
the public and moving the vehicle to a safe, legal location is impractical;
      (14)   When any vehicle is parked in such a manner as to obstruct or
interfere with any road, sidewalk or right-of-way maintenance or construction,
or any non-emergency utility work, and it is impractical to relocate the
vehicle to another point where parking is legal. No vehicle shall be removed
unless signs are posted giving notice of the work to be done and the
possibility of removal at least 24 hours prior to the removal.
      (15)   When any vehicle has been immobilized with a vehicle boot for 72
hours.
      (16)   When a vehicle is being driven unsafely under state law due to one
of the following:
         (a)   Failure to have insurance on the vehicle as required under state
law and as documented by one of the following:
            1.   An admission by the driver or other occupant of the vehicle;
            2.    Confirmation through the New Mexico Department of Motor
Vehicle records showing a prior citation for failure to have insurance within
the past six months;
            3.    Confirmation by the citing officer that the insurance company
that the driver claims covers the vehicle does not in fact cover it.
         (b)   Failure to have a driver's license as shown by New Mexico
Department of Motor Vehicle records; or
         (c)   Driving when the driver's license has been suspended or revoked
as shown by New Mexico Department of Motor Vehicle records.
   (B)   In lieu of towing and impoundment a municipal police officer, or any
municipal employee who is authorized to direct traffic or enforce state or
local parking or motor vehicle laws, may relocate or cause to be relocated any
vehicle from any street, alley or public way within the municipal corporate
limits, without prior notice to the owner or operator thereof when the
relocation is to a safe, legal location, is practical without the use of a
wrecker and the vehicle is found under the circumstances set forth in divisions
(A)(11) through (15) above.
   (C)   Whenever a vehicle could be impounded or removed pursuant to §§
8-5-2-1 et seq., and the driver of the vehicle is present, the police officer
or authorized employee may order the driver to move the vehicle to another
location.
   (D)   Whenever a sign is required under the terms of §§
8-5-2-1 et seq., to give notice of the possibility of removal of a vehicle,
such sign shall:
      (1)   State that the area is a tow-away zone, or that violations of the
restrictions stated on the sign may result in towing; and
      (2)   Be readily visible from the point of removal.
('74 Code, § 9-5-19.41D) (Ord. 67-1982; Am. Ord. 8-1996; Am. Ord._2016-011)
§ 8-5-2-5 NOTICE AND PROCEDURE FOLLOWING SUMMARY IMPOUNDMENT.
   (A)   After a vehicle is towed pursuant to §
8-5-2-4, the Chief shall promptly notify the Mayor, who shall send to the owner
of the impounded vehicle notice containing the information required in §
8-5-2-3(E). The hearing procedure for vehicles that are the subject of summary
impoundment is set forth in §
8-5-2-10.
('74 Code, § 9-5-19.41E) (Ord. 67-1982; Am. Ord. 25-2003)
§ 8-5-2-6 IMPOUNDMENT FOR INVESTIGATION EVIDENCE OR FORFEITURE.
   The notice, hearing and bond provisions set forth in §§
8-5-2-1 et seq. shall not apply to impoundment of the following vehicles, which
impoundment is hereby authorized:
   (A)   A vehicle which is impounded for purposes of a criminal investigation
or as evidence of a crime; or
   (B)   A vehicle which is lawfully seized pursuant to state or federal law.
('74 Code, § 9-5-19.41F) (Ord. 67-1982)
§ 8-5-2-7 IMPOUNDMENT OF VEHICLES GENERALLY.
   (A)   Any vehicle impounded pursuant to §§
8-5-2-1 et seq. shall be towed, in accordance with state and local law, to an
authorized storage facility or an area designated or maintained by the Police
Department or by this municipality. The Police Department member authorizing
impoundment shall obtain a receipt from the wrecker service to which such
vehicle is delivered indicating the date, hour and place of delivery and the
identification of the vehicle. In the event such vehicle is stored in a public
garage, the Police Department member shall issue signed and dated instructions
in writing to the garage (or wrecker) specifically stating whether the vehicle
is to be held for investigation or as evidence, or as the subject of forfeiture
proceedings, or whether it may be released to the owner after all attendant
charges have been satisfied pursuant to §
8-5-2-8.
   (B)   If any vehicle is about to be removed or is in the process of being
removed from such street and the owner thereof or his agent appears and claims
the vehicle and agrees forthwith to remove it from such street, such vehicle
shall be delivered to such owner or agent upon demand therefor and upon
furnishing satisfactory evidence of identity and ownership or agency and
payment of applicable fees. If any such owner or agent shall fail, refuse or
neglect to forthwith remove such vehicle, such vehicle shall nevertheless be
removed and impounded. Removal by such owner or agent shall not relieve the
offender of liability for any towing costs already incurred or for any fine or
penalty for the violation of any law or ordinance for which the vehicle was to
be removed.
('74 Code, § 9-5-19.41G) (Ord. 67-1982; Am. Ord._2016-011)
§ 8-5-2-8 RELEASE OF VEHICLES; FEES.
   (A)   The Mayor shall order release of an impounded vehicle at the city's
expense pursuant to §
8-5-2-10(E).
   (B)   In all other cases, upon proof of ownership and certification from the
Mayor or the Chief that the vehicle is insured as required under state law, and
an impounded vehicle shall be released only after direct payment of the
accumulated impoundment charges and other required fines or fees by the owner
or the owner's designee. The Chief will provide such certification upon
receiving proof that the vehicle is insured as required under state law.
   (C)   An owner who desires a hearing on the validity of an impoundment shall
request, and the garage shall issue, a receipt for the amount paid in
satisfaction of impoundment charges.
      (1)   The owner shall forfeit the amount paid if: the owner fails to
appear at the hearing before the city's Hearing Officer or, in the case of an
appeal, before the District Court, or if it is finally determined, after the
hearing or appeal, that the impoundment was valid.
      (2)   The owner shall be entitled to reimbursement from the city for the
full amount paid upon presentation of the receipt required herein if, after
hearing and appeal, if any, it is determined that the impoundment was not
valid.
   (D)   Section §
8-5-2-1 et seq., do not authorize release of any vehicle held for investigation
or as evidence of a crime or seized pursuant to state or federal law. Such
vehicle shall be released only upon the written order of the police officer
responsible for its impoundment or upon an affirmative written statement by the
Chief that such vehicle is no longer needed for investigative or evidentiary
purposes or for forfeiture proceedings. The city shall bear the cost of towing
and storage for such impoundments if the owner or any person operating the
vehicle with his permission was not involved in any criminal activity which was
any part of the reason for the impoundment. The burden of proving such lack of
involvement shall be upon the person claiming it. The Chief or his designee may
execute a Certificate of Release which shall function as one issued pursuant to
§
8-5-2-5.
('74 Code, § 9-5-19.41H) (Ord. 67-1982; Am. Ord. 33-1999; Am. Ord. 25-2003; Am.
Ord._2016-011)
§ 8-5-2-9 INOPERABLE VEHICLE ON PRIVATE PROPERTY.
   (A)   Any inoperable vehicle parked, stored or left or permitted to be
parked, stored, or left upon any private property within the city for a period
longer than three consecutive days constitutes a public nuisance. Inoperable
vehicles parked, stored or left on public property or upon private property
without the consent of the owner of such property are governed by §
8-5-2-3. Nothing in this section applies to a vehicle in an enclosed building,
a vehicle on the premises of a business that services and repairs vehicles, a
vehicle in an appropriate storage place or depository maintained for impounded
vehicles, or to a vehicle that is in compliance with §§ 66-11-1 through 66-11-
5 NMSA 1978.
   (B)   Whenever the Mayor or the Chief has probable cause to believe that an
inoperable vehicle is on private property in violation of division (A) of this
section, the Mayor or the Chief shall give written notice by certified mail to
the owner and the lessee or occupant of the property, if known, declaring the
existence of the nuisance, ordering such persons to remove the vehicle or
request a hearing within seven consecutive days of the mailing of the notice by
certified class mail, and stating that failure to remove the vehicle or request
a hearing within such seven-day period will result in the vehicle being removed
and impounded and impound charges being assessed jointly and severally against
the owners of the vehicle. When the owner of the property is not otherwise
known, such owner shall be identified from the records of the Bernalillo County
Assessor or Bernalillo County Treasurer for purposes of mailing notice under
this section.
   (C)   If an inoperable vehicle has not been removed from private property
within seven days of the date on which the notice prescribed by division (B) of
this section is mailed to the owner and the tenant or occupant of the property,
the Mayor or the Chief may, after obtaining an administrative search warrant
from a court of proper jurisdiction, cause the vehicle to be removed and
impounded, unless a hearing requested by the owner or tenant or occupant of the
property pursuant to division (B) of this section is pending, or unless a
hearing officer has determined that the vehicle was not parked, stored or left
on private property in violation of division (A) of this section.
   (D)   If the Mayor or the Chief is able to determine from the license plate
or vehicle identification number the name and address of the registered owner
of the vehicle, and the notice prescribed in division (B) of this section was
not sent to the owner of the vehicle, then the Mayor or the Chief shall give
written notice by certified mail to the registered owner of the vehicle. Such
notice shall contain the information required in §
8-5-2-3(E).
   (E)   A vehicle impounded pursuant to this section shall be released to its
owner when payment to the city of the impoundment charges are made pursuant to
§
8-5-2-10.
(Am. Ord. 25-2003; Am. Ord._2016-011)
§ 8-5-2-10 HEARING.
   (A)   Hearing Officer and Scheduling. Hearings, if requested within the
seven consecutive day period set forth in §§
8-5-2-3(D) and
8-5-2-9(B), shall be conducted by the City Hearing Officer, in accordance with
the IHO Ordinance, ROA 1994,
Chapter 2, Article 7, Part 8.
   (B)   Scope, Burden of Proof and Procedures. The party requesting the
hearing bears the burden of establishing that such person has the right to
possession of the vehicle. The city bears the burden of establishing the
validity of the proposed or completed impoundment. The standard of proof is a
preponderance of the evidence. Procedures regarding the hearing shall be the
procedures outlined in the IHO Ordinance, ROA 1994,
Chapter 2, Article 7, Part 8.
   (C)   Pre-impoundment Hearings. Requests for a pre-impoundment hearing shall
be filed with the City Clerk. The City Clerk shall notify the city department
responsible for impounding the motor vehicle and the hearing officer that the
request for hearing has been filed. At a hearing prior to the impoundment of a
vehicle allegedly parked in violation of §§
8-5-2-1 et seq., the hearing officer shall determine whether the vehicle is
parked in violation of such sections. If the hearing officer so finds, the
hearing officer shall so notify the Mayor or the Chief and shall order the
vehicle removed and impounded and assess the impoundment charges thereof
against the vehicle.
   (D)   Post Impoundment Hearing and Bond. Requests for a post impoundment
hearing shall be submitted to the City Clerk within the 30 day notice period
required in §§
8-5-2-3(E) and
8-5-2-12(A). If the hearing officer does not so find, the officer shall order
the vehicle released immediately to the person entitled to possession, assess
impoundment charges against the city and issue a certificate of release showing
the date and hour of the release and provide a copy to the owner of the
vehicle. Upon receipt of the owner's copy of such certificate, the authorized
garage (impoundment lot) having custody of the vehicle shall release the
vehicle to the owner without charge. The hearing officer shall determine that
the party receiving the certificate of release is entitled to possession of the
vehicle and has presented proof of ownership. If the owner fails to present the
certificate of release to the impoundment lot or garage within 24 hours of its
issuance, excluding days when the garage is not open for business, the owner
shall pay for all subsequent storage charges. The requirement to present the
certificate of release as required in this division shall be printed on the
certificate.
   (E)   Failure to Request Hearing. Failure of any person to request an
impoundment hearing within the time provided or attend any such hearing
constitutes a waiver of the right to such hearing.
(Ord. 25-2003; Am. Ord. 44-2003; Am. Ord. 31-2007; Am. Ord._2023-015)
§ 8-5-2-11 FAILURE TO CLAIM VEHICLE.
   If a vehicle that has been impounded by the city pursuant to this article is
still under impoundment seven days from the time at which notice prescribed by
this chapter has been mailed to the registered owner and the owner has not
requested a hearing pursuant to §§
8-5-2-1 et seq., or obtained the release of the vehicle by paying impoundment
charges within the 30-day period established in §§
8-5-2-1 et seq., the vehicle shall be deemed abandoned and the Mayor shall
dispose of such vehicle pursuant to §
8-5-2-12. Disposal shall be stayed if a timely request is made for a hearing.
(Ord. 25-2003)
§ 8-5-2-12 DISPOSITION OF MOTOR VEHICLES.
   (A)   The Mayor may dispose of impounded motor vehicles by following the
procedures provided by state law for the disposal of unclaimed property or as
otherwise provided by law.
   (B)   If the vehicle has been appraised for a value less than the towing and
storage, the Mayor may sell the vehicle to the towing and impoundment lot
operators, if such were involved, for the amount of the accrued charges. In all
other instances the Mayor may sell the vehicle at private sale or at public
sale or dispose of the vehicle as otherwise allowed by law.
   (C)   Disposition of Proceeds. The proceeds of sale of a vehicle shall be
distributed in the following order: The costs of towing and storing the
vehicle. From the balance, if any, there shall be deposited into the general
fund of the city the administrative impound fee. The remaining balance, if any,
shall then be paid first to any lien holder of record, and second to any owner
of record as their interests may appear on such records, or to any person
submitting proof of an enforceable interest in such vehicle as of the date of
sale by the city. If no such person is known to the Mayor, such balance shall
be deposited into the general fund of the city.
   (D)   Redemption. There is no right of redemption from any sale made
pursuant to this section. After a vehicle has been sold pursuant to this
section, neither the city nor any officer, agent or employee thereof is liable
for any failure to deliver such vehicle to any person other than the purchaser
at such sale.
(Ord. 25-2003; Am. Ord._2023-015)
§ 8-5-2-99 MISDEMEANOR AND PENALTY.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to abandon a vehicle or to park an
inoperable vehicle in violation of
Chapter 8, Article 5, Part 2. Any person who so violates
Chapter 8, Article 5 shall be deemed guilty of a petty misdemeanor and, upon
conviction thereof, shall be subject to the penalty provisions set forth in §
1-1-99. Every violation shall be a separate misdemeanor.
(Ord. 25-2003)
PART 3: ENFORCEMENT
§ 8-5-3-1 FREQUENCY OF PARKING CITATIONS.
   (A)   Parking Citations No More Frequently Than One For Every Legal Time
Period. A parking citation shall be issued whenever a vehicle is first found to
be in violation of §§
8-5-1-3,
8-5-1-5,
8-5-1-6,
8-5-1-8 and
8-5-1-9. Additional citations shall be issued at the expiration of each period
of time equal to the legal period of time in which a vehicle may be parked at
or within that particular stall or place. For example, if the "VIOLATION" flag
is up at a 15-minute meter, the vehicle parked in violation at the metered
stall shall be issued a parking citation immediately and shall then be issued
additional parking citations no more frequently than every 15 minutes
thereafter.
   (B)   Parking Citations No More Frequently Than One For Every 55 Minutes.
Whenever a vehicle is parked in violation of §§
8-5-1-1,
8-5-1-2,
8-5-1-4,
8-5-1-10,
8-5-1-11,
8-5-1-13,
8-5-1-14,
8-5-1-15,
8-5-1-16,
8-5-1-17,
8-5-1-18,
8-5-1-20,
8-5-1-21,
8-5-1-26,
8-5-1-32,
8-5-1-34,
8-5-1-35,
8-5-1-36 or
8-5-1-38, parking citations shall not be issued more frequently than one for
every 55 minutes. However, each such citation shall have, as an assessed
standard fine of no less than five times the amount of the standard fine
assessed for violations of the sections listed in division (A) above.
   (C)   Parking Citation No More Frequently Than One For Every 24-Hour Period.
Whenever a vehicle is parked in violation of §§
8-5-1-12,
8-5-1-19,
8-5-1-25 and
8-5-1-43, parking citations shall not be issued more frequently than one for
every 24-hour period.
   (D)   Nothing in this section shall be deemed to limit the authority of the
Police Department, Parking Enforcement Officer, or Security Officer to remove a
vehicle as authorized in §§
8-5-2-1 et seq.
('74 Code, § 9-5-19.42) (Ord. 65-1974; Am. Ord._2016-011; Am. Ord._2023-017)
Penalty, see §
8-1-3-99
ARTICLE 6: EQUIPMENT
Section
   
8-6-1   Unsafe vehicle
   
8-6-2   Minimum size
   
8-6-3   Farm and road equipment excepted
   
8-6-4   License plates
   
8-6-5   Brakes
   
8-6-6   Windshield; wipers; windows
   
8-6-7   When lighted lamps required
   
8-6-8   Headlamps
   
8-6-9   Headlamps and spotlights not to project glaring beams
   
8-6-10   Tail lamps; license plate lamp
   
8-6-11   Stop lamps
   
8-6-12   Reflectors
   
8-6-13   Mufflers required
   
8-6-14   Use of horn
   
8-6-15   Tracks, cleats, spikes, lugs and the like prohibited
   
8-6-16   "School bus" signs on school bus
   
8-6-17   School bus signals
   
8-6-18   Restriction on use of television
   
8-6-19   Lamp or flag on projecting load
   
8-6-20   Emergency equipment
   
8-6-21   Additional parts and accessories
   
8-6-22   Tampering with or injuring vehicle
   
8-6-23   Unlawful use or tampering by bailee
   
8-6-24   Coupling device, chain on trailer, semi-trailer, towing
   
8-6-25   Emission control equipment
   
8-6-26   Visible emissions from motor vehicles
   
8-6-27   Sunscreening material on windows
 
   
8-6-99   Penalty
§ 8-6-1 UNSAFE VEHICLE.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to drive or move or for the owner
to cause or permit to be driven or moved any vehicle, any combination of
vehicles or any trailer which is in such unsafe condition mechanically,
overloaded, or so loaded as to endanger any person, or which does not contain
those parts or is not at all times equipped with such lamps and other equipment
in proper condition and adjustment as required in this article or in state
statutes, or which is equipped or loaded in any manner in violation of this
article or state statutes.
   (B)   Presumption. Any police officer at any time when having reasonable
cause to believe that any such vehicle is unsafe, or not equipped as required
by law, or that its equipment is not in proper adjustment or repair, or that
the vehicle is improperly loaded, may require the operator of such vehicle to
stop and submit such vehicle to inspection and test as may be appropriate and
reasonable. When such vehicle is being operated, failure or refusal of any
operator to submit such vehicle to an inspection after a request by a uniformed
police officer to inspect such vehicle shall be prima facie evidence of an
unsafe vehicle within the meaning of division (A) of this section.
('74 Code, § 9-5-20.1) (Ord. 65-1974)
§ 8-6-2 MINIMUM SIZE.
   (A)   It is unlawful to operate on the streets any motor vehicle:
      (1)   With a wheel base, between two axles, of less than three feet, four
inches; or
      (2)   With a motor displacement of less than 45 cubic centimeters;
   (B)   For the purpose of this article, wheel base shall be measured upon a
straight line from center to center of the vehicle's axles.
('74 Code, § 9-5-20.2) (Ord. 65-1974)
§ 8-6-3 FARM AND ROAD EQUIPMENT EXCEPTED.
   The equipment required of motor vehicles by the regulations in this Traffic
Code shall not apply to implements of husbandry, road machinery, road rollers,
or farm tractors except as herein made applicable.
('74 Code, § 9-5-20.3) (Ord. 65-1974)
§ 8-6-4 LICENSE PLATES.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to park or to operate a motor
vehicle on a roadway unless there is attached to the rear thereof, a license
plate for the current license year, unless the state of issuance requires two
license plates, in which case such plate shall be affixed to the vehicle as
provided by law of the state of issuance; such license plate or plates to be
maintained free of dirt, emblems, trailer hitches, or any other obstruction so
that the color, state of issuance, years and license number or letters thereon
are clearly visible.
   (B)   No person shall display upon a vehicle any registration evidence,
registration plate, or permit not issued for such vehicle or not otherwise
lawfully issued.
   (C)   No person shall display upon a vehicle a license plate altered from
its original markings.
('74 Code, § 9-5-20.4) (Ord. 65-1974; Am. Ord. 7-2003)
§ 8-6-5 BRAKES.
   (A)   Brake Equipment Required.
      (1)   Every motor vehicle, when operated upon a street, shall be equipped
with brakes adequate to control the movement of and to stop and hold such
vehicle.
      (2)   Every house trailer of a gross weight of 3,000 pounds or more, when
operated upon a street, shall be equipped with brakes adequate to control the
movement of, and to stop and to hold such vehicle, and so designed as to be
applied by the driver of the towing motor vehicle.
      (3)   Every bus, truck, road tractor, or truck tractor shall be equipped
with parking brakes capable of locking the rear driving wheels and adequate
under any condition of loading to hold, to the limit of traction of such braked
wheels, such vehicle or combination of vehicles to which such motor vehicle may
be attached. The operating controls of such parking brakes shall be independent
of the operating controls of the service brakes.
      (4)   In any combination of motor-drawn vehicles, means shall be provided
for applying the rearmost trailer brakes, or any trailer equipped with brakes,
in approximate synchronism with the brakes on the towing vehicle and developing
the required braking effort on the rearmost wheels at the fastest rate; or
means shall be provided for applying braking effort first on the rearmost
trailer equipped with brakes; or both of the above means capable of being used
alternatively may be employed.
   (B)   Every motor vehicle or combination of motor-drawn vehicles shall be
capable at all times, and under all conditions, of loading, of being stopped on
a dry, smooth, level road, free from loose material, upon application of the
service brake, within the distance specified below, or shall be capable of
being decelerated at a sustained rate corresponding to these distances:
 
Type                          Feet to Stop from 20 mph Deceleration in Feet per
                                                       Second
Vehicles or combinations  of
vehicles having brakes on all 30                       14
wheels
Vehicles or combinations of
vehicles not having brakes on 40                       10.7
all wheels
 
   (C)   All brakes shall be maintained in good working order and shall be so
adjusted as to operate as equally as practicable with respect to wheels on
opposite sides of the vehicle.
('74 Code, § 9-5-20.6) (Ord. 65-1974)
§ 8-6-6 WINDSHIELD; WIPERS; WINDOWS.
   (A)   Sign, Poster, Nontransparent. No person shall drive any motor vehicle
with any sign, poster or other nontransparent material upon or in the front
windshield, side wings or side or rear windows of the vehicle which obstructs
the driver's clear view of the highway or any intersecting highway or a view
from the exterior into the interior of the vehicle. This provision shall not
apply to removable ventilated screens which are not permanently affixed to the
window glass.
   (B)   Windshield Wiper. No person shall drive any motor vehicle, except a
motorcycle, which is not equipped with a windshield wiper for cleaning rain,
snow or other moisture from the windshield, which wiper shall be constructed as
to be controlled or operated by the driver of the vehicle, and such windshield
wiper shall be in good working order.
   (C)   Windshield, Windows in Defective Condition. It shall be unlawful for
any person to drive a vehicle when the windshield, side wings, side or rear
windows are in such defective condition as to impair the vision of the driver.
   (D)   Windshield, Windows Obscured. It shall be unlawful for any person to
drive a vehicle when the windshield, side wings, side windows in the driver's
compartment or rear window is obscured by reason of accumulation of frost,
moisture, fog, snow, mud or dirt or any other matter to an extent as to
substantially interfere with or impair the vision of the driver to the front,
sides or rear of the vehicle.
('74 Code, § 9-5-20.7) (Ord. 65-1974)
§ 8-6-7 WHEN LIGHTED LAMPS REQUIRED.
   Every vehicle upon a roadway within this city at any time from a half hour
after sunset to a half hour before sunrise, and at any other time when there is
not sufficient light to render clearly discernible persons and vehicles on the
roadway at a distance of 500 feet, shall display lighted lamps and illuminating
devices as hereinafter respectively required, subject to exceptions with
respect to parked vehicles.
('74 Code, § 9-5-20.8) (Ord. 65-1974)
§ 8-6-8 HEADLAMPS.
   Every motor vehicle other than a motorcycle shall be driven with at least
two headlamps, with at least one on each side of the front of the motor vehicle
and both headlamps in good working order. Each headlamp shall not be more than
54 inches nor less than 20 inches, measured from the center of each headlamp to
the level ground upon which the vehicle stands when such vehicle is without a
load. Such headlamp shall emit a clear white light plainly visible from a
distance of 500 feet to the front when the vehicle is without load, when on a
straight, level, unlighted roadway under normal atmospheric conditions.
('74 Code, § 9-5-20.9) (Ord. 65-1974)
§ 8-6-9 HEADLAMPS AND SPOTLIGHTS NOT TO PROJECT GLARING BEAMS.
   (A)   Oncoming Motorist. It shall be unlawful for a driver of a vehicle to
drive at times specified in §
8-6-8 with lighted headlamps or spotlights having a distribution of lights or
composite beam so aimed or directed as to project glaring rays of light into
the eyes of any oncoming motorist when such vehicle is within 500 feet.
   (B)   Overtaken Vehicle. Whenever a driver overtakes another vehicle
proceeding in the same direction and within 200 feet, such driver shall use a
distribution of light or composite beam so aimed that the glaring rays are not
projected through the rear window of the overtaken vehicle.
('74 Code, § 9-5-20.10) (Ord. 65-1974)
§ 8-6-10 TAIL LAMPS; LICENSE PLATE LAMP.
   (A)   Every motor vehicle, including any motorcycle, motor driven cycle,
motorscooter, trailer, semi-trailer and pole trailer, and any other vehicle
which is being drawn at the end of a train of vehicles, shall be equipped with
at least one red tail lamp mounted on the rear, which when lighted shall emit a
clear light plainly visible from a distance of 300 feet to the rear when the
vehicle is without load, when on a straight, level, unlighted roadway under
normal atmospheric conditions; provided that in the case of a train of vehicles
only the tail lamp on the rearmost vehicle need actually be seen from the
specified distance.
   (B)   Every tail lamp upon every vehicle shall be located at a height of not
more than 80 inches nor less than 15 inches, when measured from the center of
the taillight to the level ground upon which the vehicle stands when such
vehicle is without a load.
   (C)   Either a tail lamp or a separate lamp shall be so constructed and
placed as to illuminate with a white light the rear registration plate and
render it clearly legible from a distance of at least 50 feet to the rear. Any
tail lamp or tail lamps, together with any separate lamp for illuminating the
rear registration plate, shall be so wired as to be lighted whenever the
headlamps or auxiliary driving lamps are lighted.
   (D)   No tail lamp shall emit a glaring or dazzling light.
('74 Code, § 9-5-20.11) (Ord. 65-1974; Am. Ord. 7-2003)
§ 8-6-11 STOP LAMPS.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to drive any motor vehicle,
motorcycle, motor driven cycle or motor scooter, unless it is equipped with at
least one stop lamp which shall emit a red light actuated by the application of
the service brakes and which may, but need not, be incorporated with one or
more other rear lamps.
   (B)   Every stop lamp shall be plainly visible and understandable from a
distance of 300 feet to the rear, both during normal sun light and at
nighttime.
   (C)   No stop lamp shall emit a glaring or dazzling light.
('74 Code, § 9-5-20.12) (Ord. 65-1974; Am. Ord. 7-2003)
§ 8-6-12 REFLECTORS.
   (A)   Every vehicle, other than a truck tractor, shall carry on the rear,
either as a part of the tail lamps or separately, two red reflectors; and every
motorcycle, motor driven cycle, and motor scooter shall carry at least one
reflector, meeting the requirements of this section.
   (B)   Every such reflector shall be mounted on the vehicle at a height not
less than 20 inches nor more than 60 inches measured from the center of the
reflector to the level ground upon which the vehicle stands when such vehicle
is without a load, and shall be of such size and characteristics and so mounted
as to be visible at night when the vehicle is on a straight, level, unlighted
roadway under normal atmospheric conditions, from all distances within 300 feet
to 50 feet from such vehicle when directly in front of lawful upper beams of
headlamps, except that visibility from a greater distance is hereinafter
required of reflectors on certain types of vehicles.
('74 Code, § 9-5-20.13) (Ord. 65-1974)
§ 8-6-13 MUFFLERS REQUIRED.
   (A)   Operating Muffler. It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a
motor vehicle if such vehicle is not equipped with a properly attached,
operating muffler in good working order of construction sufficient to prevent
excessive or unusual noise of the motor or to muffle or deaden the sound from
the motor.
   (B)   Muffler Changes or Modification. No person shall modify or change the
exhaust muffler, intake muffler or any other noise abatement device of a motor
vehicle in a manner such that the noise emitted by the motor vehicle is
increased above that emitted by the motor vehicle as originally manufactured.
Such prohibited changes or modifications shall include but not be limited to
the use of cut-outs, by-passes, illegal mufflers defined in division (C) below,
or other similar devices.
   (C)   Dealers and the like. No person shall sell, offer for sale, install or
offer to install any illegal muffler, exhaust cut-out, by-pass, or other device
which increases or tends to increase the exhaust noise of a motor vehicle. For
the purposes of this section, an illegal muffler is defined as any straight-
through muffler which does not contain baffles, including but not limited to
glass packs, steel packs, and straight pipes.
('74 Code, § 9-5-20.14) (Ord. 65-1974)
§ 8-6-14 USE OF HORN.
   The driver of a motor vehicle, when reasonably necessary to insure safe
operation, shall give audible warning with his horn. The horn shall not
otherwise be used.
('74 Code, § 9-5-20.15) (Ord. 65-1974)
§ 8-6-15 TRACKS, CLEATS, SPIKES, LUGS AND THE LIKE PROHIBITED.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to drive a tracked vehicle, a tractor
engine, tractor or other vehicle equipped with cleats, spikes, lugs or similar
devices injurious to the roadway, except metal or other non-skid contrivances
which may be used only while the streets are slippery or covered with ice or
snow.
('74 Code, § 9-5-20.16) (Ord. 65-1974)
§ 8-6-16 "SCHOOL BUS" SIGNS ON SCHOOL BUS.
   Every bus used for the transportation of school children shall bear upon the
front and rear thereof a plainly visible sign containing the words "School Bus"
in letters not less than eight inches in height.
('74 Code, § 9-5-20.17) (Ord. 65-1974)
§ 8-6-17 SCHOOL BUS SIGNALS.
   The driver of a school bus shall operate the flashing school bus lamps
required on such bus when the bus is stopped and either loading or unloading
school children, and the signal shall not be operated at any other time.
('74 Code, § 9-5-20.18) (Ord. 65-1974)
§ 8-6-18 RESTRICTION ON USE OF TELEVISION.
   It shall be unlawful to operate any motor vehicle equipped with a television
screen of any type upon which images may be projected or shown, if such screen
is within the normal view of the operator of the vehicle.
('74 Code, § 9-5-20.19) (Ord. 65-1974)
§ 8-6-19 LAMP OR FLAG ON PROJECTING LOAD.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful to drive or permit to be driven any vehicle
whenever the load upon such vehicle extends to the rear four feet or more
beyond the bed or body of such vehicle, unless there shall be displayed at the
extreme rear end of the load, at the time specified in §
8-6-7, a red light or lantern plainly visible from a distance of at least 500
feet to the sides and rear. The red light or lantern required under this
section shall be in addition to the red rear light required upon every vehicle.
At any other time there shall be displayed at the extreme rear end of such load
a bright colored flag or cloth not less than 100 square inches and so hung that
the entire area is visible to the driver of a vehicle approaching from the
rear.
   (B)   When any mechanical device, whether a temporary or permanent part of
the vehicle, extends beyond the front bumpers thereof, the extreme front
corners of such projection shall, at the times specified in §
8-6-7, be indicated by amber lights or lanterns visible from a distance of at
least 500 feet to the sides and front. At any other time there shall be
displayed at the extreme front end of such load a bright colored flag or cloth
not less than 100 square inches and so hung that the entire area is visible to
the driver of a vehicle approaching from the opposite direction.
('74 Code, § 9-5-20.20) (Ord. 65-1974)
§ 8-6-20 EMERGENCY EQUIPMENT.
   (A)   Red Lights. It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a vehicle
other than an official vehicle, equipped with any red lights mounted so as to
project a beam in a forward direction, or a siren, unless written permission of
the Mayor or his designated representative is first obtained. Such permission
shall be given only to Fire Department vehicles, law enforcement agency
vehicles and ambulances.
   (B)   Flashing Lights. It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a
vehicle equipped with flashing lights, except on authorized emergency vehicles,
school buses, snow removal equipment, highway marking equipment and tow cars
which are standing on the roadway for the purpose of removing, and actually
engaged in towing any disabled vehicle. However, such tow cars are prohibited
from using flashing lights while going to or returning from the location of
disabled vehicles if not engaged in towing such vehicle. Further, the operators
of tow vehicles shall observe all traffic regulations while going to or
returning from the locations of disabled vehicles or while engaged in the
towing of disabled vehicles.
   (C)   Flashing Red Lights. Flashing red lights may be used as warning lights
on disabled or parked vehicles and on any vehicle as a means of indicating a
turn.
('74 Code, § 9-5-20.21) (Ord. 65-1974)
§ 8-6-21 ADDITIONAL PARTS AND ACCESSORIES.
   Any motor vehicle may be equipped with additional parts and accessories,
provided such parts and accessories are not prohibited by or inconsistent with
any this article, or do not either hinder the operator while driving or reduce
the maneuverability or the safety of the vehicle.
('74 Code, § 9-5-20.22) (Ord. 65-1974)
§ 8-6-22 TAMPERING WITH OR INJURING VEHICLE.
   No person, individually or in association with one or more persons, shall:
   (A)   Purposely and without authority from the owner, start, or cause to be
started the motor of any motor vehicle;
   (B)   Purposely and maliciously shift or change the starting device or gears
of a standing motor vehicle to a position other than that in which they were
left by the owner or driver of said motor vehicle;
   (C)   Purposely scratch or damage the chassis, running gear, body, sides,
top covering or upholstering of a motor vehicle, the property of another; or
   (D)   Purposely destroy any part of a motor vehicle or purposely cut, mash,
mark or in any other way destroy or damage any part, attachment, fastening or
appurtenance of a motor vehicle, without the permission of the owner thereof;
   (E)   Purposely drain or start the drainage of any radiator or oil tank or
gas tank upon a motor vehicle without the permission of the owner thereof;
   (F)   Purposely put any metallic or other substance of liquid in the
radiator, carburetor, oil tank, grease cup, oilers, lamps, gas tanks or
machinery of the motor vehicle with the intent to injure or damage the same or
impede the working of the machinery thereof;
   (G)   Maliciously tighten or loosen any bracket, bolt, wire, nut, screw or
other fastening on a motor vehicle; or
   (H)   Purposely release the brake upon a standing motor vehicle, with the
intent to injure said machine.
('74 Code, § 9-5-20.23) (Ord. 65-1974)
Cross-reference:
   
Moving or molesting unattended vehicle,
 see § 8-5-1-40
§ 8-6-23 UNLAWFUL USE OR TAMPERING BY BAILEE.
   No person having the storage, care, safe keeping, custody or possession of
any vehicle shall, without the consent and contrary to the interest of the
bailor, take, hire, drive or use the vehicle to take or remove any part of
either the vehicle or the property within the vehicle. This section shall not
be construed to exclude any bailee from the provisions of §
8-6-22.
('74 Code, § 9-5-20.24) (Ord. 65-1974)
§ 8-6-24 COUPLING DEVICE, CHAIN ON TRAILER, SEMI-TRAILER, TOWING.
   Every trailer or semi-trailer shall be equipped with a coupling device which
shall be so designed and constructed so that the trailer or the semi-trailer
will follow substantially in the path of the vehicle drawing it without
whipping or swerving from side to side. In addition, every trailer shall be
coupled with stay chains or cables to the vehicle by which it is drawn. Such
chains or cables shall be of sufficient size and strength to prevent parting
from the drawing vehicle should the regular coupling device break or become
disengaged.
('74 Code, § 9-5-20.25) (Ord. 65-1974)
§ 8-6-25 EMISSION CONTROL EQUIPMENT.
   Every registered gasoline-fueled motor vehicle manufactured or assembled,
commencing with 1968 models, shall at all times be equipped and maintained in
good working order and adjustment with the factory installed devices and
equipment or their replacements designed to prevent, reduce or control exhaust
emissions or air pollution.
('74 Code, § 9-5-20.26) (Ord. 65-1974)
Cross-reference:
   
Air quality control, see Ch. 9, Art. 5
§ 8-6-26 VISIBLE EMISSIONS FROM MOTOR VEHICLES.
   (A)   Definitions. As used in this section:
   HIGHWAY MOTOR VEHICLE. Any vehicle, including motorcycles, powered by
gasoline or diesel fuel and which has been intended, designed and manufactured
primarily for use in carrying passengers or cargo on public roads, streets, and
highways.
   NON-HIGHWAY MOTOR VEHICLE. Any vehicle, including motorcycles, powered by
gasoline or diesel fuel which has been intended, designed and manufactured
primarily for operation off public roads, streets, and highways.
   OPACITY. The degree to which an air contaminant emission obscures the view
of an observer, expressed in percentage of obscuration or in the degree
(percent) to which transmittance of light is reduced by an air contaminant
emission.
   PERSON. Any individual, partnership, firm, public or private corporation,
association, trust, estate, political subdivision, or agency or any other legal
entity or legal representative, agent, or assign. Where the operator is not the
owner, the owner shall have primary responsibility for compliance.
   VISIBLE AIR CONTAMINANT EMISSION. Any fume, smoke, particulate matter,
vapor, or gas, or combination thereof, except water vapor or steam condensate.
   (B)   Visible Emission Requirements.
      (1)   No person shall cause to be emitted from any gasoline-powered
highway or non-highway motor vehicle any continuous visible air contaminant
emission while the vehicle is in operation for a period greater than two
consecutive seconds.
      (2)   No person shall cause to be emitted from any diesel-powered highway
motor vehicle, 10,000 pounds gross vehicle weight rating or less, visible air
contaminant emissions for a period greater than five consecutive seconds, which
is a shade or density of more than 25% opacity.
      (3)   No person shall cause to be emitted from any diesel-powered highway
motor vehicle, greater than 10,000 pounds gross vehicle weight rating,
continuous visible air contaminant emission while the vehicle is in operation
for a period greater than five consecutive seconds, which is a shade or density
of more than 30% opacity.
      (4)   No person shall cause to be emitted from any diesel-powered non-
highway motor vehicle continuous visible air contaminant emission while the
vehicle is in operation for a period greater than ten consecutive seconds,
which is a shade or density of more than 40% opacity.
      (5)   Diesel-powered highway and non-highway motor vehicles exceeding
these requirements shall be exempt for a period of ten minutes, if the
excessive visible air contaminant emissions are a direct result of cold engine
start-up and provided that the motor vehicle is in a stationary position.
('74 Code, § 9-5-20.27) (Ord. 8-1988)
§ 8-6-27 SUNSCREENING MATERIAL ON WINDOWS.
   (A)   No person shall operate a motor vehicle that is registered or required
to be registered in this state on any street or highway if that motor vehicle
has a sunscreening material on the windshield or any window that does not
comply with the requirements of this section.
   (B)   No person shall apply, install or otherwise affix sunscreening
material to a motor vehicle, which material does not comply with the
requirements of this section.
   (C)   No person or entity operating a business within the City shall allow
the employees, agents, or contractors of the business to apply, install or
otherwise affix sunscreening material to a motor vehicle, which material does
not comply with the requirements of this section.
   (D)   (1)   Except as otherwise provided in this section, a sunscreening
material:
         (a)   When used in conjunction with the windshield shall be
nonreflective, shall not be red, yellow, or amber in color and shall be used
only along the top of the windshield, not extending downward more than five
inches from the top of the windshield; and
         (b)   When used in conjunction with the safety glazing material of the
side wings or side windows located at the immediate right and left of the
driver (the front doors), the sunscreen material light transmission shall not
be less than 35% plus or minus 3% with a luminous reflectance of not more than
33% plus or minus 3%. The sunscreening material on the side windows behind the
driver and the rear most window shall have a light transmission of not less
than 20% plus or minus three percent, with a luminous reflectance of not more
than 33% plus or minus 3%.
      (2)   It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a vehicle on any
street or highway with a sunscreening material on the windows that has a light
transmission of less than 20%.
   (E)   The provisions of this section do not apply to a motor vehicle
registered in this state in the name of a person or the person's legal guardian
who has an affidavit signed by a physician or an optometrist licensed to
practice in this state that indicates the person has a physical condition that
makes it necessary to equip the motor vehicle with sunscreening material which
is in violation of this section. The affidavit shall be in the motor vehicle.
   (F)   The light transmission requirement of this section does not apply to
windows behind the driver on trucks (over 10,000 lbs.), buses and motor homes.
   (G)   Definitions. As used in this section:
   LIGHT TRANSMISSION. The ratio of the amount of total light which passes
through a product or material expressed in percentages to the amount of the
total light falling on the product or material.
   LUMINOUS REFLECTANCE. The ratio of the amount of total light expressed in
percentages which is reflected outward by the product or material to the amount
of total light falling on the product or material.
   MANUFACTURER. Any person engaged in the manufacturing or assembling of
sunscreening products or materials designed to be used in conjunction with
motor vehicle glazing materials for the purpose of reducing the effects of the
sun.
   NONREFLECTIVE. Designed to absorb light rather than to reflect it.
   SUNSCREENING MATERIAL. Any film material, substance, device or product that
is designed to be used in conjunction with motor vehicle safety glazing
materials for reducing the effects of the sun.
   (H)   Any vehicle operated on any street or highway that has a sunscreening
material on the windshield or windows contrary to divisions (B)(1)(a) and (b)
shall be exempt provided the material had been installed prior to the effective
date of this section. Proof that the material was applied prior to the
effective date shall be the responsibility of the vehicle owner and shall be in
the following form:
      (1)   Receipt from the installer or dealer with the installation date
clearly marked; or
      (2)   Notarized affidavit signed by the owner of the vehicle affirming
that the material was applied prior to the effective date of this section.
   (I)   All vehicles not in compliance with the provisions of division (B) as
of the effective date of this section shall fully comply upon transfer of
ownership.
('74 Code, § 9-5-20.28A-F,H) (Ord. 41-1989; Am. Ord. 11-1997)
§ 8-6-99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person who violates any of the provisions of this article for
which no other penalty is set forth shall be subject to the penalty set forth
in §
8-1-3-99(A).
   (B)   Any person who violates any of the provisions of §
8-6-27 shall be subject to:
      (1)   A fine of not more than $25 for the first violation;
      (2)   $50 for the second violation;
      (3)   $100 for the third and subsequent violations.
('74 Code, § 9-5-20.28G) (Ord. 65-1974; Am. Ord. 11-1997)
CHAPTER 9: HEALTH,
SAFETY AND SANITATION
   Article
      
1:   ALCOHOL AND SUBSTANCE ABUSE
      
2:   HUMANE AND ETHICAL ANIMAL RULES AND TREATMENT
      
3:   ALARM SYSTEMS
      
4:   PUBLIC SAFETY ­ POLICE, FIRE AND EMS
      
5:   AIR QUALITY AND ENVIRONMENTAL HEALTH CONTROL
      
6:   
FOOD SERVICE AND RETAIL
      
7:   INSECT AND RODENT CONTROL
      
8:   WEEDS, LITTER AND SNOW
      
9:   NOISE CONTROL
      
10:   SOLID WASTE MANAGEMENT AND RECYCLING
      
11:   TOBACCO PRODUCTS
      
12:   POLLEN CONTROL
      
13:   SMOKE DETECTORS
      
14:   
OVERNIGHT LODGING
      
15:   
SYRINGE EXCHANGE FACILITY LOCATION
      
16:   
ANTIFREEZE SAFETY
      
17:   
ANGEL'S LAW
      
18:   
PIGEON NUISANCE ABATEMENT
      
19:   
FIRE RESTRICTIONS
      
20:   
FIREWORKS
      
21:   
BLASTING
      
22:   
SECURITY ASSISTANCE FUNDING DISTRICTS
      
23:   
[RESERVED]
      
24:   
SAFE OUTDOOR SPACE OPERATOR’S PERMITS
      
25:   
PUBLIC CAMPING
      
26:   
DISTRESSED LODGING PROPERTY
ARTICLE 1: ALCOHOL AND SUBSTANCE ABUSE
Section
Part 1: Commission on Alcohol and Substance Abuse
   
9-1-1-1   Intent
   
9-1-1-2   Commission on alcohol and substance abuse
   
9-1-1-3   Duties and powers
   
9-1-1-4   Duration of the commission of alcohol and substance abuse
   
9-1-1-5   Membership and organization
   
9-1-1-6   Conflict of interest
Part 2: Phenylacetic Acid and Methylamine
   
9-1-2-1   Legislative findings
   
9-1-2-2   Purpose
   
9-1-2-3   Prohibited acts
 
   
9-1-2-99   Penalty
Part 3: Sales and Purchases of Products Containing Ephedrine
   
9-1-3-1   Findings
   
9-1-3-2   Definitions
   
9-1-3-3   Limitations on the sale or purchase of ephedrine or pseudoephedrine
products
 
   
9-1-3-99   Penalty
Part 4: Synthetic Intoxicant
   
9-1-4-1   Short title
   
9-1-4-2   Purpose and intent
   
9-1-4-3   Definitions
   
9-1-4-4   Violation
   
9-1-4-5   Enforcement
   
9-1-4-6   Appeal
PART 1: COMMISSION ON ALCOHOL
AND SUBSTANCE ABUSE
§ 9-1-1-1 INTENT.
   The city recognizes that alcohol and substance abuse have become a
significant and serious problem in the metropolitan area. As an ever-growing
problem in our community and our society, alcohol and substance abuse
contributes greatly to the cost in terms of law enforcement, health care,
treatment, lost work productivity, death due to automobile crashes, and
immeasurable losses and suffering to families who are victims of co-dependency
and/or death and injury. Because of the complex nature of the problem and the
need to maintain an ongoing effort to coordinate the development and
implementation and programs to reduce alcohol and substance abuse prevention
and intervention must remain a priority for the city. It is the intent of §§
9-1-1-1 et seq. to serve the public health and welfare by creating an entity to
maintain city leadership in addressing alcohol and substance abuse programs in
Albuquerque by coordinating the efforts of existing agencies and program, by
facilitating communication between the many private and public agencies
involved in alcohol and substance abuse prevention, intervention, treatment,
and law enforcement, and by promoting continued public awareness of the
problem.
('74 Code, § 6-1-1) (Ord. 68-1987)
§ 9-1-1-2 COMMISSION ON ALCOHOL AND SUBSTANCE ABUSE.
   (A)   There is, hereby, created a Commission on Alcohol and Substance Abuse
hereinafter called the "Commission," which will consist of 15 members. Eleven
of the members shall be appointed by the Mayor with the advice and consent of
the Council. Four of the members shall be appointed by the Chairperson of the
County Commission. Five of the eleven city appointees shall be from service
provider organizations and six shall be by citizen representatives. Two of the
county appointees shall be from service provider organizations and two shall be
lay citizen representatives. Vacancies on the commission shall be filled in the
same manner as was originally filled.
   (B)   The term of each Commission member shall be three years; of the
members first named, five shall have terms ending November 30, 1988, five shall
have terms ending November 30, 1989, and five shall have terms ending November
30, 1990. The Mayor shall determine which members are to serve such terms. The
members of the Commission shall elect a Chairperson from among its members, who
shall serve a one year term. No member shall serve as chairperson for more than
two consecutive terms.
('74 Code, § 6-1-2) (Ord. 68-1987)
§ 9-1-1-3 DUTIES AND POWERS.
   In carrying out its duties and powers, the Commission shall:
   (A)   Conduct an ongoing review of overall societal problems resulting from
alcoholism, alcohol abuse, drug addiction and drug abuse in the greater
Albuquerque metropolitan area and recommend methods for reducing such within
the city;
   (B)   Work with citizens, organized groups, schools, and substance abuse
treatment, prevention and health care providers to develop and implement new
and existing service programs;
   (C)   Educate citizens, professional groups, the business community,
churches, educators, elected officials, community organizations, and other key
persons about the problems of substance abuse;
   (D)   Promote cooperation and encourage coordination between the city law
enforcement agencies and those agencies already engaged in substance abuse
treatment, prevention and resistance education;
   (E)   Ensure that the city maintains as a priority the reduction of alcohol
and substance abuse, including driving while under the influence of alcohol
and/or drugs;
   (F)   Conduct open public meetings and give reasonable notice of such
meetings.
   (G)   Meet on a bimonthly basis;
   (H)   Advise the Mayor and Council on legislation, programs, and policies
which would contribute to the reduction of the problem;
   (I)   Form such committees as are necessary from the membership of the
Commission and the general public to carry out the assigned powers and duties
of the Commission; and
   (J)   Submit an annual report of its activities and an evaluation of the
effectiveness of §§
9-1-1-1 et seq. to the Mayor and Council.
('74 Code, § 6-1-3) (Ord. 68-1987)
§ 9-1-1-4 DURATION OF THE COMMISSION OF ALCOHOL AND SUBSTANCE ABUSE.
   The Commission shall continue in existence until November 30, 1993, at which
time the Mayor and the City Council shall determine whether the Commission is
to be continued.
('74 Code, § 6-1-4) (Ord. 68-1987)
§ 9-1-1-5 MEMBERSHIP AND ORGANIZATION.
   Except as otherwise provided herein, the Commission shall be governed by the
provisions of §§
2-6-1-1 et seq., which governs all boards, commissions and committees.
('74 Code, § 6-1-5) (Ord. 68-1987)
§ 9-1-1-6 CONFLICT OF INTEREST.
   Any member of the Commission having a private interest in matters before the
Commission shall disqualify himself from discussion and voting on those
matters.
('74 Code, § 6-1-6) (Ord. 68-1987)
PART 2: PHENYLACETIC ACID AND METHYLAMINE
§ 9-1-2-1 LEGISLATIVE FINDINGS.
   (A)   The Council finds that reports from law enforcement agencies indicate
that substantial sales of Phenylacetic Acid and Methylamine are occurring
within the city limits; that the above named chemicals are used for purposes of
manufacturing perfume products and in a very small amount of food flavoring
operations, none of which are known to exist in this city or the state.
   (B)   The Council further finds that the above named reports indicate that
Phenylacetic Acid and Methylamine are a necessary ingredient in the
manufacturing of Methamphetamine and P.C.P. said drugs being controlled
substances and the use of which is a health hazard and danger to the community.
   (C)   The Council further finds that the purchase of Phenylacetic Acid and
or Methylamine constitutes a sufficient criminal predicate as called for in the
Albuquerque Police Department Intelligence Task Force Report of March 17, 1988.
   (D)   The Council further finds it necessary to encourage the state and
county governments as well as any other responsible governmental subdivisions
to place greater restrictions on the sale of Phenylacetic Acid and Methylamine.
('74 Code, § 6-10-1) (Ord. 57-1988)
§ 9-1-2-2 PURPOSE.
   The purpose of §§
9-1-2-1 et seq. shall be to:
   (A)   Protect and preserve the public safety, health and general welfare of
the citizens of Albuquerque; and
   (B)   Assist local law enforcement agencies in their efforts to circumvent
and apprehend individuals engaged in the manufacturing of illegal drugs.
('74 Code, § 6-10-2) (Ord. 57-1988)
§ 9-1-2-3 PROHIBITED ACTS.
   (A)   It shall be a violation of §§
9-1-2-1 et seq. for any chemical or drug manufacturer or dispenser to sell to
any person Phenylacetic Acid or Methylamine within the city, without having
obtained proper identification from the purchaser at the time request for
purchase is made. For purposes of this subdivision "proper identification"
means a motor vehicle operators license or other official state issued
identification of the purchaser which contains a photograph of the purchaser,
and includes the residential or mailing address of the purchaser, other than a
post office box number.
   (B)   It shall be a violation of §§
9-1-2-1 et seq. for any chemical or drug manufacturer or dispenser to sell to
any person Phenylacetic Acid or Methylamine without the seller having notified
the office of the Chief of Police, by certified letter of the proposed sale to
the buyer. The notice shall be mailed no later than three working days
commencing on the date of request for purchase and shall contain the name and
address of the proposed buyer and shall include the amount of Phenylacetic Acid
and Methylamine proposed to be sold and shall include the buyers stated purpose
for purchasing the Phenylacetic Acid or Methylamine.
   (C)   It shall be a violation of §§
9-1-2-1 et seq. for any chemical or drug manufacturer or dispenser to sell to
any person Phenylacetic Acid or Methylamine, prior to the expiration of a 15
working day period commencing on the mailing date of the notice required in
division (B) of this section.
('74 Code, § 6-10-3) (Ord. 57-1988)
§ 9-1-2-99 PENALTY.
   Any person convicted of a violation of the provisions of §§
9-1-2-1 et seq. shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and subject to the penalty
provisions set forth in § 1-1-99 of this code of ordinances.
('74 Code, § 6-10-4) (Ord. 57-1988)
PART 3: SALES AND PURCHASES OF PRODUCTS CONTAINING EPHEDRINE
§ 9-1-3-1 FINDINGS.
   The City Council finds that:
   (A)   In addition to its legal uses, ephedrine is used in the illegal
manufacture of methamphetamine, and illicit drug manufacturers extract
ephedrine from various over-the-counter products containing as an ingredient
ephedrine or pseudoephedrine;
   (B)   There is a current and immediate threat to the public health, safety
and welfare in that the manufacture, processing, transportation, possession and
sales of illicit narcotics and drugs are inherently dangerous, and that the
chemicals, compounds, substances, byproducts and wastes associated with the
manufacture of illicit narcotics and drugs are both dangerous and injurious to
the health, welfare and safety of the citizens of the City of Albuquerque;
   (C)   There has been an increase in the sales, thefts and possession of the
over-the-counter products that contain as an ingredient ephedrine,
pseudoephedrine, ephedrine hydrochloride, pseudoephedrine hydrochloride, or
pseudoephedrine sulfate, as well as other products associated with the
manufacture of methamphetamine;
   (D)   Reasonable limitations on the quantity of products containing
ephedrine that may be sold to or purchased by a customer on a single day will
assist the City in its efforts to combat the insidious criminal methods of
illegal methamphetamine manufacturers in the City, and will not unduly restrict
legitimate businesses or customers from selling or buying these products.
(Ord. 29-1999)
§ 9-1-3-2 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this article, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   COUNT. The number of pills, tablets, capsules or individual units of a
substance contained within an individual package.
   CUSTOMER. Any person who purchases or acquires products from any retail
store.
   EPHEDRINE. Any drug, substance or compound, whether legal or illegal, that
contains ephedrine, pseudoephedrine, ephedrine hydrochloride, pseudoephedrine
hydrochloride, or pseudoephedrine sulfate.
   PACKAGE.  Any bottle, box, blister pack or other container in which products
containing ephedrine are sold.
   RETAIL STORE. Any single geographic location of any business, company,
corporation, person, employee or associate, that sells products to any
customer. It does not include any wholesaler engaged in a wholesale
transaction.
   SELL. To furnish, give away, exchange, transfer, deliver, surrender,
distribute, or supply, whether or not for monetary gain or other consideration.
   WHOLESALER. One whose business is the selling of goods in gross to retail
stores for purposes of resale.
(Ord. 29-1999)
§ 9-1-3-3 LIMITATIONS ON THE SALE OR PURCHASE OF EPHEDRINE OR PSEUDOEPHEDRINE
PRODUCTS.
    (A)   No person, during a single transaction, shall sell to a customer more
than two boxes of products containing ephedrine or pseudoephedrine.
   (B)   No person, during a single transaction, shall sell to a customer
products containing ephedrine or pseudoephedrine where the total count exceeds
100, two boxes, or six grams of ephedrine or pseudoephedrine.
   (C)   No customer on any single day shall purchase or acquire more than two
boxes of products containing ephedrine or pseudoephedrine.
   (D)   No customer on any single day shall purchase or acquire products
containing ephedrine or pseudoephedrine where the total count exceeds 100, two
boxes, or six grams of ephedrine or pseudoephedrine.
   (E)   Every person who owns, manages or operates a place of business selling
ephedrine or pseudoephedrine shall store or cause it to be stored either (1) in
the line of sight of one or more work stations that are normally continuously
occupied during business hours or of a video camera that is continuously manned
during business hours, or (2) in an area viewable by the public, but not
accessible to the public in the regular course of business without employee
assistance, pending legal sale or disposition of ephedrine or pseudoephedrine;
and shall require that each purchaser produce a photo identification and his or
her name and current address, and the owner, manager or operator shall maintain
a log recording those names and addresses. This log, which shall not be
accessible to the public, shall be kept for 90 days after its last entry and
made available to certified law enforcement upon reasonable request during
regular business hours.
   (F)   Division (E) herein shall not apply to pseudoephedrine in the form of
gel capsules or liquids.
(Ord. 29-1999; Am. Ord. 41-2005)
§ 9-1-3-99 PENALTY.
   Any person who violates any provision of §§
9-1-3-1 et seq. is subject to a fine of $250 for the first offense and a fine
of $500 for the second and each subsequent offense. Each incident in violation
of §§
9-1-3-1 et seq. shall constitute a separate offense.
(Ord. 29-1999; Am. Ord. 41-2005)
PART 4: SYNTHETIC INTOXICANT
§ 9-1-4-1 SHORT TITLE.
   Sections
9-1-4-1 et seq. shall be known and may be cited as the “Synthetic Intoxicant
Ordinance.”
(Ord._2012-031)
§ 9-1-4-2 PURPOSE AND INTENT.
   (A)   A product commonly referred to as "spice" is sold by local businesses.
Spice typically appears as a packaged dried plant product or leaves, and is
sold at gas stations, liquor stores, convenience stores, smoke shops and other
outlets. While spice sometimes has a label warning against human consumption,
that is its intended use. Businesses that sell spice openly solicit the product
by claiming that, when smoked, spice causes a marijuana-like high. Spice is a
green leafy product sprayed with synthetic substances that mimic the effects of
marijuana when smoked. Spice is marketed under numerous brand names, including
Spice, Spice Silver, Spice Gold, Spice Diamond, Spice Tropical Synergy, Spice
Arctic Synergy, Spice Gold Spirit, PEP Spice, PEPpourri, K2, Genie, Yucatan
Fire, Dream, Ex-ses, Blaze, Spike 99, Spark, Fusion, Magma, Hard Core, and
Deliverance, as well as other names.
   (B)   The use of substituted cathinones, commonly called "bath salts", has
significantly increased throughout the United States and the United States Drug
Enforcement Administration (DEA) used its emergency scheduling authority to
temporarily control Mephedrone, Methylenedioxypyrovalerone (MDPV), Methylone,
and other chemical compounds found in "bath salts" finding that ingestion of
these substances can cause serious injury and death. The City Council also
finds that death and serious injury can be caused by bath salts.
   (C)   Spice and bath salts are synthetic intoxicants that endanger the
public. While distribution of these products is a violation of state law, the
available penalties do not appear to adequately deter vendors because the
profitability from the sale of these products may outweigh the risks associated
with prosecution. Manufacturers and vendors of synthetic intoxicants change the
names, labeling, or chemical composition of the products to avoid prosecution.
Consumers, including minors, quickly learn the name of the new mock substance
by word of mouth or on the internet. Businesses that distribute synthetic
intoxicants create a public nuisance in the city as defined by state law and
city ordinances.
   (D)   Emergency room physicians report that users of these products
experience serious side effects, including convulsions, anxiety, dangerously
elevated heart rates, increased blood pressure, vomiting, and disorientation.
According to February 8, 2012 data from the American Association of Poison
Control Centers, in one year there has been a greater than two-fold increase in
the number of calls about exposure to synthetic intoxicants.
   (E)   Field testing technology is inadequate in many cases and the products
being sold to the public have to be seized from the vendor and lab tested. Lab
testing is costly and time consuming. If a particular brand name product is
determined to be an illegal substance, that substance will often be repackaged
or relabeled by the time the police return to the business. This subterfuge
wastes police resources and further endangers the public.
   (F)   Synthetic intoxicants tend to avoid drug testing methods used to
determine whether a person has consumed a controlled substance. Some of the
most dangerous consumers, those prohibited from consumption of illicit drugs or
alcohol by court orders or terms of probation, gravitate toward these products
because they are difficult to detect or undetectable.
   (G)   Synthetic intoxicants endanger the health and safety of the community.
This ordinance is a remedial ordinance promulgated pursuant to the city's home
rule authority.
(Ord._2012-031)
§ 9-1-4-3 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of §§
9-1-4-1 et seq., the following definitions shall apply unless the context
clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   BATH SALTS. The substance defined by NMSA 1978 § 30-31-6(C)(20)-(25) and the
addition of substances by state regulation, including, but not limited to,
16.19.20 NMAC, Section 65 as amended from time to time.
   BUSINESS. The premises, whether it be a main business location or an outlet,
branch or other location thereof, temporary or otherwise, to which the public
is expressly or impliedly invited for the purpose of transacting business. The
term "business" includes the sales persons on site.
   BUSINESS DAY. Regular business hours Monday through Friday. The day the
business receives a cease and desist order and notice of violation does not
count as a business day. If the business has irregular hours or the hours are
not posted, a business day shall be the next two full 24-hour weekdays after
receipt of a cease and desist order and notice of violation.
   BUSINESS OPERATOR. The person or persons on site at the business in actual
or apparent control of the business during business hours.
   BUSINESS REGISTRATION. The privilege to register to do business and the
registration of a business under §§
13-1-1 et seq. ROA 1994.
   CEASE AND DESIST ORDER AND NOTICE OF VIOLATION. Documentation delivered to
the business operator ordering the business closed for inspection and testing.
   FINAL CEASE AND DESIST ORDER AND NOTICE OF VIOLATION. A Cease and Desist
Order and Notice of Violation that was not appealed or was affirmed by a
hearing officer or court.
   LEGAL HOLIDAYS. The days described by §
3-1-12 of this Code of Ordinances.
   MAYOR. The Mayor of the City of Albuquerque or any person with authority
from the Mayor to enforce the Synthetic Intoxicant Ordinance. The term
includes,  without limitation, the Mayor's agents under §
1-1-98(B)(2)(a), and any city employee authorized by law to commence a criminal
action in the Metropolitan Court.
   PERSON. An individual, proprietorship, partnership, corporation,
association, or other legal entity.
   POLICE OFFICER. A sworn member of the Albuquerque Police Department, the
Bernalillo County Sheriff's Office or the New Mexico State Police.
   SALES PERSON. Any agent or independent contractor of the business employed
or engaged to transact business with the public on the premises.
   SPICE. A synthetic cannabinoid as defined by NMSA 1978, § 30-31-6 (2011), or
substances added to the definition of a synthetic cannabinoid by state
regulation, including, but not limited to, 16.19.20 NMAC, Section 65 as amended
from time to time.
   SYNTHETIC INTOXICANT. Bath salts or spice.
   TRANSFER OF OWNERSHIP OR CONTROL of a business.
      (1)   The sale, lease, or sublease of the business;
      (2)   The transfer of securities that constitute a controlling interest
in the business, whether by sale, exchange, or similar means; or
      (3)   The establishment of a trust, gift, or other similar legal device
that transfers the ownership or control of the business, except for transfer by
bequest or other operation of law upon the death of the person possessing the
ownership or control.
(Ord._2012-031)
§ 9-1-4-4 VIOLATION.
   It is a violation of the Synthetic Intoxicant Ordinance for a business to
manufacture, stock, sell, distribute, dispense, possess, purchase, advertise
for sale, publicly display for sale, give, trade, offer to sell, order, or
offer to order a synthetic intoxicant.
(Ord._2012-031)
§ 9-1-4-5 ENFORCEMENT.
   (A)   If the Mayor or a police officer has probable cause to believe a
violation has occurred, the Mayor or the police officer shall obtain a sample
of the substance believed to be a synthetic intoxicant. The sample shall be
tested by methods commonly utilized by law enforcement labs to determine
whether a substance is a synthetic intoxicant. If the test determines that the
substance is a synthetic intoxicant, the Mayor or the police officer shall
issue and deliver a Cease and Desist Order and Notice of Violation upon the
business operator and seize the entire inventory of the synthetic intoxicant
from the business. The Cease and Desist Order and Notice of Violation shall be
filed with the City Clerk. When the Cease and Desist Order and Notice of
Violation is delivered to the business, if the Mayor or a police officer has
probable cause to believe that the synthetic intoxicant has been relabeled,
repackaged or incorporated into other substances, those substances shall also
be seized and tested. If the test is negative, the inventory shall be returned
to the business. The transfer of ownership or control of the business does not
avoid the seizure authorized by this paragraph.
   (B)   Upon receipt of the Cease and Desist Order and Notice of Violation by
the business operator, the business shall immediately allow and not interfere
with the seizure of the inventory which is a synthetic intoxicant or is
reasonably believed to be a synthetic intoxicant that has been relabeled,
repackaged or incorporated into other substances. Any interference with the
seizure is a violation of the Synthetic Intoxicant Ordinance punishable
pursuant to §
1-1-99 ROA, 1994.
   (C)   If a business is assessed a second Final Cease and Desist Order and
Notice of Violation within five years of a first Final Cease and Desist Order
and Notice of Violation, the business shall close and cease transacting
business for three business days after the second Final Cease and Desist Order
and Notice of Violation is assessed. During the three day closure, the Mayor or
a police officer, in cooperation with other agencies if required, shall inspect
the premises, find and seize any remaining synthetic intoxicants or precursor
chemicals or materials on site. The transfer of ownership or control of the
business does not avoid the process authorized by this paragraph. No inventory,
merchandise, personal property, chattel property or other property shall be
received by or taken off the business premises during closure unless authorized
by a police officer or the Mayor.
   (D)   If a business is assessed a third Final Cease and Desist Order and
Notice of Violation within five years of a second Final Cease and Desist Order
and Notice of Violation, the business shall cease conducting business in the
city and will be barred from business registration for a period of one year
from the date the third Final Cease and Desist Order and Notice of Violation is
assessed. The transfer of ownership or control of the business does not avoid
the operation of this paragraph.
   (E)   The City of Albuquerque shall have the authority to seek an injunction
to compel compliance with the Synthetic Intoxicant Ordinance on grounds that
the business is causing irreparable harm to the community by distributing
synthetic intoxicants.
(Ord._2012-031)
§ 9-1-4-6 APPEAL.
   Upon delivery of a Cease and Desist Order and Notice of Violation, the
business has 15 days to appeal to a hearing officer in accordance with the
provisions in the IHO Ordinance, ROA 1994,
Chapter 2, Article 7, Part 8.
(Ord._2012-031; Am. Ord._2023-015)
ARTICLE 2: HUMANE AND ETHICAL ANIMAL RULES AND TREATMENT
Editor's note: Pursuant to Enactment O-2006-029 (Ordinance 29-2006), this
Article takes effect on October 10, 2006.
Section
Part 1: General Provisions
   
9-2-1-1   Short title
   
9-2-1-2   Findings
   
9-2-1-3   Legislative purpose and intent
   
9-2-1-4   Definitions
   
9-2-1-5   Administration
   
9-2-1-6   Perjury
   
9-2-1-7   No private cause of action
   
9-2-1-8   Exemption for zoo and aquarium
Part 2: Care, Maintenance, Housing, Restraint and Transportation Standards
   
9-2-2-1   Required care and maintenance for mammals and birds kept on
residential property
   
9-2-2-2   Housing and restraint standards for mammals and birds kept on
residential property
   
9-2-2-3   Required care and maintenance for mammals and birds kept at boarding
kennels, guard dog sites, animal shelters including the Albuquerque Animal Care
Center and pet stores (non-residential sites)
   
9-2-2-4   Housing and restraint standards for mammals and birds kept at
boarding kennels, guard dog sites, animal shelters including the Albuquerque
Animal Care Center (AACC) and pet stores (non-residential sites)
   
9-2-2-5   Standards for grooming parlors and doggie day care facilities
   
9-2-2-6   Transporting animals in vehicles
Part 3: Required License and Permits
   
9-2-3-1   Required Albuquerque companion pet microchip
   
9-2-3-2   Permits: General provisions
   
9-2-3-3   Permit holders: General duties and requirements
   
9-2-3-4   Permit renewals
   
9-2-3-5   Permit applications
   
9-2-3-6   Intact Companion Animal Permit or ICAP
   
9-2-3-7   Companion animal litter permit
   
9-2-3-8   Multiple Companion Animal Site Permit or MCASP
   
9-2-3-9   Permissible Exotic or Wild Animal Collection Permit or EWACP
   
9-2-3-10   Guard Dog Site Permit or GDSP
   
9-2-3-11   Animal Service Provider Permit or ASPP
   
9-2-3-12   Pet Store Permit or PSP
   
9-2-3-13   Trolley Permit
   
9-2-3-14   Animal-Drawn Vehicle Permit or ADVP
   
9-2-3-15   Hobby breeder permits
   
9-2-3-16   HEART Ordinance Fund and permit fees
Part 4: Prohibited Activities
   
9-2-4-1   Cruelty to animals
   
9-2-4-2   Specific activities that constitute cruelty to an animal
   
9-2-4-3   Animal limits and restrictions
   
9-2-4-4   Sale or gift of an animal
   
9-2-4-5   Animal racing
   
9-2-4-6   Improper disposal of animals
   
9-2-4-7   Animal noise
   
9-2-4-8   Animal fights
Part 5: Lost and Found Animals
   
9-2-5-1   Lost and found companion animals
Part 6: Rabies
   
9-2-6-1   Rabies
Part 7: Administrative Hearings and Penalties
   
9-2-7-1   Inspections and hearing process
Part 8: Safe-haven 
   
9-2-8-1   Creation of safe-haven
PART 1: GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 9-2-1-1 SHORT TITLE.
   This article may be cited as the “Humane and Ethical Animal Rules and
Treatment (HEART) Ordinance”.
(Ord. 18-2006)
§ 9-2-1-2 FINDINGS.
   (A)   The Council finds that the City shall endeavor to protect animals in
the City. Nothing herein shall be interpreted as expanding the scope of the
City’s liability under the New Mexico Tort Claims Act.
   (B)   The Council further finds that the people of Albuquerque should treat
animals as more than just lifeless inanimate chattel property and recognizes
that the relationship between human beings and animals is a special
relationship that improves people’s lives and reflects basic humanitarian
beliefs.
   (C)   The Council further finds that the public mind-set toward animals must
shift to the more progressive, humane, and compassionate attitude evident in
other jurisdictions with stricter animal laws. Several other municipalities
have achieved positive animal population management results by aggressively
microchipping companion animals, permitting and tracking pet sales and animal
breeding, and providing funding for free, low and moderate income spay and
neuter programs.
   (D)   The Council further finds that the City should continue to fund free
low and moderate income microchipping and spay and neuter programs through fees
collected in this article and from general fund monies as needed.
   (E)   The Council further finds that it is important to assist the public in
finding lost pets by encouraging individuals who find strays to provide
information about the lost animals to the City so the City can post the
information at AACC facilities and on the website. The City will create a Lost
and Found program that will be on the City website. Individuals who have lost
an animal will have the opportunity to access complete information about
whether the City or any other person has found that animal.
   (F)   The Council further finds that in certain situations animals may pose
a serious public safety threat to our community. The City of Albuquerque shall
endeavor to work toward the prevention of animal attacks on humans and other
animals. Laws against chaining animals, stricter laws dealing with animal
overpopulation, and enforcing animal restraint and housing laws are tools to
help eliminate dogs roaming at large and will ultimately help make our
community safer.
   (G)   The Council further finds that dogs that bark excessively, and not in
response to any apparent stimulus, create a public nuisance. Many dogs spend
much of their lives alone in yards or restrained by ropes or chains. Dogs that
are restrained by chaining or tethering are more likely to create barking
problems, are more likely to be aggressive toward humans and other animals, and
are more likely to run away and end up in animal shelters that have no choice
but to euthanize them. The Council is opposed to the restraint of companion
animals by ropes or chains and is also opposed to owners who refuse to provide
adequate care or supervision for companion animals in their charge.
   (H)   The Council further finds that spayed and neutered animals are less
likely to run loose, bark excessively, and endanger the public and other
animals. Most importantly, altered animals do not add to the animal
overpopulation problem. Altered animals are less likely to end up at animal
shelters that have no other option but to destroy those animals.
   (I)   The Council further finds that companion animal over-population in the
City endangers animals and human beings. Animal overpopulation requires
taxpayers to bear the burden of caring for tens of thousands of unwanted or
lost animals. In 2005, the City was forced to euthanize an average of 300
unwanted dogs and cats a week. We must lower the overwhelming supply of
animals, bringing it in line with the much lower demand.
   (J)   The Council further finds that some jurisdictions have abandoned the
common law rule of categorizing animals as chattel property, subject to the
complete discretion of the owner. These progressive jurisdictions have expanded
the role of government to include protecting animals from unfettered callous
acts that cause pain or suffering. Under this modern, progressive view, the
state can obtain warrants to search property based on probable cause pertaining
to cruelty or neglect of an animal and enter property without a warrant based
on exigent circumstances to seize an animal that is in need of emergency
medical care. The Council finds that this progressive approach is appropriate
for the City.
   (K)   The Council further finds that animal abuse has a direct and
significant correlation with domestic violence, child abuse, and elder abuse.
The Council finds that there are several obvious indicators of animal abuse and
neglect that should be much more vigorously investigated and prosecuted by the
City in order to help uncover other abuse occurring in the family. In many
abuse situations, the victim is not willing to leave behind an animal that will
almost certainly become the next victim of abuse. Although domestic violence
and emergency shelters provide an invaluable service, they are not able to
accept animals. The AACC is in the position to help with this problem.
   (L)   The Council further finds that judges have a significant role in the
disposition of animal cases and respectfully asks our courts to strictly
enforce animal cases to the fullest extent of the law, to treat animal abuse as
a serious offense, because all types of abuse have a direct correlation and
must be unacceptable behavior.
   (M)   The Council further finds that responsible pet owners already provide
adequate health care, proper food, and water and successfully restrain the
animals in their custody and will not be overly burdened by this article.
(Ord. 18-2006; Am. Ord._2019-032)
§ 9-2-1-3 LEGISLATIVE PURPOSE AND INTENT.
   (A)   The focus of this article is the prevention of cruelty, harm,
suffering, abandonment or death of animals caused by irresponsible pet owners
and the criminal acts of callous individuals. Mandatory spay and neuter laws
will help stop animal overpopulation.
   (B)   This article is also focused on assuring that the Albuquerque Animal
Care Center (AACC) not only maintains exemplary standards of humane animal
care, but promotes community education regarding humane animal care and the
importance of spaying and neutering companion animals. It is equally important
that the staff of the AACC reach out to the community in positive ways such as
putting forward friendly, helpful customer service including serious efforts to
reunite lost animals with their owners and facilitate successful adoptions. The
AACC is charged with implementing and enforcing the “Humane and Ethical Animal
Regulations and Treatment (HEART)” Ordinance. It is the duty of all AACC
employees to protect all animals in Albuquerque from neglect and abuse and to
protect the public from the dangers and nuisance that are possible when
irresponsible owners do not take care of their animals according to the
requirements set forth in this article. Many animal neglect cases can be
beneficially resolved through education, mediation and counseling. The AACC
shall endeavor to provide such counseling.
   (C)   AACC facilities are not just a series of holding pens where animals
are incarcerated for doing something wrong. The AACC will humanely and
compassionately care for animals housed at the AACC facilities by providing a
safe haven for animals while trying to reunite lost animals with their owners
or find new successful adoptive homes for the animals at AACC. The employees of
AACC shall be advocates for animals.
   (D)   The City Council intends through this article to deter and modify the
habits and conduct of irresponsible pet owners who are the source of public
safety problems and the suffering of animals.
(Ord. 18-2006)
§ 9-2-1-4 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this article, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning:
   AACC. Albuquerque Animal Care Center.
   AACC VETERINARIAN. A Veterinarian employed by the City and assigned to AACC.
   AACC WEBSITE. An Internet site maintained by AACC.
   ABANDONMENT. An Owner’s intentional act of abdicating reasonable care or
control of an Animal in a location where any reasonable person would know the
Animal has little chance of finding food, Potable Water or shelter.
   ADEQUATE SHELTER. A structurally sound, adequately ventilated, weatherproof
structure that is comprised of non-toxic materials and interior floors that
minimize injury and discomfort to the Animal. The  structure must be clean and
of a suitable size as to limit overcrowding by properly accommodating the
specific Animal. The structure must protect the Animal from extreme conditions.
The Animal must be able to lie down fully and rise to its feet, in a natural
manner, consistent with the Animal's species. An Adequate Shelter must be
within a Secure Fence.
   ADMINISTRATIVE HEARING. The process by which any grievance under this
article is resolved by adjudication.
   ADMINISTRATIVE HEARING OFFICER. The City Hearing Officer, as defined by the
Independent Office of Hearings Ordinance (§§
2-7-8-1 et seq. ROA 1994).
   ADOPTION. The transfer of ownership of an Animal Impounded at AACC to a
Qualified Adopter.
   AGGRESSIVE. With respect to a Companion Animal in the care of AACC, that the
Companion Animal is objectively observable as unnaturally hostile or violent
toward humans when unprovoked according to a comprehensive checklist of
observable objective characteristics of the Companion Animal compiled by two or
more Independent Observers conducting evaluations at different times and with
respect to a Companion Animal not in the care of AACC, that the Companion
Animal is objectively observable as unnaturally hostile or violent toward
humans when unprovoked according to the perspective of any reasonable Person
objectively observing the Companion Animal.
   ALBUQUERQUE ANIMAL CARE CENTER or AACC. Any City of Albuquerque Animal
Welfare Department (AWD) premises, locations or buildings designated as
suitable by the Mayor’s designee for the care, custody and maintenance of
Animals seized by the City.
   ALTER. To render an Animal incapable of reproduction.
   AMERICAN VETERINARY MEDICAL ASSOCIATION. Not-for-profit association
representing more than 72,000 Veterinarians, the goal of which is improving
Animal and human health and advancing the Veterinary medical profession.
   ANIMAL. Any living nonhuman mammal, bird, reptile, or amphibianincluding
bats, Companion Animals, Companion Birds, Domestic Animals, Exotic or Wild
Animals, Livestock, pigeons, porcupines, Poultry, prairie dogs, rabbits and
skunks. For the purpose of this article, insects and arachnids are not included
in the definition of ANIMALS.
   ANIMAL BROKERS. Individual who or group which deals in regulated Animals but
does not take physical possession. Must be licensed through the USDA. Sometimes
known as “bunchers”, unscrupulous brokers are known to pose as loving adopters,
even bringing children with them when responding to “free to good home” ads in
local newspapers.
   ANIMAL SERVICE OFFICER or ASO. Any Person employed by the City, assigned to
AACC and charged by the Mayor’s designee with enforcement of this article in
the field and to perform other duties as assigned by the Mayor’s designee.
   ANIMAL-DRAWN VEHICLE. Any vehicle pulled by an Animal.
   ANIMAL-DRAWN VEHICLE PERMIT or ADVP.  A Permit allowing a Person to attach
an Animal to a vehicle for the purpose of moving the vehicle.
   ANIMAL EXHIBIT. A Companion Animal or Companion Bird show, petting zoo, pony
ride, rodeo or other Animal activity operated for the purposes of showing
Animals. Prohibited Exotic or Wild Animals are forbidden in Animal Exhibits.
   ANIMAL FIGHTING PARAPHERNALIA. Equipment that any reasonable Person would
ascertain is used for Animal fighting purposes, including:
      (1)   Instruments designed to be attached to the leg of a bird, such as a
knife, gaff or other sharp instrument;
      (2)   Items to train and condition dogs to fight including hides or other
material used as hanging devices to strengthen or condition dogs, wooden sticks
or handles used to pry open dog's jaws, performance enhancing drugs or
substances, or food or water additives; and
      (3)   The presence of any dog that appears to be a fighting dog alone or
together with Animals suspected of being used as Bait Animals, including
rabbits, cats and other dogs.
   ANIMAL HANDLER. Any Person employed by the City, assigned to AACC and
charged by the Mayor’s designee to humanely receive, inspect, feed, clean and
care for Animals Impounded at AACC, to assist the public and Rescue Groups in
viewing and selecting Companion Animals and to perform other duties as assigned
by the Mayor’s designee.
   ANIMAL HEALTH TECHNICIAN or VET TECH.  Any Person employed by the City,
assigned to AACC and charged by the Mayor’s designee to assist the AACC
Veterinarian.
   ANIMAL POSSESSION LIMITS. The number of Animals allowable at one Household
without generating the need for a Multiple Animal Site Permit.
   ANIMAL SERVICE PROVIDER. Any Establishment that takes temporary possession
of an Animal from the Owner, not on the Owner’s property, to perform a service
for the Animal or Owner, including Grooming Parlors, Animal Day Care
establishments and Boarding Kennels, but excluding Pet Stores. ANIMAL SERVICE
PROVIDER does not include a licensed Veterinarian.
   ANIMAL SHELTER. A pound, lot, premises or building maintained by the City or
a private organization, for the care and custody of animals.
   ANTI-RABIES VACCINATION. Inoculation with an anti-rabies vaccine recognized
and approved by the State of New Mexico and given in an amount sufficient to
provide immunity from rabies for a minimum of one year.
   AT LARGE. An Animal, on or off the Owner's premises, that is not contained
by a Secure Fence, a Secure Facility, a Secure Enclosure, secured in the back
of a pickup truck, inside a vehicle with proper ventilation or restrained on a
leash no longer than eight feet held by a responsible Person capable of
controlling the Animal. Verbal commands do not constitute control of an Animal.
An At Large Animal is in violation of the leash law.
   BAIT ANIMAL. An Animal used to train or condition other Animals to fight and
includes living dogs, cats and rabbits exposed to attack by other dogs used or
trained to be used in dog fighting or to make the attacking Animal more
confident and Aggressive.
   BASIC GROOMING. Examination, attention and acts reasonably necessary to
maintain the eyes, ears, beaks, hooves, feet, coat and skin of an Animal in
healthy condition. Basic Grooming also obligates an Owner to provide any and
all materials an Animal requires for self-grooming. BASIC GROOMING does not
include acts to maintain appearance only.
   BASIC MEDICAL CARE. Reasonable medical care required by the species,
including periodic examinations by a Veterinarian, prompt Veterinary care when
required, age and species appropriate Vaccinations, Basic Grooming and internal
and external Parasite Control where appropriate.
   BITE. A puncture or tear of the skin inflicted by the teeth of a Companion
Animal.
   BITTERING AGENT. Nontoxic substance added to palatable toxic substances,
including antifreeze, to make those substances unpalatable to Animals and
humans. It is important to note that this additive does not change the toxic
nature of antifreeze.
   BOARDING KENNEL. An Establishment where Animals are housed overnight for the
benefit of the Owner but does not include Guard Dog Sites, state inspected
Veterinary hospitals, Pet Stores, or Zoos.
   BONA FIDE ANIMAL SHOW. An exhibition approved by the Mayor’s designee of
Companion Animals, Companion Birds or Horses in competition for prizes or
awards that does not include sales or fighting.
   CAGE. A structure for confining birds or animals, enclosed on at least one
side by a grating of wires or bars that lets in air and light.
   CHAIN. A chain, tether or other device used to restrain an animal when the
Animal is not accompanied by a Person.
   CHAINING or TETHERING. Confining an Animal when unattended by an individual
with a tether, rope, chain, or other device to a doghouse, stake, tree,
structure or other stationary object.
   CHEMICAL RESTRAINT DRUG. Any drug administered to a Companion Animal prior
to Euthanasia to reduce aggressiveness, excessive mobility or stress to the
Companion Animal including ketamine, xylazine, and acepromazine.
   CLERICAL WORKER. Any Person employed by the City, assigned to AACC and
charged by the Mayor’s designee to provide Adoption services to the public,
answer telephones, enter data or perform other duties as assigned by the
Mayor’s designee.
   COCKFIGHT or COCKFIGHTING. A fight arranged by a Person involving one or
more birds and that has the purpose or probable result of one bird inflicting
injury on or killing another bird.
   COMMERCIAL PROPERTY. Any property not zoned for dwelling units under the
Integrated Development Ordinance. A vehicle or other temporary mobile facility
used for the purpose of doing business concerning or involving Animals shall
also be deemed Commercial Property for the purposes of this article.
   COMPANION ANIMAL. A dog or cat that is not a Hybrid.
   COMPANION BIRD. A bird commonly kept as a pet by humans and confined on the
property of the Owner, including parakeets, canaries, lovebirds, finches,
parrots, macaws, cockatoos, cockatiels, toucans and lories, but excluding:
      (1)   All of the family Anatidae (waterfowl);
      (2)   All of the family Tetraonidae (grouse and ptarmigans);
      (3)   All of the family Phasianidae (quail, partridges and pheasants);
      (4)   All of the family Meleagridae (wild turkeys) except for the
domestic strains of turkeys;
      (5)   All of the family Perdicidae (francolins);
      (6)   All of the family Gruidae (cranes);
      (7)   All of the family Rallidae (rails, coots and gallinules);
      (8)   All of the family Charadriidae (plovers, turnstones and surfbirds);
      (9)   All of the family Scolopacidae (shorebirds, snipe, sandpipers and
curlews);
      (10)   All of the family Recurvirostridae (avocets and stilts);
      (11)   All of the family Phalaropodidae (phalaropes);
      (12)   All of the family Columbidae (wild pigeons and doves) except for
the domestic strains of pigeons; and
      (13)   Ducks, geese, chickens and other poultry.
   CONFISCATE. A City official has Seized an Animal with the intent and purpose
to divest the Owner of all interest in the Animal and following the procedures
set forth in this article, to convey all rights, ownership and interests in the
Animal to the City of Albuquerque for the benefit of the Animal and the public.
   CONSTRUCTIVE POSSESSION. The exercise of dominion and control over the
location and treatment of property without taking physical possession of the
property.
   CRATE. A device or structure designed for the temporary confinement of an
Animal.
   CRUELTY. A Person intentionally killing an Animal without Lawful
Justification or mistreating, injuring, maiming, disfiguring, tormenting,
torturing, beating, mutilating, burning, scalding, poisoning, attempting to
poison or otherwise unnecessarily causing an Animal to suffer physical or
emotional harm. Any of the following is a separate act of Cruelty: failing to
provide necessary sustenance to an Animal under that Person's Custody or
control, failing to provide Adequate Shelter, failing to provide Potable Water,
failing to provide palatable, nutritious food of adequate quantity, taunting an
Animal, dyeing, or artificially coloring an Animal under the age of 12 weeks,
transporting an Animal in an open vehicle without proper restraints, leaving an
Animal in a vehicle when the temperature is such that it could cause pain or
suffering to the Animal. Abandonment or Neglect of an Animal is Cruelty.
Inaction of the Owner toward an Animal in need of Basic or Emergency Medical
Care is Cruelty. Surgery by a Veterinarian is not Cruelty but ear cropping, de-
barking, tail docking or Alteration by an individual who is not a Veterinarian
is Cruelty. Euthanasia by a Veterinarian or a Euthanasia Qualified Employee of
AACC shall not be deemed Cruelty provided it is carried out by methods
specified in this  article or by other generally accepted methods. The
application of pesticides or rodenticides by a properly licensed professional
is not Cruelty.
   CUSTODY. The possession, control over and responsibility for an Animal by a
Person who may or may not be the Owner.
   DEA. Drug Enforcement Agency.
   DIRECTOR. The Director of the Environmental Health Department of the City.
   DISPLAY. Any exhibition, act, circus, ride, trade show, carnival, parade,
race, photographic opportunity, performance or similar undertaking in which
Animals are required to perform or participate for the intended amusement or
benefit of an audience.
   DOGGIE DAY CARE. An Establishment that takes temporary possession of an
Animal to provide safety, comfort and socialization for the Animal.
   DOMESTIC ABUSE BOARDING. A program at AACC where Animals owned by a victim
of a Domestic Abuse Situation may obtain temporary housing at AACC.
   DOMESTIC ABUSE SITUATION. Any situation defined in the Crimes Against
Household Members Act, §§ 30-3-10 NMSA 1978, et seq.
   DOMESTIC ANIMAL. Any Animal whose psychology has been determined or
manipulated through selective breeding and which does not occur naturally in
the wild and includes ferrets, gerbils, guinea pigs, hamsters, horses, mice,
rabbits, donkeys, rats and kangaroo rats. All Companion Animals are Domestic
Animals but all Domestic Animals are not Companion Animals.
   EMERGENCY MEDICAL CARE. The care required in response to a traumatic injury
or rapidly evolving health crisis concerning an Animal.
   ENVIRONMENTAL ENRICHMENT. Safe products appropriate for the species that
will stimulate mental, physical and grooming activities for Animals.
   ESTABLISHMENT. A place of business in a zone other than a Residential Zone
together with its grounds and equipment.
   ESTRUS. The regularly recurring state rendering a female Animal capable of
accepting the male Animal for breeding and conception.
   EUTHANASIA. The killing of an Animal in a manner commonly recognized as
humane and acceptable by local Veterinarians or HSUS. Intra- cardiac shots are
absolutely prohibited as a form of Euthanasia at AACC.
   EUTHANASIA AUTHORIZED. Employees of AACC who have met the necessary training
requirements to perform Euthanasia and have been authorized by the Person In
Charge to humanely destroy the life of an Animal.
   EUTHANASIA QUALIFIED EMPLOYEE. An AACC employee who is trained and certified
by HSUS to be qualified to perform Euthanasia and approved by the Mayor’s
designee to perform Euthanasia at City facilities.
   EUTHANASIA ROOM. A separate room at AACC facilities used to perform
Euthanasia and for no other purpose and which meets all the requirements set
forth in this article.
   EXOTIC or WILD ANIMALS. Those species of Animals that are exotic to humans.
EXOTIC ANIMALS include any or all of the following orders and families, whether
bred in the wild or in captivity, and any or all hybrids. The Animals listed in
parentheses are intended to act as examples and are not to be construed as an
exhaustive list or limit the generality of each group of Animals, unless
otherwise specified:
      (1)   Class Mammalia
         (a)   Order Artiodactyla (hippopotamuses, giraffes, camels, deer, not
cattle or swine or sheep or goats)
         (b)   Order Carnivora
            1. Family Felidae (lions, tigers, cougars, leopards, ocelots,
servals, not domestic cats)
            2.   Family Canidae (wolves, coyotes, foxes, jackals, not domestic
dogs)
            3.   Family Ursidae (all bears)
            4.   Family Mustelidae (weasels, skunks, martens, minks, not
ferrets)
            5.   Family Procyonidae (raccoons, coatis)
            6.   Family Hyaenidae (hyenas)
            7.   Family Viverridae (civets, genets, mongooses)
         (c)   Order Edentatia (anteaters, armadillos, sloths)
         (d)   Order Marsupialia (opossums, kangaroos, wallabies, not sugar
gliders)
         (e)   Order Perissodactyla (rhinoceroses, tapirs, not horses or
donkeys or mules)
         (f)   Order Primates (lemurs, monkeys, chimpanzees, gorillas)
         (g)   Order Proboscidae (elephants)
         (h)   Order Rodentia (squirrels, beavers, porcupines, not guinea pigs,
or rats, or mice, or gerbils, or hamsters)
      (2)    Class Reptilia
         (a)   Order Squamata
            1.   Family Varanidae (only water monitors and crocodile monitors)
            2.   Family Iguanaidae (only green iguanas and rock iguanas)
            3.   Family Boidae (all species whose adult length has the
potential to exceed eight feet in length)
            4.   Family Colubridae (only boomslangs and African twig snakes)
            5.   Family Elapidae (coral snakes, cobras, mambas) - All species
            6.   Family Nactricidae (only keelback snakes)
            7.   Family Viperidae (copperheads, cottonmouths, rattlesnakes) -
All species
         (b)   Order Crocodilia (crocodiles, alligators, caimans, gavials) -
All species
         (c)    Order Cetacea (whales, dolphins, porpoises)
         (d)    Order Pinnipedia (seals, sea lions, walruses)
   EXOTIC OR WILD ANIMAL COLLECTION PERMIT or EWACP. The Permit allowing a
Person to own a Permissible Exotic or Wild Animal within the Albuquerque City
Limits.
   EXTREME CRUELTY. A Person is guilty of Extreme Cruelty to Animals if a
Person intentionally or maliciously tortures, mutilates, injures or kills an
Animal, or if a Person poisons an Animal. Extreme Animal Cruelty is governed by
§§ 30-18-1 NMSA 1978 et seq. and is a Fourth Degree Felony, punishable by a
fine up to $5,000 and 18 months imprisonment.
   FACILITY-WIDE CONTAGION. The presence of any disease at AACC which could be
passed from one Animal to another or to humans to a degree not ordinarily found
in nature and exacerbated by the close proximity of large numbers of Animals at
AACC.
   FIGHTING BIRD. A bird that is possessed, reared or trained for use in, or
that is actually used in, a Cockfight or any other fight or contest involving
Animals.
   FIGHTING DOG. A dog that is trained for use in, or that is actually used in
a fight with other dogs or any other Animal.
   FINDER. Any Person who discovers and temporarily takes possession of a
Companion Animal that has been separated from its Owner.
   FOSTER. To take temporary Custody of any Animal with the approval of or at
the request of AACC to administer veterinary care, groom, train, provide
special feeding, care for or otherwise provide for the Animal.
   FOSTER CARE PROVIDER. Any Person who fosters an Animal from or through AACC
to lend aid and comfort and to otherwise assist in making the Animal Adoptable
or, in the case of Domestic Abuse Boarding,  to provide a safe, homelike
environment to minimize the negative effects on the Animal of being separated
from its family.
   FOUND COMPANION ANIMAL. A Stray Animal that is temporarily possessed by a
Person who has registered with AACC to hold the Animal for Reclaim by the Owner
or subsequent disposition as provided in this article.
   GAFF. An artificial steel spur designed for attachment to the leg of a
Fighting Bird.
   GROOMING PARLOR. An Establishment that is maintained in whole or in part for
the purposes of performing cosmetological services for Animals.
   GUARD DOG. A dog that is used to protect a Guard Dog Site.
   GUARD DOG SITE. An Establishment that utilizes a Guard Dog.
   GUARD DOG SITE PERMIT or GDSP. The Permit required for a Guard Dog Site.
   HARNESS. With respect to a dog, a properly fitting apparatus that is not
abrasive and that restrains the dog by the body and shoulders without the
involvement of the neck. With respect to a cat, a properly fitting apparatus
that is not abrasive featuring adjustable collar buckles around the neck that
are joined to an adjustable girth.
   HEALTHY. That an Animal is free from disease and not suffering from any
objectively observable illness.
   HOUSEHOLD. A human social or family unit comprised of Persons living,
residing and domiciled in the same residence.
   HSUS. The Humane Society of the United States or its successor entities.
   HYBRID. An Animal created by breeding Animals of different species. Dogs,
wolves and coyotes are different species for purposes of this definition.
   IDENTIFIED. A Companion Animal that has an affixed License Tag, Microchip,
Tattoo or other indication of the Owner sufficient for AACC or any other
Person to contact the Owner or is known to an ASO or other AACC employee.
   ILLNESS. A malady, injury, impairment, or physical/mental condition that
requires veterinary care.
   IMPOUND. Receipt of an Animal by AACC for processing as provided in this
article.
   INDEPENDENT OBSERVER. A Person who evaluates a dog for Aggressive behavior
without knowing about the conclusions or observations of another Person who has
also evaluated the dog. INDEPENDENT OBSERVER shall also mean a Person who
evaluates a dog with no predisposition or prejudice concerning the dog and who
is free from influence by any third Person desiring any certain outcome of the
assessment.
   INJURED. The condition of an Animal's being harmed, disabled or impaired in
a physical sense which is determined by the reasonable objective observation of
wounds, injured limbs, broken bones, or disfiguring lacerations.
   INTACT. A dog or a cat over six months old that has not been Altered.
   INTACT COMPANION ANIMAL PERMIT or ICAP. The annual Permit issued to the
Owner of a Companion Animal that has not been Altered.
   INTACT COMPANION ANIMAL SITE. Any residence, building or other structure in
a Residential Zone that is used in whole or in part to house or keep an Intact
Animal.
   INTAKE AREA. The area set aside at each AACC facility where Animals are
dropped off by the public, Surrendered by the Owner, or brought in by Animal
Service Officers or other public safety personnel.
   INTAKE DAY. The first day of arrival of an Animal at AACC during which time
the Animal goes through the Intake Process.
   INTAKE PROCESS. The procedure for receiving, documenting, photographing,
physically examining, vaccinating, de-worming and applying parasite prevention
to Animals that arrive at AACC, and includes all activities between the time of
arrival and the time the Animal is put in the Enclosure where it will be housed
while at AACC.
   INTENT TO ADOPT. A document filed with AACC indicating that a Qualified
Adopter wants to Adopt a Companion Animal not currently available for Adoption.
   LAWFUL JUSTIFICATION. A strictly construed defense to a charge of Cruelty
based on an immediate need to defend a threatened Person or Animal from an
imminent attack by an Animal apparently capable of causing death or serious
bodily injury to the threatened individual or Animal.
   LEASH LAW. Animals, other than wild animals not owned by any human, must be
restricted at all times by either a Secure Fence, a Secure Facility, a Secure
Enclosure, secured in the back of a pickup truck, inside a vehicle with proper
ventilation, or be on a leash no longer than 8 feet long accompanied by a
person able to control the Animal.
   LETHAL DRUG. A chemical that causes the humane death of an Animal and that
is approved by the AACC Veterinarian and the Mayor’s designee.
   LICENSE. An Albuquerque Companion Animal License.
   LICENSE TAG. The tag supplied by AACC or its agents that contains the number
of an Albuquerque Companion Animal License.
   LITTER. One or more sibling offspring Companion Animal under six months old.
   LITTER PERMIT. Permit required when an Animal becomes pregnant.
   LITTER SURRENDER AGREEMENT. An agreement between the Mayor’s designee or his
or her designated representative(s) and the Owner of a Litter.
   LIVE HUMANE TRAP. Any device designed to catch and restrict an Animal
without causing any harm to the Animal.
   LIVESTOCK. Livestock as defined in the State Livestock Code and shall
include, but not be limited to, bison, buffalo, cattle, horses, donkeys, mules,
chickens, ducks, poultry, llamas, ostriches, emus, rheas, camelids (camels),
farmed cervidae, swine, sheep or goats.
   LOST AND FOUND PROGRAM. An AACC program that focuses on reuniting lost
Animals with their Owners.
   LOW INCOME PERSON.
      (1)   A Person who possesses:
         (a)   An EBT card issued by the State of New Mexico for Food Stamps;
         (b)   Either the annual letter of statement of benefits or monthly
benefit card for Supplemental Security Income;
         (c)   An EBT card issued by the State of New Mexico for the Temporary
Assistance for Needy Families program; or
         (d)   A Medicaid health benefit card; or
      (2)   A Person:
         (a)   Whose income is 50% or less of the median gross income for the
City adjusted for family size, as determined by the U.S. Department of Housing
and Urban Development or by figures obtainable from the Family and Community
Services Department of the City of Albuquerque or its successor agencies; and
         (b)   Who signs and submits an affidavit to AACC swearing that his or
her income is 50% or less of the median gross income for the City, adjusted for
family size.
   MAYOR’S DESIGNEE. The Mayor of the City of Albuquerque or his or her
designee.
   MEDICAL WAIVER CERTIFICATE. A document written by a Veterinarian stating why
a Companion Animal should not be altered. Used in cases when Alteration would
pose a substantial threat to the health of the Animal.
   MICROCHIP. A passive transponder which can be implanted in an Animal by
injection and which is a component of a radio frequency identification (RFID)
system, but excluding any system that is not compatible with the scanner used
by AACC.
   MODERATE INCOME PERSON. Any Person:
      (1)   Whose income is 80% or less of the median gross income for the City
adjusted for family size, as determined by the U.S. Department of Housing and
Urban Development or by figures obtainable from the Family and Community
Services Department of the City or its successor agencies; and
      (2)   Who signs and submits an affidavit to AACC swearing that his or her
income is 80% or less of the median gross income for the City, adjusted for
family size.
   MULTIPLE COMPANION ANIMAL SITE or MCAS. Property in a Residential Zone upon
which, by virtue of a Permit, the Owner is allowed to exceed the authorized
Companion Animal number limits authorized by this article.
   MULTIPLE COMPANION ANIMAL SITE PERMIT or MCASP. The Permit required to
operate a Multiple Companion Animal Site.
   NEGLECT. The failure of an Owner to provide care for an Animal in the
Owner’s Custody which failure causes an Animal to suffer physical or emotional
harm.
   NIGHTTIME. The period starting at 10:01 p.m. and ending at 7:00 a.m. the
following day.
   OWNER. A Person who possesses an Animal and claims a legally valid right of
possession of an Animal superior to the rest of the world. Under this article,
any Person acting as the agent of the Owner and any Person over the age of 18
in a Household and left in charge of an Animal may be deemed the Owner.
   OWNER SURRENDER. The relinquishment by the Owner of all rights in and to an
Animal to AACC.
   OWNER SURRENDER ACKNOWLEDGEMENT FORM. The AACC form that an Owner executes
in order to relinquish an Animal to AACC.
   PARASITE CONTROL. Eradication of pests such as insects, ticks, fleas, worms,
and other organisms living or seeking to live in or on an Animal. Reasonable
Parasite Control measures must be employed to eradicate parasites from all
areas an Animal has access to and from the body of the Animal.
   PERMANENT IDENTIFICATION. Companion dogs and cats required to have a
permanent, easily detectable, identification number applied by a Veterinarian
by means of a Microchip or Tattoo.
   PERMISSIBLE EXOTIC OR WILD ANIMALS. Exotic or Wild Animals, the Ownership of
which does not violate state or federal law.
   PERMIT. A document evidencing approval by the Mayor’s designee to conduct a
certain activity or possess a certain Animal.
   PERMIT HOLDER. A qualified person to whom a valid permit has been provided.
   PERMITTED PREMISES. The Establishment, residence, real property or other
site for which a valid Permit has been issued.
   PERSON. An individual, firm, partnership, corporation, company, society,
association or legal entity, and every officer, agent or employee thereof.
   PERSON IN CHARGE. The individual present or individual in apparent
supervision or control of a premise.
   PET STORE. An Establishment that, in whole or in part, offers Animals, other
than Companion Animals, for sale or resale, or sells Animals to consumers or
wholesalers.
   PET STORE PERMIT or PSP. A Pet Store Permit for Pet Stores that do not sell
Companion Animals.
   POLICE OFFICER. Any sworn member of the Albuquerque Police Department or any
sworn officer of any other law enforcement agency authorized and empowered to
enforce or execute laws in the City.
   POSSESSION. Custody of an Animal.
   POTABLE WATER. Water that is safe for drinking.
   POULTRY. Any bird that is kept as a pet or any bird that is commonly used by
humans for eggs or meat. Companion Birds are not considered Poultry in this
article.
   PROHIBITED EXOTIC or WILD ANIMALS. Any Exotic or Wild Animal that is
unlawful to own, possess, keep, harbor, bring into the city, have in one's
possession or allow to breed under federal or state law.
   PROOF OF OWNERSHIP. Any documentation or evidence which proved to the
satisfaction of the Mayor’s designee that a Person is the Owner of an Animal,
including a Microchip identification, Veterinarian invoice, official
registration, or photographs of the Animal.
   PROTECTIVE CUSTODY. The temporary control over and care of an Animal at
AACC.
   PROVOKED. The response of an Animal that a reasonable Person believes the
Animal has taken to defend itself, its Owner or family member, or another
Person within its immediate vicinity from assault, actual or perceived, or to
defend real property belonging to its Owner or family member.
   QUALIFIED ADOPTER. A Person who is 18 years of age or older, who has never
been convicted of any form of Cruelty under any law and in addition has not
been convicted two or more times for any violation of this article or its
predecessor ordinances, has never had any Animal-related Permit Revoked or
Suspended, has never failed to Reclaim an Animal from AACC, has not Surrendered
an Animal within one year of the time of Adoption and has never been convicted
of child or domestic abuse.
   QUARANTINE. The segregation of an Animal for any time as required under
state law or this article in order to control the spread of rabies or
contagious illness.
   RABIES VACCINATION. Inoculation with an anti- rabies vaccine recognized and
approved by the State of New Mexico and given in an amount sufficient to
provide immunity from rabies for a minimum of one year.
   RECLAIM. An Owner's recovery of an Animal that has been Impounded at AACC.
   REHABILITATORS. Individuals who provide professional care to sick, injured,
and orphaned wild animals so they can ultimately be returned to their natural
habitats. Such rehabilitation is not an attempt to turn wild animals into pets.
Patients are held in captivity only until they are able to live independently
in the wild.
   RESCUE GROUP or RESCUE INDIVIDUAL.  Those groups or individuals approved by
the Mayor’s designee for the purpose of Adopting Animals from AACC at a reduced
rate to provide needed medical, grooming, behavioral or rehabilitative services
in order to facilitate successful Adoptions of Animals.
   RESERVE ANIMAL SERVICE OFFICER or RESERVE ASO. Any Person who volunteers
without compensation to assist ASOs in the field.
   RESIDENTIAL ZONE. “Zone, Residential” as defined in the city's Integrated
Development Ordinance.
   RETURN BY ADOPTER. That an Animal has been returned to AACC within thirty
days of Adoption.
   SAFE HAVEN. The period of time when an Animal is exempt from Euthanasia.
   SANCTUARY. Areas protected through the management of human activities to
provide and maintain habitat, other wildlife, and the ecosystems that support
them. Inclusions: National Wildlife Areas, Migratory Bird Sanctuaries,
Conservation Areas and Marine Protected Areas.
   SECURE ENCLOSURE. Cage or box, that may be portable, from which an Animal is
not able to escape or be invaded.
   SECURE FENCE. A visible protective or confining barrier that prevents any
Animal, including Guard Dogs, from escaping the property on which the Animal is
being restricted. The Secure Fence shall also reasonably protect the Animal
within the fence from other Animals or people coming into contact with the
restrained Animal. This includes a dog run type structure.
   SECURE FACILITY. A house or building in which an Animal is being restricted
that will prevent the Animal, including a Guard Dog, from being able to escape.
   SEIZE. To take Custody of an Animal with or without notice to the Owner or
the consent of the Owner. Exigent circumstances must exist if an Animal is
taken into Custody without notice to the Owner or the consent of the Owner.
   SENIORS. Persons 65 years of age or older.
   SERVICE ANIMAL. A dog trained or being trained by a recognized school for
training dogs to assist Persons with disabilities; an Animal recognized as a
Service Animal pursuant to the Americans with Disabilities Act of 1990; or any
other Animal approved by the Governor’s Committee on Disability as acceptable
in public places and trained to provide some special assistance to a Person
with a disability.
   SEVERE MEDICAL CONDITION. A condition that results in an Animal requiring,
permanently or for an  extended period, a high level of constant care to
maintain comfort, sustain life, or attend to a bodily function that the Animal
cannot manage itself.
   SLASHER. A steel weapon resembling a curved knife blade designed for
attachment to the foot of a Fighting Bird.
   SPRING LOADED TRAP. Any device used to capture an Animal by the leg or any
extremity by closing on the Animal by the action of a spring or any other
mechanism designed to hold, immobilize or otherwise automatically detain an
Animal for any purpose. The City does not consider this to be a humane trap.
   STAFFING LEVELS FOR ANIMAL CARETAKING.  The minimum number of kennel staff
that must be available at AACC according to the Animal population at AACC as
set forth in the October 2000 HSUS Report to the Albuquerque Animal Services
Division under the heading titled "Staffing Levels for Animal Caretaking" at
page 96 of said report and the minimum number of ASOs that must be available
according to the HSUS Report at page 159.
   STRAY. An Animal that is At Large.
   SURRENDER. The relinquishment of Ownership of an Animal to AACC by the Owner
of the Animal.
   TATTOO. An indelible mark placed on an Animal to serve as Permanent
Identification.
   TIME. Days spent at AACC.
   TREATABLE ILLNESS. An illness, injury, impairment, or physical/mental
condition that can be reasonably treated using proper medication.
   TROLLEY. A cable strung between two fixed and stable points, to which a dog
on a short lead is attached, allowing for freedom of movement.
   TROLLEY PERMIT. A permit issued by the City authorizing the use of a
Trolley. In order to obtain a Trolley Permit, the applicant must prove that all
other means of restricting the Animal to the personal property have been
exhausted.
   UNIDENTIFIED. An animal that has no identification sufficient to allow AACC
to determine the Owner’s identity.
   USDA. The United States Department of Agriculture or its successor.
   VACCINATION or VACCINATE. Administer a vaccine to an Animal, including
rabies, distemper, parvo, para influenza, corona virus or bordatella and other
vaccines deemed necessary from time to time by the Mayor’s designee.
   VERMIN. Wild rodents and various insects including flies, mosquitoes, ants
and wasps.
   VETERINARIAN. A Doctor of Veterinary Medicine licensed to practice in the
State of New Mexico.
   VETERINARY EMERGENCY CLINIC or VEC.  Any entity which contracts with the
city for Veterinarian services.
   VOLUNTEER. Any Person who performs any Animal services function or assists
any AACC employee without compensation.
   VOLUNTEER COORDINATOR. A person employed by the city, of at least class M-
14, assigned to AACC for the purpose of recruiting and maintaining a cadre of
highly committed volunteers.
   WOLF HYBRID. The offspring of a domesticated dog that has been bred with a
wolf.
   WORKING DAYS. The days AACC is open to the public.
   ZOO. The Rio Grande Zoological Park and others zoos accredited by the
American Zoological Association.
(Ord. 18-2006; Am. Ord. 31-2007; Am. Ord._2017-025; Am. Ord._2019-032; Am. Ord.
2020-011; Am. Ord._2023-016)
§ 9-2-1-5 ADMINISTRATION.
   Rules and Regulations. Reasonable rules and regulations may be prescribed by
the Mayor’s designee to carry out the intent and purpose of this article,
pursuant to standards created by this article.
(Ord. 18-2006; Am. Ord._2023-016)
§ 9-2-1-6 PERJURY.
   It is unlawful for any person to make any false affidavit, or knowingly
swear or affirm falsely to any document, matter or thing required to be sworn
to or affirmed by the terms of this article.
(Ord. 18-2006)
§ 9-2-1-7 NO PRIVATE CAUSE OF ACTION.
   Nothing in this article is intended to create a private cause of action.
(Ord. 18-2006)
§ 9-2-1-8 EXEMPTION FOR ZOO AND AQUARIUM.
   Nothing in this article shall apply to the employees of the Albuquerque
Aquarium or the Rio Grande Zoo while acting within the scope of their
employment and consistent with accepted zoological practices.
(Ord. 18-2006)
PART 2: CARE, MAINTENANCE, HOUSING, RESTRAINT AND TRANSPORTATION STANDARDS
   Any person who violates a provision of this article shall be deemed guilty
of a petty misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be subject to the
penalty provisions set forth in § 1-1-99 ROA 1994. Every violation of this
article shall be a separate misdemeanor. Every day this article is violated
shall be considered a separate offense. Upon receipt of a citation, the person
cited must appear in court.
   The Owners of less common and Permissible Exotic or Wild Animals are
responsible for knowing and meeting the specific needs of the Animals in their
care. Ignorance of these needs will not be a defense against prosecution for
failure to provide proper care, maintenance and housing.
(Ord. 18-2006)
§ 9-2-2-1 REQUIRED CARE AND MAINTENANCE FOR MAMMALS AND BIRDS KEPT ON
RESIDENTIAL PROPERTY.
   (A)   Food and Water.
      (1)   Food. Mammals and birds shall be provided with uncontaminated,
edible, nutritious food, which is of adequate quantity as to maintain the
normal weight and condition of a healthy Animal. Additionally the amount of
food administered must properly conform to the individual Animal's age and
condition.
      (2)   Water. Mammals and birds shall be provided with constant access to
a supply of Potable Water in sufficient amount as to maintain good health as
required by the species whether Animals are outdoors or indoors except as
directed by a Veterinarian.
   (B)   Medical Treatment.
      (1)   Mammal and bird Owners shall provide regular Basic Medical Care and
Emergency Medical Care as defined in this article for all their Animals.
      (2)   No Animal should ever be allowed to suffer due to lack of medical
care.
      (3)   Owners of Companion Animals or ferrets over three months of age
shall have the Companion Animals and ferrets Vaccinated against rabies no less
frequently than required under state law.
   (C)   Required Alteration of Companion Animals.  All dogs and cats over the
age of six months shall be Altered by a Veterinarian except as provided herein.
      (1)   Owners of Companion Animals may seek an exemption from this
regulation if Alteration would be dangerous for the Companion Animal due to
advanced age or health issues. The Mayor’s designee may grant this exemption if
the Owner of the Animal can provide proof in the form of a letter from a
Veterinarian stating such reasons.
      (2)   Owners of Companion Animals may buy an Intact Animal Permit for up
to four Animals per residence as an exemption to this regulation.
   (D)   Female Animals in Estrus. While a female Companion Animal is in
Estrus, such Animal shall be isolated and protected from interaction with
Intact male Companion Animals of the same species unless breeding is intended
consistent with the requirements of this article.
   (E)   Basic Grooming. All Animals shall be groomed in accordance with the
definition of Basic Grooming as applicable to the species. Basic Grooming is
necessary to maintain the eyes, ears, beaks, hooves, feet and skin of an Animal
in healthy condition. Basic Grooming ensures that the toenails or hooves are
not so long as to cause the Animal not to be able to move normally or to cause
pain to the Animal. Basic Grooming also includes the Owner providing an Animal
with whatever the Animal needs for self-grooming. Grooming the coat on most
Animals is necessary to insure the coat is not matted to the point that it
becomes so heavy as to cause skin irritation or trap fecal matter. The Animal
shall not be so dirty as to provide a home for parasites and insects. No Animal
shall be allowed to have foreign objects imbedded in its skin, fur or hair
other than the required Microchip for Companion Animals.
   (F)   Environmental Enrichment. Owners shall provide safe products,
appropriate for the species, that will stimulate mental, physical and grooming
activities.
   (G)   Permanent Identification. All Companion Animals shall be Permanently
Identified by a Microchip or Tattoo. Microchipping shall be available for free
at AACC for Low Income Persons and Seniors. It is the Owner’s responsibility to
contact AACC for information regarding using a Tattoo as a Permanent
Identification.
(Ord. 18-2006; Am. Ord. 29-2006; Am. Ord._2023-016)
§ 9-2-2-2 HOUSING AND RESTRAINT STANDARDS FOR MAMMALS AND BIRDS KEPT ON
RESIDENTIAL PROPERTY.
   (A)   Leash Law. All Animals, other than wild Animals not owned by any
human, must be restricted at all times by either a Secure Fence, a Secure
Facility, a Secure Enclosure, secured in the back of a pickup truck, inside a
vehicle with proper ventilation, or be on a leash no longer than 8 feet long
accompanied by a person able to control the Animal.
   (B)   General Standards that apply to both indoor and outdoor locations
including Secure Facility and Secure Fence.
      (1)   Cleanliness. Feces and soiled bedding must be removed at least
weekly to prevent odors and possible dangerous or toxic exposure or
contamination by fecal material, mold or internal and external parasites that
could harm the Animal or cause the spread of disease to other Animals or
humans. Premises shall be kept in such a way that no animal has an opportunity
to become entangled with loose wire, or get splinters from wooden boards, or
come into contact with other yard trash that could harm an Animal.
      (2)   Hazards. All areas where Animals are kept shall be maintained in a
manner that no Animal can accidentally or intentionally come into contact with
chemicals or other dangerous substances including, but not limited to,
antifreeze that could potentially poison an Animal.
      (3)   Exposure to insects and parasites. Areas where the Animal will be
spending time shall be maintained to minimize the Animal's exposure to fleas,
ticks, flies, mosquitoes, ants, wasps, bees, maggots or other insects that
could potentially cause the Animal harm or discomfort.
   (C)   Indoor - Secure Facility.
      (1)   Companion Animals kept in Cages or Crates indoors must be kept in a
Crate, Cage or enclosure larger than that required for Boarding Kennels, Pet
Stores and Animal Shelters in §
9-2-2-4 of this article.
      (2)   Companion Birds kept in Cages must have enough room to spread their
wings and have at least 2 perches of different diameters available to them.
      (3)   Other Animals kept indoors in Cages, Crates or other enclosures
must be provided with adequate space to prevent overcrowding and to allow the
Animals to maintain normal exercise levels required by the size, temperament
and type of Animal.
   (D)   Outdoor - Secure Fence.
      (1)   Space Requirement. When Animals are outdoors restricted by a Secure
Fence they must be provided with adequate space to prevent overcrowding and to
allow the Animals to maintain normal exercise levels required by the size,
temperament and type of Animal.
      (2)   Adequate Shelter and shade. Animals that are not allowed free
access to the Household must be provided with Adequate Shelter and shade. A
structure that provides Adequate Shelter might not provide adequate shade: for
example, a doghouse that protects the dog from wind and rain may be too hot
inside when exposed to direct sunlight during the warmer months so shade must
also be provided. Outside housing shall protect Animals from any extreme
weather conditions that may be detrimental to the health or comfort of the
Animals.
      (3)   Chaining, when not accompanied by a Person.
         (a)   Chaining is prohibited as a means of outdoor confinement for
more than one hour during any 24 hour period.
         (b)   No Chain shall weigh more than 1/8 of the Animal’s weight.
         (c)   The Chain must be affixed to the Animal by the use of a non-
abrasive, well-fitted harness.
         (d)   The Chain must be at least 12 feet long and fastened so the
Animal can sit, walk, and lie down using natural motions.
         (e)   The Chain must be unobstructed by objects that may cause the
Chain or the Animal to become entangled.
         (f)   The Chain shall have a swivel on both ends.
         (g)   The Chained Animal shall be surrounded by a barrier sufficient
to protect the Chained Animal from At Large Animals. The barrier shall be
sufficient to prevent children from accidentally coming into contact with the
Chained Animal.
      (4)   Trolley. A person may apply for a Trolley Permit as a means of
restricting an Animal to one's property. Trolleys shall be used for no longer
than nine hours in a 24 hour period. The animal attached to a Trolley shall be
surrounded by a barrier sufficient to protect the Animal from At Large animals.
The barrier shall be sufficient to prevent children from accidentally coming
into contact with the chained animal. To use a Trolley, the Owner must have a
valid Trolley Permit.
      (5)   Crates. The use of a Crate is prohibited as a means of outdoor
confinement for the purpose of circumventing the Secure Fence requirement or
the Chaining prohibition of this article.
      (6)   Cages and other enclosures.  Companion Birds kept in Cages must
have enough room to spread their wings and have at least two perches of
different diameters available to them. Other outdoor enclosures must provide
the basic needs, including shade, as stated in this article.
(Ord. 18-2006)
§ 9-2-2-3 REQUIRED CARE AND MAINTENANCE FOR MAMMALS AND BIRDS KEPT AT BOARDING
KENNELS, GUARD DOG SITES, ANIMAL SHELTERS INCLUDING THE ALBUQUERQUE ANIMAL CARE
CENTER AND PET STORES (NON- RESIDENTIAL SITES).
   Pet Stores are not allowed to sell dogs or cats. Facilities must have an
adequate number of employees on duty to maintain the care and maintenance
standards in this article. Each Animal shall be observed daily by the Person in
Charge.
   (A)   Food and Water.
      (1)   Food. Mammals and birds shall be provided with uncontaminated,
edible, nutritious food, which is of adequate quantity as to maintain the
normal weight and condition of a healthy Animal. Additionally, the amount of
food administered and feeding times must properly conform to the individual
Animal's age and condition. Food should be stored in a rodent proof and insect
proof container. Open food must be kept in covered, washable containers.
Refrigeration shall be available and used for partially consumed cans of food.
Food and water dishes must not be made of plastic and must be washed after
every meal. There should be a designated area available to wash dishes with hot
water and the appropriate disinfectant.
      (2)   Water. Mammals and birds shall be provided with constant access to
a supply of Potable Water in sufficient amount as to maintain good health as
required by the species whether the Animal is outdoors or indoors.
   (B)   Medical Treatment.
      (1)   Boarding Kennels.
         (a)   The services of a locally available Veterinarian must be
retained and his or her name must be listed on the application for the Animal
Service Provider Permit. AACC must be notified if a change in Veterinary
services occurs. If there is a medical problem with an Animal and the Owner's
Veterinarian is not available, the Veterinarian listed for the kennel shall be
contacted as soon as possible.
         (b)   Sick Animals should be placed in their own enclosures and given
medical attention immediately.
         (c)   No Animal should ever be allowed to suffer due to lack of
medical care.
      (2)   Animal Shelters including AACC.
         (a)   Veterinary Services shall be available to Animals in shelters 24
hours a day, seven days a week. AACC shall employ at least two full time
Veterinarians and contract with or employ additional staff to meet the
requirements of this article.
         (b)   Sick Animals should be placed in their own enclosures and given
medical attention immediately.
         (c)   No Animal should ever be allowed to suffer due to lack of
medical care.
      (3)   Pet Stores.
         (a)   The services of a locally available Veterinarian must be
retained and his or her name must be listed on the application for the Animal
Service Provider Permit. AACC must be notified if a change in Veterinary
services occurs. The listed Veterinarian shall be used whenever there is a
health concern.
         (b)   Sick Animals should be placed in their own enclosures and given
medical attention.
         (c)   No Animal should ever be allowed to suffer due to lack of
medical care.
      (4)   Guard Dog Sites.
         (a)   Both the Owner of the Guard Dog and the owner of the Guard Dog
Site must retain the services of a locally available Veterinarian and his or
her name must be listed on the application for the Guard Dog Site Permit. AACC
must be notified if a change in Veterinary services occurs. The listed
Veterinarian shall be used whenever there is a health concern.
         (b)   Sick Animals should be placed in their own enclosures and given
medical attention.
         (c)   No Animal should ever be allowed to suffer due to lack of
medical care.
   (C)   Required Alteration of Companion Animals. No Companion Animal owned by
a person who lives in Bernalillo County or the surrounding counties of
Valencia, Sandoval, Cibola, Santa Fe and Torrance shall leave any Animal
Shelter including AACC without having been Altered except as provided herein.
The foregoing does not apply to a permitted Intact Animal which is not required
to be Altered until Impounded twice at AACC or to an Animal whose Alteration
would be dangerous due to age or health issues. This provision does not apply
to Boarding Kennels and Guard Dog Sites. Intact Animals at Guard Dog Sites must
have Intact Animal Permits.
   (D)   Female Animals in Estrus. While a female Companion Animal is in
Estrus, such Animal shall be isolated and protected from interaction with
Intact male Companion Animals of the same species unless breeding is intended
consistent with the requirements of this article. No breeding is allowed at
Guard Dog Sites, Pet Stores or Animal Shelters including AACC.
   (E)   Basic Grooming. All Animals shall be groomed in accordance with this
article as described by the definition of Basic Grooming as applicable to the
species. Basic Grooming is necessary to maintain the eyes, ears, beaks, hooves,
feet and skin of an Animal in healthy condition. Basic Grooming includes making
sure that the toenails or hooves are not so long as to cause the Animal not to
be able to move normally or to cause pain to the Animal. Basic grooming also
includes providing the Animal with whatever the Animal needs for self-grooming.
No Animal shall be allowed to have a coat that is matted to the point that it
becomes so heavy as to cause skin irritation or trap fecal matter. The Animal
shall not be so dirty as to provide a home for parasites and insects. No Animal
shall be allowed to have foreign objects imbedded in its skin, fur or hair
other than the required Microchip for Companion Animals. Boarding Kennels are
not required to provide Basic Grooming for boarded Animals.
   (F)   Environmental Enrichment. Mammals and Companion birds kept overnight
shall be provided with safe products appropriate for the species that will
stimulate mental, physical and grooming activities. Boarding Kennels may waive
this requirement. No toy shall be used by more than one Animal. Toys shall not
be allowed to get so dirty that the toy could be a health hazard.
   (G)   Permanent Identification. No Companion Animals shall be allowed to
leave any Animal Shelter including AACC without being Microchipped. Boarding
Kennels are not responsible for Microchipping.
(Ord. 18-2006)
§ 9-2-2-4 HOUSING AND RESTRAINT STANDARDS FOR MAMMALS AND BIRDS KEPT AT
BOARDING KENNELS, GUARD DOG SITES, ANIMAL SHELTERS INCLUDING THE ALBUQUERQUE
ANIMAL CARE CENTER (AACC) AND PET STORES (NON-RESIDENTIAL SITES).
   (A)   General Housing and Restraint Standards.  Housing provided must meet
the criteria of a Secure Facility or Secure Fence as defined in this article.
      (1)   Leash Law. All Animals, other than Wild Animals not owned by any
human, must be restricted at all times by either a Secure Fence, a Secure
Facility, a Secure Enclosure, secured in the back of a pickup truck, inside a
vehicle with proper ventilation, or be on a leash no longer than eight feet
long accompanied by a Person able to control the Animal.
      (2)   Living quarters for Animals must be waterproof, structurally sound,
and have no protrusions that could injure Animals.
      (3)   Cleanliness. The entire premises shall be kept clean and in good
repair in a manner which will protect Animals from disease or injury. Feces and
urine must be removed at least twice daily from Companion Animal living
quarters to prevent odors and possible dangerous or toxic exposure or
contamination by fecal material, mold or internal and external parasites that
could harm the Animal or cause the spread of disease to other Animals or
humans. After cleaning, cats shall not be returned to their enclosures until
the enclosures have air dried. Soiled bedding must be changed daily. If hosing
the enclosures, the Animals must be removed and not allowed to come in contact
with the dirty, pooled water or wet floors. Animals shall never be squirted
with water. Suitable drainage must be provided. There can be no standing water.
      (4)   Hazards. All areas where Animals are kept shall be maintained in a
manner such that no Animal can accidentally or intentionally come into contact
with chemicals or other dangerous substances including, but not limited to,
antifreeze that could potentially poison an Animal. A room or closet must be
available to store cleaning supplies. Cleaning supplies and food cannot be
stored together. Provisions shall be made for the timely removal and proper
disposal of Animal and food waste, soiled bedding, dead Animals, and debris.
Disposal facilities and methodology shall minimize vermin infestation, odors,
and disease.
      (5)   Exposure to insects and parasites.  Areas where the Animal will be
spending time shall be maintained to minimize the Animal's exposure to fleas,
ticks, flies, mosquitoes, ants, wasps, bees, or other insects that could
potentially cause the Animal harm or discomfort.
   (B)   Indoor - Secure Facility.
      (1)   Minimum floor space and other requirements for cats.
         (a)   Cats shall have a minimum of four square feet of flat floor
space and twenty-two inches of vertical space.
         (b)   Cats shall always have access to litter. The size of a litter
box shall be subtracted when measuring the minimum space required for a cat.
         (c)   When there is more than one cat in an enclosure, additional
floor and vertical space and resting perches are required. This does not
include a cat with kittens.
      (2)   Minimum floor space requirements for dogs.
         (a)   Dogs weighing less than 30 pounds shall have eight square feet
of flat floor space and two feet of vertical space per dog.
         (b)   Dogs weighing between 30 and 65 pounds shall have 12 square feet
of flat floor space and three feet of vertical space per dog.
         (c)   Dogs that weigh more than 65 pounds shall have 24 square feet of
flat floor space and three feet of vertical space per dog.
      (3)   Minimum requirements for birds.
         (a)   Birds must have enough room to spread their wings to their full
width.
         (b)   Birds must have at least two perches of different circumferences
available to them.
      (4)   Any other Animals not specifically listed should be provided with
adequate space to prevent overcrowding and to allow the Animal to maintain
normal exercise levels required by the species, size and temperament of the
Animal.
      (5)   Heating and cooling systems are required if needed to keep the
temperature between 60 and 80 degrees Fahrenheit. All kennel buildings
constructed after the effective date of this article that are not fully and
constantly enclosed shall be required to contain radiant floor heat.
Ventilation must be such that there are no drafts in the winter, odors, or
moisture condensation. The general ventilation guideline for the areas in which
the Animals are confined is ten to 15 fresh air changes per hour. All kennel
buildings constructed after the effective date of this article shall install
ventilation systems that adhere to this guideline. Existing kennel buildings
that do not meet this guideline must do so within five years of the effective
date of this article.
      (6)   Ample light must exist so that all areas of the building and Animal
enclosures can be easily examined. Any lights in Animal areas should have
covers such as protective sleeves for fluorescent bulbs.
   (C)   Outdoor - Secure Fence.
      (1)   Space Requirements. When Animals are outdoors restricted by a
Secure Fence, they must be provided with adequate space to prevent overcrowding
and to allow the Animal to maintain normal exercise levels required by the
size, temperament and type of Animal.
      (2)   Adequate Shelter and shade. Animals that are not allowed free
access to go inside a building must be provided with Adequate Shelter and
shade. A structure that provides Adequate Shelter might not provide adequate
shade: for example, a doghouse that protects the dog from wind and rain may be
too hot inside when exposed to direct sunlight during the warmer months so
shade must also be provided. Outside housing shall protect Animals from any
extreme weather conditions that may be detrimental to the health or comfort of
the Animals. Suitable drainage must be provided and there can be no standing
water.
      (3)   Chaining. Chaining is prohibited as a means of outdoor confinement
in non-residential areas.
      (4)   Trolley. Trolleys are prohibited as a means of outdoor confinement
in non-residential areas.
      (5)   Crate. Crates are prohibited as a means of outdoor confinement in
non-residential areas.
      (6)   Cages and other stackable kennel enclosures with wire bottoms are
prohibited. The exceptions to this are Companion Bird and ferret cages and
enclosures with plastic coated mesh floors with holes smaller than one square
inch. Rabbit hutches may have a wire bottom no more than one half the floor.
(Ord. 18-2006; Am. Ord._2017-014)
§ 9-2-2-5 STANDARDS FOR GROOMING PARLORS AND DOGGIE DAY CARE FACILITIES.
   (A)   Indoor and outdoor facilities must meet the definitions of “Secure
Facility” and “Secure Fence”. Indoor temporary enclosures for Animals must be
structurally sound and have no protrusions that are reasonably likely to injure
Animals. Temporary enclosures must be large enough for the Animals to stand up,
lie down and stretch out comfortably. Cats shall have access to litter.
Ventilation must be such that there are no strong odors. If the outdoor
facilities include enclosures for the Animals, they must be waterproof. Outdoor
facilities must provide shade from the sun and shelter from rain or snow.
Suitable drainage must be provided. There can be no unintentional standing
water.
   (B)   Cleanliness. Feces and urine shall be removed as necessary to prevent
the Animals from becoming soiled and to prevent odors but under no
circumstances less than twice each day or every time a new Animal is placed in
a temporary enclosure. All areas of the premises must be kept clean and in good
repair. A room or closet must be available to securely store cleaning supplies.
Provisions shall be made for the timely removal and proper disposal of Animal
waste and debris. Disposal facilities and methodology shall minimize vermin
infestation, odors and disease.
(Ord. 18-2006)
§ 9-2-2-6 TRANSPORTING ANIMALS IN VEHICLES.
   When transporting Animals they must be kept safe.
   (A)   Pickup Trucks. Animals that are transported in the bed of a pickup
truck must be humanely restrained or Crated to prevent the possibility of the
Animal falling out, protected from extreme temperatures and provided with a
non-metal surface to sit or stand on.
      (1)   Humanely restrained. The Animal must be attached to the truck by
means of a Harness, not a neck collar, in a way to insure that the animal
cannot jump out of or fall from the truck or be strangled. There must be two
fixed point fastening locations at least two feet apart to attach the harness
to in order to prevent the Animal from strangling or falling out.
      (2)   Crate. If an Animal is put in a Crate or other enclosure, the Crate
or enclosure must be securely fastened to the bed or sides of the truck so that
the Crate or enclosure cannot turn over or fall out.
      (3)   Protection from weather. No Animal shall be left in the bed of a
truck whether in a Crate or not when the weather is such that the Animal will
be exposed to extreme heat, cold or rain.
   (B)   Cars, Vans and RVs. Animals riding inside vehicles that are not in
Crates or other enclosures must not be allowed access to a window opened wide
enough for the Animal to jump, fly or fall out. Animals left unattended in
cars, vans or RVs must have adequate ventilation to prevent the temperature in
the vehicle from rising high enough such that any reasonable Person would know
that the Animal would suffer from heat exposure. During the warmer months, no
amount of ventilation will keep the car from getting too hot. If the Mayor’s
designee determines that an Animal in a vehicle is in immediate danger, the
Mayor’s designee may enter the vehicle by whatever means necessary, without
being liable to the owner of the vehicle, and seize the Animal.
   (C)   Transporting more than one Animal. In addition to all other
regulations in this article, Animals should never be overcrowded when being
transported. If the Animals are Crated or kept in any enclosure, they may be
allowed to share a Crate but each Animal should be able to stand up, move
around, lie down and stretch out naturally. If Crates or enclosures are
stacked, they must be attached securely to prevent the Crates or enclosures
from falling or turning over. If Crates or other enclosures are stacked, it is
important that no urine or feces are passed between Crates and enclosures.
(Ord. 18-2006; Am. Ord._2023-016)
PART 3: REQUIRED LICENSE AND PERMITS
§ 9-2-3-1 REQUIRED ALBUQUERQUE COMPANION PET MICROCHIP.
   (A)   Albuquerque Residents. All residents of Albuquerque who own Companion
Animals shall have a microchip implanted and registered with the appropriate
microchipping company as well as registered with AACC for each Companion Animal
they own that is over the age of three months.
   (B)   Non-Resident. Any Person who lives in Bernalillo County or the
surrounding counties of Valencia, Cibola, Sandoval, Torrance or Santa Fe and is
not a City resident but who keeps a Companion Animal in the city for more than
15 consecutive days or an aggregate of 30 days in any year shall obtain a
Companion Pet Microchip and register such Microchip with AACC.
   (C)   Companion Animals must have a current Rabies Vaccination and be
Microchipped or Permanently Identified.
   (D)   Impounded Companion Animals. Any Person who lives in Bernalillo County
or the surrounding counties of Valencia, Cibola, Sandoval, Torrance or Santa Fe
who owns a Companion Animal that has been impounded by AACC shall obtain a a
Companion Pet Microchip.
   (E)   Collar or Harness Requirements.
      (1)   Any Companion Animal outside the Owner’s real property shall wear a
collar or a Harness with a current Anti-Rabies Vaccination Tag attached to the
collar or Harness, even if the Companion Animal is Microchipped.
      (2)   A collar or Harness with the required tag attached may be removed
from the Companion Animal temporarily for medical care, training, grooming, or
when the Companion Animal is in a Bona Fide Animal Show.
(Ord. 18-2006; Am. Ord._2019-032)
§ 9-2-3-2 PERMITS: GENERAL PROVISIONS.
   (A)   A Permit is not a property right.
   (B)   The Mayor’s designee can refuse to issue, revoke, suspend or modify
Permits and impose conditions or limits upon the issuance of Permits, including
the declaration of moratoria regarding issuance of Permits.
   (C)   Permits expire one year from the date of issue, unless otherwise
specifically provided in this article.
   (D)   The Mayor’s designee shall charge a reasonable inspection fee for
compliance inspections.
   (E)   Permits are not transferable or refundable.
   (F)   The Fees for Permits are as stated in §
9-2-3-16 of this article.
(Ord. 18-2006; Am. Ord._2023-016)
§ 9-2-3-3 PERMIT HOLDERS: GENERAL DUTIES AND REQUIREMENTS.
   Permit Holders must comply with all the requirements of this article, state
law, and federal law. Additionally, Permit Holders must comply with the
following duties and requirements. Any violation by a Permit Holder may result
in revocation, suspension or modification of the Permit.
   (A)   Permit Holders shall meet the standards of a Qualified Adopter.
   (B)   Permit Holders shall comply with all special requirements pertaining
to the type of Permit held.
   (C)   Inspections.
      (1)   A permitted Establishment, other than a residence, shall allow
entry and inspection of the Permit Holder’s premises by the Mayor’s designee.
Upon presentation of proper identification, the Mayor’s designee shall be
allowed to enter any Permitted Establishment for the purpose of making an
inspection of the premises for compliance with this article or an inspection to
ascertain the existence or nonexistence of conditions dangerous to health or
safety or otherwise relevant to the public interest in conformance with the
provisions of the Public Health Act, NMSA 1978, 24-1-1 et seq. (2006).
      (2)   The holder of a Permit pertaining to a permitted activity in a
residence may consent to an inspection but also has the right to deny entry for
an inspection or schedule the inspection at a convenient time and attempt to
prove compliance to the satisfaction of the Mayor’s designee by means other
than inspection. If the Mayor’s designee finds that the Permit Holder is not in
compliance, the Permit Holder may request an Administrative Hearing to prove
compliance to the satisfaction of the Administrative Hearing Officer. Nothing
herein limits the authority of the City or other law enforcement authority to
seek or obtain a search warrant if there is probably cause of crime on private
property or an inspectorial order for the purpose of ascertaining the existence
or nonexistence of conditions dangerous to health or safety or otherwise
relevant to the public interest.
      (3)   The Person in Charge of the Permitted Premises shall be allowed to
accompany the Mayor’s designee on his inspection.
      (4)   Upon completion of an inspection of a Permitted Premises, the
Mayor’s designee shall prepare a written inspection report stating whether the
Permitted Premises is in compliance with or in violation of the requirements of
this article.
      (5)   If the Mayor’s designee determines the Permitted Premises is not in
compliance with the provisions of this article, the report shall specify the
nature of the noncompliance.
      (6)   The Mayor’s designee and the Person in Charge of the Permitted
Premises shall sign the inspection report.
      (7)   A copy of the inspection report shall be furnished to the Person in
Charge at the time of the inspection.
      (8)   All inspection reports for business Permitted Premises shall be
posted on the AACC Website.
   (D)   Records. The Mayor’s designee shall be allowed to examine all records
pertinent to the origin, care and disposition of Animals owned by the Permit
Holder. A current record shall be kept which describes all Animals owned,
purchased or received by the Permit Holder and the disposition of each Animal.
Permit Holders shall promptly produce any and all documents pertaining to
medical care and ownership records for inspection upon request of the Mayor’s
designee. Permit Holders who sell, give away, loan, transfer or in any way
alienate possession or ownership of an Animal shall keep records containing the
name and address of each recipient, the date of disposition and the Permanent
Identification of each Companion Animal. All required documents shall be kept
for three years after the death or other disposition of any Animal owned by the
Permit Holder.
   (E)   Permit Holders shall comply with all city ordinances including the
Integrated Development Ordinance and Noise Ordinance provisions that pertain to
Animals.
   (F)   Any Permitted Premises open to the public shall post a sign
conspicuously observable by the public which states that all Companion Animals
in the city must be spayed or neutered unless they possess an Intact Animal
Permit and they must be Microchipped or otherwise Permanently Identified. Such
signs shall be at least 8 ½ inches by 11 inches in size and contain lettering
at least 1 inch in height.
   (G)   Non-residential Permitted Premises shall post their Permit in a
conspicuous place.
   (H)   The Permit Holder shall notify the Mayor’s designee of any changes
which may affect the status of the Permit and shall keep the Mayor’s designee
informed of any changes in the Permit Holder's name, address, home and business
telephone numbers, location of the Permitted Premises, emergency contacts and
activities covered by the Permit.
   (I)   Both the Person in Charge of a Permitted Premises and the Owner of the
Permitted Premises shall be responsible for complying with this article.
(Ord. 18-2006; Am. Ord._2017-025; Am. Ord._2019-032; Am. Ord._2023-016)
§ 9-2-3-4 PERMIT RENEWALS.
   (A)   An application for the renewal of a Permit shall be filed with AACC
not less than 30 days before the date the Permit expires.
   (B)   The application, inspection procedures and fees for Permit renewals
shall be the same as those for new applications.
   (C)   Failure to renew a Permit as specified shall result in the expiration
of the Permit. In addition to the renewal fee the Mayor’s designee may charge a
late fee.
(Ord. 18-2006; Am. Ord._2023-016)
§ 9-2-3-5 PERMIT APPLICATIONS.
   (A)   Applicants for any Permit shall meet the standards of a Qualified
Adopter.
   (B)   Application Process.
      (1)   The application form shall require the applicant to affirm under
penalty of perjury that the applicant meets the standards of a Qualified
Adopter and to provide information that is sufficient to assure the Mayor’s
designee that the applicant has the knowledge and facilities adequate to care
for the Animals covered by the Permit in a manner that protects both the
Animals and the public.
      (2)   The application form shall require the applicant to supply the
names, addresses and phone numbers of two adults not living at the same address
as the applicant, or each other, for the purpose of being emergency contacts.
These people must agree to take responsibility for the Animals in the event the
Permit Holder becomes unable to take care of the Animals covered by their
Permit.
      (3)   No Person shall be issued a Permit if that Person is jointly
interested in the Permit or otherwise in privity with any Person who does not
meet the standards of a Qualified Adopter.
      (4)   Within 30 days of the receipt of a Permit application the Mayor’s
designee shall review the application and inspect the premises. The Mayor’s
designee shall approve, conditionally approve or deny the Permit application
and notify the applicant in writing of the decision.
      (5)   The Mayor’s designee may approve an application only after the
following determinations are made:
         (a)   the standards established by this article and other applicable
laws and regulations have been met;
         (b)   the issuance of a Permit will not result in activity which
presents a danger to the public health, safety or welfare; and
         (c)   the issuance of a Permit does not create a nuisance for any
Person.
      (6)   If any affected party wishes to appeal the Mayor's designee’s
decision regarding a Permit application, the party may request an
Administrative Hearing before the Administrative Hearing Officer.
(Ord. 18-2006; Am. Ord._2023-016)
§ 9-2-3-6 INTACT COMPANION ANIMAL PERMIT OR ICAP.
   Owners of dogs and cats over the age of six months that have not been
Altered shall obtain an Intact Companion Animal Permit for those Animals.
   (A)   All Intact Companion Animals must be Permanently Identified by a
Microchip or other identification method acceptable to the Mayor’s designee and
registered with the AACC before an ICAP can be issued.
   (B)   No Person shall have more than four Intact Companion Animals in any
Household.
   (C)   The Household shall be secure against ingress by Companion Animals of
the same species or egress of the Companion Animal for which the ICAP is
issued. The Household shall meet the standards of a Secure Facility or a Secure
Fence.
   (D)   If an Intact Companion Animal that has been issued an ICAP is
Impounded twice by AACC, the ICAP will be automatically revoked and the Intact
Companion Animal will be required to be Altered. If an Intact Companion Animal
is Impounded twice and must therefore be Altered, the Permit Holder shall pay
AACC to Alter the Companion Animal.
   (E)   If an ICAP Holder wants to breed an Intact Companion Animal or if a
female Intact Companion Animal has been impregnated, the ICAP Holder must
obtain a Litter Permit prior to the birth of the Litter.
   (F)   Medical Waiver Certificate.
      (1)   If Alteration of a Companion Animal would endanger the health of
the Companion Animal due to age or Illness, a Veterinarian may complete a
Medical Waiver Certificate stating the reasons why the Companion Animal should
not be Altered.
      (2)   The Medical Waiver Certificate must include a description of the
Companion Animal, including the Permanent Identification information.
      (3)   Upon receipt of a Medical Waiver Certificate, the Mayor’s designee
may request a second opinion from a different Veterinarian.
      (4)   The Mayor’s designee may direct the AACC Veterinarian to examine
any Animal listed in a Medical Waiver Certificate if there appears to be an
abundance of Medical Waiver Certificates from one particular Veterinarian or
Veterinary clinic.
      (5)   If there is a difference of opinion between the two Veterinarians
as to whether the Companion Animal may be safely Altered, a written notice will
be provided to the Owner indicating that a Medical Waiver Certificate has been
rejected. The Owner will then be required to Alter the Animal or pay for an
Intact Companion Animal Permit. The decision to deny a Medical Waiver
Certificate due to a difference in professional opinions by two Veterinarians
may be subject to appeal by the Owner.
      (6)   Upon the acceptance of a Medical Waiver Certificate by AACC, the
Owner shall be issued an Intact Companion Animal Permit free of charge.
      (7)   Medical Waiver Certificates shall be valid for one year. Upon
expiration of the Medical Waiver Certificate, the Owner shall be required to
reapply for the Intact Companion Animal Permit.
(Ord. 18-2006; Am. Ord._2019-032; Am. Ord._2023-016)
§ 9-2-3-7 COMPANION ANIMAL LITTER PERMIT.
   (A)   Owners of female intact Companion Animals must obtain a Litter Permit
prior to the birth of a Litter or within one week after the birth of the
Litter.
   (B)   All female Intact Companion Animals must have an ICAP and be
Microchipped or otherwise Permanently Identified before a Litter Permit will be
issued.
   (C)   No Person shall apply for or obtain more than four Litter Permits per
Household in any consecutive 12 month period.
   (D)   No Person shall apply for or obtain more than one Litter Permit per
female Companion Animal per Household in any consecutive 12 month period.
   (E)   Litter Permits expire six months from the date of issue.
   (F)   During the time the Litter Permit is in effect and while the Litter is
with the mother, but for no longer than six months from the time of birth of
the Litter, the Litter Permit Holder may exceed the Animal Possession Limits in
this article.
   (G)   AACC may waive the Litter Permit Fee for Rescue Groups and Fosters.
   (H)   The following Care and Disposition requirements regarding Litter
Companion Animals are in effect whether or not the Owner of the Litter
possesses a Litter Permit:
      (1)   Puppies and kittens shall have at least the first in any series of
required Vaccinations and be de-wormed by a de-worming treatment consistent
with the size and age of the Animal before being transferred to a new Owner or
otherwise separated from the mother.
      (2)   Puppies and kittens shall be microchipped or otherwise Permanently
Identified prior to being separated from the mother. Proof of Permanent
Identification must be provided to AACC.
      (3)   The Litter Permit Holder shall upon transfer or conveyance of the
kitten or puppy, deliver a complete Vaccination record to the new Owner.
      (4)   The Litter Permit Holder shall document and retain for inspection
the name and address of each recipient of any Litter Companion Animal once
owned by the Litter Permit Holder.
      (5)   The Litter Permit Holder is liable for the medical costs, including
medicine, for any puppy or kitten that is diagnosed as sick by a Veterinarian
within one week from the date of sale. The Litter Permit Holder shall reimburse
the new Owner the costs associated with the sick Animal, up to the amount of
money the puppy or kitten was purchased for. The new Owner shall be allowed to
keep the puppy or kitten even if the Litter Permit Holder pays the medical
costs. The new Owner or the Litter Permit Holder may appeal to the
Administrative Hearing Officer if there is a dispute as to the fact of the
Illness or the amount of the charges. If the Litter Permit Holder does not
prevail on appeal, the Litter Permit Holder shall reimburse the costs of the
appeal to the new Owner.
      (6)   A Litter Permit is required to advertise any Companion Animal under
the age of six months old for sale, gift or other transfer or conveyance, in
any local periodical or newspaper of general circulation. The Litter Permit
number must be included in any advertisement.
      (7)   Failure to advertise without including a valid Litter Permit number
shall be a violation of this article. Any Person who advertises a Companion
Animal and purports in the advertisement to reside outside the city limits or
lists a telephone number outside the city limits and is subsequently found to
maintain Companion Animals inside the city limits or is found attempting to
sell Companion Animals in the city limits is in violation of this article. Each
day of possession of each said Animal will constitute a separate offense.
      (8)   Puppies and kittens can only be sold, given as a gift or other
transfer or conveyance from the location listed on the Litter Permit. Puppies
or kittens being sold on public property or commercial property even with the
Owner’s permission are in violation of this article and the puppies and kittens
and any other Animals in the Person’s public possession shall be seized and
Impounded pursuant to Section
9-2-4-4(A) of this article. Any Animal Seized and Impounded pursuant to Section
9-2-4-4(A) of this article shall not be eligible for an intact permit.
      (9)   Puppies and kittens shall not be sold to a Pet Store, Animal Broker
or other Animal dealer.
      (10)   Puppies and kittens shall not be released from the Permitted
Premises prior to eight weeks of age.
(Ord. 18-2006; Am. Ord._2019-032; Am. Ord._2025-022)
§ 9-2-3-8 MULTIPLE COMPANION ANIMAL SITE PERMIT OR MCASP.
   Any Person intending to exceed the maximum limit of six Companion Animals,
no more than four of which are dogs, in a Household shall obtain a Multiple
Companion Animal Site Permit (MCASP).
   (A)   All Companion Animals at a Multiple Companion Animal Site shall be
Microchipped or otherwise Permanently Identified. Fostering a pregnant
Companion Animal and her eventual offspring is a temporary exception to this
rule.
   (B)   A MCASP will only be granted to applicants in a Residential Zone.
   (C)   Any adjoining property owner may petition the Administrative Hearing
Officer for revocation, modification or suspension of a MCASP if the adjoining
property owner is reasonably aggrieved by any effects of the Multiple Animal
Site.
   (D)   No Person shall keep or maintain more than 15 Companion Animals at any
MCASP site, no more than four of which can be Intact. This limit may be
exceeded under special circumstances determined by the Mayor’s designee.
(Ord. 18-2006; Am. Ord._2019-032; Am. Ord._2023-016)
§ 9-2-3-9 PERMISSIBLE EXOTIC OR WILD ANIMAL COLLECTION PERMIT OR EWACP.
   (A)   Any Person who wishes to receive, purchase, own or keep 15 or more
Permissible Exotic or Wild Animals shall first obtain an Exotic or Wild Animal
Collection Permit (EWACP).
   (B)   The applicant shall supply AACC with a list of all Exotics owned by
the applicant. The EWACP Holder shall supply an updated list every year as part
of the Permit renewal process.
   (C)   Notwithstanding the foregoing, zoological parks, Rehabilitators
licensed through the State of New Mexico, Veterinary hospitals, and the humane
society shelters are excluded from the provisions of this section, provided
that the excluded facilities use protective devices adequate to prevent the
Exotic or Wild Animals from escaping or injuring the public and the Animals
will not be used in any kind of testing or experimentation. The city expects
these excluded entities to treat the Exotic or Wild Animals in their possession
in a humane manner as stated in this article.
   (D)   No Person shall own, harbor or keep any species in violation of
federal or New Mexico law.
   (E)   Exotic or Wild Animals shall never be released from captivity within
the city limits without written permission from the Mayor’s designee whether or
not the Owner has an EWACP.
   (F)   The Mayor’s designee may Seize the Exotic or Wild Animal for its
Owner's failure to obtain an EWACP or comply with this article and such Animal
shall become the property of the city. The EWACP Holder or Owner of the Exotic
or Wild Animal is liable for any costs incurred by the city and such costs may
result in a lien being placed against the Exotic or Wild Animal.
   (G)   The Mayor’s designee shall use Seizure procedures which protect the
public, the Exotic or Wild Animal and other Animals. The Mayor’s designee may
convey an Exotic or Wild Animal in his possession to any Zoo, Sanctuary or
refuge or dispose of the Animal in a Humane Manner.
(Ord. 18-2006; Am. Ord._2023-016)
§ 9-2-3-10 GUARD DOG SITE PERMIT OR GDSP.
   Any Person wishing to operate a Guard Dog Site shall obtain a Guard Dog Site
Permit (GDSP).
   (A)   Any Person wishing to operate a Guard Dog Site shall have a Tax ID
number and be registered under the Albuquerque Business Registration Ordinance
before applying for a GDSP.
   (B)   The Owner of the Guard Dog must have an Intact Companion Animal Permit
for each Intact dog.
   (C)   The GDSP attaches to the real property and the GDSP Holder may not
transfer Guard Dogs to a separate site lacking a GDSP.
   (D)   A GDSP will not be granted for property in a Residential Zone or
within 250 feet of a school.
   (E)   When a Guard Dog is on duty outside of a building, the premises must
be enclosed by a Secure Fence.
   (F)   The escape of a Guard Dog from a Guard Dog Site is a violation of this
article and can constitute a basis for revocation of a GDSP and seizure of the
dog.
   (G)   If the Mayor’s designee determines it is necessary to control noise at
the Guard Dog Site, the Mayor’s designee may require the Owner of the site or
GDSP Holder to construct a barrier which breaks the Guard Dog's line of sight
to the exterior and adequately buffers the noise.
   (H)   The doors, windows, and all other openings to the outside of a
building where a Guard Dog is on duty must be secured to prevent its escape.
   (I)   The Guard Dog Site shall be posted with warning signs that are at
least 12 inches by 12 inches.
      (1)   The warning signs shall state "Guard Dog" and "Guardia" and shall
show a picture of an aggressive dog.
      (2)   The warning signs shall be posted not more than 50 feet apart on
the exterior of the fences or walls surrounding the site, and shall be posted
at all exterior corners of the site and at every entrance to the site.
   (J)   Vehicles used to transport Guard Dogs shall be secured so the public
is protected from Injury, shall be constructed or modified to ensure that the
Guard Dog is transported in a safe, humane manner and that does not violate §§
9-2-2-6 et seq., and shall be posted with warning signs on each side of the
vehicle.
   (K)   A GDSP Holder shall not apply for a Litter Permit or Multiple
Companion Animal Site Permit for the Guard Dog Site. No breeding of Animals is
allowed at a Guard Dog Site.
(Ord. 18-2006; Am. Ord._2023-016)
§ 9-2-3-11 ANIMAL SERVICE PROVIDER PERMIT OR ASPP.
   Any Establishment intending to conduct business as an Animal Service
Provider shall obtain an Animal Service Provider Permit (ASPP). The ASPP
applicant must have a valid Tax ID Number and a City of Albuquerque Business
Registration under the Business Registration Ordinance.
(Ord. 18-2006)
§ 9-2-3-12 PET STORE PERMIT OR PSP.
   Pet Stores shall not sell Companion Animals but may sell other living
creatures including fish, birds, rodents, insects, arachnids, reptiles and
other Permissible Exotic Animal.
   (A)   No Pet Store shall conduct business in the city without a Pet Store
Permit (PSP).
   (B)   The applicant for a PSP must have a valid Tax ID Number and a City of
Albuquerque Business Registration under the Business Registration Ordinance
before applying for a PSP.
   (C)   The PSP must attach to a specific real property commercial site.
   (D)   No PSP Holder may sell or offer for sale any Animal from a mobile
facility or at a site away from the PSP site.
   (E)   A PSP Holder shall not apply for or obtain an Intact Companion Animal
Permit, Litter Permit or Multiple Companion Animal Site Permit.
   (F)   PSP Holders are liable for the medical costs including medicine, up to
the amount the Animal was sold for, for any Animal that is diagnosed as sick by
a Veterinarian qualified for the species within one week from the date of sale.
   (G)   The PSP Holder shall reimburse the patron the costs associated with
the sick Animal, up to the amount paid by the patron when the Animal was
purchased.
   (H)   The patron shall be allowed to keep the Animal, even if the PSP Holder
pays the medical costs.
   (I)   The patron or the PSP Holder may appeal to the Administrative Hearing
Officer if there is a dispute as to the fact of the Illness or the amount of
the charges. If the PSP Holder does not prevail on appeal, the PSP Holder shall
reimburse the costs of the appeal to the patron.
   (J)   Thorough and accurate records for each Animal that passes through a
PSP site must be maintained and kept for three years and must be made available
upon demand by the Mayor’s designee. These records shall include the name,
address and telephone number of each Person who bought an Animal and
information on where each Animal came from originally.
   (K)   Animals with known or suspected communicable diseases shall be
isolated, as appropriate, and treated as soon as possible.
   (L)   The daily use of antibiotics for preventative purposes, and not to
treat a specific Illness or condition, is prohibited whether administered in
food, water or by any other method.
(Ord. 18-2006; Am. Ord._2023-016)
§ 9-2-3-13 TROLLEY PERMIT.
   The Owner of a Dog who has exhausted all options for restricting its dog to
its property may apply for a one year Trolley Permit.
   (A)   The Mayor’s designee may issue a Trolley Permit upon an applicant’s
proving the following:
      (1)   All other methods of restricting the dog to the property of the
Owner have been exhausted.
      (2)   A Trolley is deemed the only acceptable temporary method to keep
the Animal on the Owner's property.
      (3)   The dog has been spayed or neutered and Microchipped.
   (B)   No more than one dog per Household will be allowed to use a Trolley.
   (C)   A dog attached to a Trolley shall be surrounded by a barrier
sufficient to protect the dog from At Large Animals. The barrier shall be
sufficient to prevent children from accidentally coming into contact with the
dog on the Trolley.
   (D)   No dog shall be left on a Trolley for longer than nine hours in a 24
hour period.
   (E)   Trolley Permits are good for one year only, in which time the Owner
must come up with an acceptable method of restricting the dog to his property.
Trolley Permits will not be renewed.
   (F)   AACC shall work with various Animal volunteer organizations in order
to help Owners locate resources to deal with restraint issues.
(Ord. 18-2006; Am. Ord._2019-032; Am. Ord._2023-016)
§ 9-2-3-14 ANIMAL-DRAWN VEHICLE PERMIT OR ADVP.
   Any Person intending to do business operating an Animal-Drawn Vehicle shall
apply for an Animal-Drawn Vehicle Permit (ADVP).
   (A)   Any person applying for an ADVP must have a valid Tax ID Number and a
City of Albuquerque Business Registration under the Business Registration
Ordinance before applying for the Permit.
   (B)   All operators and Owners of Animal-Drawn Vehicles shall be subject to
the following additional requirements:
      (1)   All Animals used to pull any wagon, cart, carriage or other vehicle
must weigh at least 800 pounds and be considered in good health. Any Owner or
operator of an Animal-Drawn Vehicle who desires to use a smaller Animal shall
apply to AACC for approval, in writing, prior to such use.
      (2)   Animals used to pull Animal-Drawn Vehicles exhibiting any of the
following shall be deemed unfit for work and shall be under the care of a
Veterinarian:
         (a)   Sores or abrasions caused, or likely to be irritated, by girth,
harnesses or bridles;
         (b)   Serious injury or Illness; or
         (c)   Obvious signs of emaciation, malnutrition, lameness or
exhaustion.
      (3)   Animals used to pull Animal-Drawn Vehicles requiring Veterinary
care shall not be moved, ridden or driven except for the purpose of pasturing
or obtaining medical care.
      (4)   Enclosures where Animals are kept shall be graded and raked so as
to keep the surface reasonably dry.
      (5)   Animals used to pull Animal-Drawn Vehicles shall be allocated at
least 30 minutes of rest for every two hour work period. The maximum working
period for any one Animal shall be eight hours in every 24 hour period. No
Animal used to pull an Animal- Drawn Vehicle shall be overridden or driven in a
manner that might result in overheating or exhaustion.
      (6)   Animals used to pull Animal-Drawn Vehicles shall not be worked when
the temperature at street level at any loading site reaches or exceeds 95
degrees Fahrenheit.
      (7)   Animals used to pull Animal-Drawn Vehicles shall not be driven at a
speed exceeding a slow trot.
      (8)   Animals used to pull Animal-Drawn Vehicles shall be provided
Potable Water at every loading site and at least once an hour while they are
working.
      (9)   All harnesses and other tack shall be kept oiled, cleaned and in
good repair.
      (10)   Wagons, carts, carriages or other vehicles must be kept properly
lubricated, and all wheels must spin freely.
      (11)   In addition to issuing any applicable citations, the Mayor’s
designee may order a Quarantine of the entire premises where the Animals used
to pull Animal-Drawn Vehicles are being stabled or any part thereof for any of
the following conditions in one or more of the Animals:
         (a)   Excessive parasitism, diagnosed by a Veterinarian, which could
cause any Animal to be unfit to be ridden or driven; or
         (b)   General malnutrition as diagnosed by a Veterinarian; or
         (c)   Presence or suspicion of contagious or transmittable disease as
diagnosed by a Veterinarian.
      (12)   Owners and operators of Animal-Drawn Vehicles shall not permit
unsanitary conditions to be present on any route or in any Animal rest area or
area where animals are kept. All such areas shall be kept clean and free of
conditions which might attract insects, parasites or rodents.
(Ord. 18-2006; Am. Ord._2023-016)
§ 9-2-3-15 HOBBY BREEDER PERMITS.
   Anyone in possession of a valid Hobby Breeder Permit may present the Permit
to AACC and shall receive one Intact Animal Permit in exchange, provided that
all requirements for an Intact Animal Permit are met.
(Ord. 18-2006)
§ 9-2-3-16 HEART ORDINANCE FUND AND PERMIT FEES.
   (A)   There is hereby created a new fund: The Humane and Ethical Animal
Rules and Treatment (HEART) Ordinance Fund.
      (1)   100% of all net permit fees and civil fines collected under the
HEART Ordinance shall be deposited into the HEART Ordinance Fund.
      (2)   100% of all fees for services performed by the City’s Animal
Welfare Department including but not limited to microchipping, spaying and
neutering, and crematory and pet burial services, shall be deposited in the
HEART Ordinance Fund.
      (3)   HEART Ordinance Fund monies are dedicated exclusively to the Animal
Welfare Department to provide programs for free or reduced-cost spaying and
neutering, microchipping, and vaccinations of Companion Animals for Low-Income
Persons, moderate-income persons, seniors, and when possible, the general
public. All fees listed in this article are a minimum fee amount and may be
increased administratively by the Mayor’s designee.
      (4)   The Animal Welfare Department shall provide the City Council with a
written quarterly accounting report of all activity in the HEART Ordinance Fund
via Executive Communication. The quarterly accounting shall include, at a
minimum, all permit fees, civil fines, and fees for services collected under
the HEART Ordinance and deposited into the HEART Ordinance Fund; all fund
expenditures by the Animal Welfare Department including a description of the
use of the funds; and starting and ending balances for the reporting period.
   (B)   Permit Fees.
      (1)   Intact Companion Animal Permit fee is $150 per animal.
      (2)   Litter Permit fee is $150 per litter.
      (3)   Exotic or Wild Animal Collection Permit fee is $35.
      (4)   Multiple Companion Animal Site fee is $25 per site.
      (5)   Guard Dog Site fee is $150 per site.
      (6)   Animal Service Provider fee is $25 per year.
      (7)   Pet Store Permit fee is $50 per year.
      (8)   Animal Drawn Vehicle fee is $150 per Animal.
      (9)   Trolley Permit fee is $25 per Animal.
(Ord. 18-2006; Am. Ord._2019-032; Am. Ord._2020-011; Am. Ord._2023-016; Am.
Ord._2024-025)
PART 4: PROHIBITED ACTIVITIES
§ 9-2-4-1 CRUELTY TO ANIMALS.
   Nothing herein shall be construed to preclude a conviction for Extreme
Cruelty under state law.
   (A)   Cruelty is any act or inaction that causes, is known to cause or is
calculated to cause physical or psychological pain, injury, damage or harm to
an Animal.
   (B)   Any Person, including employees of AACC, may be cited for Cruelty
hereunder whether or not said Person owns the subject Animal.
   (C)   Cruelty is applicable to all Animals within the city limits of
Albuquerque.
   (D)   Personal observation of Cruelty by an ASO, Reserve ASO or Police
Officer is not required and such officers may issue citations, file criminal
complaints or assist any other Person in filing a criminal complaint if an
Animal has been treated cruelly. A charge of Cruelty under this article is not
a lesser included offense for a charge of Cruelty under state law.
   (E)   In addition to criminal charges for Cruelty, the city may avail itself
of the remedies of Seizure, Confiscation and Protective Custody provided under
this article.
     (F)   Any Person who treats an Animal in any way that would lead a
reasonable Person to conclude that such Animal has been subjected to harm
without Lawful Justification is guilty of Cruelty.
   (G)   Any charges for medical care paid by the city for an Animal suspected
of being a victim of Cruelty shall constitute a municipal lien against the
Animal.
(Ord. 18-2006)
§ 9-2-4-2 SPECIFIC ACTIVITIES THAT CONSTITUTE CRUELTY TO AN ANIMAL.
   Any Person who acts intentionally, willfully or maliciously is guilty of
cruelty when engaged or attempting to engage in the following behavior:
   (A)   Killing or attempting to kill an Animal. Exceptions include:
      (1)   Humane Euthanasia performed by a Veterinarian, a Euthanasia
Qualified Employee or a Euthanasia Authorized employee of AACC or the Animal
Humane Association;
      (2)   Killing a bird if such bird is Poultry owned by that Person and
will be used for food;
      (3)   Killing a rabbit if such rabbit is owned by that Person and will be
used for food;
      (4)   Killing mice or rats that are not a Domestic Animal or otherwise
claimed as a pet by any Person; and
      (5)   Reasonably necessary taking of Animals by a governmental entity or
contractor of a governmental entity for bio-disease management including,
without limitation, selection of birds to determine the existence of or monitor
the spread of avian flu.
   (B)   Poisoning, attempting to poison or allowing an Animal access to
poisonous substances such as antifreeze, baiting any Animal with any substance
soaked, treated or prepared with any harmful or poisonous material unless such
actions are undertaken by a licensed professional exterminator.
      (1)   There is no justification for poisoning Animals in the city.
      (2)   A Person may use poison to kill mice and rats, but only within a
Person's own enclosed structures.
      (3)   Except when applied by a licensed exterminator, no poison may be
used outside, even on a Person's own property, or in any way in which a
poisoned animal, including mice and rats, can consequently poison other
Animals.
   (C)   Abusing an Animal which includes, but is not limited to, maiming,
disfiguring, torturing, beating, having sexual contact with, hurting, burning,
scalding or cruelly setting upon any Animal.
   (D)   Using a prod, stick, electrical shock, chemical, physical force,
starvation, pain or discomfort on an Animal in order to make it perform for
entertainment purposes.
   (E)   Generally accepted methods of animal training that do not cause undue
physical and emotional suffering, including the training of Livestock,
Companion Animals, Guard Dogs, hunting dogs, police dogs and Service Animals
shall not constitute Cruelty.
   (F)   Using a whip or riding crop in a manner that causes injury to the
Animal.
   (G)   Chaining an Animal to a stationary post, pole, or other immovable
object by means of any instrumentality or other extension device including, but
not limited to, a chain, tether, coil or rope and leaving such Animal
unattended for more than one hour in a 24 hour period.
   (H)   Any Owner who Reclaims an Injured Animal from AACC for the purpose of
obtaining treatment by a private Veterinarian and who subsequently fails to
provide written proof of treatment to AACC within five days.
   (I)   Abandonment of an Animal. Any Person who relinquishes possession or
control of an Animal in a location where any reasonable Person would know the
Animal has little chance of finding food, Potable Water, and shelter is guilty
of Cruelty. Abandonment also includes dumping or releasing an Animal anywhere
or leaving an Animal behind when a Person moves.
   (J)   Use of a Spring Loaded Trap. Spring Loaded Traps are absolutely
prohibited in the city unless used on mice or rats inside a Household or inside
a commercial property.
   (K)   Improper use of a Live Trap. Any person who leaves an Animal in a Live
Humane Trap for more than 6 daylight hours or 12 nighttime hours.
   (L)   Overworking an Animal.
   (M)   Animal Fighting. No Person shall promote, stage, hold, manage,
conduct, carry on, train for or attend a game, show, exhibition, contest or
fight in which one or more Animals is injuring, killing, maiming or destroying
itself or other Animals or attempting to injure, kill, maim, or destroy other
Animals or people.
      (1)   Any Person who attends or observes any Animal fight is vicariously
criminally liable under this article, whether or not that Person paid for entry
to the event.
      (2)   The owner of any premises used for Animal fighting is in violation
of this article.
      (3)   Any Person who profits in any manner from an Animal fight,
including but not limited to on-site vendors or purveyors of illegal gambling
concerning an Animal fight, is in violation of this article.
      (4)   Any person who sells, receives, possesses, transports, loans or
gives away any Animal used for fighting or Animal Fighting Paraphernalia is in
violation of this article.
      (5)   No Person shall provoke or entice an Animal from the property of
its Owner for the purpose of engaging the Animal in an Animal fight.
   (N)   Teasing or Taunting Animals. No Person shall tease or taunt any Animal
with the intent, purpose or effect of provoking a reaction from the Animal.
   (O)   Artificially coloring an Animal. No person shall dye or artificially
color an Animal under the age of 12 weeks or use any dyes or coloring substance
that could be harmful to the Animal.
   (P)   Any Person who violates any provision of §
9-2-2-1 except (F) and (G), §
9-2-2-2, §
9-2-2-3 except (F) and (G), §
9-2-2-4, §
9-2-2-5 or §
9-2-2-6 is guilty of Cruelty and shall be cited for Cruelty. The failure to
restrict an Animal by use of a leash or the use of a leash that is longer than
eight feet is not Cruelty.
   (Q)   Failing to report an Injury to an Animal caused by a Motorist. A Motor
Vehicle Operator who strikes or runs down an Animal shall immediately call 311
and provide the facts regarding the accident and, if possible, the injuries
sustained by the Animal. The Motor Vehicle Operator may elect to transport the
Animal to AACC, a Veterinarian or VEC for Emergency Medical Treatment.
(Ord. 18-2006; Am. Ord. 29-2006)
§ 9-2-4-3 ANIMAL LIMITS AND RESTRICTIONS.
   (A)   Intact Companion Animals. No person shall own or possess an Intact dog
or cat over the age of six months old without a valid Intact Companion Animal
Permit except as provided herein.
   (B)   Breeding Companion Animals. No Person shall own or possess a pregnant
female Companion Animal without obtaining a Litter Permit.
   (C)   Exceeding Animal Possession Limits.
      (1)   Companion Animals. No Person shall own more than six Companion
Animals, no more than four of which are dogs. Any person wishing to exceed
these limits may apply for a Multiple Companion Animal Site Permit. There are
temporary exceptions to this rule for Foster Care Providers, Finders and
Persons with a valid Litter Permit.
      (2)   Rabbits. No Person shall have more than 15 rabbits in the same
Household.
      (3)   Poultry. The Poultry limit is 15. No Person shall have more than
one rooster in a Household.
   (D)   Animals At Large. No Person shall cause or allow any Animal, other
than Wild Animals not owned by any human, to be At Large whether or not it is
accompanied by its Owner.
      (1)   Unattended Companion Animals are to be restricted by a Secure
Fence, in a Secure Facility, Secure Enclosure, secured in the back of a pickup
truck, or be inside a vehicle with proper ventilation.
      (2)   Companion Animals accompanied by a Person must be restrained by a
leash no longer than eight feet long held by a Person capable of controlling
the Animal or contained by an invisible fence.
      (3)   Verbal commands do not constitute control of an Animal and any
Person accompanying and allowing the Animal to be At Large is in violation of
this article.
      (4)   An At Large Animal shall be Seized and Impounded if the Owner is
not available or if the Owner continues to intentionally or negligently allow
his or her Animal to be At Large.
   (E)   Defecation. No Person shall allow an Animal to defecate upon public
property or upon any private property other than the property of the Animal's
Owner without thoroughly removing and disposing of the feces.
   (F)   Unlawful Use of Tags. No Person shall affix an Anti-Rabies tag to the
collar or Harness of any Animal other than the Animal for which the Anti-Rabies
tag was issued. No Person shall keep, manufacture or use a stolen, counterfeit
or forged Animal Anti-Rabies Vaccination certificateor Rabies tag.
   (G)   Interference With an ASO. No Person shall attack, assault or in any
way threaten or interfere with an ASO or a Reserve ASO in the performance of
the duties required by this article.
(Ord. 18-2006; Am. Ord._2019-032)
§ 9-2-4-4 SALE OR GIFT OF AN ANIMAL.
   (A)   Public Property. No Person shall display, sell, deliver, offer for
sale, barter, auction, give away, or otherwise dispose of an Animal upon a
street, sidewalk, public park, public right-of-way or other public property.
Adoption events approved by the Mayor’s designee, or any adoption events held
by a Rescue Group or Rescue individual are exempt.
      (1)   If a Person is found to be in violation of this section, the
Mayor’s designee shall immediately Seize and Impound any Animals found in the
Person’s public possession.
      (2)   Consistent with the Intake Process and other practices related to
lost and found Companion Animals, the Mayor’s designee shall immediately Alter,
Microchip, and otherwise ensure all standards established by this article and
other applicable laws and regulations are met for each Animal.
      (3)   If the Owner fails to Reclaim the Animal within 10 days, the Animal
shall become the property of the Animal Welfare Department. However, no Animal
shall be released prior to being Altered and Microchipped.
      (4)   Any person who is convicted of violating this section shall be
deemed guilty of a petty misdemeanor and subject to the penalty provisions set
forth in ROA 1994, § 1-1-99.
   (B)   Commercial Property. No Person shall display, sell, deliver, offer for
sale, barter, auction, give away, or otherwise dispose of any Animal upon
commercial property including parking lots, with or without the property
owner's permission. PSP Holders are limited to the property the Permit was
issued for. Adoption events approved by the Mayor’s designee are exempt.
   (C)   Residential Property. No Person shall display, sell, deliver, offer
for sale, barter, auction, give away, or otherwise dispose of any Companion
Animal puppies or kittens upon residential property without a Litter Permit.
   (D)   Sales Incentives. No Person shall offer a live Animal as an incentive
to purchase merchandise or as a premium, prize, award, or novelty.
   (E)   Advertising. No Person shall advertise puppies or kittens for sale in
any local periodical without a valid Litter Permit number conspicuously listed
in the advertisement. No Person shall advertise any Animal for sale in the City
of Albuquerque using any roadside signs, flyers, handbills or billboards.
   (F)   Turtles. No Person shall display, sell, deliver, offer for sale,
barter, auction, give away, or otherwise dispose of turtles except in
conformance with appropriate federal regulations. Sales of turtles are limited
to properly permitted Pet Stores.
   (G)   Permissible Exotic or Wild Animal.  Permissible Exotic or Wild Animals
may only be sold in accordance with this article at properly Permitted Pet
Stores.
   (H)   Prohibited Exotic or Wild Animals.
      (1)   No person shall display, sell, offer for sale, barter, auction,
give away, or otherwise dispose of Prohibited Exotic or Wild Animals.
      (2)   It shall be unlawful for any person to own, possess, keep, harbor,
bring into the city, sell, have in one's possession, act as a custodian, or
have custody or control of a Prohibited Exotic or Wild Animal.
      (3)   It shall be unlawful for a Person to breed an Exotic or Wild
Animal.
      (4)   The provisions of this section shall not apply to:
         (a)   Institutions accredited by the American Zoo and Aquarium
Association (AZA) or under mentorship through the AZA;
         (b)   Duly incorporated non-profit Animal Protection Organizations
housing an Exotic or Wild Animal at the written request of the AACC;
         (c)   Animal control or law enforcement agencies or officers acting
under the authority of this article;
         (d)   Licensed Veterinary hospitals or clinics;
         (e)   Any Wildlife Sanctuary as defined under this article;
         (f)   Any licensed or accredited research or medical institution;
         (g)   Any licensed or accredited educational institution; or
         (h)   Any lawfully operated rodeo.
   (I)   Exotic or Wild Animal Displays. It shall be unlawful for any person to
Display or sponsor a display of Prohibited Exotic or Wild Animals on any public
or private land within the City of Albuquerque.
      (1)   The following are exempt from these provisions:
         (a)   institutions accredited by the American Zoo and Aquarium
Association;
         (b)   Veterinarians, in the ordinary course of a Veterinarian's
practice of business; and
         (c)   institutions accredited by The Association of Sanctuaries, and
the American Sanctuary Association.
(Ord. 18-2006; Am. Ord._2023-016; Am. Ord._2025-022)
§ 9-2-4-5 ANIMAL RACING.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to hold, conduct, attend or operate live
Animal racing for public exhibition, pari-mutuel betting or special exhibition
events. The exception to this prohibition is horse racing and charitable events
with the approval of the Mayor’s designee.
(Ord. 18-2006; Am. Ord._2023-016)
§ 9-2-4-6 IMPROPER DISPOSAL OF ANIMALS.
   Deceased Animals shall be properly disposed of in accordance with this
article. Following the death of an Animal, the Owner shall be responsible for
removing the corpse immediately and disposing of the body by either private
burial, private cremation, or taking the Animal to AACC. It is unlawful to
dispose of the body of any Animal by dumping the corpse on public or private
property, roads or rights-of-way.
(Ord. 18-2006)
§ 9-2-4-7 ANIMAL NOISE.
   No person shall allow an Animal to persistently or continuously bark, howl
or make noise common to its species to the extent that it causes a nuisance or
as otherwise prohibited by this Chapter. This provision shall not apply to
public Zoos and approved and properly zoned Animal Shelters as defined by this
article.
(Ord. 18-2006)
§ 9-2-4-8 ANIMAL FIGHTS.
   (A)   No Person shall promote, stage, hold, manage, conduct, carry on, train
for or attend a game, exhibition, contest or fight in which one or more Animals
is injuring, killing, maiming or destroying itself or other Animals. Without
limitation on the foregoing, Cockfighting is specifically included under this
section.
   (B)   No Person shall provoke or entice an Animal from the property of its
Owner for the purpose of engaging the Animal in an Animal fight.
   (C)   No Person shall commit the offense of Cockfighting. When any Person is
charged with Cockfighting, the Mayor’s designee shall take the Fighting Birds
at the location into Protective Custody. A Person commits the offense of
Cockfighting if the person knowingly:
      (1)   owns, possesses, keeps, rears, breeds, trains, buys, sells,
transports, or advertises or otherwise offers to sell a Fighting Bird;
      (2)   promotes or participates in, or performs services in furtherance
of, the conducting of a Cockfight. Services in furtherance of a Cockfight
include, but are not limited to, transporting spectators to a Cockfight,
handling Fighting Birds, organizing, advertising or refereeing a Cockfight and
providing, or acting as a stakeholder for, money wagered on a Cockfight;
      (3)   keeps, uses or manages, or accepts payment of admission to, a place
for the conducting of a Cockfight;
      (4)   suffers or permits a place in the possession or control of the
Person to be occupied, kept or used for the conducting of a Cockfight;
      (5)   manufactures, buys, sells, barters, exchanges, possesses,
advertises or otherwise offers to sell a Gaff, Slasher or other sharp implement
designed for attachment to a Fighting Bird or any other bird; or
      (6)   attends a Cockfight or pays admission at any location to view or
bet on a Cockfight.
(Ord. 18-2006; Am. Ord._2023-016)
PART 5: LOST AND FOUND ANIMALS
§ 9-2-5-1 LOST AND FOUND COMPANION ANIMALS.
   (A)   Lost Companion Animal.
      (1)   Owners who lose a Companion Animal shall contact AACC and report
the loss within 24 hours.
      (2)   The Owner shall provide to AACC the Owner’s name, address,
telephone number, a description of the Companion Animal together with any
identification information such as a Microchip, a photograph if possible, the
date of the loss, and the last known location of the Companion Animal prior to
the loss.
   (B)   Found Companion Animal.
      (1)   Any Person who finds a Stray Companion Animal may possess and
temporarily care for such Companion Animal pursuant to the terms of this
article.
      (2)   The provisions of this article apply equally to both the Finder and
the Owner.
      (3)   The Finder may keep such Companion Animal at the Household of the
Finder and need not deliver the Animal to AACC so long as the requirements of
this section are met.
      (4)   These provisions do not apply if the Companion Animal is Owned or
claimed by any Person known to the Finder and is or may be the subject of a
dispute between the Finder and any other Person concerning ownership or Custody
of the Companion Animal.
      (5)   Within 24 hours of the time the Companion Animal is found, the
Finder must contact AACC and register as a Finder with AACC.
      (6)   No Person who does not qualify as a Qualified Adopter shall
register or be allowed to register hereunder and such Person must immediately
surrender the Found Animal to AACC upon demand of the Mayor’s designee.
      (7)   To register, the Finder shall provide a description of the
Companion Animal including, when applicable, any License, Microchip or other
identification on the Companion Animal, the time and date when the Animal was
found, and the location where the Animal was found.
      (8)   The Finder shall determine if the Companion Animal is Microchipped
by taking the Companion Animal to any Person who can scan and read a Microchip,
by calling AACC and requesting an ASO to come to the Household to scan the
Animal or by delivering the Animal to AACC so it can be scanned.
      (9)   If the Companion Animal is Microchipped, the Finder shall provide
the Microchip number to AACC.
      (10)   A registered Finder may exceed Companion Animal number limits
while in temporary possession of a Found Companion Animal.
      (11)   If the Companion Animal is not Microchipped or Altered, the Finder
does not have to Microchip or Alter said Animal while in temporary possession
but shall Microchip or Alter the Companion Animal when and if the Finder
becomes the Owner under this section.
      (12)   If the Finder wishes to own the Found Companion Animal, the Finder
shall so notify AACC and said Animal shall become the property of the Finder 10
days from the registration date if no Person Reclaims the Companion Animal.
      (13)   Within the 10 days, if any Person purports to be the actual Owner
of the Companion Animal, such Person shall contact AACC and not the Finder. The
Mayor’s designee may require Proof of Ownership. If the claimant is in fact the
Owner, the Mayor’s designee shall order the registered Finder to return the
Companion Animal to AACC for Reclaim by the Owner and the Finder shall comply.
(Ord. 18-2006; Am. Ord._2019-032; Am. Ord._2023-016)
PART 6: RABIES
§ 9-2-6-1 RABIES.
   (A)   An Anti-Rabies Vaccination shall be administered as often as required
according to state law. The duty to provide an Anti-Rabies Vaccination does not
discharge the Owner from the duty to provide other Vaccinations and reasonable
medical treatment for Companion Animals.
   (B)   Anti-Rabies Vaccination. All Owners of Companion Animals or ferrets
over the age of three months shall have Companion Animals and ferrets
Vaccinated against rabies no less frequently than required under New Mexico
State law. The Anti-Rabies Vaccination shall be administered by a Veterinarian
who also shall issue an Anti-Rabies Vaccination certificate and tag. The
Mayor’s designee may require Animals other than Companion Animals or ferrets to
receive annual Anti-Rabies Vaccinations. The Veterinarian administering the
Anti-Rabies Vaccine to an Animal shall issue the Owner an Anti-Rabies
Vaccination certificate and tag, each bearing the same number. The Veterinarian
shall legibly record, on the approved certificate, in the appropriate areas the
name and address of the Owner of the Animal, a description of the Animal, the
date of Vaccination and the expiration date of the period of immunity,
sterilization status, and Veterinary practice name. This information shall be
delivered by the Veterinarian to the Mayor’s designee in accordance with this
article. The Owner of a Companion Animal or a ferret shall produce its
certificate of Anti-Rabies Vaccination upon demand by the Mayor’s designee.
   (C)   Potentially Rabid Animals. The Owner of an Animal having rabies or
showing signs of rabies, an Animal bitten by a rabid Animal or an Animal that
has been exposed to rabies shall immediately isolate the Animal in a Secure
Facility or within a Secure Fence where it cannot possibly come into contact
with any other Animals or humans other than the Owner. Any Person who has
knowledge of an Animal infected by or exposed to rabies shall immediately
notify the Mayor’s designee of the location of the affected Animal. The Animal
shall be surrendered by its Owner to the Mayor’s designee upon demand. The
Animal shall be dealt with in accordance with state law.
   It is the duty of the Owner of an Animal that Bites a Person and of the
Person bitten by an Animal to report the Bite to the Mayor’s designee within 24
hours after the Bite occurs. If deemed necessary by the Mayor’s designee, the
Owner shall surrender the Animal to the Mayor’s designee for Impoundment,
Quarantine, observation or destruction and rabies testing at the Mayor's
designee’s discretion. A physician who renders medical treatment to a Person
bitten by an Animal shall report the Bite to the Mayor’s designee within 24
hours of such treatment. Such medical treatment shall be paid for by the Owner
of the Animal. The physician shall report the name, sex, and address of the
Person bitten, as well as the type and location of the Bite on the Person’s
body. The physician shall give the name and address of the Owner of the Animal
to the Mayor’s designee and, if known, any other facts that may assist the
Mayor’s designee in locating the biting Animal and in ascertaining the
immunization status of the Animal.
   (D)   Quarantine. An Animal that has bitten or is suspected of biting a
Person shall be confined securely at a location for a period of time deemed
necessary by the Mayor’s designee. The Owner of the Animal shall be responsible
for and bear the cost of confinement. If the Owner does not confine the Animal
as required by the Mayor’s designee, the Mayor’s designee may Seize and Impound
the Animal and will keep it under Protective Custody at AACC for no longer than
15 days and the Owner shall pay all related costs before Reclaiming the Animal.
After 15 days of Protective Custody under this subsection, the Animal will
become the property of the City and may be routed or disposed of under the
terms of this article. The Mayor’s designee may consent to confinement on the
Owner's premises only if the Owner can prove to the Mayor’s designee’s
satisfaction that the Animal cannot escape. Before the Owner's premises can be
used for Animal confinement, the premises shall be inspected and must be
approved for such purpose by the Mayor’s designee. A Person who has custody of
an Animal that has bitten a Person shall immediately notify the Mayor’s
designee if the Animal shows any signs of sickness, abnormal behavior or if the
Animal escapes confinement. If the Animal dies while in confinement, the Person
having custody of the Animal shall notify the Mayor’s designee immediately and
surrender the deceased Animal to the Mayor’s designee. Any Animal Quarantined
for rabies will, on completion of the Quarantine period, be Microchipped for
positive and Permanent Identification as a condition of Quarantine release or
Reclaim. An Animal being Quarantined by AACC will receive the Microchip prior
to being released. The Owners of any Animal Quarantined by the Owner will
immediately make arrangements for Microchipping their Quarantined Animal with a
Veterinarian of their choice or AACC, with the cost for such services being
borne by the Owner. Microchipping a Quarantined Animal must be completed within
10 days of the Quarantine and failure to do so is a violation of this article.
   (E)   Veterinarians.
      (1)   Each Veterinarian that Vaccinates shall deliver to the city
information regarding all Anti-Rabies Vaccinations administered during the
preceding month by the fifteenth day of the following month by either hard copy
or in an electronic format approved by the city.
      (2)   Approved Veterinarians shall receive a credit of fifty cents for
each Vaccination certificate submitted as a hard copy and one dollar for each
submitted electronically. The credits will only be granted if the information
is received by the fifteenth day of the month immediately following the month
in which the Vaccination certificate was issued and if the information is
complete and accurate as determined by the Mayor’s designee.
      (3)   Veterinarians shall post and maintain a sign clearly visible to the
public stating that dogs and cats must be spayed, neutered or permitted in
accordance with the ordinance including the proper citation and have anti-
rabies vaccinations as mandated by the State of New Mexico and the City of
Albuquerque. AACC will provide one sign free to each Veterinarian.
(Ord. 18-2006; Am. Ord._2019-032; Am. Ord._2023-016)
PART 7: ADMINISTRATIVE HEARINGS AND PENALTIES
§ 9-2-7-1 INSPECTIONS AND HEARING PROCESS.
   (A)   Permitted matters must be regulated by the city to protect Animals and
the public. A Permit gives a Person the privilege to possess Animals and engage
in activities in exchange for an agreement by the Permit Holder to care for
Animals pursuant to the standards in this article and protect the public. A
Permit is not a property right and can be revoked, suspended, conditioned or
limited by the City. The City may declare moratoria regarding the issuance of
Permits or temporarily limit or condition Permits from time to time. Any Person
who does not have a Permit and is engaged in any activity that requires a
Permit under this article is guilty of a petty misdemeanor under § 1-1-99 ROA
1994. Each day of activity without a Permit is a separate petty misdemeanor
offense. The absence of a Permit and engagement in activity prohibited
hereunder is prima facie evidence of a petty misdemeanor. Permits automatically
expire one year from the date granted unless otherwise specifically provided in
this article. Permits are not transferable. The Mayor’s designee may promulgate
regulations consistent with this article. The following provisions apply to
revocation, suspension or limitation and other administrative enforcement
actions concerning Permits.
   (B)   Violations and Inspections. If the Mayor’s designee discovers a
violation of this article by a Permit Holder or any citizen complains about the
activities allowed under a Permit and the Mayor’s designee finds that such
complaint is valid, the Mayor’s designee shall give notice of the violations by
means of an inspection report or other written notice. The notification shall:
      (1)   Set forth each specific violation;
      (2)   Establish a specific and reasonable period of time for the
correction of the violation;
      (3)   State that failure to comply with a notice issued in accordance
with the provisions of this article may result in a civil fine being assessed
or immediate suspension or revocation of the Permit; and
      (4)   State that an opportunity for appeal from a notice or inspection
findings will be provided if a written request for a hearing is filed with the
Office of the City Clerk within 15 days of receipt of the notice in accordance
with the procedures outlined in the Independent Office of Hearings Ordinance,
ROA 1994, §§ 2-7-8-1 to 2-7-8-9; and
      (5)   Where a civil fine has been assessed: state the amount of the fine
assessed; state that the fine must be paid in full within 30 days of the date
of the notice; and contain instructions for how the fine can be paid.
   (C)   Notice.  Notices under this section shall be deemed properly served
and received when the original inspection report or other notice has been
personally served on the Person in Charge or sent by registered or certified
mail to the last known address of the Permit Holder.
   (D)   Suspension. Permits may be suspended for failure of the Holder to
comply with the requirements of this article or other applicable laws,
ordinances or regulations. The suspension may be lifted when the Mayor’s
designee determines the violations have been corrected.
   (E)   Revocation. Permits may be revoked for serious or repeated violations
of the requirements of this article, or for violation of other applicable laws,
ordinances or regulations. A Permit revocation is permanent and a second Permit
of any kind will not be granted to the previous Holder or any Person in privity
with the previous Holder. The Permit shall be surrendered to the Mayor’s
designee upon suspension or revocation.
   (F)   Civil Fine. The Mayor's designee may impose a civil fine of $200 for a
first violation of this article, $300 for a second violation of this article
and $500 for a third or subsequent violation of this article. Notice of the
civil fine shall be appealable under the administrative appeal procedures of
this article. Failure to pay the fine, appeal the fine, or prevail at an
administrative hearing challenging the fine shall allow the Mayor's designee to
place a lien upon any asset owned by the Permit Holder. The Mayor's designee
may also collect on the fine through any other method allowed by law.
   (G)   Reinspection. A Person whose Permit has been suspended may apply for
an inspection of the premises for the purpose of reinstating the Permit by
filing an additional application for a Permit at AACC on the form provided by
the Mayor’s designee. Within five working days after AACC receives the
application, the Mayor’s designee shall make an inspection. If the applicant
and the site are in compliance with the requirements of this article and all
other applicable laws, regulations, and ordinances, the Permit shall be
reinstated. The reinstated Permit shall expire on the date of expiration of the
previously suspended permit.
   (H)   Revocation of Exotic or Wild Animal Permit. If an Exotic or Wild
Animal Permit is suspended or revoked, all Animals received, purchased, owned
or kept under the authority of the Permit shall be surrendered to the Mayor’s
designee for Impoundment as provided in the Impoundment section of this
article. After a period of at least seven days, if the violations of the
article which resulted in suspension or revocation of the Permit have not been
corrected, the Mayor’s designee may sell or dispose of the Animal(s) in a
humane manner.
   (I)   Appeal. A Person who has been assessed a civil fine or whose
application for a Permit or Permit renewal has been approved on condition or
denied, and a Permit Holder whose Permit has been suspended or revoked, may
submit to the City Clerk a written request for a hearing, provided that the
written request is received by the City Clerk within 15 days of the applicant's
receipt of the written notice of denial, conditional approval or civil fine.
The hearing shall be conducted in accordance with the provisions in the IHO
Ordinance, ROA 1994,
Chapter 2, Article 7, Part 8.
   (J)   Preclusion and Default. The Administrative Hearing Officer may render
a decision without proceeding with the hearing if the Administrative Hearing
Officer determines that the issue has been previously decided in another
proceeding which provided due process. If the applicant or the Mayor’s designee
fails to appear at a scheduled hearing, the Hearing Officer may postpone the
hearing for a period of no more than five business days or may determine that
the absent party has waived his right to a hearing. Both parties shall be
notified of such determination.
   (K)   Recording. The hearing shall be recorded by audio method, but need not
be transcribed unless a written transcript is requested, in which case the cost
of transcription shall be borne by the party requesting transcription. If one
party prefers to have the hearing transcribed by a court reporter, that party
shall pay all directly related costs, and the party requesting transcription
shall pay the cost of transcription.
   (L)   Decision. The Hearing Officer shall prepare a written report of his
findings and decision within ten days after the hearing and shall provide
copies to the parties. Following a hearing, the respondent may appeal the
decision of the Hearing Officer to the District Court within 30 days of the
decision.
   (M)   Fee. A nonrefundable hearing fee of $50 shall accompany the appeal to
the City Clerk filed pursuant to this section.
(Ord. 18-2006; Am. Ord._2023-016)
PART 8: SAFE-HAVEN
§ 9-2-8-1 CREATION OF SAFE-HAVEN.
   To increase every Animal’s chance of being adopted, this article hereby
creates SAFE-HAVEN. Safe-Haven guarantees every adoptable Animal at AACC at
least ten days, including two weekends, without the possibility of being
Euthanized.
(Ord. 18-2006)
ARTICLE 3: ALARM SYSTEMS
Section
   
9-3-1   Findings
   
9-3-2   Short title
   
9-3-3   Purpose
   
9-3-4   Definitions
   
9-3-5   Alarm user permit; fee; transferability; false statements
   
9-3-6   Duties of alarm users
   
9-3-7   Alarm business permit; fee; transferability; false statements
   
9-3-8   Duties of alarm system installation and repair businesses
   
9-3-9   Duties of alarm system monitoring businesses
   
9-3-10   Duties of Police and Fire Departments
   
9-3-11   Duties of False Alarm Reduction Unit
   
9-3-12   Nonemergency activation
   
9-3-13   Excessive false alarms, service fees
   
9-3-14   Appeals, hearings
   
9-3-15   Suspension and revocation of alarm business permits
   
9-3-16   Revenues
 
   
9-3-99   Penalty
§ 9-3-1 FINDINGS.
   The City Council finds and declares that:
   (A)   There is increasing use of private emergency alarm systems by citizens
of this city;
   (B)   Over 95 percent of alarms generated by private alarm systems are
listed as false alarms by responding authorities;
   (C)   The Albuquerque Police Department spends more than 50,000 hours
annually, equivalent to 27 full-time sworn officers or about $3 million per
year responding to false alarms;
   (D)   Police and Fire Department responses to false alarms provide an extra
public safety service that benefits only those individuals who own alarm
systems;
   (E)   Alarm users and the general public are harmed by excessive numbers of
false alarms, because excessive false alarms divert Public Safety Officers from
other potentially critical duties and constitute a nuisance that must be
abated;
   (F)   Fees to reimburse the City for the costs of responding to excessive
false alarms are justified because these false alarms divert limited public
safety resources;
   (G)   The Fire Department recognizes the value of fire and medical alarms
and will respond accordingly to investigate, suppress fire propagation, address
life safety issues, and provide medical treatment to fulfill the needs of the
public; however, these services are not used effectively when fire personnel
must respond to locations with excessive numbers of false alarms;
   (H)   Businesses with excessive false fire alarms are subject to
reinspection of their fire suppression, fire alarm system and facilities by the
Fire Marshal's Office;
   (I)   Certain records are necessary to locate the persons in control of a
property when the police have been notified by an alarm of an actual burglary
or other emergency and need access to the property or when an audible alarm
system is malfunctioning so as to cause a nuisance to the neighbors and other
persons in the proximity of the alarm;
   (J)   Fees and fines may not be sufficient inducement for alarm system
installation and repair businesses and alarm system monitoring businesses to
comply with this Ordinance; therefore, alarm system installation and repair
businesses and alarm system monitoring businesses that engage in a pattern of
violations under this Ordinance should be subject to suspension and revocation
of their alarm business permits.
(Ord. 8-2003)
§ 9-3-2 SHORT TITLE.
This Ordinance shall be known as and may be cited as the "Albuquerque Alarm
System Ordinance."
(Ord. 8-2003)
§ 9-3-3 PURPOSE.
   (A)   The purpose of this Ordinance is to establish criteria governing the
installation, use and maintenance of alarm systems within the City of
Albuquerque in order to reduce or eliminate the false alarms that consume
public safety resources. Nothing in this Ordinance is intended to discourage
proper use of alarm systems.
   (B)   This Ordinance governs systems that summon public safety agency
response, requires permitting, establishes fees, provides for penalties for
violations and establishes a system of administration.
(Ord. 8-2003)
§ 9-3-4 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this Ordinance, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ALARM BUSINESS PERMIT. An annual permit issued by the City of Albuquerque to
each alarm system installation and repair business and each alarm system
monitoring business.
   ALARM SITE.  A single fixed commercial or private premises or location
served by an alarm system. Each tenancy, if served by a separate alarm system
in a multi-tenant building or complex, shall be considered a separate alarm
site.
   ALARM SYSTEM. Any mechanical, electrical or electronic device designed to
detect an unauthorized entry or emergency situation on real property which
emits sound off the premises or transmits an electronic signal off the
premises.
   ALARM SYSTEM INSTALLATION AND REPAIR BUSINESS. Any individual, partnership,
corporation, agent, or other entity engaged in leasing, maintaining, servicing,
repairing, altering, replacing, installing or inspecting any alarm system, or
in causing any alarm system to be leased, maintained, serviced, repaired,
altered, replaced, or installed in any building, structure, or facility. The
foregoing sentence includes, but is not limited to, any person or entity that
derives any pecuniary benefit from any contract for the installation of any
alarm system, including but not limited to any person or entity that sells a
contract for the installation or monitoring of an alarm system.
   ALARM SYSTEM MONITORING BUSINESS. Any person or entity that intercepts
signals indicating the activation of an alarm system and relays this
information to the Police or Fire Department.
   ALARM USER. Any person, firm, partnership, corporation or other entity who
uses or is in control of an alarm site. In the case of a rental property, the
renter is considered the alarm user.
   ALARM USER PERMIT. An annual permit issued by the City of Albuquerque
authorizing the operation of an alarm system within the city.
   AUTOMATIC VOICE DIALER. Any electrical, electronic, mechanical or other
device capable of being programmed to send a prerecorded voice message, when
activated, over a telephone line, radio or other communication system, to a law
enforcement agency.
   BACKGROUND INVESTIGATION.  A reasonable investigation or inquiry into an
individual's previous history, including but not limited to their criminal
record and other information, that will at the minimum reveal whether the
person conducting the investigation has made a reasonable assessment of the
likelihood of danger to the alarm owner posed by the alarm system installation
and repair business personnel.
   BUSINESS PERMIT HOLDER. Any alarm system installation and repair business or
alarm system monitoring business that has received an annual alarm business
permit under this Ordinance.
   CANCELLATION. The process by which an alarm system monitoring business
verifies that a false dispatch has occurred and that there is not an existing
situation at the alarm site requiring public safety response.
   CONTACT PERSON. Person designated by the alarm user who has the ability and
the authority to allow access to the alarm site and the alarm system.
   DURESS/HOLD-UP ALARM. An alarm system designed to be activated by a person
to indicate an immediate life-threatening situation is present.
   FALSE ALARM. The activation of any alarm system resulting in notification of
the Police or Fire Department, for which the responding Public Safety Officer
finds no evidence of criminal activity, fire, smoke, carbon monoxide, heat or
other threat of emergency of the kind for which the alarm system was designed
to give notice.
   FALSE ALARM REDUCTION UNIT. Organizational entity within the City of
Albuquerque established for purposes of implementation and enforcement of the
Albuquerque Alarm System Ordinance.
   HEARING OFFICER. The City Hearing Officer, as defined by the Independent
Office of Hearings Ordinance (§§
2-7-8-1 et seq. ROA 1994).
   INTRUSION/BURGLAR ALARM. An alarm system designed to detect a breach of the
exterior of or unauthorized movement in an alarm site.
   MAYOR. The Mayor of the City of Albuquerque or his or her designated
representative.
   MONITORED ALARM SYSTEM. An alarm system that results in sending a signal to
an alarm system monitoring business.
   PERMIT HOLDER. Any alarm user who has received an annual alarm user permit
under this Ordinance.
   PLACE OF BUSINESS shall have the same meaning that term has under the
Business Registration Ordinance.
   PUBLIC SAFETY OFFICER. Sworn members of the Albuquerque Police Department or
Albuquerque Fire Department.
   VERIFY. An attempt by the alarm system monitoring business to contact the
alarm site by telephone before requesting public safety dispatch, in order to
avoid an unnecessary alarm dispatch.
(Ord. 8-2003; Am. Ord. 31-2007)
§ 9-3-5 ALARM USER PERMIT; FEE; TRANSFERABILITY; FALSE STATEMENTS.
   (A)   No alarm user shall operate, or cause to be operated, an alarm system
without a valid alarm user permit for the alarm site issued by the False Alarm
Reduction Unit as required in §
9-3-1 et seq.
   (B)   Possession of an alarm user permit is not intended to, nor will it,
create a contract, duty or obligation, either expressed or implied, of response
by a Public Safety Officer. Any and all liability and consequential damage
resulting from the failure to respond is hereby disclaimed and governmental
immunity as provided by law is retained. Without limitation of the foregoing,
by applying for an alarm user permit, the alarm user acknowledges that public
safety response may be based on factors such as availability of public safety
units, priority of calls, weather conditions, traffic conditions, emergency
conditions or staffing levels.
   (C)   A fee of $25.00 shall be charged for the issuance and each annual
renewal of each alarm user permit.
      (1)   No refund of a permit or permit renewal fee will be made.
      (2)   For private premises alarm sites, the Mayor shall waive the Alarm
User Permit fee for low-income individuals and individuals 65 years of age and
older. In making such determination, the Mayor shall require the low-income
applicant to furnish appropriate documentation establishing eligibility for the
waiver including: an EBT card issued by the State of New Mexico for Food
Stamps, either the annual letter of statement of benefits or monthly benefit
card for Supplemental Security Income, an EBT card issued by the State of New
Mexico for the Temporary Assistance for Needy Families program, or a Medicaid
health benefit card. The aforementioned documentation shall be maintained on
file by the False Alarm Reduction Unit. The Mayor shall require the applicant
65 years of age and over to furnish a driver's license or other appropriate
documentation as proof of age.
   (D)   A permit cannot be transferred to another person or alarm site.
   (E)   A separate alarm user permit is required for each alarm site.
   (F)   The initial annual alarm user permit application form and permit fee
must be submitted to the False Alarm Reduction Unit within sixty (60) days
after installation of the alarm system. In lieu of a documented date of
installation, the first recorded activation of the alarm system shall be
considered the installation date. An alarm user who operates an alarm system
without an alarm user permit shall be subject to the penalty provisions in §
9-3-99 of this Ordinance.
   (G)   Each alarm user permit application must include the following
information:
      (1)   The name, address, home, work and cellular telephone numbers and e-
mail address if available of the person in control of the alarm site.
      (2)   The street address of the alarm site.
      (3)   Classification of the alarm site as either residential or
commercial.
      (4)   Classification of the alarm site as either owner-occupied or
leased. If leased, identification of the owner of the alarm site including
name, address and phone number. If the alarm site is an apartment, the
application shall also include the name and telephone number of the apartment
manager.
      (5)   Any business name used for the alarm site.
      (6)   The type of alarm system or systems and the purpose for which they
are designed (i.e. intrusion, hold-up, fire, or any category identified by the
False Alarm Reduction Unit).
      (7)   The names and telephone numbers of two contact persons who, if
notified, at any time will come to the alarm site within 30 minutes after
receiving a request from a member of the Police or Fire Department. These
persons shall grant access to the alarm site and deactivate the alarm system if
necessary.
      (8)   Name and alarm business permit number of the alarm system
monitoring business, if applicable.
      (9)   For the initial application following installation of a new alarm
system, name and alarm business permit number of the company that installed the
alarm system, if not installed by the homeowner.
   (H)   Whenever any information on the alarm user permit application changes,
the permit holder shall notify the False Alarm Reduction Unit within 30 days of
such change.
   (I)   Any false statement of a material fact made by an applicant for the
purpose of obtaining an alarm user permit or failure to provide required
information shall be subject to the penalties in §
9-3-99.
   (J)   To the extent allowed by law, the False Alarm Reduction Unit shall
treat all information on such application as proprietary and confidential
information; provided, however, nothing in this Ordinance shall prohibit the
use of such information for legitimate public safety purposes and for
enforcement of this Ordinance.
   (K)   The False Alarm Reduction Unit shall assign an alarm permit for each
alarm site in a federal, state, county, public school and other political
subdivision facility for tracking purposes and to allow the City of Albuquerque
to cooperate with these agencies to address any recurring false alarm problems.
Neither permit fees, service fees nor fines shall be required of such agencies.
(Ord. 8-2003; Am Ord. 29-2010)
§ 9-3-6 DUTIES OF ALARM USERS.
   (A)   An alarm user, whether at a business or residence, shall be
responsible for:
      (1)   Complying with all permit and other requirements specified in other
sections of the Albuquerque Alarm System Ordinance, as well as other applicable
City Ordinances and state and federal laws;
      (2)   Instructing all persons who are authorized to place the device or
system into operation in the appropriate method of operation, advising them of
the provisions of this Ordinance, and emphasizing the importance of avoiding
false alarms. The absence of instruction does not provide a defense to any
person or entity;
      (3)   Maintaining the alarm site and the alarm system in a manner that
will reasonably eliminate false alarms;
      (4)   Responding or causing a representative to respond within 30 minutes
when requested by city officials to provide access to an alarm site where an
alarm signal is being emitted, to deactivate a malfunctioning alarm system or
to provide alternative security for the alarm site;
      (5)   Providing that no person shall manually activate an alarm for any
reason other than the emergency that the alarm system is intended to report
other than testing pursuant to §
9-3-12;
      (6)   Notifying the alarm system monitoring business prior to activation
of an alarm for maintenance, test or instruction purposes;
      (7)   Adjusting the mechanism or causing the mechanism to be adjusted so
that an intrusion alarm signal audible on the exterior of an alarm site will
sound for no longer than fifteen minutes after being activated, but may be
reactivated by a reset. Alarm systems installed prior to five days after the
effective date of this Ordinance shall be exempt from this provision; and
      (8)   Paying all fees and fines under this Ordinance within 90 days of
the date assessed.
   (B)   An alarm user shall not use an automatic voice dialer.
(Ord. 8-2003)
§ 9-3-7 ALARM BUSINESS PERMIT; FEE; TRANSFERABILITY; FALSE STATEMENTS.
   (A)   Every alarm system installation and repair business and alarm system
monitoring business must have an alarm business permit issued by the False
Alarm Reduction Unit and comply with the business registration Ordinance. Every
alarm system installation and repair business must have appropriate licensing
from the State of New Mexico. No alarm system installation and repair business
nor alarm system monitoring business shall install, repair, lease, or monitor
an alarm system without a valid alarm business permit.
   (B)   Possession of an alarm business permit is not intended to, nor will
it, create a contract, duty or obligation, either expressed or implied, of
response by a Public Safety Officer to an alarm site for any reason. Any and
all liability and consequential damage resulting from the failure to respond to
a notification is hereby disclaimed and governmental immunity as provided by
law is retained.
   (C)   A fee of $150.00 shall be charged for the issuance and each annual
renewal of each alarm business permit. No refund of a permit or permit renewal
fee will be made.
   (D)   An alarm business permit cannot be transferred.
   (E)   A separate alarm business permit is required for each alarm system
installation and repair business and for each alarm system monitoring business.
   (F)   An alarm system installation and repair business or alarm system
monitoring business that installs, repairs, leases or monitors an alarm system
without a valid alarm business permit shall be subject to the regulations and
penalty provisions of this Ordinance.
   (G)   When applying for an initial alarm business permit, an alarm system
monitoring business at the minimum shall provide a list of the names, mailing
addresses and phone numbers of alarm users and addresses of all of the alarm
sites in Albuquerque monitored by that alarm system monitoring business.
   (H)   Whenever any information on the alarm business permit application
changes, the permit holder shall notify the False Alarm Reduction Unit within
30 days of such change.
   (I)   Any false statement of a material fact made by an applicant for the
purpose of obtaining an alarm business permit or failure to provide required
information shall be subject to the penalties in §
9-3-99.
   (J)   To the extent allowed by law, the False Alarm Reduction Unit shall
treat all information on the alarm business permit application, including but
not limited to the lists of alarm users monitored by alarm system monitoring
businesses, as proprietary and confidential trade secret information; provided,
however, nothing in this Ordinance shall prohibit the use of such information
for legitimate public safety purposes and for enforcement of this Ordinance.
   (K)   Alarm business permits shall be renewed only upon payment of all
outstanding fees and fines assessed against the business permit holder under
the Albuquerque Alarm System Ordinance.
(Ord. 8-2003)
§ 9-3-8 DUTIES OF ALARM SYSTEM INSTALLATION AND REPAIR BUSINESSES.
   (A)   Alarm system installation and repair businesses shall comply with all
City Ordinances and state and federal laws.
   (B)   Alarm system installation and repair businesses must deliver to the
City a copy of all licenses required by the State of New Mexico. The False
Alarm Reduction Unit will retain on file a copy of the required licenses.
   (C)   Alarm system installation and repair businesses that install alarm
systems shall provide each alarm user with the False Alarm Reduction Unit
information sheet when a new alarm system is installed, including the alarm
business permit number and any other information required on the alarm user
permit application.
   (D)   Each alarm system installation and repair business shall provide a
monthly report to the False Alarm Reduction Unit by the twenty-fifth day of the
month listing all new alarm systems installed the previous month. Each report
shall include at the minimum the name, mailing address and phone number of the
alarm user and the address of the alarm site. The False Alarm Reduction Unit
shall treat all information in such monthly reports as proprietary and
confidential trade secret information; provided, however, nothing in this
Ordinance shall prohibit the use of such information for legitimate public
safety purposes. A late fee of $10.00 per day for each monthly report that is
overdue shall be assessed to any alarm system installation and repair business
that fails to provide this report by this deadline.
   (E)   Whenever the owner or operator of the alarm system installation and
repair business changes, the new owner or operator shall notify the False Alarm
Reduction Unit of the new owner's or operator's name, address and telephone
number. A fine of $300.00 shall be assessed to any alarm system installation
and repair business that fails to comply with this requirement within 30 days
of such change.
   (F)   An alarm system installation and repair business shall not install an
alarm system with an automatic voice dialer.
   (G)   Alarm system installation and repair businesses shall keep a written
record of the date of repair and a description of the specific repair which was
performed on any alarm system when such repair was made. Such written records
shall be maintained for at least 12 months and shall be made available in
digital or printed format for inspection and duplication upon request by the
Mayor at the office of the alarm system installation and repair business during
regular business hours.
   (H)   If an alarm installation and repair business repairs an alarm system
within 10 days after a false alarm, the alarm system installation and repair
business may transmit the repair invoice or other written record of the repair
to the False Alarm Reduction Unit, in which instance the False Alarm Reduction
Unit shall delete the false alarm from the alarm user's record. There shall be
no more than six repair deletions allowed per alarm user permit per year under
this section.
   (I)   All alarm system installation and repair business personnel responding
to alarms, repairing, or installing alarm systems shall wear a picture
identification card issued by the alarm system installation and repair business
on their outer garments, which identifies the individual and the alarm system
installation and repair business. The foregoing sentence includes, but is not
limited to, any person or entity that derives any pecuniary benefit from any
contract for the installation of any alarm system, including but not limited to
any person or entity that sells a contract for the installation or monitoring
of an alarm system. This identification card shall be in a standard form
approved by the False Alarm Reduction Unit. This identification card shall be
issued by the alarm system installation and repair business after a background
investigation has been conducted on that individual. No identification card
shall be issued if the applicant has been convicted of a felony. In addition to
other sanctions provided by this Ordinance, each alarm system installation and
repair business shall pay a fine of $300.00 for each and every installation
conducted in whole or in part by an employee who lacks the required background
investigation or identification card.
(Ord. 8-2003)
§ 9-3-9 DUTIES OF ALARM SYSTEM MONITORING BUSINESSES.
   (A)   Alarm system monitoring businesses shall comply with all City
Ordinances and state and federal laws.
   (B)   All alarm system monitoring businesses shall keep a written record of
the date and time each notification of the activation of an alarm system is
received and the date, time and method by which the person in control of the
property or his designated employee was notified. Such records shall be
retained for at least 12 months and shall be provided in digital or printed
format upon request by the Mayor.
   (C)   An alarm system monitoring business that reports an alarm to the
Albuquerque Police or Fire Department without a valid alarm business permit
shall be assessed a fine of $250.00 per occurrence by the False Alarm Reduction
Unit.
   (D)   Alarm system monitoring businesses shall provide a monthly report to
the False Alarm Reduction Unit by the twenty-fifth day of the month listing all
new alarm systems, which the alarm system monitoring business contracted to
monitor during the previous month. Each report shall include at the minimum the
name, address and phone number of the alarm user and the address of the alarm
site. The False Alarm Reduction Unit shall treat all information in such
monthly reports as proprietary and confidential trade secret information;
provided, however, nothing in this Ordinance shall prohibit the use of such
information for legitimate public safety purposes. A late fee of $10.00 per day
for each monthly report that is overdue shall be assessed to any alarm system
monitoring business that fails to provide this report by this deadline.
   (E)   Whenever the owner or operator of the alarm system monitoring business
changes, the new owner or operator shall notify the False Alarm Reduction Unit
of the name, address and phone number. A fine of $300.00 shall be assessed to
any alarm system monitoring business that fails to comply with this
requirement.
   (F)   An alarm system monitoring business shall:
      (1)   Attempt to verify every alarm signal, except a duress/holdup alarm
or fire alarm, immediately before requesting a law enforcement response to an
alarm system signal;
      (2)   Communicate cancellations of alarm dispatch requests to the Police
or Fire Department immediately upon verification of a false alarm;
      (3)   Establish a procedure for accepting cancellation of alarms by alarm
users;
      (4)   Communicate alarm dispatch requests to the Police or Fire
Department;
      (5)   Communicate any available information (north, south, front, back,
floor, zone, etc.) to help identify the location of the intrusion or other
emergency;
      (6)   Provide the Police or Fire telephone operator with the alarm
business permit number of the alarm system monitoring business when an alarm is
reported;
      (7)   Communicate type of alarm activation (silent or audible, interior
or perimeter); and
      (8)   Make every possible effort to contact the alarm user or his contact
persons when an alarm dispatch request is made to facilitate access to the
alarm site and/or deactivation of the alarm.
   (G)   A fine of $300.00 per incident shall be assessed to an alarm system
monitoring business that fails to establish procedures for accepting
cancellations from alarm users and for promptly conveying cancellation
notification to the Albuquerque Police or Fire Department or for failure to
perform any of the duties in this section.
(Ord. 8-2003)
§ 9-3-10 DUTIES OF POLICE AND FIRE DEPARTMENTS.
   The Albuquerque Police and Fire Departments shall respond to alarm
notifications according to department protocol.
(Ord. 8-2003)
§ 9-3-11 DUTIES OF FALSE ALARM REDUCTION UNIT.
   (A)   The False Alarm Reduction Unit shall:
      (1)   Be the primary agency responsible for implementation and
enforcement of the Albuquerque Alarm System Ordinance;
      (2)   Develop such forms, notifications, and systems as are necessary to
implement the Albuquerque Alarm System Ordinance;
      (3)   Send the initial billing for all permits and annual renewals of
same, as well as False Alarm service fees and applicable fines.
      (4)   Send a notice of each false alarm to the address of the alarm site.
      (5)   Coordinate between the alarm system industry, Albuquerque Police
Department and Albuquerque Fire Department to reduce the number of false alarms
and improve responses to true emergencies;
   (B)   If there is reason to believe that an alarm system is not being used
or maintained in a manner that ensures proper operation and suppresses false
alarms, the Mayor may require a conference with an alarm user and the alarm
system business responsible for the repair of the alarm system to review the
circumstances of each false alarm.
   (C)   If the False Alarm Reduction Unit identifies an alarm system
installation and repair business that is operating in Albuquerque without a
license from the Construction Industries Division of the New Mexico Regulation
and Licensing Department or without a valid Albuquerque business registration,
the False Alarm Reduction Unit shall report that business to the authorized
state or local enforcement authority.
(Ord. 8-2003)
§ 9-3-12 NONEMERGENCY ACTIVATION.
   No person shall intentionally activate an alarm system for any purpose other
than an emergency or threat of emergency of the kind for which the alarm system
was designed to give notice. Activation of an alarm system for maintenance,
testing, and instruction purposes is exempted from this provision, provided
that the alarm user notifies the alarm system monitoring business of the test
immediately prior to testing.
(Ord. 8-2003)
§ 9-3-13 EXCESSIVE FALSE ALARMS, SERVICE FEES.
   (A)   A permitted alarm user will not be assessed a service fee for the
first three false alarm responses within a permit year, except as provided in
subsection (E) of this section.
   (B)   An alarm user shall pay a service fee of $150.00 for each false
intrusion/burglar alarm, duress/hold-up alarm, or manually activated emergency
assistance alarm notification emitted from an alarm system that is in excess of
three false alarms in a permit year; $300.00 for each false fire, smoke, carbon
monoxide or heat alarm notification emitted from an alarm system in a business
in excess of three false alarms within a permit year; and $150.00 for each
false fire, smoke, carbon monoxide or heat alarm notification emitted from an
alarm system in a residence in excess of three false alarms within a permit
year.
   (C)   If multiple alarms are caused by a single technical malfunction in a
single alarm system for a period up to 72 hours, the alarm user shall be
assessed a service fee for no more than one false alarm per day (24-hour
period) up to 72 hours. After 72 hours, the alarm user shall be assessed a
service fee for each additional false alarm activation.
   (D)   For fire, smoke, carbon monoxide or heat false alarms in excess of two
false alarms in a permit year, commercial Alarm Users shall be referred by the
False Alarm Reduction Unit to the Albuquerque Fire Department Fire Marshal's
Office for inspection pursuant to §
14-2-1 et seq., ROA 1994, Fire Code of the city, as amended.
   (E)   If cancellation from the alarm system monitoring business occurs prior
to Public Safety Officers arriving at the alarm site, this is not a false alarm
for the purpose of service fees and no service fees will be assessed; however,
no cancellation shall be permitted for calls that are dispatched priority one.
   (F)   After ten false alarms in a permit year, because the alarm user has
not taken the necessary steps to address the cause of the false alarms, the
alarm user will be assessed a fine of $500.00 for each additional false alarm
in excess of ten.
   (G)   The alarm user shall be given written notice of any fees and fines
chargeable under this section. Such fees and fines shall be paid to the False
Alarm Reduction Unit within 30 calendar days of the date of the notice of fees
and fines due, unless the alarm user requests a hearing pursuant to the
provisions in the IHO Ordinance, ROA 1994,
Chapter 2, Article 7, Part 8, in which event the payment of the fees shall be
suspended pending the decision of the Hearing Officer.
(Ord. 8-2003; Am. Ord._2023-015)
§ 9-3-14 APPEALS, HEARINGS.
   (A)   Any person or entity that receives a notice of a false alarm or a
notice of fees or fines due under this Ordinance may file a written request for
appeal with the False Alarm Reduction Unit supervisor. The written request for
review must be received by the False Alarm Reduction Unit supervisor within 30
days from receipt of the notice by the person or entity or within 33 days of
the date the notice was mailed by the False Alarm Reduction Unit, whichever
comes first.
   (B)   If the False Alarm Reduction Unit supervisor denies the written
request for review, the False Alarm Reduction Unit supervisor shall send
written notice of the denial and a statement of the right to appeal to a
Hearing Officer.
   (C)   The decision of the False Alarm Reduction Unit supervisor may be
appealed to an administrative Hearing Officer. The Hearing Officer shall
conduct a hearing in accordance with the provisions in the IHO Ordinance, ROA
1994,
Chapter 2, Article 7, Part 8.
(Ord. 8-2003; Am. Ord._2023-015)
§ 9-3-15 SUSPENSION AND REVOCATION OF ALARM BUSINESS PERMITS.
   (A)   Any alarm business permit holder may be subject to an enforcement
action for suspension or revocation of an alarm business permit for the
following violations:
      (1)   Failure to perform any duty including but not limited to failure to
provide any list or other information required under this Ordinance for a
period of 90 days from the due date.
      (2)   Failure to pay any fine or fee within 90 days from the due date.
      (3)   Submission of any intentionally fraudulent information under this
Ordinance.
      (4)   Any pattern of noncompliance that indicates an inability,
unwillingness, or bad faith refusal to perform the duties required under this
Ordinance.
   (B)   If the False Alarm Reduction Unit supervisor determines that any alarm
business permit holder has violated this section, the False Alarm Reduction
Unit supervisor shall send a notice of intent to revoke the alarm business
permit. After the alarm business permit holder receives the notice of intent to
revoke the alarm business permit, the holder may admit fault and surrender the
alarm business permit within 30 days or demand a hearing. The demand for
hearing shall be in writing and mailed to the City Clerk within 15 days of
receipt of the notice of intent to revoke.
   (C)   The Hearing Officer shall conduct a hearing in accordance with the
provisions in the IHO Ordinance, ROA 1994,
Chapter 2, Article 7, Part 8. The Hearing Officer may:
      (1)   Suspend the alarm business permit for a reasonable period of time
not less than 30 days nor more than 120 days,
      (2)   Permanently revoke the alarm business permit, or
      (3)   Find in favor of the alarm business permit holder.
(Ord. 8-2003; Am. Ord._2023-015)
§ 9-3-16 REVENUES.
   All permit fines and fees shall be deposited into the General Fund.
(Ord. 8-2003; Am. Ord. 14-2011)
§ 9-3-99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person or entity charged with conducting any activity addressed by
this Ordinance without a permit shall be guilty of a petty misdemeanor and
shall be subject to the provisions set forth in §
1-1-99 ROA 1994. Each and every day such violation is committed shall
constitute a separate offense.
   (B)   Nothing in this penalty section shall preclude the City from seeking
any equitable relief including but not limited to an injunction. In the event
any person or entity defaults on any obligation to pay a fee or fine under this
Ordinance, the City may collect such unpaid amounts by any method provided by
law including but not limited to attachment and foreclosure of a lien on the
alarm site.
(Ord. 8-2003)
ARTICLE 4: PUBLIC SAFETY ­
POLICE, FIRE AND EMS
Section
Part 1: Civilian Police Oversight Agency
   
9-4-1-1   Short title
   
9-4-1-2   Purpose
   
9-4-1-3   Legislative findings
   
9-4-1-4   Civilian Police Oversight Agency
   
9-4-1-5   The CPOA Police Oversight Board
   
9-4-1-6   CPOA administrative office
   
9-4-1-7   CPOA Director qualifications, selection, retention and evaluation
   
9-4-1-8   Contract compliance officer
   
9-4-1-9   Civilian complaint procedures
   
9-4-1-10   Requests for hearing; appeals of disciplinary decisions
   
9-4-1-11   Reports
   
9-4-1-12   Special meetings
   
9-4-1-13   Confidentiality
   
9-4-1-14   Mandatory cooperation agreement
Part 2: Police Reserve Corps
   
9-4-2-1   Creation of police reserve corps
   
9-4-2-2   Membership requirements
   
9-4-2-3   Authority and control over the corps
   
9-4-2-4   Status as a police officer
   
9-4-2-5   Equipment
   
9-4-2-6   Members being city employees
 
   
9-4-2-98   Violations
   
9-4-2-99   Penalty
Part 3: Fire Reserve Corps
   
9-4-3-1   Creation of fire reserve corps
   
9-4-3-2   Definitions
   
9-4-3-3   Membership requirements
   
9-4-3-4   Authority and control over the corps
   
9-4-3-5   Status as a firefighter
   
9-4-3-6   Members being city employees
 
   
9-4-3-98   Violations
   
9-4-3-99   Penalty
Part 4: Emergency Medical Services
   
9-4-4-1   Short title
   
9-4-4-2   Findings and purpose
   
9-4-4-3   Definitions
   
9-4-4-4   State regulation
   
9-4-4-5   Medical Director of the AHJ
   
9-4-4-6   Medical Control Board
   
9-4-4-7   Providers Advisory Committee
   
9-4-4-8   911 System
   
9-4-4-9   Procedures for being included in the 911 system
   
9-4-4-10   Procedures for responses to requests for emergency transport
   
9-4-4-11   Judicial review
 
   
9-4-4-99   Penalty
Part 5: Albuquerque Police Department Personnel
   
9-4-5-1   Interview scheduling fee
Part 6: Community Policing Councils
   
9-4-6-1   Short title
   
9-4-6-2   Establishment of community policing councils
   
9-4-6-3   Purpose of community policing councils
   
9-4-6-4   Community policing councils number; boundaries
   
9-4-6-5   Membership of community policing councils
   
9-4-6-6   Duties and responsibilities
   
9-4-6-7   City collaboration with, and staffing of the community policing
councils
   
9-4-6-8   General provisions
PART 1: CIVILIAN POLICE OVERSIGHT AGENCY
§ 9-4-1-1 SHORT TITLE.
   Sections
9-4-1-1 through
9-4-1-14 may be cited as the Police Oversight Ordinance.
(Ord._2014-019; Am. Ord._2019-007; Am. Ord._2022-007; Am. Ord._2023-004)
§ 9-4-1-2 PURPOSE.
   The purpose of §§
9-4-1-1 through
9-4-1-14 is to:
   (A)   Foster and perpetuate policing policies and practices that effectively
maintain social order and which at the same time foster mutual trust and
cooperation between police and civilians;
   (B)   Ensure that the civilian police oversight agency functions as
independently as possible from the executive and legislative branches of
government of the City of Albuquerque;
   (C)   Provide civilians and police officers a fair and impartial system for
the investigations and determinations on civilian police complaints;
   (D)   Gather and analyze information, reports, and data on trends and
potential issues concerning police conduct and practices and the related
impacts on the community and individuals; and
   (E)   Provide input, guidance and recommendations to the City Council, the
Mayor and the Chief of Police for the development of policy for the Albuquerque
Police Department.
(Ord._2014-019; Am. Ord._2019-007; Am. Ord._2022-007; Am. Ord._2023-004)
§ 9-4-1-3 LEGISLATIVE FINDINGS.
   (A)   The City of Albuquerque deserves a highly professional well trained
Police Department; however, an effective oversight function has not yet evolved
to the satisfaction of the community's needs.
   (B)   In 1996 the City Council initiated a process to independently review
the city's mechanisms of police oversight since the system had not been
independently evaluated since 1988. As a result of that process, the City
Council abolished the then existing Public Safety Advisory Board, and in lieu
thereof established the current Police Oversight Commission (POC).
   (C)   In 2013 the City Council initiated a new process aimed at evaluating
potential improvements to the POC and its processes by establishing an Ad Hoc
Police Oversight Task Force (POTF). The POTF evaluated the city's current
system, studied oversight options, held three Town Hall Meetings to receive
input from the public, and presented their final recommenda tions.
   (D)   On April 10, 2014, the city also received findings from the United
States Department of Justice that in part concluded that the city's external
oversight system contributed to overall systemic problems with the Police
Department's use of force in encounters with civilians.
   (E)   The Council understands that a properly conceived and functioning
police oversight system is necessary to promote accountability of the police
officers and protect the rights of civilians, and finds that adopting the
recommendations of the POTF will advance these goals and will help respond to
the shortcomings identified by the Department of Justice.
(Ord._2014-019; Am. Ord._2019-007; Am. Ord._2022-007; Am. Ord._2023-004)
§ 9-4-1-4 CIVILIAN POLICE OVERSIGHT AGENCY.
   There is hereby created a Civilian Police Oversight Agency (the “CPOA”) as
an independent agency of city government, not part of either the city
administration or City Council, consists of the Civilian Police Oversight
Advisory Board (the "Board") and an Administrative Office led by the CPOA
Executive Director (the "Director" or the "Executive Director"). The CPOA is a
critical component of police reform and oversight in Albuquerque. This Part is
intended to comprehensively establish and set forth the rights and
responsibilities of the CPOA, but the CPOA is also contemplated within and
bears significant duties and obligations within the 2014 DOJ Settlement
Agreement with the City of Albuquerque (and any subsequent agreements), and
Findings Letter of April 10, 2014. In addition to any other duties, the
Executive Director shall direct and oversee the receipt of all citizen
complaints and direct and oversee the investigation of civilian complaints
relating to officer misconduct within the parameters of §
9-4-1-4(C)(2)(g), monitor and report on police Internal affairs matters, and
manage the day to day operations of the CPOA. The Board shall provide policy
guidance for, and civilian oversight of the Albuquerque Police Department.
Board members shall rely on the CPOA professional investigative staff to
perform the investigations called for under this article, and shall not
independently investigate any matters.
   (A)   Independence. The CPOA is accountable to, but independent of the
Mayor's Office, the City Council, and the Albuquerque Police Department with
respect to the performance of its oversight role and duties under §§
9-4-1-1 through
9-4-1-14.
      (1)   Facility Location. The CPOA shall be housed in a facility that is
separate from any police presence and is located outside of the Albuquerque
City Hall, the Police Department and/or all of the police substations.
      (2)   Budget. The CPOA shall have a dedicated budget. The Director shall
administer the budget in compliance with state and local laws, and supervise
staff in compliance with the city's Merit Ordinance and contractual services
policies and procedures. The Director shall recommend and propose its budget to
the Mayor and City Council during the city's budget process to carry out the
powers and duties under §§
9-4-1-1 through
9-4-1-14, including itemized listings for the funding for staff and all
necessary operating expenses. Adequate funding shall be provided to uphold the
ability of the CPOA to carry out its duties and support its staff and operating
expenses.
      (3)   Professional Legal Services. The CPOA shall select independent
legal counsel from the conflict counsel list maintained by the Office of the
City Attorney. The CPOA's legal counsel shall be independent from legal counsel
for APD and shall advise and represent both the Agency and the Board. The
CPOA's legal counsel shall represent the CPOA in the courts, and shall advise
the CPOA as to any legal matters relating to §§
9-4-1-1 through
9-4-1-14 and the CPOA's duties, responsibilities, and procedures except for
CPOA personnel matters which shall remain under the authority of the City
Attorney's Office.
      (4)   Applicability of City Policies and Ordinances. The CPOA shall
comply with all city ordinances and policies dealing with administrative
functions including but not limited to those dealing with personnel, the merit
system, and procurements.
   (B)   Staff. The CPOA shall employ such staff as necessary to carry out its
functions as prescribed by this Article, including but not limited to an
executive director, professional investigative staff and other staff as may be
necessary, subject to budget sufficiency and city personnel policies and
procedures.
   (C)   Responsibilities. The Civilian Police Oversight Agency is responsible
for civilian police oversight and has the following powers and duties:
      (1)   Community Outreach. The CPOA shall develop, implement, and from
time to time amend as necessary, a program of community outreach aimed at
soliciting public input from the broadest segment of the community in terms of
geography, culture, ethnicity, and socio-economics. The CPOA shall report its
community outreach efforts to the City Council as part of its reporting under §
9-4-1-11.
      (2)   Investigations. The Administrative Office shall independently
investigate all civilian complaints alleging officer misconduct; shall audit
and monitor a representative sampling of all Level 2 and Level 3 incidences of
use of force by police and all matters under investigation by APD's Internal
Affairs (IA) or other APD personnel tasked with conducting administrative
investigations related to a use of force incident; and shall prepare proposed
findings and recommendations on all officer involved shootings and serious uses
of force as defined by Article III, Paragraph 12, Subsection (qq) (or as
subsequently amended) of the court-approved DOJ Settlement Agreement with the
City of Albuquerque ("Serious Uses of Force").
         (a)   Where an officer has engaged in conduct that may reasonably lead
to a criminal charge against the officer, IA and the CPOA have a shared
interest in exercising care to avoid interfering with the criminal process
while simultaneously maintaining the integrity of the disciplinary process for
officers. Consistent with this shared interest, IA and the CPOA will regularly
confer and take reasonable steps to coordinate the handling of investigations
into matters that reasonably may lead to a criminal charge against an officer.
Before taking action related to a serious use of force or officer involved
shooting, the Director shall confer with the relevant prosecuting agency and/or
federal law enforcement agency to assess the likelihood of an officer being
criminally prosecuted based on the incident. The Director may delay or decline
to proceed with any action related to a serious use of force or officer
involved shooting until completion of the criminal investigation unless, after
consultation with the prosecuting agency, the Director determines that
proceeding is appropriate and will not compromise a criminal investigation. If
the Director seeks to proceed with investigating or presenting to the Board a
serious use of force or officer involved shooting despite a prosecuting agency
or federal law enforcement agency indicating that doing so would interfere with
a criminal investigation, the Director may proceed only after obtaining
approval to do so through a 2/3 vote of the Board. The Board shall provide
notice of any such vote permitting the Director to proceed in such
circumstances to APD and the police officer involved.
         (b)   APD shall provide Board members, the Director, and CPOA staff
with reasonable access to APD premises, files, documents, reports and other
materials that are reasonably necessary for the agency to perform thorough,
independent investigations of civilian complaints of officer misconduct and
reviews of serious uses of force and officer- involved shootings. However, any
material protected from disclosure by law shall remain within the custody and
control of APD at all times and will be handled in accordance with the
applicable legal restrictions.
         (c)   All complaints filed by police officers will be investigated by
Internal Affairs. The Agency shall not investigate complaints filed by police
officers. Internal Affairs shall provide a weekly update to the Director on all
open internal investigations. The CPOA Director's investigation report and
findings shall indicate whether within the past year there were any IA
investigations or supervisor generated complaints against the officer(s)
involved in the incident being investigated that are relevant to the subject
matter of the investigation, the general nature of the prior investigations or
complaints, and whether they resulted in any discipline. Redacted personnel
records including those of the Internal Affairs Unit shall be made available to
the Board on demand.
         (d)   Mediation First. Whenever possible, and as further described in
§
9-4-1-6(C)(3), mediation should be the first option for resolution of civilian
police complaints.
         (e)   Board Audits; Access to Files. The Board will perform semiannual
audits, on a random sample of up to 10% of individual civilian police complaint
investigations involving allegations of use of force. The Board may, by a vote
of two-thirds (2/3) of the members of the Board, perform an additional audit,
or direct that an audit be performed, on any individual Citizen Police
Complaint Investigation completed by the Administrative Office. For purposes of
its audit function, the Board shall have full access to investigation files and
may subpoena such documents and witnesses as relevant to its audit function.
         (f)   Disciplinary recommendations. The Director may recommend officer
discipline from the Chart of Sanctions for investigations that result in
sustained civilian police complaints; and may also recommend discipline based
on any findings that result from review of internal affairs Investigations of
officer involved shootings and serious uses of force. Imposition of the
recommended discipline is at the discretion of the Office of Police Reform.
However, if the Office of Police Reform does not follow the disciplinary
recommendation of the Director, the Office of Police Reform shall respond in
writing, within 30 days of the department's final disciplinary decision, with a
detailed explanation of the reason as to why the recommended discipline was not
imposed. The Office of Police Reform shall identify the specific findings of
the Director with which the Office of Police Reform disagrees, or any other
basis upon which the Office of Police Reform declined the Director's
disciplinary recommendation. The CPOA shall report data regarding the outcomes
of all disciplinary recommendations, to include whether the Office of Police
Reform imposed the recommended discipline, as part of its quarterly oral
reports, as outlined in §
9-4-1-4(C)(3).
         (g)   Summary disposition of complaints. The Director shall develop
and implement a policy that specifies those complaints that may be
administratively closed or referred to mediation. Administrative closing or
inactivation of a complaint investigation shall be used for the most minor
policy violations that do not constitute a pattern of misconduct, duplicate
allegations, allegations which are too broad and/or lack any specificity,
allegations that even if true would not constitute officer misconduct,
allegations regarding events that occurred several years before the complaint
was filed, or allegations by an individual who files repeated complaints that
the Director has determined to be without merit.
      (3)   Reports to Mayor & Council. The CPOA shall submit a semi-annual
written report to the Mayor and City Council according to §
9-4-1-11 herein. The CPOA Executive Director shall provide a quarterly oral
report to the City Council at a regular or special meeting. The oral report
shall at a minimum address community outreach efforts, agency progress and
initiatives, data regarding actual disciplinary outcomes imposed by the Office
of Police Reform as compared to the Director’s disciplinary recommendations,
any outstanding Board vacancies and the most forthcoming term expiration(s) of
any Board member(s), together with any of the agency's issues or concerns.
      (4)   CPOA Policy Recommendations. The CPOA may make recommendations on
policy to the Chief of Police. APD shall provide the CPOA with reasonable
access to APD premises, files, documents, reports, data (including APD raw
data), and any other materials that are reasonably necessary for this purpose.
For purposes of this article, "APD raw data" includes but is not limited to any
facts and statistics or other data gathered, obtained, or that are otherwise
within the possession of APD before being processed or analyzed; "police best
practices" refers to law enforcement methods or techniques based upon the
experiences and outcomes in other police departments or law enforcement
agencies that have documented superior results compared to other practices, and
to recommendations by recognized research and policy development groups,
forums, consortiums, or similar. The CPOA shall redact any personal
identification information from any APD raw data within its possession as
permitted by law prior to its release to the public. The CPOA's policy
recommendation process shall be as follows:
         (a)   Community Policing Council Review and Analysis. Policy proposals
from APD will be distributed to each Community Policing Council ("CPC") for
comment. Each CPC wishing to submit comments or recommendations must submit
them to the Director within 15 days. In making its final policy
recommendations, the Board shall review and take into consideration any timely
submitted comments and recommendations of the CPCs.
         (b)   Policy Proposals by APD. APD shall provide all policy proposals
passed by the APD Policy and Procedures Review Board to the Board for its
review, comment, and recommendations prior to final adoption.
         (c)   The Chief of Police or designee shall respond to policy
recommendations made by the CPOA pursuant to paragraph 'b' above in writing
within 45 days of final action on a policy by APD. As part of this response,
APD shall indicate whether the Board's policy recommendation will be followed
through standard operating procedures or should be adopted as policy by the
City Council, or specifically explain any reasons why such policy
recommendations will not be followed or were not adopted.
         (d)   The Board, in consultation with the Director, shall review and
update as appropriate its policies, rules and procedures that ensure that the
Board is effectively accomplishing its duties under this article on an annual
basis. Any policies, rules, and procedures shall be adopted in accordance with
ROA 1994, § 2-6-1-4(C)(2). The Board shall present its proposed policies,
rules, and procedures to the City Council for final approval. In the event that
the City Council determines that the Board's proposal fails to ensure the Board
is effectively accomplishing its duties, the City Council may modify them as
appropriate. Annual updates will become effective only upon final approval of
the City Council. Updates outside of its annual review will become effective
only upon a 2/3 vote of the membership of the Board and only upon final
approval by the City Council, as submitted or as amended by the Council.
         (e)   The chair of the Board shall designate one Board member to serve
on each APD policy development committee. The Director and the Board member
designated by the Chair shall each serve as voting members and representatives
of the Board on such committees, and shall report back to the Board about the
outcomes and votes cast at the next regularly scheduled meeting of the Board.
(Ord._2014-019; Am. Ord._2015-006; Am. Ord._2016-013; Am. Ord._2019-007; Am.
Ord._2022-007; Am. Ord._2023-004)
§ 9-4-1-5 THE CPOA POLICE OVERSIGHT BOARD.
   (A)   Composition. The Board shall be composed of five at-large members who
broadly represent the diversity and demographics of the city by way of,
including but not limited to, cultural, gender and geographic diversity; and
who are representative of the stakeholders of the police oversight process, and
who reside within the City of Albuquerque.
   (B)   Qualifications. In addition to the composition standards set forth
above, the following are the minimum qualifications for members of the Board:
      (1)   Have not been employed by APD for at least three years prior to
appointment, or have not been employed by other law enforcement departments for
at least one year prior to appointment; and
      (2)   Successfully pass a background check; and
      (3)   Personal history lacking any pattern of unsubstantiated complaints
against APD; and
      (4)   A demonstrated ability to engage in mature, impartial decision
making; and
      (5)   A commitment to transparency and impartial decision making; and
      (6)   Residency within the City of Albuquerque.
   (C)   Appointment of Members. The City Council shall establish a well-
publicized, fair and equitable application process for appointment to the
Board, and for filling vacancies. The City Council, through its staff, shall
accept applications from prospective Board members. Staff shall formulate
recommendations for appointments based on evaluation of the qualification
criteria listed in subsections (A) and (B) above and submit recommendations for
appointment(s) to the City Council for its approval. Staff shall establish
written policies and procedures for its administration of this process. If a
member is eligible for reappointment, that member may request reappointment
without a formal application process and the City Council may reappoint
accordingly.
   (D)   Timeline for Filling of Vacancies. The Director shall notify the
President of the City Council of a forthcoming vacancy on the Board at least 60
days prior to the expiration of a Board member's term, and within five days of
the resignation of a Board member. The City Council shall act on an appointment
to fill the vacancy within 60 days of the Council President's receipt of notice
from the Director.
   (E)   Membership Term. Board members shall serve a maximum of two three-year
terms on a staggered basis so that no more than three of the members are
eligible for reappointment or replacement each year.
      (1)   If a member is appointed to fill an unexpired term of another
person, that term shall not be considered a term for the purpose of this
limitation if the time remaining in the term at the time of the appointment is
one year or less.
   (F)   Removal of Members. Any Board member may be removed for cause by a
two-thirds majority vote of the City Council. In addition to any other
reasonable cause, any conduct inconsistent with the requirements and provisions
of this article, or a demonstrated inability to objectively adjudicate civilian
police complaints, shall constitute cause for removal.
      (1)   The appointment of any member who has been absent and not excused
from three consecutive regular or special meetings automatically terminates on
the date the third consecutive absence occurs.
      (2)   The appointment of any member who has not completed the training
required by subparagraph (G)(2), below, automatically terminates if all initial
training is not fully completed within an additional 30-day grace period from
the expiration of the six-month deadline, or one-year deadline to complete the
Civilian Police Academy. However, if any training is not completed because the
training was not made available by the city, the 30-day grace period is
extended to include the timeframe within which the training is offered and can
be reasonably completed.
      (3)   The appointment of any member who has not completed the training
required by subparagraph (G)(3), below, automatically terminates if the eight
hours of required on-going training is not fully completed within an additional
30-day grace period of the anniversary date of the member's appointment.
However, if any training is not completed because the training was not made
available by the city, the 30-day grace period is extended to include the
timeframe within which the training is offered and can be reasonably completed.
      (4)   The Contract Compliance Officer shall notify any member whose
appointment has automatically terminated and shall within five days report to
the City Council President that a vacancy exists requiring an appointment for
the length of the unexpired term. The appointment of a new member to fill the
resulting vacancy is subject to the timelines established by paragraph (E),
above.
   (G)   Orientation and Training. Upon initial appoint ment Board members
shall complete an orientation and training program consisting of the following:
      (1)   Required Orientation. Prior to participa tion in any meeting of the
Board, a newly appointed member must first:
         (a)   Be trained by the CPOA staff or CPOA legal counsel on CPOA
policies, and procedures; and
         (b)   Attend at least one Board meeting as an observer (except for
reappointed members).
      (2)   Required Training. The city shall provide, and each Board member
shall complete, a training program within the first six months of the member's
initial appointment, unless a different deadline is stated, that consists, at a
minimum, of the following:
         (a)   Training on the 2014 DOJ Settlement Agreement with the City of
Albuquerque (or any subsequent agreements), and Findings Letter of April 10,
2014 (or any subsequent findings letters);
         (b)   Training on this ordinance and the duties, obligations, and
responsibilities that it imposes on Board members and the CPOA;
         (c)   Training on State and local laws regarding public meetings and
the conduct of public officials, including but not limited to inspection of
public records, governmental transparency, ethics;
         (d)   Training on civil rights, including the Fourth Amendment right
to be free from unreasonable searches and seizures, including unreasonable uses
of force;
         (e)   Training on all APD policies related to use of force, including
policies related to APD's internal review of force incidents;
         (f)   Training provided to APD officers on use of force;
         (g)   Completion of the following portions of the APD Civilian Police
Academy. This training must be completed within one year from the member's
initial appointment, subject to the provisions of §
9-4-1-5(F)(2), above.
            (i)    Recruiting (one hour);
            (ii)   Basic Training (one hour);
            (iii)    Field Training and Evaluation (FTEP) (one hour);
            (iv)   Field Services (one hour);
            (v)   Response to Resistance (three hours);
            (vi)   Crisis Intervention/COAST (three hours);
            (vii)    Community Policing (one hour);
            (viii)    Impact Investigations (one hour);
            (ix)   Active Listening and De-Escalation (three hours);
            (x)   SWAT (one and one-half hours);
            (xi)   Less Lethal Options (three hours);
            (xii)    Reality Based Training Part 1 (three hours); and
            (xiii)    Reality Based Training Part 2 (three hours);
         (h)   At least two APD ride-alongs;
         (i)   Internal Affairs training;
         (j)   A briefing that identifies and explains the curriculum of all
training currently received or anticipated to be received by APD officers,
including any outside training not provided by the city; and
         (k)    Professionalism training that educates Board members on proper
professionalism when interacting with Agency staff and other city employees,
members of the public, and other Board members.
      (3)   Required On-Going Training. Board members shall receive eight hours
of annual training to include but not be limited to:
         (a)   any changes in law, policy, or training in the areas outlined
under subsection (G)(2) above, as well as developments in the implementation of
the 2014 DOJ Settlement Agreement (or any subsequent agreements) until such
time as the terms of the agreement are satisfied; or
         (b)   If a Board member elects to attend the annual NACOLE conference,
attendance may satisfy no more than four hours of a Board member's on-going
annual training requirements.
         (c)   In addition to the eight hours of on-going annual training,
Board members shall also participate in at least two police ride-alongs for
every six months of service on the Board.
      (4)   Recommended Training. Board members are encouraged to attend
conferences and workshops relating to police oversight at city expense
depending on budget availability. The Director, in collaboration with the city
and APD, shall maintain training opportunities for members that include, but
are not limited to:
         (a)   Annual firearms simulation training; and
         (b)   Equity and Cultural Sensitivity training;
      (5)   The CPOA and APD shall jointly create and maintain a Board training
calendar that outlines the dates in which the required and recommended training
opportunities outlined in this subsection (G) are available to members of the
Board. The calendar shall be provided to the City Council for its information
within 90 days of its creation or any subsequent changes or updates.
      (6)   The Contract Compliance Officer shall track training progress for
each Board member, and verify completion of the Initial and on-going training
requirements for each Board member. The Director may contract with outside,
neutral trainers or training resources in order to effectively implement any of
the training called for in this subsection (G), above.
      (7)   Each member of the Board shall be paid a $500 honorarium upon
completion of their Initial Orientation and Training as outlined in §
9-4-1-5(G)(1) - (2). Each member of the Board shall be compensated $250 upon
completion of their annual Required On-Going Training as outlined in §
9-4-1-5(G)(3). The honoraria outlined within this subsection will begin in FY
24.
   (H)   Chair. The Board shall elect one of its members as the Chairperson and
one as Vice- Chairperson, who shall each hold office for one year and until
their successors are elected. No officer shall be eligible to immediately
succeed himself or herself in the same office. Officers shall be elected in the
month of March of each calendar year or upon vacancy of an office to fill the
remaining term.
   (I)   Subcommittees. The Board may appoint such subcommittees as are deemed
necessary or desirable for the purposes of §§
9-4-1-1 through
9-4-1-14, provided that, membership on such subcommittees shall be limited to
Board members and the Board shall strive to evenly distribute subcommittee
membership among the entire Board. Subcommittees shall comply with the New
Mexico Open Meetings Act.
   (J)   Meetings. The Board shall conduct regularly scheduled public meetings
in compliance with the New Mexico Open Meetings Act, with a prepared agenda
that is distributed in advance to the Mayor, City Council, Police Chief, and
City Attorney.
      (1)   Public Comment. The Board shall allow comment on each of its agenda
items other than Citizen Police Complaints.
   (K)   Subpoenas.
      (1)   The CPOA is authorized to issue subpoenas only as necessary to
investigate civilian complaints, or to audit and monitor incidences of use of
force by police.
      (2)   Prior to seeking a subpoena, the Executive Director must make a
reasonable attempt to exhaust all other avenues for obtaining the information
sought.
      (3)   In order to issue an administrative subpoena, the Executive
Director must ensure that:
         (a)   the inquiry is within the authority of the CPOA;
         (b)   the demand is not too indefinite;
         (c)   the information is relevant to the purpose of the investigation;
and
         (d)   all other criteria for the issuance of an administrative
subpoena as set forth by New Mexico law are met.
      (4)   The Executive Director must consult the CPOA's legal counsel prior
to issuing a subpoena.
      (5)   Subpoenas shall be served in a manner that complies with all
requirements for administrative subpoenas under New Mexico Law.
      (6)   A subpoena must provide at least 14 calendar days' notice prior to
the deadline for responding to the subpoena to:
         (a)   the subpoenaed person or entity;
         (b)   any individual or entity that is the subject of subpoenaed
records; and
         (c)   the City Attorney for the City of Albuquerque.
      (7)   The subpoena and notice to third parties must include a citation to
this section and state that the recipient has the opportunity to challenge the
subpoena to the Board or in the district court having jurisdiction.
      (8)   The summoned person or entity or any person or entity that is the
subject of subpoenaed records may petition the Board or the district court of
the county where he or she resides to vacate or modify the administrative
subpoena.
      (9)   In the case of a refusal to obey a subpoena issued to any person,
the Director may make application to the District Court in the state having
jurisdiction to order the witness to appear before the Board and to produce
evidence if so ordered, or to give testimony touching on the matter in
question.
      (10)   Any summoned person may, at his or her own expense, be represented
by legal counsel during all CPOA or Board proceedings.
      (11)   The CPOA and Board shall not disclose any record obtained as a
result of a subpoena that is protected or confidential by law, ordinance,
policy, or the CASA.
   (L)   Job Description. The Director shall draft a job description that
informs Board members of their roles, responsibilities, and specific
expectations of a Board member. The Director shall present the proposed job
description to the City Council for final approval. In the event that the City
Council determines that the Director's proposal fails to accurately describe
the Board's duties, the City Council may amend it as appropriate. Each member
of the Board shall sign the job description to affirm their understanding of
their obligations to the Board.
   (M)   Stipend. Each member of the Board shall be compensated at a rate of
$100 per regular meeting of the Board, not to exceed $200 per month per Board
member. The stipend outlined within this subsection will begin in FY 24.
(Ord._2014-019; Am. Ord._2015-006; Am. Ord._2016-013; Am. Ord._2019-007; Am.
Ord._2022-007; Am. Ord._2022-019; Am. Ord._2023-004)
§ 9-4-1-6 CPOA ADMINISTRATIVE OFFICE.
   (A)   The staff and administration of the CPOA shall be directed by the CPOA
Executive Director.
   (B)   In addition to any other duties expressed or implied by this article
the Director shall:
      (1)   Receive all citizen complaints and direct and oversee the
investigation of civilian police complaints alleging officer misconduct within
the parameters of §
9-4-1-4(C)(2)(g), prepare findings and recommendations, and provide to each CPC
and the Board for informational purposes;
      (2)   Review and monitor a representative sampling of all Internal
Affairs investigations and other administrative investigations related to
officer involved shooting investigations and serious uses of force
investigations. The Director shall prepare findings and disciplinary
recommendations, as appropriate, relating to officer involved shootings and
serious uses of force. Disciplinary recommendations, if any, will be
transmitted to the Office of Police Reform. The Director shall report on
general trends and issues identified through monitoring or auditing of Internal
Affairs;
      (3)   Ensure that the duties and responsibilities of the CPOA are
executed in an efficient manner, and manage the day to day operations of the
CPOA.
   (C)   The Administrative Office will receive civilian complaints of officer
misconduct directed against the Albuquerque Police Department. The Director
shall direct and oversee the investigation of civilian complaints alleging
officer misconduct within the parameters of §
9-4-1-4(C)(2)(g) and make findings and recommendations for such civilian
complaints, or assign them for independent investigation by CPOA staff or an
outside independent investigator. If assigned to staff or an outside
investigator, the Director shall oversee, monitor and review all such
investigations and findings for each. All findings relating to civilian
complaints, officer involved shootings, and serious uses of force shall be
forwarded to APD internal affairs and the complainant. The findings will then
be sent to the chair of each CPC and to the Board for its Information. The
Director shall make recommendations and give advice regarding Police Department
policies and procedures to each CPC and the Board in the context of
investigative findings as the Director deems appropriate.
      (1)   The review and assessment of civilian complaints filed with the
CPOA shall begin promptly after complaints are filed. If the complaint alleges
officer misconduct and requires investigation, it shall proceed as
expeditiously as possible, and if an investigation exceeds a timeframe of nine
months from the date the complaint was first received the Director must report
the reasons to the Contract Compliance Officer; and
      (2)   All civilian complaints filed with other offices within the city
authorized to accept civilian complaints, including the Police Department,
shall be immediately referred to the Director; and
      (3)   If appropriate, mediation should be the first option for resolution
of civilian police complaints. Mediators should be independent of the CPOA,
APD, and the city, and should not be former officers or employees of APD. At
the discretion of the Director an impartial system of mediation should be
considered appropriate for certain complaints. If all parties involved reach an
agreement, no investigation will occur. If the complainant fails to participate
in good faith as determined by the mediator, no investigation wlll occur. If
the officer involved fails to participate in good faith as determined by the
mediator, the CPOA investigation will occur. The CPOA and APD shall coordinate
to develop a mediation program that aims to allow civilian police complainants
and officers the opportunity to communicate directly regarding disputes, find
areas of agreement, and reach their own solutions. APD should ensure that
officers have mentorship resources available in advance of mediation that
explain the mediation process and the benefits it provides for officers and
their relationships with the citizens they serve; and
      (4)   The Director shall monitor all claims of officer involved shootings
and serious uses of force. APD shall notify the Director of all settlements in
excess of $25,000. The Director shall participate, as a non-voting member, in
any portion of a meeting of the Claims Review Board addressing a claim based on
police misconduct or use of force, but shall not be present for the discussion
of any other claims; and
      (5)   All investigations shall be thorough, objective, fair, impartial,
and free from political influence; and
      (6)   The Director shall maintain and compile all information necessary
to satisfy the CPOA's semi-annual written reporting requirements in §
9-4-1-11; and
      (7)   If at any point during an investigation the investigator determines
that there may have been criminal conduct by any APD personnel, the
investigator shall immediately notify the APD Internal Affairs Bureau
commanding officer and transfer the administrative investigation to the
Internal Affairs Bureau.
   (D)   The Director shall have access to any Police Department information or
documents that are relevant to a civilian's complaint, or to an issue which is
ongoing at the CPOA.
   (E)   The Administrative Office shall staff, coordinate and provide
technical support for all scheduled Board meetings, publicize all findings and
reports, recommendations, and/or suggested policy changes.
   (F)   The Director, or the Director’s designee, shall publicize the civilian
complaint processand identify locations within the community that are suitable
for civilians to file complaints in a non-police environment.
   (G)   The Director shall be provided the necessary professional and/or
clerical employees for the effective staffing of the Administrative Office, and
shall prescribe the duties of these staff members. Such professional and
clerical employees will be classified city employees. All CPOA staff with
investigative duties shall be professional investigators trained in
professional investigation techniques and practices.
   (H)   The Director shall lead the Administrative Office; receive all citizen
complaints and direct and oversee the investigation of civilian complaints
relating to officer misconduct within the parameters of §
9-4-1-4(C)(2)(g), audit a representative sampling of all IA investigations of
complaints, recommend and participate in mediation of certain complaints, and
supervise all CPOA staff.
   (I)   The Director shall complete the initial and ongoing training
requirements for Board members as prescribed by §
9-4-1-5(G) and report completion of training activities to the Contract
Compliance Officer.
(Ord._2014-019; Am. Ord._2016-013; Am. Ord._2019-007; Am. Ord._2022-007; Am.
Ord._2023-004)
§ 9-4-1-7 CPOA DIRECTOR QUALIFICATIONS, SELECTION, RETENTION AND EVALUATION.
   (A)   Qualifications for the position of Director shall include the
requirement of a master’s or law degree and relevant experience.
   (B)   The Director will be a full-time at will city employee to be selected,
removed, or reviewed as follows:
      (1)   The Contract Compliance Officer, through CPOA staff, shall accept
applications from candidates. The CCO shall review the applications and
interview candidates. As part of this review, the CCO shall assemble a review
and interview panel to, at a minimum, include a representative of the Agency
staff, a member of the Board, and a member of a CPC. The CCO shall submit to
the City Council the names of the three candidates that they find to be the
best qualified to be the Director and indicating their ranking, and the City
Council shall appoint the Director from the three. Upon a vacancy in the
position of Director, the CCO shall submit their list of recommended
replacement candidates to the City Council within six months. The CCO's
recommendations to Council shall be based on the candidates' integrity,
capability for strong management and abilities in investigations, law,
management analysis, public administration, criminal justice administration or
other closely related fields. The CCO's transmittal of their recommendations to
the Council shall, at a minimum, include an evaluation of all the candidates
against the provisions and requirements of this §
9-4-1-7 and identify in writing the basis for selection of their top three
candidates as compared to other candidates. The City Council may decline to
confirm the CCO's recommended candidates only for reasonable cause, including
but not limited to lack of a reasonable evaluation process, or lack of a
substantive basis for the CCO's recommendations.
      (2)   The Director's compensation shall be established by the Contract
Compliance Officer in consultation with the City Human Resources Department and
taking Into account the CPOA budget, and shall be commensurate and competitive
with salaries for comparable positions within the city and other equivalent
agencies in peer municipalities.
      (3)   Once confirmed, the Director may be removed only for cause as
determined by a 2/3 majority vote of the City Council.
      (4)    If for any reason there is a period of time during which there is
no Director, the City Council may appoint a temporary Director by a majority
vote. A temporary Director shall serve in that capacity only for a period not
to exceed six months, during which time the CCO shall work diligently to select
a permanent Director.
      (5)   The Director shall create and fill a Deputy Director position
within the Agency to, among other appropriate duties, serve in the Director's
stead during any vacancies in the position of Director, or other absences, such
as during personal or sick leave.
(Ord._2014-019; Am. Ord._2015-006; Am. Ord._2019-007; Am. Ord._2022-007; Am.
Ord._2023-004)
§ 9-4-1-8 CONTRACT COMPLIANCE OFFICER.
   (A)   The City Council shall retain an independent Contract Compliance
Officer ("CCO") who shall perform the functions identified in this ordinance
and ensure CPOA compliance with this ordinance and the duties and obligations
within the 2014 DOJ Settlement Agreement with the City of Albuquerque (or any
subsequent agreements), and Findings Letter of April 10, 2014 (or any
subsequent findings letters). The CCO position shall not be held by anyone who
has been employed by APD or any current or past Board members.
   (B)   The CCO shall annually review the performance of the Executive
Director, taking into consideration the obligations and duties prescribed by
this article and the criteria outlined in §
9-4-1-7(B)(1). The CCO shall annually review the performance of the
Administrative Office and the Board. The CCO is encouraged to consult with City
Human Resources to develop evaluation tools as necessary. A summary of these
performance evaluations shall be delivered to the Mayor and the President of
the City Council for receipt by the Council. In consultation with the budget
and City Human Resources, the CCO shall also establish the Director's
compensation.
   (C)   The duties of the CCO shall also include, but not be limited to, the
following:
      (1)   Tracking and reporting Board progress on training requirements;
      (2)   Maintaining the training calendar required by §
9-4-1-5(G)(5);
      (3)   Tracking Board membership terms;
      (4)   Overseeing and monitoring timeliness of quarterly oral reports as
outlined in §
9-4-1-4(C)(3);
      (5)   Overseeing and monitoring timeliness of semi-annual reporting
requirements as outlined in §
9-4-1-11;
      (6)   Monitoring compliance with internal standards, including Board
Policies & Procedures and all city ordinances and policies dealing with
administrative functions including but not limited to those dealing with
personnel, the merit system, and procurements;
      (7)   Tracking and monitoring compliance with any other deadlines and/or
requirements of this ordinance and the DOJ Settlement Agreement; and
      (8)   Any other such tasks as may be deemed necessary and included within
the CCO contract.
(Ord._2023-004)
§ 9-4-1-9 CIVILIAN COMPLAINT PROCEDURES.
   (A)   Any person claiming to be aggrieved by actions of the police may file
a written complaint against the department or any of its officers. Neither the
Board nor any of its members shall file or initiate a complaint on behalf of a
member of the public. Anonymous complaints shall be accepted.
   (B)   In cooperation with the Agency, the Mayor shall designate civilian
city staff to receive written civilian complaints at various locations
throughout the city. The Police Department may also receive written complaints.
The party who receives the complaint shall immediately transmit all civilian
complaints for further review to the Director.
   (C)   After the review of a civilian complaint is completed, the Director
shall analyze all relevant and material circumstances, facts and evidence
gathered under the investigation. For each investigation, the Director shall
prepare or cause to be prepared investigation reports with findings and
recommendations, if any, and submit them to the civilian complainant. Reports,
findings, and recommendations, if any, will also be submitted to the CPCs and
to the Board for their information. In addition to the findings and
recommendation, each investigation report shall at a minimum also include: 1) a
section outlining any relevant background and facts relating to the matter, 2)
a listing of any relevant policies, procedures, or practices that are at issue,
and 3) an analysis of the issues in the case. The Director may submit
disciplinary recommendations to the Office of Police Reform.
   (D)   When the Director submits disciplinary recommendations to the Office
of Police Reform, the Director shall prepare and submit a public record letter
to the civilian complainant, with a copy to the Office of Police Reform, that
outlines the findings and disciplinary recommendations. Unless a hearing is
requested by the civilian complainant pursuant to §
9-4-1-10, below, within 30 days of receipt of the decision of the Director, the
Office of Police Reform shall notify the Director and the original civilian
complainant of his or her final disciplinary decision in this matter in
writing, by certified mall and as otherwise prescribed by §
9-4-1-4(C)(2)(f).
(Ord._2014-019; Am. Ord._2016-013; Am. Ord._2019-007; Am. Ord._2019-020; Am.
Ord._2022-007; Am. Ord._2023-004)
§ 9-4-1-10 REQUESTS FOR HEARING; APPEALS OF DISCIPLINARY DECISIONS.
   (A)   Requests for Hearing. Any person who has filed a civilian complaint
and who is dissatisfied with the findings and/or recommendations of the
Director may request a hearing by the Board within 30 days (inclusive of
weekends and holidays) of receipt of the Director's findings letter. The Board
shall notify the Office of Police Reform of the request for hearing and hold a
hearing on the matter at its next regularly scheduled meeting provided that
there is a period of at least 14 business days between the receipt of the
request for hearing and the next Board meeting. Any such appeals shall be
reviewed in accordance with standards of conduct prescribed below.
      (1)   The Board shall adopt and follow rules for appeals that implement
the requirements of this article and ensure fairness and completeness in its
reviews. For purposes of these reviews, the Board members shall, at a minimum,
adhere to the following standards of conduct:
         (a)   Remain impartial in deliberations and decisions and abstain from
any independent investigation or review of information not presented by the
investigation report or within the investigation file;
         (b)   Refrain from any ex-parte communication relating to the matters
and parties under consideration other than at a properly noticed meeting, and
recuse from any related hearings as may be necessary based on any improper ex-
parte communication; any ex-parte correspondence that is inadvertently received
by a member shall be referred to or otherwise disclosed to the Director and,
when appropriate, made available for review by the relevant complainant and APD
officer or their representatives; and
         (c)   Refrain from prejudgment on matters coming before the Board
until such time as all relevant information has been reviewed and considered at
a properly noticed meeting, and recuse from any hearing in which he or she has
a direct or Indirect personal conflict of interest or cannot otherwise accord a
fair and impartial review, or in which such member's participation would create
the appearance of impropriety or partiality.
   (B)   Upon close of the hearing the Board may modify or change the findings
and/or recommendations of the public record letter and may make further
recommendations to the Office of Police Reform regarding the findings and/or
recommendations and any discipline imposed by the Office of Police Reform or
proposed by the Office of Police Reform only upon a showing by the complainant
that: 1) a policy was misapplied in the evaluation of the complaint; 2) that
the findings or recommendations were arbitrary, capricious or constituted an
abuse of discretion; or 3) that the findings and recommendations were not
consistent with the record evidence. The Board shall document the outcome of
the hearing in a written Notice of Decision that shall be provided to the
complainant, the individual against whom the complaint was filed, the Director,
and the Office of Police Reform. Within 20 days of receipt of the decision of
the Board, the Office of Police Reform shall notify the Agency and the original
civilian complainant of his or her final disciplinary decision in this matter
in writing, by certified mall.
   (C)   Appeals of the Final Disciplinary Decision. If any person who has
filed a civilian complaint under §§
9-4-1-1 through
9-4-1-14 is not satisfied with the final disciplinary decision of the Office of
Police Reform or any matter relating to the Office of Police Reform’s handling
of his or her complaint, he or she may request that the Chief Administrative
Officer review the complaint, the disciplinary recommendation of the Director,
and the action of the Office of Police Reform by requesting such review in
writing within 30 days (inclusive of weekends and holidays) of receipt of the
Office of Police Reform’s letter pursuant to §
9-4-1-10(B). Upon completion of his or her review, the Chief Administrative
Officer shall, within 90 days, take any action necessary, including overriding
the decision of the Office of Police Reform regarding disciplinary action, to
complete the disposition of the complaint. The Chief Administrative Officer
shall notify in writing, by certified mail, the complainant, the individual
against whom the complaint was filed, the Office of Police Reform and the
Director, of the results of his or her review and any action taken.
   (D)   Information that is covered by Garrity will be treated as confidential
to the extent permitted by law and may only be reviewed by members of the Board
by application in writing, and by majority vote of the Board. If the Board
votes to review Garrity material, members of the Board may only do so on APD
property. The Board may not remove or make copies of such statements. If the
Board desires to discuss the specific content of statements protected by
Garrity, such discussion will occur only in closed session as permitted under
the New Mexico Open Meetings Act, NMSA 1978, § 10-15-1(H)(2). The Board shall
only summarize conclusions reached after a review of a Garrity statement but
shall not disclose the statement. The Board shall maintain the confidentiality
of any Garrity material or records that are made confidential to the extent
permitted by law and Is subject to the same penalties as the custodian of those
records for violating confidentiality requirements. In addition to any other
penalty, any Board member or other person who violates the confidentiality
provisions of this section shall be removed from the Board and shall be subject
to prosecution for a misdemeanor subject to the penalty provisions set forth in
§
1-1-99. This provision shall apply to all aspects of the Board's work.
(Ord._2014-019; Am. Ord._2019-007; Am. Ord._2022-007; Am. Ord._2023-004)
§ 9-4-1-11 REPORTS.
   The CPOA shall be responsible for regularly informing the Mayor, the City
Council, and the public by submitting semi-annual written reports that include
but are not limited to the following information:
   (A)   Data relating to the number, kind and status of all complaints
received including those complaints sent to mediation;
   (B)   Discussion of issues of interest undertaken by the Board which may
include suggested policy and/or procedural changes, a listing of complaints and
allegations by Council District, statistical ethnicity of subject officers,
statistical ethnicity of complainants, and updates on prior issues and/or
recommendations;
   (C)   The CPOA's findings and the Office of Police Reform’s issuance of
discipline on those findings and the ongoing disciplinary trends of the Police
Department;
   (D)   Information on all public outreach initiatives undertaken by the Board
or the Director such as speaking engagements, public safety announcements, and/
or public information brochures on the oversight process;
   (E)   Identification of any matters that may necessitate the City Council's
consideration of legislative amendments to this Police Oversight Ordinance; and
   (F)   The amount of time that the Board dedicated to the policy activities
prescribed by §
9-4-1-4(C)(4) relative to its other activities over the past quarter.
(Ord._2014-019; Am. Ord._2019-007; Am. Ord._2022-007; Am. Ord._2023-004)
§ 9-4-1-12 SPECIAL MEETINGS.
   On the petition of 1,000 or more civilians in the City of Albuquerque filed
in the Office of the City Clerk, the Board shall hold a special meeting for the
purpose of responding to the petition and hearing and inquiring into matters
identified therein as the concern of the petitioners. Copies of the petition
shall be filed with the Board by the City Clerk. Notice of such meeting shall
be given in the same manner as notice is given for other meetings of the Board
and shall comply with the State Open Meetings Act.
(Ord._2014-019; Am. Ord._2019-007; Am. Ord._2022-007; Am. Ord._2023-004)
§ 9-4-1-13 CONFIDENTIALITY.
   The City Council believes that full participation and cooperation of all
parties involved is essential to the success of the new police oversight
process, and that APD hereby agrees and understands that its full cooperation
is necessary, hereby agrees to mandate that its officers provide honest and
truthful responses to all questions by the Director, CPOA staff or the
designated independent investigator. If any officer refuses to answer the
questions proposed to him or her by the Director, CPOA staff, or the
independent investigator, he or she may be subject to termination or
disciplinary action at the discretion of the Chief of Police. Compelled
statements given to the Director, CPOA staff or the designated independent
investigator, by a police officer will be used only for the Director's
investigation and the closed session review of the investigation file by the
Board, if any. The actual statement will remain confidential and will not be
included in a final report. The Director may summarize conclusions reached from
a compelled statement for the investigation report and in the public record
letter to the complainant.
(Ord._2014-019; Am. Ord._2016-013; Am. Ord._2019-007; Am. Ord._2022-007; Am.
Ord._2023-004)
§ 9-4-1-14 MANDATORY COOPERATION AGREEMENT.
   The City Council believes that full participation and cooperation of all
parties involved is essential to the success of the new police oversight
process, and that APD hereby agrees and understands that its full cooperation
is necessary, hereby agrees to mandate that its officers provide honest and
truthful responses to all questions by the Director, CPOA staff or the
designated independent investigator. If any officer refuses to answer the
questions proposed to him or her by the Director, CPOA staff, or the
independent investigator, he or she may be subject to termination or
disciplinary action at the discretion of the Chief of Police. Compelled
statements given to the Director, CPOA staff or the designated independent
investigator, by a police officer will be used only for the Director's
investigation and the closed session review of the investigation file by the
Board, if any. The actual statement will remain confidential and will not be
included in a final report. The Director may summarize conclusions reached from
a compelled statement for the investigation report and in the public record
letter to the complainant.
(Ord._2014-019; Am. Ord._2019-007; Am. Ord._2022-007; Am. Ord._2023-004)
PART 2: POLICE RESERVE CORPS
§ 9-4-2-1 CREATION OF POLICE RESERVE CORPS.
   A Police Reserve Corps (hereinafter referred to as "the Corps") is created
and established as an organization which shall be composed of persons who shall
have been appointed and sworn in as members thereof (sometimes hereinafter
referred to in the singular as "member" or in the plural as "members") by the
Chief of Police (hereinafter referred to as "the Chief") and trainees. For the
purposes of §§
9-4-2-1 et seq., a TRAINEE means a person who has been accepted into training
to qualify to become a member of the Corps. Members and trainees shall be
volunteer workers only and shall not be deemed to be employees of the city or
of the Police Department for any purpose other than for the purposes of §
9-4-2-6. ('74 Code, § 6-19-1) (Ord. 36-1974)
§ 9-4-2-2 MEMBERSHIP REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   The Chief of Police shall establish the requirements to be met by
persons to qualify to become members of the Corps. Such requirements shall
include but need not be limited to physical, mental, aptitude, personality
inventory and character standards and the mandatory training of such persons
for a minimum of 120 hours, in all fields of police work and activity in
accordance with New Mexico Peace Officer standards or, in the discretion of the
Chief, better or higher standards. It shall be the duty of the Chief to provide
such training for such persons and also any further training for members which
he may deem to be necessary or desirable.
   (B)   The Chief of Police shall determine physical fitness of persons to
become members and of members to continue as such.
   (C)   Whenever all of the requirements to qualify to become a member shall
have been met by any person and he shall have certified in writing that he has
read the provisions of §§
9-4-2-1 et seq., he may be appointed and sworn in as a member by the Chief of
Police.
   (D)   The Chief may terminate any member or trainee at any time and any
member or trainee may resign as such at any time by written notification
thereof to the Chief. Any member who shall cease to be such shall surrender, at
the time he shall cease to be such, all property of the city which shall have
been issued to him pursuant to the provisions of §§
9-4-2-1 et seq. or otherwise.
('74 Code, § 6-19-2) (Ord. 36-1974)
§ 9-4-2-3 AUTHORITY AND CONTROL OVER THE CORPS.
   The Chief, subject to the restrictions and limitations contained in §§
9-4-2-1 et seq., shall have complete authority and control over the Corps and
its members and trainees and may delegate the exercise thereof, in whole or in
part, to any of his subordinates. The Chief or any of his subordinates whom he
shall have designated therefor may establish, by order which may be changed
from time to time, rules and regulations governing the Corps and its members
and trainees, providing for the maintenance of discipline and the assigning of
each member to perform Peace Officer duties.
('74 Code, § 6-19-3) (Ord. 36-1974)
§ 9-4-2-4 STATUS AS A POLICE OFFICER.
   Each member, while serving as such, shall have status as a police officer or
as a peace officer and, as such, shall have the same power and authority,
except to the extent that the same may be restricted or limited by the Chief,
as does a regular police officer while he is serving as such. However, each
member, at all times other than while serving as such shall:
   (A)   Not have status as a police officer or as a peace officer;
   (B)   Not have any power, authority or duties as a police officer or as a
peace officer; and
   (C)   Not represent, identify or hold himself out to be a police officer or
a peace officer.
('74 Code, § 6-19-4) (Ord. 36-1974)
§ 9-4-2-5 EQUIPMENT.
   (A)   Each member, while serving as such, shall maintain and keep for his
expedient use every item, which shall have been issued to him as a member,
provided, however, that he shall not carry any firearm unless he shall have
qualified for and received a gun permit signed by the Chief. Each member, at
all times other than while serving as such, shall not wear, display or carry,
as the case may be, any such item unless he shall have received in writing the
permission of the Chief of Police.
   (B)   Each item which shall be issued to a member shall remain and be the
property of the city.
('74 Code, § 6-19-5) (Ord. 36-1974)
§ 9-4-2-6 MEMBERS BEING CITY EMPLOYEES.
   (A)   For the purposes of this section only, each member of the Corps shall
be an employee of the city only while serving any assigned shift as a member or
while receiving further training as such, and any trainee shall be an employee
of the city only while receiving any required training to qualify to become a
member of the Corps.
   (B)   If any such member or any such trainee should suffer or sustain any
illness or injury proximately caused by, arising out of, and in the course of,
his service or training while an employee of the city, as hereinabove limited,
he shall be entitled to all of those Workers' Compensation benefits that he
would be entitled to if he were a regular employee of the city provided that:
      (1)   While receiving the required training, a trainee will be entitled
to those benefits he would be entitled to if he were a regular Police Cadet
receiving a monthly salary as such.
      (2)   After he has been appointed and sworn in as a member, a member will
be entitled to those benefits he would be entitled to if he were a regular
patrolman second class, receiving a salary as such.
   (C)   If any such member or any such trainee should die as a result of any
illness or injury proximately caused by, arising out of, and in the course of,
his service or training while an employee of the city, as hereinabove limited,
those persons who, if the deceased member had been a regular patrolman second
class receiving a salary as such or if the deceased trainee had been a Police
Cadet receiving a salary as such, would be entitled to any Workers'
Compensation benefits, pursuant to the provisions of the Workmen's Compensation
Act of the State of New Mexico, shall be entitled but only upon the conditions
provided therefor in said Act to the same such benefits, no more or no less.
('74 Code, § 6-19-6) (Ord. 36-1974)
§ 9-4-2-98 VIOLATIONS.
   It shall be a misdemeanor for any person, not a member of the Corps:
   (A)   To wear, display or carry, as the case may be, any items which shall
have been issued to any member of the Corps; or
   (B)   To represent, identify or hold himself out, in any manner whatsoever,
to be a member of the Corps or to have any connection with the Corps.
('74 Code, § 6-19-7B (part)) (Ord. 36-1974)
§ 9-4-2-99 PENALTY.
   Any member of the corps who violates any provision of §
9-4-2-98 shall be subject to the penalty provisions set forth in §
1-1-99 of this code of ordinances.
('74 Code, § 6-19-7B (part)) (Ord. 36-1974)
PART 3: FIRE RESERVE CORPS
§ 9-4-3-1 CREATION OF FIRE RESERVE CORPS.
   (A)   There is established a Fire Reserve Corps composed of those persons
who shall have been appointed and sworn in as members thereof by the Fire
Chief, trainees, and a member of the Fire Department appointed by the Fire
Chief as Chief of the Fire Reserve Corps. Members and trainees shall be
volunteer workers only and shall not be deemed to be employees of the city or
of the Fire Department for any purpose other than for the purposes of §
9-4-3-6.
('74 Code, § 6-24-1A) (Ord. 64-1976)
§ 9-4-3-2 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of §§
9-4-3-1 et seq., the following definitions shall apply unless the context
clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   MEMBER. A person who has been appointed and sworn into the Fire Reserve
Corps by the Fire Chief.
   TRAINEE. A person who has been accepted into training to qualify to become a
member of the Fire Reserve Corps.
('74 Code, § 6-24-1B) (Ord. 64-1976)
§ 9-4-3-3 MEMBERSHIP REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   The Fire Chief shall establish the requirements for membership in the
Fire Reserve Corps. These requirements include but are not limited to physical,
mental, aptitude, personality inventory and character standards, and mandatory
training for a minimum of 175 hours in all fields of firefighting and activity
in accordance with the Albuquerque Fire Department Training Standards, or, by
decision of the Fire Chief, better or higher standards. It shall be the duty of
the Chief of the Fire Reserve Corps to provide such training for such persons
and also any further training for members which he may deem to be necessary or
desirable.
   (B)   The Chief of the Fire Reserve Corps shall insure physical fitness of
persons who are trainees or members of the Fire Reserve Corps.
   (C)   Whenever all requirements to qualify as a member have been met, a
certification in writing must be signed by the prospective member. Then that
person may be appointed and sworn in as a member by the Fire Chief. Each member
shall maintain and keep for his expedient use every item which shall have been
issued. Members or trainees will not wear, display, or carry any such item
without written permission from the Chief of the Fire Reserve Corps.
   (D)   The Chief of the Fire Reserve Corps may terminate any member or
trainee at any time by written notification to such member or trainee. Any
member of trainee may resign from the Fire Reserve Corps at any time by written
notification to the Chief of the Fire Reserve Corps. Any member who resigns or
is terminated shall surrender to the city all property of the city which has
been issued to such person.
('74 Code, § 6-24-2) (Ord. 64-1976)
§ 9-4-3-4 AUTHORITY AND CONTROL OVER THE CORPS.
   The Chief of the Fire Reserve Corps, under the direction of the Fire Chief
and subject to the restrictions and limitations contained in §§
9-4-3-1 et seq., shall have complete authority and control over the Fire
Reserve Corps. The Chief of the Fire Reserve Corps shall establish rules and
regulations governing the Fire Reserve Corps. These rules and regulations shall
provide for the maintenance of discipline and the assignment of each member to
perform firefighting duties.
('74 Code, § 6-24-3) (Ord. 64-1976)
§ 9-4-3-5 STATUS AS A FIREFIGHTER.
   While serving as a member of the Fire Reserve Corps, each member shall have
status as a regular Firefighter and shall have the same power and authority,
except to the extent that the same may be restricted or limited by the Chief of
the Fire Reserve Corps, as does a regular Firefighter while he is serving as a
member of the Fire Department. However, each member, at all times other than
while serving as a member of the Fire Reserve Corps:
   (A)   Shall not have status as a regular Firefighter;
   (B)   Shall not have any power, authority or duties as a regular
Firefighter; and
   (C)   Shall not represent, identify or hold himself out to be a regular
Firefighter.
('74 Code, § 6-24-4) (Ord. 64-1976)
§ 9-4-3-6 MEMBERS BEING CITY EMPLOYEES.
   (A)   For the purposes of this section only, each member of the Fire Reserve
Corps shall be an employee of the city only while serving any assigned shift as
a member or while receiving further training as provided for in §
9-4-3-3, and any trainee shall be an employee of the city only while receiving
any required training to qualify to become a member of the Fire Reserve Corps.
   (B)   If any such member or any such trainee should suffer or sustain any
illness or injury proximately caused by, arising out of, and in the course of
his service or training while an employee of the city, as hereinabove limited,
he shall be entitled to all of those Workers' Compensation benefits that he
would be entitled to if he were a regular employee of the city, provided that:
      (1)   While receiving the required training, a trainee will be entitled
to those benefits to which he would be entitled if he were a regular Fire Cadet
receiving a monthly salary as a regular Fire Cadet.
      (2)   After he has been appointed and sworn in as a member, a member will
be entitled to those benefits to which he would be entitled if he were a
regular Firefighter, receiving a salary as such.
   (C)   If any such member or any such trainee should die as a result of any
illness or injury proximately caused by, arising out of, and in the course of
his service or training while an employee of the city, as hereinabove limited,
those persons who, if the deceased member had been a regular Firefighter
receiving a salary as a regular Firefighter or if the deceased trainee had been
a Fire Cadet receiving a salary as a Fire Cadet, would be entitled to any
Workers' Compensation benefits, pursuant to the provisions of the Workmen's
Compensation Act of the State of New Mexico, shall be entitled to the same such
benefits, but only upon the conditions provided therefor in the Act, no more or
no less.
('74 Code, § 6-24-5) (Ord. 64-1976)
§ 9-4-3-98 VIOLATIONS.
   It shall be a misdemeanor for any person not an active member of the Fire
Reserve Corps to wear, display, or carry any items which have been issued to
any member of the Fire Reserve Corps; or represent, identify, or hold himself
out in any manner whatsoever, to be a member of the Fire Reserve Corps.
('74 Code, § 6-24-6 (part)) (Ord. 64-1976)
§ 9-4-3-99 PENALTY.
   Any person who violates any of the provisions of §§
9-4-3-1 et seq. shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction
thereof, shall be subject to the penalty provisions set forth in §
1-1-99 of this code of ordinances. Each day that a violation occurs shall be
considered a separate offense.
('74 Code, § 6-24-6 (part)) (Ord. 64-1976)
PART 4: EMERGENCY MEDICAL SERVICES
§ 9-4-4-1 SHORT TITLE.
   Sections 9-4-4-1 et seq. may be cited as the “Emergency Medical Services
(EMS) Ordinance.”
('74 Code, § 6-28-1) (Ord. 38-1989; Am. Ord. 12-1991; Am. Ord. 9-1993; Am. Ord.
40-1997; Am. Ord._2017-001)
§ 9-4-4-2 FINDINGS AND PURPOSE.
   (A)   The City Council finds that:
      (1)   The EMS system provides a satisfactory level of service to the
community at present.
      (2)   The EMS system should be based on objectively stated and measurable
performance standards and monitored by the Authority Having Jurisdiction
(hereinafter "AHJ").
      (3)   The 911 Emergency System is a basic governmental function providing
emergency responses through the City Police and City Fire Departments.
      (4)   The City, through its 911 System, is the focal point for the
receipt of requests for emergency transport of sick and injured persons within
the City.
      (5)   The City, through its 911 System, is the focal point for the
dispatch of responses to requests for emergency transport of sick and injured
persons within the city.
      (6)   In order to provide satisfactory emergency transport of sick and
injured persons within the City, it is necessary to establish a procedure for
ambulance transport service under contract with the City.
      (7)   The provisions of this Ordinance and any regulations promulgated
pursuant to this Ordinance are in addition to those standards and/or
requirements promulgated by the state agencies as the standards and/or
requirements for ambulance services and prehospital providers, which as minimum
standards may not be sufficient for the requisite standard of care in the city.
      (8)   The EMS system should ultimately be a regional system to include
the City, County, and other governmental entities located within the county.
   (B)   The purposes of §§
9-4-4-1 et seq. are:
      (1)   To serve the community through the promotion of clinical
excellence, reliable response time performance, long range stability of
service, and cost containment of the EMS system within the city; and
      (2)   To protect the public safety and health through prehospital
emergency care and to ensure consistency of ambulance transport services within
the city; and
      (3)   To establish reasonable rates for cost recovery in dispatching
functions, consumable medical supplies, and staff time of personnel assisting
the contractor(s) in the performance of transport duties through contractual
agreements with the City.
('74 Code, § 6-28-2) (Ord. 38-1989; Am. Ord. 12-1991; Am. Ord. 9-1993; Am. Ord.
40-1997; Am. Ord._2017-001)
§ 9-4-4-3 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of §§
9-4-4-1 et seq., the following definitions shall apply unless the context
clearly indicates or requires a different meaning. The word SHALL is always
mandatory and not merely directory.
   911 EMERGENCY SYSTEM. A publicly supported and funded system for delivering
EMS, public fire protection, and law enforcement.
   ADVANCED LIFE SUPPORT (ALS). Advanced prehospital and interfacility care and
treatment including basic and intermediate life support, as prescribed by state
regulation, which may be performed only by a person licensed as a Paramedic by
the Primary Care and Emergency Medical Services Bureau of the Public Health
Systems Division of the New Mexico Department of Health and operating under
medical direction.
   AMBULANCE. Any vehicle, including motor vehicles, watercraft, and aircraft,
assigned, used, or intended to be used to transport sick or injured persons,
and operated by an ambulance service certificated as such by the New Mexico
Public Regulation Commission.
   AMBULANCE TRANSPORT PROVIDER. Any appropriately certified and contracted
person providing emergency transport of sick or injured persons by ambulance
within the city.
   BASIC LIFE SUPPORT (BLS). Prehospital and interfacility care and treatment,
as prescribed by state regulation, which can be performed by all appropriately
licensed Emergency Medical Technicians, as provided by state law.
   BOARD. The Medical Control Board.
   BUREAU. The Emergency Medical Services Bureau of the Community Health
Systems Division of the New Mexico Department of Health.
   CHIEF. The Chief of the Albuquerque Fire Department.
   CITY. The City of Albuquerque as a govern-mental entity.
   city. The City of Albuquerque as geographically defined.
   COMMISSION. The County Commission of Bernalillo County, New Mexico.
   CONTRACTOR. A provider or providers of emergency ambulance transport
services who is appropriately certified and bound by contractual agreement to
the City to engage in ambulance services.
   COUNCIL. The governing body of the City of Albuquerque.
   DRIVER. An individual who is qualified as an ambulance or rescue vehicle
driver.
   EMERGENCY MEDICAL DISPATCHER. A person who is trained and certified,
pursuant to state law, to  receive calls for emergency medical assistance, pro-
vide dispatch life support (DLS), pre- arrival medical instructions, dispatch
emergency medical assistance, and coordinate its response.
   EMERGENCY MEDICAL SERVICES (EMS). The services rendered by licensed
Emergency Medical Technicians, certified Emergency Medical Services First
Responders or Emergency Medical Dispatchers in response to an individual's need
for immediate medical care in order to prevent loss of life or aggravation of
physical or psychological illness or injury.
   EMERGENCY MEDICAL SERVICES SYSTEM (EMS SYSTEM). A coordinated system of
health care delivery that includes centralized access and emergency medical
dispatch, trained first responders, medical-rescue services, ambulance
services, hospital emergency departments, and specialty care hospitals that
respond to the needs of the acutely sick and injured.
   EMERGENCY MEDICAL TECHNICIAN (EMT). A health care provider, licensed as such
by the Emergency Medical Services Bureau of the Community Health Systems
Division of the New Mexico Depart-ment of Health.
   MAYOR. The Chief Executive of the City of Albuquerque.
   MEDICAL CONTROL. Supervision provided by or under the direction of
physicians to providers by written protocol or direct communications.
   MEDICAL DIRECTION. Guidance or supervision provided by a physician, licensed
to practice in New Mexico and Board certified in emergency medicine with
current experience in the practice of emergency medicine, including authority
over and responsibility for emergency medical dispatch, direct patient care and
transport of patients, arrangements for medical control, and all other aspects
of patient care delivered by a provider.
   MEDICAL DIRECTOR. A physician, licensed to practice in New Mexico and Board
certified in emergency medicine with current experience in the practice of
emergency medicine, who is responsible for all medical aspects of an EMS system
dealing with the provision of patient care as defined in the New Mexico
Department of Health Regulations Governing Emergency Medical Services Medical
Direction. This includes the extension of his or her license to prehospital
providers; the development, implementation, and evaluation of all medical
aspects of an EMS system; and other functions specified in §§
9-4-4-1 et seq.
   OPERATOR. Any person, firm, corporation, or public agency who is the owner
or proprietor of EMS response vehicles.
   PATIENT. An individual who is sick, injured, wounded, or otherwise
incapacitated.
   PREHOSPITAL PROVIDER. Any person who has the duty of caring for a sick, ill,
or injured person, who is certified at the EMT-Basic level or higher and who is
licensed by the State of New Mexico.
   PROTOCOL. A predetermined, written medical care plan including standing
orders.
   RESCUE SERVICE. Any ALS and BLS service, municipal, county, or private,
excluding law enforcement agencies that are not otherwise providing rescue,
that is subject to being dispatched to the scene of an injury or illness to
provide rescue and immediate emergency medical care.
   SUBSTANTIAL FINANCIAL INTEREST. That at the present or in any year within
the past two years, a person derived more than $1,000 per year income from
employment by, or business dealings with, one or more EMS operators within
Bernalillo County or a contracting organization of such provider.
('74 Code, § 6-28-3) (Ord. 38-1989; Am. Ord. 12-1991; Am. Ord. 9-1993; Am. Ord.
40-1997; Am. Ord._2017-001)
§ 9-4-4-4 STATE REGULATION.
   (A)   It is recognized that certain state agencies, such as the New Mexico
Public Regulation Commission and the State EMS Bureau, regulate certain
ambulance services and prehospital providers in the community.
   (B)   It is also recognized that certificates, permits, and/or licenses
issued by those state agencies can be suspended and/or revoked only by those
state agencies.
   (C)   It is also recognized that the establishment of rates for ambulance
services, certificated by the New Mexico Public Regulation Commission, is
solely within the purview of the New Mexico Public Regulation Commission.
   (D)   It is also recognized that the State EMS Bureau regulates EMS Medical
Direction for prehospital providers in the community.
   (E)   It is intended that any regulations promulgated pursuant to §§
9-4-4-1 et seq. are in addition to those standards promulgated by the state
agencies as the standards for ambulance services and prehospital providers. The
standards promulgated by the state agencies are minimum standards which may not
be sufficient for the requisite standard of care in the city.
   (F)   It is intended that the city may enter into joint powers agreements
and other arrangements with governmental entities as may be necessary to carry
out the purposes of §§
9-4-4-1 et seq.
('74 Code, § 6-28-4) (Ord. 9-1993; Am. Ord. 40-1997; Am. Ord._2017-001)
§ 9-4-4-5 MEDICAL DIRECTOR OF THE AHJ.
   (A)   Shall maintain medical direction pursuant to the regulations of the
Primary Care and EMS Bureau of the New Mexico Department of Health, or as
otherwise provided by state law.
   (B)   The functions of the Medical Director of the AHJ include but are not
limited to the following:
      (1)   Managing the day-to-day activities of the EMS system pursuant to
protocols written by the Medical Control Board (hereinafter "Board").
      (2)   Acting to restrict all or part of an individual's patient care
activities in accordance with existing state regulations.
      (3)   Liaison with, oversee, and coordinate the activities of the EMS
providers.
      (4)   Taking direction from and being responsible to the Board concerning
matters related to patient care and the delivery of medical services.
      (5)   Acting as a member and chairperson of the Board.
      (6)   Provides Board report to the Providers Advisory Committee.
      (7)   Acting as a liaison with physicians, nurses, other health care
professionals, and the public at large.
      (8)   Auditing and overseeing medical issues as they pertain to training,
quality improvement, and service delivery.
      (9)   Performing other duties as designated by the Fire Chief or his
designee.
      (10)   Acting as a liaison between the EMS system and local community,
medical facilities, and regional/state medical directors.
      (11)   Providing educational opportunities when appropriate.
The Medical Director of the AHJ shall be an independent contractor and shall
comply with the City purchasing ordinance.
(Ord. 40-1997; Am. Ord._2017-001)
§ 9-4-4-6 MEDICAL CONTROL BOARD.
   (A)   Membership and Terms. The members shall consist of licensed physicians
engaged in the practice of emergency medicine. The membership of the Board
shall consist of one emergency department physician or his or her designee from
each hospital organization operating a full service, 24-hour emergency
department in the city. The Board shall meet no less than once every two months
as determined by its membership. Members other than the Medical Director of the
AHJ shall have staggered terms, the term of appointment shall be for two years,
and there shall be no limit on consecutive terms. The Medical Director of the
AHJ shall serve as a member and chairperson of the Board without term of
appointment.
   (B)   Functions. The Board shall be responsible for all aspects of medical
control related to patient care and the delivery of medical services. The Board
shall meet at the call of its Chairperson. The Board shall address the
following matters but not be limited to these topics:
      (1)   Medical control over the delivery of EMS and ambulance services
including the medical control communication system.
      (2)   The effectiveness of the EMS dispatch communication system.
      (3)   Medical protocols (which are the responsibility of all Board
members) to serve as the required standard of care as required by state
regulation.
   (C)   Medical Audits. The Board shall perform medical audits with regard to
the provision of EMS when requested by the Medical Director of the AHJ.
('74 Code, § 6-28-7) (Ord. 38-1989; Am. Ord. 12-1991; Am. Ord. 9-1993; Am. Ord.
40-1997; Am. Ord._2017-001)
§ 9-4-4-7 PROVIDERS ADVISORY COMMITTEE.
   The Mayor shall appoint a Providers Advisory Committee. The Mayor shall
appoint one Emergency Medical Technician (EMT) to the Committee from each EMS
operator within Bernalillo County. The Mayor shall appoint one additional EMT
from the Bernalillo County Fire Department, and one additional EMT from the
Albuquerque Fire Department that will serve as the Chair. The Mayor shall
appoint one EMT employed by the City Fire Department and one EMT employed by
providers of ambulance services. The Providers Advisory Committee shall assist
the Board in the performance of their duties through advice and consultation.
The Committee shall meet at the call of its chairperson. Initial members shall
have staggered terms and, thereafter, the term of appointment shall be for two
years, and there shall be no limit on consecutive terms.
('74 Code, § 6-28-8) (Ord. 38-1989; Am. Ord. 12-1991; Am. Ord. 9-1993; Am. Ord.
40-1997; Am. Ord._2017-001)
§ 9-4-4-8 911 SYSTEM.
   The 911 System shall be the focal point for:
   (A)   Receipt of all requests for assistance for and emergency transport of
sick and injured persons.
   (B)   Dispatch of all responses to requests for assistance and emergency
transport of sick and injured persons.
(Ord. 40-1997; Am. Ord._2017-001)
§ 9-4-4-9 PROCEDURES FOR BEING INCLUDED IN THE 911 SYSTEM.
   (A)   The Mayor shall enter into at least one contractual agreement with an
operator to provide emergency transport ambulance services in the city pursuant
to the 911 system. The application and request for proposal for such contract
shall be subject to the City purchasing regulations.
   (B)   There shall be at least one contract awarded to provide emergency
transport ambulance services.
(Ord. 40-1997; Am. Ord._2017-001)
§ 9-4-4-10 PROCEDURES FOR RESPONSES TO REQUESTS FOR EMERGENCY TRANSPORT.
   (A)   The City through coordinated dispatch shall:
      (1)   Receive, evaluate, and categorize all requests for emergency
transport of sick and injured persons within the community.
      (2)   Dispatch appropriate Fire Department response.
      (3)   Notify ambulance operator as to location and nature of call
pursuant to written protocols prepared by the Medical Control Board.
      (4)   Take control of patient and scene and provide for patient care
until care is transferred to a contracted emergency transport ambulance
service.
      (5)   Continue patient care during transport when appropriate or upon the
request of a contractor.
      (6)   Transport patients when medically necessary or when a contracted
ambulance service is either delayed or unavailable.
   (B)   The ambulance transport providers shall respond to any request for
emergency transport of sick or injured persons which has been referred to the
ambulance provider by the City, pursuant to contract with the City.
(Ord. 40-1997; Am. Ord._2017-001)
§ 9-4-4-11 JUDICIAL REVIEW.
   All actions for judicial review must be filed within 30 days of receipt of
notice of the determination in the Second Judicial District Court in Bernalillo
County. All determinations made by the Mayor shall be sustained unless
arbitrary, capricious, contrary to law, clearly erroneous, or not based upon
substantial evidence.
('74 Code, § 6-28-12) (Ord. 9-1993; Am. Ord. 40-1997; Am. Ord._2017-001)
§ 9-4-4-99 PENALTY.
   Any person who violates §
9-4-4-5(C)(5) shall be deemed guilty of a petty misdemeanor and, upon
conviction thereof, shall be subject to the penalty provisions set forth in §
1-1-99 of this code of ordinances. Every violation shall be a separate
misdemeanor. Each day such violation is committed or permitted to continue
shall constitute a separate offense and shall be punishable as such hereunder.
('74 Code, § 6-28-13) (Ord. 9-1993; Am. Ord._2017-001)
PART 5: ALBUQUERQUE POLICE DEPARTMENT PERSONNEL
§ 9-4-5-1 INTERVIEW SCHEDULING FEE.
   (A)   Any person requesting an interview with Albuquerque Police Department
personnel in connection with a legal proceeding with regard to which the
personnel may be a witness, may be charged an administrative scheduling fee of
$15 by the city prior to the interview. The scheduling fee shall not apply to
any formal notice of deposition or subpoena.
   (B)   The Office of the Public Defender (including its private contract
attorneys when representing Public Defender clients) and any organization
providing legal services to the indigent are exempt from this provision.
(Ord. 39-2003)
PART 6: COMMUNITY POLICING COUNCILS
§ 9-4-6-1 SHORT TITLE.
   Sections
9-4-6-1 et seq. may be referred to as the "Community Policing Council
Ordinance”.
(Ord._2020-032)
§ 9-4-6-2 ESTABLISHMENT OF COMMUNITY POLICING COUNCILS.
   The Community Policing Councils (CPCs) were initialized by the Court-
Approved Settlement Agreement (CASA) in the case of United States v. City of
Albuquerque, No. 1:14-cv-1025, and are hereby formally established and
recognized by the City Council as entities that shall hereto forward operate
pursuant to §§
9-4-6-1 et seq. together with other applicable guidelines and requirements, and
shall continue in existence after the case of United States v. City of
Albuquerque is dismissed.
(Ord._2020-032)
§ 9-4-6-3 PURPOSE OF COMMUNITY POLICING COUNCILS.
   The purpose of the CPCs is to facilitate regular communication,
collaboration, consensus-building, and cooperation between the Albuquerque
Police Department and the community. All community members are encouraged to
attend Community Policing Council meetings, to provide comments, and are
welcome to participate on Community Policing Council committees.
(Ord._2020-032)
§ 9-4-6-4 COMMUNITY POLICING COUNCILS NUMBER; BOUNDARIES.
   There is one Community Policing Council for each Albuquerque Police
Department Area Command.
(Ord._2020-032)
§ 9-4-6-5 MEMBERSHIP OF COMMUNITY POLICING COUNCILS.
   (A)   Members of Community Policing Councils shall serve on a voluntary
basis.
   (B)   Community Policing Council members must live or work within the
boundaries of the Area Command to which they request membership.
   (C)   Each Community Policing Council must include diverse membership
reflecting a broad cross-section of the demographic of their respective Area
Command, including but not limited to race, ethnicity, national origin,
religion, gender identity, sexual orientation, and physical ability; and, for
example, representatives of social services providers and diverse neighborhoods
leaders in faith, business, or academic communities, and youth.
   (D)   Persons will not be disqualified based on race, ethnicity, national
origin, religion, gender identity, sexual orientation, physical ability,
membership in any protected class, or for having a criminal history; however,
current active felony warrants or active felony charges will disqualify a
person from membership.
   (E)   Each Community Policing Council shall strive to have a minimum of five
members. No Community Policing Council shall have more than eleven nor fewer
than three members at a time.
   (F)   Terms.
      (1)   Members shall serve a maximum of two terms.
      (2)   Terms shall be staggered so that the term of no more than four
members expires each year.
      (3)   Each term shall be for three years.
      (4)   The Community Policing Council shall begin reviewing applications
for members at least two months before the expiration of a member's second
term, and shall strive to select a replacement member at the meeting concurrent
with the expiration of the incumbent member's term.
      (5)   If there are no eligible candidates to replace a member on the
expiration of the member's term, that member may remain on the Community
Policing Council until an eligible replacement is selected.
(Ord._2020-032)
§ 9-4-6-6 DUTIES AND RESPONSIBILITIES.
   Each Community Policing Council shall:
   (A)   Facilitate communication, collaboration, consensus-building, and
cooperation between the Albuquerque Police Department and the community.
   (B)   Hold each of a quorum of Community Policing Council meeting open to
the public and provide notice of the meetings by publishing agendas and minutes
on a City of Albuquerque affiliated website, at a minimum. This provision does
not create any obligations under the New Mexico Open Meetings Act nor does it
create a cause of action for violation of this provision.
   (C)   Create its own guidelines for establishing operational processes and
procedures.
   (D)   Provide advice and recommendations to the Albuquerque Police
Department in areas including:
      (1)   Reviewing and assessing the propriety and effectiveness of law
enforcement priorities and related community policing strategies, materials,
and training;
      (2)   Reviewing and assessing concerns or recommendations about specific
Albuquerque Police Department policing tactics and initiatives;
      (3)   Obtaining information from the Albuquerque Police Department and
conveying feedback from the community to the Albuquerque Police Department;
      (4)   Advising the Chief of Police on recruiting a qualified, diverse
workforce.
      (5)   Advising the Chief of Police on ways to collect and publicly
disseminate data and information, including information about the Albuquerque
Police Department's compliance with the CASA (while it is in effect) in a
transparent and public-friendly format to the greatest extent allowable by law;
and
      (6)   Advising the Chief of Police on support for constitutional,
community policing.
   (E)   Accept recommendations and concerns relevant to the operations of the
Albuquerque Police Department from recognized neighborhood associations whose
area of coverage corresponds at least in part with the respective CPCs area
command, and shall submit recommendations or concerns so received to the
Albuquerque Police Department. Community Policing Councils shall share all
responses from the Albuquerque Police Department with the neighborhood
association that submitted the recommendation.
   (F)   Each Community Policing Council shall memorialize its activities and
initiatives undertaken pursuant to duties and responsibilities prescribed by
this section in an annual report.
(Ord._2020-032)
§ 9-4-6-7 CITY COLLABORATION WITH, AND STAFFING OF THE COMMUNITY POLICING
COUNCILS.
   (A)   Community Policing Councils are funded as part of the budget of the
Civilian Police Oversight Agency. Subject to budget sufficiency and
appropriation, the city shall provide sufficient funds to the Civilian Police
Oversight Agency to ensure that the Community Policing Councils can fulfill
their duties.
   (B)   The Albuquerque Police Department shall collaborate with the Community
Policing Councils by, at a minimum:
      (1)   Regularly communicating with the Community Policing Councils and
the Community Policing Council Liaison;
      (2)   Providing information and speakers for meetings of and inquiries by
the Community Policing Councils;
      (3)   Reviewing, assessing, and responding to Community Policing Council
recommendations within 45 days of receiving a recommendation; informing the
Community Policing Council of whether the recommendation will be implemented;
and providing a rationale for rejected recommendations;
      (4)   Making training available to Community Policing Council members;
and
      (5)   Holding an annual meeting between the Chief of Police, Mayor and
the Chair of each Community Policing Council to present their annual reports,
discuss progress and concerns.
   (C)   The Civilian Police Oversight Agency shall provide staff and
administrative support to the Community Policing Councils, including:
      (1)   Subject to budget sufficiency, appropriation, and city personnel
policies and procedures, employing staff, including but not limited to a
liaison and an administrative assistant, who are responsible for:
         (a)   Taking minutes at Community Policing Council meetings;
         (b)   Publishing Community Policing Council meeting minutes, agendas,
and annual reports on the Community Policing Council website;
         (c)   Communicating with and coordinating resources for the Community
Policing Councils;
         (d)   Keeping the Community Policing Councils informed of Department
developments including but not limited to information related to the CASA;
         (e)   Community outreach plans; recruitment plans; and overall
strategic goals and objectives;
         (f)   Providing support to Community Policing Councils for recruitment
activities and recruitment planning;
         (g)   Notifying Community Policing Councils of potential recruitment
opportunities;
         (h)   Helping ensure that each Community Policing Councils' selection
process is fair, transparent, non-discriminatory, includes a representative
cross-section of the community, and ultimately results in at least a CPC that
satisfies the minimum membership and duties of §§
9-4-6-1 et seq.; and
         (i)   Providing materials and supplies to the Community Policing
Councils to support the Community Policing Councils in fulfilling their duties.
(Ord._2020-032)
§ 9-4-6-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS.
   (A)   The provisions of the Public Boards, Commissions and Committees
Ordinance, ROA 1994, §§
2-6-1-1 through
2-6-1-6, do not apply to the Community Policing Councils established by this
Part.
   (B)   No Community Policing Council shall organize, sponsor, advertise, or
host any political forum, or candidates running for elected office. However,
nothing in this section is intended to restrict the members of Community
Policing Councils from engaging in any political activities outside the course
and scope of their duties as a Community Policing Council member. No CPC member
shall run for or hold elective office while serving on a CPC.
(Ord._2020-032)
ARTICLE 5: AIR QUALITY AND
ENVIRONMENTAL HEALTH CONTROL
Section
Part 1: Air Quality Control Board
   
9-5-1-1   Short title
   
9-5-1-2   Definitions
   
9-5-1-3   Joint air quality control board
   
9-5-1-4   Duties and powers of board
   
9-5-1-5   Duties and powers of the department
   
9-5-1-6   Adoption of regulations; notice and hearing
   
9-5-1-7   Permits; appeals; fees
   
9-5-1-8   Variances
   
9-5-1-9   Judicial review; administrative actions
   
9-5-1-10   Emergency powers of the director
   
9-5-1-11   Confidential information
   
9-5-1-12   Limitations on regulations
   
9-5-1-13   Local air quality permit fund established
   
9-5-1-14   Inspection
   
9-5-1-15   Representation of the department, the city and the county
 
   
9-5-1-98   Violations; compliance orders; field citations
   
9-5-1-99   Penalty
Part 2: Air Pollution Traffic Control
   
9-5-2-1   Short title
   
9-5-2-2   Definitions
   
9-5-2-3   Purpose
   
9-5-2-4   Air pollution status report and traffic control recommendation
   
9-5-2-5   Traffic control order
   
9-5-2-6   Execution of traffic control order
 
   
9-5-2-99   Penalty
Part 3: Chlorofluorocarbons
   
9-5-3-1   Findings
   
9-5-3-2   Short title
   
9-5-3-3   Definitions
   
9-5-3-4   Automotive air conditioning systems
   
9-5-3-5   Refrigeration units
   
9-5-3-6   Industrial use of chlorofluorocarbons
 
   
9-5-3-99   Penalty
Part 4: Woodburning
   
9-5-4-1   Short title and legislative intent
   
9-5-4-2   Definitions
   
9-5-4-3   No burn periods
   
9-5-4-4   Notice required
   
9-5-4-5   Exemptions
   
9-5-4-6   Appeal procedures
 
   
9-5-4-99   Penalty
Part 5: Clean Indoor Air Regulations
   
9-5-5-1   Short title
   
9-5-5-2   Legislative findings and intent
   
9-5-5-3   Definitions
   
9-5-5-4   Smoking prohibited
   
9-5-5-5   Smoking-permitted areas
   
9-5-5-6   Prohibition of smoking near entrances, windows and ventilation
systems
   
9-5-5-7   Responsibilities of employers
   
9-5-5-8   Posted smokefree and smoking- permitted areas
   
9-5-5-9   Enforcement
   
9-5-5-10   Nonretaliation; nonwaiver
 
   
9-5-5-98   Violations
   
9-5-5-99   Penalty
Part 6: Metropolitan Environmental Health Advisory Board
   
9-5-6-1   Purpose
   
9-5-6-2   Organization and membership
   
9-5-6-3   Conflict of interest
PART 1: AIR QUALITY CONTROL BOARD
§ 9-5-1-1 SHORT TITLE.
   Sections
9-5-1-1 et seq. may be cited as the "Joint Air Quality Control Board
Ordinance."
('74 Code, § 6-16-1) (Ord. 13-1975; Am. Ord. 65-1993)
§ 9-5-1-2 DEFINITIONS.
   As provided in the New Mexico Air Quality Control Act, Sections 74-2-
1 through 74-2-17 NMSA 1978 (hereinafter referred to as the "Air Quality
Control Act"), the following definitions shall apply to terms used in §§ 9-5-1-
1 et seq.
   AIR CONTAMINANT. Any substance, including but not limited to any particulate
matter, fly ash, dust, fumes, gas, mist, smoke, vapor, microorganisms,
radioactive material, any combination thereof or any decay or reaction product
thereof.
   AIR POLLUTION. The emission, except emission that occurs in nature, into the
outdoor atmosphere of one or more air contaminants in quantities and of a
duration that may with reasonable probability injure human health or animal or
plant life or as may unreasonably interfere with the public welfare, visibility
or the reasonable use of property.
   BOARD. The Albuquerque-Bernalillo County Air Quality Control Board created
by §§
9-5-1-1 et seq.
   DEPARTMENT. The administrative agency of the Albuquerque-Bernalillo County
Air Quality Control Board.
   DIRECTOR. The administrative head of the Department or his or her authorized
representative.
   EMISSION LIMITATION and EMISSION STANDARD. A requirement established by the
Board, the Department, or pursuant to the federal Act that limits the quantity,
rate or concentration, or combination thereof, of emissions of air contaminants
on a continuous basis, including any requirements relating to the operation or
maintenance of a source to assure continuous reduction.
   ENVIRONMENT DEPARTMENT. The Environment Department of the state.
   FEDERAL ACT. The Federal Clean Air Act, 42 U.S.C. 7401 through 7642, its
subsequent amendments and successor provisions.
   FEDERAL STANDARD OF PERFORMANCE. Any standard of performance, emission
limitation or emission standard adopted pursuant to 42 U.S.C. Section 7411 or
7412.
   HAZARDOUS AIR POLLUTANT. An air contaminant that has been classified as a
hazardous air pollutant pursuant to the Federal Act.
   MANDATORY CLASS I AREA. Any of the following areas in the state of New
Mexico that were in existence on August 7, 1977:
      (1)   National wilderness areas that exceed 5,000 acres in size; and
      (2)   National parks that exceed 6,000 acres in size.
   MAYOR. The Mayor or his or her authorized representative.
   MODIFICATION. Any physical change in, or change in the method of operation
of a source that results in an increase in the Potential Emission Rate of any
Regulated Air Contaminant emitted by the source or that results in the emission
of any Regulated Air Contaminant not previously emitted, but does not include:
      (1)   A change in ownership of the source;
      (2)   Routine maintenance, repair or replacement;
      (3)   Installation of air pollution control equipment and all related
process equipment and materials necessary for its operation, undertaken for the
purpose of complying with regulations adopted by the board or pursuant to the
Federal Act; or
      (4)   Unless previously limited by enforceable permit conditions:
         (a)   An increase in the production rate, if such increase does not
exceed the operating design capacity of the source;
         (b)   An increase in the hours of operation; or
         (c)   Use of an alternative fuel or raw material if, prior to January
6, 1975, the source was capable of accommodating such fuel or raw material, or
if use of an alternate fuel or raw material is caused by any natural gas
curtailment or emergency allocation or any other lack of supply of natural gas.
   NONATTAINMENT AREA. For any air contaminant, an area that is designated
"nonattainment" with respect to that contaminant within the meaning of Section
107(d) of the Federal Act.
   PERSON. An individual, partnership, corporation, association, the state or
political subdivision of the state or any agency, department, or
instrumentality of the United States and any of their officers, agents or
employees.
   PLAN. Any and all parts of the state implementation plant that pertain to
the county that are adopted by the Board for submittal by the Governor of the
state to the federal Environmental Protection Agency pursuant to 42 U.S.C.
Section 7410.
   POTENTIAL EMISSION RATE.  The emission rate of a source at its maximum
capacity in the absence of air pollution control equipment that is not vital to
production of the normal product of the source or to its normal operation; also
defined by Board regulations as "pre-controlled" emissions.
   REGULATED AIR CONTAMINANT. Any air contaminant, the emission or ambient
concentration of which is regulated pursuant to the Air Quality Control Act or
the Federal Act.
   SIGNIFICANT DETERIORATION. Any increase in the ambient concentrations of any
air contaminant above the levels allowed by the Federal Act or Federal
regulations for that air contaminant in the area within which the increase
occurs.
   SOURCE. Any structure, building, equipment, facility, installation or
operation that emits or may emit any air contaminant.
   STANDARD OF PERFORMANCE. A requirement of continuous emission reduction,
including any requirement relating to operation or maintenance of a source to
assure continuous emission reduction.
   STATE IMPLEMENTATION PLAN. Any plan submitted by the Governor of the state
of New Mexico to the federal Environmental Protection Agency pursuant to 42
U.S.C. Section 7410.
('74 Code, § 6-16-2) (Ord. 13-1975; Am. Ord. 45-1984; Am. Ord. 65-1993)
§ 9-5-1-3 JOINT AIR QUALITY CONTROL BOARD.
   (A)   In accordance with the New Mexico Air Quality Control Act, a joint air
quality control board known as the Albuquerque-Bernalillo County Air Quality
Control Board is created. The Board shall serve as a joint local authority
acting on behalf of both the city and the county. Within the exterior
boundaries of the county, the Board shall have authority and jurisdiction to
exercise the same functions pertaining to air quality as the functions that
have been delegated by the Air Quality Control Act to the New Mexico
Environmental Improvement Board except any functions reserved exclusively for
the Environmental Improvement Board.
   (B)   The membership and organization of the Board shall be as described in
this section.
      (1)   Members of the Board previously appointed and serving at the time
§§
9-5-1-1 et seq. are enacted shall continue serving their terms on the Board.
The length and termination date of their terms of office shall not be affected
by the passage of §§
9-5-1-1 et seq.
      (2)   The Board shall consist of seven members, four of whom shall be
appointed by the Mayor with the advice and consent of the City Council and
three of whom shall be appointed by the County Commission.
      (3)   Members shall be appointed for three-year terms. No member shall
serve more than two consecutive terms at a time. The positions on the Board
shall be staggered appointments so no more than two city appointee's terms
expire in any single year. Vacant positions shall be filled by individuals
appointed by the same authority that appointed the outgoing member.
      (4)   Nominations and appointments to the Board shall be made as follows:
         (a)   At least a majority of the membership of the Board shall be
individuals who represent the public interest and meet the requirements of the
state and federal guidelines set forth in the New Mexico Air Quality Control
Act, as amended, and the federal Clean Air Act, 42 U.S.C.A. Section 7401, et
seq., as amended. Further, to the extent that the requirement does not conflict
with this division (a), Board members will be selected for their concerns
about, and commitment to, the local ambient air quality. Therefore, selections
may be made from a broad range of persons representing the public interest and
who are experienced or trained in disciplines including natural sciences,
humanities, social studies, finance, medicine and health, engineering or
physics, law, law enforcement, education, business and industry.
         (b)   No person employed on a full time basis by either the city or
the county shall be a member of the Board. No elected city or county official,
and no member of the immediate family of any elected city or county official
shall be appointed to the Board.
         (c)   City-appointed members shall be residents of the city and
county-appointed members shall be residents of the county.
         (d)   A Board member may be removed from office by the appointing
authority if the member has missed three consecutive meetings or has been
absent from more than 50% of the meetings during any 12 consecutive meetings.
         (e)   At least two months before a Board member's term expires, the
Department shall solicit a recommended list of qualified members for the city
vacancy as suggested by the City Council and the Department for consideration
by the Mayor. The County Commission will appoint its representatives to the
Board. The list shall include a brief biography describing the qualifications
of each candidate. From the list, as modified or enlarged by the appointing
authority, appointments to the Board will be made. Candidates appointed shall
be notified in writing, and the candidate must accept or reject the appointment
in writing. Unless a member retires or is removed, each member shall serve
until a successor has been appointed.
         (f)   If a vacancy occurs for reasons other than expiration of a term,
the Department shall promptly utilize the procedure described in division (e)
above. Each vacancy shall be filled by the authority that appointed the
departing member. The replacement member shall serve for the remainder of the
unexpired term.
      (5)   Four members present shall constitute a quorum. A quorum shall be
present for all matters decided by a vote of the Board.
      (6)   Any action, order or decision of the Board requires a simple
majority vote of the members present, except for adoption, amendment or repeal
of a Board regulation, in which case the concurrence of four members shall be
required.
      (7)   All officers of the Board shall be elected annually by the Board
for one-year terms. No officer shall serve in the same position for more than
two consecutive years at a time.
      (8)   The Board may adopt rules to govern its proceedings.
   (C)   The Board shall meet in public facilities with public seating
available. The Board shall meet monthly if a quorum is available unless a
meeting is unnecessary or delayed for good reason. The Board shall hold a
minimum of six monthly meetings a year. Special additional meetings may be held
as needed. Notice of time, place and agenda of meetings shall be published
according to the requirements of law. Meetings, work sessions and hearings
shall be open to the public.
   (D)   The Director of the Department shall record all transactions and
proceedings of the Board and shall perform the duties required by the Air
Quality Control Act. The Director is the custodian of all files and records of
the Board, and shall meet with the Board but does not have a vote.
   (E)   Any member of the Board who has a conflict of interest regarding a
matter before the Board shall disqualify himself or herself from the discussion
and shall abstain from the vote on such matter. A conflict of interest means
any interest which may yield, directly or indirectly any monetary or other
material benefit to the Board member or the member's spouse or minor child.
   (F)   The City Environmental Planning Commission (EPC) and the County
Planning Commission (CPC) may appoint a member of the EPC and of the CPC,
respectively, to be liaisons to the Air Quality Control Board. The EPC and CPC
liaisons may attend Board meetings and may participate in Board discussions,
but will not be members of the Board and will not vote. The respective liaisons
may communicate with the Board and their respective planning commissions
regarding air quality issues.
('74 Code, § 6-16-3) (Ord. 13-1975; Am. Ord. 45-1984; Am. Ord. 65-1993)
§ 9-5-1-4 DUTIES AND POWERS OF BOARD.
   (A)   The Board, in accordance with the Air Quality Control Act, shall
prevent or abate Air Pollution within the city and county.
   (B)   The Board shall:
      (1)   Adopt, promulgate, publish, amend and repeal regulations consistent
with the Air Quality Control Act and §§
9-5-1-1 et seq. to attain and maintain national ambient air quality standards
and prevent or abate air pollution, including regulations prescribing air
standards, within the geographic area of the Board's jurisdiction, or any part
thereof; and
      (2)   Adopt a plan for the regulation, control, prevention or abatement
of Air Pollution, recognizing the differences, needs, requirements and
conditions within the county or any part thereof.
   (C)   Regulations adopted by the Board may:
      (1)   Include regulations to protect visibility in Mandatory Class I
Areas, to prevent significant deterioration of air quality and to achieve
national ambient air quality standards in nonattainment areas, provided that
such regulations:
         (a)   shall be no more stringent than but at least as stringent as
required by the Federal Act and federal regulations pertaining to visibility
protection in Mandatory Class I Areas, pertaining to prevention of significant
deterioration and pertaining to nonattainment areas; and
         (b)   Shall be applicable only to sources subject to such regulation
pursuant to the Federal Act;
      (2)   Prescribe standards of performance for Sources and Emission
Standards for Hazardous Air Pollutants that, except as provided in division (3)
below:
         (a)   Shall be no more stringent than but at least as stringent as
required by federal standards of performance; and
         (b)   Shall be applicable only to sources subject to such federal
standards of performance;
      (3)   Include regulations governing emissions from solid waste
incinerators that shall be as least as stringent as, and may be more stringent
than, any applicable federal emission limitations;
      (4)   Require notice to the Department of the intent to introduce or
allow the introduction of an air contaminant into the air within the
geographical area of the Board's jurisdiction; and
      (5)   Require any person emitting any air contaminant to:
         (a)   Install, use and maintain emission monitoring devices;
         (b)   Sample emissions in accordance with methods and at locations and
intervals as may be prescribed by the Board;
         (c)   Establish and maintain records of the nature and amount of
emissions;
         (d)   Submit reports regarding the nature and amounts of emissions and
the performance of emission control devices; and
         (e)   Provide any other reasonable information relating to the
emission of air contaminants.
   (D)   Any regulation adopted under this section shall be consistent with
federal law, if any, relating to control of motor vehicle emission.
   (E)   In making its regulations, the Board shall give weight it deems
appropriate to all facts and circumstances, including but not limited to:
      (1)   Character and degree of injury to or interference with health,
welfare, visibility and property;
      (2)   The public interest, including the social and economic value of the
Sources and subjects of air contaminants; and
      (3)   Technical practicability and economic reasonableness of reducing or
eliminating air contaminants from the Sources involved and previous experience
with equipment and methods available to control the air contaminants involved.
('74 Code, § 6-16-4) (Ord. 13-1975; Am. Ord. 45-1984; Am. Ord. 65-1993)
§ 9-5-1-5 DUTIES AND POWERS OF THE DEPARTMENT.
   The Department shall:
   (A)   Administer and enforce the provisions of the Air Quality Control Act,
§§
9-5-1-1 et seq. and any regulations adopted pursuant thereto and any other laws
relating to Air Pollution applicable within the city and the county. The staff
for the Board shall be provided by the city. The Department shall perform,
within the boundaries of the county, all functions delegated to the New Mexico
Environment Department under the Act, except for the duties and powers reserved
exclusively for the Environment Department.
   (B)   Develop facts and make investigations and studies consistent with the
Air Quality Control Act and §§
9-5-1-1 et seq., and in connection therewith, enter at all reasonable times in
or upon any private or public property, except private residences, that the
Department has reasonable cause to believe is or will become a source of air
contaminants contributing to air pollution and require the production of
information relating to emissions that cause or contribute to air pollution.
The results of any such investigations shall be reduced to writing if any
enforcement action is contemplated, and a copy thereof shall be furnished to
the owner or occupant of the premises before the action is filed.
   (C)   Institute legal proceedings to compel compliance with the Air Quality
Control Act, §§
9-5-1-1 et seq., or any regulation of the Board.
   (D)   Encourage and make every reasonable effort to obtain voluntary
cooperation by the owner or occupants to preserve, restore or improve air
purity.
   (E)   Consult with any person proposing to construct, install or otherwise
acquire an air contaminant source, device, system or control mechanism
concerning the efficiency of the device, system, or mechanism or the air
pollution problem that may be related to the source, device, system or
mechanism, provided that consultation shall not relieve any Person from
compliance with the Air Quality Control Act, §§
9-5-1-1 et seq., regulations in force, pursuant thereto, or any other provision
of law.
   (F)   Establish a small business stationary source technical and
environmental compliance assistance program, consistent with the provisions of
Section 507 of the Federal Act.
   (G)   Accept, receive and administer grants or other funds or gifts from
public and private agencies, including the federal government or from any
person.
   (H)   Classify and record air contaminant sources that in its judgment, may
cause or contribute to air pollution, according to levels and types of
emissions and other characteristics that relate to air pollution, provided that
classifications may be for application to the county as a whole or to any
designated area of the city or county, and shall be made with special reference
to the effects on health, economic and social factors and physical effects on
property.
   (I)   Develop and present to the Board a Plan for the regulation, control,
prevention or abatement of air pollution, recognizing the differences, needs,
requirements and conditions in the different portions of the geographical area
of the Department's responsibility as established by §§
9-5-1-1 et seq.
('74 Code, § 6-16-5) (Ord. 65-1993)
§ 9-5-1-6 ADOPTION OF REGULATIONS; NOTICE AND HEARING.
   (A)   Any person may recommend or propose regulations to the Board for
adoption. The Board shall determine whether to hold a hearing within 60 days of
submission of a proposed regulation.
   (B)   No regulation or emission control requirement shall be adopted until
after a public hearing by the Board. As used in this section, REGULATION
includes any amendment or repeal thereof.
   (C)   Notice of hearing shall be given at least 30 days prior to the hearing
date and shall state the subject, the time and the place of the hearing and the
manner in which interested persons may present their views. The notice shall
also state where interested persons may secure copies of any proposed
regulation or air quality standard. The notice shall be published in a
newspaper of general circulation in the city and county. Reasonable effort
shall be made to give notice to all persons who have made a written request to
the Board for advance notice of its hearings.
   (D)   At the hearing, the Board shall allow all interested persons
reasonable opportunity to submit data, views or arguments orally or in writing
and to examine witnesses testifying at the hearing. Any person heard or
represented at the hearing shall be given written notice of the action of the
Board.
   (E)   The Board may designate a hearing officer to take evidence in the
hearing.
   (F)   No regulation or emission control requirement adopted by the Board
shall become effective until 30 days after its filing under the State Rules
Act, Sections 14-3-24, 14-3-25, 14-4-1 through 14-4-9 NMSA 1978.
   (G)   A copy of adopted air quality control regulations shall be on file in
the office of the City Clerk and shall be available for inspection by the
public during regular business hours. Copies of the regulations shall be
available to any person upon request and payment of a reasonable charge set by
the Mayor.
('74 Code, § 6-16-6) (Ord. 13-1975; Am. Ord. 45-1984; Am. Ord. 65-1993)
§ 9-5-1-7 PERMITS; APPEALS; FEES.
   (A)   By regulation, the Board shall require:
      (1)   Any person intending to construct or modify any source, except as
otherwise specifically provided by regulation, to obtain a construction permit
from the Department prior to such construction or modification; and
      (2)   Any person intending to operate any source for which an operating
permit is required pursuant to the 1990 amendments to the Federal Act, except
as otherwise specifically provided by regulation, to obtain an operating permit
from the Department.
   (B)   Regulations adopted by the Board shall include at least the following
provisions:
      (1)   Requirements for the submission of relevant information, including
but not limited to information the Department deems necessary to ensure that
regulations and standards under §§
9-5-1-1 et seq., the Air Quality Control Act or the Federal Act will not be
violated.
      (2)   Specification of the deadlines for processing permit applications;
provided, the deadline for a final decision by the Department on a construction
permit application may not exceed:
         (a)   One hundred and eighty days after the application is determined
to be complete, if the application is not affected by requirements for
prevention of significant deterioration; or
         (b)   Two hundred and forty days after the application is determined
to be complete, if the application is affected by requirements for prevention
of significant deterioration;
      (3)   Specification of the public notice, comment period and public
hearing, if any, required prior to the issuance of a permit, provided the
permit regulations adopted include provisions requiring that notice be given to
the New Mexico Environment Department of all applications by any source that
emits, or has a Potential Emission Rate of 100 tons per year or more of any
Regulated Air Contaminant, including any source of fugitive emissions of any
Regulated Air Contaminant, at least 60 days prior to the date on which
construction or major modification is to commence;
      (4)   A schedule of construction permit fees sufficient to cover:
         (a)   The reasonable costs of reviewing and acting upon any
application for such permit; and
         (b)   The reasonable costs of implementing and enforcing the terms and
conditions of the permit, excluding any court or other costs associated with an
enforcement action.
      (5)   A schedule of emission fees consistent with the provisions of
Section 502(b)(3) of the 1990 amendments to the Federal Act;
      (6)   Specification of the maximum length of time for which a permit
shall be valid, provided that for an operating permit, such period may not
exceed five years; and
      (7)   For an operating permit only:
         (a)   Provisions, consistent with Sections 502(b) and 505(b) of the
Federal Act, that require:
            1.   Notice to and review and comment by the United States
Environmental Protection Agency (EPA); and
            2.   If the Department receives notice of objection from the United
States Environmental Protection Agency before the operating permit is issued,
the Department shall not issue the permit unless the permit is revised and
issued pursuant to Section 505(c) of the Federal Act;
         (b)   Provisions governing renewal of the operating permit; and
         (c)   Specification of the conditions under which the operating permit
may be terminated, modified or revoked and reissued prior to the expiration of
the term of the operating permit.
   (C)   The Department may deny any application for:
      (1)   A construction permit if it appears that the construction or
modification will not meet applicable requirements of §§
9-5-1-1 et seq., the Air Quality Control Act, the federal Act or any regulation
adopted pursuant thereto or
      (2)   An operating permit if:
         (a)   The source for which the permit is sought will emit a hazardous
air pollutant or any air contaminant in excess of a federal standard of
performance or a regulation of the Board;
         (b)   It appears that the source for which the permit is sought will
cause or contribute to air contaminant levels in excess of any national, state
or applicable local ambient air quality standard; or
         (c)   Any other provision of §§
9-5-1-1 et seq. and the Air Quality Control Act or the Federal Act will be
violated.
   (D)   The Department may specify conditions to any permit granted under this
section, including:
      (1)   For a construction permit, a requirement that such source install
and operate control technology, determined on a case-by-case basis, sufficient
to meet the requirements of §§
9-5-1-1 et seq., the Air Quality Control Act, the Federal Act or any
regulations promulgated pursuant thereto; and
      (2)   For an operating permit:
         (a)   Imposition of, individual emission limits, determined on a case-
by-case basis, but only as restrictive as necessary to meet the requirements of
the Air Quality Control Act and the Federal Act or the emission rate specified
in the operating permit application, whichever is most stringent;
         (b)   Compliance with applicable federal standards of performance;
         (c)   Imposition of reasonable restrictions and limitations not
relating to emission limits or emission rates; or
         (d)   Any combination of the conditions listed above.
   (E)   This section does not authorize the Department to require the use of
machinery, devices or equipment from a particular manufacturer if the federal
standards of performance, regulations of the Board and permit conditions may be
met by machinery, devices or equipment otherwise available.
   (F)   The issuance of a construction or operating permit does not relieve
any person from the responsibility of complying with the provisions of the Air
Quality Control Act, §§
9-5-1-1 et seq. or any applicable regulations of the Board. Any conditions
placed upon a permit by the Department shall be enforceable to the same extent
as a regulation of the Board.
   (G)   Any person who participated in a permitting action before the
Department shall be notified by the Department of the action taken by the
Department and the reasons for the action. Notification of the applicant shall
be by certified mail.
   (H)   Any person who participated in a permitting action before the
Department and who is adversely affected by such permitting action may file a
petition for hearing before the Board. The petition shall be made in writing to
the Board within 30 days from the date notice is given of the Department's
action. Unless a timely request for hearing is made, the decision of the
Department shall be final.
   (I)   If a timely petition for hearing is made, the Board shall hold a
hearing within 90 days after receipt of the petition. The Board shall notify
the petitioner and the applicant or permittee, if other than the petitioner, by
certified mail of the date, time and place of the hearing. If the subject of
the petition is a permitting action deemed by the Board to substantially affect
the public interest, the Board shall ensure that the, public receives notice of
the date, time and place of the hearing. The public in such circumstances shall
also be given a reasonable opportunity to submit data, views or arguments
orally or, in writing and to examine witnesses testifying at the hearing. Any
person submitting data, views or arguments orally or in writing shall be
subject to examination at the hearing.
   (J)   The Board may designate a hearing officer to take evidence in the
hearing. All hearings shall be recorded.
   (K)   The burden of proof shall be upon the petitioner. Based upon the
evidence presented at the hearing, the Board shall sustain, modify or reverse
the action of the Department.
   (L)   Notwithstanding any other provision of law, and subject to the
provisions of Section 74-2-4 NMSA 1978, a final decision on a permit by the
Department, the Board or the court of appeals that a new source will or will
not meet applicable local, state and federal air pollution standards and
regulations shall be conclusive and is binding on every city, county and state
agency, and as an issue before any such agency shall be deemed resolved in
accordance with that final decision.
   (M)   Fees collected pursuant to this section shall be deposited in a fund
created pursuant, to Section 74-2-16 NMSA 1978 if collected pursuant to a
permit regulation adopted by the Board pursuant to this section.
('74 Code, § 6-16-7) (Ord. 13-1975; Am. Ord. 45-1984; Am. Ord. 65-1993)
§ 9-5-1-8 VARIANCES.
   (A)   The Board may grant an individual variance from the limitations
prescribed under the Air Quality Control Act, §§
9-5-1-1 et seq., any regulation of the Board, or any permit condition imposed
by the Department whenever it is found, upon presentation of adequate proof:
      (1)   That compliance with any part of the Air Quality Control Act, §§
9-5-1-1 et seq., any regulation of the Board, or any permit condition will:
         (a)   Result in an arbitrary and unreasonable taking of property; or
         (b)   Impose an undue economic burden upon any lawful business,
occupation or activity; and
      (2)   That the granting of the variance will not:
         (a)   Result in a condition injurious to health or safety; or
         (b)   Cause or contribute to an air contaminant level in excess of any
primary national ambient air quality standard.
   (B)   No variance shall be granted pursuant to this section until the Board
has considered the relative interests of the applicant, other owners of
property likely to be affected by the discharges and the general public.
   (C)   Any variance or renewal thereof shall be granted within the
requirements of Subsection A of this section and for time periods and under
conditions consistent with the reasons therefor, and within the following
limitations:
      (1)   If the variance is granted on the ground that there are no
practicable means known or available for the adequate prevention, abatement or
control of the air pollution involved, it shall be only until the necessary
means for prevention, abatement or control become known and available;
      (2)   If the variance is granted on the ground that compliance with the
particular requirement or requirements from which variance is sought will
necessitate the taking of measures that, because of their extent or cost, must
be spread over a considerable period of time, it shall be for a period not to
exceed such reasonable time as, in the view of the Board, is requisite for the
taking of the necessary measures. A variance granted on the ground specified in
this division (2) shall contain a timetable for the taking of action in an
expeditious manner and shall be conditioned on adherence to the timetable; or
      (3)   If the variance is granted on the ground that it is justified to
relieve or prevent hardship of a kind other than that provided for in divisions
(1) and (2) of this division (C), it shall be for not more than one year.
   (D)   Any person seeking a variance shall do so by filing a petition for
variance with the Director. The Director shall promptly investigate the
petition and make a recommendation to the Board as to the disposition of the
petition.
   (E)   Upon receiving the recommendation of the Director on the variance, the
Board shall:
      (1)   If the recommendation of the Director favors a variance, hold a
public hearing prior to the granting of any variance; and
      (2)   If the Director is opposed to the granting of the variance, hold a
hearing only upon the request of the petitioner.
   (F)   In the hearing, the burden on proof shall be upon the petitioner.
('74 Code, § 6-16-8) (Ord. 13-1975; Am. Ord. 45-1984; Am. Ord. 65-1993)
§ 9-5-1-9 JUDICIAL REVIEW; ADMINISTRATIVE ACTIONS.
   (A)   Any person adversely affected by an administrative action taken by the
Board or the Director may appeal to the Court of Appeals. All appeals shall be
upon the record made at the hearing and shall be taken to the Court of Appeals
within 30 days following the date of the action being appealed.
   (B)   For appeals of regulations, the date of the action shall be the date
of the filing of the regulation by the Board pursuant to the State Rules Act,
Sections 14-3-24, 14-3-25, 14-4-1 through 14-4-9 NMSA 1978.
   (C)   Upon appeal, the Court of Appeals shall set aside the action only if
found to be:
      (1)   Arbitrary, capricious or an abuse of discretion;
      (2)   Not supported by substantial evidence in the record; or
      (3)   Otherwise not in accordance with law.
   (D)   After a hearing and a showing of good cause by the appellant, a stay
of the action being appealed may be granted:
      (1)   By the Board or the Director, whichever took the action being
appealed; or
      (2)   By the Court of Appeals if the Board or the Director denies a stay
or fails to act upon an application for a stay within 60 days after receipt of
the application.
('74 Code, § 6-16-9) (Ord. 13-1975; Am. Ord. 45-1984; Am. Ord. 65-1993)
§ 9-5-1-10 EMERGENCY POWERS OF THE DIRECTOR.
   (A)   Notwithstanding any other provision of the Air Quality Control Act, §§
9-5-1-1 et seq., or any regulation of the Board, if the Director of the
Department determines that a source or combination of sources presents an
imminent and substantial endangerment to the public health or welfare or to the
environment, the Director may bring suit in the District Court for the county
to restrain immediately any person causing or contributing to the alleged air
pollution to stop the emission of air contaminants causing or contributing to
such air pollution or to take such other action as may be necessary.
   (B)   If it is not practicable to assure prompt protection of the public
health or welfare or the environment by commencement of a civil action, the
Director may issue orders necessary to protect the public health or welfare or
the environment. An order shall be effective for a period of not more than 24
hours, unless the Director brings a civil action before the expiration of the
24 hours. If the Director brings an action within that time, the order shall be
effective thereafter for 48 hours or for such longer period as may be
authorized by the court pending litigation.
('74 Code, § 6-16-10) (Ord. 13-1975; Am Ord. 65-1993)
§ 9-5-1-11 CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION.
   (A)   Any records, reports or information obtained under the Air Quality
Control Act or §§
9-5-1-1 et seq. by the Board or the Department shall be available to the
public, except that upon a satisfactory showing by any person to the Director
or the Board that records, reports or information, except emission data, or
particular parts thereof, to which the Director or the Board has access under
the Air Quality Control Act, if made public would divulge confidential business
records or methods or processes entitled to protection as trade secrets of that
person, the Director or the Board, as applicable, shall consider such record,
report or information, or particular portion thereof, confidential in
accordance with the provisions of Section 14-2-1 NMSA 1978 and 18 U.S.C.
Section 1905, except that such record, report or other information may be
disclosed:
      (1)   To other officers, employees or authorized representatives of the
Department or the Board concerned with carrying out the Air Quality Control
Act;
      (2)   To officers, employees or authorized representatives of the United
States Environmental Protection Agency concerned with carrying out the Federal
Act; or
      (3)   When relevant, in any proceeding under the Air Quality Control Act
or the Federal Act.
   (B)   The Board shall adopt regulations to implement this section, including
regulations specifying those business records entitled to treatment as
confidential records.
('74 Code, § 6-16-11) (Ord. 13-1975; Am. Ord. 45-1984; Am. Ord. 65-1993)
§ 9-5-1-12 LIMITATIONS ON REGULATIONS.
   Sections
9-5-1-1 et seq. do not:
   (A)   Authorize the Board to make any regulation with respect to any
condition or quality of the outdoor atmosphere if the condition or air quality
level and its effect are confined entirely within the boundaries of the
industrial or manufacturing property within which the air contaminants are or
may be emitted and public access is restricted within such boundaries.
   (B)   Grant to the Board any jurisdiction or authority affecting the
relation between employers and employees with respect to or arising out of any
condition of air quality; or
   (C)   Supersede or limit the applicability of any law relating to industrial
health, safety or sanitation.
('74 Code, § 6-16-12) (Ord. 13-1975; Am. Ord. 45-1984; Am. Ord. 65-1993)
§ 9-5-1-13 LOCAL AIR QUALITY PERMIT FUND ESTABLISHED.
   (A)   Pursuant to Section 74-2-16 NMSA 1978 and §§
9-5-1-1 et seq., an Environmental Health Department air quality permit fund is
established.
   (B)   All fees collected by the Department shall be deposited in the fund
created in division (A) above, and shall be used by the city only for the
purpose of paying the reasonable costs of funding the department's performance
of the following permitting functions required by the Federal Clean Air Act
Amendments of 1990 as follows:
      (1)   Reviewing and acting upon any application for a permit;
      (2)   If the owner or operator receives a permit, implementing and
enforcing the terms and conditions of such permit, not including any court
costs or other costs associated with any enforcement action;
      (3)   Emissions and ambient monitoring;
      (4)   Preparing generally applicable regulations or guidance;
      (5)   Modeling, analysis and demonstration; and
      (6)   Preparing inventories and tracking emissions.
('74 Code, § 6-16-18) (Ord. 65-1993)
§ 9-5-1-14 INSPECTION.
   The Director or an authorized representative, upon presentation of
Departmental credentials:
   (A)   Shall have a right of entry to, upon or through any premises on which
an emission source is located or on which any records required to be maintained
by regulations of the Board or by any permit condition are located; and
   (B)   May at reasonable times:
      (1)   Have access to and copy any records required to be established and
maintained by regulations of the Board or any permit condition; and
      (2)   Inspect any monitoring equipment and method required by regulations
of the Board or by any permit condition; and
      (3)   Sample any emissions that are required to be sampled pursuant to
regulation of the Board or any permit condition.
   (C)   If premises described in divisions (A) or (B) above are unoccupied, a
Department employee shall first make a reasonable effort to locate the owner or
other person having charge or control of the premises and demand entry.
   (D)   If entry is refused, the Mayor shall proceed to obtain a search
warrant by filing the documents and following the procedures required by the
Metropolitan Court or District Court. The sworn statement filed in conjunction
with the application for the search warrant or order shall:
      (1)   Set forth the particular premises, or portion thereof, sought to be
inspected;
      (2)   State that the owner or occupant of the premises or portion
thereof, has refused entry;
      (3)   State that inspection of the premises or portion thereof is
necessary to determine whether it complies with the requirements of §§
9-5-1-1 et seq.;
      (4)   Set forth the particular provisions of §§
9-5-1-1 et seq. sought to be enforced;
      (5)   Set forth any other reason necessitating the inspection, including
knowledge or belief that a particular condition exists in the premises, or
portion thereof, which constitutes a violation of §§
9-5-1-1 et seq.; and
      (6)   State that the Mayor or the Mayor's designated representative is
authorized by the city to make the inspection.
('74 Code, § 6-16-15) (Ord. 13-1975; Am. Ord. 15-1983; Am. Ord. 65-1993)
§ 9-5-1-15 REPRESENTATION OF THE DEPARTMENT, THE CITY AND THE COUNTY.
   In any court action to enforce the provisions of the Air Quality Control
Act, §§
9-5-1-1 et seq. or any regulation, permit condition or emergency order adopted,
imposed or issued pursuant thereto:
   (A)   The city and the Department shall be represented by the City Attorney;
and
   (B)   The County or City Attorney shall be represented by the District
Attorney.
('74 Code, § 6-16-14B) (Ord. 65-1993)
§ 9-5-1-98 VIOLATIONS; COMPLIANCE ORDERS; FIELD CITATIONS.
   (A)   Whenever, on the basis of any information, the Mayor determines that
any person has violated or is violating any requirement, or prohibition of the
Air Quality Control Act, §§
9-5-1-1 et seq., any regulation promulgated pursuant to §§
9-5-1-1 et seq., or any condition of a permit issued pursuant thereto, the
Mayor may:
      (1)   Issue a compliance order stating with reasonable specificity the
nature of the violation and requiring compliance immediately or within a
specified time period or assessing a civil penalty for any past or current
violation, or both; or
      (2)   Commence a civil action in district court for appropriate relief,
including a temporary or permanent injunction.
   (B)   Any order issued pursuant to division (A) above may include a
suspension or revocation of any permit, or portion thereof, issued by the
Mayor. Any penalty assessed in the order shall not exceed $15,000 per day of
noncompliance for each violation.
   (C)   Any order issued pursuant to division (A) above shall become final
unless, no later than 30 days after the order is served, the person named
therein submits a written request to the Director for a public hearing. Upon
such request, the Director shall promptly conduct a public hearing. The
Director shall appoint an independent hearing officer to preside over the
public hearing. The hearing officer shall make and preserve a complete record
of the proceedings and forward the hearing officer's recommendation based
thereon to the Director, who shall make the final decision.
   (D)   The Board may adopt a field citation program through regulations
establishing appropriate minor violations for which field citations assessing
civil penalties not to exceed $1,000 per day of violation may be issued by
officers or employees of the Department as designated by the Mayor. The program
will be implemented by the Department.
   (E)   Any person to whom a field citation is issued pursuant to division (D)
above may, within a reasonable time as prescribed by regulation by the Board,
elect to pay the penalty assessment or to request a hearing by the issuing
agency on the field citation. If a request for hearing is not made within the
time specified in the regulation, the penalty assessment in the field citation
shall be final.
   (F)   Payment of a civil penalty required by a field citation issued
pursuant to division (D) above shall not be a defense to further enforcement by
the Department to correct a violation or to assess the maximum statutory
penalty pursuant to other authorities in the Air Quality Control Act or §§
9-5-1-1 et seq. if the violation continues.
   (G)   In determining the amount of any penalty to be assessed pursuant to
this section, the Director or the individual issuing a field citation shall
take into account the seriousness of the violation, any good-faith efforts to
comply with the applicable requirements and other relevant factors.
   (H)   In connection with any proceeding under this section, the Director may
issue subpoenas for the attendance and testimony of witnesses and the
production of relevant papers, books and documents and may adopt rules for
discovery procedures.
   (I)   Penalties collected pursuant to an administrative order or a field
citation shall be deposited in the city or the county general fund, as
applicable.
('74 Code, § 6-16-13) (Ord. 65-1993)
§ 9-5-1-99 PENALTY.
   (A) Civil Penalty. Any person who violates any provision of the Air Quality
Control Act, §§
9-5-1-1 et seq., any regulation of the Board or any permit condition or
emergency order adopted or issued pursuant to the Air Quality Control Act or §§
9-5-1-1 et seq. may be assessed a civil penalty not to exceed $15,000 for each
day during any portion of which a violation occurs.
   (B)   Criminal Penalties.
      (1)   Any person who knowingly commits any violation of §§
9-5-1-1 et seq. or a regulation of the Board which is not described as a felony
in Section 74-2-14.C or 74-2-14.D NMSA 1978 is guilty of a misdemeanor and
shall be sentenced in accordance with the provisions of Section 31-19-1 NMSA
1978.
      (2)   Any person who knowingly makes any false statement, representation
or certification in any application, record, report, plan or other document
filed or required to be maintained under the Air Quality Control Act or who
falsifies, tampers with or knowingly renders inaccurate any monitoring device
or method to be maintained under the Air Quality Control Act or §§
9-5-1-1 et seq. or regulation adopted pursuant thereto is guilty of a petty
misdemeanor and shall, upon conviction, be punished by a fine of not more than
$10,000, per day for each violation, or by imprisonment for not more than six
months, or by both.
('74 Code, §§ 6-16-14A; 6-16-17) (Ord. 65-1993; Am. Ord. 23-1996)
PART 2: AIR POLLUTION TRAFFIC CONTROL
§ 9-5-2-1 SHORT TITLE.
   Sections
9-5-2-1 et seq. may be cited as the "Air Pollution Traffic Control Ordinance."
('74 Code, § 6-21-1) (Ord. 11-1975)
Cross-reference:
   
Traffic code, see Chapter 8
§ 9-5-2-2 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of §§
9-5-2-1 et seq., the following definitions shall apply unless the context
clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   DIRECTOR. The Director of the Department of Environmental Health of the
city.
   EMERGENCY VEHICLE. Any motor vehicle of the Fire Department, state or local
police or sheriff's department, any ambulance and any motor vehicle of any
federal, state or local governmental body or any public service corporation
provided that such vehicle is properly designated and operated as an emergency
vehicle in accordance with applicable laws and regulations pertaining to
emergency vehicles.
   ENTRANCE RAMP. A public thoroughfare on which traffic is limited to one-way
traffic entering onto any interstate highway.
   EXIT RAMP. A public thoroughfare on which traffic is limited to one-way
traffic exiting from any interstate highway.
   INTERSTATE HIGHWAY. Any limited access highway which is a part of the
Federal Interstate Highway System.
   MAYOR. The Mayor or his designated representative.
   MOTOR VEHICLE. Any vehicle propelled by an internal combustion engine fueled
by gasoline, diesel fuel, or other petroleum product.
   PUBLIC THOROUGHFARE. Any street, alley, ramp, road, or highway within the
city limits constructed and maintained by any governmental body and open to the
public for the operation of motor vehicles.
   WARNING LEVEL READING. A reading obtained by the Department of Environmental
Health from air sampling equipment at any official monitoring site within the
City which indicates either or both of the following conditions:
      (1)   A level of carbon monoxide (CO) which equals or exceeds 22 parts
per million (ppm) for an eight-hour average or 50 parts per million (ppm) for a
one-hour average; or
      (2)   A level of ozone (O 3) which equals or exceeds 0.4 parts per
million (ppm) for a one-hour average.
('74 Code, § 6-21-2) (Ord. 11-1975)
§ 9-5-2-3 PURPOSE.
   The purpose of §§
9-5-2-1 et seq. is to protect the public health by providing a mechanism for
the reduction of motor vehicle traffic during periods of high air pollution
episodes, to which motor vehicle traffic is a major contributor. Sections 9-5-
2-1 et seq. serve to implement certain portions or recommendations of the
Transportation Control Plan for the Albuquerque Mid-Rio Grande Air Quality
Control Region, December, 1973.
('74 Code, § 6-21-3) (Ord. 11-1975)
§ 9-5-2-4 AIR POLLUTION STATUS REPORT AND TRAFFIC CONTROL RECOMMENDATION.
   (A)   Whenever a warning level reading is obtained for carbon monoxide (CO)
or ozone (O3) at any air pollution monitoring site maintained within the city
limits by the Department of Environmental Health and meteorological conditions
are such that pollutant considerations can be expected to remain at the above
levels for 12 or more hours or increase unless control actions are taken, the
Director shall submit to the Mayor an Air Pollution Status Report and Traffic
Control Recommendation.
   (B)   The Air Pollution Status Report and Traffic Control Recommendation
shall include, but not be limited to:
      (1)   Information on current status of air pollution in the city;
      (2)   Pollution conditions expected during the next 72 hours;
      (3)   The nature of the present and expected threat to public health
resulting from such present and expected conditions;
      (4)   Identification of any specific areas of the city where pollution
conditions and the threat to public health are of special concern;
      (5)   A statement of the extent to which motor vehicle traffic is a
contributing factor to present and expected pollution conditions;
      (6)   A statement of the extent to which traffic control measures can be
expected to reduce pollution;
      (7)   Any other information relevant to the current and expected threat
to public health and the relationship of traffic control measures thereto; and
      (8)   A recommendation as to specific traffic control measures to be
imposed to reduce pollution in the city or within any specified area of the
city.
   (C)   The Director shall confer with the Traffic Engineer and the Chief of
Police in the formulation of specific traffic control measures recommended in
the Air Pollution Status Report and Traffic Control Recommendation or any
revision thereof.
   (D)   The Air Pollution Status Report and Traffic Control Recommendation
shall be revised every 24 hours or more frequent intervals whenever the
Director determines that present or expected conditions have significantly
changed or any traffic control measure previously recommended or placed in
effect is in need of revision.
('74 Code, § 6-21-4) (Ord. 11-1975)
§ 9-5-2-5 TRAFFIC CONTROL ORDER.
   (A)   Upon receipt of an Air Pollution Status Report and Traffic Control
Recommendation from the Director, the Mayor shall determine what, if any,
public thoroughfares should be closed to motor vehicle traffic in order to
reduce air pollution, and the resulting threat to public health, and shall
issue an appropriate traffic control order to the Chief of Police. The traffic
control order shall specify the public thoroughfares, or portions thereof, to
be closed to motor vehicle traffic until further notice.
   (B)   The traffic control order shall specify such exceptions to any closure
or any public thoroughfare as the Mayor shall deem appropriate in the public
interest; provided, however, that the following exceptions shall apply to any
traffic control order issued under the authority of §§
9-5-2-1 et seq.:
      (1)   Emergency vehicles;
      (2)   Vehicles operated by or on behalf of bona fide residents of an area
served by the public thoroughfare subject to closure when alternate routes of
travel to and from places of residence are not available; and
      (3)   Buses operated by or for the Department of Transportation;
      (4)   Vehicles of the United States Military or New Mexico National
Guard; or
      (5)   U.S. Government motor vehicles.
   (C)   No interstate highway nor any entrance ramp to any interstate highway
shall be closed under the authority of §§
9-5-2-1 et seq. Any traffic control order of the Mayor issued under the
authority of §§
9-5-2-1 et seq. which orders the closing of any exit ramp of any interstate
highway shall also provide for the giving of notice of such exit ramp closure
at or near appropriate entrance ramps, by signs or other appropriate means, to
operators of motor vehicles preparing to use such interstate highway.
   (D)   Upon issuance of any traffic control order to the Chief of Police, the
Mayor shall at the same time cause the contents thereof to be released to the
public, using to the maximum extent practicable, all available press, radio,
and television media.
   (E)   Any traffic control order issued under the authority of §§
9-5-2-1 et seq. shall be cancelled or modified from time to time as the Mayor
shall determine appropriate, upon advice from the Director or as the Mayor may
deem expedient by the issuance of revised orders in the manner prescribed
herein for the issuance of traffic control orders. Orders cancelling or
modifying traffic control orders shall be issued and publicized in the manner
described in division (D) above.
('74 Code, § 6-21-5) (Ord. 11-1975)
§ 9-5-2-6 EXECUTION OF TRAFFIC CONTROL ORDER.
   The Chief of Police shall cause any traffic control order issued under the
authority of §§
9-5-2-1 et seq. to be executed in accordance with its terms and shall keep the
Mayor currently informed concerning all matters relating to execution of such
orders.
('74 Code, § 6-21-6) (Ord. 11-1975)
§ 9-5-2-99 PENALTY.
   Any person convicted of resisting or failing to obey any order of any police
officer issued in the proper execution of a Traffic Control Order issued under
the authority of §§
9-5-2-1 et seq., or of interfering with the performance of duty by any officer
under the authority of such order, or of failing to heed or obey any sign or
other traffic control device authorized by such order shall be subject to the
penalty provisions set forth in §
1-1-99 of this code of ordinances.
('74 Code, § 6-21-7) (Ord. 11-1975)
PART 3: CHLOROFLUOROCARBONS
§ 9-5-3-1 FINDINGS.
   The city finds that:
   (A)   Chlorofluorocarbons, commonly called CFCs, when discharged into the
environment deplete the earth's protective ozone layer and allow increased
amounts of ultraviolet radiation to penetrate the atmosphere, thereby posing
long-term danger to human health and the environment by increasing such harms
as skin cancers, suppression of the immune system, and damage to crops and
aquatic life.
   (B)   CFCs are widely used in refrigeration and air conditioning systems in
a form commonly known as "Freon" and currently no economically feasible
technology is available as a substitute for Freon in these systems;
   (C)   The recapturing and recycling of Freon from auto air conditioning
units alone could eliminate nearly 20% of all CFCs used nationally and could
avoid an equivalent amount of Freon escaping into the atmosphere.
   (D)   That the release of CFCs into the atmosphere is a global danger, and
any reduction in the release of these chemicals will promote the health,
safety, and welfare of the citizens of Albuquerque.
('74 Code, § 6-20-1) (Ord. 83-1989)
§ 9-5-3-2 SHORT TITLE.
   §§ 9-5-3-1 et seq. may be cited as the "Chlorofluorocarbons Ordinance."
('74 Code, § 6-20-2) (Ord. 83-1989)
§ 9-5-3-3 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of §§
9-5-3-1 et seq., the following definitions shall apply unless the context
clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   CHLOROFLUOROCARBONS or CFCs. The family of substances containing carbon,
fluorine and chlorine, and having no hydrogen atoms and no double bonds, for
example, the Freon used in air conditioning and refrigeration units.
   DISPOSE.  To discard and not reuse.
   PERSON. A natural person, governmental agency, partnership or corporation,
whether acting as a principal, agent, employee or otherwise.
   RECYCLING SYSTEM. A system by which refrigerant is pumped out of the
compressor of a cooling or freezing system, purified, and reinjected into the
same or another cooling or freezing system.
   REFRIGERATION UNIT. Refrigerators and freezers, including both those
intended to be household appliances and those which are commercial and
industrial models.
   SELL. To offer for sale, expose for sale, have in possession for sale and
distribution, whether or not the sale or distribution is made for
consideration.
   WRECKER OF VEHICLES. Every person actively engaged in the business of
acquiring vehicles, required to be registered under the Motor Vehicle Code,
Chapter 66, Articles 1 through 8 NMSA 1978 for the purpose of dismantling such
vehicles as scrap material or for the resale of reclaimable parts.
('74 Code, § 6-20-3) (Ord. 83-1989)
§ 9-5-3-4 AUTOMOTIVE AIR CONDITIONING SYSTEMS.
   (A)   No person shall, within the city, sell CFCs which can be used as a
coolant in an automotive air conditioning system to any person who does not
possess and provide evidence of possession and operation of a recycling system.
   (B)   Auto repair shops and other persons who repair or service automotive
air conditioning systems within the city shall capture any CFCs released from
automotive air conditioning systems by utilizing a recycling system.
   (C)   Wreckers of vehicles shall capture all the CFCs in any automotive air
conditioning system which they propose to dismantle within the city by
utilizing a recycling system.
('74 Code, § 6-20-4) (Ord. 83-1989)
§ 9-5-3-5 REFRIGERATION UNITS.
   (A)   Effective March 1, 1990, the city landfill will no longer accept
refrigeration units.
   (B)   Effective no later than March 1, 1990, the city will accept without
charge or arrange for some other person to so accept all refrigeration units
which have been used in the city and which the owners wish to dispose of. These
units will be recycled by the city or in programs approved by the city, whereby
the CFCs will be recaptured and recycled.
   (C)   The Mayor shall develop a sound program to implement the provisions of
this section, including appropriate education programs.
   (D)   This section shall not apply to study and/or research on the effects
of the release of CFCs into the environment and/or the development of
alternative technologies.
('74 Code, § 6-20-5) (Ord. 83-1989)
§ 9-5-3-6 INDUSTRIAL USE OF CHLORO-FLUOROCARBONS.
   (A)   Effective March 1, 1990 industrial use must be accompanied by a policy
and a system in force to capture CFCs in a comprehensive recycling program.
This includes products sold and used in Albuquerque that use CFCs, not
otherwise addressed by §§
9-5-3-1 et seq.
('74 Code, § 6-20-6) (Ord. 83-1989)
§ 9-5-3-99 PENALTY.
   Any person who violates any provision of §§
9-5-3-1 et seq. shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction
thereof shall be subject to the penalty provisions set forth in §
1-1-99 of this code of ordinances. Each violation and each day's violation
shall constitute a separate violation and shall be punishable as such. ('74
Code, § 6-20-7) (Ord. 83-1989)
PART 4: WOODBURNING
§ 9-5-4-1 SHORT TITLE AND LEGISLATIVE INTENT.
   (A)   Sections
9-5-4-1 et seq. shall be known and may be cited as the "Woodburning Ordinance."
   (B)   It is the intent of the City Council that enactment of §§
9-5-4-1 et seq. will protect residents from adverse health effects associated
with woodburning.
('74 Code, § 6-6-1) (Ord. 49-1988)
§ 9-5-4-2 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of §§
9-5-4-1 et seq., the following definitions shall apply unless the context
clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   BURN DOWN.  That period of time, not to exceed three hours, after declaring
a no burn period required for the cessation of combustion within any solid fuel
heating device by withholding fuel or increasing the air-to-fuel ratio.
   DIRECTOR. The Director of the Environmental Health Department or a
designated representative(s).
   PERSON. Any individual, household, firm, partnership, corporation, company,
society, association,and legal entity, and every officer, agent or employee
thereof.
   SOLE SOURCE. One or more solid fuel heating devices which constitute the
only source of heat in a building for the purpose of space heating. No solid
fuel heating device(s) shall be the sole source of heat if the building is
equipped with a permanently installed furnace or heating system designed to
heat the building that is connected or unconnected from its energy source,
utilizing oil, natural gas, electricity or propane.
   SOLID FUEL HEATING DEVICE. Any fireplace, wood heater, wood stove, wood
fired boiler, coal fired furnace, coal stove or similar device burning any
solid fuel used for aesthetic, cooking (excluding commercial cooking) or
heating purposes inside a building.
   WOOD HEATER. An enclosed woodburning appliance, including a fireplace
insert, capable of an intended for space heating and domestic water heating
that meets all of the following criteria:
      (1)   An air-to-fuel ratio in the combustion chamber averaging less than
35-to-1 as determined by the test procedure described in United States
Environmental Protection Agency, 40 CFR Part 60.534;
      (2)   A useable firebox volume of less than 0.56 cubic meters;
      (3)   A minimum burn rate less than 5 kg/hr as determined by the test
procedure described in the United States Environmental Protection Agency, 40
CFR Part 60.534; and
      (4)   A maximum weight, excluding devices and fixtures that are normally
sold separately, such as flue pipe, chimney and masonry components that are not
an integral part of the appliance or heat distribution ducting, of 800 kg.
('74 Code, § 6-6-2) (Ord. 49-1988)
§ 9-5-4-3 NO BURN PERIODS.
   From October 1 through February 28, following a burn down period, no person
shall operate a solid fuel heating device during a no burn period unless an
exemption has been obtained or unless the device is a wood heater that has been
emission certified by the United States Environmental Protection Agency.
Certified wood heaters may be operated during a no burn period provided that no
visible emissions are produced beyond a 20-minute start up period. No burn
periods shall be declared by the Director upon review of available
meteorological data and a determination that expected atmospheric conditions
will not reasonably disperse wood smoke.
('74 Code, § 6-6-3) (Ord. 49-1988)
§ 9-5-4-4 NOTICE REQUIRED.
   Notice of no burn periods shall be sufficient if published in a newspaper of
general circulation within Bernalillo County, or if presented orally at least
three times during a six-hour period by at least two radio or television
stations operating within the county, or if presented to the general public in
the form of a recorded telephone message, the telephone number for which is
published in the telephone directory or newspaper of general circulation within
the county.
('74 Code, § 6-6-4) (Ord. 49-1988)
§ 9-5-4-5 EXEMPTIONS.
   (A)   Exemptions may be granted by the Director if it is determined that a
solid fuel heating device is the sole source of heat for the building in which
it is situated. A temporary sole source exemption may be granted in the event
of failure of the oil, natural gas, electricity or propane heating system. In
no event, shall an exemption be issued for more than 150 days. An exemption may
be granted for economic or health reasons from §§
9-5-4-1 et seq. by the Director if the Director determines that the applicant
qualifies for energy assistance according to the economic guidelines
established under the low income energy assistance program as administered by
the Income Support Division of the New Mexico Human Services Department or if
the Director determines that failure to grant an exemption would endanger the
health of the applicant. Any person seeking an exemption shall do so by filling
a written petition with the Director. Petition shall:
      (1)   State the applicant's name and mailing address;
      (2)   State the address for which the exemption is sought;
      (3)   State the period of time for which the exemption is sought;
      (4)   State reasons for seeking the exemption.
   (B)   Following receipt of the exemption request, the Director shall either
grant the exemption, grant the exemption subject to conditions, or deny the
exemption. Any action taken by the Director shall be by written order.
('74 Code, § 6-6-5) (Ord. 49-1988)
§ 9-5-4-6 APPEAL PROCEDURES.
   (A)   In the event an applicant for an exemption under this subsection is
not satisfied with the Director's decision, the applicant may submit to the
Director a written request for a hearing, provided the written request is
received by the Director within 15 days after mailing of the Director's
decision. The hearing shall be conducted within a reasonable time of receipt of
the request.
   (B)   Hearings shall be held before the City Hearing Officer, at a time and
place designated by the Hearing Officer. A written notification specifying the
time, place, and the procedures governing the hearing shall be mailed to the
grievant and to the Director. The grievant shall be afforded a fair hearing
providing the basic safeguards of due process which shall include:
      (1)   Before the hearing, the grievant shall have the opportunity to
examine and copy all documents, records and regulations of the Director that
are relevant to the hearing. Copies shall be at the expense of the grievant.
Any document not made available by the Director after written request by the
grievant, may not be relied on by the Director at the hearing;
      (2)   The right to be represented by counsel or other persons chosen as
his or her representative;
      (3)   The right to a private hearing unless the grievant requests a
public hearing;
      (4)   The right to present evidence and arguments in support of his or
her grievance to controvert evidence relied on by the Director, and to confront
and cross-examine all witnesses on whose testimony or information on the
Director relies; and
      (5)   A decision based solely and exclusively upon the facts presented at
the hearing.
   (C)   The Hearing Officer may render a decision without proceeding with the
hearing if the Hearing Officer determines the issue has been previously decided
in another proceeding. If the grievant or the Director fails to appear at a
scheduled hearing, the Hearing Officer may postpone the hearing for a period of
no more than five business days or may determine that the absent party has
waived his right to a hearing. Both parties shall be notified of such
determination.
   (D)   At the hearing, the grievant must first show an entitlement to the
relief sought, and the Director must then justify his act or failure to act.
The hearing shall be conducted informally, but all persons present shall be
orderly. Failure to comply with the directions of the Hearing Officer to obtain
order may result in exclusion from the proceedings, or other appropriate
action. Oral or documentary evidence pertinent to the facts and issues raised
by the grievant may be received without regard to admissibility under the rules
of evidence applicable to judicial proceedings.
   (E)   The complainant or the grievant may arrange for a transcript of the
hearing in advance and at the expense of the party making the arrangement.
   (F)   The Hearing Officer shall prepare a written decision together with the
reasons therefor, within ten days after the hearing with copies to the grievant
and the Director.
('74 Code, § 6-6-6) (Ord. 49-1988)
§ 9-5-4-99 PENALTY.
   Any person who violates any of the provisions of §§
9-5-4-1 et seq. shall be deemed guilty of a petty misdemeanor, and upon
conviction thereof, shall be subject to the penalty provisions set forth in §
1-1-99 of this code of ordinances.
('74 Code, § 6-6-7) (Ord. 49-1988)
PART 5: CLEAN INDOOR AIR REGULATIONS
§ 9-5-5-1 SHORT TITLE.
   Sections
9-5-5-1 et seq. may be cited as the “Albuquerque Clean Indoor Air Ordinance.”
(Ord. 21-2008; Am. Ord._2022-16)
§ 9-5-5-2 LEGISLATIVE FINDINGS AND INTENT.
   (A)   The Council finds the 1986 Surgeon General's Report concludes that
tobacco smoke is a major contributor to indoor air pollution; that breathing
secondhand smoke is a cause of disease, including lung cancer in healthy non-
smokers; and that separation of people and tobacco smoke within the same air
space may reduce but does not eliminate exposure to environmental tobacco
smoke.
   (B)   The Council further finds the 2006 Surgeon General's Report, The
Health Consequences of Involuntary Exposure to Tobacco Smoke, unequivocally
concludes that secondhand smoke exposure can cause serious disease, including
coronary heart disease and lung cancer, and premature death in children and
adults who do not smoke, and that scientific evidence indicates that there is
no safe level of exposure to secondhand smoke, and therefore, a reduction of
smoke in City of Albuquerque facilities, and in public places and places of
employment within the City of Albuquerque, constitutes a public health
priority.
   (C)   Sections
9-5-5-1 et seq. adopt the provisions of the Dee Johnson Clean Indoor Air Act
and expand the provisions of that Act to maintain existing city prohibitions on
smoking in the following situations:
      (1)   Where a business is operating as a sole proprietor or with fewer
than two employees;
      (2)   Smoking in a private home where child care, adult care or health
care or any combination of those activities is provided and not just during the
hours of business operation of such private homes; and
      (3)   The Albuquerque Biological Park.
   (D)   The Council finds that the enactment of the New Mexico Cannabis
Regulation Act, NMSA 1978, §§ 26-2C-1 et seq. and corresponding updates to the
Dee Johnson Clean Indoor Air Act, NMSA 1978, §§ 24-16-1 et seq. require
amendment of the Albuquerque Clean Indoor Air Act to include regulation of
cannabis smoke, and to clearly define the areas in which cannabis consumption
is permitted.
(Ord. 21-2008; Am. Ord._2022-16)
§ 9-5-5-3 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of §§
9-5-5-1 et seq., the following definitions shall apply unless the context
clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   BAR. An establishment that is devoted to the selling or serving of alcoholic
beverages for consumption by patrons on the premises and in which the serving
of food is only incidental to the consumption of those beverages, including
taverns, nightclubs, cocktail lounges and cabarets.
   CANNABIS CONSUMPTION AREA. An area of a cannabis establishment licensed
under the Cannabis Regulation Act, Chapter 26, Article 2C NMSA 1978 designated
for smoking or other use of cannabis.
   CIGAR BAR. An establishment that:
      (1)   Is a bar as defined in this section; and
      (2)   Is engaged in the business of selling cigars for consumption by
patrons on the premises and generates 10% or more of its total annual gross
revenue or at least $10,000 in annual sales from the sale of cigars, not
including any sales from vending machines. A cigar bar that fails to generate
at least 10% of its total annual sales from the sale of cigars in the calendar
year after December 31, 2006, not including sales from vending machines, shall
not be defined as a CIGAR BAR and shall not thereafter be known as such
regardless of sales figures. A cigar bar shall agree to provide adequate
information to demonstrate to the city's satisfaction compliance with this
definition. Determination by the State of New Mexico that a business is a CIGAR
BAR shall be conclusive evidence that such establishment is a CIGAR BAR under
§§
9-5-5-1 et seq.
   DESIGNATED OUTDOOR SMOKING AREA. An area where smoking may be permitted,
designated by an employer or manager, outside an indoor workplace or indoor
public place; provided that the following conditions are maintained:
      (1)   Smoking shall not be permitted near any building entrance,
including a door, window or ventilation system of any facility where smoking is
prohibited under the provisions of the Albuquerque Clean Indoor Air Ordinance,
so as to prevent secondhand smoke from entering the indoor workplace or indoor
public place; and
      (2)   Employees or members of the general public are not required to walk
through the smoking area to gain entrance to the indoor workplace or indoor
public place.
   EMPLOYER. An individual, a partnership, a corporation, the City of
Albuquerque or any governmental body over which the city has jurisdiction that
employs the services of one or more individuals.
   ENCLOSED. Any interior space predominantly or totally bounded on all sides
and above by physical barriers, regardless of whether such barriers consist of
or include uncovered openings, screened or otherwise partially covered openings
or open or closed windows.
   INDOOR PUBLIC PLACE. The enclosed area within any governmental or
nongovernmental place to which the public is invited or in which the public is
permitted regardless of whether work or public business, meetings or hearings
occur at any given time.
   INDOOR WORKPLACE. Any enclosed place where one or more persons engage in
work, including lobbies, reception areas, offices, conference and meeting
rooms, employee cafeterias and lunchrooms, break rooms and employee lounges,
classrooms, auditoriums, hallways, stairways, waiting areas, elevators and
restrooms and includes all indoor workplaces and enclosed parts regardless of
whether work occurs at any given time.
   PRIVATE CLUB. An organization, whether incorporated or not, that is the
owner, lessee or occupant of a building or portion thereof used exclusively for
the organization's purposes at all times, that is operated solely for
recreational, fraternal, social, patriotic, political, benevolent or athletic
purposes, but not for pecuniary gain, and that only sells alcoholic beverages
incidental to its operation. The organization shall have bylaws or a
constitution to govern its activities and shall have been granted an exemption
as a club under the provisions of Section 501 of the Internal Revenue Code of
1986, as amended.
   PUBLIC PLACE. A place to which the general public has access and includes
hallways, lobbies, and other parts of apartment buildings and hotels that do
not constitute rooms or apartments designated for actual residence; highways;
streets; sidewalks; schools; places of amusement; parks; playgrounds; and
places used in connection with public passenger transportation.
   RESTAURANT. A coffee shop, cafeteria, private or public school cafeteria or
eating establishment and any other eating establishment that gives or offers
for sale food to the public, patrons or employees, including kitchens and
catering facilities in which food is prepared on the premises for serving
elsewhere or a bar area within or attached to the premises.
   RETAIL TOBACCO STORE. A retail store used primarily for the sale of tobacco
products and accessories and in which the sale of other products is merely
incidental, including smoke shops, cigar shops  or hookah lounges, and does not
include establishments that offer for sale alcoholic beverages for consumption
by patrons on the premises.
   SECONDHAND SMOKE. Smoke emitted from lighted, smoldering or burning tobacco
when the smoker is not inhaling, smoke emitted at the mouthpiece during puff
drawing and smoke exhaled by the smoker.
   SMOKEFREE AREA. Any building or other enclosed space where smoking is
prohibited.
   SMOKING. Inhaling, exhaling, burning, carrying or holding any lighted,
heated, or otherwise volatilized tobacco or cannabis product, including all
types of cigarettes, cigars, pipes , e-cigarettes, vaporizers, and any other
lighted tobacco or cannabis product.
   SMOKING PERMITTED AREA. Any building or other enclosed space where smoking
may be permitted; provided that secondhand smoke does not infiltrate any area
where smoking is prohibited pursuant to the Albuquerque Clean Indoor Air
Ordinance.
(Ord. 21-2008; Am. Ord._2022-16)
§ 9-5-5-4 SMOKING PROHIBITED.
   (A)   It is unlawful for a person to smoke in any indoor workplace or indoor
public place or in buses, taxicabs or other means of public transit not
specifically exempted pursuant to the Albuquerque Clean Indoor Air Ordinance.
   (B)   It is unlawful to smoke on the grounds and in all buildings within the
Albuquerque Biological Park including the Rio Grande Zoo, Aquarium and
Botanical Gardens.
   (C)   It is unlawful for a person to smoke within any public transit
boarding area located within a street median and any other outdoor or
partially-sheltered public transit boarding or designated waiting area where
smoking is prohibited, in addition to the unlawfulness of smoking in any indoor
public transit facilities or city owned or operated vehicles.
   (D)   The proprietor shall cause the smoking to cease whenever a law
enforcement officer, other first responder or employee or agent of the City of
Albuquerque, Bernalillo County, State of New Mexico, Tribal government or
public utility is conducting official business at the cannabis consumption
area.
(Ord. 21-2008; Am. Ord. 2017-030; Am. Ord._2022-16) Penalty, see §
9-5-5-99
§ 9-5-5-5 SMOKING-PERMITTED AREAS.
   (A)   Cannabis. Consumption of cannabis pursuant to the Cannabis Regulation
Act is permitted in private spaces and licensed "cannabis consumption areas."
Smoking in a cannabis consumption area on a licensed premises shall be allowed
only if the cannabis consumption area is in a designated smoking area or in a
standalone building from which smoke does not infiltrate other indoor
workplaces or other indoor public places where smoking is otherwise prohibited
pursuant to state and/or local law.
   (B)   Tobacco. Notwithstanding any other provision of the Albuquerque Clean
Indoor Air Ordinance, tobacco smoking-permitted areas include the following:
      (1)   A private residence unless it is used commercially to provide child
care, adult day care, or serves as a health care facility;
      (2)   A retail tobacco store;
      (3)   A cigar bar;
      (4)   The facilities of a tobacco manufacturing company licensed by the
United States to manufacture tobacco products that are operated by the company
in its own name and that are used exclusively by the company in its business of
manufacturing, marketing or distributing its tobacco products; provided that
smoke does not infiltrate other indoor workplaces or other indoor public places
where smoking is otherwise prohibited under the Albuquerque Clean Indoor Air
Ordinance;
      (5)   A state-licensed gaming facility, casino or bingo parlor;
      (6)   An indoor workplace to the extent that tobacco smoking is an
integral part of a smoking cessation program that is approved by the department
or of medical or scientific research that is conducted in the indoor workplace
and in which each room of the indoor workplace in which tobacco smoking is
permitted complies with signage requirements;
      (7)   Designated outdoor smoking areas;
      (8)   Private clubs;
      (9)   A limousine under private hire;
      (10)   Hotel and motel rooms that are rented to guests and are designated
as smoking- permitted rooms; provided that not more than 25% of rooms rented to
guests in a hotel or motel may be so designated;
      (11)   Enclosed areas within restaurants, bars, hotel and motel
conference or meeting rooms while these places are being used for private
functions; provided that none of these areas are open to the general public
while the private functions are occurring and provided that smoke does not
infiltrate other indoor workplaces or indoor public places where smoking is
otherwise prohibited under the Albuquerque Clean Indoor Air Ordinance;
   (12)   A site that is being used in connection with the practice of cultural
or ceremonial activities by Native Americans and that is in accordance with the
federal American Indian Religious Freedom Act, 42 U.S.C. 1996 and 1996a; and
   (13)   A theatrical stage or a motion picture or television production set
when it is necessary for performers to smoke as part of the production.
(Ord. 21-2008; Am. Ord._2022-16)
§ 9-5-5-6 PROHIBITION OF SMOKING NEAR ENTRANCES, WINDOWS AND VENTILATION
SYSTEMS.
   Smoking is prohibited near entrances, windows and ventilation systems of all
workplaces and public places where smoking is prohibited by the Albuquerque
Clean Indoor Air Ordinance. An individual who owns, manages, operates or
otherwise controls the use of any premises subject to the provisions of the
Albuquerque Clean Indoor Air Ordinance shall establish a smokefree area that
extends a reasonable distance from any entrances, windows and ventilation
systems to any enclosed areas where smoking is prohibited. The reasonable
distance shall be a distance sufficient to ensure that persons entering or
leaving the building or facility shall not be subjected to breathing tobacco or
cannabis smoke and to ensure that tobacco or cannabis smoke does not enter the
building or facility through entrances, windows, ventilation systems or any
other means.
(Ord. 21-2008; Am. Ord._2022-16) Penalty, see §
9-5-5-99
§ 9-5-5-7 RESPONSIBILITIES OF EMPLOYERS.
   (A)   Employers shall provide that their places of employment meet the
requirements of the Albuquerque Clean Indoor Air Ordinance.
   (B)   An employer shall adopt, implement, post and maintain a written
smoking policy pursuant to the Albuquerque Clean Indoor Air Ordinance.
(Ord. 21-2008; Am. Ord._2022-16) Penalty, see §
9-5-5-99
§ 9-5-5-8 POSTED SMOKEFREE AND SMOKING-PERMITTED AREAS.
   (A)   To advise persons of the existence of smokefree areas or smoking-
permitted areas, signs shall be posted as follows:
      (1)   For each indoor workplace or indoor public place where smoking is
prohibited pursuant to the Albuquerque Clean Indoor Air Ordinance, a "NO
SMOKING" sign shall be posted where it is clear, conspicuous and easily legible
at each public entrance. Posting of "NO SMOKING" signs is the responsibility of
the owner, operator, manager or other person having control of the indoor
workplace or indoor public place; and
      (2)   For each indoor workplace or indoor public place where smoking is
permitted pursuant to the Albuquerque Clean Indoor Air Ordinance, a "SMOKING
PERMITTED" sign shall be posted where it is clear, conspicuous and easily
legible at each public entrance, unless an owner, operator or manager chooses
to prohibit smoking in all or part of an indoor workplace or indoor public
place where smoking is otherwise permitted.
      (3)   For each cannabis consumption area, a "CANNABIS SMOKING PERMITTED"
sign shall be posted where it is clear, conspicuous and easily legible at each
public entrance.
   (B)   Nothing in the Albuquerque Clean Indoor Air Ordinance shall be
construed so as to require the posting of signs at a residence unless it is
used commercially to provide child care, adult day care, or serves as a health
care facility.
(Ord. 21-2008; Am. Ord._2022-16)
§ 9-5-5-9 ENFORCEMENT.
   (A)   The Albuquerque Fire or Police Departments, the Mayor or his
designated agents, or the Bernalillo County Sheriff’s Department shall enforce
the Albuquerque Clean Indoor Air Ordinance by issuance of a citation.
   (B)   A person may register a complaint regarding an alleged violation
pursuant to the Albuquerque Clean Indoor Air Ordinance to initiate enforcement
of that ordinance with the Mayor or the Albuquerque Fire or Police Departments.
   (C)   The designated enforcement agencies may inspect an establishment for
compliance with the Albuquerque Clean Indoor Air Ordinance.
(Ord. 21-2008; Am. Ord._2017-030; Am. Ord._2022-16)
§ 9-5-5-10 NONRETALIATION; NONWAIVER.
   (A)   A person or employer shall not discharge, refuse to hire or in any
manner retaliate against an employee, applicant for employment or patron
because that employee, applicant or patron exercises any rights afforded by the
Albuquerque Clean Indoor Air Ordinance or reports or attempts to prosecute a
violation of that ordinance.
   (B)   An employee who works in a setting where an employer allows smoking
does not waive or otherwise surrender any legal rights the employee may have
against the employer or any other party.
(Ord. 21-2008; Am. Ord._2022-16) Penalty, see §
9-5-5-99
§ 9-5-5-98 VIOLATIONS.
   It is unlawful for a person who owns, manages, operates or otherwise
controls the use of premises subject to regulation under the Albuquerque Clean
Indoor Air Ordinance to violate its provisions. The owner, manager or operator
of premises subject to regulation under the Albuquerque Clean Indoor Air
Ordinance shall not be subject to a penalty if a person on the premises is in
violation of the Albuquerque Clean Indoor Air Ordinance as long as the owner,
manager or operator has posted signs, implemented the appropriate policy and
informed the person that the person is in violation of the Albuquerque Clean
Indoor Air Ordinance.
(Ord. 21-2008; Am. Ord._2022-16) Penalty, see §
9-5-5-99
§ 9-5-5-99 PENALTY.
   A person 18 years of age or older who violates any provision of the
Albuquerque Clean Indoor Air Ordinance shall be guilty of a petty misdemeanor
and is subject to:
   (A)   A fine not to exceed $100 for the first violation of that ordinance;
   (B)   A fine not to exceed $200 for the second violation of that ordinance
within any consecutive 12- month period of the first violation; and
   (C)   A fine not to exceed $500 for the third and each subsequent violation
of that ordinance within any consecutive 12-month period of a previous
violation.
(Ord. 21-2008; Am. Ord._2022-16)
PART 6: METROPOLITAN ENVIRONMENTAL HEALTH ADVISORY BOARD
§ 9-5-6-1 PURPOSE.
   A Metropolitan Environmental Health Advisory Board is established for the
following purposes to:
   (A)   Keep itself informed of community environmental health needs and to
serve as a forum for public discussion;
   (B)   Recommend to the Mayor and County Manager, policies for program
improvement;
   (C)   Advise the Environmental Health Department regarding environmental
health needs and programs;
   (D)   Hold hearings and make recommendations on appeals from orders of the
Environmental Health Department as provided by other ordinances;
   (E)   Perform the functions of the Albuquerque- Bernalillo County Air
Quality Control Board as provided in the City and County Air Quality Control
Board Regulations, §§
6-5-1-1 et seq.
   (F)   Advise the Environmental Planning Commission regarding air and water
quality matters.
('74 Code, § 6-17-1) (Ord. 12-1975; Am. Ord. 72-1976)
§ 9-5-6-2 ORGANIZATION AND MEMBERSHIP.
   (A)   The Metropolitan Environmental Health Advisory Board will consist of
seven members, three of whom shall be appointed by the County Commission and
four of whom shall be appointed by the Mayor.
   (B)   Members shall serve for three-year terms, except that three of the
initial terms shall be for two-year terms. The three members to serve an
initial term of two years shall be those members previously determined by lot
in accordance with the original city and county ordinances creating the
Environmental Health Advisory Board.
   (C)   In years in which three terms expire, two of the vacancies shall be
filled by individuals appointed by the Mayor and one of the vacancies shall be
filled by an individual appointed by the County Commission. In years in which
four such terms expire, two of the vacancies shall be filled by individuals
appointed by the Mayor and two vacancies shall be filled by individuals
appointed by the County Commission. Members previously appointed and serving at
the time §§
9-5-6-1 et seq. are enacted shall continue serving to the terms they were named
and their terms shall not be affected by the passage of §§
9-5-6-1 et seq.
   (D)   City-appointed members shall be residents of the city, and county-
appointed members shall be residents of the county.
   (E)   At least a majority of the membership of the Board shall be
individuals who represent the public interest and meet the requirements of
state and federal guidelines set forth in the New Mexico Air Quality Control
Act, Sections 74-2-1 et seq. NMSA 1978, and the federal Clean Air Act, 42 USCA
§ 7401 et seq., as amended. Further, to the extent that it does not conflict
with this division. Board members shall be representative of such groups as
environmental health, engineering, legal, education, scientific, environmental,
or industrial interests.
   (F)   The Director of the Department of Environmental Health is an ex
officio member of the Board, but does not have a vote.
   (G)   A quorum of four members is required for the conduct of business. The
Board will adopt rules to govern its proceedings.
   (H)   The Board will meet in appropriate public facilities providing seating
arrangements for the expected public. The Board shall meet monthly, unless a
special need requires that additional meetings be held. Notice of time, place,
and agenda of meetings must be published as prescribed by law. Meetings shall
be open to the public as required by law.
   (I)   Minutes of Board meetings shall be kept and filed with the City Clerk
and County Clerk. Additional copies, as indicated, shall be forwarded to the
Chief Administrative Officer and the County Manager.
('74 Code, § 6-17-2) (Ord. 12-1975; Am. Ord. 32-1990)
§ 9-5-6-3 CONFLICT OF INTEREST.
   Any Board member having a pecuniary interest in matters before the Board
must disqualify himself from discussion and vote on such matters.
('74 Code, § 6-17-3) (Ord. 12-1975)
ARTICLE 6: FOOD SERVICE AND RETAIL
Section
   
9-6-1   Short title
   
9-6-2   Purpose
   
9-6-3   Definitions
   
9-6-4   Applicability
   
9-6-5   Enforcement authority promulgation of rules
   
9-6-6   Availability of ordinance and food code
   
9-6-7   Permit required for food establishments; application
   
9-6-8   Suspension, revocation, reinstatement of permits, and compliance plans
   
9-6-9   Permit renewal
   
9-6-10   Permit and administrative fees
   
9-6-11   Inspection of food establishments; investigation of foodborne illness
   
9-6-12   Condemnation of food and equipment
   
9-6-13   Food safety training requirements
   
9-6-14   Food establishments outside of the jurisdiction of the enforcement
authority
   
9-6-15   Administration and interpretation
   
9-6-16   Variances
   
9-6-17   Service of notice
   
9-6-18   Hearings
   
9-6-19   Judicial review
   
9-6-20   Civil violations; criminal violations; additional remedies; injunctive
relief
§ 9-6-1 SHORT TITLE.
   This article shall be known and may be cited as the “Albuquerque Food
Service and Retail Ordinance” and may be abbreviated as the “FSO”.
(Ord._2024-012)
§ 9-6-2 PURPOSE.
   The intent of the Albuquerque Food Service and Retail Ordinance is to
provide Food Establishments with clear and concise Food safety regulations and,
to the extent possible and consistent with the duties set out herein, collect
100% of the cost of administrative enforcement required to safeguard public
health and ensure that Food is safe, unadulterated, and honestly presented for
consumption.
(Ord._2024-012)
§ 9-6-3 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this ordinance, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning. Terms
include either the singular or the plural as the case may be.
   APPLICANT. A Person applying for a Permit.
   CITY. The City of Albuquerque.
   COMPLIANCE PLAN. A written agreement between the Permit Holder and the
Enforcement Authority that outlines conditions and corrective actions that must
be met to prevent suspension or revocation of a Food Establishment Permit.
   CLOSED SIGN. The placard, sticker, or sign placed on a Food Establishment by
the Enforcement Authority after issuing a Grade of Closed as defined in the
Rules.
   ENFORCEMENT AUTHORITY. The Mayor or the Mayor’s designated agent(s).
   ENFORCEMENT AUTHORITY. Includes references to “Regulatory Authority” in the
U.S. Food and Drug Administration Food Code.
   EXPIRATION DATE. The date listed on a Permit marking the end of the Permit
term.
   FOOD. Any raw, cooked, or processed edible substance, ice, beverage, or
ingredient used or intended for use or for sale in whole or in part for human
consumption, or chewing gum.
   FOOD CODE. Food Code as adopted by the Rules.
   FOOD ESTABLISHMENT. Any place where Food is stored, processed, packaged,
repackaged, or prepared and intended for human consumption.
   FOOD ESTABLISHMENT. Includes any such place regardless of whether the
consumption is on or off the premises, regardless of its permanence, and
regardless of whether there is a charge for the Food.
   FOOD ESTABLISHMENT. Does not include:
      (A)   Any place where Food is produced, sold, distributed, or prepared
and exempt from regulation pursuant to the Homemade Food Act, Chapter 25,
Article 12 NMSA 1978;
      (B)   A kitchen in a private home, except the Enforcement Authority may
pursue a warrant for inspection of a kitchen in a private home pursuant to §
9-6-10(C) of This Ordinance when a private home kitchen is being used as a food
establishment in violation of This Ordinance;
      (C)   Home-delivery vehicle and service including but not limited to
pizza delivery, third party ordering and delivery services, or grocery delivery
services; and
      (D)   A private home that receives catered or home-delivered Food.
   GRADE. The score showing the degree of compliance with This Ordinance, and
the Rules, that a Food Establishment receives at the time of the most recent
inspection.
   IHO ORDINANCE. Independent Office of Hearings Ordinance, Chapter 2, Article
7, Part 8 ROA 1994.
   IMMINENT HEALTH HAZARD. Any condition or circumstance which, in the judgment
of the Enforcement Authority, could be immediately injurious to life, health,
or safety; or as defined in the Food Code.
   PERMIT. The document issued by the Enforcement Authority that authorizes a
Person to operate a Food Establishment.
   PERMIT HOLDER. The legal entity responsible for the operation of the Food
Establishment such as the owner, owner’s agent, or other Person; or as defined
in the Food Code.
   PERSON. An individual, partnership, corporation, association, or any other
legal entity.
   PERSON IN CHARGE. The individual present in a Food Establishment who is the
apparent supervisor of the Food Establishment at the time of inspection. If no
individual is the apparent supervisor, then any employee present is the Person
In Charge.
   RULE. The Rules promulgated by the Enforcement Authority pursuant to This
Ordinance.
   TERM. The period of time during which a Food Establishment is authorized to
operate under a Permit.
   THIS ORDINANCE. The Albuquerque Food Service and Retail Ordinance.
   VALID. Unexpired, not suspended, and not revoked.
(Ord._2024-012)
§ 9-6-4 APPLICABILITY.
   The Albuquerque Retail and Food Service Ordinance applies to all Food
Establishments operating for any period of time within the City. Food
Establishment employees and applicants are required to comply with This
Ordinance.
(Ord._2024-012)
§ 9-6-5 ENFORCEMENT AUTHORITY PROMULGATION OF RULES.
   The Enforcement Authority shall promulgate reasonable rules to carry out the
intent and purpose of This Ordinance. Any such rules shall be adopted under the
procedures of Chapter 2, Article 15 ROA 1994 and at minimum shall:
   (A)   Adopt relevant Food safety requirements and equipment standards;
   (B)   Establish processes for the condemnation of Food and equipment by the
Enforcement Authority;
   (C)   Establish procedures for the application, issuance, renewal,
suspension, reinstatement, and revocation of Permits which regulations shall
provide for prior notice to and a hearing for any applicant or Permit Holder
when the Enforcement Authority’s proposed action is to deny an application, or
suspend or revoke a Permit;
   (D)   Establish procedures for the administration of fees, provisions for
fee proration, and the assessment of secondary permit fees;
   (E)   Establish requirements for inspections of Food Establishments, and
include provisions for inspections at a frequency based on prescribed risk
categories with inspections occurring at least once every eighteen months;
   (F)   Establish a system of grading Food Establishments, utilizing scoring
rubrics by which each violation of This Ordinance or the Food Code deducts a
predetermined percentage from the overall total score and requiring Food
Establishments to display the Grade as notice of compliance to the public;
   (G)   Establish requirements for Food Establishment employees to be properly
trained in Food safety; and
   (H)   Place additional requirements or exempting requirements for each type
of Food Establishment Permit to ensure reasonable public safety.
(Ord._2024-012)
§ 9-6-6 AVAILABILITY OF ORDINANCE AND FOOD CODE.
   A copy of This Ordinance and any Rules shall be kept on file in the Office
of the City Clerk, and be available for inspection by the public during regular
business hours. A copy of the following shall be available to any individual
upon request and the payment of a reasonable charge as set by the Chief
Administrative Officer, to be not less than the actual cost per copy. The Rules
shall be made available on the Enforcement Authority’s publicly available
website.
(Ord._2024-012)
§ 9-6-7 PERMIT REQUIRED FOR FOOD ESTABLISHMENTS; APPLICATION.
   (A)   Permit Required.
      (1)   No Person shall operate a Food Establishment in the City without a
Valid Permit issued by the Enforcement Authority for that Food Establishment.
      (2)   The Permit Holder shall be responsible for ensuring that the Food
Establishment complies with This Ordinance, the Rules, and other laws.
      (3)   Permit Holders shall not be responsible for the operations of other
Permit Holders and their Food Establishments when they are located on the same
premises.
      (4)   Each Permit Holder shall be responsible for ensuring shared
facilities or equipment on the premises complies with This Ordinance, the
Rules, and other laws.
      (5)   The Permit shall be posted in a conspicuous place on the premises
of the Food Establishment and made available immediately upon request, for
examination by the Enforcement Authority.
      (6)   No property owner shall knowingly allow a Food Establishment to
operate on the premises of their property without a Valid Permit.
   (B)   Pre-inspection Application.
      (1)   All Applicants shall submit a pre-inspection application within a
reasonable amount of time prior to the anticipated opening date of the Food
Establishment to the Enforcement Authority in a manner consistent with the
Rules.
      (2)   The pre-inspection application shall include all required
information and supporting documentation as detailed in the Rules and be on a
paper or electronic form approved by the Enforcement Authority.
   (C)   Pre-Opening Inspection of Food Establishment. Upon receipt of a
complete pre-inspection application, the Enforcement Authority shall contact
the applicant to schedule a pre-opening inspection, if applicable, within five
(5) working days, to determine compliance with the provisions of This
Ordinance.
   (D)   Issuance of Permits. The Enforcement Authority shall issue a Permit to
any Applicant that demonstrates compliance with This Ordinance and other laws.
   (E)   Term of Permits. Permits are Valid until the Expiration Date.
   (F)   Renewal of Permits. Permits shall be renewed by the Permit Holder on
or before the Expiration Date.
      (1)   Temporary Food Establishment and Market Food Establishment Permits,
as defined in the Rules, are not renewable and a new pre-inspection application
shall be submitted.
   (G)   Non-Transferrable. Permit Holders may not transfer Permits from one
Person to another Person or from one location to another location. When a
change in location or ownership of a Food Establishment occurs, a new pre-
inspection application shall be submitted to and a new Permit shall be issued
by the Enforcement Authority prior to operating as a Food Establishment.
      (1)   If after a change of location or ownership, a Food Establishment
does not submit a new pre-inspection application prior to operating as a Food
Establishment, a civil penalty may be assessed in addition to the first year
Permit fee.
   (H)   Denial of Permit Issuance. The Enforcement Authority shall refuse to
issue a Permit to any applicant who fails to comply with This Ordinance, the
Rules, or other laws.
      (1)   Notice. Notice of Permit denial shall be provided in accordance
with §
9-6-17 of This Ordinance.
      (2)   Hearing. A Permit Holder may appeal the notice of Permit denial by
filing written notice of appeal and requesting a hearing with the City Clerk’s
office within fifteen (15) business days of notice in accordance with §
9-6-18 of This Ordinance.
(Ord._2024-012)
§ 9-6-8 SUSPENSION, REVOCATION, REINSTATEMENT OF PERMITS, AND COMPLIANCE PLANS.
   (A)   The Enforcement Authority may immediately suspend a Permit when the
Enforcement Authority finds:
      (1)   The Food Establishment fails to comply with the requirements of
This Ordinance, the Rules, or other laws;
      (2)   The Food Establishment is violating a condition of any Permit;
      (3)   An Imminent Health Hazard at the Food Establishment;
      (4)   A Food Establishment has failed to follow any corrective actions
within the timeframe prescribed by the Enforcement Authority;
      (5)   A Food Establishment has violated a Safety Plan associated with a
Special Process as they are defined in the Rules;
      (6)   A Food Establishment has violated a Compliance Plan;
      (7)   A Food Establishment employee has refused to allow the Enforcement
Authority to enter the Food Establishment after proper identification has been
tendered;
      (8)   The Enforcement Authority has issued a third notice of civil
penalty to the Food Establishment for the same offense;
      (9)   The Enforcement Authority has issued a third Grade of
Unsatisfactory, as defined in the Rules, to a Food Establishment during any 36-
month period under the same Permit;
      (10)   A commissary is allowing any Person to operate a Food
Establishment on its premises that is not in possession of a Valid Permit; or
      (11)   A Food Establishment that was issued a Permit, with a Variance,
while seeking a liquor license from the State of New Mexico in accordance with
the Liquor Control Act, § 60-3A-1 et seq. NMSA 1978, is found to be in
operation without first notifying the Enforcement Authority and passing a pre-
opening inspection with a Grade of Approved or Conditional Approved.
   (B)   Suspension Procedure.
      (1)   The Enforcement Authority shall notify the Permit Holder of the
suspension and associated Grade of Closure in writing.
      (2)   When a Permit is suspended, the Enforcement Authority shall close
the Food Establishment and post the Closed Sign in a conspicuous location,
visible to the public.
      (3)   Upon suspension, the Permit Holder for the Food Establishment shall
maintain or cause to be maintained the Closed Sign in an unobstructed manner in
the location where the sign was originally posted by the Enforcement Authority.
      (4)   The Food Establishment shall not operate while the Food
Establishment Permit is suspended.
      (5)   The Food Establishment shall remain closed and the Closed Sign
shall remain in place until the suspension is modified in accordance with the
IHO Ordinance, the suspension is vacated by the Enforcement Authority when the
conditions leading to the suspension no longer exist, or the Permit is revoked.
      (6)   Notice. Notice of Permit suspension shall be provided in accordance
with §
9-6-1 of This Ordinance.
      (7)   Hearing. The Permit Holder may appeal the Permit suspension by
filing written notice of appeal and requesting a hearing with the City Clerk’s
office within fifteen (15) business days of notice in accordance with §
9-6-18 of This Ordinance.
   (C)   Reinstatement of Suspended Permits. Any Person whose Permit has been
suspended may at any time request a reinspection for the purpose of
reinstatement of the Permit. The Enforcement Authority shall reinstate the
Permit if, after performing a reinspection, the Enforcement Authority finds
that the Permit Holder complies with the requirements of This Ordinance, the
Rules, and other laws.
   (D)   Revocation of Permits.
      (1)   Permits may be revoked by the Enforcement Authority when:
         (a)   A Food Establishment Permit has been suspended and not
reinstated; or
         (b)   A Food Establishment receives the fourth Grade of
Unsatisfactory, as defined in the Rules, within any thirty-six (36) month
period under the same Permit; or
         (c)   A Food Establishment receives the third Grade of Closure, as
defined in the Rules, within any thirty-six (36) month period under the same
Permit.
   (E)   Revocation Procedure.
      (1)   The Enforcement Authority shall notify the Permit Holder of the
revocation and closure in writing.
      (2)   When a Permit is revoked, the Enforcement Authority shall order the
closure of the Food Establishment and post the Closed Sign in a conspicuous
location, visible to the public. The Food Establishment shall not operate while
the Food Establishment Permit is revoked.
      (3)   The Permit Holder for the Food Establishment shall maintain or
cause to be maintained the Closed Sign in an unobstructed manner in the
location where the sign was originally posted by the Enforcement Authority.
      (4)   The Food Establishment shall remain closed and the Closed Sign
shall remain in place until the revocation is modified in accordance with the
IHO Ordinance, or the revocation is vacated by the Enforcement Authority when
the conditions leading to the suspension no longer exist.
      (5)   Notice. Notice of revocation shall be provided in accordance with §
9-6-17 of This Ordinance.
      (6)   Hearing. The Permit Holder may appeal the Permit revocation by
filing written notice of appeal and requesting a hearing with the City Clerk’s
office within fifteen (15) business days of notice in accordance with §
9-6-18 of This Ordinance.
   (F)   Compliance Plan. In lieu of suspension or revocation of a Permit, the
Enforcement Authority may allow a Food Establishment to follow a Compliance
Plan for current or past failure of the Food Establishment or Permit Holder to
meet the requirements of This Ordinance.
      (1)   A Compliance Plan may be issued to a Food Establishment that
receives a second Grade of Unsatisfactory or Closure, as defined in the Rules,
from the Enforcement Authority, within a thirty-six (36) month period under the
same Permit.
      (2)   A Compliance Plan shall be on a form approved by the Enforcement
Authority and include all written requirements for operation of the Food
Establishment, and be signed by the Enforcement Authority and the Permit
Holder.
         (a)   The Enforcement Authority may amend a Compliance Plan when a
Food Establishment submits a written request to the Enforcement Authority and
the Enforcement Authority determines that the amendment will not pose a risk to
public health.
      (3)   Each Compliance Plan shall remain in place until the Food
Establishment has received three consecutive Grades of Approved or all
applicable fees have been paid in full.
   (G)   Application for a New Permit After Revocation. After a Permit is
revoked, a former Permit Holder may submit a pre-inspection application
consistent with This Ordinance for a new Permit only after ninety (90) days
have passed after the revocation date, any outstanding fees from the revoked
Permit are paid, and the former Permit Holder demonstrates to the Enforcement
Authority that all previously issued corrective actions have been completed.
(Ord._2024-012)
§ 9-6-9 PERMIT RENEWAL.
   (A)   Permit Renewal. To renew a permit, A Food Establishment shall pay to
the Enforcement Authority the annual fee in full prior to the Expiration Date.
At the time of Permit renewal, the Permit Holder shall update information as
required by the Rules.
   (B)   Notice. Notice of fees due shall be provided in accordance with §
9-6-17 of This Ordinance.
   (C)   Hearing. A Permit Holder may appeal the notice of Permit fees due by
filing written notice of appeal and requesting a hearing with the City Clerk’s
office within fifteen (15) business days of notice in accordance with §
9-6-18 of This Ordinance.
(Ord._2024-012)
§ 9-6-10 PERMIT AND ADMINISTRATIVE FEES.
   (A)   Permit and administrative fees shall be paid by the Food
Establishments in accordance with the type of Food Establishment, Class, and
Risk Category, as defined in the Rules at the rates in the following Appendices
attached to this Article:
      (1)   Appendix C. Primary Permits;
      (2)   Appendix D. Secondary Permits;
      (3)   Appendix E. Standalone Permits;
      (4)   Appendix F. Administrative Fees; and
   (B)   The following permit types shall have a 0.25 multiplier applied to
their permit fees. This 0.25 multiplier shall only apply to the permit types
listed herein:
      (1)   Mobile Food Establishments;
      (2)   Non-Profit Organizations designated as a 501(c) under 26 U.S.C. §
501;
      (3)   Adult Daycare Establishments (Center and Home);
      (4)   Child Daycare Establishments (Center and Home); and
      (5)   Microbusinesses (defined as a company that employs no more than
seven (7) employees at any time during the calendar year. Employees include
only those that work full-time or part-time. For startup businesses, the
responsible company official shall certify that the business does not expect to
employ more than seven (7) employees in the first year of operations. For
existing businesses seeking certification as a Microbusiness, the responsible
company official shall submit the business’s Form ES-903A, Quarterly Wage and
Contribution Report, submitted to the New Mexico Department of Workforce
Solutions, or Form TRD-31109, Quarterly Wage, Income Withholding and Workers’
Compensation Fee Report submitted to the New Mexico Taxation and Revenue
Department as proof of meeting the definition of Microbusiness.)
(Ord._2024-012; Am. Ord._2024-033)
§ 9-6-11 INSPECTION OF FOOD ESTABLISHMENTS; INVESTIGATION OF FOODBORNE ILLNESS.
   (A)   Right of Inspection. The Enforcement Authority shall make such
inspections of Food Establishments as necessary to assure compliance with This
Ordinance and the Rules. Inspection frequency shall be based on the risk
category of each Food Establishment.
      (1)   The Enforcement Authority may make more frequent inspections of
Food Establishments in response to citizen complaints regarding unsafe
conditions or foodborne illness.
      (2)   At the conclusion of each inspection, a copy of the inspection
report shall immediately be furnished to the Permit Holder or Person In Charge
of the Food Establishment indicating the degree of compliance or noncompliance
with the provisions of the Food Code, This Ordinance, and other laws.
      (3)   The Permit Holder or Person In Charge of the Food Establishment may
accompany the Enforcement Authority during the inspection.
      (4)   The Enforcement Authority shall be permitted to examine and obtain
copies of the records of the Food Establishment, pertinent information related
to Food source and supplies received, pest control records, and a list of Food
Establishment employees and their training records.
      (5)   It is a civil penalty pursuant to §
9-6-20 of This Ordinance for any Person to molest or resist the Enforcement
Authority in the discharge of its duties.
   (B)   Investigation of Foodborne Illness. The Enforcement Authority is
authorized to make such inspections of buildings, premises, and documents as
deemed necessary to investigate and abate foodborne illness or any violation of
This Ordinance which poses a threat to human health. For the purpose of making
such inspections, the Enforcement Authority is authorized to enter, examine, or
survey at all reasonable times and take samples of Food for testing. Such entry
shall be made in a manner as to minimize inconvenience to the Person In Charge.
In the event entry is denied or resisted the Enforcement Authority shall seek
an order for this purpose from a court of competent jurisdiction.
   (C)   Refusal of Entry. If entry of the Enforcement Authority is refused,
after presentation of proper identification, to fully inspect any and all
premises or facilities at any reasonable time, the Enforcement Authority may:
      (1)   Issue a Civil Penalty pursuant to §
9-6-20 of This Ordinance; and
      (2)   Proceed to obtain a search warrant by filing a complaint made
before the Metropolitan Court or District Court upon oath or affirmation. The
complaint shall:
         (a)   Set forth the particular building, premises, or portion thereof
sought to be inspected;
         (b)   State that the owner or occupant of the building, premises, or
portion thereof, has refused entry;
         (c)   State that inspection of the building, premises, or portion
thereof is necessary to determine whether it complies with the requirements of
§
9-6-1 et seq.;
         (d)   Set forth the particular provisions of §
9-6-1 et seq. sought to be enforced;
         (e)   Set forth any other reason necessitating the inspection,
including knowledge or belief that a particular condition exists in the food
establishment which constitutes a violation of §
9-6-1 et seq. or creates a hazard to human health;
         (f)   State that the complainant is authorized by the City to make the
inspection.
   (D)   Grading of Food Establishments. The Enforcement Authority shall issue
an appropriate score and associated Grade to each Food Establishment at the
conclusion of each inspection.
      (1)   Every Food Establishment shall display, in a conspicuous location,
which is readily visible to the public, a placard stating the Grade received at
the time of the most recent inspection of the Food Establishment.
   (E)   Corrective Actions. Upon inspection, the Enforcement Authority shall
provide the Permit Holder or Person In Charge with a written description of any
corrective actions to be taken, outlining the timeframe in which corrective
actions must be completed for any violation of This Ordinance or other laws.
   (F)   It is a civil penalty pursuant to §
9-6-20 of This Ordinance for any Person to threaten, intimidate, use violence,
or use physical force to intentionally obstruct, impede, or interfere with any
City employee while in the performance of the employee’s duties as authorized
by This Ordinance.
(Ord._2024-012)
§ 9-6-12 CONDEMNATION OF FOOD AND EQUIPMENT.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any Person within the City to sell, offer, or
expose for sale, or to have in possession with intent to sell, any Food which
is adulterated or misbranded. Samples of Food may be taken and examined by the
Enforcement Authority as often as may be necessary to determine freedom from
adulteration or misbranding. Food determined to be misbranded or adulterated
may be condemned, and Food reasonably suspected to be misbranded or adulterated
may be embargoed in a manner consistent with the Rules.
   (B)   Notice. Notice of the condemnation of Food or equipment, or embargo of
Food or equipment, shall be provided in accordance with §
9-6-17 of This Ordinance.
   (C)   Hearing. A Permit Holder may appeal the notice of the condemnation of
Food or equipment, or embargo of Food or equipment by filing written notice of
appeal and requesting a hearing with the City Clerk’s office within fifteen
(15) business days of notice in accordance with §
9-6-18 of This Ordinance.
(Ord._2024-012)
§ 9-6-13 FOOD SAFETY TRAINING REQUIREMENTS.
   All Food Establishment employees shall be adequately trained in Food safety
in a manner consistent with the Rules.
(Ord._2024-012)
§ 9-6-14 FOOD ESTABLISHMENTS OUTSIDE OF THE JURISDICTION OF THE ENFORCEMENT
AUTHORITY.
   (A)   Food Establishments outside of the jurisdiction of the Enforcement
Authority may vend food within the City if such Food Establishments conform to
the provisions of This Ordinance or to substantially equivalent provisions. To
determine the extent of compliance with such provisions, the Enforcement
Authority may accept reports from responsible authorities in other
jurisdictions where such Food Establishments are located.
   (B)   Food Establishments from other jurisdictions shall submit a signed
Temporary Food Establishment Permit application or Market Food Establishment
Permit application, City of Albuquerque business registration, and Food
Establishment Permit from their home jurisdiction to the Enforcement Authority
and the Temporary Food Establishment must pass an inspection performed by the
Enforcement Authority with a Grade of Approved prior to acting as a Temporary
Food Establishment or Market Food Establishment, as defined in the Rules,
within the City.
(Ord._2024-012)
§ 9-6-15 ADMINISTRATION AND INTERPRETATION.
   The Enforcement Authority shall be responsible for the administration and
enforcement of this Ordinance. In the event of a conflict between the
provisions of the Albuquerque Food Service and Retail Ordinance and any
administrative rules promulgated by the City Administration and/or
Environmental Health Department, the provisions of this Ordinance shall
prevail.
(Ord._2024-012; Am. Ord._2024-033)
§ 9-6-16 VARIANCES.
   (A)   A variance may be granted to a Food Establishment when it is presented
with adequate proof that a provision of This Ordinance or the Rules creates an
undue burden on the Food Establishment and granting of the variance will not
result in a condition injurious to health or safety.
      (1)   Any Permit Holder seeking a variance shall submit a request to the
Enforcement Authority, in writing, setting forth their reasons for the variance
and stating the length of time for which they seek the variance.
      (2)   The Enforcement Authority shall review the request for variance and
provide a written decision within a reasonable amount of time. The variance
must be approved by the Enforcement Authority prior to commencement of the
operation requiring the variance.
   (B)   Notice. Notice of the Variance approval or denial shall be provided in
accordance with §
9-6-17 of This Ordinance.
   (C)   Hearing. A Permit Holder may appeal the notice of the Variance
approval or denial, or embargo of Food or equipment by filing written notice of
appeal and requesting a hearing with the City Clerk’s office within fifteen
(15) business days of notice in accordance with §
9-6-18 of This Ordinance.
(Ord._2024-012)
§ 9-6-17 SERVICE OF NOTICE.
   (A)   Notice shall be deemed properly served when a true copy of the
inspection report or other notice has been provided to the Person In Charge or
sent to the Permit Holder at the Address Of Record via certified mail whichever
occurs first. A copy of such notice shall be filed with the records of the
Enforcement Authority.
   (B)   The notice shall state the specific reasons for the Enforcement
Authority’s actions, specify the corrective actions to be taken, and specify
the time period within which action shall be taken. The notice shall include a
provision that the Enforcement Authority will take action unless the Permit
Holder files a written request with the City Clerk for hearing within fifteen
(15) days pursuant to the provisions in the IHO Ordinance.
(Ord._2024-012)
§ 9-6-18 HEARINGS.
   (A)   A hearing provided for in This Ordinance shall be conducted by an
Independent Hearing Officer in accordance with the provisions in the IHO
Ordinance.
   (B)   Any action of the Enforcement Authority for which a hearing is not
otherwise provided for in This Ordinance, which action adversely impacts the
Permit Holder, is subject to review under this section if a hearing request is
filed within fifteen (15) business days of the action and in accordance with
the provisions in the IHO Ordinance.
   (C)   A nonrefundable hearing fee of $50.00 shall accompany each application
for hearing conducted by the Independent Hearing Officer requested pursuant to
this section.
(Ord._2024-012)
§ 9-6-19 JUDICIAL REVIEW.
   The exclusive remedy of any party dissatisfied with any final decision of
the Independent Hearing Officer is to file a petition with the District Court
within thirty (30) days after service receipt of written notice of the decision
of the concerned party. The petition for review shall be limited to the record.
(Ord._2024-012)
§ 9-6-20 CIVIL VIOLATIONS; CRIMINAL VIOLATIONS; ADDITIONAL REMEDIES; INJUNCTIVE
RELIEF.
   (A)   Civil Violations. The Enforcement Authority may impose a civil penalty
for any failure to correct a violation of This Ordinance or the Rules after
proper notice has been given.
      (1)   Civil violations of this article shall subject the Permit Holder of
the Food Establishment to the following penalties for offenses during any
thirty-six (36) consecutive-month period:
         (a)   A civil fine of $250.00 for the first offense;
         (b)   A civil fine of $500.00 for the second offense; and
         (c)   A civil fine of $1,000.00 for the third and subsequent offenses.
      (2)   Each calendar day during which the civil violation occurs shall
constitute a separate and distinct offense.
      (3)   Upon determination by the Enforcement Authority that a violation of
This Ordinance has occurred, the Enforcement Authority shall serve a notice of
civil penalty in accordance with §
9-6-17 of This Ordinance. The notice shall contain the following information:
         (a)   The address where the violation occurred;
         (b)   The approximate time the violation occurred;
         (c)   A brief narrative of the circumstances surrounding the
violation;
         (d)   A statement regarding whether this is the first, second, third
or subsequent offense within a consecutive 36-month period;
         (e)   A name and phone number or title of City employee from whom the
Permit Holder can obtain further information;
         (f)   The address where payment for the violation may be made;
         (g)   A statement that the Permit Holder has the right to contest the
validity of the civil violation by filing a written request for hearing with
the City Clerk's office within fifteen (15) days of the date of mailing of the
notice of civil penalty. A hearing shall be granted in accordance with the
provisions in the IHO Ordinance, Chapter 2, Article 7, Part 8 ROA 1994; and
         (h)   The ordinance section or rule violated.
   (B)   Criminal Penalties. Any Person convicted of a violation of any
provision of this article is guilty of a petty misdemeanor and upon conviction
thereof, shall be punished by a fine of not less than $250.00 nor more than
$500.00 and up to thirty (30) days in jail for each violation. Each day in
which any violation occurs shall constitute a separate offense. Prosecution or
conviction under this section shall not preclude any civil remedy or relief for
a violation of This Ordinance. Once cited for an offense, an additional
citation may be issued for each day the violation continues.
   (C)   Enforcement. The Enforcement Authority is hereby authorized to
undertake the enforcement activities authorized by This Ordinance.
   (D)   Injunctive Relief. As an additional remedy, if any Food Establishment
violates the provisions of This Ordinance, the Enforcement Authority may seek
injunctive relief in a court of competent jurisdiction.
(Ord._2024-012)
ARTICLE 7: INSECT AND RODENT CONTROL
Section
   
9-7-1   Short title
   
9-7-2   Definitions
   
9-7-3   Inspection of buildings, premises, and vacant lots
   
9-7-4   Enforcement, serving of notices, and orders
   
9-7-5   Administration of ordinance
   
9-7-6   Extermination measures required, and harborage not permitted
 
   
9-7-99   Penalty
§ 9-7-1 SHORT TITLE.
   This article shall be known and may be cited as the "Albuquerque Insect and
Rodent Control Ordinance."
('74 Code, § 6-18-1) (Ord. 2028)
§ 9-7-2 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this article, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   BUILDING. Any business, residential structure, and non-business building or
structure.
   EXTERMINATION. The control and elimination of insects or rodents by
eliminating their harborage, by removing or by making inaccessible materials
that may serve as their food, and by poisoning, spraying, fumigating, trapping,
or by any other recognized and legal insect or rodent control method approved
by the Mayor.
   GARBAGE. The putrescible animal and vegetable wastes resulting from the
handling, processing, preparing, cooking, or serving of food.
   INFESTATION. The presence of any insects or rodents of such kind or in such
numbers as to create a potential health hazard or nuisance.
   INSECT AND RODENT HARBORAGE. Any condition which provides shelter or
protection for insects and rodents; thus, favoring their multiplication and
continued existence in, under, outside a structure or premise.
   INSECTS. Members of Class Insecta and such other members of the Phylum
Arthropoda as may be considered dangerous or pestiferous by the Mayor.
   MAYOR. The Mayor or his designated representative.
   OCCUPANT.  The individual, partnership, or corporation that has the use of
or occupies any building or a fraction thereof, whether the actual owner or
tenant of said building. In the case of a vacant building or any vacant portion
of a building lot, the owner, lessee, agent or custodian shall have the
responsibilities of an occupant.
   OWNER. The actual owner of the building, lot, whether individual,
partnership or corporation. In the case of a leased building with a clause in
the lease specifying that the lessee is responsible for maintenance and repair,
the lessee will be considered in such cases as the owner for the purpose of
this article.
   PERSON. An individual, partnership, association, syndicate, company, firm,
trust, corporation, government corporation, department, bureau, agency, or any
entity recognized by law.
   REFUSE. Combustible and non-combustible waste material, except garbage, and
the term shall include the residue from the burning of wood, coal, coke, and
other combustible material, paper, rags, cartons, boxes, wood excelsior,
rubber, leather, tree branches, yard trimmings, tin cans, metals, mineral
matter, plastics, glass crockery, dust, industrial waste, dead animals, and
animal excrement.
   RODENT PROOFING.  A form of construction to prevent the ingress of rodents
into or under buildings or structures from the exterior or from one building or
structure to another. It consists essentially of the closing of all openings in
the exterior walls, ground or first floors, basements and foundations, that may
be reached by rodents from the ground by climbing or by burrowing, with
materials or other types of rodent proofing methods approved by the Mayor.
   RODENTS. Members of the Order Rodentia and such members of the Order
Lagomorpha as may be considered dangerous or pestiferous by the Mayor.
('74 Code, § 6-18-2) (Ord. 2028; Am. Ord. 80-1977)
§ 9-7-3 INSPECTION OF BUILDINGS, PREMISES, AND VACANT LOTS.
   The Mayor is authorized to make such inspections of buildings, lots, and
premises, as he deems necessary to investigate and abate insect or rodent
infestations or harborages. For the purpose of making such inspections, the
Mayor is authorized to enter, examine, or survey at all reasonable times. Such
entry shall be made in a manner as to cause the least possible inconvenience to
the person in control, and the Mayor shall obtain an order for this purpose
from a court of competent jurisdiction in the event entry is denied or
resisted.
('74 Code, § 6-18-3) (Ord. 2028)
§ 9-7-4 ENFORCEMENT, SERVING OF NOTICES, AND ORDERS.
   Whenever it appears to the Mayor that an insect or rodent harborage or
infestation exists, he shall issue and cause to be served on the person in
control, a complaint stating the charges in that respect and specifying a
reasonable amount of time for abatement. If after such time the Mayor
determines that such condition has not been abated the person in control shall
be deemed to be in violation of the provisions of this article.
('74 Code, § 6-18-4) (Ord. 2028; Am. Ord. 2513)
§ 9-7-5 ADMINISTRATION OF ORDINANCE.
   The Mayor or his designated representative shall be responsible for the
enforcement of this article. Rules and regulations to carry out the intent and
purpose of this article shall be prescribed by the Mayor pursuant to standards
created in this article.
('74 Code, § 6-18-5) (Ord. 2028)
§ 9-7-6 EXTERMINATION MEASURES REQUIRED, AND HARBORAGE NOT PERMITTED.
   (A)   All buildings, lots, and premises shall be kept free of infestation or
harborage. The person in control shall not allow the accumulation of water,
refuse, garbage, or other harborage.
   (B)   Every occupant of a dwelling containing a single dwelling unit shall
be responsible for the extermination of insects, and/or rodents, on the
premises; and every occupant of a dwelling unit in a dwelling containing more
than one dwelling unit shall be responsible for such extermination whenever his
dwelling unit is the only one infested. Notwithstanding the foregoing
provisions of this division, whenever infestation is caused by failure of the
owner to maintain a dwelling in a rodent proof or reasonable insect proof
condition, extermination shall be the responsibility of the owner. Whenever
infestation exists in two or more of the dwelling units in any dwelling, or in
the shared or public parts of any dwelling containing two or more dwelling
units, extermination thereof shall be the responsibility of the owner.
   (C)   When any buildings, lots, or premises are so infested, the person in
control shall utilize extermination measures in the manner prescribed by law,
regulation or manufacturer's directions; provided, however, that the
extermination measures prohibited by federal, state or local law or regulation
shall not be utilized.
   (D)   If the person in control of any buildings, lots, or premises is
notified in writing as provided and fails to comply with the provisions of this
article within ten days, the Mayor may cause such harborage to be removed or
have such infestation abated. The actual cost of removal or abatement plus any
other penalties or costs allowed by law in connection therewith, under any of
the circumstances herein set out, shall become a lien upon the property from
which such removal of harborage or abatement of infestation occurs.
('74 Code, § 6-18-6) (Ord. 2028; Am. Ord. 80-1977)
§ 9-7-99 PENALTY.
   Any person who violates any provision of this article shall be subject to
the general penalty provisions of this code set forth in §
1-1-99.
('74 Code, § 6-18-7) (Ord. 2028)
ARTICLE 8: WEEDS, LITTER AND SNOW
Section
   
9-8-1   Short title
   
9-8-2   Purpose
   
9-8-3   Definitions
   
9-8-4   Growth or accumulation of weeds and litter
   
9-8-5   Duty of owner, lessee, or occupant
   
9-8-6   Litter in public places
   
9-8-7   Placement of litter in receptacle so as to prevent scattering
   
9-8-8   Merchants' duty to keep sidewalks and parking areas free of litter
   
9-8-9   Sweeping litter into gutters prohibited
   
9-8-10   Litter thrown by persons in vehicles
   
9-8-11   Truck loads causing litter
   
9-8-12   Litter in parks
   
9-8-13   Litter in lakes and fountains
   
9-8-14   Throwing or distributing commercial or noncommercial handbills in
public places
   
9-8-15   Placing commercial or noncommercial handbills on vehicles
   
9-8-16   Depositing commercial and noncommercial handbills on uninhabited or
vacant premises
   
9-8-17   Prohibiting distribution of handbills where properly posted
   
9-8-18   Distributing commercial and noncommercial handbills at inhabited
private premises
   
9-8-19   Dropping litter from aircraft
   
9-8-20   Posting notice prohibited
   
9-8-21   Litter on occupied private property
   
9-8-22   Owner to maintain premises free of litter
   
9-8-23   Litter on vacant lots
   
9-8-24   Snow and ice
   
9-8-25   Notice to cut and remove
   
9-8-26   When city to remove
   
9-8-27   Method of removal
   
9-8-28   Appeal procedure administrative hearing
   
9-8-29   Judicial review
   
9-8-30   Removal upon default of owner
   
9-8-31   Illegal commercial handbills prevention
   
9-8-32   Smoking tobacco product litter
   
9-8-99   Penalty
§ 9-8-1 SHORT TITLE.
   This article shall be known and cited as the "Albuquerque Weed and Anti-
Litter Ordinance."
('74 Code, § 6-15-1) (Ord. 89-1967; Am. Ord. 32-1976; Am. Ord. 4-1992)
§ 9-8-2 PURPOSE.
   (A)   This article is intended to promote the general health, safety and
welfare of the people of the city by prohibiting the maintenance or
accumulation of those plants determined to be of major allergenic significance,
or which constitute a fire hazard when wind collected, or which otherwise
present a hazard or nuisance to inhabitants of the city. Further, this article
is intended to promote the growth of native and other grasses and plants whose
root structures tend to aid in stabilizing the soil and reducing dust. It is
also the intent of this article that by prohibiting those methods of plant
removal and control which fail to differentiate between harmful and helpful
plants and which tend to create the still greater problem of air pollution, the
aforementioned purposes will be realized and accomplished.
   (B)   This article is also intended to promote the general health, safety
and welfare of the people of the city by prohibiting the throwing, depositing
or accumulation of litter in public places.
('74 Code, § 6-15-2) (Ord. 89-1967; Am. Ord. 32-1976; Am. Ord. 4-1992)
§ 9-8-3 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this article, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   AIRCRAFT. Any contrivance now known or hereafter invented used or designated
for navigation or for flight in the air. The word "aircraft" shall include
helicopters and lighter-than-air dirigibles and balloons.
   APPROPRIATE PRIVATE RECEPTACLE. A litter receptacle with a fireproof
interior capable of containing and withstanding fire.
   AUTHORIZED PRIVATE RECEPTACLE. A litter storage and collection receptacle as
required and authorized in the solid waste collection regulations set forth in
§§
9-10-1-1 et seq.
   COMMERCIAL HANDBILL. Any printed or written matter, any sample or device,
dodger, circular, leaflet, pamphlet, paper, booklet, or any other printed or
otherwise reproduced original or copies of any matter of literature:
      (1)   Which advertises for sale any merchandise, product commodity, or
thing; or
      (2)   Which directs attention to any business or mercantile or commercial
establishments or other activity, for the purpose of either directly or
indirectly promoting the interest thereof by sales; or
      (3)   Which directs attention to or advertises any meeting, theatrical
performance, exhibition, or event of any kind, for which an admission fee is
charged for the purpose of private gain or profit.
      (4)   Which, while containing reading matter other than advertising
matter, is predominantly and essentially an advertisement, and is distributed
or circulated for advertising purposes, or for the private benefit and gain of
any person so engaged as advertiser or distributor.
      (5)   Newspaper as defined herein is and to be construed to be included
within the definition of COMMERCIAL HANDBILL.
   GARBAGE. Putrescible animal and vegetable wastes resulting from the
handling, preparation, cooking and consumption of food.
   LITTER.  "Garbage," "refuse" and "rubbish" as defined herein and all other
waste material which, if thrown or deposited as herein prohibited tends to
create a danger to public health, safety and welfare.
   MAYOR'S DESIGNEE. The Mayor of the City of Albuquerque or anyone designated
by the Mayor to take the actions authorized under this ordinance.
   NEWSPAPER. Any newspaper of general circulation as defined by general law,
any newspaper duly entered with the Post Office Department of the United States
in accordance with Federal statute or regulation, and any newspaper filed and
recorded with any recording officer as provided by general law; and in addition
thereto shall mean and include any periodical or current magazine regularly
published with not less than four issues per year and sold to the public.
   NONCOMMERCIAL HANDBILL. Any printed or written matter, any sample, or
device, dodger, circular, leaflet, pamphlet, newspaper, magazine, paper,
booklet, or any other printed or otherwise reproduced original or copies of any
matter of literature not included in the aforesaid definitions of a commercial
handbill or newspaper.
   OWNER. Owner, agent, lessee or occupant or person having charge or control
of the property.
   PARK. A park, reservation, playground, beach, recreation center, zoo, golf
course, or any other public area in the city, owned or used by the city and
devoted to active or passive recreation.
   PERSON. One or more persons, natural persons, corporations, partnerships,
associations, joint stock companies, societies and all other entities of any
kind capable of being sued.
   PRIVATE PREMISES. Any dwelling, house, building, or other structure designed
or used either wholly or in part for private residential purposes, whether
inhabited or temporary or continuously uninhabited or vacant and shall include
any yard, grounds, walk, driveway, porch, steps, vestibule or mailbox belonging
or appurtenant or such dwelling, house, building, or other structure.
   PUBLIC PLACE. Any and all streets, sidewalks, boulevards, alleys or other
public ways and any and all public parks, sources, spaces, grounds and
buildings.
   REFUSE. All putrescible and nonputrescible solid wastes (except body
wastes), including garbage, rubbish, ashes, street cleanings, dead animals,
inoperative vehicles and appliances, and solid market and industrial wastes.
   RUBBISH. All waste, including ashes, bottles, cans, carcasses of dead
animals, cardboard, cloth, crockery, human or animal excrement, glass,
abandoned or unusable household furnishings or appliances, metals, plastics,
tree branches and limbs, waste building materials or other items discarded in
such a manner as to create a reasonable likelihood of becoming a harborage for
insects or vermin or disease, or otherwise create a health or safety hazard.
   SMOKING TOBACCO PRODUCT. Tobacco leaves smoked in the form of a cigar or
cigarette.
   VEHICLE. Every device in, upon, or by which any person or property is or may
be transported or drawn upon a highway, including devices used exclusively upon
stationary rails or tracks.
   WEEDS. All rank, noxious, poisonous, harmful, unhealthful vegetation,
deleterious to health, and shall include but is not limited to the following
named plants:
      (1)   Pigweed (Amaranthus retroflexus).
      (2)   Russian Thistle (Salsola pestifer).
      (3)   Ragweeds (Ambrosia spp.).
      (4)   Lambsquarter. (Kenopodium spp.).
      (5)   Kochia.
      (6)   London Rocket (Sisymbrium irio).
      (7)   Flix Weed (Descurainia sophia).
      (8)   Tansy Mustard (Descurainia pinnata).
      (9)   Spurge.
      (10)   Silverleaf Nightshade (Solanum elaeagnifolium).
      (11)   Puncture Vine.
      (12)   Field Bind Weed (Convolvulus arvensis).
      (13)   Purslane.
      (14)   Hoary Cress.
      (15)   Yellow Foxtail (Setaria glauca).
      (16)   Green Foxtail (Setaria Viridis).
   The Mayor’s designee is hereby authorized and delegated the authority and
duty to determine if any other plants, due to their unhealthy or dangerous
attributes or consequences, should be placed on the list of weeds as defined
herein and shall put such plants on said list if, after a hearing based on the
evidence before him it appears that such plants do come within the meaning of
the term weeds as hereinbefore set out.
('74 Code, § 6-15-3) (Ord. 89-1967; Am. Ord. 32-1976; Am. Ord. 4-1992; Am. Ord.
50-2005; Am. Ord. 57-2005; Am. Ord. 41-2006; Am. Ord. 35-2011; Am. Ord._2023-
016)
§ 9-8-4 GROWTH OR ACCUMULATION OF WEEDS AND LITTER.
   It shall be unlawful for any owner of any occupied or unoccupied lot or
tract of land within the city to permit or maintain on any such lot or tract of
land, including the area located between the property line and the middle of
the alley adjacent to the property, and the area located between the property
line and the curb, the area of any curbs or sidewalks located on the property,
and the area located ten feet outside the property line where there is no curb,
any growth of weeds whose height, width or spread is greater than four inches,
or any accumulation of weeds and/or litter.
('74 Code, § 6-15-4) (Ord. 89-1967; Am. Ord. 40-1968; Am. Ord. 32-1976; Am.
Ord. 4-1992; Am. Ord. 57-2005; Am. Ord. 35-2011)
§ 9-8-5 DUTY OF OWNER, LESSEE, OR OCCUPANT.
   It shall be the duty of any owner of any occupied or unoccupied lot or tract
of land to cut the weeds and remove the cuttings or any accumulation of weeds
to be removed as often as necessary in order to comply with the provisions set
out in §
9-8-4.
('74 Code, § 6-15-5) (Ord. 89-1967; Am. Ord. 32-1976; Am. Ord. 4-1992)
§ 9-8-6 LITTER IN PUBLIC PLACES.
   No person shall throw or deposit litter in or upon any street, sidewalk, or
other public place within the city except in public receptacles or in
authorized private receptacles for collection, or in an official city sanitary
land fill.
('74 Code, § 6-15-6) (Ord. 89-1967; Am. Ord. 32-1976; Am. Ord. 4-1992)
§ 9-8-7 PLACEMENT OF LITTER IN RECEPTACLE SO AS TO PREVENT SCATTERING.
   Persons placing litter in public receptacles or in authorized private
receptacles shall do so in such a manner as to prevent it from being carried or
deposited by the elements upon any street, sidewalk or other public or private
place.
('74 Code, § 6-15-7) (Ord. 89-1967; Am. Ord. 32-1976; Am. Ord. 4-1992)
§ 9-8-8 MERCHANTS' DUTY TO KEEP SIDEWALKS AND PARKING AREAS FREE OF LITTER.
   It shall be the responsibility of the person in charge of a place of
business to maintain the sidewalk area adjacent to his place of business and
his private parking area, if any, used by his patrons for parking, in a
reasonably litter free condition. If, in the opinion of the Mayor’s designee,
the amount of litter in said areas amounts to a nuisance due to odors or
eyesore characteristics the Mayor’s designee shall notify the person in charge
to provide adequate, approved litter receptacles located so as to be convenient
to the patrons of the place of business and/or to parking areas. The person in
charge of such business shall be responsible for providing said litter
receptacles and be responsible for emptying such containers as often as is
necessary to prevent their becoming a nuisance. In no event shall the litter
located on sidewalks and driveways adjacent to a place of business be allowed
to be swept into the gutters or streets of the city.
('74 Code, § 6-15-8) (Ord. 89-1967; Am. Ord. 32-1976; Am. Ord. 4-1992; Am. Ord.
2023-016)
§ 9-8-9 SWEEPING LITTER INTO GUTTERS PROHIBITED.
   No person shall sweep into or deposit in any gutter, street or other public
or private place within the city the accumulation of litter from any building
or lot or from any public or private sidewalk or driveway. Persons owning or
occupying property shall keep the sidewalk and driveways abutting their
premises clean and free of litter.
('74 Code, § 6-15-9) (Ord. 89-1967; Am. Ord. 32-1976; Am. Ord. 4-1992)
§ 9-8-10 LITTER THROWN BY PERSONS IN VEHICLES.
   No person, while a driver or passenger in a vehicle, shall throw or deposit
litter upon any private property, any street or other public place within the
city.
('74 Code, § 6-15-10) (Ord. 89-1967; Am. Ord. 32-1976; Am. Ord. 4-1992)
§ 9-8-11 TRUCK LOADS CAUSING LITTER.
   No person shall drive or move any truck or other vehicle within the city
unless such vehicle is so constructed or loaded as to prevent any load or
contents of litter from being blown or deposited upon any street, alley or
other private or public place.
('74 Code, § 6-15-11) (Ord. 4-1992)
§ 9-8-12 LITTER IN PARKS.
   No person shall throw or deposit litter in any park within the city except
in public receptacles and in such a manner that the litter will be prevented
from being carried or deposited by the elements upon any part of the park or
upon any streets or other private or public place. Where public receptacles are
not provided, all such litter shall be carried away from the park by the person
responsible for its presence and properly disposed of elsewhere.
('74 Code, § 6-15-12) (Ord. 4-1992)
§ 9-8-13 LITTER IN LAKES AND FOUNTAINS.
   No person shall throw or deposit litter in any fountain, pond, lake, stream,
or any other body of water in a park or elsewhere in the city.
('74 Code, § 6-15-13) (Ord. 4-1992)
§ 9-8-14 THROWING OR DISTRIBUTING COMMERCIAL OR NONCOMMERCIAL HANDBILLS IN
PUBLIC PLACES.
   (A)   No person shall throw, post or deposit any commercial or noncommercial
handbill in or upon any sidewalk, street or other public places within the
city. Nor shall any person hand out, post or distribute or sell any commercial
or noncommercial handbill in any public place provided, however it shall not be
a violation of this article for any person to hand out or distribute without
charge to the receiver thereof any noncommercial handbill to any person willing
to accept it in such public places.
   (B)   It may be rebuttably presumed that the owner, manager, distributor,
provider or responsible party of any business, product or service which is the
subject of an illegally posted, thrown or deposited commercial handbill has
caused the commercial handbill to be posted, thrown or deposited.
('74 Code, § 6-15-14) (Ord. 4-1992; Am. Ord. 25-2005)
§ 9-8-15 PLACING COMMERCIAL OR NONCOMMERCIAL HANDBILLS ON VEHICLES.
   No person shall throw or deposit any commercial or noncommercial handbill in
or upon any vehicle.
('74 Code, § 6-15-15) (Ord. 4-1992)
§ 9-8-16 DEPOSITING COMMERCIAL AND NONCOMMERCIAL HANDBILLS ON UNINHABITED OR
VACANT PREMISES.
   No person shall throw or deposit any commercial or noncommercial handbill in
or upon any private premises which are temporarily or continuously uninhabited
or vacant.
('74 Code, § 6-15-16) (Ord. 4-1992)
§ 9-8-17 PROHIBITING DISTRIBUTION OF HANDBILLS WHERE PROPERLY POSTED.
   No person shall throw, deposit or distribute any commercial or noncommercial
handbill upon or to any private premises, if requested by any one thereon not
to do so, or if there is placed on said premises in a conspicuous position near
the entrance thereof a sign bearing the words: "No Trespassing," "No Peddlers
or Agents," "No Advertisement" or any similar notice, indicating in any manner
that the occupants of said premises do not desire to be molested or have their
right of privacy disturbed, or to have any such handbills left upon such
premises.
('74 Code, § 6-15-17) (Ord. 4-1992)
§ 9-8-18 DISTRIBUTING COMMERCIAL AND NONCOMMERCIAL HANDBILLS AT INHABITED
PRIVATE PREMISES.
   (A)   No person shall throw, deposit or distribute any commercial or
noncommercial handbill in or upon private premises which are inhabited, except
by handing or transmitting any such handbill directly to the owner, occupant,
or other person then present in or upon such private premises. Provided,
however, that in case of inhabited private premises which are not posted as
provided in this article, such person, unless requested by anyone upon such
premises not to do so, shall have the authority to place or deposit any such
handbill in or upon such inhabited private premises, if such handbill is so
placed or deposited as to secure or prevent such handbill from being blown or
drifted about such premises or sidewalks, streets or other public places and
except that mailboxes may not be so used when so prohibited by Federal postal
law or regulations.
   (B) Exemption for Mail and Newspapers. The provisions of this section shall
not apply to the distribution of mail by the United States nor to newspapers as
defined herein.
('74 Code, § 6-15-18) (Ord. 4-1992)
§ 9-8-19 DROPPING LITTER FROM AIRCRAFT.
   No person in any aircraft shall throw out, drop or deposit within the city
any litter, handbill or any other object.
('74 Code, § 6-15-19) (Ord. 4-1992)
§ 9-8-20 POSTING NOTICE PROHIBITED.
   No person shall post, place or affix or cause to be posted, placed or
affixed any commercial handbill, sign, notice, poster or other paper or device
calculated to attract the attention of the public at any lamp post, public
utility pole, street median, public right-of-way, or shade tree, or upon any
public structure or building, except as may be authorized or required by law.
This provision shall not apply to signs relating to matters of public health,
safety and welfare posted, placed, or affixed by the city.
('74 Code, § 6-15-20) (Ord. 4-1992; Am. Ord. 25-2005)
§ 9-8-21 LITTER ON OCCUPIED PRIVATE PROPERTY.
   No person shall throw or deposit litter on any occupied private property
within the city, whether owned by such person or not except that the owner or
person in control of private property may maintain authorized private
receptacles for collection in such a manner that litter will be prevented from
being carried or deposited by the elements upon any street, sidewalk, or other
public place or upon any private property.
('74 Code, § 6-15-21) (Ord. 4-1992)
§ 9-8-22 OWNER TO MAINTAIN PREMISES FREE OF LITTER.
   The owner of any private property shall at all times maintain the premises
free of litter. Provided, however, that this section shall not prohibit the
storage of litter in authorized private receptacles for collection.
('74 Code, § 6-15-22) (Ord. 4-1992)
§ 9-8-23 LITTER ON VACANT LOTS.
   No person shall throw or deposit litter on any open or vacant private
property within the city whether owned by such person or not.
('74 Code, § 6-15-23) (Ord. 4-1992)
§ 9-8-24 SNOW AND ICE.
   It shall be the duty and responsibility of all owners of property, whether
vacant or inhabited abutting any sidewalks or drivepads, if they are part of
the sidewalk to keep same free and clear of all snow and ice, provided however,
that such snow and ice shall not be placed in the gutter or street.
('74 Code, § 6-15-24) (Ord. 4-1992)
§ 9-8-25 NOTICE TO CUT AND REMOVE.
   If the provisions of this article regarding removal of weeds or litter are
not complied with, the Mayor’s designee or his authorized representative shall
notify the owner of any occupied or unoccupied lot or tract of land to comply
with the provisions of this article. The notification to the owner of any such
lot or tract of land shall be in writing. In the event such owner of such lot
or tract of land cannot be determined or the owner shall be a nonresident of
the city, such notice may be served by posting a copy of the written notice
upon the premises.
('74 Code, § 6-15-25) (Ord. 89-1967; Am. Ord. 32-1976; Am. Ord. 4-1992; Am.
Ord._2023-016)
§ 9-8-26 WHEN CITY TO REMOVE.
   Where compliance with the provisions set forth in the notice has not
occurred within ten days, the Mayor's designee shall cause such weeds to be cut
and the cuttings or any accumulation of weeds or lltter removed. Should it
appear to be a matter of public necessity for health or safety reasons, the
Mayor's designee may give notice that the weeds or litter must be cut or
removed immediately, in which event, should there be noncompliance, the Mayor's
designee is authorized to cause such weeds to be cut and the cuttings or any
accumulation of weeds or litter removed immediately. The actual cost of the
cutting or removal of weeds or litter plus any other penalties or costs allowed
by law in connection therewith, under any of the circumstances herein set out,
shall become a lien upon the property from which such weeds or litter were
removed in the manner prescribed by law.
('74 Code, § 6-15-26) (Ord. 89-1967; Am. Ord. 32-1976; Am. Ord. 4-1992; Am.
Ord._2023-016)
§ 9-8-27 METHOD OF REMOVAL.
   The approved methods of controlling weeds shall be mowing, cutting, digging,
or other methods designed to remove the weeds but not disturb other vegetation
or unnecessarily disturb the soil. The scraping and tillage of lots and tracts
of land is prohibited unless permission of the Mayor’s designee is first
obtained; except, that scraping and tillage as part of normal construction
activities or as ground preparation for agriculture or landscaping activities
shall be allowed. The Mayor’s designee shall allow scraping and tillage of lots
or tracts of land when this will not detract from or violate the clear intent
and purpose of this article.
('74 Code, § 6-15-27) (Ord. 89-1967; Am. Ord. 32-1976; Am. Ord. 4-1992; Am.
Ord._2023-016)
§ 9-8-28 APPEAL PROCEDURE ADMINISTRATIVE HEARING.
   The owner may appeal the determination of the need for weed or litter
removal or a civil fine issued pursuant to this article. The request for appeal
and the hearing shall comply with the procedures outlined in the Independent
Office of Hearings "IHO" Ordinance, ROA 1994, §§ 2-7-8-1 to 2-7-8-9.
('74 Code, § 6-15-28) (Ord. 89-1967; Am. Ord. 32-1976; Am. Ord. 4-1992; Am.
Ord._2023-016)
§ 9-8-29 JUDICIAL REVIEW.
   The exclusive remedy for parties dissatisfied with the action of the City
Hearing Officer shall be the filing of a petition for a writ of certiorari with
the State District Court. The petition for review shall be limited to the
record made at the administrative hearing held pursuant to this article.
('74 Code, § 6-15-29) (Ord. 4-1992; Am. Ord._2023-016)
§ 9-8-30 REMOVAL UPON DEFAULT OF OWNER.
   After said hearing if removal has not been commenced or prosecuted to
completion with due diligence as required by the written hearing decision, the
Mayor's designee shall commence removal upon the premises as set forth in §
9-8-26.
('74 Code, § 6-15-30) (Ord. 4-1992; Am. Ord._2023-016)
§ 9-8-31 ILLEGAL COMMERCIAL HANDBILLS PREVENTION.
   (A)   The Mayor’s designee shall create and maintain a 24- hour seven-day
per week hotline and website for individuals to report commercial handbills in
public places.
   (B)   The Mayor’s designee shall implement a public outreach program to
educate the public about the penalties for illegally posting commercial
handbills in public places.
   (C)   The Mayor’s designee shall initiate a kiosk program to prevent the
illegal distribution of commercial handbills. The city kiosk program shall
permit kiosks on public rights-of-ways and city owned property where deemed
appropriate by the Mayor’s designee in exchange for a reasonable fee.
(Ord. 25-2005; Am. Ord._2023-016)
§ 9-8-32 SMOKING TOBACCO PRODUCT LITTER.
   No person shall dispose of any portion of a smoking tobacco product except
in public receptacles or in appropriate private receptacles. Any smoking
tobacco product previously lit shall be extinguished prior to disposal.
(Ord. 41-2006; Am. Ord._2023-016)
§ 9-8-99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person who violates any of the provisions of this article,
excluding §
9-8-32, shall be deemed guilty of a petty misdemeanor and, upon conviction
thereof, shall be subject to the penalty provisions set forth in §
1-1-99 of this code of ordinances to include a minimum fine of $250. Any person
deemed guilty of a subsequent violation shall be subject to a minimum fine of
$350 and then $500 for each violation thereafter. Community service may be
imposed in lieu of or in addition to any such fine. Every violation shall be a
separate misdemeanor.
   (B)   Any person who violates the provisions of §
9-8-32 regarding smoking tobacco product litter shall be subject to the penalty
provisions set forth in §
1-1-99 of this code of ordinances to include a minimum fine of $250. Any person
deemed guilty of a subsequent violation of §
9-8-32 shall be subject to a minimum fine of $500 for each violation
thereafter.
   (C)   The Department may impose a civil fine for violations of this article
that have not been adequately cured within a reasonable time after an initial
Notice to Cut and Remove, pursuant to §
9-8-25. The amount of the fines are: $200 for a first violation of this
article; $300 for a second violation of this article; and $500 for a third or
subsequent violation of this article. Notice of the civil fine shall be
appealable under the administrative appeal procedures of this article. Failure
to pay the fine, appeal the fine, or prevail at an administrative hearing
challenging the fine shall allow the Department to place a lien upon the
subject property or any other asset owned by the subject property's owner. The
Department may also choose to collect on the fine through any other method
allowed by law.
   (D)   Notice of civil fine.
      (1)   General. When the Department imposes a civil fine for violations of
this article, the Department shall issue a notice of civil fine directed to the
owner of the subject property, their agent and/or responsible party, and, where
appropriate, to the occupant of the subject property as shown on the records of
the Bernalillo County Assessor and the Department's records. The notice of
civil fine shall contain:
         (a)   The street address and a legal description sufficient for
identification of the premises upon which the building is located;
         (b)   A statement that the Department has found the subject property
to be in violation of this article;
         (c)   A concise description of the conditions found to render the
subject property dangerous under the provisions of this code;
         (d)   The amount of the fine assessed;
         (e)   A statement that the fine must be paid in full within 30 days of
the date of the notice;
         (f)   Instructions for how the fine can be paid; and
         (g)   A statement advising that any person having any title or legal
interest in the subject property may appeal from the notice of civil fine to
the Office of Administrative Hearings, provided the appeal is made in writing
as provided in this code, and filed with the Office of the Administrative
Hearings within seven days of service of notice and order, and that failure to
timely appeal the notice of civil fine shall constitute a waiver of the right
to appeal.
      (2)   Method of service.
         (a)   Service of the notice of civil fine shall be made upon all
persons entitled to notice either personally or by mailing a copy of such
notice and order by certified mail, postage prepaid, return receipt requested,
to each such person and owner, responsible party or identified agent at their
address as shown on the records of the Bernalillo County Assessor or as known
to the Department. If no address of any such person so appears or is known to
the Department, then a copy of the notice of civil fine shall be so mailed,
addressed to such person, at the address of the building involved in the
proceedings and posted thereon.
         (b)   The failure of any such person to receive such notice shall not
affect the validity of any proceedings taken under this section. Service by
certified mail in the manner herein provided shall be effective on the date of
mailing.
      (3)    Proof of service. Proof of service of the notice of clvil fine
shall be certified by a written affidavit executed by the person effecting
service, declaring the time, date and manner in which service was made. The
declaration, together with any receipt card returned in acknowledgment of
receipt by certified mail shall be affixed to the copy of the notice and order
retained by the Department.
('74 Code, § 6-15-31) (Ord. 89- 1967; Am. Ord. 32-1976; Am. Ord. 4-1992; Am.
Ord. 52-2003; Am. Ord. 25-2005; Am. Ord. 41-2006; Am. Ord._2018-032; Am. Ord.
2023-016)
ARTICLE 9: NOISE CONTROL
Section
   
9-9-1   Short title and declaration of intent
   
9-9-2   Definitions
   
9-9-3   Decibel measurement criteria
   
9-9-4   General noise
   
9-9-5   Temporary permits for amplified sound or construction noise
   
9-9-6   Variances
   
9-9-7   Machinery, equipment fans, and air conditioners
   
9-9-8   Exceptions and exclusions
   
9-9-9   Administration
   
9-9-10   Noise mitigation plans
   
9-9-11   Making violations of the noise ordinance civil violations; providing a
hearing; additional remedies; injunctions
   
9-9-12   Article not to effect provisions of other city ordinances
§ 9-9-1 SHORT TITLE AND DECLARATION OF INTENT.
   (A)   This article may be cited as the "Noise Control Ordinance."
   (B)   A substantial body of scientific research has shown that exposure to
excessive sound and vibration is a serious hazard to the public health,
welfare, safety and quality of life. It is the express intent of the City
Council to control the level of excessive sound as noise in a manner that
promotes the use, value and enjoyment of property, conduct of business, sleep
and repose and an environment free from unnecessary and excessive sound.
('74 Code, § 6-22-1) (Ord. 21- 1975; Am. Ord. 9-2001; Am. Ord._2017-002)
§ 9-9-2 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this article, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   APPROVED SOUND-LEVEL METER. An instrument sensitive to pressure fluctuations
and meeting the American National Standards Institute (ANSI) S1.4-1983 Type 1
or Type 2 or those of IEC Publication 651 or those of the latest respective
revisions thereof.
   A-WEIGHTED SOUND PRESSURE LEVEL. The sound pressure level as measured on an
approved sound-level meter using the A-weighting network. The unit of
measurement is dB(A). Sounds measured with the "A" weighting network
approximate the response of human hearing when measuring sounds of low to
moderate intensity.
   C-WEIGHTED SOUND PRESSURE LEVEL. The sound pressure level as measured on an
approved sound-level meter using the C-weighting network. The unit of
measurement is dB(C). The "C" weighting network is more sensitive to low
frequencies than is the "A" weighting network.
   DAYTIME. From 7:00 a.m. (0700 hours) to 10:00 p.m. (2200 hours).
   DOWNTOWN ARTS AND ENTERTAINMENT FOCUS AREA.  The area designated as the
Downtown Arts and Entertainment Focus Area in the Integrated Development
Ordinance.
   EMERGENCY WORK. Work made necessary to restore property to a safe condition
following a public calamity, work to restore public utilities or work required
to protect persons or property from an imminent exposure to danger.
   EPA. U.S. Environmental Protection Agency.
   EXCESSIVE SOUND. Any sound that exceeds the applicable sound level limits
set forth in §
9-9-4.
   HOLIDAYS. Those days established by the federal government as official
holidays.
   MAYOR. The Mayor or his designated representative.
   MECHANICAL VENTILATION. A forced-air system with supply fan and ductwork;
the air which is supplied may or may not be heated or cooled. This may include,
but is not limited to: air conditioning, furnace, or swamp cooler.
   NIGHTTIME. From 10:00 p.m. (2200 hours) to 7:00 a.m. (0700 hours).
   NOISE. Any sound which annoys or disturbs humans or which causes or tends to
cause an adverse psychological or physiological effect on humans, including
excessive sound as defined and regulated by this article.
   NOISE-SENSITIVE PROPERTY. Property containing an occupied: dwelling unit or
units, school, hospital, religious institution, child-care facility, or adult-
care facility or other facility similar in nature.
   PERSISTENTLY OR CONTINUOUSLY. A 10-minute period during which any sound is
discerned and that sound exceeds the applicable sound limits in each of the ten
one-minute intervals of such period. In the case of animal noise, it means a
10-minute period during which animal noise is discerned in each of the ten one-
minute intervals therein.
   PERSON. A person, firm, association, copartnership, joint venture,
corporation, or any other entity, public or private in nature.
   PUBLIC PREMISES. All real property, including appurtenances thereon, owned
or controlled by any governmental entity and includes, without limitation,
rights-of-way, streets, highways, sidewalks, alleys, parks, and waterways.
   RECEPTOR PREMISES. The premises (residential, commercial, downtown arts and
entertainment focus area, industrial/manufacturing, or public) as listed in
Table 1 receiving noise emitted from the source premises after crossing one or
more property lines.
   REFERENCE PRESSURE. The reference pressure for all sound level measurements
shall be 20 micropascals (20µPa). This shall be further defined as 0 dB(A).
   RESIDENTIAL, OFFICE/COMMERCIAL, INDUSTRIAL/MANUFACTURING. These terms shall
be as used in the
Integrated Development Ordinance (Chapter 14, Article 16), and when used to
describe a receptor or source premises, the terms refer to the particular
zoning classification of the receptor or source premises and not the actual use
of such premises.
   SOUND.  Sound is anything perceptible by human beings through the sense of
hearing. The description of sound may include any characteristic of such sound,
including duration, intensity, and frequency.
   SOUND AMPLIFYING EQUIPMENT. Any machine or device for the sound
amplification of the human voice, music, or any other sound. “Sound amplifying
equipment” shall not include warning devices on authorized emergency vehicles
or horns or other warning devices on any motor vehicles used only for traffic
safety purposes.
   SOUND LEVEL. A logarithmic measure called the decibel. It may make use of
various frequency weighting networks, such as A or C-weighted, as specified by
ANSI. When sound level is used without further description, A-weighting of
sound level may be assumed.
   SOURCE PREMISES. The premises (residential, commercial, downtown arts and
entertainment focus area, industrial/manufacturing, or public) as listed in
Table 1 that is emitting noise that is crossing one or more property lines and
impacting the receptor premises.
   STRUCTURE. For the purposes of the Noise Control Ordinance, structure shall
mean the outer shell of a building, typically consisting of exterior walls
covered by a roof.
('74 Code, § 6-22-2) (Ord. 21- 1975; Am. Ord. 30-1981; Am. Ord. 9-2001; Am.
Ord. 5-2002; Am. Ord._2017-002; Am. Ord._2017-025)
§ 9-9-3 DECIBEL MEASUREMENT CRITERIA.
   Unless otherwise indicated, any decibel (dB) measurement made pursuant to
the provisions of this article shall be based on the reference sound pressure
and measured with an approved sound-level meter. Reference sound pressure will
be measured as LAeq for A-Weighted and LCeq for C-Weighted.
   (A)   Except as provided in division (C) below, Residential, Commercial,
Downtown Arts and Entertainment Focus Area, and Industrial/Manufacturing
properties are to be measured from inside the Structure located on the receptor
premises. Any indoor noise measurements for compliance purposes should be taken
in a location which could be reasonably assumed to affect one or more persons.
For residential receptor premises, inside noise level measurements are
performed in sleeping or living areas with windows opened to approximately 25%
of their maximum in residences without mechanical ventilation and with windows
closed for residences with mechanical ventilation.
   (B)   Public premises are to be measured at a reasonable distance from walls
or similar large reflecting surfaces and with the approved sound-level meter
protected from the effects of wind and other extraneous sounds by the use of
screens when appropriate.
   (C)   In the case where the receptor premises is located in a residential
zoning district and the source premises is located in a commercial or
industrial/ manufacturing zoning district, measurements shall be measured
outside within 25 feet from any side of the residential structure which is
nearest to the source premises.
('74 Code, § 6-22-3) (Ord. 21- 1975; Am. Ord. 9-2001; Am. Ord._2017-002)
§ 9-9-4 GENERAL NOISE.
   (A)   Except as otherwise provided in this article, no person shall make or
continue, cause to be made or continued, or allow to be made or continued, any
sound that persistently or continuously results in an exceedance of the
following sound level limits using an approved sound-level meter measuring
decibels on the A-Weighted scale.
   Table 1 (A-Weighted measurements in decibels (dB))
 
               Receptor Premises
Numbers                                  Commercial and      Industrial/
indicate       Residential               Downtown Arts and   Manufacturing and
decibel (dB)                             Entertainment Focus Public Premises
levels                                   Area
Source         Daytime      Nightti me   Daytime Nighttime   Daytime Nighttime
Premises
Residential    55           50           65      60          75      70
Commercial and
Downtown Arts  55 (indoor ) 50 (indoor )
and            60 (outdoor) 55 (outdoor) 65      60          75      70
Entertainment
Focus Area
Industrial/
Manufa cturing 55 (indoor ) 50 (indoor ) 65      60          75      70
and Public     60 (outdoor) 55 (outdoor)
Premises
 
   (B)   Except as otherwise provided in this article, no person shall make or
continue, cause to be made or continued, or allow to be made or continued, any
sound that persistently or continuously results in an exceedance of the
following sound level limits using an approved sound-level meter measuring
decibels on the C-Weighted scale.
   Table 2 (C-Weighted measurements in decibels (dB))
 
               Receptor Premises
Numbers                                  Commercial and      Industrial/
indicate       Residential               Downtown Arts and   Manufacturing and
decibel (dB)                             Entertainment Focus Public Premises
levels                                   Area
Source         Daytime      Nighttime    Daytime Nighttime   Daytime Nighttime
Premises
Residential    60           55           70      65          80      75
Commercial and
Downtown Arts  60 (indoor ) 55 (indoor )
and            65 (outdoor) 60 (outdoor) 70      65          80      75
Entertainment
Focus Area
Industrial/
Manufa cturing 60 (indoor ) 55 (indoor ) 70      65          80      75
and Public     65 (outdoor) 60 (outdoor)
Premises
 
   (C)   No person shall allow an animal in his possession or control to
persistently or continuously bark, howl or make noise common to its species, or
otherwise to disturb the peace and quiet of the inhabitants of the city, or
otherwise endanger the health and welfare of the inhabitants of the city. This
provision shall not apply to public zoos and approved and properly zoned animal
shelters as defined in the Humane and Ethical Animal Rules and Treatment
Ordinance.
   (D)   Except for work authorized by a governmental body or agency, no person
shall, on or within 500 feet of any noise- sensitive property, operate or cause
to be operated any equipment used in construction, repair, alteration,
excavation, grading or demolition work on buildings, structures, streets,
alleys or appurtenances thereto:
      (1)   With sound-control devices less effective than those provided on
the original equipment; and without using noise mitigation measures.
      (2)   On Sundays or holidays or between 10:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m., without
first obtaining a Temporary Construction Noise Permit as described in §
9-9-5.
('74 Code, § 6-22-14) (Ord. 21- 1975; Am. Ord. 30-1981; Am. Ord. 9-2001; Am.
Ord._2017-002)
§ 9-9-5 TEMPORARY PERMITS FOR AMPLIFIED SOUND OR CONSTRUCTION NOISE.
   (A)   The Mayor may grant a temporary permit which allows non-compliance
with the limitations prescribed in this article for the purpose of amplified
sound or construction noise activities of short duration.
   (B)   Permits shall be granted upon application, at no cost to applicant,
provided an initial evaluation indicates that the permit will not result in a
condition injurious to health or safety.
   (C)   The following factors shall be considered in the initial evaluation to
determine whether granting the permit will result in a condition injurious to
health or safety:
      (1)   Temporary Permits for use of sound amplifying equipment:
         (a)   Distance of proposed activities from noise-sensitive property;
         (b)   Number of amplification devices to be used in the proposed
activities;
         (c)   Anticipated direction of amplification devices;
         (d)   Anticipated length of proposed activities;
         (e)   Whether the activity will be held within or without a structure;
and
         (f)   Other circumstances or conditions that may be impacted or
aggravated by the proposed activities.
      (2)   Temporary Construction Noise Permits:
         (a)   Distance from noise-sensitive property;
         (b)   Type of activity and equipment;
         (c)   Estimated noise level and duration;
         (d)   Noise mitigation measures to be used;
         (e)   Health and safety benefits to be realized as a result of the
completed project; and
         (f)   Other circumstances or conditions that may be impacted or
aggravated by the proposed activities.
   (D)   Upon a determination that the granting of a permit will not result in
a condition injurious to health or safety, the permit shall be issued
specifying place, duration, and any requirements appropriate to the proposed
activity site, which may include maximum sound level limits.
   (E)   Unless other dates and times are explicitly addressed in the permit,
permitted noise shall not continue past 10:00 p.m. on Sunday, Monday, Tuesday,
Wednesday, and Thursday. On Friday and Saturday, permitted noise shall not
continue past 12:00 a.m.
   (F)   Issued permits become void and shall be surrendered to any city police
officer or any representative of the Mayor authorized to enforce this article
upon request when it is determined that any requirement contained in the permit
has been violated. Upon revocation of the permit, permitted activities must
either immediately cease or must be in compliance with the limitations
prescribed in this article.
   (G)   A subsequent permit application by the same applicant or another
applicant may be denied upon substantiated complaint(s) by resident(s) in the
locality of the previously permitted activity or if an applicant has in the
past been required to surrender a permit as described in division (F).
   (H)   This section shall not apply to any person who has been granted a
variance as prescribed by §
9-9-6.
   (I)   Any person aggrieved by the disposition of an application for a
temporary permit may appeal such disposition by filing a written petition with
the Mayor within 30 days of the disposition.
('74 Code, § 6-22-5) (Ord. 30-1981; Am. Ord. 9-2001; Am. Ord._2017-002)
§ 9-9-6 VARIANCES.
   (A)   The Mayor may grant an individual variance from the limitations
prescribed in this article whenever it is found, after a public hearing before
a Hearing Officer and upon presentation of adequate proof, that compliance with
any part of this article will impose an undue economic burden upon any lawful
business, occupation or activity, and that the granting of the variance will
not result in a condition injurious to health or safety.
   (B)   Any variance, or renewal thereof, shall be granted within the
requirements of division (A) of this section and for time periods and under
conditions consistent with the reasons therefore, and within the following
limitations:
      (1)   If the variance is granted on the grounds that compliance with the
particular requirement or requirements will necessitate the taking of measures
which, because of their extent or cost, must be spread over a considerable
period of time, it shall be for a period not to exceed such reasonable time as,
in the view of the Mayor, is requisite for taking of the necessary measures. A
variance granted on the ground specified in this division shall contain a
timetable for taking of action in an expeditious manner and shall be
conditioned on adherence to the timetable; or
      (2)   If the variance is granted on the ground that it is justified to
relieve or prevent hardship of a kind other than that provided for in division
(1) of this division (B), it shall be for not more than one year.
   (C)   Any person seeking a variance shall file a petition for variance with
the City Clerk's Office. The hearing shall be conducted after notice has been
provided In accordance with this section and to make the final decision
regarding the granting of the variance. The Hearing Officer shall conduct the
hearing and accept documentary and testimonial evidence in accordance with
accepted administrative hearing procedures
   (D)   Written notice of the public hearing shall be mailed by the Hearing
Officer at least 10 days prior to the hearing to:
      (1)   the petitioner;
      (2)   the petitioner's agent;
      (3)   the owners as shown by the records of the County Assessor of lots
comprising the site of the variance and lots within 100 feet, excluding public
right-of-way, of the site of the variance;
      (4)   any neighborhood association or homeowner association that has
notified the City Office of Neighborhood Coordination of two persons' addresses
where it wishes notice to be sent if the site of the variance is within the
neighborhood or homeowner association's boundaries or within 100 feet of the
neighborhood or homeowner association's boundaries, excluding public right-of-
way.
      (5)   any other person or entity that has filed with the Mayor a request
to receive a notice of the variance proceeding.
   (E)   The notice of hearing shall set forth the name and address of the
petitioner, the location of the site of the variance, that the petitioner has
requested a variance from this ordinance, the nature of the requested variance,
and that part of the ordinance that would be waived if approved.
   (F)   Following the hearing, the Hearing Officer shall render a written
final decision including findings of fact and conclusions of law. The Hearing
Officer shall mail the decision to all parties of record. The exclusive remedy
for any parties to the administrative proceedings described in this paragraph
shall be a petition for writ of certiorari to the State District Court. The
petition for review shall be limited to the record made at the public hearing
described herein.
('74 Code, § 6-22-4) (Ord. 21- 1975; Am. Ord. 30-1981; Am. Ord. 9-2001; Am.
Ord. 42-2007; Am. Ord._2017-002; Am. Ord._2023-015)
§ 9-9-7 MACHINERY, EQUIPMENT FANS, AND AIR CONDITIONERS.
   (A)   Except for emergency work as defined in this article, no person shall
operate or allow the operation of any stationary machinery, equipment, fan,
air- conditioning apparatus, or similar permanently installed mechanical device
in any manner so as to create noise which results in exceedance of the sound
level limits specified in §
9-9-4.
   (B)   No person shall operate or allow to be operated outdoors, any power
equipment, including, but not limited to, sweepers, power mowers, leaf blowers,
rototillers, power saws or other power equipment used to sweep parking areas or
other surfaces or perform gardening, property repair or other functions, within
500 feet of any noise-sensitive property:
      (1)   during the nighttime; or
      (2)   between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 9:00 a.m. on a Sunday or
holiday. Power mowers at golf courses are exempt from the requirements of this
subsection.
   (C)   No person shall install or allow the installation of any mechanical
equipment, such as, but not limited to, air conditioning or freezer
compressors, evaporative coolers, exhaust fans or other noise-producing
machines, on commercial property with such equipment on a side adjacent to
noise-sensitive property or a side separated from noise-sensitive property only
by an alley. Roof locations may be used when the mechanical equipment is
installed and maintained so as to not result in an exceedance of the sound-
level limits in §
9-9-4. Mechanical equipment legally installed or for which official final
approval for installation was received before the effective date of this
article is specifically exempt from this location requirement.
   (D)   No person shall place or allow the placement of any garage door used
for entry or exit of vehicles from an automotive repair facility on a side of
any building adjacent to noise-sensitive property or a side separated from
noise-sensitive property only by an alley. Garage doors legally installed or
for which an official final approval for installation was received before the
effective date of this article are specifically exempt from this location
requirement.
   (E)   Public Utilities. Public utility generation, transmission or
distribution sites, facilities or substations shall be deemed compliant with
this section if operated so as not to exceed the noise limits of any applicable
City of Albuquerque/Bernalillo County Facility Plan: Electric Service
Transmission and Subtransmission Facilities. In the absence of applicable
Facility Plan noise limits, the sound level limits corresponding to the zoning
district designation of the receiving property at the time of the equipment
installation as set forth in §
9-9-4 shall govern. If a subsequent zoning district designation is less
restrictive, the limits for that zoning district shall apply.
('74 Code, § 6-22-9) (Ord. 21- 1975; Am. Ord. 30-1981; Am. Ord. 9-2001; Am.
Ord._2017-002)
§ 9-9-8 EXCEPTIONS AND EXCLUSIONS.
   Aircraft and airports. The limits set forth in this article do not apply to
sounds or vibrations generated by any aircraft or generated in connection with
the operation of any airport or approved helipad used in support of law
enforcement, public utility restoration, emergency medical transport or search
and rescue.
   Earthshaking vibrations. The limits set forth in this article do not apply
to vibrations caused by construction, demolition or repair work.
   Emergency or civic construction, demolition, or repair work. The limits set
forth in this article do not apply to sounds generated in construction,
demolition or repair work of an emergency nature or in work on public
improvements authorized by a governmental body or agency.
   Entertainment events. The limits set forth in this article shall not apply
to those reasonable sounds emanating from authorized school bands, school
athletic, and school entertainment events. Furthermore, the limits set forth in
this article shall not apply to those reasonable sounds emanating from
occasional outdoor or indoor gatherings, public dances, shows, and band
performances conducted during the daytime.
   Human voices. The limits set forth in this article do not apply to noise
created by unamplified human voices.
   Fireworks displays. The limits set forth in this article do not apply to any
public or private legally permitted fireworks displays.
   Mass transit. The limits set forth in this article do not apply to sounds or
vibrations generated in the operation of any mass transit system.
   Parades and protests. The limits set forth in this article do not apply to
legally permitted parades or to protests.
   Mosquito control. Equipment for the use of mosquito control and prevention
by the City of Albuquerque or other governmental agency.
   Pre-existing mechanical equipment. The limits set forth in this article do
not apply to legally installed mechanical equipment for which official final
approval for installation was received before the effective date of this
article.
   Refuse collection. The limits set forth in this article do not apply to
municipal refuse collection activities taking place during the daytime.
   Stadiums. The limits set forth in this article do not apply to sounds
generated at any stadium.
   Total preemption. The limits set forth in this article do not apply to
sounds otherwise governed by federal, state, or municipal laws or regulations.
(Ord._2017-002)
§ 9-9-9 ADMINISTRATION.
   The Mayor shall be responsible for the administration of this article.
Rules, policies, regulations, and test and compliance procedures to carry out
the intent and purpose of this article shall be promulgated by the Mayor.
('74 Code, § 6-22-15) (Ord. 21- 1975; Am. Ord. 30-1981; Am. Ord. 9-2001; Am.
Ord._2017-002)
§ 9-9-10 NOISE MITIGATION PLANS.
   In addition to the other powers set forth in this article, the Mayor may
request an acoustical review of a proposed facility as part of the building
permit review process. Such acoustical review shall be performed by an
acoustical/sound professional and may require the submission and acceptance of
a noise mitigation plan to ensure that the facility's noise activities fall
within the dB limitations specified in this article prior to building permit
approval. Failure to comply with a noise mitigation plan will result in
enforcement actions as provided in this article.
(Ord._2017-002)
§ 9-9-11 MAKING VIOLATIONS OF THE NOISE ORDINANCE CIVIL VIOLATIONS; PROVIDING A
HEARING; ADDITIONAL REMEDIES; INJUNCTIONS.
   (A)   Each act in violation of this article shall constitute a public
nuisance and a separate civil violation. Civil violations of this article shall
subject the owner of the offending property to the following penalties for
offenses during any 36-consecutive-month period:
      (1)   a civil fine of $250 for the first offense;
      (2)   a civil fine of $500 for the second offense;
      (3)   a civil fine of $1,000 for the third and subsequent offenses.
Each calendar day during which the civil violation occurs shall constitute a
separate and distinct offense.
   (B)   Upon determination by the Mayor that a violation of this article has
occurred, the Mayor will cause to be sent a Notice of Violation, which notice
will be mailed postage pre-paid return-receipt-requested to the lawfully
registered owner of the property as determined by the records of the Bernalillo
County Clerk. The notice shall contain the following information:
      (1)   The address where the violation occurred;
      (2)   The approximate time the violation occurred;
      (3)   A brief narrative of the circumstances surrounding the violation;
      (4)   A statement regarding whether this is the first, second, or third
or subsequent offense within a consecutive 36-month period;
      (5)   A name and phone number or title of municipal employee from whom
the owner can obtain further information;
      (6)   The address where payment for the violation may be made;
      (7)   A statement that the owner has the right to contest the validity of
the civil violation by requesting a hearing in writing within ten days of the
date of mailing of the Notice of Violation; and
      (8)   A copy of this article.
   (C)   Any person who is issued a Notice of Violation may request that a
hearing be scheduled by the city hearing officer by submitting a request for a
hearing with the City Clerk's Office. The hearing shall be held In accordance
with the provisions in the IHO Ordinance, ROA 1994,
Chapter 2, Article 7, Part 8.
   (D)   Failure to pay a fine imposed by this article—whether the fine is
uncontested or unsuccessfully contested—shall subject the property owner to the
penalty provisions set forth in §
9-9-11 of this code of ordinances. Each failure is considered a separate
offense.
   (E)   As an additional remedy to the civil fines set forth in this section,
the Mayor may seek a restraining order or injunction issued by a court of
competent jurisdiction to prohibit ongoing violations of any provision of this
article.
('74 Code, § 6-22-17) (Ord. 21- 1975; Am. Ord. 30-1981; Am. Ord. 9-2001; Am.
Ord._2017-002; Am. Ord._2023-015)
§ 9-9-12 ARTICLE NOT TO EFFECT PROVISIONS OF OTHER CITY ORDINANCES.
   The enactment of this article shall not be construed to supersede or effect
the following provisions of the Albuquerque Code of Ordinances:
   (A)   Section
9-2-4-7 "animal noise";
   (B)   
Chapter 9, Article 3 "alarm systems";
   (C)   Section
8-6-14 "use of horn";
   (D)   Section
8-6-13 "muffler required"; and
   (E)   Section
12-2-4 "unreasonable noise".
(Ord._2017-002)
ARTICLE 10: SOLID WASTE
MANAGEMENT AND RECYCLING
Section
Part 1: Solid Waste Collection
   
9-10-1-1   Short title
   
9-10-1-2   Purpose
   
9-10-1-3   Definitions
   
9-10-1-4   Administration
   
9-10-1-5   Collection authorization
   
9-10-1-6   Precollection practices
   
9-10-1-7   Storage of solid waste for commercial and multi-family dwelling
collection
   
9-10-1-8   Collection practices
   
9-10-1-9   Dumping, accumulating, and scattering of refuse
   
9-10-1-10   Multiple-family dwelling recycling
   
9-10-1-11   Collection fees
   
9-10-1-12   Burning of solid waste
 
   
9-10-1-98   Enforcement
   
9-10-1-99   Penalty
   
Appendix:   Collection and Disposal Rates
Part 2: Albuquerque/Bernalillo County Regional Landfill
   
9-10-2-1   Purpose
   
9-10-2-2   Operation and monitoring of public landfills
   
9-10-2-3   Staff assistance and funding
Part 3: [Reserved]
Part 4: Computer Recycling
   
9-10-4-1   Short title
   
9-10-4-2   Purpose
   
9-10-4-3   Computer hardware recycling
   
9-10-4-4   Temporary provision
PART 1: SOLID WASTE COLLECTION
§ 9-10-1-1 SHORT TITLE.
   Sections
9-10-1-1 et seq. shall be known and may be cited as the “Municipal Solid Waste
Ordinance” of the city.
('74 Code, § 6-3-1) (Ord. 42-1980; Am. Ord._2013-009)
§ 9-10-1-2 PURPOSE.
   The purpose of §§
9-10-1-1 et seq. is to preserve the health, comfort, and convenience of the
inhabitants of the city and to preserve and improve the environmental quality
of the city.
('74 Code, § 6-3-2) (Ord. 42-1980; Am. Ord._2013-009)
§ 9-10-1-3 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of §§
9-10-1-1 et seq., the following definitions shall apply unless the context
clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ASHES. The residue from the burning of wood, coal, coke, or other
combustible materials.
   COMMERCIAL COLLECTION. All collection not otherwise defined as residential
collection.
   COMMINGLED CONTAINERS. Any container used for the purpose of collecting
multiple recyclables approved by the city.
   HAZARDOUS WASTE. Any solid waste that meets the definition of hazardous
waste under 40 CFR 261.3 and which because of its quantity, concentration or
physical, chemical or infectious characteristics may cause or significantly
contribute to an increase in mortality or an increase in serious irreversible
or incapacitating illness; or poses a substantial present or potential hazard
to human health or the environment when improperly treated, stored,
transported, disposed of or otherwise managed.
   INFECTIOUS WASTE.  Solid waste that carries a probable risk of transmitting
disease to humans, including but not limited to:
      (1)   Cultures and stocks of infectious agents and associated
biologicals.
      (2)   Human pathological wastes.
      (3)   Human and body fluid waste, including, but not limited to:
         (a)   Liquid waste human blood.
         (b)   Blood products.
         (c)   Items caking, flaking, saturated, or dripping with human blood,
including serum, plasma, and other blood components.
         (d)   Items contaminated by body fluids from persons during surgery,
autopsy, other medical procedures, or laboratory procedures.
         (e)   Specimens of blood products, and their containers.
         (f)   Other potentially infectious materials, including, but not
limited to, the following body fluids: semen, vaginal secretions, cerebrospinal
fluid, synovial fluid, pleural fluid, pericardial fluid, peritoneal fluid,
amniotic fluid, saliva in dental procedures, and body fluid that is visibly
contaminated with blood, and all body fluids in situations where it is
difficult or impossible to differentiate between body fluids.
         (g)   Contaminated animal carcasses, body parts, blood, blood
products, secretions, excretions, and bedding of animals that were known to
have been exposed to zoonotic infectious agents for non-zoonotic human
pathogens.
         (h)   Biological wastes and waste contaminated with blood, excretions,
exudates, or sections from.
         (i)   Discarded sharps, hypodermic needles, syringes (with attached
needle), Pasteur pipettes, scalpel blades, blood vials, needles with attached
tubing, culture dishes, suture needles, slides, cover slips, and other broken
or unbroken glass or plastic ware, unless properly treated or otherwise
specifically exempted.
   MAYOR.  The Mayor of the city or his designated representative.
   MULTIPLE FAMILY DWELLING. A building, or portion thereof, designed for
occupancy of two or more families living independently.
   PERSON. Any natural person or any firm, partnership, association,
corporation, company, or organization of any kind.
   PROPERTY MANAGEMENT COMPANY or HOMEOWNERS ASSOCIATION. A business or
association of homeowners within a community whose purpose includes to ensure
the provision of and maintenance of community facilities and services for the
common benefit of the residents, including arranging for solid waste and
recycling services.
   RECYCLABLE MATERIALS. Materials that would otherwise become refuse if not
recycled and that can be collected, separated, processed, reclaimed or
composted and placed in use in the form of raw materials, or products.
   RECYCLING.  Any process by which recyclable materials are collected,
separated, processed, reclaimed or composted and reused or returned to use in
the form of raw materials or products.
   REFUSE. Includes but is not limited to all putrescible and nonputrescible
solid wastes (except body wastes) such as garbage, rejected or waste food,
offal, swill, ashes, dirt, slop, waste paper, trash, rubbish, waste, litter or
unwholesome material of any kind; street cleaning; but shall not include
hazardous or toxic wastes, such as paints, corrosives, combustibles, oils,
poisons, dead animals, hot ashes, coals, vehicle batteries, infectious waste
and heavy or large building materials.
   RESIDENTIAL COLLECTION. All non-commercial collection from eight or fewer
mobile homes on a single site, multiple dwellings with eight or fewer dwelling
units on a single site, and single dwellings.
   RESPONSIBLE PARTY. For single-family dwellings, the responsible party shall
be the property owner. For a multiple-family dwelling, the responsible party
shall be the owner, manager, or agent. For a business, the responsible party
shall be the property owner.
   RUBBISH. Includes but is not limited to all nonputrescible solid wastes
(excluding ashes), such as vehicle bodies and both combustible and
noncombustible solid wastes such as paper, cardboard, cans, wood, yard
clippings, leaves, dirt, glass, bedding, crockery, and similar materials.
   SITE.  Any lot held in single ownership and requiring solid waste collection
service; if several adjacent lots are owned by a developer at the time of
building permit issuance, there is a refutable presumption that they will be
separate sites when solid waste collection is required.
   SOLID WASTE.  Includes but is not limited to discarded material, refuse,
garbage, rubbish, litter, recyclable material, green waste, yard waste, or any
waste that meets the definition of solid waste under 40 CFR 261.2.
   UNAUTHORIZED WASTE.  Any other waste not permitted for collection or
disposal at the landfill, convenience centers, or approved for recycling.
('74 Code, § 6-3-3) (Ord. 42- 1980; Am. Ord. 13-1986; Am. Ord. 9-2000; Am. Ord.
42-2006; Am. Ord._2013-009; Am. Ord._2020-041)
§ 9-10-1-4 ADMINISTRATION.
   (A)   The Mayor is responsible for the administration of §§
9-10-1-1 et seq.
   (B)   Powers delegated to the Mayor may be delegated by the Mayor to other
appropriate city departments as he or she may deem necessary to carry out the
requirements of §§
9-10-1-1 et seq.
   (C)   Reasonable rules and regulations shall be prescribed by the Mayor in
written form to carry out the intent and purpose of §§
9-10-1-1 et seq.
   (D)   The Mayor shall have the authority to establish reasonable fees for
services for which fees are not otherwise provided herein.
   (E)   The Mayor shall have the authority to delay, suspend or deny
collection or disposal services for failure to comply with §§
9-10-1-1 et seq. and the rules and regulations prescribed.
   (F)   It shall be unlawful for any person to threaten, intimidate, use
violence or physical force to intentionally obstruct, impede or interfere with
any city employee while in the performance of the employee's duties as
authorized by §§
9-10-1-1 et seq.
('74 Code, § 6-3-4) (Ord. 42-1980; Am. Ord._2013-009)
§ 9-10-1-5 COLLECTION AUTHORIZATION.
   (A)   Except as otherwise provided herein, all refuse accumulated in the
city shall be collected, conveyed, and disposed by the city. No person shall
collect, convey over any of the streets or alleys of the city, or dispose of
any refuse accumulated in the city except as herein provided. The Mayor shall
have the authority to make regulations concerning the days of collections, type
and location of pick-up, conveyance and disposal as he or she should find
necessary and to change and revoke same.
   (B)   Sections
9-10-1-1 et seq. shall not prohibit the actual producers of solid waste or the
owners of premises upon which solid waste has accumulated from personally
collecting, conveying and disposing of such solid waste. Producers or owners
must comply with the provisions herein and with any other governing law or
ordinances and pay applicable collection fees for the level of service as
deemed by the Mayor or designee that is required absent any private collection,
conveyance or disposal of solid waste. The Mayor may enjoin the collection,
conveyance or disposal of solid waste by commercial entities.
   (C)   Annual Permit to Transport Solid Waste. The Mayor is authorized to
issue permits for a fee determined by the Mayor or designee to transport, by
persons other than actual producers or owners of premises upon which commercial
solid waste accumulates, certain types of solid waste. The Mayor is authorized
to waive the following applicable collection fees:
      (1)   Construction or demolition site refuse.
      (2)   Plant-material refuse, including trees.
      (3)   Material being transported for the purpose of recycling.
   (D)   Regional Resource Recovery Program. The Mayor is authorized to
initiate studies for the regional need, location, and operation of facilities
to recover material or energy resources from solid waste.
('74 Code, § 6-3-5) (Ord. 42-1980; Am. Ord._2013-009)
§ 9-10-1-6 PRECOLLECTION PRACTICES.
   (A)   Separation of Refuse. Refuse, ashes and recyclable material shall each
be placed and maintained in separate containers if the Mayor so requires.
   (B)   Preparation of Commercial Refuse. All refuse placed in refuse
containers for collection shall be drained of all liquids.
   (C)   Duty to Provide and Maintain Commercial Containers in Sanitary
Condition. Refuse containers shall be provided by the owner, tenant, lessee,
manager, or occupant of the premises. Refuse containers shall be maintained in
good condition by the property owner. Any container that does not conform to
the provisions of §§
9-10-1-1 et seq. or that may have ragged or sharp edges or any other defect
liable to hamper or injure the person collecting the contents thereof shall be
promptly replaced by the property owner within 30 days of notification. If the
property owner fails to comply, the Mayor may designate or suspend service.
   (D)   Commercial Refuse Containers.
      (1)   Commercial or business establishments, nine or more multiple family
dwellings on a single site, and nine or more mobile homes on a single site
shall be required to furnish metal bins built according to specifications as
set forth by the Mayor.
      (2)   They shall be kept in a clean, neat, and sanitary condition at all
times, by the property owner. This shall include a requirement that the bins be
kept painted and maintained as necessary by the property owner to maintain a
clean and neat condition. Containers must be free of all graffiti. The city has
the right to identify any public or private collection container with
identifying marks, radio frequency identification (RFID) tags, or other
technique, for the purpose of uniquely identifying the collection container for
service or tracking. Such need and specifications shall be based on the volume
and type of refuse produced by the particular commercial or business
establishment or multiple family dwelling.
      (3)   It is the duty of the owner, tenant, lessee, manager, or occupant
of the premises to provide containers that are compatible with city equipment
and meet all other specifications established by the Mayor. It is the duty of
the owner, tenant, lessee, manager, or occupant to contact the Solid Waste
Management Department of the city on any relocation of container, change of
service or change of business.
      (4)   Commercial Garbage Containers. Garbage containers shall be equipped
with suitable handles and tight fitting covers, and shall be watertight.
Garbage containers shall be of a type approved by the Mayor and shall be kept
clean, neat, and in sanitary condition at all times.
      (5)   Containers for Hot Ashes and Other Materials.
         (a)   No person shall deposit hot ashes, cinders, smoldering coals, or
greasy or oily substances liable to spontaneous combustion, into any
combustible receptacle, or place the same within ten feet of any combustible
materials.
         (b)   For at least 48 hours prior to the scheduled time of collection,
ashes or cinders shall be cold, and shall be placed in a sealed plastic bag
with a capacity of not more than 20 gallons and when loaded shall weigh not
more than 50 pounds, and then may be placed in the approved city container.
   (E)   Residential Refuse and Recyclable Material Containers.
      (1)   Single family dwellings and multiple family dwellings of eight or
fewer dwellings on a single site, and mobile homes of eight or fewer mobile
homes on a single site and other customers using automation collection carts
shall be required to enclose all refuse and recyclable material in the
following manner as determined by the Mayor:
         (a)   Automated collection carts may not exceed 150 pounds when full.
         (b)   All refuse and/or recyclable material shall be properly
contained and secured before being placed in the automated collection cart and
the lid shall be closed so as to prevent contents from being scattered, blown
or spilled.
         (c)   Any areas served by manual collection, using plastic bags will
not exceed 40 pounds when containing refuse. All large and disposable
containers and plastic bags must be tightly secured so as to prevent refuse
from being scattered, blown or spilled. Sharp or extremely heavy materials will
be placed in disposable containers other than plastic bags. Tree trimmings and
similar refuse suitable for bundling will be tied in bundles not to exceed four
feet in length and two feet in diameter and 40 pounds in weight.
         (d)   Any areas served by manual collection must have recyclable
materials properly bundled, packaged, and placed at the curb for collection, as
determined by the Mayor.
      (2)   Residential refuse and recyclable carts shall be placed out for
pick up no later than 7:00 a.m., on the regularly scheduled day but no sooner
than 12 hours prior to pick up unless otherwise specified by the Mayor.
Residents who put their refuse and/or recyclable carts out after the truck has
been there, or have had their solid waste blocked or hidden from view by any
object such as a vehicle, shall be responsible for storing their refuse and/or
recyclable material until their next regular day of pick up, or pay an
additional fee as determined by the Mayor for requested curbside collection
service or disposing of it at an approved disposal facility unless otherwise
specified by the Mayor.
      (3)   Residential refuse and recyclable material shall be placed in the
street, against the curb but shall not be placed on the sidewalk and shall be
clear of pedestrian and vehicular traffic. City issued automation collection
carts containing refuse or recyclable material shall be placed in the gutter,
wheels against the curb, near the right side of the driveway, or as close as
possible to the edge of the street. Such refuse and/or recyclable material
shall be clearly visible and accessible for solid waste collection, and free
from any obstructions including but not limited to mailboxes, trees, shrubbery,
walls, fences, other carts and vehicles. Residents who fail to comply shall be
responsible for storing their refuse and/or recyclable material until their
next regular pick up day, or pay an additional fee as determined by the Mayor
for requested curbside collection service or disposing of it at an approved
disposal facility unless otherwise specified by the Mayor or his designated
representative. The Mayor shall have the authority to designate the collection
site where required by special circumstances based on standards and regulations
authorized by §§
9-10-1-1 et seq.
      (4)   Within 24 hours after scheduled pickup, automated collection carts
shall be removed from curbside.
      (5)   For at least 48 hours prior to the scheduled time of collection,
ashes or cinders shall be cold and shall be placed in a sealed plastic bag with
a capacity of not more than 20 gallons and when loaded shall weigh not more
than 50 pounds and then placed in automated collection carts or manual
collection plastic bags.
      (6)   Automated collection carts are the property of the city. Automated
collection carts are assigned to a specific street address and shall be
maintained and cleaned by the user. Automated collection carts shall not be
modified or altered in any way. It is the responsibility of the property owner
to ensure that the cart used for service is the cart that is assigned to that
street address.
      (7)   Automated collection carts shall be available for retrieval by the
Solid Waste Management Department before service can be suspended, with a
letter of vacant premise (See §
9-10-1-11 (C) (2)). If the assigned automation collection cart is not
recovered, a replacement fee will be charged to the property owner.
('74 Code, § 6-3-6) (Ord. 42- 1980; Am. Ord. 64-1990; Am. Ord. 9-2000; Am. Ord.
2013-009; Am. Ord._2020-041)
§ 9-10-1-7 STORAGE OF SOLID WASTE FOR COMMERCIAL AND MULTI-FAMILY DWELLING
COLLECTION.
   (A)   Appearance of Collection Points. At every commercial and multiple
family dwelling collection point which is within 80 feet of a public street,
solid waste and recyclable material containers shall be shielded from public
view in accordance with City of Albuquerque Solid Waste Enclosure
specifications. No commercial collection point shall be on public street right
of way unless an appropriate variance is granted.
   (B)   Selection and Design of Collection Points.  Specific points for
commercial collection, multiple-family dwelling collection, solid waste
storage, and pickup shall be designated by the Mayor, using the following
procedure and criteria. A commercial collection, solid waste and recyclable
material storage, and pickup point not so approved is unlawful.
      (1)   Site Plan Submission. A property owner or his agent, whose site
will require commercial collection, shall submit an accurate site plan of the
whole site for which service is desired to the city's Planning Department. The
plan shall be drawn accurately, at a scale adequate to clearly show all the
following required data:
         (a)   Lot lines.
         (b)   Existing and planned buildings.
         (c)   Proposed collection points and enclosures.
         (d)   On the premises or on public right-of-way within 15 feet of the
premises - existing and planned sidewalks, curb cuts, drives, parking spaces,
landscaping, recreation areas, free-standing signs, poles (e.g., street
lights), and other structures, provided that these items may be omitted where
not within 15 feet of a street, private drive, or refuse collection point.
         (e)   On the premises or adjacent to the premises of public right-of-
way - fire plugs and bus stops.
         (f)   Must clearly address residential neighborhoods that are within
40 feet of collection point.
      (2)   Enclosure Plan Submission. A property owner or his agent, whose
site will require commercial collection and/or multiple-family dwelling
recycling collection, shall submit a plan of the proposed solid waste container
enclosure when the site plan is submitted.
      (3)   Site Plan Review and Approval.
         (a)   The Mayor may approve requested locations for commercial
collection and enclosures or may require alternative locations. Such
alternative locations shall be drawn on the relevant site plan and accepted by
the applicant.
         (b)   The Mayor shall evaluate and select locations for commercial
collection according to the following criteria:
            1.    Collection from public alleys shall be maximized, to the
extent that it is consistent with efficient collection routes.
            2.   Ready, safe access by city vehicles and crews shall be
available.
            3.   View from public street shall be minimized.
            4.   Distance from residences and outdoor recreation or relaxation
areas shall be maximized.
            5.   Distance from bus stops shall be maximized.
         (c)   No site plan shall be approved if it is contrary to the
provisions of the Integrated Development Ordinance or plans approved
thereunder. No site plan shall be approved if it would place a container which
is over three feet high in a required front or corner zoning setback area
unless such a container was approved prior to October 1, 1985.
         (d)   No site plan shall be approved if it locates a container on
public street right of way unless an appropriate variance is granted.
         (e)   Commercial collection sites shall be paved with a concrete apron
meeting City of Albuquerque Solid Waste specifications for the designated
container. However, commercial collection sites approved prior to October 1,
1985, which sites were paved in a way that met the off-street parking
requirements of the Zoning Code (§ 14-16-5-5) in effect at the time of the
issuance of building permit, are exempt from the concrete-paving requirement if
the owner of the property agrees in writing to maintain the paving and hold the
city harmless for any damage to the pavement resulting from solid waste
collection.
         (f)   At the time the site plan is submitted, the Mayor shall confirm
that commercial service is appropriate as provided for herein.
         (g)   The site plan approved under this section shall be considered
part of the service agreement between the city and the person contracting for
the city solid waste collection.
      (4)   Enclosure Plan Review and Approval. The Mayor shall approve plans
for design of enclosures for commercial collection points according to the
following criteria:
         (a)   The barrier shall provide an attractive enclosure between public
streets and solid waste containers.
            1.   While a straight enclosure will usually be sufficient, the
Mayor may require up to four sides with a movable gate or door if the Mayor
determines that this is necessary to sufficiently diminish the view of the
solid waste container from public streets.
            2.   The height of the enclosure shall be not less than the height
of the container which is or will be utilized on the site. This height shall be
determined by the Plan Reviewer at the time of site plan submittal for building
permit.
            3.   The location, design, color, and material of the enclosure
shall be compatible with the principal building, the use of the site, and the
landscaping thereof.
         (b)   The enclosure shall not interfere with reasonable solid waste
collection.
         (c)   The enclosure shall be so constructed that reasonable wear and
tear from solid waste collection should not damage it. The enclosure must meet
approved City of Albuquerque Solid Waste Enclosure Specifications.
         (d)   The enclosure plan approved under this section may be revoked in
the event the type, size, or number of containers used at the site changed or
in the event that the enclosure is improperly installed or maintained, so that
it does not attractively screen the collection site as intended.
   (C)   Effective Date for Requirement for Conformance to Site Plans;
Shielding Collection Points and Removal of Illegal Containers.
      (1)   Any proposed building or land use which requires commercial
collection of refuse, for which a building permit has not been issued or the
use began by September 30, 1985 shall be developed and maintained in good
condition with refuse collection points in conformance to a site plan submitted
and approved according to the provisions of this section.
      (2)   The owner of real property which requires commercial collection of
refuse on which there is a collection point which is not covered by division
(C)(1) above, is not required to meet the enclosure requirements of this
section unless there is a material change in the premises which effects refuse
collection; however, all owners of property with commercial collection are
encouraged to comply with this section as to enclosures.
      (3)   The requirement for removing illegal collection points on public
street right-of-way shall be met not later than December 31, 1985 unless
immediate compliance is required through coverage by division (C)(1) above, as
set forth in division (D)(2) of this section.
   (D)   Variances. In appropriate cases, the Mayor may grant full or partial
variances from the requirement for collection point location or enclosure,
specified elsewhere in this section. Variance from §§
9-10-1-1 et seq. must be applied for in writing by the owner or person in
possession of real property which requires commercial collection of refuse.
      (1)   A variance may be given when the Mayor finds that provision of the
normal enclosure:
         (a)   Would not further the purpose of §§
9-10-1-1 et seq. due to the limited visibility of the collection site; or
         (b)   Would result in an arbitrary and unreasonable taking of property
or impose undue economic burden.
      (2)   A variance to allow a commercial collection point on public street
right-of-way may be given by the Mayor if he finds that:
         (a)   There is no feasible location for a collection point on the
site;
         (b)   Commercial type collection is essential; and
         (c)   The City Traffic Engineer certifies that the location on the
public street right-of-way is not a significant traffic or visibility hazard.
      (3)   The Mayor shall not approve a variance which:
         (a)   Would result in a condition injurious to public health or
safety; or
         (b)   Is not justified by a weighing of the relative interests of the
applicant and the general public.
      (4)   The purpose of §§
9-10-1-1 et seq. is served by commercial collection containers readily visible
from a public street if:
         (a)   The area is zoned C-3 Heavy Commercial, M-1 Light Manufacturing,
or M-2 Heavy Manufacturing;
         (b)   The container is near a public street designated as a local
street;
         (c)   The site cannot provide a conforming collection site and/or
enclosure without unreasonable expense to the property owner; and
         (d)   The conditions of the containers will be maintained in good
repair and properly painted.
      (5)   Variances granted shall be based on specific findings, and a
written record of such findings and decisions shall be preserved.
      (6)   More detailed guidelines for granting variances shall be developed
by the Mayor as part of the rules and regulations authorized by §§
9-10-1-1 et seq.
      (7)   The Mayor may revoke a variance when he finds that there has been a
material change in the amount or type of refuse or in the use of the site, such
that the variance is no longer justified.
      (8)   Any interested person may appeal an administrative decision on a
variance to the Zoning Hearing Examiner.
      (9)   The city may by rule adopt fees to pay the city cost of processing
such variance requests or appeals.
('74 Code, § 6-3-7) (Ord. 42- 1980; Am. Ord. 71-1984; Am. Ord. 61-1985; Am.
Ord. 42-2006; Am. Ord._2013-009; Am. Ord._2017-025)
§ 9-10-1-8 COLLECTION PRACTICES.
   (A)   Frequency of Collection.
      (1)   Residential. Refuse and recyclable material accumulated by
residences shall be collected at such times and frequency as deemed necessary
by the Mayor.
      (2)   Commercial. Hotels, restaurants, and other such businesses and
institutions as deemed necessary by the Mayor shall enter into an agreement for
greater frequency of collection.
         (a)   The Mayor shall have the authority to require that more frequent
collections be made where necessary to protect the public health.
         (b)   The Mayor shall have the authority to determine when
inaccessible containers will be serviced, provided, however, the Mayor has the
authority to charge a special fee for such collection.
         (c)   The Mayor, in his or her discretion shall have the authority to
charge a special fee for unscheduled or emergency collection (see §
9-10-1-4(D)).
         (d)   All commercial containers are to be accessible between the hours
of 5:00 a.m. and 8:00 p.m., or as otherwise designated by the Mayor. If
containers are not readily accessible, the Mayor shall have the authority to
charge a special fee for late collection (see §
9-10-1-4 (D)).
   (B)   Limitations on Quantity.
      (1)   Residential. The city shall collect the refuse and recyclable
material of each family during a collection period for the standard charge. Any
excessive accumulation as determined by the Mayor may require a special
collection at an additional fee.
      (2)   Commercial. The city shall collect all refuse which is contained
inside the approved container to be serviced for that location. Any excess
accumulation outside the designated contracted container shall be collected by
a special collection at an additional fee. The refuse must not exceed the
container capacity and the refuse container lid must be closed at all times.
The Mayor shall have the authority to determine where the compaction of refuse
is required.
   (C)   Special Solid Waste Disposal.
      (1)   Infectious Waste. Waste from homes, hospitals, nursing homes, or
other places where highly infectious or contagious diseases have prevailed
shall not be placed in containers for regular collection. The producers of such
waste shall dispose of it in accordance with all applicable regulations. If
hazardous or infectious waste is transported without knowledge by the Solid
Waste Management Department, any fines and/or associated costs for cleanup will
be reimbursed to the City of Albuquerque by the property owner.
      (2)   Highly Flammable or Explosive Solid Waste. Highly flammable or
explosive material shall not be placed in containers for regular collection and
disposal. The producers of such solid waste shall immediately notify the Mayor
who shall direct the proper collection and disposal of such solid waste at the
expense of the owner or possessor thereof.
      (3)   Hazardous Waste. Hazardous waste may only be disposed of in
accordance with all city, state and federal regulations. The city further
reserves the right to prohibit the disposal of materials otherwise identified
or defined as hazardous waste in §
9-10-1-3.
      (4)   Tires. Commercial businesses shall dispose of tires in a container
designated for tire disposal only. Any commercial business that places tires in
a container designated for residential or commercial refuse will be assessed an
additional fee. Containers designated for tire pick up by the city must be
compatible with city equipment. Separate tire disposal containers must not
contain any solid waste or a penalty will be assessed. See §§
9-10-1-98 and
9-10-1-99 below. The city shall not be responsible for procuring or maintaining
containers for the disposal of tires. Tire disposal fees will apply. See the
Collections and Disposal Rates Appendix attached to this article.
   (D)   Collection by Actual Commercial Producers.
      (1)   Requirements for Vehicles. The actual commercial producers of
refuse, the owners of premises upon which such refuse is accumulated who desire
personally to collect and dispose of such refuse, or licensed transporters of
refuse, and persons who desire to dispose of waste material not included in the
definition of refuse shall do so only with compliance with the rules and
regulations authorized by §§
9-10-1-1 et seq. Such collection shall be accomplished through the use of a
vehicle provided with a tightly secured cover. Such vehicles shall be operated
to prevent offensive odors escaping therefrom and refuse from being blown,
dropped, or spilled.
      (2)   Disposal. Disposal of refuse by persons so permitted under this
division (D) shall be made at a site authorized by the city.
      (3)   Rules and Regulations. The Mayor shall have the authority to make
other such reasonable regulations concerning individual collection or disposal.
      (4)   Applicable Fees. Nothing herein shall be construed to exempt such
producers or owners from the fees provided herein.
      (5)   Refuse and Recyclable Material Property of City. Ownership of
refuse and/or recyclable material placed in container, or set out for
collection or disposed of in the City Sanitary Landfill shall be vested in the
city upon collection or disposal.
   (E)   Change Between Residential and Commercial Collection Service.
Notwithstanding any other provisions in §§
9-10-1-1 et seq., the city may require the person in control of real property
to receive a type of collection service other than as defined in §§
9-10-1-1 et seq., according to the following standards:
      (1)   Criteria for change between residential and commercial collection
service shall be as follows:
         (a)   Two or more of the following circumstances exist as to existing
service:
            1.   The site serviced is unable to comply with requirements of §§
9-10-1-1 et seq. unless the type of collection is changed;
            2.   The existing collection service cannot conform with all other
applicable city ordinances;
            3.   The existing collection service creates a health or safety
hazard;
            4.   There have been frequent, substantial amounts of loose refuse
around the collection container, evidenced by two or more fines paid or six or
more neighborhood complaints; or
            5.   The customer requests the change in service.
         (b)   In addition, the new class of service would meet all of the
following criteria:
            1.   The site serviced will be able to comply with the requirements
of §§
9-10-1-1 et seq.;
            2.   The new collection location conforms with all other applicable
city ordinances; and
            3.   The new service would not be likely to create a health or
safety hazard.
         (c)   If an owner has eight or fewer dwelling units and mobile homes
on a single lot, it may justify a change from commercial to residential
service. The fact that an owner owns additional dwellings on other lots in the
vicinity does not normally justify a change from residential to commercial
collection service.
      (2)   If the city changes a site from commercial to residential
collection, the city shall offer to purchase any privately owned container it
had authorized for the commercial collection service. The price offered shall
reflect fair market value of the container in its present condition.
      (3)   The owner or person in control of the real property shall be
notified of the city's intended change of service at least 30 days in advance
of its effective date.
      (4)   The owner or person in control of real property may appeal the
proposed collection service change to the city's Zoning Hearing Examiner. The
city may by rule adopt a fee to pay the city cost of such an appeal.
   (F)   Automated Collection Cart Charges.
      (1)   One automated collection cart will be provided without cost to each
residence. Thereafter, if the cart is lost or stolen or destroyed by the
resident, a charge to cover the replacement cost of the container will be
assessed. The city shall confiscate all carts that have not been assigned to a
residence. Unlawful use of an additional cart will result in back charges and/
or penalties.
      (2)   A monthly per cart fee will be charged for the use of each
additional, 96 gallon, automated collection cart. See the Collections and
Disposal Rates Appendix attached to this article which includes the applicable
effective dates. Additional cart charges will be assessed for a period of no
less than six months.
   (G)   Rate Appendix. Rates are set by the Solid Waste Management Department,
are subject to change, and are published in the Collection and Disposal Rate
Appendix to this article.
('74 Code, § 6-3-8) (Ord. 42- 1980; Am. Ord. 58-1985; Am. Ord. 13-1986; Am.
Ord. 9-2000; Am. Ord. 18-2001; Am. Ord. 28-2003; Am. Ord. 15-2006; Am. Ord. 6-
2010; Am. Ord._2013-009; Am. Ord._2014-013; Am. Ord._2020-041)
§ 9-10-1-9 DUMPING, ACCUMULATING, AND SCATTERING OF REFUSE.
   (A)   Dumping. No person may discard refuse anywhere outdoors within the
boundaries of the city except at a time and place approved for collection of
that person's refuse under the terms of §§
9-10-1-1 et seq. and regulations authorized by said sections or other
provisions of this code or ordinances of the city. No person shall place refuse
and/or recyclable material in the receptacle of another person without
permission of that person.
   (B)   Unauthorized Accumulation. It shall be unlawful for any person to
allow any refuse to collect or accumulate on any lot or other premises within
the city of which he is the owner, tenant, lessee, manager, or occupant. Any
such unauthorized accumulation or collection is hereby declared to be a
nuisance and is prohibited. In the event such person fails or refuses to remove
such accumulation, the city may cause same to be removed at the expense of such
person, and such charge shall be a lien upon the property.
   (C)   Scattering of Refuse. No person shall cast, place, sweep, or deposit
anywhere in the city any refuse in such a manner that it may be carried or
deposited by the elements upon any street, sidewalk, parkway, sewer, other
public place, vacant lot, or into any premises with the city.
   (D)   Accumulation of Construction Refuse. Refuse resulting from
construction of structures may be collected within an active construction site
if and only if the refuse is maintained in such a manner that it will not be
blown to adjacent properties by the wind.
   (E)   Accumulation for Recycling. Notwithstanding other provisions of §§
9-10-1-1 et seq., it is lawful for any person to accumulate and collect rubbish
for the purpose of recycling it, provided that any collection point which is
available to the public is:
      (1)   Conforming to the Integrated Development Ordinance;
      (2)   Not on public right of way; and
      (3)   Constructed so that the rubbish is contained at the collection
point so as to not become a public nuisance, whether because the rubbish is
blown, because of the collection point's appearance, or for other reasons.
Paper collected for recycling shall be in an enclosure with a top or the paper
shall be securely bundled.
('74 Code, § 6-3-9) (Ord. 42- 1980; Am. Ord. 17-1983; Am. Ord._2013-009; Am.
Ord._2017-025; Am. Ord._2020-041)
§ 9-10-1-10 MULTIPLE-FAMILY DWELLING RECYCLING.
   (A)   Requirements for Establishment of Recycling Program.
      (1)   The responsible party for each multiple- family dwelling of less
than 25 units may work with the city to establish a recycling program in
accordance with the terms listed herein unless otherwise specified by the
Mayor.
      (2)   The responsible party for each multiple- family dwelling of 25
units or more shall establish and manage a recycling collection program in
accordance with the terms listed herein unless otherwise specified by the
Mayor.
      (3)   The city will be the collection agent for the recycling program.
The responsible party shall work with the city to determine the appropriate
level of collection service.
      (4)   The responsible party shall notify, in writing, its residents,
employees and/or clients, as applicable, that recycling participation is
mandatory. Written notification (i.e. letter, newsletter, email notice, etc.)
shall be provided within 15 days to all new residents and employees and no less
frequently than bi-annually thereafter to all existing residents and employees.
The written notification shall set forth the requirements of this article and
include at minimum:
         (a)   What materials will be recycled.
         (b)   How the recyclables are to be prepared.
         (c)   Any set-out requirements.
         (d)   Location of recycling containers.
         (e)    Prohibitions against contamination of recyclables.
         (f)   Any other requirements necessary.
   (B)   Requirements for Materials to be Collected.
      (1)   Recyclables shall be placed at the collection point, as determined
by the Mayor.
      (2)   Recyclable material shall be placed out for pick up and be
accessible no later than 6:00 a.m., on the regularly scheduled day unless
otherwise specified by the Mayor. Customers who put their recyclable materials
out after the truck has been there, or have had their recyclable material
blocked or hidden from view by any object such as a vehicle, shall be
responsible for storing their recyclable material until their next regular day
of pick up, or paying an additional fee as determined by the Mayor for
requested collection service.
      (3)   Recyclables will be collected in commingled containers. Commingled
containers are the property of the City of Albuquerque. Commingled containers
are assigned to a property for the purposes of multi-family dwelling recycling
and shall be maintained and cleaned by the responsible party. Commingled
containers may not be painted or altered in any way. It is the responsibility
of the responsible party to ensure that they commingle their recyclable
material. If a commingled container is lost, stolen or damaged, a replacement
fee will be assessed.
      (4)   If the commingled container is used for refuse a collection and
disposal fee will be charged as per the Collection and Disposal Rates Appendix
attached to this article.
   (C)   Provisions for Recycling Collection Points.  Provisions for recycling
collection points shall be as provided in §
9-10-1-7.
   (D)   Collection Fees.  The monthly fee for collection will be the
equivalent of the residential recycling fee times the number of units
regardless of occupancy.
(Ord. 42-2006; Am. Ord._2013-009; Am. Ord._2020-041)
§ 9-10-1-11 COLLECTION FEES.
   (A)   Residential Collection. See the Collections and Disposal Rates
Appendix attached to this article which includes the applicable effective
dates.
   (B)   Commercial Collection. Commercial rates can be adjusted by
administration not to exceed 5% within any fiscal year. See the Collections and
Disposal Rates Appendix attached to this article which includes the applicable
effective dates. These fees shall reflect the actual cost of service from the
level in effect immediately prior to that date. Hotels, restaurants, other
establishments and businesses, institutions, and multiple-unit dwellings
receiving commercial type service shall have fees based on the type and
frequency of service and the volume of the refuse container required to collect
such refuse.
   (C)   Starting and Stopping Service; Credit. All premises shall be charged
solid waste collection fees except as provided herein:
      (1)   Previously unoccupied residences. New home not previously occupied,
including model and show homes, will be charged at the time sold. It shall be
the duty of the builder, contractor, or agent to notify the city in writing at
the time of the sale.
      (2)   Vacant residential premises. Residential premises which become
vacant shall continue to receive charges unless said unoccupied premises meet
the following conditions:
         (a)   The service suspension period shall be 90 consecutive days or
more;
         (b)   Premises was receiving residential (and not commercial)
collection service;
         (c)   The customer's premises must be vacant of all occupants for the
entire period of suspension;
         (d)   1.   Written request for service suspension is received by the
City Solid Waste Management Department ten days prior to the beginning of
suspension. The request shall include date of departure and expected return
date. Solid waste collection service and charges will resume on the expected
return date.
            2.   Written request for suspension of service should be mailed, or
faxed to:
   City of Albuquerque
   Solid Waste Management Department
   4600 Edith Blvd. N.E.
   Albuquerque, New Mexico 87107
   Fax (505) 761-8101
            3.   Requests by telephone cannot be honored.
            4.   If refuse and/or recyclable material is found at the premises
during temporary suspension of service and it is determined said refuse and/or
recyclable material was generated by lawful occupants of the premises, the
customer may be back billed for entire suspension period.
            5.    Automated collection cart(s) must be retrieved by the Solid
Waste Management Department before service can be suspended or the cost of
replacement will be assessed.
      (3)   Vacant commercial premises. Commercial premises which become vacant
shall continue to receive charges until proper written application to stop
charges is received by the city. The owner, tenant, lessee, manager, or
occupant shall make such written application to the Department at the address
shown in §
9-10-1-11(C)(2)(d)2., above. Charges will be stopped upon verification by the
Department.
      (4)   Credit or back charge adjustments may be made retroactive, however,
such adjustments shall not exceed a period of four years.
      (5)   Any person making a false statement upon any application or request
pursuant to §§
9-10-1-1 et seq. shall be guilty of an ordinance violation.
   (D)   Payment. All charges shall be payable at the Office of the City
Treasurer, City Hall, Albuquerque, New Mexico, or other locations as designated
by the Mayor and will become delinquent 15 days following the “due by” date on
the customer's utility statement.
   (E)   Penalty. A penalty of 1½% per month may be imposed on all delinquent
accounts.
   (F)   Responsibility of Payments, Liens, and Deposits.
      (1)   The charges provided for herein are the personal responsibility of
the owner of the property served; any fee, payment, or fee shifting arrangement
with a tenant or any other person is a third-party arrangement between the
owner and the other person or entity and is not binding on the city.
      (2)   The city may file a lien on such property for such charges
including any interest or penalties accruing on same.
      (3)   In the event the property is sold the original owner shall notify
the city as provided herein the date of the transfer of title and the name and
address of the new owner.
      (4)   Reasonable deposits may be required of any customer when the Mayor
deems it appropriate. Such deposits shall draw reasonable interest as
determined by the Mayor.
   (G)   Discontinuance of Service; Hearing.
      (1)   The city may cause the water supply to be turned off and
discontinue service to the property if any charge provided for herein remains
unpaid for a period of 30 days from the “due by” date on the property owner’s
utility statement. Service may not be discontinued for delinquencies of a
previous owner.
      (2)   In order to discontinue service, a written notice shall be sent to
the property owner giving the property owner at least 15 days notice of the
termination of services and notice of property owner's right to protest the
city's action at a hearing before the City Hearing Officer.
      (3)   The property owner must request in writing that a hearing be held
and such request must be received by the City Clerk within 15 days of receipt
of notice of termination of service. The hearing shall be held in accordance
with the provisions In the IHO, ROA 1994,
Chapter 2, Article 7, Part 8. The Hearing Officer may affirm, overrule, or
modify the decision to terminate the services. The decision of the Hearing
Officer shall be final. In the event a hearing is requested, the services shall
not be terminated until and in accordance with the decision of the Hearing
Officer.
      (4)   The Mayor shall establish rules or procedures for such hearings and
for discontinuance of service not in conflict herewith.
   (H)   Rate Appendix. All rates are set by the Solid Waste Management
Department, are subject to change, and are published in the Collection and
Disposal Rate Appendix to this article.
   (I)   Legal Remedy. The city shall have a right to proceed for collection of
such unpaid charges in any manner provided by the law for collection of a
municipal claim.
   (J)   Use of City Municipal Landfill and Convenience Centers.
      (1)   City Municipal Landfill.
         (a)   The City Municipal Landfill will accept solid waste from
licensed authorized commercial haulers of two tons and over size vehicles and
city collection vehicles only, unless otherwise approved by the Mayor.
         (b)   The City Municipal Landfill and convenience centers will not
accept hazardous wastes, unauthorized waste, or infectious wastes.
         (c)   The fees for disposal in the City Municipal Landfill are set
forth in the Collections and Disposal Rates Appendix, which includes the
applicable effective dates.
      (2)   City Convenience Centers.
         (a)   Any residential producer of refuse may dispose of same at any
City Convenience Center for a fee set forth in the Collections and Disposal
Rates Appendix per each individual load plus applicable gross receipts and
local option taxes or $1 per each individual load plus applicable gross
receipts and local option taxes. Any uncovered and/or unsecured load will be
charged an additional fee set forth in the Collections and Disposal Rates
Appendix, which includes the applicable effective dates, per individual load
plus applicable gross receipts and local option taxes. A load is equivalent to
64 cubic feet (4'X8'X2').
         (b)   Any business or institution may dispose of commercial refuse,
except unauthorized waste, infectious wastes or hazardous waste, at any City
Convenience Center for a fee set forth in the Collections and Disposal Rates
Appendix, which includes the applicable effective dates, per each individual
load plus applicable gross receipts and local option taxes. Any uncovered and/
or unsecured load will be charged an additional fee as set forth in the
Collections and Disposal Rates Appendix per individual load plus applicable
gross receipts and local option taxes. A load is equivalent to 64 cubic feet
(4'X8'X2').
         (c)   Any vehicle transporting material to any City Convenience Center
is limited to a rated capacity of under two tons.
         (d)   Salvaging and scavenging is prohibited at the city landfill,
transfer stations, and convenience centers at all times without the written
permission of the Mayor.
   (K)   A fuel surcharge may be assessed each month to all refuse collection
when the purchase price of diesel fuel exceeds $2.30 per gallon.
   (L)   The costs to provide current levels of service will be calculated each
year and presented to City Council as a part of the budget process. Service
rate adjustments may be recommended annually, based on controllable and
uncontrollable expenses, and must be approved by the City Council.
('74 Code, § 6-3-10) (Ord. 42- 1980; Am. Ord. 17-1991; Am. Ord. 27-1992; Am.
Ord. 10-1993; Am. Ord. 12-1994; Am. Ord. 26-1995; Am. Ord. 13-1996; Am. Ord.
12-1998; Am. Ord. 22-1998; Am. Ord. 18-2000; Am. Ord. 18-2001; Am. Ord. 38-
2002; Am. Ord. 28-2003; Am. Ord. 51-2005; Am. Ord. 15-2006; Am. Ord. 42-2006;
Am. Ord. 6-2010; Am. Ord._2013-009; Am. Ord._2014-013; Am. Ord._2020-041; Am.
Ord._2023-015)
§ 9-10-1-12 BURNING OF SOLID WASTE.
   No solid waste shall be burned within the city except as permitted by the
Mayor.
('74 Code, § 6-3-11) (Ord. 42-1980; Am. Ord. 42-2006; Am. Ord._2013-009)
§ 9-10-1-98 ENFORCEMENT.
   Sections
9-10-1-1 et seq. will be enforced in accordance with the provisions of §§
1-1-98 ROA 1994.
(Ord._2013-009)
§ 9-10-1-99 PENALTY.
   Any person convicted of a violation of the provisions of §§
9-10-1-1 et seq. or any regulation promulgated hereunder shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor and shall be subject to the penalty provisions set forth in §
1-1-99 of this code of ordinances.
('74 Code, § 6-3-12) (Ord. 42-1980; Am. Ord._2013-009)
APPENDIX: COLLECTION AND DISPOSAL RATES
 
Table 1
Refuse Collection Codes and Rates
(eff. July 1, 2022)
Account Type Code Monthly Charge
Table 1
Refuse Collection Codes and Rates
(eff. July 1, 2022)
Account Type                                               Code Monthly Charge
Vacant premises                                            00   $0.00
Single-family residential                                  A1    
Basic Service                                              A1   $9.40
Recycling Service                                              $3.58
Clean Cities Program                                           $4.09
Environmental                                                  $0.93
Extra Cart 96g                                             A1   $7.69
Extra Cart Recycle 96g                                     A1   $2.33
Multi-family residential, Mobile Home Parks & Condominiums A3    
- 8 or less units
Basic Service                                              A3   $9.40
Recycling Service                                              $3.58
Clean Cities Program                                           $4.09
Environmental                                                  $0.93
Extra Cart 96g                                             A3   $7.69
Extra Cart Recycle 96g                                     A3   $2.33
 
Refuse Collection Codes and Rates
(eff. June 30, 2014)
Account Type Code Monthly Charge
Refuse Collection Codes and Rates
(eff. June 30, 2014)
Account Type                       Code Monthly Charge
Landfill accounts                  10   * (22-28-XXXX)
Fireline                           11   * (22-50/22- 53/XXXX)
County account                     12   * (23-XX-XXXX)
“Special, dead animals, etc.”  16   $5.00 per dead animal
Special billings                   18   See Rate Schedule
Self service                       19   By arrangement
Automated cart/bag                 2X   See Rate Schedule
Galvanized cans                    2X   See Class 2
Lift bin compactor (2 person crew) 3X   See Rate Schedule
Shares Swanson bin                 40   Billed to another account
Swanson container                  4X   See Rate Schedule
Shares lift-bin (2-man crew)       50   Billed to another account
Lift-bin compactor (2-person crew) 5X   See Rate Schedule
Shares lift-bin compactor          60   Billed to another account
Lift-bin compactor                 6X   See Rate Schedule
Shares city roll-off               70   Billed to another account
Open top                           7X   See Rate Schedule
City roll-off                      7X   See Class 7
City roll-off on call              78   See Class 7
Shares private roll-off            80   Billed to another account
Compactor                          8X   See Rate Schedule
Private roll-off                   8X   See Class 8
Private roll-off on call           88   See Class 8
Shares lift-bin (1-man crew)       90   Billed to another account
Lift-bin Lift-bin compactor        9X   See Rate Schedule
* Permit plus tonnage
1. Fireline meter used for watering only. No refuse service.
2. The monthly charge is $11.25 or the total tonnage fees, whichever is
greater.
3. Commercial accounts with multiple type containers billed according to type
of service and frequency of each.
4. The Residential Rate includes residential collection and disposal;
recycling collection and processing; residential large item collection,
graffiti, weed and litter removal; environmental needs change.
 
 
Class 20: 30-Gallon Bags)
(Effective August 1, 2024)
Carts/Bags Collection Frequency (Per Week) Special 1
           1 2 3 4 5
Class 20: 30-Gallon Bags)
(Effective August 1, 2024)
Carts/Bags       Collection Frequency (Per Week)  Special 1
                 1     2     3      4      5
One cart/bag     27.29 54.58 81.87  109.16 136.45 28.86
Two carts/bags   28.70 57.39 86.09  114.80 143.49 32.12
Three carts/bags 30.11 60.21 90.32  120.42 150.53 35.36
Four carts/bags  31.51 63.03 94.54  126.05 157.57 38.61
Five carts/bags  32.92 65.85 98.76  131.68 164.61 41.86
Six carts/bags   34.34 68.66 102.98 137.32 171.64 45.12
Seven carts/bags 35.74 71.47 107.22 142.95 178.69 48.36
   Note: Add $14.50 customer charge per premise for above scheduled
rates.
Locked access 2  10.00 20.00 30.00  40.00  50.00  2.50
1 Special charge is for each time the container is emptied.
2 Locked access fee is for each time the container is emptied. On a
special service fee, the fee is charged only once.
3 8 bags or more computation: Add $1.34 to the 7 cart/bags charge for
each additional cart/bag.
 
Class 30: Compactor Lift Bins — Hazardous Route — Customer-Owned
(Effective August 1, 2024)
Container Size Collection Frequency (Per week) Special 1
               1 2 3 4 5 6
Class 30: Compactor Lift Bins — Hazardous Route — Customer-Owned
(Effective August 1, 2024)
Container Size Collection Frequency (Per week)               Special 1
               1      2      3      4      5        6
1 cubic yard   69.17  138.34 207.52 276.70 345.87   415.03   47.46
2 cubic yards  94.85  189.69 284.54 379.41 474.25   569.10   53.07
3 cubic yards  120.53 241.05 361.58 482.10 602.63   723.16   58.65
4 cubic yards  146.20 292.40 438.61 584.81 731.01   877.21   64.24
5 cubic yards  171.89 343.76 515.64 687.51 859.38   1,031.27 69.85
6 cubic yards  197.56 395.10 592.66 790.22 987.78   1,185.32 81.02
8 cubic yards  248.91 497.82 746.73 995.62 1,244.53 1,493.44 80.58
   Note: Add $14.50 customer charge per premise for above scheduled
rates.
Locked access2 10.00  20.00  30.00  40.00  50.00    60.00    2.50
1 Special charge is for each time the container is emptied.
2 Locked access fee is for each time the container is emptied. On a
special service fee, the fee is charged only once.
3 Installation of a 5-cubic yard (or larger) compactor is not permitted
without prior approval of the Commercial Superintendent.
4 Gross weight of container (empty weight of container plus contents)
must not exceed 41,000 pounds.
 
Class 40: Swanson Containers
(Effective August 1, 2024)
Container Size and Ownership Collection Frequency (Per Week) Special 1
                             1 2 3 4 5 6
Class 40: Swanson Containers
(Effective August 1, 2024)
Container Size and Ownership Collection Frequency (Per Week)          Special 1
                             1     2      3      4      5      6
City-owned:                                                
1 cubic yard                 58.24 110.43 162.62 214.80 266.98 319.16 34.13
2 cubic yards                79.03 150.45 221.89 293.31 364.74 436.16 38.56
Customer- owned:                                           
1 cubic yard                 52.19 104.36 156.56 208.74 260.91 313.10 34.13
2 cubic yards                71.43 142.85 214.28 285.71 357.14 428.56 38.56
   Note: Add $14.50 customer charge per premise for above scheduled rates.
Locked access2               10.00 20.00  30.00  40.00  50.00  60.00  2.50
1 Special charge is for each time the container is emptied.
2 Locked access fee is for each time the container is emptied. On a special
service fee, the fee is charged only once.
 
Class 50: Lift-Bins — City-Owned — Hazardous Route
(Effective August 1, 2024)
Container Size Collection Frequency (Per week) Special 1
              1 2 3 4 5 6
Class 50: Lift-Bins — City-Owned — Hazardous Route
(Effective August 1, 2024)
Container Size Collection Frequency (Per week)             Special 1
              1      2      3      4      5      6
1 cubic yard   58.24  110.43 162.62 214.80 266.98 319.16   34.13
2 cubic yards  77.49  148.91 220.34 291.76 363.20 434.62   38.56
3 cubic yards  97.62  188.29 278.95 369.62 460.28 550.96   43.00
4 cubic yards  116.85 226.76 336.68 446.59 556.50 666.40   47.44
5 cubic yards  138.64 267.78 396.94 526.09 655.25 784.39   51.88
6 cubic yards  157.88 306.27 454.67 603.07 751.46 899.86   56.31
8 cubic yards  203.43 390.30 577.19 764.05 950.94 1,137.82 65.21
   Note: Add $14.50 customer charge per premise for above scheduled
rates.
Locked access2 10.00  20.00  30.00  40.00  50.00  60.00    2.50
1 Special charge is for each time the container is emptied.
2 Locked access fee is for each time the container is emptied. On a
special service fee, the fee is charged only once.
 
Class 50: Lift-Bins — Customer-Owned — Hazardous Route
(Effective August 1, 2024)
Container Size Collection Frequency (Per week) Special 1
               1 2 3 4 5 6
Class 50: Lift-Bins — Customer-Owned — Hazardous Route
(Effective August 1, 2024)
Container Size Collection Frequency (Per week)             Special 1
               1      2      3      4      5      6
1 cubic yard   52.19  104.36 156.56 208.74 260.91 313.10   34.13
2 cubic yards  71.43  142.85 214.28 285.71 357.14 428.56   38.56
3 cubic yards  90.67  181.34 272.01 362.68 453.34 544.01   43.00
4 cubic yards  109.90 219.82 329.73 439.65 549.55 659.46   47.44
5 cubic yards  129.16 258.30 387.46 516.61 645.77 774.91   51.88
6 cubic yards  148.40 296.79 445.19 593.59 741.98 890.38   56.31
8 cubic yards  186.89 373.76 560.65 747.52 934.41 1,121.28 65.21
   Note: Add $14.50 customer charge per premise for above scheduled
rates.
Locked access2 10.00  20.00  30.00  40.00  50.00  60.00    2.50
1 Special charge is for each time the container is emptied.
2 Locked access fee is for each time the container is emptied. On a
special service fee, the fee is charged only once.
 
Class 60: Compactor Lift-Bins — Customer Owned — Non-Hazardous
(Effective August 1, 2024)
Container Size Collection Frequency (Per Week) Special 1
               1 2 3 4 5 6
Class 60: Compactor Lift-Bins — Customer Owned — Non-Hazardous
(Effective August 1, 2024)
Container Size Collection Frequency (Per Week)             Special 1
               1      2      3      4      5      6
1 cubic yard   62.06  124.13 186.19 248.25 310.32 372.38   38.50
2 cubic yards  81.33  162.68 244.01 325.33 406.68 488.01   42.95
3 cubic yards  100.60 201.22 301.82 402.42 503.03 603.65   47.40
4 cubic yards  119.88 239.76 359.64 479.51 599.38 719.27   51.84
5 cubic yards  139.15 278.30 417.45 556.59 695.74 834.90   56.28
6 cubic yards  158.41 316.85 475.26 633.69 792.10 950.53   60.73
8 cubic yards  196.96 393.94 590.90 787.86 984.82 1,181.80 69.64
   Note: Add $14.50 customer charge per premise for above scheduled
rates.
Locked access2 10.00  20.00  30.00  40.00  50.00  60.00    2.50
1 Special charge is for each time the container is emptied.
2 Locked access fee is for each time the container is emptied. On a
special service fee, the fee is charged only once.
Notes: 
(1) Installation of a 5-cubic yard (or larger) compactor is not
permitted without the prior approval of the Commercial Superintendent.
(2) Gross weight of container (empty weight of container plus contents)
must not exceed 41,000 lbs.
 
Class 70: Open-Top Drop Box — City Owned – Hauled to Landfill
(Effective August 1, 2024)
Class 70: Open-Top Drop Box — City Owned – Hauled to Landfill
(Effective August 1, 2024)
          Collection Frequency (Per Week) 3                     Every          Monthly
Container                                                       Other  Special Rental
Size      1        2        3        4        5        6        Week   1       Fee 3

30 cubic  1,253.03 2,434.19 3,615.44 4,796.56 5,977.73 7,158.92 662.43 284.93  71.40
yards
   Note: Add $14.50 customer charge per premise for above scheduled rates.
Locked    10.00    20.00    30.00    40.00    50.00    60.00    5.00   2.50     
access2
1 Special charge is for each time the container is emptied.
2 Locked access fee is for each time the container is emptied. On a special service
fee, the fee is charged only once.
3 Rental fee applies to city-owned containers used for specials only, without weekly
or every-other-week service. This is a monthly fee, and will not be pro-rated.
 
Class 70: Open-Top Drop Box — Customer-Owned — Hauled to Landfill
(Effective August 1, 2024)
               Collection Frequency (Per Week) Every
Container Size                                 Other Special 1
               1 2 3 4 5 6                     Week
Class 70: Open-Top Drop Box — Customer-Owned — Hauled to Landfill
(Effective August 1, 2024)
          Collection Frequency (Per Week)                       Every
Container                                                       Other  Special
Size      1        2        3        4        5        6        Week   1

20 cubic  1,058.11 2,116.20 3,174.31 4,232.41 5,290.51 6,348.62 529.05 259.65
yards
22 cubic  1,082.72 2,165.44 3,248.15 4,330.87 5,413.58 6,496.31 541.36 265.32
yards
24 cubic  1,107.33 2,214.67 3,322.00 4,429.33 5,536.67 6,644.00 553.67 271.02
yards
26 cubic  1,131.95 2,263.89 3,395.85 4,527.79 5,659.74 6,791.68 565.98 276.70
yards
28 cubic  1,156.56 2,313.12 3,469.69 4,626.26 5,782.81 6,939.38 578.29 282.38
yards
30 cubic  1,181.18 2,362.36 3,543.53 4,724.71 5,905.89 7,087.07 590.58 288.05
yards
32 cubic  1,205.79 2,411.59 3,617.38 4,823.18 6,028.96 7,234.76 602.90 293.74
yards
34 cubic  1,230.41 2,460.81 3,691.22 4,921.63 6,152.04 7,382.46 615.21 299.42
yards
36 cubic  1,255.02 2,510.05 3,765.07 5,020.10 6,275.13 7,530.14 627.51 305.10
yards
38 cubic  1,279.64 2,559.28 3,838.92 5,118.55 6,398.20 7,677.83 639.83 310.77
yards
40 cubic  1,304.26 2,608.50 3,912.76 5,217.02 6,521.28 7,825.52 652.13 316.45
yards
42 cubic  1,328.87 2,657.74 3,986.61 5,315.49 6,644.35 7,973.22 664.43 322.14
yards
   Note: Add $14.50 customer charge per premise for above scheduled rates.
Locked    10.00    20.00    30.00    40.00    50.00    60.00    5.00   2.50
access2
1 Special charge is for each time the container is emptied.
2 Locked access fee is for each time the container is emptied. On a special
service fee, the fee is charged only once.
 
Class 70: Open-Top Drop Box — City Owned – Not Hauled to Landfill 4
(Effective August 1, 2024)
Class 70: Open-Top Drop Box — City Owned – Not Hauled to Landfill 4
(Effective August 1, 2024)
          Collection Frequency (Per Week)                     Every          Monthly
Container                                                     Other  Special Rental
Size      1      2        3        4        5        6        Week   1       Fee 3

30 cubic  883.80 1,695.74 2,507.69 3,319.64 4,131.59 4,943.55 477.82 199.72  71.40
yards
   Note: Add $14.50 customer charge per premise for above scheduled rates.
Locked    10.00  20.00    30.00    40.00    50.00    60.00    5.00   2.50     
access2
1 Special charge is for each time the container is emptied.
2 Locked access fee is for each time the container is emptied. On a special service
fee, the fee is charged only once.
3 Rental fee applies to city-owned containers used for specials only, without weekly
or every-other-week service. This is a monthly fee, and will not be pro-rated.
4 The “Not Hauled to Landfill” charge applies to loads hauled to locations other
than city landfill.
 
 
Class 70: Open-Top Drop Box — Customer Owned – Not Hauled to Landfill 3
(Effective August 1, 2024)
          Collection Frequency (Per Week)                     Every
Container                                                     Other  Special 1
Sizes     1      2        3        4        5        6        Week

20-50
cubic     811.94 1,623.91 2,435.85 3,247.80 4,059.75 4,871.71 405.97 202.85
yards
   Note: Add $14.50 customer charge per premise for above scheduled rates.
Locked    10.00  20.00    30.00    40.00    50.00    60.00    5.00   2.50
access2
1 Special charge is for each time the container is emptied.
2 Locked access fee is for each time the container is emptied. On a special
service fee, the fee is charged only once.
3 The “Not Hauled to Landfill” charge applies to loads hauled to locations
other than city landfill.
 
Class 80: Roll Off Compactor — Customer-Owned — Hauled to Landfill
(Effective August 1, 2024)
                        Collection Frequency (Per Week) Every
Container Size & Load 3                                 Other  Special 1
                        1 2 3 4 5 6                     Week
Class 80: Roll Off Compactor — Customer-Owned — Hauled to Landfill
(Effective August 1, 2024)
Container Collection Frequency (Per Week)                        Every
Size &                                                           Other  Special
Load 3    1        2        3        4        5        6         Week   1

17 cubic  1,162    2,324    3,487    4,649    5,811    6,974 .38 581.2  283. 78
yards     .40      .79      .19      .59      .98                0
20 cubic  1,223    2,447    3,670    4,894    6,118    7,341 .68 611.8  297. 91
yards     .61      .24      .84      .45      .07                1
22 cubic  1,264    2,528    3,793    5,057    6,322    7,586 .54 632.2  307. 34
yards     .42      .85      .27      .69      .12                2
24 cubic  1,305    2,610    3,915    5,220    6,526    7,831 .41 652.6  316. 75
yards     .23      .47      .70      .95      .18                2
26 cubic  1,346.05 2,692.10 4,038.14 5,384.19 6,730.24 8,076.29  673.02 326.16
yards
28 cubic  1,386.86 2,773.71 4,160.57 5,547.42 6,934.29 8,321.16  693.43 335.58
yards
30 cubic  1,427.67 2,855.34 4,283.00 5,710.68 7,138.34 8,566.02  713.83 345.00
yards
32 cubic  1,468.48 2,936.97 4,405.43 5,873.92 7,342.40 8,810.89  734.24 354.42
yards
34 cubic  1,509.29 3,108.58 4,527.88 6,037.16 7,546.46 9,055.75  754.65 363.84
yards
36 cubic  1,550.10 3,100.21 4,650.31 6,200.41 7,750.51 9,300.62  775.05 373.25
yards
38 cubic  1,590.92 3,181.83 4,772.74 6,363.65 7,954.57 9,545.48  795.46 382.66
yards
40 cubic  1,631.72 3,263.44 4,895.17 6,526.89 8,158.63 9,790.35  815.86 392.09
yards
42 cubic  1,672.53 3,345.07 5,017.61 6,690.15 8,362.68 10,035.22 836.27 401.51
yards
   Note: Add $14.50 customer charge per premise for above scheduled rates.
Locked    10.00    20.00    30.00    40.00    50.00    60.00     5.00    
access2
1 Special charge is for each time the container is emptied.
2 Locked access fee is for each time the container is emptied. On a special
service fee, the fee is charged only once.
3 Gross weight of container (empty weight of container plus contents) must not
exceed 41,000 pounds.
 
 
Class 80: Roll Off Compactor — Customer Owned – Not Hauled to Landfill 4
(Effective August 1, 2024)
Container Collection Frequency (Per Week)                     Every
Size &                                                        Other  Special 1
Load 3    1      2        3        4        5        6        Week

20-50
cubic     815.49 1,631.01 2,446.50 3,262.01 4,077.51 4,893.02 407.75 203.73
yards
   Note: Add $14.50 customer charge per premise for above scheduled rates.
Locked    10.00  20.00    30.00    40.00    50.00    60.00    5.00   2.50
access2
1 Special charge is for each time the container is emptied.
2 Locked access fee is for each time the container is emptied. On a special
service fee, the fee is charged only once.
3 Gross weight of container (empty weight of container plus contents) must not
exceed 41,000 lbs.
4 The “Not Hauled to Landfill” charge applies to loads hauled to locations
other than city landfill.
 
Class 90: City-Owned Lift-Bins
(Effective August 1, 2024)
Container Collection Frequency (Per Week) Special 1
          1 2 3 4 5 6
Class 90: City-Owned Lift-Bins
(Effective August 1, 2024)
Container      Collection Frequency (Per Week)           Special 1
               1      2      3      4      5      6
1 cubic yard   47.60  89.29  130.99 172.67 214.37 256.06 30.03
2 cubic yards  62.32  118.71 175.12 231.54 287.94 344.35 33.43
3 cubic yards  77.88  149.01 220.12 291.25 362.37 433.49 36.83
4 cubic yards  92.60  178.43 264.27 350.10 435.94 521.77 40.22
5 cubic yards  109.79 210.34 310.88 411.43 511.98 612.52 43.62
6 cubic yards  124.50 239.76 355.02 470.28 585.54 700.80 47.01
8 cubic yards  160.80 305.48 450.18 594.87 739.55 884.24 53.80
   Note: Add $14.50 customer charge per premise for above scheduled
rates.
Locked access2 10.00  20.00  30.00  40.00  50.00  60.00  2.50
1 Special charge is for each time the container is emptied.
2 Locked access fee is for each time the container is emptied. On a
special service fee, the fee is charged only once.
 
Class 90: Customer-Owned Lift-Bins
(Effective August 1, 2024)
Container Collection Frequency (Per Week) Special 1
          1 2 3 4 5 6
Class 90: Customer-Owned Lift-Bins
(Effective August 1, 2024)
Container      Collection Frequency (Per Week)           Special 1
               1      2      3      4      5      6
1 cubic yard   41.70  83.38  125.08 166.77 208.46 250.16 30.03
2 cubic yards  56.41  112.81 169.22 225.62 282.03 338.44 33.43
3 cubic yards  71.13  142.24 213.36 284.48 355.60 426.72 36.82
4 cubic yards  85.83  171.68 257.50 343.34 429.17 515.00 40.22
5 cubic yards  100.55 201.10 301.64 402.19 502.74 603.29 43.62
6 cubic yards  115.27 230.52 345.79 461.04 576.31 691.56 47.01
8 cubic yards  144.69 289.37 434.07 578.76 723.45 868.13 53.80
   Note: Add $14.50 customer charge per premise for above scheduled
rates.
Locked access2 10.00  20.00  30.00  40.00  50.00  60.00  2.50
1 Special charge is for each time the container is emptied.
2 Locked access fee is for each time the container is emptied. On a
special service fee, the fee is charged only once.
 
Class 50R: City-Owned Lift-Bins – Commercial Recycling Rates
(Effective August 1, 2024)
Container Collection Frequency (Per Week) Special 1
          1 2 3 4 5 6
Class 50R: City-Owned Lift-Bins – Commercial Recycling Rates
(Effective August 1, 2024)
Container      Collection Frequency (Per Week)          Special 1
               1     2      3      4      5      6
2 cubic yards  31.15 59.36  87.56  115.76 143.98 172.18 16.72
4 cubic yards  46.31 89.22  132.13 175.06 217.98 260.88 20.11
6 cubic yards  62.24 119.89 177.51 235.14 292.77 350.41 23.51
8 cubic yards  80.41 152.74 225.09 297.43 369.78 442.12 26.90
Locked access2 10.00 20.00  30.00  40.00  50.00  60.00  2.50
1 Special charge is for each time the container is emptied.
2 Locked access fee is for each time the container is emptied. On a
special service fee, the fee is charged only once.
 
   SUPPLEMENTAL FEES
   (eff. June 30, 2010)
Locked access   See rate schedule for each individual class.
Special service   For customers with accounts. See rate schedule for each
individual class.
Equipment      Automated Side Load Truck: $29.20 per hour
Charges         Bus (40 passenger): $6.40 per hour
            Dump Truck (2.5 Ton): $2.44 per hour
            Front Load Truck: $27.66 per hour
            Rear Load Truck: $22.65 per hour
            Riding Mower: $1.50 per hour
            Roll-off Truck: $21.55 per hour
            Street Sweeper: $19.99 per hour
            Tandem Truck (2.5 Ton): $6.40 per hour
            Tractor (Medium & Heavy Duty): $5.14 per hour
            Van (15 passenger): $4.11 per hour
City Staff         Clean City Operator: $26.22 per hour
Charges         Commercial Collection Driver: $27.80 per hour
            Contract Temporary Worker: $10.44 per hour
            Welder: $29.61 per hour
Relocation of bin   $27.73 (flat rate per bin)
Open-top roll-off container   Rental per day - $2.27
             Pick-up and delivery (each) - $74.50
            Service fee - see rate schedule
Container Supplies         Lid:   $21.90 per lid for 2 yard
               $25.99 per lid for 4/6/8 yard
            Caster: $14.16 per caster
      Note:
      A.   Schedule for regular truck route if possible.
      B.   Relocation of bin and open-top pick up and delivery fees include
staff charges.
      C.   See commercial rate schedule for charge according to bin size.
      D.   City Staff Charges will be added to equipment charges and container
supplies.
   DISPOSAL FEES
   (eff. June 30, 2010)
Landfill tipping fee:
   0 – 500 lbs = $7.50
   501 – 1,000 lbs = $14.99
1,001 – 1,500 lbs = $22.48
1,501 - 2,000 lbs = $30.00
Landfill special burial:
   $39.86 per ton
Landfill contaminated soils:
   Total Petroleum hydrocarbon of 1,000 ppm or less: $26.25 per ton
   Total Petroleum hydrocarbon of 15,000 ppm or less: $31.50 per ton
   Total Petroleum hydrocarbon of 15,000 ppm or more: $47.25 per ton
Landfill tire disposal:
   $222.86 per ton
Convenience center commercial:
   $5.00 per load (plus tax)
Convenience center residential:
   $5.00 per load (plus tax) per each individual
Residential uncovered and/or unsecured load:
   An additional $5.54 per vehicle.
Commercial uncovered and/or unsecured load:
   An additional $5.54 per vehicle.
(Ord. 27-1992; Am. Ord. 12-1994; Am. Ord. 13-1996; Am. Ord. 12- 1998; Am. Ord.
22-1998; Am. Ord. 18-2000; Am. Ord. 18-2001; Am. Ord. 28-2003; Am. Ord. 26-
2004; Am. Ord. 15-2006; Am. Ord. 6-2010; Am. Ord._2014-013; Am. Ord._2019-010;
Am. Ord._2020-041; Am. Ord._2022-025)
PART 2: ALBUQUERQUE/BERNALILLO COUNTY
REGIONAL LANDFILL
§ 9-10-2-1 PURPOSE.
   The purpose of §§
9-10-2-1 et seq. is to protect the public health, safety and welfare by
providing minimum standards for the establishment and operation of the
Albuquerque/Bernalillo County Regional Landfill.
('74 Code, § 6-29-1) (Ord. 42-1989; Am. Ord. 17-2005)
§ 9-10-2-2 OPERATION AND MONITORING OF PUBLIC LANDFILLS.
   (A)   The Solid Waste Management Regulations adopted by the New Mexico
Environmental Improvement Board pursuant to Section 74-1-8A(3) NMSA 1978 of the
New Mexico Environmental Improvement Act, and any regulations adopted by the
city and the county, shall be the minimum standards for the establishment and
operation of public landfills.
   (B)   Landfills owned by the city and/or the county and operated by the city
shall utilize all available appropriate technologies now existing and
technologies which become available in the future, to minimize the impact of
landfill operations on surrounding property, groundwater and the environment.
In the normal course of its operations, the City Solid Waste Management
Department shall evaluate the availability of such appropriate technologies.
('74 Code, § 6-29-2) (Ord. 42-1989; Am. Ord. 17-2005)
§ 9-10-2-3 STAFF ASSISTANCE AND FUNDING.
   Staff assistance and funding for administration and enforcement of §§
9-10-2-1 et seq. shall be provided through the regular budgeting process of the
City Solid Waste Management Department.
('74 Code, § 6-29-5) (Ord. 42-1989)
PART 3: [RESERVED]
PART 4: COMPUTER RECYCLING
§ 9-10-4-1 SHORT TITLE.
   Sections
9-10-4-1 through
9-10-4-3 may be cited as the "Computer Recycling Ordinance".
(Ord. 59-2004)
§ 9-10-4-2 PURPOSE.
   The purpose of the Computer Recycling Ordinance is to:
   (A)   Address the technology explosion that created an exponential increase
in computer hardware containing dangerous substances such as lead, mercury and
PCB's that can pollute air and water;
   (B)   Recycle used and nonfunctioning computer hardware that draws down
landfill space when disposed of in that manner and to prevent the release of
heavy metals and PCB's that could pose environmental and health risks in
landfills;
   (C)   Facilitate a collection effort of computer hardware in conjunction
with the private sector to ship, dismantle and salvage parts at minimal cost to
the city; and
   (D)   Access the market of providers of varying services in the computer
hardware recycling industry that provide low cost or free computers to schools
and charities and can be a source of job training for computer skills and
computer certifications.
(Ord. 59-2004)
§ 9-10-4-3 COMPUTER HARDWARE-RECYCLING.
   (A)   The Solid Waste Management Department shall accept or shall contract
with an appropriate entity to accept all computer hardware for recycling. The
Solid Waste Management Department shall also coordinate with the Family and
Community Services Department to contract with available educational and
community programs engaged in computer hardware recycling. The Solid Waste
Management Department shall coordinate with the Environmental Health Department
to insure that it receives the necessary technical support.
   (B)   The Director of the Solid Waste Management Department shall promulgate
regulations to implement this program. The Department may charge a reasonable
and sufficient fee to recycle computer hardware.
   (C)   The Director of the Solid Waste Management Department shall provide
information to the public to encourage the recycling of computer hardware.
   (D)   For the purposes of the Computer Recycling Ordinance, "computer
hardware" means computer monitors, computer hard drives, speakers and printers.
(Ord. 59-2004)
§ 9-10-4-4 TEMPORARY PROVISION.
   (A)   The Solid Waste Department shall issue a Request for Information to
gauge the market as to scope and availability of service providers, the extent
of the recycling market, potential issues, costs, financing and risk for
providing or not providing a computer hardware recycling program. The Request
for Information shall be issued, responses reviewed and an approach developed
no later than 90 days after the enactment of the Computer Recycling Ordinance.
   (B)   The request for proposal process, to include initiation of a service
contract, shall occur six months after the enactment of the Computer Recycling
Ordinance.
   (C)   The Solid Waste Department shall report to the Council on the Computer
Recycling Ordinance six months after the enactment of the Computer Recycling
Ordinance.
(Ord. 59-2004)
ARTICLE 11: TOBACCO PRODUCTS
Section
Part 1: Tobacco Products
   
9-11-1-1   Findings
   
9-11-1-2   Short title
   
9-11-1-3   Definitions
   
9-11-1-4   Tobacco control
   
9-11-1-5   Display of signs
   
9-11-1-6   Prohibited sales; regulation of the manner of sale and distribution
of tobacco products
   
9-11-1-7   Reports
 
   
9-11-1-99   Penalty
Part 2: Vapor Products
   
9-11-2-1   Short title
   
9-11-2-2   Purpose
   
9-11-2-3   Definitions
   
9-11-2-4   Violation
Part 3: Intoxicating Hemp
   
9-11-3-1   Findings
   
9-11-3-2   Short title
   
9-11-3-3   Definitions
   
9-11-3-4   Prohibited sales and distribution
   
9-11-3-5   Enforcement
   
9-11-3-6   Signage and education
PART 1: TOBACCO PRODUCTS
§ 9-11-1-1 FINDINGS.
   The City Council finds that:
   (A)   Approximately 434,000 Americans die each year of diseases caused by
cigarette smoking;
   (B)   The Surgeon General of the Public Health Service has determined that
smoking is the leading cause of preventable death in this country;
   (C)   Nicotine in tobacco has been found by the 1988 report of the Surgeon
General, “The Health Consequences of Smoking: Nicotine Addiction,” to be a
powerfully addictive drug, and it is therefore important to prevent young
people from using nicotine until they are mature and capable of making an
informed and rational decision;
   (D)   Most adults who smoke wish to quit, a majority of current adult
smokers have tried to quit without success, and one-half of all teenagers who
have been smoking for five years or more have made at least one serious but
unsuccessful attempt to quit;
   (E)   Every day more than 3,000 minors begin smoking; one-half of smokers
begin before the age of 18, and 90% begin before the age of 21;
   (F)   Minors spent more than $1,000,000,000 on cigarettes and other tobacco
products every year; and
   (G)   The city can adopt legislation on regulating the sale and distribution
of tobacco products pursuant to the authority set forth in Article I of the
Charter of the City of Albuquerque and Article X, Section 6 of the Constitution
of the State of New Mexico.
   (H)   One third (33%) of New Mexico students have smoked cigarettes in the
past month; and
   (I)   In Albuquerque, the non-compliance rate of merchants (merchants
selling tobacco to minors) is 23%; and
   (J)   The Surgeon General, the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services,
and the Institute of Medicine have concluded that youth access to tobacco
products, especially illegal tobacco sales to minors by retail outlets, is a
major contributing factor to tobacco initiation, use and addiction among
children and adolescents; and
   (K)   The Surgeon General, the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services,
and local public health agencies and private health organizations have found
that cigarettes and other tobacco products are easily available to minors from
retail outlets which sell tobacco products. Therefore, strong legislative
action and enforcement are necessary to curtail the wide availability of
tobacco products to minors from retail sales; and
   (L)   Present methods of prohibiting tobacco sales and distribution to
minors have proven ineffective in preventing tobacco sales and distribution to
minors; and
   (M)   It is in the public interest to regulate the manner of sale and
distribution of tobacco products in order to promote retailer compliance with
the state Tobacco Products Act prohibiting tobacco sales to minors, and to
promote the health, safety and welfare of the residents of Albuquerque under
eighteen years of age.
('74 Code, § 6-31-1) (Ord. 40-1991; Am. Ord. 28-1998)
§ 9-11-1-2 SHORT TITLE.
   This article may be cited as the “Tobacco Products Ordinance.”
('74 Code, § 6-31-2) (Ord. 40-1991; Am. Ord. 28-1998)
§ 9-11-1-3 DEFINITIONS.
   As used in this section, unless the context otherwise requires:
   MAYOR. The Mayor or his designated representative.
   PERSON. Any individual, partnership, firm or corporation and indicates
either of the above in both the singular and the plural.
   SELF-SERVICE MERCHANDISING. The open display of tobacco products that the
public has access to without the intervention of a store employee.
   TOBACCO PRODUCT . Any tobacco cigarette, cigar, pipe tobacco, smokeless
tobacco, snuff or any other form of tobacco which may be utilized for smoking,
chewing, inhalation or other manner of ingestion.
   VENDOR-ASSISTED. Only a store employee has access to the tobacco products
and assists the customer by supplying the product. The customer does not take
possession of the product until it is purchased.
('74 Code, § 6-31-3) (Ord. 40-1991; Am. Ord. 28-1998)
§ 9-11-1-4 TOBACCO CONTROL.
   (A)   The Fire Marshal's Office of the Albuquerque Fire Department shall be
the lead agency coordinating the efforts of other city departments to ensure
the following:
      (1)   (a)   Provision of signs shall be the responsibility of persons
authorized to sell tobacco products under the provisions of this article.
         (b)   The signs shall be in accordance with the state Tobacco Products
Act, Sections 30-49-1 to 30-49-12 NMSA 1978.
         (c)   The signs shall include the following statements written in red
lettering:
            (1)   'A PERSON LESS THAN 18 YEARS OF AGE WHO PURCHASES A TOBACCO
PRODUCT IS SUBJECT TO A FINE OF UP TO $1000.'
            (2)   'A PERSON WHO SELLS A TOBACCO PRODUCT TO A PERSON LESS THAN
18 YEARS OF AGE IS SUBJECT TO A FINE OF UP TO $1000.'
      (2)   Investigation and enforcement of the provisions of this article.
   (B)   The Environmental Health Department, the Albuquerque Police
Department, and Zoning Enforcement shall assist and cooperate with the Fire
Marshal's Office in the enforcement of this article.
   (C)   The Mayor, or the Mayor's designated agents, may issue citations for
violations of the provisions contained herein in order to enforce this article.
('74 Code, § 6-31-4) (Ord. 40-1991; Am. Ord. 28-1998)
§ 9-11-1-5 DISPLAY OF SIGNS.
   A person shall display prominently in the immediate area at each place at
which tobacco products are sold a sign that meets the requirements of this
article and the state Tobacco Products Act.
('74 Code, § 6-31-5) (Ord. 40-1991; Am. Ord. 28-1998)
§ 9-11-1-6 PROHIBITED SALES; REGULATION OF THE MANNER OF SALE AND DISTRIBUTION
OF TOBACCO PRODUCTS.
   (A)   Prohibition on Sale or Distribution to Individuals Under the Age of 18
and in Certain Other Cases. A person or an employee or agent of that person
shall not sell or distribute a tobacco product :
      (1)   To any individual that the employer, employee, or agent knows is
under 18 years of age;
      (2)   To any individual (other than an individual who appears without
reasonable doubt to be over 18 years of age) who does not present a driver's
license or other generally accepted means of identification that describes the
individual as 18 years of age or older, contains a likeness of the individual
and appears on its face to be valid;
   (B)   Prohibition on Self-Service Tobacco Merchandising.
      (1)   No person who owns, operates or manages a business where tobacco
products are sold, nor any person who sells or offers for sale tobacco
products, shall sell, permit to be sold, offer for sale, display for sale, or
store any tobacco product by means of self-service merchandising.
      (2)   No person who owns, operates or manages a business where tobacco
products are sold, nor any person who sells or offers for sale tobacco
products, shall sell, permit to be sold, offer for sale, display for sale, or
store any tobacco product by means other than vendor-assisted sales.
      (3)   A person is exempt from the requirements of this section if both:
         (a)   The business where tobacco products are sold prohibits entry of
individuals under the age of 18 at all times unless accompanied by an adult;
and
         (b)   Photographic identification is required from any individual who
appears to be under 27 years of age.
      (4)   The sale of tobacco products in any form other than an original
factory-wrapped package is prohibited.
   (C)   Prohibition on Maintaining Vending Machines. A person or an employee
or agent of that person shall not maintain any device that automatically
dispenses tobacco products, except in certain places.
      (1)   Tobacco products may be sold at retail through vending machines
only:
         (a)   Where the machine is in an area not open to the general public,
included but not limited to the controlled area of factories, businesses, and
offices;
         (b)   In places to which persons under the age of 18 are not permitted
access without a parent or guardian; and
         (c)   In places where alcoholic beverages are offered for sale for
consumption on the premise.
      (2)   An owner of a device which violates this division (C) shall remove
said device within three months of the effective date of this article.
   (D)   Sampling. It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in
distributing free samples of a tobacco product in or on any public street,
sidewalk, or park, within 500 feet of any youth center or youth activities.
('74 Code, § 6-31-6) (Ord. 40-1991; Am. Ord. 28-1998)
§ 9-11-1-7 REPORTS.
   The Fire Marshal's Office shall prepare and submit a quarterly report to the
City Council detailing the enforcement outlined in this article.
('74 Code, § 6-31-8) (Ord. 40-1991)
§ 9-11-1-99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Nature and Size of Penalties. Violation of this article is a petty
misdemeanor subject to the following penalties:
      (1)   Any employer that violates a requirement of §
9-11-1-5 shall be subject to a fine of not more than $100.
      (2)   Any employer, employee or agent that violates a prohibition of §
9-11-1-6 above shall each be subject to:
         (a)   A fine of $100 for the first violation within a two-year period;
         (b)   A fine of $300 for the second violation within a two-year
period;
         (c)   A fine of $500 for the third violation within a two-year period;
and
         (d)   A fine of $500 for any additional violation within a two-year
period.
   (B)   Records of Fines Imposed. The Mayor shall keep records of any fines
imposed under division (A)(2) of this section.
('74 Code, § 6-31-7) (Ord. 40-1991; Am. Ord. 28-1998)
PART 2: VAPOR PRODUCTS
§ 9-11-2-1 SHORT TITLE.
   This part shall be known and may be cited as the “Sale of Vapor Products to
Children Ordinance.”
(Ord._2014-001)
§ 9-11-2-2 PURPOSE.
   The use of vapor products has doubled among middle and high school students
from 2011 to 2012. A survey by the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
found that about one in ten high school students admitted to using vapor
products. The city can implement protections faster than the state or federal
government. The city can adapt more quickly to changes to the products that the
manufacturers or vendors may make to take their products outside the scope of
this ordinance. Council finds it is reasonable to conclude that the use of
vapor products is a gateway to the use of tobacco products which are extremely
detrimental to the health of all persons, particularly children.
(Ord._2014-001)
§ 9-11-2-3 DEFINITIONS.
   As used in §§
9-11-2-1 et seq., unless the context otherwise requires:
   CHILD or CHILDREN. Persons under 18 years of age. The singular and plural
shall include one another.
   ELECTRONIC SMOKING DEVICE. Any product or device containing or delivering
nicotine or any other similar substance intended for human consumption that can
be used by a person to simulate smoking through inhalation of vapor, vapor
product or aerosol. ELECTRONIC SMOKING DEVICE includes any component part of
such product or device whether or not sold separately, including but not
limited to vapor products. ELECTRONIC SMOKING DEVICE does not include any
product that has been approved by the United States Food and Drug
Administration for sale as a tobacco cessation product and is being marketed
and sold solely for the approved purpose.
   VAPOR PRODUCT. Any product or substance that contains nicotine or a similar
substance, and is intended for human consumption or is likely to be consumed
using an electronic smoking device. VAPOR PRODUCT does not include any product
specifically approved by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration for sale as a
tobacco cessation product that is being marketed and sold solely for the
approved purpose.
(Ord._2014-001)
§ 9-11-2-4 VIOLATION.
   It is a crime punishable pursuant to §
1-1-99 of this code of ordinances for any person or entity to sell, offer to
sell, barter or give any electronic smoking device or vapor product to any
child in the city limits of the City of Albuquerque.
(Ord._2014-001)
PART 3: INTOXICATING HEMP
§ 9-11-3-1 FINDINGS.
   The City Council finds that:
   (A)   The unregulated sale of intoxicating hemp-derived products, such as
Delta-8 THC, Delta-10 THC and THC-A, poses significant risks to public health,
safety, and welfare.
   (B)   Intoxicating cannabinoids derived from hemp can mimic the effects of
controlled substances and contribute to the abuse of controlled substances
within the community.
   (C)   Federal law permits the sale of hemp-derived cannabinoids that contain
less than 0.3% Delta-9 THC but does not adequately regulate the conversion of
hemp into intoxicating products, creating a ‘derivatives loophole.’
   (D)   Young people are particularly vulnerable to the marketing and sale of
intoxicating hemp products, which are often indistinguishable from legal,
nonintoxicating hemp products and are not subject to the same marketing
scrutiny as those in the regulated recreational and medical cannabis market.
   (E)   It is in the public interest to regulate the sale and distribution of
intoxicating hemp products to ensure public safety, discourage misuse, and
promote compliance with existing laws.
   (F)   The New Mexico Cannabis Regulation Act does not comprehensively
address the use, tracking, or testing of intoxicating hemp products intended
for sale within the State’s recreational and medical cannabis market.
(Ord._2025-019)
§ 9-11-3-2 SHORT TITLE.
   This article may be cited as the “Intoxicating Hemp Products Ordinance.”
(Ord._2025-019)
§ 9-11-3-3 DEFINITIONS.
   As used in this section, unless the context otherwise requires:
   (A)   ADVERTISE. To publish or disseminate an Advertisement.
   (B)   ADVERTISEMENT. Any written or verbal statement, illustration, or
depiction that a reasonable person would understand as intended to induce
sales, including any written, printed, graphic, or other material; billboard,
sign, or other outdoor, digital, indoor, or point-of-sale display, including,
without limitation, an individual carrying a display; other periodical,
literature, or publication; or any similar media.
   (C)   CANNABINOIDS. Structured chemical compounds found in cannabis plants,
including both THC and CBD.
   (D)   CANNABIDIOL (CBD). A type of substance identified using CAS Common
Chemistry Registry Number 13956-29-1, including cannabidiolic acid.
   (E)   INDUSTRIAL HEMP or HEMP means the plant cannabis sativa L. and any
part of that plant, including seeds and all derivatives, extracts,
cannabinoids, isomers, acids, salts and salts of isomers, whether growing or
not, with a THC concentration of not more than three-tenths percent on a dry
weight basis.
   (F)   OFFER FOR SALE. The solicitation, advertisement, allowance,
inducement, or any other method or attempt to encourage any person to acquire,
possess, sell, purchase, or exchange a product. There is a rebuttable
presumption that a product is for sale if it is located with other products
offered for sale.
   (G)   PERSON. Any individual, partnership, firm, or corporation.
   (H)   SEMI-SYNTHETIC CANNABINOID. A substance that is created by a chemical
reaction that converts one cannabinoid extracted from a cannabis plant directly
into a different cannabinoid. Semi-synthetic cannabinoids do not include
cannabinoids produced via decarboxylation of naturally occurring acidic forms
of cannabinoids, such as THCA, into the corresponding neutral cannabinoid, such
as THC, through the use of heat or light, without the use of chemical reagents
or catalysts, and that results in no other chemical change.
   (I)   SYNTHETIC CANNABINOID. A cannabinoid-like compound that was produced
by using chemical synthesis, chemical modification, or chemical conversion.
      (1)   Synthetic cannabinoid does not include:
         (a)   A compound produced through the decarboxylation of naturally
occurring cannabinoids from their acidic forms; or
         (b)   A semi-synthetic cannabinoid.
   (J)   TETRAHYDROCANNABINOL (THC) or THC OR COMPARABLE CANNABINOID. Delta-
9 tetrahydrocannabinol (CAS number 1972-08-3) as measured using a post-
decarboxylation method and based on percentage dry weight.
(Ord._2025-019)
§ 9-11-3-4 PROHIBITED SALES AND DISTRIBUTION.
   (A)   It is unlawful for any person to maintain or operate any business in
which, for the benefit of the business, hemp is chemically or synthetically
altered to have a concentration of more than 0.3 percent of
tetrahydrocannabinol.
   (B)   It is unlawful for a person, or business, to sell, advertise, offer to
sale, or manufacture any synthetically derived cannabinoid product that
contains tetrahydrocannabinol or comparable cannabinoid concentrations of more
than 0.3 percent.
   (C)   Notwithstanding the foregoing, nothing herein shall prohibit a
manufacturer from manufacturing any bulk ingredients containing hemp,
regardless of concentration, so long as such ingredients do not contain
synthetically derived cannabinoids and such ingredients are not for consumer
use or retail distribution. For the avoidance of doubt, any finished goods
containing hemp and sold to consumers or available in retail distribution in
the City shall be in accordance with this Ordinance.
(Ord._2025-019)
§ 9-11-3-5 ENFORCEMENT.
   (A)   The Albuquerque Police Department, Environmental Health Department,
and other designated agencies shall enforce this Ordinance.
   (B)   Violations of this Ordinance shall constitute a petty misdemeanor
subject to the penalty provisions in 1-1-99.
   (C)   Businesses found in violation may have their operating licenses
revoked.
(Ord._2025-019)
§ 9-11-3-6 SIGNAGE AND EDUCATION.
   (A)   Licensed businesses selling non-intoxicating hemp products must
display signage stating, “Sale of intoxicating hemp products is prohibited
under Albuquerque law.”
   (B)   The City will provide educational materials to retailers and the
public regarding the risks associated with intoxicating hemp products.
(Ord._2025-019)
ARTICLE 12: POLLEN CONTROL
Section
   
9-12-1   Short title
   
9-12-2   Legislative findings
   
9-12-3   Intent
   
9-12-4   Definitions
   
9-12-5   Regulated trees
   
9-12-6   Process
   
9-12-7   Prohibited activities
   
9-12-8   Administration
   
9-12-9   Compliance/enforcement
 
   
9-12-99   Penalty
§ 9-12-1 SHORT TITLE.
   This article may be cited as the “Albuquerque Pollen Control Ordinance.”
(Ord. 34-1994)
§ 9-12-2 LEGISLATIVE FINDINGS.
   (A)   The Council finds that there is sufficient information to believe that
certain trees and shrubs produce allergens that adversely impact the health and
well-being of many of its residents, and that actions to reduce the production
of these harmful allergens are therefore appropriate.
   (B)   The Council further finds that many residents desire to reduce their
consumption of water for landscaping, and that all trees and shrubs should also
be labeled as to the approximate level of water requirements.
   (C)   The Council further finds that there is sufficient clinical and
statistical evidence that the Albuquerque regional area has serious health
problems from allergies due to airborne tree pollens which affect a substantial
proportion of the population; and that many people in all age groups regardless
of their health condition may be at considerable risk of developing such
allergies from airborne tree pollens as their concentrations increase in our
environmental conditions; and that therefore actions to reduce the production
of these pollens which cause the greatest health problems are essential.
   (D)   The Council further finds that it is essential to provide the city
with adequate pollen counting and measurement for various facilities and sites
as identified by the Mayor, and issue periodic health advisories.
(Ord. 34-1994; Am. Ord. 45-1996)
§ 9-12-3 INTENT.
   (A)   This article is intended to require labeling information that will
enable residents to make knowledgeable and informed decisions about planting
certain trees and shrubs insofar as their potential for allergen production and
water requirements. This should assist in accomplishing the further intent of
this article of discouraging the planting of those trees and shrubs which
create the greatest pollen health problems and which excessively consume scarce
city water.
   (B)   It is further intended that adequate sampling and measuring of the
pollen content of the air within the city shall occur on an appropriate
periodic basis utilizing state-of-the-art measuring equipment.
   (C)   It is further intended that the sale and purchase of those wind-
pollinated trees of certain genera, species or cultivars/varieties, known to
produce aeroallergens at serious public health levels shall be prohibited.
   (D)   It is further intended that the city utilize appropriate resources to
provide public education that promotes community awareness on the issue of tree
pollen.
   (E)   It is further intended that the city shall determine the relative
numbers of wind pollinated trees of selected genera by means of inventory and
survey of public and private landscaping within the city, excluding the bosque,
as follows:
      (1)   Public Property. Trees on public property shall be inventoried by
the City Forester.
      (2)   Private Property.  Tree numbers on private property shall be
determined by means of a scientifically designed and statistically valid survey
managed by the city.
Results of the inventory and survey shall be provided by the Mayor and Council
every five years.
(Ord. 34-1994; Am. Ord. 45-1996; Am. Ord. 40-2004)
§ 9-12-4 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this article, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   AEROALLERGENS. Airborne or air transported particles or agents which induce
allergic reactions or responses.
   ALLERGIC REACTION. Altered body reaction or response to an antigen,
production of antibody.
   CITY. Areas within the city limits of Albuquerque presently or which are
annexed in the future.
   COMMERCIAL GROWER. Person or business which cultivates plants for wholesale
or retail sale.
   COMMERCIAL GROWING. Growing or propagation of plants for wholesale or retail
sale.
   COTTONLESS. Male sex of a variety, species or cultivar of the genus Populus
which does not produce seed covered with hairs or cotton.
   DIOECIOUS. Having male and female reproductive structures on separate
plants.
   DIRECTOR. The Director of the Environmental Health Department.
   FRUITLESS. Male sex of a variety species or cultivar which does not produce
seeds or fruit.
   MALE. Male or pollen producing member of a species either naturally
unisexual or horticulturally developed or propagated.
   MAYOR. Mayor, or Chief Administrative Officer of the City of Albuquerque.
   MONOECIOUS. Having male and female reproductive structures on the same
plant.
   PERSON. Any individual, company, firm, corporation, association, group,
political subdivision or their agents, legal representatives or assigns.
   PLANTING. Placing or putting a plant in the ground for growth.
   POLLEN. Male reproductive cell produced by the anther of the flowering
structure of higher plants whether monoecious or dioecious.
   REGULATED CULTIVAR. Species or variety developed and maintained under
cultivation and for which planting, growing or sale is restricted.
   REGULATED GENERA. Genus of plants which one or more of its species having
restriction on planting, growing or sale.
   TREES AND SHRUBS. Single- or multi-stemmed woody plants of indeterminate
height.
(Ord. 34-1994; Am. Ord. 45-1996)
§ 9-12-5 REGULATED TREES.
   (A)   Regulated genera, species, cultivars or varieties for which growing,
sale, importation or planting is prohibited include the following:
      (1)   Genus Cupressus—Cypress—all members.
      (2)   Genus Juniperus—"Juniper" a/k/a "Cedar".
         (a)   Male members of the species, cultivars or varieties.
      (3)   Genus Morus—"Mulberry"—all.
      (4)   Genus Populus—Cottonwoods and poplars—All species, varieties or
cultivars of the genus excepting P. fremontii var. Wizlizenii "Rio Grande"
Cottonwood and P. tremuloides "Quaking Aspen," and P. acuminata, "Lance leaf or
Mountain Cottonwood" providing that each of the named species of tree sold is
labeled as high pollen/high allergen potential.
      (5)   Genus Ulmus – "Elm" – all members except those listed in divisions
(B) and (C).
   (B)   The following genera and species of wind pollinated trees may be sold
and planted in the city provided that they are identified as high pollen/high
allergen potential by means of individual labels.
      (1)   Platanus—"Sycamore"—London Plane Tree.
      (2)   Fraxinus—"Ash".
      (3)   Chinese elm - ulmus parvifolia.
   (C)   The following species of non-flowering and non-pollen producing trees
may be sold and planted in the city:
         (a)   ulmus Americana – ascendens;
         (b)   ulmus glabra – horizontals;
         (c)   ulmus minor – gracilis; and
         (d)   any other non-flowering trees.
(Ord. 34-1994; Am. Ord. 45-1996; Am. Ord. 40-2004; Am. Ord. 56-2004)
§ 9-12-6 PROCESS.
   All suppliers and sellers, both retail and/or wholesale, are prohibited from
selling the trees listed in §
9-12-5 above.
(Ord. 34-1994; Am. Ord. 45-1996)
§ 9-12-7 PROHIBITED ACTIVITIES.
   (A)   Growing prohibited. After the effective date of this article
commercial growing of regulated tree genera, species, cultivars or varieties
within the city is prohibited.
   (B)   Importation prohibited. After the effective date of this article
importation of regulated tree genera, species, cultivars or varieties into the
city for growing, sale or planting is prohibited.
   (C)   Sale prohibited. After the effective date of this article wholesale or
retail sale of regulated tree genera, species, cultivars or varieties within
the city is prohibited.
   (D)   Planting prohibited. After the effective date of this article the
planting of regulated genera, cultivars or varieties within the city is
prohibited.
(Ord. 45-1996)
§ 9-12-8 ADMINISTRATION.
   (A)   The Mayor shall be responsible for the enforcement of this article and
may prescribe possible procedures or regulations to carry out the intent and
purposes of this article.
   (B)   The Mayor may grant a variance to provisions of this article according
to the criteria listed herein. Any request for variance shall name the genus,
species and/or variety, number of plants, location(s), the scientific,
historical, cultural or architectural purpose that would be served.
(Ord. 34-1994; Am. Ord. 45-1996; Am. Ord. 40-2004)
§ 9-12-9 COMPLIANCE/ENFORCEMENT.
   (A)   The Mayor or the City Forester is authorized to make such inspections
as may be necessary to enforce this article, and no person shall impede or
interfere with inspections made hereunder. The Mayor or the City Forester,
after proper identification, shall be permitted to enter, at any reasonable
time, business premises where trees covered by this article are sold within the
city for the purpose of making inspections to determine compliance with this
article.
   (B)   Upon notification of violation by the City Forester, the offender
shall have seven calendar days to remove or legally dispose of the trees found
in violation. Failure to comply after seven days will result in further
enforcement action.
(Ord. 34-1994; Am. Ord. 45-1996; Am. Ord. 40-2004)
§ 9-12-99 PENALTY.
   Any person who violates any of the provisions of this article shall be
deemed guilty of a petty misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be
punished by a fine not to exceed $500.
(Ord. 34-1994; Am. Ord. 45-1996)
ARTICLE 13: SMOKE DETECTORS
Section
   
9-13-1    Short title
   
9-13-2    Intent
   
9-13-3    Definition
   
9-13-4    Installation required
   
9-13-5    Notification of requirements
   
9-13-6    Enforcement
§ 9-13-1 SHORT TITLE.
   This article shall be known and cited as the "Allan Peifer Smoke Detector
Ordinance".
(Ord. 9-1998)
§ 9-13-2 INTENT.
   This article is intended to promote the general health, safety and welfare
of the people of the city who lease their dwelling units from lessors, by
requiring the installation of smoke detectors in all leased dwelling units and
the maintenance of such detectors to provide sufficient warning of a fire to
enable the occupants to escape.
(Ord. 9-1998)
§ 9-13-3 DEFINITION.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definition shall apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   DWELLING UNIT. A dwelling unit is any building or portion thereof which
contains living facilities, including provisions for sleeping, eating, cooking
and sanitation, as required by the Uniform Housing Code,
Chapter 14, Article 3, ROA 1994, for not more than one family.
(Ord. 9-1998)
§ 9-13-4 INSTALLATION REQUIRED.
   A smoke detector or detectors shall be installed in all dwelling units that
are occupied by persons who are leasing or renting the dwelling unit from an
owner or lessor. It shall be the responsibility of the owner of the property
and the lessor of the dwelling unit to install the smoke detector(s). The owner
or lessor shall provide a copy of this ordinance, or shall provide notice as
part of the rental agreement that the owner/lessor is required by law to
install operable smoke detectors, to the person or persons leasing or renting
the dwelling unit at the time the persons begin occupancy of the dwelling unit,
and the owner/lessor and the persons renting or leasing the dwelling unit shall
determine that all required smoke detectors are operating properly at that
time. It shall be the responsibility of the tenant or occupant to maintain the
smoke detector(s) in an operable condition. The smoke detector(s) shall be
installed and maintained pursuant to the requirements of the Albuquerque Fire
Code of the Albuquerque Fire Department.
(Ord. 9-1998)
§ 9-13-5 NOTIFICATION OF REQUIREMENTS.
   The Mayor will, through the city's water billing system, notify residents of
the requirements of this article on an annual basis.
(Ord. 9-1998)
§ 9-13-6 ENFORCEMENT.
   The Fire Chief, the Fire Chief's authorized representatives, and the
Division of Housing Code Enforcement shall have the authority to enforce this
article, which shall include the authority to issue citations.
(Ord. 9-1998)
ARTICLE 14: OVERNIGHT LODGING
Section
   
9-14-1   Short title
   
9-14-2   Legislative findings and intent
   
9-14-3   Definitions
   
9-14-4   Register
   
9-14-5   Registration
   
9-14-6   Signs and advertising
   
9-14-7   Conveyance of overnight lodging
   
9-14-8   Housekeeping checks
   
9-14-9   House rules
   
9-14-10   Training
   
9-14-11   Safety, cleanliness and appearance
 
   
9-14-99   Penalty
§ 9-14-1 SHORT TITLE.
   This article may be cited as the "Overnight Lodging Ordinance" and is
referred to herein as "this Ordinance."
(Ord. 41-2000)
§ 9-14-2 LEGISLATIVE FINDINGS AND INTENT.
   (A)   The Council finds it necessary to enact this Ordinance to protect the
health and safety of occupants of Overnight Lodging Establishments in the City
of Albuquerque.
   (B)   The Council finds that education and training of owners and operators
of Overnight Lodging Establishments will better protect and serve occupants of
Overnight Lodging Establishments in the City of Albuquerque.
   (C)   The Council finds that this Ordinance will assist in enforcement of
other public safety laws and important public policies by the Albuquerque
Police Department and Code Enforcement Team.
   (D)   The Council finds that this Ordinance will guarantee the important
policy of non-discrimination in Albuquerque.
(Ord. 41-2000)
§ 9-14-3 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purposes of this Ordinance, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ALBUQUERQUE CODE ENFORCEMENT.  Housing Inspectors or any position charged
with the responsibility of making inspections to enforce the provisions of the
Housing Code.
   CITY. The City of Albuquerque and all of its agents and employees.
   EXTENDED STAY. A period of at least 30 consecutive days.
   GUEST. Any person patronizing or otherwise doing business with an Overnight
Lodging Establishment for the purpose of securing lodging.
   HAZARDOUS. Any perilous or risky condition which could expose any guest or
other person to danger. A hazardous condition includes, but is not limited to,
the presence of any illegal controlled substances or illegal drug
paraphernalia.
   HISTORIC. A building designated as a Historic Property and listed on the
City and/or State, and/or National Registry of Historic Properties or
designated by the City as a Landmark structure or is a "contributing" building
to a designated City, State and/or National Historic District.
   HOUSE RULES. Rules promulgated by the Operator pertaining to the guests and
their safety.
   HOUSEKEEPING CHECK. An inspection of each and every part of a guest's
premises concerning the safety and condition of the facility and the safety of
the operator, guests and personnel of the Overnight Lodging Establishment.
   MAYOR.  The Office of the Mayor of Albuquerque or the Mayor's designee.
   MOTEL VOUCHER AND LEASE PROGRAM. A City program designed to provide motel
vouchers to an individual or family to rent a room in a specific motel for a
specified number of nights or to make available a specific number of rooms.
   OPERATOR. Any person who or entity which owns, leases, controls, or manages
an Overnight Lodging Establishment.
   OVERNIGHT LODGING ESTABLISHMENT.  An Overnight Lodging Establishment is any
building containing three or more guest rooms intended or designed to be, or
which are used, rented or hired out to be occupied, or which are occupied, by
guests, including, but not limited to, hotels, motels, rooming houses, rooming
units, hostels, bed and breakfasts, inns, country inns, residence inns, motor
courts or motor lodges.
   OWNER. Any person who or entity which has any property interest in the real
property used as an Overnight Lodging Establishment.
(Ord. 41-2000; Am. Ord. 34-2004)
§ 9-14-4 REGISTER.
   (A)   Operators of Overnight Lodging Establishments shall maintain a guest
register, reservation book or reservation card ("Register") and shall require
every person who rents or occupies a room within the Overnight Lodging
Establishment to write in such Register his or her name and place of residence.
Such registration shall be made on a page of the Register properly dated with
reference to the day of the year, month and week and the time of day the person
rents or arranges to occupy a room. The Mayor may ask the Operator whether a
particular person is a guest at the Overnight Lodging Establishment. The
Operator must confirm or deny to the Mayor whether that person is a current
guest. The Mayor must obtain a subpoena to examine the Register. Overnight
Lodging Establishments may use portfolio cards or a computer generated format
in lieu of the Register.
   (B)   The Owner or Operator of an Overnight Lodging Establishment shall
maintain a record of all extended stay guests and of all guests participating
in the motel voucher and lease program. If more than 10% of the Overnight
Lodging Establishment's units are rented or leased for an extended stay, then
the owner or operator shall notify Albuquerque Code Enforcement. If the
Overnight Lodging Establishment participates in the motel voucher and lease
program, it shall notify Albuquerque Code Enforcement of its participation.
Albuquerque Code Enforcement is authorized to apply to District Court for the
issuance of a subpoena to order the production of records and evidence
demonstrating that the Overnight Establishment is housing extended stay guests
or that it is participating in the motel voucher and lease program.
(Ord. 41-2000; Am. Ord. 34-2004)
§ 9-14-5 REGISTRATION.
   All Overnight Lodging Establishments shall comply with the Business
Registration Ordinance, §
13-1-1 et seq. ROA 1994. With or in the Application to do Business under the
Business Registration Ordinance, Overnight Lodging Establishments shall provide
the following information:
   (A)   If the Overnight Lodging Establishment is a sole proprietorship, the
name, address and phone number of the Owner and any other responsible person.
   (B)   If the Overnight Lodging Establishment is a partnership, the name,
address and phone number of the partner or partner's agent or assign who,
according to the partnership agreement, has the authority to and capability of
promptly contacting, identifying and notifying each and every other partner.
Service of process upon the partner or partner's agent or assignnamed in the
application pursuant to this paragraph shall be deemed adequate service on any
and all other partners. Said named partner must be an individual liable for any
violation of this Ordinance.
   (C)   If the Overnight Lodging Establishment is a corporation, the name and
address of its registered agent as required under §§ 53-12-2(A)(8) and 53-11-11
NMSA 1978.
   (D)   All Overnight Lodging Establishments shall provide the name, address,
and phone number of a person responsible for property management who may be
contacted immediately by the Mayor in the case of an emergency on the property.
   (E)   An operator of an Overnight Lodging Establishment with more than 10%
of its units rented for an extended stay shall provide a certificate of
completion of the Crime Free Rental Housing Training described in §
13-1-8(B) of the Business Registration Ordinance.
   (F)   An operator of an Overnight Lodging Establishment who participates in
the motel voucher and lease program shall provide a certificate of completion
of the Crime Free Rental Housing Training described in §
13-1-8(B) of the Business Registration Ordinance.
(Ord. 41-2000; Am. Ord. 34-2004)
§ 9-14-6 SIGNS AND ADVERTISING.
   All Overnight Lodging Establishments shall comply with the Motel Advertising
Ordinance, §
13-7-1-1 et seq. ROA 1994.
(Ord. 41-2000)
§ 9-14-7 CONVEYANCE OF OVERNIGHT LODGING.
   If a violation of this Ordinance occurs before any conveyance, lease, sale,
gift or transfer of any kind of any Overnight Lodging Establishment, the
grantor, lessor or transferor is liable for the violation. The Owner may
require indemnification and insurance covering said Owner to ensure all taxes,
operations and other liabilities are covered. In the event of any conveyance,
lease, sale, gift or transfer contemplated under this section, the grantee,
lessee, transferee or other recipient of all or any part of the Overnight
Lodging Establishment shall comply with Section 5 of this Ordinance within
thirty days of the effective date of the conveyance.
(Ord. 41-2000)
§ 9-14-8 HOUSEKEEPING CHECKS.
   The Operator may enter and inspect any and all parts of any and all rooms at
any time, twenty-four hours a day, concerning the premises and the health,
safety and welfare of the guests and personnel of the Overnight Lodging
Establishment.
(Ord. 41-2000)
§ 9-14-9 HOUSE RULES.
   An Operator may promulgate rules pertaining to guests' conduct. The rules
must be non-discriminatory. The House Rules may be directed at the prevention
of unlawfulness, drunkenness, lewdness, excessive noise, or any other form of
willful conduct which may disturb other guests. The Operator may immediately
evict, without refund, any guest for a violation of the House Rules. Such rules
will be made accessible to the guest.
(Ord. 41-2000)
§ 9-14-10 TRAINING.
   (A)   Within 120 days of registration under Section 5 of this Ordinance, all
Operators may be invited to attend a voluntary training program approved by the
Mayor.
   (B)   All new Operators of an Overnight Lodging Establishment may within
ninety days from the date of hire or contract attend a voluntary training
program approved by the Mayor. Training is not limited to but will include
crime prevention, safety, health, and human rights topics.
   (C)   Overnight Lodging Establishments with in-house training programs may
submit those programs to the City for approval by the Mayor, which approval
shall not be unreasonably withheld.
   (D)   At completion of training undertaken or approved pursuant to this
section, and upon completion of the program for certification by the Crime
Prevention Division of the Albuquerque Police Department, the trainee shall
receive a certificate issued by the Mayor which shall be valid for three years
from the date of issue.
   (E)   A facility shall be deemed certified as long as one or more of its
staff has received certification. Such certification shall be attached to the
trainee and be valid at whichever Overnight Lodging Establishment the certified
trainee works. To maintain such certification, the trainee may need to be
retrained in the program every three years. The Mayor may revoke the
certification of the trainee and require mandatory training of the Operator for
three or more intentional violations of Sections 4, 5, 7 and 11 of this
Ordinance within a two calendar year period.
   (F)   An operator of an Overnight Lodging Establishment with more than 10%
of its units rented for an extended stay shall complete the Crime Free Rental
Housing Training described in §
13-1-8(B).
   (G)   An operator of an Overnight Lodging Establishment who participates in
the motel voucher and lease program shall complete the Crime Free Rental
Housing Training described in §
13-1-8(B).
(Ord. 41-2000; Am. Ord. 34-2004)
§ 9-14-11 SAFETY, CLEANLINESS AND APPEARANCE.
   (A)    Bedding, Bed Linen And Towels. The Operator of every Overnight
Lodging Establishment shall maintain the supplied bedding in a clean and
sanitary manner, and shall change supplied bed linens and towels therein at
least once a week under any circumstances and prior to the letting of any room
to any new occupant.
   (B)   Every Overnight Lodging Establishment shall comply with and be subject
to the provisions of the Uniform Housing Code and any regulations promulgated
by Albuquerque Code Enforcement.
(Ord. 41-2000; Am. Ord. 34-2004)
§ 9-14-99 PENALTY.
   Each and every violation of this Ordinance is a criminal violation subject
to the provisions of §
1-1-99 ROA 1994. Violations found in separate rooms or multiple violations in
the same room are separate violations under §
1-1-99 ROA 1994.
(Ord. 41-2000)
ARTICLE 15: SYRINGE EXCHANGE FACILITY LOCATION
Section
   
9-15-1   Short title
   
9-15-2   Findings
   
9-15-3   Definitions
   
9-15-4   Permit required
   
9-15-5   [Reserved]
   
9-15-6   Permit application
   
9-15-7   Procedure for approval or denial of permit
   
9-15-8   Nontransferability of permit; duration; renewal of permit
   
9-15-9   Review process
   
9-15-10   Permit not endorsement; applicability of other laws
   
9-15-11   Injunction; abatement of nuisance
   
9-15-12   Interim requirements
 
   
9-15-99   Penalty
§ 9-15-1 SHORT TITLE.
   This article shall be known and may be cited as the "Syringe Exchange
Facility Location Ordinance."
(Ord. 55-2001)
§ 9-15-2 FINDINGS.
   The Council finds that though the sharing of syringes by intravenous drug
users should be prevented and certain syringe exchange programs may be
effective in reducing the spread of acquired immune deficiency syndrome or
human immunodeficiency virus, syringe exchange programs should be appropriately
located in the community and be responsive to neighborhood concerns.
(Ord. 55-2001)
§ 9-15-3 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this article, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   DAY CARE CENTER. Any place other than an occupied residence which receives
children for day care, or an occupied residence which receives more than 12
children for day care.
   MAYOR. The Mayor or the Mayor’s designated representative.
   PERSON. An individual, organization, group, association, partnership,
corporation or any combination thereof.
   SCHOOL. A place where education is offered at some or all levels from
kindergarten through grade 12, and most of the school's pupils spend at least
three hours per day there.
   SYRINGE EXCHANGE FACILITY. A place where sterile needles and/or syringes are
dispensed pursuant to a program authorized by the State Harm Reduction Act,
Sections 24-2C-1 et seq. NMSA 1978, to participants in the program for the
purpose of preventing the sharing of syringes by intravenous drug users, except
it does not include:
      (1)   An area on the premises of and operated by a hospital;
      (2)   An establishment operated by the state; or
      (3)   A program operating pursuant to the state Harm Reduction Act that
has 100 or fewer participants enrolled at all times.
(Ord. 55-2001)
§ 9-15-4 PERMIT REQUIRED.
   (A)   Location. No person shall operate a syringe exchange facility at any
location in the City without having a valid permit for such syringe exchange
facility in accordance with this ordinance. Except, however, any syringe
exchange facility in operation on the effective date of this ordinance shall
obtain a valid permit within a period of 6 months from the effective date of
the ordinance.
   (B)   Operation. No permit shall be issued unless the facility demonstrates
to the Zoning Enforcement Officer that it has designated and will maintain a
community response representative who shall be reasonably available and who
shall respond to, and keep a record of, all telephone calls and writings
received from any individual and organization regarding concerns with the
operation of the facility and its effect on the community. Such records shall
be made available to the City upon request.
   (C)   Notice of Complaint Procedure. Within 45 days after the City has
approved a permit for a syringe exchange facility, the operator of the facility
shall mail a copy of the facility’s complaint procedures to the owners of
record of all property within 500 feet of the facility.
(Ord. 55-2001)
§ 9-15-5 [RESERVED.]
§ 9-15-6 PERMIT APPLICATION.
   Any person desiring a permit pursuant to this article shall file an
application with the Mayor upon a form to be provided by the Mayor. The initial
application shall include a program description, a listing of all board
members, a description of the facility’s community complaint procedures, and
the name of and contact information for the facility’s community response
representative. An application fee of $130, which is not refundable in the
event the permit is denied, shall accompany the application.
(Ord. 55-2001)
§ 9-15-7 PROCEDURE FOR APPROVAL OR DENIAL OF PERMIT.
   (A)   Within 45 days of receipt of the application for a permit, the Mayor
shall grant or deny the permit. If the Mayor affirmatively determines, upon
inquiry and examination, that the requirements of this article have been met,
the Mayor shall grant the permit. If the Mayor determines, upon inquiry and
examination, that any of the requirements of this article have not been met,
the Mayor shall notify the applicant that the application for the permit has
been denied and shall state the findings of fact upon which the denial is
based. The denial shall not become effective for 20 days during which time the
applicant may petition for reconsideration and shall be entitled to a hearing
before the City Hearing Officer, as defined by the Independent Office of
Hearings Ordinance (§§
2-7-8-1 et seq. ROA 1994).
   (B)   A request for a hearing shall be made by the applicant within 15 days
of receipt of notice of denial. The hearing shall be held in accordance with
the provisions in the IHO Ordinance, ROA 1994,
Chapter 2, Article 7, Part 8.
(Ord. 55-2001; Am. Ord. 38-2002; Am. Ord. 31-2007; Am. Ord._2023-015)
§ 9-15-8 NONTRANSFERABILITY OF PERMIT; DURATION; RENEWAL OF PERMIT.
   (A)   A permit is not transferable to any other site.
   (B)   A permit is valid for two years, as long as the syringe exchange
facility is operating within six months after permit issuance.
   (C)   At least 45 days before the expiration of its permit, a syringe
exchange facility which intends to continue in operation shall apply for a new
permit and shall receive a new permit if it meets all standards of this article
for a permitted facility. However, these standards need not be met in relation
to a protected land use that moved to a location within the proscribed
distances from the syringe exchange facility while that facility was legally
and openly operating at the site requested for renewal.
(Ord. 55-2001)
§ 9-15-9 REVIEW PROCESS.
   (A)   The operator of a syringe exchange program shall submit annually to
the Zoning Enforcement Officer the following information after a permit is
initially approved: copies of complaints received, a summary of efforts to
resolve those complaints, and the result of such efforts; an updated program
description; an updated listing of all board members; updated information about
the community response representative; and any changes to the facility’s
complaint procedures.
   (B)   If the Zoning Enforcement Officer determines that the program is in
violation of City ordinances or regulations, the Zoning Enforcement Officer may
revoke the permit. If the Zoning Enforcement Officer determines that the
operator of the facility has not attempted to resolve significant complaints
received by the operator, the Zoning Enforcement Officer shall refer the matter
to the Zoning Hearing Examiner for a public hearing to determine if the permit
shall be revoked or if conditions should be attached to the permit approval.
The decision of the Zoning Hearing Examiner may be appealed to the
Environmental Planning Commission within 15 days after the Zoning Hearing
Examiner issues a decision.
(Ord. 55-2001)
§ 9-15-10 PERMIT NOT ENDORSEMENT; APPLICABILITY OF OTHER LAWS.
   (A)   Syringe exchange facility permits shall not be deemed to constitute
endorsement by the city of any syringe exchange facility, and no person shall
intentionally claim or infer, directly or indirectly, any such endorsement by
reason of its permit.
   (B)   The granting of a syringe exchange facility permit does not constitute
a waiver of any requirement or provision contained in any ordinance of the city
or in state or federal law.
   (C)   Nothing in this ordinance shall be construed to make lawful the
possession of a controlled substance as defined by city ordinance, state and
federal law.
(Ord. 55-2001)
§ 9-15-11 INJUNCTION; ABATEMENT OF NUISANCE.
   (A)   Whenever the Mayor believes that the operation of a syringe exchange
facility, with or without a permit, is being or will be conducted within the
city so as to create a public nuisance as that term is defined by City
ordinance or in Section 30-8-1 NMSA 1978, the Mayor may initiate judicial
proceedings to abate continued operation of such syringe exchange facility.
   (B)   Whenever the Mayor believes that a syringe exchange facility is
operating in the city without a permit, the Mayor may initiate judicial
proceedings to restrain or enjoin such operation.
(Ord. 55-2001)
§ 9-15-12 INTERIM REQUIREMENTS.
   Notwithstanding the above provisions, any syringe exchange facility in
operation upon the effective date of this ordinance and prior to obtaining a
permit shall, within 60 days of the effective date of this ordinance:
   (A)   Provide to the Zoning Enforcement Officer the facility’s complaint
procedures including the name of and contact information for a community
response representative who shall be reasonably available and who shall respond
to, and keep a record of, all telephone calls and writings received from any
individual and organization regarding concerns with the operation of the
facility and its effect on the community; and
   (B)   Mail a copy of the facility’s complaint procedures to the owners of
record of all property within 500 feet of the syringe exchange facility.
(Ord. 55-2001)
§ 9-15-99 PENALTY.
   Any person convicted of violating any of the provisions of this article or
failing or neglecting to comply with any orders issued pursuant to any section
thereof shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and such person shall be guilty
of a separate offense for each and every day or portion thereof during which
any violation is continued or permitted. Upon conviction, each such violation
shall be subject to the penalty provisions set forth in §1-1-99 of this code of
ordinances.
(Ord. 55-2001)
ARTICLE 16: ANTIFREEZE SAFETY
Section
   
9-16-1   Short title
   
9-16-2   Findings and intent
   
9-16-3   Bittering agent required in antifreeze
 
   
9-16-99   Penalty
§ 9-16-1 SHORT TITLE.
   This article may be known and shall be cited as the "Antifreeze Safety
Ordinance."
(Ord. 3-2004)
§ 9-16-2 FINDINGS AND INTENT.
   (A)   Antifreeze contains ethylene glycol, an extremely toxic yet sweet-
tasting substance that injures many children and kills thousands of animals
every year in the United States.
   (B)   The National Safety Council, the American Medical Association and the
American Association of Poison Control Centers have noted that the addition of
nontoxic bittering agents to toxic household products can make these products
so unpalatable that many children reject the products upon, or shortly after,
tasting them.
   (C)   Organizations that support the health and safety of animals favor the
passage of legislation that requires a bittering agent to be added to
antifreeze.
   (D)   The cost to add the most common bittering agent, denatonium benzoate,
to antifreeze is approximately 2 cents per gallon, and by law the antifreeze
manufacturers already blend antifreeze with this bittering agent for sale in
Oregon and California.
(Ord. 3-2004)
§ 9-16-3 BITTERING AGENT REQUIRED IN ANTIFREEZE.
   (A)   Any engine coolant or antifreeze sold in the city after March 1, 2004,
and that contains more than 10% ethylene glycol, shall include denatonium
benzoate at a minimum of 30 parts per million as a bittering agent within the
product so as to render it unpalatable. Another aversive agent may be used if
it meets or exceeds the degree of aversion in test subjects obtained by
utilizing the formulation of 30 parts per million of denatonium benzoate in
antifreeze. Any manufacturer or packager of a product subject to this section
shall maintain a record of the trade name, scientific name, and active
ingredients of any bittering agent used pursuant to this chapter. Information
and documentation maintained pursuant to this section shall be furnished to any
member of the public upon request.
   (B)   This section shall not be construed to apply to any of the following:
      (1)   The sale of a motor vehicle that contains engine coolant or
antifreeze.
      (2)   Wholesale containers of antifreeze containing 55 gallons or more of
the antifreeze.
      (3)   Antifreeze that was, prior to the effective date of this Antifreeze
Safety Ordinance, in the possession of a retail merchant, possession of an
automotive repair or similar business, or possession of a governmental unit
within the city. The exemption provided by this subsection shall expire on
January 1, 2005.
   (C)   The exemption created in subsection (B)(2) for containers of 55
gallons or more shall expire on June 1, 2004 unless any interested party can
establish that eliminating the exemption is unfeasible or would unreasonably
burden interstate commerce. The Environmental Health Department of the city
may, by administrative rule or regulation, continue the exemption for
containers of 55 gallons or more only to the extent necessary to avoid placing
unreasonable burdens on commercial users of antifreeze.
(Ord. 3-2004)
Penalty, see § 9-16-99
§ 9-16-99 PENALTY.
   Each sale of antifreeze in violation of this Antifreeze Safety Ordinance is
a separate violation of §
1-1-99 ROA 1994.
(Ord. 3-2004)
ARTICLE 17: ANGEL'S LAW
Section
   
9-17-1   Findings and intent
   
9-17-2   Short title
   
9-17-3   Definitions
   
9-17-4   Potentially dangerous dog
   
9-17-5   Dangerous dog
   
9-17-6   Irresponsible owners
   
9-17-7   Hearings
 
   
9-17-99   Penalty
§ 9-17-1 FINDINGS AND INTENT.
   City Council finds that dangerous dogs threaten the health and safety of
inhabitants of the city, especially young children and others unable to protect
themselves from vicious attacks. City Council finds that owners who allow their
dangerous dogs to run loose in the city or fail to safely and humanely restrain
those dogs on their property are criminally and civilly liable for the harm
those dogs cause. City Council finds that dogs that have mortally wounded
either a person or a companion animal without provocation or that have attacked
again after previously being deemed as dangerous dogs pose an immediate danger
to the health and safety of the inhabitants of the city and should be subject
to permanent removal. City Council further finds that owners who allow their
dangerous dogs to run loose in the city or fail to safely and humanely restrain
those dogs on their property create a nuisance that must be abated pursuant to
the city's civil remedial powers under state law. City Council finds that it is
reasonable to prevent the worst offenders from being able to own dogs in the
City of Albuquerque.
(Ord. 2-2005; Am. Ord._2016-009)
§ 9-17-2 SHORT TITLE.
   This article shall be referred to as "Angel's Law" and may sometimes be
referred to herein as "this ordinance."
(Ord. 2-2005)
§ 9-17-3 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purposes of this article, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   AACC WEBSITE. An internet site maintained by AACC and accessible by the
public and containing among other things a data base pertaining to dangerous
dogs.
   AGGRESSIVE. A dog that is objectively observable by a reasonable person as
unnaturally and unjustifiably hostile toward humans or other animals.
   ALBUQUERQUE ANIMAL CARE CENTER or AACC. Any premises, locations or buildings
designated as suitable by the Mayor for the care, custody and maintenance of
animals seized by the city.
   ANIMAL.  Any living nonhuman mammal, bird, reptile, or amphibian not
including insects.
   ANIMAL CONTROL OFFICER or ACO. Any person employed by the city, assigned to
the Albuquerque Animal Care Center and charged with enforcement of this article
and other animal laws or with any other task assigned by the Mayor from time to
time.
   ANIMAL SERVICE OFFICER or ASO. Any person employed by the city and assigned
to the Department and charged with enforcement of this article and other animal
laws or with any other task assigned by the Mayor from time to time.
   AT LARGE. An animal on or off the premises of the owner that is not
restricted by a secure fence or secure facility or on a leash controlled by a
person capable of controlling the dog. Verbal commands do not constitute
control.
   COMPANION ANIMAL. A dog or cat including a hybrid.
   CONFISCATE. The seizure of an animal by an ACO, police officer or other
public official to protect the animal, other animals or the public.
   CUSTODY. Possession and control of a dog by a person.
   DANGEROUS DOG. A dog that has, without provocation, caused serious injury,
great bodily harm, or mortal injury to a person or companion animal; or was
previously designated as a potentially dangerous dog and subsequently: (1)
causes injury to a person or companion animal that is less severe than a
serious injury; or (2) is observed by any person chasing or menacing a person
or companion animal in an aggressive manner and without provocation. Police
dogs are excepted from the definition.
   DEPARTMENT. The City of Albuquerque Animal Welfare Department, its animal
service officers and agents.
   DEPARTMENT WEBSITE. An internet site maintained by the Department and
accessible by the public and containing among other things a database
pertaining to dangerous dogs.
   DOG EXERCISE PARK. Any tract designated by the city for use by persons and
dogs where dogs may be off leash and allowed to run free.
   GREAT BODILY HARM. An injury to a person or companion animal which (1)
creates a high probability of death; (2) results in serious disfigurement; (3)
results in loss of any member or organ of the body; or (4) results in permanent
or prolonged impairment of the use of any member or organ of the body.
   HARNESS. A well fitting apparatus that is not abrasive and restrains the dog
by the body and shoulders without involvement of the neck.
   HEARING OFFICER. The City Hearing Officer, as defined by the Independent
Office of Hearings Ordinance (§§
2-7-8-1 et seq. ROA 1994).
   HUMANELY DESTROYED. Euthanized by a method commonly approved by
veterinarians or the Mayor.
   HYBRID. An animal created by breeding animals of different species. Dogs,
wolves and coyotes are different species for purposes of this definition. If a
dog is a hybrid, the owner and dog shall not be exempt from any of the
provisions of Angel's Law.
   IMPOUND. Delivery and arrival of a dog to the Department for processing as
under the Humane and Ethical Animal Rules and Treatment Ordinance.
   INTACT. A dog over six months old that is not spayed or neutered.
   IRRESPONSIBLE OWNER. An animal owner deemed incapable or unable to safely or
humanely own an animal.
   LICENSED. A dog with a valid city license.
   MAYOR. The Mayor of the City of Albuquerque or his or her designated
representatives.
   MICROCHIP. A passive transponder which can be implanted in an animal by
injection and which is a component of a radio frequency identification (RFID)
system. A system not compatible with the scanner used by the Department is not
a MICROCHIP.
   NOTICE OF APPEAL. A written notice from any person aggrieved by any action
under this article which shall be in writing and state the action appealed
from, the date the action or requirement was imposed and the grounds for the
appeal.
   OWNER. A person who possesses, harbors, keeps or has control or custody of a
dog or, if that person is under the age of eighteen, that person's parent or
guardian.
   PERSON. An individual, household, firm, partnership, corporation, company,
society, association or legal entity, and every officer, agent or employee
thereof.
   POTENTIALLY DANGEROUS DOG. A dog that may reasonably be assumed to pose a
threat to public safety as demonstrated by the following behaviors:
      (1)   Causing an injury to a person or companion animal that is less
severe than a serious injury;
      (2)   Chasing or menacing a person or companion animal in an aggressive
manner and without provocation; or
      (3)   Acting in an aggressive manner within a fenced yard or enclosure
and appearing able to jump out of the yard or enclosure.
   PROPER ENCLOSURE. Secure confinement in-doors or confinement by means of a
secure fence.
   PROPERTY. Real property where a dog is regularly found or observed by any
person who would reasonably conclude that the dog is present on the property by
virtue of the fact that the dog is owned and in the custody of the owner or
occupant of the real property.
   PROVOKED. A dog that took action in response to a stimulus when a reasonable
person would conclude that the dog was defending itself, its owner or an
immediate family member of its owner, or another person within its immediate
vicinity from an actual assault or was defending real property belonging to its
owner or an immediate family member of its owner from a crime being committed
on the owner's property at that time. UNPROVOKED shall mean the negative and
opposite of PROVOKED.
   REMEDIAL MEASURES. Repairs, modifications, additions or improvements to
property or a fence to ensure that a dog cannot escape or a young child cannot
enter. REMEDIAL MEASURES include but are not limited to signage appropriate to
warn passersby, changes to a fence or enclosure of a previously open area.
   RESPONSIBLE PERSON.  A person at least 18 years old who is familiar with the
dog and has the size, strength and experience to be able to keep the dog under
complete control at all times.
   SECURE FACILITY. A house or building from which any dog including a guard
dog cannot escape.
   SECURE FENCE. A barrier adequate to prevent a dog from leaving real property
upon which the dog is or should be kept and to prevent young children from
entering real property.
   SEIZE. To take custody and control of dog.
   SERIOUS INJURY. Any physical injury, that does not rise to the level of
great bodily harm, that results in broken bones or lacerations that require
medical attention involving multiple sutures or comparable methods for wound
closure or cosmetic surgery.
   STERILIZED. Humanely and professionally rendered incapable of procreation.
   WARNING AND NOTICE OF REINSPECTION. A written document issued to a person or
posted at the property and requiring remedial measures or other changes within
a specified time period, informing occupants that the city will conduct a
follow up inspection and informing occupants that failure to comply with the
warning will lead to further legal action by the city.
(Ord. 2-2005; Am. Ord. 31-2007; Am. Ord._2016-009)
§ 9-17-4 POTENTIALLY DANGEROUS DOG.
   (A)   Designation as potentially dangerous dog. Any person may report a
potentially dangerous dog to the Department. Persons may make anonymous reports
and the Department shall respond to anonymous reports under this article.
Pursuant to any such report or otherwise, the Department shall seize and
impound any at large dog in the ordinary manner or, if the dog is known to be
found on a particular property, initiate an investigation and inspection of the
property. After the inspection and investigation, the Department shall
determine whether the dog is in fact a potentially dangerous dog. Police dogs
are excepted from the designation. If the Department determines that the dog is
a potentially dangerous dog, the Department shall so apprise the owner of the
dog by written notice sent by certified mail, hand delivered, or conspicuously
posted on the property, which notice shall constitute actual and constructive
notice. The owner may request an administrative hearing concerning the
Department's determination that the dog is a potentially dangerous dog. The
Department may impose remedial measures or require the owner to submit to any
counseling or classes approved by the Department on the topic of owning a
potentially dangerous dog. Without regard to whether the dog has been
designated a potentially dangerous dog, no person shall chain, tie, or
otherwise affix a dog to any stationary object for more than one hour in any 24
hour period. Any person may apply to the Department for a tethering permit.
   (B)   Potentially dangerous dog response.
      (1)   Seizure for immediate danger. Following notice of the determination
of a potentially dangerous dog to the owner, if the Department has probable
cause to believe that the dog may pose an immediate danger to public safety,
the Department may obtain a search warrant and impound the dog or impound the
dog at the owner's request or with the owner's consent. If the owner requests a
hearing, the dog shall remain in protective custody at the Department pending
adjudication. The Department shall impose remedial measures or deliver a
Warning and Notice of Reinspection while the matter is pending a hearing. No
private contract or covenant is a defense to Angel's Law. If the dog is
impounded more than ten days with no response from the owner, the dog becomes
the city's property and shall be handled in the ordinary manner under the
Humane and Ethical Animal Rules and Treatment Ordinance. The dog shall not be
placed for adoption if the Department determines that the dog poses a danger to
any potential adopter or the public.
      (2)   No immediate danger. If the potentially dangerous dog does not pose
an immediate danger to public safety and remedial measures or owner education
may reasonably provide public safety, the Department may allow the dog to
remain on the property pending adjudication and issue a Warning and Notice of
Reinspection. If the inadequate conditions stated in the Warning and Notice of
Reinspection are not cured by the time of the follow-up inspection, the
Department shall seek a warrant for seizure of the dog, and if so obtained the
Department shall seize the dog. The owner may file an appeal as provided by
this article. If the dog is not on the property at the time of a failed
reinspection and not surrendered at that time but subsequently located on the
property or at large, the owner is in violation of § 1-1-99 ROA 1994 and the
dog may be seized when discovered by the Department. The Department may impose
reasonable remedial measures pertaining to any potentially dangerous dog or the
property and shall seize the dog upon any breach of a remedial measure imposed.
If the Department does not impose remedial measures or seize a dog at a point
in time, the Department is not precluded from those actions or other remedies
in the future if conditions change or the Department receives a subsequent
citizen report.
(Ord. 2-2005; Am. Ord. 2016-009) Penalty, see §
9-17-99
§ 9-17-5 DANGEROUS DOG.
   (A)   Dangerous dog designation. The Department may determine that a dog is
a dangerous dog in accord with this article. If the determination is upheld by
a Hearing Officer or the determination is not appealed by the owner, then the
dog shall be immediately sterilized and microchipped (if not already
microchipped) and the microchip number supplied to the Department. The
Department shall document and register the microchip number, a description of
the dangerous dog, the address of the property owner and the name and date of
birth of the owner and maintain the foregoing in a database available to the
public ten years from the date of first registration. The Department may
convert a potentially dangerous dog to dangerous dog status upon a breach of
any condition pertaining to the potentially dangerous dog. A dog does not have
to bite a person or animal to be deemed a dangerous dog under Angel's Law. If a
dangerous dog causes harm, the owner is civilly liable as a matter of law and
further shows that the owner knew or should have known about the propensity for
harm. If the Department determines that the dog is a dangerous dog, the
Department shall so apprise the owner of the dog by written notice sent by
certified mail, hand delivered or conspicuously posted on the property. The
owner may request an administrative hearing. This article does not abrogate the
Department's duty and authority to humanely destroy dogs as required under
other laws. The owners of dangerous dogs must comply with all other legal
requirements pertaining to dogs including but not limited to licensing and
vaccinations. The Department shall implement policies, regulations, or
procedures establishing criteria to evaluate the adoptability of dogs that are
in the custody and control of the Department, which shall define when dogs
shall not be considered suitable for adoption. If a dog is determined to be
unadoptable, the Department shall not place it in the general population or for
adoption. The Department may transfer ownership and custody of such dogs to
third party organizations specializing in the long-term care of unadoptable
dogs only when such organizations retain sole permanent custody and ownership
over unadoptable dogs and whose policies prohibit the adoption, fostering, or
transferring of unadoptable dogs. No private contract or covenant is a defense
to Angel's Law.
   (B)   Dangerous dog response.
      (1)   Seizure for attacks resulting in mortal injury. If the Department
determines that a dog has mortally wounded a person or companion animal without
provocation, the Department shall immediately seek to obtain a warrant from a
court of competent jurisdiction to seize the dog or seize the dog with the
consent of the owner. Such dog shall remain in the custody of the Department
pending adjudication and shall be handled in the ordinary manner under the
Humane and Ethical Animal Rules and Treatment Ordinance. If the owner does not
request a hearing within 15 days, or if the Hearing Officer upholds the
Department's determination that the dog has mortally wounded a person or
companion animal without provocation, such dog shall become the property of the
Department and shall be handled in the ordinary manner under the Humane and
Ethical Animal Rules and Treatment Ordinance.
      (2)   Seizure for attacks which result in great bodily harm. If the
Department determines that a dog has caused great bodily harm as defined
herein, to either a person or companion animal without provocation, the
Department shall immediately seek to obtain a warrant from a court of competent
jurisdiction to seize the dog, or seize the dog with the consent of the owner.
Such dog shall remain in the custody of the Department pending adjudication and
shall be handled in the ordinary manner under the Humane and Ethical Animal
Rules and Treatment Ordinance. If the owner does not request a hearing within
15 days, or if the Hearing Officer upholds the Department's determination that
the dog has caused great bodily harm to a person or companion animal without
provocation, then the Hearing Officer shall make a determination under the
specific circumstances as to the disposition of the dog. The Hearing Officer
shall rule that the dog will either, (1) become the property of the Department
to be handled in the ordinary manner under the Humane and Ethical Animal Rules
and Treatment Ordinance, or (2) that the dog be returned to its owner subject
to, but not limited by, the restrictions for dangerous dogs contained herein.
      (3)   Potential seizure for attacks resulting in serious injury. If the
Department determines that a dog has caused a serious injury, as defined
herein, to a person or companion animal without provocation, then the
Department may immediately seek to obtain a warrant from a court of competent
jurisdiction to seize the dog or seize the dog with the consent of the owner.
If seized, such dog shall remain in the custody of the Department pending
adjudication and shall be handled in the ordinary manner under the Humane and
Ethical Animal Rules and Treatment Ordinance. If the dog is seized by the
Department and the owner does not request a hearing within 15 days, such dog
shall become the property of the Department and shall be handled in the
ordinary manner under the Humane and Ethical Animal Rules and Treatment
Ordinance. If the Hearing Officer upholds the Department's determination that
the dog caused a serious injury upon a person or companion animal without
provocation, the dog shall be deemed dangerous, and shall be subject to the
terms and restrictions pertaining to a dangerous dog as contained herein.
      (4)   Subsequent attack by dangerous dogs. If a dog previously determined
to be a dangerous dog commits a subsequent unprovoked attack on a person or
companion animal, the Department shall immediately seek to obtain a warrant
from a court of competent jurisdiction to seize the dog or seize the dog with
the consent of the owner. Such dog shall remain in the custody of the
Department pending adjudication and shall be handled in the ordinary manner
under the Humane and Ethical Animal Rules and Treatment Ordinance. If the owner
does not request a hearing within 15 days, or if the Hearing Officer upholds
the Department's determination that the dog committed a subsequent unprovoked
attack after having previously been deemed dangerous, such dog shall become the
property of the Department and shall be handled in the ordinary manner under
the Humane and Ethical Animal Rules and Treatment Ordinance.
      (5)   Notice. Notice of the dangerous dog designation (if not previously
so designated) and any seizure shall be hand-delivered to the owner of the dog,
or if not available, posted at the property and mailed to the owner by
certified mail. If the dog is seized, the notice shall state that the dog shall
remain in the custody of the Department pending adjudication. If the Department
will be seeking to take permanent possession of a dog, the notice shall also so
apprise the owner.
   (C)   Requirements for dangerous dogs. All dangerous dogs must be sterilized
without regard to any previously issued permits. The Department shall list
dangerous dogs, including the address of the property where located, on the
Department Website. Dangerous dog owners must allow inspections of the property
by the Department at any reasonable time of day. The Department may charge
reasonable fees for inspections and assess fines for failures of compliance on
a list of fees and fines promulgated from the Department from time to time. If
the owner refuses an inspection, the Department shall seize the dog under law
and may humanely destroy the dog. The Department may impose remedial measures
pertaining to dangerous dogs on one or more occasions. The Department may
require the owner to submit to educational requirements for owners of dangerous
dogs or socialization or other classes for the dog from time to time. Without
limitation on the foregoing, the following requirements pertain to dangerous
dogs:
      (1)   Dangerous dogs are not allowed in dog exercise parks and may not be
taken off the property except on an adequate leash.
      (2)   When off the property, dangerous dogs shall be on an adequate leash
and under the constant control of a responsible person. Dangerous dogs shall
not be transported in a vehicle that might allow the dangerous dog to escape or
gain access to any person or animal outside the vehicle.
      (3)   A dangerous dog shall not be chained, restrained or otherwise
affixed to any stationary object at any time unless under the immediate and
constant observation, care and control of a responsible person. Tethering
permits shall not be issued for dangerous dogs.
      (4)   Dangerous dogs must be confined on the property by a secure fence
or secure facility. Neither verbal commands nor electronic fences are
sufficient.
      (5)   No person convicted of animal cruelty or animal fighting in any
jurisdiction at any time is allowed to own a dangerous dog or function as the
responsible person pertaining to a dangerous dog. The Department shall seize a
dangerous dog whenever any evidence of animal fighting is present on the
dangerous dog, on any other animal on the property, or on the property. Any
person who is registered with the Department and conceals or fails to inform
the Department that they have been convicted of animal cruelty or animal
fighting is subject to the criminal penalties in §
1-1-99 ROA 1994 for each day of possession of a dangerous dog in violation of
this paragraph. The owner may request a hearing if the Department takes action
under this paragraph.
      (6)   An owner of a dangerous dog shall at all times have an insurance
policy with coverage of a minimum of $500,000 pertaining to injury to any
person or property caused by the dangerous dog. The Department may increase the
minimum coverage amount from time to time by regulation.
      (7)   The owner of a dangerous dog shall not sell, loan, transfer, give,
devise, board or otherwise convey ownership or custody and control of a
dangerous dog to any other person without notifying the recipient in writing
that the dog is a dangerous dog and notifying the Department ten days prior to
any change in the location of the property upon which the dangerous dog is or
should be kept.
      (8)   Dangerous dogs shall never be allowed access to, or allowed within
the proximity of, a young child unless the child lives in the same household as
the dog and the dog is under the immediate and constant control of a
responsible person.
      (9)   No lessee shall own or possess a dangerous dog on a leasehold
without the written consent of the lessor.
(Ord. 2-2005; Am. Ord. 2016-009; Am. Ord._2023-015) Penalty, see §
9-17-99
§ 9-17-6 IRRESPONSIBLE OWNERS.
   An Animal Service Officer may determine under Angel's Law or other laws that
a person is an irresponsible owner. A violation of Angel's Law, or a violation
of any city ordinance or state law prohibiting cruelty to animals and/or animal
fighting, or a violation of any city ordinance or state law governing animal
possession limits, is a basis for the Animal Service Officer's determination
that a person is an irresponsible owner. If an Animal Service Officer
determines that a person is an irresponsible owner, the Animal Service Officer
shall so apprise such person by written notice sent by certified mail, hand
delivered or conspicuously posted on the property. Any person determined to be
an irresponsible owner has a right to appeal the determination by requesting a
hearing. If the determination is upheld by the Hearing Officer, or the person
fails to appeal the determination within the applicable time from the date of
notice, then the Hearing Officer shall order that such person is barred from
the ownership, custody or control of dogs or hybrids in the City of Albuquerque
for so long as the Hearing Officer deems necessary. The order shall be in
writing delivered by certified mail, hand delivered or conspicuously posted on
the property. Transient irresponsible owners may be served by publication. The
order may be appealed but shall remain in force unless overturned by the
Hearing Officer or a court of competent jurisdiction. An owner may petition the
Hearing Officer for removal of the irresponsible owner order two years after
the date served but bears the burden of clear and convincing evidence. Any
person who owns a dog after the date of designation as an irresponsible owner
is subject to a continuing violation of §
1-1-99 ROA 1994. The City Council and the Mayor want Angel's Law to be strictly
enforced by the courts.
(Ord. 2-2005; Am. Ord. 2016-009) Penalty, see §
9-17-99
§ 9-17-7 HEARINGS.
   Any person aggrieved by this article may file a Notice of Appeal on a form
obtained from the Department or the City Clerk. The Notice of Appeal shall be
filed with the City Clerk within 15 days from the date of the aggrieving
action. The hearing shall be held in accordance with the provisions in the IHO
Ordinance, ROA 1994,
Chapter 2, Article 7, Part 8.
(Ord. 2-2005; Am. Ord._2016-009; Am. Ord._2023-015)
§ 9-17-99 PENALTY.
   Any violation of this article subjects the violator to the penalty provided
by §
1-1-99 ROA 1994 and each day of a continuing violation is a separate petty
misdemeanor offense. Any violation of this article is not a lesser included
offense for a violation of a similar provision of any other law.
(Ord. 2-2005)
ARTICLE 18: PIGEON NUISANCE ABATEMENT
Section
   
9-18-1   Findings and intent
   
9-18-2   Definitions
   
9-18-3   Making the feeding of feral pigeons a civil violation; providing a
hearing
   
9-18-4   Other acts prohibited
   
9-18-5   Procedure for the abatement of a pigeon nuisance
   
9-18-6   Inspection of buildings, premises and vacant lots
   
9-18-7   Additional remedies
§ 9-18-1 FINDINGS AND INTENT.
   (A)   The Council finds that the urban feral pigeon population is expanding
and the droppings associated with large flocks of feral pigeons interfere with
use and enjoyment of private and public outdoor facilities, create undesirable
conditions and may have an economic impact on the City of Albuquerque.
   (B)   The Council finds that pigeon droppings damage and depreciate
property, make walkways unsafe and unsanitary, and potentially represent a
public health hazard due to parasites or disease that may be associated with
accumulation of pigeon droppings.
   (C)   The Council finds that pigeon waste contributes to the pollution of
the Rio Grande because the waste and its bacteria flows into and through the
storm drainage system to the river after a precipitation event.
   (D)   The Council finds that supplemental feeding of pigeons by humans,
whether deliberate or through negligence, is a substantial cause of the
overpopulation of pigeons in the City of Albuquerque.
   (E)    The Council finds that providing readily available food sources for
pigeons allows their numbers to increase in a manner that negatively impacts
safe and comfortable use of commercial and residential areas, and that research
has demonstrated that restricting access to food is an important factor in
maintaining urban feral pigeon populations at acceptable levels.
   (F)   It is not the intent of the Council to eradicate the feral pigeon
population; this article is intended to address public nuisance associated with
large numbers of pigeons.
   (G)   It is the intent of the Council that the city place an emphasis on
disseminating information about, and assisting citizens with, effective
measures for preventing and abating pigeon nuisance in a manner that promotes
effective management of pigeon populations.
(Ord. 16-2011)
§ 9-18-2 DEFINITIONS.  
   For the purpose of this article, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ABATE. To reduce, stop or prevent a pigeon nuisance.
   DIRECTOR. The Director of the Department of Environmental Health or the
Director's designee.
   FEEDING. Providing food to pigeons. Food may include, but is not limited to
grain, seed, greens, breadcrumbs and other miscellaneous food scraps, including
garbage not properly disposed of or contained.
   OWNER. That person holding the legal title to real property as shown by the
records of the County Assessor.
   PERSON. An individual, partnership, association, syndicate, company, firm,
trust, corporation, or any other entity recognized by law.
   PIGEON. The common pigeon, Columba livia, also known as the rock dove or
rock pigeon. For the purposes of this article, PIGEON refers to any wild state
(feral) pigeon, and does not include domestic pigeons used for recreation or
show.
   PIGEON HARBORAGE. Any condition which provides shelter or protection for
pigeons; thus, favoring their multiplication and continued inhabitance in,
under, outside a structure or premise at a location where there exists a pigeon
nuisance. Housing or shelter provided for injured or ill pigeons that are being
rehabilitated is not considered pigeon harborage.
   PIGEON NUISANCE. The excessive congregation of pigeons at a location when
such congregation of pigeons results in the accumulation of pigeon droppings or
other pigeon related waste. In addition, the accumulation of pigeon excrement,
nesting materials, pigeon carcasses and other pigeon related detritus that may
be damaging to the property, pose a threat to public health and welfare or
contribute to polluted stormwater runoff to the river.
   PIGEON-PROOFING. Actions taken to abate a pigeon nuisance. The actions may
include but are not limited to (a) construction to prevent the ingress of
pigeons into or under buildings or structures from the exterior; (b) steps to
prevent the congregation of pigeons in a given location including the addition
of spikes or other materials to prevent roosting; (c) the removal or covering
of sources of food for pigeons.
   PROPERTY. Real property including buildings structures and land regardless
of use for residential, commercial or other purposes.
   RESPONSIBLE PARTY. That person or those persons who hold that legal or
equitable interest in real property which empowers them to take appropriate
actions to abate a pigeon nuisance found to exist on that real property. This
may include, but not be limited to, a person with ownership, condominium
rights, time-share rights, leasehold rights or an easement, license,
contractual right, and any right or obligation to manage or act as agent or
trustee for any person holding any of the foregoing. The owner of real property
shall be presumed to be the responsible party.
(Ord. 16-2011)
§ 9-18-3 MAKING THE FEEDING OF FERAL PIGEONS A CIVIL VIOLATION; PROVIDING A
HEARING.
   (A)   It is a violation of this article for any person to intentionally feed
feral pigeons on any public or private property within Albuquerque city limits.
   (B)   It is a violation of this article for any person to permit or allow
the placement or discard of food, food by-products, vegetables, garbage or
animal food of any kind in a manner that such person knows will reasonably
result in the lingering, roosting and/or congregating of feral pigeons.
   (C)   This prohibition does not extend to domesticated birds used for show
or for racing, or to injured pigeons that are kept at all times in cages or are
prevented from creating pigeon nuisance conditions on nearby properties.
   (D)   This prohibition does not extend to bird seed set out in bird feeders
or otherwise provided to birds other than pigeons, provided that the seed does
not attract significant numbers of pigeons or create conditions that constitute
a pigeon nuisance.
   (E)   Each act in violation of this section shall constitute a public
nuisance and a separate violation. Any person who violates this section shall
be subject to:
      (1)   The first violation of this section shall result in a written
warning by the Director. This warning will provide the details of the violation
and will specify corrective action.
      (2)   The second violation and subsequent violations of this section
shall result in a fine not to exceed $50 for each violation or each day of a
continuing violation.
   (F)   Any person who is fined for violating this section may request a
hearing by making a written request to the City Clerk within 15 days of the
notice of violation. The hearing shall be held in accordance with the
provisions in the IHO Ordinance, ROA 1994,
Chapter 2, Article 7, Part 8.
(Ord. 16-2011; Am. Ord._2023-015)
§ 9-18-4 OTHER ACTS PROHIBITED.
   (A)   No person shall create or foster any condition or allow any condition
to exist or continue which in any way harbors a number of feral pigeons or
results in an infestation of feral pigeons that would constitute a pigeon
nuisance, as defined herein.
   (B)   No person shall allow the accumulation of pigeon excrement, nesting
materials, pigeon carcasses and other pigeon related detritus that would
constitute a pigeon nuisance, as defined herein, on property where the person
is the owner or occupant.
(Ord. 16-2011)
§ 9-18-5 PROCEDURE FOR THE ABATEMENT OF A PIGEON NUISANCE.
   (A)   There shall be an investigation of any complaint made to the Director
to determine if there is a pigeon nuisance. In addition the Director may
initiate an investigation to determine if a pigeon nuisance exists when there
has been no complaint.
   (B)   The Director shall determine if a pigeon nuisance exists.
   (C)   The Director shall attempt to meet with the property owner and any
person on the property who appears to be a responsible party to notify them
that a pigeon nuisance has been determined to exist. The goal of the meeting
shall be to enter into a written abatement agreement with the City of
Albuquerque wherein the responsible party agrees to take specific steps to
pigeon-proof the property.
   (D)   An abatement agreement may provide for the use of any pigeon-proofing
method agreed upon by the Director and the responsible party. If pigeon-
proofing involves the removal of accumulations of pigeon excrement, nesting
materials, pigeon carcasses or other pigeon related detritus, the method
selected for such removal shall protect human health and ensure that ground
water, surface water and real property are not contaminated by the waste.
   (E)   If the Director determines that the responsible party is in violation
of §
9-18-4 ROA 1994 herein and is unwilling to comply with this article, or if the
responsible party fails to act on or complete the terms and conditions agreed
to in an abatement agreement by the time set forth in the agreement, the
Director may proceed to seek the penalties provided in §
1-1-99 ROA 1994.
(Ord. 16-2011)
§ 9-18-6 INSPECTION OF BUILDINGS, PREMISES AND VACANT LOTS.
   The Director is authorized, by obtaining consent of the owner or occupant,
and at reasonable times, to make such inspections of real property as is
necessary to investigate and abate a pigeon nuisance. For the purpose of making
such inspections, the Director is authorized to enter onto premises to examine
or survey property only after reasonable notice to the owner and any person
occupying the property and with consent. Such entry shall be made in a manner
as to cause the least possible inconvenience to the person in control. In the
event that entry is denied the Director shall obtain a court order for this
purpose from a court of competent jurisdiction.
(Ord. 16-2011)
§ 9-18-7 ADDITIONAL REMEDIES.
   Nothing in this article shall be construed to preclude the city from seeking
any other remedy available in law or equity.
(Ord. 16-2011)
ARTICLE 19: FIRE RESTRICTIONS
Section
   
9-19-1   Findings
   
9-19-2   Short title
   
9-19-3   Fire restriction and bans
   
9-19-4   Imposing, amending and lifting fire bans and restrictions
   
9-19-5   Fire restriction stages
   
9-19-6   Prohibited activities
   
9-19-7   Definitions
   
9-19-8   Exemptions
 
   
9-19-98   Enforcement
   
9-19-99   Penalty
§ 9-19-1 FINDINGS.
   The City Council finds:
   (A)   The City of Albuquerque has unique wildland urban interface areas
comprised of the Bosque Areas of the Rio Grande State Park, open space
recreational areas and wildland areas that consist of 28,000 acres and over 100
miles of public-private border; and
   (B)   There are numerous days each year, due to high winds, lack of
precipitation and low humidity when the fire danger throughout Albuquerque is
high; and
   (C)   The Albuquerque Fire Department responds to numerous brush and Bosque
fires each year within the city, responds to fires that threaten any areas for
which the Fire Department has response obligation, and provides mutual aid to
surrounding communities and agencies; and
   (D)   Should a fire occur during times of high fire danger, it may be
necessary to evacuate and relocate residents of the city; and
   (E)   The affected areas consist of all areas within the municipal
boundaries of the City of Albuquerque, and all lands for which the city has
assumed control or management responsibilities by lease, easement or legal
agreement.
(Ord. 18-2011)
§ 9-19-2 SHORT TITLE.
   This article may be cited as the "Albuquerque Fire Restriction Ordinance".
(Ord. 18-2011)
§ 9-19-3 FIRE RESTRICTION AND BANS.
   (A)   The Fire Chief is hereby authorized during periods of increased fire
danger in the city, both seasonal and unexpected, that pose a significant and
immediate threat to the safety, health and welfare of the citizens, and a
significant and immediate threat to property, to issue fire restrictions and
fire bans as deemed necessary. The Fire Chief shall determine such restrictions
and bans based on current fire indices, fire behavior predictions, current and
expected weather conditions, drought indices, human factors, ignition factors
and local factors which would put undue strain on local fire agencies should a
fire start.
   (B)   The Fire Chief is further authorized during periods of increased fire
danger to prohibit the issuance of permits and ban all open burning and other
ignition sources in all public and private outdoor areas within the municipal
boundaries of the City of Albuquerque, and on all lands for which the city has
assumed control or management responsibilities by lease, easement or legal
agreement. Examples of such open burning and other ignition sources include but
are not limited to:
      (1)   Open burning;
      (2)   Bonfires;
      (3)   Recreational fires;
      (4)   The use of model rockets; and
      (5)   Open flame devices.
(Ord. 18-2011)
§ 9-19-4 IMPOSING, AMENDING AND LIFTING FIRE BANS AND RESTRICTIONS.
   (A)   A ban or stage of restriction shall be publicly declared by the Fire
Chief and announced through all public and private media accessible to the Fire
Chief.
   (B)   Once a ban or restrictions have been declared by the Fire Chief, it
shall remain in effect until the Fire Chief determines that the increased fire
danger has been alleviated.
   (C)   The Fire Chief will publicly announce that a ban or restriction has
been lessened or removed using the same media used to declare the ban or
restriction.
(Ord. 18-2011)
§ 9-19-5 FIRE RESTRICTION STAGES.
   The following fire restriction stages are established for all open space
areas in the municipal boundaries of the City of Albuquerque or owned by the
City of Albuquerque. Increased fire restrictions shall be determined by the
Fire Chief and shall be based upon current fire indices, fire behavior
predictions, current and expected weather conditions, drought indices, human
factors, ignition factors and local factors that would cause undue strain on
local fire agencies in the event of a fire.
   (A)   Stage I fire restrictions. The goal of Stage I restrictions is to
prevent the start of wildfires based on human activities that are known to be
high risk. Based on climate and fuel conditions in the Albuquerque area, Stage
I restrictions shall be in effect at all times within all open space areas as
defined herein unless a more restrictive stage has been imposed.
   (B)   Stage II fire restrictions. Stage II restrictions will be imposed when
the threat of fire danger increases from conditions requiring Stage I
restrictions. This stage intensifies the restrictions from Stage I by focusing
on activities that, although normally managed under permit or contract, have a
relatively high risk of causing a fire to start. Stage II restrictions limit
the activities of contractors, permittees and other wildlands users in open
space areas. The costs and benefits of imposing Stage II restrictions upon such
contractors, permittees and wildlands users and the general public will be
taken into account by the Fire Chief prior to determining to impose Stage II
restrictions.
   (C)   Stage III closure. Stage III results in the closure of specific open
space areas. This stage will be implemented when ongoing emergencies pose a
risk to the health and welfare of the public or when the ability to mitigate
risks using Stage I or II restrictions is no longer viable. The need to protect
the public at this stage outweighs the impacts of implementing a partial or
complete closure.
(Ord. 18-2011)
§ 9-19-6 PROHIBITED ACTIVITIES.
   (A)   Stage I. The following activities are prohibited in open space areas
as defined herein while Stage I restrictions are in effect:
      (1)   Building, maintaining, attending or using a fire, open flame,
campfire or stove fire except within a developed recreation site.
      (2)   Smoking, except within an enclosed vehicle.
      (3)   Possessing, discharging or using any kind of fireworks or other
pyrotechnic device.
      (4)   Possessing or operating a motor vehicle off any publicly designated
roadway, except when parking in developed parking lots or at developed
trailheads unless otherwise authorized by a recognized government agency having
such authority.
      (5)   Operating a chainsaw or other equipment powered by an internal
combustion engine unless otherwise authorized by a recognized government agency
having such authority.
      (6)   Operating any piece of spark-emitting equipment unless otherwise
authorized by a recognized government agency having such authority.
      (7)   Operating any internal or external combustion engine unless
otherwise authorized by a recognized government agency having such authority.
      (8)   Welding, or operating an acetylene or other torch with an open
flame unless otherwise authorized by a recognized government agency having such
authority.
      (9)   Camping or overnight stay.
   (B)   Stage II. The following activities are prohibited in open space areas
as defined herein while Stage II restrictions are in effect:
      (1)   Building, maintaining, attending or using a fire, open flame,
campfire or stove fire.
      (2)   Smoking.
      (3)   Possessing, discharging or using any kind of fireworks or other
pyrotechnic device.
      (4)   Possessing or using a motor vehicle off any publicly designated
roadways, except when parking in developed parking lots or at developed
trailheads.
      (5)   Operating a chainsaw or other equipment powered by an internal
combustion engine.
      (6)   Operating any piece of spark-emitting equipment.
      (7)   Operating any internal or external combustion engine.
      (8)   Welding, or operating an acetylene or other torch with an open
flame.
      (9)   Camping or overnight stay.
   (C)   Stage III closure. While Stage III closure is in effect for any or all
open space areas as defined herein, it shall be prohibited to enter into or be
upon the restricted area.
(Ord. 18-2011)
§ 9-19-7 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purposes of this article, the following definitions shall apply.
   BONFIRE. An outdoor fire used for ceremonial purposes.
   BOSQUE or BOSQUE AREAS. The cottonwood corridor adjacent to and on either
side of the Rio Grande.
   FIRE CHIEF. The chief officer of the Albuquerque Fire Department.
   OPEN BURNING. The burning of materials wherein products of combustion are
emitted directly into the ambient air without passing through a stack or
chimney from an enclosed chamber. OPEN BURNING does not include road flares,
smudgepots and similar devices associated with safety or occupational uses
typically considered open flames, recreational fires or use of portable outdoor
fireplaces. For the purpose of this definition, a chamber shall be regarded as
enclosed when, during the time combustion occurs, only apertures, ducts,
stacks, flues or chimneys necessary to provide combustion air and permit the
escape of exhaust gas are open.
   OPEN SPACE AREAS. Includes those lands zoned or designated as open space in
the city's adopted plan for major public open space and acquired by the city;
Bosque or Bosque Areas; the Rio Grande State Park; Wildlands Areas and
wildlands/urban interface areas; major named arroyos; lined or unlined drain-
ways; retention dams and retention pond areas and abutting rights-of-way or
easements which have been publicly acquired; and any open lands for which the
city has assumed control or management responsibility by lease, easement, or
legal agreement.
   RECREATIONAL FIRE. An outdoor fire burning materials other than rubbish
where the fuel being burned is not contained in an incinerator, outdoor
fireplace, portable outdoor fireplace, barbeque grill or barbeque pit and has a
total fuel area of three feet or less in diameter and two feet or less in
height for pleasure, religious, ceremonial, cooking, warmth or similar
purposes.
   RIO GRANDE STATE PARK. The park area established in the Rio Grande Valley
State Park Act that has boundaries defined in Section 16-4-12 NMSA 1978 and is
under the management of the City of Albuquerque pursuant to the Rio Grande
Valley State Park Act.
   WILDLANDS AREAS. The lands owned by the city that are designated for public
recreational purposes and that are covered wholly or in part by timber, brush
or native grasses.
(Ord. 18-2011)
§ 9-19-8 EXEMPTIONS.
   This article shall not apply to any federal, state, or local public safety
officer, or member of an organized rescue or firefighting force in the
performance of an official duty.
(Ord. 18-2011)
§ 9-19-98 ENFORCEMENT.
   The Fire Chief or his designees and the Albuquerque Police Department's Open
Space Officers shall enforce the "Albuquerque Fire Restriction Ordinance."
(Ord. 18-2011)
§ 9-19-99 PENALTY.
   Any person convicted of violating any provision of this article or failing
or neglecting to comply with any orders issued pursuant to any section thereof
shall be deemed guilty of a petty misdemeanor and such person shall be guilty
of a separate offense for each and every day or portion thereof during which
any such violation is continued or permitted. Upon conviction, each such
violation shall be punishable by a fine of not more than $500 or by
imprisonment for not more than 90 days, or by both such fine and imprisonment.
(Ord. 18-2011)
ARTICLE 20: FIREWORKS
Section
   
9-20-1   Findings
   
9-20-2   Prohibitions
   
9-20-3   Use of permissible fireworks
   
9-20-4   Exemption
 
   
9-20-99   Penalty
§ 9-20-1 FINDINGS.
   The Council finds:
   (A)   Pursuant to Section 60-2C-7 NMSA 1978, Permissible Fireworks, a
municipality may regulate or prohibit the sale and use of fireworks known as
aerial devices and ground audible devices.
   (B)   Fireworks that are considered "safe and sane" are those that do not
fly or explode. Aerial devices and ground audible devices are not "safe and
sane" firework devices. Once ignited, aerial devices (aerial shell kit-
reloadable tubes, aerial spinners, helicopters, mines, missile-type rockets,
multiple tube devices, roman candles, shells, and stick-type rockets) take an
unpredictable flight pattern, and pose a significant fire hazard to vegetation
and structures. They also possess a considerable injury potential to the user
and general public. Ground audible devices (chasers and fire crackers) are
disturbing to the public peace and possess a considerable injury potential to
the user and general public.
   (C)   Should the city experience a fire that burns out of control in the
Bosque or other open space areas, the flora and fauna in those protected areas
are at great risk of sustaining devastating loss and/or destruction.
   (D)   Should the city experience a fire that burns out of control in
populated areas, it may be necessary to evacuate and relocate affected
residents.
   (E)   The 4th of July weekend presents a greatly increased fire risk because
of the widespread use of fireworks.
   (F)   The outdoor recreation program for model rocketry is considered a
great educational opportunity for city youths. The rocketry program has
prepared young participants with lifelong skills such as, persistence, reading
instructions, following directions, teamwork and basic science. Model rocket
launches under this program are conducted with safety as a priority, under
strict adult supervision, and only as permitted by the Fire Department.
(Ord._2012-022; Am. Ord._2015-030)
§ 9-20-2 PROHIBITIONS.
   The following acts are prohibited within the city:
   (A)   The sale and/or use of aerial devices within the municipal limits of
Albuquerque. Aerial devices are defined as: aerial shell kit-reloadable tubes,
aerial spinners, helicopters, mines, missile-type rockets, multiple tube
devices, roman candles, shells, and stick- type rockets;
   (B)   The sale and/or use of ground audible devices within the municipal
limits of Albuquerque. Ground audible devices are defined as: chasers and fire
crackers; and
   (C)   The use of any fireworks within open space areas as defined in the
Albuquerque Fire Restriction Ordinance, §§
9-19-1 et seq. ROA 1994.
(Ord._2012-022) Penalty, see §
9-20-99
§ 9-20-3 USE OF PERMISSIBLE FIREWORKS.
   The use of any permissible fireworks not prohibited by this article should
be confined to areas that are paved or barren or that have a readily accessible
source of water for use by the homeowner or the general public.
(Ord._2012-022)
§ 9-20-4 EXEMPTION.
   Nothing within this article shall prohibit public displays of fireworks as
defined in the Fire Code as adopted in §§
14-2-1 et seq. ROA 1994, so long as those displays are in strict conformance
with the requirements and conditions for public displays as set forth in that
code and as approved by the City Fire Chief. Furthermore, nothing within this
article shall prohibit the building and launching of model rockets as part of
the city summer rocketry program while fire restrictions and bans are issued,
provided the launching of rockets is accomplished safely and only as permitted
and inspected by the Albuquerque Fire Department.
(Ord._2012-022; Am. Ord._2015-030)
§ 9-20-99 PENALTY.
   Any individual, firm, partnership or other entity found violating this
article shall, upon conviction, be subject to a fine not exceeding $500 or by
imprisonment not exceeding 90 days or both. Each separate violation shall
constitute a separate offense and upon conviction, each day of violation shall
constitute a separate offense.
(Ord._2012-022)
ARTICLE 21: BLASTING
Section
   
9-21-1   Notice requirement for blasting permit
§ 9-21-1 NOTICE REQUIREMENT FOR BLASTING PERMIT.
   (A)   Any project, public or private, that requires a city issued blasting
permit shall be subject to the requirements of this section.
   (B)   No blasting permit shall be issued without the approval of the Fire
Marshal, the Albuquerque Police Department and the City Engineer.
   (C)   The City Engineer shall not approve a blasting permit until the
applicant has submitted the following material to the City Engineer together
with the blasting permit application:
      (1)   A sample of the notice that, at least ten days prior to the first
blast, shall be:
         (a)   Mailed by first class mail to all property owners of all
properties, and/or
         (b)   Hand-delivered to all occupied properties that are within 500
feet of the perimeter of the limits of construction where the blasting is to
occur ("the notification area"); and
         (c)   Mailed or emailed to the contacts for the following associations
and coalitions determined by the city's Office of Neighborhood Coordination to
be all or partially within or adjacent to the notification area:
            (i)   Recognized neighborhood associations;
            (ii)   Unrecognized neighborhood associations and homeowner
associations that have provided contact information to the city's Office of
Neighborhood Coordination; and
            (iii)   Neighborhood coalitions.
      (2)   A list of all addresses to which the notice will be sent or hand-
delivered.
      (3)   Proof of compliance with any other notice procedures deemed
necessary by the City Engineer to protect the public's health, safety and
welfare which may include, but are not limited to, the use of variable message
board signs in the vicinity of the blasting area to alert the public to the
start date of the project. If variable message boards are required, the number
and locations of these signs will be determined by the City Engineer. The
applicant should coordinate with the City Engineer in advance of its
application to determine what notice, if any, will be required in addition to
the requirements in division (C)(1) of this section.
   (D)   At a minimum, the notice shall state the purpose for blasting, the
general project site boundaries, the anticipated start date and estimated
completion date of the blasting activity, and the name and contact phone number
of the individual(s) from whom further information may be obtained.
(Ord._2013-014)
ARTICLE 22: SECURITY ASSISTANCE FUNDING DISTRICTS
Section
   
9-22-1   Security Assistance Funding Districts
   
9-22-2   Grants for designated public safety districts
§ 9-22-1 SECURITY ASSISTANCE FUNDING DISTRICTS.
   The City Council may designate by resolution certain areas of the City as
Security Assistance Funding (SAF) Districts, for which the provisions of this
section shall apply. In making such a designation, the Council must find that
the area meets the following conditions:
   (A)   The area is a commercial or arts and cultural district with
significant economic development, art or cultural impact, tourist-related
facilities and attractions or tourist-related transportation systems, or is of
other significant importance to the city. The area cannot be primarily
residential in nature.
   (B)   The area is compact and contiguous enough to be identifiable as a
distinct area of the city, and must be listed with specificity by blocks and
map.
   (C)   The City Council has received an application requesting the
designation of a SAF District from ten or more business owners comprising at
least 51% of the total business owners in the proposed district or from five or
more real property owners comprising at least 51% of the total real property
owners in the proposed district, exclusive of any real property owned by the
United States or the state or any of its political subdivisions. Prior to
submission to the city, the applicant shall work with city staff, including
staff from APD, DMD, DFAS and Council Services, to jointly develop a proposed
security plan for the area. The application shall:
      (1)   State the purpose for the creation of the district;
      (2)   Describe in general terms the real property to be included in the
district;
      (3)   Include a security plan developed in conjunction with city staff,
that addresses specific public safety issues within the area, including
specific criminal offenses that are prevalent in the area. The security plan
must be specific to the area and backed up with verifiable data.
   (D)   The designation as an SAF District is valid for one year and the
Council must reconsider and readopt these findings on an annual basis in order
for the area to maintain the SAF District designation.
(Ord._2017-029)
§ 9-22-2 GRANTS FOR DESIGNATED PUBLIC SAFETY DISTRICTS.
   Subject to appropriation and the availability of funds, upon designation or
re-designation as a SAF District, the area is eligible for matching grants from
the city to assist in the implementation of the security plan described in
subparagraph (C)(3) above. City grants will be subject to the following
conditions:
   (A)   Grants for any designated SAF District may not exceed $100,000 in any
fiscal year;
   (B)   Grants will require a 1:1 cash match from the merchants and/or
property owners in the area. In other words, every dollar of city grant must be
matched by a dollar from the merchants or property owners in the area;
   (C)   Grants may be used to pay for components described in the security
plan for the area including, but not limited to, private security, surveillance
cameras, street and pedestrian lighting, alarm systems, signage related to
public safety, barriers, fencing, gates and chief’s overtime;
   (D)   The applicant must provide a board to administer the grant. The board
may be either a local business association, a local mainstreet program, or a
non-profit entity;
   (E)   At the end of each fiscal year, the grantee, as designated by
resolution, shall provide the city with a report consisting of a complete
accounting of all expenditures relating to the security plan for the area, and
data describing progress, if any, towards reducing the specific public safety
issues that led to the designation of the area as a SAF District.
(Ord._2017-029)
ARTICLE 23: [RESERVED]
ARTICLE 24: SAFE OUTDOOR SPACE OPERATOR'S PERMITS
Section
   
9-24-1   Short title
   
9-24-2   Applicability
   
9-24-3   Intent and purposes
   
9-24-4   Definitions
   
9-24-5   Safe outdoor space operator's permits
   
9-24-6   Safe outdoor space operating requirements
   
9-24-7   Enforcement
§ 9-24-1 SHORT TITLE.
   This Article, ROA 1994, §§
9-24-1, et seq., shall be known and cited as the "Safe Outdoor Space Operator's
Permit Ordinance."
(Ord._2022-037)
§ 9-24-2 APPLICABILITY.
   This Article applies to the permitting and operation of Safe Outdoor Spaces
as defined by §
9-24-4, Definitions.
(Ord._2022-037)
§ 9-24-3 INTENT AND PURPOSES.
   This Article, ROA 1994, §§
9-24-1, et seq., establishes minimum operational standards and a system of
operational permitting for Safe Outdoor Spaces (SOS) in order to promote
sanitation and the health, safety, and general welfare of Safe Outdoor Space
occupants and the broader community.
(Ord._2022-037)
§ 9-24-4 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of §§
9-24-1 et seq., the following definitions shall apply unless the context
clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   SAFE OUTDOOR SPACE ("SOS"). Per the Integrated Development Ordinance, a SAFE
OUTDOOR SPACE is a lot, or a portion of a lot, developed to provide designated
spaces for occupancy by tents, recreational vehicles, and/or light vehicles.
Designated spaces are provided to occupants at no charge. A safe outdoor space
offers social services and support facilities.
   SAFE OUTDOOR SPACE OPERATOR (an "OPERATOR"). The owner or party otherwise
responsible for a Safe Outdoor Space operation.
(Ord._2022-037)
§ 9-24-5 SAFE OUTDOOR SPACE OPERATOR'S PERMITS.
   (A)   Permit required. No person shall operate any safe outdoor space
without first obtaining, and maintaining, a safe outdoor space operator's
permit pursuant to this section. In addition to any other necessary
information, a prospective operator shall submit the following for each SOS
operator's permit application:
      (1)   A statement describing the operator's experience working with
people experiencing homelessness and/or managing organizations that work with
people experiencing homelessness;
      (2)   The physical address of the safe outdoor space;
      (3)   The name, phone number, email, and address of the operator or its
agent(s) who will be available 24 hours per day, seven days a week to respond
to complaints regarding the operation or occupancy of the safe outdoor space;
      (4)   Written consent to complete a background check on the primary
operator. Persons with criminal records will be denied a safe outdoor space
operators permit only to the extent authorized by the New Mexico Criminal
Offender Employment Act, Section 28-2-1 et seq. NMSA 1978;
      (5)   An operations plan that, at a minimum, addresses the following:
         (a)   The type and frequency of on-site resources and services to
support the occupants of the safe outdoor space, including food services and/or
resources as well as mental and physical health services;
         (b)   The process for checking in and registering tenants;
         (c)   Site security and tenant safety;
         (d)   Fire safety and fire evacuation;
         (e)   Whether the site will be accessible to the general public, other
than its tenants, and under what circumstances and during what hours;
         (f)   A code of conduct for the occupants and tenants that, at a
minimum, address violent behavior, weapons, drugs and alcohol, and whether
progressive warnings will be utilized before removal;
         (g)   A property maintenance plan describing how the site will be
maintained, including a plan to keep the site clean and free of weeds, debris,
or other waste;
         (h)   A pet policy that, to the extent pets are allowed, includes
provisions to help ensure humane and sanitary conditions for pets;
         (i)   A policy to assist any person staying at a Safe Outdoor Space to
obtain a government-issued identification card;
         (j)   A wastewater and sanitation plan;
         (k)   A decommissioning plan describing the process and timeline for
termination of the use and closure of the site and describing how the site will
be returned to the previous condition or better;
         (I)   Evidence of ownership or evidence of consent by the owner for
the proposed use of the property;
         (m)   A list of the data that will be collected and reported on the
site that includes, but is not limited to:
            1.   The number of individuals who receive a risk assessment using
the Vulnerability Index-Service Prioritization Decision Assistance Tool (VI
SPDAT).
            2.   The number of tenants who are served per quarter.
            3.   The number of tenants who are exited from the program,
including the reason for the departure.
            4.   The number of tenants who are employed, and whether employment
is full-time or part-time.
   (B)   Permit duration; inspection. A safe outdoor space operator's permit is
valid for 12 consecutive months unless sooner terminated by the operator, or
canceled by the city. The materials required pursuant to division (A) must be
resubmitted at the time of each requested renewal.
   (C)   Permit fee. The city shall collect a safe outdoor space operator's
permit fee of $100.00 for each initial permit, and $50.00 for the renewals
thereafter. Revenue generated will be used only to administer, manage, and
enforce this section. Safe outdoor space operator's permits are non-
transferable, and remain valid only so long as the person(s) or entities listed
on the operator's permit continue to manage and oversee the safe outdoor space.
(Ord._2022-037)
§ 9-24-6 SAFE OUTDOOR SPACE OPERATING REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   Each operator shall engage in a Good Neighbor Program with neighbors
within 100 feet of the property.
   (B)   Each operator shall maintain an up-to-date registry of the current and
past tenants of the safe outdoor space, together with an approved visitor
registry identifying each non-tenant who accesses the site.
   (C)   Each operator shall inspect the right-of-way and public spaces
adjacent to or surrounding the safe outdoor space daily for the unlawful use or
occupancy by non-tenants of the safe outdoor space, and shall immediately
report any such instances to the city using the 311 Citizens Contact Center.
   (D)   Each operator shall contract with an appropriate non-profit
organization to provide street outreach in areas adjacent to the SOS.
   (E)   During the first six months of operation, each operator shall offer to
meet with the property owners within 660 feet of the safe outdoor space at
least once per month to review operations and progress of the site, and to
address questions, concerns, and ideas from the public. Following the first six
months of operation, each operator shall offer these meetings on at least a
quarterly basis.
   (F)   Each operator must establish quiet hours for residents between the
hours of 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m.
   (G)   Safe Outdoor Space Operators shall not permit persons with a felony
assault/battery conviction to stay in a Safe Outdoor Space. Any background
checks conducted by the operator shall be done at no expense to the potential
resident. Potential residents shall be permitted to reside at the Safe Outdoor
Space while a background investigation is pending.
(Ord._2022-037)
§ 9-24-7 ENFORCEMENT.
   The city shall give warning to any operator who is determined to be non-
compliant with any section of this ordinance, or with the policies submitted
with its safe outdoor space operator's permit application. If the operator does
not come into compliance after two warnings, the city shall revoke the
operator's permit. Upon revocation, the operator shall immediately commence
with its decommissioning plan, and complete its decommissioning within 60 days
of the revocation.
(Ord._2022-037)
ARTICLE 25: PUBLIC CAMPING
Section
   
9-25-1   Short title
   
9-25-2   Purpose
   
9-25-3   Definitions
   
9-25-4   Unlawful camping
   
9-25-5   Unlawful storage of personal property
   
9-25-6   Promulgation of rules
   
9-25-7   Penalty for violations
§ 9-25-1 SHORT TITLE.
   This article may be cited as “The Public Camping Ordinance.”
(Ord. 2024-049)
§ 9-25-2 PURPOSE.
   It is the purpose of this article to prevent harm to the health and safety
of the public and to promote the health, safety and welfare of the City by
keeping streets, sidewalks and other public property clear of encampments and
to prevent the use of public property in a manner that interferes with the
rights of others to use the areas for their intended purposes.
(Ord. 2024-049)
§ 9-25-3 DEFINITIONS.
   CAMP. To occupy an area for the purpose of establishing or maintaining a
permanent or temporary place to live, or to occupy an area for 24 hours or
more.
   CAMP FACILITIES. Tents, huts and any other temporary structures or shelters.
   CAMP PARAPHERNALIA. Tarpaulins, cots, beds, sleeping bags, hammocks, carts/
shopping carts, cooking facilities and similar equipment.
   ENCAMPMENT. An area where an individual or individuals have erected one or
more tent or structures or placed personal items on public property for 24
hours or more. An area will not be deemed an encampment merely because any
individuals are present on public property or because individuals have
temporarily placed personal items on public property.
   PERSONAL PROPERTY. An item that is reasonably recognizable as belonging to a
person.
(Ord. 2024-049)
§ 9-25-4 UNLAWFUL CAMPING.
   Except as otherwise authorized by ordinance or by rules issued by the
Department of Parks and Recreation, it shall be unlawful for any person to
camp, or maintain an encampment, in any publicly owned area, including any
street, sidewalk, right of way, park, or open space. It shall further be
unlawful for any person to refuse to remove an encampment from public land
after receiving a notice instructing them to remove the encampment, or to set
up an encampment after being ordered to remove one from a particular location.
A person does not violate this ordinance if the person is merely sitting,
sleeping or lying on public property on a temporary basis.
(Ord. 2024-049)
§ 9-25-5 UNLAWFUL STORAGE OF PERSONAL PROPERTY.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to maintain personal property, including
camp facilities or camp paraphernalia, on public property after that person has
received a notice instructing them to remove the items.
(Ord. 2024-049)
§ 9-25-6 PROMULGATION OF RULES.
   The Mayor may promulgate rules necessary for the prevention, abatement and
removal of encampments from public property within the City.
(Ord. 2024-049)
§ 9-25-7 PENALTY FOR VIOLATIONS.
   Any person who violates §
9-25-4 or
9-25-5 shall be deemed guilty of a petty misdemeanor and, upon conviction
thereof, shall be subject to the penalty provisions set forth in §
1-1-99 of this code of ordinances.
(Ord. 2024-049)
ARTICLE 26: DISTRESSED LODGING PROPERTY
Section
   
9-26-1   Short title
   
9-26-2   Purpose
   
9-26-3   Definitions
   
9-26-4   Applicability
   
9-26-5   Enhanced operational requirements
   
9-26-6   Penalty
§ 9-26-1 SHORT TITLE.
   This article may be referred to as the Distressed Lodging Property
Ordinance.
(Ord. 2025-016)
§ 9-26-2 PURPOSE.
   This Ordinance establishes enhanced operational requirements for lodging
establishments.
(Ord. 2025-016)
§ 9-26-3 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this article, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   GUEST. Any individual aged 18 or older who is the registered occupant of a
lodging establishment for an overnight stay.
   LODGING ESTABLISHMENT. Any lodging facility, including a hotel, motel, bed
and breakfast, inn, extended stay property, short term rental, or other similar
place, that offers temporary overnight accommodations to the public for a fee.
   COMPLIANCE PERIOD. A period of twelve months in which the property must
adhere to all additional regulations outlined in this Ordinance.
(Ord. 2025-016)
§ 9-26-4 APPLICABILITY.
   (A)   This Ordinance applies to any lodging establishment that has:
      i.   Failed to make lodgers tax and/or hospitality fee payments to the
City for 3 consecutive months pursuant to § 4-4, the Lodgers’ Tax Ordinance.
      ii.   Has been found in violation of any City Ordinance on three or more
separate occasions within a twelve-month period.
      iii.   Has been found in violation of the Nuisance Abatement Ordinance, §
11-1-1-1 et seq. on one or more occasions in the previous twelve months.
   (B)   In the instance that a lodging establishment is subject to the
enhanced operational requirements in §
9-26-5 changes ownership, all new owners and operators of the property will
remain subject to the requirements until the Compliance Period has ended.
(Ord. 2025-016)
§ 9-26-5 ENHANCED OPERATIONAL REQUIREMENTS.
   Lodging establishments subject to this Ordinance shall comply with the
following regulations during the Compliance Period:
   (A)   Guest Identification:
      i.   If payment is with a debit or credit card, the following information
shall be retained for 45 days:
         a)   The name on the card; and
         b)   The card brand; and
         c)   The last four digits of the card.
      ii.   A copy of the guest’s photo ID if available, or if not available
then a clear, discernable, color still image of the guest that clearly depicts
a full-face view of the person must be retained for a minimum of 45 days and
made available to the City upon request in accordance with applicable laws.
      iii.   If a guest will be parking a vehicle on the property during any
portion of their stay, the guest must provide the make, model, and license
plate number(s) for any such vehicle(s).
      iv.   A record of the license plate number of all guests’ vehicles must
be retained for a minimum of 45 days and made available to the City upon
request in accordance with applicable laws.
   (B)   Guest Logbook:
      i.   Maintain a secure, digital or physical logbook of all guest check-
ins, including the name, address if available, phone number if available, and
license plate(s) of all vehicles for the guest if available, along with the
room number and duration of stay. Records must be retained for a minimum of 45
days.
      ii.   In the event that a logbook is obtained by the City, the contents
of such shall be exempt from the Inspection of Public Records Act (IPRA) and
shall only be reviewed by City Departments enforcing this Ordinance.
(Ord. 2025-016)
§ 9-26-6 PENALTY.
   Noncompliance of this section shall constitute a separate violation for each
and every day or portion thereof that the violation is continued, committed or
permitted.
   (A)   The Mayor or their designee may impose a civil fine of $500 per day
for each violation of this Ordinance. This fine may be assessed as a lien
against the property involved, or a personal obligation of the property owner.
      (1)   A civil fine assessed pursuant to this Ordinance may be appealed to
an Independent Hearing Officer pursuant to the procedures established in the
IHO Ordinance, Sections
2-7-8-1 to
-10.
      (2)   Notice of such civil fine shall be mailed by certified mail, return
receipt requested, to the owner(s) of the real property.
         i.   The mailing of the notice shall be deemed sufficient if mailed to
the owner(s) of the real property at the address(es) shown on the records of
the Bernalillo County Clerk and/or the Bernalillo County Assessor’s Office.
         ii.   The notice shall state:
            a.   The property is in violation of this Ordinance;
            b.   The conditions, actions, or deficiencies that resulted in such
violation(s);
            c.   A civil penalty has been assessed against the owner(s) of the
property and specify the amount of the civil penalty;
            d.   The civil penalty must be paid within thirty (30) days from
the date of the notice;
            e.   That a lien will be filed against the property for the amount
of the civil penalty plus the cost of fees associated with filing a lien with
Bernalillo County if the civil penalty is not timely paid; and
            f.   That the civil penalty can be appealed pursuant to the
procedures established in the IHO Ordinance, Sections
2-7-8-1 to
-10.
      (3)   Transfer of property ownership shall not terminate any order issued
pursuant to this section. An individual acquiring a property that is or was in
violation of this section shall be responsible for compliance with any order or
pending enforcement action taken pursuant to this section.
   (B)   The Mayor or their designee may, for any violation of this article,
take one or more of the following actions:
      (1)   Prevent the occupancy of the building, structure, or land on which
the business is located; or
      (2)   Assess a civil fine.
   (C)   In addition to the remedies provided above, this article may be
enforced by the City by suit in District Court.
(Ord. 2025-016)
CHAPTER 10: AMUSEMENTS,
RECREATION, CULTURE
   Article
      
1:   PARKS
      
2:   ZOO; AQUATIC PARK; BOTANICAL GARDEN
      
3:   SWIMMING POOLS
      
4:   MUSEUMS; SCIENCE AND ART CENTERS
      
5:   ART IN MUNICIPAL PLACES
      
6:   LIBRARIES
      
7:   SISTER CITY
      
8:   MUNICIPAL GOLF COURSES
      
9:   PUBLIC DANCES
      
10:   
BALLOON FIESTA
ARTICLE 1: PARKS
Section
Part 1: General Provisions
   
10-1-1-1   Definitions
   
10-1-1-2   Purpose
   
10-1-1-3   Park property
   
10-1-1-4   Sanitation
   
10-1-1-5   Animals prohibited in Civic Plaza during a special event
   
10-1-1-6   Traffic
   
10-1-1-7   Recreational activities
   
10-1-1-8   Merchandising, advertising and signs
   
10-1-1-9   Dog exercise grounds
   
10-1-1-10   Park operating policy
   
10-1-1-99   Penalty
Part 2: Metropolitan Parks and Recreation Advisory Board
   
10-1-2-1   Intent
   
10-1-2-2   Purpose
   
10-1-2-3   Composition of the board
   
10-1-2-4   Powers and duties
   
10-1-2-5   Conflict of interest
Part 3: Park Facilities Design Project Technical Committee
   
10-1-3-1   Definitions
   
10-1-3-2   Intent
   
10-1-3-3   Park facilities design project technical committee
Cross-reference:
   
City Forester's duties re parks, see
§§ 6-6-1-1 et seq.
PART 1: GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 10-1-1-1 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of §§
10-1-1-1 et seq., the following definitions shall apply unless the context
clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ANIMAL. Any vertebrate member of the animal kingdom other than humans.
   CAMP. To occupy an area for the purpose of establishing or maintaining a
permanent or temporary place to live for 24 hours or more, or outside of
regular park hours.
   CIVIC PLAZA. The park more particularly described as the City property
within the area bounded on the east by Third Street, on the north by Marquette
Avenue, on the west by Fifth Street, and on the south by Tijeras Avenue.
   MAYOR. The Mayor or his duly designated representative or agent.
   PARK. Any area of land so designated and maintained by the City as a place
of beauty or recreation or both.
   PLAYGROUND AREA. The area in a park containing playground equipment or
structures for children’s play, such as swings, slides, climbing structures,
and the like. This definition shall not include goals, backstops, or other
sports equipment or structures, but it shall include the area under and around
children’s play structures containing sand, wood chips, or other cushioned
surfaces and bordered by concrete, wood, or other means of containing this
material.
   SPECIAL EVENT. Any privately or publicly sponsored advertised activity at a
ity park or other facility operated by the Parks and Recreation Department, to
which the general public is invited for the purpose of recreation, culture or
entertainment, and at which food or beverages may be available.
('74 Code, 11-2-1) (Ord. 150-1971; Am. Ord. 27-1991; Am. Ord._2013-001; Am.
Ord. 2024-046)
§ 10-1-1-2 PURPOSE.
   The purpose of §§
10-1-1-1 et seq. is to preserve the environmental features of the City, allow
more efficient park refuse collection, more effective and unhampered custodial
care of the premises, and protect the health and welfare of the citizens of the
City.
('74 Code, 11-2-2) (Ord. 150- 1971; Am. Ord. 2024-046)
§ 10-1-1-3 PARK PROPERTY.
   (A)   Buildings and Other Property.
      (1)   Disfigure and Removal. No person in a park shall willfully mark,
deface, disfigure, injure, tamper with or remove, any building, bridges,
tables, benches, fireplaces, railings, paving or paving material, water lines
or other public utilities or parts or appurtenances thereof, signs, notices, or
placards, whether temporary or permanent, monuments, stakes, posts, or other
boundary markers, or other structures or equipment, facilities, or park
property or appurtenances whatsoever, either real or personal.
      (2)   Damage to Natural Resources. No person in a park shall dig, remove,
crush, or otherwise damage any landscaping or plant material. This includes,
but is not limited to, sand, wood chips, soil, rock, stones, trees, grass,
shrubs or plants, or down timber.
      (3)   Erection of Tents or Other Structures. No person in a park shall
camp or construct or erect any tent, building or other structure overnight or
after normal park operating hours. Exceptions may be made for youth
organizations camping with adult supervision for the purpose of introducing
children to camping and outdoor experiences, with written permission from the
Director of the Parks & Recreation Department. In such cases, the group size
shall be limited to a maximum of 25, shall not camp for more than one night,
and the adult leader in charge shall have their permit available for inspection
by City authorities. The Director of the Parks and Recreation Department may
establish other restrictions and requirements on such camping permits.
      (4)   Shopping Carts Prohibited. Shopping carts are prohibited in City
parks, open spaces, and the parking areas that serve these facilities. Any
shopping cart, whether empty or containing any merchandise or belongings, may
be confiscated and either returned to the cart owner, recycled, or otherwise
disposed of.
   (B)   Trees, Shrubbery, Lawn.
      (1)   Injury and Removal. No person in a park shall damage, cut, carve,
transplant or remove any tree or plant or injure the bark or pick the flowers
or seeds, of any tree or plant. Nor shall any person attach any rope, wire,
hammock, or other contrivance to any tree or plant. No person shall damage
grass by leaving personal items in grass areas for extended periods. This
Section shall not apply to Parks & Recreation staff conducting routine
maintenance.
      (2)   Climbing Trees and the like. No person in a park shall climb any
tree or walk, stand or sit upon monuments, vases, fountains, railings, fences
or gun carriages or upon any other property not designated or customarily used
for such purposes.
      (3)   Hitching of Animals. No person in a park shall tie or hitch a horse
or other animal to any tree or plant.
   (C)   Wild Animals, Birds and the like.
      (1)   Hunting. No person in a park shall hunt, molest, harm, frighten,
tease, shoot or throw missiles at any animal, reptile or bird; nor shall a
person remove or possess the young of any wild animals, or the eggs or nest, or
young of any reptile or bird. Exception is made for poisonous reptiles, such as
rattlesnakes, which may be killed if presenting an immediate, direct, and
proximate threat.
      (2)   Feeding. No person in a park shall give or offer food, tobacco,
alcohol, or other known noxious or injurious substances to any bird or wild
animal. Park users shall clean up and remove all food scraps and wrappers that
could attract wild animals.
('74 Code, 11-2-3) (Ord. 150-1971; Am. Ord. 2024-046)
§ 10-1-1-4 SANITATION.
   No person in a park shall:
   (A)   Throw, discharge or otherwise place or cause to be placed in the
waters of any fountain, pond, lake, stream or other body of water in or
adjacent to any park or any tributary, stream, storm sewer, or drain flowing
into such waters, any substances, matter or thing, liquid or solid, which will
or may result in the pollution of said waters.
   (B)   Dump, deposit, or leave any bottles, broken glass, paper, boxes, cans,
dirt, rubbish, waste, garbage, or refuse, or other trash. No such refuse or
trash shall be placed in any waters in or contiguous to any park, or left
anywhere on the grounds, but shall be placed in the proper receptacles where
these are provided; where receptacles are not so provided, all rubbish or waste
shall be carried away from the park responsible for its presence, and properly
disposed of elsewhere.
   (C)   Have in his possession any glass container except as necessary for the
immediate rendering of emergency medical treatment.
('74 Code, 11-2-4) (Ord. 150-1971; Am. Ord. 43-1982, Am. Ord. 65-1982; Am. Ord.
2024-046)
§ 10-1-1-5 ANIMALS PROHIBITED IN CIVIC PLAZA DURING A SPECIAL EVENT.
   (A)   No person shall cause or allow any animal to enter onto the Civic
Plaza during a special event.
   (B)   This section shall not apply to any service animal subject to the
provisions of the Americans With Disabilities Act. Further, this section shall
not apply to any animal used by the City or its agents, or any animals
specifically allowed by the Mayor.
('74 Code, 11-2-5) (Ord. 27-1991; Am. Ord._2013-001; Am. Ord. 2024-046)
§ 10-1-1-6 TRAFFIC.
   (A)   Bicycles.
      (1)   Confined to Roads. No person in a park shall ride a bicycle on
other than paved vehicular road or path designated for the purposes. A
bicyclist shall be permitted to wheel or push a bicycle by hand over any grassy
area or wooded trail or on any paved area reserved for pedestrian use.
      (2)   Designated Racks. Leave a bicycle in a place other than a bicycle
rack when such is provided and there is a space available.
   (B)   No person in a park shall operate a motorized vehicle on other than a
vehicular road designated for that purpose.
   (C)   State and City Vehicle Laws Apply. No person in a park shall fail to
comply with all applicable provisions of the State and City motor vehicle
traffic laws.
('74 Code, 11-2-6) (Ord. 150- 1971; Am. Ord. 27-1980; Am. Ord. 27-1991; Am.
Ord. 2024-046)
§ 10-1-1-7 RECREATIONAL ACTIVITIES.
   (A)   Hunting and Firearms. No person in a park shall carry or possess for
the purpose of hunting, trapping or pursuing wildlife at any time, firearms of
any description, or air rifles, spring guns, bows and arrows, slings, or any
instrument that can be loaded with and fire blanks, cartridges, or any kind of
trapping device. Shooting into park areas from beyond park boundaries is
prohibited. Exception is here made to law enforcement officers while in
performance of their duties.
   (B)   Picnic Areas and Use.
      (1)   Availability. No person in a park shall prevent any person from
using any park, or any of its facilities, or interfere with any use already
engaged in that is in compliance with §§
10-1-1-1 et seq. and the rules applicable to such use.
      (2)   Duty of Picnicker. Fires are only allowed in permanent grills
provided by the City for cooking. No person in a park shall leave a picnic area
before the fire is completely extinguished and before all trash such as boxes,
papers, cans, bottles, garbage and other refuse is placed in the disposal
receptacles where provided. If no such trash receptacles are available, refuse
and trash shall be carried away from the park area by the picnicker to be
properly disposed of elsewhere.
      (3)   Horseback Riding. Riding a horse or any other animal except on
designated bridle trails is prohibited. Where permitted, horses or any other
animal shall be thoroughly broken and properly restrained, and ridden with due
care, and shall not be allowed to graze or go unattended, or be hitched to any
rock, tree or shrub.
   (C)   Dangerous Amusements. No person in a park shall:
      (1)   Engage in activities that involve thrown or otherwise propelling
objects such as hard balls, stones, arrows, javelins, model airplanes, or other
objects likely to inflict injury, except in areas set apart for such forms of
recreation.
      (2)   Roller skate except in those areas specifically designated for such
pastime.
('74 Code, 11-2-7) (Ord. 150- 1971; Am. Ord. 27-1991; Am. Ord. 2024-046)
§ 10-1-1-8 MERCHANDISING, ADVERTISING AND SIGNS.
   (A)   Vending and Peddling. Vending is allowed by licensed vendors in
designated areas only with a valid permit from the Department of Parks &
Recreation. Permissible licensed vending shall include informal sales of crafts
and other wares during permitted events in City parks. Such events shall not
require an additional vending permit. Food vendors must carry all other permits
required by the Environmental Health Department, the Fire Marshal, and any
other regulatory agencies.
   (B)   Advertising. Advertising is allowed only by a regularly licensed
concessionaire acting by and under the authority and regulation of the Mayor.
Advertising signs and banners may be allowed on outfield fences, concession
stands, and dugouts in baseball and softball parks. The “batter’s eye” portion
of all outfield fences, defined as the area directly behind the pitcher from
the batter’s perspective, shall be kept clear of all signs, banners, and other
visual distractions.
   (C)   Signs. No person in a park shall paste, glue, tack or otherwise post
any sign, placard, advertisement, or inscription whatsoever, nor shall any
person erect or cause to be erected any sign whatsoever on any public landsor
highways or roads adjacent to a park except as provided in Section 10-1-1-8(B),
above. Exception is here made as to any authorized party or to any regularly
licensed concessionaire acting by and under the authority and regulation of the
Mayor.
('74 Code, 11-2-8) (Ord. 150- 1971; Am. Ord. 27-1991; Am. Ord. 2024-046)
§ 10-1-1-9 DOG EXERCISE GROUNDS.
   Any person may exercise dogs with or without leash in Roosevelt Park and in
other appropriately located parks designated by the Mayor during posted park
hours. Park users shall comply with the provisions of §
9-2-4-3, be in full control of and in close proximity to their dogs at all
times, and be responsible for cleaning up all dog's nuisances as defined in §
9-2-4-3.
('74 Code, 11-2-9) (Ord. 58-1975; Am. Ord. 27-1991; Am. Ord. 14-2004; Am. Ord.
2024-046)
§ 10-1-1-10 PARK OPERATING POLICY.
   (A)   Hours. Except for unusual and unforeseen emergencies, parks shall be
open to the public every day of the year from 6:00 a.m. until 10 p.m. unless
otherwise posted. No person shall remain in, occupy, or use any park in the
City that is closed to public use unless that person has been authorized to be
present by the Mayor or unless that person is present to enforce this ordinance
or other laws or ordinances or to irrigate park lands or service and maintain
facilities.
('74 Code, 11-2-10) (Ord. 150- 1971; Am. Ord. 27-1975; Am. Ord. 58-1975; Am.
Ord. 27-1991; Am. Ord. 2024-046)
§ 10-1-1-99 PENALTY.
   Any person who violates any provision of §§
10-1-1-1 et seq. shall be subject to the general penalty provisions of this
code set forth in §
1-1-99.
('74 Code, 11-2-11) (Ord. 150-1971; Am. Ord. 58-1975; Am. Ord. 27-1991; Am.
Ord. 2024-046)
PART 2: METROPOLITAN PARKS
AND RECREATION ADVISORY BOARD
§ 10-1-2-1 INTENT.
   It is the intent of the city that the Metropolitan Parks and Recreation
Advisory Board, hereinafter referred to as the "Board," shall represent the
community at large and not any specific recreational organization.
('74 Code, § 11-15-1) (Ord. 9-1979)
§ 10-1-2-2 PURPOSE.
   The Board is hereby established for the following purposes:
   (A)   To keep itself informed of city parks and recreation needs and to
serve as a forum for public discussion.
   (B)   To encourage the greatest use of parks and recreation programs
including cooperation with other agencies and organizations which are involved
in providing recreation services for the public good.
('74 Code, § 11-15-2) (Ord. 9-1979)
§ 10-1-2-3 COMPOSITION OF THE BOARD.
   (A)   The Metropolitan Parks and Recreation Advisory Board shall consist of
11 members all of whom shall reside in the City of Albuquerque. There shall be
one member of the Board from each City Council District and two members who
serve at large. When a vacancy on the Board occurs, the Councilor representing
the District in which the vacating member of the board resides, shall nominate
two members to the board who reside in his or her respective Council District
and the Mayor shall appoint one of these recommended members; provided,
however, if a member is eligible for reappointment to the Board and the
Councilor in whose District that member resides desires to reappoint the
member, the Councilor shall so notify the Council and the member shall be
reappointed subject to the advice and consent of the Council. If a member is
not being reappointed the Mayor shall deliver to the Council the Mayor's
recommendation from the two names submitted within 30 days of delivery of the
two names to the Mayor. If the Mayor fails to timely make a recommendation from
the two names submitted, the Councilor may appoint one of the two recommended
members subject to the advice and consent of the Council. When a vacancy occurs
on the Board or no more than 30 days prior to the expiration of a member's
term, the Mayor may notify the Councilor representing the District in which
that member of the Board resides of the vacancy or term expiration. If that
Councilor fails to nominate two members to the Board or to reappoint a member
to the Board within 30 days of receiving such notification, the Mayor may
appoint a member to the Board to represent that Councilor's District, subject
to the advice and consent of the City Council. The Mayor shall appoint the two
at large members to the Board with the advice and consent of the Council. In
making these appointments, consideration should be given to the City Parks and
Recreation Department's relationship with the University of New Mexico, the
Bernalillo County Parks and Recreation Department and the Albuquerque Public
Schools.
   (B)   All terms of members of the Board shall be for three years, ending
September 30, and staggered as to the year of termination.
   (C)   Except as provided in §§
10-1-2-1 et seq., the qualifications, appointment and conduct of the member of
the Board and any of its subcommittees and the organizational structure of the
Board and its subcommittees shall be governed by §§
 2-6-1-1 et seq.
   (D)   Current members of the Board shall serve out their terms. As current
members vacate their position or complete their terms they shall be replaced by
members from Council Districts where no member resides. If there are more
unrepresented Council Districts than there are vacancies on the Board the
Council President shall randomly determine which Councilors shall fill those
vacancies. Once all Council Districts are represented a vacancy shall be filled
by the Mayor.
('74 Code, § 11-15-3) (Ord. 9-1979; Am. Ord. 48-1982; Am. Ord. 73-1986; Am.
Ord. 28-2011)
§ 10-1-2-4 POWERS AND DUTIES.
   (A)   The Board shall recommend to the Mayor policies for overall
development of the park system to include plans for additional parks and
recreation facilities involving the joint-use concept with the Albuquerque
Public School System and ways and means of financing improvements.
   (B)   The Board shall meet at least quarterly, and may hold additional
meetings at its discretion.
   (C)   The Board shall conduct open public meetings and give reasonable
notice of such meetings.
   (D)   The Board may form such subcommittees as are necessary from the public
at large to make recommendations to the Board in order to carry out the
assigned responsibilities of the Board. A member of the Board shall serve as
Chairperson of any subcommittees formed under the provisions of this division
(D).
   (E)   The Board, in order to fulfill the responsibilities set forth in §
10-1-2-2 ROA 1994, can review:
      (1)   The design and or plan for a project for a park and or a recreation
facility;
      (2)   The system inventory of parks and recreation facilities; and
      (3)   The Master Plan for the park and recreation system.
   (F)   The Board shall prepare and submit an annual report of its activities
to the Mayor and the Council.
('74 Code, § 11-15-4) (Ord. 9-1979; Am. Ord. 42-2003)
§ 10-1-2-5 CONFLICT OF INTEREST.
   Any member of the Board having a private interest in matters before the
Board shall disqualify himself from discussion and voting on those matters.
('74 Code, § 11-15-5) (Ord. 9-1979)
PART 3: PARK FACILITIES DESIGN PROJECT TECHNICAL COMMITTEE
§ 10-1-3-1 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of §
10-1-3-1 ROA 1994, the following definitions shall apply unless the context
clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   NEIGHBORHOOD ASSOCIATION. An organized group of people or other legal
entities who own or occupy real property within a specified subarea of the city
as defined by §
14-8-2-3 ROA 1994.
   RESIDENT. Any person who resides within the municipal limits of the City of
Albuquerque.
(Ord. 42-2003)
§ 10-1-3-2 INTENT.
   It is the intent of the city to provide a mechanism for resident
participation in the design of selected projects in order to mitigate community
concerns.
(Ord. 42-2003)
§ 10-1-3-3 PARK FACILITIES DESIGN PROJECT TECHNICAL COMMITTEE.
   Upon the request of the Mayor or a City Councilor, (the Mayor) shall appoint
a project technical committee for a project that involves the construction of a
new park or the complete or partial renovation of an existing park. The
committee is authorized to consult on the design and planning of the park and
review all plans and/or drawings that are otherwise accepted by the city. The
committee shall be chaired by the project manager selected by the city for the
planning and/or design of the facility, and shall consist of, at a minimum, a
staff person from the Park Management Division (or its successor) and at least
one resident who resides within one-half mile of the project. The Mayor may
appoint other persons to the committee they deem appropriate. If a project is
located on a site that adjoins or is within the boundaries of recognized
neighborhood associations, the Mayor is encouraged to consult with the
association regarding the choice of the committee's resident member.
(Ord. 42-2003)
ARTICLE 2: ZOO; AQUATIC PARK;
BOTANICAL GARDEN
Section
Part 1: Zoo Development
   
10-2-1-1   Statement of intent
   
10-2-1-2   Mayor's duties
   
10-2-1-3   Contract
   
10-2-1-4   Cancellation of the contract
Part 2: Biological Park Advisory Board
   
10-2-2-1   Purpose
   
10-2-2-2   Albuquerque Biological Park Advisory Board
   
10-2-2-3   Powers and duties
   
10-2-2-4   [Reserved]
   
10-2-2-5   General Provisions
Part 3: Acquisition and Disposal of Zoo Animals
   
10-2-3-1   Authority
   
10-2-3-2   Definition
   
10-2-3-3   Reports
Part 4: Rates and Discounts
   
10-2-4-1   Definitions
   
10-2-4-2   Admission fees and passes
   
10-2-4-3   [Reserved]
   
10-2-4-4   Military discounts and special rates
PART 1: ZOO DEVELOPMENT
§ 10-2-1-1 STATEMENT OF INTENT.
   (A)   The City Council declares its intention of maintaining and improving
the municipal zoo at its present location, commonly known as Rio Grande Park,
in Albuquerque. The City Council recognizes that many people in the community
have a special interest in the preservation of and enlargement of the municipal
zoo and that some of them have together formed a corporation called "The
Zoological Society (Foundation) and Botanical Gardens of Albuquerque, Inc."
Membership in this organization is open to everyone and special classifications
have been prepared so that membership may be extended, particularly to children
and students and that they may be encouraged to develop an interest and
understanding of the purposes of the Society.
   (B)   The Council further finds that the objects and purposes for which the
Society is formed are:
      (1)   To engage in the promotion, encouragement, fostering and
cultivation of zoological gardens and museums of natural history in
Albuquerque, and the support of a program collecting, exhibiting and
maintaining live animals, fowl, insects, fish, amphibians, reptiles, birds and
mammals and other species of wildlife in appropriate surroundings and
environment inducive to family recreation and education, to stimulate
scientific study and research; and to operate exclusively for charitable,
scientific or educational purposes.
      (2)   To solicit, collect, receive, acquire, hold and invest money and
property, both real and personal, received by gift, contribution, bequest,
devise or otherwise; to sell and convert property, both real and personal, into
cash; and to use the funds of this corporation for any of the purposes for
which this corporation is formed.
   (C)   The Council further finds that these purposes of the Zoological
Society are consistent and harmonious with the program for development of the
Albuquerque Zoo and that the public will be served by coordinating and
advancing these common purposes together.
('74 Code, § 11-7-1) (Ord. 80-1968)
§ 10-2-1-2 MAYOR'S DUTIES.
   The Mayor is directed to utilize the services of the Society consistent with
the municipal purposes of the Zoo and to cooperate with the Society in all
lawful ways to achieve the maximum benefits of such association.
('74 Code, § 11-7-2) (Ord. 80-1968; Am. Ord. 36-1969)
§ 10-2-1-3 CONTRACT.
   The Mayor is authorized to enter into a contract with the Society, defining
the respective responsibilities and privileges in order to make the efforts of
both the Society and the City effective, and to provide for the protection of
property where necessary by insurance, the promotion of education, exchange of
exhibits and other activities thereto appertaining. Property of the Society and
of the city shall remain as such unless exchanged or disposed of according to
law.
('74 Code, § 11-7-3) (Ord. 80-1968)
§ 10-2-1-4 CANCELLATION OF THE CONTRACT.
   Such contract may be cancelled and terminated at any time for cause, or by
mutual agreement or by independent action of either party on 90 days' written
notice to the other party.
('74 Code, § 11-7-4) (Ord. 80-1968)
PART 2: BIOLOGICAL PARK ADVISORY BOARD
§ 10-2-2-1 PURPOSE.
   The Albuquerque Biological Park Advisory Board, hereinafter referred to as
the “Board” is established for the following purposes:
   (A)   To support the development and operation of the Albuquerque Biological
Park which includes the BioPark Zoo, BioPark Aquarium, BioPark Botanic Gardens,
BioPark Heritage Farm and Tingley Beach.
   (B)   To serve as a focal point for community input and discussion regarding
the needs and development of the Albuquerque Biological Park.
   (C)   To encourage usage and maintain ongoing community support activities
of the facility.
(Ord. 21-1995; Am. Ord._2020-039)
§ 10-2-2-2 ALBUQUERQUE BIOLOGICAL PARK ADVISORY BOARD.
   (A)   The Albuquerque Biological Park Advisory Board shall consist of 12
appointed members and one assigned member. There shall be one member of the
Board appointed from each City Council District, three members appointed by the
Mayor, who serve at large, and one assigned member from the recognized support
organization of the New Mexico BioPark Society.
   (B)   When an appointed vacancy on the Board occurs, the Councilor
representing the District in which the vacating member of the Board resides
shall nominate two members to the Board who reside in his or her respective
Council District and the Mayor shall appoint one of these recommended members;
provided, however, if a member is eligible for reappointment to the Board and
the Councilor in whose District that member resides desires to reappoint the
member, the Councilor shall so notify the Council and the member shall be
reappointed subject to the advice and consent of the Council. If a member is
not being reappointed, the Mayor shall deliver to the Council the Mayor's
recommendation from the two names submitted within 30 days of delivery of the
two names to the Mayor. If the Mayor fails to timely make a recommendation from
the two names submitted, the Councilor may appoint one of the two recommended
members subject to the advice and consent of the Council. The Mayor may notify
a Councilor in writing that his or her District member's term has expired or
the position is otherwise vacant and the Councilor shall have 60 days to submit
two recommended appointments to fill that position. If the Councilor fails to
submit two names within 60 days of notification, the Mayor shall have the right
to make the appointment subject to the advice and consent of the City Council.
The Mayor shall appoint the three at large members to the Board with the advice
and consent of the Council. The term of each appointed member shall be three
years. The terms of the members shall be staggered so that three members are
eligible for reappointment or replacement each year.
   (C)   Except as provided in this article, the qualifications, appointment
and conduct of the members of the Board and any of its subcommittees and the
organizational structure of the Board and its subcommittees shall be governed
by §§
2-6-1-1 et seq., the Public Boards, Commissions and Committees Ordinance.
   (D)   The Board shall establish and adopt bylaws as may be necessary to
conduct elections, provide notice of meetings and otherwise govern its
proceedings.
   (E)   Members of the Board shall be broadly representative of all zoological
fields. They shall include persons who are widely known for their professional
competence and experience in zoology, botany, or the conservation of nature and
knowledgeable lay persons.
   (F)   Appointed members of the Board may not serve on the board of directors
for any recognized organization supporting the Albuquerque BioPark except for
the position assigned by title described in division (A) of this provision.
Each assigned member shall serve on the Board until the term expires with the
respective organization.
   (G)   Conflict of interest. This division (G) supplements §
2-6-1-4. A Board or a subcommittee member having a financial interest in the
outcome of any policy, decision, or determination before the Board or
subcommittee on which he or she serves shall, as soon as possible after such
interest becomes apparent, disclose to each of the other members voting on the
matter the nature of his or her financial interest in the issue, and shall be
disqualified from participating in any debate, decision or vote relating
thereto.
(Ord. 21-1995; Am. Ord._2020-039)
§ 10-2-2-3 POWERS AND DUTIES.
   (A)   The Board shall advise the Mayor and City Council concerning policy
and programming issue proposals pertaining to the Biological Park.
   (B)   The Board shall encourage the greatest use of the Biological Park
facilities and programs by the community and region.
   (C)   The Board shall keep itself informed of the needs of the Biological
Park and serve as a forum for discussion.
   (D)   The Board shall meet at least quarterly, and may hold additional
meetings at its discretion.
   (E)   The Board shall prepare and submit an Annual Report of its activities
to the Mayor and CAO.
   (F)   Staff support for the Board will be provided by the Albuquerque
Biological Park Division of the Cultural and Recreational Services Department.
(Ord. 21-1995; Am. Ord._2020-039)
§ 10-2-2-4 [RESERVED].
§ 10-2-2-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS.
   This Board shall be subject to the provisions of
Chapter 2, Article 6 of the Revised Ordinances of Albuquerque 1994.
(Ord. 21-1995)
PART 3: ACQUISITION AND DISPOSAL OF ZOO ANIMALS
§ 10-2-3-1 AUTHORITY.
   The Mayor is hereby authorized to contract for the trading, selling, or
purchasing of animals for the zoo without complying with the provisions of the
Public Purchases Act, §§
5-5-1 et seq. and 3-54-1 through 3-54-3 and 5-4-6 NMSA 1978.  
('74 Code, § 11-6-1) (Ord. 2383)
§ 10-2-3-2 DEFINITION.
   For the purpose of §§
10-2-3-1 et seq., the following definition shall apply unless the context
clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ANIMAL. Mammals, birds, reptiles; wild or domestic; native or exotic;
(including live eggs).
('74 Code, § 11-6-2) (Ord. 2383)
§ 10-2-3-3 REPORTS.
   The Mayor shall file a quarterly report with the City Council listing all
exchanges of animals and items pertaining to the exhibits occurring during the
previous three months.
('74 Code, § 11-6-3) (Ord. 2383)
PART 4: RATES AND DISCOUNTS
§ 10-2-4-1 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of §§
10-2-4-1 et seq., the following definitions shall apply unless the context
clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ADULT. A person between 13 and 64 years of age.
   CHILD. A person between three and 12 years of age.
   COMBO ADMISSION. Admission to the Zoo, the Aquarium, the Botanic Garden and
train rides between the facilities but not within the Zoo.
   GENERAL ADMISSION. Admission to the Zoo, or the Aquarium and Botanic Garden.
   MEMBERS. New Mexico BioPark Society Members.
   RESIDENT. A resident of the State of New Mexico as demonstrated by a New
Mexico driver's license or other proof of residency acceptable to the Director
of Cultural Services.
   SENIOR. A person 65 years of age or older.
(Ord._2012-032; Am. Ord._2015-020)
§ 10-2-4-2 ADMISSION FEES AND PASSES.
   All tickets are good for one-day use.
   Zoo
   New Mexico residents:
      $9.00 for adults
      $4.50 for seniors
      $4.00 for children
      Children under the age of 3 are free.
   Non-New Mexico residents:
      $12.50 for adults
      $5.50 for seniors
      $4.00 for children
      Children under the age of 3 are free.
   Aquarium and Botanic Garden
   New Mexico residents:
      $9.00 for adults
      $4.50 for seniors
      $4.00 for children
      Children under the age of 3 are free.
   Non-New Mexico residents:
      $12.50 for adults
      $5.50 for seniors
      $4.00 for children
      Children under the age of 3 are free.
   BioPark Combo
   New Mexico residents:
      $15.00 for adults
      $8.00 for seniors
      $6.00 for children
      Children under the age of 3 are free.
   Non-New Mexico residents:
      $20.00 for adults
      $10.00 for seniors
      $6.00 for children
      Children under the age of 3 are free.
   The BioPark Combo includes Zoo, Aquarium & Botanic Garden admission and
train rides.
   New Mexico BioPark Society Members
   New Mexico BioPark Society Members receive unlimited general admission.
(Ord._2012-032; Am. Ord._2015-020)
§ 10-2-4-3 [RESERVED].
§ 10-2-4-4 MILITARY DISCOUNTS AND SPECIAL RATES.
   Military Discount
   All active and non-active military receive a $2 discount on adult tickets
and a $1 discount on children's tickets. Individuals must present a military
ID. The discount shall be good for general admission only.
   Special Rates
   The Cultural Services Department may provide discounts or special rates for
certain periods of time or to groups including, but not limited to, school
groups, recreation groups, children, and New Mexico BioPark Society members. In
addition, the Cultural Services Department may provide for reduced admission to
members of other institutions which have reciprocal agreements with the
BioPark.
(Ord._2012-032; Am. Ord._2015-020)
ARTICLE 3: SWIMMING POOLS
Section
Part 1: General Provisions
   
10-3-1-1   Short title
   
10-3-1-2   Definitions
   
10-3-1-3   Submission of plans and specifications; work to be inspected;
notification
   
10-3-1-4   Availability of regulations
Part 2: Design and Construction Requirements
   
10-3-2-1   Requirements to be observed
   
10-3-2-2   Construction
   
10-3-2-3   Barrier
   
10-3-2-4   Bathhouse
   
10-3-2-5   Color
   
10-3-2-6   Coving
   
10-3-2-7   Depth markings
   
10-3-2-8   Diving area
   
10-3-2-9   Diving boards, platforms, blocks and slides
   
10-3-2-10   Fill spout
   
10-3-2-11   Circulation and filtration
   
10-3-2-12   Indoor pool ventilation
   
10-3-2-13   Inlets
   
10-3-2-14   Lighting and electrical fixtures
   
10-3-2-15   Main drains
   
10-3-2-16   Overflow systems and skimmers
   
10-3-2-17   Plumbing
   
10-3-2-18   Plumbing drains
   
10-3-2-19   Runways
   
10-3-2-20   Safety precautions
Part 3: Maintenance and Operation Requirements
   
10-3-3-1   Pools to meet requirements
   
10-3-3-2   Bather load
   
10-3-3-3   Clarity
   
10-3-3-4   Cleanliness
   
10-3-3-5   Water quality testing
   
10-3-3-6   Operating and accident records
   
10-3-3-7   Indoor facilities
   
10-3-3-8   Instruction
   
10-3-3-9   Prevention of disease
   
10-3-3-10   Safety precautions
   
10-3-3-11   Suits and towels
   
10-3-3-12   Toxic materials
   
10-3-3-13   Water supply
   
10-3-3-14   Water quality
Part 4: Administration; Permits
   
10-3-4-1   Enforcement and application
   
10-3-4-2   Right of entry
   
10-3-4-3   Failure to admit
   
10-3-4-4   Variances
   
10-3-4-5   Permit required
   
10-3-4-6   Inspection fees
   
10-3-4-7   Transfer fee
   
10-3-4-8   Permission to operate
Part 5: Enforcement
   
10-3-5-1   Temporary suspension of permits
   
10-3-5-2   Service of notice
   
10-3-5-3   Reinstatement of suspended permits
   
10-3-5-4   Revocation of permit
   
10-3-5-5   Hearings
   
10-3-5-6   Judicial review
   
10-3-5-7   Injunctive relief
   
10-3-5-8   Issuance of citation
   
10-3-5-9   Inspection frequency
 
   
10-3-5-99   Penalty
   
Appendix:   Requirements and Recommendations Tables
PART 1: GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 10-3-1-1 SHORT TITLE.
   This article shall be known and may be cited as the "Albuquerque Swimming
Pool Ordinance."
('74 Code, § 11-5-1) (Ord. 12-1978; Am. Ord. 12-1993)
§ 10-3-1-2 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this article, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   BARRIER. A wall, building, fence or any combination of these which control
access to the pool proper. This barrier shall be of such construction as to
provide protection for the safety of the public.
   CLASS A SWIMMING POOL. A public swimming pool, admission to which may be
gained by the general public, with or without the payment of a fee, such as a
public school, municipal or commercial pool.
   CLASS B SWIMMING POOL. A public swimming pool on the premises of or part of
a business, such as a motel, hotel, trailer court, apartment house,
condominium, community association, health or fitness facility, recreation
camp, country club, private school, or similar establishment which is to be
used only by individuals authorized by the owner or operator but not by the
general public.
   CLASS C SWIMMING POOL. A shallow public swimming pool intended primarily for
special uses rather than general swimming, including but not limited to the
wading of small children.
   CLASS D SWIMMING POOL. A public pool which provides air-enriched water or
direct water under pressure onto the body and which by design and function is
intended to provide the benefits of hydromassage, water therapy or medical
treatment.
   COMMUNITY ASSOCIATION. Any group of persons, individuals, homeowners, or a
firm, partnership, corporation, company, society or association, which provides
or operates swimming facilities for their own use and/or for the limited use of
the public.
   CONTACT PERSON. A person or persons at least 18 years old designated by the
pool owner or management personnel to be available at all times during public
swimming pool operating hours as required in this chapter.
   DECK LEVEL DIVING BOARD INSTALLATION. A diving structure or device rising no
more than 18 inches above the normal water level.
   ENFORCEMENT AUTHORITY. The Mayor or his designated representative.
   GROUNDS. The area within the exterior boundaries of real property which
includes a public swimming pool as defined in this section.
   LIFEGUARD SERVICE. The attendance, at all times that persons are allowed to
be in the swimming pool area, of one or more lifeguards who hold a current
American Red Cross Advanced Lifeguard Training Certificate or YMCA Senior
Lifesaving Certificate or equivalent certification, as determined by the
enforcement authority, and who have no duties to perform other than to
superintend the safety of those using the swimming pool area during the time
the pool is open.
   NONCONFORMING SAMPLE. The presence of organisms of the coliform group or
other organisms in amounts which may be harmful to public health as indicated
in a bacteriological test required by the enforcement authority and conducted
by a certified laboratory.
   NONPUBLIC POOL. A swimming pool owned by a private individual for use of
family members and/or non-paying guests, or a swimming pool owned by a business
employing fewer than ten persons if the pool is for the use of employees only.
This article shall not apply to nonpublic pools.
   PERSON. Any person, individual, firm, partnership, corporation, company,
society, association, and every officer, agent or employee thereof.
   PERSON IN CHARGE. The individual present at a public swimming pool, who at
the time of inspection by the enforcement authority is the apparent supervisor
on the behalf of the owner or operator of the public swimming pool. In the
absence of an apparent supervisor, any employee on the premises shall be deemed
the person in charge.
   PREMISES. The area within the barrier and any adjacent support facilities
(i.e., bathhouses, club house, or shower room) and shall also include the
office of operational or management personnel.
   PUBLIC. The general populace regardless of age or place of temporary or
permanent residence.
   PUBLIC SWIMMING POOL. One or more abutting structures, basins, chambers, or
tanks of the same class pool provided with a controlled potable water supply,
water circulation, filtration, and sanitization equipment and which is intended
to be used collectively by numbers of persons for one of the following
purposes: swimming, diving, recreational play, therapy, medical treatment or
hydro-massage and includes all structures, appurtenances, equipment, appliances
and all other facilities appurtenant to and intended for the operation and
maintenance of each separate, distinct swimming pool and is operated by a
person be he owner, lessee, operator, licensee or concessionaire regardless of
whether a fee is charged for such use. Public swimming pool shall include Class
A, B, C, and D pools and shall apply to any structures designed to contain
water and which may reasonably be construed to be used by persons for body
immersion to a significant degree or other water treatment where all water is
not removed after each use, and which the enforcement authority determines
represents a public health concern. Public swimming pool shall hereafter also
be known as swimming pool or pool. Pools of different classes shall be treated
as separate swimming pools which require separate permits, even if circulation
and/or filtration equipment is shared. Class D swimming pools consisting of
multiple interconnected chambers may be considered as one swimming pool
provided all circulation and filtration equipment is shared so as to create
identical water conditions in each chamber.
   SEASONAL POOL. A swimming pool which is not operated on a year-round basis.
('74 Code, § 11-5-2) (Ord. 12-1978; Am. Ord. 51-1989; Am. Ord. 12-1993; Am.
Ord. 59-1995)
§ 10-3-1-3 SUBMISSION OF PLANS AND SPECIFICATIONS; WORK TO BE INSPECTED;
NOTIFICATION.
   (A)   No person shall begin construction of a swimming pool or shall alter
the design, modify plumbing, replace filtration or circulation equipment or
reconstruct any swimming pool without first having submitted plans and
specifications to the Enforcement Authority for review and approval. The
application to the Enforcement Authority for a permit to construct, alter
design or reconstruct shall be submitted on the forms required by the
Enforcement Authority, and shall be supported by all information, data, plans,
specifications and pertinent explanatory data required by the Enforcement
Authority to demonstrate compliance with the standards established by this
article and other applicable ordinances. The swimming pool shall be built in
accordance with the plans and specifications as approved by the Enforcement
Authority unless approval of each change has been given in writing by the
Enforcement Authority. Any part of the swimming pool system lawfully installed
prior to the effective date of this article may have its existing use,
maintenance or repair continued, if the Enforcement Authority determines the
use, maintenance or repair is in accordance with the original design and
location and no hazard to the public health, safety, or welfare is created by
such system. All swimming pool installations, design, alterations, significant
changes in operational procedures or reconstruction thereto including
equipment, piping, and appliances relating thereto shall be inspected or
otherwise approved prior to the use of the swimming pool. It shall be the duty
of the owner or the owner's agent to notify the Enforcement Authority that the
swimming pool is ready for inspection. Such notification of requested
inspection shall be given not less than 24 hours before the next business day
for the Enforcement Authority.
   (B)   Approval of plans or acceptance of specifications shall not prevent
the Enforcement Authority from thereafter requiring the correction of errors in
said plans or specifications or from requiring the halting of construction
operations being carried on thereunder, when in violation of this article or
any other ordinance, nor prevent the Enforcement Authority from revoking any
approval issued in error.
('74 Code, § 11-5-3) (Ord. 12-1978; Am. Ord. 12-1993)
§ 10-3-1-4 AVAILABILITY OF REGULATIONS.
   A copy of the Swimming Pool Ordinance [i.e.,
Chapter 10, Article 3 of this code] is on file in the office of the City Clerk
and is available for inspection by the public during regular business hours. A
copy of this ordinance shall be available to any individual upon request and
the payment of a reasonable charge as set by the Chief Administrative Officer,
to be not more than the actual cost per copy.
('74 Code, § 11-5-8) (Ord. 12-1993)
PART 2: DESIGN AND CONSTRUCTION REQUIREMENTS
§ 10-3-2-1 REQUIREMENTS TO BE OBSERVED.
   The Enforcement Authority shall not issue a permit to operate or approve the
construction of any swimming pool or any alteration, addition, remodeling or
any other improvement to a swimming pool unless the following design,
construction, operation and maintenance requirements are observed. Any person
owning or operating a public swimming pool shall design, construct, equip,
operate and maintain the pool to ensure safe, clean and sanitary conditions
both of the pool and of the premises and shall ensure that the following
requirements are met.
('74 Code, § 11-5-7 (part)) (Ord. 12-1978; Am. Ord. 59-1987; Am. Ord. 51-1989;
Am. Ord. 12-1993)
§ 10-3-2-2 CONSTRUCTION.
   Swimming pools and all appurtenances thereto shall be constructed of
materials which are inert, nontoxic to man, impervious and enduring, which can
withstand design stresses, which will provide a watertight structure with a
smooth and easily cleanable surface, without cracks or joints, excluding
structural joints.
('74 Code, § 11-5-7A (part)) (Ord. 12-1978; Am. Ord. 59-1987; Am. Ord. 51-1989;
Am. Ord. 12-1993)
§ 10-3-2-3 BARRIER.
   (A)   (1)   The pools shall be completely surrounded by a barrier at least
48 inches high. If the barrier is of bars or other elements with spaces
between, clear spaces shall be a maximum of four inches wide. The bottom rail
or bar shall be a maximum of four inches above the deck or grade.
      (2)   The barrier shall enclose the pool area. The barrier shall not
provide an easily climbable framework. All gates or doors installed in the
barriers or fencing shall be equipped with positively self-closing and self-
latching devices which function at all times except that facilities which
provide lifeguard service and monitored public access may have open gates
during operating hours. All gates and doors shall be capable of being locked.
Latches which remain continuously locked and which can be opened only by the
use of a key or other access control system may be of a height which allows the
barrier, fence and latch to be in compliance with the Americans with
Disabilities Act as amended, and applicable regulations. Latches which are not
continuously locked shall be at least 45 inches above the ground. Access
controlled systems and/or higher or additional latches may be required by the
Enforcement Authority if deemed necessary by the Enforcement Authority to
provide additional protection to the public.
   (B)   Variances from any requirements of this section shall not be issued.
('74 Code, § 11-5-7A.1) (Ord. 12-1978; Am. Ord. 59-1987; Am. Ord. 51-1989; Am.
Ord. 12-1993)
§ 10-3-2-4 BATHHOUSE.
   (A)   Bathhouses. Bathhouses shall provide sufficient privacy and space for
persons to change clothing for pool use but this section does not apply to
Class B, C and D pools which are operated as part of a motel, hotel, trailer
court, condominium or similar establishment where toilet and bathing facilities
are provided as part of individual housing accommodations. Where bathhouses are
provided, the following features are required.
   (B)   Floors. Floors of toilets, showers, walkways and runways shall have a
slope between 1/4 inch and 1/2 inch per foot to floor drains. The sloped floor
surfaces shall be constructed of impervious material such as concrete or tile,
have no holes or places for water to stand, and have a nonskid surface. Floor
wall joints shall be of coved construction. Floors of toilet and shower areas
may not have carpeting.
   (C)   Heating Facilities. All natural gas, alternative energy source, and
liquified petroleum installations shall comply with all state and local laws,
codes, regulations, and ordinances governing such installations. The water
heater shall be of adequate capacity to provide 90° F. to 110° F. water for all
people using the lavatories and showers.
   (D)   Lavatories. Lavatories in the ratio of one lavatory to each two toilet
facilities shall be provided. Each lavatory shall be provided with hot and cold
running water from a mixing-type faucet.
   (E)   Showers. Showers shall be provided with hot and cold running water.
The minimum number of shower installations for each sex shall be one for every
40 men and one for every 40 women or a fraction thereof for the bathing load
design. Patrons shall be provided ready access to the shower rooms.
   (F)   Toilet Facilities. The minimum number of toilets to be provided shall
be one for every 40 men or women or fraction thereof as determined by building
occupancy. However, urinals may be substituted, not to exceed 1/3 of the total
number of toilets required in toilet facilities for men.
   (G)   Ventilation. Bathhouse ventilation shall be provided to minimize
condensation and odors. Ventilation shall be a minimum of two air changes per
hour and a maximum of ten air changes per hour.
('74 Code, § 11-5-7A.2) (Ord. 12-1978; Am. Ord. 59-1987; Am. Ord. 51-1989; Am.
Ord. 12-1993)
§ 10-3-2-5 COLOR.
   The pool walls and underwater pool surface shall be a light color except
that decorative wall tiles may be any color when such tiles are installed at
the top of the pool wall or as a safety measure to draw attention to steps or
other structures and are maintained in a clean and sanitary condition.
('74 Code, § 11-5-7A.3) (Ord. 12-1978; Am. Ord. 59-1987; Am. Ord. 51-1989; Am.
Ord. 12-1993)
§ 10-3-2-6 COVING.
   The inside wall surface of a pool shall be vertical, except where coved
construction is used between the side walls and the bottom of the pool. In
coved construction, the radius of curvature in the area less than five feet
deep shall not exceed six inches at a depth of three feet six inches and shall
not exceed two feet at a depth of five feet. There shall be a uniform
transition in the cove throughout.
('74 Code, § 11-5-7A.4) (Ord. 12-1978; Am. Ord. 59-1987; Am. Ord. 51-1989; Am.
Ord. 12-1993)
§ 10-3-2-7 DEPTH MARKINGS.
   Permanent depth markings of a contrasting color and of sufficient size to be
clearly visible across the pool shall be provided and placed in pairs, one of
each pair being on either side of and at both ends of the pool on the vertical
wall near the water level and permanent depth markings of a contrasting color
and nonslip material at least four inches high shall be placed on the pool deck
near the pool edge. A pair of markings shall be placed at each successive one-
foot increment of depth, except depth markings shall not be required to be
placed less than four feet apart. In addition the minimum, maximum, and five-
foot depths shall be so designated near the water level and on the pool deck
near the pool edge. Depth markings on irregularly shaped pools shall designate
depths at all major deviations in shape as well as conform to the other
requirements of this section. In pools in which the central area of the floor
of the pool is deeper than the sides, such as Class D pools providing perimeter
seating, the range of depth of the floor shall be indicated on the deck at
appropriate locations, but no less than four feet apart.
('74 Code, § 11-5-7A.5) (Ord. 12-1978; Am. Ord. 59-1987; Am. Ord. 51-1989; Am.
Ord. 12-1993)
§ 10-3-2-8 DIVING AREA.
   In a rectangular pool or a T-, L-, or Z-shaped pool, diving shall be limited
to the end or ends. In a free-form shaped pool, diving shall be limited to the
area approved in writing by the Enforcement Authority. In any design, the
diving area shall be separated from the main swimming area (section of pool
where water is five feet deep or less) by a lifeline or other physical barrier.
Whenever diving boards are to be used, the dimensional requirements under the
following section shall apply in order to have adequate area and depth of water
for diving.
('74 Code, § 11-5-7A.6) (Ord. 12-1978; Am. Ord. 59-1987; Am. Ord. 51-1989; Am.
Ord. 12-1993)
§ 10-3-2-9 DIVING BOARDS, PLATFORMS, BLOCKS AND SLIDES.
   (A)   Diving Boards and Platforms. Diving boards and platforms shall have a
nonskid surface. All boards and platforms one meter or higher shall provide
guard rails which shall be at least 30 inches above the diving board and extend
to the edge of the pool wall. The riser height of steps on diving boards and
from steps to the deck shall not exceed 12 inches and shall be even throughout.
Diving boards and platforms shall be constructed, installed, and maintained to
provide the maximum safety for the diver. The requirements in this section are
critical safety requirements based on board or platform height and location. A
board or platform at a height between the following designations shall meet the
more restrictive requirements of the higher board or platform. In the following
divisions of this section, the term PLUMMET shall mean an imaginary line which
is perpendicular to the water surface, measured from the end of the board or
platform, and from the center of the board or platform. Variances from any
requirements of this section shall not be issued. The diagram referenced below
is set forth on following page.
      (1)   The distance from the plummet back to the pool wall shall be "A" on
the diagram and shall not be less than the distance indicated on the diagram.
      (2)   The distance from the plummet to pool wall at side shall be "B" on
the diagram and shall not be less than the distance indicated on the diagram.
      (3)   The distance from plummet to adjacent plummet shall be "C" on the
diagram and shall not be less than the distance indicated on the diagram.
      (4)   The distance from the plummet to the pool wall or five foot depth
ahead shall be "D" on the diagram and shall not be less than the distance
indicated on the diagram.
      (5)   Clear distance from board to ceiling overhead shall be "E" on the
diagram and shall not be less than the distance indicated on the diagram.
      (6)   (a)   The depth of water at the plummet shall be "H" on the diagram
and shall not be less than the distance indicated on the diagram.
         (b)   The required depth of water for "H" shall be maintained for a
minimum of ten feet beyond the plummet for a one meter or higher board or
platform before any upward incline in floor slope begins.
   (B)   Deck Level Board. The following are the requirements for deck level
diving board installations:
      (1)   An area which is a minimum of four feet square, with a depth of not
less than eight feet, six inches, shall be provided in the diving portion of
the pool. The four foot square area shall be in line with the center line of
the diving board. The nearest edge of the square area shall be no less than
eight feet from the edge of the deep end of the pool. See the diagram set forth
on following page.
      (2)   The unobstructed area above the diving board shall be constructed
so that there is no possibility of the diver touching any overhead object
      (3)   The projection of the diving board over the pool's surface shall be
a minimum of two feet and a maximum of four feet. The centerline of the board
shall be a minimum of eight feet from the side walls of the pool and all other
boards.
      (4)   The diving portion (section of pool where water is over five feet
deep) shall be a minimum of 18 feet in length with the centerline of the
deepest part of the pool being not less than ten feet from the deep end of the
pool. See the diagram set forth on the following page).
   (C)   Starting Blocks and Water Slides. Starting blocks and slides may only
be used if the pool depth is maintained at the level recommended by the
manufacturer of the blocks and/or slides. Starting blocks shall have a nonskid
surface. Starting blocks which have not been permanently installed shall be
removed from the pool area after authorized use. The requirements of the U.S.
Consumer Product Safety Commission Safety Standard for swimming pool slides as
published in the Federal Register for standards relating to swimming pool
slides shall be binding. Slides must provide a smooth and easily cleanable
surface without cracks or joints excluding well-maintained structural joints.
Slides shall comply with critical safety requirements of this section measured
from the terminus of the slide above design water level.
('74 Code, § 11-5-7A.7) (Ord. 12-1978; Am. Ord. 59-1987; Am. Ord. 51-1989; Am.
Ord. 12-1993)
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/c995cf98feccc19c1a02ee6b0fc90e468d3c8452/
IMAGES/0-0-0-14027.png]
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/c995cf98feccc19c1a02ee6b0fc90e468d3c8452/
IMAGES/0-0-0-14029.png]
§ 10-3-2-10 FILL SPOUT.
   No fill spout shall constitute a safety hazard to persons in the pool area.
The discharge end of the fill pipe shall have a minimum effective air gap of
six inches above the overflow level of the pool.
('74 Code, § 11-5-7A.8) (Ord. 12-1978; Am. Ord. 59-1987; Am. Ord. 51-1989; Am.
Ord. 12-1993)
§ 10-3-2-11 CIRCULATION AND FILTRATION.
   (A)   Pools shall be of the recirculating type. Provisions shall be made for
complete, constant, continuous circulation of water through all parts of the
pool. The circulation system shall not be turned off except for necessary
maintenance or when the pool is taken out of service for an extended period of
time. A recirculation system consisting of piping, pumps, filters, water
conditioning and disinfectant equipment and other accessory equipment which
will clarify and disinfect the volume of water in the pool shall be provided
for all swimming pools. Pools shall be provided with a rate flow meter or
meters installed in accordance with manufacturers directions to measure all
necessary rates of flow as indicated by this article. A lint and hair catcher
shall be provided on all circulation pump suction lines. All swimming pool
water shall be recirculated through rapid sand, high rate sand, cartridge-type
or diatomite filters. The rate of flow through the filter shall not exceed the
National Sanitation Foundation approved rate. All filters shall bear the Seal
of Approval of the National Sanitation Foundation.
   (B)   (1)   Pump and motor units for recirculation shall be selected for
performance and will meet the conditions of quantity required for filtering and
cleaning the filters with the total dynamic head developed by the complete
system. The requirements for filtration shall be based upon the maximum head
loss developed immediately prior to washing the filters. Pump performance
curves for the unit to be installed shall be submitted with the construction
plans for approval.
      (2)   The filtration system shall be designed to be operated at a rate
sufficient to assure a complete recirculation of the pool water through the
filter and automatic disinfection system within the following maximum time
periods:
         (a)   For Class A and Class B pools, six hours;
         (b)   For Class C pools, two hours;
         (c)   For Class D pools, one hour
      (3)   Any filtration system lawfully installed prior to the effective
date of this article which does not consistently meet the maximum time period
may continue in use only if the filtration system complies with all standards
of disinfection and water clarity established elsewhere in this article. A
system which is not consistently in compliance must be upgraded to meet the
recirculation requirements of this division (B) by the deadline established in
writing by the Enforcement Authority.
   (C)   Filters shall be piped for effective backwashing, excluding disposable
cartridge-type filters. If rapid sand filters are used, a minimum of three
filters shall be provided. The backwash rate shall meet National Sanitation
Foundation approved backwash rate. Disposable cartridge filters shall be kept
clean.
   (D)   Provisions shall be made for disposing of backwash water and pool
contents to the city sanitary sewer. A two chamber sand interceptor served by a
sewer line meeting the requirements set forth in the Uniform Plumbing Code
(UPC) shall be provided for all backwash systems installed on a pool after the
effective date of this article.
   (E)   Diatomaceous earth filtered water must be discharged into a sewer in a
manner which eliminates solids from the discharge. This shall be done by using
a separation tank, receiving chamber, or any other permanent method approved by
the Enforcement Authority.
   (F)   Nonpermanent media filters shall also have suitable provision for
adding feed chemicals or filter media.
('74 Code, § 11-5-7A.9) (Ord. 12-1978; Am. Ord. 59-1987; Am. Ord. 51-1989; Am.
Ord. 12-1993)
§ 10-3-2-12 INDOOR POOL VENTILATION.
   Ventilation shall be provided to minimize condensation and odors. A minimum
of four air changes per hour and a maximum of eight air changes per hour shall
be maintained within the indoor pool area. The pool area shall be ventilated to
the outside without returning air to the central heating system, or air shall
be recirculated through a dehumidifying system. The building ventilation system
shall be designed to preclude air in the bathroom from drifting into other
areas.
('74 Code, § 11-5-7A.10) (Ord. 12-1978; Am. Ord. 59-1987; Am. Ord. 51-1989; Am.
Ord. 12-1993)
§ 10-3-2-13 INLETS.
   Inlets shall be located to produce complete and uniform circulation of water
and to facilitate the maintenance of a uniform disinfectant residual throughout
the entire pool. Inlets from the recirculation system shall be submerged at
least 12 inches below water level. Inlets in the pool bottom shall pose no
hazard to bathers. All inlets shall be adjustable to obtain the desired rate
and direction of water flow. All pools shall have a minimum of one return inlet
for each 15,000 gallons of water or fraction thereof. If the distance across
any portion of the swimming pool is more than 30 feet, multiple inlets shall be
provided on opposite ends.
('74 Code, § 11-5-7A.11) (Ord. 12-1978; Am. Ord. 59-1987; Am. Ord. 51-1989; Am.
Ord. 12-1993)
§ 10-3-2-14 LIGHTING AND ELECTRICAL FIXTURES.
   All electrical lights, fixtures, outlets, and other equipment shall be in
compliance with the provisions of the National Electric Code. If underwater
lighting is used and night swimming is allowed, area lighting shall be provided
for the deck areas and shall be directed toward the deck areas away from the
pool surface. The area lighting shall have a total capacity of not less than 15
foot candles. If underwater lighting is not employed, and night swimming is
allowed, area and lighting on the pool combined shall be provided in an amount
of not less than 30 foot candles. If underwater lighting is provided, such
lights shall be so installed as to create no hazard to bathers.
('74 Code, § 11-5-7A.12) (Ord. 12-1978; Am. Ord. 59-1987; Am. Ord. 51-1989; Am.
Ord. 12-1993)
§ 10-3-2-15 MAIN DRAINS.
   All swimming pools shall be provided with at least one main outlet at the
deepest point. If the pool width is greater than 25 feet, multiple outlets
shall be provided. Multiple outlets shall be spaced not more than 20 feet
apart, nor more than ten feet from side walls and shall be located to provide
uniform withdrawal of water from the deepest part of the pool. Drains shall be
protected by anti-entrapment devices.
('74 Code, § 11-5-7A.13) (Ord. 12-1978; Am. Ord. 59-1987; Am. Ord. 51-1989; Am.
Ord. 12-1993)
§ 10-3-2-16 OVERFLOW SYSTEMS AND SKIMMERS.
   (A)   Overflow systems shall be provided around the entire perimeter of
swimming pools. Overflow system drains shall not exceed fifteen feet on
centers. The overflow gutter bottom shall be sloped one-quarter inch per foot
to the drainage outlets. The outlets shall be covered with approved drain
grates. The gutter shall be capable of removing continuously 50% or more of the
recirculated water and returning it to the filter. Water from overflow systems
shall recirculate through the filter or, in cases of pools installed prior to
the effective date of this article, water may be discharged into the sewer. If
a sewer is used, there shall be a minimum eight-inch air gap between the
overflow system drain line and the top rim of the approved receptacle. Enclosed
pipeless gutters shall be provided with clean-out covers at a maximum of 15
foot intervals and shall have a slope of not less than 1/8 inch per foot.
Skimmers may be used in lieu of overflow systems provided that they shall in
all respects comply with the National Sanitation Foundation Standards relating
to recessed automatic surface skimmers for swimming pools. Each skimmer shall
be equipped with a strainer basket and a self-adjusting weir device that shall
operate freely with continuous action to variations in water level over a range
of at least three inches. Skimmers shall be designed for a flow-through rate of
not less than 30 gallons per minute and the total capacity of all skimmers in
any pool shall be at least 80% of the required filter flow of the recirculation
system. Each skimmer shall be equipped with a self-actuating equalizer line,
furnished with an anti-entrapment plate or other device to prevent air lock in
the suction line should the water of the pool drop below the weir level.
   (B)   When skimmers are used in Class A and Class B pools, a minimum of two
shall be provided. Additional skimmers and skimmers used for Class C and Class
D pools shall be provided for each 500 square feet of the surface area or
fraction thereof. Skimmers shall be located to provide uniform withdrawal of
water from the pool.
('74 Code, § 11-5-7A.14) (Ord. 12-1978; Am. Ord. 59-1987; Am. Ord. 51-1989; Am.
Ord. 12-1993)
§ 10-3-2-17 PLUMBING.
   The water supply to the swimming pool shall be protected from back flow,
back-siphonage, back pressure, and cross-connection, and all plumbing fixtures
shall be installed and maintained in accordance with municipal law. All
plumbing, fixtures and piping shall comply with the Uniform Plumbing Code. All
plastic piping shall have the approval of the National Sanitation Foundation.
Water heaters and boilers shall comply with applicable ordinances. Pool piping
shall be sized to allow the flows for filtering and cleaning without exceeding
the maximum head of the pump, as rated by the National Sanitation Foundation or
other similar authority.
('74 Code, § 11-5-7A.15) (Ord. 12-1978; Am. Ord. 59-1987; Am. Ord. 51-1989; Am.
Ord. 12-1993)
§ 10-3-2-18 PLUMBING DRAINS.
   All of the plumbing drains serving the pool sewer system shall discharge
into the city sanitary sewer system. There shall be no direct connection
between the city sewer system and the swimming pool. The discharge outlet
terminal from any pool, filter, or deck drain shall be protected from backflow
by an air gap of two pipe diameters, but in no case less than eight inches
above the flood level of the approved receptor. The sewer system shall meet the
requirements of the Uniform Plumbing Code.
('74 Code, § 11-5-7A.16) (Ord. 12-1978; Am. Ord. 59-1987; Am. Ord. 51-1989; Am.
Ord. 12-1993)
§ 10-3-2-19 RUNWAYS.
   A runway at least four feet wide constructed of concrete or other impervious
material which shall be slip-resistant shall completely surround the pool,
except that Class D pools need only provide a runway around 50% of the pool.
The runway shall have a slope between 1/4 and 3/8 inch per foot away from the
pool, except that the slope shall be increased to between 3/8 and 1/2 inch per
foot wherever carpeting is used on outdoor pools. Runway areas of indoor pools
may not be carpeted. Runways shall be an integral part of the pool walls or
shall overlap the pool walls. Either deck drains or collecting troughs covered
with grates shall be provided, except that outdoor pools may drain to the
surrounding area, but not beyond the property boundaries. Deck drains shall be
in the ratio of not less than one per 200 square feet of runways, provided that
the deck drains shall not exceed 25 feet on centers. Runway drains shall not be
interconnected with overflow system drain lines.
('74 Code, § 11-5-7A.17) (Ord. 12-1978; Am. Ord. 59-1987; Am. Ord. 51-1989; Am.
Ord. 12-1993)
§ 10-3-2-20 SAFETY PRECAUTIONS.
   (A)   Slope.
      (1)   The slope of the bottom of any part of the pool shall not be more
than one foot in every 12 feet where the water is less than five feet deep, and
the slope must be even throughout.
      (2)   Any pool lawfully installed prior to the effective date of this
article not meeting the slope requirements may continue in use if no safety
hazard exists because of the slope. All portions of the pool bottom shall slope
toward the pool drains.
   (B)   Steps, Ramps, Hand Rails, Ladders, and Seats.
      (1)   Criteria for Class A, Class B, and Class C pools shall be as
follows:
         (a)   Steps for entering or leaving the pool shall be a minimum of
four feet wide, unless corner or circular steps are used. If corner or circular
steps are used, the maximum radius of the bottom steps shall be 42 inches, but
no projection shall create a safety hazard.
         (b)   Ladders shall be located on at least one side of the deep end of
the pool, except that pools greater than 30 feet in width shall provide ladders
on both sides of the deep area.
         (c)   If the distance from the bottom of the pool to the runway at the
shallow end is more than two feet, steps shall be placed at the shallow end of
the pool except that ladders may be provided in lieu of steps on pools lawfully
installed prior to the effective date of this article.
         (d)   Treads of ladders and steps shall be nonslip.
         (e)   There shall be a uniform height between ladder treads not to
exceed 12 inches. Riser heights on steps shall be between seven and 12 inches
and shall be uniform throughout except for the bottom riser when used as a
bench or seat.
         (f)   Hand rails shall be provided and shall facilitate ingress and
egress at all points of the steps. Grab rails shall be provided for ladders and
recessed steps.
         (g)   Ramps may be substituted for steps depending on the proposed use
of the pool, but only if a variance is granted by the Enforcement Authority.
      (2)   Criteria for Class D pools shall be as follows:
         (a)   Class D pools shall provide a minimum of one grab rail.
Additional handrails shall be placed at all points of ingress where a step,
ladder or ramp is provided.
         (b)   Steps which may also serve as benches shall be provided wherever
pool depth is greater than two feet. Steps shall be 12 inch minimum width.
Riser heights on steps shall be between seven and 12 inches. Riser heights
shall be uniform throughout except for the bottom riser when used as a bench or
seat.
         (c)   Benches and swimout seats shall not exceed 20 inches from the
top of the water design level for Class A, B, and C pools nor 28 inches from
the top of the water design level for Class D pools.
   (C)   Striping. For Class A pools, and all other classes of pools greater
than 30 feet in width, dark contrasting stripes, a minimum of four inches wide,
shall divide the pool in longitudinal lanes five to eight feet wide. The
terminal ends of the striping shall be five to seven feet from the pool ends.
   (D)   Lifeline. A corrosion-resistant lifeline, the minimum diameter of
which shall be 1/2 inch, shall be installed two feet into the shallow portion
of the pool at the break in grade with its position marked by colored floats
spaced no further than five feet apart. The lifeline shall be a color which
contrasts with the background and shall be securely fastened to wall anchors of
corrosion resistant material. Any restricted or special use areas in pools
shall be separated from the rest of the pool by a lifeline attached to the side
walls and supported by buoys or floats.
   (E)   Class C Pools. Class C pools intended primarily for the wading of
small children shall have a maximum depth of 24 inches.
   (F)   Physical Hazards. There shall be no protrusions, extensions,
obstructions, tripping hazards or other means of entanglement in the pool or on
the pool deck which could cause bather injury or entrapment. Equipment and
devices in the pool and at pool side, such as ladders, drain covers, anti-
vortex covers, handrails, fill lines, and diving devices must be installed so
they can only be removed or adjusted by the use of tools.
('74 Code, § 11-5-7A.18) (Ord. 12-1978; Am. Ord. 59-1987; Am. Ord. 51-1989; Am.
Ord. 12-1993)
PART 3: MAINTENANCE AND OPERATION REQUIREMENTS
§ 10-3-3-1 POOLS TO MEET REQUIREMENTS.
   Public swimming pools shall be operated and maintained in accordance with
the following requirements.
('74 Code, § 11-5-7B (part)) (Ord. 12-1978; Am. Ord. 59-1987; Am. Ord. 51-1989;
Am. Ord. 12-1993)
§ 10-3-3-2 BATHER LOAD.
   (A)   The maximum number of bathers permitted within the pool at any one
time shall not exceed the following:
      (1)   For Class A, B, and C pools, one person for each 25 square feet of
water surface.
      (2)   For Class D pools, one person for each ten square feet of water
surface.
   (B)   There shall be an allowance of 300 square feet for each diving board
or platform in addition to the amount needed for swimming purposes. A sign
shall be posted at the entrance of the pool stating the design bathing load
capacity of the pool. The pool owner shall be responsible for seeing that the
maximum capacity is not exceeded.
('74 Code, § 11-5-7B.1) (Ord. 12-1978; Am. Ord. 59-1987; Am. Ord. 51-1989; Am.
Ord. 12-1993)
§ 10-3-3-3 CLARITY.
   The water in the swimming pool at times of use shall be sufficiently clear
to allow the main drain outlet to be clearly visible from the runway around the
deep area. A swimming pool failing to meet this requirement shall be
immediately closed by the person in charge.
('74 Code, § 11-5-7B.2) (Ord. 12-1978; Am. Ord. 59-1987; Am. Ord. 51-1989; Am.
Ord. 12-1993)
§ 10-3-3-4 CLEANLINESS.
   The buildings, grounds, dressing rooms, walkways and all other such
facilities shall be kept clean, in a sanitary condition, and maintained free of
garbage, trash and other refuse. Dirt and scum in pools shall be removed at
least daily or more often as necessary to maintain sanitary conditions. A
portable vacuum cleaning system or a vacuum cleaning system which is an
integral part of the recirculation system shall be provided. Visible algae
shall be removed in a manner which will minimize reoccurrence.
('74 Code, § 11-5-7B.3) (Ord. 12-1978; Am. Ord. 59-1987; Am. Ord. 51-1989; Am.
Ord. 12-1993)
§ 10-3-3-5 WATER QUALITY TESTING.
   (A)   Pool water shall be disinfected through the use of chlorine,
hypochlorites or other equally effective disinfectant approved by the
Enforcement Authority. The pool shall be disinfected via an automatic
disinfection system bearing the National Sanitation Foundation Seal of Approval
for the disinfectant being dispensed.
      (1)   If chlorination is used, the chlorine residual shall not be less
than 0.4 ppm and not greater than 1.5 ppm of free available chlorine at all
times the pool is in operation.
      (2)   If chlorinated cyanurate disinfection is used, the residual shall
not be less than 1.0 ppm and not greater than 4 ppm of free available chlorine
at all times the pool is in operation unless a greater residual is approved by
the Enforcement Authority.
      (3)   If bromine is used, the free bromine residual shall not be less
than 2.0 ppm at all times the pool is in operation and not greater than 6.0 ppm
unless a greater residual is approved by the Enforcement Authority.
      (4)   Class C and Class D pools using chlorine shall be disinfected to
maintain a minimum disinfectant residual 50% greater than specified above.
      (5)   Other methods of disinfection shall provide a measurable halogen
residual and will be permitted only after approval by the Enforcement
Authority. Oxidization of pool water shall be required on all alternative
methods of disinfection.
      (6)   A pool not meeting this disinfectant requirement shall be closed
immediately and remain closed to all uses until the disinfection deficiency is
corrected.
   (B)    The disinfection residual in a swimming pool shall be checked
immediately prior to being opened to swimming. Frequent checks shall be made on
the amount of disinfectant residual during periods of heavy bather load and
during periods of high intensity of sunlight.
   (C)   A disinfectant comparator testing kit approved by the Enforcement
Authority, capable of measuring at least the disinfectant residual ranges
required in this section shall be used by the permit holder.
   (D)   The pH of the water in the pool shall be maintained between 7.2 and
8.0. A pH testing kit, to read from 6.8 to 8.2 with at least two intermediate
readings, shall be used by the permit holder. When the pH drops below 7.0 or
rises above 8.2 in the pool water, the pool shall be closed to all uses.
   (E)   If chlorinated cyanurate disinfection is used, the maximum permissible
concentration of cyanuric acid shall not be normally greater than 100 ppm, and
a test kit for cyanuric acid shall be used by the permit holder.
   (F)   Hand dosing of disinfectant is not allowed except for the purpose of
super-disinfection and/or for bringing the residual up to required levels when
the pool is closed. Super-chlorination to achieve breakpoint chlorination shall
be done when the difference between free and total chlorine is greater than .4
ppm. No use of the pool will be allowed until the chlorine residual has dropped
to 4.0 ppm or below throughout the pool.
   (G)   If gas chlorination is used, suitable equipment for feeding chemicals
to maintain the required pH shall be used.
   (H)   Total dissolved solids shall not exceed the lesser of either 3,000 ppm
or 2,000 ppm over the amount found to naturally occur in the supply water.
('74 Code, § 11-5-7B.4) (Ord. 12-1978; Am. Ord. 59-1987; Am. Ord. 51-1989; Am.
Ord. 12-1993)
§ 10-3-3-6 OPERATING AND ACCIDENT RECORDS.
   (A)   Daily operating records shall be kept and shall include the following:
      (1)   Date;
      (2)   Time of backwashing;
      (3)   Disinfectant residuals;
      (4)   Filter pressure;
      (5)   Circulation rate;
      (6)   pH of pool water;
      (7)   Kinds and quantities of chemicals added;
      (8)   The name of the pool operator;
      (9)   Visibility of pool bottom;
      (10)   Name, if applicable, of lifeguard on duty; and
      (11)   Testing of automatic sensor equipment.
   (B)   Monthly records shall be kept of cyanuric acid test results.
   (C)   Accidents shall be recorded.
   (D)   All such records shall be made available to the Enforcement Authority
upon request for inspection and copying.
('74 Code, § 11-5-7B.5) (Ord. 12-1978; Am. Ord. 59-1987; Am. Ord. 51-1989; Am.
Ord. 12-1993)
§ 10-3-3-7 INDOOR FACILITIES.
   All floor surfaces of dressing rooms, passageways, walkways and runways of
indoor dressing rooms shall be maintained in a clean and sanitary condition.
('74 Code, § 11-5-7B.6) (Ord. 12-1978; Am. Ord. 59-1987; Am. Ord. 51-1989; Am.
Ord. 12-1993)
§ 10-3-3-8 INSTRUCTION.
   Within two years of the effective date of this article, swimming pool
operators must be certified following successful completion of a training
course in swimming pool sanitation and safety approved by the Enforcement
Authority or certified in another manner approved by the Enforcement Authority.
The Enforcement Authority may require a swimming pool operator or employee to
attend additional training courses in pool sanitation and safety.
('74 Code, § 11-5-7B.7) (Ord. 12-1978; Am. Ord. 59-1987; Am. Ord. 51-1989; Am.
Ord. 12-1993)
§ 10-3-3-9 PREVENTION OF DISEASE.
   (A)   Footbaths. Footbaths are prohibited.
   (B)   Persons Excluded. All swimming pool users and employees known to be
afflicted with a highly contagious disease known to be capable of being
transmitted in a swimming pool, or who are suffering from sores, or wearing
bandages shall be excluded from all swimming pools.
   (C)   Shower. A cleansing shower with soap is required of all bathers
entering the pool.
   (D)   Introduction of Body Wastes. It shall be unlawful to introduce any
body wastes into the pool except perspiration.
   (E)   Supplies.  Soap and toilet paper shall be provided in toilet and
shower rooms. Easily cleanable waste receptacles shall be provided, including
one covered receptacle in the women's bathroom.
   (F)   Animals. Animals are not allowed within the barrier of any swimming
pool except service animals, as defined in §
9-2-1-4.
('74 Code, § 11-5-7B.8) (Ord. 12-1978; Am. Ord. 59-1987; Am. Ord. 51-1989; Am.
Ord. 12-1993)
§ 10-3-3-10 SAFETY PRECAUTIONS.
   (A)   First Aid Kit.  A first aid kit, comparable to the American Red Cross
Twenty-Four Unit Kit, shall be provided at all times.
   (B)   Telephone. The premises on which the pool is located shall have an
operational telephone accessible for emergency use and shall post an easily
visible emergency telephone number.
   (C)   Resuscitation Chart. An American Red Cross Resuscitation chart or
equivalent, shall be posted conspicuously in the swimming pool area.
   (D)   Lifeguard.
      (1)   Lifeguards shall be provided at all Class A pools during operating
hours.
         (a)   There shall be at least one lifeguard on duty for every 40
bathers or fraction thereof. Lifeguards shall be spaced in a manner which
assures proper surveillance of the pool surface, and especially points of
ingress and egress.
         (b)   When swim teams are facility users, the owner or designated
agent may allow substitution of a coach that is certified by the American Red
Cross or an equivalent organization in first aid and CPR and is trained to deal
with safety hazards related to the particular attraction at which they are
employed. Both the owner and the sponsoring organization furnishing the swim
coach shall have responsibility for assuring that proper credentials, training,
and bather controls are maintained in accordance with these requirements.
      (2)   All lifeguard requirements of a Class A pool shall be met at all
Class B and Class C pools during operating hours when:
         (a)   Total pool volume is 75,000 gallons or greater; and
         (b)   When diving boards or platforms of one meter or greater are
installed.
      (3)   In a Class B or Class C pool where a lifeguard is not required,
children under the age of 14 must be accompanied by a responsible observer, 18
years or older, who shall be present within the barrier area to adequately
monitor the children.
      (4)   Lifeguards, pool operators or managers shall verify adult
supervision of children in Class B or Class C pools not requiring a lifeguard.
      (5)   No lifeguard is required at public swimming pools during posted lap
swimming hours or classes with CPR trained instructors where the depth of water
does not exceed 5 feet.
      (6)   Class D pools are exempt from the lifeguard requirement.
   (E)   Contact Person. A contact person at least 18 years old shall be
designated by the pool owner or manager and shall be available as required in
this chapter at all times a public pool is open to swimmers. If the contact
person is not within the premises while the pool is open, but is within the
grounds, a sign shall be posted in the barrier area clearly stating where or
how the contact person can be reached within the grounds. If the contact person
is not within the grounds while the pool is open, a sign shall be posted within
the barrier area clearly stating how the contact person can be reached by
telephone or pager:
NOTICE: WHILE THE POOL IS OPEN IF YOU HAVE ISSUES REGARDING POOL OPERATION, YOU
CAN CONTACT SOMEONE BY...
The contact person must return the call or pager message within 30 minutes.
   (F)   If Lifeguard Service Not Required or Provided. If lifeguard service is
not required, children under the age of 12 within the barrier area must be
accompanied by an adult. If lifeguard service is not provided, a sign shall be
posted clearly stating:
WARNING, NO LIFEGUARD SERVICE IS PROVIDED. ALL CHILDREN UNDER THE AGE OF TWELVE
(12) WITHIN THE BARRIER AREA MUST BE ACCOMPANIED BY AN ADULT. IN CASE OF
EMERGENCY, CONTACT...
   (G)   Life Hooks. One or more light but strong poles not less than 12 feet
in length shall be provided, except that Class C and Class D pools need not
provide life hooks unless the Enforcement Authority determines a hook is or
hooks are necessary because of the size or depth of the pool. All life hooks
shall have blunt ends.
   (H)   Ring Buoys. Pools shall provide two or more U.S. Coast Guard approved
throwing ring buoys having minimum outside diameter of 18 inches with 1/4 inch
line attached, except that Class C and Class D pools need not provide ring
buoys unless the Enforcement Authority determines ring buoys are necessary
because of the size or depth of the pool. The length of the line attached to
the buoy shall not be less than 1/2 the pool width plus ten feet. Buoys shall
be placed on racks at strategic intervals about the pool.
   (I)   Temperature. The maximum temperature of the pool water when measured
at any point shall not exceed 104° F.
   (J)   Class D Pools.  
      (1)   For Class D pools a shatterproof thermometer shall be used to check
pool water temperature. Unless the air induction system of any Class D pool is
on a timer with a maximum setting of 15 minutes, a clock visible to pool users
shall be provided.
      (2)   A precaution sign shall be mounted adjacent to the entrance of the
pool, which reads:
         (a)   Extended exposure to hot water may be detrimental to the health
of elderly persons, persons with health problems (such as heart conditions,
diabetes, or low/high blood pressure), small children, or pregnant women.
         (b)   Consult with a physician before using spa.
         (c)   Do not use the spa while under the influence of alcohol,
narcotics, or other drugs that cause sleepiness, drowsiness, or raise/lower
blood pressure.
         (d)   Do not use the spa alone.
         (e)   Overexposure may cause nausea, dizziness, and fainting.
   (K)   Food and Refreshments. Operators providing food and drink service
within the enclosed barrier area shall not utilize glass and/or hard plastic
eating and drinking utensils and/or containers. Food and beverages shall not be
permitted on the runway of Class A pools. Glass and rigid plastic containers
shall not be allowed in shower rooms.
   (L)   Pool Closure.  Whenever a pool at an operating facility is closed to
swimming for any reason all gates and doors not utilized for necessary egress
to other parts of the building or buildings shall be locked and signs shall be
posted at locations near the pool stating that it is closed to swimming.
('74 Code, § 11-5-7B.9) (Ord. 12-1978; Am. Ord. 59-1987; Am. Ord. 51-1989; Am.
Ord. 12-1993; Am. Ord. 59-1995; Am. Ord. 37-2003)
§ 10-3-3-11 SUITS AND TOWELS.
   (A)   Laundering of Suits and Towels. Provisions shall be made for
laundering, rinsing and drying of all suits and towels supplied by the
management. All suits and towels owned by the management shall be laundered
with a detergent or soap by one of the following methods:
      (1)   In 100° F. water for fifteen minutes;
      (2)   In 170° F. water for eight minutes;
      (3)   In 212° F. water for three minutes.
   (B)   Storing of Clean Suits and Towels. Clean suits and towels shall be
kept separate from those which have been used.
('74 Code, § 11-5-7B.10) (Ord. 12-1978; Am. Ord. 59-1987; Am. Ord. 51-1989; Am.
Ord. 12-1993)
§ 10-3-3-12 TOXIC MATERIALS.
   (A)   The disinfection system shall be designed and installed to minimize
all hazards to health, safety, and welfare. Gas chlorinators and chlorine gas
cylinders shall be housed in an enclosure separated by a tight partition wall
from the swimming pool, corridors, dressing rooms and other space used by
bathers. The floor of the enclosure shall not be below the grade surrounding
the enclosure. Heat sources shall not pose any hazard to the gas chlorinators
and chlorine gas cylinders. In the room where the chlorine gas is stored, a
door to the outside shall be provided with a sign posted on the outside of the
door noting use of chlorine gas within. The device feeding gaseous
disinfectants shall not be readily accessible to any public room. Such room
shall be provided with an air intake and exhaust ventilation system to remove
contaminated air and replace with fresh air. The exhaust fan intake shall be
located near the floor level and the fan shall cause four complete air changes
per minute and discharge directly to the outside air.
   (B)   Emergency pull chains which activate the exhaust fans and shut down
the comfort ventilation system on the premises shall be installed and located
outside of and near the entrance to the chlorine room. An automatic alarm or
public address system shall be provided to expedite evacuation in case of a
chlorine gas emergency.
   (C)   Chlorine cylinders shall be secured so that they cannot fall. A valve
stem wrench (no longer than six inches on ton containers) shall be maintained
on the chlorine cylinder at all times so the supply can be quickly shut off in
case of an emergency. The valve protection hood shall be kept in place except
when the chlorine cylinder is connected. The chlorine feeding device shall be
designed so that during accident or interruption in the water supply, leaking
chlorine gas will be vented to the outside of the building in a safe manner.
   (D)   Respiratory protection apparatus designed for use in a chlorine
atmosphere approved by the National Institute of Occupational Safety and Health
shall be provided at each location or given to each employee. Each individual
employee's apparatus must have been properly fitted and adjusted and plainly
marked with the employee's name. Replacement canisters for apparatus shall be
provided, and a service record shall be maintained. Use of respiratory
protection shall conform to Occupational Health and Safety Regulations. The
respirator apparatus shall be located outside of the room where the chlorinator
is housed and shall be easily accessible for use.
   (E)   Corrosives and oxidizers shall be stored and used in a manner which
prevents chemical reactions. Organic chemicals shall be stored separate from
inorganic chemicals. All chemicals shall be stored off the floor in a clean,
dry location, in their original, closed containers and away from heat sources.
Chemical containers shall not be stacked on top of each other in an unsafe
manner.
('74 Code, § 11-5-7B.11) (Ord. 12-1978; Am. Ord. 59-1987; Am. Ord. 51-1989; Am.
Ord. 12-1993)
§ 10-3-3-13 WATER SUPPLY.
   Any person owning or operating a pool shall insure that the water used to
fill or add to a pool shall be both from a supply approved by the Enforcement
Authority and properly located, protected, and operated. Water shall be easily
accessible, adequate, and of safe and sanitary quality.
('74 Code, § 11-5-7B.12) (Ord. 12-1978; Am. Ord. 59-1987; Am. Ord. 51-1989; Am.
Ord. 12-1993)
§ 10-3-3-14 WATER QUALITY.
   Pool water samples containing 100 milliliter portions shall be collected
when the pool is in operation, as often as is reasonably necessary, as
determined by the Enforcement Authority. The samples shall be submitted to a
laboratory approved by the Enforcement Authority. If a nonconforming sample is
obtained, additional samples shall be submitted to an approved laboratory as
soon as possible. Two consecutive nonconforming samples shall constitute
grounds for suspension and/or revocation of the operating permit as provided in
this article unless evidence of correction of this deficiency is provided to
the satisfaction of the Enforcement Authority.
('74 Code, § 11-5-7B.13) (Ord. 12-1978; Am. Ord. 59-1987; Am. Ord. 51-1989; Am.
Ord. 12-1993)
PART 4: ADMINISTRATION; PERMITS
§ 10-3-4-1 ENFORCEMENT AND APPLICATION.
   This article does not apply to non-public pools. The Enforcement Authority
shall be responsible for the enforcement of this article. This article shall
apply to any structures designed to contain water and which may reasonably be
construed to be used by persons for body immersion to a significant degree or
other water treatment in which all water is not removed after each use, if the
Enforcement Authority determines the use of the structure may be a public
health concern. If the use of a swimming pool changes, the Enforcement
Authority may require changes in the structure, treatment or operation of the
swimming pool so the new use of the pool will be in compliance with this
article. Any swimming pool which by design and/or operation manifests
characteristics of multiple classes of swimming pools as defined by this
article shall adhere to the most restrictive requirements of each class. Rules
and regulations based on the standards created in this article may be
prescribed by the Enforcement Authority to carry out the intent and purpose of
this article.
('74 Code, § 11-5-4A) (Ord. 12-1978; Am. Ord. 26-1980; Am. Ord. 55-1981; Am.
Ord. 12-1993)
§ 10-3-4-2 RIGHT OF ENTRY.
   Whenever necessary to make an inspection to enforce the provisions of this
article or whenever the Enforcement Authority has reasonable cause to believe
that there exists any condition which makes such swimming pool a hazard to the
public health, welfare or safety, the Enforcement Authority may enter such
premises at all reasonable times to inspect the same or to perform any duty
imposed upon the Enforcement Authority by this article. Reasonable times shall
mean at any time the pool is open for use or maintenance or at any time the
person in charge is on the premises.
('74 Code, § 11-5-4B) (Ord. 12-1978; Am. Ord. 26-1980; Am. Ord. 55-1981; Am.
Ord. 12-1993)
§ 10-3-4-3 FAILURE TO ADMIT.
   If an owner or occupant or any other person in charge of a swimming pool
fails or neglects to allow entry by the Enforcement Authority for the purposes
of inspection and examination pursuant to this article after the Enforcement
Authority has presented proper identification then the permit to operate the
swimming pool shall be suspended immediately. Refusal to allow entry of the
Enforcement Authority is a violation of this article.
('74 Code, § 11-5-4C) (Ord. 12-1978; Am. Ord. 26-1980; Am. Ord. 55-1981; Am.
Ord. 12-1993)
§ 10-3-4-4 VARIANCES.
   (A)   Excepting §§
10-3-2-3 and
10-3-2-9, the Enforcement Authority may grant an individual variance from the
limitations prescribed in this article whenever the Enforcement Authority finds
upon presentation of adequate proof that:
      (1)   Compliance with that specific part of this article will impose an
unreasonable burden or hardship upon the pool owner or user; and
      (2)   Granting of the variance will not result in a condition hazardous
to the public health, safety or welfare.
   (B)   Any person seeking a variance shall do so in writing, setting forth
his or her reasons for the variance and stating the length of time for which
they seek the variance. The Enforcement Authority shall promptly investigate
the request and make a determination as to the disposition thereof. In granting
a variance, the Enforcement Authority may impose limitations or conditions upon
the approval. The person seeking this variance shall be given a written
decision within ten working days following receipt of the request by the
Enforcement Authority.
   (C)   Voiding of Variances.
      (1)   An approved variance shall be void one year after the date of
approval if the rights and privileges granted thereby have not been utilized.
If the Enforcement Authority voids a variance for any reason, the Enforcement
Authority will serve written notice on the permit holder.
      (2)   The Enforcement Authority may void a variance if subsequent events
show that the variance has created or may create a condition hazardous to the
public health, safety or welfare.
      (3)   An approved variance shall be void if it is utilized in a way
materially in violation of the terms of the variance. Voiding a variance is in
addition to and not instead of other remedies available to the city at any time
for violation of this article.
   (D)   Any person who has been granted a variance shall sign an
indemnification and release of liability statement form which has been approved
by the City Attorney's Office.
('74 Code, § 11-5-4D) (Ord. 12-1978; Am. Ord. 26-1980; Am. Ord. 55-1981; Am.
Ord. 12-1993)
§ 10-3-4-5 PERMIT REQUIRED.
   No person shall operate a public pool without having at all times a valid
operating permit issued by the enforcement authority. Such permit shall be
obtained from the Enforcement Authority by means of written application by the
owners or operators of the swimming pool. Only those persons who comply with
the provisions of this article and other applicable laws, regulations, and
ordinances shall be entitled to receive and retain such a permit. A separate
permit shall be required for each swimming pool. Such permits are not
transferable to another person or location.
('74 Code, § 11-5-5A) (Ord. 12-1978; Am. Ord. 18-1980; Am. Ord. 33-1987; Am.
Ord. 12-1993)
§ 10-3-4-6 INSPECTION FEES.
   Each swimming pool shall be assessed a $180 annual inspection fee to be paid
to the city. All inspection fees shall be paid by April 15 of each year, except
no person shall engage in the operation of a newly constructed swimming pool
without first paying an inspection fee and receiving a permit. A late charge of
$10 will be assessed for each late payment received by the Enforcement
Authority.
('74 Code, § 11-5-5B) (Ord. 12-1978; Am. Ord. 18-1980; Am. Ord. 33-1987; Am.
Ord. 12-1993)
§ 10-3-4-7 TRANSFER FEE.
   A transfer fee of $50 shall be assessed when there is a new owner, lessee,
or operator of a swimming pool and the annual inspection fee has been prepaid.
Such fee shall be due within 15 days of the commencement of operations by the
new owner, lessee, or operator.
('74 Code, § 11-5-5C) (Ord. 12-1978; Am. Ord. 18-1980; Am. Ord. 33-1987; Am.
Ord. 12-1993)
§ 10-3-4-8 PERMISSION TO OPERATE.
   Permission to operate a seasonal pool will be granted by the Enforcement
Authority after completion of a satisfactory pre-opening inspection. Newly
constructed and remodeled swimming pools meeting all ordinance requirements
will receive permission to operate after the pool passes a final inspection by
the Enforcement Authority and all fees are paid. The issuance of a permit shall
not be deemed or construed to be a permit for, or an approval of, any violation
of any of the provisions of this article.
('74 Code, § 11-5-5D) (Ord. 12-1978; Am. Ord. 18-1980; Am. Ord. 33-1987; Am.
Ord. 12-1993)
PART 5: ENFORCEMENT
§ 10-3-5-1 TEMPORARY SUSPENSION OF PERMITS.
   Permits shall be temporarily suspended by the Enforcement Authority for
failure of the holder to comply with the requirements of this article or other
applicable laws, ordinances or regulations. Whenever a permit holder or
operator has failed to comply with any of the requirements of this article, the
permit holder or operator shall be notified in a writing which identifies or
references such condition; specifies the time period within which such
condition shall be brought into compliance, if any period to cure is allowed;
and states that failure to comply with any notice issued in accordance with the
provisions of this article may result in immediate suspension of the permit.
Notwithstanding the other provisions of this article, whenever the Enforcement
Authority finds a condition in the operation of a swimming pool which
constitutes an immediate hazard to the public health, welfare or safety, the
Enforcement Authority may without prior warning, notice, or hearing, issue a
written notice to the permit holder or operator citing such condition and
stating that the permit is immediately suspended and that all swimming or
bathing of any kind is to be immediately discontinued. An opportunity for an
administrative hearing regarding such action will be provided if a written
request for a hearing is delivered to the City Clerk within 15 days of
suspension of the permit. Any person to whom notice of suspension is given
shall comply immediately therewith. A sign, approved by the Enforcement
Authority and in a location designated by the Enforcement Authority, shall be
displayed stating that the pool is closed for use.
('74 Code, § 11-5-6A) (Ord. 12-1978; Am. Ord. 12-1993; Am. Ord._2023-015)
§ 10-3-5-2 SERVICE OF NOTICE.
   Notice shall be deemed to have been properly served when the original or
true copy of the inspection report form or other notice has been delivered
personally to the permit holder or person in charge, or such notice has been
sent by registered or certified mail, return receipt requested, to the last
known address of the permit holder on file with the Enforcement Authority. A
copy of such notice shall be filed with the records of the Enforcement
Authority.
('74 Code, § 11-5-6B) (Ord. 12-1978; Am. Ord. 12-1993)
§ 10-3-5-3 REINSTATEMENT OF SUSPENDED PERMITS.
   Any person whose permit has been suspended, may make application for a
reinstatement of permit. Within five working days following receipt of such a
request, the Enforcement Authority shall ascertain the status of the pool and/
or premises. If the applicant is in compliance with requirements of this
article and other applicable laws, regulations and ordinances, the permit shall
be reinstated.
('74 Code, § 11-5-6C) (Ord. 12-1978; Am. Ord. 12-1993)
§ 10-3-5-4 REVOCATION OF PERMIT.
   If serious or repeated violations of any of the requirements of this article
occur, or if three or more suspensions occur which require reinspection for
permit reinstatement within any 12-month period, or if the permit has been
obtained through nondisclosure, misrepresentation or misstatement of a material
fact, or if the owner or the person in charge interferes with the Enforcement
Authority in the performance of his or her duties, then the permit may be
revoked after an opportunity for a hearing has been provided by the Enforcement
Authority. Prior to such revocation, the Enforcement Authority shall notify the
permit holder in writing stating the reason the permit is subject to revocation
and advising that the permit shall be revoked at the end of five working days
following service of such notice, unless a request for a hearing is delivered
to the City Clerk by the permit holder within 15 days. A permit may be
suspended pending revocation or pending the holding of an administrative
hearing.
('74 Code, § 11-5-6D) (Ord. 12-1978; Am. Ord. 12-1993; Am. Ord._2023-015)
§ 10-3-5-5 HEARINGS.
   The hearing shall be held in accordance with the provisions in the IHO
Ordinance, ROA 1994,
Chapter 2, Article 7, Part 8.
('74 Code, § 11-5-6E) (Ord. 12-1978; Am. Ord. 12-1993; Am. Ord. 31-2007; Am.
Ord._2023-015)
§ 10-3-5-6 JUDICIAL REVIEW.
   The exclusive remedy of any party dissatisfied with any final decision of
the Enforcement Authority shall be filing of a petition for Writ of Certiorari
to the District Court within 30 days after written notice of the decision is
served on the concerned party. The petition for review shall be limited to the
record.
('74 Code, § 11-5-6F) (Ord. 12-1978; Am. Ord. 12-1993)
§ 10-3-5-7 INJUNCTIVE RELIEF.
   As an additional remedy, if any swimming pool is in violation of the
provisions of this article, the Enforcement Authority may seek injunctive or
other equitable relief in a court of competent jurisdiction.
('74 Code, § 11-5-6G) (Ord. 12-1978; Am. Ord. 12-1993)
§ 10-3-5-8 ISSUANCE OF CITATION.
   The Enforcement Authority may issue citations for failure to comply with any
requirement set forth in this article.
('74 Code, § 11-5-6H) (Ord. 12-1978; Am. Ord. 12-1993)
§ 10-3-5-9 INSPECTION FREQUENCY.
   The Enforcement Authority shall inspect each swimming pool at least annually
and shall make as many reinspections as are necessary for the enforcement of
this article.
('74 Code, § 11-5-6I) (Ord. 12-1978; Am. Ord. 12-1993)
§ 10-3-5-99 PENALTY.
   Any person who violates any of the provisions of this article shall be
deemed guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction thereof shall be subject to
the penalty provisions set forth in §
1-1-99 of this code of ordinances. Each day this article is violated shall be
considered a separate offense.
('74 Code, § 11-5-9) (Ord. 12-1978; Am. Ord. 12-1993)
APPENDIX: REQUIREMENTS AND
RECOMMENDATIONS TABLES
REQUIREMENTS TABLE
Disinfection and Chemicals Readings Pool Class
                                    A B C D
REQUIREMENTS TABLE
Disinfection and Chemicals    Pool Class
Readings                      A       B       C       D
Chlorine, Free, ppm
   STABILIZED (Cyanurate)
   Minimum                 1.0     1.0     1.5     1.5
   Maximum                 4.0     4.0     4.0     4.0
   UNSTABILIZED
   Minimum                 .4      .4      .6      .6
   Maximum                 1.5     1.5     1.5     1.5
Bromine, Total, ppm
   Minimum                 2.0     2.0     2.0     2.0
   Maximum                 6.0     6.0     6.0     6.0
Closure Required When Readings Fall Below Minimum Listed Above
Free and Total Chlorine
   Maximum                 .4      .4      .4      .4
pH
   Minimum                 7.2     7.2     7.2     7.2
   Maximum                 8.0     8.0     8.0     8.0
   Closure Below           7.0     7.0     7.0     7.0
   Closure Above           8.2     8.2     8.2     8.2
Cyanuric Acid, ppm
   Maximum                 100     100     100     100
Complete Circulation of all   6 hours 6 hours 2 hour  1 hour
Water Within
Bather Load
   Diving Board (each)     300 ft. 300 ft. N/A     N/A
Allowance
   Person Capacity         1/25ft2 1/25ft2 1/25ft2 1/10ft2
Total Dissolved Solids, All   3,000 ppm or 2,000 ppm Over Naturally Occurring
Classes                       Whichever Is Less
Total Alkalinity, All Classes 80 - 125 ppm
Calcium Hardness, All Classes 125 - 400 ppm
ARTICLE 4: MUSEUMS;
SCIENCE AND ART CENTERS
Section
Part 1: Public Museum
   
10-4-1-1   Purpose
   
10-4-1-2   Name
   
10-4-1-3   Albuquerque Museum Board of Trustees
   
10-4-1-4   Board composition
   
10-4-1-5   Administrative responsibilities
   
10-4-1-6   [Reserved]
   
10-4-1-7   Museum collections
   
10-4-1-8   Gift, grant endowment and trust fund donations
   
10-4-1-9   Statement of policy
Part 2: Explora Science Center
   
10-4-2-1   Mission and goals
   
10-4-2-2   [Reserved]
Part 3: [Reserved]
Part 4: [Reserved]
Part 5: Anderson/Abruzzo Albuquerque International Balloon Museum
   
10-4-5-1   Purpose
   
10-4-5-2   Board of trustees
   
10-4-5-3   Board composition
   
10-4-5-4   Administrative responsibilities
PART 1: PUBLIC MUSEUM
§ 10-4-1-1 PURPOSE.
   A public museum of the city is hereby established for the purpose of
disseminating knowledge and appreciation of art and history by establishing and
maintaining a museum and related facilities in the City of Albuquerque; by
collecting and preserving objects of artistic and historic interest; by aiding
in protecting historic sites, works of art from needless destruction; by
providing facilities for research and publication; by offering instruction and
opportunities for aesthetic enjoyment to the public; and by encouraging
continued excellence of the cultural life of the community.
('74 Code, § 11-4-1) (Ord. 92-1967; Am. Ord. 18-1985; Am. Ord. 8-1994)
§ 10-4-1-2 NAME.
   The name of the museum shall be the Albuquerque Museum, hereinafter the
"Museum." The Museum will be housed in city-owned facilities built and
maintained for the Museum's use.
('74 Code, § 11-4-2) (Ord. 92-1967; Am. Ord. 18-1985)
§ 10-4-1-3 ALBUQUERQUE MUSEUM BOARD OF TRUSTEES.
   A Museum Board of Trustees, hereinafter the "Board," is established and
shall:
   (A)   Advise the Mayor and the City Council and advise and consult with the
Director of the Museum, hereinafter "Director," on matters relating to the
Museum and its needs;
   (B)   Establish such policies as are deemed necessary for the operation of
the Museum. Policies are defined as broad operational guidelines, within which
programmatic and administrative decisions may be made and implemented in
accordance with accepted city administrative procedures;
   (C)   Have trust responsibilities for the Museum collections; determine that
the collections are maintained and preserved in accordance with professional
standards for museum operations and the public interest; and establish policies
for the control, acquisition and disposal of Museum materials;
   (D)   Adopt and amend bylaws governing the activities of the Board;
   (E)   Recommend appropriate contractual arrangements between the city and
the Albuquerque Museum Foundation, Inc., hereinafter the "Museum Foundation," a
nonprofit corporation formed to further the cultural and educational programs
and purposes of the Museum as expressed in city ordinances relating to the
Museum.
('74 Code, § 11-4-3) (Ord. 92- 1967; Am. Ord. 18-1985; Am. Ord._2020-039)
§ 10-4-1-4 BOARD COMPOSITION.
   (A)   The Albuquerque Museum Board of Trustees shall consist of 12 appointed
members and one assigned member. There shall be one member of the Board
appointed from each City Council District, three members appointed by the
Mayor, who serve at large, and one assigned member from the recognized support
organization of the Albuquerque Museum Foundation.
   (B)   When an appointed vacancy on the Board occurs, the Councilor
representing the District in which the vacating member of the Board resides
shall nominate two members to the Board who reside in his or her respective
Council District and the Mayor shall appoint one of these recommended members;
provided, however, if a member is eligible for reappointment to the Board and
the Councilor in whose District that member resides desires to reappoint the
member, the Councilor shall so notify the Council and the member shall be
reappointed subject to the advice and consent of the Council. If a member is
not being reappointed, the Mayor shall deliver to the Council the Mayor's
recommendation from the two names submitted within 30 days of delivery of the
two names to the Mayor. If the Mayor fails to timely make a recommendation from
the two names submitted, the Councilor may appoint one of the two recommended
members subject to the advice and consent of the Council. The Mayor may notify
a Councilor in writing that his or her District member's term has expired or
the position is otherwise vacant and the Councilor shall have 60 days to submit
two recommended appointments to fill that position. If the Councilor fails to
submit two names within 60 days of notification, the Mayor shall have the right
to make the appointment subject to the advice and consent of the City Council.
The Mayor shall appoint the three at large members to the Board with the advice
and consent of the Council. The term of each appointed member shall be three
years. The terms of the members shall be staggered so that three members are
eligible for reappointment or replacement each year.
   (C)   Except as provided in this article, the qualifications, appointment
and conduct of the members of the Board and any of its subcommittees and the
organizational structure of the Board and its subcommittees shall be governed
by §§
2-6-1-1 et seq., the Public Boards, Commissions and Committees Ordinance.
   (D)   The Board shall establish and adopt bylaws as may be necessary to
conduct elections, provide notice of meetings and otherwise govern its
proceedings.
   (E)   Members of the Board shall be broadly representative of all fields of
art and history. They shall include persons who are widely known for their
professional competence and experience In the aforementioned fields and
knowledgeable lay persons.
   (F)   Appointed members of the Board may not serve on the board of directors
for any recognized organization supporting the Albuquerque Museum except for
the position assigned by title described in section (A) of this provision. Each
assigned member shall serve on the Board until the term expires with the
respective organization.
   (G)   Conflict of interest. This division (G) supplements §
2-6-1-4. A Board or a subcommittee member having a financial interest in the
outcome of any policy, decision, or determination before the Board or
subcommittee on which he or she serves shall, as soon as possible after such
interest becomes apparent, disclose to each of the other members voting on the
matter the nature of his or her financial interest in the issue, and shall be
disqualified from participating in any debate, decision or vote relating
thereto.
('74 Code, § 11-4-4) (Ord. 92-1967; Am. Ord. 16-1977; Am. Ord. 50-1977; Am.
Ord. 18-1985; Am. Ord. 8-1994; Am. Ord._2020-039)
§ 10-4-1-5 ADMINISTRATIVE RESPONSIBILITIES.
   The Chief Administrative Officer shall provide adequate staffing and
administrative support for enabling the Board and any of its subcommittees to
carry out their duties.
('74 Code, § 11-4-5) (Ord. 92-1967; Am. Ord. 59-1970; Am. Ord. 18-1985; Am.
Ord._2020-039)
§ 10-4-1-6 [RESERVED].
§ 10-4-1-7 MUSEUM COLLECTIONS.
   (A)   MUSEUM COLLECTIONS, hereinafter "collections," are defined as any item
or assemblage of items gathered by the Museum for educational, research,
exhibit and public benefit purposes.
   (B)   The Board shall establish and oversee application of policies relating
to:
      (1)   Acquisition of items through gift, purchase or trade;
      (2)   Loan of items;
      (3)   Conservation and maintenance of items;
      (4)   Preservation; and
      (5)   Deaccessioning of items in the Museum collections.
   (C)   Net proceeds from sales of collections or other items shall be
deposited in the Museum Trust and Agency Account to be used for future
collection acquisitions.
('74 Code, § 11-4-7) (Ord. 92- 1967; Am. Ord. 18-1985; Am. Ord._2020-039)
§ 10-4-1-8 GIFT, GRANT ENDOWMENT AND TRUST FUND DONATIONS.
   (A)   Gifts, grants, endowments and other financial aid given to the Museum
by public or private sources shall be administered according to the terms
specified by the donor.
   (B)   All money described in division (A) of this section shall be deposited
in the Museum Trust and Agency Account, an account of the city, unless the
donor requests otherwise. Property described in division (A) of this section,
which is not either money or property appropriate for the Museum collection as
defined by Board policy, shall be administered by the Museum Foundation, unless
the donor requests otherwise; in this role, the Museum Foundation shall act as
trustee for the city, and title shall vest in the city. Sections
10-4-1-1 et seq. shall not bar the Museum Foundation from owning property
specifically given or sold to the Foundation.
   (C)   All funds which the donor requests to be deposited in the Museum Trust
and Agency Account shall be invested as part of the established city investment
program, unless a specific fund is to be used immediately and the Director
requests other use or deposit. Proceeds from these investments shall be
credited to the Museum Trust and Agency Account and are not to be substituted
for public funds in determining the financing of the Museum by the city.
   (D)   The Director is empowered to expend funds from the Museum Trust and
Agency Account in accordance with applicable city practices.
('74 Code, § 11-4-8) (Ord. 92- 1967; Am. Ord. 18-1985; Am. Ord._2020-039)
§ 10-4-1-9 STATEMENT OF POLICY.
   (A)   The City Council will assume the cost of operating the Museum,
specifically, salaries of staff and employees, costs of preparing exhibitions,
maintenance of building and grounds, and other related costs and services.
   (B)   Costs of acquisition of collections and similar material for the
Museum will not normally be paid for by the city unless special funds are made
available to the city by grants, endowments, gifts or by Council action. The
Museum may charge admission fees. For special projects which are beyond the
usual operating activities of the Museum, hereinafter "special project," the
Museum may request special funds from the City and/or grants from outside
sources. The request for a grant may include all the costs of the special
project. Thus, if a special project requires additional personnel or special
equipment exclusively for that project, the grant may encompass the expenses as
costs arising from that project, expenses which the Museum would not otherwise
undertake.
   (C)   Admission fee levels shall be set by the Mayor, in consultation with
the Board, pursuant to the following policies:
      (1)   Fees should not be so high as to seriously reduce the availability
of the Museum to the public;
      (2)   Fees should be reasonable in relation to other museum and
educational attractions in the Southwest region;
      (3)   Compatible, reciprocal fees with the New Mexico Museum of Natural
History are desirable;
      (4)   In keeping with the museum's educational role, special fee
provisions should apply to students;
      (5)   Special fee provisions should apply to senior citizens and Museum
Foundation members;
      (6)   There should be periodic free days.
('74 Code, § 11-4-9) (Ord. 92-1967; Am. Ord. 56-1977; Am. Ord. 18-1985; Am.
Ord._2020-039)
PART 2: EXPLORA SCIENCE CENTER
§ 10-4-2-1 MISSION AND GOALS.
   (A)   Explora's Mission. Explora, an interactive science center, ls a
public-private partnership between the City of Albuquerque and Explora Science
Center, managed through an Operating Agreement approved by the City of
Albuquerque Chief Administrative Officer and the City Council, dedicated to
educating and exciting people of all ages, especially chlldren of New Mexico,
about the wonders of science and technology.
   (B)   Explora's Goals.
      (1)   To provide a quality Science Center for the state with interactive
hands-on exhibits and educational programs about science and technology.
      (2)   To serve the state by providing a statewide outreach program for
science education in schools and communities and by soliciting funds for
programs and transportation for visitors to come to the Center.
      (3)   To actively promote a relationship with the education systems in
the state to make the Explora Science Center a vital complement to and
extension of the classroom experience.
      (4)   To reflect the diversity and richness of the state's cultural,
natural and scientific resources.
      (5)   To seek maximum support and cooperation from government, industry
and private institutions.
('74 Code, § 11-18-1) (Ord. 55- 1993; Am. Ord._2020-039)
§ 10-4-2-2 [RESERVED.]
PART 3: [RESERVED]
PART 4: [RESERVED]
PART 5: ANDERSON/ABRUZZO
ALBUQUERQUE INTERNATIONAL BALLOON MUSEUM
§ 10-4-5-1 PURPOSE.
   A public museum of the city is established for the purpose of disseminating
knowledge and appreciation of art, sport and history of hot air ballooning and
lighter than air flight, by establishing and maintaining a museum and related
facilities in the City of Albuquerque; by collecting and preserving objects of
cultural and historic interest; by aiding in protecting historic and
contemporary ballooning related objects from needless destruction; by providing
facilities for research and publication; by offering instruction and
opportunities for enjoyment to the public; and by encouraging continued
excellence of the cultural life of the community.
(Ord._2020-039)
§ 10-4-5-2 BOARD OF TRUSTEES.
   An Anderson/Abruzzo Albuquerque International Balloon Museum Board of
Trustees is established. The Board of Trustees shall have the following powers
and duties:
   (A)   To refine the mission, purpose and goals of the Anderson-Abruzzo
Albuquerque International Balloon Museum, hereafter “the Museum”, and set the
policies pursuant to which these shall be accomplished, where policies are
defined to mean broad operational guidelines, within which programmatic and
administrative decisions may be made and implemented in accordance with
accepted city administrative procedures;
   (B)   To review and recommend the budget proposal to be submitted to the
Mayor;
   (C)   To review and recommend an annual fee schedule for renting the
facilities in the Museum;
   (D)   To review and recommend the Museum's programming as recommended by the
Museum Manager;
   (E)   To review and recommend guidelines and procedures for selecting the
resident tenants and concessionaires of the Museum and for allocating the
facilities of the Museum to all other potential users;
   (F)   To review, recommend and acknowledge the form of recognition in the
Museum for donors to the Museum Endowment;
   (G)   To review and recommend design and construction projects for the
Museum; and
   (H)   To prepare and submit an annual report of its activities to the Mayor
and the City Council.
('74 Code, § 11-22-1A) (Ord. 5- 1990; Am. Ord. 55-1993; Am. Ord._2013-015; Am.
Ord._2020-039)
§ 10-4-5-3 BOARD COMPOSITION.
   (A)   The Anderson/Abruzzo Albuquerque International Balloon Museum Board of
Trustees shall consist of 12 appointed members, one assigned member, and two
ex-officio members. There shall be one member of the Board appointed from each
City Council District; three members appointed by the Mayor, who serve at
large; one assigned member from the recognized support organization of the
Anderson Abruzzo International Albuquerque Museum Foundation; one ex-officio
designee representing the Maxie Anderson family to be recommended by the
descendants of Maxie Anderson and appointed by the Mayor with the advice and
consent of the Council; and one ex-officio designee representing the Ben
Abruzzo family to be recommended by the descendants of Ben Abruzzo.
   (B)   When an appointed vacancy on the Board occurs, the Councilor
representing the District in which the vacating member of the Board resides
shall nominate two members to the Board who reside in his or her respective
Council District and the Mayor shall appoint one of these recommended members;
provided, however, if a member is eligible for reappointment to the Board and
the Councilor in whose District that member resides desires to reappoint the
member, the Councilor shall so notify the Council and the member shall be
reappointed subject to the advice and consent of the Council. If a member is
not being reappointed, the Mayor shall deliver to the Council the Mayor's
recommendation from the two names submitted within 30 days of delivery of the
two names to the Mayor. If the Mayor fails to timely make a recommendation from
the two names submitted, the Councilor may appoint one of the two recommended
members subject to the advice and consent of the Council. The Mayor may notify
a Councilor in writing that his or her District member's term has expired or
the position is otherwise vacant and the Councilor shall have 60 days to submit
two recommended appointments to fill that position. If the Councilor fails to
submit two names within 60 days of notification, the Mayor shall have the right
to make the appointment subject to the advice and consent of the City Council.
The Mayor shall appoint the three at large members to the Board with the advice
and consent of the Council. The term of each appointed member shall be three
years. The terms of the members shall be staggered so that three members are
eligible for reappointment or replacement each year.
   (C)   Except as provided in this article, the qualifications, appointment
and conduct of the members of the Board and any of its subcommittees and the
organizational structure of the Board and its subcommittees shall be governed
by §§
2-6-1-1 et seq., the Public Boards, Commissions and Committees Ordinance.
   (D)   The Board shall establish and adopt bylaws as may be necessary to
conduct elections, provide notice of meetings and otherwise govern its
proceedings.
   (E)   Members of the Board shall be broadly representative of all fields of
the art, sport and history of hot air ballooning and lighter than air flight.
They shall include persons who are widely known for their professional
competence and experience in the aforementioned fields and knowledgeable lay
persons.
   (F)   Appointed members of the Board may not serve on the board of directors
for any recognized organization supporting the Anderson/Abruzzo Albuquerque
International Balloon Museum except for the positions assigned by title
described in section (A) of this provision. Each assigned member shall serve on
the Board until the term expires with the respective organization.
   (G)   Conflict of interest. This division (G) supplements §
2-6-1-4. A Board or a subcommittee member having a financial interest in the
outcome of any policy, decision, or determination before the Board or
subcommittee on which he or she serves shall, as soon as possible after such
interest becomes apparent, disclose to each of the other members voting on the
matter the nature of his or her financial interest in the issue, and shall be
disqualified from participating in any debate, decision or vote relating
thereto.
(Ord._2020-039)
§ 10-4-5-4 ADMINISTRATIVE RESPONSIBILITIES.
   The Chief Administrative Officer shall provide adequate staffing and
administrative support for enabling the Board and any of its subcommittees to
carry out their duties.
(Ord._2020-039)
ARTICLE 5: ART IN MUNICIPAL PLACES
Section
   
10-5-1   Purpose
   
10-5-2   Definitions
   
10-5-3   Albuquerque arts board
   
10-5-4   Powers and duties
   
10-5-5   Funds for the acquisition of art for municipal property
   
10-5-6   General requirements for art selection
   
10-5-7   Administrative responsibilities
   
10-5-8   Applicability
§ 10-5-1 PURPOSE.
   The intent of this article is to promote and encourage private and public
programs to further the development and public awareness of, and interest in,
the visual arts and fine crafts to increase employment opportunities in the
arts, and to encourage the integration of art into the architecture of
municipal structures. Except as specifically provided for herein, this article
does not intend to establish any policies or procedures relative to the Museum
of Albuquerque.
('74 Code, § 11-14-1) (Ord. 89-1978; Am. Ord. 24-1992)
§ 10-5-2 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this article, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   BOARD. The Albuquerque Arts Board established by this article.
   CAPITAL IMPROVEMENTS PROGRAM. All capital projects of the city.
   GENERAL PROGRAM CATEGORY. Each separate question or purpose submitted to the
voters in a bond election or any purpose for which a bond ordinance authorizing
revenue bonds is approved.
   MAYOR. The Mayor or the Mayor's designated representative.
   WORK OF ART. Any work of visual art, including but not limited to, a
drawing, painting, mural, fresco, sculpture, mosaic, photograph, work of
calligraphy, work of graphic art (including an etching), works in clay,
textile, fiber, wood, metal, plastic, glass, and like materials, digital media,
temporary installations, or mixed media (including a collage, assemblage, or
any combination of the foregoing art media). For projects which involve no
structures, WORK OF ART may include a combination of landscaping and landscape
design (including some natural and manufactured materials such as rocks,
fountains, reflecting pools, sculpture, screens, benches, and other types of
street furniture). Except as provided herein, the term WORK OF ART does not
include environmental landscaping or the performing or literary arts such as
dance, voice, music or poetry unless expressed in a manner defined above.
('74 Code, § 11-14-2) (Ord. 89- 1978; Am. Ord. 24-1992; Am. Ord. O-2022-035)
§ 10-5-3 ALBUQUERQUE ARTS BOARD.
   (A)   The Albuquerque Arts Board is hereby established. It shall consist of
eleven members. There shall be one member of the Albuquerque Arts Board from
each City Council District and two members appointed by the Mayor who serve at
large. When a vacancy on the Albuquerque Arts Board occurs, the Councilor
representing the District in which the vacating member of the Albuquerque Arts
Board resides, shall nominate two members to the Albuquerque Arts Board who
reside in his or her respective Council District and the Mayor shall appoint
one of these recommended members; provided, however, if a member is eligible
for reappointment to the Arts Board and the Councilor in whose District that
member resides desires to reappoint the member, the Councilor shall so notify
the Council and the member shall be reappointed subject to the advice and
consent of the Council. If a member is not being reappointed, the Mayor shall
deliver to the Council the Mayor's recommendation from the two names submitted
within 30 days of delivery of the two names to the Mayor. If the Mayor fails to
timely make a recommendation from the two names submitted, the Councilor may
appoint one of the two recommended members subject to the advice and consent of
the Council. The Mayor shall appoint the two at large members to the
Albuquerque Arts Board with the advice and consent of the Council. The term of
each member shall be three years. The terms of the members shall be staggered
so that three members are eligible for reappointment or replacement each year.
   (B)   The Mayor may notify a Councilor in writing that his or her District
member's term has expired or the position is otherwise vacant and the Councilor
shall have 60 days to submit two recommended appointments to fill that
position. If the Councilor fails to submit two names within 60 days of
notification, the Mayor shall have the right to make the appointment subject to
the advice and consent of the City Council.
   (C)   Except as provided in this article, the qualifications, appointment
and conduct of the members of the Board and any of its subcommittees and the
organizational structure of the Board and its subcommittees shall be governed
by §§
2-6-1-1 et seq.
   (D)   Members of the Board shall be broadly representative of all fields of
the visual arts and fine crafts. They shall include persons who are widely
known for their professional competence and experience in the arts and
knowledgeable lay persons.
   (E)   Conflict of Interest. This division (E) supplements §
2-6-1-4. A Board or a subcommittee member having a financial interest in the
outcome of any policy, decision, or determination before the Board or
subcommittee on which he serves shall, as soon as possible after such interest
becomes apparent, disclose to each of the other members voting on the matter
the nature of his financial interest in the issue, and shall be disqualified
from participating in any debate, decision or vote relating thereto.
('74 Code, § 11-14-3) (Ord. 89- 1978; Am. Ord. 47-1982; Am. Ord. 24-1992; Am.
Ord. 3-2000; Am. Ord. 43-2006; Am. Ord. 1-2008; Am. Ord. 14-2008; Am. Ord. 8-
2009; Am. Ord. 19-2009; Am. Ord. 2012-014; Am. Ord._2020-039)
§ 10-5-4 POWERS AND DUTIES.
   The Board shall promote and encourage private and public programs to further
the development and public awareness of, and interest in the visual arts and
fine crafts and cultural properties. In carrying out its duties and powers the
Board shall:
   (A)   Make recommendations to the Mayor on the acquisition of works of art
for city-owned facilities.
   (B)   Make recommendations to the Mayor for any work of art to be funded
from the Capital Improvements Program as provided for in §
10-5-5(A) with regard to an artist, a design proposal and/or a work of art to
be approved.
   (C)   Make recommendations to the Mayor for any work of art which will be a
part of the public art collection and which will be funded, or partially funded
by non-Capital Improvement Program sources including the public site for the
display of such art and establish criteria for the selection of the artist and/
or the work of art or make recommendations regarding the proposed artist and/or
work of art.
   (D)   Advise the Mayor on the proposed removal, relocation or alteration of
any public arts project or works of art in the possession of the city but which
are not collections or exhibitions of other city departments.
   (E)   Make recommendations to the Mayor on any arts program to be supported
by the city other than the programs operated by other city departments.
   (F)   Recommend to the Mayor programs and facilities to further the
development and public awareness of the visual arts and fine crafts.
   (G)   Seek private donations to the public art program. Advise the Mayor
regarding additional sources of public funds for the program.
   (H)   Establish such guidelines as are necessary to carry out the purpose of
§§
10-5-1 et seq. The guidelines shall include but not be limited to criteria for
selection of artists and art work, maintenance of a file of interested artists,
payment practices, procedures for artistic competitions, and requirements for
the maintenance of art works. The guidelines shall be promulgated by the Mayor.
   (I)   Establish a system of active coordination with the City's Capital
Improvement Program and other building activities to insure that works of art
are properly integrated into the built environment.
   (J)   Establish subcommittees or ad hoc task forces to advise and assist the
Board. Art Selection Committees may be established as subcommittees to the
Board to recommend to the Board an artist or a work of art to be funded from
the Capital Improvements Program as provided for in §
10-5-5(A). Subcommittee and task force members shall be appointed by the Board
for terms to be specified by the Board.
   (K)   Serve as an advisory board for such city arts or cultural properties
and programs as directed by the Mayor.
('74 Code, § 11-14-4) (Ord. 89-1978; Am. Ord. 24-1992)
§ 10-5-5 FUNDS FOR THE ACQUISITION OF ART FOR MUNICIPAL PROPERTY.
   (A)   Projects in the Capital Improvement Program shall include an amount
for works of art equal to one- and one-half percent of each bond purpose.
Provided, however, that if:
      (1)   The bond election ordinance; or
      (2)   The bond ordinance authorizing revenue bonds; or
      (3)   Other appropriate laws or regulations; or
      (4)   An official interpretation by another governmental entity regarding
allowable uses for funds which it is providing for the project, precludes art
as an expenditure of funds, then the amount of funds so restricted shall be
excluded from the total project cost in calculating the amount to be committed
to works of art.
   (B)   Funds generated as described in division (A) above shall be budgeted
as part of the Capital Improvements Program budget. Additional private or
public funds for works of art may be added to these funds and shall be budgeted
in a similar manner. Such funds may be earmarked for particular projects.
   (C)   The public art program shall expend no less than 25% but no more than
33% of the total amount allocated to the public art program for the
administrative costs of the program and to restore and conserve public works of
art to protect public investment. The appropriation will be made at the same
time as the appropriation for all projects within the Capital Improvement
Program.
   (D)   Progress payments may be made to the artist for works of art which
have been approved by the Mayor. Such payments may reimburse the artist for the
cost of materials or for services which have already been performed. At least
15% of the total amount to be paid to the artist shall not be disbursed to the
artist until the work of art is formally accepted by the Mayor.
   (E)   Nothing contained herein shall preclude funding the acquisition of art
for municipal property in other ways.
('74 Code, § 11-14-5) (Ord. 89- 1978; Am. Ord. 24-1992; Am. Ord. O-2022-035)
§ 10-5-6 GENERAL REQUIREMENTS FOR ART SELECTION.
   (A)   The work of art may be an integral part of a structure, attached to a
structure or detached from the structure within or outside of it. It may also
be located on publicly-owned property where there are no structures.
   (B)   In addition to any other placements permitted by law, a work of art
may be placed on a privately owned freestanding sign or on an exterior wall
under a lease - or other written agreement appropriate to the circumstances -
between the city and the owner of the sign or wall. Unless otherwise prescribed
by the terms of a lease or written agreement, the City Department of Arts and
Culture, Public Art Urban Enhancement Division shall maintain the sign or mural
during the contractually established duration of the art project, and shall
remove the work of art immediately upon termination.
   (C)   Any work of art which is chosen must comply with the following
standards in addition to any guidelines established by the Mayor:
      (1)   The work of art must be located in a public place with public
visibility and impact.
      (2)   The work of art, or the archival documentation of digital or
temporary works of art, shall have a permanence at least comparable to the
lifetime of the bond funding the work of art and shall be likely to remain a
thing of value for this time period.
      (3)   The work of art shall enhance the environment of the city.
   (D)   The Board shall recommend an artist, a design proposal and/or a
completed work of art, which shall be selected in a manner consistent with the
guidelines promulgated by the Mayor. The Board may recommend purchasing a
completed work of art, commissioning a work of art, holding a competition to
select a work of art, or creating some other timely and appropriate mode of
selection. The Board through public art program staff shall consult with the
user agency and project design consultants, if applicable, and involve them in
the planning process in the manner that appears most feasible. The Mayor shall
accept or reject the recommendation of the Board. If the Mayor rejects the
recommendation, the Board shall make another recommendation in accordance with
the standards and procedures outlined in this article.
   (E)   The Board shall make its recommendations in a timely manner in
accordance with the project schedule and timetable provided by the Mayor. If
the Board fails to make a recommendation within the timetable established by
the Mayor, the Mayor may identify another appropriate public procedure to
select an artist or work of art without receiving a recommendation from the
Board unless the Board and the Mayor have mutually agreed in writing to an
extension of the time period. The time period shall be extended, if necessary,
if the Mayor rejects the Board's recommendation.
('74 Code, § 11-14-6) (Ord. 89- 1978; Am. Ord. 24-1992; Am. Ord._2014-025)
§ 10-5-7 ADMINISTRATIVE RESPONSIBILITIES.
   (A)   The Chief Administrative Officer shall provide adequate staffing and
administrative support for enabling the Arts Board and any of its subcommittees
to carry out their duties.
   (B)   The Public Art Urban Enhancement Division of the Department of Arts
and Culture and/or user agency shall be responsible for the conservation and
maintenance of all works of art in the public art program. The Mayor shall
cause an annual report to be prepared on the condition and maintenance
requirements of all works of art in the public art program. The report shall be
delivered to the Mayor.
('74 Code, § 11-14-7) (Ord. 89-1978; Am. Ord. 24-1992; Am. Ord. O-2022-035)
§ 10-5-8 APPLICABILITY.
   This article is not intended to amend any bond question submitted to the
voters or any bond ordinance authorizing revenue bonds.
('74 Code, § 11-14-8) (Ord. 89-1978)
ARTICLE 6: LIBRARIES
Section
   
10-6-1   Library advisory board
   
10-6-2   Composition
   
10-6-3   Administrative responsibilities
§ 10-6-1 LIBRARY ADVISORY BOARD.
   A Library Advisory Board is established as liaison between the community and
its municipal government for the following purposes:
   (A)   To keep itself informed of library needs and serve as a forum for
discussion.
   (B)   To recommend to the Mayor policies for overall development to include
plans for additional library facilities, and ways and means of financing
improvements.
   (C)   To encourage the greatest use of library facilities and programs.
('74 Code, § 11-11-1) (Ord. 7-1967)
§ 10-6-2 COMPOSITION.
   (A)   The Library Advisory Board shall consist of 16 appointed members, and
one assigned member. There shall be one member of the Board appointed from each
City Council District, two members appointed by the Mayor, who serve at large;
one assigned member from the recognized support organization of the Albuquerque
Bernalillo County Library Foundation, and four appointed by the Bernalillo
County Commission, who also serve at large.
   (B)   When an appointed vacancy on the Board occurs, the Councilor
representing the District in which the vacating member of the Board resides,
shall nominate two members to the Board who reside in his or her respective
Council District and the Mayor shall appoint one of these recommended members;
provided, however, if a member is eligible for reappointment to the Board and
the Councilor in whose District that member resides desires to reappoint the
member, the Councilor shall so notify the Council and the member shall be
reappointed subject to the advice and consent of the Council. If a member is
not being reappointed, the Mayor shall deliver to the Council the Mayor's
recommendation from the two names submitted within 30 days of delivery of the
two names to the Mayor. If the Mayor fails to timely make a recommendation from
the two names submitted, the Councilor may appoint one of the two recommended
members subject to the advice and consent of the Council. The Mayor may notify
a Councilor in writing that his or her District member's term has expired or
the position is otherwise vacant and the Councilor shall have 60 days to submit
two recommended appointments to fill that position. If the Councilor fails to
submit two names within 60 days of notification, the Mayor shall have the right
to make the appointment subject to the advice and consent of the City Council.
The Mayor shall appoint the two at large members to the Board with the advice
and consent of the Council. The term of each appointed member shall be three
years. The terms of the members shall be staggered so that three members are
eligible for reappointment or replacement each year.
   (C)   Except as provided in this article, the qualifications, appointment
and conduct of the members of the Board and any of its subcommittees and the
organizational structure of the Board and its subcommittees shall be governed
by §§
2-6-1-1 et seq., the Public Boards, Commissions and Committees Ordinance.
   (D)   The Board shall establish and adopt bylaws as may be necessary to
conduct elections, provide notice of meetings and otherwise govern its
proceedings.
   (E)   Members of the Board shall be broadly representative of all fields of
the literary arts. They shall include persons who are widely known for their
professional competence and experience in the aforementioned fields and
knowledgeable lay persons.
   (F)   Appointed members of the Board may not serve on the board of directors
for any recognized organization supporting the Albuquerque Bernalillo County
Library except for the position assigned by title described in division (A) of
this provision. Each assigned member shall serve on the Board until the term
expires with the respective organization.
   (G)   Conflict of interest. This division (G) supplements §
2-6-1-4. A Board or a subcommittee member having a financial interest in the
outcome of any policy, decision, or determination before the Board or
subcommittee on which he or she serves shall, as soon as possible after such
interest becomes apparent, disclose to each of the other members voting on the
matter the nature of his or her financial interest in the issue, and shall be
disqualified from participating in any debate, decision or vote relating
thereto.
('74 Code, § 11-11-2) (Ord. 7- 1967; Am. Ord. 29-2011; Am. Ord._2020-039)
§ 10-6-3 ADMINISTRATIVE RESPONSIBILITIES.
   The Chief Administrative Officer shall provide adequate staffing and
administrative support for enabling the Board and any of its subcommittees to
carry out their duties.
(Ord. 29-2011; Am. Ord._2020-039)
ARTICLE 7: SISTER CITY
Section
   
10-7-1   Albuquerque sister-city board
   
10-7-2   Duties and powers of board
   
10-7-3   Membership and organization
§ 10-7-1 ALBUQUERQUE SISTER-CITY BOARD.
   There is hereby created the Albuquerque Sister-City Board, hereinafter
referred to as the "Board," which shall consist of 11 members, one of whom
shall be the president of the Albuquerque Sister Cities Foundation, Inc. The
term of each member shall be three years.
('74 Code, § 11-13-1) (Ord. 68-1977; Am. Ord. 4-1990)
§ 10-7-2 DUTIES AND POWERS OF BOARD.
   (A)   The Board shall promote and encourage private and public programs to
further the development of greater friendship and understanding between the
people of Albuquerque and cities of other nations. In carrying out its duties
and powers the Board shall:
      (1)   Sponsor cultural, social, educational and economic activities which
further community friendship.
      (2)   Recommend to the Mayor and Council programs and projects which
promote the mutual interest of the sister-cities.
      (3)   Establish ad hoc task forces to assist the Board.
      (4)   Serve as an advisory board for such city programs as directed by
the Mayor.
   (B)   All new sister city affiliations shall be made as follows:
      (1)   A person or group proposing a new sister-city relationship shall
submit the following to the Sister-City Board:
         (a)   A statement of reasons for the proposed affiliation.
         (b)   A profile of the proposed city, which shall include but need not
be limited to:
            1.   Population;
            2.   Language;
            3.   Educational and cultural institutions, activities and
organizations;
            4.   Economic resources and conditions;
            5.   Political stability;
            6.   Number of other affiliations;
            7.   Similarities.
         (c)   Outline of activities proposed to start exchange program, e.g.,
pen pals, books, cultural programs, hosting, exchange delegations and/or
students.
         (d)   Evidence of a strong local support group, including at least one
contact person in the proposed city.
         (e)   Evidence of a like group in Albuquerque with the ability to
provide an initial, minimum investment of approximately $2,000 to cover the
cost of new signs, brochures, pins and other support materials.
      (2)   Persons proposing affiliation shall make a presentation to the
Board. The Board shall invite Albuquerque Sister Cities Foundation Inc. and ask
them for their input. After evaluation of the proposed program and reviewing
the proposal with Sister Cities International, the Board shall make its
decision. If affiliation is recommended, their approval shall be submitted to
the Mayor, who shall present a resolution creating an affiliation is not
recommended by the Board, the proposing person or group may appeal to the
Mayor, who may elect to propose an affiliation resolution.
('74 Code, § 11-13-2) (Ord. 68-1977; Am. Ord. 52-1987)
§ 10-7-3 MEMBERSHIP AND ORGANIZATION.
   Except as provided in this article, the qualifications, appointment and
conduct of the members of the Board and the organizational structure of the
Board shall be governed by §§
2-6-1-1 et seq.
('74 Code, § 11-13-3) (Ord. 68-1977)
ARTICLE 8: MUNICIPAL GOLF COURSES
Section
   
10-8-1   Municipal golf advisory board
   
10-8-2   Duties and powers of board
   
10-8-3   Board membership and organization
   
10-8-4   Administrative rate setting
§ 10-8-1 MUNICIPAL GOLF ADVISORY BOARD.
   There is hereby created the Municipal Golf Advisory Board, hereinafter
referred to as the "Board," which shall consist of 11 members and four
nonvoting members (golf professionals of each course). The term of each member
shall be three years; of the Board members first named, four shall have terms
ending December 31, 1992; four shall have terms ending December 31, 1993; and
three shall have terms ending December 31, 1994. One member of the Board shall
be a member of the community at large. One member shall represent the interest
of senior golfers. One member shall represent the interest of youth golfers.
Eight members shall represent each respective Men's and Women's Golf
Association from each of the four golf courses.
('74 Code, § 11-21-1) (Ord. 11-1992)
§ 10-8-2 DUTIES AND POWERS OF BOARD.
   The Board shall act in an advisory capacity to the Mayor, Council and staff
of the Parks and Recreation Department. The Board shall promote and encourage
private and public programs to further the development and public awareness of,
and interest in the municipal golf courses. The Board shall act in an advisory
capacity to the Department of Parks and Recreation in connection with the
development and promotion in golf. In carrying out its duties and powers the
Board shall:
   (A)   Keep itself informed of the needs of the golf courses and serve as a
public forum for discussion.
   (B)   Recommend to the Mayor and Council policies for overall development of
the Golf Courses to include plans for additional facilities, and ways and means
of financing improvements.
   (C)   Seek input and work cooperatively with the Metropolitan Parks and
Recreation Advisory Board.
   (D)   Evaluate Operational Policies and Procedures.
   (E)   Make recommendations for green fee and membership changes.
   (F)   Review audited revenue and expenditure reports.
('74 Code, § 11-21-2) (Ord. 11-1992)
§ 10-8-3 BOARD MEMBERSHIP AND ORGANIZATION.
   Except as provided in this article, the qualifications, appointment and
conduct of the members of the Board and the organizational structure of the
Board shall be governed by §§
2-6-1-1 et seq.
('74 Code, § 11-21-3) (Ord. 11-1992)
§ 10-8-4 ADMINISTRATIVE RATE SETTING.
   Green fees charged for the right to use municipal golf course facilities
shall be established by rules adopted by the Parks and Recreation Department of
the City of Albuquerque. The same procedure may be used to create special rate
programs to include but not be limited to annual passes. Any such rule shall be
adopted under the procedures of Chapter 2, Article 15 ROA 1994.
(Ord. 25-2008)
ARTICLE 9: PUBLIC DANCES
Section
   
10-9-1   Regulation of public dances
   
10-9-2   Definitions
   
10-9-3   Exemptions
   
10-9-4   Permit required
   
10-9-5   Standards for public dances
   
10-9-6   Procedure for application and renewal; permit fee; denial; duration of
permit
   
10-9-7   Permit not endorsement
   
10-9-8   Delegation of authority
   
10-9-9   Violations; suspension or revocation hearing; appeal of denial;
closure
   
10-9-10    Injunction; abatement of nuisance
 
   
10-9-99   Penalty
§ 10-9-1 REGULATION OF PUBLIC DANCES.
   (A)   It is the policy of this article that the holding of public dances in
this city shall be permitted, regulated and controlled so as to protect the
public health, safety and morals of every citizen and it is the responsibility
of the Mayor to investigate the qualifications of all applicants for permits
[issued] under this article, to investigate the conditions existing in the
community in which the premises for which any permit is sought are located
before the permit is issued, to the end that permits shall not be issued to
persons or for locations when the issuance is prohibited by law or contrary to
the public health, safety, or morals.
   (B)   It is the intent of this article that each person to whom a permit is
issued shall be fully liable and accountable for the use of the permit
including but not limited to liability for all violations of this article or
conditions of the permit.
('74 Code, § 11-3-1) (Ord. 7-1983)
§ 10-9-2 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this article, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   MAYOR. The Mayor or his designated representative. (See §
10-9-8, Delegation of Authority.)
   OPERATOR. A person that is responsible for, conducts, controls, or manages
any public dance.
   ORGANIZATION. A body organized for some specific purpose, as a club, union,
society, or other publicly recognized group.
   PERMIT. Written authorization from the city to operate a public dance.
   PERSON. An individual, organization, group, association, partnership,
corporation or any combination thereof.
   PUBLIC DANCE. Any dance to which the public generally is invited whether or
not any charge is made, directly or indirectly, by or for the operator of such
a dance.
('74 Code, § 11-3-2) (Ord. 7-1983)
§ 10-9-3 EXEMPTIONS.
   Except as otherwise specifically provided in other sections of this article,
this article shall not apply to:
   (A)   Any dance limited to members of an organization. The term MEMBERS
shall not include those persons who are granted membership solely for the
purpose of admission to the dance.
   (B)   Any public dance operated exclusively under the auspices of any
charitable, religious, nationally recognized fraternal organization or school,
which dances are under the complete planning and direction of the duly elected
officers and committees and the proceeds of which go directly to charitable
purposes; except that this exemption shall be inapplicable to organizations
conducting dances of a frequency of more than one per month.
   (C)   Any public dance operated for the purpose of raising funds for a
political candidate, party or campaign, the proceeds of which dance go directly
to such candidate, party or campaign.
   (D)   Any public dance operated at the Civic Auditorium or Convention Center
of the city.
   (E)   Any public dance where alcoholic liquors are being dispensed pursuant
to a dispenser's license obtained from the State of New Mexico; provided,
however, that public dances operated on a premise where alcoholic liquors are
being dispensed pursuant to a special dispenser's permit for fairs and public
celebrations, as provided for in Section 60-6A-12 NMSA 1978, shall not be
exempted from this article.
   (F)   Any dance in the nature of an outdoor neighborhood street dance
composed solely of people from a specific neighborhood area provided that such
dance has received a special permit by the Albuquerque Police Department and
all applicable laws, ordinances, and regulations are complied with.
('74 Code, § 11-3-3) (Ord. 7-1983; Am. Ord. 17-1987)
§ 10-9-4 PERMIT REQUIRED.
   Except as otherwise provided in this article, no person may operate a public
dance in the city without having first obtained a permit for such public dance
in accordance with this article. The public dance permit shall only be valid
for the person and premises for which it was issued.
('74 Code, § 11-3-4) (Ord. 7-1983)
§ 10-9-5 STANDARDS FOR PUBLIC DANCES.
   No permit shall be issued and no public dance operated unless:
   (A)   The operator has in his possession a signed agreement with a licensed
security guard organization or off-duty law enforcement officer, which
agreement shall provide for a sufficient number of security guards to prevent
violation of the law or the creation of a public nuisance on the public dance
premises, including parking lot or grounds. The minimum number of security
guards required shall be one guard for each 150 persons capacity of the public
dance premises, with at least one-half of these guards but not less than one
guard regularly assigned to the parking lot and grounds. The city's Chief of
Police or his authorized representative shall decide the exact number and
assignment of security guards required to provide adequate security, which
number may vary by time of day and day of week.
   (B)   The operator has in his possession a written statement from the Fire
Department, indicating that the premises where the public dance is to be held
is in compliance with the Fire Code which is compiled as
Chapter 14, Article 2 and a permit which states therein the maximum number of
persons which will be permitted in the building, structure or tent, or part
thereof to be utilized for the public dance.
   (C)   The operator has in his possession a Health Department permit if food
or drink is to be served, whether for gain or otherwise.
   (D)   The operator has submitted a satisfactory site plan and legal
documentation which shows at least one off-street parking space for each 2½
persons allowed to occupy the building. The number of persons allowed to occupy
the building shall be expressed as an occupancy load limit and shall be
established by the Albuquerque Fire Department pursuant to the Fire Prevention
Code or by the conditions imposed pursuant to this article, whichever is less.
   (E)   The operator has not been convicted of any felony within the past ten
years or of any two violations of this article, including operating a public
dance without a permit, within a three year period.
   (F)   The operator and the premises are in compliance with all applicable
statutes, ordinances and regulations.
   (G)   The building or approved parking facility, whichever is closer, is not
within 300 feet of a residential dwelling or rooming unit or commercial
sleeping accommodations.
   (H)   No public dance for which a permit under this article is required
shall operate past 2:00 a.m., Monday through Saturday or 12:00 midnight on
Sunday. This provision shall not be construed to prohibit the Mayor from
imposing limitations on the hours of operations as set out in division (I) of
this section as a condition to the issuance of a public dance permit for a
public dance when such conditions are in the public interest.
   (I)   The Mayor may establish rules and regulations for the operation of
public dances and the enforcement of this article and may impose conditions
upon the permits issued. Conditions imposed upon any permits issued may
include, but are not limited to, requirements for adequate parking, buffer
landscaping with wall if applicable, provisions for adequate security guards
both inside and outside the premises of the public dance, noise limitations,
maximum occupancy limit, and limitations on the hours of operation. Failure to
substantially comply with any permit condition shall result in revocation of
the permit.
('74 Code, § 11-3-5) (Ord. 7-1983; Am. Ord. 17-1987)
§ 10-9-6 PROCEDURE FOR APPLICATION AND RENEWAL; PERMIT FEE; DENIAL; DURATION OF
PERMIT.
   (A)   Before any permit authorized by this article may be issued by the
Mayor, the applicant for the permit shall:
      (1)   Submit to the Mayor a written application for the permit in a form
prescribed by the Mayor, and stating the information required; in the case of
renewal applications, they shall be submitted at least 30 days prior to
termination of existing permit; and
      (2)   Pay the Zoning Enforcement Officer of the city an initial
application/permit fee of $275, which is not refundable in the event the permit
is denied.
   (B)   (1)   Before issuing a new permit the Mayor shall cause a notice of
the application therefor, in a form prescribed by the Mayor to be posted
conspicuously on the outside of the premises for which the permit is sought,
which notice shall be posted over a continuous period of at least 20 days prior
to approval or denial of the permit.
      (2)   It is unlawful for any person to remove or deface any notice posted
in accordance with this section. Any person convicted of a violation of this
division (B) shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor.
   (C)   If the Mayor affirmatively determines, upon inquiry and examination,
that the policies of this article and the standards set forth in §
10-9-5 have been fulfilled, he shall grant the permit.
   (D)   If the Mayor determines, upon inquiry and examination, that any of the
requirements have not been met, the Mayor shall notify the applicant in writing
of his findings, including any specific deficiencies in the application. In
addition, the Mayor shall:
      (1)   If applicable, give the applicant a specified time, but not less
than the ten working days from the date notice is served or received by
certified mail, to correct the stated deficiencies, at the end of which time
the permit may be denied. If the requested corrections are not made within the
period of time specified, the Mayor shall deny the permit.
      (2)   Notify the permit holder that he may appeal the decision by
requesting a hearing as set forth in Section §
10-9-8 on the question of whether there are deficiencies in the application.
   (E)   A permit shall be effective for a period of 12 months from the date of
issuance unless earlier revoked or suspended as provided by this article.
   (F)   Procedures and fees for permit renewals shall be the same as those
specified herein for new applications, except that the fee for renewal
applications shall be $100.
('74 Code, § 11-3-6) (Ord. 7-1983; Am. Ord. 17-1987; Am. Ord. 23-2001; Am. Ord.
30-2002)
§ 10-9-7 PERMIT NOT ENDORSEMENT.
   Permits under this article shall not be deemed to constitute endorsement by
the city of any public dance for which a permit has been issued, and no person
shall intentionally claim or infer, directly or indirectly, any such
endorsement by reason of its permit. This permit does not constitute a waiver
of any requirement or provision contained in any provision of this code or any
other ordinance of the city or state or federal law.
('74 Code, § 11-3-7) (Ord. 7-1983)
§ 10-9-8 DELEGATION OF AUTHORITY.
   As used in this article, MAYOR means the Zoning Enforcement Officer, an
official specified by the Integrated Development Ordinance in Chapter 14,
Article 16; except that enforcement action of this article in the courts shall
not be undertaken without the concurrence of the City Attorney.
('74 Code, § 11-3-11) (Ord. 17-1987; Am. Ord._2017-025)
§ 10-9-9 VIOLATIONS; SUSPENSION OR REVOCATION HEARING; APPEAL OF DENIAL;
CLOSURE.
   (A)   The Mayor may suspend or revoke a permit when he finds that any permit
holder has:
      (1)   Violated any provision of this article, including operating without
a permit, or any other applicable ordinance or statute;
      (2)   Violated any lawful order, rule or regulations of the Mayor;
      (3)   Made any material false statement in his application for the public
dance permit;
      (4)   Allowed his premises to remain a public nuisance as that term is
defined by Section 30-8-1 NMSA 1978, after written notice from the Mayor that
the establishment constitutes a public nuisance in the neighborhood. This
division (4) does not preclude the Mayor's authority to proceed under any other
provision of this article.
   (B)   If the Mayor determines that grounds exist for the revocation or
suspension of a permit, he shall give the permit holder written notice that the
permit is being suspended or revoked, stating:
      (1)   The nature of the grounds relied upon for such action;
      (2)   The approximate date of each alleged violation or incident;
      (3)   The conditions of the suspension or revocation;
      (4)   The date upon which the suspension or revocation shall take effect,
which shall not be less than ten working days from the date the notice is
personally served or delivered by certified mail;
      (5)   Notice that the permit holder may appeal a decision of suspension,
revocation, or denial by filing with the Mayor a written request for hearing,
which request must be received by the Mayor on or before the effective date of
such suspension, revocation, or denial. All requests for hearings shall set
forth briefly the objections to the Mayor's actions.
   (C)   Appeal Hearing and Decision.
      (1)   At least six days in advance of the hearing, the Mayor shall mail
notice of the hearing to the applicant; the applicant's agent; and the owners,
as shown by the records of the County Assessor, of the application site and of
the land within 300 feet of the site, excluding public right-of-way.
      (2)   The hearing shall be held by the Zoning Hearing Examiner within a
reasonable time not to exceed ten working days and shall be conducted according
to standard rules and procedures used in all such city hearings.
      (3)   The decision of the Zoning Hearing Examiner shall be final.
      (4)   If the Zoning Hearing Examiner acts on a proper appeal and does not
affirm the Mayor's action, it shall not prejudice subsequent actions by the
Mayor as to possible violations of this article subsequent to the Hearing
Examiner's decision.
   (D)   In the event a person is operating a public dance without a permit and
the Mayor has reasonable cause to believe a public dance permit is required,
the Mayor shall notify such operator, by personal service or certified mail
addressed to the place of business, to cease and desist. Such notice shall
contain the effective date of such order, which shall not be less than five
working days from the date the notice was personally served or delivered by
certified mail.
   (E)   In the event a hearing is not timely requested, or the action of the
Mayor to suspend, revoke, or deny a permit is affirmed, or in the event that a
person is operating public dances without a public dance permit five days or
more after receipt of notice as specified in division (D) of this section and
the operator has not requested a permit, the Mayor shall:
      (1)   If there is an urgent problem involving public health, safety and
general welfare, issue to the Police Department an order to close down the
premises and the operation of such public dance; and/or
      (2)   Take any other lawful enforcement actions.
('74 Code, § 11-3-8) (Ord. 7-1983; Am. Ord. 17-1987)
§ 10-9-10 INJUNCTION; ABATEMENT OF NUISANCE.
   (A)   Whenever the Mayor believes that the operation of a public dance, with
or without a permit, is being or will be conducted so as to create a public
nuisance as that term is defined in Section 30-8-1 NMSA 1978, he may initiate
judicial proceedings to abate continued operation of such a dance.
   (B)   Whenever the Mayor believes that the provisions of Sections §
10-9-9 and §
10-9-99 are inadequate to prevent the unlawful operation of public dances
without a permit, he may initiate judicial proceedings to restrain or enjoin
such operation.
('74 Code, § 11-3-9) (Ord. 7-1983)
§ 10-9-99 PENALTY.
   Any person convicted of violating any of the provisions of this article or
failing or neglecting to comply with any orders issued pursuant to any section
thereof shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and such person shall be guilty
of a separate offense for each and every day or portion thereof during which
any violation is continued or permitted. Upon conviction, each such violation
shall be subject to the penalty provisions set forth in §
1-1-99 of this code of ordinances.
('74 Code, § 11-3-10) (Ord. 7-1983)
ARTICLE 10: BALLOON FIESTA
Section
Part 1: Balloon Fiesta Park Commission
   
10-10-1   Purpose and intent
   
10-10-2   Short title
   
10-10-3   Definitions
   
10-10-4   Composition of the Commission
   
10-10-5   Duties and powers of the Commission
   
10-10-6   Responsibilities of the city
   
10-10-7   Establishing the Balloon Fiesta park staff liaison
PART 1: BALLOON FIESTA PARK COMMISSION
§ 10-10-1 PURPOSE AND INTENT.
   The Balloon Fiesta Park constitutes a unique resource of the City of
Albuquerque with attributes of a park, a museum and a recreational center. The
operation of the park has significant and direct impacts on a wide range of
groups and entities.
   The purpose of §§
10-10-1 et seq. is to create a new city organization that provides advice and
recommendations concerning the operations, management, and development of the
Balloon Fiesta Park. It is the intent of §§
10-10-1 et seq. to create a Balloon Fiesta Park Commission that can provide a
voice for the public and stakeholders in the management of Balloon Fiesta Park.
(Ord. 4-2010)
§ 10-10-2 SHORT TITLE.
   Sections
10-10-1 et seq. may be cited as the "Balloon Fiesta Park Commission Ordinance."
(Ord. 4-2010)
§ 10-10-3 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of §§
10-10-1 et seq., the following definitions shall apply unless the context
clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   COMMISSION. The Balloon Fiesta Park Commission. The Commission is the
organization created by §§
10-10-1 et seq. with the powers here set out with a responsibility to see that
the interests of the public and stakeholders in the Balloon Fiesta Park are
represented.
   LONG TERM PARK TENANTS. Persons or organizations with authority from the
city to occupy a portion of the park on a long term basis. Such authority would
generally be a multi-year lease but involves any grant of a right to occupy
park property for a period of more than one month or to occupy park property in
multiple years.
   SHORT TERM PARK TENANTS. Persons or organizations with authority from the
city to occupy a portion of the park as other than a long term park tenant.
Such authority would generally be for a period of one month or less and for a
single event.
(Ord. 4-2010)
§ 10-10-4 COMPOSITION OF THE COMMISSION.
   The Commission consists of 11 voting members and three nonvoting, ex-officio
members. The Commission shall not include any elected city officials. Voting
members may serve up to three consecutive, three-year terms subject to
reappointment as provided through the process for appointment described in
divisions (A) and (B) below. However, the Pueblo of Sandia member created by
division (A)(5) is not subject to any term limits. Terms of voting members are
staggered as to the year of completion. Members are not required to be
residents of the City of Albuquerque.
   (A)   The following are voting members subject to appointment by the City
Council upon recommendation of the respective entity that the member is
representing:
      (1)   Two representatives from the Board of Directors of the Albuquerque
International Balloon Fiesta;
      (2)   One representative from the Wildflower Neighborhood Association;
      (3)   One representative from the Alameda North Valley Association;
      (4)   One person representing the broader recreation interests of the
community and the Metropolitan Parks and Recreation Advisory Board;
      (5)   One person representing the Pueblo of Sandia;
      (6)   Two at-large positions to be filled by persons residing in other
areas of the city, in particular, one person from the west side of the city and
the other person from the east side of the city. Notwithstanding the language
of division (A) above, these at- large positions do not require a
recommendation by any particular entity prior to being filled by the Council;
and
      (7)   One representative recommended by the Albuquerque AMA Club Chapter.
   (B)   The following are voting members appointed by the Mayor with the
advice and consent of the City Council:
      (1)   One person representing local businesses located near the park;
      (2)   One person representing the Albuquerque Convention and Visitors
Bureau.
   (C)   The following are non-voting, ex-officio members:
      (1)   The Director of the Parks and Recreation Department, or designee;
and
      (2)   A city employee designated by the Mayor to represent public safety
issues;
      (3)   A city employee designated by the Mayor to represent the Anderson-
Abruzzo Albuquerque International Balloon Museum.
(Ord. 4-2010; Am. Ord._2016-015)
§ 10-10-5 DUTIES AND POWERS OF THE COMMISSION.
   The Commission is hereby created to advise and make recommendations on the
operation, management, and development of the park with the following duties
and powers:
   (A)   Recommend to the Parks and Recreation Department, the Mayor and City
Council guidelines and procedures governing the operation, management, and
development of the park, including event review and appropriate fee schedules.
   (B)   Review and recommend with respect to the approval or denial of
agreements with short term park tenants. Short term park tenants shall be
approved by the Parks and Recreation Department under guidelines and procedures
adopted by City Council resolution.
   (C)   Review and recommend with respect to the approval or denial of
agreements with long term park tenants. Long term park tenancies shall not be
in effect until approved by the City Council.
   (D)   Review all existing licensure agreements, lease agreements, and
similar agreements and make recommendations to the Parks and Recreation
Department, Mayor and City Council with respect to the status and continuation
of those agreements.
   (E)   Review and recommend to the Parks and Recreation Department, the Mayor
and City Council regarding the yearly operating budget and city's general
obligation bond program.
   (F)   Receive actual timely notice of all proposed planning and development
actions within the park, including but not limited to: any permanent changes to
the physical layout of the park; any construction within the park, any changes
to the Site Development Plan and any application for any such changes. The
Commission has the right to participate in, review and have its position given
full consideration with respect to any planning and development actions related
to the park. The Commission shall have standing in front of all city boards or
commissions authorized to consider or review such actions, and in front of the
City Council for any appeal or other consideration of such actions.
   (G)   Recommend sponsorships for the park and park events.
   (H)   Work collaboratively with other organizations to market the park.
   (I)   Such other powers not inconsistent with law that are necessary to
fully perform the assigned duties.
(Ord. 4-2010; Am. Ord._2016-015)
§ 10-10-6 RESPONSIBILITIES OF THE CITY.
   (A)   The Parks and Recreation Department will operate and maintain Balloon
Fiesta Park and all related recreation facilities within the boundaries of the
park in cooperation with the Balloon Fiesta Park Commission.
   (B)   Provide the Commission with a draft of the city's operating budget and
the city's general obligation bond program prior to City Council approval.
(Ord. 4-2010)
§ 10-10-7 ESTABLISHING THE BALLOON FIESTA PARK STAFF LIAISON.
   (A)   The Balloon Fiesta park staff liaison shall be a Parks and Recreation
Department employee designated as the liaison between the Commission and
various city departments, including but not limited to city departments
responsible for the capital improvements of the park, the Anderson-Abruzzo
Albuquerque International Museum and the landfills in the park.
   (B)   The Balloon Fiesta park liaison shall attend the regular Commission
meetings to report on activities and deal with matters within the Commission's
authority.
(Ord. 4-2010; Am. Ord._2016-015)
CHAPTER 11: MORALS AND CONDUCT
   Article
      
1:   NUISANCE ABATEMENT
      
2:   VIEWING BOOTHS
      
3:   HUMAN RIGHTS
      
4:   CRIMINAL SOLICITATION
      
5:   BODY ART
      
6:   OBSCENE MATERIAL
      
7:   GRAFFITI VANDALISM
      
8:   PUBLIC INDECENCY
      
9:   
GANGS
      
10:   TRUANCY
      
11:   PREMISE LIABILITY
      
12.   
SEXUAL OFFENDERS
      
13:   
PUBLICATION OF PERSONS CONVICTED OF DRIVING UNDER THE INFLUENCE
      
14:   [REPEALED]
ARTICLE 1: NUISANCE ABATEMENT
Section
Part 1: Nuisance Abatement
Subpart A:
General Provisions
   
11-1-1-1   Short title
   
11-1-1-2   Intent
   
11-1-1-3   Definitions
   
11-1-1-4   Administration
   
11-1-1-5   Severability
Subpart B:
Criminal Abatement of Public Nuisance Offenses
   
11-1-1-6   Public nuisances prohibited
   
11-1-1-7   Penalties for public nuisance violations
Subpart C:
Civil Abatement of Public Nuisance Offenses
   
11-1-1-8   Intent
   
11-1-1-9   Civil fines
   
11-1-1-10   Administrative procedures for the abatement of nuisances
   
11-1-1-11   Civil actions
   
11-1-1-12   Relocation
   
11-1-1-13   Judgment for costs and attorneys’ fees
   
11-1-1-14   Lien for judgments
   
11-1-1-15   Emergency abatement
Part 2: Drug Laboratory Site Remediation of Contamination
   
11-1-2-1   Title
   
11-1-2-2   Findings and intent
   
11-1-2-3   Definitions
   
11-1-2-4   Declaration of public nuisance
   
11-1-2-5   Clandestine drug laboratories
Part 3: Drug Free Zones
   
11-1-3-1   Intent
   
11-1-3-2   Short title
   
11-1-3-3   Findings
   
11-1-3-4   Drug free zones; criteria
   
11-1-3-5   Designation of drug free zone
   
11-1-3-6   Persons subject to exclusion
   
11-1-3-7   Authority to issue exclusion notices
   
11-1-3-8   Notice of exclusion
   
11-1-3-9   Appeal and variance
   
11-1-3-10   Listing of drug free zones
PART 1: NUISANCE ABATEMENT
SUBPART A:
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 11-1-1-1 SHORT TITLE.
   Sections 11-1-1-1 et seq., ROA 1994, may be cited as the “Nuisance Abatement
Ordinance.”
(Ord. 2025-009)
§ 11-1-1-2 INTENT.
   The purpose of this Ordinance is to prevent the use of property as a public
nuisance and to establish procedures to eliminate and abate nuisances.
(Ord. 2025-009)
§ 11-1-1-3 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purposes of this Ordinance, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ABATE. To bring to a halt, eliminate or, where that is not possible or
feasible, to suppress, reduce, and minimize.
   BUILDING. A structure, as defined herein, which is enclosed with walls and a
roof so that there are no sides left open.
   CLOSE, TO CLOSE, or CLOSURE. To remove all owners, tenants, occupants and
other persons and animals from the real property, vehicle, or personal
property, or a specified discrete portion thereof, and to lock, board, bar, or
otherwise close and prohibit all entry, access, and use of the real property,
vehicle, or other personal property, or a specified discrete portion thereof,
except such access and use as may be necessary for purposes of inventory,
maintenance, storage, security, and other purposes.
   CRIME PREVENTION STANDARDS. Standards established by the Mayor’s designee
for the design, management and operation of a property or business that aim to
prevent criminal activity.
   IMMINENT HAZARD. A situation that demands unusual or immediate action and
which requires the City to circumvent usual procedures and warrant requirements
in order to protect a person’s health, safety, and life from harm.
   LEGAL OR EQUITABLE INTEREST OR RIGHT OF POSSESSION. Every legal or equitable
interest, title, estate, tenancy, or right of possession recognized by law and
equity, including freeholds, life estates, future interests, condominium
rights, time-share rights, leaseholds, easements, licenses, liens, deeds of
trust, contractual rights, mortgages, security interests, and any right or
obligation to manage or act as agent or trustee for any person holding any of
the foregoing.
   MAYOR’S DESIGNEE. The person(s) or entity(ies) appointed by the Mayor to
enforce this ordinance.
   PARCEL. Any lot or other unit of real property or any combination of
contiguous lots or units owned by the same person as defined herein.
   PERSON. Natural persons and every legal entity whatsoever, including sole
proprietors, corporations, limited liability companies, partnerships, limited
partnerships, and associations.
   PUBLIC NUISANCE. Any acts or omissions that adversely affect public health,
welfare, or safety. Acts or omissions that may be deemed a public nuisance
include, but are not limited to, the following:
      (1)   Any criminal activity on three or more occasions within a three-
month period, if the City has issued citations or arrests documenting that the
criminal activity has occurred on three prior occasions;
      (2)   The failure to secure the doorways or window openings of any
building or structure to prevent the entry of unauthorized persons, where such
failure leads to repeat activity that adversely affects public health, welfare
or safety;
      (3)   Three or more violations of the following City ordinances within a
three-month period:
         (a)   Noise Control Ordinance, §
9-9-4 or
9-9-7 ROA 1994;
         (b)   Food Sanitation Ordinance, § 9-6-1-1 to § 9-6-1-99 ROA 1994;
         (c)   Humane and Ethical Animal Rules and Treatment (HEART) Ordinance,
§
9-2-2-2 ROA 1994, Housing and Restraint Standards for Mammals and Birds Kept on
Residential Property;
         (d)   Humane and Ethical Animal Rules and Treatment (HEART) Ordinance,
§
9-2-4-7 ROA 1994, Animal Noise;
         (e)   Humane and Ethical Animal Rules and Treatment (HEART) Ordinance,
§
9-2-4-8 ROA 1994, Animal Fights;
         (f)   Albuquerque Insect and Rodent Control Ordinance, §
9-7-1 to §
9-7-99 ROA 1994;
         (g)   Uniform Housing Code, §
14-3-1-1 to §
14-3-5-99 ROA 1994; or
         (h)   Fire Code, §
14-2-1 ROA 1994.
      (4)   Any acts or omissions that would be deemed a public nuisance under
common law.
   REAL PROPERTY. Land and all improvements, buildings, and structures, and all
estates rights and interests, legal and equitable, in the same, including all
forms of ownership and title, future interests, condominium rights, time-share
rights, easements, water rights, mineral rights, oil and gas rights, space
rights, and air rights.
   RELOCATION COSTS. The expenses reasonably incurred by a resident displaced
from a residential building pursuant to action of the City of Albuquerque.
Relocation costs shall be $2,000 per family unless the resident can demonstrate
special circumstances that make the relocation cost a greater amount. If
special circumstances are demonstrated, relocation costs may include the actual
cost of physically moving to a residential building approved by the relocation
agency (the “replacement unit”); costs of moving to a location outside of the
immediate area; any security/damage deposit required by the replacement unit
owner which exceed the amount of the security/damage deposit recovered from the
owner of the building the resident is moving from; utility deposits and hook up
cost and the rent for the first month; costs of moving back to the residential
building originally vacated after housing code compliance; and any other
reasonable relocation costs.
   RENTAL AGREEMENT. Any written or oral agreement allowing occupancy of a
residential building by a resident.
   RESIDENT. One or more people entitled under a rental agreement to occupy all
or a portion of a residential building to the exclusion of others and who
actually reside(s) at such location.
   RESIDENTIAL BUILDING. A building or portion thereof designed or used for
human habitation.
   STRUCTURE. Anything constructed, erected, or placed upon real property which
is so firmly attached to the land as to be reasonably considered part of the
real estate, and includes buildings of every type and nature whatsoever.
   TENANT. Any person who uses, resides in, or occupies property identified as
a public nuisance, regardless of whether the tenant has the consent of the
owner to use, reside, or occupy the property.
   VEHICLE. Every device in, upon or by which any person or property is or may
be transported or drawn upon a highway, including any frame, chassis or body of
any vehicle or motor vehicle, except devices moved exclusively by human power
or used exclusively upon stationary rails or tracks.
(Ord. 2025-009)
§ 11-1-1-4 ADMINISTRATION.
   The Mayor or Mayor’s designee shall be responsible for the administration of
this article and may promulgate reasonable rules and regulations to carry out
the intent and purpose of this article.
(Ord. 2025-009)
§ 11-1-1-5 SEVERABILITY.
   If any section, paragraph, sentence, clause, word or phrase of §§
11-1-1-1 et seq. is for any reason held to be invalid or unenforceable by any
court of competent jurisdiction, such decision shall not affect the validity of
the remaining provisions of §§
11-1-1-1 et seq. The Council hereby declares that it would have passed §§
11-1-1-1 et seq. and each section, paragraph, sentence, clause, word or phrase
thereof irrespective of any provision being declared unconstitutional or
otherwise invalid.
(Ord. 2025-009)
SUBPART B:
CRIMINAL ABATEMENT OF PUBLIC NUISANCE OFFENSES
§ 11-1-1-6 PUBLIC NUISANCES PROHIBITED.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in activities that
constitute a public nuisance or to intentionally, knowingly, recklessly, or
negligently commit, conduct, promote, facilitate, permit, fail to prevent, or
otherwise allow, any public nuisance in, on or using any property in which they
hold any legal or equitable interest or right of possession.
   (B)   A person shall not be deemed to have violated this ordinance if they
are the victim, rather than the perpetrator, or any criminal activity that
forms the basis of the nuisance determination, or if they are merely present
when nuisance activity occurs.
   (C)   An owner of property whose own activities on the real property are not
a nuisance shall not be in violation of this ordinance if the owner has no
knowledge of the public nuisance activity and, within a reasonable time after
receiving notice of the activity constituting a nuisance, the owner:
      (1)   Demonstrates to the City that the rental agreement for the property
contains a provision prohibiting criminal activity and other nuisance activity;
      (2)   Delivers to the tenant(s) a written notice of termination of the
rental agreement as provided by the New Mexico Owner-Resident Relations Act;
      (3)   Files an appropriate report with law enforcement authorities or
otherwise cooperates with such authorities in enforcing laws with respect to
tenants on the property;
      (4)   Initiates necessary and appropriate legal action to remove
residents involved in criminal activity where such activity can be proven;
      (5)   Takes all reasonable and available steps to terminate the public
nuisance activity, including, but not limited to, implementing the City’s Crime
Prevention Standards on the property; and
      (6)   Enters into a written Nuisance Abatement Agreement with the City
wherein the property owner agrees to take specific steps, which may include
providing on-site security or otherwise taking action that will abate,
terminate or eliminate the public nuisance activity on the property in exchange
for the City reserving its rights and agreeing not to initiate any legal action
for public nuisance against the property owner during the term of the agreement
provided that the property owner complies with the terms and conditions of the
written Nuisance Abatement Agreement and the public nuisance is eliminated,
abated or terminated.
   (D)   A person shall not be deemed to have violated this ordinance if the
nuisance determination is based solely on incidents of domestic violence and
the person is determined to be the victim in those incidents.
(Ord. 2025-009)
§ 11-1-1-7 PENALTIES FOR PUBLIC NUISANCE VIOLATIONS.
   (A)   Any person found to have engaged in unlawful activity, as established
in Section
11-1-1-6(A) shall, upon conviction, be subject to a fine not exceeding $500 or
by imprisonment not exceeding 90 days or both. Each separate violation shall
constitute a separate offense and every day on which any violation exists shall
constitute a separate violation and offense.
   (B)   Upon conviction of violation of this ordinance, the City shall
register the violating property with the appropriate City agencies and/or the
Bernalillo County Clerk.
   (C)   Conditions of suspended sentences. In the event that the court chooses
to suspend any portion of the fine or sentence for a violation of this
Ordinance, the City shall request that the Court make the suspended sentence
expressly conditional on the following terms:
      (1)   The Defendant must evict, remove, and permanently bar from entering
the property any persons who committed the criminal activity forming the basis
of the public nuisance, including the defendant himself, his or her family
members and relatives, and owners, tenants, occupants, guests, and other
persons. This may be accomplished through forcible entry and detainer actions,
sale of the property, new leases of the property, or other legal action as
needed; and
      (2)   The Defendant must take steps to abate the public nuisance,
eliminate its past and continuing adverse effects on the neighborhood, and
prevent public nuisances from recurring on the property. Such steps may include
landlord training, tenant background checks and screening, making improvements
to the property, including general repairs which will bring the property into
compliance with the Uniform Housing Code, §§ 14-3-1 et seq., ROA 1994,
Integrated Development Ordinance, §§ 14-16-1-1, et seq., ROA 1994, including
fencing, lighting, and destruction of structures, modifications to leases,
security guards, removal of trash, junk, and graffiti, and compliance with all
other applicable City Codes; and
      (3)   Any other conditions the court deems appropriate.
   (D)   Posting and publication of public nuisance convictions. Upon the
conviction of any person for violating this ordinance, in addition to any fine
and/or jail sentence, the City may file in the office of the Bernalillo County
Clerk a certificate describing the real property and that it has been found to
be a public nuisance. The City may also post such notices in prominent places
on the real property on which the public nuisance occurred. These notices may
be attached to any structure on the real property. The City shall have the
right to enter the real property for the purpose of erecting, affixing,
maintaining and removing these notices. The City may also publish or release
notices describing the property and stating that it has been found to be a
public nuisance in or to newspapers, periodicals, magazines, fliers and other
print media, and may release such notices to television, radio and cable media,
or on its website. The City may post the property and release or publish the
notices provided above for a period not exceeding one year from the conviction,
or, in the event that the conviction is appealed, one year from the date the
conviction is affirmed. It shall be unlawful for any person to interfere with,
remove, obliterate, obscure, cover, or destroy any notice posted pursuant to
the provisions of this section.
   (E)   Additional and alternative remedies. In addition or in the alternative
to the criminal fines, sentences, conditions of suspended sentences,
publication, posting, press and media releases, and other sanctions provided
above, the City may also seek administrative remedies against any license and
the civil remedies provided in this Ordinance. These remedies shall be
cumulative, and the City may pursue one or more of them, simultaneously or in
succession.
(Ord. 2025-009)
SUBPART C:
CIVIL ABATEMENT OF PUBLIC NUISANCE OFFENSES
§ 11-1-1-8 INTENT.
   (A)   The abatement of public nuisances for the protection of public health,
safety, and welfare is a matter of local concern. The purpose of this subpart
is not to punish, but to abate public nuisances. The actions provided in this
subpart are designed to abate public nuisances by removing the property from
criminal use and as a base of criminal operations, to make property owners
vigilant in preventing public nuisances on, in, or using their property and
responsible for the lawful use of their property by tenants, guests and
occupants, and to deter public nuisances. The remedies provided in this subpart
are directed at the property involved without regard to ownership, title or
right of possession and the culpability or innocence of those who hold these
rights. The remedial actions provided in this subpart are intended to be civil
in nature.
   (B)   In order to ensure that the remedies provided in this Ordinance are
applied in good faith and for the purposes of public nuisance abatement, no
City employee’s or law enforcement officer’s employment or level of salary
shall depend upon the frequency or quantity of actions and remedies under this
Ordinance that he or she produces.
   (C)   This subpart is not intended to authorize any act expressly prohibited
by state law, nor to forbid any conduct expressly authorized by state law. The
provisions of this subpart shall be construed to avoid any such direct and
express conflict.
   (D)   The sections of this subpart are intended to provide a comprehensive
scheme for civil public nuisance abatement and should be read together.
   (E)   The remedies provided in Subpart C of this Ordinance are cumulative
and supplementary to the criminal penalties provided in Subpart B of this
Ordinance, the criminal remedies provided by any other criminal ordinance or
statute, other civil remedies, and any administrative proceedings to revoke,
suspend, fine, or take other action against any license. The City may pursue
the remedies provided in Subpart C of this Ordinance, the criminal penalties
provided in Subpart B of this Ordinance or other ordinances or statutes, other
civil actions or remedies, administrative proceedings against a license, or any
one or more of them, and may do so simultaneously or in succession.
(Ord. 2025-009)
§ 11-1-1-9 CIVIL FINES.
   (A)   In addition to any other remedies available in this Ordinance or under
the common law, the Mayor’s designee may impose a civil fine of $500 per day
based on a determination that a person has engaged in activity that constitutes
a public nuisance, as defined herein, provided that a daily $500 fine shall
only be imposed in the case of an imminent hazard.
   (B)   When the Mayor’s designee imposes a civil fine for violations of this
article occurring on real property, the Mayor’s designee shall issue notice
directed to the owner of the subject property, their agent and/or responsible
person, and, where appropriate, to the occupant of the subject property, as
shown on the records of the Bernalillo County Clerk and/or the Bernalillo
County Assessor’s Office. The notice shall contain:
      (1)   The street address and a legal description of the subject property;
      (2)   A statement that the Mayor’s designee has found the subject
property to be in violation of this article;
      (3)   A concise description of the conditions found to render the subject
property a public nuisance under the provisions of this code;
      (4)   The amount of the fine assessed;
      (5)   A statement that the fine must be paid in full within 30 days of
the date of the order or a lien may be placed upon the subject property or any
asset owned by the subject property’s owner and that the City may seek
remedies, including foreclosure, for any unpaid liens;
      (6)   Instructions for how the fine can be paid;
      (7)   A statement that payment plans or waivers may be available if the
person can demonstrate hardship, low income or indigent status; and
      (8)   A statement advising that any person having any title or legal
interest in the subject property may appeal from the notice of civil fine to
the Office of Administrative Hearings, provided the appeal is made in writing
as provided in this article, and filed with the Office of the Administrative
Hearings within 15 days of service of notice of civil fine, and that failure to
timely appeal the notice of civil fine shall constitute a waiver of the right
to appeal.
   (C)   METHOD OF SERVICE.
      (1)   Service of the Notice shall be made upon all persons entitled
thereto either personally or by mailing a copy of such notice and order by
certified mail, postage prepaid, return receipt requested, to each such person
and owner, responsible party or identified agent at their address as shown on
the records of the Bernalillo County Assessor or as known to the Mayor’s
designee. If no address of any such person so appears or is known to the
Mayor’s designee, then a copy of the notice of civil fine shall be so mailed,
addressed to such person, at the address of the building involved in the
proceedings and posted thereon.
      (2)   The failure of any such person to receive such notice shall not
affect the validity of any proceedings taken under this section. Service by
certified mail in the manner herein provided shall be effective on the date of
mailing.
   (D)   APPEAL. Any individual who has been assessed a civil fine issued
pursuant to this article may appeal that decision. The request for appeal and
the hearing shall comply with the procedures outlined in the Independent Office
of Hearings Ordinance, ROA 1994, §§
2-7-8-1 to
2-7-8-9.
(Ord. 2025-009)
§ 11-1-1-10 ADMINISTRATIVE PROCEDURES FOR THE ABATEMENT OF NUISANCES.
   (A)   In addition to any other remedies available in this Ordinance or under
the common law, the Mayor’s designee may request an administrative hearing in
order to obtain additional remedies needed to abate a public nuisance occurring
on real property. The action may be brought against the property where the
nuisance has occurred, any persons owning or claiming any legal or equitable
interest or right of possession in the property, all tenants and occupants at
the property, managers and agents for any persons owning or claiming a legal or
equitable interest in the property, any persons committing, conducting,
promoting, facilitating or aiding the commission of a public nuisance, and any
other persons whose involvement may be necessary to abate the nuisance, prevent
it from recurring.
   (B)   To initiate an abatement action, the Mayor’s designee shall issue a
Notice of Public Nuisance and Intent to Cause Abatement to the property owner
or other responsible person of the nuisance violation(s) occurring on or near
the property in accordance with the procedures identified in ROA §
11-1-1-9(B).
      (1)   The notice shall identify the nuisance and the date of the
occurrence and include a statement that if the nuisance is not abated within
fifteen (15) days, the City will request an administrative hearing.
      (2)   The Mayor’s designee shall mail the notice by certified mail,
postage prepaid, return receipt requested, to the owner(s) of the real property
and post the notice at the main entrances to the buildings or at some other
prominent place on the real property. The mailing of the notice shall be deemed
sufficient if mailed to the owner(s) and the holder(s) of the last recorded
deed of trust at the address(es) shown on the records of the Bernalillo County
Clerk and/or the Bernalillo County Assessor’s Office.
      (3)   The notice shall include instructions in the top five non-English
languages spoken in Albuquerque on how to obtain additional information and/or
language services.
      (4)   The Mayor’s designee is authorized to enter upon property for the
purpose of posting notice and to affix the notice in any reasonable manner to
any buildings and structures.
      (5)   The Mayor’s designee shall not be required to mail any notice
whenever he or she determines that any of the following conditions exist:
         (a)   The public nuisance poses an imminent hazard;
         (b)   Notice could jeopardize a pending investigation of criminal or
public nuisance activity, confidential informants, or other police activity; or
         (c)   Other emergency circumstances exist.
      (6)   It shall be unlawful for any person other than the Mayor’s designee
to remove any notice posted under the provisions of this subsection.
   (C)   After providing the notice required in §
11-1-1-10(B), the Mayor’s designee may request an administrative hearing before
the Independent Hearing Office (“IHO”), which shall have authority to determine
whether a public nuisance exists, order abatement of the nuisance, and impose
fines or other penalties. The hearing shall be conducted in accordance with the
provisions in the IHO Ordinance, ROA 1994,
Chapter 2, Article 7, Part 8 and pursuant to the New Mexico Rules of Civil
Procedure.
   (D)   If the Hearing Officer determines that a violation of this Ordinance
has occurred, the Hearing Officer shall determine the remedies to be imposed.
The Hearing Officer may order any responsible individuals to:
      (a)   Cease the activity causing the public nuisance;
      (b)   Abate the nuisance;
      (c)   Enter into a nuisance abatement agreement with the City;
      (d)   Permit the City to inspect the property to determine compliance;
      (e)   Close the business or building for a period of time not to exceed
thirty (30) days; and
      (f)   Pay a civil fine not to exceed $500 per violation per day.
   (E)   The Order shall state the determination of the Hearing Officer
regarding the alleged violations listed in the notice of administrative civil
enforcement and shall contain findings of fact and conclusions of law.
   (F)   Any party aggrieved by a final decision of the Hearing Officer may
appeal the decision to District Court within 30 days of the final order.
   (G)   The Mayor’s Designee shall monitor compliance with the order. If the
Mayor’s designee has reason to believe that any individual subject to the order
is not complying with the order, the Mayor’s designee may seek further relief
before the IHO, commence a civil action in District Court, or refer the matter
to the District Attorney for the commencement of criminal proceedings.
   (H)   The IHO may retain jurisdiction to rescind or modify orders issued
pursuant to this section.
   (I)   Transfer of property ownership shall not terminate any order issued
pursuant to this section. An acquiring property owner shall be responsible for
compliance with any order or pending enforcement action against a nuisance
property or its prior owner.
(Ord. 2025-009)
§ 11-1-1-11 CIVIL ACTIONS.
   (A)   In addition to any other remedies available in this Ordinance or under
the common law, the City may pursue a civil action to obtain any relief
necessary to abate a nuisance.
   (B)   Civil actions brought under this Ordinance shall be filed by the City
Attorney for the City of Albuquerque. A private citizen, in the name of the
state, may also bring an action under this Ordinance.
   (C)   A civil action brought under this Ordinance shall be commenced by the
filing of a verified complaint or a complaint verified by an affidavit and a
motion for temporary restraining order in accordance with the New Mexico Rules
of Civil Procedure.
   (D)   The defendants to a civil action under this Ordinance and the persons
liable for the remedies in this section may include the property itself, any
persons owning or claiming any legal or equitable interest or right of
possession in the property, all tenants and occupants at the property, managers
and agents for any persons owning or claiming a legal or equitable interest in
the property, any persons committing, conducting, promoting, facilitating or
aiding the commission of or flight from a public nuisance, and any other
persons whose involvement may be necessary to abate the nuisance, prevent it
from recurring, or to carry into effect the court’s orders for temporary
restraining orders, closures, receiverships, permanent injunctions, liens,
sales and destruction. Any person holding any legal or equitable interest or
right of possession in the property who has not been named as a defendant may
intervene as a defendant.
   (E)   Notification before filing civil action or imposing civil fine.
      (1)   At least ten (10) calendar days before filing a civil action under
this Ordinance involving any closure or receivership of real property or
imposing a civil fine, the Mayor’s designee shall post a notice at the main
entrances to the buildings or at some other prominent place on the real
property. The Mayor’s designee shall also mail a notice by certified mail,
return receipt requested, to the owner(s) of the real property and to the
holder(s) of the last deed of trust recorded on the real property. The mailing
of the notice shall be deemed sufficient if mailed to the owner(s) and the
holder(s) of the last recorded deed of trust at the address(es) shown on the
records of the Bernalillo County Clerk and/or the Bernalillo County Assessor’s
Office. The posted and mailed notices shall state that the real property has
been identified as a public nuisance and that a civil action under this
Ordinance may be filed and a civil fine may be imposed. All notices shall
include instructions in the top five non-English languages spoken in
Albuquerque on how to obtain additional information and/or language services.
      (2)   The Mayor’s designee is authorized to enter upon property for the
purpose of posting notice and to affix the notice in any reasonable manner to
any buildings and structures.
      (3)   The Mayor’s designee shall not be required to post or mail any
notice specified in Subsection (I)(1) whenever he or she determines, in his or
her sole discretion, that any of the following conditions exist:
         (a)   The public nuisance poses a threat to public safety; or
         (b)   Notice could jeopardize a pending investigation of criminal or
public nuisance activity, confidential informants, or other police activity; or
         (c)   Notice could result in sale, transfer, encumbrancing or
destruction of the property; or
         (d)   Other emergency circumstances exist; or
         (e)   The owner(s) and the holder(s) of the last recorded deed of
trust have been notified in writing within the last 120 days that the property
has been identified as a public nuisance and that a civil action under this
Ordinance may be filed.
      (4)   It shall be unlawful for any person other than the Mayor’s designee
to remove any notice posted under the provisions of this subsection.
(Ord. 2025-009)
§ 11-1-1-12 RELOCATION.
   (A)   Whenever a civil action is filed that involves a building occupied by
a resident the following shall apply:
      (1)   The owner of a residential building (the “owner”) shall pay
relocation costs for the residents who reside at such residential building when
the ten-day notice required in §
11-1-1-11(E) ROA 1994 is issued, subject to the provisions of division (A)(6)
of this section. This requirement shall be applicable when any condition which
is the basis for the order to vacate is within the control of the owner and the
owner or his agent knew or should have known of the existence of the conditions
that violate applicable codes, statutes, ordinances or regulations prior to the
order to vacate. Notice of such conditions by a governmental agency responsible
for the enforcement of a building, residential unit, housing or other
appropriate code served on the owner or the owner’s agent shall be proof that
the owner knew of the conditions. Payment of relocation costs shall be made by
the owner to the agency designated by the Mayor to administer relocation (the
“relocation agency”) within 30 days after the owner’s receipt of the relocation
cost assessment issued by the relocation agency. Interest shall accrue on any
amount unpaid by the owner commencing 30 days after the date the relocation
agency first advances relocation assistance funds to the displaced resident.
Interest accrual shall not be stayed during an appeal by the owner, but an
owner who is successful on appeal shall not be liable for interest. Owners who,
on appeal, are found to not owe relocation costs shall have payments they have
made to the relocation agency refunded to them without interest except for any
interest actually paid by the owner.
      (2)   In addition to the notice requirements of §
11-1-1-11(E) ROA 1994, at the time the notice that the City has filed a civil
action under this Ordinance, notification shall be given to the owner that the
owner may be required to pay the relocation costs of any displaced residents.
The owner shall also be served with a copy of this Ordinance.
      (3)   At the time that a notice is served on the owner of the property, a
notice in substantially the following form shall be served on those residents
known by name to the Mayor’s designee. Such notice shall be served by personal
service or by mailing a copy of such notice by certified mail, postage prepaid,
return receipt requested. As to residents unknown by name to the Mayor’s
designee, service may be accomplished by posting such notice at the main
entrances or at some other prominent place on or within the residential
building. The notice shall be written in both English and Spanish. The notice
shall be provided to the relocation agency on or before the day the notice to
the residents is served or posted.
NOTICE TO RESIDENTS
YOU MAY BE REQUIRED TO MOVE
IF YOU MUST MOVE YOU MAY BE ENTITLED TO MONEY
      The City believes there may be health and/or safety problems with the
building where you live. The City has filed a lawsuit asking that the building
where you live be closed.
      The Court may order the building to be closed.
      If the Court orders that you must move, City law may allow you to be
paid, by your landlord, for the cost of moving and for some of your rent at a
new location.
      Please contact the City Relocation Agency at the following phone number
and address, as soon as possible, for more information on your rights. If you
wait more than 60 days you may lose your right to any money.
      Phone Number:
      Address:
      (4)   In addition to payment of actual relocation costs a minimum fixed
fee for temporary relocation may be established by regulation. Rental payments
shall not be made beyond temporary relocation periods.
      (5)   The relocation agency shall determine eligibility for and amount of
relocation benefits. Residents shall not be eligible for relocation costs if
they do not make a claim with the relocation agency for relocation costs within
60 calendar days after being served with a notice that they are to relocate. In
determining eligibility, the relocation agency shall consider whether:
         i.   The residents had a rental agreement at the time the notice was
served on the residents;
         ii.   A court had issued an eviction order to the residents prior to
the date the notice was served on the residents;
         iii.   The residents caused or substantially contributed to the
conditions that were the basis of the notice to vacate;
         iv.   The conditions that were the basis for the notice to vacate were
caused by fire, flood or other natural disasters;
         v.   The failure to meet the requirements of this code was due to the
willful or negligent acts or omissions of the owner;
         vi.   The resident was in default for non-payment of rent;
         vii.   The basis of the notice to vacate is for a condition caused by
the resident’s or any third party’s illegal conduct without the owner’s prior
knowledge; or
         viii.   For an owner occupant of a mobile home who is renting a lot or
parcel for use as a site for the location of the mobile home, whether the
requirement to vacate was caused by actions outside the control of the
resident.
      (6)   After notice to the owner and a hearing at which the owner shall
have an opportunity to appear and present evidence, the Mayor’s designee shall
be entitled to place a lien on the property on which the residential building
that is the subject of a notice to vacate is located, and to recover costs paid
by the relocation agency that are owed but have not been reimbursed by the
owner provided the Mayor’s designee proves:
         (a)   The residents were parties to a rental agreement at the time the
notice was served on the residents whose term had not expired;
         (b)   The residents had not been served with a valid notice of default
under the rental agreement which would have entitled the owner to evict the
resident;
         (c)   The residents did not cause or substantially contribute to the
conditions that were the basis of the notice to vacate;
         (d)   The conditions that were the basis for the notice to vacate were
not caused by fire, flood or other natural disasters;
         (e)   The failure to meet the requirements of this code was due
substantially to the willful or grossly negligent acts or omissions of the
owner;
         (f)   The resident was not in default for non-payment of rent;
         (g)   The basis of the notice to vacate is for a condition that was
not caused by the resident’s or any third party’s illegal conduct without the
owner’s prior knowledge; and
         (h)   For an owner occupant of a mobile home who is renting a lot or
parcel for use as a site for the location of the mobile home, the requirement
to vacate was not caused by actions outside the control of the resident.
      (7)   The Mayor’s designee shall, by regulation, establish a procedure
for notice and an impartial evidentiary hearing prior to any determination that
an owner must repay relocation costs. The owner shall be entitled to appeal the
assessment of relocation costs by the relocation agency pursuant to the appeal
provisions of this code. Such appeal shall be filed within 30 calendar days of
the owner’s receipt of the relocation cost assessment from the relocation
agency. The filing of an appeal shall not stay the relocation process.
      (8)   The Mayor’s designee may promulgate regulations governing the
administration of this section, including eligibility for relocation costs, the
amount and method of payment of relocation costs, the criteria replacement
units must meet.
      (9)   No action taken pursuant to this division shall affect the rights
of residents and owners in any civil litigation. Nothing in this division shall
be construed to change the obligations and rights of owners and residents as
required in the Uniform Owner-Resident Relations Act, Section 47-8-1 et seq.
NMSA1978.
      (10)   The relocation agency shall provide assistance in finding
alternative housing for residents who are displaced and qualify for relocation
assistance under this Ordinance.
      (11)   From the time that the City first notifies an owner of conditions
that violate applicable codes, statutes, ordinances or regulations to the time
that the relocation assistance payments are paid to eligible residents or the
time the conditions cited are corrected, the owner shall not evict, harass or
intimidate any resident for the purpose of avoiding or diminishing application
of this division. Included in this prohibition is the reduction of services to
a resident or materially increasing or changing the obligations of any
resident, including rent increases, for purposes of attempting to have the
resident vacate the residential building.
      (12)   The City shall be entitled to attorneys’ fees and costs arising
from any legal action to collect relocation costs assessed to owners.
(Ord. 2025-009)
§ 11-1-1-13 JUDGMENT FOR COSTS AND ATTORNEYS’ FEES.
   In any case in which a public nuisance is established, in addition to the
remedies provided above, the City may petition the court for a separate civil
judgment for the City’s costs and attorneys’ fees against every person who
committed, conducted, promoted, facilitated, or aided the commission of any
public nuisance or who held any legal or equitable interest or right of
possession in any real property or vehicle on or in which any public nuisance
occurred, or any real property, vehicle or other personal property used to
commit, conduct, promote, facilitate or aid the commission of any public
nuisance. This civil judgment shall be for the purpose of compensating the City
for its costs from pursuing the remedies under this Ordinance.
(Ord. 2025-009)
§ 11-1-1-14 LIEN FOR JUDGMENTS.
   In addition to any other remedies available in this Ordinance or under the
common law, the City shall have a lien against the real property and other
personal property on or in which any public nuisance occurred or which was used
to commit, conduct, promote, facilitate, or aid in the commission of any public
nuisance for the total of all judgments imposed for costs and attorneys’ fees.
The City may record a statement of this lien with the Bernalillo County Clerk.
The City may seek foreclosure on properties with unpaid liens.
(Ord. 2025-009)
§ 11-1-1-15 EMERGENCY ABATEMENT.
   (A)   Notwithstanding any other provision in this code, if the conditions at
a property constitute an imminent hazard, the Mayor’s designee may order
immediate abatement of the hazard without notice. Such abatement of an imminent
hazard shall be limited to the minimum work necessary to remove the hazard and
may include disconnection of utilities, securing of the structures,
installation of fencing or emergency cleaning of the property to abate the
hazard.
   (B)   The City shall pay the cost and expense of such abatement from any
appropriation made for that purpose.
   (C)   A lien shall be recorded with the Bernalillo County Clerk’s Office for
all the costs incurred by the City as a result of abating the property.
(Ord. 2025-009)
PART 2: DRUG LABORATORY SITE REMEDIATION OF CONTAMINATION
§ 11-1-2-1 INTENT.
   This subpart shall be known and may be cited as the “Cleanup of Clandestine
Drug Laboratory Sites Ordinance.”
(Ord. 2025-009)
§ 11-1-2-2 FINDINGS AND INTENT.
   The City Council finds and states its intent as follows. Clandestine drug
laboratory sites are increasing in number in Albuquerque and are a serious
health threat to the community. Remediation of the residually contaminated
portions of clandestine drug laboratory sites is essential to assure the
health, safety and welfare of the community. Property owners must share the
responsibility for the clandestine drug laboratory sites on their property by
bearing the initial costs of remediation of such sites, subject to restitution
as provided in this subpart. This subpart is timely and appropriate because
current laws and City regulations are insufficient to address the
aforementioned problems. The restrictions contained herein are neither over
broad nor vague and are narrowly tailored to serve a substantial government
interest.
(Ord. 2025-009)
§ 11-1-2-3 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subpart, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   CLANDESTINE DRUG LABORATORY. Property on which methamphetamine, ecstasy, LSD
or any other controlled substance is being manufactured or on which there is an
attempt to manufacture, or where a person is arrested for having on any
property any chemicals or equipment used in manufacturing methamphetamine,
ecstasy, LSD or any other controlled substance. In the case of a space rental
mobile home or recreational vehicle park, clandestine drug laboratory means the
mobile home or recreational vehicle in which methamphetamine, ecstasy, LSD or
any other controlled substance is being manufactured or where a person is
arrested for having in the mobile home or recreational vehicle any chemicals or
equipment used in manufacturing methamphetamine, ecstasy, LSD or any other
controlled substance.
   CLANDESTINE DRUG LABORATORY shall include any place or area where chemicals
or other waste materials used in clandestine drug laboratories have been
located.
   CONTROLLED SUBSTANCE. Any drug or substance or counterfeit substance listed
in the Controlled Substances Act, Chapter 30, Article 31 NMSA 1978 or
regulations adopted thereunder.
   DRUG LABORATORY SITE REMEDIATION FIRM. A professional firm that performs
remediation of residual contamination from the manufacture of methamphetamine,
ecstasy, LSD or any other controlled substance or the storage of chemicals or
equipment used in manufacturing methamphetamine, ecstasy, LSD or any other
controlled substance.
   ECSTASY (3,4-METHYLENEDIOXY AMPHETAMINE). This term has the same meaning
prescribed in Section 30-31-6 NMSA 1978 and includes any of the precursor
chemicals, regulated chemicals, other substances or equipment used in the
unlawful manufacture of Ecstasy and any derivatives thereof.
   GROSS CONTAMINATION. The chemicals, equipment and other items that are found
in a clandestine drug laboratory and that are removed by a law enforcement
officer or law enforcement agency.
   INDUSTRIAL OR ENVIRONMENTAL HYGIENIST FIRM. A professional firm that
conducts pre-remediation testing and post-remediation testing for the
remediation of residual contamination from the manufacture of methamphetamine,
ecstasy, LSD, or any other controlled substance or the storage of chemicals or
equipment used in manufacturing methamphetamine, ecstasy, LSD or any other
controlled substance.
   LAW ENFORCEMENT OFFICER. Any employee of a police or public safety
department administered by the state or any political subdivision of the state
where the employee is responsible for the prevention and detection of crime and
the enforcement of the penal, traffic or highway laws of this State as defined
in Section 30-20A-2D NMSA 1978, and specifically includes Albuquerque Police
Department nuisance abatement inspectors.
   LSD (LYSERGIC ACID DIETHYLAMIDE). This term has the same meaning prescribed
in Section 30-31-6 NMSA 1978 and includes any of the precursor chemicals,
regulated chemicals, other substances or equipment used in the unlawful
manufacture of LSD and any derivatives thereof.
   METHAMPHETAMINE. This term has the same meaning prescribed in Section 30-31-
7 NMSA 1978 and includes any of the precursor chemicals, regulated chemicals,
other substances or equipment used in the unlawful manufacture of
methamphetamine and any derivatives thereof.
   OWNER. Any person, firm, corporation or other entity that owns, in whole or
in part, the property subject to this subpart.
   PROPERTY. Real or personal property, including the area within a structure
and the area that surrounds a structure and that is within the land boundary or
property lines of any of the following:
      (1)   Property that can be used for residential purposes or is occupied
by people for any length of time for any purpose.
      (2)   Property that is governed by the Uniform Owner-Resident Relations
Act, Sections 47-8-1 et seq. NMSA 1978, or the Mobile Home Park Act, Sections
47-10-2 et seq. NMSA 1978.
      (3)   A mobile home as defined in Section 47-10-2 NMSA 1978.
      (4)   A recreational vehicle as defined in Section 66-1-4.15 NMSA 1978
and for purposes of this subpart, “recreational vehicle” shall also include a
recreational travel trailer as defined in Section 66-1-4.15 NMSA 1978.
      (5)   A vehicle, as defined in §
8-5-2-1 ROA 1994.
   RESIDUALLY CONTAMINATED PORTION OF THE PROPERTY. The structure or unit where
gross contamination was removed and the area of any adjacent structure, unit or
land where visible evidence of residual contamination is observed by a law
enforcement officer, including any of the following:
      (1)   If gross contamination is removed from a house, mobile home or
recreational vehicle and the notice of removal is posted for the entire house,
mobile home or recreational vehicle, then the entire house, mobile home or
recreational vehicle, not just the room or rooms in which the gross
contamination is found shall be deemed the residually contaminated portion of
the property.
      (2)   If gross contamination is removed from a detached shed or garage,
the other structures or property on the land are not affected and the notice of
removal is posted only for the detached shed or garage, then the detached shed
or garage shall be deemed the residually contaminated portion of the property.
      (3)   If gross contamination is removed from a hotel, motel room or
apartment unit, the adjacent rooms are not affected and the notice of removal
is posted only for the contaminated room or apartment unit, then the
contaminated room or apartment unit shall be deemed the residually contaminated
portion of the property.
      (4)   If gross contamination is removed from a vehicle, then the entire
vehicle shall be deemed the residually contaminated portion of the property.
(Ord. 2025-009)
§ 11-1-2-4 DECLARATION OF PUBLIC NUISANCE.
   Upon identification by a law enforcement officer of a clandestine drug
laboratory site, the property shall constitute a public nuisance until such
time as the remediation required by this subpart is completed.
(Ord. 2025-009)
§ 11-1-2-5 CLANDESTINE DRUG LABORATORIES.
   (A)   PROCEDURES. If a law enforcement officer discovers a clandestine drug
laboratory or arrests a person for having on any property chemicals or
equipment used in manufacturing methamphetamine, ecstasy, or any other
controlled substance or a derivative of methamphetamine, ecstasy, LSD or any
other controlled substance, the law enforcement officer shall:
      (1)   At the time of the discovery or arrest, shall deliver a copy of the
notice of removal pursuant to subsection (B) of this section to the owner of
the property if the owner is on the site at the time of delivery, the on-site
manager if the manager is on the site at the time of delivery or the on-site
drop box if available. In the case of a tenant-owned unit in a space rental
mobile home or recreational vehicle park, the officer shall deliver a copy of
the notice of removal to the occupant of the unit if the occupant is on-site at
the time of delivery and to the on-site park landlord if the park landlord is
on-site at the time of delivery.
      (2)   If the owner or the owner of a space rental mobile home or
recreational vehicle park or their agent for service is not personally provided
a copy of the notice of removal under the procedures of subsection (A)(1) of
this section, then within two City business days after the discovery or arrest,
the law enforcement officer shall send the notice of removal by certified mail
to the owner of the property and the owner’s on-site manager or, in the case of
a space rental mobile home or recreational vehicle park, to the owner of the
mobile home or recreational vehicle, if applicable, and to the park landlord.
These persons are deemed to have received the notice of removal five days after
the notice is mailed.
      (3)   If the owner or the owner of a space rental mobile home or
recreational vehicle park cannot be identified, the notice of removal may be
posted on the property pursuant to subsection (A)(6) of this section.
      (4)   The notice of removal shall be sent to the following:
         (a)   The address of the owner and the owner of the mobile home or
recreational vehicle park as shown on file with the County Assessor.
         (b)   The Albuquerque Environmental Health Department.
         (c)   The Albuquerque Fire Department.
      The law enforcement officer shall complete an affidavit of service for
personal delivery of the notice of removal or posting notice on the property.
      (5)   After law enforcement or other agency removes the gross
contamination on the property, a law enforcement officer shall order the
removal of all persons from the residually contaminated portion of the property
or dwelling unit, if applicable, or, in the case of a space rental mobile home
or recreational vehicle park, from the unit located on the property.
      (6)   After the law enforcement officer removes all persons pursuant to
subsection (A)(5) of this section, the law enforcement officer shall affix the
notice of removal in a conspicuous place on the property or, in the case of a
space rental mobile home or recreational vehicle park, on the unit located on
the property.
      (7)   The law enforcement officer shall cause a Certificate of
Substandard Property to be filed with the Bernalillo County Assessor upon
posting the notice of removal. Such certificate shall include a legal
description of the property and have attached to it the notice of removal.
   (B)   NOTICE. The notice of removal shall be in writing and shall contain
all of the following:
      (1)   The following shall be printed in large bold type at the top and
bottom of the notice: “Substandard Building. Do Not Enter. Unsafe to Occupy.”
      (2)   A statement that it is unlawful for any person other than the
owner, landlord, manager, law enforcement, an industrial or environmental
hygienist firm and/or a drug laboratory site remediation firm to enter the
residually contaminated portion of the property until the owner remediates the
residually contaminated portion of the property, or in the case of a space
rental mobile home or recreational vehicle park, the unit located on the
property.
      (3)   A statement that a clandestine drug laboratory was seized or a
person was arrested on the property for having chemicals or equipment used in
the manufacturing of methamphetamine, ecstasy, LSD or any other controlled
substance on the property.
      (4)   The date of the seizure or arrest.
      (5)   The address or location of the property, including the
identification of any dwelling unit, room number, apartment number or vehicle
identification number.
      (6)   The name of the law enforcement agency or other agency that seized
the clandestine drug laboratory or made the arrest and the agency’s contact
telephone number.
      (7)   A statement that hazardous substances, toxic chemicals or other
waste products may still be present on the property or, in the case of a space
rental mobile home or recreational vehicle park, in the unit located on the
property.
      (8)   A statement that the failure to remediate the residual
contamination pursuant to the Cleanup of Clandestine Drug Laboratory Sites
Ordinance is punishable by imprisonment up to 90 days and/or a fine up to $500.
      (9)   A statement that disturbing the notice of removal posted on the
property is punishable by imprisonment up to 90 days and/or a fine up to $500.
      (10)   A statement that the owner of the property shall remediate the
residually contaminated portion of the property in compliance with subsection
(C) of this section.
      (11)   A statement that if an owner fails to provide any notice required
by this section, the owner is subject to penalty and a buyer, tenant or
customer may void a purchase contract, rental agreement or other agreement
related to the property.
   (C)   REMEDIATION BY OWNER. The owner of the property shall remediate the
residually contaminated portion of the property by retaining an industrial or
environmental hygienist firm to pre-test the property to determine the extent
of the contamination and the nature of the required remediation. When the
industrial or environmental hygienist firm determines that remediation is
required, the owner shall retain a drug laboratory site remediation firm to
conduct the remediation. The industrial or environmental hygienist firm and the
drug laboratory site remediation firm shall be separate and unaffiliated
business entities. The owner shall retain the industrial or environmental
hygienist firm and the drug laboratory site remediation firm within 30 days of
the day of delivery of personal service of the notice of removal or within 35
days of the date the notice of removal is mailed by certified mail or posted on
the property. Remediation shall be completed within 60 days of the day of
delivery of personal service of notice to the owner or within 65 days of the
date notice is mailed by certified mail to the owner or for such other period
of time that is approved in writing by the Albuquerque Police Department.
   (D)   REMEDIATION PROCEDURES. An industrial or environmental hygienist firm
and the drug laboratory site remediation firm retained to remediate the
residually contaminated portion of any property pursuant to this section shall
comply with the best practices and standards for remediation of residual
contamination. The industrial or environmental hygienist firm shall notify the
owner whenever the firm determines that any structure requires remediation of
contamination as required in this section. The owner shall send such
notification of required remediation of contamination to Albuquerque Police
Department, the City Environmental Health Department and the City’s Chief
Building Official. Within one business day after the remediation is complete,
the drug laboratory site remediation firm shall notify the Albuquerque Police
Department, the City Environmental Health Department and the industrial or
environmental hygienist firm that the property is ready for final inspection.
After inspection by the industrial or environmental hygienist firm, the
industrial or environmental hygienist firm shall issue a final clearance
document certifying that remediation of the residually contaminated portion of
the property was completed pursuant to the standards for remediation of
residual contamination and shall deliver the certification document or send the
document by certified mail to the owner. The owner shall provide a copy of the
certification of completed remediation to each person and entity listed in
subsection (A)(4) of this section, the City’s Chief Building Official and the
law enforcement agency that issued the notice under that subsection. After the
final clearance document has been issued, both of the following apply:
      (1)   The owner, landlord, lien holder or manager of the property is not
required to comply with subsection (G) of this section.
      (2)   Any person may use, enter, occupy, rent or sell the property. It
shall be the responsibility of the owner of the property to file with the
County Assessor the document stating that the residually contaminated portion
of the property has been remediated. The owner shall also be responsible for
the costs associated with filing. The issuance of the document certifying that
remediation of the residually contaminated portion of the property was
completed pursuant to the standards for remediation of residual contamination
shall be a prerequisite for a certificate of occupancy or any City required
building inspection and shall not be in lieu of a certificate of occupancy or
any City required building inspection.
   (E)   CONTAMINATED VEHICLES. If gross contamination is removed from a
vehicle, the notice of removal required in subsection (B) of this section shall
be sent by certified mail to the owner of record and lien holder of record, if
any exists. Impounded vehicles containing residual contamination shall not be
released to the owner or lien holder until the remediation has been completed
and paid for by the owner or lien holder. Remediation shall be accomplished by
following the same procedures as set forth in subsection (D) of this section.
Remediation costs as defined in subsection (J) of this section shall be in
addition to any other towing, storage, or other impoundment fees.
   (F)   NOTICE TO BUYERS AND OCCUPANTS. The following notice requirements
apply until the remediation is complete as provided in subsection (D) of this
section:
      (1)   Within five days after a buyer signs a contract to purchase
property, the owner shall notify the buyer in writing that methamphetamine,
ecstasy, or any other controlled substance was manufactured on such property or
that an arrest, as described in subsection (A) of this section, was made. The
buyer shall acknowledge receipt of the notice. A buyer may cancel the purchase
contract within five days after receiving the notice without liability. If the
owner does not comply with this paragraph, the buyer may void the purchase
contract.
      (2)   Landlords and their agents shall provide written notice to all
prospective tenants for dwelling units that the dwelling unit was the subject
of a notice of removal, as described in subsections (A) and (B) of this
section, that methamphetamine, ecstasy, or any other controlled substance was
manufactured on the property or that an arrest, as described in subsection (A)
of this section, was made. The tenant shall acknowledge receipt of the notice
before taking possession of the property or before signing a rental agreement
for the property. The notice shall be attached to the rental agreement. If the
landlord or their agent does not comply with this paragraph, the tenant may
void the rental agreement. For purposes of this paragraph, “dwelling unit”
shall include but not be limited to mobile homes and recreational vehicles.
      (3)   Before a customer occupies a room that was the subject of the
notice of removal, as described in subsection (A) of this section, the owner or
manager shall notify the customer in writing the room was the subject of a
notice of removal as described in subsection (A) and (B) of this section, that
methamphetamine, ecstasy, LSD or any other controlled substance was
manufactured in the room or that an arrest, as described in subsection (A) of
this section, was made. The customer shall acknowledge receipt of the notice
before taking possession of the room and before signing a room rental
agreement. If the owner or manager does not comply with this paragraph, the
customer may void the agreement.
      (4)   Owners are required to notify all agents selling, leasing or
renting property that is the subject of a notice of removal that such property
is the subject of a notice of removal. When a sales, leasing or rental agent is
notified that the property is the subject of a notice of removal, such agent
shall notify in writing all prospective buyers, tenants or other occupants
about the notice of removal and manufacture of methamphetamine, ecstasy, LSD or
any other controlled substance on the property or that an arrest, as described
in subsection (A) of this section, was made on the property. Notice shall be
made in the same manner as required of the owner in this subsection (G).
      (5)   When a law enforcement officer has ordered the removal of all
persons from a property pursuant to § 11-1-1-44(A)(5), owners, landlords and
their agents shall continue to be subject to the requirement to not permit
people from occupying such property. Compliance with this subsection shall not
eliminate the requirement that the property not be occupied.
   (G)   MOBILE HOME OR RECREATIONAL VEHICLE SPACE RENTAL PARKS. If a mobile
home or recreational vehicle in a space rental park contains a clandestine drug
laboratory, the landlord of the park, on receipt of a notice pursuant to
subsection (A) of this section, shall notify the owner and lienholder of record
of the unit to remove the unit from the park within 30 days. This provision
shall not apply when the owner of the contaminated mobile home or recreational
vehicle is also the owner of the mobile home or recreational vehicle space
rental park in which such contaminated mobile home or recreational vehicle is
located. If the unit is not removed within 30 days, the landlord of the park
shall remediate the contamination following the requirements set forth in
subsections (C) and (D) of this section.
   (H)   RESTITUTION TO OWNER. A person who operates a clandestine drug
laboratory and who is not the owner of the property shall pay restitution to
the owner of the property for all costs that the owner incurred to remediate
the property and, in the instance of a mobile home or recreational vehicle, the
cost incurred by the owner of a space rental park for moving and/or remediating
such property.
   (I)   REMEDIATION BY CITY. If an owner of property, a vehicle owner, a
vehicle lien holder or an owner of a mobile home or recreational vehicle space
park, as described under subsection (G) of this section, fails to comply with
the remediation of the residually contaminated property or portion of the
property as required in this section, the City may remediate the residually
contaminated portion of the property or seek a court order requiring the owner
to remediate in the manner required in this section. If the City is unable to
locate the owner within ten days after the issuance of the Certificate of
Substandard Property, the City may proceed with remediation. If the City
remediates the contamination, the owner shall pay to the City all costs related
to such remediation. If the owner fails to pay the City for its costs of
remediation, the City shall be entitled to file a lien against such property
for the costs related to the remediation and bring legal action against the
owner for such remediation costs. Remediation costs shall include the expense
for posting, physical security of the contaminated site, notification of
affected people, businesses or any other entity, expenses related to the
recovery of cost, laboratory fees, cleanup services, costs for testing for
residual contamination, removal costs, and cost incurred for an industrial or
environmental hygienist firm and a drug laboratory site remediation firm. When
a contaminated vehicle is impounded, the vehicle shall not be released to the
owner or a lien holder until remediation is completed and paid by the owner or
lien holder and impoundment fees are paid by the owner or lien holder.
Remediation costs for vehicles in which gross contamination is found shall
include the costs for testing for residual contamination regardless of whether
residual contamination is actually required to be remediated. Impoundment fees
shall include those fees defined as impoundment charges in §
8-5-2-1 ROA 1994. The City or its contractors may remove property as part of
its remediation effort.
(Ord. 2025-009)
PART 3: DRUG FREE ZONES
§ 11-1-3-1 INTENT.
   The public purpose of §§
11-1-3-1 et seq. is to decrease the number of occurrences of the illegal sale
and purchase of drugs or imitation drugs in areas in the City where that number
is significantly greater than in other areas of the City, and to protect the
health, safety and welfare of citizens using the public right-of-way in such
areas.
(Ord. 2025-009)
§ 11-1-3-2 SHORT TITLE.
   Sections 11-1-3-1 et seq. may be cited as the “Drug Free Zone Ordinance.”
(Ord. 2025-009)
§ 11-1-3-3 FINDINGS.
   The City Council makes the following findings:
   (A)   Certain areas of the City have a significantly higher incidence of
conduct associated with trafficking in narcotics and other controlled
substances than other areas of the City. This concentration of narcotics
activity contributes to the degradation of those areas and also adversely
affects the overall quality of life for those areas¹ residents, businesses, and
visitors.
   (B)   Many persons arrested in Albuquerque for delivering controlled
substances or imitation controlled substances frequently return to the same
location or general vicinity of their arrest because the area has proven to be
a lucrative place for trafficking in controlled substances.
   (C)   After arresting drug dealers, police officers frequently encounter the
same persons shortly thereafter in the same area, engaging in the same criminal
activity.
   (D)   The City has a substantial and compelling interest in restoring the
quality of life and protecting the health, safety, and welfare of citizens
using the public right-of-way in such areas. The government has a substantial
and compelling interest in allowing the public to use and enjoy the facilities
in such areas without interference arising from sales of drugs or imitation
drugs.
   (E)   The processes presently available do not adequately control this type
of activity and the detrimental effects on the areas where this activity
occurs.
   (F)   Individuals have a significant private interest in being able to
travel and associate freely in all areas of the City. However, the public
interest in preventing the harmful effects of drug dealing is so great that it
justifies excluding the drug sellers for 90 days from an impacted area in which
they have sold drugs or imitation drugs.
   (G)   The City’s health, safety and welfare would best be served by
temporarily excluding from impacted areas those persons who are arrested
therein for the unlawful delivery of controlled substances or of imitation
controlled substances.
   (H)   To minimize the likelihood of erroneous deprivation, the City should
provide persons who are arrested therein for a crime listed in § 11-1-2-
6 herein an opportunity to quickly challenge their exclusions and have a timely
hearing before a Hearing Officer before their exclusion from the drug free zone
becomes effective.
   (I)   To ensure that health care and other legitimate needs are met,
variances should be available to those individuals with compelling need to
enter the drug free zone to preserve their health or well-being.
(Ord. 2025-009)
§ 11-1-3-4 DRUG FREE ZONES; CRITERIA.
   Drug free zones are those areas where the number of arrests for conduct
prohibited by Sections 3-31-20 through 25.1 NMSA 1978, Sections 3-31A-4 through
6 NMSA 1978, or § 12-4-16 of this code of ordinances, for the 24 month period
preceding the original designation is significantly higher than that for other
similarly sized areas of the City.
(Ord. 2025-009)
§ 11-1-3-5 DESIGNATION OF DRUG FREE ZONE.
   If the City Council designates an area meeting the criteria of §
11-1-2-4 to be a drug free zone, it shall do so by ordinance, and the
designation shall be valid for an initial period of two years. Thereafter, the
Council may extend the time of the designation as it deems appropriate, but in
no event shall the total be more than ten years. The City Council may also
remove the designation in the event it deems that appropriate. The removal of
the designation shall be by ordinance.
(Ord. 2025-009)
§ 11-1-3-6 PERSONS SUBJECT TO EXCLUSION.
   (A)   A person is subject to exclusion for a period of 90 days from the
public streets, sidewalks, and other public ways in all drug free zones
designated in § 11-1-2-9 herein if that person has been arrested or otherwise
taken into custody within any drug free zone for any of the following crimes:
      (1)   Unlawful possession of a controlled substance, in violation of
Section 3-31-23 NMSA 1978;
      (2)   Unlawful distribution of a controlled substance, in violation of
Section 3-31-22 NMSA 1978;
      (3)   Trafficking a controlled substance, in violation of Section 30-31-
20 NMSA 1978;
      (4)   Distributing a controlled substance to a minor, in violation of
Section 30-31-21 NMSA 1978;
      (5)   Unlawful manufacture, distribution or possession of an imitation
controlled substance, in violation of Section 30-31A-4 NMSA 1978 or §
12-4-16 of this code of ordinances; or
      (6)   Unlawful possession with intent to distribute an imitation
controlled substance, in violation of Section 30-31A-6 NMSA 1978 or §
12-4-16 of this code of ordinances;
      (7)   Unlawful sale to a minor of an imitation controlled substance, in
violation of Section 30-31A-5 NMSA 1978.
   (B)   If a person excluded from all designated drug free zones is found in
any drug free zone during the exclusion period, that person is subject to
immediate arrest for criminal trespass pursuant to § 12-2-3 of this code of
ordinances.
(Ord. 2025-009)
§ 11-1-3-7 AUTHORITY TO ISSUE EXCLUSION NOTICES.
   The Mayor or the Mayor’s designee shall be responsible for the public
streets, sidewalks, and public ways in drug free zones for the purpose of
issuing exclusion notices in accordance with §§
11-1-2-1 et seq. The Mayor may authorize the Police Department to issue
exclusion notices in accordance with §§
11-1-2-1 et seq.
(Ord. 2025-009)
§ 11-1-3-8 NOTICE OF EXCLUSION.
   At the time a person is arrested within a drug free zone for any of the
crimes listed in § 11-1-2-6, the officer making such arrest may deliver to the
person a written notice excluding the person from all drug free zones. The
notice shall specify the areas designated as drug free zones from which that
person is excluded and contain information concerning the right to appeal the
exclusion notice to the Hearing Officer. The person to whom the exclusion
notice is issued shall sign a written acknowledgment of receipt of the
exclusion notice. If that person refuses to do so, the arresting officer shall
make a written record of the refusal.
(Ord. 2025-009)
§ 11-1-3-9 APPEAL AND VARIANCE.
   (A)   The person to whom an exclusion notice is issued shall have a right to
an appeal from the issuance of the notice.
      (1)   An appeal of the exclusion must be filed, in writing, within five
calendar days of the notice’s issuance. A hearing on the appeal shall be had as
provided herein.
      (2)   The exclusion shall not take effect during the pendency of the
appeal. If no appeal is taken, the exclusion shall take effect on the sixth
calendar day after the notice’s issuance.
      (3)   The City shall have the burden to show by a preponderance of
evidence that the exclusion is based on conduct which constitutes any of the
crimes enumerated in § 11-1-2-6 herein. Copies of documents in its control and
which are intended to be used by the City at the hearing shall be made
available to the appellant at least two days prior to the hearing.
      (4)   The decision resulting from the hearing may be appealed to the
state district court.
   (B)   (1)   A determination by a court having jurisdiction of the matter
that the officer who issued the exclusion notice, at that time had probable
cause to arrest the person to whom the exclusion notice was issued for
violation of one or more crimes enumerated in § 11-1-2-6 herein, shall be prima
facie evidence that the exclusion was based on conduct proscribed by those
statutes.
      (2)   Variances from an exclusion may be granted at any time during the
exclusion period by either the Mayor or Mayor’s designate or by a social
service agency which provides services within the drug free zone for which the
variance is granted, only for reasons relating to the health or welfare, or
well-being of the person excluded. The Mayor shall grant a variance to any
person who can establish that he or she:
         (a)   Was a bona fide resident of the drug free zone prior to receipt
of the exclusion notice; or
         (b)   Was a bona fide owner, principal or employee of a place of
employment located in one of the designated drug free zones.
         (c)   Must conduct official business with the City, County, State or
Federal governments, including the Metropolitan, State and Federal Courts, in a
drug free zone.
         (d)   Desires to attend a house of worship located in one of the
designated drug free zones.
      (3)   The variance will allow access only to the designated drug free
zone specified in the variance.
      (4)   Only those social service agencies which have written rules and
regulations prohibiting the use or sale of controlled substances by their
clients and which have entered into a written agreement with the City
concerning the applicability and enforceability of those rules are eligible to
grant variances.
      (5)   All variances shall be in writing, for a specific period of time
and only to accommodate a specific purpose, all of which shall be stated on the
variance. The person shall keep the variance on his or her person at all times
the person is within the specific drug free zone for which the variance was
granted. In the event a person having a variance is found to be outside the
scope of the variance’s terms, that person is thereupon subject to immediate
arrest for criminal trespass pursuant to §
12-2-3 of this code of ordinances.
      (6)   In the event a person holding a variance is arrested for conduct
prohibited by state or federal law involving controlled substances, the
variance shall immediately become void and that person shall be ineligible for
any new variances for a period of one year from the date of the arrest.
(Ord. 2025-009)
§ 11-1-3-10 LISTING OF DRUG FREE ZONES.
   The following areas are designated as drug free zones:
   (A)   The area which begins at a point at the intersection of Lomas Blvd. NW
and 12th Street NW and proceeds east to the intersection of Lomas Blvd. NW and
North Broadway, then proceeds north to Odelia NE, then proceeds east along
Odelia/lndian School NE to the west boundary of Interstate 25 South, then
proceeds south along Interstate 25 South to the intersection of Gibson SE and
the interstate, then proceeds west to the intersection of Gibson SE and
Broadway Blvd. SE, then proceeds south to the intersection of Broadway Blvd. SE
and Bethel Avenue SW, then proceeds west to the intersection of Bethel Avenue
and the Atchison Topeka and Santa Fe Railroad Right of Way, then north along
the railroad right-of-way to the intersection of Bridge Blvd. SW and the
railroad right of way, then proceeds west along Bridge Blvd. SW to the
intersection of Bridge Blvd, and 8th Street SW, then proceeds north along 8th
Street SW to the intersection of 8th Street and Coal Avenue SW, then proceeds
west along Coal Avenue SW to the intersection of Coal Avenue and 10th Street
SW, then proceeds north along 10th Street to the intersection of 10th Street
and Copper NW and Central NW, then proceeds northwest along Central NW to the
intersection of Central Avenue and 12th Street NW, then proceeds north along
12th Street to the point of origin at the intersection of 12th Street NW and
Lomas Blvd. NW, including the public right-of-way.
   (B)   The area which begins at the point of the intersection of Copper NE
and Eubank NE and proceeds south to the intersection of Eubank NE and Central
NE, then proceeds west to the intersection of Central and Zuni SE, then
proceeds west to the intersection of Zuni and Wyoming SE, then proceeds south
to the municipal limits and follows the municipal limits westerly to the
intersection of Ridgecrest and San Mateo SE, then proceeds north to the
intersection of San Mateo and Zuni SE, then proceeds west along Zuni, then Lead
SE to the intersection of Lead and Carlisle SE, then proceeds north to the
intersection of Central and Carlisle NE, then proceeds east to the intersection
of Central and Louisiana NE, then proceeds north to the intersection of
Louisiana and Lomas, NE, then proceeds east to the intersection of Lomas and
Wyoming NE, then proceeds south to the intersection of Wyoming and Copper NE,
then proceeds east to the point of origin at the intersection of Copper NE and
Eubank NE, including the public right-of-way. The area which falls within a
line which begins at the intersection of Rio Grande Blvd. NW and Los Anayas
Road NW and proceeds west to the intersection of Los Anayas Road and Gabaldon
Road NW, then proceeds south to the intersection of Gabaldon Road NW and the
municipal boundary, then proceeds easterly and southeasterly along the
municipal boundary to the Duranes Ditch, then proceeds southerly along the
municipal boundary to the intersection of Montoya Street NW and Maximillian
Road NW, then proceeds westerly along the municipal boundary to the Riverside
Drain, then proceeds southerly along the Riverside Drain to the intersection of
the Riverside Drain and Central Avenue NW, then proceeds easterly along Central
Avenue NW to the intersection of Central Avenue NW and Rio Grande Blvd. NW,
then proceeds north along Rio Grande Blvd. NW to the point of origin at the
intersection of Rio Grande Blvd. NW and Los Anayas Road NW, including the
public right-of-way, and excluding any unincorporated areas of Bernalillo
County that fall within the designated area.
(Ord. 2025-009)
ARTICLE 2: VIEWING BOOTHS
Section
   
11-2-1   Short title
   
11-2-2   Intent
   
11-2-3   Definitions
   
11-2-4   Regulations
 
   
11-2-99   Penalty
§ 11-2-1 SHORT TITLE.
   This article may be cited as the "Viewing Booths Ordinance."
('74 Code, § 6-32-1) (Ord. 57-1991)
§ 11-2-2 INTENT.
   This article is intended to promote the health, safety and general welfare
of the citizens of Albuquerque. In particular, it is intended to minimize the
use of viewing booths in adult amusement establishments for unlawful sexual
activities and sexual liaisons of a casual nature which pose health risks.
('74 Code, § 6-32-2) (Ord. 57-1991)
§ 11-2-3 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this article, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ADULT ENTERTAINMENT ESTABLISHMENT. An establishment that meets the
definition provided by § 14-16-7-1 of the
Integrated Development Ordinance.
   PATRON. A person other than a principle, operator, agent, or employee of the
adult amusement establishment who does or may purchase goods or services from
the adult amusement establishment.
   PERSON. An individual, proprietorship, partner-ship, corporation,
association or other legal entity.
   PREMISES. That part of a building controlled by the adult amusement
establishment; it includes land outside such building area only if an outside
area is used as a site for conduct of the adult amusement establishment's
display, viewing or sales.
   VIEWING BOOTH. A viewing room or defined space of less than 150 square feet
of floor space in which a film, video cassette or other video reproduction
which depicts specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas is
shown.
('74 Code, § 6-32-3) (Ord. 57- 1991; Am. Ord._2017-025)
§ 11-2-4 REGULATIONS.
   A person who operates or causes to be operated an adult establishment which
contains on the premises one or more viewing booths shall comply with the
following requirements:
   (A)   Viewing booths shall be in the interior of the premises.
   (B)   No more than one patron shall be allowed to occupy a viewing booth at
a time.
   (C)   Restrooms shall not contain photographic film viewing equipment or
video reproduction or viewing equipment.
   (D)   The premises shall be kept clean and sanitary so that there will not
be a potential health problem.
('74 Code, § 6-32-4) (Ord. 57-1991)
§ 11-2-99 PENALTY.
   Any person or patron committing an offense specified in this article, upon
conviction, shall be subject to the penalty provisions set forth in §
1-1-99 of this code of ordinances.
('74 Code, § 6-32-5) (Ord. 57-1991)
ARTICLE 3: HUMAN RIGHTS
Section
   
11-3-1   Short title
   
11-3-2   Declaration of policy
   
11-3-3   Definitions
   
11-3-4   Human rights board
   
11-3-5   Powers and duties
   
11-3-6   Powers of the board
   
11-3-7   Unlawful discriminatory practice
   
11-3-8   Grievance procedure
   
11-3-9   Procedures for holding public hearings
   
11-3-10   Administrative responsibilities
   
11-3-11   Interfering prohibited
   
11-3-12   Exemptions
 
   
11-3-99   Penalty
§ 11-3-1 SHORT TITLE.
   This article may be cited as the "Human Rights Ordinance."
('74 Code, § 12-3-1) (Ord. 106-1973)
§ 11-3-2 DECLARATION OF POLICY.
   Pursuant to Article VIII of The Albuquerque City Charter, in order to assure
the public safety, public health and general welfare, to:
   (A)   Preserve, protect, and promote human rights and human dignity;
   (B)   Promote and encourage the recognition and exercise of human
responsibility;
   (C)   Protect and promote equality of access to public goods and services;
and
   (D)   Prohibit discrimination on the basis of race, color, religion, sex,
national origin or ancestry, age, physical or mental disability, pregnancy,
childbirth or condition related to childbirth or pregnancy, sexual orientation,
gender, or gender identity, or source of income, including, but not limited to
the following area:
      (1)   in places of public accommodations;
      (2)   In housing accommodations; and
      (3)   In commercial space.
('74 Code, § 12-3-2) (Ord. 106-1973; Am. Ord._2022-023; Am. Ord._2024-010)
§ 11-3-3 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this article, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   BOARD. The Human Rights Board.
   CHILDBIRTH OR CONDITION RELATED TO CHILDBIRTH OR PREGNANCY. The act or
process of giving birth to a child, including labor and delivery. Any medical
condition or complication that arises during pregnancy, childbirth, or the
postpartum period, or is exacerbated by pregnancy or childbirth.
   COMMERCIAL SPACE. Any space in a building, structure, or portion thereof,
which is used or occupied or intended to be occupied for the manufacture, sale,
resale, processing, reprocessing, displaying, storing, handling, garaging, or
distribution of personal property; and any space which is used or occupied as a
separate business or professional unit or office in any building, structure, or
portion thereof.
   CULTURAL HEADDRESS. Includes, but is not limited to, burkas, hijabs, head
wraps, head scarves, or other headdresses used as part of an individual's
personal cultural or religious beliefs.
   EMPLOYEE. Any person in the employ of an employer.
   EMPLOYER. Any person employing one or more persons acting for an employer.
   EMPLOYMENT AGENCY. Any person regularly undertaking with or without
compensation to procure opportunities to work or to procure, recruit, or refer
employees.
   GENDER. An individual or societal expectation or perception of a person as
masculine or feminine based on appearance, behavior or physical
characteristics.
   GENDER IDENTITY. A person's self-perception, based on the person's
appearance, behavior or physical characteristics, that the person exhibits more
masculinity or femininity or the absence of masculinity or femininity whether
or not it matches the person's gender or sex assigned at birth.
   HOUSING ACCOMMODATION. Any building or portion of a building which is
constructed or to be constructed, which is used or intended for use as the
residence or sleeping place of any individual.
   LABOR ORGANIZATION. Any organization which exists for the purpose in whole
or in part of collective bargaining or of dealing with employers concerning
grievances, terms or conditions of employment or of other mutual aid or
protection in connection with employment.
   MINIMUM INCOME REQUIREMENT. A requirement set by an owner relating to the
amount of income a prospective tenant must receive in a prescribed period of
time and used to determine the prospective tenant's ability to pay rent.
   PERSON. One or more individuals, a partnership, association, company,
organization, corporation, joint venture, legal representative, trustee,
receiver, cooperative, or the city and any governmental unit created and/or
sponsored by the city. Where any reference to the masculine is present, he or
she, her or him, his or her or person (as in chairperson vs. chairman) should
be in its place.
   PHYSICAL OR MENTAL DISABILITY. A physical or mental impairment that
substantially limits one or more of a person's major life activities. A person
is also considered to have a mental or physical disability if the person has a
record of a physical or mental disability or is regarded as having a physical
or mental disability.
   PREGNANCY. The condition of being pregnant, including the state of carrying
a developing embryo or fetus within the body, beginning from conception through
childbirth.
   PUBLIC ACCOMMODATION. Any establishment that provides or offers its
services, facilities, accommodations or goods to the public, but does not
include a bona fide private club or other place or establishment which is by
its nature and use distinctly private.
   PUBLIC CONTRACTOR. A person, company, or organization who receives public
funds as a result of contracting with a governmental entity.
   RACE. Includes, but is not limited to, traits historically and commonly
associated with race or ethnicity, including hair types, hair texture, volume
of hair, length of hair, protective hairstyles, or cultural headdresses.
   RACE RELATED HAIRSTYLE. Includes, but is not limited to, those hairstyles
necessitated by, or resulting from, the characteristics of a hair texture
associated with race, such as braids, locs, afros, tight coils or curls, bantu
knots, and twists.
   REAL PROPERTY. Lands, leaseholds and tenements.
   SEX. A person's categorization as male, female or intersex based on biology,
physiology and physical characteristics.
   SEXUAL ORIENTATION. A person's physical, romantic or emotional attraction to
persons of the same or a different gender or the absence of any such
attraction.
   SOURCE OF INCOME. Any lawful and verifiable source of money and program
requirements of such funding, paid directly to or on behalf of a renter or
buyer of housing, including, but not limited to:
      (1)   Income from a lawful profession, occupation, or job;
      (2)   Income derived from social security or any form of federal, state,
or local public assistance or housing assistance, including a housing choice
voucher issued pursuant to Section 8 of the United States Housing Act of 1937,
or any other form of housing assistance payment or credit, whether or not such
income or credit is paid or attributed directly to a landlord and even if such
income includes additional federal, state, or local requirements including but
not limited to required inspections and contracting with the agency
administering the public assistance program; or
      (3)   A pension, annuity, alimony, child support, foster care subsidies,
or any other recurring, lawful, and verifiable monetary consideration or
benefit.
   UNLAWFUL DISCRIMINATORY PRACTICE. Those unlawful practices and acts as
specified in §
11-3-7.
('74 Code, § 12-3-3) (Ord. 106- 1973; Am. Ord._2021-001; Am. Ord._2022-023; Am.
Ord._2024-010)
§ 11-3-4 HUMAN RIGHTS BOARD.
   (A)   There is hereby created the Human Rights Board of the city, consisting
of seven members, all of whom shall be residents of the city. All members shall
be named by the Mayor with the consent of the City Council.
   (B)   The Human Rights Board shall elect a Chairperson, who shall carry out
the usual duties of that office and such other duties as may be described
herein.
   (C)   The term of office of each member of the Board shall be three years;
of the Board Members first named, however, two shall have terms ending December
31, 1974, two shall have terms ending December 31, 1975, and three shall have
terms ending December 31, 1976. The Board shall by lot determine which member
shall have which term.
   (D)   Any vacancy occurring otherwise than by expiration of term shall be
filled by appointment of the Mayor with the consent of the City Council and
such appointment shall be for the unexpired term of the member whom he or she
is to succeed.
   (E)   The Mayor shall endeavor in all appointments to create and maintain a
Board broadly representative of the city population, and in particular, its
racial, ethnic and cultural spectrum.
   (F)   A member once appointed may be removed only by the Mayor with the
advice and consent of the City Council.
   (G)   Four members shall constitute a quorum for the purpose of conducting
Human Rights Board business.
('74 Code, § 12-3-4) (Ord. 106-1973; Am. Ord. 43-1977)
§ 11-3-5 POWERS AND DUTIES.
   The Board shall:
   (A)   Set such rules and regulations as are necessary for the operation of
the Board.
   (B)   Conduct public hearings upon the request of the City Council or Mayor
upon such matters as the City Council or Mayor may from time to time direct.
   (C)   Receive complaints alleging an unlawful discriminatory practice as
defined in this article. The staff director (as described in §
11-3-9(A)) of the Human Rights Board shall advise the complainant of the
resources available to the complainant for resolution of his or her problem
including but not limited to the State Human Rights Commission, the Federal
Equal Employment Opportunity Commission, the Albuquerque Municipal Courts and
such other agencies and entities as may be available. In addition, the staff
director shall be responsible for:
      (1)   Following the progress of the individual complaints to ensure that
the agency to whom the complainant was referred acts on the referral;
      (2)   Observing complaints for trends that may indicate a need for
changes in policies, ordinances or other practices; and
      (3)   Making recommendations to the Human Rights Board that it consider
holding public hearings under this article.
   (D)   Not receive a complaint, where a similar complaint, based on the same
facts, has been filed by the complainant with another agency.
   (E)   Use its best efforts to:
      (1)   Promote mutual trust, understanding and respect among the citizens
of the Albuquerque community and between the citizens and their governmental
agencies.
      (2)   Endeavor that all citizens may enjoy their rights and pursue their
opportunities on an equal basis without discrimination as to race, color,
religion, sex, national origin or ancestry, age, physical or mental disability,
pregnancy, childbirth or condition related to childbirth or pregnancy, sexual
orientation, gender, or gender identity.
      (3)   Conduct programs of research and investigation into the existence,
cause, prevention, and remedy of inter-group tensions and hostility, and
prejudice and discrimination within the community and to inform and educate the
citizens as to the results of such research and investigation.
      (4)   Conduct programs of information and education within the community
so as to advise citizens of their existing rights and opportunities and the
means by which they may lawfully be attained.
      (5)   Work in close cooperation with all public and private agencies
within the community whose aims or activities are consistent with the purpose
stated herein.
   (F)   Provide review of all existing and proposed ordinances and policies
which relate to the objectives of this article.
   (G)   Work with governmental agencies, including the New Mexico Human Rights
Commission, and with community organizations to carry out the purposes of this
article.
   (H)   Make recommendations to the City Council based upon its findings
concerning problems occasioned by prejudice and discrimination in all fields of
human relations and recommend corrective action to aid in carrying out the
purposes of this article.
   (I)   Submit annually a written report of its activities and an evaluation
of the effectiveness of this article to the City Council and Mayor with
recommendations for changes.
   (J)   Review and make recommendations to the Mayor, City Council, or Chief
Administrative Officer regarding the City Affirmative Action Plan and Programs;
city department, division, agency, and program affirmative action plans; and
affirmative action guidelines for City contracts. Conduct investigations,
monitor, and make recommendations to the Mayor, City Council or Chief
Administrative Officer about the city's implementation of such plans or
guidelines. Recommend any remedial action necessary for compliance with
approved plans or guidelines to the Chief Administrative Officer.
('74 Code, § 12-3-5) (Ord. 106- 1973; Am. Ord. 5-1977; Am. Ord._2024-010)
§ 11-3-6 POWERS OF THE BOARD.
   The Board may:
   (A)   Hold hearings, request the appearance of witnesses and the production
of relevant books, records, correspondence, documents, and other evidence
relating to any matter under investigation or in question before the Board.
   (B)   Make such investigations and studies in the field of human relations
as in the judgment of the Board will aid in effectuating its general purposes.
   (C)   Recommend to the City Council and Mayor legislation to aid in carrying
out the purposes of this article.
   (D)   Whenever the Board has reason to believe that a violation of this
article has occurred and a proceeding would be in the interest of the public,
it shall issue and serve upon such person a complaint stating its charges in
that respect and containing a notice of a hearing, upon a day and at a place
therein fixed, at least 30 days after the service of said complaint. The person
so complained of shall have the right to appear at the place and time so fixed
and show cause why an order should not be entered by the Board requiring such
person to cease the violation of the law so charged in said complaint. Upon
failure of the person to comply with the order within ten days, the Board shall
file an appropriate proceeding in the Municipal Court. This proceeding shall be
de novo. The Municipal Court shall have jurisdiction to entertain a complaint
alleging a violation of this article without the necessity of filing a
complaint with the Board.
('74 Code, § 12-3-6) (Ord. 106-1973)
§ 11-3-7 UNLAWFUL DISCRIMINATORY PRACTICE.
   It is unlawful discriminatory practice and a violation of this article for:
   (A)   An employer, unless based on a bona fide occupational qualification,
to refuse to hire, to discharge, to promote or demote or to discriminate in
compensation or terms and conditions of employment, against any person
otherwise qualified, because of race, color, religion, sex, national origin or
ancestry, age, race related hairstyle, the use of a cultural headdress,
physical or mental disability, pregnancy, childbirth or condition related to
childbirth or pregnancy, sexual orientation, gender, or gender identity.
   (B)   A labor organization to exclude an individual or to expel or otherwise
discriminate against any of its members or against any employer or employee
because of race, color, religion, sex, national origin or ancestry, age, race
related hairstyle, the use of a cultural headdress, physical or mental
disability, pregnancy, childbirth or condition related to childbirth or
pregnancy, sexual orientation, gender, or gender identity.
   (C)   Any employer, labor organization, or any other person to refuse to
admit or employ any individual in any program established to provide an
apprenticeship or other training or retraining because of race, color,
religion, sex, national origin or ancestry, age, race related hairstyle, the
use of a cultural headdress, physical or mental disability, pregnancy,
childbirth or condition related to childbirth or pregnancy, sexual orientation,
gender, or gender identity.
   (D)   Any employer, labor organization, or any other person to print or
circulate or cause to be printed or circulated any statement, advertisement, or
publication or to use any form of application for employment or membership, or
to make any inquiry regarding prospective employment or membership which
expresses, directly or indirectly, any limitation, specification, or
discrimination as to race, color, religion, sex, national origin or ancestry,
age, race related hairstyle, the use of a cultural headdress, physical or
mental disability, pregnancy, childbirth or condition related to childbirth or
pregnancy, sexual orientation, gender, or gender identity unless based on a
bona fide occupational qualification.
   (E)   An employment agency to refuse to list and properly classify for
employment or to refer an individual for employment in a known available job
for which the individual is otherwise qualified because of race, religion,
color, national origin, ancestry, age, sex, race related hairstyle, the use of
a cultural headdress, or any physical or mental disability, pregnancy,
childbirth or condition related to childbirth or pregnancy, sexual orientation,
gender, or gender identity unless based on a bona fide occupational
qualification; or to comply with a request from an employer for referral of
applicants for employment if the request indicates either directly or
indirectly that the employer discriminates in employment on the basis of race,
religion, color, national origin, ancestry, sex, race related hairstyle, the
use of a cultural headdress, or physical or mental disability, pregnancy,
childbirth or condition related to childbirth or pregnancy, sexual orientation,
gender, or gender identity unless based on a bona fide occupational
qualification.
   (F)   Any person who provides any public accommodation to make a
distinction, directly or indirectly, in offering or refusing to offer its
services, facilities, accommodations or goods to any individual because of
race, color, religion, sex, race related hairstyle, the use of a cultural
headdress, national origin or ancestry, physical or mental disability,
pregnancy, childbirth or condition related to childbirth or pregnancy, sexual
orientation, gender, or gender identity.
   (G)   Any person to:
      (1)   Refuse to sell, rent, assign, lease or sublease, or offer for sale,
rental, lease or sublease, or assignment, any housing accommodation, commercial
space or real property to any individual, or discriminate against any person in
the terms, conditions, or privileges of the sale, rental, lease or sublease, or
assignment of any housing accommodation, commercial space, or real property, or
to refuse to negotiate for the sale, rental, lease, assignment or sublease of
any housing accommodation, commercial space or real property, or in the
provision of facilities or services in connection therewith, because of race,
color, religion, sex, race related hairstyle, the use of a cultural headdress,
national origin or ancestry, source of income or the requirements of any
program providing the source of income, physical or mental disability,
pregnancy, childbirth or condition related to childbirth or pregnancy, sexual
orientation, gender, or gender identity.
      (2)   Print, circulate, display or mail, or cause to be printed,
circulated, displayed or mailed, any statement, advertisement, publication or
sign or use any form of application for the purchase, rental, lease, assignment
or sublease of any housing accommodation, commercial space or real property, or
to make any record or inquiry regarding the prospective purchase, rental,
lease, assignment or sublease of any housing accommodation, commercial space or
real property which expresses any preference, limitation or discrimination as
to race, color, religion, sex, race related hairstyle, the use of a cultural
headdress, national origin or ancestry, source of income, physical or mental
disability, pregnancy, childbirth or condition related to childbirth or
pregnancy, sexual orientation, gender, or gender identity.
      (3)   Represent to any person, because of race, color, religion, sex,
race related hairstyle, the use of a cultural headdress, national origin or
ancestry, source of income or because of the requirements of any program
providing the source of income, physical or mental disability, pregnancy,
childbirth or condition related to childbirth or pregnancy, sexual orientation,
gender, or gender identity, that any dwelling is not available for inspection,
sale, or rental when the dwelling is available.
      (4)   In determining whether the prospective tenant meets minimum income
requirements, exclude from the calculation any lawful and verifiable source of
income received by the applicant; or
      (5)   Impose additional requirements on a tenant or a prospective tenant
whose rent is to be subsidized by a third party not imposed on other tenants,
such as, but not limited to, additional security deposits or requirements to
maintain renter's insurance; provided that nothing in this section shall be
construed as a prohibition against a property owner or manager conducting an
income or credit inquiry on a prospective tenant or from performing other
vetting techniques, such as a background or rental history checks, provided
these techniques are used for all tenants, regardless of their source of
income.
         (a)   Nothing in this legislation shall be construed as requiring a
landlord to show preferential treatment to a prospective tenant who has a non-
traditional source of income.
         (b)   Nothing in this legislation shall be construed as requiring a
landlord to set a rent rate at or under Fair Market Rent as defined by the U.S.
Department of Urban Housing and Development.
         (c)   Nothing in this legislation shall be construed to mean a
landlord cannot change the terms of a lease after the agreed-upon lease
expires.
         (d)   Nothing in this legislation shall be construed to prevent a
landlord from evicting a tenant for any lawful reason.
      (6)   In determining whether the prospective tenant meets minimum income
requirements, include in the calculation of rent any amounts that will be paid,
credited, or attributed by the tenant or on the tenant's behalf from federal,
state, or local housing assistance payment programs. In other words, the
calculation of minimum income requirements shall be based on the portion of
rent that a tenant is personally responsible for paying, not the portion of
rent that will be paid by a housing assistance payment program.
   (H)   Any person to whom application is made for financial assistance for
the acquisition, construction, rehabilitation, repair or maintenance of any
housing accommodation, commercial space or real property, to:
      (1)   Consider race, color, religion, sex, race related hairstyle, the
use of a cultural headdress, national origin or ancestry, physical or mental
disability, pregnancy, childbirth or condition related to childbirth or
pregnancy, sexual orientation, gender, or gender identity in the granting,
withholding, extending, modifying or renewing, or in the fixing of the rates,
terms, conditions or provisions of any financial assistance, or in the
extension of services in connection with the request for financial assistance;
and
      (2)   Use any form of application for financial assistance or to make any
record or inquiry in connection with applications for financial assistance
which expresses, directly or indirectly, any limitation, specification or
discrimination as to race, color, religion, sex, race related hairstyle, the
use of a cultural headdress, national origin or ancestry, physical or mental
disability, pregnancy, childbirth or condition related to childbirth or
pregnancy, sexual orientation, gender, or gender identity.
   (I)   Any person or employer to:
      (1)   Aid, abet, incite, compel or coerce the doing of any unlawful
discriminatory practice or to attempt to do so.
      (2)   Engage in any form of threats, reprisals or discrimination against
any person who has opposed unlawful discriminatory practices or has filed a
complaint, testified or participated in any proceeding under this article.
      (3)   Willfully obstruct or prevent any person from complying with the
provisions of this article or to resist, prevent, impede or interface with the
Board or any of its members, staff or representatives in the performance of
their duties under this article.
   (J)   A governmental entity or a public contractor to refuse or otherwise
limit or put conditions on services to a person because of race, age, religion,
color, national origin, ancestry, sex, sexual orientation, gender, gender
identity, pregnancy, childbirth or condition related to pregnancy or
childbirth, physical or mental disability.
('74 Code, § 12-3-7) (Ord. 106- 1973; Am. Ord._2021-001; Am. Ord._2022-023; Am.
Ord._2024-010)
§ 11-3-8 GRIEVANCE PROCEDURE.
   Any person claiming to be aggrieved by an unlawful discriminatory practice,
as herein defined, and any Board member who has reason to believe that
discrimination has occurred, may file with the Board a written complaint which
shall state the name and address of the person alleged to have engaged in the
discriminatory practice and any other information that may be required by the
Board. All complaints must be filed with the commission within 90 days after
the alleged act was committed.
('74 Code, § 12-3-8) (Ord. 106-1973)
§ 11-3-9 PROCEDURES FOR HOLDING PUBLIC HEARINGS.
   (A)   The Human Rights Board shall give notice of its proposed public
hearings under §
11-3-6 30 days in advance of said hearings and shall within 30 days after the
hearings issue the findings of the Human Rights Board as a result of the
hearings and they shall make such recommendations to the City Council as the
Human Rights Board deems appropriate.
   (B)   Upon notification by the City Council to the Human Rights Board that a
public hearing under the provisions of §
11-3-5 is desired, a public hearing shall be heard thereon within three weeks
of the request. The Human Rights Board shall give seven days written notice by
certified mail, or two days written notice by personal service, to any
prospective witnesses it wishes to testify at said public hearing. The Human
Rights Board shall within 30 days after the public hearing under §
11-3-5, issue its findings and make such recommendations to the City Council as
it deems appropriate.
   (C)   When a public hearing is requested under §§
11-3-5 or
11-3-6, the Mayor shall issue a directive to all pertinent city personnel and
departments to cooperate and assist the Human Rights Board in effectuating and
accomplishing the charge by the City Council.
   (D)   Testimony given at the public hearing shall be taken under oath
administered by a Notary Public. Minutes of the hearing shall be kept by a
staff member; a full and verbatim transcription of the hearing, however, shall
be made only at the request of the Human Rights Board.
('74 Code, § 12-3-9) (Ord. 106-1973)
§ 11-3-10 ADMINISTRATIVE RESPONSIBILITIES.
   The Chief Administrative Officer shall:
   (A)   Employ, after consultation with the Human Rights Board, a staff
director, and hire or cause to be hired such other employees for the Board he
may deem necessary. The Staff Director may, at the discretion of the Board, in
addition to the duties described in §
11-3-5(C):
      (1)   In the event of a citizen's complaint against the city or one of
its agencies, refer the complaint to the appropriate city agency for action. If
the problem is not satisfactorily solved, intercede on behalf of the
complainant, taking such action as may be required to resolve the issues
involved in the complaint.
      (2)   In the event of a citizen's complaining against another citizen,
intercede on behalf of the complainant using conciliation and persuasion, as
appropriate, to effect a solution.
   (B)   Make available, so far as practicable, the services of all city and
city-related departments and agencies to the Board for the purpose of carrying
out the function herein stated, including the provisions of information in the
possession of such department or agency when the Human Rights Board, after
consultation with the Chief Administrative Officer, so requests.
   (C)   Instruct the City Attorney to assign counsel to assist the Human
Rights Board in the performance of its functions and make such other
administrative arrangements as are normal and necessary for the functioning of
the Board.
('74 Code, § 12-3-10) (Ord. 106-1973)
§ 11-3-11 INTERFERING PROHIBITED.
   No person shall:
   (A)   Use a threat, communicated either by physical, oral, or written means,
of harm or injury to another person, his or her reputation, or his or her
property because he or she has opposed a discriminatory practice, or because he
or she has made a charge, filed a complaint, testified, assisted, or
participated in an investigation, proceeding or hearing before any body charged
by law with the duty to hear complaints relating to problems of discrimination.
   (B)   Use a threat, communicated either by physical, oral, or written means,
or harm or injury to another person, his or her reputation, or his or her
property to coerce such person to engage in a discriminatory practice or other
violation of this article.
   (C)   Willfully obstruct, hinder or interfere with the performance of the
proper exercise of a duty, obligation, right or power by the Mayor, the
Municipal Court, or other official or body with duties, obligations, rights,
and powers under this article.
('74 Code, § 12-3-11) (Ord. 106-1973)
§ 11-3-12 EXEMPTIONS.
   Nothing in this article shall:
   (A)   Bar any religious or denominational institution or organization which
is operated or supervised or controlled by or is operated in connection with a
religious or denominational organization from limiting admission to or giving
preference to persons of the same religion or denomination, or from making
selections of buyers, leasees or tenants as are calculated by the organization
or denomination to promote the religious or denominational principles for which
it is established or maintained unless membership in the religious or
denominational organization is restricted on account of race, color, sex,
national origin, ancestry, age, physical or mental disability, pregnancy,
childbirth or condition related to childbirth or pregnancy, sexual orientation,
gender, or gender identity.
   (B)   Apply to rooms or units in dwellings containing living quarters
occupied or intended to be occupied by no more than four families living
independently of each other, if the owner actually maintains and occupies one
of the living quarters as his or her residence.
   (C)   Apply to public rest rooms, public showers, public dressing facilities
or sleeping quarters in public institutions where the preference or limitation
is based on sex.
   (D)   Apply to private living quarters where the preference or limitation is
based on sex; and
   (E)   Bar a landlord from moving on to a different applicant if an agency
providing housing support requiring a Housing Quality Standards ("HQS")
inspection fails to complete the initial inspection within five business days
after notification that a prospective tenant has selected a unit; or, if re-
inspection is required, fails to complete the re-inspection within five
business days of receiving notification that repairs have been completed,
provided the landlord makes a good faith effort to schedule the inspection with
the agency.
   (F)   Be construed to require a governmental entity or a public contractor
to provide services or programs beyond services or programs to the specific
populations that the governmental entity or public contractor is tasked with
serving.
('74 Code, § 12-3-12) (Ord. 106-1973; Am. Ord._2022-023; Am. Ord._2024-010)
§ 11-3-99 PENALTY.
   Any person who violates any provision of this article is subject to the
general penalty provision of this code set forth in §
1-1-99.
('74 Code, § 12-3-13) (Ord. 106-1973)
ARTICLE 4: CRIMINAL SOLICITATION
Section
   
11-4-1   Short title
   
11-4-2   Definitions
   
11-4-3   Criminal solicitation
 
   
11-4-99   Penalty
§ 11-4-1 SHORT TITLE.
   This article may be cited as the "Criminal Solicitation Ordinance."
('74 Code, § 12-6-1) (Ord. 33-1986; Am. Ord. 18-1987)
§ 11-4-2 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this article, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   KNOWN PROSTITUTE. A person who, within one year previous to the date of
arrest for violation of this article, has within the knowledge of the arresting
officer been convicted of prostitution or of knowingly engaging or offering to
engage in the following acts for hire:
      (1)   Sexual intercourse;
      (2)   Fellatio;
      (3)   Cunnilingus;
      (4)   Anal intercourse; or
      (5)   Masturbation of another.
   PUBLIC PLACE. Any area which is generally visible to public view, including
streets, sidewalks, bridges, alleys, plazas, parks, driveways, parking lots,
automobiles, yards, porches, doorways, windows, and the interior of buildings
open to the public.
('74 Code, § 12-6-3) (Ord. 33-1986; Am. Ord. 18-1987)
§ 11-4-3 CRIMINAL SOLICITATION.
   (A)   A person is guilty of criminal solicitation if in a public place and
with the intent that another person engage in conduct constituting a lewd or
immoral act (including prostitution) as defined in § 12-1-4-13, he or she
solicits, commands, requests, induces, employs, or otherwise attempts to
promote or facilitate another person to engage in conduct constituting lewd or
immoral acts, including prostitution, as defined in § 12-1-4-13, within or
without the city.
   (B)   Among the circumstances which may be considered in determining whether
the actor intends such prohibited conduct are that he or she:
      (1)   Repeatedly beckons to, stops or attempts to stop, or engages
passersby in conversation;
      (2)   Repeatedly stops or attempts to stop motor vehicle operators by
hailing, waving of arms, or any other bodily gesture; or
      (3)   Is a known prostitute.
   (C)   No person shall be arrested pursuant to this section unless that
person has first been afforded an opportunity to explain his or her behavior.
   (D)   It is not a defense that the person solicited is unable to commit the
crime solicited so long as the person soliciting believes that he or they have
such capacity.
('74 Code, § 12-6-2) (Ord. 33-1986; Am. Ord. 18-1987)
§ 11-4-99 PENALTY.
   Any person who violates any provision of this article is subject to the
general penalty provisions set forth in §
1-1-99 of this code of ordinances.
('74 Code, § 12-6-4) (Ord. 33-1986; Am. Ord. 18-1987)
ARTICLE 5: BODY ART
Section
   
11-5-1   Short title
   
11-5-2   Legislative findings and intent
   
11-5-3   Definitions
   
11-5-4   Body art operator requirements and professional standards
   
11-5-5   Permits
   
11-5-6   General provisions
   
11-5-7   Exemptions
   
11-5-8   Public notification requirements
   
11-5-9   Records retention
   
11-5-10   Preparation and care of the body art area
   
11-5-11   Sanitation and sterilization
   
11-5-12   Requirements for single use items
   
11-5-13   Requirements for premises
   
11-5-14   Permit requirements
   
11-5-15   Prohibitions
   
11-5-16   Suspension or revocation of permits
   
11-5-17   Enforcement
Editor's Note:
   This Ordinance shall take effect February 3, 1999.
§ 11-5-1 SHORT TITLE.
   This article may be cited as the "Body Art Ordinance."
(Ord. 33-1998)
§ 11-5-2 LEGISLATIVE FINDINGS AND INTENT.
   (A)   The Council finds that there is sufficient information to believe that
injuries, infections and occasional disease may occur as the result of body
art. In order to protect the health and welfare of residents, the regulation of
body art establishments and operators is required.
   (B)   The Council finds that residents desire regulation of body art
establishments and that such regulation is required for the health and safety
of the residents.
   (C)   The Council is concerned with health dangers posed by the unsafe
practices that could be employed by some body art establishments and operators.
(Ord. 33-1998)
§ 11-5-3 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this article, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ANTISEPTIC. An agent that destroys disease causing microorganisms on human
skin or mucosa. A list of approved antiseptic agents will be maintained by the
Environmental Health Department.
   BODY ART. The practice of physical body adornment by any method including
but not limited to the following: body piercing, tattooing, cosmetic tattooing,
branding and scarification. This definition does not include practices that are
considered medical procedures by a state medical board, such as implants under
the skin. This definition also does not include ear piercing as fully defined
in §
11-5-7(B) ROA 1994 below.
   BODY ART ESTABLISHMENT. Any place of business which performs body art and is
engaged in business as defined in §
13-1-2 ROA 1994.
   BODY PIERCING. Any method of piercing the skin or mucosa in order to place
any object including, but not limited to, rings, studs, bars or other forms of
jewelry through the skin or mucosa. This article expressly excludes ear
piercing, as defined in §
11-5-7(B) ROA 1994 below, as a body piercing procedure.
   CLIENT. Any person who inquires about or requests a body art procedure.
   CONTAMINATED WASTE. Any liquid or semi-liquid blood or other potentially
infectious materials; contaminated items that would release blood or other
potentially infectious materials in a liquid or semi-liquid state if
compressed; items that are caked with dried blood or other potentially
infectious materials and are capable of releasing these materials during
handling; contaminated sharps and pathological and microbiological wastes
containing blood and other potentially infectious materials, as further defined
in 29 CFR 1910.1030.
   COSMETIC TATTOOING. The practice of depositing pigment into the epidermis,
utilizing needles, which is either permanent, semipermanent or temporary by
someone other than a state licensed physician. Cosmetic tattooing shall also
include permanent cosmetics, dermography, micro pigmentation, permanent color
technology and micro pigment implantation.
   DEPARTMENT. The Environmental Health Department of the city including its
agents and employees.
   DISINFECTION. The killing of microorganisms, but not necessarily their
spores, on inanimate objects.
   EQUIPMENT. All machinery, including fixtures, containers, vessels, tools,
devices, implements, furniture, display and storage areas, sinks and all other
apparatuses and appurtenances used in connection with the operation of a body
art establishment.
   HANDSlNK. A lavatory equipped with hot and cold running water under
pressure, used solely for washing hands, arms or other portions of the body.
   HOT WATER. Water which is at a constant temperature of at least 100°
Fahrenheit.
   INSTRUMENTS USED FOR BODY ART. Hand pieces, needles, needle bars and other
instruments that may come in contact with any person's body during body art.
   INVASIVE. Entry into the body either by incision or insertion of an
instrument into or through the skin or mucosa, or by any other means intended
to compromise the skin or mucosa.
   JEWELRY. Any personal ornament inserted into a pierced area. Jewelry
inserted into a newly pierced area must be made of non-hazardous materials
including but not limited to 316 L or LVM surgical implant grade stainless
steel, solid 14k or 18k white or yellow gold, niobium, titanium, platinum.
Jewelry inserted into existing healed piercings must be made of materials
commonly used in the industry including but not limited to 316 L or LVM
surgical implant grade stainless steel, solid 14k or 18k white or yellow gold,
niobium, titanium, platinum, low porosity plastic such as monofilament nylon,
acrylic or lucite, tempered glass or high density low porosity non toxic hard
woods. Furthermore, such jewelry must be free of nicks, scratches or irregular
surfaces and have been properly sterilized prior to use. Hardwood jewelry is
single use only. Ear studs are not considered jewelry under this article.
   OPERATOR. Any person who controls, operates, manages, conducts, or practices
body art activities at a body art establishment and who is responsible for
compliance with these regulations whether or not that person actually performs
body art activities.
   PERMIT. Written approval by the Department to operate a body art
establishment. Approval is given in accordance with this article and is
separate from any other licensing requirements that may exist.
   PERSON. A natural person, any form of business or social organization and
any other nongovernmental legal entity including but not limited to a
corporation, partnership, limited liability company, association, trust or
unincorporated organization.
   PROCEDURE ROOM. A room in the body art establishment where body art is
performed.
   PROCEDURE SURFACE. Any surface that contacts the client's unclothed body
during a body art procedure or any associated work area which may require
sanitizing.
   SANITIZE or SANITIZATION. A procedure that reduces the level of microbial
contamination so that the item or surface is considered safe.
   SHARPS. Any sterilized object that is used for the purpose of penetrating
the skin or mucosa including, but not limited to, needles, scalpel blades and
razor blades.
   SHARPS CONTAINER. A puncture-resistant, leak-proof container that can be
closed for handling, storage, transportation and disposal and is labeled with
the international "biohazard" symbol.
   SINGLE USE. Products or items that are intended for one-time, one person use
and are disposed of after use on each client including, but not limited to,
cotton swabs or balls, tissues or paper products, paper or plastic cups, gauze
and sanitary coverings, razors, piercing needles, scalpel blades, stencils, ink
cups and protective gloves.
   STERILIZATION. Destruction of all forms of microbiotic life, including
spores.
   TATTOOING. Any method of placing ink or other pigment into or under the skin
or mucosa by the aid of needles or any other instruments used to puncture the
skin, resulting in permanent coloration of the skin or mucosa. This includes
all forms of cosmetic tattooing.
   UNDER DIRECT SUPERVISION OF A PHYSICIAN. Employed by and working in the
office or clinic of a physician licensed in the State of New Mexico, or at a
site approved by the Department, with treatment ordered by the physician.
(Ord. 33-1998)
§ 11-5-4 BODY ART OPERATOR REQUIREMENTS AND PROFESSIONAL STANDARDS.
   The following information shall be kept on file on the premises of a body
art establishment and available for inspection by the Department:
   (A)   The full names of all operators in the establishment and their exact
duties.
   (B)   The following information pertaining to all operators in the
establishment: Date of birth, gender, home address and phone number (home and
work).
   (C)   Identification photographs of all operators.
   (D)   The body art establishment name and hours of operation.
   (E)   The name and address of the body art establishment owner or owners.
   (F)   A complete description of all body art performed.
   (G)   A list of all instruments, body jewelry, sharps, and inks used for any
and all body art procedures, including names of manufacturers and serial or lot
numbers or invoices or other documentation sufficient to identify and locate
the manufacturer.
   (H)   A copy of this article.
(Ord. 33-1998)
§ 11-5-5 PERMITS.
   (A)   Permits shall be prominently displayed in the body art establishment
and shall not be defaced or altered in any manner.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person to perform body art unless such
procedures are performed in a body art establishment with a current permit. Any
person who performs a body art procedure without a permit shall be subject to
the penalty provisions in §
1-1-99 ROA 1994. Each procedure is a separate punishable act under §
1-1-99 ROA 1994.
(Ord. 33-1998)
§ 11-5-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS.
   (A)   Smoking, eating, or drinking by anyone is prohibited in the procedure
room while body art preparation, procedure and clean up is being performed.
   (B)   Operators must be a minimum of eighteen years of age.
   (C)   Operators shall refuse service to any person who, in the opinion of a
reasonable objective observer, is under the influence of alcohol or drugs.
   (D)   The operator shall maintain a high degree of personal cleanliness,
conform to hygienic practices and wear clean clothes when performing body art.
Before performing body art, the operator must thoroughly wash his or her hands
in hot running water with liquid antimicrobial soap, then rinse his or her
hands and dry with disposable paper towels. This shall be done as often as
necessary to remove contaminants.
   (E)   In performing body art, the operator shall wear disposable medical
gloves. The gloves shall be discarded at a minimum, after the completion of
each procedure on an individual client.
   (F)   If, while performing body art, the operator's glove is pierced, torn
or otherwise contaminated, the procedure in paragraphs (D) and (E) above shall
be repeated immediately. The contaminated gloves shall be immediately discarded
and the hands washed thoroughly as described in paragraph (D) above before a
fresh pair of gloves are used. Any item or other instrument used for body art
which is contaminated during the procedure shall be discarded and replaced
immediately with new ones before the procedure resumes.
   (G)   Contaminated waste, as defined in this article, which may release
liquid blood or body fluids when compressed or may release dried blood or body
fluids when handled must be placed in an approved "red" bag which is marked
with the international "biohazard" symbol. It must then be disposed of by, or
delivered to, an approved medical waste facility pursuant to federal and state
regulations including but not limited to 29 CFR 1910.1030 and New Mexico Solid
Waste Management Regulations promulgated by the New Mexico Environment
Department. Sharps ready for disposal shall be disposed of in approved sharps
containers. Contaminated waste which does not release liquid blood or body
fluids when compressed or does not release dried blood or body fluids when
handled may be placed in a covered receptacle and disposed of through normal,
approved disposal methods. Storage of contaminated waste on-site shall not
exceed the period specified by the New Mexico Environment Department.
   (H)   No person shall perform any body art upon a person under the age of 18
years without the written consent of a parent or legal guardian. The written
consent must be kept on the premises at the body art establishment. The parent
or legal guardian does not have to stay at the body art establishment during
the entire body art procedure as long as the parent or legal guardian provides
written and notarized consent to the specific planned procedure(s) to the body
art establishment prior to the procedure(s). If the parent or legal guardian
remains present during the body art procedure, the written consent does not
have to be notarized. Written consent shall be personally delivered to the body
art establishment by the parent or legal guardian; delivery by the person under
18 years of age is not sufficient. Photographic identification of the parent or
legal guardian is required. Nothing in this section is intended to require an
operator to perform any body art on a person under 18 years of age with or
without parental or guardian consent.
   (I)   Any skin or mucosa surface to receive a body art procedure shall be
free of rash, infection or any other visible active pathological condition.
   (J)   The skin of the operator shall be free of rash, infection or any other
visible pathological condition. No person or operator affected with boils,
infected wounds, open sores, abrasions, exudative lesions, acute respiratory
infection, nausea, vomiting or diarrhea shall work in any area of a body art
establishment in any capacity in which there is a likelihood of contaminating
body art equipment, supplies or working surfaces with pathogenic organisms.
   (K)   Proof shall be provided upon request of the Department that all
operators have either completed or were offered and declined, in writing, the
Hepatitis B vaccination series; that antibody testing has revealed that the
operator is immune to Hepatitis B; or that the vaccine is contraindicated for
medical reasons. Contraindication requires a dated and signed physician's
statement specifying the name of the Operator and stating that the vaccine
cannot be given. This documentation is to be kept on the premises of the body
art establishment. For those who decline the Hepatitis B vaccination series, an
information brochure developed by the Department will be provided which
explains the risks of Hepatitis B and C and provides treatment options
following an exposure incident.
(Ord. 33-1998)
§ 11-5-7 EXEMPTIONS.
   (A)   Physicians licensed by the State of New Mexico who utilize body art
procedures as part of patient treatment are exempt from these regulations.
   (B)   Individuals who pierce only the outer perimeter and lobe of the ear
using a pre-sterilized encapsulated single use stud ear piercing system,
implementing the proper procedures listed herein, are exempt from these
regulations. Individuals who use these ear piercing systems must conform to the
manufacturer's directions on use and applicable U. S. Food and Drug
Administration requirements. Individuals who use ear piercing systems must
provide written aftercare instructions to all customers regarding proper care
for their ear piercing. No individual may perform an ear piercing upon a minor
unless the parent/legal guardian is present at the time of the piercing and has
given written consent. All ear piercing records must be retained for a period
of three years. All piercers must employ handwashing or use of an antibacterial
gel and wear disposable medical gloves which are to be discarded after use for
each customer. The Department retains authority to investigate consumer
complaints relating to alleged misuse or improper procedures involving ear
piercing systems and may pursue all remedies under law.
(Ord. 33-1998)
§ 11-5-8 PUBLIC NOTIFICATION REQUIREMENTS.
   Verbal and written public educational information, approved by the
Department, shall be required to be given to all clients. Verbal and written
instructions, approved by the Department for the care of the body art procedure
site shall be provided to each client by the operator upon completion of the
procedure. The written instructions ("instructions") shall advise the client to
consult the operator or a physician licensed by the State of New Mexico at the
first sign of infection and contain: the name, address and phone number of the
body art establishment. The instructions shall be signed and dated by both
parties. The operator shall give a copy of the instructions to the client and
retain the original with all other records required to be maintained under this
article. In addition, all body art establishments shall provide clients with
information, in writing, which advises clients of the risks and possible
consequences of body art.
(Ord. 33-1998)
§ 11-5-9 RECORDS RETENTION.
   The body art establishment shall keep a record of all persons who have had
body art procedures performed. The record shall include the name, date of
birth, and address of the client, the date of the procedure, the name of
operator who performed the procedure(s), the type of procedure performed and
its location on the client's body, the signature of the client and, if the
client is a minor, written proof of parental or guardian presence and consent
as more particularly described in §
11-5-6(H) ROA 1994 above. A record of the specific ink color(s) applied, and,
when available, the manufacturer, catalogue identification number or supplier
invoice of each color used shall be maintained.For jewelry, a record of the
manufacturer, catalogue identification number or supplier invoice shall be
maintained. All records described in this paragraph shall be retained for a
minimum of three years and provided to the Department upon request.
(Ord. 33-1998)
§ 11-5-10 PREPARATION AND CARE OF THE BODY ART AREA.
   (A)   Before performing body art, the skin of and surrounding the area where
the body art is to be placed shall be washed with antimicrobial soap or iodine
or other antiseptics on a list of approved substances maintained by the
Department. If piercing or other procedures penetrating the subcutaneous layer
are to be performed, the area must be cleaned with a fresh antiseptic solution.
If shaving is necessary, safety razors with single service blades shall be used
and discarded after each use. The razor blade holder, if reusable, shall be
autoclaved after each use. Following shaving, the skin and surrounding area
shall be washed with antimicrobial soap and the washing pad shall be discarded
after a single use.
   (B)   In the event of blood flow, all products used to check the flow of
blood or to absorb blood shall be used only once and disposed of immediately
after use.
   (C)   Written and verbal instructions regarding the proper care of the body
art shall be provided to each client following each body art procedure.
(Ord. 33-1998)
§ 11-5-11 SANITATION AND STERILIZATION.
   (A)    All non-disposable instruments used for body art shall be cleaned
thoroughly after each use by scrubbing with an antimicrobial soap solution and
hot water or an appropriate disinfectant to remove blood and tissue residue and
placed in an ultrasonic unit which shall remain on the premises of the body art
establishment and which will be operated in accordance with the manufacturer's
instructions.
   (B)   After cleaning, all non-disposable instruments used for body art shall
be packed individually in paper peel-packs and sterilized. All paper peel-packs
shall contain either a sterilizer indicator or internal temperature indicator.
Properly packaged, sterilized and stored equipment can be stored no more than
one year. Paper peel-packs must be dated with an expiration date not to exceed
one year. Sterile equipment may not be used after the expiration date without
first repackaging and resterilizing.
   (C)   All non-disposable instruments used for body art shall be sterilized
in an autoclave at the body art establishment. Off site sterilization is
prohibited. The sterilizer shall be used, cleaned, and maintained according to
manufacturer's instructions. A copy of the manufacturer's recommended
procedures for the operation of the sterilization unit must be available for
inspection by the Department.
   (D)   Each holder of a permit to operate a body art establishment shall
demonstrate that the sterilizer used is capable of attaining sterilization by
monthly spore destruction tests. These tests shall be verified through an
independent laboratory. The permit shall not be issued or renewed until
documentation of the sterilizer's ability to destroy spores is received by the
Department. These test records shall be retained by the operator for a period
of three years and provided to the Department upon request.
   (E)   After sterilization, the instrument used for body art, tattooing or
body piercing shall be stored in a dry, clean cabinet or other tightly covered
container reserved for the storage of such instruments.
   (F)   All instruments used for body art, tattooing or body piercing shall
remain stored in sterile packages until just prior to performing a body art
procedure. When assembling instruments used for performing body art, the
operator shall wear disposable medical gloves and use techniques to ensure that
the instruments and gloves are not contaminated.
   (G)   All inks, dyes, pigments and sharps shall be specifically manufactured
for performing body art procedures and shall not be adulterated. Immediately
before applying a tattoo, the quantity of the dye to be used for the tattoo
shall be transferred from the bottle and placed into sterile, single use paper
cups or plastic caps. Upon completion of the tattoo, these single cups or caps
and their contents shall be discarded.
(Ord. 33-1998)
§ 11-5-12 REQUIREMENTS FOR SINGLE USE ITEMS.
   (A)   All sharps shall be sterilized prior to use and stored in paper peel-
packs.
   (B)   Single use items shall not be used on more than one client for any
reason. After use, all single use needles, razors and other sharps shall be
immediately disposed of in approved sharps containers. Piercing needles are
strictly single use.
   (C)   All body art stencils shall be single use and disposable. Petroleum
jellies, soaps and other products used in the application of stencils shall be
dispensed and applied on the area to be tattooed with sterile gauze or in a
manner which prevents contamination of the original container and its contents.
The gauze shall be used only once and then discarded.
(Ord. 33-1998)
§ 11-5-13 REQUIREMENTS FOR PREMISES.
   (A)   Body art establishments applying for a permit shall submit a scale
drawing and floor plan of the proposed establishment for a plan review by the
Department as part of the permit application process. The Department may charge
a reasonable fee for this review.
   (B)   All walls, floors, and ceilings of a body art establishment shall be
smooth, free of open holes or cracks, light-colored, washable and in good
repair. Walls, floors and ceilings shall be maintained in a clean condition.
All surfaces, including client chairs and benches shall be of such construction
as to be easily cleaned and sanitized after each client procedure. All body art
establishments shall be completely separated by solid partitions, or by walls
extending from floor to ceiling, from any room used for human habitation, a
food establishment or room where food is prepared, a hair salon, retail sales,
or other such activity which may cause potential contamination of work
surfaces.
   (C)   Insects, vermin and rodents shall not be present in any part of the
body art establishment, its appurtenances or appertaining premises.
   (D)   There shall be a minimum of 35 square feet of floor space for each
procedure room. Each body art establishment shall have an area which may be
screened from public view for clients requesting privacy. Multiple procedure
rooms shall be separated by wipeable dividers, curtains or partitions.
   (E)   The body art establishment shall be well-ventilated and provided with
an artificial light source equivalent to at least 20 foot candles three feet
off the floor, except that at least 100 foot candles shall be provided at the
level where the body art procedure is being performed, and where instruments
and sharps are assembled.
   (F)   No animals of any kind shall be allowed in a procedure room except
service animals used by persons with limitations. Small animals confined to a
cage or aquarium are allowed only outside a procedure room.
   (G)   A separate, readily accessible, handsink with hot and cold running
water, under pressure, preferably equipped with wrist or foot operated controls
and supplied with liquid antimicrobial soap and disposable paper towels shall
be readily accessible within the body art establishment. One handsink shall
serve no more than three operators. In addition, there shall be a minimum of
one lavatory, excluding any service sinks, and one toilet in a body art
establishment.
   (H)   At least one covered waste receptacle shall be provided in each
operator area and each toilet room. Receptacles in the operator area shall be
emptied daily and solid waste shall be removed from the premises at least
weekly. Receptacles in the operator area shall either have a foot operated lid
or a lid that can and shall remain open during body art procedures to prevent
hand contact with the receptacle during a procedure. All refuse containers
shall be lidded, cleanable and kept clean.
   (I)   All instruments and supplies shall be stored in clean dry covered
containers.
   (J)   If reusable cloth items, including but not limited to lap-cloths, are
used, they shall be mechanically washed after each client procedure. Reusable
cloth items shall be mechanically washed with detergent and dried. The cloth
items shall be stored in a clean dry environment.
(Ord. 33-1998)
§ 11-5-14 PERMIT REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   Body Art Establishment Permit.
      (1)   No person, firm, partnership, joint venture, association, business
trust, corporation or any organized group of persons may operate a body art
establishment without a body art establishment permit issued by the Department.
      (2)   The permit shall be obtained annually. Beginning and ending permit
time frames will be established by the Department.
      (3)   The applicant shall pay a reasonable non-refundable fee as set by
the Department for each body art establishment permit.
      (4)   A permit for a body art establishment shall not be transferable
from one place or person to another.
      (5)   A current body art establishment permit shall be posted in a
prominent and conspicuous area where it may be readily observed.
      (6)   The holder of a body art establishment permit must only hire
operators who have complied with the operator permit requirements of this
article.
      (7)   Body art establishments which are engaged in the body art business
before the effective date of this article shall have 60 days to comply with the
permitting requirements.
   (B)   Operator Permit.
      (1)   No person shall practice body art procedures without first
obtaining a permit from the Department. The Department shall set a reasonable
non-refundable fee for such permits.
      (2)   The operator permit shall be valid from the date of issuance and
shall automatically expire in two years from the date of issuance unless
revoked sooner by the Department.
      (3)   An application for an operator permit shall include: Name, date of
birth, sex, residence, mailing address, phone number, place(s) of employment,
and training and experience of the operator.
      (4)   Within 90 days of the operator's receipt of the operator's first
permit, the operator must provide proof of attendance at a blood-borne pathogen
training program (or equivalent) approved by the Department. During the said 90
days, the operator shall become familiar with this article, undergo in-house
training and familiarize themselves with information available from the
Department concerning Hepatitis B. Subsequently, the operator must attend a
blood-borne pathogen training program (or equivalent) at least once every three
years.
      (5)   No operator permit shall be issued unless, following reasonable
investigation by the Department, the operator has demonstrated compliance with
the provisions of this section and all other provisions of this article.
      (6)   All operator permits shall be conditioned upon continued compliance
with the provisions of this section as well as all applicable provisions of
this article.
      (7)   All operator permits shall be posted in a prominent and conspicuous
area.
(Ord. 33-1998)
§ 11-5-15 PROHIBITIONS.
   (A)   Performing body art is prohibited on any person under the age of 18
without the written consent of the parent or legal guardian. This consent is to
be given in person to the operator by the parent or legal guardian before the
body art procedure commences. Photographic identification of the parent or
legal guardian is required.
   (B)   Performing body art is prohibited on any person who appears to a
reasonable person to be under the influence of alcohol or drugs.
   (C)   Owning, operating or soliciting business as a body art establishment
or operator without first obtaining all necessary permits and approvals from
the Department is prohibited.
   (D)   Obtaining or attempting to obtain any body art establishment or
operator permit by means of fraud, misrepresentation or concealment is
prohibited.
(Ord. 33-1998)
§ 11-5-16 SUSPENSION OR REVOCATION OF PERMITS.
   (A)   Permits issued under the provisions of this article may be suspended
temporarily by the Department for violation of this article. There is no
property right in a permit.
   (B)   If a permit holder fails to comply with any notice or request issued
under the provisions of this article, the permit holder must be notified in
writing ("written notice") that the permit is immediately suspended. The
written notice must also contain a statement informing the permit holder that
an opportunity for a hearing will be provided if a written request for a
hearing is filed with the City Clerk's office within 15 days from receipt of
notice.
   (C)    Any person whose permit has been suspended may apply for a
replacement permit. Within 10 days following receipt of a written request for a
replacement permit, including a statement signed by the applicant that in his
or her opinion the conditions causing the suspension have been corrected, and
submission of the appropriate reinspection fees, the Department shall reinspect
the body art establishment or evaluate documentation provided by an operator.
If the applicant is complying with the provisions of this article, the
Department may in its discretion issue a replacement permit.
   (D)   For serious or repeated violations of any of the requirements of this
article or for interference with the Department in the performance of its
duties, the permit may be permanently revoked after an opportunity for a
hearing has been provided by the Department. Before taking such an action, the
Department shall notify the permit holder in writing, stating the reasons for
which the permit is subject to revocation and advising the permit holder of the
requirements for filing a request for a hearing. A permit may be suspended for
cause pending its revocation or a hearing relative thereto.
   (E)   The Department may permanently revoke a permit following service of a
notice of revocation unless a request for a hearing is filed with the City
Clerk's office within 15 days from receipt of notice.
   (F)   The hearings provided for in this section shall be conducted by the
Independent Hearing Officer in accordance with the provisions In the IHO
Ordinance, ROA 1994, Chapter 2, Article 7, Part 8.
   (G)   A nonrefundable hearing fee of $50.00 shall accompany each request for
a hearing conducted by the Department pursuant to this Section.
(Ord. 33-1998; Am. Ord. 38-2002; Am. Ord._2023-015)
§ 11-5-17 ENFORCEMENT.
   (A)   Operation of any body art establishment or performance of any body art
without a permit is a misdemeanor and shall be subject to the penalty
provisions in §
1-1-99 ROA 1994. Each day of operation without a permit and each separate body
art procedure shall be a separate offense.
   (B)   The Department may inspect body art establishments without a warrant
and as often as necessary throughout the year to ensure compliance with this
article.
   (C)   It is unlawful for any person to interfere with the Department in the
performance of its duties and any such violation is subject to the penalty
provisions in §
1-1-99 ROA 1994.
   (D)   A copy of the inspection report must be furnished to the permit
holder. The Department shall retain the original inspection report.
   (E)   If a permittee violates this article, the Department may, in its
discretion, advise the permittee, in writing, of the Department's finding of a
violation and instruct the permittee to undertake specific remedial steps to
correct such violation(s) within a reasonable period of time not to exceed 30
days.
   (F)   If the Department reasonably suspects that a communicable disease is
being transmitted or may be transmitted by an operator or body art
establishment, the Department may do any or all of the following:
      (1)   Issue an order excluding any or all operators from the permitted
body art establishment until the Department determines there is no further risk
to public health.
      (2)   Issue an order immediately suspending the body art establishment
permit until the Department determines there is no further risk to the public
health.
(Ord. 33-1998)
ARTICLE 6: OBSCENE MATERIAL
Section
   
11-6-1   Authority; exclusion
   
11-6-2   Short title
   
11-6-3   Affirmative defenses
   
11-6-4   Definitions
   
11-6-5   Prohibition
   
11-6-6   Procedures for criminal complaint
   
11-6-7   Evidence of obscenity
   
11-6-8   Seizure of obscene material
 
   
11-6-99   Penalty
§ 11-6-1 AUTHORITY; EXCLUSION.
   (A)   Pursuant to Section 3-18-17 NMSA 1978, which allows a municipality to
prohibit and suppress the sale, possession or exhibition of obscene
publications, prints, pictures, illustrations; and as enabled by Section 6D,
Article X of the New Mexico Constitution and Article I and Article IV, Section
8 of the City Charter of the city.
   (B)   Nothing in this article is intended to cover, affect, include, or
proscribe the specific conduct which is prohibited or regulated as to minors by
Sections 30-37-1 through 30-37-10 NMSA 1978. Neither is this article intended
to apply to any matter used in a bona fide program of medical or psychological
treatment by licensed personnel, or distributed or displayed not-for-profit by
a publicly owned or other nonprofit library or used in a bona fide educational
program of a bona fide educational institution; while used, distributed,
displayed or sold or held for use, distribution, display, or sale exclusively
under these conditions. Nor is this article intended to apply to mere
possession of obscene material in a private home for exclusively private use.
('74 Code, § 12-9-1) (Ord. 65-1988)
§ 11-6-2 SHORT TITLE.
   This article, may be cited as the "Obscene Material Ordinance."
('74 Code, § 12-9-2) (Ord. 65-1988)
§ 11-6-3 AFFIRMATIVE DEFENSES.
   It shall be an affirmative defense to prosecution under this article that
the material in question depicts no more than mere nudity or is a film
customarily and formally rated "G," "PG," "PG-13," or "R" by the Motion Picture
Association of America (MPAA).
('74 Code, § 12-9-3) (Ord. 65-1988)
§ 11-6-4 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this article, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   DISTRIBUTE. To transfer possession, either publicly or for consideration.
   KNOWLEDGE OF THE CONTENT AND CHARACTER. Having general knowledge or
awareness of the character of the matters distributed and knowledge of the
nature and character of the matters whether or not there is actual knowledge of
the specific contents thereof. This knowledge can be proven by direct or
circumstantial evidence or both.
   MATTER. Any book, magazine, newspaper, or other printed or written material
or any picture, drawing, photograph, motion picture, video cassette, or other
pictorial representation or any statue or other figure, or any recording
transcription or mechanical, chemical or electrical reproduction or any other
articles, equipment, machines, or materials.
   OBSCENE. 
      (1)   The average person, applying local contemporary community
standards, would find that the matter taken as a whole, appeals to the prurient
interest. In order for an item as a whole to be found or intended to have an
appeal to the prurient interest, it is not necessary that the item be
successful in arousing or exciting any particular form of prurient interest
either in the hypothetical average person, in a member of its intended and
probable recipient group or in the trier of act; and
      (2)   The average person, applying local contemporary community
standards, would find that the matter depicts or describes in a patently
offensive way, sexual conduct as that term is described in this section.
Contemporary community standards are set by what is in fact accepted in the
community as a whole; and
      (3)   A reasonable person would find that the matter, taken as a whole,
lacks serious literary, artistic, political, or scientific value; and
      (4)   The matter describes or depicts violence or simulated violence such
as but not limited to murder, rape, torture, sadomasochistic abuse, or beatings
in association with or in conjunction with sexual conduct.
   PATENTLY OFFENSIVE. So offensive on its face as to affront current community
standards of decency.
   PERSON. Any individual, partnership, firm, or association.
   SADOMASOCHISTIC ABUSE. Flagellation or torture by or upon a person 2clad in
undergarments, a mask or bizarre costume, or the condition of being fettered,
bound or otherwise physically restrained on the part of one so clothed, for the
purpose or in the context of sexual gratification or abuse.
   SEXUAL CONDUCT. Actual or simulated acts of, whether involving persons or
persons and animals:
      (1)   Sexual intercourse, including genital-genital, oral-genital, anal-
genital or oral-anal, whether between persons of the same or opposite sex.
      (2)   Penetration of the vagina or rectum by any object except when done
as part of a recognized medical procedure.
      (3)   Sexual bestiality.
      (4)   Masturbation.
      (5)   Sadomasochistic abuse.
      (6)   Lewd exhibition of the genitals, pubic or rectal areas of any
person.
      (7)   Defecation or urination in the context of a sexual act.
   SIMULATED. Any depicting of the genitals or rectal areas which gives the
appearance of sexual conduct or incipient sexual conduct.
('74 Code, § 12-9-4) (Ord. 65-1988)
§ 11-6-5 PROHIBITION.
   (A)   Distribution of obscene matter:
      (1)   A person is guilty of distribution of obscene matter when, having
knowledge of its content and character, he:
         (a)   Sends or causes to be sent into this city for sale or
distribution;
         (b)   Brings or causes to be brought into this city for sale or
distribution; or
         (c)   In this city, he:
            1.   Prepares for distribution;
            2.   Publishes for distribution;
            3.   Prints for distribution;
            4.   Exhibits publicly or for consideration before an audience of
one or more;
            5.   Distributes;
            6.   Offers to distribute;
            7.   Has in his possession with intent to so distribute, exhibit or
offer to distribute, any obscene matter;
            8.   Presents or participates in presenting the live, recorded or
exhibited performance of any obscene matter to the public or an audience of one
or more for consideration or commercial purpose; or
            9.   Owns, leases, or manages any theatre, building, structure,
room, place, or commercial establishment and knowingly leases, lets, or permits
such building, structure, room, place or commercial establishment to be used
for the purpose of presenting obscene exhibitions or performances publicly or
for consideration or for the purpose of distributing obscene matters or obscene
devices.
   (B)   This section does not apply to a person who possesses or distributes
obscene materials or participates in conduct otherwise proscribed by this
section when the possession, participation, or conduct occurs in the course of
law enforcement activities nor does it apply to those stated exceptions found
in §
11-6-1(B).
('74 Code, § 12-9-5) (Ord. 65-1988)
§ 11-6-6 PROCEDURES FOR CRIMINAL COMPLAINT.
   Proceedings under this article shall be instituted by the City Attorney's or
District Attorney's filing of formal criminal complaint in court alleging that
specific material as defined herein is obscene by a law enforcement officer or
prosecutor, and only after a finding of probable cause by a judge in the course
of issuing either a search or arrest warrant regarding the matter.
('74 Code, § 12-9-7) (Ord. 65-1988)
§ 11-6-7 EVIDENCE OF OBSCENITY.
   (A)   Expert testimony or other ancillary evidence is not required to
determine obscenity if the allegedly obscene item has been placed in evidence.
The matter itself is the best evidence of what it represents.
   (B)   The fact that other sexually explicit items are distributed in the
local community is not admissible as evidence of the local contemporary
community standard unless it is shown that:
      (1)   Such other item is similar to the item at issue. Similarity shall
be measured by the degree of sexual explicitness and type of sexual conduct or
activity depicted. It must also be in a similar medium as the item at issue;
and
      (2)   Such other item enjoys a reasonable degree of community acceptance.
('74 Code, § 12-9-8) (Ord. 65-1988)
§ 11-6-8 SEIZURE OF OBSCENE MATERIAL.
   There shall be no seizure of obscene material prior to an adversary
proceeding on the issue of whether the material is in fact obscene, provided
that the material may be seized for the bona fide purpose of preserving
evidence, if seized pursuant to a warrant issued after a determination of
probable cause that the material is obscene, and that following the seizure a
prompt judicial determination of the obscenity issue in an adversary proceeding
is available at the request of any interested party. A trial on the merits of
any alleged violation of §
11-6-5 shall constitute a prompt judicial hearing as required herein. However,
on a showing to the trial court that other copies of the specific material are
not available for exhibition, the court should permit the seized evidence to be
copied where feasible so that exhibition can be continued pending judicial
resolution of the obscenity issue in an adversary proceeding. Nothing herein
shall be deemed to authorize the seizure of large quantities of allegedly
obscene material prior to an adversary hearing unless otherwise authorized by
law or a court order.
('74 Code, § 12-9-9) (Ord. 65-1988)
§ 11-6-99 PENALTY.
   Any person who violates any of the provisions of this article shall be
deemed guilty of misdemeanor, and upon conviction thereof shall be subject to
the penalty provisions set forth in §
1-1-99. Each time this article is violated shall be considered a separate
offense.
('74 Code, § 12-9-6) (Ord. 65-1988)
ARTICLE 7: GRAFFITI VANDALISM
Section
   
11-7-1   Intent
   
11-7-2   Short title
   
11-7-3   Definitions
   
11-7-4   Office of anti-graffiti coordination
   
11-7-5   Elimination of graffiti
§ 11-7-1 INTENT.
   Graffiti is a form of vandalism which injures and stains Albuquerque. It is
a public purpose and the intent of §§ 11-7-1 et seq. to eradicate or minimize
this visual blight.
('74 Code, § 1-24-1) (Ord. 1-1993)
§ 11-7-2 SHORT TITLE.
   Sections 11-7-1 et seq. may be cited as the "Graffiti Vandalism Ordinance."
('74 Code, § 1-24-2) (Ord. 1-1993)
§ 11-7-3 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this §§
11-7-1 et seq., the following definitions shall apply unless the context
clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   GRAFFITI. Unauthorized painting, writing or inscription.
   PERSON. An individual, corporation, business trust, estate, trust,
partnership, association, two or more persons having a joint or common interest
or any other legal entity.
('74 Code, § 1-24-3) (Ord. 1-1993)
§ 11-7-4 OFFICE OF ANTI-GRAFFITI COORDINATION.
   The Mayor shall create an office of Anti-Graffiti Coordination within the
city government. The office's primary charge is graffiti eradication in
Albuquerque. The office shall be a centralized source of education, advice and
assistance on the removal and avoidance of graffiti as well as the place for
the city to collect information on graffiti's occurrence on both public and
private property. The office shall study and advise on strategies and programs
to eradicate or minimize graffiti, including, but not limited to, licensing to
assure responsible retailing of spray paint and markers. The director of the
office shall make semi-annual reports to the Mayor and the Council starting on
June 1, 1993. The director of the office shall also introduce to the Council by
June 1, 1993 amendments to §§
11-7-1 et seq. which seem appropriate.
('74 Code, § 1-24-4) (Ord. 1-1993)
§ 11-7-5 ELIMINATION OF GRAFFITI.
   (A)   Whenever the city becomes aware of the existence of graffiti on any
real property, including structures, within the city and visible from the
public right-of-way or city-owned land, the office of Anti-Graffiti
Coordination shall give or cause to be given notice that the graffiti should be
removed or effectively obscured within 16 days of notice being conveyed by the
city, removal being either by the person in charge of the property or by the
city or the city's agent. A reasonable, good faith effort shall be made to
deliver the notice to the owner or person in charge of the property. The owner
or person in charge of the property may cause the graffiti to be removed or
completely obliterated; if this is that person's intent they should so advise
the office of Anti-Graffiti Coordination within ten days from the time the
notice is delivered if the property owner/agent will remove the graffiti within
the time specified. Within a similar period, the owner/agent may advise the
office that the marking identified was authorized by the owner or person in
charge of the property and thus is not graffiti as herein defined; the city
will then not authorize removal.
   (B)   The director of the office of Anti-Graffiti Coordination shall
implement a program of graffiti removal.
      (1)   If the owner or person in control of the property does not notify
the office of Anti-Graffiti Coordination that they will remove the graffiti or
alternatively that it is not graffiti because the installation was authorized
as provided in division (A) of this section, it will be deemed to be consent to
the city's entering on the property and removing or completely obliterating the
graffiti; any color used shall be similar to that of the structure affected.
      (2)   The office of Anti-Graffiti Coordination is authorized to use city
employees, contractors, volunteers, and prisoners who have been duly made
available for such graffiti removal work.
   (C)   The office of Anti-Graffiti Coordination is authorized to assure that
all graffiti on city-owned property is eliminated within 24 hours of discovery
or report.
   (D)   The office of Anti-Graffiti Coordination shall ensure coordination and
set standards for all graffiti removal work performed by the city or its
agents.
   (E)   The Mayor may create reasonable rules and regulations to govern and
guide the office and otherwise implement §§
11-7-1 et seq.
   (F)   Divisions (A) and (B) of this section shall take effect March 30,
1993.
('74 Code, § 1-24-5) (Ord. 1-1993)
ARTICLE 8: PUBLIC INDECENCY
Section
   
11-8-1   Title
   
11-8-2   Definitions
   
11-8-3   Prohibitions
   
11-8-4   Exceptions
 
   
11-8-99   Penalty
§ 11-8-1 TITLE.
   This article may be cited as the "Public Indecency Ordinance."
(Ord. 46-1994; Am. Ord._2015-032)
§ 11-8-2 DEFINITIONS.
   NUDITY. The showing of the human male or female genitals, pubic area, or
buttocks with less than a fully opaque covering, the showing of the female
breast with less than a fully opaque covering of any part of the nipple, or the
showing of the covered male genitals in a discernibly turgid state.
(Ord. 46-1994; Am. Ord._2015-032)
§ 11-8-3 PROHIBITIONS.
   (A)   No person shall knowingly or intentionally, in a public place:
      (1)   Engage in sexual intercourse;
      (2)   Appear in a state of nudity;
      (3)   Fondle the genitals of himself or another person.
   (B)   No person who owns or operates a public place shall knowingly or
intentionally permit or allow another person to violate the provisions of this
article in that public place; provided, however, this article shall not apply
to forms of expression and the communications of ideas, such as theatrical
appearances, which may not be prohibited absent a finding of obscenity.
(Ord. 46-1994; Am. Ord._2015-032)
§ 11-8-4 EXCEPTIONS.
   Breastfeeding of a child in any location, public or private, is not
prohibited by this article and is specifically exempted from the prohibitions
and penalties otherwise prescribed herein.
(Ord._2015-032)
§ 11-8-99 PENALTY.
   Any person who violates the provisions of this article shall be deemed
guilty of a petty misdemeanor, and upon conviction thereof shall be subject to
the penalty provisions set forth in §
1-1-99. Each time this article is violated shall be considered a separate
offense.
(Ord. 46-1994; Am. Ord._2015-032)
ARTICLE 9: GANGS
Section
Part 1: Anti-Gang Recruitment
   
11-9-1-1   Intent
   
11-9-1-2   Short title
   
11-9-1-3   Legislative findings
   
11-9-1-4   Definitions
   
11-9-1-5   Prohibition
   
11-9-1-6   Forfeiture penalty
   
11-9-1-7   Officer training
 
   
11-9-1-99   Penalty
Part 2: Anti-Gang
   
11-9-2-1   Findings and intent
   
11-9-2-2   Short title
   
11-9-2-3   Definitions
   
11-9-2-4   Violation
 
   
11-9-2-99   Penalty
Part 3: Albuquerque Gang Member Registration
   
11-9-3-1   Findings and intent
   
11-9-3-2   Short title
   
11-9-3-3   Defined terms
   
11-9-3-4   Registration requirements
   
11-9-3-5   Registrant regulations
   
11-9-3-6   Notification
   
11-9-3-7   Gang prevention and intervention programs
 
   
11-9-3-99   Penalty
PART 1: ANTI-GANG RECRUITMENT
§ 11-9-1-1 INTENT. 
   The purpose of this article is to empower police officers with legal
authority to cite persons who are found to be recruiting juveniles to
participate in criminal gang activities.
(Ord. 35-1996)
§ 11-9-1-2 SHORT TITLE.
   This article may be cited as the "Anti-Gang Recruitment Ordinance."
(Ord. 35-1996)
§ 11-9-1-3 LEGISLATIVE FINDINGS.
   (A)   The City Council hereby finds and declares that it is the right of
every person, regardless of race, color, creed, religious, national origin,
sex, age or disability to be secure and protected from fear, intimidation and
physical harm caused by the activities of violent groups and individuals. It is
not the intent of this article to interfere with the exercise of the
constitutionally protected rights of freedom of expression and association. The
City Council hereby recognizes the constitutional right of every citizen to
harbor and express beliefs on any lawful subject whatsoever, to lawfully
associate with others who share similar beliefs, to petition lawfully
constituted authority for a redress of perceived grievances, and to participate
in the electoral process.
   (B)   The City Council finds, however, that neighborhoods and schools
throughout the city are being terrorized and plundered by street gangs.
   (C)   The Council further finds that it is prudent to institute reasonable
laws so as to make it a violation of a city ordinance to solicit or recruit;
conspire to solicit or recruit a juvenile as a member of a criminal street gang
or to deter a juvenile from leaving a criminal street gang.
(Ord. 35-1996)
§ 11-9-1-4 DEFINITIONS.
   CRIMINAL STREET GANG. Any ongoing organization, association in fact, or
group of three or  more persons, whether formally or informally organized, or
any sub-group or affiliated group thereof, having as one of its primary
activities the commission of one or more criminal acts or illegal acts, which
has an identifiable name or identifying sign or symbol, and whose members
individually or collectively engage in or have engaged in a pattern of criminal
gang activity for a one-year period.
   PATTERN OF CRIMINAL GANG ACTIVITY. The commission, attempt to commit,
conspiring to commit, or solicitation of two or more predicate gang crimes,
provided the criminal acts were committed on separate dates or by two or more
persons who are members of, or belong to, the same criminal street gang within
a one-year period.
   PREDICATE GANG CRIME.
      (1)   A state offense:
         (a)   Involving a controlled substance (as defined in Section 30-31-
2 NMSA 1978, as amended, and/or Section 102 of the Controlled Substances Act
(21 U.S.C. 802)) for which the maximum penalty is imprisonment for not less
than five years.
         (b)   That is a felony crime of violence that has an element the use
or attempted use of physical force against the person on another; or
      (2)   Any federal or state felony offense that by its nature involves a
substantial risk that physical force against the person of another may be used
in the course of committing the offense, including:
         (a)   Assault with a deadly weapon;
         (b)   Aggravated battery;
         (c)   Intimidation;
         (d)   Compelling organizational membership;
         (e)   Homicide or manslaughter;
         (f)   Shooting at an occupied dwelling or motor vehicle;
         (g)   Kidnapping;
         (h)   Car jacking;
         (i)   Robbery;
         (j)   Residential burglary;
         (k)   Drive-by shooting;
         (l)   Unlawful use or possession of weapons;
         (m)   Bribery;
         (n)   Tampering with or retaliating against a witness, victim,
informant, or juror;
         (o)   Rape;
         (p)   Torture; and
         (q)   Arson; or
      (3)   Any federal or state offense involving:
         (a)   Money laundering;
         (b)   Felony vandalism;
         (c)   Unlawful sale of a firearm; or
         (d)   Obstruction of justice.
(Ord. 35-1996)
§ 11-9-1-5 PROHIBITION.
   (A)   A person who solicits, recruits, entices, or intimidates a minor to
join a criminal street gang commits a violation of this article.
   (B)   A person who conspires to solicit, recruit, entice or intimidate a
minor to join a criminal street gang commits a violation of this article.
   (C)   A person who solicits, recruits, entices or intimidates a minor to
join a criminal street gang or conspires to do so repeatedly from the same
location commits a violation of this article.
   (D)   A person who expressly or impliedly threatens to do bodily harm to a
minor or to that minor's family or use any other criminally unlawful means to
deter any person from leaving a criminal street gang commits a violation of
this article.
(Ord. 35-1996) Penalty, see §
11-9-1-99
§ 11-9-1-6 FORFEITURE PENALTY.
   Any vehicle used for the purpose of recruiting or conspiring to recruit a
minor to join a criminal street gang is declared a public nuisance and subject
to forfeiture pursuant to the following procedures:
   (A)   Motor vehicles subject to forfeiture under this article may be seized
by any police officer of the city upon an order issued by the District Court.
   (B)   Seizure without such an order may be made if seizure is incident to an
arrest of the driver of the vehicle for criminal gang recruitment.
   (C)   A vehicle taken or detained under this article shall not be subject to
replevin, but is deemed to be in the custody of the Police Department seizing
it subject only to the orders and decrees of the District Court. The police
officer may take custody of the vehicle and remove it to an appropriate and
official location within the District Court's jurisdiction for disposition in
accordance with this article.
   (D)   In the event of seizure pursuant to division (B) of this section,
proceedings for an order for forfeiture shall be instituted promptly and not
later than 30 days after seizure. Any person who, pursuant to the records of
the Motor Vehicle Division of the State Taxation and Revenue Department, has an
ownership or security interest in the subject motor vehicle shall be served
with notice of the forfeiture proceedings.
   (E)   When property is forfeited pursuant to this article, the Albuquerque
Police Department shall sell the motor vehicle and the proceeds shall revert to
the general fund of the city.
(Ord. 35-1996) Penalty, see §
11-9-1-99
§ 11-9-1-7 OFFICER TRAINING.
   All Albuquerque Police Department sworn officers will undergo appropriate
training from the Gang Unit on identification of gang members and criminal
street gangs.
(Ord. 35-1996)
§ 11-9-1-99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person convicted of violating this article shall, upon conviction,
be sentenced as follows:
      (1)   A first conviction under this article shall be punished by a fine
of not more than $500 or by imprisonment not exceeding 90 days, or both.
      (2)   A second conviction under this article shall be punished by a
mandatory fine of not less than $100 but not more than $500 or by mandatory
imprisonment for not less than ten days but not exceeding 90 days, or both.
      (3)   A third or subsequent conviction under this article shall be
punished by a mandatory fine of not less than $250 but not more than $500, or
by mandatory imprisonment for not less than 25 days but not exceeding 90 days,
or both.
   (B)   Each separate violation shall constitute a separate offense.
(Ord. 35-1996)
PART 2: ANTI-GANG
§ 11-9-2-1 FINDINGS AND INTENT.
   City Council finds that criminal street gang activity presents a serious
public safety problem requiring the city to use every available resource to
quell such activity and make the city safer for our inhabitants. This part (§§
11-9-2-1 et seq.) includes criminal penalties and civil remedial measures.
(Ord. 27-2007)
§ 11-9-2-2 SHORT TITLE.
   This part shall be referred to as the "Anti-Gang Ordinance" and may
sometimes be referred to herein as "this part."
(Ord. 27-2007)
§ 11-9-2-3 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this part, the following definitions shall apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   CRIMINAL STREET GANG. Any ongoing organization, association in fact, or
group of three or more persons, whether formally or informally organized, or
any sub-group or affiliated group thereof, having as  one of its primary
activities the commission of one or more criminal acts or illegal acts, which
has an identifiable name or identifying sign or symbol, and whose members
individually or collectively engage in or have engaged in a pattern of criminal
gang activity for a one-year period.
   GANG RELATED CRIME. A crime committed for the benefit of, at the direction
of, or in association with a criminal street gang and with a specific intent to
promote, further or assist in criminal conduct by gang members.
   PERSON. Any individual, partnership, firm, public or private corporation,
association, trust, estate, political subdivision, or agency or any other legal
entity or legal representative, agent, or assign.
   VIOLATION or OFFENSE. A violation of this part.
(Ord. 27-2007)
§ 11-9-2-4 VIOLATION.
   It is a violation for any person to commit any gang related crime that by
its nature involves a substantial risk that physical force against the person
of another may be used in committing the offense including, without limitation,
a predicate gang crime under the Anti-Gang Recruitment Ordinance, §§
11-9-1-1 et seq. ROA 1994 or a conviction for one of the following crimes:
   (A)   Murder, pursuant to Section 30-2-1 NMSA 1978;
   (B)   Voluntary manslaughter, pursuant to Subsection A of Section 30-2-
3 NMSA 1978;
   (C)   Aggravated assault, pursuant to Section 30-3-2 NMSA 1978;
   (D)   Assault with intent to commit a violent felony, pursuant to Section
30-3-3 NMSA 1978;
   (E)   Aggravated battery, pursuant to Subsection C of Section 30-3-5 NMSA
1978;
   (F)   Shooting at a dwelling or occupied building or shooting at or from a
motor vehicle, pursuant to Section 30-3-8.1 NMSA 1978;
   (G)   Aggravated stalking, pursuant to Section 30-3A-3.1 NMSA 1978;
   (H)   Kidnapping, pursuant to Section 30-4-1 NMSA 1978;
   (I)   Sexual exploitation of children by prostitution, pursuant to Section
30-A-4 NMSA 1978;
   (J)   Dangerous use of explosives, pursuant to Section 30-7-5 NMSA 1978;
   (K)   Possession of explosives, explosive devices or incendiary devices,
pursuant to Sections 30-7-19 and 30-7-19.1 NMSA 1978;
   (L)   Criminal sexual penetration in the first, second or third degree,
pursuant to Section 30-9-11 NMSA 1978;
   (M)   Criminal sexual contact of a minor, pursuant to Section 30-9-13 NMSA
1978;
   (N)   Robbery, pursuant to Section 30-16-2 NMSA 1978;
   (O)   Burglary, pursuant to Section 30-16-3 NMSA 1978;
   (P)   Aggravated burglary, pursuant to Section 30-16-4 NMSA 1978;
   (Q)   Extortion, pursuant to Section 30-16-9 NMSA 1978;
   (R)   Aggravated fleeing a law enforcement officer, pursuant to Section 30-
22-1.1 NMSA 1978;
   (S)   Harboring or aiding a felon, pursuant to Section 30-22-4 NMSA 1978;
   (T)   Aggravated assault upon a peace officer, pursuant to Section 30-22-22
NMSA 1978;
   (U)   Assault with intent to commit a violent felony upon a peace officer,
pursuant to Section 30-22-23 NMSA 1978;
   (V)   Aggravated battery upon a peace officer, pursuant to Section 30-22-25
NMSA 1978;
   (W)   Bribery or intimidation of a witness or retaliation against a witness,
pursuant to Section 30-24-3 NMSA 1978;
   (X)   Trafficking in a controlled substance, pursuant to Section 30-31-20
NMSA 1978;
   (Y)   Unlawful taking of a motor vehicle, pursuant to Section 66-3-504 NMSA
1978;
   (Z)   Money laundering, pursuant to the Money Laundering Act; and
   (AA)   An attempt to commit any of the above felonies, pursuant to Section
30-28-1 NMSA 1978.
(Ord. 27-2007) Penalty, see §
11-9-2-99
§ 11-9-2-99 PENALTY.
   Any person who violates this part is subject to the registration
requirements of the Anti Gang Member Registration Ordinance (§§
11-9-3-1 et seq.).
(Ord. 27-2007)
PART 3: ALBUQUERQUE GANG MEMBER REGISTRATION
§ 11-9-3-1 FINDINGS AND INTENT.
   The City Council finds that perpetrators of gang related crimes present a
significant risk to the health and safety of inhabitants of the City of
Albuquerque. The Council further finds that these offenders will likely commit
further crimes. The City Council finds that a local registry of these persons
will promote public safety. The City Council further finds that this part is a
remedial part designed to protect occupants of the City of Albuquerque.
(Ord. 28-2007)
§ 11-9-3-2 SHORT TITLE.
   This part shall be referred to as the Albuquerque Gang Member Registration
Ordinance.
(Ord. 28-2007)
§ 11-9-3-3 DEFINED TERMS.
   For the purposes of this part, the following definitions shall apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ADULT. Any person 18 years of age or older.
   APD. The Albuquerque Police Department.
   CITY. The geographical limits of the City of Albuquerque and the City of
Albuquerque municipal corporation.
   INTERNET. An interactive computer service or system or an information
service, system or access software provider that provides or enables computer
access by multiple users to a computer server and includes, but is not limited
to, an information service, system or access software provider that provides
access to a network system commonly known as the Internet, or any comparable
system or service and also includes, but is not limited to, a World Wide Web
page, newsgroup, message board, mailing list, or chat area on any interactive
computer service or system or other on-line service.
   REGISTRANT. An adult convicted under the Anti- Gang Ordinance.
   REGISTRATION YEAR. One year from the date of first registration.
(Ord. 28-2007)
§ 11-9-3-4 REGISTRATION REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   Any person convicted of a violation of the Anti- Gang Ordinance shall
register with APD.
   (B)   A person convicted of a violation of the Anti- Gang Ordinance shall
register with APD within ten days after being released from incarceration, or
ten days from the date of sentencing if not incarcerated. A registrant must
provide APD with the following information:
      (1)   His legal name, any other names or aliases he has used or is using
and any new names he has applied for in the last year.
      (2)   His date of birth.
      (3)   His social security number.
      (4)   The type of employment in which he is engaged and the name and
telephone number of a contact person who knows his location at any and all
times during employment hours or other times he performs work in the scope of
his employment duties.
      (5)   His driver's license number and the license plate number, vehicle
identification number and description by make and model of all vehicles
registered to him, owned by him, driven by him during employment or otherwise
available to him with regularity by consent from another.
(Ord. 28-2007)
§ 11-9-3-5 REGISTRANT REGULATIONS.
   (A)   Any registrant who provides inaccurate information to the city has
committed a separate violation of this part.
   (B)   In the event of any change in registration information or addition of
new information that would have been required in the initial or subsequent
registration other than a change of employment governed by division (C), the
registrant must notify APD and provide new valid information within three days
of the time the new information becomes known or should be known by the
registrant.
   (C)   A registrant shall notify APD ten days in advance before any voluntary
change in employment occurs or five days after the change is forced or
compelled. The registrant shall provide the name and telephone number of a new
contact person within ten days of the time new work begins.
   (D)   APD shall take and retain their photograph and a set of fingerprints
from each registrant. Additionally, APD may record and retain any information
that aids in identification of the registrant including, without limitation,
scars, tattoos, and any other feature labeling the person as a gang member.
   (E)   Following the initial registration, registrants are required to
annually renew the registration before expiration of the registration year.
Registrants shall register for two years from the date of their last conviction
under the Anti-Gang Ordinance.
   (F)   Actual notice of the requirement to register is not required. This
part is actual and constructive notice of the requirement to register. The fact
that the obligation to register is not included in the judgment and sentence
issued by a District Court is not a defense against a charge of a failure to
register.
   (G)   APD shall conduct address verification checks to substantiate that
registrants are living where they claim to live. The check shall verify that
the claimed address exists and that the registrant in fact lives at the claimed
address. Any registrant who does not live where claimed commits a violation of
this part.
(Ord. 28-2007) Penalty, see §
11-9-3-99
§ 11-9-3-6 NOTIFICATION.
   APD shall maintain a local registry and forward registration information to
the Bernalillo County Sheriff's Office and the New Mexico Department of Public
Safety. APD will maintain a data base of registrants. APD shall make available
and disseminate registrant information on an Internet website which shall
include photographs of the registrants. APD shall delete from the registry
information about any registrant who has not been convicted of a violation of
the Anti-Gang Ordinance in the preceding two years. The city shall have no
liability for any delay in deleting registry information.
(Ord. 28-2007)
§ 11-9-3-7 GANG PREVENTION AND INTERVENTION PROGRAMS.
   Any registrant who successfully completes a city approved program of gang
prevention and intervention shall be deleted from the city's registry. The
Mayor shall adopt regulations for determining minimal standards for approval of
a program of gang prevention and intervention and for determining when a
registrant has successfully completed such a program. The city shall have no
liability for any delay in creating these regulations or for any delay in
deleting registry information.
(Ord. 28-2007)
§ 11-9-3-99 PENALTY.
   The penalty for a violation of this part is up to $500 and 90 days in jail
as provided by §
1-1-99 ROA 1994. Each day a registrant should have been registered but failed
to register is a separate petty misdemeanor offense as provided by §
1-1-99 ROA 1994. Each day of a continuing violation is a separate offense.
(Ord. 28-2007)
ARTICLE 10: TRUANCY
Section
   
11-10-1   Intent
   
11-10-2   Short title
   
11-10-3   Findings
   
11-10-4   Definitions
   
11-10-5   Offenses
   
11-10-6   Exemptions
 
   
11-10-99   Penalty
§ 11-10-1 INTENT.
   The public purpose of this article is to provide for the protection of
juveniles from each other and from other persons, for the enforcement of
parental control of and responsibility for their children, for the protection
of the general public, and for the reduction of the incidence of juvenile
criminal activities pursuant to the city's power to promote the health, safety
and general welfare of its citizens.
(Ord. 48-1996)
§ 11-10-2 SHORT TITLE.
   This article may be cited as the "Truancy Ordinance."
(Ord. 48-1996)
§ 11-10-3 FINDINGS.
   The City Council makes the following findings:
   (A)   City residents find problems associated with youth gangs are a major
problem facing the city; and
   (B)   It has been found that truancy is a high indicator of gang
involvement;
   (C)   The city is confronted by rising juvenile violence, juvenile gang
activity, and an increasing number of high school drop outs; and
   (D)   The crimes being committed by juveniles include serious offenses such
as murders, drive by shootings, drug-related crimes and other gang-related
activities; and
   (E)   Juveniles are particularly susceptible by their lack of maturity and
experience to participate in unlawful and gang-related activities and to be
victims of older perpetrators of crime.
(Ord. 48-1996)
§ 11-10-4 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this article, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   QUALIFIED STUDENT. A person as defined in Section 22-8-2 NMSA 1978 and any
person who because of his age is eligible to be a qualified student as defined
in Section 22-12-2 NMSA 1978, and/or a person who at the time of the offense is
enrolled in kindergarten through twelfth grade.
   PARENT.     A person who is:
      (1)   A natural parent, adoptive parent, or step parent of a qualified
student.
      (2)   At least 18 years of age and authorized by a parent or guardian to
have the care and custody of a qualified student.
   GUARDIAN.
      (1)   A person who, under court order, is the guardian of the person of a
qualified student; or
      (2)   A public or private agency with whom a qualified student has been
placed by a court.
(Ord. 48-1996)
§ 11-10-5 OFFENSES.
   (A)   A qualified student who is subject to compulsory education or to
compulsory continuing/alternative education pursuant to Section 22-12-2 NMSA
1978 is guilty of an offense if he is in or upon public streets, public places,
places of amusement and eating places, vacant lots or any unsupervised place,
including a private residence during the hours when the qualified student's
school is in session. A person shall be excused from the compulsory education
requirement if:
      (1)   The person is specifically exempted by law from the provisions of
this article;
      (2)   The person has graduated from a high school;
      (3)   The person is at least 16 years of age and has been excused by the
local school board or its authorized representative upon a finding that the
person will be employed in a gainful trade or occupation or engaged in an
alternative form of education sufficient for the person's educational needs and
the parent or other person having custody and control consents;
      (4)   With consent of the parent or person having custody and control of
the person to be excused, the person is excused from the provisions of this
section by the superintendent of schools of the school district in which the
person is a resident and the person is under eight years of age; or
      (5)   The person is judged, based on standards and procedures adopted by
the state board, to be unable to benefit from instruction because of learning
disabilities or mental, physical or emotional conditions.
This article shall not apply to qualified students who are in public places in
conjunction with a field trip or program conducted by the student's school or
who have been excused pursuant to their school's policies or regulations.
   (B)   A parent or guardian of a qualified student is guilty of an offense if
he knowingly permits the qualified student to be in violation of division (A)
of this section.
(Ord. 48-1996)
Penalty, see § 11-10-99
§ 11-10-6 EXEMPTIONS.
   Nothing in this article shall be construed to apply to home schools
established as specified in Home School Requirements (22-1-2.1A NMSA 1978).
(Ord. 48-1996)
§ 11-10-99 PENALTY.
   Any person who violates any provision of this article shall, upon
conviction, be subject to a fine not exceeding $50 for the first offense, $75
for the second offense and $100 for the third offense or up to five days
imprisonment for the second and subsequent offenses.
(Ord. 48-1996)
ARTICLE 11: PREMISE LIABILITY
Section
   
11-11-1   Intent
   
11-11-2   Short title
   
11-11-3   Findings
   
11-11-4   Definitions
   
11-11-5   Offenses
   
11-11-6   Exemptions
 
   
11-11-99   Penalty
§ 11-11-1 INTENT.
   The public purpose of this article is to provide for the protection of
juveniles from each other and from other persons, for the enforcement of
parental control of and responsibility for their children, for the enforcement
of occupant control of and responsibility for activities on the occupant’s
premises, for the protection of the general public, and for the reduction of
the incidence of juvenile criminal activities pursuant to the city's power to
promote the health, safety and general welfare of its citizens.
(Ord. 16-2000)
§ 11-11-2 SHORT TITLE.
   This article may be cited as the "Premise Liability Ordinance."
(Ord. 16-2000)
§ 11-11-3 FINDINGS.
   The City Council makes the following findings:
   (A)   City residents find problems associated with youth gatherings at
premises where the use of illegal drugs and/or consumption of intoxicating
liquors is taking place are a major problem facing the city; and
   (B)   The city is confronted by rising juvenile violence in connection with
the premises where such activities are permitted; and
   (C)   The crimes being committed by juveniles at these premises include
serious offenses such as murders, drive by shootings and drug-related
activities; and
   (D)   Juveniles are particularly susceptible by their lack of maturity and
experience to participate in unlawful activities and to be victims of crime at
premises where unlawful activities are permitted.
(Ord. 16-2000)
§ 11-11-4 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this article, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   GUARDIAN.
      (1)   A person who, under court order, is the guardian of the person of a
qualified student; or
      (2)   A public or private agency with whom a qualified student has been
placed by a court.
   OCCUPANT. Any person who is in possession of real property and has a right
to occupy and/or exert control over the real property whether or not the true
owner. This includes, but is not limited to, owner, lessee, tenant, renter, or
persons over the age of eighteen (18) entrusted to maintain control over the
property.
   PARENT.     A person who is:
      (1)   A natural parent, adoptive parent, or step parent of a qualified
student.
      (2)   At least 18 years of age and authorized by a parent or guardian to
have the care and custody of a qualified student.
(Ord. 16-2000)
§ 11-11-5 OFFENSES.
   Any occupant of property within Albuquerque city limits who knew or should
have known that property within their care and control is used to provide,
offer, or permit the usage of illegal drugs, or whose property is not subject
to the "Liquor Control Act" 60-7B-1 through 60-7B-13 NMSA 1978, and whose
property is used to provide, offer, or permit the consumption of intoxicating
liquors by three or more persons who are under the age of twenty-one (21)
without their parent's or guardian's knowledge or consent or the order of a
practicing physician, or as part of a religious ceremony, and who have failed
to use reasonable control and ordinary care to keep persons under the age of
twenty-one (21) from consuming intoxicating liquors on their property is in
violation of this ordinance.
(Ord. 16-2000)
§ 11-11-6 EXEMPTIONS.
   Foster parents are exempt from this ordinance. Nothing in this ordinance
shall limit the recovery of damages pursuant to guest host liability.
(Ord. 16-2000)
§ 11-11-99 PENALTY.
   Any person who violates any provision of this article shall, upon
conviction, be subject to a fine of $300 for the first offense, $500 for the
second offense and up to ten consecutive days of imprisonment for the third
offense.
(Ord. 16-2000)
ARTICLE 12: SEXUAL OFFENDERS
Section
Part 1: Sexual Offender Employer Notification
   
11-12-1-1   Findings and intent
   
11-12-1-2   Short title
   
11-12-1-3   Defined terms
   
11-12-1-4   Employer notification requirements
   
11-12-1-99   Penalty
Part 2: Albuquerque Sex Offender Registration and Notification Act
   
11-12-2-1   Findings and intent
   
11-12-2-2   Short title
   
11-12-2-3   Definitions
   
11-12-2-4   Registration requirements for sex offenders
   
11-12-2-5   Registrant regulations
   
11-12-2-6   Notification
   
11-12-2-7   General provisions and offenses
   
11-12-2-8   Immunity
   
11-12-2-99   Penalty
PART 1: SEXUAL OFFENDER EMPLOYER NOTIFICATION
§ 11-12-1-1 FINDINGS AND INTENT.
   (A)   The Council finds that many sex offenders pose a significant risk to
the health and safety of inhabitants of the City of Albuquerque. The Council
finds that public safety will be improved if employers know that current
employees or prospective employees are probationary convicted sex offenders.
The Council finds that approximately half of the convicted sex offenders who
will re-offend will do so during the first five years after they have been
released from incarceration or convicted and that five years is a typical
probationary period. The Council further finds that this article is a remedial
article designed to protect occupants of the City of Albuquerque. The Council
further finds this article is the most narrowly tailored means of furthering
compelling governmental interests.
   (B)   The Council finds that the protection of the victims and potential
victims of sex offenders in Albuquerque is a matter of unique local concern not
fully and adequately addressed by state law. The Council finds that statewide
offenders move to Albuquerque from smaller towns and rural areas in New Mexico
to seek the relative anonymity and employment opportunities available in a
larger city. The Council finds that there is an influx of sex offenders into
the City of Albuquerque which in part, may result from the fact that treatment
opportunities are available in Albuquerque which may not be available in other
parts of the state. The Council finds that the disclosure required hereunder
provides the employer with information not currently available pursuant to
registration under state law and information that will assist the employer in
protecting children who may be in the proximity of a sex offender in the scope
of employment.
   (C)   The Council finds that probation is a privilege and not a right, and
that the State of New Mexico exercises continuing jurisdiction over
probationers and requires probationers to comply with any and all existing laws
including municipal ordinances. The Council finds that probationers have
adequate existing opportunities to challenge conditions of probation imposed by
courts or probation officers, and that the State of New Mexico provides
adequate due process before a sex offender probationer is tasked with or
ordered to obey any condition pertaining to that probationer's access to
children.
   (D)   The Council's decision to require sex offenders to notify employers as
required under this article is based on the enhanced public safety that will
result if employers know that a probationary sex offender is not supposed to
have access to children at work and otherwise. The City of Albuquerque has not
assessed the specific risk of reoffense of any particular individual sex
offender or class of sex offenders and has made no determination regarding the
current dangerousness or degree of dangerousness of any individual sex offender
or class of sex offenders. The City Council does not intend for any person to
use the information required by this article to harm any sex offender and
recognizes the value of employment to the reintegration of sex offenders into
society.
(Ord. 36-2003)
§ 11-12-1-2 SHORT TITLE.
   This article shall be referred to as "Marissa's Sunshine Law" or the
"Employer Notification Ordinance."
(Ord. 36-2003)
§ 11-12-1-3 DEFINED TERMS.
   For the purposes of this article, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ADULT. Any person 18 years of age or older.
   CHILD or CHILDREN. Persons under 18 years of age unless the applicable
criminal statute defining the criminal offense applies to children younger than
18 in which case the younger age shall control. The singular and plural shall
include one another.
   EMPLOYER. Any individual, partnership, association, corporation, business
trust, legal representative or organized group of persons paying wages or any
form of compensation to any person for services that directly or indirectly
benefit the individual, partnership, association, corporation, business trust,
legal representative or organized group of persons. The term EMPLOYER shall
include but not be limited to any place of business under the Business
Registration Ordinance, §§
13-1-1 et seq. ROA 1994.
   HE. He or she.
   HIS. His or her.
   NMSA. The most current version of a statute compiled in New Mexico Statutes
Annotated.
   PROBATIONARY SEX OFFENDER. A sex offender who has been convicted of a sex
offense against a child and is on probation.
   ROA 1994. The Revised Ordinances of Albuquerque, New Mexico 1994.
   SEX OFFENDER. Shall have the same meaning the term has under § 29-11A-3(A)
NMSA 1978 (Repl. Pamp. 2001).
   SEX OFFENSE. Shall have the same meaning the term has under § 29-11A-3(B)
NMSA 1978 (Repl. Pamp. 2001).
(Ord. 36-2003)
§ 11-12-1-4 EMPLOYER NOTIFICATION REQUIREMENTS.
   Within twenty-four hours from the effective date of this article, a
probationary sex offender shall notify his current employer that he is a
probationary sex offender. At the time a probationary sex offender applies for
or receives an offer of employment, the probationary sex offender shall notify
the prospective employer that he is a probationary sex offender. All
probationary sex offenders shall provide the employer or prospective employer
with the current conditions of probation in writing in a form issued or
approved by the Department of Probation and Parole or District Court including,
if applicable, any conditions of probation that require the probationary sex
offender to stay away from children or contain any reference to children.
(Ord. 36-2003)
§ 11-12-1-99 PENALTY.
   Each violation of this article is a separate violation of §
1-1-99 ROA 1994. Without limitation on the foregoing, each day that passes when
a probationary sex offender should have notified but failed to notify the
employer, as required hereunder, is a separate offense.
(Ord. 36-2003)
PART 2: ALBUQUERQUE SEX OFFENDER REGISTRATION AND NOTIFICATION ACT
§ 11-12-2-1 FINDINGS AND INTENT.
   (A)   The City Council finds that many sex offenders pose a significant risk
to the health and safety of inhabitants of the City of Albuquerque. The Council
further finds that these offenders will likely re-offend and that treatment and
rehabilitation efforts are largely ineffective. The City Council finds that a
more comprehensive local counterpart of the New Mexico Sex Offender
Registration and Notification Act which includes regulations and requirements
in addition to registration will help prevent offender exploitation of
exceptions in existing laws and provide additional safety for Albuquerque
inhabitants. The City Council further finds that §§
11-12-2-1 et seq. are remedial sections designed to protect occupants of the
City of Albuquerque. The City Council further finds §§
11-12-2-1 et seq. to be the most narrowly tailored means of furthering
compelling governmental interests. Sections
11-12-2-1 et seq. hereby conform to a memorandum opinion entered on January 30,
2004 in American Civil Liberties Union of New Mexico and John Does 1-4 v. City
of Albuquerque, No. CV-2003-8803.
   (B)   The City Council finds that the protection of the victims and
potential victims of sex offenders in Albuquerque is a matter of unique local
concern not fully and adequately addressed by the New Mexico Sex Offender
Registration and Notification Act. The City Council finds that statewide
offenders move to Albuquerque from smaller towns and rural areas in New Mexico
to seek treatment, housing, employment and the solace of anonymity available in
a larger population. The City Council finds that the evidence on sex offender
recidivism and victim impact which was heard by the City Council on March 17,
2003 and April 7, 2003 pertaining to the Sex Offender Alert Program, Bill No.
F/S O-03-92, Enactment No. 19-2003, and in the hearings pertaining to F/S O-03-
125, Enactment No. 43-2003, is pertinent herein and therefore incorporated by
reference. The City Council finds that statewide registration laws do not
entirely occupy the field of sex offender registration and further finds
precedent for local versions of registration laws and measures based on the
unique local concerns reflected in local laws passed by other local
governments.
(Ord. 43-2003; Am. Ord. 17-2004)
§ 11-12-2-2 SHORT TITLE.
   Sections
11-12-2-1 et seq. shall be referred to as the Albuquerque Sex Offender
Registration and Notification Act or "ASORNA."
(Ord. 43-2003; Am. Ord. 17-2004)
§ 11-12-2-3 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purposes of §§
11-12-2-1 et seq., the following definitions shall apply unless the context
clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ADULT. Any person 18 years of age or older.
   APD. The Albuquerque Police Department.
   ASORNA VIOLATIONS. Violations of §§
11-12-2-1 et seq..
   CHILD or CHILDREN. Persons under 18 years of age. The singular and plural
shall include one another. If the applicable statute defining a crime against a
child refers to a child younger than 18, the younger age shall control.
   CITY. The geographical limits of the City of Albuquerque and the City of
Albuquerque municipal corporation.
   EXTENDED STAY ESTABLISHMENT. Any hotel, motel, rooming house, inn, rooming
unit, bed and breakfast, residence inn, country inn, motor court, R-V park or
motor lodge that lets or provides any space for occupancy by any person. Any
place of business that provides services or utilities to motor-homes,
recreational vehicles, trucks with campers or any other motor vehicle in which
an individual does or may sleep overnight is an EXTENDED STAY ESTABLISHMENT
under ASORNA.
   HIS. His or her.
   HOMELESS ADULT. Any adult who has been in the city for more than 24 hours or
intends to be in the city for more than 24 hours without a residence or place
of lodging.
   HOMELESS SHELTER. Any structure that provides temporary housing to a
homeless adult.
   INTERNET. An interactive computer service or system or an information
service, system or access software provider that provides or enables computer
access by multiple users to a computer server and includes, but is not limited
to, an information service, system or access software provider that provides
access to a network system commonly known as the Internet, or any comparable
system or service and also includes, but is not limited to, a World Wide Web
page, newsgroup, message board, mailing list, or chat area on any interactive
computer service or system or other on-line service. The City Internet shall
mean any Internet site made available by the city to the public.
   NMSA. The most current version of a statute compiled in New Mexico Statutes
Annotated.
   OUTSIDE NEW MEXICO. Anywhere outside the geographical borders of New Mexico
or any federal enclave, Indian trust lands or reservations located inside the
geographical borders of New Mexico.
   REGISTRANT. Any person required to register under ASORNA.
   REGISTRATION YEAR. One year from the date of first registration under
ASORNA.
   RESIDENT. Any person who (1) lives in the city in any apartment or home, (2)
has a usual place of abode in the city, (3) is domiciled in the city or (4)
temporarily present in the city and staying at a homeless shelter or an
extended stay establishment.
   RESPONSIBLE ADULT. An adult who is not a sex offender.
   SCHOOL. A licensed or accredited public, private or religious school that
offers instruction to students in kindergarten through any grade up to grade
twelve.
   SEX OFFENDER. An adult who: (1) is a resident of the city who is convicted
of a sex offense against a child in New Mexico or, (2) changes his residence to
the city after that person has been convicted of a sex offense against a child
or offense substantially similar to a sex offense against a child outside New
Mexico, (3) is a resident of the city who is convicted of a sex offense against
a child or offense substantially similar to a sex offense against a child
outside New Mexico or (4) is a sex offender who is convicted of a sex offense
against a child or offense substantially similar to a sex offense against a
child outside New Mexico and is temporarily in the city for more than three
consecutive days at any time or an aggregate of ten or more days in a
registration year.
   SEX OFFENSE. Shall have the same meaning the term has under § 29-11A-3(B)
NMSA 1978 (Repl. Pamp. 2001) except that ASORNA includes only offenses against
children and not offenses against adults.
   SEX OFFENDER VIOLATION. A violation of any law defined as a sex offense
above or a violation of ASORNA.
   SORNA. The New Mexico Sex Offender Registration and Notification Act, §§ 29-
11A-1 NMSA as amended from time to time.
   WARD. A child who has a legal guardian.
(Ord. 43-2003; Am. Ord. 17-2004)
§ 11-12-2-4 REGISTRATION REQUIREMENTS FOR SEX OFFENDERS.
   (A)   Sex offenders who were convicted after January 1, 1970 must register
with APD.
   (B)   A sex offender must register with APD within ten days after being
released from incarceration, or ten days from the date of sentencing if not
incarcerated, for a sex offender violation. ASORNA includes only offenses
against children and not offenses against adults. A registrant under this
section must provide APD with the following information:
      (1)   His legal name, any other names or aliases he has used or is using
and any new names he has applied for in the last year.
      (2)   His date of birth.
      (3)   His social security number.
      (4)   His current address, the address of any other residences he owns or
the address of any other real property he owns or leases and the address of any
other locations or places of lodging where the sex offender intends to stay or
does in fact stay for more than three consecutive days at any time or an
aggregate of ten or more days in a registration year. Homeless shelters and
extended stay establishments must be included in the disclosure required
pursuant to this paragraph. Pursuant to this paragraph, the registrant must
provide a description and location of any and all rented or owned spaces to
which the registrant claims a right to privacy or a right to exclude others
including but not limited to storage buildings.
      (5)   His place of employment and the name and telephone number of a
contact person who knows his location at any and all times during employment
hours or other times he performs work in the scope of his employment duties.
      (6)   His driver's license number and the license plate number, vehicle
identification number and description by make and model of all vehicles
registered to him, owned by him, driven by him during employment or otherwise
available to him with regularity by consent from another.
      (7)   A list of any and all sex offense violations and ASORNA violations
including the date and location of the offenses listed in this paragraph.
(Ord. 43-2003; Am. Ord. 17-2004)
§ 11-12-2-5 REGISTRANT REGULATIONS.
   (A)   Any sex offender who provides inaccurate information to the city has
committed a separate violation of ASORNA.
   (B)   In the event of any change in registration information or addition of
new information that would have been required in the initial or subsequent
registration other than a change of address or employment governed by
paragraphs (C) or (D) below, the registrant must notify APD and provide new
valid information within three days of the time the new information becomes
known or should be known by the registrant.
   (C)   A sex offender who is required to register under ASORNA and elects to
change the address of any place of lodging including but not limited to a
residence, extended stay establishment or homeless shelter must notify APD of
the prospective change before the change occurs.
   (D)   A sex offender who is required to register under ASORNA and changes
his place of employment must notify APD ten days before the voluntary change
occurs or five days after the change is forced or compelled. Sex offenders must
provide the name and telephone number of a new contact person within ten days
of the time new work begins.
   (E)   When a sex offender registers under ASORNA, APD shall take and retain
their photograph and a set of fingerprints. Additionally, APD may record and
retain the person's shoe size, a DNA sample, dental imprints and a description
of tattoos, scars and other identifying features that would assist in
identifying the sex offender.
   (F)   Following the initial registration, ASORNA registrants, except
homeless adults, are required to annually renew the registration before
December 31 of each subsequent calendar year for 20 years. Homeless adults
residing from time to time in homeless shelters must verify registration data
in writing every 90 days as long as they are in the city on a form provided by
APD. Sex offenders who have been convicted of two or more sex offenses or
ASORNA violations must register for life.
   (G)   If any person receives a deferred sentence from any court for a sex
offense that would otherwise trigger ASORNA registration, that person must
register as if convicted unless they obtain an order from a court of competent
jurisdiction which, after an evidentiary hearing on the issue, rules that
registration is not required on the grounds that registration would grossly
prejudice their rights. If the charges are dismissed against the person at the
completion of the deferred sentence, the person does not have to renew
registration in subsequent registration years.
   (H)   Any sex offender currently incarcerated in a correctional institution
and temporarily at large and free to move about in the city is required to
register under ASORNA ten days before each release date. This paragraph
includes but is not limited to persons on probation, parole, furlough, work
release or any similar program that results in or causes the person to be
outside the confines of the institution for any reason.
(Ord. 43-2003; Am. Ord. 17-2004)
§ 11-12-2-6 NOTIFICATION.
   APD shall maintain a local registry and forward registration information to
the Bernalillo County Sheriff's Office and the New Mexico Department of Public
Safety no later than 90 consecutive calendar days after receipt of the
information by APD. The City of Albuquerque will maintain a data base of sex
offenders distinct from SORNA but may share SORNA data. Registration under
SORNA does not exempt a sex offender from registration under ASORNA. The City
of Albuquerque will make available and disseminate sex offender registration on
the City of Albuquerque Megan's Law Website on the Internet. Inclusion of a sex
offender in and on the city's data base and website is based solely on the fact
of a prior conviction and not based on any assessment of the current degree of
dangerousness posed by any particular sex offender. The website will
conspicuously include the following statement: "The City's decision to post Sex
Offenders on this website is based on the fact that the Sex Offender was
convicted of a Sex Offense in the past. The City of Albuquerque has not
assessed the specific risk posed by any particular individual Sex Offender or
class of Sex Offenders and has made no determination regarding the current
dangerousness or degree of dangerousness of any individual Sex Offender or
class of Sex Offenders. The main purpose of providing this data on the Internet
is to make the information more easily available and accessible, not to warn
about any specific individual."
(Ord. 43-2003; Am. Ord. 17-2004)
§ 11-12-2-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS AND OFFENSES.
   (A)   City Contractors. All persons or entities that enter contracts with
the city and employ any person that may be alone with a child within the scope
of the performance of the contract shall conduct a background search of any and
all such employees and compare the background search to any applicable ASORNA
registration information. Any failure by the contractor to comply is a material
breach of the contract and entitles the city to terminate the contract. This
paragraph includes but is not limited to 501(C)(3) entities and charitable
entities. Any person or entity this paragraph applies to shall notify APD
immediately if that person or entity has or obtains any information about any
ASORNA registrant that does not conform with the information the registrant
provided to the city pursuant to ASORNA.
   (B)   Address Verification Checks. APD shall conduct address verification
checks to substantiate that registrants are living where they claim to live.
The check shall verify that the claimed address exists and that the registrant
in fact lives at the claimed address. If APD is unable to verify the address,
the registrant may be contacted by mail or otherwise and ordered to submit a
sworn affidavit to APD that the registrant in fact lives at the claimed
address. APD may contact and interview any person living or located near the
claimed address. The provisions of this paragraph are in addition to any other
lawful investigation APD may undertake.
   (C)   Sex Offender Location. After the effective date of ASORNA, sex
offenders shall not newly occupy any real property, acquire any real property
by lease or otherwise or establish a place of lodging within 1000 feet of a
school.
(Ord. 43-2003; Am. Ord. 17-2004)
§ 11-12-2-8 IMMUNITY.
   Nothing in ASORNA creates a cause of action against the city not already
authorized under existing law. Without limitation, the city is not liable to
any person harmed who claims that ASORNA notice may have prevented the harm.
(Ord. 43-2003; Am. Ord. 17-2004)
§ 11-12-2-99 PENALTY.
   Each violation of ASORNA is a separate violation of §
1-1-99 ROA 1994. The city is also entitled to injunctive relief to enforce
ASORNA provisions. It is the intent of the City Council that ASORNA violations
should not be treated by the Courts as lesser included offenses that merge into
a SORNA violation. Each day a registrant should have but failed to register or
supplement registration information under ASORNA is a separate violation of
ASORNA.
(Ord. 43-2003; Am. Ord. 17-2004)
ARTICLE 13: PUBLICATION OF PERSONS CONVICTED OF DRIVING UNDER THE INFLUENCE
Section
   
11-13-1   Publication of names, photographs and related information [of all
persons convicted of or entering a plea of nolo contendere to the offense of
driving under the influence of intoxicating liquor or drugs]
§ 11-13-1 PUBLICATION OF NAMES, PHOTOGRAPHS AND RELATED INFORMATION [OF ALL
PERSONS CONVICTED OF OR ENTERING A PLEA OF NOLO CONTENDERE TO THE OFFENSE OF
DRIVING UNDER THE INFLUENCE OF INTOXICATING LIQUOR OR DRUGS].
   (A)   The Police Department shall cause to be published on a weekly, bi-
monthly or monthly basis the names and photographs of all persons convicted of
or entering a plea of nolo contendere to driving under the influence of
intoxicating liquor or drugs in either the Bernalillo Metropolitan or Second
Judicial District Court. Publication shall be in print form in a newspaper of
general circulation in the City of Albuquerque or by posting on the portion of
the City of Albuquerque’s web site that is accessible to the general public.
Funds to carry out the purpose and intent of this subsection shall come from
the proceeds of the sale of motor vehicles seized and sold under the provisions
of Article 6 of Chapter 7 ROA 1994, which funds are intended to be used for DWI
enforcement, prevention and education.
   (B)   The Council shall evaluate the effectiveness of this article twelve
months after the publication and/or posting of names and photographs required
by this article begins.
(Ord. 9-2006)
ARTICLE 14: [REPEALED]
CHAPTER 12: CRIMINAL CODE
   Article
      
1:   GENERAL PROVISIONS
      
2:   OFFENSES RELATING TO PUBLIC ORDER AND SAFETY
      
3:   OFFENSES RELATING TO PROPERTY
      
4:   OFFENSES RELATING TO MORALS
      
5:   OFFENSES RELATING TO MINORS
ARTICLE 1: GENERAL PROVISIONS
Section
   
12-1-1   Short title
   
12-1-2   Limitations of actions
   
12-1-3   Jurisdiction
   
12-1-4   Definitions
   
12-1-5   Exceptions
 
   
12-1-99   Penalty
§ 12-1-1 SHORT TITLE.
   This chapter may be cited as "Criminal Code of Albuquerque."
('74 Code, § 12-1-1-1) (Ord. 96-1973)
§ 12-1-2 LIMITATIONS OF ACTIONS.
   All prosecutions for the alleged violation of this code shall be commenced
within one year after the alleged violation and shall be barred thereafter.
('74 Code, § 12-1-1-2) (Ord. 96-1973)
§ 12-1-3 JURISDICTION.
   This code applies only to offenses committed within the city limits as those
limits may from time to time be established.
('74 Code, § 12-1-1-3) (Ord. 96-1973)
§ 12-1-4 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ANYTHING OF VALUE. Any conceivable thing of a slightest value, tangible or
intangible, movable or immovable, corporeal or incorporeal, public or private.
The term is not necessarily synonymous with the traditional legal term
"property."
   BAILIFF. Any employee of the Municipal Court of the city who is designated
by the Presiding Judge of the Municipal Court as a bailiff.
   CITY. The city of Albuquerque.
   CORRECTIONS OFFICER. Employees of the Corrections-Detention Department who
are designated as corrections officers by the Director of the Department of
Corrections-Detention or his designated representative.
   COURT. The Municipal Court of the city.
   CRIMINAL SEXUAL CONTACT OF A MINOR. Unlawfully and intentionally touching or
applying force to the intimate parts of a minor other than one's spouse or
unlawfully and intentionally causing a minor, other than one's spouse to touch
one's intimate parts. For purposes of this section, INTIMATE PARTS means the
primary genital area, groin, buttock, anus, or breast.
   CRIMINAL SEXUAL PENETRATION. The unlawful and intentional causing of a
person, other than one's spouse, to engage in sexual intercourse, cunnilingus,
fellatio or anal intercourse, or the causing of penetration, to any extent and
with any object, of the genital or anal openings of another, whether or not
there is any emission.
   DRUG. Any chemical substance or compound either natural or synthetic having
a psychological and/or mind altering effect on its users including, but not
limited to, intoxicating liquor, narcotic drug, depressant drug, hallucinogenic
drug, stimulant drug, and the fumes of paint or glue.
   FIREFIGHTER. Any person who is so designated by the Chief of the Albuquerque
Fire Department or his designated representative.
   HOUSE OF PROSTITUTION. Any place where prostitution or promotion of
prostitution is carried on.
   MAYOR. The Mayor or his designated representative.
   MEDICAL FACILITY. A licensed hospital, diagnostic and treatment center, or
outpatient surgical center; or an office or clinic providing medical care under
the supervision of a licensed health professional.
   NEIGHBORHOOD PARKS. A park which is normally less than five acres in area
and which has been designated by resolution. Such neighborhood park shall be
posted by the mayor or his designated representative as a park in which
drinking alcoholic liquors is prohibited.
   PEACE OFFICER. Campus security officers, police officers and any other
public official or public officer vested by law with a duty to maintain public
order or to make arrests for crime, whether that duty extends to all crimes or
is limited to specific crimes.
   PERSON. Includes, but is not limited to, any natural person, whether over or
under 21 years of age, firm, partnership, association, corporation, company or
organization of any kind.
   POSSESS. Any manner of custody, control or ownership, no matter how
initiated.
   PROBATION OFFICER. Any employee of the Municipal Court who is designated by
the Presiding Judge of the Municipal Court as a probation officer.
   PROSTITUTE. A person who:
      (1)   Engages in or offers to engage in sexual intercourse for hire.
      (2)   Takes or offers to take into his or her mouth or anus, the sexual
organ of another for hire.
      (3)   Places or offers to place his or her sexual organ into the mouth or
anus of another for hire.
      (4)   Masturbates or offers to masturbate the sexual organ of another for
hire.
   PUBLIC PLACE. Includes, but is not limited to, public dance halls, pool
rooms, bars, saloons, bowling alleys, restaurants, commercial establishments
patronized by the public, city public schools, county, state or federal
property, streets, sidewalks, parks, alleys and parking lots.
   PUBLIC VIEW PLACE. An area generally visible to public view: alleys,
bridges, buildings, grounds, driveways, parking lots, parks, plazas, sidewalks,
and streets, which area is open to the general public.
   SEXUAL INTERCOURSE. Penetration of the vagina of a female to any extent by
the penis of a male. Proof of sexual intercourse does not require proof of
emission.
   SHALL. Mandatory and not merely directory.
('74 Code, § 12-1-1-4) (Ord. 96-1973; Am. Ord. 78-1978; Am. Ord. 43-1988; Am.
Ord. 55-1990)
§ 12-1-5 EXCEPTIONS.
   In all prosecutions under the code in which the defense is based on an
exception or exemption, the burden shall be on the defendant to present
sufficient evidence to raise a reasonable doubt as to such defense, and then
the burden shall shift to the prosecution to prove the absence of the exception
or exemption just as any other element of the offense.
('74 Code, § 12-1-1-6) (Ord. 96-1973; Am. Ord. 78-1978)
§ 12-1-99 PENALTY.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful to commit any of the acts set forth in Articles
2, 3, 4 and 5 of this chapter.
   (B)   Any person convicted of a violation of this code for which no other
penalty is set forth shall be subject to the penalty provisions set forth in §
1-1-99 of this code of ordinances, unless a different specific penalty is
provided.
   (C)   Upon conviction of a violation of §§
12-2-8,
12-2-9, or
12-2-10, in addition to any other penalties, the weapon or weapons shall be
forfeited to the city upon order of the Court.
   (D)   Any person who violates §
12-4-10 is guilty of a crime and upon conviction shall be subject to the
penalty provisions set forth in §
1-1-99 of this code of ordinances. ('74 Code, § 12-1-4-11 (part))
   (E)   Any money seized as a result of a violation of §
12-4-12 shall be retained by the Mayor until such property is disposed of by
order of the Court, which may include forfeiture of any such money to the city.
   (F)   Any fireworks, gambling devices, or other equipment of any kind used
in gambling and any money seized in connection with any gambling or gambling
equipment shall be retained by the Mayor until such property is disposed of by
order of the Court, which may include forfeiture of any such equipment to the
city.
   (G)   The court may sentence any corporation, club, organization or
unincorporated association which has been convicted of a violation of this code
to pay a fine authorized by said code.
('74 Code, § 12-1-1-5) (Ord. 96-1973; Am. Ord. 78-1978; Am. Ord. 32-1981; Am.
Ord. 5-1992; Am. Ord._2018-005)
   (H)   A person who violates a provision of §
12-5-5 is guilty of a separate offense for each day or part of a day during
which the violation is committed, continued or permitted. Each offense, upon
conviction, is punishable by a fine of not more than $500, or by imprisonment
for not more than 90 days, or by both such fine and imprisonment. (Ord. 24-
1994; Am. Ord. 1-1995)
ARTICLE 2: OFFENSES RELATING TO
PUBLIC ORDER AND SAFETY
Section
   
12-2-1   Assault
   
12-2-2   Battery
   
12-2-3   Criminal trespass
   
12-2-4   Unreasonable noise
   
12-2-5   Disorderly conduct
   
12-2-6   Unlawful assembly
   
12-2-7   Obstructing movement
   
12-2-8   Unlawfully carrying deadly weapons
   
12-2-9   Negligent use of weapons
   
12-2-10   Unlawful possession, transfer or sale of weapons
   
12-2-11   Propulsion of missiles
   
12-2-12   Possession of fireworks
   
12-2-13   Removal of barricades
   
12-2-14   Unauthorized presence on school premises
   
12-2-15   False reports
   
12-2-16   Concealing identity
   
12-2-17   False alarms
   
12-2-18   Impersonating a uniformed employee of the city; unauthorized wearing
of uniform or badge
   
12-2-19   Resisting, obstructing or refusing to obey an officer
   
12-2-20   Unauthorized use of vehicle signs
   
12-2-21   Public nuisances
   
12-2-22   Escape from jail
   
12-2-23   Escape from custody of a police officer, corrections officer,
bailiff, probation officer or hospital
   
12-2-24   Assisting escape
   
12-2-25   Abuse or interference with police department animals
   
12-2-26   Picketing residences
   
12-2-27   Hate crimes
   
12-2-28   [Repealed]
   
12-2-29   Safe schools and public places
   
12-2-30   Unauthorized presence and camping in drainage channels, arroyos and
irrigation channels
§ 12-2-1 ASSAULT.
   Assault consists of either:
   (A)   An attempt to commit a battery upon the person of another; or
   (B)   Any unlawful act, threat, or menacing conduct which causes another
person to reasonably believe that he is in danger of receiving an immediate
battery; or
   (C)   The use of fighting words which by their very utterance are likely to
cause an average addressee to fight.
('74 Code, § 12-1-2-1) (Ord. 96-1973)
Penalty, see § 12-1-99
§ 12-2-2 BATTERY.
   Battery is the unlawful, intentional touching or application of force to the
person of another when done in a rude, insolent or angry manner.
('74 Code, § 12-1-2-2) (Ord. 96-1973)
Penalty, see § 12-1-99
§ 12-2-3 CRIMINAL TRESPASS.
   Criminal trespass consists of unlawfully entering or remaining upon the
lands or property of another knowing that any consent to enter or remain has
been denied or withdrawn by the person or persons lawfully in possession of the
premises or after the request or demand to leave the premises by the authorized
representative of the person or persons lawfully in possession of the premises.
('74 Code, § 12-1-2-3) (Ord. 96-1973; Am. Ord. 78-1978)
Penalty, see § 12-1-99
§ 12-2-4 UNREASONABLE NOISE.
   Unreasonable noise consists of creating any unreasonably loud, disturbing or
unnecessary noise of such character, intensity or duration as to be detrimental
to the repose, life or health of others, including but not limited to, the
following specific noises if created in violation of this section:
   (A)   The sounding of any horn or signaling device of any automobile,
motorcycle, truck or other vehicle on any street or public place, except as a
danger warning, which creates an unreasonable, loud or harsh sound or which
occurs for an unnecessary and unreasonable period of time. This is not to
include noise caused by accident or mechanical, electrical or other difficulty
or failure.
   (B)   The playing of any radio, television, phonograph, musical instrument
or other sound producing machine in such a manner or with such an unreasonable
volume as to disturb the quiet, comfort or repose of persons in any dwelling,
motel, hotel, hospital or sanitorium.
   (C)   The use of any automobile, truck, bus or motorcycle so out of repair
or so loaded or in such manner as to create loud and unnecessary grating,
grinding, rattling or other noise.
   (D)   The use of any loudspeaker, drum, whistle, bell or other instrument or
device for the purpose of attracting attention by the creation of sound to any
performance, show, sale, display or merchandise or political candidate, party
or platform without first obtaining a written permit from the Mayor or his
designated representative. The Mayor or his designated representative shall
issue such permit, subject only to such reasonable standards of noise volume
and hours of operation as he or his representative may adopt.
   (E)   The creating of any excessive noise on any street adjacent to any
hospital, school institution of learning, church or court which interferes with
the workings of such institution or which disrupts or annoys occupants of said
buildings.
('74 Code, § 12-1-2-4) (Ord. 96-1973; Am. Ord. 78-1978)
Penalty, see § 12-1-99
§ 12-2-5 DISORDERLY CONDUCT.
   Disorderly conduct consists of either:
   (A)   Engaging in any public place in violent, abusive or indecent conduct
which creates a clear and present danger of violence; or
   (B)   Maliciously making a telephone call with intent to annoy or threaten
another, whether or not conversation ensues. Any offense committed by use of a
telephone as set forth in this section shall be deemed to have been committed
at either the place where the telephone call or calls originated or at the
place where the telephone call or calls were received; or
   (C)   Maliciously disturbing, threatening or, in an insolent manner,
intentionally touching any house or vehicle occupied by any person; or
   (D)   Inciting, causing, aiding, abetting or assisting in creating any riot,
affray, or disturbance at or within any dwelling or building, whether public or
private, or at any other public place in the city; or
   (E)   Using in any public place fighting words which by their very utterance
are likely to provoke a violent reaction in an average person to whom such
words are addressed; or
   (F)   Maliciously disturbing, or threatening, or in an insolent manner,
intentionally touching or applying force to any person, in the building or
grounds of any public, private school, preschool, primary or secondary school
or college; or
   (G)   Urinating or defecating in public view on any public place or on any
private property without the consent of the person lawfully in possession of
the property.
   (H)   Failure to obey the instructions of a motor coach operator.
('74 Code, § 12-1-2-5) (Ord. 96-1973; Am. Ord. 91-1977; Am. Ord. 78-1978; Am.
Ord._2023-005) Penalty, see §
12-1-99
§ 12-2-6 UNLAWFUL ASSEMBLY.
   Unlawful assembly consists of the gathering together or assemblage of three
or more persons for a common purpose which either:
   (A)   Creates a clear and present danger or an immediate threat of
substantial harm to persons and/or property.
      (1)   When an unlawful assembly occurs, as defined in this section, an
order to disperse shall be given by a police officer in such manner as can
reasonably be expected to give actual notice of said order to persons either
directly or indirectly involved in such unlawful assembly.
      (2)   Refusal to obey an order to disperse within such time as is
reasonably required for the assemblage to physically disperse after such order
is given or willful and open resistance to said order shall constitute a
violation of this code; or
   (B)   Manifests a common intent to do any unlawful act or acts by force or
violence against the person and/or property of another. Participation in an
unlawful assembly to further such unlawful purpose shall constitute a violation
of this code.
('74 Code, § 12-1-2-6) (Ord. 96-1973) Penalty, see §
12-1-99
§ 12-2-7 OBSTRUCTING MOVEMENT.
   Obstructing movement consists of:
   (A)   Hindering or molesting persons passing along any street, sidewalk,
crosswalk, or other public way; or
   (B)   Preventing or attempting to prevent persons from entering or exiting
one of the following facilities by physically detaining a person or by
intentionally obstructing, impeding, or hindering a person's entry or exit,
which action is without the permission of a person who is in charge of the
premises affected:
      (1)    A church or other place of worship, public hall, theater, public
building, or other place of public assemblage, or
      (2)   A medical facility.
('74 Code, § 12-1-2-7) (Ord. 96-1973; Am. Ord. 43-1988; Am. Ord. 55-1990; Am.
Ord. 1-2004; Am. Ord. 21-2004)
Penalty, see § 12-1-99
§ 12-2-8 UNLAWFULLY CARRYING DEADLY WEAPONS.
   (A)   Unlawfully carrying a deadly weapon consists of carrying a deadly
weapon concealed in a manner making it not readily visible on the person or in
close proximity thereto, so that the weapon is readily accessible for use,
except:
      (1)   In the person's residence or on real property belonging to him as
owner, lessee, tenant or licensee; or
      (2)   In a private automobile or other private means of conveyance for
the lawful protection of his person or property, or the person or property of
another; or
      (3)   By a peace officer in the lawful discharge of his duties; or
      (4)   On a target range, as authorized by law.
   (B)   DEADLY WEAPON, in this section means any firearm or any weapon which
is capable of producing death or great bodily harm, including but not
restricted to, any type of dagger, metallic knuckles, switchblade, poniard,
dirk knife, sword cane, sharp pointed cane or rod, slingshot, bludgeon, knum
chucks, straight razor, or slapper.
   (C)   Nothing in this section shall be construed to prevent the carrying of
any unloaded firearm.
('74 Code, § 12-1-2-8) (Ord. 96-1973; Am. Ord. 78-1978)
Penalty, see § 12-1-99
§ 12-2-9 NEGLIGENT USE OF WEAPONS.
   (A)   Negligent use of a weapon consists of either:
      (1)   Discharging a weapon within the city limits without legal
justification; or
      (2)   Carrying or having within one's reach or immediate grasp, a deadly
weapon while under the influence of an intoxicating liquor or other drug; or
      (3)   Endangering the safety of another or his property by handling or
using a firearm or other deadly weapon in a negligent manner; or
      (4)   Selling, loaning or furnishing any deadly weapon to a person with
knowledge that the person is under the influence of alcohol or other drug or
that the person is incompetent.
   (B)   Exception for peace officers. The provisions set forth above shall not
be construed to forbid peace officers from carrying, wearing or discharging
such weapons as shall be necessary in the proper discharge of their duties.
('74 Code, § 12-1-2-9) (Ord. 96-1973; Am. Ord. 78-1978)
Penalty, see § 12-1-99
§ 12-2-10 UNLAWFUL POSSESSION, TRANSFER OR SALE OF WEAPONS.
   (A)   Unlawful possession or transfer of certain weapons consists of
possessing, selling, lending, giving away or purchasing any form of metallic
knuckles, any form of bludgeon, or any knife which has a blade which opens
automatically by hand pressure to a button, spring, or other device in the
handle of the knife or which opens or falls or is ejected into position by the
force of gravity or by an outward, downward or centrifugal thrust or movement.
   (B)   Unlawful sale of a deadly weapon consists of giving, selling, trading,
bartering, or exchanging for anything of value any deadly weapon or ammunition
for any firearm to any person under the age of 18 years; provided, however,
that nothing herein contained shall be construed to prevent any parent or legal
guardian from purchasing such a weapon or ammunition for his child or ward.
('74 Code, § 12-1-2-10) (Ord. 96-1973)
Penalty, see § 12-1-99
§ 12-2-11 PROPULSION OF MISSILES.
   Propulsion of missiles consists of shooting, slinging or throwing snowballs,
stones, rocks, pellets, BB shot or any kind of missile, object or substance
whatsoever in any manner as to be reasonably likely to cause injury to any
person or property. This provision shall not be construed to prohibit target
firing when conducted so as to secure safety of the inhabitants of the city.
Target firing may be permitted when conducted on ranges meeting the
specifications of the National Rifle Association or its equivalent upon
submitting proof that such range meets such specifications and upon obtaining a
permit from the Mayor or his designated representative based on such proof.
('74 Code, § 12-1-2-11) (Ord. 96-1973; Am. Ord. 78-1978)
Penalty, see § 12-1-99
§ 12-2-12 POSSESSION OF FIREWORKS.
   (A)   Possession of fireworks consists of either selling, offering to sell,
owning, possessing, manufacturing, transporting, or discharging any
firecracker, roman candle, skyrocket, torpedo, bomb, or any type or form of
explosive commonly known as "fireworks," unless such item has been declared by
the Fire Chief as a safe and sane device and as not dangerous to persons or
property.
   (B)   Nothing herein contained shall be held to prevent such activities as
may be authorized by compliance with the Fire Code set forth in
Chapter 14, Article 2 of this code of ordinances.
   (C)   The term FIREWORKS shall not include toy pistols, toy canes, toy guns,
or other devices in which paper caps containing twenty-five hundredths grains
or less of explosive compound are used, providing they are so constructed that
the hand cannot come in contact with the cap when in place for use, and toy
pistol paper caps which contain less than twenty-hundredths grains of explosive
mixture, the sale and use of which shall be permitted at all times.
   (D)   Safe and sane devices as approved by the Fire Chief shall be those
devices listed as approved for sale by the Fire Chief. Any device which propels
any portion, part, or projectile more than ten feet in the air or has a report
louder than the paper caps described above are not considered safe and sane.
   (E)   Nothing herein contained shall be held to apply to or prohibit any
employee of the State Game and Fish Department or the United State Fish and
Wildlife Service from possessing fireworks for control of game birds and
animals or to prohibit the city or any civic organization therein from
sponsoring and conducting, in connection with any public celebration, an
officially supervised and controlled fireworks display.
('74 Code, § 12-1-2-12) (Ord. 96-1973; Am. Ord. 78-1978)
Penalty, see § 12-1-99
§ 12-2-13 REMOVAL OF BARRICADES.
   Removal of barricades consists of knowingly or willfully removing,
destroying or interfering with any barrier, guard or light placed before or at
any dangerous place in or near the street, sidewalks or ways of the city for
the purpose of warning or protecting travelers from injury or damage; provided
that removal after the danger has ceased and temporary removal to allow the
passage of a vehicle with immediate subsequent replacement shall not be
considered unlawful.
('74 Code, § 12-1-2-14) (Ord. 96-1973)
Penalty, see § 12-1-99
§ 12-2-14 UNAUTHORIZED PRESENCE ON SCHOOL PREMISES.
   It is unlawful for any person, except students, officers or employees of the
school or persons with lawful business on the premises, to knowingly enter or
remain in the buildings, yard, or parking lot, of a public, private school,
preschool, primary or secondary school or college during regular school hours
if:
   (A)   The person is in violation of posted school regulations;
   (B)   The person intends, as evidenced by some overt act, to disrupt or
interfere with the activities of students, officers or employees on the
premises;
   (C)   The person has been denied permission to enter or remain on the
premises by the school administrator or his designated representative. It shall
be grounds for denial of permission if the person commits the acts enumerated
in divisions (A) and (B) above, is on the premises without a justifiable school
purpose, or has disrupted or interfered with activities of students, officers
or employees at any school in the city in the past.
('74 Code, § 12-1-2-15) (Ord. 96-1973; Am. Ord. 91-1977)
Penalty, see § 12-1-99
§ 12-2-15 FALSE REPORTS.
   It is unlawful for any person to intentionally make or file with any law
enforcement agency or employee of said agency, who is acting in his official
capacity, any false, misleading, or unfounded report or statement knowing at
the time it is made that said statement or report is false, unfounded or
misleading.
('74 Code, § 12-1-2-16) (Ord. 96-1973; Am. Ord. 78-1978)
Penalty, see § 12-1-99
§ 12-2-16 CONCEALING IDENTITY.
   It is unlawful for anyone to conceal one's true name or identity or disguise
oneself with the intent to obstruct due execution of the law or with the intent
to intimidate, hinder or interrupt any public officer, police officer, or any
other person in the legal performance of his or her duties.
('74 Code, § 12-1-2-17) (Ord. 96-1973)
Penalty, see § 12-1-99
§ 12-2-17 FALSE ALARMS.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to knowingly give a false alarm of need
for rescue squad or ambulance assistance.
('74 Code, § 12-1-2-18) (Ord. 96-1973; Am. Ord. 78-1978)
Penalty, see § 12-1-99
§ 12-2-18 IMPERSONATING A UNIFORMED EMPLOYEE OF THE CITY; UNAUTHORIZED WEARING
OF UNIFORM OR BADGE.
   (A)   Impersonating a uniformed employee of the city consists of any person
pretending or falsely representing himself to be that employee or official of
the city with intent to deceive another.
   (B)   Unauthorized wearing of uniform or badge consists of the wearing, or
requiring the wearing, without authorization by the Chief of Police of the
Albuquerque Police Department of a uniform or badge whose material, color or
design or any combination of them is such that the wearer appears to be a
member of the Albuquerque Police Department.
('74 Code, § 12-1-2-19) (Ord. 96-1973; Am. Ord. 78-1978)
Penalty, see § 12-1-99
§ 12-2-19 RESISTING, OBSTRUCTING OR REFUSING TO OBEY AN OFFICER.
   Resisting, obstructing or refusing to obey an officer consists of either:
   (A)   Knowingly obstructing, resisting or opposing any officer of this state
or any other duly authorized person serving or attempting to serve or execute
any process or any rule or order of any of the courts of this state or any
other judicial writ or process; or
   (B)   Knowingly obstructing, resisting or opposing any individual employed
by the city for the purposes of maintaining security within the city, city
facilities and/or the city's transit system, including city buses and bus
stops; or
   (C)   Resisting or abusing any judge, magistrate or peace officer in the
lawful discharge of his duties; or
   (D)   Refusing to obey or comply with any lawful process or order given by
any police officer acting in the lawful discharge of his duties; or
   (E)   Interfering with, obstructing or opposing any officer in the lawful
discharge of his regular and affixed duties.
('74 Code, § 12-1-2-20) (Ord. 96-1973; Am. Ord._2023-011) Penalty, see §
12-1-99
§ 12-2-20 UNAUTHORIZED USE OF VEHICLE SIGNS.
   Authorized use of vehicle signs consists of displaying on any vehicle,
whether moving or parked, the words "police," "police department," "Albuquerque
Police Department," "Department of Police," "APD," "Fire Department,"
"Albuquerque Fire Department," or words or insignia of similar import without
authority of the Mayor or his designated representative; provided that nothing
herein shall apply to any State Police, County Sheriff or County Fire
Department vehicles.
('74 Code, § 12-1-2-21) (Ord. 96-1973)
Penalty, see § 12-1-99
§ 12-2-21 PUBLIC NUISANCES.
   The following acts are hereby declared a public nuisance:
   (A)   Being concealed upon any property of another without lawful business
with the person in lawful possession of the premises.
   (B)   Entering upon any private property and looking into any occupied
dwelling without the consent of the occupant or owner of the dwelling.
('74 Code, § 12-1-2-22) (Ord. 96-1973)
Penalty, see § 12-1-99
§ 12-2-22 ESCAPE FROM JAIL.
   Escape from jail consists of any person who shall have been lawfully
committed to any jail escaping or attempting to escape from such jail or from a
work detail to which such person is assigned.
('74 Code, § 12-1-2-23) (Ord. 96-1973)
Penalty, see § 12-1-99
§ 12-2-23 ESCAPE FROM CUSTODY OF A POLICE OFFICER, CORRECTIONS OFFICER,
BAILIFF, PROBATION OFFICER OR HOSPITAL.
   (A)   Escape from the custody of a police officer, corrections officer,
bailiff, or probation officer, consists of any person who shall have been
placed under lawful arrest or who shall have been remanded to the custody of
any police officer, corrections officer, bailiff, probation officer, or the
Department of Corrections-Detention pursuant to Court order, escaping or
attempting to escape from the lawful custody or control of a police officer,
corrections officer, bailiff, probation officer, or the Department of
Corrections-Detention.
   (B)   Escape from the custody of a hospital consists of any person who shall
have been placed under lawful arrest or who shall have been remanded to the
custody of any police officer, corrections officer, bailiff, probation officer,
or the Department of Corrections-Detention pursuant to Court order, escaping or
attempting to escape from the lawful custody or control of a hospital to which
the person has been assigned.
('74 Code, § 12-1-2-24) (Ord. 96-1973; Am. Ord. 13-1978)
Penalty, see § 12-1-99
§ 12-2-24 ASSISTING ESCAPE.
   Assisting escape consists of either:
   (A)   Intentionally aiding any person confined or held in lawful custody or
confinement to escape; or
   (B)   Any officer, jailer or other employee intentionally permitting any
prisoner in his custody to escape.
('74 Code, § 12-1-2-25) (Ord. 96-1973)
Penalty, see § 12-1-99
§ 12-2-25 ABUSE OR INTERFERENCE WITH POLICE DEPARTMENT ANIMALS.
   Abuse or interference with Police Department animals consists of either:
   (A)   Willfully or maliciously torturing, tormenting, beating, kicking,
striking, mutilating, injuring, disabling or killing any animal used by any
peace officer in the performance of his duties or of the functions or duties of
the Police Department; or
   (B)   Knowingly interfering with or meddling with any such animal, or the
equipment used on or by such animal; or
   (C)   Knowingly engaging in conduct designed to agitate or distract such
animal.
('74 Code, § 12-1-2-26) (Ord. 117-1983)
Penalty, see § 12-1-99
§ 12-2-26 PICKETING RESIDENCES.
   It shall be unlawful for any person, group of persons and/or association to
engage in picketing focused on and taking place in front of or next to a
particular residence, without the express prior consent of the occupant(s).
('74 Code, § 12-1-2-27) (Ord. 5-1992)
Penalty, see § 12-1-99
§ 12-2-27 HATE CRIMES.
   (A)   Short title. This section may be cited as the “Hate Crime Ordinance.”
   (B)   Finding. The Council deems it necessary and proper to create a
specific offense and penalty for prohibited conduct involving actions that
cause damage to persons or properties and that are motivated by animus toward a
certain person because of his or her actual or perceived race, religion, color,
national origin, ancestry, gender, sexual orientation, or disability.
   (C)   Hate crime. A hate crime consists of intentionally injuring a person
or intentionally damaging his property because of the actual or perceived race,
religion, color, national origin, ancestry, gender, sexual orientation, or
disability of that person, whether or not the offender's belief or perception
was correct. As used in this section, “disability” means a physical,
developmental, or mental impairment that substantially limits one or more of a
person's functions, including caring for oneself, performing manual tasks,
walking, seeing, hearing, speaking, breathing, or learning.
   (D)   Violation. It shall be unlawful to commit a hate crime as defined in
this section.
(Ord. 2-1997)
Penalty, see § 12-1-99
§ 12-2-28 [REPEALED.]
§ 12-2-29 SAFE SCHOOLS AND PUBLIC PLACES.
   (A)   Short title. Section 12-2-29 ROA 1994 shall be known and cited as the
"Safe Schools and Public Places Ordinance".
   (B)   Definitions. For purposes of this section, the following definitions
shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different
meaning.
      CRIMINAL THREAT TO A SCHOOL OR PUBLIC PLACE. Any true threat, other than
a "bomb scare" as already proscribed under NMSA 1978 § 30-20-16, to commit
violence communicated with intent to place another in fear, or to cause the
evacuation, lock down or disruption in regular, ongoing activities of any
school building, public building or space, place of assembly or facility or
transportation, or in reckless disregard of the risk of causing such fear or
evacuation, lock down or disruption in regular, ongoing activities.
      CRIMINAL THREAT OF MASS VIOLENCE. Any threat made by any means of
communication that could reasonably lead to the harm, injury, or death of two
or more people at any place accessible to the general public including but not
limited to a school, or any place of worship, business, commerce, recreation or
entertainment.
   (C)   Criminal threats to schools or public places unlawful. It is unlawful
for any person to make or cause to be made any criminal threat to a school or
public place.
   (D)   Criminal threat of mass violence unlawful. It is unlawful for any
person or group of persons to make or cause to be made any criminal threat of
mass violence.
(Ord._2016-023; Am. Ord._2020-031)
§ 12-2-30 UNAUTHORIZED PRESENCE AND CAMPING IN DRAINAGE CHANNELS, ARROYOS AND
IRRIGATION CHANNELS.
   (A)   Definitions. For purposes of this section, the following definitions
shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different
meaning:
      ARROYO. A natural or naturalistic water course formed by the action of
fast-flowing water that is owned and maintained by a public agency.
      CAMPING. The setting up of any tent, shack, or other permanent or
temporary structure or shelter, or preparing a sleeping bag or other bedding
material for use in a water conveyance system.
      DRAINAGE CHANNEL OR PIPING. Engineered structures designed to convey
water flow that is owned, maintained or under the authority of a public agency,
and that may consist of earthen, concrete, metal, rock, brick and/or heavy-duty
plastic or other materials.
      IRRIGATION CHANNEL. An engineered waterway structure, used for the
purpose of carrying water from a source to soil used for farming or landscaping
that is owned, maintained or under the authority of a public agency, and that
may consist of earthen, concrete, metal, rock, brick and/or heavy-duty plastic
or other materials.
      PUBLIC AGENCY. The City of Albuquerque, the County of Bernalillo, the
Albuquerque Metropolitan Arroyo Flood Control Authority, or the Middle Rio
Grande Conservancy District.
      RIGHT-OF-WAY. Includes all land within the parameters of the area within
which the public agency owns, operates or maintains the drainage channel,
arroyo, irrigation channel or piping, and is not restricted to the drainage
channel, arroyo, irrigation channel, or piping.
      WATER CONVEYANCE SYSTEM. An engineered or natural channel intended to
transport water, including an arroyo, drainage channel, irrigation channel, and
piping.
   (B)   It is unlawful for any person to enter or to remain in a water
conveyance system which is owned, maintained or operated by a public agency and
which is not designated as an open space area or recreational path, except for
public safety personnel and employees of the public agency that owns, maintains
or operates said water conveyance system, or those persons authorized by such
agency.
   (C)   It is unlawful for any person to camp or loiter upon any part of the
right-of-way in which a water conveyance system owned, maintained or operated
by a public agency is located, including any portion of such right-of-way
designated as open space.
   (D)   It is unlawful for any person to remain in an open space or
recreational trail that is within the right- of-way of a water conveyance
channel after having been instructed to leave by an employee of the public
agency that controls the water conveyance system, their designated
representative, or a law enforcement official, due to a public safety issue or
to allow the agency to conduct facility maintenance.
   (E)   It is unlawful for any person to operate a motor vehicle or an off
highway vehicle in the right-of- way of a water conveyance system, that is
owned, maintained or operated by a public agency, including any water
conveyance system designated as open space or as a recreation trail, except for
public safety personnel and employees of the public agency that owns, maintains
or operates said water conveyance system, or those persons authorized by such
agency.
   (F)   The penalties set forth in §
12-1-99 shall apply for a violation of this section; provided, however, that a
law enforcement officer, shall first verify that a written warning has been
issued, otherwise, the officer shall issue a Criminal Trespass Notification to
a person for violating this section prior to the issuing of a citation or
conducting an arrest. However, in the event of an immediate danger, a verbal
warning prior to a citation or arrest is permitted.
(Ord._2022-031) Penalty, see §
12-1-99
ARTICLE 3: OFFENSES RELATING TO PROPERTY
Section
   
12-3-1   Criminal damage to property
   
12-3-2   Larceny; shoplifting
   
12-3-3   Fraud
   
12-3-4   Embezzlement
   
12-3-5   Issuing a worthless check
   
12-3-6   Credit cards
   
12-3-7   Receiving stolen property
   
12-3-8   Damaging or tampering with vehicle
   
12-3-9   Falsely obtaining services or accommodations
§ 12-3-1 CRIMINAL DAMAGE TO PROPERTY.
   (A)   Criminal Damage to Private Property. Criminal damage to private
property consists of intentionally damaging to a value of less than $1,000 any
real or personal property of another without the consent of the person lawfully
in possession of the property.
   (B)   Criminal Damage to Public Property.  Criminal damage to public
property consists of intentionally damaging to a value of less than $1,000 any
real or personal property of the city, County of Bernalillo, State of New
Mexico, or United States Government, without the consent of the owner thereof.
('74 Code, § 12-1-3-1) (Ord. 96-1973)
Penalty, see § 12-1-99
§ 12-3-2 LARCENY; SHOPLIFTING.
   (A)   Petty larceny consists of the stealing of anything of value of $100 or
less which belongs to another.
   (B)   Shoplifting consists of any one or combination of the following acts:
      (1)   Willfully taking possession of any merchandise with the intention
of converting it without paying for it.
      (2)   Willfully concealing any merchandise with the intention of
converting it without paying for it.
      (3)   Willfully altering any label, price tag, or marking upon any
merchandise with the intention of depriving the merchant of all or some part of
the value of it.
      (4)   Willfully transferring any merchandise from the container in or on
which it is displayed to any other container with the intention of depriving
the merchant of all or some part of the value of it.
   (C)   Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.
   MERCHANDISE. Chattels of any type or description of the value of $100 or
less offered for sale in or about a store.
   MERCHANT. Any owner or proprietor of any store or any agent, servant or
employee of the owner or proprietor.
   STORE. A place where merchandise is sold or offered to the public for sale
or retail.
   (D)   Presumption created. Any person who willfully conceals merchandise on
his person or on the person of another or among his belongings or the
belongings of another or on or outside the premises of the store shall be prima
facie presumed to have concealed the merchandise with the intention of
converting it without paying for it. If any merchandise is found concealed upon
any person or among his belongings it shall be prima facie evidence of willful
concealment.
   (E)   Reasonable detention.
      (1)   If any police officer, special officer or merchant has probable
cause for believing that a person has willfully taken possession of any
merchandise with the intention of converting it without paying for it, or has
willfully concealed merchandise and that he can recover the merchandise by
detaining the person or taking him into custody, police officers, special
officers, or merchant may for the purpose of attempting to effect a recovery of
the merchandise take a person into custody and detain him in a reasonable
manner for a reasonable time.
      (2)   Any police officer may arrest without warrant any person he has
probable cause for believing has committed the crime of shoplifting.
('74 Code, § 12-1-3-2) (Ord. 96-1973)
Penalty, see § 12-1-99
§ 12-3-3 FRAUD.
   Fraud consists of the intentional misappropriation or taking of anything of
value of $100 or less which belongs to another by means of fraudulent conduct,
practices or representations.
('74 Code, § 12-1-3-3) (Ord. 96-1973; Am. Ord. 78-1978)
Penalty, see § 12-1-99
§ 12-3-4 EMBEZZLEMENT.
   Embezzlement consists of the embezzling or converting by a person to his own
use, anything of a value of $100 or less, with which he has been entrusted,
with fraudulent intent to deprive the owner thereof.
('74 Code, § 12-1-3-4) (Ord. 96-1973)
Penalty, see § 12-1-99
§ 12-3-5 ISSUING A WORTHLESS CHECK.
   Issuing a worthless check consists of issuing in exchange for anything of
value with intent to defraud any check, draft or order for the payment of money
in the amount of $25 or less drawn upon any bank or other depository knowing at
the time of the issuing that the offender has insufficient funds, credit or no
account with the bank or other depository, for the payment of such check, draft
or order in full upon its presentation.
('74 Code, § 12-1-3-5) (Ord. 96-1973)
Penalty, see § 12-1-99
§ 12-3-6 CREDIT CARDS.
   (A)   Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.
   ANYTHING OF VALUE. Money, goods and services.
   CARD HOLDER. The person or organization identified on the face of a credit
card to whom or for whose benefit the credit card is issued by an issue.
   CREDIT CARD. Any instrument or device whether known as a credit card, credit
plate, charge card or by other name issued with or without fee by an issuer for
the use of the card holder in obtaining money, goods, services or anything of
value, either on credit or in consideration of an understanding or guarantee by
the issuer of the payment of a check drawn by the card holder.
   EXPIRED CREDIT CARD. A credit card which shows on its face that it is
outdated.
   INCOMPLETE CREDIT CARD. A credit card upon which a part of the matter, other
than the signature of a card holder, which an issuer requires to appear on the
credit card before it can be used by a card holder, has not been stamped,
embossed, imprinted or written on it.
   ISSUER. The business organization or financial institution or its duly
authorized agent which issues a credit card.
   MERCHANT. Every person who is authorized by an issuer or a participating
party to furnish money, goods, services or anything else of value upon
presentation of a credit card by a card holder.
   PARTICIPATING PARTY. A business organization or financial institution other
than the issuer which acquires for value a sales slip or agreement.
   REVOKED CREDIT CARD. A credit card for which the permission to use has been
suspended or terminated by the issuer and notice thereof has been given to the
card holder.
   SALES SLIP or AGREEMENT. Any writing evidencing a credit card transaction.
   (B)   Theft of a credit card. A person who takes a credit card from the
person in possession, custody or control of another without the card holder's
consent, or who with knowledge that it has been so taken, acquires or possesses
a credit card with the intent to use it or to sell it, or to transfer it to a
person other than the issuer or the card holder, is guilty of a violation of
this code. Taking a credit card without consent includes obtaining it by
conduct defined or known as statutory larceny, common law larceny by
trespassory taking, common law larceny by trick, embezzlement or obtaining
property by false pretenses, false promise or extortion.
   (C)   Possession of a credit card which has been stolen, lost, mislaid or
delivered by mistake. A person other than the issuer who receives or possesses
a credit card that he knows or has reason to know to have been stolen, lost,
mislaid or delivered under a mistake as to the identity or address of the card
holder, and who retains possession thereof with the intent to use it or to sell
it or to transfer it to a person other than the issuer or the card holder is
guilty of violating this code.
   (D)   Fraudulent transfer or receipt of a credit card. A person other than
the issuer or his authorized agent who with intent to defraud transfers
possession of a credit card to a person other than the person whose name
appears thereon, or a person who with intent to defraud receives possession of
a credit card issued in the name of a person other than himself from a person
other than the issuer or his authorized agent is guilty of violating this code.
   (E)   Fraudulent taking, receiving or transferring credit cards. Any person
who with intent to defraud receives, sells, or transfers a credit card by
making directly or indirectly any false statement of a material fact, either
orally or in writing, respecting his identity or financial condition or that of
any other person, firm or corporation, is guilty of violating this code.
   (F)   Fraudulent signing of credit cards or sales slips or agreements. Any
person other than a card holder or a person authorized by him who with intent
to defraud signs the name of another or of a fictitious person to a credit card
or to a sales slip or agreement is guilty of violating this code.
   (G)   Fraudulent use of a credit card. Any person who with intent to defraud
uses to obtain anything of value of $100 or less a credit card acquired in
violation of this code or a credit card which is invalid, expired or revoked or
who falsely represents that he is the card holder named on the credit card is
guilty of violating this code. Each act or transaction of $100 or less shall
constitute a separate violation of this code.
   (H)   Fraudulent acts by merchants or their employees. Any merchant or his
employee is guilty of a violation of this code who with intent to defraud:
      (1)   Furnishes anything of a value of $100 or less upon presentation of
a credit card he knows has been obtained or retained in violation of this code
or a credit card which he knows is invalid, expired or revoked. Each act or
transaction of $100 or less shall constitute a separate violation of this code.
      (2)   Fails to furnish anything of value where the difference between the
value of anything actually furnished and the value represented by the merchant
to the issuer or participating party is less than $100 and which he represents
in writing to the issuer or a participating party that he has furnished in a
credit card or cards of the issuer. Each act or transaction of $100 or less
shall constitute a separate violation of this code.
   (I)   Possession of incomplete credit cards. A person who possesses an
incomplete credit card with intent to defraud is guilty of violating this code.
   (J)   Receipt of property. Any person who receives money, goods or services,
or anything else of a value of $100 or less, obtained by another person through
the use of a credit card possessed in violation of this section, and who knows
or has reason to believe that it was so obtained, shall be guilty of violating
this code.
   (K)   Presumption created. For the purpose of this code, every credit card,
whether valid, expired, incomplete, or revoked, is presumed to have value, and
proof of said value is not necessary in any prosecution hereunder.
('74 Code, § 12-1-3-6) (Ord. 96-1973; Am. Ord. 78-1978)
Penalty, see § 12-1-99
§ 12-3-7 RECEIVING STOLEN PROPERTY.
   (A)   Receiving stolen property means the intentionally receiving, retaining
or disposing of stolen property knowing that it has been stolen, unless the
property is received, retained or disposed of with intent to restore it to the
owner.
   (B)   The requisite knowledge or belief that property has been stolen is
presumed in the case of an individual or dealer who:
      (1)   Is found in possession or control of property stolen from two or
more persons on separate occasions; or
      (2)   Acquires stolen property for a consideration which the individual
or dealer knows is far below the property's reasonable value. A dealer shall be
presumed to know the fair market value of the property in which he deals.
   (C)   For the purposes of this section, DEALER means a person in the
business of buying or selling goods or commercial merchandise.
   (D)   Whoever receives stolen property when the value of the property is
$100 or less is guilty of violating this code.
('74 Code, § 12-1-3-7) (Ord. 96-1973)
Penalty, see § 12-1-99
§ 12-3-8 DAMAGING OR TAMPERING WITH VEHICLE.
   (A)   Damaging or tampering with a motor vehicle consists of any person who
shall individually or in association with one or more persons:
      (1)   Purposely and without authority from the owner, start, or cause to
be started, the motor of any motor vehicle;
      (2)   Purposely and maliciously shall shift or change the starting device
or gears of a standing motor vehicle to a position other than that in which
they were left by the owner or driver of said motor vehicle;
      (3)   Purposely scratches or damages the chassis, running gear, body,
sides, top covering or upholstering of a motor vehicle, the property of
another;
      (4)   Purposely destroys any part of a motor vehicle or purposely cuts,
mashes, marks or in any other way destroys or damages any part, attachment,
fastening or appurtenance of a motor vehicle, without the permission of the
owner thereof;
      (5)   Purposely drains or starts the drainage of any radiator or oil tank
or gas tank upon a motor vehicle without the permission of the owner thereof;
      (6)   Purposely puts any metallic or other substance or liquid in the
radiator, carburetor, oil tank, grease cup, oilers, lamps, gas tanks or
machinery of the motor vehicle with the intent to damage the same or impede the
working of the machinery thereof;
      (7)   Maliciously tightens, disconnects, loosens, or removes any part on
any motor vehicle belonging to another;
      (8)   Purposely releases the brake upon a standing motor vehicle, with
the intent to damage said machine; or
      (9)   Purposely enters or remains in any motor vehicle without the
consent of the owner thereof.
   (B)   Nothing in this section shall apply to a police officer or firefighter
acting in the scope of his or her duties or to any other person acting at the
direction of said police officer or firefighter.
('74 Code, § 12-1-3-9) (Ord. 96-1973; Am. Ord. 78-1978)
Penalty, see § 12-1-99
§ 12-3-9 FALSELY OBTAINING SERVICES OR ACCOMMODATIONS.
   Falsely obtaining services or accommodations consists of any person
obtaining any service, petroleum product, food, entertainment or accommodations
of a value of $100 or less without paying therefor, and with the intent to
cheat the owner or person supplying such service, petroleum product, food,
entertainment or accommodations.
('74 Code, § 12-1-3-10) (Ord. 96-1973; Am. Ord. 78-1978)
Penalty, see § 12-1-99
ARTICLE 4: OFFENSES RELATING TO MORALS
Section
   
12-4-1   Definitions relating to gambling
   
12-4-2   Gambling
   
12-4-3   Commercial gambling
   
12-4-4   Permitting premises to be used for gambling
   
12-4-5   Dealing in gambling devices
   
12-4-6   Permissive lottery
   
12-4-7   Fraudulently operating a lottery
   
12-4-8   Drinking in public
   
12-4-9   [Reserved]
   
12-4-10   Unlawful advertisement, manufacture, and delivery of drug
paraphernalia
   
12-4-11   Aiding an illegal activity
   
12-4-12   Lewd or immoral acts
   
12-4-13   Unlawfully inhaling volatile solvents
   
12-4-14   Indecent exposure
   
12-4-15   Sale and display of aerosol spray paint
   
12-4-16   Manufacture, distribution of imitation controlled substance
§ 12-4-1 DEFINITIONS RELATING TO GAMBLING.
   As used in this article:
   BET. A bargain in which the parties agree that, dependent upon chance even
though accompanied by some skill, one stands to win or lose anything of value
specified in the agreement, provided that a bet shall not include:
      (1)   Bona fide business transactions which are valid under the law of
contracts, including without limitation:
         (a)   Contracts for the purchase or sale, at a future date, of
securities or other commodities; and
         (b)   Agreements to compensate for loss caused by the happening of the
chance, including without limitation, contracts for indemnity or guaranty and
life or health and accident insurance;
      (2)   Offers of purses, prizes or premiums to the actual contestants in
any bona fide contest for the determination of skill, speed, strength or
endurance or to the bona fide owners of animals or vehicles entered in such
contest;
      (3)   A lottery as defined in this section; or
      (4)   Betting otherwise permitted by law.
   GAMBLING DEVICE. A contrivance which for a consideration affords the player
an opportunity to obtain anything of value, the award of which is determined by
chance even though accompanied by some skill, and whether or not the prize is
automatically paid by the device.
   GAMBLING PLACE. Any building, tent, vehicle (whether self-propelled or not),
or any room within any of them, a principal use of which is any of the
following: making and settling bets; receiving, holding, recording or
forwarding bets or offers to bet; conducting lotteries; or playing gambling
devices.
   LOTTERY. An enterprise wherein for a consideration the participants are
given an opportunity to win a prize, the award of which is determined by chance
even though accompanied by some skill. As used in this section, CONSIDERATION
means anything of pecuniary value required to be paid to the promoter in order
to participate in such enterprise.
('74 Code, § 12-1-4-1) (Ord. 96-1973)
Penalty, see § 12-1-99
§ 12-4-2 GAMBLING.
   Gambling consists of either:
   (A)   Making a bet.
   (B)   Entering or remaining in a gambling place with intent to make a bet,
to participate in a lottery, or to play a gambling device;
   (C)   Conducting a lottery; or
   (D)   Possessing facilities with intent to conduct a lottery.
('74 Code, § 12-1-4-2) (Ord. 96-1973)
Penalty, see § 12-1-99
§ 12-4-3 COMMERCIAL GAMBLING.
   Commercial gambling consists of either:
   (A)   Participating in the earnings of or operating a gambling place;
   (B)   Receiving, recording, or forwarding bets or offers to bet;
   (C)   Possessing facilities with the intent to receive, record, or forward
bets or offers to bet;
   (D)   For gain, becoming a custodian of anything of value bet or offered to
be bet;
   (E)   Conducting a lottery where both the consideration and the prize are
money, or whoever with intent to conduct lottery possesses facilities to do so;
or
   (F)   Setting up for use for the purpose of gambling or collecting the
proceeds of any gambling device.
('74 Code, § 12-1-4-3) (Ord. 96-1973)
Penalty, see § 12-1-99
§ 12-4-4 PERMITTING PREMISES TO BE USED FOR GAMBLING.
   Permitting premises to be used for gambling consists of either:
   (A)   Knowingly permitting any property owned, or occupied by such person or
under his control to be used as a gambling place; or
   (B)   Knowingly permitting a gambling device to be set up for use for the
purpose of gambling in a place under his control.
('74 Code, § 12-1-4-4) (Ord. 96-1973)
Penalty, see § 12-1-99
§ 12-4-5 DEALING IN GAMBLING DEVICES.
   Dealing in gambling devices consists of manufacturing, transferring
commercially, or possessing with intent to transfer commercially any of the
following:
   (A)   Anything which he knows evidences, purports to evidence, or is
designed to evidence participation in gambling;
   (B)   (1)   Any device which he knows is designed exclusively for gambling
purposes or anything which he knows is designed exclusively as a sub-assembly
or essential part of such device. This includes, without limitation, gambling
devices, numbers jars, punchboards, or roulette wheels.
      (2)   Proof of possession of any device designed exclusively for gambling
purposes which is not in a gambling place and is not set up for use is prima
facie evidence of possession with intent to transfer.
('74 Code, § 12-1-4-5) (Ord. 96-1973)
Penalty, see § 12-1-99
§ 12-4-6 PERMISSIVE LOTTERY.
   (A)   Nothing in §§
12-4-2 through
12-4-4 shall be construed to apply to any sale or drawing of any prize for the
benefit of any church, public library or religious society situated or being in
this city, or for charitable purposes. A lottery may be operated for the
benefit of the organization or charitable purpose only when the entire proceeds
of the lottery go into the organization or charitable purpose and no part of
such proceeds go to any individual member or employee thereof.
   (B)   Nothing in §§
12-4-1 through
12-4-4 shall be held to prohibit any bona fide motion picture theater from
offering prizes of cash or merchandise for advertising purposes in connection
with such business or for the purpose of stimulating business, whether or not
any consideration other than a monetary consideration in excess of the regular
price of admission is exacted for participation in drawings for prizes.
   (C)   Nothing in §§
12-4-1 through
12-4-5 shall be held to apply to any bona fide county or state fair, including
fairs for more than one county, which have been held annually at the same
location for at least two years and which offer prizes of livestock or poultry
in connection with such fair when the proceeds of such drawings shall be used
for the benefit of said fair.
('74 Code, § 12-1-4-6) (Ord. 96-1973; Am. Ord. 78-1978)
Penalty, see § 12-1-99
§ 12-4-7 FRAUDULENTLY OPERATING A LOTTERY.
   Fraudulently operating a lottery consists of operating or managing any
lottery which does not provide a fair and equal chance to all participants, or
which lottery is conducted in a manner tending to defraud or mislead the
public.
('74 Code, § 12-1-4-7) (Ord. 96-1973)
Penalty, see § 12-1-99
§ 12-4-8 DRINKING IN PUBLIC.
   Drinking in public consists of drinking or consuming alcoholic liquors (as
the term is defined in Section 60-3A-3 NMSA 1978, as amended):
   (A)   In any city-owned park, except a park in which drinking is expressly
permitted by resolution.
   (B)   (1)   In any public way, except a public way within a city-owned park
in which drinking is expressly permitted by resolution.
      (2)   For purposes of this division (B), PUBLIC WAY is defined as the
entire width between the property lines of every way publicly maintained when
any part thereof is customarily open to the use of the public for purposes of
vehicular travel and includes the street, sidewalk, and any other area between
the curb lines or lateral lines of the roadway and the adjacent property lines.
   (C)   In any city owned parking lot, except a parking lot in a city-owned
park in which drinking is expressly permitted by resolution.
   (D)   Within 100 feet of any establishment licensed to dispense alcoholic
liquors.
('74 Code, § 12-1-4-9) (Ord. 96-1973; Am. Ord. 78-1978; Am. Ord. 26-1982)
Penalty, see § 12-1-99
§ 12-4-9 [RESERVED].
§ 12-4-10 UNLAWFUL ADVERTISEMENT, MANUFACTURE, AND DELIVERY OF DRUG
PARAPHERNALIA.
   (A)   Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.
   DESIGNED FOR USE. Designed, made, or modified with the specific intent that
the item so designed, made, or modified is to be used in planting, propagating,
cultivating, growing, harvesting, manufacturing, compounding, converting,
producing, processing, preparing, testing, analyzing, packaging, repackaging,
storing, containing, concealing, injecting, ingesting, inhaling, or otherwise
introducing into the human body a controlled substance in violation of this
code and the State Controlled Substances Act, Sections 30-31-1 et seq. NMSA
1978 as it may be amended from time to time.
   DRUG PARAPHERNALIA. All equipment, products and materials of any kind which
are used, intended for use, or designed for use, in planting, propagating,
cultivating, growing, harvesting, manufacturing, compounding, converting,
producing, processing, preparing, testing, analyzing, packaging, repackaging,
storing, containing, concealing, injecting, ingesting, inhaling, or otherwise
introducing into the human body a controlled substance in violation of this
code and the State Controlled Substances Act, Sections 30-31-1 et seq. NMSA
1978 as it may be amended from time to time. It includes, but is not limited
to:
      (1)   Kits used, intended for use, or designed for use in planting,
propagating, cultivating, growing or harvesting of any species of plant which
is a controlled substance or from which a controlled substance can be derived;
      (2)   Kits used, intended for use, or designed for use in manufacturing,
compounding, converting, producing, processing, or preparing controlled
substances;
      (3)   Isomerization devices used, intended for use, or designed for use
in increasing the potency of any species of plant which is a controlled
substance;
      (4)   Testing equipment used, intended for use, or designed for use in
identifying, or in analyzing the strength, effectiveness or purity of
controlled substances;
      (5)   Scales and balances used, intended for use, or designed for use in
weighing or measuring controlled substances;
      (6)   Diluents and adulterants, such as quinine hydrochloride, mannitol,
mannite, dextrose and lactose, used, intended for use, or designed for use in
cutting controlled substances;
      (7)   Blenders, bowls, containers, spoons, mixing devices and screens or
sifting devices used, intended for use, or designed for use in compounding
controlled substances;
      (8)   Capsules, balloons, envelopes, plastic bags, and other containers
used, intended for use, or designed for use in packaging small quantities of
controlled substances;
      (9)   Containers and other objects used, intended for use, or designed
for use in storing or concealing controlled substances;
      (10)   Hypodermic syringes, needles and other objects used, intended for
use, or designed for use in parenterally injecting controlled substances into
the human body;
      (11)   Objects used, intended for use, or designed for use in ingesting,
inhaling, or otherwise introducing cocaine or other controlled substances into
the human body, such as:
         (a)   Metal, wooden, acrylic, glass, stone, plastic, or ceramic pipes
with or without screens, permanent screens, or punctured metal bowls;
         (b)   Water pipes;
         (c)   Carburetion tubes and devices;
         (d)   Smoking and carburetion masks;
         (e)   Roach clips: meaning objects used to hold burning material that
has become too small or too short to be held in the hand;
         (f)   Miniature cocaine spoons, and cocaine vials;
         (g)   Chamber pipes;
         (h)   Carburetor pipes;
         (i)   Electric pipes;
         (j)   Air-driven pipes;
         (k)   Chilams;
         (l)   Bongs;
         (m)   Ice pipes or chillers.
   (B)   Relevant Factors. In determining whether an object is drug
paraphernalia, a court or other authority should consider, in addition to all
other logically relevant factors, the following:
      (1)   Statements by an owner or by anyone in control of the object
concerning its use;
      (2)   Prior convictions, if any, of an owner, or of anyone in control of
the object, under any state or federal law relating to any controlled
substance;
      (3)   The proximity of the object, in time and space, to a direct
violation of the State Controlled Substances Act, Sections 30-31-1 et seq. NMSA
1978;
      (4)   The proximity of the object to controlled substances;
      (5)   The existence of any residue of controlled substance on the object;
      (6)   Direct or circumstantial evidence of the intent of an owner, or of
anyone in control of the object, to deliver it to persons who he knows, or
should reasonably know, intend to use the object to facilitate a violation of
the State Controlled Substances Act, Sections 30-31-1 et seq. NMSA 1978; the
innocence of an owner, or of anyone in control of the object, as to a direct
violation of the State Controlled Substances Act, Sections 30-31-1 et seq. NMSA
1978 should not prevent a finding that the object is intended for use, or
designed for use as a drug paraphernalia;
      (7)   Instructions, oral or written, provided with the object concerning
its use;
      (8)   Descriptive materials accompanying the object which explain or
depict its use;
      (9)   National and local advertising concerning its use;
      (10)   The manner in which the object is displayed for sale;
      (11)   Whether the owner, or anyone in control of the object, is a
legitimate supplier of like or related items to the community, such as a
licensed distributor or dealer of tobacco products;
      (12)   Direct or circumstantial evidence of the ratio of sales of the
object(s) to the total sales of the business enterprise;
      (13)   The existence and scope of legitimate uses for the object in the
community;
      (14)   Expert testimony concerning its use.
   (C)   Violations.
      (1)   Manufacture or Delivery of Drug Paraphernalia. It is unlawful for
any person to deliver, possess with intent to deliver, or manufacture with
intent to deliver, drug paraphernalia, knowing, or under circumstances where
one reasonably should know, that it will be used to plant, propagate,
cultivate, grow, harvest, manufacture, compound, convert, produce, process,
prepare, test, analyze, pack, repack, store, contain, conceal, inject, ingest,
inhale, or otherwise introduce into the human body a controlled substance in
violation of the State Controlled Substances Act, Sections 30-31-1 et seq. NMSA
1978.
      (2)   Advertisement of Drug Paraphernalia. It is unlawful for any person
to place in any newspaper, magazine, handbill, or other publication any
advertisement, knowing, or under circumstances where one reasonably should
know, that the purpose of the advertisement, in whole or in part, is to promote
the sale of objects designed or intended for use as drug paraphernalia. This
provision shall not be construed to apply to any advertisement which advertises
the sale of drug paraphernalia outside the city; nor shall it be construed to
apply to any printed matter criticizing the drug laws, glorifying the drug
culture, glamorizing the use of drugs, providing information on how to use
illegal drugs, or similar noncommercial speech.
      (3)   Exclusion for Cannabis Paraphernalia. Nothing in this section shall
be construed to establish a criminal penalty for possession of paraphernalia
for the exclusive purpose of cannabis use, or for any activities associated
with cannabis use or commerce, in accordance with the Cannabis Regulation Act
(NMSA 1978, §§ 26-2C-1 et seq.) or the Lynn and Erin Compassionate Use Act
(NMSA 1978, § 26-2B-1 et seq.).
('74 Code, § 12-1-4-11) (Ord. 96-1973; Am. Ord. 2-1981; Am. Ord._2018-005; Am.
Ord._2022-009) Penalty, see §
12-1-99
§ 12-4-11 AIDING AN ILLEGAL ACTIVITY.
   Aiding an illegal activity consists of either:
   (A)   Being found in any place where gambling or prostitution is being
conducted, with knowledge of such activity; or
   (B)   Giving or attempting to give any signal intended to or calculated to
warn or give warning of the approach of any police officer to any person in or
about any building, trailer, motor vehicle, premises, or establishment used for
any illegal activity or where any illegal activity is being conducted.
('74 Code, § 12-1-4-12) (Ord. 96-1973)
Penalty, see § 12-1-99
§ 12-4-12 LEWD OR IMMORAL ACTS.
   Lewd or immoral acts consist of either:
   (A)   Knowingly engaging or offering to engage in the following acts for
hire: sexual intercourse, fellatio, cunnilingus, anal intercourse, or
masturbation of another.
   (B)   Entering or remaining in a house of prostitution with intent to engage
in sexual intercourse, fellatio, cunnilingus, or anal intercourse with a
prostitute, or to masturbate or be masturbated by a prostitute.
   (C)   Knowingly hiring or offering to hire a person to engage in sexual
intercourse, fellatio, cunnilingus, or anal intercourse, or to masturbate
oneself or another.
   (D)   Knowingly establishing, owning, maintaining or managing a house of
prostitution, or participating in the establishment, ownership, maintenance or
management thereof.
   (E)   Knowingly permitting any place which a person partially or wholly owns
or controls to be used as a house of prostitution.
   (F)   Knowingly procuring a prostitute for a house of prostitution.
   (G)   Knowingly inducing another to become a prostitute.
   (H)   Knowingly soliciting a patron for a prostitute or for a house of
prostitution.
   (I)   Knowingly procuring a prostitute for a person.
   (J)   Knowingly procuring transportation for, paying for the transportation
of, or transporting a person within the city with the intention of promoting
that person's engaging in prostitution.
   (K)   Knowingly being employed by a house of prostitution to perform any
function which constitutes promoting prostitution.
('74 Code, § 12-1-4-13) (Ord. 96-1973; Am. Ord. 78-1978)
Penalty, see § 12-1-99
§ 12-4-13 UNLAWFULLY INHALING VOLATILE SOLVENTS.
   (A)   Unlawfully inhaling volatile solvents consists of intentionally
smelling, breathing, or inhaling the fumes or vapors from any paint, glue,
gasoline or any similar substance containing one or more volatile solvents for
the purpose of causing a condition of intoxication, inebriation, stupefaction,
euphoria, exhilaration, or the dulling of the brain or the nervous system.
   (B)   As used in this section, the term VOLATILE SOLVENT, shall include, but
not be limited to, the following types of chemical compounds:
      (1)   Hydrocarbons, including but not limited to petroleum distillates
and aromatic hydrocarbons;
      (2)   Oxygenated organic compounds, including but not limited to ketones,
esters and ethers;
      (3)   Halogenated hydrocarbons; and
      (4)   Nitrous oxides.
   (C)   Nothing in this section shall preclude a person from smelling,
breathing, or inhaling one or more volatile solvents when done under the
supervision of a physician, podiatrist, or dentist in the course of his
professional practice.
   (D)   It is the intent of this section that, by making unlawful inhalation
of volatile substances an offense, inhalant abusers can be identified and
treated.
('74 Code, § 12-1-4-14) (Ord. 96-1973; Am. Ord. 49-1978)
Penalty, see § 12-1-99
§ 12-4-14 INDECENT EXPOSURE.
   Knowingly and indecently exposing the private parts or sexual organs of a
person to the public view.
('74 Code, § 12-1-4-15) (Ord. 96-1973; Am. Ord. 32-1981)
Penalty, see § 12-1-99
§ 12-4-15 SALE AND DISPLAY OF AEROSOL SPRAY PAINT.
   (A)   No person other than a parent, guardian or other adult person acting
in their place shall sell or otherwise provide aerosol spray paint or glass
etching cream to any person under 18 years of age and no person under the age
of 18 years shall buy or attempt to buy any aerosol spray paint or glass
etching cream. A New Mexico driver's license, an identification card issued to
a member of the Armed Forces, or an identity card issued pursuant to Section
60-10-17 NMSA 1978 shall be prima facie proof of age.
   (B)   Every person who owns, manages or operates a place of business selling
aerosol spray paint or glass etching cream shall store or cause such spray
paint and glass etching cream to be stored either (1) in the line of sight of
one or more work stations that are normally continuously occupied during
business hours, or (2) in an area viewable by the public, but not accessible to
the public in the regular course of business without employee assistance,
pending legal sale or disposition of such spray paint or glass etching cream.
   (C)   Any person who owns, manages or operates a place of business wherein
aerosol spray paint or glass etching cream is sold shall conspicuously post:
      (1)   At or near the aerosol spray paint or glass etching cream display,
in clear public view, a sign stating: "GRAFFITI IS A CRIME. THE DEFACING OF
PUBLIC OR PRIVATE PROPERTY IS PUNISHABLE BY A FINE OR IMPRISONMENT";
      (2)   At or near the aerosol spray paint or glass etching cream display,
in clear public view, a sign stating: "NO SPRAY PAINT OR GLASS ETCHING CREAM
SOLD TO MINORS. SELLING SPRAY PAINT OR GLASS ETCHING CREAM TO OR PURCHASE OF
SPRAY PAINT OR GLASS ETCHING CREAM BY PERSONS UNDER 18 YEARS OF AGE IS AGAINST
THE LAW. VIOLATORS CAN BE FINED UP TO $500 OR IMPRISONED FOR UP TO 90 DAYS";
and
      (3)   At each cash register or other point of customer payment, in clear
view of the person accepting customer payment, a sign stating: "NO SPRAY PAINT
OR GLASS ETCHING CREAM SOLD TO MINORS. THE LAW FORBIDS SELLING SPRAY PAINT OR
GLASS ETCHING CREAM TO PERSONS UNDER 18 YEARS OF AGE. WHEN IN DOUBT, ASK FOR
PROOF OF AGE. ACCEPT ONLY IDENTIFICATION ISSUED BY THE FEDERAL, STATE OR LOCAL
GOVERNMENT."
   (D)   As used in this article, "glass etching cream" shall mean any cream or
solution containing sulfuric acid and ammonium bifluoride, or hydrofluoric
acid, and is manufactured for the purpose of etching glass.
('74 Code, § 12-1-4-16) (Ord. 96-1973; Am. Ord. 32-1981; Am. Ord. 52-1995; Am.
Ord. 57-2004)
Penalty, see § 12-1-99
§ 12-4-16 MANUFACTURE, DISTRIBUTION OF IMITATION CONTROLLED SUBSTANCE.
   (A)   It is unlawful for any person to, knowingly or under circumstances
where a person reasonably should know, manufacture, distribute or possess with
intent to distribute an imitation controlled substance. Any person who violates
the provisions of this section is guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction
shall be subject to the penalty provisions set forth in §
1-1-99 of this code of ordinances.
   (B)   Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.
   CONTROLLED SUBSTANCE. A substance as defined in Subsection E of Section 30-
31-2 NMSA 1978.
   DISTRIBUTE. The actual, constructive or attempted transfer, delivery or
dispensing to another of an imitation controlled substance.
   IMITATION CONTROLLED SUBSTANCE. A substance that is not a controlled
substance which by overall dosage unit appearance, including color, shape, size
and markings, or by representations made would lead a reasonable person to
believe that the substance is a controlled substance. In those rare cases when
the appearance of the dosage unit is not reasonably sufficient to establish
that the substance is an imitation controlled substance, for example, in the
case of powder or liquid, the court or authority concerned should consider, in
addition to all other logically relevant factors, the following factors as
related to REPRESENTATIONS MADE in determining whether the substance is an
imitation controlled substance:
      (1)   Statements made by an owner or by anyone else in control of the
substance concerning the nature of the substance or its use or effect;
      (2)   Statements made to the recipient that the substance may be resold
for consideration greatly in excess of the market value of the ingredients;
      (3)   Whether the substance is packaged in a manner normally used for
illicit controlled substances;
      (4)   Evasive tactics or actions utilized by the owner or person in
control of the substance to avoid detection by law enforcement authorities;
      (5)   Prior convictions, if any, of the owner, or anyone in control of
the object, under state or federal law related to controlled substances or
fraud, provided that this factor alone shall not be sufficient to support a
conviction under this section; and
      (6)   Whether the physical appearance of the substance is substantially
identical to a controlled substance.
   MANUFACTURE. The production, preparation, compounding, processing,
encapsulating, tableting, packaging or repackaging or labeling or relabeling of
an imitation controlled substance.
   (C)   Defenses. In any prosecution for unlawful distribution or possession
with intent to distribute of an imitation controlled substance, it is no
defense that the defendant believed the imitation controlled substance to be a
controlled substance.
   (D)   Immunity. No criminal liability shall be imposed by this Ordinance on
any person who may lawfully manufacture or distribute controlled substances
under Section 30-31-12 NMSA 1978 who manufactures, distributes, or possesses
with intent to distribute an imitation controlled substance for use as a
placebo by a registered practitioner in the course of professional practice or
research.
('74 Code, § 12-1-4-17) (Ord. 21-1982)
Penalty, see § 12-1-99
ARTICLE 5: OFFENSES RELATING TO MINORS
Section
   
12-5-1   Abandonment and cruelty to children
   
12-5-2   Enticement of child
   
12-5-3   Permitting loitering of minors
   
12-5-4   Unlawfully assisting minors to obtain alcoholic liquors
   
12-5-5   Offenses by minors
   
12-5-6   Failure of parental responsibility
   
12-5-7   Abandonment of dangerous containers
   
12-5-8   Possession of spray paint cans or glass etching cream by minors
§ 12-5-1 ABANDONMENT AND CRUELTY TO CHILDREN.
   (A)   Abandonment of child consists of the parent of a child, ten years old
or less, or any person who has been entrusted with or who has assumed the care
of such child who intentionally leaves the child or abandons him under
circumstances where the child may suffer from neglect, but which does not
result in the death of or great bodily harm to the child.
   (B)   Cruelty to children consists of any parent, guardian or other person
having care or custody of any child either:
      (1)   Intentionally causing or permitting:
         (a)   The life of such child to be endangered;
         (b)   The health of such child to be injured; or
         (c)   The morals of such child to be impaired.
      (2)   Intentionally placing such child in a situation where:
         (a)   The life of such child is endangered;
         (b)   The health of such child is injured; or
         (c)   The morals of such child are impaired.
      (3)   Who shall willfully torture, torment, or cruelly punish or injure
such child.
      (4)   Who shall willfully or negligently deprive such child of necessary
food, clothing or shelter.
('74 Code, § 12-1-5-1) (Ord. 96-1973)
Penalty, see § 12-1-99
§ 12-5-2 ENTICEMENT OF CHILD.
   Enticement of child consists of either:
   (A)   Enticing, persuading, or attempting to persuade a child under the age
of 16 years to enter a vehicle, building, room or secluded place with intent to
commit criminal sexual penetration, criminal sexual contact of a minor or
indecent exposure; or
   (B)   Having possession of a child under the age of 16 years in any vehicle,
building, room, or secluded place with the intent to commit criminal sexual
penetration, criminal sexual contact of a minor or indecent exposure.
('74 Code, § 12-1-5-2) (Ord. 96-1973; Am. Ord. 78-1978)
Penalty, see § 12-1-99
§ 12-5-3 PERMITTING LOITERING OF MINORS.
   Permitting loitering of minors consists of the owner or operator of any
establishment serving alcoholic beverages permitting a person under the age of
21 years to attend, frequent or loiter in or about such premises without being
accompanied by the parent or guardian of such person, or be engaged in the
preparation, serving, handling or delivery of alcoholic beverage, or as a
topless, bottomless or dancing entertainer in or about such premises.
('74 Code, § 12-1-5-3) (Ord. 96-1973; Am. Ord. 78-1978)
Penalty, see § 12-1-99
§ 12-5-4 UNLAWFULLY ASSISTING MINORS TO OBTAIN ALCOHOLIC LIQUORS.
   Assisting minors to obtain alcoholic liquors consists of either:
   (A)   Selling alcoholic liquor to a minor or serving, aiding or assisting a
minor to buy, procure, obtain or be served any alcoholic liquor; or
   (B)   Inducing any other person to sell, serve, or deliver any alcoholic
liquor to a minor by actual or constructive misrepresentation of any facts
calculated to cause, or by the concealment of any facts, the concealment of
which is calculated to cause the person selling, serving or delivering such
alcoholic liquors to such a minor or to any person for ultimate delivery to a
minor that such minor is legally entitled to be sold, served, or delivered
alcoholic liquor. Minor as used in §
12-5-5 means any person under 21 years of age.
('74 Code, § 12-1-5-4) (Ord. 96-1973; Am. Ord. 78-1978)
Penalty, see § 12-1-99
§ 12-5-5 OFFENSES BY MINORS.
   Offenses by minors consists of any person:
   (A)   Under the age of 21 years exhibiting any fictitious or false
registration card, identification card, note, or other instrument for the
purpose of consummating any transaction whatsoever within the city, or for the
purpose of deceiving or misleading any other person as to the true age of such
person;
   (B)   Under the age of 21 years procuring, buying, purchasing, consuming,
constructively or physically possessing or obtaining any alcoholic beverage
without the consent of the person's parent or guardian, while in the presence
of the parent or guardian or unless the alcoholic beverage is part of a
religious ceremony.
('74 Code, § 12-1-5-5) (Ord. 96-1973; Am. Ord. 24-1994; Am. Ord. 1-1995; Am.
Ord. 48-2002)
Penalty, see § 12-1-99
§ 12-5-6 FAILURE OF PARENTAL RESPONSIBILITY.
   Failure of parental responsibility consists of a person knowingly permitting
his child or ward to violate the provisions of §
12-5-5.
('74 Code, § 12-1-5-6) (Ord. 96-1973; Am. Ord. 1-1995)
Penalty, see § 12-1-99
§ 12-5-7 ABANDONMENT OF DANGEROUS CONTAINERS.
   Abandonment of dangerous containers consists of any person:
   (A)   Abandoning, discarding, or keeping in any place accessible to children
any refrigerator, icebox, freezer, air-tight container, cabinet, or similar
container of a capacity of one and one-half cubic feet or more, which is no
longer in use, without having the attached doors, hinges, lids, or latches
removed or without sealing the doors or other entrances so as to make it
impossible for anyone to be imprisoned therein;
   (B)   Being the owner, lessee, or manager of any premises with the right of
entry or possession thereof, who knowingly permits any abandoned or discarded
refrigerator, icebox, freezer, air-tight container, cabinet, or similar
container of a capacity of one and one-half cubic feet or more, and which
remains upon such premises in a condition whereby a child may be imprisoned
therein.
('74 Code, § 12-1-5-7) (Ord. 96-1973)
Penalty, see § 12-1-99
§ 12-5-8 POSSESSION OF SPRAY PAINT CANS OR GLASS ETCHING CREAM BY MINORS.
   No person under eighteen years of age shall have in his possession any can
of aerosol spray paint or container of glass etching cream (which cream
contains sulfuric acid and ammonium bifluoride or hydrofluoric acid) while in
any public place, except under the supervision of a parent or other parentally
approved adult supervisor whether such person is or is not in any automobile,
vehicle or other conveyance. A New Mexico license shall be prima facie proof of
age.
('74 Code, § 12-1-5-8) (Ord. 17-1981; Am. Ord. 57-2004)
Penalty, see § 12-1-99
CHAPTER 13: BUSINESS
AND OCCUPATIONS
   Article
      
1:   BUSINESS LICENSE ORDINANCE
      
2:   ALCOHOLIC LIQUOR
      
3:   SOLICITATIONS
      
4:   PUBLIC UTILITY COMPANIES
      
5:   COMMUNITY ANTENNA TELEVISION
      
6:   PAWNBROKERS, PRECIOUS MATERIAL DEALERS, SECONDHAND RETAILERS, AND
AUTOMATED KIOSKS
      
7:   HOTELS AND MOTELS
      
8:   PRIVATE INVESTIGATORS; PRIVATE PATROL SERVICES
      
9:   PRIVATE AGENCY FIRE PROTECTION
      
10:   PROFESSIONAL FUND RAISERS
      
11:   METHADONE CENTERS
      
12:   
MINIMUM WAGE
      
13:   
CUSTOMER SURCHARGES
      
14:   
SMALL BUSINESS IMPACT
      
15:   
SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESSES
      
16:   
HOMEOWNER AND CONDOMINIUM ASSOCIATIONS
      
17:   [RESERVED]
      
18:   CLOSED CAPTIONING
      
19:   SHORT TERM RENTALS
      
20:   TAX PREPARERS AND CONSUMER RIGHTS
      
21:   SECONDHAND CATALYTIC CONVERTER PURCHASE
ARTICLE 1: BUSINESS LICENSE ORDINANCE
Section
   
13-1-1   Short title
   
13-1-2   Definitions
   
13-1-3   Business license required
   
13-1-4   Business license fee
   
13-1-5   Exemption
   
13-1-6   Business license application
   
13-1-7   Place of business; license nontransferable
   
13-1-8   Business licenses to be displayed; exhibition upon demand
   
13-1-9   Business license renewal
   
13-1-10   Business license late fee
   
13-1-11   Fees nonrefundable
   
13-1-12   Zoning review
   
13-1-13   Notice of termination of business required
   
13-1-14   Revocation
   
13-1-15   Enforcement and penalty
   
13-1-16   Civil fine
   
13-1-17   Appeals
   
13-1-18   Liens
§ 13-1-1 SHORT TITLE.
   This article may be cited as the “Business License Ordinance.”
(Ord. 2024-048)
§ 13-1-2 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this article, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   INITIAL LICENSE DURATION ADJUSTMENT PERIOD. A 12-month period of time during
which the City of Albuquerque may prorate the business license fee by monthly
increments for the purpose of developing a staggered system of business
licensing.
   MAYOR. The Mayor or his designated representative.
   PERSON. Any individual, estate, trust, receiver, cooperative association,
club, corporation, company, firm, partnership, joint venture, syndicate, or
other entity engaging in a business, profession, occupation, trade, pursuit, or
activity within the City of Albuquerque. For the purposes of this ordinance,
the term person does not include governmental entities.
   PLACE OF BUSINESS. The premises, whether it be a personal residence, main
business location, or an outlet, branch, or other location thereof, temporary
or otherwise, to which the public is expressly or impliedly invited for the
purpose of transacting business. In the event there is no such location, but
the business is transacted at the location of the buyer, then the general sales
area shall be considered a “Place of Business”. Unless a construction
contractor has at least one permanent location within the City of Albuquerque,
“Place of Business” includes each construction site located within the City of
Albuquerque.
(Ord. 2024-048)
§ 13-1-3 BUSINESS LICENSE REQUIRED.
   (A)   Beginning on July 1, 2025, all persons are required to obtain a
Business License in order to operate a Place of Business within the City’s
municipal boundaries.
   (B)   A separate license must be obtained for each branch establishment or
separate Place of Business. Each license granted under this article shall
authorize only the person obtaining the license to practice, transact, or carry
on the business or service licensed under this article and shall authorize that
person to conduct business only at the location or Place of Business designated
in the license.
(Ord. 2024-048)
§ 13-1-4 BUSINESS LICENSE FEE.
   (A)   Each Place of Business located in the City shall pay an annual
Business License Fee imposed on the following schedule pursuant to Section 3-
38-1 NMSA 1978 as it now exists or is amended:
      (1)   Fees beginning on July 1, 2025 shall be $35 per license.
   (B)   The City may prorate the business license fee by monthly increments
during the initial license duration adjustment period.
   (C)   After the initial license duration adjustment period, renewals of
Business Licenses shall be for a full 12-month period. Other than during the
initial license duration adjustment period, the Business License Fee shall not
be prorated for business conducted for a portion of the year.
   (D)   The Business License Fee can be increased by the administration to
cover increased regulatory costs for administering the Business License program
in an amount that does not exceed 5% within any fiscal year.
(Ord. 2024-048)
§ 13-1-5 EXEMPTION.
   No Business License shall be required for any business explicitly exempted
by law. No Business License Fee shall be imposed on any sanctioned and
registered athletic official who officiates for any association or organization
that regulates any public-school activity and whose rules and regulations are
approved by the State Board of Education.
(Ord. 2024-048)
§ 13-1-6 BUSINESS LICENSE APPLICATION.
   (A)   All persons proposing to engage in business within the municipal
limits of the City shall apply for a Business License for each proposed Place
of Business.
   (B)   The City may charge an application fee for all person applying for a
Business License.
   (C)   Any person applying for a Business License shall include in the
application a current Taxpayer Identification Number and current dated evidence
of the registration certificate for such current Taxpayer Identification Number
as issued by the New Mexico Taxation and Revenue Department and any other
information required by the City.
   (D)   Applicants have an affirmative duty to ensure that their application
is complete and that they may engage in business at the proposed Place of
Business, including ensuring compliance with relevant zoning codes.
(Ord. 2024-048)
§ 13-1-7 PLACE OF BUSINESS; LICENSE NONTRANSFERABLE.
   (A)   A licensee shall conduct business only at the address shown on the
Business License. Each additional Place of Business shall require a separate
Business License.
   (B)   All licenses issued under this article shall be nontransferable to
another person or Place of Business.
   (C)   No licensee shall in any manner advertise its services as endorsed or
bonded by the City.
(Ord. 2024-048)
§ 13-1-8 BUSINESS LICENSES TO BE DISPLAYED; EXHIBITION UPON DEMAND.
   Every person having a license under the provisions of this article and
engaging in business at a fixed Place of Business shall keep such license
posted and exhibited, while in force, in some conspicuous part of such Place of
Business. Every person having such a license and not having a fixed Place of
Business shall carry such license with them at all times while engaging in
business for which the license was granted. Every person having a license under
the provisions of this article shall produce and exhibit such license when
applying for a renewal thereof, and whenever requested to do so by any City
official authorized to issue, inspect, or collect licenses.
(Ord. 2024-048)
§ 13-1-9 BUSINESS LICENSE RENEWAL.
   Within 10 days prior to the expiration of the Business License, any person
operating a Place of Business in the City shall apply to renew the Business
License and shall pay an annual Business License.
(Ord. 2024-048)
§ 13-1-10 BUSINESS LICENSE LATE FEE.
   The City may impose a late fee in the amount of $10.00 per calendar day upon
each delinquent license fee in the event a new business does not pay the
license fee before it commences business or in the event the annual renewal fee
is not paid prior to expiration.
(Ord. 2024-048)
§ 13-1-11 FEES NONREFUNDABLE.
   All established fees charged and collected by the City pursuant to this
article shall be nonrefundable unless otherwise specified.
(Ord. 2024-048)
§ 13-1-12 ZONING REVIEW.
   (A)   After any person has submitted a business license application or
application for renewal, the Zoning Enforcement Officer shall review the
applicable zoning regulations of the activity proposed to be conducted at the
given address and determine whether the activity complies with the requirements
of the Integrated Development Ordinance. The Zoning Enforcement Officer may
request additional information or documentation as necessary to make a
determination. The Zoning Enforcement Officer shall issue a written
determination, which shall be provided to the applicant.
   (B)   The Zoning Enforcement Officer’s determination does not constitute a
waiver of any requirement or provision contained in any law.
(Ord. 2024-048)
§ 13-1-13 NOTICE OF TERMINATION OF BUSINESS REQUIRED.
   The holder of a Business License shall notify the City, in writing, of the
termination of business, occupational, or professional activity at the Place of
Business either before the termination date or within fifteen (15) calendar
days thereafter. Any person who fails to provide notice of termination of
business shall be deemed as engaging in business and subject to enforcement for
failing to renew the business license and any associated late fees.
(Ord. 2024-048)
§ 13-1-14 REVOCATION.
   (A)   Any Business License issued under this article may be revoked at any
time by action of the Mayor if the business or service conducted under such
license is being or has been conducted in violation of any local, state, or
federal regulation or law. Revocation of the Business License shall be for a
period of up to 180 days from the date of revocation.
   (B)   If the 180-day revocation period is ongoing when a Business License
expires, the remainder of the 180-day revocation period shall be applied to the
following year’s Business License for that Place of Business.
(Ord. 2024-048)
§ 13-1-15 ENFORCEMENT AND PENALTY.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in business in the City
of Albuquerque without first obtaining a business license. Any violation of the
Business License Ordinance shall constitute a separate violation for each and
every day or portion thereof that the violation is continued, committed or
permitted.
   (B)   The Mayor may, for any violation of this article, take one or more of
the following actions:
      (1)   Revoke the Business License;
      (2)   Prevent the person from engaging in business at the Place of
Business until the Business License is obtained;
      (3)   Withhold the issuance of any City permits or inspections until a
valid Business License is obtained;
      (4)   Prevent the occupancy of the building, structure, or land on which
the business is located; or
      (5)   Assess a civil fine.
   (C)   In addition to the remedies provided above, this article may be
enforced by the City by suit in District Court.
(Ord. 2024-048)
§ 13-1-16 CIVIL FINE.
   (A)   The Mayor may impose a civil fine of $100 per day for the failure to
comply with the Business License Ordinance.
   (B)   General. Whenever the Mayor imposes a civil fine for violations of the
Business License Ordinance, the Mayor shall issue a notice of civil fine
directed to the person engaging in business. The notice of civil fine shall
contain:
      (1)   Sufficient information for identification of the Place of Business
where the violation occurred.
      (2)   A statement that the Mayor has found the person to be in violation
of the Business License Ordinance.
      (3)   A description of the activity conducted by the person engaging in
business without a business license as required by the Business License
Ordinance.
      (4)   The amount of the fine assessed.
      (5)   A statement that the fine must be paid in full within 15 days of
the date of the notice.
      (6)   Instructions for paying the fine; and
      (7)   A statement advising that the person engaging in business without a
license may appeal from the notice of civil fine. The request for appeal and
the hearing shall comply with the procedures outlined in the IHO Ordinance.
   (C)   Method of service.
      (1)   Service of the notice of civil fine shall be made upon all persons
entitled thereto either personally or by mailing a copy of such notice of civil
fine by certified mail, postage prepaid, return receipt requested, to each such
person, or identified agent at their address as shown on the records of the
Bernalillo County Assessor or as known to the Mayor. If no address of any such
person so appears or is known to the Mayor, then a copy of the notice of civil
fine shall be so mailed, addressed to such person, at the address of the Place
of Business involved in the proceedings and posted thereon.
      (2)   The failure of any such person to receive such notice shall not
affect the validity of any proceedings taken under this section. Service by
certified mail in the manner herein provided shall be effective on the date of
mailing.
(Ord. 2024-048)
§ 13-1-17 APPEALS.
   (A)   The person engaged in business may appeal a civil fine or revocation
issued pursuant to this article. The request for appeal and the hearing shall
comply with the procedures outlined in the Independent Office of Hearings
Ordinance, ROA 1994, §§ 2-7-8-1 to 2-7-8-9.
   (B)   If the Mayor has revoked a Business License issued under this article
due to the business or service being or having been conducted in violation of
any local, state, or federal regulation or law and the Hearing Officer
determines that such a violation of law is or has occurred, the Hearing Officer
shall uphold the Mayor’s decision to revoke the Business License and order the
business or service to be closed for the 180-day revocation period.
(Ord. 2024-048)
§ 13-1-18 LIENS.
   Failure to pay, appeal, or prevail at an administrative hearing will allow
the City to place a lien on the real property where the business is located or
any other asset owned by the property owner or business owner. In addition, the
Business License Fee or civil fines may be collected through any avenue
provided by law.
(Ord. 2024-048)
ARTICLE 2: ALCOHOLIC LIQUOR
Section
   
13-2-1   Authority to issue licenses
   
13-2-2   Definitions
   
13-2-3   Issuance or transfer of a license
   
13-2-4   Waiver of distance requirement between licensed premises for a liquor
license and church or school
   
13-2-5   License fees
   
13-2-6   Special dispenser's and celebration permits
§ 13-2-1 AUTHORITY TO ISSUE LICENSES.
   The City Council, pursuant to the provisions of Chapter 60, Articles 3A, 5A,
6A, 6B, 6C, 7A, 7B and 8A NMSA 1978, the “Liquor Control Act,” and Article X,
Section 6 of the Constitution of New Mexico, hereby enacts this article as
authorized by the “Liquor Control Act.”
('74 Code, § 10-8-1) (Ord. 58- 1979; Am. Ord. 37-1993; Am. Ord._2023-010)
§ 13-2-2 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this article, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES. Distilled or rectified spirits, potable alcohol,
powdered alcohol, frozen or freeze-dried alcohol, brandy, whiskey, rum, gin and
aromatic bitters bearing the federal internal revenue strip stamps or any
similar alcoholic beverage, including blended or fermented beverages, dilutions
or mixtures of one or more of the foregoing containing more than one-half
percent alcohol, but excluding medicinal bitters.
   BREWER. Any person who owns or operates a business for the manufacture of
beer.
   CATERED FUNCTION. A function other than a public celebration which is
catered by the business of any person holding a dispenser's license.
   CITY. The city, a municipal corporation and a local option district as
defined by the Liquor Control Act, and its representatives as authorized
herein.
   CLUB.
      (1)   Any nonprofit group, including an auxiliary or subsidiary group,
organized and operated under the laws of this state, with a membership of not
less than 50 members who pay membership dues at the rate of not less than $5
per year and who under the constitution and bylaws of the club, have all voting
rights and full membership privileges, and which group is the owner, lessee or
occupant of premises used exclusively for club purposes and which group the
State Director finds:
         (a)   Is operated solely for recreation, social, patriotic, political,
benevolent or athletic purposes; and
         (b)   the proposed licensee has been granted an exemption by the
United States from the payment of the federal income tax as a club under the
provisions of Section 501(a) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1954, as amended
or, if the applicant has not operated a club for a sufficient time to be
eligible for the income tax exemption, it must execute and file with the State
Director a sworn letter of intent declaring that it will, in good faith, apply
for such exemption as soon as it is eligible; or
      (2)   An airline passenger membership club operated by an air common
carrier which maintains or operates a clubroom at an international airport
terminal. For the purposes of this division (2), AIR COMMON CARRIER means a
person engaged in regularly scheduled air transportation between fixed
terminals under a certificate of public convenience and necessity issued by the
Civil Aeronautics Board.
    DISPENSER. Any person licensed under the provisions of the Liquor Control
Act selling, offering for sale or having in the person's possession with the
intent to sell alcoholic beverages both by the drink for consumption on the
licensed premises and in unbroken packages, including locally produced
growlers, for consumption and not for resale off the licensed premises.
   DISTILLER. Any person engaged in manufacturing spirituous liquors.
   LICENSE. Any license regulated under this article and issued by the State
Director pursuant to the New Mexico Liquor Control Act.
   LIQUOR HEARING OFFICER. A hearing officer designated by the Director of the
City Council Services Department to conduct hearings pursuant to this article
and NMSA 1978, § 60-6B-4.
   PERSON. Any individual, corporation, firm, partnership, copartnership,
association or other legal entity, and includes both the singular and plural.
   PRIVATE CELEBRATION. Any celebratory activity that is held in a private or
public venue not open to the general public and for which attendance is subject
to a private invitation.
   PUBLIC CELEBRATION. Any state or county fair, community fiesta, cultural or
artistic event, sporting competition of a seasonal nature or activities held on
an intermittent basis that are open or advertised to the general public. For
purposes of this definition, "intermittent basis” means only that an activity
occurs at a particular location with at least 48 hours before the next
separately permitted activity, and for no more than 12 hours within a single
day, or that the activity has been approved by the State Director regardless of
these limitations.
   RESTAURANT. An establishment having a New Mexico resident as a proprietor or
manager that is held out to the public as a place where food is prepared and
served primarily for on-premises consumption to the general public in
consideration of payment and that has a dining room, a kitchen and the
employees necessary for preparing, cooking and serving food; provided that
RESTAURANT does not include establishments as defined in rules promulgated by
the State Director serving only hamburgers, sandwiches, salads and other fast
foods.
    RETAILER. A person licensed under the provisions of the Liquor Control Act
selling, offering for sale or having in the person's possession with the intent
to sell alcoholic beverages in unbroken packages, including growlers, for
consumption and not for resale off the licensed premises.
   SMALL BREWER. Any brewer licensed under the provisions of the Liquor Control
Act as a small brewer.
   STATE DIRECTOR. The Director of the Alcoholic Beverage Control Division of
the New Mexico Regulation and Licensing Department.
    TRANSFER. The changing of ownership or location of any license.
   WHOLESALER. Any person whose place of business is located in the city and
who sells, offers for
sale or possesses for the purpose of sale any alcoholic beverages for resale by
the purchaser.
   WINEGROWER. Any person who owns or operates a business for the manufacture
of wine or cider.
('74 Code, § 10-8-2) (Ord. 50-1979; Am. Ord. 58-1979; Am. Ord. 89-1981; Am.
Ord. 37-1993; Am. Ord. 31-2007; Am. Ord._2014-007; Am. Ord._2015-017; Am. Ord.
2023-010; Am. Ord. 2023-030)
§ 13-2-3 ISSUANCE OR TRANSFER OF A LICENSE.
   (A)   Notice to the city.
      (1)   At the time an applicant for the issuance or transfer of a license
submits to the State Director a written application for the issuance or
transfer of a license, the applicant shall notify the city of the application
by providing written notice to the Liquor Hearing Officer through the staff of
the City Council Services Department.
      (2)   The State Director will notify the Liquor Hearing Officer through
the staff of the City Council Services Department of any preliminary approval
of the issuance or transfer of the license prior to final approval.
   (B)   Process for review by the city. Once the Liquor Hearing Officer has
received a notice of preliminary approval, or conditional preliminary approval
(pending approval of a waiver), of the issuance or transfer of a license from
the State Director the Liquor Hearing Officer may approve or disapprove the
issuance or transfer of such license in accordance with the provisions of
paragraphs (1) through (9), below:
      (1)   After receiving the preliminary approval from the State Director,
the City Council staff shall within five days submit the notice of preliminary
approval to the Liquor Hearing Officer. The Liquor Hearing Officer shall
conduct a public hearing within 45 days from the date of the mailing of the
notice of preliminary approval by the State Director. The Liquor Hearing
Officer may promulgate rules of procedure for the hearings. These rules shall
conform with accepted administrative hearing procedures. The Liquor Hearing
Officer shall conduct this hearing and accept documentary and testimonial
evidence in accordance with such rules of procedure.
      (2)   The City Council staff shall provide notice of the public hearing
required by subsection (B)(1) above by:
         (a)   Publishing a notice of the date, time and place of the hearing
at least once a week for two consecutive weeks in a newspaper of general
circulation within the territorial limits of the city. The notice of hearing
shall set forth:
            (i)   The name and address of the licensee;
            (ii)   The action proposed to be taken by the State Director;
            (iii)   The location of the licensee's premises; and
            (iv)   Such other information as may be required by the State
Director.
         (b)   Sending a notice by certified mail to the applicant of the date,
time and place of the public hearing.
      (3)   A record shall be made of the public hearing.
      (4)   As soon as practicable after the public hearing, the Liquor Hearing
Officer shall issue a decision containing his or her findings and
recommendations.
      (5)   The Liquor Hearing Officer may disapprove the issuance or transfer
of the license if:
         (a)   The proposed location is within an area where the sale of
alcoholic beverages is prohibited by state law;
         (b)   The issuance or transfer would be in violation of the zoning
regulations or any other applicable ordinance of the city; or
         (c)   The issuance or transfer would be detrimental to the public
health, safety or morals of the residents of the city.
      (6)   Within 30 days after the public hearing, the Liquor Hearing Officer
shall notify the State Director as to whether the proposed issuance or transfer
of the license has been approved or disapproved. If the Liquor Hearing Officer
fails to either approve or disapprove the issuance or transfer of the license
within 30 days after the public hearing, the State Director may give final
approval to the issuance or transfer of the license.
      (7)   In the event of disapproval, the Liquor Hearing Officer's
notification to the State Director will set forth the reasons for the
disapproval. A copy of the minutes of the public hearing shall be submitted
with any such notification.
      (8)   The City Council, by delegation of authority, deems as approved all
findings and determinations made by the Liquor Hearing Officer.
      (9)   Any person aggrieved by any decision made by the Liquor Hearing
Officer as to the approval or disapproval of the issuance or transfer of a
license may appeal to the District Court by filing a petition in that Court
within 30 days from the date of the decision. The decision of the Liquor
Hearing Officer shall continue in force, pending a reversal or modification by
the District Court, unless otherwise ordered by the Court.
('74 Code, § 10-8-3) (Ord. 50-1979; Am. Ord. 58-1979; Am. Ord. 89-1981; Am.
Ord. 37-1993; Am. Ord. 13-1999; Am. Ord._2023-010)
§ 13-2-4 WAIVER OF DISTANCE REQUIREMENT BETWEEN LICENSED PREMISES FOR A LIQUOR
LICENSE AND CHURCH OR SCHOOL.
   (A)   Waiver required. No new licensed premise will be approved within 300
feet of a church or school unless a waiver is first approved pursuant to this
section.
   (B)   Notice and application to the city.
      (1)   Any person applying for the issuance or transfer of a liquor
license shall notify the State Director and the Liquor Hearing Officer as to
whether the proposed licensed premises is located within 300 feet of any church
or school.
      (2)   In the event that a school or church distance waiver is required
for the requested liquor license issuance or transfer pursuant to NMSA 1978 §
60-6(B)-10, the person applying for the liquor license shall apply for a waiver
on a form prescribed by the Liquor Hearing Officer.
   (C)   Process for review by the city.
      (1)   After receiving the application for the waiver, City Council staff
shall submit the application for waiver to the Liquor Hearing Officer for
purposes of holding a public hearing on the matter. Nothing herein shall
prohibit the Liquor Hearing Officer from conducting both the issuance or
transfer hearing, and the waiver hearing on the same day in the proper
sequence.
      (2)   The City Council staff shall provide notice of the public hearing
at least ten days prior to such hearing, to the applicant, any church or
school, and any recognized neighborhood association within 400 feet of the
proposed licensed premises, and to any person or organization requesting such
notice. The notice of hearing shall set forth:
         (a)   The name and address of the applicant;
         (b)   The location of the applicant's proposed licensed premises; and
         (c)   That the applicant has requested a waiver of the 300 feet
distance requirement.
      (3)   A record shall be made of the public hearing. The Liquor Hearing
Officer may promulgate rules of procedure for the waiver hearing. These rules
shall conform with accepted administrative hearing procedures. The Liquor
Hearing Officer shall conduct this hearing and accept documentary and
testimonial evidence in accordance with such rules of procedure.
      (4)   The Liquor Hearing Officer may grant a waiver of the prohibition of
a licensed premises within 300 feet of a church or school pursuant to § 60-6B-
10 NMSA 1978 in all IDO zones that allow all of the liquor sale or service
activities permitted under the requested license, provided that:
         (a)   The waiver will not be detrimental to the public health, safety,
welfare or morals of the affected neighborhood, including residents;
         (b)   The proposed location for which the waiver is sought will not be
within an area where the sale of alcoholic beverages is prohibited by the laws
of the state; and
         (c)   Granting of the waiver will not be in violation of a zoning or
other ordinance of the city.
      (5)   In evaluating paragraph (4)(a), above, the Liquor Hearing Officer
may consider factors that include but are not limited to:
         (a)   The attendance, hours, or programs of the church and/or school
as related to the proposed license operation;
         (b)   Existing natural or man-made barriers or access restrictions
between the proposed licensed premises and the school and/or church in
question;
         (c)   The recommendation of the school board and/or recognized parent
association in the case of a school, and the recommendation of the pastor,
rabbi, or other religious leader of the affected church;
         (d)   The consistency of such use with the educational, cultural,
social, religious, civic and community character of the area in which the
license or licenses would be issued;
         (e)   The impact of such license or licenses on other businesses,
residents, schools or churches in the area in question;
         (f)   The number and type of other applicants and/or licensed premises
in the area;
         (g)   Previous experience with similar licensed establishments in the
area or similar areas;
         (h)   The impact of the license on the area, including but not limited
to crime, traffic control and regulation, fire protection, planning and zoning,
parking, or other city ordinances, and the impact on the city concerning the
enforcement of the same;
         (i)   The type of structure, the exact location and the exact times of
operation proposed by the applicant;
         (j)   Previous experience with the applicant's operation of a liquor
establishment, if any;
         (k)   The benefit to the community or furtherance of a city policy;
         (I)   Any other relevant information.
      (6)   The Liquor Hearing Officer shall also consider information
solicited from the Police Department, the Fire Department, Traffic Engineering,
the Envlronmental Health Department, the Planning Department and the Zoning
Office. The information from those city agencies shall be provided to the
Liquor Hearing Officer at least seven days prior to the hearing on the waiver
and made available to the applicant and members of the public at least five
days prior to the hearing on the waiver.
      (7)   As soon as practicable after the publlc hearing, the Liquor Hearing
Officer shall issue a determination either granting or denying the waiver. The
City Council, by delegation of authority, deems as approved all findings and
recommendations made by the Liquor Hearing Officer.
      (8)   If the Liquor Hearing Officer disapproves the waiver, the Liquor
Hearing Officer shall disapprove the issuance or transfer of the license. The
Liquor Hearing Officer shall notify the State Director of the reasons for the
disapproval of the waiver. A copy of the minutes of the public hearing on the
waiver application shall be submitted to the State Director by the Liquor
Hearing Officer with the notice of disapproval of the waiver and issuance or
transfer.
      (9)   If the Liquor Hearing Officer approves the waiver, the Liquor
Hearing Officer may approve or disapprove the issuance or transfer of the
license.
      (10)   Any person aggrieved by any decision made by the Liquor Hearing
Officer as to the waiver may appeal to the District Court by filing a petition
in that Court within 30 days from the date of the decision of the Liquor
Hearing Officer. The decision of the Liquor Hearing Officer shall continue in
force, pending a reversal or modification by the District Court, unless
otherwise ordered by the Court for good cause shown.
(Ord. 13-1999; Am. Ord. 21-2003; Am. Ord._2014-007; Am. Ord._2015-017; Am. Ord.
2023-010)
§ 13-2-5 LICENSE FEES.
   (A)   The fee for issuance or transfer of a liquor license shall be $600 per
application.
   (B)   The fee for an application for a waiver shall be $600.
('74 Code, § 10-8-5) (Ord. 50-1979; Am. Ord. 89-1981; Am. Ord. 29-1996; Am.
Ord. 13-1999; Am. Ord._2023-010)
§ 13-2-6 SPECIAL DISPENSER'S AND CELEBRATION PERMITS.
   (A)   Public celebration.
      (1)   Dispenser’s licenses. Any person holding a dispenser's license in
the city, pursuant to the Liquor Control Act and upon written approval by the
city and final approval by the State Director, may dispense alcoholic beverages
at a public celebration held in the city.
      (2)   Small brewer, winegrower, or craft distiller licenses. Any person
holding a small brewer's, winegrowers, or craft distiller's license pursuant to
the Liquor Control Act, whether or not their license is held within the city,
may upon written approval by the city and final approval by the State Director,
dispense alcoholic beverages produced and packaged by or for the licensee, or
produced and packaged by another New Mexico small brewer, winegrower or craft
distiller, at a public celebration held in the city.
   (B)   Private celebrations. Any person holding a small brewer's,
winegrowers, or craft distiller's license pursuant to the Liquor Control Act,
whether or not their license is held within the city, may upon written approval
by the city and final approval by the State Director, dispense alcoholic
beverages produced and packaged by or for the licensee, or produced and
packaged by another New Mexico small brewer, winegrower or craft distiller, at
a private celebration held in the city.
   (C)   Application. The licensee must complete an Application for Approval of
Special Dispenser's, Public or Private Celebration Permit ("Application") and
must, as part of the application, obtain approvals from the following city
departments or officials:
      (1)   The Police Chief or designee;
      (2)   The Fire Chief or designee;
      (3)   The Environmental Health Department Director or designee; and
      (4)   If the public celebration will be held primarily outdoors and is
other than a public dance as defined in §
10-9-2, the licensee must obtain approval from the Zoning Enforcement Officer
or designee in addition to the officials listed above, provided, however, that
the provisions in
Chapter 14, Article 16, the Integrated Development Ordinance, that restrict the
dispensing of alcoholic beverages shall not apply to the dispensing of
alcoholic beverages pursuant to a Special Dispenser's Permit.
   (D)   (1)   Approval may be withheld by a city department or official listed
in division (C) of this section for good cause including:
         (a)   The approval would be in violation of a zoning or other
ordinance except as provided herein;
         (b)   The approval would be detrimental to the public health, safety
or morals of the city residents; or
         (c)   There was a violation by the licensee of any state, federal or
local law or regulation in connection with a previously approved Special
Dispenser's Permit.
      (2)   If a city department or official listed in division (C) of this
section withholds approval the reason(s) for withholding approval shall be
provided in writing to the licensee.
      (3)   Where appropriate, as an alternative to withholding approval, any
city department or official listed in division (C) of this section may
recommend that the Liquor Hearing Officer impose certain conditions or
limitations on the approval.
   (E)   The licensee must submit to the Liquor Hearing Officer the completed
Application together with any fees required by the city and the completed state
Special Dispenser's Permit Application form.
   (F)   Approval of a Special Dispenser's, Public or Private Celebration
Permit shall not be issued by the city if the Application and all applicable
fees and forms are not received by the Liquor Hearing Officer at least 15
business days prior to the function for which the permit is sought.
   (G)   If the Application is approved by all city officials listed in
division (C) of this section and is accompanied by the city fee and the state
Special Dispenser's, Public or Private Celebration Permit application, then the
Liquor Hearing Officer shall approve the Application so long as the request is
within the scope of a "public celebration" or "private celebration" as defined
within this article.
   (H)   Notwithstanding division (G), above, approval is subject to any
reasonable conditions or requirements recommended pursuant to subparagraph (D)
(3), above, and imposed by the Liquor Hearing Officer, together with any
additional conditions deemed appropriate by the Liquor Hearing Officer relating
to the preservation of the public health, safety or morals of city residents
and the effect of the approval on land uses surrounding the location from which
alcoholic beverages will be dispensed. Approval is also subject to all
regulations adopted by the city.
   (I)   The city's approval of a Special Dispenser's, Public or Private
Celebration Permit may be revoked by any city department or official listed in
division (C), above, before or during a public celebration or catered function
for good cause including, but not limited to, the falsification of information
on the Application and the failure to follow regulations or meet conditions
imposed.
   (J)   The dispenser's, small brewer's, winegrower's, or craft distiller's
licensee and its employees shall be the only persons permitted to dispense
alcohol during the function for which the Special Dispenser's, Public or
Private Celebration Permit is sought.
   (K)   The city's approval does not authorize the licensee to dispense
alcoholic beverages unless and until the licensee receives final approval from
the State Director. It shall be the responsibility of the licensee to transmit
the state application to the state so that the State Director receives the
application at least ten days prior to the function for which the Special
Dispenser's, Public or Private Celebration Permit is sought.
('74 Code, § 10-8-4) (Ord. 37- 1993; Am. Ord. 13-1999; Am. Ord._2017-025; Am.
Ord._2023-010)
ARTICLE 3: SOLICITATIONS
Section
Part 1: Business Solicitations
   
13-3-1-1   Purpose
   
13-3-1-2   Definitions
   
13-3-1-3   Permit required
   
13-3-1-4   Exemptions
   
13-3-1-5   Permit standards
   
13-3-1-6   Permit application
   
13-3-1-7   Category A permit; locations permitted
   
13-3-1-8   Category B permit; locations permitted
   
13-3-1-9   Permit fee
   
13-3-1-10   Hours of solicitations
   
13-3-1-11   Authorization or denial of permit
   
13-3-1-12   Visibility of permit; nontransferability; duration; renewals;
maximum number of permits held
   
13-3-1-13   Responsibility for cleanup
   
13-3-1-14   Permits not endorsement
   
13-3-1-15   Administration and applicability of other laws
 
   
13-3-1-98   Violations; suspensions and revocation of permit; hearing
   
13-3-1-99   Penalty
Part 2: Old Town Solicitations
   
13-3-2-1   Short title
   
13-3-2-2   Authority
   
13-3-2-3   Legislative intent
   
13-3-2-4   Definitions
   
13-3-2-5   Permit required
   
13-3-2-6   Exemptions
   
13-3-2-7   Old town portal market advisory board
   
13-3-2-8   Permit standards
   
13-3-2-9   Permit application
   
13-3-2-10   Permit fee
   
13-3-2-11   Procedure for authorization or denial of permit
   
13-3-2-12   Old town portal market
   
13-3-2-13   Hours of solicitation
   
13-3-2-14   Visibility of permit; nontransferability; duration; renewals;
maximum number of permits held
   
13-3-2-15   Prohibited activities
   
13-3-2-16   Special events
   
13-3-2-17   Permits not endorsement
   
13-3-2-18   Administration of and applicability of other law
 
   
13-3-2-98   Violations; suspension and revocation of permit; hearing
   
13-3-2-99   Penalty
Part 3: Advance Sale of Memberships
   
13-3-3-1   Authority
   
13-3-3-2   Findings and purpose
   
13-3-3-3   Definition
   
13-3-3-4   License fee
   
13-3-3-5   Subscriber warranty
   
13-3-3-6   Denial or revocation of license-right of hearing
 
   
13-3-3-99   Penalty
PART 1: BUSINESS SOLICITATIONS
§ 13-3-1-1 PURPOSE.
   The purpose of §§
13-3-1-1 et seq. is to protect the general public, to help control congestion
in the streets and sidewalks, and to help insure compliance with
Chapter 13, Article 1, Business Registration and the State Gross Receipts Tax.
('74 Code, § 10-10-1) (Ord. 53-1976; Am. Ord. 69-1982; Am. Ord. 58-1989; Am.
Ord. 5-1991)
§ 13-3-1-2 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of §§
13-3-1-1 et seq., the following definitions shall apply unless the context
clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   CATEGORY A PERMIT. A permit which authorizes the holder to solicit on public
streets and sidewalks in commercially zoned areas in the city, except in the H-
1 Historic Old Town Zone.
   CATEGORY B PERMIT. A permit which authorizes the holder to solicit at
private residences in the city.
   CONDUCTING SOLICITATIONS or CONDUC-TING BUSINESS SOLICITATIONS. Carrying on,
causing to be carried on, or pursuing any solicitation with the purpose of
direct or indirect benefit.
   H-1 HISTORIC OLD TOWN ZONE. That area so designated on the official zone
map.
   MAYOR. The Mayor or his designated representative.
   PERMIT. Written authorization from the city to conduct business
solicitations.
   PERSON. An individual desiring to solicit under §§
13-3-1-1 et seq.
   SIDEWALK. That portion of the public right-of-way which is primarily devoted
to pedestrian use.
   SOLICITATION. Selling, offering for sale, selling and delivering, bartering,
exchanging, peddling or hawking any goods, wares, merchandise, property either
real or personal, tangible or intangible, or services, or the making of or
personal appointments, attempting to procure or procuring of interviews, or
arranging for demonstrations or explanations preliminary to selling, offering
for sale, selling and delivering, bartering, exchanging, peddling or hawking of
any of the same.
   STREET. That portion of the public right-of-way which is primarily devoted
to vehicular use.
('74 Code, § 10-10-2) (Ord. 53-1976; Am. Ord. 69-1982; Am. Ord. 58-1989; Am.
Ord. 5-1991)
§ 13-3-1-3 PERMIT REQUIRED.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to conduct any business solicitation in
any location, unless such person has in his possession a valid permit issued in
accordance with the provisions of §§
13-3-1-1 et seq. and unless such person is conducting solicitations in a
location permitted by §§
13-3-1-1 et seq.
('74 Code, § 10-10-3) (Ord. 53-1976; Am. Ord. 58-1989; Am. Ord. 5-1991)
§ 13-3-1-4 EXEMPTIONS.
   Except as otherwise specifically provided in §§
13-3-1-1 et seq., said sections shall not apply to:
   (A)   Solicitations at traditional art shows and fiestas and at special
events of citywide interest which are sponsored by civic organizations;
provided such solicitations have been authorized by the Mayor. Each such event
shall be no more frequent than semiannual and shall last for no more than four
consecutive days. The Mayor shall develop an application form and procedures
for allowing solicitations at such special events, and may require a deposit
for clean up, liability insurance, or other city services.
   (B)   Sale of vegetables, fruits, meats or other produce raised and sold in
unprocessed form by the grower or producer thereof.
   (C)   Solicitations at private residences in the city by real estate agents,
insurance agents or insurance solicitors who have obtained a license from the
State Superintendent of Insurance or the New Mexico Real Estate Commission and
who carry such license on their person and who exhibit such license to any
owner or occupant of any residence upon demand.
   (D)   Solicitations on any privately owned commercial property in the city.
   (E)   Solicitations on any property belonging to governmental or political
subdivisions of the State of New Mexico and of the United States, except the
city.
   (F)   Solicitations by any natural person of the age of 17 years or under.
   (G)   Solicitations for public transportation for hire by either horse-drawn
or human powered vehicles provided the person performing such services has
obtained written authorization from the Mayor for the provision of such
services on public street rights-of-way. The Mayor shall develop an application
form and procedures for allowing such solicitations and may limit the public
street rights-of-way on which said vehicles may operate, the times of
operation, and may require liability insurance and set other conditions of
operation to ensure compliance with the laws of the state and the ordinances of
the city and provide for the general welfare.
   (H)   Solicitations by any individual or group engaging in a street
performance as defined at §12-2-28(C) ROA 1994.
('74 Code, § 10-10-4) (Ord. 53-1976; Am. Ord. 54-1984; Am. Ord. 58-1989; Am.
Ord. 5-1991; Am. Ord. 38-2007)
§ 13-3-1-5 PERMIT STANDARDS.
   (A)   Solicitations shall be conducted in accordance with the provisions of
§§
13-3-1-1 et seq.
   (B)   No permit holder or his employer shall have been convicted of a crime
involving solicitations in the city, the state or the United States within the
past ten years.
   (C)   Permit holders shall show evidence of having paid all local and state
taxes due as a result of their business solicitations.
('74 Code, § 10-10-5) (Ord. 53-1976; Am. Ord. 58-1989; Am. Ord. 5-1991)
§ 13-3-1-6 PERMIT APPLICATION.
   Any person desiring a permit pursuant to §§
13-3-1-1 et seq. shall file an application with the Mayor upon a form to be
provided by the Mayor. Fees as hereinafter set forth in §§
13-3-1-1 et seq. shall accompany said application. The application shall
include, but not be limited to, the following information:
   (A)   The name, mailing address, telephone number and social security number
of the applicant.
   (B)   If the applicant is employed by another person to conduct business
solicitation, the name, mailing address and telephone number of this employer.
   (C)   The State Gross Receipts Tax identification number and proof that the
applicant is in compliance with
Chapter 13, Article 1, Business Registration.
   (D)   The class of permit applied for, a description of the type of article,
merchandise, or food to be offered for sale, and a description of the vending
vehicle, cart, or stand to be used, if applicable.
   (E)   Two current passport size photographs of the applicant. The
photographs shall not be supplied until the applicant has been selected for
issuance of the permit.
   (F)   The proposed location or locations where the applicant desires to
conduct business solicitations.
   (G)   A declaration under penalty of perjury that neither the applicant nor
his employer, if applicable, has been convicted of a crime involving
solicitations in the city, the state or the United States within the past ten
years.
   (H)   A declaration under penalty of perjury that the applicant is 18 years
of age or older.
   (I)   A declaration that the applicant, if and when he becomes a permit
holder, agrees to indemnify and hold harmless the city, its officers and
employees from any and all damages or injury to persons or property proximately
caused by the act or neglect of the permit holder or by hazardous or negligent
conditions maintained at the solicitations location.
('74 Code, § 10-10-6) (Ord. 53-1976; Am. Ord. 41-1984; Am. Ord. 58-1989; Am.
Ord. 5-1991)
§ 13-3-1-7 CATEGORY A PERMIT; LOCATIONS PERMITTED.
   Holders of a Category A Permit shall be allowed to solicit in the following
locations within the city with the exception of the H-1 Historic Old Town Zone,
subject to any rules and regulations adopted by the Mayor:
   (A)   On public sidewalks in commercially zoned districts so long as the
solicitation does not obstruct or restrict the free use of the sidewalk by
pedestrians and so long as the solicitation does not effectively reduce the
width of the sidewalk along local or collector streets to less than four feet;
and along local or collector streets abutting schools and churches, along
arterial streets, to less than six feet; provided, however, that no
solicitations shall be permitted on any sidewalk designated as a park by the
Mayor.
   (B)   On public streets in accordance with applicable provisions of the
Traffic Code [set forth in
Chapter 8 of this code of ordinances].
('74 Code, § 10-10-7) (Ord. 53-1976; Am. Ord. 85-1989; Am. Ord. 59-1990; Am.
Ord. 5-1991)
§ 13-3-1-8 CATEGORY B PERMIT; LOCATIONS PERMITTED.
   Holders of a Category B Permit shall be allowed to solicit at private
residences within the city subject to any rules and regulations adopted by the
Mayor; provided, however, that no person shall solicit at any such premises
where the occupant(s) or owner(s) of said premises indicates orally or in
writing that he does not desire to have his right of privacy disturbed. For the
purposes of this section, it shall be sufficient written indication that one
does not desire to have his right of privacy disturbed, if there is placed on
such premises in a conspicuous place near the entrance thereof a sign bearing
the words "No Trespassing", "No Peddlers," "No Advertisements" or any sign
bearing a similar message.
('74 Code, § 10-10-8) (Ord. 53-1976; Am. Ord. 58-1989; Am. Ord. 5-1991)
§ 13-3-1-9 PERMIT FEE.
   Upon submitting the application for a permit, the applicant shall pay the
Treasurer of the city a nonrefundable fee of $10.
('74 Code, § 10-10-9) (Ord. 53-1976; Am. Ord. 69-1982; Am. Ord. 58-1989; Am.
Ord. 5-1991)
§ 13-3-1-10 HOURS OF SOLICITATIONS.
   (A)   Solicitations conducted under a Category A Permit are permitted
between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 9:00 p.m.
   (B)   Solicitations conducted under a Category B Permit are permitted
between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and sunset.
('74 Code, § 10-10-10) (Ord. 53-1976; Am. Ord. 58-1989; Am. Ord. 5-1991)
§ 13-3-1-11 AUTHORIZATION OR DENIAL OF PERMIT.
   The Mayor shall, within ten calendar days of receipt of the application for
permit, grant or deny the permit. If the Mayor affirmatively determines, upon
the basis of a review of the application, that the requirements have been met,
he shall grant the permit. If the Mayor determines, upon the basis of a review
of the application, that any of the requirements have not been met, the Mayor
shall notify the applicant that the application for the permit has been denied
and shall state the reasons upon which the denial is based. The denial of a
permit may be appealed to a city Hearing Officer by filing a written notice of
appeal with the City Clerk within 15 days of the denial's issuance. A hearing
shall be held in accordance with the provisions in the IHO Ordinance, ROA 1994,
Chapter 2, Article 7, Part 8.
('74 Code, § 10-10-11) (Ord. 53-1976; Am. Ord. 58-1989; Am. Ord. 5-1991; Am.
Ord. 20-1992; Am. Ord._2023-015)
§ 13-3-1-12 VISIBILITY OF PERMIT; NONTRANSFERABILITY; DURATION; RENEWALS;
MAXIMUM NUMBER OF PERMITS HELD.
   (A)   Any permit issued pursuant to §§
13-3-1-1 et seq. shall include the name, address and a photograph of the permit
holder. Permits must be carried by the permit holder at any time when he is
conducting business solicitations and must be shown to the public upon request.
   (B)   All permits shall be nontransferable.
   (C)   Permits shall be valid for a maximum of one year.
   (D)   Permits shall not automatically be renewed except by direction of the
Mayor. Persons who hold permits may submit applications for additional one year
terms.
   (E)   No person may hold or be issued more than one valid permit in each
permit category in any one year.
('74 Code, § 10-10-12) (Ord. 53-1976; Am. Ord. 58-1989; Am. Ord. 5-1991)
§ 13-3-1-13 RESPONSIBILITY FOR CLEANUP.
   Permit holders shall maintain their solicitations location in a clean and
hazard free condition; failure to so maintain and failure to clean the
solicitations location of waste shall be cause for revocation or suspension of
the permit.
('74 Code, § 10-10-14) (Ord. 53-1976; Am. Ord. 58-1989; Am. Ord. 5-1991)
§ 13-3-1-14 PERMITS NOT ENDORSEMENT.
   Permits under §§
13-3-1-1 et seq. shall not be deemed to constitute endorsement by the city of
any business solicitations so registered and no person shall intentionally
claim or infer, directly or indirectly any such endorsement by reason of its
permit.
('74 Code, § 10-10-15) (Ord. 53-1976; Am. Ord. 58-1989; Am. Ord. 5-1991)
§ 13-3-1-15 ADMINISTRATION AND APPLICABILITY OF OTHER LAWS.
   The Mayor may adopt such rules and regulations as necessary for the safe and
equitable administration of §§
13-3-1-1 et seq. The business solicitations permit does not constitute a waiver
of any requirement or provision contained in any ordinance of the city or state
or Federal law.
('74 Code, § 10-10-13) (Ord. 53-1976; Am. Ord. 58-1989; Am. Ord. 5-1991; Am.
Ord. 20-1992)
§ 13-3-1-98 VIOLATIONS; SUSPENSIONS AND REVOCATION OF PERMIT; HEARING.
   (A)   If the Mayor believes that a person has:
      (1)   Violated any provision of §§
13-3-1-1 et seq. or of regulations applicable to permit holders;
      (2)   Made fraudulent, misrepresentative, or false statements in the
application for the permit; or
      (3)   Conducted business solicitations in an unlawful manner or in such a
way as to constitute a menace to the health or safety of the public; the Mayor
shall give the permit holder written notice by certified mail, return receipt
requested, that the Mayor intends to proceed to suspend or revoke the permit
unless the permit holder requests a hearing. Such request shall be made in
writing and filed in the office of the City Clerk within 15 days from the day
that the permit holder receives the notice of the proposed action. The notice
shall contain a statement of the facts upon which the Mayor has acted. A
suspension of a permit shall not exceed 90 calendar days.
   (B)   If a permit holder fails to request a hearing pursuant to division (A)
above, the Mayor shall proceed to suspend or revoke the permit. The written
determination by the Mayor to suspend or revoke the permit shall be filed in
the office of the City Clerk and sent by certified mail, return receipt
requested, to the permit holder.
   (C)   When a hearing is requested pursuant to division (A) above, the
hearing shall be held in accordance with the provisions in the IHO Ordinance,
ROA 1994,
Chapter 2, Article 7, Part 8.
   (D)   Any person whose permit has been revoked shall not be permitted to
apply for another permit for one year after the filing of the written statement
revoking the permit.
('74 Code, § 10-10-16) (Ord. 53-1976; Am. Ord. 69-1982; Am. Ord. 58-1989; Am.
Ord. 5-1991; Am. Ord._2023-015)
§ 13-3-1-99 PENALTY.
   Any person violating any of the provisions of §§
13-3-1-1 et seq. shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction
thereof shall be subject to the penalty provisions set forth in §
1-1-99 of this code of ordinances. Each day of violation shall be considered a
separate offense.
('74 Code, § 10-10-17) (Ord. 53-1976; Am. Ord. 58-1989; Am. Ord. 5-1991)
PART 2: OLD TOWN SOLICITATIONS
§ 13-3-2-1 SHORT TITLE.
   Sections
13-3-2-1 et seq. shall be known and may be cited as the "Old Town Solicitations
Ordinance."
('74 Code, § 10-2-1) (Ord. 20-1991)
§ 13-3-2-2 AUTHORITY.
   The City Council, pursuant to the Charter of the City of Albuquerque and
Article X, Section 6 of the Constitution of New Mexico, hereby enacts §§
13-3-2-1 et seq. as authorized by such provisions.
('74 Code, § 10-2-2) (Ord. 20-1991)
§ 13-3-2-3 LEGISLATIVE INTENT.
   (A)   Findings.
      (1)   The Old Town HPO 5 is one of the nation's first locally designated
historic districts.
      (2)   The designation of the Old Town HPO 5 as a historic area is an
effort to preserve, protect and promote the educational, cultural and artistic
interests of the Old Town HPO 5 and the general public.
      (3)   Regulating solicitations in the Old Town HPO 5 is necessary in
order to foster the educational, cultural and artistic interests of the Old
Town HPO 5 and the general public.
      (4)   Limiting solicitations in the Old Town HPO 5 to the Old Town Portal
Market and providing that only handcrafted items may be sold is necessary in
order to foster the educational, cultural and artistic interests of the Old
Town HPO 5 and the general public.
   (B)   Purpose. The purpose of §§
13-3-2-1 et seq. is to preserve, protect and promote the educational, cultural
and artistic interests of the Old Town HPO 5 and the general public, control
congestion, and protect the health and welfare of the citizens of the city.
('74 Code, § 10-2-3) (Ord. 20-1991; Am. Ord._2019-023)
§ 13-3-2-4 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of §§
13-3-2-1 et seq., the following definitions shall apply unless the context
clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   BOARD. The Old Town Portal Market Advisory Board created by and established
pursuant to §§
13-3-2-1 et seq.
   CRAFT UNIT. An applicant and the individuals specified in the permit
application. A craft unit may not exceed three persons.
   HANDCRAFTED. Production by one person by the use of hands and hand tools
displaying a degree of manual skill or dexterity and not primarily mass
produced or machine made.
   HANDCRAFTED ITEMS. Those objects which are produced by the use of hands and
hand tools, displaying a degree of manual skill or dexterity, and include, but
are not limited to, beadwork, basketry, pottery, silver, turquoise and shell
jewelry, handwoven cloth and blankets and objects made therefrom; leather goods
and wood carving. Such items may be comprised of new materials or machine-made
parts or elements, provided that no object which is primarily mass produced or
machine-made shall be considered to be handcrafted.
   MACHINE-MADE. The producing or reproducing of an item in mass production by
mechanically stamping, casting, blanking and weaving, except mechanically
pressed silver beads.
   MAKER'S MARK. An individual craftperson's mark or craft unit's mark, used to
verify and indicate creation of an object by that person or unit.
   MAYOR. The Mayor or the Mayor's designated representative.
   OLD TOWN HPO 5. That area so designated on the city's official zone map.
   OLD TOWN PORTAL MANAGER. The administrator of the provisions of §§
13-3-2-1 et seq. whose general duties include daily program maintenance, record
keeping, site visits, quality control, policy planning and acting as the
liaison to the Old Town Portal Market Advisory Board. The Old Town Portal
Manager shall be an employee of the city.
   OLD TOWN PORTAL MARKET. That portion of the public right-of-way set aside in
the Old Town HPO 5 where vendors may solicit in accordance with §§
13-3-2-1 et seq.
   OLD TOWN SOLICITATIONS PERMIT. Written authorization from the city to
conduct solicitations within the allowed area of the Old Town HPO 5.
   PERMIT. The Old Town Solicitations Permit.
   PERSON. An individual.
   SIDEWALK. That portion of the public right-of-way which is primarily devoted
to pedestrian use.
   SOLICIT, SOLICITING and SOLICITATION. Selling, offering for sale, bartering,
exchanging, peddling or hawking any goods, wares, merchandise, property either
real or personal, tangible or intangible, or services, or the making of
personal appointments, attempting to procure or the procuring of interviews, or
arranging for demonstrations or explanations preliminary to selling, offering
for sale, selling and delivering, bartering, exchanging, peddling, or hawking
of any of the same.
   SPECIAL EVENT. An art show, fiesta or other event of city-wide interest
which is sponsored or authorized by the city or declared to be a special event
by the Mayor.
   STREET. That portion of the public right-of-way which is primarily devoted
to vehicular use.
   VENDOR. A person over the age of 18 holding a valid Old Town Solicitations
Permit to solicit within the allowed area of the Old Town HPO 5.
('74 Code, § 10-2-4) (Ord. 20-1991; Am. Ord._2019-023)
§ 13-3-2-5 PERMIT REQUIRED.
   Only those persons holding a valid Old Town Solicitations Permit issued by
the Mayor may solicit in the Old Town HPO 5 and then only in accordance with §§
13-3-2-1 et seq.
('74 Code, § 10-2-5) (Ord. 20-1991; Am. Ord._2019-023)
§ 13-3-2-6 EXEMPTIONS.
   Except as otherwise specifically provided in §§
13-3-2-1 et seq. and subject to all other pertinent ordinances, §§
13-3-2-1 et seq. shall not apply to:
   (A)   Solicitations at traditional art shows and fiestas and at special
events of city-wide interest which are sponsored by civic organizations,
provided such solicitations have been authorized by the Mayor. Each such event
shall be no more frequent than semi-annual and shall last for no more than four
consecutive days. The Mayor shall develop an application form and procedures
for allowing solicitations at such special events, and may require a deposit
for clean up, liability insurance, or other city services.
   (B)   Solicitations made to residents at their residences, such solicitation
being covered by the Business Solicitations Ordinance.
   (C)   Solicitations in any privately owned commercial property in the Old
Town HPO 5.
   (D)   Solicitations for public transportation for hire by either horse-drawn
or human powered vehicles provided the person performing such services has
obtained written authorization from the Mayor for the provision of such
services on public street rights-of-way. The Mayor shall develop an application
form and procedures for allowing such solicitations and may limit the public
street rights-of-way on which said vehicles may operate, the times of
operations, and may require liability insurance and set other conditions of
operation to ensure compliance with the laws of the state, the ordinances of
the city and provide for the general welfare.
   (E)   Solicitations by any individual or group engaging in a street
performance as defined at §
12-2-28(C) ROA 1994. Exception: This exemption from the requirement to have a
permit from the Mayor shall not apply if the street performance occurs in the
Old Town Plaza Park or the streets immediately surrounding the Old Town Plaza
including the sidewalks on both sides of the streets and the sidewalk occupied
by the Old Town Portal Market, whether or not vendors are present.
('74 Code, § 10-2-6) (Ord. 20-1991; Am. Ord. 38-2007; Am. Ord._2019-023)
§ 13-3-2-7 OLD TOWN PORTAL MARKET ADVISORY BOARD.
   (A)   Creation. There is hereby created an Old Town Portal Market Advisory
Board of the city.
   (B)   Membership. The Board shall be composed of five members appointed by
the Mayor, two of whom shall be representatives of the merchants or property
owners in the Old Town HPO 5 who are not vendors regulated pursuant to §§
13-3-2-1 et seq., two of whom shall be representatives of vendors regulated
under §§
13-3-2-1 et seq. and one at-large member.
   (C)   Terms, Vacancies, Member Removal.
      (1)   The members shall be appointed and otherwise regulated as set forth
in §§
2-6-1-1 et seq. of this code of ordinances.
      (2)   The vendors and the merchants or property owners shall recommend
members within their respective categories to the Mayor.
   (D)   Duties, Responsibilities and Powers.
      (1)   The Board shall advise the Mayor and City Council regarding:
         (a)   Rules and regulations for the safe and equitable administration
of §§
13-3-2-1 et seq.
         (b)   Policies regulating the vendors and the equitable issuance of
permits issued pursuant to §§
13-3-2-1 et seq.
         (c)   The Board's recommendations are not binding on the Mayor.
      (2)   The Board shall make a semi-annual report to the Mayor and City
Council which shall review the operation of vendors permitted under §§
13-3-2-1 et seq. and recommend amendments to policies and procedures of §§
13-3-2-1 et seq.
      (3)   The Board should review the policy of solicitations in the Old Town
HPO 5 by conducting at least one public meeting for such pur-pose, annually;
should advise on policy and planning; and should promote communication and
collaboration among parties affected by §§
13-3-2-1 et seq.
   (E)   The Old Town Portal Manager shall be the city staff assigned to the
Board.
('74 Code, § 10-2-7) (Ord. 20-1991; Am. Ord._2019-023)
§ 13-3-2-8 PERMIT STANDARDS.
   (A)   Solicitations shall be conducted in accordance with the provisions of
§§
13-3-2-1 et seq.
   (B)   Solicitations shall only involve items which are hand-crafted by the
vendor or vendor's craft unit. The Mayor may promulgate rules on how members of
a craft unit may participate in hand crafting items.
   (C)   No more than 50 Old Town Solicitations Permits, which allow soliciting
in the Old Town HPO 5, shall be issued. In the event that there are more than
50 applications for Old Town Solicitations Permits, only 50 Old Town
Solicitations Permits shall be granted by such methods as may be established by
regulation of the Mayor that will insure a fair and equitable granting of
permits.
   (D)   Individuals who are seeking a permit as a craft unit may submit an
application only in connection with one craft unit.
   (E)   All members of a craft unit shall be capable of handcrafting a
handcrafted item produced by the craft unit for sale pursuant to this
ordinance.
   (F)   Persons who have had a permit revoked for violating the provisions of
§§
13-3-2-1 et seq. relative to the production and origin of items sold shall not
be issued another Old Town Solicitations Permit for a period of ten years from
the date of such revocation.
   (G)   Vendors shall show evidence of having paid all local and state taxes
due as a result of their solicitations.
('74 Code, § 10-2-8) (Ord. 20-1991; Am. Ord. 36-1993; Am. Ord._2019-023)
§ 13-3-2-9 PERMIT APPLICATION.
   Any person or craft unit desiring a permit pursuant to §§
13-3-2-1 et seq. shall file an application with the Mayor upon a form to be
provided by the Mayor. If a permit is issued, members of the craft unit may be
deleted during the permit period by giving the Mayor prior written notice of
the changes, provided at no time shall the craft unit exceed the maximum of
three individuals. Fees as set forth in §§
13-3-2-1 et seq. shall accompany the application. The application shall
include, but not be limited to, the following information:
   (A)   The name, mailing address, telephone number and social security number
of the applicant and any members of the applicant's craft unit who request
authorization by the permit to make and sell items under the terms of §§
13-3-2-1 et seq.
   (B)   The types of handcrafted items that the applicant makes and the
location at which the applicant makes such items.
   (C)   A description of the types of handcrafted items that the applicant
intends to offer for sale.
   (D)   The State Gross Receipts Tax identification number and proof that the
applicant is in compliance with
Chapter 13, Article 1, Business Registration.
   (E)   Two current passport size photographs of the applicant and all members
of the craft unit who will be vending. The photographs shall not be supplied
until the applicant has been selected for issuance of the permit.
   (F)   A document indicating the maker's mark of each individual member of a
craft unit or of the individual vendor. There is no requirement that the
maker's mark be registered with any other agency.
   (G)   A declaration under penalty of perjury that the applicant is 18 years
of age or older.
   (H)   A declaration that the applicant agrees to grant to the Old Town
Portal Manager, or the designee, the right to enter the studio, place of
business or place of manufacture of the vendor and the vendor's craft unit to
insure compliance with the provisions of §§
13-3-2-1 et seq. Any visitation pursuant to this grant of authority will be
done between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m. Every attempt to give
reasonable notice to the vendor will be made. In the event the Old Town Portal
Manager or designee deem that it is necessary to make a visit without notice,
they shall certify in writing the need for such visit and reasons why no notice
should be given.
   (I)   A declaration that the applicant, if and when the applicant becomes a
vendor, agrees to indemnify and hold harmless the city, its officers and
employees from any and all damages or injury to persons or property proximately
caused by the act or neglect of the vendor or by hazardous or negligent
conditions maintained at the solicitations location.
('74 Code, § 10-2-9) (Ord. 20-1991)
§ 13-3-2-10 PERMIT FEE.
   Upon submitting the application for a permit, the applicant shall pay the
Treasurer of the city a nonrefundable fee of $25. Before issuance of the
permit, the applicant shall pay the Treasurer an additional $100.
('74 Code, § 10-2-10) (Ord. 20-1991)
§ 13-3-2-11 PROCEDURE FOR AUTHORIZATION OR DENIAL OF PERMIT.
   The Mayor shall, within 45 calendar days of receipt of the application for
permit, grant or deny the permit. If the Mayor affirmatively determines, upon
inquiry and examination, that the requirements have been met, he shall grant
the permit. If the Mayor determines, upon inquiry and examination, that any of
the requirements have not been met, the Mayor shall notify the applicant that
the application for the permit has been denied and shall state the findings of
fact upon which the denial is based. The denial of a permit may be appealed to
a City Hearing Officer by filing a written notice of appeal with the City Clerk
within 15 days of the denial's issuance; the hearing shall be held in
accordance with the provisions in the IHO Ordinance, ROA 1994, Chapter 2,
Article 7, Part 8.
('74 Code, § 10-2-11) (Ord. 20-1991; Am. Ord. 38-2002; Am. Ord._2023-015)
§ 13-3-2-12 OLD TOWN PORTAL MARKET.
   Old Town Solicitations Permits will be granted to allow persons to solicit
in the Old Town HPO 5 subject to the following conditions and subject to any
necessary rules and regulations adopted by the Mayor to implement §§
13-3-2-1 et seq.:
   (A)   Vendors shall be allowed to solicit within the Old Town HPO 5 only on
the porch, on the sidewalk along the east side of San Felipe Street, NW, from
the line perpendicular to San Felipe Street taken from the midpoint of South
Plaza Street, NW, to 16 feet south of the north end of the porch. This area
shall be divided into 15 equal spaces, which shall be generally five feet in
width and six feet in depth measured from the building wall. The spaces shall
have provision for access and shall be divided in such a way to ensure movement
and safety. The Old Town Portal Manager shall administratively determine and
delineate the exact location of the spaces to insure that soliciting does not
obstruct the view from the two large windows of the La Placita Restaurant and
to insure movement and safety between the vendors. All spaces will be numbered
from 1 through 15 beginning at the south end of the designated area.
   (B)   The spaces shall be available each day to vendors. The Old Town Portal
Manager will assign spaces for each day to those vendors present at the time of
assignment. Assignment shall be made once a week for each day of the subsequent
week for a seven-day period by such methods established by regulation of the
Mayor that will insure a fair and equitable assignment of spaces. Each vendor
who is assigned a space shall pay a daily user fee of $12. No vendor may occupy
more than one space, whether or not there are spaces otherwise unoccupied, and
only one person shall be permitted to occupy one space. If a vendor has not
filled his or her assigned space on a given day, the Old Town Portal Manager
may reassign the space for the balance of that day and shall receive the daily
user fee from the vendor reassigned to the space. The reassignment procedures
will be established by regulation of the Mayor.
   (C)   A vendor shall sell only handcrafted items handcrafted by that vendor
or his or her craft unit, and each item to be sold shall contain the maker's
mark of that vendor or member of a craft unit. Items such as jewelry, shall be
labeled for content if a significant part of the value of the item relates to
its content; for example, silver should be labeled as sterling silver, nickel
silver and the like, as appropriate, stone should be labeled as turquoise,
reconstituted turquoise and the like, as appropriate. Vendors shall comply with
the provisions of all laws of the state and of the United States applicable to
the sales of the items they are vending.
   (D)   For each transaction, the vendor shall issue a sales receipt showing
the vendor's permit number.
   (E)   The Old Town Portal Manager may designate a person to make site visits
to the studio, the place of business or place of manufacture, of the vendor and
the vendor's craft unit to insure compliance with the provisions of §§
13-3-2-1 et seq. The Old Town Portal Manager and the designee shall from time
to time inspect the vendor's operation on the Old Town Portal Market.
   (F)   Vendors shall attempt to solicit in the Old Town Portal Market in at
least one weekly lottery in each four-week period.
   (G)   Permits will be issued for a one year period starting July 1, 1991.
All permits issued after July 1 of any year will expire on the following June
30.
   (H)   The Mayor shall have the authority to issue warnings and citations and
initiate complaints, as appropriate for violations of §§
13-3-2-1 et seq., its implementing rules and regulations, or other city
ordinances.
('74 Code, § 10-2-12) (Ord. 20-1991; Am. Ord. 14-2002; Am. Ord._2019-023)
§ 13-3-2-13 HOURS OF SOLICITATION.
   Solicitations conducted under the Old Town Solicitations Permits are
permitted only between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 9:00 p.m.
('74 Code, § 10-2-13) (Ord. 20-1991)
§ 13-3-2-14 VISIBILITY OF PERMIT; NONTRANSFERABILITY; DURATION; RENEWALS;
MAXIMUM NUMBER OF PERMITS HELD.
   (A)   Any permit issued pursuant to §§
13-3-2-1 et seq. shall include the name and a photograph of the vendor. Permits
shall be visible to the public at all times when the vendor is soliciting.
   (B)   All permits shall be nontransferable.
   (C)   Permits shall be valid for a maximum of one year.
   (D)   Permits shall not automatically be renewed. Persons who hold permits
may submit applications for additional one year terms.
   (E)   No person may hold or be issued more than one valid Old Town
Solicitations Permit in any one year period.
('74 Code, § 10-2-14) (Ord. 20-1991)
§ 13-3-2-15 PROHIBITED ACTIVITIES.
   (A)   No permit holder under the Portal in the Old Town Portal Market shall:
      (1)   Sell items that are not hand-crafted;
      (2)   Sell items without a permit;
      (3)   Sell items not made by that person or his or her craft unit;
      (4)   Post a sign on the building along the designated area nor shall any
item be leaned against or affixed to the adjacent building, including any of
the windows;
      (5)   Bring alcoholic beverages, or controlled dangerous substances,
drink or use the same at any time, nor shall any person be under the influence
of intoxicating liquor or a controlled dangerous substance;
      (6)   Engage in violent, abusive, indecent, profane, boisterous,
unreasonably loud or otherwise disorderly conduct which tends to disturb the
peace;
      (7)   Maliciously disturb, or threaten, or in an insolent manner,
intentionally touch or apply force to any person;
      (8)   Obstruct any portion of the entries, passages, vestibules and ways
of access in the right-of-way;
      (9)   Park his or her vehicle in front of residential properties in the
Old Town HPO 5;
      (10)   Fail to maintain his or her solicitations location in a clean and
hazard free condition;
      (11)   Exchange or otherwise assign spaces that have been assigned to
that vendor or craft unit for any given day. Reassignments will only be made
pursuant to §
13-3-2-12(B).
   (B)   Notwithstanding any other provision in §§
13-3-2-1 et seq., if the Mayor has a reasonable suspicion that a vendor is
engaged in one of the activities prohibited by division (A) of this section,
the Mayor may require the vendor to cease soliciting for that day and leave the
Old Town Portal Market. If the Mayor believes that such conduct by the vendor
is of a serious enough nature that the vendor's permit should be suspended or
revoked, the procedure set out in §
13-3-2-98 for the suspension or revocation of a permit shall apply.
('74 Code, § 10-2-16) (Ord. 20-1991; Am. Ord. 36-1993; Am. Ord._2019-023)
§ 13-3-2-16 SPECIAL EVENTS.
   The provisions of §§
13-3-2-1 et seq. regulating soliciting within the Old Town HPO 5 shall not
apply to activities in conjunction with a special event.
('74 Code, § 10-2-17) (Ord. 20-1991; Am. Ord._.2019-023)
§ 13-3-2-17 PERMITS NOT ENDORSEMENT.
   Permits issued under §§
13-3-2-1 et seq. shall not be deemed to constitute endorsement by the city of
Albuquerque of any solicitations made hereunder and no person shall claim or
infer directly or indirectly any such endorsement by reason of its permit.
('74 Code, § 10-2-18) (Ord. 20-1991)
§ 13-3-2-18 ADMINISTRATION OF AND APPLICABILITY OF OTHER LAW.
   (A)   The Mayor shall adopt such rules and regulations as necessary for the
safe and equitable administration of §§
13-3-2-1 et seq. The issuance of a permit does not constitute a waiver of any
requirement or provision contained in any ordinance of the city or state or
federal law.
   (B)   In the event that the provisions of §§
13-3-2-1 et seq. are in conflict with the provisions of §§
13-3-1-1 et seq. of this article, the provisions of §§
13-3-2-1 et seq. shall prevail.
('74 Code, § 10-2-19) (Ord. 20-1991)
§ 13-3-2-98 VIOLATIONS; SUSPENSION AND REVOCATION OF PERMIT; HEARING.
   (A)   If the Mayor has a reasonable suspicion that a vendor has:
      (1)   Violated any provision of §§
13-3-2-1 et seq. or of regulations applicable to vendors;
      (2)   Made fraudulent, misrepresentative, or false statements in the
application for the permit; or
      (3)   Conducted solicitations in an unlawful manner or in such a way as
to constitute a menace to the health or safety of the public; or in a manner
that is not conducive to the overall welfare and promotion of the Old Town HPO
5, the Mayor shall give the vendor written notice by certified mail, return
receipt requested, that the Mayor intends to proceed to suspend or revoke the
permit unless the vendor requests a hearing by a City Hearing Officer. Such
request shall be made in writing and filed in the office of the City Clerk
within 15 days from the day that the vendor receives the notice of the proposed
action. The notice shall contain a statement of the facts upon which the Mayor
has acted. A suspension of a permit shall not exceed 90 calendar days.
   (B)   If a vendor fails to request a hearing pursuant to division (A) above,
the Mayor shall proceed to suspend or revoke the permit. The written
determination by the Mayor to suspend or revoke the permit shall be filed in
the office of the City Clerk and sent by certified mail, return receipt
requested, to the vendor.
   (C)   When a hearing is requested pursuant to division (A) above, the
hearing shall be held In accordance with the provisions in the IHO Ordinance,
ROA 1994,
Chapter 2, Article 7, Part 8.
   (D)   Any person whose permit has been revoked shall not be permitted to
apply for another permit for one year after the filing of the written statement
revoking the permit; provided, that any person who has had a permit revoked for
violating the provisions of §§
13-3-2-1 et seq. relative to the production and origin of items sold shall not
be permitted to apply for another permit for a period of ten years from the
date of such revocation.
('74 Code, § 10-2-15) (Ord. 20-1991; Am. Ord._2019-023; Am. Ord._2023-015)
§ 13-3-2-99 PENALTY.
   Every person convicted of a violation of any provision of §§
13-3-2-1 et seq. shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be subject to the
penalty provisions set forth in §
1-1-99 of this code of ordinances. Every day such violation is committed or
permitted to continue shall constitute a separate offense and shall be
punishable as such hereunder.
('74 Code, § 10-2-20) (Ord. 20-1991)
PART 3: ADVANCE SALE OF MEMBERSHIPS
§ 13-3-3-1 AUTHORITY.
   Sections
13-3-3-1 et seq. is enacted pursuant to Section 3-38-1 NMSA 1978, Article I of
the Charter of the City of Albuquerque, and Article X, Section 6 of the
Constitution of New Mexico.
('74 Code, § 10-5-1) (Ord. 102-1981)
§ 13-3-3-2 FINDINGS AND PURPOSE.
   The City Council finds that residents of the city are frequently solicited
to buy membership or otherwise pay towards rights in organizations such as
health spas, dance clubs and travel clubs that are to be established in the
city in the future with no guarantee of refunds should such organizations not
come into existence according to the promises or agreements under which the
sponsor of the organization solicits the money. Sections
13-3-3-1 et seq. is intended to protect members of the general public from the
risks of such failure to perform.
('74 Code, § 10-5-2) (Ord. 102-1981)
§ 13-3-3-3 DEFINITION.
   For the purpose of §§
13-3-3-1 et seq., the following definitions shall apply unless the context
clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   FUTURE ESTABLISHMENT. A person or organization seeking to begin operation
providing services for remuneration sometime in the future and which sells
memberships or other rights to the service of the establishment prior to such
service being available.
   MAYOR. The Mayor or his designated representative.
   OWNER. The owner(s), manager(s), or agent(s)  of any future establishment.
   SUBSCRIBER. Anyone who purchases membership or other rights in a future
establishment.
('74 Code, § 10-5-3) (Ord. 102-1981)
§ 13-3-3-4 LICENSE FEE.
   Before a future establishment begins to sell memberships or other rights to
services in the establishment, the owner shall pay to the city a nonrefundable
license fee of $150. The license fee shall be accompanied by such information
as the Mayor shall by regulation require, including but not limited to the
general background of the future establishment with disclosure of past
litigation involving the owners in the future establishment, the nature of the
services to be provided by the future establishment, the full range and
schedule of membership and other rights to services to be presold, scheduled
opening date and planned locations of the future establishment, and a
subscriber warranty as set out in §
13-3-3-5. The Mayor shall have the right to inspect the books and records of
the future establishments. Future establishments shall keep accurate books and
records reflecting sales of future services and shall report such information
to the Mayor as he may periodically require to insure that such sales do not
exceed the guarantee amount as set out in §
13-3-3-5.
('74 Code, § 10-5-4) (Ord. 102-1981)
§ 13-3-3-5 SUBSCRIBER WARRANTY.
   As part of the application, the owner shall certify to the Mayor a warranty
to subscribers which guarantees that subscribers will be refunded dollar for
dollar in the event and to the extent the services promised in exchange for
payment received from the subscribers are not delivered. The owner may not sell
memberships or other rights in the future establishment in excess of the
guarantee amount established. The warranty may be in the form of a performance
bond, escrow account, or any other arrangement satisfactory to the Mayor. The
owner shall not be released from the obligation of this warranty until one year
after the commencement of full operation of all services as advertised and paid
for by subscribers prior to opening. Any subscriber aggrieved by a future
establishment because of a failure of a future establishment to deliver
services paid for by the subscriber may bring an action on the subscriber
warranty for recovery, which action shall be in addition to any other rights or
remedies the subscriber might have against the owner and/or the future
establishment.
('74 Code, § 10-5-5) (Ord. 102-1981)
§ 13-3-3-6 DENIAL OR REVOCATION OF LICENSE-RIGHT OF HEARING.
   (A)   If the Mayor determines that the owner of a future establishment fails
to meet any of the requirements for the license he may deny the application
therefor; or if the Mayor determines that the owner of a future establishment
has violated the terms under which a license has been granted he may suspend or
revoke the same.
   (B)   The owner shall be given notice of such denial, suspension, or
revocation in writing by personal service or certified mail, addressed to the
place of business listed on the application. Such notice shall contain a
statement of the reasons for and/or conditions of the denial, suspension, or
revocation, the date when the denial, suspension, or revocation shall take
effect, which shall not be less than ten working days from the date the notice
was mailed or served, and notify the permit holder that he may appeal the
decision by filing with the City Clerk a written request for hearing, which
must be received by the City Clerk within 15 days of the notice of denial.
   (C)   In the event an owner is preselling rights in a future establishment
without a license and the Mayor has reasonable cause to believe the license is
required, the Mayor shall notify the owner by personal service or certified
mail to cease and desist. Such notice shall contain the effective date of such
order, which shall not be less than ten working days from the date the notice
was mailed or served, and notify the owner that he may appeal the decision by
filing with the City Clerk a written request for hearing, which must be
received by the City Clerk within 15 days of the notice of denial.
   (D)   The hearing shall be conducted In accordance with the provisions in
the Independent Hearing Office Ordinance §§
2-7-8-1 et seq.
   (E)   In the event a hearing is not timely requested, or the action of the
Mayor to deny, suspend, or revoke a license, or cease and desist is affirmed,
and this action is not complied with, the Mayor may take appropriate legal
action to enforce the same.
('74 Code, § 10-5-6) (Ord. 102-1981; Am. Ord._2023-015)
§ 13-3-3-99 PENALTY.
   Any person who violates any provision of §§
13-3-3-1 et seq. shall be subject to the general penalty provisions of this
code set forth in §
1-1-99.
('74 Code, § 10-5-7) (Ord. 102-1981)
ARTICLE 4: PUBLIC UTILITY COMPANIES
Section
Part 1: Gas Franchise
   
13-4-1-1   Grant of authority
   
13-4-1-2   Duties of the company; city to be held harmless
   
13-4-1-3   Transfer of franchise
   
13-4-1-4   Payment to city
   
13-4-1-5   Acceptance
   
13-4-1-6   Effective date
   
13-4-1-7   Repealer
Part 2: Electricity Franchise
   
13-4-2-1    Short title
   
13-4-2-2   Grant of authority
   
13-4-2-3   Term
   
13-4-2-4   Franchise fee
   
13-4-2-5   Construction activities
   
13-4-2-6   Tree trimming, maintenance, and moving of aerials
   
13-4-2-7   Insurance and indemnity
   
13-4-2-8   Miscellaneous provisions
   
13-4-2-9   Acceptance
   
13-4-2-10   Severability clause
Part 3: Telephone Franchise
   
13-4-3-1   Grant of authority; duties
   
13-4-3-2   Use of system by city
   
13-4-3-3   Company liability
   
13-4-3-4   Housemoving and other unusual use
   
13-4-3-5   Payment to city
   
13-4-3-6   Inspection of books
   
13-4-3-7   Services provided to city
   
13-4-3-8   Payment in lieu of other taxes
   
13-4-3-9   Non-waiver of other rights
   
13-4-3-10   Term of franchise
   
13-4-3-11   Effective date; acceptance
Part 4: New Mexico Utility Franchise
   
13-4-4-1   Short title
   
13-4-4-2   Legislative findings
   
13-4-4-3   Definitions
   
13-4-4-4   Rights and privileges of authority
   
13-4-4-5   Term, effective date and execution
   
13-4-4-6   Franchise not exclusive
   
13-4-4-7   Performance and modification
   
13-4-4-8   Franchise fee
   
13-4-4-9   Inspection and retention of records
   
13-4-4-10   City regulation
   
13-4-4-11   City rights
   
13-4-4-12   Plan, design, construction coordination and installation of
authority facilities
   
13-4-4-13   NMUI excavations and relocations
   
13-4-4-14   Water and wastewater service
   
13-4-4-15   Conservation and demand side management
   
13-4-4-16   Equal opportunity and affirmative action
   
13-4-4-17   System to remain in place
   
13-4-4-18   Amendment
   
13-4-4-19   Public purpose
   
13-4-4-20   Notices
   
13-4-4-21   Venue
   
13-4-4-22   No waiver
   
13-4-4-23   Third-party beneficiary
Part 5: Brooks Fiber Communications of New Mexico, Inc. Franchise
   
13-4-5-1   Short title
   
13-4-5-2   Definitions
   
13-4-5-3   Grant of franchise
   
13-4-5-4   Duration; company offices
   
13-4-5-5   Construction plans and drawings
   
13-4-5-6   Installations, excavations and restorations
   
13-4-5-7   Location and relocation of facilities
   
13-4-5-8   Public works and improvements
   
13-4-5-9   Moving of buildings
   
13-4-5-10   Safety standards
   
13-4-5-11   Joint use agreement
   
13-4-5-12   Interference
   
13-4-5-13   Franchise fee; conditions
   
13-4-5-14   Facilities for exclusive city use
   
13-4-5-15   Books of account and reports
   
13-4-5-16   Supplying maps upon request
   
13-4-5-17   Rates
   
13-4-5-18   Franchise not exclusive
   
13-4-5-19   Limitation on privileges
   
13-4-5-20   Assignment of franchise
   
13-4-5-21   Additional city rights
   
13-4-5-22   Equal opportunity and affirmative action
   
13-4-5-23   Agreement to reopen negotiations
   
13-4-5-24   Indemnification
   
13-4-5-25   Remedies and penalties not exclusive; default
   
13-4-5-26   Acceptance
   
13-4-5-27   Severability clause
   
13-4-5-28   Notice
   
13-4-5-29   Public purpose
   
13-4-5-30   Public meeting
   
13-4-5-31   Applicable law
   
13-4-5-32   Effective date
Part 6: GST New Mexico Lightwave, Inc. Franchise
   
13-4-6-1   Short title
   
13-4-6-2   Definitions
   
13-4-6-3   Grant of franchise
   
13-4-6-4   Duration; company offices
   
13-4-6-5   Construction plans and drawings
   
13-4-6-6   Installations, excavations and restorations
   
13-4-6-7   Location and relocation of facilities
   
13-4-6-8   Public works and improvements
   
13-4-6-9   Moving of buildings
   
13-4-6-10   Safety standards
   
13-4-6-11   Joint use agreement
   
13-4-6-12   Interference
   
13-4-6-13   Franchise fee; conditions
   
13-4-6-14   Facilities for exclusive city use
   
13-4-6-15   Books of account and reports
   
13-4-6-16   Supplying maps upon request
   
13-4-6-17   Rates
   
13-4-6-18   Franchise not exclusive
   
13-4-6-19   Limitation on privileges
   
13-4-6-20   Assignment of franchise
   
13-4-6-21   Additional city rights
   
13-4-6-22   Equal opportunity and affirmative action
   
13-4-6-23   Agreement to reopen negotiations
   
13-4-6-24   Indemnification
   
13-4-6-25   Remedies and penalties not exclusive; default
   
13-4-6-26   Acceptance
   
13-4-6-27   Severability clause
   
13-4-6-28   Notice
   
13-4-6-29   Public purpose
   
13-4-6-30   Public meeting
   
13-4-6-31   Applicable law
   
13-4-6-32   Effective date
Part 7: American Communication Services of Albuquerque, Inc. Franchise
   
13-4-7-1   Short title
   
13-4-7-2   Definitions
   
13-4-7-3   Grant of franchise
   
13-4-7-4   Duration; company offices
   
13-4-7-5   Construction plans and drawings
   
13-4-7-6   Installations, excavations and restorations
   
13-4-7-7   Location and relocation of facilities
   
13-4-7-8   Public works and improvements
   
13-4-7-9   Moving of buildings
   
13-4-7-10   Safety standards
   
13-4-7-11   Joint use agreement
   
13-4-7-12   Interference
   
13-4-7-13   Franchise fee; conditions
   
13-4-7-14   Facilities for exclusive city use
   
13-4-7-15   Books of account and reports
   
13-4-7-16   Supplying maps upon request
   
13-4-7-17   Rates
   
13-4-7-18   Franchise not exclusive
   
13-4-7-19   Limitation on privileges
   
13-4-7-20   Assignment of franchise
   
13-4-7-21   Additional city rights
   
13-4-7-22   Equal opportunity and affirmative action
   
13-4-7-23   Agreement to reopen negotiations
   
13-4-7-24   Indemnification
   
13-4-7-25   Remedies and penalties not exclusive; default
   
13-4-7-26   Acceptance
   
13-4-7-27   Severability clause
   
13-4-7-28   Notice
   
13-4-7-29   Public purpose
   
13-4-7-30   Public meeting
   
13-4-7-31   Applicable law
   
13-4-7-32   Effective date
Part 8: Natural Gas Franchise
   
13-4-8-1   Authority
   
13-4-8-2   Short title
   
13-4-8-3   Purpose
   
13-4-8-4   Definitions
   
13-4-8-5   Grant of franchise; limits and reservations
   
13-4-8-6   Scope and nature of franchise
   
13-4-8-7   Franchise fee
   
13-4-8-8   No assignment without prior approval
   
13-4-8-9   Franchise non-exclusive
   
13-4-8-10   Franchise term
   
13-4-8-11   Exercise of rights under a franchise; minimum conditions on use of
property
   
13-4-8-12   Costs borne by grantee; bills for costs
   
13-4-8-13   Books and records
   
13-4-8-14   Procedures for paying franchise fees
   
13-4-8-15   Protection of city and residents: indemnity
   
13-4-8-16   Protection of city and residents: insurance
   
13-4-8-17   Enforcement and remedies: revocation
   
13-4-8-18   Enforcement and remedies: relationship
   
13-4-8-19   Captions
   
13-4-8-20   Calculation of time
   
13-4-8-21   Discrimination prohibited
   
13-4-8-22   Amendments
   
13-4-8-23   Compliance with laws; conflicts
   
13-4-8-24   Acceptance
   
13-4-8-25   Publication costs
Part 9: Albuquerque-Bernalillo County Water Utility Authority Franchise
   
13-4-9-1   Short title
   
13-4-9-2   Legislative findings
   
13-4-9-3   Definitions
   
13-4-9-4   Rights and privileges of authority
   
13-4-9-5   Term, effective date
   
13-4-9-6   Franchise not exclusive
   
13-4-9-7   Performance and modification
   
13-4-9-8   Franchise fee
   
13-4-9-9   Inspection and retention of records
   
13-4-9-10   City regulation
   
13-4-9-11   City rights
   
13-4-9-12   Plan, design, construction coordination and installation of
Authority facilities
   
13-4-9-13   Authority excavations and relocations
   
13-4-9-14   Water and wastewater service
   
13-4-9-15   Conservation
   
13-4-9-16   Equal opportunity and affirmative action
   
13-4-9-17   System to remain in place
   
13-4-9-18   Breach
   
13-4-9-19   Amendment
   
13-4-9-20   Public purpose
   
13-4-9-21   Notices
   
13-4-9-22   Venue
   
13-4-9-23   No waiver
Part 10: Public Rights-of-Way for Telecommunications Services
   
13-4-10-1   Purpose
   
13-4-10-2   Definitions
   
13-4-10-3   Application to provide services
   
13-4-10-4   Compensation and charges
   
13-4-10-5   Transfers of municipal authorities
   
13-4-10-6   Obligations of providers regarding the public rights-of-way
   
13-4-10-7   Insurance requirements
   
13-4-10-8   Term of municipal authorities
   
13-4-10-9   Rates
   
13-4-10-10   Indemnity
   
13-4-10-11   Violations and penalties
   
13-4-10-12   Unauthorized use of public rights-of-way unlawful
   
13-4-10-13   Severability clause
   
13-4-10-14   Public purpose
   
13-4-10-15   Public meeting
Cross-reference:
   
Albuquerque electric utility, see § 2-13-4
   
Cable television franchise, see §§ 13-5-3-1 et seq.
   
Competitive electric power, see Ch. 2, Art. 13
   
Streets and sidewalks, excavation, curb cuts and the like, see Ch. 6, Art. 5
PART 1: GAS FRANCHISE
§ 13-4-1-1 GRANT OF AUTHORITY.
   The city (hereinafter called "municipality") hereby grants to and vests in
Southern Union Gas Company (hereinafter called the "company"), a corporation
organized and existing under and by virtue of the laws of the State of
Delaware, with a permit to transact and actually transacting business in the
State of New Mexico its legal representatives, successors, lessees and assigns,
a franchise and the authority, license, power and privilege to maintain,
construct, equip, extend, alter and otherwise establish and operate in the
municipality, as now or hereafter constituted, works, systems plants, pipes and
all related facilities (including those now in service) necessary and
appropriate to sell, manufacture, store, distribute, convey or otherwise
conduct, serve, supply and furnish the inhabitants of the municipality and
others, and to the municipality, whenever the municipality may desire to
contact therefor, gas for light, fuel, power, heat and any and all other useful
purposes, and the company is hereby granted passage, right-of-way in, under,
along and across, and the right to occupy and use in any lawful way during the
life of this franchise any and all streets, avenues, easements, rights-of-way,
alleys, highways, sidewalks, bridges and other structures and public places and
grounds of the municipality, both above and beneath the surface or the same, as
said streets, avenues, casements, rights-of-way, alleys, highways, sidewalks,
bridges structures and other public places and grounds of the municipality now
or may hereafter exist, for every and any such service, use, effect, and lawful
purpose as herein mentioned.
(Ord. 17-1973)
§ 13-4-1-2 DUTIES OF THE COMPANY; CITY TO BE HELD HARMLESS.
   (A)   The company is authorized, licensed and empowered to do any and all
things necessary and proper to be done and performed in executing the powers
and utilizing the privileges herein mentioned and granted by this franchise,
provided the same do not conflict with water pipes, sewers or other authorized
preexisting installations, and provided that all work done in the streets,
avenues, alleys, ease-ments, rights-of-way, highways, sidewalks, bridges, or
other public places or grounds of the municipality by the company shall be done
with the utmost diligence and without unnecessary inconvenience to the public
or individuals or other authorized users of the streets, avenues, easements,
rights-of-way, alleys, highways, sidewalks, bridges, structures and other
public places and grounds of the municipality, and the company shall, within a
reasonable time, restore all places excavated by it to those conditions
required under applicable provisions of street excavation ordinances, now in
effect and as amended front time to time.
   (B)   The company agrees to defend, indemnify and save harmless the
municipality, its City Council and its officers, agents and employees, from and
against any and all loss of or damage to property, or injuries to, or death of,
any person or persons, including property and officers, employees and agents of
the municipality from any and all claims, damages, suits, costs, expense,
liability, actions or proceedings of any kind or nature whatsoever, of or by
anyone whomsoever, solely caused by the negligent acts and omissions or
wrongful conduct of officers, employees, agents, contractors, and
subcontractors of the company. The company need not defend, save harm-less or
indemnify the municipality against damage to or loss of property, or injury to
or death of persons, caused by the sole negligence or wrongful conduct of the
municipality, its City Council and its officers, employees, contractors and
agents. The municipality will give prompt notice to the company or any claim or
suit, and the company will have the right to compromise the same to the extent
of its own interest.
(Ord. 17-1973)
§ 13-4-1-3 TRANSFER OF FRANCHISE.
   The company, subject to any necessary approval of the New Mexico Public
Service Commission or any successor regulatory agency having jurisdiction,
shall have the right and privilege of transferring this franchise and all
rights and privileges granted herein, and whenever the word "company" appears
herein, it shall be construed as including its successors, assigns and lessees.
(Ord. 17-1973)
§ 13-4-1-4 PAYMENT TO CITY.
   The company, for and in consideration of the granting of this franchise and
as rentals for the occupation and use or easement or, upon and beneath the
streets, avenues, right-of-ways, alleys, highways, sidewalks, bridges and other
public places and grounds in the municipality, shall throughout the term of
this franchise pay to the municipality each year during all the time this
provision shall remain in force and effect a total aggregate sum of 2% of the
company's gross receipts (exclusive of sales or gross receipts taxes) collected
during each year from users and consumers on account of gas sold and con-sumed
within the corporate limits of the municipality under the company's rates
effective from time to time, excepting therefrom, however, the gross receipts
from gas sold for use in the generation of electricity for resale to the
general public. The company shall make such payments semiannually on or before
January 31 and July 31 in each calendar year while this provision shall remain
in force and effect. For the purpose of determining the gross receipts, the
books of the company shall at all reasonable times be subject to inspection by
duly authorized officials of the municipality. The payments by the company
provided for above in this section shall be lieu of any and all "other
municipal taxes" as hereinafter defined and, anything herein to the contrary
notwithstanding, the payments shall continue only so long as the company is not
prohibited from making the same by any lawful authority having jurisdiction in
the premises and only so long as the municipality does not charge, levy or
collect or attempt to charge, levy or collect any such "other municipal taxes,"
and if any lawful authority having jurisdiction in the premises hereafter
prohibits the making of said payments or if the municipality charges, levies or
collects or attempts to charge, levy or collect any such "other municipal
taxes" the company's obligation to continue making the payments shall forthwith
cease. As used in this section the term "other municipal taxes" means and
includes any and all franchise, license, privilege, instrument, occupation,
excise or revenue taxes and any and all other fees, charges or exactions
(except excise taxes imposed by the municipality and actually collected by the
company from its consumers, municipal occupation taxes lawfully assessed and
collected on the company's retail sale of appliances, general ad valorem taxes
and special assessments for local improvements and except compensatory service
fees imposed by ordinance of the municipality and uniformly imposed and
collected from other persons engaging in the same or similar activities), upon
all or any portion of the business, revenue, priority or activities of the
company located or conducted within the municipality during the term of this
franchise.
(Ord. 17-1973)
§ 13-4-1-5 ACCEPTANCE.
   This franchise shall be accepted by the company in writing, which acceptance
shall be filed with the City Clerk within 30 days after the taking effect of
this ordinance, and when so accepted this ordinance shall be a contract duly
executed by and between the municipality and the company.
(Ord. 17-1973)
§ 13-4-1-6 EFFECTIVE DATE.
   This franchise shall take effect and be in force from and after 30 days from
the date of its passage [i.e., January 29, 1973], during which 30-day period
this ordinance [upon which §§
13-4-1-1 et seq. are based] shall be published in a manner provided by law, and
shall continue in full force and effect for a period of 25 years from the date
of its passage.
(Ord. 17-1973)
§ 13-4-1-7 REPEALER.
   After the passage of this ordinance [upon which §§
13-4-1-1 et seq. are based] and upon its acceptance by the company all rights
and privileges heretofore granted by the municipality in and by its ordinance
or ordinances granting and/or supplement-ing gas franchise rights to the
company or its predecessors in interest, shall be superseded by this ordinance,
including (without being limited to) Ordinance No. 778, passed on March 25,
1952; which ordinance shall then be of no further force or effect.
(Ord. 17-1973)
PART 2: ELECTRICITY FRANCHISE
§ 13-4-2-1 SHORT TITLE.
   Sections
13-4-2-1 et seq. shall be known and may be cited as the PNM Franchise
Ordinance.
(Ord._2020-015)
§ 13-4-2-2 GRANT OF AUTHORITY.
   (A)   Grant. The city, a home rule municipality and municipal corporation
created under Article X, Section 6 of the New Mexico Constitution and Chapter 3
of the New Mexico Statutes Annotated, 1978, hereby grants to PNM, its
successors, and assigns (collectively referred to as the "Public Service
Company of New Mexico" or "PNM") the right and privilege to use, construct,
maintain and operate electric power infrastructure in the city's streets and
other public rights-of-way. More specifically, the city grants to PNM the right
and privilege to use, construct, install, place, erect, lay, remove, change,
expand, alter, improve, maintain and operate electric power infrastructure in,
upon, over and under the public rights-of-way, including the streets, alleys,
avenues, thoroughfares, highways, and other similar public property within the
city, as they exist now and as they may be hereafter extended, dedicated,
annexed, owned or controlled by the city; such electric power infrastructure
includes PNM's generation, transmission, and distribution facilities and
equipment within the city limits.
   (B)   Franchise not exclusive. The franchise rights and privileges extended
by this grant shall never be construed or held to be exclusive. The city
retains and shall ever be considered as having and retaining the right and
power to allow and to grant to any other person, firm or corporation and other
electrical companies, including the city itself, these same franchise rights
and privileges to be exercised in and upon its streets, highways, alleys, and
roads, and other public places as permitted by the city.
   (C)   Jurisdiction of the Public Regulation Commission. The New Mexico
Public Regulation Commission ("Commission") has the sole authority in New
Mexico to grant a company the right to provide electric service. The rates to
be charged by PNM for furnishing electricity shall be those rates effective by
tariffs or contracts filed with the Commission, as the same may be amended from
time to time, in accordance with the rules and regulations of the Commission
and the Statutes of the State of New Mexico.
(Ord._2020-015)
§ 13-4-2-3 TERM.
   The rights, privileges, and franchise herein granted shall continue in full
force and effect for the period of 15 years from and after the date Ord. 2020-
015 becomes effective. Sections
13-4-2-1 et seq. shall be subject to any and all state and federal legislative
enactments. The parties agree to negotiate the franchise fee percentage upon
receipt by PNM of a proposal from the city following the completion of the
tenth year of the term, provided that such negotiation of the franchise fee
percentage shall not obligate or otherwise require PNM to agree to the city's
proposal. The parties agree to negotiate an amendment pursuant to the process
set out in §
13-4-2-8(D) for amendments and addenda. Any amendment of the franchise fee
percentage would be effective only upon the mutual agreement of the parties and
upon Council approval.
(Ord._2020-015)
§ 13-4-2-4 FRANCHISE FEE.
   (A)   Franchise fee. In consideration of the rights, privileges, and
franchise hereby granted, PNM shall pay the city, from and after the date of
the acceptance of this franchise, on a monthly basis, a total aggregate sum of
an amount equal to 3% of the gross receipts which PNM receives from the sale of
electricity and the collection of energy transition charges within the
municipal boundaries of the city as such boundaries exist as of the effective
date or as later expanded by the city pursuant to applicable law, provided that
in the event of such expansion, the city provides PNM with written notice
specifying such boundary expansion pursuant to §
13-4-2-8(C) of this Franchise Ordinance for the next preceding one-month period
to all PNM retail customers as classified by PNM's rate schedules. PNM shall
make payments on a monthly basis on or before the thirtieth day following the
close of such month.
   (B)   Franchise fee in lieu of other payments for the occupancy and use of
the public rights-of-way. The franchise fee and payments made hereunder are and
shall be in lieu of any and all other franchise, license, right-of-way
privilege, occupancy or use fees during the term of this franchise; provided,
however, that no acceptance of payment by the city shall be construed as an
accord and in satisfaction as to any underpayment of amounts due under §
13-4-2-4(A). This Franchise Ordinance expressly provides that ad valorem
property taxes, special assessments for local improvements, gross receipts
taxes, and other assessments, taxes, and fees of general applicability shall
remain applicable and payable by PNM. Without limiting the foregoing, the city
does not waive the obligation of PNM to obtain all applicable permits and to
comply with codes, ordinances, and regulations governing the operation,
maintenance, and construction of its system.
(Ord._2020-015)
§ 13-4-2-5 CONSTRUCTION ACTIVITIES.
   (A)   Construction activities in general; excavations. PNM shall have the
right to excavate any public right-of-way, including highways, streets, alleys,
avenues, thoroughfares, roads, sidewalk and other similar public property now
or hereafter dedicated, owned, or controlled by the city within its municipal
boundaries, as now existing or hereafter extended, as such excavations are
necessary for the construction, operation, and maintenance of PNM's electric
utility system and the facilities and components associated therewith, provided
that all such construction activities shall be subject to any and all right-of-
way management ordinances of general applicability which may be adopted
pursuant to the city's police powers. In addition and except as otherwise
provided by state law or regulation, all construction activities of PNM within
the municipal limits of the city shall be done in compliance with the then-
applicable construction, planning and zoning rules, regulations, ordinances or
orders of the city and any other agency having jurisdiction.
   (B)   Restorations. There shall be no unreasonable delay in the backfilling
of excavations by PNM under this §
13-4-2-5, and all such excavations shall be restored by PNM at its own cost in
accordance with valid ordinances and regulations which the city may adopt to
reasonably control and monitor such activities. If such ordinances and
regulations are not adopted or effective, it shall then be the responsibility
of PNM to restore such property, insofar as practicable, to the condition of
such property immediately prior to the excavation.
   (C)   Relocations. Any location or relocation of PNM's facilities in the
public rights-of-way reasonably required, caused, or occasioned by any city
project, including without limitation, the installation of storm drainage,
landscaping, traffic facilities, and road reconstruction, shall be at the cost
of PNM and implemented in accordance with valid ordinances and regulations
which the city may adopt to reasonably control and monitor such activities.
Nothing in §§
13-4-2-1 et seq. shall be construed in any way to prevent the city from
opening, grading, paving, repairing, altering, or improving any of the streets,
alleys, avenues, thoroughfares, and public highways, or undertaking other
municipal projects affecting public health, safety and general welfare within
the city's rights-of-way in which PNM has its facilities located. Prior to such
activity and in the pre-design phase of any project, the city and PNM shall
make a good faith effort to coordinate activities to avoid unnecessary cost for
both parties. Except as otherwise provided by state regulation or law, PNM, at
its expense, shall protect, support, temporarily disconnect, relocate, or
remove along under or over any street, alley, or any other public place as
permitted by the city, PNM's equipment or facilities when notified in writing
and reasonably required by the city for reasons attributable to a municipal
project undertaken to promote public safety, health or general welfare in the
exercise of the city's police powers. Notwithstanding the foregoing, this
provision shall not apply to any move, regrading, rerouting, improvement, or
widening undertaken for the benefit or convenience of or at the request of a
third party, including a private developer or development entity or any other
person who develops property within the city in a manner which necessitates
such regrading, rerouting, improving or widening of any street, avenue,
easement, right-of-way, alley, highway, sidewalk, bridge or other structure, or
other public places as permitted by the city, or in a manner which necessitates
such construction, reconstruction, removal, or relocation of traffic signal
systems or utility systems owned or operated by or on behalf of the city. This
section shall also be subject to any applicable state regulation or legislation
affecting payment by a state or local public agency or body for certain
relocation costs, or any other agreements with the city affecting relocation.
   (D)   No interference with other authorized uses. PNM shall make a good
faith effort in the conduct of its activities so as not to interfere with the
activities of other franchisees. The city shall, in the grant of other
franchises, require that said franchisees similarly conduct their activities to
avoid interference with those of PNM.
(Ord._2020-015)
§ 13-4-2-6 TREE TRIMMING, MAINTENANCE, AND MOVING OF AERIALS.
   (A)   Tree trimming and obstructions. PNM shall have the right and authority
to trim or remove trees or parts of trees overhanging or within any public way
and to remove any obstruction within any public way to eliminate or minimize
interferences with its lines, system, plant, equipment, service or facilities.
PNM shall comply with the Revised City Ordinances, Article 6, §§
6-6-2-1 to
6-6-2-9, to the extent they are applicable, in the activities described in this
subsection.
   (B)   Moving aerials. Whenever it becomes necessary to temporarily
rearrange, remove, tower or raise any of PNM's aerial cables, wires, or other
apparatus of PNM to permit the passage of any building, machinery or other
object moved over the roads, streets, alleys, avenues, thoroughfares and public
highways within the city, PNM will rearrange such aerial cables, wires, or
other apparatus within a reasonable period after receiving written notice from
the owner or contractor-mover who desires that said building, machinery or
other objects be moved. All such notices must include the written approval of
the city, must set forth in detail the route of movement of the building,
machinery, or object, must state that the costs incurred by PNM for such
activities will be borne by the contractor- mover and that the contractor-mover
will indemnify and save both the city and PNM harmless from any and all damages
or claims of whatsoever kind or nature caused directly or indirectly by such
activities, and if required by PNM, must include a cash deposit or a good and
sufficient bond in an amount reasonably acceptable to PNM to pay any and all
such costs as estimated by PNM.
(Ord._2020-015)
§ 13-4-2-7 INSURANCE AND INDEMNITY.
   (A)   Commercial general liability insurance. PNM shall procure and maintain
for the duration of this franchise insurance against all claims for injuries to
persons or damages to property which may arise from or in connection with the
exercise of the rights, privileges and authority granted hereunder to PNM, its
agents, representatives or employees.
   (B)   Proof of insurance; policy limits. PNM shall provide evidence of an
insurance certificate, together with an endorsement naming the city, its
elected and appointed officers and employees as additional insureds, to the
city for its inspection prior to the commencement of any work or installation
of any facilities pursuant to §§
13-4-2-1 et seq. or not later than ten business days after approval of this
franchise ordinance by the City Council, whichever comes sooner, and such
insurance certificate shall evidence the following minimum coverages:
      (1)   Commercial General Liability Insurance:
         (a)   Bodily Injury/Property Damage in the minimum amount of One
Million Dollars ($1,000,000.00) for each occurrence and Two Million Dollars
($2,000,000.00) general aggregate; and
         (b)   Property Damage Liability Insurance shall not exclude Explosion
-Collapse - Underground Coverage (XCU).
      (2)   Workers' Compensation Insurance:
         (a)   Part I. Workers' Compensation - in accordance with statutory
requirements; and
         (b)   Part II. Employers' Liability - in the minimum amount of One
Million Dollars ($1,000,000.00); and
         (c)   PNM shall comply with the provisions of the Workers'
Compensation Act of the State of New Mexico (the "Act"). lf PNM has determined
that it is not subject to the Act, it will certify, in a signed statement, that
it is not subject to the Act. PNM will notify the city and comply with the Act
should it employ three or more persons during the term of this franchise. If
PNM fails to comply with the Act and applicable rules, this ordinance may be
terminated.
      (3)   Products and Completed Operations in the minimum amount of One
Million Dollars ($1,000,000.00) for each occurrence and Two Million Dollars
($2,000,000.00) general aggregate.
      (4)   Pollution Legal Liability in the minimum amount of One Million
Dollars ($1,000,000.00) for each occurrence (if applicable).
      (5)   Business Automobile Liability in the minimum amount of combined
single limit of One Million Dollars ($1,000,000.00) for each occurrence; and
Pollution Liability (form MCS90) for transportation exposure of One Million
Dollars ($1,000,000.00) for each occurrence. Business Automobile Liability
Insurance shall include coverage for the use of all owned, non-owned and hired
automobiles and vehicles.
      (6)   Coverage for independent contractors and their work on behalf of
PNM in public rights-of-way and any contractual liability must be included in
all policies that PNM obtains pursuant to §
13-4-2-7.
      (7)   Professional Liability in the minimum amount of One Million Dollars
($1,000,000.00) for each occurrence and Two Million Dollars ($2,000,000.00)
general aggregate.
   If such limits are higher than the minimum limits required by the city, such
limits shall apply to the coverage afforded the city under the terms and
conditions of §§
13-4-2-1 et seq. PNM shall furnish to the city copies of any insurance policy
endorsements that are subsequently issued amending coverage or limits.
   PNM or its contractor(s) shall not begin work under this franchise ordinance
until the required insurance has been obtained and the proper insurance
certificates have been provided to the city, adding the city as an additional
insured, as applicable. Neither the city's approval nor failure to approve any
insurance certificates shall relieve PNM or its contractors of their full
responsibility to maintain the required insurance policies in full force.
   (C)   Single primary; excess policy. The minimum limits may be provided for
through a single primary insurance policy providing such coverage or through
the addition of an excess liability policy written in excess of the primary
general liability and automobile liability policies.
   (D)   Insurance certificate requirements. Any insurance certificate required
by §
13-4-2-7 shall provide that the described policies and coverages will not be
canceled or modified before the expiration date thereof, without the issuing
company giving 30 days written notice to the certificate holder and those named
as additional insureds. In the event of any cancellation, modification or
intent not to renew, PNM shall obtain and furnish to the city evidence of
replacement insurance policies meeting the requirements of this section by the
cancellation or modification date.
   (E)   Insurance rating. Any commercial insurance carrier providing any
required coverage must have an A.M. Best rating of A-VII or higher.
   (F)   Indemnification, Defend and Hold Harmless. PNM, for itself and its
agents, employees, subcontractors, and the agents and employees of any
subcontractors, shall, at its own expense and throughout the term of Ord. 2020-
015, indemnify, defend, and hold harmless the city and any of its elected or
appointed officers and employees, from any and all claims, demands, actions,
proceedings (formal or informal) or suits (including on and through any final
non-appealable order or judgment) which the city, or such elected or appointed
officers or employees, may suffer, or which may be recovered from, or
obtainable against the city, or such elected or appointed officers or
employees, to the extent arising: (1) as a result of the installation, use, or
maintenance by PNM of its facilities in the right-of-way; (2) as a result of
the exercise by PNM of any or all of the rights, privileges, permission, and
authority conferred under this ordinance; or (3) as a result of any alleged act
or omission on the part of PNM in performing or failing to perform any of its
obligations under §§
13-4-2-1 et seq. PNM is not, however, liable and is not required to indemnify
or hold harmless the city for any damages caused by the negligence of any
agents, servants and/or employees of the city. Notwithstanding any other
provisions in §§
13-4-2-1 et seq., PNM’s obligation to provide indemnification to the city shall
be limited to PNM's proportionate share of fault, as determined by judgment or
by agreement with city, with respect to any claim for which indemnity is
applicable.
   (G)   Risks associated with operation of PNM's facilities; liability limits.
By entering into Ord. 2020-015, the city is not assuming any risks for the
operations of PNM's facilities and PNM shall be responsible and answerable for
any and all injuries to persons or property to the extent arising out of its
negligent operations pursuant to Ord. 2020-015. The amounts and types of
required insurance coverages, as set forth in Ord. 2020-015, shall in no way be
construed as limiting the scope of indemnity or liability set forth in this
section.
   (H)   PNM recourse for loss. PNM acknowledges that its recourse against the
city for any loss, cost, expense, or damage caused by the acts or omissions of
the city are subject to and may be limited by the New Mexico Tort Claims Act,
NMSA 1978, §§ 41-1-1 to 41-1-30.
(Ord._2020-015)
§ 13-4-2-8 MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS.
   (A)   Inspection of PNM's books, confidentiality, and public records. PNM
shall make available to the city, upon ten days written notice, such
information directly pertinent to the payment of the franchise fees pursuant to
the terms of §§
13-4-2-1 et seq., in such form as PNM can reasonably make available. Subject to
New Mexico public records laws, if PNM considers any such information that PNM
provides to the city and/or that the city reviews in camera as confidential and
proprietary, the information shall be so marked and shall not be disclosed or
used for any purpose, other than verifying and/or enforcing proper computation
and payment of franchise fees in accordance with the terms of §§
13-4-2-1 et seq.. However, if the city must release any such confidential
material pursuant to a valid court order, the city shall so advise PNM in a
timely fashion so that PNM may take appropriate steps to protect its interests.
   (B)   Annual franchise fee reports. PNM shall submit a report verified by
the PNM controller setting forth the computation of gross revenues used to
calculate the franchise fee on an annual basis for the preceding year.
   (C)   Changes in city's municipal boundaries. The city shall notify PNM in
writing of any changes in the municipal boundaries of the city within 30 days
of any extension or contraction of such municipal boundaries becoming
effective. Such notice shall be delivered to:
Public Service Company of New Mexico
Attn: Tax Department
MS 1025, 414 Silver SW
Albuquerque, NM 87102
The notice shall provide a description of the new and former municipal
boundaries. PNM shall have no obligation to calculate, collect or pay the
franchise fee attributable to any newly extended municipal boundaries until 30
days have elapsed from PNM's receipt of such notice.
   (D)   Amendment and addendum. At any time during the term of Ord. 2020-015,
the city or PNM may propose an amendment or addendum to the ordinance by giving
30 days' written notice to the other of the proposed amendment or addendum
desired, and both shall negotiate in good faith in an effort to agree upon a
mutually satisfactory amendment. Such amendment shall become effective upon
adoption and passage of an amending ordinance by the city in accordance with
the requirements of local and state law.
   (E)   Notices. For the purpose of §§
13-4-2-1 et seq., notice to the city will be to:
Mayor, City of Albuquerque
One Civic Plaza, 11th Floor, P.O. Box 1293
Albuquerque, New Mexico 87013
With a copy to:
City Attorney, City of Albuquerque
One Civic Plaza, P.O. Box 2248
Albuquerque, New Mexico 87013
Notice to PNM will be to:
Public Service Company of New Mexico
Attn: Tax Department
MS 1025, 414 Silver SW
Albuquerque, NM 87102
With a copy to:
PNM Resources Law Department
MS 0805, 414 Silver SW
Albuquerque, NM 87102
Notice will be effective upon delivery at the above addresses until the city or
PNM notifies the other, in writing, of a change in the address.
   (F)   Reservation of rights. By accepting Ord. 2020-015, the city and PNM
reserve all rights under federal law, state law, and regulation. All provisions
contained in this franchise ordinance are hereby declared to be for a public
purpose and the health, safety, and welfare of the general public; these
provisions shall be liberally construed in favor of the public interest in
order to effectuate its public purpose. Any members of the governing body, city
officials, or employees charged with the enforcement of §§
13-4-2-1 et seq., who are acting for the city in the discharge of their duties,
shall not render themselves personally liable because of these enforcement
activities. By accepting Ord. 2020-015, the city and PNM reserve all their
respective rights under federal and state law and regulation; and neither
waives its rights to exercise those rights. Further, neither the city nor PNM
waives its respective rights to seek all appropriate legal and equitable
remedies as allowed by law upon violation of the terms of this franchise,
including seeking injunctive relief and monetary damages in a court of
competent jurisdiction. Such right to injunctive relief is expressly reserved.
   (G)   Order of precedence. In the event of a conflict between Ord. 2020-015
and any other ordinance adopted by the city, the terms of Ord. 2020-015 shall
control; provided, however, that the foregoing does not negate PNM's
obligations under §
13-4-2-5(A) requiring that all construction activities shall be subject to any
and all right-of-way management ordinances of general applicability adopted
pursuant to the city's police powers.
(Ord._2020-015)
§ 13-4-2-9 ACCEPTANCE.
   (A)   PNM to accept. PNM shall, within 30 days after the passage and
approval of Ord. 2020-015, file in the office of the City Clerk, City of
Albuquerque, a written statement of acceptance duly signed and acknowledged by
the proper officer of PNM authorized to execute such acceptance.
   (B)   Failure to accept. In the event PNM does not file such acceptance
within said period, §§
13-4-2-1 et seq. and the rights, privileges and franchise granted hereunder
shall be terminated and void; provided, that the city may by resolution extend
the time herein for the filing of such acceptance for an additional period.
   (C)   Supersedes prior franchise. Ord. 2020-015, if accepted by PNM as
hereinbefore provided, shall supersede, cancel and be in lieu of any and all
other existing or prior grants of rights, permission, and authority to PNM or
any predecessor companies or assignors of PNM to construct, operate, and
maintain any system for the production, transmission, distribution, and sale of
electricity within the city.
(Ord._2020-015)
§ 13-4-2-10 SEVERABILITY CLAUSE.
   If any section, paragraph, clause, or provision of §§
13-4-2-1 et seq., or any section, paragraph, clause, or provision of any
regulation promulgated hereunder shall for any reason be held to be invalid,
unlawful, or unenforceable, the invalidity, illegality, or unenforceability of
such section, paragraph, clause, or provision shall not affect the validity of
the remaining portions of §§
13-4-2-1 et seq. or the regulation so challenged.
(Ord._2020-015)
PART 3: TELEPHONE FRANCHISE
Editor's note: Ord. 13-1992 set forth the successor to Mountain States
Telephone and Telegraph Company. The previous franchise was granted by Ord. 30-
1971 and amended by Ord. 3-1982. 
§ 13-4-3-1 GRANT OF AUTHORITY; DUTIES.
   There is hereby granted by the city to U.S. West Communications, its
successors and assigns, hereinafter called the "company," the nonexclusive
right and privilege to construct, erect, operate and maintain, in, upon, along,
across, above, over and under the streets, alleys, public ways and public
places now in use or dedicated, and all extensions thereof, and additions
thereto, in the city, poles, wires, cables, underground conduits, manholes and
other communications fixtures necessary or proper for the maintenance and
operation in the city of the company's communications business; provided,
however, that no poles or other fixtures shall be placed where the same will
interfere with sewers, electric lights, traffic control devices, water
hydrants, water mains or other public improvements and shall be placed in such
a manner as to cause a minimum interference with the rights or reasonable
convenience of property owners who adjoin any of the streets, alleys or public
ways and places.
(Ord. 13-1992)
§ 13-4-3-2 USE OF SYSTEM BY CITY.
   (A)   The city shall have the privilege, during the life of this franchise,
free of charge, where aerial construction exists, of maintaining upon the poles
of the company within the city limits wire and pole fixtures necessary for a
police and fire alarm system, such wires and fixtures to be placed and
maintained under the supervision of the company. The city in its use and
maintenance of such wires and fixtures shall at all times comply with the rules
and regulations of the company, and the provisions of the latest edition of The
National Electrical Safety Code, so that there may be minimum danger of contact
or conflict between the wires and fixtures of the company and the wires and
fixtures of the city.
   (B)   It is further agreed, in order to avoid danger to life and property,
that the police or fire alarm wires or other fixtures will not be exposed,
without the consent of the company, to the danger of contact with any conductor
carrying a voltage greater than the normal telephone voltage. The city shall be
solely responsible for all injury to persons or damage to property arising out
of the construction or maintenance of said police and fire alarm fixtures, or
arising out of the attachment, maintenance or removal of such wires and
fixtures to the poles of the company.
   (C)   In cases of rearrangement of the company's plant, or removal of poles
or fixtures, the city shall care for or remove its own fixtures, and shall save
the company harmless from any damage or injury to persons or property,
including property of the city, arising out of the removal or construction of
its wires or other fixtures.
   (D)   It is understood and agreed that if and when the city or the company
design underground facilities, they will consult with each other as to
including each other's facilities in proposed underground installation.
(Ord. 13-1992)
§ 13-4-3-3 COMPANY LIABILITY.
   The company shall, at all times during the life of this franchise, be
subject to all lawful exercise of the police power by the city and to such
reasonable regulations as the city may, by resolution or ordinance, hereafter
provide. It is expressly understood and agreed by and between the company and
the city that the company shall save the city harmless from all loss sustained
by the city on account of any suit, judgment, execution, claim or demand
whatsoever, resulting from negligence on the part of the company in the
construction or maintenance of its telephone system in the city. The city shall
notify the company representative within ten days after the presentation of any
claim or demand either by suit or otherwise made against the city on account of
any negligence as aforesaid on the part of the company.
(Ord. 13-1992)
§ 13-4-3-4 HOUSEMOVING AND OTHER UNUSUAL USE.
   Any person or corporation desiring to move a building or other structure
along, or to make any unusual use of, the streets, alleys and public ways of
the city which shall interfere with the poles, wires or fixtures of the company
or the city, shall first give notice to the company or the city, as the case
may be, and shall pay to the company or the city, as the case may be, a sum
sufficient to cover the expense and damage incident to the cutting, altering
and moving of the wires or other fixtures of the company or the city, and
before a permit is given by the city therefor, the applicant shall present a
receipt from the company showing the payment. Thereupon the company, upon
presentation of the permit, shall within a reasonable time thereafter provide
for and do such cutting, altering and moving of the wires and fixtures as may
be necessary to allow such moving or other unusual use of the streets, alleys
and public ways of the city.
(Ord. 13-1992)
§ 13-4-3-5 PAYMENT TO CITY.
   As a further consideration for this franchise, the company shall pay to the
city an amount equal to 2% of the gross revenues, exclusive of all federal and
state excise taxes, received for local exchange telephone service furnished to
subscribers of the company within the city; provided, that in the event the
company, at any time during the term of this franchise, is authorized by the
regulatory commission having jurisdiction to bill and collect pro rata from its
customers within the city the total amount of franchise fees paid by the
company or any amount of franchise fees in excess of 2%, then the city and the
company will renegotiate the franchise payments, and the company will pay to
the city such additional amount as may be agreed upon for the remainder of the
term of this franchise. Payment shall be made in quarterly installments within
60 days after the end of each calendar quarter during the term of this
franchise.
(Ord. 13-1992)
§ 13-4-3-6 INSPECTION OF BOOKS.
   The city shall have right, at all reasonable times, to inspect the books and
records of the company pertaining to the company's gross revenues for local
exchange service received from telephone subscribers located within the limits
of the city.
(Ord. 13-1992)
§ 13-4-3-7 SERVICES PROVIDED TO CITY.
   The city agrees to pay to the company in accordance with standard tariff
schedules the rates and charges for all telephone service of any description
whatsoever rendered by the company to the city, except the cost, value or
rental of attachments made by the city to the poles of the company as provided
in §
13-4-3-2.
(Ord. 13-1992)
§ 13-4-3-8 PAYMENT IN LIEU OF OTHER TAXES.
   In consideration of the payments provided for in §
13-4-3-1 et seq., it is expressly understood and agreed by the company and the
city that the payments above specified shall be in lieu of any and all
franchise, license, occupation, or any other form of excise or revenue tax
(except general ad valorem property taxes, sales or gross receipt taxes, and
special assessments for local improvements, standby charges, fees for trench
excavation permits, sidewalk permits, and curb and gutter permits, and
occupation taxes based upon revenues received from customers within the city
for directory advertising), based upon or measured by the revenue, employees,
payroll, property, poles, wires, instruments, conduits, pipes, fixtures or
other appurtenances of the company, and all other property or equipment of the
company or any part thereof; provided, that said payments shall continue only
so long as the company is not prohibited from making the same by any lawful
authority having jurisdiction in the premises, and so long as the city does not
charge, levy or collect, or attempt to charge, levy or collect any of the forms
of taxes specified above in this section; and if any lawful authority having
jurisdiction in the premises shall hereafter prohibit such payment or payments,
or if the city does levy, charge or collect or attempt to levy, charge or
collect any of the forms of taxes specified in this section, the obligation to
make such payments as provided in §§
13-4-3-1 et seq. shall forthwith cease.
(Ord. 13-1992)
§ 13-4-3-9 NON-WAIVER OF OTHER RIGHTS.
   It is expressly understood and agreed by and between the city and the
company that neither the grant nor acceptance of this franchise shall
constitute a waiver, either upon the part of the company or the city, of any
rights or claims had or made by either with respect to the occupancy of the
streets, alleys, and public places of the city, under the laws of the Territory
of New Mexico and under the Constitution and general statutes of the State of
New Mexico, nor shall anything herein in any way prejudice or impair any rights
or claims existing independently of this franchise of the city or the company,
or its predecessors or successors, with respect to the construction, operation,
and maintenance, either before or after the life of this franchise of a
telephone system in the city.
(Ord. 13-1992)
§ 13-4-3-10 TERM OF FRANCHISE.
   The franchise and rights herein granted shall continue in force and effect
to February 15, 1993, and may be renewed thereafter on a month to month basis,
by ordinance, said ordinances adopted into §§
13-4-3-1 et seq. by reference as if fully set forth herein.
(Ord. 13-1992)
§ 13-4-3-11 EFFECTIVE DATE; ACCEPTANCE.
   This ordinance [upon which §§
13-4-3-1 et seq. are based] shall become effective 30 days after its adoption
by City Council; provided the company, within the 30 days, shall have filed
with the City Clerk an unconditional acceptance thereof, unless a petition is
received in accordance with § 3-42-1 NMSA 1978, during which 30-day period this
ordinance [upon which §§
13-4-3-1 et seq. are based] shall be published in the manner provided by law.
Within ten days after the filing of the acceptance, the City Clerk shall
acknowledge in writing the receipt of the acceptance. Should the company's
occupation and use of city streets, alleys, public ways and public places
remain continuous after February 15, 1992, the obligation to remit any fee to
the city in accordance with §
13-4-3-5 shall not be abrogated or otherwise discharged should this ordinance
[upon which §§
13-4-3-1 et seq. are based] not be effective until sometime after February 15,
1992.
(Ord. 13-1992)
PART 4: NEW MEXICO UTILITY FRANCHISE
§ 13-4-4-1 SHORT TITLE.
   This ordinance may be cited as the New Mexico Utilities, Inc. Franchise
Ordinance.
(Ord. 1-1994; Am. Ord. 32-2007)
§ 13-4-4-2 LEGISLATIVE FINDINGS.
   The Council finds it necessary to grant a franchise to the New Mexico
Utilities Inc. ("NMUI") to develop, lay, re-lay, construct, maintain, operate
and remove pipes, systems, works, lift stations, manholes, reservoirs,
appliances, and other structures and facilities, on, under, along and across
all public rights-of-way in the city for the purpose of distributing water and
collecting wastewater for domestic, commercial, institutional and industrial
uses, to be used or collected in NMUI's service area all as more specifically
set out below.
(Ord. 1-1994; Am. Ord. 32-2007)
§ 13-4-4-3 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this ordinance, the following terms, phrases, words and
their derivations shall have the meaning given in this section. When not
inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the
future tense, words in the plural number include the singular number, and words
in the singular number include the plural number. The word "shall" is mandatory
and "may" is permissive. Words not defined in this section shall be given their
common and ordinary meaning.
   CITY. The City of Albuquerque, a municipal corporation of the State of New
Mexico.
   COUNCIL. The legislative body of the City of Albuquerque sometimes referred
to as "City Council".
   DIRECTOR. The Director of the Department of Municipal Development of the
City of Albuquerque or his or her designee.
   FACILITIES. Are and include, but are not limited to, plant, works, systems,
improvements and equipment of NMUI such as pipes, hydrants, systems, manholes,
underground links, meters, pumping equipment and sewer mains.
   FRANCHISE. The authorization granted herein to use Rights-of-way to
construct, operate, and maintain water and wastewater systems in the city or
any portion or portions thereof.
   GROSS REVENUE. Includes any and all revenue received by NMUI for the use of
or access to NMUI's facilities located on the city's rights-of-way plus all
revenue derived by NMUI from the sale of water or wastewater service to its
customers within the limits of the city, as those limits may be extended from
time to time including the value of water and wastewater served and consumed by
NMUI in the city. GROSS REVENUE shall not include amounts received by NMUI as a
tax, fee or assessment of general applicability collected by NMUI for pass-
through to another governmental agency, reimbursements from third parties for
expenses, bad debt, utility expansion charges or to refunds or credits. The
gross revenue shall be measured and monitored periodically as set out below.
   LINE EXTENSION. Any extension of distribution, transmission or collection
facilities into areas within the boundaries of the city not then served by
NMUI.
   MAYOR. The Mayor of the City of Albuquerque or his/her designated
representative.
   PUBLIC PROPERTY. Any property that is owned or under the control of the city
that is not a public right- of-way but may be dedicated for public use or
travel, including but not limited to, buildings and parks.
   RIGHTS-OF-WAY. The surface of and the space below any street, road, highway,
freeway, bridge, lane, path, alley, court, sidewalk, parkway, or right-of-way
or easement primarily dedicated to travel, excluding railroad rights-of-way,
parks and airport property, now or hereafter existing within the city which may
be properly used for the purpose of installing, maintaining, and operating the
water and wastewater systems. To the extent that NMUI holds an easement granted
by the city on any public property that permits use and occupation of such
property, the terms and conditions of that easement shall govern and control
the subject property.
   STORM DRAINAGE FACILITIES. Includes all city owned channels (lined or
unlined), pipe, manholes, inlets, and all other structures that handle storm
run-off.
   TREASURER. The Treasurer of the City of Albuquerque.
(Ord. 1-1994; Am. Ord. 32-2007)
§ 13-4-4-4 RIGHTS AND PRIVILEGES OF AUTHORITY.
   (A)   Permission to rent and use. There is hereby granted by the city to
NMUI, subject to the terms, conditions and limitations contained in this
franchise ordinance nonexclusive permission to rent, use and occupy and the
franchise right, privilege and authority to construct, purchase, acquire,
locate, maintain, operate and extend into, within, and through the city,
facilities for the purpose of distributing water and wastewater service, with
the right and privilege for the period and upon the terms and conditions
hereinafter specified, to sell, furnish and distribute any or all of said
products to the city and its inhabitants, by means of its facilities, on,
under, along and across all rights-of-way in the city, now or hereafter
included in the boundaries of the city and within NMUI's Public Regulation
Commission approved service area as such boundaries now exist or may hereafter
be extended. Provided, however, that NMUI's construction plans for line
extensions within the limits of the city, prepared by either a developer or
NMUI, shall be submitted to the City Development Review Committee for review of
any impact the line extension may have on city facilities. Additionally, NMUI
shall provide notice of any line extension to the city pursuant to §
13-4-4-20 ROA 1994.
   (B)   Indemnification. NMUI shall indemnify, defend and hold the city
harmless from and against claims, demands, liens and all liability or damage of
whatsoever kind on account of or arising from the operations and maintenance
conducted by NMUI and exercised pursuant to the grant of this franchise, the
exercise by NMUI of the related rights, or from the operations of NMUI within
the city, and shall pay the costs of defense plus reasonable attorneys' fees.
NMUI shall be responsible for damages to any property in the city rights-of-way
as a result of NMUI activities. The city shall give prompt written notice to
NMUI of any claim, demand or lien with respect to which the city seeks
indemnification hereunder and unless in the city's judgment a conflict of
interest may exist between the city and NMUI with respect to such claim, demand
or lien, permit NMUI to assume the defense of such claim, demand, or lien with
counsel satisfactory to the city.
   (C)   Remedies. In the event NMUI or the city fails to fulfill any of their
respective obligations under this franchise, the city or NMUI, whichever the
case may be, will have a breach of contract claim and remedy against the other
in addition to any other remedy provided by law, provided that no remedy which
would have the effect of amending the specific provisions of this franchise
shall become effective without such action which would be necessary to formally
amend the franchise.
(Ord. 1-1994; Am. Ord. 32-2007)
§ 13-4-4-5 TERM, EFFECTIVE DATE, AND EXECUTION.
   (A)   Term. This franchise ordinance, and the rights, privileges and
authority granted hereunder, shall continue for a period of ten years from the
effective date.
   (B)   Effective date. This ordinance shall become effective from and after
its passage and publication as provided by NMSA 1978, § 3-42-1, or successor
statute; provided that NMUI, before or within 60 days shall have approved this
franchise.
(Ord. 1-1994; Am. Ord. 32-2007)
§ 13-4-4-6 FRANCHISE NOT EXCLUSIVE.
   The right to use and occupy said rights-of-way for the purposes herein set
forth is not and shall not be deemed to be, an exclusive franchise, and the
city reserves the right to itself to make or grant a similar use of the said
rights-of-way to any other person, firm, or corporation.
(Ord. 1-1994; Am. Ord. 32-2007)
§ 13-4-4-7 PERFORMANCE AND MODIFICATION.
   NMUI and the city agree to take all reasonable and necessary actions to
assure that the terms of the franchise are performed, and neither will take any
action to secure modification of this franchise before any court of competent
jurisdiction before having attempted to negotiate in good faith any
modifications either party may deem necessary.
(Ord. 1-1994; Am. Ord. 32-2007)
§ 13-4-4-8 FRANCHISE FEE.
   (A)   Fee and rental. As consideration for this franchise, which provides
for the rental and use by NMUI of the rights-of-way within the boundaries of
the city and the Public Regulation Commission approved service area, which are
valuable public properties acquired and maintained by the city at great expense
to its taxpayers and citizens, NMUI shall pay to the city a franchise fee in
the amount of 4% of the annual gross revenue within the city limits, as defined
in §
13-4-4-3 of this franchise ordinance. The franchise fee provided for herein
shall constitute partial consideration by NMUI to the city for NMUI's use and
occupancy of the rights-of-way within the boundaries of the city. Said payments
shall be in lieu of any and all other franchise fee, license, privilege,
occupation, excise or revenue taxes, except special assessments of general
applicability for local improvements, standby charges, fees for barricade and
excavation permits, sidewalk permits, curb and gutter permits or other city-
required permitting fees, generally imposed by the city upon the business,
revenue, property, facilities or other appurtenances of NMUI or any part
thereof in the city during the term of this franchise ordinance. As additional
consideration for this franchise, NMUI and the city agree to the following:
      (1)   NMUI shall maintain all current fire protection waterline
connections at the main waterline and allow for all required new fire
protection connections at the main waterline for city facilities;
      (2)   NMUI shall provide water for fire suppression at no cost to the
city. The parties further agree to establish a methodology or process for
estimating water usage for fire suppression;
      (3)   NMUI shall maintain all fire hydrants to operable condition,
including periodic painting, for use by the city and the city will inspect,
lubricate and flow the hydrants within the limits of the city annually. The
city will notify NMUI of any defects observed at the time of the inspection.
NMUI will notify the city when they receive the documentation of observed
defects and when those defects have been corrected. At least quarterly, NMUI
will notify the city of the location of all new or relocated hydrants.
   (B)   Payment terms. Commencing the month following the month this franchise
ordinance becomes effective, the franchise fee shall be paid monthly on the
twenty-fifth day of each month; such fee shall be for gross revenues received
by NMUI for the preceding month. Nothing herein shall preclude NMUI and the
city from agreeing to a revised payment schedule.
   (C)   Reconciliation. NMUI shall furnish to the city with each payment of
compensation required by this section a detailed written statement showing the
amount of gross revenue received by NMUI within the city limit, broken out by
NMUI's revenue accounts, for the period covered by the payment. Within such
reasonable time as he may require, the Treasurer shall determine the accuracy
of the amounts reported. However, neither payment of the fee nor failure to
make such investigation shall estop the city in any way or prevent subsequent
investigation, collection or return of any amount properly due and not barred
by any applicable statute of limitations. In addition to paying all fees owed
plus interest, in the event that the city reviews NMUI's franchise fee
payments, and finds that NMUI has underpaid the fee owed for any year in an
amount exceeding 5% of the franchise fees actually paid, NMUI shall pay the
reasonable cost of the city's review.
   (D)   Claims. In the event it is claimed by the city that the amount of the
franchise fee paid hereunder is insufficient, or in the event NMUI claims that
the amount is excessive, and the parties cannot agree, the city and NMUI shall
attempt to informally negotiate a resolution. In the event that negotiations
fail, the dispute shall be submitted to non-binding mediation pursuant to the
Commercial Mediation Rules of the AAA in effect at the time or as otherwise
agreed to by the parties.
   (E)   Contract payment. In the event that the franchise fee set forth in
this franchise ordinance is declared illegal, unconstitutional or void for any
reason by any court, NMUI shall be contractually bound to pay the city, at the
same times and in the same manner as provided for herein, an aggregate amount
equal to the amount which would have been paid as a franchise fee.
(Ord. 1-1994; Am. Ord. 32-2007)
§ 13-4-4-9 INSPECTION AND RETENTION OF RECORDS.
   (A)   Audit. The city shall have the right to review or audit all books and
records of NMUI in accordance with generally accepted accounting and auditing
principles regarding any amounts which may be paid under this franchise
ordinance. This right includes the right to review and audit all books and
records of revenue not included in the calculation of the fee paid, but which
may be considered by the city to be subject to a franchise fee. The city shall
give written notice to NMUI of any additional amount claimed to be due to the
city as a result of any review. The additional amount due, if any, shall be
paid within 30 days following determination that such amount is due and
payable.
   (B)   Record keeping. NMUI shall keep complete and accurate books and
records of its business and operations pursuant to this franchise in accordance
with generally accepted accounting principles. NMUI and city agree that records
shall be kept on a city-specific basis for purposes of calculating franchise
fees. All such books, records and accounts shall be retained for a period of
six years in accordance with § 37-1-3 NMSA 1978. NMUI shall make such records
as are necessary to complete an audit available for inspection by the city at
its principal place of business upon 30 days notice.
(Ord. 1-1994; Am. Ord. 32-2007)
§ 13-4-4-10 CITY REGULATION.
   The city expressly reserves, and NMUI expressly recognizes, the city's right
and duty to adopt, from time to time, in addition to the provisions herein
contained, such Charter provisions, ordinances and rules and regulations as the
city may deem necessary in the lawful exercise of its police power for the
protection of the health, safety and welfare of its citizens and their
properties.
(Ord. 1-1994; Am. Ord. 32-2007)
§ 13-4-4-11 CITY RIGHTS.
   (A)   Enforcement. The Mayor, or his or her designee, is the official of the
city having full power and authority to take appropriate action for and on
behalf of the city and its inhabitants to enforce the provisions of this
franchise and to investigate any alleged violations or failures of NMUI to
comply with the provisions hereof or to adequately and fully discharge its
responsibilities and obligations hereunder. The failure or omission of the
Mayor or the city to so act shall not constitute any waiver or estoppel.
   (B)   NMUI agrees to meet with city staff at regular intervals to share and
coordinate information relative to the operation and repair of the facilities
of the city or of NMUI located in rights-of-way.
(Ord. 1-1994; Am. Ord. 32-2007)
§ 13-4-4-12 PLAN, DESIGN, CONSTRUCTION COORDINATION AND INSTALLATION OF
AUTHORITY FACILITIES.
   (A)   Before NMUI may conduct underground work involving excavation,
renovation, new construction or major relocation work in any rights-of-way,
NMUI shall first notify the city not less than five working days prior to
commencement of the work and shall comply with any special conditions relating
to location, scheduling, coordination and public safety. NMUI shall file maps
and drawings with the Director showing the location of any proposed
construction or extension of its facilities and services in any rights-of-way
of the city. Such proposed construction work to be done by NMUI shall be
performed and coordinated in a safe manner subject to the approval of the
Director and in accordance with applicable federal and state laws and city
ordinances, regulations and permit requirements now or hereafter existing
including the Barricade and Street Excavation Ordinance, as that ordinance may
be amended from time to time. In addition to any other depth standards, NMUI
shall establish a minimum depth of no less than 18 inches below finished grade
for all its facilities' lines.
   (B)   Construction forecast. On or before the first day of the sixth month
of each franchise year, the city and NMUI agree to meet and exchange three year
construction forecasts, together with such additional information as the city
and NMUI deem appropriate relating to projects planned within the city. The
city and NMUI shall hold such meetings as they deem necessary to exchange
additional information with a view toward coordinating their respective
activities in these areas where such coordination will prove mutually
beneficial to the public by minimizing disruption and costs to the public. NMUI
will comply with all building and zoning codes and assure that aesthetic and
other relevant planning principles have been given due consideration. It is
recognized that, notwithstanding the foregoing, the city retains absolute
discretion over the timing and all other aspects of its proposed projects and
NMUI acknowledges that it has a duty to coordinate its work within city
projects prior to city bidding its work. The city will make reasonable efforts
to allow NMUI work to be incorporated in its projects. NMUI will not cut or
otherwise disturb any new or rehabilitated pavement within two years of its
placement, except or unless NMUI repaves such roadway section to specifications
as may be required by the city.
   (C)   Interference; permits.  All facilities constructed by NMUI within
rights-of-way of the city shall be located so as to cause minimum interference
with public use of streets, alleys and other public ways and shall be
maintained in good repair and condition. Facilities located on, upon, and under
rights-of-way shall be constructed, installed, maintained, cleared of
vegetation, renovated or replaced in accordance with resolutions, ordinances,
rules and regulations of general application as may be adopted by the city to
control and monitor such activities. NMUI will acquire and pay for permits in
accordance with such rules and regulations as the city deems appropriate, and
the city may inspect the manner of such work and require remedies as may be
necessary to assure compliance. It is understood that this work involves the
health, safety and welfare of the community and from time to time must be done
under circumstances which will make the prior acquisition of a permit
infeasible, and in those cases the permit shall be applied for by NMUI on the
next working day.
   (D)   Compliance with laws. NMUI shall take measures which will result in
its facilities meeting the standards required by applicable federal, state and
city laws. Upon the city's request, NMUI will provide the city with copies of
any reports submitted to these agencies in compliance with such laws.
   (E)   City use of NMUI property.  Upon reasonable request by the city and to
the extent NMUI can do so, NMUI will grant joint use of its property which it
now, or in the future, owns or has an interest in within NMUI's service
territory or the city limits to the city for purposes including, but not
limited to, parks, drainage facilities, bikeways, traffic conduits, mass
transit corridors, storm sewerlines, pedestrian area parking, open spaces and
electric, cable, and natural gas distribution, provided that NMUI shall not be
required to make such an offer in any circumstance where such offer would
interfere with NMUI's use of its property. Compensation for such joint use
shall be as negotiated by the city and NMUI. If the city's joint use is
accepted by NMUI, then any improvements deemed appropriate by the city shall be
made by the city at its sole expense.
   (F)   Maintenance. NMUI shall be responsible for the maintenance of the
property within reasonable proximity of and upon which NMUI maintains above-
ground facilities, including the removal of weed and litter.
   (G)   ADA. NMUI shall insure its facilities in rights- of-way are located
and constructed in a manner such that access is not impaired in compliance with
the Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA). Following notice by the city of an
ADA construction problem, NMUI shall have 60 days or other reasonable time to
remedy the problem. In the event the city and NMUI cannot agree that a problem
exists, any dispute shall be submitted to mediation pursuant to §
13-4-4-8(D) herein.
(Ord. 1-1994; Am. Ord. 32-2007)
§ 13-4-4-13 NMUI EXCAVATIONS AND RELOCATIONS.
   (A)   Placement of facilities. NMUI shall have the right to excavate in,
occupy and use any and all rights- of-way after obtaining appropriate
excavation permits or other review in accordance with §
13-4-4-12 from the city. NMUI shall not, pursuant to this franchise, place any
of its facilities on, under or within any city park, duly designated as such by
the city, but nothing herein contained shall preclude the city from granting a
revocable permit or easement therefor. NMUI shall not place any of its
facilities on, over, under or within the median portion of any boulevard or
parkway without first having obtained the written permission of the city.
   (B)   Location and relocation expense. Any location or relocation of NMUI's
facilities in the rights-of- way reasonably required, caused or occasioned by
any city project including the installations of storm drainage, landscaping, or
traffic signal facilities, road reconstruction and construction shall be at the
cost of NMUI. The city and NMUI agree to meet and coordinate with respect to
any project such that, when timing allows, NMUI may include the costs of any
location or relocation in the next budget and/or bond cycle. NMUI shall
reconstruct, replace or restore any street, alley, or public way or place, in a
timely fashion, and any water, sewer, sanitary sewer, storm drainage, traffic
signalization facilities, or other facility of the city disturbed by NMUI,
without cost to the city, to a condition acceptable to the city consistent with
reasonable standards of safety and appearance. Any facility so disturbed by
NMUI shall be reconstructed, replaced, or restored only under the supervision
of city personnel. Any such relocation shall be accomplished as expeditiously
as possible. If there is a delay in a city project due to NMUI's relocation,
then NMUI shall pay all expenses incurred by the city as a direct result of the
delay.
   (C)   NMUI shall comply with all city ordinances and resolutions regarding
lane closures and traffic control.
   (D)   Abandoned facilities. NMUI is required to remove any and all abandoned
facilities located in rights-of-way at NMUI expense as soon as practicable, but
not later than 90 days following request by the city.
(Ord. 1-1994; Am. Ord. 32-2007)
§ 13-4-4-14 WATER AND WASTEWATER SERVICE.
   In accordance with the terms hereof, NMUI shall furnish water and wastewater
within NMUI’s service area, as heretofore noted, or any additions thereto, to
the city and to the inhabitants thereof, and to any person or persons or
corporation doing business in the city or any additions thereto.
(Am. Ord. 32-2007)
§ 13-4-4-15 CONSERVATION AND DEMAND SIDE MANAGEMENT.
   (A)   Commitment.  
      (1)   The city and NMUI recognize and agree that conservation programs
offer opportunities for the efficient use of water and reduction of customers'
costs. NMUI recognizes and shares the city's strong desire to advance the
implementation of cost-effective conservation programs that provide direct
opportunities to NMUI’s customers to manage more efficiently their use of water
and thereby create the opportunity to reduce their costs.
      (2)   In this regard, NMUI agrees to reasonably expand NMUI’s current
conservation programs and offer additional conservation programs for the
benefit of NMUI’s customers.
   (B)   Promotion. NMUI shall devote a reasonable share of NMUI’s promotional
and advertising budget to encourage the principles of conservation and the
benefits of the specific conservation programs to be implemented by NMUI.
(Ord. 1-1994; Am. Ord. 32-2007)
§ 13-4-4-16 EQUAL OPPORTUNITY AND AFFIRMATIVE ACTION.
   NMUI is committed to stimulating and strengthening the participation of
minorities and women with the company and is also committed to the principle
that the success and economic well-being of the company are related closely to
the economic strength and vigor of the communities and people it serves.
(Ord. 1-1994; Am. Ord. 32-2007)
§ 13-4-4-17 SYSTEM TO REMAIN IN PLACE.
   In the event this franchise is not renewed at the expiration of its term or
NMUI terminates any service provided herein for any reason whatsoever, NMUI
shall have no right to remove the systems, pending resolution of the
disposition of the system. NMUI further agrees it will not withhold any
temporary services necessary to protect the public, and in such event shall be
entitled only to monetary compensation in no greater amount than it would have
been entitled to were such services provided during the term of this franchise.
Only upon receipt of written notice from the city stating that the city has
adequate alternative sources to provide for the people of the city shall NMUI
be entitled to remove any or all of said systems in use under the terms of this
franchise.
(Ord. 1-1994; Am. Ord. 32-2007)
§ 13-4-4-18 AMENDMENT.
   At any time during the term of this franchise, the city through its City
Council, or NMUI may propose amendments to the franchise by giving 30 days
written notice to the other of the proposed amendment(s) desired, and both
parties thereafter, through their designated representatives, will, within a
reasonable time, negotiate in good faith in an effort to agree upon mutually
satisfactory amendment(s). No amendment or amendments to this franchise shall
be effective until mutually agreed upon by the city and NMUI and thereafter
submitted to and approved by the City Council.
(Ord. 1-1994; Am. Ord. 32-2007)
§ 13-4-4-19 PUBLIC PURPOSE.
   All of the regulations provided in this ordinance are hereby declared to be
for a public purpose and the health, safety, and welfare of the general public.
Any member of the governing body or city official or employee charged with the
enforcement of this ordinance, acting for the city in the discharge of his
duties, shall not thereby render himself personally liable; and he is hereby
relieved from all personal liability for any damage that might accrue to
persons or property as a result of any act required or permitted in the
discharge of his or her said duties. Neither the city nor NMUI by accepting
this franchise waives its right to seek all appropriate legal and equitable
remedies as allowed by law upon violation of the terms of this franchise,
including seeking injunctive relief in a court of competent jurisdiction. Such
right to injunctive relief is expressly reserved and all terms and provisions
hereof shall be enforceable through injunctive relief.
(Ord. 1-1994; Am. Ord. 32-2007)
§ 13-4-4-20 NOTICES.
   For the purpose of this ordinance, notice to the city will be to:
   Mayor
   City of Albuquerque
   P.O. Box 1293
   Albuquerque, New Mexico 87103
With a copy to:
   City Attorney, Utility Counsel
   City of Albuquerque
   P.O. Box 2248
   Albuquerque, New Mexico 87103
Notice to NMUI will be to:
   New Mexico Utilities, Inc.
   4700 Irving Blvd., N.W.
   Suite 201
   Albuquerque, New Mexico 87114
Notice will be effective upon delivery at the above addresses until the city or
NMUI notifies the other, in writing, of a change in the address.
(Ord. 1-1994; Am. Ord. 32-2007)
§ 13-4-4-21 VENUE.
   This ordinance shall be construed under and in accordance with the laws of
the State of New Mexico, and all obligations of the parties hereunder are
performable in Bernalillo County, New Mexico. In the event that any legal
proceeding is brought to enforce the terms of this franchise, the same shall be
brought in Bernalillo County, New Mexico.
(Ord. 1-1994; Am. Ord. 32-2007)
§ 13-4-4-22 NO WAIVER.
   Neither the city nor NMUI shall be excused from complying with any of the
terms and conditions of this franchise by any failure of the other, or any of
its officers, employees, or agents, upon any one or more occasions to insist
upon or to seek compliance with any such terms and conditions.
(Ord. 1-1994; Am. Ord. 32-2007)
§ 13-4-4-23 THIRD-PARTY BENEFICIARY.
   This agreement is not intended by any of the provisions of any part of the
agreement to create in the public, or any member thereof, a third-party
beneficiary or to authorize anyone not a party to the agreement to maintain a
suit for wrongful death, bodily and/or personal injury to person, damage to
property, and/or any other claim(s) whatsoever pursuant to the provisions of
this agreement.
(Ord. 32-2007)
PART 5: BROOKS FIBER COMMUNICATIONS OF NEW MEXICO, INC. FRANCHISE
§ 13-4-5-1 SHORT TITLE.
    Sections 13-4-5-1 et seq. may be cited as the “Brooks Fiber Communications
of New Mexico, Inc. Franchise Ordinance.”
(Ord. 45-1995)
§ 13-4-5-2 DEFINITIONS.
     For the purpose of this ordinance, the following terms, phrases, words and
their derivations shall have the meaning given in this section. When not
inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the
future tense, words in the plural number include the singular number, and words
in the singular number include the plural number. The word "shall" is mandatory
and "may" is permissive. Words not defined in this section shall be given their
common and ordinary meaning.
   CITY. The City of Albuquerque, a municipal corporation of the State of New
Mexico.
   CITY CLERK. The City Clerk of the City of Albuquerque or a designated
representative.
   COMPANY. Is and refers to Brooks Fiber Communications of New Mexico, Inc.
("Brooks").
   COUNCIL. The legislative body of the City of Albuquerque sometimes referred
to as "City Council."
   DIRECTOR. The Director of the Public Works Department of the City of
Albuquerque or his\her designee.
   FACILITIES. Are and refer to and include, but are not limited to, plant,
works, systems, improvements and equipment owned, leased or otherwise used by
the company such as poles, wires, fixtures, equipment, underground circuits and
conduit in public rights-of-way and other property necessary or convenient for
the transmission and distribution of telecommunication service where such
poles, wires, fixtures, equipment, underground circuits and conduit and other
property necessary or convenient for the transmission and distribution of
telecommunication service are located within rights-of-way and public places.
   FRANCHISE. The authorization granted herein to rent and use rights-of-way
and public places to construct, operate, and maintain company facilities in the
city or any portion or portions thereof.
   GROSS REVENUE.
      (1)   Includes any and all revenue, exclusive of gross receipts tax and
exclusive of any tax passed through to consumers on behalf of governmental
agencies, received by the company for services provided to customers through
use of the facilities, provided by the company, including but not limited to:
         (a)   All telecommunications service revenues charged on a flat rate
basis over facilities;
         (b)   One half of all telecommunications service revenues charged on a
flat rate basis over facilities outside the city limits, but within Bernalillo
County;
         (c)   All telecommunications service revenues charged on a usage
sensitive or mileage basis over facilities;
         (d)   One half of all telecommunications service revenues charged on a
usage sensitive or mileage basis over facilities outside the city limits, but
within Bernalillo County;
         (e)   All revenues from installation service charges;
         (f)   All revenues from connection or disconnection fees;
         (g)   All revenues from penalties or charges to customers for checks
returned from banks, net of back costs paid;
         (h)   All revenues from equipment sold or rented to customers upon
customers' premises;
         (i)   All revenues from joint pole or conduit use;
         (j)   All revenues from charges for access to local and long distance
networks. However, gross revenue shall not include such access revenues if a
local exchange carrier has paid a franchise fee on any such revenue;
         (k)   All revenues from authorized rental, lease, resale or use of any
portion of the company's network in the city, including plant, facilities or
capacity leased to others;
         (l)   Recoveries of bad debts previously written off and revenues from
the sale or assignment of bad debts. Gross revenues may be adjusted for net
write-off of uncollectible accounts computed on the average annual rate for the
entire company;
         (m)   All revenues from enhanced data service;
         (n)   All interconnect revenues from interexchange carriers. However,
gross revenue shall not include interconnection services revenues received from
any source if a local exchange carrier has paid a franchise fee on any such
revenue;
         (o)   All revenues from co-location connection fees; and
         (p)   The company acknowledges that transport services provided to an
affiliate or subsidiary will be subject to an actual or imputed charge
comparable to charges to nonaffiliated customers. Such actual or imputed
charges to affiliates or subsidiaries shall be reflected in gross revenues of
the company for purpose of calculating the franchise fee owed. This ordinance
does not authorize affiliates or subsidiaries to undertake telecommunication
services as contemplated by this ordinance.
      (2)   The company is not required to measure each category of revenues
separately; however, in the event of an audit by the city, the company will be
required to provide an appropriate justification for amounts reported as gross
revenues under this section.
      (3)    GROSS REVENUE shall not include proceeds from the sale of bonds,
mortgages or other evidence of indebtedness, securities or stocks. Gross
receipts taxes are not included in the above definition of gross revenue, and,
therefore, are not included in the calculation of the franchise fee due under
this ordinance.
      (4)   The company warrants that, as of the effective date of this
ordinance, all services of the company will be provided through facilities
located within the limits of the city or Bernalillo County. In accordance with
this section and §
13-4-5-13 herein, the company agrees to give the city not less than 60 days
notice of its intent to extend its facilities, and thus its services, outside
of Bernalillo County.
      (5)   Gross revenue shall be measured and monitored periodically as set
out in §§
13-4-5-13 and
13-4-5-15 below.
   LINE EXTENSION. Any extension of distribution or transmission facilities
into areas within the boundaries of the city not then served by the company.
   MAYOR. The Mayor of the City of Albuquerque or his/her designated
representative.
   PUBLIC PLACES. All sidewalks, alleys, or other public ways and any and all
public sources, spaces, grounds and buildings of the city within the city
limit.
   REASONABLE ATTORNEY FEES. Charges for legal representation as may be
incurred by the city.
   RIGHTS-OF-WAY. All present and future streets, avenues, highways, alleys,
bridges and public ways, (excluding railroad rights-of-way, parks and airport
property) of the city within the city limit.
   TELECOMMUNICATIONS SERVICE.
      (1)   Any switched or other one-way or two-way transmission of voice or
data, including but not necessarily limited to:
         (a)   Services interconnecting interexchange carriers for the purpose
of any one-way or two-way transmission of voice or data;
         (b)   Services connecting interexchange carriers or competitive access
carriers to local exchange providers for the purpose of any one-way or two-way
transmission of voice or data;
         (c)   Services connecting interexchange carriers to any entity, other
than another interexchange carrier or the local exchange provider for the
purpose of any one-way or two-way transmission of voice or data;
         (d)   Service providing private line point-to-point service for end
users for the purpose of any one-way or two-way transmission of voice or data;
         (e)   Nonentertainment video, video conferencing or point-to-point
private line service; or
         (f)   Subject to the exclusions in divisions (2) through (4) below,
any service regulated by state regulatory agencies or the Federal
Communications Commission ("FCC") which the state agency or FCC has authorized
the company to provide, if the company has provided advance notice of same to
city.
      (2)    TELECOMMUNICATIONS SERVICE shall not include local exchange
telephone services or other services directly regulated by the New Mexico State
Corporation Commission ("SCC"). Before proposing to provide local exchange
telephone services in the city, the company agrees to obtain prior SCC approval
to provide that service, and to obtain a separate franchise from the city for
the provision of such local exchange telephone service.
      (3)    TELECOMMUNICATIONS SERVICE shall not include cable services as
defined in Title 47, Chapter 5. Subchapter V-A of the United States Code, as
amended (47 USCA § 521, et seq.) or as recognized by the FCC. Before proposing
to provide such cable services in the city, the company agrees to obtain a
separate franchise from the city for the provision of this service.
      (4)    TELECOMMUNICATIONS SERVICE shall not include video dial tone or
personal communication service. However, in the event the company desires to
provide such service, it agrees to, as part of any franchise authorizing
provision of that service, to pay a separate fee to the city for the provision
of video dial tone, personal communication service or like service.
Notwithstanding the above, and subject to the payment of franchise fees, the
company shall have the right under this ordinance to provide, by means of its
facilities, transport services for the bulk transport of transmissions signals,
whether digital or analog, and whether voice, video or data, that are in part
or in whole a local exchange telephone service, a cable service, as defined
above, a video dial tone and a personal communication service, to any company
authorized to provide such services by the city, the State of New Mexico, or
federal government authority having jurisdiction over such services.
   TREASURER. The Treasurer of the City of Albuquerque.
(Ord. 45-1995)
§ 13-4-5-3 GRANT OF FRANCHISE.  
   (A)   The city hereby grants to Brooks Fiber Communications of New Mexico,
Inc., a New Mexico corporation, subject to the terms, conditions, and
limitations contained in this ordinance, permission to rent, use and occupy
rights-of-way and public places and a nonexclusive franchise, to provide
telecommunication service, and right and privilege to erect, construct,
maintain and operate a telecommunication system within the corporate limits of
the city as the same now exist or may be extended in the future; and a
nonexclusive franchise, right and privilege to erect, construct, maintain and
operate poles, wires, fixtures, equipment, underground circuits and conduits
and other property necessary or convenient for the transmission and
distribution of telecommunication service to the city and its inhabitants and
to other customers and territory beyond the limits of the city; and to
transmit, distribute and sell telecommunication service, upon, over, along,
under and across the streets, alleys, roads and other public ways and places,
including, but not limited to private property on which a preliminary
subdivision plat has been approved by the city for the provision of public
utilities within the corporate limits of the city as the same now exist or may
be extended in the future.
   (B)   All facilities of the company used in connection with the transmission
and distribution of telecommunication service and presently located within the
corporate limits of the city, or hereafter located within the corporate limits
of the city, shall be deemed to be covered by the terms of this ordinance.
(Ord. 45-1995)
§ 13-4-5-4 DURATION; COMPANY OFFICES.
   (A)   This franchise is granted for a period of seven years from and after
the effective date of the franchise granted through this ordinance, which
commences on the effective date of this ordinance. If the company has complied
with all material provisions of this ordinance this franchise agreement will be
renewed, by ordinance, for an additional three years on the date of expiration,
unless one party gives notice, in writing to the other, at least 240 days prior
to the date of expiration of such party's intent to terminate the franchise
agreement. Assuming notice to terminate has not been tendered by the city, at
least 180 days prior to the end of the term of this ordinance, the company
shall notify the city in writing of its intention to seek renewal of this
ordinance.
   (B)   Within one year of the effective date of this franchise or upon
commencement of operation and throughout the duration of this franchise, or any
extension thereto, the company shall be required to establish and maintain
offices within the city for customer service. The company shall make available
at such offices, at a minimum, documents required by this franchise at §§
13-4-5-5,
13-4-5-15 and
13-4-5-16 with reasonable notice by the city to the company.
(Ord. 45-1995)
§ 13-4-5-5 CONSTRUCTION PLANS AND DRAWINGS.
   (A)   Before the company may conduct underground work involving excavation,
new construction or major relocation work in any rights-of-way or public place,
the company shall first notify the city and shall comply with any special
conditions relating to location, scheduling, coordination and public safety;
and the company shall file maps and drawings with the Director showing the
location of any construction or extension of its facilities and services in any
rights-of-way or public place of the city. For multi-conduit duct banks, maps
and drawings shall show overall size, material and configuration of the duct
bank. As further set out at §
13-4-5-16, upon request from the city the company shall provide the city with
updates of the maps and drawings showing the location of any new construction,
extension or relocation of its facilities. All materials provided pursuant to
this section shall be kept confidential to the fullest extent possible under
the law.
   (B)   Such proposed construction work to be done by the company shall be
performed in a safe manner subject to the approval of the Director and in
accordance with applicable federal and state laws and city ordinances,
regulations and permit requirements now or hereafter existing including the
Street Excavation Ordinance, as that ordinance may be amended from time to
time, of the city requiring a Sidewalk, Drive-pad, Curb and Gutter Bond, a bond
securing payment of permit fees and evidence of at least $1,000,000 in the
requisite insurance coverage(s).
   (C)   Prior to initiating any construction or extension of the backbone
network and contemporaneous with the filing of maps and drawings, the company
shall tender a review/location fee, in addition to the franchise fee, with the
Director. Such preconstruction review/location fee shall be $1.50 per linear
foot of fiber laid as diagramed and mapped; however, in no event shall such fee
exceed $30,000 on an annual basis. Such review/location fee shall apply to
subsequent additions or extensions of the company's backbone network as may be
proposed from time to time and shall be due each January 15.
(Ord. 45-1995)
§ 13-4-5-6 INSTALLATIONS, EXCAVATIONS AND RESTORATIONS.
   (A)   (1)   The company shall have the right to excavate in, occupy and use
any and all rights-of-way and public places for the purpose of installing,
erecting, constructing, repairing, maintaining, removing, relocating and
operating its facilities after obtaining any and all appropriate permits from
the city, provided, however, that:
         (a)   The company shall not, pursuant to this franchise, place any of
its facilities, on, over, under or within any city park, duly designated as
such by the city, but nothing herein contained shall preclude the city from
granting a revocable permit therefor;
         (b)   The company shall not place any of its facilities, on, over, or
within the median portion of any boulevard or parkway without first having
obtained the written permission of the city;
         (c)   Where appropriate and as may be required by the city through any
permit process, installation, excavations and restorations affecting street
and/or lane closures shall, as often as practicable, be performed after 6:30
p.m. and before 6:00 a.m., but in no event shall any such work be performed
from 7:00 a.m. to 9:00 a.m. and from 4:00 p.m. to 6:00 p.m.;
         (d)   The city reserves the right to assist in the coordination and
scheduling of any company projects where such project may be reasonably
coordinated with the placement of other franchisee facilities. Otherwise, and
subject to city permit processes and approvals, it is recognized that,
notwithstanding the foregoing, the company retains discretion over the timing
of the company's proposed projects; and
         (e)   The company shall, to the extent feasible, employ "trenchless"
technology in the placement of its facilities.
      (2)   Except in an emergency, not less than five working days prior to
the commencement of any work by the company which involves excavation in any
rights-of-way or public place, the company shall notify the Director and any
appropriate utility coordinating committee for purposes of utility location.
Minimum notice to the city shall be by telephone communication or in person
prior to any work, followed by notice in writing as soon as practical. The
company will provide advance notice so as not to disrupt services of the city
or any other person or utility using any rights-of-way and public places in the
city and allow the city to place any inspector it may deem necessary at the
site of the project.
   (B)   Whenever work is performed in any rights-of-way or public place, the
company shall take all reasonable precautions to minimize interruption to
traffic flow, damage to property or creation of a hazardous condition.
   (C)   After any excavation shall be made and after work is completed
pursuant to the provisions of this ordinance, the company, at company expense
shall as soon as practicable, but not longer than one day, remove all surplus
material in compliance with specifications, requirements and regulations of the
city in effect at the time of such restoration and restore the portion of the
rights-of-way or public place to the same condition in which it was prior to
the excavation thereof. If the company fails to restore promptly the affected
portion of the rights-of-way or public place, following written notice to the
company, the city may make the restoration in a manner satisfactory to the city
and all costs incurred for such restoration, whether done with city work forces
and equipment or otherwise, shall be paid by the company, including the cost of
any inspectors the city may assign to the project.
   (D)   The company shall be responsible for the maintenance of all rights-of-
way impacted by the presence of the company's facilities and within reasonable
proximity of and upon which the company maintains aboveground facilities,
including the removal of weeds and litter.
   (E)   The company shall ensure its facilities in rights-of-way and public
places are located and constructed in a manner such that access is not impaired
in compliance with the Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA). Following notice
by the city of an ADA construction problem, the company shall have 30 days or
other reasonable time to remedy the problem. In the event the city and the
company cannot agree that a problem exists, any dispute shall be submitted to
nonbinding mediation, with the assistance and through the city's Alternative
Dispute Resolution ("ADR") Coordinator.
   (F)   Execution of this franchise requires the company to become a member of
a local utility coordinating committee, e.g. New Mexico One-Call System. The
company further agrees to participate in such organization(s) and abide by
their articles of incorporation, bylaws, and other requirements.
(Ord. 45-1995)
§ 13-4-5-7 LOCATION AND RELOCATION OF FACILITIES.
   (A)   All facilities of the company shall be placed so that they do not
interfere with the use of rights-of-way and public places by the city and shall
only be placed after approval of the location by the Director and in accordance
with any specifications adopted by the city governing the location of
facilities. The city reserves the right to construct, install, maintain and
operate any public improvement, work or facility, do any work that the city may
find desirable on, over or under any rights-of-way and public places, and
vacate, alter or close any rights-of-way and public places. All such work shall
be done, if possible, in such manner as not to obstruct, injure or prevent free
use and operation of the company's facilities. The company agrees to obtain the
city's express written approval before placing any new poles in rights-of-way
and other public places, that do not currently exist in rights-of-way and other
public places.
   (B)   (1)   The city shall have the right to require the removal or
relocation of facilities used by the company in any rights-of-way or public
place as may reasonably be required by the city for any reason, after notice to
the company, or caused or occasioned by any city project including, but not
limited to, the installations of water, sanitary sewer, storm drainage,
landscaping, or traffic signal facilities, road reconstruction and
construction, and the company shall remove and relocate such facilities within
30 days following notice to do so from the city. Prior to any such relocation
the city agrees to provide for suitable location for such relocated facilities
sufficient to maintain service. The cost of any removal or relocation of its
facilities shall be paid by the company. Notwithstanding the foregoing the
company shall not be required by the city to relocate its facilities to
accommodate another franchisee in the city. The costs of any relocations
occasioned by another franchisee of the city in no event shall be the
responsibility of the city.
      (2)   The company shall reconstruct, replace or restore any street,
alley, or public way or place, in a timely fashion, and any water, sewer,
sanitary sewer, storm drainage, traffic signalization facilities, or other
facility of the city disturbed by the company, without cost to the city, to a
condition acceptable to the city consistent with reasonable standards of safety
and appearance. Any facility so disturbed by the company shall be
reconstructed, replaced, or restored only under the supervision of city
personnel.
      (3)   Subject to the provisions of §
13-4-5-5 herein and upon notice to the city, the company may remove or relocate
transmission and distribution facilities maintained by the company on its own
initiative.
   (C)   Where the city, acting through itself, an agent, contractor or permit
holder, proposes to improve a street, including but not limited to landscaping
and traffic signalization, water line, storm sewer or sanitary sewer within the
rights-of-way or other public place under its jurisdiction or control, and such
improvements include excavation and the placement of underground utilities
vaults and conduit sufficient for the company's telecommunication service
distribution purposes, by and at the expense of someone other than the company,
then upon notification by the city and upon such reasonable scheduling as may
be required by the city's ordinances and policies, the company shall replace
such overhead distribution facilities as are then within the affected right-of-
way with underground facilities within the vaults and conduits provided
therefor. All such placement shall be at company expense. The conversion from
overhead to underground shall be conditioned upon the city requiring the
undergrounding in the area in which both the existing and new facilities are
and will be located and the city shall require:
      (1)   That all existing overhead communication and electric distribution
facilities in such area be removed;
      (2)   That each customer served from such existing overhead distribution
facilities shall, in accordance with the company's rules for underground
service, make all facility changes on customer's premises necessary to receive
service from the underground facilities of the company as soon as it is
available; and
      (3)   That the company is authorized to discontinue its overhead service
on completion of the underground facilities.
Such replacement of overhead with underground distribution facilities shall be
paid for by the company.
(Ord. 45-1995)
§ 13-4-5-8 PUBLIC WORKS AND IMPROVEMENTS.
   (A)   The city reserves the right to construct, install, maintain and
operate any public improvement, work or facility and do any work that the city
may find desirable on, over or under any rights-of-way or public place. All
such work shall be done, if possible, in such manner as not to obstruct, injure
or prevent free use and operation of the company's facilities.
   (B)   Whenever the city shall excavate or perform any work in any present
and/or future rights-of-way or public place of the city, or shall contract for
such excavation or work, where such excavation or work may disturb but not
require removal or relocation of company's facilities, the city shall notify
the company sufficiently in advance of such contemplated excavation or work to
enable the company to take such measures as may be deemed necessary to protect
such facilities from damage and possible inconvenience or injury to the public
or the city's rights-of-way or public place. If the company cannot take such
measures, the company shall be required to relocate its facilities in
accordance with §
13-4-5-7. In such case, the company, upon request, shall furnish field markings
to the city or contractor, as the case may be, showing the location of all its
facilities in the area involved in such proposed excavation or other work.
   (C)   Whenever the city shall vacate any rights-of-way or public place for
the convenience or benefit of any person or governmental agency or
instrumentality, the company's rights shall be preserved as to any of its
facilities then existing in such rights-of-way or public place.
(Ord. 45-1995)
§ 13-4-5-9 MOVING OF BUILDINGS.
   Whenever it becomes necessary to temporarily rearrange, remove, lower or
raise the aerial cables or wires or other apparatus of the company to permit
the passage of any building, machinery or other object, the company shall
perform such rearrangement upon the receipt of written notice from the person
or persons desiring to move said building, machinery or other object. The
written notice shall detail the route of movement of the building, machinery or
other object. The costs incurred by the company in making such rearrangements
of its aerial plant will be borne, excepting the city, by the person or persons
seeking such rearrangement, unless the aerial plant is placed or maintained in
violation of the applicable rules of any local, state, or federal regulatory
agency and thereby interferes with the movement.
(Ord. 45-1995)
§ 13-4-5-10 SAFETY STANDARDS.
   The facilities of the company shall at all times be constructed, operated
and maintained so as to protect and safeguard the health and safety of the
public and to this end the company shall observe all rules pertaining thereto
prescribed by any local, state, or federal regulatory authority.
(Ord. 45-1995)
§ 13-4-5-11 JOINT USE AGREEMENTS.
   The company is authorized to enter into joint use agreements with any person
or entity franchised by the city with respect to the placement of facilities.
The company may require any such person or entity to furnish evidence of
adequate insurance covering the company and adequate bonds covering the
performance of the person or entity attaching to the company's facilities as a
condition precedent to granting permission to any such person or entity to
attach transmission facilities to the company's facilities; provided that the
company's requirements for such insurance shall be reasonable.
(Ord. 45-1995)
§ 13-4-5-12 INTERFERENCE.
   Subject to §
13-4-5-13(H) herein, the company shall not be required to attach its facilities
to the facilities of any other person or entity or to permit the facilities of
any other person or entity to be attached to the company's facilities if it can
be shown satisfactorily to the city that the company will be subjected to
increased risks of interruption of service or to increased liability for
accidents, or if the facilities of such other person or entity are not of the
character, design, and construction required by, or are not being maintained in
accordance with industry standards of practice.
(Ord. 45-1995)
§ 13-4-5-13 FRANCHISE FEE; CONDITIONS.
   (A)   As consideration for this franchise, which provides for the rental and
use by the company of the rights-of-way and other public places within the
boundaries of the city, which are valuable public properties acquired and
maintained by the city at great expense to its taxpayers and citizens, the
company shall pay to the city an amount equal to 3% of the gross revenue, as
defined in §
13-4-5-2, collected by the company for the first year from the effective date
of this franchise ordinance. Thereafter, for the next one-year term the company
shall pay to the city an amount equal to 4% of the gross revenue collected by
the company. For the remaining five-year term of this franchise, the company
shall pay to the city an amount equal to 5% of the gross revenue collected by
the company. Provided, however, in accordance with this section and the
provisions contained in the definition of GROSS REVENUE in §
13-4-5-2, after notice by the company to the city of the company's intent to
extend its facilities, or services, outside of Bernalillo County, and upon the
company's commencement of services across facilities outside Bernalillo County,
the fee under this ordinance shall escalate to 5% of gross revenue. Such 5% fee
shall become due the month following the month the extended facilities are
placed in service. The city shall use its best efforts to ensure that any
company providing services substantially similar to those provided by the
company (i.e., "Brooks") shall pay an equivalent fee measured as a percentage
of gross revenues equal to or greater than that paid by the company.
   (B)   In consideration of the agreement of the company to make such
franchise payments, the city agrees that no license, tax, or charge on the
business, occupation or franchise of the company shall be imposed upon or
required of the company by the city during the term of this ordinance. This
provision shall not exempt the property of the company from lawful property, ad
valorem taxes and local improvement district assessments. This provision shall
also not exempt the company from conditions, exactions, fees and charges, which
are generally applicable during the company's real property development or use
as required by the city's ordinances.
   (C)   Commencing the month following the month this franchise ordinance
becomes effective, the franchise fee shall be paid monthly on the 25th day of
each month; such fee shall be for gross revenues received by the company for
the preceding month. The company shall furnish to the city with each payment of
compensation required by this section a written statement, showing the amount
of gross revenue of the company within the city for the period covered by the
payment. Upon receipt of such payment the city shall issue a receipt to the
company. To facilitate the city's annual budget process, on or before December
31, 1995, and each succeeding December 31st thereafter during the term of this
franchise ordinance, the company will provide the city with an estimate of the
gross revenue and resultant franchise fee for the following calendar year.
Nothing herein shall preclude the company and the city from agreeing to a
revised payment schedule.
   (D)   On or before the first day of February of each succeeding year, the
company shall submit to the City Treasurer a statement of the franchise fee
actually due to the city based upon the actual gross revenue for the previous
calendar year, together with a check for any amount due from the company or a
statement for any amount due from the city. Within 30 days from the submission
of the statement of franchise fee owing, or within such reasonable additional
time as he may request, the Treasurer shall investigate the statement and
determine the accuracy of the amounts reported. However, neither payment of the
franchise fee nor failure to make such investigation shall estop the city in
any way or prevent subsequent investigation, collection or return of any amount
properly due.
   (E)   In the event it is claimed by the city that the amount of the
franchise fee paid hereunder for any calendar year is insufficient, or in the
event the company claims that the amount is excessive, and the parties cannot
agree, the city and the company shall attempt to informally negotiate a
resolution. In the event that negotiations fail, the dispute shall, before any
other remedies are invoked, be submitted to nonbinding mediation with the
assistance of and through the city's ADR Coordinator.
   (F)   In the event that the franchise fee set forth in this franchise
ordinance is declared illegal, unconstitutional or void for any reason by any
court or proper authority, the company shall be contractually bound to pay the
city, at the same times and in the same manner as provided for herein, an
aggregate amount equal to the amount which would have been paid as a franchise
fee. This section, however, shall not constitute a waiver of any claim the
company may assert against the city.
   (G)   Acceptance by the city of any payment due under this section shall not
be deemed to be a waiver by the city of any breach of this franchise occurring
prior thereto, nor shall the acceptance by the city of any such payments
preclude the city from later establishing that a larger amount was actually
due, or from collecting any balance due to the city.
   (H)   (1)   In consideration of the rights and privileges hereby granted,
the city shall have and the company hereby grants to it, the right and
privilege at the city's expense to suspend and maintain wires and necessary
control boxes on poles placed by the company in the streets and other places
aforesaid, or if such wires are placed underground, to place and maintain in
the pipes or conduits of company, if space therein is available, wires which
the city may require for fire, police, emergency or other municipal purposes.
All such wires shall be placed on the poles or in the conduits so as not to
interfere with the service of the company and shall not pose a danger to the
company's facilities, customers, or customers' property. However, nothing in
this franchise shall limit the company's right to reserve conduit space and/or
pole space which in its sole discretion it retains for purposes of assuring the
safety of or servicing of the facilities. The city agrees in consideration of
the establishment of this service and the furnishing of such facilities to hold
the company free and harmless from all claims or liability for damage which may
arise out of the city's operation of such wires and control boxes.
      (2)   As further consideration of the rights and privileges hereby
granted, and upon reasonable request by the city and to the extent the company
can reasonably do so, pursuant to its leases and agreements with other right-
of-way providers, the company will grant joint use of rights-of-way which it
now, or in the future, has an interest in to the city for purposes including
but not limited to parks, drainage facilities, bikeways, traffic conduits, mass
transit corridors, sanitary sewer lines, pedestrian area parking, open spaces
and electric, cable, natural gas and water service distribution, provided that
the company shall not be required to make such an offer in any circumstance
where such offer would unreasonably interfere with the company's use of the
rights-of-way. Compensation for such joint use shall be as negotiated by the
city and the company. If the city's joint use is accepted by the company, then
any improvements deemed appropriate by the city shall be made by the city at
its sole expense.
   (I)   The company agrees that any franchise or other fee paid by the company
to the city shall not be reflected as a line item or separate fee on invoices
to ultimate consumers of the company. Any fee paid to the city is a cost of
doing business to the company and shall be embedded in the rates charged to
consumers.
   (J)   The compensation paid by the company for this franchise includes
compensation for the rental and use of any rights-of-way and public place
located within the city as authorized.
(Ord. 45-1995)
§ 13-4-5-14 FACILITIES FOR EXCLUSIVE CITY USE.  
   (A)   Within six months of the effective date of this ordinance, the city
will select one company, after informal competitive bid among the companies
authorized to provide telecommunication services, to provide a downtown
backbone network comprised of the following designated facilities. The company
and other companies contemporaneously franchised and authorized to provide
telecommunication services, shall provide to the city an indefeasible right to
use ("IRU") and will proportionately contribute to the reasonable and necessary
cost of:
      (1)   A three pair dark fiber backbone in that company's then existing
backbone;
      (2)   Lateral connections from the backbone to the following facilities,
at the U.S. West/City network interface (i.e., the telephone room);
         (a)   Albuquerque Bernalillo County Government Center;
         (b)   Fire Station No. 1;
         (c)   East Convention Center; and
         (d)   The city's long distance carrier's point of presence.
   (B)   In addition to the downtown network, the city may, within two years of
the effective date of this ordinance, select a second backbone network, either
the company's or that of another company franchised and authorized to provide
telecommunication services, of three pair of dark fibers for the city's IRU in
such company's backbone network. The company so selected will be reimbursed
proportionately by the companies not chosen, including companies then
franchised to provide similar services, for the incremental cost of adding the
fiber and the incremental cost of maintaining it in the future.
   (C)   The company and any other company franchised and authorized to provide
telecommunication services will proportionately contribute to the cost of
connecting the following city facilities to a network of the city's choice:
      (1)   Piño Yards; and
      (2)   Old Albuquerque High School.
   (D)   The company shall provide the city three additional lateral
connections at locations of the city's choice either connecting to the city's
then existing dark fiber networks or the then existing network of any company
then authorized to provide telecommunication services. If a lateral connection
is made to a lighted network, the city or the new end-user customer will be
expected to pay service charges to the network owner. Lateral connections will
be limited to 100 feet. Anything greater than the 100 feet will be paid for by
the city or the end-user customer.
   (E)   All facilities placed for the city's use pursuant to divisions (A)
through (D) above shall be for the city's internal and noncommercial purposes,
not for resale, and for the city's sole and exclusive use. In the event of a
sale of the company's network, the city will retain an indefeasible right to
use the above facilities.
   (F)   The company agrees to bear its pro rata share of any maintenance of
fiber dedicated to the city. Except that the city shall pay only actual
incremental labor costs to the company to repair the city's share of dark
fibers within any cable that is damaged as the result of any natural disaster.
   (G)   The city will not allow or direct any third party to access fiber
optic cable or other company facilities, if any, in city rights-of-way without
notice to the company sufficient to allow the company to supervise and direct
such access.
   (H)   The city recognizes that the company's agreements, if any, to occupy
rights-of-way or for pole attachments may be subject to the control of third
parties who may require the company to relocate its cable. In the event of such
required relocation by the company, the company shall provide notice thereof to
the city as soon as reasonably possible. The company shall provide replacement
dark fibers to the city in any company replacement cable as soon as reasonably
possible.
   (I)   The city agrees in consideration for the provision of such dark fiber
and lateral connections to hold the company free and harmless from all claims
or liability for damage which may arise out of the city's operation of such
dark fiber and lateral connections.
(Ord. 45-1995)
§ 13-4-5-15 BOOKS OF ACCOUNT AND REPORTS.
   (A)   The city shall have the right to review or audit the company's books
and records in accordance with regularly accepted accounting and audit
standards regarding any amounts which may be owed under this franchise
ordinance. This right includes the right to review and audit all books and
records of revenue not included in the calculation of the fee paid, but which
may be reasonably considered by the city to be subject to a franchise fee. The
city shall give written notice to the company of any additional amount claimed
to be due to the city as a result of the city's review. The additional amount
due the city, if any, shall be paid within 30 days following determination by
the city that such amount is due and payable.
   (B)   The company shall keep complete and accurate books and records of its
business and operations pursuant to this franchise ordinance in accordance with
generally accepted accounting principles and in accordance with the rules and
regulations of any state regulatory authority. The company shall keep its books
of account and records in such a way that breakdowns of revenues are available
by journal code within the city.
   (C)   In the event of an audit, the company shall provide the city specific
books, records, contracts, accounts, documents and papers for its operations
within the city.
   (D)   All such books, records, and accounts of the company shall be retained
by the company for a period of six years, in accordance with § 37-1-3, NMSA
1978. The company shall make such records, as are necessary for the city to
complete its audit, and be available for inspection by the city, in the city,
upon 30 days notice from the city.
   (E)   All audits will take place on company premises within the city. The
city's auditors may review all directly relevant materials and may make copies
of any materials with the approval from the company. Such approval will not be
unreasonably withheld.
   (F)   Upon request by the city, the company shall provide to the city by
U.S. mail, postage prepaid, a copy of all papers filed by the company with any
federal or state regulatory agency on the same day of filing that pertain to
the company's facilities located in New Mexico.
(Ord. 45-1995)
§ 13-4-5-16 SUPPLYING MAPS UPON REQUEST.
   The company shall maintain on file maps and operational data pertaining to
its operations in the city. The city may inspect the maps and data at any time
during business hours. Upon request of the city the company shall furnish to
the city as soon as practicable, without charge, current maps either in a "hard
copy" printed form or in the city's AGIS format or compatible data base,
showing the location and dimension of any facilities, but not other proprietary
information, used in operating the company's facilities within the city served
by the company.
(Ord. 45-1995)
§ 13-4-5-17 RATES.
   (A)   The rates to be charged by the company for telecommunication service
shall comply with the appropriate local, state or federal regulatory authority,
or any other governmental official, commission or body having jurisdiction. If
no governmental official, commission or body has rate setting jurisdiction, the
company may set rates to be charged at its sole discretion.
   (B)   To the extent that the city is, or may in the future become, entitled
to set fees and charges for the services provided pursuant to this franchise,
the city reserves the right to regulate the rates, fees, charges, deposits and
associated terms and conditions for any service provided pursuant to this
franchise to the fullest extent permitted by applicable law with appropriate
procedural due process.
(Ord. 45-1995)
§ 13-4-5-18 FRANCHISE NOT EXCLUSIVE.
   The franchise hereby granted shall not be exclusive and shall not be
construed as any limitation on the city to grant rights, privileges and
authority to other persons or corporations similar to or different from those
herein set forth or to construct, install, operate or maintain a public
utility.
(Ord. 45-1995)
§ 13-4-5-19 LIMITATION ON PRIVILEGES.
   All rights, authority and grants herein contained or conferred are also
conditioned upon the understanding and agreement that these privileges in the
rights-of-way and other public places of the city are not to operate in any way
so as to be an enhancement of the company's properties or values or to be an
asset or item of ownership in any appraisal thereof. In the event that the city
shall at any time hereafter acquire the property of the company, by purchase,
or otherwise, the value of this franchise shall be fixed and determined at $1.
(Ord. 45-1995)
§ 13-4-5-20 ASSIGNMENT OF FRANCHISE.
   (A)   The company shall not transfer or assign any rights under this
franchise or lease total capacity of its system or network to another entity
unless the city shall first review the financial, technical and operational
qualifications of such entity and give its approval, in writing, in 60 days
which approval shall not be unreasonably withheld. This prohibition shall not
apply in the instance that the company is transferred, assigned, or sold to an
affiliated interest as that term is defined at § 62-3-3.A, NMSA 1978, or
successor statute, nor shall this prohibition apply to assignments made or
security interests granted in order to secure financing. However, the company
agrees to provide at least 30 days advance notice of any affiliate transfer,
assignment or sale. The city shall have the discretion to review the financial,
technical and operational qualifications of the affiliate.
   (B)   In order that the city might share in the value this franchise adds to
the company's operation, any such transfer or assignment of any rights under
this franchise by the company, subject to the exceptions listed in division (A)
above, shall be subject to the conditions that the transferee promptly pay the
city 20% of any and all fees paid to the city including the franchise fee paid
to the city in the previous calendar year, which amount the company and the
city agree is reasonable, and that such transfer fee shall not be recovered
from the city or from city residents or property owners through rates or
surcharges of the company.
(Ord. 45-1995)
§ 13-4-5-21 ADDITIONAL CITY RIGHTS.
   The right and privilege of the city to construct, purchase or condemn a
public utility or telecommunication provider located within or without the
boundaries of the city is expressly recognized herein.
(Ord. 45-1995)
§ 13-4-5-22 EQUAL OPPORTUNITY AND AFFIRMATIVE ACTION.
   The company is committed to stimulating and strengthening the participation
of minorities and women within the company and is also committed to the
principle that the success and economic well-being of the company are related
closely to the economic strength and vigor of the communities and people it
serves.
(Ord. 45-1995)
§ 13-4-5-23 AGREEMENT TO REOPEN NEGOTIATIONS.
   (A)   The city and the company agree that the services provided pursuant to
this ordinance are in an area of law undergoing significant review by state and
federal authorities and that there is a real possibility that some of the terms
of this ordinance may be preempted by state or federal law during the term of
this ordinance. Therefore, the city and the company expressly agree that:
      (1)   The preempted terms of this ordinance, including the terms relating
to the compensation to be paid, shall, in the sole discretion of the city, be
subject to renegotiation one year from the effective date of this ordinance,
and again, if the city desires, two years and three years from the effective
date of this ordinance.
      (2)   In addition to and separate and apart from the provisions of
division (1) above, in the event an earlier negotiation must occur in order to
comply with newly enacted or decided federal or state law, such negotiation
shall occur within a reasonable time after any request for renegotiation is
issued by either the city or the company, or at such time as it becomes
apparent that a portion of this ordinance has been preempted by state or
federal law.
   (B)   By execution of this ordinance, the company agrees that upon the
conclusion of any such renegotiations, the company will enter into any
reasonably necessary amendments to this ordinance, and the company expressly
agrees to waive any rights it may have under state law to refuse to renegotiate
this ordinance as set forth in this section. It is further expressly agreed
that any renegotiation and subsequent amendment shall not reduce the initial
term of this franchise ordinance. In no event shall such renegotiations impose
obligations on the company that similar service providers would not also be
subject to. Further, if the city's right to impose a franchise is totally
preempted, this ordinance is null and void.
(Ord. 45-1995)
§ 13-4-5-24 INDEMNIFICATION.
   (A)   The company, as a condition of the grant of this franchise, and in
consideration thereof, shall protect, indemnify, and hold the city harmless
against all claims for damages to persons or property by reason of the
construction, maintenance and operation of its facilities, and conduct of
business, or in any way arising out of performance under this franchise,
directly, or indirectly, when or to the extent injury is caused, or alleged to
have been caused, wholly or in part, by any act, omission, negligence, or
misconduct of the company or any of its contractors, subcontractors, officers,
agents, or employees, or by any person for whose act, omission, negligence, or
misconduct, the company is by law responsible. This provision is not intended
to create liability for the benefit of third parties but is solely for the
benefit of the company and the city. In the event any claim is made against the
city that falls under this indemnity provision and a court of competent
jurisdiction should adjudge, by final decree, that the city is liable therefor,
the company shall indemnify and hold the city harmless of and from any such
liability, including any court costs, expenses, and reasonable attorney fees
incurred by the city in defense thereof and incurred at any stage. Upon
commencement of any suit, proceeding at law or in equity against the city
relating to or covering any matter covered by this indemnity, wherein the
company has agreed by accepting this franchise, to indemnify and hold the city
harmless, or to pay said settlement, final judgment and costs, as the case may
be, the city shall give the company immediate notice of such suit or
proceeding. Whereupon the company shall provide a defense to any such suit or
suits, including any appellate proceedings brought in connection therewith, and
pay as aforesaid, any settlement, costs or judgments that may be rendered
against the city by reason of such damage suit. Upon failure of the company to
comply with the "defense of suit" provisions of the franchise, after reasonable
notice to it by the city, the city shall have the right to defend the same and
in addition to being reimbursed for any settlement or judgment that may be
rendered against the city, together with all costs incurred therein, the
company shall reimburse the city for reasonable attorney fees, including those
employed by the city in such case or cases, as well as all expenses incurred by
the city by reason of undertaking the defense of such suit or suits, whether
such suit or suits are successfully defended, settled, compromised, or fully
adjudicated against the city.
   (B)   In the event the city is compelled to undertake the defense of any
such suit by reason of the company's failure to perform as hereinabove
provided, the city shall have the full right and authority to make or enter
into any settlement or compromise of such adjudication as the governing body
shall deem in the best interest of the city, this without the prior approval or
consent of the company with respect to the terms of such compromise or
settlement.
(Ord. 45-1995)
§ 13-4-5-25 REMEDIES AND PENALTIES NOT EXCLUSIVE; DEFAULT.
   (A)   All remedies and penalties under this ordinance are cumulative and not
exclusive, and the recovery or enforcement by one available remedy or
imposition of any penalty is not a bar to recovery or enforcement by any other
such remedy or imposition of any other penalty. The city reserves the right to
enforce the penal provisions of any ordinance or resolution and to avail itself
of any and all remedies available at law or in equity. Failure to enforce shall
not be construed as a waiver of a breach of any term, condition or obligation
imposed upon the company by or pursuant to this ordinance. A specific waiver of
a particular breach of any term, condition or obligation imposed upon the
company by or pursuant to this ordinance shall not be a waiver of any other or
subsequent or future breach of the same or of any other term, condition or
obligation, or a waiver of the term, condition or obligation itself.
   (B)   The company agrees that an Event of Default shall include, but shall
not be limited to, any of the following acts or failure to act by the company:
      (1)   Failure to obtain any applicable permits from the city pursuant to
this ordinance.
      (2)   Failure to comply with the terms of §
13-4-5-20 which limits the assignment of the franchise, or transfer of control
of the franchise.
      (3)   Failure to supply the capital items or other support for the
governmental facilities as specified in §
13-4-5-14.
      (4)   Failure to supply bonds, as may be required by the city to assure
the proper completion of any construction performed pursuant to the franchise.
      (5)   Failure to comply with any local, state or federal law that
prohibits discrimination in employment, or prohibits the creation of hostile
working environments for an employee of the company.
      (6)   Failure to make any of the payments set forth in §§
13-4-5-5 or
13-4-5-13 of this franchise.
      (7)   Failure to pay any permit fees, or failure to comply with any
rules, regulations, orders or directives of the city as set forth in this
ordinance.
      (8)   Substantial or repeated failure to comply with §
13-4-5-6 concerning installations, excavations and restorations.
      (9)   Refusal to renegotiate the terms and conditions of this ordinance
in accordance with §
13-4-5-23.
   (C)   Upon the occurrence of an Event of Default, then, in accordance with
the procedures provided for in this franchise, the city may:
      (1)   Require the company to take such actions as the city deems are
appropriate; or
      (2)   Seek money damages from the company as compensation for such Event
of Default; or
      (3)   Accelerate the expiration of the term of this franchise by
decreasing the term of the franchise provided in §
13-4-5-4; the extent of such acceleration shall be determined by the city and
may include any period of time, but not less than six months provided that six
months remain under this ordinance; or
      (4)   As a last measure only, revoke the franchise by termination of this
ordinance.
   (D)   The city shall exercise the rights set forth in this section in
accordance with the following procedures:
      (1)   The Director shall notify the company, in writing, of an alleged
Event of Default. This written notice shall set forth with reasonable
specificity the facts the city believes are the basis for declaring that an
Event of Default has occurred. The company shall, within 30 calendar days of
the date the notice is postmarked, or such additional time as the Director may
specify in the notice, cure the alleged Event of Default, or, in writing,
present for review by the Director a reasonable time frame and method to cure
the Event of Default. The company, in lieu of the cure of the Event of Default
as set forth herein, may, in writing, present facts and arguments as to why the
company disagrees that an Event of Default has occurred.
      (2)   If the company presents a written response that challenges whether
an Event of Default has occurred, the Director shall within ten days review the
submitted materials and determine again whether an Event of Default has
occurred. If the Director reaffirms that an Event of Default has occurred, the
company shall be notified in writing of this decision and shall, within 30
calendar days, cure the alleged Event of Default. The period to cure is tolled
in the event one party demands mediation until such time as mediation is
completed.
      (3)   If the company fails to cure the Event of Default so declared
pursuant to this section within the time permitted by the Director, the
Director shall prepare a written report to the Council and recommend action to
be taken. If the Council, after consideration of this report and hearing,
agrees that an Event of Default has occurred, it may order an appropriate
remedy as set forth in division (C) of this section.
   (E)   In addition to the rights under this section, the city, upon any
termination, may, at its sole discretion, direct the company to remove, at the
company's sole cost and expense, any or all of the facilities from all rights-
of-way and other public places within the city, subject to the following:
      (1)   The city may determine that removal of buried fiber optic cable, or
conduit, is not necessary;
      (2)   In removing any part of the facilities, the company shall refill
and compact, at its own expense, any excavation that shall be made by it and
shall leave all rights-of-way and other public places in as good a condition as
that prevailing prior to the company's removal of the facilities;
      (3)   The city shall have the right to inspect and approve the conditions
of the streets and public property after removal has occurred;
      (4)   The removal shall commence within 30 days of an order to remove
being issued by the Director at the direction of the Council;
      (5)   The company shall be responsible for all necessary removals of the
facilities, and maintenance of the street area in the same manner and degree as
if the facilities were in active use, and the company shall retain all
liability associated with such removals;
      (6)   As an alternative to removal, the company may, subject to the
city's approval, abandon its facilities in place and transfer ownership of the
installed facilities to the city. Nothing herein shall cause the city to incur
any costs related to the removal of the company's facilities or the transfer of
ownership of said facilities to the city.
(Ord. 45-1995)
§ 13-4-5-26 ACCEPTANCE.
   The company shall, within 90 days after adoption by the Council of this
ordinance, file with the City Clerk, its written, unconditional acceptance of
this franchise and if the company fails so to do, this ordinance shall be void.
The company agrees to bear the entire expense of publishing this ordinance
regardless of acceptance.
(Ord. 45-1995)
§ 13-4-5-27 SEVERABILITY CLAUSE.
   If any section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase, term, provision,
condition, covenant or portion of this ordinance is for any reason held
invalid, unenforceable or unconstitutional by a court of competent
jurisdiction, such portion shall be deemed a separate, distinct and independent
provision, and such holding shall not affect the validity or enforceability of
the remaining portions of this ordinance. The Council hereby declares that it
would have passed this ordinance and each portion thereof irrespective of any
provision being declared unconstitutional or otherwise invalid.
(Ord. 45-1995)
§ 13-4-5-28 NOTICE.
   For the purpose of this ordinance, notice to the city will be to:
   Office of the Mayor
   Attn: Chief Administrative Officer
   Post Office Box 1293
   Albuquerque, New Mexico 87103
   (505) 768-3000
With a copy to:
   City Attorney
   City of Albuquerque
   Post Office Box 1293
   Albuquerque, New Mexico 87103
   (505) 768-4500
Notice to the Company will be to:
   Brooks Fiber Properties
   425 Woods Mill Road South / Suite 300
   Town and Country, Missouri 63017
With a copy to:
   George R. Bryan, III
   500 Copper, N.W.
   Albuquerque, New Mexico 87102
Notice shall be by overnight delivery. Notice will be effective upon delivery
to the Mayor or the company, until the city or company notifies the other, in
writing, of a change in the address.
(Ord. 45-1995)
§ 13-4-5-29 PUBLIC PURPOSE.
   All of the regulations provided in this ordinance are hereby declared to be
for a public purpose and the health, safety, and welfare of the general public.
Any member of the governing body or city official or employee charged with the
enforcement of this ordinance, acting for the city in the discharge of his
duties, shall not thereby render himself personally liable; and he is hereby
relieved from all personal liability for any damage that might accrue to
persons or property as a result of any act required or permitted in the
discharge of his said duties. Neither the city nor the company by accepting
this franchise waives its right to seek all appropriate legal and equitable
remedies as allowed by law upon violation of the terms of this franchise,
including seeking injunctive relief in a court of competent jurisdiction. Such
right to injunctive relief is expressly reserved and all terms and provisions
hereof shall be enforceable through injunctive relief.
(Ord. 45-1995)
§ 13-4-5-30 PUBLIC MEETING.
   It is hereby officially found and determined that the meeting at which this
ordinance is passed is open to the public as required by law and that public
notice of time, place, and purpose of said meeting was given as required.
(Ord. 45-1995)
§ 13-4-5-31 APPLICABLE LAW.
   This ordinance is governed by and construed and enforced in accordance with
the laws of the State of New Mexico.
(Ord. 45-1995)
§ 13-4-5-32 EFFECTIVE DATE.
   This ordinance shall become effective from and after its passage and
publication provided by § 3-42-1 NMSA 1978, or successor statute; provided that
the company, within the specified 30 days shall have filed with the City Clerk
an unconditional acceptance thereof. Within ten days after the filing of the
acceptance, the City Clerk shall acknowledge in writing the receipt of the
company's acceptance. All costs of any publication required by law shall be at
the expense of the company in addition to other charges provided for herein.
(Ord. 45-1995)
PART 6: GST NEW MEXICO LIGHTWAVE, INC. FRANCHISE
§ 13-4-6-1 SHORT TITLE.
   Sections 13-4-6-1 et seq. may be cited as the “GST New Mexico Lightwave,
Inc. Franchise Ordinance.”
(Ord. 49-1995)
§ 13-4-6-2 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this ordinance, the following terms, phrases, words and
their derivations shall have the meaning given in this section. When not
inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the
future tense, words in the plural number include the singular number, and words
in the singular number include the plural number. The word "shall" is mandatory
and "may" is permissive. Words not defined in this section shall be given their
common and ordinary meaning.
   CITY. The City of Albuquerque, a municipal corporation of the State of New
Mexico.
   CITY CLERK. The City Clerk of the City of Albuquerque or a designated
representative.
   COMPANY. Is and refers to GST New Mexico Lightwave, Inc. ("Lightwave").
   COUNCIL. The legislative body of the City of Albuquerque sometimes referred
to as "City Council."
   DIRECTOR. The Director of the Public Works Department of the City of
Albuquerque or his\her designee.
   FACILITIES. Are and refer to and include, but are not limited to, plant,
works, systems, improvements and equipment owned, leased or otherwise used by
the company such as poles, wires, fixtures, equipment, underground circuits and
conduit in public rights-of-way and other property necessary or convenient for
the transmission and distribution of telecommunication service where such
poles, wires, fixtures, equipment, underground circuits and conduit and other
property necessary or convenient for the transmission and distribution of
telecommunication service are located within rights-of-way and public places.
   FRANCHISE. The authorization granted herein to rent and use rights-of-way
and public places to construct, operate, and maintain company facilities in the
city or any portion or portions thereof.
   GROSS REVENUE.
      (1)   Includes any and all revenue, exclusive of gross receipts tax and
exclusive of any tax passed through to consumers on behalf of governmental
agencies, received by the company for services provided to customers through
use of the facilities, provided by the company, including but not limited to:
         (a)   All telecommunications service revenues charged on a flat rate
basis over facilities;
         (b)   One half of all telecommunications service revenues charged on a
flat rate basis over facilities outside the city limits, but within Bernalillo
County;
         (c)   All telecommunications service revenues charged on a usage
sensitive or mileage basis over facilities;
         (d)   One half of all telecommunications service revenues charged on a
usage sensitive or mileage basis over facilities outside the city limits, but
within Bernalillo County;
         (e)   All revenues from installation service charges;
         (f)   All revenues from connection or disconnection fees;
         (g)   All revenues from penalties or charges to customers for checks
returned from banks, net of back costs paid;
         (h)   All revenues from equipment sold or rented to customers upon
customers' premises;
         (i)   All revenues from joint pole or conduit use;
         (j)   All revenues from charges for access to local and long distance
networks. However, gross revenue shall not include such access revenues if a
local exchange carrier has paid a franchise fee on any such revenue;
         (k)   All revenues from authorized rental, lease, resale or use of any
portion of the company's network in the city, including plant, facilities or
capacity leased to others;
         (l)   Recoveries of bad debts previously written off and revenues from
the sale or assignment of bad debts. Gross revenues may be adjusted for net
write-off of uncollectible accounts computed on the average annual rate for the
entire company;
         (m)   All revenues from enhanced data service;
         (n)   All interconnect revenues from interexchange carriers. However,
gross revenue shall not include interconnection services revenues received from
any source if a local exchange carrier has paid a franchise fee on any such
revenue;
         (o)   All revenues from co-location connection fees; and
         (p)   The company acknowledges that transport services provided to an
affiliate or subsidiary will be subject to an actual or imputed charge
comparable to charges to nonaffiliated customers. Such actual or imputed
charges to affiliates or subsidiaries shall be reflected in gross revenues of
the company for purpose of calculating the franchise fee owed. This ordinance
does not authorize affiliates or subsidiaries to undertake telecommunication
services as contemplated by this ordinance.
      (2)   The company is not required to measure each category of revenues
separately; however, in the event of an audit by the city, the company will be
required to provide an appropriate justification for amounts reported as gross
revenues under this section.
      (3)    GROSS REVENUE shall not include proceeds from the sale of bonds,
mortgages or other evidence of indebtedness, securities or stocks. Gross
receipts taxes are not included in the above definition of gross revenue, and,
therefore, are not included in the calculation of the franchise fee due under
this ordinance.
      (4)   The company warrants that, as of the effective date of this
ordinance, all services of the company will be provided through facilities
located within the limits of the city or Bernalillo County. In accordance with
this section and §
13-4-6-13 herein, the company agrees to give the city not less than 60 days
notice of its intent to extend its facilities, and thus its services, outside
of Bernalillo County.
      (5)   Gross revenue shall be measured and monitored periodically as set
out in §§
13-4-6-13 and
13-4-6-15 below.
   LINE EXTENSION. Any extension of distribution or transmission facilities
into areas within the boundaries of the city not then served by the company.
   MAYOR. The Mayor of the City of Albuquerque or his/her designated
representative.
   PUBLIC PLACES. All sidewalks, alleys, or other public ways and any and all
public sources, spaces, grounds and buildings of the city within the city
limit.
   REASONABLE ATTORNEY FEES. Charges for legal representation as may be
incurred by the city.
   RIGHTS-OF-WAY. All present and future streets, avenues, highways, alleys,
bridges and public ways, (excluding railroad rights-of-way, parks and airport
property) of the city within the city limit.
   TELECOMMUNICATIONS SERVICE.
      (1)   Any switched or other one-way or two-way transmission of voice or
data, including but not necessarily limited to:
         (a)   Services interconnecting interexchange carriers for the purpose
of any one-way or two-way transmission of voice or data;
         (b)   Services connecting interexchange carriers or competitive access
carriers to local exchange providers for the purpose of any one-way or two-way
transmission of voice or data;
         (c)   Services connecting interexchange carriers to any entity, other
than another interexchange carrier or the local exchange provider for the
purpose of any one-way or two-way transmission of voice or data;
         (d)   Service providing private line point-to-point service for end
users for the purpose of any one-way or two-way transmission of voice or data;
         (e)   Nonentertainment video, video conferencing or point-to-point
private line service; or
         (f)   Subject to the exclusions in divisions (2) through (4) below,
any service regulated by state regulatory agencies or the Federal
Communications Commission ("FCC") which the state agency or FCC has authorized
the company to provide, if the company has provided advance notice of same to
city.
      (2)    TELECOMMUNICATIONS SERVICE shall not include local exchange
telephone services or other services directly regulated by the New Mexico State
Corporation Commission ("SCC"). Before proposing to provide local exchange
telephone services in the city, the company agrees to obtain prior SCC approval
to provide that service, and to obtain a separate franchise from the city for
the provision of such local exchange telephone service.
      (3)    TELECOMMUNICATIONS SERVICE shall not include cable services as
defined in Title 47, Chapter 5. Subchapter V-A of the United States Code, as
amended (47 USCA § 521, et seq.) or as recognized by the FCC. Before proposing
to provide such cable services in the city, the company agrees to obtain a
separate franchise from the city for the provision of this service.
      (4)    TELECOMMUNICATIONS SERVICE shall not include video dial tone or
personal communication service. However, in the event the company desires to
provide such service, it agrees to, as part of any franchise authorizing
provision of that service, to pay a separate fee to the city for the provision
of video dial tone, personal communication service or like service.
Notwithstanding the above, and subject to the payment of franchise fees, the
company shall have the right under this ordinance to provide, by means of its
facilities, transport services for the bulk transport of transmissions signals,
whether digital or analog, and whether voice, video or data, that are in part
or in whole a local exchange telephone service, a cable service, as defined
above, a video dial tone and a personal communication service, to any company
authorized to provide such services by the city, the State of New Mexico, or
federal government authority having jurisdiction over such services.
   TREASURER. The Treasurer of the City of Albuquerque.
(Ord. 49-1995)
§ 13-4-6-3 GRANT OF FRANCHISE.
   (A)   The city hereby grants to GST New Mexico Lightwave, Inc., a New Mexico
corporation, subject to the terms, conditions, and limitations contained in
this ordinance, permission to rent, use and occupy rights-of-way and public
places and a nonexclusive franchise, to provide telecommunication service, and
right and privilege to erect, construct, maintain and operate a
telecommunication system within the corporate limits of the city as the same
now exist or may be extended in the future; and a nonexclusive franchise, right
and privilege to erect, construct, maintain and operate poles, wires, fixtures,
equipment, underground circuits and conduits and other property necessary or
convenient for the transmission and distribution of telecommunication service
to the city and its inhabitants and to other customers and territory beyond the
limits of the city; and to transmit, distribute and sell telecommunication
service, upon, over, along, under and across the streets, alleys, roads and
other public ways and places, including, but not limited to private property on
which a preliminary subdivision plat has been approved by the city for the
provision of public utilities within the corporate limits of the city as the
same now exist or may be extended in the future.
   (B)   All facilities of the company used in connection with the transmission
and distribution of telecommunication service and presently located within the
corporate limits of the city, or hereafter located within the corporate limits
of the city, shall be deemed to be covered by the terms of this ordinance.
(Ord. 49-1995)
§ 13-4-6-4 DURATION; COMPANY OFFICES.
   (A)   This franchise is granted for a period of seven years from and after
the effective date of the franchise granted through this ordinance, which
commences on the effective date of this ordinance. If the company has complied
with all material provisions of this ordinance this franchise agreement will be
renewed, by ordinance, for an additional three years on the date of expiration,
unless one party gives notice, in writing to the other, at least 240 days prior
to the date of expiration of such party's intent to terminate the franchise
agreement. Assuming notice to terminate has not been tendered by the city, at
least 180 days prior to the end of the term of this ordinance, the company
shall notify the city in writing of its intention to seek renewal of this
ordinance.
   (B)   Within one year of the effective date of this franchise or upon
commencement of operation and throughout the duration of this franchise, or any
extension thereto, the company shall be required to establish and maintain
offices within the city for customer service. The company shall make available
at such offices, at a minimum, documents required by this franchise at §§
13-4-6-5,
13-4-6-15 and
13-4-6-16 with reasonable notice by the city to the company.
(Ord. 49-1995)
§ 13-4-6-5 CONSTRUCTION PLANS AND DRAWINGS.
   (A)   Before the company may conduct underground work involving excavation,
new construction or major relocation work in any rights-of-way or public place,
the company shall first notify the city and shall comply with any special
conditions relating to location, scheduling, coordination and public safety;
and the company shall file maps and drawings with the Director showing the
location of any construction or extension of its facilities and services in any
rights-of-way or public place of the city. For multi-conduit duct banks, maps
and drawings shall show overall size, material and configuration of the duct
bank. As further set out at §
13-4-6-16, upon request from the city the company shall provide the city with
updates of the maps and drawings showing the location of any new construction,
extension or relocation of its facilities. All materials provided pursuant to
this section shall be kept confidential to the fullest extent possible under
the law.
   (B)   Such proposed construction work to be done by the company shall be
performed in a safe manner subject to the approval of the Director and in
accordance with applicable federal and state laws and city ordinances,
regulations and permit requirements now or hereafter existing including the
Street Excavation Ordinance, as that ordinance may be amended from time to
time, of the city requiring a Sidewalk, Drive-pad, Curb and Gutter Bond, a bond
securing payment of permit fees and evidence of at least $1,000,000 in the
requisite insurance coverage(s).
   (C)   Prior to initiating any construction or extension of the backbone
network and contemporaneous with the filing of maps and drawings, the company
shall tender a review/location fee, in addition to the franchise fee, with the
Director. Such preconstruction review/location fee shall be $1.50 per linear
foot of fiber laid as diagramed and mapped; however, in no event shall such fee
exceed $30,000 on an annual basis. Such review/location fee shall apply to
subsequent additions or extensions of the company's backbone network as may be
proposed from time to time and shall be due each January 15.
(Ord. 49-1995)
§ 13-4-6-6 INSTALLATIONS, EXCAVATIONS AND RESTORATIONS.
   (A)   (1)   The company shall have the right to excavate in, occupy and use
any and all rights-of-way and public places for the purpose of installing,
erecting, constructing, repairing, maintaining, removing, relocating and
operating its facilities after obtaining any and all appropriate permits from
the city, provided, however, that:
         (a)   The company shall not, pursuant to this franchise, place any of
its facilities, on, over, under or within any city park, duly designated as
such by the city, but nothing herein contained shall preclude the city from
granting a revocable permit therefor;
         (b)   The company shall not place any of its facilities, on, over, or
within the median portion of any boulevard or parkway without first having
obtained the written permission of the city;
         (c)   Where appropriate and as may be required by the city through any
permit process, installation, excavations and restorations affecting street
and/or lane closures shall, as often as practicable, be performed after 6:30
p.m. and before 6:00 a.m., but in no event shall any such work be performed
from 7:00 a.m. to 9:00 a.m. and from 4:00 p.m. to 6:00 p.m.;
         (d)   The city reserves the right to assist in the coordination and
scheduling of any company projects where such project may be reasonably
coordinated with the placement of other franchisee facilities. Otherwise, and
subject to city permit processes and approvals, it is recognized that,
notwithstanding the foregoing, the company retains discretion over the timing
of the company's proposed projects; and
         (e)   The company shall, to the extent feasible, employ "trenchless"
technology in the placement of its facilities.
      (2)   Except in an emergency, not less than five working days prior to
the commencement of any work by the company which involves excavation in any
rights-of-way or public place, the company shall notify the Director and any
appropriate utility coordinating committee for purposes of utility location.
Minimum notice to the city shall be by telephone communication or in person
prior to any work, followed by notice in writing as soon as practical. The
company will provide advance notice so as not to disrupt services of the city
or any other person or utility using any rights-of-way and public places in the
city and allow the city to place any inspector it may deem necessary at the
site of the project.
   (B)   Whenever work is performed in any rights-of-way or public place, the
company shall take all reasonable precautions to minimize interruption to
traffic flow, damage to property or creation of a hazardous condition.
   (C)   After any excavation shall be made and after work is completed
pursuant to the provisions of this ordinance, the company, at company expense
shall as soon as practicable, but not longer than one day, remove all surplus
material in compliance with specifications, requirements and regulations of the
city in effect at the time of such restoration and restore the portion of the
rights-of-way or public place to the same condition in which it was prior to
the excavation thereof. If the company fails to restore promptly the affected
portion of the rights-of-way or public place, following written notice to the
company, the city may make the restoration in a manner satisfactory to the city
and all costs incurred for such restoration, whether done with city work forces
and equipment or otherwise, shall be paid by the company, including the cost of
any inspectors the city may assign to the project.
   (D)   The company shall be responsible for the maintenance of all rights-of-
way impacted by the presence of the company's facilities and within reasonable
proximity of and upon which the company maintains aboveground facilities,
including the removal of weeds and litter.
   (E)   The company shall ensure its facilities in rights-of-way and public
places are located and constructed in a manner such that access is not impaired
in compliance with the Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA). Following notice
by the city of an ADA construction problem, the company shall have 30 days or
other reasonable time to remedy the problem. In the event the city and the
company cannot agree that a problem exists, any dispute shall be submitted to
nonbinding mediation, with the assistance and through the city's Alternative
Dispute Resolution ("ADR") Coordinator.
   (F)   Execution of this franchise requires the company to become a member of
a local utility coordinating committee, e.g. New Mexico One-Call System. The
company further agrees to participate in such organization(s) and abide by
their articles of incorporation, bylaws, and other requirements.
(Ord. 49-1995)
§ 13-4-6-7 LOCATION AND RELOCATION OF FACILITIES.
   (A)   All facilities of the company shall be placed so that they do not
interfere with the use of rights-of-way and public places by the city and shall
only be placed after approval of the location by the Director and in accordance
with any specifications adopted by the city governing the location of
facilities. The city reserves the right to construct, install, maintain and
operate any public improvement, work or facility, do any work that the city may
find desirable on, over or under any rights-of-way and public places, and
vacate, alter or close any rights-of-way and public places. All such work shall
be done, if possible, in such manner as not to obstruct, injure or prevent free
use and operation of the company's facilities. The company agrees to obtain the
city's express written approval before placing any new poles in rights-of-way
and other public places, that do not currently exist in rights-of-way and other
public places.
   (B)   (1)   The city shall have the right to require the removal or
relocation of facilities used by the company in any rights-of-way or public
place as may reasonably be required by the city for any reason, after notice to
the company, or caused or occasioned by any city project including, but not
limited to, the installations of water, sanitary sewer, storm drainage,
landscaping, or traffic signal facilities, road reconstruction and
construction, and the company shall remove and relocate such facilities within
30 days following notice to do so from the city. Prior to any such relocation
the city agrees to provide for suitable location for such relocated facilities
sufficient to maintain service. The cost of any removal or relocation of its
facilities shall be paid by the company. Notwithstanding the foregoing the
company shall not be required by the city to relocate its facilities to
accommodate another franchisee in the city. The costs of any relocations
occasioned by another franchisee of the city in no event shall be the
responsibility of the city.
      (2)   The company shall reconstruct, replace or restore any street,
alley, or public way or place, in a timely fashion, and any water, sewer,
sanitary sewer, storm drainage, traffic signalization facilities, or other
facility of the city disturbed by the company, without cost to the city, to a
condition acceptable to the city consistent with reasonable standards of safety
and appearance. Any facility so disturbed by the company shall be
reconstructed, replaced, or restored only under the supervision of city
personnel.
      (3)   Subject to the provisions of §
13-4-6-5 herein and upon notice to the city, the company may remove or relocate
transmission and distribution facilities maintained by the company on its own
initiative.
   (C)   Where the city, acting through itself, an agent, contractor or permit
holder, proposes to improve a street, including but not limited to landscaping
and traffic signalization, water line, storm sewer or sanitary sewer within the
rights-of-way or other public place under its jurisdiction or control, and such
improvements include excavation and the placement of underground utilities
vaults and conduit sufficient for the company's telecommunication service
distribution purposes, by and at the expense of someone other than the company,
then upon notification by the city and upon such reasonable scheduling as may
be required by the city's ordinances and policies, the company shall replace
such overhead distribution facilities as are then within the affected right-of-
way with underground facilities within the vaults and conduits provided
therefor. All such placement shall be at company expense. The conversion from
overhead to underground shall be conditioned upon the city requiring the
undergrounding in the area in which both the existing and new facilities are
and will be located and the city shall require:
      (1)   That all existing overhead communication and electric distribution
facilities in such area be removed;
      (2)   That each customer served from such existing overhead distribution
facilities shall, in accordance with the company's rules for underground
service, make all facility changes on customer's premises necessary to receive
service from the underground facilities of the company as soon as it is
available; and
      (3)   That the company is authorized to discontinue its overhead service
on completion of the underground facilities.
Such replacement of overhead with underground distribution facilities shall be
paid for by the company.
(Ord. 49-1995)
§ 13-4-6-8 PUBLIC WORKS AND IMPROVEMENTS.
   (A)   The city reserves the right to construct, install, maintain and
operate any public improvement, work or facility and do any work that the city
may find desirable on, over or under any rights-of-way or public place. All
such work shall be done, if possible, in such manner as not to obstruct, injure
or prevent free use and operation of the company's facilities.
   (B)   Whenever the city shall excavate or perform any work in any present
and/or future rights-of-way or public place of the city, or shall contract for
such excavation or work, where such excavation or work may disturb but not
require removal or relocation of company's facilities, the city shall notify
the company sufficiently in advance of such contemplated excavation or work to
enable the company to take such measures as may be deemed necessary to protect
such facilities from damage and possible inconvenience or injury to the public
or the city's rights-of-way or public place. If the company cannot take such
measures, the company shall be required to relocate its facilities in
accordance with §
13-4-6-7. In such case, the company, upon request, shall furnish field markings
to the city or contractor, as the case may be, showing the location of all its
facilities in the area involved in such proposed excavation or other work.
   (C)   Whenever the city shall vacate any rights-of-way or public place for
the convenience or benefit of any person or governmental agency or
instrumentality, the company's rights shall be preserved as to any of its
facilities then existing in such rights-of-way or public place.
(Ord. 49-1995)
§ 13-4-6-9 MOVING OF BUILDINGS.
   Whenever it becomes necessary to temporarily rearrange, remove, lower or
raise the aerial cables or wires or other apparatus of the company to permit
the passage of any building, machinery or other object, the company shall
perform such rearrangement upon the receipt of written notice from the person
or persons desiring to move said building, machinery or other object. The
written notice shall detail the route of movement of the building, machinery or
other object. The costs incurred by the company in making such rearrangements
of its aerial plant will be borne, excepting the city, by the person or persons
seeking such rearrangement, unless the aerial plant is placed or maintained in
violation of the applicable rules of any local, state, or federal regulatory
agency and thereby interferes with the movement.
(Ord. 49-1995)
§ 13-4-6-10 SAFETY STANDARDS.
   The facilities of the company shall at all times be constructed, operated
and maintained so as to protect and safeguard the health and safety of the
public and to this end the company shall observe all rules pertaining thereto
prescribed by any local, state, or federal regulatory authority.
(Ord. 49-1995)
§ 13-4-6-11 JOINT USE AGREEMENTS.
   The company is authorized to enter into joint use agreements with any person
or entity franchised by the city with respect to the placement of facilities.
The company may require any such person or entity to furnish evidence of
adequate insurance covering the company and adequate bonds covering the
performance of the person or entity attaching to the company's facilities as a
condition precedent to granting permission to any such person or entity to
attach transmission facilities to the company's facilities; provided that the
company's requirements for such insurance shall be reasonable.
(Ord. 49-1995)
§ 13-4-6-12 INTERFERENCE.
   Subject to §
13-4-6-13(H) herein, the company shall not be required to attach its facilities
to the facilities of any other person or entity or to permit the facilities of
any other person or entity to be attached to the company's facilities if it can
be shown satisfactorily to the city that the company will be subjected to
increased risks of interruption of service or to increased liability for
accidents, or if the facilities of such other person or entity are not of the
character, design, and construction required by, or are not being maintained in
accordance with industry standards of practice.
(Ord. 49-1995)
§ 13-4-6-13 FRANCHISE FEE; CONDITIONS.
   (A)   As consideration for this franchise, which provides for the rental and
use by the company of the rights-of-way and other public places within the
boundaries of the city, which are valuable public properties acquired and
maintained by the city at great expense to its taxpayers and citizens, the
company shall pay to the city an amount equal to 3% of the gross revenue, as
defined in §
13-4-6-2, collected by the company for the first year from the effective date
of this franchise ordinance. Thereafter, for the next one-year term the company
shall pay to the city an amount equal to 4% of the gross revenue collected by
the company. For the remaining five-year term of this franchise, the company
shall pay to the city an amount equal to 5% of the gross revenue collected by
the company. Provided, however, in accordance with this section and the
provisions contained in the definition of GROSS REVENUE in §
13-4-6-2, after notice by the company to the city of the company's intent to
extend its facilities, or services, outside of Bernalillo County, and upon the
company's commencement of services across facilities outside Bernalillo County,
the fee under this ordinance shall escalate to 5% of gross revenue. Such 5% fee
shall become due the month following the month the extended facilities are
placed in service. The city shall use its best efforts to ensure that any
company providing services substantially similar to those provided by the
company (i.e., "Lightwave") shall pay an equivalent fee measured as a
percentage of gross revenues equal to or greater than that paid by the company.
   (B)   In consideration of the agreement of the company to make such
franchise payments, the city agrees that no license, tax, or charge on the
business, occupation or franchise of the company shall be imposed upon or
required of the company by the city during the term of this ordinance. This
provision shall not exempt the property of the company from lawful property, ad
valorem taxes and local improvement district assessments. This provision shall
also not exempt the company from conditions, exactions, fees and charges, which
are generally applicable during the company's real property development or use
as required by the city's ordinances.
   (C)   Commencing the month following the month this franchise ordinance
becomes effective, the franchise fee shall be paid monthly on the 25th day of
each month; such fee shall be for gross revenues received by the company for
the preceding month. The company shall furnish to the city with each payment of
compensation required by this section a written statement, showing the amount
of gross revenue of the company within the city for the period covered by the
payment. Upon receipt of such payment the city shall issue a receipt to the
company. To facilitate the city's annual budget process, on or before December
31, 1995, and each succeeding December 31st thereafter during the term of this
franchise ordinance, the company will provide the city with an estimate of the
gross revenue and resultant franchise fee for the following calendar year.
Nothing herein shall preclude the company and the city from agreeing to a
revised payment schedule.
   (D)   On or before the first day of February of each succeeding year, the
company shall submit to the City Treasurer a statement of the franchise fee
actually due to the city based upon the actual gross revenue for the previous
calendar year, together with a check for any amount due from the company or a
statement for any amount due from the city. Within 30 days from the submission
of the statement of franchise fee owing, or within such reasonable additional
time as he may request, the Treasurer shall investigate the statement and
determine the accuracy of the amounts reported. However, neither payment of the
franchise fee nor failure to make such investigation shall estop the city in
any way or prevent subsequent investigation, collection or return of any amount
properly due.
   (E)   In the event it is claimed by the city that the amount of the
franchise fee paid hereunder for any calendar year is insufficient, or in the
event the company claims that the amount is excessive, and the parties cannot
agree, the city and the company shall attempt to informally negotiate a
resolution. In the event that negotiations fail, the dispute shall, before any
other remedies are invoked, be submitted to nonbinding mediation with the
assistance of and through the city's ADR Coordinator.
   (F)   In the event that the franchise fee set forth in this franchise
ordinance is declared illegal, unconstitutional or void for any reason by any
court or proper authority, the company shall be contractually bound to pay the
city, at the same times and in the same manner as provided for herein, an
aggregate amount equal to the amount which would have been paid as a franchise
fee. This section, however, shall not constitute a waiver of any claim the
company may assert against the city.
   (G)   Acceptance by the city of any payment due under this section shall not
be deemed to be a waiver by the city of any breach of this franchise occurring
prior thereto, nor shall the acceptance by the city of any such payments
preclude the city from later establishing that a larger amount was actually
due, or from collecting any balance due to the city.
   (H)   (1)   In consideration of the rights and privileges hereby granted,
the city shall have and the company hereby grants to it, the right and
privilege at the city's expense to suspend and maintain wires and necessary
control boxes on poles placed by the company in the streets and other places
aforesaid, or if such wires are placed underground, to place and maintain in
the pipes or conduits of company, if space therein is available, wires which
the city may require for fire, police, emergency or other municipal purposes.
All such wires shall be placed on the poles or in the conduits so as not to
interfere with the service of the company and shall not pose a danger to the
company's facilities, customers, or customers' property. However, nothing in
this franchise shall limit the company's right to reserve conduit space and/or
pole space which in its sole discretion it retains for purposes of assuring the
safety of or servicing of the facilities. The city agrees in consideration of
the establishment of this service and the furnishing of such facilities to hold
the company free and harmless from all claims or liability for damage which may
arise out of the city's operation of such wires and control boxes.
      (2)   As further consideration of the rights and privileges hereby
granted, and upon reasonable request by the city and to the extent the company
can reasonably do so, pursuant to its leases and agreements with other right-
of-way providers, the company will grant joint use of rights-of-way which it
now, or in the future, has an interest in to the city for purposes including
but not limited to parks, drainage facilities, bikeways, traffic conduits, mass
transit corridors, sanitary sewer lines, pedestrian area parking, open spaces
and electric, cable, natural gas and water service distribution, provided that
the company shall not be required to make such an offer in any circumstance
where such offer would unreasonably interfere with the company's use of the
rights-of-way. Compensation for such joint use shall be as negotiated by the
city and the company. If the city's joint use is accepted by the company, then
any improvements deemed appropriate by the city shall be made by the city at
its sole expense.
   (I)   The company agrees that any franchise or other fee paid by the company
to the city shall not be reflected as a line item or separate fee on invoices
to ultimate consumers of the company. Any fee paid to the city is a cost of
doing business to the company and shall be embedded in the rates charged to
consumers.
   (J)   The compensation paid by the company for this franchise includes
compensation for the rental and use of any rights-of-way and public place
located within the city as authorized.
(Ord. 49-1995)
§ 13-4-6-14 FACILITIES FOR EXCLUSIVE CITY USE.
   (A)   Within six months of the effective date of this ordinance, the city
will select one company, after informal competitive bid among the companies
authorized to provide telecommunication services, to provide a downtown
backbone network comprised of the following designated facilities. The company
and other companies contemporaneously franchised and authorized to provide
telecommunication services, shall provide to the city an indefeasible right to
use ("IRU") and will proportionately contribute to the reasonable and necessary
cost of:
      (1)   A three pair dark fiber backbone in that company's then existing
backbone;
      (2)   Lateral connections from the backbone to the following facilities,
at the U.S. West/City network interface (i.e., the telephone room);
         (a)   Albuquerque Bernalillo County Government Center;
         (b)   Fire Station No. 1;
         (c)   East Convention Center; and
         (d)   The city's long distance carrier's point of presence.
   (B)   In addition to the downtown network, the city may, within two years of
the effective date of this ordinance, select a second backbone network, either
the company's or that of another company franchised and authorized to provide
telecommunication services, of three pair of dark fibers for the city's IRU in
such company's backbone network. The company so selected will be reimbursed
proportionately by the companies not chosen, including companies then
franchised to provide similar services, for the incremental cost of adding the
fiber and the incremental cost of maintaining it in the future.
   (C)   The company and any other company franchised and authorized to provide
telecommunication services will proportionately contribute to the cost of
connecting the following city facilities to a network of the city's choice:
      (1)   Piño Yards; and
      (2)   Old Albuquerque High School.
   (D)   The company shall provide the city three additional lateral
connections at locations of the city's choice either connecting to the city's
then existing dark fiber networks or the then existing network of any company
then authorized to provide telecommunication services. If a lateral connection
is made to a lighted network, the city or the new end-user customer will be
expected to pay service charges to the network owner. Lateral connections will
be limited to 100 feet. Anything greater than the 100 feet will be paid for by
the city or the end-user customer.
   (E)   All facilities placed for the city's use pursuant to divisions (A)
through (D) above shall be for the city's internal and noncommercial purposes,
not for resale, and for the city's sole and exclusive use. In the event of a
sale of the company's network, the city will retain an indefeasible right to
use the above facilities.
   (F)   The company agrees to bear its pro rata share of any maintenance of
fiber dedicated to the city. Except that the city shall pay only actual
incremental labor costs to the company to repair the city's share of dark
fibers within any cable that is damaged as the result of any natural disaster.
   (G)   The city will not allow or direct any third party to access fiber
optic cable or other company facilities, if any, in city rights-of-way without
notice to the company sufficient to allow the company to supervise and direct
such access.
   (H)   The city recognizes that the company's agreements, if any, to occupy
rights-of-way or for pole attachments may be subject to the control of third
parties who may require the company to relocate its cable. In the event of such
required relocation by the company, the company shall provide notice thereof to
the city as soon as reasonably possible. The company shall provide replacement
dark fibers to the city in any company replacement cable as soon as reasonably
possible.
   (I)   The city agrees in consideration for the provision of such dark fiber
and lateral connections to hold the company free and harmless from all claims
or liability for damage which may arise out of the city's operation of such
dark fiber and lateral connections.
(Ord. 49-1995)
§ 13-4-6-15 BOOKS OF ACCOUNT AND REPORTS.
   (A)   The city shall have the right to review or audit the company's books
and records in accordance with regularly accepted accounting and audit
standards regarding any amounts which may be owed under this franchise
ordinance. This right includes the right to review and audit all books and
records of revenue not included in the calculation of the fee paid, but which
may be reasonably considered by the city to be subject to a franchise fee. The
city shall give written notice to the company of any additional amount claimed
to be due to the city as a result of the city's review. The additional amount
due the city, if any, shall be paid within 30 days following determination by
the city that such amount is due and payable.
   (B)   The company shall keep complete and accurate books and records of its
business and operations pursuant to this franchise ordinance in accordance with
generally accepted accounting principles and in accordance with the rules and
regulations of any state regulatory authority. The company shall keep its books
of account and records in such a way that breakdowns of revenues are available
by journal code within the city.
   (C)   In the event of an audit, the company shall provide the city specific
books, records, contracts, accounts, documents and papers for its operations
within the city.
   (D)   All such books, records, and accounts of the company shall be retained
by the company for a period of six years, in accordance with § 37-1-3, NMSA
1978. The company shall make such records, as are necessary for the city to
complete its audit, and be available for inspection by the city, in the city,
upon 30 days notice from the city.
   (E)   All audits will take place on company premises within the city. The
city's auditors may review all directly relevant materials and may make copies
of any materials with the approval from the company. Such approval will not be
unreasonably withheld.
   (F)   Upon request by the city, the company shall provide to the city by
U.S. mail, postage prepaid, a copy of all papers filed by the company with any
federal or state regulatory agency on the same day of filing that pertain to
the company's facilities located in New Mexico.
(Ord. 49-1995)
§ 13-4-6-16 SUPPLYING MAPS UPON REQUEST.
   The company shall maintain on file maps and operational data pertaining to
its operations in the city. The city may inspect the maps and data at any time
during business hours. Upon request of the city the company shall furnish to
the city as soon as practicable, without charge, current maps either in a "hard
copy" printed form or in the city's AGIS format or compatible data base,
showing the location and dimension of any facilities, but not other proprietary
information, used in operating the company's facilities within the city served
by the company.
(Ord. 49-1995)
§ 13-4-6-17 RATES.
   (A)   The rates to be charged by the company for telecommunication service
shall comply with the appropriate local, state or federal regulatory authority,
or any other governmental official, commission or body having jurisdiction. If
no governmental official, commission or body has rate setting jurisdiction, the
company may set rates to be charged at its sole discretion.
   (B)   To the extent that the city is, or may in the future become, entitled
to set fees and charges for the services provided pursuant to this franchise,
the city reserves the right to regulate the rates, fees, charges, deposits and
associated terms and conditions for any service provided pursuant to this
franchise to the fullest extent permitted by applicable law with appropriate
procedural due process.
(Ord. 49-1995)
§ 13-4-6-18 FRANCHISE NOT EXCLUSIVE.
   The franchise hereby granted shall not be exclusive and shall not be
construed as any limitation on the city to grant rights, privileges and
authority to other persons or corporations similar to or different from those
herein set forth or to construct, install, operate or maintain a public
utility.
(Ord. 49-1995)
§ 13-4-6-19 LIMITATION ON PRIVILEGES.
   All rights, authority and grants herein contained or conferred are also
conditioned upon the understanding and agreement that these privileges in the
rights-of-way and other public places of the city are not to operate in any way
so as to be an enhancement of the company's properties or values or to be an
asset or item of ownership in any appraisal thereof. In the event that the city
shall at any time hereafter acquire the property of the company, by purchase,
or otherwise, the value of this franchise shall be fixed and determined at $1.
(Ord. 49-1995)
§ 13-4-6-20 ASSIGNMENT OF FRANCHISE.
   (A)   The company shall not transfer or assign any rights under this
franchise or lease total capacity of its system or network to another entity
unless the city shall first review the financial, technical and operational
qualifications of such entity and give its approval, in writing, in 60 days
which approval shall not be unreasonably withheld. This prohibition shall not
apply in the instance that the company is transferred, assigned, or sold to an
affiliated interest as that term is defined at § 62-3-3.A, NMSA 1978, or
successor statute, nor shall this prohibition apply to assignments made or
security interests granted in order to secure financing. However, the company
agrees to provide at least 30 days advance notice of any affiliate transfer,
assignment or sale. The city shall have the discretion to review the financial,
technical and operational qualifications of the affiliate.
   (B)   In order that the city might share in the value this franchise adds to
the company's operation, any such transfer or assignment of any rights under
this franchise by the company, subject to the exceptions listed in division (A)
above, shall be subject to the conditions that the transferee promptly pay the
city 20% of any and all fees paid to the city including the franchise fee paid
to the city in the previous calendar year, which amount the company and the
city agree is reasonable, and that such transfer fee shall not be recovered
from the city or from city residents or property owners through rates or
surcharges of the company.
(Ord. 49-1995)
§ 13-4-6-21 ADDITIONAL CITY RIGHTS.
   The right and privilege of the city to construct, purchase or condemn a
public utility or telecommunication provider located within or without the
boundaries of the city is expressly recognized herein.
(Ord. 49-1995)
§ 13-4-6-22 EQUAL OPPORTUNITY AND AFFIRMATIVE ACTION.
   The company is committed to stimulating and strengthening the participation
of minorities and women within the company and is also committed to the
principle that the success and economic well-being of the company are related
closely to the economic strength and vigor of the communities and people it
serves.
(Ord. 49-1995)
§ 13-4-6-23 AGREEMENT TO REOPEN NEGOTIATIONS.
   (A)   The city and the company agree that the services provided pursuant to
this ordinance are in an area of law undergoing significant review by state and
federal authorities and that there is a real possibility that some of the terms
of this ordinance may be preempted by state or federal law during the term of
this ordinance. Therefore, the city and the company expressly agree that:
      (1)   The preempted terms of this ordinance, including the terms relating
to the compensation to be paid, shall, in the sole discretion of the city, be
subject to renegotiation one year from the effective date of this ordinance,
and again, if the city desires, two years and three years from the effective
date of this ordinance.
      (2)   In addition to and separate and apart from the provisions of
division (1) above, in the event an earlier negotiation must occur in order to
comply with newly enacted or decided federal or state law, such negotiation
shall occur within a reasonable time after any request for renegotiation is
issued by either the city or the company, or at such time as it becomes
apparent that a portion of this ordinance has been preempted by state or
federal law.
   (B)   By execution of this ordinance, the company agrees that upon the
conclusion of any such renegotiations, the company will enter into any
reasonably necessary amendments to this ordinance, and the company expressly
agrees to waive any rights it may have under state law to refuse to renegotiate
this ordinance as set forth in this section. It is further expressly agreed
that any renegotiation and subsequent amendment shall not reduce the initial
term of this franchise ordinance. In no event shall such renegotiations impose
obligations on the company that similar service providers would not also be
subject to. Further, if the city's right to impose a franchise is totally
preempted, this ordinance is null and void.
(Ord. 49-1995)
§ 13-4-6-24 INDEMNIFICATION.
   (A)   The company, as a condition of the grant of this franchise, and in
consideration thereof, shall protect, indemnify, and hold the city harmless
against all claims for damages to persons or property by reason of the
construction, maintenance and operation of its facilities, and conduct of
business, or in any way arising out of performance under this franchise,
directly, or indirectly, when or to the extent injury is caused, or alleged to
have been caused, wholly or in part, by any act, omission, negligence, or
misconduct of the company or any of its contractors, subcontractors, officers,
agents, or employees, or by any person for whose act, omission, negligence, or
misconduct, the company is by law responsible. This provision is not intended
to create liability for the benefit of third parties but is solely for the
benefit of the company and the city. In the event any claim is made against the
city that falls under this indemnity provision and a court of competent
jurisdiction should adjudge, by final decree, that the city is liable therefor,
the company shall indemnify and hold the city harmless of and from any such
liability, including any court costs, expenses, and reasonable attorney fees
incurred by the city in defense thereof and incurred at any stage. Upon
commencement of any suit, proceeding at law or in equity against the city
relating to or covering any matter covered by this indemnity, wherein the
company has agreed by accepting this franchise, to indemnify and hold the city
harmless, or to pay said settlement, final judgment and costs, as the case may
be, the city shall give the company immediate notice of such suit or
proceeding. Whereupon the company shall provide a defense to any such suit or
suits, including any appellate proceedings brought in connection therewith, and
pay as aforesaid, any settlement, costs or judgments that may be rendered
against the city by reason of such damage suit. Upon failure of the company to
comply with the "defense of suit" provisions of the franchise, after reasonable
notice to it by the city, the city shall have the right to defend the same and
in addition to being reimbursed for any settlement or judgment that may be
rendered against the city, together with all costs incurred therein, the
company shall reimburse the city for reasonable attorney fees, including those
employed by the city in such case or cases, as well as all expenses incurred by
the city by reason of undertaking the defense of such suit or suits, whether
such suit or suits are successfully defended, settled, compromised, or fully
adjudicated against the city.
   (B)   In the event the city is compelled to undertake the defense of any
such suit by reason of the company's failure to perform as hereinabove
provided, the city shall have the full right and authority to make or enter
into any settlement or compromise of such adjudication as the governing body
shall deem in the best interest of the city, this without the prior approval or
consent of the company with respect to the terms of such compromise or
settlement.
(Ord. 49-1995)
§ 13-4-6-25 REMEDIES AND PENALTIES NOT EXCLUSIVE; DEFAULT.
   (A)   All remedies and penalties under this ordinance are cumulative and not
exclusive, and the recovery or enforcement by one available remedy or
imposition of any penalty is not a bar to recovery or enforcement by any other
such remedy or imposition of any other penalty. The city reserves the right to
enforce the penal provisions of any ordinance or resolution and to avail itself
of any and all remedies available at law or in equity. Failure to enforce shall
not be construed as a waiver of a breach of any term, condition or obligation
imposed upon the company by or pursuant to this ordinance. A specific waiver of
a particular breach of any term, condition or obligation imposed upon the
company by or pursuant to this ordinance shall not be a waiver of any other or
subsequent or future breach of the same or of any other term, condition or
obligation, or a waiver of the term, condition or obligation itself.
   (B)   The company agrees that an Event of Default shall include, but shall
not be limited to, any of the following acts or failure to act by the company:
      (1)   Failure to obtain any applicable permits from the city pursuant to
this ordinance.
      (2)   Failure to comply with the terms of §
13-4-6-20 which limits the assignment of the franchise, or transfer of control
of the franchise.
      (3)   Failure to supply the capital items or other support for the
governmental facilities as specified in §
13-4-6-14.
      (4)   Failure to supply bonds, as may be required by the city to assure
the proper completion of any construction performed pursuant to the franchise.
      (5)   Failure to comply with any local, state or federal law that
prohibits discrimination in employment, or prohibits the creation of hostile
working environments for an employee of the company.
      (6)   Failure to make any of the payments set forth in §§
13-4-6-5 or
13-4-6-13 of this franchise.
      (7)   Failure to pay any permit fees, or failure to comply with any
rules, regulations, orders or directives of the city as set forth in this
ordinance.
      (8)   Substantial or repeated failure to comply with §
13-4-6-6 concerning installations, excavations and restorations.
      (9)   Refusal to renegotiate the terms and conditions of this ordinance
in accordance with § 13-4-6-23.
   (C)   Upon the occurrence of an Event of Default, then, in accordance with
the procedures provided for in this franchise, the city may:
      (1)   Require the company to take such actions as the city deems are
appropriate; or
      (2)   Seek money damages from the company as compensation for such Event
of Default; or
      (3)   Accelerate the expiration of the term of this franchise by
decreasing the term of the franchise provided in §
13-4-6-4; the extent of such acceleration shall be determined by the city and
may include any period of time, but not less than six months provided that six
months remain under this ordinance; or
      (4)   As a last measure only, revoke the franchise by termination of this
ordinance.
   (D)   The city shall exercise the rights set forth in this section in
accordance with the following procedures:
      (1)   The Director shall notify the company, in writing, of an alleged
Event of Default. This written notice shall set forth with reasonable
specificity the facts the city believes are the basis for declaring that an
Event of Default has occurred. The company shall, within 30 calendar days of
the date the notice is postmarked, or such additional time as the Director may
specify in the notice, cure the alleged Event of Default, or, in writing,
present for review by the Director a reasonable time frame and method to cure
the Event of Default. The company, in lieu of the cure of the Event of Default
as set forth herein, may, in writing, present facts and arguments as to why the
company disagrees that an Event of Default has occurred.
      (2)   If the company presents a written response that challenges whether
an Event of Default has occurred, the Director shall within ten days review the
submitted materials and determine again whether an Event of Default has
occurred. If the Director reaffirms that an Event of Default has occurred, the
company shall be notified in writing of this decision and shall, within 30
calendar days, cure the alleged Event of Default. The period to cure is tolled
in the event one party demands mediation until such time as mediation is
completed.
      (3)   If the company fails to cure the Event of Default so declared
pursuant to this section within the time permitted by the Director, the
Director shall prepare a written report to the Council and recommend action to
be taken. If the Council, after consideration of this report and hearing,
agrees that an Event of Default has occurred, it may order an appropriate
remedy as set forth in division (C) of this section.
   (E)   In addition to the rights under this section, the city, upon any
termination, may, at its sole discretion, direct the company to remove, at the
company's sole cost and expense, any or all of the facilities from all rights-
of-way and other public places within the city, subject to the following:
      (1)   The city may determine that removal of buried fiber optic cable, or
conduit, is not necessary;
      (2)   In removing any part of the facilities, the company shall refill
and compact, at its own expense, any excavation that shall be made by it and
shall leave all rights-of-way and other public places in as good a condition as
that prevailing prior to the company's removal of the facilities;
      (3)   The city shall have the right to inspect and approve the conditions
of the streets and public property after removal has occurred;
      (4)   The removal shall commence within 30 days of an order to remove
being issued by the Director at the direction of the Council;
      (5)   The company shall be responsible for all necessary removals of the
facilities, and maintenance of the street area in the same manner and degree as
if the facilities were in active use, and the company shall retain all
liability associated with such removals;
      (6)   As an alternative to removal, the company may, subject to the
city's approval, abandon its facilities in place and transfer ownership of the
installed facilities to the city. Nothing herein shall cause the city to incur
any costs related to the removal of the company's facilities or the transfer of
ownership of said facilities to the city.
(Ord. 49-1995)
§ 13-4-6-26 ACCEPTANCE.
   The company shall, within 90 days after adoption by the Council of this
ordinance, file with the City Clerk, its written, unconditional acceptance of
this franchise and if the company fails so to do, this ordinance shall be void.
The company agrees to bear the entire expense of publishing this ordinance
regardless of acceptance.
(Ord. 49-1995)
§ 13-4-6-27 SEVERABILITY CLAUSE.
   If any section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase, term, provision,
condition, covenant or portion of this ordinance is for any reason held
invalid, unenforceable or unconstitutional by a court of competent
jurisdiction, such portion shall be deemed a separate, distinct and independent
provision, and such holding shall not affect the validity or enforceability of
the remaining portions of this ordinance. The Council hereby declares that it
would have passed this ordinance and each portion thereof irrespective of any
provision being declared unconstitutional or otherwise invalid.
(Ord. 49-1995)
§ 13-4-6-28 NOTICE.
For the purpose of this ordinance, notice to the city will be to:
   Office of the Mayor
   Attn: Chief Administrative Officer
   Post Office Box 1293
   Albuquerque, New Mexico 87103
   (505) 768-3000
With a copy to:
   City Attorney
   City of Albuquerque
   Post Office Box 1293
   Albuquerque, New Mexico 87103
   (505) 768-4500
Notice to the Company will be to:
   GST New Mexico Lightwave, Inc.
   1220 Main Street, Suite 400
   Vancouver, Washington 98660
With a copy to:
   Carol A. Clifford
   Jones, Snead, Wertheim, Rodriguez and Wentworth, P.A.
   215 Lincoln Avenue
   Post Office Box 2228
   Santa Fe, New Mexico 87504-2228
Notice shall be by overnight delivery. Notice will be effective upon delivery
to the Mayor or the company, until the city or company notifies the other, in
writing, of a change in the address.
(Ord. 49-1995)
§ 13-4-6-29 PUBLIC PURPOSE.
   All of the regulations provided in this ordinance are hereby declared to be
for a public purpose and the health, safety, and welfare of the general public.
Any member of the governing body or city official or employee charged with the
enforcement of this ordinance, acting for the city in the discharge of his
duties, shall not thereby render himself personally liable; and he is hereby
relieved from all personal liability for any damage that might accrue to
persons or property as a result of any act required or permitted in the
discharge of his said duties. Neither the city nor the company by accepting
this franchise waives its right to seek all appropriate legal and equitable
remedies as allowed by law upon violation of the terms of this franchise,
including seeking injunctive relief in a court of competent jurisdiction. Such
right to injunctive relief is expressly reserved and all terms and provisions
hereof shall be enforceable through injunctive relief.
(Ord. 49-1995)
§ 13-4-6-30 PUBLIC MEETING.
   It is hereby officially found and determined that the meeting at which this
ordinance is passed is open to the public as required by law and that public
notice of time, place, and purpose of said meeting was given as required.
(Ord. 49-1995)
§ 13-4-6-31 APPLICABLE LAW.
   This ordinance is governed by and construed and enforced in accordance with
the laws of the State of New Mexico.
(Ord. 49-1995)
§ 13-4-6-32 EFFECTIVE DATE.
   This ordinance shall become effective from and after its passage and
publication provided by § 3-42-1 NMSA 1978, or successor statute; provided that
the company, within the specified 30 days shall have filed with the City Clerk
an unconditional acceptance thereof. Within ten days after the filing of the
acceptance, the City Clerk shall acknowledge in writing the receipt of the
company's acceptance. All costs of any publication required by law shall be at
the expense of the company in addition to other charges provided for herein.
(Ord. 49-1995)
PART 7: AMERICAN COMMUNICATION SERVICES OF ALBUQUERQUE, INC. FRANCHISE
§ 13-4-7-1 SHORT TITLE.
   Sections 13-4-7-1 et seq. may be cited as the “American Communication
Services of Albuquerque, Inc. Franchise Ordinance.”
(Ord. 50-1995)
§ 13-4-7-2 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this ordinance, the following terms, phrases, words and
their derivations shall have the meaning given in this section. When not
inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the
future tense, words in the plural number include the singular number, and words
in the singular number include the plural number. The word "shall" is mandatory
and "may" is permissive. Words not defined in this section shall be given their
common and ordinary meaning.
   CITY. The City of Albuquerque, a municipal corporation of the State of New
Mexico.
   CITY CLERK. The City Clerk of the City of Albuquerque or a designated
representative.
   COMPANY. Is and refers to American Communication Services of Albuquerque,
Inc. ("ACSI").
   COUNCIL. The legislative body of the City of Albuquerque sometimes referred
to as "City Council."
   DIRECTOR. The Director of the Public Works Department of the City of
Albuquerque or his\her designee.
   FACILITIES. Are and refer to and include, but are not limited to, plant,
works, systems, improvements and equipment owned, leased or otherwise used by
the company such as poles, wires, fixtures, equipment, underground circuits and
conduit in public rights-of-way and other property necessary or convenient for
the transmission and distribution of telecommunication service where such
poles, wires, fixtures, equipment, underground circuits and conduit and other
property necessary or convenient for the transmission and distribution of
telecommunication service are located within rights-of-way and public places.
   FRANCHISE. The authorization granted herein to rent and use rights-of-way
and public places to construct, operate, and maintain company facilities in the
city or any portion or portions thereof.
   GROSS REVENUE.
      (1)   Includes any and all revenue, exclusive of gross receipts tax and
exclusive of any tax passed through to consumers on behalf of governmental
agencies, received by the company for services provided to customers through
use of the facilities, provided by the company, including but not limited to:
         (a)   All telecommunications service revenues charged on a flat rate
basis over facilities;
         (b)   One half of all telecommunications service revenues charged on a
flat rate basis over facilities outside the city limits, but within Bernalillo
County;
         (c)   All telecommunications service revenues charged on a usage
sensitive or mileage basis over facilities;
         (d)   One half of all telecommunications service revenues charged on a
usage sensitive or mileage basis over facilities outside the city limits, but
within Bernalillo County;
         (e)   All revenues from installation service charges;
         (f)   All revenues from connection or disconnection fees;
         (g)   All revenues from penalties or charges to customers for checks
returned from banks, net of back costs paid;
         (h)   All revenues from equipment sold or rented to customers upon
customers' premises;
         (i)   All revenues from joint pole or conduit use;
         (j)   All revenues from charges for access to local and long distance
networks. However, gross revenue shall not include such access revenues if a
local exchange carrier has paid a franchise fee on any such revenue;
         (k)   All revenues from authorized rental, lease, resale or use of any
portion of the company's network in the city, including plant, facilities or
capacity leased to others;
         (l)   Recoveries of bad debts previously written off and revenues from
the sale or assignment of bad debts. Gross revenues may be adjusted for net
write-off of uncollectible accounts computed on the average annual rate for the
entire company;
         (m)   All revenues from enhanced data service;
         (n)   All interconnect revenues from interexchange carriers. However,
gross revenue shall not include interconnection services revenues received from
any source if a local exchange carrier has paid a franchise fee on any such
revenue;
         (o)   All revenues from co-location connection fees; and
         (p)   The company acknowledges that transport services provided to an
affiliate or subsidiary will be subject to an actual or imputed charge
comparable to charges to nonaffiliated customers. Such actual or imputed
charges to affiliates or subsidiaries shall be reflected in gross revenues of
the company for purpose of calculating the franchise fee owed. This ordinance
does not authorize affiliates or subsidiaries to undertake telecommunication
services as contemplated by this ordinance.
      (2)   The company is not required to measure each category of revenues
separately; however, in the event of an audit by the city, the company will be
required to provide an appropriate justification for amounts reported as gross
revenues under this section.
      (3)    GROSS REVENUE shall not include proceeds from the sale of bonds,
mortgages or other evidence of indebtedness, securities or stocks. Gross
receipts taxes are not included in the above definition of gross revenue, and,
therefore, are not included in the calculation of the franchise fee due under
this ordinance.
      (4)   The company warrants that, as of the effective date of this
ordinance, all services of the company will be provided through facilities
located within the limits of the city or Bernalillo County. In accordance with
this section and §
13-4-7-13 herein, the company agrees to give the city not less than 60 days
notice of its intent to extend its facilities, and thus its services, outside
of Bernalillo County.
      (5)   Gross revenue shall be measured and monitored periodically as set
out in §§
13-4-7-13 and
13-4-7-15 below.
   LINE EXTENSION. Any extension of distribution or transmission facilities
into areas within the boundaries of the city not then served by the company.
   MAYOR. The Mayor of the City of Albuquerque or his/her designated
representative.
   PUBLIC PLACES. All sidewalks, alleys, or other public ways and any and all
public sources, spaces, grounds and buildings of the city within the city
limit.
   REASONABLE ATTORNEY FEES. Charges for legal representation as may be
incurred by the city.
   RIGHTS-OF-WAY. All present and future streets, avenues, highways, alleys,
bridges and public ways, (excluding railroad rights-of-way, parks and airport
property) of the city within the city limit.
   TELECOMMUNICATIONS SERVICE.
      (1)   Any switched or other one-way or two-way transmission of voice or
data, including but not necessarily limited to:
         (a)   Services interconnecting interexchange carriers for the purpose
of any one-way or two-way transmission of voice or data;
         (b)   Services connecting interexchange carriers or competitive access
carriers to local exchange providers for the purpose of any one-way or two-way
transmission of voice or data;
         (c)   Services connecting interexchange carriers to any entity, other
than another interexchange carrier or the local exchange provider for the
purpose of any one-way or two-way transmission of voice or data;
         (d)   Service providing private line point-to-point service for end
users for the purpose of any one-way or two-way transmission of voice or data;
         (e)   Nonentertainment video, video conferencing or point-to-point
private line service; or
         (f)   Subject to the exclusions in divisions (2) through (4) below,
any service regulated by state regulatory agencies or the Federal
Communications Commission ("FCC") which the state agency or FCC has authorized
the company to provide, if the company has provided advance notice of same to
city.
      (2)    TELECOMMUNICATIONS SERVICE shall not include local exchange
telephone services or other services directly regulated by the New Mexico State
Corporation Commission ("SCC"). Before proposing to provide local exchange
telephone services in the city, the company agrees to obtain prior SCC approval
to provide that service, and to obtain a separate franchise from the city for
the provision of such local exchange telephone service.
      (3)    TELECOMMUNICATIONS SERVICE shall not include cable services as
defined in Title 47, Chapter 5. Subchapter V-A of the United States Code, as
amended (47 USCA § 521, et seq.) or as recognized by the FCC. Before proposing
to provide such cable services in the city, the company agrees to obtain a
separate franchise from the city for the provision of this service.
      (4)    TELECOMMUNICATIONS SERVICE shall not include video dial tone or
personal communication service. However, in the event the company desires to
provide such service, it agrees to, as part of any franchise authorizing
provision of that service, to pay a separate fee to the city for the provision
of video dial tone, personal communication service or like service.
Notwithstanding the above, and subject to the payment of franchise fees, the
company shall have the right under this ordinance to provide, by means of its
facilities, transport services for the bulk transport of transmissions signals,
whether digital or analog, and whether voice, video or data, that are in part
or in whole a local exchange telephone service, a cable service, as defined
above, a video dial tone and a personal communication service, to any company
authorized to provide such services by the city, the State of New Mexico, or
federal government authority having jurisdiction over such services.
   TREASURER. The Treasurer of the City of Albuquerque.
(Ord. 50-1995)
§ 13-4-7-3 GRANT OF FRANCHISE.
   (A)   The city hereby grants to American Communication Services of
Albuquerque, Inc., a New Mexico corporation, subject to the terms, conditions,
and limitations contained in this ordinance, permission to rent, use and occupy
rights-of-way and public places and a nonexclusive franchise, to provide
telecommunication service, and right and privilege to erect, construct,
maintain and operate a telecommunication system within the corporate limits of
the city as the same now exist or may be extended in the future; and a
nonexclusive franchise, right and privilege to erect, construct, maintain and
operate poles, wires, fixtures, equipment, underground circuits and conduits
and other property necessary or convenient for the transmission and
distribution of telecommunication service to the city and its inhabitants and
to other customers and territory beyond the limits of the city; and to
transmit, distribute and sell telecommunication service, upon, over, along,
under and across the streets, alleys, roads and other public ways and places,
including, but not limited to private property on which a preliminary
subdivision plat has been approved by the city for the provision of public
utilities within the corporate limits of the city as the same now exist or may
be extended in the future.
   (B)   All facilities of the company used in connection with the transmission
and distribution of telecommunication service and presently located within the
corporate limits of the city, or hereafter located within the corporate limits
of the city, shall be deemed to be covered by the terms of this ordinance.
(Ord. 50-1995)
§ 13-4-7-4 DURATION; COMPANY OFFICES.
   (A)   This franchise is granted for a period of seven years from and after
the effective date of the franchise granted through this ordinance, which
commences on the effective date of this ordinance. If the company has complied
with all material provisions of this ordinance this franchise agreement will be
renewed, by ordinance, for an additional three years on the date of expiration,
unless one party gives notice, in writing to the other, at least 240 days prior
to the date of expiration of such party's intent to terminate the franchise
agreement. Assuming notice to terminate has not been tendered by the city, at
least 180 days prior to the end of the term of this ordinance, the company
shall notify the city in writing of its intention to seek renewal of this
ordinance.
   (B)   Within one year of the effective date of this franchise or upon
commencement of operation and throughout the duration of this franchise, or any
extension thereto, the company shall be required to establish and maintain
offices within the city for customer service. The company shall make available
at such offices, at a minimum, documents required by this franchise at §§
13-4-7-5,
13-4-7-15 and
13-4-7-16 with reasonable notice by the city to the company.
(Ord. 50-1995)
§ 13-4-7-5 CONSTRUCTION PLANS AND DRAWINGS.
   (A)   Before the company may conduct underground work involving excavation,
new construction or major relocation work in any rights-of-way or public place,
the company shall first notify the city and shall comply with any special
conditions relating to location, scheduling, coordination and public safety;
and the company shall file maps and drawings with the Director showing the
location of any construction or extension of its facilities and services in any
rights-of-way or public place of the city. For multi-conduit duct banks, maps
and drawings shall show overall size, material and configuration of the duct
bank. As further set out at §
13-4-7-16, upon request from the city the company shall provide the city with
updates of the maps and drawings showing the location of any new construction,
extension or relocation of its facilities. All materials provided pursuant to
this section shall be kept confidential to the fullest extent possible under
the law.
   (B)   Such proposed construction work to be done by the company shall be
performed in a safe manner subject to the approval of the Director and in
accordance with applicable federal and state laws and city ordinances,
regulations and permit requirements now or hereafter existing including the
Street Excavation Ordinance, as that ordinance may be amended from time to
time, of the city requiring a Sidewalk, Drive-pad, Curb and Gutter Bond, a bond
securing payment of permit fees and evidence of at least $1,000,000 in the
requisite insurance coverage(s).
   (C)   Prior to initiating any construction or extension of the backbone
network and contemporaneous with the filing of maps and drawings, the company
shall tender a review/location fee, in addition to the franchise fee, with the
Director. Such preconstruction review/location fee shall be $1.50 per linear
foot of fiber laid as diagramed and mapped; however, in no event shall such fee
exceed $30,000 on an annual basis. Such review/location fee shall apply to
subsequent additions or extensions of the company's backbone network as may be
proposed from time to time and shall be due each January 15.
(Ord. 50-1995)
§ 13-4-7-6 INSTALLATIONS, EXCAVATIONS AND RESTORATIONS.
   (A)   (1)   The company shall have the right to excavate in, occupy and use
any and all rights-of-way and public places for the purpose of installing,
erecting, constructing, repairing, maintaining, removing, relocating and
operating its facilities after obtaining any and all appropriate permits from
the city, provided, however, that:
         (a)   The company shall not, pursuant to this franchise, place any of
its facilities, on, over, under or within any city park, duly designated as
such by the city, but nothing herein contained shall preclude the city from
granting a revocable permit therefor;
         (b)   The company shall not place any of its facilities, on, over, or
within the median portion of any boulevard or parkway without first having
obtained the written permission of the city;
         (c)   Where appropriate and as may be required by the city through any
permit process, installation, excavations and restorations affecting street
and/or lane closures shall, as often as practicable, be performed after 6:30
p.m. and before 6:00 a.m., but in no event shall any such work be performed
from 7:00 a.m. to 9:00 a.m. and from 4:00 p.m. to 6:00 p.m.;
         (d)   The city reserves the right to assist in the coordination and
scheduling of any company projects where such project may be reasonably
coordinated with the placement of other franchisee facilities. Otherwise, and
subject to city permit processes and approvals, it is recognized that,
notwithstanding the foregoing, the company retains discretion over the timing
of the company's proposed projects; and
         (e)   The company shall, to the extent feasible, employ "trenchless"
technology in the placement of its facilities.
      (2)   Except in an emergency, not less than five working days prior to
the commencement of any work by the company which involves excavation in any
rights-of-way or public place, the company shall notify the Director and any
appropriate utility coordinating committee for purposes of utility location.
Minimum notice to the city shall be by telephone communication or in person
prior to any work, followed by notice in writing as soon as practical. The
company will provide advance notice so as not to disrupt services of the city
or any other person or utility using any rights-of-way and public places in the
city and allow the city to place any inspector it may deem necessary at the
site of the project.
   (B)   Whenever work is performed in any rights-of-way or public place, the
company shall take all reasonable precautions to minimize interruption to
traffic flow, damage to property or creation of a hazardous condition.
   (C)   After any excavation shall be made and after work is completed
pursuant to the provisions of this ordinance, the company, at company expense
shall as soon as practicable, but not longer than one day, remove all surplus
material in compliance with specifications, requirements and regulations of the
city in effect at the time of such restoration and restore the portion of the
rights-of-way or public place to the same condition in which it was prior to
the excavation thereof. If the company fails to restore promptly the affected
portion of the rights-of-way or public place, following written notice to the
company, the city may make the restoration in a manner satisfactory to the city
and all costs incurred for such restoration, whether done with city work forces
and equipment or otherwise, shall be paid by the company, including the cost of
any inspectors the city may assign to the project.
   (D)   The company shall be responsible for the maintenance of all rights-of-
way impacted by the presence of the company's facilities and within reasonable
proximity of and upon which the company maintains aboveground facilities,
including the removal of weeds and litter.
   (E)   The company shall ensure its facilities in rights-of-way and public
places are located and constructed in a manner such that access is not impaired
in compliance with the Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA). Following notice
by the city of an ADA construction problem, the company shall have 30 days or
other reasonable time to remedy the problem. In the event the city and the
company cannot agree that a problem exists, any dispute shall be submitted to
nonbinding mediation, with the assistance and through the city's Alternative
Dispute Resolution ("ADR") Coordinator.
   (F)   Execution of this franchise requires the company to become a member of
a local utility coordinating committee, e.g. New Mexico One-Call System. The
company further agrees to participate in such organization(s) and abide by
their articles of incorporation, bylaws, and other requirements.
(Ord. 50-1995)
§ 13-4-7-7 LOCATION AND RELOCATION OF FACILITIES.
   (A)   All facilities of the company shall be placed so that they do not
interfere with the use of rights-of-way and public places by the city and shall
only be placed after approval of the location by the Director and in accordance
with any specifications adopted by the city governing the location of
facilities. The city reserves the right to construct, install, maintain and
operate any public improvement, work or facility, do any work that the city may
find desirable on, over or under any rights-of-way and public places, and
vacate, alter or close any rights-of-way and public places. All such work shall
be done, if possible, in such manner as not to obstruct, injure or prevent free
use and operation of the company's facilities. The company agrees to obtain the
city's express written approval before placing any new poles in rights-of-way
and other public places, that do not currently exist in rights-of-way and other
public places.
   (B)   (1)   The city shall have the right to require the removal or
relocation of facilities used by the company in any rights-of-way or public
place as may reasonably be required by the city for any reason, after notice to
the company, or caused or occasioned by any city project including, but not
limited to, the installations of water, sanitary sewer, storm drainage,
landscaping, or traffic signal facilities, road reconstruction and
construction, and the company shall remove and relocate such facilities within
30 days following notice to do so from the city. Prior to any such relocation
the city agrees to provide for suitable location for such relocated facilities
sufficient to maintain service. The cost of any removal or relocation of its
facilities shall be paid by the company. Notwithstanding the foregoing the
company shall not be required by the city to relocate its facilities to
accommodate another franchisee in the city. The costs of any relocations
occasioned by another franchisee of the city in no event shall be the
responsibility of the city.
      (2)   The company shall reconstruct, replace or restore any street,
alley, or public way or place, in a timely fashion, and any water, sewer,
sanitary sewer, storm drainage, traffic signalization facilities, or other
facility of the city disturbed by the company, without cost to the city, to a
condition acceptable to the city consistent with reasonable standards of safety
and appearance. Any facility so disturbed by the company shall be
reconstructed, replaced, or restored only under the supervision of city
personnel.
      (3)   Subject to the provisions of §
13-4-7-5 herein and upon notice to the city, the company may remove or relocate
transmission and distribution facilities maintained by the company on its own
initiative.
   (C)   Where the city, acting through itself, an agent, contractor or permit
holder, proposes to improve a street, including but not limited to landscaping
and traffic signalization, water line, storm sewer or sanitary sewer within the
rights-of-way or other public place under its jurisdiction or control, and such
improvements include excavation and the placement of underground utilities
vaults and conduit sufficient for the company's telecommunication service
distribution purposes, by and at the expense of someone other than the company,
then upon notification by the city and upon such reasonable scheduling as may
be required by the city's ordinances and policies, the company shall replace
such overhead distribution facilities as are then within the affected right-of-
way with underground facilities within the vaults and conduits provided
therefor. All such placement shall be at company expense. The conversion from
overhead to underground shall be conditioned upon the city requiring the
undergrounding in the area in which both the existing and new facilities are
and will be located and the city shall require:
      (1)   That all existing overhead communication and electric distribution
facilities in such area be removed;
      (2)   That each customer served from such existing overhead distribution
facilities shall, in accordance with the company's rules for underground
service, make all facility changes on customer's premises necessary to receive
service from the underground facilities of the company as soon as it is
available; and
      (3)   That the company is authorized to discontinue its overhead service
on completion of the underground facilities.
Such replacement of overhead with underground distribution facilities shall be
paid for by the company.
(Ord. 50-1995)
§ 13-4-7-8 PUBLIC WORKS AND IMPROVEMENTS.
   (A)   The city reserves the right to construct, install, maintain and
operate any public improvement, work or facility and do any work that the city
may find desirable on, over or under any rights-of-way or public place. All
such work shall be done, if possible, in such manner as not to obstruct, injure
or prevent free use and operation of the company's facilities.
   (B)   Whenever the city shall excavate or perform any work in any present
and/or future rights-of-way or public place of the city, or shall contract for
such excavation or work, where such excavation or work may disturb but not
require removal or relocation of company's facilities, the city shall notify
the company sufficiently in advance of such contemplated excavation or work to
enable the company to take such measures as may be deemed necessary to protect
such facilities from damage and possible inconvenience or injury to the public
or the city's rights-of-way or public place. If the company cannot take such
measures, the company shall be required to relocate its facilities in
accordance with §
13-4-7-7. In such case, the company, upon request, shall furnish field markings
to the city or contractor, as the case may be, showing the location of all its
facilities in the area involved in such proposed excavation or other work.
   (C)   Whenever the city shall vacate any rights-of-way or public place for
the convenience or benefit of any person or governmental agency or
instrumentality, the company's rights shall be preserved as to any of its
facilities then existing in such rights-of-way or public place.
(Ord. 50-1995)
§ 13-4-7-9 MOVING OF BUILDINGS.
   Whenever it becomes necessary to temporarily rearrange, remove, lower or
raise the aerial cables or wires or other apparatus of the company to permit
the passage of any building, machinery or other object, the company shall
perform such rearrangement upon the receipt of written notice from the person
or persons desiring to move said building, machinery or other object. The
written notice shall detail the route of movement of the building, machinery or
other object. The costs incurred by the company in making such rearrangements
of its aerial plant will be borne, excepting the city, by the person or persons
seeking such rearrangement, unless the aerial plant is placed or maintained in
violation of the applicable rules of any local, state, or federal regulatory
agency and thereby interferes with the movement.
(Ord. 50-1995)
§ 13-4-7-10 SAFETY STANDARDS.
   The facilities of the company shall at all times be constructed, operated
and maintained so as to protect and safeguard the health and safety of the
public and to this end the company shall observe all rules pertaining thereto
prescribed by any local, state, or federal regulatory authority.
(Ord. 50-1995)
§ 13-4-7-11 JOINT USE AGREEMENTS.
   The company is authorized to enter into joint use agreements with any person
or entity franchised by the city with respect to the placement of facilities.
The company may require any such person or entity to furnish evidence of
adequate insurance covering the company and adequate bonds covering the
performance of the person or entity attaching to the company's facilities as a
condition precedent to granting permission to any such person or entity to
attach transmission facilities to the company's facilities; provided that the
company's requirements for such insurance shall be reasonable.
(Ord. 50-1995)
§ 13-4-7-12 INTERFERENCE.
   Subject to §
13-4-7-13(H) herein, the company shall not be required to attach its facilities
to the facilities of any other person or entity or to permit the facilities of
any other person or entity to be attached to the company's facilities if it can
be shown satisfactorily to the city that the company will be subjected to
increased risks of interruption of service or to increased liability for
accidents, or if the facilities of such other person or entity are not of the
character, design, and construction required by, or are not being maintained in
accordance with industry standards of practice.
(Ord. 50-1995)
§ 13-4-7-13 FRANCHISE FEE; CONDITIONS.
   (A)   As consideration for this franchise, which provides for the rental and
use by the company of the rights-of-way and other public places within the
boundaries of the city, which are valuable public properties acquired and
maintained by the city at great expense to its taxpayers and citizens, the
company shall pay to the city an amount equal to 3% of the gross revenue, as
defined in §
13-4-7-2, collected by the company for the first year from the effective date
of this franchise ordinance. Thereafter, for the next one-year term the company
shall pay to the city an amount equal to 4% of the gross revenue collected by
the company. For the remaining five-year term of this franchise, the company
shall pay to the city an amount equal to 5% of the gross revenue collected by
the company. Provided, however, in accordance with this section and the
provisions contained in the definition of GROSS REVENUE in §
13-4-7-2, after notice by the company to the city of the company's intent to
extend its facilities, or services, outside of Bernalillo County, and upon the
company's commencement of services across facilities outside Bernalillo County,
the fee under this ordinance shall escalate to 5% of gross revenue. Such 5% fee
shall become due the month following the month the extended facilities are
placed in service. The city shall use its best efforts to ensure that any
company providing services substantially similar to those provided by the
company (i.e., "American Communication Services of Albuquerque, Inc.") shall
pay an equivalent fee measured as a percentage of gross revenues equal to or
greater than that paid by the company.
   (B)   In consideration of the agreement of the company to make such
franchise payments, the city agrees that no license, tax, or charge on the
business, occupation or franchise of the company shall be imposed upon or
required of the company by the city during the term of this ordinance. This
provision shall not exempt the property of the company from lawful property, ad
valorem taxes and local improvement district assessments. This provision shall
also not exempt the company from conditions, exactions, fees and charges, which
are generally applicable during the company's real property development or use
as required by the city's ordinances.
   (C)   Commencing the month following the month this franchise ordinance
becomes effective, the franchise fee shall be paid monthly on the 25th day of
each month; such fee shall be for gross revenues received by the company for
the preceding month. The company shall furnish to the city with each payment of
compensation required by this section a written statement, showing the amount
of gross revenue of the company within the city for the period covered by the
payment. Upon receipt of such payment the city shall issue a receipt to the
company. To facilitate the city's annual budget process, on or before December
31, 1995, and each succeeding December 31st thereafter during the term of this
franchise ordinance, the company will provide the city with an estimate of the
gross revenue and resultant franchise fee for the following calendar year.
Nothing herein shall preclude the company and the city from agreeing to a
revised payment schedule.
   (D)   On or before the first day of February of each succeeding year, the
company shall submit to the City Treasurer a statement of the franchise fee
actually due to the city based upon the actual gross revenue for the previous
calendar year, together with a check for any amount due from the company or a
statement for any amount due from the city. Within 30 days from the submission
of the statement of franchise fee owing, or within such reasonable additional
time as he may request, the Treasurer shall investigate the statement and
determine the accuracy of the amounts reported. However, neither payment of the
franchise fee nor failure to make such investigation shall estop the city in
any way or prevent subsequent investigation, collection or return of any amount
properly due.
   (E)   In the event it is claimed by the city that the amount of the
franchise fee paid hereunder for any calendar year is insufficient, or in the
event the company claims that the amount is excessive, and the parties cannot
agree, the city and the company shall attempt to informally negotiate a
resolution. In the event that negotiations fail, the dispute shall, before any
other remedies are invoked, be submitted to nonbinding mediation with the
assistance of and through the city's ADR Coordinator.
   (F)   In the event that the franchise fee set forth in this franchise
ordinance is declared illegal, unconstitutional or void for any reason by any
court or proper authority, the company shall be contractually bound to pay the
city, at the same times and in the same manner as provided for herein, an
aggregate amount equal to the amount which would have been paid as a franchise
fee. This section, however, shall not constitute a waiver of any claim the
company may assert against the city.
   (G)   Acceptance by the city of any payment due under this section shall not
be deemed to be a waiver by the city of any breach of this franchise occurring
prior thereto, nor shall the acceptance by the city of any such payments
preclude the city from later establishing that a larger amount was actually
due, or from collecting any balance due to the city.
   (H)   (1)   In consideration of the rights and privileges hereby granted,
the city shall have and the company hereby grants to it, the right and
privilege at the city's expense to suspend and maintain wires and necessary
control boxes on poles placed by the company in the streets and other places
aforesaid, or if such wires are placed underground, to place and maintain in
the pipes or conduits of company, if space therein is available, wires which
the city may require for fire, police, emergency or other municipal purposes.
All such wires shall be placed on the poles or in the conduits so as not to
interfere with the service of the company and shall not pose a danger to the
company's facilities, customers, or customers' property. However, nothing in
this franchise shall limit the company's right to reserve conduit space and/or
pole space which in its sole discretion it retains for purposes of assuring the
safety of or servicing of the facilities. The city agrees in consideration of
the establishment of this service and the furnishing of such facilities to hold
the company free and harmless from all claims or liability for damage which may
arise out of the city's operation of such wires and control boxes.
      (2)   As further consideration of the rights and privileges hereby
granted, and upon reasonable request by the city and to the extent the company
can reasonably do so, pursuant to its leases and agreements with other right-
of-way providers, the company will grant joint use of rights-of-way which it
now, or in the future, has an interest in to the city for purposes including
but not limited to parks, drainage facilities, bikeways, traffic conduits, mass
transit corridors, sanitary sewer lines, pedestrian area parking, open spaces
and electric, cable, natural gas and water service distribution, provided that
the company shall not be required to make such an offer in any circumstance
where such offer would unreasonably interfere with the company's use of the
rights-of-way. Compensation for such joint use shall be as negotiated by the
city and the company. If the city's joint use is accepted by the company, then
any improvements deemed appropriate by the city shall be made by the city at
its sole expense.
   (I)   The company agrees that any franchise or other fee paid by the company
to the city shall not be reflected as a line item or separate fee on invoices
to ultimate consumers of the company. Any fee paid to the city is a cost of
doing business to the company and shall be embedded in the rates charged to
consumers.
   (J)   The compensation paid by the company for this franchise includes
compensation for the rental and use of any rights-of-way and public place
located within the city as authorized.
(Ord. 50-1995)
§ 13-4-7-14 FACILITIES FOR EXCLUSIVE CITY USE.
   (A)   Within six months of the effective date of this ordinance, the city
will select one company, after informal competitive bid among the companies
authorized to provide telecommunication services, to provide a downtown
backbone network comprised of the following designated facilities. The company
and other companies contemporaneously franchised and authorized to provide
telecommunication services, shall provide to the city an indefeasible right to
use ("IRU") and will proportionately contribute to the reasonable and necessary
cost of:
      (1)   A three pair dark fiber backbone in that company's then existing
backbone;
      (2)   Lateral connections from the backbone to the following facilities,
at the U.S. West/City network interface (i.e., the telephone room);
         (a)   Albuquerque Bernalillo County Government Center;
         (b)   Fire Station No. 1;
         (c)   East Convention Center; and
         (d)   The city's long distance carrier's point of presence.
   (B)   In addition to the downtown network, the city may, within two years of
the effective date of this ordinance, select a second backbone network, either
the company's or that of another company franchised and authorized to provide
telecommunication services, of three pair of dark fibers for the city's IRU in
such company's backbone network. The company so selected will be reimbursed
proportionately by the companies not chosen, including companies then
franchised to provide similar services, for the incremental cost of adding the
fiber and the incremental cost of maintaining it in the future.
   (C)   The company and any other company franchised and authorized to provide
telecommunication services will proportionately contribute to the cost of
connecting the following city facilities to a network of the city's choice:
      (1)   Piño Yards; and
      (2)   Old Albuquerque High School.
   (D)   The company shall provide the city three additional lateral
connections at locations of the city's choice either connecting to the city's
then existing dark fiber networks or the then existing network of any company
then authorized to provide telecommunication services. If a lateral connection
is made to a lighted network, the city or the new end-user customer will be
expected to pay service charges to the network owner. Lateral connections will
be limited to 100 feet. Anything greater than the 100 feet will be paid for by
the city or the end-user customer.
   (E)   All facilities placed for the city's use pursuant to divisions (A)
through (D) above shall be for the city's internal and noncommercial purposes,
not for resale, and for the city's sole and exclusive use. In the event of a
sale of the company's network, the city will retain an indefeasible right to
use the above facilities.
   (F)   The company agrees to bear its pro rata share of any maintenance of
fiber dedicated to the city. Except that the city shall pay only actual
incremental labor costs to the company to repair the city's share of dark
fibers within any cable that is damaged as the result of any natural disaster.
   (G)   The city will not allow or direct any third party to access fiber
optic cable or other company facilities, if any, in city rights-of-way without
notice to the company sufficient to allow the company to supervise and direct
such access.
   (H)   The city recognizes that the company's agreements, if any, to occupy
rights-of-way or for pole attachments may be subject to the control of third
parties who may require the company to relocate its cable. In the event of such
required relocation by the company, the company shall provide notice thereof to
the city as soon as reasonably possible. The company shall provide replacement
dark fibers to the city in any company replacement cable as soon as reasonably
possible.
   (I)   The city agrees in consideration for the provision of such dark fiber
and lateral connections to hold the company free and harmless from all claims
or liability for damage which may arise out of the city's operation of such
dark fiber and lateral connections.
(Ord. 50-1995)
§ 13-4-7-15 BOOKS OF ACCOUNT AND REPORTS.
   (A)   The city shall have the right to review or audit the company's books
and records in accordance with regularly accepted accounting and audit
standards regarding any amounts which may be owed under this franchise
ordinance. This right includes the right to review and audit all books and
records of revenue not included in the calculation of the fee paid, but which
may be reasonably considered by the city to be subject to a franchise fee. The
city shall give written notice to the company of any additional amount claimed
to be due to the city as a result of the city's review. The additional amount
due the city, if any, shall be paid within 30 days following determination by
the city that such amount is due and payable.
   (B)   The company shall keep complete and accurate books and records of its
business and operations pursuant to this franchise ordinance in accordance with
generally accepted accounting principles and in accordance with the rules and
regulations of any state regulatory authority. The company shall keep its books
of account and records in such a way that breakdowns of revenues are available
by journal code within the city.
   (C)   In the event of an audit, the company shall provide the city specific
books, records, contracts, accounts, documents and papers for its operations
within the city.
   (D)   All such books, records, and accounts of the company shall be retained
by the company for a period of six years, in accordance with § 37-1-3, NMSA
1978. The company shall make such records, as are necessary for the city to
complete its audit, and be available for inspection by the city, in the city,
upon 30 days notice from the city.
   (E)   All audits will take place on company premises within the city. The
city's auditors may review all directly relevant materials and may make copies
of any materials with the approval from the company. Such approval will not be
unreasonably withheld.
   (F)   Upon request by the city, the company shall provide to the city by
U.S. mail, postage prepaid, a copy of all papers filed by the company with any
federal or state regulatory agency on the same day of filing that pertain to
the company's facilities located in New Mexico.
(Ord. 50-1995)
§ 13-4-7-16 SUPPLYING MAPS UPON REQUEST.
   The company shall maintain on file maps and operational data pertaining to
its operations in the city. The city may inspect the maps and data at any time
during business hours. Upon request of the city the company shall furnish to
the city as soon as practicable, without charge, current maps either in a "hard
copy" printed form or in the city's AGIS format or compatible data base,
showing the location and dimension of any facilities, but not other proprietary
information, used in operating the company's facilities within the city served
by the company.
(Ord. 50-1995)
§ 13-4-7-17 RATES.
   (A)   The rates to be charged by the company for telecommunication service
shall comply with the appropriate local, state or federal regulatory authority,
or any other governmental official, commission or body having jurisdiction. If
no governmental official, commission or body has rate setting jurisdiction, the
company may set rates to be charged at its sole discretion.
   (B)   To the extent that the city is, or may in the future become, entitled
to set fees and charges for the services provided pursuant to this franchise,
the city reserves the right to regulate the rates, fees, charges, deposits and
associated terms and conditions for any service provided pursuant to this
franchise to the fullest extent permitted by applicable law with appropriate
procedural due process.
(Ord. 50-1995)
§ 13-4-7-18 FRANCHISE NOT EXCLUSIVE.
   The franchise hereby granted shall not be exclusive and shall not be
construed as any limitation on the city to grant rights, privileges and
authority to other persons or corporations similar to or different from those
herein set forth or to construct, install, operate or maintain a public
utility.
(Ord. 50-1995)
§ 13-4-7-19 LIMITATION ON PRIVILEGES.
   All rights, authority and grants herein contained or conferred are also
conditioned upon the understanding and agreement that these privileges in the
rights-of-way and other public places of the city are not to operate in any way
so as to be an enhancement of the company's properties or values or to be an
asset or item of ownership in any appraisal thereof. In the event that the city
shall at any time hereafter acquire the property of the company, by purchase,
or otherwise, the value of this franchise shall be fixed and determined at $1.
(Ord. 50-1995)
§ 13-4-7-20 ASSIGNMENT OF FRANCHISE.
   (A)   The company shall not transfer or assign any rights under this
franchise or lease total capacity of its system or network to another entity
unless the city shall first review the financial, technical and operational
qualifications of such entity and give its approval, in writing, in 60 days
which approval shall not be unreasonably withheld. This prohibition shall not
apply in the instance that the company is transferred, assigned, or sold to an
affiliated interest as that term is defined at § 62-3-3.A, NMSA 1978, or
successor statute, nor shall this prohibition apply to assignments made or
security interests granted in order to secure financing. However, the company
agrees to provide at least 30 days advance notice of any affiliate transfer,
assignment or sale. The city shall have the discretion to review the financial,
technical and operational qualifications of the affiliate.
   (B)   In order that the city might share in the value this franchise adds to
the company's operation, any such transfer or assignment of any rights under
this franchise by the company, subject to the exceptions listed in division (A)
above, shall be subject to the conditions that the transferee promptly pay the
city 20% of any and all fees paid to the city including the franchise fee paid
to the city in the previous calendar year, which amount the company and the
city agree is reasonable, and that such transfer fee shall not be recovered
from the city or from city residents or property owners through rates or
surcharges of the company.
(Ord. 50-1995)
§ 13-4-7-21 ADDITIONAL CITY RIGHTS.
   The right and privilege of the city to construct, purchase or condemn a
public utility or telecommunication provider located within or without the
boundaries of the city is expressly recognized herein.
(Ord. 50-1995)
§ 13-4-7-22 EQUAL OPPORTUNITY AND AFFIRMATIVE ACTION.
   The company is committed to stimulating and strengthening the participation
of minorities and women within the company and is also committed to the
principle that the success and economic well-being of the company are related
closely to the economic strength and vigor of the communities and people it
serves.
(Ord. 50-1995)
§ 13-4-7-23 AGREEMENT TO REOPEN NEGOTIATIONS.
   (A)   The city and the company agree that the services provided pursuant to
this ordinance are in an area of law undergoing significant review by state and
federal authorities and that there is a real possibility that some of the terms
of this ordinance may be preempted by state or federal law during the term of
this ordinance. Therefore, the city and the company expressly agree that:
      (1)   The preempted terms of this ordinance, including the terms relating
to the compensation to be paid, shall, in the sole discretion of the city, be
subject to renegotiation one year from the effective date of this ordinance,
and again, if the city desires, two years and three years from the effective
date of this ordinance.
      (2)   In addition to and separate and apart from the provisions of
division (1) above, in the event an earlier negotiation must occur in order to
comply with newly enacted or decided federal or state law, such negotiation
shall occur within a reasonable time after any request for renegotiation is
issued by either the city or the company, or at such time as it becomes
apparent that a portion of this ordinance has been preempted by state or
federal law.
   (B)   By execution of this ordinance, the company agrees that upon the
conclusion of any such renegotiations, the company will enter into any
reasonably necessary amendments to this ordinance, and the company expressly
agrees to waive any rights it may have under state law to refuse to renegotiate
this ordinance as set forth in this section. It is further expressly agreed
that any renegotiation and subsequent amendment shall not reduce the initial
term of this franchise ordinance. In no event shall such renegotiations impose
obligations on the company that similar service providers would not also be
subject to. Further, if the city's right to impose a franchise is totally
preempted, this ordinance is null and void.
(Ord. 50-1995)
§ 13-4-7-24 INDEMNIFICATION.
   (A)   The company, as a condition of the grant of this franchise, and in
consideration thereof, shall protect, indemnify, and hold the city harmless
against all claims for damages to persons or property by reason of the
construction, maintenance and operation of its facilities, and conduct of
business, or in any way arising out of performance under this franchise,
directly, or indirectly, when or to the extent injury is caused, or alleged to
have been caused, wholly or in part, by any act, omission, negligence, or
misconduct of the company or any of its contractors, subcontractors, officers,
agents, or employees, or by any person for whose act, omission, negligence, or
misconduct, the company is by law responsible. This provision is not intended
to create liability for the benefit of third parties but is solely for the
benefit of the company and the city. In the event any claim is made against the
city that falls under this indemnity provision and a court of competent
jurisdiction should adjudge, by final decree, that the city is liable therefor,
the company shall indemnify and hold the city harmless of and from any such
liability, including any court costs, expenses, and reasonable attorney fees
incurred by the city in defense thereof and incurred at any stage. Upon
commencement of any suit, proceeding at law or in equity against the city
relating to or covering any matter covered by this indemnity, wherein the
company has agreed by accepting this franchise, to indemnify and hold the city
harmless, or to pay said settlement, final judgment and costs, as the case may
be, the city shall give the company immediate notice of such suit or
proceeding. Whereupon the company shall provide a defense to any such suit or
suits, including any appellate proceedings brought in connection therewith, and
pay as aforesaid, any settlement, costs or judgments that may be rendered
against the city by reason of such damage suit. Upon failure of the company to
comply with the "defense of suit" provisions of the franchise, after reasonable
notice to it by the city, the city shall have the right to defend the same and
in addition to being reimbursed for any settlement or judgment that may be
rendered against the city, together with all costs incurred therein, the
company shall reimburse the city for reasonable attorney fees, including those
employed by the city in such case or cases, as well as all expenses incurred by
the city by reason of undertaking the defense of such suit or suits, whether
such suit or suits are successfully defended, settled, compromised, or fully
adjudicated against the city.
   (B)   In the event the city is compelled to undertake the defense of any
such suit by reason of the company's failure to perform as hereinabove
provided, the city shall have the full right and authority to make or enter
into any settlement or compromise of such adjudication as the governing body
shall deem in the best interest of the city, this without the prior approval or
consent of the company with respect to the terms of such compromise or
settlement.
(Ord. 50-1995)
§ 13-4-7-25 REMEDIES AND PENALTIES NOT EXCLUSIVE; DEFAULT.
   (A)   All remedies and penalties under this ordinance are cumulative and not
exclusive, and the recovery or enforcement by one available remedy or
imposition of any penalty is not a bar to recovery or enforcement by any other
such remedy or imposition of any other penalty. The city reserves the right to
enforce the penal provisions of any ordinance or resolution and to avail itself
of any and all remedies available at law or in equity. Failure to enforce shall
not be construed as a waiver of a breach of any term, condition or obligation
imposed upon the company by or pursuant to this ordinance. A specific waiver of
a particular breach of any term, condition or obligation imposed upon the
company by or pursuant to this ordinance shall not be a waiver of any other or
subsequent or future breach of the same or of any other term, condition or
obligation, or a waiver of the term, condition or obligation itself.
   (B)   The company agrees that an Event of Default shall include, but shall
not be limited to, any of the following acts or failure to act by the company:
      (1)   Failure to obtain any applicable permits from the city pursuant to
this ordinance.
      (2)   Failure to comply with the terms of §
13-4-7-20 which limits the assignment of the franchise, or transfer of control
of the franchise.
      (3)   Failure to supply the capital items or other support for the
governmental facilities as specified in §
13-4-7-14.
      (4)   Failure to supply bonds, as may be required by the city to assure
the proper completion of any construction performed pursuant to the franchise.
      (5)   Failure to comply with any local, state or federal law that
prohibits discrimination in employment, or prohibits the creation of hostile
working environments for an employee of the company.
      (6)   Failure to make any of the payments set forth in §§
13-4-7-5 or
13-4-7-13 of this franchise.
      (7)   Failure to pay any permit fees, or failure to comply with any
rules, regulations, orders or directives of the city as set forth in this
ordinance.
      (8)   Substantial or repeated failure to comply with §
13-4-7-6 concerning installations, excavations and restorations.
      (9)   Refusal to renegotiate the terms and conditions of this ordinance
in accordance with §
13-4-7-23.
   (C)   Upon the occurrence of an Event of Default, then, in accordance with
the procedures provided for in this franchise, the city may:
      (1)   Require the company to take such actions as the city deems are
appropriate; or
      (2)   Seek money damages from the company as compensation for such Event
of Default; or
      (3)   Accelerate the expiration of the term of this franchise by
decreasing the term of the franchise provided in §
13-4-7-4; the extent of such acceleration shall be determined by the city and
may include any period of time, but not less than six months provided that six
months remain under this ordinance; or
      (4)   As a last measure only, revoke the franchise by termination of this
ordinance.
   (D)   The city shall exercise the rights set forth in this section in
accordance with the following procedures:
      (1)   The Director shall notify the company, in writing, of an alleged
Event of Default. This written notice shall set forth with reasonable
specificity the facts the city believes are the basis for declaring that an
Event of Default has occurred. The company shall, within 30 calendar days of
the date the notice is postmarked, or such additional time as the Director may
specify in the notice, cure the alleged Event of Default, or, in writing,
present for review by the Director a reasonable time frame and method to cure
the Event of Default. The company, in lieu of the cure of the Event of Default
as set forth herein, may, in writing, present facts and arguments as to why the
company disagrees that an Event of Default has occurred.
      (2)   If the company presents a written response that challenges whether
an Event of Default has occurred, the Director shall within ten days review the
submitted materials and determine again whether an Event of Default has
occurred. If the Director reaffirms that an Event of Default has occurred, the
company shall be notified in writing of this decision and shall, within 30
calendar days, cure the alleged Event of Default. The period to cure is tolled
in the event one party demands mediation until such time as mediation is
completed.
      (3)   If the company fails to cure the Event of Default so declared
pursuant to this section within the time permitted by the Director, the
Director shall prepare a written report to the Council and recommend action to
be taken. If the Council, after consideration of this report and hearing,
agrees that an Event of Default has occurred, it may order an appropriate
remedy as set forth in division (C) of this section.
   (E)   In addition to the rights under this section, the city, upon any
termination, may, at its sole discretion, direct the company to remove, at the
company's sole cost and expense, any or all of the facilities from all rights-
of-way and other public places within the city, subject to the following:
      (1)   The city may determine that removal of buried fiber optic cable, or
conduit, is not necessary;
      (2)   In removing any part of the facilities, the company shall refill
and compact, at its own expense, any excavation that shall be made by it and
shall leave all rights-of-way and other public places in as good a condition as
that prevailing prior to the company's removal of the facilities;
      (3)   The city shall have the right to inspect and approve the conditions
of the streets and public property after removal has occurred;
      (4)   The removal shall commence within 30 days of an order to remove
being issued by the Director at the direction of the Council;
      (5)   The company shall be responsible for all necessary removals of the
facilities, and maintenance of the street area in the same manner and degree as
if the facilities were in active use, and the company shall retain all
liability associated with such removals;
      (6)   As an alternative to removal, the company may, subject to the
city's approval, abandon its facilities in place and transfer ownership of the
installed facilities to the city. Nothing herein shall cause the city to incur
any costs related to the removal of the company's facilities or the transfer of
ownership of said facilities to the city.
(Ord. 50-1995)
§ 13-4-7-26 ACCEPTANCE.
   The company shall, within 90 days after adoption by the Council of this
ordinance, file with the City Clerk, its written, unconditional acceptance of
this franchise and if the company fails so to do, this ordinance shall be void.
The company agrees to bear the entire expense of publishing this ordinance
regardless of acceptance.
(Ord. 50-1995)
§ 13-4-7-27 SEVERABILITY CLAUSE.
   If any section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase, term, provision,
condition, covenant or portion of this ordinance is for any reason held
invalid, unenforceable or unconstitutional by a court of competent
jurisdiction, such portion shall be deemed a separate, distinct and independent
provision, and such holding shall not affect the validity or enforceability of
the remaining portions of this ordinance. The Council hereby declares that it
would have passed this ordinance and each portion thereof irrespective of any
provision being declared unconstitutional or otherwise invalid.
(Ord. 50-1995)
§ 13-4-7-28 NOTICE.
For the purpose of this ordinance, notice to the city will be to:
   Office of the Mayor
   Attn: Chief Administrative Officer
   Post Office Box 1293
   Albuquerque, New Mexico 87103
   (505) 768-3000
With a copy to:
   City Attorney
   City of Albuquerque
   Post Office Box 1293
   Albuquerque, New Mexico 87103
   (505) 768-4500
Notice to the Company will be to:
   American Communication Services, Inc.
   Ms. Riley Murphey
   Executive Vice President
   131 National Business Parkway, Suite 100
   Annapolis Junction, Maryland 20701
With a copy to:
   Rodney Schlagel
   Butt, Thornton & Baehr, P.C.
   P.O. Box 3170
   Albuquerque, New Mexico 87190
Notice shall be by overnight delivery. Notice will be effective upon delivery
to the Mayor or the company, until the city or company notifies the other, in
writing, of a change in the address.
(Ord. 50-1995)
§ 13-4-7-29 PUBLIC PURPOSE.
   All of the regulations provided in this ordinance are hereby declared to be
for a public purpose and the health, safety, and welfare of the general public.
Any member of the governing body or city official or employee charged with the
enforcement of this ordinance, acting for the city in the discharge of his
duties, shall not thereby render himself personally liable; and he is hereby
relieved from all personal liability for any damage that might accrue to
persons or property as a result of any act required or permitted in the
discharge of his said duties. Neither the city nor the company by accepting
this franchise waives its right to seek all appropriate legal and equitable
remedies as allowed by law upon violation of the terms of this franchise,
including seeking injunctive relief in a court of competent jurisdiction. Such
right to injunctive relief is expressly reserved and all terms and provisions
hereof shall be enforceable through injunctive relief.
(Ord. 50-1995)
§ 13-4-7-30 PUBLIC MEETING.
   It is hereby officially found and determined that the meeting at which this
ordinance is passed is open to the public as required by law and that public
notice of time, place, and purpose of said meeting was given as required.
(Ord. 50-1995)
§ 13-4-7-31 APPLICABLE LAW.
   This ordinance is governed by and construed and enforced in accordance with
the laws of the State of New Mexico.
(Ord. 50-1995)
§ 13-4-7-32 EFFECTIVE DATE.
   This ordinance shall become effective from and after its passage and
publication provided by § 3-42-1 NMSA 1978, or successor statute; provided that
the company, within the specified 30 days shall have filed with the City Clerk
an unconditional acceptance thereof. Within ten days after the filing of the
acceptance, the City Clerk shall acknowledge in writing the receipt of the
company's acceptance. All costs of any publication required by law shall be at
the expense of the company in addition to other charges provided for herein.
(Ord. 50-1995)
PART 8: NATURAL GAS FRANCHISE
§ 13-4-8-1 AUTHORITY.
   The City Council, pursuant to the provisions of Article X, Section 6 of the
Constitution of New Mexico enacts this ordinance relating to a gas franchise as
authorized by such Section and for the purpose of providing maximum local self-
government.
(Ord. 2-2003)
§ 13-4-8-2 SHORT TITLE.
   This ordinance shall be known and may be cited as the Natural Gas Franchise
Ordinance.
(Ord. 2-2003)
§ 13-4-8-3 PURPOSE.
   The purpose of this ordinance is to:
   (A)   Minimize the congestion, inconvenience, visual impact, and other
adverse effects on the City's Public Rights-of-Way; and
   (B)   Obtain fair and reasonable compensation for the use and rental of the
Public Rights-of-Way; and
   (C)   To the extent permitted by state and federal law, exercise such other
powers as the City may have to protect the public health, safety and welfare.
(Ord. 2-2003)
§ 13-4-8-4 DEFINITIONS.
   The following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates
or requires a different meaning. When not inconsistent with the context, words
used in the present tense include the future tense; words in the plural number
include the singular number; words in the singular number include the plural
number; and, the masculine gender includes the feminine gender. The words
"shall" and "will" are mandatory when applied to any person, and "may" is
permissive. Unless otherwise specified, references to laws, ordinances or
regulations shall be interpreted broadly to cover government actions, however
nominated, and include laws, ordinances and regulations now in force or
hereinafter enacted or amended.
   AFFILIATE. A person that (directly or indirectly) owns or controls, is owned
or controlled by, or is under common ownership or control with, Grantee.
   CITY. The City of Albuquerque, or its successor government with municipal
powers, and all departments, divisions, and agencies thereof; except when used
to describe a geographic area, the term refers to the boundaries of the City of
Albuquerque, New Mexico, as they exist now or may exist in the future.
   CITY COUNCIL. The legislative body of the City, or its designee.
   CONSTRUCTION, OPERATION OR REPAIR. This and similar formulations refer to
the named actions interpreted broadly, encompassing, among other things,
installation, extension, maintenance, replacement of components, relocation,
undergrounding, grading, site preparation, adjusting, testing, make-ready,
excavation, and the management of the system and its operations.
   DIRECTOR OF PUBLIC WORKS or DIRECTOR. The Director of the Public Works
Department of the City or his or her designee charged with the administration
of the Public Rights-of-Way.
   FRANCHISE. An authorization granted by the City giving the Grantee the non-
exclusive right to rent and occupy the space, or use facilities upon, across,
beneath, or over Public Rights-of-Way in the City, to provide specified
services within a franchise area. A permit is not a franchise.
   FRANCHISE AREA. The area of the City that a Grantee is authorized to serve
by the terms of this Franchise or by operation of law and being that area
within the City limits, including areas that may be annexed from time to time.
   GRANTEE. PNM Gas Services, a division of Public Service Company of New
Mexico, or the entity recognized by the New Mexico Public Regulation Commission
as the utility responsible for the distribution of natural gas in the Franchise
Area.
   GROSS REVENUES.
   (1)   Any and all revenues, except Excluded Revenues, actually collected by
Grantee during each year during the term of this Franchise for:
      (a)   The distribution, transmission and sale of natural gas sold and
consumed within the corporate limits of the City under Grantee's approved
bundled or unbundled rate schedules as in effect from time to time,
      (b)   Transportation service provided by Grantee to a third-party
marketer for natural gas transported on the System to a delivery point within
the corporate limits of the City and for ultimate sale and consumption by end
users located therein; and
      (c)   Items that are necessary to the provision of natural gas and
transportation services described in (a) and (b) above, including revenues from
connecting, reading and testing meters, returned check fees, collection charges
and late fees.
   (2)   "Excluded Revenues" means amounts collected by Grantee for (i) the
sale or transportation of natural gas for use in the manufacture and production
of electricity for resale to the public, (ii) the sale of natural gas by any
third-party marketer, including an Affiliate, and (iii) payment of sales or
gross receipts taxes and franchise fees.
   (3)   In the event of a dispute between the City and Grantee regarding
whether a particular item is within the definition of "Gross Revenues,"
following written notice by one party to the other, the parties shall exercise
good faith efforts to resolve the dispute. If the parties fail to resolve the
dispute to their mutual satisfaction within 15 days of such notice, for a
period of 30 days after the expiration of the 15-day period, each party shall
have the right to require binding arbitration of the disputed item by giving
written notice thereof to the other party.
   (4)   Grantee and the City acknowledge that as of the date of this
Franchise, revenues from items described in subparagraphs (a) - (c) (excluding
Excluded Revenues) ("Bundled Revenues") are not collected by any Affiliate.
Unless the New Mexico Public Regulation Commission has approved Grantee's
unbundling of Bundled Revenues, any Bundled Revenues hereafter collected by an
Affiliate shall be included in the definition of Gross Revenues for purposes of
calculating the franchise fee under §
13-4-8-7(A).
   MAYOR.  The Mayor or the Mayor's designee.
   PERSON.  Any person, individual, firm, organization, corporation,
partnership, association, limited liability company, joint stock or other
company, business or other trust, public agency, school district, the State of
New Mexico, its political subdivisionsand/or instrumentalities, or any other
legal entity, but not the City.
   PUBLIC PROPERTY. Any property that is owned or under the control of the City
that is not a public right-of-way but may be dedicated for public use or
travel, including but not limited to, buildings, parks, structures such as
utility poles and light poles, or similar facilities or property located in a
public right-of-way or owned by or leased to the City.
   PUBLIC RIGHTS-OF-WAY. The surface of and the space above and below any
street, road, highway, freeway, bridge, lane, path, alley, court, sidewalk,
parkway, or right-of-way or easement primarily dedicated to travel, now or
hereafter existing within the City which may be properly used for the purpose
of installing, maintaining, and operating a system; and any other property that
a Grantee is entitled by state or federal law to use by virtue of the grant of
a franchise. Reference to the Public Rights-of-Way will also include Public
Property. To the extent that Grantee holds an easement granted by the City on
any Public Property that permits use and occupation of such property, the terms
and conditions of that easement shall govern and control the subject property.
   SYSTEM.  Gas mains, pipes, boxes, reducing and regulation stations,
laterals, conduits and connections, including service connections, together
with all of the necessary or useful appurtenances, for purposes of supplying
natural gas within the Franchise Area.
(Ord. 2-2003)
§ 13-4-8-5 GRANT OF FRANCHISE; LIMITS AND RESERVATIONS.
   (A)   Grant, term and effective date.
      (1)   A franchise is hereby granted to Grantee, subject to the conditions
set forth in this ordinance. This Franchise grants the right, subject to
conditions, to rent the Public Rights-of-Way and to construct, maintain,
operate and repair the system in, over, along and under the Public Rights-of-
Way within the franchise area commencing on the effective date of the franchise
through the date of expiration pursuant to §
13-4-8-10, unless terminated prior to that date in accordance with the
franchise or applicable law.
      (2)   The grant shall become effective 30 days after final passage of
this ordinance except as provided herein.
      (3)   The grant shall not become effective unless and until Grantee has:
         (a)    Filed an unconditional acceptance of the grant made by this
ordinance; and
         (b)    Made all payments and supplied all information that it is
required to supply, that are related to this Franchise, prior to or upon the
effective date of the Franchise.
   (B)   Relation to other provisions of law.
      (1)   The Franchise issued by the City is subject to, and Grantee must
exercise all rights granted to it in accordance with applicable law. This
Franchise does not confer rights upon the Grantee other than as expressly
provided herein. No privilege or power of eminent domain is bestowed upon
Grantee by this grant. The Franchise does not convey title, equitable or legal,
in the Public Rights-of-Way or public property. Any right granted to Grantee by
this franchise shall not be subdivided or subleased to any other person or
Affiliate. Nothing passes by implication under this Franchise.
      (2)   This Franchise and all rights granted under the Franchise are
subject to the exercise of the police and other powers the City now has or may
later obtain, and are further subject to the exercise of the City's rights as a
property owner under state and federal laws. Neither the granting of this
Franchise or any provision herein shall constitute a waiver or bar to the
exercise of any governmental right or power of the City, including without
limitation the right to grant additional franchises. Notwithstanding the
foregoing, this Franchise is a contract and the City may not, through the
exercise of police, governmental and other powers or otherwise, change, modify
or amend any terms or conditions of this Franchise except by an amendment
mutually agreed upon by City and Grantee, adopted pursuant to §
13-4-8-22.
      (3)   The Franchise shall be interpreted to convey limited rights and
interests only as to those City Rights-of-Way in which the City has an actual
interest and only to the extent and for the purposes set out in the Franchise.
The grant of the Franchise is not a warranty of title or interest in any Right-
of-Way; it does not provide the Grantee any interest in any particular location
within the Rights-of-Way. The issuance of the Franchise does not deprive the
City of any powers, rights or privileges it now has or may later acquire in the
future to use, perform work on, construct, maintain, operate or repair
facilities or systems in, or regulate the use of the Rights-of-Way.
      (4)   The Franchise issued and the franchise fee paid hereunder are not
in lieu of barricade fee, excavation fee, road restoration fee, drive pad fee,
sidewalk fee, valley gutter fee, curb cut fee, or any other fees or top soil
disturbance permit, electrical permit, or any other required permit,
authorization, fee, charge or tax that may be required of all franchisees in
the Public Right-of-Way. Without limiting the foregoing, the City, among other
things, does not waive the requirements of, or the Grantee's duty to obtain,
all applicable permits, and to comply with the conditions thereof; to comply
with zoning laws; or to comply with codes, ordinances and regulations governing
the construction of the system.
   (C)   Interpretation. The provisions of this Franchise shall be liberally
construed in favor of the public interest in order to effectuate its purposes.
   (D)   Affiliates must comply. If Grantee delegates any right under this
Franchise to an Affiliate, joint venture or partner of the Grantee involved in
the management or operation of the System in the City, Grantee shall require
that such entity agree to be subject to the limitations of, and comply with the
terms and conditions of the Franchise. The Grantee shall be fully liable for
any act or omission of any affiliate that is responsible in any manner for the
management or operation of the system that results in a breach of this
Franchise, as if the act or omission was the Grantee's act or omission.
   (E)   Relation to prior franchise. As of the effective date of this
Franchise, the rights granted under Albuquerque City Ordinance No. 17-1973 are
superseded and of no further force and effect. Subject to any applicable
statute of limitations, nothing in this paragraph shall be deemed to release
the Grantee from any liability arising under the prior franchise during the
time it was in effect.
   (F)   Validity. Both parties waive any claim or defense that any provision
of this Franchise is unenforceable or otherwise invalid or void. Neither party
waives the right to challenge the validity of any other applicable law.
   (G)   Effect of franchise acceptance. By accepting the Franchise, the
Grantee:
      (1)   Acknowledges and accepts the City's legal right to issue and
enforce the Franchise;
      (2)   Accepts and agrees to comply with each and every provision of this
Franchise; and
      (3)   Agrees that the Franchise was granted pursuant to processes and
procedures consistent with applicable law, and that it will not raise any claim
to the contrary after Grantee accepts and agrees to comply with this Franchise
in accordance with §
13-4-8-5(G)(2).
   (H)   Grantee bears its own costs. Unless otherwise expressly provided in
this Franchise, all acts that the Grantee is required to perform under this
Franchise must be performed at its own expense, including but not limited to
protection, support, disconnection, relocation or removal of its property when
required by the City.
   (I)   No waiver.
      (1)   The failure of the City, upon one or more occasions, to exercise a
right or to require compliance or performance under this Franchise or any other
applicable law shall not be deemed to constitute a waiver of such right or a
waiver of compliance or performance, unless such right has been specifically
waived in writing; no course of dealing between a Grantee and the City shall
operate as a waiver of any such rights.
      (2)   A waiver of one right shall not be deemed a waiver of any other
right, similar or dissimilar.
   (J)    No recourse. Without limiting such immunities as the City or other
persons may have under applicable law, neither Grantee nor City shall have any
monetary recourse whatsoever against the other party's officials, boards,
commissions, agents or employees for any loss, costs, expense or damage arising
out of any provision or requirement of this Franchise, unless the same shall be
caused by criminal acts or by willful or gross negligence.
   (K)   Public purpose. All of the requirements provided in this ordinance are
hereby declared to be for a public purpose and the health, safety, and welfare
of the general public and to ensure proper management of the Public Rights-of-
Way. Any member of the governing body or City official or employee charged with
the enforcement of this ordinance, acting for the City in the discharge of his
duties, shall not thereby render himself personally liable; and he is hereby
relieved from all personal liability for any damage that might accrue to
persons or property as a result of any act required or permitted in the
discharge of his said duties. Neither the City nor Grantee waives its rights to
seek all appropriate legal and equitable remedies as allowed by law upon
violation of the terms of this Franchise including seeking injunctive relief in
a court of competent jurisdiction. Such right to injunctive relief is expressly
reserved and all terms and provisions hereof shall be enforceable through
injunctive relief.
   (L)   No fixtures. As between the City and Grantee, all facilities and
equipment owned, operated, maintained or installed by Grantee within the
Rights-of-Way are, and at all times shall remain, the property of Grantee. No
such facilities or equipment shall be characterized as "fixtures," whether
during the term of this Franchise, upon its expiration or termination or
thereafter.
(Ord. 2-2003)
§ 13-4-8-6 SCOPE AND NATURE OF FRANCHISE.
   (A)   This Franchise authorizes Grantee to rent the Public Rights-of-Way and
to construct, maintain, operate and repair the System to provide natural gas
service within the City and to provide such other services as Grantee is
required to provide; and for that purpose to erect, install, construct, repair,
replace, reconstruct, maintain facilities appurtenant to such System in, on,
over, under, upon, across, and along those Public Rights-of-Way and public
places that the City may authorize Grantee to use.
   (B)   This Franchise does not convey rights other than as expressly
specified in this Franchise; no rights shall pass by implication.
   (C)   This Franchise shall not include, or be a substitute for:
      (1)   Complying with requirements for the privilege of transacting and
carrying on a business within the City;
      (2)   Permits, agreements or authorizations required in connection with
construction, operation or repair of the system, including by way of example
and not limitation, street cut permits or zoning variances; or
      (3)   Permits or agreements for occupying any other property of the City
or private entities to which access is not specifically granted by the
Franchise.
(Ord. 2-2003)
§ 13-4-8-7 FRANCHISE FEE.
   (A)   Payment to City. For and in full consideration of the granting of this
Franchise as described in §
13-4-8-5, Grantee shall pay the City a franchise fee in an amount equal to 3%
of Gross Revenues.
   (B)   Generally Accepted Accounting Principles apply. Records of system
revenues and expenses shall be kept in accordance with Generally Accepted
Accounting Principles (GAAP). An item which would be a revenue applying GAAP
principles shall be revenue for purposes of calculating the franchise fee.
   (C)   Not in lieu of any other assessments, tax or fee. The franchise fee is
in addition to all other fees, assessments, taxes or payments of general
applicability that the Grantee may be required to pay under any federal, state,
or local law.
   (D)   Payments. Commencing the month following the month this Franchise
becomes effective, the fee shall be paid monthly by the 25th day of each month;
such fee shall be for gross revenues received by the Grantee for the preceding
month during the term of this Franchise. The Grantee shall furnish to the City
with each payment of compensation required by this section, a detailed written
statement showing the amount of gross revenue received by the Grantee within
the City limit, broken out by Grantee's revenue accounts, for the period
covered by the payment. Within such reasonable time as he/she may require, the
Treasurer shall determine the accuracy of the amounts reported. However,
neither payment of the fee nor failure to make such investigation shall stop
the City in any way or prevent subsequent investigation, collection or return
of any amount properly due and not barred by any applicable statute of
limitations.
   (E)   No accord or satisfaction. No acceptance of any payment by the City
shall be construed as a release or an accord and satisfaction of any claim the
City may have for further or additional sums payable as a franchise fee or for
the performance of any other obligation of the Grantee.
   (F)   Payment records.  The City may, from time to time, and upon reasonable
advance written notice, inspect and audit, at its own cost, any and all books
and records to determine whether gross revenues and franchise fees have been
accurately computed and paid. In the event the City reviews the Grantee's
franchise fee payments, and finds that the Grantee has underpaid the fee owed
for any year, Grantee will become immediately responsible for such payment plus
interest, retroactive to the date such payment originally was due, equal to the
current prime rate published in the Wall Street Journal. In the event that City
or Grantee finds that Grantee has overpaid the fee paid for any year, City will
become immediately responsible for refunding to Grantee the overpayment amount,
plus interest at the rate specified above, retroactive to the date such
overpayment was made.
(Ord. 2-2003)
§ 13-4-8-8 NO ASSIGNMENT WITHOUT PRIOR APPROVAL.
   (A)   No assignment of this Franchise shall occur unless prior written
request is made by the Grantee to City and the City's prior written consent is
obtained, which consent will not be unreasonably withheld; provided, however,
that Grantee may freely assign this Franchise to any third party (including an
Affiliate) in connection with such third-party's purchase or other acquisition
of all or substantially all of the System. Grantee shall provide City with
notice prior to such assignment. If City fails to respond to Grantee's written
request for approval of an assignment within 30 days of such request being
made, approval shall be deemed given. Grantee shall submit all information
reasonably requested by the City relating to the technical, financial, and
operational qualifications of any transferee. A request for a transfer must be
submitted at least 30 days prior to the date the transaction is scheduled to be
consummated.
   (B)   Notwithstanding any other provision of this Franchise, pledges in
trust or mortgages of the assets of a system to secure the construction,
operation, or repair of the System may be made without application and without
City's prior consent.
(Ord. 2-2003)
§ 13-4-8-9 FRANCHISE NON-EXCLUSIVE.
   This Franchise is not exclusive and cannot prevent the City from issuing
other franchises or authorizations, or prevent the City from itself
constructing, operating, or repairing its own system, with or without a
franchise.
(Ord. 2-2003)
§ 13-4-8-10 FRANCHISE TERM.
   This Franchise shall be for a term of ten years.
(Ord. 2-2003)
§ 13-4-8-11 EXERCISE OF RIGHTS UNDER A FRANCHISE; MINIMUM CONDITIONS ON USE OF
PROPERTY.
   (A)   Joint use. Upon request by the City and to the extent Grantee legally
can and safely do so, pursuant to its leases and agreements with other persons
using the Right-of-Way, Grantee may in its reasonable discretion grant joint
use of easements or private rights-of-way which it now, or in the future, has
an interest in, to the City for purposes, including but not limited to parks,
drainage facilities, bikeways, traffic conduits, mass transit corridors,
sanitary sewer lines, pedestrian area parking, open spaces, and electric,
cable, natural gas, and water service distribution, provided that the Grantee
shall not be required to make such an offer in any circumstance where such
offer would unreasonably interfere with the Grantee's use of the easements or
private rights-of-way. If the City's joint use is accepted by the Grantee, then
(i) any improvements deemed appropriate by the City shall be made by the City
at its sole expense, and (ii) City shall be responsible for any additional fees
and other costs resulting from granting the City such joint use of the
easements or rights-of-way.
   (B)   Budgeting. To facilitate the City's annual budget process, on or
before the 1st of November and each succeeding 1st of November thereafter
during the term of this Franchise, the Grantee will provide the City with an
estimate of the gross revenue and resultant fee for the following calendar
year.
   (C)   All work subject to City laws and regulations. The construction,
maintenance, operation, and repair of the System shall be performed in
compliance with all applicable laws, ordinances, resolutions, departmental
rules and regulations affecting such System. By way of example, and not
limitation, this includes
Chapter 14 of the Albuquerque Code of Ordinance (the City's Zoning Ordinance);
ordinances, regulations and policies to preserve or protect the public safety;
construction standards; regulations for providing notice to persons that may be
affected by system construction; and written directives issued pursuant to and
for implementation of City ordinances governing the time, place and manner in
which Facilities may be installed in the Public Rights-of-Way or on other
property, provided, however, that such written directives have been provided to
Grantee. Persons engaged in the construction, operation, or repair of systems
shall exercise reasonable care in the performance of all their activities and
shall use commonly accepted industry methods and devices for preventing
failures and accidents that are likely to cause damage, injury, or nuisance to
the public or to property.
   (D)   Permits. Except in an emergency where there is an immediate threat to
public health, safety or welfare, new construction, maintenance, operation, or
repair of the system shall not commence until all required permits have been
obtained from the proper City officials and all required fees have been paid.
All work performed will be performed in strict accordance with the conditions
of the permit. Upon order of the City, any work and/or construction undertaken
that is not completed in compliance with the City's requirements, or which is
installed without obtaining necessary permits and approvals shall be removed in
accordance with the reasonable timeline set forth by the City, if Grantee fails
to cure the non-compliance after 15 days written notice.
   (E)   Safety codes. Without limiting the foregoing, the construction,
maintenance, operation and repair of the system shall be in accordance with the
requirements of all applicable laws, ordinances, rules, regulations of the
state and of the City affecting natural gas installations and buildings, now or
hereafter in effect, provided that in the event of any conflict between State
and City laws, ordinances, rules and regulations, those of the State shall
control. All structures, lines, equipment, and connections in, over, under, and
upon the streets shall at all times be kept and maintained in a safe, suitable,
substantial condition, and in good order and repair.
   (F)   Maps. Grantee in its sole discretion may file maps, drawings, or
computer sketches with the director showing the location of any construction or
extension of Grantee's System and for all permits associated with maintenance
of Grantee's System in the Rights-of-Way. For multi-facility Public Rights-of-
Way, such maps, drawings, or computer sketches shall show overall size,
material, and configuration of the Rights-of-Way.
   (G)   Installations, excavations, and restorations. Grantee shall have the
right to excavate in, occupy, and use any and all Public Rights-of-Way for the
purpose of installing, erecting, constructing, repairing, maintaining,
removing, relocating, and operating its system after obtaining any and all
appropriate permits from the City, provided, however, that:
      (1)   The Grantee shall not hereafter place any of its facilities on,
over, under, or within any City park, duly designated as such by the City, but
nothing herein contained shall preclude the City from granting a revocable
permit therefore;
      (2)   The Grantee shall not place any of its facilities on, over, or
within the median portion of any boulevard or parkway, except for perpendicular
crossings, without first having obtained the written permission of the City
(this clause shall not limit Grantee in any way from maintaining and replacing
any facilities located on, over or within such medians prior to the granting of
this Franchise);
      (3)   Where appropriate and as may be required by the City through any
permitting process, installation, excavations, and restorations affecting
street and/or lane closures shall be approved by the City in accordance with
then-current City ordinances;
      (4)   The City may require a Grantee to coordinate its work with work
performed by others in the Public Rights-of-Way as provided in such ordinances;
      (5)   The Grantee shall use reasonable efforts in its discretion to
employ trenchless technology in the placement of its facilities where
technically feasible; and
      (6)   Interference with others' use of the Public Rights-of-Way including
others that may be installing systems must be minimized. The City encourages a
person using the Public Rights-of-Way to cooperate with others through joint
trenching and other arrangements to minimize adverse impacts on the Public
Rights-of-Way.
   (H)   Work involving excavations; notice. Except in an emergency, not less
than two working days prior to the commencement of any work by the Grantee
which involves excavation in any Public Rights-of-Way, the Grantee shall notify
the director through the barricade and excavation permit process, including
payment of any and all fees of general applicability. Grantee shall comply with
the street excavation ordinance as it now exists or may exist in the future.
   (I)   Clean-up and restoration. After any excavation shall be made and after
work is completed, the Grantee, at Grantee's expense, shall as soon as
practicable but not longer than three days, weather permitting, remove all
surplus material, and Grantee shall restore the portion of the Public Rights-
of-Way to the condition that at least meets the pre-excavation condition of
such rights-of-way, or as may otherwise be required by permit, subject to
inspection by the director. If the Grantee fails to restore promptly the
affected property in accordance with the permit, including reseeding, to the
City's satisfaction, then following written notice to Grantee, and reasonable
opportunity to cure, the City may make the restoration in a manner satisfactory
to City, and all costs incurred for such restoration, whether done with City
work forces and equipment or otherwise shall be paid by the Grantee, including
the cost of any inspectors the City may assign to the project.
   (J)   Maintaining facilities in good condition. Grantee shall be responsible
for the maintenance of its own equipment, facilities, and appurtenances placed
upon, over, or under the Public Right-of-Way, including the removal of all
graffiti there from. If after notice from the City that any such graffiti has
not been removed, it will be removed by the City at Grantee's sole cost.
    (K)   Persons with disabilities. Grantee shall ensure its facilities in
Public Rights-of-Way are located and constructed in compliance with any
applicable provisions of the Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA). In the
event that the City notifies the Grantee that the City reasonably believes that
Grantee's facilities fail to comply with the ADA in some respect, and the City
and Grantee cannot agree that a problem exists, such dispute shall be submitted
to non-binding mediation. If the parties fail to resolve such dispute through
mediation, the parties shall submit the dispute to binding arbitration.
   (L)   Utility coordinating committee.  Execution of this Franchise requires
Grantee to become a member of a local utility coordinating committee, or
Grantee may provide a similar service which service would be governed by state
law. If the Grantee elects to become a member of the local utility coordinating
committee, the Grantee further agrees to participate in such organization(s)
and abide by their articles of incorporation, by-laws, and other requirements.
   (M)   Publicizing proposed construction work.
      (1)   Grantee will publicize any substantial rebuild or upgrade of its
system in each affected neighborhood at least one week before commencing that
work by providing written notice to the City and by notifying those persons
whose property is within 300 feet of the work in one of the following ways:
         (a)   Telephone;
         (b)   In person;
         (c)   By mail;
         (d)   By distributing flyers to residences; or
         (e)   By publication in local newspapers.
      (2)   Apart from any substantial rebuild or upgrade, any construction
will be publicized in accordance with applicable notice requirements.
      (3)   For the purposes of this section, the term "substantial rebuild or
upgrade" means the planned replacement or addition of facilities affecting:
         (a)   More than 10% of the System; or
         (b)   Involving more than ten miles of plant.
      (4)   During the period of any system initial build or rebuild, a Grantee
will maintain a file open for public inspection showing its timetable for
constructing the system by area of the City.
   (N)   System maintenance. Scheduled maintenance will be performed to
minimize the effect on Public Rights-of-Way.
   (O)   Relocation.
      (1)   Grantee shall, by a time specified by the City, protect, support,
temporarily disconnect, relocate, or remove any of its property when requested
by the City for reasons directly related to the City's public works projects,
including for reason of traffic conditions; public safety; public right-of-way
construction and repair (including regrading, resurfacing or widening); public
right-of-way vacation; construction, installation or repair of sewers, drains,
water pipes, power lines, signal lines, tracks, or any other type of
government-owned system or utility, public work, public facility, or
improvement; or for any other related purpose where the foregoing work would be
aided by the removal or relocation of the system. Collectively, such matters
are referred to below as the "public work."
      (2)   The City shall provide written notice describing where the public
work is to be performed at least four weeks prior to the deadline by which a
Grantee must protect, support, temporarily disconnect, relocate or remove its
facilities; provided that, in an emergency, or where a system creates or is
contributing to an imminent danger to health, safety, welfare, or property,
notice reasonable under the circumstances may be given and Grantee shall
exercise diligent efforts to immediately protect, support, temporarily
disconnect, relocate or remove its facilities. A public emergency shall be any
condition which, in the opinion of any City official, poses an immediate threat
to the lives or property of the citizens of City, caused by any natural or man-
made disaster, including, but not limited to, storms, floods, fire, accidents,
explosions, major water main breaks, hazardous materials spills, etc. Grantee
shall be responsible for any reasonable costs incurred by the City arising from
Grantee's unreasonable delay in responding to an emergency or other instance
where the System is contributing to an imminent danger to health, safety,
welfare or property. Any City response shall comply with all federal, state and
regulatory safety standards and requirements.
      (3)   Grantee shall in accordance with any applicable permits
reconstruct, replace, or restore any street, alley, or public way or place in a
timely fashion and any water, sewer, sanitary sewer, storm drainage, traffic
signalization facilities, or other facility of the City disturbed by the
Grantee, without cost to the City, to a condition acceptable to the City
consistent with reasonable standards of safety and appearance. Any facility so
disturbed by the Grantee shall be reconstructed, replaced, or restored only
under the supervision of City personnel.
      (4)   Subject to the provisions of this section and upon notice to the
City, the Grantee may remove or relocate facilities maintained by the Grantee
on its own initiative.
      (5)   Grantee, at its own expense, shall relocate its facilities in
accordance with paragraph (O); provided, however, that Grantee shall not be
responsible for relocation costs:
         (a)   Where by City application, specific monies can be and are
obtained from federal or state sources for relocation costs, provided that no
City matching funds would be required, the scope of the City project would not
be diminished, and the City would not be required to spend additional monies;
         (b)   If the specific excavation, construction, or regrading is done
to accommodate the actions or plans of private individuals or entities who are
developing or intend to develop property within the Franchise Area, then such
private individuals or entities shall be responsible for the relocation costs,
provided that in no event shall the City be liable for such relocation costs;
or
         (c)   State or federal law requires City to pay for such relocation.
   (P)   Public works and improvements.
      (1)   Whenever the City shall excavate or perform any work in any present
and/or future public rights-of-way, or shall contract for such excavation or
work, where such excavation or work may disturb but not require removal or
relocation of Grantee's facilities, the City shall notify the Grantee
sufficiently in advance of such contemplated excavation or work to enable the
Grantee to take such measures as may be deemed necessary to protect and support
such facilities from damage and possible inconvenience or injury to the public
or the City's Public Rights-of-Way. If Grantee cannot take such measures,
Grantee shall be required to relocate its facilities in accordance with
subparagraph (O) of this Section. In either case, Grantee upon request, shall
furnish field markings to the City or contractor, as the case may be, at no
cost to the City, showing the location of all its facilities in the area
involved in such proposed excavation or other work in accordance with
applicable standards and requirements of state law.
      (2)   Whenever Grantee shall excavate or perform any work in any present
and/or future Public Rights-of-Way of the City, or shall contract for such
excavation or work, where such excavation or work may disturb but not require
removal or relocation of City facilities, Grantee shall notify the City
sufficiently in advance of such contemplated excavation or work to enable City
to take such measures as may be deemed necessary to protect and support such
facilities from damage and possible inconvenience or injury to the public or
Public Rights-of-Way. If City cannot take such measures, the Grantee shall be
required to relocate its facilities in accordance with this Section. The City
shall furnish field markings of City-owned facilities at no cost to Grantee in
accordance with applicable standards and requirements of state law.
   (Q)   Moving of buildings. Whenever it becomes necessary to temporarily
rearrange, remove, lower, or raise any facilities or plant of the Grantee
within a Right-of-Way to permit the passage of any building, machinery, or
other object, Grantee shall perform such rearrangement upon the receipt of
written notice from the person or persons desiring to move said building,
machinery, or other objects. The written notice shall detail the route of
movement of the building, machinery, or other object. The costs incurred by the
Grantee in making such rearrangements of its facilities will be borne,
excepting the City, by the person or persons seeking such rearrangement, unless
the facility is placed or maintained in violation of the applicable rules of
any local, state, or federal regulatory agency and thereby interferes with the
movement.
   (R)   Access to mapping information. The City may upon reasonable request
access existing maps, including electronic maps, if available, of Grantee
relating to the System within the Rights-of-Way that are maintained in its
files. Such access shall be at Grantee's offices, and Grantee shall furnish
hard copies of maps requested by City. Any maps furnished under this provision
shall be returned to Grantee upon completion of the project. The City shall not
divulge the contents of any maps and the parties agree that the maps shall not
be part of the public domain. Grantee may excise proprietary information so
long as the location and dimension of any facilities, and their character (e.g.
"pipe," "equipment cabinet") are clearly shown.
   (S)   Certain utility contracts. Within 90 days of the end of each calendar
year quarter during the term of this Franchise, Grantee shall file with the
city clerk a list of all contracts which Grantee has entered into during such
quarter with any public utility companies, including any telecommunications and
cable providers, whereby Grantee has granted to such contracting party any
right to use the Right-of-Way for the placement of any property, equipment or
facilities. Notwithstanding the foregoing, Grantee shall have no obligation
hereunder to provide any information on such list, including but not limited to
the identity of the contracting party, to the extent disclosure of such
information is limited by any confidentiality agreement, or applicable law or
regulation.
(Ord. 2-2003)
§ 13-4-8-12 COSTS BORNE BY GRANTEE; BILLS FOR COSTS.
   Unless otherwise specifically stated in this Franchise, all acts which
Grantee is required to perform as set out in §
13-4-8-11 under this Franchise or applicable law must be performed at Grantee's
expense.
(Ord. 2-2003)
§ 13-4-8-13 BOOKS AND RECORDS.
   (A)   Right to inspect and copy. The City shall have the right to inspect
and copy books and records related to compliance with the provisions of this
Franchise as may be determined to be relevant by any outside auditor in
accordance with generally accepted accounting principles ("Books and Records").
Grantee is responsible for maintaining control over such books, whether created
by Grantee, or by those acting on its behalf. It is responsible for producing
these records upon the City's request for the City's inspection and copying and
in accordance with subsection (B) of this §
13-4-8-13. The records that Grantee must produce shall include, but are not
limited to revenue records, and other records related to compliance with any
provision of this Franchise. Books and Records must be maintained for a period
of five (5) years and in accordance with applicable regulatory requirements.
The phrase "Books and Records" shall be read expansively to include information
in whatever format stored. The City shall be responsible for copying costs.
   (B)   Production to City. Books and Records requested shall be produced to
the City by a time and at a location in the City mutually agreeable to the
parties.
   (C)   Reports. Grantee shall submit a revenue report fully audited or
certified by an officer Grantee from the previous calendar year for the system,
and a certified statement setting forth the computation of gross revenues used
to calculate the franchise fee for the preceding year and a detailed
explanation of the method of computation showing (1) gross revenues by
category; and (2) what, if any, deductions were made from gross revenues in
calculating the franchise fee and the amount of each deduction.
   (D)   Exemptions. The director may temporarily exempt Grantee from its
obligations under this Section if the director determines that the requirement
would be unduly burdensome or unnecessary, and that City may be adequately
protected in some other manner.
   (E)   Privacy.  Grantee shall be responsible for redacting data that
applicable law prevents it from providing to the City. Nothing in this section
shall be read to require Grantee to violate state or federal privacy laws.
(Ord. 2-2003)
§ 13-4-8-14 PROCEDURES FOR PAYING FRANCHISE FEES.
   (A)   The franchise fee paid pursuant to Section 7 shall be paid monthly.
Payment for each month shall be made to the City not later than 30 days after
the end of each calendar month.
   (B)   Grantee shall file with the City within 30 days of the end of each
calendar month a statement showing gross revenues during the preceding month.
   (C)   No acceptance by the City of any payment shall be construed as an
accord that the amount paid is in fact the correct amount, nor shall such
acceptance of such payment be construed as a release of any claim the City may
have for additional sums payable or otherwise related to that payment.
   (D)   In the event that a fee payment is not received by the City on or
before the due date set forth in this section or in a franchise, or the fee
owed is not fully paid, the person subject to the fee will be charged interest
on the outstanding amount owed from the due date at an interest rate equal to
the current prime rate published in the Wall Street Journal.
   (E)   Within 90 days of the date Grantee ceases operations under this
Franchise (whether because of franchise termination, transfer, bankruptcy or
for any other reason), the Grantee (or its successor in interest) shall: (a)
make a final franchise fee payment, covering the period from the end of prior
calendar month to date the Grantee ceased operations; and (b) file a final
statement of gross revenues covering the period from the beginning of the
calendar year in which the operations ceased to the date operations ceased. The
statement shall contain the information and be certified as required above.
(Ord. 2-2003)
§ 13-4-8-15 PROTECTION OF CITY AND RESIDENTS: INDEMNITY.
   (A)   Grantee releases City from and against any and all liability and
responsibility in or arising out of the construction, maintenance, operation,
or repair of the system, but only to the extent the liability or responsibility
is the result of an act of Grantee or any of its agents. Grantee agrees not to
sue or seek any money or damages from City to the extent the liability or
responsibility is the result of an act of Grantee or any of its agents.
   (B)   Grantee shall indemnify and hold harmless City, its trustees, elected
and appointed officers, agents, and employees, from and against any and all
claims, demands, or causes of action of any kind or nature, and the resulting
losses, costs, expenses, reasonable attorneys' fees, liabilities, damages,
orders, judgments, or decrees sustained by City or any third party arising out
of, or by reason of, or resulting from or of the negligent acts, errors, or
omissions of Grantee, or its agents, independent contractors or employees
related to or in any way arising out of the construction, maintenance,
operation or repair of the System pursuant to this Franchise.
§ 13-4-8-16 PROTECTION OF CITY AND RESIDENTS: INSURANCE.
   (A)   General conditions. Grantee shall procure and maintain in full force
and effect during the life of this Franchise, such insurance as is required
herein. Policies of insurance shall be written by companies authorized to write
such insurance in New Mexico, and they shall be in a form satisfactory to City.
Grantee shall furnish City a minimum of seven copies of certificates of
required insurances (or copies of insurance policies if City calls for them).
All certificates of insurance (or policies) shall provide that 30 days' written
notice be given to the Director, Risk Management Department, City of
Albuquerque, Box 470, Albuquerque, New Mexico 87103, before a policy is
cancelled or materially changed. Various types of required insurance may be
written in one or more policies. With respect to all coverages required other
than workers' compensation, the City shall be a named additional insured. All
coverages shall be primary with respect to operations provided. The
certificates of insurance and endorsements for each policy shall be signed by a
person authorized by that insurer to bind coverage on its behalf. The City
reserves the right to require complete, certified copies of all required
insurance policies at any time. Because Grantee has facilities in the Public
Rights-of-Way as of the effective date of this Franchise, the certificate shall
be filed within 60 days of the effective date of this Article, annually
thereafter, and whenever there is any change in coverage.
   (B)   No work without insurance.  Grantee (or those acting on its behalf)
shall not commence construction, maintenance, operation or repair of the system
without first obtaining insurance in amounts and of a type satisfactory to
City. The required insurance must be obtained and maintained for the entire
period Grantee has facilities in the Public Rights-of-Way. If Grantee, its
contractors, or subcontractors do not have the required insurance, City may
order such persons to stop operations until the insurance is obtained and
approved.
   (C)   Work of subcontractors. If any part of the construction, maintenance,
operation or repair of the system is subcontracted, Grantee shall:
      (1)   Include any and all subcontractors in its insurance policies; or
      (2)   Require the subcontractor to secure insurance to protect itself
against all hazards enumerated herein which are not covered by Grantee's
policies.
   (D)   Approval of insurance. Neither approval nor failure to disapprove
certificates, policies or the insurance by City shall relieve Grantee or any
subcontractor of full responsibility to maintain the required insurance in full
force and effect.
   (E)   Commercial general liability insurance including automobile.
      (1)   Grantee shall procure and maintain during the life of this
Franchise a comprehensive commercial general liability and automobile liability
insurance policy with liability limits in amounts not less than $1,000,000
combined single limit of liability for bodily injury, including death, and
property damage in any one occurrence and in the aggregate. Said policies or
insurance must include coverage for all operations performed in the City by
Grantee, including, but not limited to, coverage for collapse (C), explosion
(X), and underground (U) liability coverage, coverage for the user of all
owned, non-owned, hired automobiles, vehicles, and other equipment both on and
off work, and contractual liability coverage which shall specifically insure
the indemnification provisions of this ordinance and any franchise.
   (F)   Workers' compensation insurance. Grantee shall comply with the
provisions of the Workers' Compensation Act, the Subsequent Injury Act, and the
New Mexico Occupational Disease Disablement Law. Grantee shall procure and
maintain during the life of this Franchise, complete workers' and employer's
liability insurance in accordance with New Mexico law and regulations. Such
insurance shall include coverage permitted under Section 52-1-10 NMSA 1978, for
safety devices. With respect to workers' compensation insurance, if Grantee
elects to be self-insured, it shall comply with the applicable requirements of
law. If any portion of the construction, operation or repair of the system is
to be subcontracted, Grantee shall require the subcontractor similarly to
provide such coverage (or qualify as a self insured) for all latter's employees
to be engaged in such work. Grantee shall save harmless City, its officers,
agents and employees from any claims or actions occasioned by failure of
Grantee to comply with the provisions of this subparagraph. It is agreed that
with respect to all workers' compensation insurance, the Grantee and its
insurer shall waive any right of subrogation it may acquire against the City,
its officers, agents and employees by reason of any payment made on account of
injury, including death resulting there from, sustained by any employee arising
out of the performance of a franchise.
   (G)   Property insurance. If the construction, maintenance, operation or
repair of the system includes bridge, culvert or channel lining work (referred
to below collectively as "channel work"), Grantee shall procure and maintain
during the life of such work until the work is inspected and declared
acceptable, property insurance upon the entire channel work to the full
insurable value thereof. Such insurance shall include the interest of City,
Grantee, and subcontractor and shall be on the "all risk" basis, specifically
including the perils of fire, extended coverage, theft, vandalism, malicious
mischief, flood and earthquake. The deductible for the flood and earthquake
coverage shall not be greater than 20% of the insurable value of the work,
except that it shall not be less than $25,000.
   (H)   Alterations in limits. The City may require Grantee to increase its
insurance limits, or obtain additional types of insurance should the City
determine that there are increased risks to the City or its citizens, by such
time as may be specified by the City.
   (I)   Ratings. Grantee's insurer shall have an "A" policyholder's rating and
a financial rating of at least Class XI in accordance with the most current
Best's rating, unless specifically waived in writing by the Risk Manager of the
City.
   (J)   No contribution. Any insurance or self-insurance maintained by the
City shall be in excess of the Grantee's insurance and shall not contribute
with it.
   (K)   Insurance as required by §
13-4-8-16 may be satisfied by equivalent coverage provided by excess liability
insurance. Such excess liability insurance may be excess of self-insured
retention amounts usually maintained by Grantee in the conduct of its business.
(Ord. 2-2003)
§ 13-4-8-17 ENFORCEMENT AND REMEDIES: REVOCATION.
   (A)   Right to terminate; generally. The City may terminate this Franchise
if Grantee commits a material breach of this Franchise and Grantee fails to
cure such material breach within 30 days of notice from the Director describing
the alleged material breach. The term "material breach" means any breach whose
cumulative effect, results in damages to the City in excess of $300,000.
   (B)   Automatic termination. The City may terminate this Franchise upon
notice and without providing Grantee an opportunity to cure where (1) Grantee
voluntarily stops providing utility gas service within the Franchise Area; or
(2) Grantee makes assignment of this Franchise without the prior consent of the
City as required by §
13-4-8-8.
   (C)   Termination in the event of bankruptcy. This Franchise will terminate
automatically by force of law 120 calendar days after an assignment for the
benefit of creditors or the appointment of a receiver or trustee to take over
the business of Grantee, whether in a receivership, reorganization, bankruptcy
assignment for the benefit of creditors, or other action or proceeding.
However, the Franchise may be reinstated within that 120 day period, if: (1)
such assignment, receivership or trusteeship has been vacated; or (2) such
assignee, receiver or trustee has fully complied with the terms and conditions
of this Franchise, and has executed an agreement, approved by any court having
jurisdiction, assuming and agreeing to be bound by the terms and conditions of
this Franchise.
   (D)   Effect of termination or forfeiture. Upon termination or forfeiture of
this Franchise, whether by action of the City as provided above, or by passage
of time, the City may do one or a combination of the following:
      (1)   Grantee may be required to continue to provide service for a
reasonable period to assure an orderly transition of service from the Grantee
to another person;
      (2)   The City may require Grantee to remove all or a portion of its
facilities and equipment at Grantee's expense, subject to any right Grantee may
have to abandon property in place. If Grantee fails to remove its property
within a reasonable period of time, the City may have the removal done at
Grantee's expense.
   (E)   In addition to the rights under this Section, the City, upon any
termination, may, at its sole discretion, direct the Grantee to remove, within
180 days of notice to Grantee and at the Grantee's sole cost and expense, any
or all of the facilities from all Public Rights-of-Way within the City, subject
to the following:
      (1)   The City may determine that removal of facilities is not necessary;
      (2)   In removing any part of the facilities, Grantee shall refill and
compact, at its own expense, any excavation that shall be made by it and shall
leave all Public Rights-of-Way in as good a condition as that prevailing prior
to the Grantee's removal of the facilities;
      (3)   The City shall have the right to inspect and approve the conditions
of Public Rights-of-way after removal has occurred;
      (4)   The removal shall commence within 30 days of Grantee's receipt from
the City of notice to remove the facilities and terminate this Franchise
pursuant to this § 13-4-8-17; and
      (5)   Grantee shall be responsible for all necessary removals of the
facilities and maintenance of the street area in the same manner and degree as
if the facilities were in active use, and Grantee shall retain all liability
associated with such removals.
   Nothing herein shall cause the City to incur any costs related to the
removal of Grantee's facilities.
   (F)   Notwithstanding anything to the contrary in this § 13-4-8-17, any
termination of this Franchise or removal of facilities shall be subject to, and
consistent with, any federal or state law applicable to Grantee, or Grantee's
operations or facilities, including any rule, regulation or order of any
federal or state agency having jurisdiction over Grantee, its operations or
facilities.
(Ord. 2-2003)
§ 13-4-8-18 ENFORCEMENT AND REMEDIES: RELATIONSHIP.
   Remedies provided for under this Franchise shall be cumulative and are in
addition to all other remedies that may be available at law or equity. Recovery
by the City of any amounts under insurance does not limit Grantee's duty to
indemnify the City or relieve Grantee of its franchise obligations, limit the
amounts owed to the City, or prevent the City from revoking this Franchise or
imposing penalties as provided hereby.
(Ord. 2-2003)
§ 13-4-8-19 CAPTIONS.
   The captions to sections throughout this Franchise are intended solely to
facilitate reading and reference to the sections and provisions of this
Franchise. Such captions shall not affect the meaning or interpretation of this
Franchise.
(Ord. 2-2003)
§ 13-4-8-20 CALCULATION OF TIME.
   Unless otherwise indicated, when the performance or doing of any act, duty,
matter, or payment is required under this Franchise, and a period of time or
duration for the fulfillment of doing thereof is prescribed and is fixed
herein, the time shall be computed so as to exclude the first and include the
last day of the prescribed or fixed period of time.
(Ord. 2-2003)
§ 13-4-8-21 DISCRIMINATION PROHIBITED.
   Grantee shall not discriminate among persons or the City or take any
retaliatory action against a person or the City because of that person's
exercise of any right it may have under federal, state, or local law.
(Ord. 2-2003)
§ 13-4-8-22 AMENDMENTS.
   The City and Grantee may by mutual agreement amend any provision of this
Franchise in accordance with state law.
(Ord. 2-2003)
§ 13-4-8-23 COMPLIANCE WITH LAWS; CONFLICTS.
   The installation, construction, operation and maintenance of the system and
the conduct of the Grantee's business shall comply with all current federal,
state and City laws, regulations and ordinances applicable thereto.
Notwithstanding anything to the contrary in this Franchise, in the event of any
conflict between federal or state laws, rules and regulations and local laws,
ordinances (including this Franchise), resolutions, departmental rules and
regulations; federal and state laws, rules and regulations shall control.
(Ord. 2-2003)
§ 13-4-8-24 ACCEPTANCE.
   If Grantee should fail to file a written acceptance of this Franchise as
required herein, the Grantee shall acquire no rights, privileges or authority
under this Franchise.
(Ord. 2-2003)
§ 13-4-8-25 PUBLICATION COSTS.
   Grantee shall pay the cost of publication of this Franchise upon Grantee's
acceptance of the Franchise. The Grantee shall acquire no rights, privileges or
authority under this Franchise until this payment is made.
(Ord. 2-2003)
PART 9: ALBUQUERQUE-BERNALILLO COUNTY WATER UTILITY AUTHORITY FRANCHISE
§ 13-4-9-1 SHORT TITLE.
   Sections 13-4-9-1 et seq. may be cited as the Albuquerque-Bernalillo County
Water Utility Authority Franchise Ordinance.
(Ord. 27-2006)
§ 13-4-9-2 LEGISLATIVE FINDINGS.
   The Council finds it necessary to grant a franchise to the Albuquerque-
Bernalillo County Water Utility Authority to develop, lay, re-lay, construct,
maintain, operate and remove pipes, systems, works, lift stations, manholes,
storage tanks, reservoirs, appliances, and other structures and facilities, on,
over, under, along and across all rights-of-way in or owned by the City for the
purpose of providing water and wastewater services all as more specifically set
out below.
(Ord. 27-2006)
§ 13-4-9-3 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of §§
13-4-9-1 et seq., the following terms, phrases, words and their derivations
shall have the meaning given in this section. When not inconsistent with the
context, words used in the present tense include the future tense, words in the
plural number include the singular number, and words in the singular number
include the plural number. The word "shall" is mandatory and "may" is
permissive. Words not defined in this section shall be given their common and
ordinary meaning.
   AUTHORITY. The Albuquerque-Bernalillo County Water Utility Authority as
established by Section 72-1-10 NMSA 1978 (2003 Supp.) (as amended Laws 2005,
Chapter 345) or successor statute.
   CITY. The City of Albuquerque, a municipal corporation of the State of New
Mexico.
   COUNCIL. The legislative body of the City of Albuquerque, sometimes referred
to as "City Council".
   DIRECTOR. The Director of the Department of Municipal Development of the
City of Albuquerque or his or her designee.
   FACILITIES. Are and include, but are not limited to, plant, works, systems,
improvements and equipment of the Authority such as pipes, hydrants, wells,
systems, lift stations, manholes, tanks, reservoirs, underground links, meters,
pumping equipment and sewer mains.
   FRANCHISE. The authorization granted herein to use rights-of-way to
construct, operate, and maintain water and wastewater systems in the City or
any portion or portions thereof.
   GROSS REVENUE. Includes any and all revenue received by the Authority from
the sale of water or provision of wastewater to its customers within the limits
of the City, as those limits may be extended from time to time including the
value of the water and wastewater served and consumed by the Authority in the
City. GROSS REVENUE shall not include amounts received by the Authority as a
tax, fee or assessment of general applicability collected by the Authority for
pass-through to another governmental agency, reimbursements from third parties
for expenses, bad debts written off, revenue received by the Authority upon
which the City already collects a franchise fee from another utility, utility
expansion charges or to refunds or credits. The gross revenue shall be measured
and monitored periodically as set out below.
   LINE EXTENSION. Any extension of distribution, transmission or collection
facilities into areas within the boundaries of the City not then served by the
Authority at the time of the extension.
   MAYOR. The Mayor of the City of Albuquerque or his/her designated
representative.
   MEMORANDUM OF UNDERSTANDING. That Memorandum of Understanding dated January
21,  2004, as amended April 7, 2004, and any subsequent amendments thereto,
between the City, the County of Bernalillo and the Authority and entered into
for the purpose, among other things, of adopting certain City policies and
procedures and recognizing the City's continued management and operation of the
facilities for the time period set out in the Memorandum of Understanding
("MOU").
   PUBLIC PLACE. Any properties that are owned or under the control of the City
that are not rights-of-way but may be dedicated for public use, including but
not limited to, buildings and parks.
   REASONABLE ATTORNEY FEES. Charges for legal representation as may be
incurred by the City or the Authority.
   RIGHTS-OF-WAY. The surface of and the space above and below any street,
road, avenue, highway, freeway, bridge, lane, path, alley, court, sidewalk,
parkway, platted or other public utility easement, right- of-way or other
easement, excluding railroad rights-of- way, parks and airport property, of the
City now or hereafter existing within or owned by the City which may be
properly used for water and wastewater systems. To the extent the Authority
occupies an easement granted by the City to the Authority on any public place
that permits use and occupation of such public place, the terms and conditions
of that easement shall govern and control the Authority's occupation thereof.
   STORM DRAINAGE FACILITIES. Includes all City owned channels (lined or
unlined), pipe, manholes, inlets, and all other structures that handle storm
run-off.
   TREASURER. The Treasurer of the City of Albuquerque.
   WASTEWATER. Residential, multi-family, commercial, industrial, institutional
and wholesale- special contracts wastewater, systems and services.
   WATER. Residential, multi-family, commercial, industrial and institutional
water, systems and services.
(Ord. 27-2006)
§ 13-4-9-4 RIGHTS AND PRIVILEGES OF AUTHORITY.
   (A)   Permission to rent and use. There is hereby granted by the City to the
Authority, subject to the terms, conditions and limitations contained in this
franchise ordinance and the MOU (which document shall control in the event of a
conflict with this franchise during the term of the MOU) nonexclusive
permission to rent, use and occupy and the franchise right, privilege and
authority to construct, purchase, acquire, locate, maintain, operate and extend
into, within, and through the City, facilities for the purpose of distributing
water and providing wastewater service, of any nature, with the right and
privilege for the period and upon the terms and conditions hereinafter
specified, to sell, furnish and distribute any or all of said products to the
City and its inhabitants, by means of its facilities, on, over, under, along
and across all rights-of-way. Provided, however, that the Authority's
construction plans for line extensions within the limits of the City, prepared
by either a developer or the Authority, shall be submitted to the City
Development Review Committee for review of any impact the line extension may
have on City facilities. Additionally, the Authority shall provide notice of
any line extension policy change to the City pursuant to §
13-4-9-21 herein.
   (B)   Indemnification. Subject to the terms and conditions of the MOU, the
Authority shall indemnify, defend and hold the City harmless from and against
claims, demands, liens and all liability or damage of whatsoever kind on
account of or arising from the grant of this franchise, the exercise by the
Authority of the related rights, or from the operations of the Authority within
the City, and shall pay the costs of defense plus reasonable attorneys' fees.
The Authority shall be responsible for damages to any property in the rights-
of-way as a result of Authority activities. The City shall give prompt written
notice to the Authority of any claim, demand or lien with respect to which the
City seeks indemnification hereunder and unless in the City's judgment a
conflict of interest may exist between the City and the Authority with respect
to such claim, demand or lien, permit the Authority to assume the defense of
such claim, demand, or lien with counsel satisfactory to the City. If such
defense is not assumed by the Authority, the Authority shall not be subject to
any liability for any settlement made without its consent. Notwithstanding any
provision hereof to the contrary, the Authority shall not be obligated to
indemnify, defend or hold the City harmless to the extent any claim, demand or
lien arises out of or in connection with any negligent act or failure to act of
the City or any of its officers or employees acting on behalf of the Authority
pursuant to the MOU unless such negligent act or failure to act is due to
direction given by the Authority to a City employee.
   (C)   Remedies. In the event the Authority or the City fails to fulfill any
of their respective obligations under this franchise, the City or the
Authority, whichever the case may be, will have a breach of contract claim and
remedy against the other in addition to any other remedy provided by law,
provided that no remedy which would have the effect of amending the specific
provisions of this franchise shall become effective without such action which
would be necessary to formally amend the franchise
(Ord. 27-2006)
§ 13-4-9-5 TERM, EFFECTIVE DATE.
   (A)   Term. This franchise ordinance, and the rights, privileges and
authority granted hereunder, shall continue for a period of ten years from the
effective date.
   (B)   Effective date. This ordinance shall become effective from and after
its passage and publication as provided by Section 3-42-1 NMSA 1978, or
successor statute; provided that the Authority, either before or within 60 days
shall have passed legislation also approving this franchise.
(Ord. 27-2006)
§ 13-4-9-6 FRANCHISE NOT EXCLUSIVE.
   The right to use and occupy said rights-of-way for the purposes herein set
forth is not and shall not be deemed to be, an exclusive franchise, and the
City reserves the right to itself to make or grant a similar use of the said
rights-of-way to any other person, firm, or corporation.
(Ord. 27-2006)
§ 13-4-9-7 PERFORMANCE AND MODIFICATION.
   The Authority and the City agree to take all reasonable and necessary
actions to assure that the terms of the franchise are performed, and neither
will take any action to secure modification of this franchise before any court
of competent jurisdiction before having attempted to negotiate in good faith
any modifications either party may deem necessary.
(Ord. 27-2006)
§ 13-4-9-8 FRANCHISE FEE.
   (A)   Fee and rental. As consideration for this franchise, which provides
for the rental and use by the Authority of the rights-of-way, which are
valuable public properties acquired and maintained by the City at great expense
to its taxpayers and citizens, the Authority shall pay to the City a franchise
fee in the amount of 4% of the annual gross revenue within the City limits, as
defined in §
13-4-9-3. As additional consideration for this franchise, the Authority and
City agree to the following:
      (1)   The Authority shall maintain all current fire protection waterline
connections at the main waterline and allow for all required new fire
protection connections at the main waterline for City facilities;
      (2)   The Authority shall provide water for fire suppression at no cost
to the City. The parties further agree to establish a methodology or process
for estimating water usage for fire suppression;
      (3)   The Authority shall maintain all fire hydrants to operable
condition, including periodic painting, for use by the City and the City will
inspect, lubricate and flow the hydrants annually. The City will notify the
Authority of any defects observed at the time of the inspection. The Authority
will notify the City when they receive the documentation of observed defects
and when those defects have been corrected. At least quarterly, the Authority
will notify the City of the location of all new or relocated hydrants. The
Authority will maintain an adequate supply of meters in order for contractors
to use fire hydrants for construction purposes.
      (4)   For dispatch services, Authority operators shall answer all after-
hour calls and contact the on-call foreman for the appropriate City department.
If the foreman cannot be reached, the Authority operator shall contact 311;
      (5)   The Authority shall provide billing services for the Solid Waste
Management Department including any inserts in the bills at historically based
cost of service;
      (6)   The Authority shall provide the City with vactors or by-pass pumps
as requested by the City to aid in pumping out storm drainage systems at the
cost of providing such equipment; and
      (7)   The Authority shall provide at least one supervisor for any City
emergency operations center activation.
   The franchise fee and services indicated hereinabove shall constitute the
only consideration by the Authority to the City for the Authority's use and
occupancy of the rights-of-way. Said payments shall be in lieu of any and all
other franchise fee, license, privilege, occupation, excise or revenue taxes
(except special assessments of general applicability for local improvements on
real property of the Authority, fees for barricade and excavation permits,
sidewalk permits, curb and gutter permits or other City-required permitting
fees) imposed generally by the City on any business, revenue, property,
facilities or other appurtenances or any part thereof within the City during
the term of this franchise ordinance.
   (B)   Payment terms. Commencing the month following the month this franchise
ordinance becomes effective, the franchise fee shall be paid monthly on the
25th day of each month; such fee shall be based on gross revenues received by
the Authority for the preceding month. Nothing herein shall preclude the
Authority and the City from agreeing to a revised payment schedule.
   (C)   Reconciliation. Subject to the terms and conditions of the MOU, and
commencing on or before the first day of the thirteenth month following the
effective date of this franchise, and annually thereafter, the Authority shall
submit to the Treasurer a statement of the franchise fee actually due to the
City based upon the actual gross revenue for the year, together with a check
for any amount due from the Authority or a statement for any amount due from
the City. In the event any sums are owed by the City or Authority, such amount
shall include interest from the last day of the franchise year computed at the
rate being paid for customer security deposits being held by the Authority.
Within 30 days from the submission of the statement of franchise fee owing, or
within such reasonable additional time as he or she may request, the Treasurer
shall investigate the statement and determine the accuracy of the amounts
reported. However, neither payment of the franchise fee nor failure to make
such investigation shall stop the City in any way or prevent subsequent
investigation or payment of any amount properly due.
   (D)   Claims. In the event it is claimed by the City that the amount of the
franchise fee paid hereunder is insufficient, and such insufficiency is not the
result of any collection, distribution or reporting error of the City in
accordance with its required performance pursuant to the MOU, or in the event
the Authority claims that franchise fees have been overpaid, and the parties
cannot agree, the City and the Authority shall attempt to informally negotiate
a resolution. In the event that negotiations fail, the dispute shall be
submitted to non- binding mediation. The party making the demand shall submit
the dispute to the American Arbitration Association ("AAA") pursuant to the
Commercial Mediation Rules of the AAA in effect at the time or as otherwise
agreed to by the parties.
   (E)   Contract payment. In the event that the franchise fee set forth in
this franchise ordinance is declared illegal, unconstitutional or void for any
reason by any court, the Authority shall be contractually bound to pay the
City, at the same times and in the same manner as provided for herein, an
aggregate amount equal to the amount which would have been paid as a franchise
fee.
(Ord. 27-2006)
§ 13-4-9-9 INSPECTION AND RETENTION OF RECORDS.
   (A)   Audit. Subject to the terms and conditions of the MOU, the City shall
have the right to review or audit all books and records of the Authority in
accordance with generally accepted accounting and auditing principles, in the
United States, regarding any amounts which may be paid under this franchise
ordinance but shall not have the right, pursuant to the MOU, to change or
otherwise redetermine the revenue components comprising the franchise fee base,
so long as the Authority has not altered the revenue components of the
franchise fee base. This right includes the right to review and audit all books
and records of revenue not included in the calculation of the fee paid, but
which may be considered by the City to be subject to a franchise fee. The City
shall give written notice to the Authority of any additional amount claimed to
be due to the City as a result of any audit or review. The additional amount
due, if any, shall be paid within 30 days following determination that such
amount is due and payable.
   (B)   Record keeping. Subject to the terms and conditions of the MOU, the
Authority shall keep complete and accurate books and records of its business
and operations pursuant to this franchise in accordance with generally accepted
accounting principles in the United States. The Authority and City agree that
Authority records shall be kept on a City- specific basis for purposes of
calculating franchise fees. All such books, records and accounts shall be
retained for a period of six years in accordance with Section 37-1-3 NMSA 1978.
The Authority shall make such records as are necessary to complete an audit
available for inspection by the City at its principle place of business upon
thirty days notice.
(Ord. 27-2006)
§ 13-4-9-10 CITY REGULATION.
   The City expressly reserves, and the Authority expressly recognizes, the
City's right and duty to adopt, from time to time, in addition to the
provisions herein contained, such Charter provisions, ordinances and rules and
regulations as the City may deem necessary in the lawful exercise of its police
power for the protection of the health, safety and welfare of its citizens and
their properties.
(Ord. 27-2006)
§ 13-4-9-11 CITY RIGHTS.
   (A)   Enforcement.  The Mayor, or his or her designee, is the official of
the City having full power and authority to take appropriate action for and on
behalf of the City and its inhabitants to enforce the provisions of this
franchise and to investigate any alleged violations or failures of the
Authority to comply with the provisions hereof or to adequately and fully
discharge its responsibilities and obligations hereunder. The failure or
omission of the Mayor or the City to so act shall not constitute any waiver or
estoppel.
   (B)   City rights. The Authority and City agree to meet at regular intervals
to share and coordinate information relative to the construction, operation and
repair of the facilities of the City or of the Authority located in rights-of-
way.
(Ord. 27-2006)
§ 13-4-9-12 PLAN, DESIGN, CONSTRUCTION COORDINATION AND INSTALLATION OF
AUTHORITY FACILITIES.
   Subject to the terms and conditions of the MOU (which document shall control
in the event of a conflict with this franchise):
   (A)   Before the Authority may conduct underground work involving
excavation, renovation, new construction or major relocation work in any
rights- of-way, the Authority shall first notify the City not less than five
working days prior to commencement of the work and shall comply with any
special conditions relating to location, scheduling, coordination and public
safety. The Authority shall file maps and drawings with the Director showing
the location of any proposed construction or extension of its facilities and
services in any rights-of-way of the City. Such proposed construction work to
be done by the Authority shall be performed and coordinated in a safe manner
subject to the approval of the Director and in accordance with applicable
federal and state laws and city ordinances, regulations and permit requirements
now or hereafter existing including the Barricade and Street Excavation
Ordinance, as that ordinance may be amended from time to time.
   (B)   Construction forecast. On or before the first day of June each year,
the City and the Authority agree to meet and exchange three year construction
forecasts, together with such additional information as the City and the
Authority deem appropriate relating to projects planned within the City. The
City and Authority shall hold such additional meetings as they deem necessary
to exchange additional information with a view toward coordinating their
respective activities in these areas where such coordination will prove
mutually beneficial to the public by minimizing disruption and costs to the
public. The Authority will comply with all building and zoning codes and assure
that aesthetic and other relevant planning principles have been given due
consideration. It is recognized that, notwithstanding the foregoing, the City
retains absolute discretion over the timing and all other aspects of the City's
proposed projects. The parties will make reasonable efforts to allow each
party's work to be incorporated in the other's respective projects. The
Authority will not cut or otherwise disturb any new or rehabilitated roadway
within two years of its placement, except or unless, (1) the Authority repaves
such roadway to specifications as may be required by the City, or (2) in
emergency conditions. Notwithstanding the foregoing, if an Authority cut or
disturbance is required in any new or rehabilitated roadway within sixty (60)
days of the placement of such new or rehabilitated roadway, and the Authority's
cut or disturbance is caused or occasioned by the City's negligent damage to
Facilities created by the placement of new or rehabilitated roadway, then, the
Authority shall not be responsible for any and all costs associated with a
subsequent repavement.
   (C)   Interference; permits. All facilities constructed by the Authority
within rights-of-way of the City shall be located so as to cause minimum
interference with public use of streets, alleys and other public ways and shall
be maintained in good repair and condition. Facilities located on, over and
under, along and across all rights- of-way shall be constructed, installed,
maintained, cleared of vegetation, renovated or replaced in accordance with
resolutions, ordinances, rules and regulations of general application as may be
adopted by the City to control and monitor such activities. The Authority will
acquire and pay for permits in accordance with such rules and regulations as
the City deems appropriate, and the City may inspect the manner of such work
and require remedies as may be necessary to assure compliance. It is understood
that this work involves the health, safety and welfare of the community and
from time to time must be done under circumstances which will make the prior
acquisition of a permit infeasible, and in those cases the permit shall be
applied for by the Authority on the next working day.
   (D)   Compliance with laws. The Authority shall take measures which will
result in its facilities meeting the standards required by applicable federal
and state water pollution laws. Upon the City's request, the Authority will
provide the City with copies of any reports submitted to these agencies in
compliance with such laws.
   (E)   Joint use. Upon reasonable request by the City or the Authority and to
the extent the City or Authority can do so, each will grant joint use of its
property which it now, or in the future, owns or has an interest in, to each
other for purposes including, but not limited to, parks, drainage facilities,
bikeways, traffic conduits, mass transit corridors, storm sewer lines,
pedestrian area parking, open spaces and water, waste water, electric, cable,
and natural gas distribution, provided that neither the City nor the Authority
shall be required to accept such a request. Compensation for such joint use
shall be as negotiated by the City and the Authority. If joint use is accepted
by the City or Authority, then any improvements deemed appropriate shall be
made at the requesting party's sole expense.
   (F)   Maintenance. The Authority shall be responsible for the maintenance of
the property within reasonable proximity of and upon which the Authority
maintains above-ground facilities, including the removal of weed and litter.
   (G)   ADA. The Authority shall insure its facilities in rights-of-way are
located and constructed in a manner such that access is not impaired in
compliance with the Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA). Following notice by
the City of an ADA construction problem, the Authority shall have 60 days or
other reasonable time to remedy the problem. In the event the City and the
Authority cannot agree that a problem exists, any dispute shall be submitted to
mediation pursuant to §
13-4-9-8(D) herein.
   (H)   Public places. The City and Authority agree that no Authority
facilities will be placed in public places without the express written consent
of the City. The City and Authority further agree that in the event the City
requests service or the placement of new or added Authority facilities in any
public place, the City shall bear all costs necessary for such placement. The
City and Authority further agree that in the event the City requests service or
the placement of new or added Authority facilities in any public place, such
facilities will require the grant of a permanent license to the Authority.
(Ord. 27-2006)
§ 13-4-9-13 AUTHORITY EXCAVATIONS AND RELOCATIONS.
   Subject to the terms and conditions of the MOU (which document shall control
in the event of a conflict with this franchise):
   (A)   Placement of facilities. The Authority shall have the right to
excavate in, occupy and use any and all rights-of-way after obtaining
appropriate excavation permits or other review in accordance with §
13-4-9-12 herein from the City. The Authority shall not, pursuant to this
franchise, place any of its facilities, on, over, under or within any City
park, duly designated as such by the City, but nothing herein contained shall
preclude the City from granting a permanent license therefore in accordance
with §
13-4-9-12(H) above. The Authority shall not place any of its facilities, on,
over, under or within the median portion of any boulevard or parkway without
first having obtained the written permission of the City.
   (B)   Location and relocation expense. Any location or relocation of the
Authority's facilities in the rights-of-way reasonably required, caused or
occasioned by any City project necessitated by the health and safety of the
public or as may be required by projects approved by the City's Capital
Improvements Program, including the installation of storm drainage,
landscaping, or traffic signal facilities, and road reconstruction shall be at
the cost of the Authority. However, in the event of any such relocation, the
parties agree that all reasonable efforts shall be made to keep such
relocations to a minimum number in any given year and at minimal cost to the
parties. The City and the Authority agree to meet and coordinate with respect
to any project such that, when timing allows, the Authority may include the
costs of any location or relocation in the next budget and/or bond cycle. The
Authority shall reconstruct, replace or restore any street, alley, or public
way or place, in a timely fashion, and any storm drainage, traffic
signalization facilities, or other facility of the City disturbed by the
Authority, without cost to the City, to a condition acceptable to the City
consistent with reasonable standards of safety and appearance. Any facility so
disturbed by the Authority shall be reconstructed, replaced, or restored only
under the supervision of City personnel. Any such relocation shall be
accomplished as expeditiously as possible. The Authority will make all
reasonable efforts to relocate its utilities so as not to delay City projects.
   (C)   The Authority shall comply with all City ordinances and resolutions
regarding lane closures and traffic control.
   (D)   Abandoned facilities. From and after the effective date of this
franchise, the Authority is required to remove any and all abandoned facilities
located in rights-of-way at Authority expense as soon as practicable, but not
later than 90 days following request by the City.
(Ord. 27-2006)
§ 13-4-9-14 WATER AND WASTEWATER SERVICE.
   In accordance with the terms hereof, the Authority shall furnish water and
wastewater service within the corporate limits of the City or any additions
thereto, to the City and to the inhabitants thereof, and to any person or
persons or corporation doing business in the City or any additions thereto.
(Ord. 27-2006)
§ 13-4-9-15 CONSERVATION.
   The City and the Authority recognize and agree that conservation programs
offer opportunities for the efficient use of water and reduction of customers'
costs. The Authority recognizes and shares the City's strong desire to advance
the implementation of cost-effective conservation programs that provide direct
opportunities to the Authority's customers to manage more efficiently their use
of water and thereby create the opportunity to reduce their costs.
(Ord. 27-2006)
§ 13-4-9-16 EQUAL OPPORTUNITY AND AFFIRMATIVE ACTION.
   The City and Authority are committed to stimulating and strengthening the
participation of minorities and women and are also committed to the principle
that the success and economic well-being of the City and Authority are related
closely to the economic strength and vigor of the communities and people they
serve.
(Ord. 27-2006)
§ 13-4-9-17 SYSTEM TO REMAIN IN PLACE.
   In the event this franchise is not renewed at the expiration of its term or
the Authority terminates any service provided herein for any reason whatsoever,
the Authority shall have no right to remove the facilities, pending resolution
of the disposition of the facilities. The Authority further agrees it will not
withhold any temporary services necessary to protect the public, and in such
event shall be entitled only to monetary compensation in no greater amount than
it would have been entitled to were such services provided during the term of
this franchise. Only upon receipt of written notice from the City stating that
the City has adequate alternative sources to provide for the people of the City
shall the Authority be entitled to remove any or all of said facilities in use
under the terms of this franchise.
(Ord. 27-2006)
§ 13-4-9-18 BREACH.
   The City shall not be entitled to allege or claim a breach of the franchise
or otherwise terminate this franchise based on acts or omissions of the City
where the City is obligated, pursuant to the MOU, to perform obligations under
this franchise.
(Ord. 27-2006)
§ 13-4-9-19 AMENDMENT.
   At any time during the term of this franchise, the City or the Authority may
propose amendments to the franchise by giving 30 days written notice to the
other of the proposed amendment(s) desired, and both parties thereafter,
through their designated representatives, will, within a reasonable time,
negotiate in good faith in an effort to agree upon mutually satisfactory
amendment(s). No amendment or amendments to this franchise shall be effective
until mutually agreed upon by the City and the Authority and thereafter
submitted to and approved by the City Council.
(Ord. 27-2006)
§ 13-4-9-20 PUBLIC PURPOSE.
   All of the provisions contained in this ordinance are hereby declared to be
for a public purpose and the health, safety, and welfare of the general public.
Any member of the governing body or City official or employee charged with the
enforcement of this ordinance, acting for the City in the discharge of his
duties, shall not thereby render himself personally liable; and he is hereby
relieved from all personal liability for any damage that might accrue to
persons or property as a result of any act required or permitted in the
discharge of his or her said duties. Neither the City nor the Authority by
accepting this franchise waives its right to seek all appropriate legal and
equitable remedies as allowed by law upon violation of the terms of this
franchise, including seeking injunctive relief in a court of competent
jurisdiction. Such right to injunctive relief is expressly reserved and all
terms and provisions hereof shall be enforceable through injunctive relief.
(Ord. 27-2006)
§ 13-4-9-21 NOTICES.
   For the purpose of this ordinance, notice to the City will be to:
   Mayor
   City of Albuquerque
   P.O. Box 1293
   Albuquerque, New Mexico 87103
With a copy to:
   City Attorney, Utility Counsel
   City of Albuquerque
   P.O. Box 2248
   Albuquerque, New Mexico 87103
Notice to the Authority will be to:
   Albuquerque Bernalillo Water Utility Authority
   Executive Director
   P. O. Box 1293
   Albuquerque, New Mexico 87103
with a copy to the Authority Counsel.
Notice will be effective upon delivery at the above addresses until the City or
Authority notifies the other, in writing, of a change in the address.
(Ord. 27-2006)
§ 13-4-9-22 VENUE.
   This ordinance shall be construed under and in accordance with the laws of
the State of New Mexico, and all obligations of the parties hereunder are
performable in Bernalillo County, New Mexico. In the event that any legal
proceeding is brought to enforce the terms of this franchise, the same shall be
brought in Bernalillo County, New Mexico.
(Ord. 27-2006)
§ 13-4-9-23 NO WAIVER.
   Neither the City nor the Authority shall be excused from complying with any
of the terms and conditions of this franchise by any failure of the other, or
any of its officers, employees, or agents, upon any one or more occasions to
insist upon or to seek compliance with any such terms and conditions.
(Ord. 27-2006)
PART 10: PUBLIC RIGHTS-OF-WAY FOR TELECOMMUNICATIONS SERVICES
§ 13-4-10-1 PURPOSE.
   The purpose of this Part 10 is to establish a competitively neutral policy
for use of the Public Rights-of-Way for the provision of Telecommunications
Services and enable the City to:
   (A)   Permit competitively neutral and non-discriminatory access to the
Public Rights-of-Way for providers of Telecommunications services; and
   (B)   Manage the Public Rights-of-Way in order to minimize the impact and
cost to the citizens of the placement of telecommunications facilities within
the Public Rights-of-Way; and
   (C)   Promote competition among telecommunications service providers and
encourage the universal availability of Telecommunications Service to residents
and businesses of the City; and
   (D)   Obtain fair and reasonable compensation for the rental and use of
Public Rights-of-Way through collection of fees and charges; and
   (E)   Minimize the congestion, inconvenience, visual impact, and other
adverse effects on the City's Public Rights-of-Way; and
   (F)   To the extent permitted by state and federal law, exercise such other
powers as the City may have to protect the public health, safety, and welfare,
ensure the continued quality of telecommunications services, and safeguard the
rights of consumers.
(Ord. 20-1997)
§ 13-4-10-2 DEFINITIONS.
   (A)    AFFILIATE. Each Person who falls into one or more of the following
categories: (i) each Person having directly or indirectly, a controlling
interest in a provider; (ii) each Person in which a Provider has, directly or
indirectly, a controlling interest; (iii) each officer, director, general
partner, limited partner holding an interest of five percent (5%) or more,
joint venturer, or joint venture partner of a Provider; and (iv) each Person,
directly or indirectly, controlling, controlled by, or under common control
with the Provider—provided that AFFILIATE shall in no event mean any limited
partner holding an interest of less than five percent (5%) of such Provider, or
any creditor of such Provider solely by virtue of its status as a creditor and
which is not otherwise an AFFILIATE by reason of owning a controlling interest
in, being owned by, or being under common ownership, common management, or
common control with such Provider.
   (B)    APPLICANT. Any Person who files an application with the City under §
§
13-4-10-3 in order to obtain the necessary permission to use the Public Rights-
of-Way to provide Telecommunications Service within the City.
   (C)    CITY. The City of Albuquerque, New Mexico, a home rule municipal
corporation, or as appropriate, any board, bureau, authority, agency,
commission, department or any other entity of the City of Albuquerque, or any
authorized officer, official, employee, or agent thereof.
   (D)    CITY CLERK. City Clerk of the City of Albuquerque or a designated
representative.
   (E)    CITY REQUIREMENTS. All laws, rules, regulations, policies, and
directives of general application of the City of Albuquerque in effect at
present or to be adopted in the future by the City Council or the City.
   (F)    COUNCIL. The legislative body of the City of Albuquerque, sometimes
referred to as CITY COUNCIL.
   (G)    DIRECTOR OF PUBLIC WORKS or DIRECTOR. The Director of the Public
Works Department of the City or his or her designee, charged with the
administration of the Public Rights-of-Way.
   (H)    EMERGENCY. Repair, restoration, or replacement of an existing
structure made necessary because of a sudden unexpected event which has created
a condition which is an immediate and continuing threat to the safety of
property or persons or the operations of a Provider.
   (I)    GROSS REVENUE.
      (1)   Includes all revenues derived directly or indirectly by a Provider
from or in connection with the Telecommunications Services set forth in
individual Municipal Authority and/or Franchise Contracts offered within the
City through or by means of a Telecommunications Network within the City,
exclusive of any Municipal Authority or Franchise Fee or tax passed through to
consumers on behalf of governmental agencies, received by the Provider for
services provided to customers through use of the Network. GROSS REVENUE shall
include any revenue received by a Provider or any Affiliate through any means
which is intended to have the effect of evading the payment of compensation
that would otherwise be paid to the City for a Municipal Authority or Franchise
Contract granted pursuant to this ordinance.
      (2)    GROSS REVENUE shall not include (i) proceeds from the sale of
bonds, mortgages, or other evidence of indebtedness, securities, or stocks; or
(ii) gross receipts taxes, bad debt write-offs, and customer credits; or (iii)
revenue of any Affiliate or Provider from long distance service, commercial
mobile radio service, cellular, personal communica-tions service, other
wireless communications service, or directory advertising—provided that, unless
otherwise provided in a Municipal Authority or Franchise Contract, GROSS
REVENUE may include revenues received by a Provider or an Affiliate from (a)
access fees, interconnection fees, or any other fees relating to or arising out
of the wireless use of the Telecommunications Network (including the facilities
and equipment of such Network) by any Person providing commercial mobile radio
service, cellular, personal communications service, other wireless
communications service; and (b) any services listed on Appendix “A.” Each of
the above are not included in the definition of GROSS REVENUE and, therefore,
are not included in the calculation of any fee due under a Municipal Authority.
      (3)    GROSS REVENUE shall not include the wholesale revenue of any
Provider to the extent that the Person providing such wholesale revenue to the
Provider pays to the City, pursuant to an agreement with the City, an annual
Municipal Authority Fee under § 13-4-10-4 of this ordinance, or an amount
equivalent thereto, calculated on the basis of such Person's GROSS REVENUE (as
defined in this ordinance) from the provision of Telecommunications Service in
the City.
      (4)    GROSS REVENUE shall be measured and monitored periodically.
   (J)    MUNICIPAL AUTHORITY or FRANCHISE CONTRACT. The right granted by the
City to rent and use Public Rights-of-Way to provide Telecommunications Service
within the City, to the public, or to other Providers, as specified by the
terms of such Municipal Authority or Franchise Contract.
   (K)    PERSON. An individual, corporation, association, partnership, joint
venture, or other legally recognized entity, whether for profit or not for
profit, but shall not mean the City.
   (L)    PROVIDER.
      (1)   Any Person who provides any Telecommunications Service within the
City by means of: (i) a Telecommunications Network owned by such Person or its
Affiliate; (ii) specifically identifiable facilities of a Telecommunications
Network reserved or made available for the use of such Person or its Affiliate
under a lease or any other arrangement for a term longer than 120 days; or
(iii) facilities of a Telecommunications Network not owned by such Person or
its Affiliate and not specifically identifiable but obtained from another
Person (including another Provider) if the use of such facilities is continuing
and substantial. A Person owning or operating telecommunications facilities
that merely pass through the City and such Person and facilities do not offer
Telecommunications Service to subscribers within the City shall not be subject
to this ordinance, provided that Person has received other appropriate
authorization from the City to rent or occupy the Public Rights-of-Way.
      (2)   Except to the extent that a PROVIDER or a Person uses the Public
Rights-of-Way, a PROVIDER or any Person which provides commercial mobile radio
service, cellular, personal communications service, or other wireless
communications service shall not be subject to this ordinance with respect to
such service.
   (M)    PUBLIC RIGHTS-OF-WAY. Present and future surface, air space above the
surface (but not including air space used by wireless carriers for the
transmission of telecommunications services), and area below the surface of any
public street, highway, lane, path, alley, sidewalk, boulevard, drive, bridge,
tunnel, easement, or similar public property in which the City holds any
property interest or exercises any rights of management or control and which,
consistent with the purposes for which it was acquired or dedicated, may be
used for the installation, maintenance, and operation of a Telecommunications
Network.
   (N)    PUBLIC STRUCTURES. Any building or structure owned by the City.
   (O)    SYSTEM or TELECOMMUNICATIONS SYSTEM. The TELECOMMUNICATIONS SYSTEM
which is to be constructed, operated, and maintained by a Provider, pursuant to
this ordinance and an agreement between the City and the Provider, including
without limitation all real property and interests in real property, all
tangible and intangible personal property, buildings, offices, furniture,
customer lists, cable, wires, optical fibers, and amplifiers, and all other
electronic devices, equipment, and facilities used in connection therewith, and
all rights, contracts, and understandings with regard to any matter related
thereto.
   (P)    TELECOMMUNICATIONS NETWORK or NETWORK. Any System which includes
facilities and/or equipment placed in the Public Rights-of-Way and used to
provide any Telecommunications Service.
   (Q)    TELECOMMUNICATIONS.
      (1)   All transmissions between or among points specified by the user of
information of the user's choosing (whether voice, video, or data), without
change in the form or content of the information as sent and received, where
such transmissions are accomplished by means of a Telecommunications Network.
      (2)    TELECOMMUNICATIONS shall not include cable services as defined in
Title 47, Chapter 5, Subchapter V-A of the United States Code, as amended (47
USC § 521 et seq.) and shall not include telecommunications services provided
and used by a public utility as that term is defined at § 62-3-3(G) NMSA 1978,
or successor statute, for (i) its internal system communication needs; and (ii)
provided directly or indirectly to its customers, including but not limited to
electronic meter reading, load control, demand side management, power quality
monitoring, and other activities related to the delivery of electricity or
natural gas.
   (R)    TELECOMMUNICATIONS SERVICE. The offering of Telecommunications within
the City for a fee directly to the public, or to such classes of users as to be
effectively available directly to the public. Examples of TELECOMMUNICATIONS
SERVICE are attached in Appendix “A.”
(Ord. 20-1997)
§ 13-4-10-3 APPLICATION TO PROVIDE SERVICES.
   (A)   Application required. Any Person who proposes to be a Provider shall
submit an application to the Director of Public Works. The application, in a
form prescribed by the Director, shall describe all services Applicant wishes
to provide, Applicant's proposed Network, and its impact on the Public Rights-
of-Way and contain such other information as the Director may lawfully specify
or require.
   (B)   City Council action. All Municipal Authorities granted under this
Chapter shall incorporate each applicable provision of this Chapter. The act of
granting, amending, denying, or terminating Municipal Authorities is a
legislative function within the sound discretion of the City Council. Any
Person who is denied a Municipal Authority or whose Municipal Authority is
terminated must petition the City Council for reconsideration before seeking
judicial remedies. The City Council shall have 30 days from the date of the
petition to reconsider such denial or termination.
   (C)   Authority of Director. The Director shall have the duty to review
applications submitted under this Chapter. The Director shall negotiate the
terms of Municipal Authorities (to the extent not prescribed in this Chapter)
for adoption by the City Council. The Director shall administrate and enforce
compliance with respect to all Municipal Authorities granted under this
Chapter.
   (D)   Authority granted. A Municipal Authority granted under this Chapter
shall authorize an Applicant to use Public Rights-of-Way to provide
Telecommunications Service. Any Person proposing to provide cable service, as
defined in 47 USC § 522(b), shall obtain a separate franchise from the City for
the provision of cable service.
   (E)   Annual list of wholesale services. Within six months after the
effective date of a Municipal Authority and annually thereafter on each January
15, each Provider shall submit to the City a list of all Persons to which a
Provider sells any Telecommunications Service on a wholesale basis. If a
Provider believes that any Person on such list falls within the meaning of §
13-4-10-2(L) of this ordinance and has not been granted a Municipal Authority
pursuant to the terms of this ordinance, the Provider shall identify that
Person and shall submit a written explanation of the reasons that the Provider
believes such Person falls within §
13-4-10-2(L).
(Ord. 20-1997)
§ 13-4-10-4 COMPENSATION AND CHARGES.
   (A)   Fees and charges.
      (1)   Municipal Authority fee. As partial compensation for the use of the
Public Rights-of-Way, each Provider shall be subject to an annual fee of three
percent (3%) of Gross Revenue obtained from the provision of the various
Telecommunications Service. Nothing contained in this ordinance shall prohibit
or otherwise prevent a Provider or other Person from passing through any
Municipal Authority or Franchise Fee to the ultimate end user of Tele-
communications Service.
      (2)   Filing fee. Each Applicant shall submit a $2,500 non-refundable
application for each Municipal Authority or Franchise request.
      (3)   Non-monetary consideration. Upon mutual agreement between the City
and Provider, each Provider shall furnish to the City, or certain communities
within the City, non-monetary consideration in the form of Network capacity,
conduit, equipment, or other infrastructure or services. This consideration
shall be negotiated with each Provider taking into account the unique
characteristics of each, and said consideration shall be valued in a
nondiscriminatory manner. Further, any nonmonetary consideration furnished to
the City shall be for the City's internal and noncommercial purposes, not for
resale, and for the City's sole and exclusive use.
      (4)   Permit, inspection, and review/location charges. Each Provider
shall furnish all permit and inspection charges related to a Provider's
construction in the Public Rights-of-Way, as assessed by the Director of Public
Works in accordance with City Requirements.
   (B)   Fee on gross revenue in lieu of fee on wholesale revenue. Any Provider
or Person electing to pay to the City, pursuant to an agreement with the City,
an annual Municipal Authority fee under §
13-4-10-4 calculated on the basis of such Person's Gross Revenue from the
provision of Telecommunications Service, shall expressly acknowledge in such
agreement or Municipal Authority that that Person's Network and Systems are
placed in and using the Public Rights-of-Way and used to provide any
Telecommunications Service.
   (C)   Payment of Municipal Authority fee.
      (1)   Commencing the month following the month any Municipal Authority or
Franchise Contract becomes effective, the fee shall be paid monthly on the 25th
day of each month; such fee shall be for Gross Revenues received by the
Provider for the preceding month. The Provider shall furnish to the City with
each payment of compensation required by this section a detailed written
statement showing the amount of Gross Revenue received by the Provider within
the City limit, broken out by Provider's revenue code, for the period covered
by the payment. Within such reasonable time as he/she may require, the
Treasurer shall determine the accuracy of the amounts reported. However,
neither payment of the fee nor failure to make such investigation shall estop
the City in any way or prevent subsequent investigation, collection, or return
of any amount properly due.
      (2)   In the event that it is claimed by the City that the amount of the
fee paid for any calendar year is insufficient, or in the event that the
Provider claims that the amount is excessive, and the parties cannot agree, the
City and the Provider shall attempt to informally negotiate a resolution. In
the event that negotiations fail, the dispute shall, before any other remedies
are invoked, be submitted to binding mediation with the assistance of the
City's ADR (Alternative Dispute Resolution) Coordinator.
      (3)   In the event that the fee set forth in any Municipal Authority is
declared illegal, unconstitutional, or void for any reason by any court or
proper author-ity, the Provider shall be contractually bound to pay the City,
at the same times and in the same manner as provided for herein, an aggregate
amount equal to the amount which would have been paid as a fee for the
remainder of the City's current fiscal year. This section, however, shall not
constitute a waiver of any claim the Provider may assert against the City.
      (4)   Acceptance by the City of any payment due under a Municipal
Authority shall not be deemed to be a waiver by the City of any breach of the
Municipal Authority occurring prior thereto, nor shall the acceptance by the
City of any such payments preclude the City from later establishing that a
larger amount was actually due, or from collecting any balance due to the City.
      (5)   (a)   In consideration of the rights and privileges granted by any
Municipal Authority, the City shall have and Provider shall grant to it the
right and privilege at the City's expense to suspend and maintain wires and
necessary control boxes on poles placed by the Provider in the Public Right-of-
Way if space therein is available, wires which the City may require for fire,
police, emergency, or other municipal purposes. All such wires shall be placed
on the poles or in the conduits so as not to interfere with the service of the
Provider and shall not pose a danger to the Provider's facilities, customers,
or customer's property. However, nothing in the Municipal Authority or
Franchise Contract shall limit the Provider's right to reserve conduit space
and/or pole space which in its sole discretion it retains for purposes of
assuring the safety of or servicing of its facilities. City agrees, in
consideration of the establishment of this service and the furnishing of such
facilities, to hold the Provider free and harmless from all claims or liability
for damage which may arise out of the City's operation of such wires and
control boxes. In no event shall the City be required to pay any pole
attachment fees in connection with the exercise of the City's rights under this
section.
         (b)   As further consideration of the rights and privileges granted by
any Municipal Authority, and upon reasonable request by the City and to the
extent the Provider can reasonably do so, pursuant to its leases and agreements
with other right-of-way providers, the Provider will grant joint use of Rights-
of-Way which it now, or in the future, has an interest in, to the City for
purposes, including but not limited to parks, drainage facilities, bikeways,
traffic conduits, mass transit corridors, sanitary sewer lines, pedestrian area
parking, open spaces, and electric, cable, natural gas, and water service
distribution, provided that the Provider shall not be required to make such an
offer in any circumstance where such offer would unreasonably interfere with
the Provider's use of the Public Rights-of-Way. If the City's joint use is
accepted by the Provider, then any improvements deemed appropriate by the City
shall be made by the City at its sole expense.
      (6)   To facilitate the City's annual budget process, on or before the
1st of November and each succeeding 1st of November thereafter during the term
of any Municipal Authority granted under this Chapter, the Provider will
provide the City with an estimate of the Gross Revenue and resultant fee for
the following calendar year. Nothing herein shall preclude the Provider and the
City from agreeing to a revised payment schedule.
   (D)   City's right to audit.
      (1)   Providers shall keep complete and accurate books of accounts and
records of their business and operations pursuant to any Municipal Authority
granted hereunder in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles.
If required by the FCC, Providers shall use the system of accounts and the
forms of books, accounts, records, and memoranda prescribed by the FCC in 47
CFR Part 32 or its successor, and as may be further described herein. The
Director may require the keeping of additional records or accounts which are
reasonably necessary for purposes of identifying, accounting for, and reporting
Gross Revenue and uncollectibles for purposes of any Municipal Authority.
Providers shall keep their books of account and records in such a way that
identification of revenues by type of service within the City are available.
      (2)   (a)   The City shall have the right to review or audit the
Provider's books and records in accordance with regularly accepted accounting
and audit standards regarding any amounts which may be owed under a Municipal
Authority. This right includes the right to review and audit all books and
records of revenue not included in the calculation of the fee paid. The City
shall give written notice to the Provider of any additional amount claimed to
be due to the City as a result of the City's review.
         (b)   If the Provider disputes the additional amount allegedly due to
the City, if any, the dispute shall be determined by binding arbitration
pursuant to the rules of the American Arbitration Association, with arbitration
to be held in the City. The party that substantially prevails should be awarded
attorneys' fees and costs for expenses incurred in resolving any dispute
arising from this section.
      (3)   In the event of an audit, the Provider shall provide City-specific
books, records, contracts, account codes, documents, and papers for its
operations within the City.
      (4)   All such books, records, and accounts of the Provider shall be
retained by the Provider for a period of six years, in accordance with § 37-1-
3 NMSA 1978, or its successor. The Provider shall make such records as are
necessary for the City to complete its audit and be available for inspection by
the City upon 30 days notice from the City.
      (5)   All audits will take place on Provider premises within the City of
Albuquerque. The City's auditors may review all directly relevant materials and
may make copies of any materials with the approval of the Provider. Such
approval will not be unreasonably withheld.
      (6)   Providers shall report to the City such other information relating
to the Municipal Authority as the Director may reasonably require and shall
comply with the City's reasonable determination of forms for reports, the time
for reports, the frequency with which any reports are to be made, and if
reports are to be made under oath.
      (7)   The Director may, at any time, make inquiries pertaining to
Providers' performance under the terms and conditions of a Municipal Authority.
Providers shall respond to such inquiries on a timely basis.
      (8)   Providers shall furnish the City:
         (a)   On a monthly basis, copies of any application or petition filed
by Provider with the State Corporation Commission or successor agency, as well
as copies of show cause orders filed by that agency; and
         (b)   Annually, reports filed with the Securities and Exchange
Commission and relating to any matters affecting the use of City streets,
alleys, and Public Rights-of-Way and/or the Telecommunications Services
authorized pursuant to a Municipal Authority granted under this Chapter.
      (9)   The City will maintain confidentiality of information provided by
Providers to the maximum extent permitted by law when Providers have notified
the City of the confidential nature of the information.
(Ord. 20-1997)
§ 13-4-10-5 TRANSFERS OF MUNICIPAL AUTHORITIES.
   (A)   (1)   No Municipal Authority granted under this Chapter, the assets
held by Providers for use under such Municipal Authority which are in the
Public Rights-of-Way, or any rights or privileges of Providers under a
Municipal Authority, either separately or collectively, shall be sold, resold,
assigned, transferred, leased, or conveyed by Providers to any other Person,
without notice to the City within 30 days of such proposed sale, transfer, or
conveyance. Provider shall submit all information reasonably requested by the
City relating to the financial, technical, and operational qualifications of
the transferee. Prior to consummation of such sale, transfer, or conveyance,
transferee shall affirmatively, and in writing, assume all obligations, rights,
and liabilities of Provider as specified in any Municipal Authority or
Franchise Contract.
      (2)   Any change of control of a Provider shall constitute a transfer
under this section. A mortgage or other pledge of assets to a bank or lending
institution in a bona fide lending transaction shall not be considered an
assignment.
   (B)   In order that the City might share in the value any Authority or
Franchise adds to the Provider's operation, any such transfer or assignment of
any rights under this section by the Provider, subject to the exceptions listed
in division (A) above, shall be subject to the condition that the transferee
promptly pay the City one percent (1%) of any and all fees paid to the City,
including the Municipal Authority fee paid to the City in the previous calendar
year, not to exceed $10,000, which amount the Provider and the City agree is
reasonable. Such transfer fee shall not be recovered from the City or from City
residents or property owners through rates or surcharges of the Provider.
(Ord. 20-1997)
§ 13-4-10-6 OBLIGATIONS OF PROVIDERS REGARDING THE PUBLIC RIGHTS-Of-WAY.
   (A)   Compliance with law. Providers are explicitly subject to the police
powers of the City, any other governmental powers, and the City's rights as a
property owner under state and federal laws. This ordinance is governed by and
construed and enforced in accordance with the laws of the State of New Mexico.
   (B)   Construction plans and drawings.
      (1)   Before the Provider may conduct underground work involving
excavation, new construction, or major relocation work in any Public Rights-of-
Way:
         (a)   The Provider shall first notify the City through the acquisition
of an Excavation and/or Barricade Permit and shall comply with any special
conditions relating to location, scheduling, coordina-tion, and public safety;
and
         (b)   The Provider shall file maps and/or drawings with the Director
showing the location of any construction or extension of its facilities and
services in any Public Rights-of-Way of the City. For multi-conduit duct banks,
maps and drawings shall show overall size, material, and configuration of the
duct bank. Upon request from the City, the Provider shall provide City with
updates of the maps and drawings showing the location of any new construction,
extension, or relocation of its facilities or line spot such facilities. All
materials provided pursuant to this section shall be kept confidential to the
fullest extent possible under the law.
      (2)   Proposed construction work to be done by the Provider shall be
performed in a safe manner subject to the approval of the Director and in
accordance with applicable federal and state laws and City Requirements now or
hereinafter existing, including the street excavation ordinance, as that
ordinance may be amended from time to time (which ordinance requires a
Sidewalk, Drive-pad, Curb, and Gutter Bond, a bond securing payment of permit
fees, and evidence of at least $1,000,000 in the requisite insurance coverage
(s) or provision for self-insurance.)
      (3)   Prior to initiating any construction or extension of the Network
and contemporaneous with the filing of maps and drawings, Provider shall tender
a review/location fee, in addition to the franchise fee, with the Director.
Such preconstruction review/location fee shall be $1.50 per linear foot as
diagramed and mapped; however, in no event shall such fee exceed $30,000 on an
annual basis. The review/location fee shall be imposed for all subsequent
additions or extensions of the Provider's Network as may be proposed from time
to time and shall be due each 15th day of January, the due date for updated
maps.
   (C)   Installations, excavations, and restorations.
      (1)   (a)   Pursuant to any Municipal Authority granted under this
Chapter, the Provider shall have the right to excavate in, occupy, and use any
and all Public Rights-of-Way for the purpose of installing, erecting,
constructing, repairing, maintaining, removing, relocating, and operating its
facilities after obtaining any and all appropriate permits from the City,
provided, however, that:
            1.   The Provider shall not place any of its facilities on, over,
under, or within any City park, duly designated as such by the City, but
nothing herein contained shall preclude the City from granting a revocable
permit therefor;
            2.   The Provider shall not place any of its facilities on, over,
or within the median portion of any boulevard or parkway, except for
perpendicular crossings, without first having obtained the written permission
of the City;
            3.   Where appropriate and as may be required by the City through
any permitting process, installation, excavations, and restorations affecting
street and/or lane closures shall be approved by the City and in accordance
with current City policies and ordinances;
            4.   The City reserves the right to assist in the coordination and
scheduling of any Provider projects where such project may be reasonably
coordinated with the placement of other franchisee or Provider facilities.
Otherwise, and subject to City permitting processes and approvals, it is
recognized that, notwithstanding the foregoing, the Provider retains discretion
over the timing of the Provider's proposed projects; and
            5.   The Provider shall, to the extent feasible, employ
“trenchless” technology in the placement of its facilities.
         (b)   Except in an emergency, not less than two working days prior to
the commencement of any work by the Provider which involves excavation in any
Public Rights-of-Way, the Provider shall notify the Director through the
barricade and excavation permit process, including payment of any and all fees.
Provider shall comply with the street excavation ordinance as it now or may
exist in the future.
      (2)   Whenever work is performed in any Public Rights-of-Way, the
Provider shall take all reasonable precautions to minimize interruption to
traffic flow, damage to property, or creation of a hazardous condition.
      (3)   After any excavation shall be made and after work is completed, the
Provider, at Provider expense, shall as soon as practicable but not longer than
one day, weather permitting, remove all surplus material in compliance with
specifications, requirements, and regulations of the City in effect at the time
of such restoration and restore the portion of the Public Rights-of-Way in a
manner consistent with the normal specifications and requirements of the City.
If the Provider fails to restore promptly the affected portion of the Public
Rights-of-Way, including reseeding, following written notice to Provider, and
reasonable opportunity to cure, the City may make the restoration in a manner
satisfactory to City, and all costs incurred for such restoration, whether done
with City work forces and equipment or otherwise shall be paid by the Provider,
including the cost of any inspectors the City may assign to the project.
      (4)   The Provider shall be responsible for the maintenance of its own
equipment, facilities, and appurtenances placed upon, over, or under the Public
Right-of-Way, including the removal of all graffiti therefrom. If after notice
from the City such graffiti has not been removed, it will be removed by the
City at Provider's sole cost.
      (5)   The Provider shall ensure its public facilities in Public Rights-
of-Way are located and constructed in a manner such that access is not impaired
in compliance with the Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA). Following notice
by the City of an ADA construction problem, the Provider shall have 30 days or
other reasonable time to remedy the problem. In the event that the City and the
Provider cannot agree that a problem exists, any dispute shall be submitted to
non-binding mediation, with the assistance and through the City's Alternative
Dispute Resolution (ADR) Coordinator.
      (6)   Execution of any Municipal Authority or Franchise Contract requires
the Provider to become a member of a local utility coordinating committee, or a
Provider may provide a similar service pursuant to a Municipal Authority or
Franchise Contract, which service would be governed by state law. If the
Provider elects to become a member of the local utility coordinating committee,
the Provider further agrees to participate in such organization(s) and abide by
their articles of incorporation, by-laws, and other requirements.
   (D)   Location and relocation of facilities.
      (1)   All facilities of the Provider shall be placed so that they do not
interfere with the use of Public Rights-of-Way by the City and shall only be
placed after approval of the location by the Director and in accordance with
any reasonable specifications adopted by the City governing the location of
facilities. The City reserves the right to construct, install, maintain, and
operate any public improvement, work, or facility, do any work that the City
may find desirable on, over, or under any Public Rights-of-Way, and vacate,
alter, or close any Public Rights-of-Way subject to Provider's rights set out
at §
13-4-10-6E(3). All such work shall be done, if possible, in such a manner as
not to obstruct, injure, or prevent use and operation of the Provider's Network
or other facilities. Pursuant to any Municipal Authority, Provider agrees to
obtain the City's express written approval before placing any poles in Public
Rights-of-Way that do not currently exist in Public Rights-of-Way.
      (2)   (a)   After notice to the Provider, where relocation cannot
reasonably be avoided and where the City and the Provider agree that no
alternative exists, the City may require the removal or relocation of
facilities used by the Provider in any Public Rights-of-Way as may reasonably
be required by the or caused or occasioned by any City project, including but
not limited to the installation of water, sanitary sewer, storm drainage, or
traffic signal facilities, road reconstruction, or other Public Right-of-Way
construction. The Provider shall remove and relocate such facilities within 60
days following notice to do so from the City. Projects requiring, in the
opinion of the Provider, in excess of 60 days to complete shall be completed in
a time frame determined on a project specific basis. Prior to any such
relocation, the City agrees to provide for a suitable location for such
relocated facilities sufficient to maintain service. The cost of any removal or
relocation of its facilities shall be paid by the Provider. Notwithstanding the
foregoing, the Provider shall not be required by the City to relocate its
facilities to accommodate another franchisee or Provider in the City. The costs
of any relocations occasioned by another franchisee of the City in no event
shall be the responsibility of the City.
         (b)   The Provider shall reconstruct, replace, or restore any street,
alley, or public way or place in a timely fashion and any water, sewer,
sanitary sewer, storm drainage, traffic signalization facilities, or other
facility of the City disturbed by the Provider, without cost to the City, to a
condition acceptable to the City consistent with reasonable standards of safety
and appearance. Any facility so disturbed by the Provider shall be
reconstructed, replaced, or restored only under the supervision of City
personnel.
         (c)   Subject to the provisions of this section and upon notice to the
City, the Provider may remove or relocate facilities maintained by the Provider
on its own initiative.
      (3)   Where the City, acting through itself, an agent, contractor, or
permit holder, proposes to improve a street, which requires the relocation of
an existing aerial facility within the Public Rights-of-Way under its
jurisdiction or control, the Provider shall replace such overhead distribution
facilities as are then within the affected right-of-way with underground
facilities. All such relocations shall be at Provider expense. The conversion
from overhead to underground shall be conditioned upon the City requiring the
undergrounding in the area in which both the existing and new facilities are
and will be located. Such replacement of overhead with underground distribution
facilities shall be paid for by the Provider.
   (E)   Public works and improvements.
      (1)   The City reserves the right to construct, install, maintain, and
operate any public improvement, work, or facility and do any work that the City
may find desirable on, over, or under any Public Rights-of-Way. All such work
shall be done, if possible, in such manner as not to obstruct, injure, or
prevent free use and operation of the Provider's Facilities.
      (2)   Whenever the City shall excavate or perform any work in any present
and/or future Public Rights-of-Way of the City, or shall contract, for such
excavation or work, where such excavation or work may disturb but not require
removal or relocation of Provider's facilities, the City shall notify the
Provider sufficiently in advance of such contemplated excavation or work to
enable the Provider to take such measures as may be deemed necessary to protect
and support such facilities from damage and possible inconvenience or injury to
the public or the City's Public Rights-of-Way. If the Provider cannot take such
measures, the Provider shall be required to relocate its facilities in
accordance with this Chapter. In such case, the Provider upon request shall
furnish field markings to the City or contractor, as the case may be, showing
the location of all its facilities in the area involved in such proposed
excavation or other work.
      (3)   Whenever the City shall vacate any Public Rights-of-Way for the
convenience or benefit of any person or governmental agency or instrumentality,
the Provider's rights shall be preserved as to any of its facilities then
existing in such Public Rights-of-Way.
   (F)   Provider offices. Within one year of the effective date of any
Municipal Authority or Franchise Contract or upon commencement of operation and
throughout the duration of the Municipal Authority or Franchise Contract or any
extension thereto, Provider shall be required to establish and maintain offices
within the City, for operational and maintenance purposes, or as may be
required by the City by agreement.
   (G)   Moving of buildings. Whenever it becomes necessary to temporarily
rearrange, remove, lower, or raise the aerial cables or wires or other
apparatus of the Provider to permit the passage of any building, machinery, or
other object, the Provider shall perform such rearrangement upon the receipt of
written notice from the person or persons desiring to move said building,
machinery, or other objects. The written notice shall detail the route of
movement of the building, machinery, or other object. The costs incurred by the
Provider in making such rearrangements of its aerial plant will be borne,
excepting the City, by the person or persons seeking such rearrangement, unless
the aerial plant is placed or maintained in violation of the applicable rules
of any local, state, or federal regulatory agency and thereby interferes with
the movement.
   (H)   Safety standards. The facilities of the Provider shall at all times be
constructed, operated, and maintained so as to protect and safeguard the health
and safety of the public, and to this end Provider shall observe all rules
pertaining thereto prescribed by any local, state, or federal regulatory
authority.
   (I)   Joint use agreements. The Provider is authorized to enter into joint-
use agreements with any person or entity franchised by the City with respect to
the placement of facilities. The Provider may require any such person or entity
to furnish evidence of adequate insurance covering the Provider and adequate
bonds covering the performance of the person or entity attaching to the
Provider's facilities as a condition precedent to granting permission to any
such person or entity to attach facilities to the Provider's facilities,
provided that the Provider's requirements for such insurance shall be
reasonable.
   (J)   Interference. The Provider shall not be required to attach its
facilities to the facilities of any other person or entity or to permit the
facilities of any other person or entity to be attached to the Provider's
facilities if it can be shown satisfactorily to the City that the Provider will
be subjected to increased risks of interruption of service or to increased
liability for accidents, or if the facilities of such other person or entity
are not of the character, design, and construction required by, or are not
being maintained in accordance with industry standards or practice.
   (K)   Supplying maps. Provider shall maintain on file all available maps,
operational data, and reports pertaining to its operations in the City. The
City may inspect the maps, data, and reports at any time during business hours.
Upon request of the City, the Provider shall furnish to the City, as soon as
practicable without charge, current maps, either in a “hard copy” printed form
or in the City's AGIS format or compatible data base, showing the location and
dimension of any facilities, but not other proprietary information, used in
operating the Provider's facilities within the City of Albuquerque.
   (L)   Limitation on privileges. All rights, authority, and grants contained
or conferred are also conditioned upon the understanding and agreement that
these privileges in the Public Rights-of-Way of the City are not to operate in
any way so as to be an enhancement of the Provider's properties or values or to
be an asset or item of ownership in any appraisal thereof in the event of a
City acquisition, by purchase or otherwise. In the event that the City shall at
any time hereafter acquire the property of the Provider, by purchase or
otherwise, the value of any Municipal Authority shall be fixed and determined
at $1.
(Ord. 20-1997)
§ 13-4-10-7 INSURANCE REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   Providers shall obtain and maintain in full force and effect
throughout the term of a Municipal Authority granted under this Chapter
insurance with an insurance provider licensed to do business in the State of
New Mexico and acceptable to the City or shall provide evidence that it is a
qualified self-insured. All insurance providers will be required to be rated A-
VI or better by A.M. Best or A or better by Standard and Poors. Providers shall
furnish the City with proof of such insurance so required at the time of the
filing of the acceptance of a Municipal Authority. The City reserves the right
to review these insurance requirements during the effective period of any
Municipal Authority and to reasonably adjust insurance coverage and its limits
when deemed necessary and prudent by the City's Risk Manager, based upon
changes in statutory law, court decisions, or the claims history of the
industry or the insurance provider.
   (B)   Subject to Providers' right to maintain reasonable deductibles in such
amounts as are approved by the Director, Providers shall obtain and maintain in
full force and effect for the duration of any Municipal Authority, at
Providers' sole expense, insurance coverage in the type and minimum amounts as
may be required by the City.
   (C)   The Director shall be entitled, upon request and without expense, to
receive copies of certificates of insurance evidencing the coverage required
above. The Director may make any reasonable requests for deletion, revision, or
modification of particular policy terms, conditions, limitations, or
exclusions, except where policy provisions are established by law or regulation
binding upon either City or a Provider, or upon the underwriter for any of such
policies. Upon request for deletion, revision, or modification by the Director,
Providers shall exercise reasonable efforts to accomplish the changes and shall
pay the cost thereof.
   (D)   Providers shall agree that with respect to the above-required
insurance, all insurance certificates will contain the following required
provisions:
      (1)   Name the City of Albuquerque and its officers, employees, board
members, and elected representatives as additional insureds (as the interests
of each insured may appear) as to all applicable coverage;
      (2)   Provide for 30 days notice to the City for cancellation, non-
renewal, or material change;
      (3)   Provide for notice to both the Director and the Office of Risk
Management by certified mail; and
      (4)   Provide that all provisions of this Chapter and the Municipal
Authority, as amended, concerning liability, duty, and standard of care,
including the indemnity section, shall be underwritten by contractual coverage
sufficient to include such obligations within applicable policies, subject to
policy terms and conditions.
   (E)   The insurance certificates obtained by Providers in compliance with
this section shall be subject to approval by the City, and such proof of
insurance shall be filed and maintained with the Director and the Office of
Risk Management during the term of a Municipal Authority, or any extension or
renewal thereof, and may be changed from time to time to reflect changing
liability limits, as required by the City. Providers shall immediately advise
the City Attorney of any actual or potential litigation that may develop that
would affect insurance coverage related to any Municipal Authority.
   (F)   Insurers shall have no right of recovery against the City, it being
the intention that the insurance policies shall protect Providers and the City
and shall be primary coverage for all losses covered by the policies.
   (G)   Companies issuing the insurance policies shall have no recourse
against the City of Albuquerque for payment of any premiums or assessments,
which all are set at the sole risk of the Providers. Insurance policies
obtained by Provider shall provide that the issuing company waives all right of
recovery by way of subrogation against the City in connection with any damage
covered by these policies.
(Ord. 20-1997)
§ 13-4-10-8 TERM OF MUNICIPAL AUTHORITIES.
   The term of each Municipal Authority granted under this Chapter shall be
subject to negotiation with Applicants but in no event shall exceed 10 years.
(Ord. 20-1997)
§ 13-4-10-9 RATES.
   The rates to be charged by the Provider for Telecommunication Service shall
comply with the appropriate regulatory authority, or any other governmental
official, commission, or body having jurisdiction.
(Ord. 20-1997)
§ 13-4-10-10 INDEMNITY.
   Each Municipal Authority granted under this Chapter shall contain provisions
whereby the Provider agrees to defend, indemnify, and hold harmless the City
and its officials, agents, and employees from and against any and all claims,
actions, suits, or proceedings of any kind brought against said parties because
of any injury or damage received or sustained by any person, persons, or
property arising out of or resulting from the Authority granted to Provider or
by reason of any asserted act or omission, neglect, or misconduct of the
Provider, or Provider's agents or employees, or any subcontractor or its agents
or employees. The indemnity required hereunder shall not be limited by reason
of the specification of any particular insurance coverage.
(Ord. 20-1997)
§ 13-4-10-11 VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES.
   (A)   Failure of a Provider to abide by the requirements of §
13-4-10-6, regarding the Public Rights-of-Way: $50 per day for each day such
violation occurs.
   (B)   Failure of a Provider to abide by the requirements of §
13-4-10-4, regarding compensation for use of the Public Rights-of-Way, and the
City's right to perform audits: $50 per day for each day such violation occurs.
   (C)   Default and termination of Municipal Authorities:
      (1)   The Provider agrees that an Event of Default shall include but
shall not be limited to any of the following acts or failure to act by the
Provider:
         (a)   Failure to obtain any applicable permits from the City pursuant
to this Chapter or the Municipal Authority or Franchise Contract.
         (b)   Failure to comply with the assignment of or transfer of control
provisions of this Chapter or the Municipal Authority or Franchise Contract.
         (c)   Failure to supply any required non-monetary consideration.
         (d)   Failure to supply bonds as may be required by the City to assure
the proper completion of any construction performed.
         (e)   Failure to make any of the payments set forth in this Chapter or
as required in any Municipal Authority or Franchise Contract.
         (f)   Failure to pay any permit fees, or failure to comply with any
rules, regulations, orders, or directives of the City as set forth in this
Chapter or any Municipal Authority or Franchise Contract.
      (2)   Upon the occurrence of an Event of Default, in accordance with the
procedures provided for in this Chapter or any Municipal Authority or Franchise
Contract, the City may:
         (a)   Require the Provider to take such actions as the City deems are
appropriate; or
         (b)   Seek money damages from the Provider as compensation for such
Event of Default; or
         (c)   Accelerate the expiration of the term of any Municipal Authority
or Franchise Contract by decreasing the term of the Municipal Authority or
Franchise Contract. The extent of such acceleration shall be determined by the
City and may include any period of time, but not less than six months, provided
that six months remain under the Municipal Authority; or
         (d)   As a last measure only, terminate the Municipal Authority or
Franchise Contract.
      (3)   The City shall exercise the rights set forth in this section in
accordance with the following procedures:
         (a)   The Director shall notify the Provider, in writing, of an
alleged Event of Default. This written notice shall set forth with reasonable
specificity the facts the City believes are the basis for declaring that an
Event of Default has occurred. The Provider shall within 30 calendar days of
the date the notice is postmarked, or such additional time as the Director may
specify in the notice, cure the alleged Event of Default, or in writing present
for review by the Director a reasonable time frame and method to cure the Event
of Default. The Provider, in lieu of the cure of the Event of Default as set
forth herein, may in writing present facts and arguments as to why the Provider
disagrees that an Event of Default has occurred.
         (b)   If the Provider presents a written response that challenges
whether an Event of Default has occurred, the Director shall within ten days
review the submitted materials and determine again whether an Event of Default
has occurred. If the Director reaffirms that an Event of Default has occurred,
the Provider shall be notified in writing of this decision and shall, within 30
calendar days, cure the alleged Event of Default. The period to cure is tolled
in the event one party demands mediation until such time as mediation is
completed.
         (c)   If the Provider fails to cure the Event of Default so declared
pursuant to this section within the time permitted by the Director, the
Director shall prepare a written report to the Council and recommend action to
be taken. If the Council, after consideration of this report and hearing,
agrees that an Event of Default has occurred, it may order an appropriate
remedy as set forth herein.
      (4)   In addition to the rights under this section, the City, upon any
termination, may, at its sole discretion, direct the Provider to remove, at the
Provider's sole cost and expense, any or all of the facilities from all Public
Rights-of-Way within the City, subject to the following:
         (a)   The City may determine that removal of facilities is not
necessary;
         (b)   In removing any part of the facilities, the Provider shall
refill and compact, at its own expense, any excavation that shall be made by it
and shall leave all Public Rights-of-Way in as good a condition as that
prevailing prior to the Provider's removal of the facilities;
         (c)   The City shall have the right to inspect and approve the
conditions of Public Rights-of-Way after removal has occurred;
         (d)   The removal shall commence within 30 days of an order to remove
being issued by the Director at the discretion of the Council;
         (e)   The Provider shall be responsible for all necessary removals of
the facilities and maintenance of the street area in the same manner and degree
as if the facilities were in active use, and the Provider shall retain all
liability associated with such removals.
         (f)   As an alternative to removal, the Provider may, subject to the
City's approval, abandon its facilities in place and transfer ownership of the
installed facilities to the City. Nothing herein shall cause the City to incur
any costs related to the removal of the Provider's facilities or the transfer
of ownership of said facilities to the City.
   (D)   Remedies and penalties not exclusive. All remedies and penalties
granted pursuant to this Chapter and any Municipal Authority or Franchise
Contract are cumulative and not exclusive, and the recovery or enforcement by
one available remedy or imposition of any penalty is not a bar to recovery or
enforcement by any other such remedy or imposition of any other penalty. The
City reserves the right to enforce the penal provisions of any ordinance or
resolution and to avail itself of any and all remedies available at law or in
equity. Failure to enforce shall not be construed as a waiver of a breach of
any term, condition, or obligation imposed upon the Provider by or pursuant to
this ordinance or any Municipal Authority. A specific waiver of a particular
breach of any term, condition, or obligation imposed upon the Provider by or
pursuant to this ordinance or any Municipal Authority shall not be a waiver of
any other or subsequent or future breach of the same or of any other term,
condition, or obligation, or a waiver of the term, condition, or obligation
itself.
(Ord. 20-1997)
§ 13-4-10-12 UNAUTHORIZED USE OF PUBLIC RIGHTS-OF-WAY UNLAWFUL.
   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to use the Public Rights-of-Way to
provide Telecommunications Service that have not been authorized by the City in
accordance with the terms of this Chapter.
   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person to place facilities on Public
Structures or utility infrastructure to provide Telecommunications Service not
allowed under the terms of a Municipal Authority.
   (C)   Each unauthorized Telecommunications Service or use shall be deemed to
be a distinct and separate offense. Each day a violation of this Chapter
continues shall constitute a distinct and separate offense.
   (D)   The violation of any provision of this Chapter shall be unlawful and a
misdemeanor offense. The penalty for any violation of this Chapter shall be as
provided in the Revised Ordinances of Albuquerque, 1994.
(Ord. 20-1997)
§ 13-4-10-13 SEVERABILITY CLAUSE.
   If any section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase, term, provision,
condition, covenant, or portion of this ordinance is for any reason held
invalid, unenforceable, or unconstitutional by a court of competent
jurisdiction, such portion shall be deemed a separate, distinct, and
independent provision, and such holding shall not affect the validity or
enforceability of the remaining portions of this ordinance. The Council hereby
declares that it would have passed this ordinance and each portion thereof
irrespective of any provision being declared unconstitutional or otherwise
invalid.
(Ord. 20-1997)
§ 13-4-10-14 PUBLIC PURPOSE.
   All of the requirements provided in this ordinance are hereby declared to be
for a public purpose and the health, safety, and welfare of the general public
and to ensure proper management of the Public Rights-of-Way. Any member of the
governing body or City official or employee charged with the enforcement of
this ordinance, acting for the City in the discharge of his duties, shall not
thereby render himself personally liable, and he is hereby relieved from all
personal liability for any damage that might accrue to persons or property as a
result of any act required or permitted in the discharge of his said duties.
Neither the City nor any Provider waives its right to seek all appropriate
legal and equitable remedies as allowed by law upon violation of the terms of
this Chapter or any Municipal Authority, including seeking injunctive relief in
a court of competent jurisdiction. Such right to injunctive relief is expressly
reserved and all terms and provisions hereof shall be enforceable through
injunctive relief.
(Ord. 20-1997)
§ 13-4-10-15 PUBLIC MEETING.
   It is hereby officially found and determined that the meeting at which this
ordinance is passed is open to the public as required by law and that public
notice of time, place, and purpose of said meeting was given as required.
(Ord. 20-1997)
Editor's note: The following franchise ordinances have been approved granting
Municipal Authority to rent, use and occupy public rights-of-way to provide
telecommunications services: Ord. 37-1997, approved November 10, 1997, granted
to US West Communications, Inc.; Ord. 38-1997, approved November 10, 1997,
granted to GST Telcom New Mexico, Inc.; Ord. 52-2000, approved December 28,
2000, granted to McLeodUSA Telecommunications Services, Inc.; and Ord. O-2008-
017, approved May 12, 2008, granted to CityLink Fiber Holdings of Albuquerque,
LLC.
ARTICLE 5: COMMUNITY ANTENNA TELEVISION
Section
Part 1: Regulation and Use of Community Antenna Television Systems
   
13-5-1-1   Authority
   
13-5-1-2   Short title
   
13-5-1-3   Purpose
   
13-5-1-4   Definitions
   
13-5-1-5   Franchise required; no transfer without prior approval
   
13-5-1-6   Form of franchise; superiority
   
13-5-1-7   Scope and nature of franchise
   
13-5-1-8   Franchise non-exclusive
   
13-5-1-9   No waiver
   
13-5-1-10   Franchise term
   
13-5-1-11   Costs borne by grantee; bills for costs
   
13-5-1-12   Exercise of rights under a franchise - prohibition of unfair trade
practices
   
13-5-1-13   Exercise of rights under a franchise - minimum conditions on use of
property; construction
   
13-5-1-14   Books and records
   
13-5-1-15   Procedures for paying franchise fees and fees in lieu of franchise
fees
   
13-5-1-16   Protection of city and residents: customer service
   
13-5-1-17   Protection of city and residents: indemnity
   
13-5-1-18   Protection of city and residents: insurance
   
13-5-1-19   Protection of the city and residents: performance bond
   
13-5-1-20   Protection of the city and residents: security fund
   
13-5-1-21   Special rules applicable to cable systems: applications
   
13-5-1-22   Special rules applicable to cable systems: franchise fees
   
13-5-1-23   Special rules applicable to cable systems: service requirements
   
13-5-1-24   Special rules applicable to cable systems: rate regulation
   
13-5-1-25   Special rules applicable to open video systems: applications
   
13-5-1-26   Special rules applicable to open video systems: initial or renewal
franchises
   
13-5-1-27   Special rules applicable to OVS systems: transfers
   
13-5-1-28   Special rules applicable to open video systems: minimum
requirements
   
13-5-1-29   Special rules applicable to open video systems: legal
qualifications
   
13-5-1-30   Enforcement and remedies: revocation
   
13-5-1-31   Enforcement and remedies: liquidated damages
   
13-5-1-32   Enforcement and remedies: relationship
   
13-5-1-33   Captions
   
13-5-1-34   Calculation of time
   
13-5-1-35   Connections to cable system; use of antennae
   
13-5-1-36   Anti-tampering
   
13-5-1-37   Discrimination prohibited
   
13-5-1-38   Emergency use of facilities
   
13-5-1-39   Subscriber privacy; use of data
   
13-5-1-40   Parental controls
   
13-5-1-41   Regulations and amendments
   
13-5-1-42   City powers
   
13-5-1-43   Compliance with laws
   
13-5-1-44   Acceptance
   
13-5-1-45   Publication costs
   
13-5-1-46   Hearings
Part 2: Cable Franchise and Hearing Board and Other Public Bodies
   
13-5-2-1   Albuquerque cable, internet and PEG advisory board
   
13-5-2-2   Government cable channel — board of directors
Part 3: Grant of Cable Franchise Renewal
   
13-5-3-1   Definitions and exhibits
   
13-5-3-2   Grant of franchise
   
13-5-3-3   Franchise fee payment and financial controls
   
13-5-3-4   Administration and regulation
   
13-5-3-5   Financial and insurance requirements
   
13-5-3-6   Customer service
   
13-5-3-7   Reports and records
   
13-5-3-8   Programming
   
13-5-3-9   PEG access
   
13-5-3-10   General right-of-way use and construction
   
13-5-3-11   Cable system, technical standards and testing
   
13-5-3-12   Service availability, interconnection and service to schools and
public buildings
   
13-5-3-13   Franchise violations
   
13-5-3-14   Franchise renewal and transfer
   
13-5-3-15   Miscellaneous provisions
PART 1: REGULATION AND USE OF COMMUNITY
ANTENNA TELEVISION SYSTEMS
§ 13-5-1-1 AUTHORITY.
   The City Council, pursuant to the provisions of Article X, Section 6 of the
Constitution of New Mexico enacts §§ 13-5-1-1 et seq. relating to cable system
and open video system franchises as authorized by such section and for the
purpose of providing maximum local self-government.
(Ord. 24-2002)
§ 13-5-1-2 SHORT TITLE.
   Sections
13-5-1-1 et seq. shall be known and may be cited as the "Albuquerque Cable and
OVS Ordinance."
(Ord. 24-2002)
§ 13-5-1-3 PURPOSE.
   The purpose of §§
13-5-1-1 et seq. is to provide for the granting of franchises for cable systems
and open video systems under certain terms and conditions, to establish certain
requirements for use of public rights-of-way and other property by such
systems, to provide for establishment of customer service standards applicable
to such systems, and to provide for the regulation and use of such systems.
(Ord. 24-2002)
§ 13-5-1-4 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purposes of §§
13-5-1-1 et seq., the following definitions shall apply unless the context
clearly indicates or requires a different meaning. When not inconsistent with
the context, words used in the present tense include the future tense; words in
the plural number include the singular number; words in the singular number
include the plural number; and, the masculine gender includes the feminine
gender. The words "shall" and "will" are mandatory when applied to any person,
and "may" is permissive. Words not defined in
Chapter 13, Article 5 shall have the same meaning as in Title VI of Title 47 of
the United States Code in effect on October 1, 2001, and, if not defined there,
then the same meaning as in Title 47 Code of Federal Regulations, and if not
defined there, then shall have their common and ordinary meaning. References to
governmental entities (whether the reference is to a person, office, agency or
otherwise) refer to those entities or their successors in authority. If
specific provisions of law referred to herein are renumbered, then the
reference shall be read to refer to the renumbered provision. Unless otherwise
specified, references to laws, ordinances or regulations shall be interpreted
to include laws, ordinances and regulations now in force or hereinafter enacted
or amended.
   ACCESS, PEG ACCESS, or PEG USE . The availability of a cable system or open
video system for non-commercial public, education or government use (including
institutional network use) by various eligible agencies, institutions,
organizations, groups, and individuals, including the city and its designated
access providers, to acquire, create, and distribute programming not under a
grantee's editorial control (except as required by applicable law), including,
but not limited to:
      (1)   Public access or public use. Non-commercial access where
organizations, groups, or individual members of the general public are the
primary or designated programmers or users having editorial control over their
programming.
      (2)   Education access or education use. Non-commercial access where
accredited schools are the primary or designated programmers or users having
editorial control over their programming.
      (3)   Government access or government use. Non-commercial access where
government institutions or their designees are the primary or designated
programmers or users having editorial control over their programming.
   AFFILIATE. A person that (directly or indirectly) owns or controls, is owned
or controlled by, or is under common ownership with another person.
   APPLICANT.  Any person which shall have filed a written application for a
franchise under §§
13-5-1-1 et seq. herein provided.
   CABLE MODEM SERVICE.   A two-way activated system that provides access to
the internet and data transmission at speeds at least as great as 200 kilobits
per second.
   CABLE SERVICE. The one-way transmission to subscribers of (i) video
programming, or (ii) other programming service; and the subscriber interaction,
if any, which is required for the selection or use of such video programming or
other programming service.
   CABLE SYSTEM. A facility, consisting of a set of closed transmission paths
and associated signal generation, reception, and control equipment that is
designed to provide cable service which includes video programming and which is
provided to multiple subscribers within a community, but such term does not
include: (1) a facility that serves only to retransmit the television signals
of one or more television broadcast stations; (2) a facility that serves
subscribers without using, or connecting to a facility that uses, any public
right-of-way within the city; (3) a facility of a common carrier which is
subject, in whole or in part, to the provisions of Title II (Common Carriers)
of the federal Communications Act of 1934, as amended, except that such
facility shall be considered a cable system to the extent such facility is used
in the transmission of video programming directly to subscribers, unless the
extent of such use is solely to provide interactive on-demand services; (4) any
facilities of any electric utility used solely for operating its electric
utility systems; or (5) an OVS that is certified by the Federal Communications
Commission (FCC).
   CHANNEL. A portion of the electromagnetic frequency spectrum which is used
in a cable system or open video system and which is capable of delivering video
programming comparable in quality to that delivered by a television broadcast
station.
   CITY. The City of Albuquerque; except that, when used to describe a
geographic area, the term refers to the boundaries of the City of Albuquerque,
New Mexico, as they exist now or may exist in the future via annexation or
consolidation.
   CITY COUNCIL.  The legislative body of the city, or where specified its
designee.
   CONSTRUCTION, OPERATION OR REPAIR. This and similar formulations refer to
the named actions interpreted broadly, encompassing, among other things,
installation, extension, maintenance, replacement of components, relocation,
undergrounding, grading, site preparation, adjusting, testing, make-ready,
excavation, and the management of the cable system and its operations.
   DIRECTOR OF PUBLIC WORKS or DIRECTOR. The Director of the Public Works
Department of the city or his or her designee charged with the administration
of the public rights-of-way.
   FCC.  The United States Federal Communications Commission.
   FRANCHISE.  An authorization granted by the city to the operator of a cable
system which authorized the upgrade, maintenance, construction or operation of
a cable system, including giving the operator the non-exclusive right to occupy
the space, or use facilities upon, across, beneath, or over public rights-of-
way in the city, to provide services within a franchise area. A permit is not a
franchise.
   FRANCHISE AREA. All parts of the city now existing or hereafter annexed or
consolidated.
   GRANTEE. The person to whom a franchise is granted by the city under §§
13-5-1-1 et seq.
   GROSS REVENUES. Any and all revenue of a grantee, of any kind, nature or
form derived from the operation of a cable system to provide cable service.
Gross revenues shall be interpreted consistent with FCC regulations and rulings
and include, by way of example and not limitation, revenues from equipment
sales and rentals, services (including cable modem services, unless such
services are determined by statute, the FCC, a court of competent jurisdiction,
or local agreement to be other than a cable service), installation, late fees
and other subscriber charges, advertising, and shopping services; the term
encompasses revenues that are received now, as well as new revenue sources from
delivery of cable service that may develop in the future; but it does not
extend to amounts received by grantee as a tax, fee or assessment of general
applicability collected by grantee for pass-through to a governmental agency or
reimbursement from third parties for expenses, nor to bad debt or to refunds or
credits issued. Further, gross revenues shall not include any value assigned to
non-monetary transactions for cable or other services provided by grantee. The
term shall be construed to include revenues of a grantee's affiliates (other
than those revenues which are already treated as the revenues of the grantee
upon which a fee is paid), only to the extent necessary to prevent avoidance of
fees owed on grantee's gross revenues from the delivery of cable service. Cable
system revenues shall be as defined by GAAP. Gross revenues shall include cable
modem service unless specifically exempted pursuant to any franchise
authorized.
   MAYOR. The Mayor or the Mayor's designee.
   OPERATOR. A person or group of persons who (1) provides cable service or
open video service over a cable system and directly or through one or more
affiliates owns a significant interest in such cable system; or (2) who
otherwise controls or is responsible for, through any arrangement, the
management and operation of such a cable system.
   OVS.  An open video system. A reference to an OVS includes pedestals,
equipment enclosures (such as equipment cabinets), amplifiers, power guards,
nodes, cables, fiber optics and other equipment necessary to operate the OVS,
or installed in conjunction with the OVS.
   PEG CHANNEL. Any channel on a cable system set aside by a grantee for non-
commercial public, educational, or governmental access, including by way of
example and not limitation, a digital PEG channel or an analog PEG channel.
   PERSON. Any person, individual, firm, organization, corporation,
partnership, association, limited liability company, joint stock or other
company, business or other trust, public agency, school district, the State of
New Mexico, its political subdivisions and/or instrumentalities, or any other
legal entity, but not the city.
   PUBLIC PROPERTY. Any property that is owned or under the control of the city
that is not a public right-of-way, including but not limited to, buildings,
parks, structures such as utility poles and light poles, or similar facilities
or property located in a public right-of-way or owned by or leased to the city.
   PUBLIC RIGHTS-OF-WAY. The surface of and the space above and below any
street, road, highway, freeway, bridge, lane, path, alley, court, sidewalk,
parkway, or right-of-way or easement dedicated to compatible uses, now or
hereafter existing within the city which may be properly used for the purpose
of installing, maintaining, and operating a cable system; and any other
property that a grantee is entitled by state or federal law to use by virtue of
the grant of a franchise.
   SCHOOL.  Any accredited public or private primary or secondary educational
institution that receives Title I funding.
   SUBSCRIBER. The city or any person who lawfully is receiving cable service
from a grantee and does not further distribute such service.
   USER.  A person or city utilizing a channel, capacity or equipment and
facilities of a cable system for purposes of producing or transmitting
programming and other communication material, as contrasted with the receipt
thereof in the capacity of a subscriber.
(Ord. 24-2002)
§ 13-5-1-5 FRANCHISE REQUIRED; NO TRANSFER WITHOUT PRIOR APPROVAL.
   (A)   No person may construct or operate a cable system in the city without
first obtaining a franchise therefor from the city pursuant to the terms and
provisions of the City Charter and this article. A franchise is required before
a permit may be issued for work associated with the construction, operation or
repair of a cable system. Any permit issued for such work to a person that does
not hold a franchise shall vest no rights in the permittee; the permit may be
revoked at will, and the permittee shall remove all facilities installed under
the permit upon and in full compliance with the city's demand.
   (B)   No transfer of a franchise, grantee, or cable system, or of control
over the same (including, but not limited to, transfer by forced or voluntary
sale, merger, consolidation, receivership, or any other means) shall occur
unless prior application is made by the grantee to city and city's prior
written consent is obtained, pursuant to this article and the franchise, and
only then upon such terms and conditions as city reasonably deems necessary and
proper to protect the public interest. City will not unreasonably withhold
consent to a requested transfer. Transfer applications shall be deemed to be
held in trust, and to be personal to the grantee. Any transfer that is made
without the prior approval of City shall be without affect. The granting of
approval for a transfer in one instance shall not render unnecessary approval
of any subsequent transfer. An application for a transfer must be submitted at
least 120 days prior to the date the transaction is scheduled to be
consummated. If the city does not act upon an application for transfer within
120 days, it shall be deemed approved.
   (C)   A change of control of a franchise, grantee, or cable system cable
will be deemed to have occurred whenever there is a change, acquisition or
transfer of control of more than a 25% ownership in the grantee or its direct
or indirect parents by any person, or a group of persons acting in concert who
did not prior to the time of such change, acquisition or transfer already own
25% or greater ownership interest in the grantee or the direct or indirect
parent, except where such change, acquisition or transfer involves only limited
partner interests. Without limiting the above, any change in the general
partners of a grantee will be presumed a change in control. A transfer also
occurs whenever there is a change in actual working control (but not including
non-ownership management), in whatever manner exercised, over the affairs of a
grantee or its direct or indirect parents.
   (D)   Notwithstanding any other provision of this article, pledges in trust
or mortgages of the assets of a cable system to secure the construction,
operation, or repair of the system may be made without application and without
city's prior consent. However, no such arrangement may be made if it would in
any respect under any condition:
      (1)   Prevent the grantee or any successor from complying with this
article, the franchise or other applicable law or regulation; or
      (2)   Permit a third party to succeed to the interest of the grantee, or
to own or control the system, without the prior consent of city. Any mortgage,
pledge or lease shall be subject to and subordinate to the rights of city under
any franchise, this article, or other applicable law.
(Ord. 24-2002)
§ 13-5-1-6 FORM OF FRANCHISE; SUPERIORITY.
   Any franchise shall be issued in the form of an ordinance and must be
accepted by the grantee pursuant to the terms of this article for the franchise
to become effective. Should there be an inconsistency or conflict between any
provision of this ordinance and the terms, conditions or other provisions in a
franchise ordinance issued to a grantee, the cable ordinance shall control
except where expressly provided otherwise in the franchise.
(Ord. 24-2002)
§ 13-5-1-7 SCOPE AND NATURE OF FRANCHISE.
   (A)   A franchise granted pursuant to this article authorizes a grantee to
construct, upgrade, operate, maintain and repair a cable system or an OVS (as
applicable) in the city and to provide such cable and other services as grantee
is entitled to provide pursuant to governing law or is required to provide in
order to comply with its franchise; and to erect, install, construct, repair,
replace, reconstruct, maintain facilities appurtenant to such system in, on,
over, under, upon, across, and along those public rights-of-way and easements
dedicated to compatible uses that the city may authorize a grantee to use.
   (B)   A franchise shall not convey rights other than as expressly specified
in this article, or in a franchise; no rights shall pass by implication.
   (C)   A franchise issued pursuant to this article shall not include, or be a
substitute for:
      (1)   Complying with requirements for the privilege of transacting and
carrying on a business within the city not inconsistent with grantee's status;
      (2)   Franchises or other authorizations lawfully required under the City
Code for the provision of non-cable services, or the construction and
installation of facilities solely to be used for the provision of non-cable
services;
      (3)   Permits, agreements or authorizations generally required in
connection with construction, operation or repair of the cable system and
comparable facilities, including by way of example and not limitation, street
cut permits or zoning variances; or
      (4)   Permits or agreements for occupying any public property of the city
or private entities to which access is not specifically granted by the
franchise.
   (D)   Except as provided therein, a franchise does not relieve a grantee of
its duty to comply with all generally applicable city ordinances, resolutions,
written policies, and regulations, and every grantee must comply with the same.
The rights granted under a franchise are subject to the exercise of police
powers the city now has or may later obtain, including but not limited to the
power of eminent domain which the city now has; and are further subject to the
exercise of the city's rights as a property owner under state and federal laws.
Nothing in any franchise shall be read to waive any of the city's police
powers. Every franchise granted shall be subject to the requirements of the
City Charter.
   (E)   A franchise does not convey title, equitable or legal, in the public
rights-of-way or public property. Any right granted to grantee by a franchise
shall not be subdivided or subleased to any other person or affiliate.
   (F)   A transfer of a franchise made without the city's prior consent is
without effect.
(Ord. 24-2002)
§ 13-5-1-8 FRANCHISE NON-EXCLUSIVE.
   No franchise shall be exclusive, or prevent city from issuing other
franchises, or prevent city from itself constructing, operating, or maintaining
its own cable system. The city shall authorize or permit any person providing
video programming services and/or cable services to enter into the public
rights-of-way in any part of the franchise area on terms or conditions
substantially similar to those applied to another grantee pursuant to its
franchise already issued.
(Ord. 24-2002)
§ 13-5-1-9 NO WAIVER.
   The failure of the city or grantee, upon one or more occasions, to exercise
a right or to require compliance or performance under a franchise or any other
applicable law shall not be deemed to prospectively constitute a waiver of such
right or a waiver of compliance or performance, unless such right has been
specifically waived in writing. Waiver of one right shall not be deemed a
waiver of any other right, similar or dissimilar.
(Ord. 24-2002)
§ 13-5-1-10 FRANCHISE TERM.
   Every franchise shall be for a term of years set forth in the franchise,
which term shall be a maximum of 10 years unless negotiated otherwise by mutual
agreement.
(Ord. 24-2002)
§ 13-5-1-11 COSTS BORNE BY GRANTEE; BILLS FOR COSTS.
   (A)   Unless otherwise specifically stated in this ordinance or a franchise,
all acts which a grantee is required to perform under the franchise or
applicable law must be performed at the grantee's expense, or that of a third
party as may be lawfully required, including but not limited to protection,
support, disconnection, relocation or removal of its property when required by
the city. This provision is not intended to limit grantee's right to pass
through to subscribers or other third parties franchise related or other costs
incurred in exercising obligations under this ordinance or the franchise.
   (B)   If a grantee fails to perform work that it is required to perform
within the time provided for performance, after written notice and a reasonable
opportunity to cure, the city may perform the work or cause the work to be
performed and bill the grantee therefor. The grantee shall pay the amounts
billed within 30 days.
(Ord. 24-2002)
§ 13-5-1-12 EXERCISE OF RIGHTS UNDER A FRANCHISE - PROHIBITION OF UNFAIR TRADE
PRACTICES.
   A grantee may not engage in any trade practices prohibited by law.
(Ord. 24-2002)
§ 13-5-1-13 EXERCISE OF RIGHTS UNDER A FRANCHISE - MINIMUM CONDITIONS ON USE OF
PROPERTY; CONSTRUCTION.
   (A)   City use of facilities. The city shall have the right to install and
maintain free of charge upon any poles or in any conduit owned by a grantee any
wire and pole fixtures that do not unreasonably interfere with the cable
service operations of the grantee.
   (B)    Joint use. Upon request by the city and to the extent the grantee
legally can do so, pursuant to its leases and agreements with other persons
using the right-of-way, the grantee will grant joint use of easements or
private rights-of-way which it now, or in the future, has an interest in, to
the city for purposes, including but not limited to parks, drainage facilities,
bikeways, traffic conduits, mass transit corridors, sanitary sewer lines,
pedestrian area parking, open spaces, and electric, cable, natural gas, and
water service distribution, provided that the grantee shall not be required to
make such an offer in any circumstance where such offer would unreasonably
interfere with the grantee's use of the easements or private rights-of-way. If
the city's joint use is accepted by the grantee, then any improvements deemed
appropriate by the city shall be made by the city at its sole expense.
   (C)   Budgeting. To facilitate the city's annual budget process, on or
before the 1st of November and each succeeding 1st of November thereafter
during the term of any franchise granted under this article, the grantee will
provide the city, upon city's request, with an estimate of the gross revenue
and resultant franchise fee for the following calendar year. The estimated
gross revenues and resultant franchise fees are not a guarantee and shall not
create a duty or obligation on the part of the grantee to meet gross revenue
estimates or remit any estimated franchise fee amounts.
   (D)   All work subject to city laws and regulations.  The construction,
operation, and repair of cable systems shall be performed in compliance with
all laws, ordinances, resolutions, departmental rules, regulations, written
policies, and practices affecting such system. By way of example, and not
limitation, this includes Chapter 14, Article 16 of the Albuquerque Code of
Ordinances (the City's
Integrated Development Ordinance); ordinances, regulations and policies to
preserve or protect the public safety; construction standards; regulations for
providing notice to persons that may be affected by system construction; and
directives governing the time, place and manner in which facilities may be
installed in the public rights-of-way or on other property. Persons engaged in
the construction, operation, or repair of cable systems shall exercise
reasonable care in the performance of all their activities and shall use
commonly accepted methods and devices for preventing failures and accidents
that are likely to cause damage, injury, or nuisance to the public or to
property.
   (E)   Permits. Construction, operation, or repair of a cable system shall
not commence until all required permits have been obtained from the proper city
officials and all required permit fees have been paid. All work performed will
be performed in strict accordance with the conditions of the permit. City will
not unreasonably withhold granting of permits. Upon order of the city, any work
and/or construction undertaken that is not completed in compliance with the
city's requirements, or which is installed without obtaining necessary permits
and approvals shall be removed in accordance with the reasonable timeline set
forth by the city, unless grantee receives the necessary permits and approvals
and/or corrects the non-compliant work or construction. To the extent generally
required of others for construction within the city, a grantee shall reimburse
the city for costs incurred in inspecting construction undertaken in the course
of major upgrades and/or installation of fiber optics. No such reimbursement
shall be required solely because of the grantee's status as a cable system or
OVS operator.
   (F)   Safety codes. Without limiting the foregoing, the installation of any
cable system shall be in accordance with the requirements of the National
Electrical Safety Code of the American Insurance Association (successor to
National Board of Fire Underwriters) and all applicable laws, ordinances,
rules, regulations of the state and of the city affecting electrical
installations and buildings in effect at the time of such installation. All
structures and all lines, equipment, and connections in, over, under, and upon
the streets shall at all times be kept and maintained in a safe, suitable,
substantial condition, and in good order and repair.
   (G)   Maps. Grantee shall file maps and/or drawings with the Director
showing the location of any construction or extension of its facilities and
services in any public rights-of-way of the city. For multi-conduit duct banks,
maps and drawings shall show overall size, material, and configuration of the
duct bank.
   (H)   Preconstruction maps; fees. Prior to initiating any construction or
extension of the cable system and contemporaneous with the filing of maps and
drawings, grantee shall tender a review/location fee, in addition to the
franchise fee, with the Director. Such preconstruction review/location fee
shall be $2.50 per linear foot as diagramed and mapped; however, in no event
shall such fee exceed $30,000 on an annual basis after completion of any
initial build or upgrade required by a franchise. The review/location fee shall
be imposed for all subsequent additions or extensions of the grantee's cable
system as may be proposed from time to time and shall be due each 15th day of
January, the due date for updated maps.
   (I)   Installations, excavations, and restorations. Pursuant to any
franchise granted under this article, the city shall have the right to regulate
the time, manner and location of facilities in the public rights-of-way.
Without limiting the foregoing, the city may require a grantee, where
unreasonable delay in grantee's work will not result, to coordinate its work
with work performed by others in the public rights-of-way so that interference
with the use of the public rights-of-way by others, including others that may
be installing cable systems, may be minimized. The city may require a person
using the public rights-of-way to cooperate with others through joint trenching
and other arrangements to minimize adverse impacts on the public rights-of-way,
subject to a grantee's right to not be unduly delayed in its emergency or
planned work. The grantee shall have the right to excavate in, occupy, and use
all public rights-of-way and easements dedicated for compatible uses for the
purpose of installing, erecting, constructing, repairing, maintaining,
removing, relocating, and operating a cable system after obtaining any and all
appropriate permits from the city, provided, however, that:
      (1)   The grantee shall not place any of its facilities on, over, under,
or within any city park, duly designated as such by the city without first
having obtained the written permission of the city;
      (2)   The grantee shall not place any of its facilities on, over, or
within the median portion of any boulevard or parkway, except for perpendicular
crossings, without first having obtained the written permission of the city;
      (3)   No cable, line, wire, amplifier, converter or other piece of
equipment owned or controlled by the grantee shall be installed by the grantee
inside a dwelling or other occupied structure without first securing the
permission of the owner or the lawful occupant of the property involved;
      (4)   The city reserves the right to determine the location of work in
the right-of-way. The city shall not unreasonably withhold or restrict a
grantee's access to right-of-ways;
      (5)   A grantee shall endeavor to employ trenchless technology in the
placement of its facilities where technically and financially appropriate.
   (J)   Work involving excavations; notice. Except in an emergency, prior to
the commencement of any work by the grantee which involves excavation in any
public rights-of-way, the grantee shall notify the Director through the
barricade and excavation permit process, and shall pay any generally applicable
fees. Grantee shall comply with the street excavation ordinance as it now
exists or may exist in the future.
   (K)   Clean-up and restoration. After any excavation shall be made and after
work is completed, the grantee, at grantee's expense, shall as soon as
practicable but not longer than one day, weather permitting, remove all surplus
material, and restore the portion of the public rights-of-way to a condition
that reasonably meets or exceeds the pre-excavation condition of such rights-
of-way, subject to inspection by the Director. Any other affected public or
private property shall be restored to a condition reasonably as good as that
which existed prior to the work. If the grantee fails to restore promptly the
affected property, including reseeding, then following written notice to
grantee, and reasonable opportunity to cure, the city may make the restoration
in a manner satisfactory to city, and all costs incurred for such restoration,
whether done with city work forces and equipment or otherwise shall be paid by
the grantee, including the cost of any inspectors the city may assign to the
project.
   (L)   Maintaining facilities in good condition. The grantee shall be
responsible for the maintenance of its own equipment, facilities, and
appurtenances placed upon, over, or under the public right-of-way, including
the removal of all graffiti therefrom. If after notice from the city that such
graffiti has not been removed, it will be removed by the city at grantee's sole
cost.
   (M)   Persons with disabilities. The grantee shall ensure its public
facilities in public rights-of-way are located and constructed in a manner
consistent with any requirements of the Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA)
applicable at the time of construction. Following notice by the city of an ADA
construction problem, the grantee shall have 30 days or other reasonable time
to remedy the problem, subject to a grantee's right to contest the alleged ADA
violation.
   (N)   Utility coordinating committee. Execution of any franchise requires
the grantee to participate with a local utility coordinating committee, or a
grantee may provide a similar service pursuant to a franchise, which service
would be governed by state law. If the grantee elects to become a member of the
local utility coordinating committee, the grantee further agrees to participate
in such organization(s) and abide by their articles of incorporation, by-laws,
and other requirements.
   (O)   Use of existing poles and conduit.  A grantee shall use existing poles
and conduit wherever appropriate. Additional poles may not be installed in the
right-of-way without the permission of the Director. While it is the policy of
the city to minimize the increase of any above ground utilities, no
undergrounding shall be required solely because of the grantee's status as a
cable system or OVS operator, nor where other existing utility facilities are
above ground.
   (P)   Publicizing proposed construction work. 
      (1)   A grantee will publicize the initial build or any substantial
rebuild or upgrade of its cable system cable in each affected neighborhood at
least one week before commencing that work by providing written notice to the
city and by notifying those persons whose property is within 300 feet of the
work in at least two of the following ways:
         (a)   Telephone;
         (b)   In person;
         (c)   By mail;
         (d)   By distributing flyers to residences; or
         (e)   By publication in local newspapers or by television public
service announcement.
      (2)   Apart from any initial build or substantial rebuild or upgrade, any
construction will be publicized in accordance with applicable notice
requirements.
      (3)   Before entering onto any person's property, a grantee will contact
the property owner or, in the case of residential property, the resident in the
manner described in this section. If grantee must enter a residence or
building, it must schedule a mutually convenient appointment with the owner or
resident. No cable, line, wire, amplifier, converter or other piece of
equipment owned or controlled by the grantee shall be installed by the grantee
inside a dwelling or other occupied structure without first securing the
permission of the owner or the lawful occupant of the property involved.
      (4)   For the purposes of this section, the term "substantial rebuild or
upgrade" means the planned replacement or addition of trunk or distribution
cable (but not drops) affecting:
         (a)   More than 10% of the cable system subscribers; or
         (b)   Involving more than 20 miles of plant.
      (5)   During the period of any cable system cable initial build or
rebuild, a grantee will maintain a file open for public inspection showing its
timetable for constructing the cable system cable by area of the city.
   (Q)   System maintenance. Scheduled maintenance will be performed to
minimize the effect of any necessary interruptions of cable service.
   (R)    Relocation.
      (1)   A grantee shall, by a reasonable time specified by the city,
protect, support, temporarily disconnect, relocate, or remove any of its
property when requested by the city by reason of traffic conditions; public
safety; public right-of-way construction and repair (including re-grading,
resurfacing or widening); public right-of-way vacation; construction,
installation or repair of sewers, drains, water pipes, power lines, signal
lines, tracks, or any other type of government-owned system or utility, public
work, public facility, or improvement. Collectively, such matters are referred
to below as the "public work." If funds are available to any person using the
public rights-of-way for the purpose of defraying the cost of any of the
foregoing, the city shall reimburse the grantee in the same manner in which
other persons affected by the requirement are reimbursed. If the funds are
controlled by another governmental entity, the city shall make application for
such funds on behalf of grantee.
      (2)   The city or agent shall provide written notice describing where the
public work is to be performed at least two weeks prior to the deadline by
which a grantee must protect, support, temporarily disconnect, relocate or
remove its facilities. However, in an emergency or where a cable system creates
or is contributing to an imminent danger to health, safety, or property (and in
which case without prior notice), or where the grantee has failed, after the
notice provided above, to protect, support, temporarily disconnect, relocate or
remove its facilities, the city may protect, support, temporarily disconnect,
remove, or relocate any necessary parts of the cable system and charge grantee
for costs incurred.
      (3)   Upon written notice of need, a grantee shall use reasonable good
faith efforts to accommodate the construction, operation or repair of the
facilities of another person authorized to use the public rights-of-way or
public property. A person seeking accommodation shall provide a grantee
reasonable notice, but, except in case of emergency, not less than 30 days
prior to the time the accommodation work is to be completed. Such other person
shall have responsibility for any and all costs associated with grantee's
efforts to protect, support, temporarily disconnect, relocate or remove its
facilities to accommodate the requesting person.
      (4)   Nothing herein shall be construed to reduce or otherwise affect any
right the city or a grantee has to recover, seek contribution for, or to offset
the costs of complying with the requirements of this provision.
   (S)   Undergrounding. Grantee shall locate or relocate its facilities
underground:
      (1)   During construction in any area where all existing electric and
telephone utilities are located underground or in an area where all electric or
telephone utilities are required to be relocated underground; and
      (2)   In any area where all owners of poles locate or relocate facilities
underground, concurrently with the placement of the pole owner's facilities
underground.
   Location or relocation underground according to this provision shall be
without direct cost to the city. If funds are available to any person using the
public rights-of-way for the purpose of defraying the cost of any of the
foregoing, the city shall reimburse the grantee in the same manner in which
other persons affected by the requirement are reimbursed. If the funds are
controlled by another governmental entity, the city shall make application for
such funds on behalf of grantee.
   (T)   Public works and improvements. 
      (1)   Whenever the city shall excavate or perform any work in any present
and/or future public rights-of-way of the city, or shall contract, for such
excavation or work, where such excavation or work may disturb but not require
removal or relocation of grantee's facilities, the city shall notify the
grantee sufficiently in advance of such contemplated excavation or work to
enable the grantee to take such measures as may be deemed necessary to protect
and support such facilities from damage or injury to the public or the city's
public rights-of-way. If the grantee cannot take such measures, the grantee may
be required to relocate its facilities in accordance with this article. In such
case, the grantee upon request shall furnish field markings to the city or
contractor, as the case may be, showing the location of all its facilities in
the area involved in such proposed excavation or other work.
      (2)   Whenever grantee shall excavate or perform any work in any present
and/or future public rights-of-way of the city, or shall contract, for such
excavation or work, where such excavation or work may disturb but not require
removal or relocation of city's facilities, grantee shall notify the city
sufficiently in advance of such contemplated excavation or work to enable city
to take such measures as may be deemed necessary to protect and support such
facilities from damage and possible inconvenience or injury to the public or
city's public rights-of-way.
      (3)   Nothing herein shall be construed to reduce or otherwise affect any
right a grantee has to recover (from a party other than the city), seek
contribution for or to offset the costs of complying with the requirements of
this provision. If funds are available to any person using the public rights-
of-way for the purpose of defraying the cost of any of the foregoing, the city
shall reimburse the grantee in the same manner in which other persons affected
by the requirement are reimbursed. If the funds are controlled by another
governmental entity, the city shall make application for such funds on behalf
of grantee.
   (U)   Moving of buildings. Whenever it becomes necessary to temporarily
rearrange, remove, lower, or raise the aerial cables or wires or other
apparatus of the grantee to permit the passage of any building, machinery, or
other object, the grantee shall perform such rearrangement upon receipt of
payment for the estimated costs incurred by the grantee in making such
rearrangements, and provided that grantee received written notice at least 30
days in advance from the person or persons desiring to move said building,
machinery, or other objects. The written notice shall detail the route of
movement of the building, machinery, or other object. The costs incurred by the
grantee in making such rearrangements of its aerial plant will be borne by the
person or persons seeking such rearrangement, unless the aerial plant is placed
or maintained in violation of the applicable rules of any local, state, or
federal regulatory agency and thereby unlawfully interferes with the movement.
   (V)   Interference and review of city project plans.  Upon submittal by the
city of city construction plans, the grantee will review and identify locations
of cables and/or conflicts within two weeks of request. The grantee shall not
be required to attach its facilities to the facilities of any other person or
entity or to permit the facilities of any other person or entity to be attached
to the grantee's facilities if it can be shown to the reasonable satisfaction
of the city that the grantee will be subjected to increased costs, risks of
interruption of service or to increased liability for accidents, or if the
facilities of such other person or entity are not of the character, design, and
construction required by, or are not being maintained in accordance with
industry standards or practice and the city determines that the potential
adverse effect on the grantee outweighs the harm to the public health, safety
or welfare. This does not preclude the city from requiring co-location in
common trenches where appropriate.
   (W)   Restoration of property. The grantee shall reconstruct, replace, or
restore in a timely fashion that portion of any street, alley, or public way or
place; and any water, sewer, sanitary sewer, storm drainage, traffic
signalization or other facility of the city, disturbed or damaged by the
grantee, to a condition reasonably acceptable to the city consistent with
reasonable standards of safety and appearance as required by generally
applicable law and codes adopted pursuant to exercise of the city's police
powers.
   (X)   Supplying maps.  Grantee shall maintain on file all available maps,
operational data, and reports pertaining to its operations in the city. The
city may inspect the maps, data, and reports at any time during business hours.
Upon request of the city, the grantee shall furnish to the city, as soon as
practicable without charge, current maps, in a hard copy printed form and in
the city's Albuquerque Geographic Information System (AGIS) format or
compatible data base, showing the location and dimension of any facilities
within the franchise area. A grantee supplying maps under this provision may
excise proprietary information so long as the location and dimension of any
facilities, and their character (e.g. "pole," "equipment cabinet;" fiber optic
cable; "power line") are clearly shown.
   (Y)    Conditions of sale.
      (1)   If a renewal of a franchise held by a grantee is denied and the
city acquires ownership of a grantee's cable system, or effects a transfer of
ownership of the system to another person, the valuation of any such
acquisition or transfer shall be in accordance with 47 U.S.C. § 547(a).
      (2)   If a franchise held by a grantee is revoked for cause and the city
acquires ownership of the cable system or effects a transfer of ownership of
the system to another person, the valuation of any such acquisition or transfer
shall be in accordance with 47 U.S.C. § 547(b).
   (Z)   Utility contracts. Within 30 days of the city's request, the grantee
shall make available for city inspection and copying copies of all contracts
which it may have with all public utility companies, whereby grantee is granted
any right to use any of the property, equipment or facilities of such utility
or utilities in the conduct of any operations pursuant to the franchise or
franchise renewal awarded to said grantee.
   (AA)   Failure to perform.  If grantee should fail to perform any work
required under this Section 13-5-1-13, the city, after written notice and
reasonable opportunity to cure, may cause work to be performed, and may bill
the grantee therefor, or draw upon any security fund or bond to recover its
costs. If the city bills the grantee, the grantee shall pay the amount billed
within 30 days of the billing date.
(Ord. 24-2002; Am. Ord._2017-025)
§ 13-5-1-14 BOOKS AND RECORDS.
   (A)   Right to inspect and copy.  The city shall have the right to inspect
and copy books and records: related in whole or in part to the construction,
operation or repair of the cable system and reasonably necessary for the city
to monitor compliance with the terms of this ordinance, a franchise or
applicable law; or reasonably necessary to the exercise of any right or duty of
the city under the same. Each grantee is responsible for maintaining control
over books and records related in whole or in part to the construction,
operation, or repair of the cable system. It is responsible for producing these
records within its care, custody or control upon the city's request for the
city's inspection. The records that grantee must produce shall include, but are
not limited to records used to compute franchise fees, and other records
related to compliance with any provision of this article or a franchise.
However, nothing herein gives the city the right to inspect or copy a grantee's
confidential financial and/or proprietary information nor access to grantee's
electronic data systems. Books and records must be maintained for a period of
three years, except that a franchise may specify a shorter period for certain
categories of voluminous books and records where the information contained
therein can be derived simply from other materials.
   (B)   Production to city.  Books and records requested shall be produced to
the city by a time and at a location in the city designated by the Mayor.
However, if the requested books and records are too voluminous, or for security
reasons cannot be copied and moved, then the grantee may request that the
inspection take place at some other location mutually agreed to by the city and
the grantee, provided that:
      (1)   The grantee must make necessary arrangements for copying documents
selected by the city after its review; and
      (2)   The grantee must pay all travel and additional copying expenses
incurred by the city (above those that would have been incurred had the
documents been produced in the city) in inspecting those documents or having
those documents inspected by its designee.
   (C)   Reports. It is recognized that reports required by the city increase
costs and may result in higher rates or subscriber pass through. Any report
required hereunder may be prepared in a manner consistent with the grantee's
regular records at the level where normally kept.
      (1)   The Mayor may from time to time (but not more often than once per
year) direct a grantee to prepare reports reasonably necessary to the city's
monitoring compliance with the terms of this ordinance, a franchise or
applicable law and to submit those reports by a date certain, allowing
reasonable time for preparation, in addition to those otherwise required by
this article.
      (2)   Within 30 days of a request by the Mayor, but not more than two
times per year, a grantee shall submit a report to the city containing the
following information:
         (a)   The number of service calls (calls requiring a truck roll)
received during the prior quarter and the percentage of service calls compared
to the subscriber base; and
         (b)   The total estimated hours of known outages as a percentage of
total hours of operation. An outage is a loss of sound or video on any signal,
or a significant deterioration of any signal affecting five or more
subscribers.
      (3)   Unless an exemption is granted by the Mayor, no later than 90 days
after the end of its fiscal year, a grantee shall submit the following
information, except that the information required by Section 13-5-1-14(C)(3)
(c), below, need only be provided where there has been a change from the
preceding year:
         (a)   An audited or certified revenue report from the previous
calendar year for the cable system, and a certified statement setting forth the
computation of gross revenues used to calculate the franchise fee for the
preceding year and a detailed explanation of the method of computation showing
(i) gross revenues by category (e.g., basic, pay, pay-per-view, advertising,
installation, equipment, late charges, miscellaneous, other); and (ii) what, if
any, deductions were made from gross revenues in calculating the franchise fee
(e.g., bad debt, credits and refunds), and the amount of each deduction.
         (b)   A report showing, for each applicable customer service standard,
the grantee's performance with respect to that standard for each quarter of the
preceding year. In each case where grantee concludes it did not comply fully,
the grantee will describe the corrective actions it is taking to assure future
compliance. In addition, the report should identify the number and nature of
the written customer service complaints received and an explanation of their
dispositions.
         (c)   An ownership report, indicating all persons who at the time of
filing control or own an interest in the grantee of 10% or more.
      (4)   Within 10 days of their receipt or (in the case of documents
created by the grantee or a person acting on its behalf) filing, a grantee
shall provide the city:
         (a)   Notices of deficiency or forfeiture related to the operation of
the cable system;
         (b)   Any request for protection under bankruptcy laws, or any
judgment related to a declaration of bankruptcy by the grantee or by any
partnership or corporation that owns or controls the grantee directly or
indirectly; and
         (c)   Copies of all petitions, applications and communications in
respect to any matters affecting the cable system submitted by the grantee to
the Federal Communications Commission, Securities and Exchange Commission or
any other federal or state regulatory commission or agency having jurisdiction.
   (D)   Other records required. Unless the Mayor specifically waives the
requirement in writing, a grantee shall at all times maintain:
      (1)   Records of all written complaints received, their nature and
resolution. The term "complaints" refers to complaints about any aspect of the
grantee's construction, operations or repair activities;
      (2)   Records of outages known to the grantee, their cause and duration;
      (3)   Records of service calls for repair and maintenance indicating the
nature of the call for service, the date and time service was requested, the
date of acknowledgment and date and time service was scheduled (if it was
scheduled), and the date and time service was provided, and (if different) the
date and time the problem was solved;
      (4)   Records of installation/reconnection and requests for service
extension, indicating date of request, date of acknowledgment, and the date and
time service was extended;
      (5)   Records sufficient to show whether the grantee has complied with
each FCC customer service standard that applies to it.
    (E)   Exemptions. The Mayor may exempt any grantee from its obligations
under Sections 13-5-1-14(C)-(D) if the Mayor reasonably determines that the
requirement would be unduly burdensome or unnecessary, and that city and
subscriber interests may be adequately protected in some other manner.
   (F)   Privacy. A grantee shall take all reasonable steps required so that it
is able to provide reports, books and records to the city, including by
providing appropriate subscriber privacy notices. Each grantee shall be
responsible for redacting data that applicable law prevents it from providing
to the city. Nothing in this section shall be read to require a grantee to
create or maintain redundant records nor to violate state or federal subscriber
privacy laws.
(Ord. 24-2002)
§ 13-5-1-15 PROCEDURES FOR PAYING FRANCHISE FEES AND FEES IN LIEU OF FRANCHISE
FEES.
   (A)   The franchise fee paid pursuant to Section
13-5-1-22 and the fee in lieu of franchise fee paid pursuant to Sections
13-5-1-28(H), (I) shall be paid quarterly, unless otherwise specified in a
franchise. Payment for each quarter shall be made to the city not later than 45
days after the end of each calendar quarter. The city prefers receipt of
franchise payments in electronic format. Grantee shall use an Automated
Clearing House (ACH) standard format. Payments will be made according to
instructions provided by the city and to credit the Common Fund account at the
city's fiscal agent bank, currently Bank of America, New Mexico.
   (B)   Unless a franchise expressly provides otherwise, a grantee or other
person subject to a fee under Sections
13-5-1-28(H) and (I) shall file with the city within 45 days of the end of each
calendar quarter a statement showing gross revenues during the preceding
quarter and the number of subscribers served.
   (C)   No acceptance of any payment by the city shall be construed as a
release or an accord and satisfaction of any claim the city may have for
further or additional sums payable as a franchise fee or for the performance of
any other obligation of the grantee.
   (D)   Neither the franchise fee under Section
13-5-1-22, nor the fee paid in lieu of the franchise fee under Sections
13-5-1-28(H) and (I), is a payment in lieu of any tax, fee or other assessment
of general applicability, and all such payments are subject to applicable
federal law and regulations affecting franchise fees.
   (E)   In the event that a fee payment is not received by the city on or
before the due date set forth in this section or in a franchise, or the fee
owed is not fully paid, the person subject to the fee will be charged interest
on the outstanding amount owed from the due date at an interest rate equal to
3% above the rate for three-month Federal Treasury Bills at the most recent
United States Treasury Department sale of such Treasury Bills occurring prior
to the due date of the franchise fee payment.
   (F)   Within 90 days of the date a grantee ceases operations under a
franchise (whether because of franchise termination, transfer, bankruptcy or
for any other reason), the grantee (or its successor in interest) shall:
      (1)   Make a final franchise fee payment, covering the period from the
end of prior calendar month to date the grantee ceased operations; and
      (2)   File a final statement of gross revenues covering the period from
the beginning of the calendar year in which the operations ceased to the date
operations ceased. The statement shall contain the information and be certified
as required by Section
13-5-1-14(C)(3)(a).
(Ord. 24-2002)
§ 13-5-1-16 PROTECTION OF CITY AND RESIDENTS: CUSTOMER SERVICE.
   Each grantee shall meet or exceed the customer service standards adopted by
the state or the FCC and shall comply with all customer service standards
adopted by the city.
(Ord. 24-2002)
§ 13-5-1-17 PROTECTION OF CITY AND RESIDENTS: INDEMNITY.
   No franchise shall be valid or effective until and unless city obtains an
adequate indemnity from the grantee. The indemnity must, to the extent
permitted by law:
   (A)   Release city from and against any and all liability and responsibility
in or arising out of the construction, operation, repair or maintenance of the
cable system, except to the extent that it arises from the intentional or
grossly negligent conduct of the city or those for whom the city is
responsible. Each grantee must further agree not to sue or seek any money or
damages from city in connection with the above mentioned matters; and
   (B)   Defend, indemnify and hold harmless city, its elected and appointed
officers, agents, and employees, from and against any and all claims, demands,
or causes of action of any kind or nature brought because of any injury,
including death, or damage received or sustained by any person, persons or
property and the resulting losses, costs, expenses, reasonable attorneys' fees,
liabilities, damages, orders, judgments or decrees sustained by the city, or by
reason of, or resulting from the acts, errors, or omissions of the grantee, or
its agents, independent contractors or employees related to or in any way
arising out of the construction, operation or repair of the system. To the
extent, if at all, § 56-7-1 NMSA 1978 is applicable to the indemnity agreements
contained in this ordinance, the indemnity agreements will not extend to
liability, claims, damages, losses or expenses, including attorney's fees,
arising out of:
      (1)   The preparation or approval of maps, drawings, opinions, reports,
surveys, change orders, designs or specifications by the city, or the agents or
employees of the city or
      (2)   The giving of or the failure to give directions or instructions by
the city, or the agents or employees of the city, where such giving or failure
to give directions or instructions is the primary cause of bodily injury to
persons or damage to property.
(Ord. 24-2002)
§ 13-5-1-18 PROTECTION OF CITY AND RESIDENTS: INSURANCE.
   (A)   General conditions.  Except as a franchise may otherwise provide, each
grantee shall procure and maintain in full force and effect during the life of
its franchise, such insurance as is required herein. Policies of insurance
shall be written by companies authorized to write such insurance in New Mexico,
and they shall be in a form reasonably satisfactory to city and properly filed
and approved by the Superintendent of Insurance, State of New Mexico. Grantee
shall furnish city a minimum of seven copies of certificates of required
insurance. All certificates of insurance (or policies) shall provide that 30
days' written notice be given to the Risk Manager, Department of Finance and
Administrative Services, City of Albuquerque, Box 470, Albuquerque, New Mexico
87103, before a policy is cancelled, materially changed or not renewed. Various
types of required insurance may be written in one or more policies. With
respect to all coverages required other than workers' compensation, the city
shall be a named additional insured. All coverages shall be primary with
respect to operations provided. The certificates of insurance and endorsements
for each policy shall be signed by a person authorized by that insurer to bind
coverage on its behalf. For persons issued Franchises after the effective date
of this article, certificates and other required proofs shall be filed within
30 days of the issuance of a franchise, once a year thereafter, and whenever
there is any change in coverage. For persons that have facilities in the public
rights-of-way as of the effective date of this article, the certificate shall
be filed within 60 days of the effective date of this article, annually
thereafter, and whenever there is any change in coverage, unless a pre-existing
franchise expressly provides for filing of certificates in a different manner.
   (B)   No work without insurance.  A grantee (or those acting on its behalf)
shall not commence construction or operation of the cable system without first
obtaining insurance in amounts and of a type satisfactory to city. The required
insurance must be obtained and maintained for the entire period the grantee has
facilities in the public rights-of-way or on public property. If the grantee,
its contractors, or subcontractors do not have the required insurance, city may
order such persons to stop operations until the insurance is obtained and
approved.
   (C)   Work of subcontractors.  If any part of the construction, operation or
repair of the cable system is subcontracted, grantee shall:
      (1)   Include any and all subcontractors in his insurance policies; or
      (2)   Require the subcontractor to secure insurance to protect himself
against all hazards enumerated herein which are not covered by grantee's
policies.
   (D)   Approval of insurance. Neither approval nor failure to disapprove
certificates, policies or the insurance by city shall relieve grantee or any
sub-grantee of full responsibility to maintain the required insurance in full
force and effect.
   (E)   Commercial general liability insurance including automobile.
      (1)   Grantee shall procure and maintain during the life of a franchise a
comprehensive commercial general liability and automobile liability insurance
policy with liability limits in amounts not less than $1,000,000 combined
single limit of liability for bodily injury, including death, and property
damage in any one occurrence and in the aggregate. Said policies or insurance
must include coverage for all operations performed for city by grantee,
including, but not limited to, coverage for collapse (C), explosion (X), and
underground (U) liability coverage, coverage for the user of all owned, non-
owned, hired automobiles, vehicles, and other equipment both on and off work,
and contractual liability coverage which shall specifically insure the
indemnification provisions of this ordinance and any franchise.
      (2)   The above requirements shall include, but shall not be limited to,
protection against:
         (a)   Damage to, or destruction of, public and private property
including telephone conduit, telegraph conduit, power conduit, telephone signal
cable, fiber optics cable, television cable, computer cable, fire alarm
circuits, gas mains, gas service connections, sanitary sewers, sewer, house or
building connections, water mains, water service connections, steam lines,
petroleum products pipe lines, storm drains, storm inlet lines, including all
appurtenances thereto while located below the surface of the ground, including
injury or death, to person or persons caused by grantee's operations, including
blasting and trenching-backfilling-tamping with or without the use of
mechanical equipment; and
         (b)   The collapse of, or structural damage to, a building, house or
structure, including power, telephone, telegraph, fire alarm, and street-light
poles, curb and gutter and sidewalk, on public or private property, and
destruction of, or damage to, other public and private property resulting
therefrom, including injury or death to person or persons caused by grantee,
including but not limited to as a result of grantee's operations in the removal
of other buildings, structures, including their supports, trees and utility
poles, or by excavation, including blasting, and trenching-backfilling-tamping
with or without use of mechanical equipment. "Other public and private
property" as used herein shall include lawns, plants, flowers, trees, fences,
yards, walls, etc.
   (F)   City's protective public liability insurance.
      (1)   Grantee shall procure and maintain during the life of a franchise,
a city's protective public liability insurance policy with liability limits in
amounts not less that $1,000,000 combined single limit of liability for bodily
injury, including death, and property damage in any one occurrence and in the
aggregate, or grantee may provide city with evidence of insurance with excess
limits in amounts not less than $5,000,000.
      (2)   The policy will be written with city as the named additional
insured and will provide coverage for city's and its employees while acting
within the scope of their duties against all claims arising out of or in
connection with the work to be performed.
      (3)   In lieu of Section
13-5-1-18(F)(1) and (2), the city may accept equivalent coverage if approved by
the city's Risk Manager.
   (G)   Workers' compensation insurance. Grantee shall comply with the
provisions of the Workers' Compensation Act, the Subsequent Injury Act, and the
New Mexico Occupational Disease Disablement Law. Grantee shall procure and
maintain during the life of a franchise, complete workers' and employer's
liability insurance in accordance with New Mexico law and regulations. Such
insurance shall include coverage permitted under Section 52-1-10 NMSA 1978, for
safety devices. With respect to workers' compensation insurance, if grantee
elects to be self-insured, it shall comply with the applicable requirements of
law. If any portion of the construction, operation or repair of the cable
system is to be subcontracted, grantee shall require the subcontractor
similarly to provide such coverage (or qualify as a self insured) for all
latter's employees to be engaged in such work. Grantee shall save harmless
city, its officers, agents and employees from any claims or actions occasioned
by failure of grantee to comply with the provisions of this subparagraph. It is
agreed that with respect to all workers' compensation insurance, the grantee
and its insurer shall waive any right of subrogation it may acquire against the
city, its officers, agents and employees by reason of any payment made on
account of injury, including death resulting therefrom, sustained by any
employee arising out of the performance of a franchise.
   (H)   Alterations in limits. A franchise may specify different initial
minimum insurance requirements in cases where the city determines that, in
light of the risks presented by a particular franchise, a higher or lower
insurance amount is appropriate. However, unless otherwise stated therein,
every franchise shall be interpreted to permit the city to require the grantee
to increase its insurance limits, or obtain additional types of insurance
should the city determine that there are increased risks to the city or its
citizens, by such time as reasonably may be specified by the city.
   (I)   Ratings. Grantee's insurer shall have no less than an "A-
" policyholder's rating and a financial rating of at least Class XI in
accordance with the Best's rating current at the time purchased, unless
specifically waived in writing by the Risk Manager of the city.
   (J)   No contribution. Any insurance or self insurance maintained by the
city shall be excess of the grantee's insurance and shall not contribute with
it.
(Ord. 24-2002)
§ 13-5-1-19 PROTECTION OF THE CITY AND RESIDENTS: PERFORMANCE BOND.
   Every operator of a cable system shall obtain and maintain a performance
bond to ensure the faithful performance of its responsibilities under this
article and any franchise. In the case of any franchise that requires the
grantee to initially build, or to upgrade a system, the amount of the
construction bond shall be in an amount sufficient to ensure that the required
construction is satisfactorily completed. The amount of the bond shall be
reduced upon successful completion of portions of the required construction.
The amount of the performance bonds shall be set in a franchise in light of the
nature of the work to be performed pursuant to or under the franchise, but
initially shall be 10% of the estimated cost of constructing or (in the case of
existing systems) upgrading the cable system. Performance bonds will be set out
in the franchise, and will be project specific in an amount equal to the cost
of construction stamped as approved by a professional engineer and approved by
the city. The bond is not in lieu of any additional bonds that may be required
in connection with any permitting process. The bond shall be in a form
reasonably acceptable to the City Attorney, and with a surety reasonably
acceptable to the city. Bonds must be obtained prior to the effective date of
any franchise, transfer or franchise renewal, unless a franchise specifically
provides otherwise.
(Ord. 24-2002)
§ 13-5-1-20 PROTECTION OF THE CITY AND RESIDENTS: SECURITY FUND.
   Every grantee shall establish and maintain a cash security fund or provide
city an irrevocable letter of credit in an amount specified in the franchise
but no less than $25,000 to secure the payment of fees owed, to secure any
other performance promised in a franchise or required by this ordinance, and to
pay any taxes, fees or liens owed to city. The letter of credit shall be in a
form and with an institution reasonably acceptable to and approved by the City
Attorney. The city shall provide 10 days written notice that the grantee has
failed to pay fees, taxes or liens or other performance. The notice shall
outline with specificity the reason(s) the city believes it is entitled to draw
upon the security fund. If the grantee does not respond in writing within five
days, the city may draw upon the security fund. Assuming grantee responds
within five days, the city and grantee shall within five days of the city's
receipt of the grantee's response to the notice of intent to draw upon the
security fund, attempt to reach a resolution. If a resolution cannot be reached
at this meeting, the city may immediately proceed to draw upon the fund. Should
the city draw upon the cash security fund or letter of credit, the grantee
shall, within 14 days, restore the fund or the letter of credit to the full
required amount. The city may from time to time require a grantee to change the
amount of the required security fund/letter of credit to reflect changed risks
to city and to the public, including delinquencies in taxes or other payments
to city. The cash security fund or letter of credit must be obtained prior to
the effective date of any franchise, transfer or franchise renewal, unless a
franchise specifically provides otherwise.
(Ord. 24-2002)
§ 13-5-1-21 SPECIAL RULES APPLICABLE TO CABLE SYSTEMS: APPLICATIONS.
   (A)   Application required. An application must be filed for an initial
cable system franchise, or for approval of a transfer. All applications under
this provision of this article shall be in writing and shall be filed in the
Office of the City Clerk. These requirements do not apply to a request for
renewal submitted pursuant to 47 U.S.C. Section 546.
   (B)   Contents for applications for initial franchise.
      (1)   The Mayor may specify the information that must be provided in
connection with an application, and the form in which the information is to be
provided, which shall comply with governing federal and state law.
      (2)   At a minimum, each application must identify the applicant, show
that the applicant is financially, technically and legally qualified to
construct, maintain and operate the cable system, contain a pro forma showing
capital expenditures and expected income and expenses for the first five years
the applicant is to hold the franchise, and show that the applicant is willing
to comply unconditionally with this article and its franchise obligations. In
addition, any application for an initial franchise must describe in detail the
cable system that the applicant proposes to build or maintain, show where it is
or will be located, set out the system construction or rebuild schedule, and
show that the applicant will provide adequate channels, facilities and other
support for public, educational and government use (including institutional
network use) of the cable system. To be accepted for filing, an original and
six copies of a complete application must be submitted. All applications shall
include the names and addresses of persons authorized to act on behalf of the
applicant with respect to the application.
      (3)   The city may at any time demand, and applicant shall provide, such
supplementary, additional or other information as the Mayor may deem reasonably
necessary to determine whether the requested franchise should be granted. An
applicant (and the transferor and transferee, in the case of a transfer) shall
respond to any request for information from the city, by the time specified by
the city.
   (C)   Rejection for incompleteness. An application may be rejected if it is
incomplete, or if the response to requests for information is not reasonably
timely and complete.
   (D)   Application for an initial franchise or renewal franchise. This
subsection establishes additional provisions that apply to an application for
an initial franchise, or a renewal franchise application that is not governed
by 47 U.S.C. Section 546(a)-(h) as may be amended.
      (1)   Any person may apply for an initial or renewal franchise by
submitting an application therefor on that person's own initiative, or in
response to a request for proposals issued by the city. If the city receives an
unsolicited application, it may choose to issue a request for additional
proposals, and require the applicant to amend its proposal to respond thereto.
The city may conduct such investigations as are necessary to act on an
application.
      (2)   The city will conduct a public hearing on an application before
finally accepting it or rejecting it. At the hearing on an application of a
franchise, the City Council shall give all persons desiring to be heard a
reasonable opportunity to be otherwise in favor of or in opposition to the
granting of a franchise to the applicant. The hearing may be continued or
adjourned, from time to time, to a stated time and place without the giving of
further notice.
      (3)   In determining whether to grant a franchise, the city may consider:
         (a)   The extent to which an applicant for renewal has substantially
complied with the applicable law and the material terms of any existing cable
franchise ordinance;
         (b)   Whether an applicant for renewal's quality of service under its
existing franchise ordinance, including signal quality, response to customer
complaints, billing practices, and the like, has been reasonable in light of
the needs of the community;
         (c)   Where the applicant has not previously held a cable system
franchise in the city, whether the applicant's record in other communities
indicates that it can be relied upon to provide high-quality service throughout
any franchise term;
         (d)   Whether the applicant has the financial, legal, and technical
ability to provide the services, facilities, and equipment set forth in an
application, and to satisfy any minimum requirements established by the city;
         (e)   Whether the applicant's application is reasonable to meet the
future cable-related needs and interests of the city, taking into account the
cost of meeting such needs and interests;
         (f)   Whether issuance of a franchise is warranted in the public
interest considering the immediate and future effect on streets, public
property, and private property that will be used by the applicant's cable
system;
         (g)   Whether issuance of the franchise would reduce competition in
the provision of cable service in the city;
         (h)   Whether the applicant has proposed to provide adequate
facilities, equipment, channels and other support for PEG use of the cable
system, taking into account the cost of providing such facilities, equipment,
channels and support;
         (i)   Such other matters as the city is authorized or required to
consider, including whether granting the application would serve the public
interest.
      (4)   If the city determines that issuance of a franchise would be in the
public interest considering the factors described in this section, it may
proffer a franchise to the applicant.
      (5)   Within 31 days after the effective date of the ordinance awarding a
franchise or franchise renewal, or within such extended period of time as the
City Council in its discretion may authorize, the successful applicant or
grantee shall file with the City Clerk a written acceptance, in form
satisfactory to the City Attorney, of the franchise or franchise renewal,
together with an agreement to be bound by and to comply with all applicable
provisions of the city's charter, this article, and the franchise ordinance.
Such acceptance and agreement shall be acknowledged before a notary public and
shall be in form and content reasonably satisfactory to and approved by the
City Attorney.
   (E)   Application for transfer. This subsection establishes provisions that
apply to applications for transfer.
      (1)   An application for transfer must include FCC Form 394 and contain
all the information required by the FCC Form 394 (as it exists on the date of
the application), and such additional information required to understand and
evaluate the FCC Form 394 as the Mayor reasonably may request, and all
information that an applicant is required to file under applicable federal or
state law. If the transferee or grantee unreasonably refuse to provide
information, the request for transfer may be denied.
      (2)   For the purposes of determining whether it shall consent to a
transfer, the city or its agents may inquire into legal, financial and
technical qualifications of the prospective transferee.
      (3)   In determining whether a transfer application should be granted,
denied, or granted subject to conditions, the city may further consider: any
potential material impact of the transfer on regulated subscriber rates or
services; whether the incumbent cable operator is in compliance with its
franchise; whether the transferee owns or controls any other cable system in
the city; whether the transfer may eliminate or reduce competition in the
delivery of cable service in the city; and whether operation by the transferee
or approval of the transfer would otherwise adversely affect subscribers, the
public, or the city's interest under this article, the franchise or other
applicable law.
      (4)   If the city finds that the transfer would be in the public
interest, considering the factors described in this section, the city may
approve the transfer by ordinance, imposing such conditions as may be necessary
to protect the public interest. No application shall be granted unless the
transferee agrees in writing that it will abide by and accept all terms of this
article applicable to the franchise being transferred and the franchise
ordinance, and that it will assume the obligations, liabilities, and
responsibility for all unremedied acts and omissions, known and unknown, of the
previous grantee; and that it will comply with lawful conditions imposed on the
transfer.
   (F)   Legal qualifications. In order to be legally qualified within the
meaning of this Section 13-5-1-21:
      (1)   An application for transfer must contain all the information
required by the Mayor, by Section 13-5-1-21(B)(2), all information required by
the FCC Form 394 as it existed on January 1, 1999, and all information that it
is required to file under applicable federal or state law.
      (2)   For the purposes of determining whether it shall consent to a
transfer, the city or its agents may inquire into all qualifications involving
the prospective transferee and such other matters as the city reasonably may
deem necessary to determine whether the transfer is in the public interest and
should be approved, denied, or conditioned. If the transferee or grantee
unreasonably refuses to provide information, or provide incomplete information,
the request for transfer may be denied.
      (3)   The applicant shall not be issued a franchise if it files
materially misleading information in its application or intentionally withholds
information that the applicant lawfully is required to provide.
(Ord. 24-2002)
§ 13-5-1-22 SPECIAL RULES APPLICABLE TO CABLE SYSTEMS: FRANCHISE FEES.
   (A)   A grantee shall pay to the city a franchise fee in an amount equal to
5% of the grantee's gross revenues, or such other amount as may be specified in
the franchise ordinance; provided, however, that if the franchise specifies an
amount, that amount shall be subject to increase or decrease should federal
limits on fee payments be eliminated or changed. To the extent that grantee or
its affiliates offer bundles of cable and non-cable services at discounted
rates, and the matter is not otherwise resolved by GAAP principles or governing
law, revenues attributable to cable service will be based upon a pro rata
comparison of charges that apply to persons who purchase the cable services and
non-cable services separately.
   (B)   GAAP applies. Records of cable system revenues and expenses shall be
kept in accordance with Generally Accepted Accounting Principles (GAAP),
without regard to the corporate level at which such records are maintained.
   (C)   Not in lieu of any other assessments, tax or fee. The franchise fee is
in addition to all other fees, assessments, taxes or payments of general
applicability that the grantee may be required to pay under any federal, state,
or local law, in accordance with 47 U.S.C. § 542.
   (D)   Payments.  Franchise fees shall be paid in accordance with the
schedule set forth in this ordinance, and late payments shall be subject to the
additional charges set forth in this Cable Ordinance.
   (E)   No accord or satisfaction. No acceptance of any payment by the city
shall be construed as a release or an accord and satisfaction of any claim the
city may have for further or additional sums payable as a franchise fee or for
the performance of any other obligation of the grantee. However, the city may
conduct an audit of franchise fee payments, and the city thereafter shall not
claim franchise fees for the audited period outside any identified as due by
such audit; every such audit shall occur not later than three years following
receipt of a particular payment.
   (F)   Payment records. The city may, from time to time, and upon reasonable
advance written notice, audit grantee's books and records necessary to
determine whether gross revenues and franchise fees have been accurately
computed and paid. Such audit does not extend to grantee's confidential or
proprietary business records. In addition to paying all fees owed plus
interest, in the event that the city reviews the grantee's franchise fee
payments, and finds that the grantee has underpaid the fee owed for any year in
an amount exceeding 10% of the franchise fees actually paid, grantee shall pay
the reasonable cost of the city's review.
(Ord. 24-2002)
§ 13-5-1-23 SPECIAL RULES APPLICABLE TO CABLE SYSTEMS: SERVICE REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   It is the policy of the city to ensure that every cable system provide
service in its franchise area upon request to any subscriber or any government
building, unless inappropriate due to technical or financial considerations.
Each grantee shall extend service upon request within its franchise area,
provided that, a franchise may permit a grantee to require a potential
subscriber to contribute a fair share of the capital costs of line extension in
cases where the population density and/or penetration make the line extension
unduly expensive. Cable service must be provided within time limits specified
in the customer service standards regulations.
   (B)   A cable system shall meet or exceed the technical standards set forth
in 47 C.F.R. § 76.601 (and any other technical standards applicable under
federal law) as may be amended.
   (C)   Each grantee shall perform at its expense such tests as may be
necessary under federal law to show whether or not the grantee is in compliance
with its obligations under applicable FCC technical standards.
   (D)   Each grantee shall, during the term of its franchise, ensure that
subscribers are able to receive continuous service subject to matters beyond
the grantee's reasonable control.
   (E)    Grantee shall comply with all provisions of applicable law regarding
nondiscrimination (including economic redlining), privacy and protection from
exposure to indecent or obscene programming.
(Ord. 24-2002)
§ 13-5-1-24 SPECIAL RULES APPLICABLE TO CABLE SYSTEMS: RATE REGULATION.
   (A)   The city may regulate any of a grantee's rates and charges to the
extent it is permitted by law.
   (B)   With respect to any rate, the regulation of which is governed by FCC
regulations, the city will follow the FCC rate regulations in its regulation of
each grantee, notwithstanding any different or inconsistent provisions in the
franchise.
      (1)   In connection with any such rate regulation, the city will ensure a
reasonable opportunity for consideration of the views of interested parties.
      (2)   The Mayor is authorized to issue such regulations, and to take such
actions as may be necessary or appropriate in order to enable the city to
regulate rates in conformity with applicable law. Without limiting the
foregoing, while any final rate order establishing rates or ordering refunds
must be issued by the City Council, any other rate order may be issued by the
Mayor.
   (C)   The City Council shall be responsible for issuing rate orders that
establish rates or order refunds. A grantee must comply with all rate orders
issued by the City Council or the Mayor pending appeals by the grantee unless a
stay order has been issued by the FCC.
   (D)   Except to the extent the city may not enforce such a requirement, a
grantee is prohibited from discriminating in its rates or charges or from
granting undue preferences to any subscriber, potential subscriber, or group of
subscribers or potential subscribers; provided, however, that a grantee may
offer temporary, bona fide promotional discounts in order to attract or
maintain subscribers, so long as such discounts are offered on a non-
discriminatory basis; and a grantee may offer discounts for the elderly, the
disabled, or the economically disadvantaged; and such other discounts as it is
expressly entitled to provide under federal law, if such discounts are applied
in a uniform and consistent manner.
   (E)   A grantee shall not deny access or charge different rates to any group
of subscribers or potential subscribers because of the income of the residents
of the local area in which such group resides.
(Ord. 24-2002)
§ 13-5-1-25 SPECIAL RULES APPLICABLE TO OPEN VIDEO SYSTEMS: APPLICATIONS.
   (A)   Application required.
      (1)   A written application shall be filed with the City Clerk for grant
of an initial or renewal OVS franchise.
      (2)   To be acceptable for filing, a signed original of the application
shall be submitted together with six copies. The application must conform to
any applicable request for proposals, and contain all information required
under Section 13-5-1-25(B). All applications shall include the names and
addresses of persons authorized to act on behalf of the applicant with respect
to the application.
   (B)   Contents. The Mayor may specify the information that must be provided
in connection with a request for proposals or an application for an initial or
renewal OVS franchise. At a minimum, each application must: identify the
applicant, where it plans to construct its OVS, and the OVS construction
schedule; show that the applicant will provide adequate channels, facilities
and other support for public, educational and government use (including
institutional network use) of the OVS; and show that the applicant is
financially, technically and legally qualified to construct and operate the
OVS.
(Ord. 24-2002)
§ 13-5-1-26 SPECIAL RULES APPLICABLE TO OPEN VIDEO SYSTEMS: INITIAL OR RENEWAL
FRANCHISES.
   (A)   A person may apply for an initial or renewal OVS franchise on its own
initiative or in response to a request for proposals. Upon receipt of an
application, the city may conduct such investigations as are necessary to
consider the application. The city may request such additional information as
it deems appropriate.
   (B)   An applicant shall respond to requests for information completely, and
within the time directed by the city, and must strictly comply with procedures,
instructions, and requirements the city may establish.
   (C)   An application may be rejected if it is incomplete or the applicant
fails to follow procedures or respond fully to information requests.
   (D)   Consideration of application.
      (1)   In evaluating an OVS franchise application, the city may consider
the following:
         (a)   Whether the applicant has the financial, technical, and legal
qualifications to hold an OVS franchise;
         (b)   Whether the application satisfies any minimum requirements
established by the city for, or will otherwise provide adequate public,
educational, and governmental use capacity, facilities, or financial support
(including with respect to institutional networks);
         (c)   Whether issuance of an OVS franchise would require replacement
of property or involve disruption of property, public services, or use of the
public rights-of-way;
         (d)   Whether the approval of the application may eliminate or reduce
competition in the delivery of cable service in the city; and
         (e)   Such other matters as the city is authorized or required to
consider in determining whether granting the application would serve the public
interest.
      (2)   If the city finds that it is in the public interest to issue an OVS
franchise considering the factors above, it shall proffer an OVS franchise to
applicant, and if applicant is willing to unconditionally accept the terms
thereof, and to comply with the requirements of applicable law, including this
chapter, the city shall issue an OVS franchise.
      (3)   Within 31 days after the effective date of the ordinance awarding a
franchise or franchise renewal, or within such extended period of time as the
City Council in its discretion may authorize, the successful applicant or
grantee shall file with the City Clerk an unconditional written acceptance, in
form satisfactory to the City Attorney, of the franchise or franchise renewal,
together with an agreement to be bound by and to comply with all applicable
provisions of the city's charter, this article, and the Franchise Ordinance.
Such acceptance and agreement shall be acknowledged before a notary public and
shall in form and content be satisfactory to and approved by the City Attorney.
(Ord. 24-2002)
§ 13-5-1-27 SPECIAL RULES APPLICABLE TO OVS SYSTEMS: TRANSFERS.
   (A)   The Mayor may specify information that must be provided in connection
with a transfer application. At a minimum, an application must: describe the
persons involved in the transaction and the person that will hold the OVS
franchise; describe the chain of ownership before and after the proposed
transaction; show that the person that will hold the OVS franchise will be
legally, financially, and technically qualified to do so; attach complete
information on the proposed transaction, including the contracts or other
documents that relate to the proposed transaction, and all documents,
schedules, exhibits, or the like referred to therein; and attach any
shareholder reports or filings with the Securities and Exchange Commission
("SEC") that discuss the transaction.
   (B)   For the purposes of determining whether it shall consent to a
transfer, the city or its agents may inquire into all qualifications of the
prospective transferee and such other matters as the city may deem necessary to
determine whether the transfer is in the public interest and should be
approved, denied, or conditioned. If the transferee or OVS grantee refuse to
provide information, or provide incomplete information, the request for
transfer may be denied.
   (C)   In deciding whether a transfer application should be granted, denied
or granted subject to conditions, the city may consider the legal, financial,
and technical qualifications of the transferee to operate the OVS; whether the
incumbent OVS operator is in compliance with its OVS franchise and this article
and, if not, the proposed transferee's commitment to cure such noncompliance;
whether the transferee owns or controls any other OVS or cable system in the
city, and whether operation by the transferee may eliminate or reduce
competition in the delivery of cable service in the city; and whether operation
by the transferee or approval of the transfer would adversely affect
subscribers, the public, or the city's interests under this article, any cable
system or OVS franchise, or other applicable law.
   (D)   No application shall be granted unless the transferee agrees in
writing that it will abide by and accept all terms of this article and the OVS
franchise, and that it will assume the obligations, liabilities, and
responsibility for all acts and omissions, known and unknown, of the previous
grantee for all purposes. The proposed transferee shall pay all reasonable
costs incurred by the city in reviewing and evaluating the applications. In the
case of a transaction involving a "change of control," the transferee is the
entity (or entities) acquiring the interests which constitute the "change of
control."
(Ord. 24-2002)
§ 13-5-1-28 SPECIAL RULES APPLICABLE TO OPEN VIDEO SYSTEMS: MINIMUM
REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   No person may be issued an OVS franchise, or commence construction of
an OVS, until:
      (1)   It agrees to match in all respects the highest PEG obligations
borne by any cable system operator in the city; or
      (2)   It agrees to PEG obligations acceptable to the city.
   (B)   Any OVS operator that constructs an institutional network must match
in all respects the highest institutional network obligations borne by any
cable system operator in the city, unless it agrees to alternative
institutional network obligations acceptable to the city.
   (C)   Every OVS franchise shall specify the construction schedule that will
apply to any required construction, upgrade, or rebuild of the OVS. The
schedule shall provide for prompt completion of the project, considering the
amount and type of construction required.
   (D)   Each OVS operator shall perform at its expense such tests as may be
necessary to show whether or not the OVS grantee is in compliance with its
obligations under this article, its franchise, and applicable law.
   (E)   Every OVS grantee must satisfy customer service consumer protection
requirements established from time to time under state or local law and
applicable to OVS. The Mayor may establish customer service regulations and
apply those regulations to OVS.
   (F)   If an OVS grantee's FCC certification is revoked or otherwise
terminates as a result of the passage of time or as a matter of law, the city
may revoke the OVS franchise after a hearing. The OVS franchise may also be
revoked if federal regulations or statutory provisions governing OVS are
declared invalid or unenforceable, or are repealed.
   (G)   The city may regulate an OVS grantee's rates and charges except as
prohibited by law, and may do so by amendment to this article, separate
ordinance, by amendment to an OVS franchise, or in any other lawful manner.
   (H)   In lieu of a franchise fee, an OVS grantee shall pay to the city a fee
in lieu of the franchise fee of 5% of gross revenues.
   (I)   Persons leasing capacity from an OVS grantee shall pay a fee in lieu
of a franchise fee.
      (1)   A person leasing capacity from an OVS operator, other than a person
whose revenues are included in the payment made under Section 13-5-1-28(H)
shall pay the city monthly a fee in lieu of the franchise fee of 5% of the
gross revenues of such person.
      (2)   Notwithstanding the foregoing, where a person, other than an
affiliate, pays an OVS grantee to use its grantee's OVS (the "use payments");
and that person recovers those use payments through charges to its subscribers
that are included in that person's gross revenues; and the OVS grantee pays a
franchise fee on those use charges; then that person may deduct from its gross
revenues the use payments it makes.
      (3)   The term "gross revenues," when used with reference to a person
leasing capacity from an OVS operator, shall mean all the revenues of such
person, or affiliate, derived from the use of the OVS to provide cable service.
The term shall be interpreted broadly to include revenue in whatever form
derived, including but not limited to in-kind compensation.
   (J)   An OVS grantee may not enter into any arrangement that would
effectively prevent other persons from using the OVS to compete in the delivery
of cable services with an OVS grantee or its affiliates.
(Ord. 24-2002)
§ 13-5-1-29 SPECIAL RULES APPLICABLE TO OPEN VIDEO SYSTEMS: LEGAL
QUALIFICATIONS.
   (A)   In order to be legally qualified:
      (1)   The applicant must be willing to comply with the provisions of this
article and applicable laws, and to comply with such requirements of an OVS
franchise as the city may lawfully require.
      (2)   The applicant must not hold a cable system franchise, or have
pending an application for a cable system franchise.
      (3)   The applicant must not have had any cable system or OVS franchise
validly revoked, by the city within three (3) years preceding the submission of
the application. A grantee may not apply while an appeal of a revocation is
pending, or for three years after the final resolution of the appeal if the
revocation is valid.
      (4)   The applicant may not have had an application for an initial or
renewal cable system franchise to the city denied on the ground that the
applicant failed to propose a cable system meeting the cable-related needs and
interests of the community within three years preceding the submission of the
application. An applicant may not apply while an appeal of a denial is pending,
or for three years after the final resolution of the appeal if the denial was
valid.
      (5)   The applicant may not have had an application for an initial or
renewal OVS franchise denied on any grounds within three years of the
applications.
      (6)   The applicant shall not be issued an OVS franchise if, at any time
during the 10 years preceding the submission of the application, applicant was
convicted of fraud, racketeering, anti-competitive actions, unfair trade
practices or other conduct of such character that the applicant cannot be
relied upon to deal truthfully with the city and the subscribers, or to
substantially comply with its obligations.
      (7)   Applicant must have the necessary authority under New Mexico and
federal law to operate an OVS, and must be certified by the FCC under Section
653 of the Cable Act as it may be amended.
      (8)   The applicant shall not be issued an OVS franchise if it files
materially misleading information in its application or intentionally withholds
information that the applicant lawfully is required to provide.
      (9)   For purposes of Section 13-5-1-29 (A)(2)-(5), the term applicant
includes any affiliate of applicant.
   (B)   Notwithstanding the foregoing, an applicant shall be provided a
reasonable opportunity to show that an OVS franchise should issue even if the
requirements of Section 13-5-1-29(A)(4)-(6) are not satisfied, by virtue of the
circumstances surrounding the matter and the steps taken by the applicant to
cure all harms flowing therefrom and prevent their recurrence, the lack of
involvement of the applicant's principals, or the remoteness of the matter from
the operation of an OVS. Provided further that nothing in this section shall be
interpreted to prevent the city from denying an application without prejudice
such that an additional application may be filed.
(Ord. 24-2002)
§ 13-5-1-30 ENFORCEMENT AND REMEDIES: REVOCATION.
   (A)   Right to revoke; generally.
      (1)   The City Council may revoke a franchise if it finds that a grantee
has committed a material breach of this article or its franchise or repeatedly
failed to comply with its franchise; has defrauded or attempted to defraud the
city or subscribers; or has attempted to evade the requirements of this article
or its franchise.
      (2)   Before revoking a franchise, the following must have occurred:
         (a)   The Mayor must give a grantee notice of an alleged default in
performance (which notice will describe the nature of an alleged violation or
breach) and a 30 calendar day opportunity to cure or such additional time as is
reasonably necessary (the "cure period"); except that an opportunity to cure is
not required where the defect in performance is due to willful misconduct or
fraud or attempted fraud, is an adjudicated felony violation of criminal law,
or is part of a pattern of violations where the grantee has already had notice
and opportunity to cure. The city may extend the cure period for up to 30
additional days if grantee has diligently attempted to correct the alleged
default.
         (b)   Not sooner than 30 calendar days after the Mayor notifies the
grantee of the default (or such longer period as may be required to encompass
an extended cure period), the City Council shall hold a public hearing to
consider whether the franchise should be revoked, at which the grantee and the
public will be given an opportunity to be heard and grantee to present evidence
for consideration by the City Council.
      (3)   Following the close of the public hearing the City Council may
determine whether to revoke the franchise. If the grantee was entitled to an
opportunity to cure a default, the franchise may not be revoked if the default
was fully cured during the cure period, including by payment of all damages and
penalties owed. If the City Council determines to revoke a franchise, it will
issue a written decision setting forth the reasons for its decision.
      (4)   A copy of such decision will be transmitted to the grantee.
   (B)   Rights upon franchise termination or revocation. If the city revokes
the franchise or the franchise otherwise terminates, the city shall have the
following rights, in addition to the rights specified in this franchise or
under applicable law:
      (1)   The city may require the former grantee to remove its facilities
and equipment at the former grantee's expense. If the former grantee fails to
do so within a reasonable period of time, the city may have the removal done at
the former grantee's and/or surety's expense, subject to any right of
abandonment that may be provided for under applicable law.
      (2)   The city, by City Council resolution, may acquire ownership or
effect a transfer of the cable system in accordance with 47 U.S.C. § 547.
      (3)   Section 13-5-1-30(B)(2) does not apply to an abandonment. If a
cable system or any part thereof is abandoned by grantee, the city may require
the grantee to transfer title to the abandoned portions to it at no charge,
free and clear of encumbrances, and the same will become the city's property
and the city may keep, sell, assign, or transfer all or part of the assets of
the cable system, or otherwise dispose of those assets as it sees fit.
   (C)   Streamlined provisions. A franchise granted pursuant to the provisions
of this ordinance may provide for more specific revocation procedures to
streamline resolution of any dispute.
   (D)   Termination in the event of bankruptcy. A franchise will terminate
automatically by force of law 180 calendar days after an assignment for the
benefit of creditors or the appointment of a receiver or trustee to take over
the business of the grantee, whether in a receivership, reorganization,
bankruptcy assignment for the benefit of creditors, or other action or
proceeding. However, the franchise may be reinstated within that 180 day
period, if:
      (1)   Such assignment, receivership or trusteeship has been vacated; or
      (2)   Such assignee, receiver or trustee has fully complied with the
terms and conditions of this article and the franchise, and has executed an
agreement, approved by any court having jurisdiction, assuming and agreeing to
be bound by the terms and conditions of this article and the franchise. In the
event of foreclosure or other judicial sale of any of the facilities, equipment
or property of a grantee, the city may revoke the franchise following a public
hearing before the City Council, by serving notice upon the grantee and the
successful bidder at the sale, in which event the franchise and all rights and
privileges thereunder will be revoked and will terminate 30 calendar days after
serving such notice, unless:
         (a)   The city has approved the transfer of the franchise to the
successful bidder; and
         (b)   The successful bidder has covenanted and agreed with the city to
assume and be bound by the terms and conditions of the franchise and this
article.
   (E)   Effect of termination or forfeiture.  Upon termination or forfeiture
of a franchise, whether by action of the city as provided above, or by passage
of time, the city may do one or a combination of the following:
      (1)   Grantee must, should the city so direct, stop using the cable
system for the purposes authorized by the franchise.
      (2)   The city may require the former grantee to remove all or a portion
of its facilities and equipment at the former grantee's expense, subject to any
right grantee may have to abandon property in place. If the former grantee
fails to remove its property within a reasonable period of time, the city may
have the removal done at the former grantee's and/or surety's expense.
      (3)   The city, by resolution of the City Council, may acquire ownership
or effect a transfer of all or a portion of the cable system in accordance with
47 U.S.C. 547. Franchisee shall execute such deeds and other papers as are
necessary to transfer ownership to the city, free and clear of all
encumbrances. Each franchise shall specify a procedure for determination of
fair market value; if no procedure is specified, value shall be established by
appraisal, with one appraiser appointed by the city, one by the grantee, and a
third by the two appraisers.
      (4)   Notwithstanding the foregoing, the city may not, pursuant to this
section, issue an order that violates 47 U.S.C. § 541(b)(3)(c).
(Ord. 24-2002)
§ 13-5-1-31 ENFORCEMENT AND REMEDIES: LIQUIDATED DAMAGES.
   (A)   Because a grantee's failure to comply with material provisions of its
franchise may result in injury to the city, and because it will be difficult to
estimate the extent of such injury, the city may impose the following
liquidated damages for the following violations, if the grantee has been served
written notice and the violation continues after the appropriate notice and
opportunity to cure. Unless otherwise specifically provided in the franchise,
the liquidated damages represent both parties' best estimate of the damages to
the city resulting from the specified injury. To maintain that estimate, the
liquidated damage amounts are in 2002 dollars and may be increased once after
every five years of the franchise term by an amount equal to the increase in
the U.S. City average of the Consumer Price Index for that period. The damages
specified are to the city, and are recoverable by the city. Damages accrue from
the date of the violation; provided that, nothing herein prevents a grantee
from contesting the alleged violation or raising a defense to the imposition of
liquidated damages from the date of violation based upon laches, waiver,
statute of limitations, or any other defense. Liquidated damages are not
franchise fees.
      (1)   For failure to complete construction of the subscriber network in
accordance with the franchise and / or within the time provided: $1,000 for
each day the violation continues until the construction is completed.
      (2)   For failure to complete upgrade of the subscriber network in
accordance with the franchise within the time provided: $1.00/day for each
affected subscriber (to a maximum of $1,000) for each day the violation
continues until the upgrade is completed.
      (3)   For transferring the franchise without required approval: $1,000/
day for each violation for each day the violation continues.
      (4)   For failure to comply with requirements for PEG access use of the
cable system for which damages to the city are not readily ascertainable: $250/
day for each violation for each day the violation continues.
      (5)   For violation of customer service standards: $500 per quarter for
any quarter during which an audit establishes that the grantee failed to
substantially comply with applicable performance standards where compliance is
not measured in terms of its response to an individual subscriber; and
      (6)   For all other categories of material violations of the franchise
for which actual damages may not be ascertainable: $500/day for each violation
for each day the violation continues after written notice to grantee and at
least 10 days opportunity to cure. A violation which affects more than one
subscriber or user shall be considered a single violation, notwithstanding the
number of subscribers or users affected.
   (B)   The City Council may impose liquidated damages as provided above.
Before doing so, the city must provide the grantee notice of the alleged
violation, and provide the grantee with an opportunity to be heard, to show
either that a violation has not occurred or that damages should not be imposed.
The city shall take all reasonable measures to expedite the resolution of any
dispute involving the transfer of the franchise, and shall forfeit any
liquidated damages which are attributable to the city's delay in resolving a
transfer dispute resulting in liquidated damages. A grantee reserves all rights
to contest and / or adjudicate alleged violations. The city is not entitled to
recover damages for the same injury under two separate sections where doing so
would result in a double recovery. If the grantee is subject to liquidated
damages pursuant to a franchise, it shall not be fined for a violation of the
any other ordinance for the same violation.
(Ord. 24-2002)
§ 13-5-1-32 ENFORCEMENT AND REMEDIES: RELATIONSHIP.
   Recovery by the city of any amounts under insurance, the performance bond,
the security fund or letter of credit, does not limit a grantee's duty to
indemnify the city or relieve a grantee of its franchise obligations, limit the
amounts owed to the city, or prevent the city from revoking the franchise or
imposing penalties.
(Ord. 24-2002)
§ 13-5-1-33 CAPTIONS.
   The captions to sections throughout this article are intended solely to
facilitate reading and reference to the sections and provisions of this
article. Such captions shall not affect the meaning or interpretation of this
article.
(Ord. 24-2002)
§ 13-5-1-34 CALCULATION OF TIME.
   Unless otherwise indicated, when the performance or doing of any act, duty,
matter, or payment is required under this article or any franchise, and a
period of time or duration for the fulfillment of doing thereof is prescribed
and is fixed herein, the time shall be computed so as to exclude the first and
include the last day of the prescribed or fixed period of time.
(Ord. 24-2002)
§ 13-5-1-35 CONNECTIONS TO CABLE SYSTEM; USE OF ANTENNAE.
   (A)   Lawful subscribers shall have the right to attach VCR's, receivers,
and other terminal equipment, and to use their own remote control devices and
converters, with a grantee's cable system as may be permitted by federal law.
   (B)   A grantee shall not, as a condition of providing service, require a
subscriber or potential subscriber to remove any existing antenna or satellite
dish, or disconnect an antenna or satellite dish except at the express
direction of the subscriber or potential subscriber, or prohibit installation
of a new antenna or connection to any other multi-channel video provider's
system. "Buy out" promotions by which a grantee acquires the antenna or dish
are not precluded.
(Ord. 24-2002)
§ 13-5-1-36 ANTI-TAMPERING.
   It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation:
   (A)   To make any unauthorized connection, whether physically, electrically,
acoustically, inductively or otherwise, with any part of a cable system within
this city for the purpose of taking or receiving television signals, radio
signals, pictures, programs, or sounds;
   (B)   To make any unauthorized connection, whether physically, electrically,
acoustically, inductively or otherwise, with any part of a cable system within
this city for the purpose of enabling himself or others to receive any
television signal, radio signal, picture, program or sound, without payment to
the owner of said system; or
   (C)   To willfully tamper with, remove or injure any cable, wires or
equipment used by a grantee within this city for distribution of television
signals, radio signals, pictures, programs or sound, without the consent of the
owner of the system.
   (D)   An act permitted under Section 13-5-1-36 cannot be a violation of this
section except to the extent use of such equipment results in reception of
signals without payment to the owner of the cable system.
(Ord. 24-2002)
§ 13-5-1-37 DISCRIMINATION PROHIBITED.
   (A)   A grantee shall not unlawfully discriminate among persons or the city
or take any retaliatory action against a person or the city because of that
person's exercise of any right it may have under federal or state law, nor may
the operator require a person or the city to waive such rights as a condition
of taking service.
   (B)   A grantee shall comply with all federal, state, and local laws and
regulations governing equal employment opportunities, and hiring practices, as
the same may be amended from time to time.
(Ord. 24-2002)
§ 13-5-1-38 EMERGENCY USE OF FACILITIES.
   (A)   A grantee must install and maintain an emergency alert system
complying with FCC standards that can override audio and video (via message
crawl or other overlay) on all channels to provide an emergency alert to all
subscribers in the city. The system must be designed and maintained so that
local officials designated by the city can activate the system remotely without
the assistance of grantee, using a telephone and secure password or by such
other technical means as the city may approve. The system must be designed and
maintained so that the designated officials, from a touch-tone telephone, can
activate a pre-recorded text message, and at such officials' option, an
accompanying live audio voice message [for up to two minutes]. The city and the
grantee shall meet periodically to discuss operational procedures for use of
the emergency alert system. As part of those discussions, the parties may agree
on alternative capabilities and activation procedures for the emergency alert
system. Subject to the foregoing, the emergency alert system should be
integrated to the extent reasonably possible with other emergency alert systems
the grantee is required to provide under federal or state law.
   (B)   In the case of any emergency or disaster, a grantee shall, upon
request of the Mayor, make available its facilities to the city for emergency
use during the emergency or disaster period.
(Ord. 24-2002)
§ 13-5-1-39 SUBSCRIBER PRIVACY; USE OF DATA.
   The grantee shall comply with 47 U.S.C. Section 551 and applicable federal
regulations in keeping private subscriber information.
(Ord. 24-2002)
§ 13-5-1-40 PARENTAL CONTROLS.
   In addition to satisfying any obligations that it has under this ordinance
or any other applicable law to provide parental control devices, or otherwise
block programming on the cable system, where technically feasible, a grantee
shall make available procedures for ordering movies or other pay-per-view
programming to assist parents in deterring children from ordering programming
without parental consent.
(Ord. 24-2002)
§ 13-5-1-41 REGULATIONS AND AMENDMENTS.
   The city may amend any provision of §§
13-5-1-1 et seq., and may adopt the regulations it finds necessary in the
exercise of the police or other powers.
(Ord. 24-2002)
§ 13-5-1-42 CITY POWERS.
   The Mayor shall have primary responsibility for the administration of §§
13-5-1-1 et seq. and any franchise [i.e., §§
13-5-3-1 et seq.] granted hereunder and the implementation of the complaint
procedures specified in this article. The Mayor is hereby authorized to settle
any dispute arising from subscriber complaints. Complaints relating to the
quality of service, equipment malfunction, and similar matters shall be
addressed to the grantee; complaints relating to rates, programming, use of
public channels and similar matters shall be addressed to the Albuquerque Cable
Television Advisory Board. Any person dissatisfied with the resolution of his
complaint by the grantee or the Board may appeal the decision to the Mayor. The
grantee shall give notice of the procedures for reporting and resolving
complaints to each subscriber at the time of initial subscription to the cable
system service.
(Ord. 24-2002)
§ 13-5-1-43 COMPLIANCE WITH LAWS.
   The installation, construction, operation and maintenance of the cable
system, the regulation of the all franchises by the city, and the conduct of
the grantee's business shall comply with all current federal, state and city
laws, regulations and ordinances applicable thereto, including those rules and
regulations adopted by the Federal Communications Commission and all federal or
state laws and regulations. A grantee shall also comply with ordinances
lawfully hereafter passed or adopted pursuant to the city's police power.
(Ord. 24-2002)
§ 13-5-1-44 ACCEPTANCE.
   If the grantee should fail to file a written acceptance of a franchise as
required by this article, the grantee shall acquire no rights, privileges or
authority under the franchise.
(Ord. 24-2002)
§ 13-5-1-45 PUBLICATION COSTS.
   The grantee shall pay the cost of publication of the franchise upon the
grantee's acceptance of the franchise. The grantee shall acquire no rights,
privileges or authority under the franchise until this payment is made.
(Ord. 24-2002)
§ 13-5-1-46 HEARINGS.
   In any case in which a hearing is held pursuant to a franchise agreement,
other than for renewal or revocation of a franchise, the City Council may
conduct the hearing or, in its sole discretion, may delegate such hearings to
the Utility Franchise Committee, or the Cable Franchise & Hearing Board to
conduct the hearing and submit a proposal for decision to it, pursuant to the
authority of the Chief Administrative Officer or the rules of practice and
procedure of the Cable Franchise & Hearing Board. A grantee shall have the
right to address the City Council concerning any proposal arising from any
proceeding conducted before other than the City Council.
(Ord. 24-2002)
PART 2: CABLE FRANCHISE AND HEARING BOARD AND OTHER PUBLIC BODIES
§ 13-5-2-1 ALBUQUERQUE CABLE, INTERNET AND PEG ADVISORY BOARD.
   (A)   Board Established. There hereby is established the Albuquerque Cable,
Internet and PEG Advisory Board which shall consist of five members to be
appointed by the Mayor with the advice and consent of the City Council. The
term "PEG" means public, education and government access cable television. The
provisions of §§
2-6-1-1 et seq. apply.
      (1)   Board members shall be persons of diverse backgrounds; they should
have experience in mass media, communications, information technology, consumer
advocacy, business, or government service, especially on or as staff to
government boards and commissions.
      (2)   No current employee or board member of any television or
telecommunications provider shall be a member of the Board; the term
"television or telecommunications provider" shall be broadly construed.
      (3)   All members must sign a Conflict of Interest statement prior to
appointment.
   (B)   Legal Authority. The Cable Television Consumer Protection and
Competition Act of 1992 requires the local regulator to provide community
participation in rate and quality of service matters in conformity with federal
laws and regulations. This Board will fulfill that duty, as well as serve,
pursuant to Article X, Section 6 of the New Mexico constitution, as an advisory
body to the city government, a home rule municipality, on municipal policies on
cable and cable- affected services.
   (C)   Duties of the Board. The Board shall act as the city's advisory body
on cable television (or wireless cable) services, specifically including those
matters subject to the city's regulation or review within the local franchise
area as allowed by federal, state and local laws, and on services that are
affected by or affect the sale and delivery of cable services. The Board will
represent consumers and allow for local cable television providers' input on
rates, service quality and equipment issues to the extent authorized by law.
More particularly, the Board's duties include but are not limited to the
following:
      (1)   Advise the Mayor and Council on matters which might constitute
grounds for revocation of authorized right-of-way usage or franchise authority
or constitute FCC violations that may require appropriate sanctions of a cable
television franchisee or permittee in accordance with the terms of Ch. 13, Art.
5, Parts 1 and 3 and/or the Cable Television Consumer Protection and
Competition Act of 1992;
      (2)   Attempt to resolve complaints and disagreements between the holder
of a cable television franchise or permit and its customers that cannot be
resolved by customer complaints made directly to the company; complaint and
review procedures shall be consistent with the Customer Service Standards
("Customer Bill of Rights") attached to the Comcast Franchise Ordinance as
Exhibit B;
      (3)   Review operations and procedures to ensure the proper and fair
distribution of resources (personnel, equipment, and financing) among each of
the PEG channels and make recommendations to the Mayor and Council for the best
use of the PEG channels based on those reviews and other information that the
Board may have;
      (4)   Receive public comment and other input regarding the city's
allocation of air time and other resources related to the use of PEG channels
and provide the Mayor and Council recommendations based on that input and other
information that the Board may have;
      (5)   Receive and decide the merits of complaints and appeals from PEG
community producers and/or interested members of the public regarding
disciplinary actions by the city's PEG administration and/or denials of access
to or other alleged misallocations of PEG resources. The Cable Board shall hear
and consider these complaints and appeals according to the following
procedures:
         (a)   Any aggrieved party shall file its complaint or appeal with the
Cable Board within ten days of the date upon which the aggrieved action took
place; and
         (b)   The Cable Board shall conduct a public hearing on the complaint
or appeal at its next regularly scheduled meeting; and
         (c)   The Cable Board shall render its written decision including the
grounds for that decision within 20 days of the conclusion of the public
hearing; in rendering its decision the Cable Board shall post that decision on
its webpage and mail the decision to the appealing party; and
         (d)   The Cable Board shall render final decisions on only those PEG
complaints or appeals solely affecting a single program, a program series of
less than six months, and/or the use of city-owned PEG equipment. The Cable
Board shall provide recommendations for the Mayor's final disposition of all
other PEG complaints or appeals, including appeals of disciplinary actions.
      (6)   Provide a forum for public participation in the event the city
decides to pursue the franchise renewal process outlined under the Cable
Television Consumer Protection and Competition Act of 1992;
      (7)   Review the cable provider's performance under applicable adopted
laws, rules and regulations and recommend that the city administration
undertake discretionary performance evaluations, financial audits,
ascertainments of programming and customer satisfaction, and technical
engineering audits as provided in the Comcast Franchise Ordinance and as
needed;
      (8)   Review and make recommendations on the level of service in the
franchise area, including channel capacity of the system and how that meets the
community needs;
      (9)   Recommend to the Mayor and City Council regulations and procedures
regarding rates, quality of service, and equipment issues consistent with Ch.
13, Art. 5, Parts 1 and 3; any information will be provided in accordance with
applicable federal law and, if necessary, pursuant to appropriate
confidentiality agreements;
      (10)   Act as hearing examiner for all public hearings required pursuant
to the Cable Television Consumer Protection and Competition Act of 1992 on
rate, service quality, equipment and other appropriate issues as authorized by
law;
      (11)   Provide technology updates to the Mayor and City Council upon
request; and
      (12)   Provide a forum for educating the public and sharing information
on services that are affected by or affect the sale and delivery of cable
services, such as information on the quality, cost and availability of internet
services.
   (D)   Public Availability of Documents. To better accomplish the purposes of
the Board, the Mayor may arrange for the televising of Cable Board public
hearings and forums and make available at city libraries those public documents
related to such public hearings and forums.
(Ord. 21-1994; Am. Ord._2021-011)
§ 13-5-2-2 GOVERNMENT CABLE CHANNEL — BOARD OF DIRECTORS.
   (A)   Short title. This section shall be known as the "TV 14 Board of
Directors Ordinance."
   (B)   Authority. The Cable Communications Policy Act of 1984 permits local
governments to promulgate rules and procedures governing the use of TV 14.
   (C)   Legislative purpose. The city and the county own and operate the TV 14
cable television station in order to provide local government access to its
residents. The existing Cable Advisory Board (see
§ 13-5-2-1) does not have the authority to effectuate policy, rules and/or
procedures for operation of TV 14, and there is a need for a Board of Directors
to establish policy for all programming of TV 14. The city and the county also
wish to promote a well educated electorate with a programming schedule that is
both newsworthy and educational.
    (D)   Board established. There is hereby established the TV 14 Board of
Directors to consist of members appointed by the Mayor, the City Council, and
the Bernalillo County Commission.
   (E)   Membership and organization. The TV 14 Board of Directors shall
consist of non-elected persons. Members should be experienced and knowledgeable
in television broadcasting and/or cable operations. Except as provided in this
section, the qualifications, appointment and conduct of the members of the
Board and the organizational structure of the Board shall be governed by
§§ 2-6-1-1 et seq. Staff support for the Board of Directors will be provided by
the city and county in order to assist the Board with any technical advice,
research and/or operational data.
   (F)   Appointment of the Board. The Board of Directors shall be appointed as
follows:
      (1)   One member appointed by the Mayor;
      (2)   One member appointed by the City Council;
      (3)   One member appointed by the Bernalillo County Commission; and
      (4)   The Chairman of the Cable Franchise and Hearing Board.
   (G)   Terms. The term of each Board member shall be as follows:
      (1)   The Mayor's appointee will have a term expiring January 30, 1996;
      (2)   The Council's appointee will have a term expiring January 30, 1995;
and
      (3)   The Commission's appointee will have a term expiring January 30,
1994.
   (H)   Duties of the Board.  The Board shall have and perform the following
duties and functions:
      (1)   Establish policy on programming rules, grievance procedures, and
operational criteria;
      (2)   Vigorously pursue a diversified programming schedule that is of
value and interest to the electorate of Albuquerque;
      (3)   Develop policy on the role of TV 14 in all politically oriented
programming;
      (4)   Ensure that all policy and recommendations are consistent with the
Federal Communications Commission (FCC) rules and requirements for regulating a
cable broadcasting station; and
      (5)   Work closely with the TV 14 staff to develop annual policy
recommendations to the Administration for approval of the City Council and the
Bernalillo County Commission. The Board shall not be involved in the day-to-day
management of the channel. Management and budget authority will remain with the
Mayor and County Commission. The policy developed by the Board and approved by
the Council and the Commission, however, will be carried out and adhered to by
the management of TV 14.
('74 Code, §§ 5-8-1 - 5-8-8) (Ord. 31-1993; Am. Ord. 38-1993 Am. Ord. 49-1994)
PART 3: GRANT OF CABLE FRANCHISE RENEWAL
§ 13-5-3-1 DEFINITIONS AND EXHIBITS.
   (A)   Definitions. For the purposes of this franchise, the following terms,
phrases, words and their derivations shall have the meaning given herein. When
not inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the
future, words in the plural include the singular, and words in the singular
include the plural. Words not defined shall be given their common and ordinary
meaning. The word "shall" is always mandatory and not merely directory.
      ACCESS. The availability for noncommercial use by various agencies,
institutions, organizations, groups and individuals in the community, including
the city and its designees, of the cable system to acquire, create, receive,
and distribute video cable services and other services and signals as permitted
under applicable law including but not limited to:
         (a)   PUBLIC ACCESS. Access where community- based, noncommercial
organizations, groups or individual members of the general public, on a
nondiscriminatory basis, are the primary users.
         (b)   EDUCATIONAL ACCESS. Access where schools are the primary users
having editorial control over programming and services. For purposes  of this
definition, "school" means any state-accredited educational institution, public
or private, including, for example, primary and secondary schools, colleges and
universities.
         (c)   GOVERNMENT ACCESS. Access where governmental institutions or
their designees are the primary users having editorial control over programming
and services.
      ACCESS CHANNEL or PEG CHANNEL. Any channel or portion thereof designated
for access purposes or otherwise made available to facilitate or transmit
access programming or services.
      ACTIVATED. The status of any capacity or part of the cable system in
which any cable service requiring the use of that capacity or part is available
without further installation of system equipment, whether hardware or software.
      AFFILIATE. When used in connection with grantee, means any person who
owns or controls, is owned or controlled by, or is under common ownership or
control with grantee.
      APPLICABLE LAW. Any statute, ordinance, judicial decision, executive
order or regulation having the force and effect of law that determines the
legal standing of a case or issue.
      BAD DEBT. Amounts lawfully billed to a subscriber and owed by the
subscriber for cable service and accrued as revenues on the books of grantee,
but not collected after reasonable efforts have been made by grantee to collect
the charges.
      BASIC SERVICE. The level of programming service that includes the
retransmission of local television broadcast channels and is made available to
all cable services subscribers in the franchise area.
      BROADCAST CHANNEL. Local commercial television stations, qualified low
power stations and qualified local noncommercial educational television
stations, as referenced under 47 USC §§ 534 and 535.
      BROADCAST SIGNAL. A television or radio signal transmitted over the air
to a wide geographic audience and received by a cable system by antenna,
microwave, satellite dishes or any other means.
      CABLE ACT. Title VI of the Communications Act of 1934, as amended.
      CABLE OPERATOR. Any person or groups of persons, including grantee, who
provide(s) cable service over a cable system and directly or through one or
more affiliates owns a significant interest in such cable system or who
otherwise control(s) or is (are) responsible for, through any arrangement, the
management and operation of such a cable system.
      CABLE SERVICE. The one-way transmission to subscribers of video
programming or other programming service and subscriber interaction, if any,
which is required for the selection or use of such video programming or other
programming service.
      CABLE SYSTEM. Any facility, including grantee's, consisting of a set of
closed transmissions paths and associated signal generation, reception, and
control equipment that is designed to provide cable service which includes
video programming and which is provided to multiple subscribers within a
community, but such term does not include:
         (a)   A facility that serves only to retransmit the television signals
of one or more television broadcast stations;
         (b)   A facility that serves subscribers without using any right-of-
way;
         (c)   A facility of a common carrier which is subject, in whole or in
part, to the provisions of Title II of the Federal Communications Act (47
U.S.C. 201 et seq.), except that such facility shall be considered a cable
system (other than for purposes of Section 621(c) (47 U.S.C. 541(c))) to the
extent such facility is used in the transmission of video programming directly
to subscribers, unless the extent of such use is solely to provide interactive
on-demand services;
         (d)   An open video system that complies with federal statutes; or
         (e)   Any facilities of any electric utility used solely for operating
its electric utility systems.
      CHANNEL. A portion of the electromagnetic frequency spectrum which is
used in the cable system and which is capable of delivering a television
channel (as television channel is defined by the FCC by regulation).
      CITY. Albuquerque, New Mexico, a body politic and incorporated with home-
rule powers under the laws of the State of New Mexico.
      CITY COUNCIL. The Albuquerque City Council, or its successor, the
governing body of the City of Albuquerque, New Mexico.
      COMMERCIAL SUBSCRIBERS. Any subscribers other than residential
subscribers.
      DESIGNATED ACCESS PROVIDER. The entity or entities designated now or in
the future by the city to manage or co-manage access channels and facilities.
The city may be a designated access provider.
      DIGITAL STARTER SERVICE. The tier of optional video programming services,
which is the level of cable service received by most subscribers above basic
service, and does not include premium services.
      DOWNSTREAM. Carrying a transmission from the headend to remote points on
the cable system or to interconnection points on the cable system.
      DWELLING UNIT. Any building or portion thereof that has independent
living facilities, including provisions for cooking, sanitation and sleeping,
and that is designed for residential occupancy. Buildings with more than one
set of facilities for cooking shall be considered multiple dwelling units
unless the additional facilities are clearly accessory.
      FCC. The Federal Communications Commission.
      FIBER OPTIC. A transmission medium of optical fiber cable, along with all
associated electronics and equipment, capable of carrying cable service by
means of electric lightwave impulse.
      FRANCHISE or FRANCHISE ORDINANCE. The document in which this definition
appears, i.e., the contractual agreement, executed between the city and
grantee, containing the specific provisions of the authorization granted,
including references, specifications, requirements and other related matters.
      FRANCHISE AREA. The area within the jurisdictional boundaries of the
city, including any areas annexed by the city during the term of this
franchise.
      FRANCHISE FEE. That fee payable to the city described in §
13-5-3-3(A).
      GRANTEE. Comcast of New Mexico, LLC, or its lawful successor, transferee
or assignee.
      GROSS REVENUES. Means and shall be construed broadly to include all
revenues derived directly or indirectly by grantee and/or an affiliate that is
the cable operator of the cable system, from the operation of grantee's cable
system to provide cable services within the city.
         (a)   GROSS REVENUES include, by way of illustration and not
limitation:
            (i)   Fees for cable services, regardless of whether such cable
services are provided to residential or commercial subscribers, including
revenues derived from the provision of all cable services (including but not
limited to pay or premium cable services, digital cable services, pay-per-view,
pay-per-event and video-on-demand cable services);
            (ii)    Installation, reconnection, downgrade, upgrade or similar
charges associated with changes in subscriber cable service levels;
            (iii)    Repair, maintenance or service call charges;
            (iv)   Payments made by non-subscriber third parties to grantee for
access to grantee's cable system and derived from the operation of grantee's
cable system for the provision of cable services within the city;
            (v)   Fees paid to grantee for channels designated for commercial/
leased access use, which shall be allocated on a pro rata basis using total
cable service subscribers within the city;
            (vi)    Converter, remote control, and other cable service
equipment rentals, leases, or sales;
            (vii)    Advertising revenues as defined herein;
            (viii)    Late fees, convenience fees, administrative fees and
similar multi-service fees, which shall be allocated on a pro rata basis using
cable services revenue as a percentage of total subscriber revenues within the
city;
            (ix)   Revenues from program guides;
            (x)    Franchise fees and PEG fees;
            (xi)   FCC regulatory fees; and
            (xii)    Commissions from home shopping channels and other cable
service revenue sharing arrangements, which shall be allocated on a pro rata
basis using total cable service subscribers within the city.
         (b)   ADVERTISING REVENUES shall mean revenues derived from sales of
advertising that are made available to grantee's cable system subscribers
within the city and shall be allocated on a pro rata basis using total cable
service subscribers reached by the advertising. Additionally, grantee agrees
that gross revenues subject to franchise fees shall include all commissions,
representative fees, affiliate entity fees, or rebates paid to National Cable
Communications and Comcast Spotlight or their successors associated with sales
of advertising on the cable system within the city, allocated according to this
subsection using total cable service subscribers reached by the advertising.
         (c)   GROSS REVENUES shall not include:
            (i)   Actual bad debt write-offs, except any portion which is
subsequently collected which shall be allocated on a pro rata basis using cable
services revenue as a percentage of total subscriber revenues within the city;
            (ii)   Any taxes and/or fees on services furnished by grantee
imposed by any municipality, state or other governmental unit, provided that
franchise fees, the PEG fee and the FCC regulatory fee shall not be regarded as
such a tax or fee;
            (iii)    Fees imposed by any municipality, state or other
governmental unit on grantee;
            (iv)   Launch fees and marketing co-op fees received as
reimbursement by programmers for the introduction of new programming; and
            (v)    Unaffiliated third-party advertising sales agency fees which
are reflected as a deduction from revenues.
         (d)   To the extent revenues are received by grantee for the provision
of a discounted bundle of services which includes cable services and non-cable
services, grantee shall calculate revenues to be included in gross revenues
using a methodology that allocates revenue on a pro rata basis when comparing
the bundled service price and its components to the sum of the published rate
card. Except as required by specific federal, state or local law, it is
expressly understood that equipment may be subject to inclusion in the bundled
price at full rate card value. This calculation shall be applied to every
bundled service package containing cable service from which grantee derives
revenues in the city. The city reserves its right to review and to challenge
grantee's calculations.
         (e)   Grantee reserves the right to change the allocation
methodologies set forth in this definition in order to meet the standards
required by governing accounting principles as promulgated and defined by the
Financial Accounting Standards Board ("FASB"), the Emerging Issues Task Force
("EITF") and/or the U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission ("SEC"). Grantee
will explain and document the required changes to the city within three months
of making such changes and as part of any audit or review of franchise fee
payments, and any such changes shall be subject to subsection (f) below.
         (f)   Resolution of any disputes over the classification of revenue
should first be attempted by agreement of the parties, but should no resolution
be reached, the parties agree that reference shall be made to generally
accepted accounting principles ("GAAP") as promulgated and defined by the FASB,
EITF and/or the SEC. Notwithstanding the forgoing, the city reserves its right
to challenge grantee's calculation of gross revenues, including the
interpretation of GAAP as promulgated and defined by the FASB, EITF and/or the
SEC.
      HEADEND. Any facility for signal reception and dissemination on a cable
system, including cables, antennas, wires, satellite dishes, monitors,
switchers, modulators, processors for broadcast signals, equipment for the
interconnection of the cable system with adjacent cable systems and
interconnection of any networks which are part of the cable system, and all
other related equipment and facilities.
      LEASED ACCESS CHANNEL. Any channel or portion of a channel commercially
available for video programming by persons other than grantee, for a fee or
charge.
      MAYOR. The Mayor of the city or designee.
      PERSON. Any individual, sole proprietorship, partnership, association, or
corporation, or any other form of entity or organization.
      PREMIUM SERVICE. Programming choices (such as movie channels, pay-per-
view programs, or video on demand) offered to subscribers on a per- channel,
per-program or per-event basis.
      RESIDENTIAL SUBSCRIBER. Any subscriber who receives cable service
delivered to dwelling units or multiple dwelling units, excluding such multiple
dwelling units billed on a bulk-billing basis.
      RIGHT-OF-WAY. Each of the following which have been dedicated to the
public or are hereafter dedicated to the public and maintained under public
authority or by others and located within the city: streets, roadways,
highways, avenues, lanes, alleys, bridges, sidewalks, easements, and similar
public property and areas.
      STATE. The State of New Mexico.
      SUBSCRIBER. Any person that elects to subscribe to, for any purpose,
cable service provided by grantee by means of or in connection with the cable
system and whose premises are physically wired and lawfully activated to
receive cable service from grantee's cable system, and that is in compliance
with grantee's regular and nondiscriminatory terms and conditions for receipt
of service.
      SUBSCRIBER NETWORK. That portion of the cable system used primarily by
grantee in the transmission of cable services to residential subscribers.
      TELECOMMUNICATIONS. The transmission between or among points specified by
the user of information of the user's choosing, without change in the form or
content of the information as sent and received (as provided in 47 U.S.C.
Section 153(50)).
      TELECOMMUNICATIONS SERVICE. The offering of telecommunications for a fee
directly to the  public, or to such classes of users as to be effectively
available directly to the public, regardless of the facilities used (as
provided in 47 U.S.C. Section 153(53)).
      TIER. A group of channels for which a single periodic subscription fee is
charged.
      TWO-WAY. The cable system is capable of providing both upstream and
downstream transmissions.
      UPSTREAM. Carrying a transmission to the headend from remote points on
the cable system or from interconnection points on the cable system.
   (B)   Exhibits.
      (1)   Exhibit A, Franchise Fee Reporting Form.
      (2)   Exhibit B, Customer Service Standards.
      (3)   Exhibit C, Dark Fiber Contract.
(Ord._2019-009)
§ 13-5-3-2 GRANT OF FRANCHISE.
   (A)   Grant.
      (1)   The city hereby grants to grantee a nonexclusive authorization to
make reasonable and lawful use of the right-of-way within the city to
construct, operate, maintain, reconstruct and rebuild a cable system for the
purpose of providing cable service or any other lawful service subject to the
terms and conditions set forth in this franchise and in any prior utility or
use agreements entered into by grantee with regard to any individual property.
This franchise shall constitute both a right and an obligation to provide the
cable services required by and to fulfill the obligations set forth in the
provisions of this franchise.
      (2)   Nothing in this franchise shall be deemed to waive the lawful
requirements of any generally applicable city ordinance existing as of the
effective date, as set forth in subsection (E).
      (3)   Each and every term, provision or condition herein is subject to
the provisions of state law, federal law, the Charter of the city, and the
ordinances and regulations enacted pursuant thereto. The Charter and the City
of Albuquerque Code of Ordinances, as they exist on the effective date of this
franchise, are hereby expressly incorporated into this franchise as if fully
set out herein by this reference. Grantee retains the right to challenge any
city ordinance or regulation to the full extent allowed by applicable law.
Notwithstanding the foregoing, the city may not unilaterally alter the material
rights and obligations of grantee under this franchise. In the event of a
conflict between the Albuquerque Cable and OVS Ordinance ("Cable Code") as it
existed on the effective date of this franchise agreement and this franchise
agreement, the franchise agreement shall control, except where expressly
provided otherwise in this franchise agreement. While the exercise of rights
hereunder is subject to the cable code, the cable code is not a contract.
Nothing in this section shall prevent grantee from challenging a particular
amendment to the cable code as an impairment to this franchise agreement.
      (4)   This franchise shall not be interpreted to prevent the city from
imposing additional lawful conditions, including additional compensation
conditions for use of the right-of-way as allowed by applicable law, should
grantee provide service other than cable service, or to prevent grantee from
making any other lawful uses of the cable system as permitted by applicable
law.
      (5)   Grantee promises and guarantees, as a condition of exercising the
privileges granted by this franchise, that any affiliate of grantee directly
involved in the offering of cable service in the franchise area, or directly
involved in the management or operation of the cable system in the franchise
area, will also comply with the obligations of this franchise.
      (6)   No rights shall pass to grantee by implication. Without limiting
the foregoing, by way of example and not limitation, this franchise shall not
include or be a substitute for:
         (a)   Any other permit or authorization required for the privilege of
transacting and carrying on a business within the city that may be required by
the ordinances and laws of the city;
         (b)   Any permit, agreement, or authorization required by the city for
right-of-way users in connection with operations on or in the right-of-way or
public property including, by way of example and not limitation, street cut
permits; or
         (c)   Any permits or agreements for occupying any other property of
the city or private entities to which access is not specifically granted by
this franchise, including without limitation permits and agreements for placing
devices on poles, in conduits or in or on other structures.
      (7)   This franchise is intended to convey limited rights and interests
only as to those rights-of-way in which the city has an actual interest. It is
not a warranty of title or interest in any right-of-way; it does not provide
grantee with any interest in any particular location within the right-of-way;
and it does not confer rights other than as expressly provided in the grant
hereof.
      (8)   This franchise does not authorize grantee to provide
telecommunications service nor is this franchise a bar to the provision of non-
cable services, or to the imposition of any lawful conditions on grantee with
respect to telecommunications, whether similar, different or the same as the
conditions specified herein. This franchise does not relieve grantee of any
obligation it may have to obtain from the city an authorization to provide
telecommunications services, or relieve grantee of its obligation to comply
with any such authorizations that may be lawfully required.
   (B)   Use of right-of-way.
      (1)   Subject to the city's supervision and control, grantee may erect,
install, construct, repair, replace, reconstruct, and retain in, on, over,
under, upon, across, and along the right-of-way within the city such wires,
cables, conductors, ducts, conduits, vaults, manholes, amplifiers, pedestals,
attachments and other property and equipment as are necessary and appurtenant
to the operation of a cable system within the city. Grantee, through this
franchise, is granted extensive and valuable rights to operate its cable system
for profit using the city's right-of-way in compliance with all applicable city
construction codes and procedures. As trustee for the public, the city is
entitled to fair compensation as provided for in §
13-5-3-3 of this franchise to be paid for these valuable rights throughout the
term of the franchise.
      (2)   Grantee must follow city established nondiscriminatory requirements
for placement of cable system facilities in the right-of-way, including the
specific location of facilities in the right-of-way, and must in any event
install cable system facilities in a manner that minimizes interference with
the use of the right-of-way by others, including others that may be installing
communications faculties. Within limits reasonably related to the city's role
in protecting public health, safety and welfare, the city may require that
cable system facilities be installed at a particular time, at a specific place
or in a particular manner as a condition of access to a particular right-of-
way; may deny access if grantee is not willing to comply with city's
requirements; and may remove or require removal of any facility that is not
installed by grantee in compliance with the requirements established by the
city, or that is installed without prior city approval of the time, place or
manner of installation, and may charge grantee for all the costs associated
with removal; and may require grantee to cooperate with others to minimize
adverse impacts on the right-of-way through joint trenching and other
arrangements.
   (C)   Effective date and term of franchise. This franchise and the rights,
privileges and authority granted hereunder shall take effect on
               , 2019 (the "effective date"), and shall terminate on
               , 2029 unless terminated sooner as hereinafter provided.
   (D)   Franchise nonexclusive. This franchise shall be nonexclusive and
subject to all prior rights, interests, easements or licenses granted by the
city to any person to use any property, right-of-way, right, interest or
license for any purpose whatsoever, including the right of the city to use same
for any purpose it deems fit, including the same or similar purposes allowed
grantee hereunder. The city may at any time grant authorization to use the
right-of-way for any purpose not incompatible with grantee's authority under
this franchise and for such additional franchises for cable systems as the city
deems appropriate, subject to §
13-5-3-2(F) below.
   (E)   Police powers. Grantee's rights hereunder are subject to the home rule
and police powers of the city to adopt and enforce ordinances necessary to the
safety, health, and welfare of the public, and grantee agrees to comply with
all laws and ordinances of general applicability enacted or hereafter enacted
by the city or any other legally constituted governmental unit having lawful
jurisdiction over the subject matter hereof. The city shall have the right to
adopt from time to time such ordinances as may be deemed necessary in the
exercise of its home rule or police power; provided that such hereinafter
enacted ordinances shall be reasonable and not materially modify the terms of
this franchise. Any conflict between the provisions of this franchise and any
other present or future lawful exercise of the city's police powers shall be
resolved in favor of the latter. Grantee reserves all rights it may have to
challenge the lawfulness of any city ordinance. The city reserves all of its
rights and defenses to such challenges.
   (F)   Competitive equity.
      (1)   Grantee acknowledges and agrees that the city reserves the right to
grant one or more additional franchises or other similar lawful authorization
to utilize the right-of-way in order to provide cable services or similar video
programming service within the city. If the city grants such an additional
franchise or other similar lawful authorization that permits a new entrant to
utilize the right-of-way for cable services or similar video programming
services containing material terms and conditions that differ from grantee's
material obligations under this franchise, or declines to require such
franchise or other similar lawful authorization where it has the legal
authority to do so, then the parties agree that the obligations in this
franchise will, pursuant to the process set forth in this section, be amended
to include any material terms or conditions that it imposes upon the new
entrant, or provide relief from existing material terms or conditions, so as to
insure that the regulatory and financial burdens on each entity are materially
equivalent. MATERIAL TERMS AND CONDITIONS include but are not limited to:
franchise fees and gross revenues; complementary services; insurance; system
bulld-out requirements; security instruments; public, education and government
access channels and support; customer service standards; required reports and
related record keeping; competitive equity (or its equivalent); audits; dispute
resolution; remedies; and notice and opportunity to cure breaches. The parties
agree that this provision shall not require a word-for-word identical franchise
or authorization for a competitive entity so long as the regulatory and
financial burdens on each entity are materially equivalent.
      (2)   The modification process of this franchise as provided for in §
13-5-3-2(F)(1) shall only be initiated by written notice by grantee to the city
regarding specified franchise obligations. Grantee's notice shall address the
following:
         (a)   Identifying the specific terms or conditions in the competitive
cable services franchise which are materially different from grantee's
obligations under this franchise;
         (b)   Identifying the franchise terms and conditions for which grantee
is seeking amendments;
         (c)   Providing text for any proposed franchise amendments to the
city, with a written explanation of why the proposed amendments are necessary
and consistent.
      (3)   Upon receipt of grantee's written notice as provided in §
13-5-3-2(F)(2), the city and grantee agree that they will use best efforts in
good faith to negotiate grantee's proposed franchise modifications, and that
such negotiation will proceed and conclude within a 90- day time period, unless
that time period is reduced or extended by mutual agreement of the parties. If
the city and grantee reach agreement on the franchise modifications pursuant to
such negotiations, then the city shall amend this franchise to include the
modifications.
      (4)   In the alternative to franchise modification negotiations as
provided for in §
13-5-3-2(F)(3), or if the city and grantee fail to reach agreement in such
negotiations, grantee may, at its option, elect to replace this franchise by
opting into the franchise or other similar lawful authorization that the city
grants to another multi-channel video programming provider (with the
understanding that grantee may use its current system design and technology
infrastructure to meet any requirements of the new franchise), so as to insure
that the regulatory and financial burdens on each entity are equivalent. If
grantee so elects, the city shall immediately commence proceedings to replace
this franchise with the franchise issued to the other multi-channel video
programming provider.
      (5)   Notwithstanding anything contained in this §
13-5-3-2(F)(1) through (4) to the contrary, the city shall not be obligated to
amend or replace this franchise unless the new entrant makes cable services or
similar video programming service available for purchase by subscribers or
customers under its franchise agreement with the city.
      (6)   Notwithstanding any provision to the contrary, at any time that a
wireline-based entity with facilities used to deliver cable services or
multiple channels of video programming located in the city's right-of-way makes
available for purchase by subscribers or customers cable services or multiple
channels of video programming within the franchise area without a franchise or
other similar lawful authorization that permits a new entrant to utilize the
right-of-way granted by the city, then:
         (a)   Grantee may negotiate with the city to seek franchise
modifications as per §
13-5-3-2(F)(2)-(4) above; or
            (i)   the term of grantee's franchise shall, upon 90 days' written
notice from grantee, be shortened so that the franchise shall be deemed to
expire on a date 18 months from the first day of the month following the date
of grantee's notice and grantee shall be deemed to have timely invoked the
renewal process under 47 USC 546; or,
            (ii)   Grantee may assert, at grantee's option, that this franchise
is rendered "commercially impracticable" and invoke the modification procedures
set forth in Section 625 of the Cable Act.
   (G)   Familiarity with franchise. Grantee acknowledges and warrants by
acceptance of the rights, privileges and agreements granted herein that it has
carefully read and fully comprehends the terms and conditions of this franchise
and is willing to and does accept all lawful and reasonable risks of the
meaning of the provisions, terms and conditions herein. Grantee further
acknowledges and states that it has fully studied and considered the
requirements and provisions of this franchise and finds that the same are
commercially practicable at this time and consistent with all local, state and
federal laws and regulations currently in effect, including the Cable Act.
   (H)   Effect of acceptance. By accepting the franchise, grantee:
      (1)   Acknowledges and accepts the city's legal right to issue and
enforce the franchise;
      (2)   Accepts and agrees to comply with each and every provision of this
franchise subject to applicable law; and
      (3)   Agrees that the franchise was granted pursuant to processes and
procedures consistent with applicable law, and that it will not raise any claim
to the contrary.
(Ord._2019-009)
§ 13-5-3-3 FRANCHISE FEE PAYMENT AND FINANCIAL CONTROLS.
   (A)   Franchise fee. As compensation for the benefits and privileges granted
under this franchise and in consideration of permission to use the city's
right-of-way, grantee shall continue to pay as a franchise fee to the city
throughout the duration of and consistent with this franchise an amount equal
to 5% of grantee's gross revenues.
   (B)   Payments. Grantee's franchise fee payments to the city shall be
computed quarterly for the preceding calendar quarter ending March 31, June 30,
September 30, and December 31. Each quarterly payment shall be due and payable
no later than 45 days after said dates.
   (C)   Acceptance of payment and recomputation. No acceptance of any payment
shall be construed as an accord by the city that the amount paid is, in fact,
the correct amount, nor shall any acceptance of payments be construed as a
release of any claim the city may have for further or additional sums payable
or for the performance of any other obligation of grantee.
   (D)   Quarterly franchise fee reports. Each payment shall be accompanied by
a written report to the city, or concurrently sent under separate cover,
verified by an authorized representative of grantee, containing an accurate
statement in summarized form, as well as in detail, of grantee's gross revenues
and the computation of the payment amount. Such reports shall detail all gross
revenues by product or service of the cable system, an example of which is set
forth on Exhibit A attached to Ord. 2019-009.
   (E)   Annual franchise fee reports. Grantee shall within 60 days after the
end of each year furnish to the city a statement stating the total amount of
gross revenues for the year and all payments, deductions and computations for
the period.
   (F)   Audits. On an annual basis, upon 30 days' prior written notice, the
city, including the city's auditor or his or her authorized representative,
shall have the right to conduct an independent audit/review of grantee's
records reasonably related to the administration or enforcement of this
franchise. Pursuant to § 13-5-3-1, as part of the franchise fee audit/review
the city shall specifically have the right to review data related to the
allocation of revenue to cable services in the event grantee offers cable
services bundled with non-cable services. For purposes of this section:
      (1)   RELEVANT DATA shall include, at a minimum, grantee's records,
produced and maintained in the ordinary course of business, including revenue
codes, showing the subscriber counts per package and the revenue allocation per
package for each package that was available for city subscribers during the
audit period and grantee's billing reports, financial reports, general ledgers,
and sample subscriber bills used by grantee to determine gross revenues for the
franchise area that would allow the city to recompute the gross revenue
determination.
      (2)   In addition, the relevant data shall include grantee's
reconciliation of revenue accounts with the franchise fees paid in the audit
year. Such reconciliations shall include monthly reconciliations of franchise
fees owed with revenue accounts or ledgers; quarterly reconciliations of
payments with revenue accounts, ledgers and annual reconciliations of franchise
fees paid with financial statements.
      (3)   If the audit/review shows that franchise fee payments have been
underpaid by 5% or more (or such other contract underpayment threshold as set
forth in a generally applicable and enforceable regulation or policy of the
city related to audits), grantee shall pay the total cost of the audit/review,
such cost not to exceed $5,000 for each year of the audit period. The city's
right to audit/review and grantee's obligation to retain records related to
this subsection shall expire three years after each franchise fee payment has
been made to the city.
   (G)   Late payments. In the event any payment due quarterly is not received
within 45 days from the end of the calendar quarter, grantee shall pay interest
on the amount due (at the prime rate as listed in the Wall Street Journal on
the date the payment was due), compounded daily, calculated from the date the
payment was originally due until the date the city receives the payment.
   (H)   Underpayments. if a net franchise fee underpayment is discovered as
the result of an audit, grantee shall pay interest at the rate of 8% per annum,
compounded quarterly, calculated from the date each portion of the underpayment
was originally due until the date grantee remits the underpayment to the city.
   (I)   Alternative compensation. In the event the obligation of grantee to
compensate the city through franchise fee payments is lawfully suspended or
eliminated, in whole or part, then grantee shall pay to the city compensation
equivalent to the compensation paid to the city by other similarly situated
users of the city's right-of-way for grantee's use of the city's right-of-way,
provided that in no event shall such payments exceed the equivalent of 5% of
grantee's gross revenues (subject to the other provisions contained in this
franchise), to the extent consistent with applicable law.
   (J)   Maximum legal compensation. The parties acknowledge that at present
applicable federal law limits the city to collection of a maximum permissible
franchise fee of 5% of gross revenues. In the event that at any time during the
duration of this franchise, the city is authorized to collect an amount in
excess of 5% of gross revenues, then this franchise may be amended unilaterally
by the city to provide that such excess amount shall be added to the franchise
fee payments to be paid by grantee to the city hereunder, provided that grantee
has received at least 90 days' prior written notice from the city of such
amendment, so long as all cable operators in the city are paying the same
franchise fee amount.
   (K)   Tax liability. The franchise fees shall be in addition to any and all
taxes or other levies or assessments, including the PEG fee required under §
13-5-3-9, which are now or hereafter required to be paid by businesses in
general by any law of the city, the state or the United States including,
without limitation, sales, use and other taxes, business license fees or other
payments. Payment of the franchise fees under this franchise shall not exempt
grantee from the payment of any other license fee, permit fee, tax or charge on
the business, occupation, property or income of grantee that may be lawfully
imposed by the city. Any other license fees, taxes or charges shall be of
general applicability in nature and shall not be levied against grantee solely
because of its status as a cable operator, or against subscribers solely
because of their status as such.
   (L)   Financial records. Grantee agrees to meet with a representative of the
city upon request to review grantee's methodology of recordkeeping, financial
reporting, the computing of franchise fee obligations and other procedures, the
understanding of which the city deems necessary for reviewing reports and
records.
   (M)   Payment on termination. If this franchise terminates for any reason,
grantee shall file with the city within 90 calendar days of the date of the
termination, a financial statement signed by a representative of grantee
showing the gross revenues received by grantee since the end of the previous
fiscal year. The city reserves the right to satisfy any remaining financial
obligations of grantee to the city by utilizing the funds available in the
letter of credit or other security provided by grantee.
(Ord._2019-009)
§ 13-5-3-4 ADMINISTRATION AND REGULATION.
   (A)   Authority.
      (1)   The city shall be vested with the power and right to reasonably
regulate the exercise of the privileges permitted by this franchise in the
public interest or to delegate that power and right or any part thereof, to the
extent permitted under federal, state and local law, to any agent in its sole
discretion.
      (2)   Nothing in this franchise shall limit nor expand the city's right
of eminent domain under state law.
   (B)   Rates and charges. All of grantee's rates and charges related to or
regarding cable services shall be subject to regulation by the city to the full
extent authorized by applicable federal, state and local laws. Grantee shall
comply with the notice requirements found at 47 C.F.R. §§76.1601–76.1630;
Negative Option Billing protections found at 47 C.F.R. §76.981; the customer
service standards found at 47 C.F.R. § 76.309; the guides against bait
advertising found at 16 C.F.R. Part 238, as applicable; the Customer Service
Standards, Exhibit B of this Franchise Ordinance 2019-009 and any other
applicable law. Grantee may not engage in any trade practice prohibited by
state or federal law.
   (C)   Rate discrimination.
      (1)   All of grantee's rates and charges shall be published (in the form
of a publicly available rate card) and be non-discriminatory as to all persons
and organizations of similar classes, under similar circumstances and
conditions. Grantee shall apply its rates in accordance with applicable law,
with identical rates and charges for all subscribers receiving identical cable
services, without regard to race, color, ethnic or national origin, religion,
age, sex, sexual orientation, marital, military or economic status, or physical
or mental disability or, where consistent with any requirements of federal law,
geographic location within the city. Grantee shall offer the same cable
services to all residential subscribers at identical rates to the extent
required by applicable law and to multiple dwelling unit subscribers to the
extent authorized by FCC rules or applicable federal law. Grantee shall permit
subscribers to make any lawful in-residence connections the subscriber chooses
without additional charge or penalizing the subscriber therefor. However, if
any in-home connection requires service from grantee due to signal quality,
signal leakage or other factors caused by improper installation of such in-home
wiring or faulty materials of such in-home wiring, the subscriber may be
charged reasonable service charges by grantee.
      (2)   Nothing herein shall be construed to prohibit lawful pricing
programs which do not discriminate based on the categories identified herein.
Such pricing programs may include:
         (a)   The temporary reduction or waiving of rates or charges in
conjunction with valid promotional campaigns; or
         (b)   The offering of reasonable discounts to senior citizens or
economically disadvantaged citizens; or,
         (c)   The offering of rate discounts for cable service; or,
         (d)   The establishing of different and nondiscriminatory rates and
charges and classes of service for commercial subscribers, as allowable by
federal law and regulations.
   (D)   Filing of rates and charges.
      (1)   Throughout the term of this franchise, grantee shall maintain on
file with the city a complete schedule of applicable rates and charges for
cable services provided under this franchise. Nothing in this subsection shall
be construed to require grantee to file rates and charges under temporary
reductions or waivers of rates and charges in conjunction with promotional
campaigns or to prohibit the city from auditing, reviewing or confirming that
promotional campaigns are consistent with the terms of this franchise.
      (2)   Upon request of the city, grantee shall provide a complete schedule
of current rates and charges for any and all leased access channels or portions
of such channels provided by grantee. The schedule shall include a description
of the price, terms, and conditions established by grantee for leased access
channels.
   (E)   Cross subsidization. Grantee shall comply with all applicable laws
regarding rates for cable services and all applicable laws covering issues of
cross subsidization.
   (F)   Reserved authority. Both grantee and the city reserve all rights they
may have under the Cable Act and any other relevant provisions of federal,
state, or local law.
   (G)   Franchise amendment procedure. Either party may at any time seek an
amendment of this franchise, including amendments which are necessary to
address any significant changes, e.g., changes in the community's cable-related
needs and interests or changes in technology affecting cable services, by so
notifying the other party in writing. Within 30 days of receipt of notice, the
city and grantee shall meet to discuss the proposed amendment(s). If the
parties reach a mutual agreement upon the suggested amendment(s), such
amendment(s) shall be submitted to the City Council for its approval. If so
approved by the City Council and grantee, then such amendment(s) shall be
deemed part of this franchise. If mutual agreement is not reached, there shall
be no amendment.
   (H)   Time limits strictly construed. Subject to §
13-5-3-4(K) and (L), whenever this franchise sets forth a time for any act to
be performed by grantee, such time shall be deemed to be of the essence, and
any failure of grantee to perform within the allotted time may be considered a
breach of this franchise and sufficient grounds for the city to invoke any
relevant remedy in accordance with § 13-5-3-13(A) of this franchise.
   (I)   Performance evaluations.
      (1)   The city may hold performance evaluation sessions upon 90 days'
written notice, provided that such evaluation sessions shall be held no more
frequently than once every two years. All such evaluation sessions shall be
conducted by the city.
      (2)   Special evaluation sessions may be held at any time by the city
during the term of this franchise, upon 90 days' written notice to grantee.
      (3)   All regular evaluation sessions shall be open to the public and
announced at least two weeks in advance in any manner within the discretion of
the city. Grantee shall also include with or on the subscriber billing
statements for the billing period immediately preceding the commencement of the
session written notification of the date, time, and place of the regular
performance evaluation session, and any special evaluation session as required
by the city, provided grantee receives appropriate advance notice.
      (4)   Topics which may be discussed at any evaluation session may include
but are not limited to cable service rate structures; franchise fee payments;
liquidated damages; free or discounted cable services; application of new
technologies; cable system performance; cable services provided; programming
offered; subscriber complaints; privacy; amendments to this franchise; judicial
and FCC rulings; line extension policies; and the city or grantee's rules;
provided that nothing in this subsection shall be construed as requiring the
renegotiation of this franchise.
      (5)   During evaluations under this subsection, grantee shall fully
cooperate with the city and shall provide such information and documents as the
city may reasonably require to perform the evaluation.
   (J)   Late fees.
      (1)   For purposes of this subsection, any assessment, charge, cost, fee
or sum, however characterized, that grantee imposes upon a subscriber solely
for late payment of a bill is a late fee and shall be applied in accordance
with applicable law.
      (2)   Nothing in this subsection shall be deemed to create, limit or
otherwise affect the ability of grantee to impose other assessments, charges,
fees or sums other than those permitted by this subsection, for grantee's other
services or activities it performs in compliance with applicable law, including
FCC law, rule or regulation.
      (3)   Grantee's late fee and disconnection policies and practices shall
be nondiscriminatory, and such policies and practices and any fees imposed
pursuant to this subsection shall apply equally in all parts of the city
without regard to the neighborhood or income level of the subscriber.
   (K)   Force majeure.
      (1)   In the event grantee is prevented or delayed in the performance of
any of its obligations under this franchise by reason beyond the control of
grantee, grantee shall have a reasonable time, under the circumstances, to
perform the affected obligation under this franchise or to procure a substitute
for such obligation that is satisfactory to the city. Those conditions which
are not within the control of grantee include but are not limited to natural
disasters, civil disturbances, work stoppages or labor disputes, power outages,
telephone network outages, and severe or unusual weather conditions which have
a direct and substantial impact on grantee's ability to provide cable services
in the city and which was not caused and could not have been avoided by
grantee, which used its best efforts in its operations to avoid such results.
      (2)   If grantee believes that a reason beyond its control has prevented
or delayed its compliance with the terms of this franchise, grantee shall
provide documentation as reasonably required by the city to substantiate
grantee's claim. If grantee has not yet cured the deficiency, grantee shall
also provide the city with its proposed plan for remediation, including the
timing for such cure.
   (L)   Minor violations. The parties hereby agree that it is not the city's
intention to subject grantee to penalties, fines, forfeitures or revocation of
the franchise for violations of the franchise where the violation was a good
faith error that resulted in no or minimal negative impact on the subscribers
within the franchise area, or where strict performance would result in
practical difficulties and hardship to grantee which outweighs the benefit to
be derived by the city and/or subscribers. The city and grantee agree to abide
by standard commercial practices and principles, including the application of
the good faith doctrine to all aspects of this Franchise Ordinance.
(Ord._2019-009)
§ 13-5-3-5 FINANCIAL AND INSURANCE REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   Indemnification.
      (1)   General indemnification. Grantee shall indemnify, defend and hold
the city, its officers, officials, boards, commissions, agents and employees,
harmless from any action or claim for injury, damage, loss, liability, cost or
expense, including court and appeal costs and reasonable attorneys' fees or
reasonable expenses, arising from any casualty or accident to person or
property, including without limitation copyright infringement, defamation, and
all other damages in any way arising out of, or by reason of, any construction,
excavation, operation, maintenance, reconstruction, or any other act done under
this franchise, by or for grantee, its agents, or its employees, or by reason
of any neglect or omission of grantee. Grantee shall consult and cooperate with
the city while conducting its defense of the city. Grantee shall not be
obligated to indemnify the city to the extent of the city's negligence or
willful misconduct.
      (2)   Indemnification for relocation. Grantee shall indemnify the city
for any damages, claims, additional costs or reasonable expenses assessed
against or payable by the city arising out of or resulting from, directly or
indirectly, grantee's failure to remove, adjust or relocate any of its
facilities in the right-of-way in a timely manner in accordance with any
relocation required by the city.
      (3)   Additional circumstances. Grantee shall also indemnify, defend and
hold the city harmless for any claim for injury, damage, loss, liability, cost
or expense, including court and appeal costs and reasonable attorneys’ fees or
reasonable expenses in any way arising out of:
         (a)   The lawful actions of the city in granting this franchise to the
extent such actions are consistent with this franchise and applicable law.
         (b)   Damages arising out of any failure by grantee to secure consents
from the owners, authorized distributors, or licensees/licensors of programs to
be delivered by the cable system, whether or not any act or omission complained
of is authorized, allowed or prohibited by this franchise.
      (4)   Procedures and defense. If a claim or action arises, the city or
any other indemnified party shall promptly tender the defense of the claim to
grantee, which defense shall be at grantee's expense. The city may participate
in the defense of a claim, but if grantee provides a defense at grantee's
expense, then grantee shall not be liable for any attorneys' fees, expenses or
other costs that city may incur if it chooses to participate in the defense of
a claim, unless and until separate representation as described below in §
13-5-3-5(A)(6) is required. In that event the provisions of §
13-5-3-5(A)(6) shall govern grantee's responsibility for the city's attorney's
fees, expenses or other costs. In any event, grantee may not agree to any
settlement of claims affecting the city without the city's approval.
      (5)   Non-waiver. The fact that grantee carries out any activities under
this franchise through independent contractors shall not constitute an
avoidance of or defense to grantee's duty of defense and indemnification under
this subsection.
      (6)   Expenses. If separate representation to fully protect the interests
of both parties is or becomes necessary, such as a conflict of interest between
the city and the counsel selected by grantee to represent the city, grantee
shall pay, from the date such separate representation is required forward, all
reasonable expenses incurred by the city in defending itself with regard to any
action, suit or proceeding indemnified by grantee. Provided, however, that in
the event that such separate representation is or becomes necessary, and the
city desires to hire counsel or any other outside experts or consultants and
desires grantee to pay those expenses, then the city shall be required to
obtain grantee's consent to the engagement of such counsel, experts or
consultants, such consent not to be unreasonably withheld. The city's expenses
shall include all reasonable out-of-pocket expenses, such as consultants' fees,
and shall also include the reasonable value of any services rendered by the
City Attorney or his or her assistants or any employees of the city or its
agents but shall not include outside attorneys' fees for services that are
unnecessarily duplicative of services provided to the city by grantee.
   (B)   Insurance.
      (1)   Grantee shall maintain in full force and effect at its own cost and
expense each of the following policies of insurance:
         (a)   Commercial general liability insurance with limits of no less
than $1,000,000 per occurrence and $2,000,000 general aggregate. Coverage shall
be at least as broad as that provided by ISO CG 00 01 1/96 or its equivalent
and include severability of interests. Such insurance shall name the city, its
officers, officials and employees as additional insureds per ISO CG 2026 or its
equivalent. There shall be a waiver of subrogation and rights of recovery
against the city, its officers, officials and employees. Coverage shall apply
as to claims between insureds on the policy, if applicable.
         (b)   Commercial automobile liability insurance with minimum combined
single limits of $1,000,000 each occurrence with respect to each of grantee's
owned, hired and non-owned vehicles assigned to or used in the operation of the
cable system in the city. The policy shall contain a severability of interest
provision.
      (2)   The insurance shall not be canceled or materially changed so as to
be out of compliance with these requirements without 30 days' written notice
first provided to the city, via certified mail, and ten days' notice for
nonpayment of premium. If the insurance is canceled or materially altered so as
to be out of compliance with the requirements of this subsection within the
term of this franchise, grantee shall provide a replacement policy. Grantee
agrees to maintain continuous uninterrupted insurance coverage in at least the
amounts required for the duration of this franchise and, in the case of the
commercial general liability, for at least one year after expiration of this
franchise.
   (C)   Deductibles and certificate of insurance.
      (1)   Any deductible of the policies shall not in any way limit grantee's
liability to the city.
      (2)   Endorsements. All policies shall contain or shall be endorsed so
that:
         (a)   The city, Its officers, officials, boards, commissions,
employees and agents are to be covered as and have the rights of additional
insureds with respect to liability arising out of activities performed by or on
behalf of grantee under this franchise or applicable law, or in the
construction, operation or repair, or ownership of the cable system;
         (b)   Grantee's insurance coverage shall be primary insurance with
respect to the city, its officers, officials, boards, commissions, employees
and agents. Any insurance or self-insurance maintained by the city, its
officers, officials, boards, commissions, employees and agents shall be in
excess of grantee's insurance and shall not contribute to it; and
         (c)   Grantee's insurance shall apply separately to each insured
against whom a claim is made or lawsuit is brought, except with respect to the
limits of the insurer's liability.
      (3)   Acceptability of insurers. The insurance obtained by grantee shall
be placed with insurers with a Best's rating of no less than "A-" or better.
      (4)   Verification of coverage. Grantee shall furnish the city with
certificates of insurance and endorsements or a copy of the page of the policy
reflecting blanket additional insured status. The certificates and endorsements
for each insurance policy are to be signed by a person authorized by that
insurer to bind coverage on its behalf. The certificates and endorsements for
each insurance policy are to be on standard forms or such forms as are
consistent with standard industry practices.
      (5)   Self-Insurance. In the alternative to providing a certificate of
insurance to the city certifying insurance coverage as required above, grantee
may provide self-insurance in the same amount and level of protection for
grantee and the city, its officers, agents and employees as otherwise required
under this section. The adequacy of self- insurance shall be subject to the
periodic review and approval of the city, including the city's approval of an
annual letter that certifies the coverage and the means through which the city
can verify coverage.
   (D)   Letter of credit.
      (1)   If there is a claim by the city of an uncured breach by grantee of
a material provision of this franchise or pattern of repeated violations of any
provislon(s) of this franchise, then the city may require and grantee shall
establish as security for the faithful performance by grantee of all of the
provisions of this franchise, within 30 days from receiving notice from the
city, a letter of credit from a financial institution satisfactory to the city
in the amount of $100,000.
      (2)   In the event that grantee establishes a letter of credit pursuant
to the procedures of §
13-5-3-5(D)(1), then the letter of credit shall be maintained at $100,000 until
the allegations of the uncured breach have been resolved.
      (3)   After completion of the procedures set forth in §
13-5-3-13(A) or other applicable provisions of this franchise, the letter of
credit may be drawn upon by the city for purposes including but not limited to
the following:
         (a)   Failure of grantee to pay the city sums due under the terms of
this franchise;
         (b)   Reimbursement of costs borne by the city to correct franchise
violations not corrected by grantee;
         (c)   Monetary remedies or damages assessed against grantee due to
default or breach of franchise requirements; and
         (d)   Failure to comply with the customer service standards of the
city, as the same may be amended from time to time by the City Council acting
by ordinance or resolution.
      (4)   The city shall give grantee written notice of any withdrawal under
this subsection upon such withdrawal. Within seven days following receipt of
such notice, grantee shall restore the letter of credit to the amount required
under this franchise.
      (5)   Grantee shall have the right to appeal to the City Council for
reimbursement in the event grantee believes that the letter of credit was drawn
upon improperly. Grantee shall also have the right of judicial appeal if
grantee believes the letter of credit has not been properly drawn upon in
accordance with this franchise. Any funds the city erroneously or wrongfully
withdraws from the letter of credit shall be returned to grantee with interest,
from the date of withdrawal at a rate equal to the prime rate of interest as
quoted in the Wall Street Journal.
(Ord._2019-009)
§ 13-5-3-6 CUSTOMER SERVICE.
   (A)   Customer service standards. Grantee shall comply with customer service
standards of the city as the same may be amended from time to time by the City
Council in its sole discretion, acting by ordinance. Any requirement in
customer service standards for a "local" telephone number may be met by the
provision of a toll-free number. The customer services standards in effect as
of the effective date of this franchise are attached as Exhibit B.
Notwithstanding any other provision of this §
13-5-3-6(A), grantee reserves the right to challenge any customer service
ordinance that it believes is inconsistent with its contractual rights and
obligations under this franchise.
   (B)   Subscriber privacy. Grantee shall fully comply with any provisions
regarding the privacy rights of subscribers contained in federal, state, or
local law, including the customer service standards of the city, attached to
Ord. 2019-009 as Exhibit B.
   (C)   Subscriber contracts. Grantee shall not enter into a contract with any
subscriber which is in any way inconsistent with the terms of this franchise or
any exhibit hereto or the requirements of any applicable customer service
standard. Upon request, grantee will provide to the city a sample of the
subscriber contract or service agreement then in use.
   (D)   Advance notice to city. Grantee shall use reasonable efforts to
furnish information provided to subscribers in accordance with the customer
service standards and to the media in the normal course of business to the city
in advance.
   (E)   Identification of local franchise authority on subscriber bills.
Within 60 days after written request from the city, grantee shall place the
city's phone number on its subscriber bills to identify where a subscriber may
call to address escalated complaints.
(Ord._2019-009)
§ 13-5-3-7 REPORTS AND RECORDS.
   (A)   Open records.
      (1)   Grantee shall manage all of its operations in accordance with a
policy of keeping its documents and records open and accessible to the city.
The city, including the city's auditor or his or her authorized representative,
shall have access to and the right to inspect any books and records of grantee,
its parent corporations and affiliates which are reasonably related to the
administration or enforcement of the terms of this franchise. Grantee shall not
deny the city access to any of grantee's records on the basis that grantee's
records are under the control of any parent corporation, affiliate or a third
party.
      (2)   The city may, in writing, request copies of any such records or
books, and grantee shall provide such copies within 30 days of the transmittal
of such request. One copy of all reports and records required under this or any
other subsection shall be furnished to the city, at the sole expense of
grantee. If the requested books and records are too voluminous or for security
reasons cannot be copied or removed, then grantee may request, in writing,
within ten days that the city inspect them at grantee's local offices. If any
books or records of grantee are not kept in a local office and not made
available in copies to the city upon written request as set forth above, and if
the city determines that an examination of such records is necessary or
appropriate for the performance of any of the city's duties, administration or
enforcement of this franchise, then all reasonable travel and related expenses
incurred in making such examination shall be paid by grantee.
   (B)   Confidentiality.
      (1)   The city agrees to treat as confidential any books or records that
constitute proprietary or confidential information under federal or state law,
to the extent grantee makes the city aware of such confidentiality. Grantee
shall be responsible for clearly and conspicuously stamping the word
"Confidential" on each page that contains confidential or proprietary
information, and shall provide a brief written explanation as to why such
information is confidential under state or federal law.
      (2)   If the city believes it must release any such confidential books
and records in the course of enforcing this franchise or complying with a court
order or other legal requirement or for any other reason, it shall advise
grantee in advance so that grantee may take appropriate steps to protect its
interests. If the city receives a demand from any person for disclosure of any
information designated by grantee as confidential, the city shall, so far as
consistent with applicable law, advise grantee and provide grantee with a copy
of any written request by the party demanding access to such information within
a reasonable time. Until otherwise ordered by a court or agency of competent
jurisdiction, the city agrees that to the extent permitted by state and federal
law, it shall deny access to any of grantee's books and records marked
confidential, as set forth above, to any person. Grantee shall reimburse the
city for all reasonable costs and attorney's fees incurred in any legal
proceedings pursued under this section.
   (C)   Records required.
      (1)   Grantee shall at all times maintain and shall make available to the
city upon 30 days' written request and subject to applicable law:
         (a)   A complete set of maps showing the general location of all cable
system facilities in the right-of-way but excluding detail on proprietary
electronics contained therein and subscriber drops. As-built maps including
proprietary electronics shall be available at grantee's offices for inspection
by the city's authorized representative(s) or agent(s) and made available to
such during the course of technical inspections as reasonably conducted by the
city. These maps shall be certified as accurate by an appropriate
representative of grantee;
         (b)   A copy of all FCC filings on behalf of grantee, its parent
corporations or affiliates which relate to the operation of the cable system in
the city;
         (c)   A list of cable services, rates and channel lineups.
      (2)   Subject to §
13-5-3-7(B), all information furnished to the city is public information and
shall be treated as such, except for information involving the privacy rights
of individual subscribers.
   (D)   Annual reports. Within 60 days of the city's written request, grantee
shall submit to the city a written report in a form acceptable to the city
which shall include but not necessarily be limited to the following information
for the city:
      (1)   A gross revenue statement, as required by §
13-5-3-3(E) of this franchise;
      (2)   A summary of the previous year's activities in the development of
the cable system, including, but not limited to, cable services begun or
discontinued during the reporting year and the number of subscribers for each
class of cable service (i.e. Basic, Digital Starter and Premium);
      (3)   The number of homes passed, beginning and ending plant miles, any
services added or dropped, and any significant technological changes occurring
in the cable system;
      (4)   A statement of planned construction, if any, for the next year; and
      (5)   A copy of the most recent annual report grantee filed with the SEC
or other governing body.
   (E)   Copies of federal and state reports. Within 30 days of a written
request, grantee shall submit to the city copies of all pleadings,
applications, notifications, communications and documents of any kind,
submitted by grantee or its parent corporation(s), to any federal, state or
local courts, regulatory agencies and other government bodies if such documents
directly relate to the operations of grantee's cable system within the city.
Grantee shall not claim confidential, privileged or proprietary rights to such
documents unless such documents have been determined by a court of competent
jurisdiction, or a federal or state agency, to be confidential.
   (F)   Complaint file and reports.
      (1)   Grantee shall keep an accurate and comprehensive file of any
complaints regarding the cable system in a manner consistent with the privacy
rights of subscribers and grantee's actions in response to those complaints.
      (2)   Within 30 days of a written request, grantee shall provide the city
a quarterly executive summary in the form attached to the customer service
standards, which shall include the following information from the preceding
quarter:
         (a)   A summary of service calls, identifying the number and nature of
the requests and their disposition;
         (b)   A log of all service interruptions;
         (c)   A summary of customer complaints referred by the city to
grantee; and
         (d)   Such other information as reasonably requested by the city.
      (3)   The parties agree the city's request for the reports described in
this §
13-5-3-7 shall remain effective and need only be made once. Such a request
shall require the grantee to continue to provide the reports until further
written notice from the city to the contrary.
   (G)   Failure to report. The failure or neglect of grantee to file any of
the reports or filings required under this franchise or such other reports as
the city may reasonably request (not including clerical errors or errors made
in good faith), may, at the city's option, be deemed a breach of this
franchise.
   (H)   False statements. Any false or misleading statement or representation
in any report required by this franchise (not including clerical errors or
errors made in good faith) may be deemed a material breach of this franchise
and may subject grantee to all remedies, legal or equitable, which are
available to the city under this franchise or otherwise.
(Ord._2019-009)
§ 13-5-3-8 PROGRAMMING.
   (A)   Broad programming categories. Grantee shall provide or enable the
provision of at least the following initial broad categories of programming to
the extent such categories are reasonably available:
      (1)   Educational programming;
      (2)   New Mexico news, weather and information;
      (3)   Sports;
      (4)   General entertainment (including movies);
      (5)    Children/family-oriented;
      (6)   Arts, culture and performing arts;
      (7)   Foreign language;
      (8)    Science/documentary;
      (9)   National news, weather and information; and,
      (10)   Public, Educational and Government Access, to the extent required
by this franchise.
   (B)   Deletion or reduction of broad programming categories.
      (1)   Grantee shall not delete or so limit as to effectively delete any
broad category of programming within its control without the prior written
consent of the city.
      (2)   In the event of a modification proceeding under federal law, the
mix and quality of cable services provided by grantee on the effective date of
this franchise shall be deemed the mix and quality of cable services required
under this franchise throughout its term.
   (C)   Ascertainment of programming and customer satisfaction. Upon request
of the city, grantee shall, at the sole expense of grantee, undertake a survey
of community views of cable operations in the city, including but not limited
to programming, response to community needs, satisfaction and dissatisfaction
with cable services offered by grantee, and customer service. The city may make
such request no more than once every two years. Grantee shall consult and
cooperate with the city in developing and implementing an ascertainment
methodology. The final form and content of the survey shall be as mutually
agreed upon by grantee and the city. Grantee shall provide the results of such
survey to the city within two months after completing the survey. Upon request,
grantee shall also provide a copy of results from any other ascertainment
survey of subscribers in the city conducted independently by grantee within the
previous year. Any survey results conducted within the city which are intended
for external publication shall also be provided to the city. Nothing herein
shall be construed to limit the right of the city to conduct its own surveys at
its own expense.
   (D)   Obscenity. Grantee shall not transmit or permit to be transmitted over
any channel subject to its editorial control any programming which is obscene
under or violates any provision of applicable law relating to obscenity and
which is not protected by the Constitution of the United States. Grantee shall
be deemed to have transmitted or permitted a transmission of obscene
programming only if a court of competent jurisdiction has found that any of
grantee's officers or employees or agents have permitted programming which is
obscene under or violative of any provision of applicable law relating to
obscenity, and is otherwise not protected by the Constitution of the United
States, to be transmitted over any channel subject to grantee's editorial
control. Grantee shall comply with all relevant provisions of federal law
relating to obscenity.
   (E)   Parental control device. Upon request by any subscriber, grantee shall
make available a parental control or lockout device, traps or filters to enable
a subscriber to control access to both the audio and video portions of any or
all channels. Grantee shall inform its subscribers of the availability of the
lockout device at the time of their initial subscription and periodically
thereafter. Any device offered shall be at a rate, if any, in compliance with
applicable law.
   (F)   Continuity of service mandatory.
      (1)   It shall be the right of all subscribers to continue to receive
cable service from grantee insofar as their financial and other obligations to
grantee are honored. Grantee shall act so as to ensure that all subscribers
receive continuous, uninterrupted cable service regardless of the
circumstances. For the purposes of this subsection, UNINTERRUPTED does not
include short-term outages of the cable system for maintenance or testing.
      (2)   In the event of a change of grantee or in the event a new cable
operator acquires the cable system in accordance with this franchise, grantee
shall cooperate with the city, new franchisee or cable operator in maintaining
continuity of cable service to all subscribers. During any transition period,
grantee shall be entitled to the revenues for any period during which it
operates the cable system, and shall be entitled to reasonable costs for its
services when it no longer operates the cable system.
      (3)   In the event grantee fails to operate the cable system for four
consecutive days without prior approval of the city, or without just cause, the
city may, at its option, operate the cable system itself or designate another
cable operator to operate the cable system until such time as grantee restores
service under conditions acceptable to the city or a permanent cable operator
is selected. If the city is required to fulfill this obligation for grantee,
grantee shall reimburse the city for all reasonable costs or damages that are
the result of grantee's failure to perform.
   (G)   Services for the disabled. Grantee shall comply with the Americans
with Disabilities Act and any amendments thereto.
(Ord._2019-009)
§ 13-5-3-9 PEG ACCESS.
   (A)   Designated access providers.
      (1)   The city shall have the sole and exclusive responsibility for
identifying the designated access providers, including itself, for access
purposes, to control and manage the use of any or all access facilities
provided by grantee under this franchise. As used in this section, such "access
facilities" includes the channels, services, facilities, equipment, technical
components and/or financial support provided under this franchise, which are
used or useable by and for public access, educational access, and government
access ("PEG" or "PEG Access").
      (2)   Grantee shall cooperate with the city in the city's efforts to
provide access programming but will not be responsible or liable for any
damages resulting from a claim in connection with the programming placed on the
access channels by the designated access provider.
   (B)   Channel capacity and use.
      (1)   As of the effective date grantee shall provide standard definition
access channels and high definition access channels for use by the city or its
designated access providers, as set forth in §
13-5-3-9(B)(3) and (4).
      (2)   Grantee shall have the right to temporarily use any channel or
portion thereof which is allocated under this subsection for public,
educational, or governmental access use, within 60 days after a written request
for such use is submitted to the city, if such channel is not "fully utilized"
as defined herein. A channel shall be considered fully utilized if
substantially unduplicated programming is delivered over it more than an
average of 38 hours per week over a six-month period. Programming that is
repeated on an access channel up to two times per day shall be considered
"unduplicated programming." Character generated programming shall be included
for purposes of this subsection but may be counted towards the total average
hours only with respect to one channel provided to the city. If a channel
allocated for public, educational, or governmental access use will be used by
grantee in accordance with the terms of this subsection, the institution to
which the channel has been allocated shall have the right to require the return
of the channel or portion thereof. City shall request return of such channel
space by delivering written notice to grantee stating that the institution is
prepared to fully utilize the channel or portion thereof in accordance with
this subsection. In such event, the channel or portion thereof shall be
returned to such institution within 60 days after receipt by grantee of such
written notice.
      (3)   Standard definition ("SD") digital access channels.
         (a)   Grantee shall continue to provide four activated downstream
channels for PEG access use in a standard definition ("SD") digital format in
grantee's Basic Service ("SD Access Channel") until such time as the city
activates additional access channels as set forth in § 13-5-3-9(B)(4). Grantee
shall carry all components of the SD access channel signals provided by a
designated access provider including but not limited to closed captioning,
stereo audio and other elements associated with the programming. A designated
access provider shall be responsible for providing the SD access channel signal
in an SD or high definition ("HD") format to the demarcation point at the
designated point of origination for the SD access channel, and grantee shall be
responsible for downconverting any HD signal to SD for distribution on the
cable system. Grantee shall transport and distribute the SD access channel
signal on its cable system and shall not unreasonably discriminate against SD
access channels with respect to accessibility, functionality and the
application of any applicable FCC Rules & Regulations, including without
limitation Subpart K channel signal standards.
         (b)   With respect to signal quality, grantee shall not be required to
carry a SD access channel in a higher quality format than that of the SD access
channel signal delivered to grantee, but grantee shall distribute the SD access
channel signal without degradation. Upon reasonable written request by a
designated access provider, grantee shall verify signal delivery to subscribers
with the designated access provider, consistent with the requirements of this §
13-5-3-9(B)(3).
         (c)   Grantee shall be responsible for costs associated with the
transmission of SD access signals on its side of the demarcation point which,
for the purposes of this §
13-5-3-9(B)(3)(c), shall mean up to and including the modulator where the city
signal is converted into a format to be transmitted over a fiber connection to
grantee. The city or designated access provider shall be responsible for costs
associated with SD access signal transmission on its side of the demarcation
point .
         (d)   SD access channels may require subscribers to buy or lease
special equipment, available to all subscribers, and subscribe to those tiers
of cable service upon which SD channels are made available. Grantee is not
required to provide free SD equipment to subscribers, including complimentary
government and educational accounts, nor modify its equipment or pricing
policies in any manner.
      (4)   High definition ("HD") digital access channels.
         (a)   Within 120 days of the effective date and upon written request
from the city, grantee shall activate on its cable system two High Definition
("HD") digital format PEG access channels ("HD access channel"), for which the
city shall provide access channel signals in HD format to the demarcation point
at the designated point of origination for the access channel.
         (b)   After the first anniversary of the effective date, and if the
city returns one SD access channel provided under §
13-5-3-9(B)(3), and with at least 120 days' written notice to grantee, grantee
shall provide on its cable system one additional HD access channel for PEG
access use.
         (c)   Activation of the one HD access channel shall only occur after
the following conditions are satisfied with respect to each of the HD access
channels:
            (i)   The city shall, in its written notice to grantee as provided
for in this subsection, confirm that it or its designated access provider has
the capabilities to produce, has been producing and will produce programming in
an HD format for the newly activated HD access channel and,
            (ii)   There will be a minimum of five hours per-day, five days
per-week of HD PEG programming available for the HD access channel. For the
purposes of this subsection, character-generated programming (i.e., community
bulletin boards) shall not satisfy, in whole or in part, this programming
require ment.
         (d)   The city shall be responsible for providing the HD access
channel signals in an HD digital format to the demarcation point at the
designated point of origination for the HD access channel. For purposes of this
franchise, an HD signal refers to a television signal delivering picture
resolution of either 720p or 1080i, or such other resolution in this same range
that grantee utilizes for other similar non-sport, non-movie programming
channels on the cable system, whichever is greater.
         (e)   Grantee shall transport and distribute the HD access channels
signal on its cable system and shall not unreasonably discriminate against the
HD access channels with respect to accessibility, functionality and to the
application of any applicable FCC Rules & Regulations, including without
limitation Subpart K channel signal standards. With respect to signal quality,
grantee shall not be required to carry an HD access channel in a higher quality
format than that of the HD access channel signal delivered to grantee, but
grantee shall distribute the HD access channel signal without degradation.
Grantee shall carry all components of the HD access channel signals provided by
the designated access provider including but not limited to closed captioning,
stereo audio and other elements associated with the programming. Upon
reasonable written request by the city, grantee shall verify signal delivery to
subscribers with the city, consistent with the requirements of this §
13-5-3-9 (B)(4).
         (f)   HD access channels may require subscribers to buy or lease
special equipment, available to all subscribers, and subscribe to those tiers
of cable service, upon which HD channels are made available. Grantee is not
required to provide free HD equipment to subscribers, including complimentary
government and educational accounts, nor modify its equipment or pricing
policies in any manner.
         (g)   The city or any designated access provider is responsible for
acquiring all equipment necessary to produce programming in HD.
         (h)   Grantee shall cooperate with the city to procure and provide, at
city's cost, all necessary transmission equipment from the designated access
provider channel origination point, at grantee's headend and through grantee's
distribution system, in order to deliver the HD access channel. The city shall
be responsible for the costs of all transmission equipment, including HD
modulator and demodulator and encoder or decoder equipment, and multiplex
equipment, required in order for grantee to receive and distribute the HD
access channel signal, or for the cost of any resulting upgrades to the video
return line. The city and grantee agree that such expense of acquiring and
installing the transmission equipment or upgrades to the video return line
qualifies as a capital cost for PEG facilities within the meaning of the Cable
Act 47 U.S.C.A. Section 542(g)(20)(C), and therefore is an appropriate use of
revenues derived from those PEG capital fees provided for in this franchise.
      (5)   Grantee shall simultaneously carry the two HD access channels
provided for in §
13-5-3-9(B)(4)(a) in high definition format on the cable system, in addition to
simultaneously carrying in standard definition format the four SD access
channels provided pursuant to §
13-5-3-9(B)(3). The total number of access channels shall be four SD access
channels and two HD access channels. At such time as the city returns one SD
access channel and grantee activates the third HD access channel in accordance
with §
13-5-3-9(B)(4)(b), the number of SD access channels shall be reduced to three
and the number of HD access channels shall be three and the total number of
access channels shall be six - three SD access channels and three HD access
channels.
      (6)   There shall be no restriction on grantee's technology used to
deploy and deliver SD or HD signals so long as the requirements of the
franchise are otherwise met. Grantee may implement HD carriage of the PEG
channels in any manner (including selection of compression, utilization of IP,
and other processing characteristics) that produces a signal quality for the
subscriber that is reasonably comparable and functionally equivalent to similar
commercial HD channels carried on the cable system. In the event the city
believes that grantee fails to meet this standard, the city will notify grantee
of such concern, and grantee will respond to any complaints in a timely manner.
      (7)   At such time as grantee provides 98% of its video programming
content on the cable system exclusively in HD, all of the existing SD access
channels will be converted to HD access channels. Prior to the time that
grantee provides 98% of its video programming content on the cable system
exclusively in HD, the parties may from time to time discuss transitioning SD
access channels access to HD access channels, and such transition may occur if
in grantee's discretion such action is technically and commercially feasible.
   (C)   Access channel assignment. Grantee will use reasonable efforts to
minimize the movement of SD and HD access channel assignments. In addition,
grantee will make reasonable efforts to locate the HD access channel provided
pursuant to §
13-5-3-9(B)(4) in a location on its HD channel lineup that is easily accessible
to subscribers.
   (D)   Relocation of access channels. Grantee shall provide city a minimum of
60 days’ notice and use its best efforts to provide 120 days' notice prior to
the time PEG access channel designations are changed.
   (E)   Web-based video on demand and streaming.
      (1)   Grantee shall provide at no cost to the city, at 400 Marquette NW,
1st Floor, Room 106, Albuquerque, a business class broadband connection,
broadband service and all necessary hardware to enable the city's delivery of
web-based PEG content. If during the term of this franchise the city moves its
location and such new location does not have the capacity to connect and
receive the broadband service described in this §
13-5-3-9(E)(1), the cost of upgrading the network to enable such service shall
be incurred by the city. The broadband connection provided herein shall be used
exclusively for web-based on demand access programming and/or web-based video
streaming of access content. Within 90 days after written request of the city,
grantee shall additionally provide a one-time grant of funding, in an amount
not to exceed $25,000, which the city shall use to acquire and/or for
replacement costs for a video on-demand server for facilitating the web-based
access programming described in this §
13-5-3-9(E).
      (2)   The city's designated access provider(s) may provide web-based
video on-demand programming on line; provided, however, that such designated
access providers shall be responsible for its own costs related to a video on-
demand server, broadband connection and service and any other associated
equipment.
      (3)   Any costs incurred by grantee in facilitating the web-based on-
demand access programming described in this §
13-5-3-9(E) may be recovered from subscribers by grantee in accordance with
applicable law.
   (F)   Support for PEG access and network costs.
      (1)   During the term of this franchise agreement, grantee shall provide
$0.62 per month per residential subscriber (the "PEG contribution") to be used
solely for capital costs related to PEG access, including the city's
institutional network connections or as may be permitted by applicable law. At
the fifth anniversary of the effective date of this franchise, the city at its
discretion, by ordinance or resolution after 120 days' notice and an
opportunity for the grantee to be heard, may require grantee to increase the
PEG contributions to $0.65 per month per residential subscriber for the
remaining term of this franchise. At the eighth anniversary of the effective
date of this franchise, the city at its discretion, by ordinance or resolution
after 120 days' notice and an opportunity for the grantee to be heard, may
require grantee to increase the PEG contributions to $0.68 per month per
residential subscriber for the remaining term of this franchise.
      (2)   Grantee shall make PEG contribution payments quarterly, following
the effective date of this franchise agreement for the preceding quarter ending
March 31, June 30, September 30, and December 31. Each payment shall be due and
payable no later than 45 days following the end of the quarter.
      (3)   The city shall have sole discretion to allocate the expenditure of
such payments for any capital costs related to PEG access. The parties agree
that this franchise shall provide the city discretion to utilize the PEG
contribution for new internal network connections and enhancements to the
city's existing network.
      (4)   The PEG contribution shall not be collected and remitted on:
         (a)   Subscribers residing in multiple dwelling units billed on a
bulk-billing basis for any additional services;
         (b)   Subscribers and/or employees receiving cable service on a gratis
or complimentary basis; and
         (c)   Subscribers whose accounts are written off as uncollectable or
are considered bad debt.
   (G)   Access support not franchise fees. Grantee agrees that capital support
for access costs arising from or relating to the obligations set forth in this
section shall in no way modify or otherwise affect grantee's obligations to pay
franchise fees to the city. Grantee agrees that although the sum of franchise
fees plus the payments set forth in this section may total more than 5% of
grantee's gross revenues in any 12-month period, the PEG contribution shall not
be offset or otherwise credited in any way against any franchise fee payments
under this franchise agreement so long as such support is used for capital
access purposes, including the city's institutional network connections
consistent with this franchise and federal law or as provided by applicable
law.
   (H)   Access channels on basic service or lowest priced HD service tier. All
SD access channels shall be available on the tier of service to which grantee
requires all subscribers to subscribe (as of the effective date, the basic
service tier), or if there is no such tier, the access channels will be made
available to every subscriber without charge beyond the charge the subscriber
pays for the cable services and equipment the subscriber receives. The HD
access channels under this franchise agreement shall be included by grantee
without limitation as part of the lowest priced tier of HD cable service upon
which grantee provides HD programming content.
   (I)   Change in technology. In the event grantee makes any change in the
cable system and related equipment and facilities or in grantee's signal
delivery technology which directly or indirectly affects the signal quality or
transmission of access services or programming, grantee shall at its own
expense take necessary technical steps or provide necessary technical
assistance, including the acquisition of all necessary equipment and full
training of the city's access personnel, to ensure that the capabilities of
access services are not diminished or adversely affected by such change. If the
city implements a new video delivery technology that is currently offered and
can be accommodated on grantee's local cable system, then the same provisions
above shall apply. If the city implements a new video delivery technology that
is not currently offered on and/or that cannot be accommodated by grantee's
local cable system, then the city shall be responsible for acquiring all
necessary equipment, facilities, technical assistance, and training to deliver
the signal to grantee's headend for distribution to subscribers.
   (J)   Technical quality. Grantee shall maintain all upstream and downstream
access services and channels on its side of the demarcation point at the same
level of technical quality and reliability required by this franchise agreement
and all other applicable laws, rules and regulations for residential subscriber
channels. Grantee shall provide routine maintenance for all transmission
equipment on its side of the demarcation point, including modulators, decoders,
multiplex equipment, and associated cable and equipment necessary to carry a
quality signal to and from the city's facilities for the access channels
provided under this franchise agreement. Grantee shall also provide, if
requested in advance by the city, advice and technical expertise regarding the
proper operation and maintenance of transmission equipment on the city's side
of the demarcation point. The city shall be responsible for all initial and
replacement costs of all HD modulator and demodulator equipment. The city shall
also be responsible, at its own expense, to replace any of grantee's equipment
that is damaged by the gross negligence or intentional acts of city staff.
Grantee shall be responsible, at its own expense, to replace any of grantee's
equipment that is damaged by the gross negligence or intentional acts of
grantee's staff. The city will be responsible for the cost of repairing and/or
replacing any HD PEG access transmission equipment that grantee maintains that
is used exclusively for transmission of the city's and/or its designated access
providers' HD access programming.
   (K)   Access cooperation. The city may designate any other jurisdiction
which has entered into an agreement with grantee or an affiliate of grantee
based upon this franchise agreement, to receive any access benefit due the city
hereunder, or to share in the use of access facilities hereunder. The purpose
of this section shall be to allow cooperation in the use of access and the
application of any provision under this section as the city in its sole
discretion deems appropriate, and grantee shall cooperate fully with, and in,
any such arrangements by the city.
   (L)   Return lines/access origination.
      (1)   Grantee shall continuously maintain the two return lines previously
constructed to the City Hall and the PEG access studio throughout the term of
the franchise, in order to enable the distribution of access programming to
residential subscribers on the access channels; provided, however, that
grantee's maintenance obligations with respect to either of these locations
shall cease if a location is no longer used in the future by the city to
originate access programming.
      (2)   Grantee shall construct and maintain new fiber optic return lines
to the headend from production facilities of new or relocated designated access
providers delivering access programming to residential subscribers as requested
in writing by the city. All actual construction costs incurred by grantee from
the nearest interconnection point to the designated access provider shall be
paid by the city or the designated access provider. New return lines shall be
completed within one year from the request of the city or its designated access
provider, or as otherwise agreed to by the parties. If an emergency situation
necessitates movement of production facilities to a new location, the parties
shall work together to complete the new return line as soon as reasonably
possible.
   (M)   Access program listings in subscriber guide. To the extent the
configuration of the cable system allows for detailed program listings to be
included on the digital channel guide, grantee will allow the city or the
designated access provider to make arrangements with the channel guide vendor
to make detailed programming listings available on the guide. The city or the
designated access provider will be solely responsible for providing the program
information to the vendor in the format and timing required by the vendor and
shall bear all costs of this guide service.
(Ord._2019-009)
§ 13-5-3-10 GENERAL RIGHT-OF-WAY USE AND CONSTRUCTION.
   (A)   Right to construct. Subject to applicable law, generally applicable
regulations, rules, resolutions and ordinances of the city, and the provisions
of this franchise, grantee may perform all construction in the right-of-way for
any facility needed for the maintenance or extension of grantee's cable system.
   (B)   Right-of-way meetings. Grantee will regularly attend and participate
in meetings of the city of which grantee is made aware regarding right-of-way
issues that may impact the cable system.
   (C)   Joint trenching/boring meetings. Grantee will regularly attend and
participate in planning meetings of the city of which grantee is made aware to
anticipate joint trenching and boring. Whenever it is possible and reasonably
practicable to joint trench or share bores or cuts, grantee shall work with
other providers, licensees, permittees, and franchisees in order to reduce as
much as possible the number of right-of-way cuts within the city subject to the
provisions in this section including §
13-5-3-10(T) and (U).
   (D)   General standard. All work authorized and required hereunder shall be
done in a safe, thorough and workman-like manner. All installations of
equipment shall be permanent in nature, durable and installed in accordance
with good engineering practices.
   (E)   Permits required for construction. Prior to doing any work in the
right-of-way or other public property, grantee shall apply for and obtain
appropriate permits, including without limitation excavation and/or barricade
permits, from the city pursuant to Chapter 6, Article 5, Part 2, of the Revised
Ordinances of Albuquerque. As part of the permitting process, the city may
impose such conditions and regulations as are necessary for the purpose of
protecting any structures in such right-of-way, proper restoration of such
right- of-way and structures, the protection of the public, and the continuity
of pedestrian or vehicular traffic, and the joint use of trenches. Such
conditions may also include the provision of a construction schedule and maps
showing the location of the facilities to be installed in the right-of-way.
Grantee shall pay all applicable fees for the requisite city permits received
by grantee. Grantee shall complete work in compliance with all permit,
construction and building codes, and all other legal requirements; if work is
non-compliant, grantee shall be subject to applicable penalties, including the
remediation or removal of the infrastructure or equipment improperly
constructed and/or installed.
   (F)   Emergency permits. In the event that emergency repairs are necessary,
grantee shall immediately notify the city of the need for such repairs. Grantee
may initiate such emergency repairs and shali apply for appropriate permits
within 48 hours after discovery of the emergency.
   (G)   Compliance with applicable codes.
      (1)   City construction codes. Grantee shall comply with all applicable
city construction and zoning ordinances and codes, State of New Mexico
construction and building codes, including without limitation the New Mexico
Commercial Building Code, the New Mexico Residential Building Code; and other
building codes, such as the International Fire Code, the New Mexico Mechanical
Code, and other generally applicable zoning codes and regulations.
      (2)   Tower specifications. Antenna supporting structures (towers) shall
be designed for the proper loading as specified by the Electronics Industries
Association (EIA), as those specifications may be amended from time to time.
Antenna supporting structures (towers) shall be painted, lighted, erected and
maintained in accordance with all applicable rules and regulations of the
Federal Aviation Administration and all other applicable federal, state, and
local codes or regulations.
      (3)   Safety codes. Grantee shall comply with all federal, state and city
safety requirements, rules, regulations, laws and practices, and employ all
necessary devices as required by applicable law during construction, operation
and repair of its cable system. By way of illustration and not limitation,
grantee shall comply with the National Electric Code, National Electrical
Safety Code and Occupational Safety and Health Administration (OSHA) Standards.
   (H)   GIS mapping. Grantee shall comply with any generally applicable
ordinances, rules and regulations of the city regarding geographic information
mapping systems for users of the right-of-way. In addition, grantee shall
comply with the following filing and reporting requirements, subject to §
13-5-3-7(B):
      (1)   Preconstruction: Grantee shall submit preconstruction maps in hard
copy printed form and in the city's Albuquerque Geographic Information System
(AGIS) or compatible format which shall show the location and dimension of any
facilities grantee proposes for the placement in the city's right-of-way.
      (2)   Post-Construction: Grantee shall submit maps after the completion
of construction which shall show the approximate location of installed
facilities.
      (3)   Availability of Maps: Grantee shall maintain on file at all times
maps, operational data, and reports showing grantee's network and operations in
the city. The city may inspect the maps and data at any time during business
hours upon request without charge.
   (I)   Minimal interference.
      (1)   Work in the right-of-way, on other public property, near public
property, or on or near private property shall be done in a manner that causes
the least interference with the rights and reasonable convenience of property
owners and residents. Grantee's cable system shall be constructed and
maintained in such manner as not to interfere with sewers, water pipes, or any
other property of the city, or with any other electrical, gas or
telecommunications infrastructure, including without limitation pipes, wires,
conduits, pedestals, structures, or other facilities that may have been laid in
the right-of-way by or under the city's authority. Grantee's cable system shall
be located, erected and maintained so as not to endanger or interfere with the
lives of persons, or to interfere with new improvements the city may deem
proper to make or to unnecessarily hinder or obstruct the free use of the
right-of-way or other public property, and shall not interfere with the travel
and use of public places by the public during the construction, repair,
operation or removal thereof, and shall not obstruct or impede traffic. In the
event of such interference, the city may require the removal or relocation of
grantee's lines, cables, equipment and other appurtenances from the property in
question at grantee's expense.
      (2)   Grantee shall not place any facilities on, over, under, or within
any city park or the median portion of any boulevard or parkway except for
perpendicular crossings without first having obtained the written permission of
the city.
      (3)   The city reserves the right to regulate the time, location, and
manner of work in the right-of-way. The city shall not unreasonably withhold or
restrict a grantee's access to particular locations in the right-of-way.
      (4)   Grantee shall employ trenchless technology in the placement of its
facilities where technically and financially appropriate and required by
generally applicable code or ordinance.
   (J)   Prevent injury/safety. Grantee shall provide and use any equipment and
facilities necessary to control and carry grantee's signals so as to prevent
injury to the city's property or property belonging to any person. Grantee at
its own expense shall repair, renew, change and improve its facilities to keep
them in good repair and safe and presentable condition. All excavations made by
grantee in the right-of-way shall be properly safeguarded for the prevention of
accidents by the placement of adequate barriers, fences or boarding, the bounds
of which during periods of dusk and darkness shall be clearly designated by
warning lights.
   (K)   Hazardous substances.
      (1)   Grantee shall comply with any and all applicable laws, statutes,
regulations and orders concerning hazardous substances relating to grantee's
cable system in the right-of-way.
      (2)   Upon reasonable notice to grantee, the city may inspect grantee's
facilities in the right-of-way to determine if any release of hazardous
substances has occurred or may occur from or related to grantee's cable system.
In removing or modifying grantee's facilities as provided in this franchise,
grantee shall also remove all residue of hazardous substances related thereto.
      (3)   Grantee agrees to indemnify the city against any claims, costs, and
expenses, of any kind, whether direct or indirect, incurred by the city arising
out of a release of hazardous substances caused by grantee's cable system.
   (L)   Locates. Prior to doing any work in the right-of-way, grantee shall
comply with each and every requirement found in Chapter 62, Article 14, of the
New Mexico Statutes Annotated 1978, regarding the one-call notification system
for the making and locating of underground facilities, as the same may be
amended from time to time.
   (M)   Grantee notice to private property owners; notice of substantial
rebuilds and upgrades.
      (1)   Work on private properties. Grantee shall give notice to private
property owners of work on or adjacent to private property in accordance with
the city's customer service standards, as the same may be amended from time to
time by the City Council acting by ordinance or resolution. Grantee shall not
install any cable, line, wire, amplifier, converter or other piece of equipment
inside a dwelling or other occupied structure without first securing the
permission of the owner or the lawful occupant of the property.
      (2)   Substantial rebuilds or upgrades. Grantee shall publicize any
substantial rebuild or upgrade of its cable system in each affected
neighborhood as follows:
         (a)   At least one week before commencing that work grantee shall
provide written notice to the city and those persons whose property is within
300 feet of the work in at least two of the following ways:
            (i)    Telephone;
            (ii)   In person;
            (iii)    Mail;
            (iv)    Distribution of flyers to residences;
            (v)    Publication in local newspapers and broadcast television
public service announcements;
            (vi)   Email; or
            (vii)   Any other notification practice that would reasonably
provide notice to the affected subscribers.
         (b)   The city may require grantee to attend neighborhood meetings
about substantial rebuilds and upgrades; and
         (c)   For the purposes of this subsection, the term "substantial
rebuild or upgrade" means the planned replacement or addition of trunk or
distribution cable (but not drops) affecting:
            (i)   More than 10% of the cable system subscribers; or
            (ii)    Involving more than 16 square miles of plant.
   (N)   Underground construction and use of poles.
      (1)   When required by general ordinances, resolutions, regulations or
rules of the city or applicable state or federal law, grantee's cable system
shall be placed underground at grantee's expense unless funding is generally
available for such relocation to all users of the right-of-way. Placing
facilities underground does not preclude the use of ground-mounted
appurtenances.
      (2)   Where electric, telephone, and other above-ground utilities are
installed underground at the time of cable system construction, or when all
such wiring is subsequently placed underground, all cable system lines shall
also be placed underground with other wireline service at no direct expense to
the city or subscribers unless funding is generally available for such
relocation to all users of the right-of-way. Related cable system equipment
such as pedestals must be placed in accordance with the city's applicable code
requirements and rules. In areas where either electric or telephone utility
wiring is aerial, grantee may install aerial cable except when a property owner
or resident requests underground installation and agrees to bear the additional
cost in excess of aerial installation.
      (3)   Grantee shall utilize existing poles and conduit wherever possible.
      (4)   In the event grantee cannot obtain the necessary poles and related
facilities pursuant to a pole attachment agreement, and only in such event,
then it shall be lawful, upon grantee obtaining all necessary permits and any
other required approvals, for grantee to make all needed excavations in the
right-of-way for the purpose of placing, erecting, laying, maintaining,
repairing, and removing poles, supports for wires and conductors, and any other
facility needed for the maintenance or extension of grantee's cable system. All
poles of grantee shall be located as designated by the proper city authorities.
      (5)   This franchise does not grant, give or convey to grantee the right
or privilege to install its facilities in any manner on specific utility poles
or equipment of the city or any other person.
   (O)   Undergrounding of multiple dwelling unit drops. In cases of single
site multiple dwelling units, grantee shall minimize the number of individual
aerial drop cables by installing multiple drop cables underground between the
pole and multiple dwelling unit where determined to be technologically feasible
in agreement with the owners and/or owner's association of the multiple
dwelling units.
   (P)   Burial standards.
      (1)   Depths. Unless otherwise required by law, grantee and its
contractors shall comply with the following burial depth standards. In no event
shall grantee be required to bury its cable deeper than electric or gas
facilities, or existing telephone facilities in the same portion of the right-
of-way, so long as those facilities have been buried in accordance with
applicable law:
         (a)   Underground cable drops from the curb shall be buried at a
minimum depth of 12 inches unless a sprinkler system or other construction
concerns preclude it, in which case underground cable drops shall be buried at
a depth of at least six inches.
         (b)   Feeder lines shall be buried at a minimum depth of 18 inches.
         (c)   Trunk lines shall be buried at a minimum depth of 36 inches.
         (d)   Fiber optic cable shall be buried at a minimum depth of 36
inches.
      (2)   Timeliness. Cable drops installed by grantee to residences shall be
buried according to these standards within one calendar week of initial
installation, or at a time mutually agreed upon between grantee and the
subscriber. When freezing surface conditions prevent grantee from achieving
such timetable, grantee shall apprise the subscriber of the circumstances and
the revised schedule for burial and shall provide the subscriber with grantee's
telephone number and instructions as to how and when to call grantee to request
burial of the line if the revised schedule is not met.
   (Q)   Cable drop bonding. Grantee shall ensure that all cable drops are
properly bonded at the home, consistent with applicable code requirements.
   (R)   Prewiring. Any ordinance or resolution of the city that requires
prewiring of subdivisions or other developments for electrical and telephone
service shall be construed to include wiring for cable systems.
   (S)   Repair and restoration of property.
      (1)   Grantee shall protect public and private property from damage. If
damage occurs, grantee shall promptly notify the property owner within 24 hours
in writing.
      (2)   Whenever grantee disturbs or damages any right-of-way, other public
property or any private property, grantee shall promptly restore the right-of-
way or property to at least its prior condition, normal wear and tear excepted,
at grantee's sole expense. At a minimum, grantee shall, subject to the terms of
any permit issued to grantee, remove all surplus material, reseed as necessary,
and otherwise restore the public right-of-way no more than one day after
completion of the work, weather permitting.
      (3)   Right-of-way and other public property. Grantee shall warrant any
restoration work performed by or for grantee in the right-of-way or on other
public property in accordance with applicable law. If restoration is not
satisfactorily performed by grantee within a reasonable time, the city may,
after prior notice to grantee or without notice where the disturbance or damage
may create a risk to public health or safety, cause the repairs to be made and
recover the cost of those repairs from grantee. Within 30 days of receipt of an
itemized list of those costs, including the costs of labor, materials and
equipment, grantee shall pay the city.
      (4)   Private property. Upon completion of the work which caused any
disturbance or damage, grantee shall promptly commence restoration of private
property and will use best efforts to complete the restoration within 72 hours,
considering the nature of the work that must be performed. Grantee shall also
perform such restoration in accordance with the city's customer service
standards, as the same may be amended from time to time by the City Council
acting by ordinance or resolution.
      (5)   Grantee shall be responsible for the maintenance of its own
equipment, facilities, and appurtenances placed upon, over, or under the public
right-of-way, including the removal of all graffiti. If after notice from the
city that such graffiti has not been removed, it will be removed by the city at
grantee's sole cost.
      (6)   Grantee shall ensure its facilities in the public right-of-way are
located and constructed in a manner consistent with any requirements of the
Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA) applicable at the time of construction.
Following notice by the city of an ADA construction problem, grantee shall have
30 days or other reasonable time to remedy the problem, subject to a grantee's
right to contest the alleged ADA violation.
   (T)   City use of grantee's trenches, bores, conduits, or infrastructure.
      (1)   Grantee agrees to cooperate with the city in the city's use of
grantee's trenches, bores, conduits, and/or infrastructure, provided that the
city has first notified grantee in some manner that it is interested in sharing
the trenches, bores, conduits or other infrastructure such as poles or towers
in the area where grantee's construction is occurring.
      (2)   The city may install or affix and maintain wires and equipment
owned by the city for city purposes in or upon any and all of grantee's
trenches, bores, conduits, or infrastructure in the right-of-way and other
public places without charge to the city, provided space is reasonably
available and such placement does not interfere with grantee's use of its
facilities.
      (3)   This right shall not extend to trenches, bores, conduits, or
infrastructure owned by an affiliate of grantee who has facilities in the
public right-of-way for the provision of non-cable services.
      (4)   For the purposes of this subsection, "city purposes" include
without limitation to the use of the structures and installations for city
fire, police, traffic, water, telephone, and/or signal systems, but not for
cable service or transmission of telecommunications or information services to
third parties in competition with grantee.
   (U)   Common users; joint trenching and use.
      (1)   For the purposes of this subsection:
         CONDUIT or CONDUIT FACILITY. Any structure or section thereof
containing one or more ducts, conduits, manholes, hand hole, or other such
facilities in grantee's cable system
         DUCT. A single enclosed raceway for cables, fiber optics or other
wires.
         SURPLUS DUCTS or CONDUITS. Facilities other than those occupied and
used by grantee or prior grantee, or used by grantee as emergency use spares,
or reasonably projected by grantee for grantee's use within two years from the
date of city's request for use.
      (2)   Grantee acknowledges that the right-of- way has a finite capacity
for containing infrastructure such as conduits and ducts. Thus, grantee agrees
that whenever the city determines it is impracticable to permit construction of
underground conduit, duct, or other infrastructure by any other person with the
legal authority to do so, excluding persons providing cable services in
competition with grantee, the city may require grantee to afford to such person
(third party) the right to use grantee's surplus ducts or conduits pursuant to
the terms and conditions of an agreement for use of surplus ducts or conduits
entered into by grantee and such other person. Nothing herein shall require
grantee to enter into an agreement with such person if in grantee's reasonable
determination such an agreement could compromise the integrity of the cable
system.
   (V)   Acquisition of facilities. Upon grantee's acquisition of cable system-
related facilities in any city right-of-way, or upon the addition to the city
of any area in which grantee owns or operates any such facility, grantee shall
within 15 days of the city's request submit to the city a statement describing
all such facilities involved, whether authorized by franchise, permit, license
or other prior right, and specifying the location of all such facilities to the
extent grantee has possession of such information. Such cable system-related
facilities shall immediately be subject to the terms of this franchise.
   (W)   Use of grantee's facilities by third parties. Grantee acknowledges
that, notwithstanding any legal rights that a telecommunications provider,
cable television provider or any other service provider may have to use the
grantee's facilities in the right-of-way, including pole attachments, the city
retains a paramount interest in managing the right-of-way. The city shall be
solely responsible for enforcement of its permitting requirements as a result
of a third party's use of facilities. Grantee agrees that it will comply with
any generally applicable city ordinances regarding use of grantee's facilities
in the right-of-way, provided, however, that grantee retains its right to
challenge any city ordinance or regulation to the full extent allowed by
applicable law or this franchise. Grantee shall use best efforts to ensure that
no third party entity shall use grantee's facilities where such use violates
any lawful city ordinance or regulation.
   (X)   Discontinuing use/abandonment of cable system facilities. Whenever
grantee intends to discontinue using any facility within the right-of-way,
grantee shall submit for the city's approval a complete description of the
facility and the date on which grantee intends to discontinue using the
facility. Grantee may remove the facility or request that the city permit it to
remain in place. Notwithstanding grantee's request that any such facility
remain in place, the city may require grantee to remove the facility from the
right-of-way or modify the facility to protect the public health, welfare,
safety and convenience, or otherwise serve the public interest. The city may
require grantee to perform a combination of modification and removal of the
facility. Grantee shall complete such removal or modification in accordance
with a schedule set by the city. Until such time as grantee removes or modifies
the facility as directed by the city, or until the rights to and responsibility
for the facility are accepted by another person having authority to construct
and maintain such facility, grantee shall be responsible for all necessary
repairs and relocations of the facility as well as maintenance of the right-of-
way in the same manner and degree as if the facility were in active use, and
grantee shall retain all liability for such facility. If grantee abandons its
facilities, the city may choose to use such facilities for any purpose
whatsoever, including but not limited to access purposes.
   (Y)   Relocation and other movement of cable system facilities for city
purposes.
      (1)   The city shall have the right to require grantee to relocate,
remove, replace, modify or disconnect grantee's facilities and equipment
located in the right-of-way or on any other property of the city for public
purposes in the event of an emergency or when the public health, safety or
welfare requires such change (for example, without limitation, by reason of
traffic conditions, public safety, right-of-way vacation, right-of-way
construction, change or establishment of right-of-way grade, installation of
sewers, drains, gas or water pipes, or any other types of structures or
improvements by the city for public purposes). Such work shall be performed at
grantee's expense. Except during an emergency, the city shall provide
reasonable notice to grantee, not to be less than 45 business days, and allow
grantee the opportunity to perform such action. In the event of any capital
improvement project exceeding $500,000 in expenditures by the city, which
requires the removal, replacement, modification or disconnection of grantee's
facilities or equipment, the city shall provide at least 60 days' written
notice to grantee. Following notice by the city, grantee shall relocate,
remove, replace, modify or disconnect any of its facilities or equipment within
any right-of-way or on any other property of the city. If the city requires
grantee to relocate its facilities located within the right-of-way, the city
shall make a reasonable effort to provide grantee with an alternate location
within the right-of-way. If funds are generally made available to users of the
right-of-way for such relocation, grantee shall be entitled to its pro rata
share of such funds.
      (2)   If grantee fails to complete this work within the time prescribed
and to the city's satisfaction, the city may cause such work to be done and
bill the cost of the work to grantee, including all costs and expenses incurred
by the city due to grantee's delay. In such event, the city shall not be liable
for any damage to any portion of grantee's cable system. Within 30 days of
receipt of an itemized list of those costs, grantee shall pay the city.
   (Z)   Reimbursement of grantee costs. Grantee specifically reserves any
rights it may have under applicable law for reimbursement of costs related to
undergrounding or relocation of the cable system, and nothing herein shall be
construed as a waiver of such rights.
   (AA)   Movement of cable system facilities for other franchise holders. If
any removal, replacement, modification or disconnection of the cable system is
required to accommodate the construction, operation or repair of the facilities
or equipment of another city franchise holder, grantee shall, after at least 30
days' advance written notice, take action to effect the necessary changes
requested by the responsible entity. Grantee shall require that the costs
associated with the removal or relocation be paid by the benefited party.
   (BB)   Temporary changes for other permittees. At the request of any person
holding a valid permit and upon reasonable advance notice, grantee shall
temporarily raise, lower or remove its wires as necessary to permit the moving
of a building, vehicle, equipment or other item. The expense of such temporary
changes must be paid by the permit holder, and grantee may require a reasonable
deposit of the estimated payment in advance.
   (CC)   Reservation of city use of right-of-way. Nothing in this franchise
shall prevent the city or public utilities owned, maintained or operated by
public entities other than the city from constructing sewers, grading, paving,
repairing or altering any right-of-way, laying down, repairing or removing
water mains, or constructing or establishing any other public work or
improvement. Subject to applicable local, state and federal law, all such work
shall be done insofar as practicable so as not to obstruct, injure or prevent
the use and operation of grantee's cable system.
   (DD)   Tree trimming. Subject to city ordinance, Article 16, Sections
6-6-2-1 to
6-6-2-9 regarding trees in the right-of-way, and state and federal law, grantee
may prune or cause to be pruned, using proper pruning practices, any tree in
the city's right-of-way which interferes with grantee's cable system. Grantee
shall comply with any general ordinance or regulations of the city regarding
tree trimming. Except in emergencies, grantee may not prune trees at a point
below 30 feet above sidewalk grade until one weeks' written notice has been
given to the owner or occupant of the premises abutting the right-of-way in or
over which the tree is growing. The owner or occupant of the abutting premises
may prune such tree at his or her own expense during this one week period. If
the owner or occupant fails to do so, grantee may prune such tree at its own
expense. For purposes of this subsection, emergencies exist when it is
necessary to prune to protect the public or grantee's facilities from imminent
danger only.
   (EE)   Inspection of construction and facilities. The city may inspect any
of grantee's facilities, equipment or construction at any time upon at least 24
hours' notice or, in case of emergency, upon demand without prior notice. The
city shall have the right to charge generally applicable inspection fees. If an
unsafe condition is found to exist, the city, in addition to taking any other
action permitted under applicable law, may order grantee, in writing, to make
the necessary repairs and alterations specified therein forthwith to correct
the unsafe condition by a time the city establishes. The city has the right to
correct, inspect, administer and repair the unsafe condition if grantee fails
to do so and to charge grantee for its costs.
   (FF)   Stop work.
      (1)   On notice from the city that any work is being performed contrary
to the provisions of this franchise, or in an unsafe or dangerous manner as
determined by the city, or in violation of the terms of any applicable permit,
laws, regulations, ordinances, or standards, the work may immediately be
stopped by the city.
      (2)   The stop work order shall:
         (a)   Be in writing;
         (b)   Be given to the person doing the work, or posted on the
worksite;
         (c)   Be sent to grantee by overnight delivery at the address given
herein;
         (d)   Indicate the nature of the alleged violation or unsafe
condition; and
         (e)   Establish conditions under which work may be resumed.
   (GG)   Work of contractors and subcontractors. Grantee's contractors and
subcontractors shall be licensed and bonded in accordance with the city's
ordinances, regulations and requirements. Work by contractors and
subcontractors is subject to the same restrictions, limitations and conditions
as if the work were performed by grantee. Grantee shall be responsible for all
work performed by its contractors and subcontractors and others performing work
on its behalf as if the work were performed by it, and shall ensure that all
such work is performed in compliance with this franchise and other applicable
law, and shall be jointly and severally liable for all damages and correcting
all damage caused by them. It is grantee's responsibility to ensure that
contractors, subcontractors or other persons performing work on grantee's
behalf are familiar with the requirements of this franchise and other
applicable law governing the work performed by them.
(Ord._2019-009)
§ 13-5-3-11 CABLE SYSTEM, TECHNICAL STANDARDS AND TESTING.
   (A)   Subscriber network.
      (1)   As of the effective date of this franchise, grantee upgraded its
cable system to a fiber to the fiber node cable system architecture, with fiber
optic cable deployed from grantee's headend to grantee's fiber nodes, tying
into grantee's coaxial cable system already serving subscribers. Grantee's
cable system shall be equivalent to or exceed the technical characteristics of
a traditional hybrid fiber coaxial ("HFC") 870 MHZ cable system and provide
activated two-way capability. The cable system is capable of supporting video
and audio. The cable system shall be capable of delivering no fewer than 110
channels of digital video programming services or its equivalent to
subscribers. Equipment must be installed so that:
         (a)   All closed captioning programming received by the cable system
shall include the closed caption signal so long as the closed caption signal is
provided consistent with FCC standards;
         (b)   All local signals received in stereo or with secondary audio
tracks (broadcast and access) are retransmitted in those same formats;
         (c)   All PEG access channels shall meet the signal quality set forth
in §
13-5-3-9(B); and
         (d)   All channels have the technical means through which subscribers
will be able to block audio and video in order to exercise their parental
control.
      (2)   All construction shall be subject to the city's permitting process.
      (3)   Grantee and the city shall meet at the city's request to discuss
the progress of the design plan and construction.
      (4)   Grantee will take prompt corrective action consistent with the
requirements of federal law and this franchise if it finds that any facilities
or equipment on the cable system are not operating as expected, or if it finds
that facilities and equipment do not comply with the requirements of this
franchise or applicable law.
      (5)   Grantee's construction decisions shall be based solely upon
legitimate engineering decisions and shall not take into consideration the
income level of any particular community within the franchise area.
      (6)   Grantee agrees to maintain the cable system in a manner that:
         (a)   Is consistent with, or in excess of these specifications
throughout the term of the franchise with sufficient capability and technical
quality to enable the implementation and performance of all the requirements of
this franchise, including the exhibits hereto;
         (b)   Meets or exceeds FCC technical quality standards at 47 C.F.R. §
76 Subpart K, regardless of the particular format in which a signal is
transmitted and as these federal standards are amended from time to time.
         (c)   Provides the quality of cable service, including signal quality,
commensurate with an 870 MHZ cable system according to cable industry
standards.
   (B)   Technology assessment.
      (1)   The city may notify grantee on or after the fourth year anniversary
of the effective date that the city will conduct a technology assessment of
grantee's cable system during or after the fifth year of the franchise. The
technology assessment may include but is not limited to determining whether
grantee's cable system technology and performance are consistent with current
technical practices and range and level of services existing in the 15 U.S.
cable systems owned and operated by grantee's parent corporation and/or
affiliates pursuant to franchises that have been renewed or extended since the
effective date, which cable systems serve approximately the same number of
subscribers as are served by grantee in the city.
      (2)   Grantee shall cooperate with the city to provide necessary non-
confidential and non-proprietary information upon the city's reasonable request
as part of the technology assessment.
      (3)   At the discretion of the city, findings from the technology
assessment may be included in any proceeding commenced for the purpose of
identifying future cable-related community needs and interests undertaken by
the city pursuant to 47 U.S.C. §546 or other proceedings authorized by state,
federal or local law.
   (C)   Standby power. Grantee's cable system headend shall be capable of
providing at least 12 hours of emergency operation. In addition, throughout the
term of this franchise grantee shall have a plan in place, along with all
resources necessary for implementing such plan, for dealing with outages of
more than four hours. This outage plan and evidence of requisite implementation
resources shall be presented to the city no later than 30 days following
receipt of a request.
   (D)   Emergency alert capability. Grantee has provided and shall continue to
provide an operating emergency alert system ("EAS") throughout the term of this
franchise in compliance with FCC standards and any State of New Mexico and
Bernalillo County ("County") requirements. If the city wishes to use the EAS
system to transmit emergency signals, it shall work out procedures with the New
Mexico – State Emergency Communications Committee and provide grantee prior
notice of not less than 60 days. Grantee shall test the EAS as required by the
FCC. Upon request, if the city is using the EAS, the city shall be permitted to
participate in and/or witness the EAS testing up to twice a year on a schedule
formed in consultation with grantee. If the test indicates that the EAS is not
performing properly, grantee shall make any necessary adjustment to the EAS,
and the EAS shall be retested.
   (E)   Technical performance and enforcement remedies. The technical
performance of the cable system shall meet or exceed all applicable federal
(including but not limited to the FCC), state and local technical standards,
including without limitation the Digital Cable Network Interface Standard,
developed by the Society of Cable Telecommunications Engineers ("SCTE" and
"SCTE-40") and adopted by the FCC on September 22, 2017 at 47 C.F.R. Section
76.602, as any of these federal standards or any applicable state or local
standards may be amended from time to time, regardless of the transmission
technology utilized. The city shall have the full authority permitted by
applicable law to enforce compliance with these technical standards.
   (F)   Cable system performance testing.
      (1)   Grantee shall at grantee's expense perform all tests required by
the FCC on its cable system; all other tests reasonably necessary to determine
grantee's compliance with technical standards adopted by the FCC or effective
at any time during the term of this franchise; and all other tests otherwise
specified in §
13-5-3-11(G) of this franchise. On the effective date of this franchise, this
shall include, without limitation, the digital signal leakage testing required
if grantee maintains coaxial cable in its cable system and otherwise meets the
FCC's parameters.
      (2)   Grantee shall maintain written records of all results of its cable
system tests performed by or for grantee. Copies of such test results will be
provided to the city upon reasonable request.
      (3)   Grantee shall be required to promptly take such corrective measures
as are necessary to correct any performance deficiencies fully and to prevent
their recurrence as far as possible. Grantee's failure to correct ongoing and
repeated material deficiencies identified through this testing process shall be
a material violation of this franchise. Sites shall be retested following
correction.
   (G)   Additional tests. Where there exists other evidence which in the
judgment of the city casts doubt upon the reliability or technical quality of
cable service, the city shall have the right and authority to require grantee
to test, analyze and report on the performance of the cable system. Grantee
shall fully cooperate with the city in performing such testing and shall
prepare the results and a report, if requested, within 30 days after testing.
Such report shall include the following information:
      (1)   The nature of the complaint or problem which precipitated the
special tests;
      (2)   The cable system component tested;
      (3)   The equipment used and procedures employed in testing;
      (4)   The method, if any, in which such complaint or problem was
resolved; and
      (5)   Any other information pertinent to said tests and analysis which
may be required.
(Ord._2019-009)
§ 13-5-3-12 SERVICE AVAILABILITY, INTERCONNECTION AND SERVICE TO SCHOOLS AND
PUBLIC BUILDINGS.
   (A)   Service availability.
      (1)   Except as otherwise provided herein, grantee shall provide cable
service within the franchise area within seven days of a request or within FCC
time limits established at any time during the term of this franchise if less
than seven days from the request. For purposes of this section, a request shall
be deemed made on the date of signing a service agreement, receipt of funds by
grantee, receipt of a written request by grantee or receipt by grantee of a
verified verbal request. Except as otherwise provided herein, grantee shall
provide such service:
         (a)   With no line extension charge except as specifically authorized
elsewhere in this franchise agreement;
         (b)   At a non-discriminatory installation charge for a standard
installation, consisting of a 125 foot drop connecting to an inside wall for
residential subscribers, with additional charges for non-standard installations
computed according to a non- discriminatory methodology for such installations,
adopted by grantee and provided in writing to the city; and
         (c)   At non-discriminatory monthly rates for residential subscribers.
      (2)   Service to multiple dwelling units. Consistent with this §
13-5-3-12(A), grantee shall offer the individual units of a multiple dwelling
unit all cable services offered to other dwelling units in the city and shall
individually wire units upon request of the property owner or renter who has
been given written authorization by the owner; provided, however, that any such
offering is conditioned upon grantee having legal access to said unit. The city
acknowledges that grantee cannot control the dissemination of particular cable
services beyond the point of demarcation at a multiple dwelling unit.
      (3)   Customer charges for extensions of service. Grantee agrees to
extend its cable system to all persons living in areas with a residential
density of 25 residences per mile of cable system plant. If the residential
density is less than 25 residences per 5,280 cable-bearing strand feet of trunk
or distribution cable, service may be made available on the basis of a capital
contribution in aid of construction, including cost of material, labor and
easements. For the purpose of determining the amount of capital contribution in
aid of construction to be borne by grantee and customers in the area in which
service may be expanded, grantee will contribute an amount equal to the
construction and other costs per mile multiplied by a fraction whose numerator
equals the actual number of residences per 5,280 cable-bearing strand feet of
its trunk or distribution cable and whose denominator equals 25. Customers who
request service hereunder will bear the remainder of the construction and other
costs on a pro rata basis. Grantee may require that the payment of the capital
contribution in aid of construction borne by such potential customers be paid
in advance.
      (4)   Service to annexed areas. Grantee shall have the right but not the
obligation to extend the cable system into any annexed area which is not
contiguous or is partially contiguous to the present franchise area of the city
or to any area that is technically infeasible. Nothing herein shall require
grantee to expand its cable system to serve or to offer service to any area
annexed by the city if such area is then served by another cable operator.
   (B)   Connection of public facilities. Grantee shall upon the city's request
and at no cost to the city provide one activated subscriber network service
drop and outlet and one converter which shall deliver Basic Service and Digital
Starter Service to all city-owned and occupied buildings, schools and public
libraries located in areas where grantee provides cable service, so long as
these facilities are already served or the inter connection point on these
facilities is located within 150 feet of the distribution point on the cable
system. For purposes of this subsection, "school" means all state-accredited K-
12 public and private schools. Such obligation to provide free cable service
shall not extend to areas of city buildings where grantee would normally enter
into a commercial contract to provide such cable service (e.g., golf courses,
airport restaurants and concourses, and recreation center workout facilities),
and such cable service shall not be used in a way that might violate copyright
laws. The city, public libraries and schools may use an outlet, drop and
converter provided in accordance with this subsection to extend cable services
throughout the qualifying building in which the outlet is located, provided
such distribution can be accomplished without causing cable system disruption
and general technical standards are maintained. Such outlets may only be used
for lawful purposes. The cable service provided shall not be distributed beyond
the originally installed outlets without authorization from grantee, which
shall not be unreasonably withheld.
   (C)   Institutional network. In satisfaction of the city's request for
institutional network capacity pursuant to 47 U.S.C §531(b), the city will
enter into a Dark Fiber Lease Agreement with Comcast Business of New Mexico, an
affiliate of grantee ("Dark Fiber Agreement"), a copy of which is attached to
Ord. 2019-009 as Exhibit C. Except as expressly provided herein, the terms and
conditions of the Dark Fiber Agreement will govern and supersede any
inconsistent terms set forth in this franchise. The term of the Dark Fiber
Agreement shall run coterminous with the term of this franchise. As the Dark
Fiber Agreement is a commercial arrangement between Comcast Business of New
Mexico and the city, the value of the fiber leased pursuant to such agreement
shall not be deemed a part of the franchise fee or subject to offset from the
franchise fee.
(Ord._2019-009)
§ 13-5-3-13 FRANCHISE VIOLATIONS.
   (A)   Procedure for remedying franchise violations.
      (1)   If the city reasonably believes that grantee has failed to perform
any obligation under this franchise or has failed to perform in a timely
manner, the city shall notify grantee in writing, stating with reasonable
specificity the nature of the alleged default. Grantee shall have 30 days from
the receipt of such notice to:
         (a)   Respond to the city, contesting the city's assertion that a
default has occurred, and requesting a meeting in accordance with §
13-5-3-13 (A)(2), below;
         (b)   Cure the default; or,
         (c)   Notify the city that grantee cannot cure the default within the
30 days because of the nature of the default. In the event the default cannot
be cured within 30 days, grantee shall promptly take all reasonable steps to
cure the default and notify the city in writing and in detail as to the exact
steps that will be taken and the projected completion date. In such case, the
city may set a meeting in accordance with §
13-5-3-13(A)(2) below to determine whether additional time beyond the 30 days
specified above is indeed needed and whether grantee's proposed completion
schedule and steps are reasonable.
      (2)   If grantee does not cure the alleged default within the cure period
stated above, or by the projected completion date under §
13-5-3-13(A)(1), or denies the default and requests a meeting in accordance
with §
13-5-3-13(A)(1)(a), or the city orders a meeting in accordance with §
13-5-3-13(A)(1)(c), the city shall set a meeting to investigate said issues or
the existence of the alleged default. The city shall notify grantee of the
meeting in writing, and such meeting shall take place no less than 30 days
after grantee's receipt of notice of the meeting. At the meeting, grantee shall
be provided an opportunity to be heard and to present evidence in its defense.
      (3)   If after the meeting the city determines that a default exists, the
city shall order grantee to correct or remedy the default or breach within 15
days or within such other reasonable timeframe as the city shall determine. In
the event grantee does not cure within such time to the city's reasonable
satisfaction, the city may:
         (a)   Withdraw an amount from the letter of credit as monetary
damages;
         (b)   Recommend the revocation of this franchise pursuant to the
procedures in §
13-5-3-13(B); or,
         (c)   Recommend any other legal or equitable remedy available under
this franchise or any applicable law.
      (4)   The determination as to whether a violation of this franchise has
occurred shall be within the discretion of the city, provided that any such
final determination may be subject to appeal to a court of competent
jurisdiction under applicable law.
   (B)   Revocation.
      (1)   In addition to revocation in accordance with other provisions of
this franchise, the city may revoke this franchise and rescind all rights and
privileges associated with this franchise in the following circumstances, each
of which represents a material breach of this franchise:
         (a)   If grantee fails to perform any material obligation under this
franchise or under any other agreement, ordinance or document regarding the
city and grantee; or
         (b)   If grantee willfully fails for more than 48 hours to provide
continuous and uninterrupted cable service; or
         (c)   If grantee attempts to evade any material provision of this
franchise or to practice any fraud or deceit upon the city or subscribers; or
         (d)   If grantee becomes insolvent, or if there is an assignment for
the benefit of grantee's creditors; or
         (e)   If grantee makes a material misrepresentation of fact in the
application for or negotiation of this franchise.
      (2)   Following the procedures set forth in §
13-5-3-13(A) and prior to forfeiture or termination of the franchise, the city
shall give written notice to grantee of its intent to revoke the franchise and
set a date for a revocation proceeding. The notice shall set forth the exact
nature of the noncompliance.
      (3)   Any proceeding under the subsection above shall be conducted by the
City Council and open to the public. Grantee shall be afforded at least 45
days' prior written notice of such proceeding.
         (a)   At such proceeding grantee shall be provided a fair opportunity
for full participation, including the right to be represented by legal counsel,
to introduce evidence, and to question witnesses. A complete verbatim record
and transcript shall be made of such proceeding and the cost shall be shared
equally between the parties. The City Council shall hear any persons interested
in the revocation and shall allow grantee, in particular, an opportunity to
state its position on the matter.
         (b)   Within 90 days after the hearing, the City Council shall
determine whether to revoke the franchise and declare that the franchise is
revoked and the letter of credit forfeited; or if the breach at issue is
capable of being cured by grantee, direct grantee to take appropriate remedial
action within the time and in the manner and on the terms and conditions that
the City Council determines are reasonable under the circumstances. If the city
determines that the franchise is to be revoked, the city shall set forth the
reasons for such a decision and shall transmit a copy of the decision to
grantee. Grantee shall be bound by the city's decision to revoke the franchise
unless it appeals the decision to a court of competent jurisdiction within 15
days of the date of the decision.
         (c)   Grantee shall be entitled to such relief as the court may deem
appropriate.
         (d)   The City Council may at its sole discretion take any lawful
action which it deems appropriate to enforce the city's rights under the
franchise in lieu of revocation of the franchise.
   (C)   Procedures in the event of termination or revocation.
      (1)   If this franchise expires without renewal after completion of all
processes available under this franchise and federal law or is lawfully
terminated or revoked, the city shall have the right to require grantee to
remove all or any portion of the system utilized exclusively for the provision
of cable services from all right-of-way and public property within the city,
and may, subject to applicable law:
         (a)   Allow grantee to maintain and operate its cable system on a
month-to-month basis or short-term extension of this franchise for not less
than six months, unless a sale of the cable system can be closed sooner or
grantee demonstrates to the city's satisfaction that it needs additional time
to complete the sale; or
         (b)   Purchase grantee's cable system in accordance with the
procedures set forth in §
13-5-3-13(D), below.
      (2)   In the event that a sale has not been completed in accordance with
§
13-5-3-13(A)(1) and/or (A)(2) above, the city may order the removal of the
above- ground cable system facilities and such underground facilities from the
city at grantee's sole expense within a reasonable period of time as determined
by the city. In removing its plant, structures and equipment, grantee shall
refill, at its own expense, any excavation that is made by it and shall leave
all right-of-way, public places and private property in as good condition as
that prevailing prior to grantee's removal of its equipment without affecting
the electrical or telephone cable wires or attachments. The indemnification and
insurance provisions and the letter of credit shall remain in full force and
effect during the period of removal, and grantee shall not be entitled to and
agrees not to request compensation of any sort therefor.
      (3)   If grantee fails to complete any removal required by §
13-5-3-13(C)(2) to the city's satisfaction, after written notice to grantee the
city may cause the work to be done, and grantee shall reimburse the city for
the costs incurred within 30 days after receipt of an itemized list of the
costs, or the city may recover the costs through the letter of credit provided
by grantee.
      (4)   The city may seek legal and equitable relief to enforce the
provisions of this franchise.
   (D)   Purchase of cable system.
      (1)   If at any time this franchise is revoked, terminated, or not
renewed upon expiration in accordance with the provisions of federal law, the
city shall have the option to purchase the cable system.
      (2)   The city may at any time thereafter offer in writing to purchase
grantee's cable system. Grantee shall have 30 days from receipt of a written
offer from the city within which to accept or reject the offer.
      (3)   In any case where the city elects to purchase the cable system, the
purchase shall be closed within 120 days of the date of the city's audit of a
current profit and loss statement of grantee. The city shall pay for the cable
system in cash or certified funds, and grantee shall deliver appropriate bills
of sale and other instruments of conveyance.
      (4)   For the purposes of this subsection, the price for the cable system
shall be determined as follows:
         (a)   In the case of the expiration of the franchise without renewal,
at fair market value determined on the basis of grantee's cable system valued
as a going concern, but with no value allocated to the franchise itself. In
order to obtain the fair market value, this valuation shall be reduced by the
amount of any lien, encumbrance, or other obligation of grantee which the city
would assume.
         (b)   In the case of revocation for cause, the equitable price of
grantee's cable system.
   (E)   Receivership and foreclosure.
      (1)   At the option of the city, subject to applicable law, this
franchise may be revoked 120 days after the appointment of a receiver or
trustee to take over and conduct the business of grantee whether in a
receivership, reorganization, bankruptcy or other action or proceeding, unless:
         (a)   The receivership or trusteeship is vacated within 120 days of
appointment; or
         (b)   The receivers or trustees have, within 120 days after their
election or appointment, fully compiled with all the terms and provisions of
this franchise and have remedied all defaults under the franchise.
Additionally, the receivers or trustees shall have executed an agreement duly
approved by the court having jurisdiction by which the receivers or trustees
assume and agree to be bound by each and every term, provision and limitation
of this franchise.
      (2)   If there is a foreclosure or other involuntary sale of the whole or
any part of the plant, property and equipment of grantee, the city may serve
notice of revocation on grantee and to the purchaser at the sale, and the
rights and privileges of grantee under this franchise shall be revoked 30 days
after service of such notice, unless:
         (a)   The city has approved the transfer of the franchise, in
accordance with the procedures set forth in this franchise and as provided by
law; and
         (b)   The purchaser has covenanted and agreed with the city to assume
and be bound by all of the terms and conditions of this franchise.
   (F)   No monetary recourse against the city. Grantee shall not have any
monetary recourse against the city or its officers, officials, boards,
commissions, agents or employees for any loss, costs, expenses or damages
arising out of any provision or requirement of this franchise or the
enforcement thereof, in accordance with the provisions of applicable federal,
state and local law. The rights of the city under this franchise are in
addition to and shall not be read to limit any immunities the city may enjoy
under federal, state or local law.
   (G)   Alternative remedies. No provision of this franchise shall be deemed
to bar the right of the city to seek or obtain judicial relief from a violation
of any provision of the franchise or any rule, regulation, requirement or
directive promulgated thereunder. Neither the existence of other remedies
identified in this franchise nor the exercise thereof shall be deemed to bar or
otherwise limit the right of the city to recover monetary damages for such
violations by grantee, or to seek and obtain judicial enforcement of grantee's
obligations by means of specific performance, injunctive relief or mandate, or
any other remedy at law or in equity.
   (H)   Assessment of monetary damages.
      (1)   The city may assess against grantee monetary damages:
         (a)   Up to $500 per day for general construction delays, violations
of PEG obligations or payment obligations;
         (b)   Up to $250 per day for any other material breaches, or
         (c)   Up to $100 per day for defaults, and withdraw the assessment
from the letter of credit or collect the assessment as specified in this
franchise.
      (2)   Damages pursuant to this section shall accrue for a period not to
exceed 120 days per violation proceeding. To assess any amount from the letter
of credit, the city shall follow the procedures for withdrawals from the letter
of credit set forth in the letter of credit and in this franchise. Such damages
shall accrue beginning 30 days following grantee's receipt of the notice
required by §
13-5-3-13(A)(1), or such later date if approved by the city in its sole
discretion, but may not be assessed until after the procedures in §
13-5-3-13(A) have been completed.
      (3)   The assessment does not constitute a waiver by the city of any
other right or remedy it may have under the franchise or applicable law,
including its right to recover from grantee any additional damages, losses,
costs and expenses that are incurred by the city by reason of the breach of
this franchise.
   (I)   Effect of abandonment. If grantee abandons its cable system during the
franchise term or fails to operate its cable system in accordance with its duty
to provide continuous service, the city, at its option, may operate the cable
system; designate another entity to operate the cable system temporarily until
grantee restores service under conditions acceptable to the city, or until the
franchise is revoked and a new franchisee is selected by the city; or obtain an
injunction requiring grantee to continue operations. If the city is required to
operate or designate another entity to operate the cable system, grantee shall
reimburse the city or its designee for all reasonable costs, expenses and
damages incurred.
   (J)   What constitutes abandonment. The city shall be entitled to exercise
its options in §
13-5-3-13(I) if:
      (1)   The grantee fails to provide cable service in accordance with this
franchise over a substantial portion of the franchise area for four consecutive
days, unless the city authorizes a longer interruption of service; or
      (2)   The grantee, for any period, willfully and without cause refuses to
provide cable service in accordance with this franchise.
(Ord._2019-009)
§ 13-5-3-14 FRANCHISE RENEWAL AND TRANSFER.
   (A)   Renewal.
      (1)   The city and grantee agree that any proceedings undertaken by the
city that relate to the renewal of the franchise shall be governed by and
comply with the provisions of Section 626 of the Cable Act, unless the
procedures and substantive protections set forth therein shall be deemed to be
preempted and superseded by the provisions of any subsequent provision of
federal or state law.
      (2)   In addition to the procedures set forth in said Section 626(a), the
city agrees to notify grantee of the completion of its assessments regarding
the identification of future cable-related community needs and interests, as
well as the past performance of grantee under the then-current franchise term.
Notwithstanding anything to the contrary set forth herein, grantee and the city
agree that at any time during the term of the then-current franchise, while
affording the public adequate notice and opportunity for comment, the city and
grantee may agree to undertake and finalize negotiations regarding renewal of
the then-current franchise, and the city may grant a renewal thereof. Grantee
and the city consider the terms set forth in this subsection to be consistent
with the express provisions of Section 626 of the Cable Act.
   (B)   Transfer of ownership or control.
      (1)   The cable system and this franchise shall not be sold, assigned,
transferred, leased or disposed of, either in whole or in part, either by
involuntary sale or by voluntary sale, merger or consolidation; nor shall title
thereto, either legal or equitable, or any right, interest or property therein
pass to or vest in any person or entity without the prior written consent of
the city, which consent shall be by the City Council/Commission, acting by
ordinance/resolution.
      (2)   Grantee shall promptly notify the city of any actual or proposed
change in or transfer of or acquisition by any other party of control of
grantee. The word "control" as used herein is not limited to majority
stockholders but includes actual working control in whatever manner exercised.
Every change, transfer or acquisition of control of grantee shall make this
franchise subject to cancellation unless and until the city shall have
consented in writing thereto.
      (3)   The parties to the sale or transfer shall make a written request to
the city for its approval of a sale or transfer and furnish all information
required by law and the city.
      (4)   In seeking the city's consent to any change in ownership or
control, the proposed transferee shall indicate whether it:
         (a)   Has ever been convicted or held liable for acts involving deceit
including any violation of federal, state or local law or regulations, or is
currently under an indictment, investigation or complaint charging such acts;
         (b)   Has ever had a judgment in an action for fraud, deceit, or
misrepresentation entered against the proposed transferee by any court of
competent jurisdiction;
         (c)   Has pending any material legal claim, lawsuit, or administrative
proceeding arising out of or involving a cable system or a broadband system;
         (d)   Is financially solvent, by submitting financial data including
financial statements that are audited by a certified public accountant who may
also be an officer of the transferee; and
         (e)   Has the financial, legal and technical capability to enable it
to maintain and operate the cable system for the remaining term of the
franchise.
      (5)   The city shall act by ordinance on the request within 120 days of
the request, provided it has received all information required by this
franchise. The city and grantee may by mutual agreement at any time extend the
120-day period. Subject to the foregoing, if the city fails to render a final
decision on the request within 120 days, such request shall be deemed granted
unless the requesting party and the city agree to an extension of time.
      (6)   Within 30 days of any transfer or sale, if approved or deemed
granted by the city, grantee shall file with the city a copy of the deed,
agreement, lease or other written instrument evidencing such sale or transfer
of ownership or control, certified and sworn to as correct by grantee and the
transferee, and the transferee shall file its written acceptance agreeing to be
bound by all of the provisions of this franchise, subject to applicable law. In
the event of a change in control, in which grantee is not replaced by another
entity, grantee will continue to be bound by all of the provisions of the
franchise, subject to applicable law, and will not be required to file an
additional written acceptance.
      (7)   In reviewing a request for sale or transfer, the city may inquire
into the legal, technical and financial qualifications of the prospective
controlling party or transferee, and grantee shall assist the city in so
inquiring. The city may condition said sale or transfer upon such terms and
conditions as it deems reasonably appropriate, in accordance with applicable
law.
      (8)   Notwithstanding anything to the contrary in this subsection, the
prior approval of the city shall not be required for any sale, assignment or
transfer of the franchise or cable system to an entity controlling, controlled
by or under the same common control as grantee, provided that the proposed
assignee or transferee must show financial responsibility as may be determined
necessary by the city and must agree in writing to comply with all of the
provisions of the franchise. Further, grantee may pledge the assets of the
cable system for the purpose of financing without the consent of the city;
provided that such pledge of assets shall not impair or mitigate grantee's
responsibilities and capabilities to meet all of its obligations under the
provisions of this franchise.
(Ord._2019-009)
§ 13-5-3-15 MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS.
   (A)   Preferential or discriminatory practices prohibited. In connection
with the performance of work under this franchise, grantee agrees not to refuse
to hire, discharge, promote or demote, or discriminate in matters of
compensation against any person otherwise qualified, solely because of race,
color, religion, national origin, gender, age, military status, sexual
orientation, marital status, or physical or mental disability; and grantee
further agrees to insert the foregoing provision in all subcontracts hereunder.
Throughout the term of this franchise, grantee shall fully comply with all
equal employment or non-discrimination provisions and requirements of federal,
state and local laws and, in particular, FCC rules and regulations relating
thereto.
   (B)   Notices. Throughout the term of the franchise, each party shall
maintain and file with the other a local address for the service of notices by
mail. All notices shall be sent via overnight delivery postage prepaid to such
respective address, and such notices shall be effective upon the date of
mailing. These addresses may be changed by the city or grantee by written
notice at any time. At the effective date of this franchise:
Grantee's address shall be:
 
Comcast of New Mexico, LLC
8440 Washington St. NE
Albuquerque, NM 87113
Attn: Government Affairs
 
With a copy to:
 
Comcast of New Mexico, LLC
1899 Wynkoop Street, Suite 55
Denver, CO 80202
Attn: Franchising Department
 
The city's address shall be:
 
Chief Administrative Officer
City of Albuquerque
Mayor's Office
P.O. Box 1293
Albuquerque, NM 87103
 
With a copy to:
 
City Attorney
City of Albuquerque
Office of the City Attorney
P.O. Box 2248
Albuquerque, NM 87103
   (C)   Descriptive headings. The headings and titles of the sections and
subsections of this franchise are for reference purposes only and shall not
affect the meaning or interpretation of the text herein.
   (D)   Publication costs to be borne by grantee. Grantee shall reimburse the
city for all costs incurred in publishing this franchise, if such publication
is required.
   (E)   Binding effect. This franchise shall be binding upon the parties
hereto, their permitted successors and assigns.
   (F)   No joint venture. Nothing herein shall be deemed to create a joint
venture or principal-agent relationship between the parties, and neither party
is authorized to nor shall either party act toward third persons or the public
in any manner which would indicate any such relationship with the other.
   (G)   Waiver. The failure of the city at any time to require performance by
grantee of any provision hereof shall in no way affect the right of the city
hereafter to enforce the same. Nor shall the waiver by the city of any breach
of any provision hereof be taken or held to be a waiver of any succeeding
breach of such provision or as a waiver of the provision itself or any other
provision.
   (H)   Reasonableness of consent or approval. Whenever under this franchise
"reasonableness" is the standard for the granting or denial of the consent or
approval of either party hereto, such party shall be entitled to consider
public and governmental policy, moral and ethical standards as well as business
and economic considerations.
   (I)   Entire agreement. This franchise and all exhibits represent the entire
understanding and agreement between the parties hereto with respect to the
subject matter hereof and supersede all prior oral negotiations between the
parties.
   (J)   Jurisdiction. Venue for any judicial dispute between the city and
grantee arising under or out of this franchise shall be in Bernalillo County
District Court, New Mexico, or in the United States District Court in
Albuquerque.
(Ord._2019-009)
ARTICLE 6: PAWNBROKERS, PRECIOUS MATERIAL DEALERS, SECONDHAND RETAILERS,
AND AUTOMATED KIOSKS
Section
   
13-6-1   Short title
   
13-6-2   Purpose
   
13-6-3   Definitions
   
13-6-4   Permits required; permit fee; penalty
   
13-6-5   Administration; applicability of other laws
   
13-6-6   Bond required
   
13-6-7   Application for permit; requirements and eligibility
   
13-6-8   Records and reports by pawnbrokers; penalties
   
13-6-9   Inspection; property crime data sharing
   
13-6-10   Notice of violation; notice of hearing; hearings; continuance; order;
penalties
   
13-6-11   Disposition of property; payment for property
   
13-6-12   Unlawful transactions
   
13-6-13   Hold orders; issuance; required information; disputed ownership;
procedures
   
13-6-14   Exemptions
§ 13-6-1 SHORT TITLE.
   This article may be cited as the "Pawnbroker, Precious Material Dealer,
Secondhand Retailer, and Automated Kiosk Ordinance."
(Ord._2020-042)
§ 13-6-2 PURPOSE.
   The purposes of this article include to:
      (1)   Ensure a sound system of making loans against, or acquiring through
purchase, tangible personal property by and through pawnshops, precious
material dealers, secondhand retailers, and automated kiosks; and to prevent
frauds, ensure fair record keeping and reporting practices;
      (2)   Provide for permitting and reporting requirements for pawnbrokers,
precious metal dealers, secondhand retailers, and automated kiosks;
      (3)   Promote financial responsibility to the city and Its residents and
compliance with city law; and
      (4)   Promote the health, safety, and welfare of the city by implementing
minimum accountability standards for pawnbroker, precious materials, secondhand
retailer, and automated kiosk businesses; help level the regulatory playing
field for these related industries; and help limit vulnerability of these
businesses to becoming unwitting participants in the cycle of property crime.
(Ord._2020-042)
§ 13-6-3 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this article, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   APPLICANT. The person who applies for a license pursuant to this article.
   AUTOMATED KIOSK. An interactive device at which used consumer electronic
devices are sold, traded, recycled, or otherwise received by or transferred to
another person or entity In exchange for payment.
   CONSUMER ELECTRONICS. All handheld electronic devices such as mobile phones,
tablets, and mp3 players, and radios, stereos, speakers, sound systems,
televisions, electronic display screens, personal computers, gaming devices,
digital cameras and recorders, video playback devices, and all similar or
related consumer electronics.
   CONTROLLING PERSON. A person who either has a ten percent (10%) or greater
interest in the ownership or earnings of the business, or is an officer,
director, or partner of a company or corporation.
   COVERED SECONDHAND GOOD. Any article of the following types of tangible
personal property that were previously owned by an original end user or
otherwise not purchased or sold as new:
      (1)   Consumer electronics,
      (2)   Firearms,
      (3)   Jewelry,
      (4)   Musical instruments and equipment,
      (5)   Precious metals,
      (6)   Precious stones,
      (7)   Sporting goods, or
      (8)   Tools, including power tools.
   COVERED TRANSACTION. Any transaction for any pledged good, and any purchase,
trade or acquisition for value (as opposed to by donation or consignment) of
any covered secondhand good by a pawnbroker, precious material dealer, or
secondhand retailer, or automated kiosk from a member of the general public at
the pawnbroker's, precious material dealer's, or secondhand retailer's, or
automated kiosk's place of business.
   DESIGNATED AGENT. The person designated by the applicant or permit holder to
receive notices from the city pursuant to this article.
   JEWELRY. Personal ornaments, such as necklaces, rings, bracelets, broaches,
pendants and similar Items that are made from or contain precious metal,
precious stones, or both.
   PAWNBROKER. Every person permitted by the city to engage, in whole or in
part, In the business of loaning money on the security of pledged goods.
   PERMITTED VENDOR. A vendor holding a valid business registration who
furnishes or supplies covered secondhand goods to a pawnbroker, precious
material dealer, or secondhand retailer and who does not maintain a physical
commercial premise in the city for the purposes of acquiring covered secondhand
goods from the general public.
   PERSON. For purposes of this article, a PERSON is an individual,
partnership, corporation, joint venture, trust, association, or any other legal
entity however organized.
   PLEDGED GOODS. Tangible personal property other than securities or printed
evidences of indebtedness, which property is deposited with or otherwise
actually delivered into the possession of a pawnbroker as security for a loan
of money, or with the express or implied agreement to sell it back at a
stipulated price.
   PRECIOUS MATERIAL DEALER. Any person who is engaged In the business of
purchasing articles of jewelry, precious metals, or precious stones, from the
general public at their place of business for purposes of sale, resale or
exchanging for value, or for smelting, melting, or otherwise processing,
combining or altering these materials for any purpose.
   PRECIOUS METALS. Gold, silver, or platinum, palladium, iridium, rhodium,
osmium, ruthenium or an alloy of these metals.
   PRECIOUS STONES. Diamonds, rubies, sapphires, emeralds, garnets, pearls,
turquoise and other pieces of mineral or rock of value for purposes of their
use in jewelry.
   PROPERTY UNIT ENFORCEMENT OFFICIAL. Any sworn officer within the Pawn Unit
or Property Crimes Division of the Albuquerque Police Department, or any person
specifically assigned to the enforcement or administration of this article.
   SECONDHAND RETAILER. For purposes of this article, a SECONDHAND RETAILER is
any person engaging in purchasing, trading or otherwise acquiring for value (as
opposed to by donation or consignment) any covered secondhand goods from the
general public at their place of business, for purposes of reselling, trading,
or otherwise retailing the good. The term SECONDHAND RETAILER does not include
automated kiosks.
   SPORTING GOODS. Bicycles, golf clubs, tennis rackets, archery bows,
binoculars, skis, snow boards, and camping equipment.
   STORE PREMISES. The total area occupied by a pawnbroker, precious material
dealer, or secondhand retailer at the address on the city-issued registration
or permit, and each automated kiosk unit and its associated offsite storage
facility where consumer electronics received may be stored within the 15 day
hold period required by this article.
(Ord._2020-042)
§ 13-6-4 PERMITS REQUIRED; PERMIT FEE; PENALTY.
   (A)   No person shall act as a pawnbroker, precious material dealer,
secondhand retailer, or automated kiosk, or advertise, transact, or solicit
business as a pawnbroker, precious material dealer, secondhand retailer, or
automated kiosk without first having obtained a permit from the city. A person
shall obtain a separate permit for each place of business at which the person
acts or transacts business. However, any business engaging in two or more of
the regulated business activities need apply for, and the city may issue, only
a single permit Identifying which activities the business plans to engage in
(i.e. pawnbroker and/or precious material dealer and/or secondhand retailer
and/or automated kiosk). Any business operated one or more automated kiosks may
be issued a single permit so long as the physical location of each automated
kiosk placement is specifically identified.
   (B)   The permit shall be conspicuously displayed in the pawnbroker's,
precious material dealer's, secondhand retailer's, or automated kiosk's place
of business. The permit will expire on July 1 of each year and must be renewed
by that date.
   (C)   Every pawnbroker, precious material dealer, secondhand retailer, and
automated kiosk shall pay an annual permit fee of $250 at the time of issuance
of the initial permit and at the time of each annual renewal to help cover the
expense of administration of this article. The city shall adjust this fee
annually to correspond with increases in the Consumer Price Index for All Urban
Consumers (CPI-U). Any business applying for a permit to engage in two or more
regulated activities (i.e. pawnbroker and/or precious material dealer and/or
secondhand retailer and/or automated kiosk) need only pay a single permit fee.
Automated kiosks need only pay a single permit fee for one or more kiosk
location, so long as the location of each automated kiosk covered by the permit
is specifically identified.
   (D)   Any person doing business as a pawnbroker, precious material dealer,
secondhand retailer, or automated kiosk without a permit is guilty of a
misdemeanor and is subject to the penalty provisions set forth in §
1-1-99.
   (E)   A person must apply to the city for a new permit upon any change,
directly or beneficially, in the ownership of any pawnshop, precious material
dealer, secondhand retail establishment, or automated kiosk. An application for
a permit or an application to transfer an existing permit is not required upon
any change, directly or beneficially, in the ownership of a pawnshop if one or
more holders of at least 90% of the outstanding equity interest of the business
before the change in ownership continue to hold at least 90% of the outstanding
equity interest after the change in ownership.
   (F)   Any person who is declined a permit or permit renewal is entitled to a
hearing as prescribed under §
13-6-10(C).
(Ord._2020-042)
§ 13-6-5 ADMINISTRATION; APPLICABILITY OF OTHER LAWS.
   The Mayor shall adopt such rules and regulations as necessary for the
equitable administration of this article. The permit provided for in this
article does not constitute a waiver of any requirement or provision contained
in any ordinance of the city or state or federal law.
(Ord._2020-042)
§ 13-6-6 BOND REQUIRED.
   No person shall engage In the business of pawnbroker without having executed
and delivered a bond to the city in the sum of $5,000. The bond shall be in a
form approved by the Mayor and shall be conditioned upon the conduct of such
pawnbroker's business according to the provisions of this article, the laws of
the state and all ordinances of the city. Such bond shall be for the benefit of
each and every person damaged by a breach of any condition set forth in the
bond. The term of the bond must cover the entire duration of the initial annual
permit or annual renewal period. Every pawnbroker shall provide the Mayor with
30 days' notice in writing of cancellation of the bond.
(Ord._2020-042)
§ 13-6-7 APPLICATION FOR PERMIT; REQUIREMENTS AND ELIGIBILITY.
   (A)   Annual application. Each application for a pawnbroker's, precious
material dealer's, secondhand retailer's, or automated kiosk permit shall be
submitted in writing to the Mayor and be accompanied by the permit fee and the
name, address, date of birth and social security number of the applicant and
each agent, manager, and controlling person, together with the physical address
of the associated store premise. Automated kiosks must identify the physical
location of all offsite storage facilities, if any, used to store items
retrieved from the automated kiosk during the 15 day hold period required by
this article. Changes in such information must be indicated on each annual
renewal application. Every pawnbroker shall furnish with each application for
an initial or renewal permit proof of execution and delivery of the bond to the
City Clerk's Office as required in §
13-6-6.
   (B)   To be eligible for a pawnbroker's, precious material dealer's,
secondhand retailer's, or automated kiosk permit, at the time of each
application or renewal, an applicant must conduct business within the
requirements and spirit of this article and all other applicable laws, and
never have had a pawnbroker's, precious material dealers, secondhand
retailer's, or automated kiosk permit revoked by the city or any other
jurisdiction.
   (C)   The city shall perform a criminal background check on each applicant
and controlling person for a pawnbroker's, precious material dealer's, second
hand retailer's, or automated kiosk permit. In deciding whether to issue a
permit the city may deny a permit to an applicant based on criminal history
only as regulated and authorized by New Mexico Criminal Offender Employment
Act., NMSA 1978 § 28-2-1 et seq. However, no person who has been convicted of a
felony shall be eligible for a pawnbroker's permit pursuant to NMSA 1978 § 56-
12-4.
(Ord._2020-042)
§ 13-6-8 RECORDS AND REPORTS BY PAWNBROKERS; PENALTIES.
   (A)   Records for covered transactions. Every pawnbroker, precious material
dealer, secondhand retailer, and automated kiosk shall keep a record of each
covered transaction made in the order in which each occurs. This record shall
be made on a digital form or database in a format approved by the Chief of
Police, and shall be preserved and made accessible to any property unit
enforcement official by 12:00 noon on the business' next business day after the
covered transaction occurred, and remain so available during normal business
hours for a period of two years. Each entry must also be uploaded or otherwise
linked to the Albuquerque Police Department's electronic "leads online" system
or any future equivalent administered by the APD by 12:00 noon of the business'
next business day following the day of the covered transaction. Each entry
shall include:
      (1)   A transaction number, and the date, time and type of transaction
(pledge or purchase);
      (2)   A brief description of the item; including make, model and serial
number (if available) together with a photograph of the item; a single
photograph is sufficient for any covered transaction for a collection of like
items;
      (3)   The name, address and the date of birth of the pledger or seller as
indicated on a valid government-issued photo identification card, a notation as
to the type of identification card, the jurisdiction that issued the same and
the identification card number; and
      (4)   A clear, discernible, color still image of the pledger or seller
that clearly depicts a full face view of the person taken in any form as
approved by the Chief of Police including by a still image camera, or from
still frame from a video surveillance camera of reasonable quality.
Alternatively, APD may approve a pawnbroker, precious material dealer, or
secondhand retailer's use of a video surveillance system on a case by case
basis where the system is designed to, and effectively does:
         (a)   Capture a clear, discernible, color image of the full face of
the pledger or seller at the time of the covered transaction (as opposed to at
the time of entry to the establishment);
         (b)   Includes an accurate time and date stamp that can be related to
the time of, and associated with, the respective covered transaction, and
         (c)   Where the footage is retained for a period of 90 days and made
available for inspection to property unit enforcement officials during this
time.
   (B)   All transactions completed by an automated kiosk must be monitored and
approved by a live representative in real time.
   (C)   The information required under division (A)(3) above may be collected
for each transaction, or may be collected only for the initial transaction so
long as each subsequent transaction with the same person is linked or otherwise
includes the information already on file. The information required under
divisions (A)(1), (2) and (4) above must be collected for each transaction.
   (D)   Records for transactions with permitted vendors, and other regulated
businesses.
      (1)   Every pawnbroker, precious material dealer, and secondhand retailer
shall keep a record of each transaction for a covered secondhand good with a
permitted vendor, or another pawnbroker, precious material dealer, or
secondhand retailer, which record must include only an invoice specifying the
permitted vendor's name, address, and the date of the sale to the pawnbroker,
precious material dealer, or secondhand retailer.
      (2)   However, any transactions for covered secondhand goods with a
permitted vendor having any owners or employees in common with any pawnbroker,
precious material dealer, or secondhand retailer are subject to the reporting
requirements for covered transactions prescribed under division (A) above.
   (E)   Records for estate purchases. Every pawnbroker, precious material
dealer, and secondhand retailer shall keep a record for any covered secondhand
goods acquired through an estate sale to include a sales slip or equivalent
with typical and customary information for such a transaction.
   (F)   In addition to any other penalty authorized by this article or other
law, any person who knowingly and willfully violates this §
13-6-8, or who knowingly and willfully makes a false entry In any record
specifically required by this section commits a violation punishable as
provided in §
1-1-99. However, clerical or recordkeeping errors, such as typographical errors
or scrivener's errors, regarding any document or record required by this
section do not constitute a knowingly and willful violation of this section,
and are not subject to criminal penalties. Such errors are, however, subject to
the administrative remedies of this article, and upon written notification of
the error by a property unit enforcement official, such errors must be
corrected by the pawnbroker, precious material dealer, secondhand retailer, or
automated kiosk by the business' next business day.
(Ord._2020-042)
§ 13-6-9 INSPECTION; PROPERTY CRIME DATA SHARING.
   (A)   Inspection. Any property unit enforcement official may inspect any
store premises including safes, vaults, and storage spaces therein during
normal business hours and have free access to all covered secondhand goods, and
the corresponding transaction records required by this article. The business
being inspected may escort the property unit enforcement official throughout
the inspection process. Each automated kiosk shall comply with a request to
remotely open an automated kiosk to permit a property unit enforcement official
to inspect the Items therein within 24 hours of the request.
   (B)   Property unit enforcement officials shall develop a system that
facilitates coordination and information sharing with pawnbrokers, precious
material dealers, secondhand retailers, and automated kiosks to provide updates
on current known property crime offenders and articles of personal property
suspected to have been the subject of theft as frequently as possible.
(Ord._2020-042)
§ 13-6-10 NOTICE OF VIOLATION; NOTICE OF HEARING; HEARINGS; CONTINUANCE; ORDER;
PENALTIES.
   (A)   Notice of violation. If a property unit enforcement official
reasonably believes that a pawnbroker, precious material dealer, secondhand
retailer, or automated kiosk has violated any one or more provisions of this
article, such official shall serve written notice upon the same of the alleged
violation (the "notice of violation"). The notice requirement is satisfied if
personal service of same is had upon the pawnbroker, precious material dealer,
secondhand retailer's designated agent or is posted in a conspicuous place upon
the pawnbroker, precious material dealer, or secondhand retailer's place of
business. A notice of violation issued to an automated kiosk must be
electronically mailed to the automated kiosk's designated agent.
      (1)   The notice of violation shall specify the provisions of this
article which have been allegedly violated, and shall set forth with reasonable
clarity the factual basis for each alleged violation, and shall state that an
administrative hearing will be conducted in accordance with the provisions in
the IHO Ordinance, ROA 1994,
Chapter 2, Article 7, Part 8. Notice of the hearing will be mailed to the
pawnbroker, precious material dealer, secondhand retailer's, or automated
kiosk's place of business or address of record with the city by certified mail
in accordance with this article.
      (2)   The property unit enforcement official shall provide the City Clerk
with a copy of the notice of violation for transmission to the City Independent
Office of Hearings within three business days of the notice of violation being
served.
   (B)   Hearing and penalties relating to a notice of violation.
      (1)   Hearing. The hearing will be conducted in accordance with the
provisions in the IHO Ordinance, ROA 1994,
Chapter 2, Article 7, Part 8.
      (2)   Findings required for imposition of penalty. The hearing officer
may enter an order imposing one or more of the penalties set forth in division
(B)(3), below, if it is found that a pawnbroker, precious material dealer, or
secondhand retailer, or automated kiosk violated or is operating in violation
of any of the provisions of this article.
      (3)   Penalties. Upon finding a violation, the hearing officer may enter
an order imposing one or more of the following:
         (a)   Ordering a pawnbroker, precious material dealer, secondhand
retailer, or automated kiosk to show proof of compliance within a reasonable
timeframe;
         (b)   Imposing a fine of up to $500 for a first violation, and up to
$1,000 for any subsequent violations depending on the severity;
         (c)   Ordering that the pawnbroker, precious material dealer,
secondhand retailer, or automated kiosk cease and desist specified activities;
or
         (d)   If the violation(s) are determined to be severe and
irredeemable, ordering that the pawnbroker's, precious material dealer's,
secondhand retailer's, or automated kiosk's permit be revoked or not renewed.
If revocation is ordered for a pawnbroker, precious material dealer, secondhand
retailer, or automated kiosk it will be effective no sooner than 120 days from
the date of the order to allow for winding-down of the business including
redemption of pawn inventory by rightful owners. No new loans or purchases may
be done during this time, only sales and redemption.
   (C)   Hearing and penalties relating to permit issuance or renewal.
      (1)   After an initial denial of a pawnbroker, precious material dealer,
secondhand retailer, or automated kiosk license or renewal by the city, the
denied applicant may request a hearing. After notice and hearing, the city may
decline to issue or renew a pawnbroker, precious material dealer, secondhand
retailer, or automated kiosk permit if it is determined that:
         (a)   The pawnbroker, precious material dealer, secondhand retailer,
or automated kiosk either knowingly or without the exercise of due care, has
violated this section or has aided or conspired with another person to violate
this section;
         (b)   A condition exists that, had it existed when the permit was
originally issued, would have justified the refusal to issue the permit; or
         (c)   The pawnbroker, precious material dealer, secondhand retailer,
or automated kiosk no longer meet the eligibility requirements to hold a
permit; or
      (2)   Any pawnbroker, precious material dealer, secondhand retailer, or
automated kiosk may surrender a permit by delivering it, by certified or
registered mail, return receipt requested, to the City Clerk's Office with
written notice of its surrender. The surrender of a permit does not affect the
civil or criminal liability of the pawnbroker, precious material dealer, or
secondhand retailer for acts committed before the surrender of the permit.
      (3)   The revocation or surrender of a permit does not Impair or affect
the obligation of any preexisting lawful contract between the pawnbroker and
any pledger of pledged goods.
   (D)   Notwithstanding any other provision of this section, the city may
terminate an investigation or action upon agreement by the pawnbroker, precious
material dealer, secondhand retailer, or automated kiosk to pay a stipulated
civil penalty, to make restitution or pay damages to customers, or to satisfy
any other relief authorized under this division and requested by the city.
(Ord._2020-042; Am. Ord._2023-015)
§ 13-6-11 DISPOSITION OF PROPERTY; PAYMENT FOR PROPERTY.
   (A)   No pledged goods shall be sold or disposed of, except by redemption,
by any pawnbroker within 120 days from the time it was pledged with the
pawnbroker or within 90 days after the indebtedness becomes due, whichever is
later.
   (B)   It is unlawful for any pawnbroker, precious material dealer,
secondhand retailer, or automated kiosk to sell, or otherwise dispose of, alter
in any way, or remove any covered secondhand goods from the store premises,
except by redemption, within 15 days from the date said covered secondhand
goods were received. Automated kiosks shall retain all covered goods at the
kiosk location or other storage location that was specifically identified as
part of the permit application.
(Ord._2020-042)
§ 13-6-12 UNLAWFUL TRANSACTIONS.
   No pawnbroker, precious material dealer, secondhand retailer, or automated
kiosk shall:
   (A)   Knowingly and willfully enter into a covered transaction with a person
under the age of 18 years, or under the influence of alcohol, any narcotic,
drug, stimulant or depressant or any person who previously sold or pawned, or
attempted to sell or pawn, stolen property with the pawnbroker, precious
material dealer, secondhand retailer, or automated kiosk;
   (B)   In the case of a pawnbroker, fail to exercise reasonable care to
protect pledged goods from loss or damage;
   (C)   Remove, alter, or obliterate any manufacturer's make, model, or serial
number, personal identification number on an item of personal property held in
pledge or for sale;
   (D)   Accept any item in a covered transaction where the manufacturer's name
plate, make, model, serial number, identification number or mark has been
obviously defaced, altered, covered, removed, or destroyed;
   (E)   Purchase or otherwise receive any item of property which the
pawnbroker, precious material dealer, secondhand retailer, or automated kiosk
knows is not lawfully owned by the person offering the same; or
   (F)   Willingly and knowingly make, cause, or allow to be made any false
entry or misstatement of any corresponding transaction records required to be
kept under this article.
(Ord._2020-042)
§ 13-6-13 HOLD ORDERS; ISSUANCE; REQUIRED INFORMATION; DISPUTED OWNERSHIP;
PROCEDURES.
   (A)   When any law enforcement officer has probable cause to believe that
property in possession of a pawnbroker, precious material dealer, secondhand
retailer, or automated kiosk is misappropriated, the officer may place a hold
order on the property for a reasonable period of time, not to exceed 30 days.
   (B)   No pawnbroker, precious material dealer, secondhand retailer, or
automated kiosk shall release or dispose of property subject to a hold order
except pursuant to a court order or a written release from the police
department.
   (C)   Where the rightful ownership of seized property is disputed, any
interested person may request a hearing to determine the issue of ownership
before the City Independent Office of Hearings by filing a request with the
City Clerk's Office. Upon its receipt of such a request, the City Independent
Office of Hearings shall notify the law enforcement officer involved in the
matter, who shall deliver the contact information for all known interested
parties within three days of being notified. Within three days of receiving
this information, the City Independent Office of Hearings shall issue a notice
of hearing to the officer and all known interested parties. The notice shall
specify the location of the hearing, and a date and time for the hearing that
is between 15 and 20 days from its mailing of the notice of hearing. Such
notice shall briefly state the nature of the hearing and that failure to attend
by any party may result in a decision adverse to their interests.
(Ord._2020-042)
§ 13-6-14 EXEMPTIONS.
   Nothing herein shall be construed as applying to:
   (A)   Charitable thrift stores;
   (B)   Charitable organizations;
   (C)   Consignment stores;
   (D)   Any business dealing exclusively in rare or valuable coins;
   (E)   Any businesses operating exclusively as an estate purchaser and/or
reseller.
(Ord._2020-042)
ARTICLE 7: HOTELS AND MOTELS
Section
Part 1: Motel Advertising
   
13-7-1-1   Definitions
   
13-7-1-2   Sign requirements
   
13-7-1-3   Discrimination prohibited
   
13-7-1-4   Misleading rates
   
13-7-1-5   Other limitations
   
13-7-1-6   Posting of maximum rates
 
   
13-7-1-99   Penalty
PART 1: MOTEL ADVERTISING
§ 13-7-1-1 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of §§ 13-7-1-1 et seq., the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ESTABLISHMENT. All hotels, motels, motor courts, motor hotels, tourist
courts, and the like.
   PERSON. Owner, operator or manager.
   RATE. Whether singular or plural, the amount charged for any unit and shall
include letters or figures.
   SIGN. Any sign or signs whether affixed to or detached from any
establishment; and shall include any sign or signs referring to such
establishment whether located on the premises or off the premises; and which is
or are visible from a public highway or street.
   UNIT. Whether singular or plural any room, apartment, section, or the like
which describes living, sleeping or eating areas.
('74 Code, § 10-4-1) (Ord. 2068)
§ 13-7-1-2 SIGN REQUIREMENTS.
   No person shall display or cause to be displayed any sign, which sign
includes rates or any statement relating to rates unless such sign shall
include in letters and figures of the same size and prominence the following
additional information:
   (A)   The number of units in the establishment and the rates charged for
each unit; that such number, whether in letters or figures refers to "units";
   (B)   The rates charged for occupancy, including the rates charged for each
person; provided, however, that the number of units in the establishment need
not be displayed if the sign indicates in words or figures of the same size and
prominence as the rates, that the rates displayed are for all units in the
establishment; and
   (C)   Provided further that where all units are grouped together in a rate
range the signs may display the rates in connection with the number of units so
grouped, said number of units to be displayed in words and figures of the same
size and prominence as the rates displayed.
('74 Code, § 10-4-2) (Ord. 2068)
§ 13-7-1-3 DISCRIMINATION PROHIBITED.
   No person, clerk or other employee of any establishment shall refuse service
or units to any person because of his race, color or creed.
('74 Code, § 10-4-3) (Ord. 2068)
Cross-reference:
   
Human rights, see Ch. 4, Art. 1
§ 13-7-1-4 MISLEADING RATES.
   No person shall post or maintain any sign relating to rates or additional
services which shall be misleading, false or fraudulent.
('74 Code, § 10-4-4) (Ord. 2068)
§ 13-7-1-5 OTHER LIMITATIONS.
   Sections
13-7-1-1 et seq. shall not be held to be complied with by signs merely stating
the rate per person, or bearing the legend "and up."
('74 Code, § 10-4-5) (Ord. 2068)
§ 13-7-1-6 POSTING OF MAXIMUM RATES.
   Every person shall post in a clearly legible fashion and in a conspicuous
place in each unit the maximum rate at which such unit is rented. Such posting
shall also show the maximum amount charged per occupant if the rate varies with
the number of occupants.
('74 Code, § 10-4-6) (Ord. 2068)
§ 13-7-1-99 PENALTY.
   Any person who violates any provision of §§
13-7-1-1 et seq. shall be subject to the general penalty provisions of this
code set forth in § 1-1-99.
('74 Code, § 10-4-7) (Ord. 2068)
ARTICLE 8: PRIVATE INVESTIGATORS;
PRIVATE PATROL SERVICES
Section
   
13-8-1   Definitions
   
13-8-2   Exemptions
   
13-8-3   Uniforms and vehicle insignia
   
13-8-4   Reports to chief of police
   
13-8-5   Interpretation
 
   
13-8-99   Penalty
§ 13-8-1 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this article, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   CHIEF OF POLICE. The Chief of Police or his designated representative.
   LICENSEE. Person who provides or performs services listed the definitions
for PRIVATE INVESTIGATOR and PRIVATE PATROL OPERATOR for a consideration.
   PERSON. Any person or persons, singular or plural, male or female, natural
or artificial.
   PRIVATE INVESTIGATOR. A person other than an insurance adjuster who, for any
consideration whatsoever, engages in business or accepts employment to furnish
or agrees to make an investigation for the purpose of obtaining information
with reference to:
      (1)   Crime or wrongs done or threatened against the United States of
America or any state or territory of the United States of America;
      (2)   The identity, habits, conduct, business, occupation, honesty,
integrity, credibility, knowledge, trustworthiness, efficiency, loyalty,
activity, movement, whereabouts, affiliation, association, transactions and the
like, reputation or character of any person;
      (3)   The location, disposition or recovery of lost or stolen property;
      (4)   The cause or responsibility for fires, liabilities, losses,
accidents or damage or injury to persons or properties; or
      (5)   Securing evidence to be used before any court, board, officer or
investigating committee.
   PRIVATE PATROL OPERATOR. A person who, for any consideration whatsoever,
agrees to furnish or furnishes a watchman, guard, patrolman, or other person to
protect persons or property or to prevent the theft, unlawful taking, loss,
embezzlement, misappropriation or concealment of any goods, wares, merchandise,
money, bonds, stocks, notes, documents, papers or property of any kind;
performs the service of such watchman, guard, patrolman, or other person for
any of the said purposes.
('74 Code, § 10-7-1) (Ord. 2737)
§ 13-8-2 EXEMPTIONS.
   This article does not apply to:
   (A)   A person employed exclusively and regularly by one employer in
connection with the affairs of such employer only and where there exists an
employer-employee relationship.
   (B)   An officer or employee of the United States of America or of this
state of the political subdivision thereof while such officer or employee is
engaged in the performance of his official duties.
   (C)   A person engaged exclusively in the business of obtaining and
furnishing information as to the financial rating of persons.
   (D)   A charitable philanthropic society or association, duly incorporated
under the laws of this state which is organized and maintained for the public
good and not for private profit.
   (E)   A person engaged exclusively in a profession licensed by a Board of
this state.
   (F)   A licensed collection agency or an employee thereof while acting
within the scope of his employment while making an investigation incidental to
the business of the agency including an investigation of the location of a
debtor or his property.
   (G)   Admitted insurers and agents and insurance brokers licensed by the
state performing duties in connection with insurance transactions by them.
   (H)   Any institution subject to the jurisdiction of the Commissioner of
Banking of the state or the Comptroller of Currency of the United States.
('74 Code, § 10-7-2) (Ord. 2737)
§ 13-8-3 UNIFORMS AND VEHICLE INSIGNIA.
   (A)   Uniform. No licensee or his employee shall wear any uniform or badge
of a pattern or design that may be mistaken for or confused with the uniform or
badge in use by the regular members of the Albuquerque Police Department,
Bernalillo County Sheriff Department, or State of New Mexico Highway Patrol.
All uniforms and badges to be utilized by a licensee who is licensed hereunder
shall be exhibited to the Chief of Police and approval obtained in accordance
with this division (A) prior to its being worn or utilized. A licensee shall
not be required to change the design or pattern of his uniform or badge if any
of the government agencies mentioned in this division (A) change the pattern or
design of the uniform or badge now in use to a pattern or design similar to one
used by a licensee.
   (B)   Vehicle Insignia. No licensee or his employee shall operate a vehicle
with an insignia, decal, or other marking of a pattern or design that may be
mistaken for or confused with a vehicle having an insignia, decal, or other
marking in use by the regular members of the Albuquerque Police Department,
Bernalillo County Sheriff Department, or State of New Mexico Highway Patrol.
All insignias, decals or other markings to be utilized on a vehicle operated by
a licensee or his employee shall be exhibited to the Chief of Police and
approval obtained in accordance with this division (B) prior to its being
utilized. A licensee shall not be required to change the pattern or design of a
vehicle insignia, decal, or other marking if any of the government agencies
mentioned in this division (B) change the pattern or design of the vehicle
insignia, decal or other marking now in use to a pattern or design similar to
one used by a licensee.
('74 Code, § 10-7-3) (Ord. 2737)
§ 13-8-4 REPORTS TO CHIEF OF POLICE.
   (A)   (1)   All private patrol operator licensees shall file a monthly
report with the Chief of Police listing:
         (a)   The name and address of clients to which the licensee is
providing service;
         (b)   The name, address, and telephone number of each employee; and
         (c)   A description and license number of each vehicle used by the
licensee.
      (2)   The reporting period shall be from the first through the last day
of the month inclusive. The report shall be filed no later than seven calendar
days after the end of the reporting period and shall be signed and dated by the
licensee. All such reports shall be confidential except to law enforcement
agencies and shall not be revealed to any person without the permission of the
Chief of Police. Out of city firms making an investigation defined in §
13-8-1 are required to report in person to the Chief of Police before the
investigation is started.
   (B)   A private investigation licensee planning a "stakeout" shall report
such plans to the Chief of Police.
('74 Code, § 10-7-4) (Ord. 2737)
§ 13-8-5 INTERPRETATION.
   Compliance with this article shall in no way be construed to relieve a
licensee from compliance with other ordinances, laws, or regulations, nor to
preclude the control of traffic movement by city Police Officers and other city
employees, when such control is deemed necessary by the Mayor.
('74 Code, § 10-7-5) (Ord. 2737)
§ 13-8-99 PENALTY.
   Any person who violates any provision of this article shall be subject to
the general penalty provisions of this code set forth in §
1-1-99.
('74 Code, § 10-7-6) (Ord. 2737)
ARTICLE 9: PRIVATE AGENCY FIRE PROTECTION
Section
   
13-9-1   Definition
   
13-9-2   Service charge rates
   
13-9-3   Additional charges
   
13-9-4   Violations
§ 13-9-1 DEFINITION.
   For the purpose of this article, the following definition shall apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   PRIVATE FIRE PROTECTION FACILITIES. Includes but is not limited to private
fire hydrants and automatic fire sprinklers.
('74 Code, § 10-6-4) (Ord. 2200)
§ 13-9-2 SERVICE CHARGE RATES.
   From and after October 1, 1962, there shall be charged and collected each
month for water and water service to Private Fire Protection Facilities within
and without the city the following rates:
Size of Connection   Service Charge
4" or smaller   $ 4
6"   6
8" or larger   8
('74 Code, § 10-6-1) (Ord. 2200)
§ 13-9-3 ADDITIONAL CHARGES.
   The charges provided for in this article shall be in addition to any metered
water charge which may be made in accordance with the ordinances of the city.
('74 Code, § 10-6-2) (Ord. 2200)
§ 13-9-4 VIOLATIONS.
   No water shall be used other than for fire extinguishing purposes from
private fire protection facilities. Unprotected cross-connections (as defined
within
Chapter 6, Article 2, Cross-Connection Prevention and Control) are prohibited.
Upon evidence of a violation hereof, the city shall install a meter of
appropriate size and design at the consumer's expense, and all water used from
the private fire protection facilities shall be charged and collected at the
rates provided for by city ordinance for metered service [see
Ch. 6, Art 4].
('74 Code, § 10-6-3) (Ord. 2200; Am. Ord. 59-1987)
ARTICLE 10: PROFESSIONAL FUND RAISERS
Section
   
13-10-1   Purpose
   
13-10-2   Definitions
   
13-10-3   Professional fund raiser license required
   
13-10-4   Issuance of license
   
13-10-5   Disclosure to persons being solicited from
   
13-10-6   Keeping of accounts
   
13-10-7   Bonding
   
13-10-8   Contracts
   
13-10-9   Denial and revocation of certificate of registration; cease and
desist order; appeals
   
13-10-10   Regulation
 
   
13-10-99   Penalty
§ 13-10-1 PURPOSE.
   The purpose of this article is to protect the general public and charitable
organizations in the city with regard to activities of professional fund
raisers, and to make available to the public information regarding their
activities, by licensing, bonding, accounting and information requirements.
('74 Code, § 10-9-1) (Ord. 110-1983)
§ 13-10-2 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this article, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   CHARITABLE. Patriotic, philanthropic, religious, social service, welfare,
benevolent, educational, civic or fraternal, either actual or purported.
   CHARITABLE ORGANIZATION.  
      (1)   Any benevolent, philanthropic, patriotic, health, educational,
social, recreational, fraternal organization, or any other person or
organization having or purporting to have a charitable nature; and
      (2)   Which solicits and collects contributions for any charitable
purpose within the city.
   COMPENSATION. Salaries, wages, fees, commissions, or any other remuneration
or valuable consideration.
   CONTRIBUTION. The donation, promise or grant, for consideration or
otherwise, of any money or property of any kind or value in the form of a
direct gift or a sale and benefit affair which is wholly or partly induced by a
solicitation. Reference to dollar amounts of "contributions" or "solicitations"
in this article means in the case of payments or promises to pay for
merchandise or rights of any description, the value of the total amount paid or
promised to be paid or such merchandise or rights, and not merely that portion
of the purchase price to be applied to a charitable purpose. Provided, however,
that CONTRIBUTION shall not include donations of money or property or any other
consideration to any political campaign on behalf of any candidate for public
office or to influence the passage or defeat of a proposition submitted to a
popular vote at an election. Nor shall CONTRIBUTION include any commercial
activity conducted by any charitable organization unless it involves
solicitation for and in the name of any charitable purpose.
   COST OF SOLICITATION. All costs, expenditures, debts, obligations, salaries,
wages, commissions, fees, or other money or thing of value paid or incurred in
making a solicitation for a direct gift or conducting a sale and benefit
affair.
   DIRECT GIFT. An outright contribution of food, clothing, money, credit,
property, financial assistance or other thing of value to be used for a
charitable or religious purpose and for which the donor receives no
consideration or thing of value in return.
   MAYOR. The Mayor or his designee.
   PERSON. An individual, organization, group, association, partnership,
corporation, or any combination thereof.
   PROFESSIONAL FUND RAISER. Any person who, for compensation, conducts, or
manages any drive or campaign in this city for the purpose of soliciting
contributions for or on behalf of any charitable organization or charitable
purpose and who is not a regular employee of that organization. This shall not
be construed to include persons whose principal activities are not within the
scope of the above definition such as established commercial enterprises (i.e.,
jewelers, restaurant chains and the like) conducting a limited fund raising
activity for the benefit of a charitable organization. Further, this definition
shall not be construed to include persons whose activities on behalf of a
charitable organization are limited to mailing written requests for donations,
provided that donations are not collected by such persons.
   SALE AND BENEFIT AFFAIR. Includes, but not be limited to, athletic or sports
event, bazaar, benefit, campaign, circus, contest, dance, drive, entertainment,
exhibition, exposition, party, performance, picnic, sale, social gathering,
theater, or variety show which the public is requested to patronize or attend,
and to which the public is requested to make a contribution, or required to pay
to attend or participate for any charitable purpose connected therewith.
   SOLICITATION. Any oral or written request for a contribution, including the
solicitor's offer or attempt to sell any property, rights, services, or other
thing, in connection with which:
      (1)   Any appeal is made for any charitable purpose; or
      (2)   The name of any charitable organization is used as an inducement
for making the contribution or consummating the sale; or
      (3)   Any statement is made which implies that the whole or any part of
the contribution or proceeds from the sale will be applied toward any
charitable purpose or donated to any charitable organization. The solicitation
shall be deemed completed when made, whether or not the person making it
received any contribution or makes any sale.
('74 Code, § 10-9-2) (Ord. 110-1983)
§ 13-10-3 PROFESSIONAL FUND RAISER LICENSE REQUIRED.
   No person shall act as a professional fund raiser within the city unless he
has first received a license from the Mayor to do so. Renewal license
applications shall be applied for prior to March 16 of each year thereafter.
Applications for a professional fund raiser's license shall be made to the
Mayor on forms prescribed by the Mayor. Applications shall be accompanied by
$100 which shall be nonrefundable. The license may not be prorated. The
application shall contain the following information and any other additional
information deemed necessary by the Mayor, consistent with the terms of this
article:
   (A)   The name and address of the applicant, including principal place of
business and local address and if the applicant is a corporation, the name and
address of each of its managing officers and agents, and state of incorporation
or if it is an unincorporated association, firm or partnership, the name and
address of each member of such unincorporated association, firm or partnership.
   (B)   The names of any officer, director, trustee, partner, or any current
agent or employee of the applicant professional fund raiser who have been
convicted of a felony or a misdemeanor involving moral turpitude within the
past seven years, and the nature of the offense, the state where the conviction
occurred, and the year of such conviction.
   (C)   The general plan, character and method in or by which applicant
proposes to conduct its or his business as a professional fund raiser. This
information shall include a listing of charitable organizations with address
and principal officers with which the applicant intends or expects to provide
fund raising services during the licensing period and a statement signed by an
authorized representative of each charitable organization stating that the
organization intends to have the applicant raise funds for it.
   (D)   The applicant's state revenue division taxpayer identification number
or evidence of application for a current revenue division taxpayer
identification number as required by Section 3-38-4(C) NMSA 1978.
   (E)   Proof that the applicant has posted a bond in accordance with §
13-10-7 or an affidavit executed by the applicant that he or she will only
raise funds for governmental entities provided that the governmental entities
for which the applicant intends to raise funds have consented in writing to the
applicant not having a bond. In the event the applicant executes such an
affidavit, solicitation shall be limited to the governmental entities listed
pursuant to division (C) above.
('74 Code, § 10-9-3) (Ord. 110-1983; Am. Ord. 9-1995)
§ 13-10-4 ISSUANCE OF LICENSE.
   The Mayor shall examine such application for a professional fund raiser's
license and shall make such further investigation of the applicant and his
affairs as he shall deem necessary to carry out his duties under this article.
A license shall be issued to the applicant unless the Mayor shall find one or
more of the following factors to exist:
   (A)   That the applicant or any officer, director, trustee, partner, or any
current agent or employee of the applicant has been convicted of a felony or a
misdemeanor involving moral turpitude or has violated this article within the
past seven years; except that the Mayor may waive this disqualification if the
applicant convincingly establishes to the Mayor that notwithstanding such
conviction the applicant and personnel thereof are responsible and of good
character and reputation.
   (B)   That one or more of the statements made in the application is not
true.
   (C)   That the applicant has no state revenue division taxpayer
identification number and has not applied for a current revenue division
taxpayer identification number.
   (D)   That the applicant has not met the bonding requirements of §
13-10-7 and has not executed an affidavit that he or she will only raise funds
for governmental entities.
('74 Code, § 10-9-4) (Ord. 110-1983; Am. Ord. 9-1995)
§ 13-10-5 DISCLOSURE TO PERSONS BEING SOLICITED FROM.
   A professional fund raiser must disclose to each person solicited from at
the time of solicitation the total percentage of projected contributions, as
per the agreement between the professional fund raiser and the applicable
charitable organization, that is anticipated to go to the charitable purpose
for which the contributions are sought. This number shall be derived from the
difference between the total money contributed and the cost of solicitation.
('74 Code, § 10-9-5) (Ord. 110-1983)
§ 13-10-6 KEEPING OF ACCOUNTS.
   No professional fund raiser shall commingle his personal funds with
contributions collected through a charitable solicitation. Every professional
fund raiser shall establish a special trustee bank account for each charitable
organization represented into which shall be placed all money coming into his
possession in connection with solicitations for such charitable organizations.
Separate books or records shall be kept by a professional fund raiser for each
solicitation showing the amounts of contributions coming into his possession.
Such books or records shall also show all disbursements made of contributions.
All such books, records and special trustee bank accounts shall be subject to
inspection by the Mayor.
('74 Code, § 10-9-6) (Ord. 110-1983)
§ 13-10-7 BONDING.
   Unless they execute an affidavit that they will only be raising funds for
governmental entities, professional fund raisers must file and have approved by
the Mayor a bond for the protection of charitable organizations for which the
applicant conducts solicitations and creditors of the fund raiser arising out
of the performance of the fund raiser in the charitable solicitation in the sum
of at least $25,000 before being issued a license pursuant to this article. The
bond must be maintained for the license period and shall cover all occurrences
arising during the term of the license.
('74 Code, § 10-9-7) (Ord. 110-1983; Am. Ord. 9-1995)
§ 13-10-8 CONTRACTS.
   All contracts entered into by professional fund raisers with charitable
organizations within the city shall be in writing and upon execution, true and
correct copies shall be supplied to the Mayor, who shall make them available
for inspection to any member of the public on request.
('74 Code, § 10-9-8) (Ord. 110-1983)
§ 13-10-9 DENIAL AND REVOCATION OF CERTIFICATE OF REGISTRATION; CEASE AND
DESIST ORDER; APPEALS.
   (A)   If a professional fund raiser has made application for a license under
this article and the Mayor has denied the license pursuant to §
13-10-4, the applicant may appeal the decision by filing with the City Clerk a
written request for hearing setting forth reasons for the appeal. The hearing
request must be received within 15 days of the notification of denial of the
license.
   (B)   In the event that a professional fund raiser or one of his agents or
employees with his knowledge or consent has failed to comply with any of the
provisions of this article or other law, the Mayor may after opportunity for
hearing, revoke or suspend the license. Notice shall be by personal service or
certified mail to the president or legal designee thereof of the professional
fund raiser at the address designated in the application. Such notice shall
contain stated reasons for the revocation or suspension, an effective date not
less than ten working days from the date the notice was personally served or
received, and notify the professional fund raiser that he may appeal the
decision by filing with the City Clerk a written request or hearing which must
be received by the City Clerk within 15 days from the receipt of the notice and
must set forth reasons for objecting to the order.
   (C)   A hearing shall be conducted in accordance with the provisions in the
IHO Ordinance,
Chapter 2, Article 7, Part 8.
   (D)   A nonrefundable hearing fee of $50.00 shall accompany each request for
hearing by the City Hearing Officer filed pursuant to this Section.
('74 Code, § 10-9-9) (Ord. 110-1983; Am. Ord. 38-2002; Am. Ord._2023-015)
§ 13-10-10 REGULATION.
   The Mayor may issue regulations necessary for the implementation and
enforcement of this article.
('74 Code, § 10-9-11) (Ord. 110-1983)
§ 13-10-99 PENALTY.
   Any person violating any of the provisions of this article or filing, or
causing to be filed, in a license application any false or fraudulent
misstatements, shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor, and shall be subject to
the general penalty provision of this code set forth in §
1-1-99. This provision is not exclusive and does not prevent the city from
seeking civil injunction or other legal remedies as appropriate.
('74 Code, § 10-9-10) (Ord. 110-1983)
ARTICLE 11: METHADONE CENTERS
Section
   
13-11-1   Short title
   
13-11-2   Authority
   
13-11-3   Purpose
   
13-11-4   Definitions
   
13-11-5   Permit required
   
13-11-6   [Reserved]
   
13-11-7   Permit application
   
13-11-8   Procedure for approval or denial of permit
   
13-11-9   Nontransferability of permit; duration
   
13-11-10   Permit not endorsement; applicability of other laws
   
13-11-11   Injunction; abatement of nuisance
 
   
13-11-99   Penalty
§ 13-11-1 SHORT TITLE.
   This article shall be known and may be cited as the "Methadone Center
Ordinance."
('74 Code, § 10-12-3) (Ord. 70-1984)
§ 13-11-2 AUTHORITY.
   "The Methadone Center Ordinance" is adopted pursuant to the authority set
forth in Article I of the Charter of the City of Albuquerque, which was
originally adopted at a special election on June 29, 1971, pursuant to Article
X, Section 6, of the Constitution of the State of New Mexico.
('74 Code, § 10-12-1) (Ord. 70-1984)
§ 13-11-3 PURPOSE.
   For the purpose of promoting health, safety, morals and the general welfare,
the use of buildings and land is restricted so as to avoid inappropriately
located methadone centers.
('74 Code, § 10-12-2) (Ord. 70-1984)
§ 13-11-4 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this article, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   MAYOR. The Mayor or his designated representative.
   METHADONE CENTER. A place where, as a principal activity, the addictive
narcotic drug methadone is administered or dispensed, except it does not
include an area on the premises of and operated by a hospital or an
establishment operated by the state.
   PERSON. An individual, organization, group, association, partnership,
corporation or any combination thereof.
   SCHOOL. A place where education is offered at some or all levels from
kindergarten through grade 12, and most of the school's pupils spend at least
three hours per day there.
('74 Code, § 10-12-4) (Ord. 70-1984)
§ 13-11-5 PERMIT REQUIRED.
   No person shall operate a methadone center at any given location in the city
without having a valid permit for such methadone center in accordance with this
article. Except, however, methadone centers already in operation prior to
December 6, 1984, the effective date of this article, may continue in operation
without a permit until June 1, 1996.
('74 Code, § 10-12-5) (Ord. 70-1984; Am. Ord. 24-1991)
§ 13-11-6 [RESERVED.]
§ 13-11-7 PERMIT APPLICATION.
   Any person desiring a permit pursuant to this article shall file an
application with the Mayor upon a form to be provided by the Mayor. An
application fee of $145, which is not refundable in the event the permit is
denied, shall accompany the application.
('74 Code, § 10-12-7) (Ord. 70-1984; Am. Ord. 23-2001; Am. Ord. 30-2002)
§ 13-11-8 PROCEDURE FOR APPROVAL OR DENIAL OF PERMIT.
   (A)   Within 45 days of receipt of the application for a permit, the Mayor
shall grant or deny the permit. If the Mayor affirmatively determines, upon
inquiry and examination that the requirements of this article have been met, he
shall grant the permit. If the Mayor determines, upon inquiry and examination,
that any of the requirements of this article have not been met, the Mayor shall
notify the applicant that the application for the permit has been denied and
shall state the findings of fact upon which the denial is based. The denial
shall not become effective for 20 days during which time the applicant may
within 15 days from receipt of the denial, petition for reconsideration to the
City Clerk and shall be entitled to a hearing by the City Hearing Officer, as
defined by the IHO Ordinance, ROA 1994,
Chapter 2, Article 7, Part 8. The state shall be notified of any such hearing.
   (B)   The Mayor shall notify the state as to all applications for methadone
center permits.
('74 Code, §10-12-8) (Ord. 70-1984; Am. Ord. 31-2007; Am. Ord._2023-015)
§ 13-11-9 NONTRANSFERABILITY OF PERMIT; DURATION.
   (A)   Permits are not transferable to any other site.
   (B)   A permit is valid for two years, so long as the methadone center is
operating within six months after permit issuance. At least 30 days before a
permit's two-year expiration, a methadone center which intends to continue in
operation shall apply for a new permit and shall receive a new permit after
meeting all standards of this article for such permitted center. However, these
standards need not be met in relation to a protected land use that moved to a
location within the proscribed distances from the methadone center while that
center was legally and openly operating at the site requested for renewal.
('74 Code, § 10-12-9) (Ord. 70-1984; Am. Ord. 24-1991)
§ 13-11-10 PERMIT NOT ENDORSEMENT; APPLICABILITY OF OTHER LAWS.
   (A)   Methadone center permits shall not be deemed to constitute endorsement
by the city of any methadone center, and no person shall intentionally claim or
infer, directly or indirectly, any such endorsement by reason of its permit.
   (B)   The granting of a methadone center permit does not constitute a waiver
of any requirement or provision contained in any ordinance of the city or state
or federal law.
('74 Code, § 10-12-10) (Ord. 70-1984)
§ 13-11-11 INJUNCTION; ABATEMENT OF NUISANCE.
   (A)   Whenever the Mayor believes that the operation of a methadone center,
with or without a permit, is being or will be conducted within the city so as
to create a public nuisance as that term is defined in Section 30-8-1 NMSA
1978, he may initiate judicial proceedings to abate continued operation of such
methadone center.
   (B)   Whenever the Mayor believes that a methadone center is operating in
the city without a permit, he may initiate judicial proceedings to restrain or
enjoin such operation.
('74 Code, § 10-12-11) (Ord. 70-1984)
§ 13-11-99 PENALTY.
   Any person convicted of violating any of the provisions of this article or
failing or neglecting to comply with any orders issued pursuant to any section
thereof shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and such person shall be guilty
of a separate offense for each and every day or portion thereof during which
any violation is continued or permitted. Upon conviction, each such violation
shall be subject to the penalty provisions set forth in §
1-1-99 of this code of ordinances.
('74 Code, § 10-12-12) (Ord. 70-1984)
ARTICLE 12: MINIMUM WAGE
Section
   
13-12-1   Short title
   
13-12-2   Definitions
   
13-12-3   Minimum wage
   
13-12-4   Notice, posting and records
   
13-12-5   Implementation and enforcement
   
13-12-6   Relationship to other requirements
§ 13-12-1 SHORT TITLE.
   This article may be cited as "The Albuquerque Minimum Wage Ordinance."
(Ord. 12-2006)
§ 13-12-2 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this article, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   CITY. The City of Albuquerque.
   EMPLOYEE. Any person who performs work for an employer for monetary
compensation for at least two hours in a given week within the municipal limits
of the city. EMPLOYEE shall include persons who perform work for an employer on
a full-time, part-time, seasonal, or temporary basis. EMPLOYEE shall not
include any person who is excluded from the definition of employee under NMSA
§§ 50-4-21(c)(3)-(5), (7) of the New Mexico Minimum Wage Act, except that
persons employed by the City of Albuquerque are employees. EMPLOYEE shall not
include interns working for an employer for academic credit in connection with
a course of study at an accredited school, college or university or employees
working for an accredited school, college or university pursuant to a work-
study program while attending that school, college or university. EMPLOYEE
shall not include any person who has received a certificate from the state
labor commissioner pursuant to § 50-4-23 NMSA 1978 or § 50-4-21(c)(12) NMSA
1978.
   EMPLOYER. Any person, partnership, associa- tion, corporation, business
trust, legal representative, or any other entity, or group of persons or
entities, including corporate officers or executives, who is required to have a
business license or business registration from the City of Albuquerque and who
directly or indirectly or through an agent or any other person including, but
not limited to, through a subsidiary or through the services of a temporary
services agency, a staffing agency, a building services contractor, or any
similar entity, employs or exercises control over the wages, hours or working
conditions of any employee. EMPLOYER shall include the City of Albuquerque.
   MINIMUM WAGE, MINIMUM WAGE RATE. The minimum hourly rates of monetary
compensation for work as specified in this article.
   TIP. A sum presented by a customer as a gift or gratuity in recognition of
some service performed for the customer. TIP shall include only tips actually
received by an employee as money belonging to him or her. Where employees
practice tip pooling or splitting, as where wait staff give a portion of their
tips to bus persons, both the actual amounts retained by the waiters or
waitresses and those given the bus persons shall be considered TIPS of the
individual employee who retains them. A compulsory charge for service imposed
on a customer by an employer's establishment shall not be considered a TIP
unless it is distributed by the employer to its employees.
   TIPPED EMPLOYEE. Any employee engaged in an occupation in which he or she
customarily and regularly receives tips from customers.
   TIPPED MINIMUM WAGE. The minimum cash wage that a tipped employee must
receive from his or her employer, as provided under §
13-12-3(A).
(Ord. 12-2006; amended at a Special Municipal Election, November 6, 2012.)
§ 13-12-3 MINIMUM WAGE.
   (A)   Minimum wage payment required. Except as provided herein, employers
shall pay all employees no less than the minimum wage for each hour worked
within the municipal limits of the city. Tips or commissions received and
retained by a tipped employee may be counted as wages and credited towards
partial satisfaction of the minimum wage. Provided, however, that the cash wage
paid to a tipped employee by his or her employer shall be no less than the
tipped minimum wage, which, beginning January 1, 2013, shall be 45% of the
minimum wage, and beginning January 1, 2014 and each year thereafter, shall be
60% of the minimum wage. An employer may credit tips as part of the wages of a
tipped employee only if the employer informs the tipped employee in advance in
writing, pays the tipped employee a cash wage equal to or greater than the
tipped minimum wage, and is able to establish by the tipped employee's
declaration for Federal Insurance Contributions Act (FICA) purposes or by its
records of charged tips that the total of the tips received by the tipped
employee and the cash wages paid by the employer is equal to or greater than
the minimum wage. The tips received by a tipped employee become the property of
the tipped employee and may not be shared with the employer. This subsection
shall not be construed to prohibit the pooling of tips among employees who
customarily and regularly receive tips.
   (B)   Minimum wage rate. Beginning January 1, 2007, the minimum wage for
employees shall be an hourly rate of $6.75. Beginning January 1, 2008, the
minimum wage for employees shall be an hourly rate of $7.15. Beginning January
1, 2009, the minimum wage for employees shall be an hourly rate of $7.50.
Beginning January 1, 2013, the minimum wage for employees shall be an hourly
rate of $8.50. For employers who provide healthcare and/or childcare benefits
to an employee during any pay period for which the employer pays an amount for
those healthcare benefits equal to or in excess of an annualized cost of
$2,500.00, beginning January 1, 2007, the minimum wage for that employee shall
be an hourly rate of $5.75, in addition to the healthcare benefits and/or
childcare benefits, beginning January 1, 2008, the minimum wage for that
employee shall be an hourly rate of $6.15, in addition to the healthcare and/or
childcare benefits, beginning January 1, 2009, the minimum wage for that
employee shall be an hourly rate of $6.50, in addition to the healthcare and/or
childcare benefits, and beginning January 1, 2013 and each year thereafter, the
minimum wage for that employee shall be an hourly rate of $1.00 less than the
current minimum wage otherwise applicable to employees who do not receive such
benefits.
   (C)   Annual cost of living adjustment. Beginning on January 1. 2014 and
annually on each January 1 thereafter, the minimum wage shall be adjusted based
on the increase, if any, in the cost of living, and rounded to the nearest
multiple of five cents. The increase in the cost of living shall be calculated
based on the percentage increase, if any, as of August of the immediately
preceding year over the level as of August of the previous year of the Consumer
Price Index (All Urban Wage Earners and Clerical Workers, U.S. City Average for
All Items) or its successor index as published by the U.S. Department of Labor
or its successor agency. The adjusted tipped minimum wage shall be calculated
based on the adjusted minimum wage, and rounded to the nearest multiple of five
cents. The city shall publish the adjusted minimum wage and the adjusted tipped
minimum wage for the forthcoming year on its Internet home page by October 15
of each year, and they shall become effective on January 1 of the forthcoming
year.
(Ord. 12-2006; amended at a Special Municipal Election, November 6, 2012.)
§ 13-12-4 NOTICE, POSTING AND RECORDS.
   (A)   Notice to employees. Every employer shall post in a conspicuous place
at any workplace or job site where any employee works a notice published each
year by the City Attorney informing employees of the current minimum wage rates
and of their rights under this article. Every employer shall post such notices
in English and Spanish.
   (B)   Records. Employers shall maintain payroll records showing the hours
worked daily by and the wages paid to all employees. Employers shall retain
payroll records pertaining to employees for a period of three years. When the
employer uses tips to meet the minimum wage for an employee, the employer must
have a tip declaration signed by the tipped employee for each pay period.
(Ord. 12-2006)
§ 13-12-5 IMPLEMENTATION AND ENFORCEMENT.
   (A)   Implementation and Rulemaking. The city shall implement and enforce
this article and shall promulgate appropriate guidelines or rules for such
purposes. Any guidelines or rules promulgated by the city shall have the force
and effect of law and may be relied on by employers, employees, and other
parties to determine their rights and responsibilities under this article. Any
such guidelines or rules shall establish procedures for ensuring fair,
efficient and cost-effective implementation of this article, including
supplementary procedures, such as a hotline, for helping to inform employees of
their rights under this article and for monitoring employer compliance with
this article.
   (B)   Civil enforcement. Any employee receiving less than the wage to which
the employee is entitled under this article may bring a civil action in a court
of competent jurisdiction and, upon prevailing, shall recover the balance of
the wages owed, including interest thereon, and an additional amount equal to
twice the wages owed, and any other appropriate legal or equitable relief. Any
employee who has suffered discrimination in any manner or had adverse action
taken against that employee in retaliation for exercising rights protected
under this article may bring a civil action in a court of competent
jurisdiction and, upon prevailing, shall recover actual damages plus
reinstatement in the case of discharge. In any case where an employee has been
discharged in retaliation for exercising rights under this article, the period
of violation extends from the day of discharge until the day the employee is
reinstated, the day the employee agrees to waive reinstatement or, in the case
of an employee who may not be rehired, from the day of discharge until the day
legal judgment is final. In such case, unpaid wages and actual damages
recovered shall be payable to the individual employee as to whom the violation
occurred. A plaintiff prevailing in an action to enforce this article shall be
entitled to recover his or her costs and expenses of suit and reasonable
attorney's fees.
   (C)   Criminal penalty. Any person who violates this article shall be deemed
guilty of a petty misdemeanor and upon conviction shall be subject to the
criminal penalty provisions set forth in §
1-1-99 of this code of ordinances. Each separate violation shall constitute a
separate offense and each day of violation shall constitute a separate offense.
   (D)   The City Attorney shall enforce this article.
(Ord. 12-2006; Am. Ord._2014-011)
§ 13-12-6 RELATIONSHIP TO OTHER REQUIREMENTS.
   This article provides for payment of minimum wage rates and shall not be
construed to preempt or otherwise limit or affect the applicability of any
other law, regulation, requirement, policy or standard that provides for
payment of higher or supplemental wages, benefits, or protections. Nothing
contained in this article prohibits an employer from paying more than the
minimum wage rates established under this article.
(Ord. 12-2006)
ARTICLE 13: CUSTOMER SURCHARGES
Section
Part 1: Disclosure of Credit Card Surcharge
   
13-13-1-1   Purpose and findings
   
13-13-1-2   Definitions
   
13-13-1-3   Required disclosure by merchant
 
   
13-13-1-99   Penalty
PART 1: DISCLOSURE OF CREDIT CARD SURCHARGE
§ 13-13-1-1 PURPOSE AND FINDINGS.
   (A)   Certain businesses within the City of Albuquerque are charging a
higher price for goods and services purchased with credit cards than the price
charged for the same goods and services if paid for by other means, normally
cash.
   (B)   The Council finds that such a practice is entirely proper, due to the
additional cost to vendors of goods and services who provide for payments with
credit cards. The Council further finds that it is improper to impose an
additional cost on the use of a credit card, a surcharge, unless there has been
disclosure of that charge prior to the use of the credit charge.
(Ord. 18-2010)
§ 13-13-1-2 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of §§
13-13-1-1 et seq., the following definitions shall apply unless the context
clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ADEQUATE NOTICE. A printed notice clearly and conspicuously located so that
a person upon whom a surcharge is to be imposed will have noticed it and
understood its meaning. It also means oral notice provided directly to the
person against whom a surcharge is to be imposed in a manner such that the
person will have understood its meaning.
   CREDIT CARD. Any card, plate, coupon book or other credit device existing
for the purpose of obtaining goods or services on credit.
   MERCHANT. A person engaged in the sale of goods and/or services.
   PERSON. A natural person or an organization.
   SURCHARGE. Any means of increasing the regular price of goods or services to
a person paying for goods or services with a credit card which is not imposed
upon customers paying by cash, check, or similar means.
(Ord. 18-2010)
§ 13-13-1-3 REQUIRED DISCLOSURE BY MERCHANT.
   A merchant may impose a surcharge for use of a credit card, unless otherwise
prohibited by the card issuer or by law. This surcharge is a finance charge and
must be disclosed in advance. The merchant must provide adequate notice of this
surcharge orally or in writing before the person using the credit card becomes
obligated to pay for the goods or services.
(Ord. 18-2010)
§ 13-13-1-99 PENALTY.
   A violation of §§
13-13-1-1 et seq. shall subject the violator to the general penalty provisions
of § 1-1-99 ROA 1994. This penalty shall be in addition to any other remedies
that may be available.
(Ord. 18-2010)
ARTICLE 14: SMALL BUSINESS IMPACT
Section
   
13-14-1   Short title
   
13-14-2   Findings
   
13-14-3   Definitions
   
13-14-4   Small Business Regulatory Advisory Commission created; membership;
duties
   
13-14-5   Process for the preparation of a small business impact statement;
submission to governing body or relevant department
   
13-14-6   Ongoing review of rules affecting small businesses; quarterly reports
to the Mayor and City Council
   
13-14-7   Legislative and administrative rulemaking process; non-interference
§ 13-14-1 SHORT TITLE.
   This article may be cited as the "Small Business Impact Ordinance".
(Ord. 23-2010)
§ 13-14-2 FINDINGS.
   (A)   A vibrant and growing small business sector is critical to creating
jobs in a dynamic economy;
   (B)   Small businesses often bear a disproportionate share of regulatory
costs and burdens;
   (C)   Changes are needed in the regulatory and enforcement culture of the
City of Albuquerque to make it more responsive to small business;
   (D)   These changes can be made without compromising the mission of the city
or its departments;
   (E)   When adopting rules and regulations to protect the health, safety, and
economic welfare of the city, the city should seek to achieve its goals as
effectively and efficiently as possible without imposing unnecessary burdens on
small employers;
   (F)   The failure to recognize differences in the scale and resources of
regulated businesses can adversely affect competition in the marketplace,
discourage innovation, and restrict improvements in productivity;
   (G)   Unnecessary regulations create entry barriers in many industries and
discourage potential entrepreneurs from introducing beneficial products and
processes;
   (H)   Alternative regulatory approaches may be available to minimize the
economic impact of rules and regulations on small businesses;
   (I)   The process by which rules and regulations are developed and adopted
should be reformed to actively solicit input, ideas and comments from small
businesses, to examine the impact of proposed and existing rules and
regulations on small businesses, and to review the continued need for existing
rules and regulation that affect small businesses.
(Ord. 23-2010)
§ 13-14-3 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this article, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   COMMISSION. The Small Business Regulatory Advisory Commission.
   LOCAL BUSINESS. A business that maintains its principal office and place of
business in the city or Bernalillo County.
   RULE. Rule means:
      (1)   An ordinance or resolution adopted or proposed to be adopted by the
governing body that imposes, increases or changes the basis for calculation of
a fee that is paid in whole or in substantial part by small businesses or that
directly or indirectly impacts the formation, operation or expansion of a small
business; or
      (2)   The promulgation of a rule, regulation, or administrative policy by
the city that imposes, increases or changes the basis for the calculation of a
fee that is paid in whole or in substantial part by small businesses or that
directly or indirectly impacts the formation, operation or expansion of a small
business.
   SMALL BUSINESS. A local business which employs an average of fewer than 20
full-time employees in a calendar year.
(Ord. 23-2010)
§ 13-14-4 SMALL BUSINESS REGULATORY ADVISORY COMMISSION CREATED; MEMBERSHIP;
DUTIES.
   (A)   The "Small Business Regulatory Advisory Commission" is created. The
Commission shall consist of seven members appointed by the Mayor with the
advice and consent of the Council. Members shall serve three year terms. A
member shall not serve more than three consecutive terms. Members shall name
the chairperson of the Commission. The Commission shall meet at the call of the
chairperson but not less than twice per quarter. A majority of the members of
the Commission shall constitute a quorum for the conduct of business.
   (B)   The Commission is administratively attached to the Economic
Development Department, and staff for the Commission shall be provided by the
Department.
   (C)   The Commission shall develop its own internal procedures for
soliciting comments from the small business community relating to existing or
proposed rules of the city, and for considering requests from small business
owners to review rules adopted by the city.
   (D)   The Commission members shall reside within the City of Albuquerque or
shall be an owner of record in or be currently serving as a corporate officer
of a business operating within the City of Albuquerque.
(Ord. 23-2010; Am. Ord. 10-2011)
§ 13-14-5 PROCESS FOR THE PREPARATION OF A SMALL BUSINESS IMPACT STATEMENT;
SUBMISSION TO GOVERNING BODY OR RELEVANT DEPARTMENT.
   (A)   Prior to the adoption of a proposed rule that the Commission
determines may have an adverse effect on small businesses, the city, either
through the governing body for legislative rules or through the appropriate
department for proposed administrative rules, shall provide a copy of the
proposed rule to the Commission. The Commission then may notify associations or
owners and officers of businesses which are likely to be affected by the
proposed rule that they may submit data or position papers to the Commission or
its designee as to whether the proposed rule will:
      (1)   Impose a direct and significant economic burden upon small
businesses; or
      (2)   Directly restrict the formation, operation or expansion of a small
business.
   (B)   Prior to the adoption of a proposed rule that might have an adverse
effect on small businesses, the Commission shall prepare a small business
impact statement that includes the following:
      (1)   An identification and estimate of the number of small businesses
subject to the proposed rule;
      (2)   A brief description of the projected reporting, recordkeeping and
other administrative costs required for compliance with the proposed rule,
including costs associated with the type of professional skills necessary for
preparation of the report or record;
      (3)   An analysis of the costs of compliance for small businesses
required to comply with the proposed rule, including costs of equipment,
supplies, labor and increased administration;
      (4)   A statement of the probable economic effect on small businesses,
including lost sales and revenue;
      (5)   A description of any less intrusive or less costly alternative
methods of achieving the purpose of the proposed rule or a reasonable
justification for not employing the methods;
   (C)   Upon finalizing the small business impact statement, the Commission
shall submit their report to the governing body or appropriate department.
      (1)   If an Economic Impact Analysis (EIA) has been requested for a
particular proposed rule pursuant to F/S R-08-176, then the small business
impact analysis shall be made available to the City Council at the same time as
the requested EIA.
      (2)   If submitted prior to final action or adoption of the proposed
rule, the report shall be made a part of the record of deliberations of the
governing body or appropriate department, and the Chair of the Small Business
Advisory Commission or his designee shall have the opportunity to present the
findings of the report to the Council or appropriate department prior to final
action or adoption of the proposed rule.
(Ord. 23-2010)
§ 13-14-6 ONGOING REVIEW OF RULES AFFECTING SMALL BUSINESSES; QUARTERLY REPORTS
TO THE MAYOR AND CITY COUNCIL.
   (A)   The Commission shall conduct an ongoing review of existing rules
promulgated by the city that affect small businesses to determine whether those
rules unduly or disproportionately negatively affect small businesses.
   (B)   In reviewing rules to minimize negative impacts on small businesses,
the Commission shall consider the following factors:
      (1)   The continued need for the rule, including the public policy
underlying the rule;
      (2)   The nature of complaints or comments received concerning the rule
from the public;
      (3)   The complexity of the rule;
      (4)   The extent to which the rule overlaps, duplicates, or conflicts
with other local, state or federal governmental rules; and
      (5)   The length of time since the rule has been evaluated or the degree
to which technology, economic conditions, or other factors have changed in the
area affected by the rule.
   (C)   On a quarterly basis, the Commission shall provide the Mayor and the
City Council with a report and recommendations concerning rules that should be
amended (in a way which is consistent with the public policy underlying the
rule) or should be rescinded, in order to minimize the adverse impact of the
rules on small businesses.
(Ord. 23-2010)
§ 13-14-7 LEGISLATIVE AND ADMINISTRATIVE RULEMAKING PROCESS; NON-INTERFERENCE.
   Nothing in this article is intended to interfere with, modify, prevent or
delay any legislative or rulemaking process or procedure. It is the
responsibility of the Commission to submit its small business impact statements
to the governing body or appropriate department prior to final action or
adoption of the proposed rule.
(Ord. 23-2010)
ARTICLE 15: SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESSES
Section
   
13-15-1   Short title
   
13-15-2   Purpose and intent
   
13-15-3   Definitions
   
13-15-4   License and designated operator required
   
13-15-5   Issuance of license
   
13-15-6   Fees
   
13-15-7   Inspection
   
13-15-8   Identification records
   
13-15-9   Expiration of license
   
13-15-10   Suspension
   
13-15-11   Revocation
   
13-15-12   Denial, suspension, revocation, or denial of renewal of a license
for criminal convictions
   
13-15-13   Notice of denial of issuance or renewal of license or suspension or
revocation of license; surrender of license
   
13-15-14   Appeal
   
13-15-15   Posting requirement
   
13-15-16   Additional regulations for adult cabaret
   
13-15-17   Prohibition against minors in sexually oriented businesses
   
13-15-18   Enforcement
§ 13-15-1 SHORT TITLE.
   Sections
13-15-1 et seq. shall be known and may be cited as the “Sexually Oriented
Business Ordinance.”
(Ord._2012-030)
§ 13-15-2 PURPOSE AND INTENT.
   (A)   It is the purpose of this article to regulate the operation of
sexually oriented businesses that provide live entertainment in order to
promote the health, safety, and general welfare of the citizens of the city and
to minimize the deleterious secondary effects of such sexually oriented
businesses both inside such businesses and outside in the surrounding
communities. The provisions of this article have neither the purpose nor effect
of imposing a limitation or restriction on the content of any communicative
performances, including sexually oriented performances. Similarly, it is
neither the intent nor effect of this article to restrict or deny access by
adults to sexually oriented performances protected by the First Amendment, or
to deny access by exhibitors of sexually oriented entertainment to their
intended market.
   (B)   This article is in addition to other provisions in the Revised
Ordinances of the City of Albuquerque that deal with related but separate
matters; specifically, the provisions of the Integrated Development Ordinance
regarding zoning regulations for Adult Amusement Establishments, the provisions
of
Chapter 11, Article 2 regarding viewing booths, and the provisions of
Chapter 11, Article 6 regarding the distribution of obscene material.
   (C)   This article is promulgated pursuant to the city's home rule authority
and Article I and Article IV § 8 of the City Charter.
   (D)   Any approvals granted under this article do not authorize or legalize
any conduct, activity, or business that is illegal under city, state or federal
law.
(Ord._2012-030; Am. Ord._2017-025)
§ 13-15-3 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this article the following definitions shall apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning:
   ADULT AMUSEMENT ESTABLISHMENT. For the purposes of this article, an
establishment such as an auditorium, bar, cabaret, concert hall, nightclub,
restaurant, theater, or other commercial establishment that provides amusement
or entertainment featuring one or more of the following: A live performance or
act distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on the depiction,
description, exposure, or representation of specified anatomical areas or the
conduct or simulation of specified sexual activities.
   ADULT CABARET. A type of adult amusement establishment that regularly
features live entertainment that is intended to provide sexual stimulation or
sexual gratification.
   ADULT CABARET ENTERTAINER. An employee of a sexually oriented business who
engages in or performs adult cabaret entertainment, or an independent
contractor who engages in or performs adult cabaret entertainment.
   ADULT CABARET ENTERTAINMENT. Live entertainment that is intended to provide
sexual stimulation or sexual gratification and is distinguished or
characterized by an emphasis on specified anatomical areas or specified sexual
activities.
   APPLICANT.
      (1)   A person in whose name a license to operate a sexually oriented
business will be issued;
      (2)   Each individual who signs an application for a sexually oriented
business license;
      (3)   Each individual who is an officer of a sexually oriented business
for which a license application is made regardless of whether the individual's
name or signature appears on the application;
      (4)   Each individual who has a 20% or greater ownership interest in a
sexually oriented business for which a license application is made regardless
of whether the individual's name or signature appears on the application; and
      (5)   Each individual who exercises substantial de facto control over a
sexually oriented business for which a license application is made regardless
of whether the individual's name or signature appears on the application.
   CONVICTION. A conviction, including a plea agreement, in a federal court or
a court of any state or foreign nation or political subdivision of a state or
foreign nation that has not been reversed, vacated, or pardoned. CONVICTION
includes disposition of charges against a person by probation or deferred
adjudication.
   DESIGNATED OPERATOR. The person or persons identified in the license
application, or in any  supplement or amendment to the license application, as
being a designated operator of the sexually oriented business.
   EMPLOYEE. Any individual who:
      (1)   Is listed as a part-time, full-time, temporary, or permanent
employee on the payroll of an applicant, licensee, or sexually oriented
business; or
      (2)   Performs or provides entertainment on the sexually oriented
business premises for any form of compensation or consideration, including
persons working as contractors or independent contractors.
   LICENSEE.
      (1)   A person in whose name a license to operate a sexually oriented
business has been issued;
      (2)   Each individual listed as an applicant on the application for a
license;
      (3)   Each individual who is an officer of a sexually oriented business
for which a license has been issued under this article, regardless of whether
the individual's name or signature appears on the license application;
      (4)   Each individual who has a 20% or greater ownership interest in a
sexually oriented business for which a license has been issued under this
article, regardless of whether the individual's name or signature appears on
the license application; and
      (5)   Each individual who exercises substantial de facto control over a
sexually oriented business for which a license has been issued under this
article, regardless of whether the individual's name or signature appears on
the license application.
   MAYOR. Mayor of the City of Albuquerque or his or her authorized designee.
   MINOR. A person under the age of 18 years.
   OPERATES OR CAUSES TO BE OPERATED. To cause to function or to put or keep in
operation. A person may be found to be operating or causing to be operated a
sexually oriented business whether or not that person is an owner, part owner,
or licensee of the business.
   OPERATOR. Any person who has managerial control of the on-site, day-to-day
operations of a sexually oriented business, regardless of whether that person
is a designated operator of the sexually oriented business.
   PERSON. An individual, proprietorship, partnership, corporation,
association, or other legal entity.
   SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESS. An adult amusement establishment, or other
commercial enterprise the primary business of which is the offering of a
service intended to provide sexual stimulation or sexual gratification to the
customer through live performances.
   SPECIFIED ANATOMICAL AREAS.
      (1)   Less than completely and opaquely covered human:
         (a)   Genitals, pubic region;
         (b)   Buttock or anus;
         (c)   Female breast below a point immediately above the top of the
areola to and including the bottom of the breast; covering of only the nipple
and areola of the breast shall not constitute such covering;
      (2)   Human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state, even if
completely and opaquely covered; and
      (3)   A covering or device that, when worn, gives the appearance of or
simulates the above listed specified anatomical areas.
   SPECIFIED SEXUAL ACTIVITIES.
      (1)   Human genitals in a state of sexual stimulation or arousal;
      (2)   Actual or simulated sex acts of human masturbation, sexual
intercourse, sodomy, or similar acts; or
      (3)   Fondling or other erotic touching of human genitals, pubic region,
buttock, anus, or female breast.
   TRANSFER OF OWNERSHIP OR CONTROL of a sexually oriented business.
      (1)   The sale, lease, or sublease of the business;
      (2)   The transfer of securities that constitute a controlling interest
in the business, whether by sale, exchange, or similar means; or
      (3)   The establishment of a trust, gift, or other similar legal device
that transfers the ownership or control of the business, except for transfer by
bequest or other operation of law upon the death of the person possessing the
ownership or control.
   VIP ROOM. Any separate area, room, booth, cubicle, or other portion of the
interior of an adult amusement establishment (excluding a restroom and
excluding an area of which the entire interior is clearly and completely
visible from the exterior of the area) to which one or more customers are
allowed access or occupancy and other customers are excluded.
(Ord._2012-030)
§ 13-15-4 LICENSE AND DESIGNATED OPERATOR REQUIRED.
   (A)   A person commits an offense if he operates a sexually oriented
business without a valid license issued by the city for the particular type of
business.
   (B)   An application for a license must be made on a form provided by the
Mayor. The application must be accompanied by a sketch or diagram showing the
configuration of the premises, including a statement of total floor space
occupied by the business. The sketch or diagram need not be professionally
prepared, but must be sufficient to accurately convey the layout and design of
the premises and business. Before the requested license can be granted, the
Mayor will perform an initial inspection of the premises and business to
confirm consistency with the provided sketch or diagram.
   (C)   Only a person who is an officer of or who has an ownership interest in
a sexually oriented business may apply for a license for the business. Each
applicant must be qualified according to the provisions of this article.
   (D)   If a person who wishes to operate a sexually oriented business is an
individual, he must sign the application for a license as the applicant. If a
person who wishes to operate a sexually oriented business is other than an
individual, each individual who is an officer of the business or who has a 20%
or greater ownership interest in the business must sign the application for a
license as an applicant. The application must be sworn to be true and correct
by each applicant.
   (E)   In addition to identifying those persons required to sign an
application under Subsection (D), the application must identify all parent and
related corporations or entities of any person who will own or operate the
sexually oriented business and include the names of the officers of each parent
or related corporation or entity.
   (F)   The application must also include the name, address, and telephone
number of one or more designated operators who will be present on the premises
of the sexually oriented business during all hours of operation. The applicant
or licensee shall maintain a current list of designated operators with the
Mayor. Before a person may serve as a designated operator of the sexually
oriented business, the person must be named in the license application, or a
supplement or amendment to the license application, and not be disqualified to
operate a sexually oriented business under this article.
   (G)   A licensee commits an offense if he fails to maintain at least one
designated operator present on the premises of the sexually oriented business
during all hours of operation.
(Ord._2012-030)
§ 13-15-5 ISSUANCE OF LICENSE.
   (A)   The Mayor shall approve the issuance of a license within 30 days after
receipt of an application unless the Mayor determines:
      (1)   An applicant is a minor;
      (2)   An applicant or an applicant's spouse is overdue in payment to the
city of taxes, fees, fines, or penalties assessed against or imposed upon the
applicant or the applicant's spouse in relation to a sexually oriented
business;
      (3)   An applicant has failed to provide information reasonably necessary
for issuance of the license or has falsely answered a question or request for
information on the application form;
      (4)   An applicant, an applicant's spouse, or a designated operator has
been convicted of a violation of a provision of this article within two years
immediately preceding the application;
      (5)   Any fee required by this article has not been paid;
      (6)   An applicant has been operating the proposed business as a sexually
oriented business without a valid license issued under this article;
      (7)   Operation of the proposed sexually oriented business would violate
the city's zoning ordinances; or
      (8)   An applicant, an applicant's spouse, or a designated operator has
been convicted of any of the following New Mexico crimes or comparable crimes
in any other jurisdiction:
         (a)   Prostitution, § 30-9-2 NMSA 1974;
         (b)   Promoting prostitution, § 30-9-4 NMSA 1974;
         (c)   Accepting earnings of a prostitute, § 30-9-4.1 NMSA 1974;
         (d)   Patronizing prostitutes, § 30-9-3 NMSA 1974;
         (e)   Sexual exploitation of children, § 30-6A-3 NMSA 1974;
         (f)   Sexual exploitation of children by prostitution, § 30-6A-4 NMSA
1974;
         (g)   Prostitution; loitering; promoting, § 60-7A-17 NMSA 1974;
         (h)   Criminal sexual penetration; § 30-9-11 NMSA 1974;
         (i)   Criminal sexual contact; § 30-9-12 NMSA 1974;
         (j)   Criminal sexual contact of a minor; § 30-9-13 NMSA 1974;
         (k)   Criminal sexual communication with a child; § 30-37-3.3 NMSA
1974;
         (l)   Indecent exposure; § 30-9-14 NMSA 1974;
         (m)   Aggravated indecent exposure; § 30-9-14.3 NMSA 1974;
         (n)   Retail display; § 30-37-2.1 NMSA 1974; or
         (o)   Incest; § 30-10-3 NMSA 1974.
      (9)   Subsection (8) shall only apply if:
         (a)   Less than two years has elapsed since the date of conviction or
the date of release from confinement imposed for the conviction, whichever is
the later date, if the conviction is for a misdemeanor offense;
         (b)   Less than five years has elapsed since the date of conviction or
the date of release from confinement for the conviction, whichever is the later
date, if the conviction is for a felony offense; or
         (c)   Less than five years has elapsed since the date of the last
conviction or the date of release from confinement for the last conviction,
whichever is the later date, if the convictions are of two or more misdemeanor
offenses or combination of misdemeanor offenses occurring within any 24-month
period.
   (B)   The Mayor is authorized to conduct such records background check on
any applicant as is permitted by law. The actual cost of any such background
check shall be charged to the applicant.
   (C)   The Mayor, upon approving issuance of a sexually oriented business
license, shall send to the applicant, by certified mail, return receipt
requested, written notice of that action and state where the applicant must pay
the license fee and obtain the license. The Mayor's approval of the issuance of
a license does not authorize the applicant to operate a sexually oriented
business until the applicant has paid all fees required by this article and
obtained possession of the license.
   (D)   The license, if granted, must state on its face the name of the person
or persons to whom it is granted, the expiration date, and the address of the
sexually oriented business. The license must be posted in a conspicuous place
at or near the entrance to the sexually oriented business so that it may be
easily read at any time.
(Ord._2012-030)
§ 13-15-6 FEES.
   There shall be an annual fee for a sexually oriented business license to
cover the cost of inspections and license approval. The fee shall be a uniform
amount for all sexually oriented businesses determined by the Mayor that is
based upon the annual cost to administer the program including inspections and
license approvals.
(Ord._2012-030)
§ 13-15-7 INSPECTION.
   An applicant, licensee, operator, or employee shall permit representatives
of city departments, including, but not limited to, the Police Department, the
Fire Department, the Planning Department and the Environmental Health
Department, to inspect the premises of a sexually oriented business, for the
purpose of ensuring compliance with the law, at any time it is occupied or open
for business and at other reasonable times upon request.
(Ord._2012-030)
§ 13-15-8 IDENTIFICATION RECORDS.
   (A)   A person commits an offense if he operates a sexually oriented
business without maintaining on the premises a current registration card or
file that clearly and completely identifies all adult cabaret entertainers who
perform at a sexually oriented business as required by this section.
   (B)   The registration card or file must contain the following information
for each adult cabaret entertainer:
      (1)   Full legal name.
      (2)   All aliases or stage names.
      (3)   Date of birth.
      (4)   Race and gender.
      (5)   Hair color, eye color, height, and weight.
      (6)   Current residence address and telephone number.
      (7)   Legible copy of a valid driver's license or other government-issued
personal identification card containing the employee's photograph and date of
birth.
      (8)   Date of commencement of employment or contractual relationship with
the sexually oriented business.
      (9)   Original color photograph with a full face view that accurately
depicts the adult cabaret entertainer's appearance at the time the adult
cabaret entertainer commenced an employment or contractual relationship with
the sexually oriented business; and
      (10)   Any other records and documents required under federal laws for
employees or independent contractors, whichever applies.
   (C)   All records maintained on an adult cabaret entertainer in compliance
with this section must be retained at the sexually oriented business for at
least 90 days following the date of any voluntary or involuntary termination of
the adult cabaret entertainer's employment or contract with the sexually
oriented business.
   (D)   A person who operates a sexually oriented business or the person's
agent or employee shall allow immediate access to these records by
representatives of the Mayor, but shall allow no other individual such access
except for the designated operator or agent, or the clerical staff charged with
maintaining the registration card file.
(Ord._2012-030)
§ 13-15-9 EXPIRATION OF LICENSE.
   Each license expires one year from the date of issuance. A license may be
renewed only by making application as provided in this article. Application for
renewal should be made at least 30 days before the expiration date, and when
made less than 30 days before the expiration date, the expiration of the
license will not be affected by the pendency of the application.
(Ord._2012-030)
§ 13-15-10 SUSPENSION.
   The Mayor shall suspend a license for a period not to exceed 30 days if the
Mayor determines that a licensee, an operator, or an employee has violated or
is not in compliance with §§
13-15-4(G),
13-15-8,
13-15-15, or
13-15-16.
(Ord._2012-030)
§ 13-15-11 REVOCATION.
   (A)   The Mayor shall revoke a license if a cause of suspension in §
13-15-10 occurs and the license has been suspended within the preceding 12
months.
   (B)   The Mayor shall revoke a license if the Mayor determines one or more
of the following has occurred:
      (1)   A licensee gave false or misleading information in the material
submitted to the Mayor during the application process;
      (2)   A licensee or an operator has knowingly allowed possession, use, or
sale of controlled substances on the premises;
      (3)   A licensee or an operator has knowingly allowed prostitution on the
premises;
      (4)   A licensee or an operator knowingly operated the sexually oriented
business during a period of time when the licensee's license was suspended;
      (5)   A licensee or designated operator has been convicted of an offense
listed in §
13-15-5(A)(8) for which the time period required in §
13-15-5(A)(9) has not elapsed.
      (6)   On two or more occasions within a 12- month period, a person or
persons committed an offense occurring in or on the sexually oriented business
premises of a crime listed in §
13-15-5(A)(8) for which a conviction has been obtained, and the person or
persons were employees of the licensee or the sexually oriented business at the
time the offenses were committed.
      (7)   A licensee or an operator has knowingly allowed any act of sexual
intercourse, sodomy, oral copulation or masturbation to occur in or on the
sexually oriented business premises.
      (8)   A licensee or an operator has violated §
13-15-17.
   (C)   The fact that a conviction is being appealed has no effect on the
revocation of the license.
   (D)   When the Mayor revokes a license, the revocation will continue for one
year, and the licensee, for one year after the date the revocation becomes
effective, shall not be issued a sexually oriented business license for the
same location for which the license was revoked. If, subsequent to revocation,
the Mayor finds that the basis for the revocation has been corrected or abated,
the applicant may apply for and be granted a license if at least 90 days have
elapsed since the date the revocation became effective. If the license was
revoked under §
13-15-11(B)(5), an applicant may not apply for or be granted another license
until the appropriate number of years required under §
13-15-5(A)(9) has elapsed.
(Ord._2012-030)
§ 13-15-12 DENIAL, SUSPENSION, REVOCATION, OR DENIAL OF RENEWAL OF A LICENSE
FOR CRIMINAL CONVICTIONS.
   (A)   In determining whether a sexually oriented business license should be
denied, suspended, revoked, or denied for renewal based on criminal convictions
of an applicant or licensee of a sexually oriented business, or on convictions
of an operator or employee of the applicant, the licensee, or the sexually
oriented business, all convictions for offenses occurring within a designated
time period will be counted, regardless of whether the offenses occurred during
the current license period, a prior license period, or an unlicensed period.
   (B)   Notwithstanding Subsection (A), a conviction for an offense committed
during a prior license period or an unlicensed period will not be counted
against a current applicant or licensee of a sexually oriented business if no
person who is deemed a current applicant or licensee was an applicant,
licensee, owner, or operator of the sexually oriented business during the prior
license period or unlicensed period in which the offense was committed.
(Ord._2012-030)
§ 13-15-13 NOTICE OF DENIAL OF ISSUANCE OR RENEWAL OF LICENSE OR SUSPENSION OR
REVOCATION OF LICENSE; SURRENDER OF LICENSE.
   (A)   If the Mayor denies the issuance or renewal of a sexually oriented
business license or suspends or revokes a sexually oriented business license,
the Mayor shall deliver to the applicant or licensee, either by hand delivery
or by certified mail, return receipt requested, written notice of the action,
the basis of the action, and a notice of the right to an appeal.
   (B)   If the Mayor suspends or revokes a license or denies renewal of a
license that was valid on the date the application for renewal was submitted,
the Mayor may not enforce such action before the eleventh day after the date
the written notice required by Subsection (A) is delivered to the applicant or
licensee.
   (C)   After suspension or revocation of a license or denial of renewal of a
license that was valid on the date the application for renewal was submitted,
the applicant or licensee shall discontinue operating the sexually oriented
business and surrender the license to the Mayor by 11:59 p.m. of the 10th day
after the date:
      (1)   Notice required by Subsection (A) is delivered to the applicant or
licensee, if no appeal is filed; or
      (2)   A final appellate decision is issued by a hearing officer upholding
the action of the Mayor.
   (D)   For purposes of this article, written notice is deemed to be
delivered:
      (1)   On the date the notice is hand delivered to the applicant or
licensee; or
      (2)   Three days after the date the notice is placed in the United States
mail with proper postage and properly addressed to the applicant or licensee at
the address provided for the applicant or licensee in the most recent license
application.
(Ord._2012-030)
§ 13-15-14 APPEAL.
   (A)   Upon delivery of written notice of the denial, suspension, or
revocation of a sexually oriented business license the applicant or licensee
whose application for a license or license renewal has been denied or whose
license has been suspended or revoked has the right to appeal. Such an appeal
must be received by the City Clerk's office within 15 days of receipt of notice
of denial, suspension, or revocation.
   (B)   An appeal shall be heard by a hearing officer in accordance with the
provisions in the IHO Ordinance, ROA 1994,
Chapter 2, Article 7, Part 8.
   (C)   The filing of an appeal under this section stays the action of the
Mayor in suspending or revoking a license, or in denying renewal of a license
that was valid on the date the application for renewal was submitted, until a
final decision is made by the hearing officer.
   (D)   The decision of the hearing officer is final and may be appealed to a
court of competent jurisdiction.
(Ord._2012-030; Am. Ord._2023-015)
§ 13-15-15 POSTING REQUIREMENT.
   (A)   Each sexually oriented business shall post in every bathroom and
dressing room of the business a notice no smaller than 8-1/2 inches by 11
inches. Such notices will be available from the city and provided at the time
of licensing and license renewal, and shall state:
   'If you or someone you know is being forced to engage in any activity and
cannot leave - whether it is commercial sex, housework, farm work, or any other
activity - call the National Human Trafficking Resource Center Hotline at 1-
888-373-7888 to access help and services.
   Victims of human trafficking are protected under the laws of the United
States and New Mexico. The hotline is available 24 Hours a day, 7 days a week;
toll-free; operated by a non-profit, non-governmental organization; anonymous
and confidential; accessible in 170 languages, and able to provide help,
referral to services, training, and general information.'
   (B)   Such notice shall be printed in English and Spanish. Additional
languages may be included as determined by the city.
   (C)   It is the responsibility of the operator of the sexually oriented
business to have the notice properly
posted at all times. If a notice is damaged or removed, the operator shall
cause the notice to be replaced immediately.
(Ord._2012-030)
§ 13-15-16 ADDITIONAL REGULATIONS FOR ADULT CABARET.
   (A)   A licensee or an operator of an adult cabaret commits an offense if he
knowingly employs, contracts with, a person who has been convicted of an
offense listed in §
13-15-5(A)(8) for which the time period required in §
13-15-5(A)(9) has not elapsed.
   (B)   An adult cabaret may not contain any VIP rooms, except that any VIP
room contained in a lawfully operating adult cabaret on the date this article
is adopted may continue in existence for six months.
   (C)   A licensee, an operator, or an employee of an adult cabaret commits an
offense if he permits any customer access to an area of the premises:
      (1)   Not visible from the manager's station or not visible by a walk
through of the premises without entering a closed area, excluding a restroom;
or
      (2)   Not regularly open to all customers of the business.
   (D)   Adult cabaret entertainment must occur only in an open and visible
area, and in the presence of, and be visually observable by, an employee who is
not an adult cabaret entertainer. A licensee or operator commits an offense if
he knowingly allows adult cabaret entertainment to be performed in violation of
this subsection.
   (E)   The purpose of Subsections (B), (C), and (D) of this section is to
reduce the opportunity for unlawful activity such as indecent exposure,
solicitation for prostitution, and prostitution that occurs in VIP rooms and
other areas of adult cabarets that are not open to the view of management
personnel, law enforcement officers, and customers. By prohibiting VIP rooms
and requiring adult entertainment to be performed in more open and visible
surroundings, unlawful activity will be deterred because it will be more
readily observable by management personnel, law enforcement officers, and
customers.
(Ord._2012-030)
§ 13-15-17 PROHIBITION AGAINST MINORS IN SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESSES.
   (A)   A licensee or an operator commits an offense if he knowingly:
      (1)   Allows a minor to enter the interior premises of a sexually
oriented business;
      (2)   Employs, contracts with, or otherwise engages or allows a minor to
perform adult cabaret entertainment; or
      (3)   Employs a minor in a sexually oriented business.
   (B)   Knowledge on the part of the licensee or operator is presumed under
paragraph (2) or (3) of Subsection (A) if identification records were not kept
in accordance with the requirements of this article, and properly kept records
would have informed the licensee or operator of the minor's age.
   (C)   An employee of a sexually oriented business commits an offense if the
employee knowingly:
      (1)   Allows a minor to enter the interior premises of a sexually
oriented business;
      (2)   Employs, contracts with, or otherwise engages or allows a minor to
perform adult cabaret entertainment; or
      (3)   Employs a minor in a sexually oriented business.
(Ord._2012-030)
§ 13-15-18 ENFORCEMENT.
   (A)   Whenever a person does an act that is prohibited, fails to perform an
act that is required, or commits an act that is made an offense by any
provision of this article, the violation is punishable as provided by §
1-1-99 ROA 1994.
   (B)   The remedies provided for in this article are not exclusive and the
city may employ any other remedy, including but not limited to injunction.
(Ord._2012-030)
ARTICLE 16: HOMEOWNER AND CONDOMINIUM ASSOCIATIONS
Section
   
13-16-1   Reasonable charges for disclosure certificates, disclosure
statements, or resale certificates.
§ 13-16-1 REASONABLE CHARGES FOR DISCLOSURE CERTIFICATES, DISCLOSURESTATEMENTS,
OR RESALE CERTIFICATES.
   Homeowner and Condominium Associations may impose a reasonable charge not to
exceed $200 payable at the time of closing for preparation of a Disclosure
Certificate as required by the New Mexico Homeowner Association Act, or for a
Disclosure Statement or Resale Certificate as required by the New Mexico
Condominium Association Act.
(Ord._2016-020)
ARTICLE 17: [RESERVED]
ARTICLE 18: CLOSED CAPTIONING
Section
   
13-18-1-1   Short title
   
13-18-1-2   Definitions
   
13-18-1-3   Closed captioning in places of public accommodation
§ 13-18-1-1 SHORT TITLE.
   Sections
13-18-1-1 et seq. shall be known and may be cited as the "Albuquerque Closed
Captioning Ordinance."
(Ord._2019-035)
§ 13-8-1-2 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this article the following definitions shall apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning:
   CLOSED CAPTIONING. A transcript or dialog of the audio portion of a
television program that is displayed on a television receiver screen when the
user activates the feature.
   CLOSED-CAPTIONED TELEVISION RECEIVER. A receiver of television or streamed
programming that has the ability to display closed captioning, including but
not limited to a television, display screen, digital set top box, and other
technology capable of displaying closed captioning for television or streamed
programming.
   DEPARTMENT. The City of Albuquerque Office of Civil Rights.
   PLACE OF PUBLIC ACCOMMODATION. The following are considered places of public
accommodations for purposes of this article:
      (1)   An inn, hotel, motel, or other place of lodging, except for an
establishment located within a building that contains not more than five rooms
for rent or hire and that is actually occupied by the proprietor of such
establishment as the residence of such proprietor;
      (2)   A restaurant, bar, or other establishment serving food or drink;
      (3)   A motion picture house, theater, concert hall, stadium, or other
place of exhibition or entertainment;
      (4)   An auditorium, convention center, lecture hall, or other place of
public gathering;
      (5)   A bakery, grocery store, clothing store, hardware store, shopping
center, or other sales or rental establishment;
      (6)   A department store, laundromat, dry-cleaner, bank, barber shop,
beauty shop, travel service, shoe repair service, funeral parlor, gas station,
office of an accountant or lawyer, pharmacy, insurance office, professional
office of a health care provider, hospital, or any other retail or service
establishment;
      (7)   A terminal, depot, or other station used for specified public
transportation;
      (8)   A museum, library, gallery, or other place of public display or
collection;
      (9)   A park, zoo, amusement park, or other place of recreation;
      (10)   A nursery, elementary, secondary, under graduate, or postgraduate
private school, or other place of education;
      (11)   A day care center, senior citizen center, homeless shelter, food
bank, adoption agency, or other social service center establishment; and
      (12)   A gymnasium, health spa, bowling alley, golf course, or other
place of exercise or recreation.
   PUBLIC AREA. Any part of a place of public accommodation that is open to the
general public.
   REGULAR HOURS. The hours of any day in which a place of public accommodation
is generally open to members of the general public.
   RESPONDENT. Any person who is alleged or found to have committed a violation
of regulations established in this section.
(Ord._2019-035)
§ 13-18-1-3 CLOSED CAPTIONING IN PLACES OF PUBLIC ACCOMMODATION.
   (A)   Any person owning or managing a place of public accommodation must
activate closed captioning, with a yellow text color, or if yellow is not
available white text on a black background, or black text in the largest font
style available, on all closed-captioned television receivers that are turned
on and operating in any public area during regular hours, except in the
following circumstances:
      (1)   No receiver of televised or streamed programming of any kind is
available in a public area of the place of public accommodations;
      (2)   The only source or receiver of the televised or streamed
programming available in a public area of the place of public accommodation is
technically incapable of displaying closed captioning; or
      (3)   If multiple television models are in use and displayed together for
sale in a public area, at least one closed-captioned television must be
available for viewing.
   (B)   Powers and duties of the Department.
      (1)   The Department shall investigate alleged violations of this section
and shall have such powers and duties as are necessary and proper for the
administration and enforcement of this ordinance.
      (2)   The Department shall promulgate rules to enforce this section.
      (3)   Any person having been found to have violated any provision of this
section who fails to demonstrate compliance within 30 days of a notice of such
violation shall be assessed a civil penalty of up to $250 for the initial
offense, and $500 for each subsequent offense.
   (C)   Exclusions.
      (1)   This section shall not be interpreted or applied to diminish or
conflict with any requirements of state or federal law. In the event of any
conflict, state and federal requirements shall supersede the requirements of
this section.
      (2)   This section does not apply to programming that is exempt from
closed captioning requirements under state or federal law.
(Ord._2019-035)
ARTICLE 19: SHORT TERM RENTALS
Section
   
13-19-1   Short title
   
13-19-2   Applicability
   
13-19-3   Intent and purposes
   
13-19-4   Definitions
   
13-19-5   General provisions
   
13-19-6   STR permits
   
13-19-7   STR occupancy
   
13-19-8   Enforcement and penalties
§ 13-19-1 SHORT TITLE.
   Sections
13-19-1 et seq. ROA 1994 shall be known and cited as the "Short Term Rental
Ordinance".
(Ord._2020-038)
§ 13-19-2 APPLICABILITY.
   This article applies to the operation of short term rentals as defined by §
13-19-4, Definitions.
(Ord._2020-038)
§ 13-19-3 INTENT AND PURPOSES.
   The intent of §§
13-19-1 et seq. is to regulate and provide a permitting system for short term
rentals (STR) in order to protect the health, safety, and general welfare of
short term rental occupants and neighboring residents.
(Ord._2020-038)
§ 13-19-4 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this article the following definitions shall apply unless
the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning:
   DWELLING UNIT. One or more connected rooms and a kitchen designed for and
occupied by no more than one family for living and sleeping purposes,
permanently installed on a permanent foundation and meeting the requirements of
Articles 14-1 and 14-3 of ROA 1994 (Uniform Administrative Code and Technical
Codes and Uniform Housing Code), as of the date of the unit's construction. For
the purposes of this article, this definition does not include hotels, motels,
or bed and breakfast establishments.
   MARKETPLACE PROVIDER. A person who facilitates the rental of lodging by:
      (1)   Advertising the lodging by any means, whether physical or
electronic, including by internet website, online booking platform, catalog,
television or radio broadcast, and
      (2)   Collecting payment from the vendee and transmitting that payment to
the vendor either directly or indirectly through agreements or arrangements
with the vendor, regardless of whether the marketplace provider receives
compensation or consideration in exchange for the marketplace provider's
services.
   SHORT TERM RENTAL ("STR"). A rental in a dwelling unit of 29 days or less.
   SHORT TERM RENTAL OPERATOR ("STRO"). The owner or party otherwise
responsible for a short term rental property or properties.
   SHORT TERM RENTAL UNIT (“STRU”). The dwelling unit or portion thereof that
is rented for 29 days or less. Each unit within a multifamily apartment
building that is rented for 29 days or less is considered a STRU.
(Ord._2020-038)
§ 13-19-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS.
   Each STRO shall:
   (A)   Maintain a valid city business registration for purposes of operating
any one or more STR within the City of Albuquerque;
   (B)   Pay all applicable local, state, and federal taxes, including lodgers'
tax, hospitality fee, gross receipts tax and income taxes associated with the
operation of each STRU unless the marketplace provider does this on the
operator's behalf;
   (C)   Maintain short term rental insurance coverage for each STRU in the
minimum amount of $250,000 per STRU to insure against damages to guest(s)
caused by the STRO, and to insure against damages caused by STRO guest(s) or
the STRO when such damages are incurred by other persons including, but not
limited to, neighbors;
   (D)   Clearly display inside each STRU a copy of the applicable STR permit
issued pursuant to this article;
   (E)   Include the STR permit number issued by the city on all marketing
materials for each respective STRU;
   (F)   Display inside each STRU a current "Good Neighbor Agreement". The Good
Neighbor Agreement will be provided by the Planning Department on an annual
basis and shall Inform the occupants of the maximum overnight occupancy,
maximum gathering occupancy and relevant city ordinances, and explain that
occupants of any STRU are required to comply with all relevant city ordinances.
(Ord._2020-038)
§ 13-19-6 STR PERMITS.
   (A)   Permit required. No STRO shall operate any STR without a valid STR
permit from the Planning Department for each STR unit proposed to be operated.
In addition to any other necessary information, the Planning Department shall
require submission of the following for each STR permit application:
      (1)   A physical address of the STRU; and
      (2)   The name, phone number, email, and business address of the STRO or
agent(s) who will be available 24 hours per day, seven days a week to respond
to complaints regarding the operation or occupancy of the STR; and
      (3)   A scaled floor plan showing the layout and square footage of the
STR unit(s); and
      (4)   A statement signed by the STRO that the STR will be operated in
compliance with this article and all other applicable city codes, including but
not limited to the Integrated Development Ordinance, the Uniform Housing Code,
the Fire Code, any relevant Public Health Orders, and the Noise Ordinance; and
      (5)   Proof of insurance as required by §
13-19-5(C), above.
   (B)   Permit duration; inspection. Any STR permit issued pursuant to this
article is valid for 12 consecutive months unless sooner terminated by the
STRO, or cancelled by the city. The Planning Department shall have the right to
inspect each STR, without prior notice, to determine compliance with this
article and all other applicable city codes.
   (C)   Permit fee. The Planning Department shall collect a STR permit fee of
$120 for each initial permit, and $90 for the renewals thereafter. Revenue from
fees imposed pursuant to this paragraph shall be used only to administer,
manage, and enforce this section. Upon the transfer of ownership of a STRU, the
STR permit shall terminate. If the new owner wishes to use the property or unit
as a STR, a new application shall be submitted.
(Ord._2020-038)
§ 13-19-7 STR OCCUPANCY.
   (A)   The maximum overnight occupancy of an STRU is limited to a maximum of
two adults per bedroom, plus an additional two adults for each unit excluding
studios or efficiencies, such that a two bedroom house would have an overnight
occupancy of six adults, or a three bedroom house would have an overnight
occupancy of eight adults. For the purposes of this division, an adult is any
person over 12 years of age.
   (B)   Gatherings of persons in excess of the maximum overnight occupancy
prescribed by division (A), above, shall not exceed two times the maximum
overnight occupancy or 20 persons, whichever is less. All such gatherings shall
conclude and attendees disburse by 10:00 p.m. local time.
(Ord._2020-038)
§ 13-19-8 ENFORCEMENT AND PENALTIES.
   The Zoning Enforcement Officer has the duty and authority to enforce the
article consistent with the Integrated Development Ordinance, Part 14-16-6:
Administration and Enforcement: 6-9 (C)
   (A)   Notice. The Zoning Enforcement Officer shall send a written notice by
first class mail to the agent designated for such purposes pursuant to §
13-19-6(A)(2), or if no such person has been identified then to the owner of
record as listed in the real property records of the County Clerk. At a
minimum, the notice must include:
      (1)   A statement that a violation of this section has been observed or
otherwise determined to exist;
      (2)   A brief description of the nature of the violation;
      (3)   Advisement of a 30-day grace period (or longer if appropriate in
the reasonable determination of the Zoning Enforcement Officer) within which to
come into compliance; and
      (4)   A reference to the penalty provisions of this section.
   (B)   Penalty. If the property has not been brought into compliance within
the grace period set forth by the notice prescribed under division (A) above or
any period of extension granted by the Zoning Enforcement Officer, the owner or
responsible party is subject to:
      (1)   The penalty provisions set forth in §
1-1-99 of this code of ordinances, with each day of violation considered a
separate offense; and
      (2)   Instead of or in addition to the penalty provision set forth in §
1-1-99, the city, acting through the City Attorney, is hereby authorized to
file an action in a court of competent jurisdiction as a means of compelling
compliance to:
         (a)   Enjoin any person from violating or threatening to violate the
terms, conditions and restrictions of this article;
         (b)   Collect civil assessments against the property of $500 per day
for every day the property remains or remained in violation of this section
after the expiration of the grace period or any extensions granted by the
Zoning Enforcement Officer identified in the notice by the Zoning Enforcement
Officer; and
         (c)   Recover damages from the owner of a STR in an amount of money
adequate for the city to undertake or reimburse expenditures for any
construction remediation, cleanup, or other activity necessary to bring about
compliance with this article.
      (3)   In addition to judicial remedies, any expenditure by the city to
bring the property into compliance, or any damages or assessments, are
recoverable through the imposition of a municipal lien on the parcel under NMSA
1978, §§ 3-36-1 to 3-36-5. To the extent that monetary penalties are recovered
as a result of enforcement under this section, any funds so recovered shall be
used exclusively for the purpose of funding enforcement activities under this
section.
      (4)   If the STR commits three or more instances of violations of city
ordinances or state statutes within a 12 month period the STR permit shall be
revoked for a period of two years and the STR shall cease to operate.
(Ord._2020-038)
ARTICLE 20: TAX PREPARERS AND CONSUMER RIGHTS
Section
Part 1: Tax Preparers
   
13-20-1-1   Findings and intent
   
13-20-1-2   Short title
   
13-20-1-3   Definitions
   
13-20-1-4   Mandatory posting
   
13-20-1-5   Mandatory disclosures
   
13-20-1-6   Tax preparer obligations and consumer rights
   
13-20-1-7   Prohibited acts
   
13-20-1-8   Certification of acknowledgment
   
13-20-1-9   Enforcement
   
13-20-1-10   Consumer’s right to action
PART 1: TAX PREPARERS
§ 13-20-1-1 FINDINGS AND INTENT.
   (A)   The City Council finds that, to better protect the public health,
safety, and welfare of Albuquerque residents, it is in the public interest to
regulate the conduct and provision of personal income tax preparation services
by tax preparers in the city.
   (B)   The purpose of this is to ensure that paid tax preparers in the city
provide certain information to taxpayers as part of the provision of tax
preparation services, and to protect taxpayers as consumers when purchasing tax
preparation services.
   (C)   The Albuquerque Tax Preparer Ordinance is enacted pursuant to the
general welfare and police powers of the City of Albuquerque.
(Ord._2022-048)
§ 13-20-1-2 SHORT TITLE.
   This Part shall be referred to as the "Albuquerque Tax Preparer Ordinance"
and will sometimes be referred to herein as "this Part."
(Ord._2022-048)
§ 13-20-1-3 DEFINITIONS.
   For purposes of the Albuquerque Tax Preparer Ordinance, the following terms
shall have the stated meaning, unless the context clearly requires a different
meaning:
   CONSUMER. A natural person who, singly or jointly with another consumer,
obtains tax preparation services in the city and files a federal or state
personal income tax return.
   PERSON. A natural person, corporation, trust, partnership, association,
cooperative association, club, company, firm, joint venture or syndicate.
   REFUND. A federal or state personal income tax refund.
   REFUND ANTICIPATION CHECK OR REFUND TRANSFER. An agreement through which:
      (1)   a temporary limited or special purpose bank account is set up at a
financial institution for the purpose of receiving the consumer's individual
tax refund(s);
      (2)   charges and fees related to the tax services, including tax
preparation and related fees, are deducted from the temporary bank account
after receipt of the consumer's tax refund(s); and
      (3)   the remaining portion of the refund Is disbursed to the consumer by
check, prepaid card, debit card, or other payment mechanism.
   REFUND ANTICIPATION LOAN. A loan that is arranged, offered or issued with
the preparation of a consumer's tax return, and for which the creditor and
consumer enter an agreement for the loan to be repaid by the consumer's federal
or state personal income tax refund(s) or tax credits.
   REFUND SETTLEMENT PRODUCT. Any refund anticipation check, refund transfer,
or refund anticipation loan.
   RETURN. A federal or state personal income tax return of a consumer.
   TAX PREPARATION SERVICE. Preparation, advice, or assistance in the
preparation of, or assumption of final responsibility for another person's
preparation of a consumer's individual federal or state personal income tax
return for compensation or valuable consideration in the City of Albuquerque.
   TAX PREPARER. A person in the City of Albuquerque who prepares for
compensation, or who employs one or more persons to prepare for compensation,
all or a substantial portion of a consumer's personal income tax return, or who
holds themselves out as providing personal income tax preparation services. A
tax preparer shall not include:
      (1)   A licensed attorney-at-law, in good standing in this state or any
other state, who provides tax preparation services and any employee of such
attorney-at-law;
      (2)   A certified public accountant who provides tax preparation services
and any employees of such certified public accountant;
      (3)   An employee or volunteer of a Volunteer Income Tax Assistance
program, Tax Counseling for the Elderly program, or Low Income Taxpayer Clinic
as described in 26 U.S.C. § 7526;
      (4)   An officer or employee of a federal, state, or local governmental
agency who provides tax preparation services In the scope of their employment;
      (5)   A duly appointed administrator, conservator, guardian, personal
representative, trustee, or receiver who provides tax preparation services in
the normal course of their prescribed duties;
      (6)   An individual enrolled to practice before the internal revenue
service pursuant to 31 C.F.R. Subtitle A, Part 10 ("Circular 230"); or
      (7)   An individual providing only typing, reproduction, or other
mechanical assistance In the preparation of a return.
   WRITTEN. Information legibly presented in paper or electronic form.
(Ord._2022-048)
§ 13-20-1-4 MANDATORY DISCLOSURES.
   (A)   A tax preparer shall post the following information in both English
and Spanish, at any premises where the tax preparer renders any personal tax
preparation services. All signs displaying such information must be prominently
and conspicuously posted at the primary public entrance to the business
premises or in the immediate area where consumers arrive and are met by the tax
preparer.
      (1)   A sign in 22-point font or larger that states:
   "KNOW YOUR RIGHTS BEFORE YOU HIRE A TAX PREPARER
   Tax Preparers must:
   -   Provide you with their contact information and PTIN (federal tax
preparer number)
   -   Give you the amount of all fees and charges in writing before you have
to pay
   -   Allow you to review your return before filing and ask any questions you
may have
   -   Give you one free copy of your tax return when it is filed
   -   Return your original documents to you when requested
   Tax Preparers may NOT:
   -   Require you to take a Refund Anticipation Loan
   -   Ask you to sign a return with blank spaces they will fill out later
   -   Guarantee that you will get a tax refund
   -   Guarantee that you won't be audited by the government
   What's a Refund Anticipation Loan (RAL)?
   -   A loan you take out that will be repaid by your tax refund
   -   These loans are not a faster way to get your refund
   -   The loan may have fees and interest
   To learn more and for additional information, visit cabq.gov/taxpreprights.
   To file a complaint about a tax preparer, visit cabq.gov/taxpreprights or
call 311."
      (2)   A statement of how fees for tax preparation services are
calculated, including all miscellaneous fees and costs that may be incurred by
the consumer In relation to the tax preparation and fees, costs or charges
related to all refund settlement products offered by the tax preparer or a
current price list containing such information.
      (3)   If the tax preparer is a sole proprietorship or partnership, the
names of all owners. If the tax preparer is a corporation, the name shall be
followed by the phrase "a corporation."
   (B)   The city may prescribe model forms consistent with this Article to
facilitate tax preparer compliance with these disclosure requirements. A tax
preparer shall be deemed in compliance with the disclosure requirements of §
13-20-1-4 if a tax preparer uses such model form. Nothing in this Article shall
be construed as requiring tax preparers to use any such model form.
(Ord._2022-048)
§ 13-20-1-5 MANDATORY DISCLOSURES.
   (A)   Prior to entering into any obligation to pay for individual tax
preparation services, a tax preparer or the tax preparer's representative must
provide the consumer with the following information:
      (1)   Tax Preparer Disclosure. A written disclosure with the title "Tax
Preparer Disclosure" for the individual tax preparer or agent who will be
responsible for preparing the return consisting of the following:
         (a)   The tax preparer's name, address, telephone number and Preparer
Tax Identification Number (PTIN) from the Internal Revenue Service (IRS);
         (b)   A statement, If applicable, that the tax preparer Is not a
certified public accountant, tax attorney or enrolled agent with the IRS;
         (c)   A description of the tax preparer's education or training
related to tax preparation;
         (d)   The tax preparer's New Mexico Business Tax Identification Number
(BTIN).
      (2)   Fee Schedule Disclosure. A separate written disclosure of fees
entitled "Fee Disclosure" that contains the following:
         (a)   How fees for the tax preparation services are calculated, such
as charges by form, a base fee for specified forms plus charges for additional
forms, charges by the hour, or other applicable fee schedule; and
         (b)   A list of, description of, and the fee for each individual tax
preparation service offered by the tax preparer for preparing and filing
federal and state tax returns for consumers, including the fees, costs, or
charges related to all refund settlement products offered by the tax preparer.
         (c)   A statement of how fees for tax preparation services are
calculated, including all miscellaneous fees and costs that may be incurred by
the consumer in relation to the tax preparation and fees, costs or charges
related to all refund settlement products offered by the tax preparer or a
current price list containing such information.
   (B)   Prior to the consumer being obligated to pay, the tax preparer shall
provide to the consumer in writing all amounts that would be charged to the
consumer for the individual tax preparation services provided and any refund
settlement products selected by the consumer, including any fees and costs for
such refund settlement products.
   (C)   The city may prescribe model forms consistent with this Article to
facilitate tax preparer compliance with these disclosure requirements. A tax
preparer shall be deemed in compliance with the disclosure requirements of §
13-20-1-5 if a tax preparer uses such model form. Nothing in this Article shall
be construed as requiring tax preparers to use any such model form.
   (D)   The written disclosures required to be provided in this section shall
be made available in English and Spanish. If the consumer does not understand
English or Spanish, the tax preparer must allow the consumer an opportunity to
secure the services of a translator at the consumer's own expense prior to
continuing with the tax preparation services.
(Ord._2022-048)
§ 13-20-1-6 TAX PREPARER OBLIGATIONS AND CONSUMER RIGHTS.
   A tax preparer shall comply with the following obligations and consumer
rights:
   (A)   The tax preparer shall provide the consumer with the opportunity to
review the final draft tax return before the taxpayer signs the return and it
is filed with the federal or state government.
   (B)   The tax preparer shall provide the consumer with a copy of the final
tax return at the time that such return is filed or given to the consumer to
file with the federal or state government for no additional fee or charge.
   (C)   The tax preparer shall provide to the consumer a copy of any permanent
schedules or worksheets prepared. These documents shall be provided to the
consumer within five days of filing of the final tax return, when the final tax
return is provided to the consumer for filing with the federal or state
government, or when requested by the consumer.
   (D)   If requested, including at any time prior to the tax return being
filed or given to the consumer to file, or the consumer terminates the
agreement, the tax preparer shall return to the consumer all personal papers
that were originally supplied. The tax preparer may retain copies of the
records returned to a consumer.
   (E)   A consumer has the right to have any tax refund deposited directly
into their own bank account or, at their request, to have the refund sent to
them via check.
   (F)   No consumer shall be liable to a tax preparer for any charge, fee, or
cost for personal income tax preparation services that is not presented as
described in this Part.
(Ord._2022-048)
§ 13-20-1-7 PROHIBITED ACTS.
   No tax preparer shall:
   (A)   Require as a condition of offering or rendering tax preparation
services to a consumer that the consumer utilize a refund settlement product;
   (B)   Obtain the signature of a consumer on an incomplete tax return or
authorizing document which contains blank spaces said tax preparer intends to
later fill in.
   (C)   Provide tax preparation services, or represent to the public, by use
of a title, including “tax preparer”, by description of services, methods or
procedures, or otherwise, that the individual is authorized to provide
individual tax preparation service in Albuquerque, without the individual tax
preparer who provides the services having a current Preparer Tax Identification
Number (PTIN) from the Internal Revenue Service.
   (D)   Knowingly make a false or misleading oral or written statement or
visual description in connection with the tax preparation services offered or
provided or in the offering of any refund settlement product.
   (E)   Conduct business in the city of Albuquerque without a city business
license.
   (F)   Any waiver by a consumer of any provision of this Article shall be
deemed null, void and of no effect.
(Ord._2022-048)
§ 13-20-1-8 CERTIFICATION OF ACKNOWLEDGMENT.
   No later than February 1 of each year in which a tax preparer will engage in
business pursuant to this Article, the tax preparer shall file with the Mayor
or Mayor's designee a Certification of Acknowledgment declaring that the tax
preparer has read each applicable provision of this Article and intends to
comply in good faith. The Certification shall be on a form or declaration
designated by the Mayor and available on the city website.
(Ord._2022-048)
§ 13-20-1-9 ENFORCEMENT.
   (A)   The city may implement and enforce this Part.
   (B)   The Mayor or the Mayor's designee is authorized to promulgate
regulations, rules, and instructions to implement this Part.
   (C)   If the city identifies conduct by a tax preparer that violates this
Part, the city shall promptly notify the tax preparer of the violation, any
penalty imposed, and any corrective actions required to avoid additional
penalties.
      (1)   The notification shall be in writing mailed to the tax preparer's
place of business within Albuquerque and sent to the email address provided by
the tax preparer in their most recent Certification of Acknowledgment, if any.
      (2)   If the tax preparer disputes the violation, the tax preparer may
provide information showing that no violation occurred within ten days of
receipt of the notice. If the city finds based on the evidence provided that
there is no violation, a penalty shall not be imposed.
      (3)   For the following violations, the city shall not impose any penalty
if the tax preparer proves that the violation has been cured within 15 days of
receipt of the notice:
         (a)   Section
13-20-1-4 (Mandatory Posting);
         (b)   Section
13-20-1-8 (Certification of Acknowledgment);
         (c)   Section
13-20-1-7(E) (Business license);
         (d)   Section
13-20-1-7(C) (PTIN).
      (4)   If the violation described in division (C)(3) above is not cured
within 15 days of receipt of the notice, each day the tax preparer continues
the violation shall constitute a separate violation.
   (D)   The penalty for each violation shall be no greater than $250 for the
first violation, and no greater than $500 for each subsequent violation.
(Ord._2022-048)
§ 13-20-1-10 CONSUMER'S RIGHT TO ACTION.
   A consumer who has suffered damages by the failure of a tax preparer to act
in accordance with specified sections of this Part has the right to seek relief
from tax preparers as set forth below.
   (A)   The remedies provided under this section are Independent of any other
remedies provided by law, including state laws prohibiting unfair, deceptive,
or unconscionable acts or practices.
   (B)   Any consumer who suffers damages as a result of a violation of any of
the sections specified below by any tax preparer may bring an action to recover
actual damages or the sum of five hundred dollars ($500) per violation,
whichever is greater.
   (C)   A consumer may bring an action to recover damages when a tax preparer
has failed to comply with any of the following provisions of this Part:
      (1)   §
13-20-1-5 (Mandatory Disclosures);
      (2)   §
13-20-1-6(A) (Requiring that the consumer be provided an opportunity to review
the final return before filing);
      (3)   §
13-20-1-6(B) (Requiring that consumer be provided with a copy of the final tax
return);
      (4)   §
13-20-1-6(C) (Requiring that consumer be provided a copy of any permanent
schedules or worksheets prepared);
      (5)   §
13-20-1-6(D) (Requiring return of consumer personal papers upon request);
      (6)   §
13-20-1-6(E) (Allowing consumer to have tax refund deposited directly into
their bank account or sent to them via check);
      (7)   §
13-20-1-7(A) (Prohibition on requiring use of a refund settlement product as a
condition of tax preparation services);
      (8)   §
13-20-1-7(B) (Obtaining the signature of a consumer on incomplete tax return);
or
      (9)   §
13-20-1-7(D) (Knowingly making a false or misleading oral or written statement
or visual description in connection with tax preparation services offered or
provided or refund settlement products offered or provided).
   (D)   Each failure to comply with the provisions set forth above in §
13-20-1-10(C) shall constitute a separate violation.
   (E)   The court shall award attorney fees and costs to the party complaining
of a violation if the party prevails. The court shall award attorney fees and
costs to the party charged with a violation if it finds that the party
complaining of such practices brought an action that was groundless.
   (F)   The remedies provided in this section are not exclusive remedies nor
must the consumer exhaust any administrative remedies provided under this
section or any other applicable law.
   (G)   No written agreement or contract for individual tax preparation
services shall contain any provision that, prior to the time a dispute arises,
waives or has the effect of waiving the rights of a party to such agreement to
resolve disputes by obtaining;
      (1)   Injunctive, declaratory or other equitable relief;
      (2)   Punitive damages;
      (3)   Damages as specified by statute;
      (4)   Attorney's fees and costs as specified by statute or as available
at common law; or
      (5)   A hearing at which that party can present evidence in person.
   (H)   Any provision in a written agreement or contract that violates this
Part shall be void and unenforceable.
(Ord._2022-048)
ARTICLE 21: SECONDHAND CATALYTIC CONVERTER PURCHASE
Section
   
13-21-1   Short title
   
13-21-2   Purpose
   
13-21-3   Definitions
   
13-21-4   Recordkeeping
   
13-21-5   Inspection; holding period
 
   
13-21-99   Penalty
§ 13-21-1 SHORT TITLE.
   This article shall be known and cited as the "Secondhand Catalytic Converter
Purchase Ordinance”.
(Ord._2023-006)
§ 13-21-2 PURPOSE.
   The purposes of this article include to:
   (A)   Ensure a sound system of acquiring catalytic converters by and through
secondhand metal dealers, to prevent frauds and theft, and ensure fair
reporting practices;
   (B)   Provide for recordkeeping requirements for the purchase of catalytic
converters by secondhand metal dealers;
   (C)   Prohibit secondhand metal dealers from purchasing or receiving
catalytic converters not lawfully possessed and to prevent criminal damage to
property by theft of a catalytic converter that is disconnected from a motor
vehicle in accordance with ROA 1994, §§ 8-6-22, 12-3-7, and 12-3-8; and
   (D)   Promote the health, safety, and welfare of the city by implementing
minimum accountability standards for secondhand metal dealer businesses and
help limit vulnerability of these businesses to becoming unwitting participants
in the cycle of property crime.
(Ord._2023-006)
§ 13-21-3 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this article, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   PROPERTY UNIT ENFORCEMENT OFFICIAL. Any sworn officer within the Property
Crimes Division of the Albuquerque Police Department, or any person
specifically assigned to the enforcement or administration of this article.
   SECONDHAND CATALYTIC CONVERTER. A catalytic converter, other than a new and
unused catalytic converter, that is not part of an entire motor vehicle.
   SECONDHAND METAL DEALER. A scrap metal processor in the business of
operating or maintaining a scrap metal yard in a physical location in which
scrap metal or cast-off regulated material is purchased for shipment, sale or
transfer.
(Ord._2023-006) Penalty, see §
13-21-99
§ 13-21-4 RECORDKEEPING.
   In addition to the reporting and recordkeeping required by the "Sale of
Recycled Metals Act" NMSA 1978 §§ 57-30-1 through 57-30-14, every secondhand
metal dealer shall keep a record of each purchase of a secondhand catalytic
converter. The record shall be preserved for a period of one year from the date
the secondhand catalytic converter was purchased. Each entry shall include:
   (A)   The name, address, and date of birth of the seller as indicated on a
valid government-issued photo identification card, a notation as to the type of
identification card, the jurisdiction that issued the same and the
identification card number;
   (B)   The year, make, model, and VIN for the vehicle from which the
catalytic converter was removed. The secondhand metal dealer must determine
that the catalytic converter presented is consistent with the manufacturer's
specifications for a catalytic converter from the vehicle which the seller
provided information for; and
   (C)   A copy of the certificate of title or other verifiable documentation
indicating that the person has an ownership interest in the vehicle from which
the catalytic converter was removed.
   (D)   The recordkeeping requirements of §§
13-21-4(B) and
13-21-4(C) shall not apply to a purchase that meets the following requirements:
      (1)   The seller of the secondhand catalytic converter is an automotive
recycler licensed by the State of New Mexico pursuant to NMSA 1978, § 66-4-1.1
(A), who manages its inventory of secondhand catalytic converters using a stock
numbering system. The stock numbering system must use a unique number that can
be readily linked to VIN of the vehicle of origin.
(Ord._2023-006) Penalty, see §
13-21-99
§ 13-21-5 INSPECTION; HOLDING PERIOD.
   (A)   Any property unit enforcement official may inspect the full premises
of the secondhand metal dealer's place of business during normal business
hours, and have free access to inspect all secondhand catalytic converters, and
the corresponding transaction records required by this article. The business
being inspected may escort the property unit enforcement official throughout
the inspection process.
   (B)   No secondhand metal dealer shall sell, or otherwise dispose of, alter
in any way, or remove any catalytic converter from their business premises
within 15 days from the date said catalytic converter was received.
(Ord._2023-006) Penalty, see §
13-21-99
§ 13-21-99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any secondhand metal dealer violating any of the provisions of this
article shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof
shall be subject to the penalty provisions set forth in §
1-1-99 of this code of ordinances. Each day of violation shall be considered a
separate offense.
   (B)   Notwithstanding the above, the city may also pursue the penalties
permitted under NMSA 1978 § 30-16D-7, "Operating a Chop Shop" and NMSA 1978, §§
57-30-1 et seq., the "Sale of Recycled Metals Act" for infractions related to
the purchase, sale, or acquisition of any catalytic converter that is
disconnected from a motor vehicle.
(Ord._2023-006)
CHAPTER 14:
ZONING, PLANNING, BUILDING, AND FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION
   Article
      
1:   UNIFORM ADMINISTRATIVE CODE AND TECHNICAL CODES
      
2:   FIRE CODE
      
3:   UNIFORM HOUSING CODE
      
4:   NUMBERING OF CITY BUILDINGS
      
5:   FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION ORDINANCE
      
6:   RAILROAD CARS, STATIONARY
      
7:   PROFESSIONAL SERVICES
      
8:   COMMISSIONS, COUNCILS, AGENCIES AND OTHER BODIES
      9:   
WORKFORCE HOUSING AND AFFORDABLE HOUSING
      
10:   WIND RESISTANT WALLS AND FENCES
      
11:   SOLAR ENERGY; PERMITS
      
12:   LANDMARKS AND URBAN CONSERVATION
      
13:   PLANNING; GOALS AND OBJECTIVES
      
14:   SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS
      
15:   AIRPORT ZONING
      
16:   INTEGRATED DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
      
17:   FAMILY HOUSING DEVELOPMENTS
      
18:   DOWNTOWN ALBUQUERQUE BUSINESS IMPROVEMENT DISTRICT
      
19:   
IMPACT FEES
      
20:   DILAPIDATED COMMERCIAL BUILDINGS AND PROPERTIES
      
21:   
AFFORDABLE HOUSING
      
22:   
ALBUQUERQUE TOURISM MARKETING DISTRICT
      
23:   
ADMINISTRATIVE DEMOLITION OF UNSAFE COMMERCIAL BUILDINGS, UNSAFE ACCESSORY
STRUCTURES, OR DWELLINGS UNFIT FOR HUMAN HABITATION
      
24:   
DOWNTOWN VACANT PREMISES
      25:   [RESERVED]
      
26:   
MANUFACTURED HOME COMMUNITY STABILITY AND EMPOWERMENT
      
27:   
[PATCH PROGRAM ORDINANCE]
ARTICLE 1: UNIFORM ADMINISTRATIVE CODE
AND TECHNICAL CODES
Section
   
14-1-1   Intent
   
14-1-2   Uniform administrative code adopted
   
14-1-3   Technical codes adopted
   
14-1-4   Amendments to uniform codes
   
14-1-5   Availability of uniform construction codes
   
14-1-6   Building safety division — jurisdiction
   
14-1-7   Fire marshal — jurisdiction; application of fire code
   
14-1-8   Conflict of codes
 
   
14-1-99   Penalty
Cross-reference:
   
Fire Code, see Ch. 14, Art. 2
§ 14-1-1 INTENT.
   It is the intent of this article that the city shall recover from fees
derived from Building and Safety 100% of the full cost, including indirect
charges of code enforcement activities. It shall be the responsibility of the
Mayor to review the Building and Safety income at yearly intervals and to
recommend to the Council the need to increase or decrease fees according to the
result of this review.
('74 Code, § 7-28-1) (Ord._2014-018; Am. Ord._2015-025; Am. Ord._2017-013; Am.
Ord._2018-008; Am. Ord._2018-022; Am. Ord._2020-040; Am. Ord._2022-001; Am.
Ord._2022-024 ; Am. Ord._2024-001)
§ 14-1-2 UNIFORM ADMINISTRATIVE CODE ADOPTED.
   The Uniform Administrative Code is hereby adopted as depicted in Exhibit A,
Uniform Administrative Code 2024 Edition to this Ord. O-24-41 and shall serve
as the administrative, organizational and enforcement rules and regulations for
the adopted technical codes within the City of Albuquerque, New Mexico.
('74 Code, § 7-28-2) (Ord._2014-018; Am. Ord._2015-025; Am. Ord._2017-013; Am.
Ord._2018-008; Am. Ord._2018-022; Am. Ord._2020-040; Am. Ord._2022-001; Am.
Ord._2022-024 ; Am. Ord._2024-001; Am. Ord._2024-015; Am. Ord. 2024-038)
§ 14-1-3 TECHNICAL CODES ADOPTED.
   For the purpose of prescribing minimum standards regulating construction and
maintenance of buildings and structures, including all building service
equipment, and installations within the city, the following codes are adopted:
   (A)   The 2021 New Mexico Commercial Building Code including Appendix C, E,
G, H, I, and J as amended, and all other Appendices as written with an
effective 15 date of July 14, 2023;
   (B)   The 2021 New Mexico Residential Building Code including Appendix
Chapters AH, AJ, AK, AR, AS, and AQ, as amended, and all other Appendices as
written with an effective date of July 14, 2023;
   (C)   The 2021 New Mexico Earthen Building Materials Code as adopted by the
Construction Industries Division of the State of New Mexico with an effective
date of July 14, 2023;
   (D)   The 2021 New Mexico Historic Earthen Building Code as adopted by the
Construction Industries Division of the State of New Mexico with an effective
date of July 14, 2023;
   (E)   The 2021 New Mexico Existing Building Code as adopted by the
Construction Industries Division of the State of New Mexico with an effective
date of July 14, 2023;
   (F)   The 2015 International Code Council Performance Code for Building and
Facilities, including all Appendix Chapters, as published by the International
Code;
   (G)   The 2021 New Mexico Mechanical Code as adopted by the Construction
Industries Division of the State of New Mexico including Appendixes A, B, C, D
with an effective date of September 1, 2022;
   (H)   The 2021 New Mexico Plumbing Code as adopted by the Construction
Industries Division of the State of New Mexico including Appendix Chapters A,
B, C, D, E, F, I, K, and L with an effective date of September 1, 2022;
   (I)   The 2012 New Mexico Swimming Pool, Spa and Hot Tub Code as adopted by
the Construction Industries Division of the State of New Mexico with an
effective date of November 1, 2018;
   (J)   The 2012 New Mexico Solar Energy Code as adopted by the Construction
Industries Division of the State of New Mexico with an effective date of
November 1, 2015;
   (K)   The 2021 New Mexico Commercial Energy Conservation Code and the 2021
New Mexico Residential Energy Conservation Code, as adopted by the Construction
Industries Division of the State of New Mexico with an effective date of
January 30, 2024, as amended;
   (L)   The 2020 New Mexico Electrical Code as adopted by the Construction
Industries Division of the State of New Mexico with an effective date of March
28, 2023;
   (M)   The 2012 New Mexico Electrical Safety Code as adopted by the
Construction Industries Division of the State of New Mexico with an effective
date of August 1, 2014;
   (N)   Errata sheets to the adopted portions of the Codes promulgated by the
International Code Council, International Association of Plumbing and
Mechanical Officials and National Electrical Code;
   (O)   The City of Albuquerque amendments to the New Mexico Codes referred to
herein are available at the City Clerk’s office and are hereby adopted and
together with the Codes in divisions (A) through (N) of this section that shall
be known as the Uniform Construction Codes of the city. From the date on which
this article takes effect they shall be controlling within the municipal
boundaries of the city.
('74 Code, § 7-28-3) (Ord._2014-018; Am. Ord._2015-025; Am. Ord._2017-013; Am.
Ord._2018-008; Am. Ord._2018-022; Am. Ord._2020-040; Am. Ord._2022-001; Am.
Ord._2022-024 ; Am. Ord._2024-001; Am. Ord._2024-015) Penalty, see §
14-1-99
§ 14-1-4 AMENDMENTS TO UNIFORM CODES.
   The Uniform Codes of the city hereby adopted may be amended or repealed in
the same manner as ordinances are amended or repealed.
('74 Code, § 7-28-7) (Ord._2014-018; Am. Ord._2015-025; Am. Ord._2017-013; Am.
Ord._2018-008; Am. Ord._2018-022; Am. Ord._2020-040; Am. Ord._2022-001; Am.
Ord._2022-024 ; Am. Ord._2024-001)
Editor's note: Ord. 28-2002 amends Chapter 3, Section 304 Fees. Ord. 23-2005
amends the Uniform Administrative Code to include a new water conservation
chapter. Ord. 34-2007 amends the Uniform Administrative Code and Technical Code
to incorporate new high performance building standards; Ord. 23-2008 amends
Ord. 34-2007. Ord. 22-2009 repeals Ord. 34-2007 and Ord. 23-2008 and adopts an
Interim 2009 Albuquerque Energy Conservation Code. Ord. 9-2011 amends the
Uniform Administrative Code to add and allow for option of third party review.
§ 14-1-5 AVAILABILITY OF UNIFORM CONSTRUCTION CODES.
   A copy of the Uniform Administrative Code and a copy of the Uniform
Construction Codes of the city as adopted by this article are on file in the
Office of the City Clerk, and are available for inspection by the public during
regular business hours. A copy of the codes shall be available to any
individual upon request and the payment of a reasonable charge as set by the
Chief Administrative Officer, to be not less than the actual cost per copy.
('74 Code, § 7-28-6) (Ord._2014-018; Am. Ord._2015-025; Am. Ord._2017-013; Am.
Ord._2018-008; Am. Ord._2018-022; Am. Ord._2020-040; Am. Ord._2022-001; Am.
Ord._2022-024 ; Am. Ord._2024-001)
§ 14-1-6 BUILDING SAFETY DIVISION — JURISDICTION.
   The Building Safety Division of the Planning Department shall have
jurisdiction to administer the Uniform Construction Codes of the city for
construction, alteration, moving, demolition, repair, use and occupancy of
buildings, structures and building service equipment.
('74 Code, § 7-28-4) (Ord._2014-018; Am. Ord._2015-025; Am. Ord._2017-013; Am.
Ord._2018-008; Am. Ord._2018-022; Am. Ord._2020-040; Am. Ord._2022-001; Am.
Ord._2022-024 ; Am. Ord._2024-001) Penalty, see §
14-1-99
§ 14-1-7 FIRE MARSHAL — JURISDICTION; APPLICATION OF FIRE CODE.
   (A)   The Fire Marshal shall have jurisdiction under the Fire Code of the
city [i.e.,
Chapter 14, Article 2 of this code of ordinances] to test and inspect fire
alarm systems and fire suppression systems, including fire hydrants, fire
extinguishers, and sprinkler systems installed in construction, alteration,
moving, repair, demolition, use and occupancy of buildings, structures and
building service equipment. The Fire Marshal shall have jurisdiction under the
Fire Code as adopted by the Fire Department of the city as applicable to
construction, alteration, moving, demolition, repair, use and occupancy of
buildings, structures and building service equipment.
   (B)   Existing Buildings. The Fire Marshal shall have jurisdiction to
administer the Fire Code of the city as applicable to all existing structures.
('74 Code, § 7-28-4) (Ord._2014-018; Am. Ord._2015-025; Am. Ord._2017-013; Am.
Ord._2018-008; Am. Ord._2018-022; Am. Ord._2020-040; Am. Ord._2022-001; Am.
Ord._2022-024 ; Am. Ord._2024-001) Penalty, see §
14-1-99
§ 14-1-8 CONFLICT OF CODES.
   When a conflict exists in specific code require-ments between applicable
sections of the Uniform Construction Codes of the city and the Fire Code of the
city, the Uniform Construction Codes shall prevail.
('74 Code, § 7-28-5) (Ord._2014-018; Am. Ord._2015-025; Am. Ord._2017-013; Am.
Ord._2018-008; Am. Ord._2018-022; Am. Ord._2020-040; Am. Ord._2022-001; Am.
Ord._2022-024 ; Am. Ord._2024-001)
§ 14-1-99 PENALTY.
   (A)   Criminal Penalties. Any person violating any of the provisions of this
article or failing or neglecting to comply with any orders issued pursuant to
any section thereof shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and such person
shall be guilty of a separate offense for each and every day or portion thereof
during which any such violation is continued or permitted. Upon conviction of
any such violation, such person shall be punished by fine of not more than $500
or by imprisonment for not more than 90 days, or by both such fine and
imprisonment.
   (B)   Civil Fines. The Building Official may impose a civil fine of $200 for
a first failure to cure violations of this article, $300 for a second failure
to cure violations of this article and $500 for a third or subsequent failure
to cure violations of this article after notice has been issued pursuant to
this Code. Failure to pay the fine, appeal the fine, or prevail at an
administrative hearing challenging the fine shall allow the Building Official
to place a lien upon the subject property or any asset owned by the subject
property’s owner. The Building Official may also choose to collect on the fine
through any other method allowed by law.
('74 Code, § 7-28-10) (Ord._2014-018; Am. Ord._2015-025; Am. Ord._2017-013; Am.
Ord._2018-008; Am. Ord._2018-022; Am. Ord._2020-040; Am. Ord._2022-001; Am.
Ord._2022-024 ; Am. Ord._2024-001)
ARTICLE 2: FIRE CODE
Section
   
14-2-1   Adoption of fire code
   
14-2-2   Conflict of codes
   
14-2-3   Authorities having jurisdiction
   
14-2-4   Amendments
   
14-2-5   Availability of code
   
14-2-6   Establishment of the Fire Marshal’s Office
 
   
14-2-99   Penalty
§ 14-2-1 ADOPTION OF FIRE CODE.
   (A)   For the purpose of prescribing minimum regulations governing
conditions hazardous to life and property from fire, hazardous materials, or
explosion within the City of Albuquerque, New Mexico, the following documents
are hereby adopted as the City of Albuquerque Fire Code, shall take effect on
the effective date of this article, and shall control within the boundaries of
the City of Albuquerque, New Mexico:
      (1)   The International Fire Code (“IFC”) 2021 Edition, including
Appendices B, C, D, F, H, E and K, except all references to the International
Plumbing, Mechanical and Electrical Codes as published by the International
Code Council (ICC) shall be deleted and replaced with the City of Albuquerque’s
Uniform Administrative Codes, as adopted in § 14-1-3.
      (2)   NFPA 1, Fire Code, 2021 Edition, Chapter 38 (Cannabis Growing,
Processing, or Extraction Facilities), except that the use of ozone generators
in connection with the production or manufacturing of cannabis shall be
prohibited.
('74 Code, § 7-27-1A) (Ord._2017-020; Am. Ord._2019-012 ; Am. Ord._2024-002)   
Penalty, see §
14-2-99
§ 14-2-2 CONFLICT OF CODES.
   (A)   Existing Structures, Facilities and Operations. The Fire Chief or his/
her duly authorized representative shall have jurisdiction to administer the
City of Albuquerque Fire Code as applicable to all existing structures as
follows:
      (1)   Existing structures and facilities built prior to July 1, 2004,
will be regulated pursuant to the NFPA 101 Life Safety Code (LSC) as adopted
and The International Fire Code (IFC) Chapter 11. Existing structures built
after July 1, 2004, and before the adoption of this code will be regulated
pursuant to the code at the time of their construction and The International
Fire Code (IFC) Chapter 11.
      (2)   When a conflict exists in a specific code requirement between the
Existing Sections of the Life Safety Code, the Existing Sections of
International Fire Code and the International Building Code (IBC), the Fire
Code Official will make the determination on which code to use that best meets
the public safety requirements of the jurisdiction.
   (B)   New Structures, Facilities and Operations. The Fire Chief or his/her
duly authorized representative shall have jurisdiction to administer the City
of Albuquerque Fire Code as it applies to all new structures:
      (1)   When a conflict exists in specific code requirements between the
applicable sections of the Uniform Administrative Codes of the City of
Albuquerque and the City of Albuquerque Fire Code, the Fire Code Official will
make the determination on which code to use that best meets the public safety
requirements of the jurisdiction.
('74 Code, § 7-27-1B) ( Ord._2017-020 ; Am. Ord._2024-002)
§ 14-2-3 AUTHORITIES HAVING JURISDICTION.
   (A)   The Fire Marshal's Office of Albuquerque Fire Rescue shall have
jurisdiction under the City of Albuquerque Fire Code to test and inspect fire
suppression systems, including fire hydrants, fire extinguishers, fire alarms
and sprinkler systems installed in construction, alteration, moving,
demolition, repair, use and occupancy of buildings, structures and building
service equipment.
   (B)   The Fire Marshal's Office shall have jurisdiction under the City Of
Albuquerque Fire Code to enforce the IFC as applicable to construction,
alterations, moving, demolition, repair, use and occupancy of building and
structures.
('74 Code, § 7-27-1C) ( Ord._2017-020 ; Am. Ord._2024-002)
§ 14-2-4 AMENDMENTS.
   The International Fire Code is hereby amended as set forth in Exhibit A to
Ord. 2024-002 and subject to the modifications, additions or deletions therein.
When an existing section number of the International Fire Code is referred in
Exhibit A, the text herein shall control. When a new chapter, section or
subsection is referred to in Exhibit A, it shall be added to the International
Fire Code as adopted in §
14-2-1.
('74 Code, §§ 7-27-2; 7-27-7) (Ord._2017-020; Am. Ord._2019-012 ; Am. Ord.
2024-002)
§ 14-2-5 AVAILABILITY OF CODE.
   A copy of the Fire Code of the City of Albuquerque as adopted by Ord. 2024-
002 and a copy of the deletions, modifications, amendments and additions to
said code are available on the website for the City of Albuquerque Fire
Marshal's Office. A copy of the adopted ordinance shall be available to any
individual upon request and payment of a reasonable charge as set forth in
Chapter 83 of this code. Three certified copies of Ord. 2024-002 as adopted
shall be filed with the City Clerk and shall be in effect immediately
thereafter and additional copies shall be kept in the office of the Fire
Marshal. One copy of the new Fire Code adopted by Ord. 2024-002 is available
for inspection in the City Clerk's Office, 600 2nd St. N.W.
('74 Code, § 7-27-5) (Ord._2017-020; Am. Ord._2019-012 ; Am.Ord._2024-002)
§ 14-2-6 ESTABLISHMENT OF THE FIRE MARSHAL’S OFFICE.
   (A)   The Fire Code of the City of Albuquerque shall be enforced by the Fire
Marshal’s Office of Albuquerque Fire Rescue, which is hereby established and
which shall be administered and directed by the Fire Code Official.
   (B)   The Fire Marshal shall be appointed by the Fire Chief of Albuquerque
Fire Rescue to exercise the powers and authority as set forth in this code.
   (C)   The Fire Code Official shall have the authority to issue citations
pursuant to the provisions of this code.
('74 Code, § 7-27-6AB) ( Ord._2017-020 ; Am. Ord._2024-002)
§ 14-2-99 PENALTY.
   Any person convicted of violating any of the provisions of this code or
failing or neglecting to comply with any orders issued pursuant to any section
thereof shall be deemed guilty of a petty misdemeanor and such person shall be
guilty of a separate offense for each and every day or portion thereof during
which any such violation is continued or permitted. Upon conviction, each such
violation shall be punishable by a fine of not more than $500 or by
imprisonment for not more than 90 days, or by both such fine and imprisonment.
('74 Code, § 7-27-10) ( Ord._2017-020 ; Am. Ord._2024-002)
ARTICLE 3: UNIFORM HOUSING CODE
Section
Part 1: General Provisions
   
14-3-1-1   Short title
   
14-3-1-2   Purpose
   
14-3-1-3   Scope
   
14-3-1-4   Definitions
Part 2: Space and Occupancy Standards
   
14-3-2-1   Room dimensions
   
14-3-2-2   Light and ventilation
   
14-3-2-3   Sanitation
Part 3: General Requirements
   
14-3-3-1   Structural requirements
   
14-3-3-2   Mechanical requirements
   
14-3-3-3   Exits
Part 4: Substandard Buildings
   
14-3-4-1   Substandard building
   
14-3-4-2   Inadequate sanitation
   
14-3-4-3   Structural hazards
   
14-3-4-4   Nuisance
   
14-3-4-5   Hazardous wiring
   
14-3-4-6   Hazardous plumbing
   
14-3-4-7   Hazardous mechanical equipment
   
14-3-4-8   Inadequate weather protection
   
14-3-4-9   Inadequate materials of construction
   
14-3-4-10   Inadequate maintenance
   
14-3-4-11   Inadequate exits
Part 5: Administration and Enforcement
   
14-3-5-1   Enforcement
   
14-3-5-2   Administrative hearing procedure
   
14-3-5-3   Notices and orders of the Department
   
14-3-5-4   Appeal
   
14-3-5-5   Procedures for conduct of hearing appeals
   
14-3-5-6   Enforcement of the order of the Department or the Hearing Officer
   
14-3-5-7   Work performed to secure, remove nuisance or demolish a building
   
14-3-5-8   Requested inspections; fee
   
14-3-5-9   Right of entry
   
14-3-5-10   Identification
   
14-3-5-11   Responsibilities of owners
   
14-3-5-12   Substandard buildings
   
14-3-5-13   Reporting illegal activity; cooperation
   
14-3-5-14   Vacant building maintenance
   
14-3-5-15   Resident reports; hotline; website; exceptions
   
14-3-5-16   Payment of relocation costs
   
14-3-5-17   Appointment of temporary receiver and recovery costs
   
14-3-5-18   Fees, fines and monetary judgments
   
14-3-5-98   Violations
   
14-3-5-99   Penalty
PART 1: GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 14-3-1-1 SHORT TITLE.
   This article shall be known as the "Uniform Housing Code," may be cited as
such, and will be referred to herein as "this code."
('74 Code, § 7-24-1A) (Ord. 34-1986; Am. Ord._2018-025)
§ 14-3-1-2 PURPOSE.
   The purpose of this code is to provide minimum standards to safeguard life
or limb, health, property, safety, and public welfare by regulating and
controlling the occupancy level and maintenance of all buildings and structures
within this jurisdiction.
('74 Code, § 7-24-1B) (Ord. 34- 1986; Am. Ord._2018-025)
§ 14-3-1-3 SCOPE.
   (A)   Application.  
      (1)   The provisions of this code shall apply to all buildings or
portions thereof used, designed or intended to be used for human habitation.
Occupancies in existing buildings may be continued as provided in Section 102.3
of the Uniform Administrative Code, except such structures as are found to be
substandard as defined in this code.
      (2)   Where any building or portion thereof is used or intended to be
used as a combination multi-family dwelling hotel, the provisions of this code
shall apply to the separate portions as if they were separate buildings.
   (B)   Alteration. Existing buildings which are altered, enlarged or repaired
shall be made to conform to this code insofar as the new work is concerned and
in accordance with Section 102.3 of the Uniform Administrative Code.
   (C)   Relocation. Residential buildings or structures moved into or within
this jurisdiction shall comply with the requirements of this code and Section
102.5 of the Uniform Administrative Code.
('74 Code, § 7-24-1C) (Ord. 34- 1986; Am. Ord._2018-025)
§ 14-3-1-4 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this code, certain terms, phrases, words and their
derivatives shall be construed as specified in either this chapter or as
specified in the Building Code. Where terms are not defined, they shall have
their ordinary accepted meanings within the context with which they are used.
Words in the singular include the plural and the plural the singular. Words
used in the masculine gender include the feminine and the masculine. All
citations and references to other codes, ordinances, statutes or regulations
thereto shall be construed to include any amendments or modifications thereof.
   ABANDONED PROPERTY. Any vacant building or a building where its principal
use has ceased and which no longer has any function or use and which may have
its doors and windows boarded up and may be frequented by persons who are not
legal occupants of such structure and absence of owner or responsible  party is
not known. For those and other reasons this property may have a substantial
adverse effect on its immediate neighborhood.
   AGENT. An entity or a person who is authorized by the owner of a residential
property to act for him or her in their place. An agent may be named as the
responsible party.
   APPROVED. Approved, as to materials, types of construction, equipment and
systems, refers to approval by the Building Official as the result of
investigation and tests conducted by him, or by reason of accepted principles
or tests by recognized authorities or scientific organizations.
   BUILDING CODE. The city's currently adopted version of the New Mexico
Commercial Building and Residential Building Code.
   BUILDING OFFICIAL. The authorized City of Albuquerque employee directed to
enforce all the provisions of the City of Albuquerque's Uniform Administrative
Code (UAC) and Technical Codes as outlined in section 105 in the UAC.
   CHIEF ADMINISTRATIVE OFFICER or CAO. The Chief Administrative Officer of the
city.
   CITY (THE). The City of Albuquerque.
   DEPARTMENT. The department tasked by the Mayor with the administration and
enforcement of this code or any Department that may be subsequently charged
with the responsibility of the enforcement of this code.
   DIRECTOR. The legally designated head of the department, or any department
that may be subsequently charged with the responsibility of the enforcement of
this code.
   DWELLING. A building or portion thereof which contains not more than two
dwelling units. This term includes any structure being used for human
habitation no matter the intended use of the structure at the time of its
design and construction.
   DWELLING UNIT. One or more connected rooms and a kitchen designed for and
occupied by no more than one family for living and sleeping purposes,
permanently installed on a permanent foundation and meeting the requirements of
this code and the  respective sections of the Uniform Administrative Code, as
of the date of the unit's construction. This term includes any structure being
used as a dwelling unit, as defined herein, for human habitation.
   EFFICIENCY DWELLING UNIT. A dwelling unit containing only one habitable room
and meeting the requirements of §
14-3-2-1(D).
   HABITABLE SPACE (ROOM). A space in a structure for living, sleeping, eating
or cooking. Bathrooms, toilet compartments, closets, halls, storage or utility
space and similar areas are not considered habitable space.
   HOT WATER. Hot water supplied to plumbing fixtures at a temperature of not
less than 110° F.
   HOTEL/MOTEL. A building or a group of buildings in which sleeping
accommodations are offered to the public and intended primarily for rental for
temporary occupancy by persons on an overnight basis, not including bed and
breakfast establishments.
   HOUSEHOLD. All the individuals who occupy a dwelling unit. A household
includes the related family members and all the unrelated individuals, if any,
such as lodgers, foster children, wards, or employees who share the housing
unit. A person living alone in a dwelling unit, or a group of unrelated people
sharing a dwelling unit such as partners or roommates, is also counted as a
household.
   IMMINENT HAZARD. A situation that demands unusual or immediate action and
which requires the department to circumvent usual procedures and warrant
requirements in order to protect a person's health, safety, and life from harm.
   IN PERSONAM. Any civil or administrative action taken against a person,
corporation, trust, or similar entity.
   IN REM. Any civil or administrative action taken against real or tangible
property.
   INSPECTOR. Any city employee tasked with the enforcement of this code or any
subsequent position charged with the responsibility of making inspections to
enforce the provisions of the Housing Code adopted by this jurisdiction.
   LAND BANK. A public or a nonprofit entity specializing in the acquisition of
vacant or abandoned properties, with the intention of repurposing these
properties to stabilize a neighborhood in accordance with community goals.
   LOCAL PROPERTY MANAGEMENT COMPANY. A company and/or an appointed individual
that is either based in or maintains an office in the State of New Mexico.
   MECHANICAL CODE. The city's currently adopted version of the New Mexico
Mechanical Code as outlined in the Uniform Administrative Code (UAC).
   MOTEL/HOTEL. A hotel as defined in this code.
   MULTI-FAMILY DWELLING. A building, located on a single lot, containing three
or more dwelling units, each of which is designed for or occupied by one family
only, with separate housekeeping and cooking facilities for each.
   NUISANCE. The following shall be defined as nuisances:
      (1)   Any public or attractive nuisance known at common law or in equity
jurisprudence.
      (2)   Any public or attractive nuisance which may prove detrimental to
the public whether in a building, on the premises of a building, or upon an
unoccupied lot, including, but not limited to:
         (a)   abandoned wells, shafts, basements or excavations;
         (b)   abandoned refrigerators/freezers;
         (c)   structurally unsound fences or structures;
         (d)   lumber, trash, debris or weeds;
         (e)   abandoned or partially destroyed vehicles;
      (3)   Overcrowding a room with occupants.
      (4)   Insufficient ventilation or illumination.
      (5)   Inadequate or unsanitary sewage or plumbing facilities.
      (6)   Any violation of the housing standards and licensing requirements
set forth in this code.
   OWNER. Any person who alone, jointly or severally with others, has legal
title to any premises, or dwelling units, with or without accompanying actual
possession thereof.
   PROPERTY MANAGER. A broker, as defined by the NM State Real Estate
Commission, or an agent or employee of the property owner who, for a fee,
salary, commission or other valuable consideration, is engaged in managing
property for others. A residential property manager is, by virtue of a written
agency agreement, an agent of the owner(s) of the property for the purpose of
performing the obligations of the owner(s) under the Uniform Owner-Resident
Relations Act and/or under the rental or lease agreement.
   RELOCATION AGENCY. Includes those employees of the Department of Family and
Community Services or persons under contract with the Department of Family and
Community Services responsible for implementing the provisions of Ordinance 21-
2007 (§ 14-3-5-16 ROA1994).
   RELOCATION COSTS. The expenses reasonably incurred by a resident displaced
from a residential building pursuant to action of the City of Albuquerque.
Relocation costs shall be up to $2,000 per household.
   RENTAL AGREEMENT. Any written or oral agreement allowing occupancy of all or
a portion of a residential building by a resident.
   RENTAL PROPERTY. A structure or part of a structure used as a home,
residence or sleeping unit by a single person or household; or any grounds or
other facilities or area promised for the use of a residential tenant and
includes, but without limitation, apartment units, boarding houses, rooming
houses, mobile home spaces, and single and two-family dwellings. The person or
household has a rental agreement with the owner of the property. This
definition shall not apply to short-term/vacation rentals of 29 days or less,
hotels/motels, campgrounds, and bed & breakfasts.
   RESIDENT. One or more people entitled under a rental agreement to occupy all
or a portion of a residential building to the exclusion of others and who
actually reside(s) at such location.
   RESIDENTIAL BUILDING. A building or portion thereof designed or being used
for human habitation.
   RESPONSIBLE PARTY. The property owner or person or entity who has the
authority from the owner or through a legal proceeding to make decisions
concerning the property, can make required expenditures pertaining to the
property and take legal responsibility for that property, including but not
limited to accepting legal service on behalf of the owner.
   SECURED.  A structure that is protected against unlawful entry by means of
locked doors and windows or the boarding of openings.
   SERIOUS VIOLATION. A violation of a State of New Mexico law or this code or
other applicable code(s) that poses an imminent threat to the health and safety
of the dwelling occupant, occupants in surrounding structures nearby or
passerby.
   SHORT-TERM/VACATION RENTAL. With the exception of hotels and motels,
campgrounds, bed & breakfasts, the rental of real property for a period of 29
days or less.
   STRUCTURE. Anything constructed or erected above ground level that requires
location on the ground or attached to something having a location on the ground
but not including a tent, vehicle, vegetation, or public utility pole or line.
   SUBSTANDARD DWELLING. Any building or portion thereof, including any
dwelling unit, guest room or suite of rooms, or the premises on which the same
is located, in which there exists any of the following conditions [set forth in
§§
14-3-4-2, et seq.] to an extent that endangers the life, limb, health,
property, safety or public welfare of the occupants thereof.
   SUBSTANTIAL STEP. An affirmative action, as determined by an inspector or
administrative court official, on the part of the property owner or responsible
party to remedy a serious violation, but not limited to, physical improvements
and/or repairs to the property, and/or securing the property against
trespassers.
   SUPERFICIAL FLOOR AREA. The floor area that is obviously or apparently used
for habitable space.
   UNIFORM ADMINISTRATIVE CODE. The provisions or code adopted by the City of
Albuquerque  that shall serve as the administrative, organizational and
enforcement rules and regulations for the Technical Codes which regulate the
site preparation and construction, alteration, moving, demolition, repair, use
and occupancy of buildings, structures and building service equipment within
this jurisdiction and interpreted and enforced by the Building Official.
   VACANT BUILDING. A dwelling, dwelling unit, efficiency dwelling unit,
habitable space, residential building, or structure lacking the continuous
habitual presence of human beings who have a legal right to be on the premises
for a period of 90 days or longer but excluding property under a listing
agreement with a real estate agent licensed in New Mexico.
('74 Code, § 7-24-2) (Ord. 34- 1986; Am. Ord. 45A-2004; Am. Ord. 60-2004; Am.
Ord. 21-2007; Am. Ord._2018-025)
PART 2: SPACE AND OCCUPANCY STANDARDS
§ 14-3-2-1 ROOM DIMENSIONS.
   (A)   Ceiling Heights.
      (1)   Habitable space shall have a ceiling height of not less than 7 feet
6 inches except as otherwise permitted in §§
14-3-2-1 et seq. Kitchens, halls, bathrooms and toilet compartments shall have
a ceiling height of not less than 7 feet measured to the lowest part of the
ceiling. Where exposed beam ceiling members are spaced at less than 48 inches
on center, ceiling height shall be measured to the bottom of these members.
Where exposed beam ceiling members are spaced at 48 inches on center, ceiling
height shall be measured to the bottom of the deck supported by these members,
provided that the bottom of the members is not less than 7 feet above the
floor.
      (2)   If any room in the building has a sloping ceiling, the prescribed
ceiling height for the room is required in only one-half the area thereof. No
portion of the room measuring less than 5 feet from the finished floor to the
finished ceiling shall be included in any computation of the minimum area
thereof.
      (3)   If any room has a furred ceiling, the prescribed ceiling height is
required in two-thirds the area thereof, but in no case shall the height of the
furred ceiling be less than 7 feet.
   (B)   Floor Space.
      (1)   Every dwelling unit shall contain at least 150 square feet of floor
space for the first occupant thereof and at least 100 additional square feet of
floor space for every additional occupant thereof, the floor space to be
calculated on the basis of total habitable room area.
      (2)   In every dwelling unit of two or more rooms, every room occupied
for sleeping purposes by one occupant shall contain at least 70 square feet of
floor space, and every room occupied for sleeping purposes by more than one
occupant shall contain at least 45 square feet of floor space for each occupant
thereof.
   (C)   Width.
      (1)   No habitable room other than a kitchen shall be less than 7 feet in
any dimension.
      (2)   Each toilet compartment stool shall be located in a clear space not
less than 30 inches in width and clear space in front of the toilet compartment
stool of not less than 24 inches shall be provided.
   (D)   Exception. Nothing in §§
14-3-2-1 et seq. shall prohibit the use of an efficiency living unit within a
multi-family dwelling meeting the following requirements:
      (1)   The unit shall have a living room of not less than 220 square feet
of superficial floor area. An additional 100 square feet of superficial floor
area shall be provided for each occupant of such unit in excess of two
occupants.
      (2)   The unit shall be provided with a separate closet.
      (3)   The unit shall be provided with a kitchen sink, cooking appliance
and refrigeration facilities, each having a clear working space of not less
than 30 inches in front. Light and ventilation conforming to this code shall be
provided.
      (4)   The unit shall be provided with separate bathroom containing a
toilet compartment, lavatory and bathtub or shower.
('74 Code, § 7-24-5A) (Ord. 34- 1986; Am. Ord._2018-025)
§ 14-3-2-2 LIGHT AND VENTILATION.
   (A)   Natural Light and Ventilation.
      (1)   All guest rooms, dormitories and habitable rooms within a dwelling
unit shall be provided with natural light by means of exterior glazed openings
with an area not less than one tenth of the floor area of such rooms with a
minimum of 10 square feet. All bathrooms, toilet compartment, laundry rooms and
similar rooms shall be provided with natural ventilation by means of openable
exterior openings with an area not less than 1/20 of the floor area of such
rooms with a minimum of 1½ square feet.
      (2)   All guest rooms, dormitories and habitable rooms within a dwelling
unit shall be provided with natural ventilation by means of openable exterior
openings with an area of not less than 1/20 of the floor area of such rooms
with a minimum of 5 square feet.
   (B)   Origin of Light and Ventilation.
      (1)   Required exterior openings for natural light and ventilation shall
open directly onto a street, public alley, a yard or a courtyard located on the
same lot as the building.
      (2)   Exception.
         (a)   Required windows may open into a roofed porch where the porch:
            1.   Abuts a street, public alley, a yard, or a courtyard;
            2.   Has a ceiling height of not less than 7 feet; and
            3.   Has the longer side at least 65 percent open and unobstructed.
      (3)   For the purpose of determining light and ventilation requirements,
any room may be considered as a portion of an adjoining room when one half of
the area of the common wall is open and unobstructed and provides an opening of
not less than one tenth of the floor area of the interior room or 25 square
feet, whichever is greater.
   (C)   Mechanical Ventilation. In lieu of required exterior openings for
natural ventilation, a mechanical ventilation system may be provided in all
guest rooms, dormitories, habitable rooms and public corridors. In bathrooms,
toilet compartments, laundry rooms and similar rooms a mechanical ventilation
system connected directly to the outside shall be provided.
('74 Code, § 7-24-5B) (Ord. 34- 1986; Am. Ord._2018-025
§ 14-3-2-3 SANITATION.
   (A)   Dwelling Units. Every dwelling unit shall be provided with a bathroom
equipped with facilities consisting of a toilet compartment, lavatory and
either a bathtub or shower.
   (B)   Kitchen. Each dwelling unit shall be provided with a kitchen. Every
kitchen shall be provided with a kitchen sink. Wooden sinks or sinks of
similarly absorbent material shall not be permitted.
   (C)   Fixtures.
      (1)   All plumbing fixtures shall be connected to a sanitary sewer or to
an approved private sewage disposal system. All plumbing fixtures shall be
connected to an approved system of water supply and provided with hot and cold
running water necessary for its normal operation.
      (2)   All plumbing fixtures shall be of an approved glazed earthenware
type or of a similarly nonabsorbent material.
   (D)   Toilet Compartment. A toilet compartment in a dwelling shall be
finished with approved nonabsorbent materials. Bathroom floor surfaces shall be
maintained so as to be reasonably impervious to water.
   (E)   Bathroom or Shower Accessories. All accessories such as grab bars,
towel bars, paper dispensers and soap dishes and the like, provided on or
within walls, shall be installed and sealed to protect structural elements from
moisture.
   (F)   Showers. Showers in all occupancies shall be finished to a height of
not less than 70 inches above the drain inlet. Materials other than structural
elements used in such walls shall be of a type which is not adversely affected
by moisture.
   (G)   Room Separations. Every toilet compartment, bathtub or shower required
by this code shall be installed in a room which will afford privacy to the
occupant. A room in which a toilet compartment is located shall be separated
from food preparation or storage rooms by a tight fitting door.
   (H)   Installation and Maintenance. All sanitary facilities shall be
installed and maintained in a safe and sanitary condition and in accordance
with all applicable laws.
('74 Code, § 7-24-5C) (Ord. 34- 1986; Am. Ord._2018-025)
PART 3: GENERAL REQUIREMENTS
§ 14-3-3-1 STRUCTURAL REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   General. Buildings or structures may be of any type of construction
permitted by the Building Code. Roofs, floors, walls, foundations and all other
structural components of buildings shall be capable of resisting any and all
forces and loads to which they may be subjected. All structural elements shall
be proportioned and joined in accordance with the stress limitations and design
criteria as specified in the appropriate sections of the Building Code.
Buildings of every permitted type of construction shall comply with the
applicable requirements of the Building Code as determined by the Chief
Building Official.
   (B)   Shelter. Every building shall be weather protected so as to provide
shelter for the occupants against the elements and to exclude dampness.
   (C)   Protection of Materials. All wood shall be protected against termite
damage and decay as provided in the Building Code.
('74 Code, § 7-24-6) (Ord. 34- 1986; Am. Ord._2018-025
§ 14-3-3-2 MECHANICAL REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   Heating, Cooling, and Ventilation.
      (1)   Heating and Cooling.
         (a)   Every dwelling unit and guest room shall be provided with
heating facilities capable of maintaining a room temperature of 68° F. at a
point of three feet above the floor in all habitable rooms. Such facilities
shall be installed and maintained in a safe condition and in accordance with
the City’s currently adopted New Mexico Mechanical Code as adopted in the UAC.
         (b)   Unvented fuel-burning heaters shall not be permitted. All
heating devices or appliances shall be of an approved type. Ovens, stoves or
ranges, or other cooking appliances shall not be used for the purpose of
heating any portion of a dwelling. Approved portable space heaters may only be
used as the sole source of heating on a temporary basis when the permanent
heating system is being repaired or replaced.
         (c)   Every dwelling unit shall be provided with cooling facilities.
            (i)    Acceptable cooling facilities are fixtures that are
permanently attached to the unit, including but not limited to: evaporative
(“swamp”) coolers, central air conditioning, heat pumps, radiant cooling,
window units, and mini-splits.
            (ii)    Non-acceptable cooling facilities are temporary and/or
portable devices such as fans, mobile evaporative coolers, and portable air
conditioners, circulating devices such as ceiling fans, and ventilation systems
and when used as the sole source of cooling for a unit, do not satisfy the
requirements of this Section. These types of cooling facilities may only be
used as a sole source of cooling on a temporary basis when the permanent
acceptable cooling facility is being repaired or replaced.
      (2)   Electrical Equipment.
         (a)   All electrical equipment, wiring and appliances shall be
installed and maintained in a safe manner in accordance with all applicable
laws. All electrical equipment shall be of an approved type.
         (b)   Every habitable room shall contain at least two supplied
electric convenience outlets or one such convenience outlet and one supplied
electric light fixture. Every toilet compartment, bathroom, laundry room,
furnace room and public hallway shall contain at least one supplied electric
light fixture.
      (3)   Ventilation. Ventilation for rooms and areas and for fuel-burning
appliances shall be provided as required in the Mechanical Code and in this
code. Where mechanical ventilation is provided in lieu of the natural
ventilation required by §
14-3-2-2(C), such mechanical ventilating system shall be maintained in
operation during the occupancy of any building or portion thereof.
('74 Code, § 7-24-7) (Ord. 34-1986; Am. Ord._2018-025; Am. Ord. 2024-047)
§ 14-3-3-3 EXITS.
   (A)   Every dwelling unit or guest room shall have access directly to the
outside or to a public corridor.
   (B)   Every sleeping room below the fourth story shall have at least one
operable window or exterior door approved for emergency escape or rescue. The
units shall be operable from the inside to provide a full clear opening without
the use of separate tools.
   (C)   All escape or rescue windows from sleeping rooms shall have a minimum
net clear opening of 5.7 square feet. The minimum net clear opening height
dimension shall be 24 inches. The minimum net clear opening width dimension
shall be 20 inches. Where windows are provided as a means of egress or rescue
they shall have a finished sill height not more than 44 inches above the floor.
('74 Code, § 7-24-8) (Ord. 34- 1986; Am. Ord._2018-025)
PART 4: SUBSTANDARD BUILDINGS
§ 14-3-4-1 SUBSTANDARD BUILDING.
   (A)   No person shall occupy and no owner or operator of a dwelling or
dwelling unit shall give consent to any person to occupy any dwelling, dwelling
unit or structure that is not maintained in a safe and sanitary manner. Safe
and sanitary means a condition free of visible dirt, debris, clutter, rubbish,
trash, human or animal waste and free from other substances, contaminants,
materials, or environmental conditions harmful to human health.
   (B)   Emergency abatement.
      (1)   Notwithstanding any other provision in this code if, in the opinion
of the inspector, the conditions at a property constitute an imminent hazard,
the inspector may order immediate abatement of the hazard without notice. Such
abatement of an imminent hazard shall be limited to the minimum work necessary
to remove the hazard, and may include disconnection of utilities, securing of
the structures or emergency cleaning of the property to abate any violations
found.
      (2)   The city shall pay the cost and expense of such abatement from any
appropriation made available for that purpose.
      (3)   A lien shall be recorded with the Bernalillo County Clerk's Office
for all the costs incurred by the city as a result of abating the property.
      (4)   Whenever the inspector finds that any structure contains an
imminent hazard or health hazard, the inspector may declare such structure
unfit for human occupancy and order it to be vacated or to
remain vacant. A structure declared unfit for occupancy and ordered vacated or
to remain vacant under the provisions of this section shall not be leased,
rented or occupied, until it has been inspected and deemed fit for occupancy by
the city. The city shall reinspect, for the purpose of re-occupancy, within
three business days of the receipt of a written request by the owner, their
agent or responsible party.
('74 Code, § 7-24-10A.1) (Ord. 34-1986; Am. Ord._2018-025)
§ 14-3-4-2 INADEQUATE SANITATION.
   INADEQUATE SANITATION shall include but not be limited to the following:
   (A)   Lack of, or not properly operative toilet compartment, lavatory,
bathtub or shower in a dwelling unit.
   (B)   Lack of, or not properly operative toilet compartments, lavatories and
bathtubs or showers in a motel/hotel/bed & breakfast.
   (C)   Lack of, or not properly operative kitchen sink.
   (D)   Lack of hot and cold running water to plumbing fixtures in a motel/
hotel/bed & breakfast.
   (E)   Lack of hot and cold running water to plumbing fixtures in a dwelling
unit.
   (F)   Lack of, or not properly operative adequate heating and cooling
facilities.
   (G)   Lack of, or improper operation of required ventilating equipment.
   (H)   Lack of minimum amounts of natural light and ventilation required by
this code.
   (I)   Lack of required room and space dimensions as defined by this code.
   (J)   Lack of required electrical lighting.
   (K)   Lack of adequate weather protection that results in dampness of
habitable rooms.
   (L)   Lack of adequate maintenance or the presence of general dilapidation.
   (M)   Lack of connection to required sewage disposal system or approved
septic system.
   (N)   Lack of one or more of the following services: electrical, gas, water,
sewer connection by a utility company or approved septic system.
('74 Code, § 7-24-10A.2) (Ord. 34-1986; Am. Ord._2018-025; Am. Ord. 2024-047)
§ 14-3-4-3 STRUCTURAL HAZARDS.
   Structures that are determined to be a hazard by the Building Official as
directed by the provisions of the City of Albuquerque's Uniform Administrative
Code (UAC) and Technical Codes as outlined in section 105 in the UAC.
   STRUCTURAL HAZARDS shall include but not be limited to the following:
   (A)   Deteriorated or inadequate foundations.
   (B)   Defective or deteriorated flooring or floor supports.
   (C)   Flooring or floor supports of insufficient size to carry imposed loads
with safety.
   (D)   Members of walls, partitions or other vertical supports that spilt,
lean, list or buckle.
   (E)   Members of walls, partitions or other vertical supports that are of
insufficient size to carry imposed loads with safety.
   (F)   Members of ceilings, roofs, ceiling and roof supports or other
horizontal members which sag, split or buckle.
   (G)   Members of ceilings, roofs, ceiling and roof supports, or other
horizontal members that are of insufficient size to carry imposed loads with
safety.
   (H)   Fireplaces or chimneys which list, bulge or settle.
   (I)   Fireplaces or chimneys which are of insufficient size or strength to
carry imposed loads with safety.
   (J)   Every inside and outside stair, every porch, and every appurtenance
thereto shall be safe to use
and capable of supporting the load that normal use may cause to be placed
thereon.
   (K)   Every interior wall and ceiling is free of holes and large cracks.
Every interior wall and ceiling is free of loose plaster and other structural
material, the collapse of which might constitute an accident hazard. Plaster,
paint, and all other surface materials are of such character as to be easily
cleanable and are reasonably smooth, clean, and tight.
('74 Code, § 7-24-10A.3) (Ord. 34-1986; Am. Ord._2018-025)
§ 14-3-4-4 NUISANCE.
   As defined in this section a NUISANCE includes:
   (A)   Unsecured doorways or window openings or holes in the exterior of the
building or structure that permit entry of unauthorized persons and without a
legal responsible party immediately available to take position of or secure the
structure.
   (B)   A building or structure has been found, upon reinspection, to be
vacant and unsecured, and either:
      (1)   The inspector has issued at least one previous notice and order to
secure within the preceding 12 months, or more than three notice and orders to
secure over any time frame; or
      (2)   The inspector has secured the building or structure on at least one
previous occasion within the preceding 12 months, or more than three times over
any time frame.
   (C)   Any property or condition meeting definition of a nuisance as
described under §
14-3-1-4 of this code.
('74 Code, § 7-24-10A.4) (Ord. 34-1986; Am. Ord. 45A-2004; Am. Ord._2018-025)
§ 14-3-4-5 HAZARDOUS WIRING.
   HAZARDOUS WIRING shall include all wiring except that which conformed with
all applicable laws in effect at the time of installation and which has been
maintained in good condition and is being used in a safe manner.
   All dwellings and dwelling units shall be provided with electrical service.
Electrical facilities connected to or in any building or structure are to be
maintained hazard-free and in a state of good repair. The electrical system
shall be free from such hazards as bare wiring; overloaded circuits or
services; equipment not properly grounded; over-fused circuits; misuse of
wiring, including the use of extension cords in lieu of permanent wiring; non-
approved wiring; and wiring exposed to moisture or extreme heat. Broken, loose,
frayed, inoperable, defective or missing portions of the electrical service,
lines, switches, outlets, fixtures and fixture coverings shall be repaired or
replaced.
('74 Code, § 7-24-10A.5) (Ord. 34-1986; Am. Ord._2018-025)
§ 14-3-4-6 HAZARDOUS PLUMBING.
   HAZARDOUS PLUMBING shall include any plumbing that does not conform to all
applicable laws in effect at the time of installation and which has been
maintained in good condition and which is free of cross- connections and
siphonage between fixtures.
   (A)   All dwellings and dwelling units shall be provided with water service.
Water facilities connected to or in any building or structure are to be
maintained hazard-free and in a state of good repair. The water system shall be
free from such hazards with the connections free from leaks, blockages, or
other defects. All plumbing fixtures shall be connected to an approved system
of water supply and provided with hot and cold running water necessary for its
normal operation.
   (B)   All plumbing shall be connected to an approved sewer or septic system
and maintained and be in accordance with all applicable laws and codes at the
time of installation.
('74 Code, § 7-24-10A.6) (Ord. 34-1986; Am. Ord._2018-025)
§ 14-3-4-7 HAZARDOUS MECHANICAL EQUIPMENT.
   HAZARDOUS MECHANICAL EQUIPMENT shall include any mechanical equipment that
does not conform to all applicable laws and codes in effect at the time of
installation and which has been maintained in a good and safe condition.
   All dwellings and dwelling units that use gas shall be provided with gas
service. Gas facilities connected to or in any building or structure are to be
maintained hazard-free and in a state of good repair. All heating and cooling
facilities shall be free from health hazards associated with ventilation,
mounting, and gas connections and other defects. Unvented fuel-burning heaters
must be of a listed and approved type and are prohibited as the sole source of
heating. Ovens, stoves or ranges, or other cooking appliances shall not be used
for the purpose of heating any portion of a dwelling. Listed, approved portable
space heaters may only be used as the sole source of heating on a temporary
basis when the permanent heating system is being repaired or replaced.
('74 Code, § 7-24-10A.7) (Ord. 34-1986; Am. Ord._2018-025; Am. Ord. 2024-047)
§ 14-3-4-8 INADEQUATE WEATHER PROTECTION.
   INADEQUATE WEATHER PROTECTION shall include but not be limited to the
following:
   (A)   Deteriorated or ineffective waterproofing of exterior walls, roof,
foundations or floors, including broken windows, doors and basement hatchways.
   (B)   Defective or lack of weather protection for exterior wall coverings,
including lack of paint, or weathering due to lack of paint or other approved
protective covering.
   (C)   Broken, rotted, split or buckled exterior wall coverings or roof
coverings.
('74 Code, § 7-24-10A.8) (Ord. 34-1986; Am. Ord._2018-025)
§ 14-3-4-9 INADEQUATE MATERIALS OF CONSTRUCTION.
   INADEQUATE MATERIALS OF CON STRUCTIONS shall include all materials of
construction except those which are specifically allowed or approved by this
code and the Building Code, and which have been adequately maintained in good
and safe condition.
('74 Code, § 7-24-10A.10) (Ord. 34-1986; Am. Ord._2018-025)
§ 14-3-4-10 INADEQUATE MAINTENANCE.
   INADEQUATE MAINTENANCE shall include any building or portion thereof which
is determined to be an unsafe building in accordance with § 106 of the UAC -
Unsafe Buildings, Structures, or Building Service Equipment.
('74 Code, § 7-24-10A.11) (Ord. 34-1986; Am. Ord._2018-025)
§ 14-3-4-11 INADEQUATE EXITS.
   (A)   INADEQUATE EXITS shall include all buildings or portions thereof not
provided with adequate exit facilities as required by this code except those
buildings or portions thereof whose exit facilities conformed with all
applicable laws at the time of their construction and which have been
adequately maintained and increased in relation to any increase in occupant
load, alteration or addition, or any change in occupancy.
   (B)   When an unsafe condition exists through lack of exits, the blocking of
required exits or improper location of exits, additional exits may be required
to be installed.
('74 Code, § 7-24-10A.12) (Ord. 34-1986; Am. Ord._2018-025)
PART 5: ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
§ 14-3-5-1 ENFORCEMENT.
   The Department is hereby authorized and directed to enforce all of the
provisions of this code. For such purposes, the Department shall have all the
powers specified herein.
('74 Code, § 7-24-3A.1) (Ord. 34-1986; Am. Ord._2018-025
§ 14-3-5-2 ADMINISTRATIVE HEARING PROCEDURE.
   The city shall designate an Independent Hearing Officer to provide for final
interpretation of the provisions of this code and to hear appeals provided for
herein. Appeals shall be heard in accordance with the provisions in the IHO
Ordinance,
Chapter 2, Article 7, Part 8.
('74 Code, § 7-24-3C) (Ord. 34- 1986; Am. Ord. 5-2001; Am. Ord._2018-025; Am.
Ord._2023-015)
§ 14-3-5-3 NOTICES AND ORDERS OF THE DEPARTMENT.
   (A)   General.
      (1)   Commencement of Proceedings. Whenever the department has inspected
or caused to be inspected any building and has found and determined that such
building is a substandard building, he shall commence proceedings to cause the
repair, rehabilitation, vacation, or securing of the building.
      (2)   Notice and Order. The Department shall issue a notice and order
directed to the owner of the building, their agent and/or responsible party and
where appropriate to the occupant of the building, as indicated by the county
assessor's and the Department's records. The effective date of the order shall
be eight days from the date of the notice. The notice and order shall contain:
         (a)   The street address and a legal description sufficient for
identification of the premises upon which the building is located.
         (b)   A statement that the Department has found the building to be
substandard with a brief and concise description of the conditions found to
render the building dangerous under the provisions of this code.
         (c)   A statement of the action required to be taken as determined by
the Mayor.
            1.   If the Department has determined that the building or
structure must be repaired, the order shall provide that all required permits
be secured therefor and the work physically commenced within such time, not to
exceed 30 days from the effective date of the order, and completed within such
time as the Department shall determine is reasonable under all the
circumstances.
            2.   If the Department has determined that the building or
structure must be vacated, the order shall require that the building or
structure shall be vacated within a certain time from the effective date of the
order as determined by the Department to be reasonable.
            3.   If the department has determined that the building or
structure must be demolished, the order shall require that the building be
vacated within such time as the department shall determine reasonable, not to
exceed 30 days from the effective date of the order; that all required permits
be secured therefore within 60 days from the date of the order, and that the
demolition be completed within such time as the department shall determine is
reasonable. Failure to comply with the order to demolish the building or
structure within such time as the department shall determine reasonable, not to
exceed 30 days from the effective date of the order, will result in a Notice of
Administrative Demolition of Dwellings Unfit for Human Habitation pursuant to
ROA 1994, Chapter 14, Article 23.
            4.   If the department has determined that the building or
structure is a nuisance or an attractive nuisance; the order shall require the
nuisance to be abated within such time the Department shall determine to be
reasonable, not to exceed 30 days from the effective date of the order; where
there has been a failure to comply with such order the Department shall proceed
to obtain an appropriate court order to abate such nuisance. Any such abatement
of the nuisance shall be accomplished and the cost thereof paid and recovered
in the manner provided by §
14-3-5-6.
           (d)   Statements advising:
            1.   That any person having any title or legal interest in the
building may appeal from the notice and order or any action of the Department,
excluding demolition, to the City Clerk’s Office, provided the appeal is made
in writing as provided in this code, and filed with the City Clerk’s Office
within 15 days of service of notice and order, and that failure to timely
appeal the notice and order shall result in the order becoming effective;
            2.   That in the case of demolition the appeal procedure shall be
as set forth in Section 3-18-5 NMSA 1978, and the hearing shall be held in
accordance with the IHO Ordinance, ROA 1994,
Chapter 2, Article 7, Part 8.
      (3)   Method of Service in Cases Other than Demolition.
         (a)   Service of the notice and order shall be made upon all persons
entitled thereto either personally or by mailing a copy of such notice and
order by certified mail, postage prepaid, return receipt requested, to each
such person and owner, responsible party or identified agent at his address as
it appears on the last assessment roll of the county or as known to the
Department. If no address of any such person so appears or is known to the
Department, then a copy of the notice and order shall be so mailed, addressed
to such person, at the address of the building involved in the proceedings and
posted thereon.
         (b)   The failure of any such person to receive such notice shall not
affect the validity of any proceedings taken under this section. Service by
certified mail in the manner herein provided shall be effective on the date of
mailing.
      (4)   Proof of Service. Proof of service of the notice and order shall be
certified to by a written affidavit executed by the person effecting service,
declaring the time, date and manner in which service was made. The declaration,
together with any receipt card returned in acknowledgement of receipt by
certified mail shall be affixed to the copy of the notice and order retained by
the Department.
   (B)   Recordation of Notice and Order.
      (1)   If compliance with the order is not achieved within the time
specified therein, and no appeal has been properly and timely filed, the
Department shall file in the office of the County Clerk a certificate
describing the property, an assessment of any costs, fees, and fines claimed by
the city against the property related to enforcement of this code, and
certifying:
         (a)   That the building is a substandard building; and
         (b)   That the owner, their agent and/or responsible party has been so
notified.
      (2)   Whenever the corrections ordered shall thereafter have been
completed or the building demolished so that it no longer exists as a
substandard building on the property described in the certificate, the
Department shall file a new certificate with the County Clerk certifying that
the building has been demolished or all required corrections have been made so
that the building is no longer substandard, whichever is appropriate.
   (C)   Repair, Vacation, Securing or Demolition.
      (1)   Standards to be Followed. The following standards shall be followed
by the department (and by the Office of Administrative Hearings if an appeal is
taken) in ordering the repair, vacation, demolition or securing of any
substandard building or structure:
         (a)   If any building is declared a substandard building under this
code it shall either be repaired in accordance with the current Building and
Housing Codes or shall be demolished at the option of the building owner.
         (b)   If the building or structure is in such condition as to make it
immediately dangerous to the life, limb, health, property or safety of the
public or of the occupants, it shall be ordered to be vacated through the
posting of a Notice and Order to Vacate.
      (2)   If the building or structure is open and determined to be an
attractive nuisance and/or nuisance, a court order to secure the building or
structure will be obtained as provided herein.
    (D)   Notice and Order to Vacate.
      (1)   Posting. Every notice to vacate shall, in addition to being served,
be posted at or upon each exit of the building, and shall be in substantially
the following form:
DO NOT ENTER
SUBSTANDARD BUILDING
UNSAFE TO OCCUPY
NO PERSON SHALL RESIDE IN THIS STRUCTURE OR PROPERTY. NO PERSON SHALL OCCUPY
THIS STRUCTURE OR PROPERTY PAST DAYLIGHT HOURS. ONLY PERSONS AUTHORIZED BY THE
CITY OR THE OWNER MAY OCCUPY THIS PROPERTY DURING DAYLIGHT HOURS FOR PURPOSE OF
REPAIRING, SECURING OR CLEANING THIS PROPERTY.
It is a misdemeanor to occupy this building, or to remove or deface this
notice.
City of Albuquerque
      (2)   Compliance. Whenever such notice is posted, the Department shall
include a notification thereof in the notice and order issued reciting the
emergency and specifying the conditions which necessitate the posting. No
person shall remain in or enter any building which has been so posted, except
that entry may be made to secure, repair, demolish or remove such building
under permit. No person shall remove or deface any such notice after it is
posted until the required repairs, demolition, or removal have been completed
and a Certificate of Compliance filed with the County Clerk. Any person
violating this division (D)(2) shall be guilty of a misdemeanor.
('74 Code, § 7-24-11) (Ord. 34- 1986; Am. Ord._2018-025; Am. Ord._2023-015; Am.
Ord._2024-003)
§ 14-3-5-4 APPEAL.
   (A)   Appeal. Any person entitled to an appeal under this code may do so by
filing a written request with the City Clerk's office within 15 days from the
date of notice being appealed. A hearing shall be conducted by the Independent
Hearing Officer in accordance with the provisions in the IHO Ordinance, ROA
1994,
Chapter 2, Article 7, Part 8.
   (B)   Effect of Failure to Appeal. Failure of any person to file an appeal
in accordance with the provisions herein shall constitute a waiver of their
right to an administrative hearing and adjudication of the notice and order or
to any portion thereof.
   (C)   Scope of Hearing Appeal. Only those matters or issues specifically
raised by the appellant shall be considered in the hearing of the appeal.
   (D)   Staying of Order Under Appeal. Enforcement of any notice and order of
the department issued under this code shall be stayed during the pendency of an
appeal therefrom which is properly and timely filed.
('74 Code, § 7-24-12) (Ord. 34- 1986; Am. Ord._2018-025; Am. Ord._2023-015; Am.
Ord._2024-003)
§ 14-3-5-5 PROCEDURES FOR CONDUCT OF HEARING APPEALS.
   Appeals shall be heard in accordance with the provisions in the IHO
Ordinance,
Chapter 2, Article 7, Part 8.
('74 Code, § 7-24-13) (Ord. 34- 1986; Am. Ord._2018-025; Am. Ord._2023-015)
§ 14-3-5-6 ENFORCEMENT OF THE ORDER OF THE DEPARTMENT OR THE HEARING OFFICER.
   (A)   Compliance.
      (1)   General. After any order of the Department or the Hearing Officer
made pursuant to this code shall have become final, no person to whom any such
order is directed shall fail, neglect, or refuse to obey any such order. Any
such person who fails to comply with any such order is guilty of a misdemeanor
or a civil penalty of $500.
      (2)   Failure to Obey Order. If, after any order of the Department or
Hearing Officer made pursuant to this code has become final, the person to whom
such order is directed shall fail, neglect or refuse to obey such order, the
department may:
         (a)   Cause such person to be prosecuted under division (A)(1) above;
or
         (b)   Institute any appropriate action to abate such nuisance; or
         (c)   file a motion to show cause before the Office of Administrative
Hearings within 60 days. If the Hearing Officer determines that there is good
cause, the Hearing Officer shall reconvene the hearing with all parties to the
appeal and notice them of the hearing in the manner provided above for
administrative hearings. The show cause hearing will be conducted in
substantially the same manner as the appeal hearing. If the Hearing Officer
determines that there is substantial evidence that the person to whom the order
is directed has failed, neglected, or refused to obey such order, then the
Hearing Officer shall order that such person must pay a fee not to exceed $500
plus an additional $100 for each month after the date of the original order
that such person failed, neglected, refused to obey the order. The total fee
shall be paid to the City of Albuquerque in the manner required by the Hearing
Officer. If the person fails to pay the total fee in the manner required by the
Hearing Officer, then the city may place a lien for the unpaid amount upon the
subject property or upon any asset or personal property of the person.
      (3)   Failure to Commence Work. Whenever the required repair or
demolition is not commenced within 30 days after any final notice and order
issued under this code becomes effective:
         (a)   The Department shall cause the building described in such notice
and order to be vacated by posting at each entrance thereto a notice reading:
DO NOT ENTER
SUBSTANDARD BUILDING
UNSAFE TO OCCUPY
NO PERSON SHALL RESIDE IN THIS STRUCTURE OR PROPERTY. NO PERSON SHALL OCCUPY
THIS STRUCTURE OR PROPERTY PAST DAYLIGHT HOURS. ONLY PERSONS AUTHORIZED BY THE
CITY OR THE OWNER MAY OCCUPY THIS PROPERTY DURING DAYLIGHT HOURS FOR PURPOSE OF
REPAIRING, SECURING OR CLEANING THIS PROPERTY.
It is a misdemeanor to occupy this building, or to remove or deface this
notice.
City of Albuquerque
         (b)   No person shall occupy any building which has been posted as
specified in this section in a manner contrary to the terms of the notice. No
person shall be on the property without the written permission from the
Department or and with the permission on them at all times while on the
property. Permission shall only be granted for the reasonable time to remove
personal belongings or the correction of violations and on a case by case
basis. No person shall remove or deface any such notice so posted until the
repairs, demolition or removal ordered by the Department have been completed
and a Certificate of Compliance issued pursuant to the provisions of the
Housing Code.
         (c)   The department may, in addition to any other remedy herein
provided cause the building to be repaired to the extent necessary to correct
the conditions which render the building substandard as set forth in the notice
and order.
         (d)   Whenever the Building and Safety Division of the Planning
Department determines that a substandard building is unsafe because it is
structurally inadequate or compromised or which constitute a fire hazard, or
are otherwise dangerous to human life, pursuant to the Uniform Administrative
Code and Technical Codes, the department shall commence proceedings to cause
the closing, demolition or removal of the building or dwelling in the manner
provided in the Administrative Demolition Ordinance, Chapter 14, Article 23.
   (B)   Extension of Time to Perform Work. Upon receipt of an application from
the person required to conform to the order and an agreement by such person
that he will comply with the order if allowed additional time, the Department
may, at his discretion, grant an extension of time, not to exceed an additional
120 days, within which to complete said repair, rehabilitation or demolition,
if the Department determines that such an extension of time will not create or
perpetuate a situation imminently dangerous to life or property. The
Department's authority to extend time is limited to the physical repair,
rehabilitation or demolition of the premises and will not in any way affect or
extend the time to appeal his notice and order.
   (C)   Interference with Repair or Demolition Work Prohibited. No person
shall obstruct, impede or interfere with any officer, employee, contractor or
authorized representative of the city or with any person who owns or holds any
estate or interest in any building which has been ordered repaired, vacated,
demolished or secured under the provisions of this code, whenever such person
is engaged in the work of repairing, vacating and repairing, demolishing or
securing any such building pursuant to the provisions of this code, or in
performing any necessary act preliminary to or incidental to such work or
authorized or directed pursuant to this code.
('74 Code, § 7-24-14) (Ord. 34- 1986; Am. Ord._2018-025; Am. Ord._2024-003)
§ 14-3-5-7 WORK PERFORMED TO SECURE, REMOVE NUISANCE OR DEMOLISH A BUILDING.
   (A)   General.
      (1)   Procedure. When any work performed to secure, remove a nuisance or
demolish a building is to be done pursuant to this code, the Department shall
cause the work to be accomplished by city personnel or by private contract
under the direction of the Department. Plans and specifications therefor may be
prepared by the Department, or it may employ such architectural and engineering
assistance on a contract basis as it may deem reasonably necessary.
      (2)   Costs. The cost of such work shall be paid from city funds and
shall be a lien against the property involved, and a personal obligation of the
property owner.
('74 Code, § 7-24-15) (Ord. 34- 1986; Am. Ord._2018-025)
§ 14-3-5-8 REQUESTED INSPECTIONS; FEE.
   A requested inspection will be made upon payment of a fee of $150 for the
first dwelling unit and $100 for each additional unit to offset the city's
administrative costs including an inspection, and reinspection.
   (A)   The inspector is authorized to make inspections of property to
determine compliance. Interior inspections will be done with approval of the
owner, their agent and/or responsible party, occupant or by a court order or as
otherwise authorized by law.
   (B)   Any person who neglects, fails or refuses to correct the violations
contained within a notice and order issued pursuant to this code may be
assessed a re-inspection fee for inspections that occur after the compliance
date specified in the notice, where such re-inspection demonstrates the failure
to comply. The fee for these re-inspections shall be set by the Department.
Failure to pay re-inspection fees within ten days of assessment is a violation
of this section. Re-inspection fees may be collected in any manner as provided
by law, including as a lien against the real property where the violation
occurred.
   (C)   A person may appeal the imposition of a re-inspection fee to the code
in writing within 15 days to the City Clerk's office.
('74 Code, § 7-24-4) (Ord. 34- 1986; Am. Ord._2018-025; Am. Ord._2023-015)
§ 14-3-5-9 RIGHT OF ENTRY.
   (A)   Whenever necessary to make an inspection to enforce any of the
provisions of this code, or whenever the Department has reasonable cause to
believe that there exists in any building or upon any premises any condition or
code violation which makes such building or premises unsafe, dangerous or
hazardous, the Department may enter such building or premises at all reasonable
times to inspect the same or to perform any duty imposed upon the Department by
this code, provided that if such building or premises be occupied, he shall
first present proper credentials and request entry; and if such building or
premises be unoccupied, he shall first make a reasonable effort to locate the
owner, their agent or responsible party or other persons having charge or
control of the building or premises and request entry. If such entry is refused
or consent cannot be obtained, the Department shall proceed to obtain a search
warrant or other appropriate legal authorization by filing a verified petition
with the Metropolitan Court or District Court. The petition shall:
      (1)   Set forth the particular building, premises or portion thereof
sought to be inspected;
      (2)   State that the owner, their agent or responsible party or occupant
of the building, premises or portion thereof, has refused entry, or cannot be
located in order to obtain right of entry;
      (3)   State that inspection of the building, premises or portion thereof
is necessary to determine whether it complies with the requirements of this
code;
      (4)   Set forth the particular provisions of this code sought to be
enforced;
      (5)   Set forth any other reason necessitating the inspection, including
knowledge or belief that a particular condition exists in the building,
premises or portion thereof which constitutes a violation of this code;
      (6)   State that the Department is authorized by the city to make the
inspection.
   (B)   When the Department shall have first obtained a proper inspection
warrant or other remedy provided by law to secure entry, no owner, their agent
or responsible party or occupant or any other persons having charge, care or
control of any building or premises shall fail or neglect, after proper request
is made as herein provided, to promptly permit entry therein by the Department
for the purpose of inspection and examination pursuant to this code.
('74 Code, § 7-24-3A.2) (Ord. 34-1986; Am. Ord._2018-025)
§ 14-3-5-10 IDENTIFICATION.
   Each inspector shall be furnished with an identification card signed by the
Department indicating his authority and must present same to other persons,
during the performance of his duty.
('74 Code, § 7-24-3A.3) (Ord. 34-1986; Am. Ord._2018-025)
§ 14-3-5-11 RESPONSIBILITIES OF OWNERS.
   (A)   Every owner remains liable for violations of duties imposed upon him
by this code even though an obligation is also imposed on the occupants of his
building, and even though the owner has, by agreement, imposed on the occupant
the duty of complying with this code.
   (B)   Every owner or responsible party shall be responsible for maintaining
the property in a sound structural condition, clean, sanitary and safe,
including the common areas.
   (C)   Every owner of a rental property found to be violating any of the
provisions of this Housing Code and failing or neglecting to comply with any
orders issued pursuant to any section thereof shall register the property and
pay a one-time $25 registration fee. Such registration shall be made on a form
provided by the Department and verified by the owner or responsible party. Any
changes to the information listed below will require an updated registration
with a $25 registration fee. Excluded from this requirement are single-family
residences in which the owner permanently resides and rents out less than half
of square footage of the residence to no more than two adult tenants who share
a single lease. The following information shall be kept current:
      (1)   Name, address, telephone number and email of the property owner
and/or responsible party;
      (2)   Name, address, telephone number and email of a local agent for the
owner, if the owner is not a resident of Bernalillo County;
      (3)   Name, local address and telephone number and email of a property
manager, if any;
      (4)   Street address, parcel number and legal description of the
property;
      (5)   Any known fines and/or liabilities being assessed against the
property;
      (6)   A 24-hours emergency telephone number where the owner, agent,
property manager or responsible party can be reached.
   (D)   An owner of a residential rental property who fails to comply with any
provision of this subsection is responsible for a civil infraction and shall be
assessed a civil penalty of $500, plus an additional $100 for each month after
the date of the original violation until compliance occurs. The city shall
serve notice of any assessed civil penalty upon the owner by mailing such
notice to the address of record maintained by the County Clerk or otherwise
known to the Department. Any person served with a notice may appeal such notice
to the City Clerk in writing within 15 days pursuant to the procedures
contained in §
14-3-5-3.
   (E)   Notwithstanding subsection (E) of this section, if the owner or
responsible party complies within ten days after receiving the complaint that
notices the violation, the Hearing Officer shall not impose a civil penalty
unless the city can demonstrate that the person has a history of noncompliance
with the registration requirements set forth in this section.
('74 Code, § 7-24-3A.4) (Ord. 34-1986; Am. Ord._2018-025; Am. Ord._2023-015)
§ 14-3-5-12 SUBSTANDARD BUILDINGS.
   All buildings or portions thereof which are determined to be substandard as
defined in this code are hereby declared to be nuisances and shall be abated by
repair, rehabilitation, demolition, removal or securing all accessible openings
and entrances to building in accordance with the procedure as provided herein.
   Whenever the Building and Safety Division of the Planning Department
determines that a substandard building is unsafe because it is structurally
inadequate or compromised or which constitute a fire hazard, or are otherwise
dangerous to human life, pursuant to the Uniform Administrative Code and
Technical Codes, the department shall commence proceedings to cause the
closing, demolition or removal of the building or dwelling in the manner
provided in the Administrative Demolition Ordinance, Chapter 14, Article 23.
('74 Code, § 7-24-3B) (Ord. 34- 1986; Am. Ord. 2-2007; Am. Ord._2018-025; Am.
Ord._2024-003)
§ 14-3-5-13 REPORTING ILLEGAL ACTIVITY; COOPERATION.
   (A)   Albuquerque Code Enforcement shall notify Animal Control upon the
discovery of violations of the Albuquerque Animal Services Ordinance.
   (B)   Albuquerque Code Enforcement shall notify the Environmental Health
Department upon the discovery of violations of the Noise Control Ordinance.
   (C)   Albuquerque Code Enforcement shall notify the Department of
Environmental Health to enforce the insect and Rodent Control Ordinance upon
discovery of violations of that ordinance.
   (D)   Albuquerque Code Enforcement shall notify the Albuquerque Police
Department upon discovery of suspected criminal activity.
   (E)   Albuquerque Code Enforcement shall coordinate its activities with the
SCSF.
   (F)   Albuquerque Code Enforcement shall notify Albuquerque Fire Rescue upon
discovery of potential fire hazards or violations to the Fire Code.
(Ord. 45A-2004; Am. Ord._2018-025)
§ 14-3-5-14 VACANT BUILDING MAINTENANCE.
   (A)   The owner of a vacant building shall apply to the Albuquerque Code
Enforcement for and obtain a vacant building maintenance license 15 days prior
to vacating the premises. The vacant building maintenance license shall be
renewed annually. The owner shall pay an annual fee to renew the vacant
building maintenance license. Albuquerque Code Enforcement shall establish the
amount of the fee by regulation. Buildings or properties located within the
Downtown Core (as identified in ROA 1994, Section 14-24-3), shall also be
subject to the Downtown Vacant Premises Ordinance, ROA 1994, Sections 14-24-
1 et seq.
   (B)   Application for a vacant building maintenance license shall be made on
a form provided by Albuquerque Code Enforcement and verified by the owner. The
application shall disclose all measures to be taken to ensure that the vacant
building will be kept weather tight and secure from trespassers, safe for entry
by police officers and firefighters in times of emergency, and, together with
its premises, free from nuisance and in good order.
   The registration form shall include and be updated with the following
information:
      (1)   Name, address, telephone number and email of the property owner
and/or responsible party;
      (2)   Name, address, telephone number and email of a local agent for the
owner, if the owner is not a resident of Bernalillo County;
      (3)   Name, local address and telephone number and email of a property
manager, if any;
      (4)   Street address, parcel number and legal description of the
property;
      (5)   Any known fines and/or liabilities being assessed against the
property.
      (6)   A 24-hours emergency telephone number where the owner, agent,
property manager or responsible party can be reached.
   (C)   At the time of application, the owner, his or her agent and/or the
responsible party shall arrange for inspection of the vacant building by
Albuquerque Code Enforcement. If the owner fails or refuses to consent to and
arrange for an inspection, Albuquerque Code Enforcement may obtain a search
warrant from a court of competent jurisdiction to authorize inspection of the
vacant building, if it is deemed necessary for public health and safety.
   (D)   Albuquerque Code Enforcement shall inspect the vacant building for the
purpose of determining the structural integrity of the vacant building; the
repairs necessary to ensure its structural integrity; that it will be safe for
entry by fire fighters and police officers in time of emergency; and that the
vacant building and its contents do not present a hazard to the public during
the time that the building remains vacant.
   (E)   Albuquerque Code Enforcement shall issue any orders for work needed
to:
      (1)   Adequately protect the vacant building from intrusion by
trespassers and from deterioration by the weather; and
      (2)   Insure that allowing the vacant building to remain will not be
detrimental to the public health, safety and welfare, will not unreasonably
interfere with the reasonable and lawful use and enjoyment of other premises
within the neighborhood, and will not pose any extraordinary hazard to police
officers or fire fighters entering the vacant building in times of emergency.
   (F)   Within 45 days of the issuance of any orders, the owner shall bring
the vacant building into compliance with any orders that may have been issued
as conditions for the issuance of the license.
   (G)   Albuquerque Code Enforcement shall issue a vacant building maintenance
license only after inspecting the building and concluding that the building
complies with the Uniform Housing Code. The Department is authorized to
administer and enforce the Uniform Housing Code as provided in §§
14-3-5-1 et seq. if the vacant building does not comply with any other
provisions of the Uniform Housing Code. Albuquerque Code Enforcement shall have
the authority to inspect the vacant building at any time.
   (H)   The owner shall notify Albuquerque Code Enforcement 15 days before a
vacant building becomes inhabited so that Albuquerque Code Enforcement can
inspect the vacant building prior to occupancy.
(Ord. 45A-2004; Am. Ord._2018-025; Am. Ord. 2025-001)
§ 14-3-5-15 RESIDENT REPORTS; HOTLINE; WEBSITE; EXCEPTIONS.
   (A)   Albuquerque Code Enforcement shall implement and operate a complaint
system that includes a hotline and a website available to city residents to
report violations of this Code.
   (B)   Vacant buildings under the authority or within the control of the
Metropolitan Redevelopment Agency or a land bank are exempt from the business
maintenance licensing provisions of the Uniform Housing Code.
(Ord. 45A-2004; Am. Ord._2018-025)
§ 14-3-5-16 PAYMENT OF RELOCATION COSTS.
   (A)   Whenever the Department orders that all or a portion of a residential
building be vacated pursuant to this code, the owner of such residential
building (the "owner") shall pay relocation costs for the residents of such
residential building who reside at the residential building when the order to
vacate is issued, subject to the provisions of division (F) of this section.
This requirement shall be applicable when any condition which is the basis for
the order to vacate is within the control of the owner and the owner or his
agent and/or responsible party knew or should have known of the existence of
the conditions that violate applicable codes, statutes, ordinances or
regulations prior to the order to vacate. Notice of such conditions by a
governmental agency responsible for the enforcement of a building, residential
unit, housing or other appropriate code served on the owner or the owner's
agent and/or responsible party shall be proof that the owner knew of the
conditions. Payment of relocation costs shall be made by the owner to the
agency designated by the city to administer relocation (the "relocation
agency") within 30 days after the owner's receipt of the relocation cost
assessment issued by the relocation agency. Interest shall accrue on any amount
unpaid by the owner commencing 30 days after the date the relocation agency
first advances relocation assistance funds to the displaced resident. Interest
accrual shall not be stayed during an appeal by the owner, but an owner who is
successful on appeal shall not be liable for interest. Owners who, on appeal,
are found to not owe relocation costs shall have payments they have made to the
relocation agency refunded to them without interest except for any interest
actually paid by the owner.
   (B)   At the time the notice and order to vacate is served on the owner or
their agent and/or responsible party in addition to other requirements of this
Code, notification shall be given to the owner or their agent and/or
responsible party that the owner may be required to pay the relocation costs of
the displaced residents. The owner or their agent and/or responsible party
shall also be served with a copy of Ordinance 21-2007.
   (C)   At the time that a notice of an order to vacate is served on the owner
of a property or their agent and/or responsible party pursuant to § 14-3-5-
3 ROA 1994, a notice in substantially the following form shall be served on
those residents known by name to the Department. Such notice shall be served by
personal service or by mailing a copy of such notice by certified mail, postage
prepaid, return receipt requested. As to residents unknown by name to the
Department, service may be accomplished by posting such notice at the main
entrances or at some other prominent place on or within the residential
building. The notice shall be written in both English and Spanish. The notice
shall be provided to the relocation agency on or before the day the notice to
the residents is served or posted.
NOTICE TO RESIDENTS
YOU MUST MOVE FROM WHERE YOU ARE LIVING
BECAUSE YOU MUST MOVE YOU MAY BE ENTITLED TO MONEY
      The City has found health and/or safety problems with the building where
you live. The City has ordered this building to be closed.
      City law may allow you to be paid, by your landlord, for the cost of
moving and for some of your rent at a new location.
      Please contact the City Relocation Agency at the following phone number
and address, as soon as possible, for more information on your rights. If you
wait more than 60 days you will lose your right to any money.
      Phone Number:
      Address:
   (D)   In addition to payment of relocation costs a minimum fixed fee for
temporary relocation may be established by regulation. Rental payments shall
not be made beyond temporary relocation periods.
   (E)   The relocation agency shall determine eligibility for and the amount
of relocation benefits. Residents shall not be eligible for relocation costs if
they do not make a claim with the relocation agency for relocation costs within
60 calendar days after being served with the notice in division (C). In
determining eligibility, the relocation agency shall consider whether:
      (1)   The residents had a rental agreement at the time the notice was
served on the residents;
      (2)   A court had issued an eviction order to the residents prior to the
date the notice was served on the residents;
      (3)   The residents caused or substantially contributed to the conditions
that were the basis of the notice to vacate;
      (4)   The conditions that were the basis for the notice to vacate were
caused by fire, flood or other natural disasters;
      (5)   The failure to meet the requirements of this code was due to the
willful or negligent acts or omissions of the owner;
      (6)   The resident was in default for non-payment of rent;
      (7)   The basis of the notice to vacate is for a condition caused by the
resident's or any third party's illegal conduct without the owner's prior
knowledge; or
      (8)   For an owner occupant of a mobile home who is renting a lot or
parcel for use as a site for the location of the mobile home, whether the
requirement to vacate was caused by actions outside the control of the
resident.
   (F)   After notice to the owner or their agent and/or responsible party and
a hearing at which the owner shall have an opportunity to appear and present
evidence, the Department shall be entitled to place a lien on the property on
which the residential building that is the subject of a notice to vacate is
located, and to recover costs paid by the relocation agency that are owed but
have not been reimbursed by the owner provided the Department proves:
      (1)   The residents were parties to a rental agreement at the time the
notice was served on the residents whose term had not expired;
      (2)   The residents had not been served with a valid notice of default
under the rental agreement which would have entitled the owner to evict the
resident;
      (3)   The residents did not cause or substantially contribute to the
conditions that were the basis of the notice to vacate;
      (4)   The conditions that were the basis for the notice to vacate were
not caused by fire, flood or other natural disasters;
      (5)   The failure to meet the requirements of this code was due
substantially to the willful or grossly negligent acts or omissions of the
owner;
      (6)   The resident was not in default for non-payment of rent;
      (7)   The basis of the notice to vacate is for a condition that was not
caused by the resident's or any third party's illegal conduct without the
owner's prior knowledge; and
      (8)   For an owner occupant of a mobile home who is renting a lot or
parcel for use as a site for the location of the mobile home, the requirement
to vacate was not caused by actions outside the control of the resident.
   (G)   The city shall, by regulation, establish a procedure for notice and an
impartial evidentiary hearing prior to any determination that an owner must
repay relocation costs. The owner shall be entitled to appeal the assessment of
relocation costs by the relocation agency pursuant to the appeal provisions of
this code. Such appeal shall be filed within 30 calendar days of the owner's
receipt of the relocation cost assessment from the relocation agency. The
filing of an appeal shall not stay the relocation process.
   (H)   The city may promulgate regulations governing the administration of
this section, including but not limited to eligibility for relocation costs,
the amount and method of payment of relocation costs, the criteria replacement
units must meet.
   (I)   No action taken pursuant to this section shall affect the rights of
residents and owners in any civil litigation. Nothing is this section shall be
construed to change the obligations and rights of owners and residents as
required in the Uniform Owner-Resident Relations Act, §§ 47-8-1 et seq. NMSA
1978.
   (J)   There is created in the City Treasury the "Relocation Assistance Fund"
that shall be used solely for the purpose of relocation cost payments, costs of
administration and enforcement costs related to relocation costs. All
relocation payments received by the relocation agency shall be deposited in the
Relocation Assistance Fund. Remaining balances at the end of the fiscal year
shall remain in the Relocation Assistance Fund and shall not revert to the
general fund.
   (K)   The relocation agency shall provide assistance in finding alternative
housing for residents who are displaced and qualify for relocation assistance
under this section.
   (L)   From the time that the city first notifies an owner of conditions that
violate applicable codes, statutes, ordinances or regulations to the time that
the relocation assistance payments are paid to eligible residents or the time
the conditions cited are corrected, the owner shall not evict, harass or
intimidate any resident for the purpose of avoiding or diminishing application
of this section. Included in this prohibition is the reduction of services to a
resident or materially increasing or changing the obligations of any resident,
including but not limited to rent increases, for purposes of attempting to have
the resident vacate the residential building.
   (M)   The city shall be entitled to attorneys' fees and costs arising from
any legal action to collect relocation costs assessed to owners.
(Ord. 21-2007; Am. Ord._2018-025)
§ 14-3-5-17 APPOINTMENT OF TEMPORARY RECEIVER AND RECOVERY COSTS.
   In addition to other remedies provided in this Code for the abatement of a
substandard property, the inspector is authorized to seek the appointment of a
temporary receiver and recover costs associated with such appointment including
the filing of liens as provided by law and to seek the appointment of trained
security personnel to monitor and surveil the property at the property owner's
expense.
(Ord._2018-025)
§ 14-3-5-18 FEES, FINES AND MONETARY JUDGMENTS.
   All fees, fines and monetary judgments obtained through the enforcement of
this article shall be placed in a fund specifically created by the city for the
purpose of funding residential rehabilitation projects and residential code
enforcement efforts in the city.
(Ord._2018-025)
§ 14-3-5-98 VIOLATIONS.
   It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, agency or corporation to violate
this Code or cause or permit the same to be done. The Department may, for any
violation of this code, issue a citation in accordance with the provisions of §
1-1-98 and/or take any other legal action at its disposal.
('74 Code, § 7-24-3D (part); Am. Ord._2018-025)
§ 14-3-5-99 PENALTY.
   Any person violating any of the provisions of this Housing Code or failing
or neglecting to comply with any orders issued pursuant to any section thereof
shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and such persons shall be guilty of a
separate offense for each and every day or portion thereof during which any
such violation is continued or permitted. Upon conviction of any such
violations such person shall be subject to the penalty provisions set forth in
§
1-1-99 of this code of ordinances.
   The department may impose a civil fine, notice of which shall be appealable
under the administrative appeal procedures of this article, of $200 for a first
violation of this article, and $300 for a second violation of this article and
$500 for a third or subsequent violation of this article. Failure to pay the
fine, appeal the fine, or prevail at an administrative hearing challenging the
fine shall allow the Department to place a lien upon the subject property or
any asset owned by the owner. The Department may also choose to collect on the
fine through any other method allowed by law.
   In addition to any other remedy available at law, remedies available in
equity or other remedies as provided for in this Code, the Department may
institute the following actions against the owner of any vacant, abandoned or
substandard dwelling that is in serious violation of this Code:
   (A)   An In Personam action may be initiated for a continuing violation for
which the owner or responsible party takes no substantial step to correct
within the six months following receipt of a Notice and Order to correct the
violation, unless the Notice and Order is subject to a pending appeal before an
administrative agency or court. Notwithstanding any law limiting the form of
action for the recovery of penalties by a municipality for the violation of
this Code, the Department may recover, in a single action under this section,
an amount equal to the penalties imposed against the owner and any costs of
remediation lawfully incurred by, or on behalf of, the Department to remedy any
violation.
   (B)   A proceeding in equity.
   (C)   A lien may be placed against the assets of an owner of any vacant,
abandoned or substandard dwelling that is in serious violation of this Code
after a judgment, decree or order is entered by a court of competent
jurisdiction or City of Albuquerque Hearing Officer against the owner of the
property for an adjudication under either an In Personam action or a proceeding
in equity as set forth above. In the case of an owner that is an association or
trust, this does not authorize a lien to be placed upon the individual assets
of the general partner, trustee, limited partner, shareholder, member or
beneficiary of the associate or trust except as otherwise allowed by law. Any
lien placed upon any asset pursuant to this article shall be foreclosed upon in
the manner prescribed by state law.
   (D)   The city may deny issuing a building or business registration permit
to the owner of any vacant, abandoned or substandard dwelling that is in
serious violation of this Code when any of the following conditions exist on
that dwelling:
      (1)   Liens were placed on the property for serious violations of this
Code, State law or other applicable codes, including municipal service liens
which exist on account of the actions of the owner, their agent or responsible
party; or
      (2)   A serious violation is present and the owner, their agent or
responsible party has taken no substantial step to correct the serious
violation within six months following the notification of the violation and for
which fines, penalties or a judgment to abate or correct were imposed by a
court or administrative proceeding or a judgment at law or in equity was
imposed by a court or administrative proceeding. No denial shall be permitted
if a judgment is subject to a stay or is superseded by order of court.
   (E)   The building or business registration permit denial as above described
shall not apply to charges that are under appeal or otherwise contested through
a court or administrative process.
   (F)   In issuing a denial of a building or business registration permit, the
department shall indicate the street address where each parcel cited is located
as a basis for the denial.
   (G)   The denial shall also state that the applicant, their agent or
responsible party may request a letter of compliance from the appropriate
agency or Board in the form specified by such entity.
   (H)   All building or business registration permits denied in accordance
with this section may be withheld by the Department until an applicant obtains
a letter of compliance from the appropriate agency or Board indicating any of
the following conditions that are applicable:
      (1)   The municipal lien(s) have been paid in full or the property owner
has agreed to participate in a payment plan to pay off the lien(s) in full;
      (2)   The property in question is now in compliance with state law, this
Code or applicable codes;
      (3)   The owner of the property or their agent or responsible party has
presented and the appropriate entity has accepted a plan to begin remediation
of a serious violation of state law, this Code or other applicable codes.
   (I)   If a letter of compliance is not obtained within 45 days of the
denial, the property shall be deemed to be in non-compliance for the purposes
of this section. Each agency or Board shall specify the form and the method of
verification in which the request for a compliance letter shall be made.
   (J)   The city may deny approval of municipal permits - which includes
special exception approval and/or variance relief - if warranted as set forth
above.
   (K)   A building or business registration permit may only be denied to an
applicant of such permit other than an owner if the applicant is acting under
the direction or with the permission of the owner and that owner owns real
property that is subject to denial as set forth herein above.
   (L)   Any denial of a building or business registration permit denied by the
city may be appealed to the Office of Administrative Hearings pursuant to §
14-3-5-3 of this Code.
('74 Code, § 7-24-3D (part)) (Ord. 34-1986 ; Am. Ord._2018-025)
ARTICLE 4: NUMBERING OF CITY BUILDINGS
Section
   
14-4-1   Designation of numbers
   
14-4-2   Quadrants
   
14-4-3   Placement of numbers on buildings
   
14-4-4   Size and type of numbers
   
14-4-5   Notice of numbers; duty to affix
   
14-4-6   Duty to maintain
 
   
14-4-99   Penalty
§ 14-4-1 DESIGNATION OF NUMBERS.
   It shall be the duty of the Mayor to designate the respective numbers for
buildings and houses fronting on all existing streets and on all streets
hereafter to be laid out or extended and to formulate rules and regulations
regarding such designation in accordance with this article. Whenever a change
or extension of any street shall necessitate a change in the building on the
street, the Mayor shall designate the proper number.
('74 Code, § 7-8-1) (Ord. 2668)
§ 14-4-2 QUADRANTS.
   The number of all buildings shall be in conformity with the following
system:
   (A)   All numbering of buildings and houses shall begin from a base
thoroughfare; the north and west sides of the street having the odd number and
the south and east sides having the even numbers.
   (B)   The City shall be divided into four quadrants, NE, NW, SE, SW, with
the center line Central Avenue dividing north and south and the Santa Fe
Railway tracks dividing east and west.
('74 Code, § 7-8-2) (Ord. 2668)
§ 14-4-3 PLACEMENT OF NUMBERS ON BUILDINGS.
   To insure the uniformity and regularity in the numbering of buildings and
houses, all numbers shall be placed in the front of buildings or houses and in
so conspicuous a manner that the number may be easily discernible and read from
the street.
('74 Code, § 7-8-3) (Ord. 2668)
§ 14-4-4 SIZE AND TYPE OF NUMBERS.
   At least one set of address numbers shall be placed on the front of each
principal building or on a separate structure in front of the building, each
figure of which shall be:
   (A)   Of any durable material which will reasonably withstand the natural
elements; or
   (B)   Of any material when placed in an area where they will not be affected
by the natural elements; and
   (C)   The numbers on a house or townhouse shall be not less than three
inches in height and of a corresponding width; and
   (D)   The numbers on a building which is not used as a house or townhouse
shall not be less than five inches in height and of a corresponding width.
   (E)   However:
      (1)   No number placed on a house or townhouse prior to the effective
date of this article need comply with the above size and type requirements, and
the building will be considered in conformance with this article if numbers are
easily readable from the street; and
      (2)   Buildings other than those used as houses and townhouses are not
required to have five inch numbers before February 1, 1990.
   (F)   For the purposes of this section, HOUSE and TOWNHOUSE have the
meanings defined in the Integrated Development Ordinance.
('74 Code, § 7-8-4) (Ord. 2668; Am. Ord. 23-1989; Am. Ord._2017-025)
§ 14-4-5 NOTICE OF NUMBERS; DUTY TO AFFIX.
   (A)   All owners, occupants, lessees, tenants or subtenants of a building or
house shall within five days after receipt of notice from the Mayor of the
number or numbers designated for such building or house affix the designated
number in a place which complies with all the requirements of this article.
   (B)   All numbers other than those designated by the Mayor shall be removed
from any building or house by the owners, occupants, lessees, tenants, or
subtenants thereof within five days from the service of the notice designating
the appropriate numbers to be placed thereon.
('74 Code, § 7-8-5) (Ord. 2668)
§ 14-4-6 DUTY TO MAINTAIN.
   (A)   All owners, occupants, lessees, tenants or subtenants of a building or
house shall maintain numbers of his houses and/or buildings as herein provided
in good condition.
   (B)   No person shall purposely take down, deface or in any manner, mar or
injure any sign or number put up under the provisions of this article.
('74 Code, § 7-8-6) (Ord. 2668)
§ 14-4-99 PENALTY.
   Any person who violates any provision of this article is subject to the
general penalty provisions of this code set forth in §
1-1-99.
('74 Code, § 7-8-7) (Ord. 2668)
ARTICLE 5: FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION ORDINANCE
Section
Part 1: Statutory Authorization, Findings of Fact, Purpose, and Methods
   
14-5-1-1   Statutory authority
   
14-5-1-2   Findings of fact
   
14-5-1-3   Statement of purpose
   
14-5-1-4   Methods of reducing flood losses
Part 2: Definitions
   
14-5-2-1   Definitions
Part 3: General Provisions
   
14-5-3-1   Lands to which this ordinance applies
   
14-5-3-2   Basis for establishing the areas of special flood hazard
   
14-5-3-3   Establishment of development permit
   
14-5-3-4   Compliance
   
14-5-3-5   Abrogation and greater restrictions
   
14-5-3-6   Interpretation
   
14-5-3-7   Warning and disclaimer or liability
Part 4: Administration
   
14-5-4-1   Designation of the Floodplain Administrator
   
14-5-4-2   Duties & responsibilities of the Floodplain Administrator
   
14-5-4-3   Permit procedures
   
14-5-4-4   Variance procedures
Part 5: Provisions for Flood Hazard Reduction
   
14-5-5-1   General standards
   
14-5-5-2   Specific standards
   
14-5-5-3   Standards for subdivision proposals
   
14-5-5-4   Standards for areas of shallow flooding (AO/AH zones)
   
14-5-5-5   Floodways
   
14-5-5-6   Severability
   
14-5-5-7   Penalties for non-compliance
Part 6: Drainage Control
   
14-5-6-1   General provisions
   
14-5-6-2   Surface use of streets for drainage and flood control purposes
   
14-5-6-3   Crossings
   
14-5-6-4   Financial responsibility
   
14-5-6-5   Multiple use right-of-way and easements
   
14-5-6-6   Construction site responsibility by property owner
   
14-5-6-7   General administration
   
14-5-6-8   Administrative procedures, criteria and standards
   
14-5-6-9   Enforcement
   
14-5-6-10   Appeals; Technical Standards Committee
   
14-5-6-11   Sensitive lands
   
14-5-6-12   Penalty
PART 1: STATUTORY AUTHORIZATION, FINDINGS OF FACT, PURPOSE, AND METHODS
§ 14-5-1-1 STATUTORY AUTHORIZATION.
   The Legislature of the State of New Mexico has in NMSA 1978, Section 3-18-
7 delegated the responsibility of local governmental units to adopt regulations
designed to minimize flood losses. Therefore, the Council of the City of
Albuquerque, New Mexico does ordain as follows:
(Ord. 2025-031)
§ 14-5-1-2 FINDINGS OF FACT.
   (1)   The flood hazard areas of the City of Albuquerque are subject to
periodic inundation, which results in loss of life and property, health and
safety hazards, disruption of commerce and governmental services, and
extraordinary public expenditures for flood protection and relief, all of which
adversely affect the public health, safety and general welfare.
   (2)   These flood losses are created by the cumulative effect of
obstructions in floodplains which cause an increase in flood heights and
velocities, and by the occupancy of flood hazard areas by uses vulnerable to
floods and hazardous to other lands because they are inadequately elevated,
floodproofed or otherwise protected from flood damage.
(Ord. 2025-031)
§ 14-5-1-3 STATEMENT OF PURPOSE.
   It is the purpose of this Ordinance to promote the public health, safety and
general welfare and to minimize public and private losses due to flood
conditions in specific areas by provisions designed to:
   (1)   Protect human life and health.
   (2)   Minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood control
projects.
   (3)   Minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with
flooding and generally undertaken at the expense of the general public.
   (4)   Minimize prolonged business interruptions.
   (5)   Minimize damage to public and private property, public facilities and
utilities such as water and gas mains, electric, telephone and sewer lines,
streets and bridges located in floodplains.
   (6)   Help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the sound use and
development of flood-prone areas in such a manner as to minimize future flood
blight areas.
   (7)   Ensure that potential buyers are notified that property is in a flood
area.
   (8)   Ensure that those who occupy the areas of special flood hazard assume
responsibility for their actions.
   (9)   Provide for timely and effective construction and maintenance of flood
control facilities.
   (10)   Preserve the capacity of flood control and storm drainage facilities
to accept, convey or store drainage flows by limiting the introduction of
groundwater cleanup flows to such flood control and storm drainage facilities.
   (11)   Prevent the creation of public safety hazards and seek to eliminate
existing problems.
   (12)   Minimize the discharge of storm runoff from public facilities onto
private property.
   (13)   Minimize damage to private property caused by storm runoff from other
private property.
   (14)   Provide a reasonable level of public health and convenience at
reasonable cost.
   (15)   As to stormwater control, sediment and erosion control to:
      (i)   Help protect the hydraulic capacity of flood control and storm
drainage facilities from losses due to sedimentation, trash, debris, and other
such stormwater constituents, and degradation.
      (ii)   Preserve public health, safety and convenience from jeopardy due
to quality impairment, erosion and sedimentation in private and public
facilities of all types.
      (iii)   Preserve the quality of the surface runoff.
   (16)   As relating to groundwater cleanup impacts to storm flow water
quality, to limit the quantity, quality, frequency, location and means of
introduction of groundwater cleanup flows into flood and storm drainage control
systems in order that such introductions do not result in a mixed flow of lower
quality than that of flood or storm flows without such introductions of
groundwater cleanup flows or of lower quality than adopted federal, state and
city standards, whichever is most stringent.
   (17)   As to stormwater quality to:
      (i)   Address construction and post-construction stormwater quality
management within the limits of New Mexico water law and within flood control
agency authorities and limitations.
      (ii)   Work cooperatively with the MRGCD, AMAFCA, and the County of
Bernalillo and other co-permittees, to best manage the discharge of storm
runoff into co-permittee facilities, maximize efficient use of stormwater
quality facilities, and minimize impact on downstream water quality and storm
drainage facilities.
(Ord. 2025-031)
§ 14-5-1-4 METHODS OF REDUCING FLOOD LOSSES.
   In order to accomplish its purposes, this Ordinance uses the following
methods:
   (1)   Restrict or prohibit uses that are dangerous to health, safety or
property in times of flood, or cause excessive increases in flood heights or
velocities.
   (2)   Require that uses vulnerable to floods, including facilities which
serve such uses, be protected against flood damage at the time of initial
construction.
   (3)   Control the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels, and
natural protective barriers, which are involved in the accommodation of flood
waters.
   (4)   Control filling, grading, dredging and other development which may
increase flood damage.
   (5)   Prevent or regulate the construction of flood barriers which will
unnaturally divert flood waters, or which may increase flood hazards to other
lands.
(Ord. 2025-031)
PART 2: DEFINITIONS
§ 14-5-2-1 DEFINITIONS.
   Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in this Ordinance
shall be interpreted to give them the meaning they have in common usage and to
give this Ordinance its most reasonable application.
   ACCESSORY STRUCTURES - Means structures that are on the same parcel of
property as a principal structure, the use of which is incidental to the use of
the principal structure. Accessory structures must be used for parking or
storage, be small and represent a minimal investment by owners, and have low
damage potential. Accessory structure size limits based on flood zone, no
larger than a one story, two-car garage in flood zones identified as A zones
(A, AE, A1-30, AH, AO, A99, and AR) and not larger than 100 square feet in
flood zones identified as V zones (V, VE, V1-30, and VO). Examples of small
accessory structures include, but are not limited to, detached garages, storage
and tool sheds, and small boathouses.
   AGRICULTURAL STRUCTURES - Means structures that are used exclusively for
agricultural purposes or uses in connection with the production, harvesting,
storage, raising, or drying of agricultural commodities and livestock.
   ALLUVIAL FAN FLOODING - Means flooding occurring on the surface of an
alluvial fan or similar landform which originates at the apex and is
characterized by high-velocity flows; active processes of erosion, sediment
transport, and deposition; and unpredictable flow paths.
   AMAFCA - The Albuquerque Metropolitan Arroyo Flood Control Authority.
   APEX - Means a point on an alluvial fan or similar landform below which the
flow path of the major stream that formed the fan becomes unpredictable and
alluvial fan flooding can occur.
   APPEAL - A request for a review of the City Engineer's interpretation of any
provision of this Flood Damage Prevention Ordinance or a decision on a request
for a variance.
   APPURTENANT STRUCTURE - Means a structure which is on the same parcel of
property as the principal structure to be insured and the use of which is
incidental to the use of the principal structure.
   AREA OF FUTURE CONDITIONS FLOOD HAZARD - Means the land area that would be
inundated by the 1-percent-annual chance (100 year) flood based on future
hydrological conditions.
   AREA OF SHALLOW FLOODING - Means a designated AO, AH, AR/AO, AR/AH, or VO
zone on a community's Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) with a 1 percent or
greater annual chance of flooding to an average depth of 1 to 3 feet where a
clearly defined channel does not exist, where the path of flooding is
unpredictable and where velocity flow may be evident. Such flooding is
characterized by ponding or sheet flow.
   AREA OF SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD - Is the land in the floodplain within a
community subject to a 1 percent or greater chance of flooding in any given
year. The area may be designated as Zone A on the Flood Hazard Boundary Map
(FHBM). After detailed rate making has been completed in preparation for
publication of the FIRM, Zone A usually is refined into Zones A, AO, AH, A1-30,
AE, A99, AR, AR/A1-30, AR/AE, AR/AO, AR/AH, AR/A, VO, V1-30, VE or V.
   BASE FLOOD - Means the flood having a 1 percent chance of being equaled or
exceeded in any given year.
   BASE FLOOD ELEVATION (BFE) - The elevation shown on the Flood Insurance Rate
Map (FIRM) and found in the accompanying Flood Insurance Study (FIS) for Zones
A, AE, AH, A1-A30, AR, V1-V30, or VE that indicates the water surface elevation
resulting from the flood that has a 1% chance of equaling or exceeding that
level in any given year - also called the Base Flood.
   BASEMENT - Means any area of the building having its floor subgrade (below
ground level) on all sides.
   BMPs - Best Management Practices. Those best management practices described
within the MS4 Permit.
   BREAKAWAY WALL - Means a wall that is not part of the structural support of
the building and is intended through its design and construction to collapse
under specific lateral loading forces, without causing damage to the elevated
portion of the building or supporting foundation system.
   CHANNEL - Any natural or constructed drainage facility, including but not
limited to an arroyo, stream, swale, ditch, diversion, or water course that
conveys storm runoff.
   CHANNEL STABILITY - A condition in which a channel neither degrades to the
degree that structures, utilities or private property are endangered, nor
aggrades to the degree that flow capacity is significantly diminished as a
result of one or more storm runoff events or moves laterally to the degree that
adjacent property is endangered.
   CHANNEL TREATMENT MEASURE - A physical alteration of a channel for any
purpose.
   CIP - The City's Capital Improvement Program.
   CITY ATTORNEY - The chief legal counsel for the City or their designee.
   CITY ENGINEER - The chief administrative engineer of the Engineering
Division of the Planning Department of the City or their designee.
   CITY HYDROLOGIST - A staff professional Engineer designated by the City
Engineer to exercise primary responsibility for drainage control, flood control
and erosion control matters assigned to the office of the City Engineer.
   COMPREHENSIVE PLAN - The Albuquerque/Bernalillo County Comprehensive Plan
and amendments thereto.
   CONCEPTUAL GRADING AND DRAINAGE PLAN - A plan prepared in graphical format
showing existing and proposed grading, drainage control, flood control, runoff
management and erosion control information in sufficient detail to determine
project feasibility.
   CONSTRUCTION GENERAL PERMIT - The National Pollutant Discharge Elimination
System General Permit for Discharges from Construction Activities, most current
version.
   COOPERATOR/COOPERATIVE AGREEMENT - Any arrangement, organization, or joint
functioning of the co-permittees, or in combination with other governmental
agencies, which works constructively with the City to address mutual stormwater
and/or stormwater quality issues.
   CRITICAL FEATURE - Means an integral and readily identifiable part of a
flood protection system, without which the flood protection provided by the
entire system would be compromised.
   DESIGN STORM - A storm which deposits a specific amount of precipitation
within a specified period over a defined area. Used in calculating storm runoff
and in designing structural and operational measures for drainage, flood,
stormwater control, and erosion control.
   DEVELOPED LAND - Any lot or parcel of land occupied by an artificial surface
or by any structure intended for human occupation, including structures
intended for commercial enterprise.
   DEVELOPER - Any individual, public entity, estate, trust, receiver,
cooperative association, club, corporation, company, firm, partnership, joint
venture, syndicate or other entity engaging in the platting, subdivision,
filling, grading, paving, excavating, or construction of structures. Farming
related work is exempted as is AMAFCA Operations and Maintenance.
   DEVELOPMENT - Means any man-made change to improved and unimproved real
estate, including but not limited to buildings or other structures, mining,
dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations or
storage of equipment or materials.
   DEVELOPMENT PROCESS MANUAL (DPM) - A compilation of City legislative
requirements and administrative rules and procedures governing development
activities in the Albuquerque area.
   DOWNSTREAM CAPACITY - The ability of downstream major facilities to accept
and safely convey runoff generated upstream from the 100-year design storm.
   DRAINAGE - Storm drainage.
   DRAINAGE CONTROL - The treatment and/or management of surface runoff from
all storms up to and including a 10-year Design Storm.
   DRAINAGE MANAGEMENT PLAN - A comprehensive drainage analysis and report
which covers a large area or an entire basin or watershed. A Drainage
Management Plan may include descriptions of infrastructure needed to solve
existing or anticipated drainage and flood control problems and may establish
allowable discharge rates and/or volumes and stormwater controls for future
development within the boundaries of the plan.
   DRAINAGE PLAN - A short, detailed plan prepared in graphical format with or
on a detailed grading plan addressing on-site and off-site drainage control,
flood control, stormwater control, and erosion control issues for a lot or
parcel of less than five acres.
   DRAINAGE REPORT - A comprehensive analysis of the drainage, flood control,
stormwater control, and erosion control constraints on and impacts resulting
from a proposed platting, development or construction project.
   DRAINAGE RIGHT-OF-WAY - A public right-of-way acquired, whether in fee or in
easement, by the City, County, AMAFCA, or the State for the primary purpose of
handling storm drainage.
   80TH PERCENTILE STORM EVENT - The runoff from a precipitation event that is
less than or equal to 80 percent of all rainfall events. The 80th percentile
storm event applies to projects where developed land is being redeveloped. The
volume to be managed is stated in the Development Process Manual.
   ELEVATED BUILDING - Means, for insurance purposes, a non-basement building,
which has its lowest elevated floor, raised above ground level by foundation
walls, shear walls, posts, piers, pilings, or columns.
   EROSION AND SEDIMENT CONTROL - Treatment measures for the prevention of
damages due to soil movement and to deposition from the two-year, 24-hour
design storm runoff.
   EROSION AND SEDIMENT CONTROL PLAN - A plan prepared by a licensed New Mexico
Professional Engineer or Certified Professional in Erosion and Sediment Control
(CPESC) submitted to ensure that minimum design standards are met to reduce
potential pollutants that may result from demolition and construction
activities.
   EXISTING CONSTRUCTION - Means for the purposes of determining rates,
structures for which the "start of construction" commenced before the effective
date of the FIRM or before January 1,1975, for FIRMs effective before that
date. "Existing construction" may also be referred to as "existing structures."
   EXISTING MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION - Means a manufactured home
park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the
lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including, at a
minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either
final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed before the
effective date of the floodplain management regulations adopted by a community.
   EXPANSION TO AN EXISTING MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION - Means the
preparation of additional sites by the construction of facilities for servicing
the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including the
installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site
grading or the pouring of concrete pads).
   FARMING - Working of the soil for agricultural purposes that does not change
the historic flow path or significantly change the amount of runoff from the
worked area.
   FLOOD OR FLOODING - Means a general and temporary condition of partial or
complete inundation of normally dry land areas from:
      (1)   the overflow of inland or tidal waters.
      (2)   the unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from
any source.
   FLOOD CONTROL - The treatment measures necessary to protect life and
property from the 100-year design storm runoff.
   FLOOD ELEVATION STUDY - Means an examination, evaluation and determination
of flood hazards and, if appropriate, corresponding water surface elevations,
or an examination, evaluation and determination of mudslide (i.e., mudflow)
and/or flood-related erosion hazards.
   FLOOD HAZARD AREA - An area subject to inundation from the 100-year design
storm runoff.
   FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP (FIRM) - Means an official map of a community, on
which the Federal Emergency Management Agency has delineated both the special
flood hazard areas and the risk premium zones applicable to the community.
   FLOOD INSURANCE STUDY (FIS) - See Flood Elevation Study.
   FLOODPLAIN OR FLOOD-PRONE AREA - Means any land area susceptible to being
inundated by water from any source (see definition of flooding).
   FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT - Means the operation of an overall program of
corrective and preventive measures for reducing flood damage, including but not
limited to emergency preparedness plans, flood control works and floodplain
management regulations.
   FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT REGULATIONS - Means zoning ordinances, subdivision
regulations, building codes, health regulations, special purpose ordinances
(such as a floodplain ordinance, grading ordinance and erosion control
ordinance) and other applications of police power. The term describes such
state or local regulations, in any combination thereof, which provide standards
for the purpose of flood damage prevention and reduction.
   FLOOD PROTECTION SYSTEM - Means those physical structural works for which
funds have been authorized, appropriated, and expended and which have been
constructed specifically to modify flooding in order to reduce the extent of
the area within a community subject to a "special flood hazard" and the extent
of the depths of associated flooding. Such a system typically includes
hurricane tidal barriers, dams, reservoirs, levees or dikes. These specialized
flood modifying works are those constructed in conformance with sound
engineering standards.
   FLOOD PROOFING - Means any combination of structural and non-structural
additions, changes, or adjustments to structures which reduce or eliminate
flood damage to real estate or improved real property, water and sanitary
facilities, structures and their contents.
   FLOODWAY - See Regulatory Floodway.
   FREEBOARD - The additional height in a drainage or flood control facility
above the design water surface elevation available for storage or flow
capacity.
   FULLY DEVELOPED WATERSHED - A hydrologic condition in which all areas
upstream and downstream of a point in question are assumed completely
developed, including any undeveloped areas which are assumed to be developed in
accordance with mid-range development densities as established by the
Comprehensive Plan, appropriate area plans or sector plans, adopted facilities
master plans and the hydraulic and hydrologic standards established by this
Flood Damage Prevention Ordinance.
   FUNCTIONALLY DEPENDENT USE - Means a use, which cannot perform its intended
purpose unless it is located or carried out in close proximity to water. The
term includes only docking facilities, port facilities that are necessary for
the loading and unloading of cargo or passengers, and ship building and ship
repair facilities, but does not include long-term storage or related
manufacturing facilities.
   GI/LID, GREEN INFRASTRUCTURE (Gl), LOW IMPACT DEVELOPMENT (LID) - Any array
of products, technologies, and practices that preserve or use natural systems,
or engineered systems that mimic natural processes and systems, to enhance
overall environmental quality and more specifically that provide treatment
resulting in stormwater quality improvement, as specified in the DPM.
   GRADING PLAN - A plan describing the existing topography and proposed
grading, including retaining wall locations and details, interfaces with
adjacent properties, streets, alleys and channels, referenced to mean sea level
based on a City Benchmark, and showing sufficient contours, spot elevations,
stormwater controls, and cross-sections to allow a clear understanding by
reviewers, contractors and inspectors.
   GROUNDWATER CLEANUP - The process necessary to remove contaminants, as
defined by state and/or federal groundwater standards, from groundwater for the
purpose of restoring the water quality of the aquifer.
   HIGHEST ADJACENT GRADE - Means the highest natural elevation of the ground
surface prior to construction next to the proposed walls of a structure.
   HISTORIC STRUCTURE - Means any structure that is:
      (1)   Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a
listing maintained by the Department of Interior) or preliminarily determined
by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the requirements for individual
listing on the National Register.
      (2)   Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the
Interior as contributing to the historical significance of a registered
historic district or a district preliminarily determined by the Secretary to
qualify as a registered historic district.
      (3)   Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places in
states with historic preservation programs which have been approved by the
Secretary of the Interior.
      (4)   Individually listed on a local inventory or historic places in
communities with historic preservation programs that have been certified
either:
         (a)   By an approved state program as determined by the Secretary of
the Interior; or
         (b)   Directly by the Secretary of the Interior in states without
approved programs.
   LARGER COMMON PLAN OF DEVELOPMENT - A contiguous area where multiple
separate and distinct construction activities may be taking place at different
times on different schedules under one plan.
   LEVEE - Means a man-made structure, usually an earthen embankment, designed
and constructed in accordance with sound engineering practices to contain,
control, or divert the flow of water so as to provide protection from temporary
flooding.
   LEVEE SYSTEM - Means a flood protection system which consists of a levee, or
levees, and associated structures, such as closure and drainage devices, which
are constructed and operated in accordance with sound engineering practices.
   LOWEST FLOOR - Means the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including
basement). An unfinished or flood resistant enclosure, usable solely for
parking or vehicles, building access or storage in an area other than a
basement area is not considered a building's lowest floor, provided that such
enclosure is not built so as to render the structure in violation of the
applicable non-elevation design requirement of Section 60.3 of the National
Flood Insurance Program regulations.
   MAINTENANCE - The cleaning, shaping, grading, repair and minor replacement
of drainage, flood control and erosion control facilities, but not including
the cost of power consumed in the normal operation of pump stations.
   MAJOR ARROYO - Any channel whose watershed exceeds 320 acres in a 100-year
design storm whether such watershed is in its natural or unaltered state or has
been altered by development, runoff diversions, or detention facilities.
   MANAGEMENT ON SITE - To control, direct, and treat the stormwater quality
volume on the property, or if from an area of common development, then at an
alternate location designed for stormwater management or as otherwise approved
by the City Engineer. The control and treatment will be for water quality and/
or flood volume purposes prior to discharge of the stormwater to the City's
MS4. Nothing in this definition shall be construed to require an action which
is contrary to state law, or to written state agency guidance regarding flood
control or surface water capture, or which requires acquisition or amendment of
a water right to legally implement.
   MANUFACTURED HOME - Means a structure transportable in one or more sections,
which is built on a permanent chassis and is designed for use with or without a
permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities. The term
"manufactured home" does not include a "recreational vehicle".
   MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION - Means a parcel (or contiguous
parcels) of land divided into two or more manufactured home lots for rent or
sale.
   MASTER PLANNED FACILITY - Any drainage control, flood control or erosion
control facility recommended in the adopted "Albuquerque Master Drainage Plan"
(1981), amendments thereto, or any approved Drainage Management or Drainage
Master Plan, or any voter approved general obligation bond financed drainage
control, flood control or erosion control facility.
   MEAN SEA LEVEL - Means, for purposes of the National Flood Insurance
Program, the North American Vertical Datum (NAVD) of 1988 or other datum, to
which base flood elevations shown on a community's Flood Insurance Rate Map are
referenced.
   MULTIPLE USE FACILITY - A drainage control, flood control or erosion control
facility in which other secondary uses are planned or allowed, including but
not limited to recreation, open space, transportation and utility location.
   NEW CONSTRUCTION - Means, for the purpose of determining insurance rates,
structures for which the "start of construction" commenced on or after the
effective date of an initial FIRM or after December 31, 1974, whichever is
later, and includes any subsequent improvements to such structures. For
floodplain management purposes, "new construction" means structures for which
the "start of construction" commenced on or after the effective date of a
floodplain management regulation adopted by a community and includes any
subsequent improvements to such structures.
   NEW MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION - Means a manufactured home park
or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots
on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including at a minimum, the
installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site
grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed on or after the effective
date of floodplain management regulations adopted by a community.
   90TH PERCENTILE STORM EVENT - The runoff from a precipitation event that is
less than or equal to 90% of all rainfall events. The 90th percentile storm
event applies to new development. The volume to be managed is stated in the
Development Process Manual.
   NUISANCE WATERS - Those waters leaving a site and entering a public street
that do not result from precipitation. Examples include landscape over-watering
or car washing.
   100-YEAR DESIGN STORM - That storm whose precipitation within a six-hour
period and resulting runoff has a 1% chance of being equaled or exceeded in any
given year.
   PAYMENT-IN-LIEU FOR PUBLIC OFF-SITE MITIGATION ("PAYMENT IN LIEU") - A
payment collected and used by the City, or collected by the City and
distributed to a cooperator for its use pursuant to an agreement with the City,
for purposes of the maintenance, retrofit, or upgrade of public drainage
infrastructure for stormwater quality improvements, and made in lieu of
management on-site or private off-site mitigation.
   PRIVATE OFFSITE MITIGATION - Approved management of the stormwater quality
volume or a portion of the stormwater quality volume at a private offsite
location. The private offsite location may be an existing facility, or the
facility may be constructed or modified to manage the stormwater quality
volume.
   PRIVATE STORMWATER FACILITY - A stormwater facility on private property.
   PROJECT - Any activity which disturbs or exposes the surface of the ground
to erosion. Farming activities are exempt.
   PUBLIC STORMWATER FACILITY - Any stormwater facility within public property,
public right-of-way or a public drainage easement.
   RECREATIONAL VEHICLE - Means a vehicle which is (i) built on a single
chassis; (ii) 400 square feet or less when measured at the largest horizontal
projections; (iii) designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a
light duty truck; and (iv) designed primarily not for use as a permanent
dwelling but as temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or
seasonal use.
   REDEVELOPMENT - Improvements made to a parcel of land that was previously
developed (see "new development").
   REGULATORY FLOODWAY - Means the channel of a river or other watercourse and
the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base
flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than a
designated height.
   RIVERINE - Means relating to, formed by, or resembling a river (including
tributaries), stream, brook, etc.
   SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD AREA - See Area of Special Flood Hazard.
   START OF CONSTRUCTION - For other than new construction or substantial
improvements under the Coastal Barrier Resources Act (Pub. L. 97-348), includes
substantial improvement and means the date the building permit was issued,
provided the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction,
rehabilitation, addition placement, or other improvement was within 180 days of
the permit date. The actual start means either the first placement of permanent
construction of a structure on a site, such as the pouring of slab or footings,
the installation of piles, the construction of columns, or any work beyond the
stage of excavation; or the placement of a manufactured home on a foundation.
Permanent construction does not include land preparation, such as clearing,
grading and filling; nor does it include the installation of streets and/or
walkways; nor does it include excavation for basement, footings, piers or
foundations or the erection of temporary forms; nor does it include the
installation on the property of accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds
not occupied as dwelling units or not part of the main structure. For a
substantial improvement, the actual start of construction means the first
alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of a building,
whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building.
   STORMWATER CONTROL MEASURE (SCM) - Any Best Management Practice, or
combination thereof, aimed at reducing pollutants from entering the Rio Grande.
   STORMWATER CONTROL PERMIT FOR EROSION AND SEDIMENT CONTROL - A permit issued
to authorize work to be performed as regulated and authorized by this Flood
Damage Prevention Ordinance.
   STORMWATER QUALITY VOLUME - See 80th Percentile and 90th Percentile storm
events.
   STRUCTURE - Means, for floodplain management purposes, a walled and roofed
building, including a gas or liquid storage tank, that is principally above
ground, as well as a manufactured home.
   SUBSTANTIAL DAMAGE - Means damage of any origin sustained by a structure
whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its before damaged condition
would equal or exceed 50 percent of the market value of the structure before
the damage occurred.
   SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT - Means any reconstruction, rehabilitation,
addition, or other improvement of a structure, the cost of which equals or
exceeds 50 percent of the market value of the structure before "start of
construction" of the improvement. This term includes structures which have
incurred "substantial damage", regardless of the actual repair work performed.
The term does not, however, include either: (1) Any project for improvement of
a structure to correct existing violations of state or local health, sanitary,
or safety code specifications which have been identified by the local code
enforcement official and which are the minimum necessary to assure safe living
conditions or (2) Any alteration of a "historic structure", provided that the
alteration will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a
"historic structure", or any construction or alteration of a structure less
than 250 square feet when measured in plan view.
   TEMPORARY DRAINAGE FACILITY - A nonpermanent drainage control, flood control
or erosion control facility constructed as part of a phased project or to serve
until such time that a permanent facility is in place, including but not
limited to desilting ponds, berms, diversions, channels, detention and
retention ponds, bank protection and channel stabilization measures.
   10-YEAR DESIGN STORM - That storm whose precipitation within a six-hour
period and resulting runoff has a 10% chance of being equaled or exceeded in
any given year.
   TRAFFIC ENGINEER - A staff Professional Engineer designated by the City
Engineer to exercise primary responsibility for transportation matters
assigned.
   VARIANCE - Means a grant of relief by a community from the terms of a
floodplain management regulation. (For full requirements see Section 60.6 of
the National Flood Insurance Program regulations.)
   VIOLATION - Means the failure of a structure or other development to be
fully compliant with the community's floodplain management regulations. A
structure or other development without the elevation certificate, other
certifications, or other evidence of compliance required in Section 60.3(b)(5),
(c)(4), (c)(10), (d)(3), (e)(2), (e)(4), or (e)(5) of Code of Federal
Regulations is presumed to be in violation until such time as that
documentation is provided.
   WATER SURFACE ELEVATION - Means the height, in relation to the North
American Vertical Datum (NAVD) of 1988 (or other datum, where specified), of
floods of various magnitudes and frequencies in the floodplains of riverine
areas.
(Ord. 2025-031)
PART 3: GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 14-5-3-1 LANDS TO WHICH THIS ORDINANCE APPLIES.
   The ordinance shall apply to all areas of special flood hazard with the
jurisdiction of the City of Albuquerque, which includes its extraterritorial
planning and platting jurisdiction.
(Ord. 2025-031)
§ 14-5-3-2 BASIS FOR ESTABLISHING THE AREAS OF SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD.
   The areas of special flood hazard identified by the Federal Emergency
Management Agency in the current scientific and engineering report entitled,
“The Flood Insurance Study (FIS) for Bernalillo County, New Mexico," dated
November 4, 2016, with accompanying Flood Insurance Rate Maps and/or Flood
Boundary-Floodway Maps (FIRM and/or FBFM) dated November 4, 2016, and any
revisions thereto are hereby adopted by reference and declared to be a part of
this Ordinance.
(Ord. 2025-031)
§ 14-5-3-3 ESTABLISHMENT OF DEVELOPMENT PERMIT.
   A Floodplain Development Permit shall be required to ensure conformance with
the provisions of this Ordinance.
(Ord. 2025-031)
§ 14-5-3-4 COMPLIANCE.
   No structure or land shall hereafter be located, altered, or have its use
changed without full compliance with the terms of this Ordinance and other
applicable regulations.
(Ord. 2025-031)
§ 14-5-3-5 ABROGATION AND GREATER RESTRICTIONS.
   This Ordinance is not intended to repeal, abrogate, or impair any existing
easements, covenants, or deed restrictions. However, where this Ordinance and
another ordinance, easement, covenant, or deed restriction conflict or overlap,
whichever imposes the more stringent restrictions shall prevail.
(Ord. 2025-031)
§ 14-5-3-6 INTERPRETATION.
   In the interpretation and application of this Ordinance, all provisions
shall be:
   (1)   considered as minimum requirements;
   (2)   liberally construed in favor of the governing body;
   (3)   deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted under
State statutes; and
   (4)   Not deemed to repeal or limit any other ordinance adopted by the City
Council unless expressly so stated herein.
(Ord. 2025-031)
§ 14-5-3-7 WARNING AND DISCLAIMER OR LIABILITY.
   The degree of flood protection required by this Ordinance is considered
reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and engineering
considerations. On rare occasions greater floods can and will occur and flood
heights may be increased by man-made or natural causes. This Ordinance does not
imply that land outside the areas of special flood hazards or uses permitted
within such areas will be free from flooding or flood damages. This Ordinance
shall not create liability on the part of the community or any official or
employee thereof for any flood damages that result from reliance on this
Ordinance or any administrative decision lawfully made hereunder.
(Ord. 2025-031)
PART 4: ADMINISTRATION
§ 14-5-4-1 DESIGNATION OF THE FLOODPLAIN ADMINISTRATOR.
   The City Engineer is hereby appointed the Floodplain Administrator to
administer and implement the provisions of this Ordinance and other appropriate
sections of 44 CFR (Emergency Management and Assistance - National Flood
Insurance Program Regulations) pertaining to floodplain management.
(Ord. 2025-031)
§ 14-5-4-2 DUTIES & RESPONSIBILITIES OF THE FLOODPLAIN ADMINISTRATOR.
   Duties and responsibilities of the Floodplain Administrator shall include,
but not be limited to, the following:
   (1)   Maintain and hold open for public inspection all records pertaining to
the provisions of this Ordinance.
   (2)   Review permit application to determine whether to ensure that the
proposed building site project, including the placement of manufactured homes,
will be reasonably safe from flooding.
   (3)   Review, approve or deny all applications for development permits
required by adoption of this Ordinance.
   (4)   Review permits for proposed development to assure that all necessary
permits have been obtained from those Federal, State or local governmental
agencies (including Section 404 of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act
Amendments of 1972, 33 U.S.C. 1334) from which prior approval is required.
   (5)   Where interpretation is needed as to the exact location of the
boundaries of the areas of special flood hazards (for example, where there
appears to be a conflict between a mapped boundary and actual field conditions)
the Floodplain Administrator shall make the necessary interpretation.
   (6)   Notify, in riverine situations, adjacent communities, the State
Engineer, and the State Coordinating Agency which is the New Mexico Department
of Homeland Security and Emergency Management (DHSEM), prior to any alteration
or relocation of a watercourse, and submit evidence of such notification to the
Federal Emergency Management Agency.
   (7)   Assure that the flood carrying capacity within the altered or
relocated portion of any watercourse is maintained.
   (8)   When base flood elevation data has not been provided in accordance
with §
14-5-3-2, the Floodplain Administrator shall obtain, review and reasonably
utilize any base flood elevation data and floodway data available from a
Federal, State or other source, in order to administer the provisions of § 14-
5-5.
   (9)   When a regulatory floodway has not been designated, the Floodplain
Administrator must require that no new construction, substantial improvements,
or other development (including fill) shall be permitted within Zones A1-30 and
AE on the City of Albuquerque’s FIRM, unless it is demonstrated that the
cumulative effect of the proposed development, when combined with all other
existing and anticipated development, will not increase the water surface
elevation of the base flood more than one foot at any point within the
community.
   (10)   Under the provisions of 44 CFR Chapter 1, Section 65.12, of the
National Flood Insurance Program regulations, a community may approve certain
development in Zones A1-30, AE, AH, on the community's FIRM which increases the
water surface elevation of the base flood by more than 1 foot, provided that
the City of Albuquerque first completes all of the provisions required by
Section 65.12.
(Ord. 2025-031)
§ 14-5-4-3 PERMIT PROCEDURES.
   (1)   Application for a Floodplain Development Permit shall be presented to
the Floodplain Administrator on forms furnished by him/her and may include, but
not be limited to, plans in duplicate drawn to scale showing the location,
dimensions, and elevation of proposed landscape alterations, existing and
proposed structures, including the placement of manufactured homes, and the
location of the foregoing in relation to areas of special flood hazard.
Additionally, the following information is required:
      (a)   Elevation (in relation to mean sea level), of the lowest floor
(including basement) of all new and substantially improved structures.
      (b)   Elevation in relation to mean sea level to which any nonresidential
structure shall be floodproofed.
      (c)   A certificate from a registered professional engineer or architect
that the nonresidential floodproofed structure shall meet the floodproofing
criteria of §
14-5-5-2(2).
      (d)   Description of the extent to which any watercourse or natural
drainage will be altered or relocated as a result of proposed development.
      (e)   Maintain a record of all such information in accordance with §
14-5-4-2(2).
   (2)   Approval or denial of a Floodplain Development Permit by the
Floodplain Administrator shall be based on all of the provisions of this
Ordinance and the following relevant factors:
      (a)   The danger to life and property due to flooding or erosion damage.
      (b)   The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to
flood damage and the effect of such damage on the individual owner.
      (c)   The danger that materials may be swept onto other lands to the
injury of others.
      (d)   The compatibility of the proposed use with existing and anticipated
development.
      (e)   The safety of access to the property in times of flood for ordinary
and emergency vehicles.
      (f)   The costs of providing governmental services during and after flood
conditions including maintenance and repair of streets and bridges, and public
utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems.
      (g)   The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise and sediment
transport of the floodwaters and the effects of wave action, if applicable,
expected at the site.
      (h)   The necessity to the facility of a waterfront location, where
applicable.
      (i)   The availability of alternative locations, not subject to flooding
or erosion damage, for the proposed use.
(Ord. 2025-031)
§ 14-5-4-4 VARIANCE PROCEDURES.
   (1)   The City Engineer, as established by the City of Albuquerque, shall
hear and render judgment on requests for variances from the requirements of
this Ordinance.
   (2)   The Mayor shall hear and render judgment on an appeal only when it is
alleged there is an error in any requirement, decision, or determination made
by the Floodplain Administrator in the enforcement or administration of this
Ordinance.
   (3)   Any person or persons aggrieved by the decision of the Mayor may
appeal such decision in the courts of competent jurisdiction.
   (4)   The City Engineer shall maintain a record of all actions involving an
appeal and shall report variances to the Federal Emergency Management Agency
upon request.
   (5)   Variances may be issued for the reconstruction, rehabilitation or
restoration of structures listed on the National Register of Historic Places or
the State Inventory of Historic Places, without regard to the procedures set
forth in the remainder of this Ordinance.
   (6)   Variances may be issued for new construction and substantial
improvements to be erected on a lot of 1/2 acre or less in size contiguous to
and surrounded by lots with existing structures constructed below the base
flood level, providing the relevant factors in §
14-5-4-3(2) have been fully considered. As the lot size increases beyond the 1/
2 acre, the technical justification required for issuing the variance
increases.
   (7)   Upon consideration of the factors noted above and the intent of this
Ordinance, the City Engineer may attach such conditions to the granting of
variances as it deems necessary to further the purpose and objectives of this
Ordinance (§
14-5-1-3).
   (8)   Variances shall not be issued within any designated floodway if any
increase in flood levels during the base flood discharge would result.
   (9)   Variances may be issued for the repair or rehabilitation of historic
structures upon a determination that the proposed repair or rehabilitation will
not preclude the structure's continued designation as a historic structure and
the variance is the minimum necessary to preserve the historic character and
design of the structure.
   (10)   Prerequisites for granting variances:
      (a)   Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the
variance is the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard, to afford
relief.
      (b)   Variances shall only be issued upon:
         (i)   showing a good and sufficient cause;
         (ii)   a determination that failure to grant the variance would result
in exceptional hardship to the applicant; and
         (iii)   a determination that the granting of a variance will not
result in increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety,
extraordinary public expense, create nuisances, cause fraud on or victimization
of the public, or conflict with existing local laws or ordinances.
      (c)   Any application to which a variance is granted shall be given
written notice that the structure will be permitted to be built with the lowest
floor elevation below the base flood elevation, and that the cost of flood
insurance will be commensurate with the increased risk resulting from the
reduced lowest floor elevation.
   (11)   Variances may be issued by a community for new construction and
substantial improvements and for other development necessary for the conduct of
a functionally dependent use provided that:
      (a)   The criteria outlined in §
14-5-4-4(1)-(9) are met; and
      (b)   The structure or other development is protected by methods that
minimize flood damages during the base flood and create no additional threats
to public safety.
(Ord. 2025-031)
PART 5: PROVISIONS FOR FLOOD HAZARD REDUCTION
§ 14-5-5-1 GENERAL STANDARDS.
   In all areas of special flood hazards the following provisions are required
for all new construction and substantial improvements:
   (1)   All new construction or substantial improvements shall be designed (or
modified) and adequately anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral
movement of the structure resulting from hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads,
including the effects of buoyancy.
   (2)   All new construction or substantial improvements shall be constructed
by methods and practices that minimize flood damage.
   (3)   All new construction or substantial improvements shall be constructed
with materials resistant to flood damage.
   (4)   All new construction or substantial improvements shall be constructed
with electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing, and air conditioning equipment
and other service facilities that are designed and/or located so as to prevent
water from entering or accumulating within the components during conditions of
flooding.
   (5)   All new and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to
minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the system.
   (6)   New and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed to
minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the system and
discharge from the systems into flood waters.
   (7)   On-site waste disposal systems shall be located to avoid impairment to
them or contamination from them during flooding.
(Ord. 2025-031)
§ 14-5-5-2 SPECIFIC STANDARDS.
   In all areas of special flood hazards where base flood elevation data has
been provided as set forth in (i) §
14-5-3-2; (ii) §
14-5-4-2(8); or (iii) §
14-5-5-3(3), the following provisions are required:
   (1)   Residential Construction - New construction and substantial
improvement of any residential structure shall have the lowest floor (including
basement), elevated to or above the base flood elevation. A registered
professional engineer, architect, or land surveyor shall submit a certification
to the Floodplain Administrator that the standard of this subsection as
proposed in § 14-5-4-3(1)(a), is satisfied.
   (2)   Nonresidential Construction - New construction and substantial
improvements of any commercial, industrial or other nonresidential structure
shall either have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated to or above
the base flood level or together with attendant utility and sanitary
facilities, be designed so that below the base flood level the structure is
watertight with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water and
with structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and
hydrodynamic loads and effects of buoyancy. A registered professional engineer
or architect shall develop and/or review structural design, specifications, and
plans for the construction, and shall certify that the design and methods of
construction are in accordance with accepted standards of practice as outlined
in this subsection. A record of such certification which includes the specific
elevation (in relation to mean sea level) to which such structures are
floodproofed shall be maintained by the Floodplain Administrator.
   (3)   Enclosures - New construction and substantial improvements, with fully
enclosed areas below the lowest floor that are usable solely for parking of
vehicles, building access or storage in an area other than a basement and which
are subject to flooding shall be designed to automatically equalize hydrostatic
flood forces on exterior walls by allowing for the entry and exit of
floodwaters. Designs for meeting this requirement must either be certified by a
registered professional engineer or architect or meet or exceed the following
minimum criteria:
      (a)   A minimum of two openings on separate walls having a total net area
of not less than 1 square inch for every square foot of enclosed area subject
to flooding shall be provided.
      (b)   The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than 1 foot above
grade.
      (c)   Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, valves, or other
coverings or devices provided that they permit the automatic entry and exit of
floodwaters.
   (4)   Manufactured Homes -
      (a)   Require that all manufactured homes to be placed within Zone A on a
community's FHBM or FIRM shall be installed using methods and practices which
minimize flood damage. For the purposes of this requirement, manufactured homes
must be elevated and anchored to resist flotation, collapse, or lateral
movement. Methods of anchoring may include, but are not limited to, use of
over-the-top or frame ties to ground anchors. This requirement is in addition
to applicable State and local anchoring requirements for resisting wind forces.
      (b)   Require that manufactured homes that are placed or substantially
improved within Zones A1-30, AH, and AE on the community's FIRM on sites;
         (i)   outside of a manufactured home park or subdivision,
         (ii)   in a new manufactured home park or subdivision,
         (iii)   in an expansion to an existing manufactured home park or
subdivision; or
         (iv)   in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision on which a
manufactured home has incurred "substantial damage" as a result of a flood,
be elevated on a permanent foundation such that the lowest floor of the
manufactured home is elevated to or above the base flood elevation and be
securely anchored to an adequately anchored foundation system to resist
flotation, collapse, and lateral movement.
      (c)   Require that manufactured homes be placed or substantially improved
on sites in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision with Zones A1-30,
AH and AE on the community's FIRM that are not subject to the provisions of
this §
14-5-5-2(4) be elevated so that either:
         (i)   the lowest floor of the manufactured home is at or above the
base flood elevation; or
         (ii)   the manufactured home chassis is supported by reinforced piers
or other foundation elements of at least equivalent strength that are no less
than 36 inches in height above grade and be securely anchored to an adequately
anchored foundation system to resist flotation, collapse, and lateral movement.
   (5)   Recreational Vehicles - Require that recreational vehicles placed on
sites within Zones A1-30, AH, and AE on the City of Albuquerque’s FIRM either:
      (i)   be on the site for fewer than 180 consecutive days; or
      (ii)   be fully licensed and ready for highway use; or
      (iii)   meet the permit requirements of §
14-5-4-3(1), and the elevation and anchoring requirements for "manufactured
homes" in §
14-5-5-2(4).
      A recreational vehicle is ready for highway use if it is on its wheels or
jacking system, is attached to the site only by quick disconnect type utilities
and security devices, and has no permanently attached additions.
   (6)   Accessory Structure - Accessory structures to be placed on sites
within Zones A1-30, AH, AO and AE on the City of Albuquerque FIRM shall comply
with the following:
      (a)   The structure shall be used only for parking and limited storage.
      (b)   The structure shall not be used for human habitation. Prohibited
activities or uses include but are not limited to working, sleeping, living,
entertainment, cooking, or restroom use.
      (c)   The structure shall be unfinished on the interior.
      (d)   Structures shall be small in size, not exceed the size of a single-
story two car garage.
      (e)   Structures exceeding the size of a single story two car garage will
be required to meet all applicable standards of § 14-3, § 14-4, and § 14-
5 including relevant subsections.
      (f)   Service facilities such as electrical and heating equipment must be
elevated to or above the BFE plus 1 foot.
      (g)   The structure shall be constructed and placed on the building site
so as to offer the minimum resistance to the flow of floodwaters.
      (h)   The structure shall be considered low in value, designed to have
low flood damage potential and constructed with flood resistance materials.
      (i)   The structure shall be firmly anchored to prevent flotation,
collapse, and lateral movement.
      (j)   Floodway requirements must be met in the construction of the
structure.
      (k)   Openings to relieve hydrostatic pressure during a flood shall be
provided below the BFE; and be placed on opposing walls with the net area of
not less than 1 square inch for every square foot of the size of the footprint
of the structure (Flood Vents).
      (l)   The openings (flood vents) shall be located no higher than 1 foot
above grade.
      (m)   The openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, valves or other
coverings or devices provided that they permit the automatic entry and exit of
floodwaters.
(Ord. 2025-031)
§ 14-5-5-3 STANDARDS FOR SUBDIVISION PROPOSALS.
   (1)   All subdivision proposals including the placement of manufactured home
parks and subdivisions shall be consistent §
14-5-1-2, §
14-5-1-3, and §
14-5-1-4 of this Ordinance.
   (2)   All proposals for the development of subdivisions including the
placement of manufactured home parks and subdivisions shall meet Floodplain
Development Permit requirements of §
14-5-3-3, §
14-5-4-3, and the provisions of § 14-5-5.
   (3)   Base flood elevation data shall be generated for subdivision proposals
and other proposed development including the placement of manufactured home
parks and subdivisions which is greater than 50 lots or 5 acres, whichever is
lesser, if not otherwise provided pursuant to §
14-5-3-2 or §
14-5-4-2(8) of this Ordinance.
   (4)   All subdivision proposals including the placement of manufactured home
parks and subdivisions shall have adequate drainage provided to reduce exposure
to flood hazards.
   (5)   All subdivision proposals including the placement of manufactured home
parks and subdivisions shall have public utilities and facilities such as
sewer, gas, electrical and water systems located and constructed to minimize or
eliminate flood damage.
(Ord. 2025-031)
§ 14-5-5-4 STANDARDS FOR AREAS OF SHALLOW FLOODING (AO/AH ZONES).
   Located within the areas of special flood hazard established in §
14-5-3-2, are areas designated as shallow flooding. These areas have special
flood hazards associated with flood depths of 1 to 3 feet where a clearly
defined channel does not exist, where the path of flooding is unpredictable,
and where velocity flow may be evident. Such flooding is characterized by
ponding or sheet flow; therefore, the following provisions apply:
   (1)   All new construction and substantial improvements of residential
structures have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated to or above the
base flood elevation or the highest adjacent grade at least as high as the
depth number specified in feet on the community's FIRM (at least 2 feet if no
depth number is specified).
   (2)   All new construction and substantial improvements of non-residential
structures.
      (a)   Have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated to or above the
base flood elevation or the highest adjacent grade at least as high as the
depth number specified in feet on the community's FIRM (at least 2 feet if no
depth number is specified); or
      (b)   Together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities be designed
so that below the base specified flood depth in an AO Zone, or below the Base
Flood Elevation in an AH Zone, level the structure is watertight with walls
substantially impermeable to the passage of water and with structural
components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic
loads of effects of buoyancy.
   (3)   A registered professional engineer or architect shall submit a
certification to the Floodplain Administrator that the standards of this
Section, as proposed in §
14-5-4-3 are satisfied.
   (4)   Require within Zones AH or AO adequate drainage paths around
structures on slopes, to guide flood waters around and away from proposed
structures.
(Ord. 2025-031)
§ 14-5-5-5 FLOODWAYS.
   Floodways - located within areas of special flood hazard established in §
14-5-3-2 are areas designated as floodways. Since the floodway is an extremely
hazardous area due to the velocity of flood waters which carry debris,
potential projectiles and erosion potential, the following provisions shall
apply:
   (1)   Encroachments are prohibited, including fill, new construction,
substantial improvements and other development within the adopted regulatory
floodway unless it has been demonstrated through hydrologic and hydraulic
analyses performed in accordance with standard engineering practice that the
proposed encroachment would not result in any increase in flood levels within
the community during the occurrence of the base flood discharge.
   (2)   If §
14-5-5-5(1) above is satisfied, all new construction and substantial
improvements shall comply with all applicable flood hazard reduction provisions
of § 14-5-5.
   (3)   Under the provisions of 44 CFR Chapter 1, Section 65.12, of the
National Flood Insurance Program Regulations, a community may permit
encroachments within the adopted regulatory floodway that would result in an
increase in base flood elevations, provided that the community first completes
all of the provisions required by Section 65.12.
(Ord. 2025-031)
§ 14-5-5-6 SEVERABILITY.
   If any section, clause, sentence, or phrase of this Ordinance is held to be
invalid or unconstitutional by any court of competent jurisdiction, then said
holding shall in no way affect the validity of the remaining portions of this
Ordinance.
(Ord. 2025-031)
§ 14-5-5-7 PENALTIES FOR NON-COMPLIANCE.
   No structure or land shall hereafter be constructed, located, extended,
converted, or altered without full compliance with the terms of this court
order and other applicable regulations. Violation of the provisions of this
court order by failure to comply with any of its requirements (including
violations of conditions and safeguards established in connection with
conditions) shall constitute a misdemeanor. Any person who violates this court
order or fails to comply with any of its requirements shall upon conviction
thereof be fined not more than $500 for each violation, and in addition shall
pay all costs and expenses involved in the case. Each day of violation is
considered a separate offense. Nothing herein contained shall prevent the City
of Albuquerque from taking such other lawful action as is necessary to prevent
or remedy any violation.
(Ord. 2025-031)
PART 6: DRAINAGE CONTROL
§ 14-5-6-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS.
   (A)   The City is and shall remain an active participant in the National
Flood Insurance Program. The City endorses the program goal of flood damage
reduction through the regulation of development within flood hazard areas and
the preservation of floodways.
   (B)   All developed land within the City shall be provided with adequate
drainage control, flood control, stormwater control, and erosion control
facilities. The protection of life, health, and property shall be considered
the primary function in the planning, design, construction and maintenance of
drainage control, flood control, stormwater control, and erosion control
facilities. However, other concerns, not limited to the following, shall be
addressed: channel capacity, watershed characteristics, channel stability,
maintenance, transitions between treatment types, multiple use goals, and
appearance. The needs of the community in transportation, utility services,
recreation, and open space shall be considered in planning, design,
construction, and maintenance – particularly in the selection of channel
treatment measures. These needs shall always be considered subsidiary to the
primary functions of the drainage control, flood control, stormwater control,
and erosion control facilities.
   (C)   The design, construction and maintenance of dams, levees and
diversions that fall within the jurisdiction of the State Engineer shall meet
or exceed standards established by the State Engineer.
   (D)   The design, construction and maintenance of flood control facilities
shall be coordinated with AMAFCA or other public agencies as appropriate.
   (E)   All facilities receiving water from public facilities and right-of-way
shall be constructed within dedicated right-of-way or recorded drainage
easements granted to and accepted by the proper public authority or a private
entity with an agreement for operations and maintenance.
   (F)   All facilities which receive only runoff from private property shall
be constructed on private property unless otherwise authorized by the City
Engineer. The use of individual on-lot ponding shall be governed by the
standards established by the City Engineer in the Development Process Manual.
   (G)   Wherever flood control, drainage control, stormwater control, or
erosion control improvements are necessary within dedicated public open space,
such improvements shall be designed and constructed in a manner reasonably
consistent with the natural surroundings. All construction and maintenance
activities in dedicated open space shall be performed so as to minimize the
disruption and destruction of vegetation and adjacent landforms. Where such
disturbance or destruction is unavoidable, revegetation shall be performed at
the earliest practical time by those responsible for such disturbance and/or
destruction.
   (H)   All new development and redevelopment projects shall apply best
management practices to manage stormwater quality volume by management on-site,
or payment-in-lieu, or private offsite mitigation. The Best Management
Practices (BMPs) shall be appropriate for the specific circumstances. On-site
mitigation solutions shall be landscaped or otherwise utilize required
landscape areas within the site. The basis for requesting payment-in-lieu or
private offsite mitigation is to be clearly demonstrated on the drainage plan.
Management on site shall not be required where stormwater quality can be
effectively controlled through private off-site mitigation, or through an
arrangement to utilize a cooperator's existing regional stormwater management
infrastructure or facilities that are available to control stormwater quality,
and where:
      (1)   The lot is too small to accommodate management on site while also
accommodating the full plan of development.
      (2)   The soil is not stable.
      (3)   The site use is inconsistent with the capture and reuse of
stormwater.
      (4)   Other physical conditions exist where compliance with on-site
stormwater quality control requirement leaves insufficient area.
      (5)   Public or private off-site facilities provide an opportunity to
effectively accomplish the mitigation requirements of this Flood Damage
Prevention Ordinance.
      (6)   There is an opportunity to develop a project to replenish regional
ground water supplies at an offsite location; or
      (7)   A waiver to state water law or acquisition of water rights would be
required in order to implement management on site.
   (I)   In new development and redevelopment cases where the stormwater
quality volume cannot be met in total through either management on site or
private off-site mitigation, payment-in-lieu is required for the difference
between the amount met and the total required. Determination of payment-in-lieu
is described in the DPM; except that payment-in-lieu that would be otherwise
owed is waived for both new development and redevelopment in Metropolitan
Redevelopment Areas or within the City of Albuquerque Annexation Boundary of
1950-1959 (per Figure 4-1: Growth Through Annexation Over Time in Albuquerque
of the Albuquerque/Bernalillo County Comprehensive Plan).
   (J)   Where practicable, Stormwater Control Measures shall be designed to
manage the stormwater quality volume and control runoff generated by
contributing surfaces.
   (K)   The City Engineer is responsible for establishing criteria, procedures
and standards for design and construction of flood control, drainage control,
stormwater control, stormwater quality control, and erosion control
improvements within the City. The City standards for design and construction
are published in the Development Process Manual (DPM) and the Standard
Specifications for Public Works Construction (latest versions). The City
Engineer shall provide for variance from normal criteria and standards when
appropriate. When a variance is required or requested, the City Engineer shall
document the justification for their decision and retain as public records such
actions and justifications. Appeal of the City Engineer's variance decisions is
as provided in § 14-5-6-10. The City Engineer is also the designated flood
control official for the City in accordance with the requirements of the
Federal Insurance Administration.
   (L)   The introduction of groundwater cleanup flow to either natural or
constructed storm drainage and flood control facilities shall be prohibited
except as herein provided.
(Ord. 2025-031)
§ 14-5-6-2 SURFACE USE OF STREETS FOR DRAINAGE AND FLOOD CONTROL PURPOSES.
   (A)   The surface of streets may be used for drainage and flood control
purposes, to the extent such use does not interfere with the safe
transportation of people and vehicles.
   (B)   The 100-year design storm runoff shall not exceed the top of curb or
the right-of-way in a sump condition, in any street nor enter private property
from a street, except in recorded drainage or flood control easements, right-
of-way, or historic channels and watercourses where easements or right-of-way
cannot be obtained.
   (C)   The 10-year design storm runoff shall not exceed a depth of 0.5 feet
in any arterial street and shall flow such that one driving lane in each
direction is free of flowing or standing water. The 10-year design storm runoff
shall not exceed a depth of 0.5 feet in any collector street. Arterial and
collector streets that are in the state highway system may require more
stringent drainage criteria.
   (D)   The product of depth times velocity shall not exceed 6.5 at any
location in any street in the event of a 10-year design storm (with velocity
calculated as the average velocity measured in feet per second and depth
measured at the gutter flow line in feet).
   (E)   The discharge of nuisance waters to public streets is prohibited.
Arterial and collector streets shall be protected from damages to the pavement
surface and from the safety hazards created by surface flow of nuisance waters
across them.
   (F)   All developed land within the City shall be served by at least one
access that shall be an all-weather facility during a 100-year design storm,
with all channel-crossing structures beneath the roadway being able to pass a
100-year design storm runoff event.
(Ord. 2025-031)
§ 14-5-6-3 CROSSINGS.
   (A)   Channel crossing structures shall be provided on all arterial and
collector streets to safely pass the 100-year design storm runoff from major
arroyos assuming a fully developed watershed.
   (B)   Streets other than arterial, collector and sole access may cross major
arroyos and other watercourses by means of a "dip section" or "overflow
section" provided depth times velocity (with velocity calculated as the average
velocity measured in feet per second and depth measured in feet at the upstream
edge of the roadway including sidewalk) does not exceed 6.5 for that portion of
the 10-year storm runoff crossing on the street.
   (C)   Where feasible, temporary crossings shall be designed so they may be
incorporated into the future permanent crossing structure and so that they meet
street design standards established by the Traffic Engineer.
   (D)   Crossings of major arroyos by arterial and collector streets shall be
at public expense. Crossings of arroyos by streets other than arterials and
collectors shall be constructed at developer expense and shall meet street
design standards established by the Traffic Engineer.
   (E)   Temporary crossings required for access, including those on arterials
and collectors, shall be constructed at developer expense.
   (F)   The maintenance of facilities constructed at private expense on public
property is the responsibility of the owner or owner's agent until permanent
facilities are in place.
   (G)   The developer shall be responsible for maintaining or replacing
temporary crossing structures for a period of six years or until a permanent
structure is built, whichever comes first. The City shall maintain temporary
crossings which are designed and built such that they may be directly
incorporated into the ultimate facilities.
(Ord. 2025-031)
§ 14-5-6-4 FINANCIAL RESPONSIBILITY.
   (A)   The City may participate in the construction of permanent flood
control facilities to the extent that public benefits are derived from such
construction and consistent with Capital Improvements Program (CIP) priorities.
Reimbursement for private funding of such projects may also be available under
these conditions.
   (B)   The City may participate in the costs of channel crossing structures
on arterial and collector streets which are required for sole access to a
development. The developer's share shall not exceed the cost required to meet
the minimum street width standards established by the Traffic Engineer.
   (C)   The City shall not participate in the funding of flood control
facilities whose sole purpose is the reclamation of undeveloped land located
within a flood hazard area for private development purposes.
   (D)   All drainage control, flood control, stormwater control, and erosion
control facilities which directly result from a proposed land use change are
the responsibility of the developer. Developer financed facilities include all
those within the boundaries of the development, those required for development
adjacent to a major arroyo or within a flood hazard area, and all temporary and
permanent off-site drainage facilities. Master planned facilities shall be the
responsibility of the City and in some instances AMAFCA. However, if such
facilities are not programmed and funded at the time of development, the
developer shall construct the master planned facilities or provide for
temporary facilities, constructed to City Engineer standards within a temporary
or permanent drainage easement until such time that the City or AMAFCA
constructed facilities are in place. If the construction of such facilities is
a condition of plat approval or building permit issuance, then financial
guarantees of such construction satisfactory to the City Engineer shall also be
provided as a prerequisite. The City Engineer shall coordinate the construction
and location of temporary facilities with AMAFCA and other City departments. If
the ultimate on-site drainage control, flood control, stormwater control, or
erosion control facilities require permanent right-of-way or easements, such
right-of-way or easements shall be dedicated at the time of platting or
building permit issuance, whichever occurs first.
   (E)   Except as allowed by AMAFCA Resolution-81-8 and amendments thereto,
the dedication of land for public purposes does not relieve a developer of
responsibilities for the construction of drainage control, flood control,
stormwater control, and erosion control facilities that would otherwise be
necessary. The dedication of right-of-way or easements for drainage control,
flood control, stormwater control, or erosion control facilities does not
relieve a developer of responsibilities that would otherwise exist for the
construction of other public infrastructure.
(Ord. 2025-031)
§ 14-5-6-5 MULTIPLE USE RIGHT-OF-WAY AND EASEMENTS.
   (A)   Multiple use is encouraged for drainage right-of-way and drainage
easements including, but not limited to, utility corridors, recreation trails,
and parks. Where multiple use is planned by the City, another public agency, or
a public utility, the City may require that dedication statements include
language which permits said specified multiple uses in addition to the primary
drainage function, flood control, stormwater, or stormwater quality control, or
erosion control. However, land required to be dedicated for drainage related
right-of-way shall be limited to those land areas necessary for drainage
control, flood control, stormwater quality control, and erosion control and
necessary appurtenances.
   (B)   Certain drainage right-of-way may be credited for open space as may be
required by the IDO, except for any area which is exclusively used for the
drainage control, flood control, stormwater quality control, or erosion control
function.
(Ord. 2025-031)
§ 14-5-6-6 CONSTRUCTION SITE RESPONSIBILITY BY PROPERTY OWNER.
   (A)   For projects that disturb one acre or more, or less than one acre but
are part of a larger common plan of development exceeding one acre, the
property owner is to provide the Construction General Permit (CGP) Electronic
Notice of Intent (eNOI) documentation that contains the property owner name and
contact information a minimum of 14 days prior to earth disturbance and prior
to obtaining Work Order or Building Permit approval. To be accepted, the eNOI
is to be properly filled out and certified. If the eNOI is a Low Erosivity
Waiver by the contractor, then an Erosion and Sediment Control Permit §
14-5-6-6(B) below is to be approved by the City.
   (B)   For projects that are less than one acre and are not part of a larger
common plan of development, but meet the criteria as specified in §
14-5-6-7(B)(6), an approved Erosion and Sediment Control Permit is required
prior to earth disturbance, Work Order approval and Building Permit approval:
      (1)   The Erosion and Sediment Control Permit or eNOI holder must be
either the owner of the property or an authorized agent of the owner in order
for the permit to legally cover the activities occurring at the site. If the
permit holder is other than the owner, evidence of delegation of authority
acceptable to the City shall be provided prior to issuance of a permit by the
City.
      (2)   A project will be approved for earth disturbance, work order, or
building permit only upon approval of plans and conditions by the City
Engineer.
   (C)   Construction site inspections and quality controls shall include:
      (1)   Self-inspections by permittee. At a minimum a routine compliance
self-inspection is required to review the project for compliance with the
Construction General Permit once every 14 days and after any precipitation
event of 1/4 inch or greater until the site construction has been completed and
the site determined as stabilized by the City. Reports of these inspections
shall be kept by the person or entity authorized to direct the construction
activities on the site and shall be conducted during progress of the work,
during work suspensions, and until final acceptance of site stabilization by
the City. An owner's or their agent's failure to properly maintain records
shall subject that owner to the penalty provisions of this Flood Damage
Prevention Ordinance.
      (2)   City compliance inspections. The City will conduct routine
compliance inspections of projects for compliance with the Construction General
Permit. The City will conduct routine compliance inspections of all
construction projects cumulatively disturbing one acre or more or as specified
in §
14-5-6-7(B)(6) for compliance with the Construction General Permit. Site
inspections will be followed by any necessary compliance or enforcement action
to ensure corrective action has occurred. Corrective action is to be completed
within seven days, or the owner is subject to escalation per this Flood Damage
Prevention Ordinance. All projects will be inspected at completion for
confirmation of stabilization:
         (a)   Construction site compliance. If the City finds that the site is
not in compliance with the Construction General Permit and that stormwater
controls will not prevent sediment and waste from entering the City's drainage
system and/or leaving the construction site, the City may direct the owner or
their agent by written order to come into compliance. If deficiencies are
required to be mitigated, the owner or their agent shall be verbally notified
with a follow-up written confirmation occurring later. It shall be the duty of
the owner or their agent to immediately take all necessary steps to prevent
such migration of sediment and waste off the premises or from entering
receiving waters. Delivery of an order by the City to the owner or their agent
shall be deemed to be notice thereof, and binding upon the owner. Owner's or
their agent's failure to substantially comply with the order shall subject that
owner to the penalty provisions of this Flood Damage Prevention Ordinance.
         (b)   Maintenance of control measures. The property owner or the
owner's agent carrying out the Construction General Permit requirements shall
maintain all control measures, retaining walls, structures, plantings, and
other protective devices. Should the applicant or any other subsequent property
owners fail to maintain the temporary control facilities, retaining walls,
structures, plantings, and other protective devices, the City reserves the
authority to enter affected property, provide needed maintenance, and to charge
the owner for the work performed by the City or its contractors and to place a
lien on the property to cover the costs of said actions. Such municipal lien
shall be a statutory lien against the real property. This provision is in
addition to the City's ability to assess penalties or pursue any other remedies
as necessary to effectuate the purpose of this Flood Damage Prevention
Ordinance:
            (i)   The maintenance of facilities constructed at private expense
on public property is the responsibility of the owner or owner's agent until
permanent facilities are in place.
            (ii)   The developer shall be responsible for maintaining or
replacing temporary crossing structures for a period of six years or until a
permanent structure is built, whichever comes first. The City shall maintain
temporary crossings which are designed and built such that they may be directly
incorporated into the ultimate facilities.
      (3)   The City will utilize sanctions and penalties to enforce upon
violations of permit requirements. Progressive enforcement escalation
procedures will be used and strictly enforced for recalcitrant or repeat
offenders.
   (D)   Post-construction maintenance shall be performed as follows:
      (1)   Except as otherwise noted herein, all public stormwater facilities
shall be maintained by the City or other public body. The maintenance of
multiple use facilities to which the general public is denied access shall be
the responsibility of the owners and shall be performed to City Engineer
standards. The City Engineer may allow private maintenance within public right-
of-way or easement provided that adequate guarantees and indemnifications are
supplied.
      (2)   Private stormwater facilities:
         (a)   Maintenance of drainage facility - The owner shall maintain the
drainage facility at the owner's cost in accordance with this Flood Damage
Prevention Ordinance.
         (b)   City compliance inspections - The City's post-construction
inspection program will begin routine compliance inspections of projects at
three years after final acceptance of the BMP's. Notwithstanding, nothing
herein prevents the City from performing an unscheduled inspection when
reasonably necessary to implement the goals and requirements of this Flood
Damage Prevention Ordinance.
         (c)   City's right of entry - No owner, occupant or any other person
having charge, care or control of any building or premises shall fail or
neglect, after proper request is made, as herein provided, to promptly permit
entry by authorized City officials for the purpose of inspection and
investigation pursuant to this Flood Damage Prevention Ordinance, or to provide
maintenance or repair of the drainage facilities as it deems appropriate
without liability to the City. In the event that the City is denied reasonable
entry for purposes of inspection on a voluntary basis, the authorized City
official shall obtain a proper inspection warrant or other remedy provided by
law to secure entry. In the event of an emergency, where immediate entry is
necessary to protect life or property, the City has the right to enter and
perform inspections, maintenance or repair of the drainage facilities as it
deems appropriate, without liability to the City.
         (d)   Demand for construction or repair - The City may send written
notice ("notice") to the owner requiring maintenance, construction, or repair
to the drainage facility within 30 days ("deadline") of receipt of the notice,
and the owner, at their expense, must comply with the requirements of the
notice by the deadline provided.
         (e)   Failure to perform by owner and emergency work by City - If the
owner fails to comply with the terms of the notice by the deadline, or if the
City determines that an emergency condition exists, the City may perform the
work itself. The City may assess the owner for the cost of the work and for any
other expenses or damages, which result from owner's failure to perform. The
owner shall pay the City the amount assessed. If the owner fails to pay the
City within 30 days after the City gives the owner written notice of the amount
due, the City may impose a lien against owner's property for the total
resulting amount.
         (f)   Liability of City for repair after notice or as a result of
emergency - The City shall not be liable to the owner for any damages resulting
from the City's maintenance or repair following notice to the owner as required
this Flood Damage Prevention Ordinance, or in an emergency, unless the damages
are the result of the reckless conduct or gross negligence of the City.
         (g)    Indemnification - The City, its officials, agents and employees
are indemnified and shall be held harmless from all claims, actions, suits and
proceedings, whether known or unknown arising out of, or resulting from the
owner's negligent maintenance, construction, repair or use of the drainage
facility. Such indemnification shall encompass actions brought by third parties
against any non-City party when such actions are related to the aforementioned
drainage facility. Furthermore, and notwithstanding the provisions of NMSA
1978, Section 56-7-1 (if applicable), such indemnification specifically extends
to liability, for all claims, whether known or unknown, damages, losses or
expenses, including attorneys' fees, arising out of:
            (i)   the preparation or approval of maps, drawings, opinions,
reports, surveys, change orders, designs or specifications (except those
created by the City or its agents or employees); or
            (ii)   the giving of or the failure to give directions or
instructions by the City.
         (h)   This Flood Damage Prevention Ordinance is not intended to
replace, supersede, undermine or otherwise alter or replace any existing
covenant or other written agreement between the City and any property owner. To
the extent that the provisions herein conflict with the covenant or other
agreement's language, then the covenant language or other agreement's language
shall apply.
(Ord. 2025-031)
§ 14-5-6-7 GENERAL ADMINISTRATION.
   (A)   The design, construction and maintenance of all drainage control,
flood control, stormwater control, stormwater quality control, and erosion
control facilities within the City shall be performed in accordance with
procedures, criteria and standards formulated by the City Engineer and in
accordance with the policies established in this Flood Damage Prevention
Ordinance.
   (B)   All construction activities within the jurisdiction of the City shall
conform to the requirements of the City Engineer with respect to drainage
control, flood control, stormwater control, stormwater quality control, and
erosion control.
      (1)   Structures constituting less than 1,000 square feet, in plan view,
are excluded.
      (2)   Construction, grading or paving on any lot within the jurisdiction
of the City shall not increase the damage potential to upstream, downstream or
adjacent properties or public facilities. Damages shall be defined as those
caused by flooding from the 100-year design storm and all smaller storms and
from erosion and sedimentation resulting from the 10-year design storm and all
smaller storms.
      (3)   During the period of May 1 through October 31, any grading within
or adjacent to a facility that conveys a minimum of 50 cfs of holds 2.0 acre-
feet must provide for stormwater control, erosion control, and the safe passage
of the 10-year design storm runoff during the construction phase.
      (4)   Grading, cut, fill or importation of material in excess of 500
cubic yards or grading of any area of one acre or more shall conform to
drainage control, flood control, stormwater control, and erosion control
policies and to standards, criteria and procedures established by the City
Engineer with respect to drainage, flood control, stormwater control, and
erosion control. A grading permit, issued by the City Engineer, shall be
required for projects involving more than 500 cubic yards of material or one
acre or more in area. Applications for development of areas known to have been
sanitary landfills shall be accompanied by a report which discusses potential
health and soil mechanics problems and their solutions. Such reports shall be
prepared by a New Mexico Professional Engineer competent in soil mechanics.
      (5)   Where practicable, active construction sites shall utilize non-
structural controls, such as phased construction, dust control, good
housekeeping practices, and spill prevention and response.
      (6)   Sites with less than one acre of total land disturbance and that
are not part of a larger common plan of development shall be required to obtain
an Erosion and Sediment Control Permit if:
         (a)   The site is identified as having a significant potential for
erosion, based on observation or site characteristics including very steep
topography.
         (b)   The site is known to contain contaminated soils.
         (c)   The site is directly adjacent to receiving waters such as
directly connected storm drains, directly connected concrete arroyos or the Rio
Grande.
         (d)   The site contains a building to be demolished and the building
is 10,000 square feet or larger and was built or renovated prior to January
1,1980.
      (7)   Paving an area larger than 10,000 square feet other than right-of-
way shall require a paving permit. Applications for paving permits shall be
accompanied by a grading plan and Erosion and Sediment Control Plan if deemed
necessary by the City Engineer. Repaving of right-of-way is excluded.
      (8)   The City Engineer shall not issue a grading permit, paving permit,
Work Order, or Building Permit unless the proposed project is in compliance
with the policies of this Flood Damage Prevention Ordinance.
      (9)   Permit fees. Permit fees shall be established by the Mayor.
   (C)   The City may participate with the private sector, and other public
bodies and agencies operating within the jurisdiction of this policy, in order
to accomplish the goals and implement the policies adopted in this Flood Damage
Prevention Ordinance. This includes, but shall not be limited to, the
development and approval of master plans for flood control, drainage and
stormwater control, and stormwater quality control; participation in the
construction of projects and exercising control through the planning, platting,
zoning, and permitting processes. Projects involving City funding shall be
prioritized, funded and scheduled within the guidelines of the CIP and with CIP
projects.
   (D)   It shall be the responsibility of the City Engineer to produce,
approve, make and retain records of all drainage plans, drainage reports,
design analyses, design drawings, as-built drawings, and maintenance schedules
related to all drainage control, flood control, stormwater control, stormwater
quality control, and erosion control facilities constructed within City right-
of-way or easements.
   (E)   The City Engineer shall not approve any plan or report pertaining to
proposed construction, or other development where the proposed activity or
change in the land affected would result in downstream capacity being exceeded
and for which stormwater control has not been addressed in compliance with this
Flood Damage Prevention Ordinance and standards established by the City
Engineer in the Development Process Manual.
      (1)   Downstream capacity is determined based on the assumption of fully
developed watersheds. This assumption prevents "the first come, first served"
approach where downstream development unduly constrains upstream development.
Parameters used in the determination of downstream capacity include, but are
not limited to:
         (a)   Channel stability.
         (b)   Crossing structure hydraulic capacity.
         (c)   Reservoir capacity.
         (d)   Hydraulic capacity of street, storm sewer, or channel.
         (e)   Public health and safety.
         (f)   Maintenance constraints.
      (2)   Planned public storm drainage facilities are assumed as in place in
determining downstream capacity, provided that construction funds are available
and design has progressed to the point where capacity can be ascertained.
   (F)   Temporary facilities are only allowed on a case-by-case basis as
determined by the City Engineer. The level of protection to be provided by
temporary facilities shall be determined by considering:
      (1)   The likelihood and consequences of a failure.
      (2)   Length of time until permanent facilities will be in place.
      (3)   The acceptance of maintenance responsibilities and legal
liabilities.
   (G)   Requests for approvals of development and/or platting proposals to the
City Engineer shall be accompanied by drainage control, flood control,
stormwater control, stormwater quality control, and erosion control information
and/or commitments. The particular nature, location and scope of the proposed
development defines the degree of detail. One or more of the following levels
of submittal may be required based on the following:
      (1)   Conceptual grading and drainage plan. A graphic representation of
existing and proposed grading, drainage, flood control and erosion control
information. The information should be of sufficient detail to determine
project feasibility. The purposes of this plan are to check the compatibility
of the proposed development within grading, drainage, flood hazard and erosion
control constraints as dictated by on-site physical features as well as
adjacent properties, streets, alleys and channels. Modifications to the
Comprehensive Plan and the development of area plans, sector plans, site
development plans and landscaping plans on tracts of five acres or more are
appropriate applications of conceptual grading and drainage plans.
      (2)   Drainage plan. A short, detailed presentation required for approval
of small, simple development approvals. Drainage plans are prepared with or on
the detailed grading plan and address both on-site and off-site drainage
control, flood control, stormwater control, stormwater quality control, and
erosion control issues. Drainage plans are required for building permits, site
development plans and landscaping plans for developments involving less than
five acres.
      (3)   Drainage report.
         (a)   A drainage report is a comprehensive analysis of the drainage
control, flood control, stormwater control, stormwater quality control, and
erosion control constraints on and impacts resulting from a proposed platting,
development or construction project.
         (b)   Drainage reports are required for subdivisions containing more
than ten lots or constituting five acres or more, platting or construction
within a designated flood hazard area and for any platting or development
adjacent to a major arroyo.
      (4)   Erosion and sediment control plan. Erosion and sediment control
plans address all phases of each project from initial grading through and
including final occupancy. Phased projects require special attention. All
construction projects, both public and private, within the jurisdiction of this
Flood Damage Prevention Ordinance, unless specifically excluded, require an
approved erosion and sediment control plan prior to start of construction. An
erosion and sediment control plan is required for sites that meet the criteria
specified in this Flood Damage Prevention Ordinance.
   (H)   The Albuquerque 100-year design storm is the 100-year storm as defined
by the National Oceanic Atmospheric Administration (NOAA) and by the storm
distributions for time and areas as developed by the City Engineer and
documented in the DPM. Design circumstances may require larger or smaller storm
volumes. The sources for the rainfall data are current NOAA publications and
the City Engineer. When the need for other design storms is apparent, the City
Engineer will provide requirements concerning appropriate storms, frequencies
and durations.
   (I)   The City Engineer shall, within 30 calendar days after the submission
to him/her of a request in writing for an approval under this Flood Damage
Prevention Ordinance, approve or deny the request and provide a copy of their
decision to the applicant. If the request is denied, the reasons for such
denial shall be stated in writing. Appeal of such decisions is as provided in
this Flood Damage Prevention Ordinance.
   (J)   Discharge of any groundwater cleanup flows to the City's storm
drainage and flood control system shall not normally be permitted, however,
when such discharge of groundwater cleanup flow is by special agreement
permitted, the entity responsible for such groundwater cleanup flow discharge
shall also be responsible for all costs of installing, operating and removing
the means of such discharges and shall provide public liability protection as
required. The discharge of such groundwater cleanup flows shall also be
responsible for payment of such permit fees, user fees, and effluent sampling
fees according to an agreement with the City. All discharges to public storm
drainage and flood control facilities shall comply with adopted local and
applicable state and federal water quality requirements.
(Ord. 2025-031)
§ 14-5-6-8 ADMINISTRATIVE PROCEDURES, CRITERIA AND STANDARDS.
   (A)   Rules concerning procedures, criteria and standards shall be adopted,
amended or abolished in compliance with the policies of this Flood Damage
Prevention Ordinance and as provided by the procedures of this section.
   (B)   Proposed rule changes relating to procedures, criteria and standards
pursuant to this Flood Damage Prevention Ordinance, are initiated by the City
Engineer or any person may submit such proposed rule changes to the City
Engineer. If a person other than an official of the City submits such a
proposal, there may be a processing fee set by a rule of the City Engineer.
   (C)   Prior to the adoption, amendment or repeal of any rule pursuant to
this Flood Damage Prevention Ordinance (hereafter, "rule change"), the City
Engineer shall:
      (1)   Publish summary notice of the proposed rule change and solicit
comments in a daily newspaper of general circulation in the City and also where
appropriate in trade, industrial, or professional publications as will
reasonably give public notice to interested persons.
      (2)   Send the proposed rule change to all applicable City departments,
as determined by the City Engineer, and AMAFCA and solicit written comments.
      (3)   Send the proposed rule change to any person or group filing written
request for notice of all such rule changes. A fee may be charged to those
requesting notices to cover reasonable City costs.
      (4)   Solicit written comment on proposed rule changes for a period of 30
days from the date of their distribution and consider all comments before
ruling on proposed rule changes.
      (5)   Upon adoption of a contested rule change, issue a concise statement
of their principal reasons for the rule change and statement of positions
rejected in adopting the rule change together with the reasons for the
rejection. All persons who submit any writing to be considered in connection
with the proposed rule change shall promptly be given a copy of the decision,
by mail or otherwise.
   (D)   If a proposed rule change is approved by the City Engineer after
receiving comments, notice shall be posted in a conspicuous place in City Hall
and a reasonable effort shall be made to notify all interested parties.
Proposed rule changes shall not take effect sooner than 30 days from posting of
notice or sooner than 90 days from original distribution for comment.
   (E)   In the event of an emergency, the Mayor may direct that rules
concerning procedures, criteria or standards take effect immediately upon their
posting and distribution. The Mayor's finding of an emergency and brief
statement of the reasons for this finding shall be incorporated in the
emergency rule change. Upon adoption of an emergency rule change which change
shall remain in effect for longer than 60 days, notice to the public shall be
given within seven days and opportunity for public comment shall be given in
the manner required in this section for proposed rules.
   (F)   Appeal of the City Engineer's rule-making decisions is as provided in
this Flood Damage Prevention Ordinance. Regular rules, adopted under §
14-5-6-8(D) above, do not take effect until an appeal is decided if they are
appealed prior to taking effect. Emergency rules adopted under §
14-5-6-8(E) above and regular rules which have taken effect prior to appeal are
in effect until such time as they may be reversed by appeal action.
   (G)   Regulation relating to groundwater cleanup flows discharged to public
storm drainage and flood control facilities shall be exempted from the
provisions of this section. Requirements relating to groundwater cleanup flows
shall be established by the City Engineer on a case-by-case basis, based on
public health and safety needs, operational needs, and state and federal
regulatory compliance requirements current at time of promulgation. The
requirements and conditions shall include provisions for public liability
protection from groundwater cleanup flow discharges to the City's systems.
(Ord. 2025-031)
§ 14-5-6-9 ENFORCEMENT.
   (A)   Inspection Procedures.
      (1)   Whenever it is necessary to make an inspection to enforce any of
the provisions of this Flood Damage Prevention Ordinance, the City Engineer or
their authorized representative may enter such premises at all reasonable times
to inspect the same or to perform any duty imposed upon him by this Flood
Damage Prevention Ordinance; provided that if such premises be occupied, he or
she shall first present proper credentials and demand entry; and if such
premises be unoccupied, he shall first make a reasonable effort to locate the
owner or other persons having charge or control of the premises and demand
entry. If entry is refused or if the owner or other responsible person is not
found, the City Engineer or their authorized representative shall proceed to
obtain a search warrant by filing a complaint made in the Metropolitan Court or
District Court upon oath or affirmation. The complaint shall:
         (a)   Set forth the particular premises, or portion thereof, sought to
be inspected.
         (b)   State that the owner or occupant of the premises, or portion
thereof, has refused entry.
         (c)   State that inspection of the premises or portion thereof is
necessary to determine whether it complies with the requirements of this Flood
Damage Prevention Ordinance.
         (d)   Set forth the particular provisions of this Flood Damage
Prevention Ordinance sought to be enforced.
         (e)   Set forth any other reason necessitating the inspection,
including knowledge or belief that a particular condition exists in the
premises, or portion thereof which constitutes a violation of this Flood Damage
Prevention Ordinance; and
         (f)   State that the complainant is authorized by the City to make the
inspection.
      (2)   Each inspector shall be furnished with a City of Albuquerque
identification card and must present the same to other persons, when requested
to do so during the performance of their duty. No owner or occupant or any
other person having charge, care or control of any premises shall fail or
neglect, after proper demand is made as herein provided, to promptly permit
entry therein by the authorized inspector for the purpose of inspection and
examination pursuant to this Flood Damage Prevention Ordinance.
   (B)   Where, after investigation, an order has been issued by the City
Engineer to the owner of the property on which a violation has occurred and the
order is not complied with within 30 days for post-construction violations and
within seven days for construction violations, or such longer reasonable time
as may be prescribed by the City Engineer, or if the responsible party or
violator cannot be found or determined, the violator shall be subject to the
penalty provisions set forth in §
1-1-99 of this code of ordinances up to $500 per day. Each day of violation is
considered a separate offense.
   (C)   In addition to any fines or penalty provisions set forth in this Flood
Damage Prevention Ordinance and §
1-1-99 of this code, the City may enforce this Flood Damage Prevention
Ordinance through any other legal or equitable actions deemed necessary and
appropriate by the City Engineer. Fines, costs of remedial action, damages, or
any other expenses attributable to an owner under this Flood Damage Prevention
Ordinance may be enforced by the City as a lien against the property as
provided in NMSA 1978, Section 3-36-2. Such municipal lien shall attach to the
property and be subject to foreclosure as provided in NMSA 1978, Sections 3-36-
1 to 3-36-7.
(Ord. 2025-031)
§ 14-5-6-10 APPEALS; TECHNICAL STANDARDS COMMITTEE.
   (A)   Any applicant aggrieved by a decision as to actions provided in this
Flood Damage Prevention Ordinance of the City Engineer or absence of such
decision, may appeal such decision to the Technical Standards Committee of the
City. Such appeal shall be made by notice of appeal in writing addressed to the
Chairperson of the Technical Standards Committee and delivered to the office of
the City Engineer within fifteen (15) calendar days after the date the decision
was mailed to the applicant. The Chairperson of the Technical Standards
Committee shall notify the applicant and the City Engineer of the date, time,
and place of the appeal hearing at least five days prior to the hearing date.
Such hearing shall be conducted not earlier than fifteen (15) calendar days nor
later than forty-five (45) calendar days after the filing of the notice of
appeal. At the hearing, the Technical Standards Committee may consider such
facts, exhibits, and engineering principles as may be presented by the
appellant or the City Engineer or their designee, or of which the members may
have knowledge or experience, and may affirm, reverse or modify the decision
appealed from, and attach as conditions to their decision such requirements as
in their opinion may be necessary or appropriate in compliance with the
policies of this Flood Damage Prevention Ordinance to safeguard persons and
property from stormwater runoff. Each decision of the Technical Standards
Committee shall be in writing and shall state reasons therefore. A copy of the
decision shall be promptly mailed to the applicant and to the City Engineer.
   (B)   The City Engineer or applicant aggrieved by any decision of the
Technical Standards Committee may appeal such decision to the City Council.
Such appeal shall be requested by notice of appeal in writing addressed to the
President of the City Council and delivered to the office of the City Council
within fifteen (15) calendar days after the date a copy of the decision was
mailed to the applicant. Such appeal shall be heard after notice at the first
available meeting of the City Council. The City Council may affirm, reverse, or
modify the decision of the Technical Standards Committee.
   (C)   There is hereby created a Technical Standards Committee, consisting of
five members who shall be appointed by the Mayor with the advice and consent of
the City Council, and who shall serve without pay. Two members shall serve for
a term ending August 1,1983, one member shall serve for a term ending August
1,1984, and two members shall serve for terms ending August 1,1985. Subsequent
terms shall be for three years. Four of such members shall be registered in
this state as professional engineers, be competent in the science of surface
water hydrology, and have experience in solving surface drainage problems. The
members shall select one member to serve as Chairperson, and their decisions
shall be by majority vote of the members attending a hearing. A quorum shall
consist of three members. The Technical Standards Committee shall hear and
determine all appeals as provided by this section. The Committee may from time
to time recommend modifications of this Flood Damage Prevention Ordinance to
the Mayor. The City Engineer shall provide such facilities, supplies, and
services, including postage, stationery and secretarial assistance, as may be
required by the Committee.
(Ord. 2025-031)
§ 14-5-6-11 SENSITIVE LANDS.
   No site clearing, grubbing, and/or dirt work are permitted prior to the
approval of a site plan if a Sensitive Lands Analysis necessitates a Site Plan
- EPC approval per IDO Section 14-16-5-2(C).
(Ord. 2025-031)
§ 14-5-6-12 PENALTY.
   A person who violates any provisions of this Flood Damage Prevention
Ordinance shall be subject to the penalty provisions set forth in §
1-1-99 of this code of ordinances. Each day of violation is considered a
separate offense.
(Ord. 2025-031)
ARTICLE 6: RAILROAD CARS, STATIONARY
Section
   
14-6-1   Prohibited in residential zones
   
14-6-2   Regulated in nonresidential zones
   
14-6-3   Appeals
   
14-6-4   Fee
   
14-6-5   Enforcement
   
14-6-6   Interpretation
 
   
14-6-99   Penalty
§ 14-6-1 PROHIBITED IN RESIDENTIAL ZONES.
   The conversion and location of railroad cars for stationary purposes is
hereby prohibited in all residential zones established by the Integrated
Development Ordinance, as amended or superseded by subsequent ordinances.
('74 Code, § 7-10-1) (Ord. 73- 1973; Am. Ord._2017-025)
§ 14-6-2 REGULATED IN NONRESIDENTIAL ZONES.
   The following applies to nonresidential zones:
   (A)   Development Plan Required. Each request for a building permit for
development utilizing railroad cars for stationary purposes must be accompanied
by three copies of an accurate site development plan drawn at a scale of one
inch to 100 feet, or larger which specifies the following:
      (1)   Legal description of the site;
      (2)   Exact structure locations;
      (3)   Structure appearance (including signs) and dimensions;
      (4)   Pedestrian and vehicular circulation;
      (5)   Off-street parking facilities in accordance with the off-street
parking regulations in the Integrated Development Ordinance;
      (6)   Loading facilities;
      (7)   Surface drainage plan;
      (8)   Areas to be covered with impervious surface; and
      (9)   Landscape plan, including an outline of proposed planting beds and
grass areas, and the location, size and species of proposed significant trees
and shrubs.
   (B)   Procedure.
      (1)   Notification. The Planning Department shall mail written notice at
least 15 days prior to the date of decision to the owners of all property
within 100 feet of the exterior boundaries of the site, excluding public right-
of-way, as shown in the records of the Bernalillo County Assessor indicating
the location and proposed use as well as where interested persons may examine
the plans and file comments, and including the date upon which a decision is to
be made.
      (2)   Review. The Planning Director, or his authorized representative,
shall request comments from other appropriate departments and agencies, and
review the plans submitted with respect to conformity to this article and
related regulations, and shall review the comments received.
      (3)   Decision. The Planning Director, or his authorized representative,
shall, after review of the plans and comments received, state his findings and
decision in writing to the applicant and any neighboring property owners who
have commented on the matter. The Planning Director, or his authorized
representative, may approve an application only when he finds that the intended
development will not, in the circumstances of the particular case and under
conditions imposed, be injurious to the neighborhood or appropriate use of
adjoining property, or otherwise be detrimental to the public welfare, safety,
health, morals, or convenience, and finds that the use will be compatible with
the intent of this article. In approving an application, he may impose
conditions necessary to achieve the above objective.
('74 Code, § 7-10-2) (Ord. 73- 1973; Am. Ord._2017-025)
§ 14-6-3 APPEALS.
   (A)   Appeal to the Planning Commission. Any person aggrieved with any
determination of the city staff acting under this article may appeal to the
Planning Commission by submitting written application to the Planning
Department within 15 days after the date of the city's decision. The date the
determination by the city is issued is not included in the 15-day period for
filing an appeal, and if the 15th day falls on a Saturday, Sunday, or holiday
as listed in
Chapter 3, Article 1, Merit System; Personnel Policies, the next working day is
considered as the deadline for filing the appeal. Such appeal shall be heard
and decided by the Planning Commission within 60 days of its filing.
   (B)   Appeal to the City Council. Any person aggrieved with any
determination of the Planning Commission acting under this article may file an
appeal to the City Council by submitting written application to the Planning
Department within 15 days of the Planning Commission's decision, such 15-day
period to be determined as in division (A) above. The City Council may decline
to hear the appeal if it finds that all needed city plans, policies, and
ordinances have been properly followed. If it decides that all needed city
plans, policies and ordinances have not been properly followed, it shall hear
the appeal. Such appeal, if heard shall be heard within 60 days of its filing.
('74 Code, § 7-10-3) (Ord. 73-1973; Am. Ord. 77-1975)
§ 14-6-4 FEE. 
   An application fee of $20 shall be charged for each application for each
premises. The fee shall not be refunded.
('74 Code, § 7-10-4) (Ord. 77-1975)
§ 14-6-5 ENFORCEMENT.
   (A)   The Zoning Administrator, a city employee designated by the Planning
Director, is the Enforcement Officer and has the authority and duty to enforce
this article.
   (B)   An application for a building permit in relation to a stationary
railroad car shall be approved by the Enforcement Officer. A permit issued in
conflict with the provisions of this article is void.
   (C)   The Enforcement Officer or his designated representative has the
authority to enter all premises for the purpose of inspection, provided,
however, that no building or stationary railroad car shall be entered without
the consent of the owner or occupant.
   (D)   In the event a stationary railroad car is located in violation of this
article, the Enforcement Officer, in addition to other remedies, may institute
an appropriate action or proceeding to prevent the unlawful action, to
restrain, correct, or abate the violation; to prevent the occupation of the
building, structure, or land, or to prevent an illegal act, conduct, business,
or use in or about the premises.
('74 Code, § 7-10-5) (Ord. 77-1975)
§ 14-6-6 INTERPRETATION.
   The regulations of this article are held to be minimum standards to carry
out the purpose of this article. This article is not intended to interfere
with, abrogate, or annul any easement, covenant, or other agreement between
parties, or other valid ordinances. Where this article imposes a greater
restriction upon the use of land or building, or upon the height of building,
or requires larger open space than is imposed by other rules, regulations,
easements, covenants, agreements, or ordinances, the provisions of this article
control.
('74 Code, § 7-10-6) (Ord. 77-1975)
§ 14-6-99 PENALTY.
   Any person who violates any provision of this article is subject to the
general penalty provisions of this code set forth in §
1-1-99.
('74 Code, § 7-10-7) (Ord. 77-1975)
ARTICLE 7: PROFESSIONAL SERVICES
Section
Part 1: Compensation
   
14-7-1-1   Definitions
   
14-7-1-2   Definite term required
   
14-7-1-3   Compensation for basic services of consulting engineers, architects
and landscape architects
   
14-7-1-4   Change in scope
   
14-7-1-5   Multi-phase projects
   
14-7-1-6   Promulgation of rules and regulations
Part 2: Selection Advisory Committee
   
14-7-2-1   Short title
   
14-7-2-2   Selection of services
   
14-7-2-3   Selection advisory committee
   
14-7-2-4   Ad hoc board
   
14-7-2-5   Publication of proposed projects
   
14-7-2-6   Method of selection
   
14-7-2-7   Promulgation of rules and regulations
   
14-7-2-8   Emergency selection
   
14-7-2-9   Disclosure statement
   
14-7-2-10   Compliance with state laws
PART 1: COMPENSATION
§ 14-7-1-1 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of §§ 14-7-1-1 et seq., the following definition shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   BASIC SERVICES. Those professional services of consulting engineers,
architects and landscape architects identified as "Basic Services" in each
specific agreement between the city and each consulting engineer, architect or
landscape architect or engineering, architectural or landscape architectural
firm to which a project is assigned.
   DESIGN-BUILD SERVICES. Services provided by a contractor under a single
design-build contract with the city, pursuant to which the contractor provides
both design and construction services for a project.
('74 Code, § 7-20-1) (Ord. 80-1976; Am. Ord. 80-1985; Am. Ord. 65-1990; Am.
Ord. 55-1999; Am. Ord._2021-002)
§ 14-7-1-2 DEFINITE TERM REQUIRED.
   Any agreement for the basic services provided by consulting engineers,
architects and landscape architects and for design-build services shall be for
a definite term which shall be stated in the agreement. The term of the
agreement may only be extended for good cause and after the written approval of
the Chief Administrative Officer.
(Ord. 55-1999; Am. Ord._2021-002)
§ 14-7-1-3 COMPENSATION FOR BASIC SERVICES OF CONSULTING ENGINEERS, ARCHITECTS
AND LANDSCAPE ARCHITECTS.
   Compensation for the basic services provided by consulting engineers,
architects and landscape architects and for design-build services shall be
negotiated. If an estimated construction cost can be determined from the
project for which the basic services are provided, it may be used as the basis
of negotiations unless use of the estimated construction cost is prohibited by
funding authorities.
('74 Code, § 7-20-2) (Ord. 80- 1976; Am. Ord. 80-1985; Am. Ord. 65-1990; Am.
Ord. 55-1999; Am. Ord._2021-002)
§ 14-7-1-4 CHANGE IN SCOPE; AUTHORIZATION REQUIRED.
   (A)   In the event there is a change in the scope, complexity, character, or
duration of a project involving the basic services of consulting engineers,
architects or landscape architects or design-build services, the compensation
for such services shall be renegotiated or negotiated as appropriate. Whenever
applicable, appropriate consideration of estimated construction cost will be
used as the basis of negotiations.
   (B)   Any change in scope that will require different or additional
services, except those services to which the emergency selection provisions in
this article apply, shall be authorized by the prior written approval of the
City Project Manager, the User Department Director and the Capital Improvements
Program Director, provided that any such change that is greater than $25,000
shall also require the prior written approval of the Chief Administrative
Officer. This provision shall apply to a change in any form, whether by
amendment, special services authorization, addendum or other designation.
   (C)   The written authorization shall specify the additional or different
services, the estimated total cost of the additional or different services, and
how the additional or different services relate to the scope of services of the
underlying agreement for basic services or design-build services .
   (D)   Verbal authorization to proceed to perform additional or different
services shall not constitute valid authorization, and no services should be
performed prior to the execution of all required written authorizations.
('74 Code, § 7-20-3) (Ord. 80- 1976; Am. Ord. 80-1985; Am. Ord. 65-1990; Am.
Ord. 55-1999; Am. Ord._2021-002)
§ 14-7-1-5 MULTI-PHASE PROJECTS.
   Compensation for the basic services of consulting engineers, architects or
landscape architects for projects to be constructed in stages over a period of
years, including design-build services, shall be negotiated. Whenever
applicable, appropriate consideration of estimated construction cost will be
used as the basis of negotiations.
('74 Code, § 7-20-4) (Ord. 80- 1976; Am. Ord. 80-1985; Am. Ord. 65-1990; Am.
Ord. 55-1999; Am. Ord._2021-002)
§ 14-7-1-6 PROMULGATION OF RULES AND REGULATIONS.
   The Mayor shall promulgate rules and regulations for determining
compensation for the basic services of consulting engineers, architects and
landscape architects when an estimated construction cost is used as the basis
of negotiations. Such rules and regulations shall provide for a biennial review
of the percentage of estimated construction cost to be paid to consulting
engineers, architects and landscape architects for basic services.
('74 Code, § 7-20-5) (Ord. 80-1985; Am. Ord. 65-1990; Am. Ord. 55-1999)
PART 2: SELECTION ADVISORY COMMITTEE
§ 14-7-2-1 SHORT TITLE.
   Sections 14-7-2-1 et seq. may be cited as the "Selection Advisory Committee
Ordinance."
('74 Code, § 7-17-1) (Ord. 48-1974)
§ 14-7-2-2 SELECTION OF SERVICES.
   The selection of firms or persons to provide professional architectural,
engineering, landscape architectural and other related professional services
which will cost $25,000 or more shall be accomplished in accordance with the
provisions of §§
14-7-2-1 et seq. For the purposes of §§
14-7-2-1 et seq., PROFESSIONAL ARCHITECTURAL, ENGINEERING, LANDSCAPE
ARCHITECTURAL AND OTHER RELATED PROFESSIONAL SERVICES means the performance of
any professional service or creative work requiring architectural, landscape
architecture or engineering education, training and experience, and the
application of special knowledge of the mathematical, physical and engineering
sciences, design or architectural principles to such professional services or
creative work as consultation, investigation, evaluation, planning, design,
observation of construction, surveying, photogrammetry and construction
management, and shall also include design-build services costing at least five
million dollars ($5,000,000). The design-build project delivery method shall
not be used for projects costing less than five million dollars ($5,000,000).
('74 Code, § 7-17-2) (Ord. 66-1976; Am. Ord. 36-1983; Am. Ord. 82-1986; Am.
Ord. 66-1990; Am. Ord._2021-002)
§ 14-7-2-3 SELECTION ADVISORY COMMITTEE.
   The Selection Advisory Committee shall be composed of five voting members
and a nonvoting Selection Advisory Committee Administrator as follows:
   (A)   Architectural Services.
      (1)   The Director of the Department of the City of Albuquerque which is
the user agency of the project or the designated staff alternate of the
Department Director.
      (2)   Three city employees, two of whom are registered in the state as
architects.
      (3)   An architect who is registered in the state shall be appointed as a
member by the Mayor from a panel which has been appointed by the Mayor with the
advice and consent of the Council in the manner prescribed herein. Such member
shall serve on the Selection Advisory Committee for a period of time designated
by the Mayor, which period shall not exceed six consecutive months. The Mayor
shall appoint a panel of three architects chosen from a list of names presented
by the Albuquerque Chapter of the American Institute of Architects. All panel
members shall be residents of the city and shall not be employees or officials
of the city and shall not be contracting directly or indirectly through a
subcontract with the city to perform architectural services for the city. The
members of the panel of architects shall be appointed for three year
unstaggered terms and shall not be reappointed for one year. Any vacancy for
any unexpired term shall be filled for the unexpired term by the same procedure
used for the original selection and appointment of the member vacating the
position. In the event that a Mayor’s representative is not available, a
registered architect who is a public employee and is approved by the Mayor may
serve as the Mayor’s representative.
      (4)   Selection Advisory Committee Administrator.
   (B)   Engineering Services.
      (1)   The Director of the Department of the City of Albuquerque which is
the user agency of the project or the designated staff alternate of the
Department Director.
      (2)   Three city employees, two of whom are registered in the state as
professional engineers.
      (3)   A professional engineer who is registered in the state shall be
appointed as a member by the Mayor from a panel which has been appointed by the
Mayor with the advice and consent of the Council in the manner prescribed
herein. Such member shall serve on the Selection Advisory Committee for a
period of time designated by the Mayor, which period shall not exceed six
consecutive months. The Mayor shall appoint a panel of three professional
engineers chosen from a list of names presented jointly by the National Society
of Professional Engineers, Albuquerque Chapter, and the Consulting Engineers
Council, New Mexico Section. All panel members shall be residents of the city
and shall not be employees or officials of the city and shall not be
contracting directly or indirectly through a subcontract with the city to
perform engineering services for the city. The members of the panel of
professional engineers shall be appointed for three year unstaggered terms and
shall not be reappointed for one year. Any vacancy for any unexpired term shall
be filled for the unexpired term by the same procedure used for the original
selection and appointment of the member vacating the position. In the event
that a Mayor’s representative is not available, a registered professional
engineer who is a public employee and is approved by the Mayor may serve as the
Mayor’s representative.
      (4)   Selection Advisory Committee Administrator.
   (C)   Landscape Architectural Services.
      (1)   The Director of the Department of the City of Albuquerque which is
the user agency of the project or the designated staff alternate of the
Department Director.
      (2)   Three city employees, two of whom are registered in the state as
landscape architects.
      (3)   A landscape architect who is registered in the state shall be
appointed as a member by the Mayor from a panel which has been appointed by the
Mayor with the advice and consent of the Council in the manner prescribed
herein. Such member shall serve on the Selection Advisory Committee for a
period of time designated by the Mayor, which period shall not exceed six
consecutive months. The Mayor shall appoint a panel of three landscape
architects chosen from a list of names presented by the American Society of
Landscape Architects. All panel members shall be residents of the city and
shall not be employees or officials of the city and shall not be contracting
directly or indirectly through a subcontract with the city to perform landscape
architectural services for the city. The members of the panel of landscape
architects shall be appointed for three year unstaggered terms and shall not be
reappointed for one year. Any vacancy for any unexpired term shall be filled
for the unexpired term by the same procedure used for the original selection
and appointment of the member vacating the position. In the event that a
Mayor’s representative is not available, a registered landscape architect who
is a public employee and is approved by the Mayor may serve as the Mayor’s
representative.
      (4)   Selection Advisory Committee Administrator.
   (D)   Design-Build Services.
      (1)   The Director of the Department of the City of Albuquerque which is
the user agency of the project or the designated staff alternate of the
Department Director.
      (2)   The City Architect.
      (3)   Department of Municipal Development Deputy Director, or their
designee.
      (4)   The Project Manager.
      (5)   An architect who is registered in the state shall be appointed as a
member by the Mayor from a panel which has been appointed by the Mayor with the
advice and consent of the Council in the manner prescribed herein. Such member
shall serve on the Selection Advisory Committee for a period of time designated
by the Mayor, which period shall not exceed six consecutive months. The Mayor
shall appoint a panel of three architects chosen from a list of names presented
by the Albuquerque Chapter of the American Institute of Architects. All panel
members shall be residents of the city and shall not be employees or officials
of the city and shall not be contracting directly or indirectly through a
subcontract with the city to perform architectural services for the city. The
members of the panel of architects shall be appointed for three year
unstaggered terms and shall not be reappointed for one year. Any vacancy for
any unexpired term shall be filled for the unexpired term by the same procedure
used for the original selection and appointment of the member vacating the
position. In the event that a Mayor's representative is not available, a
registered architect who is a public employee and is approved by the Mayor may
serve as the Mayor's representative.
      (6)   Selection Advisory Committee Administrator.
   (E)   The Selection Advisory Committee Administrator shall be a city
employee designated by the Mayor as responsible for all administrative
functions associated with the Selection Advisory Committee as delineated in
Rules and Regulations promulgated by the Mayor. The Selection Advisory
Committee Administrator shall serve as the Chairperson of the Selection
Advisory Committee.
   (F)   The Selection Advisory Committee Administrator shall not call a
meeting with less than two weeks notice to members unless the Administrator
first polls all members and finds no objection to the meeting date proposed and
a quorum of the members shall be present.
('74 Code, § 7-17-3) (Ord. 2-1976; Am. Ord. 26-1981, Am. Ord. 82-1986; Am. Ord.
66-1990; Am. Ord. 71-2005; Am. Ord._2021-002)
§ 14-7-2-4 AD HOC BOARD.
   In case of a project of unique or special nature, the Mayor may name an Ad
Hoc Board to recommend to the Mayor firms or persons to provide professional
architectural, engineering, landscape architectural and other related
professional services required on the project. The Ad Hoc Board shall be
comprised of the appropriate Selection Advisory Committee members augmented by
a maximum of four additional voting members. If the Mayor elects to use this
method of selection, the Council shall be advised of the reasons for the Ad Hoc
Board, the names of the additional voting member(s) who would augment the
Selection Advisory Committee, and the selection criteria. The Council shall
review and approve the Mayor's recommendation of the establishment of an Ad Hoc
Board and the additional voting member(s) who would augment the Selection
Advisory Committee prior to any convening of the Board. The Selection Advisory
Committee Administrator shall serve as the Chairperson of the Ad Hoc Board.
('74 Code, § 7-17-4) (Ord. 48-1974; Am. Ord. 82-1986)
§ 14-7-2-5 PUBLICATION OF PROPOSED PROJECTS.
   Brief descriptions of proposed projects shall be published in an Albuquerque
newspaper of general circulation at least twice, not less than one week apart,
with a due date for responses not less than one week after the second
publication.
('74 Code, § 7-17-5) (Ord. 48-1974; Am. Ord. 82-1986)
§ 14-7-2-6 METHOD OF SELECTION.
   (A)   Recommendation by Committee. The Selection Advisory Committee shall
evaluate proposals received for each project by assigning points to evaluation
criteria. For each project the User Department, in coordination with the
Chairperson, shall determine the maximum points for each criterion according to
adopted procedures. If interviews are conducted from a short list of
respondents, interview project related items shall be determined by the
Committee. Interviewee's responses to these items during their interview
presentation to the Committee shall also be evaluated by assigning points to
evaluation criteria which shall consist of the interview items, the overall
quality of the presentation, and subsequent response to questions from
Committee Members. The Committee shall submit the names of not more than three
qualified professional firms or persons in the order in which they are
recommended to the Mayor. Rankings shall be determined by the amount of points
for each firm or person. If the Committee determines that there are less than
three firms or persons qualified to provide the services, only those deemed
qualified shall be recommended to the Mayor.
   (B)   Recommendation by Mayor. For the purpose of review and approval by the
Council as required by §§
14-7-2-1 et seq., the Mayor shall submit the Committee's or Ad Hoc Board's
recommended list of qualified professional firms or persons to the Council and
indicate the order in which they are recommended. If the order is different
from the Committee's or Ad Hoc Board's, the Mayor shall explain the difference.
   (C)   Approval by Council. The Council shall approve or disapprove the
recommendations made by the Mayor. In the event the Council does not approve
the Mayor's recommendations, the Mayor shall then recommend another firm or
person for the number one ranking from the firms or persons recommended by the
Committee or the Ad Hoc Board.
   (D)   If the Mayor is unable to negotiate a satisfactory services agreement
with the firm or person ranked number one based upon unreasonable delay or
unreasonable cost, the Mayor shall formally terminate negotiations with such
firm or person and the Mayor may undertake negotiations with the firm or person
ranked number two. In the event that the Mayor is unable to negotiate a
satisfactory services agreement with the firm or person ranked number two, the
Mayor shall formally terminate negotiations with such firm or person and the
Mayor may undertake negotiations with the firm or person ranked number three.
In the event that the Mayor is unable to negotiate a satisfactory services
agreement with the person ranked number three, the Mayor shall formally
terminate negotiations with such firm or person. If, after the termination of
negotiations with the firm or person ranked number three there still is a need
for the services, the entire selection process shall be repeated.
   (E)   In those instances where the Mayor is unable to negotiate a
satisfactory services agreement with the firms or persons in their ranked order
as approved by Council, the Mayor shall formally communicate with the City
Council the reasons for terminating negotiations in each case.
('74 Code, § 7-17-6) (Ord. 2-1976; Am. Ord. 82-1986; Am. Ord. 22-1990; Am. Ord.
66-1990)
§ 14-7-2-7 PROMULGATION OF RULES AND REGULATIONS.
   The Mayor shall promulgate rules and regulations for the efficient and
equitable administration of §§
14-7-2-1 et seq. Such rules and regulations shall govern:
   (A)   The procedures to be followed in the selection of firms or persons to
provide professional architectural, engineering, landscape architectural and
other related professional services which will cost less than$150,000.
   (B)   The procedures to be followed by the Selection Advisory Committee in
the selection of firms or persons to provide professional architectural,
engineering, landscape architectural and other related professional services
which will cost$150,000 or more.
('74 Code, § 7-17-8) (Ord. 48- 1974; Am. Ord. 36-1983; Am. Ord. 82-1986; Am.
Ord. 66-1990; Am. Ord._2021-013)
§ 14-7-2-8 EMERGENCY SELECTION.
   When the Mayor determines that urgent and compelling reasons require
emergency contractual professional architectural, engineering, landscape
architectural and other related professional services, the Mayor,
notwithstanding any provision contained herein, may approve such services,
provided that the Mayor shall notify the Council of the action citing the
compelling and urgent reasons therefor. The report required to be made to the
Council by the Mayor, shall be submitted at the next regular meeting of the
Council.
('74 Code, § 7-17-9) (Ord. 48-1974; Am. Ord. 82-1986)
§ 14-7-2-9 DISCLOSURE STATEMENT.
   The Mayor shall cause to be incorporated into any contract between the city
and any firm or person performing professional architectural, engineering,
landscape architectural and other related services, a disclosure statement
wherein such firm or person shall affirm whether within the prior two years, it
has made or agreed to make any valuable gift, whether in the form of service,
loan, thing or promise, to any person or any of his immediate family, having
the duty to recommend, the right to vote upon, or any other direct influence on
the selection of firms or persons performing professional architectural,
engineering, landscape architectural and other related services. Provided,
however that campaign contributions as defined by the Election Code of the City
Charter shall not be considered as a valuable gift. In the event that the firm
or person affirms having made or agreed to make any such valuable gift or
refuses to make any disclosure or makes a false or misleading disclosure, the
city shall not enter into such contract or shall void such contract if it has
already been entered into it with such firm or person.
('74 Code, § 7-17-10) (Ord. 2-1976; Am. Ord. 82-1986)
§ 14-7-2-10 COMPLIANCE WITH STATE LAWS.
   The city will comply with state laws regarding prevailing wage, public
works, and apprentice training and any directive of the State Department of
Workforce Solutions related to these laws.
(Ord._2021-002)
ARTICLE 8: COMMISSIONS, COUNCILS,
AGENCIES AND OTHER BODIES
Section
Part 1: [Reserved]
   14-8-1-1 - 14-8-1-8   [Reserved]
Part 2: Neighborhood Association Recognition
   
14-8-2-1   Short title
   
14-8-2-2   Definitions
   
14-8-2-3   Application and criteria for recognition of neighborhood
associations
   
14-8-2-4   Application and criteria for recognition of neighborhood coalitions
   
14-8-2-5   Responsibilities of recognized neighborhood associations and
recognized neighborhood coalitions
   
14-8-2-6   Homeowner associations, business groups, and community groups
   
14-8-2-7   Responsibilities of city departments other than ONC
   
14-8-2-8   Responsibilities of the ONC
   
14-8-2-9   Developer responsibilities
Part 3: Urban Renewal Agency
   
14-8-3-1   Public interest
   
14-8-3-2   Urban renewal agency
   
14-8-3-3   Municipal urban development fund
Part 4: Metropolitan Redevelopment Agency
   
14-8-4-1   Short title
   
14-8-4-2   Legislative findings and purpose
   
14-8-4-3   Redevelopment project powers
   
14-8-4-4   Powers of metropolitan redevelopment agency
   
14-8-4-5   Staff of agencies provided by city
   
14-8-4-6   Annual report
   
14-8-4-7   Activities to be undertaken pursuant to statutory authority
   
14-8-4-8   Appeal
   
14-8-4-9   Lease fee
   
14-8-4-10   Tax increment financing guidelines
   
14-8-4-11   Tax increment financing district dissolution
   
14-8-4-12   Definitions
Part 5: Energy Conservation Council
   
14-8-5-1   Intent
   
14-8-5-2   Definitions
   
14-8-5-3   Energy conservation council
   
14-8-5-4   Membership and organization
   
14-8-5-5   Powers and duties
Part 6: Development Commission
   
14-8-6-1   Definitions
   
14-8-6-2   Commission created; duties
   
14-8-6-3   Temporary provision; terms of office
   
14-8-6-4   Temporary provision; references
   
14-8-6-5   Albuquerque foreign-trade zone; task forces
   
14-8-6-6   Conflict of interest
Part 7: Board of Appeals for Zoning Special Exceptions
(see
Integrated Development Ordinance)
Cross-reference:
   
Beautification Committee,
 
§ 2-6-14
   
City of Albuquerque’s Greater Albuquerque Bicycling Advisory Committee, see §
2-6-15
   
City of Albuquerque’s Greater Albuquerque Recreational Trails Committee, see §
2-6-17
   
Environmental Planning Commission, see §§ 14-13-3-1 et seq.
   Landmarks and Urban Conservation Commission, see § 14-12-5
   
Open Space Advisory Board, see
 
§ 2-6-16
   
Selection Advisory Committee for professional services, see §§ 14-7-2-1 et seq.
PART 1: [RESERVED]
 
PART 2: NEIGHBORHOOD ASSOCIATION RECOGNITION
§ 14-8-2-1 SHORT TITLE.
   Sections 14-8-2-1 et seq. shall be cited as the “Neighborhood Association
Recognition Ordinance.”
(Ord._2022-017)
§ 14-8-2-2 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of §§
14-8-2-1 et seq., the following definitions shall apply unless the context
clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   BUSINESS OR COMMUNITY GROUP. An organized group of residents or businesses
located within the city, but who may not necessarily reside within an
identifiable geographic boundary.
   HOMEOWNER ASSOCIATION. An organization located within the city that is
subject to Section 47-16-2 NMSA, The Homeowner Association Act.
   IN-PERSON. In-person meetings and voting may include the use of virtual
online meetings.
   NEIGHBORHOOD ASSOCIATION. A voluntary organization or association formed by
property owners and/or residents within a specified geographic boundary within
the city.
   NEIGHBORHOOD COALITION. A group of two or more neighborhood associations
and/or homeowner associations, together with any community or business groups
and any individual members within a specified geographic boundary within the
city.
   RECOGNIZED NEIGHBORHOOD ASSOCIATION. A neighborhood association that meets
the criteria described in §§ 14-8-2-3 et seq.
   RECOGNIZED NEIGHBORHOOD COALITION. A neighborhood coalition that meets the
criteria described In §§ 14-8-2-4 et seq.
(Ord._2022-017)
§ 14-8-2-3 APPLICATION AND CRITERIA FOR RECOGNITION OF NEIGHBORHOOD
ASSOCIATIONS.
   (A)   Any neighborhood association may request designation as a recognized
neighborhood association by submitting a request to the Office of Neighborhood
Coordination (the "ONC") on forms provided by the ONC, together with a copy of
the neighborhood association's most current bylaws.
   (B)   The city shall recognize each neighborhood association requesting
status as a recognized neighborhood association under this Part where the
neighborhood association conducts itself fairly, openly, and democratically.
Neighborhood associations will be deemed to satisfy this obligation when their
bylaws demonstrate, or their conduct is not otherwise inconsistent with, the
following criteria:
      (1)   The geographic boundaries of a recognized neighborhood association
must be reasonable. Boundaries will be considered reasonable when:
         (a)   They are contiguous; and
         (b)   They encompass an area of the city that is greater than 15
acres, but not more than one square mile; and
         (c)   They do not overlap with the boundaries of any other recognized
neighborhood association; or
         (d)   The boundaries were in existence and recognized by the city as
of October 20, 2017 and the neighborhood association is still in recognized
status as of the date this Part is enacted.
      (2)   Membership must be open to all adult persons residing within the
boundaries, and to each place of business within the boundaries. Membership
shall not be limited by race, creed, religion, color, gender, gender identity,
sexual orientation, age, heritage, national origin, or income. The recognized
neighborhood association shall in good faith take all reasonable steps to have
its membership evenly distributed throughout its boundary, and all members must
be eligible to hold any officer position within the association.
      (3)   The bylaws must expressly identify the process of succession when
an officer steps down voluntarily or is removed, and how vacant positions will
be filled.
      (4)   Only those persons within the boundaries of the association who
have affirmatively joined the neighborhood association may be counted as
members. The bylaws must clearly identify how membership is established. Dues
may be collected, however payment of dues cannot be a prerequisite of
membership or voting rights in the association.
      (5)   The association shall hold an annual meeting. It shall notify the
ONC of this meeting and make a reasonable attempt to give written notice to all
households and businesses within its boundaries at least two weeks in advance
through placement of one or more signs at prominent locations within the
neighborhood association boundaries and one or more of the following:
         (a)   U.S. mail; or
         (b)   Delivered flyers; or
         (c)   Website or social media posting; or
         (d)   E-mall, text message, direct message through social media, or
other form of electronic messages delivered to the known address of each
member.
      (6)   The association shall not hold a vote of the general membership on
any question or candidate(s) unless it is advertised through the methods
described in subsection (5) above, at least seven days in advance.
      (7)   Bylaws should be reviewed regularly, but no less frequently than at
least once every ten years, and revised and resubmitted to the ONC only as may
be necessary to reflect changes in election processes, organizational
structure, or communication processes. If none of these changes have taken
place, the association is not required to revise its bylaws.
      (8)   The recognized neighborhood association shall identify an orderly
and democratic process for making representative determinations and decisions
on behalf of the association. For the purposes of this section, a recognized
neighborhood association's process shall be deemed orderly and democratic if
decisions are made via a majority of the total votes cast by association's
officers, directors, or members. If an election or vote of the membership is
held, it will satisfy the requirements of this paragraph where:
         (a)   Members are given advance notice as prescribed by §
14-8-2-3(B)(6), above; and
         (b)   Each member is afforded the ability to vote using at least one
of the following methods: in-person, mailed paper ballot, or electronic means
(except that elections held at the annual meeting must be voted on in person
consistent with subsection (9) below); and
         (c)   If a virtual online meeting is used for an in-person vote, votes
must be recorded via a roll call vote.
         (d)   When voting occurs by paper ballot, results are tallied by a
committee consisting of two or more members of the association and reported to
association members in writing either electronically or hard copy. Electronic
ballots must be canvassed in the same method, or through other reasonable
methods.
      (9)   With the exception of elections held at the annual meeting, a
recognized neighborhood association must hold votes by at least one of the
following mechanisms: in person, electronically or by mail-in or paper ballot.
   (C)   Officers of recognized neighborhood associations shall submit an
annual report to the ONC within 60 days of their annual meeting. This annual
report shall be submitted via U.S. Mail or via an e-mail from the neighborhood
board. The annual report must at a minimum contain the following information:
      (1)   Number of members for the previous year; and
      (2)   Two designated points of contacts, who shall be responsible to
receive notices, including e-mail addresses, phone numbers, and mailing
addresses; and
      (3)   Names, addresses, e-mail addresses, and available phone numbers of
current neighborhood association officers and/or board members; and
      (4)   An updated copy of the bylaws only if they have been amended since
last submitted; and
      (5)   Evidence of how the annual meeting was noticed pursuant to §
14-8-2-3(B)(6), above, for example a copy of the flyer that was used.
   (D)   Failure to comply with any of the preceding criteria will result in a
notification of noncompliance being sent to the recognized neighborhood
association officers and/or board members from the ONC. Upon receipt of this
notice, a recognized neighborhood association must offer evidence of compliance
within 60 days; if it does not comply, the association will be removed from the
list of recognized neighborhood associations.
(Ord._2022-017)
§ 14-8-2-4 APPLICATION AND CRITERIA FOR RECOGNITION OF NEIGHBORHOOD COALITIONS.
   (A)   Any neighborhood coalition may request designation as a recognized
neighborhood coalition by submitting a request to the ONC on forms provided,
together with a copy of the neighborhood coalition's most current bylaws.
   (B)   The city shall recognize each neighborhood coalition requesting status
as a recognized neighborhood coalition under this Part where the neighborhood
coalition conducts itself fairly, openly, and democratically. Neighborhood
coalitions will be deemed to satisfy this obligation when their bylaws
demonstrate, or their conduct is not otherwise inconsistent with, the following
criteria:
      (1)   The geographic boundaries of the coalition must be reasonable.
Boundaries will be considered reasonable when:
         (a)   They are contiguous; and
         (b)   They do not include areas within more than two Council
Districts; and
         (c)   They do not overlap with the boundaries of any other recognized
neighborhood coalitions; or
         (d)   The boundaries were in existence and registered with the city as
of October 20, 2017 and the coalition remains in registered status as of the
date this Part is enacted.
      (2)   Membership must be open to all recognized neighborhood
associations, neighborhood associations, homeowner associations, business
groups, and community groups within its boundaries, and may also be available
to individual households and property owners within the boundaries of the
coalition but who are located outside the boundaries of any recognized
neighborhood association. No coalition shall limit membership based on race,
creed, religion, color, gender, gender identity, sexual orientation, age,
heritage, national origin, or income. The recognized neighborhood coalition
shall in good faith take all reasonable steps to notify all recognized
neighborhood associations within its boundaries of the recognized coalition's
existence and to have its membership evenly distributed throughout its
boundary. Each member must be eligible to hold any officer position within the
association.
      (3)   The bylaws must expressly identify the process of succession when
an officer steps down voluntarily or is removed, and how vacant positions will
be filled.
      (4)   Only those associations, groups, and households who have
affirmatively joined the coalition may be counted as members. The bylaws must
clearly identify how membership is established. Dues may be collected, however
payment of dues cannot be a prerequisite of membership or voting rights in the
coalition.
      (5)   For the purposes of notice, recognized neighborhood coalitions
shall receive notice per the boundaries of member associations or groups only,
and not for any individual members;
      (6)   The coalition shall hold an annual meeting. It shall notify the ONC
of this meeting at least two weeks in advance and make a reasonable attempt to
give notice to all members at least two weeks advance notice through two or
more of the following:
         (a)   Website or social media posting;
         (b)   One or more signs placed in prominent locations; or
         (c)   E-mail, text message, direct message through social media, or
other form of electronic messages delivered to the known address of each
member.
      (7)   The coalition shall not hold an election or a vote of the general
membership on any question or candidate(s) unless it is advertised through the
methods described in subsection (6) above, at least seven days in advance.
      (8)   Bylaws should be reviewed regularly, but no less frequently than at
least once every ten years, and revised and resubmitted to the ONC only as may
be necessary to reflect changes in election processes, organizational
structure, communication processes, and financial processes. If none of these
changes have taken place, the coalition is not required to revise its bylaws.
      (9)   The coalition shall identify an orderly and democratic process for
making representative determinations and decisions on behalf of the coalition.
For the purposes of this section, a recognized neighborhood coalition's process
will be deemed orderly and democratic if decisions are made via a majority of
the total votes cast by coalition's officers or members. If an election or vote
by the membership is held it will satisfy the requirements of this paragraph
where:
         (a)   Members are given advance notice as prescribed by §
14-8-2-4(B)(6), above; and
         (b)   Each member is afforded the ability to vote using at least one
of the following methods: in-person, mailed paper ballot, or electronic means
(except that elections held at the annual meeting must be voted on in person
consistent with subsection (10) below); and
         (c)   If a virtual online meeting is used for an in-person vote, votes
must be recorded via a roll call vote.
         (d)   When voting occurs by paper ballot, results are tallied by a
committee consisting of two or more members of the coalition and reported to
coalition members in writing either electronically or hard copy. Electronic
ballots must be canvassed in the same method, or through other reasonable
methods.
      (10)   With the exception of elections held at the annual meeting, a
recognized coalition must hold votes by at least one of the following
mechanisms: in person, electronically or by mail-in or paper ballot.
   (C)   Each recognized neighborhood coalition shall submit an annual report
to the ONC within 60 days of its annual meeting. This annual report is to be
submitted via U.S. Mail or via e-mail. The annual report must at a minimum
contain the following information:
      (1)   The names of all members who are associations or groups, and the
number of individual members of during the previous year; and
      (2)   Two designated points of contact who shall be responsible to
receive notices, including e-mail addresses, phone numbers, and mailing
addresses; and
      (3)   Names, addresses, e-mail addresses, and available phone numbers of
current recognized neighborhood coalition officers and/or board members; and
      (4)   An updated copy of the bylaws only if they have been amended since
last submitted; and
      (5)   A statement of how the annual meeting was noticed pursuant to §
14-8-2-4(B)(5).
   (D)   Failure to comply with any of the preceding criteria will result in
notification of noncompliance being sent to the recognized neighborhood
coalition two points of contact. Upon receipt of this notice, a recognized
neighborhood coalition must offer evidence of compliance within 60 days; if it
does not comply, the coalition will lose its recognized status.
(Ord._2022-017)
§ 14-8-2-5 RESPONSIBILITIES OF RECOGNIZED NEIGHBORHOOD ASSOCIATIONS AND
RECOGNIZED NEIGHBORHOOD COALITIONS.
   In addition to any other requirements of this Part, recognized neighborhood
associations and recognized neighborhood coalitions shall:
   (A)   By interaction with their members, residents, and the city, strive to
engage with community and land use planning, protect the environment, and
promote the community welfare;
   (B)   Strive to foster communication between the recognized neighborhood
association and/or recognized neighborhood coalition and city government on
plans, proposals, and activities affecting their area;
   (C)   Use best efforts to inform members and other eligible participants in
their neighborhood association and/or coalition boundary of current issues;
   (D)   When presenting its official position on an issue to the city or a
city board or commission, be prepared to identify whether the decision was
reached by the board, a poll of the general membership, or by a vote at a
general membership meeting, and the vote for and against the position.
(Ord._2022-017)
§ 14-8-2-6 HOMEOWNER ASSOCIATIONS, BUSINESS GROUPS, AND COMMUNITY GROUPS.
   (A)   Homeowner associations, business groups, and community groups may
register with ONC by providing the following information:
      (1)   A mailing address and an e-mail address where it wishes
communications to be sent; such designation may be changed when appropriate.
      (2)   A definition of the physical boundaries of the homeowner
association, business group, or community group and/or common interests.
   (B)   Organizations that provide this information with the ONC will have
access to all ONC services, including the ability to participate in the ONC's
annual Neighborhood Summit. However, homeowner associations, business groups,
and community groups are not recognized and will not receive notification per
the Integrated Development Ordinance (IDO).
(Ord._2022-017)
§ 14-8-2-7 RESPONSIBILITIES OF CITY DEPARTMENTS OTHER THAN ONC.
   (A)   The relevant city department(s) shall notify, via electronic notice,
recognized neighborhood associations and recognized neighborhood coalitions
whose boundaries include or are within one mile of the following:
      (1)   Changes in city services; and
      (2)   Major infrastructure projects.
    (B)   The relevant city department(s) shall notify, via mailed or
electronic notice, recognized neighborhood associations and recognized
neighborhood coalitions of major city development or redevelopment per the
requirements of the IDO.
   (C)   The relevant city department(s) shall notify, via electronic notice,
to the recognized neighborhood associations and coalitions within one mile of
any city street construction, closure, and/or major repair, other than
emergency work.
   (D)   The relevant city department(s) shall notify, via electronic notice,
recognized neighborhood associations of filming on city streets within a 300-
foot radius of filming.
(Ord._2022-017)
§ 14-8-2-8 RESPONSIBILITIES OF THE ONC.
   (A)   The ONC shall:
      (1)   Make available on the city website the requirements for recognition
under this Part, and upon request advise interested persons of these
requirements;
      (2)   Verify whether each recognized neighborhood association and
recognized neighborhood coalition has met the requirements for recognition
within 60 days of the due date of each association's or coalition's annual
report;
      (3)   Annually notify each recognized neighborhood association and
recognized neighborhood coalition of its current recognition status through e-
mail or U.S. mail; city agencies shall also be advised of association's and
coalition's status;
      (4)   Encourage individuals to participate in their relevant existing
recognized neighborhood association and recognized neighborhood coalition;
      (5)   Aid city officials, recognized neighborhood associations and
recognized neighborhood coalitions, and the general public during the community
planning area assessment process outlined in the IDO, emphasizing collaboration
and partnerships with all implementing departments;
      (6)   Provide via the ONC website a current list of all city government
agencies, their department heads, and corresponding contact information;
      (7)   Advise the public of available grant programs and self-help
projects including but not limited to programs that enhance communities and
quality of life, and grant programs that could enhance the quality of life
within their neighborhoods;
      (8)   Connect the public with the appropriate city staff or agencies, and
help ensure that inquiries get an initial response electronically or by mail
within seven days of receipts of any correspondence received from any
recognized association or coalition that requests an answer, definition or
status of any city project within their boundaries;
      (9)   Refer individuals and associations to the City Legal Department's
Alternative Dispute Resolution Program to assist in resolving neighborhood
disputes;
      (10)   Provide pertinent city information to the public upon request and
maintain links on its city webpage to commonly requested resources and
information;
      (11)   Maintain on the ONC webpage links to the Planning Department's
resources regarding current development and permit applications;
      (12)   Provide a city newsletter to inform the public about happenings in
city government at least quarterly;
      (13)   Provide workshops and trainings concerning city procedures and
actions as well as the effective operation of neighborhood associations; such
workshops shall be provided free of charge, and must be open to all. Such
workshops or trainings will occur at least once annually;
      (14)   Once per calendar year, provide a citywide neighborhood summit
that is noticed and open to all recognized neighborhood associations,
recognized neighborhood coalitions, and any other interested persons;
      (15)   Upon the request of any person, supply contact information for the
two designated points of contact for recognized neighborhood association or
recognized neighborhood coalition representatives, as most recently specified
by each recognized neighborhood association or coalition;
      (16)   Upon request, provide relevant city departments with the contact
information for recognized neighborhood associations or recognized neighborhood
coalitions;
      (17)   Pursuant to § 14-16-6-1 of the IDO, notice shall be provided,
which specifies requirements for mailed or electronic notice, posted signs, web
postings, and/or published notice; the ONC shall provide to the permit
applicant required recognized neighborhood association and/or recognized
neighborhood coalition point of contact information;
      (18)   Provide its newsletter and any information, other than
notifications described in § 14-16-6-1 of the IDO, to any person, homeowner
association, business group, and community group, whether or not they have
provided the information in § 14-8-2-4(A), upon request;
      (19)   Offer guidance, assistance, and resources (to the extent
available) to recognized neighborhood associations and coalitions in meeting
their notification obligations for certain meeting and votes as prescribed by
this Part.
   (B)   The ONC has no involvement with land use, permit applications, and
development beyond providing applicants with the required neighborhood contact
information and maintaining the ONC webpage links to the Planning Department's
resources regarding current development projects and permit applications.
   (C)   Public records. Documents and information submitted to the ONC
pursuant to this Part constitute public records and will be made available to
the public as otherwise required by law.
(Ord._2022-017)
§ 14-8-2-9 DEVELOPER RESPONSIBILITIES.
   Developers and persons engaging recognized neighborhood associations and
coalitions relating to development proposals shall act with diligence and good
faith in coordinating with neighborhood members and representatives. It is the
responsibility of all persons in the development project, including those
pursuing development projects, to promote collaboration, and listening with
respect to neighborhood concerns.
(Ord._2022-017)
PART 3: URBAN RENEWAL AGENCY
§ 14-8-3-1 PUBLIC INTEREST.
   It is hereby determined that it is in the public interest for the Urban
Renewal Agency created by Section 3-46-41 NMSA 1978 of the Urban Renewal Law of
the state to exercise all of the Urban Renewal project powers granted by the
Urban Renewal Law.
('74 Code, § 7-12-1) (Ord. 13-1967)
§ 14-8-3-2 URBAN RENEWAL AGENCY.
   In accordance with the powers vested in the city by the Urban Renewal Law of
the state, the City Council of the city hereby determines and declares that the
exercise of all Urban Renewal project powers contained in the Urban Renewal Law
shall be by the Urban Renewal Agency of the city, and such Urban Renewal Agency
is hereby vested by the City Council with all the powers, functions, rights,
duties and privileges contained in said laws as if conferred originally by the
Urban Renewal Law of the state. The powers herein mentioned and granted are
limited to the extent made necessary by the limitations and exceptions imposed
upon the powers of an Urban Renewal Agency by the Urban Renewal Law.
('74 Code, § 7-12-2) (Ord. 13-1967)
§ 14-8-3-3 MUNICIPAL URBAN DEVELOPMENT FUND.
   (A)   Appropriations.
      (1)   Monies disbursed to the city from the Municipal Urban Development
Fund shall not be expended for any project unless an appropriation has been
approved by the City Council. No appropriation shall be approved unless the
money is to be used as authorized by the New Mexico Urban Development Law.
      (2)   Appropriations of funds received by the city from the Municipal
Urban Development Fund shall accompany the area designation or the appropriate
urban development plan, land development plan, or substantial modification of
any such approved plan when it is submitted to the City Council for its
approval. Notification of the public hearings on the area designation, plan or
substantial modification thereof shall be sent to all units of government
participating in property tax revenue derived from property within the urban
renewal project.
   (B)   Transfer of funds between projects. The Mayor is authorized to
transfer funds between projects, as established by appropriations, if the
transfer does not result in an increase or decrease in a project in excess of
the cumulative amount of $30,000 or 10% of the total amount appropriated for a
project, whichever is lower.
   (C)   Semiannual Status Report. The Urban Development Agency shall prepare a
semiannual report of the status of funds distributed to the city from the
Municipal Urban Development Fund. The report shall describe the status of all
projects being undertaken with monies from the Fund. The Mayor shall transmit
the report to the Council, and shall distribute it to all units of government
participating in property tax revenue derived from property within the urban
renewal project.
('74 Code, § 7-12-3) (Ord. 3-1978)
PART 4: METROPOLITAN REDEVELOPMENT AGENCY
§ 14-8-4-1 SHORT TITLE.
   Sections 14-8-4-1 et seq. may be cited as the "Metropolitan Redevelopment
Agency Ordinance."
('74 Code, § 7-22-1) (Ord. 54-1979; Am. Ord._2015-008)
Cross-reference:
   
Development Commission, see §§ 14-8-6-1 et seq.
§ 14-8-4-2 LEGISLATIVE FINDINGS AND PURPOSE.
   (A)   The Council finds and declares that the New Mexico State Legislature
has enacted the Metropolitan Redevelopment Code, Sections 3-60A-1 et seq. NMSA
1978, (hereinafter referred to as the “Metropolitan Redevelopment Code”)
conferring certain powers upon the City Council.
   (B)   The Council further finds and declares that the Metropolitan
Redevelopment Code authorizes the creation by the Council of a Metropolitan
Redevelopment Agency and the delegation to the Agency of the exercise of the
metropolitan redevelopment project powers set forth in the Code.
   (C)   The Council further finds and declares that it is in the public
interest to delegate said powers to a Metropolitan Redevelopment Agency.
   (D)   The Council further finds and declares that it is in the public
interest to provide the staff for the Metropolitan Redevelopment Agency.
('74 Code, § 7-22-2) (Ord. 54- 1979; Am. Ord._2015-008)
§ 14-8-4-3 REDEVELOPMENT PROJECT POWERS.
   As used in §§
14-8-4-1 et seq., the term REDEVELOPMENT PROJECT POWERS includes any rights,
powers, functions and duties of a municipality authorized by Sections 3-60A-
5 through 3-60A-18 NMSA 1978, except the following powers which are reserved to
the City Council:
   (A)   Declaration of an area to be a slum or a blighted area or combination
thereof and designation of the area as appropriate for a redevelopment project;
   (B)   Approval or amendment of redevelopment plans;
   (C)   Approval of City plans for urban development and conservation, unless
approval is specifically delegated by Council ordinance or resolution;
   (D)   Making findings of necessity prior to preparation of a plan as
provided in Sections 3-60A-5 through 3-60A-18 NMSA 1978 and the findings and
determinations required prior to approval of a redevelopment plan or project as
provided in Sections 3-60A-5 through 3-60A-18 NMSA 1978;
   (E)   Issuance of general obligation bonds and revenue bonds authorized in
the Code;
   (F)   Grants of $100,000 or more;
   (G)   Issuance of municipal redevelopment bonds;
   (H)   Appropriation of funds, levying of taxes and assessments;
   (I)   Deciding appeals of the Metropolitan Redevelopment Agency’s action as
to acceptance of a proposal for the sale and/or redevelopment of land.
   (J)   Adopting the TIF Initiation Resolution;
   (K)   Establishing and amending the geographic boundaries for Tax Increment
Financing; and
   (L)   Approving the TIF Action and Funding Plan.
('74 Code, § 7-22-3) (Ord. 54-1979; Am. Ord. 76-1983; Am. Ord._2015-008; Am.
Ord._2024-016; Am. Ord._2025-007; Am. Ord._2025-024)
§ 14-8-4-4 POWERS OF METROPOLITAN REDEVELOPMENT AGENCY.
   The Metropolitan Redevelopment Agency is hereby vested with all of the
aforementioned metropolitan redevelopment project powers in the same manner as
though all of said powers were conferred on the Agency by the Metropolitan
Redevelopment Code.
('74 Code, § 7-22-4) (Ord. 54-1979; Am. Ord._2015-008)
§ 14-8-4-5 STAFF OF AGENCIES PROVIDED BY CITY.
   The city shall provide the Metropolitan Redevelopment Agency with the
appropriate staff support to carry out the powers granted to it under the
Metropolitan Redevelopment Code.
('74 Code, § 7-22-6) (Ord. 54-1979; Am. Ord._2015-008)
§ 14-8-4-6 ANNUAL REPORT.
   The Metropolitan Redevelopment Agency shall file annually with the City
Council a report of its activities for the preceding fiscal year, which report
shall include a complete financial statement setting forth its assets,
liabilities, income and operating expenses as of the end of such fiscal year.
('74 Code, § 7-22-7) (Ord. 54-1979; Am. Ord._2015-008)
§ 14-8-4-7 ACTIVITIES TO BE UNDERTAKEN PURSUANT TO STATUTORY AUTHORITY.
   (A)   With respect to public purchases other than real property processed by
the Metropolitan Redevelopment Agency, the provisions of Chapter 5, Article 5
of this code of ordinances, Public Purchases, shall apply.
   (B)   With respect to the disposition or lease of real property carried out
by the Metropolitan Redevelopment Agency, the provisions of Section 3-60A-12
NMSA 1978 shall apply.
   (C)   With respect to acceptance of a proposal for the sale and/or
redevelopment of land by the Metropolitan Redevelopment Agency, the decision
shall be made consistent with Section 3-60A-12 NMSA 1978 and other provisions
of the Metropolitan Redevelopment Code as applicable, and Section 13-1-116 NMSA
1978 and other provisions of the New Mexico Procurement Code as applicable.
   (D)   With respect to tax increment financing carried out by the
Metropolitan Redevelopment Agency, the provisions of the State Tax Increment
Law, NMSA 1978, Sections 3-60A-19 through 3-60A-24 and this Metropolitan
Redevelopment Agency Ordinance, ROA 1994, Sections
14-8-4-10 through
14-8-4-12 shall apply.
('74 Code, § 7-22-8) (Ord. 54-1979; Am. Ord. 76-1983; Am. Ord._2015-008; Am.
Ord._2024-016; Am. Ord. 2025-007)
§ 14-8-4-8 APPEAL.
   (A)   Application.
      (1)   Decisions of the Metropolitan Redevelopment Agency as to acceptance
of a proposal for sale and/or redevelopment of land may be appealed to the City
Council on forms prescribed by the Metropolitan Redevelopment Agency. A filing
fee of $500 shall accompany each appeal application. When an application is
withdrawn the application fee shall not be refunded.
   (B)   Limitations Period. Decisions of the Metropolitan Redevelopment Agency
are final unless appeal is initiated by application to the city on prescribed
forms within 15 days of the Metropolitan Redevelopment Agency's notice of
decision. The date of the notice of decision is not included in the 15-day
period for filing an appeal, and if the 15th day falls on a Saturday, Sunday,
or holiday as listed in
Ch. 3, Article 1, Merit System; Personnel Policy, the next working day is
considered as the deadline for filing the appeal. Selection of a proposal for
the sale and/or redevelopment of land shall not become a legally binding
acceptance by the city until an appeal of the selection is decided or the time
for filing the appeal has expired without an appeal being filed.
   (C)   Standing for Appeals. Any person who submitted a redevelopment
proposal but who was not selected for award of the redevelopment project at
issue may appeal.
   (D)   Notice of Hearing. The Mayor shall give written notice of an appeal,
together with a notice of the date, time, and place of hearing to all those who
made submittals for the project, and to all those who testified at the
Albuquerque Development Commission's hearing concerning the project.
   (E)   Hearing and Decision.
      (1)   An appeal shall be heard within 60 days of its filing. The City
Council's decision on the appeal shall be made following a public hearing. At
the hearing the City Council shall review carefully the previous decision on
the matter, and based only on the record before it, determine only whether:
         (a)   The Metropolitan Redevelopment Agency's decision was arbitrary
or capricious;
         (b)   Whether the Agency's decision is supported by substantial
evidence in the record; or
         (c)   Whether the Agency erred as a matter of law.
      (2)   The concurring vote of two-thirds of the members of the City
Council is required to reverse a determination by the Metropolitan
Redevelopment Agency.
      (3)   If the City Council reverses the decision of the Metropolitan
Redevelopment Agency, the City Council shall conduct a separate hearing, and
after reviewing all qualifying proposals considered by the Metropolitan
Redevelopment Agency and hearing any presentations and considering any new
evidence it finds appropriate:
         (a)   Select whichever of the original proposals it finds to be best
based on the criteria and standards of the Metropolitan Redevelopment Plan and
the request for proposals;
         (b)   Remand all or part of the proposals to the Metropolitan
Redevelopment Agency; or
         (c)   If the City Council determines that none of the proposals
received are in accordance with the call for proposals or do not meet the
objectives of the Metropolitan Redevelopment Code, the City Council may reject
all proposals and direct the Metropolitan Redevelopment Agency to award the
project through reasonable negotiating procedures as provided under Section 3-
60A-12(C).
      (4)   In addition to appearing before the City Council at any hearing
called for under §§
14-8-4-1 et seq., any party to an appeal may provide written argument to the
City Council by submitting it through the City Council staff. The written
argument shall not include new evidence and shall be submitted at least five
days before the next hearing on the appeal with copies provided to all parties.
   (F)   Notice of Decision. The City Council shall state its key findings of
fact in a notice of decision issued after its hearing(s).
('74 Code, § 7-22-9) (Ord. 76-1983; Am. Ord._2015-008)
§ 14-8-4-9 LEASE FEE.
   (A)   Annual Metropolitan Redevelopment Lease Fee. All lease agreements for
real property leased for the purpose of facilitating a metropolitan
redevelopment project financed by metropolitan redevelopment revenue bonds
shall include a provision requiring the lessee to pay the city, in addition to
any other monetary obligations under the lease, an annual fee equivalent to 10%
of the annual incremental abated taxes. The incremental abated value shall be
equivalent to the difference in the property valuation for property taxation
purposes that existed in the year immediately preceding the year of acquisition
by the city and the property valuation for property taxation purposes each year
the city owns the property. The annual fee will be equivalent to 10% of the
current total property tax mill rate for the incremental abated value had the
property not been exempt and had it been valued for property taxation purposes.
The fee shall be paid to the city by the lessee each year that the city owns
the property.
   (B)   Deposit of fees. All fees received by the city pursuant to §
14-8-4-9 ROA 1994 shall be deposited into the Metropolitan Redevelopment Fund
(275) to support the ongoing operations of the Metropolitan Redevelopment
Agency.
(Ord._2020-003)
§ 14-8-4-10 TAX INCREMENT FINANCING GUIDELINES.
   The provisions of this section apply for the purpose of establishing and
administering Tax Increment Financing (“TIF”) within a Metropolitan
Redevelopment Area as follows:
   (A)   The Metropolitan Redevelopment Agency may request initiation of Tax
Increment Financing by submitting to the City Council a “TIF Initiation
Resolution.” The TIF Initiation Resolution shall demonstrate the following:
      (1)   All requirements of the Metropolitan Redevelopment Code, NMSA 1978,
Chapter 3, Article 60A have been met; and
      (2)   The Metropolitan Redevelopment Plan analysis and objectives are
current, meaning either:
         (a)   The existing Metropolitan Redevelopment Plan was adopted no more
than ten years from the TIF Initiation Resolution; or
         (b)   The Metropolitan Redevelopment Plan will be updated and adopted
via Resolution within two years of the effective date of the TIF Initiation
Resolution.
   (B)   Tax Increment Financing Action and Funding Plan.
      (1)   The Metropolitan Redevelopment Agency shall prepare a Tax Increment
Financing Action and Funding Plan (“Action Plan”) for approval by City Council
via Resolution within two years of the effective date of the TIF initiation
Resolution. The approved Action Plan shall be incorporated as an appendix or
chapter to the Metropolitan Redevelopment Area Plan. The Action Plan shall
include, but is not limited to the following elements:
         (a)   A map depicting the geographical boundaries of the TIF
(“Boundary”).
         (b)   Identified Metropolitan Redevelopment Projects aimed at
achieving the objectives of the Metropolitan Redevelopment Plan. Each
Metropolitan Redevelopment Project shall include an estimated TIF revenue
contribution.
         (c)   Defined measures used to evaluate the effectiveness and progress
of the TIF (“Performance Metric”). The Performance Metric shall measure
advancement of the adopted goals of the Metropolitan Redevelopment Plan.
         (d)   The total base values of property tax and gross receipts tax
within the Boundary when available.
         (e)    Identification of participating governmental units, including
the participating increment and the duration of participation.
         (f)   A projection of anticipated revenues.
         (g)   An accounting of deposits into the TIF fund of the previous
years if applicable.
         (h)   The date marking the inception of the TIF as described in NMSA
1978, Section 3-60A-21, and the expected date of dissolution.
         (i)   The date for a midpoint review and update of the Action Plan.
The midpoint update to the Action Plan shall be submitted via Resolution for
approval by the City Council.
      (2)   Prior to the final consideration of the Action Plan by City
Council, the Action Plan shall be the subject of at least one public hearing
held by the development commission, or respective commission or board, at which
time, comments from the public as a whole shall be gathered and considered in
preparation of the final Action Plan.
      (3)   The City Council may impose conditions of approval or amendments as
part of its decision to authorize the Action Plan.
   (C)   Reporting and Transparency.
      (1)   For each TIF District, the Metropolitan Redevelopment Agency shall
submit to the City Council annual reports by March of each year, detailing:
         (a)   All Metropolitan Redevelopment Projects, including descriptions
and TIF revenue contributions.
         (b)   Revenue and expenditure summaries.
         (c)   Progress toward Performance Metrics and Metropolitan
Redevelopment Plan goals.
         (d)   Annual and compounded growth rates of property values and gross
receipt tax.
         (e)   Principal and interest on bonded indebtedness, if applicable.
      (2)   The following TIF District-related documents shall be made publicly
available on the Metropolitan Redevelopment Agency website within seven days of
becoming effective or final:
         (a)   Resolutions approving the Metropolitan Redevelopment Plan and
TIF Initiation Resolution.
         (b)   Annual reports.
         (c)   Studies and reports conducted within the TIF Boundary.
         (d)   TIF District map.
         (e)   TIF Action and Funding Plan including all attachments and
amendments thereto.
(Ord. 2025-007)
§ 14-8-4-11 TAX INCREMENT FINANCING DISTRICT DISSOLUTION.
   (A)   After termination of a TIF district, once all deposits have ended and
financial obligations have been paid, the Metropolitan Redevelopment Agency
shall compile a final closure report summarizing the TIF district’s
achievements. The report shall be published on the Metropolitan Redevelopment
Agency website and delivered via Executive Communication to the City Council.
This report shall include, but not be limited to:
      (1)   A description of the Rehabilitation and Metropolitan Redevelopment
Projects completed, including their alignment with Performance Metrics and the
goals outlined in the Metropolitan Redevelopment Plan;
      (2)   The total amount of increment revenue reinvested;
      (3)   The total amount of private funds leveraged as a result of the
reinvestment of TIF revenue; and
      (4)   The compounded annual growth rate of property taxes and gross
receipts taxes over the duration of the TIF’s designated term.
(Ord. 2025-007)
§ 14-8-4-12 DEFINITIONS.
   The definitions set forth in NMSA 1978 Chapter 3, Article 60A shall apply to
this Ordinance and any term used within it, unless otherwise defined herein.
(Ord. 2025-007)
PART 5: ENERGY CONSERVATION COUNCIL
§ 14-8-5-1 INTENT.
   The city hereby recognizes that fossil fuel based energy conservation in
residential, commercial, industrial, transportation uses, city government and
energy generation is an important community goal. It is the intent of §§
14-8-5-1 et seq. to serve the public welfare by developing and implementing a
community- wide effort to conserve energy and reduce the use of fossil fuels in
the production of energy and overall promote best energy practices. The city's
role is to provide mechanisms for community leadership in reduction of energy
consumption, to facilitate public involvement in promoting best energy
practices, conserving energy and implementing renewable energy, and to increase
the effectiveness of programs carried on by other entities.
('74 Code, § 7-21-1) (Ord. 20-1977; Am. Ord. 52-2002; Am. Ord. 35-2006)
§ 14-8-5-2 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this article, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   BEST ENERGY PRACTICES. Management of energy production and consumption to
reduce energy use and costs, implement renewable energy, promote  clean energy
sources and further the efficiency and maintenance of the city's energy
infrastructure.
   ENERGY CONSERVATION. Building materials, equipment and machinery and
supplies that reduce energy costs for Enterprise and General Fund Programs by
demonstrably reducing energy consumption by furthering the implementation of
renewable energy.
   RENEWABLE ENERGY. Any energy resource that is naturally regenerated over a
short time scale and is generated by use of low- or zero-emissions generation
technology with substantial long-term production potential or generated by
renewable energy uses that may include (1) solar, wind, hydropower and
geothermal resources; (2) fuel cells that are not fossil fueled; and (3)
biomass resources, such as agricultural or animal waste, small diameter timber,
salt cedar and other phreatophyte or woody vegetation, landfill gas and
anaerobically digested waste biomass and new technologies as they emerge.
Renewable energy does not include electric energy generated by use of fossil
fuel, waste products from fossil sources or nuclear energy.
(Ord. 35-2006)
§ 14-8-5-3 ENERGY CONSERVATION COUNCIL.
   (A)   There is hereby created the City of Albuquerque Energy Council, which
shall consist of nine members who have responsibility for effecting energy
management programs within the residential, commercial, industrial, city
government, energy conservation and management interest groups, transportation,
and utilities sectors of the community or who have leadership roles within the
community. No member shall represent a specific agency or organization, but
rather the community at large. All members shall be appointed by the Mayor with
the advice and consent of the City Council.
   (B)   The term of each City of Albuquerque Energy Council member shall be
three years; of the members first named three shall have terms ending April 30,
1981, three shall have terms ending April 30, 1982 and three shall have terms
ending April 30, 1983. The Mayor shall determine which members shall have which
terms.
('74 Code, § 7-21-2) (Ord. 20-1977; Am. Ord. 33-1980; Am. Ord. 52-2002; Am.
Ord. 35-2006)
§ 14-8-5-4 MEMBERSHIP AND ORGANIZATION.
   Except as provided in §§
14-8-5-1 et seq., the qualifications, appointment and conduct of the members of
the City of Albuquerque Energy Council and the organization structure of the
City of Albuquerque Energy Council shall be governed by §§
2-6-1-1 et seq.
('74 Code, § 7-21-3) (Ord. 20-1977; Am. Ord. 35-2006)
§ 14-8-5-5 POWERS AND DUTIES.
   The City of Albuquerque Energy Council shall:
   (A)   Study energy uses and losses and means of reducing energy consumption
and implementing renewable energy in the city;
   (B)   Establish energy saving goals and a community wide energy conservation
program for the city;
   (C)   Work with citizens, city employees, organized groups and businesses to
develop and implement energy management programs;
   (D)   Educate citizens, city employees, professional groups, the business
community, builders, educators, elected officials, community organizations, and
other key persons about best energy practices;
   (E)   Promote cooperation and encourage coordination between the city and
other entities which are involved in best energy practices;
   (F)   Advise the Mayor and Council on legislation, programs and policies
which would contribute to best energy practices;
   (G)   Provide for evaluation of energy conservation and renewable energy
programs which have been implemented;
   (H)   Adopt and promulgate such rules and regulations as may be necessary to
implement §§
14-8-5-1 et seq.;
   (I)   Form such committees as are necessary to carry out the City of
Albuquerque Energy Council’s assigned powers and duties from its membership and
from the general public;
   (J)   Submit an annual written report on its activities and an evaluation of
the effectiveness of §§
14-8-5-1 et seq. to the Mayor and Council;
   (K)   April 1st of each calendar year the Mayor and the City of Albuquerque
Energy Council shall communicate to the City Council for Receipt an Energy Use
Report for all City Programs including the enterprise fund and the general
fund. The plan shall include: 1) a ledger itemizing for the last 3 years, at
the department division level, the energy consumed by type of energy source and
the purpose for which it was consumed, 2) a report of the reasons by department
division level for increases or declines in the consumption of a particular
source of energy and 3) a list, by department division level of opportunities
for energy conservation and the implementation of renewable energy, and the
cost to implement such technologies.
   (L)   Perform all other duties delegated to it by the Mayor and the Council.
('74 Code, § 7-21-4) (Ord. 20-1977; Am. Ord. 52-2002; Am. Ord. 35-2006)
PART 6: DEVELOPMENT COMMISSION
§ 14-8-6-1 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this §§ 14-8-6-1 et seq., the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   BONDS. Any bond, debenture, note, refunding or renewal bond or note, warrant
or other security evidencing an obligation the proceeds of which, or a major
portion thereof, are to be used in the trade or business carried on by someone
other than the city and which are authorized to be issued by the city pursuant
to the Industrial Revenue Bond Act (Sections 3-32-1 to 3-32-16 NMSA 1978, as
amended from time to time); the Metropolitan Redevelopment Code (Sections 3-
60A-1 to 3-60A-48 NMSA 1978, as amended from time to time); or pursuant to the
home rule powers of the city given by Article X, Section 6 of the New Mexico
Constitution and the city's Charter.
   INDUCEMENT RESOLUTION. A resolution of the Council setting forth its good-
faith intent to issue bonds upon the prior satisfaction of all applicable land
use and development requirements of the city, other than the issuance of a
building permit.
   PROJECT PLAN. The plan describing a project, which shall include a general
description and location of the project, the number and type of new jobs to be
created, the estimated percentage of jobs to be filled by persons who are
residents of the city on the date of the project plan submission,
identification and the processing of any product associated with the project,
any relocation of individuals or businesses, the present use or conditions of
the project site, the present assessed value of the project site, if available,
the estimated value of the project site after completion of the project, the
maximum amount of the bonds to be issued, the present and proposed zoning, a
proposed construction schedule and other matters which may be reasonably
requested by the Commission.
('74 Code, § 7-23-1) (Ord. 12-1985)
§ 14-8-6-2 COMMISSION CREATED; DUTIES.
   (A)   There is created the Development Commission consisting of five members
appointed by the Mayor, with the advice and consent of the Council for
staggered terms of five years or less so that the term of one expires on
October 31, of each year. Vacancies shall be filled for the unexpired term by
the original appointing authority.
   (B)   The Commission will serve in an advisory capacity to the Council
regarding approval of project plans and inducement resolutions and issuance of
bonds. Commission review of a project plan and inducement resolution shall
occur prior to the Council's adoption of an inducement resolution. The Council
will not enact an ordinance authorizing the issuance of bonds until notified by
the Commission that the user has complied with all applicable municipal
ordinances and resolutions relating to the issuance of tax exempt bonds. The
Council will have final approval authority on the issuance of bonds and the
approval or disapproval of project plans.
   (C)   The Development Commission is the Board of Commissioners of the
Metropolitan Redevelopment Agency and the Urban Development Agency (see §§
14-8-4-1 et seq.).
   (D)   The Mayor shall designate a Chairperson and Vice-Chairperson of the
Commission.
('74 Code, § 7-23-2) (Ord. 12-1985)
§ 14-8-6-3 TEMPORARY PROVISION; TERMS OF OFFICE.
   Members of the Metropolitan Redevelopment Commission shall continue in
office as members of the Development Commission until expiration of their terms
in office.
('74 Code, § 7-23-3) (Ord. 12-1985)
§ 14-8-6-4 TEMPORARY PROVISION; REFERENCES.
   All references in law to the Metropolitan Redevelopment Commission shall be
construed as references to the Development Commission.
('74 Code, § 7-23-4) (Ord. 12-1985)
Cross-reference:
   
Metropolitan Redevelopment Commission,
see § 14-8-4-1 et seq.
§ 14-8-6-5 ALBUQUERQUE FOREIGN-TRADE ZONE; TASK FORCES.
   (A)   The Development Commission shall advise the Mayor, the City Council
and the Greater Albuquerque Economic Action Council on the city's
responsibilities and duties as the grantee for the Albuquerque Foreign-Trade
Zone, and on policy matters related to the Zone and trade issues. The
Commission shall provide general guidance to the city on the conduct of the
Foreign-Trade Zone program so as to promote economic development and to
facilitate trade with other countries, particularly Western Hemisphere
countries. The Commission shall also seek cooperation and information from
private and public organizations on matters related to the conduct of the zone
and related trade issues.
   (B)   (1)   The Commission may establish task forces to advise and assist it
in performing its duties and responsibilities listed in division (A) of this
section. Such task forces may include members of the Commission and the general
public and shall contain at least one representative of each of the following:
         (a)   Bernalillo County;
         (b)   Greater Albuquerque Chamber of Commerce;
         (c)   Albuquerque Hispano Chamber of Commerce;
         (d)   International Trade Council of New Mexico;
         (e)   New Mexico State Economic Development Department; and
         (f)   Albuquerque Economic Development, Inc.
      (2)   The task force members shall be knowledgeable on foreign-trade
zones and or trade issues. The task force members and chairman may be appointed
by the Commission for terms to be specified by the Commission. Task force
members shall serve without pay.
      (3)   For the purposes of this section, TASK FORCE means an advisory
group established to carry out a specific assignment for a predetermined time,
not to exceed 18 months. The Commission may reestablish a task force and
reappoint its members if the Commission has determined the specific assignment
has not been completed. The Commission may establish the specific assignment
and set guidelines for the task force on how to perform their work.
   (C)   The Commission shall prepare and submit an annual report of its
activities to the Mayor and City Council.
('74 Code, § 7-23-5) (Ord. 44-1993)
§ 14-8-6-6 CONFLICT OF INTEREST.
   Any member of the Development Commission or its task forces established in
accordance with §
14-8-6-5(B) having a private financial interest in matters before their body
shall disqualify himself from discussion and voting on those matters.
('74 Code, § 7-23-6) (Ord. 44-1993)
PART 7: BOARD OF APPEALS FOR ZONING
SPECIAL EXCEPTIONS
[RESERVED]
Editor's Note: § 14-8-7 Board of Appeals for Zoning Special Exceptions was
updated, incorporated into, and replaced by the
Integrated Development Ordinance, Council Bill O-17-49, Ord. 14-16, et seq.,
approved 11-13-17. See now ROA § 14-16-6, et seq.
ARTICLE 9: WORKFORCE HOUSING AND AFFORDABLE HOUSING
Section
Part 1: Workforce Housing Opportunity Act
   
14-9-1   Short title
   
14-9-2   Findings
   
14-9-3   Applicability
   
14-9-4   Definitions
   
14-9-5   Creation and administration of the Workforce Housing Trust Fund
   
14-9-6   Program elements
   
14-9-7   Notification of tenants
   
14-9-7.5   Rules and regulations
Part 2: Affordable Housing Opportunity Ordinance
   
14-9-8   Short title
   
14-9-9   Findings
   
14-9-10   Purpose
   
14-9-11   General definitions
   
14-9-12   Authorization of city contributions
   
14-9-13   General requirements
   
14-9-14   Requirements and rules
   
14-9-15   Discrimination prohibited
Cross-reference:
   Family Housing Developments, see
Ch. 14, Art. 17
PART 1: WORKFORCE HOUSING OPPORTUNITY ACT
§ 14-9-1 SHORT TITLE.
   Sections
14-9-1 through
14-9-7.5 of this article may be cited as the Workforce Housing Opportunity Act.
(Ord. 30-2006; Am. Ord._2015-001; Am. Ord._2019-016)
§ 14-9-2 FINDINGS.
   (A)   The Albuquerque/Bernalillo County Comprehensive Plan's goal is to
increase the supply of affordable housing and ameliorate the problems of
homelessness and displacement; and
   (B)   The city's Five Year Consolidated Plan 2018 - 2022 shows that 20,370
renter households are severely cost-burdened and 12,300 homeowner households
are severely cost-burdened; and
   (C)   There are currently 5,500 households on the Section 8 lottery pool of
the Albuquerque Housing Authority; and
   (D)   On any given night in Albuquerque, at least 1,320 people are sleeping
outside or in shelters, including families with children, veterans and people
with disabilities and their path to independent living depends upon permanent,
affordable housing; and
   (E)   Working families having safe, decent and affordably priced housing in
stable neighborhoods is advantageous for personal success in school and work
and is therefore a prerequisite for the economic success of our community; and
   (F)   The Workforce Housing Trust Fund created in accordance with the city's
Workforce Housing Opportunity Act, and the state's Affordable Housing Act and
Rules, has created over 900 units of affordable housing over the period of 2007
to present, generated over four times the city contribution in private
investments and supported near 1,500 construction jobs; and
   (G)   In order to maintain production of workforce housing to meet the needs
of working families an adequate and stable source of funding is required.
(Ord. 30-2006; Am. Ord._2015-001; Am. Ord._2019-016)
§ 14-9-3 APPLICABILITY.
   This article is applicable to any Workforce Housing Project or Workforce
Housing Subdivision assisted with Workforce Housing Trust funds. Other funds
leveraged for a Trust Fund assisted project or subdivision will be subject to
this article as well as the requirements and terms of the other funding source
(s). When there is a conflict the most restrictive requirements and terms shall
apply.
(Ord._2019-016)
§ 14-9-4 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this article, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   AFFORDABLE HOUSING PLAN. The Affordable Housing Plan is that component of
the city's Five Year Consolidated Plan approved by the MFA prior to adoption by
the City Council which defines and documents affordable housing needs in
Albuquerque and establishes housing priorities for all city housing funds,
including but not limited to, Workforce Housing Trust Funds, Community
Development Block Grant funds and HOME Investment Partnerships funds.
   PERMANENT AFFORDABILITY. Permanent Affordability is defined as two
consecutive 99-year periods in during which a rental property funded through
Workforce Housing Trust Funds will be restricted to renting a certain number of
apartment units to low and moderate income households. Restrictive covenants or
land use restrictions are filed on the assisted property to ensure compliance.
   WORKFORCE HOUSING. Dwelling units serving residents and their families whose
annual income is at or below 80% of the Area Median Income for Albuquerque
(AMI) as adjusted for household size and determined by the U.S. Department of
Housing and Urban Development. For rental housing monthly housing payment
should not exceed 30% of the imputed income  limit applicable to such unit or
35% under special conditions to be defined in the Workforce Housing Plan. For
homeownership the home should be purchased under a Qualified Residential
Mortgage as defined by the Consumer Financial Protection Bureau. A Qualified
Residential Mortgage is a mortgage with terms that take into account the
borrower's ability to repay the loan and includes loans that meet the standards
of Fannie Mae, Freddie Mac, Federal Housing Administration or Veterans
Administration. Subprime loans and similar loans contain terms, including but
not limited to interest rates higher than prime loans, adjustable interest
rates or mortgage terms over 30 years, which may cause the borrower to have
difficulty repaying a mortgage. “Dwelling unit” is used in this article as
defined in the Integrated Development Ordinance (see § 14-16-7-1).
   WORKFORCE HOUSING MEETING THE REQUIREMENTS OF THE WORKFORCE HOUSING
OPPORTUNITY ACT. Workforce housing projects, subdivisions, and programs that
receive funds and/or land from the Workforce Housing Trust Fund as the result
of meeting eligibility criteria pursuant to the Affordable Housing Plan.
   WORKFORCE HOUSING PROJECT or WORKFORCE HOUSING SUBDIVISION. The entire
development in which at least 30% of the dwelling units meet the definition of
workforce housing.
(Ord. 30-2006; Am. Ord._2017-025; Am. Ord._2019-016)
§ 14-9-5 CREATION AND ADMINISTRATION OF THE WORKFORCE HOUSING TRUST FUND.
   (A)   Beginning with the 2017 General Obligation Bond Program, the Mayor is
authorized and directed to set aside up to 8% of the biannual General
Obligation Bond Capital Improvement Program, up to a maximum of $10,000,000 per
two-year cycle, to be directed to the Trust Fund for the purpose of providing
workforce housing. This set aside shall be presented as a separate bond
question which solely addresses permanently affordable rental housing and
affordable homeownership assistance which includes the contribution of land
upon which the unit will be constructed, down payment assistance loan or any
other type of direct or indirect financial assistance that enables the
homebuyer to qualify for a Qualified Mortgage. If this question is turned down
by the voters no CIP funds from that election shall be spent on workforce
housing. All interest earnings of funds in the Trust Fund shall be re-
appropriated to the Trust Fund. No funds in the Trust Fund can be appropriated
or used for any other purpose than as described in the Workforce Housing
Opportunity Act.
   (B)   The Fund income and interest earnings shall be appropriated for the
purposes set forth in this article after recommendation by the Mayor and
approval of the Council.
   (C)   Programming and Selection. The projects funded by the Trust Fund shall
be selected and programmed as provided below:
      (1)   The Affordable Housing Committee. The Affordable Housing Committee
shall serve as the advisory committee to develop the Workforce Housing Plan and
Needs Assessment and shall conduct an annual review of Plan progress.
      (2)   Workforce Housing Plan and Needs Assessment. The Committee, with
the staff support of the Department of Family and Community Services (the
Department) or its successor and technical support from representatives of the
Office of Economic Development and the Planning Department, shall develop a
Five Year Workforce Housing Plan (also known as the Affordable Housing Plan),
which shall be updated every five years. The Affordable Housing Plan shall be
in accordance with the Affordable Housing Act (NMSA 1978, § 62-7-1 et seq.)
(Act), and the Affordable Housing Act Rules (Rules). The Affordable Housing
Plan shall be based on a thorough needs assessment conducted by the Department
showing the housing conditions of families at and below 80% of area median
income broken out by community planning areas, income classification, special
needs, seniors, and homeless, and addressing the displacement of low income
families. The Affordable Housing Plan shall identify the change in the City of
Albuquerque of the number of market rate, affordable and non-affordable housing
units, by income category and tenure, over the previous five years. The
Affordable Housing Plan shall include all resources available to address
affordable housing needs including, but not limited to, CDBG, HOME, other
grants, the City General Fund, Enterprise Funds, other City Housing Funds,
State of New Mexico, and Low Income Housing Tax Credits, and New Market Tax
Credits, five year goals and objectives and one year objectives, recommended
strategies for implementation and standards for monitoring and evaluation of
completed projects. The Affordable Housing Plan shall include a matrix showing
the annual and five year housing production goals and objectives and
organizations committed to its production. The Affordable Housing Plan shall
address expansion of the capacity of the non-profit housing development
organizations and identify resources necessary to carry out needed expansion.
The Affordable Housing Plan shall identify, based on housing market data
standards, city neighborhoods as "stable", "disinvesting", or "gentrifying" and
shall make it clear that different housing and affordable housing strategies
are being pursued within the different categories of neighborhoods. The
Committee shall hold at least three public hearings on the draft Affordable
Housing Plan prior to making recommendations to the Mayor and the Council. The
Affordable Housing Plan shall serve as the housing component of the
Consolidated Plan after review and comment by Committee and submitted for
review and approval to the New Mexico Mortgage Finance Authority. The
Affordable Housing Plan shall be conveyed by the Mayor to the Council by a
resolution every five years in accordance with requirements promulgated by the
U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development and shall be adopted by the
Council with or without amendments. The Affordable Housing Plan shall be
reviewed and progress evaluated annually by the Committee and a report sent to
the Council.
      (3)   Priorities and uses of funds. When feasible and practical
available, funds in any General Obligation Bond biannual program shall be used
for land acquisition for workforce housing projects and subdivisions only in
areas designated as Metropolitan Redevelopment Areas, Centers and Corridors,
and within 660 feet of an area mapped in Centers and Corridors per the
Comprehensive Plan. Funds in any General Obligation Bond biannual program may
be used for zero to low interest or, in certain cases, loans that may be
forgivable for multi-family rental projects that meet the requirements of the
Workforce Housing Opportunity Act and fall within the geographic areas
described above. Funds may be used for scattered site, single-family housing
purchase, homeownership assistance, rehab, lease-to-own and resale of existing
housing stock. The priorities for use of all funds shall be determined by
reference to the program elements as shown in § 14-9-5, but in all cases the
following requirements shall be met.
         (a)   Resources shall be allocated according to need in any General
Obligation Bond biannual program with the goal that 50% of all resources
benefiting families at or below 50% of AMI and 30% of all resources benefiting
families at or below 30% AMI. Loans that may be forgivable may be considered
for use only in multi-family rental projects benefiting families whose income
is at or below 30% AMI. Income Averaging as defined under Section 42 of the IRS
Code as authorized by the Consolidated Appropriations Act of 2018 is
permissible for multi-family rental projects utilizing Low Income Housing Tax
Credits subject to approval by the New Mexico Mortgage Finance Authority.
         (b)   Not more than 20% of resources shall be used for project related
soft development costs as defined by the Affordable Housing Plan.
         (c)   Workforce housing projects shall be accomplished by city
approved builders and developers including an individual; a government housing
agency; a for-profit organization, including a corporation, limited liability
company, partnership, joint venture, syndicate or association or a nonprofit
organization. Criteria for approval of projects shall be promulgated by the
Family and Community Services Department.
         (d)   Projects receiving funding or land under the Workforce Housing
Opportunity Act shall leverage non-city funds by at least a 4:1 ratio (non-city
to city resources). The Affordable Housing Plan may make exception to this
ratio for certain hard to develop projects as defined in the Affordable Housing
Plan and that would otherwise be financially impacted without such an
exception. Federal and state funds flowing through the city are not considered
city funds for purposes of this requirement.
         (e)   Any Workforce Housing Trust funds used to benefit an individual
or a household directly, such as homeownership assistance or homeowner housing
rehabilitation will be subject to recapture or resale provisions at the time of
sale or refinancing of the affected property.
      (4)   Project Priorities. The Committee shall develop a policy-based
ranking system so that proposed projects can be prioritized. The system of
ranking shall be included in the Affordable Housing Plan. Priority shall be
given to financially sound proposals that rank the highest according to the
priorities based on guidelines found in the Program Elements. Priority with
respect to newly constructed projects shall also be given to proposals that
demonstrate a commitment to energy efficiency and utility conservation. The
Committee can establish minimum standards below which a project will not be
approved. The Department shall issue a standing request for proposals so that
developers have adequate time to secure land and formulate proposals for city
consideration.
(Ord. 30-2006; Am. Ord. 2012-001; Am. Ord._2015-001; Am. Ord._2019-016)
§ 14-9-6 PROGRAM ELEMENTS.
   The following elements, among others, shall be used to develop a priority
setting and project ranking system for development under this article.
   (A)   Neighborhood conditions. Workforce housing should be designed, located
and integrated into the community so as to serve to stabilize that
neighborhood, with the long term goal of creating "stable" mixed-income
neighborhoods, not "disinvesting" or "gentrifying" ones. Thus, in a
disinvesting neighborhood, the goal is to increase housing and other
investment, enhance the neighborhood image, preserve a mixed-income environment
by upgrading the existing housing inventory, encourage higher income families
and serve as a catalyst for additional investment. In a neighborhood with
increasing housing prices the goal is to preserve a mixed income environment
and avoid the dislocation of low income residents by creating a reserve of
permanent affordable rental workforce housing protected from price increases
and danger of converting to market rate housing, allowing renters to own their
housing, and otherwise financially insulating low income residents from
financial burdens of gentrification while accruing its benefits.
   (B)   Design and Location Criteria. Access to public transportation; jobs
and housing balance; pedestrian access to shopping, schools and recreation;
retail in close proximity to residential; energy efficient construction; water
conservation; Universal Design Standards, quality design and construction all
enhance the value of workforce housing and, as required, the standards of the
applicable zone in the Integrated Development Ordinance.
   (C)   Preservation. Mechanisms are available for preserving existing and new
workforce housing. Neighborhoods with rising land values will most benefit from
a balance of tools that work toward permanently affordable rental housing, in
addition to a shorter term mechanism that will achieve the goals of attracting
investment into neighborhoods that are experiencing declining land values. All
rental housing shall be permanently affordable. Trust funds used for
homeownership assistance shall be subject to recapture or resale provisions. No
funds from sources other than the biannual General Obligation Bond Capital
Improvement Program or interest earnings of such shall be considered as part of
the trust fund nor shall such funds from other sources be subject to the
requirement of permanent affordability. Rental projects funded in part from the
trust fund and in part from other sources shall be subject to the requirement
of permanent affordability.
   Trust funds used for homeownership assistance shall be subject to recapture
or resale provisions. Homebuyer assistance is a direct subsidy to the homebuyer
and includes funds for down payment, closing costs, rehabilitation costs or
other financial assistance provided directly to the homebuyer. The maximum
homeownership assistance for any individual homebuyer will be $20,000. This
maximum amount may be adjusted annually by the Department of Family and
Community Services by a maximum of 5%. The homeownership assistance must be
repaid if it is provided directly to the homebuyer. Upon resale the seller may
sell to any willing buyer at any price. If the new buyer of the property has an
income at or below 80% AMI, the homeownership assistance may be assumed by the
new buyer. The homeownership assistance will be secured by a promissory note
and mortgage. The terms of the promissory note will be at zero percent interest
with the repayment of the principal balance due upon the resale, refinance or
failure to occupy the property. Once the trust funds are repaid to the city the
property is no longer subject to any trust fund restrictions. The funds
returned to the city shall be deposited in the Trust Fund account and shall be
used for future Trust Fund eligible activities.
   Rental properties shall enter into a monitoring agreement with the city or
other entity as approved by the city to provide an annual audit of compliance
with affordability requirements and the Affordable Housing Act, NMSA 1978, § 6-
27-1 et seq. Audits will take into account the requirements of all funding
sources and those requirements may conflict. Federal requirements preempt these
ordinances. For purposes of this article, income eligible families will not be
evicted from their rental dwelling unit if over time their income increases
above the eligible level. However, provisions should be made to relocate the
family within a mixed income workforce housing project to a market rate
dwelling or adjust their rents appropriately if their income warrants such a
change.
   (D)   Link to Growth Management Plan. In developing and adopting the
Affordable Housing Plan, there should be consistency with and support for the
city’s growth management plan as defined by the Planned Growth Strategy and
Comprehensive Plan. This requirement for consistency and support is not
intended to mandate the development of workforce housing, specific distribution
or locations for workforce housing but may be a factor in such decisions.
(Ord. 30-2006; Am. Ord._2015-001; Am. Ord._2019-016)
§ 14-9-7 NOTIFICATION OF TENANTS.
   In all city land use actions that will result in the displacement of
tenants, subject to federal and state law as appropriate, the applicant is
required to notify the residents affected by first-class mail at least two
weeks prior to the public hearing on the action. If names of tenants impacted
by displacement cannot be readily obtained in a city directory, the applicant
may address tenants as "resident" in required notifications.
(Ord. 30-2006; Am. Ord._2019-016)
§ 14-9-7.5 RULES AND REGULATIONS.
   The Department of Family and Community Services or its successor, or another
city department as designated by the Mayor, shall establish rules and
regulations to provide for implementation of this article. The Mayor shall
publish a draft of the rules and regulations for public comment within 120 days
of the adoption of the Workforce Housing Plan.
(Ord. 30-2006; Am. Ord._2019-016)
PART 2: AFFORDABLE HOUSING OPPORTUNITY ORDINANCE
§ 14-9-8 SHORT TITLE.
   Sections 14-9-8 through 14-9-15 of this article may be cited as the
Affordable Housing Opportunity Ordinance ("Ordinance").
(Ord._2015-001)
§ 14-9-9 FINDINGS.
   (A)   The City of Albuquerque, New Mexico (the "City") is a municipal
corporation duly organized and existing under the laws of the State of New
Mexico (the "state"); and
   (B)   Under the exception to the "anti-donation" clause as set forth in
Article IX, Section 14 of the New Mexico Constitution, the City of Albuquerque
is not prohibited from donating land it owns for the construction of affordable
housing on the property; donating an existing building owned by the City of
Albuquerque for conversion and/or renovation into affordable housing; or
providing or paying the cost of infrastructure necessary to afford affordable
housing projects; and
   (C)   The Affordable Housing Act, NMSA 1978 Sections 6-27-1 et seq. (the
"Act") implements the provisions of Subsections E and F of Section 14 of
Article 9 of the New Mexico Constitution; and
   (D)   The New Mexico Mortgage Finance Authority ("MFA"); has reviewed and
approved the form and terms of this ordinance prior to the final adoption
hereof.
(Ord._2015-001)
§ 14-9-10 PURPOSE.
   (A)   To establish procedures to ensure that City housing assistance to
grantees are qualifying grantees who meet the requirements of the Act, this
ordinance, and rules promulgated pursuant to such legislation both at the time
of the award and throughout the term of any grant or loan under the Program;
and
   (B)   To require long-term affordability of the City's Affordable Housing
Projects so that a project cannot be sold shortly after completion and taken
out of the affordable housing market to ensure a quick profit for the
qualifying grantee; and
   (C)   To require the City to enter into a contract with the Qualifying
Grantee consistent with the Act, which contract shall include remedies and
default provisions in the event of the unsatisfactory performance by the
qualifying grantee and which contract shall be subject to the review of the MFA
in its discretion; and
   (D)   To require that a grant or loan for the project must impose a
contractual obligation on the Qualifying Grantee that the affordable housing
units in the project be occupied by persons of Low or Moderate income; and
   (E)   To provide for adequate security against the loss of public funds or
property in the event that the Qualifying Grantee abandons or otherwise fails
to complete the project; and
   (F)   To require review and approval of the housing plan project budget by
the City before any expenditure of grant funds or transfer of granted property;
and
   (G)   To require that a condition of grant or loan approval be proof of
compliance with all applicable State and local laws, rules, and Ordinances; and
   (H)   To provide definitions for "low-income and moderate-income" and
setting out requirements for the verification of income levels; and
   (I)   To provide the City with a valid affordable housing program; and
   (J)   To require that the City have an existing valid affordable housing
plan or housing elements contained in a valid plan prior to authorizing a
housing assistance grant; and
   (K)   To require the Department to promulgate and follow Administrative
Requirements and Rules and Regulations to implement this ordinance, including
but not limited to further describing application requirements, procedures, and
evaluations.
(Ord._2015-001)
§ 14-9-11 GENERAL DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this article, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ACT. The Affordable Housing Act, NMSA 1978, Section 6-27-1 et seq.
   ADMINISTRATIVE REQUIREMENTS. The City of Albuquerque Family and Community
Services Department's Administrative Requirements for Social Services
Contracts, promulgated and approved pursuant to the City of Albuquerque
Purchasing Ordinance, as published now and as amended in the future.
   AFFORDABILITY PERIOD.
      (1)   For homebuyer and rental projects, the length of the affordability
period depends on the amount of the investment in the property and the nature
of the activity funded. The table below provides the affordability periods:
Activity Investment per Unit Minimum Length of the Affordability Period
Activity                           Investment per Unit Minimum Length of the
                                                       Affordability Period
                                   Less Than $15,000   5 Years
Homeownership and rental housing   $15,000 -$40,000    10 Years
acquisition and/or rehabilitation  More than $40,000   15 Years
                                   More than $100,000  20 years
New construction of rental housing Any $               20 Years
Refinancing of rental housing      Any $               15 Years
                                   More than $100,000  20 years
 
      (2)   For workforce housing funds all of the services required in the
development agreement shall be continued for 90 years from the completion of
the project ("affordable period") with a renewable 90 years after the first
Affordability Period.
   AFFORDABLE. Consistent with minimum rent and/or income limitations set forth
in the MFA Act, and in guidelines established by the MFA.
   AFFORDABLE HOUSING. Residential housing primarily for persons or households
of low or moderate income and whose monthly housing costs do not exceed 30% of
the household's gross monthly income.
   AFFORDABLE HOUSING FUNDS. Any or all funds awarded or to be awarded, loaned
or otherwise distributed under this ordinance for payment of the costs of
infrastructure for affordable housing under an affordable housing plan.
   AFFORDABLE HOUSING PLAN or PLAN. A plan pursuant to the Affordable Housing
Program that contemplates one or more affordable housing projects, which may be
developed in one or more phases.
   AFFORDABLE HOUSING PROGRAM or PROGRAM. The program the city establishes
pursuant to this ordinance or the Plan.
   AFFORDABLE HOUSING PROJECT or PROJECT. Any work or undertaking, whether new
construction, acquisition of existing residential housing, remodeling,
improvement, rehabilitation or conversion, which may be undertaken in one or
more phases, as part of an affordable housing plan, as approved by the city
and/or the MFA for the primary purposes as allowed by the Act.
   APPLICANT. An individual; a governmental housing agency; a for-profit
organization, including a corporation, limited liability company, partnership,
joint venture, syndicate or association or a nonprofit organization meeting the
appropriate criteria of the city.
   BUILDING. A structure capable of being renovated or converted into
affordable housing or a structure that is to be demolished and is located on
land donated for use in connection with an affordable housing project.
   CITY. The City of Albuquerque, New Mexico, a unit of local government under
the Constitution and laws of the State of New Mexico.
   CONGREGATE HOUSING FACILITY. Residential housing designed for occupancy by
more than five persons of low or moderate income living independently of each
other. The facility may contain group dining, recreational, health care or
other communal living facilities. Each unit in a congregate housing facility
shall contain at least its own living, sleeping, and bathing facilities.
   DEPARTMENT. The Department of Family and Community Services, or its
successor department, as determined by the Mayor.
   FEDERAL GOVERNMENT. The United States of America and any agency or
instrumentality corporate or otherwise of the United States of America.
   HOUSEHOLD. One or more persons occupying a housing unit.
   HOUSING ASSISTANCE GRANT. The donation, provision, or payment by the city
of:
      (1)   Land upon which the affordable housing will be constructed; or
      (2)   An existing building that will be renovated, converted, or
demolished and reconstructed as affordable housing; or
      (3)   The costs of acquisition, development, construction, financing, and
operating or owning affordable housing; or
      (4)   The costs of financing of infrastructure necessary to support
affordable housing.
   HUD. The United States Department of Housing and Urban Development.
   INFRASTRUCTURE. Includes but is not limited to improvements such as sanitary
sewage or water systems, drainage and flood control systems, roads and parking,
trails and parks, landscaping, electrical and natural gas facilities, cable and
telecommunications facilities, lighting systems, and traffic control systems.
Infrastructure shall also include the costs and activities reasonably necessary
to construct such improvements, including acquisition costs, demolition or
rehabilitation of existing infrastructure, planning, engineering design,
construction management, and inspection costs.
   MFA. The New Mexico Mortgage Finance Authority.
   MFA ACT. The Mortgage Finance Authority Act, enacted as Chapter 303 of the
Laws of 1975 of the State of New Mexico, as amended (NMSA 1978, Sections 58-18-
1 through 58-18-27).
   MFA RULES. The New Mexico Mortgage Finance Authority Affordable Housing Act
Rules promulgated pursuant to Section 6-27-8 NMSA 1978 of the Act.
   PERSONS OF LOW TO MODERATE INCOME. Persons and families within the City of
Albuquerque who earn up to 50% of the area median income. For purposes of this
definition, the word "households" shall mean a group of persons consisting of,
but not limited to, the head of household; his or her spouse, if any, and
children, if any, who are allowable as personal exemptions for federal income
tax purposes.
   POLICIES AND PROCEDURES. Policies and procedures of the MFA, including but
not limited to, mortgage loan purchasing, selling, servicing and reservation
procedures, which the MFA may update and revise from time to time as the MFA
deems appropriate.
   QUALIFYING GRANTEE.
      (1)   An individual who is qualified to receive assistance pursuant to
the Act and is processed and approved by the city in accordance with the
Administrative Requirements and the Rules and Regulations; and
      (2)   A governmental housing agency, regional housing authority,
corporation, limited liability company, partnership, joint venture, syndicate,
association or nonprofit organization that is (a) organized under the state or
local laws and can provide proof of such organization; and (b) if a nonprofit,
has no part of its earnings inuring to the benefit of any member, founder,
contributor, or individual; and (c) is approved by the city in accordance with
the Administrative Requirements and the Rules and Regulations.
   RECERTIFICATION. The recertification of applicants and/or qualifying
grantees participating in any affordable housing programs or in any programs
under the Act as determined necessary from time to time by the city and/or the
MFA.
   REHABILITATION. The substantial renovation or reconstruction of an existing
single-family residence or a "Multi-Family Housing Project", which complies
with requirements established by the city. REHABILITATION shall not include
routine or ordinary repairs, improvements or maintenance, such as interior
decorating, remodeling or exterior painting, except in conjunction with other
substantial renovation or reconstruction.
   RESIDENTIAL HOUSING. Any building, structure or portion thereof that is
primarily occupied, or designed or intended primarily for occupancy, as a
residence by one or more households and any real property that is offered for
sale or lease for the construction or location thereon of such a building,
structure or portion thereof. RESIDENTIAL HOUSING includes congregate housing,
manufactured homes and housing intended to provide or providing transitional or
temporary housing for homeless persons.
   RESIDENTIAL USE. Shall mean that the structure or the portion of the
structure to benefit from the affordable housing funds or housing assistance
grant, is designed primarily for use as the principal residence of the occupant
or occupants and shall exclude vacation or recreational homes.
   RFP. Any request for proposal or request for qualifications made by the
city.
   RULES AND REGULATIONS. The City of Albuquerque Family and Community Services
Department Social Services Contracts Procurement Rules and Regulations
promulgated and approved pursuant to the City of Albuquerque Purchasing
Ordinance, Chapter 5, Article 5 ROA1994, as published now and as amended in the
future.
   STATE. The State of New Mexico.
(Ord._2015-001)
§ 14-9-12 AUTHORIZATION OF CITY CONTRIBUTIONS.
   (A)   The city may make housing assistance grants, improve Infrastructure,
or provide affordable housing funds, by City Council resolution, for affordable
housing projects.
   (B)   This ordinance is created and shall be administered in accordance with
the Act and in accordance with the MFA Rules. All affordable housing
contributions authorized by this ordinance will be in compliance with the Act
and Plan and any recipients of all such contributions will comply with the
ordinance, Administrative Requirements, and Rules and Regulations.
(Ord._2015-001)
§ 14-9-13 GENERAL REQUIREMENTS.
   The following requirements shall apply to all housing assistance grants,
and/or affordable housing funds awarded, loaned or otherwise distributed by the
city to a qualifying grantee under the ordinance.
   (A)   Procurement. The city, in its discretion, shall procure services
according to its rules and regulations or shall otherwise identify a qualifying
grantee for the use of any affordable housing funds or housing assistance
grants to be awarded, loaned, donated or otherwise distributed under the Act.
   (B)   Applicant Eligibility. The following applicants are eligible under the
Act to apply for affordable housing fund or a housing assistance grant to
provide housing or related services to persons of low or moderate income in the
community.
      (1)   All individuals who are qualified to receive assistance pursuant to
this ordinance, the Administrative Requirements and the Rules and Regulations;
      (2)   All for-profit organizations, including any corporation, limited
liability company, partnership, joint venture, syndicate, or association
provided they:
         (a)   Have a functioning accounting system that is operated in
accordance with generally accepted accounting principles or has designated
entity that will maintain such an accounting system consistent with generally
accepted accounting principles; and
         (b)   Have among its purposes significant activities related to
providing housing or services to persons or households of low or moderate
income; and
         (c)   Have no significant outstanding or unresolved monitoring finding
from the city, or its most recent independent financial audit, or if it has any
such findings, it has a certified letter from the city, the MFA, or auditor
stating that the findings are in the process of being resolved.
      (3)   All nonprofit organizations meeting the following requirements:
         (a)   A primary mission of the nonprofit organization must be to
provide housing or housing-related services to persons of low or moderate
income; and
         (b)   Have a functioning accounting system that is operated in
accordance with generally accepted accounting principles or has designated
entity that will maintain such an accounting system consistent with generally
accepted accounting principles; and
         (c)   Have among its purposes significant activities related to
providing housing or services to persons or households of low or moderate
income; and
         (d)   Have no significant outstanding or unresolved monitoring finding
from the city, or its most recent independent financial audit, or if it has any
such findings, it has a certified letter from the city, the MFA, or auditor
stating that the findings are in the process of being resolved.
   (C)   Application. All applicants wishing to apply for a housing assistance
grant or an award of affordable housing funds shall follow the city's
application process, as more specifically set forth in Chapter 6 of the Rules
and Regulations.
   (D)   Additional Requirements. The selected qualifying grantee shall enter
into one or more contracts with the city, which contract(s) shall be consistent
with and further the purposes of this ordinance. At a minimum, such contracts
shall comply with the terms set forth in Chapter 8 of the Rules and
Regulations.
   (E)   The Affordable Housing Plan is the consolidated planning and needs
assessment as it occurs every five years that serves as the comprehensive
housing affordability strategy and community development plan in compliance
with HUD regulations at 24 CFR Part 91, the Act, MFA Rules, and this ordinance.
For the purposes of this ordinance and Department procedures, the Workforce
Housing Plan and the Affordable Housing Plan are synonymous. All housing
assistance grants or awards of affordable housing funds shall be in compliance
with the Plan.
   (F)   The Program shall transfer or disburse funds to a qualifying grantee
only after a budget is submitted to and approved by City Council.
   (G)   Affordable Housing Requirements. All affordable housing funds or
housing assistance grants awarded under the Act shall be used by qualifying
grantees for the benefit of persons of low or moderate income subject to the
provisions of this ordinance, and with particular regard to their housing
related needs.
      (1)   Single Family Property. Qualifying grantees shall agree that they
shall maintain any single-family property which has been acquired,
rehabilitated, converted, leased, repaired, constructed, or which property has
otherwise benefited from Affordable Housing Fund, including but not limited to
any loans which have been repaid with affordable housing funds and which loans
previously were secured by such properties, as affordable housing for so long
as any or all of the affordable housing funds which have been awarded, loaned,
or otherwise conveyed to the qualifying grantee are unpaid and outstanding or
the affordability period, whichever is longer.
      (2)   Multi-Family Property.
         (a)   Single Apartment within a Multi-Family Property. Qualifying
grantees shall agree that, if any single apartments are to be rehabilitated,
converted, leased, repaired, constructed, or otherwise are to benefit from
affordable housing funds; those apartments shall be leased to persons of low or
moderate income at the time of any such award. Qualifying grantees, who are the
landlords and/or owners of such properties, shall further agree to contribute
at least 60% of the cost of rehabilitation, conversion, lease, repair, and/or
construction. Qualifying grantees also shall agree that the persons of low or
moderate income, who are tenants of those apartments, shall be allowed to
remain tenants for so long as there are no incurred defaults by those tenants
under their respective leases and provided that there is no just cause for the
landlord to terminate any lease agreement with those tenants.
         (b)   Multiple Apartments. Qualifying grantees shall agree that, if
multiple apartments or an entire multi-family property are to be acquired,
rehabilitated, converted, leased, repaired, constructed, or otherwise are to
benefit from affordable housing funds, including but not limited to any loans
which have been repaid with affordable housing funds and which loans previously
were secured by such properties, they shall maintain at least 50% of all
resources benefiting families at or below 50% of AMI and at least 30% of all
resources benefiting families at or below 30% AMI for so long as any or all of
the affordable housing funds which have been awarded, loaned, or otherwise
conveyed for the qualifying grantee are unpaid and outstanding or for the
affordability period, whichever is longer.
      (3)   Nonresidential Property. Qualifying grantees shall agree that they
shall maintain any non-residential property which has been acquired,
rehabilitated, converted, leased, repaired, constructed, or which property has
otherwise benefited from affordable housing funds, including but not limited to
any loans which have been repaid with affordable housing funds and which loans
previously were secured by such properties, as the facility which provides
housing related services to persons of low to moderate income for so long as
any or all of the affordable housing funds which have been awarded, loaned, or
otherwise conveyed to the qualifying grantee are unpaid and outstanding of the
affordability period, whichever is longer.
      (4)   Housing Assistance Grant Affordability Requirements. Qualifying
grantees shall agree that they shall maintain any land or building received as
a housing assistance grant either as a single-family or multi-family affordable
housing or as a facility which provides housing related services to persons of
low or moderate income for the duration of the affordability period. In
calculating the affordability period for housing assistance grants of either
land or buildings, the fair market value of the land or buildings or the costs
of infrastructure at the time of the donation by the state or the city shall
apply.
      (5)   Affordability Period. The city, in its discretion, may increase the
affordability period in any contract, note, mortgage, loan agreement, land use
restriction agreement, restrictive covenant agreements, and/or any other
agreement which the city may enter into with any qualifying grantee or
beneficiary of the affordable housing funds or of the housing assistance grant.
   (H)   Consent to Jurisdiction. Each qualifying grantee shall consent to the
jurisdiction of the courts of the State of New Mexico over any proceeding to
enforce compliance with the terms of the Act, the Rules and this ordinance and
any agreement between the qualifying grantee and the city.
   (I)   Recertification Procedures.
      (1)   The qualifying grantee must meet the requirements of the Act, the
Rules and this ordinance both at the time of any award and throughout the term
of any grant and contract related thereto.
      (2)   The city may establish procedures for recertifying qualifying
grantees from time to time.
      (3)   Qualifying grantees that fail to satisfy the requirements for
recertification shall cease to be eligible and shall be denied further
participation in affordable housing programs until the requirements of the city
and the MFA are satisfied.
      (4)   Compliance with the Law. The qualifying grantee shall provide the
city with any certifications or other proof that it may require in order for
the city and the MFA to confirm that the Qualifying Grantee and the qualifying
grantee's proposed project are in compliance with all applicable federal, state
and local laws, rules and ordinances.
   (J)   Extension of Affordable Housing Programs. The city shall have the
power to create variations or extensions of affordable housing programs, or
additional programs that comply with the Act and the Rules.
(Ord._2015-001)
§ 14-9-14 REQUIREMENTS AND RULES.
   The Department has promulgated administrative requirements and rules and
regulations further describing how the Plan and Program will be administered,
and how procurements will be conducted. Copies of the current Administrative
Requirements and Rules and Regulations are adopted with this ordinance, and may
be amended from time to time by the Department. Amendments to the
Administrative Requirements, Rules and Regulations, or this ordinance shall be
submitted to MFA for review prior to adoption.
(Ord._2015-001)
§ 14-9-15 DISCRIMINATION PROHIBITED.
   The development, construction, occupancy and operation of an affordable
housing program or an affordable housing project financed or assisted under the
Act shall be undertaken in a manner consistent with principles of non-
discrimination and equal opportunity, and the city shall require compliance by
all qualifying grantees with all applicable federal and state laws and
regulations relating to affirmative action, non- discrimination and equal
opportunity.
(Ord._2015-001)
ARTICLE 10: WIND RESISTANT
WALLS AND FENCES
Section
   
14-10-1   Policy
   
14-10-2   License granted
   
14-10-3   Covenant required
   
14-10-4   Termination of license
§ 14-10-1 POLICY.
   It is hereby declared to be the policy of the City Council to encourage the
maintenance of lawns and ground cover and the beautification of residential
property by cooperating where feasible with residential property owners in
erecting and maintaining wind resistant and dust resistant walls and fences.
('74 Code, § 7-13-1) (Ord. 1023)
§ 14-10-2 LICENSE GRANTED.
   The City Council hereby grants a license to owners of residential property
who obtain a permit therefor under the provisions of the Building Code as
amended to erect and maintain a wind resistant and dust resistant fence or wall
as therein provided on the city-owned land lying between the existing sidewalk
or existing curb line and the front line of the residential property of the
applicant.
('74 Code, § 7-13-2) (Ord. 1023)
§ 14-10-3 COVENANT REQUIRED.
   No permit shall be granted for the construction of such fence or wall unless
the applicants have first executed, recorded and delivered an instrument in
writing covenanting for the owners of the fronting property and their
successors in interest that the fence or wall to be constructed under the
authority of said permit shall be removed at the cost of the then owner of the
premises on notice by the city and further covenanting for the owners and their
successors in interest the indemnification of the city against any and all
claims, lawsuits or litigation for damages or injuries arising out of the
construction or maintenance of such fence or wall, such covenant to run with
the land.
('74 Code, § 7-13-3) (Ord. 1023)
§ 14-10-4 TERMINATION OF LICENSE.
   The city may terminate the license herein granted as to one, several or all
of such licensees by giving public notice of intention so to terminate in the
then legal newspaper of the city or by delivering a written copy of such notice
to the then occupants of the property and it shall be the duty of the then
owners of the property to remove such wall or fence at their own cost within
ten days of the giving of such notice as hereinabove provided.
('74 Code, § 7-13-4) (Ord. 1023)
ARTICLE 11: SOLAR ENERGY; PERMITS
Section
   
14-11-1   Short title
   
14-11-2   Authority and jurisdiction
   
14-11-3   Intent
   
14-11-4   Interpretation
   
14-11-5   Definitions
   
14-11-6   Creation, limitation of solar rights in city
   
14-11-7   Permits for solar rights
   
14-11-8   Recording solar rights
   
14-11-9   Remedy
§ 14-11-1 SHORT TITLE.
   This article may be cited as the "Solar Permit Ordinance."
('74 Code, § 7-2-3) (Ord. 80-1981)
§ 14-11-2 AUTHORITY AND JURISDICTION.
   (A)   This article is created pursuant to the authority set forth in Article
I of the Charter of the City of Albuquerque, which was adopted pursuant to
Article X, Section 6, of the Constitution of the State of New Mexico.
   (B)   This article is consistent with the provisions of the Solar Rights
Act, Section 47-3-1 et seq. NMSA 1978. The city does not undertake to perform
any functions expressly denied by general law.
('74 Code, § 7-2-1) (Ord. 80-1981)
§ 14-11-3 INTENT.
   (A)   This article is intended to help achieve Article IX of the Charter of
the City of Albuquerque. It is also a means of conforming solar rights to local
plans and laws: the Albuquerque/Bernalillo County Compre-hensive Plan, and the
Integrated Development Ordinance of this code of ordinances. It is intended to
create orderly, harmonious, and economically sound development in order to
promote the health, safety, convenience, and general welfare of the citizens of
the city.
   (B)   The city recognizes that economic benefits can be derived for the
people of the city from the use of solar energy. The city encourages the use of
solar energy. This article is appropriate as a means to settle property rights
so that people can build structures and plant vegetation knowing what solar
rights restrict their development and so that people can know the extent of the
solar rights which attach to a solar collector.
('74 Code, § 7-2-2) (Ord. 80- 1981; Am. Ord._2017-025)
§ 14-11-4 INTERPRETATION.
   The provisions of this article shall be held to be minimum requirements to
meet the intent expressed in §
14-11-2. Where the provisions herein impose greater restrictions than those of
any other ordinance or regulation, the provisions of this article shall
prevail. Where the provisions of any other ordinance or local regulation impose
greater restrictions than those of this article, the provisions of such other
ordinance or local regulation shall prevail.
('74 Code, § 7-2-4) (Ord. 80-1981)
§ 14-11-5 DEFINITIONS.
   (A)   For the purpose of this article, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   MAYOR. The Mayor or his authorized representative.
   OBSTRUCTION. Any personal or real property, including vegetation, which
interferes with a solar right, except it does not include either antennas or
poles and wires for public utilities.
   OWNER or POSSESSOR OF REAL PROPERTY. A person who holds a fee simple
interest in real property, a real estate contract purchaser of real property,
or a person who is entitled to take immediate possession or has possession of
real property.
   PERSON. An individual, corporation, governmental agency, business trust,
estate, trust, partnership, association, two or more persons having a joint or
common interest, or any other legal entity.
   SOLAR FRACTION. The annual average proportion of the energy consumed to
accomplish a specified task which is derived from solar energy.
   (B)   Words defined in the Solar Rights Act, Section 47-3-3 NMSA 1978, are
to be construed as defined therein.
('74 Code, § 7-2-5) (Ord. 80-1981)
§ 14-11-6 CREATION, LIMITATION OF SOLAR RIGHTS IN CITY.
   (A)   Within the city no solar rights shall be created or redefined on or
after August 1, 1981 except in conjunction with solar collectors which have
been issued permits for solar rights under the terms of this article. The
spatial and temporal limits of solar rights created or redefined on or after
August 1, 1981, shall be defined by the permits for solar rights issued for
solar collectors.
   (B)   Nothing in this article shall be construed to alter, amend, deny,
impair, or modify any solar right, lease, easement, or contract right which has
vested prior to August 1, 1981.
   (C)   A solar right is enforceable as an easement appurtenant against any
person whose obstruction first infringed or was planned to infringe on such
right after that person had knowledge or notice of the solar right.
   (D)   Transfer.
      (1)   A permit for solar rights is appurtenant to the real property upon
which the related solar collector is situated; neither a solar right nor a
permit for solar rights is transferable separately from the real property upon
which the related solar collector is located unless the right is acquired for a
public purpose by an entity which has power of eminent domain.
      (2)   Unless the document of conveyance otherwise specifies, when any
real property for which an appurtenant solar right is claimed is transferred,
the permit for solar rights shall be transferred with the realty, and the solar
right shall be enforceable by the transferee in the same manner and to the same
extent to which it was enforceable by the transferor.
   (E)   Termination or diminution of a solar right defined by a permit for
solar rights which has been used shall be accomplished only by:
      (1)   Purchase of the right by the owner of the land burdened by it,
i.e., merger of the dominant and servient tenements; or
      (2)   Voidance of all or part of a permit for solar rights by the Zoning
Hearing Examiner, as specified in §
14-11-7, based on:
         (a)   Request of the owner of the permit and dominant tenement; or
         (b)   Abandonment; or
      (3)   Abandonment, as determined by a court of competent jurisdiction.
('74 Code, § 7-2-6) (Ord. 80-1981; Am. Ord._2023-015)
§ 14-11-7 PERMITS FOR SOLAR RIGHTS.
   (A)   Application and Fee.
      (1)   Request for a permit for solar rights is initiated by application
to the Mayor by the owner or possessor of real property on which a related
solar collector is located. An application shall be accompanied by two copies
of the following items:
         (a)   Plans for the proposed solar energy system, including the solar
collector and any heat storage and distribution facilities; plans shall include
calculations and sum total as to collection and beneficial use of heat,
expressed in BTUs and solar fraction.
         (b)   Plans showing the following:
            1.   The boundaries of all relevant parcels of land which either
contain or are proposed to contain a solar collector or are proposed to be
burdened by the solar right, i.e., the parcels proposed for the dominant and
servient tenements;
            2.   The owners and the possessors of the real property for which
parcel boundaries are shown;
            3.   Where relevant to the solar right requested, the topography of
the land, and the location of structures, fixtures, and vegetation existent or
known by the applicant to be planned; the horizontal and vertical dimensions of
such structures, fixtures, and vegetation; and
            4.   A spatial and temporal definition of the solar rights
requested.
      (2)   Request to void in whole or in part a permit for solar rights is
initiated by application to the Mayor by the owner or possessor of real
property with a dominant or servient tenement defined by the permit. An
application shall identify the permit which is requested to be voided.
      (3)   An application for approving or voiding a permit for solar rights
relating to the same solar collector may not be considered within 12 months of
the date of final city action on a prior application for the same action.
      (4)   Fee.
         (a)   An application fee of $50 shall accompany each application
relating to establishing a solar right.
         (b)   An application fee of $40 shall accompany each application to
void a solar right.
         (c)   When an application is withdrawn after it has been advertised
for public hearing, the application fee shall not be refunded. When an
application is withdrawn before such advertisement all but $10 of the fee shall
be refunded.
         (d)   If the city is the applicant or agent, the application fee is
waived.
   (B)   Hearing and Decision.
      (1)   A duly filed application for a permit for solar rights shall be
decided, upon the record after a hearing, by the Zoning Hearing Examiner.
      (2)   At least 15 days in advance of a hearing the Mayor shall give
notice of the public hearing by certified mail, return receipt requested, to
the following persons:
         (a)   The applicant;
         (b)   The applicant's agent; and
         (c)   The owners and possessors of involved real property, as
submitted by the applicant per division (A)(1)(b)1. and 2. of this section.
      (3)   The notice shall contain the following information:
         (a)   The time and place of hearing;
         (b)   A statement describing location of the property and the subject
matter of the hearing; and
         (c)   How additional information can be obtained.
      (4)   Prior to hearing, the Mayor may request city departments and other
agencies which he judges would be interested to comment on the application.
Comments received shall be part of the hearing record.
      (5)   A written statement giving the name and address of the person
making the appearance, signed by him or by his agent, and filed with the Zoning
Hearing Examiner, constitutes appearance of record. The parties to a hearing
shall be any of the following persons who has entered an appearance of record
either prior to commencement of the hearing or when permitted by the Zoning
Hearing Examiner:
         (a)   A person entitled to notice under division (2) above; and
         (b)   Any unit of government which has jurisdiction over the site
proposed for a permit.
      (6)   A party shall be afforded an opportunity to present evidence and
argument and to question witnesses on all relevant issues, but the Zoning
Hearing Examiner may impose reasonable limitations on the number of witnesses
heard, and on the nature and length of their testimony and questioning. The
Zoning Hearing Examiner may call witnesses and introduce papers on his own
volition.
      (7)   The Mayor shall make a full record of the hearing by sound
recording; any person shall have the opportunity to listen to, copy, or
transcribe the recording at any reasonable time at the office of the Mayor.
Summary minutes shall be kept of all Zoning Hearing Examiner’s hearings, and
they shall be kept available for public inspection.
      (8)   Prior to making a decision, the Zoning Hearing Examiner shall
neither:
         (a)   Communicate, directly or indirectly, with any party or his
representatives in connection with the merits of any issue involved except upon
notice and opportunity for all parties to participate;
         (b)   Use nor rely upon any communication, reports, staff memoranda,
or other materials prepared in connection with the particular case unless made
a part of the record; nor
         (c)   Inspect the site with any party or his representative unless all
parties are given an opportunity to be present.
      (9)   An advertised hearing may be continued to a time and place
announced at the hearing without further mailed notice.
      (10)   The Zoning Hearing Examiner shall act on an application within 15
days of the conclusion of the hearing. He shall prepare a written decision
which includes the key findings of fact. This report shall be made part of the
record. Each material finding shall be supported by substantial evidence or, if
it is noted on the record, by a personal knowledge of or inspection of the
hearing officer.
      (11)   The Zoning Hearing Examiner shall, when approving a permit for
solar rights, limit the solar rights spatially and temporally as necessary to
meet the stated criteria for granting such permits.
      (12)   When any permit for solar rights is approved or denied, as
provided in this division (12), written notification of the action, indicating
the extent of the solar rights granted, shall be sent within one day of the
action to the applicant's agent and all persons who were proposed for dominant
and servient tenements by the applicant.
   (C)   Criteria for deciding requests for permits are as follows:
      (1)   A permit for solar rights shall be approved if and only if, in the
circumstances of the particular case, the solar collector and related solar
rights created will be beneficially used, and in addition the solar rights
granted:
         (a)   Will not unreasonably interfere with the enjoyment of other
sites, either the enjoyment of present use or prospective use as indicated by
zoning or adopted plans; or
         (b)   Will be of more value to the public welfare than the precluded
enjoyment of present use or prospective use of other sites which would be
precluded by the permit. For the purpose of this division (b), PUBLIC WELFARE
means the conservation of scarce fuels and the allowance of an undertaking
which would not otherwise be viable.
      (2)   The beneficial use of a solar right which would permit radiation
from the sun to impinge directly on the solar collector before 9:00 a.m. or
after 3:00 p.m., Mountain Standard Time, on a winter solstice day or before 9:
00 a.m. or after 5:00 p.m., Mountain Daylight Savings Time, on a summer
solstice day is de minimus and shall never be protected by a permit for solar
rights. This division (2) shall not be construed to mean that an applicant has
a right to a permit for solar rights at any other time of day.
      (3)   There is a rebuttable presumption that solar rights which do not
limit the height of potential buildings more than the normally permissive
height regulations of the Integrated Development Ordinance will not
unreasonably interfere with the enjoyment of the other sites. This is true even
though the solar rights inhibit the location of objects not limited by those
height regulations.
   (D)   A permit for solar rights which is approved is voidable in whole or in
part if and only if:
      (1)   Two years after the date approval vested, the rights and privileges
in question have never been utilized; or
      (2)   The rights and privileges in question have ceased to be
beneficially used for a continuous period of two years or more; or
      (3)   The owner of the solar right, i.e., the dominant tenement, requests
that the permit be voided;
      (4)   A decision on whether to void a permit for solar rights shall be
made by the Zoning Hearing Examiner in a process consistent with division (B)
of this section;
      (5)   If a permit for solar rights is voided, the related solar right is
destroyed.
   (E)   The exclusive remedy for parties dissatisfied with the action of the
Zoning Hearing Examiner shall be filing of a Petition for Writ of Certiorari.
The petition for review shall be limited to the record made on the public
hearing held pursuant to this article.
('74 Code, § 7-2-7) (Ord. 80- 1981; Am. Ord. 31-2007; Am. Ord._2017-025; Am.
Ord._2023-015)
§ 14-11-8 RECORDING SOLAR RIGHTS.
   (A)   Recordation of a permit for solar rights with the County Clerk in
accordance with Section 14-9-1 NMSA 1978 shall be notice to all the world of
the existence of the solar right therein defined.
   (B)   Notice as to solar rights which were not recorded in accordance with
Section 14-9-1 NMSA 1978 prior to August 1, 1981, shall be given only by
recording a permit for solar rights, issued as provided by this article.
   (C)   The Mayor shall record with the County Clerk any permit for solar
rights or voidance of any permit for solar rights granted by the city. Filing
shall be no sooner than 15 days after the Zoning Hearing Examiner’s decision;
filing shall be no later than 25 days after the Zoning Hearing Examiner’s
decision unless a Writ of Certiorari has been filed and the Mayor has been so
informed. The document filed shall be signed by the Zoning Hearing Examiner;
the document shall be titled “Solar Right Declaration” and shall contain at
least the following:
      (1)   A legal description of the site of the solar collector including
the vertical and horizontal location of the solar collector on the site,
      (2)   A statement that a solar right is established and defining the
three-dimensional space or the place and time of day in which obstruction is
prohibited or limited,
      (3)   Legal descriptions of all land parcels burdened with servient
tenements by the solar right, and
      (4)   Reference to any special limitations imposed.
   (D)   A solar right declaration, as recorded, shall be mailed by the Mayor
certified mail, return receipt requested, to all owners of record of real
property burdened with servient tenements by the solar right.
   (E)   The Mayor has no duty to recognize any solar right when issuing
building permits. This is without prejudice to the enforcement of the solar
right against anyone who infringes or plans to infringe on the solar right.
('74 Code, § 7-2-8) (Ord. 80-1981; Am. Ord._2023-015)
§ 14-11-9 REMEDY.
   If any person infringes on or plans to infringe on solar rights which have
been defined under the terms of this article, the owner of the relevant solar
collector may bring civil action against such person to obtain damages and/or
enjoin the offending action or object.
('74 Code, § 7-2-9) (Ord. 80-1981)
ARTICLE 12: LANDMARKS AND URBAN CONSERVATION
Editor's Note: § 14-12 Landmarks and Urban Conservation was updated,
incorporated into, and replaced by the
Integrated Development Ordinance, Ord. 14-16, et seq., Council Bill O-17-49,
approved 11-13-17. See now ROA §§ 14-16-6, et seq.
ARTICLE 13: PLANNING; GOALS AND OBJECTIVES
Section
Part 1: Planned Growth Strategy
   
14-13-1-1   Findings
   
14-13-1-2   Definitions
   
14-13-1-3   Planned Growth Strategy Implementation Advisory Task Force
   
14-13-1-4   Impact fees; other development related charges
Part 2: Planning
   
14-13-2-1   Short title
   
14-13-2-2   Rank importance of city plans
   
14-13-2-3   Planned Growth Strategy
   
14-13-2-4   Redevelopment plans
   
14-13-2-5   Procedure for plan adoption or amendment; fee
   
14-13-2-6   Annually revised planning program
Part 3: Environmental Planning Commission
   
14-13-3-1   Environmental planning commission created
   
14-13-3-2   Duties, responsibilities, and powers
   
14-13-3-3   Organization, meetings
   
14-13-3-4   Staff
   
14-13-3-5   Beautification committee
   
14-13-3-6   City of Albuquerque’s Greater Albuquerque bicycling advisory
committee
   
14-13-3-7   Open space advisory board
   
14-13-3-8   City of Albuquerque’s Greater Albuquerque recreational trails
committee
Part 4: Infrastructure and Growth Plan
   
14-13-4-1   Intent
   
14-13-4-2   Adoption
Part 5: Land Use Assumptions
   
14-13-5-1   Findings
   
14-13-5-2   Land use assumptions
   
14-13-5-3   Periodic review and update
PART 1: PLANNED GROWTH STRATEGY
§ 14-13-1-1 FINDINGS.
   (A)   The City has authority to adopt a comprehensive "master" plan as
granted under Chapter 3, Article 19, NMSA 1978 and by the City Charter as
provided under Home Rule provisions of the Constitution of New Mexico.
   (B)   In response to a variety of concerns expressed by the public and local
elected officials with regard to the environmental, economic, social, and
fiscal impact (the costs and benefits) of growth and development in the
metropolitan area, and the concern that the Albuquerque/Bernalillo County
Comprehensive Plan and other policy and implementation tools in use are not a
fully effective growth management system, the City and the County of Bernalillo
began a joint effort in 1998 culminating in the two volume Planned Growth
Strategy report that was completed in the Fall of 2001.
   (C)   The Planned Growth Strategy report was developed with the assistance
of consultants, including Parsons Brinckerhoff; Camp Dresser & McKee; Ch2M-
Hill; Wilson and Company; Freilich, Leitner & Carlisle; Friedmann Resources;
Growth Management Analysts; Lora Lucero, Esq.; Michael McKee, Ph.D.; and Sites
Southwest.
   (D)   The Planned Growth Strategy project was assisted by planning and
engineering professionals from City and County government, the Middle Rio
Grande Council of Governments, other local governments, and by individual
citizens.
   (E)   The Planned Growth Strategy report was guided by the counsel received
from participants at Town Halls held in 1998 and 1999 organized by Shared
Vision, Inc., and also by the findings of citizen surveys carried out by the
City's Office of Management and Operations Improvement.
   (F)   The Planned Growth Strategy development process was assisted by advice
and comments from the PGS Advisory Committee that included representatives of
the business community, developers, Albuquerque Public Schools, neighborhood
associations, and a planning advocacy group.
   (G)   The Planned Growth Strategy report was reviewed at important junctures
by a Policy Committee consisting of elected officials from the Albuquerque City
Council and the Bernalillo County Commission, the Bernalillo County Manager,
and the Chief Administrative Officer of the City.
   (H)   The Planned Growth Strategy report contains a comprehensive and
integrated growth management policy analysis and program for the urban area of
Bernalillo County, and implementation of the Planned Growth Strategy as defined
herein should include coordination with Bernalillo County.
    (I)   The Planned Growth Strategy report found that the Albuquerque area
faces critical challenges related to deteriorated infrastructure; back-log of
infrastructure rehabilitation and deficiency correction projects; natural
resource conservation and preservation related to land, water, and air quality;
traffic congestion; timely provision of infrastructure, parks, schools and
other facilities to support new development; and the decline of some older
neighborhoods.
   (J)   The existing City/County Comprehensive Plan and sector, redevelopment,
and area plans contain valuable policies and vision to guide the City's
actions.
   (K)   There are inconsistencies between adopted community plans and the
structure of development regulations, design and infrastructure standards,
charges and fees, and approval processes that result in an undesirable gap
between conditions and our best aspirations for the community.
   (L)   Economic growth and development, i.e., new and well-paid jobs, should
remain a priority of the City in order to ensure that the City continues to
remain a vibrant and thriving community with opportunities for its citizens now
and in the future.
   (M)   Recognized comprehensive community-building principles have not been
and should be incorporated into the routine planning, standards, and
functioning of City departments and into their joint efforts with other
governmental agencies and public and private organizations.
   (N)   Various work activities identified in the City's FY 03 Performance
Plan are in progress which aim to reform zoning, land use and design
requirements in keeping with principles of the Planned Growth Strategy.
   (O)   The Planned Growth Strategy implementation approach shall be based on
a concerned, informed and engaged community, an open and dynamic process of
improvement, systematic public comment, and confidence that conditions can be
made better through local action.
   (P)   In order to achieve the long term goals of the policies described in
the Planned Growth Strategy report and the City/County Comprehensive Plan, a
number of near- and long-term actions are needed.
(Ord. 34-2002)
§ 14-13-1-2 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this part (§§ 14-13-1-1 - 14-13-1-4), the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.
   IMPACT FEE COMMITTEE. The advisory committee pursuant to Section 5-8-37 of
the New Mexico Development Fees Act, which shall be created according to the
provisions of the New Mexico Development Fees Act.
   INFRASTRUCTURE AND GROWTH PLAN. The forecasts of population, housing, and
employment, for ten and twenty-five year periods, in total and by subareas,
contained in the Planned Growth Strategy report and as adopted by the Council
after these forecasts have incorporated the MRCOG 2025 county-wide forecasts
for total population, housing and employment. The Infrastructure and Growth
Plan should be reviewed, and updated if necessary, every three to five years.
   PLANNED GROWTH STRATEGY. The provisions of this Ordinance as specifically
identified herein and as amended or complemented by subsequent legislation that
shall be specifically identified as a part of the Planned Growth Strategy when
such legislation is adopted.
   PLANNED GROWTH STRATEGY IMPLEMENTATION ADVISORY TASK FORCE. The principal
citizen advisory group that shall review, comment upon, and make
recommendations regarding all of the City’s efforts to implement the Planned
Growth Strategy.
(Ord. 34-2002; Am. Ord. 21-2010)
§ 14-13-1-3 PLANNED GROWTH STRATEGY IMPLEMENTATION ADVISORY TASK FORCE.
   The Planned Growth Strategy Implementation Advisory Task Force is created
and shall be composed of nineteen members appointed by the Mayor from a list of
nominees selected by the Council, with the advice and consent of the Council.
Each member of the Council shall nominate five members of the Task Force. Two
of the members suggested by each Councilor shall be recognized neighborhood
association officers or board members or a representative member appointed by
the recognized neighborhood association. The Mayor shall select two out of the
five suggested members by each Councilor for nomination to the Planned Growth
Strategy Implementation Advisory Task Force to be sent to Council for review
and final approval. The membership shall represent the following groups:
   (A)   The real estate and development industry, including architects,
consulting engineers, real estate attorneys, and planning and development
consultants. One of these members shall be a residential infill developer with
substantial development experience and another of these members shall be an
Albuquerque area industrial and/or office developer with substantial
development experience developing at or near the fringe of the City. The real
estate and development industry shall be represented by four members of the
Task Force.
   (B)   Officers, board members or representatives appointed pursuant to this
section of recognized neighborhood associations with more than half of their
geographic area within the City. There should be at least one member from each
of the nine Council districts. Neighborhood associations shall be represented
by nine members of the Task Force.
   (C)   Civic, environmental, planning, religious, or educational
organizations. These organizations shall be represented by three members of the
Task Force.
   (D)   Business and economic development organizations. One of these members
shall be a specialist in neighborhood economic development. These organizations
shall be represented by three members of the Task Force.
   (E)   The members of the Planned Growth Strategy Implementation Advisory
Task Force shall be appointed within 90 days from the effective date of this
Ordinance. The recommendation for replacement of members who resign shall be
made at the Council meeting immediately following the formal resignation of the
member.
(Ord. 34-2002)
§ 14-13-1-4 IMPACT FEES; OTHER DEVELOPMENT RELATED CHARGES.
   (A)   Impact fees, Utility Expansion Charges, and other development related
charges are key strategic tools for implementing the Planned Growth Strategy
and the City/County Comprehensive Plan. It is the intent of the Council that
current development fees, including Utility Expansion Charges and park
dedication and development charges, be incorporated into the impact fee system.
   (B)   Impact fees shall be established in a manner fully consistent with the
New Mexico Development Fees Act. The qualified professionals preparing the
proposed impact fee program shall be guided by the policies contained in this
Ordinance and Council Bill No. R-02-111 [Enactment No. 112-2002] as adopted.
The Impact Fee Committee shall review and provide written comments on the
impact fee program and the Council shall review, conduct at least one public
hearing, and adopt the impact fees according to the provisions of the New
Mexico Development Fees Act. Impact fees shall be utilized and spent within the
service areas where they are collected. The review and written comments by the
Impact Fee Committee shall be consistent with the policies contained in this
Ordinance and Council Bills R-02-111 and R-02-112 as adopted.
   (C)   Impact fees, including the incorporated Utility Expansion Charges
shall be initially calculated based upon the full marginal cost of growth,
consistent with the City's Capital Improvement Program, that provides the
facilities and infrastructure to support growth as indicated by the adopted
Infrastructure and Growth Plan. The impact fee amount charged by the City is
subject to Council approval and may include reductions and waivers set forth in
§ 14-13-1-4(D) through (F). Service areas and tiers shall be the geographical
areas for planning infrastructure and facility development.
   (D)   Impact fees, including the incorporated Utility Expansion Charges
shall be reduced based upon a schedule, to be created, of facility and
infrastructure efficiencies that result from the nature and location of the
types of development. Non-exclusive examples include projects that result in
jobs closer to predominately residential areas, mixed use projects,
neighborhood commercial centers, activity centers consistent with the City/
County Comprehensive Plan, higher density housing, affordable housing with
smaller lot sizes and fewer utility fixtures.
   (E)   Waivers to impact fees are as is provided in §
14-19-15 Exemptions.
   (F)   Other development-related charges shall be modified or fully or
partially waived in a consistent manner to support the Planned Growth Strategy,
the City/County Comprehensive Plan, and other adopted plans.
   (G)   Impact fees, including the incorporated Utility Expansion Charges,
shall not apply to the "Unserved area" tier. The provision of and charges for
facilities and services in this tier shall be based upon a development
agreement among all affected parties.
   (H)   The City shall seek statutory authority for impact fees to be enacted
for schools (with the agreement of the Albuquerque Public Schools), transit,
water rights, and other facilities as determined in the future by the City.
   (I)   The Impact Fee Committee shall be composed of 11 members, two of whom
shall be appointed by the Mayor and nine of whom shall be appointed by the
Council as set forth herein. The membership shall be as follows:
      (1)   The members of the Impact Fee Committee shall meet the
qualifications set forth in §§
2-6-1-1 et seq., the Public Boards, Commissions and Committees Ordinance, and
except as otherwise set forth herein, terms, vacancies and removal of members
shall be in accordance with §§
2-6-1-1 et seq. The Committee shall be made up of representatives of the real
estate, development or building industries, as described herein, and
representatives from neighborhood associations and other organizations: i.e.,
civic, environmental, planning, educational, economic development, and/or
religious. No member shall be an employee or official of a municipality, county
or other governmental entity. Any person who was a member of the Impact Fee
Committee as of August 1, 2010 is eligible to be appointed in accordance with
the provisions of this ordinance, for up to two additional terms.
      (2)   Members Appointed by Council. There shall be one member of the
Impact Fee Committee residing in each City Council District. When a vacancy on
the Committee occurs, the Councilor representing the District in which the
vacating member resides shall nominate two members who reside in his or her
respective Council District. The Mayor shall then appoint one of these
recommended members to the Impact Fee Committee with the advice and consent of
the Council provided, however, if a member is eligible for reappointment to the
Committee and the Councilor in whose District that member resides desires to
reappoint the member, the Councilor shall so notify the Council and the member
shall be reappointed subject to the advice and consent of the Council. If a
member is not being reappointed, the Mayor shall deliver to the Council the
Mayor's recommendation from the two names submitted within 30 days of delivery
of the two names to the Mayor. If the Mayor fails to timely make a
recommendation from the two names submitted, the Councilor who submitted the
names may appoint one of the two recommended members subject to the advice and
consent of the Council.
      (3)   Members Appointed by the Mayor. The two members appointed by the
Mayor may reside in any Council District, however, when feasible, the Mayor
should appoint one member who resides in the area of the city east of the Rio
Grande and one member who resides in the area of the City west of the Rio
Grande.
      (4)   Five of the members of the Impact Fee Committee shall be engaged in
the real estate, development or building industries, which may include
architects, consulting engineers, real estate attorneys, and planning and
development consultants.
   (J)   The members of the Impact Fee Committee shall be appointed within 90
days from the effective date of this Ordinance. The recommendation for
replacement of members who resign shall be made at the Council meeting
immediately following the formal resignation of the member.
   (K)   The report of the Impact Fee Committee shall be made within 90 days of
the Council’s adoption of the Infrastructure and Growth Plan.
(Ord. 34-2002; Am. Ord. 21-2010; Am. Ord._2017-025)
PART 2: PLANNING
§ 14-13-2-1 SHORT TITLE.
   Sections 14-13-2-1 et seq. may be cited as the "Planning Ordinance."
('74 Code, § 7-4-1) (Ord. 45- 1982; Am. Ord. 48-1987; Am. Ord._2017-025)
§ 14-13-2-2 RANK IMPORTANCE OF CITY PLANS.
   Adopted City plans to coordinate land use, development, facilities, and
resources are of varying rank importance. Lower-ranking plans should be
consistent with higher-ranking plans, and when this is indisputably not the
case, the conflicting provision of the lower-ranking plan is null and void.
Plans should identify how they relate to relevant, higher-ranking plans. Ranked
plans shall only contain policy and may not be regulatory. The highest ranks of
City plans are as follows in this section and in §
14-13-2-4:
   (A)   Rank One Plan.  The Albuquerque/Bernalillo County Comprehensive Plan
is the basic long range city policy for the development and conservation of the
entire metropolitan area.
   (B)   Rank Two Plans.
      (1)   Facility Plans are specialized in subject matter; they normally
cover only one type of natural resource utility or public facility, such as
water or parks. Such plans cover the entire metropolitan area or city, or at
least a major part thereof. These plans specify important development standards
general site locations, and multi-year programs of facility capital
improvements.
   (C)   Rank Three Plans.
      (1)   Metropolitan Redevelopment Plans provide guidance to the
Metropolitan Redevelopment Agency on redevelopment efforts, catalytic projects,
and public/private partnerships, subject to amendment per the Metropolitan
Redevelopment Agency Ordinance (§14-8-4-3(B)), for an area with common
characteristics, typically one square mile but occasionally considerably
smaller.
      (2)   Master Plans provide guidance to the implementing department for
the development of a City facility or joint facilities, such as a community
center, library, and/or park. Master Plans typically include land uses, site
layout, and design standards.
      (3)   Resource Management Plans provide guidance to the Parks and
Recreation Department's Open Space Division about how best to manage and
protect natural, historic, or cultural resources on City-owned or City-managed
Major Public Open Space (MPOS). Resource Management Plans can also guide the
overall planning, visitor uses, budgeting, and decision-making for specific
MPOS properties.
('74 Code, § 7-4-2) (Ord. 45- 1982; Am. Ord. 48-1987; Am. Ord._2017-025)
§ 14-13-2-3 PLANNED GROWTH STRATEGY.
   (A)   The City shall prepare amendments and complementary legislation and
regulations that, when adopted, in combination with the identified provisions
of this Ordinance, shall implement the Planned Growth Strategy. The Planned
Growth Strategy, in conjunction with the Albuquerque/Bernalillo County
Comprehensive Plan, shall guide the future development of the Albuquerque urban
area. The Planned Growth Strategy shall serve as the comprehensive guide for
this urban growth management program, but only policies specifically adopted
and identified as being a part of the Planned Growth Strategy shall have
binding force. One or more Town Hall meetings and other forms of public input
shall be used in the process of developing future legislation and regulations
pursuant to the direction contained in this legislation as adopted.
   (B)   Capital Improvement Program.
      (1)   The Capital Improvement Program is a key strategic tool for
implementing the Planned Growth Strategy and the City/County Comprehensive
Plan. The Planned Growth Strategy (as adopted herein and as subsequently
amended and expanded) shall provide the comprehensive framework that shall
guide all City departments’ capital programs by providing the phasing and
timing of urban growth in the Infrastructure and Growth Plan, by identifying
standards for infrastructure, facilities and design elements (especially, but
not exclusively) to achieve the community building goal, and by placing a high
priority, in terms of vitality and development, on the developed community as
it exists at the time the Capital Improvement Program is adopted.
      (2)   Funding from various sources shall be prioritized within the
capital programs of the City to catch up with the backlog of rehabilitation
needs, to address infrastructure deficiencies over time, and to provide basic
infrastructure to support urban growth (streets, water, sewer, hydrology, and
parks) to reach adopted level of service standards within service areas in
reasonable time frames. Funding shall be prioritized for rehabilitation and
deficiency correction in all areas of the City regardless of the date on which
the area was annexed.
      (3)   Development Agreements and No Net Expense Policy (Unserved Area).
Development in the water pressure zones that are unserved by urban water master
plan facilities or existing private water service companies upon the date of
the development agreement (Unserved area) will be based on the No Net Expense
policy. The existing No Net Expense policy should be further defined to include
the following.
         (a)   Developers of properties in the Unserved Area shall be required
to assure fiscal self- sufficiency; that is, the public revenues generated by
the new development must be sufficient to support the costs of facilities and
infrastructure needed to serve the new development. Facilities provided must
meet the level of service standards adopted in a development agreement signed
by the developer and the City. Consistent with this policy, subsequent
legislation shall be drafted setting forth a procedure and requiring the
developer to transfer to the City sufficient water rights, or cash sufficient
for the City to purchase adequate water rights, to support his or her proposed
project. This requirement may be phased in keeping with the project’s phasing.
         (b)   Growth related operational and maintenance expenditures for the
new development should be roughly equivalent to the public revenues generated
by and collected from the development. Otherwise, the developer, property
owner, and/or the residents of the development shall assume the additional
costs. Nothing herein, however, shall act as or be construed as a moratorium on
Planned Communities until such time as specific legislation is enacted to
implement the policy guidelines expressed herein.
      (4)   Planned Communities in the City of Albuquerque. The development of
housing, commercial and industrial structures, and supporting public
infrastructure shall be sequenced within an approved Planned Community.
Development agreements shall require that mixed use development take place in a
reasonably concurrent way. Nothing herein, however, shall be deemed to abrogate
any existing contractual agreements between the City and any developer of a
master planned community.
      (5)   Related Legislative and Regulatory Changes. The current annexation
review and decision criteria in the
Integrated Development Ordinance (§ 14-16-6-7(G)), in part, indicate conditions
under which an annexation request may be denied by the City. The emphasis in
the Planned Growth Strategy report is on the urban growth management conditions
under which annexation occurs. Annexation provisions shall be linked to the
following laws as adopted subsequent to this Ordinance: urban growth phasing
and timing contained in the Infrastructure and Growth Plan, the related
facility and infrastructure level of service standards, the Adequate Public
Facilities Ordinance, and the Capital Improvement Program contained in the
policies set forth and as defined in the Planned Growth Strategy Resolution
(Council Bill No. R- 02-111). Linking these provisions and policy instruments
will provide critical information to the applicant for annexation, to the State
Municipal Boundary Commission, the courts, and City officials in order to make
decisions regarding the review and approval of annexation applications, and
their implications with regard to the timing of access to urban facilities and
infrastructure, and the standards under which access will be provided. Nothing
herein, however, shall act as or be construed as a moratorium on any annexation
request until such time as specific legislation is enacted to implement the
policy guidelines expressed herein.
      (6)   Water Conservation Goal. Conservation is the least expensive water
source for the Albuquerque metropolitan area. In addition, benefits are
obtained from identifying innovative ways to conserve water, protecting the
riparian habitat of the Rio Grande through water flow and maintaining
traditional New Mexico water uses in the Albuquerque Basin. The City shall
request that the Albuquerque/Bernalillo County Water Utility Authority (ABCWUA)
continue to establish and update new conservation goals below 135 gallons per
person per day beyond 2024. The City shall continue to be involved in the
ABCWUA's implementation of the Water Resources Management Strategy including
the updating of building codes, zoning regulations, and technical standards for
rainwater harvesting.
      (7)   Intergovernmental Aspects of Planned Growth Strategy Implementation
– Mid-Region Council of Governments (MRCOG).
         (a)   The adopted Infrastructure and Growth Plan, consisting of the
phased and timed forecasts of population, housing, and employment by subareas,
and associated Land Use Measures (LUMs), shall serve as the City’s official
land use assumptions for the MRCOG Metropolitan Transportation Plan and
Transportation Improvement Program.
         (b)   In order to strengthen the Capital Improvement Program and
ensure consistency of infrastructure planning, the City’s streets, right of
way, transit, and multi-modal transportation improvement projects included in
the City’s Capital Improvement Program shall be those projects proposed for
inclusion in the MRCOG Metropolitan Transportation Plan and the Transportation
Improvement Program.
         (c)   The City shall request that MRCOG conduct cost-benefit
(including revenue) analyses to support decision-making for all major roadway
expansion projects within the MRCOG Regional Planning Area. This approach
should be used to evaluate alternative projects. The analysis of alternative
projects would consider the impact on traffic congestion and air quality in
relation to cost, among other factors.
(Ord. 34-2002; Am. Ord. 1-2010; Am. Ord._2017-025)
§ 14-13-2-4 REDEVELOPMENT PLANS.
   Metropolitan redevelopment plans (as used in the Redevelopment Code,
Sections 3-60A-1 to 3-60A-48 NMSA 1978) vary in rank:
   (A)   Plans that cover the entire metropolitan area or city or plans that
cover major geographic parts of the metropolitan area, such as is
characteristic of an area plan, are rank two plans.
   (B)   Metropolitan Redevelopment Plans are Rank 3 plans that provide
guidance to the Metropolitan Redevelopment Agency on redevelopment efforts,
catalytic projects, and public/private partnerships, subject to amendment per
the Metropolitan Redevelopment Agency Ordinance (§
14-8-4-3(B)), for an area with common characteristics, typically one square
mile or more but occasionally considerably smaller.
   (C)   Plans that cover one or a few premises are lesser than rank three
plans and should be consistent with higher ranking plans.
('74 Code, § 7-4-3) (Ord. 45- 1982; Am. Ord. 48-1987; Am. Ord. 2012-036; Am.
Ord._2017-025)
§ 14-13-2-5 PROCEDURE FOR PLAN ADOPTION OR AMENDMENT; FEE.
Editor's Note: § 14-13-2-5 Procedure for Plan Adoption or Amendment; Fee. was
updated, incorporated into, and replaced by the
Integrated Development Ordinance, Ord. 14-16, et seq., approved 11-13-17. See
now ROA § 14-16-6-7.
§ 14-13-2-6 ANNUALLY REVISED PLANNING PROGRAM.
Editor's Note: § 14-13-2-6 Annually Revised Planning Program was updated,
incorporated into, and replaced by the
Integrated Development Ordinance, Ord. 14-16, et seq., Council Bill O-17-49,
approved 11-13-17. See now ROA § 14-16-6-3.
PART 3: ENVIRONMENTAL PLANNING COMMISSION
§ 14-13-3-1 ENVIRONMENTAL PLANNING COMMISSION CREATED.
Editor's Note: § 14-13-3-1 Environmental Planning Commission Created was
updated, incorporated into, and replaced by the
Integrated Development Ordinance, Ord. 14-16, et seq., Council Bill O-17-49,
approved 11-13-17. See now ROA § 14-16-6-2(E).
§ 14-13-3-2 DUTIES, RESPONSIBILITIES, AND POWERS.
   (A)   Delegation by City Council. There is hereby delegated to the EPC the
following power and authority:
      (1)   Study. The EPC shall study urban and regional planning and means of
protecting and improving the environment. The EPC may request assistance of
staff of the city by request to the Mayor.
      (2)   Advisory Functions. The EPC shall advise the Mayor, City Council,
and city staff concerning the development and revision of community goals,
plans for urban development and protection of the environment, policies on
development and on protection of the environment, ordinances appropriate for
effecting such plans and policies, annexation to the city, programming of
capital improvements for the city, the designation of land desirable and needed
for public purposes, the adoption of air and water quality standards, and other
appropriate matters.
      (3)   Public Education. The EPC shall promote the understanding of
planning and environmental matters among public officials as well as residents
of Albuquerque and its environs.
      (4)   Environmental and Economic Impact Analyses. The EPC shall review
all environmental and economic impact analyses prepared by the city or required
of others by the city, or submitted to the EPC by other interested parties on
matters under consideration by the EPC.
      (5)   Approval of Extraordinary Facilities in City Parks and Open Space.
If extraordinary facilities are proposed for city-controlled parks or open
space, EPC approval of a site development plan is required before installation
or construction. Before considering approval of such facilities, the EPC shall
seek the recommendation of the Metropolitan Parks Advisory Board and/or the
Open Space Advisory Board, according to their jurisdiction over the area. The
decision of the EPC may be appealed to the City Council if appeal is filed with
the Planning Director within 15 days of the decision. For the purpose of this
division (5):
         (a)   EXTRAORDINARY FACILITIES IN PARKS are those which are not
primarily for facilitating recreation, relaxation, and enjoyment of the
outdoors; they do not include incidental parking and access roads, nor do they
include infrastructure not visible on the surface;
         (b)   EXTRAORDINARY FACILITIES IN OPEN SPACE are those other than
trails, fencing, signs, incidental parking lots, and access roads.
      (6)   Other Duties, Responsibilities, and Powers. The EPC has such other
duties, responsibilities, and powers as may be delegated to it by the City
Council, including but not limited to powers delegated by the Zoning Code and
Subdivision Regulations.
   (B)   Committees. EPC may form standing committees from EPC members in order
to carry out the assigned duties, responsibilities and powers of the EPC. The
EPC shall select the EPC members to serve on its committees and may select the
Chairperson of EPC committees except as otherwise specified by §§
14-13-3-1 et seq. Members of EPC committees who are not members of the EPC are
allowed only as authorized in §§
14-13-3-1 et seq. Where committee members from the general public are
authorized, the EPC may recommend to the Mayor people whom it believes to be
well qualified for appointment.
   (C)   Task Forces.  The EPC may form task forces consisting of EPC members
and the general public and may select the members and Chairperson of any task
force. For the purposes of this division, TASK FORCE means an advisory group
established to carry out a specific assignment for a predetermined time, not to
exceed 18 months.
   (D)   Relationship of the EPC to its Committees and Task Forces.  Committees
and task forces of the EPC shall report to the EPC on their activities at least
semi-annually, and as may be directed by the EPC. The EPC may set guidelines
for the communication from its committees and task forces to other governmental
entities and the public. The EPC may take an advisory position on a matter
which is different from the advisory position of an EPC committee or task
force; however, the EPC shall not convey its advice to another governmental
entity or the public without also conveying the position of its committee or
task force on the same matter.
   (E)   The Planning Commission may authorize a hearing officer to take
testimony and make recommendations to the Planning Commission based on that
testimony with respect to any matter within the authority delegated to the
Planning Commission. The Planning Commission may delegate to the Development
Review Board final approval of site plans that are conditionally approved by
the Planning Commission.
('74 Code, § 7-15-2) (Ord. 294- 1972; Am. Ord. 10-1983; Am. Ord. 90-1983; Am.
Ord. 79-1989; Am. Ord. 2012-036)
§ 14-13-3-3 ORGANIZATION, MEETINGS.
   (A)   Officers. Annually in January, or more frequently at the pleasure of
the EPC, the EPC shall elect a Chairperson, a Vice-Chairperson, and any other
officers which seem appropriate to the EPC members by the vote of the majority
of the members of the EPC.
   (B)   Conduct of Business. The EPC shall adopt such rules and regulations
for the conduct of business as seem appropriate to its members, and publish
such rules and regulations. A quorum of the EPC is five members. All actions,
including zone changes, may be decided by a simple majority of those present.
   (C)   Conflict of Interest. This division (C) supplements Section 4 of
Article XII of the Charter of the city. An EPC member having a financial
interest in the outcome of any policy, decision, or determination before the
EPC or one of its committees on which he serves shall, as soon as possible
after such interest becomes apparent, disclose to each of the other members
voting on the matter the nature of his financial interest in the issue, and
shall be disqualified from participating in any debate, decision or vote
relating thereto.
   (D)   Meetings. The EPC shall hold regularly scheduled meetings at least
once a month and such meetings will be open to the public. All decisions by the
EPC shall be made at regularly scheduled public meetings. The EPC may hold
additional meetings as may be called by the Chairperson or Vice-Chairperson
with at least 24-hour notice to members. Such meetings shall be open to the
public.
   (E)   Records. A record shall be kept of all meetings of the EPC and its
committees. The records shall be kept available for public inspection at
reasonable times.
('74 Code, § 7-15-3) (Ord. 294-1972; Am. Ord. 4-1976; Am. Ord. 90-1983)
§ 14-13-3-4 STAFF.
   The Mayor shall appoint city staff as appropriate and necessary to assist
the EPC and its committees and task forces.
('74 Code, § 7-15-7) (Ord. 29-1981; Am. Ord. 76-1981; Am. Ord. 10-1983)
§ 14-13-3-5 BEAUTIFICATION COMMITTEE.
Editor's Note:
   § 14-13-3-5 Beautification Committee has been moved to §
2-6-14.
§ 14-13-3-6 CITY OF ALBUQUERQUE’S GREATER ALBUQUERQUE BICYCLING ADVISORY
COMMITTEE.
Editor's Note:
   § 14-13-3-6 City of Albuquerque's Greater Albuquerque Bicycling Advisory
Committee has been moved to §
2-6-15.
§ 14-13-3-7 OPEN SPACE ADVISORY BOARD.
Editor's Note:
   § 14-13-3-7 Open Space Advisory Board has been moved to §
2-6-16.
§ 14-13-3-8 CITY OF ALBUQUERQUE’S GREATER ALBUQUERQUE RECREATIONAL TRAILS
COMMITTEE.
Editor's Note:
   § 14-13-3-8 City of Albuquerque's Greater Albuquerque Recreational Trails
Committee has been moved to §
2-6-17.
PART 4: INFRASTRUCTURE AND GROWTH PLAN
§ 14-13-4-1 INTENT.
   The Infrastructure and Growth Plan is a key strategic tool for implementing
the Planned Growth Strategy and the Albuquerque/Bernalillo County Comprehensive
Plan. The Infrastructure and Growth Plan shall be used as the basis of the
growth-related element of the Capital Improvement Program planning for streets,
water, sewer, hydrology, parks, libraries, police, fire and other city
facilities. The Infrastructure and Growth Plan forecasts shall be used in
conjunction with "level of service" standards for Capital Improvement Program
and school planning. The Infrastructure and Growth Plan shall be guided by the
following principles:
   (A)   Grow efficiently by developing where infrastructure and facilities
already exist.
   (B)   Take into consideration topological and geological constraints (such
as high slopes, poor soils, flood zones), environmental constraints (such as
landfills, landfill buffer areas, contaminated sites, leaking underground
storage tanks), and aquifer recharge zones.
   (C)   Take into consideration market absorption rates in different areas
including those in areas with antiquated and/or premature platting and in
redevelopment areas.
   (D)   Locate more jobs where people reside and locate more residences where
jobs exist, so that the demand for streets is reduced by fewer auto trips and
shorter trips.
   (E)   Grow neighborhoods contiguous to the urban fringe, with each
neighborhood ideally containing a school, local serving businesses, park, and
pedestrian and bicycle friendly streets.
   (F)   Foster community in older and newer neighborhoods.
   (G)   Prioritize the needs of the older parts of Albuquerque in terms of
vitality and development. Encourage infill and redevelopment.
   (H)   Support "centers and corridors", especially transit-oriented
corridors. This will help create a more effective and efficient transit system.
   (I)   Protect the character of the North and South Valley including the more
rural parts of the valley and preserve farm land there.
(Ord. 47-2003; Am. Ord. 1-2010)
§ 14-13-4-2 ADOPTION.
   The Land Use Assumptions prepared for impact fees at §
14-13-5-2 ROA 1994 shall serve as the Infrastructure and Growth Plan.
(Ord. 1-2010)
PART 5: LAND USE ASSUMPTIONS
§ 14-13-5-1 FINDINGS.
   Section
14-13-1-4 ROA 1994 states that Impact Fees, Utility Expansion Charges and other
development related charges are key strategic tools for implementing the
Planned Growth Strategy and the City/County Comprehensive Plan. Section
14-13-1-4 ROA 1994 requires that impact fees be established in a manner fully
consistent with the New Mexico Development Fees Act (the “Act”.) The Act
defines “land use assumptions” as “a description of the service area and
projections of changes in land uses, densities, intensities and population in
the service area over at least a five-year period.” The Act states that the
city must prepare a capital improvements plan that addresses, among other
requirements, the total number of projected service units necessitated by and
attributable to new development within the service area based on the approved
land use assumptions and calculated in accordance with generally accepted
engineering or planning criteria.
(Ord. 7-2004; Am. Ord. 1-2010)
§ 14-13-5-2 LAND USE ASSUMPTIONS.
   The following tables containing the Land Use Assumptions for population,
housing and employment as projected for the years 2015 and 2030 are adopted.
The Land Use Assumptions shall also serve as the Infrastructure and Growth
Plan.
2009 Infrastructure & Growth Plan and Land Use Assumptions
For Use in Calculation of Impact Fees
Distribution of Population in 2000, 2015, 2030
Land Use Assumption Area 2000    2015    Growth      2030    Growth
                                         2000 - 2015         2015 - 2030
Volcano                  4,019   18,758  14,739      22,684  3,926
Northwest Mesa B         35,854  45,097  9,243       45,048  -49
Northwest Mesa A         26,972  42,109  15,137      46,376  4,267
Southwest Mesa           47,482  67,864  20,382      78,460  10,596
North Albuquerque        16,629  23,109  6,480       24,752  1,643
Academy A                28,843  27,759  -1,084      26,897  -862
Academy B                32,103  31,234  -869        31,485  251
Near Northeast Heights A 13,064  12,512  -552        13,039  527
Near Northeast Heights B 20,560  20,545  -15         21,907  1,362
Far Northeast Heights    34,605  33,558  -1,047      32,965  -593
Far East Heights         26,847  25,845  -1,002      25,360  -485
Foothills                20,971  25,799  4,828       25,558  -241
East Central B           37,104  38,825  1,721       40,818  1,993
East Central A           32,999  32,565  -434        33,527  962
University               26,418  25,252  -1,166      26,649  1,397
Central City             25,760  27,686  1,926       28,886  1,200
North Valley             26,326  26,922  596         27,166  244
Pan American             5,425   9,922   4,497       13,161  3,239
Mesa del Sol             40      8,813   8,773       33,124  24,311
TOTALS                   462,021 544,174 82,153      597,862 53,688
 
2009 Infrastructure & Growth Plan and Land Use Assumptions
For Use in Calculation of Impact Fees
Distribution of Housing in 2000, 2015, 2030
Land Use Assumption Area 2000    2015    Growth      2030    Growth
                                         2000 - 2015         2015 - 2030
Volcano                  1,359   7,530   6,171       9,478   1,948
Northwest Mesa B         14,141  18,908  4,767       19,723  815
Northwest Mesa A         10,740  17,681  6,941       20,224  2,543
Southwest Mesa           16,316  24,930  8,614       30,243  5,313
North Albuquerque        6,097   8,896   2,799       9,967   1,071
Academy A                14,496  14,672  176         14,754  82
Academy B                15,515  15,871  356         16,523  652
Near Northeast Heights A 6,220   6,283   63          6,838   555
Near Northeast Heights B 10,001  10,593  592         11,677  1,084
Far Northeast Heights    15,627  15,923  296         16,294  371
Far East Heights         11,803  11,892  89          12,152  260
Foothills                9,246   11,958  2,712       12,359  401
East Central B           16,775  18,465  1,690       20,123  1,658
East Central A           17,262  17,945  683         19,125  1,180
University               13,006  13,158  152         14,182  1,024
Central City             11,419  13,717  2,298       14,832  1,115
North Valley             10,979  11,803  824         12,417  614
Pan American             2,349   4,248   1,899       7,370   3,122
Mesa del Sol             18      3,428   3,410       13,453  10,025
TOTALS                   203,369 247,901 44,532      281,734 33,833
 
2009 Infrastructure & Growth Plan and Land Use Assumptions
For Use in Calculation of Impact Fees
Distribution of Employment in 2000, 2015, 2030
Land Use Assumption Area 2000    2015    Growth      2030    Growth
                                         2000 - 2015         2015 - 2030
Volcano                  192     3,859   3,667       7,617   3,758
Northwest Mesa B         10,956  16,948  5,992       20,246  3,298
Northwest Mesa A         3,617   9,896   6,279       12,852  2,956
Southwest Mesa           7,979   15,804  7,825       18,830  3,026
                                                         
North Albuquerque        4,956   9,229   4,273       10,400  1,171
Academy A                19,652  19,610  -42         20,438  828
Academy B                8,865   8,839   -26         9,665   826
Near Northeast Heights A 20,545  19,057  -1,488      22,002  2,945
Near Northeast Heights B 24,260  23,256  -1,004      26,367  3,111
Far Northeast Heights    12,341  12,260  -81         13,092  832
Far East Heights         7,962   8,110   148         8,299   189
Foothills                2,282   3,178   896         3,341   163
                                                         
East Central B           15,395  18,402  3,007       20,204  1,802
East Central A           27,180  26,729  -451        29,121  2,392
University               42,519  45,321  2,802       52,118  6,797
Central City             37,976  39,636  1,660       44,185  4,549
                                                         
North Valley             8,544   9,325   781         10,824  1,499
Pan American             41,582  50,593  9,011       54,079  3,486
                                                         
Mesa del Sol             363     5,630   5,267       11,254  5,624
TOTALS                   297,166 345,682 48,516      394,934 49,252
 
(Ord. 1-2010)
§ 14-13-5-3 PERIODIC REVIEW AND UPDATE.
   The city shall update the land use assumptions at least every five years as
required by the New Mexico Development Fees Act.
(Ord. 7-2004)
ARTICLE 14: SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS
Editor's Note: Article 14: Subdivision Regulations were updated, incorporated
into, and replaced by the
Integrated Development Ordinance, Ord. 14-16, et seq., Council Bill O-17-49,
approved 11-13-17. See now ROA § 14-16-5-4.
ARTICLE 15: AIRPORT ZONING
Editor's Note: Article 15: Airport Zoning was updated, incorporated into, and
replaced by the
Integrated Development Ordinance, Ord. 14-16, et seq., Council Bill O-17-49,
approved 11-13-17. See now ROA § 14-16-3-2.
ARTICLE 16: INTEGRATED DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
The Integrated Development Ordinance can be accessed at:
https://codelibrary.amlegal.com/codes/albuquerque/latest/albuqido/0-0-0-1
ARTICLE 17: FAMILY HOUSING DEVELOPMENTS
Section
   
14-17-1   Intent
   
14-17-2   Short title
   
14-17-3   Findings
   
14-17-4   Definitions
   
14-17-5   Establishment of a family housing development
Cross-reference:
   Workforce Housing, see
Ch. 14, Art. 9
§ 14-17-1 INTENT.
   The intent of this article is to foster stable, diverse neighborhoods with a
robust quality of life and to create incentives for the development of
affordable housing within mixed income residential subdivisions, in which at
least 20% of the units are affordable to low and moderate income residents. To
capitalize on city investment, the article provides incentives for development
in the City Water Service Area and greater incentives for infill development.
The affordable housing within a subdivision will have the same appearance and
quality, without upgrades, as the market rate units. The city will establish
rules and regulations to ensure the long-term affordability of the affordable
units. Implementation of the program will be structured around a contractual
agreement between the city and the developer and/or builder, which provides
specific incentives to the subdivision in exchange for production of the
affordable units.
(Ord. 34-1998)
§ 14-17-2 SHORT TITLE.
   This article may be cited as the "Family Housing Development Ordinance."
(Ord. 34-1998)
§ 14-17-3 FINDINGS.
   The Albuquerque City Council hereby makes the following findings:
   (A)   There is an insufficient supply of affordable housing in Albuquerque
to meet the housing needs and demands of low-income residents, as documented in
the report, Recommendations to Address Urgent Needs for Affordable Housing,
May, 1997.
   (B)   The combined private, public and non-profit production of affordable
housing would have to increase 2½ times to meet the five-year affordable
housing goal established by the city, as documented in Recommendations to
Address Urgent Needs for Affordable Housing.
   (C)   The community has a preference for mixed income development, rather
than development of subdivisions solely comprised of affordable residential
development. This preference has been established in open houses, comments
submitted by neighborhood associations and the public and review of the public
record on development proposals over the past decade.
   (D)   The increase in supply of affordable housing will benefit our city in
the following ways:
      (1)   Residents wishing to buy homes they can afford will be able to
purchase them in Albuquerque, rather than in communities outside Albuquerque.
Short commutes between home, work and service destinations cause far less air
pollution and congestion than the lengthy commutes of people who work and shop
in Albuquerque but live elsewhere; thus, the community is taking action to
preserve the quality of life, which is one of our greatest amenities. Moreover,
the tax dollars of the home purchasers will support the city-provided services
they use.
      (2)   An adequate supply of housing affordable for working families
ensures that Albuquerque will be an attractive location for many businesses and
industries, which require housing that is affordable to their work forces.
      (3)   An adequate supply of housing for working families ensures that the
community has the essential physical resources to develop citizens who support
themselves independently, propser and make significant contributions to the
community.
§ 14-17-4 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of §§
14-17-1 et seq., the following definitions shall apply unless the context
clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   FAMILY AFFORDABLE OWNERSHIP UNIT. A dwelling unit in a family housing
development that serves a homeowner whose annualized income is at or below 80%
of the median gross income for the city, adjusted for family size and as
determined by the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development (HUD), and
whose monthly housing payment cannot exceed 33% of the homeowners gross monthly
income under city eligibility standards.
   FAMILY HOUSING AGREEMENT. A contractual agreement that commits the developer
and/or builder, in exchange for specific development incentives, to producing a
subdivision in which at least 20% of the units are family affordable ownership
units and to meeting the rules and regulations of the family housing
development program.
   FAMILY HOUSING DEVELOPMENT (FHD). A residential development designed to
provide for the development of family affordable ownership units in combination
with market rate housing, in accordance with the requirements for such
development in this article.
   INFILL AREA. The area located within the January 1, 1960 boundary limits of
City of Albuquerque.
Editor's Note: Map is available on file in the City Clerk's Office.
   QUALIFIED HOME BUYER. A home buyer whose income is 80% or less of the median
gross income for the city, adjusted for family size and as determined by the
U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development (HUD), and who meets other
eligibility requirements as established in the rules and regulations.
   WATER SERVICE AREA. The area for which city water service is available.
(Ord. 34-1998)
§ 14-17-5 ESTABLISHMENT OF A FAMILY HOUSING DEVELOPMENT.
   (A)   Location of the Family Housing Development. A Family Housing
Development (FHD) may be established on a tract of land in any residential zone
within the city limits and the City of Albuquerque's Water Service Area at the
time of the application, provided that all of the FHD units are dwelling units
as defined by the City Integrated Development Ordinance. Provided however that
no more than 50% of the cumulative total of Family Affordable Ownership Units
will be built in any one quadrant of the City (excluding area within the City’s
1960 boundary) and will be evaluated on a yearly basis as defined procedurally
in the rules and regulations. The tract of land on which the Family Housing
Development is established may be existing platted lots or land subdivided
after the effective date of this article.
   (B)   Requirements for a Family Housing Development. The family affordable
ownership units shall have the same exteriors as the market rate units and, at
a minimum, have the same package of basic amenities without the upgrades as the
market rate units. The family affordable ownership units shall blend into the
development and not be identifiable as affordable housing due to appearance or
quality of the unit and site development. Where there are more than one housing
product type within a subdivision, the family affordable ownership units may be
concentrated within a single product type. However, the subdivision shall
provide family affordable ownership units in a range of house sizes and number
of bedrooms. Out of the total number of units in a family housing development
at least 20% shall be family affordable ownership units.
   (C)   Financial Guarantee. In exchange for the density bonus, as specified
in
Integrated Development Ordinance § 14-16-5-1, the developer and/or builder
shall provide a financial guarantee in favor of the city that is equal to the
appraised value of the increased density. The financial guarantee shall become
due and payable to the city, if the developer and/or builder fails to sell a
family affordable ownership unit to a qualified home buyer. The value of the
increased density shall be determined by a qualified appraiser who shall
perform an appraisal of the property. The city shall release the financial
guarantee as the developer and/or builder provides documentation to the city
that the family affordable ownership units have been sold to qualified home
buyers.
   (D)   Sales and Resales of Family Affordable Ownership Units. A family
affordable ownership unit shall be sold by the developer and/or builder to a
qualified home buyer. The family housing agreement shall provide:
      (1)   That the proportionate amount of the value of the density bonus and
the fee rebate, provided for in the
Integrated Development Ordinance § 14-16-5-1 and subparagraph E(2) of this
section, for the family housing development that is attributable to each family
affordable ownership unit shall be passed on by the developer and/or builder to
each qualified home buyer in the form of a deferred loan of a portion of the
purchase price of the family affordable ownership unit;
      (2)   That the developer and/or builder of each family housing
development shall require each qualified home buyer to agree, as a condition of
the sale of a family affordable ownership unit to the qualified home buyer, to
pay a percentage of the appreciation in the value of the family affordable
ownership unit upon the sale of the family affordable ownership unit;
      (3)   That the agreement of the qualified home buyer to pay the deferred
loan and the percentage of appreciation in the value of the family affordable
ownership unit upon the sale of the family affordable ownership unit shall be
evidenced by the promissory note of the qualified home buyer and secured by a
mortgage covering the family affordable ownership unit; and
      (4)   That in consideration of the development incentives granted by the
city to the developer and/or builder, the developer and/or builder shall cause
the promissory note of the qualified home buyer to be made payable to the order
of the city and the mortgage to be granted to the city. The percentage of the
appreciation in the value of each family affordable ownership unit shall be
determined by dividing the amount of the deferred loan by the sales price of
the family affordable ownership unit. The promissory note of the qualified home
buyer shall provide:
         (a)   That only the amount of the deferred loan may be assumed by
subsequent qualified home buyers who purchase the family affordable ownership
unit;
         (b)   That if the family affordable ownership unit is sold to another
qualified home buyer, the amount of the percentage of the appreciation in the
value of the family affordable ownership unit shall be paid to the city upon
the closing of the sale; and
      (3)   That if the family affordable ownership unit is sold to a purchaser
who is not a qualified home buyer, the promissory note, including the deferred
loan and the percentage of the appreciation in the value of the family
affordable ownership unit, shall be paid in full to the city upon the closing
of the sale. The city shall deposit all amounts paid on the promissory notes of
qualified home buyers into the Albuquerque Housing Trust Fund which is a fund
administered under a trust agreement for the city by a private financial
institution for the purpose of accumulating resources for future housing
developments.
   (E)   Development Incentives. A family housing development is eligible for
the following development incentives, if it meets the requirements of this
article and the implementing rules and regulations:
      (1)   Density Bonus. Any family housing development located in the R-1,
RA, or RT zones is eligible for a density bonus. In these zones, the FHD may be
developed at a density that is at most 20% higher than normally allowed under
the Integrated Development Ordinance. All of the controlling setback and open
space requirements must be met for the zone in which the FHD is located. (See
the
Integrated Development Ordinance, § 14-16-2-3(A), § 14-16-2-3(B), § 14-16-2-3
(D), and § 14-16-5-1(C)).
      (2)   Fee Rebates.
         (a)   Family housing development subdivisions are eligible for rebate
of design review fees, provided that those fees have not been paid to the city
prior to approval of a family housing agreement, as specified in subparagraph F
(1) of this section, for participation in the family housing development
program. Family affordable ownership units located in a family housing
development are eligible for a rebate of the utility expansion charge, parks
dedication fee, parks development fee and building permit fee, provided that
those fees have not been paid to the city prior to approval of a family housing
agreement.
         (b)   Family affordable ownership units that are in a FHD located in
the infill area are eligible for a 100% rebate of the fees identified in this
paragraph; affordable units outside the infill area but within the city limits
and the Water Service Area are eligible for a 80% rebate of fees identified in
this paragraph. Any fees eligible for rebate shall be paid in full according to
the normal city schedules; those fees shall be repaid to the developer and/or
builder as homes are sold in the FHD subdivision, up to the fee rebate level
established in this paragraph without adjustment for inflation, when the city
determines that the requirements of this article and the implementing rules and
regulations have been met. In any family housing development a maximum of 50%
of the units may receive fee rebates. The amount of the fees rebated from the
Utility Expansion Charge and the Parks Dedication and Development Fee shall,
based on the approval of the City Council, be restored to those city funds from
a different revenue source than the source that rebated the fees.
      (3)   Fast Track Development Review for FHDs. The City Engineer's Office
in the Department of Public Works shall assign an individual on the staff to
follow, track and assist in expediting the city's review of proposals for
family housing developments.
   (F)   Rules and Regulations. The Department of Family and Community Services
(DFCS), or another city department as delegated by the Mayor, shall establish
rules and regulations to provide for the long-term affordability of the family
affordable ownership units developed under this program and to evaluate the
effectiveness of this program. The Department of Family and Community Services,
or another city department as delegated by the Mayor, shall publish a draft of
the rules and regulations for public comment within 60 days of the effective
date of this article. The rules and regulations shall require:
      (1)   The developer and/or builder to sign a family housing agreement
with the city.
      (2)   As the family affordable ownership units are sold, the developer
and/or builder to provide documentation to the city that shall verify the
qualified home buyer's income and other eligibility requirements, as
established by the rules and regulations, and that shall include a copy of the
final sales agreement showing that the deferred loan was passed on to the
qualified home buyer and copy of the mortgage and promissory note showing the
obligations of the qualified home buyer to pay the city the amounts specified
in subsection (D) of this section.
   (G)   Reporting and Monitoring. The DFCS, or another city department as
delegated by the Mayor, shall submit an annual report to the Mayor and City
Council on January 31 of each year following a year in which the program was in
place. The report will evaluate the effectiveness of the FHD program, monitor
the location of FHD subdivisions and their impacts on neighborhoods, identify
the amounts paid out of city funds for the fee rebates to provide the
information necessary for making appropriations to those funds, and recommend
any appropriate changes in the family housing development program.
(Ord. 34-1998; Am. Ord. 44-2001; Am. Ord._2017-025)
ARTICLE 18: DOWNTOWN ALBUQUERQUE
BUSINESS IMPROVEMENT DISTRICT
Section
   
14-18-1   Findings
   
14-18-2   District boundaries and creation
   
14-18-3   Improvement district benefit fee assessment method
   
14-18-4   Assessment; benefits; control, investment and disbursement of benefit
fee
   
14-18-5   Improvements provided by district
   
14-18-6   Management committee; creation, terms, method of appointment, duties
   
14-18-7   Administrative operations
§ 14-18-1 FINDINGS.
   The City Council finds that:
   (A)   After verification that the Petition to create the Downtown
Albuquerque Business Improvement District complied with Section 6 of the
Business Improvement District Act, the Council passed resolution Bill No. F/
S R-44, Enactment No. 38-2000 referring the petition for the creation of the
Downtown Albuquerque Business Improvement District to the Downtown Planning
Group for preparation of a district plan, authorizing the City Clerk to provide
notice of public hearing on the plan, and directing the Downtown Planning Group
to make a recommendation to the Council regarding the creation of the Business
Improvement District as proposed, or as amended, after public hearing.
   (B)   The required public hearing on the proposed district plan has been
completed.
   (C)   The Downtown Planning Group has forwarded to the Council its district
plan (the "business improvement district plan"), a copy of which is attached to
Ord. 38-2000 as Exhibit A, and its recommendation to create the district in
accordance with the district plan.
(Ord. 38-2000)
§ 14-18-2 DISTRICT BOUNDARIES AND CREATION.
   (A)   The Downtown Albuquerque Business Improvement District (the
"improvement district") is created, as provided for by the Business Improvement
District Act, Sections 3-63-1 to 3-63-16 NMSA 1978 (the "Act").
   (B)   The boundaries of the district generally include: Marble and Slate
Avenues to the north; railroad tracks to the east; Coal Avenue to the south;
5th, 6th and 10th Avenues to the west, and are more particularly defined in the
business improvement district plan. Council may approve the addition of
contiguous areas to the improvement district boundaries, upon a recommendation
of the management committee of the improvement district in conformance with the
business improvement district plan.
   (C)   An improvement district benefit fee (the "benefit fee") shall be
assessed against the real property parcels (the "non-excluded parcels") within
the boundaries of the improvement district, excluding residential real
property, real property parcels owned by non-profit corporations, and real
property parcels owned by the government, as otherwise identified on Exhibit B
to Ord. 38-2000.
   (D)   Improvement district services shall be budgeted for and provided on a
calendar year basis, commencing January 1, 2001, and continuing each year
thereafter until termination of the improvement district.
   (E)   The improvement district shall operate continuously, subject to
Council review every five years, as required by law. Notwithstanding:
      (1)   the Council reserves the right to terminate the existence of the
improvement district at anytime, upon receipt of a petition for termination,
signed by not less than 51% of the district property owners, who represent not
less than 51% of the assessed property value of the district, and
      (2)   the year ten Council review shall require, as a condition to the
existence of the improvement district, the submission to the Council of a
petition for reaffirmation and continuance signed by at least 51% of the real
property owners comprising at least 51% of the total real property owners in
the proposed district, exclusive of any real property owned by the United
States or the state or any of its political subdivisions, and subsequent
compliance with the Creation by Petition procedures of the Act of the State of
New Mexico.
(Ord. 38-2000)
§ 14-18-3 IMPROVEMENT DISTRICT BENEFIT FEE ASSESSMENT METHOD.
   (A)   The improvement district benefit fee assessment schedule (the
"assessment roll") shall be based upon the most current and final Bernalillo
County real property taxation assessment valuation for each non-excluded parcel
in the district.
   (B)   For each non-excluded parcel in the improvement district, the
improvement district benefit fee assessment valuation (the "assessment
valuation") amount shall be equal to one-third of the Bernalillo County real
property taxation assessment valuation.
   (C)   The benefit fee assessment rate (the "assessment rate") shall be the
lesser of .0058 or the percentage calculated by dividing the total amount of
the improvement district budget by the total amount of the assessment valuation
for all non-excluded parcels located in the improvement district.
   (D)   The benefit fee assessed for each non-excluded parcel in the
improvement district shall be calculated by multiplying the non-excluded parcel
assessment valuation by the assessment rate.
(Ord. 38-2000)
§ 14-18-4 ASSESSMENT; BENEFITS; CONTROL, INVESTMENT AND DISBURSEMENT OF BENEFIT
FEE.
   (A)   The Council shall annually assess a benefit fee against each non-
excluded parcel in the improvement district, in accordance with the business
improvement district plan and the improvement district management committee's
(the "management committee") annual recommendation.
   (B)   The benefit fees shall be held and invested in a City of Albuquerque
Trust and Agency Account, for the benefit of the improvement district.
   (C)   The benefit fees shall be disbursed annually to the management
committee.
   (D)   Benefit fees shall be due and payable in full within 30 days of the
mailing of the benefit fee assessment; thereafter, any such payments shall be
deemed delinquent.
   (E)   Assessed property owners shall pay at least 25% of the assessed
benefit fee; the amount of the assessed benefit fee paid by a commercial tenant
shall be proportional to the square footage of space that the tenant rents but
shall not be more than 75% of the assessed amount.
   (F)   A penalty of 10% of the benefit fee or $10, whichever is greater, plus
interest at the rate of 10% per annum, shall be charged on delinquent payments.
   (G)   Within 60 days after the publication of the assessment roll for the
improvement district, the municipal clerk shall prepare, sign, attest with the
municipal seal and record in the office of the county clerk a claim of lien for
any unpaid amount due and assessed against a non-excluded parcel.
   (H)   The City of Albuquerque shall recover any expenses incurred for the
assessment, collection and administration of the fee.
(Ord. 38-2000)
§ 14-18-5 IMPROVEMENTS PROVIDED BY DISTRICT.
   (A)   An initial Downtown Albuquerque Safe and Clean Program, including
downtown district ambassadors and a downtown "clean team", as described in the
district plan, shall be provided in accordance with the approved budget of the
management committee.
   (B)   An initial Image Enhancement Program, as more fully described in the
district plan, shall be provided in accordance with the approved budget of the
management committee.
   (C)   Those other services as may be proposed by the management committee
and included in the approved budget of the management committee.
   (D)   The improvements made by the improvement district shall be deemed to
benefit each improvement district real property parcel in an amount not less
than the benefit fee assessed against it.
(Ord. 38-2000)
§ 14-18-6 MANAGEMENT COMMITTEE; CREATION, TERMS, METHOD OF APPOINTMENT, DUTIES.
   (A)   In accordance with the business improvement district plan, the
Downtown Action Team, an existing downtown revitalization non-profit
corporation created pursuant to the New Mexico non-profit corporation act and
operating within the boundaries of the Downtown Albuquerque Business
Improvement District, is appointed as the management committee for the
Improvement District.
   (B)   The management committee shall serve continuously, until and unless
Council should receive a petition to change the management committee, signed by
51% of the property owners included in the improvement district, who represent
not less than 51% of the assessment valuation of the improvement district, and
Council appointment of a new committee.
   (C)   The management committee shall prepare and file annually with the
Council, for its review and approval, a budget that is in accordance with the
business improvement district plan, and a progress report for the improvement
district.
   (D)   The management committee shall administer all improvements within the
improvement district, in accordance with the business improvement district
plan.
   (E)   The management committee shall annually submit a recommendation to
Council for the benefit fee amounts to be assessed annually by the Council, in
accordance with the business improvement district plan.
   (F)   The management committee shall annually file with the Council a report
of the improvement district activities for the preceding fiscal year, which
report shall include a complete audited financial statement setting forth its
assets, liabilities, income and operating expenses as of the end of the fiscal
year and the benefits of the improvement district programs to the real property
and business owners in the improvement district.
(Ord. 38-2000)
§ 14-18-7 ADMINISTRATIVE OPERATIONS.
   (A)   The services provided by the improvement district shall be in addition
to and an enhancement of those public services that the City furnishes within
the ordinary course of its operations to the district area.
   (B)   The City may enter into an agreement with Bernalillo County to provide
for the mailing of the improvement district benefit fee assessment notices,
receipt of the benefit fees, and for the transfer of such funds to the
designated City of Albuquerque Trust and Agency Account, for the benefit of the
improvement district.
   (C)   Council approval of the annual budget, assessment of the annual
benefit fee, and approval of the annual report of the management committee
shall be subject to the management committee's compliance with the improvement
district business plan, and/or those reasonable conditions as Council may
require in order to assure such compliance with the business improvement
district plan.
   (D)   During the term of the improvement district, Council shall provide, in
accordance with the business improvement district plan, the necessary
approvals, conditions, and assessments in order to assure the required annual
funding and operations of the improvement district.
(Ord. 38-2000)
 
ARTICLE 19: IMPACT FEES
Section
   
14-19-1   Short title
   
14-19-2   Intent and purposes
   
14-19-3   Definitions
   
14-19-4   Authority
   
14-19-5   Applicability
   
14-19-6   Findings and declarations
   
14-19-7   Land use assumptions
   
14-19-8   Capital improvements plan
   
14-19-9   Advisory committee
   
14-19-10   Establishment of service areas
   
14-19-11   Imposition
   
14-19-12   Assessment and collection
   
14-19-13   Fee schedules
   
14-19-14   Use of fees collected
   
14-19-15   Exemptions
   
14-19-16   Independent fee determination
   
14-19-17    Administration of fees
   
14-19-18   Refunds
   
14-19-19   Credits
   
14-19-20    Administrative appeals
   
14-19-21   Promulgation of rules
   
14-19-22   Effect of impact fee on zoning and subdivision regulations
   
14-19-23   Impact fee as additional and supplemental requirement to city
regulations
   
14-19-24   Review and amendment
 
   
14-19-98   Enforcement
   
14-19-99   Penalty
   
Appendix: Impact Fees Maps
§ 14-19-1 SHORT TITLE.
   Sections
14-19-1 through
14-19-99 ROA 1994 shall be known and cited as the "Impact Fee Ordinance."
(Ord._2012-034)
§ 14-19-2 INTENT AND PURPOSES.
   (A)   Sections
14-19-1 et seq. are intended to implement and comply with the New Mexico
Development Fees Act (Sections 5-8-1 et seq. NMSA 1978) and shall be
interpreted to so comply.
   (B)   Sections
14-19-1 et seq. are intended to assess and collect impact fees in an amount
based upon appropriate service units for capital facilities in order to finance
such facilities, the demand for which is generated by new development in the
city. The purpose of §§
14-19-1 et seq. is to ensure the provision of an adequate level of service for
capital facilities throughout the city so that new development may occur in a
manner consistent with the city's Planned Growth Strategy and the Albuquerque/
Bernalillo County Comprehensive Plan. The City Council intends, by enactment of
§§
14-19-1 et seq., to require new development to bear an amount not to exceed its
proportionate share of the costs related to the additional capital facilities
that are rationally related to such new development in accordance with
applicable law. Only capital improvement needs that are rationally related to
new development in accordance with applicable law will be paid by impact fees.
Impact fees shall not exceed the cost to pay for a proportionate share of the
cost of system improvements based upon service units needed to serve new
development. Subject to the provisions of §§
14-19-1 et seq. and the Development Fees Act (Sections 5-8-1 et seq. NMSA
1978), impact fees shall be spent on new or enlarged capital facilities and
equipment which benefit those developments which pay the fees.
(Ord._2012-034)
§ 14-19-3 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of §§
14-19-1 et seq., the following definitions shall apply unless the context
clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ADVISORY COMMITTEE. The standing committee required to be appointed under
the  Development Fees Act (Sections 5-8-1 et seq. NMSA 1978).
   APPLICANT. A person, including any governmental entity, seeking subdivision
or development approval, a building permit, a refund, a waiver or a credit,
whichever is applicable.
   ASSESSMENT. The determination of the amount of the impact fee.
   BUILDING PERMIT. The building permit required by the Uniform Building Code,
as adopted by the city.
   CAPITAL IMPROVEMENTS. Any of the following facilities, including existing
facilities, facility expansions or new facilities, that have a life expectancy
of ten or more years and are owned and operated by or on behalf of the city.
      (1)   ROAD CAPITAL IMPROVEMENTS. Roads, bridges, bike and pedestrian
trails, bus bays, rights of way, traffic signals, landscaping and any local
components of state and federal highways as specified in Section 5-8-2D(2) NMSA
1978.
      (2)   DRAINAGE CAPITAL IMPROVE-MENTS. Storm water, drainage and flood
control facilities.
      (3)   FIRE CAPITAL IMPROVEMENTS. Buildings for fire and rescue and
essential equipment costing $10,000 or more.
      (4)   POLICE CAPITAL IMPROVEMENTS. Buildings for police and essential
equipment costing $10,000 or more.
      (5)   PARK CAPITAL IMPROVEMENTS. Parks, recreational areas, and related
areas and facilities.
      (6)   OPEN SPACE CAPITAL IMPROVEMENTS. Open space land and related
facilities.
      (7)   TRAIL CAPITAL IMPROVEMENTS. Trail improvements.
   CAPITAL IMPROVEMENTS PLAN (CIP). A document that meets the requirements of
Section 5-8-6 of the Development Fees Act (NMSA 1978), including a description
of existing capital facilities for each service  area, an analysis of the
capacity and current usage of existing facilities, a description of capital
improvements necessitated by and attributable to growth in the service area, a
demand or equivalency table, projected service units in the service area based
on the land use assumptions, the projected demand for capital improvements
required to serve the new service units, and anticipated sources of funding
independent of impact fees. This document includes an initial list of capital
improvements on which impact fees may be spent, which is subsequently
incorporated into the Component Capital Improvements Plan (CCIP).
   CITY. The City of Albuquerque.
   CITY CAPITAL IMPLEMENTATION PROGRAM. The city’s Capital Improvements Program
as set out and regulated by §§
2-12-1 et seq. ROA 1994. The Capital Implementation Program is funded by
General Obligation Bonds and includes projects that support rehabilitation,
deficiency remediation and growth. The Capital Implementation Program contains,
as an additional component, the list of growth- supporting projects that are
funded by impact fees.
   CITY COUNCIL. The duly constituted governing body of the City of
Albuquerque.
   COLLECTION. The payment of the applicable impact fees. (See also
ASSESSMENT.)
   COMMERCIAL. Establishments engaged in the selling or rental of goods,
services or entertainment to the general public, or providing executive,
management, administrative or professional services. Such uses include, but are
not limited to, shopping centers, discount stores, supermarkets, home
improvement stores, pharmacies, automobile sales and service, banks, movie
theaters, amusement arcades, bowling alleys, barber shops, laundromats, funeral
homes, vocational or technical schools, dance studios, health clubs, golf
courses, real estate, insurance, property management, investment, employment,
travel, advertising, secretarial, data processing, telephone answering,
telephone marketing, music, radio and television recording and broadcasting
studios; professional or consulting services in the fields of law,
architecture, design, engineering, accounting and similar professions; interior
decorating consulting services; medical and dental offices and clinics,
including veterinarian clinics and kennels; and business offices of private
companies, utility companies, trade associations, unions and nonprofit
organizations.
   COMPONENT CAPITAL IMPROVEMENTS PLAN (CCIP). A component of the city's
Capital Implementation Program that identifies the capital improvements on
which impact fees may be spent. This component of the city's Capital
Implementation Program is funded by impact fees and limited to projects that
support growth. The CCIP is adopted and revised at the same time and via the
same process as the Capital Implementation Program of which it is a part. The
CCIP provides the process by which the list of capital improvements identified
in the impact fee Capital Improvements Plan (CIP) is amended between updates of
the CIP.
   COUNTY. The County of Bernalillo.
   COMPREHENSIVE PLAN. The City of Albuquerque/ Bernalillo County Comprehensive
Plan.
   CREDIT. Credit for the value of the construction, contribution or dedication
of system improvements or the contribution of money for system improvements
accepted by the city.
   CREDIT-HOLDER. The person entitled to transfer, apply or seek reimbursement
for excess credits.
   DEEMED COMPLETE means that an applicant has been issued a building permit.
   DEVELOPER. Any person, corporation, organization or other legal entity
constructing or creating new development.
   DEVELOPMENT. The division of land, reconstruction, redevelopment,
conversion, structural alteration, relocation or enlargement of any structure;
or any use, change of use or extension of the use of land, any of which
increases the number of service units.
   DEVELOPMENT AGREEMENT. A written agreement entered into between the city and
a developer whereby the developer agrees to dedicate or construct capital
improvements.
   DEVELOPMENT APPROVAL. Written authorization, such as approval of a
subdivision application or issuance of a building permit, or other forms of
official action required by the city prior to commencement of construction.
   DEVELOPMENT SITE. The property under consideration for development at the
time of application for a building permit.
   DWELLING UNIT. One or more connected rooms and a single kitchen designed for
and occupied by no more than one family for living and sleeping purposes.
   EFFECTIVE DATE. July 1, 2005.
   ENCUMBERED. Impact fee funds committed for a specified capital improvement
on a specified time schedule which does not exceed seven years from the date of
payment of the impact fees, and as further defined in and for the purposes of §
14-19-19(J)(7)(c).
   EXCESS CREDITS. That portion of the credit granted for system improvements
which exceeds the value of the impact fees otherwise due from the development.
   FACILITY EXPANSION. The expansion of the capacity of an existing facility
that serves the same function as an otherwise necessary new capital
improvement, in order that the existing facility may serve new development. The
term does not include the repair, maintenance, modernization or expansion of an
existing facility to improve service to existing development.
   FIRST IN, FIRST OUT means expenditures of impact fee revenues reflecting the
chronological order in which the impact fee revenues were collected.
   GROSS FLOOR AREA. The total floor area, including basements, mezzanines, and
upper floors, if any, expressed in square feet measured from the outside
surface of outside walls, but excluding enclosed vehicle parking areas.
   HOTEL/MOTEL. An establishment that provides paid lodging in rooms or suites
that do not meet the definition of dwelling units.
   IMPACT FEE. A charge or assessment imposed by the city on new development in
order to generate revenue for funding or recouping the costs of capital
improvements rationally related to new development in accordance with
applicable law. The term includes amortized charges, lump- sum charges, capital
recovery fees, contributions in aid of construction, development fees and any
other fee that functions as described by this definition. The term does not
include hook-up fees, dedication of rights-of-way or easements or construction
or dedication of on-site water distribution, wastewater  collection or drainage
facilities, or streets, sidewalks or curbs if the dedication or construction is
required by a previously adopted valid ordinance or regulation and is
rationally related to new development in accordance with applicable law.
   IMPACT FEE STUDY. The report prepared by Duncan Associates for the City of
Albuquerque titled "Impact Fee Land Use Assumptions and Capital Improvements
Plan, 2012-2022," in September 2012, as may be amended, that constitutes the
LUA and CIP for the update of the road, park, open space, trail, fire and
police impact fees for the City of Albuquerque.
   IMPACT FEES ADMINISTRATOR.  The person designated to administer the impact
fee program established by §§
14-19-1 et seq.
   INDEPENDENT FEE DETERMINATION. A finding by the impact fees administrator
that an independent fee study does or does not meet the requirements for such a
study as established by this chapter and, if the requirements are met, the fee
calculated by the impact fees administrator therefrom.
   INDEPENDENT FEE STUDY. The engineering, financial and/or economic
documentation prepared by an applicant in accordance with §
14-19-17 to allow an individual determination of an impact fee other than by
use of the applicable fee schedule.
   INDUSTRIAL/WAREHOUSE. An establishment primarily engaged in the fabrication,
assembly or processing of goods, or the display, storage and sale of goods to
other firms for resale, as well as activities involving significant movement
and storage of products or equipment. Typical uses include manufacturing
plants, welding shops, wholesale bakeries, dry cleaning plants, bottling works,
wholesale distributors, storage warehouses, moving and storage firms, trucking
and shipping operations and major mail processing centers.
   INSTITUTIONAL. A governmental, quasi-public or institutional use, or a non-
profit recreational use, not located in a shopping center. Typical uses include
elementary, secondary or higher educational establishments, day care centers,
hospitals, mental institutions, nursing homes, assisted living facilities, fire
stations, city halls, court houses, post offices, jails, libraries, museums,
places of religious worship, military bases, airports, bus stations, fraternal
lodges, parks and playgrounds.
   LAND USE. The primary category of use for any principal or accessory
building, structure or use located on a development site.
   LAND USE ASSUMPTIONS (LUA). A description of the service area and
projections of changes in land uses, densities, intensities and population in
the service area over at least a five-year period.
   LEVEL OF SERVICE (LOS). A standardized measure of the quantity or quality of
service provided by a facility or system of facilities. It is often expressed
as a ratio between capacity and demand, or cost and demand. The term "existing
LOS" refers to the calculation of the measure at the time the CIP is prepared
or updated.
   MICRO MULTI-FAMILY. A multi-family dwelling unit with a gross floor area of
600 square feet or less.
   MINI-WAREHOUSE. An enclosed storage facility containing independent, fully
enclosed bays that are leased to persons for storage of their household goods
or personal property.
   MOBILE HOME/RV PARK. An area developed or intended to be developed for
occupancy by two or more mobile homes or recreational vehicles that are used
for dwelling purposes, and spaces are rented individually to residents.
   MULTI-FAMILY. A dwelling unit that is connected to one or more other
dwelling units.
   NEW DEVELOPMENT. The division of land; reconstruction, redevelopment,
conversion, structural alteration, relocation or enlargement of any structure;
or any use, change of use or extension of the use of land; any of which
increases the number of service units.
   OFFSET. The amount by which an impact fee is reduced to fairly reflect the
credits applied for system improvements.
   OWNER OF RECORD. The persons having legal and equitable title to the
property as recorded in the real property records of the county.
   PROJECT IMPROVEMENTS. Site specific improvements or facilities that are
primarily planned, designed or built to provide service for a specific
development project and that are necessary for the use of the occupants or
users of that project, and that do not provide significant additional capacity
for other developments. The physical location of the improvement or facility,
on-site or off-site, shall not be considered determinative of whether it is a
PROJECT IMPROVEMENT or a system improvement. No improvement or facility
specifically identified in the CIP, as may subsequently be amended in the CCIP,
shall be considered a PROJECT IMPROVEMENT.
   PROPORTIONATE SHARE. That portion of the cost of system improvements which
is reasonably and fairly related to the service demands and needs of new
development.
   QUALIFIED PROFESSIONAL. A professional engineer, surveyor, financial analyst
or planner providing services within the scope of his or her license, education
or experience.
   REFUND. Reimbursement of impact fees to the owner of record of property for
which impact fees have been paid.
   SERVICE AREAS. Geographically defined areas within the city that have been
designated in the CIP in which development potential may create the need for
capital improvements to be funded by impact fees.
   SERVICE UNIT. A standardized measure of consumption, use, generation or
discharge attributable to an individual unit of development calculated in
accordance with generally accepted engineering or planning standards for a
particular category of capital improvements. The following service units are
used in the impact fee analyses:
      (1)   Roads. Daily vehicle-miles of travel on the city arterial road
system during a typical weekday, as more fully described in the Impact Fee
Study.
      (2)   Drainage. Acres of impervious cover.
      (3)   Parks. Equivalent dwelling units, which each represent the average
number of persons residing in a single-family detached dwelling unit, as more
fully described in the Impact Fee Study.
      (4)   Open space. Equivalent dwelling units.
      (5)   Trails. Equivalent dwelling units.
      (6)   Fire. Functional population, which each represent the equivalent of
a person present at the site of a land use for 24 hours during a typical
weekday, as more fully described in the Impact Fee Study.
      (7)   Police. Functional population.
   SINGLE-FAMILY DETACHED. A building arranged or designed to be occupied by
one family, including mobile homes not located in a mobile home park, the
structure having only one dwelling unit and not attached to any other dwelling
unit.
   SYSTEM IMPROVEMENTS. Capital improvements that expand the capacity of the
type of facility to accommodate the impacts of additional development.
   SYSTEM STUDIES. Any study, analysis or report, or portion thereof, required
by the city to determine the system improvements for new development.
   WAIVE. To relinquish or abandon a claim or right.
(Ord._2012-034; Am. Ord._2017-023)
§ 14-19-4 AUTHORITY.
   The city is authorized to impose impact fees under the Development Fees Act
(Sections 5-8-1 et seq. NMSA 1978). The provisions of §§
14-19-1 et seq. shall not be construed to limit the power of the city to use
any other methods or powers otherwise available for accomplishing the purposes
set forth in §§
14-19-1 et seq., either in substitution or in conjunction with §§
14-19-1 et seq., provided that such methods or powers are not inconsistent with
or prohibited by §§
14-19-1 et seq. or the Development Fees Act.
(Ord._2012-034)
§ 14-19-5 APPLICABILITY.
   Sections
14-19-1 et seq. shall be applicable to all development that occurs within the
corporate jurisdiction of the city, as may be amended in the future, and shall
apply uniformly within each service area. Impact fees are not assessed or
collected within the Mesa del Sol development.
(Ord._2012-034)
§ 14-19-6 FINDINGS AND DECLARATIONS.
   The City Council hereby finds and declares that:
   (A)   The city is committed to the funding and provision of capital
facilities necessary to cure any deficiencies that may exist in already
developed areas of the city.
   (B)   Such facilities shall be provided by the city using existing funding
sources allocated for such facilities, other than impact fees, including, but
not limited to, the general fund, general obligation bonds, special assessment
districts and metropolitan redevelopment districts.
   (C)   New development causes and imposes increased demands on public
facilities.
   (D)   The City Council appointed an advisory committee, pursuant to Section
5-8-37 NMSA 1978, to review land use assumptions (LUA), the capital
improvements plan (CIP) and the component capital improvements plan (CCIP). The
advisory committee reviewed the LUA, the CIP and the CCIP.
   (E)   The land use assumptions, incorporated in §§
14-19-1 et seq. by reference, indicate that new development will continue and
will place increasing demands on the city to provide additional capital
improvements.
   (F)   New development should pay an amount not to exceed its proportionate
share of the capital costs related to the additional capital improvements
needed to accommodate that new development.
   (G)   The City Council finds that the impact fees do not exceed the
proportionate share of the cost attributable to new development to maintain the
existing level of service currently provided to existing development for each
type of capital improvement in each service area.
   (H)   The City Council, after careful consideration of the matter, hereby
finds and declares that it is in the best interest of the general welfare of
the city and its residents to impose impact fees upon new development in order
to finance capital improvements in the designated service areas for which
demand is created by the new development.
   (I)   The City Council further finds and declares that impact fees provide a
reasonable method of assessing new development to ensure that such new
development pays a portion of the costs of capital facilities that are
rationally related to the new development in accordance with applicable law.
   (J)    The City Council further finds and declares that such impact fees are
equitable, and impose a fair assessment on new development by requiring that
new development pay a portion of the cost, and deems it advisable to adopt §§
14-19-1 et seq. as set forth.
   (K)   The City Council further finds that there exists a rational
relationship between the capital costs of providing capital improvements at the
existing level of service and the impact fees imposed on development under §§
14-19-1 et seq.
   (L)   The City Council further finds that there exists a rational
relationship between the impact fees to be collected pursuant to §§
14-19-1 et seq. and the expenditure of those funds on capital costs related to
capital facilities as limited and restricted by §§
14-19-1 et seq.
   (M)   The City Council further finds and declares that §§
14-19-1 et seq. are consistent with both the procedural and substantive
requirements of the New Mexico Development Fees Act (Sections 5-8-1 et seq.
NMSA 1978).
   (N)   The City Council has carefully considered the Report prepared by
Integrated Utilities Group, Inc. for the City of Albuquerque titled "Drainage
Impact Fee Study Final Report" dated September 2004, and as amended November
2004, and further finds that said Report sets forth reasonable and equitable
methodology and assumptions consistent with the New Mexico Development Fees Act
for the formulation and imposition of a Drainage Facilities Development Impact
Fee Program for the City of Albuquerque.
   (O)   The City Council has carefully considered the land use assumptions and
capital improvements plan report (Impact Fee Study) dated September 2012,
prepared by Duncan Associates for the City of Albuquerque titled "Impact Fee
Land Use Assumptions and Capital Improvements Plan, 2012-2022," and further
finds that said Impact Fee Study sets forth reasonable and equitable
methodologies and assumptions consistent with the New Mexico Development Fees
Act for the update of the road, park, open space, trail, fire and police impact
fees for the City of Albuquerque.
(Ord._2012-034)
§ 14-19-7 LAND USE ASSUMPTIONS.
   The land use assumptions provide a projection of changes in land uses,
densities, intensities and population within planning information areas over at
least a five-year period.
   (A)   The City Council hereby incorporates by reference the land use
assumptions set forth in §
14-13-5-2 ROA 1994, as amended. These land use assumptions adopted in 2009
continue to be the basis for the drainage impact fees.
   (B)   The land use assumptions for the 2012 update of the road, park, open
space, trail, fire and police impact fees are contained in the Impact Fee
Study, which is hereby adopted and incorporated herein by reference.
   (C)   The land use assumptions shall be reviewed and updated, if necessary,
in conjunction with the update of the CCIP. Updates of the land use assumptions
shall occur at least every five years from the effective date of §§
14-19-1 et seq., unless the City Council makes a determination that an update
is not necessary.
(Ord._2012-034)
§ 14-19-8 CAPITAL IMPROVEMENTS PLAN.
   (A)   The Capital Improvements Plan (CIP) is a document that meets the
requirements of Section 5-8-6 of the Development Fees Act (NMSA 1978),
including a description of existing capital facilities for each service area,
an analysis of the capacity and current usage of existing facilities, a
description of capital improvements necessitated by and attributable to growth
in the service area, a demand or equivalency table, projected service units in
the service area based on the land use assumptions, the projected demand for
capital improvements required to serve the new service units, and anticipated
sources of funding independent of impact fees. This document includes an
initial list of capital improvements on which impact fees may be spent, which
is subsequently incorporated into the Component Capital Improvements Plan
(CCIP) and amended between updates of the CIP.
   (B)   The City Council hereby adopts by reference the drainage CCIP (the
report prepared by Integrated Utilities Group, Inc. for the City of Albuquerque
titled "Drainage Impact Fee Study Final Report" dated September 2004, and as
amended November 2004), particularly as it relates to the allocation of a fair
share of the costs of new facilities for drainage facilities to be borne by new
users of such facilities and the levels of service to be provided to the
citizens of the city for these facilities. Updates of the drainage CIP shall
occur at least every five years from the effective date of §§
14-19-1 et seq., unless the City Council makes a determination that an update
is not necessary.
   (C)   The City Council hereby adopts by reference the Impact Fee Study,
which contains the 2012 update of the roads, parks, open space, trails, fire
and police CIPs, particularly as it relates to the allocation of a fair share
of the costs of new facilities to be borne by new users of such facilities and
the levels of service to be provided to the citizens of the city for these
facilities. Updates of the CIPs shall occur at least every five years from the
effective date of §§
14-19-1 et seq., unless the City Council makes a determination that an update
is not necessary.
   (D)   The updated lists of capital improvements included in the Impact Fee
Study for roads, drainage, parks, open space, trails, fire and police
facilities shall be incorporated into the next update of the CCIP. The CCIP
shall be updated every two years in conjunction with the Capital Implementation
Program process. Since developers may have expectations of receiving credit for
improvements related to projects in the road and drainage portions of the CCIP,
road and drainage capital improvements will be removed from the CCIP between
updates of the respective CIPs only if the project is underway or completed.
(Ord._2012-034)
§ 14-19-9 ADVISORY COMMITTEE.
   The advisory committee is a standing committee established pursuant to §
14-13-1-4 ROA 1994. The advisory committee shall meet at the direction of the
City Council. The functions of the advisory committee shall include:
   (A)   Advise and assist the city in adopting land use assumptions;
   (B)   Review the land use assumptions, capital improvements plan and CCIP
and file written comments;
   (C)   Monitor and evaluate implementation of the CCIP;
   (D)   File annual written reports with respect to the progress of the CCIP
and report to the city any perceived inequities in implementing the plan or
imposing the impact fees;
   (E)   Advise the city of the need to update or revise the land use
assumptions, capital improvements plan, CCIP and impact fees; and
   (F)   Any other tasks the City Council may direct the advisory committee to
perform.
(Ord._2012-034)
§ 14-19-10 ESTABLISHMENT OF SERVICE AREAS.
   Service areas for the Impact Fees are established as follows (as depicted on
the maps included in the Impact Fee Study and attached to Ord. 2012-034).
   (A)   Roads. One road impact fee service area is established, encompassing
all of the land within the city limits, with the exclusion of the area within
the Mesa del Sol development.
   (B)   Drainage. Five drainage impact fee service areas are established, as
depicted on the maps included in the Impact Fee Study and attached to Ord.
2012-034.
   (C)   Parks. Four park impact fee service areas are established, as follows:
      (1)   Northeast Service Area. All of the land within the city limits, as
may be amended, located north of Candelaria Road and east of I-25.
      (2)   Southeast Service Area. All of the land within the city limits, as
may be amended, located south of Candelaria Road and east of I-25, with the
exclusion of the area within the Mesa del Sol development.
      (3)   Northwest Service Area. All of the land within the city limits, as
may be amended, located north of I-40 and west of I-25.
      (4)   Southwest Service Area. All of the land within the city limits, as
may be amended, located south of I-40 and west of I-25.
   (D)   Open space. The open space impact fee service area is the entire area
within the city limits, as may be amended, with the exclusion of the area
within the Mesa del Sol development.
   (E)   Trails. The trail impact fee service area is the entire area within
the city limits, as may be amended, with the exclusion of the area within the
Mesa del Sol development.
   (F)   Fire. The fire impact fee service area is the entire area within the
city limits, as may be amended, with the exclusion of the area within the Mesa
del Sol development.
   (G)   Police. The police impact fee service area is the entire area within
the city limits, as may be amended, with the exclusion of the area within the
Mesa del Sol development.
(Ord._2012-034)
§ 14-19-11 IMPOSITION.
   (A)   Any developer engaging in new development after the effective date of
§§
14-19-1 et seq. shall pay impact fees in the manner and in the amounts required
in §§
14-19-1 et seq., unless otherwise specified in this section. No building permit
shall be issued for development within the city unless the impact fees are
assessed and collected pursuant to §§
14-19-1 et seq.
   (B)   Payment of impact fees specified in this section shall constitute full
and complete payment of the project's proportionate share of system
improvements for which such fee was paid and shall constitute compliance with
the requirements of §§
14-19-1 et seq.
   (C)   Notwithstanding any other provision of §§
14-19-1 et seq., applications for building permits which have been filed and
deemed complete by the city prior to the effective date of this article shall
remain subject to the impact fees in place when the fees were assessed.
   (D)   Nothing in §§
14-19-1 et seq. shall prevent the city from requiring developers to construct
reasonable site specific improvements or facilities but only in connection with
a development. Required improvements must be primarily planned, designed or
built to provide service for a specific development project and necessary for
the use of the occupants or users of that project. The city may not require the
developer to construct improvements that provide significant additional
capacity for other developments. The city may require developers to prepare
necessary studies, analyses, or reports required as part of a development
approval process.
   (E)   Nothing in §§
14-19-1 et seq. shall prevent the city from requiring a developer to construct
reasonable system improvements necessitated by and attributable to the new
development as a condition of development approval or pursuant to a development
agreement with the city, provided that services are not available from existing
facilities with actual capacity to serve the new development. If the system
improvement is on the CCIP, the city shall grant applicable credits to the
developer for constructing such system improvements.
   (F)   Nothing in §§
14-19-1 et seq. shall abrogate the city's authority to require the applicant to
prepare necessary studies, analyses or reports required as a part of the
development approval process.
   (G)   Nothing in §§
14-19-1 et seq. shall prevent the city from rejecting an application for
development if it determines that such development is inconsistent with adopted
city plans, regulations or ordinances.
(Ord._2012-034)
§ 14-19-12 ASSESSMENT AND COLLECTION.
   (A)   The impact fees administrator or his/her designee shall calculate and
assess the impact fees at the earliest possible time.
      (1)   For land that is platted or replatted on or after the effective
date, the impact fees shall be preliminarily assessed for development no later
than at the time that the subdivision plat is recorded.
      (2)   For land that was platted or replatted prior to the effective date
or for development that occurs on existing lots of record, the impact fees
shall be assessed at the time of development approval, plan check or issuance
of a building permit.
   (B)   The assessment of impact fees shall be in writing and shall be valid
for a period of four years.
   (C)   Notwithstanding the provisions of this section, the assessment of
impact fees may be revised based on information provided at the time of
issuance of the building permit, or if the number of service units in the
specific development increases, provided that such revision shall be limited to
the impact fees for the additional service units.
   (D)   The impact fees administrator, or his/her designee, shall calculate
and assess all other impact fees as follows:
      (1)   Determine the applicable service area;
      (2)   Determine the applicable land use category;
      (3)   Verify the number of dwelling units or the amount of gross floor
area (whichever is applicable) in the development; and
      (4)   Multiply the number of dwelling units or the amount of gross floor
area, whichever is applicable, by the applicable impact fees from the table in
§
14-19-14.
   (E)   If the assessment occurs at the time of subdivision plat or site plan
approval, the assessment may be based on the applicable fee schedule.
   (F)   If an application proposes a use that does not directly match an
existing land use category upon which fees are based, the impact fees
administrator shall assign the proposed use to the existing land use category
that most closely resembles the proposed use.
   (G)   When new development for which an application for a building permit
has been made includes two or more buildings, structures or other land uses in
any combination, including two or more uses within a building or structure, the
total impact fee assessment shall be the sum of the fees for each and every
building, structure, or use, including each and every use within a building or
structure, or an independent fee determination may be conducted.
   (H)   When a change of use, redevelopment or modification of an existing use
or building requires the issuance of a building permit and results in a net
increase in gross floor area the impact fee shall be based on the net increase,
if the service units are calculated on gross floor area for the new category of
land use type. Should a change of use, redevelopment or modification of an
existing use or building result in a net decrease in gross floor area or
calculated impact fee, no refund or credit for past impact fees paid shall be
made or created.
   (I)   The impact fees administrator shall retain a record of the impact fees
assessment. A copy shall be provided to the applicant on the forms prescribed
by the city. A notice of impact fees assessment for the site shall be recorded
in the appropriate real property title records of the County Clerk; for
subdivisions, this notice shall be included on the final plat.
(Ord._2012-034)
§ 14-19-13 FEE SCHEDULES.
   The following impact fees are hereby imposed upon all new development in the
city, excluding in Mesa del Sol, that occurs on or subsequent to the effective
date of this article, unless fees were assessed under the previous fee schedule
within four years prior to the date of the completed building permit
application. Assessment of impact fees prior to building permit shall be based
on 50% of the maximum fees contained in the reports referenced in §
14-19-6(N) and (O) as shown in the following impact fee schedules. Assessment
and collection at time of building permit shall be based on the following
phase-in schedule:
Prior to January 1, 2014, fees shall be assessed and collected at 20% of the
rates shown in the fee schedules;
From January 1, 2014 through December 31, 2014, fees shall be assessed and
collected at 40% of the rates shown in the fee schedules;
From January 1, 2015 through December 31, 2015, fees shall be assessed and
collected at 60% of the rates shown in the fee schedules;
From January 1, 2016 through December 31, 2016, fees shall be assessed and
collected at 80% of the rates shown in the fee schedules;
From January 1, 2017 onward, fees shall be assessed and collected at 100% of
the rates shown in the fee schedules.
   (A)   Road impact fees.
Land Use Type Unit Fee/Unit
Land Use Type          Unit          Fee/Unit
Single-Family Detached Dwelling      $1,399
Multi-Family           Dwelling      $649
Micro Multi-Family     Dwelling      $325
Mobile Home/RV Park    Space         $451
Hotel/Motel            Room          $928
Commercial             1,000 sq. ft. $1,409
Public/Instit utional  1,000 sq. ft. $885
Industrial/Wa rehouse  1,000 sq. ft. $588
Mini-Warehous e        1,000 sq. ft. $228
 
   (B)   Drainage impact fees.
 
Service Area   Fee per Impervious Acre
Central City   $0
Far Northeast  $5,104
Tijeras        $5,104
Southwest Mesa $5,104
Northwest Mesa $5,104
 
   (C)   Fire impact fees.
Land Use Type Unit Fee/Unit
Land Use Type          Unit          Fee/Unit
Single-Family Detached Dwelling      $133
Multi-Family           Dwelling      $73
Micro Multi-Family     Dwelling      $37
Mobile Home/RV Park    Space         $115
Hotel/Motel            Room          $81
Commercial             1,000 sq. ft. $122
Public/Institutional   1,000 sq. ft. $76
Industrial/Warehouse   1,000 sq. ft. $19
Mini-Warehouse         1,000 sq. ft. $10
 
   (D)   Police impact fees.
Land Use Type Unit Fee/Unit
Land Use Type          Unit          Fee/Unit
Single-Family Detached Dwelling      $58
Multi-Family           Dwelling      $32
Micro Multi-Family     Dwelling      $16
Mobile Home/RV Park    Space         $50
Hotel/Motel            Room          $35
Commercial             1,000 sq. ft. $53
Public/Institutional   1,000 sq. ft. $33
Industrial/Warehouse   1,000 sq. ft. $8
Mini-Warehouse         1,000 sq. ft. $5
 
   (E)   Park impact fees.
 
Housing Type           Unit     Fee/Unit
Single-Family Detached Dwelling $902
Multi-Family           Dwelling $487
Micro Multi-Family     Dwelling $244
Mobile Home/RV Park    Space    $776
 
   (F)   Open space impact fees.
 
Housing Type           Unit     Fee/Unit
Single-Family Detached Dwelling $449
Multi-Family           Dwelling $242
Micro Multi-Family     Dwelling $121
Mobile Home/RV Park    Space    $386
 
   (G)   Trail impact fees.
 
Housing Type           Unit     Fee/Unit
Single-Family Detached Dwelling $49
Multi-Family           Dwelling $27
Micro Multi-Family     Dwelling $14
Mobile Home/RV Park    Space    $42
 
(Ord._2012-034)
§ 14-19-14 USE OF FEES COLLECTED.
   (A)   The funds collected pursuant to §§
14-19-1 et seq. shall be used solely for the purpose of planning, design, land
acquisition, construction, expansion and development of system improvements for
the service area from which the impact fees were collected.
      (1)   Eligible costs include, but are not limited to, the costs of system
capacity and/or system impact studies, planning, design and construction, land
acquisition, land improvement, design and engineering related thereto,
including the cost of constructing or reconstructing system improvements
including, but not limited to, the construction contract price, surveying and
engineering fees, and related land acquisition costs.
      (2)   Impact fees shall not be used for routine and periodic maintenance
expenditures, personnel training and other operating costs.
      (3)   Road impact fees collected on or after the effective date of this
article shall not be expended for right-of-way acquisition or collector road
improvements. The costs of these components have not been included in the
updated road impact fees, and credit will no longer be provided to developers
who make right-of-way dedications or improve collector roads.
      (4)   Trail impact fees collected on or after the effective date of this
article shall not be expended for right-of-way acquisition. The cost of right-
of-way has not been included in the updated trail impact fees, and credit will
no longer be provided to developers who make right-of-way dedications for
trails.
   (B)   Notwithstanding the above, impact fees may also be spent on:
      (1)   Fees paid to independent qualified professionals who are not
employees of the city for preparing and updating the land use assumptions,
impact fee capital improvements plan and impact fee study;
      (2)   Costs and fees charged by qualified professionals who are not
employees of the city for services directly related to the construction of
capital improvements; and
      (3)   Administrative costs associated with §§
14-19-1 et seq. for city employees who are qualified professionals. Such
administrative costs shall not exceed 3% of the total impact fees collected, as
provided by Section 5-8-4 NMSA 1978. The city shall be entitled to expend up to
3% of the impact fees collected annually to offset the permissible
administrative costs associated with the collection and use of such funds.
   (C)   The city may issue bonds, revenue certificates and other obligations
of indebtedness in such manner and subject to such limitations as may be
provided by law in furtherance of the provision of capital improvement
projects. Funds pledged toward retirement of bonds, revenue certificates or
other obligations of indebtedness for such projects may include impact fees and
other city revenues as may be allocated by the City Council. The impact fees
paid pursuant to §§
14-19-1 et seq., however, shall be restricted to use solely and exclusively for
financing directly, or as a pledge against bonds, revenue certificates and
other obligations of indebtedness for the cost of capital improvements as
specified in this section.
(Ord._2012-034)
§ 14-19-15 EXEMPTIONS.
   (A)   The following types of new development shall be exempt from the impact
fees imposed pursuant to §§
14-19-1 et seq.:
      (1)   Any addition or expansion to a building which does not increase the
number of service units attributable to the addition or expansion.
      (2)   Any accessory building for a subordinate or incidental use to a
dwelling unit on residential property, or any expansion of an existing dwelling
unit, which building does not constitute a new dwelling unit.
      (3)   Any reconstruction of a destroyed or partially destroyed building
provided that the destruction of the building occurred other than by willful
razing or demolition. The exemption only applies to the replacement of the
previous facility. A change of land use or increase in dwelling units shall be
addressed through §
14-19-13.
      (4)   Governmental entities, including the city, are not exempt from the
payment of impact fees. However, no fire impact fee shall be assessed or
collected for the construction of a fire capital improvement, and no police
impact fee shall be assessed or collected for the construction of a police
capital improvement.
      (5)   Full or partial waivers of impact fees shall be provided for
affordable housing projects that meet the criteria set forth in the Development
Process Manual.
      (6)   Full or partial waivers of impact fees shall be provided for
projects within metropolitan redevelopment areas that meet the criteria set
forth in the Development Process Manual. Notwithstanding the provisions of the
Development Process Manual, such waivers shall be provided for both non-
residential and residential development within the metropolitan redevelopment
area that conforms to the metropolitan redevelopment area plan and any others
applicable within the metropolitan redevelopment area.
   (B)   Applications for exemptions.
      (1)   An applicant for an exemption from impact fees shall have the
burden of claiming and proving that a development project qualifies for any of
the exemptions listed in this section prior to the issuance of a building
permit. Such exemptions shall be granted or denied in writing by the impact
fees administrator or his/her designee, subject to appeal pursuant to §
14-19-20.
      (2)   An application for an exemption shall be made on forms provided by
the city. An application not filed before the issuance of a building permit
shall be deemed waived.
      (3)   The city may adopt administrative procedures and guidelines to
implement exemptions granted pursuant to this section.
(Ord._2012-034; Am. Ord._2017-025)
§ 14-19-16 INDEPENDENT FEE DETERMINATION.
   An independent determination of impact fees may be made as follows:
   (A)   An applicant for development approval may elect to have an independent
determination of the impact fees due for their development project in
accordance with this section. Any applicant who makes this election shall
prepare and submit to the impact fees administrator an independent fee study
for the development project for which development approval is sought.
   (B)   All independent fee studies shall be prepared for review and submitted
to the impact fees administrator no later than the time of application for a
building permit. Any submission not so made shall be deemed waived.
   (C)   Each independent fee study shall comply in all respects with the
requirements of this section and be organized in a manner that will allow the
impact fees administrator to readily ascertain such compliance.
   (D)   Each independent fee study shall comply with all other written
specifications as may be required by the impact fees administrator from time to
time.
   (E)   The impact fees administrator shall determine the appropriate impact
fees based on the results of the independent fee study and the applicable
impact fee schedule established in §
14-19-13.
   (F)   Any impact fee calculated in accordance with this section and approved
and certified in writing by the impact fees administrator shall be valid for
four years following the certification. Following such period, a new
application for an independent fee study must be made. Any change in the
submitted development plan that in any material way affects said fee
calculation shall void the certification of the fee.
   (G)   An independent fee determination study must address the expected
impact of the development over the projected life of the structures on the
system improvement. Any claim that the use or occupancy of the structures
within the development will be different from normal use or occupancy must be
supported by the appropriate zone change or other appropriate documentation
that will support the claim.
(Ord._2012-034)
§ 14-19-17 ADMINISTRATION OF FEES.
   (A)   Collection of impact fees by the impact fees administrator or his/her
designee. The impact fees administrator or his/her designee shall be
responsible for collection of the impact fees. Upon receipt of impact fees, the
impact fees administrator or his/her designee shall place such funds into
separate accounts as specified in §§
14-19-1 et seq. All such funds shall be deposited in interest-bearing accounts
in a bank authorized to receive deposits of city funds. Interest earned by each
account shall be credited to that account and shall be used solely for the
purposes specified for funds of such account.
   (B)   Establishment and maintenance of records. The impact fees
administrator or his/her designee shall establish and maintain accurate
financial records for the impact fees collected pursuant to §§
14-19-1 et seq. which shall clearly identify for each impact fee payment the
payor of the impact fee, the specific development project for which the fee was
paid, the date of receipt of the impact fee, the amount received, the category
of capital improvement for which the fee was collected, and the applicable
service area. The financial records shall show the disbursement of all impact
fees, including the date and purpose of each disbursement.
   (C)   Annual reports. The impact fees administrator or his/her designee
shall prepare and present to the City Council an annual report describing the
amount of any impact fees collected, encumbered and used during the preceding
year by category of capital improvement and service area.
   (D)   Public inspection. The records of the accounts shall be available for
public inspection and copying at the city during ordinary city business hours.
   (E)   Expenses of administration. An amount not to exceed 3% of the total of
all impact fees collected may be allocated and applied for administration of §§
14-19-1 et seq. for city employees who are qualified professionals.
(Ord._2012-034)
§ 14-19-18 REFUNDS.
   (A)   The current owner of record of property on which an impact fee has
been paid shall be entitled to a refund of such fee if:
      (1)   The current owner of record of the property submits an application
for refund within one year of the event giving rise to the right to claim a
refund.
      (2)   All or a portion of the impact fees paid by the development are not
spent within seven years after the date of payment. The determination of
whether the impact fees paid by a development have been spent shall be
determined using a first in, first out accounting standard.
      (3)   Existing city facilities of the type for which the impact fees have
been paid are available to provide service to the development, but service from
such facilities is not provided by the city.
      (4)   Existing city facilities of the type for which the impact fees have
been paid are not available to the development, and the construction of
improvements that would serve the development are not completed and available
to provide service to the development within seven years from the date of
payment of the impact fees.
   (B)   An application for refund must be submitted to the impact fees
administrator or his/her designee within the time period specified in §
14-19-18(A)(1) on a form provided by the city for such purpose and must contain
information and documentation sufficient to permit the impact fees
administrator to determine whether the refund claimed is proper and, if so, the
amount of such refund.
   (C)   In no event shall an applicant be entitled to a refund for impact fees
assessed and paid to recover the costs of excess capacity in existing system
improvements.
   (D)   Within 30 days from the date of receipt of an application for refund,
the impact fees administrator or his/her designee must provide the applicant,
in writing, with a decision on the refund request including the reasons for the
decision. If a refund is due the applicant, the city shall issue a refund
payment to the applicant within 30 days of the impact fees administrator's
written decision on the refund request.
   (E)   The applicant may appeal the determination of the impact fees
administrator within 30 days of such determination, as provided in §
14-19-20.
   (F)   A refund shall bear interest calculated from the date of collection of
the impact fee to the date of refund at the statutory rate as set forth in
Section 56-8-3 NMSA 1978.
(Ord._2012-034)
§ 14-19-19 CREDITS.
   The city shall grant credit against impact fees imposed pursuant to §§
14-19-1 et seq. under the following circumstances:
   (A)   Credits shall be granted only for the value of any construction of
improvements or contribution or dedication of land, easements or money for
system improvements or system studies listed on the CCIP, made by a developer
or his predecessor in title or interest as a condition of development approval
or pursuant to a development agreement with the city, or for payments made or
to be made pursuant to the terms of any special assessment district (SAD),
Public Improvement District (PID), Subdivision Improvement Agreement (SIA),
Business Improvement District (BID), Metropolitan Redevelopment District (MRD)
or other program by which off-site system improvements are paid or constructed,
provided the projects are listed on the CCIP.
   (B)   Credits shall only be granted for system improvements listed on the
CCIP or system studies listed on the CCIP for the same category of system
improvements and within the same service areas for which impact fees are
imposed pursuant to §§
14-19-1 et seq.
   (C)   Credits shall only be granted for contributions, dedications or
improvements accepted by the city. Cash contributions shall be deemed accepted
when payment is received and accepted by the city. Land or easements shall be
deemed accepted when conveyed or dedicated to and accepted by the city. All
conveyances and dedications of land or easements shall be conveyed to the city
free and clear of all liens, claims and encumbrances. Improvements shall be
deemed accepted when:
      (1)   The construction of the creditable improvement is complete and
accepted by the city;
      (2)   A suitable maintenance and warranty bond or letter of credit is
received and approved by the city; and
      (3)   All design, construction, testing, bonding and acceptance
procedures are verified by the city to be in strict compliance with the current
city standards as shown by a certificate of completion and acceptance issued by
the City Engineer.
   (D)   Notwithstanding division (C) of this section, the city may, by
agreement, grant credits for system improvements which have not been completed
if the applicant for such credits provides the city with acceptable security to
ensure completion of the system improvements in the form of an irrevocable
letter of credit for the benefit of the city in an amount determined by the
impact fees administrator to be equal to 125% of the estimated completion cost
of the system improvements, including land acquisition costs and planning and
design costs. The value of such system improvements for computing credits shall
be their estimated completion cost, based on documentation acceptable to the
city.
   (E)   No credits shall be granted for:
      (1)   System improvements that fail to meet applicable city standards;
      (2)   Project improvements;
      (3)   The construction of local on-site facilities required by zoning,
subdivision, or other city regulation intended to serve only a particular
development;
      (4)   System improvements made in excess of applicable city standards,
unless such system improvements are listed on the CCIP and the higher
construction standard is required as a condition of development approval; or
      (5)   Any study, analysis or report, or portion thereof, required by the
city to determine the project improvements for a development project.
   (F)   Development agreements for system improvements may be negotiated and
entered into between the city and a developer, subject to the following
requirements:
      (1)   A developer may offer to construct, contribute, dedicate or pay the
cost of a capital improvement included as a project in the CCIP;
      (2)   The city may accept such offer on terms satisfactory to the city;
      (3)   The terms of the agreement shall be memorialized in a written
agreement between the city and the developer prior to the issuance of a
building permit;
      (4)   The agreement shall establish the estimated value of the system
improvements, the schedule for initiation and completion of the system
improvements, a requirement that the system improvements be completed to
accepted city standards, and such other terms and conditions as deemed
necessary by the city; and
      (5)   The city must review the system improvements plan, verify costs and
time schedules, determine if the system improvements are eligible system
improvements, determine if the completed improvement meets applicable city
standards, calculate the applicable impact fees otherwise due, determine the
amount of the credits for such system improvements to be applied to the
otherwise applicable impact fees, and determine if excess credits are created.
   (G)   Credits for system improvements shall be applied for as follows:
      (1)   Credits shall be applied for no later than the time of application
for a building permit on forms provided by the city. Credits not applied for
within such time period shall be deemed waived.
      (2)   Credits created pursuant to a development agreement with the city
entered into between the city and a developer from and after the effective date
shall be applied for no later than the time the development agreement is
approved by the city.
   (H)   The value of credits and the calculation of excess credits shall be
determined by the impact fees administrator, in writing, subject to appeal
pursuant to §
14-19-20.
   (I)   The value of credits for system improvements shall be computed as
follows:
      (1)   The value of cash contributions shall be based on the face value of
the cash payment at the time of payment to the city;
      (2)   The value of unimproved land or easements shall be:
         (a)   The fair market value of the land or easement prior to any
increase in value resulting from development approval demonstrated by an
appraisal prepared by an appraiser acceptable to the city; or
         (b)   The acquisition cost of the land or easement to the developer or
his/her predecessor in title or interest demonstrated by documentation
acceptable to the city.
      (3)   The value of system improvements shall be:
         (a)   The fair market value of the completed system improvement at the
time of acceptance by the city demonstrated by an appraisal prepared by an
appraiser acceptable to the city; or
         (b)   The actual construction cost of the completed system
improvement, including planning and design costs, demonstrated by documentation
acceptable to the city.
      (4)   The value of system studies shall be the cost of the study
demonstrated by documentation acceptable to the city.
      (5)   An applicant for credits shall be responsible for providing at his/
her own expense the appraisals, construction and acquisition cost documentation
and other documentation necessary for the valuation of credits by the impact
fees administrator. The city shall not be obligated to grant credits to any
applicant who cannot provide such documentation in such form as the impact fees
administrator may require.
      (6)   In lieu of the appraisals referred to in divisions (I)(2)(a) and
(I)(3)(a) of this section, the impact fees administrator may accept an
appraisal prepared by an appraiser acceptable to the city that demonstrates the
combined fair market value of land, easements or completed improvements at the
time of acceptance by the city, less the increase in land value resulting from
development approval.
      (7)   The impact fees administrator may accept an appraisal that was
prepared contemporaneously with the original contribution, dedication or
construction of a system improvement if he/she determines that such appraisal
is reasonably applicable to the computation of the credit due.
      (8)   The impact fees administrator retains the right to obtain, at the
city's expense, additional engineering and construction cost estimates and/or
property appraisals that may, at the impact fees administrator's option, be
used to determine the value of credits.
   (J)   Credits granted for system improvements and system studies shall be
applied as follows:
      (1)   No credit shall be provided for road or trail right-of-way
dedication after the effective date of this article, since the cost of right-
of-way has not been included in the updated calculation of those fees.
      (2)   Credits shall be applied first to offset the impact fees otherwise
due for the development project for which the credit was granted. If the value
of the credit exceeds the impact fees otherwise due, the excess credits shall
become the property of the applicant, subject to the requirements of §§
14-19-1 et seq.
      (3)   Credits shall only be applied to offset impact fees for projects
within the same service area for which the credit was granted. Credits shall
not be used to offset impact fees for other categories of system improvements
or for other service areas. However, credits can be applied within new service
areas if the improvement generating that credit is within that new service
area.
      (4)   If an applicant is entitled to excess credits, the impact fees
administrator shall issue a certificate of excess credit to the applicant which
denotes the dollar amount of the excess credit, the category of system
improvement and service area to which the excess credit may be applied, the
name of the applicant as the original credit-holder, a description of the
development project for which the credit was granted and the year in which the
credit will become available. The certificate of excess credit shall be signed
by both the impact fees administrator and the credit-holder. The impact fees
administrator shall retain a copy of the certificate of excess credit and the
credit-holder shall be given the original certificate.
      (5)   Excess credits shall be freely transferable in accordance with the
provisions of §§
14-19-1 et seq.
      (6)   The credit-holder of excess credits may do any of the following:
         (a)   Apply all or part of the excess credits to offset impact fees
due for new development for the same category of system improvements within the
same service area for which the credit was granted;
         (b)   Transfer all or part of the certificate of excess credits to
another person who shall become the credit-holder upon written notice to the
impact fees administrator, subject to the same rights and restrictions as the
original credit-holder, in addition to additional restrictions that apply to
transferred excess credits; and/or
         (c)   Request reimbursement from the city for all or part of the
amount of the excess credits from revenue generated by impact fees paid by new
development for system improvements within the same service category and
service area for which the credit was granted.
      (7)   Excess credits shall be subject to the following restrictions:
         (a)   Excess credits shall not accrue interest and shall not be
considered public money, public funds or public credit within the meaning of
any law or ordinance relating to public money, public funds or public credit.
         (b)   Excess credits shall not be reimbursed from the city's general
fund or from any other city funding source other than impact fees paid by new
development for system improvements within the same service category and
service area for which the credit was granted.
         (c)   The city shall, upon request from the credit-holder of excess
credits, after acceptance by the city of the project creating credits, provide
reimbursements for excess credits on a first in, first out basis and shall not
be obligated to provide reimbursements in the event there is no unencumbered
account balance in the city's impact fee account for the appropriate service
category and service area. For purposes of this section, the balance in any
impact fee account shall be deemed to be encumbered if reserved for a capital
improvement project(s) listed and identified on the CCIP for the service
category and service area for that particular account, without regard to
whether impact fees collected for that particular account are sufficient to
complete any approved project. This recognizes that funding from the collection
of impact fees is a cumulative process and generally no single funding event
provides adequate funding for a project. Construction of those projects are not
begun until full funding for a project is secured. In the meantime, impact fees
collected are committed to the completion of projects on the CCIP.
         (d)   Except as otherwise provided in §§
14-19-1 et seq., excess credits shall not constitute a liability of the city,
and the city shall not be obligated to reimburse excess credits.
         (e)   Excess credits transferred from the original credit-holder may
be applied to offset up to 100% of the impact fees otherwise due from new
development for system improvements within the same service category and
service area for which the credit was granted.
         (f)   Excess credits must be applied for, used, sold, or redeemed, if
at all, within 15 years after their issuance. Excess credits issued prior to
adoption of this article shall be permitted to be used, sold or redeemed within
15 years after the adoption of this article.
         (g)   Excess credits shall only be used, sold, or redeemed within the
same service area for which the credit was granted. However, excess credits can
be transferred within new service areas if the improvement generating the
credit is within that new service area. Excess credits shall not be used to
offset impact fees for other categories of system improvements or for other
service areas.
(Ord._2012-034; Am. Ord._2017-023)
§ 14-19-20 ADMINISTRATIVE APPEALS.
   (A)   Notice of appeal; filing; fee. An applicant who chooses to appeal the
assessment or calculation of impact fees; determination of exemptions, credits,
excess credits; or other decision of the impact fees administrator shall submit
a notice of appeal and payment of a nonrefundable processing fee to the impact
fees administrator or his/her designee within 30 days following the date of the
decision or determination of the impact fees administrator giving rise to the
appeal.
   (B)   Bond. If the notice of appeal is accompanied by a bond or other
sufficient surety satisfactory to the City Attorney, in an amount equal to the
impact fee assessed, the City Building Official or his/her duly designated
agent shall issue the building permit.
   (C)   Staying of impact fee collection; requirement. The filing of a notice
of appeal shall not stay the collection of the impact fee unless a bond or
other sufficient surety has been filed.
   (D)   Action by Environmental Planning Commission. Appeals shall be
considered by the Environmental Planning Commission in accordance with the
rules and regulations of that administrative body. Upon hearing such appeals,
the Environmental Planning Commission may affirm, change or modify the decision
of the impact fees administrator or, in lieu thereof, make such other or
additional determination as it deems proper. The decision of the Environmental
Planning Commission upon the appeal shall be in writing, concurred in by a
majority of the members present, which shall forthwith transmit a copy of the
decision to the applicant and to the impact fees administrator.
   (E)   Appeal of Environmental Planning Commission's decision. Either the
applicant or the impact fees administrator may appeal the decision of the
Environmental Planning Commission to the City Council within 30 days following
the decision of the Environmental Planning Commission.
   (F)   Final decision by City Council. The City Council shall consider the
appeal in accordance with the rules and regulations of that governing body. The
decision of the City Council shall, in all instances, be the final
administrative decision and shall be subject to judicial review in accordance
with applicable law.
(Ord._2012-034)
§ 14-19-21 PROMULGATION OF RULES.
   (A)   The Mayor is responsible for the promulgation of rules necessary to
fulfill the intent of §§
14-19-1 et seq. Authorized rules shall be published in the Development Process
Manual and shall have the same effect as the provisions within §§
14-19-1 et seq. The following process shall be observed hereafter in rulemaking
pursuant to §§
14-19-1 et seq.
   (B)   Prior to the adoption, amendment or repeal of any rule, the Mayor
shall, at least 30 days prior to the proposed action:
      (1)   Publish notice of the proposed action in a daily newspaper of
general circulation in the city; and
      (2)   Notify any person or group filing written request, such request to
be renewed yearly to assure notice of proposed action which may affect that
person or group, notification being by mail or other method to the last address
specified by the person or group. A fee may be charged those requesting notice
to cover reasonable city costs.
      (3)   The notice of proposed action shall:
         (a)   State the manner in which data, views or arguments may be
submitted to the Mayor by any interested person;
         (b)   Describe the substance of the proposed action or state the
subjects and issues involved; and
         (c)   Include specific reference to the division of this article under
which the rule is proposed.
   (C)   All interested persons shall be given reasonable opportunity to submit
data, views, and arguments concerning any proposed rule change. If the Mayor
finds that oral presentation is unnecessary or impracticable, the Mayor may
require that the presentation be made in writing. The Mayor shall consider
fully all submissions related to the proposed rule change. All persons making a
presentation, verbally or in writing, shall promptly be given a copy of the
decision, by mail or otherwise.
   (D)   Each rule or set of rules adopted is effective upon recording as an
adopted rule with the City Clerk and promulgated as an amendment of the
Development Process Manual or as specified in the rule itself.
   (E)   Regarding filing of rules and copying:
      (1)   The Mayor shall promptly record with the City Clerk one copy of
each proposed rule, adopted final rule, or amendment or repeal thereof,
including all rules existing on the effective date of §§
14-19-1 et seq.
      (2)   The Mayor shall promptly publish each final rule or amendment, or
repeal thereof, including all rules existing on the effective date of §§
14-19-1 et seq., as amendments to the Development Process Manual.
      (3)   The City Clerk shall maintain and update as necessary an index of
adopted rules on file in the Clerk's office and shall make copies of the rules
available to the public. The City Clerk shall allow the public to make copies
of rules recorded in the Clerk's office. A reasonable fee may be charged.
(Ord._2012-034)
§ 14-19-22 EFFECT OF IMPACT FEE ON ZONING AND SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS.
   Sections
14-19-1 et seq. shall not affect, in any manner, the permissible use of
property, density of development, design and improvement standards and
requirements, or any other aspect of the development of land or provision of
capital improvements subject to the zoning and subdivision regulations of the
city, which shall be operative and remain in full force and effect without
limitation with respect to all such development.
(Ord._2012-034)
§ 14-19-23 IMPACT FEE AS ADDITIONAL AND SUPPLEMENTAL REQUIREMENT TO CITY
REGULATIONS.
   The impact fee is additional and supplemental to, and not in substitution
of, any non-financial requirements imposed by the city on the development of
land or the issuance of building permits. Payment of the impact fee shall not
waive or otherwise alter compliance with zoning or other city requirements. It
is intended to be consistent with and to further the objectives and policies of
the Comprehensive Plan and other city policies, ordinances and resolutions by
which the city seeks to ensure the provision of public facilities in
conjunction with the development of land.
(Ord._2012-034)
§ 14-19-24 REVIEW AND AMENDMENT.
   The advisory committee shall review, update and propose any amendments to
the land use assumptions and the impact fees at least every five years from the
effective date. The advisory committee shall be consulted during such review
and file its written comments concerning any amendments with the City Council.
The City Council shall take action on any proposed amendments consistent with
the provisions of the Development Fees Act.
(Ord._2012-034)
§ 14-19-98 ENFORCEMENT.
   The enforcement of §§
14-19-1 et seq. will be the responsibility of the impact fees administrator and
such city personnel as he or she may designate from time to time.
(Ord._2012-034)
§ 14-19-99 PENALTY.
   The city shall have the power to sue in law or equity for relief in civil
court to enforce §§
14-19-1 et seq. including, but not limited to, injunctive relief to enjoin and
restrain any person from violating the provisions of §§
14-19-1 et seq. and to recover such damages as may be incurred by the
implementation of specific corrective actions. Knowingly furnishing false
information to the city on any matter relating to the administration of §§
14-19-1 et seq. shall constitute an actionable violation. The impact fees
administrator may revoke or withhold the issuance of any building permit or
other development permits if the provisions of §§
14-19-1 et seq. have been violated by the owner or his/her assigns. Subject to
applicable law, the city shall have the right to inspect the lands affected by
§§
14-19-1 et seq. and shall have the right to issue cease and desist orders, stop
work orders and other appropriate citations for violations.
(Ord._2012-034)
APPENDIX: IMPACT FEES MAPS
      1.   Drainage Service Areas
      2.   Parks Service Areas
      1.   Drainage Service Areas
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/c995cf98feccc19c1a02ee6b0fc90e468d3c8452/
IMAGES/0-0-0-13331.jpg]
 
      2.   Parks Service Area
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/c995cf98feccc19c1a02ee6b0fc90e468d3c8452/
IMAGES/0-0-0-13333.jpg]
 
ARTICLE 20: DILAPIDATED COMMERCIAL BUILDINGS AND PROPERTIES
Section
   
14-20-1   Short title
   
14-20-2   Intent and purposes
   
14-20-3   Definitions
   
14-20-4   Dilapidated commercial buildings prohibited
   
14-20-5   Compliance and remediation
   
14-20-6   Enforcement and penalties
   
14-20-7   Exemptions
   
14-20-8   Appeal
   
14-20-9   Procedures for conduct of hearing appeals
§ 14-20-1 SHORT TITLE.
   Article 14-20 ROA 1994 shall be known and cited as the "Dilapidated
Commercial Buildings and Properties Ordinance".
(Ord._2017-011; Am. Ord._2020-030)
§ 14-20-2 INTENT AND PURPOSES.
   The intent of this
Article 14-20 is to provide minimum aesthetic standards and maintenance
standards for dilapidated nonresidential structures and properties, to prevent
such structures and properties from contributing to blight and negatively
impacting surrounding property values and redevelopment or economic development
efforts.
(Ord._2017-011; Am. Ord._2020-030)
§ 14-20-3 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this article, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   DILAPIDATED COMMERCIAL BUILDING OR PROPERTY. Any non-residential building or
property which exhibits one or more characteristic of dilapidation, including
but not limited to:
      (1)   Overgrowth of fugitive plant materials including grasses or
invasive trees; or landscaping that is otherwise non-compliant with the
requirements of the zoning code, § 14-16-3-10(D)(3) and the Albuquerque Weed
and Anti-Litter Ordinance, §§ 9-8-1 et seq. ROA 1994;
      (2)   Unsecure, loose, or broken building façades, treatments, fixtures,
signs (including freestanding signs) or other façade features affecting more
than 15% of the façade or sign area;
      (3)   Peeling or flaking paint, and any other significant deterioration
of building surface treatments affecting more than 15% of the façade;
      (4)   Broken or uncovered glass within any window or door;
      (5)   Unsecured, loose, or broken features affecting more than 15% of any
sign (including freestanding signs);
      (6)   Broken windows or building entrances, or any other characteristics
demonstrating a lack of security or access control to the property, building or
buildings at the site;
      (7)   Unabated vandalism or graffiti;
      (8)   Outdoor lighting that is no longer compliant with the minimum
requirements of the zoning code;
      (9)   Broken pavement, interior sidewalks or pedestrian connections;
unsealed cracks exceeding two feet in length and one inch in width, or potholes
exceeding one square foot in area within off-street parking areas; or
      (10)   Unabated trespass, or police calls for service that are unrelated
to any lawful use or business establishment at the location.
   RESPONSIBLE PARTY. The owner(s) of any building or property subject to this
article, or any other party responsible for such building or property by way
lawful tenancy, management, agency, or otherwise.
(Ord._2017-011; Am. Ord._2020-030)
§ 14-20-4 DILAPIDATED COMMERCIAL BUILDINGS PROHIBITED.
   No responsible party shall permit any building or property to become or
remain a dilapidated commercial building or property within the area of the
city covered by this article.
(Ord._2017-011; Am. Ord._2020-030)
§ 14-20-5 COMPLIANCE AND REMEDIATION.
   (A)   Initial focus. The Planning Department shall identify dilapidated
buildings or properties within the area of the city covered by this article and
perform an inspection to itemize the conditions that constitute a dilapidated
commercial building or property as proscribed by this article. Initial
inspections should be prioritized to address the largest and/or most
dilapidated buildings or properties first.
   (B)   Remediation. The responsible party shall remediate or abate the
conditions identified in an initial written notice within 60 days (such 60-day
period hereafter shall be referred to as "compliance period"). This compliance
period may be reduced or eliminated by the Planning Department should it appear
to be a matter of public necessity for health and safety reasons, and the
Department is authorized to take immediate action to abate such reasons.
   (C)   If it is not possible, or if the responsible party declines or is
unsuccessful in fully remediating or abating the conditions creating a
dilapidated commercial building or property within the compliance period set
forth above, the responsible party shall:
      (1)   Register the building or property with the Planning Department
through forms provided by the Department within 20 days of expiration of the
compliance period. The registration form shall at a minimum require a
description of the location and address of the building, and the name, street
address and telephone number of the responsible party. The Planning Department
shall collect a registration fee of $500 for each initial registration, but the
Planning Director may reduce or waive this fee if it is determined that
substantial efforts have been made to bring the property into compliance; and
      (2)   Provide a written plan for how the property will be brought into
compliance with this article within a 90 day period, or longer if deemed
appropriate by the Planning Director or designee. The Planning Department shall
make property owners aware of incentives and fee reductions (e.g., impact fee
waivers for redevelopment, façade improvement programs) that are enabled in
Metropolitan Redevelopment Areas under the Metropolitan Redevelopment Act, if
applicable.
   (D)   The Planning Department shall reinitiate the process prescribed by
this section as necessary at any time or move directly to the enforcement and
penalties procedures described in §
14-20-6, or otherwise take enforcement action as authorized by any section of
the Zoning Code.
(Ord._2017-011; Am. Ord._2020-030)
§ 14-20-6 ENFORCEMENT AND PENALTIES.
   (A)   If the building or property is not successfully remediated or made
compliant pursuant to the process set forth in §
14-20-5 above, the responsible party is subject to:
      (1)   The penalty provisions set forth in §
1-1-99 of this code of ordinances; each day of violation is considered a
separate offense; and
      (2)   Instead of or in addition to the penalty provision set forth in §
1-1-99, the city, acting through the City Attorney, is hereby authorized to
file an action in a court of competent jurisdiction as a means of compelling
compliance with this article, including compliance with those sections cross
referenced within the Zoning Code, to:
         (a)   Enjoin any person from violating or threatening to violate the
terms, conditions and restrictions of this article;
         (b)   Collect civil assessments against the property of $500 per day
for every day the property remains or remained in violation of this section
after the expiration of the compliance period or any extensions granted by the
Planning Department identified in the written notice(s) sent by the Department;
and
         (c)   Recover damages from the owner of a building or property in an
amount of money adequate for the city to undertake any construction
remediation, cleanup, or other activity necessary to bring about compliance
with this article.
   (B)   In addition to judicial remedies, any expenditure by the city to bring
the building or property into compliance, or any damages or assessments are
recoverable through the imposition of a municipal lien on the parcel under NMSA
1978, §§ 3-36-1 to 3-36-5. To the extent that monetary penalties are recovered
as a result of enforcement under this section, any funds so recovered shall be
used exclusively for the purpose of funding enforcement activities under this
section.
(Ord._2017-011; Am. Ord._2020-030)
§ 14-20-7 EXEMPTIONS.
   Buildings or properties which are on the National Register of Historic
Places, have been designated as Contributing Properties to a Historic District
on the National Register of Historic Places, or have been designated by the
city as city landmarks are exempt from the requirements of this article.
(Ord._2017-011; Am. Ord._2020-030)
§ 14-20-8 APPEAL.
   (A)   General.
      (1)   Form of appeal.
         (a)   Any person entitled to appeal under this code may do so by
filing at the Office of the City Clerk a written appeal containing:
            1.   The names of all appellants participating In the appeal.
            2.   A brief statement setting forth the legal interest of each of
the appellants in the building or the land involved in the appeal.
            3.   A brief statement in ordinary and concise language of that
specific order or action protested along with a copy of the order, notice, or
action together with any material facts claimed to support the contentions of
the appellant.
            4.   A brief statement in ordinary and concise language of the
relief sought and the reasons why it is claimed the protested order or action
should be reversed, modified or otherwise set aside.
            5.   The signatures of all parties named as appellants and their
official mailing addresses.
            6.   The verification, by declaration under penalty of perjury, of
at least one appellant as to the truth of the matters stated in the appeal.
         (b)   The appeal shall be filed prior to the effective date of the
order.
      (2)   Processing of appeal. Upon receipt of any appeal filed pursuant to
this section, the City Clerk or their staff shall file and stamp the appeal
then deliver by mail or electronic means a copy of it to the party responsible
for issuing the order, notice, or action under appeal as well as a copy to the
Office of the City Attorney.
      (3)   Scheduling and noticing appeal for hearing. The Office of
Administrative Hearings shall schedule the hearing pursuant to the provisions
of the IHO Ordinance, ROA 1994,
Chapter 2, Article 7, Part 8. 
   (B)   Effect of failure to appeal. Failure of any person to file an appeal
in accordance with the provisions herein shall constitute a waiver of his or
her right to an administrative hearing and adjudication of the notice and order
or to any portion thereof.
   (C)   Scope of hearing appeal. Only those matters or issues specifically
raised by the appellant shall be considered in the hearing of the appeal.
   (D)   Staying of order under appeal. Enforcement of any notice and order of
the Department issued under this code shall be stayed during the pendency of an
appeal therefrom which is properly and timely filed.
(Ord._2020-030; Am. Ord._2023-015)
§ 14-20-9 PROCEDURES FOR CONDUCT OF HEARING APPEALS.
   Procedures regarding the hearing shall be the procedures outlined in the IHO
Ordinance, ROA 1994,
Chapter 2, Article 7, Part 8.
(Ord._2020-030; Am. Ord._2023-015)
ARTICLE 21: AFFORDABLE HOUSING
Section
   
14-21-1   Short title
   
14-21-2   Findings
   
14-21-3   Purpose
   
14-21-4   General definitions
   
14-21-5   Authorization of city contributions
   
14-21-6   General requirements
   
14-21-7   Requirements and rules
   
14-21-8   Discrimination prohibited
§ 14-21-1 SHORT TITLE.
   Sections
14-1-1 through
14-21-8 of this article may be cited as the Affordable Housing Implementing
Ordinance.
(Ord._2019-015)
§ 14-21-2 FINDINGS.
   (A)   Whereas:
      (1)   This article is established pursuant to the Mortgage Finance
Authority Act, NMSA 1978 §§ 58-18-1 et seq. (MFA Act) and the Affordable
Housing Act, NMSA 1978, §§ 6-27-1 et seq.; and
      (2)   This article is adopted to implement the city's affordable housing
programs in accordance with the New Mexico Constitution, Article IX § 14, the
Affordable Housing Act, NMSA 1978, §§ 6-27-1 et seq. and the Act Rules Sections
1 and 2; and
      (3)   The city is subject to the New Mexico Affordable Housing Act which
identifies specific requirements to ensure governmental entities donate
resources to qualifying grantees and to ensure long-term housing affordability;
and
      (4)   The city has developed an Affordable Housing Plan (AHP) to comply
with the Act Rules; and
      (5)   The Mortgage Finance Authority (MFA), the entity charged by the
State of New Mexico with ensuring compliance with the Act, has determined the
city's current Affordable Housing General Oversight Ordinance (Ordinance) is
deficient of needed components; and
      (6)   Staff, in conjunction with the MFA, has developed and updated the
Ordinance for incorporation.
   (B)   The Affordable Housing Act, NMSA 1978 §§ 6-27-1 et seq. (the "Act")
implements the provisions of Subsections E and F of §14 of Article 9 of the New
Mexico Constitution; and
   (C)   The New Mexico Mortgage Finance Authority ("MFA") has reviewed and
approved of the form and terms of this article prior to final adoption hereof.
(Ord._2019-015)
§ 14-21-3 PURPOSE.
   (A)   To establish procedures to ensure that city housing assistance to
grantees are qualifying grantees who meet the requirements of the ordinance,
and rules promulgated pursuant to such legislation both at the time of the
award and throughout the term of any grant or loan under the program. HOUSING
ASSISTANCE GRANT shall mean the donation, provision or payment by the city of:
      (1)   Land for construction of an affordable housing project;
      (2)   An existing building for conversion, renovation, or demolition and
reconstruction of affordable housing;
      (3)   The costs of financing infrastructure necessary to support
affordable housing; or
      (4)   The costs of acquisition, development, construction, financing, and
operation or owning affordable housing; and
   (B)   To require long-term affordability of the city's affordable housing
projects so that a project cannot be sold shortly after completion and taken
out of the affordable housing market to ensure a quick profit for the
qualifying grantee; and
   (C)   To require the city to enter into a contract with the qualifying
grantee consistent with the Act, which contract shall include remedies and
default provisions in the event of the unsatisfactory performance by the
qualifying grantee and which contract shall be subject to the review of the MFA
in its discretion; and
   (D)   To require that a grant or loan for the project must impose a
contractual obligation on the qualifying grantee that the affordable housing
units in the project be occupied by persons of low or moderate income; and
   (E)   To provide for adequate security against the loss of public funds or
property in the event that the qualifying grantee abandons or otherwise fails
to complete the project; and
   (F)   To require review and approval of the housing plan project budget by
the city before any expenditure of grant funds or transfer of granted property;
and
   (G)   To require that a condition of grant or loan approval be proof of
compliance with all applicable state and local laws, rules, and ordinances; and
   (H)   To provide definitions for "low-income and moderate- income" and
setting out requirements for the verification of income levels; and
   (I)   To provide the city with a valid affordable housing program; and
   (J)   To require that the city have an MFA approved affordable housing plan
or MFA approved housing elements contained in a valid plan prior to authorizing
a housing assistance grant; and
   (K)   To require the Family and Community Services Department to promulgate
and follow Administrative Requirements and Rules and Regulations to implement
this article, including but not limited to further describing application
requirements, procedures, and evaluations.
(Ord._2019-015)
§ 14-21-4 GENERAL DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this article, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   ACT. The Affordable Housing Act, NMSA 1978, §§ 6-27-1 et seq.
   ADMINISTRATIVE REQUIREMENTS. The City of Albuquerque Family and Community
Services Department's Administrative Requirements and Social Services Contracts
Procurement Rules and Regulations, promulgated and approved pursuant to the
City of Albuquerque Purchasing Ordinance, as published now and as amended in
the future.
   AFFORDABLE. Consistent with minimum rent and/or income limitations set forth
in the MFA Act, and in guidelines established by the MFA.
   AFFORDABLE HOUSING. Residential housing primarily for persons or households
of low or moderate income.
   AFFORDABLE HOUSING FUNDS. Any or all funds awarded or to be awarded, loaned
or otherwise distributed under this article or the Act.
   AFFORDABLE HOUSING PLAN or PLAN. A plan pursuant to the Affordable Housing
Program that contemplates one or more affordable housing projects, which may be
developed in one or more phases.
   AFFORDABLE HOUSING PROGRAM or PROGRAM. Any programs that the city and/or MFA
establishes pursuant to the Act and based on the approved city housing plan/
housing elements.
   AFFORDABLE HOUSING PROJECT or PROJECT. Any work or undertaking, whether new
construction, acquisition of existing residential housing, remodeling,
improvement, rehabilitation or conversion, which may be undertaken in one or
more phases, as part of an affordable housing plan, as approved by the city
and/or the MFA for the primary purposes as allowed by the Act.
   AFFORDABILITY PERIOD. For homebuyer and rental projects, the length of the
affordability period depends on the amount of the investment in the property
and the nature of the activity funded. The table below provides the
affordability periods:
 
Activity Investment per Unit Minimum Length of the Affordability Period
Homeownership and rental housing acquisition and/or rehabilitation
Less Than $15,000            not less than 5 years
$15,000 -$40,000             not less than 10 years
More than $40,000            not less than15 years
More than $100,000           not less than 20 years
 
   APPLICANT. An individual; regional or public housing authority; a for-profit
organization, including a corporation, limited liability company, partnership,
joint venture, syndicate or association or a nonprofit organization meeting the
appropriate criteria of the city.
   BUILDING. A structure capable of being renovated or converted into
affordable housing or a structure that is to be demolished and is located on
land donated for use in connection with an affordable housing project.
   CITY. The City of Albuquerque, New Mexico, a unit of local government under
the Constitution and laws of the State of New Mexico.
   CONGREGATE HOUSING FACILITY. Residential housing designed for occupancy by
more than five persons of low or moderate income living independently of each
other. The facility may contain group dining, recreational, health care or
other communal living facilities. Each unit in a congregate housing facility
shall contain at least its own living, sleeping, and bathing facilities.
   DEPARTMENT. The Family and Community Services Department, or its successor
department, as determined by the Mayor.
   FEDERAL GOVERNMENT. The United States of America and any agency or
instrumentality corporate or otherwise of the United States of America.
   HOUSEHOLD. One or more persons occupying a housing unit.
   HOUSING ASSISTANCE GRANT. The donation, provision, or payment by the city
of:
      (1)   Land upon which the affordable housing will be constructed; or
      (2)   An existing building that will be renovated, converted, or
demolished and reconstructed as affordable housing; or
      (3)   The costs of acquisition, development, construction, financing, and
operating or owning affordable housing; or
      (4)   The costs of financing of infrastructure necessary to support
affordable housing.
   HUD. The United States Department of Housing and Urban Development.
   INFRASTRUCTURE.  Infrastructure improvements and infrastructure purposes.
   INFRASTRUCTURE IMPROVEMENT shall include, but not be limited to:
      (1)   Sanitary sewage systems, including collection, transport, storage,
treatment, dispersal, effluent use and discharge;
      (2)   Drainage and flood control systems;
      (3)   Water systems for domestic purposes including production,
collection, storage, treatment, transport, delivery, connections, and
dispersal;
      (4)   Areas for motor vehicle use for travel, ingress, egress, and
parking;
      (5)   Trails and areas for pedestrian, equestrian, bicycle, or other non-
motor vehicle use for travel, ingress, egress, and parking;
      (6)   Park, recreational facilities, and open space areas for the use of
residents for entertainment, assembly, and recreation;
      (7)   Landscaping, including earthwork, structures, plants, trees and
related weather delivery systems;
      (8)   Electrical transmission and distribution facilities;
      (9)   Natural gas distribution facilities;
      (10)   Lighting systems;
      (11)   Cable or other telecommunications lines and related equipment;
      (12)   Traffic control systems and devices, including signals, controls,
markings, and signs;
      (13)   Inspection, construction management, and related costs in
connection with the furnishing of the items listed in this definition; and
      (14)   Heating, air conditioning, and weatherization facilities, systems
or services, and energy efficiency improvements that are affixed to real
property.
   INFRASTRUCTURE PURPOSE.
      (1)   Planning, design, engineering, construction, acquisition, or
installation of infrastructure, including the costs of applications, impact
fees and other fees, permits, and permits and approvals related to the
construction, acquisition, or installation of the infrastructure;
      (2)   Acquiring, converting, renovating, or improving existing facilities
for infrastructure, including facilities owned, leased, or installed by the
owner;
      (3)   Acquiring interests in real property or water rights for
infrastructure, including interests of the owner; and
      (4)   Incurring expenses incident to and reasonably necessary to carry
out the purposes specified in this definition.
   MFA. The New Mexico Mortgage Finance Authority.
   MFA ACT. The Mortgage Finance Authority Act, enacted as Chapter 303 of the
Laws of 1975 of the State of New Mexico, as amended (NMSA 1978, § 58-18-
1 through § 58-18-27).
   MFA RULES. The New Mexico Mortgage Finance Authority Affordable Housing Act
Rules promulgated pursuant to § 6-27-8 NMSA 1978 of the Act.
   PERSONS OF LOW TO MODERATE INCOME. One or more persons or a family with a
total gross annual income for the household that does not exceed 80% of the
area median income adjusted for family size for households within the
Albuquerque Metropolitan Statistical Area (MSA) as determined by HUD on an
annual basis, and with the following conditions.
      (1)   PERSONS OF LOW INCOME shall mean persons in households with annual
gross incomes below 60% of the area median income for Albuquerque, as approved
and published each year by MFA and verified by the city.
      (2)   PERSONS OF MODERATE INCOME shall mean persons in households with
annual gross incomes between 60% and 80% of area median income for Albuquerque
as approved and published each year by MFA and verified by the city.
   POLICIES AND PROCEDURES. Policies and procedures of the MFA, including but
not limited to mortgage loan purchasing, selling, servicing and reservation
procedures, which the MFA may update and revise from time to time as the MFA
deems appropriate.
   QUALIFYING GRANTEE.
      (1)   An individual who is qualified to receive assistance pursuant to
the Act and is processed and approved by the city in accordance with the
Administrative Requirements and the Rules and Regulations; and
      (2)   A governmental housing agency, regional housing authority,
corporation, limited liability company, partnership, joint venture, syndicate,
association or nonprofit organization that is:
         (a)   Organized under the state or local laws and can provide proof of
such organization; and
         (b)   If a nonprofit, has no part of its earnings inuring to the
benefit of any member, founder, contributor, or individual; and
         (c)   Is approved by the city in accordance with the Administrative
Requirements and the Rules and Regulations.
   RECERTIFICATION. The recertification of applicants and/or qualifying
grantees participating in any affordable housing programs or in any programs
under the Act as determined necessary from time to time by the city and/or the
MFA.
   REHABILITATION. The substantial renovation or reconstruction of an existing
single-family residence or a "Multi-Family Housing Project", which complies
with requirements established by the city. REHABILITATION shall not include
routine or ordinary repairs, improvements or maintenance, such as interior
decorating, remodeling or exterior painting, except in conjunction with other
substantial renovation or reconstruction.
   RESIDENTIAL HOUSING. Any building, structure or portion thereof that is
primarily occupied, or designed or intended primarily for occupancy, as a
residence by one or more households and any real property that is offered for
sale or lease for the construction or location thereon of such a building,
structure or portion thereof. RESIDENTIAL HOUSING includes congregate housing,
manufactured homes and housing intended to provide or providing transitional or
temporary housing for homeless persons.
   RESIDENTIAL USE. The structure or the portion of the structure to benefit
from the affordable housing funds or housing assistance grant is designed
primarily for use as the principal residence of the occupant or occupants and
shall exclude vacation or recreational homes.
   RFP. Any request for proposal or request for qualifications made by the
city.
   RULES AND REGULATIONS. The City of Albuquerque Family and Community Services
Department Social Services Contracts Procurement Rules and Regulations
promulgated and approved pursuant to the City of Albuquerque Purchasing
Ordinance, Chapter 5, Article 5 ROA1994, as published now and as amended in the
future.
   STATE. The State of New Mexico.
(Ord._2019-015)
§ 14-21-5 AUTHORIZATION OF CITY CONTRIBUTIONS.
   (A)   The city may make housing assistance grants, improve infrastructure,
or provide affordable housing funds, by City Council resolution, for affordable
housing projects.
   (B)   This article is created and shall be administered in accordance with
the Act and in accordance with the MFA Rules. All affordable housing
contributions authorized by this article will be in compliance with the Act and
Plan and any recipients of all such contributions will comply with the
ordinance, Administrative Requirements, and Rules and Regulations.
(Ord._2019-015)
§ 14-21-6 GENERAL REQUIREMENTS.
   The following requirements shall apply to all housing assistance grants and/
or affordable housing funds awarded, loaned or otherwise distributed by the
city to a qualifying grantee under the article.
   (A)   Procurement. The city, in its discretion, shall procure services
according to its Rules and Regulations or shall otherwise identify a qualifying
grantee for the use of any affordable housing funds or housing assistance
grants to be awarded, loaned, donated or otherwise distributed under the Act.
   (B)   Applicant eligibility. The following applicants are eligible under the
Act to apply for affordable housing fund or a housing assistance grant to
provide housing or related services to persons of low or moderate income in the
community.
      (1)   All individuals who are qualified to receive assistance pursuant to
this article, the Administrative Requirements and the Rules and Regulations;
      (2)   An individual, regional or public housing authority, a for-profit
organization, including a corporation, limited liability company, partnership,
joint venture, syndicate or association, or a nonprofit organization meeting
the appropriate criteria of the city.
         (a)   Have a functioning accounting system that is operated in
accordance with generally accepted accounting principles or has a designated
entity that will maintain such an accounting system consistent with generally
accepted accounting principles; and
         (b)   Have among its purposes significant activities related to
providing housing or services to persons or households of low or moderate
income; and
         (c)   Have no significant outstanding or unresolved monitoring finding
from the city, or its most recent independent financial audit, or if it has any
such findings, it has a certified letter from the city, the MFA, or auditor
stating that the findings are in the process of being resolved; and
         (d)   The names of all qualifying grantees, certified or recertified,
shall be submitted annually to MFA for review and approval.
   (C)   Application. All applicants wishing to apply for a housing assistance
grant or an award of affordable housing funds shall follow the city's
application process, as more specifically set forth in Chapter 6 of the Rules
and Regulations.
   (D)   Additional requirements. The selected qualifying grantee shall enter
into one or more contracts with the city, which contract(s) shall be consistent
with and further the purposes of this article. At a minimum, such contracts
shall comply with the terms set forth in Chapter 8 of the Rules and
Regulations.
   (E)   The affordable housing plan is the consolidated planning and needs
assessment as it occurs every five years that serves as the comprehensive
housing affordability strategy and community development plan in compliance
with HUD regulations at 24 CFR Part 91,The Affordable Housing Act and Rules and
this article. All housing assistance grants or awards of affordable housing
funds shall be in compliance with the Affordable Housing Act and Rules.
   (F)   Affordable housing requirements. All affordable housing funds or
housing assistance grants awarded under the Act shall be used by qualifying
grantees for the benefit of persons of low or moderate income subject to the
provisions of this article, and with particular regard to their housing related
needs.
      (1)   Single family property. Qualifying grantees shall agree that they
shall maintain any single-family property which has been acquired,
rehabilitated, converted, leased, repaired, constructed, or which property has
otherwise benefited from affordable housing fund, including but not limited to
any loans which have been repaid with affordable housing funds and which loans
previously were secured by such properties, as affordable housing for so long
as any or all of the affordable housing funds which have been awarded, loaned,
or otherwise conveyed to the qualifying grantee are unpaid and outstanding, or
the affordability period, whichever is longer.
      (2)   Single apartment within a multi-family property. Qualifying
grantees shall agree that, if any single apartments are to be rehabilitated,
converted, leased, repaired, constructed, or otherwise are to benefit from the
affordable housing fund, those apartments shall be leased to persons of low or
moderate income at the time of any such award. Qualifying grantees also shall
agree that the persons of low or moderate income who are tenants of those
apartments shall be allowed to remain tenants for so long as there are no
incurred defaults by those tenants under their respective leases and provided
that there is no just cause for the landlord to terminate any lease agreement
with those tenants.
      (3)   Multi-family property; multiple apartments. Qualifying grantees
shall agree that, if multiple apartments or an entire multi-family property are
to be acquired, rehabilitated, converted, leased, repaired, constructed, or
otherwise are to benefit from affordable housing funds, including but not
limited to any loans which have been repaid with affordable housing funds and
which loans previously were secured by such properties, such properties shall
be maintained as affordable housing for so long as any or all of the affordable
housing funds which have been awarded, loaned or otherwise conveyed to the
qualifying grantee are unpaid and outstanding, of the affordability period,
whichever is longer. Qualifying grantees also shall agree that the persons of
low or moderate income who are tenants of those apartments shall be allowed to
remain tenants for so long as there are no incurred defaults by those tenants
under their respective leases and provided that there is no just cause for the
landlord to terminate any lease agreement with those tenants.
      (4)   Nonresidential property. Qualifying grantees shall agree that they
shall maintain any non-residential property which has been acquired,
rehabilitated, converted, leased, repaired, constructed, or which property has
otherwise benefited from affordable housing funds, including but not limited to
any loans which have been repaid with affordable housing funds and which loans
previously were secured by such properties, as the facility which provides
housing related services to persons of low to moderate income for so long as
any or all of the affordable housing funds which have been awarded, loaned, or
otherwise conveyed to the qualifying grantee are unpaid and outstanding of the
affordability period, whichever is longer.
      (5)   Housing assistance grant affordability requirements. Qualifying
grantees shall agree that they shall maintain any land or building received as
a housing assistance grant either as a single-family or multi-family affordable
housing or as a facility which provides housing related services to persons of
low or moderate income for the duration of the affordability period. In
calculating the affordability period for housing assistance grants of either
land or buildings, the fair market value of the land or buildings or the costs
of infrastructure at the time of the donation by the state or the city shall
apply.
      (6)   Affordability period. The city, in its discretion, may increase the
affordability period in any contract, note, mortgage, loan agreement, land use
restriction agreement, restrictive covenant agreements, and/or any other
agreement which the city may enter into with any qualifying grantee or
beneficiary of the affordable housing funds or of the housing assistance grant
with the Affordable Housing Act and Rules.
   (G)   Consent to jurisdiction. Each qualifying grantee shall consent to the
jurisdiction of the courts of the State of New Mexico over any proceeding to
enforce compliance with the terms of the Act, the Rules and this article and
any agreement between the qualifying grantee and the city.
   (H)   Recertification procedures.
      (1)   The qualifying grantee must meet the requirements of the Act, the
Rules and this article both at the time of any award and throughout the term of
any grant and contract related thereto.
      (2)   The city may establish procedures for recertifying qualifying
grantees from time to time compliance with the Affordable Housing Act and
Rules.
      (3)   Qualifying grantees that fail to satisfy the requirements for
recertification shall cease to be eligible and shall be denied further
participation in affordable housing programs until the requirements of the city
and the MFA are satisfied.
      (4)   Compliance with the law. The qualifying grantee shall provide the
city with any certifications or other proof that it may require in order for
the city and the MFA to confirm that the qualifying grantee and the qualifying
grantee's proposed project are in compliance with all applicable federal, state
and local laws, rules and ordinances.
   (I)   Extension of affordable housing programs. The city shall have the
power to create variations or extensions of affordable housing programs, or
additional programs that comply with the Affordable Housing Act and the Rules.
(Ord._2019-015)
§ 14-21-7 REQUIREMENTS AND RULES.
   The Department has promulgated administrative requirements and rules and
regulations further describing how the plan and program will be administered,
and how procurements will be conducted. Copies of the current administrative
requirements and rules and regulations are adopted with this article and may be
amended from time to time by the Department. Amendments to the administrative
requirements, rules and regulations, or this article shall be submitted to MFA
for review prior to adoption.
(Ord._2019-015)
§ 14-21-8 DISCRIMINATION PROHIBITED.
   The development, construction, occupancy and operation of an affordable
housing program or an affordable housing project financed or assisted under the
Act shall be undertaken in a manner consistent with principles of non-
discrimination and equal opportunity, and the city shall require compliance by
all qualifying grantees with all applicable federal and state and city laws and
regulations relating to affirmative action, non-discrimination and equal
opportunity.
(Ord._2019-015)
ARTICLE 22: ALBUQUERQUE TOURISM MARKETING DISTRICT
Section
   
14-22-1   Establishment of district
   
14-22-2   Business improvement benefit fee
§ 14-22-1 ESTABLISHMENT OF DISTRICT.
   A business improvement district, hereafter referred to as the Albuquerque
Tourism Marketing District ("ATMD"), is established and is hereby authorized to
be created under the following terms and conditions:
   (A)   The initial period of existence for the ATMD shall be for a five year
period, from July 1, 2022, or as soon as possible thereafter, and end five
years from its start date. Prior to the expiration of the ATMD's initial term,
the City Council shall review the ATMD to determine whether it should remain in
existence and be renewed. If a majority of the City Council decides that the
purpose for which the ATMD was created has been served and that it is in the
best interest for the ATMD, the City Council shall terminate the ATMD's status
by ordinance or resolution and record the ordinance or resolution with the
municipal clerk. If the City Council determines that the ATMD should remain in
existence, it may renew the ATMD for an additional five year term.
   (B)   The ATMD District Plan, dated March 2, 2022, prepared by the Planning
Group is hereby adopted and approved.
   (C)   The ATMD shall provide additional tourism promotion services and
improvements that are designed and intended to increase overnight visitation to
ATMD lodging businesses and the city. The additional tourism promotion services
and improvements to be provided are sales, marketing, and communications;
visitor services enhancements; destination product development/partner grants;
and related administration programs, as described in Section IV of the ATMD
District Plan. The ATMD District Plan is attached to Ord. 2022-015 as "Exhibit
B".
   (D)   The additional tourism promotion services and improvements to be
provided by the ATMD are intended and designed to increase overnight visitation
to and room sales at lodging businesses within the boundaries of the ATMD. The
businesses to be assessed a business improvement benefit fee for the ATMD are
all lodging businesses, existing and in the future, available for public
occupancy within the boundaries of the commercial areas of the City of
Albuquerque as shown on the map attached to Ord. 2022-015 as "Exhibit A".
LODGING BUSINESS means: a hotel, apartment, apartment hotel, apartment house,
lodge, lodging house, rooming house, motor hotel, guest house, bed and
breakfast, guest ranch, ranch resort, mobile home, motor court, auto court,
trailer court, trailer camp, tourist camp, cabin or other premises used for
lodging.
   (E)   The ATMD business improvement benefit fee is levied solely upon the
ATMD lodging businesses, and the lodging business owners are solely responsible
for payment of the business improvement benefit fee when due. If the lodging
business owner chooses to collect any portion of the business improvement
benefit fee from a guest, that portion shall be specifically called out and
identified for the guest in any and all communications from the lodging
business owner as the "Tourism Marketing Benefit Fee" as specified in the
District Plan.
   (F)   The additional tourism promotion services and improvements to be
provided by the ATMD shall be funded by the levy of a business improvement
benefit fee on lodging businesses within the ATMD boundary, as recommended by
the Planning Group. The business improvement benefit fee shall be levied on the
basis of benefit to the ATMD lodging businesses. Because the additional tourism
promotion services and improvements to be provided by the ATMD are intended to
increase room rentals at ATMD lodging businesses, a business improvement
benefit fee based on room rentals is the best measure of benefit. The annual
business improvement benefit fee shall be 2% of ATMD lodging businesses' gross
room rental revenue. The total five year improvement and service plan budget is
projected at approximately $4,800,000 annually, or $24,000,000 total over the
term of the ATMD. This amount may fluctuate as sales and revenue increase at
assessed lodging businesses. Furthermore, as calculation of the ATMD budget was
based on data collected prior to the COVID-19 pandemic, this amount may
fluctuate in accordance with post-COVID economic circumstances. Based on the
benefit received, business improvement benefit fees will not be levied on:
stays of more than 30 consecutive days; stays pursuant to a written agreement
for at least 30 consecutive days; stays by any person to whom rent is charged
at the rate of $2 per day or less; stays at institutions of the federal
government, the state or any political subdivisions thereof; stays at
religious, charitable, educational, or philanthropic institutions, including
without limitation stays at summer camps operated by such institutions; stays
at clinics, hospitals, or other medical facilities; stays at privately-operated
convalescent homes or homes for the aged, infirm, indigent, or chronically ill;
stays at any short term rental unit; and stays pursuant to contracts executed
prior to July 11 2022.
   (G)   Bonds shall not be issued to fund ATMD services or improvements or for
the retirement of pre-existing debt of the city.
   (H)   Pursuant to NMSA Section 3-63-11, the City Council hereby appoints
Visit Albuquerque, an existing nonprofit corporation operating within the
boundaries of the district, to serve as the management committee for the ATMD.
Visit Albuquerque shall be responsible for the operation of the ATMD and the
administration and implementation of the District Plan. Visit Albuquerque shall
serve as the management committee for the five year term of the ATMD unless
removed earlier by the City Council. As the ATMD management committee, Visit
Albuquerque shall do all of the following:
      (1)   Prepare and file annually with the City Council for its review and
approval a budget and progress report for the ATMD;
      (2)   Administer all improvements within the ATMD;
      (3)   Recommend the annual assessment to be made by the City Council; and
      (4)   File annually with the City Council a report of the ATMD activities
for the preceding fiscal year, which report shall include a complete financial
statement setting forth its assets, liabilities, income, and operating expenses
as of the end of the fiscal year and the benefits of the ATMD's program to the
ATMD lodging businesses’ owners.
   (I)   During the operation of the ATMD, there shall be a 30 day period each
year in which ATMD lodging businesses may request disestablishment of the ATMD.
The first such period shall begin one year after the date of establishment of
the ATMD and shall continue for 30 days. Each successive year of operation of
the ATMD have such a 30 day period. Upon the written petition of ATMD lodging
businesses comprising at least 51% of the total number of lodging businesses
then operating within the ATMD, the City Council shall notice a hearing on
disestablishment of the ATMD.
   (J)   It is the intention of the City Council to adopt by reference and
incorporate into this article all of the definitions of terms set forth in the
Business Improvement District Act, N.M.S.A. Sections 3-63-1 et seq.
   (K)   It is the intention of the City Council to confer the broadest
discretion to the management committee to accomplish its goals, limited only by
the express terms of the Business Improvement District Act, N.M.S.A. Sections
3-63-1 et seq., as that State Statute now exists or may be revised, and upon
the further limitation that no ATMD service or improvement may duplicate
services or improvements provided by the city.
   (L)   The City Clerk, or his or her designee, is directed to take all
necessary actions to complete the establishment of the ATMD.
(Ord. 2022-015; Am. Ord._2022-021)
§ 14-22-2 BUSINESS IMPROVEMENT BENEFIT FEE.
   (A)   The city will be responsible for collecting the business improvement
benefit fee on a monthly basis (including any delinquencies, penalties, and
interest) from each lodging business located within the boundaries of the ATMD.
The city shall make all reasonable efforts to collect the business improvement
benefit fee from each lodging business.
   (B)   Commencing from the last date of publication of this article, the ATMD
shall reimburse the city for any costs associated with collecting unpaid
business improvement benefit fees. If sums in excess of the delinquent ATMD
business improvement benefit fees are sought to be recovered in the same
collection action by the city, the ATMD shall bear its pro-rata share of such
collection costs. Assessed lodging businesses which are delinquent in paying
the business improvement benefit fee shall be responsible for paying:
      (1)   Original delinquency. Lodging businesses shall make a return by the
25th of each month on forms provided by the city for lodging paid to the
lodging business in the preceding calendar month and shall remit therewith to
the city payment of the business improvement fee then. The report shall include
sufficient information to enable the city to audit the report. If the 25th day
of the month falls on a weekend or holiday, the return shall be due on the next
business day. If any lodging business makes a return without paying the
business improvement benefit fee then due, the lodging business shall be liable
for the business improvement benefit fee and a penalty equal to 10% thereof or
$100, whichever is greater. After receiving such return, the city shall give
the delinquent lodging business written notice of the business improvement
benefit fee and penalty.
      (2)   Neglect or refusal to make return. If any lodging business neglects
or refuses to make a return and pay the business improvement benefit fee, the
Mayor shall make an estimate based upon an examination of the lodging business'
books and records or upon any information in its possession, or that may come
into its possession, of the amount of gross room rental revenue of the
delinquent lodging business for the period in respect to which the lodging
business has failed to make a return, and upon the basis of said estimated
amount shall compute and assess the business improvement benefit fee payable by
the delinquent lodging business, adding to this amount a penalty equal to 10%
thereof or $100, whichever is greater. Promptly thereafter, the city shall give
the delinquent lodging business written notice of the estimated business
improvement benefit fee and penalty.
      (3)   Continued delinquency. If payment is not made by the lodging
business within 15 days of the date of the notice that the business improvement
benefit fee is delinquent, the Mayor may bring an action in law or equity in
the district court for the collection of any amounts due, including without
limitation penalties thereon, interest on the unpaid principal at a rate of not
exceeding 1% a month, the costs of collection and reasonable attorneys' fees
incurred in connection therewith.
      (4)   Continuous surety bond. A continuous surety bond naming the city as
the beneficiary in the amount of $3,000 plus $60 per room or individual
sleeping accommodation available for use by the public shall be posted and
filed with the City Clerk upon a lodging business' failure to remit business
improvement benefit fees for two consecutive months. If payment or posting
continuous surety bond is not made by the lodging business within 15 days of
the date of notice that the business improvement benefit fee is delinquent, the
Mayor may bring an action in law or equity in the district court for the
collection of any amount due, including without limitation penalties thereon,
interest on the unpaid principal at a rate not exceeding 1% a month, the costs
of collection and reasonable attorneys' fees incurred in connection therewith.
Continuous surety bond shall remain in force three years from the date of
issuance per arrear incident applicable. Continuous surety bond may be
augmented or applied to any succeeding arrear business improvement benefit fee
due the city.
      (5)   Lodging business disputes. A lodging business that disputes the
assessment of any business improvement benefit fee or related penalties and
interest may, within five working days of the date of the notice from the city
that the business improvement benefit fee is delinquent, appeal the Mayor's
decision to the City Hearing Officer as set forth in §
4-4-9 of the Municipal Code of the City of Albuquerque.
   (C)   The ATMD business improvement benefit fee shall be collected by the
city monthly, in accordance with Section IV of the District Plan. The city
shall retain a fee equal to 1% of the amount of business improvement benefit
fees collected to cover its costs of collection and administration.
   (D)   ATMD business improvement benefit fee funds received by the city shall
be held in a special account for the benefit of the ATMD and shall only be used
for the purposes set forth in this article and the District Plan. The funds
shall be distributed to the management committee on a monthly basis by
providing the funds received monthly to the management committee within 30 days
of receipt, less the city's 1% charge for its expense of assessing, collecting,
and administering the ATMD business improvement benefit fee. All investment and
expenditures shall be in accordance with the provisions of the ATMD District
Plan.
(Ord. 2022-015; Am. Ord._2022-021)
ARTICLE 23: ADMINISTRATIVE DEMOLITION OF UNSAFE COMMERCIAL BUILDINGS, UNSAFE
ACCESSORY STRUCTURES, OR DWELLINGS UNFIT FOR HUMAN HABITATION
Section
   
14-23-1   Short title
   
14-23-2   Intent
   
14-23-3   Definitions
   
14-23-4   Procedures
§ 14-23-1 SHORT TITLE.
   This article shall be known and may be cited as the “Administrative
Demolition Ordinance.”
(Ord._2024-003)
§ 14-23-2 INTENT.
   The purpose of this article is to allow for the administrative demolition of
unsafe commercial buildings, unsafe accessory structures, or dwellings unfit
for lawful occupancy and/or human habitation, due to dilapidation; defects
increasing the hazards of fire, accidents or other calamities; or other
conditions, rendering commercial buildings, accessory structures, or dwellings
unsafe and therefore dangerous or detrimental to the public health, safety,
morals or welfare of the residents of the City of Albuquerque.
(Ord._2024-003)
§ 14-23-3 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this article, certain terms, phrases, words and their
derivatives shall be construed as specific in either this article or as
specified in the Uniform Housing Code or the Uniform Administrative Code. Where
terms are not defined, they shall have their ordinary accepted meanings within
the context with which they are used.
   ACCESSORY STRUCTURE. A structure detached from and located on the same lot
as a primary building, customarily used with and clearly incidental and
subordinate to the primary building or use. ACCESSORY STRUCTURES include but
are not limited to shade structures such as covered patios, sheds, workshops,
detached garages, gazebos, pergolas, ramadas, or similar structures.
   COMMERCIAL BUILDING. A building or portion thereof not designed or not being
used for human habitation.
   DEPARTMENT. The department tasked by the Mayor with the administration and
enforcement of this Ordinance.
   DWELLING. One or more connected rooms and a kitchen designed to be occupied
by no more than one family for living and sleeping purposes, meeting the
requirements of the Uniform Housing Code and the Uniform Administrative Code,
as of the date of the unit’s construction. This term includes any structure
being used as a dwelling unit, as defined herein, for human habitation.
   UNFIT FOR LAWFUL OCCUPANCY OR HUMAN HABITATION. Any commercial building or
dwelling in which there exists any of the following conditions: structural
defects, dilapidation, defects or materials increasing the hazards of fire,
accidents or other calamities; or other conditions, rendering commercial
buildings or dwellings unsafe and therefore dangerous or detrimental to public
health, safety, morals or welfare of the residents of the City of Albuquerque.
   UNSAFE BUILDING. Buildings or structures that are structurally inadequate or
compromised or which constitute a fire hazard, or are otherwise dangerous to
human life, pursuant to the Uniform Administrative Code and Technical Codes.
(Ord._2024-003)
§ 14-23-4 PROCEDURES.
   (A)   Inspection. The department may enter the premises with the consent of
the property owner or lawful occupant for the purpose of making safety
inspections, provided that the entry shall be made in a manner as to cause the
least possible inconvenience to property owner or the person in lawful
possession. If consent to enter is denied, the department shall obtain a
warrant from a court with jurisdiction.
   (B)   Commencement of Proceedings. Whenever the department has inspected or
caused to be inspected any commercial building or any dwelling or accessory
structure and has found and determined that such commercial building or
accessory structure is unsafe or that such dwelling is unfit for lawful
occupancy and/or human habitation, the department shall commence proceedings to
cause the closing, demolition or removal of the building or dwelling.
      (1)   Serving Notice. The department shall serve notice by personal
service or by registered mail to the owner of record on file with the county
assessor, every mortgagee of record, and all parties of interest of record. If
the whereabouts of these persons is unknown and cannot be ascertained by the
department in exercising reasonable diligence and the department makes an
affidavit to that effect, the serving of the notice upon said persons shall be
made by publishing the notice once a week for two consecutive weeks in a
newspaper printed and published in the City of Albuquerque. A copy of the
notice shall be posted in a conspicuous place on the property. A copy of the
notice shall be filed and recorded with the County Clerk. A recorded notice
shall have the same force and effect as other lis pendens notices provided by
law. The recorded notice runs with the property, and subsequent purchasers or
grantees shall be deemed notified through the recorded notice in existence at
time of conveyance. Subsequent purchasers or grantees acquire the property at
their own risk of the contemplated administrative action in the recorded
notice, and no further notice shall be due.
      (2)   Notice of Hearing. The Notice shall inform the parties of interest
of the hearing. The Notice shall contain the following statements:
         (a)   The street address and a legal description sufficient for
identification of the premises upon which the building or dwelling or accessory
structure is located.
         (b)   A statement that the department has found the dwelling to be
unfit for human habitation with a brief and concise description of the
conditions found to render the dwelling in need of immediate abatement or a
statement that the department has found the commercial building or accessory
structure to be unsafe pursuant to the City of Albuquerque’s Uniform
Administrative Code and Technical Codes.
         (c)   A statement of the action required to be taken as determined by
the department, including whether the building or structure must be closed or
demolished.
         (d)   A statement that a hearing will be held by the Independent
Hearing Officer and shall be heard in accordance with the provisions in the
Independent Hearing Officer Ordinance, Chapter 2, Article 7, Part 8.
   (C)   Hearing.
      (1)   The hearing officer shall determine whether the commercial building
or accessory structure is unsafe or the dwelling is unfit for human habitation
and shall state findings of fact in support of the determination.
      (2)   A commercial building or accessory structure is unsafe and a
dwelling is unfit for human habitation if any of the following conditions
exist:
         (a)   The commercial building or accessory structure or dwelling is
hazardous, dangerous or injurious to the health, safety, or morals of the
occupants and those who enter the premises;
         (b)   The commercial building or accessory structure or dwelling has a
blighting influence on properties in the area; or
         (c)   The commercial building or accessory structure or dwelling has
defects or combustible materials increasing the hazards of fire, accidents, or
other calamities; or has other poor conditions such as the lack of adequate
ventilation, light or sanitary facilities, dilapidation, disrepair, structural
defects, or any violation of health, fire, building regulations or any other
laws relating to the safe use and occupancy of buildings and improvements.
      (3)   A hearing shall be conducted by the Independent Hearing Officer in
accordance with the provisions in the IHO Ordinance, ROA 1994, Chapter 2,
Article 7, Part 8.
      (4)   The hearing shall be held not less than ten days and not more than
thirty days after serving the Notice.
      (5)   If the hearing officer determines that the commercial building or
accessory structure is unsafe or that the dwelling under consideration is unfit
for human habitation, the hearing officer shall state in writing the following:
         (a)   Findings of facts in support of the determination; and
         (b)   The premises must be vacated and secured at all times; and
         (c)   The owner shall be required to secure the property within 48
hours, and then either repair and bring it into compliance with City codes to
eliminate the blighted condition or demolish the building or structure within
ninety (90) days, unless an extension is agreed to by the department.
      (6)   The hearing officer shall issue and serve an order that advises the
owner of the owner’s right to file an appeal of the hearing officer’s decision
with the City Council. The owner may file a written objection with the City
Clerk within ten (10) days of the receipt of the order, asking for a hearing
before the City Council. The City Clerk shall deliver the written objection to
City Council within fifteen (15) days of receiving the written objection. Such
appeal shall be heard after notice at the first available meeting of the City
Council. The City Council may affirm, reverse, or modify the decision of the
Independent Hearing Officer. Property owners aggrieved by the decision of City
Council can appeal to District Court, pursuant to NMSA 1978 § 39-3-1.1.
   (D)   Enforcement of Order.
      (1)   If the owner fails to comply with an order to secure the property
and then remove or demolish the commercial building or dwelling, the City may
cause the commercial building or dwelling to be removed or demolished;
      (2)   The amount of the cost of removal or demolition by the City shall
be filed as a lien against the property. If the commercial building or dwelling
is removed or demolished by the City, the City shall sell the salvageable
materials. The City shall credit the proceeds of such sale, if applicable,
against the cost of the removal or demolition. Any surplus balance remaining
shall be deposited in the District Court and shall be secured in the manner as
directed by the court and shall be disbursed by the court to the person found
to be entitled to any balance by an order or decree of the court.
   (E)   Civil Abatement Action. Nothing in this article shall be construed to
abrogate or impair the powers of the courts or of any department to enforce any
other City ordinance to prevent or punish violations. The powers conferred by
this article shall be in addition to, and supplemental to, powers conferred by
any other law.
(Ord._2024-003; Am. Ord._2024-028)
ARTICLE 24: DOWNTOWN VACANT PREMISES
Section
   
14-24-1   Short title
   
14-24-2   Intent and purposes
   
14-24-3   Definitions
   
14-24-4   Applicability
   
14-24-5   Registry
   
14-24-6   Annual registration fee
   
14-24-7   Exemptions for certain buildings and properties
   
14-24-8   Enforcement and penalties
   
14-24-9   Appeal
   
14-24-10   Procedures for conduct of hearing appeals
   
14-24-11   Use of fees, fines, and monetary penalties
§ 14-24-1 SHORT TITLE.
   This Chapter 14, Article 24 shall be known and cited as the “Downtown Vacant
Premises Ordinance.”
(Ord. 2025-001)
§ 14-24-2 INTENT AND PURPOSES.
   The intent of this Ordinance is to further revitalization efforts in the
Downtown area by activating vacant premises by encouraging property owners to
make robust efforts to make productive use of their properties and preventing
such structures from being a public or private nuisance or otherwise
contributing to blight and negatively impacting surrounding property values and
redevelopment or economic development efforts.
(Ord. 2025-001)
§ 14-24-3 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this Ordinance, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   COMMON AREA. Portions of a building that are available for use by all
tenants or occupants on a non-exclusive basis.
   COMPETITIVE MARKET RENT. The rental rate commonly charged for comparable
properties within the same submarket.
   DOWNTOWN CORE. The area bounded by 8th Street to the West, Copper Ave. to
the North, Gold Ave. to the South, and 1st Street to the East, to include all
premises with a front lot line along Gold Avenue to the North and South. A map
outlining this area is included as Exhibit A.
   FAIR MARKET VALUE (FMV). The estimated sale price a property would achieve
under typical market conditions, as shown by comparable properties within the
same submarket. This value may be established through a third-party appraisal
or broker opinion based on comparable property sales and/or income approach
metrics.
   FISCAL YEAR. The City of Albuquerque’s fiscal year is from July 1st – June
30th.
   RESPONSIBLE PARTY. The owner(s) of any building or property subject to this
Ordinance, or the owner’s designee, or any other party responsible for such
building or property by way of management, agency, or otherwise.
   SQFT BASE COST. The fee determined by the amount of vacant UFA that is
applicable to properties and buildings subject to this Ordinance, as outlined
in the Table under §
14-24-6.
   USEABLE FLOOR AREA (UFA). The net floor area of a building where persons may
move about and carry-on usual tasks for working and living but does not include
common area. For empty parcels or lots, the UFA is the total area.
   VACANT PREMISES. Any building or property which no person or persons
actually, currently conducts a lawfully licensed business, or lawfully resides
or lives in any part of the building or structure as the legal or equitable
owner(s) or tenant-occupant(s), or owner-occupant(s), or tenant(s), or
otherwise claiming possession through the owner, on a permanent, non-transient
basis.
      a.   A building is deemed vacant when 30 percent or more of the ground
floor UFA is vacant.
      b.   An empty parcel or lot is deemed vacant.
   YEARS VACANT. The number of years a premises has had more than nine months
of vacancy in a fiscal year. This number resets after a property is considered
occupied for a fiscal year.
(Ord. 2025-001)
§ 14-24-4 APPLICABILITY.
   The provisions of this Ordinance apply only to buildings and properties
within the Downtown Core as defined herein in Section
14-24-3.
(Ord. 2025-001)
§ 14-24-5 REGISTRY.
   (A)   By June 30th of each year, all Responsible Parties must register their
Downtown Core premises, if the premises was vacant for at least nine months
during the prior City fiscal year. As defined above:
      a.   A building is deemed vacant when 30 percent or more of the ground
floor UFA is vacant.
      b.   An empty parcel or lot is deemed vacant.
   (B)   To ensure compliance with this Ordinance, the Mayor or their designee
shall conduct an annual survey of all buildings and properties within the
Downtown Core to determine if the premises are vacant or occupied. The annual
survey shall include all buildings and properties.
   (C)   The Mayor or their designee can require proof of occupancy to
determine if the premises was occupied for at least three months of the fiscal
year.
      (1)   Proof of occupancy may include, but is not limited to: a bona fide
lease, utility records, mail, property inspections, business license or
registration, etc.
   (D)   The application for a vacancy registration shall be made on a form
provided by Albuquerque Code Enforcement and verified by the owner. The
application shall disclose all measures to be taken to ensure that the vacant
premises will be kept weather tight and secure from trespassers, safe for entry
by police officers and firefighters in times of emergency, and together with
its premises, free from nuisance and in good order. The Downtown Vacancy
Registration form shall include and be updated with the following information:
      (1)   Name, address, telephone number, and email of the property owner
and Responsible Party, if applicable;
      (2)   Name, address, telephone number, and email of a local agent for the
owner, if the owner is not a resident of Bernalillo County;
      (3)   Name, local address and telephone number, and email of a property
manager, if any;
      (4)   Street address, parcel number and legal description of the
property;
      (5)   Any known fines and/or liabilities being assessed against the
property.
      (6)   A 24-hours emergency telephone number where the owner, agent, or
property manager or Responsible Party can be reached and is required to respond
to calls from the City within 2 hours.
   (E)   At the time of registration, the Responsible Party shall arrange for
inspection of the vacant premises by Albuquerque Code Enforcement or their
representative. If the Responsible Party fails or refuses to consent to and
arrange for an inspection, Albuquerque Code Enforcement may obtain a search
warrant from a court of competent jurisdiction to authorize inspection of the
vacant premises, if it is deemed necessary for public health and safety. If a
Responsible Party fails or refuses to consent to and arrange for an inspection,
their premises shall be deemed vacant and assessed the maximum registration fee
from the table in Section
14-24-6, regardless of the actual SQFT of the premises.
(Ord. 2025-001)
§ 14-24-6 ANNUAL REGISTRATION FEE.
   The fee to register a vacant premises pursuant to Section
14-24-5 above shall be assessed using area and time. The City shall use the
equation and table below to determine vacancy registration fees:
   (Years Vacant)*(SQFT base cost) = Vacancy Registration Fee
 
Total Ground Floor Vacant UFA SQFT Base Cost
< 1,000 sqft                  $1,000.00
1,001 -5,000 sqft             $2,000.00
5,001 -10,000 sqft            $3,000.00
10,001 -15,000 sqft           $4,000.00
> 15,001 sqft                 $5,000.00
 
(Ord. 2025-001)
§ 14-24-7 EXEMPTIONS FOR CERTAIN BUILDINGS AND PROPERTIES.
   (A)   The Downtown Vacant Premises Registration Fee does not apply in the
following circumstances, as determined by the Mayor or their designee:
      (1)   A City of Albuquerque active building permit shows the premises
undergoing construction, rehabilitation or renovation that is proceeding
without unreasonable delay caused by the owner or property manager. The
Responsible Party shall provide a written plan for how the active building
permit is working to achieve occupancy on the property. The written plan shall
include, but is not limited to, a reasonable timeline, description of necessary
improvements, milestones for completion, and anticipated occupancy date;
      (2)   The premises was purchased through a foreclosure action and the
statutory redemption period has not expired;
      (3)   The premises is physically secured and the subject of a probate
action for a period not longer than one year, or other litigation in which
ownership is contested;
      (4)   Disaster Period. A one-year exemption period shall apply following
the date that a building or property was severely damaged and made
uninhabitable or unusable due to fire, natural disaster, or other catastrophic
event. This does not relieve the property owner of any restoration required or
enforced by the Planning Department;
      (5)   Actively Marketed Properties. If the premises is actively marketed
for sale or lease, a two-year exemption period shall apply, provided that the
marketing efforts meet the following conditions:
         (a)   The responsible party shows evidence of the premises being
listed with a New Mexico real estate broker qualified to conduct business in
Bernalillo County within thirty (30) days of becoming vacant or documented as
being marketed on at least three commercially recognized listing platforms.
         (b)   If offered for sale, the listing price must be no greater than
130% of the Fair Market Value as established through an independent third-party
appraisal of Broker Opinion of Value (BOV), utilizing either a sales comparison
approach or income approach. If offered for lease, the proposed rental rate
must be no greater than 130% of the competitive market rent, as established by
a rent study by a certified MAI appraiser or qualified real estate broker with
relevant experience.
         (c)   Supplementary Marketing. The responsible party shows evidence of
marketing activities that enhance the visibility of the vacant space, including
but not limited to building signage, window wraps and marketing other materials
that comply with the Integrated Development Ordinance’s regulations.
(Ord. 2025-001)
§ 14-24-8 ENFORCEMENT AND PENALTIES.
   (A)   If the Responsible Party fails to register their vacant premises
within 20 days after an initial written notice from the City, the Responsible
Party is subject to:
      (1)   The penalty provisions set forth in § 1-1-99 of this code of
ordinances; each day of violation is considered a separate offense; and
      (2)   Instead of or in addition to the penalty provision set forth in §
1-1-99, the City, acting through the City Attorney, is hereby authorized to
file an action in a court of competent jurisdiction as a means of compelling
compliance with this article, including compliance with those sections cross
referenced within the Zoning Code, to:
         (i)   Enjoin any person from violating or threatening to violate the
terms, conditions and restrictions of this article;
         (ii)   Collect civil assessments against the property of $500 per day
for every day the property remains or remained in violation of this section
after the expiration of the compliance period or any extensions granted by the
City identified in the written notice(s) sent by the City; and
         (iii)   Recover damages from the owner of a building or property in an
amount of money adequate for the City to undertake any construction
remediation, cleanup, or other activity necessary to bring about compliance
with this article.
      (3)   In addition to judicial remedies, any expenditure by the City to
bring the building or property into compliance, or any damages or assessments
are recoverable through the imposition of a municipal lien on the parcel under
NMSA 1978, §§ 3-36-1 to 3-36-5. To the extent that monetary penalties are
recovered as a result of enforcement under this section, any funds so recovered
shall be used exclusively for the purpose of funding enforcement activities
under this section. Should the building or property owner fail to make
reasonable efforts to satisfy and discharge the lien on the building or
property within one year of assessment, the City Attorney is authorized to file
suit to force the satisfaction of the lien in any way authorized by law.
(Ord. 2025-001)
§ 14-24-9 APPEAL.
   (A)   General.
      (1)   Form of appeal.
         (a)   Any person entitled to appeal under this code may do so by
filing at the Office of the City Clerk a written appeal containing:
            1.   The names of all appellants participating In the appeal.
            2.   A brief statement setting forth the legal interest of each of
the appellants in the building or the land involved in the appeal.
            3.   A brief statement in ordinary and concise language of that
specific order or action protested along with a copy of the order, notice, or
action together with any material facts claimed to support the contentions of
the appellant.
            4.   A brief statement in ordinary and concise language of the
relief sought and the reasons why it is claimed the protested order or action
should be reversed, modified or otherwise set aside.
            5.   The signatures of all parties named as appellants and their
official mailing addresses.
            6.   The verification, by declaration under penalty of perjury, of
at least one appellant as to the truth of the matters stated in the appeal.
         (b)   The appeal shall be filed prior to the effective date of the
order.
      (2)   Processing of appeal. Upon receipt of any appeal filed pursuant to
this section, the City Clerk or their staff shall file and stamp the appeal
then deliver by mail or electronic means a copy of it to the party responsible
for issuing the order, notice, or action under appeal as well as a copy to the
Office of the City Attorney.
      (3)   Scheduling and noticing appeal for hearing. The Office of
Administrative Hearings shall schedule the hearing pursuant to the provisions
of the IHO Ordinance, ROA 1994, Chapter 2, Article 7, Part 8.
   (B)   Effect of failure to appeal. Failure of any person to file an appeal
in accordance with the provisions herein shall constitute a waiver of his or
her right to an administrative hearing and adjudication of the notice and order
or to any portion thereof.
   (C)   Scope of hearing appeal. Only those matters or issues specifically
raised by the appellant shall be considered in the hearing of the appeal.
   (D)   Staying of order under appeal. Enforcement of any notice and order of
the City issued under this code shall be stayed during the pendency of an
appeal therefrom which is properly and timely filed.
(Ord. 2025-001)
§ 14-24-10 PROCEDURES FOR CONDUCT OF HEARING APPEALS.
   Procedures regarding the hearing shall be the procedures outlined in the IHO
Ordinance, Chapter 2, Article 7, Part 8 of the Revised Ordinances of
Albuquerque 1994.
(Ord. 2025-001)
§ 14-24-11 USE OF FEES, FINES, AND MONETARY PENALTIES.
   100% of all registration fees, fines, and monetary penalties collected
pursuant to this Ordinance shall be used for the purpose of funding enforcement
activities under this Downtown Vacant Premises Ordinance.
(Ord. 2025-001)
ARTICLE 25: [RESERVED]
 
ARTICLE 26: MANUFACTURED HOME COMMUNITY STABILITY AND EMPOWERMENT
Section
   
14-26-1   Short title
   
14-26-2   Intent
   
14-26-3   Definitions
   
14-26-4   Notice to resident of intent to sell property
   
14-26-5   Notice to residents of proposed sale, lease, or transfer
   
14-26-6   Proposed purchase agreement by resident homeowner group
   
14-26-7   Duty to consider a resident homeowner group’s proposed purchase
agreement
   
14-26-8   Proposed purchase agreement that matches the third-party offer
   
14-26-9   Subsequent offers
   
14-26-10   Exemptions
   
14-26-11   Resources available to resident homeowner groups
   
14-26-12   Penalty
§ 14-26-1 SHORT TITLE.
   This article shall be known and may be cited as the “Manufactured Home
Community Stability and Empowerment Ordinance.”
(Ord. 2024-043)
§ 14-26-2 INTENT.
   The purpose of this Ordinance is to promote stability within Manufactured
Housing Communities and encourage the ownership of such properties by their
residents.
(Ord. 2024-043)
§ 14-26-3 DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this Ordinance, certain terms, phrases, words and their
derivatives shall be construed as specified in this Ordinance. Where terms are
not defined, they shall have their ordinary accepted meaning within the context
with which they are used.
   PROPERTY OWNER. The owner of a manufactured home community.
   FAMILY MEMBER OF A HOMEOWNER OR PROPERTY OWNER. The homeowner or property
owner’s spouse, a child, parent, or grandparent of the homeowner or property
owner or the homeowner or property owner’s spouse, or a descendant of any such
person, and shall include all such persons, whether of the whole or the half
blood and whether related by blood or adoption.
   MANUFACTURED HOME. A structure transportable in one or more sections that is
built on a permanent chassis, is designed for use with or without a permanent
foundation when connected to the required utilities and meets the construction
safety standards of the federal Manufactured Housing Act of 1974. Similar
structures that do not meet the construction safety standards of that Act are
referred to as “mobile homes” and are not allowed to be installed in the City.
   MANUFACTURED HOME COMMUNITY. Any real property on which two or more lots or
spaces are offered for rent or lease for the placement of manufactured homes
and in which the primary use of the community or the manufactured home section
thereof is residential.
   MANUFACTURED HOMEOWNER. A person who owns a manufactured home in a
manufactured home community.
   RESIDENT HOMEOWNER GROUP or RESIDENT-OWNED COMMUNITY. Any organization,
group, or association, formal or informal, including a corporation or
cooperative, that consists of resident owners of manufactured homes in the
manufactured home community and is governed by and open to all owners of
manufactured homes who occupy the home and live in the community. A resident
homeowner group may allow resident owners of homes in the manufactured home
community to become members even though their homes do not meet the definition
of “manufactured home” as defined in this section. A resident homeowner group
may designate an agent to act on its behalf. As used in this Ordinance, the
term “Resident Homeowner Group” is synonymous with “Resident-Owned Community.”
(Ord. 2024-043)
§ 14-26-4 NOTICE TO RESIDENT OF INTENT TO SELL PROPERTY.
   (A)   If a property owner intends to sell, lease, or transfer the
manufactured home community, the property owner shall, at least seven days
prior to listing the property for sale, notify each resident household in the
manufactured home community by first class mail with tracking to inform them of
the intent to sell.
(Ord. 2024-043)
§ 14-26-5 NOTICE TO RESIDENTS OF PROPOSED SALE, LEASE, OR TRANSFER.
   (A)   If a property owner receives an offer for the sale, lease, or transfer
of the community that the property owner intends to accept, the property owner
shall, at least fifteen calendar days before making a final unconditional
acceptance of such offer, give notice:
      (1)   to each resident household in the manufactured home community by
certified mail with return receipt requested; and
      (2)   by delivery to each manufactured home on the property.
   (B)   The notice required by subsection (A) shall include:
      (1)   a statement advising the recipient of the intended sale, lease or
other transfer of the manufactured home community; and
      (2)   a statement of the homeowners’ rights pursuant to this Ordinance
and the deadlines for exercising such rights; and
   (C)   A property owner may accept an offer for the sale, lease or transfer
of the community before giving the notice required by this section and the
purchase opportunity required by §§
14-26-5 through
14-26-9 of this Ordinance, as long as the purchase agreement is contingent upon
providing the requisite notice and purchase opportunity.
(Ord. 2024-043)
§ 14-26-6 PROPOSED PURCHASE AGREEMENT BY RESIDENT HOMEOWNER GROUP.
   (A)   No later than the fifteenth calendar day after a notice complying with
§
14-26-5 is mailed, a resident homeowner group, including a group formed after
the issuance of such notice, may deliver, in writing, a proposed purchase
agreement for the manufactured home community to the manufactured home property
owner, along with a statement that the owners of more than fifty percent of the
manufactured homes in the community that are occupied by the homeowner or a
family member of the homeowner support submitting the proposed purchase
agreement. A homeowner may indicate support for proposing a purchase agreement
by signing a petition or any other document that so states.
   (B)   If the property owner does not receive a proposed purchase agreement
in writing from a resident homeowner group during the 15 calendar day period
provided by §
14-26-5, the property owner has no further duties under this ordinance with
respect to the proposed sale, lease, or transfer of the manufactured home
community.
(Ord. 2024-043)
§ 14-26-7 DUTY TO CONSIDER A RESIDENT HOMEOWNER GROUP’S PROPOSED PURCHASE
AGREEMENT.
   If a resident homeowner group or its assignee or agent delivers a proposed
purchase agreement in writing to the manufactured home property owner in
compliance with §
14-26-6, the manufactured home property owner shall consider the group’s
proposed purchase agreement and negotiate with the group in good faith to
determine whether a mutual agreement can be reached to enable the group to
purchase the community. The duty of good faith includes a duty to make the same
information available to a resident homeowner group that the property owner has
or would have provided to another prospective purchaser.
(Ord. 2024-043)
§ 14-26-8 PROPOSED PURCHASE AGREEMENT THAT MATCHES THE THIRD-PARTY OFFER.
   If a resident homeowner group or its assignee or agent delivers a proposed
purchase agreement to the property owner in compliance with §
14-26-6 and its proposed purchase agreement matches the price and terms and
conditions as the offer the property owner has conditionally accepted or plans
to accept, the group shall have the right to purchase the manufactured home
community at the price, terms, and conditions stated in its proposed purchase
agreement, and this §
14-26-8 shall apply rather than §
14-26-7. No property owner shall unreasonably refuse to enter into or
unreasonably delay the execution or closing on a purchase agreement with a
resident homeowner group which has proposed a bona fide purchase agreement to
meet the price and equivalent terms and conditions of an offer for which notice
is required to be given pursuant to §
14-26-5.
(Ord. 2024-043)
§ 14-26-9 SUBSEQUENT OFFERS.
   If a property owner provides the notice and purchase opportunity required by
this Ordinance but it does not result in a purchase agreement between the
property owner and a resident homeowner group, and the property owner then
receives an offer at a different price or with different terms and conditions
that the property owner intends to accept, the requirements of this Ordinance
shall apply separately to that subsequent offer.
(Ord. 2024-043)
§ 14-26-10 EXEMPTIONS.
   (A)   This ordinance shall not apply to:
      (1)   A sale, lease or transfer to a family member of the property owner
or to a trust, the beneficiaries of which are family members of the property
owner;
      (2)   A transfer by gift, devise or operation of law;
      (3)   A sale, lease or transfer by a partnership or a limited liability
company to one or more of its partners or members, between joint tenants or
tenants in common, or by a business entity to a subsidiary or affiliate of such
entity;
      (4)   A lease of a lot within the manufactured home community to a person
who will live in a manufactured home on such lot;
      (5)   A conveyance of an interest in the community that is incidental to
the financing of such community; or
      (6)   A sale or transfer pursuant to eminent domain.
   (B)   The exclusions set forth in this section shall not carry over to any
subsequent resale, lease or transfer of a community unless such subsequent
resale, lease or transfer independently meets the criteria set forth in
subsection (A) of this section.
   (C)   To qualify for an exemption under this section, a transaction must not
be made in bad faith, must be made for a legitimate business purpose or a
legitimate familial purpose consistent with the exemptions listed in subsection
(A) of this section, and must not be made for the primary purpose of avoiding
the opportunity-to-purchase provisions set forth in this Ordinance.
(Ord. 2024-043)
§ 14-26-11 RESOURCES AVAILABLE TO RESIDENT HOMEOWNER GROUPS.
   The City shall make available staff from the Office of Financial Empowerment
or it’s successor division to act as resources to resident homeowner groups
seeking to utilize the provisions of this bill.
(Ord. 2024-043)
§ 14-26-12 PENALTY.
   (A)   Any person who violates any provision of this Ordinance is subject to
the general penalty provision of this code set forth in ROA 1994, §
1-1-99.
   (B)   A property owner who sells, leases, or transfers a community and fails
to comply with this Ordinance shall be liable to the resident homeowner group
in the amount of $50,000 or 10 percent of the total sales price, whichever is
greater.
   (C)   A violation of this Ordinance is an unfair or deceptive practice and
is a violation of the “Unfair Practices Act,” NMSA 1978, Chapter 57, Article
12.
(Ord. 2024-043)
ARTICLE 27: [PATCH PROGRAM ORDINANCE]
Section
   
14-27-1   Short title
   
14-27-2   Purpose
   
14-27-3   Definitions
   
14-27-4   Eligibility
   
14-27-5   Scope of repairs
   
14-27-6   Financial assistance structure
   
14-27-7   Annual reporting
   
14-27-8   Funding
§ 14-27-1 SHORT TITLE.
   This “Preserving Albuquerque Through Critical Housing” Program Ordinance
shall be known and may be cited as the “PATCH Program Ordinance.”
(Ord. 2025-029)
§ 14-27-2 PURPOSE.
   The purpose of this Ordinance is for the City or its designee to administer
a housing rehabilitation program to provide income-qualified homeowners with
financial support to make critical health, safety, and structural repairs. The
program is designed to preserve long-term homeownership, stabilize
neighborhoods, and maximize the public benefit of housing investment.
(Ord. 2025-029)
§ 14-27-3 DEFINITIONS.
   AFFORDABILITY PERIOD. A recorded agreement that runs with the land and
includes restrictions on use of the property. The length of the affordability
period depends on the amount of the investment in the property, as outlined
below:
 
INVESTMENT AMOUNT AFFORDABILITY PERIOD
Less than $15,000 5 years
$15,000 - $40,000 10 years
More than $40,000 15 years
 
   HEALTH AND SAFETY REPAIRS. Structural, utility, and environmental repairs
necessary to ensure safe occupancy of a home.
   LOW-INCOME. Household income at or below 80% of Area Median Income (AMI), as
defined and measured by the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development
(HUD).
   OWNER OCCUPIED. A housing unit that serves as the legal primary residence of
the property owner.
(Ord. 2025-029)
§ 14-27-4 ELIGIBILITY.
   (A)   To qualify for PATCH assistance, the applicant must:
      (1)   Reside in a low-income household at or below 80% AMI;
      (2)   Own and occupy the property as a primary residence;
      (3)   Not have liens or judgments exceeding $5,000, excluding municipal
liens eligible for forgiveness.
   (B)   The City must inspect the unit to ensure the required repairs are
within a reasonable scope for the City to rehabilitate the property.
   (C)   The City may require the property owner to vacate the premises for the
duration of the repairs. All relocation costs may be the responsibility of the
property owner.
   (D)   Nothing in this Ordinance limits the City’s ability to impose
additional eligibility requirements as required by any funding source.
   (E)   In the event of a conflict between this Ordinance and the terms of a
funding source, the requirements imposed by the funding source shall prevail.
   (F)   In the event of a conflict between this Ordinance and an existing
local, state, or federal law, those requirements in existing law shall prevail.
(Ord. 2025-029)
§ 14-27-5 SCOPE OF REPAIRS.
   Eligible repairs shall be limited to those affecting health, safety, and
structural integrity, including but not limited to:
   (A)   The maximum amount of assistance available to any household shall not
exceed $75,000. This maximum may be increased annually or as needed based on
the U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics’ Producer Price Index (PPI). If repairs are
identified after the initial inspection that could not have reasonably been
anticipated and would exceed the maximum, the Director of the Health, Housing,
and Homelessness Department may approve additional funding on a case-by-case
basis.
   (B)   Plumbing, such as replacement of failing pipes, fixtures, and/or water
supply systems to ensure water conservation, safe and sanitary water access, or
drainage.
   (C)   Electrical systems, such as repairing or upgrading wiring, electrical
panels, and/or circuits that improve safety or support energy efficiency
upgrades.
   (D)   Space conditioning improvements such as installation or repair of heat
pumps or efficient HVAC systems needed for year-round comfort and safety,
protection from extreme weather, or lower utility bills.
   (E)   Roofing, such as replacement or structural repair of roofs that are
leaking, collapsing, or otherwise compromised, including related water damage.
   (F)   Foundation, such as structural repairs to address cracked, sinking, or
unstable foundations that may threaten the overall safety of the home.
   (G)   Sewer and water connections, such as replacement or repair of
deteriorating or failing service lines to ensure reliable water access and
prevent backups or environmental hazards.
   (H)   Energy efficiency and electrification improvements, such as
insulation, weatherization, and/or installation of efficient windows and/or
doors, provided such improvements contribute to the long-term habitability or
affordability of the home.
   Work that is primarily cosmetic, including but not limited to landscaping,
flooring, or paint, is generally not eligible. However, exceptions may be made
when such improvements are necessary to restore safe, functional, and dignified
living conditions, even if not explicitly required by housing code.
   Repairs should utilize energy efficient materials, equipment, and
components, whenever possible.
(Ord. 2025-029)
§ 14-27-6 FINANCIAL ASSISTANCE STRUCTURE.
   (A)   Municipal Lien Forgiveness.
      (1)   The City may forgive existing municipal liens if the property owner
reinvests an equivalent amount into PATCH-eligible repairs.
   (B)   Repair Funding Structure.
      (1)   All PATCH-funded repairs shall be issued as a 0% interest, deferred
payment loan.
      (2)   The loan shall be secured by a recorded lien and subject to an
affordability requirement.
      (3)   The loan shall be fully forgiven if the homeowner complies with the
affordability requirement for the full Affordability Period as defined in this
Ordinance. For the purposes of this Ordinance and the PATCH Program, the
affordability requirement shall be considered fulfilled if the homeowner
maintains the property as their primary residence for the entirety of the
Affordability Period.
      (4)   If the property is sold or transferred before the end of the loan
term (excluding exempt family transfers), the property owner shall be required
to repay to the City a prorated portion of the assistance received, based on
the amount of time remaining in the affordability term. The funds shall be
directed into a dedicated revolving fund to support future PATCH program
activities.
      (5)   Transfer of ownership to an immediate family member (defined as
spouse, child, stepchild, sibling, grandchild or parent) shall not trigger loan
repayment, provided the new owner agrees in writing to assume all loan
obligations, including continued occupancy requirements.
      (6)   If the property owner passes away during the loan period, repayment
shall not be required so long as the property is transferred to an immediate
family member who agrees in writing to maintain the property as their primary
residence for the remainder of the original term. If no immediate family member
assumes ownership and occupancy, repayment by the seller shall be due upon sale
or transfer of the property.
(Ord. 2025-029)
§ 14-27-7 ANNUAL REPORTING.
   (A)   Program Activity Summary:
      (1)   Total number of households assisted during the reporting period;
      (2)   Breakdown of repairs by type (e.g., roofing, electrical, plumbing);
      (3)   Average amount of assistance provided per household.
   (B)   Financial Overview:
      (1)   Total program funds disbursed;
      (2)   Total funds recovered through early repayments;
      (3)   Balance of the revolving fund.
   (C)   Geographic and Equity Analysis:
      (1)   Map and data showing the geographic distribution of funded
projects;
      (2)   Analysis of how the program is reaching populations historically
underserved or at risk of displacement.
(Ord. 2025-029)
§ 14-27-8 FUNDING.
   The PATCH Program is contingent upon the availability of local, state, and
federal funding. The City may prioritize and actively pursue a variety of
funding sources to support the implementation and sustainability of the program
at the local, state, and federal level. The City shall follow all required
procurement processes applicable to the type of funding used for the program.
Provided, however, that if the initial procurement process results in only one
response, the City shall review the specifications and repost the program
request along with additional community outreach.
(Ord. 2025-029)
TABLE OF SPECIAL ORDINANCES
   Table
      
I:   
COLLECTIVE BARGAINING AGREEMENTS
TABLE I: COLLECTIVE BARGAINING AGREEMENTS
Date Effective   Description
 
7-1-2023   Agreement Between the City of Albuquerque and Local 624 AFSCME,
Council 18, AFL-CIO
 
7-1-2023   Agreement Between the City of Albuquerque and AFSCME Local 624
Transit Union
 
7-1-2023   Agreement Between the City of Albuquerque and the Albuquerque
Officers’ Association Local 1888
 
7-1-2023   Agreement Between the City of Albuquerque and the Albuquerque
Clerical and Technical Employees affiliated with the American Federation of
State, County, and Municipal Employees (AFSCME, Local 2962, AFL-CIO, CLC)
 
7-1-2023   Agreement Between the City of Albuquerque and Local 3022 AFSCME,
Council 18, AFL-CIO
 
7-15-2023   Agreement Between the City of Albuquerque and the Albuquerque
Police Officers Association
 
7-15-2023   Agreement Between the City of Albuquerque and Prisoner Transport
Officers
 
12-21-2023   Memorandum of Understanding Between AFSCME Local 1888 Security and
the City of Albuquerque General Services Division Regarding Reduced Staffing
for Holidays
 
2-22-2024   Memorandum of Understanding Between Albuquerque Police Officers
Association and the City of Albuquerque Regarding Domestic Abuse Response Team
(DART)
 
3-8-2024   Agreement between the City of Albuquerque and Communications Workers
of America (“CWA”) Regarding Albuquerque Community Safety Department (“ACS”)
 
4-25-2024   Memorandum of Agreement Between the Albuquerque Police Officers
Association and the City of Albuquerque Regarding Specialty and Incentive Pay
Re-Open 2024
 
5-12-2024   Memorandum of Understanding Between the American Federation of
State, County and Municipal Employees, Local 624 – Blue Collar and the City of
Albuquerque Regarding Aviation Building Maintenance Division and Working
Lunches
 
5-17-2024   Memorandum of Understanding Between AFSCME Local 624 Transit and
the City of Albuquerque Regarding Motorcoach Operators and Sun Van Chauffeurs
Split Shift Differential Pay
 
5-19-2024   Memorandum of Understanding Between AFSCME Local 624 Blue and the
City of Albuquerque Regarding Mechanic Positions Holding a CDL
 
6-20-2024   Memorandum of Understanding Between AFSCME Local 624 Transit and
the City of Albuquerque Regarding Addendum to Motorcoach Operators and Sun Van
Chauffeurs Differential Pay
 
6-25-2024   Memorandum of Understanding Between the American Federation of
State, County and Municipal Employees (AFSCME) Locals 624 Blue, 624 Transit,
1888, 2962 and 3022 and the City of Albuquerque Regarding Additional Family
Members Eligible for Bereavement Leave
 
7-1-2024   Agreement Between the City of Albuquerque and the Albuquerque Area
Fire Fighters Union, IAFF Local 244, City Chapter
 
9-10-2024   Memorandum of Understanding Between the Albuquerque Police Officers
Association (APOA) and the City of Albuquerque Sworn Unit Limited Re-Opener FY
25
 
9-13-2024   Memorandum of Understanding Between the Albuquerque Police Officers
Association and the City of Albuquerque Regarding Specialty and Incentive Pay
Re-Open 2024
 
9-13-2024   Memorandum of Understanding Between the Albuquerque Police Officers
Association Prisoner Transport Unit (APOA) and the City of Albuquerque Limited
Re-Opener FY 25
 
11-6-2024   Memorandum of Understanding Between the American Federation of
State, County, and Municipal Employees, Local 2962 and the City of Albuquerque
Regarding Maintaining Seniority When Employees Promote from C1C to C2C
 
11-8-2024   Memorandum of Understanding Between the American Federation of
State, County, and Municipal Employees, Local 3022 and the City of Albuquerque
Regarding Anniversary Incentive Pay for Police Data Coordinators at the
Emergency Communications Center
 
11-13-2024   Memorandum of Understanding Between the American Federation of
State, County, and Municipal Employees, Local 3022 and the City of Albuquerque
Regarding Anniversary Incentive Pay for Police Communication Shift Supervisors
at the Emergency Communications Center
 
12-1-2024   Memorandum of Understanding Between the American Federation of
State, County, and Municipal Employees, Local 2962 and the City of Albuquerque
Regarding Scheduling of Dispatchers (C2 & C2C) at the Emergency Communications
Center
 
12-2-2024   Memorandum of Understanding Between the American Federation of
State, County and Municipal Employees (AFSCME) Locals 624 Blue, 624 Transit,
1888, 2962, 3022, and the City of Albuquerque Regarding the Eligibility of FMLA
While Using Union Time for Union Business
 
2-6-2025   Memorandum of Understanding Between the American Federation of
State, County, and Municipal Employees, Local 624 and the City of Albuquerque
Regarding Trade Positions Wages
 
2-6-2025   Memorandum of Understanding Between the American Federation of
State, County and Municipal Employees (AFSCME) Local 1888 and the City of
Albuquerque Regarding Solid Waste Assignments
 
2-14-2025   Memorandum of Understanding Between the American Federation of
State, County, and Municipal Employees, Local 2962 and the City of Albuquerque
Regarding Payment of Overtime to Members of AFSCME at the Emergency
Communications Center
PARALLEL REFERENCES
References to New Mexico Statutes Annotated 1978
References to 1974 Code
References to Ordinances
REFERENCES TO NEW MEXICO
STATUTES ANNOTATED 1978
NMSA 1978 Section Code Section
NMSA 1978 Section          Code Section
Chapter 1                  1-1-98
Chapter 1, Article 6       2-4-14
1-1-4                      6-9-7
1-8-30                     2-4-9
1-12-71                    6-9-7
1-14-1 et seq.             6-9-7
1-22-3.2(D)                2-4-10
1-22-7                     2-4-10
1-23-1 - 1-23-7            4-3-6-6,
                           4-3-8-6
Chapter 3                  13-4-2-2
3-1-2(K)                   4-10-5,
                           6-9-3
3-1-5                      2-4-11,
                           2-4-12
3-8-37.1                   6-9-7
3-9-1 et seq.              1-1-98
3-17-1                     1-1-9
3-18-5                     14-3-5-3
3-18-7                     14-5-1-1
3-18-17                    11-6-1
3-18-17(A)(2)              7-15-5
Chapter 3, Article 19      14-13-1-1
3-19-1 - 3-19-12           14-14-1-3
3-19-12                    6-5-6-2
3-20-1 - 3-20-16           6-5-6-2, 14-14-1-3
3-24-1                     2-13-1
3-24-4                     2-13-5
3-31-20 - 3-31-25.1        11-1-3-4
3-31-22                    11-1-3-6
3-31-23                    11-1-3-6
3-31A-4 - 3-31A-6          11-1-3-4
3-32-1 - 3-32-16           14-8-6-1
Chapter 3, Article 36      14-14-1-6
                           13-19-8,
3-36-1 - 3-36-5            14-20-6,
                           14-24-8
3-36-1 - 3-36-6            14-14-5-4
                           4-4-12,
3-36-1 - 3-36-7            4-8-11,
                           4-9-6 ,
                           14-5-6-9
3-36-1 et seq.             14-14-5-12
3-36-2                     14-5-6-9 , 14-14-5-4
3-38-1                     3-1-4,
                           13-3-3-1
3-38-4                     13-10-3
3-38-13 - 3-38-24          4-4-2,
                           4-4-6
3-38-15                    4-4-13,
                           4-8-12
3-38-21                    4-8-12
3-38-23                    4-4-5,
                           4-4-6
3-38-24                    4-4-5,
                           4-4-6
3-38A-1 - 3-38A-12         4-8-2
                           13-4-3-11,
                           13-4-4-5,
3-42-1                     13-4-5-32,
                           13-4-6-32,
                           13-4-7-32,
                           13-4-9-5
3-46-41                    14-8-3-1
3-54-1 - 3-54-3            10-2-3-2
Chapter 3, Article 60A     14-8-4-10,
                           14-8-4-12
3-60A-1 et seq.            14-8-4-2
3-60A-1 - 3-60A-48         14-8-6-1,
                           14-13-2-4
3-60A-5 - 3-60A-18         14-8-4-3
3-60A-10 et seq.           6-5-6-2
3-60A-12                   14-8-4-7
3-60A-19 - 3-60A-24        14-8-4-7
3-60A-21                   14-8-4-10
3-63-1 et seq.             14-22-1
3-63-1 - 3-63-16           14-18-2
3-63-11                    14-22-1
3-64-1 - 3-64-5            2-14-2-1,
                           2-14-2-3
5-4-6                      10-2-3-2
5-5-1 et seq.              10-2-3-2
                           14-19-2 -
5-8-1 et seq.              14-19-4,
                           14-19-6
5-8-2 D(2)                 14-19-3
5-8-4                      14-19-14
5-8-6                      14-19-3,
                           14-19-8
5-8-37                     14-19-6
5-10-1 et seq.             2-14-1-2
5-11-1 et seq.             6-9-1
5-11-2                     6-9-7
5-11-3                     6-9-7
5-11-6.B                   6-9-7
5-11-7                     6-9-7
5-11-7(A)                  6-9-7
5-11-7.D                   6-9-7
5-11-7(G)                  6-9-7
5-11-9(C)                  6-9-7
5-11-10(D)                 6-9-1
5-11-23                    6-9-5
5-15-4(A)                  4-10-6
5-15-4(E)                  4-10-6
5-15-6                     4-10-6
5-15-7                     4-10-6
5-18-1                     4-11-2
6-4-1(A) and (B)           2-12-2,
                           2-12-9
Chapter 6, Article 6       4-8-12
6-8-7                      4-1-10
6-10-10.1                  4-1-10
                           14-9-9,
6-27-1 et seq.             14-9-11,
                           14-21-2,
                           14-21-4
6-27-8                     14-9-11,
                           14-21-4
7-1-6(D)(3)                4-3-1-3,
                           4-3-2-2
                           4-3-3-4,
                           4-3-5-4,
7-1-6.4(C)                 4-3-6-4,
                           4-3-8-4,
                           4-3-9-3
7-19D-9                    4-3-7-2
Chapter 7, Article 9       4-3-5-1
7-19D-9(D)                 4-3-3-7
7-19-4(C)(2)               4-3-3-5
7-24-3                     4-5-1
7-35-2(G)                  4-11-3
10-5-1 - 10-5-4            2-16-5
10-7E-17                   3-2-15
10-15-1 et seq.            3-1-5
10-15-1(H)(2)              9-4-1-10
10-16C-1 et. seq.          2-17-6
12-6-1 - 12-6-14           4-8-12
12-10-5                    2-9-2-1
13-1-21                    5-5-17
13-1-28 et seq.            5-5-33
13-1-98K                   5-5-2
13-1-116                   14-8-4-7
13-4-2                     5-5-17
14-2-1                     9-5-1-11
                           2-7-6-1,
14-2-1 et seq.             2-7-6-2,
                           2-7-6-5
14-3-24                    9-5-1-6,
                           9-5-1-9
14-3-25                    9-5-1-6,
                           9-5-1-9
14-4-1 - 14-4-9            9-5-1-6,
                           9-5-1-9
14-9-1                     14-11-8
15-5A-1 et seq.            2-14-1-2
16-4-12                    9-19-7
22-1-2                     6-5-4-3
22-1-2.1                   11-10-6
22-8-2                     11-10-4
22-8B-1 - 22-8B-17.1       6-5-4-3
22-12-2                    11-10-4,
                           11-10-5
24-1-1 et seq.             9-2-3-3
24-2C-1 et seq.            9-15-3
24-16-1 et seq.            9-5-5-2
Chapter 25, Article 12     9-6-3
26-2B-1 et seq.            12-4-10
Chapter 26, Article 2C     9-5-5-3
26-2C-1 et seq.            12-4-10
26-2C-2(B)                 4-12-2
28-2-1 et seq.             9-24-5,
                           13-6-7
29-1-13 - 29-1-15          5-4-4
29-11A-1                   11-12-2-3
29-11A-3(A)                11-12-1-3
29-11A-3(B)                11-12-1-3,
                           11-12-2-3
Chapter 30, Article 31     11-1-2-3
30-A-4                     11-9-2-4
30-2-1                     11-9-2-4
30-2-3                     11-9-2-4
30-3-2                     11-9-2-4
30-3-3                     11-9-2-4
30-3-5                     11-9-2-4
30-3-8.1                   11-9-2-4
30-3-10 et seq.            9-2-1-4
30-3A-3.1                  11-9-2-4
30-4-1                     11-9-2-4
30-6A-3                    13-15-5
30-6A-4                    13-15-5
30-7-5                     11-9-2-4
30-7-19                    11-9-2-4
30-7-19.1                  9-15-11,
                           11-9-2-4
                           9-15-11,
30-8-1                     10-9-9,
                           10-9-10,
                           13-11-11
30-9-2                     13-15-5
30-9-3                     13-15-5
30-9-4                     13-15-5
30-9-4.1                   13-15-5
30-9-11                    11-9-2-4,
                           13-15-5
30-9-12                    13-15-5
30-9-13                    11-9-2-4,
                           13-15-5
30-9-14                    13-15-5
30-9-14.3                  13-15-5
30-10-3                    13-15-5
30-16-2                    11-9-2-4
30-16-3                    11-9-2-4
30-16-4                    11-9-2-4
30-16-9                    11-9-2-4
30-16D-7                   13-21-99
30-18-1 et seq.            9-2-1-4
30-20-1 et seq.            1-1-98
30-20-16                   12-2-29
30-20A-2D                  11-1-2-3
30-22-1.1                  11-9-2-4
30-22-4                    11-9-2-4
30-22-22                   11-9-2-4
30-22-23                   11-9-2-4
30-22-25                   11-9-2-4
30-24-3                    11-9-2-4
30-28-1                    11-9-2-4
30-31-1 et seq.            12-4-10
30-31-2                    11-9-1-4
30-31-2E                   12-4-16
30-31-6                    11-1-2-3
30-31-6(C)(20) - (25)      9-1-4-3
30-31-6 (2011)             9-1-4-3
30-31-7                    11-1-2-3
30-31-12                   12-4-16
30-31-20                   11-1-3-6,
                           11-9-2-4
30-31-21                   11-1-3-6
30-31A-5                   11-1-3-6
30-31A-6                   11-1-2-6
30-37-1 - 30-37-10         11-6-1
30-37-2.1                  13-15-5
30-37-3.3                  13-15-5
30-37A-1                   2-7-6-2
30-45-4                    2-7-6-2
30-49-1 - 30-49-12         9-11-1-4
31-19-1                    9-5-1-99
Chapter 32A                2-7-6-5
Chapter 32A, Article 2     8-2-1-12
                           13-4-4-9,
                           13-4-5-15,
37-1-3                     13-4-6-15,
                           13-4-7-15,
                           13-4-9-9,
                           13-4-10-4
39-3-1.1                   14-23-4
41-1-1 - 41-1-30           13-4-2-7
41-4-1 et seq.             2-8-2-1,
                           2-8-2-3
41-4-25B                   2-8-2-8
42A-1-34                   14-16-3-5
Chapter 47, Article 10     14-16-3-21
47-3-1 et seq.             14-11-2
47-3-3                     14-11-6
                           11-1-1-12,
47-8-1 et seq.             11-1-2-3,
                           14-3-5-16
47-10-2 et seq.            11-1-2-3
47-10-2                    11-1-2-3
47-16-2                    14-8-2-2
50-4-21(c)(3)-(5)          13-12-2
50-4-21(c)(7)              13-12-2
50-4-21(c)(12)             13-12-2
50-4-23                    13-12-2
52-1-1 et seq.             3-1-15
52-1-6                     7-7-12
52-1-10                    13-4-8-16,
                           13-5-1-18
53-11-11                   9-14-5
53-12-2(A)(8)              9-14-5
56-7-1                     13-5-1-17,
                           14-5-6-6
56-8-3                     14-19-18
56-12-4                    13-6-7
Chapter 57                 2-9-1-10
Chapter 57, Article 12     5-7-4,
                           14-26-12
57-12-2                    2-9-1-10
57-30-1 - 57-30-14         13-21-4
57-30-1 et seq.            13-21-99
58-15-1 - 58-15-39         14-16-1-5
58-18-1 et seq.            14-21-2
58-18-1 - 58-18-27         14-9-11,
                           14-21-4
60-2C-7                    9-20-1
Chapter 60, Article 3A     13-2-1 
60-3A-1 et seq.            9-6-8
60-7A-4.1                  11-1-1-3
60-7A-7                    11-1-1-3
60-7A-16                   11-1-1-3
60-7A-17                   13-15-5
60-3A-3                    12-4-8
Chapter 60, Article 5A     13-2-1
Chapter 60, Article 6A     13-2-1
60-6A-4                    4-5-2, 14-16-2-16
60-6A-12                   10-9-3
Chapter 60, Article 6B     13-2-1
60-6B-4                    13-2-2
60-6B-10                   13-2-4
60-6B-14 through 60-6B-16  4-5-2
Chapter 60, Article 6C     13-2-1
Chapter 60, Article 7A     13-2-1
Chapter 60, Article 7B     13-2-1
60-7B-1 through 60-7B-13   11-11-5
Chapter 60, Article 8A     13-2-1
60-10-17                   12-4-15
Chapter 60, Article 14     14-16-1-5
                           13-4-5-20,
62-3-3.A                   13-4-6-20,
                           13-4-7-20
62-3-3(G)                  13-4-10-2
64-2-1                     14-15-9
Chapter 65, Article 2      7-7-3
65-2-873                   7-7-3
Chapter 66, Articles 1 - 8 7-8-3,
                           9-5-3-3
66-1-1 et seq.             8-3-4-2
66-1-4.15                  11-1-2-3
66-1-4B(11)(c)             7-5-3
66-1-4B(39)                7-5-3
66-3-7                     7-8-8
66-3-16                    14-16-3-1
66-3-504                   11-9-2-4
66-3-801 - 66-3-887        8-3-4-2
66-4-1.1(A)                13-21-4
66-7-104                   7-15-3
66-8-105 - 66-8-112        8-2-1-8
66-8-108                   8-2-1-8
66-11-1 - 66-11-5          8-5-2-9
                           5-5-3;
72-1-10                    Ch. 6, Art. 4;
                           13-4-9-3
66-11-1 - 66-11-5          8-5-2-9
72-16-1 et seq.            14-14-1-6
74-1-8A(3)                 9-10-2-2
74-2-1 et seq.             9-5-6-2
74-2-1 - 74-2-17           7-8-5,
                           9-5-1-2
74-2-4                     9-5-1-7
74-2-14.C                  9-5-1-99
74-2-14.D                  9-5-1-99
74-2-16                    9-5-1-7,
                           9-5-1-13
                           
 
REFERENCES TO 1974 CODE
1974 Code Section 1994 Code Section
1974 Code Section   1994 Code Section
1-1-1               1-2-1
1-2-1               2-9-3-1
1-2-2               2-9-3-2
1-2-3               2-9-3-3
1-2-4               2-9-3-4
1-2-5               2-9-3-5
1-2-6               2-9-3-6
1-2-7               2-9-3-7
1-2-8               2-9-3-8
1-3-1               2-9-1-1
1-3-2               2-9-1-2
1-3-3               2-9-1-3
1-3-4               2-9-1-5
1-3-5               2-9-1-6
1-3-6               2-9-1-7
1-7-1               2-1-1
1-7-2               2-1-2
1-7-3               2-1-3
1-7-4               2-1-4
1-7-5               2-1-5
1-7-6               2-1-6
1-7-7               2-1-7
1-7-8               2-1-8
1-7-9               2-1-9
1-7-10              2-1-10
1-7-11 (part)       2-1-11
1-7-12              2-1-12
1-7-13              2-1-13
1-8-1               2-7-1-1
1-8-2               2-7-1-2
1-8-3               2-7-1-3
1-8-4               2-11-6
1-8-5               2-11-7
1-8-6               2-11-9
1-8-7               2-11-10
1-8-8               2-11-11
1-8-9               2-11-12
1-8-10              2-11-14
1-8-11              2-11-15
1-8-12              2-11-16
1-8-13              2-11-17
1-8-14              2-7-3-1
1-8-15              2-7-3-2
1-8-16              2-11-18
1-8-18              2-11-19
1-9-1               2-9-2-1
1-9-2               2-9-2-2
1-10-1              2-12-1
1-10-2              2-12-3
1-10-6              2-12-5
1-10-7              2-12-6
1-12-1              2-6-1-1
1-12-2              2-6-1-2
1-12-3              2-6-1-3
1-12-4              2-6-1-4
1-12-5              2-6-1-5
1-13-2              2-2-1
1-13-4              2-2-4
1-13-5              2-2-5
1-15-1              2-8-2-1
1-15-2              2-8-2-2
1-15-3              2-8-2-3
1-15-4              2-8-2-4
1-15-5              2-8-2-5
1-15-6              2-8-2-6
1-15-7              2-8-2-7
1-15-8              2-8-2-8
1-15-9              2-8-2-9
1-15-10             2-8-2-10
1-15-11A,B          2-8-2-11
1-15-11C            2-8-2-99
1-16-1              2-8-1-1
1-16-2              2-8-1-2
1-16-3              2-8-1-3
1-16-4              2-8-1-5
1-18-1              2-7-4-1
1-18-2              2-7-4-2
1-19-6              2-7-5-6
1-19-7              2-7-5-7
1-20-1              2-7-2-1
1-20-2              2-7-2-2
1-20-3              2-7-2-3
1-21-1              2-6-3-1
1-21-2              2-6-3-2
1-21-3              2-6-3-3
1-22-1              2-13-1
1-22-2              2-13-2
1-22-3              2-13-3
1-22-4              2-13-4
1-22-5              2-13-5
1-22-6              2-13-6
1-23-1              2-6-2-1
1-23-2              2-6-2-2
1-23-3              2-6-2-3
1-23-4              2-6-2-4
1-24-1              11-7-1
1-24-2              11-7-2
1-24-3              11-7-3
1-24-4              11-7-4
1-24-5              11-7-5
1-25-1              2-4-1
1-25-2              2-4-2
1-25-3              2-4-3
1-25-4              2-4-4
1-25-5              2-4-5
1-25-8              2-4-6
1-25-10             2-4-7
1-25-11             2-4-8
1-25-12             2-4-9
1-25-13             2-4-10
1-25-14             2-4-11
1-25-15             2-4-12
1-25-16             2-4-13
2-2-1               3-2-1
2-2-2               3-2-2
2-2-3               3-2-3
2-2-4               3-2-4
2-2-5               3-2-5
2-2-6               3-2-7
2-2-7               3-2-8
2-2-8               3-2-9
2-2-9               3-2-11
2-2-10              3-2-12
2-2-11              3-2-13
2-2-12              3-2-14
2-2-13              3-2-15
2-2-14              3-2-16
2-2-15              3-2-17
2-3-1               3-3-1
2-3-2               3-3-2
2-3-3               3-3-3
2-3-4               3-3-4
2-3-5               3-3-5
2-3-6               3-3-6
2-3-7               3-3-7
2-3-8               3-3-8
2-3-9               3-3-9
2-3-10              3-3-10
2-3-11              3-3-11
2-3-12              3-3-12
2-3-13 (part)       3-3-13
2-5-1               3-6-1
2-5-2               3-6-2
2-5-3               3-6-3
2-5-4               3-6-4
2-5-5               3-6-5
2-5-6               3-6-6
2-5-7               3-6-7
2-5-8               3-6-8
2-5-9               3-6-9
2-5-10              3-6-10
2-5-11              3-6-11
2-5-12              3-6-12
2-5-13              3-6-13
2-5-14              3-6-14
2-5-15              3-6-15
2-5-16              3-6-16
2-5-17              3-6-17
2-8-1               3-4-1
2-8-2               3-4-2
2-8-3               3-4-3
2-8-4               3-4-4
2-8-6               3-4-5
2-9-1               3-1-1
2-9-2               3-1-2
2-9-3               3-1-3
2-9-4               3-1-4
2-9-5               3-1-5
2-9-6               3-1-6
2-9-8               3-1-7
2-9-9               3-1-8
2-9-10              3-1-9
2-9-11              3-1-10
2-9-12              3-1-11
2-9-13              3-1-12
2-9-14              3-1-13
2-9-15              3-1-14
2-9-16              3-1-15
2-9-17              3-1-16
2-9-18              3-1-17
2-9-19              3-1-19
2-9-21              3-1-20
2-9-23              3-1-21
2-9-24              3-1-23
2-9-25              3-1-24
2-9-26              3-1-27
2-9-27              3-1-26
4-1-1               4-2-1-1
4-1-2               4-2-1-2
4-1-3               4-2-1-3
4-2-1               4-4-1
4-2-2               4-4-3
4-2-3               4-4-4
4-2-4               4-4-6
4-2-5               4-4-7
4-2-6               4-4-8
4-2-7               4-4-9
4-2-8               4-4-10
4-2-9               4-4-11
4-2-10              4-4-12
4-2-11              4-4-99
4-2-12              4-4-13
4-3-1               4-3-3-1
4-3-2               4-3-3-2
4-3-3               4-3-3-3
4-3-4               4-3-3-4
4-3-5               4-3-3-5
4-3-6               4-3-3-6
4-5-1               4-1-1
4-5-2               4-1-3
4-5-3               4-1-4
4-5-4               4-1-5
4-5-5               4-1-6
4-5-6               4-1-7
4-5-7               4-1-9
4-5-8 (part)        4-1-2
4-5-8 (part)        4-1-10
4-5-9               4-1-11
4-5-10              4-1-12
4-6-1               4-5-1
4-6-2               4-5-2
4-6-3               4-5-3
4-6-5               4-5-4
4-7-1               4-3-1-1
4-7-2               4-3-1-2
4-7-3               4-3-1-3
4-8-1               4-3-2-1
4-8-2               4-3-2-3
4-8-3               4-3-2-2
4-10-1              4-2-2-1
4-10-2              4-2-2-2
4-10-3              4-2-2-3
4-10-4              4-2-2-4
4-11-1              4-2-3-1
4-11-2              4-2-3-2
4-11-3              4-2-3-3
4-11-4              4-2-3-4
4-11-5              4-2-3-5
4-11-6              4-2-3-6
4-12-1              4-3-4-1
4-12-2              4-3-4-2
4-12-3              4-3-4-3
4-12-4              4-3-4-4
4-12-5              4-3-4-5
4-13-1              4-3-5-1
4-13-2              4-3-5-2
4-13-3              4-3-5-3
4-13-4              4-3-5-4
5-1-1               5-1-1
5-1-2               5-1-2
5-1-3               5-1-3(A)
5-1-4               5-1-3(B)
5-1-5               5-1-4
5-2-1               5-6-1
5-2-2               5-6-2
5-2-3               5-6-3
5-2-4               5-6-4
5-2-5               5-6-5
5-2-6               5-6-6
5-2-7               5-6-7
5-2-8               5-6-8
5-2-9               5-6-9
5-2-10              5-6-10
5-2-11              5-6-11
5-3-1               5-2-1
5-3-2               5-2-2
5-3-3               5-2-3
5-3-4               5-2-4
5-3-5               5-2-5
5-3-6               5-2-6
5-4-1               5-3-1
5-4-2               5-3-2
5-4-3               5-3-3
5-4-4               5-3-4
5-4-5               5-3-5
5-5-1               5-4-1
5-5-2               5-4-2
5-5-3               5-4-3
5-5-4               5-4-4
5-6-1               5-8-1
5-6-2               5-8-2
5-6-3               5-8-3
5-6-4               5-8-4
5-6-5               5-8-5
5-6-6               5-8-6
5-6-7               5-8-7
5-6-8               5-8-99
5-7-1               5-5-1
5-7-2               5-5-2
5-7-3               5-5-3
5-7-4               5-5-4
5-7-5               5-5-5
5-7-6               5-5-6
5-7-7               5-5-7
5-7-11              5-5-11
5-7-12              5-5-12
5-7-14              5-5-14
5-7-15              5-5-15
5-7-16              5-5-16
5-7-17              5-5-17
5-7-19              5-5-19
5-7-20              5-5-20
5-7-21              5-5-21
5-7-22              5-5-22
5-8-1 - 5-8-8       13-5-2-2
6-1-1               9-1-1-1
6-1-2               9-1-1-2
6-1-3               9-1-1-3
6-1-4               9-1-1-4
6-1-5               9-1-1-5
6-1-6               9-1-1-6
6-3-1               9-10-1-1
6-3-2               9-10-1-2
6-3-3               9-10-1-3
6-3-4               9-10-1-4
6-3-5               9-10-1-5
6-3-6               9-10-1-6
6-3-7               9-10-1-7
6-3-8               9-10-1-8
6-3-9               9-10-1-9
6-3-10              9-10-1-11
6-3-11              9-10-1-12
6-3-12              9-10-1-99
6-6-1               9-5-4-1
6-6-2               9-5-4-2
6-6-3               9-5-4-3
6-6-4               9-5-4-4
6-6-5               9-5-4-5
6-6-6               9-5-4-6
6-6-7               9-5-4-99
6-10-1              9-1-2-1
6-10-2              9-1-2-2
6-10-3              9-1-2-3
6-10-4              9-1-2-99
6-15-1              9-8-1
6-15-2              9-8-2
6-15-3              9-8-3
6-15-4              9-8-4
6-15-5              9-8-5
6-15-6              9-8-6
6-15-7              9-8-7
6-15-8              9-8-8
6-15-9              9-8-9
6-15-10             9-8-10
6-15-11             9-8-11
6-15-12             9-8-12
6-15-13             9-8-13
6-15-14             9-8-14
6-15-15             9-8-15
6-15-16             9-8-16
6-15-17             9-8-17
6-15-18             9-8-18
6-15-19             9-8-19
6-15-20             9-8-20
6-15-21             9-8-21
6-15-22             9-8-22
6-15-23             9-8-23
6-15-24             9-8-24
6-15-25             9-8-25
6-15-26             9-8-26
6-15-27             9-8-27
6-15-28             9-8-28
6-15-29             9-8-29
6-15-30             9-8-30
6-15-31             9-8-99
6-16-1              9-5-1-1
6-16-2              9-5-1-2
6-16-3              9-5-1-3
6-16-4              9-5-1-4
6-16-5              9-5-1-5
6-16-6              9-5-1-6
6-16-7              9-5-1-7
6-16-8              9-5-1-8
6-16-9              9-5-1-9
6-16-10             9-5-1-10
6-16-11             9-5-1-11
6-16-12             9-5-1-12
6-16-13             9-5-1-98
6-16-14A            9-5-1-99
6-16-14B            9-5-1-15
6-16-15             9-5-1-14
6-16-17             9-5-1-99
6-16-18             9-5-1-13
6-17-1              9-5-6-1
6-17-2              9-5-6-2
6-17-3              9-5-6-3
6-18-1              9-7-1
6-18-2              9-7-2
6-18-3              9-7-3
6-18-4              9-7-4
6-18-5              9-7-5
6-18-6              9-7-6
6-18-7              9-7-99
6-19-1              9-4-2-1
6-19-2              9-4-2-2
6-19-3              9-4-2-3
6-19-4              9-4-2-4
6-19-5              9-4-2-5
6-19-6              9-4-2-6
6-19-7B (part)      9-4-2-98
6-19-7B (part)      9-4-2-99
6-20-1              9-5-3-1
6-20-2              9-5-3-2
6-20-3              9-5-3-3
6-20-4              9-5-3-4
6-20-5              9-5-3-5
6-20-6              9-5-3-6
6-20-7              9-5-3-99
6-21-1              9-5-2-1
6-21-2              9-5-2-2
6-21-3              9-5-2-3
6-21-4              9-5-2-4
6-21-5              9-5-2-5
6-21-6              9-5-2-6
6-21-7              9-5-2-99
6-22-1              9-9-1
6-22-2              9-9-2
6-22-3              9-9-3
6-22-4              9-9-6
6-22-5              9-9-5
6-22-9              9-9-7
6-22-14             9-9-4
6-22-15             9-9-9
6-22-17             9-9-11
6-24-1A             9-4-3-1
6-24-1B             9-4-3-2
6-24-2              9-4-3-3
6-24-3              9-4-3-4
6-24-4              9-4-3-5
6-24-5              9-4-3-6
6-24-6 (part)       9-4-3-98
6-24-6 (part)       9-4-3-99
6-28-1              9-4-4-1
6-28-2              9-4-4-2
6-28-3              9-4-4-3
6-28-4              9-4-4-4
6-28-7              9-4-4-6
6-28-8              9-4-4-7
6-28-12             9-4-4-11
6-28-13             9-4-4-99
6-29-1              9-10-2-1
6-29-2              9-10-2-2
6-29-5              9-10-2-3
6-31-1              9-11-1-1
6-31-2              9-11-1-2
6-31-3              9-11-1-3
6-31-4              9-11-1-4
6-31-5              9-11-1-5
6-31-6              9-11-1-6
6-31-7              9-11-1-99
6-31-8              9-11-1-7
6-32-1              11-2-1
6-32-2              11-2-2
6-32-3              11-2-3
6-32-4              11-2-4
6-32-5              11-2-99
7-1-1               14-15-1
7-1-2               14-15-2
7-1-3               14-15-3
7-1-4               14-15-4
7-1-5               14-15-5
7-1-6               14-15-6
7-1-7               14-15-7
7-1-8               14-15-8
7-1-9               14-15-9
7-1-10              14-15-10
7-1-11              14-15-11
7-1-12              14-15-99
7-2-1               14-11-2
7-2-2               14-11-3
7-2-3               14-11-1
7-2-4               14-11-4
7-2-5               14-11-5
7-2-6               14-11-6
7-2-7               14-11-7
7-2-8               14-11-8
7-2-9               14-11-9
7-4-1               14-13-2-1
7-4-2               14-13-2-2
7-4-3               14-13-2-3
7-8-1               14-4-1
7-8-2               14-4-2
7-8-3               14-4-3
7-8-4               14-4-4
7-8-5               14-4-5
7-8-6               14-4-6
7-8-7               14-4-99
7-10-1              14-6-1
7-10-2              14-6-2
7-10-3              14-6-3
7-10-4              14-6-4
7-10-5              14-6-5
7-10-6              14-6-6
7-10-7              14-6-99
7-12-1              14-8-3-1
7-12-2              14-8-3-2
7-12-3              14-8-3-3
7-13-1              14-10-1
7-13-2              14-10-2
7-13-3              14-10-3
7-13-4              14-10-4
7-14-1              14-16-1-2
7-14-2              14-16-1-3
7-14-3              14-16-1-1
7-14-4              14-16-1-4
7-14-5              14-16-1-5
7-14-6              14-16-21-1
7-14-7              14-16-2-2
7-14-8              14-16-2-3
7-14-9              14-16-2-4
7-14-9A             14-16-2-5
7-14-10             14-16-2-6
7-14-11             14-16-2-7
7-14-12             14-16-2-8
7-14-13             14-16-2-9
7-14-14             14-16-2-10
7-14-15             14-16-2-11
7-14-16             14-16-2-12
7-14-17             14-16-2-13
7-14-18             14-16-2-14
7-14-20             14-16-2-15
7-14-21             14-16-2-16
7-14-22             14-16-2-17
7-14-23             14-16-2-18
7-14-24             14-16-2-19
7-14-25             14-16-2-20
7-14-26             14-16-2-21
7-14-30             14-16-2-22
7-14-31             14-16-2-23
7-14-32             14-16-2-24
7-14-33             14-16-2-25
7-14-34             14-16-2-26
7-14-35             14-16-2-27
7-14-36             14-16-2-29
7-14-39             14-16-2-28
7-14-40A            14-16-3-1
7-14-40B            14-16-3-2
7-14-40C            14-16-3-3
7-14-40D            14-16-3-4
7-14-40E            14-16-3-5
7-14-40F            14-16-3-6
7-14-40G            14-16-3-7
7-14-40H            14-16-3-8
7-14-40I            14-16-3-9
7-14-40J            14-16-3-10
7-14-40K            14-16-3-11
7-14-40L            14-16-3-12
7-14-40M            14-16-3-13
7-14-40O            14-16-3-15
7-14-41             14-16-4-1
7-14-42             14-16-4-2
7-14-44             14-16-4-3
7-14-45             14-16-4-4
7-14-46A.1, 2       14-16-4-5
7-14-46A.3          14-16-4-7
7-14-46A.4          14-16-4-10
7-14-46A.5          14-16-4-11
7-14-46A.6          14-16-4-12
7-14-46A.7          14-16-4-8
7-14-46A.8-10       14-16-4-6
7-14-46C            14-16-4-8
7-14-46B            14-16-4-99
7-14-47             14-16-1-6
7-15-2              14-13-3-2
7-15-3              14-13-3-3
7-15-4              2-6-14
7-15-5              2-6-15
7-15-6              2-6-16
7-15-7              14-13-3-4
7-15-8              2-6-17
7-16-1A             14-14-1-2
7-16-1B             14-14-1-1
7-16-1C             14-14-1-3
7-16-1D             14-14-1-4
7-16-1E             14-14-1-5
7-16-2              14-14-1-6
7-16-3A             14-14-2-1
7-16-3B             14-14-2-2
7-16-3C             14-14-2-3
7-16-3              14-14-2-4
7-16-4A             14-14-3-1
7-16-4B             14-14-3-2
7-16-4C             14-14-3-3
7-16-4D             14-14-3-4
7-16-4E             14-14-3-5
7-16-4F             14-14-3-6
7-16-5A             14-14-4-1
7-16-5B             14-14-4-2
7-16-5C             14-14-4-3
7-16-5D             14-14-4-4
7-16-5E             14-14-4-5
7-16-5F             14-14-4-6
7-16-5G             14-14-4-8
7-16-5H             14-14-4-9
7-16-5I             14-14-4-10
7-16-5J             14-14-4-11
7-16-5K             14-14-4-12
7-16-5L             14-14-4-13
7-16-5M             14-14-4-14
7-16-6A             14-14-5-1
7-16-6B             14-14-5-2
7-16-6C             14-14-5-3
7-16-6D             14-14-5-4
7-16-6E             14-14-5-5
7-16-6F             14-14-5-6
7-16-6G             14-14-5-7
7-16-6H             14-14-5-8
7-16-6I             14-14-5-9
7-16-6J             14-14-5-10
7-16-6K             14-14-5-11
7-16-7A             14-14-6-1
7-16-7B             14-14-6-2
7-16-7C             14-14-6-3
7-16-7D             14-14-6-4
7-16-8A             14-14-7-1
7-16-8B             14-14-7-2
7-16-8C             14-14-7-3
7-16-9A             14-14-8-1
7-16-9B             14-14-8-4
7-16-10A            14-14-9-1
7-16-10B            14-14-9-2
7-16-10C            14-14-9-3
7-16-10D            14-14-9-4
7-16-10E            14-14-9-99
7-16-11             14-14-1-7
7-16-12A            14-14-1-8
7-16-12B            14-14-1-9
7-16-12C            14-14-1-10
7-16-12D            14-14-1-11
7-16-12E            14-14-1-12
7-16-12F            14-14-1-13
7-16-12G            14-14-1-14
7-16-13             14-14-1-15
7-17-1              14-7-2-1
7-17-2              14-7-2-2
7-17-3              14-7-2-3
7-17-4              14-7-2-4
7-17-5              14-7-2-5
7-17-6              14-7-2-6
7-17-8              14-7-2-7
7-17-9              14-7-2-8
7-17-10             14-7-2-9
7-20-1              14-7-1-1
7-20-2              14-7-1-3
7-20-3              14-7-1-4
7-20-4              14-7-1-5
7-20-5              14-7-1-6
7-21-1              14-8-5-1
7-21-2              14-8-5-3
7-21-3              14-8-5-4
7-21-4              14-8-5-5
7-22-1              14-8-4-1
7-22-2              14-8-4-2
7-22-3              14-8-4-3
7-22-4              14-8-4-4
7-22-6              14-8-4-5
7-22-7              14-8-4-6
7-22-8              14-8-4-7
7-22-9              14-8-4-8
7-23-1              14-8-6-1
7-23-2              14-8-6-2
7-23-3              14-8-6-3
7-23-4              14-8-6-4
7-23-5              14-8-6-5
7-23-6              14-8-6-6
7-24-1A             14-3-1-1
7-24-1B             14-3-1-2
7-24-1C             14-3-1-3
7-24-2              14-3-1-4
7-24-3A.1           14-3-5-1
7-24-3A.2           14-3-5-9
7-24-3A.3           14-3-5-10
7-24-3A.4           14-3-5-11
7-24-3B             14-3-5-12
7-24-3C             14-3-5-2
7-24-3D (part)      14-3-5-98
7-24-3D (part)      14-3-5-99
7-24-4              14-3-5-8
7-24-5A             14-3-2-1
7-24-5B             14-3-2-2
7-24-5C             14-3-2-3
7-24-6              14-3-3-1
7-24-7              14-3-3-2
7-24-8              14-3-3-3
7-24-9              14-3-3-4
7-24-10A.1          14-3-4-1
7-24-10A.2          14-3-4-2
7-24-10A.3          14-3-4-3
7-24-10A.4          14-3-4-4
7-24-10A.5          14-3-4-5
7-24-10A.6          14-3-4-6
7-24-10A.7          14-3-4-7
7-24-10A.8          14-3-4-8
7-24-10A.10         14-3-4-9
7-24-10A.11         14-3-4-10
7-24-10A.12         14-3-4-11
7-24-11             14-3-5-3
7-24-12             14-3-5-4
7-24-13             14-3-5-5
7-24-14             14-3-5-6
7-24-15             14-3-5-7
7-27-1A             14-2-1
7-27-1B             14-2-2
7-27-1C             14-2-3
7-27-2              14-2-4
7-27-5              14-2-5
7-27-6AB            14-2-6
7-27-7              14-2-4
7-27-10             14-2-99
7-28-1              14-1-1
7-28-2              14-1-2
7-28-3              14-1-3
7-28-4              14-1-6,
                    14-1-7
7-28-5              14-1-8
7-28-6              14-1-5
7-28-7              14-1-4
7-28-10             14-1-99
8-1-1               6-5-1-1
8-1-2               6-5-1-2
8-1-3               6-5-1-3
8-1-4               6-5-1-4
8-2-1               6-1-3-1
8-2-2               6-1-3-2
8-2-3               6-1-3-3
8-3-1               6-1-2-1
8-3-2               6-1-2-2
8-5-1               6-6-2-1
8-5-2               6-6-2-2
8-5-3               6-6-2-3
8-5-4               6-6-2-4
8-5-5               6-6-2-5
8-5-6               6-6-2-6
8-5-7               6-6-2-7
8-5-8               6-6-2-8
8-5-9               6-6-2-9
8-6-1               6-5-5-1
8-6-2               6-5-5-2
8-6-3               6-5-5-3
8-6-4               6-5-5-4
8-6-5               6-5-5-5
8-6-6               6-5-5-6
8-6-7               6-5-5-7
8-6-8               6-5-5-8
8-6-9               6-5-5-9
8-6-10              6-5-5-10
8-6-11              6-5-5-11
8-6-12              6-5-5-12
8-6-13              6-5-5-13
8-6-14              6-5-5-14
8-6-15              6-5-5-15
8-6-18              6-5-5-18
8-6-19              6-5-5-19
8-6-20              6-5-5-20
8-6-21              6-5-5-21
8-6-22              6-5-5-22
8-6-23              6-5-5-23
8-6-24              6-5-5-24
8-8-1               6-5-3-1
8-8-2               6-5-3-2
8-8-3               6-5-3-3
8-8-4               6-5-3-4
8-8-5               6-5-3-5
8-8-6               6-5-3-6
8-8-7               6-5-3-7
8-8-8               6-5-3-99
8-12-1              6-7-1
8-12-2              6-7-2
8-12-3              6-7-3
8-12-4              6-7-4
8-12-5              6-7-5
8-12-6              6-7-6
8-12-7              6-7-7
8-12-8              6-7-8
8-12-9              6-7-9
8-13-1              6-5-4-1
8-13-2              6-5-4-2
8-13-3              6-5-4-3
8-13-4              6-5-4-4
8-13-5              6-5-4-5
8-13-6              6-5-4-6
8-13-7              6-5-4-7
9-1-1               7-8-1
9-1-2               7-8-2
9-1-3               7-8-3
9-1-4               7-8-4
9-1-5               7-8-5
9-1-6               7-8-6
9-1-7               7-8-7
9-1-8               7-8-8
9-1-9               7-8-9
9-1-10              7-8-10
9-1-11              7-8-11
9-1-12              7-8-12
9-1-13              7-8-13
9-1-14              7-8-14
9-2-1               7-1-1-1
9-2-2               7-1-1-2
9-2-3               7-1-1-3
9-2-4               7-1-1-4
9-2-5               7-1-1-5
9-2-6               7-1-1-6
9-2-7               7-1-1-7
9-2-8               7-1-1-99
9-3-1               7-4-1
9-3-2               7-4-2
9-3-3               7-4-3
9-3-4               7-4-4
9-5-1               8-1-1-2
9-5-2.1             8-1-2-1
9-5-2.2             8-1-2-2
9-5-2.3             8-1-2-3
9-5-2.4             8-1-2-4
9-5-2.5             8-1-2-5
9-5-2.7             8-1-2-6
9-5-2.8             8-1-2-7
9-5-2.10            8-1-2-8
9-5-2.11            8-1-2-9
9-5-2.12            8-1-2-10
9-5-2.13            8-1-2-11
9-5-2.14            8-1-2-12
9-5-2.15            8-1-2-13
9-5-2.16            8-1-2-14
9-5-2.18            8-1-2-15
9-5-2.19            8-1-2-16
9-5-2.20            8-1-2-17
9-5-2.21            8-1-2-18
9-5-2.22            8-1-2-19
9-5-2.23            8-1-2-20
9-5-2.24            8-1-2-21
9-5-2.25            8-1-2-22
9-5-2.26            8-1-2-23
9-5-2.27            8-1-2-24
9-5-2.28            8-1-2-25
9-5-2.29            8-1-2-26
9-5-2.30            8-1-2-27
9-5-2.31            8-1-2-28
9-5-2.32            8-1-2-29
9-5-2.33            8-1-2-30
9-5-2.34            8-1-2-31
9-5-2.35            8-1-2-32
9-5-2.36            8-1-2-33
9-5-2.37            8-1-2-34(A)
9-5-2.38            8-1-2-34(B)
9-5-2.39            8-1-2-35
9-5-2.40            8-1-2-36
9-5-2.41            8-1-2-37
9-5-2.42            8-1-2-38
9-5-2.45            8-1-2-39
9-5-2.46            8-1-2-41
9-5-2.47A           8-1-2-42
9-5-2.47B           8-1-2-40
9-5-2.50 - 9-5-2.52 8-1-2-43
9-5-2.54 - 9-5-2.57 8-1-2-46
9-5-2.58            8-1-2-44
9-5-2.59            8-1-2-45
9-5-4.1             8-1-1-1
9-5-4.2             8-2-1-1
9-5-4.3             8-2-1-2
9-5-4.4             8-2-1-3
9-5-4.5             8-2-1-4
9-5-4.6             8-2-1-5
9-5-4.7             8-2-1-6
9-5-4.8             8-2-1-7
9-5-4.9             8-2-1-8
9-5-4.10            8-2-1-9
9-5-4.11            8-2-1-10
9-5-4.12            8-2-1-11
9-5-4.13A           8-2-1-12
9-5-4.13B           8-2-1-99
9-5-4.14            8-2-1-13
9-5-4.16            8-2-1-14
9-5-4.17A           8-2-1-15
9-5-4.17B           8-2-1-99
9-5-4.18            8-2-1-16
9-5-4.19            8-2-1-17
9-5-4.20            8-2-1-18
9-5-4.21            8-2-1-19
9-5-4.22A           8-2-1-20
9-5-4.22B           8-2-1-99
9-5-4.23            8-2-1-21
9-5-4.24            8-2-1-22
9-5-4.25            8-2-1-23
9-5-4.26            8-2-1-24
9-5-4.27            8-2-1-25
9-5-4.28            8-2-1-26
9-5-4.29            8-2-1-27
9-5-4.30            8-2-1-28
9-5-4.31            8-2-1-29
9-5-4.32            8-2-1-30
9-5-4.33            8-2-1-31
9-5-4.34            8-2-1-32
9-5-4.35            8-2-1-33
9-5-4.36            8-2-1-34
9-5-4.37            8-2-1-35
9-5-4.38            8-2-1-36
9-5-4.39            8-2-1-37
9-5-4.40            8-2-1-38
9-5-4.41            8-2-1-39
9-5-4.42            8-2-1-40
9-5-4.43            8-2-1-41
9-5-4.44            8-2-1-42
9-5-4.46            8-2-1-43
9-5-4.47            8-2-1-44
9-5-4.48            8-2-1-45
9-5-4.49            8-2-1-46
9-5-4.50            8-2-1-47
9-5-4.51            8-2-1-48
9-5-4.52            8-2-1-49
9-5-4.53            8-2-1-50
9-5-4.54            8-2-1-51
9-5-4.55            8-2-1-52
9-5-4.56            8-2-1-53
9-5-4.57            8-2-1-54
9-5-4.58            8-2-1-55
9-5-4.59            8-2-1-56
9-5-4.61            8-2-1-57
9-5-4.62            8-2-1-58
9-5-4.63            8-2-1-59
9-5-4.64            8-2-1-60
9-5-4.65            8-2-1-61
9-5-4.66            8-2-1-62
9-5-4.67            8-2-1-63
9-5-4.68            8-2-1-63
9-5-4.69            8-2-1-64
9-5-4.70            8-2-1-65
9-5-4.71            8-2-1-66
9-5-4.72            8-2-1-67
9-5-5.1             8-2-9-1
9-5-5.2             8-2-9-2
9-5-5.3             8-2-9-3
9-5-5.4             8-2-9-4
9-5-5.5             8-2-9-5
9-5-5.6             8-2-9-6
9-5-5.7             8-2-9-7
9-5-5.8             8-2-9-8
9-5-5.9             8-2-9-9
9-5-6.1             8-2-4-1
9-5-6.2             8-2-4-2
9-5-6.3             8-2-4-3
9-5-6.4             8-2-4-4
9-5-6.5             8-2-4-5
9-5-6.7             8-2-4-6
9-5-6.8             8-2-4-7
9-5-6.9             8-2-4-8
9-5-6.10            8-2-4-9
9-5-7.1             8-2-5-1
9-5-7.2             8-2-5-2
9-5-7.3             8-2-5-3
9-5-7.4             8-2-5-4
9-5-7.5             8-2-5-5
9-5-7.6             8-2-5-6
9-5-7.7             8-2-5-7
9-5-7.8             8-2-5-8
9-5-7.9             8-2-5-9
9-5-7.10            8-2-5-10
9-5-8.1             8-2-6-1
9-5-8.2             8-2-6-2
9-5-8.3             8-2-6-3
9-5-8.4             8-2-6-4
9-5-8.5             8-2-6-5
9-5-8.6             8-2-6-6
9-5-8.7             8-2-6-7
9-5-8.8             8-2-6-8
9-5-8.9             8-2-6-9
9-5-8.11            8-2-6-10
9-5-8.12            8-2-6-11
9-5-8.13            8-2-6-12
9-5-10.1            8-2-2-1
9-5-10.2            8-2-2-2
9-5-10.3            8-2-2-3
9-5-10.4            8-2-2-4
9-5-10.5            8-2-2-5
9-5-10.6            8-2-2-6
9-5-10.7            8-2-2-7
9-5-10.8            8-2-2-8
9-5-10.9            8-2-2-9
9-5-10.10           8-2-2-10
9-5-10.11           8-2-2-11
9-5-10.12           8-2-2-12
9-5-10.13           8-2-2-13
9-5-10.14A, B       8-2-2-14
9-5-10.14C, D       8-2-2-15
9-5-11.1            8-2-8-1
9-5-11.2            8-2-8-2
9-5-11.3A           8-2-8-3
9-5-11.3B           8-2-8-4
9-5-11.3C           8-2-8-5
9-5-11.4            8-2-8-6
9-5-11.5            8-2-8-7
9-5-12.1            8-2-3-1
9-5-12.2            8-2-3-2
9-5-12.3            8-2-3-3
9-5-12.4            8-2-3-4
9-5-12.5            8-2-3-5
9-5-12.6            8-2-3-6
9-5-14.1            8-2-7-1
9-5-14.2            8-2-7-2
9-5-14.3            8-2-7-3
9-5-14.4            8-2-7-4
9-5-14.5            8-2-7-5
9-5-14.6            8-2-7-6
9-5-14.7            8-2-7-7
9-5-14.8            8-2-7-8
9-5-14.9            8-2-7-9
9-5-14.10           8-2-7-10
9-5-14.11           8-2-7-11
9-5-14.13           8-2-7-12
9-5-14.14           8-2-7-13
9-5-14.15           8-3-1-1
9-5-15.1            8-3-2-1
9-5-15.2            8-3-2-2
9-5-15.3            8-3-2-3
9-5-15.4            8-3-2-4
9-5-15.5            8-3-2-5
9-5-15.7            8-3-2-6
9-5-15.8            8-3-2-7
9-5-15.10           8-3-2-8
9-5-15.11           8-3-2-9
9-5-15.12           8-3-2-10
9-5-15.14           8-3-2-11
9-5-15.15           8-3-2-12
9-5-15.16           8-3-2-13
9-5-15.18           8-3-2-14
9-5-15.19           8-3-2-15
9-5-16.1            8-3-3-1
9-5-16.2            8-3-3-2
9-5-16.4            8-3-3-3
9-5-16.5            8-3-3-4
9-5-16.6            8-3-3-5
9-5-16.7            8-3-3-6
9-5-16.8            8-3-3-7
9-5-16.9            8-3-3-8
9-5-16.11           8-3-3-10
9-5-16.12           8-3-3-12
9-5-16.13           8-3-3-13
9-5-16.15           8-3-3-14
9-5-16.16           8-3-3-15
9-5-16.17           8-3-3-16
9-5-16.18           8-3-3-17
9-5-16.19           8-3-3-18
9-5-16.20           8-3-3-19
9-5-16.23           8-3-3-20
9-5-16.24           8-3-3-21
9-5-16.25           8-3-3-22
9-5-16.26           8-3-3-23
9-5-16.29           8-3-3-24
9-5-17.1            8-4-1
9-5-17.2            8-4-2
9-5-17.3            8-4-3
9-5-17.4            8-4-4
9-5-17.5            8-4-5
9-5-17.6            8-4-6
9-5-17.7            8-4-7
9-5-17.8            8-4-8
9-5-17.9            8-4-9
9-5-17.10           8-4-10
9-5-17.11           8-4-11
9-5-17.12           8-4-12
9-5-19.1            8-5-1-1
9-5-19.2            8-5-1-2
9-5-19.3            8-5-1-3
9-5-19.4            8-5-1-3
9-5-19.5            8-5-1-5
9-5-19.6            8-5-1-6
9-5-19.7            8-5-1-7
9-5-19.8            8-5-1-8
9-5-19.9            8-5-1-9
9-5-19.10           8-5-1-10
9-5-19.11           8-5-1-11
9-5-19.12           8-5-1-12
9-5-19.13           8-5-1-13
9-5-19.14           8-5-1-14
9-5-19.15           8-5-1-15
9-5-19.16           8-5-1-16
9-5-19.17           8-5-1-17
9-5-19.18           8-5-1-18
9-5-19.19           8-5-1-19
9-5-19.20           8-5-1-20
9-5-19.21           8-5-1-21
9-5-19.22           8-5-1-22
9-5-19.23           8-5-1-23
9-5-19.24           8-5-1-24
9-5-19.25           8-5-1-25
9-5-19.26           8-5-1-26
9-5-19.27           8-5-1-27
9-5-19.28           8-5-1-28
9-5-19.31           8-5-1-31
9-5-19.32           8-5-1-32
9-5-19.34           8-5-1-34
9-5-19.35           8-5-1-35
9-5-19.36           8-5-1-36
9-5-19.37           8-5-1-37
9-5-19.38           8-5-1-38
9-5-19.39           8-5-1-39
9-5-19.40           8-5-1-40
9-5-19.41A          8-5-2-1
9-5-19.41B          8-5-2-2
9-5-19.41C          8-5-2-3
9-5-19.41D          8-5-2-4
9-5-19.41E          8-5-2-5
9-5-19.41F          8-5-2-6
9-5-19.41G          8-5-2-7
9-5-19.41H          8-5-2-8
9-5-19.42           8-5-3-1
9-5-19.43           8-5-1-41
9-5-20.1            8-6-1
9-5-20.2            8-6-2
9-5-20.3            8-6-3
9-5-20.4            8-6-4
9-5-20.6            8-6-5
9-5-20.7            8-6-6
9-5-20.8            8-6-7
9-5-20.9            8-6-8
9-5-20.10           8-6-9
9-5-20.11           8-6-10
9-5-20.12           8-6-11
9-5-20.13           8-6-12
9-5-20.14           8-6-13
9-5-20.15           8-6-14
9-5-20.16           8-6-15
9-5-20.17           8-6-16
9-5-20.18           8-6-17
9-5-20.19           8-6-18
9-5-20.20           8-6-19
9-5-20.21           8-6-20
9-5-20.22           8-6-21
9-5-20.23           8-6-22
9-5-20.24           8-6-23
9-5-20.25           8-6-24
9-5-20.26           8-6-25
9-5-20.27           8-6-26
9-5-20.28A-F, H     8-6-27
9-5-20.28G          8-6-99
9-5-21.1            8-1-3-1
9-5-21.2            8-1-3-2
9-5-21.3            8-1-3-3
9-5-21.4            8-1-3-4
9-5-21.5            8-1-3-5
9-5-21.6            8-1-3-6
9-5-21.7            8-1-3-7
9-5-21.8            8-1-3-8
9-5-21.9            8-1-3-9
9-5-21.10           8-1-3-10
9-5-21.11           8-1-3-11
9-5-21.13           8-1-3-14
9-5-21.14           8-1-3-15
9-5-21.15           8-1-3-16
9-5-21.16           8-1-3-99
9-5-21.17           8-1-3-17
9-5-21.18           8-1-3-18
9-5-21.19           8-1-3-19
9-5-21.20           8-1-3-20
9-5-21.21           8-1-3-21
9-5-21.22           8-1-3-22
9-6-1               7-1-2-1
9-6-2               7-1-2-2
9-6-3               7-1-2-3
9-6-4               7-1-2-4
9-6-5               7-1-2-5
9-6-6               7-1-2-6
9-6-7               7-1-2-7
9-6-8               7-1-2-8
9-7-1               7-5-1
9-7-2               7-5-2
9-7-3               7-5-3
9-7-4A              7-5-99
9-7-4B              7-5-4
9-9-1               7-7-1
9-9-2               7-7-2
9-9-4               7-7-3
9-9-5               7-7-4
9-9-6               7-7-5
9-9-7               7-7-6
9-9-8               7-7-7
9-9-9               7-7-8
9-9-10              7-7-9
9-9-11              7-7-10
9-9-12              7-7-11
9-9-13              7-7-12
9-9-14              7-7-13
9-9-15              7-7-14
9-9-16              7-7-15
9-9-17              7-7-16
9-9-18              7-7-17
9-9-19              7-7-18
9-9-20              7-7-10
9-9-21              7-7-20
9-9-22              7-7-22
9-9-24              7-7-99
10-2-1              13-3-2-1
10-2-2              13-3-2-2
10-2-3              13-3-2-3
10-2-4              13-3-2-4
10-2-5              13-3-2-5
10-2-6              13-3-2-6
10-2-7              13-3-2-7
10-2-8              13-3-2-8
10-2-9              13-3-2-9
10-2-10             13-3-2-10
10-2-11             13-3-2-11
10-2-12             13-3-2-12
10-2-13             13-3-2-13
10-2-14             13-3-2-14
10-2-15             13-3-2-98
10-2-16             13-3-2-15
10-2-17             13-3-2-16
10-2-18             13-3-2-17
10-2-19             13-3-2-18
10-2-20             13-3-2-99
10-4-1              13-7-1-1
10-4-2              13-7-1-2
10-4-3              13-7-1-3
10-4-4              13-7-1-4
10-4-5              13-7-1-5
10-4-6              13-7-1-6
10-4-7              13-7-1-99
10-5-1              13-3-3-1
10-5-2              13-3-3-2
10-5-3              13-3-3-3
10-5-4              13-3-3-4
10-5-5              13-3-3-5
10-5-6              13-3-3-6
10-5-7              13-3-3-99
10-6-1              13-9-2
10-6-2              13-9-3
10-6-3              13-9-4
10-6-4              13-9-1(A)
10-7-1              13-8-1(B)
10-7-2              13-8-2
10-7-3              13-8-3
10-7-4              13-8-4
10-7-5              13-8-5
10-7-6              13-8-99
10-8-1              13-2-1
10-8-2              13-2-2
10-8-3              13-2-3
10-8-4              13-2-6
10-8-5              13-2-5
10-9-1              13-10-1
10-9-2              13-10-2
10-9-3              13-10-3
10-9-4              13-10-4
10-9-5              13-10-5
10-9-6              13-10-6
10-9-7              13-10-7
10-9-8              13-10-8
10-9-9              13-10-9
10-9-10             13-10-99
10-9-11             13-10-10
10-10-1             13-3-1-1
10-10-2             13-3-1-2
10-10-3             13-3-1-3
10-10-4             13-3-1-4
10-10-5             13-3-1-5
10-10-6             13-3-1-6
10-10-7             13-3-1-7
10-10-8             13-3-1-8
10-10-9             13-3-1-9
10-10-10            13-3-1-10
10-10-11            13-3-1-11
10-10-12            13-3-1-12
10-10-13            13-3-1-15
10-10-14            13-3-1-13
10-10-15            13-3-1-14
10-10-16            13-3-1-98
10-10-17            13-3-1-99
10-12-1             13-11-2
10-12-2             13-11-3
10-12-3             13-11-1
10-12-4             13-11-4
10-12-5             13-11-5
10-12-7             13-11-7
10-12-8             13-11-8
10-12-9             13-11-9
10-12-10            13-11-10
10-12-11            13-11-11
10-12-12            13-11-99
11-1-1              6-6-1-1
11-1-2              6-6-1-2
11-1-3              6-6-1-3
11-1-4              6-6-1-4
11-1-5              6-6-1-5
11-1-6              6-6-1-6
11-1-7              6-6-1-7
11-1-8              6-6-1-8
11-1-9              6-6-1-9
11-2-1              10-1-1-1
11-2-2              10-1-1-2
11-2-3              10-1-1-3
11-2-4              10-1-1-4
11-2-5              10-1-1-5
11-2-6              10-1-1-6
11-2-7              10-1-1-7
11-2-8              10-1-1-8
11-2-9              10-1-1-9
11-2-10             10-1-1-10
11-2-11             10-1-1-99
11-3-1              10-9-1
11-3-2              10-9-2
11-3-3              10-9-3
11-3-4              10-9-4
11-3-5              10-9-5
11-3-6              10-9-6
11-3-7              10-9-7
11-3-8              10-9-9
11-3-9              10-9-10
11-3-10             10-9-99
11-3-11             10-9-8
11-4-1              10-4-1-1
11-4-2              10-4-1-2
11-4-3              10-4-1-3
11-4-4              10-4-1-4
11-4-5              10-4-1-5
11-4-7              10-4-1-7
11-4-8              10-4-1-8
11-4-9              10-4-1-9
11-5-1              10-3-1-1
11-5-2              10-3-1-2
11-5-3              10-3-1-3
11-5-4A             10-3-4-1
11-5-4B             10-3-4-2
11-5-4C             10-3-4-3
11-5-4D             10-3-4-4
11-5-5A             10-3-4-5
11-5-5B             10-3-4-6
11-5-5C             10-3-4-7
11-5-5D             10-3-4-8
11-5-6A             10-3-5-1
11-5-6B             10-3-5-2
11-5-6C             10-3-5-3
11-5-6D             10-3-5-4
11-5-6E             10-3-5-5
11-5-6F             10-3-5-6
11-5-6G             10-3-5-7
11-5-6H             10-3-5-8
11-5-6I             10-3-5-9
11-5-7 (part)       10-3-2-1
11-5-7A (part)      10-3-2-2
11-5-7B (part)      10-3-3-1
11-5-7A.1           10-3-2-3
11-5-7A.2           10-3-2-4
11-5-7A.3           10-3-2-5
11-5-7A.4           10-3-2-6
11-5-7A.5           10-3-2-7
11-5-7A.6           10-3-2-8
11-5-7A.7           10-3-2-9
11-5-7A.8           10-3-2-9
11-5-7A.9           10-3-2-11
11-5-7A.10          10-3-2-12
11-5-7A.11          10-3-2-13
11-5-7A.12          10-3-2-14
11-5-7A.13          10-3-2-15
11-5-7A.14          10-3-2-16
11-5-7A.15          10-3-2-17
11-5-7A.16          10-3-2-18
11-5-7A.17          10-3-2-19
11-5-7A.18          10-3-2-20
11-5-7B.1           10-3-3-2
11-5-7B.2           10-3-3-3
11-5-7B.3           10-3-3-4
11-5-7B.4           10-3-3-5
11-5-7B.5           10-3-3-6
11-5-7B.6           10-3-3-7
11-5-7B.7           10-3-3-8
11-5-7B.8           10-3-3-9
11-5-7B.9           10-3-3-10
11-5-7B.10          10-3-3-11
11-5-7B.11          10-3-3-12
11-5-7B.12          10-3-3-13
11-5-7B.13          10-3-3-14
11-5-8              10-3-1-4
11-5-9              10-3-5-99
11-6-1              10-2-3-1
11-6-2              10-2-3-2
11-6-3              10-2-3-3
11-7-1              10-2-1-1
11-7-2              10-2-1-2
11-7-3              10-2-1-3
11-7-4              10-2-1-4
11-11-1             10-6-1
11-11-2             10-6-2
11-13-1             10-7-1
11-13-2             10-7-2
11-13-3             10-7-3
11-14-1             10-5-1
11-14-2             10-5-2
11-14-3             10-5-3
11-14-4             10-5-4
11-14-5             10-5-5
11-14-6             10-5-6
11-14-7             10-5-7
11-14-8             10-5-8
11-15-1             10-1-2-1
11-15-2             10-1-2-2
11-15-3             10-1-2-3
11-15-4             10-1-2-4
11-15-5             10-1-2-5
11-18-1             10-4-2-1
11-21-1             10-8-1
11-21-2             10-8-2
11-21-3             10-8-3
11-22-1A            10-4-5-2
12-1-1-1            12-1-1
12-1-1-2            12-1-2
12-1-1-3            12-1-3
12-1-1-4            12-1-4
12-1-1-5            12-1-99
12-1-1-6            12-1-5
12-1-2-1            12-2-1
12-1-2-2            12-2-2
12-1-2-3            12-2-3
12-1-2-4            12-2-4
12-1-2-5            12-2-5
12-1-2-6            12-2-6
12-1-2-7            12-2-7
12-1-2-8            12-2-8
12-1-2-9            12-2-9
12-1-2-10           12-2-10
12-1-2-11           12-2-11
12-1-2-12           12-2-12
12-1-2-14           12-2-13
12-1-2-15           12-2-14
12-1-2-16           12-2-15
12-1-2-17           12-2-16
12-1-2-18           12-2-17
12-1-2-19           12-2-18
12-1-2-20           12-2-19
12-1-2-21           12-2-20
12-1-2-22           12-2-21
12-1-2-23           12-2-22
12-1-2-24           12-2-23
12-1-2-25           12-2-24
12-1-2-26           12-2-25
12-1-2-27           12-2-26
12-1-3-1            12-3-1
12-1-3-2            12-3-2
12-1-3-3            12-3-3
12-1-3-4            12-3-4
12-1-3-5            12-3-5
12-1-3-6            12-3-6
12-1-3-7            12-3-7
12-1-3-9            12-3-8
12-1-3-10           12-3-9
12-1-4-1            12-4-1
12-1-4-2            12-4-2
12-1-4-3            12-4-3
12-1-4-4            12-4-4
12-1-4-5            12-4-5
12-1-4-6            12-4-6
12-1-4-7            12-4-7
12-1-4-9            12-4-8
12-1-4-11 (part)    12-1-99(D)
12-1-4-11 (part)    12-4-10
12-1-4-12           12-4-11
12-1-4-13           12-4-12
12-1-4-14           12-4-13
12-1-4-15           12-4-14
12-1-4-16           12-4-15
12-1-4-17           12-4-16
12-1-5-1            12-5-1
12-1-5-2            12-5-2
12-1-5-3            12-5-3
12-1-5-4            12-5-4
12-1-5-5            12-5-5
12-1-5-6            12-5-6
12-1-5-7            12-5-7
12-1-5-8            12-5-8
12-3-1              11-3-1
12-3-2              11-3-2
12-3-3              11-3-3
12-3-4              11-3-4
12-3-5              11-3-5
12-3-6              11-3-6
12-3-7              11-3-7
12-3-8              11-3-8
12-3-9              11-3-9
12-3-10             11-3-10
12-3-11             11-3-11
12-3-12             11-3-12
12-3-13             11-3-99
12-4-1 - 12-4-5     1-1-98
12-6-1              11-4-1
12-6-2              11-4-3
12-6-3              11-4-2
12-6-4              11-4-99
12-8-1              2-5-1
12-8-2              2-5-2
12-8-3              2-5-3
12-8-4              2-5-4
12-8-5              2-5-5
12-9-1              11-6-1
12-9-2              11-6-2
12-9-3              11-6-3
12-9-4              11-6-4
12-9-5              11-6-5
12-9-6              11-6-99
12-9-7              11-6-6
12-9-8              11-6-7
12-9-9              11-6-8
                    
 
REFERENCES TO ORDINANCES
Ord. No. Code Section
Ord. No. Code Section
957      6-6-1-1 -
         6-6-1-9
964      3-6-1 -
         3-6-17
1023     14-10-1 -
         14-10-4
1083     3-6-9
1461     7-4-1 -
         7-4-4
1462     7-4-1 -
         7-4-4
1490     7-4-1 -
         7-4-4
         6-5-3-1 -
1728     6-5-3-7,
         6-5-3-99
1903     6-5-4-1 -
         6-5-4-7
         3-6-2,
         3-6-5,
1936     3-6-6,
         3-6-9,
         3-6-13,
         3-6-17
         9-7-1 -
2028     9-7-6,
         9-7-99
2046     1-2-1
         13-7-1-1 -
2068     13-7-1-6,
         13-7-1-99
2167     2-9-3-1 -
         2-9-3-8
2200     13-9-1 -
         13-9-4
2383     10-2-3-1 -
         10-2-3-3
2391     14-15-10, 14-15-11, 14-15-99
2513     9-7-4
         14-4-1 -
2668     14-4-6,
         14-4-99
         7-1-1-1 -
2697     7-1-1-7,
         7-1-1-99
         13-8-1 -
2737     13-8-5,
         13-8-99
2764     7-1-1-4
13-1966  5-1-1 -
         5-1-4
7-1967   10-6-1,
         10-6-2
13-1967  14-8-3-1,
         14-8-3-2
         9-8-1 -
         9-8-10,
89-1967  9-8-25 -
         9-8-28,
         9-8-99
         10-4-1-1 -
92-1967  10-4-1-5,
         10-4-1-7 -
         10-4-1-9
152-1967 7-1-2-1 -
         7-1-2-7
40-1968  9-8-4
         2-9-1-1 -
58-1968  2-9-1-3,
         2-9-1-5 -
         2-9-1-7
80-1968  10-2-1-1 -
         10-2-1-4
36-1969  10-2-1-2,
         4-4-1,
         4-4-3,
80-1969  4-4-4,
         4-4-6 -
         4-4-12 ,
         4-4-99
59-1970  10-4-1-5
98-1970  1-1-98
151-1970 6-1-2-1,
         6-1-2-2
         10-1-1-1 -
         10-1-1-4,
150-1971 10-1-1-6 -
         10-1-1-8,
         10-1-1-10,
         10-1-1-99
         3-2-1 -
         3-2-5,
         3-2-7 -
153-1971 3-2-10,
         3-2-12 -
         3-2-14,
         3-2-16,
         3-2-17
121-1972 3-2-2
218-1972 3-2-8,
         3-2-16
219-1972 6-5-5-1 -
         6-5-5-24
234-1972 6-1-3-1 -
         6-1-3-3
         2-6-14,
294-1972 14-13-3-2,
         14-13-3-3
17-1973  13-4-1-1 -
         13-4-1-7
69-1973  3-2-7,
         3-2-9
73-1973  14-6-1 -
         14-6-3
         12-1-1 -
         12-1-5,
         12-2-1 -
         12-2-24,
         12-3-1 -
96-1973  12-3-9,
         12-4-1 -
         12-4-8,
         12-4-10 -
         12-4-15,
         12-5-1 -
         12-5-7
         11-3-1 -
106-1973 11-3-12,
         11-3-99
         9-4-2-1 -
36-1974  9-4-2-6,
         9-4-2-98,
         9-4-2-99
         14-7-2-1,
         14-7-2-4,
48-1974  14-7-2-5,
         14-7-2-7,
         14-7-2-8
         2-11-6,
         2-11-7,
         2-11-9,
64-1974  2-11-10,
         2-11-12,
         2-11-14 -
         2-11-16
         8-1-1-1,
         8-1-1-2,
         8-1-2-1 -
         8-1-2-46,
         8-1-3-1 -
         8-1-3-12,
         8-1-3-14 -
         8-1-3-21,
         8-1-3-99,
         8-2-1-1 -
         8-2-1-67,
         8-2-1-99,
         8-2-2-1 -
         8-2-2-15,
         8-2-3-1 -
         8-2-3-6,
         8-2-4-1 -
         8-2-4-9,
         8-2-5-1 -
         8-2-5-10,
         8-2-6-1 -
         8-2-6-12,
         8-2-7-1 -
65-1974  8-2-7-13,
         8-2-8-1 -
         8-2-8-7,
         8-2-9-1 -
         8-2-9-9,
         8-3-1-1,
         8-3-2-1 -
         8-3-2-15,
         8-3-3-1 -
         8-3-3-8,
         8-3-3-10,
         8-3-3-12 -
         8-3-3-24,
         8-4-1 -
         8-4-12,
         8-5-1-1 -
         8-5-1-28,
         8-5-1-31,
         8-5-1-32,
         8-5-1-34 -
         8-5-1-40,
         8-5-3-1,
         8-6-1 -
         8-6-25,
         8-6-99
3-1975   5-2-1,
         5-2-2
9-1975   2-9-2-1,
         2-9-2-2
         9-5-2-1 -
11-1975  9-5-2-6,
         9-5-2-99
12-1975  9-5-6-1 -
         9-5-6-3
         9-5-1-1 -
         9-5-1-4,
13-1975  9-5-1-6 -
         9-5-1-12,
         9-5-1-14
         2-11-7,
17-1975  2-11-15,
         2-11-7
         9-9-1 -
         9-9-4,
21-1975  9-9-6,
         9-9-7,
         9-9-9,
         9-9-11
27-1975  10-1-1-10
32-1975  3-4-1 -
         3-4-5
34-1975  2-12-1,
         2-12-3
         10-1-1-9,
58-1975  10-1-1-10,
         10-1-1-99
         4-1-1 -
73-1975  4-1-8,
         4-1-10,
         4-1-12
76-1975  2-12-5
         14-6-3 -
77-1975  14-6-6,
         14-6-99
80-1975  14-16-1-1 - 14-16-1-6, 14-16-2-1 - 14-16-2-28, 14-16-3-1 - 14-16-3-15,
         14-16-4-1 - 14-16-4-12, 14-16-4-99
         14-7-2-3,
2-1976   14-7-2-6,
         14-7-2-9
4-1976   14-13-3-3
15-1976  8-1-2-7,
         8-2-4-9
19-1976  5-3-2 -
         5-3-5
26-1976  6-1-3-3
         9-8-1 -
         9-8-3,
         9-8-5 -
32-1976  9-8-10,
         9-8-25 -
         9-8-28,
         9-8-99
36-1976  5-2-1 -
         5-2-3
39-1976  14-16-3-1 - 14-16-3-15
40-1976  14-16-1-5, 14-16-2-9, 14-16-2-11 - 14-16-2-13, 14-16-2-15 - 14-16-2-
         18, 14-16-2-20
48-1976  14-16-2-22
50-1976  2-2-1
         13-3-1-1 -
53-1976  13-3-1-15,
         13-3-1-98,
         13-3-1-99
56-1976  14-16-1-5, 14-16-3-1 - 14-16-3-15
57-1976  14-16-2-17, 14-16-3-1 - 14-16-3-15
62-1976  8-2-1-30
         9-4-3-1 -
64-1976  9-4-3-6,
         9-4-3-98,
         9-4-3-99
66-1976  14-7-2-2
69-1976  14-16-3-1 - 14-16-3-15
71-1976  5-2-4
72-1976  2-6-15,
         9-5-6-1
         14-7-1-1,
80-1976  14-7-1-3 -
         14-7-1-5
81-1976  14-16-1-5
86-1976  14-16-1-5, 14-16-2-13, 14-16-3-1 - 14-16-3-15, 14-16-4-4
87-1976  14-16-2-16
88-1976  14-16-2-16
1-1977   14-16-2-16
         3-2-1 -
         3-2-5,
4-1977   3-2-7 -
         3-2-10,
         3-2-12 -
         3-2-17
5-1977   11-3-5
6-1977   14-16-1-5, 14-16-2-19, 14-16-2-22, 14-16-3-1 - 14-16-3-15, 14-16-4-4 -
         14-16-4-12, 14-16-4-99
12-1977  3-2-13,
         3-2-14
13-1977  14-16-1-5, 14-16-2-16 - 14-16-2-18, 14-16-2-20, 14-16-3-1 - 14-16-3-15
16-1977  10-4-1-4
         14-8-5-1,
20-1977  14-8-5-3 -
         14-8-5-5
22-1977  2-11-7,
         2-11-9
26-1977  14-16-1-5, 14-16-2-12, 14-16-2-13, 14-16-2-15 - 14-16-2-17, 14-16-2-
         19, 14-16-2-20, 14-16-2-22, 14-16-2-25, 14-16-3-1 - 14-16-3-15
31-1977  14-16-4-1, 14-16-4-4
43-1977  11-3-4
44-1977  8-1-3-5
45-1977  14-16-1-5, 14-16-2-23, 14-16-4-1, 14-16-4-3, 14-16-4-5 - 14-16-4-12,
         14-16-4-99
50-1977  10-4-1-4
51-1977  14-16-3-1 - 14-16-3-15, 14-16-4-1
54-1977  4-4-13
56-1977  10-4-1-9
57-1977  14-16-4-5 - 14-16-4-12, 14-16-4-99
65-1977  8-3-2-13
         2-8-1-1 -
66-1977  2-8-1-3,
         2-8-1-5
68-1977  10-7-1 -
         10-7-3
70-1977  2-11-18
74-1977  14-16-2-16 - 14-16-2-18, 14-16-2-20, 14-16-3-1 - 14-16-3-15
76-1977  14-16-2-19, 14-16-3-1 - 14-16-3-15
80-1977  9-7-2,
         9-7-6
91-1977  12-2-5,
         12-2-14
3-1978   14-8-3-3
         10-3-1-1 -
         10-3-1-3,
         10-3-2-1 -
         10-3-2-20,
         10-3-3-1 -
12-1978  10-3-3-14,
         10-3-4-1 -
         10-3-4-8,
         10-3-5-1 -
         10-3-5-9,
         10-3-5-99
13-1978  12-2-23
21-1978  14-16-1-5, 14-16-2-1, 14-16-2-25, 14-16-2-28, 14-16-3-1 - 14-16-3-15,
         14-16-4-1, 14-16-4-3, 14-16-4-4
30-1978  14-16-2-16
31-1978  14-16-2-16
32-1978  14-16-1-5
38-1978  14-16-1-5, 14-16-2-6, 14-16-2-9, 14-16-2-11 - 14-16-2-17, 14-16-2-19,
         14-16-2-20, 14-16-2-22, 14-16-2-27, 14-16-3-1 - 14-16-3-15,
38-1978  14-16-4-1, 14-16-4-3, 14-16-4-4
46-1978  3-4-4,
         3-4-5
49-1978  12-4-13
         3-1-1 -
         3-1-17,
         3-1-19 -
52-1978  3-1-21,
         3-1-23,
         3-1-24,
         3-1-27
54-1978  3-2-8,
         3-2-17
55-1978  14-16-1-5, 14-16-2-17, 14-16-3-1 - 14-16-3-15
57-1978  14-16-2-11
63-1978  14-16-2-6
64-1978  8-5-1-3
         12-1-4,
         12-1-5,
         12-1-99,
         12-2-3 -
         12-2-5,
         12-2-8,
         12-2-9,
         12-2-11,
         12-2-12,
         12-2-15,
78-1978  12-2-17,
         12-2-18,
         12-3-3,
         12-3-6,
         12-3-8,
         12-3-9,
         12-4-6,
         12-4-8,
         12-4-12,
         12-5-2 -
         12-5-4
85-1978  14-16-2-8
87-1978  2-11-17
88-1978  6-1-3-3
89-1978  10-5-1 -
         10-5-8
3-1979   5-4-1 -
         5-4-4
7-1979   14-16-2-6
9-1979   10-1-2-1 -
         10-1-2-5
21-1979  14-16-4-1
22-1979  14-16-2-13
23-1979  14-16-1-5, 14-16-2-6, 14-16-2-9
45-1979  4-5-2 -
         4-5-4
         13-2-2 -
50-1979  13-2-3,
         13-2-5
54-1979  14-8-4-1 -
         14-8-4-7
55-1979  2-11-12
58-1979  13-2-1 -
         13-2-3
59-1979  5-2-1
65-1979  14-16-1-5, 14-16-2-28, 14-16-3-1 - 14-16-3-15
68-1979  14-16-2-22
69-1979  8-2-2-14,
         8-2-2-15
         4-5-1,
76-1979  4-5-2,
         4-5-4
13-1980  2-11-17
15-1980  5-3-1 -
         5-3-5
18-1980  10-3-4-5 -
         10-3-4-8
22-1980  14-16-2-25, 14-16-4-4
         5-8-1 -
23-1980  5-8-7,
         5-8-99
26-1980  10-3-4-1 -
         10-3-4-4
27-1980  10-1-1-6
32-1980  5-2-5
33-1980  14-8-5-3
40-1980  14-16-2-22
         9-10-1-1 -
         9-10-1-9,
42-1980  9-10-1-11,
         9-10-1-12,
         9-10-1-99
48-1980  14-16-2-15
49-1980  14-16-2-22
50-1980  14-16-2-11
52-1980  14-16-2-6
53-1980  14-16-1-5, 14-16-3-1 - 14-16-3-15, 14-16-4-1, 14-16-4-3 - 14-16-4-12,
         14-16-4-99
54-1980  14-16-2-8, 14-16-2-9
55-1980  14-16-3-1 - 14-16-3-15
56-1980  14-16-3-1 - 14-16-3-15
61-1980  14-16-2-15, 14-16-2-16
62-1980  14-16-1-3, 14-16-1-5, 14-16-2-6, 14-16-3-1 - 14-16-3-15
69-1980  14-16-2-25
70-1980  14-16-2-25
74-1980  14-16-2-16, 14-16-2-17, 14-16-3-1 - 14-16-3-15
78-1980  14-16-1-5, 14-16-4-2
92-1980  14-16-2-9, 14-16-2-10, 14-16-2-12 - 14-16-2-14
100-1980 14-16-4-1, 14-16-4-4
2-1981   12-4-10
7-1981   14-16-2-23
17-1981  12-5-8
18-1981  2-11-18
22-1981  14-16-2-11
23-1981  14-16-1-5, 14-16-2-6
26-1981  14-7-2-3
29-1981  14-13-3-4
         9-9-2,
         9-9-4 -
30-1981  9-9-7,
         9-9-9,
         9-9-11
         12-1-99,
32-1981  12-4-14,
         12-4-15
34-1981  14-16-2-20
36-1981  14-16-3-1 - 14-16-3-15
39-1981  6-5-5-1 -
         6-5-5-24
42-1981  14-16-1-5, 14-16-2-1, 14-16-2-7, 14-16-2-14, 14-16-2-17, 14-16-2-22,
         14-16-3-1 - 14-16-3-15
44-1981  4-5-3
47-1981  2-12-5
49-1981  4-3-1-1 -
         4-3-1-3
50-1981  4-3-2-1 -
         4-3-2-3
54-1981  6-6-2-1 -
         6-6-2-9
55-1981  10-3-4-1 -
         10-3-4-4
66-1981  14-16-2-16
68-1981  14-16-1-1
69-1981  14-16-4-4
72-1981  14-16-1-5, 14-16-4-1, 14-16-4-4 - 14-16-4-12, 14-16-4-99
76-1981  14-13-3-4
78-1981  14-16-1-5, 14-16-2-1, 14-16-2-2, 14-16-2-3, 14-16-3-1 - 14-16-3-15
79-1981  2-6-14
80-1981  14-11-1 -
         14-11-9
83-1981  6-5-5-10
         13-2-2 -
89-1981  13-2-3,
         13-2-5
94-1981  14-16-2-16
101-1981 14-16-2-2, 14-16-2-3, 14-16-2-6
         13-3-3-1 -
102-1981 13-3-3-6,
         13-3-3-99
         7-5-1 -
110-1981 7-5-4,
         7-5-99
1-1982   6-5-5-14
19-1982  14-16-3-1 - 14-16-3-15
20-1982  14-16-1-5, 14-16-2-2, 14-16-2-6
21-1982  12-4-16
25-1982  4-5-2,
         4-5-3
26-1982  12-4-8
43-1982  10-1-1-4
         14-13-2-1,
45-1982  14-13-2-2,
         14-13-2-4,
         14-13-2-5
47-1982  10-5-3
48-1982  10-1-2-3
         4-4-3,
         4-4-4,
50-1982  4-4-8,
         4-4-9,
         4-4-11,
         4-4-12
62-1982  14-16-4-1
65-1982  10-1-1-4
67-1982  8-5-2-1 -
         8-5-2-8
         13-3-1-1,
69-1982  13-3-1-2,
         13-3-1-9,
         13-3-1-98
73-1982  14-15-1 - 14-15-9
         7-7-1 -
3-1983   7-7-20,
         7-7-22,
         7-7-99
         10-9-1 -
7-1983   10-9-10,
         10-9-99
9-1983   5-2-5
         2-6-16,
10-1983  14-13-3-2,
         14-13-3-4
12-1983  2-12-5,
         2-12-6
15-1983  9-5-1-14
17-1983  9-10-1-9
23-1983  5-2-1
         7-7-7,
35-1983  7-7-9,
         7-7-14,
         7-7-15
36-1983  14-7-2-2,
         14-7-2-7
39-1983  14-16-1-5, 14-16-2-15, 14-16-2-16
40-1983  14-16-2-15 - 14-16-2-17, 14-16-3-1 - 14-16-3-15
         7-5-3,
47-1983  7-5-4,
         7-5-99
53-1983  7-7-4,
         7-7-7
54-1983  14-16-2-15 - 14-16-2-17, 14-16-3-1 - 14-16-3-15
         14-14-1-1 - 14-14-1-15, 14-14-2-1 - 14-14-2-4, 14-14-3-1 - 14-14-3-6,
56-1983  14-14-4-14, 14-14-5-1 - 14-14-5-11, 14-14-6-1 - 14-14-6-4, 14-14-7-1 -
         14-14-7-3, 14-14-8-1, 14-14-8-4, 14-14-9-1 - 14-14-9-4, 14-14-9-99
65-1983  4-2-1-1 -
         4-2-1-3
68-1983  14-16-2-25, 14-16-4-4
73-1983  4-3-1-3
74-1983  4-3-2-3
         14-8-4-3,
76-1983  14-8-4-7,
         14-8-4-8
         2-6-14,
90-1983  2-6-15,
         14-13-3-2,
         14-13-3-3
91-1983  8-1-3-10
         2-8-2-1 -
95-1983  2-8-2-9,
         2-8-2-11,
         2-8-2-99
99-1983  6-5-1-1 -
         6-5-1-4
100-1983 8-5-1-41
101-1983 14-16-2-16
102-1983 14-16-2-16
103-1983 14-16-1-5
104-1983 14-16-2-25
         13-10-1 -
110-1983 13-10-10,
         13-10-99
117-1983 12-2-25
4-1984   14-16-4-4
6-1984   7-7-4
14-1984  14-16-2-19, 14-16-2-22
15-1984  5-6-1 -
         5-6-11
20-1984  4-2-1-3
23-1984  14-16-2-1, 14-16-2-28, 14-16-3-1 - 14-16-3-15, 14-16-4-1
37-1984  14-16-3-1 - 14-16-3-15
41-1984  13-3-1-6
         9-5-1-2 -
         9-5-1-4,
45-1984  9-5-1-6 -
         9-5-1-9,
         9-5-1-11,
         9-5-1-12
51-1984  14-14-6-1 - 14-14-6-4
54-1984  13-3-1-4
68-1984  4-4-6
         13-11-1 -
         13-11-5,
70-1984  13-11-7 -
         13-11-11,
         13-11-99
71-1984  9-10-1-7
77-1984  14-16-1-5, 14-16-2-4, 14-16-2-14, 14-16-2-22, 14-16-2-24, 14-16-3-1 -
         14-16-3-15
12-1985  14-8-6-1 -
         14-8-6-4
         10-4-1-1 -
18-1985  10-4-1-5,
         10-4-1-7 -
         10-4-1-9
30-1985  3-1-8,
         3-1-9
         3-1-21,
31-1985  3-3-1 -
         3-3-13
39-1985  14-16-3-1 - 14-16-3-15
51-1985  14-16-2-6, 14-16-3-1 - 14-16-3-15
58-1985  9-10-1-8
61-1985  9-10-1-7
72-1985  14-16-3-1 - 14-16-3-15
74-1985  14-16-2-13, 14-16-2-16, 14-16-2-17, 14-16-2-20, 14-16-3-1 - 14-16-3-15
75-1985  14-16-4-4
         14-7-1-1,
80-1985  14-7-1-3 -
         14-7-1-6
84-1985  2-12-5
3-1986   14-16-1-5, 14-16-2-8, 14-16-2-9, 14-16-2-11, 14-16-2-12, 14-16-3-1 -
         14-16-3-15
6-1986   14-16-4-5 - 14-16-4-12, 14-16-4-99
8-1986   2-12-1,
         2-12-3
10-1986  14-16-3-1 - 14-16-3-15
11-1986  14-16-1-5, 14-16-2-15, 14-16-2-17, 14-16-2-19, 14-16-2-22, 14-16-3-1 -
         14-16-3-15
13-1986  9-10-1-3,
         9-10-1-8
18-1986  14-14-7-1 - 14-14-7-3
19-1986  6-6-2-1 -
         6-6-2-9
         11-4-1 -
33-1986  11-4-3,
         11-4-99
         14-3-1-1 -
         14-3-1-4,
         14-3-2-1 -
         14-3-2-3,
34-1986  14-3-3-1 - 14-3-3-4,
         14-3-4-1 - 14-3-4-13,
         14-3-5-1 -
         14-3-5-12,
         14-3-5-99
40-1986  14-16-3-1 - 14-16-3-15
         4-1-2 -
         4-1-7,
44-1986  4-1-9,
         4-1-10,
         4-4-12
48-1986  8-1-2-24,
         8-2-1-2
49-1986  14-16-4-5 - 14-16-4-12, 14-16-4-99
59-1986  14-16-1-5
60-1986  14-16-4-1
63-1986  14-16-2-16
         2-8-2-1 -
66-1986  2-8-2-9,
         2-8-2-11,
         2-8-2-99
73-1986  10-1-2-3
78-1986  14-16-2-23
80-1986  14-16-1-4, 14-16-1-5, 14-16-2-17, 14-16-3-1 - 14-16-3-15
81-1986  14-16-3-1 - 14-16-3-15
82-1986  14-7-2-2 -
         14-7-2-9
1-1987   8-2-6-1
5-1987   14-16-1-5, 14-16-2-2, 14-16-2-6
         3-1-4,
6-1987   3-1-24,
         3-1-26
9-1987   5-2-4
         7-7-6,
12-1987  7-7-8 -
         7-7-14,
         8-5-1-31
         10-9-3,
         10-9-5,
17-1987  10-9-6,
         10-9-8,
         10-9-9
         11-4-1 -
18-1987  11-4-3,
         11-4-99
27-1987  2-2-4,
         2-2-5
32-1987  3-1-7
33-1987  10-3-4-5 -
         10-3-4-8
         5-8-2,
35-1987  5-8-3,
         5-8-6,
         5-8-7
39-1987  6-1-3-3
         14-16-1-5, 14-16-2-2, 14-16-2-6, 14-16-2-10 - 14-16-2-13, 14-16-2-15 -
41-1987  14-16-2-17, 14-16-2-19 - 14-16-2-22, 14-16-2-25, 14-16-3-1 - 14-16-3-
         15
         2-8-1-2,
45-1987  2-8-1-3,
         2-8-1-5
46-1987  4-3-3-1 -
         4-3-3-6
47-1987  7-8-1 -
         7-8-14
         14-13-2-1,
48-1987  14-13-2-2,
         14-13-2-4
49-1987  14-16-4-1, 14-16-4-2, 14-16-4-4
52-1987  10-7-2
53-1987  4-2-2-1 -
         4-2-2-4
54-1987  3-1-6
58-1987  14-16-4-1 - 14-16-4-2
         10-3-2-1 -
         10-3-2-9,
         10-3-2-11 -
         10-3-2-14,
59-1987  10-3-2-15 -
         10-3-2-20,
         10-3-3-1 -
         10-3-3-14,
         13-9-4
68-1987  9-1-1-1 -
         9-1-1-6
1-1988   2-6-15
6-1988   3-6-1 -
         3-6-16
7-1988   2-11-6
8-1988   8-6-26
16-1988  6-5-5-8,
         6-5-5-9
         7-8-3,
33-1988  7-8-4,
         7-8-7 -
         7-8-14
43-1988  12-1-4,
         12-2-7
45-1988  6-5-5-18
47-1988  4-3-3-6
48-1988  3-1-23,
         3-1-24
         9-5-4-1 -
49-1988  9-5-4-6,
         9-5-4-99
52-1988  3-1-13
54-1988  2-11-6
55-1988  4-1-10
56-1988  2-12-1,
         2-12-3
         9-1-2-1 -
57-1988  9-1-2-3,
         9-1-2-99
61-1988  3-1-12
62-1988  14-16-2-17, 14-16-2-18, 14-16-3-1 - 14-16-3-15
         11-6-1 -
65-1988  11-6-8,
         11-6-99
67-1988  2-9-3-3
68-1988  14-16-3-1 - 14-16-3-15
         3-1-2,
         3-1-3,
         3-1-5,
69-1988  3-1-6,
         3-1-8,
         3-1-15 -
         3-1-17
72-1988  4-2-3-1 -
         4-2-3-6
14-1989  14-16-2-23
16-1989  14-14-6-1 - 14-14-6-4
20-1989  4-3-4-1 -
         4-3-5-5
21-1989  14-16-2-28, 14-16-3-1 - 14-16-3-15
23-1989  14-4-4
24-1989  7-8-3 -
         7-8-8
26-1989  8-1-2-25
         3-1-6,
         3-1-12,
30-1989  3-1-13,
         3-1-16,
         3-1-23,
         3-1-24
32-1989  7-8-4
34-1989  14-16-1-5
36-1989  7-8-5
         9-4-4-1 -
38-1989  9-4-4-3,
         9-4-4-6,
         9-4-4-7
         7-1-2-3,
40-1989  7-1-2-4,
         7-1-2-8
41-1989  8-6-27
         9-10-2-1,
42-1989  9-10-2-2 -
         9-10-2-5
44-1989  6-6-2-6
47-1989  3-1-16
48-1989  3-1-10
49-1989  8-1-3-99
         10-3-1-2,
         10-3-2-1 -
51-1989  10-3-2-20,
         10-3-3-1 -
         10-3-3-14
         3-6-1,
52-1989  3-6-2,
         3-6-5,
         3-6-8
53-1989  14-16-2-6, 14-16-3-1 - 14-16-3-15
55-1989  3-1-23
56-1989  2-6-17
         13-3-1-1 -
         13-3-1-6,
58-1989  13-3-1-8 -
         13-3-1-15,
         13-3-1-98,
         13-3-1-99
65-1989  14-16-3-1 - 14-16-3-15
73-1989  14-16-4-1, 14-16-4-4
75-1989  14-16-2-18
77-1989  6-5-5-1 -
         6-5-5-21
79-1989  2-6-16,
         14-13-3-2
         9-5-3-1 -
83-1989  9-5-3-6,
         9-5-3-99
85-1989  13-3-1-7
86-1989  14-16-2-28, 14-16-3-1 - 14-16-3-15
3-1990   14-16-2-17, 14-16-2-18, 14-16-2-20, 14-16-3-1 - 14-16-3-15
4-1990   10-7-1
5-1990   10-4-5-2
8-1990   7-1-2-2
12-1990  14-16-1-5 - 14-16-2-25, 14-16-3-1 - 14-16-3-15, 14-16-4-1, 14-16-4-3
17-1990  3-1-3
19-1990  14-16-1-5, 14-16-3-1 - 14-16-3-15
21-1990  14-16-1-5, 14-16-3-1 - 14-16-3-15
22-1990  14-7-2-6
27-1990  5-2-6
30-1990  14-16-1-5, 14-16-2-16, 14-16-2-17, 14-16-2-22, 14-16-3-1 - 14-16-3-15
32-1990  9-5-6-2
36-1990  14-16-4-3
38-1990  4-3-3-4
39-1990  2-6-16,
         4-2-3-5
40-1990  14-16-2-25
44-1990  14-16-1-5
45-1990  14-16-4-2, 14-16-4-4
47-1990  14-16-1-4, 14-16-1-5, 14-16-2-1 - 14-16-2-13, 14-16-2-15 - 14-16-2-20,
         14-16-2-22, 14-16-3-1 - 14-16-3-15, 14-16-4-5 - 14-16-4-12, 14-16-4-99
48-1990  2-6-17
49-1990  14-16-4-3
50-1990  2-6-14
51-1990  2-11-12,
         2-11-18
55-1990  12-1-4,
         12-2-7
58-1990  5-2-4
59-1990  13-3-1-7
60-1990  2-13-1 -
         2-13-6
63-1990  14-16-2-16, 14-16-2-17, 14-16-3-1 - 14-16-3-15
64-1990  9-10-1-6
         14-7-1-1,
65-1990  14-7-1-3 -
         14-7-1-6
         14-7-2-2,
66-1990  14-7-2-3,
         14-7-2-6 - 14-16-2-9
69-1990  14-16-2-16 - 14-16-2-18, 14-16-2-22, 14-16-3-1 - 14-16-3-15
1-1991   2-11-6
2-1991   14-16-2-18, 14-16-2-20
3-1991   14-16-2-6
         13-3-1-1 -
5-1991   13-3-1-15,
         13-3-1-98,
         13-3-1-99
         5-5-1 -
         5-5-7,
6-1991   5-5-11 -
         5-5-17,
         5-5-19 -
         5-5-22
8-1991   14-16-3-1 - 14-16-3-15
10-1991  14-14-1-6, 14-14-2-1 - 14-14-2-4, 14-14-3-1 - 14-14-3-6, 14-14-4-14,
         14-14-5-1 - 14-14-5-11, 14-14-7-1 - 14-14-7-3
11-1991  2-12-6
         9-4-4-1 -
12-1991  9-4-4-3,
         9-4-4-6,
         9-4-4-7
13-1991  14-16-1-5, 14-16-4-2
17-1991  9-10-1-11
19-1991  2-11-16,
         2-11-19
         13-3-2-1 -
20-1991  13-3-2-18,
         13-3-2-98,
         13-3-2-99
23-1991  5-3-1 -
         5-3-5
24-1991  13-11-5,
         13-11-9
25-1991  14-16-3-1 - 14-16-3-15, 14-16-4-5 - 14-16-4-12, 14-16-4-99
26-1991  14-16-2-16
         10-1-1-1,
27-1991  10-1-1-5 -
         10-1-1-10,
         10-1-1-99
32-1991  8-5-1-36
38-1991  14-16-1-5, 14-16-4-4
39-1991  5-1-3
         9-11-1-1 -
40-1991  9-11-1-7,
         9-11-1-99
43-1991  14-16-1-5, 14-16-2-16, 14-16-2-17, 14-16-2-20, 14-16-3-1 - 14-16-3-15,
44-1991  14-16-1-5
45-1991  14-16-2-6, 14-16-3-1 - 14-16-3-15
48-1991  4-4-6
56-1991  6-7-1 -
         6-7-9
         11-2-1 -
57-1991  11-2-4,
         11-2-99
         2-11-12,
3-1992   2-11-14 -
         2-11-19
         9-8-1 -
4-1992   9-8-30,
         9-8-99
5-1992   12-1-99,
         12-2-26
6-1992   2-11-11
8-1992   6-7-4,
         6-7-9
9-1992   14-16-4-4
10-1992  14-16-2-25
11-1992  10-8-1 -
         10-8-3
13-1992  13-4-3-1 -
         13-4-3-11
14-1992  4-3-5-1 -
         4-3-5-4
16-1992  14-16-4-1, 14-16-4-4
17-1992  14-14-1-1 - 14-14-1-6, 14-14-3-1 - 14-14-3-6, 14-14-4-14, 14-14-5-1 -
         14-14-5-11
19-1992  14-14-1-6, 14-14-4-14
20-1992  13-3-1-11,
         13-3-1-15
22-1992  14-16-1-5, 14-16-3-1 - 14-16-3-15
23-1992  2-12-1
24-1992  10-5-1 -
         10-5-7
27-1992  9-10-1-11,
         9-10-1-99
         4-1-2,
29-1992  4-1-6,
         4-1-10 -
         4-1-12
39-1992  14-16-1-5, 14-16-2-17, 14-16-3-1 - 14-16-3-15
42-1992  8-2-1-24
45-1992  14-16-1-5, 14-16-2-22
50-1992  14-16-2-17, 14-16-3-1 - 14-16-3-15
52-1992  8-1-3-99
54-1992  14-16-4-4
1-1993   11-7-1 -
         11-7-5
2-1993   14-14-2-1 - 14-14-2-4, 14-14-3-1 - 14-14-3-6
7-1993   8-1-3-99
8-1993   2-8-1-3
         9-4-4-1 -
         9-4-4-4,
9-1993   9-4-4-6,
         9-4-4-7,
         9-4-4-11,
         9-4-4-99
10-1993  9-10-1-11
         10-3-1-1 -
         10-3-1-4,
         10-3-2-1 -
         10-3-2-20,
         10-3-3-1 -
12-1993  10-3-3-14,
         10-3-4-1 -
         10-3-4-8,
         10-3-5-1 -
         10-3-5-9,
         10-3-5-99
13-1993  14-16-2-17, 14-16-3-1 - 14-16-3-15
18-1993  2-4-1 -
         2-4-13
20-1993  4-5-2,
         4-5-3
23-1993  14-16-2-6
26-1993  2-12-4
31-1993  13-5-2-2
36-1993  13-3-2-8,
         13-3-2-15
         13-2-1 -
37-1993  13-2-3,
         13-2-6
38-1993  13-5-2-2
43-1993  4-2-2-4
44-1993  14-8-6-5,
         14-8-6-6
45-1993  14-14-5-1 - 14-14-5-11
46-1993  14-14-8-2, 14-14-8-3
47-1993  14-16-2-25
48-1993  4-2-2-4
50-1993  14-16-3-1
51-1993  14-16-1-5
54-1993  7-7-12
55-1993  10-4-2-1, 
         10-4-5-2
         4-4-4,
         4-4-6,
56-1993  4-4-8 -
         4-4-13,
         4-4-99
58-1993  14-16-1-5, 14-16-2-29, 14-16-3-1 - 14-16-3-15, 14-16-4-3
59-1993  14-16-4-4
         9-5-1-1 -
65-1993  9-5-1-15,
         9-5-1-98,
         9-5-1-99
1-1994   13-4-4-1 -
         13-4-4-22
2-1994   14-16-2-16, 14-16-2-17
4-1994   8-1-1-2,
         8-2-1-68
8-1994   10-4-1-1,
         10-4-1-4
11-1994  14-14-7-1, 14-14-7-2
12-1994  9-10-1-11
13-1994  2-7-2-4
14-1994  2-7-2-5
20-1994  2-12-7
21-1994  13-5-2-1
24-1994  12-1-99,
         12-5-5
27-1994  Adopting ordinance
28-1994  4-2-1-1 -
         4-2-1-3
         8-1-3-12,
29-1994  8-1-3-14 -
         8-1-3-22
         9-12-1 -
34-1994  9-12-8,
         9-12-99
         2-11-4 -
35-1994  2-11-7,
         2-11-9 -
         2-11-19
36-1994  14-16-4-3
38-1994  4-3-3-6
         7-1-2-3,
39-1994  7-1-3-1 -
         7-1-3-5, 14-15-2
43-1994  14-16-2-22, 14-16-3-1 - 14-16-3-15
         2-7-6-1,
44-1994  2-7-6-3 -
         2-7-6-6
         11-8-1 -
46-1994  11-8-3,
         11-8-99
49-1994  13-5-2-2
1-1995   12-1-99,
         12-5-5
2-1995   2-6-15
4-1995   14-16-2-9
8-1995   14-16-1-5, 14-16-2-22, 14-16-4-2
         13-10-3,
9-1995   13-10-4,
         13-10-7
10-1995  14-16-1-5, 14-16-2-2, 14-16-2-4- 14-16-2-7, 14-16-3-16
11-1995  4-3-3-4,
         4-3-3-7
18-1995  6-1-1-1 -
         6-1-1-6
19-1995  2-2-1 -
         2-2-5
20-1995  2-6-6-1 -
         2-6-6-4
         10-2-2-1 -
21-1995  10-2-2-3,
         10-2-2-5
26-1995  9-10-1-11
29-1995  14-16-4-4
31-1995  14-16-3-5
32-1995  14-16-4-1 - 14-16-4-2
33-1995  14-16-1-5
35-1995  14-16-3-3
36-1995  14-16-2-25
         2-11-6 -
40-1995  2-11-19,
         2-12-3 -
         2-12-5
44-1995  7-2-1-3
45-1995  13-4-5-1 -
         13-4-5-32
46-1995  3-1-24,
         3-1-27
49-1995  13-4-6-1 -
         13-4-6-32
50-1995  13-4-7-1 -
         13-4-7-32
52-1995  12-4-15
53-1995  2-8-2-11
58-1995  14-16-1-5, 14-16-2-15 - 14-16-2-17, 14-16-2-19, 14-16-2-22, 14-16-2-24
59-1995  10-3-1-2,
         10-3-3-10
8-1996   8-5-2-4
9-1996   8-5-1-38
13-1996  9-10-1-11
23-1996  9-5-1-99
         7-5-1 -
26-1996  7-5-4,
         7-5-99,
         8-1-3-99
29-1996  13-2-5
31-1996  14-16-2-6
         11-9-1-1 -
35-1996  11-9-1-7,
         11-9-1-99
43-1996  4-3-6-1 -
         4-3-6-9
         6-8-1-1 -
         6-8-1-3,
         6-8-2-1 -
         6-8-2-3,
         6-8-3-1 -
         6-8-3-3,
         6-8-4-1 -
44-1996  6-8-4-3,
         6-8-5-1 -
         6-8-5-5,
         6-8-6-1 -
         6-8-6-2,
         6-8-7-1 -
         6-8-7-3,
         6-8-8-1 -
         6-8-8-2
45-1996  9-12-2 -
         9-12-9 
         11-10-1 -
48-1996  11-10-6,
         11-10-99
2-1997   12-2-27
4-1997   2-6-7-1 -
         2-6-7-5
5-1997   16-16-2-25
11-1997  8-6-27,
         8-6-99
         7-7-3,
         7-7-8,
14-1997  7-7-12,
         7-7-14,
         7-7-16
15-1997  8-1-3-99
17-1997  14-16-2-22
20-1997  13-4-10-1 -
         13-4-10-15
22-1997  14-16-2-19, 14-16-2-20
33-1997  14-16-2-22
36-1997  2-6-8-1 -
         2-6-8-7
40-1997  9-4-4-1 -
         9-4-4-11
1-1998   6-1-1-8
9-1998   9-13-1 -
         9-13-6
12-1998  9-10-1-11
13-1998  2-4-6,
         2-4-14
22-1998  9-10-1-11
24-1998  6-1-1-2 -
         6-1-1-99
         9-11-1-1 -
28-1998  9-11-1-7,
         9-11-1-99
         3-1-1 -
29-1998  3-1-17,
         3-1-19 -
         3-1-27
         5-5-1 -
         5-5-7,
30-1998  5-5-11 -
         5-5-17,
         5-5-19 -
         5-5-24
33-1998  11-5-1 -
         11-5-17
34-1998  14-17-1 -
         14-17-5
         14-16-1-5, 14-16-2-6, 14-16-2-7(A), 14-16-2-15(A), 14-16-2-15(B), 14-
9-1999   16-2-16(A), 14-16-2-16(B), 14-16-2-17(A), 14-16-2-17(B), 14-16-2-19
         (A), 14-16-2-20(B), 14-16-3-17
13-1999  13-2-3 -
         13-2-6
15-1999  14-16-2-4(E), 14-16-2-5(D), 14-16-2-6(A), 14-16-2-6(D), 14-16-2-8(D),
         14-16-2-9(D)
26-1999  14-16-3-4
         9-1-3-1 -
29-1999  9-1-3-3,
         9-1-3-99
31-1999  14-14-5-12
33-1999  8-5-2-8-
38-1999  7-1-3-4
40-1999  2-4-14
51-1999  5-5-11,
         5-5-19
52-1999  2-12-5,
         2-12-6
54-1999  6-1-1-5
55-1999  14-7-1-1 -
         14-7-1-6
67-1999  8-2-2-2
2-2000   14-16-1-5
3-2000   10-5-3
8-2000   14-16-1-5, 14-16-2-22, 14-16-3-4
         9-10-1-3,
9-2000   9-10-1-6,
         9-10-1-8
12-2000  4-2-1-2,
         4-2-1-3
         7-7-1 -
14-2000  7-7-22,
         7-7-99
15-2000  14-16-3-4
         11-11-1 -
16-2000  11-11-6,
         11-11-99
18-2000  9-10-1-11
20-2000  2-7-6-1 -
         2-7-6-6
         8-1-1-2,
22-2000  8-1-2-7,
         8-1-3-99
24-2000  5-5-22
35-2000  14-16-2-22
38-2000  14-18-1 -
         14-18-7
         9-14-1 -
41-2000  9-14-11,
         9-14-99
44-2000  14-16-3-4
47-2000  3-1-21
2-2001   6-1-5-1 -
         6-1-5-8
         3-2-7,
4-2001   3-2-10 -
         3-2-18
5-2001   14-3-5-2
7-2001   4-1-1 -
         4-1-12
         9-9-1 -
9-2001   9-9-7,
         9-9-9,
         9-9-11
11-2001  14-16-3-4
12-2001  5-5-19
13-2001  3-1-23
14-2001  5-5-19
         2-11-1 -
         2-11-4,
         2-11-6 -
         2-11-11,
         2-11-15,
16-2001  2-11-17,
         2-11-18,
         2-12-1,
         2-12-3 -
         2-12-7,
         4-2-1-3
18-2001  9-10-1-8,
         9-10-1-11
20-2001  4-6-1 -
         4-6-5
21-2001  5-9-1 -
         5-9-5
         10-9-6,
23-2001  13-11-7, 14-12-13,
         14-13-2-5, 14-16-3-5, 14-16-3-12, 14-16-3-13, 14-16-4-1 - 14-16-4-4,
         14-16-4-6
         4-4-1 -
24-2001  4-4-13,
         4-4-99
25-2001  2-6-9-1 -
         2-6-9-6
27-2001  14-16-1-5, 14-16-2-6
39-2001  14-16-1-5, 14-16-3-5
40-2001  6-5-5-18
41-2001  5-1-3
42-2001  6-1-1-3,
         6-1-1-99
44-2001  14-17-5
         9-15-1 -
         9-15-4,
55-2001  9-15-6 -
         9-15-12,
         9-15-99
60-2001  4-7-1 -
         4-7-10
62-2001  2-3-1 -
         2-3-7
63-2001  2-6-10-1 -
         2-6-10-5
5-2002   9-9-2
8-2002   14-16-2-6(B)
9-2002   3-1-22
11-2002  14-16-2-15(B), 14-16-2-17(A)(12)(a), 14-16-2-17(B)(17), 14-16-2-20(B)
         (6), 14-16-2-22, 14-16-3-4(A)
12-2002  14-16-3-17
14-2002  13-3-2-12
15-2002  14-16-3-4
20-2002  3-2-19
21-2002  3-1-18
24-2002  13-5-1-1 -
         13-5-1-46
         10-9-6(A)(2),
         13-11-7, 14-12-13,
30-2002  14-13-2-5(B), 14-16-3-5(A)(3),
         14-16-3-12(G), 14-16-3-13(F), 14-16-4-1(B), 14-16-4-2(A)(4), 14-16-4-3
         (B), 14-16-4-4(D), 14-16-4-6
31-2002  14-16-3-5(B)(1)
33-2002  5-5-17
         14-13-1-1 -
34-2002  14-13-1-4,
         4-13-2-3
36-2002  14-16-1-5, 14-16-2-15, 14-16-3-1, 14-16-3-9
         2-3-7,
         4-4-9,
         6-7-8,
         7-7-16,
38-2002  7-7-17,
         9-10-1-11,
         9-15-7,
         11-5-16,
         13-3-2-11,
         13-10-9
         7-10-1 -
42-2002  7-10-3,
         7-10-99
44-2002  14-16-1-5, 14-16-3-4, 14-16-4-13
45-2002  8-2-1-30
47-2002  2-1-1
48-2002  12-5-5
50-2002  14-16-2-22, 14-16-3-17
         2-12-1,
52-2002  14-8-5-1,
         14-8-5-3,
         14-8-5-5
2-2003   13-4-8-1 -
         13-4-8-25
4-2003   5-5-3,
         5-5-20
5-2003   2-3-1 -
         2-3-8
         8-3-2-3,
         8-3-2-5,
         8-3-2-7,
         8-3-2-10,
7-2003   8-3-2-15,
         8-3-3-24,
         8-5-1-19,
         8-6-4,
         8-6-10,
         8-6-11
         9-3-1 -
8-2003   9-3-16,
         9-3-99
12-2003  6-9-1 -
         6-9-6
20-2003  14-16-1-5, 14-16-4-4
21-2003  13-2-4
         7-5-4,
         8-1-3-99,
         8-5-2-0,
         8-5-2-1,
25-2003  8-5-2-3,
         8-5-2-5,
         8-5-2-8 -
         8-5-2-12,
         8-5-2-99,
         14-6-2-6
28-2003  9-10-1-8,
         9-10-1-11
29-2003  14-6-2-19
35-2003  2-6-1-3
         11-12-1-1 -
36-2003  11-12-1-4,
         11-12-1-99
37-2003  10-3-3-10
39-2003  9-4-5-1
         10-1-2-4,
42-2003  10-1-3-1 -
         10-1-3-3
         11-12-2-1 -
43-2003  11-12-2-8,
         11-12-2-99
44-2003  8-5-2-3,
         8-5-2-10
47-2003  14-13-4-1
48-2003  14-16-2-22
49-2003  6-1-1-12,
         6-1-1-99
51-2003  14-16-3-1
52-2003  9-8-99
54-2003  8-5-2-3
57-2003  2-6-1-3
1-2004   12-2-7
         3-1-23,
2-2004   3-1-24,
         3-7-1 -
         3-7-11
         9-16-1 -
3-2004   9-16-3,
         9-16-99
6-2004   4-3-8-1 -
         4-3-8-7
7-2004   14-13-5-1,
         14-13-5-3
10-2004  14-16-1-5, 14-16-2-16, 14-16-2-17. 14-16-3-18
11-2004  4-2-3-4
         6-5-5-14,
12-2004  6-6-2-3,
         6-6-2-4, 14-14-1-6, 14-14-4-3, 14-14-4-5
13-2004  6-1-1-3,
         6-1-1-8
14-2004  10-1-1-9
16-2004  14-16-2-22
         11-12-2-1 -
17-2004  11-12-2-8,
         11-12-2-99
18-2004  5-5-19
         4-8-1 -
19-2004  4-8-12,
         4-8-99
21-2004  12-2-7
24-2004  4-2-1-1,
         4-2-1-3
26-2004  Ch. 9, Art. 10, Pt. 1 App.
29-2004  14-16-2-6, 14-16-2-28, 14-16-3-3, 14-16-3-19
33-2004  2-14-1-1 -
         2-14-1-13
         9-14-3 -
34-2004  9-14-5,
         9-14-10,
         9-14-11
35-2004  2-14-2-1 -
         2-14-2-9
39-2004  4-9-1 -
         4-9-10
         6-6-1-1,
         6-6-1-3,
         6-6-1-6 -
         6-6-1-8,
         6-6-1-99,
40-2004  6-6-2-3 -
         6-6-2-5,
         9-12-3,
         9-12-5,
         9-12-8,
         9-12-9
41-2004  6-1-1-8
42-2004  14-16-1-5, 14-16-2-17 - 14-16-2-20, 14-16-2-22, 14-16-3-4
43-2004  8-1-3-99
         14-3-1-4,
45A-2004 14-3-4-4,
         14-3-5-13 -
         14-3-5-15
47-2004  3-1-21
56-2004  9-12-5
57-2004  12-4-15,
         12-5-8
59-2004  9-10-4-1 -
         9-10-4-4
60-2004  14-3-1-4
61-2004  8-1-1-2,
         8-5-1-5
62-2004  2-1-1
         2-7-2-5,
         2-10-1 -
         2-10-16,
         2-11-18,
         3-1-6,
         3-1-10,
1-2005   3-1-23,
         3-7-3,
         3-7-4,
         3-7-6 -
         3-7-8,
         3-7-10,
         3-7-11,
         5-5-20
         9-17-1 -
2-2005   9-17-7,
         9-17-99
4-2005   14-16-1-5, 14-16-2-15 - 14-16-2-17, 14-16-2-20, 14-16-2-22, 14-16-3-12
8-2005   14-14-8-4, 14-16-4-4
         2-11-6,
9-2005   2-12-1,
         2-12-3
10-2005  3-4-5
12-2005  14-16-3-12
13-2005  6-5-2-1 -
         6-5-2-29
14-2005  2-1-1
16-2005  14-16-2-15, 14-16-2-17, 14-16-3-4
17-2005  9-10-2-1,
         9-10-2-2
22-2005  5-5-16
23-2005  14-1-4
         9-8-14,
25-2005  9-8-20,
         9-8-31,
         9-8-99
26-2005  6-5-1-3
27-2005  5-5-25
29-2005  14-16-3-3
30-2005  14-16-2-22
         6-10-1 -
36-2005  6-10-3,
         6-10-99
40-2005  7-12-1 -
         7-12-5
41-2005  9-1-3-3,
         9-1-3-99
43-2005  14-16-2-16 - 14-16-2-18, 14-16-2-20, 14-16-3-5
44-2005  14-16-1-5, 14-16-2-6, 14-16-2-8 - 14-16-2-11, 14-16-3-3
50-2005  9-8-3
51-2005  9-10-1-11
52-2005  14-16-3-5
55-2005  4-3-4-4
57-2005  9-8-3,
         9-8-4
58-2005  5-5-19
60-2005  5-2-7
         5-8-3,
63-2005  5-8-6,
         5-8-7
64-2005  2-7-5-1 -
         2-7-5-3
66-2005  14-16-2-18, 14-16-2-19, 14-16-2-21
68-2005  14-16-3-4
71-2005  14-7-2-3
1-2006   8-1-1-2,
         8-5-1-5
2-2006   14-16-3-1
7-2006   14-16-2-16, 14-16-2-17
9-2006   11-13-1
10-2006  2-1-1
11-2006  5-2-7
12-2006  13-12-1 -
         13-12-6
13-2006  5-5-3,
         5-5-19
15-2006  9-10-1-8;
         9-10-1-10; Ch. 9, Art. 10, Pt. 1 App.
         9-2-1-1 -
         9-2-1-8,
         9-2-2-1 -
         9-2-2-6,
         9-2-3-1 -
18-2006  9-2-3-16,
         9-2-4-1 -
         9-2-4-8,
         9-2-5-1,
         9-2-6-1,
         9-2-7-1,
         9-2-8-1
21-2006  14-16-2-25
23-2006  14-16-3-12
26-2006  4-3-4-1
27-2006  13-4-9-1 -
         13-4-9-23
28-2006  2-4-9
29-2006  9-2-2-1,
         9-2-4-2
30-2006  14-9-1 -
         14-9-7
34-2006  5-5-22
         2-12-1 -
35-2006  2-12-7,
         14-8-5-1 -
         14-8-5-5
36-2006  4-10-1 -
         4-10-8
37-2006  14-14-1-6, 14-14-4-7 - 14-14-4-14
39-2006  2-6-8-1 -
         2-6-8-7
40-2006  14-1-3
         9-8-3,
41-2006  9-8-32,
         9-8-99
         9-10-1-3,
42-2006  9-10-1-7,
         9-10-1-10 -
         9-10-1-12
43-2006  10-5-3
         2-10-2,
45-2006  2-10-7,
         2-10-11,
         2-11-18
46-2006  14-16-3-5
1-2007   14-16-4-4
2–2007 14-3-5-12
4-2007   8-2-1-24
         2-11-6,
5-2007   2-11-10,
         2-12-3
6-2007   14-14-1-6, 14-14-4-13
9-2007   14-16-1-5
15-2007  4-3-4-5
17-2007  14-16-2-6, 14-16-2-8, 14-16-2-9, 14-16-3-1
18-2007  2-12-6
         8-3-3-3 -
         8-3-3-8,
19-2007  8-3-3-10,
         8-3-3-12 -
         8-3-3-24
21-2007  14-3-1-4,
         14-3-5-16
         5-2-1,
22-2007  5-2-4 -
         5-2-6
         8-1-2-39,
23-2007  14-8-2-7, 14-16-1-5, 14-16-2-16, 14-16-2-17, 14-16-2-20 - 14-16-2-24,
         14-16-3-2, 14-16-3-18
24-2007  8-1-3-99,
         8-5-1-30
25-2007  2-12-1, 14-14-3-4, 14-16-1-5, 14-16-3-20
26-2007  2-12-8
         11-9-2-1 -
27-2007  11-9-2-4,
         11-9-2-99
         11-9-3-1 -
28-2007  11-9-3-7,
         11-9-3-99
         2-7-6-1,
29-2007  2-7-6-3 -
         2-7-6-7
         3-1-6,
         7-7-2,
         7-10-99,
         7-12-3,
         8-5-2-10,
         9-2-1-4,
31-2007  9-3-4,
         9-15-7,
         9-17-3,
         10-3-5-5,
         13-2-2,
         13-11-8,
         14-11-7, 14-16-2-25, 14-16-4-13
32-2007  13-4-4-1 -
         13-4-4-23
33-2007  5-5-3,
         5-5-17
34-2007  14-1-4
37-2007  14-16-3-4
38-2007  13-3-1-4,
         13-3-2-6, 14-16-2-25
39-2007  2-10-6,
         2-10-10
41-2007  3-1-28
         9-9-6,
         14-8-2-2,
42-2007  14-8-2-3,
         14-8-2-5 -
         14-8-2-7
         2-6-1-4,
43-2007  2-15-1 -
         2-15-5
         2-6-1-3,
1-2008   10-5-3,
         14-13-3-1
2-2008   2-6-1-3
4-2008   8-1-1-2,
         8-5-1-5
5-2008   14-16-1-5, 14-16-2-15 - 14-16-2-17, 14-16-2-19, 14-16-2-22, 14-16-3-17
7-2008   14-16-2-22, 14-16-2-23, 14-16-3-21, 14-16-4-1
8-2008   2-6-17
9-2008   2-6-15
11-2008  7-10-99
13-2008  2-8-1-1 -
         2-8-1-5
14-2008  10-5-3
         6-6-1-1,
         6-6-1-3.
19-2008  6-6-1-6 -
         6-6-1-8,
         6-6-2-5
         9-5-5-1 -
21-2008  9-5-5-10,
         9-5-5-98,
         9-5-5-99
23-2008  14-1-4
25-2008  10-8-4
29-2008  4-1-9
33-2008  14-16-4-4
37-2008  8-3-3-1 -
         8-3-3-24
39-2008  6-5-1-3
40-2008  14-16-2-15
45-2008  2-4-9
46-2008  2-4-10
1-2009   14-14-1-4
2-2009   6-1-7-1 -
         6-1-7-4
3-2009   2-4-10
6-2009   14-16-1-5, 14-16-2-13, 14-16-2-15 - 14-16-2-17, 14-16-2-19, 14-16-3-5
7-2009   14-16-3-5
8-2009   2-6-1-3,
         10-5-3
9-2009   14-16-2-22, 14-16-3-22
14-2009  14-14-5-3
15-2009  8-5-1-30
19-2009  10-5-3
20-2009  4-10-6
21-2009  7-10-3
22-2009  14-1-4
30-2009  4-3-7-1 -
         4-3-7-6
         14-13-2-3,
         14-13-4-1,
1-2010   14-13-4-2,
         14-13-5-1,
         14-13-5-2
4-2010   10-10-1 -
         10-10-7
         9-10-1-8,
6-2010   9-10-1-11;
         Ch. 9, Art. 10, Pt. 1 App.
         3-1-2,
         3-1-4,
7-2010   3-1-6,
         3-1-7,
         3-1-13,
         3-1-14
         3-1-3,
8-2010   3-1-12,
         3-1-18
9-2010   14-16-1-5
10-2010  14-14-7-1 - 14-14-7-3
15-2010  2-16-1 -
         2-16-5
16-2010  8-2-1-24
17-2010  14-16-2-26, 14-16-2-27
         13-13-1-1 -
18-2010  13-13-1-3,
         13-13-1-99
19-2010  14-16-2-6 - 14-16-2-9, 14-16-2-11 - 14-16-2-22, 14-16-2-24, 14-16-2-
         25, 14-16-3-1 - 14-16-3-15, 14-16-3-22, 14-16-4-1, 14-16-4-3
21-2010  14-13-1-2,
         14-13-1-4
23-2010  13-14-1 -
         13-14-7
29-2010  9-3-5
         2-7-2-5,
         2-10-2 -
         2-10-9,
         2-10-11,
         2-10-13 -
         2-10-16,
         2-11-18,
         2-17-1 -
30-2010  2-17-12,
         3-1-6,
         3-7-3,
         3-7-4,
         3-7-6 -
         3-7-8,
         3-7-10,
         3-7-11,
         5-5-20
8-2011   8-2-1-44,
         8-3-3-6
9-2011   14-1-4
10-2011  13-14-4
11-2011  8-5-1-5
14-2011  9-3-16
16-2011  9-18-1 -
         9-18-7
17-2011  14-16-3-5
         9-19-1 -
18-2011  9-19-8,
         9-19-98,
         9-19-99
         14-1-1 -
20-2011  14-1-8,
         14-1-99
23-2011  14-2-4
24-2011  14-16-2-25
         7-13-1 -
25-2011  7-13-6,
         7-13-99
         5-5-3,
         5-5-7,
         5-5-9 -
         5-5-13,
         5-5-15,
26-2011  5-5-17,
         5-5-19,
         5-5-20,
         5-5-23,
         5-5-24,
         5-5-26 -
         5-5-39
27-2011  14-16-2-16
28-2011  10-1-2-3
29-2011  10-6-2,
         10-6-3
31-2011  14-16-1-5, 14-16-3-5
35-2011  9-8-3,
         9-8-4
2012-001 14-9-4
2012-002 2-12-1
2012-004 14-16-2-16, 14-16-2-17
2012-012 14-16-3-5
2012-014 10-5-3
2012-021 14-16-2-16
         9-20-1 -
2012-022 9-20-4,
         9-20-99
2012-030 13-15-1 -
         13-15-18
2012-031 9-1-4-1 -
         9-1-4-6
2012-032 10-2-4-1 -
         10-2-4-4
         14-19-1 -
2012-034 14-19-24,
         14-19-98,
         14-19-99
         14-13-2-4,
2012-036 14-13-3-2, 14-16-1-5, 14-16-2-14, 14-16-2-23, 14-16-2-24, 14-16-4-1,
         14-16-4-3
2012-037 14-16-2-6, 14-16-2-8, 14-16-2-9, 14-16-3-4, 14-16-3-19, 14-16-3-22
2012-038 14-16-1-5, 14-16-3-4
2013-001 10-1-1-1,
         10-1-1-5
2013-002 5-5-17
         2-10-5,
2013-003 2-10-6,
         2-17-5
2013-004 14-16-3-23
         9-10-1-1  -
2013-009 9-10-1-12 ,
         9-10-1-98 ,
         9-10-1-99
2013-010 4-10-6
2013-011 14-16-1-5, 14-16-3-16
2013-013 14-16-3-5
2013-014 9-21-1
2013-015 10-4-5-2
2013-018 5-5-31  -
         5-5-40
2014-001 9-11-2-1 -
         9-11-2-4
2014-002 6-5-4-3
2014-003 14-16-1-5, 14-16-2-15, 14-16-3-1
2014-004 14-16-4-2
2014-007 13-2-2,
         13-2-4
2014-009 14-16-4-4
2014-011 13-12-5
         9-10-1-8,
2014-013 9-10-1-11;
         Ch. 9, Art. 10, Pt. 1 App.
2014-014 2-12-4
2014-015 6-9-1,
         6-9-7
2014-016 2-6-12-1 -
         2-6-12-6
         14-1-1 -
2014-018 14-1-8,
         14-1-99
2014-019 9-4-1-1 -
         9-4-1-13
2014-021 2-4-17
         8-1-1-2,
2014-022 8-3-4-1 -
         8-3-4-8
2014-024 14-16-1-5, 14-16-3-17
2014-025 10-5-6
         14-9-1,
         14-9-2,
2015-001 14-9-4,
         14-9-5,
         14-9-8 -
         14-9-15
2015-002 14-16-1-5, 14-16-3-24
         2-12-1,
         2-12-8,
         4-3-7-5,
2015-003 6-5-6-1,
         6-5-6-2,
         6-5-6-4 -
         6-5-6-6
2015-004 2-6-10-2 -
         2-6-10-5
         9-4-1-4,
2015-006 9-4-1-5,
         9-4-1-7
2015-008 14-8-4-1 -
         14-8-4-8
2015-010 4-1-9
2015-012 14-16-3-5
2015-013 14-14-4-5, 14-14-5-1, 14-14-5-2, 14-14-6-1
2015-016 14-14-1-6, 14-14-3-4, 14-14-3-5
2015-017 13-2-2,
         13-2-4
2015-018 2-6-5-1 -
         2-6-5-6
2015-019 5-5-11,
         5-5-31
         10-2-4-1,
2015-020 10-2-4-2,
         10-2-4-4
2015-022 2-12-1
2015-024 8-5-1-42, 14-16-1-5, 14-16-3-25
         14-1-1 -
2015-025 14-1-8,
         14-1-99
2015-026 2-10-5
2015-027 2-17-5
2015-028 4-2-3-1 -
         4-2-3-7
2015-029 2-6-16
2015-030 9-20-1,
         9-20-4
         11-8-1 -
2015-032 11-8-4,
         11-8-99
2016-002 14-14-5-12
2016-004 8-5-1-42
         5-5-19,
2016-005 5-5-23,
         5-5-32
2016-006 6-6-2-4 -
         6-6-2-9
2016-007 14-16-3-1, 14-16-3-10
2016-008 2-6-16,
         5-2-5
         9-17-1,
2016-009 9-17-3 -
         9-17-7
         8-1-1-2,
         8-1-2-5,
         8-1-2-6,
         8-1-2-20,
         8-1-2-24,
         8-1-2-26,
         8-1-2-28,
         8-1-2-32 -
         8-1-2-35,
         8-1-2-37,
         8-1-2-40 -
         8-1-2-42,
         8-1-2-46,
         8-1-3-4 -
         8-1-3-6,
         8-1-3-9 -
         8-1-3-13,
         8-1-3-18,
         8-1-3-19,
         8-1-3-99,
         8-2-1-2,
         8-2-1-33,
2016-011 8-2-1-45,
         8-2-1-61 -
         8-2-1-64,
         8-2-2-15,
         8-3-2-15,
         8-3-3-23,
         8-5-1-3 -
         8-5-1-5,
         8-5-1-7,
         8-5-1-11,
         8-5-1-12,
         8-5-1-14,
         8-5-1-19,
         8-5-1-30,
         8-5-1-32,
         8-5-1-35,
         8-5-1-40,
         8-5-2-1,
         8-5-2-2,
         8-5-2-4,
         8-5-2-7 -
         8-5-2-9,
         8-5-3-1
2016-012 2-6-13-1 -
         2-6-13-7
         9-4-1-4 -
2016-013 9-4-1-6,
         9-4-1-8,
         9-4-1-12
2016-014 2-12-1
         10-10-4,
2016-015 10-10-5,
         10-10-7
2016-016 6-11-1 -
         6-11-14
2016-018 2-10-1 -
         2-10-16
2016-020 13-16-1
2016-021 14-16-2-2, 14-16-2-4, 14-16-2-5
2016-023 12-2-29
         9-4-4-1 -
2017-001 9-4-4-11,
         9-4-4-99
2017-002 9-9-1 -
         9-9-12
2017-003 5-5-31
2017-006 2-6-5-3 -
         2-6-5-6
         6-5-6-2,
         6-5-6-4,
2017-008 6-8-2-2,
         6-8-6-2, 14-14-4-5, 14-14-5-1, 14-16-1-5, 14-16-2-1, 14-16-2-6, 14-16-
         2-9 - 14-16-2-12, 14-16-2-22, 14-16-2-24
2017-009 5-5-11
         8-1-1-2,
2017-010 8-1-3-99,
         8-5-1-5
2017-011 14-20-1 -
         14-20-7
2017-012 14-16-2-6
         14-1-1 -
2017-013 14-1-8,
         14-1-99
2017-014 9-2-2-4
2017-019 2-18-1 -
         2-18-10
         14-2-1 -
2017-020 14-2-6,
         14-2-99
2017-022 3-1-16
2017-023 14-19-3,
         14-19-19
         2-6-14 -
         2-6-17,
         4-10-3,
         5-1-4,
         6-1-1-12,
         6-1-1-99,
         6-5-5-3,
         6-5-5-4,
         6-5-5-12,
         6-5-5-14,
         6-5-5-15,
         6-5-5-18,
         6-6-1-2,
         6-6-2-2 -
         6-6-2-5,
         6-6-2-7,
         6-6-2-9,
         6-7-2,
         6-9-1,
         7-5-2,
         7-5-3,
         8-2-2-15,
2017-025 8-5-1-42,
         9-2-1-4,
         9-2-3-3,
         9-9-2,
         9-10-1-7,
         9-10-1-9,
         10-9-8,
         11-2-3,
         13-2-6,
         13-5-1-13,
         13-15-2,
         14-4-4,
         14-6-1,
         14-6-2,
         14-9-3,
         14-11-3,
         14-11-7,
         14-13-1-4,
         14-13-2-1 -
         14-13-2-4,
         14-16,
         14-17-5,
         14-19-15
         2-14-1-2 -
2017-026 2-14-1-4,
         2-14-1-8
2017-028 8-2-7-2
2017-029 9-22-1,
         9-22-2
         7-2-1-3,
         7-2-2-1,
2017-030 7-2-2-2,
         9-5-5-4,
         9-5-5-9
2018-001 4-3-9-1 -
         4-3-9-5
2018-002 2-6-12-1 -
         2-6-12-6
2018-004 2-6-1-6
         12-1-99,
2018-005 12-4-9,
         12-4-10
2018-007 2-18-1 -
         2-18-10
         14-1-1 -
2018-008 14-1-8,
         14-1-99
2018-012 8-5-1-1,
         8-5-1-15
         8-1-1-2,
2018-021 8-3-5-1 -
         8-3-5-4
         14-1-1 -
2018-022 14-1-8,
         14-1-99
         14-3-1-1 -
         14-3-1-4,
         14-3-2-1 -
         14-3-2-3,
         14-3-3-1 -
2018-025 14-3-3-3,
         14-3-4-1 -
         14-3-4-11,
         14-3-5-1 -
         14-3-5-18,
         14-3-5-98,
         14-3-5-99
2018-026 5-10-1 -
         5-10-11
2018-028 4-11-1 -
         4-11-13
2018-032 8-2-1-60,
         9-8-99
2018-034 2-4-5,
         2-4-6
2018-036 3-1-16
2019-002 2-12-3
2019-004 2-6-6-1 -
         2-6-6-4
         5-5-3,
         5-5-6,
         5-5-7,
         5-5-9,
         5-5-10,
         5-5-12,
         5-5-16,
         5-5-17,
2019-005 5-5-19,
         5-5-20,
         5-5-22 -
         5-5-24,
         5-5-26 -
         5-5-30,
         5-5-32,
         5-5-33,
         5-5-36 -
         5-5-39
2019-007 9-4-1-1 -
         9-4-1-13
2019-009 13-5-3-1 -
         13-5-3-15
2019-010 Ch. 9, Art. 10, Pt. 1 App.
2019-011 8-2-4-6
         14-2-1,
2019-012 14-2-4,
         14-2-5
2019-015 14-21-1 -
         14-21-8
2019-016 14-9-1 -
         14-9-7.5
2019-017 8-1-1-2,
         8-2-7-2
2019-019 2-4-10,
         2-4-16
2019-020 9-4-1-8
         6-5-6-1,
2019-022 6-5-6-2,
         6-5-6-4 -
         6-5-6-8
         13-3-2-3 -
         13-3-2-8,
2019-023 13-3-2-12,
         13-3-2-15,
         13-3-2-16,
         13-3-2-98
         4-4-1 -
         4-4-14,
2019-024 4-4-99,
         4-8-1 -
         4-8-13,
         4-8-99
2019-028 2-6-11-1 -
         2-6-11-4
2019-031 2-3-2 -
         2-3-5
         9-2-1-2,
         9-2-1-4,
         9-2-3-1,
         9-2-3-3,
         9-2-3-6 -
2019-032 9-2-3-8,
         9-2-3-13,
         9-2-3-16,
         9-2-4-3,
         9-2-5-1,
         9-2-6-1
2019-035 13-18-1-1 -
         13-18-1-3
2020-001 4-1-1 -
         4-1-12
2020-003 14-8-4-9
2020-007 5-5-31
         2-9-1-1 -
         2-9-1-7,
2020-010 2-9-1-18,
         2-9-2-1,
         2-9-2-2
2020-011 9-2-1-4,
         9-2-3-16
2020-015 13-4-2-1 -
         13-4-2-10
2020-016 4-3-7-1 -
         4-3-7-6
2020-018 2-14-1-9
2020-019 2-3-8,
         2-4-10
2020-020 2-9-1-8 -
         2-9-1-18
2020-028 2-4-10
2020-030 14-20-1 -
         14-20-9
2020-031 12-2-29
2020-032 9-4-6-1 -
         9-4-6-8
         4-4-13,
2020-038 13-19-1 -
         13-19-8
         10-2-2-1 -
         10-2-2-3,
         10-4-1-3 -
         10-4-1-5,
         10-4-1-7 -
2020-039 10-4-1-9,
         10-4-2-1,
         10-4-5-1 -
         10-4-5-4,
         10-5-3,
         10-6-2,
         10-6-3
         14-1-1 -
2020-040 14-1-8,
         14-1-99
         9-10-1-3,
         9-10-1-6,
2020-041 9-10-1-8 -
         9-10-1-11;
         Ch. 9, Art. 10, Pt. 1 App.
2020-042 13-6-1 -
         13-6-14
2020-045 3-2-1 -
         3-2-19
2021-001 11-3-3,
         11-3-7
         14-7-1-1 -
         14-7-1-5,
2021-002 14-7-2-2,
         14-7-2-3,
         14-7-2-10
2021-010 8-5-1-4
2021-011 13-5-2-1
2021-013 14-7-2-7
2021-015 2-6-15
2021-016 8-5-1-30
2021-019 3-2-1 -
         3-2-19
2021-021 4-8-8,
         4-8-13
2021-022 4-4-9,
         4-4-14
2021-023 7-2-1-3
2021-024 7-15-1 -
         7-15-5
2021-025 5-5-11
         14-1-1 -
2022-001 14-1-8,
         14-1-99
2022-003 2-1-1
2022-007 9-4-1-1 -
         9-4-1-13
2022-009 12-4-10
2022-015 14-22-1,
         14-22-2
         9-5-5-1 -
2022-016 9-5-5-10,
         9-5-5-98,
         9-5-5-99
2022-017 14-8-2-1 -
         14-8-2-9
2022-019 9-4-1-5
2022-021 14-22-1,
         14-22-2
         11-3-2,
2022-023 11-3-3,
         11-3-7,
         11-3-12
         14-1-1 -
2022-024 14-1-8,
         14-1-99
2022-025 Ch. 9, Art. 10, Pt. 1 App.
2022-031 12-2-30
2022-034 2-7-2-2
         10-5-2,
2022-035 10-5-5 -
         10-5-7
2022-037 9-24-1 -
         9-24-7
2022-038 8-1-1-2,
         8-2-7-2
2022-041 2-4-1 -
         2-4-16
         2-7-6-2 -
2022-044 2-7-6-5,
         2-7-9-1 -
         2-7-9-6
2022-045 5-5-3,
         5-5-20
2022-046 2-6-18-1 -
         2-6-18-4
2022-048 13-20-1-1 -
         13-20-1-10
2023-001 2-2-1
         5-5-3,
         5-5-17,
         5-5-20,
2023-003 5-5-27,
         5-5-29,
         5-5-31,
         5-5-41
2023-004 9-4-1-1 -
         9-4-1-14
         2-11-20,
2023-005 7-2-1-3,
         7-2-2-1,
         12-2-5
         13-21-1 -
2023-006 13-21-5,
         13-21-99
2023-007 2-14-1-3,
         2-14-1-9
2023-008 2-6-1-4
2023-010 13-2-1 -
         13-2-6
2023-011 12-2-19
         1-1-19,
         2-3-7,
         2-7-8-1 -
         2-7-8-10,
         2-9-1-14,
         3-1-25,
         4-4-8,
         4-4-11,
         4-5-3,
         4-8-6,
         4-8-10,
         5-5-24,
         5-7-1 -
         5-7-6,
         6-1-1-12,
         6-5-2-29,
         6-7-7,
         6-7-8,
         7-3-13,
         7-5-4,
         7-10-99,
         8-5-2-10,
         8-5-2-12,
         9-1-4-6,
         9-2-7-1,
         9-3-13 -
         9-3-15,
2023-015 9-8-28,
         9-9-6,
         9-9-11,
         9-10-1-11,
         9-15-7,
         9-17-5,
         9-17-7,
         9-18-3,
         10-3-5-1,
         10-3-5-4,
         10-3-5-5,
         11-5-16,
         13-3-1-11,
         13-3-1-98,
         13-3-2-11,
         13-3-2-98,
         13-3-3-6,
         13-6-10,
         13-10-9,
         13-11-8,
         13-15-14,
         14-3-5-2 -
         14-3-5-5,
         14-3-5-8,
         14-3-5-11,
         14-11-6 -
         14-11-8,
         14-20-8,
         14-20-9
         9-2-1-4,
         9-2-1-5,
         9-2-2-1,
         9-2-2-6,
         9-2-3-2 -
         9-2-3-6,
         9-2-3-8 -
         9-2-3-10,
         9-2-3-12 -
         9-2-3-14,
2023-016 9-2-3-16,
         9-2-4-4,
         9-2-4-5,
         9-2-4-8,
         9-2-5-1,
         9-2-6-1,
         9-2-7-1,
         9-8-3,
         9-8-8,
         9-8-25 -
         9-8-32,
         9-8-99
         7-15-4,
         7-15-5,
2023-017 8-1-3-12,
         8-5-1-43,
         8-5-3-1
2023-018 2-17-1 -
         2-17-12
         7-3-1 -
2023-019 7-3-18,
         7-3-99
2023-020 2-10-1 -
         2-10-16
2023-021 4-2-1-1 -
         4-2-1-3
2023-022 2-12-1
2023-025 2-6-18-2
2023-026 2-12-1
2023-027 4-12-1 -
         4-12-4
2023-028 7-2-1-1 -
         7-2-1-3
2023-030 13-2-2
2023-034 4-2-3-2 -
         4-2-3-7
         14-1-1 -
2024-001 14-1-8,
         14-1-99
         14-2-1 -
2024-002 14-2-6,
         14-2-99
         14-3-5-3,
         14-3-5-4,
2024-003 14-3-5-6,
         14-3-5-12,
         14-23-1 -
         14-23-4
2024-005 1-1-12,
         1-1-15
2024-008 6-5-6-5,
         6-5-6-6
2024-009 2-11-17
         11-3-2,
         11-3-3,
2024-010 11-3-5,
         11-3-7,
         11-3-12
2024-012 9-6-1 -
         9-6-20
2024-013 2-4-6
2024-015 14-1-2,
         14-1-3
2024-016 14-8-4-3,
         14-8-4-7
         5-8-3,
         5-8-8,
         8-1-1-2,
2024-021 8-3-3-1,
         8-3-3-5,
         8-3-3-6,
         8-3-3-16
2024-022 8-3-5-1 -
         8-3-5-4
2024-024 2-6-19-1 -
         2-6-19-6
2024-025 9-2-3-16
2024-028 14-23-4
2024-029 2-2-2 -
         2-2-5
2024-033 9-6-10,
         9-6-15
2024-038 14-1-2
2024-039 2-14-1-12
2024-040 2-6-20-1 -
         2-6-20-5
2024-041 2-1-10
2024-042 2-2-2,
         2-2-3
2024-043 14-26-1 -
         14-26-12
         8-1-3-10,
2024-044 8-1-3-11,
         8-1-3-99
2024-045 2-12-2,
         2-12-9
         10-1-1-1 -
2024-046 10-1-1-10,
         10-1-1-99
         14-3-3-2,
2024-047 14-3-4-2,
         14-3-4-7
2024-048 13-1-1 -
         13-1-18
2024-049 9-25-1 -
         9-25-7
         14-3-5-14,
2025-001 14-24-1 -
         14-24-11
2025-005 5-5-20
2025-006 2-7-6-5
         14-8-4-3,
2025-007 14-8-4-7,
         14-8-4-10 -
         14-8-4-12
         11-1-1-1 -
         11-1-1-15,
2025-009 11-1-2-1 -
         11-1-2-5,
         11-1-3-1 -
         11-1-3-10
         2-6-1-3,
2025-010 2-6-1-7,
         2-6-1-8
2025-012 2-19-1 -
         2-19-9
         2-7-8-3,
2025-015 2-7-8-7,
         2-7-8-8,
         2-7-8-9
         4-4-11,
2025-016 4-4-12,
         9-26-1 -
         9-26-6
2025-019 9-11-3-1 -
         9-11-3-6
2025-022 9-2-3-7,
         9-2-4-4
2025-024 14-8-4-3
         5-5-3,
2025-025 5-5-18 -
         5-5-20
2025-026 5-8-6
2025-029 14-27-1 -
         14-27-8
         14-5-1-1 -
         14-5-1-4,
         14-5-2-1,
         14-5-3-1 -
         14-5-3-7,
2025-031 14-5-4-1 -
         14-5-4-4,
         14-5-5-1 -
         14-5-5-7,
         14-5-6-1 -
         14-5-6-12
         6-5-5-4,
         7-15-5,
         8-1-1-2,
         8-1-2-22,
         8-1-3-2,
         8-2-1-23,
         8-2-1-32,
         8-2-1-34,
         8-2-1-48,
         8-2-2-2 -
         8-2-2-6,
         8-2-3-1 -
         8-2-3-4,
         8-2-3-6,
2025-032 8-2-6-10,
         8-2-7-3,
         8-2-7-7,
         8-2-7-9,
         8-2-7-11,
         8-2-7-12,
         8-3-3-1,
         8-3-3-4,
         8-3-3-5,
         8-3-3-7,
         8-3-3-8,
         8-3-3-10,
         8-3-3-12,
         8-3-3-13,
         8-3-3-15,
         8-5-1-1
         
 
 
CHARTER OF THE
CITY OF ALBUQUERQUE
CHARTER TABLE OF CONTENTS
Section
   Preamble
Article I. Incorporation and powers
Article II. Elections
   
1   Charter election laws
   
2   Election dates
   
3   Reference to state law
   
4   Qualifications for mayor and councillors
   
5   Designation of candidates
   
6   Definition
   
7   Fifty percent minimum vote
   
8   Runoff elections
Article III. Recall Elections, Referenda and Direct Legislation
   
1   Recall
   
2   Referendum
   
3   Direct legislation by voter initiative
Article IV. Council
   
1   Authority and membership of the council
   
2   Council districts
   
3   District boundary revisions
   
4   Terms of office
   
5   Council organization
   
6   Compensation of the council
   
7   Meetings of the council
   
8   Council powers
   
9   Vacancies in office
   
10   Council duties
   
11   Definitions
   
12   Officer or employee of a county
   
13   Term limits
Article V. Mayor
   
1   Election of the mayor
   
2   Mayor's term and salary
   
3   Powers; performance; appointments
   
4   Duties of the mayor
   
5   Vacancy in the office of mayor
Article VI. Charter Amendments
   
1   [Procedure]
   
2   [Petition process]
   
3   [Council process for articles other than XII and XIII]
   
4   [Election]
   
5   [Ballot]
   
6   [Vote]
   
7   [Authority of city clerk to correct]
Article VII. The Operating Budget and the Capital Improvement Program
   
1   [Mayor to formulate]
   
2   [Council representative to participate]
   
3   [Proposal and approval date]
   
4   [Public hearings]
   
5   [Failure of council to approve]
   
6   [Procedure ordinance]
Article VIII. [Human Rights]
Article IX. [Environmental Protection]
Article X. Merit System
   
1   Maintenance of the merit system
   
2   Involvement in personnel matters
   
3   Dual positions
Article XI. Ordinances
   
1   Style
   
2   Adoption
   
3   Mayor's approval or disapproval; override veto
   
4   Money appropriations
   
5   Time limits
   
6   Authentication; publication; effective date; codification
   
7   Public vote on performing arts center
Article XII. Code of Ethics
   
1   Declaration of policy
   
2   Definitions
   
3   Board of ethics and campaign practices
   
4   Conflict of interest
   
5   Disclosure
   
6   Use of public property
   
7   Misuse of city employees in campaigns
   
8   Enforcement; violation; penalty; automatic fines; removal from office;
appeal
   
9   Investigation
   
10   Non-waiver of penalties
   
11   Regulations
   
12   Amendments
Article XIII. Election Code
   
1   Declaration of policy
   
2   Definitions
   
3   Candidate disclosure
   
4   Campaign financing
   
5   Campaign materials and required disclaimers
   
6   Measure finance committees
   
7   Familiarity with election code and rules and regulations
   
8   Preservation of records
   
9   Rules and regulations, assistance; campaign and election auditor
   
10   Enforcement
   
11   Non-waiver of penalties
   
12   Amendments
Article XIV. Severability
   
1   No impairment from partial invalidity
Article XV. Competitive Bidding for Electrical Franchises
Article XVI. Open and Ethical Elections Code
   
1   Citation
   
2   Legislative intent
   
3   Definitions
   
4   Terms of participation - declaration of intent
   
5   Qualifying contributions
   
6   Seed money and in-kind contributions
   
7   Certification of participation
   
8   Guidelines and restrictions for contributions to and expenditures of
participating candidates
   
9   Candidate reporting requirements
   
10   Fund creation - fund use
   
11   Determination of fund amount
   
12   Timing and amount of fund distribution
   
13   Adjustments to fund distribution
   
14   Run-off elections
   
15   Communication of participation status to voters
   
16   Adjustments for inflation and population growth
   
17   Administration - Clerk -- duties
   
18   Appeals
   
19   Penalties - enforcement
   
20   Amendments
Article XVII. [Planning]
Article XVIII. Citizens' Independent Salary Commission
Article XIX. Determination of Separation of Powers Issues under the Charter.
Appendix A: Nine Council Districts Identified According to Bernalillo County
Precincts, June 2001
Historical Postscript
PREAMBLE
   We, the people of the City of Albuquerque, under the law of the State of New
Mexico, do ordain and establish this form of government for the City of
Albuquerque, New Mexico.
(Adopted at Special Election, June 29, 1971.)
ARTICLE I. INCORPORATION AND POWERS
   The municipal corporation now existing and known as the City of Albuquerque
shall remain and continue to be a body corporate and may exercise all
legislative powers and perform all functions not expressly denied by general
law or charter. Unless otherwise provided in this Charter, the power of the
city to legislate is permissive and not mandatory. If the city does not
legislate, it may nevertheless act in the manner provided by law. The purpose
of this Charter is to provide for maximum local self government. A liberal
construction shall be given to the powers granted by this Charter.
(Adopted at Special Election, June 29, 1971.)
ARTICLE II. ELECTIONS
Section 1. CHARTER ELECTION LAWS.
   Article II, Elections, Article XIII, Election Code, and Article XVI, Open
and Ethical Elections Code, all govern elections in Albuquerque. Article II
sets forth candidate qualifications, governing law, and the non-partisan
election process. Article XIII establishes campaign reporting requirements,
contribution limitations, and the regulation of campaign practices by the Board
of Ethics. Article XVI allows candidates to run for office with public
financing. Candidates may choose to run for office with either public financing
or private financing. Whether publicly or privately financed, a candidate must
meet the Section 4 qualification requirement of petition signatures.
(Adopted at Regular Municipal Election, October 6, 2009.)
Section 2. ELECTION DATES.
   The Councillors representing even-numbered Districts shall be elected by the
voters to four- year terms at the regular municipal election held on October 7,
1975. The Mayor and the Councillors representing odd- numbered Districts shall
be elected by the voters to four- year terms at the regular municipal election
held on October 4, 1977. Thereafter, regular municipal elections shall be held
on the first Tuesday after the first Monday in November of odd-numbered years,
provided that a regular municipal election day may be set by election
resolution on an alternate date when the first Tuesday after the first Monday
in November falls on a recognized holiday or a recognized religious holiday or
eve.
(Amended at Regular Municipal Election, October 2, 2007. Am. Ord. 2018-034)
Section 3. REFERENCE TO STATE LAW.
   (a)   The Municipal Election Code, Chapter 3, Articles 8 and 9, NMSA 1978,
as amended and as supplemented from time to time, shall govern the conduct of
all aspects of municipal elections, except where inconsistent with the terms of
this Charter, in which event this Charter shall control.
   (b)   Any ordinance adopted subsequent to the effective date of this Section
by a majority of the entire membership of the Council plus two additional
members thereof voting in favor of such ordinance, and said ordinance being
otherwise governed by Article XI of this Charter, which ordinance expressly
provides that it is to take precedence over the Municipal Election Code, shall
take precedence over such Code except where such ordinance is inconsistent with
the terms of this Charter, in which event this Charter shall control.
Section 4. QUALIFICATIONS FOR MAYOR AND COUNCILLORS.
   Persons desiring to become candidates for Mayor shall, before being placed
on the ballot, file with the City Clerk a petition containing signatures of
three thousand (3,000) registered city voters. Persons desiring to become
candidates for District Councillor shall, before being placed on the ballot,
file with the City Clerk a petition containing signatures of five hundred (500)
registered voters residing in the district which the person desires to
represent.
(Amended at a Special Election held in conjunction with a Regular Municipal
Election, October 5, 1999, as Question #3. Amended at a Regular Municipal
Election, October 6, 2009.)
Section 5. DESIGNATION OF CANDIDATES.
   The ballots shall be printed by the city and shall contain the names of the
candidates without party or other designation. In city elections, paper ballots
may be used exclusively if found more expedient or desir- able. Where voting
machines are used, any references to ballots will apply equally to voting
machines.
Section 6. DEFINITION.
   The term “elector” or “voter” when used in this Charter means a person who
is a resident of the city and who is entitled to vote for candidates for
municipal office in a municipal election under the Constitution and statutes of
New Mexico as amended and supple- mented from time to time and who is
registered pursuant to the applicable statutes of New Mexico as amended and
supplemented from time to time or who is registered pursuant to any ordinance
of the Council which expressly provides that it is to take precedence over such
statutes and which is enacted after the effective date of this Section.
Section 7. FIFTY PERCENT MINIMUM VOTE.
   Those persons who are candidates for Mayor or Councillor and receive the
largest number of votes cast for the office in question are elected, provided
the number of votes equals or exceeds 50% of the total number of votes cast for
the office.
(Amended at a Special Municipal Election, March 11, 2013.)
Section 8. RUNOFF ELECTIONS.
   (a)   If no candidate receives 50% of the votes cast for the particular
office in question, a runoff election shall be held within forty-five days
after certification of the results of the election in question as now provided
by law and as amended and supplemented from time to time. Unless otherwise
specified in this Charter, the two candidates who receive the highest number of
votes cast for the office in question shall automatically become the candidates
at the runoff election and the filing of declarations of candidacy is dispensed
with.
   (b)   The Council shall by resolution fix the date of the runoff election
and specify the offices to be filled and the names of the candidates therefor.
The resolution shall be published once, at least seven days before the runoff
election date. Otherwise, no publications are required in connection with
runoff elections.
   (c)   Only such voting precincts and procedures will be reactivated for a
runoff as will be required, on a city-wide basis if officials to be voted on by
the entire city electorate are involved, otherwise only such District
Councillor districts as may be involved.
(Amended at a Special Municipal Election, March 11, 2013.)
(Article II amended at Regular Municipal Election, October 3, 1989, as part of
Proposition #1.) (The State Constitution was amended to allow the runoff
procedure and the 40% minimum vote requirement.)
ARTICLE III. RECALL ELECTIONS, REFERENDA
AND DIRECT LEGISLATION
Section 1. RECALL.
   (a)   Any elective officer of the city shall be subject to a recall election
initiated by the following procedures:
      (1)   Notice of intent to circulate a petition for recall must be signed
by five qualified voters and filed with the City Clerk.
      (2)   A petition for recall election shall cite grounds of misconduct in
office or the violation of the oath of office by the official occurring during
the current term of office.
      (3)   The recall petition shall be signed by not less than thirty-three
and one third percent of the number of persons who voted in the last regular
municipal election for the position the official was elected.
      (4)   Prior to and as a condition of circulating a petition for recall
the factual allegations supporting the grounds of misconduct in office or
violation of the oath of office stated in the petition shall be presented to
the City Clerk. The petition shall not be circulated unless, after a hearing in
state district court in which the proponents of the recall and the official
sought to be recalled are given an opportunity to present evidence.
      (5)   The signed petitions must be filed with the City Clerk no more than
60 days after the determination of the district court. The City Clerk shall
verify the signatures.
      (6)   No elected official shall be the subject of a recall election
during the last six months of the official's term.
   (b)   The election must be held within ninety days after the last
permissible date for filing petitions.
   (c)   At such election, the ballot shall contain the name of the officer,
the position which the officer holds, and the dates of the beginning and
termination of the official term. Below the name of the officer shall be the
two phrases "For the Recall" and "Against the Recall", one below the other.
   (d)   If a majority of the ballots and a number equal to a majority of the
ballots cast at the election of the officer whose recall is proposed, show a
vote for the recall, the office in question shall be thenceforth vacant.
   (e)   If an officer is recalled as provided for above, the officer shall not
be appointed to fill his or her own unexpired term nor be eligible for re-
election to the position from which they have been recalled until the term for
which the officer was originally elected shall have expired.
   (f)   Vacancies created by a recall election shall be filled in the same
manner as is provided for the filling of vacancies in the office of Councillor
or Mayor due to other causes; provided, that if all the Councillors are
recalled at one election, the City Clerk, or if there be no City Clerk, the
Chief Judge of the District Court of the County of Bernalillo, shall within
three days call an election to be held in accordance with the provisions
specified in this Charter for the election of Councillors at regular elections.
   (g)   When a Councillor is subjected to recall proceedings, only voters
registered as residing in the District which the Councillor represents may sign
petitions and vote in the recall proceedings.
(Amended at Regular Municipal Election, October 2, 2007.)
Section 2. REFERENDUM.
   (a)   Except as provided in (d) of this Section, any ordinance may be
subject to a referendum on such ordinance as follows:
      1.   If such ordinance is not an emergency measure, the filing of such
petition shall suspend the effective date of the ordinance until an election
shall have been held as petitioned. If such ordinance is an emergency measure,
it shall go into effect at once, subject to repeal by an adverse majority at
the election.
      2.   The number of qualified voters required to sign the petition shall
be a number more than 20% of the average number of voters who voted at the four
regular municipal elections prior to publication of the ordinance or more than
20% of the number of voters who voted at the regular municipal election prior
to publication of the ordinance, whichever is the greater.
      3.   Before any signatures are affixed thereon, the form of such petition
must be approved by the City Clerk as provided by law.
      4.   No such petition or any part thereof, may be filed more than thirty-
five days after publication of the ordinance.
      5.   An election on the issue must be held within ninety days after the
date of filing the petition.
   (b)   At such election the ballot shall contain the text of the measure in
question and below the same the phrases: "For the Above Measure" and "Against
the Above Measure" followed by spaces for marking with a cross or a check the
phrase desired.
   (c)   If a majority of the votes cast are against the measure, it shall be
of no effect. If a majority of the votes cast be not against the measure, it
shall go into effect forthwith.
   (d)   The referendum procedure of this Section shall not be available for:
      1.   Any ordinance authorizing bonds or other obligations where such
ordinance, bonds or other obligations appropriately have been approved at an
election in the city;
      2.   Any ordinance levying or otherwise relating to special assessments;
or
      3.   Any ordinance which imposes, levies, increases or otherwise amends
rates, tolls, fees and charges for services rendered by any municipal utility
or any municipal revenue producing project if bonds or other obligations
payable from the designated source are then outstanding.
Section 3. DIRECT LEGISLATION BY VOTER INITIATIVE.
   (a)   Except as provided in (d) of this Section, a measure may be proposed
to the governing body for enactment as follows:
      1.   Notice of intent to circulate a petition proposing any measure must
be signed by five qualified voters and filed with the City Clerk;
      2.   Concurrently with the filing of the notice of intent, the proposed
measure shall be filed with the City Clerk;
      3.   The number of qualified voters required to sign the petition shall
be a number more than 20% of the number of voters who voted at the last regular
municipal mayoral election prior to filing the notice of intent;
      4.   Before any signatures are affixed thereon, the form of such petition
must be approved by the City Clerk as provided by law and the date of filing
the notice of intent shown thereon;
      5.   No such petition or any part thereof, may be filed more than sixty
days after the date of filing the notice of intent;
      6.   If the Council fails to act upon a measure so proposed within
fourteen days after the City Clerk files a certification with the Council that
the petition has been signed by the required number of voters, or the Council
acts adversely thereon or substantively amends it an election on the issues
must be held at the next general election or regular municipal election.
   (b)   Subject to state law and Secretary of State rules regarding ballot
questions, at such election the ballot shall contain the proposed measure as
originally submitted and the measure as amended, if substantively amended by
the governing body of the city. If the question was not substantively amended
by the governing body, or if the proponents of the measure originally submitted
concur with the governing body's substantive amendments, only the measure as
amended shall be placed on the ballot. Below any such measure, there shall be
printed the words: "For" and "Against" followed by spaces for marking with a
cross or a check the word desired.
   (c)   The measure receiving a majority of the votes cast on that measure in
its favor is adopted. If each measure receives a majority of votes cast on that
measure in its favor, the measure receiving the greatest number of votes cast
in its favor is adopted. If neither measure receives a majority of the votes
cast, neither shall be in effect.
   (d)   The initiative procedure of this Section shall not be available to
amend or repeal, directly or indirectly:
      1.   Any ordinance authorizing bonds or other obligations where such
ordinance, bonds or other obligations appropriately have been approved at an
election in the city;
      2.   Any ordinance levying or otherwise relating to special assessments;
      3.   Any ordinance which imposes, levies, increases or otherwise amends
any excise tax pledged to any bonds or other obligations then outstanding;
      4.   Any ordinance which imposes, levies, increases or otherwise amends
rates, tolls, fees and charges for services rendered by any municipal utility
or any municipal revenue producing project if bonds or other obligations
payable from the designated source are then outstanding; or
      5.   Any ordinance authorizing or otherwise relating to any city bonds or
other obligations then outstanding.
(Amended at Regular Municipal Election, October 6, 2015.)
(Article III amended at Regular Municipal Election, October 3, 1989, as part of
Proposition #1.) (Amended by Ordinance No. 2019-019)
ARTICLE IV. COUNCIL
Section 1. AUTHORITY AND MEMBERSHIP OF THE COUNCIL.
   The legislative authority of the city shall be vested in a governing body
which shall constitute the legislative branch of the city and shall be known as
a Council, consisting of nine members from separate Council Districts, each
member to be known as a Councillor. Each of the Council Districts shall elect
one Councillor, who shall be a qualified voter of the District. (Amended at
Regular Municipal Election, October 8, 1991, as Proposition #1; Amended at a
Special Election held in conjunction with a Regular Municipal Election, October
5, 1999, as Question #7.)
Section 2. COUNCIL DISTRICTS.
   (a)   The total area of the city shall be divided into nine Council
Districts, numbered one to nine inclusive, and each district shall elect one
Councillor. Any member of the Council representing one of the districts shall
be elected by the registered qualified electors of that district only.
   (b)   The boundaries, 1980 Census population and numerical designation of
the Council Districts are specified in Appendix A of this Charter and shall
remain in effect until altered or changed in accordance with the provisions set
forth in this Charter.
Section 3. DISTRICT BOUNDARY REVISIONS.
   (a)   After each Federal Census, the Council shall appoint a committee
composed of an equal number of representatives from each Council District, none
of whom shall be elective city officers, to review and make recommendations
concerning the nine Council Districts. In making such appointments, the Council
shall, as nearly as is practicable, provide fair and balanced representation of
all geographical areas of the City in the redistricting process and provide a
total membership that reflects the racial, ethnic and gender makeup of the
City's population. Any recommended changes will comply with constitutional
principles governing voting rights, population and similar related problems as
determined by judicial decision from time to time. The district boundaries may
be altered by the Council and Mayor once following each Federal Census. Such
action shall require the approval of the Mayor and shall not constitute an
amendment to the Charter.
   (b)   The district boundaries may be altered as necessary to incorporate
areas which are annexed to the city. Such action shall not constitute an
amendment to this Charter.
(Amended at Regular Municipal Election, October 2, 2001, as Proposition #8.)
Section 4. TERMS OF OFFICE.
   The terms of the office of a Councilor, unless sooner recalled or removed,
shall begin on January 1 following the candidate's election and be four years
or until a successor is duly elected and qualified. The Councilors may succeed
themselves in office. The terms of office of Councilors shall be staggered with
four or five districted Councilors elected every two years.
(Am. Ord. 2018-034)
Section 5. COUNCIL ORGANIZATION.
   The Council shall elect a president from its number and shall determine its
order and procedure.
Section 6. COMPENSATION OF THE COUNCIL.
   Councillors shall receive annual salaries as determined by a citizens'
independent salary commission.
(Amended at Regular Municipal Election, October 6, 2009.)
Section 7. MEETINGS OF THE COUNCIL.
   (a)   The Council or any of its component committees shall meet as
frequently as its business may require. The Council shall establish regular
Council meeting times by ordinance. Between official Council meetings the
Council shall form itself into committees for consideration of specific areas
of government, using citizenship participation in committee work if found
advisable.
   (b)   All meetings of both the Council and the committees shall be open to
the public and due notice thereof given. Records shall be kept of all voting by
each Councillor and committee member. Publicity shall be given to the minutes
of all meetings of the Council and committees, and the official records of such
meetings shall be open to inspection at all convenient times.
Section 8. COUNCIL POWERS.
   The Council shall have the power to adopt all ordinances, resolutions or
other legislation conducive to the welfare of the people of the city and not
inconsistent with this Charter, and the Council shall not perform any executive
functions except those functions assigned to the Council by this Charter.
Section 9. VACANCIES IN OFFICE.
   (a)   A vacancy in the office of Councillor occurs upon the Councillor's
death, disability, recall, resignation, removal or termination of residency in
the district represented.
   (b)   If a vacancy occurs in the office of Councillor, the Mayor shall
appoint a registered qualified elector of the District to fill the vacancy.
Anyone appointed to fill a vacancy shall serve until the next regular election,
at which time a person shall be elected to fill the remaining unexpired term,
if any.
Section 10. COUNCIL DUTIES.
   The Council shall:
   (a)   Be the judge of the election and qualification of its members;
   (b)   Establish and adopt by ordinance or resolution five-year goals and
one-year objectives for the city, which goals and objectives shall be review
and revised annually by the Council;
   (c)   Consult with the Mayor, seek advice from appropriate committees,
commissions and boards, and hold one or more public hearings before adopting or
revising the goals and objectives of the city;
   (d)   Review, approve or amend and approve all budgets of the city and adopt
policies, plans, programs and legislation consistent with the goals and
objectives established by the Council;
   (e)   Preserve a merit system by ordinance;
   (f)   Hire the personnel necessary to enable the Council to adequately
perform its duties;
   (g)   Perform other duties not inconsistent with or as provided in this
Charter; and
   (h)   Faithfully execute and comply with all laws, ordinances, regulations
and resolutions of the city and all laws of the State of New Mexico and the
United States of America which apply to the city.
Section 11. DEFINITIONS.
   Whenever used in this Charter:
   (a)   The word "Commission" means "Council"; "Commissioner" and "District
Councillor" mean "Councillor"; "Commissioners" means "Councillors".
   (b)   "Quorum" means a majority of the entire Council, committee or other
body involved.
   (c)   The masculine term refers equally to the feminine.
Section 12. OFFICER OR EMPLOYEE OF A COUNTY.
   Effective December 1, 1993, no Councillor shall be an officer or employee of
any county of the State of New Mexico while in office, except a person who on
October 3, 1989, is both a Councillor and an officer or employee of a county of
the State of New Mexico may thereafter hold and be elected to the office of
Councillor while so employed.
(Section 12 adopted at Regular Municipal Election, October 3, 1989, as
Proposition #7; Article IV amended at Regular Municipal Election, October 3,
1989, as Proposition #2.)
Section 13. TERM LIMITS.
   Effective January 1, 1994, Councillors may not serve more than two elected
terms. Councillors who have served more than two terms on that date may remain
in office until their term expires.
(Section 13 adopted at Special Municipal Election, January 11, 1994, as
Proposition #7. This Section has been declared unconstitutional by the New
Mexico Court of Appeals on July 18, 1995. The New Mexico Supreme Court denied
certiorari and therefore the New Mexico Court of Appeals decision declaring
this section unconstitutional stands.)
ARTICLE V. MAYOR
Section 1. ELECTION OF THE MAYOR.
   The Mayor shall be a registered qualified elector on the date of filing of
the declaration of candidacy for the office of Mayor. The Mayor shall be
elected by the registered qualified electors of the city.
(Amended at a Special Election held in conjunction with a Regular Municipal
Election, October 5, 1999, as Question #9.)
Section 2. MAYOR'S TERM AND SALARY.
   The term of Mayor, unless sooner recalled or removed, shall begin on January
1 following the candidate's election and shall be for four years or until a
successor is duly elected and qualified. The Mayor's salary shall be determined
by a citizens' independent salary commission.
(Amended at Regular Municipal Election, October 6, 2009. Am. Ord. 2018-034)
Section 3. POWERS; PERFORMANCE; APPOINTMENTS.
   The executive branch of the city government is created. The office of Mayor
is created. The Mayor shall control and direct the executive branch. The Mayor
is authorized to delegate executive and administrative power within the
executive branch. The Mayor shall be the chief executive officer with all
executive and administrative powers of the city and the official head of the
city for all ceremonial purposes. The Mayor shall devote full time and
attention to the performance of the duties of office and shall hold no other
paid public or private employment.
Section 4. DUTIES OF THE MAYOR.
   The Mayor shall:
   (a)   Organize the executive branch of the city;
   (b)   Exercise administrative control and supervision over and appoint
directors of all city departments, which appointments shall not require the
advice or consent of the Council except as provided in (d) of this Section;
   (c)   Be responsible for the administration and protection of the merit
system;
   (d)   With the advice and consent of the Council, appoint the Chief
Administrative Officer, any deputy administrative officers, the Chief of
Police, and the Fire Chief. For the purposes of this section, “deputy
administrative officers” shall mean any position with supervisory authority
over anyone in a department director position. Appointees requiring the advice
and consent of the Council shall be presented to the Council for confirmation
within 45 days after the Mayor takes office or after a vacant appointed
position has a proposed appointee. The Mayor (even if reelected) shall
reappoint all above noted positions at the beginning of each new term. When an
appointee is presented to and not confirmed by the Council, the Mayor shall,
within 60 days thereafter, nominate another person to fill the position, and
the Mayor may continue to nominate until confirmation. No person may serve in
an interim position for any of the above noted positions for a period of
greater than 270 days unless the Council does not confirm an appointee
presented to them within the timeline stated within this section;
      1.   The Police Chief and Fire Chief shall have an employment agreement
with the City specifying the terms and conditions of employment including a
provision for the early termination and expiring at the end of the current
Mayor’s term. The Mayor may terminate this agreement at any time for cause. The
Council may terminate the agreement at any time, with notice to the Mayor and
Police Chief or Fire Chief, by an affirmative vote of two-thirds plus one of
the entire membership of the Council.
   (e)   Select and remove the City Attorney only as follows:
      1.   The City Attorney shall be selected and appointed through an open
and competitive hiring process conducted by the Mayor with the advice and
consent of two-thirds of the entire membership of the Council.
      2.   The City Attorney's appointment shall be for a term that coincides
and terminates with the term of the Mayor making the appointment unless sooner
removed as provided herein.
      3.   The City Attorney may only be removed from office for cause by the
Mayor with the concurrence of two-thirds of the entire membership of the
Council after cause has been determined by the Director of the Office of
Internal Audit and Investigations.
   (f)   Select and remove the City Clerk only as follows:
      1.   The City Clerk shall be selected and appointed through an open and
competitive hiring process conducted by the Mayor with the advice and consent
of two-thirds of the entire membership of the Council.
      2.   The City Clerk's appointment shall be for a term that coincides and
terminates with the term of the Mayor making the appointment unless sooner
removed as provided herein.
      3.   The City Clerk may only be removed from office for cause by the
Mayor with the concurrence of two-thirds of the entire membership of the
Council after cause has been determined by the Director of the Office of
Internal Audit and Investigations.
   (g)   Except as otherwise provided for by ordinance, with the prior advice
and final consent of the Council appoint the members of city committees,
commissions and boards;
   (h)   Formulate the budgets of the city consistent with the city's goals and
objectives, as provided in this Charter;
   (i)   Establish and maintain a procedure for investigation and resolution of
citizen complaints;
   (j)   Prepare a written state of the city report annually, within thirty
days after final approval of the operating budget of the city, which report
shall be filed with the City Clerk, made a part of the permanent records of the
city and available to the public;
   (k)   Perform other duties not inconsistent with or as provided in this
Charter; and
   (l)   Faithfully execute and comply with all laws, ordinances, regulations
and resolutions of the city and all laws of the State of New Mexico and the
United States of America which apply to the city.
(Amended at Regular Municipal Election, October 2, 2007. Amended at Regular
Municipal Election, October 6, 2009. Amended at Regular Municipal Election,
October 6, 2015. Amended at Regular Municipal Election, November 5, 2024.)
Section 5. VACANCY IN THE OFFICE OF MAYOR.
   (a)   If the Mayor shall die, resign or terminate residence in the City of
Albuquerque during his term of office, or be removed from office, the office of
the Mayor shall become vacant.
   (b)   If a regular election will occur within one year of the date on which
the vacancy occurs, the President of the Council shall serve as Mayor Pro Tem
until a successor is elected and qualified. If the President of the Council
shall decline to serve, the Council shall select from among its membership the
person to serve as Mayor Pro Tem until a successor is elected and qualified. If
the President of the Council or any Councillor becomes Mayor Pro Tem pursuant
to this Section, the Mayor Pro Tem shall cease to be a Councillor during the
term as Mayor Pro Tem and the seat on the Council shall become vacant. The
Mayor Pro Tem shall receive the same salary on a pro-rata basis as that
provided for the former Mayor.
   (c)   A vacancy in the office of Mayor which occurs more than one year prior
to the next regular election shall be filled for the remainder of the unexpired
term by a special election. During the interim between the date the office is
vacated and the date of the special election, the Mayor's position shall be
filled by a Mayor Pro Tem determined by the same procedure specified in
Subparagraph (b) above. However, in this event, the Mayor Pro Tem shall
temporarily cease to be a Councillor during the term as Mayor Pro Tem and the
seat on the Council shall remain vacant until reassumed. Likewise, in this
event the Mayor Pro Tem is exempt from the provision of Section 3 above that
the Mayor shall hold no other paid public or private employment. During the
interval the Mayor Pro Tem serves pursuant to this Subparagraph, the Mayor Pro
Tem shall receive a pro-rata salary based on the same salary that the former
Mayor was receiving and shall receive no salary as a member of the Council.
(Article V amended at Regular Municipal Election, October 3, 1989, as part of
Proposition #4.)
ARTICLE VI. CHARTER AMENDMENTS
Section 1. [PROCEDURE].
   Amendments to this Charter may be proposed by the Council or by Petition.
Section 2. [PETITION PROCESS].
   (a)   Notice of intent to circulate a petition proposing any amendment to
this Charter must be signed by five qualified voters and filed with the City
Clerk;
   (b)   Concurrently with the filing of the notice of intent, the proposed
amendment shall be filed with the City Clerk;
   (c)   The number of qualified voters required to sign the petition shall be
a number more than 20% of the average number of voters who voted at the four
regular municipal elections prior to filing the notice of intent;
   (d)   Before any signatures are affixed thereon, the form of such petition
must be reviewed by the City Attorney and approved by the City Clerk as
provided by law, and the date of filing the notice of intent shown thereon;
   (e)   The petition, and any part thereof, must be filed with the City Clerk
within sixty days after the date of filing the notice of intent.
(Amended at a Special Election held in conjunction with a Regular Municipal
Election, October 5, 1999, as Question #2.)
Section 3. [COUNCIL PROCESS FOR ARTICLES OTHER THAN XII AND XIII].
   (a)   An amendment to the Charter proposed by the Council must be approved
by a vote of a majority of all Councillors plus one;
   (b)   The Council shall hold at least two public hearings prior to its vote
on the proposed Charter amendment. The Council may revise the proposed
amendment as a result of suggestions and recommendations made at the first
public hearing, but if such a revision is made at the second of the two public
hearings, the Council shall hold a third public hearing on the proposed Charter
amendment. Any revisions made shall be posted along with the notice of the next
meeting after a review by the City Attorney to ensure the summary is still
accurate after the revision.
Section 4. [ELECTION].
   The election must be held at the next general election or regular local
election.
(Amended by Ordinance No. 2019-019)
Section 5. [BALLOT].
   At such election the ballot shall contain a summary, title and the complete
text of the proposed amendment and below the same the phrases "For the Above
Amendment" and "Against the Above Amendment" followed by spaces for marking
with a cross or a check the phrase desired. The summary of a proposed amendment
to the Charter may differ from its title and shall be a clear, concise
statement describing the substance of the proposed amendment without argument
or prejudice. The City Attorney must review the form of the summary to
determine that the summary accurately reflects the text of the proposed
amendment.
Section 6. [VOTE].
   If a majority of the votes cast are against the amendment, it shall be of no
effect. If a majority of the votes cast are for the amendment, it shall be
adopted.
Section 7. [AUTHORITY OF CITY CLERK TO CORRECT].
   Subject to review of the City Attorney and approval of a majority of the
Council, the City Clerk shall have authority to rearrange, renumber, reletter,
capitalize, punctuate and divide provisions of this Charter, and to correct
clerical errors and omissions and insert captions in accordance with the
meaning and intent of the provisions of this Charter, from time to time, and
may delete provisions which have become inoperative or any provision ruled
invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction. The City Clerk may substitute any
current title of an official or department in lieu of the title originally
appearing in the Charter provision, in accordance with the changes of title or
duties subsequently made by law.
(Article VI amended at Regular Municipal Election, October 3, 1989, as part of
Proposition #1; Article VI amended at Regular Municipal Election, October 6,
2009.)
ARTICLE VII. THE OPERATING BUDGET AND THE CAPITAL IMPROVEMENT PROGRAM
Section 1. [MAYOR TO FORMULATE].
   The Mayor shall formulate the city's operating budget and the biennial
capital improvement budget in consultation with the Council. The budgets shall
be consistent with this Charter, the city's adopted goals and objectives, city
legislation, and the Comprehensive Plan.
Section 2. [COUNCIL REPRESENTATIVE TO PARTICIPATE].
   A representative of the Council shall be allowed to participate in all
meetings and have access to all information relating to the formulation of the
budget.
Section 3. [PROPOSAL AND APPROVAL DATE].
   The Mayor shall propose the operating budget to the Council by April 1. The
Council shall approve the operating budget as proposed or amend and approve it
by May 31 after it is proposed by the Mayor.
Section 4. [PUBLIC HEARINGS].
   During the deliberation by the Council, the Council shall hold at least
three public hearings on the proposed budget. The Mayor, or the Mayor's
representative, shall be present at the hearings on the proposed budget to
answer questions about the budget.
Section 5. [FAILURE OF COUNCIL TO APPROVE].
   If the Council fails to approve an operating budget by May 31 after it is
proposed to the Council by the Mayor on April 1, then the operating budget as
proposed by the Mayor is deemed approved by the Council.
Section 6. [PROCEDURE ORDINANCE].
   A procedure for formulation of the annual operating budget shall be
established by ordinance adopted by the Council, after consultation with the
Mayor, consistent with this provision of the Charter. The ordinance shall
establish a conference committee comprised of six members, three of whom shall
be designated by the Mayor and three of whom shall be designated by the
Council, for the resolution of any disagreements between the Mayor and the
Council that arise concerning the operating budget during the period between
April 1 and May 31.
(Article VII adopted at Regular Municipal Election, October 3, 1989, and
repealed former Article VII as part of Proposition #4. Article VII amended at
Regular Municipal Election, October 6, 2009.)
ARTICLE VIII. [HUMAN RIGHTS]
   The Council shall preserve, protect and promote human rights and human
dignity, shall promote and encourage the recognition and exercise of human
responsibility and shall prohibit discrimination on the basis of race, color,
religion, sex, national origin or ancestry, age or physical handicap. To effect
these ends the Council (City Commission) shall take whatever action is
necessary and shall enact ordinances and shall establish appropriate
Commissions, Boards or Committees with jurisdiction, authority and staff
sufficient to effectively administer city policy in this area.
(Adopted at Special Election, June 29, 1971.)
ARTICLE IX. [ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION]
   The Council (City Commission) in the interest of the public in general shall
protect and preserve environmental features such as water, air and other
natural endowments, insure the proper use and development of land, and promote
and maintain an aesthetic and humane urban environment. To effect these ends
the Council shall take whatever action is necessary and shall enact ordinances
and shall establish appropriate Commissions, Boards or Committees with
jurisdiction, authority and staff sufficient to effectively administer city
policy in this area.
(Adopted at Special Election, June 29, 1971.)
ARTICLE X. MERIT SYSTEM
Section 1. MAINTENANCE OF THE MERIT SYSTEM.
   It is necessary for the optimum functioning of the Mayor-Council form of
government that the city maintain a merit system governing the hiring,
promotion, discharge and general regulations of employees. The Mayor and
Council shall maintain by ordinance, and the Mayor administer, a merit system
which shall include as a minimum, reasonable provisions establishing:
   (a)   Classified and unclassified service;
   (b)   Methods of service rating of classified employees;
   (c)   Methods of initial employment, continuation thereof and promotion,
recognizing efficiency and ability as the applicable standards;
   (d)   Appropriate grievance and appeal procedures for classified employees;
and
   (e)   An active personnel board composed of individuals not employed by the
city.
Section 2. INVOLVEMENT IN PERSONNEL MATTERS.
   (a)   Councillors are prohibited from becoming involved in the hiring,
promotion, demotion or discharge of any city employee, except those positions
for which the Charter requires the advice and consent of the Council and those
personnel who are hired by and directly responsible to the Council.
   (b)   Except to the extent necessary for the administration of the merit
system, the Mayor is prohibited from becoming involved in the hiring,
promotion, demotion, or discharge of any city employee except those personnel
hired for unclassified positions directly responsible to the Mayor.
Section 3. DUAL POSITIONS.
   Effective January 1, 1993, employees of the city are prohibited from holding
an elective office of the State of New Mexico or any of its political
subdivisions, except employees of the city on October 3, 1989, who on that date
hold elective office of the State of New Mexico or any of its political
subdivisions may thereafter hold and be elected to the same elective office
while serving as a city employee.
(Section 3 adopted at Regular Municipal Election, October 3, 1989, as
Proposition #8; Article X amended at Regular Municipal Election, October 3,
1989, as part of Proposition #4.)
ARTICLE XI. ORDINANCES
Section 1. STYLE.
   The enacting clause of an ordinance of the City of Albuquerque shall be: "Be
It Ordained By the Council, the Governing Body of the City of Albuquerque:".
Section 2. ADOPTION.
   If a majority of a legal quorum of the Councillors present at a Council
meeting vote in favor of adopting the ordinance or resolution, it is adopted.
Section 3. MAYOR'S APPROVAL OR DISAPPROVAL; OVERRIDE VETO.
   The Mayor shall have presented for approval every proposed ordinance,
resolution or act creating rights or duties, and if the Mayor approves, shall
within ten days from presentation sign it and deposit it with the City Clerk,
and if the Mayor disapproves, the Mayor shall likewise within ten days return
it to the Council with objections and the proposal shall not be effective
unless two-thirds of the entire membership of the Council at the next regularly
scheduled meeting approve the proposal. If the Mayor shall fail to approve or
disapprove any such ordinance, resolution or act within ten days after
presentation it shall nevertheless be in full force and effect as if the Mayor
had approved the same. The Mayor's veto power shall not extend to any measure
approved by the voters in accordance with the initiative procedure of this
Charter and such measure shall be effective on the date approved by the voters
or on any other effective date as stated in the measure.
(Amended at Regular Municipal Election, October 3, 1989, as part of Proposition
#4.)
Section 4. MONEY APPROPRIATIONS.
   The Mayor shall have presented for approval every proposed ordinance,
resolution or act appropriating money. The Mayor may approve or disapprove any
part or parts, item or items of any proposed act appropriating money and such
parts or items approved shall become effective, and such as are disapproved
shall be void unless passed over the Mayor's veto as herein provided.
Section 5. TIME LIMITS.
   All veto authority of the Mayor shall be exercised within 10 days after
presentation of the matter to the Mayor by the Council. The Council shall take
action on any disapproved or altered ordinance, resolution or act at the next
regularly scheduled meeting after return of the same to the Council by the
Mayor.
(Amended at Regular Municipal Election, October 7, 1975, as Proposition #3.)
Section 6. AUTHENTICATION; PUBLICATION; EFFECTIVE DATE; CODIFICATION.
   (a)   An ordinance shall be recorded and preserved by the City Clerk,
authenticated by the signature of the presiding officer of the governing body
and City Clerk, and bear the seal of the city. The ordinance shall be published
one time either in its entirety or by title and general summary of the subject
matter contained in the ordinance, whichever the Council elects to do.
   (b)   An ordinance shall not become effective until five days after it has
been published, unless passed and approved as an emergency measure, in which
event it shall become effective immediately following publication or at a
subsequent date determined by Council.
   (c)   If the ordinances of the city are codified, it is not necessary to
publish same in entirety. An ordinance, referring to the codification by title
only and specifying one place in the city's municipal offices where the
codification may be inspected during normal and regular business hours, may be
published instead of the codification.
Section 7. PUBLIC VOTE ON PERFORMING ARTS CENTER.
   The city shall not appropriate funds for a performing arts center costing
more than ten (10) million dollars without prior approval of a majority of
votes cast on the proposed performing arts center in a municipal election. The
city may, however, appropriate funds to study, to analyze the feasibility of,
and to undertake preliminary design of any such center prior to the election
required by this section.
(Section 7 repealed and new Section 7 adopted at Regular Municipal Election,
October 8, 1991, as Proposition #3; Section 7 adopted at Special Municipal
Election, March 26, 1991, as Proposition #1; Article XI adopted at Special
Election, February 26, 1974 as part of Proposition #3.)
ARTICLE XII. CODE OF ETHICS
Section 1. DECLARATION OF POLICY.
   The proper administration of democratic government requires that public
officials be independent, impartial, and responsible to the people; that
government decisions and policy be made in the best interest of the people, the
community and the government; and that the public have confidence in the
integrity of its government. In recognition of these goals, the following Code
of Ethics shall apply to all officials of the city.
Section 2. DEFINITIONS.
   (a)    "Beneficially owned" means a beneficiary's interest in trust
property.
   (b)   “Board” means the Board of Ethics and Campaign Practices established
pursuant to Article XII of this Charter.
   (c)   “Business Dealings” or "Business Dealings With The Governmental Body"
includes circumstances where a person is: (1) presently a party to a contract
with the city; (2) presently a subcontractor under a subcontract with a party
under contract with the city; (3) bidding, proposing, or applying for contracts
with the city; (4) a party in litigation with the city; (5) a party before a
quasi- judicial administrative proceeding conducted by a city board,
commission, committee or hearing officer; or (6) a party to an appeal of a
decision of a city department, quasi-judicial administrative board, commission,
committee or hearing officer.
   (d)   "Business entity" means a corporation, business trust, estate, trust,
partnership, limited liability company, association, joint venture or any other
legal or commercial entity.
   (e)   “Candidate” means any individual who has: (1) obtained a nominating
petition from the City Clerk pursuant to Section 4(d)1.D. of the Election Code
for the office of Mayor or Councilor; (2) filed an affidavit on a form approved
by the City Clerk, stating that they are a candidate for either the office of
Mayor or City Councilor; (3) filed as a candidate for elected office as
required by law, whichever first occurs; or (4) has received or solicited
contributions or made expenditures of one thousand dollars ($1,000) or more or
authorized another person or campaign committee to receive or solicit
contributions or make expenditures of one thousand dollars ($1,000) or more for
the purpose of seeking election to the office.
   (f)   “Consideration” means something of value or a written promise to pay
or otherwise provide something of value which is enforceable through the
courts.
   (g)   “Contract with the City” means a written contract to: (1) purchase
real property from the city; (2) sell real property to the city; (3) rent real
or personal property to or from the city; or (4) provide services and/or goods
to the city. A contract with the city shall also include all subdivision
improvement agreements for the private development of public infrastructure and
associated easements and revocable permits. Contracts excluded from this
definition are those for services provided by the city such as water,
wastewater or solid waste collection; intergovernmental agreements such as a
joint powers agreement or a memorandum of understanding. Permits and licenses
issued by the city shall not be deemed contracts with the city for purposes of
the Ethics Code.
   (h)   "Controlled" means the ability of a person, through share ownership or
other means, to make changes in the management of a business entity or to
appoint persons who will control the management of that business entity.
   (i)   "Disclosure statement" means a statement on a form prepared by the
City Clerk for purposes of compliance with this ordinance.
   (j)   "Direct Interest", "Private Interest" or "Private Financial Interest"
means an interest concerning; (1) a partnership, limited liability partnership,
limited liability company, corporation, or any other for-profit entity in which
an official owns an interest of 10% interest or more; or (2) a corporation,
partnership, limited liability partnership, or limited liability company in
which the official is an officer, director, or agent. Direct Interest, Private
Interest or Private Financial Interest does not mean an interest in stock owned
indirectly through a mutual fund, retirement plan, or other similar commingled
investment vehicle the individual investments of which the official does not
control or manage.
   (k)   “Gift” or “Valuable Gift” means that which is directly or indirectly
paid or given to another for an individual’s benefit or by any other means, for
which consideration equal or greater than fair market value was not given by
the official within 90 days of the official’s receipt of such gift, including,
but not limited to: (1) real property; (2) the use of real property; (3)
tangible or intangible personal property; (4) the use of tangible personal
property; (5) a preferential rate or terms on a debt, loan, goods, or services,
which rate is below the customary rate and is neither a government rate nor a
rate available to similarly situated members of the public by virtue of
occupation, affiliation, age, religion, sex, or national origin; (6) debt
forgiveness; (7) transportation, other than that provided to an official by a
governmental agency in relation to approved government business, lodging or
parking; (8) food or beverage; (9) membership dues, other than dues paid by a
city agency; (10) entrance fees, admission fees, or tickets to events,
performances, or facilities other than those hosted, sponsored, or co-sponsored
by the City or occurring at a city facility; (11) plants, flowers, or floral
arrangements; (12) services provided by persons pursuant to a professional
license or certificate; (13) other personal services for which a fee is
normally charged by the person providing the services; and (14) any other
similar service or thing having an attributable value not already provided for
in this section. For purposes of calculating the dollar limits to the term
“gift”, any gift provided by a lobbyist shall be attributed to the lobbyist
individually as well as to the business organization which he or she owns or by
which he or she is employed.
   Gift does not include: (1) salary, benefits, services, fees, commissions,
returns on an investment, a loan, interest incurred on a bond, expenses, or
other forms of compensation associated primarily with the official’s
employment, business or service as an officer or director of a private
corporation or organization; (2) any activity authorized by the Election Code,
the Code of Ethics, and items excluded from the definition of “contributions”
pursuant to Section 2(h)(3) of the Election Code, including but not limited to
the acceptance of a donation, transfer or contribution, or the making of an
expenditure or reimbursement; (3) an honorarium or an expense related to an
honorarium event paid to an official or the official’s spouse; (4) an award,
plaque, certificate, or similar personalized item given in recognition of the
official’s public, civic, charitable, or professional service; (5) an honorary
membership in a service or fraternal organization presented merely as a
courtesy by such organization; (6) the use of a public facility or public
property made available by a governmental agency for a public purpose; (7)
transportation provided to an official by a governmental agency in relation to
official and approved governmental business; (8) gifts provided directly or
indirectly by a state, regional or national organization whose primary purpose
is the promotion of the exchange of ideas between governmental officials or
employees or to provide for the professional development or training of such
governmental officials or employees, provided that such organization has a
membership primarily composed of elected or appointed public officials or
employees; (9) the use of a city facility by an official; (10) a gift motivated
by a familial or close personal relationship rather than the recipient’s
position as an official; and (11) all non-pecuniary things or services donated
in any twelve (12) month period from a single donor that have a cumulative fair
market value of two hundred fifty dollars ($250) or less.
   (l)    “Governmental Body” means the City of Albuquerque and any of its
boards, commissions and committees.
   (m)    “Immediate Family” or “Immediate Family Member” means spouse,
children, step-children, parents, grandparents, grandchildren, siblings, first
cousins, nieces, nephews, uncles and aunts.
   (n)   "Income" means the money or other form of payment that a person
receives from labor or services, including from employment, a business entity,
contracts, goods or services rendered and investments.
   (o)    “Indirect interest” or “indirect private financial interest” means
any interest in which legal title is held by another as trustee or other
representative, but the equitable or beneficial interest is held by the
official or the official's immediate family. Indirect interest shall include a
pecuniary or competitive advantage that exists or could foreseeably accrue as a
result of the act or inaction of the official.
   (p)   "Office" means a position of duty, trust or authority.
   (q)    “Official” means the Mayor, all members of the Council, all members
of boards, commissions and committees; all directors and the equivalent thereof
for each department, division or section; assistant, associate or deputy
department, division or section directors and the equivalent thereof; the
Director of Council Services; the Chief Administrative Officer; Deputy or
Assistant Chief Administrative Officers and the equivalent thereof; and all
other city employees appointed directly by the Council, Mayor or Chief
Administrative Officer.
   (r)   "Ordinary consumer debt" means a personal debt owed as a result of
purchasing goods used for individual or household consumption, including credit
card debt and auto loans.
   (s)   "Participate in a political campaign" means: (1) to hold a paid
position in a campaign; (2) to hold an unpaid position in a campaign that
includes a title or functions in a manner that would typically include a title;
(3) to host a fundraiser for a candidate or host a house party or any other
event for a candidate or campaign; (4) to volunteer for a candidate or
campaign; (5) contribute to a candidate or campaign; (6) electronically posting
or sharing candidate or campaign materials or communications, or otherwise
publishing statements that reference a candidate or campaign, via social media
or otherwise. "Participate in a political campaign" does not include: (1)
signing a nominating petition; (2) making a $5 qualifying contribution to a
candidate seeking public financing; (3) "liking" a social media post that
references a candidate or campaign.
   (t)   “Person” means any individual, cooperative association, club,
corporation, company, firm, partnership, joint venture, syndicate, profit or
nonprofit organization, or other legal entity.
   (u)   "Public agency" means a department, commission, council, board,
committee, agency or institution of the executive or legislative branch of
state government or a political subdivision of the state or an instrumentality
of the state or of a political subdivision of the state.
   (v)   "Publicly endorse" means: (1) to publish in any way a statement of
support or approval regarding a candidate or campaign; (2) to knowingly allow
one's name to be published by others as endorsing a candidate or campaign; (3)
to appear in advertisements of any sort for a candidate or campaign. "Publicly
endorse" does not include: (1) a statement of personal opinion in a non-public
setting to another individual; or (2) a publication regarding a Board of Ethics
ruling.
   (w)   "Publicly oppose" means: (1) to publish in any way a statement of
opposition or criticism regarding a candidate or campaign; (2) to knowingly
allow one's name to be published by others as opposing a candidate or campaign;
(3) to appear in advertisements of any sort opposing or criticizing a candidate
or campaign. "Publicly oppose" does not include a statement of personal opinion
in a non-public setting to another individual or a publication regarding a
Board of Ethics ruling.
(Amended by Ordinance Nos. 35-1975, 91-1980, 24-1981, 34-2006, 2018-033, 2019-
030, 2022-043, and 2025-020; Amended at Regular Municipal Election, October 3,
1989, as part of Proposition #4.)
Section 3. BOARD OF ETHICS AND CAMPAIGN PRACTICES.
   (a)   The Board shall be made up of seven members, who shall be chosen as
follows: The Council shall appoint three members and the Mayor shall appoint
three members. The six members so appointed shall select a seventh person to
serve as Chairperson of the Board. A simple majority of members shall
constitute a quorum. The appointment of a Board member by one appointing
authority shall not be approved or disapproved by the other two appointing
authorities. Each member shall be a qualified elector of the city, and no
member shall be an official or employee of the city or the spouse, parent or
child of an official or city employee.
      (1)   No member of the Board shall (1) have held public office as a city
official or have been a candidate, as defined in
Article XIII, Section 2, for a two-year period prior to appointment; (2) seek
or hold an elective public office or an appointed public position while serving
on the Board; (3) participate in any political campaign for a candidate who is
a city official or candidate, as defined in
Article XIII, Section 2, while serving on the Board; (4) be a lobbyist, or be
employed by or have an equity interest or ownership interest in a lobbying
organization, as defined in ROA §
2-3-3, while serving on the Board; (5) be a paid political campaign employee,
or be employed by, or have an equity interest or ownership interest in, a
business entity that derives any of its revenue or income from political
campaign work, while serving on the Board; (6) have a contract with the city as
defined in
Article XIII, Section 2, while serving on the board; (7) publicly endorse or
publicly oppose a ballot initiative, a candidate who is a city official or a
candidate, as defined in
Article XIII, Section 2, while serving on the Board; or (8) solicit funds for a
Measure Finance Committee, Candidate Finance Committee, or candidate as defined
in
Article XIII, Section 2, while serving on the Board.
      (2)   A Board member who is found to have violated any of the provisions
of Subsection (a)(1) of this Section shall resign from the Board, or if the
Board member fails to resign the member shall be removed pursuant to Board of
Ethics rules.
      (3)   There shall be a public comment period for any individual proposed
for membership on the Board of Ethics and Campaign Practices by the Mayor, the
Council and for the seventh member selected by the Board. The name and resume
of any individual proposed for membership shall be posted on the city's website
at least two weeks, via an agenda published by City Council or otherwise, prior
to the date when final action is taken to appoint that individual. Any person
shall be allowed to submit comments about the proposed member by written
submission, electronically or otherwise, to the City Clerk.
      (4)   The members of the Board of Ethics and Campaign Practices shall
receive at least six hours of training prior to acting in the capacity of a
Board member. The training shall be provided by the City Attorney and shall
cover the ethical responsibility of Board members and the content of the Code
of Ethics and the Election Code as those codes relate to the duties of the
Board. The training requirement shall not apply to any current Board member,
who shall continue to serve their unexpired term, or to any Board member
reappointed at the end of a term.
   (b)   All members shall serve terms of four years, and be eligible for
reappointment for additional terms, not to exceed two terms consecutively,
consisting of the initial term the member was appointed to and the second,
consecutive term. Terms are staggered and shall continue with the same term
cycle as currently exists. Any vacancy shall be filled for an unexpired term by
the same authority that made the original selection and appointment of the
member vacating his or her position. Members may continue in office after their
term has expired until a successor is appointed. If a member continues to serve
for more than one hundred eighty days (180) after his or her term has expired,
his or her successor shall be eligible for appointment to a full four-year
term.
   (c)   The jurisdiction of the Board is limited to acting within the scope of
matters covered by the Code of Ethics, the Election Code, the Open and Ethical
Elections Code, and rules promulgated by the Board and/or the City Clerk. When
a complaint contains allegations outside the scope of the Board's jurisdiction,
the city reserves the right to refer all or part of the complaint to any agency
or law enforcement agency with competent jurisdiction for criminal or civil
investigation or prosecution.
   (d)   No violation of the Code of Ethics, the Election Code, the Open and
Ethical Elections Code, and/or rules promulgated by the Board and/or the City
Clerk shall be found by the Board of Ethics and Campaign Practices except upon
the concurrence of a majority of the Board.
   (e)   Any rules promulgated by the City Clerk for the purposes of
administering the Code of Ethics shall be submitted for receipt to the City
Council.
   (f)   The Board shall:
      (1)   meet as necessary;
      (2)   receive and investigate complaints regarding possible violations of
the Code of Ethics, the Election Code, the Open and Ethical Elections Code,
and/or rules promulgated by the Board and/or the City Clerk;
      (3)   hold hearings when necessary to determine whether there has been a
breach as alleged in a complaint;
      (4)   contract for professional services through the City Clerk as
necessary to carry out duties;
      (5)   provide the Mayor and City Council with a report following each
municipal election year stating the number of complaints that were submitted to
the City Clerk alleging a violation of the Code of Ethics, the Election Code,
the Open and Ethical Elections Code, and/or rules promulgated by the Board and/
or the City Clerk, the number of complaints submitted to the Board by the City
Clerk, and a summary of the status of each complaint to include the date of the
complaint, the date for the case to be heard, and date for possible final
action. The report called for in this section shall be submitted to Council by
no later than the July after each municipal election year, and shall also
include any recommendations regarding amendments to city ethics or public
accountability laws, and recommendations regarding the scope of the Board and/
or City Clerk's powers and duties. The annual status reports must be approved
by the Board and made available to the public on the City Clerk's website.
Status reports may be provided to Mayor and City Councilors and their staff on
an informal basis as appropriate.
   (g)   The Board shall have the authority to administer oaths, and power to
issue administrative subpoenas to compel witnesses to testify and produce
records and documents before the Board. The Board may promulgate rules and
regulations establishing procedures for issuance of subpoenas. The Board may
request the City Attorney to enforce such subpoenas in a court of proper
jurisdiction.
   (h)   The Board may issue to candidates, officials, and lobbyists advisory
opinions concerning the Code of Ethics, the Election Code, the Open and Ethical
Elections Code, and rules promulgated by the Board and/or the City Clerk.
Candidates and officials shall make all requests for advisory opinions in
writing to the City Clerk. Draft advisory opinions may be prepared by Board
members for consideration by the Board, or may be assigned to an outside,
independent legal counsel for preparation. The City Clerk shall maintain a
contract with outside, independent legal counsel during each election cycle for
this purpose. Any draft advisory opinions shall be submitted to the Board of
Ethics for consideration of approval within fourteen (14) days of a written
request for advisory opinion being received by the City Clerk. Within thirty
(30) days of receiving the proposed advisory opinion, the Board shall vote to
adopt or decline to adopt the proposed advisory opinion as written. If the
Board of Ethics declines the proposed advisory opinion, the Board of Ethics
will either direct the City Clerk, Board member, or outside counsel to amend
the proposed opinion as appropriate or to draft a new advisory opinion for
consideration for adoption at its next meeting, which shall be held within
fourteen (14) days. Official advisory opinions will be issued only upon the
Board's approval. All timeframes noted in this subsection are mandatory unless
the City Clerk or the Board notifies the requester in writing of a delay in
issuance and with specificity as to that request, the reason for the delay, and
continues to notify the requester in writing every thirty (30) days until the
advisory opinion is issued, which in all cases shall be within one hundred
eighty (180) days of the request.
   An advisory opinion shall become public record at the time the Board votes
on such opinion. Advisory opinions shall only concern prospective matters.
Specifically, no advisory opinion shall be issued with respect to an event that
has already occurred. Advisory opinions shall only be issued with respect to
conduct in which the requestor of the opinion intends to engage. No advisory
opinion shall be given unless approved by four members of the Board. Approved
opinions shall be kept as permanent records by the City Clerk. The Board may
promulgate rules and regulations establishing procedures for issuing advisory
opinions and limitations on the use of advisory opinions as a defense to
violations of the Code of Ethics or the Election Code. The Board may issue
consent orders and may promulgate rules and regulations establishing procedures
of issuance of consent orders.
   (i)   Limitations on Complaints.
      (1)   The Board will not set for hearing any complaint charging a
violation alleged to have occurred more than one hundred twenty (120) days
prior to the date the complaint is filed unless the facts and documentation
supporting the charges alleged in the complaint were not public knowledge or
available for public inspection within that time frame.
      (2)   In no event shall the Board hear a complaint alleging violations in
which the violation occurred more than one (1) year prior to the date the
complaint is filed unless the complainant also alleges fraud or purposeful
misrepresentation on the part of the respondent to conceal the conduct that is
the subject of the complaint.
      (3)   All complaints referred to the Board by the City Clerk at any time
prior to sixty (60) days before election day shall be resolved, determined, or
dismissed by the Board within sixty (60) days from the referral of the
complaint. If the complaint is not resolved within sixty (60) days, the
complaint shall be dismissed, unless delayed by the Chair of the Board upon a
showing of good cause.
      (4)   All complaints referred to the Board by the City Clerk during the
sixty (60) day period preceding election day shall be resolved, determined, or
dismissed by the Board within thirty (30) days from the referral of the
complaint. If the complaint is not resolved within thirty (30) days, the
complaint shall be dismissed, unless delayed by the Chair of the Board upon a
showing of good cause.
      (5)   Notwithstanding the foregoing, the Board shall not adjudicate a
complaint filed against a candidate less than seven (7) days before election
day. The time limitations referenced in this section (h) applicable to a
complaint shall not include the seven (7) day blackout period prior to election
day.
   (j)   A Board member who has participated in any hearing on a case
concerning a complaint alleging a violation of the Code of Ethics or the
Election Code shall continue to serve as a Board member on such case until the
completion of the case, regardless of the expiration of that Board member's
term, but only when the Board has voted on a matter concerning the case. A
replacement Board member shall not serve on such cases.
   (k)   Board Member Conflicts of Interest and Recusals.
      (1)   A Board member shall not hear complaints involving candidates or
Measure Finance Committees to which they have contributed within three (3)
years prior to the complaint or have participated in the candidate's or Measure
Finance Committee's campaign activities within three (3) years prior to the
complaint. Nor shall Board members hear cases involving complaints concerning
candidates and Measure Finance Committees who are in opposition to the
candidates or Measure Finance Committees to which the Board member contributed
or participated in their campaign activities within three (3) years prior to
the complaint.
      (2)   A Board member is required to recuse himself or herself from an
official matter that involves any individual, association, corporation or other
entity that employed or did business with the Board member during the one year
prior to the Board member's appointment to the Board. The recusal shall remain
in effect until the Board no longer has any interest in the matter.
      (3)   A Board member is required to recuse himself or herself on an
official matter if the member had any involvement in that matter, other than on
behalf of the city, prior to the Board member's appointment to the Board. The
recusal shall remain in effect until the Board no longer has any interest in
the matter.
      (4)   A Board member must recuse himself or herself from a matter if the
member has:
         (a)   Any financial interest, direct or indirect, that is incompatible
with the discharge of the Board member's duties; or
         (b)   Any personal interest, direct or indirect, that is incompatible
with the discharge of the Board member's duties.
      (5)   For purposes of (4) above, there is a rebuttal presumption that an
incompatible financial or personal interest includes, but is not limited to,
outside employment; a debtor/creditor relationship; a relationship involving
legal representation; a fiduciary relationship; a source of income; any matter
pertaining to or involving a relative or cohabitant of the member; a
relationship with a person providing funds, goods or services without
compensation; any matter pertaining to or involving a business associate or
business investment; and a leadership role in a professional or trade
organization, which interest might reasonably be expected to impair a Board
member's objectivity and independence of judgment in the exercise of his or her
official duties or might reasonably be expected to create an impression or
suspicion among the public having knowledge of his or her acts that the member
may be engaged in conduct violative of his or her trust as a Board member.
      (6)   An incompatible financial or personal interest may exist in other
situations which are not clearly within the provisions of (4) and (5) above,
depending on the totality of the circumstances. A Board member may contact the
City Clerk for guidance in such cases.
      (7)   A Board member may seek the advice of the City Attorney or outside
counsel as to the propriety of participation in a matter if any person requests
that a Board member recuse himself or herself from that matter. Oral advice,
followed up by a writing to be provided to the full Board, may be provided by
the City Attorney or outside counsel to avoid delay.
      (8)   If the propriety of a Board member's participation in a particular
matter is questioned on the grounds that the member has a conflict of interest
and if the member refuses to recuse from participation in the matter, the Board
may disqualify that member from participation in the relevant board proceeding
with concurrence of a majority of members.
   (I)   If the Board finds, upon a majority vote of the board, that a
candidate, elected official, Measure Finance Committee, or lobbyist has
violated the Code of Ethics, the Election Code, the Open and Ethical Elections
Code, and/or rules promulgated by the Board and/or the City Clerk, the Board
may impose any of the following penalties, subject to the individual's existing
rights under a collective bargaining agreement and/or the Merit System
Ordinance, after the entry of written findings of fact and conclusions of law:
      (1)   A civil fine not to exceed the maximum set by state law;
      (2)   A written finding of censure;
      (3)   When an official or candidate has committed an act that the Board
believes may constitute a violation of the State Election Code, NMSA 1978 § 1-
1-1, et seq., the Board may refer the matter to the Secretary of State and/or
the State Ethics Commission.
   (m)   Nothing in this Section shall be read to preclude the Board from
referring any matter to appropriate enforcement authorities.
   (n)   No former member of the Board may represent any business or person,
other than himself or herself, before the Board for a period of one year
following the end of such member's service on the Board.
   (o)   Any member who misses three consecutive meetings, unexcused by the
chair, shall be deemed to have resigned from the Board and may be replaced by
the original appointing authority. Members may attend non-quasi- judicial
hearings by phone.
   (p)   A recused or disqualified Board member shall not participate in any
proceeding related to the matter from which the member is recused or
disqualified, and the member shall be excused from that portion of a meeting at
which the matter is discussed.
   (q)   If a majority of Board members have recused themselves or are
disqualified from participating in a proceeding, the remaining members shall
request the appointment of temporary members from the original appointing
authorities that appointed the recused or disqualified members. Appointing
authorities shall appoint temporary members within ten (10) days of the request
for appointment.
   (r)   Ex parte communications. Members of the Board of Ethics shall not
communicate ex parte with any person or party or their representative in any
quasi- judicial Board matter, except upon notice and opportunity for all
parties to participate. The members of the Board may severally communicate with
each other, in conformity with the Open Meetings Act, and may have the aid and
advice of the City Attorney, City Clerk, or other appropriate city staff or
outside experts when such assistance is requested by the Board.
(Am. Ord 35-1975; Am. Ord. 77-1978; Am. Ord. 91-1980; Am. Ord. 24-1981; Am.
Ord. 34-2006; Am. Ord. 29-2009; Am. Ord. 2019-030; Am. Ord. 2020-019)
Section 4. CONFLICT OF INTEREST.
   (a)   No official of the city shall knowingly:
      1.   Disclose or use confidential information concerning the property,
government or affairs of the governmental body by which that official is
employed or of which the official is a member without proper authorization in
order to advance the direct or indirect private financial or other private
interests of said official or others;
      2.   Vote or otherwise participate in the negotiation or the making of
any contract with any business or entity in which the official has a direct or
indirect private financial interest;
      3.   Represent private interests in any action or proceeding before the
governmental body by which the official is employed or of which the official is
a member or any appeal of a decision of such body;
      4.   Accept any valuable gift, whether in the form of service, loan,
thing or promise, from any employee of or applicant for employment with the
City of Albuquerque or from any person, firm or corporation which to the
official's knowledge is interested directly or indirectly in any manner
whatsoever, in business dealings with the governmental body by which the
official is employed or of which the official is a member, including donors who
are unidentified; provided, however, that this subsection shall not be read as
prohibiting an incumbent candidate for any elective office from receiving duly
disclosed campaign contributions in accordance with the provisions of Article
XIII of this Charter or an official who is a candidate for a non-city office
from receiving campaign contributions for that non-city office.
   (b)    No member of the City Council shall:
      1.   During the term for which he or she was elected, be appointed to or
selected for any paid office or employment with the city, nor shall he or she
within one year thereafter be appointed to any paid city office or employment
which the city created, or the emoluments of which first were established or
were increased during such term; nor shall any member of the City Council
during the term for which he or she was elected nor within one year thereafter,
be interested directly in any contract with the city, which was authorized by
any law passed during such term;
      2.    During their term of office participate in any debate or vote on
any matter which will likely result in any benefit to the member which benefit
is greater than the benefit to the public in general. A benefit for purposes of
this paragraph shall mean a financial benefit or a benefit conferred by the
City Council member's employer as a direct result of the member's participation
in the matter.
   (c)   Disqualification. An official is disqualified from participating in a
matter when: (1) the official has or is in the process of acquiring a direct
interest in an enterprise which would be affected by the official's vote on
proposed legislation, unless the interest is common to all members of a
profession or occupation of which the official is a member or the general
public or a large class of the general public, (2) the official benefits
financially from a direct or indirect interest with a person whom the official
knows has an interest in an enterprise or interest that would be affected by
the official taking any action, (3) the official benefits financially from a
direct interest with a person who is lobbying for the purpose of influencing
any action, or (4) the official solicits, accepts, or agrees to accept a loan,
other than a loan from a commercial lender in the normal course of business,
from a person who would be affected by or has an interest in an enterprise
which would be affected by the official's participation in any action.
(Am. Ord 35-1975; Am. Ord. 29-1976; Am. Ord. 91-1980; Am. Ord. 23-1988; Am.
Ord. 33-1989; Am. Ord. 34-2006)
Section 5. DISCLOSURE.
   (a)   An official of the City with any private financial interest in any
contract or other matter pending before or within the governmental body the
official is employed by or a member of, shall file an annual disclosure
statement to the governmental body.
   (b)   Any Councilor who has a direct or indirect interest in any matter
pending before the Council shall disclose such interest on the records of the
Council. The existence of a direct or indirect private financial interest on
any matter coming before the Council, including approval of a contract, shall
disqualify a Councilor from debating and voting on the matter. A majority of
the remaining members of the Council shall determine whether a Councilor has a
direct or indirect interest and whether the Councilor shall be allowed to vote
and participate in the decision-making process related to the matter. A
Councilor who has a conflict of interest may voluntarily decline to vote and
participate in the decision-making process related to the matter.
   (c)   The Mayor and each City Councilor, during their term of office, shall
file contribution and expenditure disclosure statements on the second Monday in
May and November of each year setting out all contributions and expenditures,
as defined in the City Election Code, during the previous period, raised or
spent in connection with any campaign or pre-campaign activity for any elected
office. Expenditures of public funds in the regular course of the Mayor or
Councilor's official duties are not contributions and expenditures subject to
such disclosure under this section. The Mayor and Councilors are not required
to file a biannual statement if they have had no campaign or pre-campaign
contributions or expenditures during the previous period. These reporting
requirements shall be in addition to the reporting requirements of the Election
Code, provided that any information filed with the City Clerk pursuant to City
Charter Article XIII, Section 4(c) need not be included in the subsequent
biannual reports required by this section. The contributions and expenditures
identified in the biannual statements that are to be applied to a campaign for
election to a City office shall be included in the first campaign disclosure
report that the candidate files pursuant to the Election Code.
   (d)   All elected officials and Department Directors shall file with the
City Clerk an annual disclosure statement listing all of the changes or
additions to the disclosure information provided by the elected official at the
time of filing his or her declaration of candidacy pursuant to Section 3 of the
Election Code or if a Department Director, at the time of beginning their
position as a Director. If no changes have occurred, the official shall so
state in the annual disclosure statement. The annual disclosure statement shall
be due on the first city work day of July and shall be submitted on a form
approved by the City Clerk. The annual disclosure statement shall be a public
record.
   (e)   In addition to the information disclosed pursuant to Section 3 of the
Election Code, the annual disclosure statement for all elected officials and
Department Directors shall include the following information for the preceding
calendar year:
      (1)   the full name of the reporting individual and the reporting
individual's spouse;
      (2)   the name and address of any employer employing the reporting
individual or the reporting individual's spouse, the title or position held,
and a brief description of the nature of the business or occupation;
      (3)   the identity, zip code, and purpose of use of real property owned
by the reporting individual, the reporting individual’s spouse, or the
reporting individual's dependent children; provided that in the absence of a
zip code, the county of situs is required to be disclosed;
      (4)   the identity of assets of more than fifty thousand dollars
($50,000) directly or beneficially owned by the reporting individual, the
reporting individual's spouse or the reporting individual's dependent children;
provided that in determining whether an asset has a value of more than fifty
thousand dollars ($50,000), the value should not be reduced by any debt secured
by the asset, such as a mortgage or other secured loan, and a good faith
estimate of the fair market value of an asset is permitted if the exact value
is neither known or easily obtainable. The disclosure of assets shall include:
         (A)   commodities, including the type of commodity;
         (B)   investments in stocks, bonds, futures contracts, options,
derivatives, currency, real estate investment trusts, mutual funds, private
equity funds, exchange-traded funds, and trust funds of which the reporting
individual is a beneficiary; provided that if the investment is or forms part
of a fund, the reporting individual is only required to identify the fund, the
fund manager, and any underlying holdings of the fund that have a value of more
than fifty thousand dollars ($50,000); and
         (C)   contractual rights that are reasonably likely to generate future
income, such as royalties and intellectual property, the names of the
contracting parties, and the purpose of the contract;
      (5)   all sources of income equal to or greater than the amount that must
be disclosed to the internal revenue service pursuant to 26 U.S.C. Section 6041
(a), as amended, directly or indirectly accrued by the reporting individual,
the reporting individual's spouse or the reporting individual's dependent
children over the age of 18, except for income below $50,000 accrued by such
dependent children, including:
         (A)   the identity of the source of earned income; provided that:
            (i)   if a source of earned income is owed a legal or professional
duty of confidentiality and the identity of the source of the income has not
been disclosed to a public agency, the reporting individual may identify the
source as "confidential" and describe the duty of confidentiality that prevents
disclosure of the source of the earned income; and
            (ii)   if an indirect source of earned income is a client of a
business entity of which the reporting individual or the reporting individual's
spouse is a member, the indirect source of earned income is not required to be
disclosed if the reporting individual or the reporting individual's spouse has
no role in any matter involving the source; and
         (B)   the identity of sources of unearned income, including taxable
interest, capital gains, dividends, annuities, trust distributions, rents from
real property and insurance policies;
      (6)   Liabilities of more than five thousand dollars ($5,000) owed by:
         (A)   the reporting individual, the reporting individual's spouse or
the reporting individual's dependent children over the age of 18; and
         (B)   a trust of which the reporting individual, the reporting
individual's spouse or the reporting individual's dependent children over the
age of 18 are beneficiaries;
      (7)   For a liability identified pursuant to Subsection (6) of this
section, the reporting individual shall disclose:
         (A)   the identity of the person who owes the debt or liability;
         (B)   the person to whom the debt or liability is owed;
         (C)   the amount of the debt or liability; and
         (D)   any payments on the debt or liability during the previous
calendar year;
      (8)   The disclosure statement is not required to include:
         (A)   ordinary consumer debt;
         (B)   mortgage debt on the primary residence of the reporting
individual, the reporting individual's spouse or the reporting individual's
dependent children over the age of 18;
         (C)   student loans;
         (D)   liabilities owed to parents, grandparents, children or siblings
of the reporting individual, the reporting individual's spouse or the reporting
individual's dependent children over the age of 18; and
         (E)   One passenger vehicle registered to the reporting individual,
the reporting individual's spouse, and the reporting individual's dependent
children over the age of 18;
      (9)   The following information related to any privately held business
controlled by the reporting individual, the reporting individual's spouse or
the reporting individual's dependent children over the age of 18:
         (A)   the name of the business entity, a brief description of the
nature of its activities and its geographic location, including the City and
State; and
         (B)   for a privately held business entity formed for the purpose of
holding investments:
            (i)   assets of more than fifty thousand dollars ($50,000) or that
generated income directly or beneficially owned by the business entity in an
amount equal to or greater than the amount that must be disclosed to the
internal revenue service pursuant to 26 U.S.C. Section 6041(a), as amended;
provided that in determining whether an asset has a value of more than fifty
thousand dollars ($50,000), the value should not be reduced by any debt secured
by the asset, such as a mortgage or other secured loan; and
            (ii)   any liability of the business entity in an amount greater
than fifty thousand dollars ($50,000), including:
               (a)   the identity of the business entity that owes the debt or
liability;
               (b)   the person to which the debt or liability is owned;
               (c)   the amount of the debt or liability; and
               (d)   any payments on the debt or liability during the previous
calendar year;
      (10)   The following information related to professional licenses,
memberships and offices held for the prior calendar year:
         (A)   professional licenses held by the reporting individual and the
reporting individual's spouse; and
         (B)   board memberships, offices or other positions held by the
reporting individual and the reporting individual's spouse in:
            (i)    corporations, partnerships, trusts or other for-profit
business entities; and
            (ii)    nonprofit organizations, educational organizations,
political organizations or other nongovernmental organizations; and
      (11)   Any gift received in the prior calendar year by the reporting
individual, the reporting individual's spouse or the reporting individual's
dependent children over the age of 18 having a market value greater than fifty
dollars ($50.00) from a restricted donor, a registered lobbyist, a lobbyist's
employer, a government contractor or a person that has responded to a request
for proposals or an invitation to bid issued by the City.
(Am. Ord. 35-1975; Am. Ord. 91-1980; Am. Ord. 24-1981; Am. Ord. 13-2003; Am.
Ord. 34-2006; Am. Ord. 2017-007; Am. Ord. 2019-003; Am. Ord. 2019-030; Am. Ord.
2022-043; Am. Ord._2024-036) (Amended at Regular Municipal Election, October 2,
2001, as Proposition #10.)
Section 6. USE OF PUBLIC PROPERTY.
   No official of the city shall use property, owned by any governmental body
or funds of any governmental body, for personal benefit, convenience or profit,
except in accordance with policies promulgated by the Council. This prohibition
includes the use of city property or funds to advertise or promote the campaign
of any official, except as provided in this section. Use of city property to
promote a campaign is limited to areas made available to all candidates for
public office, including public areas, areas used for public meetings and such
city facilities that are designated as meeting space that is available to all
candidates for public office. No campaign activities shall be conducted in
those portions of city facilities that are dedicated as work areas for city
employees. Officials are prohibited from using any method of communication paid
for with city resources, including but not limited to public service
announcements, signage, official websites or mail during the three months prior
to their election date, if such advertising states or implies personal
responsibility of the official for any city accomplishment. Officials are
prohibited from using any method of communication paid for with city resources,
including but not limited to public service announcements, signage, official
websites or mail if such communication is in a form that would be reasonably
mistaken for the campaign materials of the official because of the similarity
of design, content or graphics being used in the campaign.
(Am. Ord. 34-2006)
Section 7.  MISUSE OF CITY EMPLOYEES IN CAMPAIGNS.
   No official shall participate in the following types of political activity:
   (A)   Using his or her position or employment with the city to influence
support of employees of the city for or against any candidate, issue or Measure
Finance Committee or other similar organization in any election or pre-election
activity; provided, however, that nothing herein shall deny the right of an
official of the city to express his or her views on any issue.
   (B)   Accepting and/or soliciting campaign contributions for any candidate
or Measure Finance Committee or other similar organization in any election or
pre-election activity, during working hours, at a city workplace or in the
scope of their city employment.
   (C)   Accepting and/or soliciting contributions for the benefit of a city
employee or official for political purposes during working hours, at a city
workplace or in the scope of his or her city employment.
   (D)   This section shall not apply to electioneering communications,
provided that no electioneering communications may be sent to a city employee
at his or her place of work by leafleting, mail, phone, e-mail or by other
electronic communication.
   (E)   No adverse employment action shall be taken against any employee for
reporting to the Board of Ethics and Campaign Practices any violation of this
section, including but not limited to direct solicitation.
(Ord. 34-2006)
Section 8. ENFORCEMENT; VIOLATION; PENALTY; AUTOMATIC FINES; REMOVAL FROM
OFFICE; APPEAL.
   (a)   Any charge of violations of this Code of Ethics shall be brought
before the City Clerk. Any private citizen may initiate such a charge in
accordance with regulations established by the City Clerk.
   (b)   Should the Board find, after referral of the complaint from the City
Clerk and due hearing, that a violation has occurred, it may make a public
reprimand or impose a fine of not to exceed $500 for each violation or do both.
   (c)   Automatic Fines. Notwithstanding subsection (b) of this section, a
failure of an elected official to file a biannual report required in Section 5
of this Code of Ethics or the filing of a false report shall subject the
elected official to an automatic fine according to the schedule of fines
established in the Rules and Regulations of the Board and a public reprimand.
The Board may establish in its Rules and Regulations additional automatic fines
for the failure of an elected official to file a report or correct a report
after the initial determination by the Board that the elected official failed
to file a report or that the report was false. In situations where there is an
incomplete filing, the elected official shall be notified by the City Clerk
that the biannual report is incomplete. The elected official shall have ten
days from the date of notice to complete the biannual report. If the incomplete
biannual report is not completed within ten days, the elected official shall be
subject to an automatic fine according to the schedule of fines established in
the Rules and Regulations of the Board and a public reprimand. If the report is
completed within ten days and the Board determines from the face of the filings
that any omissions in the report were inadvertent and made in good faith, the
Board shall find that there has been no violation. The City Clerk shall issue
all automatic fines required in this subsection, subject to the appeal
procedures established in the Rules and Regulations of the Board.
   (d)   In addition to imposing such sanctions, or as an alternative thereto,
the Board may recommend to the Council that an appointed or employed official
be suspended or removed from office or that an elected official be removed from
office.
   (e)   The Council may, upon the recommendation of the Board of Ethics and
Campaign Practices, and after due hearing of the charge, order the suspension
or removal of an appointed or employed official, or the removal of an elected
official; provided, however, that no official shall be removed or suspended
except upon the concurrence of two-thirds of the Councilors qualified to vote
thereon.
   (f)   An appeal may be taken from any findings and action of the Board
pursuant to Subparagraph (b) of this Section, and from any order of the Council
pursuant to Subparagraph (d) of this Section, to the District Court of the 2nd
Judicial District, by filing Notice of Appeal in the said District Court within
5 days of the date of the action or order appealed from, and by filing with
said District Court within 30 days a true transcript and record of the
proceedings upon which said action or order is based. The hearing in the
District Court shall be held on the said transcript and record only, and new
testimony shall not be taken.
(Am. Ord. 35-1975; Am. Ord. 24-1981; Am. Ord. 34-2006; Am. Ord. 44-2007; Am.
Ord. 2019-030; Amended at a Special Election held in conjunction with a Regular
Municipal Election, October 5, 1999, as Question #12.)
Section 9. INVESTIGATION.
   (a)   The Board or City Clerk may choose to ask for an investigation; to do
this, it may temporarily employ or contract with investigators and require
investigation by city staff assigned to the Board or by the Office of Inspector
General upon acceptance of the complaint, or upon evidence or belief of fraud
or a violation of the Charter. The Board or City Clerk shall direct and limit
the scope and nature of all such investigations. No such investigation shall be
undertaken unless it is specifically authorized and defined by the Board or
City Clerk. For the purposes of this section, the term "allegations" means both
any formal charges filed with the Board or City Clerk or initiated by the Board
or City Clerk and other information raising a substantial question related to
compliance with the Code of Ethics, the Open and Ethical Election Code, or the
Election Code. Such investigation may relate to violation of the Code of
Ethics, the Open and Ethical Election Code, or the Election Code.
   (b)   In retaining an investigator, the Board of Ethics and Campaign
Practices shall not be bound by procedures of the City of Albuquerque which
would otherwise apply to selecting a contractor or employee. The Board shall
adopt its own procedures, consistent with good administrative practices.
   (c)   All officials and contractors of the City of Albuquerque shall furnish
the Board of Ethics and Campaign Practices or its investigator with requested
information and records within their custody which are germane to an
investigation authorized by the Board. Officials and contractors may be
required to appear as witnesses in hearings concerning ethics or campaign
practices charges heard by the Board.
(Ord. 31-1989; Am. Ord. 34-2006; Am. Ord. 2022-042)
Section 10. NON-WAIVER OF PENALTIES.
   Nothing herein set forth shall be construed to affect or otherwise diminish
any penalties otherwise provided by law for violation of the matters set forth
in this Code of Ethics, or shall prevent the Board of Ethics and Campaign
Practices from bringing to the attention of the proper authority any alleged
violation coming to its attention which may be subject to such other penalties.
(Am. Ord. 24-1981; Am. Ord. 31-1989; Am. Ord. 34-2006)
Section 11. REGULATIONS.
   The Board of Ethics and Campaign Practices shall have the authority to
establish reasonable rules and regulations for its conduct and for explanation
and interpretation of the Code of Ethics.
(Am. Ord. 24-1981; Am. Ord. 31-1989; Am. Ord. 34-2006)
Section 12. AMENDMENTS.
   The above Code of Ethics may be amended without requiring compliance with
Article VI of this Charter by ordinance adopted by a majority of the entire
membership of the Council plus two additional members thereof voting in favor
of such amendment or amendments and said ordinance being otherwise governed by
Article XI of this Charter.
(Article XII adopted at Special Election, February 26, 1974 as part of
Proposition #1) (Am. Ord. 35-1975; Am. Ord. 29-1976; Am. Ord. 77-1978; Am. Ord.
91-1980; Am. Ord. 24-1981; Am. Ord. 31-1989; Am. Ord. 34-2006)
ARTICLE XIII. ELECTION CODE
Editor's note: Ord. 46-1975, as amended by Ord. 63-1977, Ord. 77-1978 and Ord.
24-1981, set forth the previous Election Code, which has been replaced in its
entirety by Ord. 17-1993.
Section 1. DECLARATION OF POLICY.
   Public disclosure and regulation of certain campaign practices will serve to
increase public confidence in the integrity of government by informing the
public of the qualifications of a candidate for elective office and of the
possible sources of influence upon that candidate and of the financing of a
campaign to influence the passage or defeat of a measure. The principle that
the candidate assumes ultimate and complete responsibility for the conduct of
the campaign is therefore incorporated in to this Charter and shall be
implemented according to this Election Code.
(Ord. 17-1993; Am. Ord. 2022-042)
Section 2. DEFINITIONS.
   (a)   "Anonymous Contribution" means a contribution received by a candidate
or a Measure Finance Committee for which the contributor cannot be identified.
Contributions received by a host pursuant to Section 4(j) of this Election Code
shall not be considered anonymous contributions.
   (b)   “Broadly Distributed" means material that has been sent, delivered, or
transmitted to more than 100 people.
   (c)   "Board" means the Board of Ethics and Campaign Practices established
pursuant to Article XII of this Charter.
   (d)   "Campaign Materials" means any published, printed or broadly
distributed campaign advertising or communications such as newspaper
advertisements, handbills, petitions, circulars, letters, radio or TV
broadcasts, cable distributions, social media sites, websites, electronic or
telephonic transmissions or similar written material used in a campaign by a
candidate or a Measure Finance Committee.
   (e)   “Candidate” means any individual who has: (1) obtained a nominating
petition from the City Clerk pursuant to Section 4(d)1.D. of this Election Code
for the office of Mayor or Councilor; (2) filed an affidavit on a form approved
by the City Clerk, stating that he or she is a candidate for either the office
of Mayor or City Councilor; (3) filed as a candidate for elected office as
required by law, whichever first occurs; or (4) has received or solicited
contributions or made expenditures of one thousand dollars ($1,000) or more or
authorized another person or campaign committee to receive or solicit
contributions or make expenditures of one thousand dollars ($1,000) or more for
the purpose of seeking election to the office.
   (f)   "Candidate Finance Committee” consists of the candidate, the
candidate's treasurer, and any person authorized either expressly or by
implication by the candidate to participate in the solicitation, receipt,
expenditure, or employment of contributions on behalf of the candidate. "Member
of the Candidate Committee" means any such person.
   (g)   "Candidate's Treasurer" means the person who is appointed by a
candidate to receive, keep and disburse all money which may be collected,
received or disbursed by the candidate, the Candidate Finance Committee, or any
of its members.
   (h)   "Contributions'* means:
      1.   Monies, loans, debts incurred, obligations incurred, property in-
kind, including the use thereof, or commercial or professional services:
         A.   Incurred or received by a candidate, the candidate's treasurer,
the Candidate Finance Committee, or a member thereof on behalf of the
candidate, or by a Measure Finance Committee or a member thereof on behalf of
the Committee. For the purposes of this Subsection, a debt or obligation shall
be considered incurred at the time authorization is given or contract made for
the debt or obligation.
         B.   Not received by a person or entity named in Subparagraph A above,
but expended or employed on behalf of a candidate or measure, where such
monies, loans, debts incurred, obligations incurred, property in-kind, or
commercial or professional services have been solicited or otherwise consented
to by such committee or have been expended or employed in a manner or amount
directed, authorized, either expressly, by implication, or consented to by such
committee.
      2.   Contributions of property, including the use thereof, and
contributions of commercial or professional services shall be attributed a cash
value equal to their fair market value.
      3.   Notwithstanding the foregoing, none of the following shall be
considered a contribution: a candidate's own services and property, other than
cash; the use of a dwelling unit and residential premises incidental thereto
for any campaign purpose and the provision of refreshments and entertainment in
connection with such use; the services of the person who is performing the
duties of the candidate's treasurer; and the use of vehicles for any campaign
purpose other than in connection with the performance of a commercial or
professional service.
      4.   The payment or waiver of legal fees to advise a candidate on
compliance with campaign laws or regulations, and payment or waiver of legal
fees or court costs to represent a candidate or candidate committee in any
action reasonably related to the campaign or election in which the candidate or
committee has been named as a defendant, are contributions that must be
disclosed, but are not subject to any contribution limits in the Charter.
   (i)   “Coordinated Expenditure” means an expenditure that is made:
      1.   by a person other than the candidate or campaign committee;
      2.   at the request or suggestion of, or in cooperation, consultation or
concert with, a candidate, campaign committee or political party or any agent
or representative of a candidate, campaign committee or political party; and
      3.   for the purpose of:
         A.   supporting or opposing the nomination or election of a candidate;
or
         B.   paying for an advertisement that refers to a clearly identified
candidate and is published and disseminated to the relevant electorate in New
Mexico within thirty days before the primary election or sixty days before the
general election in which the candidate is on the ballot.
   (j)   “Corporation” means a corporation, company, limited liability company,
limited partnership, business trust, business association, or other similar
entity.
   (k)   “Covered Office” means the office of Mayor of the City of Albuquerque
or the office of any City Councilor.
   (l)   “Disclaimer” means a notice that identifies the person(s) or
organization(s) who paid for a communication and whether the communication was
authorized by one or more candidates.
   (m)   “Disclosure reports” means statements filed by candidates and
committees in the electronic campaign finance reporting system as required
pursuant to Article XIII, Section 4.
   (n)   "Early Voter” means a voter who votes in person before election day,
and has not been issued an absentee ballot at the time the voter presents
himself at an early voting location.
   (o)   "Election” means any City of Albuquerque municipal election.
   (p)   “Electioneering Communication” means any audio or visual communication
in any form that is broadcast or distributed by any means that:
      (1)   unambiguously refers to any candidate or ballot measure;
      (2)   is broadcast, printed, mailed, delivered, or distributed within the
60 days preceding a regular or special election, or 45 days preceding a runoff
election; and
      (3)   is broadcast to, printed in a newspaper, distributed to, mailed to,
delivered by hand or otherwise distributed to an audience that includes members
of the electorate for a covered office.
   (q)   “Express Advocacy” means an expenditure made by a person or group,
other than a candidate or candidate’s committee, that advocates the election or
defeat of a candidate or ballot measure, including all costs of designing,
producing, or disseminating a communication that contains phrases such as “vote
for”, “re-elect”, “support”, “cast your ballot for”, “name of candidate for
name of office”, “name of candidate in year”, “vote against”, “defeat”,
“reject”, or similar phrases, or other explicit references to a candidate or
ballot measure that indicates intent to influence an election.
   (r)   "Expenditure” means the payment or furnishing of money or anything of
value or the incurring or repayment of indebtedness or obligation, by or on
behalf of any person, candidate or political committee in consideration for any
services, supplies, equipment or other thing of value performed or furnished
for any reason, including support of or opposition to a candidate or political
committee or for reducing the debt of a candidate or political committee.
Notwithstanding any other provision of the Charter, for the purposes of
Election Code and the Open and Ethical Elections Code, the payment of legal
fees to advise a candidate on compliance with campaign laws or regulations, and
the payment of legal fees or court costs to represent a candidate or candidate
committee in any action reasonably related to the campaign or election in which
the candidate or committee has been named as a defendant, are expenditures that
must be disclosed, but are not subject to any expenditure limits in the
Charter.
   (s)   “Foreign-influenced corporation” means one or more foreign investors,
in aggregate, holds, owns, controls, or otherwise has direct or indirect
beneficial ownership of fifty percent or more of the total equity, outstanding
voting shares, membership units, or other applicable ownership interests of the
corporation.
   (t)   “Foreign investor” means a person or entity that:
      1.   Holds, owns, controls, or otherwise has direct or indirect
beneficial ownership of equity, outstanding voting shares, membership units, or
other applicable ownership interests of a corporation; and
      2.   Is a government of a foreign country; a political party of a foreign
country; a partnership, association, corporation, organization, or other
combination of persons organized under the laws of or having its principal
place of business in a foreign country; or an individual, not lawfully admitted
for permanent residence, who is not a citizen of the United States or a
national of the United States.
   (u)   “Immediate Family” means the candidate’s spouse, parent, grandparent,
child, grandchild, sister, half-sister, brother, half-brother, stepparent,
step-grandparent, stepchild, step-grandchild, stepsister, stepbrother, mother-
in-law, father-in-law, brother-in-law, sister-in-law, son-in-law, daughter-in-
law, guardian, former guardian, domestic partner, and the immediate family of
the candidate’s spouse or domestic partner.
   (v)   “Independent Expenditure” mean any funds spent on express advocacy or
electioneering communications that are made without the cooperation,
consultation or coordination with, or at the request or suggestion of, a
candidate, a candidate's authorized committee or an agent thereof. An
independent expenditure may include materials already distributed to the public
or broadcast by a candidate, the candidates authorized committee or an agent
thereof.
   (w)   “Mass Communications” means any communication of substantially
identical content reasonably expected to reach 100 or more individuals within
three (3) months of a regular or special election, or within 45 days of a
runoff election. This includes communications sent directly to individuals, and
communications placed or posted where they will likely be seen by 100 or more
individuals, such as signs.
   (x)   "Measure" means any proposition submitted to a popular vote at an
election, whether by initiative, referendum or recall procedure or otherwise.
   (y)   "Measure Finance Committee" means a political committee or any person
or combination of two or more persons acting jointly in aid of or in opposition
to the effort of anyone seeking to have their name placed on the ballot for
city office, a petition to place a measure on the ballot pursuant to Article
III of this Charter, voter approval or disapproval of one or more measures on
the ballot and/or the election to, or recall from, office of one or more
candidates for office when such person or people have accepted contributions in
excess of $250 or make expenditures in excess of $250 for any of the purposes
listed heretofore.
   (z)   "Person" means any individual, cooperative association, club,
corporation, company, firm, partnership, joint venture syndicate, profit or
nonprofit organization, or other entity.
   (aa)   "In-Kind Contribution" means a good or service, other than money,
having monetary value not to exceed the limits set in Section 4 of Article
XIII, but not including an individual who volunteers his own personal service.
Professional services, including legal services, accounting services,
consulting services and similar services provided directly from the
professional to the Candidate are permitted, provided no single In-Kind
Contributor exceeds the limits set in Section 4 of Article XIII.
Notwithstanding the foregoing, a Candidate may accept unlimited In-Kind
Contributions in the following areas:
      (1)   legal services provided directly from attorneys for the purpose of
providing legal advice to comply with election laws and public financing laws,
      (2)   professional services provided directly from the professional,
including attorneys, experts and consultants, for the sole purpose of
participating in a proceeding under Section 8 of the Code of Ethics, Section 10
of the Election Code, and Sections 20 and 21 of the Open and Ethical Elections
Code; and
      (3)   office space.
      Such In-Kind Contributions shall be reported on the next statement filed
with the Clerk or within 30 days of receiving the goods or services.
   (bb)   "Reporting individual" means every public official, candidate or
treasurer of a campaign committee and every treasurer of a Measure Finance
Committee.
(Ord. 17-1993; Am. Ord. 45-2003; Am. Ord. 34-2006; Am. Ord. 44-2008; Am. Ord.
2012-033; Am. Ord. 2018-033; Am. Ord. 2019-003; Am. Ord. 2022-042; Am. Ord.
2024-036; Am. Ord._2025-020)
Section 3. CANDIDATE DISCLOSURE.
   Each candidate shall file a financial disclosure with the City Clerk. The
candidate disclosure shall be filed with the City Clerk when the candidate
becomes a declared candidate, be on a form prescribed by the City Clerk, and
shall be sworn and attested to under penalty of perjury by the Candidate. The
Candidate disclosure statement shall be a public record. The Candidate
disclosure statement shall include:
      (1)   the full name of the reporting individual and the reporting
individual's spouse;
      (2)   the name and address of any employer employing the reporting
individual or the reporting individual's spouse, the title or position held,
and a brief description of the nature of the business or occupation;
      (3)   the identity, zip code, and purpose of use of real property owned
by the reporting individual, the reporting individual's spouse or the reporting
individual's dependent children over the age of 18; provided that in the
absence of a zip code, the county of situs is required to be disclosed;
      (4)   the identity of assets of more than fifty thousand dollars
($50,000) directly or beneficially owned by the reporting individual, the
reporting individual's spouse or the reporting individual's dependent children
over the age of 18; provided that in determining whether an asset has a value
of more than fifty thousand dollars ($50,000), the value should not be reduced
by any debt secured by the asset, such as a mortgage or other secured loan, and
a good faith estimate of the fair market value of an asset is permitted if the
exact value is neither known or easily obtainable. The disclosure of assets
shall include:
         (A)   commodities, including the type of commodity;
         (B)   investments in stocks, bonds, futures contracts, options,
derivatives, currency, real estate investment trusts, mutual funds, private
equity funds, exchange-traded funds, and trust funds of which the reporting
individual is a beneficiary; provided that if the investment is or forms part
of a fund, the reporting individual is only required to identify the fund, the
fund manager, and any underlying holdings of the fund if it has a value of more
than fifty thousand dollars ($50,000); and
         (C)   contractual rights reasonably likely to generate future income,
such as royalties and intellectual property, the names of the contracting
parties, and the purpose of the contract;
      (5)   all sources of income equal to or greater than the amount that must
be disclosed to the internal revenue service pursuant to 26 U.S.C. Section 6041
(a), as amended, directly or indirectly accrued by the reporting individual,
the reporting individual's spouse or the reporting individual's dependent
children over the age of 18, including:
         (A)   the identity of the source of earned income; provided that:
            (i)   if a source of earned income is owed a legal or professional
duty of confidentiality and the identity of the source of the income has not
been disclosed to a public agency, the reporting individual may identify the
source as "confidential" and describe the duty of confidentiality that prevents
disclosure of the source of the earned income;
            (ii)   if an indirect source of earned income is a client of a
business entity of which the reporting individual or the reporting individual's
spouse is a member, the indirect source of earned income is not required to be
disclosed if the reporting individual or the reporting individual's spouse has
no role in any matter involving the source; and
         (B)   the identity of sources of unearned income, including taxable
interest, capital gains, dividends, annuities, trust distributions, rents from
real property and insurance policies;
      (6)   Liabilities of more than five thousand dollars ($5,000) owed by:
         (A)   the reporting individual, the reporting individual's spouse or
the reporting individual's dependent children over the age of 18; and
         (B)   a trust of which the reporting individual, the reporting
individual's spouse or the reporting individual's dependent children over the
age of 18 are beneficiaries;
      (7)   For a liability identified pursuant to Subsection (6) of this
section, the reporting individual shall disclose:
         (A)   the identity of the person who owes the debt or liability;
         (B)   the person to whom the debt or liability is owed;
         (C)   the amount of the debt or liability; and
         (D)   any payments on the debt or liability during the previous
calendar year;
      (8)   For a liability identified pursuant to Subsection (6) of this
section, the reporting individual is not required to disclose:
         (A)   ordinary consumer debt;
         (B)   mortgage debt on the primary residence of the reporting
individual, the reporting individual's spouse or the reporting individual's
dependent children over the age of 18;
         (C)   student loans; and
         (D)   liabilities owed to parents, grandparents, dependent children
over the age of 18 or siblings of the reporting individual, the reporting
individual's spouse or the reporting individual's dependent children over the
age of 18;
         (E)   One passenger vehicle registered to the reporting individual,
the reporting individual’s spouse, and the reporting individual's dependent
children over the age of 18;
      (9)   The following information related to any privately held business
controlled by the reporting individual, the reporting individual's spouse or
the reporting individual's dependent children over the age of 18:
         (A)   the name of the business entity, a brief description of the
nature of its activities and its geographic location, including the city and
state; and
         (B)   for a privately held business entity formed for the purpose of
holding investments:
            (i)   assets of more than fifty thousand dollars ($50,000) or that
generated income directly or beneficially owned by the business entity in an
amount equal to or greater than the amount that must be disclosed to the
internal revenue service pursuant to 26 U.S.C. Section 6041(a), as amended;
provided that in determining whether an asset has a value of more than fifty
thousand dollars ($50,000), the value should not be reduced by any debt secured
by the asset, such as a mortgage or other secured loan; and
            (ii)   any liability of the business entity in an amount greater
than fifty thousand dollars ($50,000), including:
               (a)   the identity of the business entity that owes the debt or
liability;
               (b)   the person to which the debt or liability is owed;
               (c)   the amount of the debt or liability; and
               (d)   any payments on the debt or liability during the previous
calendar year;
      (10)   The following information related to professional licenses,
memberships and offices held for the prior calendar year:
         (A)   professional licenses held by the reporting individual and the
reporting individual's spouse; and
         (B)   board memberships, offices or other positions held by the
reporting individual and the reporting individual's spouse in:
            (i)    corporations, partnerships, trusts or other for-profit
business entities; and
            (ii)    nonprofit organizations, educational organizations,
political organizations or other nongovernmental organizations; and
      (11)   Any gift received in the prior calendar year by the reporting
individual, the reporting individual's spouse or the reporting individual's
dependent children over the age of 18 having a market value greater than fifty
dollars ($50.00) from a restricted donor, a registered lobbyist, a lobbyist's
employer, a government contractor or a person that has responded to a request
for proposals or an invitation to bid issued by the City.
(Ord. 17-1993; Am. Ord. 32-1999; Am. Ord. 2019-003; Am. Ord. 2022-042; Am. Ord.
2024-036)
Section 4. CAMPAIGN FINANCING.
   (a)   One Candidate Finance Committee. Each candidate shall establish no
more than one Candidate Finance Committee and shall appoint a treasurer who
shall not be the candidate.
   (b)   Measure Finance Committee. Each Measure Finance Committee shall
appoint a treasurer who shall not be the chairperson.
   (c)   One Bank Account Filing Requirements.
      1.   Each candidate or the candidate's treasurer and each Measure Finance
Committee shall establish one and only one campaign bank checking account for
each election. The City Clerk shall issue a form to be submitted by campaigns
and committees disclosing bank account information.
      2.   All contributions of monies received for the benefit of the
candidate's campaign or the Measure Finance Committee shall be deposited in
that account, and all disbursements shall be made from that account.
      3.   Each candidate and Measure Finance Committee shall submit monthly
bank statements reflecting the previous month’s activities directly to the
Campaign and Election Auditor by the second Monday of each month. Monthly bank
statements shall be submitted each month for the duration of the election cycle
as long as the campaign or committee is required to file a report pursuant to
Article XIII Section 4(d)(2)(F) or (G).
      4.   Upon the request of the Clerk, each candidate, the candidate's
treasurer, or the chairperson or treasurer of each Measure Finance Committee
shall provide to the Clerk all bank records, canceled checks, and any other
financial information relating to the campaign as may be requested by the
Clerk.
   (d)   Disclosure of Campaign Financing.
      (1)   Each candidate for the office of Mayor or Councilor and each
Measure Finance Committee, shall file with the City Clerk the statements
required in Section 4(d)2 of this Election Code, each of which shall be
cumulative, signed under oath by the candidate or the candidate's treasurer or
by the chairperson or treasurer of the Measure Finance Committee, setting forth
through 5:00 p.m. of the day preceding the filing of each statement.
         A.   The total of all contributions, which shall include all
contributions received, regardless of whether the contribution has been
deposited in the candidate's or Measure Finance Committee's campaign bank
account. A contribution is deemed received when a candidate or a Measure
Finance Committee or any agent of a candidate or a Measure Finance Committee
receives a contribution or the benefit of the services donated.
         B.   When the contributor is an individual, the name and address of
the contributor, the contributor's principal business or occupation, the name
and address of the contributor's employer, if self-employed, the address of the
contributor's business, and the nature of the contributor's or the
contributor's employer's business. If the contributor is retired or not
employed, the residential address of the contributor shall be disclosed. When
the contributor is an entity other than an individual, the name and address of
the contributor, the business or activities conducted by the contributor and
the owners and managers of the contributor. The amount of each contribution and
the cumulative value of all contributions contributed by the contributor shall
be disclosed. Measure Finance Committees that support or oppose more than one
candidate or measure shall specify in separate sections in each disclosure
statement the candidate or measure to which each contribution and expenditure
applies. In the event a contribution or expenditure applies to more than one
candidate or measure, the pro rata share of such contribution or expenditure
shall be clearly identified for each candidate or measure.
         C.   All expenditures made on behalf of the campaign, including any
reimbursements and the nature thereof, and the name and address of the person
or business to which payment was made.
            A.    Reporting of expenditures shall include for each expenditure
including type and quantity of items purchased, names and roles of staff paid,
names of companies and materials produced, etc.
            B.   The Campaign and Election Auditor, as provided for in Article
XIII, Section 9 shall, at their discretion, request additional details of
expenditures or contributions.
         D.   A person seeking to qualify to be on the ballot for the office of
Mayor or Councilor shall include any person who has obtained a nominating
petition form approved by the City Clerk, or who has received or solicited
contributions or made expenditures of one thousand dollars ($1,000) or more or
authorized another person or campaign committee to receive or solicit
contributions or make expenditures of one thousand dollars ($1,000) or more for
the purpose of seeking election to the office. The City Clerk shall issue an
approved nominating petition only to the person seeking to be on the ballot.
Such approved nominating petition forms shall state the name of the person and
the City office for which such person is petitioning to qualify to be on the
ballot. People who have sought to be on the ballot as described above, but who
do not qualify for the ballot or do not file a declaration of candidacy are
required to file as provided in this section by 5:00 p.m. on the second Monday
in May, a report of all expenditures made and contributions received on or
before the first Monday in May and not previously reported and to file a final
report by 5:00 p.m. on the second Monday in November, a report of all
expenditures made and contributions received on or before the first Monday in
November and not previously reported.
         E.   Within 48 hours of the receipt of a statement listing campaign
contributors, or as soon thereafter as reasonably possible, the Purchasing
Office shall determine if any contributor has business dealings with the City.
For the purposes of this section, a person is deemed to have business dealings
if the person or in the case of an individual, the contributor's principal
business or the contributor's employer has received $20,000 or more pursuant to
a contract with the City in the 24 months prior to the date of contribution.
The Purchasing Office shall immediately notify the City Clerk of any campaign
contributors who have business dealings with the City and the City Clerk shall
post that information (including: contribution amount, recipient and business
relationship) on the City's website.
         F.   The Purchasing Office shall maintain a list of all contributors
to the campaign of any elected Mayor or Councilor and, for a period of one and
one-half years following the election of that Official, shall notify the City
Clerk of any campaign contributors who form business dealings with the City, as
defined in the preceding paragraph, and the City Clerk shall post that
information (including: contribution amount, recipient and business
relationship) on the City's website.
         G.   In addition to other campaign disclosure requirements of the
Election Code, a candidate shall designate in his or her disclosure reports
those contributors who have contracts pursuant to which they receive funds from
the employer of the candidate if the candidate was solely or partially
responsible for the recommendation or award of the contract or for the
administration of the contract. The City Clerk shall post this designation
separately from the other contributions on the City's website.
      2.   The statements required by this subsection shall be filed as
follows:
         A.   Except as otherwise provided in this section, a reporting
individual shall file with the City Clerk by 5:00 p.m. on the second Monday in
May and November a report of all expenditures made and contributions received
on or before the first Monday in those months and not previously reported. The
report shall be filed biannually until the reporting individual's bank account
has been closed and the other provisions specified in Subsection F of this
section have been satisfied.
         B.   In an election year, instead of the biannual reports provided for
in Subsection A of this section, reporting individuals, except for public
officials who are not candidates in an election that year, shall file reports
of all expenditures made and contributions received or, if applicable,
statements of no activity, according to the following schedule:
            (1)   by 5:00 p.m. on the second Monday in April, a report of all
expenditures made and contributions received on or before the first Monday in
April and not previously reported;
            (2)   by 5:00 p.m. on the second Monday in May, a report of all
expenditures made and contributions received on or before the first Monday in
May and not previously reported;
            (3)   by 5:00 p.m. on the second Monday in June, a report of all
expenditures made and contributions received on or before the first Monday in
June and not previously reported;
            (4)   by 5:00 p.m. on the second Monday in July, a report of all
expenditures made and contributions received on or before the first Monday in
July and not previously reported;
            (5)   by 5:00 p.m. on the second Monday in August, a report of all
expenditures made and contributions received on or before the first Monday in
August and not previously reported;
            (6)   by 5:00 p.m. on the second Monday in September, a report of
all expenditures made and contributions received on or before the first Monday
in September and not previously reported;
            (7)    beginning on the second Monday in October, by 5:00 p.m. on
every Monday thereafter before the regular election candidates shall file a
report of all expenditures made and contributions received on or before the
previous Friday and not previously reported;
            (8)    beginning on the Friday before the regular election, any
contribution or pledge to contribute that is for five hundred dollars ($500) or
more shall be reported to the City Clerk in a supplemental report on a
prescribed form within twenty-four hours of receipt;
            (9)   run-off candidates and Measure Finance Committees shall file
statements as follows:
               i.    beginning on the first Monday following the regular
election, by 5:00 p.m. on every Monday before the run-off election candidates
shall file a report of all expenditures made and contributions received on or
before the previous Friday and not previously reported; and
               ii.    beginning on the Friday before the run-off election, any
contribution or pledge to contribute that is for five hundred dollars ($500) or
more shall be reported to the City Clerk in a supplemental report on a
prescribed form within twenty-four hours of receipt;
            (10)   In the event of a special election, reporting individuals,
except for public officials who are not candidates in the special election,
shall file reports of all expenditures made and contributions received as
follows:
               i.    beginning on the first Monday following the County Clerk's
first publication of the special election resolution, by 5:00 p.m. on every
Monday before the special election reporting individuals shall file a report of
all expenditures made and contributions received on or before the previous
Friday and not previously reported; and
               ii.    beginning on the Friday before the special election, any
contribution or pledge to contribute that is for five hundred dollars ($500) or
more shall be reported to the City Clerk in a supplemental report on a
prescribed form within twenty-four hours of receipt;
            (11)   by 5:00 p.m. on the thirtieth day after a regular, run-off,
or special election, a report of all expenditures made and contributions
received on or before the twenty-fifth day after the election and not
previously reported.
         C.   If a candidate or public official has not received any
contributions and has not made any expenditures since the candidate's or
official's last report was filed with the proper filing officer, the candidate
or official shall only be required to file a statement of no activity, which
shall not be required to be notarized, in lieu of a full report when that
report would otherwise be due and shall not be required to file a full report
until the next required filing date occurring after an expenditure is made or a
contribution is received.
         D.   In an election year, a public official who is not a candidate
shall file biannual reports of expenditures made and contributions received or
statements of no activity in accordance with the schedule provided for in
Subsection A of this section.
         E.   A report of expenditures and contributions filed after a deadline
set forth in this section shall not be deemed to have been timely filed.
         F.   Except for candidates and public officials who file a statement
of no activity, each reporting individual shall file a report of expenditures
and contributions pursuant to the filing schedules set forth in this section,
regardless of whether any expenditures were made or contributions were received
during the reporting period. Reports shall be required until the reporting
individual delivers a report to the City Clerk stating that:
            (1)   there are no outstanding campaign debts;
            (2)   all money has been expended in accordance with the provisions
Section 4 of Article XIII, the Election Code; and
            (3)   the bank account has a zero balance
         G.   Each treasurer of a Measure Finance Committee shall file a report
of expenditures and contributions pursuant to the filing schedules set forth in
this section until the treasurer files a report that affirms that the committee
has dissolved or no longer exists, and that its bank account has a zero
balance.
         H.   A reporting individual who is a candidate within the meaning of
the Election Code because of the amount of contributions the candidate receives
or expenditures the candidate makes and who does not ultimately file a
declaration of candidacy or a nominating petition with the City Clerk and does
not file a statement of no activity shall file biannual reports in accordance
with Subsection A of this section.
         I.   Reports required by this section shall be subscribed and sworn to
by the candidate or the treasurer of the Measure Finance Committee. A report
filed electronically shall be electronically authenticated by the candidate or
the treasurer of the Measure Finance Committee using an electronic signature in
conformance with the Uniform Electronic Transactions Act. For the purposes of
Article XIII, Section 4, a report that is electronically authenticated in
accordance with the provisions of this subsection shall be deemed to have been
subscribed and sworn to by the candidate or the treasurer of the political
committee who was required to file the report.
         J.   Reports required by this section shall be filed electronically by
all reporting individuals.
         K.   Reporting individuals may apply to the City Clerk for exemption
from electronic filing in case of hardship, which shall be defined by the City
Clerk.
   (e)   Limits to Contributions. No privately financed candidate shall, for
any one election, allow total contributions, including in-kind contributions,
from any one person with the exception of contributions from the candidate
themselves of more than $2,000 for Council Candidates and $6,000 for Mayoral
Candidates. Limitations on contributions for publicly financed candidates are
detailed in the Open and Ethical Elections Act.
      (1)   Beginning January 15, 2027, and every two years thereafter, the
Clerk shall adjust the contribution limit based on the change in the Consumer
Price Index for All Urban Consumers (CPI-U) as published by the United States
Bureau of Labor Statistics. The adjustment shall reflect the percentage change
in the CPI-U from January 1, 2024, to December 31 of the year preceding the
adjustment.
   (f)   Ban on Contributions from City Contractors. No candidate for Mayor or
Council, or Official who is a candidate for an office other than Mayor or
Council, shall accept a contribution in support of the candidate's campaign
from any person or entity, other than a City employee, who at the time of the
contribution is in a contractual relationship with the City to provide goods or
services to the City. Nor shall any candidate for Mayor or Council, or Official
who is a candidate for an office other than Mayor or Council, accept a
contribution that is knowingly given on behalf of any person or entity who, at
the time of the contribution, is in a contractual relationship with the City to
provide goods or services to the City. The remedy for an unknowing violation of
this subsection shall be the return of the contribution.
   (g)   Ban on Contributions from Foreign Nationals. No candidate for Mayor or
Council, shall accept a contribution in support of the candidate's campaign
from any person or entity from a foreign national without lawful United States
permanent residence.
   (h)   Ban on Contributions from Foreign-Influenced Corporations. No
candidate for Mayor or Council, shall accept a contribution in support of the
candidate's campaign from any foreign-influenced corporation.
   (i)   Unexpended Contributions. Any contributions not expended on the
campaign shall be disposed of, such that the campaign account is brought to a
zero balance, at the option of the candidate or chairperson of a Measure
Finance Committee, by one of the following methods:
      (1)   Retained in the campaign or Measure Finance Committee banking
checking account for a possible runoff election for that office,
      (2)   Returned to the person who made the contribution,
      (3)   Placed in the City's General Fund, or
      (4)   Given to a charity identified by the candidate.
      The final campaign financing statement shall reflect the final
disposition of such contributions.
   (j)   Anonymous Contributions.
      (1)   All anonymous contributions shall be disposed of by a candidate or
the chairperson of a Measure Finance Committee either by placing the
contribution in the City's General Fund or by giving the contribution to a
charity.
      (2)   An anonymous contribution shall not be considered to be a
contribution to or expenditure of the campaign; however, a record of all
anonymous contributions shall be kept by the candidate or the candidate's
treasurer, or by the chairperson or treasurer of the Measure Finance Committee
and the receipt and disposition of every anonymous contribution shall be
reported in the campaign financing disclosure statements required by subsection
(d) of this section are filed. Such report must disclose the goods, services,
monies, or other contributions received, its value, the date of receipt and the
date and method of disposition.
   (k)   For the purposes of this section, contributions and expenditures
include those contributions received and expenditures made by or on behalf of
an individual at any time prior to the individual filing a Declaration of
Candidacy for the office of Mayor or Councilor through the time the final
campaign financing disclosure statement is due, or by or on behalf of a Measure
Finance Committee at any time prior to the relevant election through the time
the final campaign financing disclosure statement is due.
   (l)   Campaign Finance Records.
      1.   All campaign finance records and statements shall be open to
inspection and/or audit by the Board, its designated representative, or its
auditor; statements shall be presented to the Board for inspection or audit, or
both. The City Clerk shall create an electronic data base for all campaign
reporting required in this Election Code and place that information on the
City's web site.
      2.   Campaign Financial Records.
         A.   Each candidate or the candidate's treasurer and each chairperson
or treasurer of a Measure Finance Committee shall keep financial records of the
campaign for a period of one year following the date of election, to assure
their availability in the event of complaint or inquiry by the Board. Such
campaign financial records shall include records of all contributions,
regardless of amount, expenditures, canceled checks, invoices, receipts, bank
statements, bills of sales, statements of accounts, leases, rental agreements,
and all other financial records pertinent to the campaign.
         B.   ln preparing and maintaining financial records, ledgers,
journals, or otherwise, and in recording contributions and expenditures on the
statements required by subsection (c) of this section, each candidate or the
candidate's treasurer and each chairperson or treasurer of a Measure Finance
Committee shall:
            1)   Record in-kind contributions as both contributions and
expenditures equal to the fair market value of the goods or services received.
            2)   Record campaign loans as contributions, with subsequent
repayment of loans credited against contributions.
            3)   Record returned contributions as credits against
contributions.
            4)   Record names of contributors on the bank deposit slips.
      3.   During the election cycle, or within one year after the date of the
election, the Campaign and Election Auditor, as provided for in Article XIII,
Section 9 may request a candidate or committees’ campaign finance records so
the Campaign and Election Auditor can perform an additional audit on the
campaign or committee. The results of the audit will be submitted to the Board
of Ethics and the City Clerk.
   (m)   Fund-Raising Activity.
      a.   The gross receipts of a fund-raising activity on behalf of a
candidate are considered to be campaign contributions, and all expenditures
associated with such a fund-raising activity are considered to be campaign
expenditures. As used in this subsection, the term "gross receipts" includes
all monies and donations of any kind which are received as part of the fund-
raising activity.
      b.   The host of a fund-raising activity on behalf of a candidate or
Committee shall be responsible for reporting the contributions resulting from
the activity unless contributors are identified in the required manner on the
Disclosure of Campaign Financing Statement, and the limits to contributions
specified in subsection (e) of this Section 4 shall apply as if the total
contributions at the fund-raising activity, not otherwise reported, were made
by the host.
   (n)   Measure Campaign Financing. Any person or group which has contributed
in excess of thirty percent of the Mayor's salary to support or oppose a
measure or candidate shall have the name of such person or group inserted into
the name of the Measure Campaign Committee to which the funds were contributed
or shall create a new committee with the name of the contributor in the
committee name. It is the obligation of the Measure Finance Committee to
immediately inform the Clerk of the Committee's required name change by forming
a new committee with the funds, or updating the committee name with the City
Clerk's Office and on the campaign finance website; the Committee shall
simultaneously report the amount of the contribution which triggers the name
change. For the purposes of this subsection, “Mayor's salary” means the salary
paid by the City of Albuquerque as of the date of the contribution; support or
oppose a measure or candidate covers qualification for the ballot plus voter
approval or disapproval of a given measure.
(Ord. 17-1993; Am. Ord. 32-1999; Am. Ord. 16-2002; Am. Ord. 13-2003; Am. Ord.
34-2006; Amended at Regular Municipal Election, October 2, 2007; Am. Ord. 44-
2008; Am. Ord. 2012-033; Am. Ord. 2018-033; Am. Ord. 2019-003; Am. Ord. 2019-
030; Am. Ord. 2022-042; Am. Ord._2024-036; Am. Ord._2025-020)
Section 5. CAMPAIGN MATERIALS AND REQUIRED DISCLAIMERS.
   (a)   Campaign Materials. Each candidate and each chairperson of each
Measure Finance Committee shall ensure that an image of all broadly distributed
campaign material used in the campaign is filed with the City Clerk's Office on
or prior to the day the financial report disclosing the expenditure for said
campaign material is due. Campaign materials shall be filed electronically in a
manner prescribed by the City Clerk. If the campaign material is a video or
radio broadcast, a copy of the video or radio broadcast shall be uploaded or a
link to a copy of the video or radio broadcast shall be sent directly to the
City Clerk and the Independent Auditor.
   (b)   Required Disclaimers. Each candidate and each chairperson of each
Measure Finance Committee shall ensure that all campaign materials display a
clear and conspicuous disclaimer stating information on how the material was
paid and any additional information as required by the rules promulgated by the
City Clerk.
(Ord. 17-1993; Am. Ord. 2020-019; Am. Ord. 2022-042)
Section 6. MEASURE FINANCE COMMITTEES.
   (a)   Each Measure Finance Committee shall register with the City Clerk
within five days of formation by preparing and filing a statement, signed by
the chairperson of the Committee, setting forth:
      1.   The exact name of the Committee;
      2.   The official address and phone number of the Committee;
      3.   The names of the officials of the Committee;
      4.   The purpose of the MFC including the measure(s) or candidate(s)
supported or opposed by the MFC; and
      5.   Acknowledgement of understanding of the Election Code, the Board's
Rules and Regulations, and the disclosure requirements for financial
statements.
   (b)   It is recognized that an affirmative duty rests on the officials of
any such Measure Finance Committee to be aware of the provisions of this
Election Code, and nothing contained in this Section shall exempt a Measure
Finance Committee from filing its statement of formation or existence as
required herein at the earliest possible date. Failure to so file according to
the provisions of subsection (a) of this section shall subject the Committee to
a fine not to exceed the maximum amount authorized by state law or public
reprimand or both as provided in the Board's Rules and Regulations.
Accordingly, such officials are enjoined to prepare and file the statement
specified in subsection (a) of this section without such a request from the
Board.
   (c)   A Measure Finance Committee's registration shall expire each year on
December 31st. A Measure Finance Committee shall renew its registration with
the City Clerk upon expiration or within five days of any contribution
collection or expenditure by the Measure Finance Committee that is in excess of
$250. At the time a Measure Finance Committee renews its registration, it shall
review the information that is on file with the City Clerk in accordance with
subsection(a) of this section and shall revise that information if any changes
have occurred since the prior registration.
(Ord. 17-1993; Am. Ord. 2012-033; Am. Ord. 2022-042)
Section 7. FAMILIARITY WITH ELECTION CODE AND RULES AND REGULATIONS.
   The Board and Clerk shall make available electronically on its website, or
physically by request, copies of the Board's Rules and Regulations, the Clerk's
Rules and Regulations, and the City Charter of Albuquerque, revised to date,
and require that each registered candidate and each registered Measure Finance
Committee acknowledge in writing on a prescribed form familiarity with the
terms of this Election Code, the Clerk's Rules and Regulations, and the Board's
Rules and Regulations. Each candidate and chairperson of a Measure Finance
Committee shall acknowledge understanding of the Election Code, the Clerk's
Rules and Regulations, and the City Charter, and acknowledge responsibility for
the campaign or committee. Each candidate and chairperson shall furnish an
address and phone number at which the candidate or chairperson can be reached,
and to which communications, including notifications of alleged violations or
hearings, can be mailed or delivered, and agreeing that notice left at such
address shall be deemed received by the candidate or chairperson.
(Ord. 17-1993; Am. Ord. 2019-003; Am. Ord. 2022-042)
Section 8. PRESERVATION OF RECORDS.
    (a)   The records and statements required by this Election Code shall be
preserved intact as public records by the Board for a period of at least seven
years after the election in question.
    (b)   All records of the Board in the conduct of its business, including
minutes of meetings and recommendations to the City Council and Mayor, shall be
preserved intact as permanent public records by the Board.
(Ord. 17-1993; Am. Ord. 2022-042)
Section 9. RULES AND REGULATIONS, ASSISTANCE; CAMPAIGN AND ELECTION AUDITOR.
   (a)   The Board and City Clerk shall promulgate reasonable Rules and
Regulations for their conduct and in aid of interpretation and enforcement of
this Election Code, and amend such Rules and Regulations as they may, from time
to time, deem advisable; provided, that amendments to said Rules and
Regulations shall not be made by the Board or City Clerk during the ninety days
preceding an election. The current Rules and Regulations of the Board and City
Clerk shall be made available in published form no later than sixty days prior
to any election.
   (b)   There is hereby created the position of Campaign and Election Auditor.
The Auditor shall be a Certified Public Accountant, a Registered Public
Accountant, Certified Internal Auditor, or have other qualified campaign
finance experience.
(Ord. 17-1993; Am. Ord. 2018-033; Am. Ord. 2020-019; Am. Ord. 2022-042)
Section 10. ENFORCEMENT.
   (a)   Charges of Violations.
      1.   The City Clerk shall issue Rules and Regulations regarding the
requirements for complaints and the process by which facial sufficiency of the
complaint is determined.
      2.   Any charge or charges that a candidate or the chairperson of a
Measure Finance Committee or any other group has committed a violation of this
Election Code or of the Rules and Regulations promulgated by the Board or the
City Clerk shall be made in writing, notarized and brought before the City
Clerk, pursuant to Rules and Regulations issued by the City Clerk pursuant to
this Section.
      3.   If the City Clerk determines that the complaint meets the
requirements in the Rules and Regulations issued by the City Clerk pursuant to
this Section, the City Clerk shall refer the complaint to the Board.
      4.   Except as provided in subsection (c) of this section, the Board
shall give written notice of such charge or charges to the candidate or
chairperson before taking further action.
   (b)   Notwithstanding any other provision in this section, the Board and/or
the City Clerk may, on their own initiative, initiate a charge or charges that
a candidate or the chairperson of a Measure Finance Committee or any other
group has committed a violation of this Election Code, the Open and Ethical
Election Code, or of the Rules and Regulations promulgated by the Board or the
City Clerk. In the event that inspection and/or audit of the candidates or
Measure Finance Committees campaign financial records made pursuant to Section
4(j)3 results in a charge or charges against a candidate or Measure Finance
Committee, written notice to the candidate or chairperson of the charge or
charges shall not be required before the Board takes further action.
   (c)   Should the Board find, after due hearing, that a violation of this
Election Code or the Rules and Regulations of the Board has occurred, it may,
for each violation, issue a public reprimand or impose a fine not to exceed the
maximum amount authorized by state law, or do both.
   (d)   Automatic Fines. Notwithstanding subsection (d) of this section, a
failure to file or late filing shall subject the candidate or the chairperson
of the Measure Finance Committee or any other obligated person, whichever may
be the case, to an automatic fine and public reprimand according to the
schedules established in the Rules and Regulations of the Board. In situations
where there is an incomplete filing the candidate or the chairperson of the
Measure Finance Committee shall be notified of the failure and shall have ten
days from the date of notice to correct the failure. If the incomplete filing
is not corrected within ten days there shall be an automatic fine and public
reprimand. If the failure is corrected within ten days and the Board determines
from the face of the filings that any failure appears to have been inadvertent
and made in good faith, the Board shall find that there has been no violation.
   (e)   In addition to imposing such sanctions, or as an alternative thereto,
and if the violator be a successful candidate in the election, the Board may
recommend to the Council that the violator be removed from office.
   (f)   The Council may, upon the recommendation of the Board, and after due
hearing of the charge, order the suspension or removal of an elected official;
provided, however, that no official shall be removed or suspended except upon
the concurrence of two-thirds of the Councilors qualified to vote thereon.
   (g)   An appeal may be taken from any findings and action of the Board
pursuant to subsections (d) and (e) of this section and from any order of the
Council pursuant to subsection (g) of this Section to the District Court of the
Second Judicial District, by filing Notice of Appeal in the said District Court
within five days of the date of the action or order appealed from, and by
filing with said District Court within thirty days a true transcript and record
of the proceedings upon which said action or order is based. The hearing in
District Court shall be held on said transcript and record only, and new
testimony shall not be taken.
   (h)   All fines not timely paid shall be assessed interest at the maximum
rate allowed by state law commencing on the thirty-first day following the date
that the fine was imposed.
   (i)   Any fines collected under this section shall be placed into the City's
General Fund.
   (j)   Any candidate who fails or refuses to file a report of expenditures
and contributions or statement of no activity or to pay a penalty imposed by
the City Clerk as required by
Section 4 of Article XIII shall not, in addition to any other penalties
provided by law:
      (1)   have the candidate's name printed upon the ballot if the violation
occurs before and through the final date for the withdrawal of candidates; or
      (2)   be issued a certificate of nomination or election, if the violation
occurs after the final date for withdrawal of candidates or after the election,
until the candidate satisfies all reporting requirements of
Article XIII, Section 4, and pays all penalties owed.
   (k)   Any candidate who loses an election and who failed or refused to file
a report of expenditures and contributions or a statement of no activity or to
pay a penalty imposed by the City Clerk or Board of Ethics for a violation of
the Code of Ethics, the Election Code, the Open and Ethical Elections Code, or
Rules and Regulations promulgated by the City Clerk or the Board of Ethics,
shall not be, in addition to any other penalties provided by law, permitted to
file a declaration of candidacy or nominating petition for any future election
until the candidate satisfies all reporting requirements and pays all penalties
owed.
(Ord. 17-1993; Am. Ord. 34-2006; Am. Ord. 2018-033; Am. Ord. 2020-019; Am. Ord.
2022-042)
Section 11. NON-WAIVER OF PENALTIES.
   Nothing herein set forth shall be construed to affect or otherwise diminish
any penalties otherwise provided by law for violation of this Election Code or
the Rules and Regulations promulgated by the Board or the Clerk, nor shall
anything herein set forth prevent the Board from bringing to the attention of
the proper authority any alleged violation coming to its attention which may be
subject to other penalties.
(Ord. 17-1993; Am. Ord. 2019-003; Am. Ord. 2022-042)
Section 12. AMENDMENTS.
   This Election Code may be amended without requiring compliance with Article
VI of this Charter by ordinance adopted by a majority plus two of the entire
membership of the Council voting in favor of such amendment or amendments, and
said ordinance being otherwise governed by Article XI of this Charter.
(Ord. 17-1993; Am. Ord. 2019-003; Am. Ord. 2022-042)
ARTICLE XIV. SEVERABILITY
Section 1. NO IMPAIRMENT FROM PARTIAL INVALIDITY.
   The provisions of this Charter are severable, and if any provision, section,
clause, sentence, or part thereof is held to be illegal, invalid,
unconstitutional, or inapplicable, to any person, persons, circumstances,
situation, or otherwise, the illegality, invalidity, unconstitutionality or
inapplicability shall not affect or impair any of the remaining sentences,
clauses, sections, articles, or parts of this Charter or their applicability to
other persons, circumstances or situations.
(Adopted at Special Election, February 26, 1974 as part of Proposition #3.)
ARTICLE XV. COMPETITIVE BIDDING
FOR ELECTRICAL FRANCHISES
   The City of Albuquerque shall have no power to grant or extend any
franchises, licenses or other rights to provide electricity to the public or to
wholesalers unless the franchise, license or right has been awarded by
competitive bid to the lowest cost suppliers. The total term of any franchise,
license or right shall not exceed 25 years. The city shall have the power and
the mandatory duty to implement this Article through legislation. Such
legislation shall maximize actual competition in the selection process, in fact
as well as form. This Article shall not prohibit the grant of multiple
franchises, licenses or rights for all or part of the city.
(Article XV adopted at Runoff Election, November 1, 1989.)
ARTICLE XVI. OPEN AND ETHICAL ELECTIONS CODE
Section 1. CITATION.
   Sections 1 through 21 of this article may be cited as the "Open and Ethical
Elections Code".
(Am. Ord. 2022-042)
Section 2. LEGISLATIVE INTENT.
   The intent of the Open and Ethical Elections Code is to:
   (A)   Avoid both actual undue influence of large campaign donors and the
appearance of undue influence in Council and Mayoral elections and decision-
making;
   (B)   Diminish the public perception of corruption and strengthen public
confidence in the governmental and election process;
   (C)   Provide well-qualified candidates with adequate funding to mount
campaigns to encourage competitive Council and Mayoral elections so that the
City’s residents have more choices about the leadership and direction of the
City;
   (D)   Increase the accountability of elected officials to their constituents
who elect them, as opposed to the contributors who fund their campaigns; and
   (E)   Insure that the City’s Council and Mayoral election process is fair,
responsible and ethical.
(Am. Ord. 2022-042)
Section 3. DEFINITIONS.
   As used in the Open and Ethical Elections Code:
   (A)   APPLICANT CANDIDATE. A candidate, but not a write-in candidate,
running for a Covered Office and who is seeking to be a Participating
Candidate.
   (B)   APPLICABLE SPENDING LIMIT. The total amount a candidate may spend on a
campaign as determined by the City Clerk's Office. For a City Councilor, this
amount is based on the number of registered voters in the district the
candidate is running in. For the Mayor, this amount is determined by the number
of registered voters in the City of Albuquerque. For a participating candidate,
the applicable spending limit is the amount set for distribution from the Fund.
Any seed money collected by an applicant candidate will be subtracted from the
distribution from the Fund.
   (C)   CLERK. The City Clerk.
   (D)   CONTESTED ELECTION. A regular municipal election in which there is
more than one candidate for a City Council or Mayor position.
   (E)   COORDINATED EXPENDITURE. Any expenditure made with the cooperation,
consultation or coordination with, or at the request or suggestion of, a
candidate, a candidate's authorized committee or an agent thereof. Any
expenditure that is coordinated within the meaning of this paragraph is an In-
Kind Contribution to the candidate or candidate's committee with whom or with
which it was coordinated and the candidate must report the Coordinated
Expenditure as an In-Kind Contribution.
   (F)   COVERED OFFICE. City Council or Mayor.
   (G)   ELECTIONEERING COMMUNICATION. Any communication broadcasted by
television or radio, printed in a newspaper or on a billboard, directly mailed
or delivered by hand to personal residences or otherwise distributed that:
      (1)   unambiguously refers to any candidate; and
      (2)   is broadcasted, printed, mailed, delivered or distributed within
thirty days before a regular municipal election; and
      (3)   is broadcasted to, printed in a newspaper distributed to, mailed
to, delivered by hand to or otherwise distributed to an audience that includes
members of the electorate for a Covered Office.
      (4)   ELECTIONEERING COMMUNICATION does not include:
         (a)   any news articles, editorial endorsements, opinion or
commentary, writings or letters to the editor printed in a newspaper, magazine
or other periodical not owned or controlled by a candidate or political party;
         (b)   any editorial endorsements or opinions aired by a broadcast
facility not owned or controlled by a candidate or political party;
         (c)   any communication by Persons made in the regular course and
scope of their business or any communication made by a membership organization
solely to members of such organization and their families; or
         (d)   paid for by a candidate or candidate’s campaign committee.
   (H)   EXPENDITURE. The payment or furnishing of money or anything of value
or the incurring or repayment of indebtedness or obligation, by or on behalf of
any Person, candidate or political committee in consideration for any services,
supplies, equipment or other thing of value performed or furnished for any
reason, including support of or opposition to a candidate, political committee
or measure for or for reducing the debt of a Participating Candidate for
nomination or election to a Covered Office.
   (I)   EXPLORATORY PERIOD.
      (1)   For Mayoral Applicant Candidates, the exploratory period begins at
246 days before the election, and ends 200 days before the election; and
      (2)   For Council Applicant Candidates, the exploratory period begins 191
days before the election, and ends 156 days before the election.
   (J)   EXPRESS ADVOCACY. An Expenditure made by a Person or group, other than
a candidate or a candidate’s committee, that advocates the election or defeat
of a candidate, including all costs of designing, producing or disseminating a
communication that contains phrases such as “vote for”, “re-elect”, “support”,
“cast your ballot for”, “[name of candidate] for [name of office]”, “[name of
candidate] in [year]”, “vote against”, “defeat”, “reject” or similar phrases.
   (K)   FUND. The Open and Ethical Elections Fund.
   (L)   IMMEDIATE FAMILY. The candidate's spouse, parent, grandparent, child,
grandchild, sister, half-sister, brother, half-brother, stepparent, step-
grandparent, stepchild, step-grandchild, stepsister, stepbrother, mother-in-
law, father-in-law, brother-in-law, sister-in-law, son-in-law, daughter-in-law,
guardian, former guardian, domestic partner, the Immediate Family of the
candidate's spouse or domestic partner.
   (M)   INDEPENDENT EXPENDITURE. Any funds spent on Express Advocacy or
Electioneering Communications that are not coordinated with any candidate’s
campaign. The Clerk shall adopt regulations to determine whether funds spent on
Express Advocacy or Electioneering Communications are coordinated Expenditures.
Coordinated Expenditures on Express Advocacy or Electioneering Communications
are treated as contributions.
   (N)   IN-KIND CONTRIBUTION. A good or service, other than money, having
monetary value not to exceed more than $2,500.00, but not including an
individual who volunteers his own personal service. Professional services,
including legal services, accounting services, consulting services and similar
services provided directly from the professional to the Applicant Candidate or
Participating Candidate are permitted, provided no single In-Kind Contributor
exceeds the $2,500.00 limitation herein and provided the total value of all In-
Kind Contributions does not exceed 10% of the applicable spending limit per
regular or run-off election. Notwithstanding the foregoing, an Applicant
Candidate or Participating Candidate may accept unlimited In-Kind Contributions
in the following areas: 1) legal services provided directly from attorneys for
the purpose of providing legal advice to comply with election laws and public
financing laws. 2) professional services provided directly from the
professional, including attorneys, experts and consultants, for the sole
purpose of participating in a proceeding under the Code of Ethics, the Election
Code, the Open and Ethical Elections Code, or the rules and regulations of the
Board of Ethics and/or City Clerk, and 3) office space. Such In-Kind
Contributions shall be reported as required by Article XIII, Section 4.
   (O)   NONPARTICIPATING CANDIDATE. A candidate running for a Covered Office
who does not choose to participate in the Open and Ethical Elections Code or a
candidate running for a Covered Office who declares an intent to participate in
the Open and Ethical Elections Code, but who fails to become a Participating
Candidate.
   (P)   OPPOSING FUNDS. Funds spent opposing a Participating Candidate. The
amount of Opposing Funds is calculated by determining the opponent of the
Participating Candidate who has the highest total of Expenditures and
supportive Independent Expenditures; the amount of Opposing Funds is calculated
by totaling the Expenditures made by that opponent, the amount spent on
Independent Expenditures in support of that opponent and the amount spent on
Independent Expenditures in opposition to the Participating Candidate. No
Independent Expenditure may be counted as both opposing a Participating
Candidate and in support of that candidate’s opponent.
   (Q)   PARTICIPATING CANDIDATE. A candidate running for a Covered Office who
chooses to obtain financing pursuant to the Open and Ethical Elections Code and
who is certified to participate as an Open and Ethical Elections Code
Candidate.
   (R)   PERSON.
      (1)   a City resident;
      (2)   a labor organization, club, association or organization who have
members who are City residents; or
      (3)   a corporation, limited liability company, firm, partnership, joint
stock company or other entity conducting business in the City.
   (S)   QUALIFYING CONTRIBUTION. A non-refundable donation of $5.00 in the
form of cash, check, debit card, credit card or money order payable to the Fund
in support of an Applicant Candidate that:
      (1)   for the Mayoral race is made by a registered City voter and for a
Council race is made by a registered City voter residing in the district in
which the Applicant Candidate desires to represent;
      (2)   is made during the designated Qualifying Period and obtained
through efforts made with the knowledge and approval of the Applicant
Candidate;
      (3)   is acknowledged by a receipt that identifies the contributor's
name; and
      (4)   identifies which Applicant Candidate the City resident supports.
   (T)   QUALIFYING PERIOD.
      (1)   For Mayoral Applicant Candidates the Qualifying Period begins 8:00
a.m. 199 days before the election, and ends 5:00 p.m. 136 days before the
election; and
      (2)   For Council Applicant Candidates, the Qualifying Period begins 8:00
a.m. 155 days before the election, and ends 5:00 p.m. 120 days before the
election.
   (U)   REGULAR LOCAL ELECTION. An election that is held the first Tuesday
after the first Monday in November in odd numbered years.
   (V)   SEED MONEY. A contribution in support of an Applicant Candidate of no
more than $250.00 per Person, except for the Applicant Candidate who can
contribute up to $2,500.00, raised for the primary purpose of enabling
Applicant Candidates to collect Qualifying Contributions and petition
signatures the aggregate amount of which may not exceed 20% of the applicable
spending limit. Seed Money may only be accepted during the Exploratory Period
and the Qualifying Period. Seed Money contributed by the candidate to their own
campaign may be donated prior to the exploratory period, or during the
exploratory or qualifying period.
   (W)   ELECTION CYCLE. The period beginning on the day after the regular or
run-off election for any municipal office and ending on the day of the next
regular election for that office.
   (X)   CANDIDATE. "Candidate" has the same definition that is provided in
Article XIII, Section 2 of the Election Code, with the addition that
"Candidate" also includes any individual who has filed a declaration of intent
to seek public financing.
(Amended at Regular Municipal Election, November 5, 2019.) (Amended by
Ordinance No. 2019-019; Am. Ord. 2020-028; Am. Ord. 2022-042)
Section 4. TERMS OF PARTICIPATION - DECLARATION OF INTENT.
   (A)   An Applicant Candidate, choosing to obtain financing pursuant to the
Open and Ethical Elections Code, shall file a declaration of intent with the
Clerk to participate as an Applicant Candidate for a Covered Office. The
declaration of intent shall be filed with the Clerk prior to or during the
Qualifying Period according to forms and procedures developed by the Clerk.
   (B)   An Applicant Candidate shall submit a declaration of intent prior to
collecting any Qualifying Contributions and make explicit in the declaration of
intent that the Applicant Candidate has complied with and will continue to
comply with the Open and Ethical Code’s contribution and Expenditure limits and
all other requirements set forth in the Open and Ethical Elections Code.
   (C)   The declaration of intent shall specify that the Applicant Candidate
agrees that any money received from the Fund shall not be used to retire a
prior campaign debt from a previous election period.
   The declaration of intent shall specify that the Applicant Candidate has
not, within one year prior to the declaration, raised or expended any monies in
excess of the pre- and post-Exploratory Period contribution limitations with
the intent or effect of campaigning for any elected office. Any Applicant
Candidate who has, within one year before filing the declaration, raised or
expended any monies in excess of the pre- and post- Exploratory Period
contribution limitations with the purpose or effect of campaigning for elected
office, shall be disqualified from receiving funds under this Code.
(Amended at Regular Municipal Election, November 5, 2019.) (Am. Ord. 2022-042)
Section 5. QUALIFYING CONTRIBUTIONS.
   (A)   An Applicant Candidate for Mayor shall obtain Qualifying Contributions
from a minimum of 1% of registered City voters.
   (B)   An Applicant Candidate for Council shall obtain Qualifying
Contributions from a minimum of 1% of the City voters registered in the
district that the Applicant Candidate desires to represent.
   (C)   No payment, gift or anything of value shall be given in exchange for a
Qualifying Contribution.
   (D)   Audit.
      (1)   The Office of Internal Audit shall conduct audits on a percentage
of qualifying contributions submitted to the City Clerk's Office throughout the
qualifying period.
      (2)   Prior to the start of the exploratory period, the City Auditor
shall develop an audit plan for the conduct of the audit for the election
cycle. The City Auditor shall confer with the City Clerk's Office in regards to
resources that may be required of that office.
      (3)   At the completion of every audit, written reports shall be
submitted to the Board and the City Clerk's Office and shall be made available
for public inspection.
(Am. Ord. 2022-042)
Section 6. SEED MONEY AND IN-KIND CONTRIBUTIONS.
   (A)   An Applicant Candidate may accept Seed Money not to exceed $250.00 per
Person.
   (B)   An Applicant Candidate may contribute up to $2,500.00 from the
Applicant Candidate’s personal funds for Seed Money.
   (C)   Seed Money shall be deducted from the revenues distributed to the
Participating Candidate from the Fund.
   (D)   The aggregate amount of Seed Money received and spent by an Applicant
Candidate shall not exceed an amount equal to 20% of the distribution from the
Fund, or the Applicable Spending Limit to a Participating Candidate.
   (E)   An Applicant Candidate or Participating Candidate may accept In-Kind
Contributions from the beginning of the Exploratory Period up to the regular
municipal election, or, in the event that a Participating Candidate is in a
run-off, up to the run-off election. The value of any In-Kind Contribution
shall not count against the applicable limit on Seed Money contributions. The
aggregate amount of In-Kind Contributions received by an Applicant Candidate
shall not exceed an amount equal to 10% of the applicable spending limit.
   (F)   Volunteer work-hours are non-reportable and shall not count as In-Kind
Contributions or against the applicable limit on Seed Money. An individual may
volunteer personal services to an Applicant Candidate as long as the volunteer
is not compensated. If an individual volunteers during working hours, paid by a
third-party employer or the Applicant Candidate, then that employer makes an
In-Kind Contribution to the Applicant Candidate.
   (G)   If a Participating Candidate is defeated or is elected, any unspent
Seed Money shall be forfeited to the Fund.
   (H)   Mayoral Applicant Candidates may accept Seed Money from 246 days
before the election through 136 days before the election. Council Candidates
may accept Seed Money from 191 days before the election through 120 days before
the election.
      (1)   In the event that a Candidate's certification for public financing
or qualification by the County Clerk as a Candidate has been challenged, the
Candidate may continue to accept seed money until the City Clerk provides the
Candidate with notice that the certification or qualification by the County
Clerk as a Candidate has been upheld.
(Amended at Regular Municipal Election, November 5, 2019.) (Amended by
Ordinance No. 2019-019; Am. Ord. 2020-019; Am. Ord. 2020-028; Am. Ord. 2022-
042; Am. Ord._2024-036)
Section 7. CERTIFICATION OF PARTICIPATION.
   (A)   Within twenty days of a final submittal of Qualifying Contributions by
an Applicant Candidate, the Clerk shall determine whether the Applicant
Candidate has:
      (1)   signed and filed a declaration of intent to obtain fund revenue;
      (2)   submitted the appropriate number of Qualifying Contributions;
      (3)   qualified as a candidate pursuant to other applicable City and
State election law;
      (4)   complied with Seed Money contribution and Expenditure restrictions;
      (5)   otherwise met the requirements for obtaining financing pursuant to
the Open and Ethical Elections Code;
      (6)   otherwise met any additional criteria for certification set forth
in rules by the Clerk;
      (7)   been qualified as a Candidate by the County Clerk; and
      (8)   there are not pending challenges to the County Clerk's
qualification of the Candidate.
   (B)   The Clerk shall certify Applicant Candidates running for Mayor and
Council, complying with the requirements of this section, as Participating
Candidates twenty days after the last day of the Qualifying Period.
   (C)   A Participating Candidate shall comply with all requirements of the
Open and Ethical Elections Code and applicable City and state election law
after certification as a Participating Candidate and throughout the election
cycle.
(Amended by Ordinance No. 2019-019; Am. Ord. 2022-042)
Section 8. GUIDELINES AND RESTRICTIONS FOR CONTRIBUTIONS TO AND EXPENDITURES OF
PARTICIPATING CANDIDATES.
   (A)   All money distributed to a Participating Candidate shall be used for
that Participating Candidate's campaign-related purposes in the election year
in which the money was distributed.
   (B)   A Participating Candidate shall limit total campaign Expenditures and
debts to the amount of money distributed to that Participating Candidate from
the Fund. A Participating Candidate shall not accept contributions or loans
from any other source.
   (C)   Within two weeks after the regular municipal election, a Participating
Candidate shall return to the Clerk for direct deposit into the Fund any amount
that is unspent or unencumbered by the date of the regular local election.
   (D)   A Participating Candidate shall not use revenues from the Fund for
personal use including:
      (1)   salary or payment to an individual unless that individual is
providing bona fide services to the campaign and is compensated at fair market
value;
      (2)   admission to a sporting event, concert, theater or other form of
entertainment unless part of a specific campaign activity;
      (3)   dues, fees, parking or gratuities at a country club, health club or
other recreational facility unless the costs are part of a specific fundraising
event;
      (4)   mortgage, rent or household utility payments for any part of a
personal residence;
      (5)   purchases of household food items or supplies; or
      (6)   purchase of clothing, other than items of de minimus value used in
the campaign.
   (E)   A Participating Candidate shall not use revenues distributed from the
Fund to:
      (1)   contribute to any other candidate, political committee or measure;
      (2)   support or oppose any candidate, political committee or measure not
in their race;
      (3)   use to repay any loans, debts or penalties;
      (4)   use to pay for consulting services to an individual unless the
individual is providing bona fide services to the campaign and is compensated
at fair market value;
      (5)   use for out-of- state travel;
      (6)   the purchase of "alcoholic beverages" as that term is defined at §
13-2-2 ROA 1994; or
      (7)   Any payment to a registered voter in exchange for that voter
agreeing to vote in an election.
   (F)   Additional guidance and clarification regarding permissible and
prohibited uses of the distribution, only as those are identified and provided
for in the City Charter and Code, may be provided in the City Clerk's rules and
regulations.
(Amended at Regular Municipal Election, November 5, 2019.) (Am. Ord. 2022-042)
Section 9. CANDIDATE REPORTING REQUIREMENTS.
   Applicant Candidates shall file financial disclosures in accordance with
Article XIII, Section 4 of this Charter.
(Am. Ord. 2022-042)
Section 10. FUND CREATION - FUND USE.
   (A)   There is created in the City Treasury the "Open and Ethical Elections
Fund" solely for the purposes of:
      (1)   financing the election campaigns of Participating Candidates for
Covered Offices;
      (2)   paying administrative and enforcement costs of the Open and Ethical
Elections Code; and
      (3)   carrying out all other specified provisions of the Open and Ethical
Elections Code.
   (B)   The City Treasurer shall invest the Fund as other City funds are
invested and pursuant to Section 4-1-10 ROA 1994, and all income derived from
the Fund shall be credited directly to the Fund. Within 30 days after the end
of each fiscal year, the City Treasurer shall furnish the Mayor and Council a
report of all investment activity of the past year in connection with the
administration of the Fund. Remaining balances at the end of a fiscal year
shall remain in the Fund and shall not revert to the general Fund.
   (C)   Money received from the following sources shall be deposited directly
into the Fund:
      (1)   Qualifying Contributions that have been submitted to the Clerk;
      (2)   any recurring balance of unspent Fund money distributed to a
Participating Candidate who does not remain a Participating Candidate through
the municipal election period for which the money was distributed;
      (3)   money that remains unspent or unencumbered by a Participating
Candidate following the date of the regular municipal election;
      (4)   Seed Money that exceeds 10% of the applicable spending limit; and
      (5)   additional money appropriated by the Council based on
recommendations received by the Clerk and the City Attorney.
   (D)   One-tenth of 1% of the approved General Fund (Fund 110) appropriation
shall be reserved in the Fund to fund Participating Candidates for the 2007
regular municipal election and subsequent regular municipal elections as
provided in the Open and Ethical Elections Code.
   (E)   The Fund shall also be funded by voluntary contributions from members
of the public. Money in the Fund is appropriated to the Clerk to carry out the
purposes of the Open and Ethical Elections Code.
(Am. Ord. 2022-042)
Section 11. DETERMINATION OF FUND AMOUNT.
   (A)   Once the Open and Ethical Elections Code is enacted, the Clerk shall
prepare and provide to the Mayor and Council an annual report documenting,
evaluating and making recommendations relating to the administration,
implementation and enforcement of the Open and Ethical Elections Code.
   (B)   In the report, the Clerk shall set out the revenues received to date,
the expected costs to the Fund for the next election cycle and the amount of
any annual appropriation from the Council that will be required to meet this
need.
(Am. Ord. 2022-042)
Section 12. TIMING AND AMOUNT OF FUND DISTRIBUTION.
   (A)   The Clerk shall distribute money from the Fund to Participating
Candidates. The Clerk shall distribute revenue within three business days of
certification. In the event that a Candidate's certification for public
financing or qualification by the County Clerk as a Candidate has been
challenged, the Clerk shall distribute funds to the Participating Candidate
within three business days of receiving notice that the certification and/or
qualification by the County Clerk as a Candidate has been upheld.
   (B)   The Clerk shall distribute $2.00 per registered City voter to Mayoral
Participating Candidates and $1.25 per registered City voter residing in the
district in which the Participating Council Candidate desires to represent.
Notwithstanding the foregoing, in Council districts containing fewer than
40,000 registered voters, the Clerk shall distribute $40,000 to each
Participating Council Candidate, in lieu of $1.25 per registered City voter
residing in the district.
      (1)   Beginning January 15, 2027, and every two years thereafter, the
Clerk shall adjust the distribution amount per registered City voter based on
the change in the Consumer Price Index for All Urban Consumers (CPI-U) as
published by the United States Bureau of Labor Statistics. The adjustment shall
reflect the percentage change in the CPI-U from January 1, 2024, to December 31
of the year preceding the adjustment.
   (C)   The amount of revenue to be distributed to a Participating Candidate
shall be reduced by an amount equal to the aggregate amount of Seed Money
contributions received by the Participating Candidate during the Exploratory
and Qualifying Periods.
   (D)   A Participating Candidate may withdraw as a Participating Candidate by
filing a written statement of withdrawal with the Clerk.
   (E)   If the withdrawn Participating Candidate continues to participate in
the election as a Non-Participating Candidate then:
      (1)   at the time the statement of withdrawal is filed, the candidate
shall deliver to the Clerk an amount of money equal to all monies distributed
to the candidate from the Fund after the candidate was certified as a
Participating Candidate plus interest of the total amount of monies received at
a rate of 12% per annum.
   (F)   If a Participating Candidate is not certified as a candidate, in
accordance with applicable state and other City law, then the candidate shall
deliver to the Clerk an amount of money equal to all monies distributed to the
candidate from the Fund after the candidate was certified as a Participating
Candidate plus interest of the total amount of monies received at a rate of 12%
per annum.
   (G)   If a Participating Candidate entirely withdraws from a race for a
Covered Office then he shall immediately return any amount to the Fund that is
unspent or unencumbered at the time he ceases to be a Participating Candidate
before a regular municipal election.
   (H)   If a Participating Candidate becomes unopposed following the
distribution of funds, the Participating Candidate shall be promptly given
notice by the City Clerk and shall be given three (3) business days after being
notified to return any unspent or unencumbered funds. Following the return of
funds, the Participating Candidate becomes a privately financed candidate and
is no longer subject to the contribution and expenditure requirements of the
Open and Ethical Election Code.
(Amended at Regular Municipal Election, November 5, 2019.) (Amended by
Ordinance No. 2019-019; Am. Ord. 2022-042; Am. Ord._2024-036)
Section 13. ADJUSTMENTS TO FUND DISTRIBUTION.
   (A)   Once the certification of participation for Participating Candidates
for a regular local election has been completed, the Clerk shall calculate the
total amount of money to be distributed in the election cycle, based on the
number of Participating Candidates and the allocations specified in Section 12
of the Open and Ethical Elections Code and shall then distribute the Fund
revenue within three business days.
   (B)    If the allocation specified in Subsection A of this section is
greater than the total amount available for distribution, then the amounts to
be distributed to individual Participating Candidates shall each be reduced by
the same percentage as the reduction by which the total amount needed has been
reduced relative to the total amount available.
(Am. Ord. 2022-042)
Section 14. RUN-OFF ELECTIONS.
   (A)   On the Friday after a regular local election when the election results
are certified, the Clerk shall issue Fund revenue to each Participating
Candidate involved in a runoff election in the following amounts:
      (1)   for Mayoral candidates$1.00 per registered City voter; and
      (2)   for Council candidates$.50 per registered City voter residing in a
Council district.
   (B)   Notwithstanding the foregoing, in Council districts containing fewer
than 40,000 registered voters, the Clerk shall distribute$20,000 to each
Participating Council Candidate, in lieu of$.50 per registered City voter
residing in the district.
(Amended at Regular Municipal Election, November 5, 2019.) (Am. Ord. 2022-042)
Section 15. COMMUNICATION OF PARTICIPATION STATUS TO VOTERS.
   Once a candidate is certified as a Participating Candidate, the Clerk shall
publish the Participating Candidate's Certification on the City Clerk's website
along with the terms and conditions of the Open and Ethical Election Code the
Candidate has agreed to abide by.
(Am. Ord. 2020-019; Am. Ord. 2022-042)
Section 16. ADJUSTMENTS FOR INFLATION AND POPULATION GROWTH.
   The City Attorney and the Clerk shall review the dollar amounts specified in
the Open and Ethical Elections Code periodically. The City Attorney and Clerk
shall recommend any necessary adjustments to reflect inflation or population
change to the Council and Mayor to consider amendments to the Code.
(Am. Ord. 2020-019; Am. Ord. 2022-042)
Section 17. ADMINISTRATION - CLERK -- DUTIES.
   (A)   The Clerk with the assistance of the City Attorney shall adopt rules
to insure effective administration of the Open and Ethical Elections Code.
   (B)   The rules shall include procedures for:
      (1)   qualifications, certification and disbursement of revenues and
return of unspent Fund revenues;
      (2)   obtaining Qualifying Contributions;
      (3)   certification of a candidate’s participation;
      (4)   collection of revenues; and
      (5)   return of Fund disbursements and other money to the Fund.
   (C)   The Clerk shall provide the public with educational materials relating
to the provisions of the Open and Ethical Elections Code.
(Am. Ord. 2020-019; Am. Ord. 2022-042)
Section 18. APPEALS.
   The procedure for challenging a decision of the Clerk to grant, deny, or
revoke a Candidate's certification as a Participating Candidate is as follows:
   (A)   A Person aggrieved by the Clerk's decision may appeal to the Clerk
within three days of the decision. The appeal shall be in writing and shall set
forth the reasons for appeal;
   (B)   Within five days after an appeal is properly made, and after due
notice is given to the parties in dispute, the City Hearing Officer shall hold
a hearing whereby:
      (1)   the appellant has the burden of providing evidence to demonstrate
that the Clerk's decision was improper; and
      (2)   the City Hearing Officer shall rule on the appeal within three days
after the completion of the hearing;
   (C)   the parties in dispute may appeal the decision of the City Hearing
Officer to the Board of Ethics and then to district court as provided by law;
and
   (D)   Participating Candidates whose certification of participation is
revoked on appeal may be required to return to the Clerk up to all money
distributed from the Fund. If the City Hearing Officer or court finds that an
appeal was made frivolously or to cause delay or hardship, the City Hearing
Officer or court may sanction the moving party by requiring the party to pay
the attorney's fees and administrative and/or court costs of the opposing
parties.
   (E)   For the purposes of this section, “parties in dispute” includes the
City.
(Amended by Ordinance No. 2019-019; Am. Ord. 2020-019; Am. Ord. 2022-042)
Section 19. PENALTIES - ENFORCEMENT.
    The Clerk and Board of Ethics and Campaign Practices shall enforce the Open
and Ethical Elections Code pursuant to Articles
XII and
XIII of the City Charter and pursuant to rules promulgated by the Clerk.
(Amended at Regular Municipal Election, October 6, 2009. Amended at Regular
Municipal Election, November 5, 2019.)
(Article XVI adopted at Regular Municipal Election, October 4, 2005) (Am. Ord.
2020-019; Am. Ord. 2022-042)
Section 20. AMENDMENTS.
   The Open and Ethical Elections Code may be amended without requiring
compliance with
Article VI of this Charter by ordinance adopted by a majority plus two of the
entire membership of the Council voting in favor of such amendment or
amendments, and said ordinance being otherwise governed by
Article XI of this Charter.
(Section 22 adopted at Regular Municipal Election, November 5, 2019) (Am. Ord.
2020-019; Am. Ord. 2022-042)
ARTICLE XVII. [PLANNING]
Section 1.
   The Council is the city's ultimate planning and zoning authority, including
the adoption and interpretation of the Comprehensive Plan and the Capital
Improvement Plan. The Council is also the city's ultimate authority with
respect to interpretation of adopted plans, ordinances, and individual cases.
Section 2.
   The Mayor or his designee shall formulate and submit to the Council the
Capital Improvement Plans and shall oversee the implementation, enforcement,
and administration of land use plans.
(Article XVII adopted at Regular Municipal Election, October 6, 2009.)
ARTICLE XVIII. CITIZENS' INDEPENDENT SALARY COMMISSION
   A Citizens' Independent Salary Commission is created with the authority to
set the salaries of the Mayor and Councillors. The Commission has the authority
to evaluate the annual salaries and determine whether they should be increased
or decreased. The Commission has authority to consider all factors relevant to
the salaries.
   (a)   The Commission shall consist of five members selected by the
Accountability in Government Committee. All members shall be residents of the
City of Albuquerque and shall not be an officer, official or employee of the
city or an immediate family member of the same. The term of each member shall
be for four years, unless a member is selected to fill a vacancy, and no member
shall be appointed to more than two terms. The initial terms of members of the
newly established Commission shall be staggered; the initial term for two
members shall be two years and the initial term of three members shall be four
years.
   (b)   At least one year prior to each regular municipal election, the
Commission shall review the salaries paid by the city to the Mayor and
Councillors. If after such review the Commission determines that the salary
should be increased or decreased, the Commission shall file a written salary
schedule with the City Clerk indicating the proposed salary.
   (c)   Changes to the salaries shall not be effective for the incumbent Mayor
and Councillors, but shall be effective at the beginning of the next term.
   (d)   Any change to salaries recommended by the Commission shall be subject
to the referendum procedures as provided for in Article III, Section 2 of this
Charter.
   (e)   All meetings of the Commission shall be open to the public and subject
to the Open Meetings Act, Sections 10-15-1 et seq. NMSA 1978.
(Article XVIII adopted at Regular Municipal Election, October 6, 2009.)
ARTICLE XIX. DETERMINATION OF SEPARATION OF POWERS ISSUES UNDER THE CHARTER.
   A procedure for resolving disputes between the executive and legislative
branches of government with respect to their respective duties and obligations
under the City Charter shall be established by ordinance adopted by the Council
after consultation with the Mayor. The ordinance shall establish a conference
committee for the determination of the role of the City Council and the Mayor
under the Charter. The committee shall be limited to making determinations on
issues raised by either the Mayor or the City Council. The City Attorney shall
not participate as either an advocate before or advisor to the committee. The
committee shall be comprised of three members. The Mayor shall appoint one
member and the Council shall appoint one member 30 days prior to an appointee’s
term expiring, or immediately upon the City Clerk being notified that a person
has resigned prior to the regular expiration of their term, the City Clerk
shall notify the appointing body. If either the Mayor or City Council fails to
name a replacement Committee member within 60 days of a vacancy, the other body
shall make the appointment. The two members so appointed shall select the third
member to serve as the chairperson of the committee. The appointment of a
committee member by one appointing authority shall not be approved or
disapproved by the other appointing authority.
(Article XIX adopted at Regular Municipal Election, October 6, 2009. Amended at
Regular Municipal Election, November 5, 2024.)
APPENDIX A: NINE COUNCIL DISTRICTS IDENTIFIED
ACCORDING TO BERNALILLO COUNTY PRECINCTS
SEPTEMBER 2022
District 1 20    21  22  23  24  25   26  27  28  29
          30    38  39  55  57  70   83  100 110 111
          112   113 114 119 120 134  136 156 157 158
          159   160 167 168 169 178  189 204 206 207
          208   209 210 249 263 265  394 399 599 607
          609   614 615 616 617 622  633 639 648 649
          650   653 687                     
District 2 4     11  12  13  14  34   35  36  37  40
          94    95  103 104 105 106  108 109 121 122
          123   124 125 126 131 132  133 135 150 151
          152   153 154 155 161 162  163 164 165 166
          180   181 182 183 184 185  186 187 188 191
          192   193 194 195 196 197  199 211 212 221
          224   225 226 233 257 266  276 277 279 345
          613   618 634 640 646               
District 3 32    33  41  42  43  44   45  46  47  48
          49    50  51  52  53  54   56  58  59  60
          61    62  63  65  67  72   73  76  90  91
          130   137 138 140 141 142  143 144 145 146
          147   148 149 190 198 234  236 237 239 247
          267   268 269 340 367 600  604 619 620 621
          629   638 655                     
District 4 10    15  16  18  86  218  238 339 359 369
          370   375 398 406 407 408  409 410 418 419
          420   421 422 423 424 425  426 427 438 439
          440   448 455 456 457 458  459 460 467 468
          470   479 481 485 486 487  488 489 490 499
          500   510 581 584 589 590  592 593 594 601
          651   661 662 664 665 666  668 669 673 674
          682   683 685                     
District 5 1     2   3   19  68  69   78  79  80  81
          82    84  85  87  89  115  116 117 118 127
          128   129 170 171 172 173  174 175 176 177
          179   200 201 202 203 205  217 222 227 228
          229   230 231 232 248 261  264 605 606 610
          611   612 623 624 625 626  627 628 631 632
          635   636 637 641 642 643  644 645 647 652
          686                             
District 6 96    101 102 107 213 214  215 216 223 235
          241   242 243 244 245 246  251 252 253 254
          255   256 258 262 271 272  273 274 275 278
          280   281 282 283 284 285  286 287 311 312
          318   321 322 323 326 327  336 337 351 352
          353   358 378 379 381 382  383 384 477 478
          591   671                        
District 7 313   314 315 316 317 338  341 342 343 344
          346   347 354 355 356 357  371 372 373 374
          377   385 386 387 400 401  402 403 404 405
          411   412 413 414 415 416  417 431 432 433
          434   435 436 437 441 442  443 444 445 446
          461   462 463 464 465 466  471 472 473 474
          475   476 491 492 493 494  495 496 497 498
          502   508 509 663 670               
District 8 360   361 362 364 365 366  368 376 380 388
          389   390 395 396 397 428  429 430 449 450
          451   452 453 454 480 482  483 484 503 504
          505   506 507 511 512 513  514 515 516 517
          518   519 520 521 522 523  524 525 526 527
          528   529 530 537 538 561  562 563 564 565
          566 * 568 583 585 586 587  588 598 602 603
          672   675 676 677 678 679            
* Northern part within the city limits
District 9 289   290 291 292 293 294  295 296 297 298
          299   300 301 302 303 304  305 306 307 308
          309   310 319 320 324 325  328 329 330 331
          332   333 334 335 348 349  350 393 531 532
          533   534 535 536 540 542  543 544 545 546
          547   548 549 550 554 566* 656 657 658 659
          660   680                        
* Southern part within the city limits
 
(Am. Ord. 35-1981; Am. Ord. 41-1981; Am. Ord. 28-1991; Am. Ord. 31-1991; Am.
Ord. 21-1993; Am Ord. 26-2001; Am. Ord. 2012-10; Am. Ord. O-2022-033)
HISTORICAL POSTSCRIPT
   The City of Albuquerque as a community was established in 1706 with the
founding of Old Town by the Spanish. In 1885, while New Mexico was still a
territory of the United States, Albuquerque was chartered as a Town, and in
1891 Albuquerque was organized under Territorial laws as a city.
   The Charter adopted pursuant to State Law, under which the City of
Albuquerque government now operates, was adopted in 1917. It changed the system
of government from a Mayor-Council (ward) system to a Commission-Manager
system. The Charter was amended four times (July 22, 1919, October 7, 1919,
February 15, 1966, and June 29, 1971) prior to the city's government being
changed to the Mayor-Council form in 1974.
   The July 22, 1919 amendment increased the number of City Commissioners from
three to five and provided for the election of the added members within 60 days
[Note 1]. They were in fact chosen October 7, 1919, and their successors have
been selected every four years thereafter
[Note 2]. Also at the October 7, 1919 election, two additional amendments were
adopted, one concerning the method of filling vacancies on the City Commission
created by a recall election and the other eliminating the provision concerning
compensation of $5 per week for each member of the City Commission.
   At the Special Election, February 15, 1966, eight amendments, adding some
new sections and repealing some other sections, were adopted as indicated in
the parenthetical statements following the appropriate sections. These
amendments were submitted to the electors of the City of Albuquerque upon
recommendations made by a City Charter Study Committee appointed by the City
Commission on July 6, 1965. Nine proposals had been made but one recommendation
was rejected by the electors. The rejected proposal would have increased the
number of City Commissioners from five to seven and changed the general
election date to the first Tuesday of March in even-numbered years
[Note 3].
   On November 3, 1970, the State adopted a new constitutional provision
popularly called the Home Rule Amendment to the New Mexico State Constitution,
compiled as Article X, Section 6. Subsequently, on December 7, 1970, the City
Commission appointed a Charter Study Committee which made its final report on
May 10, 1971. Its recommendations, consisting of five propositions, were
submitted to the electors on June 29, 1971; of these propositions, three were
adopted. The preamble and Article I providing for Home Rule were amended, a new
provision (Article VIII) was adopted concerning human rights, and a new
provision (Article IX) was added concerning the preservation of environment
[Note 4].
   Of the two proposed amendments which were not adopted, Proposition #2 would
have changed the form of city government to a Mayor-Council type, would have
established councilmanic districts, provided for the official salaries and
would have made other changes. Proposition #5 would have permitted the City
Council to establish subordinate governmental districts and provide an elective
citizen council in each district with authority to act upon appropriate local
matters.
   It should be noted that the Charter Committee of 1971 proposed the title
"City Council" for the existing City Commission. Since Propositions #2 and #5
failed while Propositions #1, #3, and #4 succeeded, the reader should recognize
that "City Commission" and "City Council" refer to the same body.
   On January 24, 1974, the City Commission submitted to the electors five
proposed amendments which were voted upon at the Special Election, February 26,
1974. Three amendments were adopted by the electorate as indicated in the
parenthetical statements following the appropriate sections. The amendments
replaced the five-member, at-large City Commission which had governed the city
since 1917 with a full-time Mayor as the city's chief executive and a nine-
member, part-time districted City Council as the legislative arm of city
government. The amendments also provided for an Election Code and a Code of
Ethics
[Note 5].
   Of the two proposed amendments which were not adopted, Proposition #4 would
have added four at-large commissioners to the nine-member City Commission and
Proposition #5 would have provided for partisan elections.
   On August 4, 1975, the City Council submitted to the electors four proposed
amendments to the Charter which were voted upon at the Regular Municipal
Election October 7, 1975. All four amendments were approved by the electorate.
The amendments removed all of the transitional language in the Charter relating
to the shift from the Commission-City Manager form of government to the Mayor-
City Council form of government, exempted certain contractual obligations
relating to bonding from the initiative and referendum procedures, clarified
the time limits relating to veto power and required candidates for Mayor and
Councillor to obtain petitions in order to be placed on the ballot
[Note 6].
   On July 27, 1977, the City Council submitted to the electors a proposed
amendment to the Charter which was voted upon at the Regular Municipal
Election, October 4, 1977. The proposed amendment, which was not approved by
the electorate, would have changed the annual salaries of the Councillors
[Note 7].
   On July 16, 1979, the City Council submitted to the electors three proposed
amendments to the Charter which were voted upon at the Regular Municipal
Election, October 2, 1979. All three proposed amendments were disapproved by
the electorate. Proposition #1 would have required the Mayor to attend City
Council meetings, Proposition #2 would have changed the annual salaries of the
Councillors, and Proposition #3 would have increased the membership of the
Council
[Note 8].
   On July 20, 1981, the City Council submitted to the electors two proposed
amendments to the Charter which were voted upon at the Regular Municipal
Election, October 6, 1981. Proposition #1, which was not approved by the
electorate, would have changed the annual salaries of the Councillors.
Proposition #2, which was adopted by the electorate, amended the provision
relating to Council district boundary revisions
[Note 9].
   On July 18, 1983, the City Council submitted to the electors a proposed
amendment to the Charter which was voted upon at the Regular Municipal
Election, October 4, 1983. The proposed amendment, which was approved by the
electorate, increased the number of signatures on petitions of persons desiring
to be candidates for Mayor or Councillor to be placed on the ballot
[Note 10].
   On August 5, 1985, the City Council submitted to the electors two proposed
amendments to the Charter which were voted upon at the Regular Municipal
Election, October 8, 1985. Both proposed amendments were disapproved by the
electorate. Proposition #1 would have increased the salary of the Mayor and
Proposition #2 would have changed the salaries of the Councillors to equal the
salaries received by the Bernalillo County Commissioners
[Note 11].
   On August 3, 1987, the City Council submitted to the electors a proposed
amendment to the Charter which was voted upon at the Regular Municipal
Election, October 6, 1987. The proposed amendment, which was not approved by
the electorate, would have changed the annual salaries of the Councillors
[Note 12].
   A City Charter Review Task Force was established in July 1988 and in its
final report, which was submitted on January 17, 1989, the Task Force
recommended thirty-five amendments to the Charter. Subsequently, on June 19,
1989, the City Council submitted to the electors eight proposed amendments to
the Charter which were voted upon at the Regular Municipal Election, October 3,
1989. The eight proposed amendments included twenty-nine of the thirty-five
amendments recommended by the Task Force.
   In addition, on August 7, 1989, the City Council submitted to the electors a
proposed amendment to the Charter which was proposed by a petition filed
pursuant to Article VI and which was voted upon at the Regular Municipal
Election, October 3, 1989.
   Five of the nine proposed amendments were adopted by the electorate as
indicated in the parenthetical statements following the appropriate articles.
The amendments amended Articles II, III, IV, V, VI, VII, X, XI, and XII.
   Of the four proposed amendments which were not adopted, Proposition #3 would
have increased the salaries of the Councillors, Proposition #5 would have
increased the salary of the Mayor, Proposition #6 would have added a new
article concerning open meetings and public records and Proposition #9 would
have added a new section to Article XI, which would have required prior voter
approval of increases in gross receipts and property taxes
[Note 13].
   On October 10, 1989, the City Council submitted to the electors two proposed
amendments to the Charter which were proposed by two petitions filed pursuant
to Article VI and which were voted upon at the Runoff Municipal Election,
November 1, 1989. Proposition #1, which was not approved by the electorate,
would have required the approval of the voters of any city building project for
which the construction cost is estimated to exceed $3 million. Proposition #2,
which was approved by the electorate, requires competitive bidding for
electrical franchises
[Note 14].
   On January 23, 1991, the City Council submitted to the electors a proposed
amendment to the Charter which was proposed by a petition filed pursuant to
Article VI and which was voted upon at the Special Municipal Election, March
26, 1991. The proposed amendment, which was approved by the electorate, added
Section 7 to Article XI, requiring the approval of the voters of any city
building or project costing more than $10 million, except for specifically
excepted buildings or projects
[Note 15].
   On July 15, 1991 and August 5, 1991, the City Council submitted to the
electors two proposed amendments to the Charter which were voted upon at the
Regular Municipal Election, October 8, 1991. In addition, on August 5, 1991,
the City Council submitted to the electors a proposed amendment to the Charter
which was proposed by a petition filed pursuant to Article VI and which was
voted upon at the Regular Municipal Election, October 8, 1991. All three
propositions were approved by the electorate; however, because of the wording
in Proposition #2 that it would take effect only if Proposition #3 was not
adopted, Proposition #2 did not take effect. Proposition #1 changed the one
year residency requirement for candidates for City Council and Proposition #3
repealed the requirement of a public vote on major buildings or projects
costing more than $10 million and enacted a requirement that a public vote be
held on a proposed performing arts center costing more than $10 million
[Note 16].
   On October 5, 1992, the City Council submitted to the electors a proposed
amendment to the Charter which was proposed by a petition filed pursuant to
Article VI [of the Charter] and which was voted upon at the Special Municipal
Election, December 8, 1992. The proposed amendment, Proposition #4, which was
not approved by the electorate, would have repealed existing Article XV [of the
Charter] and added a new Article XV which would have prohibited the city from
owning, operating or leasing property or equipment to be used for providing
electrical service without prior approval of the voters
[Note 17].
   The Code of Ethics and the Election Code have been amended by the enactment
of several ordinances since their initial adoption at the Special Election,
February 26, 1974.
   The Election Code has since been amended by the enactment of several
ordinances since its initial adoption at the Special Election, February 26,
1974, including being extensively amended by Ordinance No. 17-1993.
   On April 20, 1981 the City Council, pursuant to Article IV, Section 3,
adopted Ordinance No. 35-1981 (amended by Ordinance No. 41-1981), which altered
the boundaries of the nine Council districts on the basis of the 1980 Federal
Census and amended Appendix A to identify the Council districts according to
Bernalillo County precincts.
   On June 17, 1991 the City Council, pursuant to Article IV, Section 3,
adopted Ordinance No. 28-1991 (amended by Ordinance No. 31-1991), which altered
the boundaries of the nine Council districts on the basis of the 1990 Federal
Census and amended Appendix A to identify the Council districts according to
Bernalillo County precincts.
   On May 3, 1993, the City Council adopted Ordinance 21-1993 amending Appendix
A by modifying some of the precinct numbers to conform to the precinct numbers
adopted by the Bernalillo County Commission.
   On June 21, 1993, the City Council submitted to the electors two proposed
amendments to the Charter which were voted upon at the Regular Municipal
Election, October 5, 1993. Both proposed amendments were disapproved by the
electorate. Proposition #5 would have permitted the City Council and attorneys
from the City's Legal Department to meet in closed attorney-client meetings and
Proposition #6 would have changed the annual salaries of the Councillors
[Note 18].
   On November 15, 1993, the City Council submitted to the electors a proposed
amendment to the Charter which was proposed by a petition filed pursuant to
Article VI [of the Charter] and which was voted upon at a Special Municipal
Election, January 11, 1994. The proposed amendment, Proposition #7, which was
approved by the electorate, added Section 13 to Article IV, limiting the terms
of Councillors to two elected terms
[Note 19].
   On June 19, 1995, the City Council submitted to the electors a proposed
amendment to the Charter which was voted upon at the Regular Municipal
Election, October 3, 1995. The proposed amendment, which was not approved by
the electorate, would have changed the annual salaries of the Councillors.
[Note 20].
   A City Charter Review Task Force was established in September 1998 and its
final report, which was submitted on June 2, 1999, the Task Force recommended
eleven amendments to the Charter. In addition, City Council recommended an
additional amendment. Subsequently, on August 2, 1999, the City Council
submitted to the electors twelve proposed amendments to the Charter which were
voted upon at a Special Election held in conjunction with a Regular Municipal
Election on October 5, 1999.
   Five of the twelve proposed amendments were adopted by the electorate as
indicated in the parenthetical statements following the appropriate articles.
The amendments amended Articles II, IV, V, VI, and XII.
   Of the seven proposed amendments which were not adopted, Question #1 would
have repealed Article XI regarding a public vote on a performing arts center,
Question #4 would have amended Article VIII, regarding human rights, Question
#5 would have increased the salaries of the Councillors, Question #6 would have
increased the salary of the Mayor, Question #8 would have added language to
Article IV, Section 10, regarding council duties, Question #10 would have
repealed Article IV, Section 13, regarding term limits, and Question #11 would
have repealed Article XV, regarding competitive bidding for electrical
franchises.
[NOTE 21]
   On June 25, 2001 the City Council, pursuant to Article IV, Section 3,
adopted Ordinance No. 26-2001, which altered the boundaries of the nine Council
districts on the basis of the 2000 Federal Census and amended Appendix A to
identify the Council districts according to Bernalillo County precincts.
   On May 21, 2001 and August 6, 2001, the City Council submitted to the
electors three proposed amendments to the Charter which were voted upon at the
Regular Municipal Election, October 2, 2001. All three propositions were
approved by the electorate. Proposition #8 requires the appointment of a
redistricting committee representative of the city's geographic, racial, ethnic
and gender diversity to redraw boundaries after every federal census.
Proposition #9 requires all candidates for mayor or City Council to publicly
disclose all campaign contributions and expenditures at any time prior to their
formal declaration of candidacy. Proposition #10 requires quarterly financial
reports of political contributions and expenditures by the incumbent mayor and
councilors throughout their terms of office.
[NOTE 22]
   On August 16, 2004, the City Council submitted to the electors a proposed
amendment to the Charter which was voted upon at the November 2, 2004 General
Election. The proposed amendment, which was not approved by the electorate,
would have changed the annual salaries of the Councillors.
[NOTE 23]
   On June 20, 2005 and June 30, 2005, the City Council submitted to the
electors two proposed amendments to the Charter which were voted upon at the
Regular Municipal Election, October 4, 2005. Both were adopted by the
electorate. The adopted propositions amend the Charter to add an Open and
Ethical Elections Code and a photo voter identification requirement for
Albuquerque municipal elections. Direct legislation by voter initiative that
would have adopted a Fair Wage Ordinance was not approved by the electorate.
[NOTE 24]
   On October 17, 2005, February 5, 2007, March 5, 2007 and June 4, 2007, the
City Council submitted to the electors five proposed amendments to the Charter
which were voted upon at the Regular Municipal Election, October 2, 2007. Of
the five propositions, four were adopted by the electorate. The adopted
propositions amend the Charter to preclude municipal elections on religious
holidays, prohibit candidates for the office of Mayor or City Council from
accepting campaign contributions from any business entity or person or
organization that has a contract with the city, allow the City Council to
appoint members to City boards and commissions if allowed by ordinance, and
changes procedures for recall elections. The proposition which was not approved
by the electorate would have changed the annual salaries of the Councillors.
[NOTE
25]
   A City Charter Review Task Force was established in August 2008 and in its
final report, which was submitted on May 4, 2009, the Task Force recommended
fourteen amendments to the Charter. Subsequently, on June 22, 2009, the City
Council submitted to the electors' ten propositions to the Charter which were
voted upon at a Regular Municipal Election on October 6, 2009. The ten
propositions included ten of the fourteen amendments recommended by the Task
Force in addition to two City Council recommended amendments.
   All ten propositions were adopted by the electorate as indicated in the
parenthetical statements following the appropriate articles. The amendments
amended Articles II, IV, V, VI, VII, and XVI, and added new Articles XVII,
XVIII, and XIX.
[NOTE
26]
   Pursuant to Section 2, Article V regarding the Mayor's salary, the Council
has passed three resolutions approving increases. Resolution 132-1977, adopted
July 18, 1977, increased the Mayor's salary from $34,000 to $39,000 per year,
effective December 1, 1977. Resolution 246-1981, adopted November 23, 1981,
increased it from $39,000 to $46,000 per year, effective July 1, 1982.
Resolution 245-1981, also adopted November 23, 1981, provided that the Mayor's
salary “shall be automatically increased July 1 of each fiscal year in the
amount equal to the across the board percentage increase granted to city M-
series employees.” On October 6, 2009, Proposition 2009-001, Charter
Amendments, was adopted by electorate stating that the Mayor’s salary shall be
determined by a Citizens’ Independent Salary Commission pursuant to Article 5
Section 2. The Mayor's salary as of July 1, 2009, is $109,324.80.
Endnotes
   1.   Election certified at Regular Commission Meeting held on July 31, 1919.
   2.   Election certified at Regular Commission Meeting held on October 8,
1919.
   3.   Election certification dated February 16, 1966. Approved at Regular
Commission Meeting, February 22, 1966.
   4.   Election certification dated June 30, 1971. Approved at Regular
Commission Meeting, July 12, 1971.
   5.   Election certification dated February 27, 1974. Approved at Regular
Commission Meeting, March 4, 1974.
   6.   Election certification dated October 13, 1975. Certification noted in
Journal at Regular Council Meeting, October 20, 1975.
   7.   Election certification dated October 11, 1977. Certification noted in
Journal at Regular Council Meeting, October 17, 1977.
   8.   Election certification dated October 8, 1979. Certification noted in
Journal at Regular Council Meeting, October 15, 1979.
   9.   Election certification dated October 12, 1981. Certification noted in
Journal at Regular Council Meeting, October 12, 1981. Amended election
certification dated October 15, 1981 noted in Journal at Regular Council
Meeting, October 19, 1981.
   10.   Election certification dated October 11, 1983. Certification noted in
Journal at Special Council Meeting, October 11, 1983.
   11.   Election certification dated October 15, 1985. Certification noted in
Journal at Regular Council Meeting, October 21, 1985.
   12.   Election Certification dated October 7, 1987. Certification noted in
Journal at Special Council Meeting, October 12, 1987. Amended election
certification dated October 15, 1987 noted in Journal at Regular Council
Meeting, October 19, 1987.
   13.   Election certification dated October 6, 1989. Certification noted in
Journal at Special Council Meeting, October 10, 1989.
   14.   Election certification dated November 3, 1989. Certification noted in
Journal at Regular Council Meeting, November 6, 1989.
   15.   Election certification dated March 29, 1991. Certification noted in
Journal at Regular Council Meeting, April 1, 1991.
   16.   Election certification dated October 11, 1991. Certification noted in
Journal at Regular Council Meeting, October 21, 1991.
   17.   Election certification dated December 11, 1992. Certification noted in
Journal at Regular Council Meeting, January 4, 1993. Amended election
certification dated March 29, 1993, noted in Journal at Regular Council
Meeting, May 3, 1993.
   18.   Election certification dated October 8, 1993. Certification noted in
Journal at Regular Council Meeting, October 11, 1993.
   19.   Election certification dated January 13, 1994. Certification noted in
Journal at Regular Council Meeting, February 7, 1994.
   20.   Election certification dated October 6, 1995. Certification noted in
Journal at Regular Council Meeting, October 16, 1995. Amended election
certification dated October 30, 1995 noted in Journal at Regular Council
Meeting, November 6, 1995.
   21   Election certification dated October 8, 1999. Certification noted in
Journal at Regular Council Meeting, November 1, 1999.
   22.   Election certification dated October 5, 2001. Certification noted in
Journal at Regular Council Meeting, October 15, 2001.
   23.   Election certification dated November 12, 2004. Certification noted in
Journal at Regular Council Meeting, December 6, 2004.
   24.   Election certification dated October 7, 2005. Certification noted in
Journal at Regular Council Meeting, February 6, 2006.
   25.   Election certification dated October 9, 2007. Certification noted in
Journal at Regular Council Meeting, November 19, 2007.
   26.   Election certification dated October 16, 2009. Certification noted in
Journal at Regular Council Meeting, November 16, 2009.
City of Albuquerque
Administrative Instructions
Current through December 12, 2025
 
Published by:
American Legal Publishing
525 Vine Street * Suite 310 * Cincinnati, Ohio 45202
1-800-445-5588 * www.amlegal.com
Executive Instructions
EI NO: 1
ASSUMPTION OF OFFICE AND POLICY DIRECTIVES
DECEMBER 1, 2017
TITLE:   Assumption of Office and Policy Directives
PRIMARY DEPARTMENT:   Mayor’s Office
In accordance with the Charter of the City of Albuquerque and the statutes of
the State of New Mexico, I, Timothy M. Keller, have assumed the position of the
Mayor of the City of Albuquerque, New Mexico as of December 1, 2017.
All policy directives and guidance of the previous administration will remain
in effect and enforced, unless rescinded or amended by subsequent instructions.
 
______________________________
Timothy M. Keller              [https://export.amlegal.com/media/
Mayor                          6d88fadbb394cb34f1263b3e9230120271b111d2/IMAGES/
_____________________________  0-0-0-1594.jpg]
Effective Date
 
EI_NO:_1_(pdf)
EI NO: 2
SIGNATURE AUTHORITY
DECEMBER 1, 2017
TITLE:   Signature Authority
PRIMARY DEPARTMENT:   Mayor’s Office
1.) The signature authority of the City of Albuquerque is vested in the Mayor
as the Chief Executive of the City, unless otherwise delegated.
2.) Signature authority for the City of Albuquerque is herewith delegated to
the Chief Administrative Officer, unless specifically reserved to the Mayor by
statute, ordinance or regulation.
3.) In the absence of a Chief Administrative Officer, the Mayor may appoint an
acting Chief Administrative Officer. All signature authority delegated to the
Chief Administrative Officer is vested in the acting Chief Administrative
Officer.
4.) The Chief Administrative Officer may delegate vested signature authority by
administrative directive or instruction.
 
______________________________
Timothy M. Keller              [https://export.amlegal.com/media/
Mayor                          6d88fadbb394cb34f1263b3e9230120271b111d2/IMAGES/
_____________________________  0-0-0-1600.jpg]
Effective Date 
 
EI_NO:_2_(pdf)
EI NO: 3
APPOINTMENT OF CHIEF ADMINISTRATIVE OFFICER
December 1, 2017
TITLE:   Appointment of a Chief Administrative Officer
PRIMARY DEPARTMENT:   Mayor’s Office
Effective December 1, 2017, I hereby appoint Sarita Nair as Chief
Administrative Officer for the City of Albuquerque. Ms. Nair will serve as the
Chief Administrative Officer and will have responsibility for enforcement of
the Merit System Ordinance among her other duties.
 
______________________________
Timothy M. Keller              [https://export.amlegal.com/media/
                               6d88fadbb394cb34f1263b3e9230120271b111d2/IMAGES/
Mayor                          0-0-0-1606.jpg]
_____________________________
Effective Date
 
EI_NO:_3_(pdf)
EI NO: 4
APPOINTMENT OF CITY CLERK
(Rescinded 3-11-22)
EI_NO:_4_(pdf)
EI NO: 4
RESCISSION OF EXECUTIVE INSTRUCTION No. 30
March 27, 2018
TITLE:   Rescission of Executive Instruction No. 30
PRIMARY DEPARTMENT:   Mayor’s Office
As a result of a Review by the Administration and the Transit Department, the
following Executive Instruction has been identified for rescission.
EI-30    Restrictions on the Placement of Exterior Advertisements on Transit
Department Revenue Vehicles
Justification for the rescission is as follows:
EI-30 should be rescinded because it prohibits the Transit Department from
pursuing a much needed source of revenue for the City.
 
______________________________
Timothy M. Keller              [https://export.amlegal.com/media/
Mayor                          6d88fadbb394cb34f1263b3e9230120271b111d2/IMAGES/
_____________________________  0-0-0-1627.jpg]
Effective Date 
 
EI_NO:_4_(pdf)
EI NO: 5
IMPROVING THE ENERGY EFFICIENCY OF CITY FACILITIES
August 16, 2018
TITLE:   Improving the Energy Efficiency of City Facilities
PRIMARY DEPARTMENT:   Mayor's Office
This Executive Instruction mandates that the City of Albuquerque ("City")
utilize the 2015 International Energy Conservation Code ("IECC"), as an interim
measure, with respect to new publicly owned building projects. The
Administration intends to utilize the 2018 IECC once an analysis of the most
recent version of the code is complete. This measure shall remain in effect
until the enactment of a new citywide ordinance updating the energy
conservation code.
Addressing climate change at the local level is a priority of this
Administration. With residential, commercial, and governmental buildings being
one of the largest energy-consuming sectors, heightened energy efficiency
standards can lower energy waste and reduce carbon emissions in an effective
and fiscally responsible manner.
The City's Uniform Construction Codes prescribe minimum standards regulating
the construction and maintenance of buildings, structures and installations
within Albuquerque. The City currently utilizes the 2009 New Mexico Energy
Conservation Code, which is significantly behind national standards. Updating
minimum energy efficiency standards used by the City significantly reduces
operational costs and greenhouse gas emissions over the lifespan of a building.
Adoption of the 2015 IECC is estimated to produce energy cost savings between
20 to 25% compared to the 2009 code, a significant saving for taxpayers. The
newer standards are also more workable, flexible, and foster greater building
durability and resiliency.
Pursuant to R-18-18, the Planning Department is convening a committee of public
and private entities to conduct an analysis of the 2018 IECC, the most recent
standards, and make recommendations regarding the adoption of the 2018 code for
all buildings within Albuquerque. Utilizing the 2015 IECC on an interim basis,
until an analysis of the 2018 IECC is complete, will provide an important step
forward in enhancing the minimum energy efficiency standards for publicly owned
facilities.
REFERENCES:    New Mexico Statutes Annotated § 60-13-44(F) (2017); New Mexico
Statutes Annotated§ 3-18-4 (2017); City of Albuquerque, New Mexico, Charter
art. V, § 3; City of Albuquerque, New Mexico, Code of Ordinances §§ 3-1-1 to -
25 (as amended through 2010); City of Albuquerque, New Mexico, Administrative
Instructions No. 5-16.
 
______________________________
Timothy M. Keller              [https://export.amlegal.com/media/
Mayor                          6d88fadbb394cb34f1263b3e9230120271b111d2/IMAGES/
                               0-0-0-1663.jpg]
_____________________________
Effective Date 
 
EI_NO:_5_(pdf)
EI NO: 10
EXTENSION OF BENEFITS TO DOMESTIC PARTNERS OF EMPLOYEES
TITLE:   Extension of Benefits to Domestic Partners of Employees
PRIMARY DEPARTMENT:   Mayor’s Office
The City of Albuquerque recognizes and values the diverse composition of its
employees. The City acknowledges that people's lives have evolved from when
laws governing family relationships were enacted. Perpetuation of the
traditional definitions of "family" excludes a significant segment of the
employee population, deprives them of recognition and validation, and denies
certain rights that should be afforded to persons who share their homes, their
hearts and their lives. In recognition of the City's commitment to
nondiscrimination and fair treatment of its employees, I am directing the Chief
Administrative Officer to issue an administrative instruction to implement this
Executive Instruction.
REFERENCES:
Administrative Instruction 7-29 (2016) Extension of Benefits to Domestic
Partners of Employees
 
______________________________
Richard J. Berry               [https://export.amlegal.com/media/
Mayor                          6d88fadbb394cb34f1263b3e9230120271b111d2/IMAGES/
_____________________________  0-0-0-499.png]
Effective Date
 
EI_NO:_10_(pdf)
EI NO: 11
TELEPHONE COURTESY
August 8, 2000
SUBJECT: Telephone Courtesy
Policy:
Every time an employee of the City makes or receives a telephone call at work,
he or she is representing the City. It is the policy of the City of Albuquerque
that customers and citizens are treated in a courteous and professional manner.
Telephone Etiquette:
Not only is it important that calls be answered promptly and with a
professional tone of voice, but also that customers and citizens are able to
identify employees with whom they speak on the telephone. Employees should be
accountable to our citizens for the quality of their service.
Employees of the City of Albuquerque whose primary contact is with the public
shall, when answering the telephone, identify their department or work unit as
a City of Albuquerque government function, along with their name.
Example: "City of Albuquerque. Mayor's Office. This is Jane."
"City Water Customer Services. This is John. How may I help you?"
"Albuquerque Convention Center. This is Steve. How may I direct your call?"
"City Human Resources Department. This is JoEllen. How may I help you?"
"City of Albuquerque. Transit Department. This is Frank."
Telephone Call Responsibility:
Employees should be concerned problem solvers. City employees should make every
effort to assist callers before transferring them to someone else. If
transferring, make sure it is to the appropriate person to avoid the
"bureaucratic bounce". Calls should be answered promptly and with a
professional tone of voice.
Since everyone's time is valuable, realize that placing someone on hold may be
a time waster. Should it take longer than expected to gather information,
return to the line periodically to assure the caller their request is still
being worked on.
To avoid placing callers on hold for an extended period of time, offer to
promptly return the call when the information is acquired.
 
Jim Baca [https://export.amlegal.com/media/
Mayor    6d88fadbb394cb34f1263b3e9230120271b111d2/IMAGES/0-0-0-501.png]
 
EI_NO:_11_(pdf)
EI NO: 13
CORRESPONDENCE MANAGEMENT AND STANDARDS
November 17, 2000
SUBJECT: Correspondence Management and Standards
Policy: Since the quality of correspondence prepared in the City of Albuquerque
reflects directly on the City and the services the City provides, it is
expected that correspondence will be handled promptly and provide requested
information in a courteous, compassionate manner that mirrors a customer-
service orientation. Correspondence management is the responsibility of key
management officials who will ensure that:
   a) City correspondence will be created in a timely, economical and efficient
manner;
   b) Style and usage of correspondence will reflect good business practices;
   c) All correspondence prepared in the City should be written in concise and
simple language;
   d) The signature level will be based on the content of the correspondence,
as well as the organizational level of the addressee;
   e) Correspondence prepared in the City of Albuquerque will:
      1) Be responsive to all issues or questions raised,
      2) Reflect completed staff work; that is, be appropriately researched,
fully coordinated, and clearly presented in a concise, logical manner.
Correspondence Standards: All correspondence will be prepared in accordance
with the guidelines set out in the City of Albuquerque Correspondence Handbook,
dated October 1, 2000.
Timeliness: Correspondence should be prepared in a timely manner. An interim
response may be appropriate, depending on the nature of the inquiry.
Information Copies: When controlling correspondence that is internally
generated or received directly, offices will provide information copies to all
elements of the organization affected by the subject matter; those expected to
concur in the reply; and any offices who are otherwise likely to have an
interest in the response (including those outside of the City of Albuquerque).
Mayor/CAO Correspondence: All correspondence requiring the signature of the
Mayor or CAO will be prepared in accordance with the guidelines set out in the
City of Albuquerque Correspondence Handbook, dated October 1, 2000.
The Mayor's administrative assistant will assign due dates for responses
prepared for the Mayor's signature. When the established time frame for
responding to an inquiry cannot be met, an extension should be requested early
in the process by contacting the Mayor's administrative assistant.. An interim
response may be required. Requests for extension should be made prior to the
assigned response date.
Where Mayor's correspondence touches on an issue involving more than one
department/office, the action office is expected to take the lead in
coordinating and developing a reply. If the action office received
correspondence which could be answered more appropriately by another office,
reassignment may be requested by contacting the Mayor's administrative
assistant in person or by e-mail. The assignee will first contact the office to
which reassignment is proposed to ensure that there is agreement on the
reassignment. If agreement cannot be reached, the Mayor's administrative
assistant will determine the assignee who will assume responsibility for
handling the correspondence.
 
Jim Baca
Mayor         [https://export.amlegal.com/media/
             6d88fadbb394cb34f1263b3e9230120271b111d2/IMAGES/0-0-0-503.png]
Date: 12-6-00
 
EI_NO:_13_(pdf)
EI NO: 14
PROHIBITING RACIAL PROFILING
January 30, 2002
SUBJECT: Prohibiting Racial Profiling
It is the policy of the City of Albuquerque to prohibit any form of racial
profiling in which city employees prejudge the likelihood that persons are
engaged in unlawful activity based solely on their race and ethnicity and not
on an objective assessment of their conduct.
Racial profiling offends the interests for all citizens in being treated
fairly, impartially, and justly and is therefore contrary to the fundamental
notion of fairness and respect for individual civil rights.
It is important that in addition to measures already being taken by the City of
Albuquerque to deter racial profiling, all citizens of Albuquerque must work
together to forge a stronger, more positive and cooperative relationship
between Albuquerque's public agencies and the community to which they serve. In
order to foster an environment that will facilitate the elimination of any form
of racial profiling, it is appropriate to form a task force to study the status
of city agencies and community relations in Albuquerque, including the issue of
racial profiling.
A task force of enforcement executives, city officials, and community leaders
shall be convened within 60 days following the issuance of this Executive
Instruction to examine the issue of racial profiling and to review those
efforts being made by the City of Albuquerque to address racial profiling and
to otherwise enhance the relationship between the city and the community to
which they serve.
The task force shall identify the expectations of the community and
responsibilities of City agencies and determined means by which civic public
policy makers can understand these expectations and translate them into civic
strategies that are effective, comply with local mandates, and are acceptable
to the community.
 
 
_________________________________ [https://export.amlegal.com/media/
Martin J. Chavez                  6d88fadbb394cb34f1263b3e9230120271b111d2/
Mayor                             IMAGES/0-0-0-505.png]
 
EI_NO:_14_(pdf)
EI NO: 15
GENDER IDENTITY NON DISCRIMINATION POLICY
May 6, 2003
SUBJECT: Gender Identity Non Discrimination Policy
The City of Albuquerque acknowledges its continuing commitment to protect
individual rights and privileges. In accordance with this commitment, the City
prohibits discrimination in City employment and in the operation of government
on the basis of gender identity.
 
______________________________
Martin J. Chavez               [https://export.amlegal.com/media/
Mayor                          6d88fadbb394cb34f1263b3e9230120271b111d2/IMAGES/
______________________________ 0-0-0-507.png]
Date
 
EI_NO:_15_(pdf)
EI NO: 16
NEW MEXICO COMMISSION FOR THE BLIND
JUNE 20, 2003
SUBJECT: New Mexico Commission for the Blind
I hereby reiterate the City of Albuquerque’s intention to comply with the
Horace DeVargas Act, §§22-14-24 through 22-14-29 NMSA 1978, with regard to the
placement of vending stands on City property.
The purposes of the Act -- to enlarge economic opportunities for the blind and
to stimulate them to greater efforts in striving to make themselves self-
supporting -- will be furthered by establishing vending stands throughout the
City that are operated by blind licensees of the Commission for the Blind and
allowing the Commission a preference in the future establishment and operation
of vending stands on City property.
The City has in the past and will continue to cooperate with the Commission to
survey City property and identify suitable locations for the operation of
vending stands by blind persons, to issue permits for the operation of vending
stands by blind persons, and to cooperate in the installation of vending
stands.
The City shall provide appropriate vending space and utility services for the
operation of vending stands at no cost to the Commission or to the blind
licensees.
In addition, in the future selection of vending stand operators for City
facilities, the City will give blind persons licensed by the Commission a
preference, if available and capable of serving as operators at such locations.
The City acknowledges the good work of the Commission and its licensees and
shall cooperate with the Commission to the greatest possible extent.
 
______________________________ [https://export.amlegal.com/media/
Martin J. Chávez              6d88fadbb394cb34f1263b3e9230120271b111d2/IMAGES/
Mayor                          0-0-0-509.png]
 
EI_NO:_16_(pdf)
EI NO: 18
PROHIBITING SMOKING IN THE RIO GRANDE VALLEY STATE PARK
July 15, 2005
SUBJECT:   Prohibiting Smoking in the Rio Grande Valley State Park.
PURPOSE:
This Executive Instruction governs smoking in the Rio Grande Valley State Park.
The potential severity of a catastrophic wildfire in the Rio Grande Valley
State Park, which includes the bosque, and the resulting endangerment of life
and property due to fire in the bosque is due in part to the improper disposal
of lit tobacco products. Due to the size of the bosque, it is difficult to
monitor and control proper use of burning tobacco products by those people
present in the Park. As a result all smoking shall be prohibited in the Park.
DEFINITIONS:
“Rio Grande Valley State Park” means the park area established in the Rio
Grande Valley State Park Act, has its boundaries defined in Section 16-4-12
NMSA 1978 and is under the management of the City of Albuquerque pursuant to
the Rio Grande Valley State Park Act.
“Smoke or Smoking” means inhaling, exhaling, or burning any lighted cigar,
cigarette, pipe or other combustible tobacco product.
PROHIBITION:
No person, including but not limited to the public and all City employees,
shall smoke within the boundaries of the Rio Grande Valley State Park at any
time either inside or outside of any structure or any type of vehicle. Any
person who violates this Executive Instruction shall be required to leave the
Rio Grande Valley State Park. Appropriate “no smoking” signs shall be posted to
alert the public to the requirements of this Executive Instruction.
 
_________________________________ [https://export.amlegal.com/media/
Martin J. Chavez, Mayor           6d88fadbb394cb34f1263b3e9230120271b111d2/
Date: _________________           IMAGES/0-0-0-511.png]
 
EI_NO:_18_(pdf)
EI NO: 22
ADMINISTRATIVE HEARING OFFICE
(Rescinded 3-11-22)
EI_NO:_22_(PDF)
EI NO: 23
PROHIBITING SMOKING ON CITY PROPERTY
June 15, 2007
SUBJECT:   Prohibiting Smoking on City Property
Smoking of any tobacco product is hereby banned on City property owned or
leased by the City and real property upon which City operations are conducted
or that is occupied by City employees in their normal duties. City property
includes but is not limited to all buildings of any type, parking structures
and lots and all other structures and the grounds and unenclosed space located
on City Property.
This smoking ban applies to all persons. The City shall make every effort to
provide smoking cessation programs for members of the community.
 
________________________________   [https://export.amlegal.com/media/
Martin J. Chávez, Mayor   Date 6d88fadbb394cb34f1263b3e9230120271b111d2/
                                   IMAGES/0-0-0-515.png]
 
EI_NO:_23_(pdf)
EI NO: 25
AMENDED INSTRUCTION REGARDING REGISTERED SEX OFFENDERS IN PUBLIC LIBRARIES
May 6, 2010
SUBJECT: Amended Instruction Regarding Registered Sex Offenders in Public
Libraries
In response to the court order in John Doe v. City of Albuquerque, CV-1041 MCA/
LFG, this instruction applies to any person currently registered under the
Megan’s Law of any State, the New Mexico Sex Offender Registration and
Notification Act (“Registered Sex Offender”). Registered Sex Offenders are
allowed only in the Main Library of the Albuquerque Library System at 501
Copper Ave. NW, Albuquerque, NM 871-2 (“Main Library”) on Thursdays and
Saturdays (from 10:00 a.m. through 6:00 p.m.). Registered Sex Offenders are not
allowed in the children’s section of the Main Library for any reason.
   The reasons for allowing access for allowing access to the Main Library
pursuant to this Instruction, as opposed to other branch libraries in the
system, are that the Main Library is centrally located, staffed by City
Security Officers, and accessible by public transportation. The collection at
the Main Library is equal or superior to the other libraries in the system. To
the extent materials are not presently available at the Main Library because
the materials may be in use; these materials can be delivered to the Main
Library upon request.
   A sign shall be posted at the entrance to the Main Library advising all
Registered Sex Offenders they are required to check in with City Security
Officers immediately upon entering the Main Library and that the Registered Sex
Offenders are allowed in the Main Library only on Thursdays and Saturdays.
Signs shall be posted at all branch libraries other than the Main Library
warning Registered Sex Offenders they are not allowed in the branch libraries
and are allowed only in the Main Library on certain days during certain hours.
   Registered Sex Offenders shall report to the City Security Officers at the
security desk located at the entry to the Main Library immediately upon entry
to the Library. The Registered Sex Offender shall give their correct registered
name to the City Security Officers, as identified on the applicable sex
offender registry, and tell the Security Officers they are a Registered Sex
Offender. The Security Officers at the Main Library shall keep a daily sign-in
log pertaining to Registered Sex Offenders. The City Security Officer shall log
the name of the Registered Sex Offender reported entry to the Main Library. The
City Security Officer shall warn Registered Sex Offender her or she is not
allowed in the children’s area of the Main Library. The Registered Sex Offender
shall initial the log in a space provided indication they have been
specifically warned not to enter the children’s are of the Main Library.
   If any Registered Sex Offender is found in, or it is determined that the
Registered Sex Offender had been in, any branch other than the Main Library or
in the Main Library in violation of this Instruction, the Registered Sex
Offender shall be banned from access to all Libraries in the City for one year.
Upon a second offense, the Registered Sex Offender shall be banned for the
duration of the time they are required to register as a sex offender.
   Every Registered Sex Offender who enters the Main Library shall have in
their possession a photo identification card as that term is used in Article
III, Section 14 of the City Charter (“identification”). No Registered Sec
Offender shall enter the main Library without Identification. Without
limitation on the foregoing, a driver’s license, student identification card,
picture credit card or card issued by the City Clerk satisfies this requirement
provided such card is current and valid. A City Security Officer shall ask for
and examine the Identification and indicate on the log that identification has
been examined. A City Security Guard ma ask for and examine the Identification
of any Registered Sex Offender or any person reasonably believed to be a
Registered Sex Offender in the Main Library at any time. Any Registered Sex
Offender who refuses to show Identification to a City Security Officer or shows
false Identification to a City Security Officer shall be banned for the
duration of the time they are required to register as a sex offender, even on a
first offense. Without limitation on the foregoing, the fact that the likeness
of any person appears on a sex offender registry and that person has not
checked in under this Instruction is sufficient cause to ask for Identification
and eject the person from the Main Library if they refuse to produce
Identification or entered the Main Library in violation of this Instruction.
   A notice of the violation shall be provided to the Registered Sex Offender.
This notice of a violation shall be hand delivered to the Registered Sex
Offender by City Security Officers, or, if the Registered Sex Offender refuses
delivery of the notice, the notice shall be mailed by City Security Officers
with the assistance of Library Staff, or by Library Staff, to the address of
the Registered Sex Offender according to the applicable sex offender registry.
The mailing of a notice of violation to the address of the Registered Sex
Offender according to the applicable sex offender registry shall constitute
constructive notice of a violation of this instruction. City Security Officers
shall prepare an incident report and provide a copy of the notice and report
forthwith to the following entities: City Library Staff, City Legal, the Sex
Offender Unit of the Albuquerque Police Department and the Sex Offender Unit of
the Bernalillo County Sheriff’s Office. Copies shall also be provided to any
other law enforcement agency upon request.
   Any Registered Sex Offender found in violation of this instruction may
request a hearing from the City of Albuquerque Office of Administrative Hearing
to determine whether City Security Officers or other personnel correctly
determined that the Registered Sex Offender or person reasonably believed to be
a Registered Sex Offender entered a library other than the Main Library,
entered the Main Library in violation of this instruction or refused to produce
a photo identification card as required by this Instruction. The hearing
request shall be filed within thirty days of the date of the notice of
violation. There shall be no filing fee required for the first offense, but
there shall be a filing fee for the second and all subsequent offended. If the
hearing request is not timely filed, the opportunity for a hearing shall be
forfeited. The ban shall apply while any requested hearing is pending. Any
Registered Sex Offender found in a Library while banned under this instruction
is subject to prosecution for criminal trespass pursuant to NMSA 1978, § 30-14-
1(C) (1995), as amended from time to time. Delivery of the notice of violation
shall constitute withdrawal of consent under the foregoing Statue.
Executive Instruction 25 date September 16, 2008 is withdrawn.
 
______________________________   [https://export.amlegal.com/media/
Richard J. Berry      Date 6d88fadbb394cb34f1263b3e9230120271b111d2/
Mayor                            IMAGES/0-0-0-517.png]
 
EI_NO:_25_(pdf)
EI NO: 28
OFFICE OF EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT
MARCH 1, 2012
TITLE:   Office of Emergency Management
PRIMARY DEPARTMENT:   Mayor’s Office
Section A of this Executive Instruction became effective March 1, 2012.
Section B of this Executive Instruction became effective July 1, 2012
Section A:
   The Office of Emergency Management was created as an administrative office
within the Executive Branch of the City of Albuquerque under the Office of the
Chief Administrative Officer.
   The Office of Emergency Management and its facilities will be
administratively transferred to the Albuquerque Police Department and report
directly to Chief of Police.
Section B:
For the purpose of payroll, budget and other administrative matters the Office
of Emergency Management will be listed under the Albuquerque Police
Department’s Officer and Department Support category.
 
______________________________
Richard J. Berry               [https://export.amlegal.com/media/
Mayor                          6d88fadbb394cb34f1263b3e9230120271b111d2/IMAGES/
_____________________________  0-0-0-519.png]
Effective Date
 
EI_NO:_28_(pdf)
EI NO: 29
SELF DRIVING VEHICLE TESTING AND OPERATION IN THE CITY OF ALBUQUERQUE
TITLE:   Self-Driving Vehicle Testing and Operation in the City of Albuquerque
With the development of new technologies, it is now possible to adapt vehicles
with "self-driving technology," that provides the motor vehicle with the
capability to drive without direct or active control by a human operator,
either with an operator physically present in the vehicle or providing
direction remotely while the vehicle is operating in self-driving mode.
It is in the City of Albuquerque's interest to support the development and
advancement of these technologies, by allowing testing and operation of self-
driving vehicles in a manner that supports development while protecting public
safety.
The City believes that the development of self-driving vehicle technology will
promote economic growth, bring new jobs, provide research opportunities for
academic institutions in Albuquerque and their students and faculty, and allow
the City to host the emergence of new technologies.
The testing and operation of self-driving vehicles could produce
transformational social benefits such as the elimination of traffic and
congestion, an increase in pedestrian and passenger safety, the reduction of
parking facilities, and the facilitation of movement of residents across the
city.
The future of transportation and commerce relies on innovative technologies to
improve passenger and pedestrian safety, increase mobility options, and foster
economic productivity.
The City shall support the development of self-driving vehicle technology as
follows:
   1.   The Department of Municipal Development and all other agencies of the
City of Albuquerque shall work cooperatively with one another to undertake
appropriate steps to support the testing and development of self-driving
vehicles within the City of Albuquerque.
   2.   The Director of the Department of Economic Development shall promote
pilot programs on campuses of public and private institutions in cooperation
with entities that are developing technology for self-driving vehicles. Any
pilot program shall maintain the following requirements:
      a.   Testing and operation of self-driving vehicles in such pilot
programs shall abide by all Albuquerque Ordinances and state and federal
traffic laws, and no testing or operation shall be conducted on public roads
absent specific legal authority allowing such testing or operation.
      b.   The City Legal Department must review any use of municipal, county,
or state property to ensure compliance with the Anti-Donation clause of the New
Mexico Constitution.
      c.   Vehicles may be operated only by an employee, contractor, or other
person designated or otherwise authorized by the entity developing self-driving
technology, and the individuals operating vehicles shall be licensed to operate
a motor vehicle in the United States.
      d.   Vehicles shall be monitored and an operator shall have the ability
to direct the vehicle's movement if assistance is required.
      e.   The vehicle owner shall submit proof of financial responsibility to
the same extent generally required of contractors conducting business on city
property.
   3.   The Chief Administrative Officer may promulgate additional rules
considered necessary to implement this instruction.
 
______________________________
Richard J. Berry               [https://export.amlegal.com/media/
Mayor                          6d88fadbb394cb34f1263b3e9230120271b111d2/IMAGES/
_____________________________  0-0-0-521.png]
Effective Date
 
EI_NO:_29_(pdf)
EI NO: 30
RESTRICTIONS ON THE PLACEMENT OF EXTERIOR ADVERTISEMENTS ON TRANSIT DEPARTMENT
REVENUE VEHICLES (Rescinded 3-27-18)
 
EI NO: 31
OPEN DATA PROGRAM AND POLICY
TITLE:   Open Data Program and Policy
The City of Albuquerque launched an Open Data Initiative – ABQ Data – in June,
2012, based on the following tenets:
   ∙  Access to public information promotes a higher level of civic engagement
and allows citizens to provide valuable feedback to government officials
regarding local issues;
   ∙  The thoughtful implementation of an open data program improves provision
of services, increases transparency and access to public information, and
enhances coordination and efficiencies among departments, partner organizations
and citizens;
   ∙  Open Data can proactively provide information currently sought through
public records requests, thereby saving the City time and money;
   ∙  Information technologies, including web-based and other Internet
applications and services, are an essential means for Open Government, and good
government generally; and
   ∙  Publishing structured standardized data in machine readable formats
allows the City to encourage the local community to develop software
applications and tools to collect, organize, and share public record data in
new and innovative ways.
The Open Data Initiative has shown the above tenets to be feasible within City
government operations and valuable components for our community. The City of
Albuquerque hereby formalizes the Open Data Initiative as the Open Data
Program.
Section 1: Definitions
   a.   “Data” means statistical, factual, quantitative, or qualitative
information that is maintained or created by or on behalf of a city agency.
   b.   “Open data” means data that is available online, in an open format,
with no legal encumbrances on use or reuse, and is available for all to access
and download in full without fees [or a requirement of registration]. “Legal
encumbrance” includes federal copyright protections and other, non-statutory
legal limitations on how or under what conditions a dataset may be used.
   c.   “Open format” means a (one or more) widely accepted, nonproprietary,
platform-independent, machine-readable data format, which permits automated
processing of such data and facilitates analysis and search capabilities.
   d.   “Dataset” means a named collection of related records, with the
collection containing data organized or formatted in a specific or prescribed
way, often in tabular form.
   e.   “Protected information” means any dataset or portion thereof to which
an agency may deny access pursuant to the federal, state, or City public
records statutes or any other law or rule or regulation.
   f.   “Sensitive information” means any data which, if published by the City
online, could raise privacy, confidentiality or security concerns or have the
potential to jeopardize public health, safety or welfare to an extent that is
greater than the potential public benefit of publishing that data.
   g.   “Publishable data” means data which is not protected or sensitive and
which has been prepared for release to the public.
Section 2: Open Data Program
   a.   The City commits to maintain and improve practices that will allow it
to:
      a.   Proactively release publishable city data, making it freely
available in appropriately varied and useful open formats, using an open
license with no restrictions on use or reuse, and fully accessible to the
broadest range of users to use for varying purposes;
      b.   Publish high quality, updated data with documentation (metadata) and
permanence to encourage maximum use;
      c.   Minimize limitations on the disclosure of public information while
appropriately safeguarding protected and sensitive information; and
      d.   Support innovative uses of the City’s publishable data by agencies,
the public, and other partners.
   b.   The development and implementation of these practices shall be overseen
by the Chief Information Officer, reporting to the Mayor [or to the Mayor’s
designee.]
   c.   The requirements of this Order shall apply to any city department,
office, administrative unit, commission, board, advisory committee or other
division of city government (“agency”).
Section 3: Governance
   a.   Implementation of the Open Data Program will be overseen by the Chief
Information Officer as chair of the Data Governance Team.
   b.   The Data Governance Team will be comprised of the following unless
otherwise designated by the Mayor’s Office:
      a.   Chief Information Officer (Chair);
      b.   Mayor’s Office Representative;
      c.   Public Safety Services Representative;
      d.   Transportation Services Representative;
      e.   Traffic and Transportation Infrastructure;
      f.   Internal Services Representative;
      g.   Environmental Services Representative;
      h.   Business and Economic Services Representative;
      i.   Cultural and Recreational Services Representative;
      j.   Community, Family, and Senior Services Representative;
      k.   City Clerk Representative;
      l.   Legal Department Representative; and
      m.   Open Data Program Manager (Associate CIO, non-voting).
   c.   The Chief Information Officer and Open Data Program Manager will work
with the City’s departments and agencies to:
      a.   Identify an open data coordinator who will be responsible for
managing each department’s or office’s participation in the Open Data Program;
      b.   Oversee the creation and regular updating of a comprehensive
inventory of datasets held by each city department or office;
      c.   Develop and implement a process for determining the relative level
of risk and public benefit associated with potentially sensitive, non-protected
information so as to make a determination about whether and how to publish it;
      d.   Develop and implement a process for prioritizing the release of
datasets taking into account new and existing signals of interest from the
public (such as the frequency of public records requests), the City's
programmatic priorities, existing opportunities for data use in the public
interest, and cost;
      e.   Proactively consult with members of the public, City staff,
journalists, researchers, and other stakeholders to identify the datasets which
will have the greatest benefit to city residents; and
      f.   Establish processes for publishing datasets to the central open data
location, including processes for ensuring that datasets are high quality, up-
to-date, are in use-appropriate formats, and exclude protected and sensitive
information.
   d.   In order to increase and improve use of the City’s open data, the Chief
Information Officer will actively encourage agency and public participation
through providing regular opportunities for feedback and collaboration.
Section 4: Central Online Location for Published Data
   a.   The City will maintain a publicly available, online location accessible
directly and via the City's website where the City’s published data will be
available for download.
   b.   Published datasets shall be placed into the public domain.
   c.   Publish datasets so they are available for bulk download and/or
available via public application programming interfaces (APIs) without legal
encumbrance.
   d.   Datasets placed in the public domain by the City shall have no
restrictions or requirements placed on their use.
   e.   Each published dataset shall have associated metadata to include:
      a.   Contact information for the City employee most appropriate to answer
questions about that dataset;
      b.   A file layout or data dictionary that provides information about
field labels and values;
      c.   Information about the dataset’s currency (timeliness) and update
frequency; and
      d.   A recommended data citation form to encourage responsible reuse of
city data.
 
______________________________
Richard J. Berry               [https://export.amlegal.com/media/
Mayor                          6d88fadbb394cb34f1263b3e9230120271b111d2/IMAGES/
                              0-0-0-525.png]
_____________________________
Effective Date
 
EI_NO:_31_(pdf)
EI NO: 32
REQUIRING THE DEVELOPMENT OF A COMPREHENSIVE PLAN TO PROCESS THE BACKLOG OF
ALBUQUERQUE POLICE DEPARTMENT UNTESTED SEXUAL ASSAULT EVIDENCE KITS
EXECUTIVE ORDER
TITLE:   REQUIRING THE DEVELOPMENT OF A COMPREHENSIVE PLAN TO PROCESS THE
BACKLOG OF ALBUQUERQUE POLICE DEPARTMENT UNTESTED SEXUAL ASSAULT EVIDENCE KITS
   WHEREAS, one in four women and one in 20 men in New Mexico have experienced
sexual assault in their lifetime, and 65 percent of sexual assault victims are
minors; and
   WHEREAS, the Albuquerque Police Department (APD) has the largest historical
backlog of untested sexual assault evidence kits in the State of New Mexico;
and
   WHEREAS, processing sexual assault evidence kits is crucial to identifying
offenders and solving crimes as well as honoring the commitment made to
victims; and
   WHEREAS, APD has received federal grant funding and may benefit from
legislation requiring the State's crime lab to process kits in the City's
possession; and
   WHEREAS, the City Council enacted two resolutions related to the issue: R-
2017-006 (establishing additional City policy relating to the processing of
untested sexual assault evidence kits in the possession of APD) and R-2017-022
(establishing time frames for processing sexual assault evidence kits); and
   WHEREAS, despite these efforts, no comprehensive plan to address all
untested kits in the City exists at the current time.
   NOW, THEREFORE, I, Timothy M. Keller, Mayor of the City of Albuquerque, by
virtue of the Charter of the City of Albuquerque, do hereby ORDER:
   1.   That APD to collaborate with the Albuquerque Sexual Assault Evidence
Response Team (ASERT) to develop a comprehensive plan to address the backlog of
untested sexual assault evidence kits in APD's possession that originated
before January 1, 2017.
   2.   That the plan include funding requirements, vendors required, and the
uses of federal grant funds.
   3.   That the plan include a process for ensuring that a new "backlog" of
untested kits does not develop.
   4.   That the plan be submitted to me no later than March 15, 2018.
This Executive Order does not create any legal rights on the part of any person
or entity and shall not be a basis for a challenge to rules or regulations or
any other action or inaction by the City.
   THIS EXECUTIVE ORDER supersedes any other previous orders, proclamations, or
directives to the extent they are in conflict. This Executive Order shall take
effect immediately.
____________________________
Timothy M. Keller, Mayor
 
______________________________
Timothy M. Keller              [https://export.amlegal.com/media/
Mayor                          6d88fadbb394cb34f1263b3e9230120271b111d2/IMAGES/
                              0-0-0-1745.png]
_____________________________
Effective Date
 
EI_NO:_32_(pdf)
EI NO: 33
PROCLAIMING THE CITY’S COMMITMENT TO END ALL TRAFFIC FATALITIES AND SEVERE
INJURY ACCIDENTS IN ALBUQUERQUE THROUGH PARTICIPATION IN THE VISION ZERO PLEDGE
EXECUTIVE ORDER
TITLE:   PROCLAIMING THE CITY’S COMMITMENT TO END ALL TRAFFIC FATALITIES AND
SEVERE INJURY ACCIDENTS IN ALBUQUERQUE THROUGH PARTICIPATION IN THE VISION ZERO
PLEDGE
   WHEREAS, sixty nine (69) individuals were needlessly killed on Albuquerque
roadways in 2018; and,
   WHEREAS, various City departments including the Office of the Mayor, the
Department of Municipal Development, the Albuquerque Police Department, the
Albuquerque Transit Department, the Albuquerque Office of Equity and Inclusion,
the Albuquerque Department of Technology and Innovation, and the City of
Albuquerque Planning Department recognize the need for action to increase
safety and to prevent deaths and injuries on City streets; and,
   WHEREAS, City partners such as the Mid-Region Council of Governments
(“MRCOG”), the New Mexico Department of Transportation, Albuquerque Public
Schools, the University of New Mexico, and the County of Bernalillo have
pledged to join with Albuquerque to meet this goal; and,
   WHEREAS, Vision Zero is a proven international framework for eliminating
traffic deaths and serious injuries through intergovernmental and community
partnerships leveraging resources and funds to ensure safe and efficient multi-
modal transportation; and,
   WHEREAS, taking the Vision Zero pledge gives the City access to global best
practices and resources; and,
   WHEREAS, the Albuquerque City Council enacted the Complete Streets
Ordinance, O-14-27, in 2015 to utilize best practices for safe and efficient
multi-modal transportation on City streets, and the City Council is currently
updating the Ordinance to incorporate the proven best practices of the Vision
Zero initiative; and,
   NOW, THEREFORE, I, Timothy M. Keller, Mayor the City of Albuquerque, by
virtue of the Charter of the City of Albuquerque, do hereby:
   1.   Pledge the City of Albuquerque’s commitment to Vision Zero;
   2.   Order the immediate creation of a Vision Zero Task Force responsible
for drafting an Albuquerque Vision Zero Action Plan within the next 12 months
with the input of multiple City departments, our Vision Zero partners, and
Albuquerque community members; and,
   3.   Order the Vision Zero Task force to submit the completed Albuquerque
Vision Zero Action Plan to me for implementation no later than May 18, 2020.
   THIS EXECUTIVE ORDER does not create any legal rights or right of action on
the part of any person or entity, and shall not serve as a basis for any
challenge to ordinances, rules, regulations, policies, administrative
instructions, or any other action or inaction by the City. This Executive
Order supersedes any previous orders, proclamations, or directives to the
extent they are in conflict with the terms above. This Executive Order shall
take effect immediately.
 
______________________________
Timothy M. Keller              [https://export.amlegal.com/media/
Mayor                          6d88fadbb394cb34f1263b3e9230120271b111d2/IMAGES/
                              0-0-0-1747.png]
_____________________________
Effective Date
 
EI_NO:_33_(pdf)
EI NO: 34
REDUCED EMISSION LIGHT AND HEAVY-DUTY CITY VEHICLES
EXECUTIVE ORDER
TITLE:   Reduced Emission Light and Heavy-Duty City Vehicles
PRIMARY DEPARTMENT:   Department of Finance and Administrative Services
   Understanding and dealing with climate change impacts is an imperative for
major cities in the United States. It is in the current and future interests of
both the City of Albuquerque (“City”) and its community members to manage City
resources in the most environmentally reasonable and responsible manner.
   Traditional gasoline-powered vehicles are a primary source of emissions and,
according to the Union of Concerned Scientists, account for approximately 20
percent of all emissions in the United States, with almost 20 pounds of heat-
trapping emissions arising from tailpipes for every gallon of gas utilized by
cars and trucks.
   Further, in the Albuquerque area, vehicles are the largest contributor of
hazardous air pollutants and also emit carbon monoxide and precursors which
form ground level ozone. These pollutants can cause lung damage and heart
disease, shortening human lifespans. Reducing ozone precursors is especially
important here because ozone concentrations in our air are close to the federal
health-based limit. Vehicles are the primary source of nitrogen oxides, a key
ozone precursor.
   The use of electric, alternative fuel, and hybrid vehicles has five benefits
for our community: (1) reduce ground level ozone; (2) reduced harmful tailpipe
emissions; (3) improved community health outcomes; (4) continued compliance
with the Clean Air Act; and (5) reduced dependence on petroleum. Moreover, as
the electric grid converts to solar, each electric vehicle replacement will
eventually eliminate almost all emissions for that vehicle slot in the City
fleet. Replacing traditional gasoline powered vehicles with electric,
alternative fuel, and hybrid vehicles makes the City of Albuquerque part of the
solution to global warming, just as every city should be, and just as
municipalities are moving to do all over the country.
   Therefore, this Executive Instruction mandates that the City commit to
developing and implementing a plan to optimize the fuel mix of the fleet of
City vehicles by purchasing and, when appropriate, replacing existing
traditional vehicles with electric, alternative fuel, and hybrid vehicles,
taking into consideration the intended uses of such vehicles and potential for
carbon, ozone, and air pollutant reduction.
REFERENCES:   Clean Air Act, 42 U.S.C. §§ 7401-7671q; Air Quality Control Act,
NMSA 1978, § 74-2-1 to -17; City Joint Air Quality Control Board Ordinance,
Revised Ordinances of Albuquerque, §§ 9-5-1-1 to –99; County Joint Air Quality
Control Board Ordinance; Bernalillo County Ordinances, Art. II, Sec. 30-31 to -
44; City Motor Vehicle Emissions Control, ROA §§ 7-8-1 to -14; City
Improvements Program Intent; Scope § 2-12-1; City Vehicle Pollution Abatement
§§ 7-12-1 to -5; City Prohibiting Unattended Delivery Vehicles From Being Left
Idling § 8-5-1-41; City of Albuquerque Code of Ordinances §§ 8-6-25 to - 26;
Albuquerque Code of Ordinances § 4-11; Albuquerque Code of Ordinances § 3-5-1
(D); Albuquerque Code of Ordinances § 3-9-4(4); Albuquerque Code of Ordinances
§ 6-3-6; Albuquerque Code of Ordinances §4-2-3; City of Albuquerque, New
Mexico, Administrative Instructions No. 4-3.
 
______________________________
Timothy M. Keller              [https://export.amlegal.com/media/
Mayor                          6d88fadbb394cb34f1263b3e9230120271b111d2/IMAGES/
                              0-0-0-1788.png]
_____________________________
Effective Date
 
EI_NO:_34_(pdf)
EI NO: 35
DIRECTING CITY OF ALBUQUERQUE TO PROVIDE LANGUAGE ACCESS
EXECUTIVE ORDER
TITLE:   DIRECTING CITY OF ALBUQUERQUE TO PROVIDE LANGUAGE ACCESS
This Executive Order affirms the aspiration of the City of Albuquerque to
provide equal access to City services for all people living in Albuquerque,
including those with limited proficiency in English and those who use American
Sign Language, closed captioning, and Braille. This Executive Order directs all
city departments to create and implement a Language Access Plan.
   WHEREAS, the Albuquerque metropolitan area is home to 845,849 people. Of
those, 67,357 speak little or no English and five percent report having a
hearing disability. The most common languages other than English are Spanish,
Dine, American Sign Language, Vietnamese, and Mandarin, all of whom have more
than 1,000 speakers. We have an estimated 55,537 monolingual Spanish-speakers;
2,300 speakers of Northern Native American languages, predominantly Dine
(1207); 2,063 mono-lingual Vietnamese speakers and 1,344 speakers of Mandarin.
As well, we have hundreds of speakers of each of the following languages who
speak English less than well: Japanese, Arabic, Tagalog, French, Korean,
Russian, Thai, Gujarati, Pashto, Farsi, Dari and Swahili. These populations
enrich our city with cultures, skills and abilities gained from their lived
experiences, and all have chosen to live in Albuquerque.
   WHEREAS, the City seeks to make government services and resources easily
available and understandable to all people living in Albuquerque, including
non-English speakers and those with vision and communication disabilities; and
   WHEREAS, Title VI of the federal Civil Rights Act of 1964 states that "[n]o
person in the United States shall, on the ground of race, color, or national
origin, be excluded from participation in, be denied the benefits of, or be
subjected to discrimination under any program or activity receiving Federal
financial assistance" and requires federal grant recipients to provide language
access; and
   WHEREAS, Ordinance Ch. 11, Art. 3, adopted in 1973 and known as the Human
Rights Ordinance, was created in order to preserve, protect and promote human
rights and human dignity, to promote and encourage the recognition and exercise
of human responsibility, to protect and promote equality of access to public
good and services and to prohibit discrimination on the bases of race, color,
religion, sex, national origin or ancestry, age or disability; and
   WHEREAS, Ordinance R-18-7, adopted in 2018, reaffirms Albuquerque as an
Immigrant Friendly City, states the City's intent is to promote public safety,
safeguarding the civil rights, safety and dignity of all residents and creating
an environment conducive to all victims of violent crime seeking assistance;
and
   WHEREAS, Ordinance R-18-7 supports the equal treatment of all persons and
states that all persons who live within the City should have full access to all
city services with respect and dignity, including public safety services and
programs, regardless of their race, disability, national origin, gender
identity, religion, sex, sexual orientation, ethnicity, economic or immigration
status; and
   WHEREAS, Article VIII of the City Charter states that, "The Council shall
preserve, protect and promote human rights and human dignity .... and shall
prohibit discrimination on the basis of race, color, religion, sex, national
origin or ancestry, age or physical handicap"; and
   WHEREAS, language access and use of technology to make information more
accessible helps all residents, regardless of their ability or English
proficiency, to have meaningful and equitable access to City services,
programs, and stakeholder engagement; and
   NOW, THEREFORE, I, TIM KELLER, Albuquerque Mayor, hereby direct all City of
Albuquerque departments to submit a Language Access Plan to the Office of
Equity & Inclusion for review and approval by the Chief Administrative Officer
and prioritize implementation of the Language Access Plan by taking the
following actions:
   1.   The Office of Equity & Inclusion shall provide departments with a
Language Access Plan Template to guide the development of each department's
Language Access plan.
   2.   Each department shall submit a Language Access Plan to the Office of
Equity & Inclusion for technical assistance review and approval by the Chief
Administrative Officer.
   3.   Starting with the Fiscal Year 2023 Annual Budget request, each
department will propose an issue paper for its annual budget to cover costs
associated with implementation of its language access plan.
   4.   The Office of Equity & Inclusion shall provide departments with
technical assistance for language access, including assistance with identifying
language service providers and training.
   5.   The ADA Coordinator shall provide departments with technical assistance
for making written, verbal and other types of communication more accessible
through use of available tools such as read aloud and alt-text.
   6.   The Office of Equity and Inclusion shall prioritize technical
assistance to departments involved in responding to health-and safety-related
crises, immigrant integration, asylum-seeker and refugee relief, emergency
preparedness and response, economic recovery programs, and emergent situations.
   7.   The Office of Equity & Inclusion is responsible for the following
Language Access Program oversight duties:
      a.   Work with departments to finalize Language Access Plans before they
are sent for approval to the Chief Administrative Officer.
      b.   Provide technical assistance for language services to all
departments to include training department staff.
      c.   Provide strategic guidance to departments about best practices for
working with Limited English Proficiency populations.
      d.   Oversee and maintain language service vendor lists, copies of
translated documents, and data.
      e.   Conduct periodic, random reviews of departments to check for
language accessibility.
Inquiries regarding this Executive Order should be directed to the Office of
Equity and Inclusion at (505) 768-3307.
 
______________________________
Timothy M. Keller              [https://export.amlegal.com/media/
Mayor                          6d88fadbb394cb34f1263b3e9230120271b111d2/IMAGES/
                              0-0-0-2154.png]
_____________________________
Effective Date
 
EI_NO:_35_(pdf)
EI NO: 36 CITY OF ALBUQUERQUE EXECUTIVE ORDER FOR EQUITABLE AND
JUST IMPLEMENTATION OF JUSTICE40
EXECUTIVE ORDER
TITLE:   CITY OF ALBUQUERQUE EXECUTIVE ORDER FOR EQUITABLE AND JUST
IMPLEMENTATION OF JUSTICE40
WHEREAS President Biden, in a historical signing made a commitment, setting as
a goal that 40 percent of the overall benefits of Justice40 qualifying federal
investments across all agencies flow to disadvantaged communities. Communities
that are marginalized, underprivileged, underserved, and overburdened by legacy
pollution, disinvestment and economic inequity;
WHEREAS that commitment is contained in Executive Order 14008, signed on
January 27, 2021.
The categories of Justice40 investments include: climate change, clean energy
and energy efficiency, clean transit, affordable and sustainable housing;
training and workforce development; remediation and reduction of legacy
pollution; and the development of clean water and wastewater infrastructure.
This would be done through 17 Federal Agencies and over 445 Justice40 covered
programs  1  with over $60 billion of unique federal funding for environmental
justice;
WHEREAS in Executive Order 14008, the President directed the Director of the
Office of Management and Budget (0MB), the Chair of the Council on
Environmental Quality (CEQ), the National Climate Advisor, and White House
Interagency Advisory Council in consultation with the White House Environmental
Justice Advisory Council (WHEJAC) to jointly pursue the goal that 40 percent of
the overall benefits of such investments flow to disadvantaged communities  2
. The Justice40 Initiative is a critical part of the Administration's whole-of-
government approach to advancing environmental justice.
WHEREAS relevant City of Albuquerque departments will work with and invest in
an interdepartmental collaboration with grassroots community leadership on the
CABQ Justice40 Oversight Coordinating Committee (OCC). The primary goal of the
OCC is to prepare and implement a five-year CABQ Justice40 Equitable and Just
Administration Plan. This process will include support for two years of
technical assistance for local community efforts and other support appropriate
for Justice40 proposal submissions and monitoring results. The plan is to
ensure successful implementation of Justice40 in our city that prioritizes
federal investments for community-driven solutions addressing environmental and
economic injustices in and with marginalized, overburdened and underserved
communities;
WHEREAS Albuquerque's diversity is a major asset in addressing environmental
injustice, yet systemic inequities and disparities hold us back. Albuquerque,
the largest city in New Mexico with a population of over 560,000, consists of
an essential complex cultural makeup from urban, agricultural and indigenous
lifeways. Albuquerque neighbors the tribal nations of Pueblo of lsleta, Santa
Ana Pueblo, To'hajiilee Navajo Chapter, Laguna Pueblo and Sandia Pueblo.
Albuquerque is home to over 15,000 Dine peoples and urban natives of other
tribes as well as many immigrant and refugee communities.
WHEREAS I, Mayor Tim Keller, believe that it is necessary to join departments
and community together by fonning a Justice40 OCC to act immediately on the
coordination of city agencies with community, state and federal counterparts to
forward equitable community-driven proposals to be submitted to appropriate
agencies for funding;
WHEREAS Albuquerque must invest in multigenerational community leadership that
prioritizes the existing and emerging environmental and social crises. To
achieve these goals, we must mobilize all of our assets-----communities, all
levels of government, science and research, and businesses and industries-
toward the development of just, equitable, and sustainable long-term holistic
solutions with racial, environmental and economic justice as core goals and
match the scale of the urgent challenges we face;
WHEREAS The Justice40 OCC will work with neighborhoods and grassroots
coalitions to prioritize Justice40 investments to build healthy and sustainable
communities through innovative community-driven solutions with government. This
includes investments in local food systems, local and community choice energy,
home ownership, water quality, wastewater infrastructure, fare-free renewable-
based transitt pollution remediation, and employment and workforce development
issues in the most burdened communities in our city;
WHEREAS President Biden's $1 trillion Infrastructure Legislation which passed
November 6, 2021, is directed to invest $55 billion to expand access to clean
drinking water for households, businesses, schools, and centers across the
country. The investment covers rural towns to struggling cities, and addresses
water and sewage infrastructure and eliminate lead service pipes, including in
tribal nations and disadvantaged communities that need it the most;
WHEREAS the Bipartisan Infrastructure Law will deliver $65 billion to ensure
that every American has high-speed internet access through a historic
investment in broadband infrastructure and deployment;
WHEREAS $39 billion of new investment is available to invest in equitable
transit, including the fare-free transit program and meeting other transit
program needs for the next five years as part of the surface transportation
reauthorization. In total the Bipartisan Infrastructure Law provides $89.9
billion in guaranteed funding for public transit over the next five years and
over 39 Justice40 funded programs in Department of Transportation;
WHEREAS $65 billion will be invested in clean energy which will include
building thousands of miles of new resilient transmission lines to facilitate
the expansion of renewable and clean energy while lowering cost. The bill
includes funding for innovative programs to support the development and
demonstration, and deployment of cutting-edge clean energy technologies to
accelerate our nation's transition away from fossil fuel dependence, including
146 Justice40 funded programs from the Department of Energy;
WHEREAS the Bipartisan Infrastructure bill will create community-impacted
resilience and provide an investment of over $50 billion to protect against
droughts, heat, floods, and wildfires, in addition to a major investment in
weatherization;
WHEREAS the Bipartisan Infrastructure Legislation will deliver $21 billion, the
largest investment in tackling legacy pollution by cleaning up Superfund and
brownfield sites, reclaiming abandoned mines, and capping orphaned oil and gas
wells. These projects will remediate environmental harm and address legacy
pollution that harms the public health of communities and advance long overdue
environmental justice by addressing infrastructure inequity, disinvestment,
structural racism and legacy multigenerational adverse impacts;
WHEREAS through the President's Bipartisan Infrastructure Law, The Inflation
Reduction Act and the American Rescue Plan, federal agencies are making
historic levels of investment to advance environmental justice which will
confront decades of underinvestment in disadvantaged communities and bring
critical resources to communities that have been overburdened by discriminatory
practices, legacy pollution, economic redlining, and environmental hazards; and
WHEREAS the City of Albuquerque seeks to ensure Justice40 investments to
rehabilitate water and wastewater infrastructure, local food systems, expanded
routes for fare-free renewable-based transit, affordable housing, home
ownership, quality education, workforce development, increase local and
community-owned renewable penetration; and
WHEREAS climate change and other historical injustices have impacted the health
and quality of life for Albuquerque residents especially those in underserved
communities of color and lowincome communities. This executive order puts in
place an oversight infrastructure committee to further address the inequitable
social, economic, and environmental conditions of Albuquerque calling on the
input of our stakeholders in cooperation with city, state and federal
governments towork closely and consistently together to secure funding for
these initiatives; and
WHEREAS this executive order supports the 17 federal agencies listed under
Justice 40 by creating an OCC appointed by the mayor that will coordinate with
local and state agencies to assist in preparing applications that will assure
maximum benefits to Albuquerque residents.
NOW, THEREFORE, I, Mayor Tim Keller, by virtue of the authority vested in me by
the Charter and laws of the City of Albuquerque, order and direct as follows:
The establishment of the Justice40 Oversight Coordinating Committee (OCC) will
consist of Department heads of each relevant city agency or their designee that
are required to collaborate with state and federal agency counterparts
including all relevant agencies involved in distributing qualifying Justice 40
federal funding.
I, Mayor Tim Keller, will also appoint seven community stakeholders to the
Justice 40 OCC and work with our city department leads and federal partners who
are forwarding the Justice40 Initiative, including guidance from those serving
on the White House Environmental Justice Advisory Council, Council of
Environmental Quality and Office of Management and Budget.
I, Mayor Tim Keller, will also appoint a City Representative as ex-officio Co-
Chair of the Justice40 OCC to serve alongside a community environmental justice
stakeholder as Co-Chair; The first meeting of the OCC will occur no later than
one month after the signing of this Executive Order. Hereafter the OCC will
meet monthly and as required to carry out the CABQ Justice40 Equitable and Just
Implementation Plan.
In accordance with this Executive Order, the Justice40 OCC will guide the city
in implementing Justice40 initiatives and creating equitable access to federal
funding intended for our most vulnerable and disproportionately impacted
communities.
Each city agency will work with an OCC coordinator to track projects that are
being submitted to the federal agency that corresponds with their agency,
ensure equity and participation of communities with greatest disproportionate
impact and report progress regularly.
This Executive Order establishes a term by which the OCC will engage in the
work of delivering community/government cooperative proposals to be submitted
to the city covering the various federal agencies identified under Justice40
for funding, in accordance with the Bipartisan Infrastructure Legislation.
American Rescue Plan Act, The Inflation Reduction Act, or any other federal
funding sources that are/may become available during this process. The City of
Albuquerque commits to a goal of 40% of targeted J40 related federal dollars
coming to the city to be allocated to projects identified as legacy needs.
These projects must be led by and with indigenous, POC, low-income and
immigrant community residents and/or those with clear direct benefits for the
most impacted and disadvantaged communities.
Inquires regarding this Executive Order should be directed to the Office of
Equity and Inclusion at (505) 768-3307.
 
 
______________________________
Timothy M. Keller              [https://export.amlegal.com/media/
Mayor                          6d88fadbb394cb34f1263b3e9230120271b111d2/IMAGES/
                              0-0-0-2431.png]
_____________________________
Effective Date
 
EI_NO:_36_(pdf)
 
 
Notes
1 1 https://www.whitehouse.gov/wp-content/uploads/2022/07/Justice40-Covered-
  Programs-List_vl.1_07-15-2022.pdf
2 2 https://www.whitehouse.gov/wp-content/uploads/2021/07/M-21-28.pdf
EI NO: 37
ESTABLISHING THE CITY OF ALBUQUERQUE'S COMMITMENT TO ENVIRONMENTAL JUSTICE,
CLIMATE ACTION, AND A HEALTHY FUTURE FOR ALL RESIDENTS
 
EXECUTIVE ORDER
ESTABLISHING THE CITY OF ALBUQUERQUE'S COMMITMENT TO ENVIRONMENTAL JUSTICE,
CLIMATE ACTION, AND A HEALTHY FUTURE FOR ALL RESIDENTS
WHEREAS, the City of Albuquerque recognizes the inherent right of every
resident to a healthy, sustainable environment-including clean air and water,
access to green space, and freedom from environmental toxins; and
WHEREAS, climate change poses an existential threat to the health, safety, and
economic well-being of Albuquerque residents, particularly communities that
have been historically marginalized and overburdened by pollution and
disinvestment; and
WHEREAS, local governments are on the frontlines of climate adaptation and
resilience, and Albuquerque has a moral and practical responsibility to lead
through action, innovation, and equity; and
WHEREAS, executive actions and regulatory rollbacks in the first Trump
Administration undermined national commitments to the Paris Agreement, weakened
clean air and water protections, and attempted to restrict local authority to
pursue progressive environmental policies; and
WHEREAS, in 2020, President Trump formally removed the United States from the
Paris Climate Agreement, withdrawing federal support for global cooperation on
climate resilience and forcing cities like Albuquerque to act independently to
meet climate goals; and
WHEREAS, Executive Order 13868, issued by President Trump, sought to limit _
consideration of climate resilience in infrastructure decision-making and
furthered reliance on fossil fuel infrastructure at the expense of long-term
public and environmental health; and
WHEREAS, Executive Order 13807 eliminated requirements for federal agencies to
consider the cumulative and long-term impacts of climate change during
environmental reviews under the National Environmental Policy Act (NEPA),
weakening protections for vulnerable communities and ecosystems; and
WHEREAS, Executive Order 13783 directed federal agencies to dismantle the Clean
Power Plan and remove climate considerations from regulatory frameworks,
halting progress toward decarbonization and energy transition; and
WHEREAS, the Trump administration disbanded the federal Advisory Committee for
the Sustained National Climate Assessment, silencing independent scientific
guidance intended to help cities, states, and private entities prepare for
climate-related threats; and
WHEREAS, the weakening of vehicle emissions standards under the Safer
Affordable Fuel-Efficient (SAFE) Vehicles Rule undercut local efforts to reduce
air pollution, undermining public health and increasing carbon emissions; and
WHEREAS, the administration weakened methane emissions rules for oil and gas
operations, increasing exposure to harmful pollutants for nearby communities,
many of which are Indigenous, rural, or economically disadvantaged; and
WHEREAS, the revocation of the Federal Flood Risk Management Standard
eliminated requirements to account for sea-level rise and climate-related
flooding in federally funded infrastructure, putting communities at greater
long-term risk; and
WHEREAS, on April 8, 2025, President Trump signed executive orders promoting
coal energy, including opening federal lands for mining, designating coal as a
critical mineral, and relaxing environmental regulations, actions that
environmental groups criticized for favoring outdated energy sources and
undermining progress toward renewable energy and climate action; and
WHEREAS, on April 9, 2025, President Trump signed an executive order titled
"Maintaining Acceptable Water Pressure in Showerheads," which reversed previous
federal regulations limiting water flow in showerheads to 2.5 gallons per
minute; and
WHEREAS, the relaxation of these water efficiency standards undermines efforts
to promote sustainable water use and environmental stewardship, leading to
increased water waste and higher utility costs for consumers; and
WHEREAS, in response to these rollbacks, cities across the country-including
Albuquerque-have reaffirmed their climate commitments and embraced local
environmental leadership as essential to protecting current and future
generations.
Therefore, I, Tim Keller, Mayor of the City of Albuquerque, do hereby order and
affirm the following:
1.   The City of Albuquerque strongly opposes all federal Executive Orders and
any federal actions or policies that obstruct local climate resilience,
sustainability planning, or environmental justice efforts.
2.   The City and will prioritize the protection of clean air, water, soil, and
biodiversity in all City operations, ordinances, and planning processes,
because environmental rights are human rights.
3.   All City departments shall align their policies, budgets, and strategic
planning with the goal of achieving net-zero greenhouse gas emissions by 2050
or sooner.
4.   The City shall prioritize frontline communities in climate adaptation
efforts, including the development of heat-resilient housing, equitable green
infrastructure, and public health preparedness.
5.   City agencies shall consider long-term climate impacts in making land use,
transportation, housing, and economic development decisions to ensure and
climate resilience and environmental sustainability.
6.   The City shall ensure that every resident lives within a 10-minute walk of
a public green space by 2030, prioritizing neighborhoods with historic
disinvestment.
7.   The City shall accelerate the transition away from fossil fuels in all
municipal buildings, including the use of 100% renewable energy to power our
operations by the end of 2025.
8.   The City is committed to its pledge to halve carbon emissions by 2030 and
achieve net-zero emissions by 2050.
9.   The City shall ensure transparency and public participation in major
environmental decisions, centering the voices of frontline communities.
10.   The City shall propose purchasing policies that prioritize sustainable,
non-toxic, and circular economy-aligned goods and services.
11.   The City shall continue to foster partnerships with regional and tribal
governments to address shared environmental challenges and protect water, land,
and air across jurisdictions.
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/6d88fadbb394cb34f1263b3e9230120271b111d2/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2681.jpg]
TIMOTHY M. KELLER MAYOR OF ALBUQUERQUE
EI_NO._37_(PDF)
EI NO: 38
PRESERVATION AND STEWARDSHIP OF ALBUQUERQUE'S OPEN SPACE AS IT RELATES TO
BIODIVERSITY AND CLIMATE RESILIENCE
WHEREAS, the City of Albuquerque manages approximately 30,597 acres of Major
Public Open Space, encompassing diverse landscapes such as the West Mesa,
Foothills, BosqueNalley, Tijeras Arroyo, and East Mountains; and
WHEREAS, the Trump administration's rollback of the Waters of the United States
(WOTUS) rule drastically reduced the number of water bodies protected under the
Clean Water Act, endangering drinking water and aquatic ecosystems,
particularly in arid and semi-arid regions like Albuquerque; and
WHEREAS, on March 3, 2025, President Trump issued an executive order to expand
logging across 280 million acres of national forests and public lands,
bypassing environmental protections including the Endangered Species Act; and
WHEREAS, on April 10, 2025, the U.S. House narrowly passed a budget framework
central to President Trump's agenda, advancing approximately $1.5 trillion in
tax cuts and federal spending reductions, which could potentially impact
funding for environmental protection programs, public land management, land
acquisition and habitat protection programs, City park programs, urban tree
planting initiatives, and local agriculture and food programs; and
WHEREAS, President Trump's attempted workforce reductions at agencies such as
the National Park Service, U.S. Forest Service, Bureau of Land Management, and
U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service will purposely inhibit these agencies from
carrying out their essential missions and leave cherished public lands in New
Mexico and across the West understaffed and unprotected, including Petroglyph
National Monument in Albuquerque; and
WHEREAS, President Trump's Interior Secretary issued orders making public lands
ground zero for drilling and mining, aiming to end protections of cherished
places and expand oil, gas, and mining activities on the country's public lands
that will threaten national park units in New Mexico such as Chaco and Carlsbad
Caverns; and
WHEREAS, the administration's efforts to roll back environmental protections
have been viewed as a systematic undermining of the laws that protect public
lands, the agencies that manage them, and the irreplaceable resources these
places safeguard for the American people; and
WHEREAS, the Rio Grande Valley in New Mexico diverse wildlife habitat, supports
hundreds of species, including endangered species such as the Rio Grande
silvery minnow and Southwestern willow flycatcher, and offers recreational
opportunities that enhance the quality of life for Albuquerque residents and
visitors; and
WHEREAS, the City of Albuquerque, through its Open Space Division, helps to
manage the Rio Grande Valley State Park, encompassing over 4,300 acres of
protected cottonwood forest, commonly known as the Bosque, to preserve and
restore native habitats and provide educational and recreational opportunities;
and
WHEREAS, the City of Albuquerque recognizes the critical importance of the Rio
Grande to the community's environmental integrity, public health, and economic
vitality, and is committed to counteracting federal rollbacks by implementing
robust local measures to safeguard this precious resource; and
WHEREAS, Albuquerque's commitment to open space ~reservation, collaboration
with the National Park Service, and urban park and tree planting efforts
reflects the city's dedication to environmental stewardship, climate
resilience, and the well-being of its residents.
Therefore, I, Tim Keller, Mayor of the City of Albuquerque, do hereby order and
affirm the following:
1. That open space and tree planting shall be central to our city's climate
resilience strategy, mitigating heat, absorbing carbon, and buffering flood
risk.
2. That Albuquerque shall not yield to federal efforts that weaken conservation
laws or open space protections that threaten federal, state and local lands but
shall instead lead through local action.
3. That the City of Albuquerque shall continue to prioritize the preservation
and restoration of its open spaces, including the Rio Grande bosque, Sandia
Foothills, West Mesa, and other lands as vital community assets.
4. The City shall continue to be a vigilant steward of the health, flow, and
ecological integrity of the Rio Grande and surrounding bosque.
5. The City shall expand nature-based stormwater management and protect the
aquifer through sustainable water practices.
6. That the ecological integrity of the bosque shall be safeguarded through
sciencebased management, habitat restoration, and native species protection.
7. That the City shall promote food justice by supporting community gardens,
urban farms, and access to locally grown foods.
8. The City shall identify and remediate brownfields and contaminated lands,
giving priority to city-owned sites in frontline communities.
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/6d88fadbb394cb34f1263b3e9230120271b111d2/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2693.jpg]
TIMOTHY M. KELLER MAYOR OF ALBUQUERQUE
EI_NO._38_(PDF)
EI NO: 39
STRENGTHENING THE CITY OF ALBUQUERQUE'S COMMITMENT TO DEFENDING OUR IMMIGRANT-
FRIENDLY CITY THROUGH INCLUSIVE PROTECTION OF IMMIGRANT AND REFUGEE POPULATIONS
Strengthening the City of Albuquerque's Commitment to Defending Our Immigrant-
Friendly City Through Inclusive Protection of Immigrant and Refugee Populations
Albuquerque has long stood as a city of refuge and resilience, rooted in values
of justice, compassion, and community. We recognize the humanity of all
Albuquerque residents, whether their citizenship status is immigrant, asylum
seeker, refugee, U.S.-bom, or naturalized; they have built and contributed to a
city defined by diversity, strength, and shared purpose. In the face of federal
actions and proposals that undermine human rights and respect, sow fear,
destabilize families, damage our economy, and upend collaborative partnerships,
the City of Albuquerque reaffirms its moral and legal duty to uphold civil
rights, promote public safety, and serve all residents with dignity.
This executive order affirms the City of Albuquerque's unwavering commitment to
protecting civil rights, promoting transparent governance, and ensuring public
safety in response to the impacts of federal legislation like H.R. 1, the "One
Big Beautiful Bill Act," signed into law by the 119th Congress on July 4, 2025,
and many other dangerous federal actions. We implore our New Mexico
congressional delegation and Congress, as a body, to support the Visible Act of
2025, which would strengthen oversight, transparency, and accountability for
the Trump Administration's indiscriminate and alarming immigration enforcement
tactics that have terrorized communities across the nation. Federal action is
needed to restrain and regulate the behavior of federal agencies.
This executive order focuses on what can be done by the City to mitigate harms
and shore up safeguards for immigrant and refugee communities by rejecting
exploitative private contracts, safeguarding due process, and prioritizing the
needs of working families and vulnerable children.
WHEREAS, the City of Albuquerque is an officially recognized immigrant-friendly
city (R-18-7), committed to upholding the dignity, safety, and legal
protections of all residents regardless of immigration status and enhancing the
public safety, economic development, business opportunity, and civil rights for
all members of our community.
WHEREAS, immigrants have long been foundational to the cultural richness of
Albuquerque, contributing to its unique blend of traditions, languages,
cuisines, music, and art.
WHEREAS, one in eight New Mexico workers is an immigrant, making up a vital
part of the state's labor force across key industries, many of which are
currently experiencing work shortages; and
WHEREAS, immigrants have a significant impact on our economy, having
contributed more than $1.5 billion in taxes and spending more than $5.6 billion
in consumer goods in 2023. More than 15,559 immigrants contribute to the
entrepreneurial landscape and future economic vitality of Albuquerque and the
state, and 16% of Albuquerque small businesses are immigrant-owned.
WHEREAS, the City affirms that due process and equal protection under the law
are foundational constitutional principles that must be safeguarded for all
individuals within the City's jurisdiction; and
WHEREAS, recent federal legislation signed by President Donald Trump expands
civil immigration enforcement and detention practices that undermine community
trust and harm vulnerable populations; and
WHEREAS, Immigration and Customs Enforcement (ICE) initiated enhanced
immigration operations within the City of Albuquerque, and these operations
have heightened fears within the community.
WHEREAS, our society entrusts law enforcement with significant authority,
including the powers to detain, arrest, carry firearms, and use force; and
WHEREAS, conducting law enforcement activities in uniform signals
professionalism and service to the public, and prevents the opportunity for
rogue or bad actors to defraud and potentially injure community members; and
WHEREAS, there have been numerous community complaints of individuals
impersonating law enforcement to defraud or injure vulnerable populations; and
WHEREAS, impersonating law enforcement officers erodes public confidence in our
justice system, makes it more difficult for genuine government officials to
maintain law and order, and creates fear and distrust in communities; and
WHEREAS, immigrant-friendly policies help to improve public safety by ensuring
that our most vulnerable - victims of domestic violence, sexual assault, and
other victims of crime - can report crime, seek safety, and serve as witnesses
in the prosecution of a crime without fear that it will lead to family
separation.
WHEREAS, the City supports transparent and accountable governance, including
the routine public disclosure of immigration enforcement activities that may
impact local residents and the economic vitality of our community.
WHEREAS, keeping families together and children protected and safe is a
fundamental value for the City of Albuquerque; and
WHEREAS, the safety and well-being of children, including unaccompanied migrant
minors, must be a top priority in all public policies and practices.
WHEREAS, the City recognizes that the economic security of working families
must be prioritized, particularly when federal actions are destabilizing
essential programs and services.
WHEREAS, immigrant friendly policies are conducive to public safety, economic
development, and growth, and are vital to keeping families together.
WHEREAS, the City plays a critical role in providing services to support
residents and their needs.
Therefore I, Timothy M. Keller, Mayor of the City of Albuquerque, do hereby
order, direct and affirm the following:
PROTECTION OF IMMIGRATION DUE PROCESS
1. The City of Albuquerque remains committed to the principles set forth in C/
S R-18-7, which affirmed Albuquerque's status as an immigrant-friendly city. In
accordance with that resolution, City agencies, departments, officers,
employees, or agents shall not use City resources, including but not limited to
moneys, equipment, personnel, or City facilities to assist in or otherwise
facilitate the enforcement of federal civil immigration laws, including
participation in civil immigration raids, detentions, or information sharing
efforts, except where required by federal law or court order.
IMPLEMENTATION AND OVERSIGHT
2. The Office of Equity and Inclusion (OEI) shall lead the implementation of
this Executive Order.
3. The Office of Immigrant and Refugee Affairs (OIRA) Steering Committee,
established in 2021 , will solicit feedback from the community, immigration
rights organizations, service providers, business owners, health care
providers, educators, domestic violence advocates, faith leaders, and other
community partners on federal immigration actions and the City's response,
identify ways that the City can protect the rights of immigrants, and
collaborate with local nonprofits, legal service providers, and schools to
ensure access to legal representation, counseling, and safe shelter options.
4. The Office of Equity and Inclusion (OEI) shall continue to disseminate Know
Your Rights information, shall identify additional opportunities to educate the
community and, in coordination with other City of Albuquerque departments,
shall share information on City services and assistance programs for families
impacted by federal enforcement actions.
5. All departments shall designate a liaison to coordinate compliance,
training, and reporting. OEI shall provide regular progress reports to the
mayor and/or his designee.
TRANSPARENCY IN CITY OF ALBUQUERQUE SERVICES
6. City departments shall not support secret policing tactics by ICE agents.
7. When encountering ICE agents at City facilities, City employees shall follow
any guidance issued by the City Attorney's Office, including all previous
guidance from the memorandum issued to all City employees on February 10, 2025.
8. City departments shall review their existing programs and services to
identify additional ways to support families that have been impacted by federal
immigration enforcement actions.
9. City departments shall report any ICE activity on City properties or
facilities to the Mayor's Office, the City Attorney's Office, and the OIRA
Steering Committee.
10. The Albuquerque Police Department (APD) cannot legally interfere with ICE
activity, but upon request from a member of the community who has observed
activity at a specific location, APD will assist in confirming whether federal
agents are engaged in immigration enforcement activity.
11. The City will exhaust all available avenues to prosecute to the highest
degree allowable those who defraud the public and commit crimes in our
community through impersonation of law enforcement.
TRANSPARENCY IN IMMIGRATION ENFORCEMENT
12. As a law enforcement agency, ICE and its employees should demonstrate
professional behavior that is beyond reproach and representative of the special
public trust they hold.
Its employees should demonstrate behavior that promotes the highe.st levels of
integrity and professionalism, which should include clear communication and
clear and consistent identification as ICE agents.eCFR :: 8 CFR 287.8 -
- Standards for enforcement activities.
13. ICE must not disrupt the safety or well-being of City public spaces through
violent or harmful detainment actions.
14. The City Attorney's Office shall file and maintain regular Freedom
oflnformation Act (FOIA) requests with the United States Department of Homeland
Security and ICE regarding immigration enforcement activities within or
affecting the City of Albuquerque and disseminate relevant information to the
Mayor's Office, OIRA Steering Committee, and any relevant City department.
PROTECTION OF CHILDREN, INCLUDING MIGRANT YOUTH
15. Led by the City's Child Wellbeing Impact Officer, in collaboration with
OEI, all City departments serving children and youth shall develop trauma-
informed protocols to assist minors impacted by immigration enforcement,
including unaccompanied and separated children.
SUPPORT FOR WORKING FAMILIES
16. The City shall direct relevant departments to identify and support families
disproportionately affected by immigration enforcement, particularly in areas
such as housing, healthcare, employment, and education.
17. The City will expand virtual access to services and provide support as
needed to facilitate secure interactions with other government agencies.
I recognize the enforcement of federal immigration law is under the sole
purview of the federal government. As such, I strongly encourage our New Mexico
congressional delegation to support and join with the congressional co-sponsors
of the Visible Act of 2025, which would strengthen oversight, transparency, and
accountability for the Trump Administration's indiscriminate and alarming
immigration enforcement tactics that have terrorized communities across the
nation. Nothing in this executive order shall be interpreted as requiring any
City officer or employee to violate federal or state law or a valid court
order. If any section, clause, or provision of this order is found to be
invalid or unenforceable, the remainder shall continue in full force and
effect.
Inquiries regarding this executive order should be directed to the Office of
Equity and Inclusion at (505) 768-3491.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/6d88fadbb394cb34f1263b3e9230120271b111d2/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2800.png]
EI_NO:_39_(pdf)
EI NO: 40
COMMITMENT TO SUPPORTING A LOCAL FOOD SYSTEM AND ECONOMY; AND STABALIZING OUR
FAMILIES AND COMMUNITIES
City of Albuquerque
Office of the Mayor Timothy M Keller
WHEREAS, food insecurity - defined as limited or uncertain
access to adequate food resources - is a key determinant for both physical and
mental health, affecting children's ability to learn, grow, and thrive; and
WHEREAS, in New Mexico over 350,000 residents, including nearly one in four
children, live in food-insecure households, with the state ranking fourth in
the nation for high rates of food insecurity, and food costs have risen
dramatically in recent years; and
WHEREAS, lack of access to fresh, healthy food contributes
directly to hunger, malnutrition, obesity, diabetes, and other
chronic health conditions such as asthma and depression, increasing long-term
health care costs and reducing quality oflife; and
WHEREAS, some food insecure households report having to skip meals whereas
others depend on calorie-dense and lower-quality foods that do not satisfy
basic nutritional requirements; and
WHEREAS,  lower-cost foods and those with processed grains, fats, and sugars
are associated with higher rates of childhood obesity and diabetes; therefore,
children in food-insecure households are at a higher risk of being overweight
and having diabetes, in part due to frequent consumption of calorie-
dense, nutritionally poor foods, which are generally lower cost; and
WHEREAS, limited access to nutritious food and fresh produce is a significant
barrier to healthy dietary choices, and studies show that improving
access to fresh produce significantly increases consumption
of fresh fruits and vegetables; and
WHEREAS, childhood obesity remains a pressing concern in New Mexico,
with nearly one in three children ages 10-17 classified as overweight
or obese, creating long-term risks for diabetes, heart disease, and
other chronic illnesses; and
WHEREAS, 
disparities in childhood obesity rates reflect disparities in access to fresh, healthy food in certain areas;
and
WHEREAS, heart disease is the leading cause of death in New Mexico, driven
in part by poor nutrition, diet-related risk factors, and limited access to
fresh, healthy food; and
WHEREAS, New Mexico ranks among the most food-insecure states for older adults,
with the 13th largest senior population in the nation and nearly one in five
seniors experiencing food insecurity while another one in five are at risk,
placing New Mexico third in the United States and well above the national
average; and
WHEREAS, food insecurity also affects college students, as 58% of college
students in New Mexico were food insecure in 2023, including 37% of University
of New Mexico students, some of whom go days at a time without any food; and
WHEREAS, a "food desert" is a geographic area with limited access to
nutritious, affordable food, at least one mile in urban settings from the
nearest supermarket or large grocery store; and
WHEREAS, 79% of households in Bernalillo County are located in a food desert,
and many neighborhoods in Albuquerque, including parts of the International
District and South Valley, are identified as food deserts, where access to
fresh, healthy foods is severely limited; and
WHEREAS, federal nutrition assistance programs such as the Supplemental
Nutrition Assistance Program (SNAP) have faced deep funding cuts and stricter
eligibility requirements, impeding critical access to fresh, nutritious food
for low-income families; and
WHEREAS, multiple programs supporting local food procurement, including school
meals and food bank partnerships, have been terminated or scaled back by the
U.S. Department of Agriculture, reducing opportunities for schools and food
banks to source healthy, locally grown food; and
WHEREAS, rising food and grocery costs resulting from inflation and disruptions
in supply chains are placing additional financial burdens on families,
especially those with limited incomes, thereby deepening food insecurity; and
WHEREAS, 
the erosion of trust in federal food and economic systems has underscored the need for cities like Albuquerque
to build self-reliant, community-based solutions that can respond
quickly to residents' needs regardless of federal timelines or political
shifts; and
WHEREAS, a resilient and self-sustaining local food system rooted in local
production, community distribution, and equitable access reduces dependence
on outside systems and strengthens public confidence in the City's ability to
provide stability during national or global disruptions; and
WHEREAS, food systems comprise interconnected components
including production, processing, transport, distribution, marketing,
consumption, and waste management, all of which play vital roles in feeding
communities and influencing sustainability; and
WHEREAS,  the loss of arable land in recent decades directly impacts food
production and can lead to shortages or increased food prices; this issue can
be managed through the production of more arable land, increasing the
productive capacity of existing arable land, and conserving arable land
to prevent degradation; and
WHEREAS, food access challenges are not normally limited to one section
of the food system, and if only one part of the system is addressed, food
access problems may persist; and
WHEREAS, reducing food waste in Albuquerque presents an opportunity to lower
household costs, strengthen food security, and cut methane emissions from
landfills, advancing the City's environmental and economic goals; and
WHEREAS, strengthening Albuquerque's local food system can expand access to
fresh produce, support healthier diets, reduce food waste, contribute to
the local economy, and build resilience against climate-related challenges; and
WHEREAS, New Mexico's agricultural sector is a multibillion-dollar industry,
yet 95% of products leave the state, creating an opportunity to connect local
producers with local consumers; and
WHEREAS, local governments play a vital role in building sustainable,
inclusive, and resilient food systems through removing regulatory barriers,
building partnerships, and engaging deeply with communities; and
WHEREAS, Albuquerque benefits from a robust local agricultural and food system,
with dozens of individuals and organizations working daily to address food
insecurity and expand healthy food access across the community; and
WHEREAS, the Mayor has committed to advancing the City's Food and Agriculture
Plan and Climate Action Plan, including the historic establishment of a Local
Agriculture Community Coordinator position dedicated to supporting and
strengthening Albuquerque's agricultural community, and to addressing
the growing impacts of federal nutrition program cuts and funding reductions by
building local capacity and self-reliance within the City's food system.
Therefore I, Timothy M. Keller,
Mayor of the City of Albuquerque, do hereby order and affirm the following:
A COMMITMENT TO SUPPORTING A LOCAL FOOD SYSTEM AND ECONOMY; AND STABILIZING OUR
FAMILIES AND COMMUNITIES
The City of Albuquerque is committed to supporting a stronger local food
system that is affordable, sustainable, inclusive, equitable, and safe.
Our goal is to ensure that every resident has access to affordable, fresh, and
healthy food, regardless of income or neighborhood. At a time when families are
facing increased financial strain from rising food costs, ongoing
inflation, and federal cuts to nutrition and social support programs like SNAP, the City recognizes that access to affordable
food is more than a matter of choice, it is a matter of stability and health.
In response, the City of Albuquerque will:
1.   Use every legal tool available to restore and protect
federal funding for food programs that families depend on.
2.   Take immediate action to support residents through enhanced coordination between City community centers, health
and social service centers, senior centers, local food banks, pantries, and
mutual-aid networks to address food insecurity.
3.   fortify a self-reliant, affordable, and sustainable local food system
through coordinated policy, planning, and community partnerships. This approach
will strengthen the connection between local producers and consumers, expand
neighborhood-based food access, and grow the City's local food economy.
4.   Align zoning, procurement, and education initiatives with community-driven
goals to significantly reduce household food insecurity, stabilize costs, and
support the vitality of local farmers and small businesses.
The City's long-term vision is to make "buying local" synonymous with "buying
affordable," ensuring that fresh, healthy, and locally produced
food is accessible to every household while fostering a stronger, self-reliant
regional food system for future generations.
SUPPORT AND EXPAND LOCAL FOOD SYSTEM OPPORTUNITIES
City of Albuquerque departments will immediately update or develop rules, policies, programs, and practices to strengthen
the local food system and support access to affordable, fresh, healthy, and local food in Albuquerque.
Affordability depends on reducing costs at every step - from production to
distribution to the point of purchase - while creating efficiencies that allow
farmers, small businesses, and families to thrive together.
1.   In furtherance of the City's commitment to legalize and incentivize
neighborhood micro-markets (bodegas), the Environmental Health Department shall
immediately promulgate rules for food establishment permits to provide for
bodegas, mobile food markets, and uncut produce mobile retail. Permitting will
be streamlined with zero fees.
2.   In furtherance of the City's commitment
to making City property available for urban agriculture and other activities
that support a local food system:
a.   The Parks & Recreation Department shall update and develop policies and procedures for existing and new
parks facilities to support local food system activities, including
but not limited to allowing for public use of parks facilities for community
gardens, edible landscaping, pollinator gardens, growers' markets, and other
food retail and distribution opportunities, water capture, and community
education.
b.   The City's Child Wellbeing Impact Officer shall collaborate
with the Parks & Recreation Department and Albuquerque Public Schools
to establish school community gardens for on-site, hands-on education about
sustainable diets.
c.   The Department of Family & Youth Services shall work with the Parks & Recreation Department
to update
and develop polices for existing and new community facilities to further support local food system activities
including through community gardens, edible landscaping, pollinator
gardens, growers' markets and other
food retail and distribution opportunities, water capture, community refrigerators, and community
education.
3.   The Environmental Health Department shall develop and adopt rules and/or
policies for the establishment and operation of community refrigerators to
reduce food waste and increase access to fresh, nutritious food.
4.   The Parks & Recreation Department Open Space Division shall update or
develop policies and practices for existing and new Open Space urban
agriculture and composting sites to improve access to affordable local food and
compost.
5.   The Economic Development Department shall develop programs and identify funding sources to support local food
system businesses, from farmers to retailers, including but not limited
to incentives, business assistance, training, marketing assistance, and/or
waste reduction strategies education.
6.   The Planning Department shall revise and/or develop policies to support
urban agriculture, food production, food
processing, markets, and retail food sales through zoning and zoning flexibility, development incentives, fast-
track permitting, develop process assistance, and other means.
CITY OF ALBUQUERQUE OPERATIONS OPPORTUNITIES
The City of Albuquerque will lead by example through an internal transformation
of food policies and procurement practices. By changing how we buy, serve,
source, and manage food products within city government, we 're investing
directly in our local growers, supporting small businesses, and
helping families - especially those hit hardest by inflation with access to
fresh, affordable food close to home.
7.   The Sustainability Office shall develop food waste prevention, separation,
and diversion plans for the City of Albuquerque and individual
departments, incorporating as practicable waste reduction
strategies, food rescue and redistribution programs
to improve food access, and food waste diversion from landfills to composting
partners to support a more sustainable local food system model.
The Sustainability Office shall:
a.   Work with the Environmental Health Department
to develop guidelines for food rescue at municipal facilities, prioritizing
those with kitchens.
b.   Work with the Department of Senior Affairs, Department of Youth & Family
Services, and the Department of Health, Housing & Homelessness to
scale the 2024 CASA Kitchen food waste pilot program.
c.   Work with the Arts & Culture Department to develop a food waste prevention
and separation plan for their facilities, programs, and concessions that
include visitor education.
d.   Work with the Aviation Department to develop and implement a food waste prevention and separation plan that
includes visitor education at the Sunport and Double Eagle concessions.
e.   Develop and implement a food waste prevention and separation plan for City
Hall.
f.   Collaborate with the Office of Civic Engagement to connect OneABQ Volunteers with opportunities to support
food rescue through apps or other means.
8.   The Arts & Culture Department and Parks & Recreation Department
shall increase options of fresh, nutritious, and local food within their food
concessions.
9.   The Senior Affairs Department, Youth & Family Services, and the Department of Health, Housing & Homelessness
shall incorporate more fresh, nutritious, local food into department programs and promote sustainable diets through
relevant education, health promotion, and communication programs.
10.   The Purchasing Division and Sustainability Office shall adopt policies
that improve the City's ability to prefer locally grown/made products,
consistent with the City's Buy Local Initiative and 2024
Sustainability Resolution.
The Purchasing Division shall also work with all City departments requiring
procurement or service contracting of foods to develop Good Food Purchasing
Standards or similar guidelines to encourage the procurement of healthy foods.
11.   Parks & Recreation Open Space Division shall identify lands in the Middle
Rio Grande Conservancy District (MRGCD) that are available for agriculture
and food production and shall work with the MRGCD to protect these properties.
TASK FORCE ON IMPLEMENTATION AND INVESTMENT
The City shall establish a cross-departmental task force, coordinated by the
CABQ Local Agriculture Community Coordinator, to oversee continued
implementation of the Executive
Order, ensure accountability across City departments, secure future funding and
resource alignment to sustain and scale the initiative's impact, and
ensure equitable community engagement with a focus on neighborhoods most
affected by food insecurity.
12.   City departments will seek alignment of policies and programs that impact
the food system across multiple sectors and administrative levels. An
interdepartmental Local Food System City Task Force shall be formed with
designated liaisons from the following departments and offices:
Arts & Culture Department
Economic Development
Environmental Health Department
Health, Housing & Homelessness
Mayor's Office
Metropolitan Redevelopment Agency Office of Equity & Inclusion
Office of Civic Engagement
Open Space Division
Parks & Recreation Department Planning Department Purchasing Division
Real Property
Senior Affairs Department Sustainability Office Youth & Family Services
13.   The Task Force shall identify, map, and evaluate local initiatives and community food movements to transform best
practices into relevant programs and policies and to identify partnership
opportunities.
14.   The Task Force shall identify all vacant City properties and complete an
assessment as to suitability for various food systems related uses including
but not limited to urban agriculture, farming/growing, production, storage,
commissary, distribution, wholesale, farmers' markets and retail sales to
activate vacant lots for local urban agriculture and food system activities
as supported by the Climate Action Plan and the and the Albuquerque Food and
Agriculture Action Plan.
15.   The Task Force shall work with the Office of Civic Engagement to develop
a plan for community input and collaboration with the private sector along with
research, educational, and community-based organizations for
further review of municipal policies and regulations, and proposing changes to and/
or development of new policies and regulations.
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/6d88fadbb394cb34f1263b3e9230120271b111d2/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2860.jpg]
EI_NO:_40_(pdf)
Administrative
AI NO: 1-1
SIGNATURE AUTHORITY FOR WRITTEN AGREEMENTS, BUDGET DOCUMENTS, FINANCIAL
DOCUMENTS, EXECUTIVE COMMUNICATIONS, AND PUBLIC PURCHASING DOCUMENTS (2023)
ADMINISTRATIVE INSTRUCTION NO: 1-1 (2023)
TITLE: Signature Authority for Written Agreements, Budget Documents, Financial
Documents, Executive Communications, and Public Purchasing Documents
PRIMARY DEPARTMENT: Chief Administrative Officer Office
Purpose of Administrative Instruction:
The purpose of this Administrative Instruction is to delegate the Chief
Administrative Officer’s authority to Executive or Departmental management to
ensure City agreements, budget documents, financial documents, executive
communications, and public purchasing documents are effectively and efficiently
processed and managed.
Background:
This Administrative Instruction supersedes the following Administrative
Instructions or directives relating to the signature authority described
herein: Administrative Instruction No. 1-1, dated February 2, 2023,
Administrative Instruction No. 1-1, dated September 21, 2018, Administrative
Instruction No. 1- 1 (Revised), dated January 5, 2000, Administrative
Instruction No. 1-1-A (Amended 07-18-03), dated July 18, 2003, Administrative
Instruction 2-1-A, dated February 3, 1994, Administrative Instruction 3-1.1A
(Revised), dated May 18, 1995, and Administrative Instruction 7-1-lA (Revised),
dated February 3, 1994, each of which is hereby rescinded in its entirety. This
Administrative Instruction does not supersede any review or approval authority
that may be set forth in any other Administrative Instruction not specifically
identified in this paragraph.
Section 5-5-13 ROA1994 provides that the Mayor is authorized to enter into
agreements of any type on behalf of the City and that the Mayor may delegate
this signature authority by executive instruction.
Executive Instruction No. 2 also provides that the Chief Administrative Officer
may delegate signature authority by administrative directive or instruction.
This Administrative Instruction delegates to designated City officials, final
signature authority. The right of approval of such documents granted by
statute, ordinance, resolution or regulation may differ from the final
signature authority as provided herein. The official with final signature
authority should not execute a document until all such required approvals are
obtained. In particular where the City Council has the right of approval of a
contract, document, or agreement, it should not be executed until after the
Council approval is obtained. This Administrative Instruction contains
references to additional required approvals but should not be considered an
exhaustive listing.
Signature authority for written agreements and other official documents which
bind the City and which are not specifically delegated in this Administrative
Instruction, or by separate instruction, directive or other document, is
reserved to the Chief Administrative Officer.
Unless a different rule is specified in this Administrative Instruction or in
another directive of the Chief Administrative Officer, signature authority
delegated herein may be further delegated in writing as follows:
   1. For a short period (thirty-one (31) days or less), to another City
employee of equal rank or an immediate subordinate by the individual to whom
authority is delegated in this Administrative Instruction; or
   2. For a longer or indefinite period, to any City employee approved by the
Chief Administrative Officer.
The Chief Procurement Officer and Capital Improvement Program Official (CIP
Official) may also delegate the signature authority granted to them by the
Public Purchases Ordinance by written directive from the Chief Administrative
Officer or relevant Executive Administrator. Said signature authority may be
delegated:
   1. For a short period (thirty-one (31) days or less) to an immediate
subordinate.
   2. For a longer or indefinite period, to an employee of equal or greater
rank.
An individual to whom signature authority is delegated as provided above is not
authorized to delegate that authority to another individual.
If Department names or officials' titles are changed after the effective date
of this Administrative Instruction, the authority delegated herein shall fall
to the successors to such officials. If it is not clear to whom the authority
falls, the Chief Administrative Officer shall specify the official who has the
signature authority.
ELECTRONIC SIGNATURES ARE PREFERRED: Authenticated electronic signatures are
legally acceptable pursuant to Section 14-16-7 NMSA 1978. The written agreement
must include affirmative language such as the following: "The parties agree
that this agreement may be electronically signed and that the electronic
signatures appearing on the agreement are the same as handwritten signatures
for the purposes of validity, enforceability, and admissibility." Unless
otherwise specifically delegated to another City official by statute,
ordinance, resolution, regulation, directive or instruction, final signature
authority for the City is delegated to the following officials listed below for
the types of contracts, documents and under the circumstances indicated.
Definitions:
Department Director – Director of the designated department.
Executive Administrator – Assigned administrator of the Mayor’s executive team
with administrative oversight for assigned department(s). The assigned
Executive Administrator shall be designated by title through approved and
posted organizational chart.
General Policy:
This Administrative Instruction establishes the signature authority for
specific documents related to the City's:
   I.    Written Agreements (Page 3);
   II.    Budget Documents, Financial Documents, and Executive Communications
(Page 13);
   III.      Public Purchasing Documents (Page 15); and
All approvals delegated within this Administrative Instruction will be given to
the CAO for review/notification by the appropriate Executive Administrator
within 5 days.
Signatory actions taken as a result of the delegated authority included and/or
referenced to Administrative Instruction No. 1-1 must be documented and
communicated to the Chief Administrative Officer with 5 days of action. The
Chief Administrative Officer must also document and communicate signatory
actions taken on behalf of the Executive Administrators or department staff to
the applicable department(s) Executive Administrator within 5 days of action.
For items not covered in this Administrative Instruction, reference should be
made to the State statute, City Ordinance, City Resolution, or City policies
listed in the References section below.
I.   SIGNATURE AUTHORITY FOR WRITTEN AGREEMENTS
   A.   Contracts for Professional/Technical Services
   For design professional contracts (architectural, engineering, landscape,
and other related professional services as defined by § 14-7-2-2 ROA 1994) as
follows:
      1.   Where the contract amount is $100,000 or less - Applicable
Department Director and CIP Official
      2.   Where the contract amount is more than $100,000 - Chief
Administrative Officer or Executive Administrator
The design professional contracts referenced herein are awarded based on the
recommendation of the Selection Advisory Committee, which recommendation is
approved by Council as provided in §14-7-2-6 ROA 1994. No further Council
approval is needed on design professional contracts that have been through this
recommendation and selection process. §5-5-19(A)(7) ROA 1994
   B.   For legal services contracts as follows:
      1.   Where the legal contract amount is $100,000 or less - City Attorney
and Chief Procurement Officer. The Director of the Department of Finance and
Administrative Services and the Risk Manager shall approve all contracts
charged to the Risk Management Fund.
      2.   Where the legal contract amount is more than $100,000 - Chief
Administrative Officer or Executive Administrator , City Attorney, and Chief
Procurement Officer. The Director of the Department of Finance and
Administrative Services and the Risk Manager shall approve all contracts
charged to the Risk Management Fund, following approval by Council as provided
in § 5-5-19(A)(3)(a) ROA 1994.
      3.   Supplements to a legal contract, which, when added to the original
legal contract, causes the legal contract amount in its entirety to exceed
$100,000 - Chief Administrative Officer or Executive Administrator , City
Attorney, and Chief Procurement Officer. The Director of the Department of
Finance and Administrative Services and the Risk Manager shall approve all
contracts charged to the Risk Management Fund, following approval by Council as
provided in §5-5-19(A)(3)(b) ROA 1994.
   C.   For all other professional/technical services contracts as follows:
      1.   Where the contract amount is $100,000 or less - Department Director
and Chief Procurement Officer.
      2.   Where the contract amount is more than $100,000 - Chief
Administrative Officer or Executive Administrator , Department Director and
Chief Procurement Officer following approval by Council as provided in §5-5-19
(A)(3 )(a) ROA 1994.
      3.   Any supplements to a contract which, when added to the original
contract, causes the contract amount in its entirety to exceed $100,000 - Chief
Administrative Officer or Executive Administrator , Department Director and
Chief Procurement Officer following approval by Council as provided in §5-5- 19
(A)(3 )(b) ROA 1994. All professional/technical contracts must be reviewed and
approved by the City Attorney or designee, and the Chief Procurement Officer or
the CIP Official if capital funds are used.
   D.   Concession Contracts and Revenue-Producing Contracts
      1.   Concession contracts are contracts which allow the use of City
property for sale of goods, services, advertising, etc. to generate a profit
for the business and to provide revenues to the City.
         For concession contracts with estimated revenues to the contractor
over a 12-month period are:
         a.   $75,000 or less - Department Director
         b.   More than $75,000- Chief Administrative Officer or Executive
Administrator following approval by Council as provided in §5-5-19(A)(5) ROA
1994
      2.   For contracts for the loan of City-owned exhibits where estimated or
known revenues to the City are:
         a.   $25,000 or less - Department Director
         b.   More than $25,000 - Chief Administrative Officer or Executive
Administrator
      3.   For all other revenue-producing contracts (excludes real property
and grant agreements covered below) where estimated or known revenues to the
City are:
         a.   $25,000 or less - Department Director
         b.   More than $25,000 – Chief Administrative Officer or Executive
Administrator
      4.   Except as provided herein, all concession and revenue-producing
contracts must be reviewed and approved by the City Attorney or designee and
the Chief Procurement Officer.
   E.   Real Property Agreements
      1.   For leases of City owned property or other conveyances of City real
property interests (§5-2-4 ROA 1994) other than Metropolitan Redevelopment
Agency (MRA) leases and other MRA real property agreements:
         a.   Where the term is either: (i) longer than two (2) years or (ii)
longer than one (1) month and the rent is more than $500/month - or Executive
Administrator following approval by Council
         b.   For leases other than those described in Section C. l .a above -
Department Director and Real Property Manager
         c.   For acceptance of extension or renewal options already provided
for and described in leases previously approved by Council and signed by Chief
Administrative Officer or Executive Administrator - Department Director
      2.   For leases of private or non-City-owned property to the City (§ 5-2-
6 ROA 1994) (Does not include construction and utility easements) other than
MRA leases:
         a.   Where the term is longer than six (6) months and the rent is more
than $500/month - Chief Administrative Officer or Executive Administrator
following approval by Council
         b.   For any leases of non-City-owned property other than those
described 111 Section C.2.a. above - Department Director and Real Property
Manager
         c.   To exercise the extension or renewal option provided for and
described in leases previously approved by Council and signed by Chief
Administrative Officer or Executive Administrator - Department Director
      3.   For all MRA leases:
         a.   When the term is of one (1) year or less- MRA Manager
         b.   When the term is greater than one (1) year - Chief Administrative
Officer or Executive Administrator following approval by Council
      4.   For contracts for the disposal of City property (§5-2-1 ROA 1994)
other than MRA contracts:
         a.   For real property having a value of not more than $10,000, upon
Mayor's determination that property is not essential - Applicable Department
Director and Property Manager
         b.   For real property having a value over $10,000 but no more than
$50,000-upon Council determination that property is not essential to §5-2-1 and
§5-2-2 ROA 1994 - Applicable Department Director, and Chief Administrative
Officer or Executive Administrator
         c.   For real property having a value over $50,000 - upon Council
determination that property is not essential - Applicable Department Director,
and Chief Administrative Officer or Executive Administrator following approval
by Council
      5.   For contracts for the acquisition of real property (§5-2-5 ROA
1994), other than MRA contracts and excluding contracts listed in Section C.6
below, where the purchase amount is:
         a.   $50,000 or less - Department Director supervising the Property
Manager and Applicable Department Director
         b.   More than $50,000 - Chief Administrative Officer or Executive
Administrator and Applicable Department Director, following Council approval,
unless funds have been appropriated specifically or generally for the
acquisition
      6.   For all written contracts for the purchase or sale, including lease,
of water rights - Chief Administrative Officer or Executive Administrator
(Consult Council Resolutions and State Statutes to determine if Council
approval is required.)
      7.   For miscellaneous real property documents:
         a.   Encroachment agreements, licenses, easements and similar permits
on City-owned property (excludes short term concession contracts or leases of
City-owned property described above in Sections B and C. l .), estoppel
agreements, and encroachment agreements, licenses, easements and similar
permits for non-City-owned property to the City (excludes private development
agreements described in Section D.4. below) - Applicable Department Director
and Department Director supervising the Property Manager
         b.   Vacation of public rights-of-way and easements - Chief
Administrative Officer or Executive Administrator following action by the
Development Review Board (§ 14-14-7-1 et seq. ROA 1994) and Council if required
by § 14-14-7-2 (F)(3)(b)
         c.   Releases of real property liens - Department Director supervising
the Property Manager
         d.   Plats of City property – Chief Administrative Officer or
Executive Administrator
         e.   All agreements pertaining to the real property administered
pursuant to the Open Space Trust Fund and Land Administration Ordinance (§ 4-2-
3-1 et seq. ROA 1994) – Chief Administrative Officer or Executive Administrator
         f.   All agreements pertaining to Film and Photography Location
License Agreements except MRA and Aviation Agreements - City Film Liaison and
Department Director of Department in control of property used in Film and
Photography
      8.   For deeds, promissory notes, mortgages, and releases of m01tgages –
Chief Administrative Officer or Executive Administrator
      9.   All real property agreements must be reviewed and approved by the
City Attorney or designee, the CIP Official if capital funds are used, and the
Property Manager
   F.   Construction and Related Agreements
      1.   For construction contracts as follows:
         a.   Where contract amount is $1,000,000 or less - Municipal
Development Director (if the Chief Administrative Officer or Executive
Administrator has signed the Notice of Award)
         b.   Where contract amount is more than $1,000,000 – Chief
Administrative Officer or Executive Administrator
      2.   For change orders to construction contracts as follows:
         a.   Where the change to the contract amount is $100,000 or less -
Municipal Development Director, Applicable Department Director, and CIP
Official
         b.   Where the change to the contract amount is more than $100,000 –
Chief Administrative Officer or Executive Administrator
      3.   For special assessment district (improvement district) contracts and
change orders. The rules for construction (Section D.1 and 2) and design
professional contracts (A.1) above apply.
      4.   For private development agreements and related documents (listed
below) - City Engineer.
         a.   Subdivision improvement agreements, including but not limited to
Procedures A, B and C agreements as defined in the Albuquerque Development
Process Manual, Volume I, Chapter 5
         b.   Easements on non-city property
         c.   Encroachment agreements
         d.   Sidewalk variance agreements
         e.   Drainage covenants
         f.   Licenses revocable permits
         g.   Special permit agreements
(Additional signatures and approvals and procedures applicable to private
development agreements and related documents are set out in the Development
Process Manual.)
      5.   All construction and related agreements must be reviewed and
approved by the City Attorney or designee and the CIP Official.
   G.   Intergovernmental Agreements
      1.   All Joint Powers Agreements as defined in the New Mexico Joint
Powers Agreements Act, NMSA § 11-1-1 et seq. – Chief Administrative Officer or
Executive Administrator
      2.   For grant agreements with governmental agencies, as follows:
         a.   Where the amount granted to the City is $100,000 or less -
Department Director
         b.   Where the amount granted to the City is more than $100,000 -
Chief Administrative Officer or Executive Administrator (All applications or
proposals for federal or state grants require Council approval, with four
exceptions, see § 2-11-17 ROA 1994)
      3.   For all other agreements with governmental agencies, including but
not limited to, memoranda of understanding, memoranda of agreement, cooperative
agreements, revenue-producing agreements, service agreements and professional/
technical agreements as follows:
         a.   Where the amount of the contract is $100,000 or less - Department
Director and Chief Procurement Officer
         b.   Where the amount of the contract is more than $100,000 - Chief
Administrative Officer or Executive Administrator, Department Director and
Chief Procurement Officer
         c.   Where the contract does not involve a payable - Chief
Administrative Officer or Executive Administrator and Department Director
      4.   For agreements between City Departments, as follows:
         a.   Where the amount of the interdepartmental contract is $100,000 or
less - all applicable Department Directors
         b.   Where the amount of the interdepartmental contract is more than
$100,000 - Chief Administrative Officer or Executive Administrator and all
applicable Department Directors
         c.   Where the amount of the intradepartmental contract is $100,000 or
less, including nonmonetary contracts - all applicable Division Managers
         d.   Where the amount of the intradepartmental contract is more than
$100,000 - Chief Administrative Officer or Executive Administrator and all
applicable Division Managers
      5.   All intergovernmental agreements that do involve a payable must be
reviewed and approved by the City Attorney or designee, and the Chief
Procurement Officer or the CIP Official if capital funds are used.
      6.   All intergovernmental agreements that do not involve a payable must
be reviewed and approved by the City Attorney or designee.
      7.   All agreements between City Departments and Divisions must be
reviewed and approved by the City Attorney or designee.
   H.   Social Services Agreements and Development Agreements
      1.   For all social services agreements, as defined in § 5-5-3 R.O.A
1994, and development agreements:
         a.   $100,000 or less (or amount as provided in the Social Services
Contracts Procurement Rules dated November 24, 2021 and as may be amended, for
purchases of social services allowed to be procured by negotiation) -
Department Director
         b.   More than $100,000 (or amount as provided in the DFCS SS
Procurement Rules for purchases of social services over the amount allowed to
be procured by negotiation) - Chief Administrative Officer or Executive
Administrator and Department Director
      2.   Council approval of social services agreements is not required if
the goal, amount, and contractor is included in an annual performance plan or
has been previously approved by Council in an appropriating resolution as set
forth in § 5-5-19(A)(4)( d). This exception shall not apply if a City Councilor
has requested a special report on a particular contract from the Mayor, and a
Councilor has requested approval of the particular contract by the full Council
as provided in § 5-5-19(A)(4)(e).
      3.   If a social services agreement is not contained in an annual
performance plan or appropriating resolution and has not been requested to go
before full Council as set forth in § 5-5-19(A)(4)(e), Council approval is
required if the amount of the social services agreement is (a) more than
$150,000; (b) an amendment which causes the amount of that contract to exceed
$150,000; (c) an amendment to a social services agreement exceeding $150,000
that increases the amount of the social services agreement by more than 20%; or
(d) a social services agreement with a single organization or agency where the
total amount of all social services agreements in a single fiscal year exceeds
$150,000.
      4.   All social services and development agreements must be reviewed and
approved by the City Attorney or designee.
      5.   The following departments are authorized to enter into social
service agreements: Department of Family and Community Services, Department of
Youth and Family Services; Department of Health, Housing and Homelessness,
Albuquerque Community Services Department, Office of Equity and Inclusion, and
any other department as authorized by the CAO. Social service agreements may
only be executed by departments that have both the appropriate City personnel,
and the existing fiscal and programmatic policies and procedures required for
contract execution, oversight, and monitoring.
   I.   Aviation Department Agreements
      1.   Because of the extensive federal funding and security clearance
requirements of the Aviation Department, the signature authority and co-
signature requirements herein apply to Aviation Department agreements except as
indicated below. Aviation Department construction projects are subject to the
requirements set forth above in Section D Construction and Related Agreements.
      2.   For concession and revenue producing contracts including real
property agreements where expected revenues to the City or the contractor over
a 12 month period are:
         a.   $75,000 or less - Department Director
         b.   More than $75,000 – Chief Administrative Officer or Executive
Administrator
      (Where estimated revenues to the contractor over a 12 month period are
more than $75 ,000 approval by Council is required.) (§5-5-19(A)(5) ROA 1994)
      3.   Co-signature by the Chief Procurement Officer shall not be required
for Aviation Department intergovernmental agreements that do not involve a
payable.
      4.   Review and approval by the Purchasing Division or CIP shall not be
required for Aviation Department concession, revenue generating, or other
contracts which do not involve expenditures of Aviation Department funds.
      5.   Review and approval by Real Property shall not be required unless
co-signature of the Department Director for the Property Manager is required.
      6.   Review and approval by the City Film Liaison for film and
photographic licenses and agreements shall not be required.
      7.   All Aviation Department agreements that do involve a payable must be
reviewed and approved by the City Attorney or designee, and the Chief
Procurement Officer or the CIP Official if capital funds are used.
   J.   Metropolitan Redevelopment Agreements and Contracts
      1.   Pursuant to the Metropolitan Redevelopment Code and the Metropolitan
Redevelopment Agency Ordinance, the signature authority and co-signature
requirements herein apply to MRA agreements.
      2.   MRA public purchases not involving or affecting real property shall
be made in accordance with the Public Purchases Ordinance, 5-5-1 et seq., ROA
1994.
      3.   All MRA agreements involving or affecting real property, including,
but not limited to, contracts, property management agreements, leases with a
term of one (1) year or less, concessions, licenses, design and construction
project agreements, and property maintenance and remediation agreements, shall
require the approval and signature of the MRA Manager, except as otherwise
provided in Section J.6 below.
      4.   Review and approval of MRA agreements by the Real Property Division
shall not be required per Administrative Instruction 5-3 (Amendment No. I), and
review and approval by the City Film Liaison for film and photographic licenses
agreements shall not be required.
      5.   All MRA agreements must be reviewed and approved by the City
Attorney or designee.
      6.   Review and approval by the Chief Administrative Officer or Executive
Administrator is required on all MRA real property purchase and sale
agreements, development agreements, leases with a term greater than one year,
grant agreements, loan agreements, promissory notes, mortgages, releases of
mortgages, and any other documents that are required by the Metropolitan
Redevelopment Ordinance to be approved by City Council.
   K.   Miscellaneous Written Agreements
      1.   For software maintenance and software support agreements and related
quotes and terms and conditions
         a.   If the amount of the agreement is $100,000 or less - Department
Director and Chief Procurement Officer
         b.   If the amount of the agreement is more than $100,000 - Chief
Administrative Officer or Executive Administrator, Department Director, and
Chief Procurement Officer
      2.   For software licenses and other computer-related agreements and
related quotes and terms and conditions
         a.   If the amount of the agreement is $100,000 or less - Department
Director and Chief Procurement Officer
         b.   If the amount of the agreement is more than $100,000 - CAO Chief
Administrative Officer or Executive Administrator, Department Director, and
Chief Procurement Officer
      3.   For purchase or lease of equipment or goods and related quotes and
terms and conditions - Chief Procurement Officer
         a.   If the amount of the agreement is $100,000 or less - Department
Director and Chief Procurement Officer
         b.   If the amount of the agreement is more than $100,000 - Chief
Administrative Officer or Executive Administrator, Department Director, and
Chief Procurement Officer
      4.   For animal agreements
         a.   Zoo animal agreements - ABQ BioPark from Zoo Director
         b.   Police animal agreements - Police Chief
         c.   All other animal agreements - Department Director
      5.   For ambulance services and other emergency rescue services (§5-5-19
ROA 1994) - Chief Administrative Officer or Executive Administrator, following
Council approval
      6.   For One Percent for Art Agreements(§ 10-5-1 et seq. ROA 1994), as
follows:
         a.   $75 ,000 or less - Department Director
         b.   More than $75 ,000 – Chief Administrative Officer or Executive
Administrator
      (One Percent for Art Agreements may require Council approval as
determined by the Ordinances applicable to the type of contract.)
      7.   For Urban Enhancement Trust Fund Agreements (§4-2-1-1 et seq. ROA
1994) which are:
         a.   Capital projects (§4-2-1-3(A)(l)(a) ROA 1994) - The rules for
construction (Section D.1. and 2.) and design professional contracts (A.1.)
above must be followed, as applicable. Other projects (§4-2-1-3(A)(l)(b) ROA
1994) - The rules of this Administrative Instruction applicable to the type of
contract shall apply. (Urban Enhancement Trust Fund Agreements may require
Council approval as determined by the Ordinances applicable to the type of
contract.)
      8.   For contracts where the City incurs an expense for the use/loan of
non-City exhibits where the contract amount is:
         a.   $75,000 or less - Department Director and Chief Procurement
Officer
         b.   More than $75,000 - Department Director, Chief Procurement
Officer, Chief Administrative Officer or Executive Administrator
      9.   For the purchase of insurance or the issuance of certificates of
self-insurance - Risk Manager
      10.   For non-monetary or small amount ($500 or less) agreements and
permits issued by a Department on a regular basis - Department Director
      11.   For agreements resolving any air quality action initiated by the
Environmental Health Department - Department Director or Deputy Director. Note:
This Administrative Instruction does not supersede the "Delegation to the
Environmental Health Department Acting Deputy Director or Deputy Director of
the Air Program of the EHD Director's Authority to Sign Settlement Agreements
as Part of the Issuance of a Stipulated Final Order Pursuant to the Air Quality
Control Act, NMSA 1978, Section 74-2-12, Enforcement; compliance orders; field
citations," dated January 6, 2014 and the Mayor's "Delegation Authority for Air
Quality Compliance Orders," dated June 26, 2014. Agreements resolving air
quality actions initiated by the Environmental Health Department do not require
approval by the Chief Procurement Officer or the CIP Official.
      12.   For all miscellaneous written agreements for services (for example,
property management services, security services, and armored car services):
         a.   $100,000 or less - Department Director and Chief Procurement
Officer
         b.   More than $100,000 - Chief Administrative Officer or Executive
Administrator, Department Director and Chief Procurement Officer
      13.   Except as provided in this Section, all miscellaneous written
agreements must be reviewed and approved by the City Attorney, and the Chief
Procurement Officer or the CIP Official if capital funds are used.
ALL WRITTEN AGREEMENTS SHALL BE ROUTED TO THE DATABASE MAINTAINED BY THE CITY
CLERK AS THE CHIEF RECORDS CUSTODIAN FOR THE CITY.
All contracts or agreements prepared by the City requiring the approval of the
Mayor, the Chief Administrative Officer, Executive Administrator, or the City
Council shall contain a paragraph, the substance of which provides that the
contract or agreement shall not be binding upon the City until approved by the
highest of these approval authorities.
The Chief Procurement Officer shall submit in writing to the Chief
Administrative Officer a quarterly report listing the contracts awarded during
the preceding quarter. The quarterly report shall list the vendor name and
number, a description of the services, and the contract amount.
II.   SIGNATURE AUTHORITY FOR BUDGET DOCUMENTS, FINANCIAL DOCUMENTS, AND
EXECUTIVE COMMUNICATIONS
This Section describes the signature authority for specified documents related
to the City's administration of budget and financial matters. For items not
covered in this Administrative Instruction reference should be made to the City
of Albuquerque Travel Regulations, the Treasury Division's Cash Imprest Funds
policy, and any policies and procedures of the City's Accounting, Budget and
Treasury Divisions, as currently or hereafter enacted or amended.
Unless otherwise specifically delegated to another City official by statute,
ordinance, resolution, regulation, directive or instruction, final signature
authority for the City is delegated to the following officials listed below in
the areas and circumstances indicated:
   A.   Budget
      1.   Line Item operating budget adjustments within programs - Budget
Officer
      2.   Budget adjustment between programs [if the lesser of $100,000 or 5%
of the program's budget in accordance with 1-8-12 R.O. 1974] - Mayor
      3.   Budget adjustment between CIP projects if not greater than 20% of
the original project amount (1-10-6.D. R.O. 1974)- Chief Administrative Officer
or Executive Administrator
   (Council approval required for changes exceeding 20% or if funds have not
been appropriated, as provided in 1-10-6.D. R.O. 1974.)
   B.   Financial Documents
      1.   Travel and Related Expenses - As provided m City of Albuquerque
Travel Regulations.
      2.   Petty cash vouchers/vehicle mileage reimbursement -- Department
Director
      3.   Payment Authority
         a.   Execution of checks from the Risk Management Fund and the Risk
Management Impress Fund - Risk Manager
         b.   Execution of all other drafts, checks, EFTs, including ACH and
Wires, and other financial instruments - Chief Administrative Officer,
Executive Administrator or City Treasurer
      4.   Endorsement of checks, drafts and other financial instruments made
payable in whole or in part to the City- Chief Administrative Officer,
Executive Administrator or City Treasurer
      5.   Cash Management and Banking Agreements, including, but not limited
to, credit or debit card agreements, agreements for incoming ACH or wire
transfer of monies to City bank accounts - City Treasurer
      6.   Bank Account
         a.   Authorization to create - Chief Administrative Officer, Executive
Administrator or City Treasurer
         b.   Authorization of signature authority on all accounts - Chief
Administrative Officer or Executive Administrator, City Treasurer, Chief
Investment Officer, or Department of Finance & Administrative Services (DFAS)
Director
      7.   Bond and Disclosure Closing Documents - Mayor, City Treasurer, DFAS
Director, City Clerk, City Attorney, City Financial Advisor, Disclosure
Counsel, Tax Counsel, and City Bond Counsel
   C.   Executive Communications. Executive Communications shall be routed
electronically through the City's electronic signature software to the
following City representatives for initials or signatures. When the initials
and signatures identified below are complete, the Director of Governmental
Affairs shall route the packet to the Chief Administrative Officer, Executive
Administrator, the Mayor, and Council Services.
      1.   Goldenrod -- Fiscal Manager, Department Director, Executive Budget
Analyst, Budget Officer, City Economist, Assistant City Attorney, City
Attorney, all initial
      2.   Memorandum from Mayor to Council President - Department Director
signs, Assistant City Attorney initials, City Attorney signs
      3.   Cover Analysis (no initials or signatures)
      4.   Item to be approved (no initials or signatures)
      5.   Fiscal Impact Analysis (if required) - Fiscal Manager, Department
Director, Executive Budget Analyst, Budget Officer, City Economist
III.   SIGNATURE AUTHORITY FOR PUBLIC PURCHASES
This Section describes the signature and approval authority for specified
documents related to the City's purchase of goods, services and construction.
For items not covered in this Administrative Instruction reference should be
made to the City's Public Purchases Ordinance, the City of Albuquerque
Purchasing Rules and Regulations, and the Regulations Governing the Award and
Rejection of Bids and Debarment of Contractors for Public Works Projects of the
City of Albuquerque, effective July 8, 1988, all as currently enacted or
hereafter amended.
Unless otherwise specifically delegated to another City official by statute,
ordinance, resolution, regulation, directive or instruction, final signature
authority for the City is delegated to the following representatives listed
below in the areas and circumstances indicated:
   A.   Purchases of Goods, Services and Construction Services
      1.   Procurement Contracts and Purchase Orders; and Amendments thereto
         a.   Issued by Purchasing - Chief Procurement Officer
         b.   Issued by CIP - CIP Official
         c.   Issued by Department Buyer - Individual Department Buyer
      2.   Payment Authority -- Authorized by Department Director
      3.   Ratifications of Contracts - as provided in Administrative
Instruction 3-10
   B.   Purchasing Procurement Documents
      1.   Request for Proposals Process
         a.   Appointment of Ad Hoc Committee to evaluate Request for Proposals
– Chief Administrative Officer or Executive Administrator
         b.   Recommendation of Award- Chief Administrative Officer or
Executive Administrator (May require Council approval)
      2.   Departments are authorized to purchase professional/technical
services up to $100,000 by negotiation and execution of a contract, pursuant to
§ 5-5-29. For all professional/technical contracts that will exceed $55,000 in
one fiscal year, using a format approved by the Purchasing Division,
Departments shall prepare an explanation of how the Department arrived at the
best obtainable price for the services. The explanation shall be reviewed by
the Chief Administrative Officer, Executive Administrator or designee and the
purchase shall be approved by the Chief Administrative Officer, Executive
Administrator or designee prior to the execution of any contract for
professional/technical services.
      3.   All other Purchasing documents - Chief Procurement Officer
   C.   CIP/Consultant (Architects & Engineers)/ Construction Procurement
Documents
      1.   Selection of Consultants Process
         a.   Executive Communications (EC) (with Committee Recommendation
attached) - Department Director responsible for Selection Advisory Committee
function, Chief Administrative Officer or Executive Administrator (Approved by
Council.)
         b.   Permission to Proceed (with contract attached)
            i.   Contract amount of $25,000 or less - CIP Official
            ii.   Contract amount of more than $25,000 – Chief Administrative
Officer or Executive Administrator
      2.   Selection of Construction Contractors
         a.   Recommendation of Award - Selected Consultant; Applicable
Department Director; Municipal Development Director; CIP Official
         b.   Notice of Award – Chief Administrative Officer or Executive
Administrator
   D.   Miscellaneous Documents Related to Public Purchases
      1.   Bill of Sale for excess personal property - Chief Procurement
Officer
      2.   Title to personal property - City Controller
      3.   The Department Director shall delegate and train appropriate staff
to receive and safeguard delivered goods. The Department Director shall
likewise delegate and train staff to verify and receive as proof of deliver for
construction services.
      4.   Protest Determination if no hearing granted - Chief Procurement
Officer
      5.   Protest Determination after hearing – Chief Administrative Officer
or Executive Administrator
REFERENCES: Executive Instruction No. 2 Signature Authority; City Charter, City
Ordinance Article 5 ROA 1994 Public Purchases Ordinance; City of Albuquerque
Purchasing Rules and Regulations; Air Quality Control Act, NMSA 1978, Section
74-2-12, Enforcement; compliance orders; field citations; the Regulations
Governing the Award and Rejection of Bids and Debarment of Contractors for
Public Works Projects of the City of Albuquerque; City of Albuquerque Travel
Regulations; Treasury Division's Cash Imprest Funds policy; New Mexico Joint
Powers Agreements Act, NMSA §11-1-1 et seq.; the Metropolitan Redevelopment
Code; and the Metropolitan Redevelopment Agency Ordinance.
 

______________________________
Lawrence Rael                  [https://export.amlegal.com/media/
Chief Administrative Officer   6d88fadbb394cb34f1263b3e9230120271b111d2/IMAGES/
                              0-0-0-2507.png]
_____________________________
Effective Date
 
AI_NO:_1-1_(pdf)
AI NO: 1-2
POSTING OF SIGNS, NOTICES, AND FLYERS
TITLE:   Posting of Signs, Notices, and Flyers
PRIMARY DEPARTMENT:   General Services Department
Purpose of Administrative Instruction: The purpose of this policy is to
establish clear guidelines for the submission, approval, and display of digital
flyers within the public lobby areas of the Albuquerque City Hall and Plaza del
Sol.
Background: The last time this policy was updated was in 2017 and only applies
to the Albuquerque City Hall building - this AI will also include Plaza del
Sol, as the two primary buildings in which members of the public seek City
services. The existing AI only refers to physical postings, whereas current
practice utilizes digital boards instead.
General Policy:
The official policy of the City of Albuquerque concerning the posting of signs,
notices, flyers, etc., in the lobby areas of all floors of the Albuquerque City
Hall and Plaza del Sol is as follows:
Only official notices from City of Albuquerque, Albuquerque Bernalillo County
Water Utility Authority, or County Government departments are eligible for
display. All notices must relate directly to government operations or City-
sponsored activities. Personal or commercial postings-such as announcements for
private businesses, graduations, or political campaignsare not permitted and
will not be approved. Paper postings are strictly prohibited in all cases and
will be removed if found.
All flyers must be submitted electronically and must be in a digital format
suitable for display. Specifically, flyers should be submitted as PDFs and must
be designed in portrait orientation, sized at 8.5 x 11 inches. The design
should be easy to read, avoiding the use oflong web addresses or Zoom links.
Each flyer must include the Department or government logo and a point of
contact within the sponsoring department, including a name, title, and either
an email address or phone number.
To request posting, departments must email the flyer to
cityhallflyers@cabq.gov. The email must include the flyer PDF as well as the
desired posting start and end dates. All requests should be submitted at least
2 business days in advance to allow time for review and scheduling
Once approved, flyers will be posted by the City of Albuquerque General
Services team. They will appear on the digital monitors for the specified
duration. Flyers may not be posted more than seven days prior to the associated
event unless extended posting is explicitly approved by the CAO or a designee.
Flyers will be removed automatically once the event date has passed, or as
specified in the removal request.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/6d88fadbb394cb34f1263b3e9230120271b111d2/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2706.jpg]
 
AI_NO:_1-2_(pdf)
AI NO: 1-3
LITIGATION REVIEW, SETTLEMENT APPROVAL, LEGAL DEFENSE CONTRACTS AND EXPENSES,
LEGAL OPINION REQUESTS, DEFENSE OF CITY EMPLOYEES, AND WITNESS FEES
September 1, 1992
 
SUBJECT: Litigation Review, Settlement Approval, Legal Defense Contracts and
Expenses, Legal Opinion Requests, Defense of City Employees, and Witness Fees
PURPOSE OF ADMINISTRATIVE INSTRUCTION
The purposes of the Administrative Instruction are: 1) to provide procedures
for litigation review and settlement approval for all claims or actions brought
by or against the City of Albuquerque which are not subject to the review and
approval of the Risk Management Review Board; 2) to specify the procedure for
approval and payment of legal expenses; 3) to specify the procedure for
requesting legal opinions; 4) to establish procedures for the defense of City
employees in litigation; and 5) to establish procedures for handling subpoenas
and witness fees to City employees.
I.   Litigation Review Board Created
   There is hereby created the Litigation Review Board which shall be composed
of three members: one member appointed by the Chief Administrative Officer or a
person designated by the CAO; the City Attorney or a person designated by the
City Attorney; and the director of the department to which the settlement will
be charged or allocated or a person designated by such director. The Legal
Department shall provide any necessary support services to the Litigation
Review Board. The Litigation Review Board shall be responsible for assuring the
most beneficial resolution of all losses and claims, except those claims set
forth below, in the best interests of the City, consistent with the provisions
of the New Mexico Constitution, state law and City ordinances. This
Administrative Instruction shall not be applicable to workmen's compensation
cases, tort claims, civil rights actions, property and casualty claims, surety
bond claims, foreclosures and collections by or against the City.
   A.   Duties of the Litigation Review Board
      Upon request of the City Attorney, the Litigation Review Board shall meet
to review and approve or disapprove the handling, payment and disposition of
all cases or controversies which are not subject to the review and approval of
the Risk Management Review Board when the amount in actual controversy exceeds
$50,000, including, but not limited to: claims arising out of the capital
improvement program of the City; condemnation actions or inverse condemnation
actions; breach of contract cases by or against the City; and all other cases
or controversies involving property owned by the City of Albuquerque.
   B.   Approval of the Chief Administrative Officer
      No settlement of any case or controversy shall be final without the prior
written approval of the Chief Administrative Officer if such settlement:
      1. Exceeds $10,000 but is less than $50,000. The City Attorney may
approve any settlement not exceeding $10,000, provided that if the claim or
controversy exceeds $2,500, the "client" department (department to which the
settlement will be charged or allocated) shall be consulted prior to any
approval of the settlement. If the client department objects to the settlement,
the settlement may be submitted to the Chief Administrative Officer for his
approval. No settlement offer exceeding $1,000 shall be approved by the City
Attorney unless the client department has completed a written report setting
forth the nature of the controversy; or
      2. May result in the entry of an order or writ which either prohibits a
City officer or employee from performing some act or which orders a City
officer or employee to perform some act.
II.   Approval and Payment of Legal Expenses
   A.   Approval of Contracts and Agreements for Consultants, Appraisers and
Expert Witnesses
      The City Attorney may enter into written contracts or letter agreements
for expert witnesses or consultants, including accountants and appraisers to be
retained by the City in conjunction with any litigated matter, in accordance
with the Public Purchases Ordinance and other applicable ordinances or
policies.
   B.   Payment of Legal Expenses and Costs in Connection with Cases or
Controversies Involving the City
      All legal expenses and costs shall be paid as follows:
      1. Upon submission by the City Attorney, or by the client department if
the case is related to the acquisition of property or right of way and is
financed by bonds or other capital improvement funds;
      2. Except as provided in 1 above, if the City is the Plaintiff in such
action, the legal expenses and costs shall be paid by the client department
with the prior approval of the department director and charged to its
designated fund appropriation;
      3. All legal expenses and costs pertaining to workmen's compensation
cases, tort claims, civil rights actions, property and casualty claims, and
surety bond claims by or against the City shall be paid from the Risk
Management Fund as provided in the Risk Management Manual;
      4. All legal expenses and costs not set forth in 1, 2 or 3 above,
including expenses related to administrative hearings, shall be paid by the
client department.
III.   Legal Opinions
   Formal written legal opinions by the City Attorney's Office may be requested
by "clients," who shall be the Mayor, Chief Administrative Officer (CAO),
department directors, agency heads, City Councillors and chairpersons of city
boards, commissions, and committees, acting in their official capacity. Members
of city boards, commissions, and committees shall not be considered "clients"
for these purposes. Such opinion requests shall be made in accordance with the
following procedures:
   A.   Pre-opinion Conference. Prior to the submission of a request for a
formal legal opinion, the requesting client and/or the client's representatives
shall meet with the assigned attorney in order to discuss the matter and to
explore the facts and circumstances to determine if a formal legal opinion is
necessary, and if so, to properly formulate the questions to be included in the
request.
   B.   The question or questions must then be submitted in written form by the
client to the City Attorney.
   C.   A formal legal opinion will be issued in writing and be approved by the
City Attorney. A copy will be provided to the client and to the CAO, unless the
client is a City Councillor. The City Attorney's office will maintain copies of
all formal legal opinions, which will be considered confidential and privileged
communications unless released by the client.
   D.   Requests for legal opinions from a City Councillor shall be made in
writing to the City Attorney and such opinions shall be considered confidential
and privileged unless released by the client councillor.
IV.   Defense of City Employees Involved in Litigation
   A.   In the event any City employee or official has taken action which may
result in a lawsuit as a result of and in the course of his/her employment:
      1. The matter is to be immediately reported by the person and his/her
supervisor to the Risk Management Department.
      2. An immediate investigation of the incident will be made by Risk
Management to determine liability on the part of the City employee or the City
or both.
   B.   If the liability on the part of the employee or official arises out of
the employee's duties:
      1. The City of Albuquerque will defend the City employee or official and
pay for any judgment obtained against the employee, pursuant to the Tort Claims
Act.
      2. However, if it is shown that the employee or official acted
fraudulently or with actual intentional malice in causing the liability, the
City is entitled to recover from the employee or official the cost of providing
the defense, plus the amount of any judgment or settlement paid.
   C.   In specific situations, the employee may be defended by third parties,
such as insurance carriers, without consent of or participation of the City.
V.   Subpoena of City Personnel for Court Hearings
   A.   Employees who are served with a subpoena must accept the subpoena
whether or not they are given a check for their appearance.
      1. If the subpoena is delivered without a check, the employee must ask
for a check. If the person who delivers the subpoena does not have a check, the
employee must notify his/her supervisor, whose responsibility it will be to
assure that a check is ultimately received.
      2. The person who subpoenaed the employee must arrange for delivery of a
witness fee check, or the court may require that it be done. The employee must
appear in response to the subpoena whether or not a check is received.
      3. The check should be in the amount provided by statute for witness
fees. This amount is presently $75 per day in state courts as set forth in
§§10-8-4 and 38-6-4, N.M.S.A. 1978, and $40 per day in federal courts as set
forth in 28 U.S.C. Section 1821. The witness fee should include mileage fees
for testimony in courts not located in Albuquerque. The mileage fee is $.25 per
mile for state courts and $.25 per mile for federal courts. Witness fees are
subject to change by the Legislature.
   B.   Disposition of the payment
      1. If the substance of the testimony concerns the employee's functions as
an employee of the City, the employee is expected to endorse the check to the
City to return the check to his department director and utilize City time for
such testimony. At the option of the department director, the employee may take
vacation leave for the testimony in lieu of returning the check to the City.
      2. If the substance of the testimony is unrelated to the employee's
functions as an employee of the City, or if such testimony is required on a day
the employee would not otherwise be expected to work for the City, such check
may be retained by the employee with no further reimbursement due from the
City.
 
Arthur A. Blumenfeld         [https://export.amlegal.com/media/
Chief Administrative Officer 6d88fadbb394cb34f1263b3e9230120271b111d2/IMAGES/0-
                             0-0-975.png]
 
AI_NO:_1-3_(pdf)
AI NO: 1-4
RISK MANAGEMENT CLAIMS REVIEW BOARD
TITLE: Risk Management Claims Review Board
PRIMARY DEPARTMENT:  Department of Finance and Administrative Services
In accordance with Section 2-8-2-6 of the Revised Ordinances, there is hereby
created a Risk Management Claims Review Board whose scope shall be to review
claims relating to Workers’ Compensation, torts, civil rights, property,
casualty, surety, and breach of contract. The membership of the Risk Management
Claims Review Board shall consist of the following:
   1.   The Chief Administrative Officer (or designated representative)
(Chairperson);
   2.   The City Attorney (or designated representative);
   3.   The Director of the Department of Finance and Administrative Services
(or designated representative);
   4.   The Director of the Human Resources Department (or designated
representative);
   5.   A department head appointed by the Chief Administrative Officer (or
designated representative);
   6.   A representative of Risk Management, who shall be a non-voting member;
   7.   A member of the staff of the City Council designated by the President
of the City Council, who shall be a non-voting member; and;
   8.   The Director of the Civilian Police Oversight Agency, who shall be a
non-voting member.
The Risk Management Claims Review Board shall review claims and problems within
the City of Albuquerque as more fully set in the Risk Management Manual.
REFERENCES:   Section 2-8-2-6 of the Revised Ordinances of the City of
Albuquerque, Risk Management Manual.
 
______________________________
Robert J. Perry                [https://export.amlegal.com/media/
Chief Administrative Officer   6d88fadbb394cb34f1263b3e9230120271b111d2/IMAGES/
_____________________________  0-0-0-531.png]
Effective Date
 
AI_NO:_1-4_(pdf)
AI NO: 1-5
RECORDS MANAGEMENT
TITLE:   Records Management
PRIMARY DEPARTMENT:   City Clerk
   I.   Scope: This Administrative Instruction governs the production of public
records pursuant to the New Mexico Inspection of Public Records Act ("IPRA"),
NMSA 1978, Sections 14-2-1 to -12, and the retention and disposition of public
records within the City of Albuquerque.
   II.   Rescission of Prior Administrative Instructions: Administrative
Instruction 1-5 and Administrative Instruction 1-7 are hereby rescinded.
   III.   Definitions. For the purpose of this AI, the following definitions
apply:
   a.   "City records," as opposed to non-records, are those City records that
evidence the organization, functions, policies, contractual obligations,
decisions and other final actions, directives, procedures, or other operational
activities of the City. Draft records are not considered City records under the
Functional Records Retention and Disposition Schedule ("FRRDS").  1
   b.   "Disposition" is the final action for a City record, such as transfer
to archives or destruction.
   c.   "Non-records" are public records kept for convenience that are not
considered City records, such as preliminary drafts, blank forms, extra copies
of City records, transmittal letters, personal communications, and other
materials intended only for reference or exhibition. (See Section VII for
further discussion and examples of non-records).
   d.   "Official copy of record" is the particular copy of a City record that
is considered the official copy for the purposes of fulfilling the retention
requirements.
   e.   "Official repository" is the Department designated, through policy or
practice, as having responsibility for retaining specific types of public
records, particularly official copies of records.
   f.   "Public records" are records, regardless of physical format, produced,
received, or held by the City of Albuquerque and relating to City business.
Public records may be City records or non-records.
   g.   "Records Analysis and Disposition Committee:" ("the committee") A
committee established pursuant to ROA 1994, Section 2-6-4-2 for the purpose of
analyzing the minimum bookkeeping, auditing, legal, and historical needs of the
City; analyzing current departmental records retention needs; ensuring
compliance with State and Federal laws and regulations; determining whether
modification of the FRRDS is necessary; and recommending changes to the Mayor
and State of New Mexico Commission on Public Records. The Committee shall not
have rule making authority and shall be considered a task force for purposes of
ROA 1994, Section 2-6-1-5.
   h.   "Records Custodian:" The Office of the City Clerk.
   i.   "Records Manager:" A City employee designated as responsible for the
maintenance, care, or keeping of a City department's records regardless of
whether the records are in that person's actual physical custody and control.
   j.   "Retention period" is the minimum period of time during which a
Department should maintain the official copy of record.
   k.   "Transitory records" are a specific type of non-records that serve to
convey information of temporary importance, and often in lieu of oral
communications; they are retained for a limited time to ensure the completion
of a routine action or the preparation of a subsequent record.
   IV.   Roles and responsibilities
   a.   The City Clerk: As the records custodian for the City of Albuquerque,
the City Clerk shall have primary responsibility for ensuring compliance with
IPRA. See § 14-2-7. The Office of the City Clerk shall train and communicate
with all departmental records managers regarding updates on issues related to
IPRA, public records, records retention, and applicable ordinances. The City
Clerk shall also ensure that the Regulations and Procedures on Requests to
Inspect Public Records are up-to-date and compliant with the law. The Office of
the City Clerk shall administer and maintain the electronic IPRA request
tracking system. The Office of the City Clerk, as well as the Office of the
City Attorney, shall advise and direct City employees and officials on issues
related to the inspection of public records.
   b.   Department Directors: All Department Directors shall appoint a
department records manager and provide the City Clerk with all applicable
contact information. Upon a vacancy of a department records manager, the
Director shall inform the City Clerk of the vacancy and shall provide either a
replacement designee or an acting designee until a permanent department records
manager is selected.
   c.   Departmental Records Managers: Department Records Managers are
responsible for assisting the Office of the City Clerk with gathering records
responsive to requests to inspect public records and reviewing and applying the
proper retention period for the Department or Division 's public records .
Records managers shall attend training with the Office of the City Clerk as
soon as practicable after their designation to the position and attend periodic
public records training. All department records managers shall notify the
Office of the City Clerk of any planned absences or vacations from work and
provide an alternate designee that will handle records requests in that person
's absence. All department records managers shall timely review and respond to
all requests from the Office of the City Clerk regarding records requests,
delegate responsibilities within the department in order to respond to
requests, and maintain communication with the Office of the City Clerk
regarding requests and responses.
   d.   City employees: City employees shall help the Office of the City Clerk
and department records managers in responding to requests to inspect public
records. Employees shall also timely address requests for records, and shall
integrate requests for records they maintain into their workflow in order to
ensure timely compliance with IPRA. City employees receiving a public records
request shall immediately forward the request to the Office of the City Clerk.
   e.   "Records Analysis and Disposition Committee" ("the Committee") A
committee established pursuant to ROA 1994, Section 2-6-4-2 for the purpose of
analyzing the minimum bookkeeping, auditing, legal, and historical needs of the
City; analyzing current departmental records retention needs; ensuring
compliance with State and Federal regulations; determining whether modification
of the FRRDS is necessary; and recommending changes to the Mayor and State of
New Mexico Commission on Public Records. The Committee shall have an annual
general meeting and shall meet as needed throughout the year to address records
management and retention issues.
   V.   Retention and Disposition of City Records
   Except as otherwise required by federal or state law, regulation, or
contract, the retention periods for general records common to and maintained by
all City departments, agencies, and offices shall be in accordance with the
FRRDS codified in the New Mexico Administrative Code at NMAC 1.21.2.1 to 943,
as recommended by the Committee on September 19, 2019, and approved by the
Chief Administrative Officer on October 6, 2019. The Records Retention Schedule
posted on the City Clerk's website lists minimum retention periods for basic
types of records and is not intended to be exhaustive in scope. Special
circumstances, such as federal regulations, contractual obligations, and
professional guidelines, may warrant extending a retention period.
   City departments and agencies requesting changes, exceptions, or additions
to the FRRDS shall meet with the Committee to present and discuss proposed
additions, exceptions, or changes to the retention schedule. In lieu of meeting
with the Committee, City departments may meet with the Office of the City
Clerk, who may then relay the proposed additions, exceptions, or changes to the
Committee. The Committee shall recommend to the Mayor and the New Mexico
Commission on Public Records any proposed additions, exceptions, and changes to
the FRRDS. Based on the particular records retention issue raised by a City
department, the Committee or City Clerk may decide to create a city-specific
exception to the FRRDS or request that the FRRDS be modified.
   VI.   Requests for Public Records
   a.   Processing requests: The City Clerk shall process requests for public
records directed to any City Departments, Boards, Commissions, and agencies.
Any city employee receiving a request for records shall immediately forward the
request to the Office of the City Clerk. The City Clerk shall establish
procedures for the processing of public records requests by the staff of the
Office of the City Clerk.
   b.   Denial of Requests: If after appropriate review, the City Clerk finds
that the City should deny the request, in whole or in part, the City Clerk
shall submit its finding, along with the request, to the Office of the City
Attorney. The Office of the City Clerk, in consultation with the City Attorney,
will make an independent determination whether the City should deny the
request, in whole or in part. Upon concurrence, the Office of the City Clerk
will then notify the requester of the determination. The notification shall
contain all information required for a denial under Section 14-2-11(B),
including the legal basis for the denial.
   VII.   Holds for Litigation Matters, Audits, Investigations, and IPRA
Requests:
   The retention periods in the RRS may be lengthened when there is pending,
foreseeable, or ongoing litigation matters, audits, investigations, or IPRA
requests involving the records. In these situations, steps must be taken to
ensure that the City preserves all of its public records that relate to the
subject matter of the litigation matter, audit, investigation, or IPRA request.
   To preserve records, various administrative offices of the City described
below will send out hold notices. Holds control the preservation, retention,
and disposition of specifically listed public records, including non-records
such as draft documents. Holds apply to all forms of public records, including
emails and other electronic records and communications. No one notified of a
hold may alter or delete any record that falls within the scope of the hold
while the hold is in effect.
   The City distributes hold notices through several means. In the case ofIPRA
requests, the City Clerk's Office will reach out to individual City
Departments, Divisions, and employees requesting responsive public records.
Even if those documents are past their retention period or are non-records, the
relevant entity will pause destruction of such records. The records retention
schedule related to public records requests will then apply to the responsive
records.
   When the City Risk Management Division of DFAS receives a preservation
notice within a Tort Claims Notice, it shall distribute the preservation notice
to Departments and individuals who are likely to have records related to the
matters addressed in the notice. Other preservation notices may be distributed
to the relevant departments by the City Legal Department or the City Clerk's
Office.
   To ensure the City's compliance with court rules regarding the preservation
of evidence, the affected Departments and employees must identify, preserve,
and sequester all public records within the Department's control that relate to
the hold, regardless of any established retention periods. Litigation hold
notices are in effect until rescinded by the Legal Department.
   VIII.   Electronic Records and Communications:
   Public records include electronic records and communications that relate to
official City business, such as email and any attachments, as well as postings
on official City websites, biogs, and other social media websites and
applications.
   To the extent that electronic records and communications are City records,
they shall be retained depending upon the nature and content of the document,
consistent with the retention periods for that type or content of document had
it been created in paper form. In general, if the content of the email or
electronic record makes it a "non-record" the document is not subject to
retention and can be destroyed. Employees must comply with any applicable
regulatory requirements , such as FERPA, HIPAA, and state confidentiality laws,
to maintain confidentiality when transmitting information electronically.
   All employees are urged to use the same discretion and good judgment in
creating electronic records and communications as they would in creating paper
documents. Employees should segregate, as much as possible, personal from
professional correspondence and also segregate correspondence that concerns
City business from other professional correspondence, such as work for
scholarly publications and organizations.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/6d88fadbb394cb34f1263b3e9230120271b111d2/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2032.png]
 
   IX.   Public Records Storage and Disposition
   City Departments may store City records in the City Records Center storage
facilities until the applicable retention periods are met, or they may store
them within their Departments .
   The City Clerk is the only City Department authorized to approve destruction
of City records. Prior to the destruction of any City records, the following
requirements must be met:
   •   The retention period in the Records Retention Schedules must have
expired;
   •   There must be no pending, foreseeable, or ongoing litigation matters,
audits, investigations, and IPRA requests related to the documents;
   •   There must be no current Litigation hold on the records; and
   •   The Department seeking to dispose of City Records must complete a
disposition request and obtain signatures from the Department Director and the
City Clerk or designee.
   Once these requirements have been met, the City Clerk authorizes destruction
of City records in coordination with City Departments. Certain types of City
records must be destroyed in a manner that ensures the confidentiality of the
records and renders the information no longer recognizable. The City Clerk
contracts with approved vendors for records destruction stored at the Records
Center. City Departments are responsible for destruction of City Records they
store and which are past their retention period pursuant to the chart attached
as exhibit A. Any exceptions to this destruction procedure must be approved in
writing by the City Clerk.
   X.   Non-Records Storage and Disposition
   Although non-records are not City records, they may be valuable to the
workflow of Departments and, as such, are often kept locally within a
Department to facilitate future business processes. Non-records typically have
one of the following attributes:
   •   The material communicates information of short-term value (such as
reminders about scheduled meetings, announcements of office events, telephone
message slips, self­ sticking notes, and voice mail messages). For example, an
employee prepares notes on the status of projects and initiatives within their
division for their supervisor for use in an upcoming meeting.
   •   The material is a working paper or draft (such as work-in-progress
toward the development of a new policy). For example, a department public
information officer prepares a draft press release and receives feedback on the
draft over email on the draft. Upon issuance of the final press release, the
draft and correspondence about the draft may be disposed of when no longer
needed for reference.
   •   The material is used for reference purposes (such as a downloaded
version of a professional journal article). For example, an employee conducts
research on the budgets of other municipalities and, as part of that research,
prints copies of the annual budgets for the City of Santa Fe. These copies may
be disposed of when no longer needed for reference.
   •   The material is duplicative of a City record for which another
Department serves as the official copy of record (such as a duplicate of the
official copy of a contract).
   Non-records may be destroyed by the Department once they are no longer
useful. Please note, non-records are still public records and therefore subject
to IPRA as long as they are retained by the individual or Department.
 
REFERENCES: ROA 1994, Section 2-6-1-5
 

______________________________ [https://export.amlegal.com/media/
Sarita Nair                    6d88fadbb394cb34f1263b3e9230120271b111d2/IMAGES/
Chief Administrative Officer   0-0-0-2034.png]
_____________________________
Effective Date
 
AI_NO:_1-5_(pdf)
 
Notes
  1 City records generally align with the definition of "public records" under
  the Public Records Act (PRA), but the City has opted to use a different term
1 here for clarity because the Inspection of Public Records Act (IPRA) and the
  PRA define "public records" differently. This AI defines "public records" to
  match the definition used in the IPRA, while "city records" matches the
  definition of "public records" used in the PRA.
AI NO: 1-6
OBJECTIVES, DUTIES, AND RESPONSIBILITIES OF THE OFFICE OF INTERNAL AUDIT
TITLE:   Objectives, Duties, and Responsibilities of the Office of Internal
Audit
PRIMARY DEPARTMENT:   Chief Administrative Officer
The Office of Internal Audit was established by City Ordinance the
Accountability in Government Ordinance.
The independent Office of Internal Audit assists the City Council, the Mayor
and the Chief Administrative Officer in performing their oversight
responsibilities for City functions and activities by conducting audits to
assure accountability and management studies to improve integrity.
All officials, employees, vendors and contractors of the City shall timely
furnish the Office of Internal Audit with requested information and records in
their custody regarding City activities. In addition, they shall provide access
for the Office of Internal Audit to inspect all property, equipment and
facilities in their custody.
The Office of Internal Audit shall adhere to professional standards in
conducting its work and will be considered independent as defined by those
standards.
 
______________________________
Robert J. Perry                [https://export.amlegal.com/media/
Chief Administrative Officer   6d88fadbb394cb34f1263b3e9230120271b111d2/IMAGES/
_____________________________  0-0-0-535.png]
Effective Date 
 
AI_NO:_1-6_(pdf)
AI NO: 1-7
OPEN RECORDS AND TRANSPARENCY (Rescinded 3/8/21)
TITLE:   Open Records and Transparency (Rescinded 3/8/21 by AI-5)
AI_NO:_1-7_(pdf)
AI NO: 1-8
ACCEPTANCE OF LAWSUITS AND SUBPOENAS
TITLE:   Acceptance of Lawsuits and Subpoenas
PRIMARY DEPARTMENT:   Legal
SECONDARY DEPARTMENT:   City Clerk
Purpose of Administrative Instruction:
This Administrative Instruction will provide the procedure for accepting
lawsuits and subpoenas issued to the City and various sub parties of the City.
Background:
The city, its employees, and its officials are frequently asked to accept
service of lawsuits and subpoenas relating to City business. "Service" occurs
when a summons and complaint or subpoena is delivered to the City, its
employees or officials. Service of legal documents creates a legal duty to
respond and, therefore, these procedures should be carefully followed.
General Policy:
SUMMONS AND COMPLAINT
   1.   The City Clerk and City Attorney are the City of Albuquerque's agents
authorized to accept the service of a summons and complaint for:
      a.   City of Albuquerque
      b.   Mayor
      c.   City Councilors
      d.   Chief Administrative Officer
      e.   Deputy/Associate Chief Administrative Officers
      f.   City Departments
      g.   City Department Directors
   2.   The City Clerk or City Attorney are authorized to accept summonses and
complaints addressed to the parties enumerated in paragraph one (1) of this
Administrative Instruction, by mail, email, or in person. Summonses and
complaints addressed to City employees not listed in paragraph one (1) shall
not be accepted by the City Clerk or the City Attorney.
   3.   Summonses and Complaints addressed to a City employee or official, not
covered in paragraph 1, should only be accepted by the employee or official
named in the summons. Employees or officials may get served at work, at home,
by email, or by posting at their home. The named employee or official shall
immediately give a copy of the legal documents to their Department Director's
office or the Mayor's office. The Department or Mayor's office shall
immediately deliver the legal documents to the City Attorney's office.
   4.   The City Attorney may accept service as otherwise provided by law.
SUBPOENAS
   1.   Subpoenas must be personally served to the individual named in the
subpoena with only three exceptions: the City Attorney, City Clerk, or Deputy
City Clerks may accept service of subpoenas directed to the Mayor or Chief
Administrative Officer. City employees may accept service only of those
subpoenas issued in their name.
   2.   If the subpoena is served on the individual City employee named in the
subpoena, the employee shall accept service and determine if a witness fee in
the correct amount is attached to the subpoena. Currently, the correct amount
of the witness fee is $95.00 for cases in state courts and $40.00 for cases in
federal courts. If the response to the subpoena will be accomplished through
appearance on City time, the employee is to immediately turn the witness fee
over to his or her department finance officer. If the appearance will be done
on the employee's personal time, the employee may accept the witness fee.
   3.   If the correct witness fee is missing, the employee named in the
subpoena shall accept service, make a written note to his or her supervisor
that the fee is missing and make an oral demand for the correct witness fee.
   4.   Following acceptance of a subpoena, the employee is to immediately
contact the City Attorney's office. The City Attorney's office will instruct
the employee on how to handle the subpoena.
   5.   Any subpoena issued for the production of City records shall be served
upon the City Clerk in-person, by mail, or by email at cityclerkipra@cabq.gov.
Writ of Garnishment
   1.   The Payroll Division of the Department of Finance and Administrative
Services shall accept service of all writs of garnishment. No other person or
department shall accept service of writs of garnishment.
 
Dr. Samantha Sengel          [https://export.amlegal.com/media/
Chief Administrative Officer 6d88fadbb394cb34f1263b3e9230120271b111d2/IMAGES/0-
__3/7/2025_______________    0-0-2660.jpg]
Effective Date 
 
AI_NO:_1-8_(pdf)
AI NO: 1-9
LITIGATION DEFENSE OF MEMBERS OF INFORMAL COUNCILS, COMMITTEES AND TASK FORCES
TITLE:   Litigation Defense of Members of Informal Councils, Committees and
Task Forces
PRIMARY DEPARTMENT:   Legal Department
In order to obtain and maintain the best assistance and involvement by the
Albuquerque citizenry in City government, the City Attorney shall provide a
defense for members of informal City task forces, review committees, advisory
councils, or other informal committees established to assist the City in
various subjects and studies. This policy applies to those informal committees
not created by City Council and covered by the indemnification ordinance.
Pursuant to the New Mexico Tort Claims Act and the Albuquerque Boards,
Commissions and Committees Defense and Indemnification Ordinance, the City will
provide a defense when liability is sought for actions alleged to have been
committed by the member while acting within the scope of the member's duties,
responsibilities and service to the committee. At the time of providing such
defense, an agreement will be entered into with the member that the City will
have the right to recover the amount expended by the City if it is shown that
the member acted fraudulently or with actual intentional malice.
The Chief Administrative Officer will designate which of the City task forces,
review committees, advisory councils, or other informal committees will be
eligible for such a defense. In order for the Chief Administrative Officer to
make these designations, all department directors are directed to request
approval by the Chief Administrative Officer of all such committees and task
forces in service to their department and approval of indemnification of those
committees and task forces. Department directors shall request approval of
creation and indemnification of committees in an ongoing manner as they are
established. Those committees and task forces currently in existence but not
approved by the Chief Administrative Officer shall cease to exist.
REFERENCES:
New Mexico Tort Claims Act, 41-4-1 – 41-4-27, et seq.
Albuquerque Boards, Commissions, and Committees Defense and Indemnification
Ordinance
 
______________________________
Robert J. Perry                [https://export.amlegal.com/media/
Chief Administrative Officer   6d88fadbb394cb34f1263b3e9230120271b111d2/IMAGES/
_____________________________  0-0-0-541.png]
Effective Date
 
AI_NO:_1-9_(pdf)
AI NO: 1-11
ADOPTION OF PROCEDURE FOR ADMINISTRATION OF THE GRIEVANCE RESOLUTION PROCEDURE
ESTABLISHED BY THE MERIT SYSTEM ORDINANCE
TITLE: Adoption of Procedure for Administration of the Grievance Resolution
Procedure Established by the Merit System Ordinance
PRIMARY DEPARTMENT:   Human Resources
Purpose
To adopt a procedure for the orderly and expeditious administration of the
Grievance Resolution Procedure established by the Merit System Ordinance § 3-1-
24.
Policy
The City has enacted the Grievance Resolution Procedure of the Merit System
Ordinance to provide a means for reconciling complaints concerning minor
disciplinary actions and working conditions or departmental rules. The purpose
of the Grievance Resolution Procedure is to promote harmonious relations among
employees, supervisors and managers; to encourage the settlement of
disagreements informally at the employee-supervisor level; to provide an
orderly procedure to handle grievances through the various supervisory levels
when necessary; to resolve grievances as quickly as possible; and to discourage
the filing of unfounded grievances.
The Grievance Resolution Committee (GRC) created by the Merit System Ordinance
serves in an advisory capacity to investigate disputes and make a
recommendation to the Chief Administrative Officer on resolving the disputes.
The Chief Administrative Officer is the sole decision maker.
Scope  
Pursuant to § 3-1-24 of the Merit System Ordinance, this Grievance Resolution
Procedure applies to all permanent classified employees who are not covered by
labor agreements providing an alternate grievance procedure.
Procedures for Filing and Processing Grievances
A. General Rules:
   1. When calculating time limits under this Administrative Instruction the
date of the act or occurrence that triggers the time limit shall not be
included. If the last day of the time limit is a weekend or holiday, the
following business day shall be considered the last day.
   2. Failure of an employee to comply with the time limits established by the
Merit System Ordinance shall result in the grievance being dismissed. A
grievance dismissed for failure to comply with time limits may not be refiled.
   3. A written grievance shall be deemed submitted on the date it is received
by the City’s Human Resources Department.
   4. A written response shall be deemed submitted on the date it is received
by the employee, if hand delivered, or the date it is placed in the United
States mail to the employee's last known address. Whenever the City or the
employee delivers a paper to the other party which requires a response within a
certain time period and the paper is delivered by U.S. mail, an additional
three (3) days shall be added to the time period for responding.
   5. The original Grievance Request Form (attached), which the employee fills
out to initiate the grievance, will be used throughout the entire grievance
process. The form is obtained through the Human Resources Department and that
Department will assure that a copy is returned to the employee at the end of
the process.
B. Step One:
   1. The employee shall obtain the Grievance Resolution Form through the Human
Resources Department and assure that Parts 1 and 2 are filled out thoroughly.
The employee shall then initiate a grievance by filing a request for review
with the City Employee Mediation Program in the Alternative Dispute Resolution
(ADR) Office, 2nd Floor Old City Hall 768-4500 (FAX 768-4525).
   2. The request for review shall be submitted in writing, on the Grievance
Resolution Form attached as Appendix 1 to this Administrative Instruction.
   3. The request for review shall be submitted within ten (10) calendar days
of the date of the act being grieved or from the date the employee became aware
of the action.
   4. Within seven (7) calendar days of receipt of the request for review, the
City ADR Coordinator or his/her designee will determine if mediation of the
dispute is appropriate.
   5. If the City ADR Coordinator or his/her designee determines that mediation
of the dispute is not appropriate, the ADR Coordinator shall notify the
employee in writing, and the employee may proceed to Step Two of the Grievance
Resolution Procedure.
   6. If the City ADR Coordinator or his/her designee determines that mediation
of the dispute is appropriate, the mediation will be held according to the
guidelines of the City Employee Mediation Program.
   7. If the mediation process results in a resolution consistent with existing
City policy and acceptable to all mediation participants, the matter shall be
deemed concluded.
   8. If the parties do not resolve the grievance in mediation, the ADR
Coordinator shall notify the employee in writing that the employee may proceed
to Step Two of the Grievance Resolution Procedure.
C. Step Two:
   1. The employee shall initiate Step Two of the Grievance Resolution
Procedure by submitting the grievance to his/her Department Director within
seven (7) calendar days after the mediation or the decision of the ADR
Coordinator that mediation is not appropriate.
   2. The grievance shall be in writing on the Grievance Request Form, attached
as Appendix 1 to this Administrative Instruction.
   3. Either the employee or the Department Director may request a meeting.
   4. The decision of whether or not to have a meeting between the Department
Director and the employee shall be at the sole discretion of the Department
Director.
   5. Within seven (7) calendar days from the meeting, or, if no meeting is
held, within seven (7) calendar days of receipt of the grievance, the
Department Director should respond, in writing to the employee on the original
Grievance Request Form.
   6. If the employee is not satisfied with the decision of the Department
Director, the employee may proceed to Step Three of the Grievance Resolution
Procedure.
D. Step Three:
   1. Within seven (7) calendar days after the Department Director submits his/
her written response to the employee, the employee shall submit his/her Step
Three grievance, in writing, to the Human Resources Department, which shall be
responsible for receiving Step Three Grievances on behalf of the Chief
Administrative Officer.
   2. The Step Three Grievance shall be submitted on the Grievance Request Form
originally obtained from the Human Resources Department and also attached to
this Administrative Instruction as Appendix 1.
   3. Upon receipt of the grievance, the Human Resources Department shall
forward the written grievance to the Chief Administrative Officer or his/her
designee who shall determine grievability on behalf of the Chief Administrative
Officer.
   4. If the Chief Administrative Officer or his/her designee determines that
the matter is not grievable, the Human Resources Department shall notify the
employee in writing, on Part 9 of the original Grievance Request Form, and the
matter shall be deemed concluded.
   5. If the Chief Administrative Officer or his/her designee determines that
the matter is grievable, the Chief Administrative Officer or designee shall
convene a Grievance Resolution Committee to investigate the dispute and
recommend a resolution.
Rules and Procedures for the Grievance Resolution Committee
A. Qualifications of Members of the Grievance Resolution Committee:
   1. Members of the Grievance Resolution Committee shall be full-time,
permanent non-probationary employees.
   2. An individual shall not serve on a Grievance Resolution Committee if he/
she has received a disciplinary suspension or demotion within the last two (2)
years, unless the disciplinary action was overturned by action of a Grievance
Resolution Committee, the Personnel Board or a court of competent jurisdiction.
   3. An individual shall not serve on a Grievance Resolution Committee for any
individual employed within his/her own department/division.
   4. An individual shall not serve on a Grievance Resolution Committee for any
grievant or respondent to whom the Grievance Resolution Committee member is
related by blood or by marriage.
   5. Individuals selected for the Grievance Resolution Committee shall receive
a minimum of four (4) hours training. All training for the Grievance Resolution
Committee shall be approved by the Chief Administrative Officer or his/her
designee.
B. Selection of Members of the Grievance Resolution Committee
   1. The Director of Human Resources shall develop guidelines for selecting a
pool of twenty-five (25) qualified supervisory and twenty-five (25) qualified
non-supervisory employees. A new pool of qualified employees shall be
established as often as is determined necessary by the Chief Administrative
Officer.
   2. Each Grievance Resolution Committee that is convened shall consist of two
(2) supervisory and two (2) non-supervisory employees, selected at random from
the pool of qualified employees.
   3. Individuals selected to serve on a Grievance Resolution Committee shall
not be excused from service without a documented valid reason approved by the
Director of Human Resources or designee, or unless the individual is employed
within the same department/division as the grievant, or the individual is
related by blood or marriage to the grievant or the respondent.
C. Grievance Resolution Committee Hearing Procedures
   1. Upon selection of the Grievance Resolution Committee, the Human Resources
Department shall notify the grievant, respondent and committee members of the
selection.
   2. The Human Resources Department shall act as coordinator and record keeper
for the Grievance Resolution Committee.
   3. Within thirty (30) days of selection, the Grievance Resolution Committee
shall convene a hearing to investigate the matter.
   4. At a minimum of ten (10) working days prior to the investigative hearing,
the grievant and respondent shall submit any documentation they wish to have
considered by the Grievance Resolution Committee to the Human Resources
Department. The Human Resources Department shall be responsible for preparing
copies of the documentation and providing them to the respective parties and
the Grievance Resolution Committee members prior to the hearing.
   5. At a minimum of ten (10) working days prior to the investigative hearing,
the grievant and respondent shall submit a list of any individuals they wish to
appear before the Grievance Resolution Committee in support of their position.
The Human Resources Department shall be responsible for notifying those
employees who are requested to appear before the Grievance Resolution
Committee.
   6. Grievants and respondents appearing before the Grievance Resolution
Committee may be accompanied by a representative, but the role of the
representative is limited to advising the grievant or respondent. A
representative may not make arguments, question the committee or individuals
appearing before the committee or make objections to the proceedings. Labor
unions do not have representation rights for non-bargaining unit employees.
   7. The Grievance Resolution Committee may make a decision based on the
documents submitted, or it may permit the grievant and the respondent to make a
presentation to the Grievance Resolution Committee. The total time allowed for
a presentation by a party to the committee shall not exceed one-half hour for
each party.
   8. In addition to any presentation made by the grievant and respondent, the
Grievance Resolution Committee may elect to question individuals who have been
requested to appear in support of a party's position. A grievant or respondent
may submit, in writing to the Grievance Resolution Committee, questions he/she
wishes to have asked, but only the committee members may ask questions of any
individual. The total time allowed for questioning all individuals supporting a
party's position shall not exceed one (1) hour for each party.
   9. At the conclusion of the investigative hearing, the Grievance Resolution
Committee shall deliberate in closed session. Following deliberations, the
Grievance Resolution Committee shall make a written recommendation and forward
it to the Chief Administrative Officer.
   10. The written recommendation shall be submitted within five (5) working
days of the conclusion of the investigative hearing.
Chief Administrative Officer Review
   1. The Chief Administrative Officer shall review the written recommendation
and make a final written resolution.
   2. The final written resolution shall be forwarded to the employee and the
Department Director by the Human Resources Department.
   3. The Chief Administrative Officer's decision shall be the final step in
the Grievance Resolution Process.
REFERENCES: Merit System Ordinance § 3-1-24
 
_________________________________
Robert J. Perry                   [https://export.amlegal.com/media/
Chief Administrative Officer      6d88fadbb394cb34f1263b3e9230120271b111d2/
_________________________________ IMAGES/0-0-0-543.png]
Effective Date
 
AI_NO:_1-11_(pdf)
GRIEVANCE_REQUEST_FORM in PDF
GRIEVANCE REQUEST FORM
THE GRIEVANT IS RESPONSIBLE FOR INSURING THAT PARTS 1 THROUGH 6 OF THIS FORM
ARE COMPLETED
PLEASE PRINT OR TYPE
NAME:                   EID:
HOME PHONE:              WORK PHONE:
HOME ADDRESS:
DEPARTMENT:                 DIVISION:
POSITION:              SUPERVISOR'S NAME: 
WORK SCHEDULE (DAYS AND SHIFT):
DATE(S) OF INCIDENT(S) OR DISCIPLINARY ACTION:
REASON FOR GRIEVANCE:   DISCIPLINE:          OTHER:
Instructions:   Employee picks this form up from the City of Albuquerque Human
Resources Department and fills out Part 1 and Part 2 of the form, then submits
it to the Employee Mediation Program (ADR Office, 2nd Floor, Old City Hall, 400
Marquette NW, 768-4500; Fax 768-4525) within ten (10) calendar days of the
incident to be grieved.
Employee answers the questions listed below, and then proceeds to number 2 of
this form.
HAVE YOU RECEIVED A FLYER ABOUT THE MEDIATION PROGRAM?
YES          NO
WHICH OF THE FOLLOWING MIGHT HELP RESOLVE YOUR GRIEVANCE?
    Communicate about workplace issues       Clear up misunderstandings
    Confirm job expectations             Clarify workplace policies
    Other
Employee fills out the Statement of Problem, Suggested Solution, and other
information listed below and signs and dates at the bottom of the page.
STATEMENT OF PROBLEM: (Please use additional pages, if necessary, and attach to
this form)
SUGGESTED SOLUTION:
HAVE YOU FILED A PREVIOUS GRIEVANCE ON THIS ISSUE? NO     YES
If YES, LIST DATE(S):
I would like to grieve the above actions (s) under Section 3-1-24 of the Merit
System Ordinance?
Employee Signature:                        Date: 
Employee Mediation Program completes Part 3 and returns form to employee.
DATE RECEIVED BY EMPLOYEE MEDIATION PROGRAM
WAS GRIEVANCE MEDIATED? YES        ON DATE           NO
WAS THE GRIEVANCE RESOLVED? YES       NO
If no, employee may proceed to the next step of the of the grievance resolution
procedure by submitting this form to his/her Department Director within seven
(7) calendar days of the date the form is returned from the ADR Office.
Department Director completes Part 4 and returns form to employee within seven
(7) calendar days from meeting with the employee or receipt of this form if no
meeting is held.
DATE GRIEVANCE RECEIVED BY DEPARTMENT DIRECTOR
DEPARTMENT DIRECTOR HELD MEETING? NO    YES     DATE
WRITTEN RESPONSE OF DIRECTOR: (Please use additional pages, if necessary, and
attach)
 
SIGNATURE OF DIRECTOR:
DATE DIRECTOR RETURNED TO EMPLOYEE:
Employee submits form to the Human Resources Department within 7 calendar days
of receiving the form from the Director.
The Human Resources Department completes Part 6. CAO's designee reviews for
grievability and returns to the Human Resources Department; the Human Resources
Department returns a copy of form to employee and retains the original.
DATE RECEIVED BY HUMAN RESOURCES:
DATE GRIEVANCE SUBMITTED TO CAO's DESIGNEE FOR REVIEW:
IS GRIEVANCE REVIEWABLE BY COMMITTEE:    YES           NO
SIGNATURE OF CAO’ DESIGNEE: 
The Human Resources Department completes Part 7 and submits form to Grievance
Committee.
DATE COMMITTEE CONVENED:
COMMITTEE MEMBERS: 
SUPERVISORS:                  
NON-SUPERVISORS:                     
FACILITATOR:
Grievance Committee completes Part 8 and returns form to Human Resources.
RECOMMENDED RESOLUTION:
SIGNATURES OF COMMITTEE MEMBERS:
Name:                      Date: 
Name:                      Date:
Name:                      Date:
Name:                      Date:  
 
9.    The Human Resources Department submits to CAO, CAO completes Part 9 and
returns form to Human Resources.
DATE RECEIVED BY CAO: 
 
CAO DECISION:
CAO SIGNATURE:                      DATE:
10.   The Human Resources Department completes Part 10 and retains original
form in the Human Resources files.
COPY SENT TO: EMPLOYEE:              DIRECTOR:
COPIES SENT BY:
AI NO: 1-12
CITY OF ALBUQUERQUE S.A.F.E. AT WORK
TITLE: City of Albuquerque S.A.F.E at Work
PRIMARY DEPARTMENT: Albuquerque Police Department
Purpose of Administrative Instruction:
To support the City of Albuquerque's S.A.F.E. at Work campaign by posting
informational flyers in City facilities and introducing the program during New
Employee Orientation.
The S.A.F.E. at Work program (Support, Awareness, Freedom, Empowerment) raises
awareness about domestic violence, conflict management, and behavioral health
support, offering confidential resources to employees who may need assistance
for themselves or others.
Background:
The City of Albuquerque and the Albuquerque Police Department are launching the
S.A.F.E at Work campaign, aiming to bring awareness and provide resources about
domestic violence. The campaign idea came about in January 2025, when it was
determined that many victims who may be facing domestic violence may feel most
empowered to find help while at their place of employment. The City of
Albuquerque, being one of the biggest employers in the city, is a place to
bring awareness and resources to potentially hundreds of victims, family,
friends, coworkers and supervisors of victims.
Through this initiative, information flyers would be posted in all city
facilities with links to a city website that provides details and resources for
victims. This campaign is different than most because there is also a focus and
outreach for those who may also be potential offenders, possibly facing stress
or anger management issues. This campaign will direct those in needs of
services to the website where they can also learn about how the Employee
Assistance Program can help with behavioral health issues.
The hopes for this campaign is to reach potential victims who may be employed
with the City and have finally found the empowerment and safe place to get the
resources they need to leave a violent situation and also encourage other big
employers to follow the City's lead and bring awareness to all work places.
Instructions
1. Flyer Posting Requirements
   • Post the S.A.F.E. at Work flyer in the following areas:
   • Restrooms
   • Break rooms
   • Announcement boards
   • Digital facility boards
   • Near employee wage, labor law, and workers ' compensation postings
   • All City facilities, including but not limited to:
      o Pino Yards
      o Transit facilities
      o Community Centers
      o Multigenerational Centers
      o Senior Centers
Ensure flyers are:
   • Clearly visible and replace them if damaged or missing.
   • The flyer includes a QR code and a link to cabq.gov/safe, where employees
can access confidential resources for domestic violence support, conflict
management, and behavioral health services.
2. New Employee Orientation Requirements
Introduce the S.A.F.E. at Work program during the Employee Assistance Program
(EAP) portion of New Employee Orientation.
Use the following talking points:
   • S.A.F.E. at Work stands for Support, Awareness, Freedom, and Empowerment.
   • Support is available if you are experiencing domestic violence, struggling
with conflict, or are concerned about someone else.
   • Your workplace can be more than a job-it can be a lifeline.
   • Scan the QR code on the flyer or visit cabq.gov/safe for confidential
resources.
3. Current Employee Requirements
Require current employees to take the updated Domestic Violence Awareness
training every 2 years through the HR Employee Portal.
The updated Domestic Violence Training will be given during all City of
Albuquerque new supervisor trainings.
4. Responsibilities
Department Directors - Ensure flyers are posted and maintained in all
designated locations.
Human Resources Department - Ensure New Employee Orientation includes the
introduction of the S.A.F.E. at Work program.
Facility Managers - Regularly monitor and maintain flyer postings to ensure
visibility and availability.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/6d88fadbb394cb34f1263b3e9230120271b111d2/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2968.jpg]
AI_NO:_1-12_(pdf)
AI NO: 1-13
NOTARY PUBLIC ACTS AND FEES
TITLE:   NOTARY PUBLIC ACTS and FEES
PRIMARY DEPARTMENT:   Legal Department
Certain Departments of City government have need for a notary public in
connection with the execution of official City documents. To mitigate delays in
the prompt handling of these documents, it is appropriate that those
Departments have one or more persons who are authorized by the State to perform
notarial acts.
Effective July 1, 2003, the New Mexico Secretary of State implemented new
requirements with respect to notaries public under the provisions of the Notary
Public Act passed by the 2003 New Mexico Legislature. After the effective date
of the Act, any application for appointment or re-appointment as a New Mexico
notary public must be accompanied by an application fee of $20.00. In addition,
the application must be accompanied by a bond in the amount of $10,000.00
executed by a licensed surety for a term of four years commencing on the
effective date of the notary's commission and terminating on its expiration
date.
The Legal Department will maintain a master list of all notaries public for
whom the City provides the required bond and pays the application fee. Each
Department must provide a letter of justification at least thirty (30) days in
advance of the date when an application for appointment or re-appointment is to
be filed. If the Legal Department concurs with the justification, the Legal
Department will make the necessary arrangements for the required surety bond.
Upon receipt from the licensed surety, the bond, application and an E&O policy
naming the City of Albuquerque will be forwarded to the applicant. The
applicant will fill out the application for appointment or re-appointment,
obtain the application fee from the applicant's Department and submit the
following to the New Mexico Secretary of State: (1) the application form; (2)
the application fee; and (3) the surety bond. The Legal Department will retain
the E&O policy and provide a copy to the applicant. Charges for the surety bond
will be charged to the requesting Department.
Persons for whom the City has paid the costs associated with compliance with
the Notary Public Act are encouraged to limit their notarial acts to those
rendered on behalf of the City during their period of employment with the City.
Further, such persons are required to maintain a log of all acts undertaken as
a notary public, which log shall be submitted to the Legal Department for
review at the request of the Legal Department.
This policy is effective for the fiscal year beginning July 1, 2017.
REFERENCES:   NMSA 1978 § 14-14-1 et seq. 
 
_____________________________
Robert J. Perry               [https://export.amlegal.com/media/
Chief Administrative Officer  6d88fadbb394cb34f1263b3e9230120271b111d2/IMAGES/
_____________________________ 0-0-0-548.png]
Effective Date
 
AI_NO:_1-13_(pdf)
AI NO: 1-14
SUBMISSION OF REPORTS TO THE MAYOR AND/OR CITY COUNCIL
TITLE:   Submission of Reports to the Mayor and/or City Council
PRIMARY DEPARTMENT:   Chief Administrative Officer
Resolutions and Ordinances enacted by the City Council sometimes require
Departments to submit periodic reports to the Mayor and/or City Council.
Departments must ensure that these reports are completed and submitted to the
appropriate party in a timely manner. Such reports shall be submitted via
Executive Communication to assure that they are filed in the electronic system.
Reports shall be routed through the Budget Office prior to signature by the
Chief Administrative Officer.
 
______________________________
Robert J. Perry                [https://export.amlegal.com/media/
Chief Administrative Officer   6d88fadbb394cb34f1263b3e9230120271b111d2/IMAGES/
_____________________________  0-0-0-550.png]
Effective Date 
 
AI_NO:_1-14_(pdf)
AI NO: 1-15
OPEN MEETINGS ACT – COMPLIANCE BY CITY BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS
TITLE:   OPEN MEETINGS ACT – COMPLIANCE BY CITY BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS
PRIMARY DEPARTMENT:   City Clerk
Background:
The City Charter and City ordinances create various City boards, commissions
and other bodies with adjudicatory authority that are subject to the Open
Meetings Act, Sec. 10-15-1 NMSA 1978 et. seq.
Policy:
Members of all formal City boards, commissions or other bodies with
adjudicatory authority who are subject by operation of law to the state Open
Meetings Act shall receive training with respect to compliance with that Act
and take all necessary actions to ensure that they are consistently in
compliance with that Act. To that end, the meetings of all formal City boards,
commissions or other bodies with adjudicatory authority shall cause each and
every public meeting to be recorded through the use of analog or digital media.
The analog or digital media shall be retained until minutes of the meeting have
been prepared and approved by the board, commission or other body with
adjudicatory authority; provided, however, that if the action of the board,
commission or other body with adjudicatory authority is subject to appeal or
review under any provision of law, the analog or digital media recording shall
be retained for a period expiring concurrently with the last date for the
filing of such appeal or review.
Minutes of meetings are generally subject to the Retention and Disposition
Schedule for General Administrative Records, unless some other standard
applies.
All formal city boards, commissions or other bodies subject to the Open
Meetings Act shall meet one of four ways:
•   In person;
•   remotely by use of a webinar platform with sufficient administrative
controls to allow for controlled participation of the public;
•   remotely while streaming the meeting on the official City of Albuquerque
YouTube page; or
•   by using a hybrid format utilizing two or more of the above methods.
REFERENCES:   Open Meetings Act, Sec. 10-15-1 NMSA 1978 et. seq
 
______________________________
Dr. Samantha Sengel            [https://export.amlegal.com/media/
Chief Administrative Officer   6d88fadbb394cb34f1263b3e9230120271b111d2/IMAGES/
_____________________________  0-0-0-2886.jpg]
Effective Date
 
AI_NO:_1-15_(pdf)
AI NO: 1-16
RECISSION AND REPEAL OF CHIEF ADMINISTRATIVE OFFICER'S 1983 POLICIES AND
PROCEDURES MANUAL AND SIMILAR DOCUMENTS
TITLE:   Rescission and Repeal of Chief Administrative Officer’s 1983 Policies
and Procedures Manual and Similar Documents
PRIMARY DEPARTMENT:   Chief Administrative Officer
A document titled “Chief Administrative Officer’s 1983 Policies and Procedures
Manual”, believed to have last been updated in December, 1986, may still be
available in hard copy in some areas of City government. The directives,
policies and procedures included in that document were superseded by the
initial series of Administrative Instructions issued September, 1992, and which
have subsequently been expanded and amended.
Therefore, this Administrative Instruction serves to rescind and repeal the
“Chief Administrative Officer’s 1983 Policies and Procedures Manual”. Any
existing copies should be destroyed or marked as superseded and void.
 
______________________________
Robert J. Perry                [https://export.amlegal.com/media/
Chief Administrative Officer   6d88fadbb394cb34f1263b3e9230120271b111d2/IMAGES/
_____________________________  0-0-0-554.png]
Effective Date 
 
AI_NO:_1-16_(pdf)
AI NO: 1-17
PROTOCOL FOR ADDRESSING SIGNAGE ISSUES
TITLE:   Protocol for Addressing Signage Issues
PRIMARY DEPARTMENT:   Planning
With the exception of street banners or identification signs approved by the
City, signs located within the public right-of-way are prohibited and will be
discarded as soon as they are collected.
Various City departments are responsible for the disposal of illegal signs.
Illegal signs attached to traffic signals, utility poles, traffic signs, and
arroyos and bridges within City jurisdiction, are disposed of by the Department
of Municipal Development. Illegal signs located within unimproved street
medians or other unimproved public right-of- way, are disposed of by the Solid
Waste Management Department. Illegal signs placed within parks, improved,
landscaped medians and streetscapes within the City are disposed of by the
Parks & Recreation Department. The Zoning Enforcement division of the Planning
department will resolve all sign related to 311 calls on private property.
While performing their normal job duties in the field, the employees of the
departments responsible for the disposal of illegal signs shall dispose of all
illegal signs in each department's designated areas of responsibility, and will
dispose of any other illegal signs observed even if those signs may be the
responsibility of another department.
Improperly placed political signs within the public right-of-way, that may have
been collected by the City of Albuquerque during an election season to which
the sign pertains will be temporarily stored and may be retrieved at the City
of Albuquerque, Pino Yards facility located at 5501 Pino Ave NE, Albuquerque NM
87109. All political signs collected by the city will be held for 20 days after
the conclusion of the election and then will be disposed of by the City. To
retrieve political signs, individuals will be required to check in at the
security guard station at the Pino Yard facility and a photo ID. Political
signs may be retrieved Monday through Friday, between 8:00 am and 6:00 p.m. All
other illegal signs within the public right-of-way will be discarded as soon as
they are collected.
To help reduce the improper placement of signs within the right-of-way, the
Planning Department shall continue to notify all registered candidates in
writing at least 60 days prior to an election of the proper placement
locations, areas prohibited from posting, and size limitations throughout the
City. Similarly, yearly notifications are sent to various professional real
estate organizations throughout Albuquerque. The Planning Department shall also
continue to address all permitting and enforcement duties for illegal signs
located on private property, including their removal as outlined in Section 14-
16-4-11 of the zoning code.
REFERENCES: Section 14-16-4-11 of the zoning code
 
______________________________
Robert J. Perry                [https://export.amlegal.com/media/
Chief Administrative Officer   6d88fadbb394cb34f1263b3e9230120271b111d2/IMAGES/
_____________________________  0-0-0-556.png]
Effective Date 
 
AI_NO:_1-17_(pdf)
AI NO: 1-18
ELECTRONIC IDENTIFICATION
TITLE: Electronic Identification
PRIMARY DEPARTMENT:Department of Finance and Administrative Services, Transit,
Cultural Services, Parks and Recreation, Family and Community Services,
Department of Senior Affairs
The purpose of this Administrative Instruction is to establish City policy
regarding the acceptance of electronic identification in the provision of City
services and benefits. This instruction is not intended to apply to activities
of law enforcement, the airport or City concessionaires or transactions in
which proof of identity is otherwise mandated by law.
The following definitions shall apply to this instruction:
   1.   “Electronic” means relating to technology having electrical, digital,
magnetic, wireless, telephonic, optical, electromagnetic or similar
capabilities.
   2.   “Electronic identification (ID)” means an electronic representation of
an identification document, such as a student ID, a driver’s license, or a
military/veteran’s ID, that an issuing authority has created, generated, sent,
communicated, or stored by electronic means.
   3.   “Issuing authority” means a school, governmental or other entity that
issues electronic IDs.
Acceptance of Electronic IDs. Upon request and unless otherwise prohibited by
state or federal law, City departments that require proof of an individual’s
identity to verify eligibility for a City service or benefit shall accept an
electronic ID in lieu of a physical ID.
Monitoring and Implementation. The Department of Finance and Administrative
Services (DFAS) shall be responsible for implementing this instruction as
follows:
   1.   DFAS shall periodically monitor legal notices, websites and other
available sources to determine those issuing authorities who are currently
using electronic IDs. DFAS shall contact each issuing authority for
confirmation that the entity is using electronic IDs.
   2.   The DFAS shall maintain, update, and circulate to all departments a
list of issuing authorities. The list shall include information designed to
assist the departments in determining the validity of electronic IDs, including
information explaining the features of the electronic ID and/or a photographic
representation of the electronic ID.
   3.   DFAS shall update the list and promptly notify City departments when it
becomes aware that an issuing authority starts accepting electronic IDs.
   4.   DFAS shall coordinate responses to questions from City departments
related to the authenticity or legal validity of electronic IDs.
This Administrative Instruction is effective immediately.
 
______________________________
Sarita Nair                    [https://export.amlegal.com/media/
Chief Administrative Officer   6d88fadbb394cb34f1263b3e9230120271b111d2/IMAGES/
_____________________________  0-0-0-1990.png]
Effective Date
 
AI_NO:_1-18_(pdf)
AI NO: 1-19
SOCIAL MEDIA POLICY (2025)
TITLE: Social Media Policy
PRIMARY DEPARTMENT: Department of Technology and Innovation
Purpose of Administrative Instruction: The purpose of this policy is to
establish rules and responsibilities around the use of social media for City of
Albuquerque departments. It is intended to guide City departments and employees
as they create and publish content and maintain user standards on social media
sites on behalf of the City of Albuquerque.
Background:
Social media has the potential to fundamentally change the way in which
residents and City Government communicate and interact. To address the evolving
landscape of the Internet and the way we communicate online, Departments within
the City of Albuquerque may use social media as a tool to reach a broader
audience. The City encourages the use of social media to further the goals of
the City and the mission of its departments.
The City of Albuquerque has an overriding interest and expectation in deciding
what is communicated on behalf of the City on social media sites. This policy
establishes standards for the official use of City of Albuquerque social media.
City of Albuquerque sites include all accounts representing City of Albuquerque
departments, programs, facilities or divisions.
Violations of this policy may be grounds for discipline up to and including
termination.
Definitions:
Blog: A self-published diary or commentary on a particular topic that may allow
visitors to post responses, reactions, or comments. The term is short for "Web
log."
Page: The specific portion of a social media website where content is displayed
and managed by an individual or individuals with administrator rights.
Post: A discrete piece of content an individual shares on a social media site
or the act of publishing content on a site.
Profile: Information that a user provides about themself on a social networking
site.
Social Media: A category of Internet-based resources that integrate user
generated content and user participation. This includes, but is not limited to,
social network sites, microblogging sites, photo and video sharing sites,
wikis, blogs, and news sites.
Social Networks: Online platforms where users can create profiles, share
information, and socialize with others using a range of technologies.
Wiki: Web page(s) that can be edited collaboratively.
General Policy:
Rules and Responsibilities:
   1.   The City of Albuquerque's website (www.cabq.gov) will remain the City's
primary website and online presence.
   2.   Departmental staff are responsible for the content and upkeep of any
social media sites their department creates. Department directors must
authorize employees to post prior to them receiving credentials.
   3.   Department directors, the Communications Director, or their designee
will be responsible for updating passwords and removing social media access for
employees who are separating from service with the City.
   4.   New Accounts.
      a.   The decision to create a social media site or account shall be part
of a well thought out social media strategy approved by communications staff
and the Department Director and based on an assessment and understanding of the
risks associated with social media.
      b.   All new social media sites proposed for City use will be approved by
the Communications Director or other designated staff member.
      c.   All departments and divisions must fill out a New Social Media form
and send it to the Communications Director or their designee to receive
approval.
   5.   All City of Albuquerque social media sites shall be created and
maintained with the identifiable characteristics of an official City site.
   6.   All City of Albuquerque social media sites shall comply with all
appropriate City of Albuquerque policies and standards, including but not
limited to:
      a.   Website Responsibility;
      b.   Purpose and Commitment to Quality;
      c.   User standards to maintain appropriate content on City pages; and
      d.   All exceptions will be approved by the Director of Communications.
   7.   City of Albuquerque social media sites shall comply with the City of
Albuquerque's Code of Ethics, the City of Albuquerque's Election Code, and all
administrative rules created under those codes.
   8.   City of Albuquerque social media sites are subject to the State of New
Mexico's public records laws. This means that any content maintained in a
social media format that is related to City business may be a public record.
The Department maintaining the site is responsible for providing records to the
City Clerk's Office when the City receives a request for records which includes
social media content.
   9.   There is not a specific retention schedule for social media, though
most social media content is likely non-record and not subject to retention.
When transmitting through social media information which has a specific
retention schedule, such as press and news releases, a copy of the information
must be transmitted rather than the original. Save the original content in a
shared X drive or in another readily accessible location.
   10.   Users and visitors to social media sites shall be notified that the
intended purpose of the site is to serve as a mechanism for communication
between City departments and members of the public.
   11.   City of Albuquerque social media site posts or comments made by
constituents/followers containing any of the following content are prohibited,
and may be removed without notice by the Communications Director or their
designee:
      a.   Posts not topically related to the particular social media site, or
comments not topically related to the post or article being commented upon;
      b.   Posts or comments in support of or opposition to political campaigns
or ballot measures;
      c.   Profane language or content;
      d.   Posts or comments intended to spread false information or threaten,
harass or defame others;
      e.   Content that promotes, fosters, or perpetuates discrimination on the
basis of race, creed, color, age, religion, gender, marital status, status with
regard to public assistance, national origin, physical or mental disability or
sexual orientation;
      f.   Sexual content or links to sexual content;
      g.   Solicitations of commerce not directly related to City business;
      h.   Conduct or encouragement of illegal activity;
      i.   Information that is intentionally factually incorrect and which may
tend to compromise the safety or security of the public or public systems; j.
Content that violates any federal, state or local law or a legal ownership
interest of any other party;
      k.   Information about actual or potential claims and litigation
involving the City, unless such claims have been resolved;
      l.   Any protected or confidential information regarding any City
employee, resident, or elected official.
   12.   The guidelines in subsection K shall be displayed to users or made
available by linking to the City's website.
   13.   City of Albuquerque accounts may respond to comments or posts relevant
to the department, division, or program in order to provide information. When
responding or posting to social media on behalf of the City:
      a.   Maintain professionalism and a respectful tone at all times.
      b.   Correct errors, and if modifying an earlier post, identify the
change.
      c.   Refrain from engaging in arguments or personal attacks. Responses to
negative or inflammatory comments should be handled respectfully and with the
goal of informing.
      d.   Departments may delete, merge, or unpublish a social media post only
with prior approval from the Director of Communications or their Department
Director.
   14.   City department social media sites will serve as the primary social
media presence for Boards & Commissions, initiatives, events and programs.
   15.   Administration of City of Albuquerque social media sites will be as
follows:
      a.   DTI will maintain a list of social media sites which are approved
for use by City departments and staff. DTI will review this list annually for
changes such as, but not limited to, usage agreements and new or expired
offerings.
      b.   DTI will maintain a list of all City of Albuquerque social media
sites, including login and password information. This list must be accessible
to the Director of Communications. Departmental staff will inform DTI of any
administrative or password changes to existing sites. If an administrator
leaves City employment, the Department will change the password and inform DTI
of the new password. DTI will update the password list.
      c.   The City must be able to immediately edit or remove content from
social media sites. 16. For each social media tool approved for use by the
City, the following documentation will be developed and adopted:
         a.   User guidelines;
         b.   Standards and processes for managing accounts on social media
sites; and
         c.   City and departmental branding standards.
   Q.   City websites shall not contain automatic feeds to uncensored social
media site content. Prior to approving content for display on City websites,
departments shall consult with DTI to ensure they have sufficient monitoring
protocols in place to ensure content and links are appropriate and free from
harmful technical attacks.
   R.   City of Albuquerque departments can develop their own social media
policy with additional rules and regulations. These departments must also
comply with the City of Albuquerque social media policy and their departmental
social media policy must be approved by the Communications Director.
   S.   The Albuquerque Police Department is responsible for keeping a list of
active Department social media sites.
      a.   Any APD division proposing a new social media site must obtain
approval from the APD Director of Communications.
      b.   This policy does not apply to any social media site that is part of
a law enforcement tactical operation.
   T.   Personal Social Media Accounts:
      a.   Do not use a City of Albuquerque email address when using social
media in a personal capacity. For example, don't create a personal Facebook or
Twitter account using your cabq.gov email address.
      b.   If you identify yourself as a City of Albuquerque employee when
conducting personal social media activities, consider stating in your profile
that your comments are not representative of the City of Albuquerque. Examples
include:
         i.    Twitter bio: Tweets are my own.
         ii.   Blog or website bio: While I work for the City of Albuquerque,
anything I publish is my personal opinion and should not be considered the
opinion or position of the City of Albuquerque.
      c.   Regardless of whether you identify your employment with the City of
Albuquerque on personal social media accounts, your status as a City employee
is public information. Accordingly, employees should be aware that any online
activity or commentary, whether made in a personal or professional capacity,
may be associated with their role as a representative of the City.
      d.   Nothing in this AI is meant to prevent an employee from exercising
his or her right to make a complaint of discrimination or other workplace
misconduct, engage in lawful collective bargaining activity, or to express an
opinion on a matter of public concern.
      e.   City employees may post about City-related programs, initiatives, or
events from their personal social media accounts only when they have received
prior written approval from their Department Director or designee. The content
must be factual, professional, and consistent with the employee's assigned
duties.
   17.   The following additional rules also apply to employees' use of social
media, on and offduty:
      a.   Social media content that relates to City business may be a public
record subject to retention and disclosure under state law. For that reason,
unless it is part of their official duties or they have received written
approval from their Department Director or designee as described in section T
( e ), employees are prohibited from using social media to conduct City
business.
      b.   Employees are required to protect and maintain the confidentiality
of all private and confidential City information.
      c.   Employees may not create a link from their blog, website or other
social networking site to a City website if such a link causes the viewer to
reasonably believe that the City endorses the contents of the employee's social
media site.
      d.   Employees may not use the City or Department's official logo for
personal online communications or activities except for incidental use allowed
by a written Department policy.
   18.   City officials will only use logos, slogans, signs, graphics, and
other media, consistent with Article XII, Section 6 of the City Charter.
References:
N/A
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/6d88fadbb394cb34f1263b3e9230120271b111d2/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2787.jpg]
AI_NO:_1-19_(pdf)
AI NO: 1-20
DESIGNATED AGENTS FOR ORDINANCE VIOLATION CITATIONS (2023)
ADMINISTRATIVE INSTRUCTION NO. 1-20 (2025)
TITLE: Designated Agents for Ordinance Violation Citations
PRIMARY DEPARTMENT: General Services Department
Pursuant to my authority under Section 1-1-98 (B)(2) R.O.A. 1994, I hereby
authorize the General Services Department ("Department") to designate Officers
in the Metro Security Division as agents to issue Ordinance Violation Citations
when they have probable cause to believe that a person has violated any
ordinance of the City punishable by fine and/or imprisonment. Once designated
by the Department, the Officers will have the authority to issue citations for
violations of the following City ordinances:
   1.   § 5-8-6 R.O.A. 1994 (prohibited activities in open space)
   2.   § 7-2-2-1(B) R.O.A. 1994 (transit boarding area restrictions)
   3.   § 8-2-7-2 R.O.A. 1994 (occupying medians)
   4.   § 8-2-7-13 R.O.A. 1994 (articles obstructing sidewalks)
   5.   § 9-8-6 R.O.A. 1994 (litter in public places)
   6.   § 9-8-12R.O.A.1994 (litter in parks)
   7.   § 9-25-4 R.O.A. 1994 (unlawful camping)
   8.   § 9-25-5 R.O.A. 1994 (unlawful storage of personal property)
   9.   § 10-1-1-3(A)(3) R.O.A. 1994 (no structures in parks)
   10.   § 10-1-1-3(A)(4) R.O.A. 1994 (no shopping carts in parks)
   11.   § 10-1-1-10(A) (R.O.A. 1994 (occupying parks after closing time)
   12.   § 11-8-3 R.O.A. 1994 (public indecency)
   13.   § 12-2-3 R.O.A. 1994 (criminal trespass)
   14.   § 12-2-5 R.O.A. 1994 (disorderly conduct)
   15.   § 12-2-30 R.O.A. 1994 (camping in arroyos)
   16.   § 12-3-1 R.O.A. 1994 ( criminal damage to property)
   17.   § 12-3-8 R.O.A. 1994 (damaging or tampering with a vehicle)
   18.   § 12-4-8 R.O.A. 1994 (drinking in public)
   19.   § 12-4-14 R.O.A. 1994 (indecent exposure)
The Department shall develop an Ordinance Violation Citation form that meets
the requirements of the Ordinance.
 
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/6d88fadbb394cb34f1263b3e9230120271b111d2/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2812.png]
 
AI_NO:_1-20_(pdf)
AI NO: 1-21
DESIGNATED AGENTS FOR ORDINANCE VIOLATION CITATIONS
ADMINISTRATIVE INSTRUCTION NO.1-21 (2023)
TITLE: Designated Agents for Ordinance Violation Citations
PRIMARY DEPARTMENT: Department of Municipal Development
Under Section 1-1-98 (B)(2) R.O.A. 1994 ("Ordinance"), whenever the Mayor or
the Mayor's designated agent has probable cause to believe that a person has
violated any ordinance of the City punishable by fine and/or imprisonment, the
Mayor or the Mayor's designated agent may prepare, present, and deliver to the
alleged violator an Ordinance Violation Citation. The Director of the
Department of Municipal Development, subject to the approval of the Chief
Administrative Officer, has the authority to designate employees within the
Parking Division to be designated agents with authority to issue Ordinance
Violation Citations for violations of § 8-2-7-2 R.O.A. 1994. The Department
shall develop an Ordinance Violation Citation form that meet the requirements
of the Ordinance.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/6d88fadbb394cb34f1263b3e9230120271b111d2/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2477.png]
AI_NO:_1-21_(pdf)
AI NO: 1-22
DESIGNATED AGENTS FOR ORDINANCE VIOLATION CITATIONS
ADMINISTRATIVE INSTRUCTION N0.1-22 (2025)
TITLE: Designated Agents for Ordinance Violation Citations
PRIMARY DEPARTMENT: Albuquerque Police Department
Purpose of Administrative Instruction: Pursuant to my authority under Section
1-1-98 (B)(2) R.O.A. 1994, I hereby authorize the Albuquerque Police Department
to designate Police Service Aides and Transit Officers as agents to issue
Ordinance Violation Citations when they have probable cause to believe that a
person has violated any ordinance of the City punishable by fine and/or
imprisonment. Once designated by the Department, the Police Service Aides and
Transit Officers will have the authority to issue citations for violations of
the following City ordinances
1. § 5-8-6 R.O.A. 1994 (prohibited activities in open space)
2. § 7-2-2-l(B) R.O.A. 1994 (transit boarding area restrictions)
3. § 8-2-7-2 R.O.A. 1994 (occupying medians)
4. § 8-2-7-13 R.O.A. 1994 (articles obstructing sidewalks)
5. § 9-8-6 R.O.A. 1994 (litter in public places)
6. § 9-8-12R.O.A.1994 (litter in parks)
7. § 9-25-4 R.O.A. 1994 (unlawful camping)
8. § 9-25-5 R.O.A. 1994 (unlawful storage of personal property)
9. § 10-1-1-3(A)(3) R.O.A. 1994 (no structures in parks)
10. § 10-1-1-3(A)(4) R.O.A. 1994 (no shopping carts in parks)
11. § 10-1-1-l0(A) (R.O.A. 1994 (occupying parks after closing time)
12. § 11-8-3 R.O.A. 1994 (public indecency)
13. § 12-2-3 R.O.A. 1994 (criminal trespass)
14. § 12-2-5 R.O.A. 1994 (disorderly conduct)
15. § 12-2-30 R.O.A. 1994 (camping in arroyos)
16. § 12-3-1 R.O.A. 1994 (criminal damage to property)
17. § 12-3-8 R.O.A. 1994 (damaging or tampering with a vehicle)
18. § 12-4-8 R.O.A. 1994 (drinking in public)
19. § 12-4-14 R.O.A. 1994 (indecent exposure)
The Department shall develop an Ordinance Violation Citation form that meets
the requirements of the Ordinance.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/6d88fadbb394cb34f1263b3e9230120271b111d2/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2991.jpg]
AI_NO:_1-22_(pdf)
 
AI NO: 1-23
AUTHORIZATION TO DIRECT TRAFFIC AND ENFORCE PARKING LAWS
TITLE: Authorization to Direct Traffic and Enforce Parking Laws
PRIMARY DEPARTMENT: Planning Department
Pursuant to Section 8-5-2-4 R.O.A. 1994, a City employee who is authorized to
direct traffic or enforce state or local parking or motor vehicle laws may
order the impoundment of any vehicle within City limits, in specific
circumstances set forth in the Ordinance.
I hereby authorize employees of the Code Enforcement Division of the Planning
Department to direct traffic or enforce City parking ordinances while
conducting code enforcement operations within the City. Accordingly, employees
of the Code Enforcement Division have the authority to order the impoundment of
any vehicle in accordance with the terms of the Ordinance. Employees of the
Code Enforcement Division may also direct traffic or enforce City parking
ordinances as necessary to maintain order at a location where they are
conducting code enforcement operations.
The Department shall develop policies and procedures for the impoundment of
vehicles.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/6d88fadbb394cb34f1263b3e9230120271b111d2/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2826.png]
 
AI_NO:_1-23_(pdf)
 
AI NO: 1-24
AUTHORIZATION TO DIRECT TRAFFIC AND ENFORCE PARKING LAWS
TITLE:   Authorization to Direct Traffic and Enforce Parking Laws
PRIMARY DEPARTMENT:   General Services Department
Pursuant to Section 8-5-2-4 R.O.A. 1994, a City employee who is authorized to
direct traffic or enforce state or local parking or motor vehicle laws may
order the impoundment of any vehicle within City limits, in specific
circumstances set forth in the Ordinance.
I hereby authorize employees of the Metro Security Division of the General
Services Department to direct traffic or enforce City parking ordinances while
performing operations within the City. Accordingly, employees of the Metro
Security Division have the authority to order the impoundment of any vehicle in
accordance with the terms of the Ordinance. Employees of the Metro Security
Division may also direct traffic or enforce City parking ordinances as
necessary to maintain order at a location where they are conducting operations.
The Department shall develop policies and procedures for the impoundment of
vehicles.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/6d88fadbb394cb34f1263b3e9230120271b111d2/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2828.png]
AI_NO:_1-24_(pdf)
Financial
AI NO: 2-1
ASSESSMENT OF INDIRECT OVERHEAD
TITLE:   Assessment of Indirect Overhead
PRIMARY DEPARTMENT:   Department of Finance and Administrative Services
   1.   City policy for Administrative Overhead - It is the City's policy to
recover for the General Fund, Internal Service Funds and Enterprise Funds costs
incurred in providing services to departments and agencies which are not
financed by the General Fund. Therefore, indirect costs will be assessed
against all applicable activities in accordance with the City's approved
Central Services Cost Allocation Plan, updated annually.
      a.   Charges for indirect costs are to be considered a basic element of
project and program budgets. They are not to be considered a residual after
other costs have been determined.
      b.   All grant applications must include: (i) a request for reimbursement
of any position working directly for the grant program, including department
fiscal staff, but not included in the indirect overhead plan; and (ii) a
request for the grantor to pay the indirect overhead amount applicable for the
year.
      c.   There are two types of administrative overhead rates: rates based on
percentage of wages and rates based on percentage of non-personnel operating
costs. A comparison of the two rates should be presented in the fiscal impact
analysis form submitted to the Office of Management and Budget (OMB). The
criteria for determining what method to use is below:
         1.   Rates based on percentage of wages - if a grant or project fund
has at least one full time equivalent employee, or the expenditures are
predominately made up of wages and fringe benefits, the indirect overhead rate
based on percentage of wages should be used. The administrative rate should be
applied to all wages (regular, overtime, and temporary).
         2.   Non-personnel rates based on total operating costs - If a grant
or project has less than one fulltime employee or operating & capital
expenditures make up the majority of the expenditures, the non-personnel rate
should be used. The non-personnel rate should be applied to all non-personnel
costs except transfers or indirect overhead.
         3.    Indirect costs are to be included in the following situations:
            ∙    All grant proposals when allowable.
            ∙    Setting rates for utilities.
            ∙    Establishing capital project budgets.
            ∙    As one of the elements of cost in the establishment of City
fees or other charges.
            ∙    Other appropriate areas.
      d.   An exception to the indirect cost assessment policy can be made if
the external funding source does not allow such costs or the external funding
is on a direct reimbursement for goods or services only. Such exceptions shall
require documentation from the external funding source.
      e.   Any other exceptions must be approved by the Director of Finance and
Administrative Services Department.
   2.   Direct Charges - In providing a specific service, if the hours used and
the hourly cost to provide the service can be isolated, the cost for the
service shall be billed directly when the service is provided.
   3.   Capital Overhead Rate - A rate to recover the costs of central service
support shall be charged to all capital projects.
      a.   The Capital Overhead Rates shall be calculated by the Department of
Finance and Administrative Services Director (“DFAS Director”). The Capital
Overhead Rates may be based on the ratio of the estimated central service costs
associated with the capital program to the estimated expenditures on capital
projects, and are subject to change during the fiscal year by the Director of
DFAS. The central service costs may include costs from DMD Construction in
Process (CIP) Fiscal, DFAS Director’s Office, Accounting, Budget, Purchasing
and Legal. Overhead rates on tax-exempt bonds are subject to federal
limitations.
      b.   All capital projects shall be assessed a capital overhead charge
equal to the project or department Capital Overhead Rate, as established by the
DFAS Director. It is a department's responsibility to seek an appropriation for
those projects that lack the resources to pay the capital overhead charge.
      c.    ny exemptions to capital indirect overhead charges must be approved
by the DFAS Director.
REFERENCES:   AI 2-26, Uniform Guidance (2 CFR 200), Budget Ordinance § 2-11-17
APPLICATION FOR FEDERAL AND STATE GRANTS; BUDGETING FEDERAL FUNDS
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/6d88fadbb394cb34f1263b3e9230120271b111d2/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2772.jpg]
AI_NO:_2-1_(pdf)
AI NO: 2-2
CREDIT, COLLECTIONS & ACCOUNTS RECEIVABLE
TITLE: Credit, Collections & Accounts Receivable
PRIMARY DEPARTMENT: Department of Finance and Administration
1.0    INTRODUCTION
   This Administrative Instruction has been written in accordance with the City
Albuquerque’s administrative policies and fiscal rules currently in effect. Any
questions can be directed to the Accounting Division of the Department of
Finance and Administrative Services.
   ACCOUNTS RECEIVABLE CONTACT INFORMATION:
   Mail Delivery:         Web Address:
   City of Albuquerque         http://www.cabq.gov/dfa/accounting
   Accounts Receivable Section
   PO Box 27780
   Albuquerque, NM 87125
   General Telephone:         Fax:
   505-768-3437            505-768-3476
2.0    PURPOSE
   In order to properly authorize credit, recognize, record, collect, and
report all monies which are due the City of Albuquerque (“City”), but not
received at the time of a transaction, the City has adopted the following
policy to govern the recording and management of its Accounts Receivable.
Departments that extend credit will be responsible for the administration of
those transactions in accordance with this policy and procedure manual. This
policy supersedes Administrative Instruction 2-2, dated December 28, 2009. The
Accounting Division of the Department of Finance and Administrative Services
(“DFAS”) is responsible for this manual.
3.0    GOALS AND RESPONSIBLITIES FOR ACCOUNTS RECEIVABLES
   The following goals have been identified for Accounts Receivable:
   3.1    Maintain a current and active Customer database to ensure invoices
and notices are addressed to the appropriate responsible party.
   3.2    Recover Accounts Receivables promptly in order to improve cash flow
to pay for current operating expenditures and invest funds where most
appropriate;
   3.3    Maintain the Aging Report at thirty (30) days level;
   3.4    Review and update goals, policies and procedures regularly to ensure
that policies reinforce collections efforts;
   The Accounts Receivable Section of the Accounting Division is responsible
for:
   3.5   Monitoring transactions in the billing and accounts receivable module
of PeopleSoft;
   3.6   Initiating system generated invoices;
   3.7   Monitoring for duplicate and inactive customer accounts;
   3.8   Inactivating customer accounts as circumstances dictate;
   3.9   Supporting the collection of delinquent accounts;
   3.10   Providing AR support and training to departments
4.0   DEFINITIONS
   4.1    Accounts Receivable – Any amount that is due from a customer for
services provided to them or on their behalf.
   4.2    Aging Report – A report that identifies all open Accounts Receivable
accounts, the number of days outstanding and the dollar amount due.
   4.3    Chart of Accounts – Numeric classification of assets, liabilities,
revenues and expenditures.
   4.4    Current Account – An account that is payable within thirty (30) days
from the original invoice date.
   4.5    Customer – A debtor to the City and may include, but not be limited
to individuals, organizations, or Federal, State and Local Agencies.
   4.6    Default Management – A process followed by staff to assist in the
collection of Past Due Accounts.
   4.7    Dunning Letter – A Notice of Collection letter used to help manage
outstanding invoices and collect on delinquent accounts.
   4.8    Deposits – Monies received in the form of cash, check, money order,
and/or traveler’s checks.
   4.9    Final Reminder Notice – A notice issued to inform customers that
payment is past due and if not received within 10 days, their account will be
sent to collections.
   4.10   Fiscal Period – Accounting period which begins on July 1 and ends
June 30 of the following year.
   4.11    Invoice – A notice issued to the customer specifying the terms, the
amount due and the services provided.
   4.12    Money – Legal tender received and collected, in the form of cash,
checks, money orders and/or traveler’s checks.
   4.13    Monthly Reconciliation – The process of reconciling the subsidiary
accounts to the controlling account to ensure that all payments were posted
appropriately and timely.
   4.14    Past Due Account – An account that has not been paid by the due
date.
   4.15    Promissory Note – A written contract signed by a customer who
promises to pay a debt owed to City under specific payment terms.
   4.16    Qualified Gross Accounts Receivable – All receivables that are past
due more than 60 days, except 1) leases, contracts or other agreements entered
into by the City which specifically enumerated different collection fees, or 2)
accounts owed to the City which are not subject to a collection fees because of
federal, state or local laws.
   4.17    Receipt – A document provided to debtor as evidence that payment for
an account has been received; a source document used for posting to the general
ledger account and for audit trail purposes. Depending on the debtor's request,
a receipt can be either mailed or picked up.
   4.18    Recurring Invoices – The process of recording routine invoices to
the general ledger and generating monthly, semiannual or yearly invoices
systematically by the PeopleSoft System.
   4.19   Installment Invoices – The process of recording invoices over a
defined period of time to the general ledger and generating invoices over set
number of periods automatically by the PeopleSoft System.
   4.20    Write-Off – A transaction that removes an invoice from the City’s
financial accounting records after management has determined that the item is
not collectible. All requests to remove an invoice from the accounting records
must be submitted in writing and with proper documentation to Financial
Services for approval.
   4.21    Year-end Closing – The process of posting all financial transactions
to the general ledger for a 12-month fiscal year. This information is used in
the preparation of financial reports.
5.0   CREDIT POLICY
   5.1   A provision of credit comes about when a department or division
chooses to invoice a customer rather than to obtain payment at the time a good
or service is provided. Provided that all other provision within this document
is met, the decision to extend credit and determine limits rests with the
department head that is accountable for the department providing the good or
service. However, in absence of the department head establishing credit limits,
the Accounting Division will evaluate and determine appropriate terms and
credit limits for all accounts. Decisions will be based on factors such as
billing types (i.e. monthly parking, permits, etc.), departmental activities
and payment history. All limits are subject to revision. Credit limits are put
in place to reduce the risk of outstanding receivables and write-offs.
   5.2   Credit should not extend for a receivable that is less than $25.00.
Smaller, repetitive charges should be accumulated and billed on a quarterly
basis or paid in advance.
   5.3   The following forms of payment may be used as alternatives to an
extension of credit:
      a.   Cash
      b.   Personal check
      c.   Cashier’s check
      d.   Money Order
      e.   Credit or Debit Card
      f.   Check truncation (requires customer’s written approval)
      g.   Direct debit (requires customer’s written approval)
      h.   Electronic re-presentment (customer must receive prior notice)
      i.   Payment in advance
   5.4   Minimum documentation for an express contract is required to enforce
debtor’s obligation to pay and to record the terms and conditions of such
repayment.
      5.4.1   Verbal contracts that are not documented are a violation of this
policy.
      5.4.2   Promissory notes require the name and description of the
transaction, due date, terms, including security or collateral, and notarized
signatures of the City’s debtor(s) plus job titles and any specific information
that would help in identifying or skip tracing a debtor such as date of birth,
social security number, and a driver’s license number.
      5.4.3   Current Joint Power Agreements shall be in force for all
intergovernmental transaction.
      5.4.4   The DFAS Accounting Division “Accounts Receivable Form” and the
signature block thereon for customer’s signature shall be used, if no other
form of contract available.
   5.5   Implied or undocumented agreements are not acceptable and are a
violation of this policy. An implied contract is a presumed obligation based
upon inference rather than a specific, documented agreement. Therefore, such
agreements are not acceptable.
   5.6   Surety Bonds - Taxpayers may be required to post bonds based on their
estimated tax liability, if the terms and conditions are approved by the Legal
Department, of if the customer has a history of non-payment or slow payment.
Department Directors may also require surety bonds from customers in order to
secure open accounts with significant payment risk, such as those maintained
for building contractors who obtain numerous building related permits.
      5.6.1   Obtain written authority in advance to debit a customer’s
account, if payment is not rendered within an agreed upon deadline.
      5.6.2   Departments may also require a prepayment, if it has been
determined that the customer has been delinquent or is a bad credit risk.
6.0   STRUCTURE OF ACCOUNTS RECEIVABLE SYSTEM
   6.1    The City maintains a decentralized Accounts Receivable system
composed of eighteen (18) business units: Albuquerque Metro Arroyo Flood
Control (AMAFCA), Aviation, Mayor’s Office, City Council, Animal Welfare,
Cultural Services, Finance and Administrative Services, Municipal Development,
Senior Affairs, Solid Waste, Environmental Health, Family and Community
Services, Fire, Human Resources, Planning, Police, Parks and Recreation, and
Transit.
   6.2   There are three (3) areas that record its own billings in the
PeopleSoft system. Those areas are; Zoo, a division of the Cultural Services
Business Unit; Parking, a division of the Municipal Development Business Unit;
and the Fire Department Business Unit.
   6.3   There are seven (7) business units that process billing for their
respective units utilizing a system other than PeopleSoft. They are: Aviation,
Finance and Administrative Services (Special Assessments billing), Planning,
Solid Waste, Environmental Health, Fire, Police, and Transit.
      6.3.1   All external billing and receivable systems other than PeopleSoft
shall be approved by the Department of Finance and Administrative Services and
shall interface with the City’s PeopleSoft Billing, Accounts Receivable, and/or
the General Ledger modules.
      6.3.2   External billing and receivable systems other than PeopleSoft
that have been approved for use must have consultation and feedback from the
Accounting Division and the ERP Division of the Department of Technology &
Innovation before final specifications are complete.
      6.3.3   If it determined an external billing system is necessary due to
specialization of a service or process, the external system will interface with
PeopleSoft Accounts Receivables & Billing modules. Items from the external
billing systems that are identified as extending credit (generating invoices
payable at a later date) will interface with the PeopleSoft Billing module.
Items that are identified as “cash & carry” and do not warrant extending
credit, will interface with the PeopleSoft Accounts Receivable module.
   6.4    The Accounts Receivable section processes the billing for various
departments and divisions who do not have access to PeopleSoft Accounts
Receivable Billing module. These include but not limited to: Mayor’s Office,
City Council, Animal Welfare, Cultural Services, Finance and Administrative
Services, Municipal Development, Senior Affairs, Family and Community Services,
Human Resources, Planning, Police, Parks and Recreation, and Transit.
   6.5    The Accounts Receivable section provides each department with a
three-character alpha prefix code. This code will appear on all invoices
followed by the 10 numeric digits (13-character total). The Billing module will
automatically assign the next number to be used.
   6.6    The Accounting Division, in conjunction with the ERP Division,
monitors the overall PeopleSoft processes to ensure that billing and collection
processes are done timely and accurately by running queries and reports.
7.0   12 PERCENT ONE-TIME COLLECTION FEE
   7.1   In accordance with this Administrative Instruction, the City is
allowed to collect a one-time collection fee of 12 percent on delinquent
accounts that fall under the definition of Qualified Gross Accounts Receivable.
Accounts that have been selected and approved to send to a third-party
collection agency will be charged a 12 percent fee.
8.0   AGING REPORT
   8.1   An Aging Report is prepared on a monthly basis. Invoices are
classified as either Current or Past Due. Past Due Invoices are further
classified as 31-60 days, 61-90 days, 91-120 days or over 120 days past due.
Invoices that are over 61 days past due are considered delinquent and are
eligible for third-party collection efforts. Past due invoices are researched
to verify that a payment was not missed prior to issuing a Final Reminder
Notice. Final Reminder Notices are mailed after an invoice is past due 61 days.
   8.2   Business Units that generate invoices from a system other than
PeopleSoft must provide monthly Aging Reports to the Accounting Division.
   8.3   Departments shall be responsible for reconciling their accounts
receivable to the PeopleSoft General Ledger on a monthly basis.
9.0   BANKRUPTCY CASES
   9.1   The Legal Department will notify DFAS when an individual or a business
has declared bankruptcy. The Accounts Receivable staff will research the name
and, if necessary, communicate back to the Legal Department the amount that is
due from the customer along with any additional information requested. The
Account Receivable is earmarked as a bankruptcy.
   9.2   If the City is in receipt of a bankruptcy notice naming the City as a
creditor, a copy of the notice will be sent immediately to the Legal
Department, the Treasury Division, and Accounting Division.
      9.2.1.   All department level billing and collection efforts must cease.
Departments shall not contact a customer in bankruptcy about their bills by
phone or mail.
      9.2.2.   Claims of bankruptcy shall be honored only if supported by a
physical copy of the court order naming the City as a debtor
      9.2.3.   Taxes due and intentional torts are not dischargeable.
      9.2.4.   Passive payments received from a bankrupt business shall be
deposited, as appropriate, to the Common Fund account.
      9.2.5.   The City may be compelled to extend credit to a company in
reorganization if withholding such credit would endanger the viability of the
business.
   9.3   If the City is not named by the court as a creditor, continue doing
business, but reconsider the degree to which the extension of further credit
may be prudent.   
   9.4   See Section 17.0 for available assistance from the Legal Department.
Bill Type Description                        Department
          Payroll expenditures processed on
          behalf of other agencies by the    Finance and Administrative
PAY       City of Albuquerque. Usually for   Services.
          AMAFCA and Mid-Region Council of
          Governments (MRCOG).
WHS       Warehouse charges                  Finance and Administrative
                                             Services
          Administrative expenditures and
          fees billed to external agencies.  Finance and Administrative
ADM       Usually for Albuquerque Housing    Services
          Services for various
          administrative expenditures.
          Rental billing for leases and      Real Property and Various
RNT       other contractual rental           Departments
          agreements.
JPA       Intergovernmental agreements for   Various Departments
          services
SAD       Title search fees                  Finance and Administrative
                                             Services
TRN       Academy Training services          Fire
INS       Insurance Assessments              Human Resources
PRM       Permits and Inspections            Fire, Code Enforcement
OTC       Chiefs Overtime                    Police
RPT       Copies of accident reports         Police
PRK       Monthly Parking contracts          Municipal Development, Parking
                                             Division
RCM       Recurring Monthly billings other   Various Departments
          than Parking fees and rental fees
RCQ       Recurring Quarterly billings other Various Departments
          than Parking Fees and rental fees
RBA       Recurring Bi-Annual billings other Various Departments
          than parking fees and rental fees.
RAN       Recurring Annual billings other    Various Departments
          than parking fees and rental fees
INM       Monthly installment billings       Various Departments
          Solid Waste recycled materials,
SWD       weed and litter services, and      Solid Waste Department
          trash bag sales to area merchants
LEN       Demolition and code enforcement    Municipal Development, Planning
          expenses billed to property owners Division
OND       Miscellaneous invoices             Various Departments
EVT       Elevator Inspections               Municipal Development, Planning
                                             Division
BOL       Boiler Inspections                 Municipal Development, Planning
                                             Division
ROW       Right of Way Annual Fees           Municipal Development, Planning
                                             Division
AMT       Grants related. Fixed Amount       Various Departments
          billings
LOC       Grants related. Letter of credit   Various Departments
          billings
RFR       Grants related. Request for        Various Departments
          reimbursement
 
Chart 1. Bill Types
10.0   ASSESSMENT OF INTEREST AND PENALTIES
   10.1    In absence of a written contract fixing an interest rate, the rate
of interest shall be 0.0411 percent per day (15% per year simple interest) in
the following cases:
      10.1.1.   For money due by contract.
      10.1.2.   For money retained by a customer’s agent without the customer’s
consent, expressed or implied.
      10.1.3.   Upon the settlement of matured accounts from the day the
balance is ascertained.
   10.2    Interest may be charged to current or open accounts beginning thirty
(30) days of the invoice date.
   10.3    All invoices must include written notice of the date certain when
interest or penalties will be charged, if the account is not brought current.
   10.4    Interest may not be charged when there is no “prior” notice that
interest is accruing.
   10.5    Partial payments shall be applied to the oldest interest and
penalties first.
   10.6    Interest charges shall not be imposed in those instances where the
contract states that no interest will accrue regardless of what statutes may
allow.
11.0   COLLECTION POLICY FOR ACCOUNTS LESS THAN 90 DAYS PAST DUE
   11.1    Purpose: The purpose of section 12.0 is to outline the necessary
steps to ensure collection of Accounts Receivable is performed in a timely,
fair and cost effective manner for the City. A key assumption is that the
longer an account goes unpaid, the more difficult it becomes to collect.
   11.2    DFAS Responsibilities: The Overall Collection Policy governs the
policy and procedures that staff in the DFAS will follow. The Accounting
Division oversees the City’s Accounts Receivable. Accounting Division should
effectively manage Accounts Receivable balances and be consistent in the
collection processes. In order to do so, Accounting may contract with an
outside agency to assist in Default Management as defined by the City.
   11.3    Departmental Responsibilities: Each Business Unit should have a
written policy and procedures for Collections . The roles and responsibilities
of Collections for each department should be clearly defined; however, if a
department does not have a Collections Policy and Procedures, then the policies
in this manual will govern the department’s policies. All departments are
responsible for collecting on amounts invoiced and identifying staff assigned
with these duties. This effort will be coordinated with the Accounting Division
and Accounts Receivable section.
   11.4    Collection Responsibilities
      11.4.1 Procedures
         a.    The City provides customers fifteen (15) to forty-five (45) days
in which to pay an invoice, unless specified by an alternate approved
agreement.
         b.    An Aging Report is available at the beginning of each month to
all user departments.
         c.   The department’s accounts receivable staff is responsible for
reviewing the list for accounts that are past due. Departments are responsible
for investigating past due items listed in the 31-60 days column of the Aging
Report. This translates to invoices being one (1) day to thirty (30) days late.
         d.    If an invoice has not been paid within 30 days, department staff
will contact the customer.
         e.    Additional procedures under Sections 12.4.2 – 12.4.5 may be
followed as necessary.
         f.    Document all contacts with the customer in the customer’s online
(PeopleSoft) file through the use of the Customer Interactions page.
      11.4.2    Phone Calls and Payment Arrangements
         a.    Phone calls can be made in an attempt to collect; however,
employees must make certain the customer is not being harassed in any way.
Department staff shall place no more than two (2) phone calls to a delinquent
account per item (invoice) for which payment is in arrears.
         b.   Calls must be made during normal business hours.
         c.    If a customer agrees to pay the debt over a period of three (3)
months or less, a Promissory Note will be prepared and must be signed by the
debtor (customer). Email communication can also serve as a promissory note or
promise to pay. The payment agreement is as follows:
            i. 25% of outstanding balance paid immediately
            ii. Remaining 75% paid over the three (3) months or less.
            iii. All payment arrangements should be accompanied by a Follow-Up
letter.
         d.    Under no circumstances, will staff engage in outside collection
efforts by way of personal visits to the customer’s location.
         e.   In the event that City has sent an item to a Collection Agency,
department staff shall not call the debtor about that debt, nor answer any
questions from the Customer. Customer must be directed to speak to the
collection agency.
      11.4.3    Invoice Credit
         a.    If it is determined that a credit should be applied against an
invoice, the credit request must be supported by proper documentation and
authorized by the appropriate supervisor.
         b.    For additional information, refer to Sections 15.0, 18.0 and
19.0.
      11.4.4    One-time Collection Fee
         a.    Per this administrative instruction, the City may add a one-time
collection fee of twelve (12%) percent to any qualified gross account
receivable balance. Notice of the fee should be noted on final Dunning Letter
sent to the customer.
      11.4.5   Withholding Service until Debt is Paid
         a.   Holding one (1) or more City services until a debt is paid may be
permissible.
         b.   Decision to withhold services shall be policy based, not made on
a case-by-case basis.
         c.    The Legal Department shall review any withholdings of service
due to non-payment for legal ramifications, before their implementation.
         d.   No such withholdings shall occur without written authorization
from the Legal Department.
      11.4.6   Uniform Treatment
         a.   Government has an obligation to apply uniform credit standards.
         b.   Exceptions, however, may be justified by an adequately documented
credit history.
         c.   Remedies such as requiring payments or surety bonds prior to
rendering service must have a rational basis and must be equivalent for debtors
with similar credit histories.
      11.4.7   Dunning Letters
         a.   First Dunning Letter will automatically generate from the
PeopleSoft Accounts Receivable module when an item (invoice) is 10 days past
due. Letters will be mailed by the Accounts Receivable Section.
         b.   Second Dunning Letter will automatically generate from the
PeopleSoft Accounts Receivable module when an item (invoice) is 25 days past
due. Letters will be mailed by the Accounts Receivable Section. Letter should
disclose the 12 percent One-Time Collection Fee.
         c.   For billings systems other than PeopleSoft, Dunning Letters or
Follow-up letters should be mailed for outstanding items.
         d.   For billings systems other than PeopleSoft, identify customers
whose accounts are 10 days past due, but have not made arrangements to pay.
Generate the first Dunning Letter specifying the past due invoice(s), past due
amount(s), original due date(s), number of days late, total balance due,
current terms, and notice to payment due date.
         e.   For billings systems other than PeopleSoft, identify customers
whose accounts are 25 days past due, but have not made arrangements to pay.
Generate the second Dunning Letter specifying the past due invoice(s), past due
amount(s), original due date(s), number of days late, total balance due,
current terms, and notice to payment due date.
      11.4.8    If after sixty-one (61) days the item is outstanding and there
has been no response from the customer and/or no payment arrangements have been
made, then the Default Management process will commence.
   11.5 Default Management
      11.5.1    Sixty-One (61) Days Past Due
         a.    Once an account is more than sixty-one (61) days past due, the
account is eligible for management by a Collection Agency.
         b.    No phone calls will be made to the Customer. Previous collection
letters with strong verbiage should have been mailed per section 12.4.7 to
inform the debtor that the invoice is past due and of possible consequences.
         c.    These consequences include but are not limited to submitting a
negative report of the delinquent account to a national credit bureau, thus
affecting the customer’s credit worthiness.
      11.5.2    Reporting Past Due Accounts
         a.    Only Qualified Gross Receivable Accounts will be reported to the
Collection Agency.
         b.    Once the City agrees that debt collection proceedings are to
commence, the City will contact the Collection Agency and forward the file with
relevant information
         c.    All accounts turned over to the Collection Agency must have
valid and accurate supporting documentation.
         d.    The Collection Agency is considered a third party collector.
         e.    The Collection Agency will follow state and federal laws in
their efforts to collect a debt.
         f.    The Collection Agency will charge the City a fee based on a
signed agreement.
         g.    All payments on past due accounts submitted to the Collection
Agency are submitted directly to the Agency. The Agency will remit payment to
the City for accounts collected on behalf of the City. The Agency will provide
the City a bill for accounts collected on. Payment of the fees will be made out
of the Department’s budget. Invoices from the Agency will be approved for
payment by the Accounting Division.
         h.    It is the obligation of the City to notify the Collection Agency
when payments are received and to suspend collection efforts for the paid
account.
      11.5.3 Ninety (90) Days Past Due
         a.    Outstanding items could be reported to a national credit bureau
via the collection agency. See section 12.6.
         c.    No further action will be taken on these accounts until it is
determined at a later date that additional steps can be taken to collect on the
account.
   11.6    Credit Bureau Reporting
      12.6.1    Reporting
         a.   See Section 13.0
         b.    Outstanding items could be reported to a national credit bureau
via the collection agency.
         c.    If an account is later collected, then the file will be adjusted
and reported accordingly.
   11.7    Gross Receivables
      12.7.1    Chart I in section 10.0 is a list of revenues billing type
codes that the DFAS is responsible for billing. Most of these accounts meet the
criteria for submission to the collection agency and the credit bureau.
      11.7.2    The Finance Technician in the Accounts Receivable section will
process the following invoices on a daily basis. Each billing type has its own
requirements and may have their own set of procedures. A close review of the
status of each account will be made before sending. This information can be
found in the internal procedures of the Accounts Receivable section.
   11.8    Measurement of Collection Performance
      11.8.1    Accounting Division, Accounts Receivable section monitors
collections performance as follows:
         a.    On a monthly basis, an aging report will be prepared for the
following time periods: 0-30 days (current), 31-60 days, 61-90 days, 91-120
day, and Over 120 days.
         b.    The Aging Report will be run by each type of receivable as
follows: Fund, Customer, and Bill Type. Aging Reports can also be run by
Business Units.
         11.8.2    Accounting Division will review collection goals on a
regular basis to ensure that goals are being met.
   11.9    Assistance from the Legal Department
      11.9.1   For debts at least $10,000, an assigned attorney will write a
formal collection letter to the debtor, if requested.
      11.9.2   For debts of at least $25,000:
         a.   Legal action shall be taken
         b.   Contact Assistant City Attorney assigned to collections
         c.   The City may sue other governments that owe it money.
         d.   Settlement agreements, including terms and conditions of payment,
should be drafted with the assistance of the Legal Department.
      11.9.3   Documentation provided to the assigned attorney should be as
complete as possible and include the following information:
         a.   All related correspondence and emails.
         b.   Information about the past credit history of the debtor.
         c.   Back-up for invoices.
         d.   Any other available information about the debtor such as other
businesses that the same individual may operate.
      11.9.4   Liens, as authorized by Statute, Ordinance or Contract
         a.   Shall be filed within 30 days of customer’s refusal to settle.
         b.   Statute of Limitations (time limit for filing a lien):
            i.   Contract = 4 years
            ii.   Open account = 3 years
12.0   COLLECTION POLICY FOR ACCOUNTS OVER 90 DAYS PAST DUE
   12.1    Purpose: The following procedures are for accounts that are over 90
days past due but were never processed through the Collection Policy in Section
12.0 of this manual.
   12.2    Accounts Receivable Section Responsibilities: Reducing the risk of
uncollectible accounts is a top priority for the City. DFAS encourages all
departments to take a hands-on approach in collection efforts. Departments that
use the Accounts Receivable Section to invoice are required to help monitor
their accounts to ensure that invoices are paid in full and in a timely manner.
   12.3    Departmental Responsibilities: Accounts receivable management is an
ongoing process that requires planning and constant attention. The accounts
receivable staff for each Business Unit is responsible for collection efforts
of delinquent accounts within their Business Unit. Therefore, it is essential
that staff from each Business Unit review their monthly Aging Report for
delinquent accounts. Each department is held accountable for all amounts
invoiced, collected and uncollected, as this is reflected in the preparation of
their budget.
   12.4    Collection Responsibilities
      12.4.1    The following steps should be followed when attempting to
collect on delinquent accounts:
         a.    Document any contact with customer regarding past due invoices
in the PeopleSoft system.
         b.    Contact customers by phone, if appropriate. Generate a follow-up
letter from PeopleSoft.
         c.    If possible, request that the customer sign a promissory note.
      12.4.2    Dunning Letter
         a.    See section 12.4.7
      12.4.3    Credit Bureau Reporting
         a.    See also section 12-6.
         c.    If applicable, the account is provided to the legal department
for further collection attempts or other proper disposition.
         d.   Mark the invoice/item as in collection status in the PeopleSoft
system. Add any relevant notes to the customer’s account in PeopleSoft.
      12.4.4    In order to report the delinquent customer to the Credit
Bureau, the account must be supported by a source document. Credit Bureau
reporting approval should be obtained from the Legal Department before
submission.
      12.4.5    Department standards established to classify delinquent
accounts not eligible for 3 rd -Party collections:
         a.    Bankruptcy Cases
         b.    Deceased
         c.    Unable to Locate
         d.    No Supporting Source Document Found
   12.5    Employees are strictly prohibited from destroying supporting
documentation for mature accounts. If original invoice and backup documents are
not scanned into PeopleSoft or other document management system, departments
shall maintain all original documentation pertaining to an unpaid/open invoice
and shall make them accessible for review and audit.
      12.5.1   Records shall be retained in the department for one (1) year
after the close of the    fiscal year in which payment was received and then
store according to the City’s document retention policy or as required by law
or regulation.
      12.5.2   Once a receivable is written off, the original supporting
documentation shall be forwarded to the Treasury Division where it stall be
retained and made available for audit for a period of twelve (12) months.
   12.6    Employees are not allowed to forgive or negotiate a settlement
amount for any mature account. For additional information, refer to Section
18.0.
   12.7   Allowance for Doubtful Accounts
      12.7.1   If an item (invoice) remains unpaid for more than 90 days, the
dollar value of the invoice will be added to the allowance for doubtful
accounts and charged against the Fund and Department’s appropriate revenue
account. For Enterprise Funds, the dollar value of the invoice will be charged
to the Fund’s bad debt expense.
Chart II – Outline of Default Management Procedures
 
Age of   Action
Accounts
         ∙Monthly aging reports available to Departments and Business Units.
         ∙Departments should make phone contact as appropriate
31-60    ∙Attempt to receive a promise to pay; document any agreements made in the Customer
days     Interactions page on PeopleSoft.
         Send follow-up letters for any payment arrangements
         ∙Dunning Letter #1 will be generated for invoices that are 10 days late.
         ∙Dunning Letter #2 will be generated for invoices that are 25 days late.
         ∙Monthly aging reports available to Departments and Business Units.
         ∙Departments should make phone contact as appropriate
         ∙Attempt to receive a promise to pay; document any agreements made in the Customer
61-90    Interactions page on PeopleSoft.
days     Send follow-up letters for any payment arrangements
         ∙Invoices are considered delinquent and will proceed with default management.
         ∙Evaluate accounts that can be sent to third-party collection agency.
         ∙Invoices sent to a Collection Agency will be marked as “Collections” in the
         Monthly Aging Report.
         ∙Monthly aging reports available to Departments and Business Units.
         ∙For accounts not sent to a third-party collection agency, Central Accounts
91-120   Receivable group attempts final call for payment arrangement.
days     ∙Invoices are reviewed and researched and final determination is made to send to a
         Collection Agency or Legal Department.
         ∙Invoices sent to a Collection Agency will be marked as “Collections” in the
         Monthly Aging Report.
120+     ∙Monthly aging reports sent to Departments and Business Units.
days:    ∙Uncollected items will be reported to a Credit Bureau via collection agency with
91+ days approval from the Legal Department.
past due
 
13.0   CREDIT INVOICES - PEOPLESOFT
   13.1    If it is determined that a credit should be applied against an
invoice, the credit request is prepared by the accounts receivable staff.
   13.2    All credit requests must be supported by proper documentation and
authorized by the appropriate supervisor.
   13.3    Once approved, the customer’s account is credited and a copy of the
credit invoice is scanned and filed in the customer’s file, including any
backup documents.
   13.4    Credits are only permitted for the following limited reasons:
      13.4.1    Duplicate invoice
      13.4.2    Department waived fees
      13.4.3    Payment received applied directly to the general ledger and not
applied against the invoice
      13.4.4    Invoice entered with incorrect data
      13.4.5   Billing error
   13.5    A credit invoice register should be processed and reviewed monthly.
      13.5.1    The register should match the supporting documents for credit
invoices approved by the Supervisor during the month.
      13.5.2    Investigate any unauthorized credits applied.
14.0   RETURNED CHECKS
   All insufficient funds (NSF) returned checks are distributed to the Treasury
Service Section of the DFAS.
   14.1   Collection is centralized in the Treasury Division.
      14.1.1   Banks will make second and third presentments, if directed to do
so, and may charge the maker a fee if electronic re-presentment is utilized.
      14.1.2   Collection agent may charge a service fee for an RCK transaction
of up to $30.00 using a separate ACH debit, if maker has signed prior
authorization.
      14.1.3   City departments may charge a fee of up to $30.00 for NSF checks
received, but prior written notice must be given to the maker. Such notice
would customarily consist of a prominent writing conspicuously displayed at the
point of sale, on bills or invoices and in contracts or application forms.
      14.1.4   Treasury department will notify the Accounting Division or
Central Accounts Receivable when they receive an NSF check. Credits posted to
the customer’s account on PeopleSoft will be reversed.
15.0   SECURITY AND CONTROLS
   Departments must establish proper internal controls over receipts and the
recording of money. Adequate separation of duties must exist. The following
provides guidelines to separate duties.
   15.1    The following functions must be segregated: establish and maintain
the accounts receivable, open mail and receive cash or check, prepare bank
deposits, and enter receipts into the system.
      15.1.1   In no instance shall the individual responsible for setting up a
receivable account be permitted to receive and/or post payments to that
account.
      15.2.2   Where on individual must perform multiple tasks, written control
policies must be established, followed and documented. Under no circumstances,
however, shall one (1) individual be permitted to perform all such duties.
   15.2    Maintain a central check log of all incoming daily checks with
sufficient information to track timing of deposit and for future information
that may be needed. All logged checks should be summarized on a monthly basis
to ensure that all checks were deposited timely and appropriately and to
provide a clear audit trail for future questions on payment history and audits
as requested. This may be maintained using automated cashiering software.
   15.3    All checks must be endorsed properly and must be safeguarded until
deposited. Banking deposit slips must be verified against the daily deposit
total to ensure completeness of deposit.
   15.4    The department will establish a “Cut-Off Time” for the daily
deposit. Monies received after the cut –off time will be deposited the next
business day.
   15.5    Independent parties are to reconcile the bank deposits to the
general ledger activity, customer’s account, and receipts. A trial balance
should be taken at the end of each monthly period and reconciled with the
related sub accounts. Differences should be investigated and adjusted
accordingly. Report any discrepancies to the appropriate staff.
   15.6    Only the City Controller or Associate City Controller has the
authority to approve credit transaction for Accounts Receivable.
   15.7    Cash/checks received must be processed within twenty-four (24) hours
of receipt. Any checks received and not deposited need a justification as to
why checks were not deposited within twenty-four (24) hours.
   15.8    All monies received must have a complete and clear audit trail for
internal and external auditors to be able to trace any transaction from its
inception to the final outcome and from the accounting records back to the
original transaction.
   15.9    Departments must undertake periodic reviews and audits of their
recordings of the monies received to ensure processes are done accurately.
   15.10    Deposits
      15.10.1 Treasury Division processes the daily deposit. All deposits must
be entered separately; no entries should include cash, checks, and credit cards
as one deposit.
      15.10.2 All deposits should reflect the bank statement date not the
business day for the date used in PeopleSoft.
      15.10.3 All cash deposits should be taken to the bank within 24 hours. No
deposit should be held or saved and deposited once a week. All cash deposits
must have dual verification.
      15.10.4 Credit cards must be entered within a 24 hour period.
      15.10.5 American Express (AMEX) must be entered when credited in the bank
statement, as they do not settle the next day. The usual settlement time is one
(1) to two (2).
      15.10.6 Guidelines to enter deposits into PeopleSoft.
         a. Cash Deposit: Cash and checks (Money Orders, Cashier’s Check,
Traveler’s Checks) is one deposit entry. Use the deposit slip number for
“Payment ID”.
         b. Credit Cards: Use the two numbers that identify the department (the
first two numbers of the deposit slip is the department number), and then the
date of the deposit (i.e. Treasury’s credit cards for 6/1/2012 were $45.00 and
settled on 6/2/2012; payment ID would be 020602).
         c. American Express: The process is the same for credit cards
mentioned above in b., however payment ID would include an “A” (i.e. 020602A).
      15.10.7 If an entry is made into PeopleSoft and does not match the bank
statement and/or have the correct date, the deposit ID will require correction
by the originator. If a debit or credit correction is sent to the department,
it requires research in a 24-hour time period. If the debit or credit requires
a dispute, please contact the Treasury Division at 768-3357 within the 24-hour
period.
16.0   STATUTE OF LIMITATIONS ON DELINQUENT ACCOUNT
   16.1   NMSA 1978 §37-1-1 et seq. governs New Mexico’s statute of limitations
for the collection of open accounts, written contracts, and judgments entered
by the Court. In New Mexico, the statute of limitations for open accounts is
four (4) years, while the statute of limitations for written contracts is six
(6) years. Statute of limitation on judgments is seven (7) years unless renewed
for a 2 nd 7-year period.
17.0   WRITE-OFF PROCEDURES
   17.1   If an account is no longer collectible because a customer has filed
for bankruptcy, has died or because the account lacks supporting documentation,
or some other justifiable reason, then the account must be submitted to DFAS on
the Account Write-Off Report Form for approval before writing-off the account
no later than the last day of the business day in January. The form must be
signed by the Division Manager or Supervisor. Compliance with the City’s write-
off policy must be adequately documented and readily available for audit.
   17.2    For a customer who has filed for bankruptcy, obtain from the Legal
Department the bankruptcy case number, type of bankruptcy filed (Chapter 7, 11
or 13), and date of file. Attach a copy of the bankruptcy notice, if available,
a copy of the invoice and any supporting documentation to the Form. Submit the
form to Accounting Division for review. After review, the documents will be
provided to the Legal Department who will determine whether or not to file a
proof of claim with the Bankruptcy Court.
      17.2.1   If a claim is filed with the bankruptcy court, then the account
WILL NOT be written-off.
      17.2.2    If Legal determines that the City will not file a proof of
claim, then the account may be written-off.
      17.2.3   If debt in bankruptcy case is discharged, then account may be
written off.
   17.3    For a customer who has died, obtain a copy of the death certificate
from the person who provided notification of death. Attach a copy of the death
certification and the invoice to the Form and submit to the Accounting Division
for review. For accounts that are more than $5,000, the documents will be
provided to the Legal Department who will determine whether or not to file a
proof of claim with the Probate Court.
      17.3.1    If a claim is filed with the Probate Court, then the account
WILL NOT be written-off.
      17.3.2    If Legal determines that the City will not file a proof of
claim, then the account may be written-off.
   17.4    For an account that lacks supporting documentation, attach a copy of
the invoice to the Form and submit to the Accounting Division for approval.
Your request will be reviewed on a case by case basis and approval will be
issued by the Associate City Controller.
   17.5   The final write-off list is presented to City Council and approved
via City Ordinance. The signed copy of the ordinance is presented to the
Accounting Division. When the signed copy is received, the balances can be
written off the system.
   17.6   Balances that have been written off must be presented to the Internal
Revenue Service. Form 1099-C must be completed. This form is required by the
Internal Revenue Service in the U.S. to summarize how much debt has been
cancelled, that is written off and all collection attempts completed without
success. Run report AR_20006 from PeopleSoft.
18.0   UNPAID BALANCES AND CREDITS OF $25.00 AND UNDER
   18.1   The Accounts Receivable section is allowed to write-off an account
with an outstanding balance or credit of $25.00 or less. Please note that
invoices made out for $25.00 or less do not apply, only unpaid balances or
credits of $25.00 or less. The customers’ account is closed by crediting the
Accounts Receivable.
REFERENCES: None.
 
______________________________
Robert J. Perry                [https://export.amlegal.com/media/
Chief Administrative Officer   6d88fadbb394cb34f1263b3e9230120271b111d2/IMAGES/
_____________________________  0-0-0-560.png]
Effective Date 
 
AI_NO:_2-2_(pdf)
AI NO: 2-3
CITY CHECK DISTRIBUTION POLICY
TITLE: City Check Distribution Policy
PRIMARY DEPARTMENT: Department of Finance and Administrative Services
CHECK DISTRIBUTION POLICY
Sound financial practices require adequate internal controls to safeguard city
assets against loss from unauthorized use or disposition. This instruction
establishes city policy for the distribution of accounts payable and payroll
checks.
A. Accounts Payable Checks
      To comply with internal accounting control requirements, city checks will
be transmitted to payees (vendors, city staff, etc.) by the City’s Fiscal Agent
Payment Management System or directly by the Accounts Payable Division.
B. Payroll Checks
      Direct payroll deposits are required by the administration. For
situations where checks are issued and to ensure adequate control over the
distribution of payroll checks the following policy is established:
   1.   Payroll checks will be mailed out by the Treasurer's office.
   2.   Individuals who complete time sheets (payroll clerks, timekeepers,
etc.) will not be eligible to obtain payroll checks from the Treasurer's
Office.
REFERENCES:   None.
 
______________________________
Robert J. Perry                [https://export.amlegal.com/media/
Chief Administrative Officer   6d88fadbb394cb34f1263b3e9230120271b111d2/IMAGES/
_____________________________  0-0-0-562.png]
Effective Date
 
AI_NO:_2-3_(pdf)
AI NO: 2-4
MYSTERIOUS DISAPPEARANCE OF CITY MONIES RESULTING FROM BURGLARY, LOSS, THEFY
AND/OR EMPLOYEE DISHONESTY,
FRAUD, INCLUDING CURRENCY, FORGED CHECKS AND/OR CASH IMPREST FUNDS
TITLE: Mysterious Disappearance of City Monies Resulting From Burglary, Loss,
Theft and/or Employee Dishonesty, Fraud, Including Counterfeit Currency, Forged
Checks and/or Cash Imprest Funds
PRIMARY DEPARTMENT: Department of Finance and Administrative Services
1. General This Administrative Instruction establishes City policy regarding
disappearance of City monies, including, but not limited to checks, currency,
cash/coins, Traveler’s checks, money orders, cashier’s checks, EFTs, ACH/wires,
credit/debit cards, or checking/saving accounts, resulting from burglary, loss,
theft, dishonesty, negligence, counterfeit currency, forged checks and/or cash
imprest funds.
2. Notification Requirements
   Employees and/or Management Personnel (Missing Monies) - Discovery of
missing City monies requires timely notification of appropriate departmental
management and the City’s Department of Finance and Administrative Services
Treasury Division.
   The following information and administrative action should be taken:
   A.   Notify the Albuquerque Police Department and request an Offense and
Incident Report associated with the missing monies. Provide a summary statement
of the missing money incident. The statement shall include, but not limited to,
the following:
      1. Method and time of discovery;
      2. Date, amount and/or damages or missing property if known.
      3.    Parties involved and their statements regarding the incident.
   B.   Notify Department Director.
   C.   Notify the Treasury Division. Department Director shall notify the
City’s Treasury Division in writing and shall provide supporting documentation.
   D.   Notify the Office of Inspector General.
   E. Request a written report from applicable supervisor within eight (8)
hours. Submit a copy of the police report and completed Over/Short Form to the
Treasury Division.
3. Special Notification
   Employee and/or Management Personnel (Employee Dishonesty) - Fraudulent
Embezzlement Associated with Missing Monies - The department, through the
Employee and/or Management Personnel, shall immediately notify the City's Chief
Administrative Officer of discovered or suspected acts of embezzlement by any
department employee. The notification from the department shall come from
Management Personnel, after being notified by any department Employee. The
Chief Administrative Officer will notify the Albuquerque Police Department
Investigative Bureau in a timely manner.
4. Treasury Notification
   Employee and/or Management Personnel - Shortage Discrepancies of Fifty
Dollars or More - Any discrepancy involving shortages of fifty dollars ($50) or
more in receipts, imprest funds, counterfeit monies, or forged checks requires
direct notification of the Treasury Division.
   Within forty-eight (48) hours after oral and/or written notification, the
Treasury Division will:
   A.   Follow-up with a formal written notification and tentative status
report to City's Chief Administrative Officer, copies to Risk Management Claims
Manager, Office of Internal Audit; Accounting Officer, Office of Inspector
General, Department Director, and Department of Finance and Administrative
Services Director;
   B.   Direct a supervisor from the Treasury Division to: coordinate any
efforts to review and examine the status of internal cash controls, and provide
any necessary special training or other necessary Treasury action;
   C.   Maintain administrative files concerning missing monies for a minimum
of three (3) years after the investigation has been completed by the necessary
investigative parties.
5. Departmental Recording Requirements
   Fiscal Managers are required to ensure the proper accounting is completed in
the general ledger for all missing monies. The following must be recorded as
shortages in accordance with Generally Accepted Accounting Principles:
   A.   The loss of cash imprest funds, including, but not limited to change
funds, petty cash funds, or checking/saving accounts;
   B.   The loss of other City monies, including, but not limited to checks,
currency, cash/coins, Traveler’s checks, money orders, cashier’s checks, EFTs,
ACH/wires, credit/debit cards, or gift cards.
   C.   The Department of Finance and Administrative Services Accounting
Division, and/or Treasury Division, can assist with the required accounting
steps in recording the loss.
6. Other Requirements
   A. Departmental Insurance Reimbursement: Questions concerning insurance
determinations will be directed to the Department of Finance and Administrative
Services, Risk Management Division.
   B. Departmental Cash Imprest Funds Replenishment: Questions concerning cash
imprest fund replenishment will be directed to the Department of Finance and
Administrative Services Treasury Division.
Shortages less than fifty dollars ($50) will require an Over/Short Form to be
completed for recording purposes and signed by appropriate management. All
copies of shortages shall be forwarded to the Treasury Division, Office of
Internal Audit, and Office of Inspector General for review and monitoring.
7. Failure to Comply: City employees found to be in violation of this
Administrative Instruction may be subject to disciplinary action pursuant to
the City’s Personnel Rules and Regulations.
REFERENCES:    City’s Cash Handling Policy & Procedures manual 
 
______________________________
Robert J. Perry                [https://export.amlegal.com/media/
Chief Administrative Officer   6d88fadbb394cb34f1263b3e9230120271b111d2/IMAGES/
_____________________________  0-0-0-564.png]
Effective Date
 
AI_NO:_2-4_(pdf)
AI NO: 2-6
EMPLOYEE CASH HANDLING TRAINING PROGRAM
TITLE:   Employee Cash Handling Training Program
PRIMARY DEPARTMENT:   Department of Finance and Administrative Services
The purpose of this Administrative Instruction is to provide a comprehensive
training program in cash-handling procedures for all employees involved with
handling city monies and their supervisors.
   1.   General
      All City employees who handle City monies, as well as their supervisors,
fiscal manager and directors who oversee and manage cash sites, are required to
attend a Cash Handling training every three (3) years.  City monies include,
but are not limited to the following: checks, currency (cash/coins, Traveler’s
check, money orders, cashier’s checks, EFTs (ACH/Wires), credit/debit cards,
checking/savings accounts, etc.
   2.   Applicability
      Cash-Handling training is applicable to those involved with cash-handling
operations and imprest fund usage, including, but not limited to, directors,
managers, supervisors, city employees, temporary employees and city volunteers.
      It is the intent of the City, through this administrative instruction, to
train all new cash handlers within the first month of their hire and/or
appointment to the position. All employees participating in the training will
be issued Certificates of Completion when the training has been satisfactorily
completed, and this certificate must be renewed every three (3) years after
completion of a refresher course in cash-handling procedures.
   3.   Requirements
      The City of Albuquerque Department of Finance and Administrative
Services, Treasury Division, shall provide cash-handling training for all
personnel handling (directly or indirectly) City monies and those responsible
for managing such related activities (e.g., directors, fiscal managers, fiscal
officers, supervisors, managers.
      The Treasury Division will be responsible for keeping up-to-date records
with regard to employees attending class and assigned to areas of cash
handling.
      The hiring department will be held responsible for ensuring that
employees are up to date with their cash handling certification. Those
employees not certified by the Treasury Division will not be recognized as
official cash handlers and shall not handle City monies until completing the
training course and receiving certification.
   4.   Other Requirements
      The area of cash handling is an integral part of the overall financial
system in any given department. Thus, this administrative instruction allows
the City to certify all cash handlers. However, this does not relieve the
departments from the responsibility of notifying the Treasury Division of
changes in personnel and of the need for training for these employees or other
individuals who will be handling cash to ensure that qualified, certified
personnel handle City monies.
REFERENCES:   City’s Cash Handling Policy & Procedures Manual
 
______________________________
Robert J. Perry                [https://export.amlegal.com/media/
Chief Administrative Officer   6d88fadbb394cb34f1263b3e9230120271b111d2/IMAGES/
_____________________________  0-0-0-566.png]
Effective Date
 
AI_NO:_2-6_(pdf)
AI NO: 2-8
CASH HANDLING, DEPOSITING, AND RECORDING OF PUBLIC MONIES
TITLE:   Cash Handling, Depositing, and Recording of Public Monies
PRIMARY DEPARTMENT:   Department of Finance and Administrative Services
   1.   General The purpose of this Administrative Instruction is to reaffirm
the City's policy on the cash handling, depositing, and recording of City
(public) monies.
      City monies include, but are not limited to: checks, currency (cash/
coins, Traveler’s check, money orders, cashier’s checks, EFTs (ACH/Wires),
credit/debit cards, checking/savings accounts.
   2.   General Deposit Requirements
      a.    The Treasury Division of the Department of Finance and
Administrative Services will administer the City’s Cash Handling Policy and
Procedures manual.
      b.   The Treasury Division is responsible for the cash management and
investment of public monies. Each department shall obtain authorization from
the Treasury Division prior to establishing a cash site.  Special event or
temporary locations for receiving cash must obtain prior authorization from the
Treasury Division.
      c.   Each City department receiving monies at authorized cash sites on
behalf of the City shall formally designate persons to receive, deposit and
record these monies to the general ledger utilizing the PeopleSoft System
Accounts Receivable Deposit module within twenty-four (24) hours of receiving
monies pursuant to Section 6-10-2 through 6-10-3 NMSA 1978 and the City’s Cash
Handling Policy & Procedures manual.  Names of designated persons (designated
as a “Custodian”) responsible for handling City monies shall be submitted to
the Treasury Division, and additions and deletions shall be submitted as they
occur.
      d.   The Custodian will be responsible for all monies issued to their
cash site. Substitute Custodians may be designated for coverage purposes,
however, the Custodian will have the ultimate responsibility to ensure policies
and procedures are in place for the safe guarding of monies handled.
      e.   The Fiscal Manager of each Department is responsible for overseeing
and ensuring the fiscal integrity of daily deposits as well as the recording of
deposits to the general ledger within twenty-four (24) hours of receiving
monies, including, but not limited to, ensuring proper internal controls and
segregation of duties are in place for all cash sites, and ensuring the policy
and procedures are updated on a regular basis.
      f.   Persons receiving public monies shall prepare miscellaneous cash
receipts or other approved documents acknowledging receipt of public monies and
shall issue the receipts to those who remit monies to the City.
      g.   Persons depositing public monies shall deliver such monies directly
to the City Fiscal Agent or designated primary cash site before the close of
the business day following the receipt of such funds pursuant to Section 6-10-
2 through 6-10-3 NMSA 1978, and the City’s Cash Handling Policy and Procedures
manual.  Under certain conditions, within this same time period and with prior
approval of the City Treasurer, public monies may be deposited in a properly
designated bank account and bank location.
      h.   Persons recording any public monies received shall post the amounts
to appropriate accounting codes.  Questions regarding coding of financial
documents and/or recording or transactions should be referred to the Accounting
Division (Fiscal Section) of the Department of Finance and Administrative
Services
      i.   All departments shall receive authorization from the Treasury
Division prior to conducting business with the City’s designated fiscal agent
bank.
   3.   Erroneous Deposit Requirements
      a.   An Erroneous Deposit is an excess deposit that does not have a bank
transaction to reconcile to.
      b.   Erroneous Deposits may occur due to the following reasons,
including, but not limited to:
         ∙    Cash site entered duplicate entries;
         ∙    Cash site selected wrong bank account;
         ∙    Cash site delayed deposit entries (passed 24 hours) - Goes to
Miscellaneous Revenue (must process a journal entry);
         ∙    Cash site combined deposits;
         ∙    Cash site entered incorrect amounts;
         ∙    Cash site had deposit corrections/adjustments; or
         ∙    Cash site had on-line sales (i.e. numerous departments using one
merchant ID, or one deposit in bank with too many entries in PeopleSoft).
      c.   Each cash site is responsible for reversing their own erroneous
deposits each month from the general ledger. Fiscal Mangers for each department
will be responsible for ensuring their erroneous deposits for their cash sites
are reversed. Failure to comply will misstate the city’s financial records.
      d.   All erroneous deposits from a prior month shall be reversed by the
eighth (8 th ) business day of the current month.
   4.   Miscellaneous Revenues Deposit Requirements
      a.   A “Miscellaneous Revenue Deposit” is a deposit that is entered using
an external transaction into the PeopleSoft System by the Treasury Division and
posted to a Miscellaneous Revenue account.
      b.   Deposits not entered within twenty-four (24) hours of receipt will
be entered by the Treasury Division using an external transaction that will be
posted to a Miscellaneous Revenue account for the corresponding department.
      c.   Fiscal Managers shall ensure that a journal entry is processed from
their departments “Miscellaneous Revenue” account to the valid revenue account.
Failure to comply may misstate the City’s financial records.
   5.   Failure to Comply
      City employees found to be in violation of this Administrative
Instruction may be subject to disciplinary action pursuant to the City’s
Personnel Rules and Regulations, and access to the PeopleSoft system may be
suspended.
REFERENCES:    Section 6-10-2 through 6-10-3 NMSA 1978 and the City’s Cash
Handling Policy & Procedures manual.
 
______________________________
Robert J. Perry                [https://export.amlegal.com/media/
Chief Administrative Officer   6d88fadbb394cb34f1263b3e9230120271b111d2/IMAGES/
_____________________________  0-0-0-568.png]
Effective Date
 
AI_NO:_2-8_(pdf)
AI NO: 2-12
PARKING FEE POLICY
TITLE:   Parking Fee Policy
PRIMARY DEPARTMENT:   Department of Municipal Development
This instruction promulgates the City's policy on the collection of fees for
parking in parking structures, garages and surface lots owned by the City of
Albuquerque, operated and maintained by the Department of Municipal
Development’s Parking Division.
Effective February 1, 1986, the policy shall be:
1. All patrons shall pay parking fees in full, based on the current fee
schedule for applicable parking services provided. "Patrons" includes, but is
not limited to: the City of Albuquerque and its employees; other governmental
entities and their employees; institutions, organizations and associations,
whether they are charitable, fraternal, paternal, religious or service-
oriented; and private individuals.
2. Any exception to the Parking Fee Policy established by this administrative
instruction shall be made only by the Mayor or the Chief Administrative
Officer.
3. In the event that the Mayor or the Chief Administrative Officer does make an
exception to the Parking Fee Policy, the Manager of the Parking Division shall
be notified in writing, and any fees or portion of fees appearing in the
current fee schedule but not collected shall be reimbursed to the Parking
Division as directed by the Chief Administrative Officer.
 
______________________________
Robert J. Perry                [https://export.amlegal.com/media/
Chief Administrative Officer   6d88fadbb394cb34f1263b3e9230120271b111d2/IMAGES/
_____________________________  0-0-0-570.png]
Effective Date 
 
AI_NO:_2-12_(pdf)
AI NO: 2-13
FINANCIAL RESERVE POLICY FOR THE GENERAL FUND
TITLE: Financial Reserve Policy for the General Fund
PRIMARY DEPARTMENT: Department of Finance and Administrative Services
To protect the City from shortfalls in revenues due to changes in the economy
and unanticipated fiscal needs or emergencies, it is prudent to establish a
minimum reserve in the General Fund of the City equal to one-twelfth (1/12 or
8.333%) of total appropriations for each fiscal year based on the Original
Approved Budget. The purpose of the general fund reserve is to provide for
unforeseen emergency expenditures and not to be available for general
appropriations. In addition, $200,000 shall be added to this reserve each
fiscal year as a part of the Mayor’s Proposed Operating Budget until the total
reserve is equal to one-tenth (1/10 or 10.00%) of total appropriations. Should
the reserve be needed to cover unforeseen emergency expenditures, an
appropriation by the City Council is required and the Mayor will request
replenishment of those reserves in the Proposed Operating Budget made to the
Council on or before the next April 1.
REFERENCES: None.
 
______________________________
Robert J. Perry                [https://export.amlegal.com/media/
Chief Administrative Officer   6d88fadbb394cb34f1263b3e9230120271b111d2/IMAGES/
_____________________________  0-0-0-572.png]
Effective Date
 
AI_NO:_2-13_(pdf)
AI NO: 2-16
DIRECT PAYROLL DEPOSIT
TITLE:   Direct Payroll Deposit
PRIMARY DEPARTMENT:   Department of Finance and Administrative Services
It is the policy of the City that all new hires, re-employments and re-hires be
paid via direct payroll deposit. The only exceptions will be short term
seasonal and student positions. All employee wages will be deposited via direct
deposit to the employee's bank account. A payroll check will be issued only
during the "pre-note" phase of the account setup. Employees will be required to
complete the necessary direct deposit enrollment set up via Employee Self
Service (ESS), or complete the form requesting a pay card, on the date they
report for New Employee Orientation. The Human Resources Department shall
include this policy in the new employee orientation packet and will assist
employees in submitting direct deposit information via ESS or in filling out
the form requesting a pay card with necessary supporting documentation.
 
______________________________
Robert J. Perry                [https://export.amlegal.com/media/
Chief Administrative Officer   6d88fadbb394cb34f1263b3e9230120271b111d2/IMAGES/
_____________________________  0-0-0-574.png]
Effective Date
 
AI_NO:_2-16_(pdf)
AI NO: 2-17
CITY PAYROLL DEDUCTION POLICY
TITLE: City Payroll Deduction Policy
PRIMARY DEPARTMENT: Department of Finance and Administrative Services
1.   Background:
In the past the City has allowed a number of businesses and organizations to
participate in the employee payroll deduction program. City policy requires the
application of an administrative processing fee as well as a minimum level of
participation. The intent of this Administrative Instruction is to update the
policy and provide clear and consistent guidelines for all entities
participating in the City of Albuquerque payroll deduction program.
2.   Policy:
   A.   It is the policy of the City to allow businesses and organizations
which provide a direct and substantial benefit or service to employees to
participate in the payroll deduction program. Based on this requirement the
following category of businesses and organizations will be allowed to request
participation:
      i.   City approved health providers, medical, dental, and vision;
      ii.   Insurance companies;
      iii.   Uniform companies (those companies that supply items that meet the
uniform specifications required to be worn by city employees);
      iv.   Prepaid legal services;
      v.   Charitable organizations;
      vi.   Union dues and agency fees check-off; and
      vii.   Organizations that advance the goals of city employees (e.g. CPOA,
NMSPA)
   B.   In order to participate in this program the business and organization
will be assessed an administrative fee and must comply with the minimum
employee participation levels as follows:
   C.   Fee Structure -- an administrative processing fee of 2.5% will be
applied to the total amount deducted from employees each pay period. The
balance, after deducting the administrative fee, will be remitted to the
business and organization each pay period with a report reflecting the total
amount deducted from employees, the administrative fee and the net amount to be
remitted to the business and organization.
   D.   Participation Levels -- a minimum of 1% of the budgeted City’s employee
population must be enrolled in the program in order to participate. If the
enrollment drops below the minimum participation for two (2) consecutive pay
periods the payroll deduction will be terminated for a minimum period of six
(6) months.
   E.   New Businesses -- new businesses and organizations that are requesting
to participate in the automatic payroll deduction program must be eligible
under one of the categories specified in this policy and will be allowed to
submit a request to participate during the month of April each calendar year.
3.   Exemptions:
Unions, charitable organizations, city approved health providers and
organizations that advance the goals of city employees will be exempt from the
required fees and minimum participation levels. No other exemptions will be
made to the policy. Any solicitations by either commercial or non-profit
organizations must adhere to Administrative Instruction 5-13 which requires
approval of the Chief Administrative Officer prior to contacting any city
employee.
The Human Resources Department and the Finance and Administrative Services
Department will develop the enrollment procedures and any necessary forms/
reports to ensure compliance with this program.
4.   Employee Participation:
All employees may establish a payroll deduction for City approved health
providers, insurance companies, prepaid legal services, charitable
organizations, unions and fraternal organizations. The employee must meet the
requirements of these organizations and enroll in the individual program prior
to establishing an automatic payroll deduction.
A payroll deduction to a uniform/uniform related business will be allowed only
for employees that are actually required to purchase a uniform as a condition
of their employment.
5.   Procedures:
The City Payroll Office will prepare an enrollment package for use by the
business community which will include written procedures and forms required to
request participation.
 
______________________________
Robert J. Perry                [https://export.amlegal.com/media/
Chief Administrative Officer   6d88fadbb394cb34f1263b3e9230120271b111d2/IMAGES/
_____________________________  0-0-0-576.png]
Effective Date 
 
AI_NO:_2-17_(pdf)
AI NO: 2-19
ADMINISTRATIVE (NON-COURT) ENFORCEMENT ACTIONS - CAO APPROVAL REQUIRED IF
MONIES RESULTING FROM THE ACTION ARE NOT PAID INTO CITY GENERAL FUND
TITLE:   Administrative (Non-court) Enforcement Actions - CAO Approval Required
if Monies Resulting from the Action are Not Paid into City General Fund
PRIMARY DEPARTMENT:   Legal Department
Background:
This Administrative Instruction requires the Chief Administrative Officer to
review and approve the proposed disposition of an administrative (non-court)
enforcement action if the proposed disposition will result in the respondent to
the administrative action paying monies to a non-City of Albuquerque entity or
individual.
Policy:
For purposes of this Administrative Instruction, an "administrative enforcement
action" is an action taken by City staff regarding an alleged violation of an
act, statute, ordinance, regulation, permit or other legal requirement, if the
enforcement action is not filed in criminal or civil court.
Requirement:
If an administrative enforcement action is initiated, and if part or all of the
proposed disposition of the action requires the respondent to the action to pay
monies to a non-City of Albuquerque entity or individual instead of paying the
monies into the City general fund, the Chief Administrative Officer must give
written approval before the disposition of the administrative enforcement
action will be effective.
REFERENCES:   none
 
______________________________
Robert J. Perry                [https://export.amlegal.com/media/
Chief Administrative Officer   6d88fadbb394cb34f1263b3e9230120271b111d2/IMAGES/
_____________________________  0-0-0-578.png]
Effective Date
 
AI_NO:_2-19_(pdf)
AI NO: 2-20
BUDGETARY CONTROL RESPONSIBILITIES
TITLE:   Budgetary Control Responsibilities
PRIMARY DEPARTMENT: Department of Finance and Administrative Services
It is the policy of the administration to maintain financial responsibility in
the operation of City government. This entails control of city expenditures
through the budgetary process established through state law and City Charter.
Budgetary responsibility is delegated from the Mayor and Chief Administrative
Officer to Department Directors. Department Directors in turn delegate this
authority to various managers. These may be Associate Directors, Deputy
Directors, Division Managers, Fiscal Managers, Human Resource Coordinators and
a variety of other titles. This administrative instruction applies to anyone
who has the authority to expend or oversee expenditures of public funds
regardless of title. The ultimate test will be whether that position has the
ability to effectively monitor and control expenditures within a budget at a
Program or Project level.
City services will be delivered as efficiently as possible and within the
resources available. Service levels will be adjusted to reasonable expectations
based on the revenues appropriated.
Programs and Projects are the level at which appropriations are authorized by
the City Council. It is at this level that managers must ultimately be
responsible for controlling expenditures.
All employees with budgetary control over a Program or Project must accomplish
their tasks within the approved budget. All expenditure decisions must be made
within that framework. It is unacceptable for an employee with budgetary
control to spend in excess of the appropriated budget. Employees such as fiscal
managers and human resource coordinators who may lack direct control, but serve
in a direct advisory capacity for expenditure decisions, shall provide
management with the best information available. If the manager fails to act in
a financially prudent manner upon receipt of the advice, the fiscal manager
and/or human resource coordinator shall report to the manager's supervisor.
This process will be repeated at ascending levels of management until
appropriate resolution is reached. If necessary, after following this
procedure, if he/she still believes corrections have not been made, he/she
should report directly to the City Budget Officer. Failure to follow this
procedure will result in the same disciplinary procedure applicable to the
Program Manager, described below.
Failure on the part of the Program Manager to monitor and control expenses
within the appropriated budget will be subject to disciplinary action as
defined in the Personnel Rules and Regulations. Disciplinary action may include
written reprimand, suspension, demotion or dismissal.
REFERENCES:   City Code of Ordinances, Article 11 City Budget, Section 6-6-1 et
seq. NMSA 1978.
 
______________________________
Robert J. Perry                [https://export.amlegal.com/media/
Chief Administrative Officer   6d88fadbb394cb34f1263b3e9230120271b111d2/IMAGES/
_____________________________  0-0-0-580.png]
Effective Date
 
AI_NO:_2-20_(pdf)
AI NO: 2-21
RECORDING AND REMEDIATION OF CASH OVERAGES AND SHORTAGES
TITLE: Recording and Remediation of Cash Overages and Shortages
PRIMARY DEPARTMENT: Department of Finance and Administrative Services
1. General
   This instruction states the City's policy on recording transactions
associated with cash overages or shortages and with appropriate remedial
measures to be taken with respect to individuals responsible for cash overages
or shortages.
2.    Recording
   Daily overages or shortages shall be recorded in the City's general ledger
using the City of Albuquerque Over/Short Form (see form below). The form must
include the following information:
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/6d88fadbb394cb34f1263b3e9230120271b111d2/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1188.png]
(1) The amount and type (overage/shortage) of discrepancy.
(2) The reason(s) for the discrepancy.
(3) The custodian/sub-custodian signature.
(4) The supervisor signature.
(5) The appropriate accounting string (must include: Fund#, Account# 469002,
Department ID# or PC Project/ PC Business Unit/ Activity#).
Any overages/shortages shall be recorded utilizing the City's PeopleSoft AR
Deposit function within twenty four (24) hours of receiving monies pursuant to
Section 6-10-2 & 6-10-3 NMSA 1978 and the City’s Cash Handling Policy &
Procedures manual.
3. Remediation
Department Fiscal Managers are required to monitor all overages/shortages for
their respective cash sites.
Copies of all overages/shortages should be provided to both Treasury and
Internal Audit.
Large or frequent overages and shortages may justify retraining, investigating
and/or disciplinary action up to and including termination, pursuant to the
City’s Personnel Rules and Regulations.
Departments shall not seek reimbursement for periodic, minor cash shortages
from the assigned cashier or custodian.
REFERENCES:   Section 6-10-2 & 6-10-3 NMSA 1978 and the City’s Cash Handling
Policy & Procedures manual.
 
______________________________
Robert J. Perry                [https://export.amlegal.com/media/
Chief Administrative Officer   6d88fadbb394cb34f1263b3e9230120271b111d2/IMAGES/
_____________________________  0-0-0-582.png]
Effective Date
 
AI_NO:_2-21_(pdf)
AI NO: 2-22
INTERNAL AND EXTERNAL AUDITS AND REPORT RESPONSES
TITLE:   Internal and External Audits and Report Responses
PRIMARY DEPARTMENT:   Department of Finance & Administrative Services
   1.   Background:
City departments and programs are regularly subject to audit, review and
oversight by a number of internal and external agencies including, but not
limited to, the Office of Internal Audit, the federal Department of
Transportation, the federal Department of Justice, both state and federal
Environment Departments, the Department of Housing and Urban Development (HUD),
etc.
It is not uncommon for multiple oversight agencies to be engaged in an audit or
review of a specific department or program either concurrently or
consecutively. This Administrative Instruction is meant to ensure consistency
in responses to audit findings and recommendations.
   2.   Policy:
   A.   Notification of Intent to Audit or Commencement of Audit
Department Directors must notify the CAO immediately via e-mail whenever a
department is notified by any internal or external agency of that agency’s
intent to commence an audit, review or investigation of the department or a
program administered by the department. The notification must include, at a
minimum:
   i.   the name of the agency that will be conducting the audit, review or
investigation,
   ii.   a contact name and contact information from the agency, if provided,
   iii.   the subject matter or scope of the audit, review or investigation,
   iv.   the time period to be covered by the audit, review or investigation,
and
   v.   any specific calendaring information provided, such as the date for the
entrance conference.
   vi.   Any other pertinent documents, including the transmittal letters.
   vii.   Department Responsibilities During Audit
Should a department not understand the purpose or intent of the audit, review
or investigation, proper inquiry should be made and documented. In most cases,
a cooperative attitude should be maintained.
Each department should make reasonable efforts to respond in a timely manner to
all requests for documents, schedules, meetings and tours. If requests are
unclear, ambiguous or vague, clarification should be requested in writing
before attempting to respond. All contacts, requests, and responses must be
documented in order to maintain an audit trail.
If a department desires assistance in responding to requests or inquiries, they
should promptly notify the Director of the Department of Finance and
Administrative Services who will meet with appropriate department personnel to
determine the type of assistance needed.
Should significant findings be indicated during the course of the audit, review
or investigation, the department must immediately notify the CAO by e-mail of
the pertinent facts and findings. This notification must include a brief
summary of the key issues and findings.
   B.   Receipt of Draft Report
It is standard practice for the auditor to issue a draft report for technical
review and response from the department. A copy of the draft report, with the
response deadline clearly indicated, must be immediately delivered to the CAO,
preferably in electronic format. Any technical errors in the findings or
recommendations must be highlighted so that they can be promptly addressed.
Absent any technical errors in the findings or recommendations, the department
must prepare proposed responses to the findings and forward them to the
Director of Finance and Administrative Services for his/her review not less
than four (4) business days prior to the due date of the response. The proposed
responses will be forwarded to the CAO not less than two (2) days prior to the
due date.
All responses to reports issued by the Office of Internal Audit will be
finalized and issued under the name of the CAO. The CAO will determine whether
responses to reports issued by other oversight agencies will be issued under
the name of the CAO or the department director. Under no circumstances will
responses to a report, in draft or final form, be issued until they have been
reviewed and approved by the CAO or his delegate.
   C.   Resolution of Report Findings and Recommendations
Each department director will maintain a copy of the final report, review or
investigation related to that director’s department. Each department director
is responsible for maintaining a written record of all action taken to resolve
each finding and recommendation to avoid the repetition of a finding in a
subsequent or follow-up audit, review, or investigation. The CAO or his
delegate may meet with a department director at any time to review the status
of resolving all outstanding findings and recommendations.
REFERENCES:   New Mexico State Audit Rule NMAC 2.2.2
 
______________________________
Robert J. Perry                [https://export.amlegal.com/media/
Chief Administrative Officer   6d88fadbb394cb34f1263b3e9230120271b111d2/IMAGES/
_____________________________  0-0-0-584.png]
Effective Date
 
AI_NO:_2-22_(pdf)
AI NO: 2-23
APPLICATION INTERFACE WITH PEOPLESOFT ERP SYSTEM
TITLE:   Application Interface with PeopleSoft ERP System
PRIMARY DEPARTMENT:   Department of Technology and Innovation
The citizens of the City of Albuquerque expect and deserve efficient and
effective local government. Delivering services most efficiently and
effectively entails prudent use of the resources provided to the City by its
constituency. Administrative support services – accounting, budgeting,
procurement, human resources, and others – can be delivered in a manner that
will facilitate more optimal primary City service delivery. The key is the
combination of enterprise-wide business practice standardization and re-
engineering with an integrated technology solution. As such, the City has
created a Program (the ERP Program) and chosen a software vendor (Oracle) to
drive widespread improvement in administrative value to citizens.
The City of Albuquerque owns and utilizes the Oracle PeopleSoft Enterprise
Resource Planning (ERP) application as its primary administrative support
services system of record. One of the purposes of the ERP initiative is to
consolidate the work of as many of the organization’s functions and processes
as is practical and beneficial into a single enterprise resource planning tool.
This can be accomplished by utilization of the ERP system to replace all
current applications and systems that at their core are utilized to perform
accounting, budgeting, financial analysis, and human resources functions.
PeopleSoft and other integrated Oracle solutions are capable of fulfilling most
City business needs; however, the City recognizes that the need for specialized
solutions not offered by the PeopleSoft vendor will occasionally be required.
This need for an interfaced solution applies to both prospective and existing
applications. In such instances, a compelling business case will need to be
made to acquire the new software (or maintain the existing alternative) in lieu
of utilizing PeopleSoft ERP, as well as to interface a third party solution
with the ERP system.
Whenever a business need arises for an application solution, the City should
look first to its ERP vendor. Although a specialized solution may appear to be
superior to the ERP offering, the following issues/pitfalls with making the
non-ERP choice must be considered:
·   Most interfaces are two-way, as opposed to only one-way from the
specialized solution to PeopleSoft. The need to feed ERP data to the third-
party application increases the complexity of the interface.
·   Using non-ERP databases as repositories of detailed information compromises
auditability, reconciliation, and transparency.
·   Support risk increases significantly as City staff must own and maintain
knowledge of the specialized application as well as the PeopleSoft environment.
This risk is exacerbated with the introduction of upgrades to either the
interfaced application or ERP. Further, the number of contracts and vendor
relationships that have to be managed increases.
·   Consistency and standardization of business rules can easily be compromised
by the use of functionally and/or departmentally segmented applications.
·   Reporting needs can be met more efficiently when a single data repository
can be used for report building.
Policy
Effective immediately, existing City governance mechanisms will be utilized to
help ensure the most effective use of the ERP application, while providing
enterprise-wide consideration of proposed non-ERP solutions. Specifically, the
following process is to be used for vetting City needs for enterprise
technology solutions:
·   All proposals for business application solutions must be submitted to the
chairs of the ITSD Technology Review Committee (TRC) and the ERP Business
Alignment Committee (BAC), accompanied by a detailed business case (ERP Program
management should be consulted for assistance in business case development).
This submittal requirement applies to new acquisitions as well as proposals for
interfaces to existing City owned applications. Approval from these Committees
should be sought prior to beginning the solicitation process in the case of new
acquisition.
·   At a minimum, the business case should include the following elements:
   ·   Executive summary of the business need. The summary must include
designation of one individual from the proposing business unit as the proposed
project’s sponsor, as well as designation of a project manager who is a
functional staff member of the proposing business unit.
   ·   Analysis and description of business process improvements to accompany
the proposal;
   ·   If proposing a non-Oracle solution, the business justification for that
approach including a detailed functionality comparison with the relevant ERP
solution, highlighting the specific business needs unable to be accommodated by
ERP;
   ·   Summary of the specific benefits for the City of Albuquerque to be
derived from the proposal;
   ·   A preliminary project plan with critical path, resource requirements,
and resource dependencies;
   ·   Estimated cost budget, to include software license fees and maintenance
charges, consultancy fees, estimated benefits-loaded City staff project costs,
and other;
   ·   Return on investment (ROI) analysis, stated as the net present value
(NPV) of quantifiable benefits in excess of costs;
   ·   An overview of the software support plan.
·   All data proposed for interface with ERP must meet any and all regulatory
requirements.
·   The TRC and BAC will request and receive from the ERP Program Manager a
review and recommendation of the proposal, to include suggestions for revision
of the business case.
·   The TRC must approve requests for non-ERP applications, and the BAC must
approve requests to interface such solutions with the PeopleSoft system.
Approval of both governance bodies is required.
REFERENCES:   None
 
______________________________
Robert J. Perry                [https://export.amlegal.com/media/
Chief Administrative Officer   6d88fadbb394cb34f1263b3e9230120271b111d2/IMAGES/
_____________________________  0-0-0-586.png]
Effective Date
 
AI_NO:_2-23_(pdf)
AI NO: 2-24
POLLUTION REMEDIATION OBLIGATIONS
TITLE:   Pollution Remediation Obligations
PRIMARY DEPARTMENT:   Finance and Administrative Services
New Mexico State Statutes Section 12-6-12, NMSA 1978 and New Mexico
Administrative Code Section 2.2.2 requires the City to have an annual financial
and compliance audit in accordance with Governmental Accounting and Financial
Reporting Standards issued by the Governmental Accounting Standards Board. For
the City's 2009 annual audit and thereafter, the Department of Finance and
Administrative Services (DFAS) is now required to estimate the components of
expected pollution remediation outlays for the five event categories listed
below and determine whether the liability should be accrued in the City's
annual financial statements. All City departments are now required to
immediately notify the DFAS Director and Accounting Officer upon discovery of
one or more of the following events:
• The City is compelled to take pollution remediation action because of an
imminent endangerment;
• The City violates a pollution prevention related permit or license;
• The City is named, or evidence indicates mat it will be named, by a regulator
as a responsible party or potentially responsible party for remediation, or as
a government responsible for sharing costs;
• The City is named, or evidence indicates that it will be named, in a lawsuit
to compel participation in pollution remediation;
• The City commences or legally obligates itself to commence pollution
remediation; or
• The City is subject to cost attributed to compliance with environmental
regulations.
The measurement of the City's pollution remediation liability should include
remediation work that the City expects to perform for other parties less any
expected recoveries from third parties or insurance companies. The scope of
this administrative instruction as it relates to City department's obligation
to notify the DFAS excludes pollution prevention or control obligations with
respect to current operations, and future pollution remediation activities that
are required upon retirement of an asset, such as landfill closure and
postclosure care. Departments should plan and budget for required environmental
cost similar to their other departmental operations.
REFERENCES: New Mexico State Statutes Section 12-6-12, NMSA 1978 and New Mexico
Administrative Code Section 2.2.2
 
______________________________
Robert J. Perry                [https://export.amlegal.com/media/
Chief Administrative Officer   6d88fadbb394cb34f1263b3e9230120271b111d2/IMAGES/
_____________________________  0-0-0-588.png]
Effective Date 
 
AI_NO:_2-24_(pdf)
AI NO: 2-25
SOCIAL MEDIA POLICY (2021) (RESCINDED)
August 2, 2022
ADMINISTRATIVE INSTRUCTION 2-25 (Rescinded)
TITLE:   Social Media Policy
PRIMARY DEPARTMENT:   Department of Technology and Innovation
This Administrative Instruction is hereby rescinded.
See Administrative Instruction 1-19 Social Media Policy
 

______________________________
Lawrence Rael                  [https://export.amlegal.com/media/
Chief Administrative Officer   6d88fadbb394cb34f1263b3e9230120271b111d2/IMAGES/
                              0-0-0-2203.png]
_____________________________
Effective Date
 
AI_NO:_2-25_(pdf)
AI NO: 2-26
PROCEDURES FOR APPLYING AND IMPLEMENTING FEDERAL/STATE GRANTS
TITLE:   Procedures for Applying and Implementing Federal/State Grants
PRIMARY DEPARTMENT:   Finance and Administrative Services
Background:
This administrative instruction is intended to provide guidance and
interpretation to Budget Ordinance § 2-11-17 APPLICATION FOR FEDERAL AND STATE
GRANTS; BUDGETING FEDERAL FUNDS.
GRANTS SUBJECT TO THIS RULE: This process applies to all grants implemented by
City Departments, both capital and operating.
Each Department (Managing Department for the grant) is responsible for ensuring
that all grant reporting requirements, drawdowns and other activities are
current. The Department is also responsible for ensuring that all grant
activity is properly recorded in the City’s accounting system and prior year
grants are properly closed out with the grantor agency and the City’s
Department of Finance and Administrative Services Department Accounting
Division Grants Section. The Department should not apply for new grants if
reporting and accounting requirements are delinquent for current or prior year
grants; should extenuating circumstances require the application, contact the
Grant Administrator immediately.
Procedures:
1.   PRE-APPLICATION CONFERENCE:
a)   When a Department contemplates applying for a grant, a pre-application
conference must be scheduled as follows:
   i)   If the prospective grant is an operating grant, the pre-application
meeting must include representatives from the Department applying for the
grant, the Office of Management and Budget (OMB) and the Accounting Division
Grants Section of the Department of Finance and Administrative Services (DFAS).
   ii)   If the prospective grant is a capital grant, the Fiscal Division of
Capital Implementation Program (CIP) of the Department of Municipal Development
should be substituted in lieu of OMB as a required representative.
   iii)   The Department must:
      (1)   Prepare a draft resolution, fiscal impact analysis and application
(when applicable) for review at the meeting; and
      (2)   Provide the name of the Department manager for the grant (an update
of Department grant contacts will be required each April by DFAS Accounting
Division Grants Section); and
      (3)   Use the applicable City Department’s Dun and Bradstreet (D & B)
identification number (DUNS number) if required. The DUNS number shall be
supplied by the Treasury Division of DFAS; and
      (4)   Include the indirect overhead charge per Administrative Instruction
2-1. (If a waiver is contemplated, a draft waiver must be provided at the pre-
application conference.) Ensure inclusion of the current predetermined indirect
cost rate in the grant application.
2.   SUBMISSION TO COUNCIL: Upon review and agreement among the Department,
OMB/CIP and DFAS Accounting Division, the Department shall submit a resolution
for introduction to City Council prior to submitting the application to the
grantor agency. If the grant application deadline is prior to the next regular
meeting of the Council, the application may be submitted to the grantor agency
prior to Council approval, but then must be submitted to the Council at its
next regular meeting. All grant applications must be approved by Council
except:
a)   Applications for less than $1,500 where the matching funds have already
been budgeted or the award does not require a monetary match or have any future
financial implications for the City.
3.   SUBMITTING THE GRANT APPLICATION TO THE GRANTOR AGENCY: All grant
applications must be signed by the Department Director or his/her authorized
designee. A designee must be authorized in writing and a copy of the
authorization must be submitted to the City’s Department of Finance and
Administrative Services Department Accounting Division Grants Section’s Grant
Administrator.
4.   COUNCIL ACTION: If Council approves the application, the Department shall
submit the application, accept the award and expend with no further action by
the Council. However, under the following conditions the grant agreement must
be introduced to Council for consideration:
a)   conditions are subsequently added to the grant agreement which have major
financial or policy implications for the City. (A major financial implication
is defined as an increase of 10%, in the commitment of City funds or resources.
A major policy change is defined as a change in the goals, objectives and
proposed programs included in the grant.)
b)   if it is an ongoing grant that does not require application and the
agreement is only seen by the City at the award stage.
Council may approve, take no action, disapprove, or recommend revision to the
proposed agreement with or without conditioning approval on the adoption of
such revisions. If no action is taken within 21 days from the date of the
Council meeting immediately following receipt of the proposed agreement, the
Department may proceed with the grant process as if approval had been granted.
5.   AWARD OF THE GRANT: The following events shall be promptly executed after
notification of award:
a)   The Department’s grant manager will coordinate with the Accounting
Division Grants Section/CIP to set up a project, activity number, contract,
rate plan/set and budget plan for the operating/capital grant. The grant must
be approved on the City’s financial system by Accounting Division Grant
Section/CIP before any expenditures, including payroll, are incurred;
   i)   Departments shall not charge expenditures to incorrect funding strings
pending setup of the grant in the City’s accounting software;
   ii)   Departments may set up a new grant in advance of receiving the final
award notification, with the approval of the Grant Administrator and the OMB,
if:
      (1)   There is reasonable certainty of receiving the award (e.g. a grant
is awarded every year) and an alternative funding source is identified in the
event the award is cancelled; or
      (2)   The grant comes with pre-award spending authority;
b)   The Department will be notified of the approved grant budget plan (on the
City’s financial system) as follows:
   i)   Operating Grants: the Budget Office will approve the Budget Plan after
being notified by Accounting Division Grants Section that the grant has been
properly established;
   ii)    Capital grants: CIP will approve the Budget Plan for all Capital
grants;
c)   Departments and/or grant managers will inform the Accounting Division
Grants Section of the drawdown/reimbursement request procedures per the grant
and provide all necessary information to perform these procedures for operating
grants.
d)   Quarterly Federal Financial Reports (SF-425) will be prepared by the
grantee Department and submitted to Accounting Division Grants Section for
review and approval prior to submission to the grantor agency.
6.   GRANT FUNDS/ACTIVITIES
a)    All grant financial transactions must be recorded to exclusive grant
funds and project activities for both operating and capital grants, as assigned
by Accounting Division Grants Section/CIP.
b)   All City Departments shall use the City’s financial software to bill
grantors for funds due to the City; financial software billing must occur at
the time of grantor report preparation and request for reimbursement;
c)   Grant funds and project activities shall be structured to facilitate the
reconciliation of federal, state, local, and non-governmental grant
transactions to financial software billing and reporting required by the grant
award, the Schedule of Expenditures of Federal Awards (SEFA) and the City’s
Comprehensive Annual Financial Report (CAFR); City matching funds must be
appropriated within the grant project; depending on the specifics of the grant,
a separate activity ID may need to be used to segregate city match revenue/
expenditures from grantor revenue/expenditures.
7.   ACCOUNTING, REPORTING, MONITORING AND AUDIT REQUIREMENTS:
Accounting shall:
a)   Ensure that Journal Entries, Journal Vouchers, and Adjust Paid Entry
adjustments are reviewed and posted in a timely manner to facilitate grant
billing and reporting;
b)   Ensure that the general ledger is closed on a monthly basis so that
Departments may accurately bill and report on the financial status of their
grants;
c)   Provide assistance, guidance and training to Departments in order to
ensure they may timely and properly account, report, bill, reconcile and
closeout their grants; and
d)   Serve as the lead for the City’s annual audit, including the Single Audit.
Grantee Departments must:
a)   Oversee, monitor and administer grant compliance from acceptance to
closeout;
b)   Understand the administrative compliance and special terms and conditions,
if any, as well as laws and regulations related to the grant award;
c)   If the funding source is Federal, a grantee Department shall determine
whether vendors are subrecipients or contractors per Federal guidelines and
ensure that contracts with subrecipients and/or contractors comply with all
Federal requirements, including required clauses and compliance with the
Federal Funding Accountability and Transparency Act Subaward Reporting System;
d)   Monitor and oversee subrecipients, subrecipient reporting, audit results,
etc. as required by the grant award;
e)   Maintain accurate, current and complete disclosure of the financial
results of activities funded in whole or in part by the grant;
f)   Maintain records which adequately identify sources and applications of
funds, including authorizations, obligations, un-obligated balances, assets,
liabilities, outlays or expenditures and income;
g)    Upload into the accounting software all grant-related documentation
including, but not limited to: legislation, award letter, application,
contract/agreement, interim reports, final reports, and formal correspondence
with the grantor agency;
h)   Maintain effective control and accountability over the grant;
i)   Comply with City Procurement Code (City of Albuquerque Code of Ordinances,
Article 5) as well as Federal, State or grantor agency procurement requirements
as applicable;
j)   Submit financial reports to the grantor agency by the deadlines required
under the grant award; Federal Financial Reports (SF-425) reports must be
submitted to Accounting Division Grants Section for review and approval prior
to submission to the Federal agency;
k)   Comply with all requirements of and requests related to the Single Audit
Act of 1996 (2 CFR Part 200 Subpart F);
l)    Understand and provide to Accounting Division’s Grants Section of DFAS
information required to be presented on the Schedule of Expenditure of Federal
Awards (SEFA), as well as underlying audit and roll-forward schedules, by the
required due dates;
m)   Understand and provide to the Accounting Division Grants Section of DFAS
the grant’s line item budget including chart of accounts to be used related to
the grant;
n)   Monitor and record all revenue, including program income, related to the
grant and comply with all grant requirements related to the revenue;
o)    Maintain detailed support of in-kind services received and/or provided as
well as donations of property received in relation to the grant;
p)   Identify the type of financial transactions to be incurred and how to
properly record the transactions prior to incurring expenditures related to the
grant;
q)   Ensure that all expenditures charged to the grant are allowable per the
grant agreement, grant budget, and any special terms and conditions;
r)   Defer any advance grant payments until the revenue is earned by incurring
expenditures related to these advances;
s)   Maintain supplemental records related to assets purchased with grant funds
as required by the Uniform Guidance (2 CFR 200.313(d)(1)) and grantor agency;
t)   Within 10 days of receiving an amendment, enter appropriate changes/
adjustments into the City’s financial software and notify Accounting Division
Grants Section to perform the amendment review, enter processing changes and
initiate budget finalization, as applicable;
u)   Comply with the City’s Conflict of Interest Policy (Sections 300 and 311.7
of the City Personnel Manual) and the City’s Code of Ethics (Charter of the
City of Albuquerque, Article XII, Section 4)
8.   GRANTOR COMMUNICATION AND AUDITS/REVIEWS:
a)   Any communication outside of normal program and/or fiscal communication
must be forwarded to Accounting Division Grants Section. Such communication
includes, but is not limited to, notifications of:
   i)   grantor agency review or audit
   ii)   violations of terms and conditions
   iii)   requirement to repay grant funds
b)   If a grantor provides notice of an official review or audit, follow the
requirements of Administrative Instruction 2-22 and forward the notice to the
Grant Administrator. At a minimum, the Grant Administrator will attend Entrance
and Exit Conferences, and Accounting Division’s Grants Section staff will be
available and involved in the review/audit to the extent necessary.
9.   GRANT REVENUE:
a)   DRAWDOWN: With the exception of the grant drawdowns prepared by the
Accounting Division Grants Section, the Department is responsible for and shall
drawdown through electronic funds transfers and/or request reimbursement of
expenditures no less than on a quarterly basis:
   i)   According to the terms and conditions of the grant;
   ii)   Upon billing the grant in the accounting software; and
   iii)   Upon receipt of signed Financial Status Reports from the Departments
for Federal grants, reconciled to the general ledger, and supporting
documentation.
b)   REQUEST FOR REIMBURSEMENT:
   i)   According to the terms and conditions of the grant;
   ii)   Upon billing the grant in the accounting software; and
   iii)   Upon completion of grantor agency required reports and supporting
documentation.
c) CIP managed grants: CIP will bill and drawdown/request reimbursement for
Capital projects they administer.
10.   CLOSE OUT: Grants are considered complete either when all work set forth
under the agreement has been performed or on the date grant support is
scheduled to end. If a grantee does not seek a supplemental grant or a no-cost
extension on or before the completion date, the grant is closed out with the
grantor agency by submitting all final performance, financial and other
required reports; adjusting the grantor agency share of costs, upward or
downward, if necessary; and settling any cash balances:
a)   Within 90 days of grant closing (having expired in term, expenditure and/
project), the recipient Department must provide a complete reconciliation to
Accounting and OMB/CIP. The reconciliation must include a copy of the Notice of
Termination or pay reimbursement marked final. If the grantor agency’s deadline
for final reporting and reimbursement is less than 90 days after the
expiration, the final reconciliation and reports will be submitted to OMB/CIP
on or before the grantor agency’s due date.
b)   Accounting will have the responsibility for ensuring all final
transactions are properly posted, disallowing any further transactions to be
posted to the grant and properly closing out the grant within the accounting
system.
11.    RECORD RETENTION: Program and financial records related to the grant are
required to be retained at least seven years and no more than ten years if
records are under audit, involving audit findings or involved in appeals or
litigation.
REFERENCES:   Budget Ordinance § 2-11-17 APPLICATION FOR FEDERAL AND STATE
GRANTS; BUDGETING FEDERAL FUNDS; City Procurement Code (City of Albuquerque
Code of Ordinances, Article 5); Federal Financial Reports (SF-425) reports;
Administrative Instruction 2-22 Internal and External Audits and Report
Responses; City’s Conflict of Interest Policy (Sections 300 and 311.7 of the
City Personnel Manual); City’s Code of Ethics (Charter of the City of
Albuquerque, Article XII, Section 4); Federal Conflict of Interest policies;
Uniform Guidance (2 CFR 200); Administrative Instruction 2-1
 
______________________________
Robert J. Perry                [https://export.amlegal.com/media/
Chief Administrative Officer   6d88fadbb394cb34f1263b3e9230120271b111d2/IMAGES/
_____________________________  0-0-0-592.png]
Effective Date 
 
AI_NO:_2-26_(pdf)
AI NO: 2-27
SEGREGATION OF COSTS ASSOCIATED WITH COVID-19 (2020)
TITLE: Segregation of Costs Associated with COVID-19
PRIMARY DEPARTMENT:   Finance and Administrative Services
BACKGROUND
The City of Albuquerque, the State of New Mexico and the United States have
declared an emergency due to the spread of the novel coronavirus. The City will
request financial aid from appropriate state and federal agencies to assist in
responding to the outbreak of COVID-19. This AI addresses the tracking of costs
related to COVID19 for all payroll and purchase transactions. Thus, to the
extent any request for reimbursement will require documentation, the City must
be able to accurately identify all costs associated with COVID-19.
Documentation includes the following: invoices, receipts, payroll timesheets,
etc.
A summary of allowable expenditures covered under Federal Guidelines is
attached in this link: https://tinyurl.com/CABQ-COVID-resources 
PAYROLL POLICY AND TASK PROFILES
Employees performing functions outside of their normal job duties should
segregate that time and charge it to the COVID19 funding string and identify
the COVID-specific work performed.
Employees performing their normal job functions should charge their hours as
regular hours worked (REG pay code).
If an employee is performing a function outside of his or her normal functions
directly related to COVID-19, the task profile dedicated to this work must be
utilized. Use task profile COVID19 and the proper pay code (REG, OCB, OPL,
ETC).
Kronos:
COVID19 task profile is available to all City departments.
   1.   Each employee performing a function outside of his or her normal
functions directly related to COVID-19 must submit by email a timesheet
identifying the time spent and specific activity so that for each day the
manager can input the time into Kronos related to COVID before payroll is
processed. Managers must send the timesheets to timekeepers as backup.
Timekeepers must also send the timesheets to covidrecoveryteam@cabq.gov as
backup for any potential grants. Comments must be added to identify the
specific assignment task and/or location related to COVID-19.
   2.   Managers must record the time to COVID19 before payroll is processed.
If the employee is unable to send their timesheet, they will be allowed to
submit it when they return to work.
Telestaff (APD/AFR):
Each employee performing a function outside of his or her normal functions
directly related to COVID-19 must enter the appropriate task profile/work code
identifying the time spent and specific activity.
Trapeze:
Time Schedulers will need to track hours for drivers who directly work on
COVID-19 related tasks and are required to submit a timesheet for each driver
that identifies the work assignment and description. Time Schedulers must also
send the timesheets to covidrecoveryteam@cabq.gov.
PAY CODES:  
Employees who are working from home as instructed by their Director should do
so in accordance with Administrative Instruction 7-30 TELECOMMUNITING/WORK FROM
HOME DURING THE COVID-19 OUTBREAK (2020). Use normal pay codes for the
position.
PEM:
Employees who have called in sick with the virus or have self-quarantined due
to travel or potential exposure, or taking care of a symptomatic family member,
he or she should be provided leave under the pay code “PEM.” Each employee will
be required to fill out a paper timesheet if they do not have access to the
system. The paper timesheet will need to be signed by the employee and manager
and sent to the time keepers and used as backup to the time paid. Send a copy
of the timesheet to covidrecoveryteam@cabq.gov.
PEW:
Employees that are able to work but are being sent home in accordance with AI
7-59, and cannot telework, he or she should be provided leave under the pay
code “PEW.” The employee will be required to fill out a paper timesheet if they
do not have access to the system. The paper timesheet will need to be signed by
the employee and manager and sent to the time keepers and used as backup to the
time paid. Send a copy of the timesheet to covidrecoveryteam@cabq.gov.
PEC: (EFFECTIVE 4/2/2020)
Per the Families First Coronavirus Response Act effective 4/2/2020: Employees
who are required to report to work but are unable due to child care issues
should code their time as “PEC”. The paper timesheet will need to be signed by
the employee and manager and sent to the time keepers and used as backup to the
time paid. Send a copy of the timesheet to covidrecoveryteam@cabq.gov.
Links:
Link to access the instructions on how to assign a task profile and enter pay
codes in
Kronos: https://tinyurl.com/CABQ-COVID-resources
Link to access the timesheet: https://tinyurl.com/CABQ-COVID-resources
 
PURCHASES POLICY
Procurements related to COVID19 must be in alignment with federal and city
guidelines and must utilize the funding string specific for COVID-19, with the
proper account number identified on the chart of accounts:
Fund          265
PCBU         PCDFA
Project         25_20_COVID19
Activity      2599004
Category of items covered include equipment cost, materials (supplies,
allowable food expense, etc.), and other (shelter, lodging, IT, etc.). Federal
procurement regulations must be followed. Emergency procurements must be
documented per the Emergency Purchase Justification form. Purchasing guidelines
during the COVID19 Emergency are available in the SharePoint.
Link to access the purchasing documents: https://tinyurl.com/CABQ-COVID-
resources
Tracking for all categories needs to be done on the expense tracking spread
sheets in SharePoint. The link is as follows: https://tinyurl.com/CABQ-COVID-
exp-track. The expense tracking spreadsheet needs to be updated no later than
Thursday at 12:00 PM. All receipts, requests, or other documentation must be
sent to Central Accounting within three (3) days.
All expenditures coded to the COVID19 project will be audited for allowability.
    
 
This Administrative Instruction is effective immediately.
 
______________________________
Sarita Nair                    [https://export.amlegal.com/media/
Chief Administrative Officer   6d88fadbb394cb34f1263b3e9230120271b111d2/IMAGES/
_____________________________  0-0-0-1837.png]
Effective Date
 
AI_NO:_2-27_(pdf)
AI NO: 2-28
TIME REPORTING AND APPROVAL POLICY
TITLE: TIME REPORTING and APPROVAL POLICY
PRIMARY DEPARTMENT: Finance & Administrative Services
PURPOSE:
The purpose of this policy is to provide work time reporting requirements for
all City of Albuquerque employees.
DEFINITIONS:
"Clock in" and "Punch in" (or out) means the method to register one's arrival
or departure from work by use of a time clock attendance system.
"Exception" based reporting for completing timecards means an employee is not
required to use the time clock to record hours worked. A standard total of work
hours is scheduled for payment each pay period and the employee records only
approved leave time.
POLICY:
1.   The City of Albuquerque requires all employees to accurately record work
hours and approved leave (annual leave, sick leave, educational leave, jury
duty, leave without pay, etc.). Federal and State laws require the City of
Albuquerque to keep an accurate record of time worked in order to calculate
employee pay and benefits. In addition, correct and complete timekeeping is
essential to:
   a.   Ensure employees are paid in a uniform and consistent manner in
accordance with applicable laws, rules, regulations, standards, and collective
bargaining agreements.
   b.   Provide accountability to the public. All City records, including
payroll and personnel records must be prepared factually and accurately. It is
the personal obligation of the employee completing such records as well as the
supervisor to ensure that such records are accurate and comply with federal,
state, and City record-keeping and accounting requirements.
   c.   Ensure compliance with Section 30-23-2 NMSA 1978 which makes it a
felony (timecard fraud) for public employees to receive public money for
services not rendered except for lawful remuneration to public employees for
vacation periods or absences from work due to sickness or for other lawfully
authorized purposes such as designated legal holidays.
2.   The City of Albuquerque utilizes an electronic timekeeping system, Kronos,
TeleStaff and Trapeze, as authorized timekeeping systems to report, approve,
and submit employees' work and approved leave to the Department of Finance and
Administrative Services (DFAS) for payment of wages at the end of each pay
period.
3.   Departments using other timekeeping systems that interface into Kronos are
responsible for ensuring time repo1ied is approved and accurate and for
maintaining a record.
4.   All employees must accurately record time off.
5.   Exempt employees may record their time worked on an exception basis.
Exempt employees are required to request and record approved leave in
accordance with City policies.
6.   It is the responsibility of each employee to ensure that their electronic
timecard is complete and accurate.
   a.   Employees are responsible for approving their own electronic timecard,
and by doing so, the employee is attesting that, to the best of his/her
knowledge, the information submitted is complete and accurate.
   b.   Regardless of who entered the time, employees are responsible for any
inaccuracy or omission of which the employee is aware at the time the
electronic timecard is approved and submitted.
   c.   Employees, Managers/Supervisors may not at any time share passwords to
any timekeeping systems.
   d.   Managers/Supervisors of employees are responsible for the review and
correction of missed clock in or out punches, and for making edits to
employees' time as needed.
   e.   Managers/Supervisors are responsible for approving work time submitted
by their employees at the end of each pay period by the date and time
designated by the Payroll Office.
   f.   By approving an employee's timecard, each Manager/Supervisor is
attesting that, to the best of his/her knowledge, the employee's electronic
timecard is complete and accurate.
7.   All overtime work must be pre-approved by the employee's supervisor. At
times, it may not be possible to receive prior approval before working overtime
due to emergencies or other unanticipated situations. In such cases, employees
must notify their supervisor of the overtime worked as soon as possible.
8.   If an employee works unauthorized ove1iime the appropriate compensation
will be made for all time reported as worked. However, the employee may be
subject to disciplinary action for failure to obtain the necessary supervisory
approval to work overtime.
9.   No leave accruals shall be advanced by the employer. Thus, no leave
balance shall ever result in a negative number.
10.   Nothing in this Administrative Instruction prohibits a Department from
establishing more specific or specialized policies regarding timekeeping or
overtime.
PROCEDURES:
1.   Requests for time off are completed through the Kronos, TeleStaff or
Trapeze systems. Time off must be requested in accordance with the City of
Albuquerque Personnel Rules and Regulations or the employee's applicable
collective bargaining union agreement.
2.   Employees may use only the amount of leave available. Requests for amounts
of leave in excess of available leave will be requested through Supervisors/
Managers.
3.   Approval or denial of leave requests by Supervisors/Managers will also be
completed through Kronos, TeleStaff or Trapeze.
REFERENCES:
§30-23-2 NMSA 1978
Fair Labor Standards Act
City of Albuquerque Personnel Rules and Regulations
 
______________________________
Sarita Nair                    [https://export.amlegal.com/media/
Chief Administrative Officer   6d88fadbb394cb34f1263b3e9230120271b111d2/IMAGES/
_____________________________  0-0-0-2161.png]
Effective Date
 
AI_NO:_2-28_(pdf)
Purchases
AI NO: 3-1
STANDARD AGREEMENT PROVISIONS FOR ARCHITECTURAL, ENGINEERING AND LANDSCAPE
ARCHITECTURAL SERVICES FOR THE CITY OF ALBUQUERQUE
TITLE:   Standard Agreement Provisions for Architectural, Engineering and
Landscape Architectural Services for the City of Albuquerque
PRIMARY DEPARTMENT:   Department of Municipal Development
All procurement of engineering, architectural or landscape architectural
services made pursuant to the Selection Advisory Committee Ordinance shall
require any offeror submitting a proposal to perform such services to state in
the proposal that the offeror agrees, if selected, to enter into an agreement
with the City of Albuquerque which contains the standard terms and conditions
found in the model Engineering, Architectural and Landscape Architectural
Services Agreement dated October 1, 2001 as amended, which is incorporated
herein by reference.
The model Engineering Services Agreement, Landscape Architectural Services
Agreement and Architectural Services Agreement shall be the Agreement entered
into for all Architectural, Engineering or Landscape Architectural Services
that are exempt from the Selection Advisory Committee Ordinance except for
ancillary engineering, architectural or landscaping, architectural services
procured through construction contracts such as pre-engineered metal buildings,
manufactured shade structures, specific lighting design or similar services.
Changes in the provisions of the referenced model agreements shall be approved
by the City Attorney and the Department of Municipal Development Director or
their designees in advance of any requests for such services, and such changes
shall be contained in the model agreements made available to all those
responding to the solicitation.
REFERENCES:   Engineering, Architectural and Landscape Architectural Services
Agreement, dated October 1, 2001.
 
______________________________
Robert J. Perry                [https://export.amlegal.com/media/
Chief Administrative Officer   6d88fadbb394cb34f1263b3e9230120271b111d2/IMAGES/
_____________________________  0-0-0-594.png]
Effective Date 
 
AI_NO:_3-1_(pdf)
AI NO: 3-2
ACQUISITION OF AUDIT SERVICES
TITLE:   Acquisition of Audit Services
PRIMARY DEPARTMENT:   Department of Finance and Administrative Services
The acquisition of services for audits of the City's financial records, other
statistical and management information, or any agreed upon procedures which are
to be performed by external auditors shall be coordinated by the Department of
Finance and Administrative Services, Accounting Division. This administrative
instruction applies to all financial audits as well as grant compliance
financial and nonfinancial audits. Requests for such audits will be approved by
the Chief Administrative Officer upon recommendation of the Director of Finance
and Administrative Services.
At the time that a City department identifies the need for an additional
independent annual audit, it will formally transmit a request for such an audit
to the Accounting Division, identifying the need for and the scope of the audit
to be performed. This request shall indicate a desired completion date, cost,
distribution and any other requirements. If notified in a timely manner, the
Accounting Division will negotiate each year with the State Auditor, so that
each year the independent audit contract for the City's annual audit will also
include an amount for audits which may be performed in addition to the City's
annual financial audit (an umbrella contract that includes extra audit work).
The extra audit work is based on an estimate of the audit requirements.
If a City department identifies the need for an independent audit not
identified in the annual requirement, the Accounting Division, in conjunction
with the affected department, will discuss audit requirements with the
independent auditors of record and arrive at the cost to perform such work. If
the audit is identified as additional scope, the department will follow rules
set out in the Procurement Ordinance, which may require approval from City
Council. Should the estimated audit costs for an audit exceed the purchasing
ordinance limits, the Accounting Division will assist the affected department
in the preparation and circulation of an RFP.
REFERENCES:
Article 5: Public Purchases Ordinance, §5-5-28 Competitive Sealed Bids and 5-5-
30 Competitive Sealed Proposals
 
______________________________
Robert J. Perry                [https://export.amlegal.com/media/
Chief Administrative Officer   6d88fadbb394cb34f1263b3e9230120271b111d2/IMAGES/
_____________________________  0-0-0-596.png]
Effective Date 
 
AI_NO:_3-2_(pdf)
AI NO: 3-3
SMALL PURCHASES AND USE OF LOCAL VENDORS (2022)
TITLE: Small Purchases and Use of Local Vendors
PRIMARY DEPARTMENT: Department of Finance and Administrative Services
1.   Small Purchases
   A.   General
      (1)   The Small Purchase procurement methodology allows for purchases of
goods and services without competition or approval from the Central Purchasing
Division of the Department of Finance and Administrative Services (Purchasing
Division) when the total purchase price for all years that the product or good
will be purchased does not exceed the amounts set forth in the Public Purchases
Ordinance, Section 5-5-26.
      (2)   Except where funding of a program or operation is derived in whole
or in part from federal grant funding, purchases using the Small Purchase
procurement methodology shall be made from local vendors when feasible and not
cost prohibitive, as defined herein.
   B.   Application
      (1)   Each Department shall determine which City employees in that
Department are approved to make Small Purchase expenditures. Small Purchases
shall be made in accordance with the policies and procedures stated herein, the
Public Purchases Ordinance, and the Purchasing Rules and Regulations. All
purchases shall be made strictly for City business.
      (2)   Purchases made using the Small Purchase methodology shall be made
at the best obtainable price. For the purposes of this Administrative
Instruction, "best obtainable price" means the most competitive price at which
services or goods can be purchased, with consideration to other factors that
are important to the City, such as experience with a vendor, match to
specifications and customer service. Best obtainable price can be found by
obtaining quotes; based on research, experience, or purchase history; or other
appropriate methods to allow for a diligent review. The Department shall
maintain a record of the best obtainable price review in its procurement file
for the purchase.
      (3)   Employees shall not make Small Purchases of goods or services that
are available from pre-established, City-wide contracts or price agreements or
City punchouts.
      (4)   Employees shall not split purchases into two or more transactions
to bring the purchase amount below the Small Purchase transaction limit set
forth in the Public Purchases Ordinance, Section 5-5-26.
      (5)   Employees shall not use the Small Purchases procurement methodology
for repetitive purchases of the same item and/or the same item with the same
vendor. If a Department needs to make such repetitive purchases, those goods or
services must be procured by another authorized procurement methodology
established by the Purchasing Division.
   C.   Procedure for Payment
      (1)   Payments for Small Purchases may be made in one of the following
ways:
         (a)   Peoplesoft Accounting Quick Invoice entry up to small purchase
transaction limit set forth in the Public Purchases Ordinance, Section 5-5-26,
as may be authorized by DFAS Accounts Payable;
         (b)   P-Card use up to approved p-card limit; or
         (c)   Purchase Order up to the Small Purchase transaction limit set
forth in the Public Purchases Ordinance, Section 5-5-26.
      (2)   The Accounts Payable Division will conduct periodic audits of
entries made into the PeopleSoft Accounting Quick Invoice system.
      (3)   All purchases by P-card shall comply with the P-card regulations
set forth in the City's P-card Manual.
      (4)   For Purchase Orders, use the Small Purchase PO requisition type.
      (5)   Employees shall not purchase airline tickets or travel-related
expenditures through either the Quick Invoice or P-card programs. Employees
shall make travel-related expenditures in accordance with the City of
Albuquerque Travel Regulations located at https://partner.cabq.gov/CityTravel/
default.aspx. Travel for non-City employees is not addressed in the City of
Albuquerque Travel Regulations. Questions about purchasing travel for non-City
employees should be directed to a Department's Department Buyer.
      (6)   The payment of Small Purchases with Petty Cash is highly
discouraged. A Petty Cash account must be approved by the DFAS Treasury
Division.
   D.   Use of Local Businesses.
      (1)   Except where funding of a program or operation is derived in whole
or in part from federal grant funding, purchases shall be made from local
businesses, when feasible and not cost prohibitive, unless granted an exception
by a representative from the City's Buy Local Initiative.
      (2)   "Cost prohibitive" means the total cost is at least twenty percent
(20%) more than the total price for comparable goods or services.
      (3)   When deciding how to use local businesses for procurements, the
tier structure identified in the Procurement Rules and Regulations shall be
used to prioritize the order. In the Procurement Rules and Regulations, the
tiers for "Local" include those entities headquartered within the Greater
Albuquerque Metropolitan Area, as defined by the Public Purchases Ordinance,
Section 5-5-3 as well as those doing business locally and within the State of
New Mexico.
Questions with regard to any issue on Small Purchases are to be directed to a
Department's Department Buyer. Questions with regard to using local businesses
are to be directed to a representative from the City's Buy Local Initiative.
REFERENCES: City Ordinance Article 5 R.O.A. 1994 Public Purchases Ordinance,
Administrative Instruction 3-3; City of Albuquerque Travel Rules and
Regulations; 2 CFR Part 200.
This Administrative Instruction is effective immediately.
 
______________________________
Sarita Nair                    [https://export.amlegal.com/media/
Chief Administrative Officer   6d88fadbb394cb34f1263b3e9230120271b111d2/IMAGES/
_____________________________  0-0-0-2319.png]
Effective Date
 
AI_NO:_3-3_(pdf)
AI NO: 3-4
VENDOR AND CITY RELATIONS AND MANAGING VENDOR PERFORMANCE (2021)
TITLE: Vendor and City Relations and Managing Vendor Performance
PRIMARY DEPARTMENT: Department of Finance and Administrative Services
1.   Purpose and Scope
This Administrative Instruction sets forth the requirements for relationships
between the City of Albuquerque ("City") and vendors ("Vendors") and managing
Vendor performance. Pursuant to Section 5-5-25 of the City of Albuquerque
Public Purchases Ordinance, Section 5 of this Administrative Instruction,
Vendor Noncompliance, does not apply to Capital Improvement Projects (CIP).
2.   Vendor and City Relations
   A.   The following ethical conduct rules are applicable to all City
employees, officials, and Vendors engaged in procurement with the City:
      1   City of Albuquerque Charter: Article XII: Code of Ethics
      2   City of Albuquerque Public Purchases Ordinance, Section 5-5-22 ROA
1994
      3   City of Albuquerque Ordinance, Chapter 3, Article 3: Conflicts
oflnterest
      4   The State Governmental Conduct Act, NMSA 1978, Chapter 10, Article 16
   B.   Vendors shall not pay for City employees' travel expenses. This section
shall not apply to reimbursements for City employees' travel expenses incurred
as a result of active participation in presentations or workshops. Provided
however, that all such requests for approval of travel reimbursement shall be
submitted in advance of the proposed travel to the Department Director (or CAO
if the Director is the person proposing travel) and shall include the purpose
of the presentation or workshop, name of the Vendor or firm, names of
individuals traveling, and the benefit of the trip to the City and the
employee's City Department.
   C.   In order to ensure objective Vendor performance and eliminate unfair
competitive advantage, Vendors that develop or draft specifications,
requirements, statements of work, or requests for bids or requests for
proposals shall be excluded from competing for such procurements. For the
purpose of this Administrative Instruction, "develop or draft" shall mean all
active participation, by a vendor, in the drafting or development of
specifications, requirements, statements of work, or requests for bids or
requests for proposals following the City's decision to affirmatively move
forward on a competitive solicitation. This section shall not apply to problem
based competitive solicitations, in which the development or drafting of
specifications, requirements, statements of work, or requests for bids or
requests for proposals are conducted in a public setting and open to the
general public to participate. The participation of a vendor in a public
meeting, survey, questionnaire, town hall or similar event shall not be deemed
to be participation in development or drafting. Questions about the timing of
Vendor participation in development or drafting shall be directed to the Chief
Procurement Officer.
   D.   The City shall not draft specifications in such a way as to limit the
number of Vendors that would be eligible to submit responses.
3.   Department Responsibilities Relating to Vendor Performance
A statement of work or scope of services should provide the Department clear
direction for measuring Vendor performance. The goal of managing Vendor
performance is to ensure that contractual requirements are satisfactorily
performed and the responsibilities of both parties are properly discharged.
Effective management of Vendor performance helps to minimize problems and
potential claims and disputes. With regard to Vendor performance, the
responsibilities of the Department consist of the following:
   A.   Participate in the development of the solicitation or contract by
writing the specifications, statements of work, or scope of services, or by
providing a subject matter expert who can assist in the development of well-
defined specifications, statements of work, or scopes of services.
   B.   Notify the Department of Finance and Administrative Services Purchasing
Division ("Purchasing Division") if federal or other source grant funds will be
used to procure the goods or services, and identify all applicable federal or
other grant requirements associated with the funding agency or source.
   C.   Ensure the Department and Vendor have executed a contract and released
a Purchase Order before shipment of the goods or commencement of the services.
   D.   The Department, and a representative of the Purchasing Division, may
conduct a post-award conference with the Vendor to ensure that all parties
understand the terms of the contract and performance requirements. The post
award conference shall not change the terms of the solicitation or contract.
   E.   Monitor the Vendor's progress and performance to ensure that goods and
services conform to the contractual requirements.
   F.   Conduct a thorough inspection of all goods purchased to ensure that
they comply with contractual requirements. Inspections of goods shall be upon
receipt unless otherwise provided by contract or Purchase Order. The receiving
Department shall also inspect and validate that the services being performed on
behalf of the City by the Vendor have been performed and completed in
accordance with contractual requirements.
   G.   Coordinate with the Department's fiscal representative on submission
and approval of change orders and/or amendments to Purchase Orders and/or
contract terms. A Department shall not authorize a Vendor, either verbally or
in writing, to provide goods or services prior to execution of a fully approved
change order or contract amendment.
   H.   Maintain records that detail the history of the purchase, including but
not necessarily limited to, the following: Rationale for the method of
procurement, selection of contract type, contractor selection or rejection, and
the basis for the contract price, the original contract and all amendments.
   I.   Close out the contract to verify that both parties have fulfilled their
contractual obligations and there are no remaining contractual obligations to
be completed.
   J.   Report Vendor noncompliance to the Purchasing Division, using the
process set forth herein.
4.   Vendor Responsibilities to the City
   A.   Vendors shall comply with all Terms and Conditions of contracts
executed with and Purchase Orders issued by the City. Vendors shall not seek to
impose Terms and Conditions that have not been agreed to by the City, and
include in the Terms and Conditions of executed contracts or issued Purchase
Orders, or are otherwise against City policy.
   B.   Vendors shall reply to notices of noncompliance within the deadlines
set forth in the notice and comply with any corrective action plan that may be
established as provided herein.
5.   Vendor Noncompliance Reporting, Investigation, and Corrective Action
   A.   Departments are responsible for documenting vendor noncompliance with
contract provisions and any other performance issues related to business with
the City. To report noncompliance events, a Department shall complete and
submit the Vendor Noncompliance Form in Peoplesoft forms (or a successor form
provided by Purchasing) with supporting documentation explaining the
noncompliance, including dates and individuals involved, and the Department's
efforts in communicating the noncompliance to the vendor.
   B.   For purposes of this Administrative Instruction, noncompliance includes
but is not limited to: (i)   failure to deliver goods and services when
specified; (ii) noncompliance with the Terms and Conditions, technical
specifications, scope of work, or scope of services of the contract or Purchase
Order; (iii) being nonresponsive to requests for information or performance;
(iv) being non-responsible as provided in the City of Albuquerque Purchasing
Rules and Regulations; (iv) failing to obtain a Purchase Order prior to sending
goods or providing services; and (v) continued failure to properly and timely
invoice the City.
   C.   The Chief Procurement Officer or designee, upon receipt of a Vendor
noncompliance form, will investigate the issue. If required, the Chief
Procurement Officer or designee will schedule a meeting with the Department and
Vendor to establish a corrective action plan as quickly as reasonably possible.
The Chief Procurement Officer or designee will ensure that any required follow-
up action is tracked and, if necessary, appropriate other action taken, up to
and including termination of the vendor's contract and/or Purchase Order, and
possible suspension or debarment proceedings
This Administrative Instruction is effective immediately and valid until
December 31, 2021.
 
______________________________
Sarita Nair                    [https://export.amlegal.com/media/
Chief Administrative Officer   6d88fadbb394cb34f1263b3e9230120271b111d2/IMAGES/
______________________         0-0-0-2084.png]
Effective Date
 
AI_NO:_3-4_(pdf)
AI NO: 3-6
COMPREHENSIVE PURCHASING TRAINING PROGRAM
TITLE:   Comprehensive Purchasing Training Program
PRIMARY DEPARTMENT:   Department of Finance and Administrative Services
1.   General
   The Central Purchasing Division of the Department of Finance and
Administrative Services (“Purchasing Division”) provides comprehensive
training, including training materials and pertinent notifications to its end-
users through the Purchasing Liaison User Group (“PLUG”). Training sessions are
conducted at a minimum on a quarterly basis at the PLUG meetings and
notifications are distributed electronically to all PLUG members via e-mail.
Training materials are posted on-line at the Purchasing SharePoint website for
all City employees.
2.   Definitions
   A.   Department Buyer- a City employee hired by a department or division to
assist with the purchasing functions in coordination with and approval by the
Purchasing Division.
   B.   Level 1 Buyers- designated City employees that issue Quick Quotes
through the Sicomm.Net system.
   C.   PLUG- the Purchasing Liaison User Group is a membership comprised of
City employees who have been identified from within their respective
departments and divisions to coordinate purchasing activities with the
Purchasing Division.
   D.   Purchasing Systems- the various software systems employed by the
Purchasing Division to carry out the purchasing functions of the City which
include, but are not limited to, the Enterprise Resource Program (ERP)
PeopleSoft modules; the online bidding program, Sicomm.Net and the Contract
Tracking System (CTS) which generates professional technical and other
agreements.
3.   Application
   A.   The Purchasing Division shall provide formal training materials,
including online courses called UPKs (User Productivity Kit), and other
relevant material at its Purchasing SharePoint website on pertinent purchasing
topics and purchasing procedures. In addition, the Purchasing Division shall
develop and offer purchasing training programs throughout the year at
reasonable intervals.
   B.   The Purchasing Division shall provide training materials or offer
training programs to new City employees regarding the Purchasing process.
   C.   Departments and divisions shall appoint Staff Designee(s) responsible
for generating purchasing requests and coordinating purchasing activities with
the Purchasing Division. Departments and divisions shall provide the Purchasing
Division with the names of these Staff Designee/s so that they may be included
in the PLUG membership by the Purchasing Division and provided notice of PLUG
meetings.
   D.   Staff Designees, Level 1 and Department Buyers are required to attend
all PLUG meetings. Failure to attend more than two (2) consecutive PLUG
meetings will result in a notification to the Department director and may lead
to the suspension of the designated staff member’s access to the Purchasing
Systems.
   E.   Staff Designees, Level 1 and Department Buyers are required to receive
training on the various Purchasing Systems prior to gaining a password and
access to the systems. Sharing of passwords or gaining access to a system
without proper authority is prohibited and may lead to the suspension of access
to the Purchasing Systems and disciplinary action, up to and including
termination from employment.
   F.   Department directors, deputy directors, associate directors, division
managers, supervisors, and fiscal personnel are encouraged to participate in
PLUG and attend PLUG meetings.
Questions regarding this process should be directed to the Chief Procurement
Officer.
REFERENCES:   None.
 
______________________________
Robert J. Perry                [https://export.amlegal.com/media/
Chief Administrative Officer   6d88fadbb394cb34f1263b3e9230120271b111d2/IMAGES/
_____________________________  0-0-0-602.png]
Effective Date
 
AI_NO:_3-6_(pdf)
AI NO: 3-7 (2021)
PAYMENTS TO VENDORS DOING BUSINESS WITH THE CITY
TITLE:   Payments to Vendors Doing Business with the City
PRIMARY DEPARTMENT: Department of Finance and Administrative Services
This Administrative Instruction supersedes the Administrative Instructions or
directives in previously issued versions of Administrative Instruction 3-7,
each of which is hereby rescinded in its entirety. This Administrative
Instruction does not supersede any review or approval authority that may be set
forth in any other Administrative Instruction not specifically identified in
this paragraph.
A.   Background
The City conducts business with a significant number of vendors and it is the
intent of the City to expedite payments to vendors when it is necessary and
practicable. It is also the intent of the City to maximize earnings on vendor
discounts.
On March 11, 2020, the World Health Organization declared that the COVID-19
outbreak should be characterized as a pandemic. Also, on that date, New Mexico
Governor Michelle Lujan Grisham and the New Mexico Department of Health
announced the first confirmed cases of COVID-19 in New Mexico, and the Governor
issued Executive Order 2020-004: Order Declaring a State of Public Health
Emergency and Invoking the Powers Provided by the All Hazard Emergency
Management Act and the Emergency Licensing Act. As a result of the COVID-19
pandemic, supply chains for a wide range of essential items have now been
disrupted, requiring additional flexibility in the City's purchasing process.
To help the City of Albuquerque meet the challenges caused by the supply chain
disruption, Section 7 of Mayor Keller's first Declaration of Public Health
Emergency, issued on March 18, 2020, provides as follows:
Pursuant to §§ 5-5-19(B)(1) and 5-5-35, I find urgent and compelling reasons,
including the unforeseen and dangerous situation of the COVID-19 pandemic,
enabling the City to make emergency procurements to preserve the peace, health,
or safety of people or property within the jurisdiction of the City or to
prevent significant economic loss.
The exigent circumstances caused by the pandemic necessitate a revision to this
Administrative Instruction to address both current and future civil or public
health emergencies.
B.   Policy-Time of Payment
It is the policy of the City to pay all vendors in accordance with the terms of
the pertinent contracts, or within thirty days from the date of an invoice,
whichever is later. In the event of a declared civil or public health emergency
when it is necessary to expeditiously order or procure emergency goods or
services, the payment by the City may precede delivery of the goods or services
from the vendor when warranted by the circumstances. However, in the normal
course of procuring non-prepaid goods or services, and absent delays caused by
problems with the delivered goods or services, a thirty-day payment policy will
be achieved for the majority of payment obligations made by the City of
Albuquerque.
C.   Policy-Taxes on Purchases of Food
The City understands that there exists a gross receipts tax deduction for
receipts derived from the sale of tangible personal property to a government
entity, NMSA 1978, § 7-9-54, and that this deduction applies to the sale of
food in any form to the City. The City further understands that collecting,
applying deductions, payment, and reporting of the gross receipts tax to the
New Mexico Department Taxation and Revenue is the responsibility of the vendor.
It is a common business practice for a vendor to include gross receipts tax on
invoices to the City as a pass-through charge. However, the City, at a vendor's
request, will issue a Non Taxable Transaction Certificate for the vendor's use
in applying and reporting deductions.
The City purchases food from both local and national vendors, who as a matter
of course may include gross receipts tax on invoices to the City as a pass-
through charge. While acknowledging that the purchase of food is a nontaxable
transaction and that the pass-through amount could be deducted by the vendor,
the City must also balance the administrative costs and delay imposed on the
transaction should the City require that employees engaged in the purchase
stop, obtain all required paperwork, and negotiate with the vendor to require
the gross receipts tax be removed. To alleviate the impracticality of taking
such action, it is the policy of the City to waive the requirement that a City
end user seek the removal of the pass-through gross receipts tax charges by a
vendor.
D.   Responsibility
The Purchasing Division of the Department of Finance and Administrative
Services (DFAS), Operating Departments, and the Accounts Payable Section of the
Accounting Division of DFAS each share the responsibility for achieving an
expedient payment process.
These parties are charged with the following responsibilities:
Purchasing Division of DFAS:
   1.   Ensure that all Purchase Orders and City Contract Purchase Orders are
processed on a timely basis.
   2.   Ensure that change orders to Purchase Orders are expeditiously
processed or acted upon to avoid payment delays.
Operating Departments:
   1.   Ensure that all applicable individuals within the departments place a
high priority on processing and entering necessary purchasing information and
vendor information.
   2.   Ensure that department procedures for purchase/receipt/payment approval
are reviewed to eliminate bottlenecks and speed the payment process. The
emphasis should be on the proper and timely approval of the purchase prior to
receipt of goods or services, followed by verified receipt of the goods or
services. Prompt payment should be a natural outflow of these functions and
result in an expedient payment-approval process.
   3.   Ensure that goods or services are not acquired before a Purchase Order
is finalized.
   4.   Appoint department liaisons to be the contact persons for problem
resolution with the Accounts Payable Section and the Purchasing Division.
Furnish Accounting with the name of the appointed department liaisons when
initially appointed and also when turnover occurs.
   5.   Ensure that vendors are provided with proper information at the time of
purchase, i.e., Department/Division name, employee names and contact
information, and Purchase Order numbers, for inclusion on the vendor's invoice.
Accounts Payable Section of DFAS:
   1.   Ensure that all invoices are processed when received. Invoices will be
processed using the Purchase Order number referenced on the invoice. The
financial system will validate against open Purchase Orders and receipts. Where
there are exceptions identified by a match- exception process, the Accounts
Payable staff will work with the departments to resolve the issues. For
invoices submitted through the network hub Transcepta, the Accounts Payable and
Accounting staff will review information to ensure that the data is properly
loaded in voucher tables and ready for processing. Where there are exceptions
identified by a match-exception process, the Accounts Payable staff will work
with departments to resolve the issues.
   2.   Work with department liaisons to research and resolve any issues
regarding vendor invoices on a timely basis.
   3.   Work with departments to identify and review invoices older than 60
days for follow-up.
   4.   Ensure that original invoices are either directly mailed or e-mailed to
the Accounts Payable Section, or submitted through the network hub Transcepta.
Ensure that invoices sent directly to departments are redirected to the
Accounts Payable Section.
   5.   Ensure that appropriate training is provided to departments on the use
of the automated systems and on procedures to be followed.
   6.   Ensure that, in conjunction with the Purchasing Division of DFAS,
appropriate information and procedures are provided to all City vendors
periodically.
 
 

______________________________ [https://export.amlegal.com/media/
Sarita Nair                    6d88fadbb394cb34f1263b3e9230120271b111d2/IMAGES/
Chief Administrative Officer   0-0-0-2177.png]
_____________________________
Effective Date
 
AI_NO:_3-7_(pdf)
AI NO: 3-8
VENDING MACHINES AND VENDING STANDS ON CITY PROPERTY
TITLE:   Vending Machines and Vending Stands on City Property
PRIMARY DEPARTMENT:   Department of Municipal Development
General
This Administrative Instruction establishes City policy for the operation of
vending machines and vending stands on City property.
The following vending machines and vending stands are exempt from the
provisions of this Administrative Instruction:
1.   Restaurants or Concessions designated by the CAO to be awarded through a
formal competitive process.
2   Vending machines and vending stands which are operated by restaurants or
concessions in accordance with their contracts with the City.
3.   Vending machines and vending stands which are operated by citizen groups
sponsored by the City, e.g., Senior Centers and Community Centers.
Placement of vending machines or vending stands will not conflict with federal
law or other statutory or legal requirements.
Application
This instruction will apply to all facilities/properties owned by the City of
Albuquerque. This instruction does not apply to rental or lease properties.
Definitions
1.   Concession - The leasing of a portion of a property/facility for a
specific purpose in accordance with the City's Public Purchases and Real
Property ordinances.
2.   Restaurant - Any facility wherein food is prepared, cooked, heated and
served, and a seating area is provided for the consumption of food.
3.   Vending Machine - A money-operated machine designed for vending
prepackaged consumable products for a predetermined price.
4.   Vending Stand - A stand for the purpose of selling prepackaged consumable
products for the benefit of City employees and citizens conducting City
business at a City-owned facility. A vending stand may also include any number
of vending machines.
Procedure
The City Purchasing Officer will promulgate procedures for the application and
contracting of vending machines and vending stands. Such procedures will comply
with State Statutes 22-14-24 to 22-14-29 NMSA 1978 concerning preference for
the operation of vending stands by blind persons who are licensed by the New
Mexico Commission for the Blind.
Revenues
All revenues received by City departments from the operation of vending
machines and vending stands are City revenues. All revenues from these sources
shall be paid by a contractor's check made payable to the City of Albuquerque.
All revenues shall be deposited in accordance with Administrative Instruction
No. 3-4.
Inventory
All Departments shall respond to the Department of Municipal Development survey
of vending machines on or in City property. Departments shall report the name
of the vendor, identify where the machine is located and provide a copy of all
contracts or other agreements regarding revenue. DMD will compile a vending
machine master list.
REFERENCES:   State Statutes 22-14-24 to 22-14-29 NMSA 1978
         Administrative Instruction No. 3-4
 
______________________________
Robert J. Perry                [https://export.amlegal.com/media/
Chief Administrative Officer   6d88fadbb394cb34f1263b3e9230120271b111d2/IMAGES/
_____________________________  0-0-0-606.png]
Effective Date 
 
AI_NO:_3-8_(pdf)
AI NO: 3-10
PROCEDURES FOR RATIFYING PURCHASE VIOLATIONS (2021)
TITLE:   Procedures for Ratifying Purchase Violations
PRIMARY DEPARTMENT: Department of Finance and Administrative Services
1.   General
The Department of Finance and Administrative Services Purchasing Division
("Purchasing Division") has the authority and responsibility to administer the
City's Public Purchases Ordinance, the Purchasing Rules and Regulations, and
the Administrative Instructions in the Purchases Section ( collectively,
"Purchasing Rules").
2.   Definitions
   A.   A Purchase Violation occurs when an employee makes a purchase, either
knowingly or unknowingly, that violates any of the Purchasing Rules.
   B.   A Ratification is the way the Purchasing Division affirms a Purchase
Violation. A ratification has the effect of putting the Purchase Violation in
the same position as if it had been originally authorized. A ratification is
not a disciplinary action. Any disciplinary action shall be at the discretion
of the Department.
   C.   Purchasing Systems means the various software systems employed by the
Purchasing Division to carry out the purchasing functions of the City, which
include but are not limited to the Enterprise Resource Program (ERP) PeopleSoft
modules the online bidding program, and any other software systems that support
the purchasing functions.
3.   Procedure
   A.   When the Purchasing Division is notified of a Purchase Violation, it
shall initiate a Purchase Ratification Form and complete Sections I and II.
Section I is an explanation of why the purchase of goods or services was not in
accordance with the Purchasing Rules. Section II is the Purchasing Division's
recommendation on how to avoid a similar Purchase Violation in the future.
   B.   The Purchase Ratification Form will route to the employee who engaged
in the Purchasing Violation, who shall complete Sections III and IV. Section
III requires that that employee provide a complete explanation of the
circumstances of the Purchase Violation, including all applicable dates and
names of individuals involved with the purchase. Section IV requires the
identification of steps the individual and Department agree to take to ensure
future purchases are made in accordance with the Purchasing Rules.
4.   Approvals Required for Purchase Ratification Forms
Ratifications of Purchasing Violations require the approvals of the employee
involved in the Purchasing Violation, the Department Director, and the Chief
Procurement Officer.
5.   Consequence of Purchasing Violations
   A.   Any City employee who is found to have committed a Purchasing Violation
may be subject to disciplinary action, up to and including termination from
employment.
   B.   Notwithstanding Section 5A, any City employee who is found to have used
any Purchasing System to purchase items for non-City use may be required to
reimburse the City for the unauthorized purchase.
   C.   Pursuant to Section 2-17-12(A) ROA 1994, all City officials, City
employees, and contractors shall promptly notify the Inspector General of every
known or suspected instances of: theft or other disappearance of cash, check,
or property; misuse of funds; improper governmental actions as defined in the
City's Whistleblower Ordinance; or non-compliance with federal law, state law,
or City ordinances or regulations.
   D.   Depending on the facts surrounding a Purchase Violation, the Chief
Procurement Officer may suspend the involved employee's access to any and all
Purchasing Systems. If the Purchase Violation involves the City's Procurement
Card ("P-card"), the P-card holder may be required to immediately surrender the
P-card to the Chief Procurement Officer.
REFERENCES: City Ordinance Article 5 R.O.A. 1994, Public Purchases Ordinance;
Inspector General Ordinance, Sections 2-17-1 et seq. R.O.A. 1994; City of
Albuquerque Purchasing Rules and Regulations; Administrative Instructions
Section 3, Purchasing.
 
______________________________
Sarita Nair                    [https://export.amlegal.com/media/
Chief Administrative Officer   6d88fadbb394cb34f1263b3e9230120271b111d2/IMAGES/
_____________________________  0-0-0-2076.png]
Effective Date
 
AI_NO:_3-10_(pdf)
AI NO: 3-13
ENCUMBRANCES AS BUDGET MANAGEMENT TOOL – POLICY & PROCEDURES
TITLE:   Encumbrances as Budget Management Tool – Policy & Procedures
PRIMARY DEPARTMENT:   Department of Finance and Administrative Services
Background:
An appropriation is the legal authority for a governmental entity to spend
funds for a specific purpose. Appropriations are established by adoption of
program or project level budgets by the City Council. During the course of a
fiscal year, the authority of an appropriation is used in part to acquire
necessary goods and services. An encumbrance represents a commitment to spend
some or all of an appropriation and reduces the amount available for other
encumbrances or expenditures. At any point in time, the sum of all expenditures
plus all encumbrances in place cannot exceed the available appropriation.
Policy:
Every department has an affirmative obligation to ensure that all encumbrances
are appropriate and valid at each month end, with particular attention required
at the end of each fiscal year. Failure to properly monitor the status of each
encumbrance may lead to negative consequences for the City. Failure of a
department to properly and accurately record all valid encumbrances at fiscal
year-end may have a negative impact on that department's operating budget for
the following fiscal year because valid obligations will have to be met out of
the subsequent year’s budget.
General Procedures:
A requisition to obtain goods and or services, approved by the department
director or his designee, must be prepared and submitted to the Purchasing
Division of the Department of Finance and Administrative Services (DFAS). The
requisition must include, at a minimum, the type and quantity of goods or
services to be obtained, the estimated amount to be paid, required general
ledger posting data, and the contract period or date(s) the goods or services
are required.
   1.   At the time that a purchase order is prepared by the Purchasing Office,
an encumbrance is also created. No encumbrance, when added to the current
fiscal year expenditures and encumbrances, can exceed the related
appropriation. If the estimated amount to be paid exceeds the sum of year-to-
date expenditures and existing encumbrances, the encumbrance will be limited to
the amount available for encumbrance.
   2.   Multiple year contracts are acceptable. However, the contract must
state that the commitment is for the current fiscal year appropriation only and
that renewals are contingent on future appropriations. Only amounts
representing commitments against current year appropriations will be
encumbered.
   3.   Purchase orders prepared by the Purchasing Division will include a
statement that contract extensions for subsequent periods beyond the close of
the current fiscal year are contingent on sufficient appropriations being
available. Only amounts representing commitments against current year
appropriations will be encumbered.
   4.   A contract period may span two fiscal years, if the contract period
differs from the City's fiscal year. Only the dollar value of that portion of
the contract to be performed in the current fiscal year will be encumbered. The
dollar value of the balance of the contract will not be encumbered, but will be
disclosed in the CAFR footnotes as a commitment of the following year's revenue
to the extent the data is available.
   5.   Departments are responsible for closing out purchase orders that are no
longer valid due to expired funding, inactivity, or expenditures ending lower
than anticipated.
   6.   In accordance with Section 2-11-12 (B) of the City's Budget Ordinance,
the reserve for encumbrances balance at the end of each fiscal year will be re-
appropriated to the next fiscal year provided there are sufficient reversions
in the respective program and subject to approval of the Office of Management
and Budget. The re-appropriated funds may be used only for the payment of goods
and services that were encumbered in the previous fiscal year. 
   7.   The reserve for encumbrances balance at fiscal year-end represents
amounts for goods or services ordered prior to fiscal year end, but not
received as of the last day of the fiscal year. Goods and services which were
ordered prior to fiscal year end, but were not received prior to fiscal year
end and for which there is an appropriation in the subsequent fiscal year will
be disclosed in the footnotes to the CAFR as a commitment of future revenues.
Exceptions to this Policy and Procedures
Open-ended contracts or agreements represent agreements for pricing only and do
not obligate the City to purchase goods or services. The estimated dollar
amount of purchases to be made under an open-ended contract or agreement will
not be encumbered at the time such a contract or agreement is entered into. The
dollar value of a purchase order release issued under the terms of an open-
ended contract or agreement will be encumbered at the time the purchase order
release is issued.
Questions may be directed to the Accounting Division, the Office of Management
and Budget Division, or the Purchasing Division of the Department of Finance
and Administrative Services.
REFERENCES:   Chapter 11: City Budget 2-11-12 (B); Chapter 5: City Property,
Purchases and Sales.
 
______________________________
Robert J. Perry                [https://export.amlegal.com/media/
Chief Administrative Officer   6d88fadbb394cb34f1263b3e9230120271b111d2/IMAGES/
_____________________________  0-0-0-610.png]
Effective Date
 
AI_NO:_3-13_(pdf)
AI NO: 3-14 (2021)
PURCHASE OF GOODS OR SERVICES FOR USE BY EMPLOYEES
TITLE:   Purchase of Goods or Services for Use by Employees
PRIMARY DEPARTMENT:   Department of Finance and Administrative Services
1.   General; Exceptions:
   A.   For the purposes of this Administrative Instruction, goods or services
for use by employees include, but are not limited to:
      I.   Food and beverage items; and related supplies or catering thereof;
      II.   Televisions computers, telephones and other electronics; microwave
ovens, refrigerators, or other appliances;
      III.   On premise gyms or athletic facilities for employees and their
spouses, domestic partners and dependent children;
      IV.   Achievement awards;
      V.   Items of clothing and uniforms; and
      VI.   Badges and side anns.
   B.   The City's Travel Regulations are applicable to goods and services
related to travel for City business and the payment of travel expenses.
   C.   Items purchased from the Mayor's discretionary fund or City Council
discretionary funds are not subject to the provisions of this Administrative
Instruction.
2.   De Minimus Purchases: The City adopts by reference Internal Revenue
Service guidelines, as existing or amended, with respect to the provision of
non-taxable employee benefits and achievement awards. A de minimis benefit is
any good or service provided to an employee that has so little value (taking
into account how frequently similar benefits are provided to employees) that
accounting for it would be unreasonable or administratively impracticable. Cash
or cash equivalents, regardless of the amount, are NEVER a de minimis benefit.
The Chief Administrative Officer ("CAO") or their designee may approve the
purchase of the goods or services under the de minimis benefit provision as
follows:
   A.   Food and Beverage Items:
      I.   Coffee, tea, soft drinks, juices, water, and other non-alcoholic
liquid refreshments or the catering thereof for board, commission and committee
members, and assigned staff, at a regularly scheduled or specially called
board, commission or committee meeting;
      II.   Pastries or other breakfast or snack items, or the catering
thereof, for board, commission, and committee members, and assigned staff, at a
regularly scheduled or specially called board, commission or committee meeting;
      III.   Food and beverages for employees furnished on-site at a City
facility as a convenience for the Department. A written or oral statement that
the meals are furnished for the Department's convenience is not sufficient
support for such a purchase. There must be a substantial business reason; for
example, sandwiches and cold drinks provided during a working lunch as part of
a training session or other group work activity would be evidence of a
substantial business reason;
      IV.   Food and beverages, at a cost of up to one hundred dollars, for
graduation ceremonies or retirement celebrations or open houses open to
employees, their families, and the public; and
      V.   All purchases pursuant to this section A. by employees other than a
Department director must be approved in advance in writing by the Department
director. All purchases pursuant to this section A. by a Department director
shall be approved in advance by the CAO or their designee.
   B.   Achievement Awards for Length-of-Service: A length-of-service
achievement award is limited to tangible personal property, such as a plaque,
watch, trophy, or similar item. The following items are not allowed as length-
of-service achievement awards: cash, cash equivalents, or gift certificates, or
other intangible property such as vacations, meals, lodging, tickets to theater
or sporting events, or stocks, bonds and other securities.
      I.   An achievement award for length-of-service is an item of tangible
personal property that meets the following conditions:
         a.   It is given to an employee for length-of-service;
         b.   It is awarded as part of a meaningful presentation; and
         c.   The award is not structured to result in disguised pay or any of
the unallowable items referenced above.
      II.   A length-of-service award may not be given to:
         a.   Any employee during the first five (5) years of the employee's
employment with the City; or
         b.   Any employee who received another length-of-service achievement
award from the City during the same year or in any of the prior four (4) years.
      III.   The recommended allowable costs for a length-of-service
achievement award are:
         a.   For five to nine (5 - 9) years of service, Fifty and  No/1 00
Dollars  ($50.00);
         b.   For ten to fourteen (10 - 14) years of service, Seventy-Five and
No/100 Dollars ($75.00);
         c.   For fifteen to nineteen (15 - 19) years of service, One Hundred
and No/1 00  Dollars ($100.00);
         d.   For twenty or more (20+) years of service, One-Hundred Fifty and
No/1 00  Dollars ($150.00).
      IV.   A Department director may approve a higher dollar amount for a
length-of-service award in advance and in writing, but in no case may a length-
of-service award exceed Two-Hundred and No/1 00  Dollars ($200.00).
      V.   All purchases pursuant to this section B. by employees other than a
Department director must be approved in advance in writing by the Department
director. All length-of-service awards for Department directors must be
approved in advance and in writing by the CFO or Director of Finance and
Administrative Services.
   C.   Annual Picnic or Party: With advance written approval from the CAO or
their designee, each Department may conduct an annual picnic or party for
Department employees and their guests. There may be no more than one (1) such
event in each fiscal year.
   D.   Other Allowable Purchases: City funds may be used to purchase goods or
services for use by employees if:
      I.   The Department director determines in advance and in writing that a
good or service is necessary for the health, safety or welfare of employees,
due to working conditions or the physical location of the workstation; or
      II.   The good or service is used in conjunction with a City-sponsored
training program that has been approved by a Department director in writing; or
      III.   The good or service is required to perform assigned Departmental
responsibilities or functions.
      IV.   All purchases pursuant to this section D. by employees other than a
Department director must be approved in advance in writing by the Department
director. All purchases under this section by Department directors shall be
approved in advance by the CAO, CFO, or Chief Operating Officer, as applicable.
   E.   Unallowable Purchases:
      I.   Except as provided in Section 2 herein, City funds may not be used
to pay for retirement lunches, dinners, parties, or receptions, or for
graduation or award ceremonies.
      II.   City funds may not be used to purchase goods or services for or on
behalf of a contractor.
      III.   City funds may not be used to purchase an item merely for the
convenience of one or more employees. For clarification, this section does not
apply to reasonable accommodation for the purposes of the Americans with
Disabilities Act.
      IV.   Under no circumstances should an employee use a City-based goods or
services contract for the employee's own personal use even if no City funds are
utilized in the purchase.
   F.   Items of Clothing and Uniforms.  When required by the Department, items
of clothing and uniforms with City or Department patches, printing, embroidery,
labels, or logos, with or without an employee's name, are not considered to be
goods for use by employees.
   G.   Badges and Sidearms: The City purchases badges and sidearms for certain
classes of employees. At retirement, the retiring employee may purchase from
the City that badge or sidearm assigned to them at the time of their
retirement. The Accounting Officer shall determine the fair market value of the
badge or sidearm, which shall be paid into the City treasury prior to the
employee's retirement.
REFERENCES: Public Purchases Ordinance Sections 5-5-1 et seq. ROA 1994;
applicable Internal Revenue Code; City of Albuquerque Travel Regulations.
 
______________________________
Sarita Nair                    [https://export.amlegal.com/media/
Chief Administrative Officer   6d88fadbb394cb34f1263b3e9230120271b111d2/IMAGES/
_____________________________  0-0-0-2146.png]
Effective Date
 
AI_NO:_3-14_(pdf)
AI NO: 3-15
NUTRITION STANDARDS FOR VENDING MACHINE BEVERAGES AND SNACK
TITLE: Nutrition Standards for Vending Machine Beverages and Snack
PRIMARY DEPARTMENT:   Human Resources
Background:
The City of Albuquerque desires to provide a healthier food and beverage
vending program for vending machines located on all City property; and to
further promote the City’s commitment to improving the health of its employees
and visitors of all City of Albuquerque properties.
This instruction pertains to vending machines on City property, owned or
leased, and real property upon which City operations are conducted or is
occupied by City employees in their normal duties. City property includes but
is not limited to all buildings of any type, parking structures, parking lots,
and all other structures including the grounds of unenclosed space located on
City Property.
Policy:
In alignment with the U. S. Department of General Services Administration
document “Health and Sustainability Guidelines for Concessions and Vending
Operations”:
Calorie Labeling of Articles of Food in Vending Machines: The vending machine
operator shall provide a sign in close proximity of each article of food or the
selection button that includes a clear and conspicuous statement disclosing the
number of calories contained in the article when the Nutrition Facts Panel or
Calorie Content is not visible.
Trans fat: Only offer items that contain 0 grams trans fat per serving as
defined by the Unites States Food and Drug Administration.
Sodium:
   ∙  Only offer snack items that contain no more than 230 milligrams sodium
per serving (excludes refrigerated meals).
   ∙  Individual meal items must contain no more than 480 milligrams sodium per
serving.
In addition to meeting the menu labeling, trans fat, and sodium requirements
listed above, at least 25% of all packaged food choices must meet the following
criteria:
   ∙  Limit all snack (not refrigerated meals) items to no more than 200
calories per item (excluding nuts and seeds without added fats, oils, or
caloric sweeteners).
   ∙  Limit total calories from saturated fat to no more than 10% (excluding
nuts and seeds without added fats or oils).
   ∙  Limit calories from sugars to no more than 35% of total weight (excluding
fruits or vegetables without added caloric sweeteners).
Beverage requirements:
   ∙  At least 50% of available beverage choices (other than 100% juice and
unsweetened milk) must contain no more than 40 calories per serving.
   ∙  If milk is offered, only offer 2%, 1% and non-fat milk dairy-type
products.
   ∙  If juice is offered, offer at least one 100% juice with no added caloric
sweeteners.
   ∙  Vegetable juice must contain no more than 230 milligrams sodium per
serving.
REFERENCES:   Council Resolution R-16-52 (Enacted)
 
______________________________
Robert J. Perry                [https://export.amlegal.com/media/
Chief Administrative Officer   6d88fadbb394cb34f1263b3e9230120271b111d2/IMAGES/
_____________________________  0-0-0-614.png]
Effective Date
 
AI_NO:_3-15_(pdf)
AI NO: 3-16
CREDIT CARD SECURITY
TITLE:   Credit Card Security
PRIMARY DEPARTMENT:   Department of Technology and Innovation
1.   Background
The number and type of credit cards accepted at City facilities continue to
increase. As more transactions are made with credit cards, including over the
internet, the City will remain vigilant and continue to earn the trust of the
public by ensuring credit card information is used in a secure and responsible
manner.
2.   Policy
The City will comply with the current version of the Payment Card Industry Data
Security Standards (PCI-DSS). In particular, the City will ensure:
   • All payment systems are PCI-DSS compliant
   • All payment systems are implemented in compliance with PCI-DSS
requirements.
   • All payment systems are maintained and operated in compliance with PCI-DSS
requirements.
In particular:
   • Unencrypted credit card numbers are not sent through end-user messaging
technologies such as, but not limited to, email, instant messaging (IM) or
chat.
   • Credit card numbers are not stored in paper form.
   • Card transactions processed by City personnel via telephone are entered
directly into the card processing system as the card information is relayed
from the constituent/customer. The card information is not written on paper or
keyed and is not stored on any application or database.
   • All employees involved in handling credit card information are trained to
securely handle credit card information.
   • In the event of a data breach, incident management will follow the
incident management guidelines laid out by the card company (companies)
impacted.
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/6d88fadbb394cb34f1263b3e9230120271b111d2/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2946.jpg]
 
AI_NO:_3-16_(pdf)
AI NO: 3-17
SENIOR LEVEL PURCHASING POSITIONS
TITLE: Senior Level Purchasing Positions
PRIMARY DEPARTMENT: Department of Finance and Administrative Services
Except as otherwise provided by the Public Purchases Ordinance, the Central
Purchasing Office (also known as the Purchasing Division of the Department of
Finance and Administrative Services) is the central purchasing office for the
City. The Central Purchasing Office is staffed with several levels of
purchasing personnel to carry out this function. Although a Department may
decide it needs a dedicated buyer and is willing to fund its own senior level
purchasing personnel, all such employees shall be directly supervised by,
located in, and held accountable to the Purchasing Division and the Chief
Procurement Officer.
REFERENCES:   Public Purchases Ordinance Sections 5-5-1 et seq. ROA 1994,
applicable Internal Revenue Code. 
 
______________________________
Robert J. Perry                [https://export.amlegal.com/media/
Chief Administrative Officer   6d88fadbb394cb34f1263b3e9230120271b111d2/IMAGES/
_____________________________  0-0-0-618.png]
Effective Date
 
AI_NO:_3-17_(pdf)
AI NO: 3-18
GENDER PAY EQUITY REPORTING AND PREFERENCE POLICY (2020)
TITLE: Gender Pay Equity Reporting and Preference Policy
PRIMARY DEPARTMENT: Finance and Administrative Services
BACKGROUND
The City of Albuquerque encourages potential vendors and contractors to
prioritize gender pay equity by offering a preference to qualifying respondents
to requests for proposals. This administrative instruction is to provide
interpretation of Albuquerque City Ordinance ROA 1994, §§ 5-5-31 regarding the
City’s Gender Pay Equity policy. Organizations seeking contracts with the City
of Albuquerque through the submission of a bid or proposal will be required to
comply with the requirements of City Ordinance § 5-5-31, the New Mexico Fair
Pay for Women Act, NMSA Sec.28-23-1, et seq., and the federal Equal Pay Act, 29
USCA 206(d) and other federal gender pay equity laws. This preference shall not
be applied to bids or proposals submitted in response to solicitations for
federally funded projects. Federal procurement regulations prohibit the use of
statutorily or administratively imposed state or local geographical preferences
in the evaluation of bids or proposals.
POLICY
1)   Definitions:
   a)   Gender Pay Equity Initiative: Collaborative partnership between the
City of Albuquerque, Bernalillo County, and the Albuquerque Bernalillo County
Water Utility Authority.
   b)   Pay Equity Employee Data Form: The document in which a vendor enters
information.
   c)   Pay Equity Reporting Form: The document that is generated based on the
information submitted on the Pay Equity Data Form.
   d)   Pay Equity Certificate: The document certifying compliance with the Pay
Equity initiative as specified in section C.
   e)   Full Time: Employees working an average of at least 30 hours per week.
   f)   Part Time: Employees working an average of less than 30 hours per week.
   g)   Total Annual Compensation: The total monetary earnings for one full
year.
   h)   Job Category Titles: Job category classifications determined by the
U.S. Equal Employment Opportunity Commission, which categorizes jobs by title
in its EE0-1 Job Classification Guide (2010), which may be amended or updated
from time to time.
   i)   Technical Change: A technical change, as defined by the Gender Pay
Equity Initiative, consists of a missing component, flawed calculation, failure
to sign or date, or an incorrectly uploaded document. If one of these should
happen, the employer will be given 24 hours after the response deadline to
resubmit with the necessary correction to be considered responsive.
2)   Pay Equity Reporting Form
   a)   Structure
      i)   The Pay Equity Reporting Form is the document automatically
generated based on the data entered on the Pay Equity Employee Data Form. The
Pay Equity Employee Data Form can be accessed through the Gender Pay Equity
Initiative website: https://www.cabq.gov/gender-pay-equity-initiative.
      ii)   Individual pay data shall not be included in the Pay Equity
Reporting Form that is generated after completing the Pay Equity Employee Data
Form – only the organization’s summary pay equity information shall be included
on the Pay Equity Reporting Form that is submitted.
      iii)   Each Pay Equity Reporting Form is valid for one year from the date
it was signed.
      iv)   Sole proprietors are not required to enter pay information into the
Pay Equity Employee Data Form, but they must fill out the company information
section of the Pay Equity Employee Data Form and submit a signed Pay Equity
Reporting Form indicating they are a sole proprietorship.
      v)   Businesses that do not employ New Mexico residents are not required
to enter pay information into the Pay Equity Employee Data Form, but they must
fill out the company information section of the Pay Equity Employee Data Form
and submit a signed Pay Equity Reporting Form indicating they employ no New
Mexico residents.
   b)   Submission
      i)   A signed Pay Equity Reporting Form (or a valid Pay Equity
Certificate – see section 3) shall be submitted with all responses to requests
for bids and requests for proposals.
   c)   Processing
      i)   Pay Equity Reporting Forms and Pay Equity Certificates submitted in
bid or proposal packets shall be reviewed for technical compliance.
      ii)   If a technical change is necessary, Purchasing or CIP staff will
alert the bidder/proposer that they have 24 hours after receiving notification
to correct
the error.
      iii)   If an error on the Pay Equity Reporting Form or Pay Equity
Certificate is not corrected within 24 hours, that bid or proposal shall be
deemed nonresponsive.
3)   Pay Equity Certificate
   a)   Eligibility
      i)   To be eligible to receive a 5% pay equity preference on the bid
price or total proposal score, an organization must obtain a Pay Equity
Certificate and submit it with the bid or proposal. To obtain a Pay Equity
Certificate, the organization must meet two criteria:
         (1)   overall percent deviation between male and female pay must be
0.00%; and
         (2)   the position-specific deviations between any two gender
categories must be 0.00%.
      ii)   Each Pay Equity Certificate is valid for one year from the date of
issuance.
      iii)   Organizations that employ only one gender are not eligible for
certification.
      iv)   Organizations that only employ men and women in separate job
categories are not eligible for certification.
      v)   Organizations that employ no New Mexico residents are not eligible
for certification, although they must still comply with Section 2(a)(5) above.
      vi)   The pay equity preference shall not apply to bids or proposals
submitted in response to solicitations for federally funded projects. Federal
procurement regulations prohibit the use of statutorily or administratively
imposed state or local geographical preferences in the evaluation of bids or
proposals.
      vii)   Existing Certificates at the time this Administrative Instruction
becomes effective shall continue to be honored until the date of their
expiration. Certifications must be valid at the time of the solicitation close
date.
   b)   Submission
      i)   To be certified, an organization must submit a signed Pay Equity
Reporting Form, which will automatically be reviewed by the Gender Pay Equity
Initiative if the organization meets the eligibility criteria.
      ii)   Pay Equity Certificates issued by the Gender Pay Equity Initiative
are accepted by the City of Albuquerque, Bernalillo County, and the Albuquerque
Bernalillo County Water Utility Authority. To provide consistency, the City of
Albuquerque shall serve as the certifying agency for all three organizations.
      iii)   To be eligible for the pay equity preference, a valid Pay Equity
Certificate must be submitted with all responses to requests for bids and
requests for proposals.
   c)   Processing
      i)   The certifying agency will review all certification requests and
either issue a Pay Equity Certificate or communicate denial of the request
within two business days of receiving the Pay Equity Reporting Form.
4)   Verification of Submitted Data
   a)   The City reserves the right to request any organization provide a
third-party certification of data submitted to ensure compliance of
organizations seeking certification, claiming sole proprietorship, or claiming
to employ no New Mexico residents.
   b)   Gender identity categories are determined by the jurisdiction in which
the employee resides and are subject to verification by birth certificate or
other vital record.
   c)   Organizations found to have submitted inaccurate information in the Pay
Equity Reporting Form will have their bids/proposals deemed nonresponsive and
may be prohibited from bidding or proposing on future business with the City
according to Albuquerque City Ordinance ROA 1994, § 5-5-24.
5)   Reporting
   a)   The Gender Pay Equity Initiative will make organizational pay equity
data, but not individual pay data, available through a public-facing dashboard.
References: City Ordinance § 5-5-31; Women’s Pay Equity Task Force; New Mexico
Fair Pay for Women Act, NMSA 1978, §§ 28-23-1 to -6 (2013); Equal Pay Act, 29
USCA 206(d)
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/6d88fadbb394cb34f1263b3e9230120271b111d2/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2136.png]
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/6d88fadbb394cb34f1263b3e9230120271b111d2/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2140.png]
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/6d88fadbb394cb34f1263b3e9230120271b111d2/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2138.png]
 
AI_NO:_3-18_(pdf)
Vehicles
AI NO: 4-1
PREVENTATIVE MAINTENANCE AND SCHEDULING OF VEHICLE REPAIRS
TITLE: Preventative Maintenance and Scheduling of Vehicle Repairs
PRIMARY DEPARTMENT:  Department of Finance and Administrative Services
Purpose:
City of Albuquerque owned vehicles and equipment require periodic maintenance
to ensure a safe, reliable, cost effective operation over its service life.
Each vehicle maintained by the Fleet Division has been assigned to a detailed
multi-tiered preventative maintenance (PM) program based on vehicle class and
application. Adherence to the PM program is mandatory. Failing to follow
preventative maintenance services according to the manufacturer guidelines
could void any claim to a warranty. All documentation of vehicle or equipment
repair or services will be kept through the life of the vehicle and recorded in
the City of Albuquerque’s fleet management system, Fleet Focus.
Policy:
It is the responsibility of the Fleet Division to maintain City owned vehicles
and equipment, and to ensure that they conform to specified conditions,
functions and safety standards. This instruction provides procedures that are
applicable for the repair and servicing of City owned vehicles and equipment.
The Fleet Division will send monthly PM and emission schedules to department
liaisons. It is the responsibility of the department liaisons and department
managers to ensure compliance with the schedules.
A follow up report will also be sent to department liaisons listing the
vehicles previously scheduled for PM and /or emissions testing that have not
complied with the schedule. Vehicles that fail to achieve compliance within 500
miles and/or 30 days of the schedule will have fuel privileges deactivated.
Procedures:
A.   The vehicle operator shall report with the vehicle or equipment to the
Fleet Division Service Writer office located at Pino Yards.
B.   The vehicle operator may submit a work request for repairs or maintenance
from any City issued computer prior to his/her arrival at the maintenance
facility. Otherwise a Fleet Division Service Writer will initiate a repair or
service order and either direct the vehicle operator to park the vehicle in the
appropriate repair line or direct the operator to the appropriate maintenance
area.
C.   All vehicle operators shall wait in designated waiting areas. At no time
will vehicle operators be allowed to wait in inspection bays, shops, or other
work areas. All equipment brought in for repairs or services will be moved at
the direction of Fleet Division personnel.
D.   Vehicles left for repairs or services will be locked and all valuable
items removed by the vehicle operator. The Fleet Division is not responsible
for items left in vehicles that are lost or stolen.
E.   Vehicle operators are responsible for contacting or delivering vehicles
and/or equipment with safety related issues. No appointment is necessary. If
the vehicle cannot safely be driven, contact Fleet Division Service Writer’s
for assistance.
F.   All City vehicles and equipment in need of service and under the
maintenance responsibility of the Fleet Division will be reported to the Fleet
Division’s maintenance facility, whether in-house or outside service is
required.
G.   Only the Fleet Division is authorized to initiate purchases for parts or
commercial repair for vehicles and equipment under its responsibility.
This Administrative Instruction excludes Aviation, Fire Department Heavy
Apparatus, Police Special Investigations Division, Transit vehicles, and Solid
Waste Management.
REFERENCES:   None. 
 
______________________________
Robert J. Perry                [https://export.amlegal.com/media/
Chief Administrative Officer   6d88fadbb394cb34f1263b3e9230120271b111d2/IMAGES/
_____________________________  0-0-0-620.png]
Effective Date
 
AI_NO:_4-1_(pdf)
AI NO: 4-2
VEHICLE IDENTIFICATION
TITLE: Vehicle Identification
PRIMARY DEPARTMENT:   Department of Finance and Administrative Services
This Administrative Instruction establishes the vehicle identification policy
for all City owned Vehicles. The Chief Administrative Officer must approve any
exceptions to this policy in writing.
1.    City owned vehicles shall display the City of Albuquerque logo as well as
the assigned vehicle number. All vehicles shall display the city logo on both
driver and passenger doors.
2.    All vehicles shall have the vehicle number displayed on the left and
right front fenders, and on the trunk lid or tailgate.
3.    Installation of all identification markings (including logos and
department/division names) shall be administered by the Fleet Division. As an
option, a department's name may be installed below the logo on each door.
4.    This Instruction excludes Aviation, Police, Fire, Transit, and Solid
Waste Management vehicles. Off-road landfill equipment is also excluded.
5.    Unless extenuating circumstances exist, there shall be no exceptions to
this policy. In the event there is such a circumstance, a formal request
identifying the reason for deviation from this policy, shall be submitted in
writing to the Chief Administrative Officer for approval. No vehicle
identification work shall begin until the request is approved.
 
______________________________
Robert J. Perry                [https://export.amlegal.com/media/
Chief Administrative Officer   6d88fadbb394cb34f1263b3e9230120271b111d2/IMAGES/
_____________________________  0-0-0-622.png]
Effective Date
 
AI_NO:_4-2_(pdf)
AI NO: 4-3
VEHICLE ACQUISITION POLICY AND PROCEDURES (2024)
TITLE: Vehicle Acquisition Policy and Procedures
PRIMARY DEPARTMENT:  General Services
Purpose:
To create an environmentally and fiscally responsible City of Albuquerque fleet
by ensuring that it is properly sized and fuel efficient, while still meeting
all intended uses. The Departments exempt from this policy are Solid Waste,
Transit, Fire, and Aviation. Not exempt are Fire non-emergency response
equipped vehicles and Solid Waste, Transit and Aviation light-duty vehicles.
Definitions:
a)   Zero emissions vehicle
   "Zero emissions vehicle" or "ZEV" is defined as a vehicle that does not
produce tailpipe emissions.
b)   Cost-competitive
   "Cost-competitive" is defined as a vehicle's total cost of ownership within
ten percent of the cost of a gasoline or hybrid vehicle, which includes the
costs of vehicle purchase, fuel, maintenance, and insurance, etc. Please see
Exhibit A: Attached cost of ownership Analysis
c)   Replacement Criteria
   "Replacement Criteria" is defined as the conditions that must be met to
replace an existing vehicle. Fleet vehicles must meet at least two of the
following three criteria to be considered for replacement:
      1)   More than 110,000 miles driven
      2)   More than 15 years old
      3)   The total repair over the life of the vehicle is more than 75% of
initial purchase price.
d)   Charging stations:
      a.   TYPES:
         i.   Level I Charging System- is a ZEV and EHV charging systems that
are low power electrical supply chargers that are the slowest to reach a full
charge. Level I chargers are typically supported by existing infrastructure.
         ii.   Level II charging - Is an ZEV and EHV charging system that can
require infrastructure improvements. Level II charging systems typically take
longer than level III to restore a full charge to ZEVs and EHV's.
         iii.   Level III -Is an ZEV and EHV charging system that requires more
electrical energy and typically requires infrastructure improvements/upgrades.
Level III Charging systems typically reach full charge in faster than level I
and level II.
e)   City Vehicles: Pool/ Assigned
   a.   City Vehicle - an automobile/passenger vehicle that is owned by the
City that is used as a conveyance to travel throughout the city while
conducting city business or directly providing services to the public.
      i.   City Vehicle Pool - a collection of vehicles managed by departments
to offer to department staff that is not specifically assigned to any one
person. Pool vehicles are issued or assigned to a variety of fleet users for
short time use.
         1.   Departments can have a pool of fleet vehicles that are specific
to the department however, General Services Department does have a pool of
fleet vehicles that other departments have access to.
      ii.   Assigned vehicles- Fleet vehicles that are assigned specifically to
one driver /user.
f)   Prepositioned City Vehicles-Vehicles that are positioned strategically at
publicly owned properties for City Staff that have approval for parking city
vehicles in strategic locations to provide efficiencies to the city.
Policy:
1)   It is the policy of the City of Albuquerque (COA) that all eligible new
vehicles and vehicles that meet the replacement criteria-purchased for the City
of Albuquerque's fleet will be:
   a)   Fuel-efficient with the lowest emissions within the vehicle class/type;
following a hierarchy from highest to lowest priority: (1) zero emissions
vehicles (ZEVs), (2) plug-in hybrid vehicles, (3) hybrid-electric vehicles
(HEVs),, and (4) internal combustion vehicles utilizing fossil fuels.
   b)   Commercially available, practical, and cost-competitive for the class/
type of vehicles needed for specific assignments.
   c)   Evaluated to determine if it is necessary to operate that class/type of
vehicle and if a suitable lower emissions vehicle would be sufficient.
2)   New vehicle requests for Sport Utility Vehicles (SUVs) or large trucks
that would increase the number of units to the COA fleet, will not be approved
unless justified based on a verified work assignment. Such work assignments
include: rough terrain/off-road travel, passenger/cargo requirements, and/or
trailer towing requirements on a routine basis. Requests shall be reviewed by
the Fleet Review Committee (FRC) and General Services Department (GSD) Director
and forwarded with a recommendation to the Chief Administrative Officer (CAO)
for approval.
3)   The General Services Department (GSD) Fleet Division will work with City
departments to coordinate and support the replacement of fleet vehicles with
lower emissions and greater fuel-efficiency. Solid Waste, Transit, Fire, and
Aviation will coordinate their respective Department's replacement of vehicles
that are subject to this policy.
4)   When the GSD fleet division replaces eligible light-duty vehicles, the
standard budgeting approach involves replacing them with similar vehicles.
However, the division prioritizes the replacement of vehicles with ZEVs of the
appropriate vehicle class/type, in accordance with the policy stated in Item 1.
This approach underscores the division's commitment to sustainable and
environmentally friendly transportation solutions.
   a)   The General Services Department will also evaluate the assigned
location of the proposed replacement vehicle to determine the feasibility of
charging stations for ZEV's and EHV's at the site. The Facilities Management
Division, Energy and Sustainability Division, in some cases DMD, will work
collectively to make improvements for accommodations for charging the ZEV and
EHV Fleet.
5)   Exceptions to this policy may be approved on a case-by-case basis by the
FRC, GSD Director, and CAO based upon the intended use, application, vehicle
specifications, and/or overriding cost considerations. Fuel economy and vehicle
emissions are prioritized when requesting other vehicle types.
Fleet Review Committee (FRC) - Applicable to the GSD Administered Fleet
Purpose:
1)   Define vehicle utilization and allocation policies and procedures to
enhance the control, operation, cost effectiveness, and positive environmental
impact of the City of Albuquerque's Fleet.
2)   Provide guidance to City departments and divisions regarding vehicle
upgrades, additions, and replacements.
3)   Improve communication with vehicle users throughout the City of
Albuquerque.
4)   Serve as the final recommendation authority to the GSD Department Director
on vehicle upgrades, additions, and replacements.
Members:
1)   The FRC shall consist of a representative from each Department for which
the Fleet Management Division manages vehicle acquisition, appointed by the
Director thereof. All members will be considered to have equal rights and
responsibilities. All votes will be determined by majority rule, the requesting
department does not have a vote
2)   Members must make every effort to attend and actively participate in FRC
meetings. Members must also be knowledgeable about all activities occurring in
their respective departments that may impact the utilization and allocation of
vehicles. Each member shall have an alternate who will attend in his or her
absence.
3)   A member of the Fleet Management Division, appointed by the Fleet Manager,
will serve in a non-voting capacity to ensure compliance with policies and
requirements.
Responsibilities:
1)   Review, revise, and initiate, if required, City of Albuquerque policies
and procedures governing the control and operation of City-owned vehicles.
2)   Make recommendations regarding requests for vehicle upgrades,
replacements, or additions.
3)   Annually review Citywide standardized specifications for each class of
vehicle.
4)   Development and maintenance of City Fleet replacement and utilization
criteria.
5)   Development and maintenance of the Alternative Fuel Policy.
Fleet Management Division's Role - Applicable to the GSD Administered Fleet
Purpose:
1)   Provide policy guidance and support both the end user departments and the
FRC with fleet data and analysis.
2)   Serve as the facilitator of the FRC meetings.
3)   Administer the purchase, salvage of all approved equipment and vehicle
requests, and to assign under-utilized vehicles.
Responsibilities:
1)   Perform an annual fleet analysis, and make recommendations for vehicle
replacements to the FRC using the utilization and replacement criteria set
forth by the FRC.
2)   Fleet Management will work with the Purchasing Division to establish
contracts for the standard specifications that the FRC has set forth for each
class of vehicle.
3)   Assist the end-user departments with preparing requests to the FRC for
vehicle and equipment upgrades or additions.
4)   Order, track, receive, and prepare all approved vehicle purchases for the
end-user departments.
5)   Receive and prepare for salvage units submitted for replacement.
Procedure for Vehicle Additions, Upgrades, Replacements and ZEV Exemption:
1)   Vehicle Additions/Upgrades
   a)   Any department or division interested in upgrading or adding a vehicle
must contact and work with the Fleet Division to prepare a proposal to submit
to the FRC.
   b)   A representative from the requesting department or division will
provide a memo of justification to the FRC to include details on the need for
the requested upgrade or addition.
   c)   The Fleet Division staff will provide supporting documentation
including, but not limited to, the total number and usage of vehicles for the
department or division.
   d)   The FRC will make a recommendation on the need for the requested
upgrade or the addition based on the following criteria:
      i)   Whether the vehicle is required to continue providing excellent
customer service;
      ii)   Whether the vehicle required is due to an increase in staffing or
the addition of new programs;
      iii)   Whether the need can be met without a vehicle upgrade or addition;
      iv)   Whether the upgrade/addition/retention is in the best interest of
the City of Albuquerque;
      v)   Whether current department/division vehicles are used enough to
warrant this addition; and
      vi)   Whether this vehicle will help improve the sustainability of the
City fleet in a fiscally responsible manner.
   e)   The FRC will review the request based on the criteria above and provide
a recommendation to the GSD Director.
   f)   Department directors can appeal the GSD Director's decision to the CAO.
2)   Vehicle Replacements
   a)   The Fleet Management Division will annually perform an overall analysis
of the City fleet, make recommendations for vehicle replacements, and submit
such recommendation to the GSD Director for review.
   b)   The Fleet Management Division will critically assess vehicles due for
replacement to determine if the current vehicle is necessary to accomplish City
goals.
   c)   The Fleet Management Division will meet annually with department
directors or designee to discuss vehicles approved for replacement within their
respective departments.
   d)   Fleet Management and the FRC will determine if a fleet vehicle (whether
pool or assigned) will be replaced with either a ZEV or EHV if the following
criteria is met;
      i)   The pool vehicle is eligible based on existing criteria for fleet
disposal/surplus; and,
      ii)   The existing electrical charging infrastructure is in place where
the fleet pool vehicle will be parked either at the daily worksite or the
approved prepositioned location.
3)   ZEV Exemptions
   a)   The FRC may recommend an exemption from ZEVreplacement based on vehicle
criteria including, but not limited to: public safety vehicle capabilities,
emergency response functions, operating requirements, challenges due to
infrastructure access for charging or refueling, or no cost-competitive or
otherwise suitable ZEV replacement available.
   b)   When the FRC recommends an exemption to a ZEV procurement and the class
of vehicle has a ZEV option, the Fleet Management Division will select an
alternative vehicle pursuant to the following hierarchy: 1) plug-in hybrid
vehicles, 2) hybridelectric vehicles, 3) alternative fuel or other vehicle with
demonstrated lower emissions than the vehicle eligible for replacement.
Funding of Replacement Vehicles:
The Fleet Management Division on behalf of the FRC will request funding during
the annual budget process for all of the City vehicles that have been
identified as eligible for replacement.
Exemptions:
Written requests for exemption from this Administrative Instruction shall be
reviewed by the FRC and the GSD Director and forwarded with a recommendation to
the CAO for approval.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/6d88fadbb394cb34f1263b3e9230120271b111d2/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2675.png]
 
Exhibit A
Total Cost of Ownership Vehicle Analysis
Basic Assumptions (there are many more than listed below):
• Annual vehicle mileage= 10,000 miles
• Ownership period= 10 years
• Electricity cost= $0.11/kWh
• Gasoline cost = $4.00/gallon
• WECC regional electricity grid mix
• Lifecycle cost of externalities analysis includes Well-to-Wheels and Vehicle
Production Petroleum Use, GHGs, and Air Pollutants
• Analysis used data from the Alternative Fuel Life-Cycle Environmental and
Economic Transportation (AFLEET) Tool 2023, developed by Argonne National
Laboratory
Passenger Car
Item   Gasoline   Electric
Purchase Price   $20,000   $37,000
Depreciation   $15,796   $29,223
Fuel   $12,807   $3,116
Maintenance   $14,341   $9,041
Insurance   $10,444   $13,961
License and Registration   $370   $370
Total Cost of Ownership   $53,758   $55,711
Externalities   $4,627   $2,004
Total Cost with Externalities   $58,385   $57,715
 
Light-Duty Pickup Truck
Item   Gasoline   Electric
Purchase Price   $39,000   $63,000
Depreciation   $30,803   $49,759
Fuel   $18,785   $5,013
Maintenance   $17,029   $10,736
Insurance   $14,374   $19,340
License and Registration   $503   $503
Total Cost of Ownership $81,496 $85,351
Externalities   $6,493   $2,772
Total Cost with Externalities $87,988 $88,123
AI_NO:_4-3_(pdf)
AI NO: 4-4
VEHICLE MAINTENANCE AND REPAIR RATES
TITLE: Vehicle Maintenance and Repair Rates
PRIMARY DEPARTMENT: Department of Finance & Administrative Services
Purpose:
To provide for the maintenance of all City owned vehicles and equipment
including both preventive and emergency maintenance to assure such equipment
can be utilized in the most productive and cost efficient manner.
The Fleet Management Division of the Department of Finance and Administrative
Services operates as an internal service fund. Revenue to support operations is
derived by directly billing user departments for services provided. All revenue
is offset by costs within each department as a result of charges for direct
labor, parts, fuel, commercial labor and parts.
The direct bill fees exclude maintenance service not considered normal wear or
required due to driver abuse, accident damage, vandalism, cosmetic (repaint and
detail), vehicle modifications, capitalization, vehicle repairs that are in
excess of the current book value, and glass replacement. These exclusions will
be charged based on actual maintenance costs to an accounting string provided
by the Department.
REFERENCES:
 
______________________________
Robert J. Perry                [https://export.amlegal.com/media/
Chief Administrative Officer   6d88fadbb394cb34f1263b3e9230120271b111d2/IMAGES/
_____________________________  0-0-0-1242.png]
Effective Date
 
AI_NO:_4-4_(pdf)
AI NO: 4-5
CITY VEHICLE USAGE POLICY
TITLE:   City Vehicle Usage Policy
PRIMARY DEPARTMENT:   Department of Finance and Administrative Services
I.   Background:
The City spends a significant amount of resources on acquiring and maintaining
a fleet of vehicles and equipment to enable employees to perform their duties.
The City and its employees have a fiduciary responsibility to use these
resources wisely, effectively, safely and in conformance with federal, state,
and City laws, statutes, ordinances, rules and regulations. This AI provides
general guidelines, policies and procedures, but cannot be read in isolation
from other relevant documents including, but not limited to, the City
Operator’s Permit (COP) program policies and procedures, other related
Administrative Instructions, and local, state and federal law.
The City reserves the right to deny any employee the use of a City vehicle. Any
City employee who fails to adhere to the policies and procedures contained in
this document may be subject to appropriate disciplinary action.
II.   Definitions:
   1.   “Assigned Take Home Vehicle” means a City vehicle which is used by a
City employee for City business and for regularly commuting to and from the
employee’s home and work station.
   2.   “Assigned Vehicle” means a City vehicle assigned to a department or
City employee for City business, but not for employee commuting to and from the
employee’s home and work station.
   3.   “Call–Out” means a directive to an employee to report to a work site
during off duty time or day, and to respond to emergencies, which require
immediate response to protect life and property.
   4.   "Designated Parking Area" means a City parking facility or lot which
has been identified by an employee's department director as an acceptable
overnight location for parking the employee's assigned City vehicle.
   5.   “Emergency Response" means an employee has primary responsibility for
immediate response, to protect life and property, and to maintain and enforce
law and order or an employee has primary City-wide custodial control of
resources used during emergency response.
   6.   "Motor Pool Dispatch Vehicle" means a vehicle issued from a central
motor pool for a single trip or motor pool policy.
   7.   Pre-positioned Vehicle means a vehicle assigned to a department and
parked in a designated parking area.
   8.   "Temporary On-Call Status" means an employee is directed by his or her
supervisor to be available to respond to emergency situations for a specified
and limited period of time.
   9.   "Work Station" means the office or site a City employee reports to
perform normally scheduled work.
III.   Policy:
For the purpose of this AI, “City vehicle” means all vehicles, regardless of
whether they are required to be registered under State law, made available by
the City, whether through purchase, lease, rental, or other means, to employees
to enable them to perform their duties and personal vehicles being operated for
city business.
   1.   City vehicles will be used exclusively to conduct official City
business.
   2.   Employees operating a City Vehicle are required to have a valid
driver’s license and City identification and be in compliance with the COP
program policies and procedures. If an employee is operating a City vehicle
that requires a Commercial Driver’s License (CDL), the employee must carry a
valid CDL and a valid medical card.
   3.   City vehicles are not to be used to conduct personal business
including, but not limited to, leaving City property solely for meals or
breaks, running personal errands to cleaners, banks, etc., going to medical
appointments unless based on a workers compensation claim, or visiting friends
or relatives. Personal errands in a City vehicle are only allowed if the
location of the errand is on the way to the employee’s Work Station and not
done during work hours.
   4.   City vehicles shall not be used to transport non-City employees except
for persons who have a working or other business relationship with the City, or
with advance CAO approval for special events such as parades. It is allowable
for employees to transport family members (e.g. children to school) if the
location of the school is on the way to the employee’s Work Station and not
done during work hours.
   5.   City vehicles shall not be used for commuting between the employee’s
residence and the place where the employee reports to work on a regular basis
and back, unless the employee has been an Assigned Take Home Vehicle.
   6.   City employees who are authorized the exclusive use of an Assigned Take
Home Vehicle will be subject to all pertinent Internal Revenue Services (IRS)
rules and regulations regarding taxation of that use. See the attached IRS
Fringe Benefit Form.
   7.   In the course of performing their normal duties while operating a City
vehicle, an employee may stop for regularly scheduled lunch or break periods at
establishments that sell food if that stop is otherwise incidental to their use
of the vehicle.
   8.   City vehicles, in general are not provided for the exclusive use of a
particular City employee.
   9.   Assignment of a City vehicle shall not be made based on employee merit
or employee status.
   10.   City employees operating City vehicles are required to obey all
traffic laws.
   11.   Any employee receiving a criminal or civil citation for violation of
state or City motor vehicle statutes or ordinances shall be personally
responsible for timely paying any assessed fine or penalty.
An employee is required to notify their supervisor of any criminal or civil
citation issued to them while operating a City vehicle. Failure to do so may
result in disciplinary action and is subject to review as an incident of
potential driver misconduct under the COP program. Fines or penalties charged
to a City vehicle and paid by the City shall be promptly reimbursed by the
employee operating the vehicle. City employees may be personally liable for
damages incurred during the operation of a City vehicle during official or
unofficial use, as well as during any misuse or abuse of a City vehicle. All
damages to and all accidents involving a City vehicle, no matter how minor,
must be reported in accordance with the Risk Management Procedures Manual.
   10.   Usage of mobile telephone by anyone operating any City vehicle shall
be incompliance with the City’s Traffic Regulations, specifically §8-2-1-24(E)
ROA 1994, as amended (“Ordinance”): “Except as otherwise provided below, no
person shall operate a motor vehicle upon a public highway while using a mobile
telephone to engage in a call or create, send or read text messages” while such
vehicle is in motion,” except in the hands-free mode.” As defined in the
Ordinance, drivers operating in an emergency situation and public safety
personnel use in the course of their employment are exempt. With Chief
Administrative Officer approval, Departments may enact more restrictive
policies regarding the use of cellular phones or other telecommunication devise
during operation of a City vehicle.
   12.   Wherever possible, assigned City vehicles shall be picked up and
dropped off at an approved Designated Parking Area, thereby avoiding the need
of an Assigned Take Home Vehicle.
   13.   Assigned Take Home Vehicle assignments must first be reviewed by the
Fleet Division and approved by the Chief Administrative Officer.
   14.   Emergency Response City vehicles may be taken home by designated City
employees who:
      a.   Are on Call-Out at least twelve (12) times per quarter, or
      b.   Forty-eight (48) times a year and have primary responsibility to
respond to emergencies which require immediate response to protect life or
property.
      c.   Cannot use alternative forms of transportation to respond to
emergencies; and
      d.   Cannot pick up City-owned Assigned Vehicles at designated sites
without impacting the employee's ability to respond to emergencies, which
require immediate response to protect life or property.
Emergency Response assignments should be supported by data demonstrating the
actual number and nature of Emergency Responses in the prior year, and
estimates of future Emergency Responses. There must be written justification as
to why an employee cannot use alternative forms of transportation to respond to
the emergencies or pick up City-owned Assigned Vehicles at Designated Parking
Areas.
IV.   Re-authorization of Assigned Take Home Vehicles: The Assigned Take Home
Vehicle assignment period shall not be greater than twelve (12) months unless
re-authorized by the Chief Administrative Officer or otherwise specified in a
collective bargaining agreement for represented employees.
No City employee shall operate a city vehicle outside the greater Albuquerque
metropolitan area without first submitted written justification and receiving
the required approval by both the Director of the user Department and Chief
Administrative Officer.
The City is not responsible for lost or damaged personal property. Valuables
should not be left in any City vehicles when parked overnight at an employee’s
residence. Unattended vehicles should be locked at all times. Employees shall
ensure parking is at a safe, secure, and legal location.
V.   Procedures:
The Fleet Division of the Department of Finance and Administrative Services
shall be the executive agency in charge of administering the provisions of this
AI.
Pre-positioned Vehicles:
   1.   Pre-positioned Vehicles shall be parked overnight at their Designated
Parking Areas and keys promptly returned to locations designated by the
Director of the user Department.
   2.   The Director of each user Department shall identify a fleet
administrator to ensure that all drivers (City employee) are accountable for
ensuring that each City vehicle is in proper operating condition daily
(checking tire pressure, fluid levels, etc.), receives preventive maintenance
according to schedule, is in compliance with vehicle emissions testing, and
reports vehicle problems and or damage.
   3.   Not less than annually, the Fleet Division will make recommendations to
the CAO for reassignment of City vehicles that appear to be underutilized. The
Fleet Division will serve as the facilitator of the Fleet Review Committee,
comprised of Department representatives who will be responsible for identifying
underutilized vehicles.
VI.   Motor Pool Dispatch Vehicles:
   1.   Shall be dispatched and maintained by the Fleet Division from
centralized locations accessible to City employees.
   2.   Motor Pool Dispatch Vehicles are to be returned to the lot from which
they were removed, the parking brake set and the vehicle locked.
   3.   The employee is to notify the Fleet Division immediately of any damage
or mechanical problems with a Motor Pool Dispatch Vehicle.
   4.   Employees shall follow all motor pool guidelines established by the
Fleet Division.
VII.   Take-Home Vehicles:
   1.   For the purposes of the this AI, and in addition to the Assigned Take
Home Vehicle definition, a “take-home” vehicle is one that is assigned
exclusively to an individual because of the nature of their job duties and that
they are authorized to operate outside of normal working hours. Absent union
contract provisions to the contrary, no employee shall be authorized to use an
Assigned Take Home Vehicle unless:
      a.   The employee’s primary residence is within the City limits; and
      b.   The employee must normally respond to after-hour Call-Outs or attend
after-hour meetings on an average of two (2) times per week; or
      c.   Call-Outs must be an operational benefit to the city and related to
the mitigation of public health and or safety emergencies, which require
immediate response to protect life and property.
   Department Directors have the authority to grant permission to allow a City
vehicle to be driven to an employee’s residence outside the take-home vehicle
boundaries, however, only after the employee submits special written
justification to the Department Director and the request is approved by the
Chief Administrative Officer. Formal notification of the permission must be
provided to the Fleet Division.
   2.   Department Directors are responsible for conducting annual reviews to
ensure employees with Assigned Take Home Vehicles are still qualified by
verifying there is no change in employment status or work assignment; those
reviews must be documented in writing and filed with the annual application
required in Section 3 below.
   3.   Applications for a “take-home” vehicle are available from the Fleet
Division. The employee must complete and sign the form certifying they have
read and understand the AI which governs the take-home vehicle policy. The
employee must deliver the application and any required documents therein to the
Department Director for their recommendation, prior to the employee being
assigned the vehicle.
   The Director shall submit the completed application upon initial assignment
of a take home vehicle or before January 1 st of each year, with their
recommendation, to the Fleet Division for review. The Fleet Division will in
turn submit the form to the Chief Administrative Officer (CAO) for final
approval or disapproval.
   If approved by the CAO, the original application will be forwarded back to
the Fleet Division and maintained on file by the Fleet Division who will be
responsible for appropriate billing to the approving Department. The Fleet
Division will provide the Department a copy of the approved application for
their files.
   4.   Authorization to operate an Assigned Take Home Vehicle is automatically
rescinded whenever an employee is transferred or promoted. If the employee
believes they still qualify for a “take-home” vehicle in their new position,
they must initiate the application process.
   Department Directors directly, or through their designees, are responsible
to notify the Fleet Division of any changes.
   Falsification or misrepresentation on the application may result in
immediate revocation of the “take-home” authorization, as well as other
disciplinary action.
VIII.   Temporary Rotating or Seasonal Use “Take-Home” Vehicles:
   1.   From time to time, a Director may determine that it is in the City’s
best interest for one or more employees, concurrently or sequentially, to have
the use of a “take-home” vehicle. For example, it may reduce response time if
employees whose job duties require them to rotate being on-call for emergencies
are provided with a “take-home” vehicle on those days they are in on-call
status. The criteria and application process for approval of rotating or
seasonal use of a “take-home” vehicle is the same as for a fulltime “take-home”
vehicle, as outlined above.
   2.   Occasional late night or early morning meetings are not justification
for requesting authorization of use of a “take-home” vehicle.
   3.   Department Directors directly, or though their designees, are
responsible for management, monitoring and enforcement of this policy. Within
thirty (30) days of the effective date of this AI, each Department Director
shall conduct a review of every employee currently operating a “take-home”
vehicle to determine that the authorization is still appropriate.
   4.   City employees found to be in violation of this AI will be subject to
disciplinary action.
REFERENCES:   IRS Regulations for Take-Home Vehicles (Available at
www.irs.gov); City of Albuquerque Personnel Rules and Regulations - City
Operator Permit Policy; City of Albuquerque Risk Management Manual; City of
Albuquerque Code of Ordinances F/S O-06-57, section 8-2-1-24 – Driver’s
Prohibited Acts; City of Albuquerque Motor Pool Guidelines
 
______________________________
Robert J. Perry                [https://export.amlegal.com/media/
Chief Administrative Officer   6d88fadbb394cb34f1263b3e9230120271b111d2/IMAGES/
_____________________________  0-0-0-626.png]
Effective Date
 
AI_NO:_4-5_(pdf)
AI NO: 4-7
CITY VEHICLES PARKING IN METERED SPACES
TITLE:   City Vehicles Parking in Metered Spaces
PRIMARY DEPARTMENT:   Department of Municipal Development
This Administrative Instruction refers to City vehicles parking at metered
parking spaces throughout the city, especially in the downtown area, and in
some cases parking overnight at metered spaces. Parking meters are for use by
the general public and on occasion by city vehicles provided, in the case of
the latter, that the city employee utilizing the city vehicle is responsible
for the payment of any parking fee and subject to any time limitations. Metered
spaces are not to be used as daily, weekly or monthly parking.
City Departments are responsible for securing parking privileges for all
vehicles. Such privileges will normally be expected to be at City owned
facilities. Effective June 1, 1998, Parking Enforcement Officers will be
issuing violation citations to city vehicles parking in expired meter spaces or
any other parking violation. Unpaid tickets or failure to move vehicles will
result in towing and associated fines. Fines will be the responsibility of
vehicle operators and not the departments and may subject the employee to
discipline.
 
______________________________
Robert J. Perry                [https://export.amlegal.com/media/
Chief Administrative Officer   6d88fadbb394cb34f1263b3e9230120271b111d2/IMAGES/
_____________________________  0-0-0-628.png]
Effective Date 
 
AI_NO:_4-7_(pdf)
AI NO: 4-8
REPAIR TO VEHICLES THAT EXCEED BOOK VALUE
TITLE: Repair to Vehicles that Exceed Book Value
PRIMARY DEPARTMENT:   Department of Finance and Administrative Services
The City will not make repairs to vehicles in which the repair costs exceed the
book value of that unit. This policy spells out how the City will identify
which repairs will be made to vehicles, and which vehicles must be removed from
service because they are not economically viable to repair.
   1.   When any vehicle is brought to any Fleet Maintenance Facility for
extensive repair, a financial investment analysis will be performed. The Fleet
Division will evaluate whether or not it makes economic sense to repair the
unit. A predetermined set of criteria will be used to evaluate the vehicle,
including mileage, recent repair costs, book value, and current maintenance
needs.
   2.   The Fleet Division will not authorize further repair to a vehicle if
the cost of the repairs exceeds the value of the vehicle. This rule will apply
to all vehicles, with some flexibility taken into consideration for heavy,
specialized, or emergency type vehicles.
   3.   Fleet Division staff will prepare a detailed report on all such units
specifying the information listed in 1. A Surplus/Salvage Property form
containing a Director or Manager signature will be prepared by the department/
division that is assigned to the vehicle and submitted to the Fleet Division
for processing. Surplus/Salvage Property forms that are not submitted within 30
days of notification to the department/division will be signed, processed, and
moved to the Public Surplus for auction by the Fleet Division. The Fleet
Division will not repair units that cost more than the value of the vehicle
without written approval of the CAO.
REFERENCES:   None.
 
______________________________
Robert J. Perry                [https://export.amlegal.com/media/
Chief Administrative Officer   6d88fadbb394cb34f1263b3e9230120271b111d2/IMAGES/
_____________________________  0-0-0-630.png]
Effective Date
 
AI_NO:_4-8_(pdf)
AI NO: 4-9
PROHIBITING SMOKING AND THE USE OF SMOKELESS TOBACCO PRODUCTS ON CITY PROPERTY
AND VEHICLES
TITLE:   Prohibiting Smoking and the Use of Smokeless Tobacco Products on City
Property and Vehicles
PRIMARY DEPARTMENT:   Legal Department
This Administrative Instruction Governs Smoking and the Use of Smokeless
Tobacco Products on City Property and in and Around City Vehicles.
DEFINITIONS:
"City Contractor" means (1) anyone working under contract with the City at
times they perform the contract on City property or (2) anyone who is an
employee of a company providing labor to the City at the times they perform
services or labor on City property.
"City Employee" means all people employed in any manner by the City and receive
any compensation of any type from the City for their services.
"City Property" means all real property owned or leased by the City or real
property occupied by City employees in their normal duties. City property
includes but is not limited to all buildings of any type, parking structures
and lots and all other structures located on City property.
"City Vehicle" means any vehicle owned, leased or borrowed for the use by the
City. City vehicle also means any vehicle under the control of any City
employee. City vehicle does not mean a vehicle owned and operated by a City
contractor unless such contractor provides a vehicle to the City for use by
City employees.
"City Volunteer" means all volunteers for City programs who are under the
direction of a person employed by the City while providing their volunteer
services on or at City Property.
“Smokeless Tobacco Products” means loose leaf, pouch, pulverized or shredded
tobacco products that are chewed, snuffed, or placed in the mouth instead of
being smoked. Nicotine replacement therapies approved by the Food and Drug
Administration, including, but not limited to nicotine gum, lozenge, patch, and
nasal spray, are not smokeless tobacco products.
“Smoking” or “smoke” means inhaling, exhaling, burning, or carrying any lighted
or heated cigar, cigarette, or pipe, or any other lighted or heated tobacco or
plant product intended for inhalation, including hookah, whether natural or
synthetic, in any manner or in any form. “Smoking” or “smoke” also includes the
use of an electronic smoking device which creates an aerosol or vapor, in any
manner or in any form, or the use of any oral smoking device for the purpose of
circumventing the prohibition of smoking in this Administrative Instruction.
"Vehicle" means any device in, upon, or by which any person or property is or
may be transported or drawn propelled by a power other than human power, and
includes but is not limited to automobiles, trucks, trailers, motorcycles,
tractors, buggies, and wagons. The term "vehicle" includes all devices
regardless of the type or power, including but not limited to electric power
and any type of gas or gasoline power or any combination thereof and any
connected trailer or semi-trailer.
PROHIBITION:
No City employee, City volunteer or City contractor shall smoke or use
smokeless tobacco products in or within 30 feet of a City vehicle when such
vehicle is not located on City property.
No person, including but not limited to City employees, City volunteers or City
contractors shall smoke or use smokeless tobacco products within 30 feet of the
entrance to any structure located on City property. This prohibition applies to
all members of the public.
REFERENCES:   None
 
______________________________
Robert J. Perry
Chief Administrative Officer
_____________________________
Effective Date
 
AI_NO:_4-9_(pdf)
AI NO: 4-14
CITY OPERATORS PERMIT SUSPENSION/REVOCATION
TITLE:   City Operators Permit Suspension/Revocation
PRIMARY DEPARTMENT:   Department of Finance and Administration Services
The City of Albuquerque has a vested interest in ensuring that City employees
operating City vehicles do not pose risks either to themselves or to the public
they serve. Accordingly, the City issues a City Operator Permit (COP) to
employees required to drive its vehicles or their personal vehicle on City
business.
Upon receiving notification of a suspended COP, the employee may not operate
any vehicle on city business until the COP is restored. Additionally, any
employee who, as a condition of employment must possess a COP to operate City
vehicles, will have ninety (90) days from the date of the suspension to either
have the matter adjudicated and present a valid state operator's license
without restriction, or to transfer to another position within the City that
does not require a COP. During this period and at the City's sole discretion,
the employee will either be assigned other job duties for which a COP is not
required, or will be allowed to take Annual Leave or Leave Without Pay during
this period. At the end of this time-frame, if the employee's COP has not been
restored or the employee has not been able to be selected for transfer to
another position, the employee shall be terminated for failing to meet the
essential functions of the position and the minimum qualifications for the
position. An employee selecting to transfer to another vacant position must
meet the minimum qualifications for the position, be selected as part of the
normal selection process and accept, if the position is at a lower salary
range, a reduction in pay as required by the Personnel Rules and Regulations.
Upon notification that an employee's COP has been suspended, the Director of
the Human Resources Department shall initiate a review of the affected
employee's position to validate that driving is an essential function of the
position and to assess if the department is able to transfer the employee to
another position in the same classification which does not require driving.
This review will consider the employee's duties as described in the relevant
job description and actually performed by the employee. Such review will be
completed as soon as is practicable but in no case shall the initiation of this
process exceed thirty (30) days from receipt of notice. The Director of Human
Resources shall provide the results of the review to the relevant Department
Director. If the Department Director disagrees with the results of the review,
the matter shall be submitted for a final determination by the Chief
Administrative Officer (CAO) within five (5) days. The CAO shall review the
matter and make a final determination.
If the final determination is that driving is not an essential function of the
position or that the department can laterally transfer the employee into a like
position that does not require driving, the employee will be returned to work.
REFERENCES: City Operator Permit Policy Section 1200 of the Personnel Rules and
Regulations
 
______________________________
Sarita Nair                    [https://export.amlegal.com/media/
Chief Administrative Officer   6d88fadbb394cb34f1263b3e9230120271b111d2/IMAGES/
_____________________________  0-0-0-1777.png]
Effective Date
 
AI_NO:_4-14_(pdf)
AI NO: 4-15
FUEL CONSERVATION POLICY
TITLE: Fuel Conservation Policy
PRIMARY DEPARTMENT: Department of Finance and Administrative Services
Purpose
Adopting a policy that creates a uniform idle-reduction and fuel conservation
program will enable the City of Albuquerque to lead by example, control costs,
inspire the community and staff, and preserve the environment.
   I.   Policy
   This policy addresses major contributing factors such as, vehicle cold
starts, vehicle idling, hard accelerations, etc. Implementation of the policy
will reduce fuel and repair related costs, and mitigate the environmental
impact.
   II.   Responsibility
      A.   Reports of violations of mandatory procedures should be made
directly to the supervisor of the violating party, or if unknown, the
Department of Finance and Administrative Services Fleet Division (Fleet
Division) can be contacted.
      B.   It is the responsibility of each Division Manager to ensure
compliance with the policy and procedures.
   III.   Procedures
      A.   Mandatory
         1.   Vehicles shall not be left idling while tools, equipment or
passengers are loaded or unloaded;
         2.   Vehicles shall not be left idling while parked for the purpose of
keeping the cab cool or heated;
         3.   Start up for turbo-charged diesel engines shall not exceed three
minutes;
         4.   Cool down for turbo- charged diesel engines shall not exceed five
minutes, unless it is a heavy duty vehicle that has returned from a long
distance trip or was towing a sizeable load, or an Exemption set forth below
applies;
         5.   Drivers shall observe all posted speed limits, maintain a steady
speed, and anticipate traffic flows;
         6.   Ensure maintenance on vehicles and equipment is current;
         7.   Properly stock vehicles prior to leaving for the job work site to
avoid excessive return trips;
         8.   Drive the most fuel-efficient vehicle available when there are
options; and
         9.   Ensure tires are kept properly inflated, 10% under inflation can
decrease fuel economy by 3-4%.
      B.   Recommendations
         1.   Ensure daily, that job requirements are managed in an efficient
manner while reducing unnecessary travel;
         2.   Combine trips, when feasible; and
         3.   Carpool when attending meetings, trainings sessions or going to
work site. 
Exemptions
This policy does not apply to a vehicle or piece of equipment during the
following situations when:
      A.   Traffic conditions exist which a driver has no control over,
including but not limited to: stopped in a line of traffic, stopped at a
railroad crossing, or stopped at a construction zone;
      B.   Idling when necessary for testing, maintenance, repair or diagnostic
purposes;
      C.   Idling when necessary to ascertain that the vehicle and/or off-road
piece of equipment is in safe operating condition, and is equipped as required
by all provisions of law and established safety policies;
      D.   The vehicle is not expected to restart due to mechanical or
electrical problems;
      E.   Idling the engine is required to power auxiliary equipment other
than a heater or air conditioner, including but not limited to, hoist, lift,
computers, or safety lighting;
      F.   Idling is necessary to cool down a turbo-charged heavy-duty vehicle
that has been driven for a long period of time or used to pull heavy loads. The
cool down period for such vehicles is up to but, may not exceed 15 minutes in
accordance with the manufacturer’s recommendation;
      G.   Idling when necessary to perform an exhaust regeneration to clean
out soot build up from a diesel vehicle exhaust system, but only for the time
necessary to clean the system, which is typically 20 to 30 minutes; and
      H.   Severe weather conditions dictate the need to idle the vehicle for
ice and snow removal. Vehicle should only be left idling for the period
required to remove ice and snow, and should not be left unattended.
REFERENCES:   None.
 
______________________________
Robert J. Perry                [https://export.amlegal.com/media/
Chief Administrative Officer   6d88fadbb394cb34f1263b3e9230120271b111d2/IMAGES/
_____________________________  0-0-0-636.png]
Effective Date
 
AI_NO:_4-15_(pdf)
City Real Estate
AI NO: 5-1
SECURITY POLICY FOR CITY OF ALBUQUERQUE EMPLOYEE IDENTIFICATION BADGES
TITLE:   Security Policy for City of Albuquerque Employee Identification Badges
PRIMARY DEPARTMENT:   Municipal Development
While on City of Albuquerque property personnel will have their identification
badges displayed on their person.
The following guidelines are established concerning the issuance of employee
identification badges.
   a. Employees will wear ID badges on the outer most layer of their clothing,
above the waist area at all times while at their work site or in any City of
Albuquerque owned or operated facility or property.
   b. The City of Albuquerque will issue a badge clip to each employee. Should
the employee choose to purchase a lanyard, it must be appropriate for use and
work environment. Employees are encouraged to use safety or break away
lanyards.
   c. Human Resources and City Security will be responsible for the issuance of
the identification cards, and each employee will sign for receipt of the ID
card.
   d. Loss of employee identification card must be immediately reported to the
employee’s supervisor. The loss of second and subsequent cards will result in a
replacement fee of $15.00 paid to City Treasury. This fee will be incurred by
the employee. Loss or misuse of the card could lead to disciplinary measures
being taken against the employee.
   e. Identification cards must be returned to their immediate supervisor in
the event of the following:
      i. Transfer to another department
         1. Employee will have 30 days to report to Human Resources to receive
a new identification card.
         2. Upon demand from the employee’s supervisor or appropriate Security
Personnel.
      ii. Suspension
      iii. Termination/Retirement
   f. Each department may be issued Visitor badges, which will be numbered for
accountability. Departments are encouraged to issue temporary badges when
Visitors are anticipated to be in a City owned facility for longer than one (1)
work day. It will be up to the issuing Department to implement procedures to
secure the return of the issued Visitor badge.
Temporary, contractor and/or seasonal employees will be issued an ID card if
their employment is anticipated to extend beyond 90 days.
   g. Identification cards will be color-coded for restricted access, and
Treasury purposes. The City Treasurer will determine the level of cash handling
authority and issue the appropriate color code. The Chief Administrative
Officer will determine the level of access for employees into restricted or
sensitive areas and issue a “Green All Access” color to the ID card.
This Administrative Instruction shall remain in effect until amended.
 
______________________________
Robert J. Perry                [https://export.amlegal.com/media/
Chief Administrative Officer   6d88fadbb394cb34f1263b3e9230120271b111d2/IMAGES/
_____________________________  0-0-0-638.png]
Effective Date 
 
AI_NO:_5-1_(pdf)
AI NO: 5-3
REAL ESTATE RECORDS
TITLE:   Real Estate Records
PRIMARY DEPARTMENT:   Planning
The Real Property Division is required to keep current and complete records of
all real estate transactions involving leases, licenses, land use agreements,
memorandum of understanding documents, memorandum of agreement documents,
intergovernmental agreements, contracts, facility use agreements, easements,
purchases, sales, transfers, condemnations, donations and all other related
property documents and agreements. This includes property to be leased,
purchased or otherwise acquired by the City and property owned by the City to
be leased, sold or otherwise transferred to the private sector or any other
public sector entity.
It is the responsibility of each department director to involve the Real
Property Division in every real estate transaction, from the earliest possible
date. This includes sales, purchases, trades, leases, easements, donations, and
any other transaction involving real property. No transaction of any type
involving real estate in any department may be initiated or concluded without
the involvement of the Real Property Division. It is the responsibility of each
department director to provide the Real Property Division with all
documentation and information related to any and all transactions involving
real property that is required to complete the real property files.
A transmittal form available from the Real Property Division must be attached
to all real estate documents which are presented for the Chief Administrative
Officer's signature. This transmittal form must be signed by the Legal
Department and the Real Property Division Manager, or his/her designee, before
delivery to the Chief Administrative Officer for signature. These documents,
after approval and signature by the Chief Administrative Officer, will be
returned to the Real Property Division Manager who will forward the original to
the City Clerk/Recorder for filing.
In addition, all summary plats involving vacations, park dedications, or City-
owned property must be signed by the Real Property Division Manager or the Real
Property Division Manager's designee.
In addition to the information each department is required to provide to the
Real Property Division, as described above, and to further facilitate efficient
processing of transactions and effective management of City-owned or City-
leased property, the Real Property Division will also collect from all
departments, all property related data, including but not limited to utilities,
maintenance and cost information, and any information or records concerning
revenue generation or in-kind services received.
The Real Property Division may develop guidelines and procedures concerning the
use, property management roles and responsibilities, and maintenance of City
owned properties. The guidelines and procedures may also include instructions
for the process and forms to be used for providing real property documentation
(including the costs of ownership and maintenance, as well as the revenue
generated or in-kind services provided), the desired and required transaction
documentation for the purchase, lease or sale of City owned property, and the
property data and documentation requirements needed for the property management
software (e.g., location, managing department, use, floor plans/facility
plans).
Because the Aviation Department and the Metropolitan Redevelopment Agency
maintain their own real property functions, this instruction does not apply to
leases and agreements managed by the Aviation Department and the Metropolitan
Redevelopment Agency, except as to the requirement that each must still provide
the Real Property Division with copies of all documentation related to the
acquisition, trade, sale, lease, or donation of real property, or any easements
granted or acquired on their respective properties.
 
______________________________
Robert J. Perry                [https://export.amlegal.com/media/
Chief Administrative Officer   6d88fadbb394cb34f1263b3e9230120271b111d2/IMAGES/
_____________________________  0-0-0-640.png]
Effective Date 
 
AI_NO:_5-3_(pdf)
AI NO: 5-4
DISPOSITION OF VACATED STREETS
TITLE:   Disposition of Vacated Streets
PRIMARY DEPARTMENT:   Planning
The following policy shall govern disposition of streets which are requested to
be vacated, pursuant to the City of Albuquerque Subdivision Ordinances, Section
7-11-42.C R.O. 1974, and pursuant to the extraterritorial platting and planning
jurisdiction of the City, Section 3-20-5 and 3-20-12 NMSA 1978. It should be
noted that the City may decide to dispose of the fee interest in the vacated
street, while retaining easements for utilities, drainage, or some other
municipal purpose.
A. Upon confirmation by Real Property that the City owns the right-of-way fee
simple, the Real Property Manager shall determine whether to retain all or part
of the vacated right-of-way for municipal purposes or to dispose of, at market
value as determined by Real Property, part or all of the vacated right-of-way
to abutting property owners.
Each abutting property owner is entitled to acquire up to the center line of
the nonessential right-of-way abutting the property owner’s land. However, if
one of the abutting property owners fails to notify the City of his or her
election to purchase the nonessential vacated right-of-way as provided in the
ordinance or does not wish to acquire the nonessential vacated right-of- way,
the other owner may acquire all of the adjoining nonessential right- of-way.
The City shall record a final plat of the vacated right-of-way retained by the
City as an independent lot, or incorporate the vacated right-of-way into
adjoining City-owned property, if applicable.
B. If an owner replats a subdivision that vacates all or part of a previously
dedicated right-of-way and dedicates a new, acceptable right-of-way which has
value equal to or greater than that of the vacated right-of-way as determined
by Real Property, and the same owner owns all property abutting the vacated
right-of-way, then the vacated right-of-way shall be conveyed to the property
owner without consideration due from the owner, except for a processing fee.
However, if the right-of-way to be dedicated is less valuable than the right-
of-way to be vacated, then the property owner shall be expected to pay an
amount representing the difference in value between the vacated right-of-way
and the right-of-way to be dedicated. The City shall pay no compensation for
dedicated right-of-way of greater value than the vacated right-of-way.
REFERENCES: City of Albuquerque Subdivision Ordinances, Section 7-11-42.C R.O.
1974
Section 3-20-5 and 3-20-12 NMSA 1978
 
______________________________
Robert J. Perry                [https://export.amlegal.com/media/
Chief Administrative Officer   6d88fadbb394cb34f1263b3e9230120271b111d2/IMAGES/
_____________________________  0-0-0-642.png]
Effective Date 
 
AI_NO:_5-4_(pdf)
AI NO: 5-6
MULTIPLIERS FOR CONSULTANT AGREEMENTS PROCURED PURSUANT TO ROA § 14-7-1 ET SEQ.
TITLE:   Multipliers for Consultant Agreements Procured Pursuant to ROA § 14-7-
1 et seq.
PRIMARY DEPARTMENT:   Department of Municipal Development
Engineering Services Agreements between the City of Albuquerque and consulting
engineering firms or persons contain a number termed a "multiplier" which is a
value applied to raw labor costs to compensate consultants for labor, overhead
and profit on work that is not a specific negotiated amount such as additional
services or studies. In order to establish the amount which the City of
Albuquerque will use for the multiplier and to determine the development of the
multiplier for each agreement, the following procedure shall be used.
A. Maximum (Upset) Multiplier Value
The maximum allowable multiplier has been 2.97 for several decades. This
multiplier was derived by analyzing financial statements of twelve consulting
engineer firms compiled by an independent accounting firm, analyzing
information provided by the Consulting Engineers Council in the late 1980’s,
and analyzing industry information.
B. Multiplier to be Used for Individual Engineering Services Agreements
The multiplier used for each firm will be determined from an audit of a
financial statement prepared by each firm with the maximum allowed being the
"upset multiplier" of 2.97. In each case a markup for profit of 10% will be the
maximum allowed. The Department of Municipal Development will develop and
implement a federally compliant process for determining the specific multiplier
to be used on a given contract.
REFERENCES:   ROA § 14-7-1 et seq.
 
______________________________
Robert J. Perry                [https://export.amlegal.com/media/
Chief Administrative Officer   6d88fadbb394cb34f1263b3e9230120271b111d2/IMAGES/
_____________________________  0-0-0-644.png]
Effective Date 
 
AI_NO:_5-6_(pdf)
AI NO: 5-7
SPECIAL ASSESSMENT DISTRICT POLICY FOR LEVIED ASSESSMENTS AGAINST CITY-OWNED
PROPERTY
TITLE:   Special Assessment District Policy for Levied Assessments Against
City-Owned Property
PRIMARY DEPARTMENT:   Department of Municipal Development
The Special Assessment District (SAD) Program is an integral part of the
physical development of the City. These districts often contain city-owned
properties which abut the programmed development for paving, sidewalks, water,
sanitary sewer and storm drainage. These city-owned properties are assessed on
the same basis as all other private properties in the SAD. Payment of SAD
assessments levied against city-owned properties will be made under the
following policy.
The Department of Municipal Development shall pay all paving assessment costs
and all storm drainage assessment costs against City-owned properties in a SAD,
irrespective of which department has operational responsibilities for a
particular property in the SAD. However, the department which has operational
responsibility for a particular property shall pay for water and sewer
assessment costs for such property.
The SAD Engineer shall be responsible for estimating the water and sewer
assessment costs and shall notify the affected departments of these costs in
writing. An estimate will be presented to the affected departments once the SAD
Engineer's report is complete and then final notice will be given to said
departments once Resolution No. 4 of the SAD (Notice of Assessment Roll
Hearing, ROA § 6-8-5-2) is complete. Payment will be due during the 30 day cash
pay period after passage of Resolution No. 5 (modification and Confirmation of
Assessment Roll, ROA § 6-8-5-4) for the SAD.
The newly-adopted policy will not change previous policy or practice for the
non-assessable city-participating share of SAD construction, which will
continue.
The effective date of this policy will be April 10, 1997, and all SAD funding
following SAD 225 shall adhere to this policy.
 
______________________________
Robert J. Perry                [https://export.amlegal.com/media/
Chief Administrative Officer   6d88fadbb394cb34f1263b3e9230120271b111d2/IMAGES/
_____________________________  0-0-0-646.png]
Effective Date 
 
AI_NO:_5-7_(pdf)
AI NO: 5-8
BUILDING MAINTENANCE AND ALTERATION/REMODELING POLICY
TITLE:   Building Maintenance and Alteration/Remodeling Policy
PRIMARY DEPARTMENT:   Department of Municipal Development
This Administrative Instruction establishes City policy regarding building
maintenance, alterations and remodeling of City facilities. The Department of
Municipal Development (DMD), will provide repair and maintenance services to
most City facilities, with the exception of certain departments which currently
have staff which maintain their respective buildings/equipment. Limited
alteration/remodeling services will be provided to all City facilities after
requests have been approved as specified herein.
Maintenance Policy
There will be no charge for labor or supplies connected with maintenance. Costs
to the general fund of providing maintenance services to non-general-fund
programs will be recovered through the indirect overhead rate determined by the
City's central cost allocation plan. This will allow non-general-fund
departments to budget a known amount for maintenance.
It will be the responsibility of DMD to make the final determination as to the
category in which any given service belongs. These categories are:
   A.   "Emergency Maintenance" means work which is brought about by
unanticipated failure or breakdown, which requires immediate action for the
purposes of life, health, safety, security or to minimize property damage.
(Examples: electrical failure, broken water line, heating or air conditioning
failure, or jammed exit doors.)
   B.   "Urgent Maintenance" means work which is not of an immediate emergency
but if left unattended could result in an emergency situation or result in
additional costs to repair. (Examples: faulty electrical wires, switches or
fixtures, and clogged plumbing fixtures.)
   C.   "Routine Maintenance" means work which is generally required to keep
structures and equipment in good repair. It preserves that which exists but
nothing is substantially altered or added. (Examples: painting, repair or
replacement of heating, refrigeration equipment and boilers, repair of exhaust
fans, fix doors and start-up and close-down to air conditioning and heating
systems.)
   D.   "Preventive Maintenance" means regularly scheduled inspections of
building mechanical equipment. If needed, lubrication, changing of filters and
minor repairs are provided. If more extensive work is required, the work will
be scheduled for maintenance repair.
DMD will be responsible for the preventive and other maintenance of boilers in
the City Yards, downtown facilities and most other facilities, with the
exception of departments which currently have staff which are licensed and
certified by the State of New Mexico to maintain and repair boilers.
DMD responsibilities generally do not include maintenance repairs on non-
building equipment, which includes cooking stoves, food warmers, domestic or
commercial refrigerators, ice-making machines, security systems, carpeting and
office furniture. Maintenance repairs for such equipment will be provided in
facilities where non-building equipment is used by multiple users, such as the
Albuquerque/Bernalillo County Government Center, and where funding has been
provided for such maintenance repairs.
DMD will repair and replace roofs of City facilities as funding permits, and
will coordinate or oversee roof replacement or repairs on most facilities.
Alteration/Remodeling Policy.
DMD will have a limited capability to perform and/or coordinate through outside
contracting, alteration and remodeling jobs. The limitations will be determined
by staff and budgetary resources, total project costs, complexity and type of
jobs and project approval.
All requests for work of this nature shall be submitted to DMD. Projects must
have the following approvals prior to any work being done:
The Director of DMD may approve alterations/remodeling projects with a total
cost not to exceed $50,000.
All requests require the concurrence of the department director making the
request.
All projects in excess of $50,000.00 require the approval of the CAO.
If the additional cost of a subsequent change order puts the total amount of
the project in a higher category, the appropriate approval will be required, as
outlined above.
Cumulative costs associated with all change orders which are in addition to the
original costs, will be assessed to departments for services performed, which
include materials, labor and allocated overhead rates.
Job estimates will closely approximate actual costs. Changes requested by a
user department will require a new estimate. If the new estimate exceeds ten
percent (10%) of the original cost, a change order will be required to be
signed by the same parties who requested and approved the original work.
DMD will recognize only one person (building liaison) from each City facility
or department when receiving telephone or written requests for maintenance.
Department directors should appoint such personnel, as all maintenance
communication will go through these individuals.
If the user department cannot determine whether the work requested is for
remodeling or maintenance, DMD will determine the classification.
ACTION: DMD will be responsible for implementing and monitoring this policy.
 
______________________________
Robert J. Perry                [https://export.amlegal.com/media/
Chief Administrative Officer   6d88fadbb394cb34f1263b3e9230120271b111d2/IMAGES/
_____________________________  0-0-0-648.png]
Effective Date 
 
AI_NO:_5-8_(pdf)
AI NO: 5-9
ENERGY MANAGEMENT FOR OCCUPANTS OF THE ALBUQUERQUE/BERNALILLO COUNTY LOCAL
GOVERNMENT CENTER, (NORTH AND SOUTH BUILDINGS) AND LAW ENFORCEMENT CENTER
TITLE:   Energy Management for Occupants of the Albuquerque/Bernalillo County
Local Government Center, (North and South Buildings) and Law Enforcement Center
PRIMARY DEPARTMENT:   Department of Municipal Development
This instruction outlines energy management responsibilities for all occupants
of the Albuquerque/Bernalillo County Government Center. It is vital that all
occupants be aware of, and practice, the procedures outlined below to help
further reduce energy consumption in a facility designed to be energy
efficient.
THERMOSTATS
Properly assigned Building Maintenance personnel are the only individuals
authorized to set thermostats. Each floor has two equipment rooms which contain
the heating and cooling systems for the two zones on that floor. Building
Maintenance strives to achieve a year-round comfort level of between 70-78
degrees Fahrenheit. Tampering with thermostats by unauthorized individuals will
cause hot and cold spots on the respective floor. Occupants are reminded to
take weather into account when dressing for the business day.
AIR REGISTERS
Occupants will not tamper with the ceiling registers, since such action can
cause airflow imbalances throughout the building. Airflow problems are to be
corrected by Building Maintenance only.
LIGHTING
Office workers must familiarize themselves with light switches and
corresponding banks of lights. If an area is to be vacant for 30 minutes or
longer, lights are to be turned off. Do not use lighting when it is not needed.
The use of natural lighting is recommended when possible. Natural lighting is
an energy saver, and it is also healthier than manufactured lighting.
OFFICE MACHINES
While most office machines are small consumers of electricity, their combined
consumption for any given length of time can be significant. All office
equipment should also be turned off or programed to go into sleep mode if not
in use, unless otherwise specified by manufacturer's warranty or maintenance
agreement.
PORTABLE HEATERS
All portable heaters are prohibited in this facility unless approved by
Building Maintenance.
FANS
Small fans such as fixed position or oscillating types are allowed in the
building, but ceiling fans are prohibited.
APPLIANCES
Heat-producing appliances such as cook-top stoves, hot plates or microwave
ovens will not be allowed within office areas. The kitchen areas on the south
side of levels three through eleven will accommodate cooking needs.
Refrigerators and coffee makers may be permitted, depending on their condition,
in specified areas determined by Building Maintenance. Prior approval must be
obtained before these appliances are installed. Refrigerators must have energy
guide labels attached which indicate high efficiency and low cost.
PROBLEMS
In a situation which is perceived to be an energy management problem, please
call the Facility and Energy Management Division of Department of Municipal
Development (“DMD”). If office environmental conditions warrant attention,
contact Building Maintenance.
 
______________________________
Robert J. Perry                [https://export.amlegal.com/media/
Chief Administrative Officer   6d88fadbb394cb34f1263b3e9230120271b111d2/IMAGES/
_____________________________  0-0-0-650.png]
Effective Date 
 
AI_NO:_5-9_(pdf)
AI NO: 5-13
SOLICITATIONS WITHIN CITY HALL AND CITY CONTROLLED AREAS OF THE CITY-COUNTY
BUILDING
TITLE:   Solicitations within City Hall and City Controlled Areas of the City-
County Building
PRIMARY DEPARTMENT:   Mayor’s Office
Policy: In City Hall and the City-controlled areas of the City-County Building,
all solicitations by either commercial or non-profit organizations shall
require the prior approval of the Chief Administrative Officer of the City of
Albuquerque. Requests for approval must be submitted in writing. Approval shall
be granted based on a determination that such solicitations will not be
disruptive to government business and that the number of requests previously
granted for the same period of time will not make such a request a disruption.
This Administrative Instruction applies to all commercial solicitations and
solicitations by non-profit organizations, excluding non-profit solicitations
by city employees.
 
______________________________
Robert J. Perry                [https://export.amlegal.com/media/
Chief Administrative Officer   6d88fadbb394cb34f1263b3e9230120271b111d2/IMAGES/
_____________________________  0-0-0-652.png]
Effective Date
 
AI_NO:_5-13_(pdf)
AI NO: 5-15
APPROVAL OF EMINENT DOMAIN ACTIONS
TITLE:   Approval of Eminent Domain Actions
PRIMARY DEPARTMENT:   Planning
All eminent domain actions must be approved by the Chief Administrative Officer
before the action is filed.
 
______________________________
Robert J. Perry                [https://export.amlegal.com/media/
Chief Administrative Officer   6d88fadbb394cb34f1263b3e9230120271b111d2/IMAGES/
_____________________________  0-0-0-654.png]
Effective Date 
 
AI_NO:_5-15_(pdf)
AI NO: 5-16
DESIGN APPROVAL OF CONSTRUCTION PROJECTS
TITLE:   Design Approval of Construction Projects
PRIMARY DEPARTMENT:   Municipal Development
On all construction projects that involve remodel or new construction of
publicly owned facilities, the Municipal Development Department shall review
and approve the design of such projects to determine whether the proposed
design has incorporated such proper efficiencies to reduce long-term
maintenance and operational costs of the facility.
 
______________________________
Robert J. Perry                [https://export.amlegal.com/media/
Chief Administrative Officer   6d88fadbb394cb34f1263b3e9230120271b111d2/IMAGES/
_____________________________  0-0-0-656.png]
Effective Date 
 
AI_NO:_5-16_(pdf)
AI NO: 5-17
TIPPING FEES RELATED TO MITIGATION BY REMOVAL OF FORMER LANDFILL SITES
SUBJECT:   TIPPING FEES RELATED TO MITIGATION BY REMOVAL OF FORMER LANDFILL
SITES
PRIMARY DEPARTMENT:   Solid Waste Management
The residents of the City of Albuquerque have, over the years, generated
substantial amounts of rubbish that have been disposed of at both permitted and
un-permitted landfill sites. As a result of the continuing growth of the City,
a number of former landfill locations may be attractive as sites for surface
development in the near future. The City wishes to encourage a strategy of
mitigation with respect to former landfill locations that would result in the
removal and relocation of the rubbish from those locations to an existing
permitted landfill with appropriate environmental protections.
The City adopts the following policies with respect to tipping fees associated
with the removal of rubbish from former landfill locations to an existing
permitted landfill:
1.   On the properties where the City generated the rubbish at a City owned
and/or operated landfill registered with the State of New Mexico and located on
property wholly owned by the City, the City will waive all tipping fees for any
individual or business entity willing to relocate, at their cost, the rubbish
to the City of Albuquerque’s Cerro Colorado landfill; and
2.   On properties where the City generated rubbish at formerly City owned and/
or operated landfills registered with the State of New Mexico and located on
property not presently owned by the City, the City will reduce the tipping fees
by no less than 50% nor more than 80%, depending on the facts and
circumstances, for any individual or business entity willing to relocate, at
their cost, the rubbish to the City of Albuquerque’s Cerro Colorado landfill;
and
3.   On properties where the City generated the rubbish at formerly City owned
and/or operated landfills registered with the State of New Mexico and located
on property not presently owned by the City, but is adjacent to property owned
by the City, if the individual or business entity will agree to relocate, at
their cost, rubbish from the City-owned property concurrently with the
relocation of rubbish from the non-City-owned property, the City will waive all
tipping fees on equal amounts of rubbish relocated from both City-owned and
non-City owned property to the City of Albuquerque’s Cerro Colorado landfill;
and
4.   On properties where the City did not generate the rubbish and/or where the
former landfill was not registered with the State of New Mexico and the
property is not owned by the City, the City may determine, on a case-by-case
basis, whether tipping fees will be waived or reduced for any individual or
business entity willing to relocate, at their cost, the rubbish to the City’s
Cerro Colorado landfill. Factors to be considered in determining whether
tipping fees should be waived or reduced shall include, but are not limited to,
the risk to the general public, the risk of migration of pollutants to adjacent
property that may or may not be owned by the City, and the risk of groundwater
contamination; and
5.   On properties acquired by the City, where the City did or did not generate
the rubbish and whether or not the former landfill was registered with the
State of New Mexico, the City may determine, on a case-by-case basis, whether
tipping fees will be waived or reduced for any department, or their contractor,
relocating the rubbish to the City’s Cerro Colorado landfill. Factors to be
considered in determining whether tipping fees should be waived or reduced
shall include, but are not limited to, the availability of other funding
sources.
For all rubbish removed in association with this Administrative Instruction,
each individual or business entity agreeing to relocate the rubbish, including
any special waste or other material restricted from disposal in the City’s
Cerro Colorado landfill, assumes responsibility for properly disposing of all
excavated material. All rubbish delivered to the City’s Cerro Colorado landfill
may be subject to load inspections. Materials that are restricted from disposal
at the Cerro Colorado landfill will be rejected. The tipping fee waiver also
applies to tires excavated as a result of the qualifying projects. However,
tires qualifying for the waiver shall be separated from the other rubbish and
delivered to the landfill separately, and shall not exceed 10% of the accepted
volume from any approved project.
All projects granted a waiver or reduction of the tipping fee must be approved
by the Chief Administrative Officer, or designee, in writing, prior to
excavation of the rubbish. Projects must comply with all applicable state and
federal laws as well as all regulations, ordinances and guidelines of the City
of Albuquerque. A waiver of all or part of the tipping fee must consider the
ability of the City’s Cerro Colorado landfill to accept the rubbish. In
determining whether tipping fees should be waived or reduced, consideration
should be given to actual disposal costs. Whenever appropriate, fees should not
be reduced below the Cerro Colorado landfill’s disposal costs as determined by
the most recent Cost of Service. Waiving fees or setting them lower than the
Cost of Service rate reassigns the actual cost of disposal from the project or
property owner to the Solid Waste Management Department’s rate payers (i.e.
Albuquerque residents and businesses).
Every three years, the Environmental Health Department shall assess the risks
associated with known former landfills and identify the priority order for the
relocation of rubbish from those landfills to the City of Albuquerque’s Cerro
Colorado landfill. That priority will be used to determine which properties
will be considered for waived or reduced tipping fees in situations 2), 4), and
5) above.
This policy is effective for the fiscal year beginning July 1, 2016.
 
___________________________
Robert J. Perry              [https://export.amlegal.com/media/
Chief Administrative Officer 6d88fadbb394cb34f1263b3e9230120271b111d2/IMAGES/0-
_______________              0-0-658.png]
Effective Date 
 
REQUEST_FOR_TIPPING_FEE_WAIVER (pdf)
AI_NO:_5-17_(pdf)
AI NO: 5-18
BADGE ACCESS WITHIN CITY HALL
ADMINISTRATIVE INSTRUCTION NO: #5-18 (2019)
TITLE:    Badge Access within City Hall
PRIMARY DEPARTMENTS:   Department of Municipal Development and Department of
Technology and Innovation
The City of Albuquerque recognizes the need to limit access to certain secure
areas within City Hall for the safety and security of all City, County and
Water Utility Authority personnel, as well as the public.
The Chief Administrative Officer must be notified of and give prior approval:
1.   Before any person is granted badge access to the Mayor's Office; or
2.   Before any person is granted unrestricted badge access to City Hall
If badge access is granted without this approval, the employee who authorized
the access may be subject to disciplinary action, up to and including
termination.
Management and maintenance of badge access and CCTV systems are the
responsibility of assigned personnel within the Security Division of the
Department of Municipal Development. This includes turning on or off any level
of badge access for all authorized individuals working within City Hall and
other City properties, subject to any required approvals.
The Manager of the Security Division within the Department of Municipal
Development (or equivalent position) will provide the Chief Administrative
Officer with a quarterly list of all employees with access to the Mayor's
Office, and all employees who have unrestricted badge access to City Hall, on
the first day of each quarter (i.e. January 1st, April 1st, July 1st, and
September 1st).
 
______________________________
Sarita Nair                    [https://export.amlegal.com/media/
Chief Administrative Officer   6d88fadbb394cb34f1263b3e9230120271b111d2/IMAGES/
_____________________________  0-0-0-1757.png]
Effective Date
 
AI_NO:_5-18_(pdf)
AI NO: 5-19
NOTING THE APPLICABILITY OF STATE LAWS PROHIBITING FIREARMS IN CITY OF
ALBUQUERQUE CHILD DEVELOPMENT CENTERS, COMMUNITY CENTERS, HEALTH AND SOCIAL
SERVICE CENTERS, MULTIGENERATIONAL CENTERS, AND SENIOR CENTERS, SUBJECT TO
CERTAIN EXCEPTIONS
ADMINISTRATIVE INSTRUCTION NO:   5-19
TITLE:   Noting the applicability of State laws prohibiting firearms in City of
Albuquerque Child Development Centers, Community Centers, Health and Social
Service Centers, Multigenerational Centers, and Senior Centers, subject to
certain exceptions
PRIMARY DEPARTMENTS:   Department of Family and Community Services and
Department of Senior Affairs
SECONDARY DEPARTMENTS:   Department of Municipal Development, Albuquerque
Police Department, Legal Department, Albuquerque Fire Rescue
As set forth in Administrative Instruction No. 8-5, it is the policy of the
City of Albuquerque to ensure that safe and healthful working conditions exist
for its employees, contractors and the general public whose work involves the
conducting of business in city-owned buildings, on city- owned properties or in
the course of normal business. In addition, the City may have liability under
the Tort Claims Act for negligence in the operation of its facilities.
Accordingly, it is the policy of the City to determine what federal, state and
local laws apply to City facilities and to ensure such laws are observed and
enforced.
This Administrative Instruction confirms that the City’s Community Centers,
Multigenerational Centers, and Senior Centers (collectively, the "Centers") all
fall within the definition set forth in New Mexico Statutes Annotated 1978,
Sections 30-7-2.1 of "school premises." In addition, Health and Social Service
Centers fall within the definition set forth in NMSA 1978, § 30-7-2.4, of
"university premises." Pursuant to Sections 30-7-2.1 and 30-7-2.4, it is
unlawful to carry firearms at any of these facilities, subject to the
exceptions set forth in, and coextensive with, those statutes.
1.   The prohibition on deadly weapons and firearms in schools and universities
NMSA 1978, § 30-7-2.1(A) (1994) makes it unlawful to carry a deadly weapon on
"school premises," except by "(1) a peace officer; (2) school security
personnel; (3) a student, instructor or other school-authorized personnel
engaged in army, navy, marine corps or air force reserve officer training corps
programs or state-authorized hunter safety training instruction; (4) a person
conducting or participating in a school-approved program, class or other
activity involving the carrying of a deadly weapon; or (5) a person older than
nineteen years of age on school premises in a private automobile or other
private means of conveyance, for lawful protection of the person's or another's
person or property." Those who commit unlawful carrying of a deadly weapon on
school premises may be charged with a fourth degree felony under NMSA 1978, §
30-7-2.1(C).
NMSA 1978, § 30-1-12 (1963) defines "deadly weapon" as "any firearm, whether
loaded or unloaded; or any weapon which is capable of producing death or great
bodily harm, including but not restricted to any types of daggers, brass
knuckles, switchblade knives, bowie knives, poniards, butcher knives, dirk
knives and all such weapons with which dangerous cuts can be given, or with
which dangerous thrusts can be inflicted, including swordcanes, and any kind of
sharp pointed canes, also slingshots, slung shots, bludgeons; or any other
weapons with which dangerous wounds can be inflicted."
NMSA 1978, § 30-7-2.4(A) (2003) makes it unlawful to carry a firearm on
"university premises" except by: "(1) a peace officer; (2) university security
personnel; (3) a student, instructor or other university-authorized personnel
who are engaged in army, navy, marine corps or air force reserve officer
training corps programs or a state-authorized hunter safety training program;
(4) a person conducting or participating in a university-approved program,
class or other activity involving the carrying of a firearm; or (5) a person
older than nineteen years of age on university premises in a private automobile
or other private means of conveyance, for lawful protection of the person's or
another's person or property." Those who commit unlawful carrying of a firearm
on university premises may be charged with a petty misdemeanor under NMSA 1978,
§ 30-7-2.4(D).
2.   Policy Rationale for State laws prohibiting firearms in public schools and
universities
The US Supreme Court has long upheld laws forbidding the carrying of firearms
in sensitive places such as schools. See District of Columbia v. Heller, 554
U.S. 570, 626-27 (2008). The need for such a law in New Mexico has only become
clearer since the 1994 and 2003 enactments of the State laws prohibiting the
carrying of firearms on public school and university premises.
Between the Columbine massacre, which occurred on April 20, 1999, and the date
of this Administrative Instruction, the United States has seen 68 mass K-12
“school shootings.” Thirty-one of those 68 shootings occurred after December
14, 2012, when a mass shooter murdered 20 six- and seven-year-old school
children at Sandy Hook Elementary, as well as six staff members who tried to
protect them. Since 2013, American schools, including post-secondary, have seen
181 deaths and 358 injuries attributable to gunfire.
Three school shootings have occurred in New Mexico: (1) Roswell Berrendo Middle
School with two injured on January 14, 2014; (2) Aztec High School with three
fatalities, including the shooter, on December 7, 2017; and (3) Cleveland High
School in Rio Rancho on February 14, 2019 with no physical injuries. These are
in addition to the mass shooting that occurred at the Clovis public library on
August 28, 2017, when a 16-year-old Clovis High School student killed two and
injured four.
Strong policy considerations continue to underlie the State laws cited above.
Like schools, mass shooters have targeted municipal centers such as community
centers across the country. In 1999, a mass shooter killed one community member
and injured five people at the Los Angeles Jewish Community Center. In 2014, a
mass shooter killed two people in a shooting at the Overland Park Jewish
Community Center in Kansas. Most recently, a mass shooter killed 12 people and
injured four more at a Virginia Beach municipal center.
Between August 1, 2015, and July 31, 2019, 27 gun offenses have been reported
to the Albuquerque Police Department (“APD”) at City community, health and
social service, and senior centers (see attached map). On May 31, 2013, an
eight-year-old girl was shot and killed at the City’s own Alamosa Community
Center. Most recently, on April 4, 2019, a shooting occurred at the Alamosa
Community Center. Over that same time period, 510 gun offenses have been
reported to APD within a two-block radius of the City’s community centers,
health and social service centers, multigenerational centers, and senior
centers.
3.   Applicability of Sections 30-7-2.1 and 30-7-2.4 to City facilities
In addition to the buildings and grounds that house public schools, NMSA 1978,
§ 30-7-2.1(B)(2) defines "public school premises" as "any other public
buildings or grounds, including playing fields and parking areas that are not
public school property, in or on which public school-related and sanctioned
activities are being performed." Under this definition, all Centers fall under
the definition of public school premises.
The City’s Community Centers, Multigenerational Centers, and Senior Centers are
all inextricably linked to schools, provide school-related and school
sanctioned activities, and even themselves serve as schools by providing
various education classes. The City is party to several contracts and
agreements with Albuquerque Public Schools (“APS”), reflecting joint use of the
Centers. In addition, the City works with public schools in a broad array of
programs and services, including, but not limited to:
   ∙   APS Access/CTAP/APS Transitional Services to provide high school age
students with disabilities that need transition into areas of employment, post-
secondary education/training, independent living and community connections
   ∙   APS-sanctioned or APS-related before- and after-school programming
   ∙   APS-sanctioned or APS-related school meal programs
   ∙   Performances by APS and public charter schools
   ∙   School-sanctioned transport to and from APS public schools
   ∙   Direct use of Center facilities by charter schools
   ∙   25 playground recreation sites with APS
   ∙   Therapeutic recreation programs with APS
   ∙   Job mentorship programs
   ∙   Child and family development programs
In Fiscal Year 2019, 200,000 City youth and nearly 325,000 City adults visited
City community centers. The City Playground Recreation Program served almost
270,000 children, and the City Therapeutic Recreation Program served almost
48,000 youth and 12,000 adults. The City Job Mentorship Program had an
enrollment of over 1,500.
In addition to the buildings and grounds of a university, NMSA 1978, § 30-7-2.4
(C)(2)(b) (2003) defines "university premises" as "any other public buildings
or grounds, including playing fields and parking areas that are not university
property, in or on which university-related and sanctioned activities are
performed." Under this definition, all four Health and Social Service Centers
fall under the definition of "university premises" because they are used for
the UNM Maternity & Family Planning clinic. In addition, San Pablo Young
Children’s Health Center leases space to UNM. City Health and Social Service
Centers serve approximately 144,000 clients annually.
As the Attorney General recently noted, local governments do not have the right
to pick and choose what state laws to enforce. The state laws cited above are
clear and unambiguous. The State legislature could have narrowly defined
"public school premises" and "university premises" to mean only those
properties owned or leased by public schools or universities. Instead, the
Legislature chose expressly to include buildings and areas "that are not public
school property" and "that are not university property." 
4.   Training and posting
The Department of Family & Community Services, Department of Senior Affairs,
Department of Municipal Development Security Division, Legal Department,
Albuquerque Police Department and the community risk reduction initiative of
Albuquerque Fire Rescue are instructed to develop and implement training to
ensure that affected employees are aware of the provisions of state law
discussed above, and to make any required postings or public notices related to
NMSA 1978, §§ 30-7-2.1 and 30-7-2.4.
Until such training is developed, City personnel who see a violation of the
State laws cited in this Administrative Instruction should call 9-1-1 and take
no further action.
 
______________________________
Sarita Nair                    [https://export.amlegal.com/media/
Chief Administrative Officer   6d88fadbb394cb34f1263b3e9230120271b111d2/IMAGES/
                              0-0-0-1763.png]
August 16, 2019
Effective Date
 
AI_NO:_5-19_(pdf)
AI NO:   5-20
NOTING THE APPLICABILITY OF STATE LAW TO CONDITIONS TO ENTRY TO CITY OF
ALBUQUERQUE PARKS AND OTHER FACILITIES (8/31/2020)
ADMINISTRATIVE INSTRUCTION NO:   5-20
TITLE: Noting the Applicability of State Law to Conditions to Entry to City of
Albuquerque Parks and Other Facilities
PRIMARY DEPARTMENTS: Parks and Recreation Department, Department of Family and
Community Services, Department of Senior Affairs
Secondary Departments: Albuquerque Police Department, Department of Municipal
Development, Legal Department, Albuquerque Fire Rescue
As set forth in Administrative Instruction No. 8-5 ("AI 8-5"), it is the policy
of the City of Albuquerque to ensure that safe and healthful working conditions
exist for its employees, contractors, and the general public whose work
involves the conducting of business in city-owned buildings, on city-owned
properties or in the course of normal business. Administrative Instruction No.
5-19 ("AI 5-19") provided guidance on the policy set forth under AI 8-5 to City
community centers, health and social service centers, multigenerational
centers, and senior centers under applicable State laws. In addition, both AI
8-5 and 5-19 indicated that the City may have liability under the Tort Claims
Act for negligence in the operation of its facilities and provides the need to
ensure laws are observed and enforced.
This Administrative Instruction shall:
   (1)   Ensure enforcement of the State's prohibition of carrying deadly
weapons, including firearms, at City property or facilities that are used for
school or college related and sanctioned activities pursuant to NMSA 1978 § 30-
7-2.1 and § 30-7-2.4. This includes enforcement at certain City property or
facilities used for such activities but not encompassed in AI 5-19; and
   (2)   Ensure that conditions of entry to City parks and recreations centers,
established by the City herein, are enforced under New Mexico's criminal
trespass law, NMSA 1978 § 30-14-1(C) NMSA 1978, including a prohibition of
carrying deadly weapons at certain City property or facilities.
1. Prohibition of carrying deadly weapons, including firearms, at city property
and facilities used for school or college related and sanctioned activities
   A. The prohibition on deadly weapons and firearms in schools
NMSA 1978, § 30-7-2.1(A) makes it unlawful to carry a deadly weapon on "school
premises," except by "(1) a peace officer; (2) school security personnel; (3) a
student, instructor or other school-authorized personnel engaged in army, navy,
marine corps or air force reserve officer training corps programs or state-
authorized hunter safety training instruction; (4) a person conducting or
participating in a school-approved program, class or other activity involving
the carrying of a deadly weapon; or (5) a person older than nineteen years of
age on school premises in a private automobile or other private means of
conveyance, for lawful protection of the person's or another's person or
property." Those who commit unlawful carrying of a deadly weapon on school
premises may be charged with a fourth degree felony under NMSA 1978, § 30-7-2.1
(C).
NMSA 1978, § 30-1-12 defines "deadly weapon" as "any firearm, whether loaded or
unloaded; or any weapon which is capable of producing death or great bodily
harm, including but not restricted to any types of daggers, brass knuckles,
switchblade knives, bowie knives, poniards, butcher knives, dirk knives and all
such weapons with which dangerous cuts can be given, or with which dangerous
thrusts can be inflicted, including swordcanes, and any kind of sharp pointed
canes, also slingshots, slung shots, bludgeons; or any other weapons with which
dangerous wounds can be inflicted."
   B. Applicability of NMSA 1978, § 30-7-2.1 to City property and facilities
The state laws cited above are clear and unambiguous. The State legislature
could have narrowly defined "public school premises" and "university premises"
to mean only those properties owned or leased by public schools or
universities. Instead, the Legislature chose expressly to include buildings and
areas "that are not public school property" and "that are not university
property."
In addition to the buildings and grounds that house public schools, NMSA 1978,
§ 30-7-2.1(B)(2) defines "public school premises" as "any other public
buildings or grounds, including playing fields and parking areas that are not
public school property, in or on which public school-related and sanctioned
activities are being performed."
Under this definition, the statute's prohibition, including the exception for
law enforcement officers, applies to:
   (1)   City property or facilities expressly covered by AI 5-19;
   (2)    City neighborhood parks, which are used as playing areas for public
schools and other public school programming, including those used for the Food
Services Program for Children in partnership with Albuquerque Public Schools;
   (3)   City sports fields, including the Albuquerque Regional Sports Complex,
and City golf courses, which are used for public school and university sports
or physical education classes, but not including facilities at Shooting Range
Park;
   (4)   City pools, including the surrounding parking lots, which are used for
school activities;
   (5)   Balloon Fiesta Park, which is used for school activities;
   (6)   The Albuquerque Convention Center, which is used for public school
graduations and other school activities;
   (7)   Civic Plaza, which educators and students from Amy Biehl Charter High
School regularly use for physical education activities and in which playground
equipment is located.
Exceptions: This AI is not applicable to the at Shooting Range Park, the
Esperanza Bike Shop, the BMX Complex, Open Space or other Parks and Recreation
Department maintenance yards or administrative business offices.
2. Criminal trespass and the prohibition of deadly weapons on government
property
   A. Criminal trespass
New Mexico's criminal trespass statute regarding government property may be
used to disallow the carrying of firearms, according to an Attorney General
Advisory Letter dated September 8, 2011. Under NMSA 1978, § 30-14-1(C),
"Criminal trespass also consists of knowingly entering or remaining upon lands
owned, operated or controlled by the state or any of its political subdivisions
knowing that consent to enter or remain is denied or withdrawn by the custodian
thereof." As noted by the 2011 Attorney General letter, this statute authorizes
a political subdivision to consent to entry by others to its property,
establish reasonable conditions to consenting to entry, and enforce such
conditions. Such conditions may include banning dangerous weapons, including
firearms, if the government "reasonably conclude[s] that adequate and proper
security requires imposing such a condition as a requirement for members of the
public generally to access the" property.
If members of the public are properly advised of a condition, including the
prohibition of carrying deadly weapons, to gain entrance to a public facility,
the trespass statute can be used for enforcement purposes. The facility at
issue in the Attorney General letter was a district attorney's office, which
counties are required to provide. The letter stated the same condition could be
imposed by either the district attorney's office or the county, depending on
which was the "custodian" of the property for purposes of Section 30-14-1(C).
However, this analysis did not turn on whether a state agency or local
government established the condition.
Provided this authority, the City of Albuquerque shall enforce this state law
by ensuring adequate and proper security, including a prohibition on the
carrying of deadly weapons, with the exception of law enforcement officers,
property and facilities identified herein.
   B. Prohibiting possession of deadly weapons at certain City property and
facilities
Pursuant to the City of Albuquerque's authority to impose and enforce
conditions to entry to its property under New Mexico's criminal trespass
statute as interpreted by the Attorney General letter dated September 8, 2011,
possession of deadly weapons at the following City property and facilities is
prohibited, with the exception of law enforcement officers, to ensure adequate
and proper security for City personnel and members of the public:
   (1)   Any City property and facilities utilized for school sanctioned
activity;
   (2)   City parks or facilities listed in Section 1(B)(1) - (7),.
Notice shall be posted regarding this Administrative Instruction and the
enforcement of NMSA 1978, § 30-7-2.1(A) and § 30-14-1(C) at each property or
facility in which this Administrative Instruction applies.
Preemption pursuant to Article II, §6 of the Constitution of New Mexico is not
applicable because the right to keep and bear arms does not encompass carrying
deadly weapons, including firearms, under the circumstances and at the public
places set forth herein.
3. Prohibition of deadly weapons, including firearms, in sensitive places
   A. Sensitive places
Albuquerque saw the risk of firearms at parks on June 15, 2020. After armed
counter-demonstrators confronted protestors near Tiguex Park in Old Town,
tensions escalated leading to physical altercations and an armed counter-
demonstrator shot a protestor four times. With the Albuquerque Police
Department recovering a large number of firearms and ammunition, that incident
had the potential to be much more violent it was. The City of Albuquerque has
the police power to protect its inhabitants and preserve peace and order under
NMSA 1978, § 3-18-1, and desires to exercise this authority to prevent future
incidents like the shooting on June 15, 2020.
In declaring the Second Amendment's individual right to bear arms in District
of Columbia v. Heller, the United States Supreme Court recognized the
legitimacy of prohibitions on carrying firearms in "sensitive places." D.C. v.
Heller, 554 U.S. 570, 626, 128 S. Ct. 2783, 2817, 171 L. Ed. 2d 637 (2008). The
Court noted schools and government buildings as obvious such places, but
declined to provide an exhaustive list. Courts have since found public parks to
be sensitive places. Particularly, some jurisdictions have held there is no
logical distinction between schools and parks where children recreate. Warden
v. Nickels, 697 F. Supp. 2d 1221, 1224 (W.D. Wash. 2010).
In denying a challenge to a statewide ban on firearms in parks, an Illinois'
court not only found there was a compelling argument that public parks were
"sensitive places" but that the ban also withstood intermediate scrutiny under
the Second Amendment. People v. Bell, 2018 IL App (1st) 153373. The law was a
justified restriction to protect the police and public from dangerous weapons
because large numbers of people congregate in parks for recreation.
   B. Prohibition of deadly weapons, including firearms, at certain City
property or facilities deemed sensitive places
In accordance with established law, in order to protect citizens exercising
their First Amendment rights as well as protecting children who often
congregate in public parks, recreational facilities, and plazas under a variety
of circumstances, such City owned property and facilities are "sensitive
places." Possession of deadly weapons is prohibited at the following "sensitive
places," with the exception of law enforcement officers, to ensure adequate and
proper security for City personnel and members of the public:
   (1)   Any City property utilized for school sanctioned activity;
   (2)   City parks and recreation facilities listed in Section 1(B)(1)-(7)..
Notice shall be posted regarding this Administrative Instruction and the
enforcement of NMSA 1978, § 30-18-1 at each property or facility in which this
Administrative Instruction applies.
Preemption pursuant to Article II, § 6 of the Constitution of New Mexico is not
applicable because state law already addresses carrying deadly weapons,
including firearms, under the circumstances and at the public places set forth
herein and this Instruction merely clarifies the applicability of those state
laws.
4. Severability
If any section, subsection, sentence, clause, word, or phrase of this
Administrative Instruction is for any reason held to be unconstitutional or
otherwise invalid by any court of competent jurisdiction, such decision shall
not affect the validity of the remaining portions of this Administrative
Instruction.
 
 
______________________________
Sarita Nair                    [https://export.amlegal.com/media/
Chief Administrative Officer   6d88fadbb394cb34f1263b3e9230120271b111d2/IMAGES/
______________________________ 0-0-0-1976.png]
Effective Date
 
AI_NO:_5-20_(pdf)
Other Property
AI NO: 6-1
DISPOSITION OF SURPLUS LIBRARY MATERIALS
TITLE:   Disposition of Surplus Library Materials
PRIMARY DEPARTMENT:   Cultural Services
The purpose of this Administrative Instruction is to establish City policy and
guidelines regarding the disposition of library surplus materials. Disposition
of library surplus materials will be an exception to the disposition of other
City personal property surplus materials as required by Administrative
Instruction 6-2.
Library surplus materials, as defined below, are items of City personal
property which are part of the Library inventory and have been designated as no
longer useful or necessary. Each library surplus materials item is of little
value in itself. A large volume of the materials becomes available on an almost
daily basis. As a result, substantial work must be expended, and storage and
handling of the library surplus materials are a problem for the City.
Therefore, the following guidelines establish the procedures for identifying
and disposing of City library surplus materials.
Policy: Library Surplus Materials Identification and Designation
1. "Library Surplus Materials" are items of City personal property which are
included in the Library inventory and which are worn or outdated or which
duplicate existing inventory. Library Surplus Materials include books,
magazines, records, printed material and audiovisual material. They do not
include furniture, fixtures, equipment or vehicles.
2. Library Surplus Materials which no longer are necessary to perform their
intended functions or which are worn, outdated or duplicates may be designated
Library Surplus Materials by the Library staff.
3. The Library is authorized to dispose of Library Surplus Materials to a not-
for-profit organization in return for services to be provided to the Library by
that organization, including accepting delivery of the Library Surplus
Materials, sorting, processing, packing for storage and other related services
which will benefit the City. Any such agreement will be made in writing and
must be reviewed and signed according to standard City procedures.
4. The Accounting Division, Property Accounting Section, Department of Finance
and Management, may review both the disposition procedures and any written
agreement concerning the disposition of Library Surplus Materials.
Handling of Any Proceeds from Disposition of Library Surplus Materials
If a not-for-profit organization contracts with the City and, as a result of
the organization's disposition of the Library Surplus Materials, obtains any
net profit, then the net proceeds will be paid by the organization to the City
or will be applied by the organization to the benefit of the Library. If any
proceeds are paid to the City, the proceeds will be deposited to the Revenue
Accounts of the originating fund. The written agreement between the City and
the organization disposing of Library Surplus Materials will establish that the
Library staff and other City employees may perform periodic or sporadic reviews
of the records of the organization to verify appropriate handling of any
proceeds.
REFERENCES: Administrative Instruction 6-2
 
______________________________
Robert J. Perry                [https://export.amlegal.com/media/
Chief Administrative Officer   6d88fadbb394cb34f1263b3e9230120271b111d2/IMAGES/
_____________________________  0-0-0-663.png]
Effective Date 
 
AI_NO:_6-1_(pdf)
AI NO: 6-2
DISPOSITION OF SURPLUS PROPERTY, SALVAGE PROPERTY, AND SCRAP PROPERTY (2022)
TITLE: Disposition of Surplus Property, Salvage Property, and Scrap Property
PRIMARY DEPARTMENT: General Services Department
1.   PURPOSE
   A.    The purpose of this Administrative Instruction is to dictate
procedures for disposition of City Surplus Property, Salvage Property and Scrap
Property per Public Purchases Ordinance 5-5-16.
2.   DEFINITIONS
   A.   "Fair Market Value" is the estimated value of a tangible personal
property item as determined through the use of any available tool, index,
record, appraisal or reasonable method. The required determination of the fair
market value of property is intended to protect the interests of the City.
   B.   "Fixed Assets" consist of furniture, equipment, and vehicles, as well
as City assets, as defined by Public Purchases Ordinance 5-5-16 and
Administrative Instruction 6-4, that are recorded on the City's inventory of
fixed assets.
   C.   "Surplus Property" is tangible personal property of the City of any
value, which has been determined to be functional, but is no longer required or
needed for use within or by a City department, and the cost to the City to
retain the property may be adverse to City interests based on space allocation,
obsolescence or depreciating market value.
   D.   "Salvage Property" is tangible personal property of the City of any
value, which has been determined to no longer be functional as originally
intended, but retains a value in the proper marketplace in its marginal use, by
repair, resale, scrap value in recyclable materials, or other reasons.
   E.   "Scrap Property" is tangible personal property of the City, which has
been determined to be surplus property, but which has also been determined to
be of no value, or where the cost to repair or maintain such property would
exceed its value. Scrap Property does not include salvage property, including
but not limited to any material or equipment that retains a salvage value such
as copper, aluminum or other recyclable materials, as determined by the Chief
Procurement Officer.
3.   DISPOSITION OF SURPLUS PROPERTY, SALVAGE PROPERTY, OR SCRAP PROPERTY
   A.   Responsible Parties. Each department shall ensure that Surplus
Property, Salvage Property, and Scrap Property is properly disposed of in
accordance with this Administrative Instruction and that City assets are
properly and timely removed from the City's fixed asset inventory list, where
applicable. Departments shall contact the Department of Finance and
Administrative Services, Accounting Division regarding questions related to
fixed assets, excluding real property, and contact the Public Surplus
Administrator, General Services Department, Fleet Management Division on
questions regarding the disposition of Surplus Property, Salvage Property, or
Scrap Property. The Accounting Division shall supply annual inventory lists of
property to departments.
      1.   A Fixed Assets Liaison shall be designated in each department, and
that liaison shall ensure that property control procedures required herein are
followed within the department/division in which the fixed assets are located,
and that periodic property inventories of fixed assets are completed timely.
Each department director will determine, based on organizational needs, whether
liaisons will be appointed on a department or division basis. The liaison shall
contact the Principal Accountant assigned to monitor and process fixed assets
in the Accounting Division of the Department of Finance and Administrative
Services (DFAS) regarding questions that concern the control of City property,
excluding real property.
      2.   A Property Disposal Officer shall be designated in each department,
and that officer shall ensure that Surplus Property, Salvage Property, and
Scrap Property are properly disposed of in accordance with the Public Purchases
Ordinance and this Administrative Instruction.
      3.   A Public Surplus Administrator within the Fleet Division of the
General Service Department shall be responsible for the administration of the
online auction site for the disposal of City Surplus Property, Salvage Property
and Scrap Property.
   B.   The Process.
      1.   Determination. All Fixed Assets shall be determined to be Surplus
Property, Salvage Property, or Scrap Property, in accordance with the Public
Purchases Ordinance and this Administrative Instruction by the Property
Disposal Officer. The determination of vehicles shall be done in coordination
with the Fleet Management Division. No City employee shall directly dispose of
any Fixed Assets outside of this process.
      2.   Surplus/Salvage Property Form. Departments shall use the electronic
Surplus/Salvage Property Forms, available through PeopleSoft, to commence with
the disposition of Surplus Property or Salvage Property. The form shall be
completed by the Property Disposal Officer of the Department disposing of the
Surplus Property or Salvage Property. The following information shall be
included on the form:
         a)   The Department\Division disposing of the Surplus Property or
Salvage Property;
         b)   The activity or Department identification number of the
            c)   If item is stolen, a police report must accompany the Surplus/
Salvage form.
         c)   The correct account number for taxable and tax-exempt items;
         d)   The date of the action;
         e)   A statement as to whether the item is being transferred to a
Department\Division, transferred or sold to another government or nonprofit, or
publicly listed for surplus or salvaged;
         f)   The director's or designated authority's signature;
         g)   A description and identification of the Surplus Property or
Salvage Property including:
            (1)   A City asset identification number and/or serial number and/
or vehicle identification number for vehicles;
            (2)   The condition of the Surplus Property or Salvage Property:
               i.   Good means still working;
               ii   Fair means working, but not to original standard or not
reliable;
               iii.   Poor means needs repair;
               iv.   Unusable means not economically repairable; and
               v.   Unknown means the condition is not known.
            (3)   The Fair Market Value or an approved pricing methodology for
use in determining value. For vehicles, the Fair Market Value is determined by
the General Services Department, Fleet Management Division.
         h)   The name of the Property Disposal Officer disposing of the
Surplus Property and who prepared the form;
         i)   For items being transferred or issued to another Department/
Division, the name of the Fixed Asset Liaison of the Department receiving the
Surplus Property or Salvage Property;
   C.   Surplus Property. Surplus Property can be disposed of in one of the
following ways:
      1.   Transfers to other Departments by electronic process.
         a)   All transfers of fixed assets from one administrative unit to
another shall be processed through the submission of a transfer form, available
on the Accounting Division SharePoint site, to the Accounting Division.
            (1)   This form shall be prepared by the unit transferring the
assets within five working days from date of physical transfer.
            (2)   The transfer form shall identify the Division to which the
assets are transferred, the Department ID number of that Division, a
description of the property, the general condition of the property, the model
and serial number, if available, and the property tag number, if available.
            (3)   The transfer form shall be signed by the Fixed Asset Liaison
for the unit transferring the assets and the unit's Department Director (or
designee), as well as the Fixed Asset Liaison for the unit to which the assets
are transferred and that unit's Department Director (or designee).
      2.   Donation or Sale at Fair Market Value to another government agency
or non-profit;
         a)   The Department's Property Disposal Officer must obtain from the
approving authority of a government agency or non-profit organization a letter
requesting the Surplus Property.
            (1)   Non-profit organizations must provide validation of 501(c)(3)
non-profit status in any request for Surplus Property.
         b)   The Department's Property Disposal Officer will turn over the
letter and request to the Public Surplus Administrator, who will then
coordinate with the Chief Administrative Officer the approval for donation, as
well as the physical movement of the donated items.
         c)   The Public Surplus Administrator will transfer Surplus Property
to the government agency or non-profit organization as follows:
            (1)   The Surplus Property will be sold to the government agency or
non-profit organization at fair market value or at a discounted rate as
determined by the Department's designated authorizing authority in conjunction
with the Public Surplus Administrator. Fair Market Value is determined by the
Department transferring the property and the Public Surplus Administrator,
except for vehicles. Vehicle Fair Market Value is determined by one of the
following City Departments or divisions: Fleet Management Division, Solid Waste
Management, Transit Department, Albuquerque Fire Rescue or Aviation Department.
            (2)   Items sold or donated under this Section will be signed
received by the requesting agency.
            (3)   The Fixed Assets Liaison will assure that Fixed Assets are
removed from the Department's fixed asset inventory through the Accounting
Division.
            (4)   The Fixed Assets Liaison will retain all documentation for
the entire transaction and process.
      3.   Sale of Surplus using Online Auction
         a)   The Property Disposal Officer posts Surplus Property to online
public surplus site, with the exception of vehicles, for which the Fleet
Management Division is responsible, as outlined below in Section H.
            (1)   All Surplus Property sold by the City is sold "as is" with no
implied or granted warranty. All risk is borne by the buyer.
            (2)   The buyer of the Surplus Property will arrange through the
Property Disposal Officer to pick the item up from the City.
            (3)   At the time of pick up, the Property Disposal Officer will
require the buyer to sign for receipt of the item, and will retain this
documentation on file to validate the item has been picked up.
            (4)   No City employees that administer the sale of Surplus
property shall submit a bid or solicit any other person to submit a bid on
Surplus Property through the auction process.
   D.   Salvage Property. Salvage Property may be disposed of using the process
for Surplus Property, in Section C, or using Vendor Offers, with sale to the
highest of three written bids, under the following conditions:
      1)   Offers must be requested with the same information and criteria for
each vendor solicited.
      2)   Award of sale shall be made to the highest offer meeting the
specification requirement.
      3)   Payments shall follow procedures set forth in Administrative
Instruction 2-2.
   E.   Scrap Property. If the City is unable to dispose of Surplus Property or
Salvage Property by a process identified in Sections B or C, above, the
property shall be considered to have no value and may be disposed of as Scrap
Property. Scrap Property may be disposed of or recycled in a manner determined
by the Department Director to be most advantageous to the City.
   F.   Payment received by the City for transfer of property described in this
Section shall follow the process described in A.I. 2-2, Credit, Collections, &
Accounts Receivable.
   G.   E-waste Disposal Through an Approved Disposal Agent
      An Approved Disposal Agent is a vendor with which the City has executed a
Memorandum of Understanding or City contract for the purpose of disposal of
City-owned e-waste in a manner that meets City requirements.
         a)   A Department Disposal Officer is responsible for contacting the
Approved Disposal Agent regarding e-waste disposal.
         b)   The Approved Disposal Agent shall: coordinate pick up of the
waste and send confirmation of the waste's disposal to the Department Disposal
Officer.
         c)   The Department Disposal Officer shall document and file the
confirmation of disposal.
   H.   Vehicles. Departments shall turn in vehicles determined to be Surplus
Property to the Fleet Management Division, except Transit, Aviation, Fire and
Solid Waste who will schedule transfer of surplus and salvage vehicles for
disposal. The vehicles shall be clear and free of all debris.
      1.   Surplus Property vehicles will be processed using the Surplus/
Salvage Property Form.
      2.   If sold through the on-line auction or public auction process, such
listing and sale will be conducted by the Fleet Management Division.
      3.   Vehicles declared surplus by Fleet Management may be transferred to
another Department with the approval of the Fleet Manager and both Department
Directors.
      4.   Vehicles declared salvage are not considered reusable within the
City fleet.
      5.   Vehicles turned in as Surplus Property or Salvage Property shall not
be cannibalized for parts except as approved by the Fleet Manager for
maintaining the current fleet.
   I.   Revenues from Sales. Monies generated through the sale of Surplus
Property and Salvage Property (except vehicles and recycled materials) will be
deposited to a fund designated by the department that declared the property to
be surplus and salvage. Revenues from the transfer of vehicles and heavy
equipment will be deposited to Fund 730 or Fund 305, dependent upon how the
property was initially purchased. Proceeds from heavy equipment purchased by an
enterprise department will be deposited into the enterprise's capital fund.
4. ACTION
Department directors will notify the Fleet Manager and the City Controller of
the Accounting Division in writing of the names of the employees who are
designated as Property Disposal Officers and Fixed Assets Liaisons within their
Departments, and of any changes in such designations.. The Accounting Division
will provide a list of the Fixed Asset Liaisons to the Chief Administrative
Officer annually.
REFERENCES: City Ordinance Article 5 R.O.A. 1994 Public Purchases Ordinance,
Administrative Instruction 6-4, Administrative Instruction 2-2.
 
 
______________________________       [https://export.amlegal.com/media/
Lawrence Rael                        6d88fadbb394cb34f1263b3e9230120271b111d2/
Interim Chief Administrative Officer IMAGES/0-0-0-2372.png]
_____________________________
Effective Date
 
AI_NO:_6-2_(pdf)
AI NO: 6-3
ESTABLISHMENT OF FIXED ASSET LIAISONS AND PROPERTY ACCOUNTING PROCEDURES
TITLE:   Establishment of Fixed Asset Liaisons and Property Accounting
Procedures
PRIMARY DEPARTMENT:   Department of Finance and Administrative Services
1.   Purpose
The purpose of this instruction is to establish a Fixed Asset Liaison in each
department or division for the proper control of fixed asset inventories. Fixed
assets consist of equipment, vehicles and furniture. Each department director
will determine, based on organizational needs, whether liaisons will be
appointed on a department or division basis.
The responsibility of the Fixed Asset Liaison is to see that property control
procedures, as described below, are adequately followed within the department/
division and that periodic property inventories are carried out. The liaison
shall contact the Principal Accountant assigned to monitor and process fixed
assets in the Accounting Division of the Department of Finance and
Administrative Services (DFAS) regarding questions which concern the control of
City property, excluding real estate.
2.   Procedures
A.   All transfers of fixed assets from one administrative unit to another
shall be processed through the submission of a transfer form, available on the
Accounting Division SharePoint site, to the Accounting Division. This form
shall be prepared by the unit transferring the assets within five working days
from date of physical transfer. The transfer form will identify the division to
which the assets are transferred, the department ID number of that division, a
description of the property, the general condition of the property, the model
and serial number if available and the property tag number. The transfer form
shall be signed by the transferor department Fixed Asset Liaison and the
Department Director (or designee) as well as the transferee department Fixed
Asset Liaison and that Department Director (or designee).
B.   If an item is damaged beyond economic repair, lost, or stolen, submission
of a disposal form to the Accounting Division is required with the same
information as listed above and the reason for disposal. The property item will
be moved to the Surplus Yard by the department unless lost or stolen. The
disposal form can be obtained from the City Warehouse.
C.   If an item is stolen, a police report must accompany the disposal form.
D.   In accordance with Administrative Instruction 6-2, all property being
turned in to Surplus Property because it is no longer serviceable must be
accompanied by a Surplus/Salvage form, also obtained from the City Warehouse,
before the Accounting Division can accept it. The memorandum must include the
name of the item, City property tag number, and a model or serial number. It is
the responsibility of the department turning in the property to make
arrangements for transferring its materials to the City's surplus warehouse/
yard and notifying the Accounting Division.
E.   The Accounting Division will be responsible for supplying annual inventory
lists of property to the department or division Fixed Asset Liaisons.
3.   Action
Please notify the City Controller of the Accounting Division, in writing, with
the name of the employee(s) who will be assigned the responsibility of Fixed
Asset Liaison within your department or within your separate division(s), and
any changes in such assignment that occur thereafter. The Accounting Division
will provide a list of the Fixed Asset Liaisons to the Chief Administrative
Officer annually.
REFERENCES:   New Mexico Administrative Code (NMAC) 2.20.1 Accounting and
Control of Fixed Assets of State Government Accounting for Acquisitions and
Establishing Controls; Albuquerque Code of Ordinances §5-5-16 Disposition of
City-Owned Surplus, Salvage and Scrap Property.
 
______________________________
Robert J. Perry                [https://export.amlegal.com/media/
Chief Administrative Officer   6d88fadbb394cb34f1263b3e9230120271b111d2/IMAGES/
_____________________________  0-0-0-667.png]
Effective Date 
 
AI_NO:_6-3_(pdf)
AI NO: 6-4
CAPITALIZATION OF CITY ASSETS (2022)
TITLE: Capitalization of City Assets
PRIMARY DEPARTMENT: Department of Finance and Administrative Services
BACKGROUND
The New Mexico Administrative Code (NMAC) Section 2.20.1 “Accounting and
Control of Fixed Assets” and Governmental Accounting Standards Board Statement
(GASBS) No. 34 require the City to maintain detailed records for capital assets
by classification. Public-sector managers must maintain adequate control over
all assets to minimize the risk of loss or misuse. Capital assets that are
reported in the City’s Comprehensive Annual Financial Report (CAFR) are
referred to as “capitalized”.
CAPITAL ASSETS
Capital assets include land, improvements to land, easements, buildings,
building improvements, vehicles, machinery, equipment, infrastructure, and all
other tangible or intangible assets that are used in operations and that have
initial useful lives extending beyond a single reporting period. Capital assets
should be reported at historical cost. The cost of a capital asset should
include capitalized interest and ancillary charges necessary to place the asset
into its intended location and condition for use. Ancillary charges include
costs that are directly attributable to asset acquisition such as freight and
transportation charges, site preparation costs, and professional fees. Capital
assets include those assets constructed by City personnel. Construction costs
for such assets include direct labor (salary and overtime), materials,
equipment usage (depreciation, rental, supplies, etc.), and overhead that can
be distributed on the basis of direct labor such as employee benefits. Indirect
overhead charges shall not be capitalized. In certain instances, departments
may enter into lease agreement(s) where the City either acquires or has the
right to acquire the property at the end of the lease. The Accounting Division
of the Department of Finance and Administrative Services (DFAS) should be
contacted for the specific criteria used to determine when a lease is
classified as a capital lease. Donated capital assets should be reported at
their estimated fair value at the time of donation to the City plus ancillary
charges, if any. Replacement of components to an asset or improvements to
assets above the capitalization threshold should be capitalized if they
significantly extend the useful life or value of the asset. Repairs and
maintenance on fixed assets, which are routine and necessary for continued safe
and productive operation, shall not be capitalized and should be charged to
maintenance expense in the period in which they occur. If an asset consists of
identifiable and separately valued components, and a component is improved, the
old component should be removed from the asset account, and the new component
added to that asset account.
INFRASTRUCTURE ASSETS
Infrastructure assets are long-lived capital assets that are normally
stationary in nature and can be preserved for a significantly greater number of
years than most other capital assets. Classification of Infrastructure assets
used by the City fall into two networks: Street and Storm. Assets within the
“Street Network” may include: landscaped medians, roadway, right of way,
bridges, signals, beacons, trails, and trail bridges. Assets within the “Storm
Network” may include: easements, drainage pipe, lift stations, bridges, dams,
detention basins right of way, arroyo easements right of way and easements.
Infrastructure assets also include those assets that are constructed by
developers that have been dedicated and transferred to the City.
POLICY
It is the policy of the City to charge all disbursements for capital assets
using the following schedule per item:
Equipment, vehicles            $5,000
Software               $10,000
Land and Improvement         $50,000
Building and Improvement         $100,000
Infrastructure               $100,000
to the appropriate capital outlay expenditure account (53XXXX accounts). These
items are assigned a city tag number(s), where appropriate, by the Accounting
Division of DFAS and recorded into the City’s fixed asset tracking system. The
capitalization of costs associated with construction projects will include
other expenses such as professional or contractual fees and service costs
incurred by the project. Annual software licenses and user fees are operating
costs and should not be capitalized. Software products owned by the City or
developed internally are capitalized if they meet the capitalization threshold
and the criteria contained in GASBS 51. General ledger accounts were
established as of July 1, 1995, in which to record computer-related expenses
regarding MIS hardware and software. Reference should be made to the Chart of
Accounts to ensure the proper accounts are utilized. Capital assets costing
less than the thresholds listed on the table above per item will be charged to
the operating expense account 522099 and will not be tagged and recorded into
the City’s fixed asset tracking system. Departments, however, should exercise
control over their non-capitalized assets by establishing and maintaining
adequate control procedures. Departments are required to maintain an inventory
of all computer equipment in their control regardless of the cost of the
individual item.
 
 
______________________________
Lawrence Rael                        [https://export.amlegal.com/media/
Interim Chief Administrative Officer 6d88fadbb394cb34f1263b3e9230120271b111d2/
_____________________________        IMAGES/0-0-0-2325.png]
Effective Date
 
AI_NO:_6-4_(pdf)
AI NO: 6-5
USE OF CITY PROPERTY
TITLE:   Use of City Property
PRIMARY DEPARTMENT:   Chief Administrative Officer
Municipal officials and workers have an obligation to the public to be prudent
and careful in their use of public property. Property which is purchased and
maintained with public funds must be used for City business only.
Administrative Instruction Number 4-5 details the policy for use of City
vehicles. This Administrative Instruction concerns the use of other items of
City property, including (but not limited to) typewriters, calculators,
furnishings, and tools.
City property must be used exclusively for the benefit of the public. Such
property is not provided for the personal use of City employees. With this as
the basic underlying policy, the following guidelines have been developed and
will apply to the use of City property.
GENERAL GUIDELINES
The use of office equipment such as typewriters, calculators, computers,
furnishings, and work-related tools shall be restricted to official business
only. Personal use of such materials is prohibited. If there arises a question
concerning whether such use is of public or personal interest, a decision
should be obtained from the department director or his designee.
Regarding the take-home use of City property such as those items noted above,
prior permission should be obtained from the department director or his
designee.
Should there be questions on the part of department directors regarding the use
of City property, such questions should be referred to the Chief Administrative
Officer for his determination of appropriateness.
 
______________________________
Robert J. Perry                [https://export.amlegal.com/media/
Chief Administrative Officer   6d88fadbb394cb34f1263b3e9230120271b111d2/IMAGES/
_____________________________  0-0-0-671.png]
Effective Date 
 
AI_NO:_6-5_(pdf)
AI NO: 6-6
MANAGEMENT OF STORAGE TANKS CONTAINING PETROLEUM PRODUCTS OR OTHER REGULATED
SUBSTANCES
TITLE:   Management of Storage Tanks Containing Petroleum Products or Other
Regulated Substances
PRIMARY DEPARTMENT:   Environmental Health
In order to minimize the possibility of environmental contamination and avoid
the associated liability, it shall be the policy of the City to regulate the
installation, replacement, repair, modification and removal of all underground
storage tanks (USTs), above-ground storage tanks (ASTs) and associated piping
systems storing or conveying petroleum products or other regulated substances,
that are owned or operated by the City or that are located on City property. It
shall be the policy of the City to comply with all environmental regulations
governing the storage and dispensing of petroleum products or other regulated
substances, including, but not limited to: Federal regulations promulgated
under the Resource Conservation and Recovery Act and the Comprehensive
Environmental Response, Compensation, and Liability Act; the New Mexico
Administrative Code for Petroleum Storage Tanks (20.5 NMAC); the New Mexico
Hazardous Waste Act; and the fire codes of the City of Albuquerque. Bernalillo
County fire codes will apply to the following facilities located in the
unincorporated area of Bernalillo County: Solid Waste Convenience Center at
Montessa Park, Solid Waste Cerro Colorado Landfill, Water Utility Authority-
Soil Amendment Facility, and Water Utility Authority-Southside Water
Reclamation Plant.
The City Environmental Health Department Environmental Services Division (ESD)
is assigned the leadership role for ensuring City-wide compliance of all State
and Federal regulations that are administered by the New Mexico Environment
Department Petroleum Storage Tank Bureau (NMED PSTB). These requirements shall
include, but will not necessarily be limited to, the following:
   1. Each City department (user department) is responsible for notifying the
ESD of all storage tank systems containing regulated petroleum substances (PST)
that are owned or operated by that department, or that are owned or operated by
any tenant on City property that is under the jurisdiction of the department
   2. Each user department will have on the facility premises, a copy of the
current 20.5 NMAC, Petroleum Storage Tank Regulations to support all
requirements set forth in this Administrative Instruction. If a copy is not
available, contact the ESD for a current issue.
   3. Each user department is required to have an Operations and Maintenance
Plan (OMP) written in accordance with 20.5.5.9 NMAC. The OMP shall be a written
document that is developed by the user department or by designee and shall be
kept for the life of the PST system. The OMP shall be specific to the facility
and shall include operations and maintenance of the tank, piping, and all
ancillary equipment that is part of the PST system. Contact ESD for guidance
and examples in drafting an OMP. A well written OMP will aid user departments
to comply the 20.5 NMAC and with this Administrative Instruction.
   4. Each user department is responsible for reporting a known spill or
release from a PST or any emergency to the ESD and NMED PSTB as required in
20.5.7 NMAC, Reporting and Investigation of Suspected and Confirmed Releases by
telephone within 24 hours. Each user department will have posted in clear view,
a list of emergency contact telephone numbers to immediately report such
events. If a current list is not available, contact the ESD.
   5. Any user department contemplating the design, construction, modification,
or closure of a PST or dispensing system shall contact the ESD prior to any
planning and design efforts, to ensure compliance with current City policy and
all applicable City, State, and Federal regulations.
   6. All new PST installations and/or modifications shall conform to all
design, construction, installation and upgrading requirements set forth in
20.5.4 NMAC New and Upgraded Storage Tank Systems: Design Construction and
Installation. Any deviation from these standards must be approved in writing by
NMED PST and the ESD before system installation.
   7. Installation, replacement, repair, modification and removal of PST
systems shall follow all applicable City, State and Federal regulations, and
shall be subject to inspection by the ESD, NMED PSTB and the City Fire Marshal.
When facilities are located in the unincorporated area of Bernalillo County,
County Fire Marshal regulations apply.
   8. Three sets of hard and electronic copies of as-built drawings shall be
required for all new or modified storage tank systems; one set to be retained
by the user department, one set will be retained by the Department responsible
for maintenance activities at the facility, and the other by the ESD for a
period of time equal to the life expectancy of the tank system.
   9. The user department shall provide the ESD with a site development plan
and a facility site and equipment plan for review and approval, before
proceeding to final design and installation of any new or substantially
modified petroleum storage tank system.
   10. Installation, replacement, repair, modification and removal of storage
tank systems shall be performed only by certified contractors and employees, in
accordance with the requirements set forth in 20.5.14 NMAC, Certification of
Tank Installers.
   11. Installation, replacement, repair, modification and removal of PST
systems shall be performed by contractors that comply with occupational safety
and health standards promulgated under the Occupational Safety and Health Act
of 1970.
   12. The user department shall comply with all financial responsibility
requirements set forth in 20.5.9 NMAC, Financial Responsibility.
   13. The ESD in consultation with user departments is authorized to establish
mandatory procedures for the day-to-day management of all City-owned and
operated PST and dispensing systems. Such procedures shall be designed to
ensure compliance with all applicable environmental and safety regulations, and
shall reflect the best management practices in the petroleum and hazardous
materials management industries at the time of implementation. The procedures
will include, but are not limited to the following requirements:
      A. Documentation of all fuel usage and other fuel transactions (including
deliveries and transfers). At sites where equipment for automatic recording of
fuel transactions is not installed, usage and other transactions will be
recorded manually by personnel of the user department;
      B. Monthly completion an environmental compliance inspection checklist as
required in 20.5.5.8 NMAC, General Operating Instructions; and
      C. Each user department shall submit copies of completed environmental
compliance checklists (listed in Facility OMP) to ESD on the first week of each
month or more frequently if required by ESD or NMED PSTB.
   14. Any Notice of Violation (NOV) citations and fines will be the
responsibility of the user department.
   15. The surcharge added to each gallon by the Department of Finance and
Administrative Services, Fleet Management Division, Fuels Section (DFAS-Fuels)
to the cost of fuel provided to City users during Fiscal Year 1997 will remain
in effect The proceeds of this surcharge will continue to provide funds for
necessary upgrades and modifications for City fueling facilities, environmental
compliance and petroleum-related sustainability initiatives.
   16. The ESD will be available to provide technical assistance and
participation in the resolution of issues related to the management of
regulated petroleum substances in underground and above-ground storage tank
systems.
   17. In the event that any user department fails to notify the ESD in a
timely manner of the presence, installation, modification, or removal of a PST
operated by the user department, the user department shall be responsible for
any back fees, fines or testing that may be assessed or required by regulatory
authorities as a result of the City's failure to properly register or manage
the tank system
      A. It is the responsibility of the user department overseeing the tenant
lease to communicate all appropriate information to the ESD for its review and
approval.
      B. The ESD with concurrence from NMED PSTB has final approval authority
with regard to proposed tank installation, replacement, modification or removal
by user departments on City property. However, day-to-day operation and
inventory control shall be the sole responsibility user department
   18. This Administrative Instruction does not supersede any regulatory
requirement set forth in 20.5 NMAC, Petroleum Storage Tank Regulations.
This Administrative Instruction shall remain in effect until amended.
REFERENCES: Federal regulations promulgated under the Resource Conservation and
Recovery Act and the Comprehensive Environmental Response, Compensation, and
Liability Act; the New Mexico Administrative Code for Petroleum Storage Tanks
(20.5 NMAC); the New Mexico Hazardous Waste Act; fire codes of the City of
Albuquerque, Bernalillo County fire codes
 
______________________________
Robert J. Perry                [https://export.amlegal.com/media/
Chief Administrative Officer   6d88fadbb394cb34f1263b3e9230120271b111d2/IMAGES/
_____________________________  0-0-0-673.png]
Effective Date 
 
AI_NO:_6-6_(pdf)
AI NO: 6-7
WATER, ELECTRIC AND NATURAL GAS UTILITIES CLEARINGHOUSE
TITLE:   Water, Electric and Natural Gas Utilities Clearinghouse
PRIMARY DEPARTMENT:   Department of Municipal Development
Background:
In order to ensure the proper management of water, electric and natural gas
utility accounts, a utilities clearinghouse was established for municipal
operations. The Utilities Clearinghouse was created by this Administrative
Instruction and adherence of responsibility from all City Departments/Division
and/or User Agencies (DDUA) will be monitored by the Facilities and Energy
Management Division (FEMD), Department of Municipal Development (DMD) located
at 1801 Fourth Street NW, Albuquerque, New Mexico 87102.
All Departments shall identify a Fiscal Manager to reconcile information and to
coordinate utility account information with FEMD. If at any time there is a
Fiscal Manager change, it must be communicated to FEMD in a written memorandum.
All City DDUA will be required to follow the procedures outlined below when
water, electric or natural gas utility services are needed:
Procedures:
Initiating Water, Electric and Natural Gas Service
1.   DDUA may initiate water, electric and natural gas service from the
appropriate utility.
2.   Upon initiation, the DDUA must complete and submit a Utility Account
Billing Information Form with the address, activity number, and description of
the service required to FEMD at 1801 Fourth Street N.W., Building B,
Albuquerque, New Mexico 87102. This form will also serve as the instrument to
ensure the proper assignment of this newly identified account to the monthly
COA utility billing with the identified address, activity number, and proper
rate structure.
Terminating Water Electric and Natural Gas Service
1.   DDUA may terminate water, electric and natural gas service from the
appropriate utility.
2.   Upon termination, the DDUA must complete and submit a Utility Account
Billing Information Form with the address, activity number, and description of
the terminated service to FEMD at 1801 Fourth Street N.W., Building B,
Albuquerque, New Mexico 87102. This form will also serve as the instrument to
ensure the proper termination/removal of the account from the monthly COA
utility billing.
Monthly Compliance
1.   The appropriate DDUA will be responsible for monitoring water, electric
and natural gas billing on a monthly basis, and reconciling these charges to
the general ledger. DMD will provide a monthly spreadsheet with billing
information. Training information on utilizing composite billing is available
by contacting FEMD at 768-5310.
2.   Any DDUA that begins a new construction, renovation or building/facility
demolition project, must submit Utility Account Billing Information Form to
FEMD prior to initiating services.
3.   If there is a seasonal facility or seasonal meter, the DDUA must notify
FEMD of this type of service by completing and forwarding a Utility Account
Billing Information Form. The FEMD will ensure the proper rate schedule and
billing information for the seasonal account is reflected in the monthly COA
utility billing.
4.   If there are any changes to the utility accounts such as name, activity
number, seasonal usage or ownership at any time during the year, the DDUA will
be responsible for providing this information to FEMD immediately using the
Utility Account Billing Information Form.
Annual Update
1.   At the beginning of each fiscal year, FEMD will provide each DDUA with a
comprehensive list of City water, electric and gas utility service accounts for
annual verification by City DDUA.
2.   If there are any changes to the utility accounts such as name, activity
number, seasonal usage, account status or ownership, the DDUA will be
responsible for providing this information to FEMD with a new Utility Account
Billing Information Form with verified and correct information for each
account. Failure to submit the updated form could result in disconnection of
service.
3.   If there are no changes identified during the Annual Update, the Fiscal
Manager must return the list of accounts with a written formal memo to FEMD
stating that all information is verified and all account information is
correct.
 
______________________________
Robert J. Perry                [https://export.amlegal.com/media/
Chief Administrative Officer   6d88fadbb394cb34f1263b3e9230120271b111d2/IMAGES/
_____________________________  0-0-0-675.png]
Effective Date 
 
AI_NO:_6-7_(pdf)
AI NO: 6-11
ENVIRONMENTAL ASSESSMENT OF REAL PROPERTY ACQUISITIONS
TITLE:   Environmental Assessment of Real Property Acquisitions
PRIMARY DEPARTMENT:   Planning
The following policy shall govern the acquisition by purchase of all real
property by the City. This policy shall not apply to the acquisition of real
property by eminent domain or by plat dedication.
For all purchases of real property, the City, through the Real Property
Division, shall obtain the following environmental assessments of the real
property by qualified licensed environmental consultants.
1. A Phase I Environmental Assessment.
2. A Phase II Environmental Assessment if the Phase I Environmental Assessment
recommends a Phase II Assessment.
3. Further environmental assessments, including those recommended by a Phase II
Environmental Assessment, if performed.
4. The City shall require the completion of the recommendations set forth in
any of the environmental assessments, if any, as either a precondition to the
closing of the real estate contract, or as a condition subsequent to the
closing of the contract as determined by the City.
Notwithstanding anything herein to the contrary, the City may purchase real
property that is determined to be contaminated so long as the environmental
condition of the property will not prevent the planned use of the property by
the City, and the purchase is approved by the Chief Administrative Officer.
Additionally, the requirement to obtain any or all of the Environmental
Assessments and the completion of any recommendations may be waived, as is
reasonably determined by the Real Property Division Manager, and approved by
the Chief Administrative Officer, based upon factors including, but not limited
to, the location of the property, the size of the property, the cost of the
property, the intended use of the property, and the necessity of the property
to the City.
 
______________________________
Robert J. Perry                [https://export.amlegal.com/media/
Chief Administrative Officer   6d88fadbb394cb34f1263b3e9230120271b111d2/IMAGES/
_____________________________  0-0-0-677.png]
Effective Date 
 
AI_NO:_6-11_(pdf)
AI NO: 6-13
ACQUISITION OF PROPERTY IN EXCESS OF APPRAISED VALUE
TITLE:   Acquisition of Property in Excess of Appraised value
PRIMARY DEPARTMENT:   Chief Administrative Officer
The following policy shall govern the acquisition by purchase of all real
property by the City.
All proposed purchases of real property in excess of ten percent over the
appraised value shall be submitted to the Executive Acquisition Committee for
its review and approval. The Real Property Division Manager may approve a
purchase price that is up to ten percent (10%) over the appraised value without
seeking the approval of the Executive Acquisition Committee.
 
______________________________
Robert J. Perry                [https://export.amlegal.com/media/
Chief Administrative Officer   6d88fadbb394cb34f1263b3e9230120271b111d2/IMAGES/
_____________________________  0-0-0-679.png]
Effective Date 
 
AI_NO:_6-13_(pdf)
AI NO: 6-14 (2023)
DISPOSITION OF BICYCLES ABANDONED ON CITY PROPERTY
TITLE:   Disposition of Bicycles Abandoned on City Property
PRIMARY DEPARTMENT:   Parks and Recreation Department
The Parks and Recreation Department provides refurbished bicycles to the public
through its Esperanza Bicycle Safety and Education Center. Bicycles that are
found on City property, including its vehicles, and are unclaimed after thirty
(30) days and thereby deemed abandoned, shall be transferred to the custody and
care of the Esperanza Bicycle Safety and Education Center. This instruction
shall supersede other Administrative Instructions with regard to procedures
required to dispose of abandoned, unclaimed, unused and surplus property, where
contrary procedures apply with regard to unclaimed and abandoned bicycles only.
 
 
______________________________ [https://export.amlegal.com/media/
Lawrence Rael                  6d88fadbb394cb34f1263b3e9230120271b111d2/IMAGES/
Chief Administrative Officer   0-0-0-2457.png]
_____________________________
Effective Date
 
AI_NO:_6-14_(pdf)
AI NO: 6-15
ENSURING CPOA COMPLAINT FORMS AND RECRUITING BROCHURES
ARE AVAILABLE AT LIBRARIES AND COMMUNITY CENTERS
TITLE:   Ensuring CPOA Complaint Forms and Recruiting Brochures are Available
at Libraries and Community Centers
PRIMARY DEPARTMENTS:   APD; Family and Community Services; Cultural Services;
Senior Affairs
1.   General
The City must "make complaint forms and informational materials, including
brochures and posters," regarding making a complaint or commendation about an
officer, available at City locations, including libraries and community
centers, as agreed to in the Court Approved Settlement Agreement in the case of
United States v. City of Albuquerque, 14-CV-1025. In addition, the City must
recruit "qualified applicants from a broad cross section of the community'' to
the police academy, and thus, as part of the City's recruitment strategy, the
City will make APD recruitment brochures available at libraries and community
centers.
This Administrative Instruction defines the process by which the City will
ensure that such documents are available at libraries and community centers and
restocked as necessary.
2.   Application
   a.   APD must refill out-of-stock and low stocked complaint forms,
informational brochures and materials at each library, community center, and
senior center.
   b.   Each library, community center, and senior center must:
      I.   On the first of each month or the first subsequent business day,
ensure that the following documents are stocked, visible to the public, and
easily accessible to the public: Albuquerque Police Department Complaint or
Commendation Form (in both English and Spanish: Civilian Police Oversight
Agency Informational Brochure (in English and Spanish); and APD recruitment
brochure.
      II.   If there are less than ten APD recruitment brochures in stock,
contact Sergeant Deanne Otzenberger at (505) 228-2559 or Drush@cabq.gov to
request additional recruitment brochures.
      III.   If there are less than ten Complaint/Commendation forms or CPOA
Informational Brochures in stock, call Kathy Roybal-Nunez at 768-2880 to
request additional forms or brochures.
      iv.   Ensure that the "Let's put 'COMMUNITY' into APD COMMUNITY POLICING"
poster, in English and Spanish, is posted in a location visible to the public
and is not torn, tattered or worn in a way that interferes with legibility.
      v.   If the poster needs to be replaced, call Kathy Roybal-Nunez at 768-
2880 and ask that APD replace the poster.
 
______________________________
Sarita Nair                    [https://export.amlegal.com/media/
Chief Administrative Officer   6d88fadbb394cb34f1263b3e9230120271b111d2/IMAGES/
_____________________________  0-0-0-1706.jpg]
Effective Date
 
AI NO: 6-16
APPROVALS FOR WORK ON THE COMMUNICATIONS BUILDING
TITLE:   Approvals for Work on the Communications Building
PRIMARY DEPARTMENT: Albuquerque Fire Rescue ("AFR")
The City must allow for improvements, repairs, construction, maintenance, and
other comparable work ("work") to the Communications Building located at 11510
Sunset Garden Southwest, Albuquerque, New Mexico 87121. To ensure critical
services housed within the Communications Building are not interrupted, no work
shall be performed on the Communications Building without prior written
approval from the AFR Chief and the APD Chief.
 
 
______________________________
Sarita Nair                    [https://export.amlegal.com/media/
Chief Administrative Officer   6d88fadbb394cb34f1263b3e9230120271b111d2/IMAGES/
                               0-0-0-1708.jpg]
_____________________________
Effective Date
 
 
 
Personnel
AI NO: 7-1
SIGNATURE AUTHORITY FOR PERSONNEL MATTERS (October 2023)
TITLE: Signature Authority for Personnel Matters
PRIMARY DEPARTMENT: Human Resources
Background:
The City of Albuquerque acknowledges that appropriate delegation of authority
is required for efficient processes associated with the signing of
documentation for personnel matters.
This AI provides general guidelines for delegation of signature authority. For
items not covered in this Administrative Instruction, reference State statute,
City Ordinance, City Resolution, City Rules and Regulations, the Merit System
Ordinance, or City policies. This AI supersedes all other personnel related
AIs.
Definitions:
   A.   Chief Administrative Officer (CAO)
   B.   Department Director- Director of the designated department
   C.   Executive Administrator (EA) – Assigned administrator of the Mayor’s
executive team with administrative oversight for assigned department(s). The
assigned Executive Administrator shall be designated by title through approved
and posted organizational chart.
   D.   Human Resources Director (HRD)
   E.   Middle Management- Employment of individual where the job description
contains the essential function of directly supervising others. These middle
management level positions are levels of management below Deputy Director and
Associate Director.
General Policy:
The City of Albuquerque CAO hereby delegates signature authority associated
with the following personnel workflows:
   I.   Creation, re-classification or release of positions
      A.   Newly-created, non-funded positions; reclassifications requiring
additional budgetary funding; and non- routine requests must be approved by the
HRD, Budget Officer and EA.
      B.   Reclassifications not requiring additional budget or release of
funded positions must be approved by the Department Director(s) associated with
the reclassification, Budget Analyst(s), HRD and EA.
   II.   Hiring
      A.   Hiring of the CAO, any deputy administrative officers, Chief of
Police, Fire Chief, City Clerk, and the City Attorney require approval of
Council as provided in Article IV, Section 4 of the City Charter.
      B.   Unclassified Employees
         1.   All Unclassified Directors, Deputy Director and Associate
Director Employees must be approved by the CAO.
         2.   All unclassified Middle Management employees must be approved by
the Department Director and EA.
         3.   All other unclassified staff level positions must be approved by
the Department Director, Budget Officer and EA.
      C.   Classified Employees
         1.   All Middle Management employees in titles of Assistant or
Associate Director must be approved by the Department Director and EA.
         2.   All other Middle Management and staff level positions must be
approved by the Department Director.
      D.   Positions identified as Difficult to Recruit must be approved by the
HRD and EA. Hiring Incentive limits have been established through AI 7-44.
   II.   Compensation
      A.   All wage adjustment requests to base pay must be submitted to the
Human Resources Department, Classification and Compensation Division for
appropriate benchmarking.
      B.   All permanent wage adjustment requests must be approved by the CAO.
      C.   Temporary Upgrades
         1.   Temporary Upgrades for Director or Deputy Director Positions must
be approved by the CAO.
         2.   Temporary Upgrades for Middle Management and staff level
positions must be approved by the Department Director and EA.
   III.   Leave
      A.   With Pay
         1.   Accrued vacation, sick, and injury time approval
            a)   Time off request of Directors must be approved by EA.
            b)   Time off requests of Deputy Directors and Associate Directors
must be approved by Department Directors
            c)   Time off requests of Middle Management and staff are approved
by their designated supervisor
      B.   Without Pay
         1.   Time off requests of Directors must be approved by CAO
         2.   Time off requests of less than 2 weeks of Deputy Directors and
Associate Directors must be approved by Department Director and EA.
         3.   Time off request of more than 2 weeks of Deputy Directors must be
approved by CAO
         4.   Time off request of less than 2 weeks of Middle Management and
staff as approved by Department Director and EA.
         5.   Time off requests of more than 2 weeks of Middle Management and
staff must be approved by CAO.
      C.   Leave Donations
         1.   Leave donations requested from employees within a Department must
be approved by the Department Director
         2.   The Department Director, HRD and EA must approve leave donations
requested from employees within other departments.
      D.   All other leave requests must be approved by the CAO.
   IV.   Resignation acceptance or Termination
      A.   Director or Deputy Director position resignation acknowledged or
termination approved by EA.
      B.   Middle Management and staff position resignations acknowledged or
termination approved by Department Director
   V.   Temporary Assignment of Signature Authority- Temporary signature
authority may be delegated in writing by the official who holds the applicable
position.
      A.   Temporary signature authority delegated for less than a 2-week
period must be approved by EA.
      B.   Temporary signature authority delegated for more than a 2-week
period must be approved by CAO.
   VI.   Notice of Delegated Action
      A.   Signatory actions taken as a result of the delegated authority
included and/or referenced to Administrative Instruction No. 7-1 must be
documented and communicated to the Chief Administrative Officer with 5 days of
action. The Chief Administrative Officer must also document and communicate
signatory actions taken on behalf of the Executive Administrators or department
staff to the applicable department(s) Executive Administrator within 5 days of
action.
REFERENCES: Executive Instruction No. 2 Signature Authority; City Charter;
City's Merit System Ordinance; City Personnel Administrative Instructions; and
the City of Albuquerque Personnel Rules and Regulations.
 
 

______________________________
Lawrence Rael                  [https://export.amlegal.com/media/
Chief Administrative Officer   6d88fadbb394cb34f1263b3e9230120271b111d2/IMAGES/
                              0-0-0-2513.png]
_____________________________
Effective Date
 
AI_NO:_7-1_(pdf)
AI NO: 7-2
INJURY TIME ADMINISTRATION, INJURY REPORTING, INITIAL HEALTH CARE PROVIDER
DESIGNATION AND CHANGE OF HEALTH CARE PROVIDER
TITLE:   Injury Time Administration, Injury Reporting, Initial Health Care
Provider Designation and Change of Health Care Provider
PRIMARY DEPARTMENT:   Department of Finance and Administration Services
The Risk Management Division within the Department of Finance and
Administrative Services is responsible for administering the City’s Workers
Compensation program and the Injury Time benefit, and therefore has established
procedures to assure compliance with City policy and the Workers’ Compensation
Act. This instruction further clarifies those procedures:
   ∙  Employees and supervisors are required to follow the current reporting
requirements of the Risk Management Division. These requirements are available
from the Risk Management Division and are posted on Risk Management Division’s
internal webpage.
   ∙  Department Directors are to ensure that a “City of Albuquerque,
Supervisor’s Injury Investigation Report” is completed immediately after the
injury and submitted to the Risk Management Division within two workdays.
   ∙  The Risk Management Division will verify and approve Injury Time. The
Payroll Office will not release an employee’s Injury Time check until it
receives verification from the Risk Management Division.
   ∙  When a City employee is injured in the course of and arising out of his/
her employment, the City shall provide the worker with reasonable and necessary
health care services. Per the Workers’ Compensation Act (52-1-49 NMSA 1978),
the City shall initially select the health care provider for the injured
worker.
   ∙  Pursuant to NMSA 1978 Section 52-1-49 of the Workers’ Compensation Act,
the worker may elect to change the healthcare provider after 60 days from
initial treatment. Should a worker intend to change from the City’s designated
health care provider, the worker shall complete the “Notice of Change of
Healthcare Provider” and submit it to the Risk Management Division. The form is
available Online at www.workerscomp.state.nm.us.
Injury Reporting and Initial Treatment
The City provides health care services by/through the City Employee Health
Center. City workers shall abide by the following instructions:
   ∙  If EMERGENCY MEDICAL TREATMENT IS NECESSARY CALL 911. Subsequent to the
emergency situation, call the Telephonic Nurse Triage number to report the
injury.
   ∙  For non-emergencies call the Telephonic Nurse Triage number to report the
injury and receive instructions for treatment. If instructed to seek medical
treatment outside of the Employee Health Center, the injured employee must
report to the Employee Health Center prior to returning to work and for any
follow up evaluation or care.
   ∙  Detailed instructions for this procedure are available at the Risk
Management office or on the Risk Management internal webpage. http://
sharepoint.cabq.gov/dfas/risk/WC/default.aspx
REFERENCES:   Workers’ Compensation Act (Section 52-1-49 NMSA 1978) and
Personnel Rules and Regulations Section 401.10 Injury Time.
 
______________________________
Robert J. Perry                [https://export.amlegal.com/media/
Chief Administrative Officer   6d88fadbb394cb34f1263b3e9230120271b111d2/IMAGES/
_____________________________  0-0-0-683.png]
Effective Date
 
AI_NO:_7-2_(pdf)
AI NO: 7-3
HUMAN TRAFFICKING AWARENESS TRAINING FOR CITY EMPLOYEES
TITLE: Human Trafficking Awareness Training for City Employees
PRIMARY DEPARTMENT:Human Resources   
Purpose of Administrative Instruction:
This Administrative Instruction serves to implement Council resolution R-24-42
and establish mandatory anti human trafficking awareness training.
Background:
Human Trafficking is a crime wherein someone exploits another person
using force, fraud, or coercion for the purposes of compelled
labor or commercial sex. Human Traffickers operate in every country, state,
city, and town. It’s happening right now in Albuquerque, New Mexico, maybe even
in your community. It’s difficult to realize, because human trafficking often
goes unrecognized, or it’s underreported because victims are afraid, or they
don’t understand what is happening.
Traffickers find vulnerable people and exploit them. Circumstances like
poverty, an unstable living situation, lack of support, social and cultural
inequalities, addiction or substance use, or previous trauma or victimization
are a few of the contributors that can put someone at risk.
The city of Albuquerque is committed to empowering our employees to be aware
and diligent in recognizing, identifying and helping to report Human
Trafficking in our community and help build a safe and sustainable environment
for our residents.
General Policy:
The Employee Learning Center, Albuquerque Fire and Rescue, and Transportation
Departments have collaborated to provide training to all City employees for
Human Trafficking awareness.
This training is mandatory for all City employees on an annual or biennial
basis depending on department specific training requirements.
All new employees will receive Human Trafficking awareness training during
their New Employee Orientation. This training must be completed within two
weeks of the employee’s hire date.
Options for employee trainings will include the following:
Mandatory biennial online training for all Regular and Part-Time employees in
non-public safety or aviation departments. This training is offered online
through the City of Albuquerque Employee Learning Center in the Human Resources
Department.
Mandatory annual online department specific Human Trafficking awareness
training as provided by AFR and APD for all first-responder or Public Safety
Employees.
Mandatory annual Human Trafficking Awareness training as provided by the
Transportation Security Administration through the Aviation Department for all
Aviation employees.
Employee training records will be monitored and managed by the City of
Albuquerque Human Resources Department, and the HR staff in the AFR, APD, ACS
and Aviation departments.
References:
R-24-42
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/6d88fadbb394cb34f1263b3e9230120271b111d2/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2639.jpg]
AI_NO:_7-3_(pdf)
AI NO: 7-4
REHABILITATION LOANS FOR CITY EMPLOYEES
TITLE:   Rehabilitation Loans for City Employees
PRIMARY DEPARTMENT:   Family and Community Services
All applications from City employees for rehabilitation loans must be examined
by the Housing Advisory and Appeals Committee. The Housing Advisory and Appeals
Committee will be responsible for insuring that all City guidelines and Federal
regulations are followed before a rehabilitation loan is made to a City
employee.
REFERENCES:   none 
 
______________________________
Robert J. Perry                [https://export.amlegal.com/media/
Chief Administrative Officer   6d88fadbb394cb34f1263b3e9230120271b111d2/IMAGES/
______________________________ 0-0-0-685.png]
Effective Date 
 
AI_NO:_7-4_(pdf)
AI NO: 7-5
PRE-EMPLOYMENT MEDICAL EXAMINATIONS
TITLE:   Pre-Employment Medical Examinations
PRIMARY DEPARTMENT:   Human Resources
Job applicants for City employment may be required to submit to and pass
employment medical examinations and alcohol and illegal drug testing.
The medical examination shall be conducted only after a contingent offer of
employment has been made to the job applicant. An alcohol and illegal drug test
shall be conducted in conjunction with the medical examination for SAFETY
SENSITIVE positions as identified by the Director of Human Resources
Department. The medical examination and the alcohol and illegal drug test shall
be completed prior to extending the final approved offer of employment. The
medical examinations shall be conducted by/through the City Employee Health
Center. The medical examinations shall be requested through the Human Resources
Department Director or his/her designee. The results of the medical
examinations shall be identified as pass/fail in the approval process.
A job applicant who passes all other prerequisites for employment but does not
pass the medical examination, alcohol, or drug testing will be notified
pursuant to Personnel Rules and Regulations Section 1100 Substance Abuse
Policy.
The City shall test for alcohol and illegal drugs in conjunction with medical
examinations. However, such tests are not medical examinations, and their
results are not subject to the appeals process contained in Personnel Rules and
Regulations Section 1100 Substance Abuse Policy.
The City prohibits the use of alcohol and illegal drugs at the workplace by all
employees, and the City requires that employees not be under the influence of
alcohol or illegal drugs in the workplace. The City requires that all employees
be in compliance with the requirements of the Drug-Free Workplace Act of 1988.
The application process shall be terminated for a job applicant who tests
positive for alcohol or an illegal drug pursuant to Personnel Rules and
Regulations Section 1100 Substance Abuse Policy.
 
__________________________________
Robert J. Perry                    [https://export.amlegal.com/media/
Chief Administrative Officer       6d88fadbb394cb34f1263b3e9230120271b111d2/
_______________________________    IMAGES/0-0-0-687.png]
Effective Date
 
AI_NO:_7-5_(pdf)
AI NO: 7-6
MULTILINGUAL DIFFERENTIAL PAY POLICY
TITLE: Multilingual Differential Pay Policy PRIMARY DEPARTMENT: Human Resources
Purpose of Administrative Instruction: This Administrative Instruction
implements a policy for allocating pay incentives for multilingual capable
employees in accordance with R-23-103.
Background: The City of Albuquerque acknowledges that bilingual City employees
help make government services and resources more easily available and
understandable to the diverse residents of Albuquerque, including non-English
speakers and those who use American Sign Language. This AI supersedes all other
Multi or Bilingual Pay related AIs.
Definitions:
1.   CAO – Chief Administrative Officer
2.   Department Director – Director of the designated department
3.   Human Resources Director (HRD)
4.   Safe Harbor Languages
   i.   Spanish
   ii.   American Sign Language (“ASL”)
   iii.   Dine (Navajo)
   iv.   Vietnamese
   v.   Mandarin Chinese
   vi.   Arabic
   vii.   Swahili
5.   Collective Bargaining Agreement(s) CBA
General Policy:
I.   Eligibility:
Eligibility shall include all classified and unclassified positions within the
City. The City emphasizes the importance of using various languages across our
workforce. This list provides a prioritization hierarchy for providing
bilingual pay consideration:
   1)   Emergency Services:
      i.   Albuquerque Police Department
      ii.   Albuquerque Fire Rescue
      iii.   Albuquerque Police 911 Communications
      iv.   Albuquerque Community Safety Department
      v.   Aviation Emergency Communications
   2)   Positions with citizens with special needs/circumstances:
      i.   Senior Affairs Department
      ii.   Department of Youth & Family Services
      iii.   Department of Health, Housing & Homelessness
      iv.   Civil Rights Office
      v.   Violence Intervention Program (VIP)
      vi.   Civilian Police Oversight Agency
      vii.   Transit Department
   3)   Positions or Departments which have daily bilingual citizen contact:
      i.   311 Contact Center Employees
      ii.   Mayor’s Office
      iii.   Animal Welfare Department
      iv.   General Services Department
      v.   Parks & Recreation Department
      vi.   Planning Department
      vii.   Solid Waste Department
   4)   Positions or Departments which have occasional bilingual citizen
contact:
      i.   Arts & Culture Department
      ii.   Aviation Department
      iii.   City Clerk’s Department
      iv.   City Council
      v.   Office of Consumer Protection
      vi.   Economic Development
      vii.   Emergency Management Office
      viii.   Environmental Health Department
      ix.   Equity & Inclusion Office
      x.   Human Resources Department
      xi.   Inspector General’s Office
      xii.   Internal Audit Department
      xiii.   Legal Department
      xiv.   Management & Budget Office
      xv.   Metropolitan Redevelopment Department
      xvi.   Municipal Development
      xvii.   Technology & Innovation Department
I.   PRIORITIZATION
The Department Director of each Department shall prioritize each position to
receive Bilingual Differential Pay within their respective Department
considering the following:
   A.   All roles within the organization are eligible; limited by the
organizations ability to provide appropriate testing;
   B.   Employees demonstrating fluency in Safe Harbor Languages shall be
prioritized over employees who speak other languages;
   C.   Staff positions shall be prioritized before leadership positions;
   D.   Non-Probationary employees shall be prioritized over Probationary
employees;
   E.   Eligible Jobs require individuals to utilize a different language more
than 10% of the time;
   F.   Temporary Employees shall be eligible for Bilingual Differential Pay
only after all full time employees who qualify;
   G.   Employees who assist co-workers with Bilingual Language (10% or more
their time) shall be eligible for Bilingual Differential Pay;
   H.   Any employee may lose their Bilingual Differential Pay if they change
their job classification into a position or Department with a lower
prioritization.
   I.   Language pay will be provided when an employee has certified for their
first language; no additional pay consideration shall be provided for multiple
languages;
   J.   A maximum of 377 employees may qualify for Bilingual Pay Differential;
   K.   Employees who utilize Bilingual Interpretation Services shall not be
eligible for Bilingual Pay Differential;
   L.   Employees who receive Bilingual Differential Pay shall be required to
use their Bilingual Language to the best of their ability and shall become
ineligible for Bilingual Pay Differential should they become unable or
unwilling;
   M.   Employees who qualify for Bilingual Differential Pay but do not receive
Bilingual Pay Differential due to budgetary limitations shall not use their
Bilingual proficiency.
   N.   Employees who receive Bilingual Differential Pay shall be required to
assist other Departments with their Bilingual skills as needed;
II.   TESTING:
   A.   Human Resources will oversee the bilingual examination, certify exam
results, and determine effective date of the bilingual pay.
   B.   Testing resources shall be determined by Human Resources in
collaboration with the Office of Equity and Inclusion.
   C.   The City will only fund testing for any employee once per year.
   D.   If an employee would like to retest in the same year, the individual
may self-pay for retesting using City approved testing resources.
   E.   The City will only pay for testing for the same individual 2 times over
a 5-year period.
III.   CERTIFICATION/RECERTIFICATION OF BILINGUAL ABILITY
   A.   The supervisor of an employee who receives Bilingual Differential Pay
shall be required to certify that the position requires the employee to use
their bilingual skills at least 10% of the time on an annual basis;
   B.   Supervisors are required to notify the Human Resources Department
immediately if a qualifying position no longer uses bilingual skills the
required 10% of the time.
   C.   The Human Resources Department shall confirm that the supervisor of an
employee who receives Bilingual Pay Differential has certified/recertified on
an annual basis. An employee will cease receiving Bilingual Pay Differential
should they not be certified/recertified on an annual basis.
IV.   DIFFERENTIAL PAY
A salary differential allowance shall be paid to employees in positions
requiring bilingual proficiency that qualify and shall be designated as
follows:
   A.   $.75 per hour applied to regular hours/hours worked for employees
certified in performing both listening/speaking and reading/writing proficiency
or
   B.   For employees who are not certified in both listening/speaking and
reading writing:
      i)   $.30 per hour for listening/speaking proficiency
      ii)   $.20 per hour for reading/writing proficiency
References:
R-23-130
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/6d88fadbb394cb34f1263b3e9230120271b111d2/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2654.jpg]
 
AI_NO:_7-6_(pdf)
AI NO: 7-7
CITY PAYROLL DEDUCTION POLICY - NON-CITY SPONSORED ACTIVITIES OR INSURANCE
TITLE:   City Payroll Deduction Policy - Non-City Sponsored Activities or
Insurance
PRIMARY DEPARTMENT: Department of Finance and Administrative Services
It shall be the policy of the City to make payroll deductions only for official
City- sponsored activities. The City shall not make deductions for non-City
sponsored organizations or employee recreation funds.
Payroll deductions for existing non-City-sponsored life insurance, which
currently are the only payroll deductions for non-City sponsored activities,
will be continued as a convenience for City employees.
Every July 1, the service charges to the insurance companies will be reviewed
and revised if necessary. The service charges will be billed each July 1 and
will be due in 30 days. Any charges paid after the due date will be deducted
from any distributions to the companies. Failure of companies to pay the
service charge may result in the elimination of payroll deductions for that
firm. The service charges are as follows:
    No. of Employees Annual Fee
     30 to 99     $750.00
    100 to 200     $1,000.00
     Over 200     $1,500.00
 
______________________________
Robert J. Perry                [https://export.amlegal.com/media/
Chief Administrative Officer   6d88fadbb394cb34f1263b3e9230120271b111d2/IMAGES/
_____________________________  0-0-0-689.png]
Effective Date
 
AI_NO:_7-7_(pdf)
AI NO: 7-8
CITY EMPLOYEES HOLDING ELECTIVE OFFICE
TITLE:   City Employees Holding Elective Office
PRIMARY DEPARTMENT:   Human Resources
Background
At the municipal election on October 3, 1989, the voters of Albuquerque
approved Proposition No. 8, which added a new §3 to Article XI (now renumbered
as Article X) of the City Charter. Section 3 prohibits City employees from
holding an elective office of the State of New Mexico or any of its political
subdivisions. The effective date of the prohibition is January 1, 1993.
However, those City employees who held such elective offices as of October 3,
1989, were allowed to continue to serve in such elective offices and to
continue to be elected to the same office while serving as City employees.
Also, since the prohibition did not become effective until January 1, 1993, any
City employee who was elected to such an elective office after October 3, 1989,
but before January 1, 1993, was able to remain in elective office until January
1, 1993.
The effect was to create three classes of City employees:
1.   City employees who were employed by the City and were holding elective
office on October 3, 1989. These employees were to be allowed to continue to
hold elective office, so long as they are elected to the same elective office.
2.   City employees who were first elected and held office after October 3,
1989, but before January 1, 1993. These employees were permitted to remain in
office and City employment until January 1, 1993.
3.   City employees who did not hold any elective office on or after January 1,
1993.
As of the Effective Date of this Administrative Instruction No. 7-8 (2016), the
Human Resources Department is not aware of any current city employee who would
fall within the first two classes of employees described above.
Policy
Effective January 1, 1993, it is the policy of the City of Albuquerque that all
City employees are prohibited from holding an elective office of the State of
New Mexico or any of its political subdivisions while employees of the City.
The foregoing prohibition does not apply to an employee of the City of
Albuquerque who was employed by the City on October 3, 1989, and who at that
time held elective office of the State of New Mexico or any of its political
subdivisions. That employee may continue to hold that same elective office
while serving as a City employee.
REFERENCES:
City Charter Article X, §3 (adopted at Regular Municipal Election on October 3,
1989, as Proposition No. 8.)
City of Albuquerque Ordinances, § 3-1-21(B), Political Activity (recommended
reference on this topic)
City of Albuquerque Personnel Rules and Regulations, Section 311.3(B) –
Political Activities (recommended reference on this topic)
 
______________________________
Robert J. Perry                [https://export.amlegal.com/media/
Chief Administrative Officer   6d88fadbb394cb34f1263b3e9230120271b111d2/IMAGES/
_____________________________  0-0-0-691.png]
Effective Date
 
AI_NO:_7-8_(pdf)
AI NO: 7-9
EMPLOYEE LEAVE PURCHASE PROGRAM
TITLE: City of Albuquerque – Employee Leave Purchase
PRIMARY DEPARTMENT: Human Resources (HR)
OVERVIEW: The purpose of this Administrative Instruction is to outline the
guidelines and procedures for the purchase of additional leave by eligible City
employees. This program aims to provide employees with greater flexibility in
managing their work-life balance, while ensuring that City services continue to
function effectively and efficiently.
SCOPE: This program applies to all full-time and permanent part-time City
employees who are eligible to purchase additional leave under the terms
outlined herein. Employees must adhere to the guidelines and procedures as
specified in this document.
ELIGIBILITY: Employees are eligible to purchase additional leave if they meet
the following criteria:
•Must be a full-time or permanent part-time employee.
•Employees who have been placed on unpaid suspension in the previous year are
not eligible to participate in the leave purchase program.
LEAVE PURCHASE LIMITS:
•Full-time employees may purchase up to 40 hours of additional leave per fiscal
year; part-time employees may purchase up to 20 hours of additional leave per
fiscal year.
•Leave must be purchased in increments of 8 hours for full-time employees and
in increments of 4 hours for part-time employees.
•During initial and subsequent open enrollment, employees may purchase up
to100% of the purchase limit.
•Newly hired employees and existing employees purchasing leave after initial
and open enrollment, may purchase leave based on the following schedule:
Full-time:
   40 hours if purchased during the first quarter of the fiscal year.
   32 hours if purchased during the second quarter of the fiscal year.
   24 hours if purchased during the third quarter of the fiscal year.
   16 hours if purchased during the fourth quarter of the fiscal year.
Part-time:
   20 hours if purchased during the first quarter of the fiscal year.
   16 hours if purchased during the second quarter of the fiscal year.
   12 hours if purchased during the third quarter of the fiscal year.
   8 hours if purchased during the fourth quarter of the fiscal year
•Employees may not purchase leave in excess of vacation leave limits.
HOW TO PURCHASE LEAVE:
•All leave purchase requests are subject to approval by the employee’s
director, and departmental financial officer based on departmental needs and
operational coverage.
•Employees may only submit one purchase request per fiscal year.
•Employees shall provide the leave purchase requests to their departmental
payroll and human resources coordinators.
•The cost of purchased leave will be deducted in equal amounts from the
employee’s salary throughout the remainder of the fiscal year.
USAGE OF PURCHASED LEAVE:
•Purchased leave will be coded as Vacation Leave Buy (VCBUY) upon purchase for
tracking and reporting. Employees shall use the code Vacation Purchase Taken
(VPT) when submitting payroll after using the purchased leave.
•Employees should request to use leave in accordance with their departmental
policy.
•Purchased leave can be taken in conjunction with other types of leave (such as
vacation leave or sick leave), subject to supervisor approval.
•Supervisors must review the request and ensure there is sufficient leave
balance.
LEAVE BALANCE UPON SEPERATION:
•If an employee owes a remaining balance for leave taken, but not repaid to the
City, the employee shall be fully responsible for repaying the balance and the
full amount shall be deducted from the employee’s final paycheck.
•If an employee leaves City employment before the full purchased leave amount
is utilized, the balance of the leave purchase will be credited to them on
their final paycheck.
SPECIAL CIRCUMSTANCES:
•Transfers: If an employee transfers to another department, any unused leave
purchased under this program will be transferred to the new department and the
granting of any additional requested purchased leave will be up to the new
department.
•Promotions and Demotions: Employees who are promoted or demoted will have
purchased leave paid out at their rate of pay at the time the leave is taken.
•Usage with Other Types of Leave: Employees may use purchased leave in
conjunction with other types of approved leave. The purchase and usage of
additional leave does not alter and will not extend the eligibility for other
leave entitlements under relevant personnel rules and labor laws.
RECORDKEEPING:
•Payroll, and the employee’s department will maintain records of all leave
purchases, including the employee's request form, repayment schedule, and any
adjustments to the leave balance.
•Employees are responsible for ensuring that they are aware of their remaining
leave balance and the status of their repayment.
PROGRAM REVIEW AND MODIFICATION:
•This leave purchase program is subject to periodic review and may be modified
or terminated at the discretion of the City.
•Employees will be notified in writing of any changes to the program’s terms
orconditions.
COMPLIANCE:
Employees must comply with all relevant laws, regulations, and employment
agreements concerning leave. Any violation of this policy may result in
disciplinary action, including the denial of future leave purchase requests.
_______________________________________________
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/6d88fadbb394cb34f1263b3e9230120271b111d2/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2843.jpg]
AI_NO:_7-9_(pdf)
AI NO: 7-10
AMERICANS WITH DISABILITIES ACT (ADA) GRIEVANCE PROCEDURE
TITLE:   Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA) Grievance Procedure
PRIMARY DEPARTMENT:   Human Resources
Background:
Title II of the ADA prohibits discrimination on the basis of disability by
public entities in all services, programs and activities (including employment)
provided or made available to the public.
Disability means, with respect to an individual, a physical or mental
impairment that substantially limits one or more of the major life activities
(caring for one's self, performing manual tasks, walking, seeing, hearing,
speaking, breathing, learning, working, etc.) of such individual; a record of
such an impairment; or being regarded as having such an impairment.
The U.S. Department of Justice, Civil Rights Division, has adopted regulations
at 28 CFR Part 35, entitled “Nondiscrimination on the Basis of Disability in
State and Local Government Services”. 28 CFR §35.107(b) provides that:
      "A public entity that employs 50 or more persons shall adopt and publish
grievance procedures providing for prompt and equitable resolution of
complaints alleging any action that would be prohibited by this part."
ADA GRIEVANCE PROCEDURE:
A.   POLICY
    The City of Albuquerque, in maintaining a policy of Equal Employment
Opportunity and equal access, will afford to all employees, applicants for
employment, and users of public services, programs and activities, the right to
file a complaint or grievance on any discriminatory action, procedure or
practice in selection, employment and access. However, this Grievance Procedure
only applies to employees employed by the City of Albuquerque or citizens
applying for advertised positions posted by the City of Albuquerque.
   The Human Resources Department, located in Old City Hall, shall be
responsible for investigation of all such complaints and grievances as it
relates to employment with the City of Albuquerque. The purpose of the
grievance procedure is to provide an avenue for the resolution of disability
discrimination complaints, verbally or written, equitably and in a timely
manner. The procedure shall be utilized only for complaints based on
discrimination or alleging noncompliance with the ADA. The grievance procedure
outlined in the City's Merit System Ordinance shall be used for grievable
issues not alleging discrimination based on disabilities covered under the ADA.
   Investigation of complaints regarding accessibility to City government
programs, services and activities, reasonable accommodation or discrimination
in employment, may be initiated by filing a charge with the Human Resources
Employee Relations Manager (Human Resources Manager), or his or her designee.
B.   PRE-INTAKE PROCEDURE
     When investigating claims of discrimination in employment practices other
than hiring, prior to accepting and investigating a complaint of
discrimination, the grievant will be encouraged by the Human Resources
Department to discuss the complaint with his or her supervisor or department
head to attempt to resolve the issues at the department level. If the grievant
does not receive a satisfactory resolution of the complaint at that level, he
or she may file a charge and initiate an investigation into the matter by
contacting the Human Resources Manager, or his or her designee.
C.   INTAKE PROCEDURE
     The following procedure will be used by the Human Resources Manager, or
his or her designee, in investigating and attempting to resolve ADA complaints:
   1. The grievant must notify the Human Resources Manager, or his or her
designee, of the grievant’s complaint either in person or in writing within 30
calendar days from the date the alleged discriminatory action took place. The
complaint shall include:
      a.   the name and phone number of grievant, and department of grievant,
if internal;
      b.   the date, description and/or location of alleged discriminatory act;
      c.   the name(s), if known, of person(s) responsible for alleged
discriminatory act; and
      d.   the nature of remedial action sought.
   2. The Human Resources Manager, or his or her designee, will meet with the
grievant to review and clarify the issues and explain the complaint procedure,
including the availability of alternative dispute resolution procedures.
   3. The complaint will result in a thorough investigation conducted by the
Human Resources Manager or his or her designee. The Human Resources Manager, or
his or her designee, will submit investigative findings and recommendations to
the Department Director for review and a final decision will be rendered within
ten (10) working days of the completion of the investigation. The Human
Resources Manager, or his or her designee, may recommend such interim relief as
may be appropriate.
D.   APPEAL PROCEDURE
   1.   If the response by the Human Resources Manager or his or her designee
does not satisfactorily resolve the issue, the grievant may appeal the decision
within ten (10) working days after the receipt of the response from the Human
Resources Director, or his or her designee.
   2.   Within ten (10) working days after the receipt of the appeal, the Human
Resources Manager, or his or her designee, will meet with the grievant to
discuss the complaint and possible resolutions. Within ten (10) working days
after the meeting, the Human Resources Manager, or his or her designee, will
respond in writing, and where appropriate, in a format accessible to the
grievant, with a final resolution to the complaint.
   3.   Anyone wishing to file a complaint alleging discrimination on the basis
of disability in the provision of services, activities, programs, and/or
benefits offered by the City of Albuquerque, should utilize the grievance and
appeal procedure outlined in the following link:
https://www.cabq.gov/humanrights/americans-with-disabilities-act-ada
E.   NONRETALIATION
   No individual, applicant for employment or user of public services, programs
or activities will be discriminated against, harassed, intimidated, retaliated
against or suffer reprisal as a result of filing a complaint or participating
in the investigation of a complaint by providing information, testimony or
assisting in the investigation in any way.
   Nothing in this section shall preclude any individual from filing a formal
charge with the appropriate local, state or federal civil rights enforcement
agency at any stage of the procedure.
   All written complaints received by the City of Albuquerque and responses
will be retained by the City of Albuquerque for three (3) years.
REFERENCES:
Americans with Disabilities Act Title II, 42 U.S.C. 12101 et seq.;
28 CFR Part 35, as amended and effective October 11, 2016 (81 FR 53203).
 
______________________________
Robert J. Perry                [https://export.amlegal.com/media/
Chief Administrative Officer   6d88fadbb394cb34f1263b3e9230120271b111d2/IMAGES/
_____________________________  0-0-0-693.png]
Effective Date 
 
AI_NO:_7-10_(pdf)
AI NO: 7-11
AMERICANS WITH DISABILITIES ACT (ADA) 1990
TITLE:   Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA) 1990
PRIMARY DEPARTMENT:   Human Resources
Background:
The ADA prohibits discrimination against people with disabilities in
employment, transportation, public accommodation, communications, and
governmental activities. The Act guarantees protection comparable to that
previously afforded other groups on the basis of race, color, sex, national
origin, age, and religion.
Policy:
The Administrative Instruction affirms the dedication of the City of
Albuquerque to honor the spirit and promote the purpose of the ADA as well as
to adhere to the letter of the Act.
Therefore:
   PART I
   The following clause shall appear on all printed material prepared for
public dissemination:
   The City of Albuquerque does not discriminate on the basis of race, color,
national origin, ancestry, sex, religion, age or disability in the provision of
services, programs, and activities.
   PART II
   The City of Albuquerque shall not discriminate on the basis of disability in
contracting for the purchase of goods and services. It may not directly or
through contractual or other arrangements, use criteria or methods of
administration that have the effect of subjecting qualified individuals with
disabilities to discrimination on the basis of their disability. Further, in
the selection of procurement contractors, the City shall not use criteria that
subject qualified individuals with disabilities to discrimination on the basis
of such disability.
   To comply with these provisions and to ensure that City contractors and
subcontractors also comply, the following provision shall be inserted in all
contracts to which the City of Albuquerque is a party:
   The contractor shall comply with all applicable provisions of the Americans
with Disabilities Act of 1990 (42 U.S.C. §12101) and federal regulations
promulgated thereunder (28 C.F.R. Parts 35, 36 and 37).
   PART III
   The City of Albuquerque shall not administer a licensing or certification
program in a manner that subjects qualified individuals with disabilities to
discrimination on the basis of disability, nor will it support the programs or
activities of licensees or certified entities that subject qualified
individuals with disabilities to discrimination on the basis of disability.
REFERENCES:   Americans with Disabilities Act of 1990 (42 U.S.C. §12101) and
federal regulations promulgated thereunder (28 C.F.R. Parts 35, 36 and 37) 
 
______________________________
Robert J. Perry                [https://export.amlegal.com/media/
Chief Administrative Officer   6d88fadbb394cb34f1263b3e9230120271b111d2/IMAGES/
_____________________________  0-0-0-695.png]
Effective Date 
 
AI_NO:_7-11_(pdf)
AI NO: 7-12
ADA COMPLIANCE FOR PUBLIC SERVICE ANNOUNCEMENTS, PROMOTIONS AND BROCHURES
TITLE:   ADA Compliance for Public Service Announcements, Promotions and
Brochures
PRIMARY DEPARTMENT:   Mayor’s Office
The Americans with Disabilities Act requires the City of Albuquerque to ensure
that its communications with persons with disabilities are as effective as
communications with others.
All public service announcements and promotions produced by or for the City of
Albuquerque which are prepared for television shall be open or closed
captioned.
All such announcements which are prepared for radio broadcast or to appear in
print shall say that the announcement is also available in alternate formats,
upon request.
All such public service announcements and promotions produced by or for the
City shall contain a statement that the City of Albuquerque is relay-friendly
and will accept calls from constituents calling through text or video relay.
All public service announcements and advertisements of City-sponsored programs,
services, and events previously produced must be modified as set forth above
before they may be broadcast or distributed. Existing brochures shall be
withdrawn and either reprinted or modified (for example, by adding the required
information using stick-on labels or inked stamps).
 
______________________________
Robert J. Perry                [https://export.amlegal.com/media/
Chief Administrative Officer   6d88fadbb394cb34f1263b3e9230120271b111d2/IMAGES/
_____________________________  0-0-0-697.png]
Effective Date
 
AI_NO:_7-12_(pdf)
AI NO: 7-14
NONDISCRIMINATION POLICY
TITLE:   Nondiscrimination Policy
PRIMARY DEPARTMENT:   Human Resources
The City of Albuquerque acknowledges its continuing commitment to protecting
individual rights and privileges. In accordance with this commitment, the City
prohibits discrimination in the operation of government on the basis of race,
color, religion, national origin or ancestry, physical or mental handicap or
serious medical condition, disability, age, gender, spousal affiliation,
Vietnam Era or disabled veteran status, sexual orientation or gender identity.
 
______________________________
Robert J. Perry                [https://export.amlegal.com/media/
Chief Administrative Officer   6d88fadbb394cb34f1263b3e9230120271b111d2/IMAGES/
_____________________________  0-0-0-699.png]
Effective Date 
 
AI_NO:_7-14_(pdf)
AI NO: 7-16
ADMINISTRATION OF MERIT SYSTEM FOR DEPARTMENT OF COUNCIL SERVICES
TITLE:   Administration of Merit System for Department of Council Services
PRIMARY DEPARTMENT:   Chief Administrative Officer
City of Albuquerque Merit System Ordinance §3-1-1 authorizes the Chief
Administrative Officer to administer the merit system. Pursuant to the
authority of this ordinance, the Chief Administrative Officer hereby delegates
to the Director of Council Services administration of the merit system
contained in §§3-1-1 through 3-1-25, City of Albuquerque Ordinances (1994) as
it pertains to employees in the Department of Council Services.
REFERENCES: City of Albuquerque Merit System Ordinance §3-1-1 through 3-1-25
 
______________________________
Robert J. Perry                [https://export.amlegal.com/media/
Chief Administrative Officer   6d88fadbb394cb34f1263b3e9230120271b111d2/IMAGES/
_____________________________  0-0-0-701.png]
Effective Date
 
AI_NO:_7-16_(pdf)
AI NO: 7-17
RETURN TO TEMPORARILY RESTRICTED DUTY AND PERMANENTLY MODIFIED WORK ASSIGNMENTS
RESULTING FROM WORK RELATED INJURY
TITLE:   Return to Temporarily Restricted duty and Permanently Modified Work
Assignments resulting from work related injury.
PRIMARY DEPARTMENT:   Department of Finance and Administrative Services
It is the policy of the city of Albuquerque to fully utilize its employees and
to maintain a productive, equitable and positive work environment. To
accomplish this goal and to comply with the Workers' Compensation Act this
policy encourages the return of employees injured on the job to productive work
as soon as medically appropriate after the injury. The Policy also includes
provisions for providing appropriate assignments for those employees who have
permanent work restrictions as the result of a work related injury or illness.
Participation in the Program is required by all employees returning from a work
related injury or illness. All Departments will participate and provide full
cooperation with the Risk Management Division of the Department of Finance and
Administrative Services in the effort to identify and develop appropriate
assignments and to place these returning employees in them. If an appropriate
assignment is unavailable in the employee’s home department temporary or
permanent reassignment to another department may be considered. In the case of
a Temporary Restricted Duty reassignment the employee’s payroll status will
remain with the home department.
The Risk Management Division shall administer the program, which will include
the following components.
   1.   Temporary Restricted Duty
This component is intended to return an employee who has sustained an on- the-
job injury to a productive level of work in preparation for return to his/her
pre-injury position. The maximum duration of temporary restrictions shall be 45
calendar days. Extension of restricted duty will be determined by Risk
Management based on medical information from the authorized provider.
The employee's department in collaboration with Risk Management shall be
responsible for identifying Restricted Duty assignments. The Restricted Duty
assignment will be temporary in nature to assist the employee and the operating
department during the employee's temporary inability to return to normal duty.
   2.   Permanently Restricted – Modified Duty
When the Employee Health Center or other authorized medical provider places
permanent restrictions, the Risk Management Division, in conjunction with the
Human Resources Department, the department, and employee will work to identify
modification of the current job or permanent reassignment to a position for
which the employee is qualified. If no such modification or reassignment is
identified, the appropriate leave and physical layoff positions in the
Personnel Rules and Regulations shall be utilized.
REFERENCES: New Mexico Workers' Compensation Act (52-1-25.1 and 52-1-50.1 NMSA
1978) 
 
______________________________
Robert J. Perry                [https://export.amlegal.com/media/
Chief Administrative Officer   6d88fadbb394cb34f1263b3e9230120271b111d2/IMAGES/
_____________________________  0-0-0-703.png]
Effective Date 
 
AI_NO:_7-17_(pdf)
AI NO: 7-18
HARASSMENT/SEXUAL HARASSMENT POLICY (2020)
TITLE:   Harassment/Sexual Harassment Policy (Revised April ______, 2020)
PRIMARY DEPARTMENT:   Human Resources
The City of Albuquerque is committed to providing a work environment free from
all forms of harassment. Harassment in the workplace includes, but is not
limited to, sexual harassment. Harassment is any verbal or physical conduct
including displaying or forwarding any visual material, that denigrates or
shows hostility or aversion toward an individual because of his or her race,
color, religion, gender, national origin, ancestry, age, disability, medical
condition, sexual orientation or gender identity, or hair types, textures, and
styles commonly associated with race, gender, or religion; that has the purpose
or effect of creating an intimidating, hostile, or offensive work environment;
and has the purpose or effect of unreasonably interfering with an individual's
work performance; or otherwise adversely affects an individual's employment
opportunities or ability to obtain public services. Harassment based on any of
the foregoing statuses is a form of discrimination which is unlawful under
local, state and federal civil rights laws. This policy applies to all forms of
harassment, including sexual harassment.
The City of Albuquerque, as a public employer and a provider of services, WILL
NOT TOLERATE OR CONDONE HARASSMENT IN ANY FORM from any employee, regardless of
his or her employment status, nor from a provider of services who is under
contract with the City. All employees, supervisors and managers are responsible
for maintaining a work environment free of any form of harassment, and will be
held fully accountable in complying with this policy and taking appropriate
measures to ensure that such conduct does not occur. Applicants for employment
are entitled to employment consideration without being subjected to sexual or
other forms of harassment. Any employee found to have engaged in prohibited
harassment will be subject to disciplinary action, up to and including
termination.
This policy supersedes all previous policies with the City of Albuquerque
addressing harassment including sexual harassment and is made in accordance
with City Council Bill No. C/S R-158, regarding sexual harassment. Departments
may reinforce this policy with an additional departmental policy consistent
with this policy and with the signature of the Chief Administrative Officer.
MANDATORY TRAINING
Training on harassment/sexual harassment is mandatory each year for all City of
Albuquerque employees and is essential for our organization to ensure employees
experience a safe, fair and healthy work environment. The City of Albuquerque
will make training available to all employees on an annual basis. Initial
training will be provided in person and thereafter annually, utilizing the
City's on-line training.
DEFINITION OF SEXUAL HARASSMENT
Title VII of the Civil Rights Act of 1964, in conjunction with the Equal
Employment Opportunity Commission's guidelines for defining sexual harassment
prohibits unwelcome sexual advances, requests for sexual favors, and verbal
expression or physical conduct of a sexual nature.
Sexual harassment is defined as any unwelcome sexual advances, requests for
sexually motivated physical contact, or other verbal expression or physical
conduct or communication of a sexual nature when:
   1.   Submission to that conduct or communication is made a term or
condition, either explicitly or implicitly, of obtaining employment or public
services; or
   2.   Submission to or rejection of that conduct or communication by an
individual is used as a factor in decisions affecting that individual's
employment or obtaining public services; or
   3.   That conduct or communication has the purpose or effect of unreasonably
interfering with an individual's employment or obtaining public services or
creating an intimidating, hostile or offensive environment in which to work or
obtain services.
The following criteria will be looked at to determine if sexual harassment
exists:
   1. The frequency of the conduct.
   2. The severity of the conduct.
   3. Whether the conduct unreasonably interferes with work performance.
Unwelcome verbal or physical conduct, even if it does not rise to the level of
sexual harassment, may be a violation of City policies and is prohibited.
Examples of Sexual Harassment
The following are examples of conduct which may be considered sexual
harassment. Conduct which is not on this list can also be sexual harassment if
it meets the above definition.
A.   Physical Assaults of a Sexual Nature, such as:
   1.   Rape, sexual battery, molestation, or attempts to commit the foregoing;
   2. Intentional physical conduct, such as touching, pinching, patting,
grabbing, brushing against another employee's body, or poking another
employee's body that is sexual in nature.
B. Unwanted Sexual Advances, Propositions, or Other Unwanted Sexual Comments,
such as:
   1.   Threatening adverse actions in order to have a sexual favor performed;
   2.   Suggesting a desire for sexual relations or physical contact;
   3.   Propositions of sexual nature;
   4.   Continued requests for dates after being informed that such requests
are unwelcome;
   5.   Use of any offensive or demeaning terms which have a sexual connotation
such as:
      a.   Verbal abuses of a sexual nature;
      b.   Graphic commentaries about a person's body;
      c.   Use of sexually degrading words to describe a person;
      d.   Telling jokes or making remarks of a sexual nature to, or in the
presence of, persons who find such jokes or remarks offensive.
      e.   Making offensive remarks about someone's sexual orientation or
gender identity.
   6.    Whistling or calling another in such a manner as to attract unwelcome
attention to another person, i.e. "wolf whistling" "cat calls";
   7.   Initiating unwanted discussion of one's personal sex life.
   8.   Non-verbal gestures such as:
      a.   Looking or staring at a person up and down;
      b.   Winking, throwing kisses, or licking lips;
      c.   Making sexual gestures with hands or through body movements.
C.   Sexual Displays or Publications Anywhere in Workplace by Employees, such
as:
   1.   Displaying pictures, posters, calendars, graffiti, cartoons, objects,
promotional materials, reading materials, or other materials that are sexually
suggestive, sexually demeaning or pornographic, or bringing into the work
environment or possessing any such material to read, display, or view at work;
or
   2.   Reading or otherwise publicizing in the work environment materials that
are in any way sexually revealing, sexually suggestive, sexually demeaning, or
pornographic.
DEFINITION OF HARASSMENT
Title VII of the Civil Rights Act of 1964, in conjunction with the Equal
Employment Opportunity Commission's guidelines defines harassment as unwelcome
conduct that is based on membership in a protected class.
Harassment is unlawful and prohibited where:
   l.   Enduring the offensive conduct becomes a condition of continued
employment or a condition of obtaining employment or public services, or
   2.   The conduct is severe or pervasive enough to create a work environment
that a reasonable person would consider intimidating, hostile, or abusive.
   Examples Which May Constitute Harassment
   1.   Epithets;
   2.   Slurs;
   3.   Negative stereotyping;
   4.   Threats;
   5.   Hostile acts;
   6.   Ridicule or mockery because of a person's protected class;
   7.   Denigrating or hostile written or graphic material posted or circulated
in the workplace.
Retaliation for Harassment/Sexual Harassment Complaints is prohibited, such as:
   1.   Disciplining, providing inaccurate work information to, or refusing to
cooperate or discuss work- related matters with any employee because that
employee has complained about or resisted harassment, discrimination, or
retaliation; and
   2.   Intentionally pressuring, falsely denying, lying about or otherwise
covering up or attempting to cover up any conduct that meets the definition of
harassment, as provided above.
The above is not to be construed as an all-inclusive list of prohibited acts
under this Policy.
Any form of harassment, including sexual harassment, is prohibited, hurts other
employees, and contributes to a general negative atmosphere in which all
employees suffer the consequences. Any of the prohibited conduct described
here, if found to constitute harassment/sexual harassment, has no legitimate
business purposes. Accordingly, the employee who engages in harassment/sexual
harassment should be and will be made to bear the full responsibility for such
conduct.
REPORTING HARASSMENT
Employees and applicants for employment who believe they have been subjected to
sexual or other harassment are encouraged to tell the person responsible for
the behavior that his or her actions are offensive and unwelcome. Employees and
applicants for employment have an obligation to report the matter as soon as
possible to a supervisor, the Department Director, or to the Human Resources
Director. An employee may also exercise his/her rights to pursue an action
through any local (City of Albuquerque, Human Rights Office), state (Human
Rights Commission of New Mexico) or federal (Equal Employment Opportunity
Commission) regulatory agency responsible for enforcement of anti-
discrimination laws. This policy does not extend the time limits to file any
discrimination action.
ANY DEPARTMENT DIRECTOR, MANAGER OR SUPERVISOR WHO OBSERVES OR HAS KNOWLEDGE OF
HARASSMENT, MUST IMMEDIATELY BRING THE MATTER TO THE ATTENTION OF THE
DEPARTMENT DIRECTOR OR THE HUMAN RESOURCES DIRECTOR. FAILURE TO DO SO MAY
RESULT IN DISCIPLINARY ACTION.
The City will investigate all reports of alleged harassment. To the extent
possible, the City will keep the information confidential, consistent with its
obligation to provide a prompt, impartial, and thorough investigation. If the
City determines that harassment or other violations of City policy have
occurred or that counseling, training, disciplinary measures or termination are
appropriate, it will take appropriate measures to correct the problem.
No employee will be retaliated against in any way for reporting in good faith
any allegations of harassment or assisting, testifying, or participating in an
investigation. Such retaliation in and of itself may result in disciplinary
action, up to and including termination.
All employees are required to cooperate with any investigation undertaken by
the City in response to an allegation of harassment. Department Directors are
responsible for assuring cooperation with investigations. Refusal to cooperate
in an investigation may result in disciplinary action, up to an including
termination.
Each Department Director shall adhere to and enforce the procedures established
by the City of Albuquerque which provides work sites free of harassment
including sexual harassment, so that instances of harassment including sexual
harassment will be detected soon after their occurrences, and to provide for
prompt resolution of complaints within the department.
ALL EMPLOYEES OF THE CITY OF ALBUQUERQUE HAVE THE RIGHT TO AN EQUITABLE WORKING
ENVIRONMENT.
The Human Resources Department is available to discuss incidents, investigate
whether the conduct appears to be harassment, including sexual harassment, and
explain the options for dealing with harassment. Any activity that may be
harassment should be reported immediately to determine if any corrective action
should be taken.
For more information contact the Human Resources Department at 768-3700.
Effective Date
This Administration Instruction is effective immediately.
REFERENCES: Title VII of the Civil Rights Act of 1964, the Age Discrimination
in Employment Act of 1967, (ADEA), and the Americans with Disabilities Act of
1990, (ADA), Equal Employment Opportunity Commission guidelines, the New Mexico
Human Rights Act, 28-1-1, et. al.
 
______________________________
Sarita Nair                    [https://export.amlegal.com/media/
Chief Administrative Officer   6d88fadbb394cb34f1263b3e9230120271b111d2/IMAGES/
                              0-0-0-1859.png]
_____________________________
Effective Date
 
AI_NO:_7-18_(pdf)
AI NO: 7-19
POLITICAL ACTIVITIES OF CITY EMPLOYEES AND USE OF CITY PROPERTY FOR POLITICAL
ACTIVITIES
TITLE:   Political Activities of City Employees and Use of City Property for
Political Activities
PRIMARY DEPARTMENT:   City Clerk
Every city employee has the right to support the Candidates and ballot
questions of their choice; however, the credibility and the integrity of our
service demands that City employees obey the laws and regulations governing
political activity and prevent the appearance of governmental involvement or
bias.
1. Definitions
Candidate or Candidates shall mean a person who is a prospective candidate or a
person who has filed as a candidate or their representative or anyone promoting
or opposing any ballot proposition or the election of anyone seeking public
office in any election.
Public Meeting Space means a City owned or leased area inside or outside of a
structure that is used as a meeting area for general public on an ongoing basis
throughout the year and shall not include meeting rooms and conference rooms or
other areas used only for government business.
2. Conduct of City Employees
The following activities are permitted or prohibited for all City employees
with respect to all elections.
   A. Activities Permitted - Any City employee may:
   1) Register and vote;
   2) Express an opinion about Candidates or on issues;
   3) Assist in voter registration drives;
   4) Display political pictures, stickers or posters in homes or on private
vehicles;
   5) Become politically active in connection with any question or issue on the
ballot;
   6) Attend a political rally, fund raising function or other political
gathering; or
   7) Participate in the following activities while not on duty.
      a. Sign nominating petitions;
      b. Make voluntary contributions to Candidates or issues committees; or
      c. Wear political buttons or badges while not on duty or in City uniform.
   B. Activities Prohibited - No City Employee Shall:
   1) Become a Candidate for any elective City office;
   2) Actively campaign for or against a Candidate for any elective office
while on duty or represent a Candidate while on duty. Volunteers assisting in
City functions under the supervision or direction of City employees shall not
campaign for a Candidate while performing such duties for the City;
   3) Receive, disburse or account for assessments, contributions or other
funds for any Candidate;
   4) Receive or offer to receive any money, gratuity or benefit from any
candidate;
   5) Wear on one's person political badges or buttons while on duty or while
in a City uniform at any time;
   6) Take either a position for or against any Candidate for elective office
while representing either that such position is an official City position on
such Candidate or that such position is taken in one's official capacity as a
City employee;
   7) Circulate nominating petitions within or on City property while on duty,
at the place of one's employment or at any time or any place while in City
Uniform;
   8) Serve as an election judge or clerk in a City election;
   9) Use any City-owned properly, equipment, supplies, vehicles or space
either to campaign for or against a Candidate.
   10) Display or distribute any political stickers, posters or materials on or
from City-owned vehicles or City property;
   11) Display or distribute any political stickers, posters or material for or
against any Candidate while on duty or at the City employee's work place, other
than bumper stickers displayed on the employee's private vehicle, including
vehicles parked in City owned parking lots; or
   12) Use the employee's position or status to influence the support of other
City employees or City officials for or against any Candidate or issue.
   C. Hatch Act - Any City employee whose principal employment is in connection
with an activity which is financed in whole or part by loans or grants made by
the United States or a Federal agency is subject to the provisions of the Hatch
Act in addition to the prohibited activities set forth in this memorandum. Each
City Employee is responsible for determining if Hatch Act prohibitions apply to
his or her employment with the City.
3. Facility Tours.
City employees who are authorized to conduct tours of City facilities may guide
Candidates through City facilities provided that such employees do not campaign
for or against any Candidate while conducting such tour. Tours shall not
disrupt or otherwise interfere with ongoing City programs, activities, or
meals.
4. Public Meetings.
Candidates may attend meetings of advisory councils or other similar
organizations that are authorized by the City to conduct activities at a City
facility as well all City boards and commissions. Candidates may be introduced
to the public at the meetings of such organizations. Candidates shall be
entitled to make public comment on agenda items that are open for public
comment.
5. Petition Signatures.
Candidates may ask members of the public at City facilities to sign nomination
or other petitions to qualify to be on the ballot. Candidates shall not solicit
such signatures from City employees during the employee's working hours.
Solicitation of petition signatures shall not interrupt ongoing City
activities, programs, or meals and shall not block the orderly flow of traffic.
6. Campaign Materials.
Candidates may wear campaign logos, clothing, buttons, name tags and other
similar campaign materials while at City facilities, as may members of the
public, whether or not they are actively campaigning. City employees and
volunteer staff under the direction of City employees shall not wear, carry or
distribute such campaign materials while on duty.
7. Use of City Property.
City Property may be used for political activities only through compliance with
the following:
   A. Candidates shall be allowed access to Public Meeting Space for campaign
events through written request at least two weeks prior to the planned event.
The manager of the facility the Candidate designates for use shall make the
determination of availability of the requested facility. Any previously
scheduled use of the location or conflicting on going uses for a City-sponsored
activity shall take precedence over the request. Campaign events consist of the
use of part or all of a facility for a meeting or program by the Candidate and
do not include activities described previously in this administrative
instruction. In the event more than one Candidate requests use of Public
Meeting Space on City property for the same day and time, the request first
received shall be allowed if the Public Meeting Space is otherwise available.
No City equipment, materials, or labor of City employees on duty shall be
provided to Candidates related to their use of a Public Meeting Space.
   B. A Candidate may distribute campaign materials, greet employees and
solicit contributions and petition signatures at entrances or exits to City
property as well as at any place open to the general public but only in a
manner that does not disrupt the orderly flow of traffic or interrupt City
activities, programs or meals.
   C. Campaign materials may be placed in a manner and at locations as
designated by the manager of the City facility. The manager shall provide
locations accessible to the public. The manager shall be entitled to limit
space available for each Candidate in order that all Candidates may have space
for their materials and to limit the number of locations for such materials to
ensure the public safety.
   D. Candidates and their representatives shall not contact City employees at
their work sites while the City employee is on duty other than to make
arrangements for the use of City facilities as allowed in this administrative
instruction.
REFERENCES:   Hatch Act
 
______________________________
Robert J. Perry                [https://export.amlegal.com/media/
Chief Administrative Officer   6d88fadbb394cb34f1263b3e9230120271b111d2/IMAGES/
_____________________________  0-0-0-707.png]
Effective Date
 
AI_NO:_7-19_(pdf)
AI NO: 7-20
CITY OF ALBUQUERQUE SUBSTANCE ABUSE REVIEW AND HEARINGS PROCESS - RULES OF
PROCEDURE FOR CONTESTING THE DESIGNATION OF POSITIONS AS "SAFETY SENSITIVE"
TITLE:   City of Albuquerque Substance Abuse Review and Hearings Process -
Rules of Procedure for Contesting the Designation of Positions as “Safety
Sensitive”
PRIMARY DEPARTMENT:   Department of Finance and Administrative Services
1. Statement of Purpose. The purpose of these rules is to implement and clarify
the City of Albuquerque (hereinafter the “City”) policies regarding the
designation of certain positions as “safety sensitive” for purposes of
substance abuse and alcohol and drug testing, as required by Section 2(B) of
Resolution R-237 of the City Council for the City of Albuquerque, and to
establish fair and expeditious procedures for employees to contest the
designation of their positions as “safety sensitive” as required by said
Resolution.
2. Authority. These rules are enacted pursuant to powers stated in Section 2(B)
of R-237.
3. List of “Safety-Sensitive” Positions. The City Human Resources Department
shall promulgate and cause to be circulated to each City Department a list of
all “safety-sensitive” positions within City government.
4. Notification of Employees. The Human Resources Department shall notify each
“safety-sensitive” employee of such designation. Such notification shall be in
writing, and shall state that the employee’s position has been designated as
“safety sensitive”, that the employee’s Department has been notified of such
designation, and shall advise each affected employee of their right to contest
such designation. Employees newly hired or transferred into a “safety-
sensitive” position shall be promptly notified of such status by the Director
of the Human Resources Department.
5. Employee’s Notice of Protest. An employee whose position has been designated
as “safety sensitive” may contest such action by submitting a notice of protest
to the Director of the Human Resources Department within thirty (30) calendar
days of his or her notification that his/her position has been designated as
“safety sensitive”. The notice of protest shall state:
   a.   The employee’s name;
   b.   Social security number;
   c.   Job classification, or other information identifying the employee’s
position; and
   d.   The reasons for the employee’s claim that his or her position is not
“safety sensitive”, including information relating to the employee’s daily job
duties together with any supporting documents.
   The rights of protest set forth in these rules shall not apply or be
available to employees whose positions are defined in United States Department
of Transportation Regulations as “safety sensitive” nor to the designation of
“safety-sensitive” positions held by police officers, corrections officers or
firefighters.
6. Department Inquiry. The Director of the Human Resources Department shall
review the information submitted by the employee, along with any information
provided by the employee’s department, and shall notify the employee in writing
of a determination within fifteen (15) calendar days of the employee’s
submission. The Director of the Human Resources Department shall simultaneously
forward the employee’s claim and the notification of determination to the City
Hearing Officer.
7. Notification of Hearings on Protesting a Safety-Sensitive Designation. If
the determination of the Director of the Human Resources Department is to deny
the employee’s claim, the Hearing Officer shall set the employee’s hearing as
expeditiously as possible, and shall notify the employee, or his or her
representative, the employee’s Department Director, and the Director of the
Human Resources Department of the date, time and place of the hearing. In the
event the employee fails to appear at the time and place specified, the
employee may reapply for a hearing within ten (10) calendar days of the hearing
date by submitting another notice of protest to the Director of the Human
Resources Department, as provided in Section 5, above, and, in addition, the
employee shall state the reasons for his or her failure to appear at the
earlier scheduled hearing. It shall be within the Hearing Officer’s discretion
to grant or deny the employee’s renewed request for a hearing.
8. Conduct of Hearings. In all hearings conducted under this regulation, the
employee shall have the right to be represented by a person of his or her
choosing. The proceedings shall be recorded either by means of stenographic or
audio tape by a certified reporter or monitor. Neither the rules of evidence
nor of civil procedure shall apply, but, the employee and the Director of the
Human Resources Department, shall each be accorded a full and fair opportunity
to examine witnesses and to present any relevant evidence to the Hearing
Officer so as to establish a complete record.
9. Standard of Review. In deciding whether a position should be classified as
“safety sensitive”, the Hearing Officer shall apply the criteria set forth in
Personnel Rules & Regulations Section 1100, and shall apply the designation, at
a minimum, to employees with access to Controlled Substances and to those
employees who are required by their job descriptions to hold a commercial
driver’s license, and who actually drive commercial vehicles. In determining
whether the designation should apply to additional positions, the Hearing
Officer shall consider the extent to which the job responsibilities impact upon
the safety of the public, the extent to which the job responsibilities expose
the employee or co-workers to hazardous conditions, and the extent to which the
job requires responsibility for the safety of others.
10. The Hearing Officer’s Decision. The Hearing Officer shall issue a written
decision within thirty (30) calendar days of the completion of the hearing to
either uphold or to reverse the determination of the Director of the Human
Resources Department. The Hearing Officer shall state the reason for its
decision, and shall transmit its decision to the Chief Administrative Officer.
Copies of the Hearing Officer’s decision also shall be provided to the
employee, or his or her representative, the employee’s Department Director, and
to the Director of the Human Resources Department. The Hearing Officer’s
decision on the matter shall be the City’s final administrative step, and shall
not be subject to further review or appeal.
REFERENCES:   Personnel Rules and Regulations Section 1100 Substance Abuse Part
I
 
______________________________
Robert J. Perry                [https://export.amlegal.com/media/
Chief Administrative Officer   6d88fadbb394cb34f1263b3e9230120271b111d2/IMAGES/
_____________________________  0-0-0-709.png]
Effective Date
 
AI_NO:_7-20_(pdf)
AI NO: 7-22
VIOLENCE IN THE WORKPLACE AND DOMESTIC VIOLENCE POLICIES
TITLE:    Violence in the Workplace and Domestic Violence Policies
PRIMARY DEPARTMENT: Department of Finance and Administrative Services
A. Background
Violence in the workplace is a tragedy which occurs all too frequently and
appears to be on the rise within the workforce in today's society. Homicide is
now the leading cause of death for women in the workplace and the second
leading cause for men. As a major and diverse employer in the community, the
City of Albuquerque has a significant interest in providing a work environment
to all of its employees that minimizes the risk of workplace violence.
Domestic violence is a significant concern in addressing workplace violence
since this form of violence often extends to the worksite of the victim.
Although statistics indicate that most incidents of domestic violence are
attributed to males, no one should ignore the fact that such abuse can also be
attributed to females or occur in same sex relationships.
B. Violence in the Workplace Policy
It is the policy of the City of Albuquerque that workplace violence by
employees shall be prohibited. Furthermore, violent behavior including domestic
disputes directed toward a City employee by a member of the general public
shall not be tolerated.
Prohibited workplace behavior includes intimidation; verbal threats; physical
assault; vandalism; arson; sabotage; the unauthorized display, possession or
use of weapons on City property (Personnel Rules/Regulations 301.7), jokes or
comments regarding violent acts which are reasonably perceived to be a threat;
or any other behavior reasonably perceived to be a threat of imminent harm
against an employee or member of the general public.
It is the responsibility of all employees who witness or are the subject of the
behaviors prohibited by this policy to report the incident(s) to their
immediate supervisor unless the supervisor is the one exhibiting the prohibited
behavior, in which case the employee shall report the behavior to the next
highest person within the organization.
It is the responsibility of the supervisor receiving the complaint to conduct
an investigation of the incidents(s) in accordance with the methods and
procedures presented in the mandated supervisory development training. These
materials may be obtained from Employee Health Services, 768-4613. The
supervisor will initiate appropriate action to abate the prohibited behavior.
The supervisor shall prepare a written response within 10 days to the employees
(s) reporting the incident(s). This response shall include acknowledgement of
the employee(‘s) complaint; that an appropriate investigation is being or has
been conducted; and, the action that was initiated to abate the prohibited
behavior.
After a finding of fact that an employee engaged in prohibited behavior, a pre-
determination hearing will be conducted and the hearing officer will make a
mandatory referral to the Employee Assistance Program (768-4613) and recommend
disciplinary action. The applicable department director will determine the
level of discipline up to and including termination.
C. Implementation Guidance
Workplace violence is highly situational, requiring creativity and judgment to
be applied to a specific situation.
Upon occasion, employees may encounter situations in which the threat of
immediate harm from another employee or the general public may occur. In the
vast majority of these situations, employees can de-escalate the situation.
Examples of appropriate de-escalation techniques include:
   1. Offering to transfer an irate caller on the telephone to a supervisor.
   2. Requesting the intervention of supervisor.
   3. Walking away from the situation.
   4. Staying in control of speech and behavior. Do not retaliate or respond in
kind.
   5. Contacting security or APD to have the offender removed from the
premises.
Appropriate action which could be initiated by the supervisor to abate
prohibited behavior by an employee might include:
   1. Referral of an employee to the City's Employee Assistance Program. This
is initiated by contacting the manager of Employee Health Services, 768-4613.
   2. Referral of an employee to the City's Medical Director for a Fitness for
Duty examination. This is initiated by contacting the HR Administrator of the
Human Resources Department, 768-3700.
   3. Placing the employee on administrative leave.
   4. Imposing disciplinary action up to and including termination from City
employment.
   5. Offering assistance and cooperation in filing a criminal complaint
against the offender.
Appropriate action which could be initiated by the supervisor to abate
prohibited behavior directed at a City employee by the general public might
include:
   1. Notifying the individual that a complaint has been filed by the employee.
The specific prohibited behavior should be stated and the individual advised
that this behavior violates City Policy, will not be tolerated, and may result
in legal action.
   2. If possible, eliminate or reduce the opportunity for future contact
between the employee and the individual.
   3 Assist the employee in filing a criminal complaint against the offender.
D. Domestic Violence/Civil Protection Orders
It is the intent of this policy to encourage employees to self-disclose
situations relating to domestic violence. Employees shall notify their
supervisors the workplace may be in danger from the perpetrator. Employees
shall notify their supervisor and the Employee Health Services Manager when the
City worksite has been included (or is requested to be included) in a civil
protection order and to provide a copy of the civil protection order to their
supervisor.
Supervisors have the responsibility to take reasonable steps to honor the civil
protection order and to expedite a request for leave of absence, if necessary.
Supervisors shall contact the City's Employee Assistance Program to facilitate
contact between the Program and impacted employee. Supervisors shall maintain
respect for individual privacy and confidentiality within the context of
protecting the worksite, co-workers, general public and the individual employee
involved.
REFERENCES: Personnel Rules/Regulations 301.7
 
______________________________
Robert J. Perry                [https://export.amlegal.com/media/
Chief Administrative Officer   6d88fadbb394cb34f1263b3e9230120271b111d2/IMAGES/
_____________________________  0-0-0-711.png]
Effective Date
 
AI_NO:_7-22_(pdf)
AI NO: 7-23
EMPLOYEE CLEARANCE FORM
TITLE:   Employee Clearance Form
PRIMARY DEPARTMENT:   Human Resources
Background:
During the course of employment, City staff is issued a variety of equipment
and /or supplies for official use in the performance of the essential tasks of
the position. Upon termination of an employee or transfer from one department/
division to another it is the supervisor’s responsibility to retrieve all
issued equipment and/or supplies and to notify the proper offices of the
termination and/or transfer.
Policy:
EMPLOYEES TERMINATING CITY EMPLOYMENT
It is the responsibility of both the employee and the supervisor to ensure the
return of all City property and badges on or before the employee's last work
day. An Employee Clearance Form is to serve as a means of (1) obtaining the
correct mailing address for the employee; (2) documenting the reason for
terminating employment; (3) serving as check list to ensure the supervisor
retrieves all equipment and/or supplies previously issued; and (4) reminding
the supervisor to request cancellation of computer access through submittal of
a service request and/or e-mail message to the Help Desk. Additionally, all
petty cash funds for which the employee had custodial responsibility should be
reconciled and returned to the supervisor.
EMPLOYEES TRANSFERRING TO ANOTHER CITY DEPARTMENT
It is the immediate supervisor's responsibility to ensure completion of the
Employee Clearance Form upon transfer of the employee to another City
department or division.
This action will ensure all equipment and/or supplies are retrieved prior to
the transfer and will also ensure that all the required Payroll and DTI
coordination occurs.
 
______________________________
Robert J. Perry                [https://export.amlegal.com/media/
Chief Administrative Officer   6d88fadbb394cb34f1263b3e9230120271b111d2/IMAGES/
_____________________________  0-0-0-713.png]
Effective Date 
 
AI_NO:_7-23_(pdf)
AI NO: 7-25
EFFECTIVE DATES FOR PERSONNEL ACTIONS
TITLE:   Effective Dates for Personnel Actions
PRIMARY DEPARTMENT:   Human Resources
Background:
One of the key components of processing a new hire, transfer or promotion is
the timely approval of the required documentation for the personnel file and
for payment purposes. In the past we have had problems in coordinating the
timing of the paperwork with the actual physical movement of the employee. The
retirement percentage paid by employees can change due to a transfer from one
union group to another in addition to changing salary rates which if not
processed timely will require a manual proration or retroactive pay. In order
to ensure all paperwork is processed timely and accurately a sufficient amount
of processing time must be incorporated in the procedure.
Policy:
All new hires, promotions and transfers will be effective at the start of pay
period. City managers should be cognizant of this policy when making employment
or promotional offers. After the selected individual is approved for hire,
transfer or promotion the Human Resources representative will be the sole
entity to contact the employee and advise them of the actual effective date.
This process will allow sufficient time for the Human Resources Department to
arrange for required physicals and/or substance abuse testing.
The Human Resources representative will be responsible for ensuring these types
of personnel actions always reflect the first day of a pay period as the
effective date. The City of Albuquerque has defined the typical pay period to
be a two week period that starts on a Saturday and ends on a Friday.
The Human Resources Department, Department Directors and Human Resources
representatives must ensure the proper personnel transaction paperwork and all
required testing, physicals and/or substance abuse testing is completed prior
to an employee’s formal job offer and first day of work.
Questions regarding this policy may be directed to the Human Resources
Department.
 
__________________________________
Robert J. Perry                    [https://export.amlegal.com/media/
Chief Administrative Officer       6d88fadbb394cb34f1263b3e9230120271b111d2/
_______________________________    IMAGES/0-0-0-715.png]
Effective Date
 
AI_NO:_7-25_(pdf)
AI NO: 7-26
POLICY FOR COMPENSATION ADJUSTMENTS FOR RETENTION OF MISSION CRITICAL EMPLOYEES
TITLE:   Policy for Compensation Adjustments for Retention of Mission Critical
Employees
PRIMARY DEPARTMENT:   Human Resources
Purpose
To establish a compensation plan to retain qualified management and
professional employees in mission critical positions, by providing competitive
compensation adjustments to certain employees who have received outside offers
of employment.
Policy
The City will implement a system to permit competitive compensation adjustments
to retain classified management and professional employees in mission critical
positions, who have received a bona fide offer of employment from another
employer outside City government. The criteria for such adjustments and the
procedure to determine when such adjustments will be awarded is as follows:
1. Criteria: A competitive compensation adjustment must meet all of the
following criteria.
   a. The employee must currently hold a classified position within City
government as a permanent, non-probationary employee, and the City must
reasonably anticipate some tangible or intangible benefit in retaining the
employee.
   b. The employee’s position within City government must be one that is
critical to carry out essential governmental functions.
   c. The employee must possess exceptional skills, experience and/or
qualifications for the position and must have demonstrated exceptional job
performance as a City employee.
   d. The employee must have received a bona fide offer of employment from an
employer outside of City government, and must be able to demonstrate that the
outside employer has offered compensation significantly greater than what the
employee currently earns, for a comparable position.
   e. A competitive compensation adjustment for an employee may be offered as a
salary increase and/or as a lump sum compensation adjustment.
   f. A position will not be reclassified in order to offer a competitive
compensation adjustment unless the job duties of the position actually warrant
reclassification.
   g. A salary increase offered under this Administrative Instruction shall not
exceed the range for the grade of the position.
   h. A salary increase offered under this Administrative Instruction shall not
exceed 10% of an employee’s annual salary.
   i. A lump sum compensation adjustment offered under this Administrative
Instruction shall not exceed 10% of an employee’s annual salary.
   j. An employee who accepts a lump sum compensation adjustment under this
Administrative Instruction shall be required to sign an agreement to repay the
adjustment on a pro-rated basis if he/she resigns from City employment within
one (1) year of receiving the adjustment.
   k. The total competitive compensation adjustment offered under this
Administrative Instruction shall not exceed 20%.
   l. A compensation increase offered under this Administrative Instruction
shall not exceed 1% above the amount offered to the employee by the outside
employer.
2. Procedure: The following procedure is established to determine whether to
offer an employee a competitive compensation increase:
   a. The Chief Administrative Officer shall designate a committee consisting
of three (3) people to review requests for compensation increases made pursuant
to this Administrative Instruction. The Committee member shall serve at the
discretion of the Chief Administrative Officer. No employee of the Department
making the request shall serve as a committee member.
   b. A request for a compensation increase under this Administrative
Instruction may only be made by the Department Director of the individual for
whom the increase is sought. The request must be in writing, must include a
copy of a written offer of employment to the employee for whom the adjustment
is sought, from an outside employer and must show justification for the
increase in accordance with the criteria established by this Administrative
Instruction.
   c. The Department Director seeking the increase shall submit the request to
all committee members, who shall then review the request, determine whether or
not the criteria have been met, and submit a recommendation to the Chief
Administrative Officer.
   d. The Chief Administrative Officer shall have the final authority to
determine whether or not to offer a compensation adjustment under this
Administrative Instruction to any person.
   e. Any action taken under this Administrative Instruction shall not be the
subject of a grievance under the Merit System Ordinance.
 
______________________________
Robert J. Perry                [https://export.amlegal.com/media/
Chief Administrative Officer   6d88fadbb394cb34f1263b3e9230120271b111d2/IMAGES/
_____________________________  0-0-0-717.png]
Effective Date
 
AI_NO:_7-26_(pdf)
AI NO: 7-27
RETIREMENT PROCESS
TITLE:   Retirement Process
PRIMARY DEPARTMENT:   Human Resources
Background:
The purpose of this Administrative Instruction is to revise the established
Policy and Guidelines regarding the retirement process to include calculating
deferred compensation "catch-up" provisions, vacation and sick leave "cash out"
payments and regular wages for the last pay period. This will allow a
sufficient amount of time to ensure all payments and calculations are timely
and accurate.
Policy:
In order to ensure that retirees are transferred into Early Retirement in a
timely manner and to ensure that all sick and vacation balances are accurate
and Deferred Compensation lump sums payments are done accurately and in a
timely manner the following process will be enforced:
Employee Responsibilities:
1.    Prospective retirees are advised to submit a request for Total Service
Credit Verification using the PERA Request Form (available in the Insurance and
Benefits Office) or a request letter, at least one year prior to their planned
Early Retirement date or planned PERA retirement date.
2.    The prospective retiree must contact the PERA office to complete their
retirement application at least 90 days prior to retirement or, if using Early
Retirement, 90 days prior to Early Retirement date.
3.    Prospective retirees must submit a memorandum to their Department
Director, through their immediate supervisor, advising the Department Director
of their intent to retire. This memorandum should include the effective date of
retirement. A copy of this memorandum will then be submitted to the Insurance
and Benefits Division of Human Resources.
4.    Immediately upon completing the retirement application, the prospective
retiree must contact the Insurance and Benefits Division for an appointment to
chart out their Early Retirement schedule, to finalize cash out payments and to
complete the basic life beneficiary form. At this initial appointment, the
prospective retiree must submit a copy of the PERA Application for Pension,
date-stamped and/or Retirement Letter from PERA.
5.    Retirees electing to defer a lump sum payment to their Deferred
Compensation plan under the "catch-up" provision must contact their Deferred
Compensation representative to complete the necessary forms. Forms must be
submitted to the Insurance and Benefits Division at least three weeks prior to
the actual retirement date. The retiree must ensure that the amount being
deferred is equal to or less than the vacation/sick leave balance the retiree
is entitled to receive. Once this deferral is processed adjustments cannot be
made so it is important that the amounts and paperwork be correct.
Operating Departments Responsibilities
1.    Forward notices of resignation to the Human Resources Department
Insurance and Benefits Division within 24 hours of receipt from the prospective
retiree. Scan and email the notices of resignation to all Insurance & Benefits
Specialists.
2.    Reconcile the prospective retiree’s vacation and sick leave balances.
3.    Ensure the prospective retiree has taken their birthday leave, managerial
leave and floating holidays and has used or is paid for compensatory time prior
to transferring into Early Retirement.
4.    Ensure that the prospective retiree is coded correctly on the last
payroll so that there is no delay in submitting a certification to PERA.
Human Resources Responsibilities
1.    Process all early retirements and process "cash out" payments timely and
accurately.
2.   Ensure the Deferred Compensation "catch up" provisions are processed in
accordance with the rules and regulations and to coordinate with the respective
Deferred Compensation representative and City payroll as necessary.
3.    Ensure the reconciled balances of all vacation and sick leave hours are
"cashed out" in accordance with the designated timelines.
4.    Distribute this Administrative Instruction annually to all prospective
retirees with twenty-three years, of service or more, or eighteen (18) years
for Police and fire, as reflected in the payroll system.
5.    Present this Administrative instruction at all pre-retirement seminars.
6.    Ensure that all medical and dental benefits for prospective retirees are
in effect through the end of the corresponding month.
Early Retirement
1.    Prospective retirees must schedule an appointment with the Insurance and
Benefits Office ninety (90) days prior to entering into Early Retirement.
Prospective retirees may take leave with pay equivalent to the amount of sick
and vacation leave they have accumulated.
2.    The prospective retiree must submit a copy of the PERA Application for
Pension, date-stamped, and/or a copy of the PERA Retirement Letter, at the time
of their Early Retirement appointment.
3.    HR will transfer prospective retirees to Early Retirement at the
beginning of a pay period in accordance with a leave chart which establishes
the entry date into Early Retirement and which schedules leave usage up to the
retirement date.
4.    Prospective retirees in Early Retirement are not entitled to salary
increases afforded City employees and may not use donated leave or hardship
leave in early retirement. Prospective retirees using sick and vacation leave
in Early Retirement are not eligible to accrue sick or vacation leave while in
Early Retirement.
Retirements During the Calendar Year
1.    Prospective retirees will receive a paycheck with regular wages for the
last pay period corresponding with their effective date of retirement, on the
next regularly scheduled pay date.
2.    If the prospective retiree has a balance of vacation and/or sick leave
that is to be paid out in cash, this amount will be paid on the next regular
pay date after the pay date in which the prospective retiree received their
final regular wages.
End of Year Retirements
1.    Prospective retirees will receive their last biweekly wages on the first
payday in January to include any regular hours worked through December 31.
2.    For prospective retirees opting for the split "catch-up" clause for
deferred compensation, the first portion of the "catch-up" will be processed on
a special payroll run during the last regular payroll in November.
3.    For prospective retirees opting for the split "catch up" clause for
deferred compensation, the second portion of the deferral will be paid on the
second payroll in January.
4.    For prospective retirees not deferring, the remainder of vacation and
sick leave balances will be paid by direct deposit on the second payroll in
January.
Other Special Circumstances
1.    Prospective retirees covered by the APD or AFD Collective Bargaining
Agreements are permitted, by contract provision, to defer sick and vacation
leave at year end if they are retiring at any time prior to the end of the
following calendar year. Such prospective retirees are to declare retirement
and file paperwork with the City Insurance and Benefits Division in accordance
with the policy outlined in this Administrative Instruction before the end of
the calendar year prior to the year in which they intend to retire. Upon filing
the required paperwork and being credited with the first deferral payment,
retirement is not revocable.
2.    Prospective retirees using deferral of sick and vacation leave to
purchase prior service credit or uniformed service credit from PERA may defer
leave 90 days prior to their retirement date in order to allow sufficient time
for the necessary fund transfers. The 90-day advance deferral will be subject
to processing of retirement paperwork as outlined in the Administrative
Instruction. It will also be necessary for prospective retirees to submit a
letter requesting approval from the Director of Human Resources for the sell
back, a copy of the Credit Service Letter from PERA, and a copy of the estimate
from PERA for the purchase of the credit service time. Upon completion of the
advanced deferral, retirement is not revocable.
Conflict of Interest Early Retirement/Retirement
Individuals in early retirement and within one (1) year of their official
retirement date cannot represent any person or business in connection with
matters in which the employee has performed in an official act, unless the
Director of Human Resources concurs and the Chief Administrative Officer
consents in writing to such representation. Any requests to enter into a
contract to represent the City in any matter may be approved with the
concurrence of the Director of Human Resources and the approval of the Chief
Administrative Officer.
Pre-Retirement Seminars/Counseling
City employees will receive updated information regarding the retirement
process through regularly scheduled Pre-Retirement Seminars (every other month
for the general employee population and public safety officers).
 
______________________________
Robert J. Perry                [https://export.amlegal.com/media/
Chief Administrative Officer   6d88fadbb394cb34f1263b3e9230120271b111d2/IMAGES/
_____________________________  0-0-0-719.png]
Effective Date
 
AI_NO:_7-27_(pdf)
AI NO: 7-29
BENEFITS FOR DOMESTIC PARTNERS OF EMPLOYEES
TITLE:   Benefits for Domestic Partners of Employees
PRIMARY DEPARTMENT:   Human Resources
Background:
The City of Albuquerque recognizes and values the diverse composition of its
employees. The City adopts this policy acknowledging domestic partnerships.
Policy
Beginning July 1, 2000, the City will provide health and dental insurance
coverage, optional supplemental life insurance and extension of COBRA benefits
and leave usage, including leave under the Family and Medical Leave Act (FMLA),
to its employees with domestic partners who meet the criteria established by
the City, to the same extent that these benefits are provided to employees
spouses. Vision insurance was added 7/1/2004 and made available to domestic
partners.
1. Domestic Partners
   The City defines domestic partners as two individuals who live together in a
long-term relationship of indefinite duration. There must be an exclusive
mutual commitment similar to that of marriage, in which the partners agree to
be financially responsible for each other's welfare and share financial
obligations.
2. Qualifying Criteria
   To be recognized as domestic partners by the City, both individuals must
meet all of the following criteria and sign an Affidavit of Domestic
Partnership (form attached to this Administrative Instruction as Exhibit A) and
submit any necessary documentation.
   a. Both domestic partners must be unmarried;
   b. Domestic partners must have been in a mutually exclusive relationship for
the last twelve (12) months, intending to do so indefinitely, and must share
the same primary residence;
   c. Domestic partners must be jointly responsible for the common welfare of
each other and share financial obligations;
   d. Domestic partners must meet the age requirements for marriage in the
State of New Mexico and be mentally competent to consent to contract; and
   e. Domestic partners must not be related by blood to the degree prohibited
in a legal marriage in the State of New Mexico.
3. Affidavit of Domestic Partnership
   a. Both partners must sign an Affidavit of Domestic Partnership using the
form attached to this Administrative Instruction. The partners must also
present three (3) of the documents listed below: At least one of them must be
dated at least 12 months prior to the Affidavit of Domestic Partnership to
support their declaration of commitment and financial interdependence
   1. Joint lease or mortgage;
   2. Recent bank account/credit card statement;
   3. Recent rent bill or receipt;
   4. Joint checking, savings or brokerage account;
   5. Joint automobile registration;
   6. Joint ownership of a tangible major asset;
   7. Designation of domestic partner as beneficiary in a will;
   8. Designation of domestic partner as beneficiary for life insurance or
pension retirement benefits; or
   9. Durable power of attorney designating the partner.
   b. Providing false information may result in disciplinary action, loss of
benefits, and/or reimbursement to the City and insurer of costs involved in
providing benefit coverage.
4. Termination of Domestic Partnership
   a. A domestic partnership is terminated when the employee files an Affidavit
of Termination (form attached to this Administrative Instruction as Exhibit B).
   b. The employee must provide a valid mailing address for the ex-partner for
COBRA notification purposes
   c. Individuals granted domestic partnership status must report any change in
status that terminates the relationship within thirty-one (31) calendar days of
the change.
5. Dependents of Domestic Partners
   a. The child of a domestic partnership may be claimed as a dependent if the
child meets the age requirements for insurance benefits coverage and is
biological or adopted child of the domestic partner
6. Taxation Issues
   a.    The value of insurance benefits provided to the domestic partner is
considered taxable income to the employee by the Internal Revenue Service and
is subject to social security and federal and state income tax withholding.
   b. Domestic partners are to be extended COBRA continuation benefits even
though they do not meet the definition of spouse under COBRA. Any other laws
pertaining to continuation of benefits that require coverage for a spouse will
apply to a domestic partner.
   c. For an employee who is in a domestic partnership, the employee's portion
of the premium is still eligible for pre-tax deduction.
 
_________________________________
Robert J. Perry                   [https://export.amlegal.com/media/
Chief Administrative Officer      6d88fadbb394cb34f1263b3e9230120271b111d2/
_________________________________ IMAGES/0-0-0-721.png]
Effective Date
 
AI_NO:_7-29_(pdf)
AFFIDAVIT_OF_DOMESTIC_PARTNERSHIP (pdf)
AFFIDAVIT OF DOMESTIC PARTNERSHIP
Declaration
We, ____________________________      __________________
(Employee Name)             (Social Security Number)
and  _______________________________________________      _____________________
    (Domestic Partner’s Name)                (Social Security Number)
declare that:
We are unmarried; nor has either of us been so during the past 12 months.
We are not a member of another domestic partnership; nor has either of us been
so during the past 12 months.
We have been in a mutually exclusive relation for the last twelve (12) months
and intend to do so indefinitely.
We have shared the same primary residence for at least (12) consecutive months.
We meet the age requirements for marriage in the State of New Mexico and are
mentally competent to consent to contract.
We are not related by blood to the degree prohibited in the legal marriage in
the State of New Mexico.
We are jointly responsible for the common welfare of each other and share
financial obligations.
Change in Domestic Partnership
We agree to notify the City of Albuquerque Human Resources Department
in writing within thirty-one (31) days of any change in our status as domestic
partners (for example, if we no longer share the same principal residence) or
if we wish to terminate domestic partner benefits.
   III.   Dependent(s) of Domestic Partners
We declare as eligible dependent(s):
      Name of Child      Biological Parent-EE      Employee   Partner’s
               Or Domestic Partner      Initials      Initials
      ________________           EE DP         ________   _______
      ________________           EE DP         ________   _______
      ________________           EE DP         ________   _______
      ________________           EE DP         ________   _______
Acknowledgements
We understand that the value of insurance benefits provided to the domestic
partner is considered taxable income to the employee by the Internal Revenue
Service and is subject to social security and state income tax withholding.
We understand that courts have recognized some non-marriage relationships as
the equivalent of marriage for the purpose of establishing and dividing
community property.
We acknowledge the City’s advice that we consult our private attorney before
signing this document.
We affirm, under penalty of perjury, that the assertions in this Affidavit are
true and correct. We understand that any misrepresentation of fact may result
in loss of benefits, disciplinary action and that the employee is responsible
for reimbursement to the City for any cost involved in providing benefits
coverage.
_______________________________________________         _____________
         Employee’s Signature                   Date
_______________________________________________         _____________
Domestic Partner’s Signature   Date
STATE OF NEW MEXICO    )
             ) ss.
COUNTY OF _________________)            
The foregoing Affidavit of Domestic Partnership was subscribed before me this
_____ day
of ___________,20__ by ___________________ and ____________________ as their
own free act and deed. Employee Name Domestic Partner Name         
                        
My commission Expires:
____________________                     _________________________
                              Notary Public
_____________________________________________      ___________________
Received by: Insurance Representative            Date
AI NO: 7-30
TELECOMMUTING/WORKFROM HOME DURING THE COVID-19 OUTBREAK (RESCINDED 1-2-2023 )
TITLE: Telecommuting/Workfrom Home During the COVID-19 Outbreak (REVISED)
PRIMARY DEPARTMENT:   Human Resources
This Administrative Instruction is hereby rescinded effective January 2, 2023.
AI NO: 7-66 (2021) Telecommuting/Work From Home may be referenced.
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/6d88fadbb394cb34f1263b3e9230120271b111d2/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2394.png]
 
AI_NO:_7-30_(pdf)
AI NO: 7-33
ADOPTION OF PROCEDURES FOR A VOLUNTARY TRANSFER PROGRAM PRIOR TO LAYOFF
TITLE:   Adoption of Procedures for a Voluntary Transfer Program Prior to
Layoff
PRIMARY DEPARTMENT:   Human Resources
Background:
Layoff is defined as the involuntary separation of classified, non-probationary
employees from City service as a result of the abolishment of a position,
program elimination or a lack of funds. Probationary, unclassified, temporary,
seasonal, and student employees are not eligible for layoff privileges.
The Chief Administrative Officer and the Director of the Human Resources
Department are responsible for approving all layoffs and offering transfers or
placement offers to employees who are or may be identified for layoff. Prior to
a layoff, the Chief Administrative Officer shall develop a layoff plan that
must be based on seniority principles and applicable collective bargaining
agreements.
Purpose:
In an effort to reduce the impact of a potential layoff, and prior to the
implementation of the layoff plan, the Chief Administrative Officer may offer
voluntary transfers to employees affected by the plan to avoid placing
employees in layoff status. These voluntary transfers will be offered using
seniority principles.
Procedure:
When the City contemplates the abolishment of positions, elimination of
programs or faces a lack of funds, the City may institute voluntary transfers
prior to layoff. The following procedures will be followed:
1. If applicable, department directors may administratively transfer identified
employees within their departments with the guidance and approval of the Human
Resources Department. Efforts will be made to transfer employees to the same
job title; if that is not possible then to the same grade. Prior to transfer,
the Human Resources Department must verify the employee's qualifications for
the new position. The employee must sign the (attached) form indicating that
the transfer is voluntary (to reduce the impact of a potential layoff) and the
transfer is final. The acceptance of a voluntary transfer will constitute final
action.
2. After departmental transfer possibilities have been exhausted, the Human
Resources Department will identify positions Citywide (available vacant funded
positions) for which the affected employees (within departments and Citywide)
may qualify.
3. Only the Human Resources Department is authorized to make offers to
employees within the classification within the department, and Citywide. If
employees wish to voluntarily transfer (to offered positions), offers will
first be made to the most senior qualified employee within the classification
in the affected department. If no employee is willing to voluntarily transfer,
the layoff process will be initiated.
4. Employees must sign the (attached) form indicating that the transfer is
voluntary and final. If employees do not wish to voluntarily transfer, the
employee must sign the (attached) form indicating that they are not interested
in a voluntary transfer and prefer to remain in their current position even
though it may be affected by layoff.
5. The Human Resources Department will process the voluntary transfers in
coordination with the affected department. All voluntary transfers will be
effective on a date determined by the Human Resources Department and at the
beginning of a pay period.
 
______________________________
Robert J. Perry                [https://export.amlegal.com/media/
Chief Administrative Officer   6d88fadbb394cb34f1263b3e9230120271b111d2/IMAGES/
_____________________________  0-0-0-726.png]
Effective Date
 
 
AI NO: 7-34
PROHIBITION OF SUPERVISION OF CITY EMPLOYEES BY NON-CITY PERSONNEL
TITLE:   Prohibition of Supervision of City Employees by Non-City Personnel
PRIMARY DEPARTMENT:   Human Resources
Background:
City employees are required to abide by standards set forth in the Merit System
Ordinance, the Labor Relations Management Ordinance and the Personnel Rules and
Regulations, and collective bargaining agreements. Independent contractors and
temporary employment agency employees are not knowledgeable of the standards
contained in these documents and are not subject to the provisions therein. It
is the intent of the City of Albuquerque to treat all City employees
consistently and in accordance with all required laws and regulations, and hold
all City employees to the same standards.
Purpose:
The purpose of this Administrative Instruction is to provide requirements for
independent contractors supervising City employees and prohibit temporary
employment agency employees from supervising City personnel.
There are several elements of supervision required to ensure a productive work
environment including, but not limited to; attendance, payroll, work hours,
work schedules, employee work planning, disciplinary action, etc. Supervision
also requires ensuring collaboration with co-workers to achieve the work
objectives and ensuring employees receive appropriate work assignments.
Independent contractors cannot exercise independent authority when they are not
subject to or knowledgeable of the requirements of these relevant laws,
ordinances or rules. However, contractors may upon occasion and within specific
timeframes need to direct city employees on work assignments to ensure proper
performance and completion of such assignments in order to achieve the
objectives of the contract with the City.
Should it be necessary for an independent contractor to supervise City
employees, the contract authorizing such services will specify that the
independent contractor will not have the authority to hire, terminate,
discipline, or evaluate any classified City employee. Any and all such
personnel actions shall be directed to the Human Resources Department. The
Human Resources Department will assist the appropriate department in the
application of all personnel actions to ensure compliance with the Merit System
Ordinance, the Labor Relations Management Ordinance, the Personnel Rules and
Regulations, applicable collective bargaining agreements, and any applicable
federal, state or local laws dealing with employer/employee relations. No
personnel actions will be taken by contractors without the supervision of the
Human Resources Department.
In no instance will temporary employment agency employees be allowed to
supervise City employees.
 
______________________________
Robert J. Perry                [https://export.amlegal.com/media/
Chief Administrative Officer   6d88fadbb394cb34f1263b3e9230120271b111d2/IMAGES/
_____________________________  0-0-0-728.png]
Effective Date
 
AI_NO:_7-34_(pdf)
AI NO: 7-35 (August 2022)
MILITARY LEAVE - PAYMENT OF INSURANCE BENEFITS & WAGE DIFFERENTIAL
TITLE: Military Leave - Payment of Insurance Benefits & Wage Differential
PRIMARY DEPARTMENT:   Human Resources
The provisions of this Administrative Instruction do not apply to employees who
are identified as “seasonal” or “temporary”, or who are working in a non-
benefited position.
Background:
The City of Albuquerque Personnel Rules and Regulations provide for Military
Leave. It is important that all employees are aware of their benefits and
responsibilities to the City while serving on Military Leave. Employees should
also be made aware of the following:
   1.   The City policy on Military Leave is stated in the Personnel Rules and
Regulations Section 402.2. Section 402.2 C. Military Leave states: "To request
a military leave of absence, the employee or his or her designated
representative, must attach a copy of the orders to a written request for
military leave. In the event official orders are not issued the employee will
be required to provide verification of attendance from their commander. All
requests must be approved by the Human Resources Director."
   2.   Employees who have insurance benefits will be allowed to continue their
benefits and must make payments directly to the Insurance and Benefits
Division. The employee is responsible for paying their portion of insurance
premiums, and the City will continue to pay the City portion as long as the
employee pays the required premium. If an employee fails to make payments and
is delinquent for three (3) pay periods, the insurance benefits will be
cancelled at the end of the pay period last paid. Payments can be made in one
lump sum, monthly or bi-weekly whichever is more convenient for the employee.
Payments made by check or money order may be mailed directly to the Insurance
and Benefits Office.
   3.   Employees on approved Military Leave Without Pay will accrue sick and
vacation leave during their military leave of absence per Resolution R-04-112.
   4.   Employees on approved Military Leave Without Pay will not be allowed to
work any other paid hours during their Military Leave (i.e., overtime,
compensatory time, etc.). If any exceptions to this provision are needed, the
department director must review that exception with the Human Resources
Department Director.
Military Differential Pay:
The City of Albuquerque is appreciative of the commitment and sacrifices that
our active duty military members make to protect our nation. In recognition of
their dedication and to ease their financial burden, the City shall provide
military differential pay for specified periods of active duty service.
Military differential pay is defined as the difference between the employee’s
base rate of pay with the City of Albuquerque and their military base rate of
pay.
   1.   Differential pay shall be provided to active duty military members who
are called to service as a result of a specified military effort or national
emergency.
   2.   The CAO shall specify in writing to the Human Resources and Payroll
Departments the military efforts that qualify for differential pay
consideration to include:
      a.   Name of the military effort
      b.   Duration of differential pay to be provided, if applicable
   3.   Communication shall be provided by Human Resources to HR Coordinators
and through EWeb related to military efforts or national emergencies eligible
for military differential pay.
   4.   The employee or his/her designated representative, may request
differential pay by submitting a Military Leave Request Form. The form must
include a copy of the orders and any applicable documentation which connects
the employee to the approved military effort.
   5.   Differential pay is not eligible for retro payment.
   6.   Upon completion of the known military effort, Human Resources shall
provide the employee written notice of the discontinuance of the military
differential pay.
      a.   Employees are responsible for notifying Human Resources if their
active duty assignment concludes or changes such that they would lose
eligibility for military differential pay consideration.
      b.   The employee’s military differential pay will be discontinued at the
beginning of the next regularly scheduled pay period following conclusion or
reassignment from the specified military effort or national emergency.
REFERENCES:
Personnel Rules and Regulations Section 402.2
Resolution R-05-311
Resolution R-04-112
AI 7-38
 
 
______________________________ [https://export.amlegal.com/media/
Lawrence Rael,                 6d88fadbb394cb34f1263b3e9230120271b111d2/IMAGES/
Chief Administrative Officer   0-0-0-2378.png]
_____________________________
Effective Date
 
AI_NO:_7-35_(pdf)
AI NO: 7-36
OBLIGATIONS OF CITY EMPLOYEES AND APPLICANTS FOR EMPLOYMENT WHO ARE SEX
OFFENDERS
TITLE: Obligations of City Employees and Applicants for Employment Who are Sex
Offenders
PRIMARY DEPARTMENT:   Human Resources
The protection of the victims and potential victims of sex offenders in
Albuquerque is of paramount importance and the City will do its part to protect
potential victims that could come into contact with sex offenders while those
offenders are working for the City.
Applicants for City Employment
Applicants selected for an interview who are registered sex offenders under any
applicable law and on probation must notify the City that they are registered
sex offenders. Applicants who are registered sex offenders under any applicable
law must notify the City in writing that they are registered sex offenders
immediately upon beginning employment or volunteer services. The Human
Resources Department will verify the information provided by the sex offender
and will validate the information with available background check reports. Any
inconsistency in the information provided to the City and to any other
governmental entity is the sole responsibility of the sex offender. Applicants
may be required to provide documentation to show rehabilitation. Background
searches will be performed for all applicants being considered in the final
employment selection process.
City Employees
Current City employees ("Employees") who are registered sex offenders under any
applicable law must notify the City that they are registered sex offenders and
provide copies of any registration documentation submitted to any governmental
entity. The Human Resources department will verify the information provided by
the sex offender and will validate the information with available background
check reports. Any inconsistency in the information provided to the City and to
any other governmental entity is the sole responsibility of the sex offender.
Sex offense convictions for current Employees may be grounds for termination in
accordance with the New Mexico Criminal Offenders Employment Act. Upon request
Employees who are sex offenders may be required to demonstrate they have been
rehabilitated. If they have not been rehabilitated they will be subject to
termination from employment. The City will periodically review the Employee’s
rehabilitation status.
REFERENCES:   
Sex Offender Registration and Notification Act, NMSA 1978 §§ 29-11A-1 to -10
(1999); Criminal Offender Employment Act, NMSA 1978 §§ 28-2-1 to -6 (2010);
City of Albuquerque, New Mexico Code of Ordinances, Sexual Offender Employer
Notification, §§ 11-12-1-1 to -99 (2003); City of Albuquerque, New Mexico, Code
of Ordinances, Albuquerque Sex Offender Registration and Notification Act, §§
11-12-2-1 to -99 (2003)
 
______________________________
Robert J. Perry                [https://export.amlegal.com/media/
Chief Administrative Officer   6d88fadbb394cb34f1263b3e9230120271b111d2/IMAGES/
_____________________________  0-0-0-732.png]
Effective Date
 
AI_NO:_7-36_(pdf)
AI NO: 7-37
GENDER IDENTITY POLICY (2019)
TITLE: Gender Identity Policy
PRIMARY DEPARTMENT:   Human Resources
The City of Albuquerque acknowledges its continuing commitment to protect
individual rights and privileges. The City of Albuquerque also acknowledges its
continuing commitment to the principles of equal employment opportunity and
equal access to City services as an integral part of the operation of City
government. Through this policy, the City commits itself to heighten awareness
of, and sensitivity to the experiences affecting members of the LGBTQ
community. The City also establishes through this policy that, in the operation
of government, discrimination on the basis of gender identity is prohibited.
Employees and applicants for employment are entitled to employment
opportunities, and consumers of City services are entitled to equal access and
equal treatment and have the right to be treated according to their gender
identity in all respects.
DEFINITIONS
"Gender Identity" means a person's self-perception, or perception of that
person by another, of the person's identity as a male or female based upon the
person's appearance, behavior or physical characteristics that are in accord
with or opposed to the person's physical anatomy, chromosomal sex, or sex at
birth.
"Gender Non-Conforming" is a term to describe people who have, or are perceived
to have, behaviors or physical characteristics that do not conform with the
cultural norms or expectations for gender.
EMPLOYMENT
In addition to other basis of discrimination prohibited by the City in
employment and application for employment, discrimination based on gender
identity is also prohibited. This includes, but is not limited to, recruitment,
hiring, employee health benefits, wages, disciplinary actions, conditions of
employment, and promotion . This policy does not anticipate every situation
that might occur with respect to gender nonconforming employees and applicants,
and the needs of each gender nonconforming employee must be assessed on a case-
by-case basis. Senior Personnel /Labor Relations Officers for each Department
should contact both the Legal Departmentand the Human Resources Department when
confronted with issues, concerns, or questions relating to gender identity or
expression. The following policies are designed to reinforce the City's
commitment to promoting an open and welcoming work environment that respects
all City employees:
   A.   Employee Records
The City will prospectively change an employee's records and other work-related
documents to reflect a name and gender that corresponds to their gender
identity upon request from the employee. Certain employee records such as
insurance paperwork, PERA documents, and W-4 and 1-9 forms must reflect the
employee's birth name and gender assigned at birth until proof of a legal name
change is provided. However, other records, public facing items, and
correspondence directed to the employee will be changed to reflect the person'
s preferred name and gender without proof of a legal name change. Employees
requesting a change to their name or gender must contact their Department's
Senior Personnel/Labor Relations Officer and submit a form noting the
employee's preferred name and gender. Any such name change must be approved by
the Director of Human Resources or a designee .
   B.   Names and Pronouns
When addressing employees verbally or in written correspondence, supervisors,
HR personnel, and coworkers should use the name and pronouns that correspond
with the employee's gender identity. Further, supervisors, HR personnel, and
coworkers should take care to ensure the correct name and pronouns are used in
employee records and in communications with others regarding employees.
   C.   Facilities Access
Empl oyees shall have access to the restrooms and lock er rooms that con-
esponds to th eir gend er id entit y. Any employee who has a need or desire for
increased privacy, regardless of the underlying reason, will be provided access
to a single-stall restroom, a priva te alternative changing area, or other
reasonable accommodations, when availabl e. All employees have a right to safe
and appropriate restroom and locker room facilities, regardles s of the empl
oyee's sex assigned at birth.
   D.   Appearance Standards
The Cit y does not have a dress code that restrict empl oyees' clothing or
appearance on the basis of gend er. All employees must compl y with the dress
code and appearance standards set by their depa1t ment. However, within those
standard s, all employees shall be allowed to appear and dress in a manne r
consistent with the employee' s gender identit y.
CITY SERVICES
In addition to other basis of discrimination prohibited by the City in the
access to services and facilities, discrimination based on gender identity is
also prohibited. This includes, but is not limited to, recreation, cultural
services, senior services, multi-generational centers, housing services, and
transportation.
COMPLAINT PROCESS
Individuals who believe that they have been discriminated against because of
their gender identity have the right to seek redress. The following procedures
are to be used in seeking resolution of such complaints:
A.   Employment
Employees or applicants for employment who believe that they were discriminated
against in an employment- related action on the basis of their gender identity
may file a complaint with the Employee Relations Division of the Human
Resources Department. The Employee Relations Division will receive and process
employment- related complaints. Any City employee who believes that they are
being discriminated against because of their gender identity may contact the
Employee Relations Division of the Human Resources Department. In the event
assistance is needed to resolve the issue, it may be appropriate to consult
with the Office of Equity and Inclusion .
B.   City Services
Consumers who believe that they were denied a city service or received unequal
treatment on the basis of their gender identity may seek resolution of their
complaint as specified below:
   1.   The consumer may notify the department or facilities director of his or
her complaint. The director, upon notification of the complaint, will conduct
an internal inquiry of the complaint and, as appropriate, attempt resolution of
the complaint. If the complaint is resolved, no further action is required and
a summary of the complaint and actions taken will be kept in the department's
files.
   2.   In the event that the complaint is not resolved through the
departmental process, or should the consumer elect not to go to the department
or facility director, the consumer may file a complaint with the Office of
Equity and Inclusion. The Office of Equity and Inclusion, on behalf of the
City, will accept and process the consumer's complaint as specified below:
      a.   An attempt at an initial resolution of the complaint will be made
between the consumer and the department or facility director .
      b.   If resolution is not possible, the ODHR will initiate an
investigation on behalf of the City. Upon completion of its investigation, the
ODHR will submit to the Chief Administrative Officer or designee a written
report of its investigation and findings, together with recommendations, for
review and a final decision.
      c.   The decision of the Chief Administrative Officer or designee will be
final.
RETALIATION
Retaliation against any individual for filing a discrimination complaint based
on gender identity for assisting, testifying or participating in the
investigation of such a complaint is a violation of this policy.
 
 
______________________________
Sarita Nair                    [https://export.amlegal.com/media/
Chief Administrative Officer   6d88fadbb394cb34f1263b3e9230120271b111d2/IMAGES/
_____________________________  0-0-0-1700.jpg]
Effective Date
 
               Employee Name Change Request Form
New Name: ____________________________________________________________________
Previous Name:
____________________________________________________________________
Preferred Title (optional):
      O Ms.
      O Mrs.
      O Mr.
      O Other:           
Pronoun Designation (optional):
      O She/Her/Hers
      O He/Him/His
      O They/Them/Theirs
      O Other:           
Pursuant to Administrative Instruction 7-37, this form initiates a request for
the employee to change their name on certain records and public facing items
used throughout the City. This form does not change the full name displayed on
insurance paperwork, PERA documents, W-4 and 1-9 forms, KRONOS, and PeopleSoft.
To change the full name displayed on those items, the employee must provide the
Human Resources Department with a new Social Security Card and another form
oflD (for 1-9 verification) showing the name change.
Upon completion of this form, the Department's Senior Personnel/Labor Relations
Officer will assist the employee in changing their full name on the following
items:
   ∙    Employee identification badge
   ∙    Microsoft Outlook
   ∙    Employee business cards
In addition, this form changes the full name that will appear on all written
correspondence to the employee.
 
Employee Signature: __________________________________
Employee ID: _______________________________________
 
HR Approval: ______________________________________
AI_NO:_7-37_(pdf)
AI NO: 7-38
ADMINISTRATION AND INTERPRETATION OF MILITARY LEAVE PROVISIONS FOR NON-
BARGAINING EMPLOYEES
TITLE:   Administration and Interpretation of Military Leave Provisions for
Non-Bargaining Employees
PRIMARY DEPARTMENT:   Human Resources
The provisions of this Administrative Instruction do not apply to employees
covered by a collective bargaining agreement, employees who are identified as
“seasonal” or “temporary”, or who are working in non-benefited positions.
The City of Albuquerque supports those employees who contribute to the defense
of our nation through military service. This Administrative Instruction:
   ∙  Clarifies the provisions of Personnel Rules and Regulations Section
402.2.A, Military Leave with Pay;
   ∙  Implements the provisions of Resolution R-05-311 enacted July 15, 2005,
which amended R-04-112 enacted October 1, 2004, regarding the accrual of
vacation and sick leave while on paid military leave;
   ∙  Implements the provisions of Resolution R-01-351 enacted November 30,
2001 regarding the payment of insurance benefits; and
   ∙  Modifies the provisions of Personnel Rules and Regulations Section
402.2.A to provide additional paid military leave on a calendar year basis for
the period from September 12, 2001 until such time as the City determines that
the national emergency created by the terrorist attack on September 11, 2001
has ended.
All military leave granted by the City is in conformity with Federal law and
may be paid or unpaid military leave, depending on the circumstances and the
period of military leave.
Members of Organized Reserve Units
Military Leave of Absence
Employees, who are members of the National Guard, Air National Guard or any
organized reserve unit of the Armed Forces of the United States, including the
Public Health Services, are granted:
1) The equivalent of fifteen (15) 8-hour work days of paid military leave per
calendar year. This leave, while normally used for annual training purposes,
may also be used for pre-deployment training or active duty service; and or
2) The equivalent of an additional fifteen (15) 8-hour work days of paid
military leave per calendar year if the employee is mobilized to active duty by
the President of the United States in support of operations overseas, in
defense of our nation, or in response to national disasters, or in response to
an emergency declared by the Governor of New Mexico. This additional leave may
be used for pre-deployment training or active duty service.
The maximum paid military leave is 240 hours per calendar year for employees,
who are members of organized reserve units. Employees whose military commitment
requires leave time in excess of that granted above may elect: (1) to be placed
into unpaid military leave of absence status; or (2) to use accrued vacation
leave, in whole or in part, during their period of military leave. When an
employee has used all available paid military leave and paid vacation leave,
that employee will be placed into unpaid military leave status for the balance
of their military leave period.
Vacation and Sick Leave Accruals While in Military Active Duty Status
Employees mobilized to active duty by the President of the United States on or
after September 12, 2001 in support of operations overseas, in defense of our
nation, or in response to national disasters will continue to accrue vacation
and sick leave at the same accrual rate as if the employee was not on active
military duty during all periods of active military duty, regardless of whether
the military leave of absence is paid or unpaid.
This accrual shall continue while the employee is in active military duty
status and until:
1) The employee returns to City employment; or
2) Until the employee notifies the City of their resignation from City
employment while in active military duty status; or
3) Until the employee notifies the City of their intention not to return to
City employment at the end of their active military duty, whichever date is
earlier (R-04-112).
Health Insurance Benefits While in Military Active Duty Status
For employees mobilized to active duty by the President of the United States on
or after September 12, 2001 in support of operations overseas, in defense of
our nation, or in response to national disasters, the City shall continue to
pay the employer portion of health insurance premiums for that employee to the
same extent as if that employee were not on active military duty status.
The employee in active military duty status must continue to timely make
payment of the employee portion of health insurance premiums to the same extent
as if that employee were not on active military duty status. Failure to do so
will result in termination of health insurance coverage. It is the obligation
of the employee on active military duty status to notify the Insurance and
Benefits Division of the Human Resources Department and to complete all
necessary forms and make all necessary elections to ensure that the employee’s
portion of health insurance premiums are made timely, if the employee wishes to
continue health insurance coverage.
Provided the employee is and remains current on all required employee
contributions to health insurance premiums, the City shall continue to pay the
employer portion of health insurance premiums while the employee is in active
military duty status and until: 1) the employee returns to City employment; or
2) until the employee notifies the City of their resignation from City
employment while in active military duty status; or 3) until the employee
notifies the City of their intention not to return to City employment at the
end of their active military duty, whichever date is earlier.
Members of Unorganized Reserve Units
Employees, who are members of unorganized reserve components, as sanctioned by
the State of New Mexico or the Federal government, are granted:
1) The equivalent of fifteen (15) 8-hour work days of paid military leave per
calendar year. This leave is for the purpose of attending organized courses of
instruction or training; and or
2) The equivalent of fifteen (15) 8-hour work days of paid military leave per
calendar year if the employee is mobilized to active duty by the President of
the United States in support of operations overseas, in defense of our nation,
or in response to national disasters, or in response to an emergency declared
by the Governor of New Mexico. This leave may be used only for active duty
service.
The maximum paid military leave is 240 hours per calendar year for employees
who are members of unorganized reserve units, regardless of the purpose for
which that paid military leave is used.
Employees whose military commitment requires leave time in excess of that
granted above may elect: (1) to be placed into unpaid military leave of absence
status; or (2) to use accrued vacation leave, in whole or in part, during their
period of military leave. When an employee has used all available paid military
leave and paid vacation leave, that employee will be placed into unpaid
military leave of absence status for the balance of their military leave
period.
General Provisions
In no case shall the hours of paid military leave in a calendar year exceed the
maximum number of hours provided above, even though the maximum number of hours
may be calculated by reference to “work days”.
Employees utilizing this benefit must provide written military orders to their
department’s payroll division before said benefits are awarded.
All military leave pay is paid at the employee’s straight-time rate of pay.
Employees, including those in the classified service and those in unclassified
positions, working on a part-time basis will be granted paid military leave on
a prorated basis.
REFERENCES: Resolution R-04-112, Resolution R-05-311, Resolution R-01-351,
Personnel Rules and Regulations Section 402.2.A 
 
______________________________
Robert J. Perry                [https://export.amlegal.com/media/
Chief Administrative Officer   6d88fadbb394cb34f1263b3e9230120271b111d2/IMAGES/
_____________________________  0-0-0-736.png]
Effective Date 
 
AI_NO:_7-38_(pdf)
AI NO: 7-39
MANDATORY ANNUAL MANAGEMENT/SUPERVISORY TRAINING (2023)
TITLE: Mandatory Annual Management / Supervisory Training
PRIMARY DEPARTMENT:   Human Resources
BACKGROUND
City Personnel Rules and Regulations (Section 301.2) state that employees are
encouraged to strive for personal and professional excellence as a means of
keeping current on relevant issues and administering the public's business with
professional competence, efficiency, and effectiveness. The Merit System
Ordinance (§ 3-1-1 a, f, & h) mandates the Director of Human Resources, under
the general direction of the Chief Administrative Officer, to exercise
leadership in and encourage the development of effective personnel
administration within the departments, agencies, and special programs in the
city service, and to make available the resources of the Human Resources
Department available to develop and establish training and educational programs
for persons in the city service.
GENERAL POLICY
Mandatory Annual Management/ Supervisory Training: It is the policy of the City
of Albuquerque that all management employees with supervisory responsibilities
shall be required to attend sixteen (16) hours of management/supervisory
development training on an annual basis as designated by the Human Resources
Director. This training can be completed by attending the Supervisory
Development Program for new supervisors (64 hours), a Supervisor Professional
Development Day (8 hours), and through Online Supervisor Refresher Training (8
hours) and other online training courses (.5-5 Hours each). Supervisors can
also achieve credit toward the 16 hours by participating in off-site workshops
and conferences and college courses as approved by the Human Resources
Department’s Employee Learning Center.
RECORD OF TRAINING 
The City of Albuquerque will record all supervisors’ training through the
Online Learning Management System (ELM) and report training in the learner
profile for each employee. All outside training, workshops, conferences, and
professional development activities will be recorded as supplemental learning
by the employee in their ELM learner profile. The intent of the program is to
provide all City employees who have supervisory responsibilities with a forum
to stay current on relevant management issues and develop new competencies that
will be deployed in the administration of public business with professional
competence, efficiency, and effectiveness.
REFERENCES:
Personnel Rules and Regulations (Section 301.2)
Merit System Ordinance (§ 3-1-1 a, f, & h)
 

______________________________
Samantha Sengel                [https://export.amlegal.com/media/
Chief Administrative Officer   6d88fadbb394cb34f1263b3e9230120271b111d2/IMAGES/
                              0-0-0-2929.jpg]
_____________________________
Effective Date
 
AI_NO:_7-39_(pdf)
AI NO: 7-40
VOLUNTEER SCREENING (2021)
TITLE: Volunteer Screening
PRIMARY DEPARTMENT:   Human Resources
BACKGROUND
The City of Albuquerque values the work that volunteers perform for the benefit
of the City and its residents. With both employees and volunteers the City must
take reasonable precautions to limit its liability and to keep the city safe by
ensuring that individuals who may be dangerous to the public and vulnerable
populations are not serving as volunteers or agents of the City. Vulnerable
populations include children age 17 or younger, persons age 60 and older, and
individuals with disabilities. Volunteers include all volunteers, community
service assignees, and appointees to boards and commissions ("Volunteers") that
work with or for the City but are not considered to be City employees.
Volunteers are not provided monetary compensation, with the exception of City-
Management Relations Board Members as dictated by the Labor-Relations
Management Ordinance ('74 Code,§ 2-2-1) (Ord. 153-1971; Am. Ord. 4-1977; Am.
Ord. 2020-045).
In order to ensure compliance with this Administrative Instruction in the
screening and engagement of volunteers across city departments, all City of
Albuquerque programs using volunteers must screen volunteers through the One
Albuquerque Volunteers Platform or through the Boards and Commissions page on
the City of Albuquerque website. Programs seeking an exception to this
requirement must receive approval from the Chief Administrative Officer or a
representative from the Office of the CAO.
Any Volunteer may be rejected for any reason, and no reason for the rejection
needs to be given to a Volunteer or applicant. Convictions for offenses that
are sexual in nature will deem the volunteer ineligible to serve. Convictions
for offenses other than those sexual in nature are not an automatic bar to
service. Volunteers with other convictions or pending charges will be reviewed
by the Human Resources Department on a case-by-case basis and will be
considered for a Volunteer position if they do not pose a threat to the public
or vulnerable populations and the convictions are not related to the particular
area of volunteer service. Consideration for felony convictions and misdemeanor
convictions involving moral turpitude will include a determination that the
person has been sufficiently rehabilitated to warrant the public trust.
The Department Director or the Mayor may dismiss and further preclude any
Volunteer from participation in any City Volunteer program for any reason or no
reason at all. The Department Director may dismiss and further preclude any
Volunteer from participation in any City Volunteer program if the Volunteer
engages in any conduct reasonably perceived as dangerous to the public or
otherwise disruptive to the City or other Volunteers.
VOLUNTEER CLASSIFICATIONS:
Short Term Volunteers
   •   Volunteers who perform services for single events or for term-limited
volunteer opportunities as determined by department volunteer coordinators, the
City of Albuquerque Human Resources Department, and the Office of Civic
Engagement will be considered short term volunteers.
   •   Short-Term Volunteers will, at all times during the Volunteer function,
be supervised, observed, and within the control of a paid City employee
authorized to be alone with vulnerable populations.
   •   Short-Term Volunteers do not undergo a background investigation, but may
be subject to a review of the National Sex Offender Public Website (NSOPW).
Level 1 Volunteers
   •   Level I Volunteers do not generally engage with the public within the
purview of their volunteer job description but may still have some exposure to
vulnerable populations.
   •   Level 1 Volunteer background checks will include sex offender registry
and national criminal database checks.
   •   Convictions for offenses other than those sexual in nature will be
reviewed and evaluated based on risk to the public.
   •   Board and Commission members are considered Level I .
Level 2 Volunteers
   •   Level 2 Volunteers may have unsupervised access to vulnerable
populations and protected critical infrastructure.
   •   Level 2 Volunteer background investigations will include sex offender
registry, national criminal database, and motor vehicle record checks.
   •   Convictions for offenses other than those sexual in nature will be
reviewed and evaluated based on risk to the public.
   •   Level 2 Volunteers may be subject to regular background investigations
and fingerprintbased background screenings.
The Departments will maintain a written list of all Volunteers.
APPLICATION FORM:
Level I and Level 2 Volunteers will be required to complete appropriate
background authorization forms. Short term volunteers may be asked to provide
information required to perform a review of the NSOPW. The City shall not use
any Volunteer who fails to submit a complete application. In addition to the
volunteer profile and background authorization form, the Volunteers must also
complete a form which waives all claims for liability against the City for
injury or damage arising out of volunteer work for the City that are a result
of his or her own actions or negligence. Certain volunteer positions may
require confidentiality agreements or fingerprint-based FBI criminal history
check, as required by certain departments.
The application will include the applicant's name, date of birth, gender, and
address.
If the Volunteer is under the age of 18, the application must be approved and
signed by the applicant's parent or legal guardian.
BACKGROUND CHECK:
Short term volunteers, those performing services for a single event or term
limited position, may be screened for sex crime convictions through review of
the National Sex Offender Public Website (NSOPW).
The Department reviewing a Volunteer will verify that the background
investigation does not list them as a registered sex offender. The background
investigation shall be substantially the same as that allowable on any City of
Albuquerque employee. Background investigations may be conducted as often as
reasonably necessary. Volunteers may be required to resubmit a background
authorization form if more than 180 days have passed since their last volunteer
shift.
Volunteers are responsible for notifying their immediate supervisor in writing
of an arrest, conviction, entry of a "no contest" plea, or imposition of a
sentence if the infraction relates to the position held by the volunteer.
Arrests and misdemeanor convictions will be considered based on job
relatedness.
Volunteer applicants for the Department of Senior Affairs' Senior Corps
programs (RSVP, Foster Grandparent Program, and Senior Companion Program) are
subject to additional screening. Foster Grandparents and Senior Companions are
required to undergo National Service Criminal History Checks (NSCHC) which
consist of a nationwide search of the National Sex Offender Public Website, a
search of the NM Department of Public Safety or the NM Department of Health,
and a fingerprint-based FBI criminal history check.
Senior Corps applicants with the Department of Senior Affairs will be provided
a reasonable opportunity to review and challenge the factual accuracy of a
result before action is taken to exclude the individual from serving.
VOLUNTEERS WITH DRIVING ASSIGNMENTS:
If the Volunteer will be using a non-City vehicle for Volunteer duties, the
Volunteer must provide a driver's license number and the license plate number
and proof of insurance for the vehicle(s) that will be used.
REFERENCES:   The Code of Federal Regulations outlines the NSCHC rules and
regulations in full at 45 CFR 2540.200-207. The final ruling can be found in
the Federal Register at Federal Register Vol. 77, No. 194.
 
______________________________
Sarita Nair                    [https://export.amlegal.com/media/
Chief Administrative Officer   6d88fadbb394cb34f1263b3e9230120271b111d2/IMAGES/
_____________________________  0-0-0-2052.png]
Effective Date
 
AI_NO:_7-40_(pdf)
AI NO: 7-42
AUTOMATED EXTERNAL DEFIBRILLATOR (AED) PROGRAM
TITLE: Automated External Defibrillator (AED) Program
PRIMARY DEPARTMENT:  General Services Department
1.   Background:
The City of Albuquerque (City), through its Executive Safety Committee and with
the cooperation and assistance of the General Services Department (GSD),
Albuquerque Fire Rescue (AFR), and the Risk Management Division (RMD), has
established an Automated External Defibrillator (AED) program as part of the
City's commitment to the health and well-being of our citizens and employees.
This Administrative Instruction establishes the policies and procedures that
will govern the AED program City-wide and supersedes any and all earlier
instructions, policies or procedures, written or verbal. This Administrative
Instruction applies to all City departments and all City employees.
2.   Procedures:
   A.   Participation in AED Program
      The AED program will be administered as required by the New Mexico
Cardiac Arrest Response Act (24-l0C-1 NMSA) and New Mexico Administrative Code
7.27.8. Cardiac Arrest Targeted Response Program.
      Every City department shall participate in the AED program. All City
employees shall be trained in the use of AED; however, City employees may
choose to complete either the in-person hands-on training or the online
training provided through the Human Resources Department's Employee Leaming
Center.
Operating Guidelines for the City of Albuquerque's Approved AED Program:
   B.   AED Program Coordinator
      GSD will select a Supervising Trained Targeted Responder within the
City's Metro Security Department to serve as the City's AED Program Coordinator
(Coordinator).
   To comply with 7.27.8 NMAC, the Coordinator shall:
      •   Oversee the AED program and assume responsibility for how the AED
program is planned and conducted.
      •   Select and identify other participating persons as trained targeted
responders.
      •   Maintain AED training records for all trained targeted responders
while they are active in the program, and for at least three years thereafter.
      •   Maintain AED program records including AED maintenance records,
trained targeted responder training records, and AED usage records, as detailed
in 7.27.8(0) NMAC.
      •   Ensure that all trained targeted responders are trained using a
training program which has been approved by the department.
      •   Provide evidence of coordination of the AED program with local EMS
services and emergency dispatch agencies, including 911 dispatch agencies.
      •   Register the AED program with the department and pay registration
fees, as detailed in 7.27.8 NMAC.
      •   Report all operational uses of the AED to the Department.
      •   Perform quality assurance review of all operational defibrillations;
and
      •   Ensure AED equipment is maintained in accordance with the
manufacturer's guidelines.
      •   Notify local EMS and emergency dispatch agencies of the activation
and existence of the City's AED program, as detailed in 7.27.8(E) NMAC.
   Additionally, the City requires the Coordinator to:
      •   Provide a list of AED equipment locations to the RMD for RMD's
records;
      •   Ensure that a maintenance record is kept for all AED equipment;
      •   Inspect, repair and or replace any AED equipment as needed after each
AED deployment;
      •   Monitor the effectiveness of the AED program within the City;
      •   Not less than quarterly each year, report to the Employee Health
Services Section of RMD and NMDOH Emergency Medical Services Bureau on each
incident involving the use of AED equipment;
      •   Not less than once each calendar year, conduct and document a system
readiness review of AED training records, equipment operation, and maintenance
records. The report will be provided to RMD and the Executive Safety Committee;
      •   Assist all City departments in developing an internal Emergency
Response Plan to include roles and responsibilities for department staff.
   C.   Trained Targeted Responders
   To comply with 7.27.8 NMAC, Trained Targeted Responders shall be:
      •   Selected by the Coordinator.
      •   Understand how to activate the local emergency medical system for any
sudden collapse or cardiac arrest victim:
      •   Prior to participating in an AED program, trained targeted responders
shall complete an initial AED training course from a Department approved
training program. The course shall include both cardiopulmonary resuscitation
(CPR) and AED training.
      •   At least every two years, trained targeted responders shall recertify
in CPR and AED training, by successfully completing a department approved AED
training course.
      •   Activate the emergency medical system during any operational response
to a victim of cardiac arrest, and advise that AED is being used.
      •   Comply with program protocols for operational response to victims of
cardiac arrest.
      •   Report all operational responses to victims of cardiac arrest to the
supervising trained targeted responder and complete a defibrillation report. A
copy of the report shall be submitted to the department within 20 calendar
days.
      •   Ensure AED's are maintained and used in accordance with the
manufacturer's guidelines, and inspect AED equipment at least monthly.
   Additionally, the City requires:
      •   Trained Targeted Responders complete in-person hands-on CPR and AED
training.
   D.   Department Directors
   The City requires all City Department Directors to:
      •   Ensure City Department cooperation with the Coordinator to develop an
Emergency Response Plan.
      •   Notify the Mayor's Office of all incidents involving the deployment
of AED equipment;
      •   Ensure that all employees who receive AED treatment are provided post
incident care, such as the City's Employee Assistance Program;
      •   Notify the Coordinator through Metro Security Dispatch at (505) 924-
3954 or (505) 239-0900 after the incident has been resolved and inform the
Coordinator of the AED deployment.
      •   Select one or more Department Responders.
   E.   Department Responders shall:
      •   Activate the internal emergency response system and provide basic
life support including AED, CPR and first aid according to the responder's
training and experience.
      •   Notify his or her respective Department Director after AED equipment
is deployed.
      •   Notify his or her supervisor, Department Director or HR Coordinator
of the need for post-incident care.
   F.   All Department staff will:
      •   Receive emergency medical calls from within the Department; Follow
reasonable instructions and assist with implementation of the City Department's
Emergency Response Plan.
   G.   Use of City-owned AED Equipment by Non-City Employees
   Non-City volunteer responders may, at their discretion, provide voluntary
assistance to victims of medical emergencies on City property. The extent to
which these individuals respond shall be appropriate to their training and
experience.
   H.   Selection of AED Equipment
   The Coordinator, in collaboration with AFR, will be responsible for the
selection, placement and signage of all AED equipment used by the City.
   I.   Maintenance of AED equipment
   AED programs shall maintain the AED(s) and associated supplies and batteries
in accordance with the manufacturer's suggested guidelines. GSD shall maintain
these supplies and distribute after each deployment of AED equipment or as
needed.
3.   Transition Provisions:
To be fully in compliance with this Administrative Instruction, any City
Department that has AED equipment in place in any of their facilities on the
effective date of this Administrative Instruction must notify the Coordinator
of that fact and begin developing the City Department's Emergency Response Plan
REFERENCES: New Mexico Administrative Code 7.27.8.8 Establishment of an AED
Program
 
______________________________
Dr. Samantha Sengel            [https://export.amlegal.com/media/
Chief Administrative Officer   6d88fadbb394cb34f1263b3e9230120271b111d2/IMAGES/
_____________________________  0-0-0-2909.jpg]
Effective Date
 
AI_NO:_7-42_(pdf)
AI NO: 7-44
INCENTIVE PROGRAM FOR POSITIONS WHICH ARE
"DIFFICULT TO RECRUIT" (Revised January 2023)
TITLE: Incentive Program for Positions which are "Difficult to Recruit"
PRIMARY DEPARTMENT: Human Resources
The City has established an incentive program to help address the challenges
faced by the City in recruiting highly qualified, performance-orientated
candidates for specific classifications that have been identified as "difficult
to recruit." "Difficult to recruit" classifications are defined as:
   a)   Positions which are highly competitive in the labor market due to
specialized skills and/or certifications, or
   b)   Positions influenced due to unusual market demands, or
   c)   Positions that experience high turnover making it difficult to maintain
adequate staffing levels to provide critical City services.
All recruitment incentives, and the classifications to which they will apply,
must be approved in advance in writing by the Human Resources Director as
delegated by the Chief Administrative Officer (CAO) prior to discussion with
any candidate or recruiting effort proposing to offer one or more of these
incentives. Recruitment incentives may be discontinued at any time at the sole
discretion of the CAO. The CAO will exercise final authority regarding the
implementation and administration of this incentive program.
The following recruitment incentives may be offered in appropriate
circumstances with the written concurrence of the CAO:
HIRING INCENTIVE:
The Addendum to this Administrative Instruction will provide a comprehensive
list of positions eligible for a hiring incentive, effective dates, and amount
of the applicable incentive. In addition, each job title includes an exclusion
for individuals who have been previously employed by the City. Individuals who
are rehired within the exclusion timeframe are not eligible for the Hiring
Incentive.
For the purposes of this Administrative Instruction, successful completion of
any period of time required for the payment of a hiring incentive must be
evidenced by the completion of a Performance Evaluation showing that
performance expectations were met.
SICK LEAVE TRANSFER:
Unclassified employees who leave another employer to accept a "difficult to
recruit" position in the City may be credited with up to 96.2 hours (bi-weekly
accrual of 3.7 hours for 26 pay periods) of sick leave. The actual amount to be
credited may not exceed the maximum of 96.2 hours and shall be based on
documentation provided by the employee indicating the sick leave balance in
effect, net of any "payout" or "conversion" of sick leave, at the date of the
employee's termination of their previous employment. The sick leave shall be
credited to the employee's City sick leave bank after the completion of one
full pay period.
Police Officer Laterals: Each lateral hire, upon completion of the officer's
academy training, shall be credited with forty ( 40) hours of sick leave.
VACATION ACCRUAL RATE:
Unclassified employees hired into "difficult to recruit" positions in the City
will accrue vacation leave at the rate applicable to employees with five years
of experience with the City provided they have at least five years of
experience with one or more previous employers in a position comparable to the
one into which they are hired. The enhanced accrual rate shall go into effect
at the completion of six (6) months of employment. The enhanced accrual rate
will remain in effect until the employee reaches ten (10) years of service with
the City.
Police Officer Laterals: Upon completion of the officer's academy training, and
for each year of prior service recognized by the Albuquerque Police Department
for purposes of lateral credit, each lateral hire shall be credited with
vacation leave as follows:
   40 hours for 2-4 years
   70 hours for 5-14 years
   100 hours for 15 or more years
FINDER'S FEE:
Any City employee who has referred a candidate not currently or previously
employed by the City within the last eight (8) years for employment into a
"difficult to recruit" classification may be paid a finder's fee of up to
$2500.
   a)   Incentive payments for difficult to fill positions will be made only
after the referred candidate is hired and successfully completes six months of
City service with a "meets expectations" or higher evaluation rating and may be
paid a finder's fee of up to $500, or
   b)   Incentive payments for police officer cadets and laterals will be made
once the referred candidate is hired and successfully completes their OJT with
a "meets expectations" or higher evaluation rating and may be paid a finder's
fee of up to $2500, or
   c)   Incentive payments for Albuquerque Fire Rescue 3/Class will be made
only after the referred candidate is hired and successfully completes their
probationary year with a "meets expectations" or higher evaluation rating and
may be paid a finder's fee of up to $1000.
The following conditions apply for a City employee to be eligible to receive
the finder's fee:
   •   The referring employee must be identified on the candidate's original
application for employment; and
   •   The candidate cannot have been a City employee within the last eight (8)
years.
Executives, Directors, Deputy Directors, Associate Directors, Assistant
Directors, Human Resources, and leadership positions with oversight over a
finder's fee eligible job are excluded from receiving a Finder's Fee. No
finder's fee will be payable with respect to a candidate who has retired from
the PERA or ERA system.
The determination of whether a finder's fee is to be paid and the amount to be
paid will be made by the Director of the department that hired the candidate.
Any finder's fee may be subject to applicable collective bargaining agreement
(s).
RELOCATION ASSISTANCE:
Candidates for "difficult to recruit" classifications may be eligible for a
relocation assistance of up to $5000. Relocation assistance shall be included
with the applicable individual's offer letter and is payable the pay period
following completion of the employee's first full pay period worked.
CONDITIONS APPLICABLE TO INCENTIVE PROGRAM:
Any incentive to be paid under the terms of this program shall be payable from
the existing fiscal year budget of the Department proposing to offer the
incentive. No budget line item shall be proposed or approved to accommodate
this incentive program.
All payments to candidates or employees under this Administrative Instruction
shall be treated as taxable income on the date paid, and subject to all normal
withholdings and deductions.
Department Directors may request additions and deletions from the list of
recruitment incentives by emailing CentralHR@CABQ.gov.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/6d88fadbb394cb34f1263b3e9230120271b111d2/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2439.png]
AI_NO:_7-44_(pdf)_(3/3/2023)
AI NO: 7-44 ADDENDUM
(7/3/2025)
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/6d88fadbb394cb34f1263b3e9230120271b111d2/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2794.png]
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/6d88fadbb394cb34f1263b3e9230120271b111d2/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2796.png]
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/6d88fadbb394cb34f1263b3e9230120271b111d2/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2798.png]
 
AI_NO:_7-44_addendum_(Revised:_7/3/2025)
AI NO: 7-44
AFR PARAMEDIC NEW HIRE SUPPLEMENT (Aug. 2020)
TITLE: Incentive Program for Paramedic New Hires with Albuquerque Fire Rescue
PRIMARY DEPARTMENT: Albuquerque Fire Rescue
Definitions:
A new hire is a person who is offered and accepted a position with AFR and who
possesses all of the qualifications and certifications listed in the job
posting. Each individual must complete the traditional cadet program.
Individuals with NM State or National Registry Emergency Medical Technician
(EMT) license at the basic level or higher are preferred.
COMPLETE INCENTIVE PACKAGE FOR PARAMEDIC NEW HIRES:
   HIRING BONUS:
   A hiring bonus of $15,000 shall be offered to a new hire with an EMT-
Paramedic license only, payable as follows: $5,000 at the successful completion
of the first two weeks of the AFR Training Academy, $5,000 at the successful
completion of the AFR Training Academy and the remaining $5,000 payable
following the successful completion of the one-year probationary period.
   Training Program Duration:
   All AFR new hires must complete an eighteen (18) week Training Academy.
While in the Academy, all members will be assigned to a forty (40) hour work
week. Following completion of the Training Academy, all members shall be
assigned to a fifty-six (56) hour work week and subject to Department policies
regarding overtime.
   CONDITIONS APPLICABLE TO INCENTIVE PROGRAM:
   The incentives offered under this program shall be delineated in a written
agreement signed by the candidate, the Department director, and the CAO, in
advance of, or concurrently with, the Recommendation of Hire.
   EFFECTIVE DATE; TRANSITION RULE; EXCEPTIONS:
   This Administrative Instruction is effective the date the document is signed
by the CAO and valid until December 31, 2021. This Administrative Instruction
will apply only to prospective City employees for the purpose of new hires for
the Albuquerque Fire Rescue who possess an EMT Paramedic license. Any person to
whom an offer of employment has been made on or before the effective date of
this Administrative Instruction, as revised, is not eligible for any hiring
incentive under this program. Individuals previously employed by Albuquerque
Fire Rescue are not eligible to participate in the Incentive Program for
Paramedic New Hires.
REFERENCES: AI Number 7-44 (Incentive Programs for Positions which are
"Difficult to Recruit" 2016)
 
 
______________________________ [https://export.amlegal.com/media/
Sarita Nair, CAO               6d88fadbb394cb34f1263b3e9230120271b111d2/IMAGES/
                              0-0-0-2015.png]
_____________________________  [https://export.amlegal.com/media/
Effective Date                 6d88fadbb394cb34f1263b3e9230120271b111d2/IMAGES/
                               0-0-0-2017.png]
 
AI_NO:_7-44_(pdf)
AI NO: 7-44
APD Lateral Supplement (Aug. 2021)
TITLE: Incentive Program for APD Laterals with Albuquerque Police Department
PRIMARY DEPARTMENT: Albuquerque Police Department
Definitions:
A Lateral Hire is a person who is offered and accepted a position with APD and
who possesses all of the qualifications and certifications listed in the job
posting.
HIRING INCENTIVE FOR LATERAL HIRES:
A maximum incentive of up to $15,000 may be offered, payable as follows: $5,000
at the successful completion of the fourth week of academy training, $5,000 at
successful completion of one-year probationary period, and $5,000 at four ( 4)
years of service from date of hire. A lower incentive amount may be offered,
and will be paid on a prorated basis according to the above schedule. No
incentive may be offered to any person who was employed by the City of
Albuquerque as a sworn officer at any time in the prior eight years.
EFFECTIVE DATE; TRANSITION RULE:
This Administrative Instruction is effective the date the document is signed by
the CAO and valid until December 31, 2021. This Administrative Instruction will
apply only to prospective City employees for the purpose of Lateral Officers
for the Albuquerque Police Department. Any person to whom an offer of
employment has been made on or before the effective date of this Administrative
Instruction, as revised, is not eligible for the hiring incentive under this
program.
REFERENCES: AI Number 7-44 (Incentive Programs for Positions which are
"Difficult to Recruit")
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/6d88fadbb394cb34f1263b3e9230120271b111d2/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2116.png]
AI_NO:_7-44_(pdf)
AI NO 7-44 APD
Police Cadet Supplement (Oct 2021)
TITLE: Incentive Program for APD Police Cadets with Albuquerque Police
Department
PRIMARY DEPARTMENT: Albuquerque Police Department
Definitions:
A Police Cadet hire is a person who is offered and accepts a position with APD
and who possesses all of the qualifications and certifications listed in the
job posting.
HIRING INCENTIVE FOR POLICE CADET HIRES:
A maximum incentive of up to $10,000 may be offered, payable as follows: $3,000
upon graduation from the academy, $3,000 at successful completion of On-the-Job
training (OJT), and $4,000 at the successful completion of the one-year
probationary period. A lower incentive amount may be offered, and will be paid
on a prorated basis according to the above schedule. No incentive may be
offered to any person who was employed by the City of Albuquerque as a sworn
officer at any time in the prior eight (8) years.
EFFECTIVE DATE; TRANSITION RULE:
This Administrative Instruction is effective the date the document is signed by
the CAO and valid until December 31, 2021. This Administrative Instruction will
apply only to prospective City employees for the purpose of Police Cadets for
the Albuquerque Police Department. Any person to whom an offer of employment
has been made on or before the effective date of this Administrative
Instruction, as revised, is not eligible for the hiring incentive under this
program.
REFERENCES: AI Number 7-44 (Incentive Programs for Positions which are
"Difficult to Recruit")
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/6d88fadbb394cb34f1263b3e9230120271b111d2/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2193.png]
 
AI_NO:_7-44_(pdf)(Oct_2021)
AI NO: 7-44
TRANSIT MOTORCOACH OPERATOR SUPPLEMENT (2021)
TITLE: Incentive Program for Motorcoach Operators with the Transit Department
PRIMARY DEPARTMENT:   Transit Department
BACKGROUND:
As result of high turnover of the Motorcoach Operator position within The
Transit Department, the department has been approved to utilize a recruitment
incentive (i.e. finder's fee) and hiring bonus initiative for this position.
DEFINITIONS:
A new hire is a person who accepts a Motorcoach Operator position with the
Transit Department and who possesses the minimum education, experience, and
additional requirements as listed in the job posting. A transfer is a current
City employee who accepts a Motorcoach Operator position with the Transit
Depaitment and who possesses the minimum education, experience, and additional
requirements as listed in the job posting.
CONDITIONS APPLICABLE TO INCENTIVE PROGRAMS:
The incentives offered under this Administrative Instruction shall be
delineated in a written agreement signed by the candidate, the Department
Director and the CAO, in advance of or concurrently with the Recommendation for
Hire. Transfers will be eligible for the hiring bonus as follows: Transfers
that have not completed probation will be considered a new hire; Transfers that
have completed probation will be eligible for a hiring bonus as outlined below.
HIRING BONUS:
Motorcoach Operators (New Hires):
A maximum incentive of $1,000 will be offered, payable as follows:
   •   At completion of probation - $250.00
   •   At nine (9) months of employment - $250.00
   •   At one (1) year of employment - $500.00
Motorcoach Operators (Transfers - Probation Completed):
A maximum incentive of $500.00 will be offered, payable as follows:
   •   At one (1) year of employment with Transit - $500.00
FINDER'S FEE:
Motorcoach Operator:
A maximum incentive of $100 will be offered as outlined and payable as follows:
Any City employee that has completed probation who has referred a candidate not
currently or previously employed by the City for employment into a "difficult
to recruit" classification will be paid a finder's fee of up to $100. Incentive
payments for such referrals will be made only after the referred candidate is
hired and successfully completes their respective probationary period with a
"meets expectations" or higher evaluation rating. The following conditions
apply for a City employee to be eligible to receive the finder's fee:
   •   The referring employee must be identified in the candidate's interview
for employment; and
   •   The candidate cannot have been a City employee within the last eight (8)
years .
No employee whose regular job duties include recruiting, hiring or training of
new employees will be eligible for the finder's fee. Finder's fees will be
limited to three (3) per calendar year per employee. No finder's fee will be
payable with respect to a candidate who has retired from the PERA or ERA
system. The determination of whether a finder's fee is to be paid, will be made
by the Transit Department Director.
EFFECTIVE DATE & TRANSITION RULE:
This Administrative Instruction is effective the date the document is signed by
the CAO and valid until December 31, 2022. This Administrative Instruction will
apply only to prospective City employees for the purpose of Motorcoach
Operators in the Department of Transit. Any person to whom an offer of
employment has been made on or before the effective date of this Administrative
Instruction, is not eligible for any hiring or finder's fee incentive under
this program. Individuals previously employed by the City of Albuquerque
Transit Department, may be able to participate in the Incentive Program for New
Hires contingent upon the Department Director's approval, which will be
reviewed on a case by case basis. All payments to candidates or employees under
this Administrative Instruction shall be treated as taxable income on the date
paid, and subject to all normal withholdings and deductions.
All other hiring processes and procedures are in effect.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/6d88fadbb394cb34f1263b3e9230120271b111d2/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2096.png]
 
AI_NO:_7-44_(pdf)
AI NO: 7-45
TEMPORARY UPGRADES FOR EMPLOYEES OTHER THAN SWORN POLICE AND FIRE
TITLE: Temporary Upgrades for Employees other than Sworn Police and Fire
PRIMARY DEPARTMENT:   Human Resources
Temporary upgrades will be permitted in accordance with the following
requirements:
A. Upgrades for 10 working days or less.
   1. Upgrades of 10 working days or less will be handled by the individual
departments based on short-term critical business needs.
   2. Employees upgraded under this section will automatically cease performing
the duties of the upgraded position at the conclusion of the need for the
temporary upgrade or upon expiration of the 10 working days, whichever occurs
first.
   3. If an employee is required to serve in an upgraded position for more than
10 working days, the department will be required to comply with section B. of
this policy.
B. Upgrades for more than 10 working days.
   1. Human Resources Department must approve upgrades for more than 10 working
days. The employee to be upgraded must possess the minimum qualifications for
the upgraded position, as specified in the job description of the upgraded
position. The department requesting the temporary upgrade under this section
will provide documentation of the qualifications of the employee to be upgraded
prior to an employee being placed in the upgraded position.
   2. In recommending employees for upgrade, departments are required to comply
with the provisions of any applicable collective bargaining agreement in
upgrading employees, including rotation of upgrades among qualified employees.
   3.    Departments may provide the Human Resources Department a list of
employees eligible to be upgraded for the position to be filled with
documentation of their qualifications. The Human Resources Department will
review the qualifications of each employee whose name is provided. The
department seeking to upgrade will be able to rotate employees to the upgraded
position without submitting the names again to the Human Resources Department.
C. Upgraded employees will be required to perform all of the duties of the
upgraded position as well as the duties of their regular position.
D. Only fully qualified individuals will be upgraded. An employee who is
upgraded will be paid in accordance with the respective collective bargaining
agreement for the time served in an upgraded capacity. E and I series employees
will receive compensation as approved by the Chief Administrative Officer.
E. If a license is required for performance of any upgraded position, no
employee who lacks the required license may be upgraded to that position,
regardless of the length of the upgrade.
F. Employees who are upgraded to safety sensitive positions must be designated
safety sensitive within the same safety sensitive category as the position to
which he or she is upgraded.
G. An FLSA non-exempt employee will be upgraded only if an FLSA exempt employee
is not available to perform the duties of the position. A non-exempt employee
who is upgraded for less than ten (10) days will be entitled to overtime
compensation in the upgraded position. An employee upgraded for more than ten
(10) days will be entitled to overtime compensation if he or she is performing
duties considered to be non-exempt under the provisions of the FLSA. The Human
Resources Department will make the determination whether an employee upgraded
for more than 10 days is entitled to overtime compensation at the time that the
Human Resources Department qualifies the employee for upgrade.
H. No employee will be upgraded for less than an eight hour period.
I. No employee will be upgraded during lunch or other similar work periods.
J. The maximum number of hours an employee may be upgraded will be in
accordance with the respective collective bargaining agreement for union
employees. The maximum number of hours E and I series employees may be upgraded
will be in accordance with the Personnel Rules & Regulations.
K. Supervisors who fail to adhere to this instruction will be subject to
disciplinary action.
REFERENCES:   Personnel Rules & Regulations
 
______________________________
Robert J. Perry                [https://export.amlegal.com/media/
Chief Administrative Officer   6d88fadbb394cb34f1263b3e9230120271b111d2/IMAGES/
_____________________________  0-0-0-748.png]
Effective Date 
 
AI_NO:_7-45_(pdf)
AI NO: 7-47
LONGEVITY PAY FOR NON-BARGAINING UNIT EMPLOYEES
TITLE: Longevity Pay for Non-Bargaining Unit Employees
PRIMARY DEPARTMENT:   Human Resources
Background:
On November 21, 2001, the City began awarding longevity pay of $85.00 per pay
period to M series employees who had twenty years of continuous City service.
At that time, “M series employees” referred to employees who were not members
of a bargaining unit and thus not otherwise eligible for the longevity pay that
had been negotiated for members of the bargaining unit represented by AFSCME
Local 3022.
Policy:
It is the policy of the City that employees in the classified service shall be
granted longevity pay of $85.00 per pay period in the first pay period when
they reach 20 years of continuous City service, excluding service in a
temporary or seasonal position or any other position identified as “non-
benefited time”.
It is the policy of the City that employees serving in unclassified positions
who are not identified as members of any existing bargaining unit shall be
granted longevity pay of $85.00 per pay period in the first pay period when
they reach 20 years of continuous City service, excluding service in a
temporary or seasonal position or any other position identified as “non-
benefited time”. Examples of employees who may be eligible under this paragraph
include assistant City Attorneys, City Council staff, and Deputy Directors of
departments.
It is the policy of the City that the granting of longevity pay as described
above is not a right and may be rescinded with sixty days written notice. An
employee who is promoted or transferred from a position receiving longevity pay
under this Administrative Instruction will cease to be eligible to receive that
longevity pay although he/she may be eligible to receive longevity pay under
the pay plan governing his/her new position.
Any longevity pay allowable under the provisions of this Administrative
Instruction shall be prorated for half-time and three-quarter time employees.
Procedures:
Employees who are promoted or transferred from a position in a bargaining unit
where they were receiving longevity pay to a position that is not included in a
bargaining unit may be granted longevity pay in their new position only if they
are eligible under the provisions of this Administrative Instruction.
REFERENCES:   none
 
______________________________
Robert J. Perry                [https://export.amlegal.com/media/
Chief Administrative Officer   6d88fadbb394cb34f1263b3e9230120271b111d2/IMAGES/
_____________________________  0-0-0-750.png]
Effective Date 
 
AI_NO:_7-47_(pdf)
AI NO: 7-48
ASSIGNED DUTIES WHILE ON ADMINISTRATIVE LEAVE
TITLE: Assigned Duties While on Administrative Leave
PRIMARY DEPARTMENT:   Human Resources
The Personnel Rules and Regulations ("PRR") provide that an employee may be
placed on administrative leave status during an investigation. Pursuant to PRR
402.6(C), the Chief Administrative Officer (CAO) may assign City employees to
duties and responsibilities that are of benefit to the City while on
administrative leave. Work accomplished by the Clean City Task Force ("CCTF")
benefits the City.
All employees placed on administrative leave under PRR 402.6(C) will be
assigned to the CCTF unless the CAO, in his or her sole discretion, determines
the employee should be assigned different duties and responsibilities. The CAO
may also determine, in his or her sole discretion, that an employee should be
relieved of all duties during an investigation.
The Chief of Police and the Fire Chief have the authority to re-assign Public
Safety employees as appropriate.
REFERENCES:   Personnel Rules and Regulations 402.6 (C) Administrative Leave
 
______________________________
Robert J. Perry                [https://export.amlegal.com/media/
Chief Administrative Officer   6d88fadbb394cb34f1263b3e9230120271b111d2/IMAGES/
_____________________________  0-0-0-752.png]
Effective Date 
 
AI_NO:_7-48_(pdf)
AI NO: 7-49
LIMITATION OF COMPENSATION AND BENEFITS
TITLE:   Limitation of Compensation and Benefits
PRIMARY DEPARTMENT:   Human Resources
The administrator of the Merit System Ordinance shall not enter into any
Agreement with an unclassified city employee such that the salary or benefits
of that employee upon entering the classified service are greater than that to
which the employee would be entitled under the then-current City of Albuquerque
classified pay plan or benefits schedule.
 
______________________________
Robert J. Perry                [https://export.amlegal.com/media/
Chief Administrative Officer   6d88fadbb394cb34f1263b3e9230120271b111d2/IMAGES/
_____________________________  0-0-0-754.png]
Effective Date
 
AI_NO:_7-49_(pdf)
AI NO: 7-51
EMPLOYEE SELF-SERVICE PAYROLL DELIVERY
TITLE: Employee Self-Service Payroll Delivery
PRIMARY DEPARTMENT: Department of Finance and Administrative Services
1.   Purpose
The citizens of the City of Albuquerque expect and deserve efficient and
effective local government. A component of delivering services most efficiently
and effectively is enabling City employees to spend as much of their employment
time as possible providing direct services to our constituency by reducing the
amount of time spent performing administrative tasks.
The following options are available in Employee Self-Service in the PeopleSoft
ERP system.
a)   View Paycheck
b)   Benefits Summary
c)   View W-2’s
d)   1095 Consent form
e)   View 1095-C form
f)   Direct Deposit
g)   Personal Information Summary
h)   Paycheck Modeler
i)   My Current Profile
j)   W-4 Tax Information
k)   Voluntary Deductions
l)   Life Events
With respect to pay delivery, the City mandated direct deposit as a condition
of employment effective January 1, 1999. At that time and subsequently,
employees exempted from this mandate have been encouraged to adopt direct
deposit for pay delivery.
2.    Policy
Payroll delivery is accommodated only via one of the following options:
   A.   Employees with a commencement date of January 1, 1999, or later:
      1. Direct deposit to a financial institution account or accounts of the
employee’s choice, as designated in the City Payroll Policies and Guidelines;
      2. Application of net pay amount to a Pay Card, administered by the
City’s designated Pay Card provider.
Employees with a commencement date prior to January 1, 1999:
   B.   These employees may choose either option 2(A)(1) or 2(A)(2) above, or
if currently receiving pay via paper paycheck, continue to receive pay via a
paper check that will be postmarked and mailed to the employee’s home mailing
address as recorded in the PeopleSoft system and on file with the City’s Human
Resources Department on the pay date. (The cut-off date to effect a change of
the designated mailing address shall be at least 30 days prior to the pay day
on which the paper check will be mailed).
With respect to remittance advices:
   C.   The City has enabled electronic payroll remittance advice access via
the PeopleSoft ERP Employee Self-Service (ESS) functionality. Effective
November 1, 2012, paper advices will no longer be centrally printed and
distributed by the City. Advices may be accessed via the employee’s City-issued
work computer, smartphone, or tablet, or any other such personal device with
web access. Employees with no access to these ESS tools may request and receive
advice view/print capability from the designated Department representative.
REFERENCES:   Administrative Instruction 2-16 – Direct Payroll Deposit
 
______________________________
Robert J. Perry                [https://export.amlegal.com/media/
Chief Administrative Officer   6d88fadbb394cb34f1263b3e9230120271b111d2/IMAGES/
____________________________   0-0-0-756.png]
Effective Date
 
AI_NO:_7-51_(pdf)
AI NO: 7-52
HIRING PROCEDURES FOR FISCAL, INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY, RISK MANAGEMENT/SAFETY,
AND HUMAN RESOURCES POSITIONS
TITLE: Hiring Procedures for Fiscal, Information Technology, Risk Management/
Safety, and Human Resources Positions
PRIMARY DEPARTMENT:   Human Resources
Background
This Administrative Instruction (AI) provides general guidelines when
advertising and interviewing for positions in the Fiscal, Information
Technology, Risk Management/Safety, and Human Resources professions. In order
for the City to hire the best qualified applicant in these specialized
occupations, departments are directed to employ the expertise of the Department
of Finance and Administrative Services (DFAS), the Department of Technology and
Innovation (DTI) or the Human Resources Department (HR).
Policy
All departments are required to contact DFAS, DTI or HR in accordance with the
specific position to appoint an interview panel member when hiring for these
positions. The hiring department should advertise the vacant position both
internally and externally to obtain a larger pool of applicants.
Procedures
Below are procedures set in place for departments to follow when a position
becomes vacant in these professions:
1. When a department has a vacancy in the above mentioned professions, the
hiring department must contact DFAS, DTI or HR as appropriate.
2. Fiscal positions - DFAS will assist in the following:
   a. Fiscal Manager E18  – DFAS will appoint a Budget staff member and a
Fiscal Manager from another department to participate in the interview panel
and the hiring department will assign one (1) staff member of their own.
   b. Fiscal Officer or other fiscal positions at a level of E/M16  - DFAS will
appoint a Budget or an Accounting staff member to participate in the interview
panel and the hiring department will assign two (2) staff members of their own.
   c. Fiscal Positions at a level of E/M15  – the hiring department will notify
DFAS of the appointees for the interview panel and obtain DFAS’s concurrence to
ensure the appropriate individuals participate in the interview panel. The
interview panel for all other lower level fiscal positions are at the
discretion of the hiring department to obtain the appropriate interview panel.
DFAS will generate technical questions for an E/M16 through E18 and the hiring
department will generate other relevant questions. Positions at an E/M15 level,
the hiring department will generate the interview questions.
3. Information Technology Positions  - DTI will assign one (1) IT staff member
or an IT specialist from another department to participate in the interview
panel and the hiring department will assign the remaining panel members. DTI
will generate technical questions and the hiring department will generate other
relevant questions.
4. Risk Management/Safety Positions  – DFAS will appoint a Risk Management
Safety staff member to participate in the interview panel and the hiring
department will assign the remaining panel members. Risk Management/DFAS will
generate technical questions and the hiring department will generate other
relevant questions.
5. Human Resources Positions  - the HR Department will assign one (1) staff
member and an HR specialist from another department to participate in the
interview panel and the hiring department will assign the remaining panel
members. HR will generate technical questions and the hiring department will
generate other relevant questions.
6. The interview panel will make a recommendation for the proposed employee or
candidate to the hiring Department Director and that Department Director will
submit the request for hire through the NEOGOV system.
By following this AI, the City will ensure departments hire the best qualified
and suitable candidate to fit the needs of the department as well as the City
of Albuquerque.
 
______________________________
Robert J. Perry                [https://export.amlegal.com/media/
Chief Administrative Officer   6d88fadbb394cb34f1263b3e9230120271b111d2/IMAGES/
_____________________________  0-0-0-758.png]
Effective Date 
 
AI_NO:_7-52_(pdf)
AI NO: 7-53
BREAK TIME FOR LACTATION
TITLE:   Break Time for Lactation
PRIMARY DEPARTMENT:   Human Resources Department
The City of Albuquerque recognizes the health benefits of breastfeeding and
supports accommodation of mothers who choose to utilize their own breast pump
to express breast milk upon returning to work after maternity leave of absence.
This Administrative Instruction is in compliance with the break time
requirement for nursing mothers in the Patient Protection and Affordable Care
Act (PPACA), which took effect on March 23, 2010 (P.L. 111-148). PPACA also
amended Section 7(r) of the Fair Labor Standards Act (FLSA) which regulates
break time for nursing mothers.
This Administrative Instruction also aligns with New Mexico state law [NMSA
1978, Section 28-20-2 (Amended 2007)] which requires employers to provide
flexible break time and a clean, private space, not a bathroom, in order to
foster the ability of a nursing mother who is an employee to use a breast pump
in the workplace.
Policy
A.   Flexible Scheduling
   1.   A nursing employee is allowed to use a breast pump to express milk
during the work day using her regular break and meal periods. Since the
frequency and duration of lactation breaks will likely vary throughout the
nursing period, a nursing employee shall be allowed a reasonable flexible break
schedule for lactation with her own breast pump. The time allowed for milk
expression breaks each work day will not exceed the combined total amount of
time for regular employee break and meal periods. For time above and beyond the
combined total amount of time for break and meal periods, the employee may
request a lactation break schedule that includes the use of available vacation
or sick leave accruals. An employee who does not have sufficient vacation or
sick leave accruals must request the use of Personal Leave Without Pay.
   2.   Under no circumstances will the employee be paid overtime pay to
complete their work due to the time required to express milk.
   3.   In order to prepare a work schedule and coverage for a nursing employee
who provides uninterrupted city services, the employee must provide to her
supervisor at the beginning of each pay week a proposed schedule for expressing
milk with a breast pump.
   4.   All flexible lactation break schedule requests are subject to approval
by the department based on reasonableness of the request. Supervisors will
consult with the employee to identify a flexible break schedule that considers
parameters of the employee’s job description and the service being provided.
B.   Designated Lactation Space
   1.   Each department will provide a sanitary, lockable, private room or
other space where an employee can express milk with her own breast pump in
privacy, shielded from view, and free from intrusion from coworkers and the
public. This room or space may be used by other on-duty city employees when the
room is not being used to express milk.
   2.   Where possible, the room will be located near a sink with running water
for washing hands and rinsing out breast pump parts, and have an electrical
outlet. Where possible, the room or space will be in close proximity to the
employees' work area. The room may not be a toilet stall or bathroom. If
employees prefer, they may express milk in their own private office or other
comfortable locations agreed upon in consultation with the employee's
supervisor.
   3.   It is the employee's responsibility to keep the location clean after
each use and remove any personal items.
   4.   Nursing employees who do not work in an office setting but provide
uninterrupted city services may be required to use a room or space established
by this Administrative Instruction at a city facility that is not operated by
the department in which the employee works. The employee would be required to
use this room or space in order to minimize travel time to and from the
employee’s work location to the room or space.
   5.   Some departments may elect to provide transportation for the employee
from the field to the building in which the lactation space is located.
   6.   Twice a year, in January and in July, the Human Resources department
will distribute a list of each city facility that has or may have a private
room or space for expressing milk. This list will provide the following
information: Name of facility or complex, street address, days and hours of
operation, location of the room or space, parking information, any restrictions
for the use of the room or space, contact name, phone number, and email
address. Department representatives may use the list to identify facilities
that meet the needs of their department. Each department is responsible for
making lactation space arrangements.
C.   Storing Breast Milk
   1.   Nursing employees will provide their own containers and storage unit
such as small ice chest or thermos from home if these accommodations are not in
place.
   2.   If breast milk is stored in a common refrigerator, the expressed milk
container must be placed in a clean, closed container, which has the mother's
name and date on it. It is the employee's responsibility to remove expressed
milk at the end of each day.
D.   Employee's Responsibility
   1.   Employees need to inform their supervisor as early as possible of their
intention to continue breast pumping following maternity leave of absence. At
least two (2) weeks' advance notice should be given. This provides the
department time for all necessary arrangements to be made.
   2.   At the beginning of each pay week, provide the supervisor a proposed
break schedule for expressing milk with a breast pump.
E.   Supervisor's Responsibility
   1.   Upon receiving an employee’s advance notification of her intention to
express milk during the work day, the department must take necessary steps to
ensure schedule and room arrangements are made prior to an employee's return to
work.
   2.   Retaliation is prohibited against an employee who files a complaint,
institutes a proceeding, or testifies in a lactation break time investigation
(Section 15(a)(3) of the FLSA).
F.   Human Resources Department Responsibility
   1.   Provide list identified in section B-6 of this Administrative
Instruction.
   2.   As part of the procedure for applying for maternity leave under the
Family and Medical Leave Act, mothers shall be provided this Administrative
Instruction.
G.   Maximum Time Frame for Schedule Adaptation
   1.   The flexible lactation break schedule and space accommodations for
employees will expire one year from the date of birth of the child.
   2.   If the employee discontinues breast pumping before the child’s first
birthday, the employee is obligated to inform her supervisor of the date she
will discontinue breast pumping. Failure to inform the supervisor upon
discontinuing breast pumping and continuing to utilize the space accommodations
or schedule adaptation would be considered a policy violation subject to
appropriate disciplinary action.
H.   Scope
This Administrative Instruction applies to all current employees, classified
and unclassified, including but not limited to interns, volunteers and seasonal
employees.
REFERENCES:
Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act (PPACA)
Section 7(r) of the Fair Labor Standards Act (FLSA)
NMSA 1978, Section 28-20-2 (Amended 2007)
Section 15(a)(3) of the FLSA
 
______________________________
Robert J. Perry                [https://export.amlegal.com/media/
Chief Administrative Officer   6d88fadbb394cb34f1263b3e9230120271b111d2/IMAGES/
_____________________________  0-0-0-760.png]
Effective Date
 
AI_NO:_7-53_(pdf)
AI NO: 7-54
MANDATORY ETHICS AND CODE OF CONDUCT TRAINING
TITLE:  Mandatory Ethics and Code of Conduct Training
PRIMARY DEPARTMENT:   Human Resources
BACKGROUND
Upholding public confidence in the integrity of government requires that public
officials and employees maintain their conduct at the highest standards.
Employees are required to serve the public in an ethical manner with respect,
concern, courtesy and responsiveness, recognizing service to the public is the
reason for their employment. As such, it is important to ensure that all City
of Albuquerque ("City") employees are aware of, and properly trained on, the
City's ethics and Code of Conduct requirements.
Council Resolution R-2016-032 established a Public Service Ethics and Code of
Conduct training program for the City. However, the Resolution only applies to
senior officials and employees. Expanding training to all employees would
promote professional excellence throughout city government.
POLICY
The Mandatory Ethics and Code of Conduct Training is established as a resource
to the public servants of the City of Albuquerque and to reaffirm that City
officials and employees must maintain their conduct at the highest standards to
retain the confidence and trust of the public.
Effective January 1, 2019, all regular City employees shall be required to
complete the Ethics and Code of Conduct Training provided by the City every two
years. All newly hired employees shall be required to complete the training
within 30 days of hire.
RECORD OF TRAINING
The City will record all Ethics training through the People Soft Enterprise
Learning Management (ELM) System and report training in the learner profile for
each employee.
REFERENCES
City of Albuquerque, New Mexico, Charter art. XII (Code of Ethics); City of
Albuquerque, New Mexico, Code of Ordinances §§ 3-3-1 to -13 (as amended through
1985) (Conflict of Interest); City of Albuquerque Personnel Rules and
Regulations, § 301 (Code of Conduct)
 
 
______________________________
Sarita Nair                    [https://export.amlegal.com/media/
Chief Administrative Officer   6d88fadbb394cb34f1263b3e9230120271b111d2/IMAGES/
_____________________________  0-0-0-1679.jpg]
Effective Date
 
AI_NO:_7-54_(pdf)
AI NO: 7-55
PAID PARENTAL LEAVE
ADMINISTRATIVE INSTRUCTION NO:   7-55 (2019)
TITLE:   Paid Parental Leave
PRIMARY DEPARTMENT:   Human Resources
   The City of Albuquerque is committed to a productive and healthy work
environment for all employees. The City strives to provide competitive benefits
that are flexible, and when possible, responsive to the needs of our employees
in order to continue to attract and retain a qualified, engaged and diverse
workforce. Paid Parental Leave, as established by Ordinance No. 0-18-37,
Enactment No. 0-2018-036, recognizes family and work-life balance as important
to the success of the City of Albuquerque. In accordance with this commitment,
the City provides employees with Paid Parental Leave to spend with a child
newly added to their family through birth, adoption, or foster care. The Paid
Parental Leave benefit supports parents by having additional flexibility and
time to bond with their new child and to balance professional obligations.
Eligibility:
   ∙   An employee must have worked for the City a total of twelve (12) months
(or fifty-two (52) weeks if the work is intermittent); and
   ∙   Must have worked one thousand two hundred and fifty (1,250) hours in the
twelve (12) months preceding the date the Parental Leave will begin.
   FLSA-exempt employees who have worked full-time for twelve (12) months are
presumed to meet the hourly requirement. Paid and unpaid absences used in the
twelve (12) months preceding the date the FMLA leave will begin are not counted
toward the one thousand two hundred and fifty (1,250) hour total.
Qualifying Event:
The Parental Leave Benefit begins with the following qualifying events:
   ∙   On the date of the birth of the child; or
   ∙   On the date of placement for adoption of a child age eighteen (18) years
or younger; or
   ∙   On the date of placement for foster care of a child (excluding the
adopting of a stepchild or partner's child) age eighteen (18) years or younger.
Entitlement:
The City provides eligible employees with the following Parental Leave
benefits:
   ∙   The parental leave must run concurrently to the Family Medical Leave
Act, ("FMLA"), if the employee is eligible for FMLA.
   ∙   Up to twelve (12) standard work weeks of paid time off used within six
(6) months of the qualifying event;
   ∙   If both parents work at the City, each employee is entitled to twelve
(12) weeks of parental leave;
   ∙   For events that occurred prior to the enactment of Ordinance No. 0-18-
37, retroactive parental leave benefits may be deemed qualified where an event
occurred within the FY19 Fiscal Year, (July 1, 2018 -June 30, 2019);
   ∙   Employees receiving Parental Leave may not simultaneously receive sick
or vacation time pay, however, will accrue sick and vacation time while on paid
parental leave;
   ∙   Approved parental leave must be taken in a continuous block of time
unless an intermittent schedule has been pre-approved and pre-scheduled by the
Department Director and the Human Resources Director. If approved, the
intermittent schedule must be consistent and taken in increments of four (4)
hours;
   ∙   Employees may be eligible for other types of leave that occur prior to
or after Parental Leave under other applicable administrative policies or
contracts;
   ∙   During the Parental Leave, medical coverage will continue to be
available for the employee and any dependents under their current group
insurance policy in existence at the time ofleave. While on paid leave, the
continued coverage will be provided on the same basis as available to the
employee during the course of employment.
Procedures:
Employees must request Parental Leave and obtain approval:
   ∙   An employee must give at least thirty (30) days written notice to Human
Resources and his/her Department Director before leave starts. If thirty (30)
days' notice is not possible, notice is expected as soon as practical. "As soon
as practical" means at least verbal notice within two (2) business days of
learning of the need for leave followed by written confirmation. If an employee
fails to give thirty (30) days' notice for foreseeable leave with no reasonable
excuse for the delay, the Human Resources Director (or Department Director, as
applicable) or designee may delay the taking of Parental Leave until at least
thirty (30) days after the date the employee provided notice based upon the
business needs of the Department.
   ∙   Request for leave must be submitted on a Parental Leave Request Form,
concurrently with a Family Medical Leave Certification Form.
   ∙   Any FMLA-qualifying absence will be designated as FMLA leave by the
Human Resources Department and will be applied to the twelve (12) weeks paid
leave entitlement, even if not requested by the employee.
   ∙   The Human Resources Department will notify the employee within two (2)
workdays , if feasible, of the approval or disapproval of their Parental Leave
request.
   ∙   The City may make a preliminary designation ofleave as Parental Leave
pending receipt of documented proof of event certification.
   ∙   To address the retroactive activity of the Ordinance, the City may
designate another type leave, which has already been taken, as Parental Leave
if the leave was taken within six
(6) months of the qualifying event.
   ∙   Where Parental Leave is foreseeable and thirty (30) days' notice has
been provided, an employee must provide documented proof of qualifying event
before leave begins. The employee is responsible for any expense connected with
the supporting documentation to prove the event. Failure to provide the
required documented proof of the event may result in a delay or denial of
Parental Leave.
   ∙   For birth or placement, documentary proof to support the date of the
qualifying event must be received within 30 calendar days.
Timekeeping:
Employees approved for paid parental leave will be entered and coded as
"Parental Leave" (PLF or PLY) in the City's time keeping system.
Effective Date:
This Administrative Instruction is effective immediately.
REFERENCES:   Family and Medical Leave Policy.
         Ordinance No. 0-18-37
 
______________________________
Sarita Nair                    [https://export.amlegal.com/media/
Chief Administrative Officer   6d88fadbb394cb34f1263b3e9230120271b111d2/IMAGES/
_____________________________  0-0-0-1694.jpg]
Effective Date
 
AI_NO._7-55.pdf
AI NO: 7-56
AFR ANNUAL PHYSICAL POLICY
ADMINISTRATIVE INSTRUCTION NO: 7-56 (2019)
TITLE: AFR Annual Physical Policy 
PRIMARY DEPARTMENT: Albuquerque Fire Rescue
BACKGROUND:
All members of AFR will be given an annual physical consistent with the NFPA
1582 Standard on Comprehensive Occupational Medical Program for Fire Department
v. 2018 and OSHA 29 CFR 191 0.134 - Respiratory protection. Cancer reduction
best practices for firefighters include having an annual exam. This document
will explain the agreed upon interpretation of NFPA 1582, AFR member
responsibilities, and Employee Health responsibilities.
ANNUAL PHYSICAL TWO-TIER PROCESS:
All AFR members will receive a physical annually, which will increase the
number of exams required. The annual physical will be a two-tier process: Blood
draws, which will occur while a member is on duty, and the actual physical
exam/ doctor's visit, which will be conducted while a member is off duty, with
appropriate compensation as enumerated below. With the increase in the number
of physicals needed to be scheduled, it will be imperative that members
communicate with the Department Health and Safety Officer when they need a
schedule change. Failure to appear for a scheduled physical without notifying
the HSO may lead to progressive discipline.
Tests included in a physical exam include: physical exam, fasting blood draw,
audiogram, vision, pulmonary, urinalysis, spirometry, EKG, chest x-ray as
indicated and treadmill stress test as indicated.
Base line physicals, previous physicals, any exposures, and TB testing results
will be included in what the physician reviews for each exam. By including the
exposure and TB results in the physical, this will now become a part of a
member's medical file, which will ensure they are kept and are accessible for
at least 60 years from a member's separation from the city.
SCHEDULING:
The AFR-HSO will schedule the member for their blood draw at Employee Health.
The member will be given a 4 week window for their physical to be scheduled.
The physical will be scheduled at the time of the blood draw at Employee
Health; members are reminded to schedule their clinic visit for their OSHA
physical on a day they are in an off-duty status. All communications with the
AFR-HSO will be done with an email for scheduling issues, even if a call has
been made.
All follow up testing is to be scheduled off duty; at no time will field units
be placed “Out of Service” for follow up testing for an annual physical. Once
scheduled, the date of the examination will be considered a "Special" day and
the member is required to go, barring emergent circumstances. It will be the
responsibility of the Member to contact the AFR-HSO prior to their blood draw
being taken if they need to have their physical window rescheduled.
COMPENSATION:
Members will be compensated 5 hours of CTA for the physical scheduled off duty.
The 5 hours of CTA will include any additional testing required, i.e. chest x-
ray or treadmill; no further compensation for follow up exams will be provided.
EFFECTIVE DATE; TRANSITION RULE:
This Administrative Instruction is effective from the date of the Chief
Administrative Officer’s signature, and will apply to all AFR members.
 
 
______________________________
Sarita Nair                    [https://export.amlegal.com/media/
Chief Administrative Officer   6d88fadbb394cb34f1263b3e9230120271b111d2/IMAGES/
_____________________________  0-0-0-1735.png]
Effective Date
 
AI_NO._7-56.pdf
AI NO: 7-57
MILITARY VETERANS INTERVIEW PREFERENCE (2024)
ADMINISTRATIVE INSTRUCTION NO: 7-57 (2024)
TITLE: Military Veterans Interview Preference
PRIMARY DEPARTMENT: Human Resources
The Effective Date: This Administrative Instruction is effective immediately.
Background:
The City of Albuquerque acknowledges the people who served, or serve, in the
United States Armed Forces or the National Guard or Reserve and their spouses,
and follows specific consideration procedures within their application process
for employment.
The City of Albuquerque is committed to provide ongoing outreach services to
maximize opportunities for people in this demographic by offering them and
their spouses employment information and consultation, program referrals, and
education on City resources available for their support.
This Administrative Instruction provides general guidelines when selecting
applicants for interviews for posted classified job vacancies.
Policy:
The City of Albuquerque’s Veteran and Military Interview Preference (“Interview
Preference”) provides persons who served or applicants currently serving in
active-duty military service or the National Guard or Reserve, and their
spouses the advantage of consideration for an interview for vacant and
advertised, classified positions for which they apply and are qualified.
In order to be eligible for the Interview Preference, the applicant must be
qualified as per the minimum qualifications for the position of interest as
listed on the job posting; the applicant must attach eligibility documentation
as noted in the specified procedures below; the applicant must comply with any
and all instructions stated in the job posting and with Section 100 of the City
of Albuquerque’s Personnel Rules and Regulations, and any amendments thereto,
regarding application procedures; and the applicant must submit a completed
application through the City’s applicant tracking system.
A qualified applicant under the Interview Preference will receive consideration
as indicated below, contingent on the individual following the procedures as
described herein, as follows:
Procedures:
   1.   Interested applicants must apply by the closing date specified in the
classified job posting.
   2.   Applicants must meet the Interview Preference’s eligibility
requirements as follows:
      a.   Complete and submit an application for employment including the
applicant’s previous employment experience stated in the applicant’s own words
and with dates of employment for each previous employment experience;
      b.   Answer the required Supplemental Application Questions to
demonstrate the applicant’s relevant experience for the position and
eligibility for the Interviewing Preference;
      c.   Applicants must verifiably qualify for one of the following:
         i.   A veteran; or
         ii.   Currently serving in active-duty military service; or
         iii.   Currently in the National Guard or Reserve; or
         iv.   A spouse of one of the following: a (1) veteran; (2) a current
active-duty service member; or 3) a current National Guard or Reserve service
member.
      d.   Applicants must meet the minimum qualifications for the position as
listed on the job posting;
      e.   Applicants must provide all of the applicable eligibility documents
as described below:
         i.   DD-214; or
         ii.   Current orders of assignment; or
         iii.   If the applicant is a spouse as qualified above in Section (2)
(c)(iv): a copy of (1) the current marriage license to a veteran, an active-
duty service member, or a National Guard or Reserve member; and (2) a copy of
the current orders of assignment or the veteran’s DD- 214.
      f.   Applicants must provide documentation verifying any discharge from
military service, including other than honorable conditions. Applicants with
any discharge from military service, including discharge other than honorable
conditions, are encouraged to apply and will be considered equally for
eligibility.
   3.   Upon meeting all applicable requirements above, the applicant shall be
granted an interview.
   4.   All other hiring processes and procedures are in effect, and the City
undertakes no obligation to guarantee the applicant will be selected for the
classified position if the applicant is not the most qualified or does not meet
the minimum requirements of the position.
This Administrative Instruction will provide guidance to our departments to
follow the Interview Preference and the procedures while recognizing our
residents serving our country and communities and their spouses.
 
 
______________________________ [https://export.amlegal.com/media/
Dr. Samantha Sengel            6d88fadbb394cb34f1263b3e9230120271b111d2/IMAGES/
Chief Administrative Officer   0-0-0-2609.png]
_____________________________   
Effective Date
 
AI_NO._7-57.pdf
AI NO: 7-58 (2022)
MODIFIED SICK LEAVE POLICY DURING THE COVID-19 OUTBREAK   (REVISED)
TITLE:   Modified Sick Leave Policy During the COVID-19 Outbreak (REVISED)
PRIMARY DEPARTMENT:   Human Resources
BACKGROUND
The City of Albuquerque values its employees and the public’s welfare and wants
to take all appropriate precautions to restrict the spread of the COVID-19
virus. The Family First Coronavirus Relief Act, HR 6201, was signed into law by
President Trump on March 18, 2020, and creates new obligations for the City
under the FMLA and for emergency leave. The federal law will go into effect on
April 2, 2020 and expired on December 31, 2020. While no mandate to provide
leave currently exists, the City will continue to provide leave subject to the
following conditions.
POLICY
The total cumulative amount of “Public Emergency Sick” (PEM) leave available to
employees beginning on February 1, 2022 is 50 hours, regardless of the reason
for being placed in the status. However, a department director may increase the
amount of leave available on a case by case basis if they feel circumstances
justify such an increase. Time coded as PEM or PEV after January 1, 2022, shall
not be counted as time used under the FMLA.
Calling In:
No employee should come to work or have contact with the public if they are
exhibiting symptoms of COVID-19.
Beginning on January 1, 2021, all employees who exhibit symptoms of COVID-19 as
described by the Center for Disease Control (CDC), or have a household member
who is exhibiting symptoms of COVID-19, must notify their Department Director
immediately and not report to a non-telecommuting place of work. If the
employee is well and able to work from home (i.e., their “telecommuting
workplace”), they should do so in accordance with Administrative Instruction 7-
66 until they are eligible to return to work and may be allowed to do so more
than two days per week at Director discretion.
Directors may place employees calling in under this provision in a “Public
Emergency Sick” (“PEM”) paid status, subject to the 50 hours maximum set forth
above. Employees should remain in daily communication with their immediate
supervisor while on PEM status. After PEM leave is exhausted, employees will be
required to utilize any other paid leave accruals, including compensatory time
if applicable, or FMLA if eligible. If an employee has no accruals available,
they will be placed into an unpaid leave status for which they are eligible.
Employees should remain in contact with their direct supervisor on a daily
basis while in PEM status.
The City reserves the right to require medical assessment or a doctor’s note
from employees who are taking leave under this Administrative Instruction.
Vaccine Side Effects
If an employee chooses to receive a COVID-19 vaccination and they experience
side effects, they may be authorized to take up to twenty-four (24) hours of
“PEM” leave, subject to the overall limitation set forth above. After PEM leave
is exhausted, an employee is required to utilize any paid leave accruals,
including compensatory if applicable, or FMLA if eligible. If the employee does
not have any accruals available, they will be placed into an unpaid leave
status or other eligible unpaid leave status.
Symptomatic Employees at Work:
If an employee is presenting as symptomatic for COVID-19 at work, their
supervisor shall notify the Department Director immediately. The Director may
send the employee home and require that the employee not report for work under
this instruction until they meet the Return to Work Criteria as detailed below.
Employees not reporting for work under this section will be placed in a “PEM”
paid status, subject to the overall limitation set forth above. After PEM leave
is exhausted, employees will be required to utilize any other paid leave
accruals, including compensatory time if applicable, or FMLA if eligible. If
the employee has no accruals available, they will be placed into an eligible
unpaid leave status. If the employee is well and able to work from home, they
should do so in accordance with Administrative Instruction 7-66 until they are
eligible to return to work and may be allowed to do so more than two days per
week at Director discretion.
Return to Work Criteria
An employee’s Director may require that the employee not return to a non-
telecommuting workplace under this instruction as follows.
If an employee had a positive test result, they may return:
   ∙   After isolating at home for five days from the positive test results; or
   ∙   If they have no symptoms after five (5) days; or
   ∙   Receives a recommendation to return to work from a health care
professional or the Employee Health Center and provides documentation of such.
If an employee has symptoms, they may return:
   ∙   When they test negative; or
   ∙   At least five (5) days have passed after symptoms first appeared if
fever free for 24 hours without fever-reducing medication and symptoms are
improving.
   ∙   Receives a recommendation to return to work from a health care
professional or the Employee Health Center and provides documentation of such.
These criteria are based on current New Mexico Department of Health Guidelines,
which may change as new information becomes available and further research is
conducted.
Employees must abide by AI 7-61 Protective Requirement to Protect Against a
Resurgence of the Covid-19 Outbreak (2021).
Travel Reporting and Self Quarantine:
As of February 10, 2021, the State of New Mexico eliminated mandatory post-
travel self-quarantine requirements.
Leave Related to Childcare
The childcare provisions of this administrative instruction are not applicable
to “health care providers and emergency responders.”
A “health care provider” is defined as anyone employed at any doctor's office,
hospital, health care center, clinic, post-secondary educational institution
offering health care instruction, medical school, local health department or
agency, nursing facility, retirement facility, nursing home, home health care
provider, any facility that performs laboratory or medical testing, pharmacy,
or any similar institution, Employer, or entity. This includes any permanent or
temporary institution, facility, location, or site where medical services are
provided that are similar to such institutions.
An “emergency responder” is defined as anyone necessary for the provision of
transport, care, healthcare, comfort and nutrition of such patients, or others
needed for the response to COVID–19. This includes but is not limited to
military or national guard, law enforcement officers, correctional institution
personnel, fire fighters, emergency medical services personnel, other
responders to 9-1-1 calls, physicians, nurses, public health personnel,
emergency medical technicians, paramedics, emergency management personnel, 911
operators, child welfare workers and service providers, public works personnel,
and persons with skills or training in operating specialized equipment or other
skills needed to provide aid in a declared emergency, as well as individuals
who work for such facilities employing these individuals and whose work is
necessary to maintain the operation of the facility.
Employees may, upon providing appropriate certification to the Human Resources
Department that their child’s regular care provider is unavailable because of
the child’s COVID-19 illness or exposure may also be placed in a PEM paid
status, subject to the overall 50 hour limitation set forth above. This status
shall not be applied retroactively. Employees are encouraged to find
alternative solutions or use this option intermittently. Intermittent use must
be approved by the applicable Department Director.
Fifty-Six Hour Rule:
Subject to any negotiation required in these circumstances, the City will not
be enforcing the fifty-six hour rule found in the collective bargaining
agreements for employees utilizing PEM leave under this section.
Directors may require time to be recoded and may return accruals to employees
if employee time was improperly coded in accordance with previous versions of
this Administrative Instruction.
Employees who provide false or fraudulent proof of COVID-19 vaccination,
testing, or other documentation as part of the process related to this
Administrative Instruction, may be subject to disciplinary action.
To the extent necessary, the effects of this Administrative Instruction are
subject to negotiation for those employees within a collective bargaining unit.
This Administrative Instruction is effective February 1, 2022, and valid until
December 31, 2022.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/6d88fadbb394cb34f1263b3e9230120271b111d2/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2285.png]
AI_NO:_7-58_(pdf)
AI NO. 7-59
REPORTING REQUIREMENTS DURING THE COVID-19 OUTBREAK (2020) (Rescinded)
Interoffice Memorandum
May 14, 2020
ADMINISTRATIVE INSTRUCTION 7-59 (2020) (Rescinded)
TITLE: Reporting Requirements During the COVID-19 Outbreak
PRIMARY DEPARTMENT: Human Resources
This Administrative Instruction is hereby rescinded effective Thursday, May 14,
2020.
See Administrative Instruction 7-60 (2020) Reporting Requirements During the
COVID-19 Outbreak – Phase I
 
 
______________________________
Sarita Nair                    [https://export.amlegal.com/media/
Chief Administrative Officer   6d88fadbb394cb34f1263b3e9230120271b111d2/IMAGES/
_____________________________  0-0-0-1867.png]
Effective Date
 
AI_NO:_7-59_(pdf)
AI NO. 7-60
REPORTING REQUIREMENTS DURING THE COVID-19 OUTBREAK – PHASE I (RESCINDED 1-2-
2023)
TITLE: Reporting Requirements During the COVID-19 Outbreak – Phase I
PRIMARY DEPARTMENT:   Human Resources
This Administrative Instruction is hereby rescinded effective when signed.
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/6d88fadbb394cb34f1263b3e9230120271b111d2/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2394.png]
 
AI_NO:_7-60_(pdf)
AI NO: 7-61 (2021)
PROTECTIVE REQUIREMENTS TO PROTECT AGAINST A RESURGENCE OF THE COVID-19
OUTBREAK (RESCINDED 1-2-2023)
TITLE:   Protective Requirements to Protect Against a Resurgence of the Covid-
19 Outbreak
PRIMARY DEPARTMENT:   Human Resources
This Administrative Instruction is hereby rescinded effective when signed.
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/6d88fadbb394cb34f1263b3e9230120271b111d2/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2394.png]
 
AI_NO:_7-61_(pdf)
AI NO: 7-62
CERTIFICATION OF DEPARTMENT FISCAL MANAGERS-OFFICERS (2020)
TITLE: CERTIFICATION OF DEPARTMENT FISCAL MANAGERS-OFFICERS
PRIMARY DEPARTMENT:    Finance & Administrative Services
BACKGROUND
The Department of Finance & Administrative Services (DFAS) reports to the Chief
Financial Officer (CFO) and is responsible for the oversight and administration
of central financial functions including, but not limited to accounting,
budgeting, purchasing and treasury. These functions and services are provided
in coordination with city departments. Each department is responsible for and
manages its budget and has staff internal to the department responsible for
making purchases, collecting payments, processing invoices, preparing budgets,
reconciling accounts at year end; all in accordance with city policy and
procedures.
POLICY
This policy requires each department director to designate a fiscal manager-
officer to manage and assume primary responsibility for the department’s fiscal
operations. The designated fiscal manager- officer must be certified annually
by the Department of Finance & Administrative Services. The purpose of the
certification is to ensure that the fiscal manager-officer has the education,
experience, skills and performance required to successfully carry-out the
duties and responsibilities of their role which in turn allows DFAS to carry
out city-wide obligations in a timely and satisfactory manner.
RESPONSIBILITIES of FISCAL MANAGER-OFFICER
The department fiscal manager-officer is responsible for the following:
   ∙   Adherence to city financial and administrative rules, regulations and
instructions. See Reference section for a list of these.
   ∙   Compliance with annual budget, fiscal year end, annual Comprehensive
Annual Financial Report (CAFR) and other intermediate deadlines related to city
finances
   ∙   Being fully available and accountable for the work and activities
assigned to your department and associated with preparing and delivering the
annual CAFR
   ∙   Tracking and review with your department management team of actual
expenditures to operating budget at least on a quarterly basis
   ∙   Familiarity with relevant business processes, including but not limited
to PeopleSoft supported processes
   ∙   Attendance at, and dissemination of information and instructions to
appropriate department staff from, monthly Fiscal Manager Meetings, Purchasing
Liaison User Group meetings, and other finance related meetings as determined
by the DFAS
   ∙   Continuing education each year as determined by the DFAS
   ∙   Any other contingencies as required by the Department of Finance &
Administrative Services Director and/or City Controller
CERTIFICATION PROCEDURE
The department director will designate a fiscal manager-officer in writing
using a standard certification request form. The form must be signed by the
department director and include a copy of the designee’s resume, telephone
numbers and email address. The form will also require specific information
regarding the education, experience and skills of the designated employee, as
well as a current department organizational chart that highlights the staff in
the department who have financial responsibilities whether or not they report
directly to the fiscal manager-officer.
The DFAS Director and City Controller will review the request and consider the
designee’s background in context with department’s size, complexity, known
financial challenges and past performance. The City Controller will notify the
department director, in writing, whether the individual designated as fiscal
manager-officer has been approved or denied. Upon approval, the City Controller
will prepare a certification letter which will require acknowledgement by the
fiscal manager-officer, department director, DFAS Director and City Controller.
The letter will list the key responsibilities of the fiscal manager-officer
position and specify any training or performance goals that will need to be
met.
Should a request for certification be denied, the reason for the denial will be
provided in writing along with specifics on what actions need to be taken to
obtain an approval. The department director will assume the approval authority
assigned to the fiscal manager-officer position until a certification is
approved for a designated fiscal manager-officer.
The initial deadline for certification letters to be completed and submitted to
the City Controller is the first day of January 2021, and thereafter every
first day of June effective for the new fiscal year beginning the first day of
July.
If at any time during the fiscal year, a fiscal manager-officer will be out of
the office and unavailable to serve for more than ten (10) consecutive days,
the department director shall notify, as soon as possible, the City Controller
to specify the timeframe the fiscal manager-officer will be out, in addition to
the contact information of the interim fiscal manager-officer.
SUSPENSION of CERTIFICATION
Failure to successfully perform the responsibilities of the fiscal manager-
officer position may result in suspension of the certification and disciplinary
action. Decisions to suspend and reinstate the certification will be made by
the DFAS Director and City Controller. The reasons for the suspension and a
corrective action plan geared toward reinstating the certification will be
documented and presented to the fiscal manager-officer and department director.
The department director will assume the approval authority assigned to the
fiscal manager-officer for the period of time that the certification is removed
suspended. The corrective action plan may include required training and/or
follow-up on to mitigate quality and other performance issues.
REFERENCES: Personnel Rules & Regulations, Code of Conduct 301.1 Duty to the
Public, 301.2 Professional Excellence, 301.11 City Funds and 301.13 City
Records and Accounting. Any failure to comply with the provisions of this
agreement may lead to disciplinary action.
 
______________________________
Sarita Nair                    [https://export.amlegal.com/media/
Chief Administrative Officer   6d88fadbb394cb34f1263b3e9230120271b111d2/IMAGES/
_____________________________  0-0-0-2000.png]
Effective Date
 
AI_NO:_7-62_(pdf)
AI NO: 7-63
EMPLOYEE COVID-19 VACCINATION TRACKING (RESCINDED 1-2-2023)
TITLE: Employee CO VID-19 Vaccination Tracking
PRIMARY DEPARTMENT: Human Resources
This Administrative Instruction is hereby rescinded effective when signed.
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/6d88fadbb394cb34f1263b3e9230120271b111d2/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2394.png]
 
AI_NO:_7-63_(pdf)
AI NO: 7-64 (2022)
LEAVE TO RECEIVE COVID-19 VACCINE (RESCINDED 1-2-2023)
TITLE:   Leave to Receive COVID-19 Vaccine
PRIMARY DEPARTMENT:   Human Resources
This Administrative Instruction is hereby rescinded effective December 31,
2022.
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/6d88fadbb394cb34f1263b3e9230120271b111d2/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2394.png]
 
AI_NO:_7-64_(pdf)
AI NO: 7-65 (2021)
OFFICER AND EMPLOYEE FINANCIAL DISCLOSURE
TITLE: Officer and Employee Financial Disclosure
PRIMARY DEPARTMENT: Clerk
BACKGROUND
Effective operation of City government requires transparency from the City's
leaders to earn the public's trust. Elected officials and city employees have
various responsibilities to identify and disclose financial interests pursuant
to Article XII, Section 5 of the City Charter and Section 3-3-5 of the City
Ordinances. Accordingly, three tiers of disclosure requirements for city
officials and employees have been established to ensure compliance with the
City's Conflict of Interest rules.
POLICY
Tier 1- includes all elected officials, the Chief Administrative Officer, the
Chief Operating Officer, the Chief Financial Officer, the Chief of Staff, the
Deputy Chief of Staff, members of the Environmental Planning Commission,
members of the Albuquerque Development Commission, members of the Landmarks
Commission, the Planning Director, the Zoning Hearing Examiner, the Zoning
Enforcement Official, the City Engineer, the Director of Municipal Development,
the Capital Improvements Project Official, and the Administrative Hearing
Officer.
Tier 2- includes all other Department Directors including the Director of
Council Services and the Director of the Civilian Police Oversight Agency, all
Department Deputy Directors or Deputy Chiefs of the Police or Fire Departments,
the Inspector General, the Chief Procurement Officer, members of the Air
Quality Board, members of the Accountability in Government Oversight Committee,
members of the Arts Board, members of the Board of Ethics, members of the Fire
Code Board of Appeals, members of the Housing and Neighborhood Economic
Development Committee, members of the Information Services Committee, members
of the Labor-Management Relations Board, members of the Lodgers' Tax Advisory
Board, members of the Open Space Advisory Board, and members of the Urban
Enhancement Trust Fund Citizens Committee.
Tier 3- includes all other city employees and board and commission members.
By July 31, 2021 and by January 31 of each calendar year thereafter all Tier 1
and Tier 2 employees and officials shall complete a financial disclosure form
on a form designated by Clerk. Should a new conflict or potential conflict of
interest arise, all Tier 1 and Tier 2 employees and officials shall submit a
conflict of interest form within ten (10) days oflearning of the conflict or
potential conflict. Tier 1 and Tier 2 Board and Commission members shall fill
out a financial disclosure form following appointment and approval by City
Council. Tier 1 and Tier 2 Board and Commission members shall submit a conflict
of interest form within ten (10) days of learning of the conflict or potential
conflict. Tier 1 individuals shall fill out all parts of the financial
disclosure form. Tier 2 individuals shall fill out all parts other than the
fourth section regarding real estate interests.
All Tier 3 Board and Commission members shall sign an acknowledgement of the
City's Conflict of Interest Rules. All Tier 3 employees shall receive training
on ethics and conflicts of interest during new employee orientation. In the
event a conflict or potential conflict of interest arises, all Tier 3 officials
and employees shall submit a conflict of interest form within ten (10) days of
learning of the conflict or potential conflict. This form shall be a public
record.
DISCIPLINE
City employees or officials who fail to promptly disclose potential conflicts
of interest may face disciplinary action according to the Merit System
Ordinance or other applicable ordinances, the City's Personnel Rules and
Regulations, or Collective Bargaining Agreements if applicable. Board and
commission members who fail to promptly disclose potential or actual conflicts
may be subject to removal from their board or commission pursuant to ROA 1994,
2-6-1-1 et seq.
This Administrative Instruction is effective immediately.
 
______________________________
Sarita Nair                    [https://export.amlegal.com/media/
Chief Administrative Officer   6d88fadbb394cb34f1263b3e9230120271b111d2/IMAGES/
_____________________________  0-0-0-2110.png]
Effective Date
 
AI_NO:_7-65_(pdf)
AI NO: 7-66 (2021)
TELECOMMUTING/WORK FROM HOME
TITLE: Telecommuting/Work from Home
PRIMARY DEPARTMENT: Human Resources
BACKGROUND
The purpose of this Administrative Instruction is to provide guidance to City
Department Directors on establishing a departmental remote work policy for
certain departmental employees or divisions. This includes guidance to ensure a
safe and productive remote work environment. Directors are responsible for
making the ultimate decision as to whether any position's functions are
compatible with a remote work schedule under this Administrative Instruction.
This decision must be made with careful consideration of the missions of the
department and the City.
POLICY
Telecommuting reflects a work agreement between an employee and their
Department Director which allows an employee to perform assigned duties at an
alternate work site during some of their scheduled work hours. Telecommuting
may be appropriate for some employees and some jobs. It is not an entitlement,
it is not a City-wide benefit, and it in no way changes the terms and
conditions of employment with the City of Albuquerque. It is a managerial
option and must conform to all City ordinances, state laws and department
regulations regarding employment.
This Administrative Instruction or any other telecommuting/work from home
policy does not supersede or affect any language or benefits provided under any
applicable collective bargaining agreements ("CBA").
A request for a reasonable accommodation under the ADA does not fall within the
scope of this Administrative Instruction. Upon receiving such a request, the
employee's direct supervisor should refer the employee to the Human Resources
Department.
TELECOMMUTING CONSIDERATIONS
When considering whether telecommuting for various City employees is
appropriate, many factors must be considered. These factors include, but are
not limited to:
   a)   the impact to community residents;
   b)   the impact on the department, customers and co-workers;
   c)   the type of job to be performed;
   d)   the alternate work site to be used;
   e)   the employee's ability and willingness to adhere to all relevant DTI
cyber security, network and hardware requirements under DTI Policies Standards
and Procedures;
   f)   the employee's ability and willingness to provide a secure place for
confidential work files and information within their alternate work site; and
   g)   the employee's ability and willingness to create and maintain a safe,
secure, and ergonomic work environment within the designated alternate work
site.
Any telecommuting arrangement may be discontinued by the approving Department
Director. Regardless of the type of work performed, the employee must be able
to fully perform their job duties during scheduled hours of work. Employees
shall not be approved to remote work solely in response to an inability to get
to work on time or consistently.
TELECOMMUTING POLICY
Pursuant to this administrative instruction and the guidelines below, a
Department Director may submit a proposed telecommuting policy to the Chief
Administrative Officer. Such a policy may allow eligible employees or divisions
to work remotely for up to two (2) days/work shifts in a one-week work period.
Each proposed policy must include a justification for why the position, group
of positions or division is suitable for remote work. This justification should
also detail any unique reasons specific to an individual Department and its
affected divisions in issuing a remote work policy. The Chief Administrative
Officer shall approve or deny each Department's policy. Such a policy may not
be implemented until it has been affirmatively approved by the Chief
Administrative Officer.
Prior to implementation of any remote work agreement, an employee shall sign a
copy of the Department's policy acknowledging receipt, understanding and
agreeing to comply with the terms of the Department's remote work policy.
Each policy must include the following provisions:
   •   Employees may be required to work at their City worksite as needed and
remote work days will not be guaranteed.
   •   Reschedule, delay, or postponement of work assignments or meetings based
upon a remote work schedule is not allowed.
   •   Specific examples in which an employee/division would be required to
work at a City worksite, even if previously scheduled to work from home.
   •   Remote work days/shifts may not be intermittent or be divided throughout
the work week nor set as an employee's normal work schedule (e.g., if an
employee works an 8-hour shift per day, they should only be allowed to work
remotely for two solid 8-hour shifts in one work week, an employee may not be
allowed to regularly split the 16 hours throughout the week).
   •   Any exceptions should only be made occasionally and after approval of
the Department Director on a case-by-case basis. Department Directors may
authorize direct supervisors to manage and track occasional or periodic work
from home arrangements for more than two (2) days in a one-week time period.
Such arrangements should be the exception and not the norm. Any exceptions
shall be documented and kept in the employee's department file.
   •   The City will determine, with information supplied by the employee and
direct supervisor, the appropriate equipment needs and VPN access for each
telecommuting arrangement. The Human Resources Department (HRD) and Department
of Technology and Innovation (DTI) will serve as resources in this matter.
   •   Work product and intellectual property generated as a result of any
remote work agreement remains the property of the City, as is true of any work
product and intellectual property generated during onsite work.
   •   Employees must perform all work securely and safeguard any confidential
information. Employees must follow all City cybersecurity practices. Any
computer or security issues must be reported to the Employee's supervisor and
the appropriate service desk for the Employee's department.
   •   Employees must adhere to any applicable record retention policies or
procedures.
   •   Each policy must include a procedure on how scheduling will be approved
and that implementation is contingent upon Director approval. Telecommuting
employees who are not exempt from the overtime requirements of the Fair Labor
Standards Act will be required to record all hours worked in a manner
designated by the City. Hours worked in excess of those specified per day and
per workweek, in accordance with state and federal requirements, will require
the advance approval of the Department Director.
   •   Each policy must specify instances when an employee is not or may not be
eligible for remote work. For example: probationary employees, employees that
have received disciplinary action within a 12-month period.
   •   A Department director may revoke a remote work agreement with or without
notice for any reason. If the remote work agreement is revoked for any reason
other than a violation of City policy regarding telecommuting, discipline or
proposed discipline, reasonable notice of revocation will be provided to
employees at least one week prior to revocation when possible. Each Department
policy should clarify any additional circumstances in which a remote work
agreement may be terminated.
   •   Procedures for appropriate assurances of work productivity and recording
of hours worked should be included.
   •   Unless otherwise approved by an employee's direct supervisor, an
employee's alternate work location shall be at the employee's home. The City
may, with 24-hour notice, access the alternate work location to assess safety
and security. The City is not liable for any injury to others at the alternate
work location.
   •   The City is not responsible for any utility costs, including but not
limited to the cost of an internet connection or cell phone, associated with
the use of a computer or the performance of work functions at the alternate
work location. Unless explicitly and previously approved by the Department
Director, the City is not responsible for the costs of equipment or supplies
required to work from an alternate location. Any request to take City office
supplies or equipment to a remote worksite shall be approved by the employee's
direct supervisor.
   •   Any employee who has requested to work remotely is responsible for
providing, maintaining and repairing employee-owned equipment in addition to
paying for electronic service expenses used at the remote work location at
personal expense.
   •   Any equipment supplied by the City is to be used for business purposes
only. Employees will provide an inventory of all office property and take
approp1iate action to protect items from damage or theft. All equipment,
records, and materials provided by the City will remain the property of the
City. All equipment, records, and materials must be returned to the City within
five days of the end of the telecommuting period, or earlier, if requested.
   •   Employees are responsible for any tax or insurance consequences as a
result of this arrangement. Employees are responsible for conforming with any
local zoning regulations.
   •   Injuries sustained by the employee while at his or her alternative work
location and in conjunction with his or her regular work duties may be covered
by the company's workers' compensation policy. However, each employee is
responsible for providing themselves an ergonomic work environment.
Telecommuting employees are responsible for notifying the employer at the
earliest possible opportunity of such injuries in accordance with the City's
workers compensation procedures.
Any failure to comply with the provisions of this agreement may lead to
disciplinary action.
This Administrative Instruction is effective immediately.
 
______________________________
Sarita Nair                    [https://export.amlegal.com/media/
Chief Administrative Officer   6d88fadbb394cb34f1263b3e9230120271b111d2/IMAGES/
_____________________________  0-0-0-2167.png]
Effective Date
 
AI_NO:_7-66_(pdf)
AI NO: 7-67
EMPLOYEE COVID-19 VACCINATION AND TESTING (RESCINDED 1-2-2023)
TITLE: Employee COVID-19 Vaccination and Testing
PRIMARY DEPARTMENT: Human Resources
This Administrative Instruction is hereby rescinded effective when signed.
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/6d88fadbb394cb34f1263b3e9230120271b111d2/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2394.png]
 
AI_NO:_7-67_(pdf)
AI NO: 7-68
CITY OF ALBUQUERQUE - HIRING PROCESS (2022)
ADMINISTRATIVE INSTRUCTION NO: 7-68 (2022)
TITLE: City of Albuquerque - Hiring Process
PRIMARY DEPARTMENT: Human Resources (HR)
OVERVIEW:
The City has established a detailed hiring process to ensure consistency and
equity within our hiring practices. HR will provide guidance, support, and
direction to Department HR Coordinator's (HRC) with questions related to this
process. The hiring process will be utilized concurrently with any terms and
conditions set forth in collective bargaining agreements. This AI does not
apply to sworn police and fire positions.
JOB DESCRIPTION VALIDATION:
Hiring Managers (HM) should review job descriptions prior to posting a job.
This provides the opportunity to validate the appropriate position and
qualifications have been outlined. HMs should work with their HRCs on making
modifications to job descriptions.
(Job Aide on Job Descriptions)
POSTING TIMEFRAME:
Absent collective bargaining agreement requirements, classified positions will
be posted for a minimum of ten ( 10) working days. A department has the option
to request a different timeframe and/or post a position "internal only."
Requests outside the ten working days timeline shall be submitted to HR along
with a justification for review and HR Director approval.
Unclassified positions may be appointed or posted. HR Coordinators must
collaborate with HR on posting requirements.
APPLICANT REVIEW:
Department HRCs will review and verify applicants who have passed through the
Applicant Tracking System (ATS) to ensure applicants meet the qualifications
including minimum education and experience requirements. HMs will only receive
applications of qualified individuals. For specialized and technical positions,
the HRC shall review and confirm qualifications with the HM. If a disagreement
occurs between the HRC and Department Director regarding qualifications, the HR
Director or designee shall provide final validation.
Formal documentation to validate credentials is preferred but not required for
an individual to be deemed qualified or selected for interview; see required
documentation by selection stage below.
SELECTION FOR INTERVIEW:
HMs are encouraged to select at least two (2) qualified applicants for
interview. It is preferred that a minimum of five (5) qualified applicants (to
provide effective comparison of skills and abilities) are selected for an
interview; however, there is no maximum number of applicants who can be
interviewed. If the department has received less than two (2) qualified
applicants, the HRC may repost the job or continue with the interview process.
Interviewing preference programs must be followed. Refer to AI 7-57 Military
Veterans Hiring Initiative and Corporation for National and Community Service
programs (i.e. AmeriCorps and SeniorCorps) for additional requirements to
interview qualified applicants. Collective bargaining agreements may also
impose requirements for internal candidates which HR and HRC should check for.
The HRC will inform the HM by noting any qualified applicants who are entitled
to an interview within the ATS. If there are any questions regarding collective
bargaining agreements, the HRC shall refer to the HR Department. The HRC will
be required to document all interviews in the ATS.
INTERVIEW PROCESS:
Hiring committee: It is preferred that the hiring committee is comprised of a
diverse panel of position stakeholders (individuals who will work directly or
be supported by the individual who shall hold the position). The panel shall be
made up of at least three (3) members; one panelist must be the immediate
supervisor or in the chain of command if the supervisory position is vacant.
The committee members must be trained regarding legally compliant interviewing
techniques. The committee members should not change once the interview process
has started. If such a change is unavoidable, the hiring matrix should assist
with identifying the top candidate. Additional interviews may be necessary for
hiring matrix scores that are the same or close, to appropriately identify
candidate(s) to be hired. Department HRCs shall provide guidance to HMs on the
selection of a hiring committee. Refer to AI 7-52 Hiring Procedures for Fiscal,
Information Technology, Risk Management/Safety, and Human Resources positions
for additional requirements.
Interviews may be conducted at any point during the posting process while
maintaining consistency of the hiring committee. HMs must make sure that all
qualified candidates are considered that have applied during the posting window
to ensure equal employment opportunities and compliance with hiring preference
Ais. Positions with two (2) or more vacancies may be submitted for hire prior
to when the posting closes; at least one position must be available to fill
after the posting window closes to meet applicable collective bargaining
agreements
Interview questions: Interview questions shall be created by the HM and
submitted to the HRC for review and approval. The Director, Associate/Deputy
Director, or HM may assign the HRC to assist in the development of interview
questions. Each set of interview questions shall also have a documented set of
benchmarks which are described on the hiring matrix that will assist members in
the scoring process and provide consistency for the hiring committee. It is
recommended that HMs change/rotate interviewing questions and benchmarks.
Matrix: A hiring matrix shall be used for all interviews. The HM and HRC should
collaborate on the creation of a hiring matrix. A template hiring matrix is
available on the HR Coordinator SharePoint Site for reference. Final approval
of the hiring matrix and benchmarks resides with the Department Director or
designee.
All documentation created during the interviewing process should be uploaded
into the ATS. After the documentation has been uploaded, it should be shredded.
This process finalizes hiring with an open requisition. The requisition should
be closed and all applicants dispositioned.
SELECTION FOR HIRE:
The hiring manager shall provide the HRC with a recommended list of candidates
for hire in ranked order based on interview performance and in accordance with
any collective bargaining agreement provisions, if applicable. The HRC will
review and obtain Department Director approval to extend conditional offers of
employment determined by hiring matrix performance and how well the individual
is suited for the department and the position.
The interviewing matrix must be submitted on all previously classified "M"/"E"/
"I" series positions, sworn Police/Fire positions and unclassified positions
not on a pay plan to the CAO for final hire validation. Departments may be
required to submit additional information to the CAO depending on their
turnover/vacancy rates.
The following steps shall be completed prior to a conditional offer being
extended:
Verification of Rehire Eligibility: The HRC shall email Risk and HR to verify
rehire eligibility of all previously employed candidates. In addition, the HRC
shall review the employee's HR file and contact their previous manager, if
available, and the Employment/Labor section in Legal if necessary. Validation
of rehire eligibility should be noted under the candidate in the A TS including
who the HRC spoke with. Rehires are considered external candidates.
Verification of Transfer/Promotion Eligibility: The HRC shall email Risk and HR
to verify status/eligibility. Validation of transfer/promotion eligibility
should be noted under the candidate in the ATS including who the HRC spoke
with.
Reference Check: The HRC or HM shall conduct reference checks of the selected
candidate utilizing the approved template. If issues arise, the HRC and HM will
discuss and determine next steps. There is no minimum requirement as to the
number of reference checks conducted on external candidates. HMs must conduct a
reference check with the internal candidate's immediate supervisor or the
Department Director prior to conditional offer. Internal candidate reference
validation must be documented under the candidate in the ATS.
Compensation Determination: Refer to Rules & Regulations, Section 700,
Compensation.
JOB OFFER:
Once the Personnel Action Form (P AF) has been approved, the HM or HRC may
proceed with a conditional offer and scheduling New Employee Orientation (NEO).
All new hires shall attend NEO on their first day of work; an adjusted NEO date
is required if the below documentation is not received.
Central HR will process all unclassified Associate/Deputy Director and Director
positions as well as other appointed candidates at the direction of the Mayor's
Office. HRCs will assist with workflows as necessary.
The following steps shall be completed prior to New Employee Orientation:
Background Check: The HRC shall initiate the background check of the selected
candidate. If the candidate does not pass, the HRC shall inform the HM and
proceed with the second candidate. If the department does not identify a second
candidate, the advertisement process shall be reinitiated. If the background
results indicate "review," the HRC shall reach out to HR for assistance. The
decision to proceed with candidates with background checks under review shall
be done by the HR Director and the Department Director. If a disagreement
occurs, final decision will be made by the CAO.
Verification of Education: The HRC shall obtain required documentation and
validate authenticity of documents received. Documentation should be uploaded
into the appropriate HR system.
Verification of Licensure/Certificates: The HRC shall obtain required
documentation and validate authenticity of documents received. Documentation
should be uploaded into the appropriate HR system.
Pre-Employment Testing: The HRC shall coordinate all pre-employment testing to
be conducted by the Employee Health Center. Refer to AI 7-5 Pre-Employment
Medical Examinations.
Validating of documentation includes but is not limited to name, degree awarded
(confer date), type of degree, educational institution name, educational
institution accreditation, etc.
FINAL:
Departments shall adhere to the Hiring Policy as outlined.
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/6d88fadbb394cb34f1263b3e9230120271b111d2/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2491.png]
 
AI_NO:_7-68_(pdf)
AI NO: 7-69
DEPLOTMENT AND OPERATIONAL STANDARDS COMPLIANCE (NFPA 1710)
ADMINISTRATIVE INSTRUCTION NO: 7-69
TITLE: Deployment and Operational Standards Compliance (NFPA 1710)
PRIMARY DEPARTMENT:  Albuquerque Fire Rescue 
Purpose of Administrative Instruction:
The purpose of this Administrative Instruction is to confirm the City’s
commitment to NFPA 1710, provide direction and establish responsibilities for
ensuring Albuquerque Fire Rescue (AFR) operations align with the requirements
of NFPA 1710. This includes staffing, response times, apparatus deployment, and
performance benchmarks for fire suppression, EMS, and special operations in
career fire departments.
Scope
This instruction applies to all divisions and personnel under the authority of
the Fire Chief.
Policy
It is the policy of Albuquerque Fire Rescue to meet or exceed the minimum
deployment standards and operational benchmarks set forth in NFPA 1710 to
ensure effective and safe emergency response to the community.
Responsibilities
·   As Chief Administrative Officer, I will ensure all administrative systems
(HR, scheduling, procurement, finance) support NFPA 1710 operational goals,
coordinate with the Fire Chief to support data-driven deployment decisions, and
ensure labor agreements, staffing models, and budget planning align with 1710
mandates (e.g., minimum staffing, turnout times, response time goals).
To implement these goals, the Fire Chief shall:
·   Maintain records of unit staffing, arrival times, and incident outcomes for
compliance tracking.
·   Collaborate with Training and EMS divisions for readiness and quality
assurance.
·   Ensure adequate hiring practices and staffing levels to meet minimum
company staffing of four (4) firefighters per engine, three (3) firefighters
per ladder, (2) two firefighters per transport capable apparatus, (2)
firefighters per Hazmat squad, and (4) firefighters per HTR squad, except when
exigencies occur.
·   Track and report vacancies, overtime usage, and absenteeism that may affect
compliance.
·   Incorporate NFPA 1710 deployment expectations into training curricula.
·   Coordinate annual evaluations of firefighter readiness and response
capacity.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/6d88fadbb394cb34f1263b3e9230120271b111d2/
IMAGES/0-0-0-2810.png]
AI_NO:_7-69_(pdf)
Miscellaneous
AI NO: 8-1
CITY TELECOMMUNICATIONS SERVICES USAGE POLICY
TITLE:    City Telecommunications Services Usage Policy
PRIMARY DEPARTMENT:    Department of Technology and Innovation
Policies governing the use of City telecommunications services including, but
not limited to land lines, smartphones, cellular phones, pagers and wireless
data access for tablet computers and laptop computers, have been consolidated
as part of the Information Technology Policies and Standards. These IT Policies
and Standards can be accessed at http://itpolicies.cabq.gov . Select
"Telecommunications", select "Policy", select “Mobile Device Policy" and
“Mobile Device Procedures”.
Employees are reminded that all messages, files and user actions are subject to
monitoring. There is no expectation of personal privacy either expressed or
implied when using or accessing City telecommunications services. Further,
absent a clear exception provided below, all land line, cell phone and pager
numbers paid with taxpayer dollars are to be made available to the public on
request.
Exceptions to this privacy policy will be made for public safety officers
working in an environment that requires their identity to be protected, and
employees who have sought and/or obtained a temporary restraining order or
domestic violence/civil protection order to protect them while they are in the
workplace. Other exceptions may be granted by the Chief Administrative Officer
with adequate justification and documentation. The Human Resources Department,
working in conjunction with the Telecommunications Management Group when
necessary, will ensure that such employee's City land line, cell phone and
pager numbers are not available to the public.
Departments will regularly monitor their use of cell phones and cellular data
plans for mobile computing devices (PCs, Tablets, and Smartphones). To control
costs and validate the need for continued existing use, departments shall
review the cell phone bill monthly and validate the need for all assigned cell
phones and cellular data plans charged to their accounts annually.
All new cell phones and cellular data plans for mobile computing devices must
receive approval by the Department Director, the Director of Finance &
Administrative Services and the Chief Administrative Officer through a Mobile
Device Authorization Form. This form will need to be accompanied by a written
wireless business need justification for the issuance of each mobile device.
See Mobile Device Procedures. A wireless business need justification will
adhere to the following definition: City employees whose job responsibilities
clearly dictate the unquestionable need for regular cellular communication
either via telephone, remote access to the City’s information systems, or the
ability to remotely perform data acquisition using cloud based services or by
using applications that cannot be loaded locally on the device. Cellular
telephones and/or tablet computers with MiFi connection necessary for promoting
public or employee safety shall take highest priority.
REFERENCES:    Information Technology Policies and Standards, “Mobile Device
Policy" and “Mobile Device Procedures”, Mobile Device Authorization Form
 
________________________________
Robert J. Perry                  [https://export.amlegal.com/media/
Chief Administrative Officer     6d88fadbb394cb34f1263b3e9230120271b111d2/
________________________________ IMAGES/0-0-0-762.png]
Effective Date
 
AI_NO:_8-1_(pdf)
AI NO: 8-2
ESTABLISHMENT OF THE DEVELOPMENT REVIEW BOARD
TITLE:   Establishment of the Development Review Board
PRIMARY DEPARTMENT:   Planning Department
INTENT
The Development Review Board (DRB) is hereby established to provide a forum for
key City departments directly responsible for specialized aspects of the
physical development of this community to review and make decisions on
proposals scheduled for their hearings. The DRB is intended to meet three
general goals:
1. Implement a more effective and less time-consuming review and approval
process for both the City and the applicants.
2. Implement a mechanism for discussion where all key agencies and the
applicants receive the same information and interface as a group, thereby
establishing the same base for analysis of the proposal and its relevant impact
on each agency's specialization area.
3. Facilitate better coordination, planning and judgment which will lead to
better quality development in the City of Albuquerque.
DEVELOPMENT REVIEW BOARD ESTABLISHED
Section 1.
A. Establishment: There is hereby established a Development Review Board of the
City of Albuquerque, hereinafter called the “DRB.”
B. Organization: The DRB shall be composed of six (6) members, who are
employees of the City of Albuquerque and Albuquerque Bernalillo County Water
Utility Authority (ABCWUA) representing, the following:
a. Planning Director or designee
b. Director of Parks and Recreation or designee
c. (ABCWUA) Water Resources Engineer, or designee
d. Traffic Engineer, or designee
e. City Engineer, or designee
f. Zoning Enforcement Officer, or designee
C. Member Qualifications:
a. General:
1. A board member or alternate must be authorized to sign plats.
2. Each of the members and any designated alternates shall have qualifications
which are commensurate with the qualifications to be established below.
b. Specific: Specific qualifications and responsibilities for each member shall
be delineated within the Rules and Procedures recommended by the DRB and
approved by the Chief Administrative Officer.
c. Conflict: If any item is to be considered in which any of the members voting
on the item has a personal financial interest, he/she must disclose such
interest and ensure that his/her alternate sits in review of that item.
D. Appointment:
a. The appropriate department director shall appoint a member and an alternate.
b. All appointments of members and alternates shall be made by written memo to
the Planning Director, with the concurrence of the Chief Administrative
Officer.
c. Every member and alternate, unless removed, shall serve until a replacement
has been assigned.
d. In the case of the emergency absence of designated member(s), the
appropriate department director can sit for, or can designate a temporary
alternate for, the missing representative(s).
E. Member Removal:
a. Any member (not alternate) of the DRB who has missed more than 50 percent of
the meetings held during a three-month period shall be automatically removed
from the DRB unless the appropriate department director assures the DRB that
the member will attend in the future.
b. Any member may be removed by written notice of the City Planner with the
concurrence of the Chief Administrative Officer. A copy of the notice will be
sent to the appropriate department director.
Section 2. DUTIES, RESPONSIBILITIES AND POWERS:
The DRB is hereby granted the responsibility for the exercise of administrative
approval authority, advisory and review authority, potential duly delegated
responsibilities, and powers of delegation as set forth in this section.
The DRB shall exercise administrative approval authority for:
A. Subdivisions (where no rezoning action or annexation is required);
B. Site development, for administrative approval and as delegated by the
Environmental Planning Commission (EPC);
C. Minor amendments to approved development plans;
D. Sidewalk variances; and
E. Sign-off for compliance with written conditions set by the EPC on
development plans.
The DRB shall have the right to exercise advisory/review responsibilities for:
A. Subdivisions for which rezoning and/or annexation is required;
B. Sector development and area plans;
C. Plans for transportation corridors shown on the Long Range Transportation
System Guides or in an alignment study;
D. Future street alignment recommendations;
E. Facilities master plan review for flood control;
F. Functional review of site development plans to be approved by other bodies;
and
G. Preliminary subdivision and/or sector plan service agreements as
appropriate.
1. The DRB is hereby authorized to act, subject to approval by the Mayor, in
other matters which may be duly delegated by the responsible entity(ies).
2. The DRB may delegate responsibilities assigned to it:
A. To Committees: The chairperson, with concurrence of a majority vote of the
DRB, may create committees and assign responsibilities and authority in writing
from time to time as it may deem necessary or desirable. DRB committees may be
formed from DRB members and/or other City staff. Committees shall handle
specific project areas, special problems and shall carry out the assigned
duties, responsibilities and powers of the DRB. The DRB shall select the
members, and the committee will select its chairperson.
a. Committees established by the DRB shall proceed by these rules of procedure.
b. When related staff development review committees are established by other
bodies, such as the design team established by the Sidewalk Ordinance, the DRB
shall make recommendations as appropriate for implementation.
B. To Staff Agencies: The DRB will establish criteria and standards to allow
staff to exercise administrative approval on specific types of requests. The
criteria and standards must be appended to the rules of conduct of the DRB
prior to delegation of authority. A consensus is required to establish or amend
the criteria or standards.
Section 3. ORGANIZATIONS AND MEETINGS
1. Chairman: The City Planner or his designated representative shall be the
chairman of the DRB.
2. Decisions
A. By Consensus:
A consensus of all five members is necessary to advise and to exercise
administrative approval on items before the DRB. Failure to achieve a consensus
shall be deemed a denial for purposes of appeal unless a deferral is agreed to
in writing by the applicant.
B. By Vote:
Voting occurs on rules, procedures, and similar items. A simple majority of
votes cast shall carry all motions.
3. Meetings and Hearings:
A. Open Meetings. All DRB meetings are open to the public.
B. Meetings shall be held on a regularly scheduled basis.
C. Special meetings. Special meetings may be called by the chairperson with at
least twenty-four hours public notice posted in the lobby of City Hall. Such
meetings shall be open to the public.
D. Notice. Notice of time and place of DRB hearings shall be in accordance with
the ordinances, rules and regulations governing the items under discussion.
E. Quorum. A DRB quorum consists of all five members or their alternates. A
quorum is necessary to conduct business.
F. Records. The DRB shall maintain records of all matters which it considers.
Such records shall be kept available for public inspection during regular
working hours.
APPEALS:
1. A denial based on irreconcilable conflict between members will be resolved
by the Environmental Planning Commission.
2. Any individual or agency may appeal a DRB decision. Appeals follow the
process appropriate to the type of request.
REFERENCES:   none
 
______________________________
Robert J. Perry                [https://export.amlegal.com/media/
Chief Administrative Officer   6d88fadbb394cb34f1263b3e9230120271b111d2/IMAGES/
_____________________________  0-0-0-764.png]
Effective Date 
 
AI_NO:_8-2_(pdf)
AI NO: 8-4
ESTABLISHMENT OF THE DESIGN REVIEW COMMITTEE
TITLE:   Establishment of the Design Review Committee
PRIMARY DEPARTMENT:   Planning Department
A. INTENT
The Design Review Committee (DRC) is hereby established to provide a forum for
the City departments directly responsible for specialized aspects of the
physical development of this community to review and make decisions on
construction project designs scheduled for their review and approval.
The DRC is intended to meet three general goals:
1. Implement a more effective and less time-consuming review and approval
process for both the City and the designer/developer.
2. Implement a mechanism for discussion in which all key agencies and the
designer/developer receive the same information and interface as a group,
thereby establishing the same base for analysis of infrastructure designs and
City capital improvement projects and the integration of design elements
affecting each agency's specialization area into a balanced design consistent
with adopted standards.
3. Facilitate better coordination, integration of design elements, and more
effective design which will lead to better quality and consistent development
in the City of Albuquerque.
B. DESIGN REVIEW COMMITTEE ESTABLISHED
1. Establishment: There is hereby established a Design Review Committee of the
City of Albuquerque, hereinafter called the “DRC.”
2. Organization: The DRC shall be composed of members who are employees of the
City of Albuquerque and Albuquerque Bernalillo County Water Utility Authority
(ABCWUA) representing the following:
a. City Engineer
b. Transportation/Traffic
c. ABCWUA
d. Hydrology/Storm Drainage
e. City Architect (as needed basis)
3. Member Qualifications
a. General:
i. A committee member or alternate must be qualified and authorized to sign
design documents.
ii. Each of the members and any designated alternate shall have the
qualifications as follows:
b. Specific:
i. Committee members charged with the responsibility to review and endorse
engineering designs must be Registered Professional Engineers according to the
laws of New Mexico.
ii. Members serving on an "as needed basis" must be licensed in the discipline
represented, such as a Registered Landscape Architect or a Registered Architect
on architectural projects.
c. Conflict: If an item is to be considered in which any of the members voting
on the item has a personal financial interest, he/she must disclose such
interest and ensure that his/her alternate sits in review of that item.
4. Appointment:
a. The City Engineer shall appoint the committee chairperson and an alternate,
subject to the approval of the director of the Planning Department.
b. All appointments of members and alternates, other than the City Engineer's,
shall be made in writing by the appropriate department director.
c. Every member and alternate, unless removed, shall serve until a replacement
has been assigned. A two-year appointment is encouraged.
d. In the case of emergency absence of designated member(s), the appropriate
department director can designate a temporary professionally-qualified
alternate for the absent representatives.
5. Member Removal:
a. An immediate qualified replacement will be appointed by the appropriate
department director. Any member may be removed for due cause by written notice
of the DRC Chairperson, with the concurrence of the appropriate department
director.
C. DUTIES, RESPONSIBILITIES AND POWERS
The DRC is hereby granted the responsibility for the exercise of administrative
approval authority, advisory and review authority, potential duly delegated
responsibilities, and powers of delegation as set forth in the section.
1. The DRC shall exercise administrative approval authority for:
a. Design Documents, including plans, estimates and specifications, for
privately sponsored development.
b. Infrastructure design documents for Capital Improvements Projects involving
facilities of one of the City's agencies, or which are within public right-of-
way.
c. Variance from infrastructure design details as provided in adopted standards
(where such variance granting approval authority is not reserved to a superior
entity such as the City Engineer, Development Review Board or other
authoritative body).
2. The DRC shall have the right to exercise advisory/review responsibilities
for:
a. Proposed revisions to the Development Process Manual.
b. Proposed revisions to City of Albuquerque Standard Specifications for Public
Works Construction and the City of Albuquerque Standard Detail Drawings
appended thereto.
c. Proposed new techniques, materials and methods for infrastructure design and
construction.
3. The DRC is hereby authorized to act (subject to approval by the CAO) in
other matters which may be duly delegated by the responsible entity(ies).
4. The DRC may delegate responsibilities assigned to it:
a. To Committees: The DRC Chairperson may, with the concurrence of a majority
vote of the DRC members, create committees and assign responsibilities and
authority in writing as he/she may from time to time deem necessary or
desirable. DRC committees may be formed from DRC members and/or other City
staff. Committees shall handle specific project areas, special problems and
shall carry out duties, responsibilities and powers as assigned by the DRC. The
DRC shall select the members and the committee will select its chairperson.
Committees established by the DRC shall proceed by these rules of procedures.
b. To Staff Agencies: The DRC will establish criteria and standards to allow
the Chairman to exercise administrative approval on specific types of design
requests.
5. The DRC shall develop and publish appropriate operating procedures for the
exercise of the committee's responsibilities.
D. ORGANIZATION AND MEETINGS
1. CHAIRPERSON: The City Engineer's representative or alternate shall be the
chairperson of the DRC.
2. DECISIONS
a. By Consensus: A consensus of all members is necessary to advise and to
exercise administrative approval on items before the DRC. Failure to achieve a
consensus shall be deemed a denial for purposes of appeal unless a deferral is
agreed to in writing by the applicant.
b. By Vote: Voting occurs on rules, procedures and similar items. A simple
majority of votes cast shall carry all motions.
3. MEETINGS AND HEARINGS
a. Open Meetings. All DRC meetings are open to the public, although only DRC
members may make conditions and requirements for the applicant pertaining to
the design of the project before the DRC.
b. Meetings shall be held on a regularly scheduled basis.
c. Special Meetings. Special meetings may be called by the Chairperson with at
least twenty-four hours notice. Such meetings shall be open to the public.
d. Quorum. A DRC quorum consists of all members or their alternates. A quorum
is necessary to conduct business.
e. Records. The DRC shall maintain records of all matters it considers. File
copies of design documents approved shall be kept in the City Engineer's
Office. Such records shall be kept available for public inspection during
regular working hours.
4. APPEALS
a. A denial based on irreconcilable conflict between members will be resolved
by a committee of the directors of the appropriate departments.
b. Any individual or agency may appeal a DRC decision. Appeal must be made to
the Director of the Planning Department. Appeal of the department director's
decision must be to the Chief Administrative Officer.
REFERENCES:   none
 
______________________________
Robert J. Perry                [https://export.amlegal.com/media/
Chief Administrative Officer   6d88fadbb394cb34f1263b3e9230120271b111d2/IMAGES/
_____________________________  0-0-0-766.png]
Effective Date 
 
AI_NO:_8-4_(pdf)
AI NO: 8-5
SAFETY POLICY
TITLE:   Safety Policy
PRIMARY DEPARTMENT:   Department of Finance and Administrative Services
It is the policy of the City of Albuquerque to ensure that safe and healthful
working conditions exist for its employees, contractors and the general public
whose work involves the conducting of business in city-owned buildings, on
city- owned properties or in the course of normal business, with the aim of
reducing damage to property and assuring that no person suffers diminished
health, functional capacity or life expectancy.
It is the responsibility of each employee to perform assigned job duties in the
safest possible manner, using all available safety measures and devices to
prevent injury to the employee, co-workers or the general public, and to report
unsafe equipment, materials or conditions to the employee’s supervisor.
It is the responsibility of each supervisor to assign duties and
responsibilities to subordinates which are necessary in the course of business
and to provide the necessary job-related safety devices and equipment,
information, education and training to ensure a safe and healthful working
environment, realizing that some occupations have unavoidable, inherent
dangers.
It is the responsibility of each department director to develop and promulgate
rules, regulations and operating procedures specific to the safety of the
Department’s employees to include training sessions, identification of safety
hazards, formation of safety committees, the adoption and enforcement of
appropriate safety recommendations, and to establish and maintain an
accountability system for all employees which holds each employee accountable
for accident prevention.
It is the responsibility of the Risk Manager to coordinate all city and
departmental activities relating to this policy to include, but not limited to,
the identification, investigation and inspection of all safety related concerns
and issues and recommendations of potential solutions to operating departments.
The Risk Manager or his/her designee has the authority to stop work at a City
worksite when a condition that poses an imminent threat to life or health
exists.
Realizing the separate but dependent responsibilities and rights of the
aforementioned, it is the shared, corporate responsibility to work in unison
toward the development of a safe and harmonious working environment through the
development of goals, directives, standards, rules and regulations designed to
minimize work related illness and injury through the administration and
enforcement of all conditions consistent with, and pursuant to, the intent and
application of this policy.
 
______________________________
Robert J. Perry                [https://export.amlegal.com/media/
Chief Administrative Officer   6d88fadbb394cb34f1263b3e9230120271b111d2/IMAGES/
_____________________________  0-0-0-768.png]
Effective Date
 
AI_NO:_8-5_(pdf)
AI NO: 8-6
CLOSURE OF CENTRAL AVENUE FOR EVENTS
TITLE:   Closure of Central Avenue for Events
PRIMARY DEPARTMENT:   Cultural Services
The official policy of the City of Albuquerque concerning closing Central
Avenue for special events, such as parades, is as follows:
No more than half the total number of the traffic lanes of Central Avenue
should be blocked for parades or other events, at any one time.
Exceptions, such as a major parade or other major event requiring the use of
all traffic lanes, must be granted by the Chief Administrative Officer.
Because blocking any lanes on Central Avenue can cause a major disruption in
traffic flow, including passage of emergency vehicles, and in the City's
ability to provide consistent transit service, all of which may adversely
affect the safety and welfare of the citizens, City departments included in the
processing of parade or event request permits should encourage the planners of
these events to seek less traveled routes.
 
______________________________
Robert J. Perry                [https://export.amlegal.com/media/
Chief Administrative Officer   6d88fadbb394cb34f1263b3e9230120271b111d2/IMAGES/
_____________________________  0-0-0-770.png]
Effective Date
 
AI_NO:_8-6_(pdf)
AI NO: 8-7
FLOOD HAZARD ORDINANCE CERTIFICATION FEE
TITLE:   Flood Hazard Ordinance Certification Fee
PRIMARY DEPARTMENT:   Planning Department
Effective July 1, 1995, the City will charge, in addition to and in conjunction
with all Building Permit Applications, a Flood Hazard Ordinance Fee,
hereinafter referred to as the "Fee". The Fee is required to offset the
administrative expenses associated with the enforcement of the Flood Hazard
Ordinance including requests for variances for all single family, commercial,
multi-family and Mobile home developments in the City and to certify compliance
with the Flood Hazard Ordinance.
The Fee for all Flood Hazard Ordinance Certifications shall be Fifty Dollars
($50.00).
REFERENCES:   none
 
______________________________
Robert J. Perry                [https://export.amlegal.com/media/
Chief Administrative Officer   6d88fadbb394cb34f1263b3e9230120271b111d2/IMAGES/
_____________________________  0-0-0-772.png]
Effective Date 
 
AI_NO:_8-7_(pdf)
AI NO: 8-9
GAMBLING ON CITY PROPERTY
TITLE: Gambling on City Property
PRIMARY DEPARTMENT:   Human Resources
The purpose of this Administrative Instruction is to establish a policy
prohibiting for-profit or commercial gambling on City property. The City
recognizes that bingo, raffles, lotteries, and other forms of charitable games
should not be prohibited, provided that they are conducted by non-profit
organizations.
Unless waived by the Chief Administrative Officer, any form of gambling, as
defined by state law, may not be conducted on property owned, leased or
maintained by the City of Albuquerque. Under this Administrative Instruction,
gambling includes any form of lottery authorized by the New Mexico Lottery Act,
Section 6-24-1, NMSA 1978, as amended, including the sale of lottery tickets
under that Act.
This Administrative Instruction does not apply to non-commercial gambling held
for the purpose of raising money for non-profit organizations or for charitable
purposes.
REFERENCES:   Gaming Control Act, Section 60-2E-1, NMSA 1978, New Mexico
Lottery Act, Section 6-24-1, NMSA 1978, The New Mexico Bingo and Raffle Act,
Section 60-2F-01, NMSA 1978, Criminal Offenses, Section 30-19-1 “Gambling”,
NMSA 1978
 
______________________________
Robert J. Perry                [https://export.amlegal.com/media/
Chief Administrative Officer   6d88fadbb394cb34f1263b3e9230120271b111d2/IMAGES/
_____________________________  0-0-0-774.png]
Effective Date 
 
AI_NO:_8-9_(pdf)
AI NO: 8-10
APPEALS OF DECISION OF CITY BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS
TITLE:   Appeals of Decision of City Boards and Commissions
PRIMARY DEPARTMENT:   Chief Administrative Officer
It is the policy of the City of Albuquerque that, when the City is not the
prevailing party in a proceeding before any City board or commission, the Chief
Administrative Officer will decide whether to appeal the decision.
 
______________________________
Robert J. Perry                [https://export.amlegal.com/media/
Chief Administrative Officer   6d88fadbb394cb34f1263b3e9230120271b111d2/IMAGES/
_____________________________  0-0-0-776.png]
Effective Date
 
AI_NO:_8-10_(pdf)
AI NO: 8-11
PARKING POLICY - MONTHLY SPACE ALLOCATION AND USAGE
TITLE:   Parking Policy-Monthly Space Allocation and Usage
PRIMARY DEPARTMENT:   Department of Municipal Development
This instruction promulgates and formally establishes the City's policy on
monthly space allocation and usage thereof for parking structures, garages, and
surface lots owned by the City of Albuquerque, operated and maintained by the
Department of Municipal Development through its Parking and Security Division.
   1.   The Parking and Security Division has initiated and maintained formal
waiting lists where the demand for monthly parking space has exceeded the total
number of spaces or percentage allocated thereof in a particular facility/
structure/surface lot.
      The formal waiting list(s) were, after a lengthy process, updated in
December 1994 to insure correctness.
      No individual will be inserted nor grand-fathered in ahead of the
established lists as of this writing.
   2.   Individuals who desire to obtain a monthly parking space, for a
particular facility/structure/surface lot for which, no space is available,
will be required to formally sign-up in person at the Parking and Security
Division Office or via email, the official waiting list signup sheet.
   3.   As a service, Parking and Security Division staff will send individuals
on the waiting list(s) via mail an interest form in order to update and keep
the waiting list(s) current. Individuals who do not return the interest form
within the time frame indicated will be removed from the waiting list.
SIGN UP FOR SPACE:
   1.   When a vacancy occurs, and a parking space becomes available at a
facility/structure/surface lot, an assigned Parking and Security Division staff
member will contact, the first name on the waiting list in numerical order by
phone or email to notify of a space availability. Only one (1) parking space
will be issued per individual.
   2.   Division staff members shall verify that the individual to be issued a
space is in fact valid and legitimate from the facility/structure/surface lot
waiting list prior to completion of any required forms.
   3.   Individuals who are notified of a space availability will be required
to present a valid picture identification, read and sign the standard contract
agreement, complete any applicable payroll deduction forms, and pay the access
card deposit and applicable pro-rate fees prior to being issued a space.
SPACE USAGE:
Failure to comply with the provisions of the contract agreement or misuse of
the assigned parking space for other than its intended purpose will result in
forfeiture of the space privilege without benefit of 30 (thirty) days notice
and refund.
The Parking and Security Division will comply with the provisions of the policy
for space allocation and usage as indicated. However, it is also recognized and
understood that there are factors which will cause preemption of a facility/
structure/surface lot waiting list.
PRE-EMPTION OF THE WAITING LIST:
Preemption of a facility/structure/surface lot will occur only under the
following conditions:
   1.   To provide reasonable accommodation due to ADA requirements.
   2.   Employees who cannot walk long distances due to recent injury, surgery,
and pregnancy. Employees in this category will be required to submit a
physician's documentation for record, and may only utilize a space for a short
duration, not to exceed six (6) months.
   3.   Special status - Department Directors or above, or as approved by the
Chief Administrative Officer.
   4.   City Council and Mayor's office staff. A block of spaces for staff
members of these two (2) departments will be provided with the provision that
when an employee of either office leaves due to transfer, promotion etc., the
space held by the employee will not be grand-fathered in, but would be made
available to the next employee.
      Employees in this category will be given the option of signing up on a
facility/structure/surface lot waiting list when they assume a space.
   5.   Long term agreements for the good of the City.
   6.   Relocations due to construction repairs/renovations of a facility/
structure/surface lot.
 
______________________________
Robert J. Perry                [https://export.amlegal.com/media/
Chief Administrative Officer   6d88fadbb394cb34f1263b3e9230120271b111d2/IMAGES/
_____________________________  0-0-0-778.png]
Effective Date 
 
AI_NO:_8-11_(pdf)
AI NO: 8-14
ABBREVIATED WORK SCHEDULE
TITLE:   Abbreviated Work Schedule
PRIMARY DEPARTMENT:   Chief Administrative Officer
On occasion employees do not work a full work day due to early release for a
holiday or may have a change in schedule due to adverse weather conditions.
Since these are two distinct situations the following policies will apply:
Adverse Weather Conditions:
Background:
At times the City experiences extreme weather conditions which may affect
driving conditions. At the same time the City is charged with providing
essential services such as Police, Fire, Corrections, Street Maintenance and
Computer Services on a 7 day / 24 hour basis. These essential services cannot
be interrupted.
Policy:
Essential Services -- employees providing essential services must adhere to
their scheduled hours in order to continue uninterrupted service on a 7 day /
24 hour basis.
Non-essential Services -- employees providing non-essential services that
arrive late or leave early due to actual or potential weather conditions must
submit a leave request form for vacation or the employee will be allowed to
make-up the time within the same work week up to a maximum of two hours.
Early Release:
Background:
During the holiday season or on special occasion the Mayor or CAO may announce
the early release of employees. This announcement is applicable only to
employees that were actually on-duty at that particular time.
Policy:
Only employees that are actually "on-duty" may be released early. If an
employee is on leave on the specific day and time of early release, their time
will continue to be reported as leave. A comparable number of hours will not be
taken at a later time.
If an employee volunteers or is required to stay as part of a skeleton crew to
ensure coverage of the office, this employee will be allowed to take a
comparable number of hours off at another time within the next pay period.
It is the responsibility of the Department Directors and all managers to ensure
full compliance with these policies.
 
______________________________
Robert J. Perry                [https://export.amlegal.com/media/
Chief Administrative Officer   6d88fadbb394cb34f1263b3e9230120271b111d2/IMAGES/
_____________________________  0-0-0-780.png]
Effective Date
 
AI_NO:_8-14_(pdf)
AI NO: 8-15
PARENTAL PERMISSION FORMS
TITLE:   Parental Permission Forms
PRIMARY DEPARTMENT:   Family and Community Services
The City of Albuquerque provides programs in which children under the age of
eighteen participate. City employees involved in these programs need to know
certain information about each child in order to properly respond to
emergencies involving the child. In addition, the City needs to know that the
parents of the child are aware of their child's participation in these City
programs.
In order to address the above concerns, all City Departments shall use the
Parental Permission, Medical Release, and Waiver Form for each child
participating in a program sponsored by the Department. The form shall be kept
current as the child participates in subsequent programs. The Department shall
have the completed and signed form for each child readily available for use by
its employees. The Departments shall not rely on past forms or forms for a
child on file with other Departments or for other programs.
In the event the program includes travel, the Parental Permission for Travel,
Medical Release, and Waiver Form shall also be completed and signed by the
parent or guardian of each child participating in such travel. This permission
form shall specify each out of town trip in which the child participates.
All Parental Permission forms will be reviewed and updated every two (2) years
and will be reviewed and approved by the Legal Department.
REFERENCES:   None
 
______________________________
Robert J. Perry                [https://export.amlegal.com/media/
Chief Administrative Officer   6d88fadbb394cb34f1263b3e9230120271b111d2/IMAGES/
_____________________________  0-0-0-782.png]
Effective Date 
 
AI_NO:_8-15_(pdf)
AI NO: 8-18
ESTABLISHMENT OF THE DEVELOPMENT PROCESS MANUAL
TITLE:   Establishment of the Development Process Manual
PRIMARY DEPARTMENT:   Planning Department
Purpose:
Development Process Manual (DPM), dated March, 1982, as prepared by the
Municipal Development Department, implemented June 14, 1982, updates by the
City Planning Department in July, 1997, and the latest updates by the Planning
Department posted on American Legal Publishing Corporation and City Planning
website. City agencies shall make arrangements to ensure the use and adherence
to the procedures and criteria contained in the manual.
The Directors of the City Planning Department and the Department of Municipal
Development have the authority and responsibility to:
1. Solicit input from the public and other interested parties regarding land
development matters.
2. Receive and maintain records of suggested changes and recommendations for
change to the DPM from the public and other interested parties.
3. Review suggested changes and recommendations to the DPM to determine
appropriate action. Prepare and implement any approved revisions or additions
deemed necessary.
4. Coordinate with the DPM Steering Group and Subcommittees using the
prescribed forum to review and propose the implementation of substantive
changes to the DPM Executive Committee for their review and approval.
5. Post the latest DPM updates on American Legal Publishing Corporation and
City Planning website
 
______________________________
Robert J. Perry                [https://export.amlegal.com/media/
Chief Administrative Officer   6d88fadbb394cb34f1263b3e9230120271b111d2/IMAGES/
_____________________________  0-0-0-784.png]
Effective Date 
 
AI_NO:_8-18_(pdf)
AI NO: 8-19
GUIDELINES FOR MEDIA MONITORING OF 800 MHz TRANSMISSIONS
TITLE:   Guidelines for Media Monitoring of 800 MHz Transmissions
PRIMARY DEPARTMENT:   Fire Department
The City of Albuquerque agrees to provide the media with access to information
available over the 800 MHz communications system. However, at no time shall
access to information which could result in compromising the safety of City of
Albuquerque personnel, the efficient delivery of City services, or the
communication of protected health information be granted. In order to obtain
access to any 800 MHz channel, members of the media must submit their requests,
in writing, to the Chief Administrative Officer, stating the specific channel
(s) for which they desire access.
In order to be considered for access, members of the media must agree to:
   1. purchase and maintain their own FCC accepted equipment; and
   2. agree to never key up (talk) on any frequency.
The Director of the affected City of Albuquerque department and the Radio
Communications Manager shall submit their recommendations of approval or denial
to the Chief Administrative Officer for final determination of access to the
system.
Media equipment will be programmed once, free of charge, by the City of
Albuquerque Radio Communications Shop. All reprogramming services must be
performed by the City of Albuquerque Radio Communications Shop. Costs, fees and
charges shall be identical to those charged to City of Albuquerque departments.
When technical problems or violations to this instruction arise, the Radio
Communications Manager may suspend access to the 800 MHz system. Access will be
restored as soon as the problem is resolved. The City of Albuquerque reserves
the right to terminate access to the 800 MHz system. Termination must be deemed
to be in the best interest of the City by the Chief Administrative Officer.
 
______________________________
Robert J. Perry                [https://export.amlegal.com/media/
Chief Administrative Officer   6d88fadbb394cb34f1263b3e9230120271b111d2/IMAGES/
_____________________________  0-0-0-786.png]
Effective Date
 
AI_NO:_8-19_(pdf)
AI NO: 8-20
PARKING IN CITY-OWNED LOTS, PERSONS WITH DISABILITIES, REQUIREMENTS FOR
EMPLOYEES
TITLE:   Parking in City-Owned Lots, Persons With Disabilities, Requirements
for Employees
PRIMARY DEPARTMENT:   Municipal Development
State Law (PASSENGER MOTOR VEHICLE OF DISABLED PERSON - PARKING, SECTION 3-51-
46 NMSA 1978) requires the City to provide free parking on city-owned or
operated property where parking is allowed to persons with disabilities
properly displayed current special plates or parking placards.
Persons with disabilities displaying special registration plates or parking
placards issued by the New Mexico Motor Vehicle Department pursuant to SPECIAL
REGISTRATION PLATES; DISABLED PERSON; PARKING PLACARDS, SECTION 66-3-16 NMSA
1978 shall be permitted to park at city-owned or operated parking facilities
without payment of regularly charged parking fees.
Persons with disabilities who are employees of the City of Albuquerque who wish
to park at no cost in parking facilities owned by the City of Albuquerque must
provide documentation to the manager of the Parking Division that the special
registration plate or parking placard has been issued to the employee driver or
employee passenger of the vehicle. Valid documentation shall be deemed to
include a current registration for the license plate or current "Placard Holder
Identification Card" which was issued with the placard. The City reserves the
right to reasonably designate which parking space or facility will be used by
the individual employee.
REFERENCES: PARKING, SECTION 3-51-46 NMSA 1978 PARKING PLACARDS, SECTION 66-3-
16 NMSA 1978
 
______________________________
Robert J. Perry                [https://export.amlegal.com/media/
Chief Administrative Officer   6d88fadbb394cb34f1263b3e9230120271b111d2/IMAGES/
_____________________________  0-0-0-788.png]
Effective Date
 
AI_NO:_8-20_(pdf)
AI NO: 8-22
DESIGN AND LOCATION GUIDELINES FOR OFF-LEASH DOG EXERCISE AREAS
TITLE:   Design and Location Guidelines for Off-Leash Dog Exercise Areas
PRIMARY DEPARTMENT:   Parks and Recreation
Design Guidelines for Off-Leash Dog Exercise Areas are to provide designated
spaces for pet owners, maximize the experience for visitors, avoid undesirable
landscape changes, and maintain the overall visual beauty of the area. The
guidelines include but are not limited to the following:
1. Off-Leash Dog Exercise Areas shall meet the existing requirements set forth
in the Development Process Manual of the City of Albuquerque, City of
Albuquerque Specifications for Public Works Construction, Park Design
Guidelines 2003, and other City policies and ordinances.
2. Off-Leash Dog Exercise Areas can be part of an existing park or a stand-
alone site. Designated Off-Leash Dog Exercise Areas should be sized in
consideration of the total park size, site features, and other programmed
activities.
3. Where Off-Leash Dog Exercise Areas are part of an existing park, the area
should be located on undeveloped land within that park. If such land is not
available, developed land may be used if existing activities are not displaced.
4. Preferably, amenities for Off-Leash Dog Exercise Areas should include
seating, shade, a communications board, fencing designed appropriate to the
surrounding built environment, ground cover that does not scuff paws and can
withstand high traffic, an entry transition pen, and appropriate parking that
is accessible under the standards established in the Americans with
Disabilities Act. If the City determines it is appropriate, security lighting
and a water source may be included in the design of the park.
5. A Public Input Committee of citizens and staff shall be formed. The
Committee shall be chaired by City staff and will be comprised of appropriate
City staff, a representative from the Metropolitan Parks and Recreation
Advisory Board, a member of the dog exercise community and a resident/owner
whose property adjoins the facility and an appointee from the Neighborhood
Association whose boundaries include the park. Using the list of identified
sites, the Administration shall gather public input on the use of these sites
and other locations the Administration considers appropriate for Off-Leash Dog
Exercise Areas. Potential sites for Off-Leash Dog Exercise Areas shall not
displace current activities within parks and should be located throughout the
City to provide reasonable distribution for this activity. The Committee, at
its discretion, may conduct further Technical Analysis regarding the
appropriateness of these sites for such a use. The Administration shall
communicate to the City Council by December 31st 2004, a list of at least 6
designated Off-Leash Dog Exercise Areas that the Committee recommended as
eligible for development. If, during the public input process and further
technical analysis a site or sites are determined inappropriate for use as an
Off-Leash Dog Exercise Area and the Administration is unable to submit a list
of at least 6 sites by December 31st, the Administration shall submit to the
City Council a list of those sites that are eligible and include in its report
the reasons for determining why certain sites were not eligible for this use.
The Committee shall proceed to identify alternative sites by June 15th, 2005.
6. Once an Off-Leash Dog Exercise Area is developed, either the neighborhood
association(s) whose boundaries include the park or the users of the facility
may establish a sponsor group for the Off-Leash Dog Exercise Area. The Group
shall operate under the same regulations as the City of Albuquerque Adopt a
Park Program, through the Department of Parks and Recreation, Park Management
Division.
 
______________________________
Robert J. Perry                [https://export.amlegal.com/media/
Chief Administrative Officer   6d88fadbb394cb34f1263b3e9230120271b111d2/IMAGES/
_____________________________  0-0-0-790.png]
Effective Date
 
AI_NO:_8-22_(pdf)
AI NO: 8-23
JUMPER USE POLICY
TITLE:   Jumper Use Policy
PRIMARY DEPARTMENT:   Parks and Recreation
This policy constitutes the written permission of the Mayor as required by
Ordinance 10-1-1-3. Offenders may be cited under 1-1-99 the general policy
provision within the Ordinances, allowing for a fine up to $500 and/or
imprisonment up to 90 days. Other citations may be cited under criminal
trespass on City property 12-2-3 and 12-2-4.
Jumpers will be permissible under the following conditions. The user must
receive a jumper use permit from the Parks and Recreation Department. A fun
jump Authorization Charge will be assessed at a cost of $35. To obtain a permit
the vendor of the jumper must carry liability insurance, have a current
business license and agree to the following conditions. Jumpers will only be
allowed in the parks listed below. Each of the parks will have an area
identified for the use of jumpers, the jumpers may only be placed in that area.
An approved permit must be obtained 48 hours prior to the event or by Wednesday
at noon for weekend events.
Each permit will be valid for a four hour reservation.
Parks and Recreation will hire a monitor to visit problem sites where jumpers
are not permitted, as well as scheduled sites to ensure jumpers are located in
designated areas. The monitor will ask violators to leave or move, if they are
not cooperative, APD will be called and the event organizer and vendor may be
cited as indicated above.
The Parks and Recreation Department will provide a training session for jumper
companies on the policies for setting up jumpers in City Parks. Companies that
participate will receive a certification and will be an approved company on the
City web site.
Signs will be posted identifying jumper areas and in parks where jumpers are
not allowed signs stating no jumpers allowed will be posted.
Jumpers will only be allowed in the following parks:
1.   Balloon Fiesta Park
2.   Kirtland Park
3.   Korean War Veterans Park
4.   Manzano Mesa Park
5.   Mariposa Basin Park
6.   Martineztown-Santa Barbara Park
7.   Montgomery Park
8.   North Domingo Baca Park
9.   Pat Hurley Lower Park
10.   Phil Chacon Park
11.   Redlands Park
12.   Tower Pond Park
13.   U.S.S. Bullhead Memorial Park – Weekdays only
14.   Ventana Ranch Community Park
15.   Westgate Community Park
16.   Matthew Meadows Park
17.   Terrazas Park
18.   Ventana West Park
19.   Alamosa Park
20.   Lazy Day Park
21.   Vista Verde Park
REFERENCES: Ordinance 10-1-1-3, 1-1-99 the general policy provision, City
property 12-2-3 and 12-2-4
 
______________________________
Robert J. Perry                [https://export.amlegal.com/media/
Chief Administrative Officer   6d88fadbb394cb34f1263b3e9230120271b111d2/IMAGES/
_____________________________  0-0-0-792.png]
Effective Date 
 
AI_NO:_8-23_(pdf)
AI NO: 8-24
ENSURING OPERATIONAL CONTINUITY AND DEPARTMENTAL CONTROL OVER SUNPORT
OPERATIONS
TITLE: Ensuring Operational Continuity and Departmental Control Over Sunport
Operations
PRIMARY DEPARTMENTS: APD; Aviation.
1.    Establishment of Police Perimeters Having the Effect of Ceasing Airport
Operations
The Director of Aviation may request that the APD Aviation Unit establish,
modify, or close a control perimeter. No APD Aviation Unit officer shall
establish any control perimeter having the effect of ceasing airport operations
without the prior authorization of the City Chief Administrative Officer, Chief
Operations Officer, the Chief of Police, the Director of Aviation, or their
designee as authorized in writing by the designating official. A perimeter
shall be deemed to have the effect of ceasing airport operations if it:
Closes off all public access to the Sunport terminal public side;
Closes off all public access to the Sunport terminal sterile area; or
Requires a ground stop of outbound aircraft or diversion of inbound aircraft
traffic.
2.   Ordering the Creation, Closure, or Modification of Police Perimeters at
Department Request
The official who authorizes the APD Aviation Unit to establish a perimeter
having the effect of ceasing airport operations, or that person’s designee as
authorized in writing by the designating official, may order the APD Aviation
Unit to stand down its perimeter. If the perimeter may not be eliminated in its
entirety due to a bona fide need to preserve evidence of a crime, then APD
shall reduce to size of its control perimeter to the minimum physical area
required to preserve the evidence.
3.    Department Executive Staff Access to Areas Within Police Perimeter
At any time during which APD Aviation Unit officers have established a
perimeter of any size or location for any reason on Aviation Department
property, the APD officers and security officers controlling said perimeter
shall grant full access to or from the areas within the perimeter to the
Director of Aviation, Deputy Directors of Aviation, and the Airport Security
Coordinator and alternates, provided that those employees shall follow all APD
orders with respect to the preservation of evidence while they are within the
perimeter boundaries.
 
______________________________
Sarita Nair                    [https://export.amlegal.com/media/
Chief Administrative Officer   6d88fadbb394cb34f1263b3e9230120271b111d2/IMAGES/
_____________________________  0-0-0-1771.png]
Effective Date
 
AI_NO:_8-24_(pdf)
AI NO: 8-25
ALBUQUERQUE CLOSED CAPTIONING ORDINANCE ENFORCEMENT
ADMINISTRATIVE INSTRUCTION NO.:   8-25 (2020)
TITLE:   Albuquerque Closed Captioning Ordinance Enforcement
PRIMARY DEPARTMENT:   Office of Civil Rights
The City of Albuquerque acknowledges its continuing commitment to the
principles of equal access. Pursuant to the Albuquerque Closed Captioning
Ordinance (“Ordinance”), enacted as O-2019-035 and currently located at Chapter
13, Business and Occupations, Article 18 of the Albuquerque Code of Ordinances
(“Code”), the principles of equal access include closed captioning in places of
public accommodation.
The Albuquerque Office of Civil Rights (“OCR”) shall enforce the Ordinance
pursuant to the Albuquerque Human Rights Ordinance (“HRO”) located at Chapter
11, Article 3 of the Code. If the Ordinance conflicts, or is interpreted to
conflict, with the HRO, the HRO shall control. If the Ordinance conflicts, or
is interpreted to conflict, with state or federal law, such state or federal
law shall control. If OCR receives a complaint against a local government
entity, OCR shall refer the matter to the appropriate enforcement individual or
entity.
Generally, OCR will process complaints using the following steps:
   1.   The Complainant must contact OCR within 90 days of an alleged
violation.
   2.   OCR will conduct an intake interview.
   3.   OCR makes a determination whether to issue a complaint to the entity
alleged to have violated the Ordinance.
   4.   At this stage, if both parties agree, they may pursue pre-determination
settlement.
   5.   If the parties do not pursue pre-determination settlement, or if pre-
determination settlement is unsuccessful, OCR will conduct an investigation.
   6.   Thereafter, OCR provides a report to the Human Rights Board (“HRB”)
with a recommended decision.
   7.   The HRB may issue a decision based upon the report or require a
hearing.
   8.   If the HRB finds probable cause to believe the Ordinance was violated,
OCR will engage the parties in conciliation.
   9.   The HRB may find that an entity has violated the Ordinance and order
the entity to stop the violation immediately.
   10.   If the entity fails to comply with the HRB order, OCR and the HRB may
pursue the matter in the Bernalillo County Metropolitan Court, seeking fines
against the Respondent for $250 for the initial violation and $500 for each
subsequent violation.
 
 
______________________________
Sarita Nair                    [https://export.amlegal.com/media/
Chief Administrative Officer   6d88fadbb394cb34f1263b3e9230120271b111d2/IMAGES/
_____________________________  0-0-0-1938.png]
Effective Date
 
AI_NO:_8-25_(pdf)
 
City of Albuquerque, New Mexico
Table of Resolutions
This code contains a list of Albuquerque City Council Resolutions,
current through Res. No. R-2026-001, passed 1-5-2026
 
Published by:
AMERICAN LEGAL PUBLISHING
525 Vine Street * Suite 310 * Cincinnati, Ohio 45202
1-800-445-5588 www.amlegal.com
[City_of_Albuquerque,_NM_Home_Page]
1974 Resolutions
Res. No. Date Disposition Short Title
Res. Date Disposition Short Title
No.
1-   9-3-  Not        Authorizing and directing submission of application for a low-rent housing
1974 74   Included    program
2-   9-3-  Not        Proposing to amend the fiscal year 1975 budget and declaring an emergency to
1974 74   Included    provide funds for the Human Rights Program
3-   9-    Not        Modifying and confirming the assessment roll for Special Assessment District
1974 16-  Included    No. 183
     74
4-   9-    Not
1974 16-  Included    Development of international air service with Mexico
     74
     9-               Urging the addition of portions of the Elena Gallegos Grant to Cibola
5-   16-   Not        National Forest; Urging the New Mexico congressional delegation to further
1974 74   Included    seek this action; providing that the Mayor use the good graces and power of
                      his office for public acquisition of said portion of Elena Gallegos Grant
6-   9-    Not        Approving a license to conduct a distress sale by Gulf Mart of Albuquerque,
1974 16-  Included    Inc.
     74
7-   9-    Not        Appropriation resolution approving additional city monies for replacement of
1974 16-  Included    6" steel pipe waterlines in Special Assessment District No. 180
     74
8-   9-    Not        Requesting the United States Department of Housing and Urban Development to
1974 16-  Included    make available transition funds amounting to $325,087 for the phasing out of
     74               the Model Cities Program in Albuquerque
9-   9-    Not        Calling for modification of inlet grates on storm sewer inlets; Mayor
1974 30-  Included    requested to develop 5-year program of priorities
     74
10-  9-               Setting forth procedures on presentation of ordinances and resolutions by and
1974 30-  3-2-1       between Mayor and Council
     74
11-  9-    Not        Requesting the Chief Administration Officer to have a study performed as to
1974 30-  Included    feasibility of establishing one or more branches of city government in
     74               various areas of Albuquerque
                      Stating initial estimates, making necessary determinations and directing the
12-  9-    Not        preparation, submission and filing with the City Clerk of certain plans,
1974 30-  Included    descriptions, cost estimates and assessment plats in connection with a
     74               parking project and the proposed “Old Town” parking district, pursuant to the
                      greater municipality parking law; and declaring an emergency
13-  9-    Not
1974 30-  Included    Budgeting of vehicle maintenance inspection program grant
     74
14-  9-    Not
1974 30-  Included    Budgeting of revenue from the sale of the municipal code
     74
15-  9-    Not        Allocation of funds for completion of Municipal Court automated information
1974 30-  Included    system
     74
16-  9-    Not
1974 30-  Included    Funds for FAA Runway Improvement Project #0003
     74
17-  9-    Not
1974 30-  Included    Budgeting of revenue from the lease of city-owned building
     74
18-  9-    Not        Fiscal year 1975 budgeting of federal prisoners - management assistance fund
1974 30-  Included    and declaring an emergency
     74
19-  9-    Not        Approving additional city of Albuquerque monies for minor construction
1974 30-  Included    revisions for Special Assessment District No. 179
     74
20-  9-
1974 30-  1-8-10      Approving Amendment No. 3 to Urban Renewal Plan for NDP A-1-2
     74
 
Res. No. Date Disposition Short Title
Res. No. Date     Disposition   Short Title
21-1974  10-21-74 1-8-11        Development Program for NM1-13A - housing for
                                low income families
22-1974  10-21-74 1-8-12        Development program for NM1-10A - housing for
                                the elderly
23-1974  10-7-74   Not_Included Appropriating funds to the Drug Abuse Education
                                and Coordination Center
                                Approving of and consenting to the transfer of
24-1974  10-21-74 5-1-10        liquor dispenser license #872 to Walgreen's
                                Payless Drug Stores, Inc.
25-1974  10-21-74  Not_Included Providing a citizen participation plan for the
                                Community Development Act of 1974
26-1974  10-21-74  Not_Included Appropriating funds for a Citizens Advisory
                                Group
                                Directing Molzen-Corbin and Associates,
                                consulting engineers, to prepare, submit, and
                                file with the City Clerk certain preliminary
                                plans, estimate of cost, assessment plats
                                setting forth the basis for assessment, and
                                addenda to the assessment plats showing the
27-1974  10-28-74  Not_Included amounts of maximum benefits estimated to be
                                assessed against certain tracts and parcels of
                                land, all in connection with the proposed
                                improvement and construction of certain
                                streets, curbs, gutters and other improvements
                                and pursuant to sections 14-32-1 to 14-32-38,
                                inclusive New Mexico Statutes, 1953, and laws
                                amendatory thereof and supplemental thereto
                                Adjusting the construction contract for Special
28-1974  10-21-74  Not_Included Assessment District No. 187 by deletion of
                                improvement on Airport Road Northwest and on
                                Cloudcoft Road Northwest
                                Making a provisional order of the effect that
                                the work of improvement and construction of
29-1974  10-21-74  Not_Included certain streets and parts thereof and sanitary
                                sewer and water lines, all within the proposed
                                Albuquerque, New Mexico Special Assessment
                                District No. 185 in said city, shall be done
                                Awarding a contract for construction of Special
30-1974  10-21-74  Not_Included Assessment District No. 187 and acknowledging
                                receipt of ratification number 1 through 28 for
                                Street Improvement District No. 187
                                Appropriating interdepartmental revenues for
31-1974  10-21-74  Not_Included lease of copy machine with Xerox Corporation
                                for the Council
32-1974  11-4-74  4-2-1         Officially adopting the bikeway network plan
                                and phase I of its pilot project
                                Providing for the adjustment of preliminary
33-1974  11-4-74   Not_Included quantities to as-built quantities on Special
                                Assessment District No. 180 deleting certain
                                items and reducing the contract amount
                                Accepting a grant for the historic landmark
34-1974  11-4-74   Not_Included survey program from the Historical Preservation
                                Program of the New Mexico State Planning Office
                                and matching same with city contributions
                                Accepting a grant for the city edges study from
35-1974  11-4-74   Not_Included the National Endowment for the Arts and
                                rebudgeting unexpended fund balance from the
                                same grant during fiscal year 1974
                                Accepting a grant for the Traffic Engineering
36-1974  11-4-74   Not_Included Division from the State Traffic Safety
                                Commission for purchasing videotape equipment
                                Appropriating funds for the modification of
37-1974  11-4-74   Not_Included storm sewer inlet grates to insure the safety
                                of bicyclists
                                Rebudgeting library funds received and budgeted
38-1974  11-4-74   Not_Included during fiscal year 1974, to be expended prior
                                to the end of fiscal year 1975
                                Transferring funds from general revenue sharing
39-1974  11-4-74   Not_Included reserve to the Legal Department for the Alcohol
                                Traffic Safety Program
                                Directing William Matotan and Associates to
                                prepare, submit, and file with the City Clerk
                                certain preliminary plans, estimate of cost,
                                and assessment plat setting forth the basis for
                                assessment, and an addendum to the assessment
                                plats showing the amount of maximum benefits
40-1974  11-4-74   Not_Included estimated to be assessed against certain tracts
                                and parcels of land, all in connection with the
                                proposed improvement and construction of
                                certain streets, curbs, gutters and other
                                improvements and pursuant to sections 14-32-
                                1 to 14-32-38, inclusive New Mexico Statutes,
                                1953, and laws amendatory thereof and
                                supplemental thereto
 
Res. No. Date Disposition Short Title
Res.    Date    Disposition Short Title
No.
                 Not        Authorizing the Mayor to issue a license for a
41-1974 11-4-74 Included    distress sale to Charles Williams Clothes, Inc.,
                            6307 Menaul Northeast, Albuquerque, New Mexico
42-1974 11-20-   Not        Appropriating funds for Council services
        74      Included
        11-20-   Not        For approval of proposed Supplemental Agreement No.
43-1974 74      Included    1 to the Engineering Services Agreement for Special
                            Assessment District No. 185
        11-20-   Not        Rebudgeting unexpended fiscal year 1974 701
44-1974 74      Included    planning assistance grant funds for Project CPA-NM-
                            06-16-1009 for expenditure by December 31, 1974
        11-20-   Not        Authorizing the Mayor to budget fund balance for
45-1974 74      Included    overhaul and update of the air conditioning system
                            at the civic auditorium
                            Accepting a grant from the New Mexico Arts
46-1974 12-19-   Not        Commission for a photograph documentation project
        74      Included    to be carried out by the Museum of Albuquerque and
                            providing in-kind services for matching said grant
        12-19-   Not        Making an appropriation to purchase eight mobile
47-1974 74      Included    radios to replace obsolete equipment in the Water
                            Division of the Public Works Department
                            Accepting a grant from the New Mexico Commission on
        12-19-   Not        Aging funded by Health, Education, and Welfare,
48-1974 74      Included    Title III, for the Metropolitan Area Agency of
                            Aging (MAAA) to provide transportation services for
                            senior citizens
                            Accepting a grant from the Law Enforcement
49-1974 12-19-   Not        Assistance Agency and providing for local matching
        74      Included    funds for a corrections-detention computerized sub-
                            system project
50-1974 12-19-   Not        Appointing Deputy City Clerks
        74      Included
        12-19-              Setting forth the terms and conditions for the sale
51-1974 74      3-1-1       of surplus personal property and unclaimed personal
                            property of the city of Albuquerque
        12-19-   Not        Establishing procedures for making building
52-1974 74      Included    modifications and making an appropriation for
                            building modifications
                            On policy and programs to reduce vehicle miles
                            traveled to improve air quality of city; requesting
                            Mayor to have studies made on automated carpooling,
53-1974 12-2-74 3-3-1       bus transportation, deposit of employee paychecks,
                            requiring study of real needs for public
                            transportation; considering improvement of traffic
                            flow; and urging proper land use to reduce VMT
                            Fixing the time when objections to the assessment
                            roll for Special Assessment District No. 187 of the
        12-19-   Not        city of Albuquerque. New Mexico, made by the City
54-1974 74      Included    Council, together with Gordon Herkenhoff and
                            Associates, Inc., engineers, competent engineers
                            will be heard and causing such roll to be filed in
                            the office of the City Clerk
55-1974 12-19-   Not        Determining the area of “Albuquerque, New Mexico,
        74      Included    Special Assessment District No. 185” to be improved
        12-19-   Not        Authorizing the Mayor to issue a license for a
56-1974 74      Included    distress sale to Lea Rae Wig Imports, 1441 San
                            Mateo Northeast, Albuquerque, New Mexico
57-1974 1-2-75  1-1-9       Establishing procedures on special warranty deeds
                            and quitclaim deeds on foreclosed property
                 Not        Appropriating funds to initiate a Tripper Bus
58-1974 1-2-75  Included    Program for employees in the Central Business
                            District by acquisition of four 50 passenger buses
                            Directing the Kent Nowlin Construction Company to
                 Not        perform certain additional work in connection with
59-1974 1-2-75  Included    Special Assessment District No. 183 as provided by
                            contract change order No. 2, and increasing the
                            contract by $1,919.60
                 Not        Adjusting the construction contract for Special
60-1974 1-2-75  Included    Assessment District No. 183 by extending the
                            contract time 50 days
                            Transferring funds from the aviation Income Fund
                            balance to the Aviation Capital and Deferred
61-1974 1-2-75   Not        Maintenance Fund for purchasing a tract of land
                Included    surrounded by the Sunport golf course to be used as
                            a glide path for the north-south runway approach
                            zone
62-1974 12-23-   Not        Reprogramming of Model Cities funds
        74      Included
63-1974 12-17-   Not        Approving the application for auction license by
        74      Included    Brooks Auctioneers, Inc.
64-1974 1-2-75   Not        Modifying and confirming the assessment roll for
                Included    Special Assessment District No. 187
65-1974 1-2-75   Not        Authorizing the submission of an application and
                Included    proposal to the state Board of Finance
66-1974 1-2-75   Not        Initiating condemnation of abandoned property at
                Included    805 Branding Iron, S.E. and 11505 Chico, N.E.
 
 
 
Notes
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
1975 Resolutions
Res. No. Date Disposition Short Title
Res. No. Date    Disposition   Short Title
1-1975   1-10-75  Not_Included Payment from N.M. state fair for city services
                               rendered during 1974 fair
2-1975   1-10-75  Not_Included Condemnation of building at 1617 Mountain Road,
                               N.W.
3-1975   1-10-75  Not_Included Funds for 2 crawler tractors for sanitary
                               landfill
4-1975   1-10-75  Not_Included Funds for transfer of traffic violations section
                               from Dept. of Administration to Municipal Court
5-1975   1-10-75  Not_Included Funds for transfer of car pool operation from
                               equipment pool to Vehicle Maintenance Division
6-1975   1-10-75  Not_Included Funds for purchase of new floor scrubbers,
                               aviation division, terminal building
7-1975   1-10-75  Not_Included Funds from Police Dept. to Legal Dept. to pay
                               contract fees for service of summonses
8-1975   1-10-75  Not_Included Funds for scheduled bond payment - joint water
                               and sewer bond number 75
9-1975   1-10-75  Not_Included Funds to Dept. of Housing and Development to
                               purchase uniform codes for resale to public
10-1975  1-10-75  Not_Included Funds for secretarial position, Probation
                               Division, Municipal Court
11-1975  1-13-75  Not_Included Funds for full-time attorney for City Council
                               Request for advance funds from HUD for planning
12-1975  1-23-75  Not_Included and preparation of application for block grant
                               funds
13-1975  1-23-75  Not_Included License for distress sale, Franklin's
14-1975  1-23-75  Not_Included S.A.D. 180 - Amending construction contract
15-1975  1-23-75  Not_Included Budgeting revenues - animal control ordinance
16-1975  1-23-75  Not_Included Fiscal year 1975 budget Resolution No. 2
17-1975  1-23-75  Not_Included Sidewalk and Curb and Gutter Improvement -
                               District No. 4
18-1975  1-23-75  Not_Included Sidewalk and Curb and Gutter Improvement -
                               District No. 4
19-1975  1-23-75  Not_Included Improving South Barelas Industrial Park
20-1975  2-13-75 2-1-6         Task force to study parks and recreation
21-1975  2-19-75  Not_Included Affirming active support for the Indian Pueblo
                               Cultural
22-1975  2-19-75  Not_Included Distress sale license - Bennett's of Albuquerque
23-1975  3-5-75   Not_Included Objections for S.A.D. No. 179
 
Res. No. Date Disposition Short Title
Res. No. Date    Disposition   Short Title
24-1975  3-5-75   Not_Included Federal matching funds - Transportation
                               Department Transit Division - purchase of buses
25-1975  3-5-75   Not_Included Supporting state funding - improvements to
                               Highways 44, 371 and 666
26-1975  3-5-75  3-2-2         Procedures for distribution of bills introduced
                               to Council - setting fees
27-1975  3-5-75   Not_Included Supporting establishment of the national solar
                               energy research institute in Albuquerque, N.M.
                               Cost of living increases during 1975 to
28-1975  3-5-75   Not_Included metropolitan criminal justice coordinating
                               council
29-1975  3-5-75   Not_Included Distress sale license - Enchanted Home
                               Furniture, Inc.
                               Designating block north of municipal police
30-1975  3-5-75   Not_Included building for new Bernalillo County criminal
                               justice complex
31-1975  3-5-75  3-5-5         Guidelines for public systems west of Rio Grande
32-1975  3-5-75   Not_Included Authorizing City Clerk to advertise for bids -
                               S.A.D. No. 185
33-1975  3-3-75  3-2-5         Relationship between City Council and City
                               Attorney - services by city legal staff
34-1975  3-7-75   Not_Included Transferring funds to Municipal Court for
                               mailing machine ordered in fiscal year 1974
                               Accumulated funds from state library for new
35-1975  3-7-75   Not_Included office furniture and equipment for new main
                               library
                               Funds from general obligation bond interest to
36-1975  3-7-75   Not_Included construct tunnel between civic plaza parking
                               structure and convention center
37-1975  3-7-75   Not_Included Authorizing Mayor to apply for advance of
                               community development funds from HUD
                               Increasing Emergency Employment Act budget to
38-1975  3-7-75   Not_Included reflect additional three months of operation and
                               budgeting concentrated employment and training
                               act fund for 5 months of fiscal year 1975
39-1975  3-7-75   Not_Included Reallocating cigarette tax bond funds
                               Increasing city's contribution to model cities
40-1975  3-7-75   Not_Included administration extending program through
                               February 28, 1975
                               Parks and recreation to establish and coordinate
41-1975  3-14-75 4-4-1         cooperative gardening program for senior
                               citizens and recipients of public assistance
                               Requiring Mayor to furnish Council with a study
42-1975  3-14-75  Not_Included of disability benefits for regular city
                               employees, police, and firefighters
43-1975  3-14-75  Not_Included Protection at intersections - Phase I of Bikeway
                               Network Plan
                               Requesting N.M. Legislature to pass house
44-1975  3-17-75  Not_Included taxation and revenue committee substitute for
                               H.B. 66
45-1975  3-11-75 2-1-8         City participation in joint city-Bernalillo
                               County committee of elected officials
                               Application to Department Of Transportation,
46-1975  3-11-75  Not_Included U.S.A., for grant under Urban Mass
                               Transportation Act of 1964
 
Res. No. Date Disposition Short Title
Res. No. Date    Disposition   Short Title
47-1975  4-3-75   Not_Included Condemnation of building at 215 Virginia, S.E.
48-1975  4-4-75   Not_Included Condemnation of building at 412 Lead, S.E.
49-1975  4-3-75   Not_Included Comprehensive policies plan for Albuquerque and
                               Bernalillo County
50-1975  4-4-75   Not_Included Funds for initiating administration of proposed
                               anti-noise ordinance
                               Making agreement of June 25, 1974, as amended
                               March 13, 1975, between city and AMAFCA,
51-1975  4-3-75   Not_Included concerning granting or denial of approvals or
                               waivers under the drainage regulation, the
                               official policy of city of Albuquerque
                               Request for advance of funds from HUD for
52-1975  4-10-75  Not_Included additional planning, engineering and
                               administrative activities under Title I
53-1975  4-10-75  Not_Included Application for community development funds
54-1975  4-10-75 3-2-3         Use of official seal of city of Albuquerque
                               Application to U.S. Department of Transportation
55-1975  4-10-75  Not_Included for matching funds for blood-alcohol testing
                               program, police department
                               Requesting MRGCOG urban transportation planning
56-1975  4-10-75  Not_Included policy board to transmit information regarding
                               Rancho de Carnue to N.M. Highway Department re.
                               study for the Gibson Corridor
                               $10,000 to office of the Mayor to contract with
57-1975  4-10-75  Not_Included Odyssey House (drug addicts) for work to be
                               performed for city of Albuquerque
58-1975  4-10-75  Not_Included Distress sale license - Clifton B. Hayes d/b/a C
                               and S Furniture
59-1975  4-10-75  Not_Included S.A.D. 185 - Awarding contract to Co-Con
60-1975  4-10-75  Not_Included Maximum of $19,200 as local match for a city
                               spirit, national endowment of the arts grant
61-1975  4-11-75  Not_Included S.A.D. 187
62-1975  4-11-75  Not_Included Proposed Bernalillo County criminal justice
                               complex
63-1975  3-31-75  Not_Included S.A.D. 179
64-1975  3-31-75  Not_Included S.A.D. 179
65-1975  3-31-75  Not_Included S.A.D. 180
66-1975  3-31-75  Not_Included Sidewalk and Curb and Gutter Improvement
                               District No. 4
67-1975  4-21-75 4-1-1         Requesting comprehensive plan covering
                               objectives of Manpower Programs fiscal year 1976
68-1975  4-21-75  Not_Included Condemnation of building at 438 Santa Fe, S.W.
69-1975  4-21-75  Not_Included Adopting metropolitan areas and urban centers
                               plan
70-1975  6-6-75   Not_Included Approving basic program activities of community
                               development program
                               Approving acquisition of land for public
71-1975  5-6-75   Not_Included purposes and authorizing Mayor to sign documents
                               necessary to acquire the land
72-1975  5-6-75   Not_Included Distress sale license - Constantine Nellos d/b/
                               a the Bike Shop
 
Res. No. Date Disposition Short Title
Res. No. Date    Disposition   Short Title
73-1975  5-6-75   Not_Included Grant from LEAA for equipment for fire
                               prevention division, fire department
74-1975  5-8-75   Not_Included Adopting fiscal year 1975 budget Resolution No.
                               3
75-1975  5-8-75   Not_Included Adopting fiscal year 1975 budget Resolution No.
                               4
                               Authorizing Mayor to apply for N.M. Arts
76-1975  5-8-75   Not_Included Commission grants for Albuquerque Public Library
                               and Parks and Recreation Department
                               Appropriating fund balance for operating
77-1975  5-8-75   Not_Included expenses of North Valley Community Center, April
                               1, 1975 to June 30, 1975
                               Appropriating funds to Parks and Recreation
78-1975  5-8-75   Not_Included Dept. to provide citizens with opportunity to
                               enjoy high quality, serious music
                               Requesting Albuquerque Bicentennial Commission
79-1975  5-16-75  Not_Included to designate development of the Rancho de Carnue
                               archeological site a bicentennial project, etc.
80-1975  5-16-75  Not_Included Grant from LEAA for Albuquerque Police Dept.,
                               Police Athletic League, to purchase a van
81-1975  5-16-75  Not_Included Funds for drop-in center for urban Native
                               Americans
82-1975  5-16-75 4-2-2         Adopting transit development program from MRGCOG
                               on February 24, 1975
                               Continuation of Old Main Library as a free
83-1975  5-16-75 6-5-8         public library and as a center for preservation
                               and collection of written and printed materials
                               concerning local history and culture
                               Authorizing submission of facilities plan for
84-1975  5-20-75 4-3-10        South Valley Sewers, Phase I, priority I project
                               and application for step 2
85-1975  5-21-75  Not_Included Authorizing filing of application with Dept. of
                               Transportation of the United States for a grant
86-1975  5-22-75  Not_Included S.A.D. 186
87-1975  5-22-75  Not_Included Refers to consulting engineers on curb, streets,
                               etc.
88-1975  5-22-75  Not_Included S.A.D. 187 - Change order no. 4
                               Special policy permitting additional connections
89-1975  5-22-75  Not_Included to city's sanitary sewer system at University
                               Apartments
90-1975  5-22-75  Not_Included G.O. Refunding bonds, series 1-1975
                               Appropriating funds for operating the government
91-1975  6-3-75   Not_Included of the City of Albuquerque, July 1, 1975 through
                               June 30, 1976
92-1975  6-4-75  5-1-11        Requesting issuance of liquor license at
                               Albuquerque convention center complex
                               Grant from U.S. Civil Service Commission for
                               Personnel Department to purchase testing
93-1975  6-6-75   Not_Included equipment and supplies and provide technical
                               assistance to individual cities and counties
                               within state of New Mexico
                               Grant from N.E.A.A. to continue Police Dept.
94-1975  6-6-75   Not_Included intelligence unit during year 1975, and matching
                               said grant with city funds from L.E.A.A.
                               matching fund
                               Adopting plan recommendations of the city edges
95-1975  6-5-75  1-1-3         (bosque) study for use of the Rio Grande
                               floodway and adjacent bosque areas
96-1975  6-12-75  Not_Included S.A.D. 179 - Change order No. 5
97-1975  6-12-75  Not_Included S.A.D. 179 - Change order No. 4
                               Modification of prime sponsor's city-county
98-1975  6-13-75  Not_Included comprehensive employment and training act grant
                               to continue Manpower Program into 1976
99-1975  6-16-75  Not_Included 1976 transportation improvement program
 
Res. No. Date Disposition Short Title
Res. No. Date    Disposition   Short Title
100-1975 6-17-75  Not_Included S.A.D. 185
101-1975 6-18-75  Not_Included Application for comprehensive planning
                               assistance grant to H.U.D.
102-1975 6-18-75  Not_Included Step 2 grant assistance for construction of
                               phase I, priority I, South Valley sewer system
                               Requesting state of N.M. Environmental
103-1975 6-19-75  Not_Included Improvement Agency to place North Valley, Phase
                               I, and South Valley, Phase I, sewerage system in
                               top priority
104-1975 6-19-75  Not_Included S.A.D. 187 - Change order No. 3
105-1975 6-19-75  Not_Included Appropriating funds from capital accts. to
                               purchase property - Navajo Freight Lines
106-1975 6-18-75  Not_Included Condemnation of building at 614 Kathryn, S.E.
107-1975 6-19-75  Not_Included Condemnation of building at 1936 Arno, S.E.
108-1975 6-19-75  Not_Included Condemnation of building at 2004 Hinkle, S.E.
109-1975 6-19-75  Not_Included Condemnation of building at 2005 Hinkle, S.E.
110-1975 6-19-75  Not_Included Application for law enforcement assistance grant
                               for Albuquerque Police Department
111-1975 6-30-75  Not_Included Requiring City of Albuquerque to implement its
                               affirmative action program
                               Council's support for proposed new corrections-
112-1975 6-18-75  Not_Included detention center in bond election on June 17,
                               1975
113-1975 6-18-75  Not_Included Condemnation of building at 1306 Edith, S.E.
114-1975 6-19-75  Not_Included Reprogramming of model cities funds
                               Adopting housing policies; encouraging locating
115-1975 6-30-75  Not_Included low-income or subsidized housing in areas with
                               low numbers and percentages of low-income
                               persons, etc.
                               Authorizing Mayor to submit grant application to
116-1975 6-30-75  Not_Included Environmental Protection Agency for air
                               pollution control funds
                               Requesting town affiliation association to
117-1975 6-30-75  Not_Included recommend City of France to become sister City
                               of Albuquerque
                               Approving modification of city-county
118-1975 6-30-75  Not_Included Comprehensive Employment and Training Act Title
                               II to continue Manpower Program effort, fiscal
                               year 1976
                               Authorizing Mayor to apply for community
                               services administration grant for summer
119-1975 6-30-75  Not_Included recreation program, administered by city Parks
                               and Recreation Dept., county Parks and
                               Recreation Dept., and city/county EOB
120-1975 6-30-75  Not_Included Appropriating funds from general fund to city/
                               county EOB for summer recreation program
121-1975 7-16-75 1-9-1         Requiring city to negotiate purchase of open
                               land available in Sandia Foothills
122-1975 7-16-75  Not_Included Approving Turnkey I - operating budget for
                               fiscal year 1976
123-1975 7-16-75  Not_Included S.A.D. 183
 
Res. No. Date Disposition Short Title
Res. Date    Disposition Short Title
No.
124-          Not        Approving alternate method of financing urban
1975 7-16-75 Included    renewal projects as provided by N.M.S.A. § 14-47-2,
                         1953
125-          Not        Supporting federally funded public service
1975 7-18-75 Included    employment programs and urging Congress and
                         President Ford to approve certain programs
126- 7-18-75  Not        Specifying duties of the citizens advisory group for
1975         Included    community development activities
127- 7-18-75 1-7-1       Designation of community development areas
1975
128- 7-18-75  Not        Adopting the 1975 Downtown Plan revision
1975         Included
129- 7-18-75  Not        Determining reasonable notice of public meetings of
1975         Included    the Council
                         Ratifying and readopting Resolution #124-1975
130- 7-25-75  Not        approving an alternative method of financing urban
1975         Included    renewal projects adopted by the City Council, June
                         16, 1975
131- 7-25-75  Not        Authorizing submission of proposal for S.A.D. 185 to
1975         Included    State Board of Finance
132- 7-25-75  Not        Modifying and confirming assessment roll for S.A.D.
1975         Included    185
133-          Not        Amending Resolution 49-1975 and adopting policies
1975 7-25-75 Included    for rural areas as part of policies plan portion of
                         the Albuquerque/Bernalillo County Comprehensive Plan
134-          Not        Appropriating funds for operating subsidized housing
1975 7-25-75 Included    program for fiscal year July 1, 1975 and ending June
                         30, 1976
135- 7-25-75  Not        Adopting changes to fiscal year 1975 budget for the
1975         Included    following funds: general, model cities, etc.
136-          Not        Recommending that bridge/stadium railroad
1975 7-25-75 Included    overcrossing be given high priority for federal-aid
                         urban system funds, etc.
137-          Not        Appropriating community development funds for
1975 7-25-75 Included    restoration of historic community site of San Miguel
                         de Carnue
138-          Not        Approving programming of funds for capital
1975 7-30-75 Included    improvements projects for two fiscal years beginning
                         July 1, 1976 and ending June 30, 1976
139-          Not        Adopting eligibility criteria and selection process
1975 7-24-75 Included    for housing rehabilitation in conjunction with
                         community development block grant program, etc.
                         Appropriating community development funds for model
140- 7-25-75  Not        neighborhood dental clinic and community development
1975         Included    central administration reducing budget for North
                         Valley Community Center, etc.
141- 7-25-75 4-1-10      Endorsing the troubled employee assistance program
1975
142-          Not        Authorizing Director of Department of Finance and
1975 7-25-75 Included    Management to write off uncollectible accounts
                         receivable
143-                     Adopting rehabilitation standards for residential
1975 7-30-75 1-1-1       properties in conjunction with community development
                         block grant program
144-          Not        Authorizing change in program sponsorship for
1975 7-30-75 Included    expenditure of city contribution to Paso and Deseo
                         projects
145-                     Providing for acquisition of northern portion of
1975 7-30-75 1-9-2       Navajo Freight Yard as site for museum of
                         Albuquerque, etc.
146- 7-30-75  Not        S.A.D. 189
1975         Included
147- 7-31-75  Not        S.A.D. 186
1975         Included
 
Res. No. Date Disposition Short Title
Res. Date Disposition Short Title
No.
148- 8-    Not        Concerning regular municipal election to be held in City of Albuquerque,
1975 25-  Included    October 7, 1975
     75
149- 8-6- 1-9-3       Establishing policy regarding acquisition of certain portions of land in
1975 75               mid-north valley for use as open space
150- 8-7-  Not        Appropriating $83,000 for establishment of an automated parking citations
1975 75   Included    systems
151- 8-7-  Not        Providing matching funds for a grant from the law enforcement assistance
1975 75   Included    administration for the ex-offender program, etc.
152- 8-    Not        Authorizing mayor of City of Albuquerque or his designated representative
1975 25-  Included    to negotiate agreement relating to park dedication and development in the
     75               Ed Leslie subdivision with Elmer Sproul
153- 8-    Not
1975 25-  Included    Adopting the plan for major open space
     75
154- 8-    Not        Appropriating funds for establishment and operation of office of Human
1975 25-  Included    Resources for improving delivery of social services
     75
155- 8-    Not
1975 25-  Included    Appointing Deputy City Clerks (elections)
     75
156- 8-    Not        Requiring reimbursement of capital accounts for portion of cost of
1975 25-  Included    acquisition of Navajo Freight Lines site, contingent upon approval of
     75               Museum proposal in Oct. 1975 bond election
157- 8-    Not        Appropriating funds to Department of Transportation for revisions of
1975 25-  Included    storm drainage discharge systems in underground parking facility
     75
158- 8-    Not        Appropriating funds for implementing a collection program for water and
1975 25-  Included    sewer standby charges on improved and unimproved lots in City of
     75               Albuquerque
159- 8-    Not
1975 29-  Included    Reprogramming of model cities funds
     75
160- 9-2-  Not        Condemnation of building at 215 Anderson, S.E.
1975 75   Included
161- 9-2-  Not        Condemnation of building at 718 Broadway, S.E.
1975 75   Included
162- 8-    Not        Amending resolution adopted by Albuquerque City Commission July 1, 1968,
1975 29-  Included    referred to as fare Resolution No. 1, 1968; and reducing bus fares for
     75               “honored citizens”
163- 9-8- 1-6-1       Adopting area redevelopment plan for the downtown neighborhood area
1975 75
164- 9-2-  Not        S.A.D. 190 - Leverton-Denny Engrs., Inc. to prepare preliminary plans,
1975 75   Included    etc.
165- 9-    Not
1975 16-  Included    S.A.D. 190
     75
166- 9-8- 1-6-2       Adopting Los Duranes area redevelopment plan
1975 75
167- 9-    Not
1975 16-  Included    Authorizing sale of $10,155,000 G.O. bonds on September 15, 1975
     75
168- 9-    Not
1975 18-  Included    S.A.D. 187
     75
169- 9-    Not        Approving application for section 8 housing assistance payments program
1975 18-  Included    existing housing under Housing and Community Development Act, 1975
     75
170- 9-    Not        Appropriating funds to Environmental Health Dept. for “lead analysis”
1975 18-  Included    inspections at service stations in Albuquerque-Bernalillo Co.
     75
171- 9-    Not
1975 18-  Included    S.A.D. 189
     75
172- 9-    Not
1975 18-  Included    S.A.D. 189
     75
173- 9-    Not        Appointment of precinct board members for regular municipal election,
1975 22-  Included    October 7, 1975
     75
174- 9-    Not        Appropriating (additional) funds from the Bernalillo County Board of
1975 17-  Included    Commissioners to Albuquerque Public Library Department for summer library
     75               services in rural county schools
175- 9-    Not        Rescinding commitment of City of Albuquerque to purchase the “Ilfeld
1975 17-  Included    warehouse”
     75
176- 9-
1975 17-  1-6-3       Adopting the Martineztown-Santa Barbara area redevelopment plan
     75
 
Res. No. Date Disposition Short Title
Res. Date Disposition Short Title
No.
177- 9-    Not
1975 30-  Included    Determining the area of Albuquerque, New Mexico S.A.D. No. 190 to be improved
     75
178- 9-    Not        Appropriating funds from increased revenues to the Parks and Recreation
1975 24-  Included    Department for the lunch program
     75
179- 9-    Not        Adopting amendment to master plan for electric utilities, “Plan for electric
1975 30-  Included    service in Albuquerque: subtransmission facilities” 345 kilovolt line, West
     75               Mesa to Sandia S.W. Sta.
180- 9-    Not        S.A.D. 186 - Annulling order to pave, sewer and otherwise improve Girard
1975 30-  Included    Boulevard N.E. from the centerline of Menual Boulevard to a point
     75               approximately 490 feet south thereof
181- 9-    Not        Accepting grant from U.S. Civil service com. for Personnel Dept. for video
1975 30-  Included    cassette training library
     75
182- 9-
1975 30-  2-1-1       Abolishing certain city created commissions and committees
     75
183- 9-               Authorizing Mayor to acquire real property in block bounded by Fourth Street,
1975 30-  1-9-4       Roma Street, Fifth Street and Fruit Street as site for new Bernalillo county-
     75               city criminal justice complex
184- 9-    Not        Appropriating funds to John Marshall multi-purpose center for remodeling and
1975 30-  Included    operating expenses
     75
185- 10-   Not        Determining that the building at 5602 Lucca, S.W. is so ruined, damaged and
1975 2-75 Included    dilapidated as to be a menace to the public comfort, health, peace, or safety
186- 10-   Not        Determining that the building at 214 Iron, S.W. is so ruined, damaged and
1975 2-75 Included    dilapidated as to be a menace to the public comfort, health, peace, or safety
187- 10-   Not        Appropriating funds to Transportation dept. for major maintenance on Fourth
1975 2-75 Included    and Silver parking facility
188- 9-    Not        Adopting amendment to master plan for electric utilities, “Plan for electric
1975 30-  Included    service in Albuquerque: subtransmission facilities” - 115 kilovolt line on
     75               Montgomery Blvd., N.E.
                      S.A.D. 188 - Directing William Matotan & Associates to prepare, submit and
                      file with the City Clerk certain preliminary plans, estimate of cost, and
                      assessment plat setting forth the basis for assessment, and an addendum to the
189- 10-   Not        assessment plat showing the amount of maximum benefits estimated to be
1975 29-  Included    assessed against certain tracts and parcels of land, all in connection with
     75               the proposed improvement and construction of certain streets, alleys, curbs,
                      gutters and other improvements and pursuant to Sections 14-32-1 to 14-32-38,
                      inclusive, New Mexico Statutes, 1953, and laws amendatory thereof and
                      supplemental thereto
190- 10-   Not
1975 21-  Included    Runoff municipal election, November 4, 1975
     75
     10-              Recommending to urban transportation planning policy board of Middle Rio
191- 29-   Not        Grande Council of Governments that policy be established leading toward
1975 75   Included    certain amendments to long-range major street plan and that these amendments
                      be reflected as appropriate in future transportation improvement programs
192- 11-   Not        Adopting new policy 15 to govern water line extensions and connections within
1975 6-75 Included    the area boundaries of the North and South Valley, etc.
193- 10-
1975 29-  2-6-1       Delegating certain duties and responsibilities to the Housing Commission
     75
194- 10-
1975 29-  1-6-4       Adopting North Barelas area redevelopment plan
     75
195- 10-   Not        Awarding the construction contract for S.A.D. 190 to Kent Nowlin Construction
1975 29-  Included    Company
     75
196- 11-   Not        Appropriating funds for implementation of community development program
1975 3-75 Included    activities; amending previous resolutions
197- 11-   Not        Calling for a celebration of the 270th anniversary of the City of Albuquerque
1975 5-75 Included    in 1976
198- 10-   Not        Making a provisional order of the effect that the work of improvement and
1975 20-  Included    construction of certain streets and alleys and parts thereof and sanitary
     75               sewer and water lines, all within the proposed S.A.D. 188 shall be done
199- 10-   Not        Determining that the building at 431 47th Street, N.W. is so ruined, damaged
1975 20-  Included    and dilapidated as to be a menace to the public comfort, health, peace, or
     75               safety
 
Res. No. Date Disposition Short Title
Res. Date Disposition Short Title
No.
200- 11-              Empowering the Mayor's ad hoc Performing Art Board to operate
1975 19-  2-10-1      the “city spirit” grant until permanent board is established
     75
     11-              Authorizing and directing City Attorney to commence in District
201- 26-  1-9-5       Court of Bernalillo County, action in eminent domain condemning
1975 75               easements, for constructing water line to connect Valley Gardens
                      South addition to the city water system
202- 12-   Not        Determining the area of S.A.D. 189 to be improved
1975 1-75 Included
                      Making a provisional order to the effect that the work of
203- 12-   Not        improvement and construction of certain streets and parts
1975 1-75 Included    thereof, and sanitary sewers and water lines, all within the
                      proposed S.A.D. 184, shall be done
                      S.A.D. 184 - Directing Scanlon & Associates, Inc., engineers, to
                      prepare, submit and file with the City Clerk/Recorder certain
                      preliminary plans, estimate of cost, assessment plats setting
                      forth the basis for assessment, and addenda to the assessment
204- 12-   Not        plats showing the amounts of maximum benefits estimated to be
1975 1-75 Included    assessed against certain tracts or parcels of land, all in
                      connection with the proposed improvement and construction of
                      certain streets, curbs, gutters and other improvements and
                      pursuant to Sections 14-32-1 to 14-32-38, inclusive, New Mexico
                      Statutes, 1953, and laws amendatory thereof and supplemental
                      thereto
205- 12-   Not        Accepting grant from N.M. American Revolution Bicentennial
1975 5-75 Included    Commission to Museum of Albuquerque to prepare and install an
                      exhibit depicting Albuquerque in 1976, etc.
206- 12-              Stating Albuquerque city government's intent to support efforts
1975 5-75 6-6-1       of minority entrepreneurs and actively seek technical assistance
                      from office of minority business enterprise
207- 12-   Not        Appropriating funds for public employee professional liability
1975 5-75 Included    insurance
208- 12-   Not        Opposing the annexation of Volcano Cliffs to the Lakeshore
1975 5-75 Included    Sanitation District
209- 12-   Not        Distress sale, Morey J. Bobrick d/b/a Republic Shoe Outlet, 7618
1975 5-75 Included    Menaul Blvd., N.E.
210- 12-              Expressing desire of City Of Albuquerque to accept ownership of
1975 5-75 1-9-6       certain privately owned lands along Rio Grande and expressing
                      commitment to preservation of such property
211- 12-   Not        Authorizing filing of application for grant to renovate and
1975 1-75 Included    expand Albuquerque skill center
212- 12-  6-2-1       Endorsing the Bicentennial Eagle Project
1975 9-75
213- 12-   Not        Condemnation of building at 327 Shirley, N.E.
1975 9-75 Included
214- 12-   Not        Relating to City of Albuquerque Joint Water and Sever Refunding
1975 16-  Included    Bonds, Series Dec. 1, 1975
     75
215- 12-   Not        Distress sale, Ray R. Gomez, d/b/a Rae Lea Wig Imports, 113
1975 17-  Included    Fourth Street, N.W.
     75
216- 1-    Not        Determining brotherhood awareness center site to be a blighted
1975 27-  Included    area and designating it as appropriate for a community
     76               development project
217- 12-   Not        Adopting policies for zone map change applications and appeals
1975 17-  Included    of environmental planning commission decisions; superseding City
     75               Commission Resolution dated July 23, 1973
218- 12-   Not        Reaffirming commitment of City of Albuquerque to the planned
1975 24-  Included    revitalization, redevelopment and beautification of the downtown
     75               area
219- 12-              Declaring certain city owned land surplus and authorizing an
1975 23-  1-9-7       exchange of such land for property owned by Albuquerque Public
     75               Schools
220- 12-   Not        Determining that the building at 1331 Candelaria, N.W. is so
1975 23-  Included    ruined, damaged and dilapidated as to be a menace to the public
     75               comfort, health, peace, or safety
221- 12-   Not        Providing for temporary relocation due to rehabilitation of
1975 23-  Included    residents under the community development block grant program,
     75               setting amounts for assistance
222- 12-   Not        Appropriating fund to police department for replacement of five
1975 23-  Included    motorcycles
     75
223- 12-   Not        Appropriating funds to Museum of Albuquerque for an
1975 23-  Included    archeological excavation program at Abiquiu reservoir
     75
224- 12-   Not        Distress sale, Dupler's Fine Furs, Inc., 5410 Lomas Boulevard,
1975 23-  Included    N.E.
     75
225- 12-   Not
1975 23-  Included    Condemnation of building at 1604 Walter, S.E.
     75
 
 
 
Notes
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
1976 Resolutions
Res. No. Date Disposition Short Title
Res. No. Date    Disposition   Short Title
1-1976   1-5-76   Not_Included Appropriating unappropriated bond funds to the
                               capital police facilities activity
                               Appropriating State Chapter 229 funds to
                               Metropolitan Area Agency on Aging for
2-1976   1-5-76   Not_Included information and referral project, senior citizen
                               law office project, senior transportation
                               project and self-help fund project
                               Appropriating funds to the zoo for salaries,
3-1976   1-2-76   Not_Included expenses and properties not funded by Bernalillo
                               County as anticipated
                               Acknowledging receipt of earned community
                               development indirect overhead revenues in
4-1976   1-2-76   Not_Included general fund and appropriating funds to
                               Department of Finance and Management for
                               additional staff, etc. for Community Development
                               Program
                               Approving and authorizing Mayor to apply for a
5-1976   1-2-76   Not_Included national theme, city scale grant from the
                               Architecture and Environmental Arts Program of
                               the National Endowment for the Arts
6-1976   1-21-76  Not_Included Appropriating funds for the Fifth and Copper
                               parking facility
7-1976   1-21-76  Not_Included Appropriating funds to assist in establishing
                               the office of Youth Development
                               Reprogramming community development act funds
8-1976   1-21-76  Not_Included from the Ranchos de Carnue project to the Sandia
                               Foothills open space acquisition project
                               Amending Resolution 25-1974 by providing that
9-1976   1-21-76  Not_Included members of the Citizens Advisory Group serve at
                               pleasure of Mayor and Council and providing an
                               appeal procedure
10-1976  1-21-76  Not_Included Appropriating funds to Transportation Dept. for
                               emergency sign and signal maintenance
11-1976  1-21-76  Not_Included Determining the area of S.A.D. 188 to be
                               improved
                               Reallocating and appropriating funds for
12-1976  1-27-76  Not_Included adjustments to salaries and other benefits for
                               city employees as a result of cost of living
                               increases, union contract negotiations, etc.
                               Appropriating capital funds to the equipment
13-1976  1-27-76  Not_Included project from the taxiway improvement project
                               within the aviation capital and deferred
                               maintenance fund for the purchase of equipment
                               Approving and authorizing Mayor to submit
                               application to N.M. State Planning Office for
14-1976  1-27-76  Not_Included federal grant to continue the city historic
                               landmark survey program and committing city
                               matching funds
                               Declaring certain city owned land surplus and
15-1976  1-27-76 1-9-7         authorizing exchange of such surplus land for
                               property owned by Albuquerque public schools
                               Establishing priorities for Bridge-Stadium
16-1976  1-27-76  Not_Included Boulevard, Rio Bravo Boulevard, and Gibson
                               Corridor west of Interstate 25
                               Requesting Urban Development Agency to proceed
17-1976  2-16-76  Not_Included with redevelopment of the civic auditorium
                               project area
18-1976  2-6-76   Not_Included Determining the area of S.A.D. 184 to be
                               improved
19-1976  2-13-76  Not_Included Appropriating funds for implementation of
                               community development program activities
                               Fixing the time when objections to the
                               assessment roll for S.A.D. 190, made by the City
20-1976  2-13-76  Not_Included Council together with Leverton-Denney Engineers,
                               Inc., competent engineers will be heard and
                               causing such roll to be filed in the office of
                               the City Clerk/Recorder
                               Appropriating capital funds to fire station 16
21-1976  2-20-76  Not_Included project for completion of construction and
                               purchase of equipment
                               Appropriating funds to Legal Department for
22-1976  2-24-76  Not_Included legal assistant in charge of delinquent special
                               assessment accounts and sup. expenses
                               Appropriating funds to Legal Department for
23-1976  2-24-76  Not_Included legal investigator and support expenses to
                               assist in preparation of lawsuits
 
Res. No. Date Disposition Short Title
Res. Date Disposition Short Title
No.
24-  2-    Not
1976 24-  Included    Appropriating capital funds for purchase of land in NDP A-1-2 project area
     76
25-  2-    Not
1976 23-  Included    Appropriating funds to Human Rights Office for a contract compliance officer
     76
26-  2-    Not        Appropriating additional funds to special activities provided by drug abuse
1976 24-  Included    education and coordination center for payment of services budgeted but not
     76               dispersed during fiscal year 1975
27-  2-    Not        Appropriating funds in joint water and sewer capital fund for meter service
1976 24-  Included    renovation project
     76
28-  2-
1976 24-  3-6-1       Establishing goals for park development
     76
29-  3-1-  Not        Approving basic program activities of a community development program and
1976 76   Included    authorizing Mayor to prepare a grant application to the federal government
30-  3-1-  Not        Authorizing Mayor to submit application to Governor's Council on Criminal
1976 76   Included    Justice planning for federal grant to continue Youth Information System
                      Project, etc.
31-  3-1-  Not        Authorizing Mayor to submit application to Governor's Council on Criminal
1976 76   Included    Justice planning for federal grant to continue multi-agency evidence room,
                      etc.
32-  3-1-  Not        Urging Economic Development Administration (EDA) of Dept. of Commerce to
1976 76   Included    approve grant application submitted by Albuquerque Black Economic League, Inc.
                      for funds to provide assistance to business entrepreneurs
33-  3-    Not        Awarding the construction contract for S.A.D. 186 to Kent Nowlin Construction
1976 19-  Included    Company
     76
34-  3-    Not
1976 17-  Included    Establishing reduced golf course greens fees for senior citizens
     76
35-  3-    Not
1976 27-  Included    Authorizing sale of $19,270,000 G.O. Bonds dated May 1, 1976
     76
36-  3-    Not        S.A.D. 190 - Authorizing the submission of an application and proposal to the
1976 24-  Included    State Board of Finance
     76
37-  3-    Not
1976 25-  Included    Modifying and confirming the assessment roll for S.A.D. 190
     76
38-  3-    Not        Amending resolution adopted by Albuquerque City Commission, referred to as
1976 27-  Included    fare Resolution No. 1-1968, as amended; lowering age of “honored citizens”
     76
39-  3-    Not        Authorizing Mayor to submit application to Governor's Council on Criminal
1976 27-  Included    Justice planning for federal grant to initiate a Roving Recreation Unit
     76               Project, etc.
40-  3-    Not        Authorizing Mayor to submit application to Governor's Council on Criminal
1976 27-  Included    Justice planning for federal grant to increase capabilities of Albuquerque
     76               Fire Department arson and fire investigation unit, etc.
41-  3-    Not        Appropriating funds to Police Department for increasing sworn officer
1976 27-  Included    personnel
     76
42-  3-   1-6-2, 1-7-
1976 27-  1           Extending boundaries of Los Duranes redevelopment area
     76
43-  3-    Not
1976 27-  Included    Reprogramming model cities funds and appropriating matching funds
     76
44-  3-    Not
1976 27-  Included    Approving contract change order No. 1 for S.A.D. 185
     76
45-  3-    Not        Providing for management audit of contracts management of Public Works
1976 29-  Included    Department, etc.
     76
46-  3-    Not        Approving and authorizing filing of attached application for community
1976 30-  Included    development funds with appropriate agencies;... budget revisions, etc.;
     76               ...administration of...etc.
 
Res. No. Date Disposition Short Title
Res. No. Date    Disposition   Short Title
                               Affirming previous decision to acquire the
47-1976  3-30-76 1-9-8         sunport swimming pool and related improvements
                               as part of the first year community development
                               program
                               Determining that a certain building or structure
48-1976  3-30-76  Not_Included at 710 Garfield, S.E. is so ruined, damaged and
                               dilapidated as to be a menace to the public
                               comfort, health, peace, or safety
                               Determining that certain buildings or structures
49-1976  3-30-76  Not_Included at 211 and 211-1/2 Bell, S.E. are so ruined,
                               damaged and dilapidated as to be a menace to the
                               public comfort, health, peace, or safety
                               Determining that a certain building or structure
50-1976  3-30-76  Not_Included at 823 15th St., N.W. is so ruined, damaged and
                               dilapidated as to be a menace to the public
                               comfort, health, peace, or safety
                               Authorizing Mayor to submit application to New
                               Mexico Governor's Council on Criminal Justice
51-1976  3-30-76  Not_Included Planning for a federal grant to improve and
                               upgrade emergency center of Albuquerque Police
                               Department
                               Authorizing Mayor to submit application to
                               Governor's Council on Criminal Justice Planning
52-1976  3-30-76  Not_Included for federal grant to initiate a contraband
                               detection project in city jails, and committing
                               city matching funds, etc.
                               Transferring funds from reserve for
53-1976  4-14-76  Not_Included contingencies to equipment category in refuse
                               fund to purchase replacement vehicles for
                               department of services
54-1976  4-16-76  Not_Included Increasing appropriations to the Tourist and
                               Convention Bureau
                               Distress sale licenses-McCrory Stores, Store No.
55-1976  4-16-76  Not_Included 294, 1128 San Mateo Blvd., S.E., and Store No.
                               248, 6001-8 Lomas Blvd., N.E.
                               Appropriating additional funds for the operation
56-1976  4-16-76  Not_Included of the water division and continuation of the
                               meter rehabilitation program
57-1976  4-16-76  Not_Included Appropriating funds to Library Department for
                               increased library services
58-1976  4-16-76  Not_Included Setting fees for installation of water meters to
                               the water system
59-1976  4-15-76 3-5-30        Establishing drainage policy
                               Authorizing Mayor to submit application to the
                               Governor's Council on Criminal Justice Planning
60-1976  4-15-76  Not_Included for a federal grant to continue corrections-
                               detention in-house training and committing city
                               matching funds
                               Authorizing Mayor to submit application to
                               Governor's Council on Criminal Justice Planning
61-1976  4-15-76  Not_Included for federal grant to continue the corrections-
                               detention jail crisis unit and committing city
                               matching funds
62-1976  4-15-76 1-6-5         Adopting the brotherhood awareness center area
                               redevelopment plan
63-1976  4-15-76 1-7-9         Adopting the Boys' Club area redevelopment plan
                               Appropriating surplus capital funds for
64-1976  4-27-76  Not_Included acquisition, remodeling and furnishing of
                               available warehouse space for city use
65-1976  4-28-76  Not_Included Awarding the construction contract for S.A.D.
                               189 to Co-Con, Inc.
                               The fiscal year 1977 Manpower Program and the
66-1976  4-29-76 4-1-1         Comprehensive Employment Training Act;
                               establishing policy of Manpower Program under
                               C.E.T.A. for fiscal year 1977
                               Acquisition by city of certain portions of
                               Rancho de Carnue site; appropriating funds from
67-1976  5-4-76   Not_Included surplus capital account; authorizing preparation
                               of a grant application to the national park
                               service
                               Reciting that City of Albuquerque has met the
68-1976  5-18-76  Not_Included maintenance of effort requirement of the Urban
                               Mass Transportation Act of 1964, as amended
                               Authorizing filing of application with Dept. of
69-1976  5-18-76  Not_Included Transportation, USA, for grant under the Urban
                               Mass Transportation Act of 1964, as amended,
                               etc.
                               Authorizing filing of application with Dept. of
70-1976  5-18-76  Not_Included Transportation, USA, for grant under the Urban
                               Mass Transportation Act of 1964, as amended,
                               etc. (24 buses)
 
Res. No. Date Disposition Short Title
Res. Date Disposition Short Title
No.
71-  5-    Not        Authorizing filing of application with Dept. of Transportation, USA, for
1976 18-  Included    grant under the Urban Mass Transportation Act of 1964, as amended; providing
     76               reimbursement from general fund
72-  5-    Not        Defining “handicapped person” for transit system and making reduced fare
1976 18-  Included    transit ridership available to such persons; repealing Council II,
     76               Resolution No. 8
73-  5-    Not        Defining “handicapped person” for transit system and making reduced fare
1976 25-  Included    transit ridership available to such persons
     76
74-  5-    Not        Recommending to urban transportation planning policy board that the long
1976 25-  Included    range major street plan, dated January, 1976, be approved
     76
75-  5-    Not        Recommending to Urban Transportation Planning Policy Board that the
1976 25-  Included    transportation systems management element dated February, 1976, as amended
     76               be approved
76-  5-               Exchanging certain city owned surplus land for property owned by Spyrock
1976 25-  1-9-9       Corp.
     76
77-  5-               Recommending adoption of housing policies addressing needs of low-income and
1976 25-  3-4-2       physically disabled and mentally handicapped persons and recommending city
     76               seek advice of the handicapped to help evaluate housing and related services
78-  5-    Not
1976 25-  Included    Appropriating funds for refuse vehicles
     76
79-  5-    Not        Step 3 grant assistance for construction of Phase I, Priority 1, South
1976 26-  Included    Valley sewer
     76
80-  6-9-  Not        Application for comprehensive planning assistance grant to Department of
1976 76   Included    Housing and Urban Development, etc.
81-  6-9-  Not        Appropriating funds for purchase of a materials testing laboratory building
1976 76   Included
82-  6-9-  Not        Adopting Martineztown-Santa Barbara sector development plan and community
1976 76   Included    development plan
83-  6-9- 1-7-3       Adopting Los Duranes sector development plan and community development plan
1976 76
84-  6-9-  Not        Application for grant from U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development
1976 76   Included    to provide funds for an innovative community development project to preserve
                      Huning Highland neighborhood, etc.
85-  6-9-  Not        Approving modification of prime sponsor's city-county comprehensive
1976 76   Included    employment and training act Title III, summer youth employment grant to
                      continue Manpower Program effort into summer of 1976, etc.
86-  6-9-  Not        Proposed solar energy research project, etc.
1976 76   Included
87-  6-    Not        Appropriating funds for operating the government of the City of Albuquerque
1976 22-  Included    for fiscal year beginning July 1, 1976 and ending June 30, 1977
     76
88-  6-    Not        Determining that a certain building or structure at 136 Wisconsin, N.E. is
1976 25-  Included    so ruined, damaged and dilapidated as to be a menace to the public comfort,
     76               health, peace, or safety
89-  6-    Not        Determining that a certain building or structure at 1905 High, S.E. is so
1976 25-  Included    ruined, damaged and dilapidated as to be a menace to the public comfort,
     76               health, peace, or safety
90-  6-    Not
1976 25-  Included    Establishing a commission on the handicapped, etc.
     76
91-  6-    Not        Amending rehabilitation standards for residential properties to provide
1976 25-  Included    water and sewer hookups in designated community development areas
     76
92-  6-    Not        Approving and authorizing filing of attached application for summer food
1976 25-  Included    service program grant funds with appropriate state or federal agencies, etc.
     76
93-  6-    Not        Approving attached grant application for summer recreation program funds
1976 25-  Included    from community services administration to provide recreation through the
     76               summer of 1976, etc.
94-  6-    Not        Appropriating funds for implementation of community development program
1976 25-  Included    activities, etc.
     76
95-  6-               Declaring certain city-owned property surplus and authorizing exchange of
1976 25-  1-9-10      such surplus land for property owned by Board of Education of County of
     76               Bernalillo
96-  6-    Not        Appropriating unappropriated fund balance in fire fund accumulated in
1976 28-  Included    previous fiscal years from funds distributed by the State Fire Marshall's
     76               Office for purchase of fire fighting equipment and supplies
97-  6-    Not        Amending Council Bill No. R-102 concerning proposed solar energy research
1976 28-  Included    project
     76
98-  7-6-  Not        Appropriating funds for capital purposes
1976 76   Included
99-  7-6-  Not        Appropriating funds to Personnel Department for three positions formerly
1976 76   Included    supported directly by federal funds
 
Res. No. Date Disposition Short Title
Res. No. Date    Disposition   Short Title
100-1976 7-6-76   Not_Included Establishing policies for implementation of
                               Huning-Highland innovative project
101-1976 7-6-76   Not_Included Appropriating funds for operation of transit
                               division
                               Appropriating additional funds to Department of
102-1976 7-6-76   Not_Included Corrections and Detention for payment of
                               increased operating expenses
103-1976 7-6-76   Not_Included Adopting a weed and litter youth project in the
                               parks and recreation
104-1976 7-6-76   Not_Included Appropriating $290,000 additional funds for
                               water division from joint water and sewer fund
105-1976 7-6-76   Not_Included Appropriating funds to Parks and Recreation
                               Department for leasing portable toilets
106-1976 7-6-76   Not_Included Distress sale Economy Furniture, Inc., 5401
                               Lomas Boulevard, N.E.
107-1976 7-13-76  Not_Included Determining reasonable notice of public meetings
                               of the Council
                               Fixing the time when objections to the
                               assessment rill for S.A.D. 189, made by the City
108-1976 7-21-76  Not_Included Council , together with Wilson and Company
                               Engineers, will be heard and causing such roll
                               to be filed in the office of the City Clerk/
                               Recorder
                               Committing City of Albuquerque to assist
109-1976 7-23-76 6-6-2         Albuquerque branch of National Assn. for
                               Advancement of Colored People in development of
                               employment opportunities
                               Amending certain park and recreation project
110-1976 7-23-76  Not_Included descriptions; establishing priorities for
                               capital improvement projects approved by voters
                               in 1975, etc.
                               Approving and authorizing the filing of
111-1976 7-23-76  Not_Included application for bikeway demonstration grant
                               funds with appropriate state or federal
                               agencies, etc.
112-1976 7-23-76 1-7-10        Adopting North Barelas sector development plan
                               and community development plan
                               Reaffirmation of membership and participation in
113-1976 8-3-76   Not_Included Middle Rio Grande Council of Governments of New
                               Mexico (COG)
114-1976 8-3-76   Not_Included Approving Change Order No. 2 for S.A.D. 189
                               Approving alternate method of financing urban
115-1976 8-3-76   Not_Included renewal projects as provided by section 14-47-21
                               N.M.S.A., 1953, as amended, etc.
                               Appropriating additional funds to the
116-1976 8-3-76   Not_Included Transportation Department for major maintenance
                               on 4th and Silver parking facility
117-1976 8-6-76   Not_Included Approving Change Order No. 1 for S.A.D. No. 189
118-1976 8-9-76   Not_Included Amending policy 14 of city water and sewer line
                               extension policies regarding time payments
                               Supporting Environmental Planning Commission
                               action allowing 30 days for abutting property
119-1976 8-9-76   Not_Included owners of Trumbull Ave., S.E. Between Moon and
                               Wyoming and Moon between Trumbull and Central to
                               submit a request for annexation to city, etc.
                               Appropriating funds to Albuquerque Police
120-1976 8-9-76   Not_Included Department for implementing vehicle take Home
                               Plan, Phase I
                               Determining that the exchange of certain real
121-1976 8-27-76  Not_Included property with the USA is in the best interests
                               of the City of Albuquerque
                               Distress sale license - Furniture Warehouse,
122-1976 8-9-76   Not_Included Inc., d/b/a Furniture House, Inc. 1208 San
                               Pedro, N.E.
123-1976 9-3-76   Not_Included Appropriating funds to metropolitan area agency
                               on aging
 
Res. No. Date Disposition Short Title
Res. No. Date    Disposition   Short Title
124-1976 9-3-76   Not_Included Appropriating additional funds for the Riverview
                               Skill Center Project
125-1976 9-21-76  Not_Included Requiring the Mayor to prepare a study of types
                               of water users in City of Albuquerque
126-1976 9-21-76  Not_Included Determining certain city owned real property to
                               be not essential for a municipal purpose
127-1976 9-21-76 1-7-1         Designating additional community development
                               areas
128-1976 9-21-76  Not_Included Appropriating funds for the designing of a
                               microform system
                               Appropriating additional funds for operation of
129-1976 9-17-76  Not_Included new activated sludge waste water treatment
                               facilities
130-1976 9-17-76  Not_Included Appropriating funds for support of a Municipal
                               Court training program for fiscal year 1977
                               Appropriating funds for partial replacement of
131-1976 9-20-76  Not_Included city's general fund and revenue sharing fund
                               vehicle fleet
                               Establishing comprehensive plan to improve
132-1976 9-17-76  Not_Included communications and public relations between city
                               governmental departments and the public
                               Appropriating additional community development
                               funds for recreation services, reducing budget
133-1976 9-20-76  Not_Included for metro AAA planning, management and
                               administration, reducing budget for housing
                               rehabilitations in fiscal year 1976 community
                               development program, etc.
                               Authorizing Mayor to seek federal funds from law
134-1976 9-20-76  Not_Included enforcement assistance administration and
                               committing city to providing required matching
                               funds
135-1976 9-22-76  Not_Included Approving Change Order No. 1 for S.A.D. 186
                               Accepting the construction work comprising
136-1976 9-22-76  Not_Included S.A.D. 185; approving final adjusting Change
                               Order No. 2; and authorizing final payment to
                               the contractor
                               Determining that a certain building or structure
137-1976 9-22-76  Not_Included at 4821 Central, N.W. is so ruined, damaged and
                               dilapidated as to be a menace to the public
                               comfort, health, peace, or safety
                               Accepting the construction work comprising
138-1976 9-22-76  Not_Included S.A.D. 190; approving final adjusting Change
                               Order No. 1; authorizing final payment to the
                               contractor
139-1976 9-22-76  Not_Included Modifying and confirming the assessment roll for
                               S.A.D. 189
140-1976 9-22-76  Not_Included Authorizing submission of an application and
                               proposal to the state Board of Finance
                               Fixing the time when objections to the
                               assessment roll for S.A.D. No. 186, made by the
141-1976 9-22-76  Not_Included City Council, together with Molzen-Corbin and
                               Associates, Inc., Engineers, will be heard and
                               causing such roll to be filed in the office of
                               the City Clerk/Recorder
                               Determining that certain buildings or structures
                               at 226 Louisiana, S.E. (front and rear) are so
142-1976 9-27-76  Not_Included ruined, damaged and dilapidated as to be a
                               menace to the public comfort, health, peace, or
                               safety
                               Authorizing Mayor to enter into grant agreement
                               with federal aviation administration for
143-1976 9-29-76  Not_Included obtaining reimbursement from federal funds for
                               land purchased at Albuquerque International
                               Airport
                               Authorizing Mayor to enter into grant agreement
                               with federal aviation administration for
144-1976 9-29-76  Not_Included obtaining reimbursement from federal funds for
                               work done at Albuquerque International Airport
                               under 1972 federal grant
                               Authorizing Mayor to enter into grant agreement
                               with federal aviation administration for
145-1976 9-29-76  Not_Included obtaining federal funds for first phase of five
                               year capital improvement program at Albuquerque
                               International Airport
146-1976 10-7-76  Not_Included Issuance of club liquor dispenser license to
                               Saint George Greek Orthodox Church
 
Res. No. Date Disposition Short Title
Res. No. Date     Disposition   Short Title
                                Creating Transit Citizens Advisory Board;
147-1976 10-7-76   Not_Included prescribing duties and powers of said board,
                                etc.
                                Determining that donation of certain real
148-1976 10-7-76  1-9-11        property to N.M. State Highway Department is in
                                the best interests of City of Alb.
149-1976 10-8-76   Not_Included Appropriating funds for support of office of
                                youth development for fiscal year 1977
                                Determining that a certain building or
150-1976 10-8-76   Not_Included structure at 508 Cromwell, S.E. is so ruined,
                                damaged and dilapidated as to be a menace to
                                the public comfort, health, peace, or safety
                                Appropriating funds to Parks and Recreation
151-1976 10-8-76   Not_Included Department for recreation services and
                                equipment at public housing sites
                                Requesting State Highway Dept. to participate
152-1976 10-19-76  Not_Included in repaving of West Central Ave. and Rio Grande
                                Boulevard, N.W.
153-1976 10-28-76  Not_Included Appropriating funds for purchase of parcel of
                                Martineztown N.D.P. A-1-1 project area
154-1976 10-28-76  Not_Included Providing for study of city pay plan for
                                management and unclassified personnel, etc.
155-1976 10-28-76  Not_Included Appropriating funds for storm drainage
                                enforcement
                                Appropriating to the library funds received
156-1976 10-28-76  Not_Included from N.M. State Library Commission for fiscal
                                year 76-77
                                Appropriating funds to parks and recreation for
157-1976 10-28-76  Not_Included payment on real estate contract between
                                Albuquerque National Bank and John F. Simms
                                Jr., for the Albuquerque Academy
158-1976 10-28-76 1-7-4         Adopting downtown neighborhood area sector
                                development plan and community development plan
159-1976 10-28-76  Not_Included Appropriating additional funds to Transit Dept.
                                from transit fund and general fund
                                Determining that a certain building or
160-1976 10-8-76   Not_Included structure at 312 Rosemont, N.E. is so ruined,
                                damaged and dilapidated as to be a menace to
                                the public comfort, health, peace, or safety
                                Determining that a certain building or
                                structure at 1255 Eighth St., N.W. is so
161-1976 10-8-76   Not_Included ruined, damaged and dilapidated as to be a
                                menace to the public comfort, health, peace, or
                                safety
                                Determining that a certain building or
162-1976 10-8-76   Not_Included structure at 1952 Atrisco, N.W. is so ruined,
                                damaged and dilapidated as to be a menace to
                                the public comfort, health, peace, or safety
                                Determining that a certain building or
163-1976 10-8-76   Not_Included structure at 215 Atlantic, S.W. is so ruined,
                                damaged and dilapidated as to be a menace to
                                the public comfort, health, peace, or safety
                                Determining that a certain building or
164-1976 10-8-76   Not_Included structure at 312 Virginia, N.E. is so ruined,
                                damaged and dilapidated as to be a menace to
                                the public comfort, health, peace, or safety
                                Approving proposal for Comprehensive Employment
165-1976 10-8-76   Not_Included and Training Act Title I grant for Manpower
                                Program in fiscal year 1977 from U.S. Dept. of
                                Labor, etc.
166-1976 10-8-76   Not_Included Appropriating additional funds to the 1975
                                aviation projects
167-1976 10-8-76   Not_Included Appropriating funds for model cities program
168-1976 10-8-76   Not_Included Determining area to be improved - Sidewalk and
                                Curb and Gutter Improvement Dist. No. 4
                                Distress sale license - extending the
169-1976 10-8-76   Not_Included expiration date - Economy Furniture Co., Inc.,
                                5401 Lomas Blvd., N.E.
                                Authorizing Mayor to submit application the
170-1976 9-20-76   Not_Included traffic safety division of the N.M. Dept. of
                                Motor Vehicles for a federal grant to purchase
                                equipment for Albuquerque Police Department
                                Authorizing Mayor to apply for a city spirit
171-1976 10-8-76   Not_Included grant from the National Endowment for the Arts,
                                etc.
172-1976 10-8-76   Not_Included Approving Contract Change Order No. 4 for
                                S.A.D. 186
                                Appropriating additional funds to the Fire
173-1976 9-20-76   Not_Included Department for implementation of civilian
                                communication center
                                Authorizing Mayor to submit application to
174-1976 10-8-76   Not_Included traffic safety division of N.M. Dept. of Motor
                                Vehicles for a federal grant to purchase radar
                                units for Albuquerque Police Department
175-1976 10-28-76 4-1-9         Endorsing participation of City of Albuquerque
                                in clean community systems program
                                Appropriating additional funds to Police
176-1976 10-28-76  Not_Included Department to increase number of sworn
                                personnel by fifty-two officers
                                Appropriating additional funds for fiscal year
177-1976 10-28-76  Not_Included 1977 for the M, C, and unclassified series city
                                employees in the utility, general and revenue
                                sharing, funds
                                Authorizing and directing the City Attorney to
178-1976 10-28-76  Not_Included commence in district court an action in eminent
                                domain condemning privately owned real property
                                needed for park purposes
179-1976 10-28-76  Not_Included Appropriating funds to Municipal Court for
                                salary increases for municipal judges
 
Res. No. Date Disposition Short Title
Res. No. Date     Disposition   Short Title
                                Appropriating funds for automobile fleet
180-1976 10-28-76  Not_Included insurance and appropriating funds to reserve
                                for tort liability claims
                                Appropriating additional funds...for the
181-1976 10-28-76  Not_Included purchase of an insect and rodent control
                                chemical and equipment storage building
182-1976 10-28-76  Not_Included Distress sale license - Blackburns Ready To
                                Wear, 3503 Lomas Blvd., N.E.
                                Approving and authorizing filing of application
183-1976 10-28-76  Not_Included for field services career development program
                                with Governor's Council on Criminal Justice
                                Planning, etc.
                                Awarding the construction contract for
184-1976 11-4-76   Not_Included Sidewalk, Curb and Gutter Improvement District
                                No. 4 to Kent Nowlin Construction Company
                                Approving the filing of application for
185-1976 11-5-76   Not_Included community economic development program grant
                                for the central corridor with the U.S.
                                Department of Commerce, etc.
186-1976 11-5-76   Not_Included Approving Change Orders 3 and 4 for S.A.D. 189
                                Proposal of Yellow Checker Cab Company, Inc. of
                                Albuquerque, N.M. to modify its rates, fares,
187-1976 11-5-76   Not_Included and charges for taxicab, limousine,
                                sightseeing, passenger, package delivery
                                service, etc.
                                Distress sale license - Furniture Warehouse,
188-1976 11-5-76   Not_Included Inc., 1208 San Pedro, N.E. - Extending
                                expiration date to November 17, 1976
                                Adopting downtown interim sector development
189-1976 11-16-76  Not_Included plan, expanding SU-3 zoning, and establishing
                                downtown SU-3 zone regulations
190-1976 11-16-76 1-7-6         Adopting the La Mesa sector development plan
                                and community development plan
191-1976 11-16-76 1-7-7         Adopting the West Mesa sector development plan
                                and community development plan
192-1976 11-16-76  Not_Included Approving Contract Change Order No. 5 for
                                S.A.D. 186
193-1976 11-16-76 6-3-1         Extending invitation to city of Gijon, Spain,
                                to become sister city, etc.
                                Approving and authorizing filing of the
194-1976 11-16-76  Not_Included attached application for a crafts demonstration
                                project in the arts in the parks program with
                                Natl. Endowment for the Arts
195-1976 11-18-76  Not_Included Additional funds for design, construction and
                                equipment for joint-use pool, (highland pool)
                                Relating to policies for deciding appeals
196-1976 11-16-76  Not_Included pursuant to the comprehensive city zoning code,
                                etc.
                                Waiving payment of certain assessments owing in
197-1976 11-16-76  Not_Included Paving District 185 and appropriating $7,587.82
                                from the street bond fund to Paving District
                                185
                                Approving and authorizing filing of application
198-1976 11-16-76  Not_Included for Eighth Street sewer project with U.S.
                                economic development administration
                                Approving and authorizing filing of application
199-1976 11-16-76  Not_Included for coal avenue overpass project with U.S.
                                economic development administration
                                Approving and authorizing filing of application
200-1976 11-19-76  Not_Included for a Museum of Albuquerque planning grant with
                                the National Endowment for the Humanities, etc.
                                Approving and authorizing filing of application
201-1976 11-19-76  Not_Included for historic landmark survey grant with N.M.
                                State Planning Office, etc.
                                Requesting extraterritorial zoning commission
202-1976 11-26-76 2-5-1         be set up in accordance with applicable state
                                law
                                Approving and authorizing filing of application
203-1976 11-26-76  Not_Included for the San Jose drain area project with U.S.
                                economic development administration
                                Approving and authorizing filing of application
204-1976 11-28-76  Not_Included for the park link from Tingley Beach to San
                                Gabriel park project with E.D.A.
                                S.A.D. 186 - Authorizing the submission of an
205-1976 12-9-76   Not_Included application and proposal to the State Board of
                                Finance
206-1976 12-9-76   Not_Included Modifying and confirming the assessment roll
                                for S.A.D. 186
                                Approving application for section 8 housing
207-1976 12-9-76   Not_Included payments program existing housing under the
                                Housing and Community Development Act of 1974
                                Requiring Mayor to prepare a study of parking
208-1976 11-15-76  Not_Included and traffic problems in areas surrounding the
                                New Mexico state fairgrounds, etc.
                                Appropriating funds to dues and memberships in
209-1976 12-20-76  Not_Included special activities for purpose of subscribing
                                to public technology, inc.
                                Adopting legislative program for City of
210-1976 12-27-76  Not_Included Albuquerque for 1st session of thirty-third
                                legislature of state of New Mexico
211-1976 12-27-76  Not_Included Appropriating funds to Mayor's office for
                                implementing crime prevention program
                                Requesting Mayor to study...P.E.R.A. coverage
212-1976 12-27-76  Not_Included for certain transit employees prior to January
                                31, 1976
                                Repealing resolution concerning Metropolitan
                                Crime Commission adopted...Oct. 6, 1969; and
213-1976 12-27-76  Not_Included repealing resolution (joint city-county
                                resolution concerning metropolitan crime
                                commission) adopted...May 22, 1972
                                Appropriating funds to Parks and Recreation
214-1976 12-27-76  Not_Included Department... for acquiring right-of-way of
                                Tramway Boulevard from I-40 to Copper Ave.
215-1976 12-27-76  Not_Included Appropriating funds... community development
                                program activities
216-1976 1-4-77   1-7-8         Adopting Los Griegos sector development plan
                                and community development plan
217-1976 1-4-77    Not_Included Appropriating additional funds to Riverview
                                Skill Center
 
 
 
Notes
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
1977 Resolutions
Res. No. Date Disposition Short Title
Res. Date Disposition Short Title
No.
1-   1-    Not        Appropriating funds to Mayor's office for emergency utility assistance
1977 25-  Included    payments
     77
2-   2-3- 3-2-6       Creating guidelines and financial policies for programs which receive
1977 77               federal funds, operating programs and bonding matters
3-   2-3- 1-7-11      Adopting the Old Town Sector and Community Development Plan
1977 77
4-   2-3-  Not        Adopting the Huning Highland Sector Development Plan and Community
1977 77   Included    Development Plan
5-   2-3-  Not        Authorizing the Mayor to accept bids for revenue bonds and appropriating
1977 77   Included    funds for New Gold facilities
6-   2-3-  Not        Appropriating additional funds to the Department of Finance and Management
1977 77   Included
7-   2-3-  Not        Reallocation of funds from various capital projects and appropriations of
1977 77   Included    monies from sale of surplus land to the Candelaria Farms acquisition
                      project within the parks and recreation bond funds
8-   2-3-  Not        Establishing a home weatherization plan under the Community Development
1977 77   Included    Rehabilitation Program; declaring an emergency
                      Approving and authorizing the filing of the attached application for
9-   2-3-  Not        Corrections - Detention In-House Training Program with the Governor's
1977 77   Included    Council on Criminal Justice Planning; providing an appropriation to the
                      Albuquerque Corrections - Detention Dept.
10-  2-3-  Not        Approving and authorizing the filing of the attached application for the
1977 77   Included    “Governor's Special Grant” with the Governor's Office of Employment and
                      Training Administration
                      Approving and authorizing the filing of the attached application for a
11-  2-3-  Not        video system for the Albuquerque Police Department with the Governor's
1977 77   Included    Council on Criminal Justice Planning; and providing for an appropriation to
                      the Albuquerque Police Department
                      Approving and authorizing the filing of the attached application for a jail
12-  2-3-  Not        psychiatric unit with the Governor's Council on Criminal Justice Planning;
1977 77   Included    and providing for an appropriation to the Albuquerque Corrections -
                      Detention Department
                      Approving and authorizing the filing of the attached application to
13-  2-3-  Not        increase the capabilities of the Albuquerque Fire Department Arson and Fire
1977 77   Included    Investigation Unit with the Governor's Council on Criminal Justice
                      Planning; and providing an appropriation to the Albuquerque Fire Department
14-  6-    Not        Opposing transfer of liquor license held by Crown Liquor Store and Lounge,
1977 17-  Included    514 Central Ave. S.E., to any location within Huning-Highland neighborhood
     77
                      Approving and authorizing the filing of the attached application for
15-  2-3-  Not        shelter services for Women in Crisis Program with the Governor's Council on
1977 77   Included    Criminal Justice Planning; Providing for an appropriation to the Human
                      Resources Program for Women in Crisis Program
16-  2-3-  Not        Amending the legislative program; adopted as Resolution No. 210-1976
1977 77   Included
17-  2-3-  Not        Committing the city to develop and implement an energy management plan for
1977 77   Included    all city departments
18-  2-3-  Not        Creating a joint city/county interim committee to study the structure and
1977 77   Included    operations of the general addictions treatment effort and make a report of
                      its recommendations to the city and the county
19-  2-3-  Not        Supporting the Beautification Committee's special annual awards program
1977 77   Included
20-  4-    Not        Reverting a portion of the appropriation for vehicle take-home plan to the
1977 28-  Included    general fund
     77
21-  2-
1977 24-  3-11-1      Adopting policies relating to applications for police and fire cadets
     77
22-  2-    Not        Approving the basic program activities of a community development; defining
1977 23-  Included    the areas of concentrated activity and authorizing the Mayor to prepare a
     77               grant application for submission to the federal government
                      Approving the 1977 Transportation Improvement Program, prepared by the
                      Transportation Improvement Program Task Force of the Transportation
23-  2-    Not        Coordinating Committee and Middle Rio Grande Council of governments staff
1977 23-  Included    in cooperation with the U.S. Department of Transportation, Federal Highway
     77               Administration and Urban Mass Transportation Administration, as a Short-
                      Range Multi-Modal Program for transportation capital improvements for the
                      Albuquerque Urbanized Area as Amended
24-  2-    Not        Appropriating funds to the Mayor's office for the implementation of the
1977 23-  Included    Irrigation Ditch Safety and Education Program
     77
25-  2-    Not
1977 23-  Included    Appointing Deputy City Clerks
     77
 
Res. No. Date Disposition Short Title
Res. No. Date    Disposition   Short Title
                               Approving and authorizing the filing of the
                               attached application for a Municipal Public-
26-1977  2-23-77  Not_Included Defender System with the Governor's Council On
                               Criminal Justice Planning; and providing for an
                               appropriation to the Albuquerque Municipal Court
                               Filing of attached application for a Roving
                               Recreation Unit with the Governor's Council on
27-1977  2-23-77  Not_Included Criminal Justice Planning; and providing for an
                               appropriation to the Parks and Recreation
                               Department
                               Filing of attached application for a corrections
                               information system with the Governor's Council
28-1977  2-23-77  Not_Included on Criminal Justice Planning; providing for an
                               appropriation to Albuquerque Corrections-
                               Detention Department
                               Filing of attached application for multi-agency
29-1977  2-23-77  Not_Included evidence room with the Governor's Council on
                               Criminal Justice Planning; and providing
                               appropriation to Police Department
                               Filing of attached application for aid to
30-1977  2-23-77  Not_Included special exhibitions project with National
                               Endowment for Arts; providing appropriation to
                               Museum of Albuquerque
                               Filing of attached application for museum
31-1977  2-23-77  Not_Included purchase of arts and crafts with National
                               Endowment for the Arts; providing appropriation
                               to Museum of Albuquerque
                               Appropriating additional funds to Mayor's office
32-1977  2-23-77  Not_Included for feasibility study for proposed auto race
                               track
33-1977  3-11-77  Not_Included Supporting efforts of Indian Pueblo Cultural
                               Center to change title to certain lands
                               Resolution concerning industrial revenue bonds
                               in connection with a proposed project for
                               Motorola Corporation to issue and sell
                               industrial revenue bonds in the amount up to
34-1977  3-11-77  Not_Included $5,000,000 for inducing said Motorola
                               Corporation to acquire facility, for inducing
                               Motorola Corporation to enter into lease of
                               facility in order to expand, relocate from
                               outside New Mexico Certain of its manufacturing
                               functions
                               Recommending to Urban Transportation Planning
35-1977  3-17-77  Not_Included Policy Board that long range major street plan
                               as proposed on December 17, 1976 be approved;
                               that Resolution 74-1976 be superseded
                               Relating to Section 13(c) of the Urban Mass
36-1977  3-18-77  Not_Included Transportation Act of 1964 and its effect on
                               federal financial operating assistance for
                               Albuquerque Transit System
                               Adopting affirmative action program; making
                               appropriation to the office of Chief
37-1977  3-21-77  Not_Included Administrative Officer for the affirmative
                               action program; superseding resolution adopting
                               affirmative action program which was adopted by
                               City Commission on December 23, 1973
38-1977  3-21-77  Not_Included Making an additional appropriation to the
                               Department of services for fiscal year 1977
                               Directing Wilson and Company, Consulting
                               Engineers, to prepare, submit and file with City
                               Clerk/Recorder certain preliminary plans,
39-1977  3-22-77  Not_Included estimate of cost, assessment plats, addenda
                               thereto, all in connection with proposed
                               construction of improvements comprising Special
                               Assessment District No. 191
                               Adopting housing policies; Establishing
                               guidelines for a maximum number of subsidized
                               housing units per site, location, design review,
40-1977  3-18-77  Not_Included environmental conditions of subsidized housing
                               requiring equal administration of code
                               enforcement program; providing appeal
                               procedures; superseding Resolution No. 115-1975
                               Establishing horse patrol program; providing for
41-1977  3-25-77  Not_Included funding to program from salary savings in Police
                               Department
                               Determining that certain building or structure
                               at 200 Maple, N.E., within city limits is so
42-1977  3-25-77  Not_Included ruined, damaged and dilapidated as to be a
                               menace to the public comfort, health, peace or
                               safety
                               Determining that a certain building or structure
                               at 208 Maple, N.E., within the city limits of
43-1977  3-25-77  Not_Included Albuquerque is so ruined, damaged and
                               dilapidated as to be a menace to public comfort,
                               health, peace or safety
                               Determining that a certain building or structure
                               at 210 Maple, N.E., within the city limits is so
44-1977  3-25-77  Not_Included ruined, damaged and dilapidated as to be a
                               menace to the public comfort, health, peace or
                               safety
                               Determining that a certain building or structure
                               at 214 Maple, N.E., within the city limits is so
45-1977  3-25-77  Not_Included ruined, damaged and dilapidated as to be a
                               menace to the public comfort, health, peace or
                               safety
                               Determining that a certain building or structure
                               at 216 Maple, N.E., within city limits is so
46-1977  3-25-77  Not_Included ruined, damaged and dilapidated as to be a
                               menace to public comfort, health, peace or
                               safety
                               Determining that a certain building or structure
                               at 218 Maple, N.E., within the city limits is so
47-1977  3-25-77  Not_Included ruined, damaged and dilapidated as to be a
                               menace to public comfort, health, peace or
                               safety
                               Determining that a certain building or structure
                               at 220 Maple, N.E., within the city limits is so
48-1977  3-25-77  Not_Included ruined, damaged, and dilapidated as to be a
                               menace to public comfort, health, peace or
                               safety
                               Determining that a certain building or structure
                               at 1510 Tijeras, N.E., within city limits is so
49-1977  3-25-77  Not_Included ruined, damaged and dilapidated as to be a
                               menace to public comfort, health, peace or
                               safety
 
Res. No. Date Disposition Short Title
Res. Date Disposition Short Title
No.
50-  3-    Not        Determining that a certain building or structure at 1519 Copper, N.E.,
1977 25-  Included    within city limits is so ruined, damaged and dilapidated as to be a menace
     77               to public comfort, health, peace or safety
51-  3-    Not        Appropriating funds for purpose of land acquisition for Wyoming - Comanche
1977 25-  Included    Project
     77
52-  3-    Not
1977 25-  Included    Appropriating additional funds to complete Riverview Skill Center Project
     77
53-  3-    Not        Authorizing the Mayor to issue a license for distress sale to Arlene's
1977 25-  Included    Women's Apparel, 129 Montgomery Plaza
     77
     3-               Funds with appropriate federal and state officials or agencies; providing
54-  25-   Not        for City Council approval of certain budget revisions or changes in program
1977 77   Included    or activities included; authorizing Mayor to provide for administration of
                      Community Development Program
55-  3-    Not        Approving contract change order No. 2 for Sidewalk, Curb and Gutter
1977 29-  Included    Improvement District No. 4
     77
56-  4-    Not        Youth Information System with Governor's Council on Criminal Justice
1977 13-  Included    Planning; providing for appropriation to office of Youth Development
     77
57-  4-    Not        Authorizing submission of environmental impact assessment report for
1977 13-  Included    proposed General Aviation Reliever Air Facility at West Mesa Site in
     77               Albuquerque, Federal Aviation Administration
58-  4-    Not        Funds to Human Resources Program - Alcohol Traffic Safety Program for
1977 13-  Included    repaying federal government for disallowed expenses incurred in Alcohol
     77               Traffic Safety Program
59-  4-    Not        Funds to Police Department to allocate resources received under Title II of
1977 13-  Included    Public Works Employment Act of 1976 and reducing current revenues in
     77               general fund
60-  4-    Not        Grant to develop teacher's guidebook in environmental education with New
1977 13-  Included    Mexico American Revolution Bicentennial Commission; and providing for
     77               appropriation to Planning Dept.
61-  4-    Not        Cultural activities and reducing budget for Ilfeld Building; adjusting
1977 13-  Included    appropriation in Resolution No. 46-1976, as amended
     77
62-  4-    Not        Determining that a certain building or structure at 806 Bellamah, N.W.,
1977 28-  Included    within the city limits of Albuquerque is so ruined, damaged and dilapidated
     77               as to be a menace to public comfort, health, peace or safety
63-  4-    Not        Determining that a certain building or structure at 1500 Broadway S.E.,
1977 28-  Included    within city limits is so ruined, damaged and dilapidated as to be a menace
     77               to public comfort, health, peace or safety
64-  4-    Not        Determining that a certain building or structure at 1315 Walter, S.E.,
1977 28-  Included    within city limits is so ruined, damaged and dilapidated as to be a menace
     77               to public comfort, health, peace or safety
65-  4-    Not        “C.E.T.A.” Title VI Public Service Employment Grant with employment and
1977 28-  Included    training administration of U.S. Department of Labor; providing for
     77               appropriation to Office of Comprehensive Employment and Training Program
66-  4-    Not
1977 28-  Included    Air Pollution Control Grant With U.S. Environmental Protection Agency
     77
67-  4-    Not        Supporting a Special Task Force considering options available to establish
1977 28-  Included    community-oriented grocery facility in South Broadway San Jose Area;
     77               supporting concept of community-owned food cooperative
     4-               Authorizing Mayor to issue license for distress sale to Lamson Brothers Co.
68-  28-   Not        D/B/A Levines Department Stores, store number 7017-79 Montgomery Plaza
1977 77   Included    N.E., 7065-913 Sunset Rd. S.W. 7067-4910, Central Ave. S.E., 7089-4904
                      Fourth Street, N.W., Albuquerque, N.M..
69-  4-    Not        Authorizing notice for bids on joint water, sewer refunding revenue bonds
1977 27-  Included    ($8,445,000) and extension revenue bonds ($9,300,000), both series June 1,
     77               1977
70-  4-    Not        Authorizing notice for bids on sale of $10,485,000 general obligation
1977 28-  Included    bonds, series June 1, 1977
     77
                      Accepting preliminary plans, estimates of cost, assessment plat with
                      addendum and report as to method used in determining benefits; making
71-  5-9-  Not        provisional order of effect that work and improvement; construction of
1977 77   Included    certain streets and parts thereof and sanitary sewer and water lines,
                      within Albuquerque, N.M., Special Assessment District No. 191 in said city,
                      shall be done
72-  5-9- 4-3-11      Adopting Areawide Wastewater Collection and Treatment Facilities Plan as
1977 77               element of Comprehensive Master Plan
73-  5-
1977 16-  1-8-1       Resolution designating Albuquerque High School Urban Development Area
     77
74-  5-
1977 16-  1-8-2       Resolution designating the Robinson Urban Development Area
     77
75-  5-
1977 16-  1-8-3       Amending the Tijeras Urban Renewal Plan
     77
 
Res. No. Date Disposition Short Title
Res. No. Date    Disposition   Short Title
                               Making Adoption of Albuquerque Areawide
76-1977  4-4-77   Not_Included Wastewater Collection and Treatment Facilities
                               Plan contingent upon certain modifications in
                               draft plan; outlining these conditions
                               Solar heating system at Animal Control Center
77-1977  5-16-77  Not_Included with U.S. Energy Research and Development
                               Administration; providing for appropriation to
                               Animal Control Facilities Project
78-1977  5-16-77  Not_Included Funds to Albuquerque Museum Department for the
                               Abiquiu Project
79-1977  5-16-77  Not_Included Additional funds to Water Resources Department
                               Directing Gardner, Sweenhart, Inc., engineers,
                               to prepare, submit and file with City Clerk/
                               Recorder certain preliminary plans, estimate of
80-1977  5-16-77  Not_Included cost, assessment plats, addenda thereto, all in
                               connection with proposed construction of
                               improvements comprising Special Assessment
                               District No. 193
                               Accepting preliminary plans, estimates of cost,
                               assessment plat with addendum, method, used in
                               determining benefits; making provisional order;
81-1977  5-16-77  Not_Included work of improvement and construction of certain
                               streets, parts thereof and sanitary sewer and
                               water lines, Special Assessment District No.
                               191, shall be done
                               Accepting construction work comprising Special
82-1977  5-16-77  Not_Included Assessment District No. 189; approving final
                               adjusting change order No. 5; authorizing final
                               payment to contractor
83-1977  5-16-77  Not_Included Appropriating additional capital funds to Water
                               Resources Department
84-1977  5-18-77  Not_Included Adopting policies for provision of centers for
                               senior citizens
                               Funds for implementation of Community
85-1977  5-18-77  Not_Included Development Activities; amending previous
                               resolutions concerning appropriations for
                               program activities
                               Approving modification of prime sponsor's City
                               County Comprehensive Employment and Training Act
86-1977  5-18-77  Not_Included Title III, Summer Youth Employment Grant to
                               Continue Manpower Program into summer of 1977,
                               fiscal year 1977 funds from U.S. Department of
                               Labor; providing for an appropriation
87-1977  5-31-77  Not_Included Increasing appropriation for construction of
                               North Barelas Multi-Purpose Center for Elderly
                               Funds to special activities - city telephone for
88-1977  5-31-77  Not_Included fiscal year 1977 in order to pay for increased
                               cost of city telephone services
                               Funds for implementation of activities; amending
89-1977  5-31-77  Not_Included previous resolutions concerning appropriation
                               for community development activities
                               Corrections training project with U.S. Law
90-1977  5-31-77  Not_Included Enforcement Assistance Administration;
                               Corrections Department
                               Directing Molzen-Corbin and Assoc., Consulting
                               Engineers, to prepare, submit and file with City
                               Clerk/Recorder certain preliminary plans,
91-1977  5-31-77  Not_Included estimate of cost, assessment plats and addenda
                               thereto, all in connection with the proposed
                               construction of improvements comprising Special
                               Assessment District No. 192
                               Awarding the construction contract for Special
92-1977  5-31-77  Not_Included Assessment District No. 184 to McElroy Brothers,
                               Inc.
93-1977  5-31-77  Not_Included Appropriating additional funds to the Parks and
                               Recreation Department for summer concerts
94-1977  5-31-77  Not_Included Appropriating additional funds to the Museum
                               Department and authorizing admission fees
                               Appropriating Funds for operating the government
95-1977  6-7-77   Not_Included of the city of Albuquerque for the fiscal year
                               beginning July 1, 1977, and ending June 30, 1978
                               Approving and authorizing the filing of an
                               amendment to an application which has been filed
96-1977  6-7-77   Not_Included with the U.S. Department of Transportation for a
                               grant under the Urban Mass Transportation Act of
                               1964, as amended
97-1977  6-7-77   Not_Included Appropriating funds for the revision of the
                               city's Automated Financial/Personnel Systems
                               Approving the grant application of city of
                               Albuquerque's Summer Recreation Program as
98-1977  6-7-77   Not_Included provided through the Community Services
                               Administration (CSA); providing for an
                               appropriation to provide recreation through the
                               summer of 1977
                               Calling upon Mayor to request private proposals
99-1977  6-7-77   Not_Included for Resource Recovery Systems or Solid Waste
                               Collection and Disposal Systems, including
                               resource recovery
100-1977 6-21-77 5-1-50        Issuance of club liquor dispenser license to
                               Fleet Reserve Association, Branch 200
 
Res. No. Date Disposition Short Title
Res. No. Date    Disposition   Short Title
                               Grant agreement with federal aviation for funds
101-1977 6-22-77  Not_Included for airport taxiway, access road construction at
                               airport
102-1977 6-21-77  Not_Included Regulating adult establishments in downtown SU-
                               3 area; and amending Resolution No. 189-1976
                               Requesting Middle Rio Grande Council of
                               Governments to seek funding for planning studies
                               for development of an agricultural/industrial
103-1977 6-21-77  Not_Included complex, areawide solid waste resource recovery
                               facility and related activities; requesting
                               Planning Dept. to prepare a Preliminary Area
                               Development Plan
104-1977 6-21-77  Not_Included Adopting Gate Interim Study Committee
                               Recommendation
                               Summer Food Service Program for children with
105-1977 6-21-77  Not_Included Dept. of Education; providing for appropriation
                               to Parks and Recreation
106-1977 6-28-77  Not_Included Funds to special activities - Visitor and
                               Convention Bureau
                               Programming of funds for capital improvements
107-1977 6-28-77  Not_Included projects for two fiscal years beginning July 1,
                               1978 and ending June 30, 1979
108-1977 6-28-77  Not_Included Funds to Grand Center Project
                               Funding for study of development of centralized
109-1977 6-28-77  Not_Included communication center of all local law
                               enforcement agencies
110-1977 6-28-77  Not_Included Additional funding for Water Resources
                               Department
                               Adopting a proposed one-way frontage road system
111-1977 6-28-77  Not_Included for I-25 Between Menaul Boulevard and Tramway
                               Road
                               Relating to Senate Bill 96; requesting N.M.
112-1977 6-28-77  Not_Included Municipal League to join suit to declare bill
                               unconstitutional
                               Reducing fund balance to reflect elimination of
113-1977 6-28-77  Not_Included a receivable From Middle Rio Grand Council of
                               Governments
114-1977 6-28-77  Not_Included Funds for city projects from the capital surplus
                               account
115-1977 6-28-77  Not_Included Additional funds to the Fire Department
116-1977 6-28-77  Not_Included Additional funds to various city departments
                               relative to the fiscal year end 1977 closing
117-1977 6-28-77  Not_Included Determining reasonable notice of public meetings
                               of the Council
118-1977 6-28-77  Not_Included Funds for courts building project from the
                               capital surplus account
119-1977 7-18-77  Not_Included Reduced golf course greens fees for the
                               handicapped
120-1977 7-18-77  Not_Included Appropriating additional funds for open space
                               project
121-1977 7-18-77  Not_Included Determining the area of S.A.D. 191 to be
                               improved
122-1977 7-18-77  Not_Included Declaring land on which jail is located as
                               surplus
                               Amending established urban area boundaries to
123-1977 7-18-77 1-3-2         include tracts 2 and 3, Academy Hills
                               Subdivision
                               Approving and authorizing filing of application
124-1977 7-18-77  Not_Included for Therapeutic Recreation Program with N.M. H
                               and SS Department, etc.
                               Approving and authorizing filing of application
125-1977 7-18-77  Not_Included for a Municipal Public Defender System with
                               Governors Council on Criminal Justice Planning,
                               etc.
 
Res. No. Date Disposition Short Title
Res. No. Date    Disposition   Short Title
                               Approving alternate method of financing urban
126-1977 7-19-77  Not_Included renewal projects as provided by section 14-47-21
                               N.N.S.A., 1953, etc.
                               Determining that a certain building or structure
                               at 904 Third St., S.W., within the city limits
127-1977 7-20-77  Not_Included is so ruined, damaged and dilapidated as to be a
                               menace to the public comfort, health, peace or
                               safety
                               Approving and authorizing amendments to the
128-1977 7-21-77  Not_Included third year Community Development Grant Program
                               and grant application including the Housing
                               Assistance Plan
                               Appropriating additional funds to City Clerk-
129-1977 7-21-77  Not_Included Recorder Department for the October 4, 1977
                               election
130-1977 7-21-77  Not_Included Appropriating funds for Spay Neuter Clinic
                               Proposed project for Creamland Dairies, Inc. -
131-1977 7-21-77  Not_Included issue and sell industrial revenue bonds of City
                               of Albuquerque up to $5,000,000
                               Increasing Mayor's salary from thirty-four
132-1977 7-21-77  Not_Included thousand dollars to thirty-nine thousand
                               dollars, etc.
                               Approving and authorizing filing of application
133-1977 7-21-77  Not_Included for air pollution control grant with the
                               Environmental Protection Agency, etc.
134-1977 7-21-77  Not_Included City's intent to issue industrial revenue bonds
                               for St. Joseph Hospital
135-1977 7-21-77  Not_Included Establishing a six month pilot program for night
                               court; making an appropriation
136-1977 7-21-77  Not_Included City's intent to issue industrial revenue bonds
                               for Presbyterian Hospital Center
137-1977 7-21-77  Not_Included City's intent to issue industrial revenue bonds
                               for University Heights Hospital
138-1977 7-21-77  Not_Included Appropriating funds for purchase of land at West
                               Mesa Airport site
                               Termination of joint powers agreement for
139-1977 7-21-77  Not_Included operation of G.A.T.E. (General Addiction and
                               Treatment Effort)
                               Termination of joint powers agreement
                               establishing joint detention facility system...
140-1977 7-21-77  Not_Included and providing for negotiations for joint powers
                               agreement for the operation of the new detention
                               facility
141-1977 8-2-77   Not_Included Concerning regular municipal election - 4th Day
                               of October, 1977
                               Authorizing submission of a grant application
142-1977 8-3-77   Not_Included for Title XX funds to support a law office, day
                               services and a transportation program for senior
                               citizens
                               Reprogramming community development funds for
143-1977 8-4-77   Not_Included service assistance in public housing projects,
                               etc.
                               Determining that a certain building or structure
                               at 514 Lewis, S.E., within the city limits is so
144-1977 8-4-77   Not_Included ruined, damaged and dilapidated as to be a
                               menace to the public comfort, health, peace or
                               safety
                               Determining that a certain building or structure
                               at 1511 2nd St., S.W., within the city limits is
145-1977 8-4-77   Not_Included so ruined, damaged and dilapidated as to be a
                               menace to the public comfort, health, peace or
                               safety
                               Determining that a certain building or structure
                               at 1403 3rd St., S.W., within the city limits is
146-1977 8-4-77   Not_Included so ruined, damaged and dilapidated as to be a
                               menace to the public comfort, health, peace or
                               safety
                               Submission of application for 21 units of new
147-1977 8-5-77   Not_Included construction and 32 units of acquisition without
                               rehabilitation for the city's low-rent public
                               housing program, etc.
                               Application for Coal Avenue Overpass
148-1977 8-18-77  Not_Included Reconstruction Project with U.S. Department of
                               Commerce, etc.
                               Proposed memorandum of agreement by and between
149-1977 8-19-77  Not_Included Urban Renewal Agency and City of Albuquerque
                               NMA-1-1(LG)
                               Proposed memorandum of agreement by and between
150-1977 8-19-77  Not_Included Urban Renewal Agency and City of Albuquerque
                               NMA-2(LG)
 
Res. No. Date Disposition Short Title
Res. No. Date    Disposition   Short Title
                               Giving high priority in city union contract
151-1977 8-19-77  Not_Included negotiations to establishing a career ladder in
                               the Fire Department Emergency Rescue Squad, etc.
152-1977 8-19-77  Not_Included Accepting work - Sidewalk, Curb and Gutter
                               Improvement District No. 4 - final
                               Combining various capital projects for transit
153-1977 8-19-77  Not_Included and increasing appropriations for transit
                               facilities, and for acquisition of additional
                               real estate
154-1977 8-19-77  Not_Included Appropriating additional funds to the Personnel
                               Department
155-1977 8-19-77  Not_Included Approving and appropriating funds to the Central
                               City Maintenance Facility Project
                               Providing for the use of sodium pentobarbital,
156-1977 9-1-77  3-1-8         or a derivative thereof, for the euthanasia of
                               animals in the city
                               Filing of application for the Park Link from
157-1977 9-1-77   Not_Included Tingley to San Gabriel Park Project with U.S.
                               Department of Commerce, etc.
158-1977 9-1-77   Not_Included Appropriating additional funds to Water
                               Resources Dept.
                               Extending deadline for receipt of proposals for
159-1977 9-1-77   Not_Included providing resource recovery systems or solid
                               waste collection and disposal systems, etc.
                               Filing of application for South Valley Sewer
160-1977 9-1-77   Not_Included Project - Phase I Priority I Schedule III
                               Subarea 3 with U.S. Dept. of Commerce, etc.
                               Filing of application for the Old Main Library
161-1977 9-1-77   Not_Included Restoration Project with U.S. Dept. of Commerce,
                               etc.
                               Adopting policy that pedestrian protection be
162-1977 9-1-77   Not_Included considered for all overcrossing projects within
                               the City of Albuquerque, etc.
                               Filing of application for the North Hahn Arroyo
163-1977 9-1-77   Not_Included Improvements Project with the U.S. Dept. of
                               Commerce, etc.
164-1977 9-1-77   Not_Included Filing application for Museum of Albuquerque
                               Project with the U.S. Dept. of Commerce, etc.
                               Filing application for the Eighth Street Storm
165-1977 9-1-77   Not_Included Sewer Extension Project with the U.S. Dept. of
                               Commerce, etc.
                               Appropriating funds for implementation of
166-1977 9-2-77   Not_Included community development program activities for the
                               Palo Duro Elderly Center, etc.
                               Reprogramming community development funds for
167-1977 9-12-77  Not_Included women's crisis services programs and reducing
                               budget for housing rehabilitation, etc.
168-1977 9-14-77  Not_Included Supporting comprehensive full employment
                               legislation
169-1977 9-14-77  Not_Included Determining the area of S.A.D. 188 to be
                               improved
                               Accepting the preliminary plans, estimates of
                               cost, assessment plat with addendum and the
                               report as to the method used in determining
                               benefits; and making a provisional order to the
170-1977 9-14-77  Not_Included effect that the work of improvement and
                               construction of certain streets and parts
                               thereof, and sanitary sewer and storm sewer and
                               water lines, all within the proposed S.A.D. 193,
                               shall be done
                               Accepting the construction work comprising
171-1977 9-14-77  Not_Included S.A.D. 186; approving final adjusting change
                               order No. 6; and authorizing final payment to
                               the contractor
172-1977 9-14-77 2-5-2         Creating a Metropolitan Planning Coordinating
                               Commission
173-1977 9-21-77  Not_Included Requiring city to implement recommendations of
                               the State Fair Parking Problems Task Force
174-1977 9-21-77  Not_Included Appointment of precinct board members for
                               regular municipal election, October 4, 1977
                               Providing for the Mayor to have a study
                               conducted about building, plan checking and
175-1977 9-22-77 2-2-2         inspection services provided by those city
                               departments having jurisdiction over these
                               services, etc.
 
Res. No. Date Disposition Short Title
Res. No. Date     Disposition   Short Title
176-1977 9-22-77   Not_Included Adopting final recommendations of the South
                                Broadway Task Force report, etc.
                                Filing application for Albuquerque Coordinated
177-1977 9-22-77   Not_Included Team Project equipment with the Governor's
                                Council on Criminal Justice Planning, etc.
                                Filing application for continuation of Field
178-1977 9-22-77   Not_Included Service Career Development Program with
                                Governor's Council on Criminal Justice
                                Planning, etc.
                                Further extending deadline for receipt of
179-1977 9-22-77   Not_Included proposals for providing resource recovers
                                systems or solid waste collection and disposal
                                systems, etc.
                                Requesting the State Environmental Improvement
                                Agency to continue efforts to provide
180-1977 9-22-77   Not_Included assistance to alleviate insanitary conditions
                                in South Valley by maintaining priority status
                                of Phase 1, Priority 1, of South Valley Sewer
                                Project
                                Requesting Town Affiliation Association to
181-1977 9-22-77   Not_Included recommend city in Germany or Austria...to
                                become sister city of Albuquerque
                                Grant agreement with Federal Aviation
182-1977 9-26-77   Not_Included Administration for obtaining federal funds for
                                construction of Phase II of the South General
                                Aviation Area at airport
183-1977 11-16-77  Not_Included Appropriating additional funds to Mayor's
                                office for senior citizens
                                Determining that the certain buildings or
                                structures at 4511 Central, N.W., within the
184-1977 11-28-77  Not_Included city limits are so ruined, damaged and
                                dilapidated as to be a menace to the public
                                comfort, health, peace or safety and they be
                                required to be removed
185-1977 9-28-77   Not_Included Appropriating additional funds to the
                                Engineering Program, Public Works Dept., etc.
                                Approving and authorizing the attached
186-1977 9-28-77   Not_Included modification for the Comprehensive Employment
                                and Training Act (C.E.T.A.) Title II Program,
                                etc.
                                Requesting city to provide water and sewer
187-1977 9-28-77   Not_Included service for Albuquerque Garden Center at Los
                                Altos Park at no charge, etc.
                                Grant application for traffic signal system
188-1977 9-28-77   Not_Included demonstration project with Federal Highway
                                Administration, etc.
189-1977 9-28-77  1-8-4         Designating the Alvarado Development Area, etc.
                                Establishing interim guidelines and policies
190-1977 9-28-77  3-2-7         for use of public financing in urban
                                redevelopment, etc.
                                Approving and authorizing attached modification
191-1977 9-28-77   Not_Included for Comprehensive Employment and Training Act
                                (C.E.T.A.) Title VI Programs, etc.
192-1977 9-28-77   Not_Included Appropriating additional funds to the library
                                for copying services
193-1977 9-28-77   Not_Included Appropriating additional funds to the Legal
                                Department
                                Application for fiscal year 1978 Title I
194-1977 9-28-77   Not_Included Comprehensive Employment and Training Act
                                Program, etc.
                                Appropriating funds for implementation of
195-1977 9-28-77   Not_Included community development program activities for
                                South Broadway Library and Cultural Center,
                                etc.
196-1977 9-28-77   Not_Included Amending Resolution No. 151-1977, relating to
                                Fire Department Emergency Squad
197-1977 10-7-7    Not_Included S.A.D. 191
                                Application for Rio Grande Zoo Natural History
198-1977 10-26-77  Not_Included Museum with National Endowment for the
                                Humanities, etc.
199-1977 10-26-77  Not_Included Appropriating additional funds to Fire
                                Department from State Fire Fund Balance
 
Res. No. Date Disposition Short Title
Res. No. Date     Disposition   Short Title
                                Establishing a petty larceny program in
200-1977 10-26-77  Not_Included municipal court and making an appropriation for
                                operation of said program
                                Determining that certain invoices to the county
201-1977 10-26-77  Not_Included of Bernalillo are invalid and directing that
                                the amount of these invoices be removed from
                                city's list of accounts receivable
202-1977 10-26-77  Not_Included Appropriating funds to the City Clerks Recorder
                                to assist Board of Ethics
                                Appropriating additional funds to the
203-1977 10-26-77  Not_Included Department of Services for the City Building
                                Insulation Program and the City Parks Restroom
                                Program
                                Requesting that the undeveloped portions of the
                                Elena Gallegos Land Grant Area be acquired by
204-1977 10-26-77 1-9-12        public authority and be designated as open
                                space for public use in the Master Recreation
                                Plan, etc.
                                Fixing date of runoff election and specifying
205-1977 10-26-77  Not_Included the office to be filled and names of the
                                candidates therefor
                                Amending Resolution R-398 concerning City of
206-1977 10-26-77  Not_Included Albuquerque and County of Bernalillo Joint
                                Powers Agreement Regarding Operation of
                                G.A.T.E.
                                Accepting the preliminary plans, estimates of
                                cost, assessment plat with addendum and the
                                report as to the method used in determining
207-1977 10-26-77  Not_Included benefits; and making a provisional order to the
                                effect that the work of improvement and
                                construction of certain streets and parts
                                thereof and sanitary sewer and water lines, all
                                within the proposed S.A.D. 192, shall be done
208-1977 10-26-77  Not_Included Determining the area of S.A.D. 193 to be
                                improved
                                Determining that a certain building or
                                structure at 521 Dallas, S.E., within the city
209-1977 10-26-77  Not_Included limits is so ruined, damaged and dilapidated as
                                to be a menace to the public comfort, health,
                                peace or safety and that it be required to be
                                removed
                                Providing for implementation of the
210-1977 10-26-77  Not_Included recommendations in City of Albuquerque Traffic
                                Engineering Division Central Avenue -
                                University of New Mexico Pedestrian Study
                                Requesting Mayor to negotiate for the
211-1977 11-3-77   Not_Included acquisition of a building at 523 Spruce, S.E.
                                for use by Albuquerque Police Athletic League
212-1977 11-4-77   Not_Included Awarding the construction contract for S.A.D.
                                188 to Kent Nowlin Construction Company
213-1977 11-16-77 3-3-2         Electing method of payment for unemployment
                                compensation
                                Establishing the legislative policy of the City
214-1977 11-22-77  Not_Included of Albuquerque for 1978 Legislative Session of
                                the New Mexico Legislature
                                Appropriating additional funds to the Mayor's
215-1977 11-23-77  Not_Included office for Office of Intergovernmental and
                                Legislative Relations
216-1977 11-16-77  Not_Included Appropriating additional funds to the City
                                Clerk/Recorder Program
                                Determining that a certain building or
                                structure at 207 Santa Fe, S.W., within the
217-1977 11-28-77  Not_Included city limits is so ruined, damaged and
                                dilapidated as to be a menace to the public
                                comfort, health, peace or safety and that it be
                                required to be removed
                                Determining that a certain building or
                                structure at 2905 Broadway, S.E., within the
218-1977 11-28-77  Not_Included city limits is so ruined, damaged and
                                dilapidated as to be a menace to the public
                                comfort, health, peace or safety and that it be
                                required to be removed
                                Determining that a certain building or
                                structure at 221 Maple, N.E., within the city
219-1977 11-28-77  Not_Included limits is so ruined, damaged and dilapidated as
                                to be a menace to the public comfort, health,
                                peace or safety and that it be required to be
                                removed
                                Determining that a certain building or
                                structure at 123 Maple, N.E., within the city
220-1977 11-28-77  Not_Included limits is so ruined, damaged and dilapidated as
                                to be a menace to the public comfort, health,
                                peace or safety and that it be required to be
                                removed
                                Expressing City of Albuquerque's commitment to
221-1977 11-28-77  Not_Included maintenance of public open space calling on
                                Mayor to Have an Open Space Management Plan
                                prepared, etc.
                                Setting forth City of Albuquerque's intent to
222-1977 11-28-77  Not_Included issue industrial revenue bonds for Lovelace
                                Center for Health Services
                                Adopting Tramway Boulevard access control from
223-1977 11-28-77  Not_Included the Central/I-40 Interchange Area to Montgomery
                                Blvd., City of Albuquerque
                                Appropriating funds for Operating Subsidized
224-1977 11-28-77  Not_Included Housing Program for fiscal year beginning July
                                1, 1977 and ending June 30, 1978
225-1977 11-28-77  Not_Included Appropriating funds for Transit Intern Program
                                Amending Resolution 25-1974, relating to terms
226-1977 11-28-77  Not_Included of members of Citizens Advisory Group and the
                                Title of the Federal Act
                                Requesting Mayor to expedite development of
227-1977 12-9-77   Not_Included Model Neighborhood Area Rehabilitation Sector
                                Development Plan
                                Transit System study and analysis....to include
228-1977 12-22-77  Not_Included consideration of improved services to the
                                elderly and handicapped, etc.
 
 
 
Notes
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
1978 Resolutions
Res. No. Date Disposition Short Title
Res. No. Date    Disposition   Short Title
1-1978   1-4-78   Not_Included Reprogramming community development funds and
                               adjusting appropriations
2-1978   1-6-78   Not_Included Appropriating additional funds to the Department
                               of Housing and Development
                               Relating to Section 13(c) of the Urban Mass
3-1978   1-9-78   Not_Included Transportation Act of 1964 and federal operating
                               assistance grants NM-05-4001 and NM-05-4002
                               under the Urban Mass Transportation Act of 1964
4-1978   1-18-78  Not_Included Appropriating additional funds to the City
                               Clerk/Recorder Department
                               Requiring City of Albuquerque to provide posters
                               to food-service establishments detailing the
5-1978   1-18-78  Not_Included Heimlich maneuver for saving lives of
                               individuals choking on food and other objects,
                               etc.
                               Appropriating additional funds to the records
6-1978   1-18-78  Not_Included and Election Department for the records
                               management micrographics program
7-1978   1-18-78  Not_Included Appropriating funds to G.A.T.E.
                               Appropriating funds for capital purposes related
8-1978   1-18-78  Not_Included to the October 1977 general obligation bond
                               election
                               Approving and authorizing filing attached
                               application with the Federal Aviation
9-1978   1-18-78  Not_Included Administration for the purpose of obtaining
                               federal funds for high intensity runway
                               lighting, etc. at Albuquerque International
                               Airport, etc.
10-1978  1-18-78  Not_Included Appropriating additional funds to the data
                               processing program for additional personnel
                               Authorizing the Mayor to enter into a grant
                               agreement with the Federal Aviation
11-1978  1-18-78  Not_Included Administration to obtain federal funds for
                               construction of Phase III of the South General
                               Aviation Area, etc.
12-1978  1-18-78  Not_Included Prohibiting expenditure of city funds for
                               certain dues and memberships for city employees
                               Adopting New Foothills development policy and
13-1978  1-18-78  Not_Included extension of area to include the Four Hills
                               area, and rescinding the Sandia Foothills
                               development policy adopted on July 23, 1973
                               Appropriating additional funds to the museum
14-1978  1-18-78  Not_Included program for additional position and increase in
                               insurance premium Council Resolutions for 1978
                               Application for a photorecords project with the
15-1978  1-18-78  Not_Included National Historical Publication and Records
                               Commission, etc.
                               Repealing Resolution No. 204-1977 and
                               reaffirming policies established by the
16-1978  1-18-78  Not_Included Albuquerque/Bernalillo County comprehensive
                               policies plan for public acquisition of land in
                               the Sandia Foothills
                               Calling on Mayor to establish a pilot resource
17-1978  1-24-78  Not_Included recovery program in certain residential areas in
                               the city
18-1978  1-24-78 4-6-1         Establishing a program of volunteer services to
                               animals, etc.
                               Implementation of certain recommendations in
                               City of Albuquerque Traffic Engineering Division
19-1978  1-24-78  Not_Included Central Avenue - University of New Mexico
                               Pedestrian Study and the associated students of
                               UNM Resolution, etc.
                               Fixing time when objections to the assessment
                               roll for Sidewalk, Curb and Gutter Improvement
20-1978  1-24-78  Not_Included District No. 4 will be heard and causing such
                               roll to be filed in the office of the City
                               Clerk/Recorder
                               Distress sale, Andres M. Vigil Trust and Regina
21-1978  1-24-78  Not_Included C. Vigil Trust, d/b/a Superior Furniture Co.,
                               500 2nd St., S.W., Alb., N.M.
22-1978  1-24-78  Not_Included Determining the area of S.A.D. No. 192 to be
                               improved
                               Authorizing notice for bids on the sale of
23-1978  1-25-78  Not_Included $1,810,000 general obligation bonds, series
                               March 1, 1978
                               Authorizing the submission of an application and
24-1978  2-8-78   Not_Included proposal to State Board of Finance - Sidewalk,
                               Curb and Gutter Improvement District No. 4
                               Modifying and confirming the assessment roll for
25-1978  2-8-78   Not_Included Sidewalk, Curb and Gutter Improvement District
                               No. 4
 
Res. No. Date Disposition Short Title
Res. No. Date    Disposition   Short Title
                               Expressing city's intent to develop a victim's
26-1978  2-8-78   Not_Included assistance program; and establishing task force
                               to prepare proposal to be delivered to Mayor and
                               Council by 6-1-78
27-1978  2-8-78   Not_Included Appropriating additional funds to the Department
                               of Services for the animal control program
28-1978  2-8-78   Not_Included Amending Tramway East storm drainage project in
                               the 1977 capital improvements program
29-1978  2-8-78   Not_Included Appropriating additional funds to G.A.T.E.
                               Filing application for shelter for battered
30-1978  2-8-78   Not_Included women program with the Governor's Council on
                               Criminal Justice Planning
31-1978  2-8-78   Not_Included Initiating identification of neighborhoods and
                               neighborhood planning districts, etc.
                               Requesting Mayor to have prepared certain
32-1978  2-8-78   Not_Included information regarding streets, street
                               conditions, maintenance, etc.
                               Filing of grant proposal for the comprehensive
33-1978  2-8-78   Not_Included employment and training act (C.E.T.A.) Title III
                               youth community conservation and improvement
                               project with U.S. Dept. of Labor etc.
                               Filing of grant proposal for the comprehensive
34-1978  2-8-78   Not_Included employment and training act (C.E.T.A.) title III
                               competitive skill training improvement program
                               with U.S. Dept. of Labor, etc.
                               Filing of grant proposal for the comprehensive
35-1978  2-8-78   Not_Included employment and training act (C.E.T.A.) title
                               youth employment and training program with U.S.
                               Dept. of Labor, etc.
36-1978  2-8-78   Not_Included Providing for establishment of construction
                               priorities in special assessment districts
37-1978  2-8-78   Not_Included Requiring special assessment district status
                               reports
                               Reprogramming community development funds for
                               Lavaland Park and for the after school
38-1978  2-8-78   Not_Included recreation program and reducing the budget for
                               Valley Gardens Park and for the community center
                               program, etc.
39-1978  2-8-78   Not_Included Appropriating funds for appraisal of real and
                               personal property owned by the city
                               Requesting Urban Transportation Planning Policy
40-1978  2-8-78   Not_Included Board approve the advancing of the Chelwood
                               Bicycle Lane Project from the 1979-1983 element
                               to the 1978 element, etc.
                               Negotiation of contract with Pueblo of Laguna
41-1978  2-8-78   Not_Included for water supply to a Center for Handicapped
                               Indian Children
42-1978  2-8-78  5-1-13        Transfer of a liquor dispense license to Captain
                               Ahab's Seafood Restaurant, Ltd.
                               Filing of grant proposal for the comprehensive
43-1978  2-8-78   Not_Included employment and training act (C.E.T.A.) Title III
                               competitive youth incentive entitlement pilot
                               project with the Dept. of Labor, etc.
                               Authorizing Mayor to develop and present to
44-1978  2-8-78   Not_Included Council a comprehensive public information and
                               education system for the city
45-1978  2-8-78   Not_Included Authorizing the submission of an application and
                               proposal to State Board of Finance
                               Filing application for the North Valley sanitary
46-1978  2-8-78   Not_Included sewer lines construction project with U.S. Dept.
                               of Commerce, etc.
47-1978  3-1-78   Not_Included Supporting development of an Independent
                               Community College
                               Requesting the Mayor to conduct a feasibility
48-1978  2-24-78  Not_Included study of city acquisition of Monroe Jr. High
                               School; and requesting the Board of Education
                               not to dispose of same until city takes actions
49-1978  2-24-78  Not_Included Appropriating funds to the community development
                               program for services to battered women
                               Approving the basic program activities of a C.D.
                               program for the City: defining the areas of
50-1978  2-24-78  Not_Included concentrated activity and authorizing the Mayor
                               to prepare and submit a grant application for
                               submission to the Fed. Government
 
Res. No. Date Disposition Short Title
Res. No. Date    Disposition   Short Title
51-1978  2-24-78 4-1-8         Providing for the Mayor to develop a city
                               employee award program
                               Expressing the city's commitment to protecting
52-1978  2-24-78  Not_Included citizens from environmental hazards, and
                               providing for a city study relative to
                               protecting citizens from such hazards
53-1978  2-24-78  Not_Included Appropriating capital funds for the purchase of
                               parcel of land at Central Avenue and First St.
                               Requesting the Urban Development Agency to call
54-1978  3-7-78   Not_Included for proposals and prepare other urban renewal
                               plans for projects located in the Alvarado Urban
                               Renewal Area; and making an appropriation
55-1978  3-7-78   Not_Included Appropriating funds for study of tourist and
                               convention promotion activities for Albuquerque
                               Approving the filing of the second year work
56-1978  3-7-78   Not_Included program for C.E.D. grant for the Central
                               corridor with the U.S. Dept. of HUD and
                               providing for an appropriation
                               Approving the filing of the grant proposal for a
                               Governor's Discretionary Comp. Employment and
57-1978  3-7-78   Not_Included Training Act, Title I program with the ESC of
                               N.M.; and providing for an appropriation to the
                               O.C.E.T.A.
58-1978  3-7-78   Not_Included Appropriating additional funds to the Department
                               of Services to repair the convention center roof
                               Fixing the time when objections to the
59-1978  3-20-78  Not_Included assessment roll for S.A.D. No. 184 will be heard
                               and causing such roll to be filed in the office
                               of the City Clerk/Recorder
                               Making certain findings required by state law
                               relating to the Urban Renewal Plan for Phase I
60-1978  3-15-78  Not_Included Redevelopment Plan of the Alvarado Urban
                               Development Area; approving the Urban Renewal
                               Plan; and appropriating funds to the UDA from
                               the trust and agency tax increment account
                               Determining that certain real property located
61-1978  3-20-78  Not_Included at Louisiana Blvd. and Indian School Rd. is not
                               essential for a municipal purpose
                               Approving and authorizing the filing of
                               application for a roving rec. unit with the
62-1978  3-20-78  Not_Included Governor's Council on Criminal Justice Planning;
                               and providing for an appropriation to the P and
                               R Dept.
                               Committing the city to negotiate for acquisition
63-1978  3-20-78  Not_Included of open space in the Manzano foothills and
                               authorizing the Mayor to purchase such land.
                               Appropriating additional funds to the Dept. of
64-1978  3-20-78  Not_Included Services for the refuse collection and disposal
                               program and a refuse capital project
                               Approving and authorizing the filing of the
65-1978  3-20-78  Not_Included attached application for the museum purchase
                               plan grant with the National Endowment for the
                               Arts; and providing for an appropriation
66-1978  3-20-78 2-9-1         Establishing the law enforcement consolidation
                               task force, etc.
67-1978  3-20-78  Not_Included Approving change order No. 1 for Special
                               Assessment District No. 191
                               Appropriating additional funds to the Municipal
68-1978  3-20-78  Not_Included Court's municipal and judicial ordinance
                               enforcement program for the operation of a night
                               court
69-1978  3-20-78  Not_Included Approving change order No. 1 for Special
                               Assessment District #188
70-1978  3-20-78  Not_Included Approving the transfer of funds within the Water
                               Resources Dept.
                               Providing for an appropriation to the Dept. of
71-1978  3-20-78  Not_Included Finance and Management for a study of automated
                               data processing operations of the City
                               Calling upon the Directors of the Middle Rio
                               Grande Conservancy District to reconsider its
72-1978  7-5-78   Not_Included position and allow fences on its property where
                               applicable; to share with the city of
                               Albuquerque the responsibility of fence
                               maintenance
                               Approving and authorizing filing of application
73-1978  3-20-78  Not_Included for a grant for a solar system for public
                               housing with the Dept. of HUD and providing an
                               appropriation
                               Authorizing and approving a joint powers
                               agreement by and between the City of Albuquerque
74-1978  3-20-78  Not_Included and the N.M. Highway Dept. and providing an
                               appropriation to boards and commissions, clean
                               cities campaign
                               Supporting candidacy of Pat Baca, Council
75-1978  3-20-78  Not_Included President for election to the Board of National
                               League of Cities
 
Res. No. Date Disposition Short Title
Res. Date Disposition Short Title
No.
76-  3-7-  Not        Establishing lobo week in Albuquerque, etc.
1978 78   Included
77-  3-    Not
1978 20-  Included    Appropriating additional funds of $51,590 to the Environmental Health Dept.
     78
78-  4-5-  Not        Providing for the execution of a proposed memo of agreement between urban
1978 78   Included    renewal agency and the city
79-  4-    Not        Approving and authorizing filing of the application for a solar cooling
1978 10-  Included    system at the Museum with the Dept. of Energy and providing for an
     78               appropriation
     4-               Approving and authorizing the filing of grant application with the Governor's
80-  10-   Not        Council on Criminal Justice Planning for an arson investigation
1978 78   Included    communications equip. grant and providing appropriation to the Fire
                      Department
81-  4-    Not        Establishing a committee to seek fed. grant funds for an art in public places
1978 10-  Included    program
     78
82-  4-    Not
1978 10-  Included    Appropriating additional funds to the office of Youth Development
     78
83-  4-    Not
1978 10-  Included    Changing appropriation amounts for capital projects previously authorized
     78
84-  4-    Not        Reprogramming community development funds for various program activities and
1978 10-  Included    adjusting appropriations in Resolution 54-1977, as amended
     78
85-  4-    Not        Approving and authorizing filing of application for title III funds with the
1978 10-  Included    Middle Rio Grande COG through the Commission on Aging; and providing for an
     78               appropriation to the Albuquerque./ Bern. Co. office of Senior Affairs
86-  4-    Not
1978 10-  Included    Approving change order No. 1 for Special Assessment District No. 184
     78
     4-               Authorizing and directing submission of a proposal for 20 units of elderly or
87-  21-   Not        handicapped housing and 25 units of family housing under § 8...approving the
1978 78   Included    funding of said project through use and issuance of tax exempt bonds by a
                      non-profit corp. under § 11(b)
88-  4-    Not        Appropriating funds to the Albuquerque./Bern. Co. Office of senior affairs
1978 28-  Included    for operation of the Barelas multi-purpose activity senior center
     78
89-  5-1-  Not        Adopting the subareas master plan for the developing urban area of North
1978 78   Included    Albuquerque acres
90-  5-1-  Not        Approving and authorizing establishment of a fund for operating grants from
1978 78   Included    out side agencies, etc.
91-  5-1-  Not        Approving and authorizing the filing of application for a municipal public
1978 78   Included    defender system with the Gov. Council on Criminal Justice Planning; providing
                      for appropriation to executive branch program
92-  5-1-  Not        Appropriating funds to the Parks and Rec. Dept. for San Gabriel Park
1978 78   Included
93-  5-1-  Not        Establishing “chamber of commerce month” in the city as the month of may,
1978 78   Included    1978, and each succeeding month of may
94-  5-1-  Not        Approving and authorizing filing of grant application with the Governor's
1978 78   Included    Council on Criminal Justice Planning for a half way house; and providing
                      appropriation to halfway house project
95-  5-1-  Not        Reprogramming C.D. funds for women's crisis services
1978 78   Included
96-  5-1-  Not        Requesting that the Mayor implement a half-rate parking fee for motorcycles,
1978 78   Included    motor scooters and mopeds at all city-owned parking facilities in the city
97-  5-2-  Not        Urging the congress of the U.S. to amend House Resolution 5683 to extend the
1978 78   Included    boundaries of the Cibola National Forest
98-  5-3-  Not        Amending Resolution No. 82-1976 which adopted the Martineztown-Santa Barbara
1978 78   Included    sector development plan and C.D. plan
99-  5-3- 1-7-1       Amending Resolution 127-1975, as amended regarding C.D. area boundaries and
1978 78               titles
100- 5-3- 1-7-3       Amending Resolution 83-1976 which adopted the Los Duranes sector development
1978 78               plan and community development plan
 
Res. No. Date Disposition Short Title
Res. No. Date    Disposition   Short Title
                               Amending Resolution 216-1976 which adopted the
101-1978 5-3-78  1-7-8         Los Griegos sector development plan and C.D.
                               plan
                               Amending Resolution 190-1976 which adopted the
102-1978 5-3-78  1-7-6         La Mesa sector development plan and community
                               development plan
103-1978 5-3-78  1-7-9         Amending Resolution 63-1976 which adopted the
                               Boy's Club area redevelopment plan
                               Amending Resolution 191-1976 which adopted the
104-1978 5-3-78  1-7-7         West Mesa Sector Development Plan and Community
                               Development Plan
                               Amending Resolution 158-1976 which adopted the
105-1978 5-3-78  1-7-4         Downtown Neighborhood Area sector development
                               plan
                               Amending Resolution 112-1976 which adopted the
106-1978 5-3-78  1-7-10        North Barelas sector development plan and
                               community development plan
                               Appropriating additional funds to special
107-1978 5-3-78   Not_Included activities - city telephone for fiscal year 1978
                               to pay for the increased cost of City telephone
                               services
108-1978 5-3-78   Not_Included Repealing Resolution 121-1976 relating to the
                               exchange of certain real property with the USA
                               Approving and authorizing filing of application
                               to the N.M. state planning office for a federal
109-1978 5-3-78   Not_Included grant to continue the historic landmark survey
                               program; and providing for an appropriation to
                               the Planning Department
                               Prohibiting the acceptance of applications for
                               building permits for construction in the
110-1978 5-17-78  Not_Included University of N.M. area for the period from June
                               1, 1978 through Oct. 16, 1978 pending the
                               adoption of a sector development plan
111-1978 5-17-78  Not_Included Urging the Mayor to establish clean air day in
                               Albuquerque on a monthly basis
                               Establishing a 4-day work week and implementing
112-1978 5-17-78  Not_Included the concept of flex-time on a pilot basis for
                               selected city departments
                               Establishing the community development housing
113-1978 5-17-78  Not_Included rehabilitation revolving loan fund; making
                               appropriation to the fund; providing for future
                               appropriations
114-1978 5-17-78  Not_Included Appropriating additional funds to special
                               activities - visitors and convention bureau
                               Appropriating funds for environmental health
115-1978 5-17-78  Not_Included fish breeding pond project from the capital
                               surplus account
                               Appropriating additional funds to the urban
                               development agency of the city from the trust
116-1978 5-17-78  Not_Included and agency tax increment account for the purpose
                               of financing economic development planning with
                               respect to the preparation of a plan for the
                               Alvarado Urban Renewal Area
                               Declaring the intent of the city to appropriate
117-1978 5-17-78  Not_Included funds for the operation of the corrections/
                               detention program
118-1978 5-23-78  Not_Included Appropriating funds to a special activities
                               project
                               Causing the preparation of a request for
119-1978 5-23-78  Not_Included proposals to study the economic impact of a
                               restrictive quota system of liquor licensing of
                               Albuquerque and N.M.
                               Approving the attached application for a
120-1978 6-6-78   Not_Included comprehensive employment and training act Title
                               III, summer program etc.
121-1978 6-16-78  Not_Included Modifying and confirming the assessment roll for
                               Special Assessment District No. 184
122-1978 6-9-78   Not_Included Authorizing the submission of an application and
                               proposal to the state Board of Finance
                               Authorizing notice for bids on sale of
123-1978 6-9-78   Not_Included $18,060,000 general obligation bonds series July
                               1, 1978
                               Approving transfer of capital funds from the
124-1978 6-16-78  Not_Included Parks and Recreation projects completion fund to
                               the Sandia Vista Park Project
125-1978 6-16-78  Not_Included Approving an expansion in scope of previously
                               authorized capital projects
 
Res. No. Date Disposition Short Title
Res. No. Date    Disposition   Short Title
                               Appropriating to the library funds received from
126-1978 6-16-78  Not_Included the N.M. State Library Commission for fiscal
                               year 1977-78
127-1978 6-16-78  Not_Included Calling upon the Mayor to negotiate a contract
                               for the continuation of spay neuter services
                               Approving additional funds for the acquisition
128-1978 6-16-78  Not_Included of property for the North Valley multi-service
                               senior center
                               Approving and authorizing the filing of the
                               attached application for the museum purchase of
129-1978 6-16-78  Not_Included folk arts grant with the national endowment for
                               the arts; and providing for an appropriation to
                               the Museum of Albuquerque
                               Appropriating funds for operating the government
130-1978 6-16-78  Not_Included of the city for the fiscal year beginning July
                               1, 1978 and ending 6/30/79
131-1978 6-16-78  Not_Included Approving change order No. 2 for Special
                               Assessment District 188
                               Approving and authorizing the filing of the
                               grant application of the city of Albuquerque
132-1978 6-16-78  Not_Included summer recreation program as provided through
                               the community services administration and
                               providing for an appropriation to the Parks and
                               Recreation Department
                               Awarding the construction contract for Special
133-1978 6-16-78  Not_Included Assessment District 193 to Kent Nowlin
                               Construction, Inc.
                               Further extending the deadline for receipt of
                               proposals for providing resource recovery
134-1978 6-16-78  Not_Included systems or solid waste collection and disposal
                               systems, including resource recovery systems by
                               the City of Albuquerque
                               Authorizing the Mayor to issue a license for a
135-1978 6-16-78  Not_Included distress sale to Running Bear Trading Post, 1221
                               Central Ave. N.E., Albuquerque, N.M.
136-1978 6-16-78  Not_Included Authorizing the Mayor to issue a license for a
                               distress sale to Trans-NBH Association, etc.
                               Determining that certain city-owned real
137-1978 6-16-78  Not_Included property located at 217 Marquette, N.E.,
                               Albuquerque is not essential for a municipal
                               purpose
                               Fixing the time when objections to the
                               assessment roll for Special Assessment District
                               No. 191 ...made by the City Council ...together
138-1978 7-5-78   Not_Included with Wilson and Co., Engineers, competent
                               engineers will be heard and causing such roll to
                               be filed in the office of the City Clerk/
                               Recorder
139-1978 7-7-78   Not_Included Approving change order No. 2 for Special
                               Assessment District No. 191
                               Approving and authorizing the filing of the
                               attached application for a summer food service
140-1978 7-7-78   Not_Included program for children with the N.M. Department of
                               Education school food services division, and
                               providing for an appropriation to the Parks and
                               Recreation Department
                               Adopting a new water and sewer line extension
141-1978 7-7-78  3-5-18        policy relating to sewage treatment service to
                               Sandia Heights
142-1978 7-7-78   Not_Included Increasing Water Resources Department
                               appropriation
                               Authorizing and directing submission of an
                               application for 500 units to be administered
143-1978 7-7-78   Not_Included under the section 8 existing housing assistance
                               payments program to the U.S. Department of
                               Housing and Urban Development
                               Authorizing the Mayor to seek federal funds from
144-1978 7-7-78   Not_Included the law enforcement assistance administration
                               and committing the city to providing the
                               required matching funds
                               Establishing a permit parking program and
145-1978 7-7-78   Not_Included limiting parking to one side of the street in
                               selected areas in the vicinity of the State
                               Fairgrounds during the 1978 state fair
                               Appropriating funds for the acquisition of land
146-1978 7-7-78   Not_Included to increase water storage facilities and
                               decreasing certain other capital projects
147-1978 7-7-78   Not_Included Appropriating funds for the acquisition of 2,120
                               acres of West Mesa land for open space
148-1978 7-7-78   Not_Included Appropriating additional funds to various city
                               departments relative to fiscal year end 1978
149-1978 7-7-78   Not_Included Authorizing and directing submission of
                               applications for 68 units of turnkey I.
                               Reprogramming community development funds for
150-1978 7-7-78   Not_Included Public Housing Tenant Services and adjusting
                               appropriations in Resolution No. 54-1977, as
                               amended
 
Res. No. Date Disposition Short Title
Res. No. Date    Disposition   Short Title
                               Reimbursing the community development fund for
151-1978 7-7-78   Not_Included expenditures on the Central YMCA Park in
                               settlement of an audit exception by HUD
152-1978 7-20-78  Not_Included Determining reasonable notice of public meetings
                               of the Council
                               Reprogramming community development funds for
153-1978 7-19-78  Not_Included various program activities; and adjusting
                               appropriations in Resolution No. 29-1976, as
                               amended
                               Appropriating additional funds to the Mayor/CAO
154-1978 7-20-78  Not_Included program for a hearing officer for fiscal year
                               1979
                               Approving and authorizing the filing of the
                               attached grant application with the U.S.
155-1978 7-20-78  Not_Included Department of Transportation for a breath
                               alcohol testing mobile unit; and appropriation
                               to the Police Department
                               Approving and authorizing the filing of the
                               attached application to the Department of Health
                               Education and Welfare for federal funds to
156-1978 7-20-78  Not_Included implement an emergency medical. services system
                               in cooperation with the N.M. Health and
                               Environment Department; and appropriating funds
                               to the Fire Department
                               Approving and consenting to the transfer of
157-1978 7-25-78 5-1-12        liquor dispenser license No. 1441 to El
                               Escondido Lounge at 1916 and 1920 Central, S.W.
                               Setting forth directions for appropriation and
158-1978 7-25-78  Not_Included expenditure of revenues generated by the
                               municipal gross receipts tax ordinance of 1978
                               Approving the 1979 transportation improvement
159-1978 7-24-78  Not_Included program; annual and 3-5 year elements, as
                               prepared by the transportation coordinating
                               committee of the Middle Rio Grande COG
                               Requesting the Mayor to prepare initial plans
160-1978 8-2-78   Not_Included and estimates for a parking assessment district
                               in the Downtown CBD
                               Urging the Congress of the U.S. to extend the 3/
161-1978 7-26-78  Not_Included 22/79 deadline for ratification of the equal
                               rights amendment
                               Approving and authorizing the filing of the
                               attached application for a therapeutic
162-1978 7-28-78  Not_Included recreational program with the N.M. Health and
                               Environment Department and providing for an
                               appropriation to the Parks and Recreation
                               Department
                               Approving and authorizing the filing of an
                               application with the U.S. Department of
163-1978 8-11-78  Not_Included Transportation for a grant for a program to
                               reduce traffic accidents through speed control;
                               and providing for an appropriation to APD
164-1978 8-11-78  Not_Included Approving change order No. 2 for Special
                               Assessment District No. 184
                               Determining that certain city-owned property
165-1978 8-11-78  Not_Included located at Glenwood Hills N. Sub., is not
                               essential for a municipal purpose
                               Approving and authorizing the filing of the
                               attached application for laws 1978 (S.S.)
166-1978 8-11-78  Not_Included Chapter 4 funds grant, with the Middle Rio
                               Grande COG of N.M. and providing an appropriate
                               to the Albuquerque-Bernalillo county office of
                               senior affairs
167-1978 8-11-78  Not_Included Appropriating funds for support of the office of
                               youth development for fiscal year 1979
                               Approving and authorizing a joint powers
                               agreement by and between the City of Albuquerque
168-1978 8-11-78  Not_Included and the N.M. Natural Resources Department
                               Division of State Forestry, and providing for an
                               appropriation to the Parks and Recreation
                               Department
                               Approving and authorizing the filing of the
169-1978 8-11-78  Not_Included attached grant application with action for a
                               retired Sr. Volunteer Program and providing for
                               an appropriation to the Office of Sr. Affairs
                               Approving and authorizing an application with
                               the environmental protection agency for a
170-1978 8-11-78  Not_Included demonstration grant on subsurface injection of
                               sludge and providing for an appropriation to the
                               Water Resources Department, Liquid Waste
                               Division
                               Approving and authorizing the filing of the
                               attached grant application with the LEAA for a
171-1978 8-11-78  Not_Included field testing and evaluation program; and
                               providing for an appropriation to the Police
                               Department
                               Authorizing the Mayor to issue a license for a
172-1978 8-11-78  Not_Included distress sale to AMFAC Merchandising Corporation
                               d/b/a Liberty House
                               Requesting the City of Albuquerque to file an
173-1978 8-14-78  Not_Included Amicus Curiae brief in support of the plaintiffs
                               in the case of White v. Harris
174-1978 9-1-78   Not_Included Modifying and confirming the assessment role for
                               Special Assessment District No. 191
175-1978 8-30-78  Not_Included Authorizing the submission of an application and
                               proposal to the State Board of Finance
 
Res. No. Date Disposition Short Title
Res. Date Disposition Short Title
No.
176- 8-    Not        Approving alternate method of financing urban renewal projects as
1978 21-  Included    provided by Section 14-47-21 NMSA...and requesting other units of
     78               government approve the use of alternate method of financing
177- 8-    Not        Appropriating additional funds to the airport operating fund for fiscal
1978 22-  Included    year 1979
     78
     8-               Determining that a certain building or structure at 4405 Skyline Ct.,
178- 22-   Not        N.E. within city limits of Albuquerque is so ruined, damaged and
1978 78   Included    dilapidated as to be a menace to public comfort, health, peace or safety
                      and that if be required removed
179- 8-    Not        Determining that a certain building or structure at 2409 Rice, N.W.
1978 22-  Included    within city limits is so ruined, damaged...
     78
180- 8-    Not        Determining that certain city-owned real property located at Kirtland
1978 22-  Included    Air Force Base is not essential for a municipal purpose
     78
181- 8-    Not        Determining that a certain building or structure at 214 Cromwell, S.E.
1978 22-  Included    within city limits is so ruined...and that it be required to be removed
     78
182- 8-    Not        Relating to procedures for remanding appeals pursuant to the
1978 22-  Included    comprehensive city zoning code; and amending Resolution 217-1975 by R
     78               196-1976
     8-               Appropriating additional funds to the building construction inspection
183- 22-   Not        program for fiscal year 1979 to fund facility improvements including
1978 78   Included    phone installation and other expenses necessary for the centralization
                      of the building permit/plan check process
184- 8-    Not        Appropriating funds for the expansion of passenger facilities at the
1978 22-  Included    Albuquerque International Airport
     78
185- 9-1-  Not        Approving the attached application for a Comprehensive Employment and
1978 78   Included    Training Act Title III
186- 9-1-  Not        Determining that a certain building or structure at 820 Third St., S.W.
1978 78   Included    and that it be required to be removed
187- 9-1-  Not        Determining that the certain buildings or structures at 3906, 3908, 3910
1978 78   Included    and 3910½ Second St. N.W. and shacks within the city limits are so
                      ruined...
188- 9-1-             Amending Resolution No. 175-1977 to restructure the composition of the
1978 78   2-2-2       Construction Industry Advisory Committee and to make the advisory
                      committee permanent and to extend the deadline...
189- 9-1-  Not        Making certain findings required by state law relating to the Urban
1978 78   Included    Development Plan for Phase II Redevelopment of the Alvarado Urban
                      Development Area...
190- 9-1-  Not        Appropriating funds for design and construction of an Old Town visitors
1978 78   Included    center
191- 9-1-  Not        Authorizing the Mayor to issue a license for a distress sale to Joel
1978 78   Included    Marks d/b/a Turquoise Joe, etc.
192- 9-5- 1-8-5       Designating the University Neighborhood Area as an additional community
1978 78               development area
193- 9-5-  Not        Authorizing the Mayor to issue a license for a distress sale to the
1978 78   Included    Spread Shed, 2813 San Mateo, N.E.
194- 9-5-  Not        Authorizing the Mayor to issue a license for a distress sale to Walgreen
1978 78   Included    Co. 200 Wilmot Rd., Deerfield, Ill, d/b/a Globe Discount City
195- 9-5-  Not        Authorizing the Mayor to issue a license for a distress sale to Morse
1978 78   Included    Shoe Co. 555 Turnpike St., Canton, Mass, d/b/a Globe Discount City, 7100
                      Lomas, N.E.
196- 9-8-  Not        Establishing the Community development Housing Rehabilitation revolving
1978 78   Included    loan fund, etc.
197- 9-    Not        Changing appropriation amounts for capital projects previously
1978 15-  Included    authorized and appropriating funds for capital purposes
     78
198- 9-    Not        Transferring funds to provide for self-insurance in the area of auto
1978 15-  Included    liability
     78
199- 9-    Not        Appropriating additional funds to the Fire Department for the pilot
1978 15-  Included    project recruit class from the general fund for the fiscal year 1978-
     78               1979
 
Res. No. Date Disposition Short Title
Res. Date Disposition Short Title
No.
200- 9-    Not        Concerning the special municipal election to be held in the City of Albuquerque
1978 27-  Included    on Monday Nov. 13, 1978
     78
201- 9-    Not        Requesting the state Environmental Improvement Agency continue efforts to
1978 26-  Included    provide assistance to alleviate insanitary liquid waste conditions in the North
     78               Valley
202- 9-    Not        Appropriating additional funds to the records and elections program for the
1978 27-  Included    special municipal election to be held on 11/13/78
     78
203- 10-   Not        Appropriating funds to special activities for convention and tourist promotion
1978 4-78 Included
204- 10-   Not        Approving and authorizing the filing of the attached grant application for the
1978 5-78 Included    Social Security Act Title XI, competitive cooperation research and demonstration
                      project...
                      Directing Wilson and Co. Engineers to prepare, submit and file with the City
205- 10-   Not        Clerks Recorder certain preliminary plans, estimate of cost, assessment plats
1978 5-78 Included    and addenda thereto, in connection with the proposed construction of
                      improvements regarding Special Assessment Dist. No. 194
206- 10-   Not        Rejecting the construction bids for Special Assessment District No. 192
1978 5-78 Included
207- 10-   Not        Approving and authorizing the filing of the attached application for purchase of
1978 5-78 Included    land at the West Mesa Airport site and appropriating funds to the project
208- 10-   Not        Appropriating funds for support of the Department of Human Services
1978 5-78 Included
209- 10-   Not        Adopting the University Neighborhoods Area sector development plan and C.D.
1978 11-  Included    plan.
     78
210- 10-   Not        Adopting the policy that all new buses delivered after 10/1/78 be accessible to
1978 16-  Included    persons with impaired mobility
     78
211- 10-   Not
1978 23-  Included    Adopting the Lomas Blvd. Transit/pedestrianway project
     78
212- 10-   Not
1978 23-  Included    Adopting the Sawmill sector development plan and community development plan
     78
213- 10-   Not        Determination requiring the removal of building at 316 Virginia N.E., menace to
1978 23-  Included    public
     78
214- 10-   Not        Approval and authorization of US Department of Labor planning grant (PSIP)
1978 23-  Included    providing for appropriation to office of comprehensive employment and training
     78               administration
215- 10-   Not        Determination requiring the removal of building at 614 Arno S.E. as a menace to
1978 23-  Included    public
     78
216- 10-   Not        Programming community development funds to activities approved by Council;
1978 23-  Included    appropriating urban renewal surplus; adjusting appropriations in Resolutions
     78               196-1975, 46-1976, 54-1977 and 50-1978, as amended
217- 10-   Not
1978 23-  Included    Appropriating additional funds for support of youth development, 1979
     78
     10-              Changing approbation capital projects; amend priorities for parks and
218- 23-   Not        recreation, HCRS matching funds; authorize grant application for heritage
1978 78   Included    conservation and recreation matching funds; establish priorities for HCRS grant
                      application; provide appropriation to P and R Acquisition fund
219- 10-   Not        Approve and authorize filing of application for air pollution control grant with
1978 23-  Included    EPA; provide appropriation for...
     78
220- 10-   Not
1978 27-  Included    Establish permanent display regarding Double Eagle II
     78
221- 10-   Not
1978 27-  Included    Name new municipal court for the late Harry Robins, Judge
     78
222- 10-   Not        Name new general aviation “reliever” facility “Double Eagle General Aviation
1978 27-  Included    Reliever Facility”
     78
223- 11-   Not        Appoint precinct board members for special municipal election 11/13/78
1978 1-78 Included
224- 11-   Not        Determining requirement of removal of building 617 Coal S.W., and rear, menace
1978 2-78 Included    to public
225- 11-   Not        Approve city-county comprehensive employment and training act Title I (manpower)
1978 2-78 Included    1979
 
Res. No. Date Disposition Short Title
Res. No. Date     Disposition   Short Title
226-1978 11-2-78   Not_Included Approve, authorize grant application with EPA
                                for engineering design, treatment plant No. 2.
227-1978 11-2-78   Not_Included Appropriating funds for judgments, 1979
                                Approve, authorize grant proposal for C.E.T.A.
                                Title III, youth employment and training U.S.
228-1978 11-2-78   Not_Included Department of Labor; provide for appropriation
                                to comprehensive employment and training
                                administration
229-1978 11-2-78   Not_Included City-county, approve Title VI employment
                                program
230-1978 11-2-78   Not_Included City-county, approve Title II employment
                                program
231-1978 11-2-78   Not_Included Grant proposal for C.E.T.A. Title III, Youth
                                Conservation and Improvement Programs
232-1978 11-2-78   Not_Included Change appropriation amounts for capital
                                projects previously authorized
233-1978 11-2-78   Not_Included Determining requirement for removal of 619
                                Coal, menace to public
234-1978 12-9-78   Not_Included Establish golf course program, self-supporting
                                level objective
235-1978 12-6-78  3-8-3         Adopt policy relating to mobility impaired
                                regarding transit services
                                Directions for appropriation and expenditure -
236-1978 11-6-78   Not_Included gross receipts tax ordinance of 1978, repealing
                                Resolution 158-1978, revenues generated thereby
237-1978 11-17-78  Not_Included Determining requirement for removal of 232
                                Southern S.E., menace to public
238-1978 11-17-78  Not_Included Determining requirement for removal of 710
                                Broadway S.E., menace to public
239-1978 11-17-78  Not_Included MRGCD second phase solid waste resource
                                recovery facility
                                Citizen participation plan, community
240-1978 11-17-78 2-5-3         development program establish Citizens Advisory
                                Group repealing 25-1974, 126-1975, 9-1976 and
                                226-1977
241-1978 11-17-78  Not_Included Determining requirement for removal of 709
                                Miles Rd., S.E., menace to public
242-1978 11-27-78  Not_Included Determining requirement for removal of 1623
                                Menaul N.W., menace to public
243-1978 11-20-78  Not_Included Appropriating additional funds to zoo, for gift
                                shop
                                Appropriating additional funds to certain
244-1978 11-20-78  Not_Included programs for 1978 fiscal year actual
                                expenditures
245-1978 11-20-78  Not_Included Legislative policy of city for 1979 legislature
246-1978 11-20-78  Not_Included Approve change order No. 3 for Special
                                Assessment District No. 191
                                Fixing-time for objections to be heard by
247-1978 11-22-78  Not_Included Council, et al., for Special Assessment
                                District No. 188
                                Approve contract agreement for Huning-Highlands
248-1978 11-22-78  Not_Included with state Department of Educational Finance,
                                etc., provide for appropriation to the Planning
                                Department
                                Appropriating additional funds for the
249-1978 11-22-78  Not_Included operation of Water Resources Department, 1/1/78
                                to 6/30/79
 
Res. No. Date Disposition Short Title
Res. No. Date     Disposition   Short Title
250-1978 11-22-78  Not_Included Appropriating funds for capital purposes
                                Grant application for funds under Medical
251-1978 11-22-78  Not_Included Services Fund Act, Chapter 178, Laws 1978
                                appropriation for Fire Department
252-1978 11-22-78  Not_Included Contract agreement authorized and approved,
                                Kimo Theatre acquisition; appropriation
                                Approve and authorize, grant application with
253-1978 11-22-78  Not_Included FAA for Phase IV, South General Aviation Area
                                Paving, Taxiway T-3 reconstruction and security
                                fencing and landscaping
                                Approve, authorize grant application with MRGCD
254-1978 11-22-78  Not_Included under Older Americans Act, 1965, Title V,
                                provide appropriation for senior affairs.
                                Approve, authorize grant application, Phase II,
255-1978 11-22-78  Not_Included high intensity runway lighting, and
                                appropriation therefore
                                Concerning industrial revenue bonds in
                                connection with a proposed project for Pertec
                                Computer Corporation to issue and sell
256-1978 12-12-78  Not_Included industrial revenue bonds of the city of
                                Albuquerque in the amount up to $10,000,000 and
                                for the purpose of inducing said Pertec corp.
                                to acquire a facility...
257-1978 12-12-78 6-5-1         Designating neighborhood parks in accordance
                                with provisions of the criminal code
                                Authorizing the Mayor to issue a license for a
258-1978 12-12-78  Not_Included distress sale to Bertha Burkholder d/b/a Bert's
                                Fashion Classics
                                Making a determination to acquire lot 2 and
                                Lots 7-12, Blk. 13, real property in the
                                Huning-Highland addition, a community
259-1978 12-12-78  Not_Included development area; and appropriating fourth year
                                CD program income and the proceeds from the
                                sale of parcel 10C, Tijeras Urban Renewal Area,
                                for said acquisition
260-1978 1-8-78    Not_Included Modifying and confirming the assessment roll
                                for S.A.D 188
261-1978 1-8-79    Not_Included Authorizing the submission of an application
                                and proposal to the state Board of Finance
262-1978 12-5-78   Not_Included Authorizing the Mayor to issue a license for a
                                distress sale to F.W. Woolworth Company
 
 
 
Notes
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
1979 Resolutions
Res. No. Date Disposition Short Title
Res. No. Date    Disposition   Short Title
                               Directing Gardner Engineers, Inc. to prepare
                               submit and file certain preliminary plans,
                               estimate of cost, an assessment plat and an
                               addendum to the assessment plat showing the
                               amount of maximum benefits estimated to be
1-1979   1-3-79   Not_Included assessed against certain tracts and parcels of
                               land, all in connection with the proposed
                               improvements construction and reconstruction of
                               certain sidewalks, curbs, gutters and other
                               improvements pursuant to Sec. 14-32-1 to 14-32-
                               38, N.M.S.A. 1953
                               Amending Resolution 4-1977 which adopted the
2-1979   1-3-79   Not_Included Huning Highland sector development plan and
                               community development plan
                               Relating to residential housing for persons and
3-1979   1-3-79   Not_Included families of low and middle income; the financing
                               of such residential housing; and the policy
                               guidelines therefor
                               Urging the dominating committee of the National
4-1979   1-3-79   Not_Included League of Cities to select William H. Hudnut,
                               III, as the candidate for the office of second
                               vice president of the National League of Cities
                               Appropriating funds to the capital improvement
5-1979   1-8-79   Not_Included administration program, reducing appropriations
                               to certain programs, and appropriating transfers
                               to the general fund
6-1979   1-3-79   Not_Included Approving change order No. 5 for S.A.D. 188
                               Requesting the Metro. Criminal Justice
                               Coordinating Council to study the proposed move
                               of the Bern. Co. Sheriff's Department to the
7-1979   1-3-79   Not_Included Albuquerque Police Department Building and the
                               feasibility of a combined communication system;
                               and the feasibility of a combined Albuquerque
                               Fire Department and Bern. County Fire Department
                               Arson Investigation Unit
                               Approving and authorizing the filing of grant
                               application for a water conservation program
8-1979   1-3-79   Not_Included grant with the N.M. Interstate Stream Commission
                               and providing for an appropriation to the Water
                               Resources Department
                               Approving and authorizing the filing of the
                               grant proposal for a Governor's discretionary
9-1979   1-3-79   Not_Included Comp. Employment and Training Act (C.E.T.A.)
                               Title I program with the state of N.M. Human
                               Services Department and providing for an
                               appropriation to the office of C.E.T.A..
                               Approving and authorizing the filing of the
                               application for Energy Conservation mini-grants
10-1979  1-3-79   Not_Included with the state of N.M. Department of Energy and
                               Minerals; and providing for an appropriation to
                               the Environmental Health Department
                               Approving and authorizing filing of grant
                               proposal for the C.E.T.A. Title III Governor's
11-1979  1-3-79   Not_Included Youth Employment and Training Program with the
                               state of N.M. Department of Human Resources; and
                               providing for an appropriation to the
                               O.C.E.T.A..
                               Approving and authorizing filing of grant
                               application for a volunteer shelter bed program
12-1979  1-3-79   Not_Included grant with the N.M. Criminal Justice Department;
                               and providing for an appropriation to the Human
                               Services Department
                               Approving and authorizing the filing of a grant
                               application for parenting workshop grant with
13-1979  1-3-79   Not_Included the Levi Strauss Foundation; and providing for
                               an appropriation to the Human Services
                               Department
                               Approving and authorizing filing of the fiscal
                               year 1979 grant proposal for the C.E.T.A. Title
14-1979  1-3-79   Not_Included III youth incentive entitlement pilot project
                               with the Department of Labor; and providing for
                               an appropriation to the O.C.E.T.A.
                               Approving and authorizing filing of grant
                               application for a juvenile and delinquency
15-1979  1-3-79   Not_Included prevention grant with the N.M. Criminal Justice
                               Department; and providing for an appropriation
                               to the Human Services Department
                               Approving and authorizing the filing of grant
                               application for an air pollution control
16-1979  1-3-79   Not_Included equipment grant with the Environmental
                               protection agency; and providing for an
                               appropriation to the Environmental Health
                               Department
                               Making a determination to acquire real property
                               in the Alvarado Urban Renewal Area and
17-1979  1-8-79   Not_Included appropriating the proceeds from the sale of
                               South Barelas Industrial Park lands for said
                               acquisition
                               Fixing the time when objections to the
                               assessment role for S.A.D. 193 made by the City
18-1979  1-8-79   Not_Included Council of said city, together with Gardner
                               Engineers, Inc. competent engineers will be
                               heard and causing such roll to be filed in the
                               office of the City Clerk/Recorder
                               Expressing intent with regard to fiscal year
19-1979  1-23-79  Not_Included 1979 fund balances in the general and revenue
                               sharing funds
20-1979  1-23-79  Not_Included Approving change order No. 1 for S.A.D. 193
                               Concerning industrial revenue Bonds in
                               connection with a proposed project for the
21-1979  1-23-79  Not_Included Stewart/Walker Co. to issue and sell industrial
                               revenue bonds to the City of Albuquerque in the
                               amount up to $10,000...
                               Concerning industrial revenue bonds in
22-1979  1-23-79  Not_Included connection with a proposed project for the
                               Abbott Transistor Laboratories Inc. to issue and
                               sell...up to $10,000
                               Approving and authorizing filing of grant
                               application for Title III funds with the Middle
23-1979  1-23-79  Not_Included Rio Grande COG; and providing for an
                               appropriation to the Albuquerque/ Bernalillo
                               County Office of Senior Affairs
                               Establishing that certain CIP funds are to be
24-1979  1-23-79  Not_Included used for detailed design and Phase I
                               implementation of the Lomas Blvd. Transit/
                               Pedestrianway Project
25-1979  2-28-79  Not_Included Modifying and confirming the assessment roll for
                               S.A.D. No. 193
 
Res. No. Date Disposition Short Title
Res. No. Date    Disposition   Short Title
26-1979  2-28-79  Not_Included Authorizing the submission of an application and
                               proposal to the state Board of Finance
                               Approving and authorizing filing of grant
                               application for an air pollution demo grant with
27-1979  2-22-79  Not_Included the Environmental Protection Agency; and
                               providing for an appropriation to the
                               Environmental Health Department
                               Expressing the C of A's intent to prepare a
                               sector development plan for the North Fourth
28-1979  2-22-79  Not_Included Street Corridor, to designate appropriate
                               portions of this area as CD areas, and to
                               prepare the necessary CD plans
                               Establishing guidelines and policies for
29-1979  2-22-79 3-2-8         implementing funding reductions for city
                               services
                               Committing the City of Albuquerque to follow
30-1979  2-22-79  Not_Included President Carter's voluntary wage and price
                               guidelines
                               Approving and authorizing the filing of the
                               attached grant application for Title XX funds
31-1979  2-22-79  Not_Included with the New Mexico Human Services Department
                               and providing for an appropriation to the
                               Albuquerque/Bernalillo County Office of Senior
                               Affairs
                               Determining that certain city-owned real
32-1979  2-22-79  Not_Included property located at Skyline Rd. and Tramway
                               Blvd., N.E., Albuquerque, N.M. is not essential
                               for a municipal purpose
                               Appropriating funds to the Albuquerque
                               Convention and Visitors Bureau for National and
33-1979  2-22-79  Not_Included International Promotional Programs; and
                               expressing the intent of the Council with regard
                               to fiscal year 1980 appropriations
34-1979  2-22-79  Not_Included Appropriating funds for a community cultural
                               affairs program
                               Approving and authorizing the filing of the
                               grant application for an impact of BAT mobile
35-1979  2-22-79  Not_Included grant with the N.M. Department of
                               Transportation; and providing for an
                               appropriation to the Municipal Courts
                               Determining that a certain building or structure
                               at 211 Atlantic, S.W. within the city limits of
36-1979  2-22-79  Not_Included Albuquerque is so ruined, damaged and
                               dilapidated as to be a menace to the public
                               comfort, health, peace or safety and that it be
                               required to be removed
                               Determining that a certain building or structure
                               at 739 Commercial, S.E. within the city limits
37-1979  2-22-79  Not_Included of Albuquerque is so ruined, damaged and
                               dilapidated as to be a menace to the public
                               comfort, health, peace or safety and that it be
                               required to be removed
                               Determining that the certain buildings or
                               structures at 806 Edith, S.E. and rear garage,
38-1979  2-22-79  Not_Included within the city limits are so ruined, damaged
                               and dilapidated as to be a menace to the public
                               comfort, health, peace, safety and they be
                               required to be removed
                               Determining that a certain building or structure
39-1979  2-22-79  Not_Included at 1223 Second St., S.W. within the city limits
                               is so ruined...
                               Approving the city of Albuquerque/County of
                               Bern. Comprehensive Employment and Training Act
                               Title VI, Public Service Employment Program's
40-1979  2-22-79  Not_Included annual plan modification to conduct the federal
                               fiscal year 1979 Title VI program with fiscal
                               year 1978 and 1979 funds from the U.S.
                               Department of Labor; and providing for an
                               appropriation to the office of C.E.T.A.
41-1979  2-22-79  Not_Included Appropriating funds for the continuation of the
                               expanded transit system
                               Approving the City of Albuquerque/County of
                               Bernalillo Comprehensive Employment and Training
                               Act Title II, Public Service Employment
42-1979  2-22-79  Not_Included Program's annual plan modification to conduct
                               the federal fiscal year 1979 Title II program
                               with fiscal years 1978 and 1979 funds from the
                               U.S. Department of Labor; and providing for an
                               appropriation to the office of C.E.T.A.
                               Supporting the development of flood control
43-1979  3-12-79 3-5-42        protection in the Rio Grande Valley from
                               Bernalillo to Belen to equal that provided in
                               the city of Albuquerque
                               Authorizing the Mayor to issue a thirty-day
44-1979  3-16-79  Not_Included extension for a distress sale license to Bertha
                               Burkholder, d/b/a Bert's Fashion Classics, 3310
                               Centra, S.E.
                               Authorizing the Mayor to issue a license for a
45-1979  3-16-79  Not_Included distress sale to Steve R. Markham d/b/a Tails in
                               Action, 2508 San Mateo, N.E.
                               Approving and authorizing the filing of grant
46-1979  3-16-79  Not_Included application for a youth and family counselling
                               grant...
                               Approving and authorizing the filing of the
                               attached application to the Department of
                               Health, Education and Welfare for federal funds
47-1979  3-16-79  Not_Included to implement an emergency medical services
                               system in cooperation with the N.M. Health and
                               Environment Department; and providing for an
                               appropriation to the Fire Department
                               Approving and authorizing the filing of the
                               attached application for the City of Albuquerque
                               Bern. County Comp. Employment and Training Act
48-1979  3-16-79  Not_Included (C.E.T.A.) Title VII, private sector initiative
                               program (PSIP) planning grant for fiscal year
                               1979 funds from the U.S. Department of Labor;
                               and providing for an appropriation to the office
                               of C.E.T.A.
                               Approving and authorizing the filing of the
                               grant application for an intergenerational
49-1979  3-16-79  Not_Included program with the Levi Strauss Foundation and
                               providing for an appropriation to the
                               Albuquerque/ Bernalillo County Office of Sr.
                               Affairs
50-1979  3-22-79  Not_Included Changing appropriation amounts for capital
                               projects previously authorized
 
Res. No. Date Disposition Short Title
Res. No. Date    Disposition   Short Title
                               Requesting the United States Congress to reject
                               the Department of Transportation's proposal to
51-1979  3-23-79  Not_Included discontinue daily service by Amtrak to
                               Albuquerque, New Mexico, from Los Angeles,
                               California and Chicago, Illinois
52-1979  3-23-79  Not_Included Adopting the South Broadway Neighborhood sector
                               development plan and community development plan
                               Approving the basic program activities of a CD
                               program for the city; defining the areas
53-1979  3-23-79  Not_Included concentrated activity and authorizing Mayor to
                               prepare and submit a grant application for
                               submission to the federal government...
                               Authorizing notice for bids on general
54-1979  4-5-79   Not_Included obligation water and sanitary sewer bonds (water
                               and sewer revenue supported - subordinate lien),
                               Series may 1, 1979, in the amount of $12,825,000
                               Approving and authorizing the filing of the
                               attached application with the N.M. Criminal
55-1979  4-9-79   Not_Included Justice Coordinating Council for federal funds
                               to implement an arson crime laboratory; and
                               providing for an appropriation to the Fire
                               Department
                               Approving and authorizing the filing of a grant
                               application with the EPA and appropriating the
                               city's share of a grant award from the U.S.
56-1979  4-9-79   Not_Included Department of Commerce Economic Development
                               Administration for building and erecting a
                               treatment works sanitary sewer collection system
                               for portion of South Valley and providing an
                               appropriation to water resources
                               Establishing a police cadet class in fiscal year
57-1979  4-9-79   Not_Included 1980 and calling for consideration of a second
                               police cadet class during normal budget hearings
                               on the fiscal year 1980 budget
58-1979  4-9-79   Not_Included Appropriating funds for capital purposes related
                               to the 1979 sales tax revenue bonds
                               Providing for a Corrections-Dentention
59-1979  4-9-79   Not_Included Intermediate Holding Facility and Detoxification
                               Facility
                               Repealing the resolution dated 10/27/69, which
60-1979  4-9-79   Not_Included established a Committee for Water Resource and
                               Use Development
                               Authorizing and directing submission of a
61-1979  4-9-79   Not_Included proposal for 48 units of family housing under
                               section 8 new construction for the city's low-
                               rent public housing program...
                               Adopting a new sewer line extension policy for
                               sewage service to a two-acre tract of property
62-1979  4-9-79   Not_Included described as follows: TR, Land of Coda C.
                               Roberson as shown on the official map of the Rio
                               Grande Conservancy District property map Number
                               26
                               Approving and authorizing receipt of an
63-1979  5-16-79  Not_Included emergency grant from the United Way of Greater
                               Albuquerque; and providing for an appropriation
                               to the Department of Human Services
                               Approving and authorizing the filing of an
64-1979  4-10-79  Not_Included application with the N.M. State Planning Office
                               for a federal grant to continue the Historic
                               Landmark Survey Program...
                               Adopting a policy statement on the development
65-1979  4-10-79 1-3-3         of the Albuquerque downtown area as an urban
                               center
                               Requiring the development of a short and long-
                               range transit development program for the City
66-1979  4-10-79  Not_Included public transit operating system and requiring
                               annual update, review and approval of the plan
                               by the City Council
                               Repealing Resolution No. 173-1978, relating to
67-1979  4-10-79  Not_Included determining city-owned real property located at
                               217 Marquette, N.E., not essential for a
                               municipal purpose
                               A resolution concerning industrial revenue bonds
                               in connection with proposed project for Ethicon,
                               Inc. to issue and sell industrial revenue bonds
68-1979  4-10-79  Not_Included of the City of Albuquerque in the amount up to
                               $15,000,000 and for the purpose of inducing said
                               Ethicon to acquire a facility in order to bring
                               in from outside N.M. certain of its
                               manufacturing functions
                               Providing for appropriation; amending
69-1979  4-16-79  Not_Included appropriations and titles for capital projects
                               previously authorized
                               Authorizing and directing submission of
70-1979  4-23-79  Not_Included application for 253 units of Turnkey I new
                               construction for the city's low rent public
                               housing program...
                               Adopting a comprehensive plan policy statement
71-1979  5-16-79  Not_Included on development of the Coors Rd. corridor between
                               interstate 40 and Corrales Rd.
                               Setting forth the City of Albuquerque's intent
72-1979  5-16-79  Not_Included to issue industrial revenue bonds for the EV.
                               Lutheran Good Samaritan Society
                               Approving and authorizing the filing of the
                               attached agreement for a grant of transportation
73-1979  5-16-79  Not_Included funds under Chap. 115, Laws of N.M., 1978, with
                               the MRGCOG; and providing for an appropriation
                               to the Human Services Department
                               Determining that a certain building or structure
74-1979  5-22-79  Not_Included at 4012 4th St., N.W. is so ruined, damaged and
                               dilapidated as to be a menace to public
                               comfort... and be removed
75-1979  5-22-79  Not_Included Determining that a certain building or structure
                               at 324 Mescalero, N.W is so ruined... be removed
 
Res. No. Date Disposition Short Title
Res. No. Date    Disposition   Short Title
                               Declaring the intent of the City of Albuquerque
76-1979  5-22-79  Not_Included to appropriate funds for the operation of the
                               corrections/detentions program
                               Authorizing notice for bid on sale of
77-1979  6-26-79  Not_Included $10,500,000 general obligation bonds, Series
                               July 1, 1979
                               Approving and authorizing the filing of an
78-1979  6-14-79  Not_Included application with the Department of
                               Transportation, USA, for a grant under the Urban
                               Mass Transportation Act of 1964, as amended
                               Approving and authorizing the filing of an
79-1979  6-14-79  Not_Included application with the Department of
                               Transportation, USA, for a grant under the Urban
                               Mass Transportation Act of 1964
                               Establishing guidelines for the revolving loan
80-1979  6-14-79  Not_Included fund, part of the CD program; amending Council
                               Resolution No. 196-1978; and repealing Council
                               Resolution No. 139-1975
                               Appropriating funds for operating the government
81-1979  6-14-79  Not_Included of the City of Albuquerque for the fiscal year
                               beginning July 1, 1979 and ending June 30, 1980
82-1979  6-14-79  Not_Included Transferring of funds appropriated for employee
                               productivity development in fiscal year 1979
                               Approving and authorizing the filing of the
                               attached grant application for a summer food
83-1979  6-14-79  Not_Included service program for children with the U.S.
                               Department of Agriculture and providing for an
                               appropriation to the Parks and Recreation
                               Department
84-1979  6-14-79  Not_Included Appropriating funds for the purchase of parking
                               meters
                               Requiring the City of Albuquerque to study the
                               feasibility of assisting in providing
                               transportation for school students through high
85-1979  6-14-79  Not_Included school and to complete the study by 8/31/79; and
                               committing the City to work cooperatively with
                               the Albuquerque schools to determine whether the
                               City might provide some school transportation
                               Amending priorities for Parks and Recreation
                               capital improvement projects eligible for
86-1979  6-14-79  Not_Included heritage conservation and recreation service
                               matching funds; authorizing submittal of a grant
                               application for HCRS funds; and establishing
                               priorities for the HCRS grant application
                               Accepting the construction work comprising
87-1979  6-14-79  Not_Included Special Assessment District 188; approving final
                               adjusting change order No. 6; and authorizing
                               final payment to the contractor
                               Concerning the City of Albuquerque's intent to
                               issue, when and if it becomes legal to do so,
                               metropolitan redevelopment bonds in connection
                               with a proposed project for the old First
88-1979  6-14-79  Not_Included National Bank building in Albuquerque in an
                               amount up to $10,000,000 and for the purpose of
                               inducing the old Bank Limited Partnership to
                               acquire and rehabilitate said old First National
                               Bank building
89-1979  6-14-79  Not_Included Determining reasonable notice of public meetings
                               of the Council
                               Appropriating funds to improve cultural and
90-1979  6-14-79  Not_Included recreational opportunities by providing special
                               weekend and holiday transit service
                               Approving the description of properties to be
                               acquired and leased by the city in connection
91-1979  6-26-79  Not_Included with the Stewart-Walker Co. project for which
                               industrial development revenue bonds have been
                               authorized under Ordinance No. 43-1979 adopted
                               April 30, 1979
                               Accepting the construction work comprising
92-1979  7-12-79  Not_Included S.A.D. 193; approving final adjusting change
                               order No. 2; and authorizing final payment to
                               contractor
                               Concerning the regular municipal election to be
93-1979  7-24-79  Not_Included held in the City of Albuquerque, N.M. on Tuesday
                               the second day of October, 1979
                               Appropriating additional funds to the refuse
94-1979  7-23-79  Not_Included collection and disposal program in the refuse
                               disposal operating fund
                               Accepting the preliminary plans, estimates of
                               cost, assessment plat with addendum and the
                               report as to the method used in determining
                               benefits; and making a provisional order to the
95-1979  7-23-79  Not_Included effect that the work of improvement and
                               construction of certain streets and parts
                               thereof, all within the proposed Albuquerque
                               N.M. Sidewalk and Curb and Gutter District No. 5
                               shall be done
96-1979  7-23-79  Not_Included Transferring funds between Department of
                               Services' programs
                               Approving the 1980 transportation improvement
97-1979  7-23-79  Not_Included program: annual and 3-5 year elements, as
                               prepared by the Transportation Coordinating
                               Committee of the MRGCOG
                               Approving and authorizing the filing of the
98-1979  7-23-79  Not_Included attached grant application for a metropolitan
                               court consolidation plan with the N.M. Governors
                               Council on Criminal Justice Planning...
                               Appropriating funds for operating the
99-1979  7-23-79  Not_Included corrections and Detention Department for the
                               fiscal year beginning July 1, 1979 and ending
                               June 30, 1980
                               Authorizing the Mayor to issue a license for a
100-1979 7-23-79  Not_Included distress sale to Charles M. Jones d/b/a Rena's
                               Apparel, 3117-C San Mateo, N.E.
 
Res. No. Date Disposition Short Title
Res. No. Date    Disposition   Short Title
                               Appropriating funds for the acquisition of land,
101-1979 8-2-79   Not_Included capital equipment and capital improvements
                               during fiscal year 1980
                               Determining that a certain building or structure
102-1979 8-1-79   Not_Included at 131 Aztez, N.W., within the city limits of
                               Albuquerque, is so ruined... and that it be
                               required to be removed
                               Determining that a certain building or structure
103-1979 8-1-79   Not_Included at 2613 8th St., N.W., within the city limits of
                               Albuquerque, N.M. is so ruined,... and that it
                               be required to be removed
                               Determining that a certain building or structure
104-1979 8-1-79   Not_Included at 2617 8th St., N.W. is so ruined... and that
                               it be required to be removed
105-1979 8-1-79  6-4-1         Designating the Kimo Theatre as a city landmark
                               Approving and authorizing the filing of an
                               application to the N.M. State Planning Office
106-1979 8-1-79   Not_Included for a federal grant to continue the Historic
                               Landmarks Survey Program; and providing for an
                               appropriation to the Department of Municipal
                               Development
107-1979 8-1-79   Not_Included Appropriating additional funds to the Department
                               of Cultural Services, Museum Program
                               Determining that it is necessary to empower the
108-1979 8-1-79   Not_Included Mayor with the authority to comply with F.A.A.
                               regulations 107.0 through 107.17 and any future
                               amendments thereto
109-1979 8-8-79   Not_Included Regarding the designation of a signatory agent
                               for water pollution control projects
                               Approving a grant application with the F.A.A.
                               for the purchase of land and the construction of
110-1979 8-8-79   Not_Included certain improvements necessary for the proposed
                               West Mesa Airport; and providing for an
                               appropriation to the Albuquerque International
                               Airport
                               Approving the programming of funds for capital
111-1979 8-10-79  Not_Included improvements projects for 2 fiscal years
                               beginning July 1, 1980, and ending 6/30/82
                               Approving the application of the City of
                               Albuquerque/Bern. County Comp. Employment and
                               Training Act Title IV summer youth employment
112-1979 8-17-79  Not_Included program grant to conduct the 1979 summer program
                               with fiscal year 1979 funds from the U.S.
                               Department of Labor providing for an
                               appropriation to the office of Comp. Employment
                               and Training Administration
                               Appropriating funds to the Special Human Needs
                               Program administered by the Human Services
113-1979 8-17-79  Not_Included Department to be used for a Community Crisis
                               Services Center operated by the Bernalillo
                               County Mental Health/Mental Retardation Center
                               Approving and authorizing the filing of the
                               attached grant application for a Japan in
114-1979 8-17-79  Not_Included Albuquerque festival with the Department of
                               Health Education and Welfare; and providing for
                               an appropriation to the Cultural Services
                               Department
                               Approving and authorizing the filing of the
115-1979 8-17-79  Not_Included attached grant application with the
                               Environmental Protection Agency for engineering
                               design of North Valley Sewer Phase II
116-1979 8-17-79  Not_Included Appropriating funds for Saturday Night festival
                               Authorizing and appropriating funds to the
                               operations review program to provide staff for
117-1979 8-17-79  Not_Included the Albuquerque Energy Conservation Council;
                               promoting carpooling and bus ridership as an
                               energy conservation strategy
                               Appropriating additional funds for the expansion
118-1979 7-16-79  Not_Included of passenger facilities at the Albuquerque
                               International Airport
119-1979 8-17-79  Not_Included Awarding the construction contract for S.A.D.
                               No. 192 to Co-Con, Inc.
                               Approving and authorizing the filing of the
                               attached application for the Museum aid-to-
120-1979 8-27-79  Not_Included special exhibitions grant from the National
                               Endowment for the Arts; and providing for an
                               appropriation to the Cultural Services
                               Department
                               Approving and authorizing the filing of the
                               attached grants applications for artist's
121-1979 8-27-79  Not_Included workshops in Sr. Centers Pilot Project and
                               Theatre Arts for Sr. Citizens with the N.M. Arts
                               Division; and providing for an appropriation to
                               the Human Services Department
122-1979 8-27-79 6-4-2         Designating the Old Albuquerque Airport as a
                               city landmark
                               Appropriating to the Cultural Services
123-1979 8-27-79  Not_Included Department funds received from the N.M. State
                               Library Commission for fiscal year 1980
                               Appropriating additional funds for the operation
124-1979 8-27-79  Not_Included of the Water Resources Department, City of
                               Albuquerque for the fiscal year beginning July
                               1, 1978 and ending June 30, 1979
                               Adopting a comprehensive plan policy statement
                               of intent to plan, design, and develop a second
                               arterial between the Rio Rancho Community and I-
125-1979 8-27-79  Not_Included 40; and to provide for the protection of the
                               West Mesa Escarpment as a unique environmental
                               feature affected by urban development related to
                               the proposed road
 
Res. No. Date Disposition Short Title
Res. Date Disposition Short Title
No.
                      Approving and authorizing the filing of the attached fiscal years 1979-
126- 8-    Not        1980 grant proposal for the Comprehensive Employment and Training Act
1979 27-  Included    Title IV Youth Incentive Entitlement Pilot Project Enrichment Program
     79               with the U.S. Department of Labor; and providing for an appropriation to
                      the O.C.E.T.A.
127- 8-    Not        Approving and authorizing the filing of the attached application for an
1979 27-  Included    action grant; and providing for an appropriation to the Department of
     79               Human Services/Office of Sr. Affairs
128- 8-    Not        Approving and authorizing the filing of a grant application for HB-2 from
1979 27-  Included    Laws 1979, Chapter 404, funds with the MRGCOG; and providing for an
     79               appropriation to the Department of Human Services/Office of Sr. Affairs
     8-               Approving alternate method of financing urban renewal projects as
129- 27-   Not        provided by § 3-46-45 NMSA (1978 comp.) as amended, and requesting other
1979 79   Included    units of government to approve the use of alternate method of financing,
                      all approvals to be effective 9/1/79
130- 8-    Not        Accepting the construction work comprising S.A.D. 191; approving final
1979 27-  Included    adjusting change order No. 4; and authorizing final payment to the
     79               contractor
     8-               Making certain findings and determinations pursuant to the metropolitan
131- 27-   Not        redevelopment code; and authorizing and directing the Albuquerque
1979 79   Included    Metropolitan Development Agency to prepare a metro redevelopment plan(s)
                      for the Alvarado Metropolitan Redevelopment Area
132- 8-    Not        Establishing a permit parking program and limiting parking to one side of
1979 27-  Included    the street in selected areas in the vicinity of the state fairgrounds
     79               during the 1979 state fair
     8-               Relating to industrial development revenue bonds payable from project
133- 27-   Not        rentals by the EV. Lutheran Good Samaritan Society; making a
1979 79   Included    determination as to the sufficiency of rentals of the project; and
                      ratifying certain actions heretofore taken
134- 8-    Not        Urging that the N.M. Municipal League Nominating Committee select
1979 27-  Included    Albuquerque City Councillor Tom Hoover as a candidate for the office of
     79               VP. of the Municipal League for 1979-1980
135- 9-    Not
1979 13-  Included    Appropriating funds for a campaign and election auditor
     79
136- 9-    Not        Approving general guidelines for Albuquerque Downtown Development Loan
1979 13-  Included    Pool and appropriating C.D. funds to the loan pool
     79
     9-               Approving and authorizing the filing of the attached grant application
137- 19-   Not        for a corrections- detention GED, job skills and job placement program
1979 79   Included    with the National Institute of Corrections and providing for an
                      appropriation to the Department of Corrections and Detention
     9-               Approving and authorizing the filing of a grant application for SB-88
138- 25-   Not        funds, Laws 1979, Chapter 230, for a Sr. Citizen nutrition program with
1979 79   Included    the MRGCOG, and providing for an appropriation to the Department of Human
                      Services/ Albuquerque-Bern. County office of Sr. Affairs
139- 9-    Not        Authorizing architectural services for the development of a 5-year master
1979 25-  Included    plan for refurbishing, remodeling and redecorating City Hall;
     79               appropriating money for architectural services.
140- 9-    Not        Providing for an appropriation for the library program for fiscal year
1979 25-  Included    1980
     79
141- 9-    Not        Approving and authorizing the filing of the attached grant application
1979 25-  Included    for an air pollution control grant with the EPA; and providing for an
     79               appropriation to the Environmental Health Department
142- 9-               Amending established urban area of the metropolitan areas and urban
1979 25-  1-3-2       centers plan to include Lots 1, 2 and 3, Blk. 2, Unit 29, Volcano Cliffs
     79               subdivision
143- 9-    Not        Approving and authorizing the filing of the attached grant and providing
1979 25-  Included    for an appropriation to the O.C.E.T.A.
     79
144- 9-    Not        Changing appropriation amounts for capital and C.D. projects previously
1979 25-  Included    authorized
     79
                      Concerning the city of Albuquerque, N.M.'s intent to issue, when and if
     9-               it becomes legal to do so, metropolitan redevelopment bonds in connection
145- 25-   Not        with a proposed project for the Springer Warehouse in Albuquerque, in an
1979 79   Included    amount up to $10,000,000 and for the purpose of inducing the Auric
                      Partners, Ltd., limited partnership to acquire and rehabilitate said
                      Springer Warehouse
146- 9-    Not
1979 25-  Included    Providing for an appropriation for the N.M. Municipal League
     79
147- 10-   Not        Fixing November 6, 1979 as the date of the runoff election and specifying
1979 22-  Included    the office to be filled and the names of the candidates
     79
148- 10-   Not
1979 22-  Included    Appropriating additional funds to the elections program
     79
149- 10-              Adopting the St. Joseph Hospital/Civic Auditorium area sector development
1979 22-  1-7-16      plan as an amendment to the U.D. plan for the Civic Auditorium area.
     79
150- 10-   Not
1979 22-  Included    Calling for a feasibility study of solar energy for city-owned buildings
     79
 
Res. No. Date Disposition Short Title
Res. No. Date     Disposition   Short Title
                                Establishing the areas of Central Ave. and west
151-1979 10-22-79  Not_Included of the Rio Grande River as a priority area for
                                the single family mortgage purchase program
                                Directing Gordon Herkenhoff and Assoc, Inc.
                                Engineers, to prepare, submit and file with the
152-1979 10-22-79  Not_Included City Clerk/Recorder certain preliminary plans,
                                estimate of cost, assessment plats setting
                                forth the basis for assessment and addenda to
                                the assessment plats
                                Appropriating additional funds to the
153-1979 10-22-79  Not_Included Department of Services Vehicle Maintenance
                                Program for the acquisition of a mobile fuel
                                storage system
                                Authorizing the Mayor to issue a license for a
154-1979 10-22-79  Not_Included distress sale to the Carpetman, a division of
                                Raby Floor Covering, Inc., 1102 Mountain Rd.,
                                N.W.
                                Declaring certain city-owned property not
155-1979 11-1-79   Not_Included essential for municipal purpose and authorizing
                                transfer to urban development agency
                                Fixing time when objections to roll for S.A.D.
156-1979 11-2-79   Not_Included 192 together with Molzen-Corbin will be heard
                                and causing roll to be filed in office of City
                                Clerk/Recorder
                                Directing Molzen-Corbin to prepare, submit and
                                file with City Clerk/Recorder certain
157-1979 11-2-79   Not_Included preliminary plans, estimate of cost, assessment
                                plats and addenda in connection with proposed
                                construction of improvements comprising S.A.D.
                                196
                                Accepting preliminary plans, estimates of cost,
                                assessment plat, etc. as to method used
158-1979 11-2-79   Not_Included determining benefits and making provisional
                                order of effect that work of improvement and
                                construction of streets, sewer and water lines
                                within S.A.D. 196 shall be done
                                Appropriating funds to Urban Development Agency
159-1979 11-5-79   Not_Included from trust and agency tax increment for purpose
                                of financing contractual services with
                                Albuquerque Center and for dues in center
                                Authorizing and approving filing of grant
                                applications with Metropolitan Criminal Justice
160-1979 11-5-79   Not_Included Council and Governor's Council for Crime
                                Prevention Mobile Classroom van. Appropriation
                                to Department of Services
                                Approving filing of grant for education and
161-1979 11-5-79   Not_Included prevention of child abuse and neglect with
                                Department of Health, Education and Welfare to
                                Department of Human Services
                                Approving 1980 grant for C.E.T.A. Title IV
162-1979 11-5-79   Not_Included project with U.S. Department of Labor to Office
                                of C.E.T.A.
                                Authorizing application of Municipal Public
163-1979 11-5-79   Not_Included Defender System with Governor's Council on
                                Criminal Justice and providing funds to
                                Municipal Court
164-1979 11-5-79   Not_Included Appropriating funds to Civic Plaza use by non-
                                profit organizations
                                Establishing legislative policy of city for
165-1979 11-5-79   Not_Included 1980 legislative session of New Mexico
                                legislature
                                Requesting Mayor to cause development of
166-1979 11-5-79   Not_Included surface drainage policies for submission to
                                Council by 1-1-80
                                Approving grant for Urban Forester with N.M.
167-1979 11-5-79   Not_Included Natural Resources Department and providing
                                appropriation to Parks and Recreation
                                Department
                                Approving agreement with N.M. Department of
                                Finance and Administration (historic
168-1979 11-5-79   Not_Included preservation program) to reimburse city for
                                Kimo Theatre and providing appropriation to
                                Community Development Fund
                                State law findings regarding metropolitan
169-1979 10-16-79  Not_Included redevelopment plan for Project I - old First
                                National Bank building in Alvarado metropolitan
                                redevelopment and approving plan
170-1979 10-16-79  Not_Included Intent to issue metropolitan redevelopment
                                bonds for Rosenwald building up to $2,000,000
171-1979 11-5-79   Not_Included Joint agreement between city and Albuquerque
                                Center, Inc.
172-1979 11-15-79 3-3-4         20 year retirement for sworn members of
                                Albuquerque Police Department
173-1979 12-28-79  Not_Included Modifying assessment roll for S.A.D. 192
174-1979 11-26-79  Not_Included Condemnation of 523 Rio Grande, N.W.
175-1979 11-27-79  Not_Included Appropriating funds to Municipal Court for
                                additional secretaries for judges
 
Res. No. Date Disposition Short Title
Res. No. Date     Disposition   Short Title
176-1979 11-27-79  Not_Included Proposal to State Board of Finance
177-1979 12-12-79  Not_Included Appointing Patrick J. Baca to Board of New
                                Mexico Municipal League
178-1979 12-12-79  Not_Included Changing appropriation amounts for the Courts
                                Building
                                Accepting construction work on S.A.D. 184,
179-1979 12-12-79  Not_Included approving final change order and authorizing
                                payment to contractor
                                Urging state legislature to support state
180-1979 12-12-79  Not_Included funding for North and South Valley Area water
                                and sewer systems
                                Requesting Governor King and the legislature to
181-1979 12-12-79  Not_Included reinstate funding for Title XX funds for
                                Hogares, Villa Santa Maria, Women's Community
                                Association and Albuquerque child care centers
                                Approving grant for reading materials for
182-1979 12-12-79  Not_Included Detention Center, appropriation to Department
                                of Services
183-1979 12-12-79  Not_Included Condemnation at 1505, 1507 Central, N.W. and
                                112 Laguna, N.W.
184-1979 12-12-79  Not_Included Condemnation at 4813 Central, N.W.
                                Authorizing filing of grant application for
185-1979 12-12-79  Not_Included urban library with state library, appropriation
                                to Cultural Services Department
                                Grant application with Environmental Protection
186-1979 12-12-79  Not_Included Agency for engineering design of South Valley
                                Phase I and Mountainview Step 2, appropriation
                                to Valley Sewer Fund
187-1979 12-12-79  Not_Included Condemnation at 5014 4th St., N.W.
188-1979 12-12-79  Not_Included Appropriating funds for capital purposes, Oct.
                                1979 bond election
189-1979 12-12-79  Not_Included Funding for construction of holding and
                                detoxification facility at Detention Center
                                Approving grant for telecommunications system
190-1979 12-12-79  Not_Included upgrade with Criminal Justice Department of
                                N.M., appropriation to Police Department
191-1979 12-12-79  Not_Included Metropolitan redevelopment bonds for Plaza Maya
                                up to $10,000,000 for building
                                Metropolitan redevelopment bonds for Old
192-1979 12-12-79  Not_Included Albuquerque High School up to $10,000,000 to
                                rehabilitate south portion
                                Metropolitan redevelopment bonds for Old
193-1979 12-12-79  Not_Included Albuquerque High School up to $10,000,000 to
                                rehabilitate north portion
194-1979 12-12-79  Not_Included Funds for grant pick-up of Corrections Officer
                                (BAT mobile)
195-1979 12-14-79  Not_Included Funds to Community Cultural Affairs Program by
                                performing arts groups
                                Program to identify points of cultural,
                                historical, recreational, and other centers of
196-1979 12-18-79  Not_Included interest and to design and place a standard
                                graphic symbol along routes of these centers of
                                interest
                                Grant with U.S. Department of Transportation
197-1979 12-20-79  Not_Included for program to reduce traffic accidents through
                                officer training and public awareness,
                                appropriation to Police Department
                                Metropolitan redevelopment bonds for El Fidel
198-1979 12-20-79  Not_Included Hotel up to $10,.000,000 to rehabilitate
                                property
199-1979 12-20-79 6-4-3         Designating Whittlesey House a city landmark
200-1979 12-20-79 6-4-4         Designating Old Main Library as city landmark
201-1979 12-20-79  Not_Included Additional funds to parks and recreation for
                                specialized recreational programs
202-1979 12-20-79  Not_Included Appropriating $110,000 for retirement of Valley
                                Gardens Sanitation District Bonds in advance
                                Appropriation to Police Department to hold
203-1979 12-20-79  Not_Included assessment centers for sergeant and lieutenant
                                promotion in January 1980
                                Requesting U.S. Department of Transportation
                                and Middle Rio Grande Council of Governments to
204-1979 12-28-79  Not_Included accelerate completion of interim safety and
                                capacity increase improvements for interchange
                                between I-40 and I-25 for reconstruction of
                                facility to higher level of safety
 
 
 
Notes
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
1980 Resolutions
Res. No. Date Disposition Short Title
Res. No. Date    Disposition   Short Title
                               Approving and authorizing the filing of the
                               attached grant application for historic
1-1980   1-7-80   Not_Included architecture in Old Town Publication Project
                               from N.M. Humanities Council; providing for
                               appropriation to Cultural Services Department
2-1980   1-7-80   Not_Included Approving and authorizing grant application for
                               a Japan in Albuquerque Festival
                               Determining that 10 parcels of city-owned
3-1980   1-7-80   Not_Included property are not essential for a municipal
                               purpose
                               Making certain findings and determinations
4-1980   1-7-80   Not_Included regarding metropolitan redevelopment code; Old
                               Albuquerque High School
5-1980   1-7-80   Not_Included Appropriating funds to the corrections and
                               detention program for 12 transportation officers
                               Concerning industrial revenue bonds regarding
6-1980   1-7-80   Not_Included proposed project for Missouri Research
                               Laboratories, Inc. to sell industrial revenue
                               bonds of Albuquerque
                               Providing for an appropriation for the
7-1980   1-7-80   Not_Included preparation of a proposal for expanding
                               Convention Center facilities
                               Industrial revenue bonds regarding proposed
8-1980   1-18-80  Not_Included project for Murdock, Inc., to issue and sell
                               industrial revenue bonds
                               Making certain findings by state law relating to
9-1980   1-18-80  Not_Included metropolitan redevelopment plan for Project II,
                               rehabilitation of the El Fidel/Cole Hotel the
                               Forum Building, Alvarado area
10-1980  1-18-80  Not_Included Requiring that a second police cadet class be
                               initiated on March 24, 1980
                               Urging the Legislature and Governor to approve
11-1980  1-28-80  Not_Included funding for a study of the feasibility of
                               relocating N.M. state fairgrounds to less
                               congested site
                               Providing preparation of planning standards
12-1980  1-29-80  Not_Included emphasizing urban design prior to improvement of
                               San Mateo Blvd. Bt. Zuni and Gibson
                               Approving and authorizing filing of an
13-1980  1-29-80  Not_Included application with U.S. Department of Commerce,
                               for grant to fund phase I of the Kimo Theater
                               renovation and expansion program
14-1980  1-29-80  Not_Included Appropriating funds to certain programs to
                               provide for fiscal year 1979 actual expenditures
                               Repealing Resolution 131-1977 regarding
15-1980  1-29-80  Not_Included industrial revenue bonds - Creamland Dairies and
                               Resolution 22-1979 regarding industrial revenue
                               bonds regarding Abbott Transistor Labs
16-1980  1-29-80  Not_Included Declaring 1980 as the centennial year of
                               railroad in Albuquerque
                               Requiring state law relating to metro
17-1980  1-29-80  Not_Included redevelopment plan for Project III,
                               rehabilitation of Rosenwald Building
18-1980  1-29-80  Not_Included Appropriating funds for 3 major museum exhibits
                               during 1980
19-1980  1-29-80 1-3-2         Amending urban area boundaries to include Tracts
                               266 through 272, Unit 8, Atrisco Grant
20-1980  1-29-80  Not_Included Concerning industrial revenue bonds regarding
                               Intel Corporation to issue and sell same
                               Establishing policy relative to a municipal
21-1980  1-30-80 3-8-4         airport system and to finance projects with the
                               system
                               Approving and authorizing filing of grant
22-1980  1-30-80  Not_Included application for funds under the Emergency
                               Medical Services Fund Act
23-1980  1-30-80  Not_Included Appropriating funds to Department of Services
                               Approving and authorizing the acceptance of an
24-1980  1-30-80  Not_Included award from the Heritage Conservation and
                               Recreation Service for an arts recreation
                               strategies program
                               Appropriating funds to the parking facilities
25-1980  1-30-80  Not_Included capital fund for completion of the downtown
                               parking structure
 
Res. No. Date Disposition Short Title
Res. No. Date    Disposition   Short Title
                               Approving and authorizing filing of grant
26-1980  1-30-80  Not_Included application for corrections-detention walk
                               through metal detector with New Mexico Criminal
                               Justice Department
                               Providing for an appropriation to the Human
27-1980  1-30-80  Not_Included Services Department for expansion of crime
                               prevention program
                               Approving and authorizing filing of application
28-1980  1-30-80  Not_Included for basic state grant-in-aid program with N.M.
                               State Library; providing appropriation to
                               Cultural Services Department
                               Approving and authorizing filing of grant
                               application with N.M. Health and Environmental
29-1980  1-30-80  Not_Included Department and U.S. Environmental Protection
                               Agency for engineering design of sanitary sewer
                               lift station 20
                               Appropriating funds to remodel the police
30-1980  1-30-80  Not_Included building to accommodate Bernalillo County
                               Sheriff's Department
                               Concerning industrial revenue bonds regarding
31-1980  1-30-80  Not_Included proposed project for Signetics Corporation to
                               issue and sell same
                               Approving and authorizing filing of application
32-1980  1-30-80  Not_Included with N.M. Criminal Justice Department for an
                               arson crime laboratory - appropriation to Fire
                               Department
                               Dedicating the amount obtained from the sale of
33-1980  1-30-80  Not_Included Civic Auditorium to construction of a new
                               auditorium
                               Determining the area of Albuquerque New Mexico,
34-1980  2-12-80  Not_Included Special Assessment District No. 196 to be
                               improved
                               Findings and determinations to metropolitan
35-1980  2-12-80  Not_Included redevelopment code; Alvarado area; Skinner
                               Building metropolitan redevelopment
36-1980  2-12-80 3-9-1         Reaffirming the policies and strategies of city
                               and county for air pollution abatement
                               Requesting the Mayor to include within the
37-1980  2-13-80  Not_Included annual budget a proposal to weatherize and
                               renovate selected city owned facilities
                               Urging the voters to support the Albuquerque
38-1980  2-19-80  Not_Included public school district bond election and capital
                               improvement program on March 11, 1980
                               Determining that three parcels of city-owned
39-1980  2-19-80  Not_Included property are not essential for a municipal
                               purpose
                               Appropriating additional funds to the Department
40-1980  2-19-80  Not_Included of Services refuse collection and disposal
                               program
                               Concerning industrial revenue bonds regarding
41-1980  2-19-80  Not_Included proposed project for Ethicon, Inc., to issue and
                               sell same
                               Determining that the Fourth and Silver parking
42-1980  2-19-80  Not_Included structure, the Sunshine Y parcel, and a 49 acre
                               parcel of vacant land on University Blvd., S.E.
                               are not essential for municipal purposes
                               Authorizing the Mayor to issue a license for a
43-1980  2-19-80  Not_Included distress sale to 21st Century Sound, Inc., d/b/
                               a Stereo Den, 5400 Lomas, N.E., Albuquerque
44-1980  2-19-80  Not_Included Authorizing the Mayor to issue a license for a
                               distress sale to Lloyd's Furs Inc.
                               Creating a committee of public officials to
45-1980  2-19-80  Not_Included assess the future needs of the Albuquerque/
                               Bernalillo County corrections detention center.
                               Authorizing amendment of escrow deposit
46-1980  2-19-80  Not_Included agreement of 6/1/75 between city and Albuquerque
                               National Bank; authorizing escrow agent to
                               substitute U.S. treasury notes and bonds
                               Approving and authorizing grant application with
                               the U.S. Department of Commerce, Economic
47-1980  2-20-80  Not_Included Development Administration for access road from
                               Rio Bravo/I-25 to Albuquerque International
                               Airport; and appropriation
                               Approving and authorizing the filing of federal
48-1980  3-4-80   Not_Included fiscal years 1980-1981 grant proposal for
                               comprehensive employment and training act
                               (C.E.T.A.)
                               Approving and authorizing filing of grant
                               application for Title III Older Americans Act
49-1980  3-4-80   Not_Included Funds with Middle Rio Grande Council of
                               Governments; providing appropriation to Human
                               Services/Office of Senior Affairs
                               Declaring the City Council's intent to recommend
50-1980  3-4-80   Not_Included establishing a development project; earmarking
                               funds for 4th and Lead parking structure
 
Res. No. Date Disposition Short Title
Res. No. Date    Disposition   Short Title
51-1980  3-4-80  6-4-10        Designating the Old Albuquerque High School as a
                               city landmark
52-1980  3-4-80  6-4-7         Designating the Rosenwald Building as a city
                               landmark
53-1980  3-4-80  6-4-8         Designating the Highland-Hudson Hotel as a city
                               landmark
                               Rescinding Resolution No. 213-1978, which
54-1980  3-4-80   Not_Included ordered the condemnation of building at 316
                               Virginia, N.E.
                               Approving and authorizing filing of federal
55-1980  3-4-80   Not_Included fiscal year 1980 grant proposal for C.E.T.A.
                               Title IV governor's youth employment and
                               training program; appropriations to C.E.T.A.
56-1980  3-4-80   Not_Included Approving Change Order No. 1 for Special
                               Assessment District No. 192
                               Approving and authorizing filing of federal
57-1980  3-4-80   Not_Included fiscal year 1980 grant proposal for C.E.T.A.
                               Title 11a governor's discretionary program;
                               appropriation to C.E.T.A.
                               Approving and authorizing filing of grant
58-1980  3-4-80   Not_Included application for a birds of prey exhibit grant
                               with National Endowment for Humanities -
                               appropriation to Cultural Services
                               Electing the tax increment method of financing
59-1980  3-4-80   Not_Included metropolitan redevelopment projects for tax
                               years beginning on or after January 1, 1980
60-1980  3-4-80   Not_Included Appropriating additional funds to the Parks and
                               Recreation Department
                               Authorizing the Mayor to seek federal funds from
61-1980  3-4-80   Not_Included the law enforcement assistance administration
                               and committing city to providing required
                               matching funds
                               Urging all citizens of Albuquerque/Bernalillo
62-1980  3-4-80   Not_Included County to return completed census questionnaires
                               on 4/1/80
                               Approving and authorizing filing of grant
                               application for South Industrial development
63-1980  3-14-80  Not_Included sector urban development action grant with
                               Department of Housing and Urban Development;
                               appropriation to Water Resources
64-1980  3-14-80  Not_Included Appropriating additional funds to Department of
                               Transportation, Transit Operations Program
                               Authorizing the Mayor to issue a license for
65-1980  3-14-80  Not_Included distress sale to Freight Sales, Inc., 3920 San
                               Mateo and 7413 Menaul
                               Authorizing notice for proposals for lease of
66-1980  3-14-80  Not_Included certain property and notice for bid on sale of
                               $4,400,000 metropolitan redevelopment revenue
                               bonds, Series 1980
                               Determining certain building or structure at 818
                               Los Arboles, N.W. is so ruined damages and
67-1980  3-25-80  Not_Included dilapidated as to be a menace to public comfort,
                               health, peace or safety, that it be required to
                               be removed
68-1980  3-25-80 4-4-2         Adopting a master plan for the development of
                               the Rio Grande Zoological Park
                               Urging the N.M. State Highway Department to fund
69-1980  3-25-80  Not_Included replacements of the Barelas and Central Bridges;
                               encouraging the N.M. State Legislature to
                               approve HB-126 (funding for bridge replacements)
                               Making certain findings required by state
70-1980  3-25-80  Not_Included relating to metropolitan redevelopment plan for
                               the sale or lease and rehabilitation of the
                               Skinner Building
                               Determining certain buildings or structures at
71-1980  3-25-80  Not_Included 5602 Central, S.W. within city limits are so
                               ruined, damages and dilapidated to require
                               removal
                               Determining certain buildings or structures at
72-1980  3-25-80  Not_Included 9909 Salem Road, N.E. are so damaged, ruined,
                               and dilapidated as to require removal
                               Concerning Albuquerque's intent to issue
                               metropolitan redevelopment bonds in connection
73-1980  3-25-80  Not_Included with proposed residential and related use
                               project in Alvarado Redevelopment Area to induce
                               Sproul Investment Corp. to acquire land and
                               construct single-family units, etc.
                               Authorizing submission of grant application for
75-1980  3-28-80  Not_Included 25 additional buses and appropriation funds to
                               provide matching requirement of grant
 
Res. No. Date Disposition Short Title
Res. No. Date    Disposition   Short Title
                               Calling for a special session of N.M. State
76-1980  3-31-80  Not_Included Legislature regarding interest on public
                               securities
                               Adopting policies for the protection, management
77-1980  4-8-80  1-5-1         and development of open space lands, regional
                               preserves and natural resource areas
78-1980  4-8-80   Not_Included Rescinding Resolution No. 113-1979 relating to a
                               community crisis services center
                               Approving and authorizing the filing of grant
                               application for the exhibition the American farm
79-1980  4-8-80   Not_Included - a photographic history and lecture series from
                               the N.M. Humanities Council; appropriations to
                               Cultural Services Department
                               Approving and authorizing the filing of grant
80-1980  4-8-80   Not_Included application for C.E.T.A., alternative youth
                               employment strategies program
                               Authorizing and appropriating funds to the
81-1980  4-8-80   Not_Included operations review program for community
                               promotion of carpooling as an energy
                               conservation measure
                               Authorizing the Mayor to issue a license for
82-1980  4-8-80   Not_Included distress sale to Mi-Leon, Inc., d/b/a W/ W.
                               Sophisticates
                               Authorizing the Mayor to issue a license for
83-1980  4-8-80   Not_Included distress sale to White Stores, Inc., d/b/a/
                               Whites Home and Auto Store, 4616 Central, S.E.
                               Approving basic program activities for fiscal
84-1980  4-11-80  Not_Included year 1981 community development program -
                               appropriating funds to community development
                               fund
                               Designating uses for funds received by the city
85-1980  4-21-80  Not_Included of Albuquerque from the refunding of mortgage
                               revenue bonds
                               Affirming the city of Albuquerque's commitment
86-1980  4-18-80  Not_Included to regional solid waste disposal program;
                               requesting MRGCOG to obtain funding for such a
                               program
                               Making certain findings and determinations
87-1980  4-18-80 1-12-2        pursuant to metropolitan redevelopment code
                               regarding Railroad Metropolitan Redevelopment
                               Area
                               Approving and authorizing filing of grant
                               application with Federal Aviation Administration
88-1980  4-18-80  Not_Included for reconstruction of a portion of runway 08/26
                               at Albuquerque International Airport;
                               appropriation to Aviation Department
                               Appropriating funds for construction of a
89-1980  4-18-80  Not_Included federal inspection services area at the
                               Albuquerque International Airport
90-1980  4-18-80 6-5-1         Designation of neighborhood parks in accordance
                               with provisions of the criminal code
                               Creating the Old Town Liquor License Study
91-1980  4-21-80  Not_Included Committee; requiring the committee to submit a
                               study and recommendations to the Mayor and City
                               Council by July 1, 1980
                               Approving the issuance of a special dispensers
92-1980  4-24-80  Not_Included permit for a location within 300 feet of Manzano
                               Day School
93-1980  4-21-80  Not_Included Appropriating additional funds to Parks and
                               Recreation Department
                               Approving and authorizing filing of grant
                               application for a safe drinking water program
94-1980  4-11-80  Not_Included grant with N.M. Environmental Improvement
                               Division - appropriation to Water Resources
                               Department
                               Appropriating funds to Council for an
95-1980  5-2-80   Not_Included independent operational audit of the Water
                               Resources Department
                               Approving the issuance of a special dispenser's
96-1980  4-28-80  Not_Included permit for a location within 300 feet of St.
                               Therese School and church
                               Authorizing and directing submission of
97-1980  4-28-80  Not_Included application for 48 units of turnkey I new
                               construction for city's low-rent public housing
                               program
                               Determining certain matters with respect to
98-1980  5-12-80  Not_Included residential mortgage revenue refunding bonds,
                               Series 1980, Ord. 19-1980
                               Approving the issuance of a special dispenser's
99-1980  5-7-80   Not_Included permit for a location within 300 feet of
                               Annunciation Parish, 2600 Vermont, N.E.
 
Res. No. Date Disposition Short Title
Res. Date Disposition Short Title
No.
100- 5-7-  Not        Approving the issuance of a special dispenser's permit for a location within
1980 80   Included    300 feet of University of Albuquerque
101- 5-7-  Not        Approving the issuance of special dispensers permit for a location within 300
1980 80   Included    feet of University of Albuquerque
102- 5-7-  Not        Approving the issuance of a special dispensers permit for a location within
1980 80   Included    300 feet of University of Albuquerque
103- 5-7-  Not        Appropriating funds for operating the Corrections and Detention Department for
1980 80   Included    fiscal year beginning July 1, 1980 and ending June 30, 1980
104- 5-8-  Not        Changing appropriation amounts for capital projects previously authorized
1980 80   Included
105- 5-8-  Not        Appropriating funds from the lodgers tax receipts in the general fund to be
1980 80   Included    used for the “feria artesana,” an art show which will focus on New Mexican
                      Hispanic artists
106- 5-8-  Not        Appropriating funds to Albuquerque Public Library for implementing city wide
1980 80   Included    summer reading program for children
107- 5-9-  Not        Appropriating funds to the Legal Department for a study of economic impact of
1980 80   Included    present liquor license quota system
108- 5-    Not
1980 20-  Included    Appropriating additional funds to special activities - Traffic Records Center
     80
109- 5-    Not        Approving and authorizing filing of grant application for appropriate energy
1980 20-  Included    technology small grants program with the U.S. Department of Energy; providing
     80               appropriation to Office of Senior Affairs
110- 5-    Not        Approving and authorizing filing of grant application for a noise control
1980 20-  Included    grant with the Environmental Protection Agency; providing appropriation to
     80               Department Services
111- 5-    Not
1980 20-  Included    Appropriating funds for a comprehensive aviation master plan for the city
     80
112- 5-    Not        Proposing issuance and sale of industrial revenue bonds of city in amount of
1980 20-  Included    not more than $10,000,000 to defray part or all of cost of acquiring assets
     80               necessary for project of Sperry Corp.
113- 5-    Not        Authorizing the Mayor to issue a license for a distress sale to Mandb School
1980 20-  Included    and Office Supply Company, 6336 Linn Ave., N.E.
     80
114- 2-5-  Not        Approving option agreement between city and Albuquerque Academy for
1980 80   Included    acquisition of portion of Elena Gallegos Land Grant for open space,
                      recreation, and conservation purposes
115- 5-    Not        Approving the issuance of a special dispensers permit for a location within
1980 22-  Included    300 feet of First Unitarian Church
     80
116- 5-    Not        Adopting policies relative to streets, drainage and bikeways serving the area
1980 22-  Included    to be annexed to city south of San Antonio Drive
     80
117- 5-
1980 22-  4-5-1       Adopting the Albuquerque Public Library comprehensive plan
     80
118- 5-    Not        Approving a joint powers agreement with the county of Bernalillo with respect
1980 22-  Included    to intermediate holding and detoxification facility and authorizing the Mayor
     80               to execute said agreement
119- 5-    Not        Approving and authorizing filing of grant proposal for C.E.T.A., YETP;
1980 22-  Included    appropriation to C.E.T.A.
     80
120- 5-    Not        Changing appropriation amounts for capital and community development projects
1980 22-  Included    previously authorized
     80
121- 5-    Not        Making certain findings required by state law relating to metropolitan
1980 22-  Included    redevelopment plan for Project VI, Public Service Co. of N.M., Phase I office
     80               complex expansion in Alvarado Metropolitan Redevelopment Area
122- 5-    Not        Urging that New Mexico Congressmen support updating the Brook Cranston Bill
1980 22-  Included    (senate Bill 2177) for assistance of the housing industry
     80
123- 6-5-  Not        Approving issuance of special dispensers permit for a location with 300 feet
1980 80   Included    of La Puetta De Los Ninos
124- 6-5-  Not        Approving issuance of special dispensers permit for a location within 300 feet
1980 80   Included    of University of Albuquerque
125- 6-    Not        Appropriating funds for operating government of city of Albuquerque July 1,
1980 13-  Included    1980 - June 30, 1981
     80
 
Res. No. Date Disposition Short Title
Res. Date Disposition Short Title
No.
126- 6-    Not        Appropriating funds to urban development from trust and
1980 16-  Included    agency tax increment account
     80
127- 6-    Not        Application for summer food service for children -
1980 16-  Included    appropriation to Parks and Recreation
     80
128- 6-               Nominating “Las Mananitas” to be a city of Albuquerque
1980 16-  6-4-9       landmark
     80
129- 6-    Not        Appropriation of funds for purchase of land for a Natural
1980 16-  Included    History Museum
     80
130- 6-    Not        Transferring funds from the 1977 bond issue activity
1980 16-  Included    interest income to the Paseo Del Nordeste Recreation Trail
     80               project
131- 6-    Not        Determining that two parcels of city-owned property are
1980 17-  Included    not essential for a municipal purpose
     80
132- 6-               Designating Huning Highland Historic Overlay Zone and
1980 17-  1-10-1      approving accompanying design guidelines
     80
     6-               Delegating Mayor responsibility of issuance of special
133- 23-   Not        dispensers permits per 10/8/4 and 4/6/4 of ordinances of
1980 80   Included    1974 and to establish administrative regulations
                      concerning same
134- 6-    Not        Approving the issuance of a special dispensers permit for
1980 23-  Included    a location within 300 feet of Queen of Heaven Church
     80
     6-               Making certain findings required by state law relating to
135- 24-   Not        Metropolitan Redevelopment plan for rehabilitation and
1980 80   Included    redevelopment of the Kimo Theater in Alvarado Metropolitan
                      Redevelopment Area
136- 6-    Not        Determining the area of “Albuquerque, New Mexico, Special
1980 26-  Included    Assessment District No. 194” to be improved
     80
137- 6-    Not        Modification of joint powers agreement between city and
1980 27-  Included    county of Bernalillo concerning corrections/detention
     80               facility
138- 6-    Not        Appropriating funds for operating the government of city
1980 27-  Included    for fiscal year 1980/1981
     80
                      Endorsing city's plan to transition in compliance of
139- 7-9-  Not        Rehabilitation Act 1973; initiating vehicle retro-fit
1980 80   Included    program retaining current vehicle replacement and
                      acquisition program
140- 7-2-  Not        Rescinding Resolution 71-1980 which ordered the
1980 80   Included    condemnation of building at 5602 Central Ave., S.W.
141- 7-2-  Not        Rescinding Resolution No. 72-1980 which ordered the
1980 80   Included    condemnation of building at 9909 Salem Road, N.E.
                      Revising comprehensive plan policy statement of intent to
142- 7-3-  Not        plan, design, develop second arterial between Rio Rancho
1980 80   Included    Community and Interstate 40 (Res. 125-1979); protection of
                      West Mesa Escarpment
143- 7-3-  Not        Approving and authorizing filing of grant application for
1980 80   Included    supplemental air pollution control grant with EPA
                      Making certain findings required by state law relating to
144- 7-3-  Not        metropolitan redevelopment plan for sale or lease and
1980 80   Included    rehabilitation of Wool Warehouse Building in Railroad
                      Metropolitan Redevelopment Plan
145- 7-3-  Not        Making certain findings required by state law relating to
1980 80   Included    metropolitan redevelopment plan for Project VII, Mountain
                      Bell Plaza Campana and 4th Street and Copper
146- 7-3-  Not        Approving Change Order No. 2 for Special Assessment
1980 80   Included    District 192
147- 7-3-  Not        Making certain findings required by state law relating to
1980 80   Included    metropolitan redevelopment plan for the sale or lease and
                      rehabilitation of J.F. Pearce Home, 718 Central, S.W.
148- 7-3-  Not        Setting forth the city's intent to issue industrial
1980 80   Included    revenue bonds for Presbyterian Hospital Center
                      Approving and authorizing filing of application to N.M.
149- 7-3-  Not        State Planning Office for federal grant to continue the
1980 80   Included    historic landmarks survey program; providing appropriation
                      to Department of Municipal Development
150- 7-3-  Not        Adopting the Human Services Plan, long range goals, fiscal
1980 80   Included    year 1981 implementation plan
 
Res. No. Date Disposition Short Title
Res. No. Date    Disposition   Short Title
                               Adopting an official estimate of the recurring
151-1980 7-8-80   Not_Included revenues that will be received by the city
                               during fiscal year 1981
                               Setting forth the city's intent to issue
152-1980 7-8-80   Not_Included industrial revenue bonds for University Heights
                               Hospital
153-1980 7-17-80 3-3-5         Institute voluntary 20-year retirement municipal
                               sworn members Fire Department
154-1980 7-17-80  Not_Included C.E.T.A. - federal fiscal year 1980 grant
155-1980 7-17-80 3-5-31        Design of North Glenwood Hills Arroyo storm
                               drainage project
156-1980 7-17-80  Not_Included Requesting state support for human service
157-1980 7-17-80  Not_Included Building at 1222 12th Street dilapidated
158-1980 7-17-80  Not_Included Building at 2810 Los Tomases dilapidated
159-1980 7-17-80  Not_Included Buildings at 2505 Serna dilapidated
160-1980 7-17-80  Not_Included Appropriation of funds for acquisition of
                               equipment
161-1980 7-17-80  Not_Included Grant for research law enforcement assistant to
                               study blood factors
162-1980 7-17-80  Not_Included Grant application/human services
163-1980 7-18-80  Not_Included Grant application for air pollution control
                               grant with EPA; appropriation to services
164-1980 7-18-80  Not_Included Gardner Engineers plans for Special Assessment
                               District No. 199
165-1980 7-18-80  Not_Included Application with General Services Administration
                               to obtain surplus federal property
166-1980 7-18-80  Not_Included Approving sale of land by Metropolitan
                               Redevelopment Agency for solar home construction
167-1980 7-18-80  Not_Included Determining that city-owned property is not
                               essential for municipal purpose
                               Requesting U.S. Department of Housing and Urban
168-1980 7-18-80  Not_Included Development to utilize funds to provide 1000
                               additional certificates of family eligibility
                               for housing assistance
169-1980 7-25-80  Not_Included Grant proposal for C.E.T.A. III program
170-1980 7-25-80  Not_Included Completion of Winrock/Coronado Sector
                               Development Plan
171-1980 7-25-80  Not_Included Recommending 1981 Transportation Program for
                               Albuquerque
172-1980 7-31-80  Not_Included Grant application for hazardous waste evaluation
                               study involving landfill site
173-1980 8-1-80   Not_Included Grant application for HB-2 from Laws 1980,
                               Chapter 155, funds with MRGCOG
                               Authorizing notice for bid on sale of
174-1980 8-1-80   Not_Included $21,495,000 general obligation bonds, Series
                               September 1, 1980
175-1980 8-4-80   Not_Included Determining reasonable notice of public meetings
                               of Council
 
Res. No. Date Disposition Short Title
Res. No. Date    Disposition   Short Title
176-1980 8-4-80  6-4-5         Designating the Santa Fe Railroad Depot as a
                               city landmark
177-1980 8-4-80   Not_Included Requesting the Water Resources Department to
                               develop a budget plan for water and sewer bills
                               Delegating Mayor administrator of Distress Sales
178-1980 7-12-80  Not_Included Act and authorizing Mayor to establish an appeal
                               procedure to city hearing officer
179-1980 8-18-80  Not_Included Determining the Sidewalk and Curb and Gutter
                               District No. 5 to be improved
180-1980 8-18-80  Not_Included Authorizing city to participate in government
                               programming through cable television
181-1980 8-18-80  Not_Included Calling for analysis of traffic on the proposed
                               northwest arterial network
182-1980 8-18-80  Not_Included Designation of major and collector streets and
                               related planning and platting
183-1980 8-21-80  Not_Included Approving transfer of liquor dispenser's to La
                               Placita, Old Town
184-1980 8-21-80  Not_Included Industrial development planning
185-1980 8-26-80  Not_Included Bookmobile program - library
186-1980 8-26-80  Not_Included Requiring Council approval of Washington
                               representatives/consultants
187-1980 8-26-80  Not_Included Funding office of emergency prep.
188-1980 8-26-80  Not_Included Amending/establishing priorities for parks and
                               recreation CIP
189-1980 8-26-80  Not_Included C.E.T.A.
190-1980 9-2-80   Not_Included S.A.D. 194
191-1980 9-10-80  Not_Included Metropolitan redevelopment plan for Project IX,
                               Sunshine Building renovation
192-1980 9-8-80   Not_Included Requesting state legislation providing state
                               funds to match Title XX funds
193-1980 9-9-80   Not_Included Appropriating funds to municipal development for
                               completion of Coronado/Winrock
194-1980 9-9-80   Not_Included Amending Res. 3-1977 - Old Town Sector
                               Development Plan
195-1980 9-9-80   Not_Included Restoration of the southwest room
196-1980 9-9-80   Not_Included Approving filing of grant application for BAT
                               unit and providing funds to APD
                               Approving grant for corrections-detentions
197-1980 9-9-80   Not_Included management education program with LEAA and
                               providing funds to Department of Corrections
198-1980 9-10-80  Not_Included Ratifying policies of Fire Department with
                               respect to holiday in Fire Prevention Bureau
199-1980 9-10-80  Not_Included Authorizing $25,000 park development fees and
                               creating park project at S.Y. Jackson School
 
Res. No. Date Disposition Short Title
Res. No. Date     Disposition   Short Title
200-1980 9-10-80   Not_Included Condemnation of 2324 Hollywood, N.W. (West
                                Struc.)
201-1980 9-10-80   Not_Included Grant application for Albuquerque/Bernalillo
                                air pollution control to Department of Services
202-1980 9-10-80   Not_Included Metropolitan development bonds for Sunshine
                                Building in amount of $1 million
203-1980 9-18-80   Not_Included Selection of wrecker companies policies and
                                procedures
204-1980 9-17-80   Not_Included Appropriation of $2262 for development of West
                                Bluff Park
205-1980 9-17-80   Not_Included Appropriating funds for 9-1-80 general
                                obligation bond issue
206-1980 9-17-80  6-4-6         Designating Skinner Building to be city
                                landmark
207-1980 9-17-80   Not_Included Supporting international year of disabled
                                persons
208-1980 9-17-80   Not_Included Designating Production Credit (Occidental)
                                Building to be city landmark
209-1980 9-17-80   Not_Included Approving grant to C.E.T.A.
210-1980 9-24-80   Not_Included Adopting master plan for Volcano Park
                                Approving filing of application with Department
211-1980 9-26-80   Not_Included of Transportation for Section V operating grant
                                under Mass Transportation Act of 1964
                                Approving filing of application with Department
212-1980 9-26-80   Not_Included of Services for Section V operating grant under
                                Mass Transportation Act of 1964
                                Approving filing of application with Department
213-1980 9-26-80   Not_Included of Transportation for Section V operating grant
                                under Mass Transportation Act of 1964
                                City's intent to issue metropolitan
214-1980 9-26-80   Not_Included redevelopment bonds for Woolworth Building for
                                $3 million to rehabilitate the building
215-1980 9-26-80   Not_Included Appropriating funds to Department of Services
                                refuse and disposal program
                                Metropolitan redevelopment bonds for New Mexico
216-1980 9-26-80   Not_Included Produce Building in amount of $1 million for
                                rehabilitation
217-1980 9-26-80   Not_Included Bonds for Journal Center Corp. to sell bonds up
                                to $15 million to establish industrial park
218-1980 9-26-80   Not_Included Allowing tax exempt financing to be used with
                                fixed base operator facilities
219-1980 9-26-80   Not_Included Grant application with FAA for reconstruction
                                of partition of runway 08-26
                                Directing Charles F. Horne and Associates to
220-1980 10-13-80  Not_Included prepare, etc. plans and estimate of cost, etc.,
                                in connection with proposed improvement and
                                construction of certain streets, etc.
221-1980 10-13-80  Not_Included Sale of bonds up to $3 million for Seven Bar
                                Flying Service, Inc.
222-1980 10-13-80  Not_Included Sale of bonds up to $3 million for Cutter
                                Flying Service, Inc.
223-1980 10-13-80  Not_Included Financing by city for Altair Corporation up to
                                $3 million
224-1980 10-13-80  Not_Included Financing by city for Robertson Aircraft
                                Repair, Inc. in amount up to $3 million
225-1980 10-13-80  Not_Included Financing by city bonds for Mueller Aero
                                Service, Inc. up to $3 million
 
Res. No. Date Disposition Short Title
Res. No. Date     Disposition   Short Title
226-1980 10-14-80  Not_Included Changing appropriation amounts for capital
                                projects previously authorized
227-1980 10-21-80  Not_Included City's residential housing program for persons
                                of low and moderate income
228-1980 10-20-80  Not_Included Amending R-20 (31-1980) by increasing amount of
                                bonds for Signetics Corporation to $125 million
                                Setting forth city's intent to issue industrial
229-1980 10-20-80  Not_Included revenue refunding for Lovelace Medical
                                Foundation
230-1980 10-22-80  Not_Included Reconsidering R-209 which adopted University
                                Neighborhoods Sector Development Plan
                                Approving filing grant application for an urban
231-1980 10-23-80  Not_Included library resources to Cultural Services
                                Department
232-1980 10-23-80  Not_Included Grant for traffic offense program with Highway
                                Traffic Safety Bureau to APD
233-1980 10-23-80  Not_Included Amending guidelines for downtown development
                                loan pool
234-1980 10-31-80  Not_Included Establishing 1981 legislative policy New Mexico
                                legislature
235-1980 10-31-80  Not_Included Wilson and Company preliminary plans for S.A.D.
                                203
                                Requiring city general fund budget to utilize
236-1980 11-14-80  Not_Included same uniform accounting principles which are
                                applied to city's financial statements
                                Grant for Highway Traffic Safety Administration
237-1980 11-4-80   Not_Included with N.M. Transportation Department to city
                                Transportation Department
                                Grant for Section 141(c) bicycle with Federal
238-1980 11-4-80   Not_Included Highway Administration to capital acquisition
                                fund
239-1980 11-4-80   Not_Included Grant for a very special arts festival with
                                Kennedy Foundation to Parks and Recreation
                                Grant for rideshare program with Federal
240-1980 11-3-80   Not_Included Highway Administration to Department of
                                Transportation
                                Grant for Title III Older Americans Act funds
241-1980 11-4-80   Not_Included and House Bill 2 from Laws 1980, to Department
                                of Human Services
                                Funding required by state law to metropolitan
242-1980 11-4-80   Not_Included redevelopment plan for Project X, Woolworth
                                Building, Alvarado Area
                                Urging congressional delegation of N.M. to
243-1980 11-4-80   Not_Included support reenactment of general revenue sharing
                                and schedule action of 52574, HB 711 (Boland
                                Amendment)
                                Creating committee to make recommendations to
244-1980 11-5-80   Not_Included the Council regarding boundaries of the nine
                                Council districts
245-1980 11-5-80   Not_Included Preliminary plans, estimates, etc. for S.A.D.
                                203
246-1980 11-5-80   Not_Included Rescinding R-116 ordering condemnation of 2505
                                Serna, N.W.
247-1980 11-5-80   Not_Included Condemnation of 1407 Rio Grande, N.W.
248-1980 11-5-80   Not_Included Condemning 1829 Williams, S.E.
249-1980 11-10-80  Not_Included Preliminary plans for S.A.D. 199
250-1980 11-10-80  Not_Included Awarding contract for S.A.D. 194 to Wylie Bros.
 
Res. No. Date Disposition Short Title
Res. No. Date     Disposition   Short Title
251-1980 11-20-80  Not_Included Creating ad hoc study team regarding a
                                replacement facility for the civic auditors
                                Creating task force to study impact of local
252-1980 11-20-80  Not_Included regulations on cost of housing and ways to
                                reduce costs of housing construction
253-1980 11-20-80 2-2-4         Supporting creation of independent convention
                                and visitors bureau
254-1980 11-21-80  Not_Included Policies on annexation to city and repealing
                                previous policies
255-1980 12-2-80   Not_Included Appropriating funds for cable television
                                programming
                                Industrial revenue bonds to $1,000,000 for
256-1980 12-4-80   Not_Included inducing Western Power Service and Construction
                                Co., Inc. to expand and acquire new facility
                                Approving filing of grant application for
257-1980 12-4-80   Not_Included special project with Kennedy Foundation and
                                providing authorization to Parks and Recreation
258-1980 12-4-80   Not_Included Creating committee regarding reapportioning
                                Council districts
259-1980 12-5-80   Not_Included Accepting preliminary plans, cost estimates
                                etc. for S.A.D. 195
                                Concerning financing by city for Journal Center
260-1980 12-5-80   Not_Included Corp. and issuance of industrial revenue bonds
                                up to $15,000,000
                                City's residential housing program for persons
261-1980 12-22-80  Not_Included of low and moderate income and amending
                                Resolution No. 227-1980
262-1980 12-29-80  Not_Included S.A.D. 203 area to be improved
263-1980 12-29-80  Not_Included Concerning issuance of industrial revenue bonds
                                for La Vida Llena facility
                                1981 grant proposal for C.E.T.A. Title II-
264-1980 12-29-80  Not_Included a governor's discretionary program -
                                authorizing appropriation to C.E.T.A.
                                Authorizing appropriation of $310,155 of
265-1980 12-29-80  Not_Included general obligation funds to Martineztown Park
                                Project
                                Amending Resolution 234-1980 to include support
                                for Albuquerque-Bernalillo County drinking
266-1980 12-29-80  Not_Included driver program in legislative policy of
                                Albuquerque for 1981 legislative session of
                                N.M. Legislature
                                Intent to issue metropolitan redevelopment
267-1980 12-29-80  Not_Included bonds for proposed Hudson Highland Hotel
                                Building in amount up to $1,000,000 for
                                rehabilitation of building
268-1980 12-30-80  Not_Included Approving lease between city and New Mexico
                                Natural Resources Department
                                Concerning issuance of industrial development
                                revenue bonds to finance proposed project for
269-1980 12-30-80  Not_Included Blood Systems, Inc. for purpose of inducing
                                Blood Systems to acquire facility in
                                Albuquerque, N.M.
                                Adopting policies for zone map changes and
270-1980 12-30-80 1-1-2         superseding Resolutions 217-1975 and 182-1978
                                relating to zone change applications and
                                appeals
                                Fixing time when objections to assessment roll
271-1980 12-30-80  Not_Included for S.A.D. 194 made by city and Wilson and
                                Company will be heard and causing such roll to
                                be filed in office of City Clerk/Recorder
                                Street sweeping program in residential areas on
272-1980 12-8-80   Not_Included 120-day basis and appropriating funds for the
                                program
 
 
 
Notes
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
1981 Resolutions
Res. No. Date Disposition Short Title
Res. No. Date    Disposition   Short Title
                               Amending plan for Major Open Space and
1-1981   1-2-81  1-3-2         Metropolitan Areas and Urban Centers Plan of the
                               Albuquerque/ Bernalillo County Comprehensive
                               Plan
                               Establishing procedures for distribution of
2-1981   1-2-81  3-2-9         bills introduced to Council; setting fees for
                               distribution of Bills and repealing Resolution
                               26-1975
                               Adopting City Affirmative Action Program and
3-1981   1-2-81  4-1-2         superseding Program which was adopted on
                               February 22, 1977
                               Approving and authorizing grant application for
                               funds under Emergency Medical Services Fund Act
4-1981   1-6-81   Not_Included with New Mexico Health and Environment
                               Department and providing appropriation to Fire
                               Department
                               Approving and authorizing filing of grant
5-1981   1-14-81  Not_Included application with Department of Transportation
                               for Section 3 Capital Grant under Urban Mass
                               Transportation Act of 1964, as amended
                               Approving and authorizing filing of grant
                               application for Corrections- Detention
6-1981   1-8-81   Not_Included Classification; Data Collection System with
                               National Institute of Corrections and providing
                               appropriation to Department of Corrections-
                               Detention
                               Approving and authorizing filing of fiscal year
                               1981 Grant Proposal for C.E.T.A., Title II,
7-1981   1-8-81   Not_Included Special grants to Governor's with N.M.
                               Department of Education, Vocational Education
                               Unit, C.E.T.A.; and providing appropriation to
                               Office of C.E.T.A.
8-1981   1-8-81   Not_Included Redesign of Tramway Blvd. near Rover Avenue
9-1981   1-9-81  1-11-1        Adopting Northwest Mesa Area Plan
                               Approving and authorizing filing of grant
10-1981  1-14-81  Not_Included application with Department of Transportation
                               for a Section 3 Capital Grant under Urban Mass
                               Transportation Act of 1964, as amended
                               Appropriating funds to Services Department for
11-1981  1-14-81  Not_Included extension of contract with Albuquerque Ambulance
                               Service
                               Appropriating funds to Department of Services,
12-1981  1-20-81  Not_Included Technical Services Program, Office of Emergency
                               Preparedness
13-1981  1-20-81 1-7-17        Adopting Trumbull Neighborhood Sector
                               Development Plan
14-1981  1-27-81 1-11-1        Concerning future transportation network for the
                               Northwest Mesa
15-1981  2-2-81   Not_Included Initiating program for phased extension of time
                               that Suntran bus service is available
16-1981  1-30-81  Not_Included Determining area of Albuquerque S.A.D. 199 to be
                               improved
                               Changing appropriation amounts for capital
17-1981  1-30-81  Not_Included project previously authorized and appropriating
                               funds
18-1981  1-30-81  Not_Included Approving appropriation of $167,265 of golf
                               course revenue bond interest
                               Directing Scanlon and Associates to submit to
                               CC/R preliminary plans, costs, etc. in
19-1981  1-30-81  Not_Included connection with proposed improvements and
                               construction of certain streets, curbs, gutters,
                               etc.
20-1981  1-30-81  Not_Included Approving filing of grant for Art-in-Public
                               Places and providing funds
21-1981  1-30-81  Not_Included Determining area of S.A.D. 195 to be improved
22-1981  1-30-81 1-7-18        Adopting Huning Castle and Raynolds Addition
                               Neighborhood Sector Development Plan
                               Approving transfer of liquor dispenser license
25-1981  2-12-81  Not_Included to Paragon Resources, Inc. at Alvarado Square,
                               415 Silver Ave., S.W.
 
Res. No. Date Disposition Short Title
Res. No. Date    Disposition   Short Title
26-1981  2-12-81  Not_Included Approving transfer of club liquor license to
                               Loyal Order of Moose
                               Approving transfer of liquor dispenser license
27-1981  2-12-81  Not_Included to James J. Doyle and Janice A. Doyle at 5801
                               Wyoming, N.E.
28-1981  2-9-81   Not_Included Modifying and confirming assessment roll for
                               S.A.D. 194
29-1981  2-13-81  Not_Included Authorizing application and proposal to State
                               Board of Finance
                               Calling upon Mayor to institute annual banquet
30-1981  2-16-81  Not_Included to recognize City employees with certain years
                               of Municipal employment for public service
                               Making findings required by State law relating
31-1981  2-16-81 1-12-1        to Metro Redevelopment Plan for Project XIII,
                               Occidental Building and approving plan for
                               project
                               Intent to issue Metro Redevelopment bonds for
32-1981  2-16-81  Not_Included Occidental Life Insurance Building in amount up
                               to $3,000,000
33-1981  2-16-81  Not_Included Appropriating funds for operation of Water
                               Resources for fiscal year
                               Requesting Legislature to enact legislation
34-1981  2-16-81  Not_Included requiring control of non-deposit glass beverage
                               containers
35-1981  2-16-81  Not_Included Approving filing of Federal DY81 grant proposal
                               for C.E.T.A. Title VI and appropriating funds
36-1981  2-16-81  Not_Included Approving Federal fiscal year 1981 grant for
                               C.E.T.A. Title IV and providing funds
37-1981  2-16-81  Not_Included Approving new Capital project N. Pino Arroyo
                               Crossing Structure
38-1981  2-16-81  Not_Included Changing appropriation amounts and scope for
                               Arroyo Del Oso Dam Rehab.
39-1981  2-19-81  Not_Included Adjusting appropriations to certain programs for
                               fiscal year 1980 expenditures
                               Amending 258-1980 creating committee to make
40-1981  2-19-81  Not_Included recommendations to Council regarding
                               reapportioning Council Districts
41-1981  2-27-81  Not_Included Approving and Authorizing transfer of $90,000 to
                               tennis court construction
                               Authorizing sale of certain computer equipment
42-1981  3-3-81   Not_Included and appropriating funds for acquisition of
                               computer equipment
                               Appropriating funds for 1981 Feria Artesana, an
43-1981  3-3-81   Not_Included art show to be focused on the New Mexican
                               Hispanic
44-1981  3-3-81   Not_Included Authorizing Director of DFM to write off
                               uncollectible accounts receivable
                               Appropriating funds for joint water and sewer
45-1981  3-3-81   Not_Included capital fund and changing appropriations for
                               debt service requirements in fund for fiscal
                               year 1981
46-1981  3-3-81   Not_Included Setting back date for recommendation of
                               redistricting committee to Council
47-1981  3-3-81   Not_Included Awarding construction contract for S.A.D. 203 to
                               Kent Nowlin Construction, Inc.
                               Authorizing notice for bid on sale of
48-1981  3-3-81   Not_Included $13,910,000 General Obligation Bonds, Series
                               April 1, 1981
                               Requesting Mayor submit letters of Interest to
                               Appropriate State Agency for forwarding to
49-1981  3-5-81   Not_Included Federal Highway Administration to obtain funding
                               under Department of Transportation Comp.
                               Transportation Systems Management Assistance and
                               Complimentary DOT Programs
                               Authorizing City Participation in construction
50-1981  3-5-81   Not_Included of pedestrian bridge across arroyo immediately
                               to the east of Eldorado High School
 
Res. No. Date Disposition Short Title
Res. Date Disposition Short Title
No.
51-  3-    Not        Appropriating additional funds to the Corrections Detention Department to
1981 11-  Included    provide for alternations and additions to the Bernalillo County Detention
     81               Center
53-  3-    Not        Concerning Industrial Revenue Bonds in connection with Honeywell, Inc. in
1981 11-  Included    amount up to $25,000,000
     81
54-  3-    Not        Appropriating funds to Double Eagle II General Aviation Reliever Facility
1981 11-  Included    Project
     81
55-  3-    Not        Determining that four parcels of City-owned property are not essential for a
1981 11-  Included    Municipal purpose
     81
56-  3-    Not
1981 11-  Included    Approving Change Order No. 1 for S.A.D.-194
     81
57-  3-
1981 16-  4-1-3       Adopting City of Albuquerque Minority Business Enterprise Program
     81
58-  3-
1981 17-  4-1-2       Amending Resolution No. 3-1981 concerning City Affirmative Action Program
     81
59-  4-3-  Not        Changing Title and Scope for a Capital Project previously authorized
1981 81   Included
     3-               Accepting preliminary plans, estimates of cost, assessment plats and report as
60-  23-   Not        to method used in determining benefits and making provisional order to effect
1981 81   Included    that work on certain streets and sanitary sewer and water lines, etc. all in
                      S.A.D. No. 200 shall be done
     3-               Suggesting that Enerpharm acquire, construct and complete project within
61-  23-   Not        meaning of New Mexico Industrial Revenue Bond Act (3-32-1 through 3-32-16 NMSA
1981 81   Included    1978) in City of Albuquerque and agreeing that City will authorize and issue
                      one or more series of Industrial Revenue Bonds to defray the costs
62-  3-
1981 23-  1-7-3       Amending the Los Duranes Sector Development Plan and Community Development Plan
     81
63-  4-1- 4-3-12      Adopting the Albuquerque Master Drainage Plan
1981 81
                      Approving Basic Program Activities for fiscal year 1981-1982 Community
64-  4-1-  Not        Development Program for the City; etc. and authorizing Mayor to prepare and
1981 81   Included    submit grant request to Federal government for appropriation to the Community
                      Development Fund
65-  4-1-  Not        Awarding construction contract for sidewalk, curb and gutter Improvement
1981 81   Included    District No. 5 to Moore and Cowart
66-  4-1-  Not        Concerning approval by the Council of Metropolitan Redevelopment plan “Project
1981 81   Included    XIV Redevelopment Plan for Alvarado Redevelopment Area” and intent to issue
                      bonds up to $6,000,000 re: 500 Lead, etc
67-  4-1-  Not        Superseding Resolution No. 23-1981 concerning completion date of Winrock/
1981 81   Included    Coronado Sector Development Plan
68-  4-1-  Not        Adopting an official revenue estimate for fiscal year 1982 for the City
1981 81   Included
69-  4-1-  Not        Appropriating funds for certain programs which require additional funding in
1981 81   Included    order to operate for remainder of fiscal year 1981
70-  4-1-  Not        Appropriating funds to special activities - City Telephone Program in order to
1981 81   Included    operate for remainder of fiscal year 1981
71-  4-1-             Creating Small Business Task Force to review operations and determine those
1981 81   2-2-3       commercial/industrial activities which could be performed more inexpensively
                      and efficiently by private enterprise
72-  4-1- 1-7-10      Amending North Barelas Sector Development Plan and Community Development Plan
1981 81
73-  4-1-  Not        Requesting remodeling of airport's flight service station
1981 81   Included
74-  4-1-  Not        Appropriating funds to Parking Facilities capital fund for commencement of
1981 81   Included    design for a downtown parking structure
75-  4-8-  Not        Appropriating funds to purchase open space land in connection with the Double
1981 81   Included    Eagle Two General Aviation Reliever Facility
 
Res. No. Date Disposition Short Title
Res. No. Date    Disposition   Short Title
76-1981  4-9-81   Not_Included Appropriating funds to special activities -
                               Bernalillo County Ditch Fencing
                               Approving and authorizing filing of Federal
77-1981  4-9-81   Not_Included fiscal year 1981 grant application for C.E.T.A.
                               and YETP grant's and authorizing an
                               appropriation to Office of C.E.T.A.
                               Approving and consenting to issuance of new club
78-1981  4-9-81  5-1-51        license to UNM Alumni Association at University
                               and Central, N.E.
79-1981  4-10-81  Not_Included Adopting findings in connection with AC-80-3,
                               the appeal of Clare Mowbray
                               Concerning Municipal Joint Water and Sewer
80-1981  4-14-81  Not_Included System of the City, awarding and selling Revenue
                               Bonds authorized by Ordinance 27-1981, providing
                               other detail
                               Changing appropriation amount for Capital
                               Projects previously authorized for change of
81-1981  4-20-81  Not_Included more than 20 of amount designated. Human
                               Resources (Senior Center Improvements);
                               Municipal Development (Drain facility, and
                               others
82-1981  5-5-81   Not_Included Requiring Mayor to reinstate operation of Civic
                               Plaza fountain
                               Concerning Industrial Revenue Bonds for MRL in
83-1981  4-23-81  Not_Included amount up to $3,000,000 to expand facility in
                               City and to induce MRL to expand facility of
                               manufacturing functions
                               Concerning Industrial Revenue Bonds for
84-1981  4-23-81  Not_Included Albuquerque Bell Federal Credit Union building
                               at Sixth and Tijeras in amount up to $2,500,000
                               to induce Metropolitan Rehabilitation Project
                               Concerning Industrial Revenue Bonds for Mission
85-1981  4-23-81  Not_Included Research Corp in amount of $3,000,000 to induce
                               entering into a lease of facility in order to
                               expand New Mexico manufacturing functions
86-1981  5-6-81   Not_Included Affirming participation in an endeavor to
                               construct a joint City/County Office Building
                               Determining that City-owned property is not
                               essential for municipal purpose and providing
87-1981  5-1-81   Not_Included appropriation to the Capital Acquisition Funds
                               for closing and remodeling costs at 606 John,
                               N.E.
                               Concerning Industrial Revenue Bonds for
88-1981  5-1-81   Not_Included Americare Corporation in amount up to $4,000,000
                               for purpose of inducing establishment of health
                               care facility in Albuquerque
89-1981  5-5-81   Not_Included Appropriating additional funds to the Human
                               Rights Board for Personnel Services
                               Approving and Consenting to Transfer of
91-1981  5-18-81  Not_Included Dispenser Liquor License to Marriott Corporation
                               at I-40 and Louisiana Blvd., N.E.
92-1981  5-20-81  Not_Included Awarding construction contract for S.A.D. 199 to
                               Moore and Cowart Contractors, Inc.
                               Amending text of University Neighborhoods Sector
93-1981  5-20-81  Not_Included Development Plan Resolution 209-1978, to
                               establish lot sizes, setbacks and conditional
                               uses in zones
94-1981  5-27-81  Not_Included Changing title and scope for a capital project
                               previously authorized
95-1981  5-27-81  Not_Included Establishing approved land application as most
                               effective alternative for disposal of sludge
                               Approving and authorizing filing of application
96-1981  5-27-81  Not_Included for Summer Food Service Program for children
                               with U.S. Department of Agriculture to Parks and
                               Recreation Department
                               Requesting U.S. Dept of Housing and Urban
97-1981  5-27-81  Not_Included Development to utilize existing funds to provide
                               190 additional certificates of family
                               eligibility under Section 8
98-1981  5-27-81  Not_Included Recommending design of San Mateo, S.E. from Zuni
                               to Gibson to NM State Highway Department
                               Authorizing submission of application to U.S.
99-1981  5-27-81  Not_Included Department of Housing and Urban Development for
                               52 units of Turnkey I new construction and loan
                               authority for said units, etc.
100-1981 5-27-81  Not_Included Determining area of S.A.D. 200 to be improved
 
Res. No. Date Disposition Short Title
Res. No. Date    Disposition   Short Title
                               Making certain findings and determinations
                               pursuant to Metropolitan Redevelopment Code;
101-1981 5-27-81  Not_Included amending Alvarado Metropolitan Redevelopment
                               Area boundaries; and authorizing Agency to
                               prepare plan for Bell Credit Union Property
102-1981 5-27-81  Not_Included Approving and authorizing appropriation of
                               $8,550 to complete Mesa Verde Park
                               Approving transfer of dispenser liquor license
103-1981 5-27-81 5-1-14        to Marriott Corp. at I-40 and Louisiana, N.E.,
                               superseding 91-1981
104-1981 6-2-81   Not_Included Appropriating funds for operating in fiscal year
                               1982 additional for various departments
105-1981 6-11-81  Not_Included Appropriating additional funds for Corrections
                               and Detentions Department
106-1981 6-11-81  Not_Included Urging Congress to fund Amtrak to maintain daily
                               service on the Southwest Limited
107-1981 6-10-81  Not_Included Providing for early retirement incentive program
                               and appropriating funds
                               Approving and authorizing action grant to
108-1981 6-17-81  Not_Included Department of Human Services Office of Senior
                               Affairs
                               Approving and authorizing application to NM
                               State Planning Office for Federal grant to
109-1981 6-17-81  Not_Included continue Historic Landmarks Survey Program and
                               appropriation to Department of Municipal
                               Development
                               Metropolitan Redevelopment Plan Entitled Project
                               XVIII - McCanna-Hubbell Bldg. (old Public
110-1981 6-17-81  Not_Included Service Bldg.) for Alvarado Metropolitan
                               Redevelopment Area and issue bonds in amount up
                               to $1,300,000
                               Grant application for grants-in-aid with NM
111-1981 6-17-81  Not_Included State Library and providing appropriation to
                               Cultural Services
                               Grant to C.E.T.A. with Department of Labor and
112-1981 6-17-81  Not_Included providing funds for YETP and YCCIP and SYEP to
                               C.E.T.A. office
113-1981 6-17-81  Not_Included Changing appropriation of funds for Water
                               Resources for fiscal year 1982
114-1981 6-17-81 1-12-1        Approving Metropolitan Redevelopment plan for
                               Project XVII, 8th and Central Commercial Area
                               Approving Metropolitan Redevelopment Plan for
115-1981 6-17-81 1-12-1        Project XI, Public Service Company area at Fifth
                               Street and Lead Avenue
                               Approving Metropolitan Redevelopment Plan for
116-1981 6-17-81 1-12-3        Old Albuquerque High School, Southern Portion at
                               Broadway and Central Avenue
                               Approving Club Liquor License to Tennis Club of
118-1981 6-24-81 5-1-52        Albuquerque, Inc. at 2901 Indian School Rd.,
                               N.E.
                               Approving transfer to dispense alcoholic
119-1981 6-24-81 5-1-15        beverages at Nunzio's Pizza Inc. at 107 Cornell,
                               S.E.
                               Approving dispensing alcoholic beverages by
120-1981 6-24-81 5-1-16        Great Western Incorporated d/b/a Posh Bagel at
                               2216 Central, S.E.
                               Approving dispensing alcoholic beverages at
121-1981 6-24-81 5-1-17        Albuquerque Sports Stadium and the Distillery at
                               1400 University Blvd., S.E.
                               Adopting recommendations of City Engineer and
122-1981 6-30-81  Not_Included authorizing Transportation Department to expend
                               funds for portion of paving assessments for 47th
                               Street in S.A.D. 194
                               Requesting CAB to deny application of Texas
123-1981 6-30-81  Not_Included International Airlines to acquire controlling
                               interest of Continental Airlines
124-1981 6-30-81  Not_Included Approving programming of funds for CIP for two
                               fiscal years beginning 7-1-82 to 6-30-84
                               Approving issuance of restaurant license to
125-1981 6-30-81 5-1-30        dispense beer and wine at Pizza Paisano at 1935
                               Eubank, N.E.
 
Res. No. Date Disposition Short Title
Res. No. Date    Disposition   Short Title
                               Approving issuance of license to dispense beer
126-1981 6-30-81 5-1-31        and wine at Fiesta Restaurant at 6001 Menaul
                               Blvd., N.E.
127-1981 6-30-81 5-1-32        Issuing license to dispense beer and wine to
                               Mexican Kitchen at 4917 South St.
                               Issuing license to dispense beer and wine to
128-1981 6-30-81 5-1-33        Dramer Inc. dba Harry's Place at 2128 Central,
                               S.E.
                               Issuing license to dispense beer and wine to
129-1981 6-30-81 5-1-34        Mannies Family Restaurant, Inc. at 2900 Central,
                               S.E.
130-1981 6-30-81 5-1-35        Issuing license to dispense beer and wine ar
                               Soup `R' Sub at 2206 Central, S.E.
131-1981 6-30-81 5-1-18        Issuing license to dispense alcoholic beverages
                               at Ray's Pizza at 2004 Central, S.E.
                               Approving issuance of license to dispense beer
132-1981 6-30-81 5-1-36        and wine at Willie's Family Diner at 918
                               Central, S.W.
                               Issuing license to dispense beer and wine to
133-1981 6-30-81 5-1-37        Salad Bar Restaurant at Fourth and Silver, S.W.
                               in Alvarado Square
134-1981 6-30-81 5-1-38        Issuing license to dispense beer and wine at
                               Pauline's Mexican Foods at 3401 Fourth St., N.E.
                               Approving transfer of dispensers liquor license
135-1981 6-30-81 5-1-19        to the Albuquerque International Airport at
                               Sumport Blvd., S.E.
136-1981 6-30-81 5-1-39        Issuing license to dispense beer and wine at
                               Gyros Diner at 106 Cornell, S.E.
137-1981 6-30-81 5-1-40        Issuing license to dispense beer and wine at
                               Cel's Pizza at 11032 Montgomery, N.E.
138-1981 6-30-81 5-1-41        Issuing license to dispense beer and wine at El
                               Patio at 142 Harvard, S.E.
139-1981 6-30-81 5-1-42        Issuing license to dispense beer and wine at
                               Pizza City at 127 Harvard S.E.
140-1981 6-30-81 5-1-43        Issuance of license to dispense beer and wine at
                               Polly's Home Cooking at 417 Aspen, N.W.
                               Approving filing of grant application for Title
                               III Older Americans Act Funds and House Bill 2
141-1981 7-8-81   Not_Included from Laws 1981, Chapter 38 funds with Middle Rio
                               Grande Council of Governments and appropriation
                               to Department of Human Services
                               Approving of grant application with Department
142-1981 7-8-81   Not_Included of Transportation for Section 3 Capital Grant
                               under Urban Mass Transportation Act of 1954, as
                               amended
                               Appropriating funds to purchase open space land
143-1981 7-8-81   Not_Included pursuant to real property contract dated 8-6-79
                               made and entered into by Four Hills Estates as
                               seller
                               Transferring inventories from Joint Water and
144-1981 7-7-81   Not_Included Sewer Fund and General Fund to the Materials/
                               Supplies Inventory Management funds as of July
                               1, 1981
145-1981 7-8-81   Not_Included Adjusting appropriations within General Fund and
                               Parking Fund Programs for fiscal year 1981
                               Concerning City's intent to issue bonds for Wool
146-1981 7-8-81   Not_Included Warehouse at First and Roma, N.W. in amount up
                               to $10,000,000 rehabilitation
                               Approving Metropolitan Redevelopment Plan for
147-1981 7-8-81  1-12-1        Project XVI, Albuquerque Bell Federal Credit
                               Union at Sixth and Tijeras
                               Proposing use of City Funds for water and sewer
148-1981 7-8-81   Not_Included extension if City is released from ground lease
                               for same tract
                               Directing Molzen-Corbin to submit plans,
                               estimate of cost, assessment plats, etc. in
149-1981 7-8-81   Not_Included connection with proposed improvement and
                               construction of certain streets, curbs, gutters,
                               and other improvements pursuant to 3-33-
                               1 through 3-33-43 NMSA 1978
                               Approving grant for training officers and
150-1981 7-8-81   Not_Included officer survival certification with LEAA and
                               providing appropriation to APD
 
Res. No. Date Disposition Short Title
Res. No. Date    Disposition   Short Title
151-1981 7-8-81   Not_Included Approving change order No. 3 for S.A.D. 194
152-1981 7-9-81   Not_Included Declaring 14.09 acres of City owned land non-
                               essential for municipal purposes
                               Withdrawing City's notice of termination of
153-1981 7-21-81  Not_Included participation in Joint Powers Agreement with
                               Bernalillo County for operation of joint
                               Corrections/Detention operation
                               Directing Wilson and Co. to prepare, submit and
                               file preliminary plans, estimate of cost,
154-1981 7-21-81  Not_Included assessment plats, for proposed construction of
                               improvements comprising Storm Sewer Assessment
                               District No. 206
                               Approving formation of Albuquerque Housing
155-1981 7-21-81 2-6-2         Finance Corporation, appoint the corporation's
                               initial board of directors, etc. related to
                               corporation's formation and operation
                               Appropriating additional funds to Department of
                               Human Services for continuation of various
156-1981 7-21-81  Not_Included activities previously administered by Senior
                               Citizen Advisory Councils at the Senior Citizen
                               Centers
157-1981 7-21-81  Not_Included Dissolving S.A.D. 196
                               Intent to issue bonds for Graham Paper Company
158-1981 7-21-81  Not_Included Building at 119 John Street, S.E. in amount up
                               to $1,000,000 for rehabilitation of building and
                               surrounding land
                               Approval of 1982 Transportation program for
                               urbanized area, etc. and making recommendations
                               to Middle Rio Grande Council of Governments'
160-1981 7-21-81  Not_Included Urban Planning Policy Board for adoption and
                               transmittal to various State and Federal
                               Agencies assisting with transportation
                               improvements
161-1981 7-23-81  Not_Included Changing appropriations for certain Water
                               Resources Capital Projects
                               Appropriating funds to purchase open space land
162-1981 7-28-81  Not_Included pursuant to contract dated 8-6-79 by Four Hills
                               Estates and superseding R-413 adopted on June
                               22, 1981
                               Approving Mayor to execute agreement for City
163-1981 7-31-81  Not_Included acquisition of 69.25 acres of land designated in
                               Sandia Foothills Master Plan as proposed open
                               space
164-1981 7-28-81  Not_Included Appointing Deputy Clerks
165-1981 8-4-81   Not_Included Calling Regular Municipal Election to be held on
                               October 6, 1981
                               Providing for initiation of S.A.D. 209 on
                               emergency basis and expressing intent of Council
166-1981 8-3-81   Not_Included to borrow funds from unrestricted reserve
                               accounts to finance City's portion of the
                               District
                               Appropriating funds in operating grants fund to
167-1981 8-4-81   Not_Included continue the Supplemental Crime Prevention
                               Effort
168-1981 8-10-81  Not_Included Fixing time when objection to assessment roll
                               for S.A.D. 203 will be heard
                               Continuing assignment of police officers at
169-1981 8-14-81  Not_Included Albuquerque Public Schools as component of
                               School Detective Program
                               Adopting sector development Plan (SD-81-1) for
170-1981 8-11-81 1-7-20        land described in summary plat of El Rancho
                               Atrisco, Phase III, containing approximately 348
                               acres
                               Endorsing St. Joseph Hospital's plans for early
171-1981 8-11-81  Not_Included development of a hospital on west side of
                               Albuquerque
172-1981 8-11-81  Not_Included Establishing charge for Federal prisoners in
                               City/County Detention Center at $45/day
                               Expressing intend of Council to authorize
173-1981 8-10-81  Not_Included issuance of Sales Tax Revenue Bonds to finance
                               portion of Joint City/County office building
                               Amending Resolution 165-1981, Municipal
174-1981 8-11-81  Not_Included Election, by changing the location of polling
                               place for Consolidated Precinct No. 21
 
Res. No. Date Disposition Short Title
Res. Date    Disposition Short Title
No.
                         Authorizing City Grant anticipation notes Series
                         August 19, 1981, in amount of $2,000,000 pursuant to
175- 8-18-81  Not        No. 63-1981; providing detail with respect to such
1981         Included    note making appropriation to pay principal and
                         interest; relating to action previously taken and
                         declaring emergency
176- 8-17-81  Not        Repealing No. 116-1980 and selecting an alignment
1981         Included    for arterial in “San Antonio Corridor”
                         Appropriating funds to Urban Development Agency from
177- 8-17-81  Not        Trust and Agency Tax Increment Account for purpose
1981         Included    of financing dues for City and County membership in
                         Albuquerque Center, Inc
178-          Not        Appropriating additional funds to Special Activities
1981 8-17-81 Included    dues and membership program to cover increase in
                         dues for New Mexico Municipal League
179- 8-17-81  Not        Amending programming of funds for CIP for two fiscal
1981         Included    years July 1, 1982 - ending June 30, 1984
180-          Not        Declaring certain real property located within
1981 8-17-81 Included    Alvarado Metropolitan Redevelopment Area to be not
                         essential for municipal purposes
181- 8-17-81  Not        Approving contract Change Order No. 3 for S.A.D. 192
1981         Included
182-          Not        Adopting Metro Redevelopment Bond policies related
1981 8-17-81 Included    to taxation, ownership, selection and project review
                         procedures
183-          Not        Approving transfer of $166,000 to Arroyo Del Oso
1981 8-17-81 Included    Park Soccer Field and changing total project site to
                         Arroyo Del Oso Park
                         Approving filing of grant application for Laws 1981,
184- 8-17-81  Not        Chapter 6, funds with Middle Rio Grande Council of
1981         Included    Governments and providing for appropriation to
                         Department of Human Services
                         Approving filing of grant application for Air
185- 8-18-81  Not        Pollution Control Grant with Environmental
1981         Included    Protection Agency (EPA) and providing for
                         appropriation to Services Department
186- 8-24-81  Not        Requesting proposals for management and fiscal
1981         Included    audits of Water Resources Department
                         Approving and authorizing filing of application with
187-          Not        FAA for grant to acquire land for Albuquerque
1981 9-3-81  Included    International Airport and providing for
                         appropriation to Airport Capital and Deferred
                         Maintenance Fund
                         Approving and authorizing filing of application with
188-          Not        FAA for grant to continue construction of Double
1981 9-3-81  Included    Eagle II General Aviation Reliever Airport, and
                         providing and appropriation to Airport Capital and
                         Deferred Maintenance Fund
189-          Not        Endorsing Presbyterian Hospital Center's plans for
1981 9-3-81  Included    early development of hospital located on north side
                         of Albuquerque
190- 9-3-81   Not        Appropriating funds for Master Plan for Albuquerque
1981         Included    International Airport
                         Approving formula to be used by the New Mexico State
                         Library for distribution of funds to assist local
191- 9-3-81   Not        governments in providing residents with books for
1981         Included    their public libraries and providing appropriation
                         to Cultural Services Department/Albuquerque Public
                         Library
192-          Not        Rescinding Resolution No. 210-1978, policy that all
1981 9-10-81 Included    buses delivered to City after 10-1-78 be equipped to
                         be accessible to persons whose mobility is impaired
193- 9-10-81  Not        Determining reasonable notice of public meetings of
1981         Included    the Council
194-          Not        Appointing Fran J. Hill as voting delegate to N.M.
1981 9-10-81 Included    Municipal League annual business meeting for the
                         city and appointing Thomas J. Hoover as alternate
                         Accepting preliminary plans, estimates of cost,
195-          Not        assessment plat with addendum and report as to
1981 9-16-81 Included    method used in determining benefits: and making
                         provisional order to effect that improvement and
                         construction work in S.A.D. 206 be done
196- 9-16-81 3-2-10      Adopting policy for establishment and revision of
1981                     city fees
                         Concerning Industrial Revenue Bonds in HJS Limited
197- 9-24-81  Not        Partnership in amount up to $5,000,000 for purposes
1981         Included    of inducing them to acquire facility within city of
                         certain of its health care facilities
                         Authorizing city grant application notes in amount
198- 9-29-81  Not        of $1,900,000 pursuant to Ord. 63-1981 to pay
1981         Included    principal and interest and ratifying action taken
                         with foregoing and declaring emergency
                         Requesting New Mexico State Highway Department to
199- 9-28-81  Not        initiate study for Gibson Blvd. Corridor East from
1981         Included    vicinity of San Mateo to Tramway/Central/I-40/Four
                         Hills Rd. intersection
 
Res. No. Date Disposition Short Title
Res. No. Date     Disposition   Short Title
200-1981 9-29-81   Not_Included Authorizing the submission of an application
                                and proposal to the State Board of Finance
201-1981 9-29-81   Not_Included Modifying and confirming assessment roll for
                                S.A.D. No. 203
202-1981 10-1-81   Not_Included Appointing Deputy City Clerks and rescinding
                                Resolution 164-1981
                                Directing Tom Mann and Associates, Inc. to
                                prepare, submit and file with City Clerk
203-1981 9-30-81   Not_Included proposal regarding construction of streets,
                                etc. in connection with proposed construction
                                in S.A.D. No. 205
204-1981 9-30-81   Not_Included Appointing Precinct Board Members for Regular
                                Election, October 6, 1981
                                Approving guidelines to be used for selection
205-1981 10-14-81  Not_Included of audit firms to review Water Resources
                                Department in accordance with 186-1981
                                Approving filing of grant application for
206-1981 10-12-81  Not_Included Rideshare Program with Federal Highway
                                Administration and providing for appropriation
                                to Department of Transportation
                                Approving grant application for funds under
207-1981 10-12-81  Not_Included Emergency Medical Services Fund Act with New
                                Mexico Health and Environment Department and
                                providing appropriation to Fire Department
                                Appropriating funds to Operations Review
208-1981 10-12-81  Not_Included Program to conduct mailing to Albuquerque
                                residents regarding Ridesharing Program
                                Approving City/County C.E.T.A. Title IIB, Title
209-1981 10-12-81  Not_Included IV SYEP, and Title VII to conduct fiscal year
                                1982 C.E.T.A. Program with fiscal year 1982
                                funds from U.S. Department of Labor
                                Amending determination of area of S.A.D.-195 to
210-1981 10-12-81  Not_Included be improved, previous area having been set by
                                Council enactment No. 21-1981
                                Concerning city's intent to issue Metropolitan
                                Redevelopment Bonds for project to be located
211-1981 10-12-81  Not_Included at Fourth and Tijeras, N.W. in amount up to
                                $5,000,000 for purpose of constructing office
                                building on said location
                                Making findings required by state law regarding
                                Metropolitan Redevelopment Plan for Project
212-1981 10-12-81 1-12-1        XIX, New Mexico Pacific Building Project, at
                                Southeast corner of Tijeras and Fourth and
                                approving plan for project
                                Providing additional appropriation to CIP for
213-1981 10-12-81  Not_Included construction of access road from Rio Bravo/I-25
                                to Albuquerque International Airport
                                Relating to refunding escrow agreement dated
                                12/29/75 between city and First Interstate Bank
                                of Albuquerque; authorizing escrow holder to
                                substitute U.S. Treasury Notes and Bonds; state
                                and local government series with other U.S.
214-1981 10-12-81  Not_Included Treasury obligations in account created
                                pursuant to refunding escrow agreement;
                                authorizing and directing city officials to
                                take all necessary action to redeem all or
                                portion of such notes and bonds and authorizing
                                officials to take action to effectuate the
                                transactions
                                Concerning city's intent to issue hospital
                                revenue bonds for new hospital facility west of
215-1981 10-12-81  Not_Included Albuquerque up to $45,000,000 for purpose of
                                inducing St. Joseph Hospital to construct and
                                operate said new hospital
                                Fixing November 10, 1981 as date of runoff
216-1981 10-14-81  Not_Included election and specifying office to be filled and
                                names of candidates
                                Appropriating park dedication cash-in-lieu
217-1981 10-14-81  Not_Included funds and development fees for improvements at
                                Alamosa Park
                                Concerning Revenue Bonds for De Vore Aviation
218-1981 10-14-81  Not_Included Corporation in amount up to $2,000,000 for
                                purpose of inducing De Vore Aviation to expand
                                its production activities and functions
                                Approving filing of grant for instruction in
219-1981 10-14-81  Not_Included Traffic Accident Investigation with N.M.
                                Highway Safety Bureau and providing
                                appropriation to Police Department
                                Providing minimum requirements for funds
220-1981 10-28-81  Not_Included received under the Community Development Act of
                                1974 as amended for the fiscal year 1982 and
                                subsequent years
                                Requesting legal and actuarial review of
221-1981 10-28-81  Not_Included benefits which should be or are available for
                                annuity reserve fund
222-1981 10-28-81  Not_Included Appropriating funds to Records and Elections
                                for Runoff Election
                                Metropolitan Redevelopment Bonds for Old St.
223-1981 11-2-81   Not_Included Josephs Building up to amount of $10,000,000 to
                                rehabilitate
                                Providing endorsement of city for Investment of
224-1981 11-2-81   Not_Included N.M. Severance Tax Permanent Fund Money in N.M.
                                Residential securities
 
Res. No. Date Disposition Short Title
Res. No. Date     Disposition   Short Title
225-1981 11-2-81   Not_Included Urging State Legislature to regulate sale of
                                legal stimulants
                                Adoption of the build alternate for the I-25
226-1981 11-2-81   Not_Included frontage roads improvement project as described
                                in the environmental analysis
227-1981 11-2-81   Not_Included Determining area of City Storm Sewer Assessment
                                District 206 to be improved
                                Metropolitan Redevelopment Bonds for Woolworth
228-1981 11-2-81   Not_Included Building in amount up to $1,000,000 To induce
                                Crossroads East Limited to acquire and
                                rehabilitate building
                                Metropolitan Redevelopment Bonds for M.J.
229-1981 11-2-81   Not_Included O'Fallon Building in amount up to $1,500,000 to
                                induce 612 First Street Partners to
                                rehabilitate building
                                Metropolitan Redevelopment Bonds for Woolworth
230-1981 11-2-81   Not_Included Building in amount up to $1,000,000 for purpose
                                of inducing Crossroads West Limited to
                                rehabilitate
                                Metropolitan Redevelopment Bonds for Kerr
231-1981 11-2-81   Not_Included Companies, Inc. at Second and Copper N.W. in an
                                amount up to $10,000,000 for Plaza Hotel
                                Rehabilitation
                                Metropolitan Redevelopment Bonds for Slade
232-1981 11-2-81   Not_Included Dairy Building in an amount up to $1,000,000 to
                                induce Slade Dairy to rehabilitate building for
                                offices
                                Requiring the city Department of Finance and
233-1981 11-4-81   Not_Included Management and the Transit Program to study the
                                possibility of raising funds for bus purchases
                                using private capital
                                Requiring Water Resources and consultants to
234-1981 11-4-81   Not_Included give consideration to technical and economic
                                justification for not considering West-Air
                                Oxidation method for sludge
                                Amending determination of area of S.A.D. 195 to
235-1981 11-4-81   Not_Included be improved, area having been set by R-513
                                (210-1981)
                                Adoption of Alternate B for North/South Coors
236-1981 11-4-81   Not_Included Connection in Draft Environmental Impact
                                Statement
237-1981 11-4-81   Not_Included Fixing Objection time for S.A.D. 199 to be
                                heard
                                Making findings required by state law for Crane
238-1981 11-18-81 1-12-2        Warehouse Building in Railroad Metropolitan
                                Redevelopment Area and approving Metro
                                Redevelopment Plan for project
                                Declaring 3.680 acres now used for Beverly
239-1981 11-18-81  Not_Included Woods Tennis Courts non-essential for municipal
                                purposes
240-1981 11-18-81  Not_Included Adopting Uptown Sector Development Plan and
                                amending Zoning Code and Zone Map
241-1981 12-1-81  2-1-3         Creating Citizens Board to develop five year
                                financial plan to be updated annually
242-1981 11-25-81  Not_Included Adjusting funds for certain programs to provide
                                for fiscal year 1981 actual expenditures
243-1981 11-25-81  Not_Included Appropriating funds for cable television
                                operator for fiscal year 1982
                                Approving recommendation of Mayor for award of
244-1981 11-25-81  Not_Included contract to Hamilton Test Systems for
                                establishment of motor vehicle inspection
                                program
245-1981 11-25-81 3-3-6         Providing automatic salary adjustments for
                                position of Mayor
                                Increasing salary of position of Mayor from
246-1981 11-25-81  Not_Included $39,000 to $46,000 in accordance with Article
                                V, Section 2 of Charter
247-1981 11-25-81  Not_Included Declaring approximately 10 acres of city-owned
                                land non-essential for municipal purposes
                                Changing name of Lomas Blvd. Transit
248-1981 11-30-81  Not_Included pedestrianway to Phil Chacon Transit
                                Pedestrianway
                                Industrial Revenue Bonds for Como Plastics
249-1981 11-30-81  Not_Included Corp. in amount up to $3,000,000 to acquire
                                facility for manufacturing
                                Industrial Revenue Bonds for Jackson Plastics
250-1981 11-30-81  Not_Included Co. in amount up to $3,000,000 to acquire
                                facility for manufacturing
 
Res. No. Date Disposition Short Title
Res. No. Date     Disposition   Short Title
251-1981 11-30-81  Not_Included Amending 39-1980 determining that city property
                                is not essential for municipal purpose
                                Approving Joint Powers Agreement for
252-1981 11-30-81  Not_Included implementation of design and construction of
                                City/County Building
                                Amending Sandia Foothills Master Plan approved
253-1981 11-30-81  Not_Included by 13-1978, changing demarcation line between
                                Copper Ave. and Upper Lomas Drainage Channel in
                                Sandia Master Plan
254-1981 11-30-81  Not_Included Appropriating funds for audit of Water
                                Resources Program
                                Appropriating funds for capital purposes
255-1981 11-30-81  Not_Included related to October 1981 General Obligation Bond
                                Election
                                Awarding construction contract for Storm Sewer
256-1981 11-30-81  Not_Included Assessment District 206 to Brice Construction
                                Company of N.M. Inc.
                                Removing requirement that balance of amount
                                over $250,000 provided from G.O. Bonds to
257-1981 11-30-81  Not_Included acquire Michaelson Property in Old Town be from
                                non-local government sources and requesting
                                Mayor to investigate and recommend source of
                                funding for balance
                                Rescinding R-408 (149-1981) and adopting new
                                resolution directing Molzen-Corbin to prepare,
258-1981 11-30-81  Not_Included submit and file preliminary plans, etc., for
                                certain streets, curbs, gutters and other
                                improvements
                                Creating citizen committee to study feasibility
259-1981 11-30-81  Not_Included of renegotiating CATV franchise agreement with
                                Albuquerque Cable Television, Inc. or of
                                purchasing same for resale
260-1981 12-15-81  Not_Included Establishing legislative policy of city for
                                1982 Legislative Session of Legislature
261-1981 12-15-81  Not_Included Appropriating funds to Traffic Engineering
                                program to replace irreparable boiler
262-1981 12-15-81  Not_Included Awarding construction contract for S.A.D. 195
                                to Kent Nowlin Construction Company
                                Setting forth city's intent to issue Industrial
263-1981 12-17-81  Not_Included Revenue Bonds for Southwest Community Health
                                Services
264-1981 12-17-81  Not_Included Modifying assessment roll for S.A.D. 199
                                Authorizing Grant Application Notes in amount
                                of $1,900,000 pursuant to 63-1981; providing
265-1981 1-26-82   Not_Included detail with respect to such notes; making
                                appropriation to pay the principal of and
                                interest on such notes
                                Approving application of C.E.T.A. Title IV YTEP
266-1981 12-22-81  Not_Included with fiscal year 1982 funds from U.S.
                                Department of Labor
                                Appropriating funds to purchase open space
267-1981 12-28-81  Not_Included pursuant to contract of 8-6-79 with Four Hills
                                Estates and city
                                Requesting evaluation by Mayor of alternates
268-1981 12-28-81  Not_Included available for implementation of motor vehicle
                                inspection program and submission of revised
                                draft contract
 
 
Notes
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
1982 Resolutions
Res. No. Date Disposition Short Title
Res. No. Date     Disposition   Short Title
1-1982   12-30-81  Not_Included Authorizing the submission of an application
                                and proposal to the State Board of Finance
                                Adjusting fiscal year 1981 appropriations for
2-1982   1-7-82    Not_Included certain non-operating programs to provide for
                                fiscal year 1981 expenditures
                                A resolution concerning industrial revenue
                                bonds in connection with a proposed project for
                                El Encanto, Inc., a New Mexico Corporation, to
3-1982   1-7-82    Not_Included issue and sell industrial revenue bonds of the
                                city in an amount up to $3,000,000 and for the
                                purpose of inducing said El Encanto, Inc., to
                                acquire a facility in order to expand its
                                manufacturing functions
                                Amending the determination of area of
                                Albuquerque, New Mexico, Special Assessment
4-1982   1-7-82    Not_Included District No. 195 to be improved, the previous
                                areas having been set by Resolution R-539,
                                Council Enactment No. 210-1981
5-1982   1-7-82    Not_Included Approving contract change order No. 1 for
                                Special Assessment District No. 199
                                Approving contract change order No. 2 for
6-1982   1-22-82   Not_Included sidewalk and curb and gutter improvement
                                District No. 5
                                Declaring eight areas of city-owned land now
7-1982   1-22-82   Not_Included used as a portion of the candelaria farms
                                recreation area non-essential for municipal
                                purposes
                                Approving and authorizing the filing of the
8-1982   1-22-82   Not_Included attached grant application with the New Mexico
                                State Library; and providing for an
                                appropriation to the Albuquerque Public Library
                                Approving and authorizing the filing of the
                                attached grant application for a staff
9-1982   1-22-82   Not_Included development grant with the New Mexico State
                                Library; and providing for an appropriation to
                                the Albuquerque Public Library
                                Making certain findings required by state law
                                relating to the Metropolitan Redevelopment Plan
10-1982  2-1-82   1-12-2        for Project III, Union Square, at Central
                                Avenue and Broadway Blvd., in the Railroad
                                Metropolitan Redevelopment Area; approving the
                                Metropolitan Redevelopment Plan for the project
                                Amending the capital improvement program to
                                include the Fifth and Copper parking structure
                                project for design and construction of the
                                project improvements, making certain findings
11-1982  2-1-82    Not_Included required by state law relating to the
                                Metropolitan Redevelopment Plan for Project
                                XII, Fifth and Copper parking structure in the
                                Alvarado Metropolitan Redevelopment area, and
                                approving the Metropolitan Redevelopment Plan
                                for the project
                                Amending the capital improvements program to
12-1982  2-1-82    Not_Included include the joint City/County Office Building
                                Project and the Parking Structure Project to
                                serve the City/County Building
13-1982  2-1-82    Not_Included Further implementing the Terminal Master Plan
                                of the Albuquerque International Airport
                                Authorizing the Mayor to file an application
14-1982  2-1-82    Not_Included for conveyance of property to the city of
                                Albuquerque (Airport)
                                Urging the State Legislature to Pass House Bill
15-1982  2-2-82    Not_Included 118 for the Relief of the Employment Security
                                Department
16-1982  2-2-82   4-2-3         Approving an Inspection and Maintenance Program
                                Directing Gardner, Mason and Associates, Inc.,
                                to prepare, submit and file with the City
                                Clerk/Recorder certain Preliminary Plans,
17-1982  2-4-82    Not_Included Estimate of Cost, Assessment Plats and Addenda
                                thereto, all in connection with the Proposed
                                Construction of Improvements comprising Special
                                Assessment District No. 202
                                Making Certain Findings and Determinations
                                Pursuant to the Metropolitan Redevelopment
                                Code, and Authorizing and Directing the
18-1982  2-4-82    Not_Included Albuquerque Metropolitan Redevelopment Agency
                                to Prepare a Metropolitan Redevelopment Plan(s)
                                for the St. Joseph's Hospital Metropolitan
                                Redevelopment Area
                                Making Certain Findings Required by State Law
                                Relating to the Metropolitan Redevelopment Plan
                                for Project I, Old St. Joseph's Hospital
19-1982  2-4-82   1-12-4        Renovation, 715 Grand Ave. N.E. in the St.
                                Joseph's Hospital Metropolitan Redevelopment
                                Area; approving the Metropolitan Redevelopment
                                Plan for the Project (Repealed by R-2025-086)
                                Approving and Authorizing the Acceptance of
                                Grant Monies from New Mexico State Library to
20-1982  2-4-82    Not_Included Provide 1981-82 Summer Library Services Program
                                for Bernalillo County Children; and Providing
                                for an Appropriation to Albuquerque Public
                                Library
                                Requesting that the Mayor Terminate the South
                                Broadway Economic Development Corporation
21-1982  2-4-82    Not_Included Contract and Rebudgeting Economic Development
                                Funds for Housing Activities and Public Service
                                Programs
                                Appropriating Albuquerque Public School Funds
22-1982  2-4-82    Not_Included into Osuna School Park and Appropriating State
                                Land and Water Conservation Funds into Montano
                                West Park
23-1982  2-11-82   Not_Included Appropriating Additional Funds to the Police
                                Department for fiscal year 1982
24-1982  2-11-82   Not_Included Funding an expansion in the Weed and Litter
                                Program in the Services Department
25-1982  2-11-82   Not_Included Appropriating Funds to Restore Library Hours of
                                Service and Children's Programs
 
Res. No. Date Disposition Short Title
Res. No. Date    Disposition   Short Title
                               Authorizing Notice for Bids on Sale of
26-1982  2-11-82  Not_Included $10,530.00 General Obligation Bonds, Series
                               March 1, 1982
                               Concerning Industrial Revenue Bonds in
                               Connection with a Proposed Project for SDD
                               Magnetics, Inc. to Issue and Sell Industrial
27-1982  2-11-82  Not_Included Revenue Bonds of the city in an amount up to
                               $350,000 and for the Purpose of Inducing SDD
                               Magnetics, Inc. to Remain and Expand in New
                               Mexico its Production Activities and Functions
28-1982  2-11-82  Not_Included Approving Contract Change Order No. 3 for
                               Special Assessment District No. 203
                               Approving the reconstruction contract in
29-1982  2-11-82  Not_Included connection with the Metropolitan Redevelopment
                               Project XIII (Occidental Building Project) in
                               the Alvarado Metropolitan Redevelopment Area
30-1982  3-1-82  4-6-2         Approving Downtown Beautification Report as
                               amended
31-1982  3-1-82   Not_Included Concerning issuance of Industrial Development
                               Revenue Bonds - Hancock/Dikewood Services, Inc.
32-1982  3-1-82   Not_Included Appropriating Funds for 1982 Feria Artesana
33-1982  3-1-82   Not_Included Appropriating Funds to Water Resources
                               Department for Capital Purposes
34-1982  3-1-82   Not_Included Awarding construction contract for Special
                               Assessment District 200 to KNC
35-1982  3-11-82 1-7-21        Adopting La Cuesta Sector Development Plan
                               Approving five-year lease for Metropolitan
37-1982  3-26-82  Not_Included Redevelopment Agency Property, Parcel NMT 21-1-
                               Alvarado Metropolitan Redevelopment Area
38-1982  3-26-82  Not_Included Resolution concerning Industrial Revenue Bonds -
                               Coca Cola Bottling Co.
                               Appropriating $25,000 from General Fund Balance
39-1982  3-26-82  Not_Included for Police Programs to correct Resolution No.
                               23-1982
                               Urging New Mexico Taxation and Revenue
40-1982  3-26-82  Not_Included Department to exempt fixed price contracts from
                               subsequent gross receipts tax increases
41-1982  3-26-82  Not_Included Establishing permanent fund for acquisition and
                               management of Open Space land
                               Approving and authorizing filing of an
42-1982  4-1-82   Not_Included application with Department of Transportation
                               for a Section V operating grant for fiscal 1982
43-1982  4-2-82   Not_Included Concerning parking to serve Planned Joint City/
                               County Office Building
44-1982  4-2-82   Not_Included Changing appropriation amounts for Capital
                               projects previously authorized
45-1982  4-2-82   Not_Included Appropriating Funds to purchase Open Space Land
                               Resolution authorizing exchange of certain
46-1982  4-7-82   Not_Included investments deposited in refunding escrow
                               account established in conjunction with issuance
                               of joint water and sewer refunding revenue bonds
                               Adopting facility plan: electric service
47-1982  4-12-82  Not_Included transmission and subtransmission facilities
                               (1981-1991)
48-1982  4-12-82  Not_Included Determining that certain building or structure
                               at 635 Alcazar S.E. is ruined
                               Approving and authorizing 1979 Bond Project
49-1982  4-12-82  Not_Included scope change to include the procurement of three
                               fire apparatus and one rescue unit to Support 82
                               budget
                               Concerning issuance of Industrial Development
50-1982  4-12-82  Not_Included Revenue Bonds - Four Seasons Nursing Centers,
                               Inc.
 
Res. No. Date Disposition Short Title
Res. No. Date    Disposition   Short Title
                               Approving and authorizing filing of Grant
51-1982  4-12-82  Not_Included application for highway traffic safety
                               administration grant
52-1982  4-12-82  Not_Included Appropriating funds for administration of flood
                               damage prevention program
                               Accepting preliminary plans, estimates of cost,
                               assessment plat with addendum and report as to
                               method used in determining benefits; making a
53-1982  4-12-82  Not_Included provisional order to effect that work of
                               improvement and construction of certain streets
                               and parts thereof, sanitary sewer and water
                               lines all within proposed Special Assessment
                               District No. 202
                               Making certain findings and determinations
                               pursuant to Metropolitan Redevelopment Code;
                               amending Railroad Metropolitan Redevelopment
54-1982  4-12-82 1-12-2        area; authorizing and directing Albuquerque
                               Metropolitan Redevelopment Agency to prepare a
                               Metropolitan Redevelopment Plan for Roma
                               Northwest Building
                               Concerning approval by City Council of City
55-1982  4-12-82  Not_Included Metropolitan Redevelopment Plan entitled Project
                               IV Redevelopment Plan for Railroad Metropolitan
                               Redevelopment Area
56-1982  4-12-82  Not_Included Appropriating funds for 1982 Mayor's Conference
                               for Women in city government
                               Authorizing the city of Albuquerque, New Mexico
                               to grant anticipation notes, series April 5,
                               1982, in the aggregate principal amount of
                               $1,900,000 pursuant to Ordinance No. 63-1981,
57-1982  4-12-82  Not_Included adopted July 13, 1981; providing detail with
                               respect to such notes; making an appropriation
                               to pay the principal of and interest on such
                               notes; otherwise relating to and ratifying
                               action previously taken in connection with the
                               foregoing
                               Setting back date for recommendation of CATV
58-1982  4-12-82  Not_Included franchise Agreement study Committee to Council;
                               amending Resolution 259-1981
                               Amending City/County of Bernalillo Joint Powers
                               Agreement relating to implementing design
59-1982  4-12-82  Not_Included approval stage of City/County Building providing
                               for alternates to joint city, county
                               intergovernmental committee
                               Setting city policy to seek reversal of District
60-1982  4-11-82  Not_Included Court Decision in City and County v. Paradise
                               Hills Special Zoning District Commission No. CV
                               81 07542
                               Amendment to Council Bill R-514 granting waiver
61-1982  4-20-82  Not_Included to Municipal Development Department and
                               Citizen's Advisory Group in meeting requirements
                               of Section 2(a) and Section 2(b) for fiscal 1982
                               Urging villages of Los Ranchos de Albuquerque
62-1982  4-20-82  Not_Included and Tijeras to join Albuquerque/Bernalillo
                               County Air Quality Program
63-1982  5-3-82   Not_Included Adopting municipal hours program for day to day
                               operations of city
64-1982  5-3-82   Not_Included Appropriating additional funds to Department of
                               Services Refuse Collection and Disposal Program
65-1982  5-3-82   Not_Included Approving Metropolitan Redevelopment Plan
                               entitled Project V - New Mexico Produce Building
                               Appropriating additional funds to Urban
66-1982  5-3-82   Not_Included Development Agency from Trust and Agency Tax
                               Increment Account for purpose of financing dues
                               for city membership in Albuquerque Center, Inc.
                               Designating public park and recreation areas
67-1982  5-3-82  6-5-2         where drinking of alcoholic liquors will be
                               permitted
68-1982  5-3-82   Not_Included Continuing child abuse council until 4/30/83
69-1982  5-3-82   Not_Included Approving Contract Change Order No. 2 for storm
                               Sewer Assessment District No. 206
                               Amending City of Albuquerque/County of
                               Bernalillo Joint Powers Agreement relating to
70-1982  5-3-82   Not_Included implementing design approval stage of City/
                               County Building providing for alternates to
                               joint City/County Intergovernmental Com.; and
                               repealing Council Resolution 59-1982
                               Directing Mayor to seek reversal of District
71-1982  5-12-82  Not_Included Court decision in City and County v. Paradise
                               Hills Special Zoning District Commission No. CV
                               81 07542
                               Appropriating funds in Joint water and sewer
72-1982  5-17-82  Not_Included capital fund and changing appropriations for
                               debt service requirements in Joint Water and
                               Sewer Debt Service Fund for fiscal 1982
73-1982  5-17-82  Not_Included Adjusting appropriations in accordance with
                               projected fiscal year 1982 expenditures
                               Fixing time when objections to Assessment Roll
74-1982  5-17-82  Not_Included for Sidewalk, curb and gutter improvement
                               District No. 5
                               Changing appropriation of funds for operation of
75-1982  5-17-82  Not_Included Water Resources Department for 7/1/81, ending 6/
                               30/82
 
Res. No. Date Disposition Short Title
Res. No. Date    Disposition   Short Title
                               Approving and authorizing filing of attached
76-1982  5-17-82  Not_Included grant application for an Emergency Medical
                               Services Fund Act Grant with State of New Mexico
                               Emergency Medical Services Bureau
77-1982  5-28-82  Not_Included Setting level of Projected General Fund Revenue
                               for fiscal 1983
                               Appropriating Funds for operating government of
78-1982  5-28-82  Not_Included the city for fiscal year 7/1/82, ending June 30,
                               1983
                               Determining that a certain building or structure
79-1982  5-28-82  Not_Included at 1251 Seventh St. N.W. is ruined, damaged and
                               dilapidated
                               Determining that a certain building or structure
80-1982  5-28-82  Not_Included at 2824 Williams, S.E. is ruined, damaged and
                               dilapidated
81-1982  5-28-82  Not_Included Approving Contract Change Order No. 1 for
                               Special Assessment District No. 195
82-1982  5-28-82  Not_Included Approving Contract Change Order No. 2 for
                               Special Assessment District No. 195
                               Authorizing Mayor to retain consultant to assist
83-1982  5-28-82  Not_Included in disposition of property received in exchange
                               for portions of Elena Gallegos Grant
                               Making certain findings and determinations to
84-1982  5-28-82 1-12-2        Metropolitan Redevelopment Code; amending
                               Railroad Metropolitan Redevelopment Area
                               boundaries
85-1982  5-28-82 1-12-2        Approving Amendments to Metropolitan
                               Redevelopment Plan entitled Project IV
86-1982  5-28-82  Not_Included Approving and authorizing filing of application
                               for Summer Food Service Program for children
                               Directing Tom Mann and Associates, Inc. to
87-1982  5-28-82  Not_Included prepare, submit, file preliminary plans,
                               estimate of cost, assessment plants and addenda
                               for Assessment District No. 208
                               Concerning Industrial Revenue Bonds in
88-1982  5-28-82  Not_Included connection with proposed Project for Ladera
                               Health Care Co.
                               Appropriating Additional funds to Parks and
                               Recreation Therapeutics Project in the
89-1982  5-28-82  Not_Included Recreation Program provided by Albuquerque
                               Association for Retarded Citizens, Deaf/Blind
                               Program
                               Appropriating Additional Funds from various New
90-1982  5-28-82  Not_Included Revenues to Police Department for fiscal year
                               1982
91-1982  5-20-82  Not_Included Fixing time when objections to Assessment Roll
                               for Storm Sewer Assessment District No. 206
                               Approving and authorizing filing of application
92-1982  5-28-82  Not_Included for an Action Grant; providing for appropriation
                               to Department of Human Services/Office of Senior
                               Affairs
                               Determining Area of Albuquerque, New Mexico
93-1982  5-28-82  Not_Included Special Assessment District No. 202 to be
                               improved
94-1982  6-10-82  Not_Included Approving Contract Change Order No. 4 for
                               Special Assessment District No. 203
                               Approving and authorizing filing of grant
95-1982  6-10-82  Not_Included application for funds for fiscal year 1982
                               through Governor's Office by C.E.T.A. TITLE II-
                               A to provide employment and training activities
                               Approving and authorizing filing of federal
96-1982  6-10-82  Not_Included fiscal year 1982 C.E.T.A. TITLE IV Grant
                               application for summer youth employment Program
                               (SYEP)
                               Authorizing the issuance of the first series of
                               negotiable grant anticipation notes authorized
                               by Ordinance No. 28-1982 in the aggregate
97-1982  6-24-82  Not_Included principal amount of $1,900,000, providing for
                               the series designation thereof, the date, term,
                               interest rate, purchase price and purchaser of
                               said first series; and setting the limitation of
                               action period
                               Naming Mellon Bank N.A., Pittsburgh,
                               Pennsylvania, as agent Bank under Bank Credit
98-1982  6-24-82  Not_Included Agreement and as Trustee under the Trust
                               Indenture provided by Ordinance 29-1982 as
                               amended; ratifying use of prime lending rate of
                               Mellon Bank
99-1982  6-24-82  Not_Included Appropriating additional funds to Department of
                               Services Refuse Collection and Disposal Program
 
Res. No. Date Disposition Short Title
Res. No. Date    Disposition   Short Title
                               Rebudgeting community development funds
100-1982 6-24-82  Not_Included previously allocated to South Broadway Economic
                               Development Corp.
                               Appropriating additional funds to parks and
101-1982 6-24-82  Not_Included recreation's park maintenance program provided
                               through additional new revenues from a contract
                               agreement with Albuquerque Baseball, Inc.
102-1982 6-24-82  Not_Included Appropriating funds for Joint City/County
                               Building in advance of sale of bonds
                               Approving final statement of Community
103-1982 6-24-82  Not_Included Development Objectives and Projected use of
                               Funds for Community Development Program for city
                               for fiscal year 1982
104-1982 6-24-82  Not_Included Appropriating funds to Special Capital
                               Acquisition Program for One-time Expenditures
                               Approving land purchase agreement made and
105-1982 6-24-82 1-9-13        entered into by Regents of University of New
                               Mexico as Seller and city as Buyer
                               Adopting 1982 Urban Implementation Plan
106-1982 6-24-82  Not_Included Revisions demonstrating attainment of National
                               Ambient Air Quality Standards
                               Making certain findings and determinations
107-1982 6-24-82  Not_Included pursuant to Metropolitan Redevelopment Code;
                               Amending St. Joseph Hospital Metropolitan
                               Redevelopment Area boundaries
                               Making certain findings required by State Law
                               relating to Metropolitan Redevelopment Plan for
108-1982 7-7-82  1-12-1        Project XX Bradford Hotel, in Alvarado
                               Metropolitan Redevelopment Area; approving
                               Metropolitan Redevelopment Plan for Project
109-1982 7-7-82   Not_Included Appropriating Funds to Purchase the Michaelson
                               Property in Old Town
                               Appropriating Funds in amount of $1,000 to gross
                               receipts tax revenue note project fund from
110-1982 7-7-82   Not_Included general fund and providing for repayment of such
                               funds to general fund from severance tax revenue
                               bond
111-1982 7-7-82   Not_Included Appropriating additional nutritional program
                               income funds (donations)
112-1982 7-7-82   Not_Included Approving Contract Change Order No. 3 for
                               Special Assessment District 195
113-1982 7-7-82   Not_Included Rebudgeting Community Development Funds
114-1982 7-9-82   Not_Included Approving Contract Change Order No. 4 for
                               Special Assessment District No. 195
                               Approving and authorizing filing of Grant
                               application with National Endowment for Arts for
115-1982 7-9-82   Not_Included a grant to presenting organizations and
                               providing for an appropriation to the Library
                               Department
                               Approving and authorizing filing of an
                               application to New Mexico State planning office
116-1982 7-9-82   Not_Included for Federal Grant to continue Historic Landmarks
                               Survey Program; providing for appropriation to
                               Department of Municipal Development
                               Appropriating funds for campaign to raise public
117-1982 7-9-82   Not_Included contributions for New Mexico History Museum in
                               Albuquerque
118-1982 7-9-82   Not_Included Urging Public donations to fund for construction
                               of Natural History Museum
119-1982 7-9-82   Not_Included Appropriating $23,200 for Elena Gallegos Grant
                               purchase
120-1982 7-21-82  Not_Included Modifying and confirming assessment roll for
                               Storm Sewer Assessment District No. 206
                               Appropriating additional funds to the joint
121-1982 7-23-82  Not_Included water and sewer operating fund 621 for fiscal
                               year 1982
                               Concerning approval of 1983 transportation
                               program elements for Albuquerque urban area and
                               making recommendations to Middle Rio Grande
122-1982 7-23-82  Not_Included Council of Governments Urban Transportation
                               Planning Policy Board for final adoption and
                               transmittal to various state and federal
                               agencies assisting with transportation
                               improvements
                               Approving and authorizing filing of a grant
                               application for Title III Older Americans Act
123-1982 7-23-82  Not_Included Funds and House Bill 2 from Laws 1982, Chapter 4
                               Funds with Middle Rio Grande Council of
                               Governments and providing for an appropriation
                               to Department of Human Services District No. 206
124-1982 - -82    Not_Included Missing
125-1982 7-23-82  Not_Included Determining reasonable notice of public meetings
                               of the council
 
Res. No. Date Disposition Short Title
Res. No. Date    Disposition   Short Title
                               Amending City/County of Bernalillo Joint Powers
                               Agreement relating to implementing the Design
                               Approval state of City/County Building;
126-1982 7-23-82  Not_Included providing Committee authority to contract with
                               architect through final acceptance of project
                               and to solicit binds and award contract for
                               construction of the project
                               Declaring 640 acres of city-owned land located
127-1982 7-23-82  Not_Included in Sandoval County non-essential for municipal
                               purposes
128-1982 7-23-82  Not_Included Amending city Resolution 65-1982
                               Appropriating funds to the parks maintenance
129-1982 7-23-82  Not_Included program to publish parks and recreation
                               ordinance and regulation
                               Modifying and confirming Assessment Roll for
130-1982 7-28-82  Not_Included sidewalk, curb and gutter improvement District
                               No. 5
131-1982 7-28-82  Not_Included Approving Contract Change Order No. 1 for
                               Special Assessment District No. 200
                               Amending boundaries for area eligible for
132-1982 7-28-82 6-6-3         subsidized loans from downtown development loan
                               pool
                               Approving land purchase agreement made and
133-1982 7-28-82 1-9-14        entered into by Beverly Woods Associates, a New
                               Mexico Co-partnership, as seller, and City of
                               Albuquerque, a Municipal corporation as buyer
134-1982 7-28-82  Not_Included Authorizing submission of application and
                               proposal to state Board of Finance
                               Implementing single family mortgage purchase
                               program, authorizing issuance of bonds to
135-1982 7-28-82  Not_Included finance program, establishing guidelines and
                               authorizing sending of invitations to mortgage
                               originators
                               Appropriating additional funds for operation of
136-1982 7-28-82  Not_Included Water Resources Department for fiscal year 7/1/
                               82 - 6/30/83
                               Appropriating additional funds to parking
137-1982 8-5-82   Not_Included program for emergency repair of underground
                               parking generator
                               Approving and authorizing acceptance of grant
138-1982 8-5-82   Not_Included monies from New Mexico State Library to provide
                               1982 summer library services for Bernalillo
                               County children
                               Approving and authorizing filing of grant
139-1982 8-5-82   Not_Included application for basic state grant-in-aid grant
                               with New Mexico State Library; providing for an
                               appropriation to Albuquerque Public Library
                               Approving and authorizing filing of an
140-1982 8-5-82   Not_Included application with Department of Transportation
                               for Section V operating grant for fiscal year
                               1982 under Urban Mass Transportation Act of 1964
                               Accepting preliminary plans, estimates of cost,
                               assessment plat with addendum and report as to
                               method used in determining benefits; making a
                               provisional order of the effect that work of
141-1982 8-5-82   Not_Included improvement and construction of certain streets
                               and parts thereof, water lines, sanitary sewer
                               lines, storm drainage system, all within
                               proposed Albuquerque New Mexico Assessment
                               District No. 201
142-1982 8-23-82  Not_Included Appropriating Funds for Capital purposes related
                               to October General Obligation Bond election
                               Approving and authorizing filing of the attached
                               grant application for an air pollution control
143-1982 8-23-82  Not_Included grant with the environmental protection agency
                               and providing for appropriation to the
                               Environmental Health Department
                               Approving application of City of Albuquerque
                               Bernalillo County Comprehensive Employment and
144-1982 8-23-82  Not_Included training act transitional block grant to conduct
                               the fiscal year 1983 C.E.T.A. transitional
                               program with fiscal year 1983 funds from the
                               United States Department of Labor
                               Authorizing notice for bids on sale of $56,590
145-1982 8-23-82  Not_Included General Obligation Bonds Series September 30,
                               1982
                               Directing Wilson and Company, consulting
                               engineers to prepare submit and file with City
                               Clerk certain preliminary plans, estimate of
146-1982 8-23-82  Not_Included cost, assessment plats and addenda thereto, all
                               in connection with proposed construction of
                               improvements compromising Special Assessment
                               District No. 210
                               Appropriating funds in the Pension Fund for
                               acquisition and management of open space land
147-1982 8-23-82  Not_Included for purpose of retaining consultant to assist is
                               marketing of property to be received in exchange
                               for portions of Elena Gallegos Grant; and for
                               other related miscellaneous expenses
                               Awarding construction contract for Special
148-1982 8-23-82  Not_Included Assessment District No. 202 to Moore and Cowart
                               Contractors, Inc.
149-1982 8-23-82  Not_Included Approving Contract Change Order No. 2 for
                               Special Assessment District 200
 
Res. No. Date Disposition Short Title
Res. Date Disposition Short Title
No.
150- 8-    Not        Authorizing loan of $100,000 September 1, 1982 Single Family Mortgage
1982 23-  Included    Purchase Program from General Fund for fiscal year 1983
     82
151- 9-9-             Establishing standards for the determination by City Council whether or not a
1982 82   5-1-1       waiver of the prohibition of alcoholic liquor being sold within 300 feet of a
                      church or school should be granted or denied
152- 9-
1982 16-  3-1-6       Requiring Competitive Bidding for Airport Parking Lease
     82
153- 9-    Not
1982 16-  Included    Appropriating Funds for use in City Employee Education and Training Programs
     82
154- 9-    Not        Appropriating Funds to the Women's Community Association for the acquisition
1982 16-  Included    of Real Property to be used as the site for the programs as well as for the
     82               lodging of clients of the Women's Community Association
155- 9-    Not        Appropriating Supplemental Funds for the Albuquerque Air Pollution Control
1982 17-  Included    Program of the Environmental Health Department
     82
156- 9-    Not
1982 17-  Included    Appropriating additional funds to the Corrections-Detention Department
     82
157- 9-    Not        Relating to the City of Albuquerque Family Mortgage Purchase Program; a
1982 16-  Included    certain matters related thereto; an Authorizing the execution and delivery by
     82               the City of a Bond Purchase Contract
159- 9-    Not        Approving the “Sycamore Metropolitan Redevelopment Plan” for the Sycamore
1982 29-  Included    Metropolitan Redevelopment Area as a policy guide to redevelopment of the
     82               Sycamore Metropolitan Redevelopment Area
160- 9-    Not        Amending the University Neighborhoods Area Sector Development Plan and
1982 29-  Included    Community Development Plan
     82
161- 9-               Designating an expansion to the University Neighborhoods Community
1982 29-  1-12-6      Development
     82
162- 9-    Not        Approving and Authorizing the filing application with the Federal Aviation
1982 29-  Included    Administration for a grant to provide a master plan for Albuquerque
     82               International Airport
                      Accepting the preliminary plans, estimates of cost, assessment plat with
                      addendum and the report as to the method used in determining benefits: and
163- 9-    Not        making a provisional order to the effect that the work of improvement and
1982 29-  Included    construction of certain streets and parts thereof, and sanitary sewer, and
     82               water, storm sewer lines, and sidewalks, curbs and gutters, all within the
                      proposed Albuquerque New Mexico Special Assessment District #208 in said
                      city, shall be done
                      Approving the Metropolitan Redevelopment plan entitled “Project XXI-Third
                      central redevelopment plan for the Alvarado Metro Redevelopment Area, and the
164- 9-    Not        city of Albuquerque's intent to issue Metro Redevelopment bonds amount up to
1982 29-  Included    $2,000,000 in connect proposed project located at the southwest corner of
     82               Central Ave. and Third St. S.W. in Alb. N.M., for the purpose of inducing
                      central plaza partnership to redevelop the project site in the manner set
                      forth in the plan
165- 9-    Not        Approving and authorizing the filing of the attached grant application for a
1982 29-  Included    rideshare program with the Federal Highway Administration; and providing for
     82               an appropriation to the Department of Transportation
     9-               Approving and Authorizing the Filing of the Attached Grant Application for a
166- 29-   Not        Traffic Accident Investigation and Traffic Management Course with the New
1982 82   Included    Mexico Highway Safety Bureau and providing for an appropriation to the
                      Albuquerque Police Department
167- 9-    Not        Authorizing notice for bids on sale of $56,590,000 general obligation bonds,
1982 29-  Included    series October, 1982 dated the date of issue
     82
168- 9-    Not
1982 29-  Included    Approving Contract Change Order No. 5 for Special Assessment District No. 203
     82
169- 9-    Not        Determining the Area of “Albuquerque, N.M. Special Assessment District No.
1982 29-  Included    201 to be improved
     82
     9-               Making certain findings and determinations pursuant to the Metropolitan
170- 29-  1-12-5      Redevelopment Code, and authorizing and directing the Alb. Metro
1982 82               Redevelopment Agency to prepare a Metro redevelopment plan for the Sycamore
                      Metro Redevelopment Area
171- 10-   Not        Approving Amendments to Alvarado Urban Renewal Plan
1982 7-82 Included
172- 10-   Not        Appropriating Funds for Local Share of Cost of Natural History Museum Project
1982 12-  Included    and approving agreement to place funds in escrow
     82
173- 11-   Not        Authorizing notice for bids on sale of $56,590 general obligation bonds,
1982 5-82 Included    Series December 1, 1982
174- 10-
1982 20-  1-7-22      Adopting Heritage Hills East Sector Development Plan
     82
 
Res. No. Date Disposition Short Title
Res. No. Date     Disposition   Short Title
                                Establishing Legislative Policy of the city for
175-1982 10-20-82  Not_Included 1983 Legislative Session of New Mexico
                                Legislature
                                Amending Resolution 107-1982 to correct legal
176-1982 10-20-82  Not_Included description of an area added to St. Joseph's
                                Hospital Metropolitan Redevelopment Area
                                boundaries
                                Appropriating $130,000 from the Surplus Capital
177-1982 10-20-82  Not_Included to Open Space Trust Fund to be repaid upon
                                receipt of money from sale of land
                                Repealing Section 6A of the Park Policy
178-1982 10-20-82  Not_Included relating to dedication of land for parks and
                                recreation purposes
                                Approving Metropolitan Redevelopment Plan
179-1982 10-20-82  Not_Included entitled Project II Regina Hall Redevelopment
                                Plan for St. Joseph Metropolitan Redevelopment
                                area
                                Adjusting appropriated funds for certain
180-1982 11-9-82   Not_Included programs to provide for fiscal year 1982 actual
                                expenditures
                                Approving and authorizing filing of grant
181-1982 11-9-82   Not_Included application for traffic reduction via statewide
                                office general public video instruction
182-1982 11-9-82   Not_Included Changing appropriation amount for capital
                                projects previously authorized
                                Requesting review by city staff of proposals
183-1982 11-9-82   Not_Included and alternatives available for the expansion or
                                improvement of the convention center
                                Appropriating funds for State Fair grounds
184-1982 11-9-82   Not_Included improvement project; approving agreement with
                                New Mexico State Fair Commission
185-1982 11-23-82  Not_Included Changing Water Resources Department Capital
                                Appropriations
                                Establishing Program to review, evaluate, and
186-1982 11-23-82  Not_Included make recommendations as to policies plan
                                element of Albuquerque/Bernalillo County
                                Comprehensive Plan
                                Requesting New Mexico State Legislature that if
187-1982 11-23-82  Not_Included a statewide lottery is created that
                                distribution of net lottery proceeds be to
                                municipalities
                                Determining that the certain buildings or
                                structures at 123 Rhode Island, N.E. are so
188-1982 11-23-82  Not_Included ruined, damaged and dilapidated as to be a
                                menace to public health, peace or safety and
                                they should be removed
                                Implementing recommendations of Cable TV
189-1982 11-23-82 2-10-2        feasibility study committee by charging
                                Albuquerque Cable Television Advisory Board
                                Approving and authorizing filing of grant
                                application for H.B. 277, Chapter 96, Laws 1982
190-1982 11-23-82  Not_Included Funds with the Middle Rio Grande Council of
                                Governments and providing for an appropriation
                                to the Department of Human Services
191-1982 11-23-82 3-1-7         Ratifying and affirming controlled bidding
                                process for purchase of insurance
192-1982 12-1-82   Not_Included Appropriating funds for replacement of carpet
                                at Convention Center
                                Amending Sandia Foothills Master Plan as
193-1982 12-1-82   Not_Included approved by Resolution Number 13-1976 by
                                changing demarcation line in the Sandia
                                Foothills Master Plan changing plan's name
                                Approving and authorizing the filing of
                                attached grant application for funds under the
194-1982 12-1-82   Not_Included emergency medical services fund act with the
                                New Mexico Health and Environment Department:
                                providing for an appropriation to the Fire
                                Department
                                Creating Special Assessment District No. 208
195-1982 12-1-82   Not_Included and determining advisability of constructing
                                improvements type and character of improvements
                                therein
 
 
 
Notes
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
1983 Resolutions
Res. No. Date Disposition Short Title
Res. Date Disposition Short Title
No.
2-   1-5-  Not        Determining that certain buildings or structures at 442½ Santa Fe S.W. are
1983 83   Included    ruined, damaged and dilapidated
3-   1-5-  Not        Appropriating additional funds to Department of Services, Refuse, Weed and
1983 83   Included    Litter
4-   1-5-  Not        Appropriating additional funds to Human Services Program for implementation
1983 83   Included    of neighborhood organized crime sign program
5-   1-5-  Not        Appropriating funds to Department of Environmental Health and Energy
1983 83   Included
6-   1-5-  Not        Approving and authorizing filing of attached supplemental grant application
1983 83   Included    for Air Pollution Control Grant with Environmental Protection Agency
7-   1-7-  Not        Appropriating additional funds to Corrections-Detention Program
1983 83   Included
8-   1-7-  Not        Amending Resolution No. 121-1982
1983 83   Included
9-   1-4-  Not        Fixing time when objections to the assessment roll for Special Assessment
1983 83   Included    District No. 22 will be heard and causing such roll to be filed
10-  1-7-  Not        Appropriating funds to Sixth and Marquette Parking Structure Project
1983 83   Included
11-  1-7-  Not        Making certain findings and determinations pursuant to Metropolitan
1983 83   Included    Redevelopment Code: amending Alvarado Metropolitan Redevelopment Area
                      boundaries
12-  1-7-             Approving Metropolitan Redevelopment Plan entitled Project XXII, Marquette
1983 83   1-12-1      and Sixth Parking Structure located at the southeast corner of Marquette
                      Avenue and Sixth Street N.W.
13-  1-7-  Not        Providing for appropriation; amending appropriations and title for capital
1983 83   Included    projects previously authorized
14-  1-    Not        Concerning agreements contained in current bargaining unit contracts
1983 13-  Included    between city, Police Officers Association and Local 1455 of International
     83               Association of Firefighters
15-  1-    Not        Resolution relating to pledge of additional security for bonds issued by
1983 13-  Included    city and payable from project rentals by St. Joseph Hospital, Inc.
     83
16-  1-    Not        Approving and accepting grant to provide domestic water service in Mountain
1983 13-  Included    View area from N.M. Health and Environmental Department
     83
17-  1-    Not        Approving water storage contract between U.S. acting through the Bureau of
1983 13-  Included    Reclamation and the city
     83
18-  1-    Not        Providing for appropriation to the capital acquisition fund for capital
1983 13-  Included    improvement project to construct improvements on Tramway Blvd. from Menaul
     83               Blvd. to Montgomery Blvd.
19-  1-    Not        Urging the voters to support the Albuquerque Public School District Bond
1983 19-  Included    Election and Capital Improvement Program on February 1, 1983
     83
20-  1-    Not        Providing minimum requirements for funds received under the Housing and
1983 31-  Included    Community Development Act of 1974 and 1980 as amended for the fiscal year
     83               1983 and subsequent years; repealing Council Resolution No. 514-1981.
                      Concerning the City of Albuquerque, New Mexico's intent to issue
21-  1-    Not        Metropolitan Redevelopment Bonds in connection with a proposed project for
1983 31-  Included    the Shufflebarger Building located at the northeast corner of Gold Avenue
     83               and John Street, S.E. in Albuquerque, New Mexico, in an amount up to
                      $1,000,000
22-  1-    Not        Amending Resolution 175-1982 and establishing an additional city policy for
1983 31-  Included    the 1983 Legislative session of the New Mexico Legislature
     83
23-  1-    Not        Concerning the issuance of Industrial Development Revenue Bonds to finance
1983 31-  Included    a proposed project for American Parts System, Inc.
     83
24-  2-3-  Not        Amending the city policy for the 1983 legislative session; urging
1983 83   Included    implementation of recommendations of the Governor's Task Force on Driving
                      while Intoxicated and Alcohol Abuse
25-  2-4-  Not        Urging the first session of the Thirty-Sixth New Mexico Legislature to
1983 83   Included    allow municipalities to increase the Lodgers' Tax
 
Res. No. Date Disposition Short Title
Res. Date Disposition Short Title
No.
26-  2-4-  Not        Providing for the creation of a Committee composed of City Officials, the
1983 83   Included    Hospitality Industry, and Albuquerque Center, Inc., to study alternative
                      ways of maximizing the use of the 2 increment of the Lodgers' tax
27-  2-    Not        Modifying and confirming the assessment roll for Special Assessment District
1983 10-  Included    No. 200
     83
28-  2-    Not        Authorizing the submission of an application and proposal to the State Board
1983 10-  Included    of Finance
     83
29-  2-    Not
1983 16-  Included    Adopting the Singing Arrow Neighborhood Plan
     83
30-  2-    Not        Concerning Industrial Revenue Bonds in connection with a proposed project
1983 16-  Included    for Westernair, Inc. to issue and sell Industrial Revenue Bonds of the city
     83               of Albuquerque in an amount up to $1,000,000
31-  2-    Not        Awarding the construction contract for Special Assessment District No. 201
1983 16-  Included    to New Concepts, Inc.
     83
32-  2-3-  Not        Amending the determination of area of “Albuquerque, New Mexico, Special
1983 83   Included    Assessment District No. 201” to be improved, the previous area having been
                      set by Resolution R-196, Council Enactment No. 169-1982
33-  2-
1983 17-  1-1-6       Calling for an annually revised Program of planning priorities
     83
34-  2-    Not
1983 18-  Included    Appropriating funds for landfill work completed by Signetics Corporation
     83
35-  2-               Amending the Albuquerque Areawide Wastewater Collection and Treatments
1983 18-  4-3-11      Facilities Plan to provide for alternative wastewater sludge management
     83               systems
36-  2-    Not        Amending the Community Development Fund subsidy in order to allow a change
1983 18-  Included    from subsidizing interest amounts to subsidizing principal amounts
     83
37-  3-    Not        Pursuant to Ordinance 16-1983, relating to Hospital Revenue Bonds;
1983 11-  Included    authorizing and directing Mayor to accept conveyance of land necessary for
     83               implementation of St. Joseph West Mesa Hospital Project
38-  3-               Approving the Metropolitan Redevelopment Plan entitled “Project XXIII Sun
1983 11-  1-12-1      Countryplex Redevelopment Plan for the Alvarado Metropolitan Redevelopment
     83               Area
39-  3-    Not        Providing for an appropriation to the Capital Acquisition Fund for the
1983 11-  Included    Capital Improvement Project to construct concrete paying inlay on Lomas
     83               Boulevard
40-  3-    Not        Concerning Industrial Revenue Bonds in connection with a proposed project
1983 11-  Included    for the American Society of Radiologic Technologists
     83
41-  3-    Not        Approving contract Change Order No. 5 for Special Assessment District No.
1983 11-  Included    195
     83
42-  4-    Not        Concerning the city of Albuquerque, New Mexico loans to lenders Revenue
1983 15-  Included    Bonds
     83
43-  4-6-  Not        Urging the Albuquerque Public Schools Board of Education to consider
1983 83   Included    retention of Lew Wallace School as a magnet school in the Downtown Area
44-  4-8- 1-7-23      Adopting the Singing Arrow Neighborhood Plan; superseding Resolution 29-1983
1983 83
45-  4-8-  Not        Establishing policy relative to the Convention Center operations and
1983 83   Included    maintenance expenditures
46-  4-8- 1-7-4       Amending the Downtown Neighborhoods Area Sector Development and Community
1983 83               Development Plan
47-  4-8-  Not        Appropriating funds from the Miscellaneous Capital Account for Acquisition
1983 83   Included    of property at Sixth and Aspen
48-  4-8-  Not        Concerning the issuance of Industrial Revenue Bonds to finance a proposed
1983 83   Included    project for Lovelace Medical Foundation
49-  4-8-  Not        Approving a lease and option for purchase of water between Theodore Barry
1983 83   Included    and the city of Albuquerque
50-  4-8-  Not        Approving Contract Change Order No. 1 for Special Assessment District No.
1983 83   Included    201
 
Res. No. Date Disposition Short Title
Res. Date Disposition Short Title
No.
                      Directing Scanlon and Associates, Inc. Engineers, to prepare, submit and
51-  4-8-  Not        file with the City Clerk/Recorder certain preliminary plans, estimate of
1983 83   Included    cost, assessment plats setting forth the basis for assessment, and addenda
                      to the assessment plats showing the amounts of maximum benefits estimated to
                      be assessed against certain tracts or parcels of land
52-  4-8-  Not        Directing Espey, Huston and Associates, Inc. to prepare, submit and file
1983 83   Included    with the City Clerk certain preliminary plans,...in connection with proposed
                      construction of improvements comprising Special Assessment District No. 212
53-  4-    Not        Transferring the Inspection Maintenance Program Appropriation from the
1983 15-  Included    General Fund to the Motor Vehicle Inspection-Maintenance Fund
     83
54-  4-    Not        Appropriating additional funds from Special Revenues to the Albuquerque
1983 15-  Included    Police Department for fiscal year 1983
     83
     4-               Approving and authorizing the filing of the attached grant application for
55-  15-   Not        funds made available in fiscal year 1983 through New Mexico State Governor
1983 83   Included    Office by C.E.T.A. Title II-A Governor's discretionary to provide employment
                      and training activities
56-  4-    Not        Approving the application of the city of Albuquerque-Bernalillo County
1983 15-  Included    Comprehensive Employment and Training Act
     83
57-  4-    Not        Appropriating additional funds to the Urban Development Agency of the city
1983 15-  Included    of Albuquerque from the Trust and Agency Tax Increment Account
     83
58-  4-    Not        Making certain findings and determinations pursuant to the Metropolitan
1983 15-  Included    Redevelopment Code
     83
59-  4-               Approving the Metropolitan Redevelopment Plan entitled “Project XXV - Ocho
1983 15-  1-12-1      Building, Redevelopment Plan for the Alvarado Metropolitan Redevelopment
     83               Area”
60-  4-    Not        Amending Resolution No. 90-1976 to alter the composition of the Commission
1983 15-  Included    on the Handicapped
     83
61-  4-    Not        Approving the Metropolitan Redevelopment Plan entitled “Project XXIV -
1983 15-  Included    Quickel Building Renovation Redevelopment Plan” for the Alvarado
     83               Metropolitan Redevelopment Area
62-  4-    Not        Amending the Policies Plan element of the Albuquerque/Bernalillo County
1983 25-  Included    Comprehensive Plan, concerning energy policies in Section B., Environmental
     83               Protection and Community Services
63-  4-    Not        Concerning Industrial Revenue Bonds in connection with a proposed project
1983 25-  Included    for Lasertechnics, Inc. to issue and sell Industrial Revenue Bonds of the
     83               city of Albuquerque in an amount up to $2,500,000
64-  4-    Not        Concerning Industrial Revenue Bonds in connection with a proposed project
1983 25-  Included    for Edwin E. Martin and Associates to issue and sell Industrial Revenue
     83               Bonds in an amount up to $4,000,000
65-  4-    Not        Making certain findings and determinations pursuant to the Metropolitan
1983 25-  Included    Redevelopment Code and amending the Old Albuquerque High School Metropolitan
     83               Redevelopment Area Boundaries
66-  4-    Not        Appropriating funds for a continued campaign to raise public contributions
1983 25-  Included    for the New Mexico Natural History Museum in Albuquerque
     83
                      Amending the existing Capital Improvements Program by approving new
67-  5-5-  Not        projects, changing the scope of certain projects, deleting certain projects
1983 83   Included    and changing appropriation for certain capital projects previously
                      authorized
68-  5-    Not        Amending the interim Downtown Sector Development Plan boundaries and re-
1983 18-  Included    zoning approximately 3.4 acres as SU-3
     83
     5-               Fixing the time when objections to the Assessment Roll for Special
69-  18-   Not        Assessment District No. 202, of the city of Albuquerque, New Mexico, made by
1983 83   Included    the City Council, together with Gardner, Mason and Associates, Inc., will be
                      heard
70-  5-    Not        Indicating intent to issue Health Care Revenue Bonds for the purpose of
1983 18-  Included    refinancing existing indebtedness related thereto
     83
71-  5-    Not        Rescinding Resolution No. R-292, Enactment No. 19-1981 and adopting a new
1983 18-  Included    resolution directing Scanlon and Associates to prepare, submit and file
     83               certain preliminary plans
72-  5-    Not        Approving Contract Change Order No. 2 for Special Assessment District No.
1983 18-  Included    201
     83
73-  5-    Not
1983 18-  Included    Changing appropriation amounts for Capital Projects previously authorized
     83
74-  5-    Not        Approving and authorizing the filing of the attached application for a
1983 18-  Included    summer food service program for children with the New Mexico Department of
     83               Human Services
75-  6-3-  Not        Appropriating funds for operating the Government of the city for fiscal year
1983 83   Included    July 1, 1983
 
Res. No. Date Disposition Short Title
Res. Date Disposition Short Title
No.
76-  6-8-  Not        Appropriating funds for a Foreign Trade Zone Marketing and Development
1983 83   Included    Study
77-  6-8-  Not        Adjusting appropriations in accordance with projected fiscal year 1983
1983 83   Included    expenditures
78-  6-8-  Not        Approving and authorizing the filing of the attached application for an
1983 83   Included    action grant
79-  6-8-  Not        Approving the final statement of Community Development objectives and
1983 83   Included    projected use of funds for the CD Program for fiscal year 1983
80-  6-8-  Not        Designating the Tingley Beach Metropolitan Redevelopment Area, making
1983 83   Included    certain findings and determinations pursuant to the Metropolitan
                      Redevelopment Code
81-  6-8-             Approving the Metropolitan Redevelopment Plan entitled “Project I, Beach
1983 83   1-12-7      Property Redevelopment Plan for the Tingley Beach Metropolitan
                      Redevelopment Area”
82-  6-8-  Not        Fixing the time when objections to the Assessment Roll for Special
1983 83   Included    Assessment District No. 195 of the city, made by the City Council,
                      together with Leedshill-Herkenhoff, will be heard
83-  6-8-  Not        Amending the St. Joseph Hospital Metropolitan Redevelopment Area
1983 83   Included    Boundaries
84-  6-8-             Approving the Metropolitan Redevelopment Plan entitled “Project III,
1983 83   1-12-4      Woodward Center Redevelopment Plan for the St. Joseph Hospital
                      Metropolitan Redevelopment Area”
85-  6-8- 1-6-6       Approving Amendments to the Phase I Alvarado Metropolitan Redevelopment
1983 83               Plan
86-  6-8-  Not        Authorizing an Urban Development Action Grant Application to the U.S.
1983 83   Included    Department of Housing and Urban Development for El Encanto, Inc.
                      Directing Gardner, Mason and Associates, Inc. to prepare, submit and file
87-  6-8-  Not        with the City Clerk preliminary plans...in connection with proposed
1983 83   Included    construction of improvements comprising Special Assessment District No.
                      211
88-  6-8-  Not        Approving and authorizing the filing of an application with the Department
1983 83   Included    of Transportation for a Section V operating grant for fiscal year 1983
                      under the Urban Mass Transportation Act of 1964, as amended
                      Accepting the preliminary plans, estimate of cost, assessment plat with
89-  6-8-  Not        addendum and the report as to the method used in determining benefits and
1983 83   Included    making a provisional order to the effect that the work of improvement and
                      construction of certain streets and parts thereof, and sanitary sewer and
                      storm sewer... within proposed Special Assessment District No. 205
90-  6-8-  Not        Approving Contract Change Order No. 1 for Special Assessment District No.
1983 83   Included    202
91-  6-8-  Not        Relating to the proposed Albuquerque Special Assessment District No. 212;
1983 83   Included    accepting preliminary plans...within proposed district
92-  6-8-  Not        Relating to proposed Albuquerque Special Assessment District No. 214;
1983 83   Included    accepting preliminary plans...within proposed district
93-  6-8-  Not        Appropriating funds for operating the Bernalillo County Corrections and
1983 83   Included    Detention Facility for fiscal year 1983
94-  6-    Not        Concerning notification to the PERA Board regarding election of
1983 10-  Included    Albuquerque Police Officers and Firefighters to participate in increased
     83               employee contributions and benefits
95-  6-    Not        Relating to Industrial Revenue Bonds payable from Project Rentals by Love-
1983 15-  Included    Lace Medical Foundation
     83
96-  6-               Amending the adopted Northwest Meas Area Plan to allow community scale
1983 15-  1-11-1      commercial development at the intersection of Coors and Montano, N.W.
     83
97-  6-    Not        Creating an operating reserve fund; setting conditions for expenditure
1983 15-  Included    from this fund
     83
98-  6-    Not        Appropriating funds to the C.E.T.A. funds for the city's portion of the
1983 15-  Included    Summer Youth Employment Program
     83
99-  6-    Not        Concerning the interest rate on city industrial development revenue bonds
1983 15-  Included    (Motorola, inc. Project)
     83
 
Res. No. Date Disposition Short Title
Res. No. Date    Disposition   Short Title
100-1983 6-15-83  Not_Included Approving Contract Change Order No. 3 for
                               Special Assessment District No. 200
101-1983 6-16-83 1-11-10       Readopting the rand two Sandia Foothills Area
                               Plan; modifying the demarcation line
102-1983 6-16-83  Not_Included Establishing policy regarding user charge in
                               city parks and recreational facilities
                               Approving the final statement of Community
103-1983 6-28-83  Not_Included Development objectives and projected use of
                               funds for the Special Community Development Jobs
                               Bill Program for 1983
                               Authorizing and filing of an application with
104-1983 6-29-83  Not_Included the Department of Transportation for a grant
                               under the Urban Mass Transportation Act of 1964
                               Guaranteeing the local share of a capital grant
105-1983 6-29-83  Not_Included from the Urban Mass Transportation
                               Administration
                               Determining that four parcels of city-owned
106-1983 6-29-83  Not_Included property are not essential for a municipal
                               purpose
                               Approving and authorizing the filing of an
107-1983 6-29-83  Not_Included application to the Historic Preservation Bureau
                               of the N.M. Department of Finance and
                               Administration, for a federal grant
108-1983 6-29-83  Not_Included Modifying and confirming the Assessment Roll for
                               Special Assessment District No. 202
109-1983 6-29-83  Not_Included Authorizing application by the city for the
                               designation of a foreign trade zone
                               Appropriating funds for the acquisition of a
110-1983 6-29-83  Not_Included 28.5 acre parcel of land for the expansion of
                               the Phil Chacon Park
111-1983 6-29-83  Not_Included Appropriating funds for paving an access road
                               and parking area for the North Valley Park
                               Reprogramming G.O. Bond funds for the Urban Mass
                               Transit Administration Grant Match for the
112-1983 6-29-83  Not_Included Transit Department and appropriating Heritage
                               Conservation and Resource Service Grant funds
                               for Parks Department
113-1983 6-29-83  Not_Included Amending Resolution 91-1983 to change the date
                               and time of the protest hearing
114-1983 6-29-83  Not_Included Authorizing the submission of an application and
                               proposal to the State Board of Finance
                               Approving the submission of an Economic
115-1983 6-30-83  Not_Included Development Administration Grant for the city
                               for fiscal year 1983
                               Approving the programming of funds for Capital
116-1983 7-6-83   Not_Included Improvements Projects for the 1983 two-year
                               Capital Improvements Budget
117-1983 7-21-83  Not_Included Concerning the regular municipal election to be
                               held in the city on Tuesday, October 4, 1983
                               Setting forth the city's intent to issue
118-1983 7-28-83  Not_Included Industrial Revenue Bonds for Hospital
                               Corporation of America to induce said company to
                               construct a health care facility in Albuquerque
                               Concerning the city's intent to issue Industrial
119-1983 7-28-83  Not_Included Development Revenue Bonds to finance a proposed
                               project for Albuquerque Academy, Inc., in an
                               amount up to $10,000,000
120-1983 7-28-83  Not_Included Determining reasonable notice of public meetings
                               of the Council
                               Relating to the proposed Albuquerque Special
121-1983 7-28-83  Not_Included Assessment District No. 211; accepting
                               preliminary plans...in determining benefits
                               thereto
                               Determining the area of Albuquerque, New Mexico,
122-1983 7-28-83  Not_Included Special Assessment District No. 205 to be
                               improved
                               Approving and authorizing the filing of the
123-1983 7-28-83  Not_Included attached application for a Foster Grandparent
                               Grant with the State Action Office and the N.M.
                               State Agency on Aging
124-1983 8-3-83   Not_Included Approving the 1984 Transportation Program for
                               the Albuquerque urbanized area
                               Establishing minimum guidelines for the
125-1983 8-3-83   Not_Included Community Development Housing Program Revolving
                               Loan Funds
 
Res. No. Date Disposition Short Title
Res. No. Date    Disposition   Short Title
126-1983 8-3-83   Not_Included Appropriating additional funds to the
                               Corrections-Detention Department
                               Approving a Grant Application with the Federal
127-1983 8-3-83   Not_Included Aviation Administration for reconstruction of a
                               portion of Runway 08/26 and 17/35 at Albuquerque
                               International Airport
128-1983 8-3-83   Not_Included Designating funds for the landscaping of Tramway
                               Boulevard
                               Amending the boundaries for the area eligible
129-1983 8-3-83  6-6-3         for subsidized loans from the Downtown
                               Redevelopment Loan Pool
                               Suggesting that Old Memorial Associate Limited,
130-1983 8-3-83   Not_Included acquire, construct, and complete a project
                               within the meaning of the New Mexico Industrial
                               Revenue Bond Act
                               Appropriating funds in the Operating Grants
131-1983 8-3-83   Not_Included Funds to continue the Supplemental crime
                               prevention effort
                               Revising the usage for which the proceeds from
132-1983 8-3-83   Not_Included the sale of the Civic Auditorium property can be
                               used
                               Approving and authorizing the filing of a Grant
133-1983 8-3-83   Not_Included Application with the Middle Rio Grande Council
                               of Governments for Title III, Older Americans
                               Act Fund
                               Appropriating funds in the Capital Program for
134-1983 8-3-83   Not_Included the purpose of constructing a salt storage
                               facility for the Transportation Department's
                               Street Maintenance Division
135-1983 8-3-83   Not_Included Relating to and creating Albuquerque Special
                               Assessment District No. 212
136-1983 8-10-83  Not_Included Appropriating funds for Capital Projects and to
                               the Urban Enhancement Trust Fund
                               Reaffirming the policy of the city regarding the
137-1983 8-17-83  Not_Included Council of Governments on the area agency on
                               aging
138-1983 8-18-83  Not_Included Adopting the Transit Development Program
                               transmitted to the Council on June 20, 1983
139-1983 8-17-83 6-6-6         Setting city policy with regard to Motion
                               Picture and Television Promotion
140-1983 8-17-83  Not_Included Appropriating additional funds to the Services
                               Department Building Maintenance Program
                               Approving and authorizing filing of the attached
141-1983 8-17-83  Not_Included grant application for an air pollution control
                               grant with EPA
                               Approving and authorizing filing of the attached
142-1983 8-17-83  Not_Included application for coordinated community in-home
                               care grant
                               Concerning city's intent to issue first mortgage
143-1983 8-17-83  Not_Included rental housing facility industrial revenue bonds
                               - OGL retirement
144-1983 8-29-83  Not_Included Calling for preparation of revised Downtown
                               Sector Development Plan
145-1983 8-29-83  Not_Included Modifying and confirming assessment roll for
                               Special Assessment District 195
146-1983 8-29-83 1-1-5         Setting city policy as to withdrawal of
                               petitioners for annexation
147-1983 8-29-83  Not_Included Authorizing submission of application and
                               proposal to state Board of Finance
                               Concerning city's intent to issue Metropolitan
                               Redevelopment Revenue Bonds in connection with
148-1983 8-29-83  Not_Included proposed project for Alvarado Metropolitan
                               Redevelopment Area in an amount up to $6,000,000
                               - Dinerstein Interests 1982-A
149-1983 8-29-83  Not_Included Setting forth city's intent to issue bonds on
                               behalf of Osteopathic Hospital Association
                               Appropriating funds to purchase aggregate
150-1983 8-29-83  Not_Included concrete waste receptacles to place in parts of
                               city public rights-of-way
 
Res. No. Date Disposition Short Title
Res. No. Date     Disposition   Short Title
                                Amending Resolution No. 117-1983, Municipal
151-1983 8-29-83   Not_Included Election Resolution, by changing consolidated
                                precincts in Section 8
                                Approving and authorizing filing of the
152-1983 8-29-83   Not_Included attached grant application with the Department
                                of Justice for reduction of jail overcrowding
                                Accepting invitation by city of Hualien,
153-1983 8-29-83  6-3-2         Taiwan, Republic of China, to become Sister
                                City
154-1983 8-30-83   Not_Included Creating a Joint City/County Unification Task
                                Force
                                Concerning city's intent to issue Metropolitan
155-1983 9-12-83   Not_Included Redevelopment Bonds in connection with proposed
                                project for Southwestern Resorts Associates
                                Approving and authorizing filing of attached
156-1983 9-13-83   Not_Included grant application for a basic state grant-in-
                                aid grant with the N.M. State Library
                                Awarding construction contract for Special
157-1983 9-13-83   Not_Included Assessment District No. 212 to Broce
                                Construction Co., Inc.
                                Urging the Administration to move quickly in
158-1983 9-13-83   Not_Included the development of detailed procedures and
                                policy guidelines for improvement districts
                                Authorizing removal of certain uncollectable
159-1983 10-6-83   Not_Included accounts from the city's Accounts Receivable
                                Records
                                Amending city's Joint Powers Agreement relating
160-1983 10-6-83   Not_Included to implementing design approval state of City/
                                County Building
                                Creating Mass Transit Citizens Advisory Board
161-1983 10-6-83   Not_Included and Advisory Committee on transit for elderly
                                and handicapped as a Sub-Committee of the Board
                                Approving and authorizing filing of application
162-1983 10-6-83   Not_Included with Department of Transportation for a Section
                                9A Capital Grant for a bus storage facility
                                Approving and authorizing filing of an
163-1983 10-6-83   Not_Included application with Department of Transportation
                                with a Section V Capital Grant for Purchase of
                                four vans for handicapped citizens
                                Concerning city's intent to issue Industrial
164-1983 10-4-83   Not_Included Development Revenue Bonds to finance proposed
                                project for Albuquerque-Mountain View, Ltd.
                                Approving and authorizing the filing of the
165-1983 10-6-83   Not_Included attached grant application for a rideshare
                                program with Federal Highway Administration
166-1983 10-6-83   Not_Included Expression of concern and support of National
                                Government in Korean Airliner incident
167-1983 10-6-83   Not_Included Amending Resolution 154-1983, creating a joint
                                City/County Unification Task Force
                                Fixing November 8, 1983, as date of the runoff
168-1983 10-19-83  Not_Included election and specifying office to be filled and
                                names of candidates therefor
                                Appropriating additional funds to the
169-1983 10-21-83  Not_Included Department of Services and Refuse, Weed and
                                Litter Program
                                Appropriating additional funds to the
170-1983 10-21-83  Not_Included Department of Human Services for the purpose of
                                maintenance of effort of youth crisis services
                                Approving and authorizing filing of attached
                                grant application for funds to be made
171-1983 10-21-83  Not_Included available in fiscal year 1984 through N.M.
                                State Governor's Office by the Job Training
                                Partnership Act to provide employment
                                Concerning city's intent to issue Metropolitan
172-1983 10-21-83  Not_Included Redevelopments Bonds in connection with
                                proposed project for Fourth and Tijeras Limited
                                Partnership
173-1983 10-21-83  Not_Included Amending existing CIP by approving new projects
174-1983 10-21-83  Not_Included Correcting a technical error in attachment to
                                Resolution No. 160-1982 (R-170 Fourth Council)
                                Approving and authorizing filing of attached
175-1983 10-21-83  Not_Included grant application for funds under the Emergency
                                Medical Services Fund Act with N.M. Health and
                                Environment Department
 
Res. No. Date Disposition Short Title
Res. No. Date     Disposition   Short Title
                                Relating to and creating Albuquerque Special
176-1983 10-21-83  Not_Included Assessment District No. 214; determining the
                                advisability of constructing certain street,
                                sanitary sewer, drainage and water improvements
                                Appropriating a portion of the Water Resources
177-1983 10-25-83  Not_Included Department net operating revenues for capital
                                purposes
                                Suggesting that New Mexico Surgicenter
178-1983 10-25-83  Not_Included Partnership, a N.M. General Partnership,
                                construct and complete a project within the
                                meaning of the N.M. Industrial Revenue Bond Act
                                Amending Resolution 144-1981, transferring
179-1983 10-25-83  Not_Included inventories from joint water and sewer funds
                                and general fund to the materials/supplies
                                inventory management fund
                                Amending Resolution No. 67-1982 to permit
180-1983 10-25-83 6-5-2         drinking of alcoholic liquors at Civic Plaza
                                only during certain special events
                                Providing for participation in federal aid for
181-1983 10-25-83  Not_Included outdoor recreation assistance under the Land
                                and Water Conservation Act of 1963
                                Approving and authorizing filing of attached
182-1983 10-25-83  Not_Included grant application for an Albuquerque Bus Data
                                Study for fuel cell research grant from Urban
                                Consortium Energy Task Force
183-1983 10-25-83  Not_Included Awarding construction contract for Special
                                Assessment District No. 208 to KNC, Inc.
                                Concerning Industrial Revenue Bonds in
184-1983 10-25-83  Not_Included connection with proposed project for Plastech
                                Research, Inc.
                                Calling for a citizen committee and staff to
185-1983 10-25-83  Not_Included pursue the development of a performing arts
                                center
                                Amending Section 2 of Resolution No. 255,
186-1983 10-25-83  Not_Included Enactment No. 26-1983, establishing the
                                Lodgers' Tax Ad Hoc Committee
                                Changing appropriation amounts for Capital
187-1983 10-25-83  Not_Included Projects previously authorized and also
                                approving and authorizing the acceptance of a
                                grant from the EPA
                                Appropriating interest earned on a portion of
188-1983 10-25-83  Not_Included the funds received as a result of the gross
                                receipts tax decision
                                Relating to Albuquerque, New Mexico Special
                                assessment District No. 212; setting the time
189-1983 11-8-83   Not_Included and place of an assessment hearing when
                                objections to the assessment roll for such
                                district will be heard
                                Appropriating funds to purchase the YMCA
190-1983 11-3-83   Not_Included property located in the vicinity of Grecian
                                Avenue and Guadalupe Trail
                                Amending the city of Albuquerque/County of
                                Bernalillo Joint Powers Agreement relating to
191-1983 11-7-83   Not_Included the city-county building, increasing the
                                authority of the project coordinator for the
                                construction phase of the project
192-1983 11-7-83   Not_Included Repealing Resolution 154-1983; Creating a Joint
                                City/County Unification Task Force
                                Designating the Phoenix Ave. Metropolitan
193-1983 11-7-83   Not_Included Redevelopment Area, making certain findings and
                                determinations pursuant to the Metropolitan
                                Redevelopment Code
194-1983 11-7-83   Not_Included Approving the cancellation of Sanitary Sewer
                                Special Agreement No. 1974-1
                                Approving and authorizing the filing of the
195-1983 11-7-83   Not_Included attached grant application for a diversion of
                                convicted offenders program with the State of
                                New Mexico Corrections Department
                                Concerning the city of Albuquerque, New
                                Mexico's intent to issue Metropolitan
196-1983 11-7-83   Not_Included Redevelopment Bonds in connection with a
                                proposed project for Phoenix Apartments Ltd.,
                                Partnership
                                Amending Section 1. (2) of Resolution 439 to
197-1983 11-18-83  Not_Included alter composition of Joint City/County
                                Unification Task Force
198-1983 11-18-83  Not_Included Appropriating funds to secure mediation
                                services for the city of Albuquerque
                                Appropriating money to fund public access cable
199-1983 11-18-83  Not_Included TV and to provide for the employment of a city
                                cable TV officer
 
Res. No. Date Disposition Short Title
Res. No. Date     Disposition   Short Title
                                Requiring the refuse removal fund to transfer
                                funds to the gross receipts revenue note debt
200-1983 11-18-83  Not_Included service fund in the amount equal to the
                                interest and principal payments on the portion
                                of those notes which funded the refuse removal
                                project
201-1983 11-18-83  Not_Included Appropriating funds to the Lodgers Promotion
                                Program in the Lodgers Tax Fund
                                Establishing the legislative policy of the city
202-1983 11-18-83  Not_Included of Albuquerque for the 1984 legislative session
                                of the New Mexico legislature
                                Adjusting appropriated funds for certain
203-1983 11-18-83  Not_Included programs to provide for fiscal year 1983 actual
                                expenditures
                                Appropriating funds to the Museum to
204-1983 11-18-83  Not_Included participate in the organization of a traveling
                                exhibition of ancient Mayan art
205-1983 11-18-83  Not_Included Appropriating $300,000 to the Microelectronic
                                Economic Development Fund
                                Relating to the proposed Albuquerque N.M.
                                Special Assessment District No. 204; directing
206-1983 11-18-83  Not_Included William Matotan and Asst., Inc Engineers to
                                prepare, submit and file with the City Clerk
                                certain preliminary plans
                                Relating to the proposed Albuquerque, N.M.
                                Special Assessment District No. 207; directing
                                Denney-Gross and Ass. Inc., to prepare, submit
207-1983 11-18-83  Not_Included and file with the City Clerk certain
                                preliminary plans, estimates of cost and
                                assessment plans with addendum all in
                                connection therewith
                                Approving and authorizing the acceptance of
                                grant monies for increasing use of restraint
208-1983 11-18-83  Not_Included systems and decreasing DWI through officer,
                                citizen Video Education from the N.M. Traffic
                                Safety Bureau and providing for an
                                appropriation to the APD
                                Appropriating funds to the Zoo to construct
209-1983 11-18-83  Not_Included wolf rearing pens under contract to the State
                                of N.M.
                                Approving and authorizing the filing of the
                                attached application for a grant from the
210-1983 12-7-83   Not_Included Federal Department of Health and Human
                                Services; and providing for an appropriation to
                                the Department of Human Services
                                Approving the Metropolitan Redevelopment Plan
                                entitled Phoenix Ave. Apartment Complex
                                (Project I) for the Phoenix Ave. Metropolitan
211-1983 12-7-83   Not_Included Redevelopment area and making certain findings
                                required by state law relating to the plan for
                                the Phoenix Ave. Apartment Complex Pro. West of
                                4th St. and Phoenix S.W.
212-1983 12-7-83   Not_Included Appropriating funds for a touring cultural
                                series
                                Authorizing an Urban Development Action Grant
213-1983 12-7-83   Not_Included Application to the U.S. Department of Housing
                                and Urban Development for the Phoenix Ave.
                                Apartment Complex
                                Concerning the city of Albuquerque, N.M.'s
                                intent to issue industrial development revenue
214-1983 12-7-83   Not_Included bonds to finance a proposed project for United
                                Softball Facilities, a N.M. limited
                                partnership, its successors or assigns, in an
                                amount up to $3,000,000
                                Relating to industrial revenue bonds payable
                                from project rentals by OGL retirement
215-1983 12-7-83   Not_Included facilities; confirming the sale of the city's
                                first Mortgage Rental Housing Facility Revenue
                                Bonds (OGL Retirement Facilities Project)
                                Series 1983
                                Repealing Resolution 117-1983; Appropriating a
                                portion of the Water Resources Department net
                                operating revenues for capital purposes;
216-1983 12-7-83   Not_Included authorizing the issuance of revenue notes or
                                bonds to defray the cost of certain wastewater
                                treatment plant capital projects and
                                reprogramming currently appropriated capital
                                project funds
217-1983 12-27-83  Not_Included Concerning City Metropolitan Redevelopment
                                Revenue Bonds (Western Resorts Associates)
                                Relating to Albuquerque Special Assessment
218-1983 1-9-84    Not_Included District No. 212; submission of application and
                                proposal to State Board of Finance
219-1983 12-27-83  Not_Included Appointing Nadyne Bicknell to the Board of
                                Directors of the New Mexico Municipal League
220-1983 12-27-83  Not_Included Relating to and creating Albuquerque Special
                                Assessment District No. 211
                                Amending adopted Northwest Mesa Area Plan to
221-1983 12-27-83 1-11-1        allow a regional center at Coors and Paradise,
                                N.W.
222-1983 12-27-83  Not_Included Appropriating additional funds to the Animal
                                Control Program
223-1983 12-27-83  Not_Included Ranking of city plans adopted prior to adoption
                                of Article 7-4 R.O. 1974
                                Amending and establishing priorities for Parks
224-1983 12-27-83  Not_Included and Recreation Capital Improvements Projects
                                eligible for land and water conservation funds
                                Approving and authorizing the acceptance of a
225-1983 12-27-83  Not_Included grant from the EPA and providing for an
                                appropriation to the Water Resources Department
 
Res. No. Date Disposition Short Title
Res. No. Date     Disposition   Short Title
226-1983 12-27-83  Not_Included Relating to proposed Special Assessment
                                District No. 213
                                Approving and authorizing filing of attached
227-1983 12-27-83  Not_Included grant application for a public energy
                                demonstration center with the New Mexico Energy
                                and Minerals Department
                                Requesting the Town Affiliation Association
228-1983 12-27-83 6-3-3         with Helmstedt, Germany, to become a Sister
                                City of Albuquerque
229-1983 12-28-83  Not_Included Amending the CIP to include the Piedras
                                Marcadas Open Space Acquisition
                                Concerning the city's intent to issue
230-1983 12-29-83  Not_Included industrial development revenue bonds to finance
                                a proposed project for Crestview Aviation, Inc.
                                Approving and authorizing the filing of the
                                attached grant application for traffic
231-1983 12-29-83  Not_Included enforcement and accident reconstruction with
                                the New Mexico Highway Traffic Safety Bureau;
                                and providing for an appropriation to the
                                Police Department
                                Relating to Albuquerque, New Mexico Special
                                Assessment District No. 212; Modifying,
232-1983 12-23-83  Not_Included confirming and approving the assessment roll
                                and distribution of assessments for such
                                district
                                Approving and authorizing the filing of an
                                application with the Department of
233-1983 12-29-83  Not_Included Transportation for a Section V Capital Grant
                                for purchase of shop equipment under the Urban
                                Mass Transportation Act of 1964, as amended
                                Approving and authorizing the filing of an
                                application with the Department of
234-1983 12-29-83  Not_Included Transportation for a Section IX Capital Grant
                                for purchase of fleet maintenance equipment
                                under the Urban Mass Transportation Act of
                                1964, as amended
                                Relating to industrial revenue bonds payable
235-1983 12-29-83  Not_Included from project rentals by OGL retirement
                                facilities
                                Approving and authorizing the filing of a grant
                                application for Senate Bill 174, Laws 1983,
236-1983 12-29-83  Not_Included Chapter 375 funds with the New Mexico State
                                Office on Aging and providing for an
                                appropriation to the Office of Senior Affairs
                                Concerning industrial revenue bonds in
                                connection with a proposed project for Zwan
                                Magnetics, Inc. to issue and sell industrial
                                revenue bonds of the City of Albuquerque in an
                                amount up to $10,000,000 and for the purpose of
237-1983 12-29-83  Not_Included inducing said Zwan Magnetics, Inc. to acquire a
                                facility In Albuquerque, and for the purpose of
                                inducing Zwan Magnetics, Inc. to enter into a
                                lease of a facility for the production of high
                                technology components and for research and
                                development in connection therewith
                                Amending Resolution 192-1983; conforming City/
238-1983 12-29-83  Not_Included County Unification Task Force Resolution to
                                Bernalillo County Resolution
 
 
 
Notes
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
1984 Resolutions
Res. No. Date Disposition Short Title
Res. Date Disposition Short Title
No.
1-   1-5-  Not        Authorizing Metropolitan Redevelopment Plan for the McCellan Park; Metro
1984 84   Included    Redevelopment Area - rehabilitate and develop of the park
2-   1-5-  Not        Expansion to the Downtown Neighborhood Community Development Area.
1984 84   Included    Rehabilitation of older neighborhoods should be continued and expanded
3-   1-4-  Not        Parking structure city/county administrative offices building at Sixth and
1984 84   Included    Marquette 550 Spaces/Cavan Assoc. Ltd., Contractor; substitutes for R-43-1982
4-   1-5- 1-12-1      Amendments to parking structure plan (Project XXII) at Sixth and Marquette
1984 84               Alvarado Metropolitan Redevelopment Area. Incentives to private developer
5-   1-4-  Not        Funds for professional services - Urban Core Area - additional $75,000 from
1984 84   Included    general fund to James Rouse/Enterprise Dev. Co. for feasibility study for
                      Festival Market Area in Urban Core Area
6-   1-4-  Not        Future street line designation: Unser Blvd., N.W., Ladera to Atrisco
1984 84   Included
7-   1-9-  Not        Additional funds to programs for fiscal year 1984: Environmental Health
1984 84   Included    $14,000; Personnel $50,000; Police $65,000; Budget Administration $17,000
8-   1-    Not
1984 30-  Included    Authorize notice for bids of $19,860,000 G.O. Bonds, Series 3-1-84
     84
9-   2-8- 1-6-7       Approving McClellan Park Metropolitan Redevelopment Plan
1984 84
10-  2-8- 1-7-24      Adopting McClellan Park District Sector Development Plan
1984 84
11-  2-8- 1-7-4       Amending Downtown Neighborhood Area Sector Development Plan and Community
1984 84               Development Plan
12-  2-9- 1-7-4       Amending boundaries of Downtown Core Interim Sector Development Plan
1984 84
13-  2-9- 6-6-3       Amending (by expanding) boundaries for area eligible for subsidized
1984 84
14-  2-9-  Not        Establishing City Council work program for first year of sixth council. Loans
1984 84   Included    from downtown development loan pool (19 Areas of concern)
15-  2-9-  Not        IR bonds - $10,000,000 - for Charter Medical New Mexico, Inc. to establish
1984 84   Included    health care facility in Albuquerque
16-  2-    Not        Metropolitan Redevelopment Project XXVI - “Railroad Area Plaza Renovation Plan”
1984 14-  Included    $3,900,000 (bds.) to Keleher to redevelop 3rd and Central, S.W.
     84
17-  2-    Not        Metropolitan Redevelopment Project XXVII - “Kress Building Renovation Plan”
1984 14-  Included    $2,000,000 (bds.) to Kress Bldg. Ltd. to renovate 414 Central, S.W.
     84
18-  2-    Not
1984 14-  Included    Construction contract to Broce Con. Co. (Special Assessment District 214)
     84
19-  2-    Not        Approve lease agreement/250 spaces/proposed parking structure at 6th and
1984 14-  Included    Marquette/city and Cavan Associates, Ltd.
     84
20-  2-   3-5-10 - 3- New policies/water and sewer system extension and expansion both inside and
1984 28-  5-17        outside the city limits (repeals previous policies)
     84
21-  2-    Not        Condemnation of building 400 Camino De La Sierra - to be removed within 10 days
1984 29-  Included    (Wm. Melich, et ux, and Robert Lietzman, owners)
     84
22-  2-    Not        Metropolitan Redevelopment Project XXVII - “State Theatre Remodel Plan”
1984 29-  Included    $2,000,000 to Merit Southwest Dev. Co. to redevelop 213 Central, N.W.
     84
23-  2-    Not        Change Order No. 1 on contract - Special Assessment District No. 208 raises
1984 29-  Included    contract amount due to $548,208.30
     84
24-  2-               Setting policy for Fire Department to review changes in National and Uniform
1984 29-  3-11-2      Fire Codes for consideration in the city's Fire Code
     84
25-  2-    Not        Appropriating $7,500 for use by City/County Unification Task Force to determine
1984 29-  Included    feasibility and appropriate form for unification of city/county
     84
 
Res. No. Date Disposition Short Title
Res. No. Date    Disposition   Short Title
                               Relating to Ord. 10-1984 Floating/Fixed Rate
26-1984  3-22-84  Not_Included Revenue Bonds to Charter Medical New Mexico,
                               Inc. - details and ratification of same
                               Urging U.S. House of Representatives Energy and
27-1984  3-22-84  Not_Included Commerce Committee to protect the interests of
                               local government and cable consumers
                               Requesting State to implement motor vehicle
28-1984  3-27-84  Not_Included emissions control program for Albuquerque and
                               for the Mayor to give notice of repeal of MVEC
                               Ord.
                               Fixing time when objections to assessment roll
29-1984  3-22-84  Not_Included for S.A.D. No. 201, made by Council and Molzen-
                               Corbin and Association, causing roll to be fixed
                               Approving purchase agreement on land acquisition
30-1984  4-2-84   Not_Included 1173060 south of Albuquerque International
                               Airport - Using federal grant monies and airport
                               capital funds
31-1984  4-2-84   Not_Included Transferring an appropriation to fund public
                               access cable television
                               Authorizing Mayor to prepare demonstration grant
32-1984  4-2-84   Not_Included application to the federal government and
                               amendment to fiscal year 1983-1984 Community
                               Development Program
33-1984  4-2-84   Not_Included Authorizing application for federal 2,006,000
                               grant under UMTA
34-1984  4-2-84   Not_Included Condemnation of structure at 1901 Arno, S.E.; to
                               be removed by owner
                               Authorizing application with Department of
35-1984  4-2-84   Not_Included Transportation for Section 9A planning grant of
                               $20,000 under UMTA for transit marketing plan
                               study
                               Authorizing application with Department of
36-1984  4-2-84   Not_Included Transportation for Section 9A planning grant of
                               $20,000 under UMTA for ridership data collection
                               Authorizing application with Department of
37-1984  4-2-84   Not_Included Transportation for Section 9A planning grant of
                               $40,000 for ridership monitoring study under
                               UMTA
                               Authorizing application with Department of
38-1984  4-2-84   Not_Included Transportation for Section 9A planning grant of
                               $40,000 for downtown terminal site study under
                               UMTA
                               Authorizing application with Department of
39-1984  4-2-84   Not_Included Transportation for Section 9A planning grant of
                               $8,000 for minority business study under UMTA
                               Authorizing application with Department of
40-1984  4-2-84   Not_Included Transportation for Section 9A planning grant of
                               $8,000 for energy contingency planning study
                               under UMTA
                               Authorizing application with Department of
41-1984  4-2-84   Not_Included Transportation for Section 9A planning grant of
                               $40,000 for driver training under UMTA
                               Authorizing application with Department of
42-1984  4-2-84   Not_Included Transportation for Section 9A planning grant of
                               $8,000 for private sector participation study
                               under UMTA
                               Authorizing application with Department of
43-1984  4-2-84   Not_Included Transportation for Section 9A planning grant of
                               $8,000 for bus patronage model under UMTA
                               Instructing the Mayor to conduct a study
44-1984  4-4-84   Not_Included determining the status of minority and women's
                               business enterprises
                               Mandating the establishment of intersection
45-1984  4-9-84   Not_Included capacity utilization analysis by the city and
                               appropriating funds for such program
                               Appropriating funds for capital purposes related
46-1984  4-9-84   Not_Included to the October, 1983 general obligation bond
                               election
47-1984  4-9-84   Not_Included Increasing fiscal year 1984 appropriation to
                               Albuquerque Convention and Visitor's Bureau
48-1984  4-5-84   Not_Included Appropriating funds for the acquisition of the
                               Sierra Vista West Swim and Tennis Club
49-1984  4-9-84   Not_Included Appropriating funds for the high technology
                               leadership seminar
                               Authorizing application for a foster grandparent
50-1984  4-9-84   Not_Included grant with the state action office and the N.M.
                               state agency on aging
 
Res. No. Date Disposition Short Title
Res. No. Date    Disposition   Short Title
                               Determining that lots 133 through 155, replat of
51-1984  4-9-84   Not_Included Los Cerros Addition might be essential for
                               municipal purposes and shall not be sold
                               Expressing the interest of the city regarding
52-1984  4-9-84   Not_Included the expansion of the Police Building and the
                               joint ownership of the property with the County
                               Authorizing grant application for an Urban
53-1984  4-9-84   Not_Included Library Resources Grant with the New Mexico
                               State Library
                               S.A.D. 207; Accepting plans, estimates of cost,
54-1984  4-13-84  Not_Included street, sewer, storm drainage and water
                               improvements to be constructed
55-1984  4-19-84  Not_Included Approving/authorizing grant application for
                               grant with N.M. State Library
                               Issue IDR bonds for Rose's Southwest Papers,
56-1984  4-19-84  Not_Included Inc. of $3,000,000 for Paper Converting/
                               Manufacturing Co. in South Barelas Industrial
                               Park
                               Requesting Arts Board to obtain art to honor
57-1984  4-19-84  Not_Included founder of Albuquerque, Francisco Cuervo Y.
                               Valdes
58-1984  4-19-84  Not_Included Application for RSVP action grant and
                               appropriation to Senior Affairs
                               Approving city's lease agreement with El Encanto
59-1984  5-1-84   Not_Included as required by U.S. Department of Housing and
                               Urban Development for release of UGAG grant to
                               El Encanto
                               Appropriating additional funds ($23,725) to
60-1984  5-7-84   Not_Included Municipal Development Department Code
                               Administration Program fiscal year 1984
                               Amending CIP by approving new projects, changing
61-1984  5-7-84   Not_Included scope, deleting projects, changing
                               appropriations for CIP projects
                               Approving submission of an economic dev. adm.
62-1984  5-7-84   Not_Included grant and allocation funds for Double Eagle II
                               Airport Project
                               Appropriating funds for operation of newly-
63-1984  5-7-84   Not_Included acquired tennis/swim facilities west of the Rio
                               Grande
64-1984  5-21-84  Not_Included S.A.D. 201 - Authorizing submission of
                               application to State Board of Finance
                               Authorizing Mayor to enter contract with
65-1984  5-11-84  Not_Included Hamilton Test Systems for two motor vehicle
                               emissions inspection stations
66-1984  5-11-84  Not_Included Structure at 818 Los Arboles, N.W. in state of
                               ruin, to be removed
                               Authorizing application for summer food service
67-1984  5-11-84  Not_Included program for children with N.M. Department of
                               Health and Environment through Parks and
                               Recreation Department
                               Technical adjustments for debt service
68-1984  5-11-84  Not_Included appropriations in fiscal year 1984 transfers to
                               various refunding debt service funds
                               Approving application for grant funds from
69-1984  5-11-84  Not_Included Governor's Office for Job Training Partnership
                               to provide jobs/training for dislocated workers
                               through the city's Work Unlimited Office
                               Directing sale of city-owned property, Block 1,
70-1984  5-11-84  Not_Included Joseph Van Cleave Addition, back to the previous
                               owner, James W. Eden for $22,700
71-1984  5-11-84  Not_Included Requesting the U.S. Forest Service acquire
                               Rounds Estate in South Sandia Foothills
72-1984  5-16-84 1-7-27        Adopting Coors Corridor Plan as a Rank 3 Sector/
                               Neighborhood Plan
                               Approving statement of community development
73-1984  5-16-84  Not_Included objectives and use of funds for fiscal year
                               1984-1985; Authorizing application for Grant
                               from federal government
                               Appropriating funds for lease purchase of a
74-1984  5-16-84  Not_Included central computer for Data Processing Department,
                               for $1,575,000 through Project 7271010
                               Appropriating additional funds from fiscal year
75-1984  5-16-84  Not_Included 1984 general fund for phase one of the joint
                               Fire and Police Departments' computer-aided
                               dispatch system
 
Res. No. Date Disposition Short Title
Res. Date Disposition Short Title
No.
76-  5-    Not        Appropriating funds to Corrections/Detention for operations fiscal
1984 16-  Included    year 1984
     84
77-  5-    Not        Amending Section 1 of Resolution 431, extending life of Lodgers'
1984 17-  Included    Tax Ad Hoc Committee
     84
78-  5-    Not        Modifying and confirming the assessment roll for Special
1984 17-  Included    Assessment District No. 201
     84
79-  5-    Not        Transferring interest monies earned on investments in city/county
1984 22-  Included    construction fund to debt service ($1,575,000)
     84
80-  5-    Not        Industrial revenue bonds - Monolithic Memories, Inc. (Manufactures
1984 22-  Included    semiconductors and related electronic devices
     84
81-  5-    Not
1984 22-  Included    Condemnation of structure at 4801 McKnight, N.E., to be removed
     84
82-  5-    Not
1984 22-  Included    Condemnation of structure at 4800 McKnight, N.E., to be removed
     84
83-  5-    Not        Appropriating general fund monies to minority and women's business
1984 30-  Included    enterprises program
     84
84-  5-    Not        Appropriating operating funds for city fiscal year 1984-1985 (city
1984 31-  Included    budget)
     84
85-  6-5-  Not        Authorizing Mayor to sell limited quantities of water from San
1984 84   Included    Juan/Chama Water Project for use outside municipal limits
86-  6-5-  Not        Appropriating $7,500 for dues to Albuquerque Center for the County
1984 84   Included    of Bernalillo membership; Funds from Municipal Urban Dev. Funds
87-  6-5-  Not        Appropriating $2,348,000 (Monies from sale of water from San Juan
1984 84   Included    Chama Water Project) to enhance Capital Joint Water/Sewer Fund
88-  6-    Not        Rescinding Resolution No. 12-1978 which prohibits the expenditure
1984 20-  Included    of city funds for certain dues/membership for city employees
     84
89-  6-               Amending Metro. Redevelopment Plan “Project XXII, Marquette and
1984 20-  1-12-1      Sixth Parking Structure”" to increase number of parking spaces
     84
90-  6-    Not        Appropriating additional funds to MDD for fiscal year 1984, fiscal
1984 20-  Included    year 1985 and fiscal year 1986
     84
91-  6-    Not
1984 20-  Included    S.A.D. 207, determining construction of sewer, drainage, etc.
     84
92-  6-
1984 20-  6-4-11      Designating “La Posada De Albuquerque” a landmark of Albuquerque
     84
93-  6-    Not        City to appropriate IRB to Rio Grande Partners, Ltd., for project
1984 20-  Included    within 15 miles of city limits
     84
94-  6-    Not
1984 20-  Included    Appropriating state grants for treatment plant improvements/sewer
     84
95-  6-    Not        Adjusting fiscal year 1984 appropriations with projected
1984 26-  Included    expenditures
     84
96-  6-    Not
1984 26-  Included    Appropriating funds to Fleet Management Department
     84
97-  6-    Not
1984 26-  Included    Appropriating $83,215 to Albuquerque Yough Commission
     84
98-  6-    Not        Approving grant application/job training partnership act and
1984 28-  Included    approving appropriation to “Work Unlimited Office”
     84
99-  6-    Not        IRB up to $10,000,000 for La Vida Llena Corporation/Retirement
1984 28-  Included    Center
     84
100- 7-3- 2-1-4       Establishing a Goals Commission and delegating duties; 15-Member;
1984 84               liaison to implement “Goals for Albuquerque 1983-1984”
 
Res. No. Date Disposition Short Title
Res. No. Date    Disposition   Short Title
                               Determining that lots l through 12, Block 19,
101-1984 7-3-84   Not_Included Chelwood Park Addition might be essential for
                               municipal purposes and are not to be sold
102-1984 7-12-84  Not_Included Approving 1985 Transportation Program/Urbanized
                               Area
                               Approving 30-year lease with option to purchase
103-1984 6-29-84  Not_Included the Wool Warehouse Building at 516 First Street,
                               N.W., Railroad Metropolitan Redevelopment Area,
                               Project I
                               Appropriating funds for lease of facility for
104-1984 7-3-84   Not_Included City/Record Center for $82,000 per year as
                               rental for facility
105-1984 7-12-84  Not_Included Determining reasonable notice of public meetings
                               of the Council
                               Redevelopment bonds up to $5,000,000 for D.J.R.
106-1984 7-12-84  Not_Included Inc., for Beach Property Redevelopment Plan for
                               Tingley; West Central Avenue
                               Authorizing Mayor to purchase non-essential
107-1984 7-3-84   Not_Included property from Board of Education to Monolithic
                               Memories, Inc.
108-1984 7-12-84  Not_Included Authorizing notice for bids/sale of $15,000,000
                               GO Bonds/Series August 1, 1984
                               Approving grant application with Office of Aging
109-1984 7-12-84  Not_Included for Title III Older Americans Act Funds -
                               Appropriation to Senior Affairs Office
                               Appropriating $686,669 from residential mortgage
110-1984 7-26-84  Not_Included program fund to housing authority fund for
                               repairs/improvements to public-owned housing
111-1984 7-26-84  Not_Included Authorizing removal of certain uncollectible
                               accounts from city's accounts receivable records
                               Amending Resolution 180-1983 to permit drinking
112-1984 7-26-84 6-5-2         alcohol at Crossroads Pedestrian Mall only
                               during certain events
113-1984 7-26-84  Not_Included Appropriating funds for Rio Grande Corridor
                               Rapid Rail Study
                               Adopting fiscal year 1985-1986 multi-year
114-1984 7-26-84  Not_Included planning program establishing the city's major
                               planning priorities
115-1984 7-26-84  Not_Included Approving Contract Change Order No. 3 for S.A.D.
                               201; net increase in contract price - $2,864.94
                               Approving/authorizing application for Section 5
116-1984 7-26-84  Not_Included capital grant for purchase of management
                               information system under UMTA
                               Approving/authorizing application for Section 9A
117-1984 7-26-84  Not_Included capital grant for purchase of 8 bus shelters
                               under UMTA
                               Approving/authorizing application for basic
118-1984 7-26-84  Not_Included state grant-in-aid grant with N.M. State
                               Library; appropriation to public library
119-1984 7-26-84  Not_Included Authorizing Mayor to prepare/submit grant
                               application to federal government
120-1984 7-26-84  Not_Included Authorizing grant application for Senior
                               Companion Program Office of Senior Affairs
121-1984 7-26-84  Not_Included Approving grant funds from Department of
                               Transportation and amending CIP
                               $10,000,000 IRB for Park West Associates,
122-1984 7-26-84  Not_Included Arizona firm for construction of requirement
                               living center facilities
123-1984 7-26-84  Not_Included $3,500,000 IRB for Forum Group, Inc., Indiana
                               Corp., to construct nursing home facilities
124-1984 7-26-84  Not_Included Relinquishing unneeded portions drainage
                               easements/North La Cueva Arrova
                               Amending CIP by approving increase funds for two
125-1984 7-26-84  Not_Included major storm drainage projects - Odelia Road and
                               Bear Tributary Arroyo Channel
 
Res. No. Date Disposition Short Title
Res. No. Date    Disposition   Short Title
                               Approving a five year lease for 2459 square feet
126-1984 7-30-84  Not_Included of space in the Fifth and Copper Parking
                               Facility, Alvarado Metropolitan Redevelopment
                               Area Project XII and adjacent outdoor space
127-1984 8-15-84  Not_Included Amending Huning Highland Sector to allow beer/
                               wine in areas zoned SU-2/NCR
128-1984 8-15-84  Not_Included City not to make additional compensation to
                               Hamilton Test Systems
                               Determining building at 304 Trumbull, S.E. is
129-1984 8-15-84  Not_Included ruined, damaged, dilapidated, requiring its
                               removal
130-1984 8-15-84  Not_Included Awarding construction contract for S.A.D. 211 to
                               Cook Construction Co. (Low Bidder - $494,142.84)
131-1984 8-15-84  Not_Included Approving Contract Change Order No. 2 S.A.D. No.
                               208
                               Approving application coordinated community in-
132-1984 8-15-84  Not_Included home care grant with N.M. Department of Human
                               Services/Office of Senior Affairs
                               Approving application with FAA for grant to
133-1984 8-15-84  Not_Included remove hangars at International Airport -
                               appropriation to Aviation Department Capital
                               Fund
                               Approving application for grant for air
134-1984 8-15-84  Not_Included pollution control grant with Environmental
                               Protection Agency
135-1984 8-15-84  Not_Included Rescinding Resolution No. R-42, which ordered
                               condemnation of building at 1901 Arno, S.E.
136-1984 8-22-84  Not_Included Future streetline designation: Paseo del Norte
                               Boulevard, Coors Boulevard to Paseo del Volcan
137-1984 9-14-84  Not_Included Relating to S.A.D. 208; Sets date for hearing
                               for objections to assessment roll to be heard
                               Relating to proposed S.A.D. No. 210 - street,
138-1984 9-12-84  Not_Included sanitary sewer, drainage water improvements to
                               be constructed
                               Urging Albuquerque Cable TV and Mecure
139-1984 9-12-84  Not_Included Telecommunications to warn subscribers of
                               possible objectionable programming
140-1984 9-12-84  Not_Included Repealing Resolution 122-1983 and recreating the
                               area of S.A.D. 205
141-1984 9-12-84  Not_Included Awarding construction contract for S.A.D. 205 to
                               Inter-Mtn. Constructors
                               Approving acceptance of grant from E.P.A. and
142-1984 9-12-84  Not_Included state for providing for appropriation of
                               $3,403,210 to Water Resources Department
                               Authorizing filing of application for funds to
143-1984 9-12-84  Not_Included Skill Center from state to provide microcomputer
                               training for eligible applicants
144-1984 9-17-84  Not_Included Appropriating $500,000 to emergency water/sewer
                               repair program
                               Appropriating funds for Capital Improvements
145-1984 9-17-84  Not_Included Program related to October, 1983, General
                               Obligation Bond Election
146-1984 9-17-84  Not_Included Appropriating $200,000 to Refuse Disposal
                               Division, Services Department
                               Appropriating $244,603 to Transit Department;
147-1984 9-17-84  Not_Included $192,000 from UMTA; $48,000 from city in-kind
                               funds; and $4,603 city funds for indirect costs
                               Appropriating additional funds of $10,000 to
148-1984 9-17-84  Not_Included Human Services/Health/Med. Counselling to
                               Albuquerque adult population free of charge
                               Authorized grant application for rideshare
149-1984 9-17-84  Not_Included program and appropriation to Department of
                               Transportation
150-1984 9-25-84  Not_Included Condemning building at 1407 Third Street, S.W.;
                               to be removed
 
Res. No. Date Disposition Short Title
Res. No. Date     Disposition   Short Title
                                Authorizing application to FAA for $2,000,000
151-1984 9-25-84   Not_Included grant (city providing $314,200) to construct
                                additional ramp facilities
                                IRB to finance Skyview Manor in amount of
152-1984 9-26-84   Not_Included $5,000,000 for a retirement facility in
                                Albuquerque
                                Pledging consultation on zoning between city
153-1984 9-25-84   Not_Included and Paradise Hills Special Zoning District
                                Commission
                                Amending Resolution No. 180-1983 regarding use
154-1984 9-25-84  6-5-2         of alcoholic liquors at Civic Auditorium and
                                the Albuquerque Sports Stadium
                                Requesting the Mayor to have the City Attorney
155-1984 9-25-84   Not_Included intervene in litigation affecting the North
                                Valley River Crossings Project
156-1984 9-25-84   Not_Included IRB La Vida Llena Retirement City in principal
                                amount of $7,950,000
                                Appropriating funds for capital purposes
157-1984 9-25-84   Not_Included related to storm drainage construction of the
                                Kirtland Detention Basin
158-1984 10-29-84  Not_Included Relating to S.A.D. 208; Submission of proposal
                                to State Board of Finance
159-1984 10-8-84   Not_Included Appropriating funds to continue supplemental
                                criminal prevention effort
                                Appropriating additional funds to purchase
160-1984 10-8-84   Not_Included South Broadway Cultural Center Building and
                                remodel it at a cost of $123,450
                                Establishing city's policy regarding
161-1984 10-8-84   Not_Included reinstitution of auto emission inspection
                                program
                                Relating to S.A.D. 208, assessment roll/
162-1984 10-8-84   Not_Included distribution of assessments appropriating
                                $75,000 to Dept. Services, building maintenance
                                program
163-1984 10-8-84   Not_Included Appropriating funds to the Department od
                                Services, Building Maintenance Program
164-1984 10-8-84   Not_Included Creating S.A.D. 210 for sewer, drainage, water
                                improvements/sealed bids
                                Appropriating additional funds to community
165-1984 10-11-84  Not_Included development fund to finance business
                                development loans
166-1984 10-16-84  Not_Included IRB payable from rentals by Monolithic Memories
                                in principal amount of $1,000,000
167-1984 10-30-84  Not_Included Relating to proposed S.A.D. No. 213 - accepting
                                preliminary plans
                                Appropriating $360,000 from general fund for
168-1984 10-30-84  Not_Included construction of the Simms Park Access Road in
                                Sandia Mountains
                                Amending existing CIP by approving new projects
169-1984 10-30-84  Not_Included by transferring revenues to specific projects,
                                as listed
                                Establishing ad hoc committee to evaluate
170-1984 10-30-84  Not_Included development approval process and appropriating
                                funds for their activities
                                Establishing legislative policy of city for
171-1984 10-30-84  Not_Included 1985 legislative session of the New Mexico
                                Legislature
                                Requesting Town Affiliation Association with
172-1984 10-30-84 6-3-4         Guadalajara, Mexico, to become a sister city of
                                Albuquerque
                                Declaring city's intent to issue metropolitan
                                redevelopment bonds for $1,100,000 for Dietz
173-1984 10-30-84  Not_Included Building located 100 block John Street to
                                induce Graham Paper Co. to redevelop project
                                site
174-1984 10-30-84  Not_Included Appropriating $145,000 from emergency repairs
                                program
                                Declaring city's intent to issue metropolitan
175-1984 10-30-84  Not_Included redevelopment bonds for $5,900,000 to Brittany
                                Partners to redevelop project for a commercial
                                office building at 200 Lomas Boulevard, N.E.
 
Res. No. Date Disposition Short Title
Res. Date Disposition Short Title
No.
176- 10-   Not        IRB of $3,000,000 to induce Affiliated Imaging Associates, Inc. to provide
1984 30-  Included    facility for technological services/health care center
     84
177- 10-   Not
1984 30-  Included    Relating to S.A.D. 213 - additional areas to be included
     84
178- 11-   Not        Relating to N.M. Airport refunding revenue bonds, Series 11-15-84;
1984 7-84 Included    establishing principal amount, interest rate; redemption schedules
179- 11-   Not        Appropriating funds from trust and agency fund and urban enhancement for
1984 6-84 Included    payment to state Department of Taxation and Revenue/settlement of
                      controversy relating to overpayment of municipal gross receipts taxes
180- 11-   Not        Appropriating $27,110 additional funds to legislative coordinator program
1984 6-84 Included    for Office of Intergovernmental/Legislative Relations
181- 11-   Not        Approving Metro Redevelopment Plan “Project XXX, Silver Sq. Redevelopment
1984 6-84 Included    Plan for Alvarado Metro Area - $1,000,000 located at 625 Silver Avenue,
                      S.W., Albuquerque, N.M. (Ameriwest Corp. to develop)
182- 11-   Not        Establishing an Archaeological Resources Planning Advisory Committee
1984 9-84 Included
183- 11-   Not        Approving the 10-Year Plan for Urban Enhancement Trust Fund
1984 9-84 Included
184- 11-   Not        Approving filing of grant application for assessment of energy production
1984 9-84 Included    using wood/coal and other residential combustion units (RCUs)
185- 11-   Not        Determining that structure at 3400 Wellesley, N.E. is dilapidated; the city
1984 9-84 Included    to remove it if necessary
186- 11-   Not        Approving the filing of grant application for funds under the Emergency
1984 9-84 Included    Medical Services Fund Act with N.M. Health and Environment Department and
                      providing an appropriation to the Fire Department
187- 11-   Not        Providing assurances to FAA relating to funding/construction of proposed
1984 15-  Included    flight service center
     84
188- 10-   Not        Approving agreement between UNM and city for acquisition of road right-of-
1984 8-84 Included    way and storm drain improvements UNM South Golf Course/International
                      Airport
189- 11-   Not
1984 15-  Included    In support of constitutional amendment No. 1
     84
190- 11-   Not        Renovate and expand Convention Center using $100,000 from Ledgers Tax Fund
1984 15-  Included    - plans due April 1, 1985
     84
191- 11-
1984 15-  1-7-25      Adopting the Lava Shadows Sector Development Plan
     84
192- 11-   Not        Adjusting appropriated funds for certain programs to for fiscal year 1984
1984 19-  Included    actual expenditures
     84
193- 11-   Not
1984 21-  Included    S.A.D. 204 - plans of costs, street, sewer, drainage and water improvements
     84
194- 11-   Not        Redevelopment revenue bonds (Quickel Partners) $2,200,000; approval of
1984 21-  Included    lease and sale agreement, mortgage and security agreement for multi-tenant
     84               commercial office facility
195- 11-   Not        Filing contract for therapeutic recreation leisure education program with
1984 21-  Included    Board of Education; appropriation to Parks and Recreation
     84
196- 11-
1984 21-  1-7-26      Adopting East Atrisco Sector Development Plan
     84
197- 11-   Not        Rescinding Resolution No. 474 which ordered condemnation of building at 400
1984 21-  Included    Camino De La Sierra, N.E.
     84
198- 11-              Establishing city policy to comment on applications to state of New Mexico
1984 21-  3-10-1      for private methadone clinics
     84
199- 11-   Not
1984 21-  Included    Approving Contract Change Order No. 1 for S.A.D. 205
     84
200- 11-   Not
1984 21-  Included    Authorizing CAO to file application for conveyance of property to city
     84
 
Res. No. Date Disposition Short Title
Res. No. Date     Disposition                 Short Title
                                              Establishing Commission on
201-1984 11-21-84 2-4-3                       Adult Literacy; delegating
                                              duties and responsibilities to
                                              that Commission
                                              Repealing Resolution No. 161-
202-1984 12-10-84 4-2-4                       1984; reinstitution of Auto
                                              Emission Inspection Program
                                              Metropolitan redevelopment
203-1984 12-10-84  Not_Included               bonds $1,450,000 for McHenbrook
                                              Apartments located 1311 Copper
                                              Avenue
                                              Appropriating funds for land
204-1984 12-10-84  Not_Included               acquisition for Albuquerque
                                              International Airport
                                              Adjusting appropriated funds
205-1984 12-10-84  Not_Included               for risk management fund of
                                              $1,676,000
                                              Amending CIP by creating
                                              project for advanced land
206-1984 12-10-84  Not_Included               acquisition for treatment plant
                                              purposes and appropriating
                                              funds
                                              Approving appropriation of
207-1984 12-10-84  Not_Included               grant funds of $70,400 for
                                              purchase of four vans for
                                              handicapped citizens
                                              Adopting policy governing
208-1984 12-13-84  Not_Included               Special Assessment Districts
                                              inside the city limits and
                                              repealing previous policies.
                  * Repealed by Ordinance 44-
                  1996
                                              Industrial revenue bonds to
                                              finance project for Casa
209-1984 12-17-84  Not_Included               Pacifica Group $8,000,000 to
                                              construct multi-family
                                              retirement rental housing
                                              Industrial revenue bonds to
                                              finance Villa Pacific Group in
210-1984 12-17-84  Not_Included               amount of $7,700,000 to
                                              construct multi-family
                                              retirement rental housing
                                              Appropriating additional funds
211-1984 12-17-84  Not_Included               to Environmental Health
                                              Department for hazardous waste
                                              program ($70,000.00)
                                              Appropriating funds for county
212-1984 12-17-84  Not_Included               information systems project in
                                              amount of $250,000
                                              Industrial revenue bond money
213-1984 12-18-84  Not_Included               to Sky Scenes, Inc., for
                                              project
                                              Amending existing community
                                              development block grant;
214-1984 12-20-84  Not_Included               deleting certain projects -
                                              playground equipment at
                                              Roosevelt Park
215-1984 12-20-84  Not_Included               Condemning structure at 1901
                                              4th Street
216-1984 12-20-84  Not_Included               Condemning structure at 1917
                                              William, S.E.
                                              Appropriating funds for
217-1984 12-20-84  Not_Included               purchase of refuse equipment/
                                              anticipation of revenue bond
                                              sale - $3,800,000 worth
                                              Project VI, Springer Square;
218-1984 12-20-84  Not_Included               Metro redevelopment bonds
                                              $10,000,000 to Auric Partners,
                                              Ltd.
                                              Metropolitan redevelopment
                                              bonds of $1,100,000 for Dietz
219-1984 12-26-84  Not_Included               Building; 100 Block of John
                                              Street, S.E. to Graham Paper
                                              Co. Building Partnership to
                                              redevelop project in R-173-1984
220-1984 12-26-84  Not_Included               S.A.D. 214
                                              Determining city parcel not
                                              essential for municipal purpose
                                              exchanging land at Central/Arno
                                              Street for land within Sandia
221-1984 12-26-84  Not_Included               Foothills authorizing urban
                                              development. Action grant
                                              application for the Banner
                                              Square Project (Old Albuquerque
                                              High School)
                                              Authorizing an urban
                                              development action grant
                                              application to the U.S.
                                              Department of Housing and Urban
222-1984 12-26-84  Not_Included               Development for the Banner
                                              Square Project, Renew Mexico
                                              Development Associates,
                                              Developer; and appropriating
                                              funds
223-1984 12-26-84  Not_Included               Amending Huning Highland Sector
                                              Development Plan
                                              Metro Redevelopment Plan,
224-1984 12-26-84  Not_Included               Project I Banner Square Bonds
                                              to $10,000,000
225-1984 12-27-84  Not_Included               Ratifying request of CAO for
                                              Crestview Aviation Project
226-1984 12-27-84  Not_Included               Ratifying request for CAO for
                                              CA Investors Project
 
 
 
Notes
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
1985 Resolutions
Res. No. Date Disposition Short Title
Res. Date Disposition Short Title
No.
1-   1-4-  Not        Appropriation of federal grant funds to CIP for reconstruction
1985 85   Included    and improvements to intersections Zuni/San Pedro/Louisiana
2-   1-4-  Not        Amending CIP and approving certain aviation projects/city is
1985 85   Included    selling $65,000,000 revenue bonds to improve international
                      airport
3-   1-4-  Not        City/educational facility/revenue bonds (Albuquerque Academy
1985 85   Included    Project) aggregate principal amount of $10,000,000
4-   1-4-  Not        Amending R-171-1984, and establishing additional city policy
1985 85   Included    for 1985 legislative session of N.M. legislature supports
                      funding of regional honor farm in Bernalillo County
                      Approving and authorizing filing application with the
5-   1-4-  Not        Department of Transportation, USA, for section 9 grant for
1985 85   Included    operating assistance under Urban Mass Transportation Act of
                      1964
6-   1-    Not        Declaring certain city-owned property non-essential for city
1985 15-  Included    purposes in order to exchange land for 12.9 Acres in north I-25
     85               industrial area
7-   1-    Not        Amending R-128-1983, providing for alternate uses of land
1985 15-  Included    acquired in connection with development of Tramway Boulevard
     85
8-   1-    Not        Approving option to purchase certain lands on Yale, S.E. for
1985 15-  Included    municipal purposes/changing scope of CIP Project Cactus drive-
     85               in purchase on Yale
     1-               Approving and authorizing application for UMTA Section 9A
9-   15-   Not        planning grant with USA Department of Transportation to conduct
1985 85   Included    management information systems study $3,000 of city funds to
                      get $12,000 federal
     1-               Approving and authorizing application to USA Department of
10-  15-   Not        Justice for COMIENZO (prerelease and post-release program;
1985 85   Included    feds. to give $15,000; city $56,030; and appropriation to
                      Corrections/Detention Department
11-  1-    Not        Approving and authorizing three contracts for HB 47, Chap. 86;
1985 15-  Included    $89,368 from state agency/aging; city budget $316,300 overhead
     85               costs of Office of Senior Affairs
12-  1-    Not
1985 15-  Included    Amending CIP and reprogramming certain projects/transportation
     85
13-  1-    Not        Amendments to CIP and changing name of existing project “Light
1985 15-  Included    Paving Dust Control” to change to “Camino de la Sierra Street
     85               Paving”
14-  1-    Not        Appropriating additional funds to Refuse Department for Los
1985 15-  Included    Angeles Reclamation Project Closing - increase of $171,500 to
     85               transportation
15-  1-    Not
1985 31-  Included    S.A.D. 213
     85
16-  1-               Review of Industrial Revenue Bond Projects/Development
1985 30-  3-2-15      Commission rescinding R-182-1981
     85
17-  1-               Changing names of segments of Los Angeles Drive; Corrales Road;
1985 31-  6-1-1       Richfield Avenue; Atrisco Road; 81st Street; Kimmick Drive
     85
18-  2-8-  Not        Authorizing mayor to prepare grant application to federal
1985 85   Included    government; $254,000 available from USA Housing/Urban
                      Development for rental rehabilitation
19-  2-8-  Not        Endorsing amendment of N.M. Regional Planning Act
1985 85   Included
20-  2-8-  Not        Establishing citizen committee for methods of financing;
1985 85   Included    purchase/ processing of books for public library to meet
                      national minimum library standards
21-  2-8-  Not        S.A.D. 204
1985 85   Included
22-  2-8-  Not        Amending R-103-1983; reprogramming community development jobs
1985 85   Included    bill grant funds to Albuquerque emergency care alliance for
                      emergency food, shelter, services
23-  2-    Not
1985 12-  Included    Relating to S.A.D. 214
     85
24-  2-    Not
1985 12-  Included    Relating to S.A.D. 211
     85
25-  2-    Not        Intent of city regard to anticipated revenue increases
1985 12-  Included    resulting from property reappraisal request by statute in 1986
     85
 
Res. No. Date Disposition Short Title
Res. Date Disposition Short Title
No.
26-  2-    Not        Approving appropriation grant funds from Department of Transportation for
1985 12-  Included    CIP
     85
27-  2-               Amending Downtown Neighborhood Area Sector Development Plan as to
1985 13-  1-7-4       conditional uses in residential/ commercial land use category
     85
28-  2-    Not        Metropolitan Redevelopment Code; amending Railroad Metropolitan
1985 13-  Included    Redevelopment Area boundaries
     85
29-  2-    Not        Allocating $3,900,000 of the city's portion of 1985 state ceiling aunt
1985 15-  Included    for private activity bonds
     85
30-  2-    Not        Appropriating funds for capital purposes to October 1983 general
1985 15-  Included    obligation bond election
     85
31-  2-    Not        Appropriating portion of Water Resources Department net operating
1985 15-  Included    revenues to defray costs of certain wastewater treatment plant capital
     85               projects
32-  2-    Not        Appropriating funds to the Building Maintenance Program, Department of
1985 15-  Included    Refuse and Services, to connect the city/county automated energy
     85               management system to three major downtown, city-owned facilities
33-  2-               Authorizing city to connect three major downtown, city-owned facilities
1985 15-  6-5-3       to the automated energy management system of city/county building
     85
34-  2-    Not        Approving programming of funds for 1985-1989 6-year capital improvements
1985 20-  Included    program and projects for 1985 2-year capital improvements budget
     85
35-  2-    Not        Making certain findings relating to and approving the Metropolitan
1985 21-  Included    Redevelopment Project VII Plan
     85
36-  3-5-  Not        Relating to S.A.D. No. 214
1985 85   Included
37-  3-5- 1-7-20      Adopting the El Rancho Atrisco Sector Development Plan, Phase II
1985 85
38-  3-5-  Not        Adopting fiscal year 1986; fiscal year multi-year planning program
1985 85   Included
39-  3-5-  Not        Approving planning standards for improvement of San Mateo between Zuni
1985 85   Included    Road and Gibson Boulevard
40-  3-5-  Not        Approving appropriation of grant funds from Department of Transportation
1985 85   Included    for existing capital improvements program
41-  3-5-  Not        Appropriating funds to cultural affairs division of library and
1985 85   Included    continuing committee established to pursue development of performing arts
                      center
42-  3-5-  Not        Adjusting appropriated funds for certain programs to provide for
1985 85   Included    projected fiscal year 1985 expenditures
43-  3-5-  Not        Appropriating funds to establish a “state and local economic studies”
1985 85   Included    program
44-  3-5-  Not        Appropriating funds from general fund for purpose of accelerating
1985 85   Included    renovation for the KiMo Theater
45-  3-5-  Not        Approving and authorizing filing of attached grant application for
1985 85   Included    hazardous waste management program assistance grant with Environmental
                      Protection Agency
46-  3-5-  Not        Approving contract Change Orders No. 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, and
1985 85   Included    12 for S.A.D. No. 205
47-  3-5-  Not        Appropriating funds for capital projects and amending scope of certain
1985 85   Included    projects for Water Resources Department
48-  3-5-  Not        Providing and appropriation to capital acquisition fund for capital
1985 85   Included    improvement project to widen Yale Boulevard
49-  3-7-  Not        Fixing April 23, 1985 as date of election on questions of approving or
1985 85   Included    disapproving Ordinance 8-1985 and Ordinance 11-1985
50-  3-7-  Not        Appropriating additional funds for records and elections program for
1985 85   Included    special municipal election to be held on 4-23-85
 
Res. No. Date Disposition Short Title
Res. No. Date    Disposition                 Short Title
                                             Declaring moratorium not to
                                             exceed June 1, 1985, on
51-1985  3-13-85  Not_Included               development plan and permit
                                             approvals for El Pueblo Road/
                                             Coors Boulevard interchange
52-1985  3-14-85  Not_Included               Relating to S.A.D. No. 211
                                             Approving the filing of
                                             application to historic
53-1985  3-14-85  Not_Included               preservation division for
                                             federal grant to fund
                                             completion of city historic
                                             preservation plan
54-1985  3-14-85  Not_Included               Relating to S.A.D. No. 213
                                             Approving Metropolitan
                                             Redevelopment Plan (Project
55-1985  3-14-85  Not_Included               XXXII), Sears Building
                                             Redevelopment Plan, and city's
                                             intent to issue bonds in amount
                                             of $4,700,000
56-1985  4-17-85  Not_Included               Relating to S.A.D. No. 205
                                             Stating intent of city in
57-1985  3-29-85  Not_Included               regard to purchasing open space
                                             lands by means of sale of Elena
                                             Gallegos trade lands
58-1985  3-29-85  Not_Included               Awarding construction for
                                             S.A.D. No. 210
                                             Adjusting appropriations in
59-1985  3-29-85  Not_Included               refuse funds (651) to provide
                                             for projected fiscal year 1985
                                             expenditures
                                             Appropriating funds for
60-1985  3-29-85  Not_Included               Aviation Department Advance
                                             Engineering
                                             Approving Metropolitan
                                             Redevelopment Plan (Project
61-1985  3-29-85  Not_Included               XXXI), Old Cook's Redevelopment
                                             Plan for Alvarado Area, and
                                             city's intent to issue bonds in
                                             amount of $500,000
                                             Providing for appropriation for
62-1985  3-29-85  Not_Included               celebration of the arts to the
                                             Library Department in fiscal
                                             year 1985
                                             Approving and authorizing
63-1985  3-29-85  Not_Included               filing of attached application
                                             for RSVP expansion action grant
                                             Endorsing and approving
64-1985  3-29-85 4-3-13                      pretreatment program of city of
                                             Albuquerque
                                             Approving filing of attached
65-1985  3-29-85  Not_Included               grant application with
                                             Department of Finance and
                                             Administration
                                             Concerning city of Albuquerque
66-1985  3-29-85  Not_Included               Metropolitan Redevelopment
                                             revenue bonds series 1985 -
                                             $4,840,000
                                             Consolidating precincts and
67-1985  4-11-85  Not_Included               appointing precincts board
                                             members for special election
                                             municipal election
                                             Amending city/county joint
68-1985  3-29-85  Not_Included               peers agreement relating to
                                             city/county building
69-1985  4-17-85  Not_Included               Amending policy governing
                                             Special Assessments Districts.
                 * Repealed by Ordinance 44-
                 1996
70-1985  4-17-85  Not_Included               Regarding S.A.D. No. 205
                                             Stating intent of city to loan
71-1985  4-17-85  Not_Included               funds from the general fund for
                                             acquisition of open space
72-1985  4-19-85 1-11-1                      Amending Northwest Area Plan
73-1985  5-20-85  Not_Included               Relating to S.A.D. No. 211
74-1985  5-3-85  1-7-28                      Adopting Seven Bar Neighborhood
                                             Sector Development Plan
75-1985  5-3-85   Not_Included               Amending existing capital
                                             improvement program
 
Res. No. Date Disposition Short Title
Res. No. Date    Disposition   Short Title
                               Approving city's intent to issue metropolitan
76-1985  5-7-85   Not_Included bonds in amount of up to $2,000,000 in
                               connection with proposed Union Station Project
                               located in 100 Block of John Street
                               Approving sales and purchase agreement,
                               appropriating funds for acquisition of open
77-1985  5-7-85   Not_Included space land from Sproul Enterprises, and
                               declaring property not essential for municipal
                               purposes
                               Appropriating funds for operating refuse
78-1985  5-10-85  Not_Included collection and disposal division of Department
                               of Refuse and Services for year beginning July
                               1, 1985 and ending June 30, 1986
                               Approving final statement of community
79-1985  5-10-85  Not_Included development objectives for the community
                               development program for city
                               Appropriating funds for the Corrections and
80-1985  5-13-85  Not_Included Detention Department for facility to operate
                               fiscal year July 1, 1985 until June 30, 1986
                               Appropriating funds to purchase telephone system
81-1985  5-15-85  Not_Included for outside city hall city offices and city/
                               county building
82-1985  5-15-85  Not_Included Appropriating funds to purchase property
                               adjacent to city zoo
                               Appropriating and re-appropriating funds for
83-1985  5-15-85  Not_Included transfer to capital acquisition fund to purchase
                               equipment for Albuquerque geographic information
                               system
84-1985  5-15-85  Not_Included Appropriating funds to Department of Refuse and
                               Services, building and maintenance program
                               Determining that certain buildings of structures
85-1985  5-16-85  Not_Included at 5508 Central Avenue S.E., are required to be
                               removed
                               Approving filing of attached application for
86-1985  5-16-85  Not_Included foster grandparent grant with state action
                               office
87-1985  5-16-85  Not_Included Approving the filing of attached application for
                               an RSVP action grant
88-1985  5-16-85  Not_Included Relating to S.A.D. No. 211
89-1985  5-20-85  Not_Included Modifying and confirming assessment roll for
                               S.A.D. No. 205
90-1985  5-22-85  Not_Included Adopting criteria for metro redevelopment and
                               industrial revenue bond projects
91-1985  5-22-85 3-2-15        Amending Resolution 16-1985
92-1985  5-22-85  Not_Included Approving option to purchase lands within
                               Section 23, TION, R4E, N.M.P.M
93-1985  6-4-85   Not_Included Authorizing the submission of an application and
                               proposal to state Board of Finance
                               Approving and authorizing the filing of
94-1985  6-4-85   Not_Included application for federal grant for development of
                               program for archeological site preservation
95-1985  6-4-85   Not_Included Concerning city of Albuquerque, New Mexico loans
                               to landers revenue bonds
96-1985  6-4-85   Not_Included Approving and authorizing filing of application
                               for summer food service program for children
                               Providing for appropriation to capital fund for
97-1985  6-4-85   Not_Included project for construct Atrisco Drive Roadway and
                               drainage improvements from Bridge Blvd. to
                               Central Avenue
                               Approving and authorizing filing of proposal for
98-1985  6-4-85   Not_Included matching grant with state historic preservation
                               office for cultural resource management
                               inventory of West Mesa Escarpment
99-1985  6-4-85   Not_Included Amending existing community development block
                               grant (CDBG) jobs bill program
                               Appropriating funds for operating government of
100-1985 6-7-85   Not_Included Albuquerque for fiscal year beginning July 1,
                               1985 and ending June 30, 1985
 
Res. No. Date Disposition Short Title
Res. Date Disposition Short Title
No.
101- 6-    Not
1985 13-  Included    Appropriating funds for Main Street Program
     85
102- 6-    Not
1985 13-  Included    Stating intent of council in regard to intra-year positions
     85
103- 6-    Not
1985 24-  Included    Relating to S.A.D. No. 197
     85
104- 6-    Not        Providing for appropriation to Economic Development Department from
1985 24-  Included    metro redevelopment fund for financing dues for county of
     85               Bernalillo membership in Albuquerque Center, Inc.
105- 6-    Not        Approving and authorizing filing of grant application with New
1985 24-  Included    Mexico State Office on Aging for Title III Older Americans Act Fund
     85               and laws 1985
106- 6-    Not        Determining that building at 1903 High Street S.E., is a menace to
1985 24-  Included    the public comfort, health, peace or safety and is required to be
     85               removed
107- 6-    Not        Approving and authorizing filing of attached grant application with
1985 24-  Included    Department of Justice, and providing for Appropriation to
     85               Corrections and Detention Department
108- 6-    Not
1985 24-  Included    Amending Section 1 of Resolution 78-1985
     85
109- 7-5-  Not        Determining that certain buildings at 2715 Fifth Street N.W. are so
1985 85   Included    ruined, damaged, and dilapidated as to be a menace to the public
                      comfort, health, or safety and that they be required to be removed
110- 7-    Not        Providing for appropriation of municipal arterial program funds for
1985 10-  Included    reconstruction of Broadway Blvd., Phase I, Central Avenue to Ethlyn
     85               Avenue
111- 7-    Not
1985 10-  Included    Amending Resolution 20-1985
     85
112- 7-    Not
1985 10-  Included    Awarding contract for S.A.D. No. 213
     85
113- 7-    Not
1985 10-  Included    Awarding contract for S.A.D. No. 204
     85
114- 7-    Not        Approving industrial development plan entitled capitol glass
1985 10-  Included    project
     85
115- 7-    Not        Extending the allocation of $3,900,000 of the city's portion of the
1985 10-  Included    1985 state ceiling amount for private activity bonds
     85
116- 7-    Not        Approving first addendum to metropolitan redevelopment plan
1985 10-  Included    entitled “Project Redevelopment Plan to the Alvarado Metropolitan
     85               Area”
117- 7-    Not        Concerning the regular municipal election to be held in the city of
1985 30-  Included    Albuquerque, New Mexico, on Tuesday, the eighth day of October 1985
     85
118- 7-    Not        Approving the 1986 Transportation Program for Albuquerque Urbanized
1985 17-  Included    Area
     85
119- 7-    Not
1985 17-  Included    Determining reasonable notice of public meetings of Council
     85
120- 7-
1985 17-  6-5-2       Amending Resolution No. 67-1982
     85
121- 7-    Not        Approving/authorizing filing of attached application for airport
1985 17-  Included    master planning grant with Federal Aviation Administration
     85
122- 7-    Not
1985 17-  Included    Approving Contract Change Orders No. 3 and 4 for S.A.D. No. 214
     85
123- 7-    Not
1985 17-  Included    Approving/authorizing filing for senior companion grant
     85
124- 7-    Not        Awarding construction for S.A.D. No. 207 J.R. Hale Contracting Co.,
1985 17-  Included    Inc.
     85
125- 7-    Not        Providing appropriation of federal grant funds to capital
1985 17-  Included    improvements program for construction of a bridge
     85
 
Res. No. Date Disposition Short Title
Res. No. Date    Disposition   Short Title
126-1985 7-17-85  Not_Included Concerning city's metropolitan redevelopment
                               revenue bonds series 1985 - $500,000
                               Appropriating funds to Department of Services
127-1985 7-19-85  Not_Included for support services to mentally disabled
                               citizens
128-1985 7-31-85  Not_Included Authorizing release of unimproved land leased by
                               city of Osteopathic Hospital Assoc., Inc.
129-1985 7-25-85  Not_Included Appropriating funds for acquisition of downtown
                               land and facility
                               Adopting the facility plan: electric service
130-1985 7-25-85  Not_Included transmission subtransmission facilities (1985-
                               1995)
                               Appropriating $32,000 to human services program
131-1985 7-30-85  Not_Included to undertake pilot study on mentally and
                               developmentally disabled offender
                               Approving and authorizing filing of attached
132-1985 7-30-85  Not_Included grant application with department of finance and
                               administration and providing for appropriation
                               to the Corrections and Detention Department
                               Approving and authorizing filing of attached
133-1985 7-30-85  Not_Included grant application for grant-in-aid grant with
                               the New Mexico State Library
                               Approving and authorizing filing of attached
134-1985 7-30-85  Not_Included grant application for an urban library resources
                               grant
                               Noting that Banner Square Associates are
135-1985 7-30-85  Not_Included successors and Assigns of the developer, Renew
                               Mexico Development Associates; amending
                               Resolution 224-1984
                               Providing for appropriation to capital
136-1985 7-30-85  Not_Included improvement program for capital project to
                               repave Rio Grande Blvd.
                               Amending adopted Uptown Sector Development Plan
137-1985 7-30-85  Not_Included to Allow certain drive-in facilities within the
                               SU-2 Zone
                               Approving and authorizing filing of attached
138-1985 7-30-85  Not_Included modification to job training plan for funds to
                               be made available for program year 1985
                               effective July 1, 1985
139-1985 7-30-85  Not_Included Amending Resolution 182-1984
140-1985 7-30-85  Not_Included Approving Contract Change Order No. 14 for
                               S.A.D. No. 205
                               Creating task force on alcohol and substance
141-1985 8-6-85  2-4-7         abuse as it relates to crime in greater
                               Albuquerque area
                               Approving and authorizing filing of attached
142-1985 8-6-85   Not_Included grant application for Albuquerque comprehensive
                               alcohol program grant with the Traffic Safety
                               Bureau
                               Approving and authorizing acceptance of grant
143-1985 8-6-85   Not_Included amendment from EPA and state of N.M.
                               Environmental Improvement Division
144-1985 8-6-85  4-2-5         Adopting Albuquerque international master plan
                               and airport noise compatibility program
                               Authorizing the removal of certain uncollectible
145-1985 8-6-85   Not_Included accounts from the city's accounts receivable
                               records
146-1985 8-6-85   Not_Included Relating to and creating S.A.D. No. 197
                               Urging that N.M. municipal league nominating
149-1985 8-14-85  Not_Included committee select Albuquerque City Councillor
                               Nadyne C. Bicknell as candidate for office of
                               Vice-President of municipal league for 1985-86
150-1985 8-16-85  Not_Included Adopting two-year plan for urban enhancement
                               trust fund
 
Res. No. Date Disposition Short Title
Res. Date     Disposition Short Title
No.
151- 8-16-85   Not        Appropriating funds in operating grants fund to
1985          Included    continue supplemental crime prevention
152-           Not        Effort approving/authorizing filing of attached
1985 8-16-85  Included    grant application for rideshare program with
                          Federal Highway Administration
153-           Not        Appropriation to human services program to conduct
1985 8-16-85  Included    study of mentally and developmentally disabled
                          offenders
154- 8-16-85   Not        Amending Bill No. R-421 concerning S.A.D. No. 197
1985          Included
                          Designating Soldiers and Sailors Park Metropolitan
155-                      Redevelopment Area; making findings pursuant to
1985 9-6-85   1-12-8      metro redevelopment code; and authorizing
                          Albuquerque Metro Redevelopment Agency to prepare
                          plan for Soldiers and Sailors Park
156-           Not        Appropriating funds for North Albuquerque Acres
1985 9-6-85   Included    planning related to sector plan for a portion of
                          North Albuquerque Acres
157-           Not        Approving/authorizing filing of attached grant
1985 9-6-85   Included    application for instruction in traffic accident
                          investigation with N.M. Highway Safety Bureau
158- 9-6-85    Not        Relating to S.A.D. No. 210
1985          Included
159- 9-6-85   1-6-8       Approving “Soldiers and Sailors Park Metropolitan
1985                      Redevelopment Plan”
160- 9-6-85    Not        Approving Metropolitan Redevelopment Plan entitled
1985          Included    “Project I, 14th and Central Project”
161- 9-6-85    Not        Making certain technical changes and amendments to
1985          Included    Ordinance 142, Enactment No. 42-1985
162- 9-19-85   Not        Amending Resolution No. 117-1985
1985          Included
163- 10-30-85  Not        Relating to S.A.D. No. 210
1985          Included
164- 10-3-85   Not        Creating the public/private partnership task force
1985          Included
165-           Not        Appropriating $260,062 to Housing and Community
1985 10-3-85  Included    Department for construction of moderate income
                          housing units
166-           Not        Amending existing Water Resources Department
1985 10-3-85  Included    capital improvement program by approving a new
                          project
167- 10-3-85   Not        Requiring preparation of comprehensive recreation
1985          Included    needs assessment for city
168-           Not        Approving industrial development plan entitled The
1985 10-3-85  Included    Mission Research Corporation Phase II project (IRB
                          1985-8)
169- 10-3-85   Not        Approving industrial development plan entitled
1985          Included    Robertson-Black Project
                          Determining that three structures at 2412 San
170- 10-4-85   Not        Bernardino, N.W., 1321 Rio Grande, N.W. and 2421
1985          Included    Lilac, N.W. are a menace to the public and should
                          be removed
171- 10-4-85   Not        Approving Contract Change Order No. 1 for S.A.D.
1985          Included    No. 204
172- 10-4-85   Not        Approving Contract Change Order No. 1 for S.A.D.
1985          Included    No. 212
173-           Not        Appropriating funds to provide for moving costs
1985 10-4-85  Included    associated with city's fund departments' move to
                          new city/county building
174- 10-4-85   Not        Approving/authorizing filing of application for
1985          Included    funds under criminal justice block grant program
175-           Not        Approving/authorizing filing of application with
1985 10-4-85  Included    Federal Aviation Administration for grant to
                          upgrade taxiway guidance sign system
 
Res. No. Date Disposition Short Title
Res. Date     Disposition Short Title
No.
                          Approving/authorizing filing of application with
176- 10-4-85   Not        Federal Aviation Administration for grant to
1985          Included    reconstruct runway 17/35 and construct taxiway T-14
                          at Albuquerque Airport
177-           Not        Approving/authorizing filing of application for an
1985 10-15-85 Included    on-site fuel cell power plant feasibility study
                          grant from the urban consortium energy task force
178-           Not        Approving the first amendment to bank credit
1985 10-15-85 Included    agreement relating to city's municipal gross
                          receipts tax revenue demand bonds
179- 10-15-85  Not        Relating to S.A.D. No. 210
1985          Included
180- 10-15-85  Not        Appropriating funds to city/county building
1985          Included    construction fund
181- 10-16-85  Not        Approving/authorizing filing of allocation of funds
1985          Included    to the work unlimited office
182- 10-16-85  Not        Appropriating funds to extend city office space
1985          Included    lease
183- 10-16-85  Not        Approving/authorizing filing of application for
1985          Included    funds under Emergency Medical Services Fund Act
184- 10-21-85  Not        Fixing November 12, 1985 as the date of runoff
1985          Included    election
185- 10-21-85  Not        Appropriating funds to elections program for runoff
1985          Included    election for office of Mayor
186- 10-23-85  Not        Amending existing improvement program
1985          Included
187- 10-30-85  Not        Appropriating funds to Environmental Health and
1985          Included    Energy Department, hazardous waste program
188- 11-6-85  1-12-1      Making findings relating to Metro Redevelopment Plan
1985                      for Project XXXIII, “500 Marquette Project”
189- 11-6-85   Not        Approving additional five year period of tax
1985          Included    increment financing for Project VI and VII
190- 11-6-85   Not        Approving Change Order No. 3 for S.A.D. No. 204
1985          Included
191- 11-6-85   Not        Authorizing notice for bids on sale of $47,960,000
1985          Included    general obligation bonds, series December 1, 1985
192-           Not        Amending existing capital improvements program by
1985 11-6-85  Included    approving the 19th Street - Old Town Parking
                          Facility
193- 11-6-85   Not        Adopting a timetable for convention center expansion
1985          Included    and related convention hotel and parking facilities
194- 11-8-85   Not        Adjusting appropriated funds for certain programs to
1985          Included    provide for fiscal year 1985 actual expenditures
195- 11-8-85   Not        Adjusting funds for certain programs in risk
1985          Included    management
196-                      Making certain findings relating to Metro
1985 11-8-85  1-12-2      Redevelopment Plan for Project VIII, 7th Broadway
                          Place at Broadway and Lomas Avenue
197- 11-12-85  Not        Approving Contract Change Order No. 2 for S.A.D. No.
1985          Included    204
198- 11-19-85  Not        Approving Industrial Development Plan Entitled IRB-
1985          Included    1985-10 (New St. Pius X High School Project)
199- 11-27-85  Not        Appropriating funds for acquisition of mobile
1985          Included    recreation unit
200- 11-27-85  Not        Appropriating funds for implementation of Bill No.
1985          Included    C-134
 
Res. No. Date Disposition Short Title
Res. No. Date     Disposition   Short Title
                                Adjusting funds for certain programs to provide
201-1985 11-27-85  Not_Included for projected fiscal year 1986 expenditures
                                relating to risk management services
                                Establishing legislative policy of city for the
202-1985 11-27-85  Not_Included 1986 legislative session of the New Mexico
                                legislature
203-1985 11-27-85  Not_Included Approving supplemental joint powers agreement
                                between city and county
204-1985 11-27-85  Not_Included Approving Contract Change Order No. 2 for
                                S.A.D. No. 211
205-1985 11-27-85  Not_Included Relating to S.A.D. No. 198
                                Approving/authorizing filing of application for
206-1985 11-27-85  Not_Included funds to be made available in fiscal year 1986
                                through N.M. Governor's Office by Title III of
                                Job Training Partnership Act
                                Appropriating two state grants enacted by N.M.
207-1985 11-27-85  Not_Included legislature for treatment plant improvements
                                and a sewer project
                                Providing for appropriation of federal grant
208-1985 11-27-85  Not_Included and N.M. Utilities Inc. funds to capital
                                improvements for construction of box culvert
                                and approaches along Golf Course Road
209-1985 11-27-85  Not_Included Appropriating funds to contingency activities
                                of specific purposes
                                Declaring city policy as to payment of attorney
210-1985 11-27-85 3-3-7         expenses of city officials in matters before
                                city ethics commission
211-1985 11-27-85  Not_Included Requesting feasibility analysis of regional
                                wastewater treatment authority
                                Appropriating funds from lodgers' tax fund to
212-1985 11-27-85  Not_Included provide for supplemental appropriation to
                                lodgers promotion program
                                Approving/authorizing filing of application for
213-1985 11-27-85  Not_Included Albuquerque comprehensive alcohol program grant
                                with the traffic safety bureau
                                Authorizing Mayor to file application for N.M.
214-1985 11-27-85  Not_Included community assistance funds for storm drainage
                                project on 4th Street
215-1985 12-6-85   Not_Included Relating to insured industrial development
                                bonds series 1985 in the amount of $2,000,000
                                Appropriating funds for capital purposes
216-1985 12-20-85  Not_Included related to the October 1985 general obligation
                                bond election
217-1985 12-20-85 1-7-29        Adopting the Riverview Neighborhood Sector
                                Development Plan
                                Declaring the property at 606 John Street, N.E.
                                non-essential for municipal purposes and
218-1985 12-23-85  Not_Included appropriating funds for the acquisition/
                                exchange and refurbishment of the Dr. Pepper
                                facility located at 6th and Menaul
219-1985 11-21-85  Not_Included Appropriating Contract Change Order No. 1 for
                                S.A.D. No. 210
 
 
 
Notes
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
1986 Resolutions
Res. No. Date Disposition Short Title
Res.    Date    Disposition Short Title
No.
1-1986  1-10-86  Not        Amending Resolution 224-1984
                Included
2-1986  1-10-86  Not        Appropriating funds for asbestos abatement of City
                Included    Hall
                 Not        Requiring parking at Albuquerque Airport now
3-1986  1-10-86 Included    utilized by rental cars be available to general
                            public
4-1986  1-10-86  Not        Amending fiscal year 1986; fiscal year 1987 multi-
                Included    year planning program
                 Not        Supplementing Ordinance No. 68-1985 relating to
5-1986  1-10-86 Included    N.M. industrial development bond (Robertson-Black
                            Joint Venture Project) series 1985
6-1986  1-10-86  Not        Adjusting appropriated funds for city employee
                Included    tuition assistance
7-1986  1-10-86  Not        Approving/authorizing filing of grant application
                Included    for air pollution control grant with the EPA
                 Not        Approving/authorizing filing application with U.S.
8-1986  1-22-86 Included    Department of Transportation for a Section 9 and
                            Section 5 operating and capital grant
9-1986  1-22-86  Not        Adding to legislative program of city for 1986
                Included    legislative session of N.M. legislature
                 Not        Approving/authorizing filing of subgrant and
10-1986 1-28-86 Included    allocation of funds to city's Department of
                            Personnel, work unlimited office
11-1986 1-28-86  Not        Appropriating funds for utility costs at former
                Included    YMCA facility at Grand and Broadway
12-1986 1-28-86  Not        Transferring funds to Mayor's office and CAO's
                Included    programs from surplus funds in other programs
13-1986 1-28-86  Not        Awarding construction contract for S.A.D. No. 197
                Included    to J.R. Hale Contracting Co., II
14-1986 1-28-86  Not        Approving Contract Change Order No. 1 for S.A.D.
                Included    No. 207
                 Not        Adjusting appropriated funds for sworn police
15-1986 1-28-86 Included    personnel program to provide for fiscal year 1986
                            traffic control overtime expenditures
                 Not        Adopting fiscal year 1987 - fiscal year 1988 multi-
16-1986 1-28-86 Included    year planning program and amending fiscal year
                            1986-1987 multi-year planning program
                            Appropriating $6,666 to Human Services Department
17-1986 1-29-86  Not        for Educational Services Coordination through
                Included    Albuquerque Volunteers Office of N.M. Aids
                            Services, Inc.
18-1986 1-29-86  Not        Mandating that great care be taken with variances
                Included    for signs
19-1986 1-29-86  Not        Appointing City Clerk, Deputy City Clerks and
                Included    rescinding Resolution 202-1981
20-1986 1-23-86  Not        Approving industrial development plan entitled
                Included    sandia laboratory federal credit union project
                 Not        Setting city policy on site of convention center
21-1986 2-5-86  Included    expansion and location of nearby additional hotel
                            space
22-1986 2-5-86  6-5-2       Amending Resolution No. 67-1982
                 Not        Adopting facility plan for arroyos; commending
23-1986 2-27-86 Included    facility plan to other jurisdictions; calling on
                            Mayor to detail and implement plan
24-1986 2-27-86  Not        Approving Metropolitan Redevelopment Plan entitled
                Included    “Project 1986-1 J.S. Brown Mercantile Building”
25-1986 2-27-86  Not        Appropriating funds for capital purposes and
                Included    amending approved capital improvements program
 
Res. No. Date Disposition Short Title
Res. Date Disposition Short Title
No.
26-  2-    Not        Transferring funds to weed and litter program from utilities program
1986 27-  Included    to fund temporary employees
     86
27-  2-
1986 27-  6-6-5       Adopting city MBE participation goals
     86
28-  2-    Not        Approving/authorizing filing of grant application for MBE program
1986 27-  Included    directory with Adolph Coors Co.
     86
29-  2-    Not
1986 27-  Included    Relating to Albuquerque, N.M. S.A.D. No. 204
     86
30-  2-    Not
1986 27-  Included    Approving Contract Change Order No. 4 for S.A.D. No. 213
     86
31-  2-    Not        Approving Metropolitan Redevelopment Plan entitled “Project No. 3 -
1986 27-  Included    Sycamore Square Redevelopment Plan for the Sycamore Metro
     86               Redevelopment Area”
32-  3-5-  Not        Adjusting appropriated funds for certain programs for projected
1986 86   Included    fiscal year 1986 expenditures
33-  3-    Not        Appropriating funds to parks and recreation program to provide very
1986 17-  Included    special art services to APS
     86
34-  3-    Not        Appropriating funds to building maintenance program, Department of
1986 17-  Included    Refuse and Services, to connect city/county automated energy
     86               management system to two major downtown, city-owned facilities
35-  3-    Not        Approving/authorizing contract with N.M. State Office on Aging for
1986 17-  Included    Chapter 15 funds, 1985 - laws and providing appropriation to OSA
     86
36-  3-    Not        Approving Metro Redevelopment Plan entitled “Project III - Five
1986 17-  Included    Woodward Center”
     86
37-  3-
1986 17-  4-4-3       Adopting Rio Grande Valley State Park Management Plan
     86
38-  3-    Not
1986 17-  Included    Amending and superseding Resolution No. 85-1984
     86
39-  3-    Not
1986 17-  Included    Appropriating funds in amount of $148,000 to APD for body armor
     86
40-  3-    Not
1986 19-  Included    Relating to S.A.D. No. 213
     86
41-  3-    Not        Appropriating funds for capital purposes at Albuquerque International
1986 19-  Included    Airport
     86
42-  3-    Not        Establishing Bicentennial/Diamond Jubilee Committee to observe
1986 28-  Included    bicentennial of the U.S. Constitution and 75th anniversary of N.M.
     86               statehood
43-  4-    Not
1986 29-  Included    Relating to N.M. S.A.D. No. 204
     86
44-  4-8-  Not        Appropriating funds and amending existing CIP for Phase 1 acquisition
1986 86   Included    of Westside master planned facility and extension of Phase 2
                      acquisition
45-  4-    Not
1986 11-  Included    Relating to N.M. S.A.D. No. 213
     86
46-  4-    Not        Approving industrial development plan entitled Cook Development Group
1986 15-  Included    Project (IRB-1986-1)
     86
47-  4-    Not        Approving Metropolitan Redevelopment Plan entitled “Project IV, Grand
1986 15-  Included    Avenue Apartment Project”
     86
48-  4-    Not        Creating citizens committee to study preservation of historic
1986 15-  Included    structures in Fourth Ward and Eighth Street/Forrester historic
     86               districts
49-  4-    Not        Providing for appropriation of funds, creating projects, changing
1986 15-  Included    scope of existing projects, combining like projects, and
     86               reprogramming projects in CIP of the city
50-  4-    Not        Appropriating funds for operation of Refuse Department for fiscal
1986 21-  Included    year beginning July 1, 1986 and ending June 30, 1987
     86
 
Res. No. Date Disposition Short Title
Res. Date Disposition Short Title
No.
51-  4-    Not        Appropriating funds for operation of Water Utilities
1986 21-  Included    Department for fiscal year July 1, 1986 to June 30, 1987
     86
52-  4-    Not        Amending Refuse Department approved 1985-1989 six year
1986 21-  Included    capital improvements plan
     86
53-  4-    Not        Appropriating funds to ADD from the trust and agency tax
1986 21-  Included    increment account for financing dues for Bernalillo
     86               membership in Alb. Ctr., Inc.
54-  4-    Not
1986 21-  Included    Approving Contract Change Order No. 15 for S.A.D. No. 205
     86
55-  4-    Not
1986 21-  Included    Approving Contract Change Order No. 2 for S.A.D. No. 212
     86
56-  4-               Amending Coors Corridor Neighborhood/Sector Development
1986 29-  1-7-27      Plan
     86
57-  4-               Amending Seven Bar Neighborhood/Sector Development Plan
1986 29-  1-7-28      and clarifying name
     86
58-  4-    Not
1986 29-  Included    Relating to S.A.D. No. 204
     86
59-  4-    Not
1986 30-  Included    Relating to S.A.D. No. 213
     86
60-  4-    Not
1986 30-  Included    Relating to S.A.D. No. 204
     86
61-  4-    Not        Rescinding R-248, which ordered condemnation of building
1986 30-  Included    at 1001 Fourth St., S.W.
     86
62-  5-9-  Not        Amending Water Utilities Department approved 1985-1989 6-
1986 86   Included    year capital improvements plan
63-  5-    Not        Setting policy for beginning implementation of
1986 19-  Included    Albuquerque/ Bernalillo County motor vehicle inspection-
     86               maintenance program
64-  5-    Not        Prohibiting approval of building permits for construction
1986 20-  Included    in South Broadway Area pending the adoption of 1986 South
     86               Broadway Neighborhoods Sector Plan
65-  5-               Approving Metro Redevelopment Plan entitled “Project X,
1986 21-  1-12-2      Downtown Convention Center”
     86
66-  5-    Not        Appropriating funds to Corrections and Detention
1986 28-  Included    Department for operation for fiscal year July 1, 1986 to
     86               June 30, 1987
     5-               Appropriating Funds for operating city's government for
67-  28-   Not        fiscal year July 1, 1986 to June 30, 1987; repealing R-30,
1986 86   Included    Enactment No. 51-1986 and appropriating joint water and
                      sewer funds in the Public Works Department
68-  5-    Not        Approving/authorizing filing of application for summer
1986 28-  Included    food service program for children
     86
69-  5-    Not        Approving Metro Redevelopment Plan entitled “Project II
1986 28-  Included    (MRB-1986-4) Washington Apartments Historic
     86               Rehabilitation”
     5-               Appropriating funds in general fund, joint water/sewer
70-  28-   Not        fund, and city/county building construction fund to
1986 86   Included    provide funds to complete City Hall renovation and for
                      office space lease extensions
71-  5-    Not        Authorizing city's entering into a joint powers agreement
1986 28-  Included    with Bernalillo County to conduct special election
     86
72-  6-5-  Not        Approving/authorizing filing of application for an RSVP
1986 86   Included    action grant
73-  6-5-  Not        Amending Resolution No. 41-1982
1986 86   Included
                      Establishing guidelines for community development housing
74-  6-6-  Not        rehabilitation and other programs; providing for waivers
1986 86   Included    and appeals and repealing Resolution No. 353, Enactment
                      125-1983
                      Approving final statement of community development
75-  6-6-  Not        objectives and projected use of funds for the fiscal year
1986 86   Included    1986-1987, and authorizing the Mayor to prepare and submit
                      a grant application to federal government
 
Res. No. Date Disposition Short Title
Res. Date Disposition Short Title
No.
76-  6-    Not        Approving/authorizing execution of cooperative agreement between city and
1986 16-  Included    state of New Mexico Highway Department
     86
77-  6-6-  Not        Approving/authorizing filing of grant application with N.M. state office on
1986 86   Included    Aging for Title III Older Americans Act Funds and Laws 1986 Chapter 7
78-  6-6-  Not        Approving/authorizing filing of application for foster grandparent grant with
1986 86   Included    the state action office
79-  6-6-  Not        Creating and appropriating funds for the Albuquerque Youth Task Force
1986 86   Included
80-  6-               Adopting policy towards lands in area covered by La Cueva High School land use
1986 16-  1-1-7       guide
     86
81-  6-    Not        Amending Metropolitan Areas and Urban Centers Plan and Plan for Major Open
1986 16-  Included    Space elements of Albuquerque/ Bernalillo County Plan
     86
82-  6-    Not        Adding requirements for approval of development in “Planned Community” to
1986 16-  Included    Albuquerque/Bernalillo County Comprehensive Plan
     86
83-  6-    Not        Appropriating funds from Federal Highway Administrative and State Highway
1986 16-  Included    Department for construction of projects in CIP and Amending Resolution No. 49-
     86               1986
84-  6-    Not        Determining that structures at 209 Vermont, S.E. are so ruined and dilapidated
1986 16-  Included    as to be a menace to the public
     86
85-  6-    Not
1986 16-  Included    Approving/authorizing filing of application for senior companion grant
     86
86-  6-    Not        Amending Resolution 66-1986, appropriating funds to Corrections and Detention
1986 16-  Included    Department
     86
87-  6-    Not        Creating project and appropriating funds for acquisition and improvement of
1986 16-  Included    solid waste facility in CIP
     86
88-  6-    Not        Stating preference on time of referendum on ordinance imposing county wide
1986 16-  Included    gasoline tax
     86
89-  6-    Not
1986 19-  Included    Urging county to consider expansion of Corrections-Detention facilities
     86
90-  6-    Not
1986 20-  Included    Approving Contract Change Order No. 2 for Special Assessment District No. 207
     86
91-  6-    Not        Approving/authorizing filing of modification to job training plan for funds
1986 25-  Included    available for program year 1985 through N.M. Governor's office by Job Training
     86               Partnership Act (Public Law 97-300)
92-  7-7-  Not        Approving Contract Change Order No. 3 for Special Assessment District No. 210
1986 86   Included
93-  7-7-  Not        Approving/authorizing filing of job training plan for funds for program year
1986 86   Included    1986-1987 to provide employment and training activities
94-  7-7-  Not        Confirming support of City Council for Project I, 14th and Central Project,
1986 86   Included    plan for Soldiers and Sailors Park Areas and extending sunset date for
                      issuance of bonds
95-  7-7-  Not        Amending Council Resolution 224-1984 (R-258) regarding “Project I, Banner
1986 86   Included    Square”
96-  7-7-  Not        Appropriating funds to planning from Metro Redevelopment Fund for services
1986 86   Included    relating to convention center expansion, hotel development and mixed-use
                      project in downtown core
97-  7-    Not        Approving plan entitled “First Eastern Corporation of New Mexico Project”
1986 15-  Included    (IRB-1986-2)
     86
98-  7-    Not        Determining that four city-owned houses are not essential for municipal
1986 16-  Included    purposes
     86
99-  7-
1986 21-  3-5-18      Amending Resolution 141-1978 regarding city water and sewer extension policies
     86
100- 7-    Not
1986 21-  Included    Determining reasonable notice of public meetings of the Council
     86
 
Res. No. Date Disposition Short Title
Res. No. Date    Disposition   Short Title
                               Extending date for report of Citizen's Committee
101-1986 7-21-86  Not_Included to Study Preservation of Historic Structures,
                               created by Resolution 48-1986
102-1986 7-25-86 1-7-13        Adopting University Neighborhoods Area Sector
                               Development Plan
103-1986 7-25-86 2-4-4         Establishing Veterans Affairs Advisory Board
                               Setting policy for protection and preservation
104-1986 7-20-86  Not_Included of West Mesa Volcanic Escarpment and associated
                               Native American rock art
                               Amending city policy regarding the site of
105-1986 7-28-86  Not_Included convention center expansion and location of
                               nearby hotel site and repealing Resolution No.
                               21-1986
106-1986 7-7-86  1-6-9, 1-7-15 Adopting South Broadway Neighborhoods Sector
                               Development Plan and Metro Redevelopment Plan
107-1986 7-29-86  Not_Included Designating South Broadway Neighborhoods Metro
                               Redevelopment Area
108-1986 7-29-86  Not_Included Relating to proposed S.A.D. No. 215
                               Transferring funds from planning's convention
109-1986 7-29-86  Not_Included center program to parks and recreation's land
                               management fund
110-1986 7-29-86  Not_Included Relating to S.A.D. No. 207
                               Approving/consenting to dispense alcoholic
111-1986 7-29-86 5-1-20        beverages at Cavan Building 15th floor, 500
                               Marquette Ave., N.W.
112-1986 8-12-86  Not_Included Appropriating funds to fleet management for
                               establishing vehicle replacement program
                               Appropriating $200,000 from open space trust
113-1986 7-30-86  Not_Included fund for partial option payment on Piedras
                               Marcadas open space acquisition
114-1986 7-30-86  Not_Included Approving 1987 Transportation Program for the
                               Albuquerque Urbanized Area
115-1986 7-30-86  Not_Included Approving Contract Change Order No. 4 for S.A.D.
                               No. 204
                               Authorizing urban development action grant
116-1986 7-30-86  Not_Included application to the U.S. Department of Housing
                               and Urban Development for the downtown hotel
                               Requesting Revenue Division of Taxation and
117-1986 8-8-86   Not_Included Revenue Department of state to approve city's
                               proposed ordinance imposing county-wide two cent
                               per gallon gas tax
118-1986 8-27-86  Not_Included Relating to city's joint water and sewer bi-
                               modal multi-term format revenue bonds
119-1986 8-20-86  Not_Included Relating to city's general obligation general
                               purpose bi-modal multi-term format bonds
                               Approving/authorizing work unlimited to apply
120-1986 8-20-86  Not_Included for and receive funds from office of the
                               Governor
121-1986 8-20-86 1-7-30        Adopting/amending north I-25 Sector Development
                               Plan
                               Urging New Mexico Municipal League Nominating
122-1986 8-25-86  Not_Included Committee to select City Councillor Nadyne C.
                               Bicknell as candidate for President-Elect of
                               League
123-1986 8-26-86  Not_Included Relating to Proposed S.A.D. No. 198
124-1986 8-26-86  Not_Included Amending Existing CIP Program
                               Approving/authorizing filing of attached grant
125-1986 8-26-86  Not_Included application for basic state grant-in-aid grant
                               with N.M. State Library
 
Res. No. Date Disposition Short Title
Res.  Date Disposition Short Title
No.
126-  8-    Not
1986a 26-  Included    Approving/authorizing filing of grant application for ride sharing program
      86
126-  8-    Not        Rejecting proposal received regarding convention hotel redevelopment on Railroad
1986b 27-  Included    Metro Redevelopment Area, Project X property
      86
127-  8-    Not
1986  29-  Included    Providing appropriation for office of internal audit for fiscal year 1987
      86
128-  9-    Not
1986  10-  Included    Concerning joint election to be held on Tuesday, November 4, 1986
      86
129-  9-9-  Not        Relating to Proposed S.A.D. No. 215
1986  86   Included
130-  9-    Not
1986  11-  Included    Approving/authorizing filing of application for criminal justice block grant
      86
131-  9-    Not
1986  11-  Included    Relating to S.A.D. No. 207
      86
132-  9-    Not
1986  15-  Included    Relating to S.A.D. No. 207
      86
133-  9-    Not        Accepting report of Citizen's Committee on Preservation of Structures within Eighth
1986  30-  Included    Street/Forrester and Fourth Ward historic districts
      86
134-  9-    Not
1986  30-  Included    Providing for amendment to Resolution No. 55 - Enactment No. 67-1986
      86
135-  9-    Not
1986  30-  Included    Reappropriating additional funds to Planning Department for fiscal year 1987
      86
136-  9-    Not
1986  30-  Included    Approving Contract Change Order No. 5 for S.A.D. No. 197
      86
137-  10-   Not        Making findings of facts necessary to inclusion in tax increment method of financing
1986  6-86 Included    for the “500 Marquette Project” and “7 Broadway Place Project” and for continuation
                       of “Alvarado Square” and “Plaza Campana”
138-  10-  1-11-1      Amending Northwest Mesa Area Plan for Tract R, Taylor Ranch Subdivision
1986  8-86
139-  10-   Not        Approving/authorizing grant under N.M. Litter Control and Beautification Act with
1986  8-86 Included    N.M. Highway Department
140-  10-   Not        Appropriating funds to risk management to establish medical clinic
1986  8-86 Included
141-  10-   Not        Approving/authorizing filing of grant application for hazardous waste by-product of
1986  8-86 Included    energy production/consumption: a management system grant with the Urban Consortium
                       Energy Task Force
142-  10-   Not        Approving Contract Change Order No. 3 for S.A.D. No. 197
1986  8-86 Included
143-  10-   Not        Approving/authorizing filing of grant application for funds under Emergency Medical
1986  13-  Included    Services Fund Act
      86
144-  10-   Not
1986  13-  Included    Creating task force to study proper controls on halfway houses and rescue missions
      86
145-  10-   Not        Approving grant application and appropriating funds for paving improvements at
1986  13-  Included    Double Eagle II Airport
      86
146-  10-   Not        Appropriating additional funds for the creation of a Bicentennial/Diamond Jubilee
1986  13-  Included    Coordinator position in special programs
      86
147-  10-   Not        Appropriating funds to facilities management program for sublease of Wool Warehouse
1986  21-  Included    Building
      86
148-  10-   Not        Providing for appropriation of State Highway Department cooperative agreement funds
1986  21-  Included    to CIP for rehabilitation of Gibson Blvd.
      86
149-  10-   Not
1986  21-  Included    Amending approved capital improvements program of city
      86
150-  10-   Not        Approving scope and budget for design/construction of Albuquerque Convention Center
1986  21-  Included    Expansion Project and Urban Blvd.
      86
 
Res. No. Date Disposition Short Title
Res. No. Date     Disposition   Short Title
151-1986 10-21-86  Not_Included Relating to and creating New Mexico S.A.D. No.
                                215
152-1986 10-21-86  Not_Included Appointing Vincent F. Griego to Board of
                                Directors of New Mexico Municipal League
153-1986 10-23-86 1-1-8         Concerning access control and right-of-way
                                acquisition policy for Paseo Del Norte
154-1986 10-27-86  Not_Included Relating to and creating New Mexico S.A.D. No.
                                198
155-1986 10-27-86 2-1-4         Amending Council Resolution No. R-75, Enactment
                                100-1984
                                Approving/authorizing application and
156-1986 10-27-86  Not_Included acceptance of grant from EPA and State
                                Environmental Improvement Division
157-1986 10-27-86  Not_Included Appropriating funds in operating grants fund to
                                continue supplemental crime prevention effort
                                Approving/authorizing filing of grant
158-1986 10-27-86  Not_Included application for traffic safety project grant
                                with State Transportation Department
                                Approving/authorizing filing of grant
159-1986 10-27-86  Not_Included application for Lomas Blvd. rehabilitation
                                project
                                Approving/authorizing filing of grant
160-1986 10-27-86  Not_Included application for urban library resources grant
                                with State Library
161-1986 10-27-86  Not_Included Calling for Mayor to enter in and present joint
                                powers agreement for an interstate access study
                                Increasing appropriation in fiscal year 1987 to
162-1986 11-19-86  Not_Included cash management and collections program of DFM
                                in general fund by $11,200
                                Providing policy and guidelines for
163-1986 11-19-86  Not_Included comprehensive infrastructure replacement/
                                rehabilitation program
                                Providing for appropriation of general
164-1986 11-19-86  Not_Included obligation bond funds to capital improvements
                                program for completion/ rehabilitation of
                                sidewalks
                                Approving/authorizing filing of attached grant
165-1986 11-19-86  Not_Included application for air pollution control grant
                                with EPA
                                Adjusting appropriated funds for certain
166-1986 11-19-86  Not_Included programs to provide for fiscal year 1986 actual
                                expenditures and adjusting fiscal year 1987
                                appropriations
                                Establishing financial planning and rate
167-1986 11-19-86 3-5-2         setting guidelines for joint water sewer fund
                                and refuse fund
                                Providing for appropriation to implement and
                                provide follow-through of recommendations
168-1986 11-21-86  Not_Included presented in July 15, 1986 final report of
                                Mayor's Task Force on Alcohol/Drug Abuse and
                                Crime
                                Rejecting proposal received in connection with
169-1986 8-27-86   Not_Included request for proposals for convention hotel
                                redevelopment
                                Supporting Selection of Stallion Site by U.S.
170-1986 12-20-86  Not_Included Army Strategic Defense Command for construction
                                of proposed ground based free electron laser
                                technology integration experiment facility
171-1986 12-10-86 3-3-8         Establishing policy of city regarding sexual
                                harassment
                                Authorizing removal of certain uncollectible
172-1986 12-10-86  Not_Included accounts from the city's accounts receivable
                                records
                                Providing appropriation to Human Services
173-1986 12-10-86  Not_Included Department to contract with N.M. Citizens
                                Council on Alcoholism and Drug Abuse
                                Establishing procedures to better insure that
174-1986 12-10-86 3-10-2        persons in city who are without shelter do not
                                face risk of death or serious health
                                impairments due to the elements
                                Declaring Tracts E and F of Forest Hills
175-1986 12-10-86 1-9-15        Subdivision and vacated 34 Feet of Forest Hills
                                Drive to be non-essential for municipal
                                purposes
 
Res. No. Date Disposition Short Title
Res. No. Date     Disposition   Short Title
176-1986 12-15-86  Not_Included Establishing legislative policy of city for
                                1987 legislative session
                                Setting policy regarding storage of additional
177-1986 12-29-86 3-5-50        water at Abiquiu Reservoir and calling for
                                investigation of alternatives for use and
                                disposition of San Juan-Chama water
                                Approving acquisition of property adjacent to
                                security federal to convey it to security
178-1986 12-29-86  Not_Included federal in settlement of condemnation and
                                declaring it non-essential for municipal
                                purpose
                                Setting policy for museum acquisition and
179-1986 12-29-86  Not_Included requesting Councillor Hoover to cooperate in
                                effort to enhance Four Centuries of Albuquerque
                                History Collection
                                Extending termination date of internal audit
180-1986 12-29-86  Not_Included program in Affirmative Action/Internal Audit
                                Department
181-1986 12-29-86  Not_Included Approving Contract Change Order No. 6 for
                                S.A.D. No. 197
182-1986 1-20-87   Not_Included Transferring fund balance from operating
                                reserve to general fund
183-1986 1-8-87    Not_Included Appropriating funds for renovation of city
                                refuse facility
184-1986 1-20-87   Not_Included Extending Enactment No. 46-1986 - Cook
                                Development Group
                                Appropriating $183,659 to Human Services
185-1986 1-20-87   Not_Included Department, Housing Division for repairs and
                                improvements to public housing
186-1986 1-20-87  6-5-2         Amending Resolution No. 67-1982 - Tingley Beach
187-1986 1-20-87   Not_Included Approving Western Skies Hotel Project
                                Appointing person ranked highest by Audit
188-1986 1-7-87    Not_Included Committee to position of Internal Auditor for
                                city
 
 
 
Notes
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
1987 Resolutions
Res. No. Date Disposition Short Title
Res. Date Disposition Short Title
No.
1-   2-4-  Not        Appropriating funds to capital improvements program for the Zoo and
1987 87   Included    Convention Center, and approving new projects
2-   2-    Not        Declaring January 6, 1987 as Statehood Day; Declaring 1987 as “Diamond
1987 10-  Included    Jubilee/Bicentennial Year”; Observing that 1987 is 200th Anniversary of
     87               Constitution of U.S.A.
3-   2-    Not        Appropriating funds to Albuquerque International Airport expansion, apron
1987 11-  Included    and service project
     87
4-   2-    Not
1987 18-  Included    Appropriation to PWD for employment of Assistant City Attorney
     87
5-   2-    Not        Modifying project description and appropriating funds for construction of
1987 23-  Included    Zone 1E, Alameda Trunk Water Line
     87
6-   2-    Not        Approving the programming of funds and projects for the 1987-1991 six-
1987 23-  Included    year CIP
     87
7-   2-    Not        Appropriating funds for the design of the Albuquerque Convention Center
1987 23-  Included    expansion and Urban Blvd. projects
     87
8-   2-    Not
1987 23-  Included    Declaring the city's intent to issue bonds (La Vida Llena)
     87
9-   3-3-  Not        Amending Sawmill Sector Development Plan
1987 87   Included
10-  3-3-  Not        Appropriation for Albuquerque International Airport Master Plan
1987 87   Included    Improvement Program
11-  3-3-  Not        Decreasing appropriation for employee health centers
1987 87   Included
12-  3-3-  Not        Appropriation for office of Independent Counsel (APD-IA)
1987 87   Included
13-  3-3-  Not        Reducing balance in various funds to increase general fund balance
1987 87   Included
14-  3-3-  Not        Appropriation for regional wastewater treatment feasibility study
1987 87   Included
15-  3-3-  Not        Appropriating revenue from San Juan Chama Water sales to water rights
1987 87   Included    enhancement project
16-  3-3-  Not        Appropriating 1985 general obligation bond funds for city-wide
1987 87   Included    rehabilitation project
17-  3-               Amending I-25 Sector Development to provide auto sales and service as
1987 20-  1-7-30      conditional use
     87
18-  3-    Not
1987 25-  Included    Awarding construction contract; S.A.D. 215
     87
19-  3-    Not        Terminating joint powers agreement creating Regional Solid Waste
1987 25-  Included    Authority
     87
20-  3-    Not
1987 25-  Included    Appropriation for public safety and civil rights unit
     87
21-  3-    Not        Appropriation to Parks and Recreation - landscape maintenance at Museum
1987 25-  Included    of Natural History
     87
22-  3-               Policy for additional protection of West Mesa Escarpment Native American
1987 25-  1-5-2       Rock Art
     87
23-  3-
1987 25-  1-7-30      Amendment to north I-25 Sector Development Plan - zone change
     87
24-  3-    Not
1987 25-  Included    Appropriation to hearing officer program
     87
25-  4-1-  Not        Concerning guidelines for community development housing rehabilitation
1987 87   Included
 
Res. No. Date Disposition Short Title
Res. No. Date    Disposition   Short Title
26-1987  4-1-87   Not_Included Increase local match for urban development
                               action grant application for downtown hotel
27-1987  4-7-87   Not_Included Creating ad hoc task force to evaluate emergency
                               medical services program
                               Rescinding Resolution No. 144-1986 which
28-1987  4-7-87   Not_Included appropriated funds for study on halfway houses
                               and rescue missions
29-1987  4-7-87   Not_Included Appropriation - fiscal year 1988 refuse program
30-1987  4-10-87  Not_Included Appropriation - fiscal year 1988 joint water/
                               sewer program
31-1987  4-10-87  Not_Included Approving 4th quarter audit plan
32-1987  4-10-87  Not_Included Grant application to Department of HUD
33-1987  4-10-87  Not_Included Setting May 4, 1987 for assessment hearing -
                               S.A.D. 215
34-1987  4-10-87  Not_Included Appropriating G.O. bond funds for north/south
                               Coors Connection project
35-1987  4-29-87  Not_Included Appropriation for very special arts program -
                               Parks and Recreation
36-1987  5-12-87  Not_Included Appropriation for Youth Task Force
37-1987  5-12-87  Not_Included UMTA Section 9 grant application
38-1987  5-12-87  Not_Included Grant application - retired senior volunteer
                               program
39-1987  5-12-87  Not_Included Amending capital improvements program
40-1987  6-22-87  Not_Included Authorizing submission of application to State
                               Board of Finance - S.A.D. 215
41-1987  6-4-87   Not_Included Corrections and Detention budget - fiscal year
                               1988
42-1987  6-4-87   Not_Included Albuquerque/Bernalillo County Government Center
                               budget - fiscal year 1988
43-1987  6-4-87   Not_Included City budget - fiscal year 1988
44-1987  6-4-87   Not_Included Grant application with State Human Services -
                               summer food service program
45-1987  6-4-87   Not_Included Appropriation for youth events recommended by
                               Youth Task Force
46-1987  6-18-87  Not_Included Grant application - foster grandparents program
47-1987  6-18-87  Not_Included Final statement of community developments use of
                               funds and authorizing grant application
48-1987  6-18-87  Not_Included Approving Human Services contract awards
49-1987  6-22-87  Not_Included Transferring fund balance to general fund
50-1987  6-22-87  Not_Included Appointing City Clerk and Deputy City Clerks
 
Res. No. Date Disposition Short Title
Res. No. Date    Disposition   Short Title
51-1987  6-22-87 6-6-5         Reaffirming minority business enterprise
                               participation goals
52-1987  6-22-87  Not_Included Change Order No. 1 (S.A.D. 215) Unser Blvd/98th
                               St.
53-1987  6-22-87  Not_Included Supporting location of superconducting super
                               collider in Albuquerque area
54-1987  6-22-87  Not_Included Designation of Western Skies Metropolitan
                               Redevelopment Area
55-1987  6-22-87  Not_Included Approving contract with state agency on aging
                               and providing appropriation to HSD
56-1987  6-22-87  Not_Included Grant application - litter control and
                               beautification
57-1987  6-22-87  Not_Included Confirming assessment roll - S.A.D. 215
58-1987  6-22-87  Not_Included Appropriation - city/county information systems
                               project
59-1987  7-9-87   Not_Included Grant application with State Agency on Aging -
                               senior companion program
60-1987  7-9-87   Not_Included Grant application with State Agency on Aging -
                               Title III Older Americans Act Fund
61-1987  7-9-87   Not_Included Grant application - retired senior volunteer
                               program
62-1987  7-9-87   Not_Included Grant application with HUD - rental
                               rehabilitation
63-1987  7-13-87  Not_Included Calling for regular municipal election on
                               October 6, 1987
64-1987  7-13-87 6-5-2         Amending resolution concerning consumption of
                               alcoholic beverages at certain city-owned parks
65-1987  7-14-87  Not_Included Appropriation for air pollution control
66-1987  7-14-87  Not_Included Creating fiscal agent program
67-1987  7-14-87  Not_Included Grant application with EPA - development of
                               underground storage tank program
68-1987  7-14-87  Not_Included Authorizing removal of uncollectible accounts
69-1987  7-14-87  Not_Included Appropriation for salary increases
70-1987  7-14-87  Not_Included Decreasing appropriation to parking fund and
                               rescinding rollback of parking fees
                               Amending ordinance concerning metropolitan
71-1987  7-14-87  Not_Included redevelopment refunding bonds - Albuquerque
                               Imaging Center Ltd.
72-1987  7-14-87  Not_Included Determining reasonable notice of public meetings
                               Amending Resolution No. 30-1987, operating
73-1987  7-14-87  Not_Included budget for Public Works - Utilities to correct
                               an error
74-1987  7-20-87  Not_Included Los Griegos Sector Development Plan status
                               report
75-1987                        Not used
 
Res. No. Date Disposition Short Title
Res. No. Date     Disposition   Short Title
76-1987  8-28-87   Not_Included Setting August 17, 1987 at 5:30 p.m. for
                                protest hearing - S.A.D. 197
                                Authorizing development agreement with
77-1987  7-27-87   Not_Included Albuquerque Plaza Partners - construction of
                                hotel, office and convention center expansion
78-1987  7-31-87   Not_Included Approving 1988 transportation program
                                Amending municipal election resolution to
79-1987  8-10-87   Not_Included include councillor's salaries on election
                                ballot
80-1987  8-10-87   Not_Included Amending municipal election resolution
                                concerning precincts
81-1987  8-21-87  1-12-2        Convention Center/hotel Metropolitan
                                Redevelopment Plan
82-1987  8-28-87   Not_Included Appropriation for acquisition of Piedras
                                Marcados Open Space
83-1987  8-28-87   Not_Included Appropriation for expansion of Convention
                                Center and related infrastructure improvements
84-1987  8-28-87   Not_Included Grant application with Frost Foundation BAT
                                mobile
85-1987  8-28-87   Not_Included Amending CIP - improvements at Arroyo del Oso
                                Golf Course
86-1987  8-28-87   Not_Included Modifying job training plan and allowing
                                application for special grant
87-1987  9-4-87    Not_Included Appropriation for improvements to public
                                housing
88-1987  9-4-87    Not_Included Award of contract for S.A.D. 198
89-1987  9-17-87   Not_Included Adopting a quarter cent plan
90-1987  9-11-87   Not_Included State grant-in-aid for public library
91-1987  9-11-87   Not_Included Approving fiscal year 1988 audit plan
92-1987  9-11-87   Not_Included Appropriation for marketing and management
                                study - convention center expansion
93-1987  9-11-87   Not_Included Appropriation for reconstruction of Fifth St.
                                (Lomas to McKnight)
94-1987  9-30-87   Not_Included Awarding bonds and setting interest rates -
                                S.A.D. 215
95-1987  9-30-87   Not_Included Confirming and approving assessment roll -
                                S.A.D. 197
96-1987  9-30-87   Not_Included Fixing of notes on general obligations bonds
97-1987  10-13-87  Not_Included Appropriating lodgers tax funds
98-1987  9-30-87   Not_Included Appropriation for vehicle emissions testing
                                program
99-1987  9-30-87   Not_Included Adopting two-year urban enhancement trust fund
                                plan
100-1987 9-30-87   Not_Included Grant application with Federal Highway
                                Administration - ride sharing program
 
Res. No. Date Disposition Short Title
Res. No. Date     Disposition   Short Title
101-1987 9-30-87   Not_Included Appropriation for utility legal representation
                                function
102-1987 9-30-87  1-7-27        Amending Coors Corridor Neighborhood Sector
                                Development Plan
103-1987 9-30-87   Not_Included Appropriation for Southwest Area Plan
104-1987 9-30-87   Not_Included Adopting 1987-1988 multi-year planning program
105-1987 9-30-87   Not_Included Adopting future street line for Alameda Blvd.
106-1987 9-30-87   Not_Included Contract Change Order No. 3 - S.A.D. 215
107-1987 9-30-87   Not_Included Contract Change Order No. 1 - S.A.D. 215
                                Commemorating an ERA and ordering acquisition
108-1987 10-1-87   Not_Included of property for Four Centuries of History
                                Collection
109-1987 10-2-87   Not_Included Grant application - urban interstate highway
                                traffic enforcement program
110-1987 12-1-87   Not_Included Relating to S.A.D. No. 197
111-1987 10-13-87  Not_Included Declaring two parcels non-essentials for
                                municipal purposes
112-1987 10-22-87  Not_Included Fixing November 3, 1987 as date for Council
                                runoff election
113-1987 10-30-87  Not_Included Creating task force to study Lead and Coal
                                Avenues
114-1987 10-30-87  Not_Included Appropriation for salary increases for blue
                                collar employees
115-1987 10-30-87  Not_Included Condemnation 2609 Third St N.W.
116-1987 10-30-87  Not_Included Appropriation for debt service - airport fund
117-1987 10-30-87  Not_Included Appropriating funds for South Broadway landfill
                                lease
118-1987 10-30-87  Not_Included Appropriating funds for Council runoff election
                                Approving and authorizing filing grant
119-1987 11-24-87  Not_Included application to Urban Consortium Energy Task
                                Force
120-1987 11-24-87 1-7-31        Adopting West Route 66 Sector Development Plan
121-1987 11-24-87  Not_Included Creation and appropriation for right-of-way
                                function, CIP
122-1987 11-24-87  Not_Included Semi-annual amendments to CIP
123-1987 12-4-87   Not_Included Appropriating funds for consultants to analyze
                                PNM restructuring
124-1987 12-4-87   Not_Included Establishing Joint Advisory Commission on the
                                disabled
125-1987 12-24-87  Not_Included Providing for an expenditure control program
 
Res. No. Date Disposition Short Title
Res. No. Date     Disposition   Short Title
126-1987 12-17-87  Not_Included Appropriation for updating Civic Arena needs
                                analysis
127-1987 12-17-87  Not_Included Approving and authorizing filing EPA air
                                pollution control program grant
128-1987 12-17-87  Not_Included Authorizing filing of comprehensive homeless
                                assistance grant
129-1987 12-17-87  Not_Included Adjusting fiscal year 1987 appropriations
                                Appropriation funds for professional services
130-1987 12-17-87  Not_Included Convention Center expansion and hotel
                                development
131-1987 12-17-87  Not_Included Condemnation 1521 3rd S.W.
132-1987 12-17-87  Not_Included Condemnation 305 Bridge S.W.
133-1987 12-17-87  Not_Included Condemnation 1419 4th S.W.
134-1987 12-17-87  Not_Included Condemnation 1120 Arno S.E.
135-1987 12-17-87  Not_Included Condemnation 428 Aspen N.E.
136-1987 12-17-87  Not_Included Condemnation 729 Arno S.E.
 
 
 
Notes
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
1988 Resolutions
Res. No. Date Disposition Short Title
Res. No. Date    Disposition   Short Title
1-1988   1-5-88  3-5-51        Adopting policies on siting of domestic water
                               storage reservoirs
2-1988   1-5-88  1-7-4         Amending Downtown Neighborhood Area Sector
                               Development and Community Development Plan
3-1988   1-5-88  1-7-12        Adopting Huning Highland Sector Development Plan
4-1988   1-5-88  1-11-11       Adopting Northwest Mesa Escarpment Plan
5-1988   1-5-88   Not_Included Establishing a task force for evaluation of a
                               Police Commission
6-1988   1-5-88   Not_Included Supporting H.R. 1049 concerning utility
                               ratepayer refund
7-1988   1-5-88   Not_Included Appropriating federal forfeiture funds to the
                               Police Department
                               Approving and authorizing filing of grant
8-1988   1-5-88   Not_Included application emergency medical services and
                               providing appropriation to Fire Department
9-1988   1-5-88   Not_Included Appropriating funds for enforcement of numbering
                               of city buildings ordinance
10-1988  1-5-88   Not_Included Creating a task force to study removal of
                               abandoned and inoperable vehicles
11-1988  1-5-88   Not_Included Declaring moratorium on construction of
                               disciplinary institutions in downtown core
12-1988  1-5-88  1-7-32        Adopting Nob Hill Sector Development Plan
                               Creating intergovernmental committee concerning
13-1988  1-5-88   Not_Included coordinated planning of facilities and programs
                               with APS
                               Providing for the appropriation of capital
14-1988  1-5-88   Not_Included improvements for Aviation, Solid Waste and Parks
                               Department
15-1988  1-5-88   Not_Included Amending legislature concerning 1988 policy
                               position pertaining to property valuation date
                               Amending legislative policy to include support
16-1988  1-5-88   Not_Included for use of state to attract Sematech to
                               Albuquerque
17-1988  1-5-88   Not_Included Setting time and place of assessment hearing -
                               S.A.D. 198
18-1988  1-5-88   Not_Included Establishing 1988 legislative policy
19-1988  1-14-88  Not_Included Amending quarter cent plan
20-1988  2-3-88   Not_Included Condemn 419 Manuel S.W.
21-1988  2-3-88   Not_Included Condemn 416 Cromwell S.E.
22-1988  2-3-88   Not_Included Condemn 414 Cromwell S.E.
23-1988  3-2-88   Not_Included Appropriating funds for bicentennial coordinator
                               positions
                               Requesting presentation of Mayor's priorities in
24-1988  3-2-88   Not_Included fiscal year 1989 budget and providing for an
                               appropriation
25-1988  3-2-88   Not_Included Appropriating funds to DFM for Prof. Svc
                               Contract
 
Res. No. Date Disposition Short Title
Res. Date Disposition Short Title
No.
26-  3-4-  Not        Condemn 2520 Williams S.E.
1988 88   Included
27-  3-9-  Not        Authorizing filing grant application for the “just say no” intergenerational
1988 88   Included    project
28-  3-9-  Not        Approval of conveyance - property east of Convention Center - UDA parcels
1988 88   Included
29-  3-    Not
1988 17-  Included    Appropriating funds for early retirement program
     88
30-  3-    Not        Approving and authorizing grant application for an appropriation to the
1988 17-  Included    treatment plant capital fund
     88
31-  3-    Not
1988 17-  Included    Directing the Mayor to name roadway Martin Luther King, Jr. Avenue
     88
32-  3-    Not        Amending legislative policy authorizing city to enact gross receipts tax in
1988 17-  Included    increments less than 1/4 cent
     88
33-  3-    Not
1988 17-  Included    Urging federal government to participate in purchase of Rounds Estate
     88
34-  3-    Not
1988 17-  Included    Designating Don Felipe Oxbow Site to developing urban
     88
35-  3-    Not
1988 17-  Included    Declaring nine parcels of land non-essential for municipal purposes
     88
36-  3-
1988 17-  4-6-3       Adopting Woodburning education plan
     88
37-  3-    Not
1988 17-  Included    Condemn 520 Hazeldine S.W.
     88
38-  3-    Not
1988 17-  Included    Condemn 109 Pacific S.E.
     88
39-  3-    Not        Appropriating funds to Council Services for Prof. Svc. to evaluate
1988 17-  Included    recommendation of ad hoc EMS task force
     88
40-  3-    Not
1988 17-  Included    Directing engineering consultant to prepare preliminary plans - S.A.D. 218
     88
41-  3-    Not
1988 17-  Included    Directing engineering consultant to prepare preliminary plans - S.A.D. 217
     88
42-  3-    Not
1988 17-  Included    Adopting transit development program update
     88
43-  3-    Not        Appropriating N.M. Highway Department municipal arterial program funds - Lomas
1988 17-  Included    from Washington to San Pedro, Phase II
     88
44-  3-    Not
1988 17-  Included    Approving and authorizing filing of grant application for an urban library
     88
45-  3-
1988 17-  4-3-11      Amending wastewater collection treatment facilities plan
     88
46-  3-    Not        Metropolitan redevelopment refunding revenue bonds 1988 series A and B (Old St.
1988 29-  Included    Joseph Hospital project)
     88
47-  3-
1988 30-  2-1-7       Creating a task force to study possible revision of city charter
     88
48-  3-    Not        Approving and authorizing filing of grant application for participation in
1988 30-  Included    fiscal year 1977 EMS special projects award
     88
49-  3-    Not
1988 30-  Included    Adopting an amendment to the facility plan
     88
50-  3-    Not        Amending policy governing Special Assessment Districts; Repealed by Ordinance
1988 30-  Included    44-1996
     88
 
Res. No. Date Disposition Short Title
Res. Date Disposition Short Title
No.
51-  3-    Not        Establishing city policy concerning the current PNM
1988 30-  Included    restructuring plan
     88
52-  3-    Not        Establishing a program to temporarily shelter homeless
1988 30-  Included    families and providing appropriation
     88
53-  3-    Not        Approving and authorizing filing of grant application for
1988 30-  Included    Native American senior companion program
     88
54-  3-    Not        Appropriating funds to CIP for 1987 G.O. bond program and
1988 30-  Included    making application for UMTA grant funds
     88
55-  3-    Not        Approving and authorizing a contract with N.M. State
1988 30-  Included    Office on Aging for Chapter 354 funds, 1987-Laws and
     88               providing appropriation
56-  3-    Not        Modifying, confirming and approving assessment roll -
1988 30-  Included    S.A.D. 198
     88
57-  3-    Not        Amending Uptown Sector Development Plan regarding
1988 30-  Included    alignment of loop road
     88
58-  3-    Not        Amending zone regulations of Interim Downtown Sector
1988 30-  Included    Development Plan concerning disciplinary institutions
     88
59-  3-    Not        Approving and authorizing expansion of APD parking
1988 30-  Included    control unit and providing an appropriation
     88
60-  4-    Not        Appropriating funds for operation of Solid Waste
1988 14-  Included    Department
     88
61-  4-    Not        Appropriating funds for operation of Public Works
1988 21-  Included    Utilities Department
     88
62-  4-               Declaring April 23 as the city of Albuquerque's Official
1988 22-  6-1-2       Founder's Day
     88
63-  4-    Not        Declaring concern over Sandia Pueblo's claim in Cibola
1988 22-  Included    National Forest and calling for public hearings
     88
64-  4-
1988 26-  6-1-1       Street name change - Kircher Blvd. to Jefferson St.
     88
65-  4-    Not        Directing formulation of electric power policy in
1988 26-  Included    granting franchise
     88
66-  4-    Not        Appropriating funds from Convention Center construction
1988 26-  Included    project to a “parking structure” project
     88
67-  4-    Not
1988 26-  Included    Condemnation - 1600 Broadway S.E.
     88
68-  4-    Not        Authorizing and appropriating funds for certain parks and
1988 26-  Included    recreation projects and changing funding sources
     88
69-  4-    Not        Supporting APSS's effort to fund an expanded school
1988 26-  Included    capital program
     88
70-  4-    Not        Correcting and amending Eighth Council Bill No. R-43 -
1988 26-  Included    S.A.D. 198
     88
71-  5-3-             Reestablishing the utility oversight committee and
1988 88   2-3-3       specifying Council involvement in certain electric
                      utility matters
72-  5-3- 3-11-10     Declaring city policy opposing use of private jail
1988 88
73-  5-3-  Not        Setting property tax policy
1988 88   Included
74-  5-3-  Not        Authorizing the Mayor to proceed in selection of
1988 88   Included    engineering and case manager contracts on the PNM
                      restructuring case
75-  5-
1988 12-  2-4-5       Creating a Homeless Advisory Committee
     88
 
Res. No. Date Disposition Short Title
Res. No. Date    Disposition   Short Title
                               Appropriating funds for salary increase for
76-1988  5-12-88  Not_Included white collar, sworn police, sworn fire and UTA
                               contract employees
77-1988  5-12-88  Not_Included Final statement of community developments use of
                               funds and authorizing application
                               Authorizing application of emergency shelter
78-1988  5-12-88  Not_Included grant program funds and providing an
                               appropriation
79-1988  5-12-88  Not_Included Appropriating street surface restoration funds
                               to street maintenance program
80-1988  5-12-88  Not_Included Appropriating funds for transitional
                               demonstration project
81-1988  5-17-88  Not_Included Requiring development of a comprehensive ground
                               water protection policy
82-1988  5-17-88  Not_Included Adopting 1989-1900 multi-year planning program
                               Appropriating funds to Planning Department -
83-1988  5-17-88  Not_Included drainage alternatives for Piedras Marcadas
                               Arroyo
                               Approving and authorizing filing of grant
84-1988  5-17-88  Not_Included application - EMS funds and providing an
                               appropriation
85-1988  5-17-88  Not_Included Condemnation - 1227 Fourth Street S.W.
86-1988  5-17-88  Not_Included Conveying city's intent to appropriate funding
                               to supplement federal purchase of Rounds Estate
                               Approving memorandum of understanding between
87-1988  5-17-88  Not_Included city and MRGCD relating to use of Alameda/
                               Riverside drain
88-1988  6-2-88   Not_Included Amending adopted capital implementation program
                               Approving exchange agreement for real property
89-1988  6-2-88   Not_Included located at the northeast corner of Tramway and
                               Montgomery
90-1988  6-23-88  Not_Included Appropriating funds to corrections for fiscal
                               year 1989
91-1988  6-23-88  Not_Included Appropriating funds to general services for
                               fiscal year 1989
                               Approving and authorizing filing of application
92-1988  6-27-88  Not_Included for RSVP action grant and providing
                               appropriation to HSD
93-1988  6-16-88 1-7-11        Amending the Old Town Sector Development and
                               Community Development Plan
                               Establishing a joint city/county study for total
94-1988  6-16-88  Not_Included or partial consolidation of local government and
                               appropriating funds for study
                               Requesting formal RFI for future electric power
95-1988  6-16-88  Not_Included supply and appropriating funds to resource
                               management program
                               Recommending establishment of mediation process
96-1988  6-16-88  Not_Included for city of Albuquerque and PNM in negotiation
                               of alternative PNM restructuring plan
97-1988  6-16-88  Not_Included Approving and authorizing filing of UMTA Section
                               9 grant
98-1988  6-16-88 1-7-31        Amending West Route 66 Sector Development Plan
99-1988  6-16-88  Not_Included Filing declaratory judgment upon determination
                               of ownership of PNM installed fixtures
                               Approving and authorizing application for Job
100-1988 6-16-88  Not_Included Training Partnership Act funds and providing an
                               appropriation to HSD
 
Res. No. Date Disposition Short Title
Res. No. Date    Disposition   Short Title
                               Concerning multi-family housing revenue
101-1988 6-16-88  Not_Included refunding bonds, Series 1988 (Sunchase
                               Apartments project)
                               Approving rental rehabilitation program for
102-1988 6-16-88  Not_Included fiscal year 1989 and authorizing filing of grant
                               application
103-1988 6-16-88  Not_Included Approving and authorizing filing of application
                               for foster grandparent grant
104-1988 6-16-88  Not_Included Condemn 1815/1817 Broadway S.E.
105-1988 6-16-88  Not_Included Amending the adopted capital implementation
                               program
106-1988 6-16-88  Not_Included Appropriating funds for expansion of public
                               safety and civil rights unit of Legal Department
107-1988 6-16-88  Not_Included Awarding bonds and setting interest rates -
                               S.A.D. 198
108-1988 6-30-88  Not_Included Accepting preliminary plans - S.A.D. 217
109-1988 6-30-88  Not_Included Approving and authorizing filing of grant
                               application for summer food service program
110-1988 7-7-88   Not_Included Setting city policy concerning zoning code
                               enforcement in relation to adult book stores
111-1988 6-30-88  Not_Included Calling for citizen committee concerning
                               development of a therapeutic recreation center
                               Investigating the feasibility of annexing land
112-1988 6-30-88  Not_Included upon which Sandia Laboratories' offices are
                               situated
113-1988 6-30-88  Not_Included Authorizing the Mayor to enter into an agreement
                               to develop affordable housing
114-1988 6-30-88  Not_Included Appropriating funds to corrections for fiscal
                               year 1989
115-1988 7-12-88  Not_Included Declaring a city emergency due to flooding
                               Authorizing the filing of a grant application
116-1988 7-14-88  Not_Included for HB-2 Laws 1988 funds and Title III Older
                               American Funds
117-1988 7-14-88  Not_Included Providing a time extension for submission of
                               police commission task force report
118-1988 7-20-88 2-9-2         Participating in joint Bernalillo County jail
                               population review task force
119-1988 7-25-88  Not_Included Providing an appropriation to the Public Works
                               Department - service and information program
                               Providing a time extension for an implementation
120-1988 7-25-88  Not_Included plan for creating a separate Water Resources
                               Department
                               Approving and authorizing acceptance of state of
121-1988 7-25-88  Not_Included New Mexico litter control and beautification
                               grant funds and providing appropriation to Parks
                               and Recreation
122-1988 7-25-88  Not_Included Authorizing filing of grant application for
                               senior companion program
123-1988 7-25-88  Not_Included Authorizing removal of certain uncollectible
                               accounts from accounts receivable records
                               Appropriating funds for purpose of storm
124-1988 7-25-88  Not_Included drainage maintenance - Alameda and Riverside
                               drain systems
125-1988 7-27-88  Not_Included Establishing a task force to develop and action
                               plan to fight crime in the East Central area
 
Res. No. Date Disposition Short Title
Res. No. Date    Disposition   Short Title
126-1988 7-27-88  Not_Included Approving the fiscal year 1989 audit plan from
                               internal audit committee
127-1988 7-27-88  Not_Included Condemn 1200 Commercial S.E.
128-1988 7-27-88  Not_Included Approving Contract Change Order No. 1 - S.A.D.
                               198
129-1988 7-27-88  Not_Included Adopting the position ofthe city of Albuquerque
                               regarding PNM's restructuring plan
130-1988 8-11-88  Not_Included Resolution No. 3 - S.A.D. 217
131-1988 8-18-88 3-3-9         Increasing retirement contributions - blue
                               collar unit
132-1988 8-18-88 3-3-9         Increasing retirement contributions - management
                               series
133-1988 8-18-88  Not_Included Requesting postponement proposed auction of
                               vacant land located next to Bullhead Park
                               Joint city/county study - legal framework and
134-1988 8-18-88  Not_Included organizational and service options for total or
                               partial consolidation
135-1988 8-25-88  Not_Included Adopting criteria for selection of site for
                               performance arts center
136-1988 8-25-88  Not_Included Accepting preliminary plans - S.A.D. 218
                               Requiring development of a comprehensive ground
137-1988 8-25-88  Not_Included water protection policy consistent with the
                               Comprehensive Plan and repealing Bill No. 81-
                               1988
138-1988 8-30-88 1-2-1         Adopting the Comprehensive Plan
139-1988 8-30-88 1-11-2        Adopting Southwest Area Plan
140-1988 6-9-88   Not_Included Appropriating operating funds for fiscal year
                               1989
141-1988 9-15-88  Not_Included Approving the 1989 Transportation Program
                               Establishing projects and programs and making
142-1988 9-15-88  Not_Included appropriations relative to quality of life gross
                               receipts tax
143-1988 9-15-88  Not_Included Appropriating funds to Human Services Department
                               for repairs and improvements to public housing
                               Appropriating funds to Bernalillo County
144-1988 9-15-88  Not_Included Information Systems Services project fund for
                               data processing services
                               Commending Metropolitan Court for increasing
145-1988 9-15-88  Not_Included amount of bail required from persons arrested
                               for certain sex-related crimes
                               Offering the city's support in continuing to
146-1988 9-15-88  Not_Included host the Arabian horse show and providing in-
                               kind services
                               Approving and authorizing filing of grant
147-1988 9-15-88  Not_Included application for ride sharing program and
                               providing an appropriation to PWD
                               Directing Andrews, Asbury and Robert Inc. to
148-1988 9-15-88  Not_Included prepare, submit and file preliminary plans -
                               S.A.D. 216
149-1988 9-15-88  Not_Included Establishing revenue requirements from city's
                               debt service levy for fiscal year 1989
                               Directing administration to perform pilot study
150-1988 9-15-88  Not_Included of fully mechanized residential refuse
                               collection system
 
Res. No. Date Disposition Short Title
Res. No. Date     Disposition   Short Title
                                Appropriating funds to zoning enforcement
151-1988 9-15-88   Not_Included program for enforcement of numbering of city
                                buildings ordinance
152-1988 9-15-88   Not_Included Determining city's use of property tax
                                operating levy for fiscal year 1989
                                Amending Resolution 5-1988 concerning task
153-1988 9-15-88   Not_Included force membership requirements and providing
                                time extension
154-1988 9-22-88   Not_Included Directing the administration to perform a pilot
                                study of motor vehicles using alternative fuels
155-1988 9-28-88   Not_Included Condemnation - 1405 5th N.W.
156-1988 9-28-88   Not_Included Requiring development density regulations for
                                wood heaters in new construction
157-1988 9-28-88   Not_Included Increasing the penalty for persons convicted of
                                certain sex-related crimes
                                Approving and authorizing filing of grant
158-1988 9-28-88   Not_Included application for airport improvements and
                                providing an appropriation to Aviation
                                Department
                                Determining city's use of property tax
159-1988 9-28-88   Not_Included operating levy for fiscal year 1989 and
                                appropriating additional funds for operating
                                reserve
160-1988 9-28-88   Not_Included Reappropriating additional funds to Planning
                                Department - Southwest Area Plan
161-1988 9-28-88   Not_Included Change Order No. 2 - S.A.D. 198
162-1988 9-28-88   Not_Included Requesting creation of work of art honoring
                                Martin Luther King, Jr.
163-1988 9-28-88   Not_Included Condemnation - 3814 Pedroncelli N.W.
                                Urging the N.M. Municipal league nominating
164-1988 9-28-88   Not_Included committee to select Michael C. Wiener as a
                                candidate for Treasurer 1988-89
165-1988 10-12-88  Not_Included Appropriating funds to AFD to enforce clean
                                indoor air ordinance
166-1988 9-28-88   Not_Included Appropriating funds to departments for salary
                                increases for blue collar employees
                                Appropriating funds to departments for salary
167-1988 9-29-88   Not_Included increases for management and paraprofessional
                                employees
                                Establishing 45 day moratorium on execution of
                                employee contracts by CAO and/or Mayor and
168-1988 10-13-88  Not_Included requesting recommended changes to improve
                                administration of unclassified employee benefit
                                policies
                                Approving and authorizing grant application and
169-1988 10-13-88  Not_Included providing appropriation to transit department
                                grant fund
170-1988 10-13-88  Not_Included Appropriating funds to EHD - vehicle pollution
                                management division
171-1988 10-28-88  Not_Included Authorizing notice of sale - G.O. bonds -
                                Series December 1, 1988
172-1988 10-28-88 2-3-10        Establishing office of recycling and making an
                                appropriation of Solid Waste Department
173-1988 10-28-88  Not_Included Authorizing joint powers agreement with the
                                state to provide shelter for the homeless
174-1988 10-28-88  Not_Included Funding for valley and wastewater projects
175-1988 10-28-88  Not_Included Appropriating funds to transit/parking - Cavan,
                                Inc.
 
Res. No. Date Disposition Short Title
Res. No. Date     Disposition   Short Title
176-1988 10-28-88  Not_Included Approving and authorizing amendments to UDAG
                                Agreement
                                Providing an appropriation to Legal Department
177-1988 10-28-88  Not_Included Utility Unit - continuation of representation
                                before NMPSC
                                Providing time extension for Mayor to submit
178-1988 10-28-88  Not_Included implementation plan - creation of separate
                                Water Resources Department
                                Approving and authorizing filing of action
179-1988 11-3-88   Not_Included seniorcompanion and providing an appropriation
                                to HSD
                                Requiring development of strategic budgeting
180-1988 11-3-88   Not_Included system - creating steering committee and
                                requesting a report
181-1988 11-3-88   Not_Included Requesting APD to develop long range police/
                                community action plan
182-1988 11-3-88   Not_Included Resolution 3 - determining area - S.A.D. 218
183-1988 11-3-88  1-12-2        Amending Convention Center/Hotel Metropolitan
                                Redevelopment Plan
184-1988 11-3-88  1-12-2        Amending boundaries of Alvarado Metropolitan
                                Redevelopment Area
                                Appropriating funds for local match - UDAG
185-1988 11-3-88   Not_Included agreement and establishing Albuquerque Plaza
                                Partner public improvements project
                                Project XXXV plan approval and inducement
186-1988 11-3-88   Not_Included resolution - Albuquerque Plaza - Alvarado
                                Metropolitan Area
                                Supplementing Council Resolution - Technical
187-1988 11-3-88   Not_Included Advisory Committee for a comprehensive
                                groundwater protection policy
                                Encouraging voters to support passage of
188-1988 11-3-88   Not_Included library bonds and Constitutional Amendment No.
                                4
189-1988 11-18-88  Not_Included Establishing public hearings for city's basic
                                services needs
190-1988 11-16-88  Not_Included Clarifying provisions on consultant studies and
                                moratorium on new employee contracts
191-1988 11-21-88  Not_Included Approving and authorizing filing of grant with
                                state historic preservation division
192-1988 11-21-88  Not_Included Appropriating funds for purchase of Rounds
                                Estate
193-1988 11-21-88 3-11-11       Stating city's intent - current satellite
                                corrections/detention facility
194-1988                        Not used
195-1988 12-1-88   Not_Included Determining reasonable notice of public
                                meetings of the Council
196-1988 11-22-88  Not_Included Creating Deputy CAO for public safety position
                                and making an appropriation
197-1988 11-23-88 3-3-9         Increasing city's PERA contribution - J Series
                                bargaining unit
                                Amending Bill No. R-124 to allow consideration
198-1988 11-28-88  Not_Included of sites outside cultural corridor - Performing
                                Arts Center
199-1988 11-28-88  Not_Included Concerning joint water and sewer revenue bonds
200-1988 11-28-88 3-3-6         Clarifying automatic salary adjustment for
                                Mayor
 
Res. No. Date Disposition Short Title
Res. No. Date     Disposition   Short Title
201-1988 12-1-88   Not_Included Adopting HSD strategic plan
202-1988 12-1-88   Not_Included Semi-annual amendments to CIP/October 1988
203-1988 12-1-88   Not_Included Approving and authorizing filing of grant
                                application - Albuquerque public library
204-1988 12-1-88   Not_Included Determining reasonable notice of public
                                meetings
205-1988 12-1-88  4-1-4         Adopting state of New Mexico's deferred
                                compensation plan
206-1988 12-1-88   Not_Included Urging enforcement of laws relating to
                                obscenity and adult amusement establishments
                                Approving and authorizing filing of grant
207-1988 12-15-88  Not_Included application to the urban consortium energy task
                                force
                                Approving and authorizing filing of grant
208-1988 12-15-88  Not_Included application for urban library resources funds -
                                Albuquerque library
209-1988 12-15-88  Not_Included Continuing a program to temporarily shelter
                                homeless and providing for an appropriation
210-1988 12-15-88  Not_Included Approving and authorizing filing of Section 9
                                UMTA grant
211-1988 12-15-88  Not_Included Endorsing Albuquerque Metroplex Group to
                                attract business to Albuquerque
212-1988 12-22-88 4-1-5         Adopting ICMA retirement trust program
213-1988 12-22-88  Not_Included Establishing legislative policy - 1989
                                legislative session
214-1988 12-22-88  Not_Included Appropriating funds to Personnel Services -
                                Tuition Assistance Program
215-1988 12-22-88 1-7-33        Adopting Rio Bravo Sector Development Plan and
                                amending zone map
 
 
 
Notes
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
1989 Resolutions
Res. No. Date Disposition Short Title
Res. No. Date    Disposition   Short Title
1-1989   1-13-89  Not_Included Providing appropriation of federal and state
                               forfeiture funds
                               Approving and authorizing filing of grant
2-1989   1-13-89  Not_Included application - state and local assistance
                               narcotics control program
3-1989   1-13-89  Not_Included Clean-up of fiscal year 1988 appropriations
4-1989   1-13-89  Not_Included Condemnation - 816 John S.E.
5-1989   1-13-89  Not_Included Condemnation - 1416 and 1420 John S.E.
                               Approving and authorizing filing of grant
6-1989   1-13-89  Not_Included application for facsimile transmission equipment
                               and providing an appropriation to Albuquerque
                               Public library
7-1989   1-13-89  Not_Included Appropriating funds to EHD - household hazardous
                               waste collection project
8-1989   1-13-89  Not_Included Appropriating funds for acquisition of various
                               approved open space properties
                               Providing for an appropriation to museum and
9-1989   1-13-89  Not_Included convention center - Albuquerque Trolley Co.
                               service stops
10-1989  1-13-89  Not_Included Approving and authorizing funds for joint powers
                               agreement - emergency response plan
                               Providing for an appropriation to PWD for
11-1989  1-13-89  Not_Included expenses incurred - clean-up operation caused by
                               heavy rainfall
12-1989                        Was a Do Not Pass
13-1989  1-20-89  Not_Included Appropriation to EHD - voluntary oxygenated
                               fuels program
14-1989  1-23-89  Not_Included Pertaining to protection of open space
                               Approving participation in public employee
15-1989  1-20-89  Not_Included retirement municipal general member coverage
                               plan 2 - clerical employees
16-1989  1-20-89  Not_Included Appropriating funds for victim offender
                               mediation program
17-1989  2-1-89   Not_Included Assuring all feasible mitigation efforts be
                               pursued - Montano Roadway project
18-1989  2-1-89   Not_Included Preliminary plans - S.A.D. 219 - Resolution 1
19-1989  2-1-89   Not_Included Creating three member review team to analyze and
                               evaluate lodgers tax
                               Approving and authorizing joint powers agreement
20-1989  2-1-89   Not_Included with Environmental Improvement Division -
                               expansion of leaking underground storage tank
                               remedial action program
21-1989  2-6-89   Not_Included Supplementing Resolution 135-1988 to extend
                               deadline for proposals suggested by the public
22-1989  2-6-89  2-3-1         Establishing an Office of Utilities Management
23-1989  1-30-89  Not_Included Requesting a presentation of the Mayor's
                               priorities in the fiscal year 1990 budget
24-1989  2-15-89  Not_Included Resetting the general fund operating reserve for
                               fiscal year 1989
                               Adopting an amendment of the Albuquerque/
                               Bernalillo County comprehensive plan to
25-1989  2-15-89 1-2-1         designate eighty-four acres in the southeast
                               quadrant of the proposed intersection of Gibson
                               Boulevard S.W. and Ninety-eighth Street S.W.,
                               (as extended) as the Westgate Urban Center
 
Res. No. Date Disposition Short Title
Res. No. Date    Disposition   Short Title
26-1989  2-15-89  Not_Included Appropriating funds to departments for salary
                               increases for J-series employees
                               Amending North I-25 Sector Development Plan
27-1989  2-15-89 1-7-30        (Bicknell) which was passed by the Council on
                               January 30, 1989
28-1989  2-15-89  Not_Included Appropriating funds to Police Department for
                               salary increases for police officers
                               Establishing task force to study reorganization
29-1989  2-15-89  Not_Included of certain city controls over matters which can
                               damage neighborhoods
                               Providing an appropriation to library/community
30-1989  2-15-89  Not_Included Cultural Affairs Department - cultural outreach
                               programs
                               Appropriating funds for the establishment of
31-1989  2-15-89  Not_Included additional positions at the Metropolitan Court
                               Pre-trial Services Division
                               Amending the legislative policy of the city of
                               Albuquerque for the 1989 legislative session of
32-1989  2-15-89  Not_Included the New Mexico legislature, adding a policy on
                               the use of lodger's tax for promotional
                               activities
33-1989  2-16-89  Not_Included Appropriating funds to Fire Department for
                               salary increases for firefighters
34-1989  3-2-89  1-4-1         Adopting 1989 downtown core revitalization
                               strategy
35-1989  3-2-89  1-13-1        Adopting the Rank 3 Rio Grande Boulevard
                               Corridor Plan
                               Appropriating funds to zoning enforcement
36-1989  3-2-89   Not_Included program relating to numbering of city buildings
                               ordinance
37-1989  3-2-89   Not_Included Approving and authorizing filing of EPA air
                               pollution control program grant
                               Amending quality of life tax legislation for
38-1989  3-2-89   Not_Included funding extension of Paseo Del Norte to Unser
                               Boulevard
39-1989  3-2-89   Not_Included Condemnation - 421 Georgia, S.E.
40-1989  3-2-89   Not_Included Appropriating funds to Corrections/ Detention
                               Department for purchase of computer equipment
41-1989  3-16-89  Not_Included Rental rehabilitation grant application
                               Establishing inventory compilation - city's
42-1989  3-28-89  Not_Included authorization of private purpose revenue bonds
                               or tax policy to stimulate economic development
43-1989  3-28-89  Not_Included Establishing pilot residential curbside
                               recycling program
44-1989  3-28-89  Not_Included Appropriating funds for operation of parking
                               facility - Albuquerque International Airport
45-1989  3-28-89  Not_Included Amending appropriation for archaeological
                               services
                               Instructing Legal Department to contract for
46-1989  3-28-89  Not_Included legal research relating to electric franchise
                               and appropriating funds
                               Authorizing Mayor to enter into joint powers
47-1989  3-28-89  Not_Included agreement with state - emergency shelter grant
                               programs
48-1989  4-3-89   Not_Included Decade plan for capital improvements program
49-1989  4-14-89  Not_Included Condemnation - 3808 Pedroncelli, N.W.
50-1989  4-14-89 4-5-3         Establishing city program to encourage and
                               facilitate voter registration and voting
 
Res. No. Date Disposition Short Title
Res. No. Date    Disposition   Short Title
                               Appropriating funds for convention center
51-1989  4-14-89  Not_Included expansion related to infrastructure improvement,
                               parking structure and marketing
                               Authorizing city to enter into joint powers
52-1989  4-14-89  Not_Included agreement with city of Las Cruces to analyze
                               options available to lower electricity rates
                               Requesting Mayor to present semi-annual reports
53-1989  4-14-89 4-2-3         to council - status of vehicle emissions testing
                               program
54-1989  4-14-89  Not_Included Appropriating funds for North and South Valley
                               drainage projects
55-1989  4-20-89 6-5-4         Eliminating admission fee to Albuquerque Museum
56-1989  4-27-89  Not_Included Approving and authorizing filing of grant
                               application
57-1989  4-27-89  Not_Included Appointing City Clerk and Deputy City Clerks and
                               rescinding Resolution 50-1987
                               Approving and authorizing grant with N.M. state
58-1989  4-27-89  Not_Included Office on Aging for Chapter 353 funds and
                               providing an appropriation
59-1989  4-27-89  Not_Included Transportation and storm drainage - quarter cent
                               plan
60-1989  5-3-89   Not_Included Appropriating additional funds to records and
                               elections for special municipal election
61-1989  5-3-89   Not_Included Setting date for special election
                               Establishing a strategy for business and
62-1989  5-11-89  Not_Included economic development and creating an action
                               council
63-1989  5-11-89  Not_Included Urban enhancement 1990-1991 plan
                               Authorizing investigators for Board of Ethics
64-1989  5-11-89  Not_Included and campaign practices and providing an
                               appropriation
                               Appropriating funds to Environmental Health
65-1989  5-11-89  Not_Included Department for operation of voluntary oxygenated
                               fuels program
66-1989  5-11-89  Not_Included Encouraging city use of recycled products and
                               requesting a study
67-1989  5-11-89  Not_Included Approving and authorizing grant application -
                               traffic fatality investigation van
68-1989  5-11-89  Not_Included Authorizing grant application - early childhood
                               development programs
                               Adopting utility extension and property
69-1989  5-11-89  Not_Included acquisition policy - petroglyph national
                               monument
70-1989  5-11-89  Not_Included Adopting site development plan for Simms
                               Reservoir
71-1989  5-23-89  Not_Included Appropriating funds to Transit Department - cost
                               allocation model for Sun Tran
72-1989  5-23-89  Not_Included Instructing administration to develop incentives
                               for city employees to use public buses
                               Setting criteria necessary to continue voluntary
73-1989  5-23-89  Not_Included oxygenated fuels program or implement mandatory
                               program
74-1989  5-23-89  Not_Included Appropriating funds to Council Services
                               Department - legal services
75-1989  5-23-89  Not_Included Awarding construction contract - S.A.D. 218
 
Res. No. Date Disposition Short Title
Res. No. Date    Disposition   Short Title
76-1989  6-2-89   Not_Included City budget - fiscal year 1990
77-1989  6-2-89   Not_Included Corrections and Detention budget - fiscal year
                               1990
78-1989  6-2-89   Not_Included Albuquerque/Bernalillo County Government Center
                               budget - fiscal year 1990
                               Authorizing the city of Albuquerque to intervene
79-1989  6-9-89   Not_Included in two lawsuits presently pending against the
                               New Mexico Environmental Improvement Board
80-1989  6-9-89   Not_Included Approving Contract Change Order No. 3 - S.A.D.
                               198
81-1989  6-9-89   Not_Included Recognizing affordable housing and calling for a
                               demonstration project
82-1989  6-9-89   Not_Included Approving and authorizing filing of grant
                               application for summer food program
83-1989  6-9-89   Not_Included Approving and authorizing grant application for
                               job training
84-1989  6-9-89   Not_Included Approving and authorizing grant application for
                               foster grandparent program
85-1989  6-9-89   Not_Included Authorizing Mayor to enter into option agreement
                               to purchase property for botanical garden
                               Requiring a finding as to meeting ambient air
86-1989  6-9-89   Not_Included quality standards when approving zone map
                               changes and certain plans
87-1989  6-9-89   Not_Included Semi-annual amendments to capital improvements
                               program - water and sewer
                               Requesting Environmental Health Department study
88-1989  6-9-89   Not_Included the removal of prairie dog colonies prior to
                               development of vacant lands
89-1989  6-9-89   Not_Included Establishing committee to observe quincentennial
                               of discovery of America by Spain
90-1989  6-9-89   Not_Included Authorizing submission of application for
                               Turnkey I public housing
91-1989  6-9-89   Not_Included Approving and authorizing grant application -
                               EMS Fund Act - paramedic equipment
92-1989  6-9-89   Not_Included Approving and authorizing grant application for
                               retired senior volunteer program
93-1989  6-9-89   Not_Included Approving and authorizing grant application for
                               senior companion program
                               Approving final statement of community
94-1989  6-16-89  Not_Included development objectives and projected use of
                               funds
95-1989  6-16-89  Not_Included Semi-annual amendments to capital improvements
                               program
96-1989  6-16-89  Not_Included Appropriating funds to Transit Department -
                               completion of uptown transit study
97-1989  6-28-89 1-11-11       Approving amendment to Northwest Mesa Escarpment
                               Plan - special building height regulations
98-1989  6-29-89  Not_Included Calling for municipal bond election - October 3,
                               1989
99-1989  6-29-89  Not_Included Establishing complete census count task force
100-1989 6-29-89  Not_Included Calling for regular municipal election - October
                               3, 1989
 
Res. No. Date Disposition Short Title
Res. No. Date    Disposition   Short Title
                               Approving and authorizing expansion and
101-1989 6-29-89  Not_Included automation of city's traffic and parking
                               citation programs and providing an appropriation
102-1989 6-29-89  Not_Included Establishing task force to study creation of
                               Albuquerque Urban Indian Center
103-1989 6-29-89  Not_Included Rescinding condemnation of 816 John S.E.
104-1989 6-29-89  Not_Included Appropriating funds to city/county information
                               systems project fund
105-1989 7-7-89  3-3-10        Setting policy regarding lawsuits which effect
                               bargained wages paid by the city
106-1989 7-7-89   Not_Included Approving the fiscal year 1990 audit plan as
                               submitted by the internal audit
107-1989 7-13-89  Not_Included Approving and authorizing execution of amendment
                               between city and plaza partners
108-1989 7-13-89  Not_Included Rescinding condemnation of 421 Georgia, S.E.
109-1989 7-27-89  Not_Included Determining reasonable notice of public meetings
                               of the Council
                               Approving and authorizing a grant under the New
                               Mexico Litter Control and Beautification Act
110-1989 7-27-89  Not_Included with the New Mexico State Highway Department;
                               and providing for an appropriation to the city
                               of Albuquerque Parks and Recreation Department
111-1989 7-27-89 2-1-5         Establishing Animal Issues Advisory Board
112-1989 7-27-89  Not_Included Creating a task force to evaluate the public
                               purchases ordinance and recommend changes
                               Calling on Director of Planning Department to
113-1989 8-3-89   Not_Included study Lot No. 11-A, Block No. 1 Volcano Cliffs
                               Subdivision - public park of other facility
                               Calling for implementation of on-site child day-
114-1989 8-3-89   Not_Included care program for city employees, creating
                               implementation committee, and providing for an
                               appropriation
115-1989 8-31-89  Not_Included Authorizing notice for bids on sale of G.O.
                               general purpose and storm sewer bonds
                               Joint powers agreement between the city of
116-1989 8-17-89  Not_Included Albuquerque and the county of Bernalillo for a
                               joint Albuquerque/ Bernalillo county regional
                               landfill
                               Selecting the Cerro Colorado site as a regional
                               landfill to serve the residents of the city of
117-1989 8-17-89 1-9-18        Albuquerque and the county of Bernalillo in
                               order to protect the health and welfare of the
                               citizens of the city of Albuquerque and the
                               county of Bernalillo
                               Approving and authorizing filing of grant
118-1989 8-17-89  Not_Included application - Title III Older Americans Act
                               funds
                               Authorizing an urban development action grant
119-1989 8-17-89  Not_Included application to the U.S. Department of Housing
                               and Urban Development for El Encanto, Inc.
                               expansion and renovation
                               Declaring city policy to provide information on
120-1989 8-22-89 4-6-13        cable television channel 30 to inform voters as
                               to Albuquerque municipal elections
                               Determining that the building or structure at
121-1989 8-17-89  Not_Included 5100 Aztec N.E. within the city limits of
                               Albuquerque, New Mexico, is so ruined, damaged,
                               and dilapidated ...be removed
                               Determining that the building or structure at
122-1989 8-17-89  Not_Included 1838 Broadway, S.E. within the city limits of
                               Albuquerque, New Mexico, is so ruined, damaged,
                               and dilapidated ...be removed
123-1989 8-17-89  Not_Included Approving Contract Change Order No. 5 for the
                               Unser Blvd/98th St. portion of S.A.D. No. 215
                               Appropriating additional funds to the Parks and
124-1989 8-17-89  Not_Included Recreation Department, recreational services
                               program to provide service to the waiting list
                               of children for the extended care program
                               Electing to be responsible for making
                               contributions of seventy-five percent of its
125-1989 8-17-89 3-3-9         employees' member contribution in the employee
                               division known as the white collar bargaining
                               unit
 
Res. No. Date Disposition Short Title
Res. No. Date    Disposition   Short Title
126-1989 8-31-89  Not_Included Amending election resolution - changing location
                               of polling place and adding charter amendment
127-1989 8-31-89  Not_Included Amending election resolution - changing location
                               of polling place and adding charter amendment
                               Amending capital improvements program of Solid
128-1989 8-31-89  Not_Included Waste Department to release appropriations and
                               allow for sale of revenue bonds - joint regional
                               landfill
129-1989 8-31-89 1-7-34        Adopting Tower/Unser Sector Development Plan and
                               amending zone map
                               Specifying city departments as activity centers
130-1989 8-31-89  Not_Included for crime prevention and providing an
                               appropriation
131-1989 8-31-89  Not_Included Approving 1990 Transportation Program
132-1989 8-31-89  Not_Included Calling for preservation of Old Albuquerque High
                               School and making an appropriation
133-1989 8-31-89  Not_Included Adopting policy recommendations - Lead/Coal
                               Avenues task force
                               Changing implementation schedule of step
134-1989 8-31-89  Not_Included increase for certain city employees and
                               providing an appropriation
                               Appropriating funds to Human Services
135-1989 8-31-89  Not_Included Department, city housing fund - housing related
                               projects
136-1989 8-31-89  Not_Included Condemnation - 340 Bethel, S.E.
137-1989 8-31-89  Not_Included Educational industrial revenue bond -
                               Albuquerque Academy facilities
                               Revising Public Works Department fiscal year
138-1989 8-31-89  Not_Included 1990 enterprise and general fund program
                               appropriations
139-1989 8-31-89 3-3-11        Stating city policy to prohibit use of severance
                               pay for city employees
                               Providing for an appropriation to Environmental
140-1989 8-31-89  Not_Included Health Department - hazardous waste management
                               program assistance grant
141-1989 8-31-89  Not_Included Calling for study on establishment of skateboard
                               facilities
                               Relating to employee compensation time
142-1989 9-14-89 3-3-12        legislator/employee documenting of hours worked
                               and reimbursement for salary payments
143-1989 9-14-89  Not_Included Approving industrial development bonds for El
                               Encanto, Inc. expansion project
144-1989 9-14-89  Not_Included Declaring two parcels of land not essential for
                               municipal purposes
145-1989 9-14-89  Not_Included Concerning defeasance of metropolitan
                               redevelopment revenue bond
                               Establishing city policy which rejects the
                               imposition of user fees on commercial ground
146-1989 9-28-89 3-8-5         transporters engaged in the business of
                               transporting airline travelers from the
                               Albuquerque International Airport
                               Expanding and extending the pilot residential
147-1989 9-28-89  Not_Included curbside recycling program; and providing for an
                               appropriation
                               Amending the adopted capital implementation
                               program of the city of Albuquerque by
148-1989 9-28-89  Not_Included appropriating funds for approved quality of life
                               projects for the second year of project
                               operations, and updating the scope of existing
                               projects
149-1989 9-28-89  Not_Included Appropriating funds for the continuation of the
                               pilot residential curbside recycling program
                               Accepting state funding for North Valley
                               wastewater projects, appropriating said funding,
                               appropriating companion city funds from joint
150-1989 9-28-89  Not_Included water/sewer revenues, approving grant agreements
                               between the city and the New Mexico
                               Environmental Improvement Division, and amending
                               the adopted capital implementation program of
                               the city of Albuquerque
 
Res. No. Date Disposition Short Title
Res. Date Disposition Short Title
No.
151- 9-    Not
1989 28-  Included    Condemnation - 717 Eleventh Street S.W.
     89
152- 9-    Not
1989 28-  Included    Condemnation - 1414 Broadway S.E.
     89
153- 9-    Not
1989 28-  Included    Condemnation - 809 John S.E.
     89
154- 9-    Not        Rescinding Resolution No. 169, which ordered the condemnation of the building at
1989 28-  Included    3814 Pedroncelli, N.W.
     89
155- 9-    Not        Appropriating funds of $400,000 to the Transit and Parking Department for
1989 28-  Included    operating nine additional peak hour buses and operating needs of the
     89               department's management information system (MIS)
156- 9-    Not        Authorizing the Mayor to endorse the goal to provide safe, decent and affordable
1989 28-  Included    housing for all Americans
     89
157- 9-    Not
1989 28-  Included    Condemnation - 4611 Valley Park S.W.
     89
158- 9-    Not        Appropriating additional funds to the zoning enforcement program of the Planning
1989 28-  Included    Department for the enforcement of the numbering of city buildings ordinance
     89
159- 9-    Not        Providing an appropriation to the “SENSE” task force for consultant services and
1989 28-  Included    task force expenses associated with its deliberations and investigation of
     89               electricity supply arrangements
160- 9-    Not        Providing for appropriations to the Albuquerque Museum and the convention center
1989 28-  Included    to contract with the Albuquerque Trolley Company for service stops at their
     89               facilities
161- 9-    Not        Declaring a moratorium on approval of signs near the proposed international
1989 28-  Included    airport access road
     89
162- 9-    Not        Creating a task force to study refinement of controls on community residential
1989 28-  Included    programs
     89
163- 10-              Amending the Coors Corridor Plan Issue 4, visual impressions and urban design
1989 12-  1-7-27      overlay zone
     89
164- 10-   Not        Requiring a valuation study of the electric distribution system serving
1989 12-  Included    Albuquerque and providing an appropriation
     89
165- 10-   Not        Stating the intent of the city to enter into a joint powers agreement with the
1989 12-  Included    University of New Mexico for the renovation of the sports arena known as the
     89               “Pit”
166- 10-   Not        Approving and authorizing the filing of the attached grant application for a
1989 12-  Included    ridesharing program with the Federal Highway Administration and the New Mexico
     89               State Highway and Transportation Department
167- 10-              Extending an invitation to the city of Ashkhabad, Turkmenia, USSR to become a
1989 12-  6-3-5       sister city
     89
168- 10-   Not        Authorizing the Mayor to enter into a joint powers agreement with the state of
1989 12-  Included    New Mexico, and providing for an appropriation to the Human Services Department
     89
169- 10-   Not        Adopting an alignment and plans for the Unser Boulevard transportation corridor
1989 12-  Included    from Paradise Boulevard to the Sandoval County line
     89
170- 10-   Not        Authorizing the removal of certain uncollectible accounts from the city's
1989 12-  Included    accounts receivable records
     89
171- 10-   Not        Supporting an alternative school for students committed to the recovery from
1989 12-  Included    drug involvement
     89
172- 10-   Not        Amending the joint powers agreement with the city of Las Cruces to appoint an
1989 12-  Included    alternate City Council member from each city to serve on the “SENSE” task force
     89
173- 10-   Not
1989 12-  Included    Establishing a task force to address neighborhood problems in the Trumbull area
     89
174- 10-   Not        Fixing November 1, 1989 as the date of the runoff election and specifying the
1989 12-  Included    offices to be filled and the names of the candidates therefor
     89
175- 10-   Not        Appropriating additional funds to the Records and Elections Department for the
1989 12-  Included    runoff election to be held in the city of Albuquerque, N.M. on Wednesday,
     89               November 1, 1989
 
Res. No. Date Disposition Short Title
Res. Date Disposition Short Title
No.
176- 10-   Not        Fixing November 1, 1989 as the date for a special election to be held on the
1989 12-  Included    question of adopting amendments to the city charter
     89
177- 11-   Not        Relating to refuse removal and disposal revenue bonds, series 1989 in the
1989 3-89 Included    amount of $17,930,000 of the city of Albuquerque, New Mexico
178- 10-   Not        Appropriating funds to the joint task force (“SENSE”) to provide contract
1989 26-  Included    services and clerical support for the joint city task force of Albuquerque and
     89               Las Cruces in its search for electricity options and franchise analyses
179- 10-              Establishing “project treestart” as an ongoing city program to achieve the
1989 26-  4-4-4       goal of planting one million trees, shrubs and indigenous plant life within
     89               the city of Albuquerque during the next decade
180- 10-   Not        Requiring a task force to study development of a regional industrial park for
1989 26-  Included    recycling activities; providing an appropriation for a feasibility analysis
     89
181- 10-   Not        Defining an affordable housing policy; and establishing a committee
1989 26-  Included    responsible for creating an affordable housing strategy
     89
182- 10-   Not
1989 26-  Included    Condemnation - 910 Arno, S.E.
     89
183- 10-   Not
1989 26-  Included    Condemnation - 2200 Arno S.E.
     89
184- 10-   Not        Requesting the administration to develop consistent policies for sick leave
1989 26-  Included    incentive programs; requiring a report
     89
185- 11-   Not        Relating to the city of Albuquerque, New Mexico educational facilities
1989 3-89 Included    refunding and improvement revenue bonds (Albuquerque Academy project)
186- 11-   Not
1989 17-  Included    Approving Contract Change Order No. 1 - S.A.D. 218
     89
187- 11-   Not
1989 17-  Included    Extending life of task force - community residential programs
     89
188- 11-   Not        Concerning comprehensive ground-water protection policy and action plan and
1989 17-  Included    extending life of task force
     89
189- 11-   Not
1989 17-  Included    Regarding incorporation efforts in Bernalillo County
     89
190- 11-   Not        Directing the city of Albuquerque to prepare legislation for competitive
1989 27-  Included    bidding of its electric franchise agreement
     89
191- 11-
1989 27-  1-7-27      Amending the Coors Corridor Plan - signage policy
     89
192- 11-   Not        Providing an appropriation to Environmental Health Department - operation of
1989 27-  Included    mandatory oxygenated fuels program
     89
193- 11-   Not
1989 27-  Included    Appropriating state of New Mexico crime lab funds to Police Department
     89
194- 11-   Not        Approving and authorizing filing of grant application with New Mexico State
1989 27-  Included    Library and providing appropriation to Library Department
     89
195- 11-
1989 27-  4-5-4       Participation by city of Albuquerque in enhanced 911 fund
     89
196- 11-   Not
1989 27-  Included    Authorizing filing of grant application traffic safety project
     89
197- 11-   Not        Concerning Mayor's Commission on adult literacy/volunteers program and
1989 27-  Included    appropriating funds to Human Services Department
     89
198- 11-   Not        Approving grant application for literacy training for homeless adults and
1989 27-  Included    appropriating funds to Human Services Department
     89
199- 11-   Not
1989 27-  Included    Condemnation - 404 and 412 Marble, N.W.
     89
 
Res. No. Date Disposition Short Title
Res. No. Date     Disposition   Short Title
200-1989 11-27-89  Not_Included Condemnation - 7624 Central, S.E.
201-1989 11-27-89  Not_Included Approving and authorizing filing of grant
                                application for urban library resources
202-1989 11-27-89  Not_Included Semi-annual amendments to CIP program
203-1989 11-27-89  Not_Included Concerning purchase of recycled products for
                                use by the city
                                Calling for the city of Albuquerque to conduct
204-1989 11-27-89  Not_Included a preference poll of its employees to assist in
                                development of the city's smoking policy
205-1989 11-27-89 1-9-16        Authorizing real property division to use
                                authority of eminent domain - Piedras Marcadas
206-1989 11-27-89  Not_Included Adopting joint powers agreement for city/county
                                emergency medical services authority
207-1989 11-27-89  Not_Included Award of contract to Construction Contracting
                                and Management, Inc. - S.A.D. 217
208-1989 11-27-89  Not_Included Adjusting fiscal year 1989 appropriations to
                                provide for actual expenditures
                                Authorizing urban development action grant for
209-1989 11-27-89  Not_Included El Encanto expansion and renovation and
                                providing for appropriation to Planning
                                Department
210-1989 11-27-89  Not_Included Amending original El Encanto, Inc. UDAG
                                agreement
211-1989 11-27-89  Not_Included Authorizing execution of grant agreement for
                                early childhood development activities
                                Appropriating funds to Environmental Health
212-1989 11-27-89  Not_Included Department for construction of warning signs -
                                alcoholic beverages
213-1989 12-7-89   Not_Included Declaring a moratorium on selection of airport
                                gift shop concessions
                                Relating to city of Albuquerque, N.M.
214-1989 12-19-89  Not_Included industrial development refunding revenue bonds
                                (El Encanto, Inc. project) and the other bond
                                relating to UDAG grant agreement with USHUD
215-1989 12-20-89 1-2-1         Amending the Albuquerque and Bernalillo county
                                comprehensive plan development area map
                                Calling on the Mayor to establish a working
216-1989 12-20-89  Not_Included group to review and evaluate existing
                                environmental regulations and procedures for
                                city development projects
                                Providing an appropriation to the Human
217-1989 12-20-89  Not_Included Services Department in order to provide funds
                                for purposes of maintaining a shelter for
                                children who are abused and neglected
                                Establishing the legislative policy of the city
218-1989 12-20-89  Not_Included of Albuquerque for the 1990 legislative session
                                of the New Mexico legislature
                                Appropriating funds to the Corrections
219-1989 12-20-89  Not_Included Department for the victim offender mediation
                                program
220-1989 12-28-89  Not_Included Approving and authorizing filing of application
                                for air pollution control grant
                                Authorizing an option agreement to purchase the
221-1989 12-28-89 1-9-17        Albuquerque High School; detailing subsequent
                                reports to the Council
222-1989 12-28-89  Not_Included Concerning Albuquerque Plaza project and
                                requesting approval of tax increment process
223-1989 12-28-89  Not_Included Semi-annual amendments to water/ sewer CIP
                                projects
224-1989 12-28-89  Not_Included Designating the North Civic Plaza site for the
                                New Mexico Performing Arts Center
225-1989 12-28-89 1-6-7         Approval of metropolitan redevelopment project
                                plan II - National Bank of Albuquerque
 
 
 
Notes
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
1990 Resolutions
Res. No. Date Disposition Short Title
Res. No. Date    Disposition   Short Title
1-1990   12-9-89  Not_Included Relating to leaking underground storage tank
                               remedial action program
2-1990   12-9-89  Not_Included Appropriating funds to extend city's orthodontic
                               program
3-1990   12-9-89  Not_Included Declaring moratorium on approval of signs
                               Instructing the Public Works Department to
4-1990   12-9-89  Not_Included construct a northbound directional left-turn bay
                               in the median on San Mateo
                               Amending legislative policy supporting stringent
5-1990   1-10-90  Not_Included legislation relating to solid waste disposal,
                               handling and recycling
6-1990   1-19-90  Not_Included Appropriating funds for transfer to risk
                               management fund
7-1990   1-19-90  Not_Included Approving Contract Change Order No. 2 - S.A.D.
                               218
8-1990   1-19-90  Not_Included Stating the intent of the city to provide funds
                               for the renovation of Dukes Stadium
9-1990   1-19-90 1-12-9        Designating Martineztown/Santa Barbara
                               Neighborhoods Metropolitan Redevelopment Area
10-1990  2-6-90   Not_Included Condemnation of building
                               Requesting the administration to conduct a
11-1990  2-6-90   Not_Included public meeting to be televised on the government
                               channel about a Cable T.V. rate increase
                               Adding two members to the Complete Census Task
12-1990  2-6-90   Not_Included Force in order to provide representation of
                               Bernalillo County
13-1990  2-6-90   Not_Included Amending the Quarter Cent Plan Resolution
14-1990  2-13-90  Not_Included Declaring one parcel of land not essential for
                               municipal purposes
15-1990  2-13-90  Not_Included Appropriating funds to the CIP 1989 general
                               obligation bond program
16-1990  2-13-90  Not_Included Accepting preliminary plans - S.A.D. 219
17-1990  2-13-90  Not_Included Approving and authorizing grant application with
                               New Mexico State Library
18-1990  2-13-90  Not_Included Directing the City Attorney to engage outside
                               counsel
19-1990  2-13-90  Not_Included Unser Blvd. environmental assessment - Ouray to
                               Dellyne Ave.
20-1990  3-5-90   Not_Included Determining that a certain building or structure
                               at 1600 Broadway S.E. be removed
                               Extending the life of the task force to study
21-1990  3-5-90   Not_Included refinement of controls on community residential
                               programs
22-1990  3-5-90  1-7-35        Adopting the Martinez/Santa Barbara
                               Neighborhoods Sector Development Plan
23-1990  3-20-90  Not_Included Declaring a moratorium on the approval of off-
                               premise sign and sign structure permits
24-1990  3-20-90  Not_Included Adopting “SENSE” task force recommendation
25-1990  3-22-90  Not_Included Concerning industrial development revenue bonds
 
Res. No. Date Disposition Short Title
Res. No. Date    Disposition   Short Title
26-1990  3-22-90  Not_Included Setting list of regular City Council meetings
27-1990  3-22-90  Not_Included Requesting New Mexico Commissioner of Public
                               Lands to extend landfill lease
28-1990  3-22-90  Not_Included Repealing city policy to have a deputy CAO for
                               public safety
29-1990  3-28-90  Not_Included Adopting joint powers agreement-travel demand
                               forecasting study
30-1990  3-28-90  Not_Included Increasing appropriations to meet department
                               service on gross receipts tax revenue note
31-1990  3-28-90  Not_Included Condemnation - 11116 Rio Puerco Trail S.W.
32-1990  3-28-90  Not_Included Condemnation - 5920 Avalon N.W.
33-1990  3-28-90  Not_Included Rescinding condemnation - 3808 Pedroncelli N.W.
34-1990  3-28-90  Not_Included Endorsing development of New Mexico crackdown
                               program
                               Establishing restricted cash account and
35-1990  3-28-90  Not_Included liability account in refuse collection and
                               disposal fund
36-1990  4-16-90 2-4-1         Establishing an Office of Substance Abuse
                               Coordination
37-1990  4-16-90  Not_Included Appropriating funds to the Solid Waste
                               Management Department
38-1990  4-16-90  Not_Included Calling for a task force study - establishment
                               of youth activity centers
39-1990  4-16-90  Not_Included Condemnation - 6525 Sunset Gardens S.W.
40-1990  4-16-90  Not_Included Declaring two parcels as not essential for
                               municipal purposes
41-1990  4-16-90  Not_Included Condemnation - 816 John S.E.
                               Approving and authorizing grant with New Mexico
42-1990  4-16-90  Not_Included State Office on Aging and providing
                               appropriation
43-1990  5-25-90  Not_Included Authorizing notice for bids on sale of general
                               obligation general purpose bonds
44-1990  4-27-90 1-4-1         Amending downtown core revitalization strategy
45-1990  4-27-90  Not_Included Providing an appropriation to Internal Audit
                               Department
46-1990  4-27-90  Not_Included Authorizing grant application to provide an
                               appropriation to community development fund
47-1990  4-27-90  Not_Included Instructing Legal Department to contract legal
                               services for implementing Article XV
48-1990  4-27-90  Not_Included Amending moratorium on off-premise sign and sign
                               structure permits
49-1990  4-27-90  Not_Included Extending moratorium regarding Petroglyph
                               National Monument
                               Approving final statement of community
50-1990  5-16-90  Not_Included development objectives and use of funds and
                               authorizing application
 
Res. No. Date Disposition Short Title
Res. Date Disposition Short Title
No.
51-  4-    Not        Approving and authorizing filing of grant application for summer food service
1990 23-  Included    program
     90
52-  5-    Not
1990 25-  Included    Providing an appropriation to Transit and Parking Department
     90
53-  6-8-  Not        Establishing city policy regarding limited access of Gibson
1990 90   Included
54-  5-
1990 25-  1-1-4       Adopting policies on annexation and repealing previous policies
     90
55-  5-    Not        Approving and authorizing filing of grant application for traffic safety
1990 25-  Included    project
     90
56-  5-    Not
1990 31-  Included    Placing a moratorium on purchase of equipment and services for information
     90
57-  5-    Not
1990 30-  Included    Semi-annual amendments to CIP water/sewer projects
     90
58-  5-    Not
1990 30-  Included    Condemnation - 1734 Griegos N.W.
     90
59-  5-    Not
1990 30-  Included    Condemnation - 5422 San Isidro N.W.
     90
60-  5-    Not
1990 30-  Included    Condemnation - 806 Edith S.E.
     90
61-  5-    Not
1990 30-  Included    Amending condemnation - 11116 Rio Puerco Trail S.W.
     90
62-  5-    Not
1990 30-  Included    Rescinding condemnation - 4611 Valley Park S.W.
     90
63-  5-    Not
1990 30-  Included    Condemnation - 609 12th Street N.W.
     90
64-  5-    Not
1990 30-  Included    Concerning recycling and long term solid waste planning
     90
65-  5-    Not
1990 30-  Included    Albuquerque/Bernalillo County Government Center fiscal year 1991 budget
     90
66-  5-    Not
1990 30-  Included    Appropriating funds to correction detention facility for fiscal year 1991
     90
67-  6-1-  Not        City budget - fiscal year 1991
1990 90   Included
68-                   Not used
1990
69-  6-    Not
1990 11-  Included    Declaring parcel of land not essential for municipal purposes
     90
70-  6-
1990 11-  3-5-51      Supplementing policy concerning domestic water reservoirs
     90
71-  6-    Not
1990 11-  Included    Semi-annual amendments to capital improvements program
     90
72-  6-    Not        Approving and authorizing grant for litter control and beautification
1990 11-  Included    activities
     90
73-  6-    Not
1990 11-  Included    Requesting considerations of community-wide recycling programs
     90
74-  6-    Not        Relating to the city of Albuquerque, New Mexico joint water and sewer revenue
1990 21-  Included    bonds
     90
75-  6-    Not        Adopting “offset” alignment plans and environmental documentation for Paseo Del
1990 12-  Included    Norte East transportation corridor
     90
 
Res. No. Date Disposition Short Title
Res. No. Date    Disposition   Short Title
76-1990  6-12-90  Not_Included Determining area of S.A.D. 219 and ratifying
                               procedures
77-1990  6-12-90  Not_Included Approving rental rehabilitation program
78-1990  6-12-90  Not_Included Approving grant application - Emergency Medical
                               Services Fund Act
79-1990  6-12-90  Not_Included Approving grant application with state Historic
                               Preservation Division
80-1990  6-12-90  Not_Included Approving foster grandparent grant application
81-1990  6-12-90  Not_Included Approving RSVP grant application
82-1990  6-12-90  Not_Included Approving application for Job Training
                               Partnership Act funds
83-1990  6-12-90  Not_Included Approving senior companion grant application
84-1990  6-13-90  Not_Included Amending Resolution 43-1990 by changing dates
                               relating to sale of general obligation bonds
85-1990  6-14-90  Not_Included Establishing a committee to address accelerating
                               construction of capital projects
                               Calling for the Rio Grande Zoo to proceed with
86-1990  6-26-90 6-5-5         free admission at their facilities, to all
                               school-aged children ages 5 to 18
                               Authorizing joint powers agreement and
87-1990  6-21-90  Not_Included memorandum of understanding for establishment of
                               Petroglyph National Monument
88-1990  6-21-90  Not_Included Appropriating funds to corrections/ detention
                               facility for fiscal year 1991
89-1990  6-26-90  Not_Included Condemnation - 3822 Second Street N.W.
90-1990  6-26-90  Not_Included Condemnation - 1923 Williams S.E.
91-1990  6-26-90  Not_Included Condemnation - 604, 606, 608, and 610 Kathryn
                               Avenue S.E.
92-1990  6-26-90  Not_Included Condemnation - 1206 Arno S.E.
93-1990  6-26-90  Not_Included Appropriating funds for removal of structure at
                               1600 Broadway S.E.
94-1990  6-26-90  Not_Included Condemnation - 521 Aztec N.W.
95-1990  6-26-90  Not_Included Condemnation - 2645 Madison N.E.
96-1990  6-26-90 2-1-9         Establishing intergovernmental coordinating
                               council
97-1990  6-26-90 3-5-60        Concerning recycling and long term solid waste
                               planning
98-1990  6-26-90  Not_Included Appointing City Clerk and Deputy City Clerks
99-1990  6-26-90  Not_Included Approving Contract Change Order No. 1 - S.A.D.
                               217
 
Res. No. Date Disposition Short Title
Res. No. Date    Disposition   Short Title
100-1990 7-9-90   Not_Included Urging caution in expenditure for information
                               services
101-1990 7-23-90  Not_Included Joint water and sewer system revenue bond series
                               1990 C
102-1990 7-23-90  Not_Included Rescinding condemnation - 2200 Arno S.E.
103-1990 7-23-90  Not_Included Establishing a Water Conservation Task Force
104-1990 7-23-90  Not_Included Approving the fiscal year 1991 audit plan
                               Approving grant applications for urban mass
105-1990 7-23-90  Not_Included transportation administration operating and
                               planning assistance grants
106-1990 7-23-90  Not_Included Approving and authorizing filing of application
                               for an Environmental Protection Agency grant
107-1990 7-23-90  Not_Included Appropriating funds in the city/county
                               information systems project fund
108-1990 7-23-90  Not_Included Determining reasonable notice of public meetings
                               Ratifying, confirming and approving the filing
109-1990 7-23-90  Not_Included of grant application under the drug control and
                               system improvement formula and providing an
                               appropriation
110-1990 8-22-90  Not_Included Creating a special temporary criterion for
                               granting variances to landscaping requirements
                               Approving the 1991 Transportation Program and
111-1990 8-22-90  Not_Included making recommendations to the Middle Rio Grande
                               Council of Governments' Urban Transportation
                               Planning Policy Board
112-1990 8-22-90  Not_Included Adopting fiscal year 1991-1992 multi-year
                               planning program
113-1990 8-23-90  Not_Included Industrial development revenue bonds - the
                               Towers on Montgomery project
                               Establishing city policy providing for
114-1990 8-27-90  Not_Included installation of electrical warning systems at
                               school crossings
115-1990 9-4-90  1-13-2        Adopting the Rank Three Pajarito Arroyo Corridor
                               Plan
116-1990 9-4-90   Not_Included Condemnation - 637 Arno S.E.
117-1990 9-4-90   Not_Included Rescinding Resolution No. 56 - Condemnation 6525
                               Sunset Gardens S.W.
118-1990 9-4-90   Not_Included Rescinding Resolution No. 36 - Condemnation -
                               5920 Avalon, N.W.
119-1990 9-4-90   Not_Included Condemnation - 514 57th Street, S.W.
120-1990 9-4-90   Not_Included Amending Resolution No. 120 - condemnation of
                               1206 Arno S.E. to extend the time period
                               Supplementing the objectives of the Solid Waste
                               Recycling Advisory Committee established in Bill
121-1990 9-13-90  Not_Included No. 0-4, Enactment No. 2-1990 to study
                               development of regional industrial park for
                               recycling activities
122-1990 9-26-90 3-2-11        Establishing city policy as to publication of
                               legal notices
123-1990 9-26-90  Not_Included Authorizing submission of application for
                               Turnkey I public housing
                               Appropriating funds to the capital improvements
124-1990 9-26-90  Not_Included program of the city of Albuquerque for the
                               purpose of exchanging land with Albuquerque
                               Public Schools
125-1990 9-26-90  Not_Included Condemnation - 2304 Indian School Road N.W.
 
Res. No. Date Disposition Short Title
Res. No. Date     Disposition   Short Title
126-1990 9-26-90   Not_Included Condemnation - 827 Eroy S.W.
127-1990 9-26-90   Not_Included Condemnation - 3418 Ross S.E.
                                Approving grant agreements for valley water and
128-1990 9-26-90   Not_Included wastewater projects and appropriating funds
                                from the New Mexico State Legislature
129-1990 9-28-90   Not_Included Condemnation - 516 Arno S.E.
                                Amending Resolution No. 90 - condemnation -
130-1990 9-28-90   Not_Included 3822 Second Street, N.W. to extend the time
                                period
                                Agreeing to the dismissal of court appeals
131-1990 9-28-90   Not_Included cause no. 114469, solid waste landfill
                                litigation and to the terms and conditions of
                                the stipulation of dismissal
                                Amending capital improvements program,
132-1990 10-2-90   Not_Included approving a project for a downtown parking lot
                                and appropriating funds
133-1990 10-15-90 3-1-2         Adopting policy for the management of risk;
                                repealing R-461, Enactment 201-1985
                                Adopting Department of Human Services Housing
134-1990 10-15-90  Not_Included Division rehabilitation grant program tenant
                                assistance policy
                                Approving and authorizing filing of a grant
135-1990 10-15-90  Not_Included with New Mexico State Office on Aging and
                                providing an appropriation to the Department of
                                Human Services
                                Requesting Public Works Department to present
136-1990 10-15-90 3-5-40        Council with quarterly progress reports of
                                flood control projects
                                Awarding construction contract S.A.D. 218,
137-1990 10-15-90  Not_Included Phase II to Construction Contracting and
                                Management, Inc.
                                Approving and authorizing filing of grant
138-1990 10-15-90  Not_Included application for summer food service program and
                                providing an appropriation to Parks and
                                Recreation Department
                                Creating a committee to make recommendations to
139-1990 10-24-90  Not_Included the Council regarding the boundaries of the
                                nine council districts
                                Requiring a five-year forecast of operating
140-1990 10-25-90 2-2-5         expenditures and revenues; creating a multi-
                                year forecasting advisory committee and
                                requiring a report
141-1990 11-1-90   Not_Included Condemnation - 517 57th Street S.W.
142-1990 11-1-90   Not_Included Rescinding Resolution No. 122- Condemnation -
                                521 Aztec N.W.
                                Authorizing Mayor to enter into an agreement
143-1990 11-1-90   Not_Included with state of New Mexico to secure funding for
                                a youth services center and providing an
                                appropriation to HSD
                                Calling for the Energy Conservation Council to
                                expand provisions of life-cycle costing
144-1990 11-1-90   Not_Included ordinance to include facility design
                                considerations that impact energy and
                                operational cost
145-1990 11-1-90   Not_Included Amending CIP program by reprogramming capital
                                funds
146-1990 11-1-90   Not_Included Condemnation - 421 Louisiana Boulevard S.E.
147-1990 11-1-90   Not_Included Condemnation - 540 Utah, N.E.
148-1990 11-1-90   Not_Included Rescinding Resolution No. 88 - condemnation -
                                4522 San Isidro, N.W.
                                Awarding construction contract for S.A.D. 219
149-1990 11-1-90   Not_Included to Construction Contracting and Management,
                                Inc.
150-1990 11-1-90   Not_Included Condemnation - 315 [front and rear units] and
                                317 Princeton, S.E.
 
Res. No. Date Disposition Short Title
Res. No. Date     Disposition   Short Title
                                Adopting criteria to zoning and subdivision
151-1990 11-5-90  1-1-10        regulations governing development of planned
                                communities
152-1990 11-5-90   Not_Included Condemnation - 724 Mountain Road N.W.
                                Amending the adopted capital implementation
153-1990 11-8-90   Not_Included program by supplementing and consolidating
                                existing projects
                                Amending the adopted capital implementation
                                program of the city of Albuquerque by approving
154-1990 11-9-90   Not_Included new projects, supplementing current
                                appropriations and changing the scope of
                                existing projects
                                Establishing a policy on expansion of utilities
155-1990 11-9-90  3-5-6         and development approvals within the boundaries
                                of the Petroglyph National Monument
156-1990 11-15-90  Not_Included Condemnation - 2332 Mountain Road N.W.
                                Appropriating metropolitan redevelopment funds
157-1990 11-15-90  Not_Included for the implementation of redevelopment
                                programs in metropolitan redevelopment areas
158-1990 11-15-90  Not_Included Rescinding Resolution No. 87 - condemnation -
                                1734 Griegos N.W.
159-1990 11-15-90  Not_Included Rescinding Resolution No. 123 - condemnation -
                                2645 Madison, N.E.
                                Authorizing the Mayor to enter into an
160-1990 11-15-90  Not_Included agreement to secure funding for developing
                                programs and services to assist the homeless
161-1990 11-15-90  Not_Included Appropriating funds to HSD housing fund for
                                housing related projects
162-1990 11-15-90  Not_Included Providing for the appropriation of federal and
                                state forfeiture funds to the Police Department
163-1990 11-15-90  Not_Included Directing engineering consultant to prepare
                                preliminary plans - S.A.D. 221
                                Requesting administration to provide quarterly
164-1990 11-15-90 3-5-3         neighborhood meetings regarding placement and
                                maintenance of solid waste convenience centers
                                Establishing policy requiring the capital
165-1990 11-27-90 3-5-41        implementation program to consider one hundred
                                year flood protection for North and South
                                Valleys as priority
                                Establishing legislative policy of the city of
166-1990 11-27-90  Not_Included Albuquerque for the 1991 legislative session of
                                the New Mexico State Legislature
167-1990 11-27-90  Not_Included Industrial development revenue bonds - General
                                Mills, Inc. packaged food plant project
                                Adjusting fiscal year 1990 appropriations for
168-1990 12-5-90   Not_Included certain programs to provide for actual
                                expenditures
                                Approving and authorizing filing of grant
169-1990 12-5-90   Not_Included application for the grant-in-aid with New
                                Mexico State Library
                                Appropriating funds to the Department of Land
170-1990 12-5-90   Not_Included Resources and Regulation, code administration
                                division to contract for the removal of the
                                building or structure at 1923 Williams S.E.
                                Authorizing Mayor to enter into an agreement to
171-1990 12-5-90   Not_Included secure funding for child development services
                                for poor families
172-1990 12-5-90   Not_Included Condemnation - 132 Virginia, N.E.
173-1990 12-5-90   Not_Included Condemnation - 5304 Territorial Road N.W.
174-1990 12-5-90   Not_Included Condemnation - 318 Alamo, S.E.
 
Res. No. Date Disposition Short Title
Res. No. Date     Disposition   Short Title
                                Establishing a task force to analyze
                                accessibility regulations to study and
175-1990 12-5-90   Not_Included prioritize needs for accommodations and
                                improvements to existing accesses for persons
                                with disabilities and requiring a report
176-1990 12-5-90   Not_Included Approving grant application for a public
                                housing drug elimination program
177-1990 12-5-90   Not_Included Condemnation - 128 Aztec N.W.
                                Approving and authorizing filing of grant
178-1990 12-5-90   Not_Included application for a food service program for
                                children and providing for an appropriation to
                                the HSD
                                Amending the Uptown Sector Development Plan to
                                allow the use of public funds for extension of
179-1990 12-5-90   Not_Included the Loop Road from its existing terminus on the
                                west side to America's Parkway; amending the
                                CIP program with respect to the Uptown Loop
                                Road
180-1990 12-5-90   Not_Included Declaring a moratorium on the introductions of
                                amendments to the zoning code
                                Calling for Transit Department to make transit
181-1990 12-5-90  3-8-1         system more available and responsive to
                                commuters and riders
182-1990 12-26-90  Not_Included Condemnation - 1208, 1208 1/2, 1210 and 1210 1/
                                2 Iron, S.W.
                                Approving and authorizing filing grant
183-1990 12-26-90  Not_Included application for a ride sharing program and
                                providing an appropriation to PWD
184-1990 12-26-90  Not_Included Rescinding Resolution No. 495 - 404 and 412
                                Marble, N.W.
                                Approving and authorizing filing application
185-1990 12-26-90  Not_Included for alternatives to traditional rate setting
                                conference grant with Urban Consortium Energy
                                Task Force and providing an appropriation
                                Declaring city's intent to issue industrial
186-1990 12-26-90  Not_Included development revenue bonds - [the Towers on
                                Montgomery]
187-1990 12-26-90  Not_Included Approving Contract Change Order No. 3 for
                                S.A.D. 217
 
 
 
Notes
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
1991 Resolutions
Res. No. Date Disposition Short Title
Res. No. Date    Disposition   Short Title
1-1991   1-3-91   Not_Included Accepting preliminary plans - S.A.D. 216
                               Approving and authorizing filing of application
2-1991   1-17-91  Not_Included for air pollution control grant and providing
                               for an appropriation to the Environmental Health
                               Department
3-1991   1-17-91  Not_Included Rescinding Resolution No. 168 - 517 57th Street,
                               S.W.
4-1991   1-17-91  Not_Included Rescinding Resolution No. 175 - 516 Arno S.E.
5-1991   1-17-91  Not_Included Setting list of regular City Council meetings
                               from March, 1991 through February, 1992
                               Authorizing Mayor to execute a grant agreement
6-1991   1-17-91  Not_Included and providing an appropriation to Human Services
                               Department to develop and implement a community-
                               wide substance abuse prevention program
                               Approving and authorizing the filing of grant
7-1991   1-17-91  Not_Included application for an urban library resources grant
                               and providing an appropriation to the Library
                               Department
8-1991   1-18-91 6-1-3         Proposing five-year goals for the city of
                               Albuquerque
                               Appropriating funds to the General Services
                               Department in fiscal year 1991 for improvements
9-1991   1-18-91  Not_Included to the audio/visual system of the Council/
                               Commission chambers in the Albuquerque/
                               Bernalillo County Government Center
                               Requiring that whenever a bill is introduced for
                               Council consideration, a fiscal impact analysis
10-1991  1-24-91 3-2-12        of the bill also be submitted when the fiscal
                               impact is $25,000 or greater in any one fiscal
                               year
11-1991  1-25-91  Not_Included Fixing March 26, 1991 as the date for special
                               municipal election
12-1991  1-25-91  Not_Included Appropriating funds to the Legal Department for
                               the special municipal election
13-1991  2-1-91   Not_Included Rescinding Resolution No. 480 - removal of
                               building at 609 Twelfth Street, N.W.
14-1991  2-1-91   Not_Included Adding members to the Economic Development
                               Council
15-1991  2-1-91   Not_Included Approving Contract Change Order No. 1 - S.A.D.
                               219
16-1991  2-12-91  Not_Included Authorizing application for state traffic safety
                               and education and enforcement fund grant
                               Appropriating funds from the refuse disposal
17-1991  2-12-91  Not_Included fund balance to fund additional staff at
                               Montessa Park convenience center and Cerro
                               Colorado landfill
                               Appropriating funds from the refuse disposal
18-1991  2-12-91  Not_Included fund balance for the Don Reservoir convenience
                               center
                               Authorizing Mayor to enter into a joint powers
19-1991  2-12-91  Not_Included agreement for enhancements to the drug treatment
                               system and providing an appropriation to Human
                               Services Department
                               Approval of Parks and Recreation Department's
20-1991  2-12-91  Not_Included Golf Management Division establishment as an
                               enterprise fund
21-1991  2-12-91  Not_Included Authorizing grant application for converting
                               vehicles to compressed natural gas fuel systems
                               Approving joint powers agreement with New Mexico
22-1991  2-15-91  Not_Included Health and Environment Department to continue
                               leaking underground storage tank remedial action
                               program
23-1991  2-15-91  Not_Included Directing engineering consultant to prepare
                               preliminary plans, Resolution No. 1 - S.A.D. 223
                               Appropriating funds for site environmental audit
24-1991  2-15-91  Not_Included system/activity in the environmental Health
                               Department
                               Authorizing the giving of notice for bids for
25-1991  3-11-91  Not_Included the sale of general obligation general purpose
                               bonds
 
Res. No. Date Disposition Short Title
Res. Date Disposition Short Title
No.
26-  3-    Not        Relating to issuance and sale of general obligation bonds [series 1991 A and
1991 25-  Included    1991 B]
     91
27-  2-    Not        Amending Resolution No. 11-1991 changing special election polling locations for
1991 27-  Included    precincts 80, 81 and 84
     91
28-  2-    Not        Directing Parks and Recreation Department to utilize funds appropriated to
1991 20-  Included    aquatics division to maintain swimming pool hours
     91
29-  2-    Not        Calling for reinstatement of flower program of the Parks and Recreation
1991 20-  Included    Department and the exploration of alternative ways of offering and funding the
     91               program
30-  2-    Not
1991 27-  Included    Condemnation - 507 Veranda N.W.
     91
31-  2-    Not        Appropriating funds for the implementation of the substance abuse and modified
1991 27-  Included    work programs
     91
32-  2-               Amending comprehensive plan policies regarding planned communities in reserve
1991 27-  1-1-10      areas
     91
33-  2-               Adding language to planned communities criteria; policy element regarding bed
1991 27-  1-1-10      and board and shelter care facilities and landfills
     91
34-  2-    Not        Declaring one parcel of land as not essential for municipal purposes - Alta
1991 27-  Included    Monte little league field
     91
35-  2-    Not
1991 27-  Included    Approving Contract Change Order No. 2 - S.A.D. 219
     91
36-  3-               Directing the Solid Waste Management Department to pursue a course of action to
1991 13-  4-3-31      expand the recycling educational program
     91
37-  3-    Not        Appropriating funds for solid waste characterization study, develop a commercial
1991 13-  Included    recycling strategy and expand a recycling education program
     91
38-  3-    Not        Requesting Albuquerque “SENSE” task force to examine their mission statement and
1991 13-  Included    organizational structure and make recommendations
     91
39-  3-    Not
1991 13-  Included    Directing City Clerk to call for sealed bids, Resolution No. 3 - S.A.D. 216
     91
40-  3-    Not        Approving grant application to provide a master plan update for Double Eagle II
1991 13-  Included    General Aviation Reliever Airport
     91
41-  4-2- 4-3-30      Formation of an association of cities to develop a regional program to support
1991 91               local recycling efforts
42-  4-2- 3-5-6       Approving plans for construction of Unser Blvd. within Water Pressure Zone 2-
1991 91               W and/or the Petroglyph National Monument
43-  4-2-  Not        Repealing Resolution No. 206-1989; adopting joint powers agreement for a
1991 91   Included    combined city/county emergency medical authority
44-  4-2-  Not        Expanding the scope of Council Resolution No. 135-1989
1991 91   Included
45-  4-2-  Not        Amending capital improvements programs, making appropriations and incorporating
1991 91   Included    and adopting the 1992-1993 urban enhancement trust fund plan
46-  4-2- 1-10-2      Designating fourth ward and Eighth/Forrestor Historic Overlay Zones and
1991 91               approving design guidelines
47-  4-2-  Not        Approving the programming of funds and projects for the 1991-2000 decade capital
1991 91   Included    improvements program
                      Authorizing discussions with public service company of New Mexico and
48-  4-5-  Not        discussions with other interested entities, approving a city discussion team,
1991 91   Included    authorizing investigation of constructing a segmented distribution system,
                      authorizing analysis of the Black and Veatch report
49-  4-    Not        Authorizing Mayor to submit grant application and providing an appropriation to
1991 10-  Included    Human Services Department for the emergency shelter grants program
     91
50-  4-    Not        Providing an appropriation to the Planning Department for updating the East
1991 10-  Included    Mountain Area Plan
     91
 
Res. No. Date Disposition Short Title
Res. No. Date    Disposition Short Title
51-1991  4-10-91  Not        Approving Contract Change Order No. 1 for S.A.D.
                 Included    218
                  Not        Providing an appropriation to the Environmental
52-1991  4-10-91 Included    Health Department to conduct a household hazardous
                             waste spring 1991
53-1991  4-17-91  Not        Declaring one parcel of land to be not essential
                 Included    for municipal purposes
54-1991  4-24-91  Not        Condemnation - 113 Ogle S.E.
                 Included
55-1991  4-24-91  Not        Condemnation - 1100 Santa Fe, S.W.
                 Included
56-1991  4-24-91  Not        Condemnation - 813 Broadway S.E.
                 Included
57-1991  4-24-91  Not        Rescinding Resolution No. 126-1990 - 827 Eroy St.
                 Included    S.W.
                  Not        Approving and authorizing the filing of grant
58-1991  4-24-91 Included    application for an alternative fuels initiative
                             grant for a compressed natural gas program
                             Approving and authorizing the filing of grant
                  Not        application for UMTA capital assistance grant,
59-1991  4-24-91 Included    operating assistance grant and planning assistance
                             grant and providing an appropriation to the
                             Transit and Parking Department
60-1991  4-24-91  Not        Adopting one-year objectives to help implement the
                 Included    adopted five-year goals
61-1991  4-24-91  Not        Appropriating funds for removal of structure at
                 Included    7624 Central Avenue, S.E.
62-1991  4-24-91  Not        Industrial development revenue bonds
                 Included
                  Not        Appropriating funds fromU.S. Environmental
63-1991  4-24-91 Included    Protection Agency to fund a back yard composting
                             project
                  Not        Approving and authorizing grant application for a
64-1991  4-24-91 Included    senior companion grant with the state Agency on
                             Aging
                  Not        Approving and authorizing Mayor to submit
65-1991  5-13-91 Included    application for use of funds for community
                             development program fiscal year 1991-1992
66-1991  5-23-91  Not        Appointing a fifth member to the city's electric
                 Included    utility discussion team
67-1991  5-23-91  Not        Recommendations to the Albuquerque and Las Cruces
                 Included    City Council from the joint “SENSE” task force
                             Requesting the city to consider the potential of a
                  Not        waste-to-energy component in our formal solid
68-1991  5-23-91 Included    waste recovery policy; establishing a waste
                             recovery and energy study group; and requiring a
                             report
69-1991  5-24-91  Not        Requesting further work of the water conservation
                 Included    task force; requiring a report
                             Amending the Vineyard Sector Development Plan
                             expanding the plan boundaries to include tracts B-
70-1991  5-24-91 1-7-36      2 and B-3, tr. 3, North Albuquerque Acres; Lots 1-
                             8 and 25-32, Block 9, tract 3, North Albuquerque
                             Acres; and Lot A, Block 10, tract 3, North
                             Albuquerque Acres
                             Adopting policy to insure the organized and
71-1991  5-29-91 4-1-6       systematic offering of employee benefit programs
                             to city employees
                  Not        Amending the adopted capital implementation
72-1991  5-28-91 Included    program of the city by approval of new projects,
                             supplementing and consolidating existing projects
                             Approving and authorizing the filing of the
                  Not        attached grant application for funds under the
73-1991  5-28-91 Included    Emergency Medical Services Fund Act with the N.M.
                             Health and Environment Department and providing
                             for an appropriation to the Fire Department
                             Relating to proposed S.A.D. No. 223; accepting
                             preliminary plans, estimates of costs, assessment
                             plat with addendum and engineer's report in
                             determining benefits with respect thereto; making
74-1991  5-28-91  Not        a provisional order that certain street and
                 Included    associated storm drainage, water and sanitary
                             sewer improvements, all within the proposed
                             district, shall be constructed; and directing that
                             notice of hearing on the provisional order be
                             given
                             Relating to S.A.D. No. 217; setting the time and
75-1991  5-28-91  Not        place of an assessment hearing when objections to
                 Included    the assessment roll for such district will be
                             heard
 
Res. No. Date Disposition Short Title
Res. No. Date    Disposition   Short Title
                               Setting policy and requesting a solid waste
76-1991  5-30-91 3-5-61        management, recycling and waste reduction plan
                               for the city
                               Approving and authorizing the execution of
                               second amendment to the development agreement
77-1991  5-30-91  Not_Included between the city and Albuquerque Plaza Partners
                               and approving and authorizing the execution of
                               conforming amendments to the UDAG grant
                               agreement
                               Appropriating funds to the General Services
                               Department and the Police Department for
78-1991  5-28-91  Not_Included operating the Albuquerque/Bernalillo County
                               Government Center for the fiscal year beginning
                               July 1, 1991, and ending June 30, 1992
                               Appropriating funds to the Corrections and
                               Detention Department for operating the
79-1991  5-28-91  Not_Included Bernalillo County Corrections and Detention
                               facility for the fiscal year beginning July 1,
                               1991 and ending June 30, 1992
                               Approving and authorizing a grant application
                               with the N.M. state Office on Aging for health
80-1991  5-31-91  Not_Included promotion funds, and providing for an
                               appropriation to the Department of Human
                               Services
                               Declaring a moratorium on approval of signs near
81-1991  5-31-91  Not_Included the proposed international airport access road;
                               declaring a priority for setting the alignment
                               of said road
                               Calling for the Albuquerque Parks and Recreation
                               Department swimming pools to provide free
82-1991  5-31-91 6-5-6         admission at their facilities, to all school-
                               aged children ages 5 to 18, one day a week
                               during the last two hours of operation from June
                               1 to August 15 each year
                               Approving the application for Job Training
                               Partnership Act Funds, discretionary grant funds
83-1991  5-31-91  Not_Included and income generating activities; and providing
                               for an appropriation to the Human Services
                               Department
                               Approving and authorizing the filing of the
                               attached application for a summer food service
84-1991  5-31-91  Not_Included program for children with the N.M. Health and
                               Environment, Public Health Division, and
                               providing for an appropriation to the Parks and
                               Recreation Department
                               Declaring a moratorium on approval of signs near
85-1991  5-31-91  Not_Included the Unser Boulevard Parkway; declaring a
                               priority for setting the total alignment of said
                               parkway
86-1991  5-31-91  Not_Included Approving the fiscal year 1992 audit plan as
                               submitted by the Internal Audit Committee
                               Approving and authorizing the filing of the
87-1991  5-31-91  Not_Included attached application for an RSVP action grant
                               and providing for an appropriation to the
                               Department of Human Services
                               Appropriating funds for operating the government
88-1991  6-3-91   Not_Included of the city for the fiscal year beginning July
                               1, 1991, and ending June 30, 1992
                               Declaring the intent of the City Council in
                               establishing the joint city/county Unification
                               Charter Study Committee; requiring initial
                               public hearings by the Committee to hear
                               testimony on the needs of both city and
89-1991  6-13-91 2-1-10        unincorporated area citizens; requiring that the
                               Committee explore and evaluate unification
                               provisions which would permit a flexible
                               unification of governments beneficial to the
                               citizens and taxpayers of both areas and fair to
                               the employees and officials of the affected
                               governments
90-1991  6-11-91  Not_Included Approving Contract Change Order No. 1 for S.A.D.
                               218, Phase II
                               Requesting that certain funds appropriated to
91-1991  6-11-91  Not_Included the Risk Management Department to lease computer
                               equipment be deappropriated and transferred to
                               the risk management fund balance
                               Relating to Albuquerque, N.M. S.A.D. 218;
92-1991  6-11-91  Not_Included setting the time and place of an assessment
                               hearing when objections to the assessment roll
                               for such district will be heard
                               Approving and authorizing the filing of the
                               attached application for a foster grandparent
93-1991  6-11-91  Not_Included grant with the state action and the N.M. state
                               Agency on Aging; and providing for an
                               appropriation to the Department of Human
                               Services
                               Amending the adopted capital implementation
94-1991  6-11-91  Not_Included program of the city by approving new projects,
                               supplementing and consolidating existing
                               projects
                               Amending the 1986 University Neighborhoods
                               Sector Development Plan SU-2/SF land use
95-1991  6-11-91 1-7-13        category to provide that dwelling structures
                               legally built and occupied prior to 1978 may be
                               retained even where there are multiple dwellings
                               on a lot
                               Amending the parking lot pavement regulations of
96-1991  6-11-91 1-4-1         the Downtown Core Sector Development Plan,
                               adopted as part of the 1989 Downtown Core
                               Revitalization Strategy
                               Providing for the transfer of Bernalillo County
                               landfill bond monies to the city of Albuquerque
97-1991  6-11-91  Not_Included in exchange for the provision of refuse disposal
                               services by the city of Albuquerque to
                               Bernalillo County
                               Stating the intent of the city of Albuquerque
                               and county of Bernalillo to file a construction
                               permit application with the FCC for the purpose
98-1991  6-24-91  Not_Included of operating a non-commercial low power
                               television station to be used for education
                               programs and rebroadcast of the government
                               channel
                               Determining that a certain building or structure
                               at 1414 Broadway, S.E., within the city limits
99-1991  6-18-91  Not_Included of Albuquerque, is so ruined, damaged and
                               dilapidated as to be a menace to the public
                               comfort, health, peace or safety and that it be
                               required to be removed
 
Res. No. Date Disposition Short Title
Res. No. Date    Disposition   Short Title
                               Adopting the Rank Three Bear Canyon Arroyo
100-1991 6-21-91 1-13-3        Corridor Plan; adopting a design overlay zone
                               and amending zone maps to illustrate boundaries
                               of this zone
101-1991 6-21-91  Not_Included Approving Contract Change Order No. 3 for S.A.D.
                               219
                               Approving and authorizing the filing of the
                               attached grant application for a public works
                               and development facilities assistance grant with
102-1991 6-21-91  Not_Included U.S. Department of Commerce, Economic
                               Development Administration; and providing for an
                               appropriation to the Public Works Department,
                               capital improvements program
103-1991 6-21-91  Not_Included Determining reasonable notice of public meetings
                               of the Council
104-1991 6-21-91  Not_Included Awarding construction contract for S.A.D. 223,
                               Part I, master sanitary sewer to MCC, Inc.
                               Relating to and creating S.A.D. 223; determining
                               the advisability of constructing, and the type
                               and character of, certain streets and associated
105-1991 6-21-91  Not_Included storm drainage, sanitary sewer, and water
                               improvements therein and directing the City
                               Clerk to call for sealed bids on such
                               improvements
                               Appropriating funds to the Corrections and
                               Detention Department for operating the
106-1991 6-24-91  Not_Included Bernalillo County corrections and detention
                               facility for the fiscal year beginning July 1,
                               1991, and ending June 30, 1992, and repealing R-
                               345, Enactment No. 79-1991
                               Redesignating up to $30,000 of existing
                               appropriation within the Human Services
107-1991 7-5-91   Not_Included Department in order to provide funding for
                               purposes of maintaining shelter services for
                               abused and neglected children
                               Concerning a municipal bond election at the
                               regular municipal election to be held in the
                               city on October 8, 1991; submitting to a vote of
                               the qualified, registered electors and non-
                               resident municipal electors at such election
                               certain questions for authorizing the issuance
                               of general obligation bonds in varying principal
108-1991 7-16-91  Not_Included amounts and for specified public purposes;
                               providing the form of the bond questions, the
                               emergency and absentee paper ballots therefor
                               and the designation clause for such questions on
                               voting machines; providing for notice of the
                               election; prescribing other details in
                               connection with such election and bonds; and
                               ratifying action previously taken in connection
                               therewith
                               Concerning the regular municipal election to be
109-1991 7-16-91  Not_Included held in the city on Tuesday, the eighth day of
                               October 1991
                               Approving, ratifying, reaffirming, declaring and
                               stating the city's intent to issue industrial
                               development revenue bonds in an amount up to
                               $7,800,000 in connection with the proposed
                               project for the Towers on Montgomery, a
                               congregate care center and senior retirement
                               housing project located at 5400 Montgomery,
110-1991 7-23-91  Not_Included N.E., in Albuquerque, New Mexico, for the
                               purpose of inducing Leafland Group II,
                               Montgomery Towers limited partnership, a New
                               Jersey limited partnership, or its successors or
                               assigns to redevelop the project in the manner
                               set forth in Resolution No. 113-1990, and
                               extending the inducement to issue industrial
                               development revenue bonds as contained therein
                               to June 30, 1992
111-1991 7-23-91 4-2-6         Adopting the Transit and Parking Department's
                               1991 transit development program
                               Determining that two buildings or structures at
                               1620 Broadway, S.E., within the city limits of
112-1991 7-23-91  Not_Included Albuquerque, New Mexico, are so ruined, damaged,
                               and dilapidated as to be a menace to the public
                               comfort, health, peace or safety and that they
                               be required to be removed
                               Determining that two buildings or structures at
                               420 Utah, N.E., within the city limits of
113-1991 7-23-91  Not_Included Albuquerque, New Mexico, are so ruined, damaged,
                               and dilapidated as to be a menace to the public
                               comfort, health, peace, or safety and that they
                               be required to be removed
                               Approving and authorizing a grant under the New
                               Mexico Litter Control and Beautification Act
114-1991 7-23-91  Not_Included with New Mexico State Highway Department; and
                               providing for an appropriation to the city Solid
                               Waste Department
                               Ratifying, confirming and approving the filing
                               of a grant application with New Mexico State
115-1991 7-23-91  Not_Included Office on Aging for Title III Older Americans
                               Act funds and HB-2 laws 1991, funds; and
                               providing for an appropriation to the Department
                               of Human Services; Senior Affairs Division
                               Authorizing the removal of certain uncollectible
116-1991 7-23-91  Not_Included accounts from the city's accounts receivable
                               records
                               Relating to Albuquerque, New Mexico, S.A.D. 223;
117-1991 7-23-91  Not_Included amending Resolution No. 105-1991 adopted by the
                               City Council on June 17, 1991
                               Authorizing negotiations for a competitive
                               standards agreement for electricity; approving
118-1991 8-6-91   Not_Included procedures governing the negotiation process;
                               and requiring progress reports to the City
                               Council
                               Approving the 1992 transportation program for
                               the Albuquerque urbanized area, including the
119-1991 8-6-91   Not_Included transportation improvement program; making
                               recommendations to the M.R.G.C.'s Urban
                               Transportation Planning Policy Board for final
                               adoption
                               Stating the intent of the Council to review
                               concerns which have arisen in the development of
                               the New Mexico Performing Arts Center, to obtain
                               input from the citizens of Albuquerque, to cause
120-1991 8-6-91   Not_Included an evaluation of important aspects of the
                               Performing Arts Center to take place, to
                               establish a committee and assign it specific
                               tasks, and to establish a procedure to guide the
                               committee's work
121-1991 8-6-91   Not_Included Adopting the joint powers agreement relating to
                               zoning authority outside municipal boundaries
                               Amending Resolution No. 109-1991 concerning the
122-1991 8-7-91   Not_Included regular municipal election to be held in the
                               city of Albuquerque, New Mexico, on Tuesday, the
                               eighth day of October, 1991
                               Fixing October 8, 1991 as the date for a special
123-1991 8-7-91   Not_Included election to be held on the question of adopting
                               an amendment to the city charter
                               Endorsing the city of Albuquerque's pact
124-1991 8-26-91 6-8-1         practice of providing in-kind support services
                               to the Albuquerque international balloon fiesta
                               and specifying such services to be provided
                               Determining that a certain building or structure
                               at 4319 Indian School Road, N.E., within the
125-1991 8-19-91  Not_Included city limits of Albuquerque, New Mexico, is so
                               ruined, damaged and dilapidated as to be a
                               menace to the public comfort, health, peace, or
                               safety and that it be required to be removed
 
Res. No. Date Disposition Short Title
Res. No. Date     Disposition   Short Title
                                Rescinding Resolution No. 212, Enactment No.
126-1991 8-19-91   Not_Included 30-1991, Which ordered the condemnation and
                                removal of the building at 507 Veranda N.W.
127-1991 8-19-91   Not_Included Adopting the fiscal year 1992-1993 multi-year
                                planning program
                                Ratifying, confirming, and approving the filing
                                of the attached grant application under the
                                drug control and system improvement formula
128-1991 8-19-91   Not_Included grant with the state of New Mexico Department
                                of Public Safety; and providing for an
                                appropriation to the city of Albuquerque Police
                                Department
                                Requesting consideration of a bikeway trail/
129-1991 8-19-91   Not_Included route along interstate highway 40 in
                                Albuquerque
                                Amending exhibit a of Resolution No. 109-1991,
                                concerning the regular municipal election to be
                                held in the city of Albuquerque, New Mexico, on
130-1991 8-21-91   Not_Included Tuesday, the eighth day of October, 1991, by
                                changing the consolidation of certain general
                                election precincts and by changing the location
                                of certain polling places
                                Amending exhibit a of Enactment No. 108-1991,
                                concerning the municipal bond election to be
                                held in the city of Albuquerque, New Mexico, on
131-1991 8-21-91   Not_Included Tuesday, the eighth day of October, 1991, by
                                changing the consolidation of certain general
                                election precincts and by changing the location
                                of certain polling places
                                Amending Resolution Nos. 109-1991 and 122-1991
132-1991 8-29-91   Not_Included concerning the regular municipal election to be
                                held in the city of Albuquerque, New Mexico, on
                                Tuesday, the eighth day of October, 1991
                                Authorizing the Mayor to enter into agreements
133-1991 8-29-91   Not_Included of development and sale with the Rural Housing,
                                Inc. and the affordable housing foundation to
                                develop affordable housing
                                Approving and authorizing the filing of
                                applications with the federal aviation
134-1991 8-29-91   Not_Included administration for grants to construct certain
                                improvements at Double Eagle II general
                                aviation reliever airport and Albuquerque
                                International Airport
135-1991 8-29-91   Not_Included Amending Resolution 5-1991 by amending the
                                adopted list of regular City Council meetings
                                Relating to the city of Albuquerque, New
                                Mexico, sisters of charity health care system
                                hospital revenue bonds, series 1991A (St.
                                Joseph Health Care System) in an aggregate
                                original principal amount of $14,115.00;
                                establishing the purchase price, principal
                                amount, interest rates, maturities and other
                                terms of the bonds; providing for the issuance,
                                execution, sale and delivery of the bonds and
136-1991 8-29-91   Not_Included the deposit of proceeds of the bonds;
                                authorizing the execution of and approving
                                certain documents relating to the bonds and the
                                distribution of a preliminary offering circular
                                and an offering circular; determining the
                                sufficiency of payments from the project and by
                                St. Joseph Health Care System to pay the debt
                                service on the bonds and to pay all costs of or
                                relating to the project; and ratifying certain
                                actions heretofore taken
                                Placing a moratorium on amendments to the
                                animal control ordinance until a seven member
137-1991 8-30-91   Not_Included citizens' working group thoroughly reviews and
                                recommends changes to the animal control
                                ordinance
                                Relating to the city of Albuquerque, New Mexico
                                gross receipts/lodgers' tax adjustable tender
                                refunding revenue bonds, series 1991A to be
                                issued to refund the city's gross receipts/
                                lodgers' tax bonds, series 1985; providing
138-1991 10-10-91  Not_Included certain terms and the form of the series 1991A
                                bonds, the price to be paid by the investment
                                banker for the series 1991A bonds and other
                                details concerning the series 1991A bonds and
                                proceeds thereof; approving documents relating
                                to the series 1991A bonds; and ratifying
                                certain actions previously taken
                                Adopting an interim joint powers agreement
                                relating to zoning authority outside the
139-1991 9-23-91   Not_Included Albuquerque municipal boundaries; superseding
                                Resolution 121-1991; directing a process for
                                developing a permanent agreement on the same
                                subject
                                Amending amended Exhibit A of Resolution No.
                                130-1991, concerning the regular municipal
                                election to be held in the city of Albuquerque,
140-1991 9-23-91   Not_Included New Mexico, on Tuesday, the eighth day of
                                October, 1991, by changing the location of
                                certain polling places and by correcting the
                                street addresses of certain polling places
                                Amending amended exhibit a of Resolution No.
                                131-1991, concerning the municipal bond
                                election to be held in the city of Albuquerque,
141-1991 9-23-91   Not_Included New Mexico, on Tuesday, the eighth day of
                                October, 1991, by changing the consolidation of
                                certain general election precincts and by
                                changing the location of certain polling places
                                Amending the parking lot landscaping
142-1991 9-30-91  1-4-1         regulations of the Downtown Core Sector
                                Development Plan, adopted as part of the 1989
                                downtown core revitalization strategy
                                Determining that a certain building or
                                structure at 802 Lomas N.W., within the city
143-1991 9-30-91   Not_Included limits of Albuquerque, New Mexico is so ruined,
                                damaged, and dilapidated as to be a menace to
                                the public comfort, health, peace, or safety
                                and that it be required to be removed
                                Determining that a certain building or
                                structure at 5601 Bluewater N.W., within the
144-1991 9-30-91   Not_Included city limits of Albuquerque, New Mexico is so
                                ruined, damaged, and dilapidated as to be a
                                menace to the public comfort, health, peace, or
                                safety and that it be required to be removed
                                Directing the city attorney to initiate an
                                action seeking a declaratory ruling on the
                                constitutionality of the requirement that there
145-1991 9-30-91   Not_Included be a separate approval on the consolidation of
                                the city and county governments by the voters
                                within the city and the voters in the county
                                outside the city
                                Rescinding Council Bill No. 233 Enactment No.
146-1991 9-30-91   Not_Included 173-1990, which ordered the removal of the
                                building at 5304 Territorial Road N.W.
                                Authorizing the Mayor to enter into an
                                agreement with the U.S. Department of Housing
                                and Urban Development (HUD) to secure funding
147-1991 9-30-91   Not_Included for developing programs and services to assist
                                the residents of public housing sites, and
                                providing for an appropriation to the Human
                                Services Department
                                Making certain findings and determinations
                                pursuant to the metropolitan redevelopment
148-1991 9-30-91   Not_Included code, and authorizing and directing the
                                Albuquerque metropolitan redevelopment agency
                                to prepare a metropolitan redevelopment plan(s)
                                for the Barelas Metropolitan Redevelopment Area
                                Approving and authorizing the filing of a grant
                                application for a certified local government
149-1991 9-30-91   Not_Included grant with the state historic preservation
                                office and providing an appropriation for the
                                Planning Department
                                Amending the adopted capital implementation
                                program of the city of Albuquerque by
150-1991 10-2-91   Not_Included appropriating funds for the landscaping and
                                paving of city-owned parking lots in the SU-
                                3 downtown urban center; rescinding Resolution
                                132-1990
 
Res. No. Date Disposition Short Title
Res. No. Date     Disposition   Short Title
                                Relating to Albuquerque, New Mexico S.A.D. 218;
151-1991 10-4-91   Not_Included setting the time and place of an assessment
                                hearing when objections to the assessment roll
                                for such district will be heard
                                Authorizing the giving of notice for bids for
152-1991 11-22-91  Not_Included the sale of city of Albuquerque, New Mexico
                                general obligation bonds consisting of
                                $42,000,000 general purpose bonds, series 1992A
                                Relating to the city of Albuquerque, New Mexico
                                gross receipts/lodgers' tax refunding and
                                improvement revenue bonds, series 1991B
                                authorized to be issued pursuant to city
                                ordinance Enactment No. 41-1991 to refund the
                                city's gross receipts tax revenue bonds,
153-1991 11-22-91  Not_Included improvement series 1987B and to improve the
                                city's convention center facilities; providing
                                terms of the series 1991B bonds and terms
                                relating to bond insurance; providing the price
                                to be paid by the original purchaser for the
                                series 1991B bonds; approving documents
                                relating to the series 1991B bonds; and
                                ratifying certain actions previously taken
                                Extending the date for completion of certain
154-1991 10-25-91  Not_Included recycling studies as defined in Resolution No.
                                R-296, Enactment No. 76-1991
                                Approving and authorizing the filing of the
                                attached application for a food service program
155-1991 10-25-91  Not_Included for children with the New Mexico Health and
                                Environment, Public Health Division, and
                                providing for an appropriation to the Parks and
                                Recreation Department
                                Approving the rental rehabilitation program for
                                the city of Albuquerque for the fiscal year
156-1991 10-25-91  Not_Included 1992 and authorizing the Mayor to prepare and
                                submit a grant application to the federal
                                government, and providing for an appropriation
                                to the community development fund
                                Adopting the city of Albuquerque Department of
157-1991 10-25-91  Not_Included Human Services Housing Division procurement
                                policy
                                Requesting the city of Albuquerque to intervene
                                in New Mexico Public Service Commission Case
158-1991 10-25-91  Not_Included No. 2383 regarding a rulemaking proceeding on
                                the adoption of a least cost planning rule and
                                requirements for demand side planning
                                management
                                Approving and authorizing the filing of the
                                attached grant application for a fully
159-1991 10-25-91  Not_Included integrated multi-fuels service station grant
                                with the urban consortium energy task force;
                                and providing for an appropriation to the
                                General Services Department
                                Amending the Albuquerque/Bernalillo County
160-1991 10-25-91 1-2-1         Comprehensive Plan, based on recommendations
                                from the 1990 biennial monitoring/
                                implementation report on the comprehensive plan
                                Rescinding Council Bill No. 301 Enactment No.
161-1991 10-25-91  Not_Included 56-1991, which ordered the removal of the
                                building located at 813 Broadway S.E.
                                Authorizing the Mayor to execute a grant
                                agreement with the U.S. Department of Health
162-1991 10-25-91  Not_Included and Human Services for child development
                                services for poor families and providing an
                                appropriation to the Human Services Department
                                Approving and authorizing the filing of a grant
                                application for a food service program for
163-1991 10-25-91  Not_Included children with the New Mexico Department of
                                Human Services and providing for an
                                appropriation to the Human Services Department
                                Approving and authorizing the filing of the
                                attached grant application for an urban library
164-1991 10-25-91  Not_Included resources grant with the New Mexico State
                                Library; and providing for an appropriation to
                                the Library Department
165-1991 10-25-91 1-13-4        Adopting the Rank Three Amole Arroyo Corridor
                                Plan
166-1991 11-8-91  3-2-13        Establishing a policy of continuous sequential
                                numbering of city charter amendments
                                Adopting the D/H east alternative, study
                                recommendations, and planning policies for the
                                Sunport Transportation Corridor, consisting of
167-1991 11-14-91  Not_Included a new interchange on interstate 25 and a
                                limited access, principal arterial from
                                interstate 25 to the Albuquerque International
                                Airport
168-1991 11-14-91 3-3-13        Establishing a consistent sick leave incentive
                                policy for city employees
                                Amending the North I-25 Sector Development Plan
169-1991 11-14-91 1-7-30        amending the zone map to provide for an
                                equipment training facility on the balloon
                                fiesta site
                                Ratifying, confirming, and approving the filing
                                of the attached grant application for a state
                                traffic safety and education and enforcement
170-1991 11-14-91  Not_Included fund grant with the state of New Mexico
                                Department of Highway and Transportation,
                                Bureau of Traffic Safety; and providing for an
                                appropriation to the city of Albuquerque Police
                                Department
                                Reaffirming the North I-25 Sector Development
                                Plan and establishing SU-2/HC zoning for lots
                                1, 2, 3, 30, 31, and 32, block 28, tract A,
171-1991 11-14-91 1-7-30        unit B, North Albuquerque Acres located on the
                                north east corner of San Pedro N.E. and Alameda
                                N.E.; amending the North I-25 Sector
                                Development Plan by adding an SU-2 zoning
                                category
                                Appropriating funds to the capital improvements
172-1991 11-14-91  Not_Included program for the 1991 general obligation bond
                                program
                                Amending the adopted capital implementation
                                program of the city of Albuquerque by approving
173-1991 11-14-91  Not_Included new projects, supplementing current
                                appropriations and changing the scope of
                                existing projects
                                Providing for an appropriation to the Police
174-1991 11-14-91  Not_Included Department for the reimbursement of damaged
                                vehicles and vehicular equipment
175-1991 11-14-91  Not_Included Providing for the appropriation of federal and
                                state forfeiture funds to the Police Department
 
Res. No. Date Disposition Short Title
Res. No. Date     Disposition   Short Title
                                Specifying city policy to proceed as soon as
                                possible with construction of the Montano
176-1991 11-19-91  Not_Included Bridge; setting a deadline on advertising for
                                bids; requesting the Mayor to undertake certain
                                studies
                                Authorizing a study of radioactive waste
177-1991 11-27-91  Not_Included discharges into the city's sewers and making an
                                appropriation
                                Relating to Albuquerque, New Mexico Special
178-1991 12-3-91   Not_Included Assessment District No. 217; modifying,
                                confirming and approving the assessment role
                                for such district
                                Approving and authorizing the filing of the
                                attached grant application for a ride sharing
179-1991 12-3-91   Not_Included program with the Federal Highway Administration
                                and the New Mexico State Highway and
                                Transportation Department; and providing for an
                                appropriation to the Public Works Department
                                Requesting the Transit Department to complete a
                                thorough feasibility and cost analysis of the
180-1991 12-3-91   Not_Included purchase and installation of signs at bus stop
                                locations to increase accessibility for persons
                                who are visually impaired or blind; and
                                providing a report
                                Establishing a policy of making reasonable
181-1991 12-3-91  3-3-3         accommodation for those in city government
                                employment to be proactive in compliance with
                                the Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA)
                                Requesting the city of Albuquerque to research
                                and prepare an appropriate city position
182-1991 12-3-91   Not_Included concerning the renewal of the US West
                                Communications franchise; requiring progress
                                reports to the City Council; and providing for
                                Council input
                                Approving and authorizing the filing of a grant
                                application for a certified local government
183-1991 12-3-91   Not_Included grant with the state of New Mexico Environment
                                Department, solid waste facility grant program
                                for a residential composting pilot program
                                Requesting the Mayor to evaluate the current
184-1991 12-3-91   Not_Included art in public places program and make
                                recommendations to the Council
                                Directing the administration to attempt to
185-1991 12-10-91  Not_Included recover the 1/8th percent gross receipts tax
                                revenue taken by the state legislature
                                Directing development of an affirmative action
                                plan to ensure that city government employment
186-1991 12-4-91   Not_Included is reasonably representative of the
                                metropolitan workforce, and that businesses
                                contracting with the city practice non-
                                discrimination and affirmative action
                                Approving ratifying, reaffirming, declaring and
                                stating the city of Albuquerque's intent to
                                issue industrial development revenue bonds in
                                an amount up to $6,000,000 in connection with
                                the proposed project for Sadler Aircraft of New
                                Mexico, Inc., an aircraft manufacturing
                                project, located at Flightway Avenue S.E.,
187-1991 12-16-91  Not_Included further described as Block 2, Lot 1-A-I,
                                Sunport Business Park addition, Albuquerque,
                                New Mexico, for the purpose of inducing Sadler
                                Aircraft of New Mexico, Inc. or its successors
                                or assigns, to develop the project in the
                                manner set forth in Resolution No. 62-1991, and
                                extending the inducement to issue industrial
                                development revenue bonds as contained therein
                                to December 31, 1992
188-1991 12-16-91  Not_Included Appropriating funds from the state fire fund to
                                the Albuquerque Fire Department
                                Adjusting fiscal year 1991 appropriations for
189-1991 12-16-91  Not_Included certain programs to provide for actual
                                expenditures
                                Relating to the proposed Albuquerque, New
                                Mexico Special Assessment District No. 221,
                                accepting preliminary plans, estimates of
                                costs, assessment plat with addendum and
                                engineers report as to the methods used in
                                determining benefits with respect thereto;
190-1991 12-16-91  Not_Included making a provisional order that certain street
                                and associated storm drainage improvements,
                                water improvements, sanitary sewer
                                improvements, natural gas line improvements and
                                electric line improvements, all within the
                                proposed district, shall be constructed; and
                                directing that notice of a hearing on the
                                provisional order be given
                                Relating to Albuquerque, New Mexico Special
191-1991 12-16-91  Not_Included Assessment District No. 218; modifying,
                                confirming and approving the assessment roll
                                for such district
 
 
 
Notes
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
1992 Resolutions
Res. No. Date Disposition Short Title
Res. No. Date    Disposition    Short Title
                                Relating to the city of Albuquerque, New Mexico
                                joint water and sewer system revenue bonds,
                                series 1992 to be issued to extend, enlarge,
                                better, repair, replace and otherwise improve
                                the city's joint water and sewer system;
1-1992   1-24-92  Not_Included  providing the terms and form of the series 1992
                                bonds, the price to be paid by the original
                                purchaser for the series 1992 bonds and other
                                details concerning the series 1992 bonds;
                                approving documents relating to the series 1992
                                bonds; making certain appropriations; and
                                ratifying certain actions previously taken
                                Relating to Albuquerque, New Mexico, Special
                                Assessment District No. 217, street improvement
                                bonds, subseries A, issue of January 1, 1992
                                and water and sewer improvement bonds, sub-
                                series B, issue of January 1, 1992;
                                establishing the principal amount, maturity
                                dates, the rate of interest thereon and price
2-1992   1-24-92  Not_Included  with respect to the bonds in accordance with
                                Ordinance No. 54-1991; establishing the final
                                rate of interest of unpaid assessments in
                                accordance with Ordinance No. 55-1991; making
                                appropriations of proceeds of the bonds and for
                                payment of debt service on the bonds; ratifying
                                certain actions heretofore taken; and repealing
                                all action inconsistent with this resolution
                                Establishing the legislative policy of the city
3-1992   1-10-92  Not_Included  of Albuquerque for the 1992 legislative session
                                of the New Mexico state legislature
                                Determining that the building or structure at
                                906 Walter S.E. within the city limits of
4-1992   1-21-92  Not_Included  Albuquerque, New Mexico, is so ruined, damaged,
                                and dilapidated as to be a menace to the public
                                comfort, health, peace, or safety and that it
                                be required to be removed
                                Determining that a certain building or
                                structure at 423 Fourth Street S.W., within the
5-1992   1-21-92  Not_Included  city limits of Albuquerque, New Mexico is so
                                ruined, damaged, and dilapidated as to be a
                                menace to the public comfort, health, peace, or
                                safety and that it be required to be removed
                                Determining that the building or structure at
                                414 Wheeler S.E. within the city limits of
6-1992   1-21-92  Not_Included  Albuquerque, New Mexico, is so ruined, damaged,
                                and dilapidated as to be a menace to the public
                                comfort, health, peace, or safety and that it
                                be required to be removed
                                Determining that two buildings or structures at
                                521 Aztec Road N.W. within the city limits of
7-1992   1-21-92  Not_Included  Albuquerque, New Mexico, are so ruined,
                                damaged, and dilapidated as to be a menace to
                                the public comfort, health, peace, or safety
                                and that they be required to be removed
                                Appropriating funds to the Bernalillo County
                                information systems services project in the
8-1992   1-21-92  Not_Included  city/county information systems projects fund
                                for data processing services provided to
                                Bernalillo County
                                Adopting the Los Griegos Design Overlay Zone
9-1992   1-21-92 1-10-20        and related design regulations and amending the
                                Los Griegos Neighborhood Development Plan
                                Directing the Solid Waste Management Department
10-1992  1-21-92  Not_Included  to construct and operate an intermediate
                                processing facility
                                Directing the Solid Waste Management Department
11-1992  1-21-92 4-3-32         to establish a residential commingled curbside
                                recycling program
                                Amending the Albuquerque/Bernalillo County
12-1992  1-21-92 1-2-1          comprehensive plan map in order to designate
                                tracts A and B, Thunderbird Partnership as
                                being located in the developing urban area
                                Appropriating metropolitan redevelopment funds
13-1992  1-21-92  Not_Included  for the implementation of redevelopment program
                                in metropolitan redevelopment areas
                                Ratifying, confirming, and approving the filing
                                of the attached grant application for a grant
14-1992  1-21-92  Not_Included  with the New Mexico Energy, Minerals and
                                Natural Resources Department; and providing for
                                an appropriation to the city of Albuquerque
                                Police Department
                                Approving an additional five year period of tax
                                increment financing for project XXXIII of the
                                Alvarado Metropolitan Redevelopment Area and
15-1992  1-21-92 1-12-1, 1-12-2 Project VIII of the Railroad Metropolitan
                                Redevelopment Area and requesting other
                                participating governmental units for similar
                                approval for both projects
                                Authorizing the Mayor to enter into a contract
                                agreement with the state of New Mexico, and
16-1992  1-21-92  Not_Included  providing for an appropriation to the Human
                                Services Department, for enhancements to the
                                drug treatment system
                                Approving and authorizing the filing of the
                                attached grant application for a comprehensive
17-1992  1-21-92  Not_Included  improvement assistance program grant with the
                                United States Department of Housing and Urban
                                Development and providing for an appropriation
                                to the Human Services Department
                                Setting an official list of regular City
18-1992  1-21-92  Not_Included  Council meetings from March, 1992 through
                                February, 1993
                                Amending Resolution 137-1991 by providing a
19-1992  1-21-92  Not_Included  change in the date for completion of
                                recommendations on animal control issues from
                                the citizen's working group
                                Establishing a technical advisory committee to
20-1992  1-28-92  Not_Included  investigate the feasibility of city generation
                                of electrical power for municipal consumption;
                                and requiring a report
                                Relating to Albuquerque, New Mexico, Special
                                Assessment District No. 218, street improvement
                                bonds, subseries A, issue of February 1, 1992
                                and water and sewer improvement bonds,
                                subseries B, issue of February 1, 1992;
                                establishing the principal amount, maturity
                                dates, the rate of interest thereon and price
21-1992  2-7-92   Not_Included  with respect to the bonds in accordance with
                                Ordinance No. 01-1992; establishing the final
                                rate of interest on unpaid assessments in
                                accordance with Ordinance No. 60-1991; making
                                appropriations of proceeds of the bonds and for
                                payment of debt service on the bonds; ratifying
                                certain actions heretofore taken; and repealing
                                all action inconsistent with this resolution
                                Appropriating funds for the purpose of
22-1992  1-28-92  Not_Included  providing an operating budget for the joint
                                city/county unification charter study committee
                                Amending Resolution 176-1991 (being Resolution
                                462 of the Ninth Council) which established
23-1992  2-3-92   Not_Included  city policy to proceed as soon as possible with
                                construction of the Montano Bridge; rescinding
                                section 2 which requires the Mayor to undertake
                                certain studies
                                Directing city to research and proceed to
                                judicial resolution of issues necessary to
24-1992  2-3-92   Not_Included  evaluate condemnation of electric distribution
                                facilities; making an appropriation; and
                                requiring progress report to the City Council
                                Relating to Albuquerque, New Mexico Special
                                Assessment District No. 219; setting the time
25-1992  2-10-92  Not_Included  and place of an assessment hearing when
                                objections to the assessment roll for such
                                district will be heard
 
Res. No. Date Disposition Short Title
Res. Date Disposition Short Title
No.
                      Relating to the city of Albuquerque, New Mexico, hospital system revenue
                      refunding bonds, 1992 series A (Presbyterian Healthcare Services) in an
                      aggregate original principal amount of $50,300,000 and hospital system revenue
                      bonds, 1992 series B (Presbyterian Healthcare Services) in an aggregate original
     2-               principal amount of $16,000,000; establishing the purchase price, principal
26-  20-   Not        amounts, interest rates, maturities and other terms of each series of the bonds;
1992 92   Included    providing for the deposit of proceeds of the bonds; authorizing the execution of
                      and approving certain documents relating to the bonds and the distribution of an
                      official statement; determining the sufficiency of payments from the project and
                      by Presbyterian Healthcare Services to pay the debt service on the bonds and to
                      pay all costs of or relating to the project; and ratifying certain actions
                      heretofore taken
                      Requesting the Albuquerque Open Space Advisory Board to consider the possibility
27-  3-    Not        of establishing a joint City/County Open Space Advisory Board with the County of
1992 10-  Included    Bernalillo and to consider entering into a joint powers agreement with the
     92               County of Bernalillo for the acquisition, administration, and operation of open
                      space lands; and reporting to the City Council and County Commission
28-  3-    Not        Approving an authorizing the filing of the attached grant application for an air
1992 10-  Included    pollution control grant with the Environmental Protection Agency; and providing
     92               for an appropriation to the Environmental Health Department
29-  3-    Not        Relating to the city of Albuquerque, New Mexico general obligation bonds;
1992 10-  Included    increasing the initial appropriation of funds to pay principal and interest in
     92               fiscal year 1992
30-  3-               Approving the South Barelas Industrial Park Metropolitan Redevelopment Plan for
1992 10-  1-6-10      the Barelas Metropolitan Redevelopment Area as a policy guide for redevelopment
     92               of the area
     3-               Appropriating funds to the General Services Department city/county building
31-  10-   Not        operation and maintenance program for maintenance and related equipment for the
1992 92   Included    audio/visual system of the Council/Commission chambers in the Albuquerque/
                      Bernalillo County Government Center
32-  3-    Not        Approving and authorizing the filing of an application with the U.S. Department
1992 10-  Included    of Transportation for a section 3 grant to purchase up to five compressed
     92               natural gas, rubber wheeled trolleys
     3-               Repealing Resolution R-408, Enactment No. 145-1991 and directing the City
33-  10-   Not        Attorney to dismiss the declaratory judgment action on the issue of the
1992 92   Included    constitutionality of the separate voter approval of the consolidation of the
                      city and county governments
34-  3-
1992 20-  4-3-14      Adopting the facilities plan for reservoir siting
     92
35-  3-    Not        Amending the facility plan: electric service transmission and subtransmission
1992 20-  Included    facilities (1985-1995)
     92
36-  3-
1992 20-  6-1-3       Proposing five year goals for the city of Albuquerque
     92
     3-               Approving the authorizing the filing of the attached grant application for a
37-  23-   Not        Section 302(a) planning assistance for states and urban areas grant with the
1992 92   Included    U.S. Department of Commerce, economic development administration; and providing
                      for an appropriation to the operating grant fund
38-  3-    Not        Adjusting fiscal year 1992 appropriations for certain programs to provide for a
1992 23-  Included    reorganization of recreation programs
     92
     4-               Requesting the New Mexico congressional delegation to sponsor special
39-  10-   Not        legislation allowing the city of Albuquerque to return a landfill acquired from
1992 92   Included    the Department of the Interior, Bureau of Land Management, for other developable
                      lands
40-  4-    Not        Approving and authorizing the filing of the attached grant application for funds
1992 16-  Included    under the emergency medical services fund act with the New Mexico Health and
     92               Environment Department and providing for an appropriation to the Fire Department
41-  4-    Not        Directing the Environmental Health Department to establish a permanent household
1992 16-  Included    hazardous waste collection center
     92
42-  4-    Not        Establishing a conflict resolution panel to develop an interim electric service
1992 16-  Included    contract with public service company of New Mexico
     92
     4-               Determining that the building or structure at 400 Rosemont N.E. within the city
43-  27-   Not        limits of Albuquerque, New Mexico, is so ruined, damaged, and dilapidated as to
1992 92   Included    be a menace to the public comfort, health, peace, or safety and that it be
                      required to be removed
     4-               Determining that the building or structure at 4601 Crest Avenue S.E. within the
44-  27-   Not        city limits of Albuquerque, New Mexico, is so ruined, damaged, and dilapidated
1992 92   Included    as to be a menace to the public comfort, health, peace, or safety and that it be
                      required to be removed
45-  4-    Not        Appropriating funds to the Department of Finance and Management, Treasury
1992 27-  Included    Division to perform U.S. West Communications telephone utility franchise tax
     92               audit
46-  4-    Not        Amending the adopted capital implementation program of the city of Albuquerque
1992 27-  Included    by supplementing current appropriations and changing the scope of existing
     92               projects
47-  4-    Not
1992 27-  Included    Establishing a process to create a shared vision for the city of Albuquerque
     92
                      Amending Resolution 120-1991 by changing all references to “committee” to “task
     5-               force,” by clarifying that city employees and public members may serve on the
48-  12-   Not        task force, by deleting consideration of the sites proposed at the University of
1992 92   Included    New Mexico and the Old Albuquerque Indian School, by extending the date that a
                      report reviewing the Performing Arts Center is due, and by requiring two interim
                      reports
49-  5-               Adopting recommendations of the Water Conservation Task Force as to both short-
1992 12-  4-3-15      term and long-term water conservation strategy for the city of Albuquerque;
     92               calling for early modeling of the geohydrology of the Albuquerque basin
50-  1-               Establishing a policy to seek efficiency in city government activities; creating
1992 22-  3-1-3       a procedure for initiating government efficiency audits and management studies;
     92               and providing an appropriation for consultant assistance
 
Res. No. Date Disposition Short Title
Res. No. Date    Disposition   Short Title
51-1992  5-12-92  Not_Included Declaring a parcel of land as not essential for
                               municipal purposes and approving of its disposal
                               Appropriating funds of $33,000 to the grant fund
                               (265) to accommodate the city of Albuquerque
52-1992  5-12-92  Not_Included Planning Department's expenses of finalizing the
                               East Mountain Area Plan for the county of
                               Bernalillo
                               Adopting the city of Albuquerque community
                               development block grant housing rehabilitation
                               loan program guidelines; establishing duties and
                               responsibilities of the Housing Advisory and
                               Appeals Committee with relation to the housing
                               rehabilitation loan program guidelines;
53-1992  5-12-92  Not_Included providing for a waiver of the guidelines for
                               sub-recipient agencies receiving community
                               development funds; calling for sub-recipients to
                               establish their own guidelines and appeal
                               process; repealing Resolution No. 48, Enactment
                               74-1986; and repealing Resolution No. 222,
                               Enactment 25-1987* Repealed by Resolution No.
                               88-2001.
                               Authorizing declarations of official intent with
                               respect to reimbursements from note and bond
54-1992  5-12-92  Not_Included proceeds of temporary advances made for capital
                               expenditures, and related matters; and declaring
                               an emergency
                               The assignment of a street name to the unnamed
55-1992  5-12-92  Not_Included segment of the roadway being constructed by the
                               Uptown Loop Road Project
                               Approving and authorizing the filing of the
                               attached application for a foster grandparent
56-1992  5-12-92  Not_Included grant with the state action office and the New
                               Mexico State Agency on Aging; and providing for
                               an appropriation to the Department of Community
                               Services
                               Approving and authorizing the filing of the
                               attached application for a senior companion
57-1992  5-12-92  Not_Included grant with action, including funds allocated by
                               the state agency on aging, and providing for an
                               appropriation to the Department of Human
                               Services
                               Approving and authorizing the filing of the
58-1992  5-12-92  Not_Included attached application for an RSVP action grant
                               and providing for an appropriation to the
                               Department of Human Services
                               Supplementing Resolution No. 208-1984, as
                               amended by Resolution No. 69-1984 and by
                               Resolution No. 50-1988, Special Assessment
                               District Steps and Policies; stating the policy
                               of the city to limit expenditures of city funds
                               on construction of improvements in a special
                               assessment district until after completion of
59-1992  5-14-92  Not_Included the assessment hearing on the assessment roll
                               for each special assessment district and after
                               adoption of the resolution responding to
                               protests received at the assessment hearing; and
                               providing that special assessment districts will
                               become a part of the city capital improvement
                               program planning and budgetary process; Repealed
                               by Ordinance 44-1996
                               Relating to and creating Albuquerque, New
                               Mexico, Special Assessment District No. 221;
                               determining the advisability of constructing,
60-1992  5-14-92  Not_Included and the type and character of, certain streets
                               and associated storm drainage, sanitary sewer,
                               water, natural improvements therein and
                               directing the City Clerk to call for sealed bids
                               on such improvements
                               Approving and authorizing the filing of the
                               attached grant application for community D.W.I.
61-1992  5-26-92  Not_Included prevention fund with the state of New Mexico
                               Highway and Transportation Department, and
                               providing for an appropriation to the
                               Corrections and Detention Department
                               Amending the adopted capital implementation
62-1992  5-29-92  Not_Included program of the city of Albuquerque by approving
                               new projects, supplementing and consolidating
                               existing projects
                               Appropriating funds for operating the government
63-1992  5-29-92  Not_Included of the city of Albuquerque for the fiscal year
                               beginning July 1, 1992 and ending June 30, 1993
                               Appropriating funds in the parks and General
                               Services Department for operating the
64-1992  5-29-92  Not_Included Albuquerque/Bernalillo County Government and Law
                               Enforcement Centers for the fiscal year
                               beginning July 1, 1992 and ending June 30, 1993
                               Appropriating funds in the Corrections and
                               Detention Department for operating the
65-1992  5-29-92  Not_Included Bernalillo County corrections and detention
                               facility for the fiscal year beginning July 1,
                               1992 and ending June 30, 1993
                               Determining that the building or structure at
                               12901 Central Avenue N.E. within the city limits
66-1992  5-29-92  Not_Included of Albuquerque, New Mexico is so ruined,
                               damaged, and dilapidated as to be a menace to
                               the public comfort, health, peace, or safety and
                               that it be required to be removed
                               Superseding Resolution No. 27-1992 relating to
                               the establishment of a joint City/County Open
67-1992  6-8-92   Not_Included Space Advisory Board and joint powers agreement
                               for open space lands; making certain technical
                               corrections
                               Approving and authorizing the filing of the
                               attached grant application for basic state
68-1992  6-8-92   Not_Included grant-in-aid grant with the New Mexico state
                               library; and providing for an appropriation to
                               the Albuquerque public library
69-1992  6-8-92   Not_Included Extending the moratorium on approval of signs
                               near the proposed Sunport Boulevard
                               Approving and authorizing the filing of the
                               attached application for a summer food service
70-1992  6-8-92   Not_Included program for children with the New Mexico Health
                               Department, Public Health Division, and
                               providing for an appropriation to the Community
                               Services Department
                               Authorizing the Mayor to execute a contract
71-1992  6-8-92   Not_Included agreement with the New Mexico Department of
                               Human Services and providing an appropriation to
                               the Human Services Department
                               Authorizing the filing of a grant application
                               for a Hope I Planning Grant with the United
72-1992  6-8-92   Not_Included States Department of Housing and Urban
                               Development and providing for an appropriation
                               to the Community Services Department
                               Approving the final statement of community
                               development objectives and projected use of
                               funds for the community development program for
73-1992  6-8-92   Not_Included the city of Albuquerque for the fiscal year
                               1992-93 and authorizing the Mayor to prepare and
                               submit a grant application to the federal
                               government, and providing for an appropriation
                               to the community development fund
                               Authorizing the Mayor to execute a grant
74-1992  6-8-92   Not_Included agreement with the New Mexico Department of
                               Human Services and providing an appropriation to
                               the Human Services Department
                               Authorizing the Mayor to execute a grant
75-1992  6-8-92   Not_Included agreement with the U.S. Department of Housing
                               and Urban Development and providing an
                               appropriation to the Human Services Department
 
Res. No. Date Disposition Short Title
Res. No. Date    Disposition   Short Title
                               Amending the current zoning, Map 14, of the Nob
76-1992  6-8-92  1-7-32        Hill Sector Development Plan for Lots 1 and 2,
                               Mesa Grande Addition from SU-1 for a church to
                               SU-2/CCR
                               Determining that the building or structure at
                               12821 Dorado Drive S.E. within the city limits
77-1992  6-8-92   Not_Included of Albuquerque, New Mexico, is so ruined,
                               damaged, and dilapidated as to be a menace to
                               the public comfort, health, peace, or safety and
                               that it be required to be removed
78-1992  6-8-92   Not_Included Appropriating funds for hepatitis B vaccination
                               and post-exposure evaluation and follow-up
                               Amending the SU-2/CCR community/residential land
79-1992  6-8-92  1-7-32        use category within Section 3.B. of the Nob Hill
                               Sector Development Plan
                               Relating to Albuquerque, New Mexico Special
80-1992  6-8-92   Not_Included Assessment District No. 219; modifying,
                               confirming and approving the assessment roll for
                               such district
81-1992  6-9-92  4-1-7         Calling for the presentation of annual employee
                               safety awards by the City Council
                               Requesting preparation and implementation of a
                               waste reduction and recycling program for
82-1992  6-9-92  2-3-11        Albuquerque's municipal government facilities;
                               establishing an employee recycling committee;
                               and requiring semi-annual reports
                               Establishing a pro-environmental quality
                               economic growth policy, supporting a positive
83-1992  6-9-92  3-9-2         business climate and expanded diversified
                               employment opportunities; requiring an annual
                               report
                               Authorizing and appropriating funds for a
                               comprehensive study on the social, economic and
                               other impacts of city/county unification, the
84-1992  6-17-92  Not_Included formation of a separate county within the
                               boundaries of Bernalillo County and moving
                               portions of the county into other counties, as
                               recommended by the joint City/County Unification
                               Charter Study Committee
                               Approving and authorizing a grant under the New
                               Mexico Litter Control and Beautification Act
85-1992  6-30-92  Not_Included with the New Mexico State Highway Department;
                               and providing for an appropriation to the city
                               of Albuquerque Solid Waste Department
                               Approving and authorizing the filing of an
                               application with the U.S. Department of
                               Transportation for three separate Section 9
86-1992  6-30-92  Not_Included grants: a capital assistance grant, an operating
                               assistance grant, and a planning assistance
                               grant under the Federal Transit Act of 1991, as
                               amended; and providing for an appropriation to
                               the Transit and Parking Department
                               Approving and authorizing a professional
                               services contract between the New Mexico
                               Environment Department, the University of New
87-1992  6-30-92  Not_Included Mexico, and the city of Albuquerque; and
                               appropriating funds to the Public Works
                               Department, wastewater utility program, to
                               develop a waste minimization pilot program
                               Amending policies governing water and sewer
88-1992  6-30-92 3-5-17        system extension and expansion both inside and
                               outside the city limits; adding an exception
                               Establishing a task force to study and make
89-1992  7-2-92   Not_Included recommendations on how to address the graffiti
                               and inhalant abuse problems associated with
                               canned spray paint
                               Requesting the city's conflict resolution panel
90-1992  7-8-92   Not_Included to continue negotiations with public service
                               company of New Mexico regarding an agreement in
                               principle; and requiring a report
                               Superseding R-55-1992 relative to the assignment
91-1992  7-9-92  6-1-1         of a street name to the unnamed segment of the
                               roadway being constructed by the Uptown Loop
                               Road project; making a technical correction
92-1992  7-9-92   Not_Included Approving the fiscal year 1993 audit plan as
                               submitted by the internal audit committee
                               Determining that the building or structure at
                               1025 11th Street N.W. within the city limits of
93-1992  7-9-92   Not_Included Albuquerque, New Mexico is so ruined, damaged,
                               and dilapidated as to be a menace to the public
                               comfort, health, peace, or safety and that it be
                               required to be removed
                               Determining that the building or structure at
                               425 Louisiana Boulevard S.E. within the city
94-1992  7-9-92   Not_Included limits of Albuquerque, New Mexico is so ruined,
                               damaged, and dilapidated as to be a menace to
                               the public comfort, health, peace, or safety and
                               that it be required to be removed
95-1992  7-9-92  1-10-21       Adopting and mapping the Unser Boulevard Design
                               Overlay Zone
                               Authorizing the giving of notice for bids for
                               the sale of city of Albuquerque, New Mexico
96-1992  7-9-92   Not_Included general obligation bonds consisting of
                               $23,355,000 general purpose bonds, Series 1992B
                               and $12,120,000 storm sewer bonds, Series 1992C
97-1992  7-10-92  Not_Included Appropriating funds for Sun Van service in the
                               Transit and Parking Department
                               Rescinding Resolution No. R-399 which ordered
98-1992  7-28-92  Not_Included the removal of the building at 5601 Bluewater
                               N.W.
                               Amending Resolution 99-1986, of the city water
                               and sewer extension policies relating to
                               provision of city wastewater collection and
99-1992  7-28-92  Not_Included treatment services to Sandia Heights, increasing
                               the area and number of units that may be served
                               in the Sandia Peak Tram Company service area;
                               mandating review and proposed amendment of the
                               Subareas Master Plan
100-1992 7-28-92  Not_Included Determining reasonable notice of public meetings
                               of the Council
 
Res. No. Date Disposition Short Title
Res. Date Disposition Short Title
No.
                      Relating to the issuance and sale of $35,475,000 city of Albuquerque, New
                      Mexico general obligation bonds consisting of $23,355,000 general purpose
                      bonds, Series 1992B and $12,120,000 storm sewer bonds, Series 1992C for the
101- 8-    Not        following purposes: street improvements, facilities and equipment, parks and
1992 24-  Included    recreation, library, police, and storm sewer; providing for the award and
     92               sale of the bonds to the original purchaser and the price to be paid by the
                      original purchaser for the bonds; providing the terms and form of the bonds
                      and other details concerning the bonds; approving documents relating to the
                      bonds; and ratifying certain actions previously taken
102- 8-    Not        Approving and authorizing the filing of the attached grant application for
1992 12-  Included    an air pollution control grant with the Environmental Protection Agency; and
     92               providing for an appropriation to the Environmental Health Department
103- 8-    Not        Extending the deadline for reporting the feasibility of a Joint Open Space
1992 12-  Included    Advisory Board between the city of Albuquerque and the county of Bernalillo
     92
104- 8-    Not        Making an appropriation to repay funds borrowed from the basic services tax
1992 12-  Included    for public works infrastructure purposes
     92
105- 8-    Not        Rescinding Resolution No. 61, Enactment No. 77-1992, which ordered the
1992 12-  Included    condemnation and removal of the building located at 12821 Dorado Drive, S.E.
     92
     8-               Determining that the building or structure at 1208½ Broadway Boulevard S.E.
106- 12-   Not        within the city limits of Albuquerque, New Mexico is so ruined, damaged, and
1992 92   Included    dilapidated as to be a menace to the public comfort, health, peace, or
                      safety and that it be required to be removed
107- 8-    Not        Rescinding Resolution No. 475, Enactment No. 7-1992, which ordered the
1992 12-  Included    condemnation and removal of the buildings at 521 Aztec Road, N.W.
     92
108- 8-    Not        Adopting one-year objectives for the city of Albuquerque, which objectives
1992 12-  Included    are to help implement the adopted five-year goals of the city
     92
     8-               Determining that the building or structure at 1315 1st Street N.W. within
109- 12-   Not        the city limits of Albuquerque, New Mexico is so ruined, damaged, and
1992 92   Included    dilapidated as to be a menace to the public comfort, health, peace, or
                      safety and that it be required to be removed
110- 8-
1992 12-  1-10-22     Adopting and mapping the Sunport Boulevard Design Overlay Zone
     92
111- 9-3-  Not        Amending Bill No. C/S R-22, which addresses the greater Albuquerque Economic
1992 92   Included    Action Council, to eliminate funding for an Economic Development Planner
     8-               Repealing Resolution 344 (Enactment 69-1989), Resolution 72-1990 (Enactment
112- 24-   Not        49-1990), and C/S Resolution 222-1990 (Enactment 155-1990) which established
1992 92   Included    a policy on expansion of utilities and development approvals within the
                      boundaries of the Petroglyph National Monument
113- 8-    Not        Appropriating funds for the purpose of providing a latch key program at Lew
1992 24-  Included    Wallace Elementary School
     92
                      Relating to $6,400,000 city of Albuquerque, New Mexico floating/fixed rate
114- 8-    Not        revenue bonds (Charter Medical New Mexico, Inc. Project) Series 1984;
1992 24-  Included    authorizing a supplemental indenture No. 3, a third amendment to lease
     92               agreement and a revised form of bond; and approving certain actions to be
                      taken in connection therewith
115- 8-    Not
1992 24-  Included    Approving the 1992 transportation program for the Albuquerque urban area
     92
     8-               Amending the boundaries of the Alvarado Metropolitan Redevelopment Area, the
116- 27-  1-12-1      Project XVII, 8th and Central Commercial Project metropolitan redevelopment
1992 92               area boundaries and the Project XVII, 8th and Central Commercial Project
                      metropolitan redevelopment plan
                      Establishing a strategy for business and economic development for greater
                      Albuquerque; creating and delineating the duties and responsibilities of an
     8-               oversight, coordination and implementation council known as the Greater
117- 17-  2-2-1       Albuquerque Economic Action Council; establishing an economic development
1992 92               goals-setting and reporting process; establishing a process for addressing
                      economic development opportunities and obstacles; undertaking planning
                      processes for economic development; superseding and repealing Resolution 62-
                      1989
118- 8-
1992 27-  1-11-3      Adopting the Rank Two East Mountain Area Plan
     92
     8-               Appropriating funds to the zoo (Cultural and Recreational Services
119- 27-   Not        Department) for the purpose of providing additional parking and planning a
1992 92   Included    new exhibit while record attendance periods are being experienced and
                      projected to continue through fiscal year 1993
120- 8-    Not        Providing for the appropriation of state funds to the Corrections and
1992 27-  Included    Detention Department for the purpose of creating an alternative sentencing
     92               facility pilot program for D.W.I. Offenders
                      Accepting state funding for North and South Valley water and wastewater
121- 8-    Not        projects, appropriating said funding, appropriating companion city funds
1992 27-  Included    from joint water/sewer revenues, approving grant agreements between the city
     92               and the New Mexico Environment Department, and amending the adopted capital
                      implementation program of the city of Albuquerque
122- 8-    Not        Approving and authorizing the filing of the attached grant application for
1992 27-  Included    basic state grant-in-aid grant with the New Mexico State Library; and
     92               providing for an appropriation to the Albuquerque Public Library
123- 8-    Not        Calling for Westside planning, establishing a time schedule for completion
1992 27-  Included    of work items
     92
124- 8-    Not        Adopting an interim joint powers agreement relating to zoning authority
1992 27-  Included    outside the Albuquerque municipal boundaries; directing a process for
     92               developing a permanent agreement on the same subject
125- 9-               Amending the Downtown Core Revitalization Strategy, which includes a sector
1992 30-  1-4-1       development plan for an urban center
     92
 
Res. No. Date Disposition Short Title
Res. Date Disposition Short Title
No.
126-                  Not used
1992
127- 9-    Not        Appointing Tim Kline to the Board of Directors of the New Mexico Municipal
1992 30-  Included    League
     92
     9-               Amending the Urban Enhancement Trust Fund 1992-1993 plan, which is part of
128- 30-   Not        the city's capital improvement program, and appropriating funds for the
1992 92   Included    purpose of commemorating the Columbus quincentennial through an artistic
                      program
129- 9-    Not        Making an appropriation to the Albuquerque Children's Museum for emergency
1992 30-  Included    operational support
     92
130- 9-    Not        Appropriating additional funds to the Legal Department for the special
1992 30-  Included    municipal election to be held on Tuesday, December 8, 1992, on the question
     92               of adopting an amendment to the city charter
131- 9-    Not        Calling for a report on the history and growth of the Albuquerque Museum and
1992 30-  Included    a plan for the museum's future programs
     92
132- 9-    Not        Authorizing the Mayor to execute a grant agreement with the U.S. Department
1992 30-  Included    of Housing and Urban Development and providing an appropriation to the
     92               Community Services Department
133- 9-    Not        Appropriating funds in the Corrections and Detention Department for
1992 30-  Included    operating the Bernalillo County corrections and detention facility for the
     92               fiscal year beginning July 1, 1992 and ending June 30, 1993
     9-               Defining an affordable housing policy; setting a comprehensive housing
134- 30-  3-4-3       affordability strategy; and restructuring responsibilities and membership of
1992 92               the affordable housing committee; and repealing R-463, Enactment No. 181-
                      1989
                      Approving the industrial development bond entitled Southwest Airlines Co.
                      Albuquerque Reservations Center Project (IRB-1992-02), and declaring the
                      city of Albuquerque's intent to issue industrial development bonds in an
135- 10-   Not        amount up to $6,000,000 in connection with a proposed project located
1992 2-92 Included    approximately 1,400 feet south of the intersection of Clark Carr Boulevard,
                      S.E. and Access road “D,” in Albuquerque, New Mexico, for the purpose of
                      inducing Southwest Airlines Co. or its successors or assigns, to develop the
                      project site in the manner set forth in the plan
136- 10-   Not        Rescinding Resolution No. 67, Enactment No. 92-1992, which ordered the
1992 2-92 Included    condemnation and removal of the building located at 425 Louisiana S.E.
                      Ratifying, confirming and approving the filing of a grant application with
137- 10-   Not        the New Mexico State Office on Aging for Title III Older Americans Act Funds
1992 2-92 Included    and HB-2 laws 1992 funds; and providing for an appropriation to the
                      Department of Community Services, Senior Affairs Division
138- 10-  1-1-11      Adopting policies for SU-1 for bed and breakfast establishments in
1992 2-92             residential areas
139- 10-   Not        Fixing Tuesday, December 8, 1992, as the date for a special election to be
1992 6-92 Included    held on the question of adopting an amendment to the city charter
140- 10-   Not        Authorizing the Mayor to execute a grant agreement with the New Mexico
1992 15-  Included    Department of Children, youth and families and providing an appropriation to
     92               the Department of Community Services
     10-              Approving and authorizing the filing of a grant application for a food
141- 15-   Not        service program for children with the New Mexico Department of Community
1992 92   Included    Services and providing for an appropriation to the Community Services
                      Department
     10-              Determining that the building or structure at 1615 Edith S.E. (front unit),
142- 15-   Not        within the city limits of Albuquerque, New Mexico is so ruined, damaged, and
1992 92   Included    dilapidated as to be a menace to the public comfort, health, peace, or
                      safety and that it be required to be removed
     10-              Determining that the building or structure at 416 Coal S.W. within the city
143- 15-   Not        limits of Albuquerque, New Mexico is so ruined, damaged, and dilapidated as
1992 92   Included    to be a menace to the public comfort, health, peace, or safety and that it
                      be required to be removed
     10-              Determining that the building or structure at 1606 John St. S.E., within the
144- 15-   Not        city limits of Albuquerque, New Mexico is so ruined, damaged, and
1992 92   Included    dilapidated as to be a menace to the public comfort, health, peace, or
                      safety and that it be required to be removed
     10-              Determining that the building or structure at 800 and 804 Knox Ct. N.E.,
145- 15-   Not        within the city limits of Albuquerque, New Mexico is so ruined, damaged, and
1992 92   Included    dilapidated as to be a menace to the public comfort, health, peace, or
                      safety and that it be required to be removed
     10-              Formally acknowledging the receipt and review of the municipal water
146- 15-   Not        pollution prevention (MWPP) environmental audit of the Public Works
1992 92   Included    Department, wastewater collection and treatment system, required by the
                      Environmental Protection Agency (EPA)
147- 10-   Not        Authorizing the Mayor to execute a grant agreement with the U.S. Department
1992 15-  Included    of Health and Human Services and providing an appropriation to the Community
     92               Services Department
     10-              Ratifying, confirming, and approving the filing of the attached grant
148- 15-   Not        application under the drug control and system improvement formula grant with
1992 92   Included    the state of New Mexico Department of Public Safety; and providing for an
                      appropriation to the city of Albuquerque Police Department
     10-              Determining that the building or structure at 408 Tennessee Street S.E.,
149- 15-   Not        within the city limits of Albuquerque, New Mexico is so ruined, damaged, and
1992 92   Included    dilapidated as to be a menace to the public comfort, health, peace, or
                      safety and that it be required to be removed
150- 10-              Creating the city of Albuquerque - Bernalillo County constructed wetlands
1992 16-  2-8-1       study group, charging the study group with a work program, and calling for
     92               reports
 
Res. No. Date Disposition Short Title
Res. No. Date     Disposition   Short Title
                                Determining that a certain building or
                                structure at 419 Manuel Avenue S.W., within the
151-1992 10-16-92  Not_Included city limits of Albuquerque, New Mexico is so
                                ruined, damaged, and dilapidated as to be a
                                menace to the public comfort, health, peace, or
                                safety and that it be required to be removed
                                Determining that a certain building or
                                structure at 6335 Central N.W., within the city
152-1992 10-16-92  Not_Included limits of Albuquerque, New Mexico is so ruined,
                                damaged, and dilapidated as to be a menace to
                                the public comfort, health, peace, or safety
                                and that it be required to be removed
                                Determining that the building or structure at
                                1734 Griegos N.W., within the city limits of
153-1992 10-16-92  Not_Included Albuquerque, New Mexico is so ruined, damaged,
                                and dilapidated as to be a menace to the public
                                comfort, health, peace, or safety and that it
                                be required to be removed
                                Providing for an appropriation to the Police
154-1992 10-23-92  Not_Included Department for the reimbursement of damaged
                                vehicles and vehicular equipment
                                Approving and authorizing the filing of the
                                attached application for a food service program
155-1992 10-23-92  Not_Included for children with the New Mexico Health and
                                Environmental, Public Health Division, and
                                providing for an appropriation to the Community
                                Services Department
                                Adding a representative of the N.M. Association
156-1992 10-23-92 2-2-1         of Commerce and Industry to the Greater
                                Albuquerque Economic Action Council
157-1992 11-3-92   Not_Included Providing for the appropriation of federal and
                                state forfeiture funds to the Police Department
                                Authorizing the Mayor to execute a contract
158-1992 11-3-92   Not_Included agreement with the New Mexico Department of
                                Human Services and providing an appropriation
                                to the Community Services Department
                                Adopting an amended interim joint powers
                                agreement relating to zoning authority outside
159-1992 11-6-92   Not_Included the Albuquerque municipal boundaries;
                                continuing the process for developing a
                                permanent agreement on the same subject
                                Rescinding Resolution No. 25, Enactment No. 44-
160-1992 11-13-92  Not_Included 1992, which ordered the condemnation and
                                removal of the building located at 4601 Crest
                                Avenue S.E.
                                Rescinding Resolution No. 75, Enactment No. 93-
161-1992 11-13-92  Not_Included 1992, which ordered the condemnation and
                                removal of the building located at 1025 11th
                                St. N.W.
                                Determining that the building or structure at
                                1103 Barelas S.W. within the city limits of
162-1992 11-13-92  Not_Included Albuquerque, New Mexico is so ruined, damaged,
                                and dilapidated as to be a menace to the public
                                comfort, health, peace, or safety and that it
                                be required to be removed
                                Determining that the building or structure at
                                709 Kathryn S.E. within the city limits of
163-1992 11-13-92  Not_Included Albuquerque, New Mexico is so ruined, damaged,
                                and dilapidated as to be a menace to the public
                                comfort, health, peace, or safety and that it
                                be required to be removed
                                Establishing a policy of resolving conflict
                                promptly, equitably, at the lowest possible
164-1992 11-13-92 3-1-4         administrative level, and at the least cost to
                                taxpayers, through the systematic and
                                appropriate use of alternative dispute
                                resolution (ADR)
                                Authorizing the submission of an application
165-1992 11-13-92  Not_Included for one hundred and sixty three units of
                                turnkey I public housing
                                Approving and authorizing the filing of the
                                attached grant application for a water
166-1992 11-13-92  Not_Included pollution control research grant with the
                                Environmental Protection Agency; and providing
                                for an appropriation to the Public Works
                                Departments
                                Appropriating funds to the following programs:
                                Planning Department's code administration
                                program (fund 110), the transfer to vehicle/
                                equipment replacement fund program (fund 110),
167-1992 11-13-92  Not_Included and the vehicle/equipment replacement program
                                (fund 730) from additional revenue to be
                                realized from the implementation of the re-
                                roofing permit and inspection process and from
                                additional revenues to be realized from re-
                                estimated code administration fees
                                Authorizing the Mayor to execute a grant
                                agreement with the U.S. Department of Health
168-1992 11-13-92  Not_Included and Human Services and providing an
                                appropriation to the Department of Community
                                Services
                                Amending amended Exhibit A of Resolution No.
169-1992 11-11-92  Not_Included 139-1992, special municipal election
                                resolution, by changing the locations for
                                certain polling places
170-1992 11-23-92  Not_Included Adopting the fiscal years 1993-1994 multi-year
                                planning program
                                Establishing city policy for the imposition of
171-1992 11-30-92  Not_Included commercial ground transportation fees and the
                                adoption of the commercial lane traffic study
                                for Albuquerque International Airport
                                Appropriating $45,207 to the operating grants
172-1992 11-30-92  Not_Included fund (265) to perform services under a tree
                                planting grant from the state of New Mexico;
                                approving a related joint powers agreement
                                Setting an official list of regular City
173-1992 11-30-92  Not_Included Council meetings from December 1992 through
                                December 1993
                                Establishing a legislative policy for the city
174-1992 11-30-92  Not_Included of Albuquerque for the 1993 session of the New
                                Mexico legislature
                                Amending the adopted capital implementation
                                program of the city of Albuquerque by approving
175-1992 11-30-92  Not_Included new projects, supplementing current
                                appropriations and changing the scope of
                                existing projects
 
Res. No. Date Disposition Short Title
Res. No. Date     Disposition   Short Title
                                Relating to the city of Albuquerque, New
                                Mexico, Sisters of Charity Health Care System
176-1992 12-14-92  Not_Included Hospital revenue adjustable rate tender
                                securities (ARTS), (St. Joseph Healthcare
                                System Project) Series 1992
                                Authorizing the Council Services Department to
177-1992 12-14-92  Not_Included enter into a contract to hire an attorney to
                                review the Walker and Jackson lawsuit
                                Ratifying, confirming, and approving the filing
                                of the attached grant application for a state
                                traffic safety education and enforcement fund
178-1992 12-17-92  Not_Included grant with the state of New Mexico Department
                                of Highway and Transportation, Bureau of
                                Traffic Safety; and providing for an
                                appropriation to the city of Albuquerque Police
                                Department
                                Determining that the building or structure at
                                843 Sunset Dr. S.W., within the city limits of
179-1992 12-18-92  Not_Included Albuquerque, New Mexico is so ruined, damaged,
                                and dilapidated as to be a menace to the public
                                comfort, health, peace, or safety and that it
                                be required to be removed
                                Adjusting fiscal year 1992 appropriations for
180-1992 12-18-92  Not_Included certain programs to provide for actual
                                expenditures
                                Changing the reporting date of R-490,
181-1992 12-18-92  Not_Included concerning electricity generation for municipal
                                operations, to March 1, 1993
                                Authorizing the removal of certain
182-1992 12-18-92  Not_Included uncollectible accounts from the city's accounts
                                receivable records
 
 
 
Notes
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
1993 Resolutions
Res. No. Date Disposition Short Title
Res. No. Date    Disposition   Short Title
                               Relating to the city of Albuquerque, New Mexico,
                               Special Assessment District No. 219, street
                               improvement bonds, Subseries A, issue of January
                               1, 1993, water and sewer improvement bonds,
                               Subseries B, issue of January 1, 1993, and
                               electric and natural gas improvement bonds,
                               Subseries C, taxable issue of January 1, 1993;
                               establishing the maturity dates and rate of
1-1993   1-6-93   Not_Included interest thereon and approving a bond purchase
                               agreement and other documents in accordance with
                               City Ordinance Enactment No. 58-1992;
                               establishing the final rate of interest on
                               unpaid assessments in accordance with City
                               Ordinance Enactment No. 25-1992; making
                               appropriations of proceeds of the bonds and for
                               payment of debt service on the bonds; ratifying
                               certain actions heretofore taken; and repealing
                               all action inconsistent with this resolution
2-1993   1-11-93  Not_Included Making an appropriation to the Police Department
                               for the purpose of combatting graffiti vandalism
                               Making an appropriation to the Community
3-1993   1-11-93  Not_Included Services Department for the City Office of Anti-
                               Graffiti Coordination
                               Determining that the building or structure at
                               2410 B Rice N.W., within the city limits of
4-1993   1-13-93  Not_Included Albuquerque, New Mexico, is so ruined, damaged
                               and dilapidated as to be a menace to the public
                               comfort, health, peace or safety and that it be
                               required to be removed
                               Approving and authorizing the filing of a grant
                               application for a certified local government
5-1993   1-13-93  Not_Included grant with the State Historic Preservation
                               Office and providing an appropriation for the
                               Planning Department
6-1993   1-13-93  Not_Included Appropriating metropolitan redevelopment funds
                               for the construction of a downtown parking lot
7-1993   1-13-93  Not_Included Appropriating funds from the state fire fund to
                               the Albuquerque Fire Department
                               Approving and authorizing the filing of the
                               attached grant application for an urban library
8-1993   1-13-93  Not_Included resources grant with the New Mexico State
                               Library; and providing for an appropriation to
                               the Albuquerque/Bernalillo County Library System
                               Approving and authorizing the filing of the
                               attached grant application for an interlibrary
9-1993   1-13-93  Not_Included cooperation and resource sharing grant with the
                               New Mexico State Library; and providing for an
                               appropriation to the Albuquerque/ Bernalillo
                               County Library System
                               Approving and authorizing the filing of the
                               attached grant application for a library
10-1993  1-13-93  Not_Included literacy grant through the United States
                               Department of Education and providing for an
                               appropriation to the South Broadway Cultural
                               Center
                               Approving and authorizing the filing of the
                               attached grant application for a Section 302(a)
                               planning assistance for states and urban areas
11-1993  1-25-93  Not_Included grant with the U.S. Department of Commerce,
                               Economic Development Administration; and
                               providing for an appropriation to the operating
                               grant fund
                               Addressing the health care benefit system in New
12-1993  1-25-93  Not_Included Mexico, in the city's legislative policy for the
                               1993 session of the New Mexico legislature
13-1993  1-25-93  Not_Included Providing for a one-time city residential refuse
                               rebate
                               Creating a task force to investigate and make
14-1993  1-25-93  Not_Included recommendations on creating affordable housing
                               and infrastructure related to Resolution R-210
                               of the Tenth Council
15-1993  1-25-93  Not_Included Appropriating funds for the purpose of emergency
                               street repairs
                               Appropriating funds for the purpose of
16-1993  1-27-93  Not_Included contracting an assistant lobbyist to serve the
                               city during the 1993 session of the New Mexico
                               legislature
                               Adjusting fiscal year 1992 appropriations for
17-1993  1-27-93  Not_Included certain programs to provide for actual
                               expenditures
                               Expanding the scope of Council Resolution No.
                               44-1992 (Being R-313 of the 9th Council)
18-1993  1-27-93  Not_Included appropriating funds to the Community Services
                               Department, city housing fund for housing
                               related projects
                               Determining that the building or structure at
                               507 Veranda N.W. within the city limits of
19-1993  2-3-93   Not_Included Albuquerque, New Mexico, is so ruined, damaged,
                               and dilapidated as to be a menace to the public
                               comfort, health, peace, or safety and that it be
                               required to be removed
                               Determining that the building or structure at
                               1828 Rio Grande N.W., within the city limits of
20-1993  2-3-93   Not_Included Albuquerque, New Mexico, is so ruined, damaged,
                               and dilapidated as to be a menace to the public
                               comfort, health, peace, or safety and that it be
                               required to be removed
                               Appropriating funds to the Bernalillo County
                               Information Systems Services project in the
21-1993  2-3-93   Not_Included city/county information systems project fund for
                               data processing services provided to Bernalillo
                               County
                               Appropriating funds to the Community Services
22-1993  2-3-93   Not_Included Department for the purpose of supplementing
                               existing youth and family drug prevention in
                               targeted areas of Albuquerque
                               Approving and authorizing the filing of the
                               attached grant application for a ride sharing
23-1993  2-3-93   Not_Included program with the federal highway administration
                               and the New Mexico State Highway and
                               Transportation Department; and providing for an
                               appropriation to the Public Works Department
24-1993  2-3-93   Not_Included Providing an appropriation to the Department of
                               Community Services
                               Determining that a certain building or structure
                               at 156 Griegos Road N.W., within the city limits
25-1993  2-4-93   Not_Included of Albuquerque, New Mexico is so ruined,
                               damaged, and dilapidated as to be a menace to
                               the public comfort, health, peace, or safety and
                               that it be required to be removed
 
Res. No. Date Disposition Short Title
Res. Date Disposition Short Title
No.
26-  3-4- 3-5-40      Changing the frequency of progress reports from the Public Works Department to
1993 93               the City Council on flood control projects
27-  3-4-  Not        Addressing the lodgers' tax law in the city of Albuquerque's legislative policy
1993 93   Included    for the 1993 session of the New Mexico legislature
28-  3-    Not        Approving and authorizing the filing of an application with the U.S. Department
1993 10-  Included    of Transportation for a Section 20 human resource grant to implement a mechanic
     93               certification training program
     3-               Changing the name of the Advisory Committee on Transit for the elderly and the
29-  10-  2-7-1       handicapped, a subcommittee of the Transit Citizens Advisory Board, to the
1993 93               “Advisory Committee on Transit for the Mobility Impaired;” and repealing
                      Resolution No. 147-1976
30-  3-               Requesting the Solid Waste Management Department to increase the frequency of
1993 23-  4-3-32      collection of its curbside recycling program to once per week
     93
31-  3-    Not        Calling for mediated negotiations between the city of Albuquerque and the Pueblo
1993 23-  Included    of Isleta concerning the Pueblo's stream standards for the Rio Grande
     93
32-  3-               Calling for the city of Albuquerque's sponsorship of the Lovelace Duke City
1993 23-  6-8-2       Marathon as part of the city's special events programming
     93
33-  3-    Not        Appropriating funds in the general fund for the operation of the Bernalillo
1993 23-  Included    County corrections and detention facility
     93
     3-               Determining that the building or structure at 1724 Walter S.E., within the city
34-  23-   Not        limits of Albuquerque, New Mexico, is so ruined, damaged and dilapidated as to
1993 93   Included    be a menace to the public comfort, health, peace or safety and that it be
                      required to be removed
                      Approving the programming of funds and projects for the 1993-2002 decade capital
35-  4-2-  Not        improvements program including the 1993 two-year capital improvements budget,
1993 93   Included    approving policies governing the general obligation bond and revenue bond
                      funding
     3-               Amending the city's capital improvements program by making appropriations for
36-  23-   Not        new projects, incorporating the urban enhancement trust fund 1994-1995 two-year
1993 93   Included    plan for the urban enhancement trust fund and appropriating funds for the two-
                      year plan's projects
     4-               Determining that the building or structure at 2309 John Street, S.E., within the
37-  12-   Not        city limits of Albuquerque, New Mexico, is so ruined, damaged and dilapidated as
1993 93   Included    to be a menace to the public comfort, health, peace or safety and that it be
                      required to be removed
38-  5-4-  Not        Providing for a freeze on filling vacant positions in the general fund and in
1993 93   Included    funds dependent on the general fund, except with regard to certain positions in
                      public safety and in emergency situations
     4-               Determining that the building or structure at 2008 Hinkle S.E., within the city
39-  30-   Not        limits of Albuquerque, New Mexico, is so ruined, damaged and dilapidated as to
1993 93   Included    be a menace to the public comfort, health, peace or safety and that it be
                      required to be removed
40-  4-    Not        Appropriating housing and economic development trust funds for the
1993 30-  Included    implementation of a low and moderate income housing program in the Barelas
     93               Community Development Area
41-  4-               Amending Bill No. 165 (Enactment No. 150-1992) to add a representative of the
1993 30-  2-8-1       Pueblo Office of Environmental Protection of the Allindian Pueblo Council to the
     93               Constructed Wetlands Study Group
42-  4-    Not        Amending the adopted capital implementation program of the city of Albuquerque
1993 30-  Included    by approving new projects, supplementing current appropriations and changing the
     93               scope of existing projects
43-  4-    Not        Appropriating metropolitan redevelopment funds for the implementation of
1993 30-  Included    redevelopment program in metropolitan redevelopment areas
     93
     4-               Approving and authorizing the filing of the attached cooperative agreement for a
44-  30-   Not        gang resistance education and training grant with the United States Department
1993 93   Included    of Treasury, Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco and Firearms and providing for an
                      appropriation to the city of Albuquerque Police Department
     5-               Formally acknowledging the receipt and review of the municipal water pollution
45-  24-   Not        prevention (MWPP) environmental audit of the Public Works Department, wastewater
1993 93   Included    collection and treatment system, required by the Environmental Protection Agency
                      (EPA)
46-  5-    Not        Authorizing the Mayor to execute a contract agreement with the New Mexico
1993 24-  Included    Department of Human Services and providing an appropriation to the Community
     93               Services Department
47-  5-    Not        Approving and authorizing the filing of a grant application for a certified
1993 24-  Included    local government grant with the State Historic Preservation Office and providing
     93               an appropriation for the Planning Department
48-  5-    Not        Adopting one-year objectives for the city of Albuquerque for fiscal year 1994,
1993 24-  Included    which objectives are to help implement the adopted five-year goals of the city
     93
49-  5-    Not        Repealing Resolution 493, Enactment No. 24-1992, directing the city to research
1993 24-  Included    and proceed to judicially resolve certain issues necessary to evaluate
     93               condemnation of the electric distribution facilities
50-  5-               Adopting the High Desert Sector Development Plan as a Rank 3 Sector Development
1993 26-  1-7-37      Plan, establishing the zoning, and adopting a design overlay zone, all as
     93               specified in the High Desert Sector Development Plan
 
Res. No. Date Disposition Short Title
Res. No. Date    Disposition   Short Title
                               Appropriating funds to the Office of Internal
51-1993  5-26-93  Not_Included Audit for the purpose of creating an internal
                               auditor position to perform contract compliance
                               audits
                               Requesting the Public Safety Advisory Board to
                               examine the impact of new state D.W.I.
52-1993  5-26-93  Not_Included legislation on city government operations;
                               monitor implementation of new D.W.I.
                               initiatives; present reports to the Mayor and
                               City Council
                               Rescinding Resolution No. 142, Enactment No.
53-1993  6-2-93   Not_Included 145-1992, which ordered the condemnation and
                               removal of the building located at 800 and 804
                               Knox Ct., N.E.
                               Amending the adopted capital implementation
54-1993  6-2-93   Not_Included program of the city of Albuquerque by approving
                               new projects, supplementing and consolidating
                               existing projects
                               Adopting a joint powers agreement relating to
55-1993  6-2-93   Not_Included zoning authority outside the Albuquerque
                               municipal boundaries
                               Amending the Albuquerque/Bernalillo County
56-1993  6-2-93  1-2-1         comprehensive plan boundaries consistent with
                               recommendations of the North Valley Area Plan
                               Authorizing the submission of a grant
                               application for a community D.W.I. prevention
57-1993  5-28-93  Not_Included fund with the state of New Mexico Highway and
                               Transportation Department, and providing for an
                               appropriation to the Community Service
                               Department
                               Approving and authorizing the filing of an
                               application with the U.S. Department of
                               Transportation for congestion mitigation and air
58-1993  6-2-93   Not_Included quality funds under the Section 9 program of the
                               Federal Transit Act of 1991, as amended; and
                               providing for an appropriation to the Transit
                               and Parking Department
                               Appropriating funds to the water and wastewater
59-1993  6-2-93   Not_Included enterprise fund for the purpose of compensating
                               for the water conservation fee imposed by the
                               state through Senate Bill 391
60-1993  6-2-93  1-11-4        Adopting the North Valley Area Plan as a Rank 2
                               area plan
                               Relating to and setting the terms of the city of
                               Albuquerque, New Mexico retirement center
                               revenue and refunding revenue bonds (La Vida
                               Llena project) Series 1993 in the aggregate
                               principal amount of $50,236,000 to be issue to
                               finance the refunding, payment and exchange of
                               the city's $41,975,000 retirement center
61-1993  6-18-93  Not_Included refunding revenue bonds (La Vida Llena project),
                               Series 1987 and to finance certain improvements;
                               setting the price to be paid by the original
                               purchaser for the Series 1993 bonds; providing
                               other details concerning the Series 1993 bonds;
                               approving documents relating to the Series 1993
                               bonds; and ratifying certain actions previously
                               taken
                               Appropriating funds in the Corrections and
                               Detention Department for operating the
62-1993  6-4-93   Not_Included Bernalillo County corrections and detention
                               facility for the fiscal year beginning July 1,
                               1993 and ending June 30, 1994
                               Appropriating funds in the Parks and General
                               Services Department for operating the
63-1993  6-4-93   Not_Included Albuquerque/Bernalillo County Government and Law
                               Enforcement Centers for the fiscal year
                               beginning July 1, 1993 and ending June 30, 1994
                               Addressing difficulties at the Bernalillo County
                               detention center, limiting the number of
                               residents at the facility, authorizing a study
64-1993  6-4-93   Not_Included to identify options to reduce overcrowding and
                               to evaluate personnel issues, accreditation, and
                               management effectiveness, and making an
                               appropriation
                               Appropriating funds for operating the government
65-1993  6-4-93   Not_Included of the city of Albuquerque for the fiscal year
                               beginning July 1, 1993 and ending June 30, 1994
                               Appropriating funds for computer equipment to
                               maintain compatibility between the city of
66-1993  6-7-93   Not_Included Albuquerque and the Middle Rio Grande Council of
                               Governments computer networks to assure
                               continued support to the city of Albuquerque
                               Determining that the building or structure at
                               701 Stagecoach S.E., within the city limits of
67-1993  6-18-93  Not_Included Albuquerque, New Mexico, is so ruined, damaged
                               and dilapidated as to be a menace to the public
                               comfort, health, peace or safety and that it be
                               required to be removed
                               Adopting the Quintessence Sector Development
68-1993  6-18-93 1-7-38        Plan as a Rank 3 Sector Development Plan and
                               establishing the zoning, as specified in the
                               Quintessence Sector Development Plan
                               Approving the Barelas Neighborhood Commercial
                               Area Revitalization and Metropolitan
69-1993  6-18-93 1-6-11        Redevelopment Plan for the Barelas Metropolitan
                               Redevelopment Area, as a policy guide for
                               redevelopment of the South Fourth Street
                               Commercial Area
                               Approving the final statement of community
                               development objectives and projected use of
                               funds for the community development program for
70-1993  6-18-93  Not_Included the city of Albuquerque for the fiscal year
                               1993-94 and authorizing the Mayor to prepare and
                               submit a grant application to the federal
                               government providing for an appropriation to the
                               community development fund
                               Implementing Article XI, Section 7, of the
                               Albuquerque city charter requiring a public vote
71-1993  6-18-93  Not_Included on the Performing Arts Center; requesting the
                               City Clerk to place the question of the
                               Performing Arts Center on the ballot at the
                               October 5, 1993 municipal election
                               Approving and authorizing the filing of an
                               application with the U.S. Department of
                               Transportation for a Section 9 capital
72-1993  6-18-93  Not_Included assistance grant, and a Section 9 operating
                               assistance grant under the Federal Transit Act
                               of 1991, as amended; and providing for an
                               appropriation to the Transit and Parking
                               Department
73-1993  6-18-93 1-7-37        Repealing Section 5 of Resolution 50-1993,
                               concerning the High Desert Sector Plan
                               Adopting the 1993 Barelas Sector Development
74-1993  6-18-93 1-7-39        Plan and amending the SU-2 zoning in the sector
                               development plan area
                               Adopting the WM1 alternative, study
                               recommendations, environmental documentation,
                               and planning policy for implementing the Unser
75-1993  6-18-93  Not_Included Middle Transportation Corridor, consisting of
                               limited access, principal arterials on the west
                               alignment for the Unser Boulevard and the middle
                               escarpment crossing, mesa top alignment No. 1
                               for Paseo del Norte
 
Res. No. Date Disposition Short Title
Res. No. Date    Disposition   Short Title
                               Concerning a municipal bond election at the
                               regular municipal election to be held in the
                               city of Albuquerque on October 5, 1993;
                               submitting to a vote of the qualified,
                               registered electors and non-resident municipal
                               electors at such election certain questions for
                               authorizing the issuance of general obligation
76-1993  6-23-93  Not_Included bonds in varying principal amounts and for
                               specified public purposes; providing the form of
                               the bond questions, the emergency and absentee
                               paper ballots therefor and the designation
                               clause for such questions on voting machines;
                               providing for notice of the election;
                               prescribing other details in connection with
                               such election and bonds; and ratifying action
                               previously taken in connection therewith
                               Concerning the regular municipal election to be
77-1993  6-23-93  Not_Included held in the city of Albuquerque, New Mexico, on
                               Tuesday, the fifth day of October, 1993
                               Relating to the city of Albuquerque, New Mexico
                               revenue refunding bonds (the Evangelical
                               Lutheran Good Samaritan Society project), Series
                               1993 in the aggregate principal amount of
                               $6,975,000; establishing the purchase price,
                               principal amount, interest rates, maturities and
                               other terms of the bonds; providing for the
78-1993  6-23-93  Not_Included deposit of proceeds of the bonds; authorizing
                               the execution of and approving certain documents
                               relating to the bonds and the distribution of an
                               official statement; determining the sufficiency
                               of payments from the project and by the society
                               to pay the debt service on the bonds and to pay
                               all costs of or relating to the project; and
                               ratifying certain actions previously taken
                               Approving participation in public employees
79-1993  6-23-93 4-1-20        retirement association municipal general member
                               coverage plan 3; calling for an election and 75
                               assumption of member contributions
                               Appropriating funds in the lodgers tax fund to
                               the Parks and General Services Department for
80-1993  6-25-93  Not_Included the Albuquerque Hispano Chamber of Commerce,
                               Inc. for the purpose of promoting and assisting
                               in the development of the New Mexico Hispanic
                               Cultural Center
                               Accepting state funding for North and South
                               Valley water and wastewater projects,
                               appropriating said funding, approving grant
81-1993  6-25-93  Not_Included agreements between the city and the Department
                               of Finance and Administration, Local Government
                               Division, and amending the adopted capital
                               implementation program of the city of
                               Albuquerque
                               Approving and authorizing a grant under the New
                               Mexico Litter Control and Beautification Act
82-1993  6-25-93  Not_Included with the New Mexico State Highway Department;
                               and providing for an appropriation to the city
                               of Albuquerque Solid Waste Department
                               Approving and authorizing the filing of the
                               attached application for a foster grandparent
83-1993  6-25-93  Not_Included grant with the State Action Office and the New
                               Mexico State Agency on Aging; and providing for
                               an appropriation to the Department of Community
                               Services
84-1993  6-25-93  Not_Included Approving the fiscal year 1994 audit plan as
                               submitted by the Internal Audit Committee
                               Approving and authorizing the filing of the
                               attached application for a senior companion
85-1993  6-25-93  Not_Included grant with action, including funds allocated by
                               the State Agency on Aging, and providing for an
                               appropriation to the Department of Community
                               Services
                               Amending the adopted capital implementation
86-1993  6-25-93  Not_Included program of the city of Albuquerque by approving
                               new projects for the purpose of accounting for
                               Special Assessment Districts
87-1993  6-25-93 4-5-2         Adopting the human needs strategic plan for
                               Albuquerque/Bernalillo County
                               Mandating high quality in site development type
88-1993  6-30-93 1-1-12        plans approved by the city; creating panel;
                               requiring report
                               Approving the industrial development project
                               entitled Trend Plastics, Inc. project (IRB-1993-
                               02), and declaring the city of Albuquerque's
                               intent to issue industrial development bonds in
89-1993  6-30-93  Not_Included an amount not to exceed $3,425,000 in connection
                               with a proposed project located at 8501
                               Washington, N.E., in Albuquerque, New Mexico,
                               for the purpose of inducing Trend Plastics, Inc.
                               or its successors or assigns, to develop the
                               project site in the manner set forth in the plan
                               Approving and authorizing the filing of the
90-1993  6-30-93  Not_Included attached application for an RSVP action grant
                               and providing for an appropriation to the
                               Department of Community Services
91-1993  6-30-93  Not_Included Requesting that the Arts Board have a work of
                               art created to honor Cesar Chavez
                               Amending Resolution No. 67-1982 as amended by
                               Resolution No. 64-1987, concerning the list of
92-1993  6-30-93 6-5-2         those city parks at which drinking of alcoholic
                               beverages is permitted; adding the crossroads
                               pedestrian mall as such a park under specific
                               conditions
                               Appropriating metropolitan redevelopment funds
93-1993  6-30-93  Not_Included for the acquisition of property to be used for a
                               housing project
94-1993  6-30-93 6-7-1         Dedicating the trail on Tramway Boulevard in
                               honor of John Ramsey
                               Establishing graffiti removal teams in all areas
95-1993  7-29-93 4-6-5         of the city; appropriating funds to the
                               neighborhood coordination program for the Office
                               of Anti-Graffiti; requiring a report
                               Ratifying, confirming, and approving the filing
                               of the attached grant application under the drug
                               control and system improvement formula grant
96-1993  7-29-93  Not_Included with the state of New Mexico Department of
                               Public Safety; and providing for an
                               appropriation to the city of Albuquerque Police
                               Department for the continuation of the drug
                               abuse resistance education (D.A.R.E.) program
97-1993  7-29-93  Not_Included Determining reasonable notice of public meetings
                               of the Council
                               Commending the Shared Vision Process,
98-1993  7-29-93  Not_Included establishing its relationship to city goals and
                               objectives; defining and accepting the action
                               program for implementation
                               Approving the application for Job Training
                               Partnership Act funds, discretionary grant funds
99-1993  7-29-93  Not_Included and income generating activities; and providing
                               for an appropriation to the Department of
                               Community Services
 
Res. No. Date Disposition Short Title
Res. Date Disposition Short Title
No.
100- 7-
1993 29-  1-11-5      Adopting the Trails and Bikeways Facility Plan as a Rank Two Facility Plan
     93
     7-               Approving and authorizing the filing of the attached application for a summer
101- 29-   Not        food service program for children with the New Mexico Children, Youth and
1993 93   Included    Families Department and providing for an appropriation to the Community
                      Services Department
     7-               Approving and authorizing the filing of the attached grant application for
102- 29-   Not        funds under the Emergency Medical Services Fund Act with the New Mexico Health
1993 93   Included    and Environment Department and providing for an appropriation to the Fire
                      Department
103- 7-    Not        Authorizing the Mayor to execute a grant agreement with the U.S. Department of
1993 29-  Included    Health and Human Services and providing an appropriation to the Community
     93               Services Department
104- 7-    Not        Authorizing the Mayor to submit a grant application to the federal government
1993 29-  Included    and providing for an appropriation to the Community Services Department
     93
105- 7-    Not
1993 29-  Included    Providing for an appropriation to the Department of Community Services
     93
     7-               Approving and authorizing the filing of the attached grant application for
106- 29-   Not        funds under the Emergency Medical Services Fund Act with the New Mexico Health
1993 93   Included    and Environment Department and providing for an appropriation to the UNM
                      School of Medicine Department of Emergency/Medicine Bow
107- 8-2-  Not        Appropriating funds for the purpose of conducting a disparity study to ensure
1993 93   Included    that the goals of the city's minority and women's business enterprises program
                      are consistent with federal law
                      Adopting the “ten-year comprehensive neighborhood development plan for housing
108- 8-2- 3-4-4       and economic development in the pocket of poverty” and appropriating funds for
1993 93               the purpose of facilitating an early payback of the Albuquerque Plaza UDAG
                      loan
109- 8-    Not        Providing an appropriation to the Planning Department's code administration
1993 10-  Included    program in order to comply with the Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA)
     93
                      Accepting state funding for extension of sewer lines and sewer hookups to the
     8-               Alameda Community Center located in Bernalillo County, appropriating said
110- 10-   Not        funding, appropriating companion city funds from joint water/sewer revenues,
1993 93   Included    approving grant agreement between the city and the New Mexico Environment
                      Department, and amending the adopted capital implementation program of the
                      city of Albuquerque
111- 8-               Adopting the bosque action plan as a Rank Two Facility Plan and adopting
1993 10-  1-11-6      standards for management of the Rio Grande Valley State Park
     93
     8-               Approving and authorizing the filing of the attached grant application for
112- 10-   Not        developing a photovoltaic specifications guidebook for local and state
1993 93   Included    governments grant with the urban consortium energy task force; and providing
                      for an appropriation to the Parks and General Services Department
     8-               Establishing policy to continue our existing decentralized vehicle emissions
113- 20-   Not        testing program; urging support from the county of Bernalillo the Albuquerque/
1993 93   Included    Bernalillo County Air Quality Control Board, and the New Mexico congressional
                      delegation
114- 8-    Not        Adopting an intergovernmental agreement between the city of Albuquerque and
1993 10-  Included    the county of Bernalillo; establishing the Albuquerque/ Bernalillo County
     93               D.W.I. Planning Council according to state law; and requiring an annual report
115- 8-    Not        Appropriating funds to reinstate the Police Department's school detectives
1993 25-  Included    program for high schools in the Albuquerque public schools system
     93
116- 8-    Not        Appropriating funds for the purpose of providing a latch key program at Acoma
1993 25-  Included    Elementary School
     93
117- 8-    Not        Approving and authorizing the execution of amendments to UDAG loan documents
1993 25-  Included    between the city of Albuquerque and Albuquerque Plaza Partners and related
     93               approvals and authorizations
118- 8-    Not        Making an appropriation to the Police Department for the purpose of combatting
1993 25-  Included    graffiti vandalism
     93
119- 8-    Not        Rescinding Resolution No. 206, Enactment No. 150-1990, which ordered the
1993 25-  Included    condemnation and removal of the buildings at 315 and 317 Princeton S.E.
     93
120- 8-    Not        Adopting a joint powers agreement between the city of Albuquerque, Bernalillo
1993 25-  Included    County, the Commissioner of Public Lands and AMAFCA for the remediation of the
     93               former South Eubank Landfill
     8-               Determining that the building or structure at 426 Towner A, B, and C, N.W.,
121- 25-   Not        within the city limits of Albuquerque, New Mexico, is so ruined, damaged and
1993 93   Included    dilapidated as to be a menace to the public comfort, health, peace or safety
                      and that it be required to be removed
122- 8-    Not        Adopting policy for the use of alternative dispute resolution (ADR) concerning
1993 25-  Included    site-specific land use issues
     93
123- 8-               Amending the Martineztown/Santa Barbara Sector Development Plan to provide a
1993 25-  1-7-35      zoning classification, SU-2 PR, for off-site reserved parking
     93
124- 8-    Not        Appropriating funds to the Transit and Parking Department for an analysis of
1993 25-  Included    an improved transit system between downtown and the west side setting policy
     93               on future funding
     8-               Approving the filing of a grant application with the New Mexico State Office
125- 25-   Not        on Aging for Title III Older Americans Act Funds and HB-2 laws 1993 funds; and
1993 93   Included    providing for an appropriation to the Department of Community Services, Senior
                      Affairs Division
 
Res. No. Date Disposition Short Title
Res. Date Disposition Short Title
No.
126- 8-    Not
1993 25-  Included    Providing for an appropriation to the Department of Community Services
     93
127- 8-
1993 31-  4-6-4       Adopting an implementation plan for the Performing Arts Center
     93
                      Amending Exhibit “A” of Resolution No. 77-1993, concerning the regular
128- 9-3-  Not        municipal election to be held in the city of Albuquerque, New Mexico, on
1993 93   Included    Tuesday, the fifth day of October, 1993, by splitting consolidated
                      Precinct No. 46
                      Amending Exhibit A of Resolution No. 76-1993, concerning the municipal
129- 9-3-  Not        bond election to be held in the city of Albuquerque, New Mexico, on
1993 93   Included    Tuesday, the fifth day of October, 1993, by splitting consolidated
                      Precinct No. 46
                      Appropriating funds for fiscal year 1994, from the unreserved general fund
130- 9-7-  Not        balance to the legal services program of the Legal Department, for the
1993 93   Included    development and coordination of alternative dispute resolution (ADR)
                      through the office of the ADR Coordinator
                      Increasing sworn personnel positions of the Albuquerque Police Department;
131- 9-7-  Not        appropriating funds for salaries; reallocating existing appropriation for
1993 93   Included    vehicles/equipment for the city's additional sworn police staff for fiscal
                      year 1994; modifying Resolution 65-1993 (F/S R-249 of the Tenth Council)
132- 9-7-             Amending Bill R-152 (Enactment No. 150-1992) to add a representative of
1993 93   2-8-1       the village of Los Ranchos to the Constructed Wetlands Study Group and to
                      change the due date of the final report
133- 9-7-             Approving participation in public employees retirement association
1993 93   4-1-21      municipal general member coverage plan 3 and 75 pick-up of member
                      contributions
134- 9-9-  Not        Adopting the fiscal year 1994-1995 multi-year program
1993 93   Included
                      Requiring administration to research and report to Council on local
135- 10-   Not        franchising or municipal regulatory authority under the Cable Television
1993 1-93 Included    Consumer Protection and Competition Act of 1992; and requiring the city to
                      submit the appropriate form for regulatory certification
136- 9-    Not        Setting an official list of regular City Council meetings from October,
1993 29-  Included    1993 through December, 1994
     93
137- 9-               Approving participation in public employees retirement association
1993 29-  4-1-22      municipal general member coverage plan 3 and 75 pick-up of member
     93               contributions
138- 9-    Not
1993 29-  Included    Approving the 1994 Transportation Program for the Albuquerque urban area
     93
139- 9-    Not        Providing for the appropriation of state funds to the Corrections and
1993 29-  Included    Detention Department for the purpose of continuing an alternative
     93               sentencing facility pilot program for D.W.I. offenders
     9-               Approving and authorizing the filing of the attached grant application for
140- 29-   Not        a foreign language materials acquisition grant from the United States
1993 93   Included    Department of Education; and providing for an appropriation to the
                      Albuquerque Public Library System
141- 9-    Not        Authorizing the Mayor to submit a grant application to the federal
1993 29-  Included    government and providing for an appropriation to the Department of
     93               Community Services
142- 10-   Not        Authorizing the Mayor to execute a grant agreement with the U.S.
1993 14-  Included    Department of Housing and Urban Development and providing an appropriation
     93               to the Community Services Department
143- 10-   Not        Authorizing the submission of an application for one hundred and fifty-one
1993 14-  Included    units of turnkey public housing
     93
144- 10-   Not        Approving and authorizing the acceptance of state of New Mexico Law
1993 14-  Included    Enforcement Protection Act and crime lab funds; and providing for an
     93               appropriation to the Albuquerque Policy Department
145- 10-              Determining reasonable notice of public meetings of the Council and
1993 14-  3-2-4       Council committees
     93
146- 10-   Not
1993 14-  Included    Assigning the area annexed by Ordinance 33-1993 to Council District 4
     93
147- 10-   Not        Providing for the appropriation of federal and state forfeiture funds to
1993 14-  Included    the Police Department
     93
148- 10-   Not        Fixing Tuesday, November 9, 1993 as the date of the runoff election and
1993 14-  Included    specifying the offices to be filled and the names of the candidates
     93               therefor
149- 10-   Not        Appropriating additional funds to the Legal Department for the runoff
1993 14-  Included    election to be held on Tuesday, November 9, 1993
     93
150- 10-              Amending the Albuquerque/Bernalillo County comprehensive plan map to
1993 14-  1-2-1       remove the designation of major public open space for a portion of tract
     93               1-2, High Desert Subdivision
 
Res. No. Date Disposition Short Title
Res. Date Disposition Short Title
No.
151- 10-   Not        Appropriating funds to the Department of Finance and Management (DFM) for
1993 25-  Included    staffing needs in the accounting program
     93
152- 10-   Not        Authorizing the Mayor to execute a grant agreement with the U.S. Department
1993 25-  Included    of Health and Human Services and providing an appropriation to the
     93               Department of Community Services
153- 10-   Not        Appropriating funds for the VET H.E.L.P. Bunkhouse emergency shelter program
1993 25-  Included    at the state fairgrounds during fiscal year 1994
     93
154- 10-   Not        Authorizing the Mayor to execute a grant agreement with the New Mexico
1993 25-  Included    Children, Youth and Families Department and providing an appropriation to
     93               the Department of Community Services
155- 10-              Amending the High Desert Sector Development Plan to correct a mapping error
1993 25-  1-7-37      in land use map 10
     93
156- 10-   Not        Appropriating funds to the Community Services Department for a contract with
1993 25-  Included    the Albuquerque Children's Museum
     93
157- 10-   Not        Authorizing the Mayor to execute a grant agreement with the U.S. Department
1993 25-  Included    of Health and Human Services and providing an appropriation to the
     93               Department of Community Services
158- 10-   Not        Appropriating metropolitan redevelopment funds for the acquisition of
1993 25-  Included    property to be used for a housing project
     93
159- 10-   Not        Authorizing the mayor to execute a grant agreement with the U.S. Department
1993 25-  Included    of Housing and Urban Development and providing an appropriation to the
     93               Department of Community Services
                      Relating to the city of Albuquerque, New Mexico general obligation refunding
                      bonds, Series 1993 to be issued in three series for the purpose of paying,
                      refinancing and refunding the city's outstanding general obligation
                      refunding bonds, Series 1983, and certain of the maturities of the city's
     11-              outstanding weekly adjustable/fixed rate general obligation storm sewer
160- 19-   Not        bonds, Series 1988A, general obligation general purpose bonds, Series 1989,
1993 93   Included    general obligation storm sewer bonds, Series 1989 and general obligation
                      storm sewer bonds, Series 1991B; providing the terms and form of the Series
                      1993 bonds, the price to be paid by the investment bankers for the Series
                      1993 bonds and other details concerning the Series 1993 bonds; approving
                      documents relating to the Series 1993 bonds; making certain appropriations;
                      and ratifying certain actions previously taken
161- 11-   Not        Approving a consolidated application for U.S. Department of Housing and
1993 4-93 Included    Urban Development funds and appropriating funds to the Department of
                      Community Services
162- 11-              Amending the North I-25 Sector Development Plan to clarify the land use and
1993 15-  1-7-30      zoning section as to the uses of Balloon Fiesta Park
     93
163- 11-   Not        Requiring an audit of the books, records, maps, plans and other like
1993 15-  Included    materials of Jones Intercable, Inc. to determine compliance with franchise
     93               ordinance; and making an appropriation
164- 11-              Making certain findings and determinations pursuant to the metropolitan
1993 15-  1-12-10     redevelopment code, declaring the Sawmill Area to be suffering from slum and
     93               blight, and designating the “Sawmill Metropolitan Redevelopment Area”
     11-              Approving and authorizing the filing of the attached grant application for a
165- 15-   Not        water quality research grant with the environmental protection agency; and
1993 93   Included    providing for an appropriation to the Public Works Department, water and
                      wastewater enterprise fund
     11-              Appropriating funds to the city/county building operation and maintenance
166- 15-   Not        program, Parks and General Services Department, to construct a vertical air
1993 93   Included    shaft on the southwest corner of the Albuquerque/Bernalillo County
                      Government Center
167- 11-   Not        Fixing Tuesday, January 11, 1994 as the date for a special election to be
1993 19-  Included    meld on the question of adopting an amendment to the city charter
     93
168- 11-   Not        Establishing a negotiation team to resolve the U.S. West Communications,
1993 22-  Included    Inc., franchise fee audit findings and related issues; and requiring a
     93               report
169- 11-   Not        Approving and authorizing the filing of the attached grant application for
1993 24-  Included    an air pollution control grant with the Environmental Protection Agency; and
     93               providing for an appropriation to the Environmental Health Department
170- 11-   Not        Authorizing the Mayor to submit a grant application to the U.S. Department
1993 11-  Included    of Education and providing for an appropriation to the Department of
     93               Community Services
     11-              Approving and authorizing the filing of the attached application for a food
171- 24-   Not        services program for children with the New Mexico Children, Youth and
1993 93   Included    Families Department and providing for an appropriation to the Department of
                      Community Services
     11-              Approving and authorizing the filing of a grant application for a food
172- 24-   Not        services program for children with the New Mexico Department of Human
1993 93   Included    Services and providing for an appropriation to the Department of Community
                      Services
173- 11-   Not        Appropriating additional funds to the Legal Department for the special
1993 24-  Included    election to be held on Tuesday, January 11, 1994, on the question of
     93               adopting an amendment to the city charter
174- 11-   Not        Amending the adopted capital implementation program of the city of
1993 30-  Included    Albuquerque by approving new projects, supplementing current appropriations
     93               and changing the scope of existing projects
                      Approving and authorizing the filing of the attached grant application for a
175- 12-   Not        state traffic safety and education and enforcement fund grant with the state
1993 22-  Included    of New Mexico Department of Highway and Transportation, Bureau of Traffic
     93               Safety and providing for an appropriation to the city of Albuquerque Police
                      Department
 
Res. No. Date Disposition Short Title
Res. No. Date     Disposition   Short Title
176-1993 12-22-93  Not_Included Appointing Steve Gallegos to the Board of
                                Directors of the New Mexico Municipal League
                                Continuing graffiti removal teams in all areas
177-1993 12-22-93  Not_Included of the city; appropriating funds to the
                                neighborhood coordination program for the
                                Office of Anti-Graffiti
                                Adjusting fiscal year 1993 appropriations for
178-1993 12-22-93  Not_Included certain programs to provide for actual
                                expenditures
                                Amending the Huning Castle and Raynolds
                                Addition Neighborhood Sector Development Plan
179-1993 12-22-93 1-7-18        to include the sales of wholesale jewelry,
                                arts, and crafts as a permissive neighborhood
                                use in the SU-2 CLD (Special Neighborhood Zone
                                Commercial/Low Density Apartments)
                                Approving and authorizing the filing of the
                                attached grant application for basic state
180-1993 12-22-93  Not_Included grant-in-aid grant with the New Mexico
                                Department of Health Promotion and providing
                                for an appropriation to the Cultural and
                                Recreational Services Department
                                Authorizing the Mayor to execute a contact
181-1993 12-22-93  Not_Included agreement with the New Mexico Department of
                                Human Services and providing an appropriation
                                to the Department of Community Services
                                Relating to the $103,095,000 city of
                                Albuquerque, New Mexico joint water and sewer
                                system refunding and improvement revenue bonds,
                                Series 1994A to be issued to extend, enlarge,
                                better, repair, replace and otherwise improve
                                the city's joint water and sewer system and to
                                advance refund, in part, the city's outstanding
                                joint water and sewer system revenue bonds,
                                Series 1990A and Series 1990C and $9,365,000
                                city of Albuquerque, New Mexico joint water and
182-1993 2-3-94    Not_Included sewer system taxable refunding revenue bonds,
                                Series 1994B to be issued to advance refund, in
                                part, the city's outstanding joint water and
                                sewer refunding revenue bonds, Series June 15,
                                1984; providing the terms and forms of the
                                bonds, the price to be paid by the original
                                purchaser for the bonds and other details
                                concerning the bonds and the refunding;
                                approving documents relating to the bonds;
                                making certain appropriations; and ratifying
                                certain actions previously taken
 
 
 
Notes
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
1994 Resolutions
Res. No. Date Disposition Short Title
Res. No. Date    Disposition   Short Title
                               Calling for the Public Works Department to
                               conduct trials of methods to increase the pace
1-1994   1-3-94   Not_Included at which infrastructure projects are built; to
                               investigate other methods for achieving the same
                               objective; and to produce a report and make
                               recommendations
                               Establishing an Advisory and Oversight Committee
2-1994   1-3-94  2-8-2         on policy matters concerning the city of
                               Albuquerque and the Middle Rio Grande
                               Conservancy District
                               Approving and authorizing the filing of the
                               attached grant application for a ride sharing
3-1994   1-4-94   Not_Included program with the Federal Highway Administration
                               and the New Mexico State Highway and
                               Transportation Department; and providing for an
                               appropriation to the Public Works Department
                               Appropriating funds to the Albuquerque Police
4-1994   1-4-94   Not_Included Department for a contract with the Albuquerque
                               Police Activities League, Inc. for the purpose
                               of providing youth recreational programs
                               Appropriating funds in the Corrections and
                               Detention Department for operating the
5-1994   1-10-94  Not_Included Bernalillo County corrections and detention
                               facility for the fiscal year beginning July 1,
                               1993 and ending June 30, 1994
                               Authorizing the Mayor to enter into a contract
                               agreement with the state of New Mexico and
6-1994   1-10-94  Not_Included providing for an appropriation to the Community
                               Services Department for enhancements to the
                               substance abuse treatment system
                               Establishing a legislative policy for the city
7-1994   1-20-94  Not_Included of Albuquerque for the 1994 legislative session
                               of the New Mexico legislature
                               Appropriating funds to the capital improvements
8-1994   1-11-94  Not_Included program for the 1993 general obligation bond
                               program
                               Appropriating funds from the New Mexico Energy,
9-1994   1-21-94  Not_Included Minerals, and Natural Resources Department to
                               develop a sustainable recycling infrastructure
                               Approving and authorizing the filing of the
                               attached grant application for a special DWI
                               prevention operations plan grant with the state
10-1994  1-21-94  Not_Included of New Mexico Department of Highway and
                               Transportation, Bureau of Traffic Safety and
                               providing for an appropriation to the city of
                               Albuquerque Police Department
                               Appropriating funds to the Fire Department for
11-1994  1-21-94  Not_Included the purchase and replacement of three rescue
                               units
                               Approving and authorizing the filing of the
                               attached grant application for a federal police
12-1994  1-21-94  Not_Included hiring supplement program grant with the United
                               States Department of Justice, Bureau of Justice
                               Assistance and providing for an appropriation to
                               the city of Albuquerque Police Department
                               Approving and authorizing the filing of the
                               attached grant for a gang resistance education
                               and training grant with the United States
13-1994  1-21-94  Not_Included Department of Treasury, Bureau of Alcohol,
                               Tobacco and Firearms and providing for an
                               appropriation to the city of Albuquerque Police
                               Department
                               Adopting energy policies and strategies for the
14-1994  1-26-94 3-5-1         city of Albuquerque and a method of reporting
                               and updating the policies and strategies on a
                               regular basis
                               Appropriating storm drainage basic services
15-1994  2-1-94   Not_Included funds to the general fund and transferring the
                               basic services revenue to the capital
                               acquisition fund
                               Authorizing the giving of notice for bids for
                               the sale of city of Albuquerque, New Mexico
16-1994  2-22-94  Not_Included general obligation bonds consisting of
                               $72,115,000 general purpose bonds, Series 1994A
                               and $15,000,000 storm sewer bonds, Series 1994B
17-1994  2-10-94  Not_Included Setting policy as to further redesign of the
                               Civic Plaza
                               Appropriating funds for a contract with the
18-1994  2-22-94  Not_Included Middle Rio Grande Conservancy District for the
                               construction and maintenance of public
                               improvements along the Arenal Main Canal
                               Amending Bill Number 153-1993 appropriating
19-1994  2-22-94  Not_Included funds for the Vet Help Bunkhouse Emergency
                               Shelter program at the state fairgrounds during
                               fiscal year 1994
                               Appropriating funds to the Community Services
20-1994  2-22-94  Not_Included Department for the purpose of supplementing
                               existing youth and family drug prevention in
                               targeted areas of Albuquerque
                               Authorizing the Mayor to execute a joint powers
                               agreement with the New Mexico Department of
21-1994  3-11-94  Not_Included Human Services to expand services to the
                               homeless and providing for an appropriation to
                               the Department of Community Services
                               Authorizing declarations of official intent with
                               respect to reimbursements from note and bond
22-1994  3-11-94  Not_Included proceeds of temporary advances made for capital
                               expenditures, repealing Resolution R-50,
                               Enactment No. 54-1992 and related matters
                               Amending the project insurance requirements of
                               the Albuquerque community development block
23-1994  3-11-94  Not_Included grant housing rehabilitation loan program
                               guidelines, which were adopted by Resolution No.
                               56, Enactment No. 53-1992* Repealed by
                               Resolution No. 88-2001.
                               Authorizing the submission of a revised grant
                               application for a community D.W.I. prevention
24-1994  3-11-94  Not_Included fund with the state of New Mexico Highway and
                               Transportation Department, and providing for an
                               appropriation to the Community Services
                               Department
25-1994  3-11-94  Not_Included Appropriating funds to change the staffing of
                               the Mayor/CAO Department for fiscal year 1994
 
Res. No. Date Disposition Short Title
Res. No. Date    Disposition   Short Title
                               Establishing priorities for the 1995 CIP,
                               providing a set aside for neighborhood CIP
26-1994  3-18-94  Not_Included projects, defining the criteria to be used in
                               rating project requests for the 1995 bond cycle;
                               and ranking the criteria in priority order
                               Adopting housing policies; establishing
                               guidelines for a maximum number of subsidized
                               housing units per site, and for location, design
27-1994  3-18-94  Not_Included review, and environmental conditions of
                               subsidized housing projects; requiring equal
                               administration of the code enforcement program;
                               providing appeal procedures; and superseding
                               Resolution Nos. 115-1975 and 40-1977
                               Providing for an appropriation to the Transit
28-1994  3-24-94  Not_Included and Parking Department, transit operating fund,
                               to meet project paratransit service demand level
29-1994  4-4-94   Not_Included Amending Resolution 136-1993 by amending the
                               adopted list of regular City Council meetings
                               Continuing graffiti removal teams in all areas
30-1994  4-5-94   Not_Included of the city; appropriating funds to the Solid
                               Waste Management Department for the graffiti
                               removal and eradication program
31-1994  4-5-94   Not_Included Appropriating funds for the codification of the
                               city of Albuquerque, New Mexico, ordinances
                               Accepting state funding for North and South
                               Valley water and wastewater projects,
                               appropriating said funding, approving grant
32-1994  5-3-94   Not_Included agreements between the city and the Department
                               of Finance and Administration, Local Government
                               Division, and amending the adopted capital
                               implementation program of the city of
                               Albuquerque
                               Appropriating funds in the special assessments
                               debt service fund to provide for the completion
33-1994  5-3-94   Not_Included of the special assessment debt management and
                               lien receivable system previously approved by
                               City Council and to provide equipment to support
                               this system
34-1994  5-3-94   Not_Included Establishing five year goals for the city of
                               Albuquerque
                               Approving and authorizing the filing of the
                               attached grant application for funds under the
35-1994  5-23-94  Not_Included Emergency Medical Services Fund Act with the New
                               Mexico Health and Environment Department and
                               providing for an appropriation to the Fire
                               Department
                               Appropriating funds in the lodgers tax fund to
                               the Parks and General Services Department for
36-1994  5-23-94  Not_Included the purpose of promoting and assisting in the
                               development of the New Mexico Hispanic Cultural
                               Center
                               Establishing an expenditure plan for public
                               works portion of Ordinance 20-1989 (Bill No. F/
37-1994  5-23-94  Not_Included S 0-89), basic service tax, and appropriating
                               funds, including for North and South Valley
                               drainage projects
                               Appropriating funds to the Community Services
                               Department for the purpose of providing
38-1994  5-23-94  Not_Included information and referral services on HIV/AIDS to
                               the citizens of the Albuquerque metropolitan
                               area
                               Appropriating funds to the Corrections and
                               Detention Department for operating the
39-1994  5-26-94  Not_Included Bernalillo County corrections and detention
                               facility for the fiscal year beginning July 1,
                               1994 and ending June 30, 1995
                               Appropriating funds in the Parks and General
                               Services Department for operating the
40-1994  5-26-94  Not_Included Albuquerque/Bernalillo County Government and Law
                               Enforcement Centers for the fiscal year
                               beginning July 1, 1994 and ending June 30, 1995
                               Appropriating funds for operating the government
41-1994  5-30-94  Not_Included of the city of Albuquerque for the fiscal year
                               beginning July 1, 1994 and ending June 30, 1995
                               Approving participation in Public Employees
42-1994  5-31-94 4-1-23        Retirement Association municipal general member
                               coverage plan 3 for transportation employees
                               Requesting that the Mayor evaluate charging the
43-1994  5-31-94  Not_Included Department of Finance and Management with
                               management of accounting staff and functions of
                               the city of Albuquerque; asking for a report
44-1994  6-8-94  1-7-11        Amending the Old Town Sector Development and
                               Community Development Plan
                               Concerning the amendment of the zone map,
45-1994  6-7-94  1-10-2        changing the boundaries of the Fourth Ward
                               Historic Overlay Zone
                               Amending the adopted capital implementation
                               program of the city of Albuquerque by approving
46-1994  6-16-94  Not_Included new projects, supplementing current
                               appropriations and changing the scope of
                               existing project
                               Amending the adopted capital implementation
47-1994  6-16-94  Not_Included program of the city of Albuquerque by approving
                               new projects, supplementing and consolidating
                               existing projects
                               Authorizing the Mayor to submit a grant
48-1994  6-16-94  Not_Included application to the federal government and
                               providing an appropriation to the Department of
                               Community Services
                               Authorizing the Mayor to execute a grant
49-1994  6-17-94  Not_Included agreement with the state of New Mexico and
                               providing for an appropriation to the Department
                               of Family and Community Services
                               Approving and authorizing the filing of an
                               application with the U.S. Department of
                               Transportation for a Section 9 capital
                               assistance grant, and a Section 9 operating
                               assistance grant under the Federal Transit Act
50-1994  6-23-94  Not_Included of 1991, as amended; and for congestion
                               mitigation and air quality funds under the
                               Section 9 program of the Federal Transit Act of
                               1991, as amended; and providing for an
                               appropriation to the Transit and Parking
                               Department
 
Res. No. Date Disposition Short Title
Res. No. Date    Disposition    Short Title
                                Relating to $67,000,000 city of Albuquerque,
                                New Mexico taxable industrial development
                                revenue bond (Sumitomo Sitix Silicon, Inc.
51-1994  6-24-94  Not_Included  Project) Series 1993; authorizing a first
                                amendment to lease agreement; and approving
                                certain actions to be taken in connection
                                therewith
52-1994  5-24-94  Not_Included  Approving the fiscal year 1995 audit plan as
                                submitted by the Internal Audit Committee
                                Making an appropriation to the Department of
53-1994  7-6-94   Not_Included  Community Services to administer the local DWI
                                grant program
                                Authorizing the Mayor to submit an application
54-1994  7-6-94   Not_Included  to the United States Department of Housing and
                                Urban Development for a federal enterprise
                                community designation
                                Amending the Vineyard Sector Development Plan
55-1994  7-6-94  1-7-36         expanding the boundaries and establishing R-
                                D and RO-1 zoning
                                Approving and authorizing an agreement with
                                public technology, incorporated to develop a
56-1994  7-6-94   Not_Included  city enterprise center and providing for an
                                appropriation to the Office of Economic
                                Development
                                Determining that a certain building or
                                structure at 4700 Fourth N.W. within the city
57-1994  7-6-94   Not_Included  limits of Albuquerque, New Mexico is so ruined,
                                damaged and dilapidated as to be a menace to
                                the public comfort, health, peace, or safety
                                and that it be required to be removed
                                Determining that a certain building or
                                structure at 1300 Juan Tabo N.E., within the
58-1994  7-6-94   Not_Included  city limits of Albuquerque, New Mexico is so
                                ruined, damaged and dilapidated as to be a
                                menace to the public comfort, health, peace, or
                                safety and that it be required to be removed
                                Establishing a process for the release of
                                billing materials in connection with city of
59-1994  7-6-94  3-1-5          Albuquerque litigation; establishing a process
                                for release of billing materials of previous
                                litigation and for billing materials in future
                                litigation
                                Rescinding Resolution No. 243, Enactment No.
60-1994  7-6-94   Not_Included  67-1993, which ordered the condemnation and
                                removal of the building at 701 Stagecoach S.E.
                                Establishing a Joint Advisory Commission on
                                Persons with Disabilities in the County of
61-1994  7-18-94 2-4-6          Bernalillo and the city of Albuquerque;
                                repealing Resolution No. 93, Enactment No. 90-
                                1976 and Resolution R-311; Enactment No. 124-
                                1987
                                Approving and authorizing a grant from the New
                                Mexico State Highway Department surface
                                transportation enhancement funds for a
62-1994  7-22-94  Not_Included  demonstration and maintenance project of
                                protective structural coatings; and providing
                                for an appropriation to the city of Albuquerque
                                Solid Waste Management Department
                                Approving and authorizing an agreement with the
                                New Mexico State Highway Department for
                                accepting funds for paint supplies for a
63-1994  7-22-94  Not_Included  demonstration and maintenance project of
                                protective structural coatings; and providing
                                for an appropriation to the city of Albuquerque
                                Solid Waste Management Department
                                Authorizing the Mayor to execute a grant
                                agreement with the U.S. Department of Health
64-1994  7-27-94  Not_Included  and Human Services and providing an
                                appropriation to the Department of Family and
                                Community Services
                                Approving and authorizing the use of Transit
                                and Parking Department capital improvement
                                program funds as matching funds for an
65-1994  7-27-94  Not_Included  intelligent vehicle highway system corridors
                                project under the intelligent vehicle highway
                                system corridors project program of the
                                Intermodal Surface Transportation Efficiency
                                Act of 1991, as amended
                                Rescinding Resolution No. 70, Enactment No. 66-
66-1994  7-27-94  Not_Included  1992, which ordered the condemnation and
                                removal of the buildings at 12901 Central
                                Avenue N.E.
                                Amending the adopted capital implementation
67-1994  7-27-94  Not_Included  program of the city of Albuquerque by
                                appropriating funds for the purpose of
                                replacing the city's human resources system
                                Changing the street name of Grand Avenue N.E.
68-1994  8-9-94  6-1-1          to Martin Luther King, Jr. Avenue N.E. from its
                                intersection with Broadway Boulevard N.E. to
                                its intersection with University Boulevard N.E.
                                Establishing an Advisory Committee for
69-1994  8-9-94  2-1-11         Development Impact Fee Issues; specifying the
                                structure and general activities of the
                                committee
                                Approving and authorizing a grant under the New
                                Mexico Litter Control and Beautification Act
70-1994  8-9-94   Not_Included  with the New Mexico State Highway Department;
                                and providing for an appropriation to the city
                                of Albuquerque Solid Waste Department
                                Amending the adopted capital implementation
                                program of the city of Albuquerque by
71-1994  8-9-94   Not_Included  appropriating funds for the purpose of
                                designing plant nitrogen removal facilities and
                                acquiring a constructed wetlands site
72-1994  8-9-94  3-2-4          Determining reasonable notice of public
                                meetings of the Council and Council committees
                                Amending Resolution R-491, Enactment Number 15-
                                1992 by extending the allowable time for
                                approval of the tax increment financing method
73-1994  8-9-94  1-12-1, 1-12-2 by other governing bodies for Project XXXIII of
                                the Alvarado Metropolitan Redevelopment Area
                                and Project VIII of the Railroad Metropolitan
                                Redevelopment Area
                                Accepting recommendations contained in the
                                downtown center city transportation study final
                                report as guidance for development of
                                transportation system improvements in the
74-1994  8-12-94  Not_Included  center city over the next 20 years and as
                                guidance during the periodic update of the city
                                capital program and transportation improvement
                                program for the Albuquerque metropolitan area
                                and related city and regional policies and
                                plans
                                Authorizing the Mayor to execute a grant
                                agreement with the New Mexico Department of
75-1994  8-12-94  Not_Included  Children, Youth and Families and providing an
                                appropriation to the Department of Family and
                                Community Services
 
Res. No. Date Disposition Short Title
Res. No. Date     Disposition   Short Title
                                Determining that a certain building or
                                structure at 5605 Fourth N.W., within the city
76-1994  8-12-94   Not_Included limits of Albuquerque, New Mexico is so ruined
                                damaged, and dilapidated as to be a menace to
                                the public comfort, health, peace, or safety
                                and that it be required to be removed
                                Approving and authorizing the filing of the
                                attached application for a senior companion
77-1994  8-12-94   Not_Included grant with action, including funds allocated by
                                the State Agency on Aging and providing for an
                                appropriation to the Department of Senior
                                Affairs
                                Approving and authorizing the filing of the
78-1994  8-12-94   Not_Included attached application for RSVP action grant and
                                providing for an appropriation to the
                                Department of Senior Affairs
                                Approving and authorizing the filing of a grant
                                application with the New Mexico Health and
                                Environment Department for funds under the
79-1994  8-12-94   Not_Included Emergency Medical Services Fund Act and
                                providing for an appropriation to the
                                Albuquerque Fire Department in the operating
                                grants fund on behalf of UNM Center for
                                Disaster Medicine/Medicine Bow
                                Approving and authorizing the filing of the
                                attached application for a foster grandparent
80-1994  8-12-94   Not_Included grant with action, including funds allocated by
                                the State Agency on Aging and providing for an
                                appropriation to the Department of Senior
                                Affairs
                                Adopting the ground-water protection policy and
81-1994  8-12-94  3-5-4         action plan; instructing the policy
                                coordinating committee to begin implementation
                                Supplementing and amending existing city policy
                                concerning intra-year personnel positions
82-1994  8-19-94  3-3-14        during the period between adoption of the
                                city's annual operating budgets; calling for a
                                report on intra-year positions and position
                                upgrades
                                Appropriating funds to the Council Services
                                Department for a programmatic audit of the
83-1994  8-25-94   Not_Included Middle Rio Grande Council of Governments,
                                establishing city policy with regard to the
                                selection of the MRGCOG Director, conditionally
                                deappropriating funds to MRGCOG
                                Declaring three parcels of land as not
84-1994  8-25-94   Not_Included essential for municipal purposes and approving
                                of the disposal of these parcels
                                Appropriating funds to the Bernalillo County
85-1994  8-25-94   Not_Included Information Systems Services project in the
                                city/county projects fund for data processing
                                services provided to Bernalillo County
                                Authorizing the removal of certain
86-1994  8-25-94   Not_Included uncollectible accounts from the city's account
                                receivable records
                                Approving the filing of a grant application
                                with the New Mexico State Agency on Aging for
87-1994  8-25-94   Not_Included Title III Older Americans Act Funds and HB-
                                2 Laws 1993 and 1994 funds; and providing for
                                an appropriation to the Department of Family
                                and Community Services
                                Determining that the building or structure at
                                906 Aztec Road N.W., within the city limits of
88-1994  8-25-94   Not_Included Albuquerque, New Mexico, is so ruined, damaged
                                and dilapidated as to be a menace to the public
                                comfort, health, peace or safety and that it be
                                required to be removed
                                Determining that the building or structure at
                                1826 Griegos Road N.W., within the city limits
89-1994  8-25-94   Not_Included of Albuquerque, New Mexico, is so ruined,
                                damaged and dilapidated as to be a menace to
                                the public comfort, health, peace or safety and
                                that it be required to be removed
                                Determining that the building or structure at
                                419 Aspen Ave N.E., within the city limits of
90-1994  8-25-94   Not_Included Albuquerque, New Mexico, is so ruined, damaged
                                and dilapidated as to be a menace to the public
                                comfort, health, peace or safety and that it be
                                required to be removed
91-1994  8-25-94   Not_Included Approving the 1995 Transportation Program for
                                the Albuquerque urban area
                                Setting an official list of regular City
92-1994  10-4-94   Not_Included Council meetings from October, 1994 through
                                December, 1995
                                Approving and authorizing the filing of the
                                attached grant application for converting an S-
93-1994  10-4-94   Not_Included 10 pick-up from salvage and one full-time
                                temporary staff person; and providing for an
                                appropriation to the General Services
                                Department
                                Authorizing the Mayor to execute a grant
                                agreement with the New Mexico Children, Youth
94-1994  10-4-94   Not_Included and Families Department and providing an
                                appropriation to the Department of Family and
                                Community Services
                                Approving the application for Job Training
                                Partnership Act Funds, discretionary grant
95-1994  10-4-94   Not_Included funds and income generating activities; and
                                providing for an appropriation to the
                                Department of Family and Community Services
                                Approving and authorizing the filing of an
                                application with the U.S. Department of
                                Transportation for a Section 3 capital
96-1994  10-4-94   Not_Included assistance grant, under the Federal Transit Act
                                of 1991, as amended; and providing for an
                                appropriation to the Transit and Parking
                                Department
                                Appropriating metropolitan redevelopment funds
97-1994  10-4-94   Not_Included for the implementation of redevelopment program
                                in metropolitan redevelopment areas
                                Approving participation in Public Employees
98-1994  10-19-94 4-1-24        Retirement Association municipal general member
                                coverage plan 3 and 75 pick-up of member
                                contributions
                                Approving and authorizing the filing of a grant
                                application with the New Mexico Department of
                                Public Safety for funds under the U.S.
                                Department of Transportation Hazardous
99-1994  10-24-94  Not_Included Materials Transportation Uniform Safety Act
                                (HMTUSA) and providing for an appropriation to
                                the Albuquerque Fire Department in the
                                operating grants fund and on behalf of the
                                Local Emergency Planning Committee (LEPC)
                                Authorizing the Mayor to execute a grant
                                agreement with the U.S. Department of Health
100-1994 10-24-94  Not_Included and Human Services and providing an
                                appropriation to the Department of Family and
                                Community Services
 
Res. No. Date Disposition Short Title
Res. No. Date     Disposition   Short Title
                                Authorizing the submission of a grant
                                application for a community D.W.I. prevention
101-1994 10-24-94  Not_Included fund with the state of New Mexico Highway and
                                Transportation Department, and providing for an
                                appropriation to the Family and Community
                                Services Department
                                Approving and authorizing the filing of a grant
                                application with the U.S. Department of
                                Commerce for an Albuquerque Metropolitan
102-1994 10-24-94  Not_Included Information Network (AMINet) project and
                                amending the adopted capital implementation
                                program of the city of Albuquerque providing
                                for an appropriation for the AMINet project
                                Determining that the building or structure at
                                8710 Robby Avenue S.W., within the city limits
103-1994 10-24-94  Not_Included of Albuquerque, New Mexico, is so ruined,
                                damaged and dilapidated as to be a menace to
                                the public comfort, health, peace or safety and
                                that it be required to be removed
                                Authorizing the Mayor to submit an application
                                for designation of an enterprise community in
104-1994 10-25-94  Not_Included Albuquerque and providing for an appropriation
                                to the Department of Family and Community
                                Services
105-1994 10-25-94 1-11-7        Adopting the airport master plan for the
                                Albuquerque International Sunport
                                Appropriating funds in fiscal year 1995 from
                                the unreserved general fund balance to the
                                facilities management program of the Parks and
106-1994 10-25-94  Not_Included General Services Department to lease hour
                                hundred and eighty (480) square feet in the
                                Plaza Don Luis located at 303 Romero N.W.,
                                Suite RR 101-102, Old Town to be used as public
                                restrooms
                                Approving and authorizing the filing of a grant
                                application for a certified local government
107-1994 10-25-94  Not_Included grant with the State Historic Preservation
                                Office and providing an appropriation for the
                                Planning Department
                                Appropriating funds for stabilization of the
108-1994 10-25-94  Not_Included South Eubank Landfill contingent upon matching
                                funds from the State Commissioner of Public
                                Lands
                                Approving the industrial development project
                                entitled the city of Albuquerque, New Mexico
                                industrial development revenue bonds (Plastech
                                Corporation Project) Series 1994A and city of
                                Albuquerque, New Mexico industrial development
                                refunding revenue bonds (Plastech Corporation
                                Project) Series 1994B and declaring the city of
                                Albuquerque's intent to issue industrial
109-1994 10-25-94  Not_Included development revenue bonds in amount no to
                                exceed $6,950,000 in connection with a project
                                presently located at 4300 Alexander Boulevard,
                                N.E., in Albuquerque, New Mexico, for the
                                purpose of inducing Plastech Corporation to
                                expand the project and declaring the city of
                                Albuquerque's intent to refund certain
                                outstanding industrial development revenue
                                bonds
                                Authorizing the Mayor to execute a contract
                                agreement for homeless programs with the New
110-1994 10-25-94  Not_Included Mexico Department of Human Services and
                                providing an appropriation to the Department of
                                Family and Community Services
                                Authorizing the Mayor to execute a grant
111-1994 10-25-94  Not_Included agreement with the New Mexico Arts Division and
                                providing an appropriation to the Department of
                                Family and Community Services
                                Approving and authorizing the filing of a grant
                                application for a food service program for
112-1994 10-25-94  Not_Included children with the New Mexico Department of
                                Children, Youth and Families and providing for
                                an appropriation to the Department of Family
                                and Community Services
                                Establishing a committee to observe the
113-1994 10-25-94  Not_Included quartocentennial and prescribing its powers and
                                duties
                                Establishing five-year goals for the city of
114-1994 10-25-94  Not_Included Albuquerque in fiscal year 1996; indicating
                                future steps as to goals and objectives
                                Determining that a certain building or
                                structure at 2101 San Pedro N.E., within the
115-1994 11-23-94  Not_Included city limits of Albuquerque, New Mexico is so
                                ruined, damaged, and dilapidated as to be a
                                menace to the public comfort, health, peace, or
                                safety and that it be required to be removed
                                Determining that a certain building or
                                structure at 1519 5th Street N.W., within the
116-1994 11-23-94  Not_Included city limits of Albuquerque, New Mexico is so
                                ruined, damaged, and dilapidated as to be a
                                menace to the public comfort, health, peace, or
                                safety and that it be required to be removed
                                Approving and authorizing the acceptance of
                                state of New Mexico Law Enforcement Protection
117-1994 11-23-94  Not_Included Act and crime lab funds; and providing for an
                                appropriation to the Albuquerque Police
                                Department
118-1994 11-23-94  Not_Included Providing for the appropriation of federal and
                                state forfeiture funds to the Police Department
                                Providing for the appropriation of state funds
                                to the Corrections and Detention Department for
119-1994 11-23-94  Not_Included the purpose of continuing an alternative
                                sentencing facility pilot program for D.W.I.
                                offenders
                                Appropriating funds to the Fire Department for
120-1994 11-23-94  Not_Included the purchase and replacement of three fire
                                rescue units
                                Ratifying, confirming, and approving the filing
                                of the attached grant application under the
                                drug control and system improvement formula
121-1994 11-23-94  Not_Included grant with the state of New Mexico Department
                                of Public Safety; and providing for an
                                appropriation to the city of Albuquerque Police
                                Department for the continuation of the Drug
                                Abuse Resistance Education (D.A.R.E.) Program
                                Expressing policy regarding future operation of
122-1994 11-23-94 3-8-2, 6-1-1  Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr. Avenue from
                                Interstate 25 to University Boulevard
                                Approving and authorizing the filing of the
                                attached grant application for a special DWI
                                prevention operations plan grant with the state
123-1994 11-23-94  Not_Included of New Mexico Department of Highway and
                                Transportation, Bureau of Traffic Safety and
                                providing for an appropriation to the
                                Albuquerque Police Department
                                Approving and authorizing the filing of the
                                attached grant application for an air pollution
124-1994 11-23-94  Not_Included control grant with the Environmental Protection
                                Agency; and providing for an appropriation to
                                the Environmental Health Department
                                Amending the adopted capital implementation
125-1994 11-29-94  Not_Included program of the city of Albuquerque by
                                appropriating funds for the Albuquerque
                                International Sunport
                                Approving and authorizing the filing of the
                                attached grant application for a gang
                                resistance education and training grant with
126-1994 11-29-94  Not_Included the United States Department of Treasury,
                                Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco and Firearms and
                                providing for an appropriation to the
                                Albuquerque Police Department
                                Appropriating funds to the special lodger's
                                promotion program (18030) in the lodger's tax
127-1994 11-29-94  Not_Included fund for use by the Albuquerque Convention and
                                Visitors Bureau (ACVB) and the Hispano Chamber
                                of Commerce in promoting and servicing events
                                during fiscal year 1995
                                Approving the industrial development project
                                entitled Tri-Gas Inc. project, and declaring
                                the city of Albuquerque's intent to issue
                                industrial development bonds, in an amount not
128-1994 11-29-94  Not_Included to exceed $18,500,000 in connection with a
                                proposed project located at 8200 Washington,
                                N.E., in Albuquerque, New Mexico, for the
                                purpose of inducing Tri-Gas Inc. or its
                                successors or assigns, to develop the project
                                site in the matter set forth in the plan
                                Determining that real property located in the
129-1994 12-9-94   Not_Included South Barelas Industrial Park is not essential
                                for a municipal purpose and donation of the
                                real property to the state of New Mexico
                                Authorizing the Mayor to enter into a contract
130-1994 12-23-94  Not_Included with Youth Development, Inc. (YDI) to pay the
                                costs for YDI to acquire the Wool Warehouse
 
 
 
Notes
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
1995 Resolutions
Res. No. Date Disposition Short Title
Res. No. Date    Disposition   Short Title
                               Relating to the $54,260,000 city of Albuquerque,
                               New Mexico airport revenue bonds, Series 1995A
                               and $14,340,000 city of Albuquerque, New Mexico
                               airport revenue bonds, Series 1995B to be issued
                               to finance part of the costs of acquiring,
1-1995   1-19-95  Not_Included constructing, improving and equipping the city's
                               municipal airport; providing certain terms of
                               the bonds, the price to be paid for the bonds
                               and other details concerning the bonds and the
                               project; approving documents relating to the
                               bonds; making certain appropriations; and
                               ratifying actions previously taken
                               Approving land authorizing the filing of the
                               attached grant application for a drug control
                               and system improvement formula grant with the
2-1995   1-9-95   Not_Included state of New Mexico Department of Public Safety,
                               Office of Special Projects and providing for an
                               appropriation to the Albuquerque Police
                               Department
                               Approving and authorizing the filing of the
                               attached grant application for a state traffic
                               safety education and enforcement fund grant with
3-1995   1-9-95   Not_Included the State of New Mexico Department of Highway
                               and Transportation, Bureau of Traffic Safety and
                               providing for an appropriation to the
                               Albuquerque Police Department
                               Approving and authorizing the filing of an
                               application for reimbursement of summer food
4-1995   1-9-95   Not_Included service program for children with the New Mexico
                               Department of Children, Youth and Families, and
                               providing for an appropriation to the Department
                               of Family and Community Services
                               Approving and authorizing the filing of the
                               attached grant application for a ride sharing
                               program with the Federal Highway Administration
5-1995   1-9-95   Not_Included and the New Mexico State Highway and
                               Transportation Department; and providing for an
                               appropriation to the transit and Parking
                               Department
                               Providing an appropriation for city sewer and
                               water utility connection expenses in areas of
6-1995   1-9-95   Not_Included critical public health concern, the Kinney Brick
                               Neighborhood and the Mt. Carmel area; calling
                               for matching funds from Bernalillo County
                               Adopting land use assumptions for the city of
                               Albuquerque and the county of Bernalillo based
7-1995   1-9-95  1-1-13        on the urban growth trends and urban growth
                               projections for use in the development of impact
                               fees
                               Adjusting fiscal year 1994 appropriations for
8-1995   1-9-95   Not_Included certain programs to provide for actual
                               expenditures
                               Approving the alternative design scheme for the
9-1995   1-9-95   Not_Included Civic Plaza renovation; including the Kiva
                               Auditorium renovation in the financing plan
                               Establishing the policy for the city to acquire
                               Old Albuquerque High School for beneficial
                               reuse; directing the Real Property Division of
                               the Finance and Management Department and the
                               Albuquerque Development Services Division of the
10-1995  1-20-95 1-9-19        Family and Community Services Department to
                               initiate actions possibly leading to the
                               condemnation of Old Albuquerque High School,
                               authorizing the Legal Department to file a
                               condemnation action with the courts as needed,
                               and making an appropriation for these purposes
                               Establishing a legislative policy for the city
11-1995  1-11-95  Not_Included of Albuquerque for the 1995 legislative session
                               of the New Mexico Legislature
                               Requesting the Mayor to vigorously pursue
                               alternative funding sources for the city's
                               compliance with the U.S. Environmental
12-1995  1-17-95  Not_Included Protection Agency's NPDES permit for stream
                               standards; joining with members of the New
                               Mexico congressional delegation to identify and
                               obtain these funds
                               Deappropriating $40,000 in the transfer to
                               operating grants program in the general fund for
13-1995  1-17-95  Not_Included fiscal year 1995 and appropriating $40,000 to
                               the Department of Family and Community Services
                               contract services program in the general fund
                               for fiscal year 1995
                               Awarding the construction contract for Special
14-1995  1-17-95  Not_Included Assessment District 223 Part 2 improvements to
                               MCC, Inc. and Parts 3 and 4 improvements to
                               Albuquerque Underground, Inc.
                               Relating to Albuquerque, New Mexico, Special
                               Assessment District No. 223; setting the time
15-1995  1-17-95  Not_Included and place of an assessment hearing when
                               objections to the assessment roll for such
                               district will be heard and making an
                               appropriation
                               Appropriating funds to the Family and Community
16-1995  1-17-95  Not_Included Services Department for a contract with the
                               Albuquerque Children's Museum
                               Approving and authorizing the filing of an
                               application for the Department of Veterans
                               Affairs reimbursement funds pursuant to the
17-1995  1-17-95  Not_Included Service Members Occupational Conversion and
                               Training Act (SMOCTA) and providing for an
                               appropriation to the Albuquerque Fire Department
                               in the operating grants fund
                               Amending the adopted capital implementation
                               program of the city of Albuquerque by approving
18-1995  1-18-95  Not_Included new projects, supplementing current
                               appropriations and changing the scope of
                               existing projects
                               Amending the adopted quality of life program of
19-1995  1-18-95  Not_Included the city of Albuquerque by approving new
                               projects and establishing a permanent trust fund
                               for operating purposes
                               Establishing a task force to study and recommend
20-1995  1-25-95  Not_Included revisions to the city of Albuquerque wrecker
                               ordinance, and requiring a report
                               Approving the two-year program for the use of
                               Urban Development Action Grant (UDAG) revenues
21-1995  2-3-95   Not_Included in the pocket of poverty housing and
                               neighborhood economic development fund for
                               fiscal year 1995 and fiscal year 1996; providing
                               an appropriation
                               Establishing a sustainable community initiative
                               for the purpose of studying, evaluating, and
                               recommending the appropriate strategies to move
22-1995  2-3-95   Not_Included the city of Albuquerque closer to a sustainable
                               future; providing for the committee on a
                               sustainable community; requiring public
                               hearings, a report to the Mayor and Council, and
                               an implementation strategy
                               Approving and authorizing the filing of the
                               attached grant application for participation in
                               NMSA fiscal year 1978, as amended by laws of
23-1995  2-3-95   Not_Included 1994 EMS system improvement project funds under
                               the Emergency Medical Services Fund Act with the
                               New Mexico Department of Health and providing
                               for an appropriation to the Albuquerque Fire
                               Department in the operating grants fund
                               Declaring a moratorium on the approval of
24-1995  2-9-95   Not_Included development plans in the Uptown Sector
                               Development Plan area
                               Authorizing the Mayor to submit an application
                               for a Section 302(A) planning assistance grant
25-1995  2-16-95  Not_Included to the United States Commerce Department,
                               Economic Development Administration; and
                               providing for an appropriation to the operating
                               grant fund
 
Res. No. Date Disposition Short Title
Res. Date Disposition Short Title
No.
                      Approving and authorizing execution of an agreement with
     2-               the New Mexico State Highway and Transportation Department
26-  16-   Not        for Intermodal Surface Transportation Efficiency Act
1995 95   Included    (ISTEA) funds to operate a bicycle/pedestrian safety
                      education program; appropriating city matching funds; and
                      identifying the purpose of the program
     2-               Adopting the cultural plan for Albuquerque and setting city
27-  16-  4-6-6       priorities and responsibilities for implementation of the
1995 95               goals, objectives and action agendas outlined in cultural
                      planning document
                      Appropriating funds for the purpose of reprinting local
                      history related monographs by the Albuquerque Museum; to
28-  2-    Not        support an oral history of the North and South Valley area
1995 16-  Included    of Albuquerque; seeking contributions from other public and
     95               private sources for the oral history project; and to
                      continue the Lo Maduro de la Cultura program of the
                      Albuquerque Museum
29-  3-3-  Not        Approving funds for the renovation of the Plaza del Sol
1995 95   Included
                      Relating to Albuquerque, New Mexico Special Assessment
30-  3-3-  Not        District No. 223; confirming and approving the assessment
1995 95   Included    roll for such district; and establishing a condition for
                      completion of such district
                      Accepting funding from Albuquerque Metropolitan Flood
                      Control Authority (AMAFCA) for improvements of the south
31-  3-3-  Not        diversion channel at Stadium Boulevard, appropriating said
1995 95   Included    funding, approving an agreement between the city of
                      Albuquerque and AMAFCA, and amending the adopted capital
                      improvement program of the city of Albuquerque
                      Approving and authorizing the filing of the attached grant
                      application with the State Transportation Authority (STA)
32-  3-3-  Not        for a light-rail transit screening study through the
1995 95   Included    Bernalillo County Transportation Development District
                      (BCTDD); and providing for an appropriation to the Transit
                      and Parking Department
33-  3-3-  Not        Authorizing the Mayor to enter into a grant agreement with
1995 95   Included    the state of New Mexico and providing an appropriation to
                      the Department of Family and Community Services
                      Establishing policy concerning the Albuquerque Police
                      Department mobile command post, involving the Community
34-  3-3- 3-11-3      Policing Steering Committee in decisions regarding the
1995 95               deployment of the mobile command post, and calling for
                      regular reports from the Community Policing Steering
                      Committee
35-  3-3-  Not        Appropriating funds for the purpose of supporting and
1995 95   Included    maintaining employment levels at Kirtland Air Force Base
                      Appropriating revenue generated from a $0.088 increase in
36-  3-    Not        the water commodity charge specifically dedicated to
1995 24-  Included    implement the groundwater protection policy and action
     95               plan, the water conservation program, and water resources
                      management planning investigations
                      Appropriating funds to the Corrections and Detention
37-  3-    Not        Department for operating the Bernalillo County corrections
1995 24-  Included    and detention facility for the fiscal year beginning July
     95               1, 1994 and ending June 30, 1995, and repealing F/S R-38,
                      Enactment No. 39-1994
38-  3-    Not        Establishing one year objectives for the city of
1995 24-  Included    Albuquerque in fiscal year 1996; to meet five-year goals
     95
39-  3-    Not        Declaring 14 parcels of land as not essential for municipal
1995 24-  Included    purposes and approving of the disposal of these parcels
     95
40-  3-               Adopting a long-range water conservation strategy for the
1995 24-  4-3-16      city of Albuquerque and the properties served by the city's
     95               water utility
                      Defining economic vitality; adopting general strategies to
41-  3-               serve as the basis for an economic development program;
1995 24-  4-6-7       requiring the preparation of an action plan to implement
     95               and monitor the strategies; and endorsing the formation of
                      appropriate partnerships to carry out the action plan
     3-               Authorizing the Mayor to enter into a contract agreement
42-  24-   Not        with the state of New Mexico and providing an appropriation
1995 95   Included    to the Department of Family and Community Services for
                      enhancements to the substance abuse treatment system
43-  4-5-  Not        Identifying the statute under which the condemnation of Old
1995 95   Included    Albuquerque High may proceed and correcting the
                      appropriation for this purpose
44-  4-5-  Not        Awarding the construction contract for Special Assessment
1995 95   Included    District 221 (the “district”) improvements to CCM, Inc.
                      Relating to Albuquerque, New Mexico, Special Assessment
45-  4-5-  Not        District No. 221; setting the time and place of an
1995 95   Included    assessment hearing when objections to the assessment roll
                      for such district will be heard and making an appropriation
                      Approving the programming of funds and projects for the
46-  4-5-  Not        1995-2004 decade capital improvements program including the
1995 95   Included    1995 two-year capital improvements budget, and
                      appropriating funds from the general fund for decentralized
                      community policing facilities
                      Amending the city's capital improvements program by making
                      appropriations for new projects, incorporating the urban
47-  4-5-  Not        enhancement trust fund 1996-1997 plan into the city's
1995 95   Included    capital improvements program, adopting the 1996-1997 two-
                      year plan for the urban enhancement trust fund and
                      appropriating funds for the two-year plan's projects
48-  4-3-  Not        Establishing a policy of abstention from further
1995 95   Included    legislative action regarding the Montano Bridge
                      Adopting a policy to pursue claims only for the
     4-               certificates of deposit and for litigation costs, not to
49-  11-   Not        exceed a specified amount, in the public nuisance action
1995 95   Included    brought by the village of Los Ranchos de Albuquerque
                      against the city of Albuquerque to enjoin the building of
                      the Montano Bridge
                      Appropriating funds for the purpose of conducting a
50-  4-    Not        disparity study to ensure that the goals of the city's
1995 11-  Included    minority and women's business enterprises program are
     95               consistent with federal law and appropriating funds to the
                      city lobbyists program for fiscal year 1995
 
Res. No. Date Disposition Short Title
Res. No. Date    Disposition   Short Title
                               Appointing City Clerk, Chief Deputy Clerk and
51-1995  4-11-95  Not_Included Deputy City Clerks and rescinding Council Bill
                               No. R-131, Enactment No. 98-1990
                               Establishing an ad-hoc board to recommend to the
                               Mayor a firm or person to provide engineering
52-1995  4-21-95  Not_Included and other related services for city project
                               #5190, water and wastewater utility program
                               assessment for the joint water and sewer fund
                               Authorizing an independent analysis of three
                               proposed franchise ordinances for competitive
53-1995  4-21-95  Not_Included access providers to the city of Albuquerque for
                               the purpose of utilizing the city's right-of-way
                               to construct and operate a fiber optic
                               telecommunications system
                               Amending the policy of city of Albuquerque with
                               regard to the Montano Bridge as contained in
54-1995  4-17-95  Not_Included Bill No. R-462 (Enactment No. 176-1991), calling
                               for the delay of construction until Bill No. R-
                               214, eleventh council, or a substitute bill,
                               either is adopted into law or fails
                               Approving and authorizing the filing of the
                               attached grant application for funds under the
55-1995  4-28-95  Not_Included Emergency Medical Services Fund Act with the
                               Department of Health and providing for an
                               appropriation to the Fire Department
                               Approving and authorizing the filing of the
                               attached grant application for basic state
56-1995  4-28-95  Not_Included grant-in-aid grant with the New Mexico State
                               Library; and providing for an appropriation to
                               the Albuquerque/ Bernalillo County Library
                               System
                               Amending the adopted capital improvements
57-1995  4-28-95  Not_Included program of the city of Albuquerque by
                               supplementing current appropriations
58-1995  4-28-95 1-2-1         Amending the Albuquerque and Bernalillo County
                               comprehensive plan development areas map
                               Amending Resolution No. R-66, Enactment No. 69-
                               1994, establishing an advisory committee for
59-1995  4-28-95 2-1-11        development impact fee issues; specifying the
                               structure and general activities of the
                               committee
                               Amending the subordination section of the
                               Albuquerque community development block grant
60-1995  4-28-95  Not_Included housing rehabilitation loan program guidelines,
                               which were adopted by Resolution No. 56,
                               Enactment No. 53-1992 * Repealed by Resolution
                               No. 88-2001.
                               Providing for an appropriation to the Transit
                               and Parking Department of funds granted under
61-1995  4-28-95  Not_Included the intelligent vehicle highway system corridors
                               project program of the Intermodal Surface
                               Transportation Efficiency Act for an intelligent
                               vehicle highway system corridors project
                               Appropriating funds for operating the government
62-1995  5-4-95   Not_Included of the city of Albuquerque for the fiscal year
                               beginning July 1, 1995 and ending June 30, 1996
                               Requesting the Albuquerque/Bernalillo County Air
63-1995  5-9-95   Not_Included Quality Control Board to delay the requirement
                               for use of Bar 90 Vehicle Emission Testing
                               Equipment for our decentralized testing program
                               Appropriating funds to the A.C.E. Dental Program
64-1995  5-9-95   Not_Included (47006) in the employee insurance fund (735) for
                               use by the Human Resources Department to pay for
                               employee dental services during fiscal year 1995
                               Adopting policies for the city of Albuquerque
65-1995  5-9-95  3-3-15        regarding employee substance abuse and alcohol
                               and drug testing
                               Requiring an independent team of experts which
                               is not a board, commission or committee to
66-1995  5-19-95  Not_Included conduct a 30-day evaluation of the Montano
                               Bridge project; present recommendations to the
                               Mayor and City Council and repealing R-221,
                               Enactment No. 48-1995
                               Amending the Coors Corridor Plan recommended
67-1995  5-15-95 1-7-27        land use map for Lot D-1A Coors Central North
                               from commercial to residential (page 69)
                               Approving a consolidated application for U.S.
68-1995  5-15-95  Not_Included Department of Housing and Urban Development
                               funds and appropriating funds to the Department
                               of Family and Community Services
                               Amending the boundaries of the McClellan Park
                               Section Development Plan and the Downtown Core
69-1995  5-18-95 1-4-1, 1-7-24 Revitalization Strategy, which includes a sector
                               development plan for the Downtown Urban Center,
                               and rezoning McClellan Park SU-3 Special Center
                               Zone
                               Relating to Albuquerque, New Mexico Special
70-1995  6-2-95   Not_Included Assessment District No. 221 and modifying,
                               confirming and approving the assessment roll for
                               such district
                               Approving and authorizing the filing of the
                               grant application for a drug control system
71-1995  6-2-95   Not_Included improvement formula grant with the state of New
                               Mexico Department of Public Safety and providing
                               for an appropriation to the city of Albuquerque
                               Police Department
                               Appropriating additional funds to the code
                               administration program in the Planning
72-1995  6-2-95   Not_Included Department for three additional (MN08) building
                               inspectors and vehicles to maintain a timely
                               response to the increased volume of construction
                               inspections
73-1995  6-2-95  6-7-2         Naming the exhibit hall in the east complex of
                               the Albuquerque Convention Center
                               Appropriating funds in the Parks and General
                               Services Department for operating the
74-1995  6-2-95   Not_Included Albuquerque/Bernalillo County Government and Law
                               Enforcement Centers for the fiscal year
                               beginning July 1, 1995 and ending June 30, 1996
                               Appropriating funds to the Corrections and
                               Detention Department for operating the
75-1995  6-2-95   Not_Included Bernalillo County corrections and detention
                               facility for the fiscal year beginning July 1,
                               1995 and ending June 30, 1996
 
Res. No. Date Disposition Short Title
Res. No. Date    Disposition   Short Title
76-1995  6-2-95   Not_Included Approving the fiscal year 1996 audit plan as
                               submitted by the Internal Audit Committee
                               Determining that certain buildings or structures
                               at 1206, 1208 and 1210 Broadway S.E. within the
77-1995  6-2-95   Not_Included city of Albuquerque, New Mexico, are so ruined,
                               damaged and dilapidated as to be a menace to the
                               public comfort, health, peace or safety and that
                               they be required to be removed
                               Amending Resolution R-237, Enactment No. 65-1995
78-1995  6-2-95  3-3-15        to allow city employees to serve on the
                               Substance Abuse Policy Review and Appeals Board
                               Appropriating funds for operating the government
79-1995  6-2-95   Not_Included of the city of Albuquerque for the fiscal year
                               beginning July 1, 1995 and ending June 30, 1996
                               Relating to the city of Albuquerque, New Mexico,
                               Special Assessment District No. 223, street
                               improvement and water and sewer improvement
                               bonds, issues of June 1, 1995; establishing the
                               maturity dates and rates of interest on the
                               bonds and approving certain documents relating
80-1995  6-26-95  Not_Included to the bonds; establishing the final rates of
                               interest on unpaid assessments in the district;
                               making certain appropriations in connection with
                               the bonds and the district; ratifying certain
                               actions heretofore taken; amending city
                               ordinance Enactment No. 28-1995 which authorized
                               the bonds; and repealing all action inconsistent
                               with this resolution
                               Relating to the $38,940,000 city of Albuquerque,
                               New Mexico joint water and sewer system revenue
                               bonds, Series 1995 to be issued to improve the
                               city's joint water and sewer system; providing
81-1995  7-21-95  Not_Included the terms and forms of the bonds, the price to
                               be paid by the original purchaser for the bonds
                               and other details concerning the bonds;
                               approving documents relating to the bonds;
                               making certain appropriations; and ratifying
                               certain actions previously taken
                               Relating to the $13,515,000 city of Albuquerque,
                               New Mexico refuse removal and disposal refunding
                               revenue bonds, Series 1995 to be issued for the
                               purpose of refunding a portion of the city's
                               outstanding refuse removal and disposal revenue
82-1995  7-5-95   Not_Included bonds, Series 1989; providing the terms and form
                               of the Series 1995 bonds, the price to be paid
                               by the investment banker for the Series 1995
                               bonds; approving documents relating to the
                               Series 1995 bonds; making certain
                               appropriations; and ratifying certain actions
                               previously taken
                               Concerning the regular municipal election to be
83-1995  7-11-95  Not_Included held in the city of Albuquerque, New Mexico, on
                               Tuesday, the 3rd day of October, 1995
                               Concerning a municipal bond election at the
                               regular municipal election to be held in the
                               city of Albuquerque on October 3, 1995;
                               submitting to a vote of the qualified,
                               registered electors and non-resident municipal
                               electors at such election certain questions for
                               authorizing the issuance of general obligation
84-1995  6-27-95  Not_Included bonds in varying principal amounts and for
                               specified public purposes; providing the form of
                               the bond questions, the emergency and absentee
                               paper ballots therefor and the designation
                               clause for such questions on voting machines;
                               providing for notice of the election;
                               prescribing other details in connection with
                               such election and bonds; and ratifying action
                               previously taken in connection therewith
                               Approving and authorizing the filing of the
                               grant application for a drug control system
                               improvement formula grant for a Trumbull/La Mesa
85-1995  6-28-95  Not_Included community policing pilot project with the state
                               of New Mexico Department of Public Safety,
                               Office of Special Projects and providing for an
                               appropriation to the city of Albuquerque Police
                               Department
                               Appropriating funds to the Department of Family
86-1995  6-28-95  Not_Included and Community Services for housing related
                               projects
87-1995  6-28-95 2-7-2         Establishing the Transportation Evaluation Study
                               Advisory Committee
                               Approving and authorizing the filing of an
                               application with the U.S. Department of
                               Transportation for a Section 9 operating
                               assistance grant, a Section 9 planning
                               assistance grant, and a Section 9 capital
88-1995  6-28-95  Not_Included assistance grant under the Federal Transit Act
                               of 1991, as amended; and for congestion
                               mitigation and air quality funds under the
                               Section 9 program of the Federal Transit Act of
                               1991, as amended; and providing for an
                               appropriation to the Transit and Parking
                               Department
                               Authorizing the Mayor to execute a grant
89-1995  6-28-95  Not_Included agreement with the U.S. Department of Health and
                               Human Services and providing an appropriation to
                               the Department of Family and Community Services
                               Approving and authorizing the filing of the
                               grant application for a computerized criminal
                               history system grant with the state of New
90-1995  6-28-95  Not_Included Mexico Department of Public Safety, Office of
                               Special Projects and providing for an
                               appropriation to the city of Albuquerque Police
                               Department
                               Establishing a task force to review the city's
91-1995  6-29-95  Not_Included annexation policy related to county development
                               connecting to city water and sewer
                               infrastructure, requiring a report
                               Appropriating funds in fiscal year 1995 from the
                               unreserved golf course fund balance (Fund 681)
92-1995  6-29-95  Not_Included to the golf course operating program of the
                               parks and General Services Department for the
                               purpose of increasing the fiscal year 1995 water
                               line item
                               Establishing an ad hoc board to recommend to the
93-1995  7-5-95   Not_Included Mayor a firm or person to provide architectural
                               and other related services for city project
                               #5202, Balloon Fiesta Park and Balloon Museum
                               Adopting the Uptown Sector Development Plan, as
94-1995  7-19-95 1-7-19        revised, and repealing the 1981 version of the
                               plan as amended March 1988.
                               Amending the adopted capital improvements
                               program of the city of Albuquerque by approving
95-1995  7-17-95  Not_Included new projects, supplementing current
                               appropriation and changing the scope of existing
                               projects
                               Approving the application for Job Training
                               Partnership Act Funds, discretionary grant funds
96-1995  7-21-95  Not_Included and income generating activities; and providing
                               for an appropriation to the Department of Family
                               and Community Services
                               Amending the Rio Grande Valley State Park
                               management plan to incorporate measures to
                               minimize the impacts of construction, operation
                               and maintenance of the city's Montano River
97-1995  7-21-95 4-4-3         crossing project on the Rio Grande Valley State
                               Park, including the mitigation measures
                               contained in the United States Army Corps of
                               engineering permit NM-OYT-0458 for the Montano
                               River crossing project
                               Declaring the official intent of the city of
                               Albuquerque to provide for the reimbursement of
                               certain capital expenditures to be undertaken on
98-1995  7-21-95  Not_Included behalf of the city; identifying said capital
                               expenditures and the funds to be used for such
                               payment; and providing certain other matters in
                               connection therewith
                               Approving and authorizing a grant under the New
                               Mexico Litter Control and Beautification Act
99-1995  7-21-95  Not_Included with the New Mexico State Highway Department;
                               and providing for an appropriation to the city
                               of Albuquerque Solid Waste Department
                               Adjusting fiscal year 1996 appropriations for
100-1995 7-25-95  Not_Included certain enterprise fund programs to reduce tort
                               and other claims line item
 
Res. No. Date Disposition Short Title
Res. Date Disposition Short Title
No.
                      Revising commercial lane fees at the Albuquerque International Sunport; adoption
101- 8-9-  Not        of Neff and Co.'s review of commercial lane revenues and costs of operation and
1995 95   Included    adoption of the first semi-annual report on the operation and revenue generated
                      by the commercial lane program
102- 8-7- 4-6-8       Approving the “community identity” program as the city's approach to inter-
1995 95               departmental sub-area planning and ongoing public involvement
                      Identifying the recommendations of the City Council's Montano Bridge consultants
103- 8-    Not        which are adopted into policy, programming specified revenue sources, approving
1995 24-  Included    the evidence and results of the good faith negotiations between the city of
     95               Albuquerque and the village of Los Ranchos, and providing the elements of the
                      agreement
104- 8-    Not        Approving a grant application to the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban
1995 25-  Included    Development for homeless services and making an appropriation to the Department
     95               of Family and Community Services
105- 8-               Determining reasonable notice of public meetings of the Council and Council
1995 25-  3-2-4       committees
     95
     8-               Declaring it to be the policy of the city of Albuquerque to actively abate the
106- 25-  4-6-15      public nuisance of the unlawful use of premises for the sale of alcoholic
1995 95               beverages through drive-up windows; directing the City Attorney to initiate
                      abatement of nuisance actions
     8-               Approving and authorizing the filing of the attached application for a foster
107- 25-   Not        grandparent program grant with the corporation for national and community
1995 95   Included    service funds allocated by the State Agency on Aging and providing for an
                      appropriation to the Department of Senior Affairs
                      Authorizing an amendment to the $67,000,000 city of Albuquerque, New Mexico
                      taxable industrial development revenue bond (Sumitomo Sitix Silicon, Inc.
                      project) Series 1993; changing the advance date for purchases for Phase II of
108- 8-    Not        the project; authorizing the execution and delivery of a first amendment to
1995 25-  Included    indenture and $67,000,000 city of Albuquerque, New Mexico taxable industrial
     95               development revenue bond (Sumitomo Sitix Silicon, Inc. Project) Series 1993 and
                      other documents in connection with the amendment to the bond and Phase II of the
                      project; ratifying certain actions taken previously; and repealing all actions
                      inconsistent with this resolution
     8-               Approving and authorizing the filing of the attached application for a senior
109- 25-   Not        companion grant with the corporation for national and community service,
1995 95   Included    including funds allocated by the State Agency on Aging and providing for an
                      appropriation to the Department of Senior Affairs
110- 8-    Not        Approving and authorizing the filing of the attached application for an RSVP
1995 25-  Included    corporation for national and community service grant and providing for an
     95               appropriation to the Department of Senior Affairs
111- 8-    Not        Providing for an appropriation to the Transit and Parking Department of funds
1995 25-  Included    granted from the Federal Highway Administration and the New Mexico State Highway
     95               and Transportation Department for a guaranteed ride home program
112- 9-1-  Not        Rescinding Resolution No. 99, Enactment No. 103-1994, which ordered the
1995 95   Included    condemnation and removal of the building at 8710 Robby S.W.
113- 9-1-  Not        Appropriating metropolitan redevelopment funds for the implementation of
1995 95   Included    redevelopment programs in metropolitan redevelopment areas
114- 9-1-  Not        Adjusting fiscal year 1995 transfer to corrections and detention fund (260)
1995 95   Included    program from the general fund balance for fiscal year 1996 to provide for actual
                      expenditures
115- 9-1-  Not        Adjusting fiscal year 1995 appropriations for certain programs to provide for
1995 95   Included    actual expenditures
116- 9-1-  Not        Amending Exhibit “A” of Resolution No. 83-1995, concerning the regular municipal
1995 95   Included    election to be held in the city of Albuquerque, New Mexico, on Tuesday, the
                      third day of October, 1995
117- 9-1-  Not        Amending Exhibit “A” of Resolution No. 84-1995 concerning the municipal bond
1995 95   Included    election to be held in the city of Albuquerque, New Mexico, on Tuesday, the
                      third day of October, 1995
                      Amending the High Desert Sector Development Plan changing the zoning for a
118- 10-              portion of Lot 14, High Desert Subdivision, consisting of approximately 16
1995 5-95 1-7-37      acres, from SU-2 HD/RT to SU-2 HD/R-1 and changing the zoning for a portion of
                      Lot 2A-1C, High Desert Subdivision, consisting of approximately 20 acres, from
                      SU-2 HD/R-LT to SU-2 HD/RT
119- 10-              Amending the High Desert Sector Development Plan revising the text to delete
1995 5-95 1-7-37      references to lot size and width restrictions in the SU-2 HD/RT zone and to
                      delete the reference to building envelopes in the SU-2/RLT zone
120- 10-   Not        Authorizing the Mayor to execute a contract agreement with the New Mexico
1995 5-95 Included    Department of Children, Youth and Families and providing an appropriation to the
                      Department of Family and Community Services
                      Approving and authorizing the filing of the grant application for a drug control
121- 10-   Not        system improvement formula grant with the state of New Mexico Department of
1995 5-95 Included    Public Safety and providing for an appropriation to the city of Albuquerque
                      Police Department
122- 10-   Not        Authorizing the Mayor to execute a grant agreement with the New Mexico Arts
1995 5-95 Included    Division and providing an appropriation to the Department of Family and
                      Community Services
123- 10-   Not        Setting an official list of regular City Council meetings from October, 1995
1995 5-95 Included    through December, 1996
124- 10-  3-2-14      Creating a designated fund balance policy for the public safety and community
1995 5-95             policing tax
125- 10-   Not        Authorizing the Mayor to execute a grant agreement with the U.S. Department of
1995 16-  Included    Health and Human Services and providing an appropriation to the Department of
     95               Family and Community Services
 
Res. No. Date Disposition Short Title
Res. No. Date     Disposition   Short Title
                                Determining that certain buildings or
                                structures at 300 Alcazar S.E. within the city
126-1995 10-16-95  Not_Included of Albuquerque, New Mexico, are so ruined,
                                damaged and dilapidated as to be a menace to
                                the public comfort, health, peace or safety and
                                that they be required to be removed
                                Appropriating funds to the Bernalillo County
127-1995 10-16-95  Not_Included information systems services project in the
                                city/county projects fund for data processing
                                services provided to Bernalillo County
                                Approving a grant application to the U.S.
                                Department of Housing and Urban Development for
128-1995 10-16-95  Not_Included homeless services and making an appropriation
                                to the Department of Family and Community
                                Services
                                Approving the filing of a grant application
                                with the New Mexico State Agency on Aging for
129-1995 10-16-95  Not_Included Title III Older Americans Act Funds and HB-
                                2 Laws 1995; providing an appropriation to the
                                Family and Community Services Department
                                Approving and authorizing the filing of the
                                attached grant application for an air pollution
130-1995 10-16-95  Not_Included control grant with the Environmental Protection
                                Agency; and providing for an appropriation to
                                the Environmental Health Department
                                Approving and authorizing the filing of the
                                attached grant application for a guaranteed
                                ride home program with the Federal Highway
131-1995 10-16-95  Not_Included Administration and the New Mexico State Highway
                                and Transportation Department; and providing
                                for an appropriation to the Transit and Parking
                                Department
                                Approving and authorizing the filing of a grant
                                application with the New Mexico State
                                Corporation Commission for Federal Emergency
132-1995 10-16-95  Not_Included Management Agency (FEMA) funds under the United
                                States Fire Administration issued pursuant to
                                the Arson Prevention Act of 1994 and providing
                                for an appropriation to the Albuquerque Fire
                                Department in the operating grants fund
                                Approving and authorizing the filing of the
                                attached grant application for a ride sharing
                                program with the Federal Highway Administration
133-1995 10-18-95  Not_Included and the New Mexico State Highway and
                                Transportation Department; and providing for an
                                appropriation to the Transit and Parking
                                Department
134-1995 10-30-95  Not_Included Increasing the appropriation for the Tal Net
                                Cable Education Channel
                                Directing the Mayor to take action to determine
135-1995 11-1-95   Not_Included the appropriateness of U.S. West Communications
                                Inc.'s treatment of municipal franchise fees
                                Making appropriations to the Office of the
136-1995 11-1-95   Not_Included Economic Development based on funds received
                                from Bernalillo County
                                Amending the North I-25 Sector Development
                                Plan, changing the zoning for Lots 3-12 and 21-
                                29, Block 33 and Lots 4-12 and 21-29, Block 34,
137-1995 11-1-95  1-7-30        Tract A, Unit B, North Albuquerque Acres to R-
                                D located between Holly Avenue N.E. and Anaheim
                                Avenue N.E. and between San Pedro Boulevard
                                N.E. and Louisiana Boulevard N.E.
                                Adopting the South Martineztown Sector
                                Development Plan, repealing the 1973
138-1995 11-1-95  1-7-40        Martineztown Urban Renewal Plan, and
                                establishing SU-2 zoning for the South
                                Martineztown Neighborhood
                                Relating to the city of Albuquerque, New
                                Mexico, Special Assessment District No. 221,
                                street improvement bonds, Subseries A, issue of
                                December 1, 1995, water and sewer improvement
                                bonds, Subseries B, issue of December 1, 1995,
                                and electric and natural gas improvement bonds,
                                Subseries C, taxable issue of December 1, 1995;
139-1995 12-14-95  Not_Included establishing the maturity dates and rates of
                                interest on the bonds and approving a bond
                                purchase agreement and other documents in
                                accordance with city Ordinance Enactment No.
                                55-1995; establishing the final rates of
                                interest on unpaid assessments; making certain
                                appropriations; ratifying certain actions
                                heretofore taken; and repealing all action
                                inconsistent with this resolution
                                Amending the adopted capital improvements
140-1995 11-15-95  Not_Included program of the city of Albuquerque by
                                supplementing the Rio Grande Biological Park
                                appropriation
                                Approving grant applications to the state of
141-1995 11-15-95  Not_Included New Mexico and making an appropriation to the
                                Department of Family and Community Services to
                                administer a local DWI grant program
                                Rescinding Resolution No. R-210 Enactment No.
142-1995 11-15-95  Not_Included 77-1995, which ordered the condemnation of the
                                buildings at 1206, 1208 and 1210 Broadway S.E.,
                                Albuquerque, New Mexico
                                Adopting city policy on the proposed merger of
143-1995 11-15-95 6-5-7         Explora Science Center and the Albuquerque
                                Children's Museum
144-1995 11-15-95  Not_Included Amending the housing and neighborhood economic
                                development 1995-1996 two year program
                                Authorizing the giving of notice for bids for
                                the sale of city of Albuquerque, New Mexico
145-1995 1-12-96   Not_Included general obligation bonds consisting of
                                $23,025,000 general purpose bonds, Series 1996A
                                and $3,500,000 storm sewer bonds, Series 1996B
                                Approving and authorizing the acceptance of
                                state of New Mexico Law Enforcement Protection
146-1995 12-14-95  Not_Included Act and crime lab funds; and providing for an
                                appropriation to the Albuquerque Police
                                Department
                                Ratifying, confirming, and approving the filing
                                of the attached grant application under the
                                drug control and system improvement formula
147-1995 12-14-95  Not_Included grant with the state of New Mexico Department
                                of Public Safety; and providing for an
                                appropriation to the city of Albuquerque Police
                                Department for the continuation of the Drug
                                Abuse Resistance Education (D.A.R.E.) Program
                                Authorizing the Mayor to enter into a contract
                                agreement with the state of New Mexico and
148-1995 12-14-95  Not_Included providing an appropriation to the Department of
                                Family and Community Services for enhancements
                                to the substance abuse treatment system
                                Appropriating funds representing the city of
                                Albuquerque's portion for the joint city and
                                county of Bernalillo construction and operation
149-1995 12-14-95  Not_Included of a temporary minimum security facility at
                                either the city's soils amendment facility or
                                at Montessa Park in fiscal year 1996;
                                establishing city policy with regard to the
                                site location of the minimum security facility
 
 
 
Notes
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
1996 Resolutions
Res. No. Date Disposition Short Title
Res. Date Disposition Short Title
No.
1-   1-               Implementing the goals and objectives process pursuant to city ordinance 0-
1996 12-  2-1-2       119 and providing an appropriation
     96
2-   1-    Not        Approving and authorizing the filing of a grant application for a certified
1996 12-  Included    local government grant with the State Historic Preservation Office and
     96               providing an appropriation for the Planning Department
3-   1-    Not        Amending the adopted capital improvements program of the city of Albuquerque
1996 12-  Included    by supplementing the Aviation Department's runway 8/26 project
     96
4-   1-               Allowing the imposition and use of a passenger facility charge (“PFC”) at
1996 12-  6-6-4       Albuquerque International Sunport
     96
5-   1-    Not        Authorizing the Mayor to execute a grant agreement with United States
1996 12-  Included    Department of Justice, Community Oriented Policing Services, providing for an
     96               appropriation to the city of Albuquerque Police Department
6-   1-               Amending the North Interstate-25 Sector Development Plan SU-2/IP zone to
1996 12-  1-7-30      delete the non-conforming regulations provided by this zone
     96
7-   1-
1996 12-  6-3-6       Approving membership in the cities for climate protection campaign
     96
8-   1-    Not        Authorizing the Mayor to execute a grant agreement with the New Mexico
1996 12-  Included    Children, Youth and Families Department and providing an appropriation to the
     96               Department of Family and Community Services
9-   2-1-  Not        Establishing a legislative policy for the city of Albuquerque for the 1996
1996 96   Included    legislative session of the New Mexico legislature
     1-               Approving and authorizing the filing of an application for reimbursement of
10-  30-   Not        summer food service program for children with the New Mexico Department of
1996 96   Included    Children, Youth and Families, and providing for an appropriation to the
                      Department of Family and Community Services
     1-               Approving and authorizing the filing of a grant application for a food
11-  30-   Not        service program for children with the New Mexico Department of Children,
1996 96   Included    Youth and Families and providing an appropriation to the Department of Family
                      and Community Services
     1-               Approving and authorizing the filing of the attached grant application for
12-  30-   Not        basic state grant-in-aid grant with the New Mexico State Library; and
1996 96   Included    providing for an appropriation to the Albuquerque/Bernalillo County Library
                      System
13-  1-               Establishing a committee for the review, assessment, and guidance of the
1996 30-  2-1-12      Legal Department in areas concerning utility franchises
     96
14-  1-    Not        Providing for the appropriation of federal and state forfeiture funds to the
1996 30-  Included    Police Department
     96
15-  2-5-  Not        Appropriating funds to the special lodger's promotion program (18030) in the
1996 96   Included    lodger's tax fund for use by the Albuquerque Convention and Visitors Bureau
                      (ACVB) in fiscal year 1996
     1-               Determining that the building or structure at 1917 William S.E., within the
16-  30-   Not        city limits of Albuquerque, New Mexico, is so ruined, damaged and dilapidated
1996 96   Included    as to be a menace to the public comfort, health, peace or safety and that it
                      be required to be removed
17-  1-               Declaring that it is the policy of the city of Albuquerque to support
1996 30-  6-2-4       alternative transportation (non-single occupant vehicle) methods of
     96               transportation
18-  1-    Not        Amending the adopted capital improvements program of the city of Albuquerque
1996 30-  Included    by approving new projects, supplementing current appropriations and changing
     96               the scope of existing projects
19-  1-    Not        Appropriating funds to the Planning Department code administration program
1996 30-  Included    for additional positions and related expenses to enforce the water
     96               conservation landscaping and water waste ordinance
20-  2-7-             Adopting the Sawmill/Wells Park Sector Development Plan and its plan
1996 96   1-7-14      boundaries, repealing the 1978 Sawmill Sector Development Plan and its plan
                      boundaries, and establishing SU-2 zoning for the plan area
21-  1-               Authorizing the city of Albuquerque to enter into a sister city relationship
1996 30-  6-3-7       with the city of Lanzhou, in Gansu Province, China; inviting representatives
     96               of the city to Lanzhou to Albuquerque's 1996 Founder's Day celebration
     1-               Approving and authorizing the filing of the attached grant application for a
22-  30-   Not        special DWI prevention operations plan grant with the state of New Mexico
1996 96   Included    Department of Highway and Transportation, Bureau of Traffic Safety and
                      providing for an appropriation to the city of Albuquerque Police Department
                      Approving and authorizing the filing of the attached grant application for a
23-  1-    Not        state traffic safety and education and enforcement fund grant with the state
1996 30-  Included    of New Mexico Department of Highway and Transportation, Bureau of Traffic
     96               Safety and providing for an appropriation to the city of Albuquerque Police
                      Department
                      Amending Resolution R-226, Enactment No. 29-1993 to change the Advisory
24-  2-2-             Committee on Transit for the Mobility Impaired from a subcommittee of the
1996 96   2-7-1       Transit Advisory Board to a free-standing committee, change the designation
                      of the representatives on the committee, and set forth the responsibilities
                      of the committee
                      Authorizing the Mayor to execute a grant agreement with the New Mexico
25-  2-2-  Not        Energy, Minerals and Natural Resources Department, youth conservation corps,
1996 96   Included    providing for an appropriation to the city of Albuquerque, Parks and General
                      Services Department, Open Space Division
 
Res. No. Date Disposition Short Title
Res. Date Disposition Short Title
No.
                      Amending the University of Albuquerque Sector Development Plan to change the
                      land use designation of Parcel V and a portion of Parcel A, platted as Lot A-
                      1-A (SP-85-486), from Employment Center and Education to Village Center Mixed
                      Use: permissive uses are multi family residential 10-25 dwelling units per
26-  2-2- 1-7-5       net acre, permissive uses in the C-1 zone plus theater and sale of alcoholic
1996 96               beverages for consumption on or off premises and land uses are to be located
                      as identified on the site development plan for subdivision submitted as case
                      number Z-95-94. Sale of alcoholic beverages for off premises consumption will
                      be set back at least 300 feet from the right-of-way lines of Western Trail
                      and Coors Boulevard
27-  2-               Adopting the Sawmill Revitalization Strategy and determining that it shall be
1996 14-  1-4-2       used as the basis for a metropolitan redevelopment plan
     96
     2-               Determining that certain buildings or structures at 4806 Central Avenue S.W.
28-  26-   Not        within the city of Albuquerque, New Mexico, are so ruined, damaged and
1996 96   Included    dilapidated as to be a menace to the public comfort, health, peace or safety
                      and that they be required to be removed
29-  2-    Not        Appropriating funds to support the development of an Arid Lands Institute in
1996 26-  Included    Albuquerque and the planning of the first International Arid Lands Conference
     96
30-  2-    Not        Approving a consolidated application for U.S. Department of Housing and Urban
1996 26-  Included    Development funds and appropriating funds to the Department of Family and
     96               Community Services
31-  2-    Not        Approving and authorizing the filing of the attached grant application for
1996 26-  Included    funds under the Emergency Medical Services Fund Act with the Department of
     96               Health and providing for an appropriation to the Fire Department
                      Making certain findings and determinations pursuant to the metropolitan
32-  3-1-  Not        redevelopment code, and authorizing and directing the Albuquerque
1996 96   Included    metropolitan redevelopment agency to prepare metropolitan redevelopment plan
                      for the Isleta and Bridge Boulevards Corridors Metropolitan Redevelopment
                      Area
33-  3-1-  Not        Appropriating funds to the special lodger's promotion program (18030) in the
1996 96   Included    lodger's tax fund for use by the Albuquerque Hispano Chamber of Commerce in
                      fiscal year 1996
34-  3-1-  Not        Appropriating funds to the risk management program for a management audit of
1996 96   Included    the city's risk management function
35-  3-    Not        Appropriating funds to the Department of Family and Community Services to
1996 28-  Included    support the quatrocentennial project committee
     96
36-  3-               Creating a Customers Advisory Committee to review and make recommendations
1996 28-  2-3-2       regarding the development of the Albuquerque Water Resources Management
     96               Strategy
37-  3-    Not        Appropriating funds to the Albuquerque Police Department to purchase portable
1996 28-  Included    battery charges for hand-held radios utilized by officers
     96
38-  3-               Adopting the facility plan: electric service transmission and subtransmission
1996 28-  4-3-1       facilities (1995-2005) and repealing the facility plan: electric service
     96               transmission and subtransmission facilities (1985 - 1995)
39-  3-               Adopting a policy requiring the City Council's prior notice of annexations
1996 21-  1-1-14      initiated by the city of Albuquerque by petition to the State Municipal
     96               Boundary Commission
                      Amending the Tower/Unser Sector Development Plan, changing the zoning for
40-  4-1- 1-7-34      Tracts 152, 153, and a portion of Tract 151, Unit 6, Town of Atrisco grant
1996 96               from RT and SU-1 for a church and related facilities to SU-1 for a Family and
                      Community Services Center and park
41-  4-1-  Not        Authorizing the removal of certain uncollectible accounts from the city's
1996 96   Included    accounts receivable records
                      Appropriating funds to the Corrections and Detention Department for operating
42-  4-1-  Not        the Bernalillo County corrections and detention facility for the fiscal year
1996 96   Included    beginning July 1, 1995 and ending June 30, 1996, and repealing F/S R-233,
                      Enactment No. 75-1995
                      Appropriating additional funds representing the city of Albuquerque's portion
43-  4-1-  Not        for the joint city and county of Bernalillo construction and operation of a
1996 96   Included    temporary minimum security facility at the city's soils amendment facility in
                      fiscal year 1996
44-  4-1-  Not        Approving a grant application to the Levi Strauss Foundation and making an
1996 96   Included    appropriation to the Department of Family and Community Services
45-  4-               Naming the new community center in the Phil Chacon Regional Park the “Cesar
1996 19-  6-7-3       E. Chavez” Community Center; and calling for the creation of a Cesar E.
     96               Chavez statue to be located in the vicinity of the community center
46-  4-               Naming the South Exhibit Hall in the West Complex of the Albuquerque
1996 19-  6-7-4       Convention Center
     96
                      Approving the industrial development bonds entitled city of Albuquerque
                      industrial development bonds (El Encanto, Inc. project), Series 1996A and
                      Series 1996B (taxable) (IRB-96-4), and declaring the city of Albuquerque's
47-  5-1-  Not        intent to issue industrial development bonds in an aggregate principal amount
1996 96   Included    up to $5,000,000 in connection with a proposed project located at 2001 Fourth
                      Street, S.W. in Albuquerque, New Mexico, for the purpose of inducing El
                      Encanto, Inc. or its successors or assigns, to develop the project site in
                      the manner set forth in the plan
48-  5-1-  Not        Approving and authorizing the filing of the attached grant application for an
1996 96   Included    urban library resources grant with the New Mexico State Library; and
                      providing for an appropriation to the Albuquerque Public Library System
49-  4-               Appropriating funds to the Albuquerque Police Department to fund a sexual
1996 30-  4-5-5       assault nurse examiner (SANE) program to provide better forensic evidence
     96               collection within a safer medical environment for victims of sexual assault
50-  5-1-  Not        Establishing priorities for the 1997 CIP, defining the criteria to be used in
1996 96   Included    rating project requests for the 1997 bond cycle; and ranking the criteria in
                      priority order
 
Res. No. Date Disposition Short Title
Res. No. Date    Disposition   Short Title
                               Amending the adopted capital improvements
                               program of the city of Albuquerque by approving
51-1996  5-1-96   Not_Included new projects, supplementing current
                               appropriations and changing the scope of
                               existing projects
                               Amending the adopted capital improvements
52-1996  4-30-96  Not_Included program of the city of Albuquerque by
                               supplementing current appropriations
                               Requesting the Police Department to develop a
53-1996  5-1-96   Not_Included community plan for local business owners that
                               will provide training for their employees in
                               public safety
                               Appropriating funds for operating the government
54-1996  5-8-96   Not_Included of the city of Albuquerque for the fiscal year
                               beginning July 1, 1996 and ending June 30, 1997
                               Appropriating funds to the Corrections and
                               Detention Department for operating the
55-1996  6-7-96   Not_Included Bernalillo County corrections and detention
                               facility for the fiscal year beginning July 1,
                               1996 and ending June 30, 1997
                               Appropriating funds for operating the government
56-1996  6-7-96   Not_Included of the city of Albuquerque for the fiscal year
                               beginning July 1, 1996 and ending June 30, 1997
                               Appropriating funds in the Parks and General
                               Services Department for operating the
57-1996  6-7-96   Not_Included Albuquerque/Bernalillo County Government and Law
                               Enforcement Centers for the fiscal year
                               beginning July 1, 1996 and ending June 30, 1997
                               Adopting the Window G Sector Development Plan
58-1996  6-7-96  1-7-41        and its plan boundaries and establishing R-t, O-
                               1, C-2, SU-1 PRD (20 DU/AC), SU-1 for O-
                               1 permissive uses and plant nursery zoning
                               Requesting the Mayor to establish a community
                               restoration fee to be paid by prisoners who are
                               convicted and sentenced for a crime or prisoners
59-1996  6-7-96  4-6-9         who later become convicted of charges for which
                               they were originally incarcerated in the
                               Bernalillo County Detention Center; calling for
                               alternatives in lieu of payment
                               Establishing a program to preserve and
                               distribute the music of Albuquerque and New
60-1996  6-7-96  4-6-10        Mexico; creating a new recording label at the
                               Albuquerque Museum; establishing a trust and
                               agency account; making an appropriation
                               Establishing policy regarding Albuquerque's
61-1996  6-7-96  4-6-14        presence on the internet by development of the
                               city's published home page on the world wide web
                               Relating to Albuquerque, New Mexico, Special
                               Assessment District No. 223; setting the time
62-1996  6-7-96   Not_Included and place of a hearing when objections to the
                               revised terms of the deferred payment of the
                               long-term assessments for such district will be
                               heard
                               Approving and authorizing the filing of an
                               application with the U.S. Department of
                               Transportation for two chapter 5307 capital
63-1996  6-7-96   Not_Included assistance grants and a chapter 5307 operating
                               assistance grant; and for congestion mitigation
                               and air quality funds under chapter 5307 of
                               title 49; and providing for an appropriation to
                               the Transit and Parking Department
                               Approving and authorizing the filing of an
                               application with the U.S. Department of
                               Transportation for a Section 3 capital
64-1996  6-7-96   Not_Included assistance grant, under the Federal Transit Act
                               of 1991, as amended; and providing for an
                               appropriation to the Transit and Parking
                               Department
65-1996  6-7-96   Not_Included Approving the fiscal year 1997 audit plan as
                               submitted by the Internal Audit Committee
                               Consideration of a shared investment between the
66-1996  6-21-96  Not_Included city of Albuquerque and the county of Bernalillo
                               for new radio communications systems
                               Appropriating funds to the Department of Family
67-1996  7-1-96   Not_Included and Community Services to provide social
                               services to Vietnam veterans in Bernalillo
                               County
                               Approving grant applications to the state of New
68-1996  7-1-96   Not_Included Mexico to administer a local DWI grant program
                               and providing an appropriation to the Department
                               of Family and Community Services
                               Appropriating funds to the Department of Family
69-1996  7-1-96   Not_Included and Community Services for the continuance of
                               gang intervention activities; declaring an
                               emergency
                               Approving and authorizing the filing of an
70-1996  7-1-96   Not_Included application with the U.S. Environmental
                               Protection Agency for a Brownfields economic
                               redevelopment pilot grant
                               Adopting and mapping the Airport Protection
71-1996  7-1-96  1-10-30       Overlay Zones for Albuquerque International
                               Sunport
72-1996  7-3-96  3-3-16        Establishing a policy on health and dental
                               insurance benefits for city employees
                               Amending Resolution, R-331, Enactment No. 147-
                               1995, to appropriate an additional $835 in the
73-1996  7-3-96   Not_Included city of Albuquerque's cash match for drug
                               control and system improvement formulas grant
                               with the state of New Mexico Department of
                               Public Safety
                               Amending the membership provisions for the
                               Customers Advisory Committee to review and make
74-1996  7-3-96  2-3-2         recommendations regarding the development of the
                               Albuquerque Water Resources Management Strategy,
                               as contained in Section 1 and 2 of Bill No. R-32
                               (Enactment No. 36-1996)
                               Establishing one year objectives for the city of
75-1996  7-3-96   Not_Included Albuquerque in fiscal year 1997; to meet five-
                               year goals
 
Res. No. Date Disposition Short Title
Res. No. Date    Disposition   Short Title
                               Providing for an appropriation to the Middle Rio
76-1996  7-3-96   Not_Included Grande Council of Governments to support the
                               1996 National Association of Regional Councils'
                               Conference
77-1996  7-3-96   Not_Included Amending 123-1995 by amending the adopted list
                               of regular City Council meetings
                               Amending the University of Albuquerque Sector
                               Development Plan to change the land use
                               designation for Parcels C, D, E and F as shown
                               on the annexation plat (SP-82-8), from mixed use
                               to mixed residential; residential development
                               not to exceed 25 DU/acre and neighborhood
                               commercial/office (C-1 and O-1 uses). There
                               shall be a minimum of 5 acres (adjacent to Coors
78-1996  7-3-96  1-7-5         Boulevard) developed with townhomes and/or
                               apartments at not less than 8 DU/acre and an
                               additional 3 to 5 acres (at the corner of Coors
                               Boulevard and St. Joseph's Drive) that shall be
                               developed as either neighborhood commercial,
                               office and/or townhomes or apartments at not
                               less than 8 DU/acre. The balance of parcels C,
                               D, and E shall be developed at an average 4 to 8
                               DU/acre. Parcel F shall be developed at 1 to 3
                               DU/acre
                               Amending the University of Albuquerque Sector
                               Development Plan to change the land use
                               designation for Tracts X1A and X2A, Albuquerque
                               Urban Center (SP-95-133 and SP-95-136) from
79-1996  7-3-96  1-7-5         Employment Center to Mixed Residential: 40 acres
                               within tracts X1A and X2A shall be developed as
                               apartments R-3 uses at 20 to 25 DU/acre with the
                               balance of the property (approximately 19 acres)
                               shall be developed as commercial (C-2) and/or
                               office (O-1)
                               Appropriating funds from Bernalillo County to
80-1996  7-1-96   Not_Included the Department of Family and Community Services
                               for the safe ride home program
                               Amending La Cueva High School Land Use Guide to
                               incorporate newly annexed properties into the
81-1996  7-17-96 1-1-7         boundary of the plan and to amend the governing
                               concepts to reflect this annexation; calling for
                               a sector development plan to be initiated by the
                               city
                               Relating to Albuquerque, New Mexico Special
                               Assessment District No. 223; addressing protests
82-1992  7-17-96  Not_Included to the reamortization of the unpaid long-term
                               assessments; and confirming the unpaid long-term
                               assessments
                               Requiring the implementation of a temporary
83-1996  7-17-96  Not_Included mandatory water conservation program for the
                               city of Albuquerque; requesting periodic
                               evaluations and status reports
                               Approving and authorizing the filing of the
                               grant application for a high intensity drug
                               trafficking area (HIDTA) grant program with the
84-1996  8-22-96  Not_Included state of New Mexico Department of Public Safety;
                               providing for an appropriation to the city of
                               Albuquerque Police Department and declaring an
                               emergency
                               Approving and authorizing the filing of the
                               attached grant application for a substance abuse
85-1996  8-22-96  Not_Included prevention services grant with the state of New
                               Mexico Department of Health; and providing for
                               an appropriation to the city of Albuquerque
                               Police Department
                               Adjusting fiscal year 1997 appropriations for
86-1996  8-22-96  Not_Included certain interfund transfers from the general
                               fund to other funds and enterprise fund programs
                               to reduce tort and other claims line item
                               Appropriating grant funds awarded to the Transit
87-1996  8-22-96  Not_Included Department by the International Council for
                               Local Environmental Initiatives for a project to
                               reduce vehicle miles traveled in the Uptown Area
88-1996  8-22-96 3-2-4         Determining reasonable notice of public meetings
                               of the Council and Council Committees
                               Enhancing the Xeriscape landscape retrofit
89-1996  8-23-96 4-3-16        incentive program; amending Section 7(D) of Bill
                               No. R-174 (Enactment No. 40-1995); requesting
                               timely action to implement program
                               Relating to the $11,245,000 city of Albuquerque,
                               New Mexico affordable housing project/gross
                               receipts tax subordinate lien revenue bonds,
                               series 1996 authorized to be issued by city
                               Ordinance Enactment No. 10-1996; providing
90-1996  10-1-96  Not_Included certain terms of the bonds, the price to be paid
                               by the original purchaser for the bonds and
                               other details concerning the bonds; approving
                               documents relating to the bonds; making certain
                               appropriations; and ratifying certain actions
                               previously taken
                               Approving the fiscal year 1996-2001
91-1996  9-9-96  4-2-10        Transportation Program for the Albuquerque urban
                               area
                               Recognizing an imminent and substantial
                               endangerment related to contamination in the
                               vicinity of the Sparton Technology Site at 9621
                               Coors Road N.W., Albuquerque; declaring the
                               city's compelling interest in protecting the
92-1996  9-9-96   Not_Included city's water resources; calling upon state and
                               federal authorities to act immediately to
                               require responsible parties to characterize and
                               abate the imminent and substantial endangerment;
                               and, calling for independent programmatic and
                               legal action by the city of Albuquerque
                               Appropriating funds to the Department of Family
93-1996  9-9-96   Not_Included and Community Services for the operation of the
                               work source program
                               Appropriating the city's contribution for an
                               agreement with the New Mexico State Highway and
                               Transportation Department for Intermodal Surface
94-1996  9-9-96   Not_Included Transportation Efficiency Act (ISTEA) funding to
                               operate a bicycle/pedestrian safety education
                               program; and appropriating the ISTEA grant funds
                               for this purpose
                               Adjusting fiscal year 1996 appropriations for
95-1996  9-9-96   Not_Included certain programs to provide for actual
                               expenditures
                               Appropriating funds to the Family and Community
96-1996  9-9-96   Not_Included Services Department, city housing fund for
                               housing related projects
                               Approving and authorizing a grant under the New
                               Mexico Litter Control and Beautification Act
97-1996  9-9-96   Not_Included with the New Mexico State Highway Department;
                               and providing for an appropriation to the city
                               of Albuquerque Solid Waste Department
                               Approving and authorizing the filing of the
                               attached application for an RSVP corporation for
98-1996  9-9-96   Not_Included national and community service grant and
                               providing for an appropriation to the Department
                               of Senior Affairs
                               Approving and authorizing the filing of the
                               attached application for a senior companion
                               program grant with the corporation for national
99-1996  9-9-96   Not_Included and community services, including funds
                               allocated by the State Agency on Aging and
                               providing an appropriation to the Department of
                               Senior Affairs
                               Approving and authorizing the filing of the
                               attached application for a foster grandparent
                               program grant with the corporation for national
100-1996 9-9-96   Not_Included and community services funds allocated by the
                               State Agency on Aging and providing an
                               appropriation to the Department of Senior
                               Affairs
 
Res. No. Date Disposition Short Title
Res. No. Date     Disposition   Short Title
                                Relating to the proposed Albuquerque, New
                                Mexico Special Assessment District No. 222,
                                directing Andrews, Asbury and Robert, Inc. to
101-1996 9-9-96    Not_Included prepare, submit and file with the City Clerk
                                certain preliminary plans, estimates of costs,
                                and assessment plats with addendum, all in
                                connection therewith and making an
                                appropriation
                                Amending policy adopted in Resolution R-46,
102-1996 9-9-96   3-3-17        Enactment No. 56-1996 to allow tuition
                                assistance funds to be used for employee's
                                pursuing a master's degree
                                Approving and authorizing the filing of the
                                attached grant application for developing water
103-1996 9-23-96   Not_Included and energy conservation guidelines for public
                                parks and providing for an appropriation to the
                                Parks and General Services Department
                                Establishing a Planning and Management
104-1996 9-24-96  2-10-3        Oversight Committee for the Balloon Fiesta Park
                                Master Plan; requiring recommendations
                                concerning the master plan
                                Appropriating funds to the Department of Family
105-1996 10-1-96   Not_Included and Community Services to provide social
                                services to Vietnam Veterans
                                Appropriating funds from the unreserved general
106-1996 10-1-96   Not_Included fund balance to the capital implementation
                                program for the Balloon Fiesta Park
                                Approving and authorizing the filing of the
                                attached grant application for a sustainable
107-1996 10-1-96   Not_Included development challenge grant with the U.S.
                                Environmental Protection Agency in conjunction
                                with the University of New Mexico Department of
                                Economics
                                Approving and authorizing the filing of a grant
                                application for a certified local government
108-1996 10-1-96   Not_Included grant with the State Historic Preservation
                                Office and providing an appropriation to the
                                Planning Department
                                Approving and authorizing the filing of the
                                grant application for a Forensic DNA Laboratory
109-1996 10-1-96   Not_Included Program grant with the United States Department
                                of Justice and providing for an appropriation
                                to the city of Albuquerque Police Department
                                Amending the North I-25 Sector Development Plan
110-1996 10-1-96  1-7-30        to clarify the land use and zoning section as
                                to the uses of Balloon Fiesta Park
                                Approving and authorizing the filing of the
                                attached grant application for an air pollution
111-1996 10-1-96   Not_Included control grant with the Environmental Protection
                                Agency; and providing for an appropriation to
                                the Environmental Health Department
                                Authorizing the filing of a grant application
                                with the New Mexico State Agency on Aging for
112-1996 10-1-96   Not_Included Title III Older Americans Act Funds and HB-
                                2 Laws 1996, providing an appropriation to the
                                Family and Community Services Department
                                Relating to the $18,315,000 city of
                                Albuquerque, New Mexico gross receipts tax
                                refunding revenue bonds, Series 1996 authorized
                                to be issued by city Ordinance Enactment No.
                                32-1996; providing certain terms of the bonds,
                                awarding the bonds to, and providing the price
                                to be paid for the bonds by, the original
113-1996 11-12-96  Not_Included purchaser; providing other details concerning
                                the bonds; approving documents relating to the
                                bonds; making certain appropriations; amending
                                city Ordinance Enactment No. 32-1996 with
                                respect to parking-maximum allocable revenues
                                and by adding provisions relating to the use of
                                certain lodgers' tax revenues; and ratifying
                                certain actions previously taken
                                Appropriating funds to the Legal Department to
                                put the city of Albuquerque's resolutions, the
114-1996 10-18-96  Not_Included development process manual and the
                                administrative instructions manual in search
                                and retrieval format on disk
                                Appropriating metropolitan redevelopment funds
115-1996 10-18-96  Not_Included for the implementation of redevelopment
                                programs in metropolitan redevelopment areas
                                Setting an official list of regular City
116-1996 10-18-96  Not_Included Council meetings from October, 1996 through
                                December, 1997
                                Approving and authorizing the filing of a grant
                                application for a literacy education project
117-1996 10-18-96  Not_Included with the New Mexico Coalition for Literacy and
                                providing an appropriation to the Department of
                                Family and Community Services
                                Approving and authorizing the filing of a grant
                                application for a ride sharing program with the
118-1996 10-18-96  Not_Included Federal Highway Administration and the New
                                Mexico State Highway and Transportation
                                Department; and providing for an appropriation
                                to the Transit Department
                                Approving and authorizing the filing of a grant
                                application for a guaranteed ride home program
119-1996 10-18-96  Not_Included with the Federal Highway Administration and the
                                New Mexico State Highway and Transportation
                                Department; and providing for an appropriation
                                to the Transit Department
                                Amending the Academy-Tramway- Eubank Sector
                                Development Plan and changing the zoning for
                                tract M-1 of Tanoan Properties, consisting of
                                approximately 11 acres, from R-D/Office Park
120-1996 10-18-96 1-7-2         and Restaurants for full service liquor to SU-
                                1 for C-1 permissive and conditional uses
                                (excluding drive-up windows except at banks)
                                including package liquor sales within 500 feet
                                of a residential zone
                                Recognizing and supporting the Open Space
                                Alliance, a non-profit volunteer organization,
121-1996 10-31-96 6-2-2         engaged in the process of promoting
                                appreciation and conservation of the open space
                                system managed by the city of Albuquerque
                                Approving an application for Job Training
122-1996 10-31-96  Not_Included Partnership Act Funds, income generating
                                activities; and providing an appropriation to
                                the Department of Family and Community Services
                                Determining that the building or structure at
                                248 Smith S.E., within the city limits of
123-1996 10-31-96  Not_Included Albuquerque, New Mexico, is so ruined, damaged
                                and dilapidated as to be a menace to the public
                                comfort, health, peace or safety and that it be
                                required to be removed
                                Appropriating funds to the Legal Department for
                                the special election to be held on the question
124-1996 11-7-96   Not_Included of the imposition of a one-quarter of one
                                percent municipal gross receipts tax to be
                                dedicated to parks and open space
                                Fixing Tuesday, January 14, 1997, as the date
                                for a special election to be held on the
125-1996 11-7-96   Not_Included question of the imposition of a one-quarter of
                                one percent municipal gross receipts tax to be
                                dedicated to parks and open space
 
Res. No. Date Disposition Short Title
Res. No. Date     Disposition   Short Title
                                Adopting policies for the city of Albuquerque
126-1996 11-12-96 3-3-18        regarding collective bargaining and fair share
                                provisions
                                Appointing the person ranked highest by the
127-1996 11-12-96  Not_Included Audit Committee to the position of internal
                                auditor for the city of Albuquerque
                                Informing the U.S. Environmental Protection
                                Agency, Region VI, that the city of Albuquerque
128-1996 11-29-96  Not_Included has taken the appropriate action concerning
                                pretreatment program requirements contained in
                                NPDES wastewater Permit No. NM022250
                                Formally objecting to the proposed changes in
129-1996 11-29-96  Not_Included the state liquor regulations and encouraging
                                their modification
                                Approving and authorizing the acceptance of
                                state of New Mexico Law Enforcement Protection
130-1996 11-29-96  Not_Included Act and crime lab funds; and providing for an
                                appropriation to the Albuquerque Police
                                Department
                                Approving and authorizing the filing of the
                                grant application for a grant to encourage
                                arrest policies with the United States
131-1996 11-29-96  Not_Included Department of Justice, Office of Justice
                                programs, Violence Against Women Grants Office
                                and providing for an appropriation to the city
                                of Albuquerque Police Department
                                Approving and authorizing the filing of the
                                grant application for a drugfire equipment
132-1996 11-29-96  Not_Included program grant with the United States Bureau of
                                Justice assistance and providing for an
                                appropriation to the city of Albuquerque Police
                                Department
                                Amending the adopted capital improvements
                                program of the city of Albuquerque by approving
133-1996 11-29-96  Not_Included new projects, supplementing current
                                appropriations and changing the scope of
                                existing projects
                                Approving and authorizing the filing of the
                                attached grant application for an operation DWI
                                and buckle down enforcement grant with the
134-1996 11-29-96  Not_Included state of New Mexico Department of Highway and
                                Transportation, Bureau of Traffic Safety and
                                providing for an appropriation to the city of
                                Albuquerque Police Department
                                Requesting the Metropolitan Parks and
135-1996 11-29-96  Not_Included Recreation Advisory Board to study the use and
                                scheduling of parks for organized sports
136-1996 12-3-96   Not_Included Providing for the appropriation of federal and
                                state forfeiture funds to the Police Department
                                Calling for the enforcement of Bill No. R-285
                                (Enactment No. 106-1995) which requires the
                                administration to abate the nuisance of
137-1996 12-3-96  4-6-15        unlawful use of drive-up windows; establishing
                                on going monitoring of Liquor Control Act
                                violations; requesting the investigation of
                                whether the record of violations indicates that
                                drive-up windows constitute a nuisance per se
                                Establishing an alternative pilot suspension
138-1996 12-3-96  4-6-11        program and making an appropriation to the
                                Department of Family and Community Services
                                Approving and authorizing the filing of a grant
                                application with the New Mexico State
                                Corporation Commission for Federal Emergency
139-1996 12-3-96   Not_Included Management Agency (FEMA) funds under the United
                                States Fire Administration issued pursuant to
                                the Arson Prevention Act of 1994 and providing
                                for an appropriation to the Albuquerque Fire
                                Department in the operating grants fund
                                Approving and authorizing the filing of the
                                grant application for a renewal of the COPS
                                MORE (Community Oriented Policing Services
140-1996 12-3-96   Not_Included Making Officer Redeployment Effective) program
                                grant with the United States Department of
                                Justice, Community Oriented Policing Services
                                and providing for an appropriation to the City
                                of Albuquerque, Police Department
                                Declaring the official intent of the city of
                                Albuquerque to provide for the reimbursement of
                                certain capital expenditures paid for the city;
141-1996 12-18-96  Not_Included identifying said capital expenditures and the
                                funds to pay for such expenditures and
                                providing certain other matters in connection
                                therewith
                                Declaring the official intent of the city of
                                Albuquerque, New Mexico to provide for the
                                reimbursement of certain capital expenditures
142-1996 12-18-96  Not_Included to be undertaken on behalf of the city;
                                identifying said capital expenditures and the
                                funds to be used for such payment; and
                                providing for certain other matters in
                                connection therewith
 
 
 
Notes
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
1997 Resolutions
Res. No. Date Disposition Short Title
Res. No. Date    Disposition   Short Title
                               Establishing a legislative policy for the city
1-1997   1-13-97  Not_Included of Albuquerque for the 1997 legislative session
                               of the New Mexico legislature
                               Providing for an appropriation to the Department
                               of Family and Community Services to address the
                               impact of federal and state budget cuts and gaps
                               and deficiencies in service, and creating a high
                               school student retention block grant to support
2-1997   1-13-97  Not_Included the city's goal of improving the lives of youth
                               and seniors, supporting the family, fostering
                               and maintaining stable neighborhoods and
                               providing an appropriation to city support
                               functions to pay for lobbying services for
                               Bernalillo County in fiscal year 1997
                               Adjusting fiscal year 1996 appropriations for
3-1997   1-13-97  Not_Included certain programs to provide for actual
                               expenditures
4-1997   1-13-97 6-1-1         Changing the street name of Stadium Boulevard to
                               Avenida Cesar Chavez
                               Authorizing the giving of notice for bids for
                               the sale of city of Albuquerque, New Mexico
5-1997   1-13-97  Not_Included general obligation bonds consisting of
                               $44,620,000 general purpose bonds, Series 1997A
                               and $6,700,000 storm sewer bonds, Series 1997B
                               Approving and authorizing the filing of a grant
                               application for a food service program for
6-1997   1-13-97  Not_Included children with the New Mexico Department of
                               Children, Youth and Families and providing for
                               an appropriation to the Department of Family and
                               Community Services
                               Approving and authorizing the filing of an
                               application for a summer food service program
7-1997   1-13-97  Not_Included for children with the New Mexico Department of
                               Children, Youth and Families Department;
                               providing an appropriation to the Family and
                               Community Services Department
                               Amending the Interim Level A Community Master
8-1997   1-21-97 1-11-9        Plan for Mesa Del Sol to accommodate a regional
                               recreational facility, including a Performing
                               Arts Facility
                               Relating to the proposed Albuquerque New Mexico
                               Special Assessment District No. 224, directing
                               Wilson & Company, engineers and architects, to
9-1997   1-31-97  Not_Included prepare, submit, and file with the City Clerk
                               certain preliminary plans, estimates of costs,
                               and assessment plats with addendum, all in
                               connection therewith and making an appropriation
                               Establishing a city Office of Violence Against
                               Women to be located within the Family and
10-1997  2-13-97 2-4-2         Community Services Department; approving and
                               authorizing the filing of a grant application
                               with the U.S. Department of Justice; authorizing
                               a city position to act as program coordinator
                               Approving and authorizing the filing of the
                               attached grant application for a traffic safety
                               education and enforcement grant with the state
11-1997  1-31-97  Not_Included of New Mexico Department of Highway and
                               Transportation, Bureau of Traffic Safety and
                               providing for an appropriation to the city of
                               Albuquerque Police Department
                               Authorizing the removal of certain uncollectible
12-1997  1-31-97  Not_Included accounts from the city's accounts receivable
                               records
                               Authorizing the Mayor to execute a grant
13-1997  1-31-97  Not_Included agreement with the U.S. Department of Health and
                               Human Services and providing an appropriation to
                               the Department of Family and Community Services
                               Approving a consolidated application for U.S.
                               Department of housing and Urban Development
                               grant funds, making an appropriation to the
14-1997  2-4-97   Not_Included Department of Family and Community Services, and
                               repealing Resolution R-21, Enactment No. 27-
                               1994, Resolution No. 115-1975 and Resolution No.
                               40-1977 (scattered site housing policy)
                               Appropriating funds to provide for a wage
15-1997  2-4-97   Not_Included adjustment for sworn police officers in the
                               Police Department for fiscal year 1997
                               Requesting that the Mayor develop a
16-1997  2-18-97  Not_Included comprehensive neighborhood traffic management
                               program
                               Providing an official city designation of the
17-1997  2-10-97 6-7-5         Community Cultural Festival and the Community
                               Fine Arts Festival
                               Authorizing the Mayor to execute an agreement
                               with the New Mexico Department of Children,
18-1997  2-10-97  Not_Included Youth and Families for child care activities at
                               Longfellow and Lew Centers and providing an
                               appropriation to the Department of Family and
                               Community Services
                               Establishing an automated victim notification
                               service and an inmate information line at the
19-1997  2-18-97 4-6-12        Bernalillo County Corrections and Detention
                               Center; requiring development of administrative
                               regulations
                               Establishing one-year objectives for the city of
20-1997  2-18-97  Not_Included Albuquerque in fiscal year 1998; to meet five-
                               year goals
                               Reappropriating funds for fiscal year 1997 to
                               the government of the city of Albuquerque for
21-1997  2-21-97  Not_Included implementing and meeting the City Council
                               adopted five-year goals, one year objectives,
                               and amendments
                               Approving and authorizing the appropriation of
                               $30,000 from the Commissioner of Public Lands
                               for the state of New Mexico into the city of
22-1997  2-18-97  Not_Included Albuquerque Environmental Health Department to
                               cooperate in the installation of groundwater
                               monitoring wells at the former South Eubank
                               Landfill
                               Approving and authorizing the filing of the
                               attached grant application for a New Mexico
23-1997  2-18-97  Not_Included solid waste facility grant with the New Mexico
                               Environment Department (NMED); and providing for
                               an appropriation to the Public Works Department,
                               water and wastewater enterprise fund
                               Determining that the building or structure at
                               409 Forty-Ninth St. N.W., within the city limits
24-1997  3-6-97   Not_Included of Albuquerque, New Mexico, is so ruined,
                               damaged and dilapidated as to be a menace to the
                               public comfort, health, peace or safety and that
                               it be required to be removed
                               Consenting to the operation of the Regional
25-1997  3-6-97   Not_Included Housing Authority Region No. 3 in the city of
                               Albuquerque, New Mexico
 
Res. No. Date Disposition Short Title
Res. Date Disposition Short Title
No.
                      Appropriating and providing funds to Sandoval County for the maintenance,
26-  3-    Not        development and improvement of property at the New Mexico Tournament Soccer Complex
1997 14-  Included    at Santa Ana Pueblo as a youth soccer facility; providing for a joint powers
     97               agreement for the use of the facility by soccer players from both the city
                      Albuquerque and Sandoval County
27-  3-    Not        Authorizing the Mayor to execute a grant agreement with the U.S. Department of
1997 10-  Included    Justice, Bureau of Justice Assistance, providing for an appropriation to the city of
     97               Albuquerque Police Department
28-  3-               Amending the Tower/Unser Sector Development Plan and Zone Map to change the zoning
1997 19-  1-7-34      of portions of Tracts A and B of Tower West Joint Venture Subdivision from SU-1 for
     97               C-1 and R-2 uses to R-T
29-  3-    Not        Transferring funds from the refuse operating fund (651) fund balance to the refuse
1997 19-  Included    capital fund (653) fund balance to purchase automated refuse trucks
     97
                      Amending the University of Albuquerque Area Sector Development Plan to remove the
                      words “town homes or apartment” from the “Mixed Residential” land use designation,
30-  4-               and to substitute “Residential Development” for Plan Parcels C, D, E, and F as shown
1997 18-  1-7-5       on the annexation plat (SP-82-8), as previously approved by the Environmental
     97               Planning Commission as SD-80-3-2 on February 16, 1996 adopted by the City Council
                      through Resolution R-58 on June 17, 1996 and approved by the Development Review
                      Board on August 6, 1996 as DRB-96-361
     4-               Approving and authorizing the filing of the attached grant application for a traffic
31-  18-   Not        safety education and enforcement grant with the state of New Mexico Department of
1997 97   Included    Highway and Transportation, Bureau of Traffic Safety and providing for an
                      appropriation to the city of Albuquerque Police Department
     4-               Approving and authorizing the filing of the grant application for a computerized
32-  18-   Not        criminal history system with the state of New Mexico Department of Public Safety,
1997 97   Included    Office of Special Projects and providing for an appropriation to the city of
                      Albuquerque Police Department
     4-               Approving and authorizing the filing of the attached grant application for a 1997
33-  18-   Not        sub-grant for speed enforcement with the state of New Mexico Department of Highway
1997 97   Included    and Transportation, Bureau of Traffic Safety and providing for an appropriation to
                      the city of Albuquerque Police Department
34-  4-    Not        Appropriating funds to the capital implementation program for the purchase of
1997 18-  Included    Anderson Fields; declaring an emergency
     97
35-  4-               Adopting the West Side Strategic Plan, a Rank II Area Plan establishing policies for
1997 25-  1-11-8      growth and development of Albuquerque's west side
     97
36-  4-    Not        Adopting the fiscal year 1998-1999 two-year urban enhancement program and
1997 25-  Included    appropriating funds for the urban enhancement program's projects
     97
37-  4-               Amending the Tower/Unser Sector Development Plan for Lots 18-20, west of Westland,
1997 28-  1-7-34      Row 3, Unit B, town of Atrisco grant, located north of Tower Road S.W., between
     97               114th Street S.W. and 110th Street S.W., containing approximately 15 acres
38-  4-    Not        Amending Resolution No. 116-1996 by amending the adopted list of regular City
1997 28-  Included    Council meetings; declaring an emergency
     97
39-  5-    Not        Appropriating funds from the reserved general fund balance to the capital
1997 19-  Included    implementation program for the Westside Jail Facility
     97
40-  5-               Adopting the Albuquerque water resources management strategy as the city's water
1997 19-  3-5-7       supply policy; and directing the Mayor to implement the policies and projects
     97               identified in the strategy
41-  5-    Not        Appropriating funds to the capital implementation program for the purchase of
1997 19-  Included    Anderson Fields; declaring an emergency
     97
42-  5-    Not        Appropriating funds for operating the government of the city of Albuquerque for the
1997 28-  Included    fiscal year beginning July 1, 1997 and ending June 30, 1998
     97
43-  5-    Not        Amending the adopted capital implementation program of the city of Albuquerque by
1997 23-  Included    supplementing current appropriations
     97
44-  4-    Not        Approving the programming of funds and projects for the 1997-2006 decade plan for
1997 25-  Included    capital improvements including the 1997 two-year capital budget
     97
45-  5-               Authorizing the city of Albuquerque to enter into a technicak support relationship
1997 28-  6-3-8       with Quetzaltenango, Guatemala through the International City/County Management
     97               Association's (ICMA) International Resource Cities Program
46-  5-    Not
1997 28-  Included    Regarding negotiations with blue collar employees; declaring an emergency
     97
47-  6-    Not        Approving and authorizing the filing of the grant application for a forensic DNA
1997 10-  Included    laboratory grant with the United States Department of Justice and providing for an
     97               appropriation to the city of Albuquerque Police Department
48-  6-               Amending the Tower/Unser Sector Development Plan and Zone map to change the zoning
1997 10-  1-7-34      of Lot 17 and Tracts 13, 14, 15, and 16 of Unit 2, Town of Atrisco grant from SU-1/
     97               PDA to RD/9 du/ac
49-  6-    Not        Adopting a joint powers agreement with Bernalillo County to re-establish the
1997 10-  Included    Metropolitan Criminal Justice Coordinating Council (MCJCC)
     97
50-  6-    Not        Amending the adopted capital implementation program of the city of Albuquerque by
1997 10-  Included    approving new projects, supplementing current appropriations and changing the scope
     97               of existing projects
 
Res. No. Date Disposition Short Title
Res. No. Date    Disposition   Short Title
                               Appropriating funds for operating the government
51-1997  6-10-97  Not_Included of the city of Albuquerque for the fiscal year
                               beginning July 1, 1997 and ending June 30, 1998
                               Appropriating funds to the Corrections and
                               Detentions Department for operating the
52-1997  6-10-97  Not_Included Bernalillo County Corrections and Detention
                               Facility for the fiscal year beginning July 1,
                               1997 and ending June 30, 1998
                               Appropriating funds in the Parks and General
                               Services Department for operating the
53-1997  6-10-97  Not_Included Albuquerque/Bernalillo County Government and Law
                               Enforcement Centers for the fiscal year
                               beginning July 1, 1997 and ending June 30, 1998
                               Declaring an emergency moratorium on the
                               permitting on any new off-premise signs on
54-1997  6-10-97  Not_Included Alameda Boulevard in the area west of Interstate
                               25 and east of the AMAFCA north diversion
                               channel
                               Appropriating additional quality of life funds
                               for the construction of the Explora Science
55-1997  7-1-97   Not_Included Center, Baolloon Museum and Rio Grande Bosque
                               Railroad and repealing the Quality of Life Trust
                               Fund
                               Authorizing the acquisition of New Mexico
56-1997  7-1-97   Not_Included Utilities; appropriating funds; and creating new
                               programs
                               Declaring a six-month extension of the emergency
                               moratorium on the permitting of any new off-
57-1997  7-1-97   Not_Included premise signs on Alameda Boulevard in the area
                               west of Interstate 25 and east of AMAFCA North
                               Diversion Channel
                               Relating to the $46,715,000 City of Albuquerque,
                               New Mexico joint water and sewer system revenue
                               bonds, Series 1997 authorized to be issued by
                               city ordinance Twelfth Council Bill No. F/S O-
                               87; providing certain terms of the bonds,
                               awarding the bonds to, and providing the price
58-1997  7-1-97   Not_Included to paid for the bonds by, the original
                               purchaser; providing other details concerning
                               the bonds; approving documents relating to the
                               bonds; amending city ordinance Twelfth Council
                               Bill No. F/S O-87; making certain
                               appropriations; and ratifying certain actions
                               previously taken
                               Adopting a policy prohibiting additional waivers
59-1997  7-1-97  5-1-1         of the distance requirement between churches or
                               schools and licensed premises from which
                               alcoholic beverages are sold
                               Concerning the regular municipal election to be
60-1997  7-1-97   Not_Included held in the city of Albuquerque, New Mexico, on
                               Tuesday, the 7th of October, 1997
                               Concerning a municipal bond election at the
                               regular municipal election to be held in the
                               city of Albuquerque on October 7, 1997;
                               submitting to a vote of qualified, registered
                               electors and nonresident municipal electors at
                               such election certain questions for authorizing
                               the issuance of general obligation bonds in
61-1997  7-1-97   Not_Included varying principal amounts and for specified
                               public purposes; providing the form of the bond
                               questions, the emergency and absentee paper
                               ballots therefor and the designation clause for
                               such questions on voting machines; providing for
                               notice of the election; prescribing other
                               details in connection with such election and
                               bonds; and ratifying action previously taken in
                               connection therewith
                               Calling for an independent audit of the city's
62-1997  7-7-97  2-5-4         Community Residential Program Regulations;
                               creating a panel to work with Community
                               Residential Programs and Neighborhoods
                               Approving and authorizing the filing of an
                               application with the U.S. Department of
63-1997  7-7-97   Not_Included Transportation for two Chapter 5307 Congestion
                               Mitigation and Air Quality Grants; and a Chapter
                               5307 Operating Assistance Grant; and providing
                               an appropriation to the Transit Department
                               Amending Council Bill No. R-150, Enactment No.
64-1997  7-7-97  4-6-12        19-1997, the Victim Notification Service and
                               Inmate Information Line, correcting the
                               appropriation language in Section 4
                               Amending the North I-25 Sector Development Plan
                               to change the zoning from SU-2/IP to R-D for
                               Lots 3-12 and 21-30, plus the eastern 53 feet of
65-1997  7-7-97  1-7-30        Lots 2 and 31, all in Block 31, Tract A, Unit B,
                               North Albuquerque Acres, located east side of
                               San Pedro Drive NE between Wilshire Avenue NE
                               and Corona Avenue NE containing approximately 18
                               acres
                               Relating to the city of Albuquerque, New Mexico
                               industrial development revenue bonds (Universal
                               Printing and Publishing Co., Inc. project)
                               Series 1997 in the aggregate principal amount of
                               $2,400,000; establishing the purchase price,
                               principal amount, maturities and other terms of
66-1997  7-7-97   Not_Included the bonds; approving and authorizing the
                               execution of certain documents relating to the
                               bonds; determining the sufficiency of payments
                               from the project and by Universal Printing and
                               Publishing Co., Inc. to pay the debt service on
                               the bonds and to pay all costs of or relating to
                               the project; and ratifying certain actions
                               heretofore taken
                               Concerning the city of Albuquerque, New Mexico
                               industrial revenue bonds (MCT Industries, Inc.
                               project) Series 1997A in the aggregate principal
                               sum of $4,330,000 and the city of Albuquerque,
                               New Mexico taxable industrial revenue bonds (MCT
                               Industries, Inc. project) Series 1997B in the
67-1997  7-7-97   Not_Included aggregate principal sum of $670,000;
                               establishing the principal maturities, interest
                               rates and other terms of the bonds; authorizing
                               the execution and approval of certain documents
                               concerning the bonds; ratifying certain actions
                               previously taken; and repealing all action
                               inconsistent with this resolution
                               Appropriating funds to the Department of Family
68-1997  7-7-97   Not_Included and Community Services to support the Neutral
                               Corner Program
69-1997  7-7-97   Not_Included Approving the fiscal year 1998 audit plan as
                               submitted by the Internal Audit Committee
                               Appropriating supplemental monies to the Gang
70-1997  7-7-97   Not_Included Resistance Education and Training Grant Program
                               (G.R.E.A.T), approved in R-136, Enactment 126-
                               1994
                               Appropriating funds to the Family and Community
71-1997  7-7-97   Not_Included Services Department for a contract with the New
                               Mexico Hispano Music Association
                               Appropriating grant funds awarded to the Transit
72-1997  7-7-97   Not_Included Department by the Department of Energy for
                               demonstration of heavy duty alternative fuel
                               vehicles
                               Ratifying, confirming, and approving the filing
                               of the attached grant application under the drug
                               control system improvement grant with the state
73-1997  7-7-97   Not_Included of New Mexico Department of Public Safety; and
                               providing for an appropriation to the city of
                               Albuquerque Police Department for the
                               continuation of the Drug Abuse Resistance
                               Education (D.A.R.E.) Program
                               Approving and authorizing the filing of the
                               attached grant agreement for a child restraint
74-1997  7-7-97   Not_Included law enforcement grant with Safer New Mexico Now,
                               a non-profit agency, and providing for an
                               appropriation to the city of Albuquerque Police
                               Department
                               Approving and authorizing the filing of an
                               application with the U.S. Department of
75-1997  7-7-97   Not_Included Transportation for a Section 5309 Capital
                               Assistance Grant; and providing an appropriation
                               to the Transit Department
 
Res. No. Date Disposition Short Title
Res. No. Date     Disposition   Short Title
                                Approving and authorizing the filing of the
                                attached grant agreement for a New Mexico Gang
                                Task Force subgrant with the Rio Ranchero
76-1997  7-7-97    Not_Included Department of Public Safety, New Mexico Gang
                                Task Force Division, and providing an
                                appropriation to the city of Albuquerque Police
                                Department
                                Appropriating funds to the Department of Family
77-1997  7-7-97    Not_Included and Community Services for social services to
                                homeless veterans
                                Amending the Seven Bar Sector Development Plan
                                for a portion of Tract 14, partition of Black
                                Ranch; Lots 4A and 4B, replat of Lots 2 and 4,
                                northeast portion of Black Ranch, Lot 3 as
                                shown on the replat map for Tract C-2 northeast
78-1997  7-16-97  1-7-28        portion of Black Ranch; Lots 1A, 2A-1, and 2B-
                                1 of the northern portion of Black Ranch; plus
                                Tracts C-1-A and C-3, northeast portion of
                                Black Ranch, located east of Coors Boulevard NW
                                between Alameda Boulevard NW and Coors Bypass
                                Boulevard NW, containing approximately 16.31
                                acres
                                Approving funds for the use of the Albuquerque
79-1997  8-21-97   Not_Included Visitor Information Center by the State
                                Department of Tourism
                                Repealing Bill No. R-45, Enactment No. 44-1994,
80-1997  8-21-97  1-7-11        regarding the Old Town Sector Development and
                                Community Development Plan
81-1997  8-28-97  3-2-4         Determining reasonable notice of public
                                meetings of the Council and Council committees
                                Clarifying the approval process for the
82-1997  8-21-97   Not_Included construction of the Eastdale Little League
                                concession stand and storage building at the
                                Balloon Fiesta Park
                                Declaring the city of Albuquerque's intent to
                                issue industrial revenue bonds (IRB 97-6) in an
                                aggregate principal amount up to $4,640,000 in
                                connection with a proposed project located
                                adjacent to and on the west side of Interstate
83-1997  9-5-97    Not_Included Highway 25 between Gibson Boulevard SE and
                                Sunport Boulevard SE for the purpose of
                                inducing the Karsten Company of New Mexico,
                                L.L.C. and Golden Ventures, L.L.C. or their
                                respective successors or assigns, to develop
                                the project site in the manner set forth in the
                                plan.
                                Appropriating funds to the Corrections and
                                Detention Department for operating the
84-1997  9-12-97   Not_Included Bernalillo County Corrections and Detention
                                Facility for the fiscal year beginning July 1,
                                1996 and ending June 30, 1997, and repealing F/
                                S R-48, Enactment No. 55-1996
                                Approving an application for job training
85-1997  9-12-97   Not_Included partnership act funds, income generating
                                activities, and providing an appropriation to
                                the Department of Family and Community Services
                                Approving and authorizing the filing of the
                                attached grant application for an air pollution
86-1997  9-12-97   Not_Included control grant with the Environmental Protection
                                Agency; and providing an appropriation to the
                                Environmental Health Department
                                Authorizing the Mayor to execute an agreement
                                with the New Mexico Department of Children,
87-1997  9-12-97   Not_Included Youth and Families for child care activities at
                                Longfellow and Lew Wallace Child Development
                                Centers and providing an appropriation to the
                                Department of Family and Community Services
                                Relating to the proposed Albuquerque, New
                                Mexico Special Assessment District No. 224,
                                accepting preliminary plans, estimates of
                                costs, assessment plat with addendum and
                                engineer's report as to the methods used in
                                deter- mining benefits with respect thereto;
88-1997  9-12-97   Not_Included making a provisional order that certain street
                                and associated storm drainage improvement,
                                water improvements, sanitary sewer
                                improvements, natural gas line improvements,
                                and electric line improvements, all within the
                                proposed district, shall be constructed; and
                                directing that notice of a hearing on the
                                provisional order be given
                                Approving and authorizing a grant under the New
                                Mexico Litter Control and Beautification Act
89-1997  9-30-97   Not_Included with the New Mexico State Highway Department;
                                and providing for an appropriation to the city
                                of Albuquerque Solid Waste Management
                                Department.
90-1997  10-13-97  Not_Included Amending Resolution 116-1996 by amending the
                                adopted list of regular City Council meetings.
                                Appropriating additional monies for an existing
                                traffic safety education and enforcement grant
91-1997  10-10-97  Not_Included with the State of New Mexico Department of
                                Highway and Transportation, Bureau of Traffic
                                Safety and providing for an appropriation to
                                the city of Albuquerque Police Department.
                                Approving and authorizing the filing of the
                                attached grant application with the federally
                                funded Urban Consortium Energy Task Force to
92-1997  10-10-97  Not_Included conduct a feasibility assessment for Biogas
                                energy production from source separated organic
                                municipal solid waste and providing for an
                                appropriation to the Parks and General Services
                                Department.
                                Amending R-189, Enactment 51-1997 to require
                                Shared Vision, Inc. in lieu of 1000 friends of
93-1997  10-15-97  Not_Included New Mexico to organize and hold a Town Hall
                                promoting infill development and conduct public
                                education on growth management.
                                Approving grant applications to the State of
94-1997  10-15-97  Not_Included New Mexico to administer a local DWI Grant
                                Program and providing an appropriation to the
                                Department of Family and Community Services.
                                Appropriating funds to the Corrections and
                                Detention Department for operating the
95-1997  10-15-97  Not_Included Bernalillo County Corrections and Detention
                                Facility for the year beginning July 1, 19997
                                and ending June 30,1998 and repealing F/S R-
                                190, Enactment No. 52-1997.
                                Adjusting fiscal year 1998 Enterprise Fund
                                appropriations to establish goals and
96-1997  10-15-97  Not_Included objectives reserves and reducing tort and other
                                claims line items for fiscal 1998 to correspond
                                to risk assessments in other funds.
                                Approving and authorizing a grant between the
                                City of Albuquerque and the State of New
                                Mexico, Office of Cultural Affairs, Hispanic
97-1997  10-15-97  Not_Included Cultural Division to administer the Cuarto
                                Centennial Program; and providing an
                                appropriation to the City of Albuquerque, Legal
                                Department.
                                Approving and authorizing the filing of the
                                attached grant application for a major urban
                                library resources grant with the New Mexico
98-1997  10-15-97  Not_Included State Library for the grant awards period,
                                OCtober 1, 1996 through September 30,1997; and
                                providing for an appropriation to the
                                Albuquerque Public Library System.
                                Approving and authorizing the filing of the
                                attached grant application for basic state
99-1997  10-15-97  Not_Included grant-in-aid with the New Mexico State Library;
                                and providing for an appropriation to the
                                Albuquerque Public Library.
100-1997 10-15-97 1-4-3         Approving a Bridge/Isleta Revitalization Plan.
 
Res. No. Date Disposition Short Title
Res. No. Date     Disposition   Short Title
                                Calling for the establishment of a corridor
101-1997 11-6-97   Not_Included plan along the Lomas Boulevard Corridor from
                                Interstate 25 to Interstate 40; appropriating
                                funds to prepare the corridor plan.
                                Determining that the building or structure at
                                1726 Walter SE, within the city limits of
102-1997 11-10-97  Not_Included Albuquerque, New Mexico, is so ruined, damaged
                                and dilapidated as to be a menace to the public
                                comfort, health, peace or safety and that it be
                                required to be removed.
                                Determining that the building or structure at
                                305 Utah SE, within the city limits of
103-1997 11-10-97  Not_Included Albuquerque, New Mexico, is so ruined, damaged
                                and dilapidated as to be a menace to the public
                                comfort, health, peace or safety and that it be
                                required to be removed.
                                Establishing an Indicators Progress Commission
104-1997 11-10-97 2-1-13        and assigning responsibilities pursuant to
                                Chapter 14, Article 13, Part 3, ROA 1994.
                                Approving and authorizing the filing of the
                                attached grant award for an Operation DWI/
                                Operation Buckle Down/Child Restraint
105-1997 11-10-97  Not_Included Enforcement Grant with the state of New Mexico
                                Department of Highway and Transportation,
                                Bureau Safety and providing for an
                                appropriation to the city of Albuquerque Police
                                Department.
                                Approving and authorizing the filing of the
                                attached grant application for Basic State
106-1997 11-10-97  Not_Included Grant-In-Aid with the New Mexico State Library;
                                and providing for an appropriation to the
                                Albuquerque Public Library.
                                Approving and authorizing the filing of a grant
                                application with the US Department of Justice
                                for funds under the Public Law 104-208, the
                                Omnibus Consolidated Appropriations Act of
107-1997 11-14-97  Not_Included 1997, pursuant to Title VIII, Subtitle B,
                                Section 819, of the Anti-Terrorism and
                                Effective Death Penalty Act of 1996 and
                                providing for an appropriation to the
                                Albuquerque Fire Department in the operating
                                grants fund.
                                Approving and authorizing the filing of the
                                attached grant application for funds under the
108-1997 11-14-97  Not_Included Emergency Medical Services Fund Act with the
                                Department of Health and providing for an
                                appropriation to the Fire Department.
                                Calling for a program analysis and
109-1997 11-14-97  Not_Included recommendations concerning non-emergency calls
                                to the Police Department.
                                Approving and authorizing the filing of a grant
                                application with the New Mexico State Agency on
110-1997 11-14-97  Not_Included Aging for Title III Older Americans Act funds
                                and HB-2 Laws 1997, providing an appropriation
                                to the Family and Community Services
                                Department.
                                Approving and authorizing the filing of the
                                attached grant application for funds under the
                                Emergency Medical Services Fund Act with the
111-1997 11-14-97  Not_Included Department of Health and providing for an
                                appropriation to the Fire Department pass
                                through purchase for Albuquerque ambulance
                                service.
                                Appropriating funds from Bernalillo County to
112-1997 11-14-97  Not_Included the Department of Family and Community Services
                                for high school retention block grant at Rio
                                Grande High School.
                                Setting an official list of regular City
113-1997 11-14-97  Not_Included Council meetings from November 3, 1997 through
                                December 14, 1998.
                                Appropriating Metropolitan Redevelopment Funds
114-1997 11-14-97  Not_Included for the implementation of redevelopment
                                programs in metropolitan redevelopment areas.
                                Approving the two-year program for the use of
                                Urban Development Action Grant (UDAG) revenues,
115-1997 11-21-97  Not_Included including recommended use of funds, for fiscal
                                years 1998 and 1999; providing an
                                appropriation.
                                Appropriating funds to the Capital
116-1997 11-21-97  Not_Included Implementation Program for the purchase of
                                Tingley Beach, San Gabriel Park, Tres Pistolas,
                                and the Blanchard property.
                                Approving and authorizing the filing of the
                                attached grant application for a traffic safety
                                education and enforcement grant with the State
117-1997 11-25-97  Not_Included of New Mexico Department of Highway and
                                Transportation, Bureau of Traffic Safety and
                                providing for an appropriation to the City of
                                Albuquerque Police Department.
                                Approving and authorizing the filing of an
                                application for a summer food service program
118-1997 11-25-97  Not_Included for children with the New Mexico Children,
                                Youth and Families Department; providing an
                                appropriation to the Family and Community
                                Services Department.
                                Relating to the proposed Albuquerque, New
                                Mexico Special Assessment District No. 224;
                                determining the advisability of constructing,
                                and the type and character of, certain streets
119-1997 11-25-97  Not_Included and associated storm drainage, sanitary sewer,
                                water, natural gas line and electric line
                                improvements therein and directing the City
                                Clerk to call for sealed bids on such
                                improvements.
                                Accepting the City of Albuquerque Water and
                                Wastewater Utility Program Assessment report
120-1997 11-28-97 Not Included  prepared by Parsons Engineering Science, Inc.
                                and the memo by the Council Services Department
                                concerning the report findings.
 
 
 
Notes
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
1998 Resolutions
Res. No. Date Disposition Short Title
Res. No. Date    Disposition   Short Title
                               Approving and authorizing the filing of an
                               assistance instrument with the Federal Emergency
                               Management Agency for funds under the National
1-1998   1-6-98   Not_Included Urban Search & Rescue Response System
                               Cooperative Agreement and providing for an
                               appropriation to the Albuquerque Fire Department
                               in the operating grants fund.
                               Amending Council Bill No. R-31, Enactment 36-
                               1996 creating a Water Resources Planning
                               Customer's Advisory Committee by reducing the
2-1998   1-6-98  2-3-2         number of members and authorizing the committee
                               to review and make recommendations regarding the
                               implementation of the Albuquerque Water
                               Resources Management Strategy.
                               Approving and authorizing the acceptance of
                               State of New Mexico Law Enforcement Protection
3-1998   1-6-98   Not_Included Act and Crime Lab funds; and providing for an
                               appropriation to the Albuquerque Police
                               Department.
4-1998   1-6-98   Not_Included Providing for the appropriation of federal and
                               state forfeiture funds to the Police Department.
                               Adopting an amendment to the north I-25 Sector
5-1998   1-6-98  1-7-30        Development Plan eliminating off-premise signs
                               along the Alameda Corridor between I-25 and the
                               North Diversion Channel.
                               Approving and authorizing the filing of an
                               attached grant application for a tire recycling
6-1998   1-6-98   Not_Included project with the New Mexico Environment
                               Department (NMED); and providing for an
                               appropriation to the Solid Waste Management
                               Department, refuse capital enterprise fund.
                               Adjusting Fiscal Year 1997 appropriations for
7-1998   1-6-98   Not_Included certain programs to provide for actual
                               expenditures.
                               Amending the adopted Capital Implementation
                               Program of the City of Albuquerque by approving
8-1998   1-12-98  Not_Included new projects, supplementing current
                               appropriations and changing the scope of
                               existing projects.
                               Approving and authorizing the filing of the
                               attached grant award for a Stop Violence Against
9-1998   1-29-98  Not_Included Women Act (VAWA) subgrant with the State of New
                               Mexico Crime Victim's Reparation Commission and
                               providing for an appropriation to the City of
                               Albuquerque Police Department.
                               Appropriating supplemental monies to the Gang
10-1998  1-29-98  Not_Included Resistance Education and Training Grant Program
                               (G.R.E.A.T.) approved in R-136, Enactment 126-
                               1994.
                               Appointing City Clerk, Chief Deputy Clerk, and
11-1998  1-29-98  Not_Included Deputy City Clerks and rescinding Council Bill
                               R-211, Enactment No. 51-1995.
                               Approving and Authorizing the filing of an
                               attached grant application for a 1988 traffic
                               safety speed enforcement grant from the State of
12-1998  1-29-98  Not_Included New Mexico Department of Highway and
                               Transportation, Bureau of Traffic Safety, and
                               providing for an appropriation to the City of
                               Albuquerque, Albuquerque Police Department.
                               Approving the submission of a supportive housing
                               application to the United States Department of
13-1998  1-29-98  Not_Included Housing and Urban Development and providing an
                               appropriation to the Department of Family and
                               Community Services.
                               Approving and Authorizing the filing of an
                               attached grant agreement for an advancing
                               community policing grant from the United States
14-1998  1-29-98  Not_Included Department of Justice, Office of Community
                               Oriented Policing, and providing for an
                               appropriation to the City of Albuquerque,
                               Albuquerque Police Department.
                               Establishing a legislative policy for the City
15-1998  2-11-98  Not_Included of Albuquerque for the 1998 Legislative Session
                               of the New Mexico Legislature.
                               Declaring the official intent of the City of
                               Albuquerque, New Mexico to provide for the
                               reimbursement of certain capital expenditures to
16-1998  2-19-98  Not_Included be undertaken on behalf of the city; identifying
                               said capital expenditures and the funds to be
                               used for such payments; and providing for
                               certain other matters in connection therewith.
                               Authorizing the giving of notice for bids for
                               the sale of City of Albuquerque, New Mexico
17-1998  2-24-98  Not_Included General Obligation Bonds consisting of
                               $38,030,000 General Purpose Bonds, Series 1998A
                               and $6,350,000 Storm Sewer Bonds, Series 1998B.
                               Deappropriating funds for operating the
18-1998  2-24-98  Not_Included government of the City of Albuquerque for the
                               Fiscal Year beginning July 1, 1997 and ending
                               June 30, 1998.
                               Amending the University of Albuquerque Sector
                               Development Plan to change the land use
                               designation for tracts X1A and X2A, Albuquerque
                               Urban Center (SP-95-135 and SP-95-136) from
                               "mixed residential: a minimum of 40 acres within
                               tracts X1A and X1B shall be developed as
                               apartments (R-3) at 20 to 25 DU/acre with the
                               balance of the property (approximately 19 acres)
19-1998  2-24-98 1-7-5         shall be developed as commercial (C-2) and/or
                               office (O-1)" to "mixed uses: a minimum of
                               approximately 30 acres within tracts X1a and X1b
                               shall be developed as apartments (R-3) at 24 to
                               30 DU/acre; the balance of the property is to be
                               developed as (C-2) commercial or (O-1) office
                               (approximately 19 acres); and church and related
                               uses, residential uses (R-3) at 24 to 30 DU/acre
                               and/or a joint-use-park-and- ride facility (10
                               acres or less)."
                               Approving funds for a Violence Against Women
20-1998  2-24-98  Not_Included Coordinator position and providing an
                               appropriation to the Department of Family and
                               Community Services.
                               Appropriating funds to the Capital
21-1998  2-24-98  Not_Included Implementation Program for the land purchase of
                               Manzano open space.
22-1998  2-24-98 1-12-3        Approving Old Albuquerque High School
                               Metropolitan Redevelopment Plan II.
                               Prohibiting the Albuquerque Police Department
23-1998  3-6-98   Not_Included from authorizing overtime expenses to prosecute
                               non-traffic misdemeanors in Metropolitan Court.
                               Establishing one-year objectives for the City of
24-1998  2-24-98  Not_Included Albuquerque in Fiscal Year 1999; to meet five-
                               year goals.
                               Appropriating funds to the Capital
25-1998  2-27-98  Not_Included Implementation Program for the land purchase of
                               the Gardens subdivision.
 
Res. No. Date Disposition Short Title
Res. No. Date    Disposition   Short Title
                               Approving a consolidated application for U.S.
26-1998  3-5-98   Not_Included Department of Housing and Urban Development
                               Grand Funds and making an appropriation to the
                               Department of Family and Community Services.
                               Approving and authorizing the filing of an
                               attached application for a Senior Companion
27-1998  3-5-98   Not_Included Program Grant with the Corporation for National
                               Service, including funds allocated by the State
                               Agency on Aging and providing an appropriation
                               to the Department of Senior Affairs.
                               Approving and authorizing the filing of an
                               attached application for a Foster Grandparent
                               Program Grant with the Corporation for National
28-1998  3-5-98   Not_Included and Community Services Funds allocated by the
                               State Agency on Aging and providing an
                               appropriation to the Department of Senior
                               Affairs.
                               Approving and authorizing the filing of an
                               attached application for an RSVP Corporation for
29-1998  3-5-98   Not_Included National Service Grant and providing an
                               appropriation to the Department of Senior
                               Affairs.
                               Repealing Resolution No. R-23, prohibiting the
30-1998  3-5-98   Not_Included Albuquerque Police Department from authorizing
                               overtime expenses to prosecute non-traffic
                               misdemeanors in Metropolitan Court.
                               Further enhancing the xeriscape retrofit
31-1998  3-5-98  4-3-16        incentive program; amending Enactment 89-1996;
                               modifying the qualifications for receiving a
                               xeriscape retrofit incentive program rebate.
                               Establishing priorities for the 1999 CIP;
                               defining the criteria to be used in rating
32-1998  4-1-98   Not_Included project proposals for the 1999 bond cycle;
                               assigning weights to the criteria; allocating an
                               amount for the neighborhood set-aside within the
                               1999 G.O. bond program.
                               Approving and authorizing the filing of an
                               attached grant application for a Ridesharing
33-1998  4-1-98   Not_Included Program with the Federal Highway Administration
                               and the New Mexico State Highway and
                               Transportation Department; and providing for an
                               appropriation to the Transit Department.
                               Approving a grant request to the Levi Strauss
34-1998  4-1-98   Not_Included Foundation and providing an appropriation to the
                               Department of Family and Community Services.
35-1998  4-13-98  Not_Included Resolving the future operation of the Bernalillo
                               County Detention Center.
                               Adopting the Rank 3 Alameda Design Overlay Zone
36-1998  4-28-98 1-10-23       and amending Zone Maps to illustrate the
                               boundaries of this zone.
37-1998  4-28-98 6-5-9         Establishing city policy on the placement of
                               commemorative memorials on Civic Plaza.
                               Approving and authorizing the filing of a grant
                               application fo a food service program for
38-1998  4-28-98  Not_Included children with the New Mexico Department of
                               Children, Youth and Families and providing for
                               an appropriation to the Department of Family and
                               Community Services.
                               Authorizing the Mayor to execute a grant
39-1998  4-28-98  Not_Included agreement with the U.S. Department of Health and
                               Human Services and providing an appropriation to
                               the Department of Family and Community Services.
                               Authorizing the Mayor to execute a grant
                               agreement with the U.S. Department of Health and
40-1998  4-28-98  Not_Included Human Services, Early Head Start Program, and
                               providing an appropriation to the Department of
                               Family and Community Services.
                               Authorizing the Mayor to execute a contract
                               agreement with the New Mexico Department of
41-1998  4-28-98  Not_Included Children, Youth and Families and providing an
                               appropriation (excellence mini-grant) to the
                               Department of Family and Community Services.
                               Establishing and appropriating the projects
                               associated with the enactment of the one quarter
42-1998  4-28-98  Not_Included of one percent municipal gross receipts tax
                               dedicated for the acquisition, development and
                               maintenance of parks and open space.
                               To initiate review of the Uptown Sector
43-1998  4-28-98  Not_Included Development Plan and solicit public input
                               regarding proposed amendments.
                               Appropriating funds for operating the government
44-1998  5-5-98   Not_Included of the City of Albuquerque fo the Fiscal Year
                               beginning July 1, 1998 and ending June 30, 1999.
                               Amending the adopted Capital Implementation
45-1998  5-5-98   Not_Included Program of the City of Albuquerque by
                               supplementing current appropriations.
46-1998  5-5-98   Not_Included Appropriating funds for the purpose of emergency
                               street rehabilitation.
                               Approving and authorizing the filing of an
                               attached grant application for a special purpose
47-1998  5-5-98   Not_Included grant to establish a particulate matter 2.5 (PM-
                               2.5) monitoring network with the Environmental
                               Protection Agency by the Environmental Health
                               Department.
                               Calling for a task force to examine options for
                               improving governmental efficiency and cost-
48-1998  5-5-98  2-1-14        effective delivery of services by the City of
                               Albuquerque; providing a process to establish a
                               city policy.
                               Approving and authorizing the filing of a grant
                               application for a Certified Local Government
49-1998  5-5-98   Not_Included Grant with the State Historic Preservation
                               Office and providing an appropriation to the
                               Planning Department.
                               To initiate a review of the Downtown Core
                               Revitalization Strategy, Downtown Urban Center
50-1998  5-12-98  Not_Included Sector Development Plan, and solicit public
                               input regarding an action plan to revitalize
                               downtown.
 
Res. No. Date Disposition Short Title
Res. No. Date    Disposition   Short Title
                               Adopting the Westland Master Plan, subject to
51-1998  5-19-98 1-11-12       specified conditions, which plan area includes
                               6,424 acres located in the extraterritorial
                               jurisdiction of the City of Albuquerque.
52-1998  6-1-98   Not_Included Adopting the Urban Enhancement Trust Fund Ten
                               Year Plan.
                               Authorizing the Mayor to execute a grant
                               agreement with the United States Department of
53-1998  5-18-98  Not_Included Justice, Bureau of Justice Assistance, providing
                               for an appropriation to the Albuquerque Police
                               Department.
                               Amending the adopted capital implementation
                               program of the City of Albuquerque by approving
54-1998  6-1-98   Not_Included new projects, supplementing current
                               appropriations and changing the scope of
                               existing projects.
                               Relating to the proposed Albuquerque, New Mexico
                               Special Assessment District No. 225, directing
                               Andrews, Asbury & Robert, Inc. to prepare,
55-1998  5-18-98  Not_Included submit and file with the City Clerk certain
                               preliminary plans, estimates of costs, and
                               assessment plats with addendum, all in
                               connection therewith and making an
                               appropriation.
                               Approving and authorizing the filing of an
                               application with the U.S. Department of
56-1998  5-18-98  Not_Included Transportation for a Section 5309 Capital
                               Assistance Grant; and providing an appropriation
                               to the Transit Department.
                               Approving a grant application to the U.S.
57-1998  5-18-98  Not_Included Department of Energy and making an appropriation
                               to the Office of Economic Development.
                               Approving and authorizing the filing of an
                               application with the U.S. Department of
                               Transportation for a Section 5307 Operating
                               Assistance Grant; a Section 5307 Capital
58-1998  5-18-98  Not_Included Assistance Grant; a Section 5307 Planning Grant;
                               and Congestion Mitigation and Air Quality (CMAQ)
                               funds under Section 5307 of Title 49; and
                               providing for an appropriation to the Transit
                               Department.
                               Appropriating funds for operating the government
59-1998  6-1-98   Not_Included of the City of Albuquerque for the fiscal year
                               beginning July 1, 1998 and ending June 30, 1999.
                               Appropriating funds in the Parks and General
                               Services Department for operating the
60-1998  6-1-98   Not_Included Albuquerque/Bernalillo County Government and Law
                               Enforcement Centers for the fiscal year
                               beginning July 1, 1998 and ending June 30, 1999.
                               Appropriating funds to the Corrections and
                               Detentions Department for operating the
61-1998  6-1-98   Not_Included Bernalillo County Corrections and Detention
                               Facility for the fiscal year beginning July 1,
                               1998 and ending June 30, 1999
                               Approving and authorizing the filing of the
                               grant application for a renewal of the COPS MORE
                               (Community Oriented Policing Services Making
62-1998  6-1-98   Not_Included Officer Redeployment Effective) program grant
                               with the United States Department of Justice,
                               Community Oriented Policing Services and
                               providing for an appropriation to the City of
                               Albuquerque Police Department
                               Appropriating funds to the Department of Family
63-1998  5-18-98  Not_Included and Community Services for social services to
                               homeless veterans.
64-1998  6-1-98   Not_Included Appropriating funds to allow for the purchase of
                               a museum art piece.
65-1998  6-15-98 6-7-6         Naming the Albuquerque Law Enforcement Building
                               after Jack Price.
                               Declaring the intent of the City of Albuquerque,
                               New Mexico, subject ot the satisfaction of
                               certain conditions, to issue industrial revenue
                               bonds in an aggregate principal amount not to
                               exceed $15,000,000 in connection with the
66-1998  6-15-98  Not_Included acquisition, renovation, construction and
                               equipping of a proposed project for the
                               manufacture of turbine generators for the
                               purpose of inducing Allied Signal Power Systems,
                               Inc. to locate certain of its operations in the
                               City as described in the preliminary project
                               plan.
67-1998  6-15-98  Not_Included Approving the fiscal year 1999 audit plan as
                               submitted by the Internal Audit Committee.
                               Determining that the building or structure at
                               524 Slate NE, within the city limits of
68-1998  6-15-98  Not_Included Albuquerque, New Mexico, is so ruined, damaged
                               and dilapidated as to be a menace to the public
                               comfort, health, peace or safety and that it be
                               required to be removed
                               Establishing the Employee Insurance Fund and
69-1998  6-15-98  Not_Included appropriating funds to the Human Resources
                               Department beginning July 1, 1998 and ending
                               June 30, 1999.
                               Amending the recommendations contained in the
                               Downtown Center City Transportation Study Final
70-1998  8-17-98  Not_Included Report for development of transportation system
                               improvements in the Center City in order to
                               define the locations of the recommended urban
                               trails.
                               Amending R-111, Enactment No. 134-1992;
                               replacing the Comprehensive Housing
                               Affordability Strategy (CHAS) with the
71-1998  8-17-98 3-4-3         Consolidated Plan 1998-2002; revising income
                               definitions as required by the United States
                               Department of Housing and Urban Development; and
                               restructuring the Affordable Housing Committee;
                               and repealing R-463, Enactment No. 181-1989.
                               Approving grant applications to the State of New
72-1998  8-17-98  Not_Included Mexico to administer a local DWI grant program
                               and providing an appropriation to the Department
                               of Family and Community Services.
                               Authorizing the Mayor to execute a grant
73-1998  8-17-98  Not_Included agreement with the Department of Energy and
                               providing an appropriation to the Department of
                               Family and Community Services.
                               Providing an appropriation to the Cultural and
                               Recreation Services Department for Intermodal
74-1998  8-17-98  Not_Included Surface Transportation Efficiency Act (ISTEA)
                               funding to operate a bicycle/pedestrian safety
                               education program.
                               Approving and authorizing the filing of attached
                               grant agreement for a drug control and system
75-1998  8-17-98  Not_Included improvement formula grant with the State of New
                               Mexico, Department of Public Safety and
                               providing for an appropriation to the City of
                               Albuquerque.
 
Res. No. Date Disposition Short Title
Res. No. Date     Disposition   Short Title
                                Declaring a moratorium on the approval of
                                commercial telecommunications antennas, towers
76-1998  8-17-98   Not_Included and related facilities used to provide
                                cellular, digital, and like wireless services
                                in Albuquerque.
                                Reauthorizing the community restoration fee as
                                per Council Bill R-40, Enactment No. 59-1996,
                                to be paid by prisoners who are convicted and
77-1998  6-1-98   4-6-9         sentenced for a crime or prisoners who later
                                become convicted of charges for which they were
                                originally incarcerated in the Bernalillo
                                County Detention Center; calling for
                                alternatives in lieu of payment.
                                Calling for implementation steps to convert all
                                operating funds to multi-year program and
78-1998  8-17-98  2-1-15        budget planning in an annual budget cycle, and
                                creating a Program and Budget Planning Task
                                Force.
                                Approving and authorizing the filing of
                                attached grant application for a major urban
                                library resources grant with the New Mexico
79-1998  6-15-98   Not_Included State Library for the grant award period,
                                October 1, 1997 through September 30, 1998; and
                                providing for an appropriation to the
                                Albuquerque Public Library System.
                                Approving and authorizing the filing of
                                attached grant application for basic state
80-1998  6-15-98   Not_Included grant-in-aid with the New Mexico State Library;
                                and providing for an appropriation to the
                                Albuquerque Public Library.
                                Approving and authorizing the filing of the
                                grant application for a Master Street
                                Addressing Guide (MSAG) - Enhanced 911 Grant
81-1998  6-15-98   Not_Included with the Local Government Division of the New
                                Mexico Department of Finance and Administration
                                and providing for an appropriation to the City
                                of Albuquerque Police Department.
                                Relating to the $42,685,000 City of
                                Albuquerque, New Mexico Governmental Purpose
                                Airport Refunding Revenue Bonds, Series 1998
                                authorized to be issued by City Ordinance
                                Thirteenth Council Bill No. F/S O-18; providing
82-1998  8-17-98   Not_Included certain terms of the bonds, awarding the bonds
                                to, and providing the price to be paid for the
                                bonds by, the original purchaser; providing
                                other details concerning the bonds; approving
                                documents relating to the bonds; making certain
                                appropriations; and ratifying certain actions
                                previously taken.
                                Approving and authorizing a grant under the New
                                Mexico Litter Control and Beautification Act
83-1998  8-17-98   Not_Included with the New Mexico State Highway Department;
                                and providing for an appropriation to the City
                                of Albuquerque Solid Waste Management
                                Department.
                                Approving a grant request to the United States
84-1998  8-17-98   Not_Included Department of Justice and providing an
                                appropriation to the Department of Family and
                                Community Services.
                                Relating to the proposed Albuquerque, New
                                Mexico Special Assessment District No. 222,
                                accepting preliminary plans, estimates of
                                costs, assessment plat with addendum and
                                engineer's report as to the methods used in
85-1998  8-17-98   Not_Included determining benefits with respect thereto,
                                making a provisional order that certain street
                                improvements, water improvements, sanitary
                                sewer improvements, and storm drainage
                                improvements, all within the proposed district,
                                shall be constructed; and directing that notice
                                of a hearing on the provisional order be given.
86-1998  8-17-98   Not_Included Appropriating funds for the purpose of
                                supporting the Kirtland Partnership Committee.
                                Awarding the construction contract for Special
87-1998  8-17-98   Not_Included Assessment District No. 224 improvements to
                                Triad Builders of NM, Inc.
                                Relating to Albuquerque, New Mexico Special
                                Assessment District No. 224; setting the time
88-1998  8-17-98   Not_Included and place of an assessment hearing when
                                objections to the assessment roll for such
                                District will be heard and making an
                                appropriation.
                                Establishing a Charter Review Task Force to
89-1998  9-28-98  2-1-7         review challenged and unchallenged portions of
                                the City Charter and to propose any Charter
                                amendments deemed appropriate.
                                Extending moratorium on the approval of
90-1998  9-28-98   Not_Included commercial telecommunications, antennas,
                                towers, and related facilities in Albuquerque.
                                Establishing a growth policy framework to
91-1998  10-7-98  3-8-6         govern key decisions of the City of
                                Albuquerque; receiving the Transportation
                                Evaluation Study Final Report.
                                Approving a grant application to the
                                International Trade Administration, U.S.
92-1998  10-7-98   Not_Included Department of Commerce, on behalf of the
                                Central New Mexico Trade Partnership and making
                                an appropriation to the Office of Economic
                                Development.
                                Amending the North I-25 Sector Development Plan
                                and establishing SU-2/Hospital and Medical
                                zoning for Tracts 1 and 3 of Horizon Health
                                Care, located north of Alameda Boulevard NE,
                                east of the north diversion channel and west of
93-1998  10-7-98  1-7-30        Horizon Boulevard containing approximately 19.9
                                acres; amending the North I-25 Sector
                                Development Plan to expand permissive uses
                                within the SU-2 for Hospital and Medical zone
                                to include general office use, nursing home and
                                assisted living facility.
                                Approving and authorizing the filing of the
94-1998  10-7-98   Not_Included attached grant application for an air pollution
                                control grant with the Environmental Protection
                                Agency by the Environmental Health Department.
                                Approving and authorizing the filing of the
95-1998  10-7-98   Not_Included attached grant application for an air pollution
                                control grant with the Environmental Protection
                                Agency by the Environmental Health Department.
                                Establishing a vision statement and revising
96-1998  10-7-98  6-1-3         the five-year goals for the City of
                                Albuquerque.
                                Relating to $67,000,000 City of Albuquerque,
                                New Mexico Taxable Industrial Development
                                Revenue Bond (Sumitomo Sitix Silicon, Inc.,
                                Project) Series 1993 and the assumption
                                agreement among the City of Albuquerque, New
97-1998  10-7-98   Not_Included Mexico, Sumitomo Sitix Silicon, Inc. and
                                Silmax, Incorporated; authorizing a first
                                amendment to assumption agreement and second
                                amendment to lease agreement; and approving
                                certain actions to be taken in connection
                                therewith.
                                Calling for the city administration to develop
98-1998  10-20-98 1-4-1         transit plans to support downtown
                                revitalization and a partnership with UNM and
                                T-VI for parking and bus service.
                                Authorizing the removal of certain
99-1998  10-20-98  Not_Included uncollectible accounts from the city's accounts
                                receivable records.
                                Approving an application for Job Training
                                Partnership Act funds, income generating
100-1998 10-20-98  Not_Included activities; and providing an appropriation to
                                the Department of Family and Community
                                Services.
 
Res. No. Date Disposition Short Title
Res. No. Date     Disposition    Short Title
                                 Approving and authorizing the filing of the
                                 attached grant application for funds under the
101-1998 10-20-98  Not_Included  Emergency Medical Services Fund Act with the
                                 Department of Health and providing for an
                                 appropriation to the Fire Department.
                                 Setting an official list of regular City
102-1998 10-20-98  Not_Included  Council meetings from October 5, 1998 through
                                 December 13, 1999.
                                 Determining reasonable notice of public
103-1998 10-20-98 3-2-4          meetings of the Council and Council
                                 committees.
                                 Approving a grant request to the New Mexico
104-1998 10-20-98  Not_Included  Youth Conservation Corps and providing an
                                 appropriation to the Department of Family and
                                 Community Services.
                                 Approving and authorizing the filing of the
                                 attached grant application for developing
                                 planning tools that will facilitate municipal
105-1998 10-20-98  Not_Included  involvement in the President's Million Solar
                                 Roofs Initiative and providing for an
                                 appropriation to the Parks and General
                                 Services Department.
                                 Appropriating additional monies for an
                                 existing Traffic Safety Education and
106-1998 10-20-98  Not_Included  Enforcement Grant with the State of New Mexico
                                 Department of Highway and Transportation,
                                 Bureau of Traffic Safety and providing for an
                                 appropriation to the City of Albuquerque.
                                 Relating to Albuquerque, New Mexico Special
107-1998 10-20-98  Not_Included  Assessment District No. 224 and modifying,
                                 confirming and approving the assessment roll
                                 for such District.
                                 Amending the Seven Bar Ranch Sector
                                 Development Plan and Zone Map to reflect the
                                 establishment of SU-1/C-2 uses/IP permissive
                                 uses zoning for Lots 15C, 15D and the
108-1998 11-25-98 1-7-28         southerly 175 feet of Lot 1, Questa Del Rio
                                 Subdivision and a portion of the Corrales
                                 Acequia Main Canal; C-2 zoning for Lot A,
                                 Plaza Del Norte; and SU-1 for C-2 uses zoning
                                 for Lots B and C of Plaza Del Norte.
                                 Installing a traffic signal at La Cueva High
                                 School in Alameda, and appropriating New
109-1998 11-25-98  Not_Included  Mexico State Highway and Transportation
                                 Department (NMSHTD) severance tax funds to the
                                 intersection improvements project in the
                                 capital implementation program.
                                 Designating the Near Heights Metropolitan
                                 Redevelopment Area, making certain findings
                                 and determinations pursuant to the
                                 Metropolitan Redevelopment Code, and
110-1998 11-25-98 1-12-11        authorizing and directing the Metropolitan
                                 Redevelopment Agency to issue a request for
                                 proposals for the preparation of a
                                 metropolitan plan for the new metropolitan
                                 redevelopment area.
                                 Approving and authorizing the acceptance of
                                 State of New Mexico Law Enforcement Protection
111-1998 11-25-98  Not_Included  Act and Crime Lab Funds; and providing for an
                                 appropriation to the Albuquerque Police
                                 Department.
                                 Authorizing the filing of a grant application
                                 with the New Mexico State Agency on Aging for
112-1998 11-25-98  Not_Included  Title III Older Americans Act Funds and HB-
                                 2 Laws 1998, providing an appropriation to the
                                 Family and Community Services Department.
                                 Approving and authorizing the acceptance of
113-1998 11-25-98  Not_Included  abandoned evidence funds; and providing for an
                                 appropriation to the Albuquerque Police
                                 Department.
                                 Providing for the appropriation of federal and
114-1998 11-25-98  Not_Included  state forfeiture funds to the Police
                                 Department.
                                 Repealing Bill No. R-227, Enactment No. 59-
                                 1997, in order to allow the application for
                                 waivers of the distance requirements between
115-1998 11-25-98 5-1-1          churches or schools and licensed premises from
                                 which alcoholic beverages are sold under a
                                 restaurant license; adopting criteria;
                                 superseding Bill No. F/S R-166, Enactment 151-
                                 1992.
                                 Authorizing the Mayor to execute a contract
                                 agreement with the New Mexico Department of
                                 Children, Youth and Families for child care
116-1998 11-25-98  Not_Included  activities at Longfellow and Lew Wallace Child
                                 Development Centers and providing an
                                 appropriation to the Department of Family and
                                 Community Services for fiscal year 1999.
                                 Authorizing the Mayor to execute a grant
                                 agreement with the U.S. Department of Health
117-1998 11-25-98  Not_Included  and Human Services, Early Head Start Program,
                                 and providing an appropriation to the
                                 Department of Family and Community Services
                                 Clarifying the city's policy on the placement
                                 of judgments on the property tax rolls (R-181,
118-1998 11-25-98  Not_Included  Enactment No. 133-1990); requiring a plan to
                                 correct the projected deficit in the Risk
                                 Management Fund.
                                 Appropriating Metropolitan Redevelopment Funds
119-1998 11-25-98  Not_Included  for the implementation of redevelopment
                                 programs in metropolitan redevelopment areas.
120-1998 11-25-98 1-12-2         Approving an amendment to the boundaries of
                                 the Railroad Metropolitan Redevelopment Area.
                                 Amending the Seven Bar Ranch Sector
                                 Development to change the zoning of Lot 1,
                                 Riverwalk Marketplace from SU-1/C-2, SU-1/IP,
                                 and SU-1/R-3 to SU-1/C-2 uses/IP permissive
121-1998 11-25-98 1-7-28         uses/R-3 permissive uses, located on the west
                                 side of Coors Boulevard NW, south of Alameda
                                 Boulevard/NM 528 NW; north of Seven Bar Loop
                                 NW, and east of Cottonwood Drive NW,
                                 containing approximately 26.9 acres.
122-1998 11-25-98  Not_Included  Appropriating funds for the purpose of Tingley
                                 Beach renovation.
123-1998 11-25-98 6-7-7          Naming City Hall after Frank L. Horan
                                 Determining that the building or structure at
                                 2524 Corregidor SW, within the city limits of
124-1998 12-8-98   Not_Included  Albuquerque, New Mexico, is so ruined, damaged
                                 and dilapidated as to be a menace to the
                                 public comfort, health, peace or safety and
                                 that it be required to be removed.
                                 Amending the Capital Implementation Program of
125-1998 12-8-98   Not_Included  the City of Albuquerque by approving new
                                 projects, supplementing current appropriations
                                 and changing the scope of existing projects.
                                 Approving and authorizing a grant award with
                                 the United States Department of Justice,
126-1998 12-8-98   Not_Included  Office of Justice Programs, Violence Against
                                 Women Grants Office, Grants to encourage
                                 arrest policies and providing for an
                                 appropriation to the City of Albuquerque.
                                 Approving and authorizing the filing of the
                                 attached grant award for an Operation DWI/
                                 Operation Buckle Down Enforcement Grant with
127-1998 12-8-98   Not_Included  the State of New Mexico Department of Highway
                                 and Transportation, Bureau of Traffic Safety
                                 and providing for an appropriation to the City
                                 of Albuquerque Police Department.
                                 Appropriating supplemental monies to the Gang
128-1998 12-8-98   Not_Included  Resistance Education and Training Grant
                                 Program (G.R.E.A.T.) approved in R-136,
                                 Enactment 126-1994.
                                 Authorizing the acquisition of New Mexico
                                 Utilities by the mutual agreement between the
129-1998 12-21-98  Not_Included  City of Albuquerque and Southwest Water
                                 Company, making the acquisition self-
                                 supporting financially.
                                 Approving the Alvarado Transportation Center
                                 Metropolitan Redevelopment Plan for Project XI
130-1998 12-9-98  1-12-1, 1-12-2 in the Railroad Metropolitan Redevelopment
                                 Area and Project XXXV in the Alvarado
                                 Metropolitan Redevelopment Area.
 
 
 
Notes
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
1999 Resolutions
Res. No. Date Disposition Short Title
Res. No. Date    Disposition   Short Title
                               Adopting the Open Space Facility Plan, a Rank II
1-1999   1-5-99  1-2-1         Plan establishing policies for growth and
                               management of Albuquerque's open space program.
                               Relating to the $93,030,000 city of Albuquerque,
                               New Mexico joint water and sewer system
                               refunding and improvement revenue bonds, Series
                               1999A, and the $26,375,000 city of Albuquerque,
                               New Mexico joint water and sewer system
                               refunding revenue bonds, Series 2000A,
                               authorized to be issued by city Ordinance
2-1999   1-5-99   Not_Included Thirteenth Council Bill No. F/S O-36; providing
                               certain terms of the bonds, awarding the bonds
                               to, and providing the price to be paid for the
                               bonds by, the investment bankers; providing
                               other details concerning the bonds; approving
                               documents relating to the bonds; making certain
                               appropriations; and ratifying certain actions
                               previously taken.
                               Adjusting Fiscal Year 1998 appropriations for
3-1999   1-5-99   Not_Included certain programs to provide for actual
                               expenditures.
                               Approving and authorizing the filing of the
                               attached grant application for a traffic safety
                               education and enforcement grant with the state
4-1999   1-5-99   Not_Included of New Mexico Department of Highway and
                               Transportation, Bureau of Traffic Safety and
                               providing for an appropriation to the city of
                               Albuquerque Police Department
                               Amending the Tower/Unser Sector Development Plan
                               and Zone Map to change a certain tract of land
5-1999   1-5-99  1-7-34        being located in the North 1/2 of Section 32,
                               Township 10 North, Range 2 East NMPM (41.6
                               acres).
                               Approving and authorizing the acceptance of 1997
                               and 1998 state information systems grant with
6-1999   1-5-99   Not_Included the state of New Mexico, Department of Public
                               Safety and state of New Mexico DNA funds,
                               providing an appropriation to the Albuquerque
                               Police Department.
7-1999   1-15-99 1-11-1        Rescinding the Northwest Mesa Area Plan A Rank 2
                               Plan and eliminating the boundaries thereof.
                               Approving the 5th and Lead Metropolitan
8-1999   1-15-99 1-12-1        Redevelopment Plan for Project XXXVI in the
                               Alvarado Metropolitan Redevelopment Area.
                               Approving and authorizing the filing of the
                               attached grant application for the gang
                               resistance education and training (G.R.E.A.T.)
9-1999   1-15-99  Not_Included program grant from the Bureau of Alcohol,
                               Tobacco and Firearms and providing for an
                               appropriation to the Albuquerque Police
                               Department.
                               Approving and authorizing the filing of the
                               attached grant application for a ridesharing
10-1999  1-15-99  Not_Included program with the Federal Highway Administration
                               and the New Mexico State Highway and
                               Transportation Department and providing for an
                               appropriation to the Transit Department.
                               Establishing a legislative policy for the City
11-1999  1-25-99  Not_Included of Albuquerque for the 1999 Legislative Session
                               of the New Mexico Legislature.
                               Reappropriating funds for fiscal year 1999 to
                               the government of the city of Albuquerque for
                               implementing and meeting the City Council
12-1999  1-25-99  Not_Included adopted five-year goals, one year objectives,
                               and amendments, and appropriating additional
                               funds for salary adjustments for city employees
                               to programs listed in Fiscal Year 1999.
                               Establishing and appropriating the projects
                               associated with the enactment of the one quarter
13-1999  2-4-99   Not_Included of one percent municipal gross receipts tax
                               dedicated for the acquisition, development and
                               maintenance of parks and open space.
                               Amending the Seven Bar Ranch Sector Development
                               Plan and Zone Map to reflect the establishment
14-1999  2-4-99  1-7-28        of SU-1 for PRD (Planned Residential
                               Development), 9 du/ac zoning for Tract B-9G,
                               Seven Bar Addition.
                               Providing an appropriation to the Cultural and
                               Recreation Services Department for Intermodal
15-1999  2-4-99   Not_Included Surface Transportation Efficiency Act (ISTEA)
                               funding to operate a bicycle/pedestrian safety
                               education program.
                               Approving and authorizing the filing of an
                               application for a summer food service program
16-1999  2-4-99   Not_Included for children with the New Mexico Children, Youth
                               and Families Department and providing an
                               appropriation to the Department of Family and
                               Community Services.
                               Relating to the $6,070,000 city of Albuquerque,
                               New Mexico municipal gross receipts tax
                               refunding revenue bonds, series 1999A,
                               authorized to be issued by city Ordinance
                               Thirteenth Council Bill No. F/S O-42; providing
17-1999  2-4-99   Not_Included certain terms of the bonds, awarding the bonds
                               to, and providing the price to be paid for the
                               bonds by, the original purchaser; providing
                               other details concerning the bonds; approving
                               documents relating to the bonds; making certain
                               appropriations; and ratifying certain actions
                               previously taken.
                               Relating to the $45,335,000 city of Albuquerque,
                               New Mexico municipal gross receipts tax/lodgers'
                               tax refunding revenue bonds, series 1999B,
                               authorized to be issued by city Ordinance
                               Thirteenth Council Bill No. F/S O-43; providing
18-1999  2-4-99   Not_Included certain terms of the bonds, awarding the bonds
                               to, and providing the price to be paid for the
                               bonds by, the original purchaser; providing
                               other details concerning the bonds; approving
                               documents relating to the bonds; making certain
                               appropriations; and ratifying certain actions
                               previously taken.
                               Fixing Wednesday, March 31, 1999, as the date
                               for a special election to be held on the
19-1999  2-4-99   Not_Included question of the imposition of a one-quarter of
                               one percent municipal gross receipts tax to be
                               dedicated to transportation infrastructure.
                               Appropriating funds to the office of the City
                               Clerk for the special election to be held on the
20-1999  2-4-99   Not_Included question of the imposition of a one-quarter of
                               one percent municipal gross receipts tax to be
                               dedicated to transportation infrastructure.
                               Relating to the proposed Albuquerque, New Mexico
                               Special Assessment District No. 225, accepting
                               preliminary plans, estimates of costs,
                               assessment plat with addendum and engineer's
                               report as to the methods used in determining
21-1999  2-4-99   Not_Included benefits with respect thereto, making a
                               provisional order that certain street
                               improvements and storm drainage improvements,
                               all within the proposed district, shall be
                               constructed, and directing that notice of a
                               hearing on the provisional order be given.
                               Amending the Old Town Sector Development Plan
22-1999  2-18-99 1-7-11        establishing the SU-1 for office zoning for 1.29
                               acres.
                               Approving an application for welfare-to-work
23-1999  2-18-99  Not_Included program funds and providing an appropriation to
                               the Department of Family and Community Services.
                               Amending the Uptown Sector Development Plan as
                               revised and adopted by the City Council through
                               Resolution R-244, Enactment 94-1995, on June 19,
                               1995, to: allow retail/commercial uses
                               (including restaurants) in up to 20 of a site's
24-1999  2-18-99 1-7-19        total approved floor space (gross leasable
                               area); allow up to 26,000 square feet per
                               retail/commercial establishment; and require the
                               addition of one housing unit for every 2,000
                               square feet of retail/commercial space above 10
                               of the site's total developed floor space (gross
                               leasable area).
                               Relating to the proposed Albuquerque, New Mexico
                               Special Assessment District No. 226, directing
                               Wilson & Company, Engineers and Architects, to
25-1999  2-18-99  Not_Included prepare, submit and file with the City Clerk
                               certain preliminary plans, estimates of costs,
                               and assessment plats with addendum, all in
                               connection therewith and making an
                               appropriation.
 
Res. No. Date Disposition Short Title
Res. No. Date    Disposition   Short Title
                               Authorizing the giving of notice for bids for
                               the sale of city of Albuquerque, New Mexico
26-1999  2-18-99  Not_Included general obligation bonds consisting of
                               $16,870,000 General Purpose Bonds, Series 1999A
                               and $4,760,000 Storm Sewer Bonds, Series 1999B.
                               Appropriating funds from Bernalillo County to
27-1999  2-18-99  Not_Included the Department of Family and Community Services
                               for a high school dropout prevention program at
                               Rio Grande High School.
                               Establishing one-year objectives for the City of
28-1999  2-18-99  Not_Included Albuquerque in Fiscal Year 2000; to meet five-
                               year goals.
                               Relating to the city of Albuquerque, New Mexico,
                               Special Assessment District No. 224, street
                               improvement bonds, subseries A, issue of
                               February 1, 1999, water and sewer improvement
                               bonds, subseries B, issues of February 1, 1999,
                               and electric and natural gas improvement bonds,
                               subseries C, taxable issue of February 1, 1999;
                               establishing the principal amounts, maturity
                               dates, rates of interest and other terms of the
29-1999  2-25-99  Not_Included bonds and approving a bond purchase agreement
                               and other documents in accordance with city
                               Ordinance Thirteenth Council Bill No. F/S O-40;
                               establishing the final rates of interest on
                               unpaid assessments; making certain
                               appropriations; ratifying certain actions
                               heretofore taken; amending city Ordinance
                               Thirteenth Council Bill No. F/S O-40; and
                               repealing all action inconsistent with this
                               resolution
                               Approving a program investment summary
                               application for United States Department of
30-1999  2-25-99  Not_Included Housing and Urban Development grant funds and
                               making an appropriation to the Department of
                               Family and Community Services.
                               Authorizing the Mayor to execute a contract
                               agreement with the New Mexico Department of
31-1999  2-25-99  Not_Included Children, Youth and Families and providing an
                               appropriation to the Department of Family and
                               Community Service / Office of Child Development,
                               Teen Residence Program.
                               Approving and authorizing the filing of the
                               attached grant application for a forensic DNA
32-1999  2-25-99  Not_Included laboratory grant with the United States
                               Department of Justice and providing for an
                               appropriation to the city of Albuquerque Police
                               Department.
                               Appropriating funds to the Corrections and
                               Detention Department for operating the
33-1999  3-15-99  Not_Included Bernalillo County Corrections and Detention
                               Facility for the fiscal year beginning July 1,
                               1998 and ending June 30, 1999, and repealing R-
                               65, Enactment No. 61-1998.
                               Calling for the establishment and implementation
                               of a comprehensive citywide policy to prudently
34-1999  3-19-99 3-1-9         manage and promote the sponsorship of city
                               properties and events in order to use these
                               public assets to generate non-tax revenues in
                               support of public services and facilities.
                               Amending the Downtown Neighborhood Area Sector
                               Development Plan zoning to eliminate off-street
35-1999  3-19-99 1-7-4         commercial parking lots as a permitted use and
                               as a conditional use in specified SU-2 zones of
                               the plan area.
                               Amending the High Desert Sector Development Plan
                               to change the regulations of the plan's SU-2 HD/
                               C-1 zone, a 26.9 acre (Section 4.A.5, p. 4.2)
                               to: allow the sale of alcoholic drink for
36-1999  3-19-99 1-7-37        consumption off premise (package liquor) as an
                               incidental use located within a grocery store;
                               and increase the allowable net leasable square
                               feet of retail sales and service uses from
                               50,000 to 65,000 square feet.
                               Approving and authorizing the filing of the
                               attached grant agreement for an enhanced 911
                               training grant from the Local Government
37-1999  3-19-99  Not_Included Division with the state of New Mexico,
                               Department of Finance and Administration and
                               providing for an appropriation to the city of
                               Albuquerque Police Department.
                               Relating to the $27,130,000 city of Albuquerque,
                               New Mexico gross receipts tax refunding revenue
                               bonds, series 1999C, authorized to be issued by
                               City Ordinance Thirteenth Council Bill No. F/
                               S O-41; providing certain terms of the bonds,
38-1999  3-30-99  Not_Included awarding the bonds to, and providing the price
                               to be paid for the bonds by, the original
                               purchaser; providing other details concerning
                               the bonds; approving documents relating to the
                               bonds; making certain appropriations; and
                               ratifying certain actions previously taken.
                               Amending the Tower/Unser Sector Development Plan
                               to change zoning from C-1 to SU-1 PRD 9 DU/AC
                               for two 1-acre parcels located on the northeast
                               and northwest corners of Tanager Drive and Sage
39-1999  3-30-99 1-7-34        Road and From R-D 9 DU/AC to SU-1 PRD 9 DU/AC
                               for the remaining 33 acres if the parcel
                               described as the northerly 35 acre portion of
                               Tract 2, Plat of Tracts 1, 2 and 3, lands of
                               Grevey-Liberman (Figure 12, Pages 61 and 62,
                               Tower/Unser Sector Development Plan).
                               Adopting the fiscal year 2000-2001 two-year
40-1999  4-6-99   Not_Included urban enhancement program and appropriating
                               funds for the urban enhancement program's
                               projects.
                               Approving the programming of funds and projects
41-1999  4-6-99   Not_Included for the 1999-2008 decade plan for capital
                               improvements including the 1999 two-year capital
                               budget.
42-1999  4-6-99   Not_Included Clarifying the policy of the City of Albuquerque
                               regarding the Cuarto Centenario Project.
                               Approving and authorizing the filing of the
                               attached grant application for a Kids@Risk
43-1999  4-15-99  Not_Included Environmental Improvement Project Grant with the
                               Environmental Protection Agency by the
                               Environmental Health Department.
                               Appropriating funds from the Gates Library
                               Initiative for the purpose of purchasing public
44-1999  4-15-99  Not_Included access internet PCs for the public library
                               branches and developing a regional training lab
                               at the Main Library.
                               Amending the adopted Capital Implementation
                               Program of the City of Albuquerque by
45-1999  4-27-99  Not_Included supplementing current appropriations; amending
                               the programming of funds and projects for the
                               1999-2008 decade plan for capital improvements
                               including the 1999 two-year capital budget.
                               Appropriating funds for operating the government
46-1999  4-27-99  Not_Included of the City of Albuquerque for the fiscal year
                               beginning July 1, 1999 and ending June 30, 2000.
47-1999  4-27-99 3-8-7         Providing a policy for the process of developing
                               the Alvarado Transportation Center Project.
                               Relating to the proposed Albuquerque, New Mexico
                               Special Assessment District No. 226, accepting
                               preliminary plans, estimates of costs,
                               assessment plat with addendum and engineer's
                               report as to the methods used in determining
                               benefits with respect thereto; making a
48-1999  4-27-99  Not_Included provisional order that certain street and
                               associated storm drainage improvements, water
                               improvements, sanitary sewer improvements,
                               natural gas line improvements, and electric line
                               improvements, all within the proposed district,
                               shall be constructed; and directing that notice
                               of a hearing on the provisional order be given.
                               Approving and authorizing the filing of a grant
                               application for a Certified Local Government
49-1999  4-27-99  Not_Included Grant with the State Historic Preservation
                               Office and providing an appropriation to the
                               Planning Department.
50-1999  5-18-99  Not_Included Imposing a temporary position freeze on city
                               employment.
 
Res. No. Date Disposition Short Title
Res. No. Date    Disposition   Short Title
                               Amending the adopted Capital Implementation
                               Program of the City of Albuquerque by approving
51-1999  6-3-99   Not_Included new projects, supplementing existing
                               appropriations and changing the scope of
                               existing projects.
                               Approving grant application to the State of New
52-1999  6-3-99   Not_Included Mexico to administer a Local DWI Grant Program
                               and providing an appropriation to the Department
                               of Family and Community Services.
                               Appropriating fiscal year 1999 fourth quarter
                               funds from the balance of fiscal year 1999
53-1999  6-3-99  4-6-8         community based reserved appropriations;
                               establishing administrative and legislative
                               intent for the operation of the Community-Based
                               Planning Program in fiscal year 2000.
                               Requesting a renewal of the tax increment
                               process be approved for 10 years for "Project
                               VIII Brittany Partners," "Project XXXIII Cavan
54-1999  6-3-99   Not_Included Associates Office Structure," "Project II
                               National Bank of Albuquerque," and "Project XXXV
                               Albuquerque Plaza Project/ Office Tower" from
                               the City of Albuquerque.
                               Requesting approval of the tax increment process
55-1999  6-3-99   Not_Included for 10 years for "Project XXXV Albuquerque Plaza
                               Project/Hotel, Retail & Parking" from the City
                               of Albuquerque.
                               Appropriating funds for operating the
                               Albuquerque/Bernalillo County Government and Law
56-1999  6-3-99   Not_Included Enforcement Centers for the fiscal year
                               beginning July 1, 1999, and ending June 30,
                               2000.
                               Appropriating funds to the Corrections and
                               Detention Department for operating the
57-1999  6-3-99   Not_Included Bernalillo County Corrections and Detention
                               Center for fiscal year beginning July 1, 1999,
                               and ending June 30, 2000.
                               Relating to the proposed Albuquerque, New Mexico
                               Special Assessment District No. 225; determining
                               the advisability of constructing, and the type
58-1999  6-3-99   Not_Included and character of, certain street improvements,
                               storm drainage improvements therein and
                               directing the City Clerk to call for sealed bids
                               on such improvements.
                               Approving and authorizing the filing of a grant
                               application for a Food Service Program for
59-1999  6-3-99   Not_Included Children with the New Mexico Department of
                               Children, Youth and Families and providing for
                               an appropriation to the Department of Family and
                               Community Services.
                               Appropriating funds for operating the government
60-1999  6-3-99   Not_Included of the City of Albuquerque for the fiscal year
                               beginning July 1, 1999, and ending June 30,
                               2000.
                               Rescinding Resolution No. R-281, Enactment No.
61-1999  6-16-99  Not_Included 124-1998, which ordered the condemnation and
                               removal of the Building at 2524 Corregidor SW.
                               Authorizing the Aviation Department of the city
                               to enter into agreements with car rental
                               companies located off of airport property;
                               assessing fees on rental car companies for use
62-1999  6-16-99  Not_Included of airport property in the conduct of the
                               companies' business at the Albuquerque
                               International Sunport; authorizing the issuance
                               of permits for the use of airport property
                               pursuant to the agreements.
                               Authorizing the Aviation Department of the city
63-1999  6-16-99  Not_Included to enter into agreements with car rental
                               companies establishing certain customer facility
                               charges.
                               Declaring the intent of the City of Albuquerque,
                               New Mexico, subject to the satisfaction of
                               certain conditions, to issue Metropolitan
64-1999  6-16-99  Not_Included Redevelopment Bonds in an aggregate principal
                               amount not to exceed $6,250,000 in connection
                               with the acquisition and construction of a 160-
                               unit affordable housing apartment complex as
                               described in the project plan.
                               Authorizing the removal of certain uncollectible
65-1999  6-16-99  Not_Included accounts from the city's accounts receivable
                               records.
                               Declaring all municipal portions of Historic
66-1999  6-16-99  Not_Included Route 66, including Central Avenue and North and
                               South Fourth Street, as historic roadways of
                               Albuquerque.
                               Authorizing the Mayor to execute a grant
                               agreement with the United States Department of
                               Justice, Bureau of Justice Assistance, providing
67-1999  6-29-99  Not_Included for an appropriation to the City of Albuquerque,
                               Albuquerque Police Department; eliminating the
                               requirement for a mobile police substation in
                               Bill No. R-51, Enactment No. 53-1998.
                               Concerning the regular municipal election to be
68-1999  7-2-99   Not_Included held in the City of Albuquerque, New Mexico, on
                               Tuesday, the 5th day of October, 1999.
                               Concerning a municipal bond election at the
                               regular municipal election to be held in the
                               City of Albuquerque on October 5, 1999;
                               submitting to a vote of the qualified,
                               registered electors and nonresident municipal
                               electors at such election certain questions for
                               authorizing the issuance of general obligation
69-1999  7-2-99   Not_Included bonds in varying principal amounts and for
                               specified public purposes; providing the form of
                               the bond questions, the emergency and absentee
                               paper ballots therefor and the designation
                               clause for such questions on voting machines;
                               prescribing other details in connection with
                               such election and bonds; and ratifying action
                               previously taken in connection therewith.
                               Approving a grant application to the State of
                               New Mexico Traffic Safety Bureau, to provide DWI
                               enforcement, prevention and education and
70-1999  7-16-99  Not_Included information programs and services to the
                               residents within Bernalillo County limits; and
                               providing an appropriation to the Department of
                               Family and Community Services.
                               Authorizing the Mayor to execute a grant
71-1999  7-21-99  Not_Included application with the Environmental Protection
                               Agency and providing an appropriation to the
                               Department of Family and Community Services.
                               Approving a grant request to the United States
                               Department of Justice and providing
72-1999  7-21-99  Not_Included appropriations to the Department of Family and
                               Community Services and the Albuquerque Police
                               Department.
                               Approving and authorizing a grant under the New
                               Mexico Litter Control and Beautification Act
73-1999  7-21-99  Not_Included with the New Mexico State Highway Department;
                               and providing for an appropriation to the City
                               of Albuquerque Solid Waste Management
                               Department.
74-1999  7-21-99  Not_Included Approving the fiscal year 2000 audit plan as
                               submitted by the Internal Audit Committee.
                               Approving and authorizing the filing of the
                               attached grant application for a Drug Control
75-1999  7-21-99  Not_Included and System Improvement Formula Grant with the
                               State of New Mexico, Department of Public Safety
                               and providing for an appropriation to the City
                               of Albuquerque Police Department.
 
Res. No. Date Disposition Short Title
Res. No. Date     Disposition   Short Title
76-1999  7-21-99   Not_Included Changing the name of San Mateo Linear Park to
                                Workers' Memorial Park.
                                Determining that the building or structure at
                                108 Lewis SE, within the city limits of
77-1999  7-21-99   Not_Included Albuquerque, New Mexico, is so ruined, damaged
                                and dilapidated as to be a menace to the public
                                comfort, health, peace, or safety and that it
                                be required to be removed
                                Authorizing the giving of notice for bids for
                                the sale of City of Albuquerque, New Mexico
78-1999  7-21-99   Not_Included General Obligation Bonds consisting of
                                $24,105,000 General Purpose Bonds, Series
                                1999C.
                                Fixing Tuesday, October 5, 1999, as the date
                                for a special election to be held on the
                                questions of whether Article XI, Section 7 of
                                the City Charter regarding a public vote on a
                                performing arts center should be amended;
                                whether Article VI, Section 1(c) of the City
                                Charter regarding the number of qualified
                                voters required to place a Charter amendment on
                                the ballot should be amended; whether Article
                                II, Section 3 of the City Charter regarding the
                                number of petition signatures required for
                                Mayoral and Council candidates should be
                                amended; whether Article VIII of the City
                                Charter should be amended regarding human
                                rights to prohibit discrimination on the basis
                                of sexual orientation or on the basis of mental
                                disability; whether Article IV, Section 6, and
79-1999  8-4-99    Not_Included Article V, Section 2 of the City Charter
                                regarding compensation of the Mayor, City
                                Councillors and the Council President, Article
                                IV, Section 1 of the City Charter regarding the
                                authority and membership of the Council,
                                Article IV, Section 10 of the City Charter
                                regarding Council duties, and Article V,
                                Section 1 of the City Charter regarding
                                election of the Mayor should be amended;
                                whether Article IV, Section 13 of the City
                                Charter regarding term limits of City
                                Councillors should be amended; whether Article
                                XV of the City Charter regarding competitive
                                bidding for electrical franchises should be
                                amended; and whether Article XII, Section 7(b)
                                of the Code of Ethics regarding the amount of
                                the fine that may be imposed for violation of
                                the code should be amended.
                                Denying SPR-96-01, an application to the City
                                of Albuquerque for a Level "A" Community Master
                                Plan, named "Valle Del Sol Village," located in
80-1999  8-12-99   Not_Included the extraterritorial jurisdiction of the City
                                of Albuquerque, east of Interstate 25, south of
                                the Albuquerque International Sunport, north
                                and west of Mesa Del Sol, and west of Kirtland
                                Air Force Base.
                                Approving and authorizing the attached grant
                                award for a Senior Companion Grant with the
81-1999  8-12-99   Not_Included Corporation for National Service, including
                                funds allocated by the State Agency on Aging
                                and providing for an appropriation to the
                                Department of Senior Affairs.
                                Approving and authorizing the filing of the
                                attached grant application for funds under the
82-1999  8-12-99   Not_Included Emergency Medical Services Fund Act with the
                                Department of Health and providing an
                                appropriation to the Fire Department.
                                Approving and authorizing the filing of the
                                grant award for a Foster Grandparent Grant with
83-1999  8-12-99   Not_Included the Corporation for National Service, including
                                funds allocated by the State Agency on Aging
                                and providing for an appropriation to the
                                Department of Senior Affairs.
                                Approving and authorizing the attached grant
                                award for an RSVP Corporation for Nation
84-1999  8-12-99   Not_Included Service Grant and providing for an
                                appropriation to the Department of Senior
                                Affairs.
                                Approving and authorizing the filing of an
                                application with the United States Department
                                of Transportation for a short range planning
                                grant, a capital assistance grant, and a FTA
85-1999  9-3-99    Not_Included transit enhancement grant under Section 5307 of
                                Title 49; a surface transportation program -
                                urban (TPU) grant; and a congestion mitigation
                                and air quality (CMAQ) grant. Also to provide
                                for an appropriation to the Transit Department.
                                Approving and authorizing the filing of the
                                attached grant award for a COPS More 98 Grant
86-1999  9-3-99    Not_Included with the United States Department of Justice,
                                Office of Community Oriented Policing Service,
                                and providing for an appropriation to the City
                                of Albuquerque Police Department.
                                Authorizing the filing of a grant application
                                with the New Mexico State Agency on Aging for
87-1999  9-3-99    Not_Included Title III Older Americans ACT funds and HB-
                                2 Laws 1999, providing an appropriation to the
                                Family and Communities Services Department.
                                Authorizing the Mayor to execute a contract
                                agreement with the New Mexico Department of
88-1999  9-3-99    Not_Included Children, Youth and Families and providing an
                                appropriation (excellence mini-grant) to the
                                Department of Family and Community Services.
                                Relating to the proposed Albuquerque, New
                                Mexico Special Assessment District No. 226;
                                determining the advisability of constructing
                                and the type and character of, certain street
89-1999  9-3-99    Not_Included and associated storm drainage, sanitary sewer,
                                water, natural gas line and electrical line
                                improvements therein and directing the City
                                Clerk to call for sealed bids on such
                                improvements.
                                Approving and authorizing the filing of the
                                attached application for a foster grandparent
                                grant with the Corporation for National
90-1999  9-3-99    Not_Included Service, including funds allocated by the State
                                Agency on Aging and providing for an
                                appropriation to the Department of Senior
                                Affairs.
                                Approving and authorizing the filing of the
                                attached application for an RSVP Corporation
91-1999  9-3-99    Not_Included for National Service Grant and providing for an
                                appropriation to the Department of Senior
                                Affairs.
                                Approving and authorizing the filing of the
                                attached application for a senior companion
                                grant with the Corporation for National
92-1999  9-3-99    Not_Included Service, including funds allocated by the State
                                Agency on Aging and providing for an
                                appropriation to the Department of Senior
                                Affairs.
                                Approving and authorizing the filing of the
                                attached grant application for a 1999 United
93-1999  9-3-99    Not_Included States Environmental Protection Agency (EPA)
                                National Brownfields Assessment Demonstration
                                Pilot and providing an appropriation to the
                                Department of Family and Community Services.
                                Approving and authorizing the filing of an
                                application with the United States Department
                                of Transportation for job access and reverse
94-1999  9-3-99    Not_Included commute grant under Section 3037 of the
                                Transportation Equity Act for the 21st Century
                                of 1998; and to provide for an appropriation to
                                the Transit Department.
                                Directing the Mayor to enhance the city's weed
                                control and maintenance and enforcement program
95-1999  9-3-99    Not_Included and encouraging business and residential
                                property owners enhance weed control and
                                maintenance as well.
                                Approving and authorizing the filing of an
                                application with the United States Department
96-1999  10-7-99   Not_Included of Transportation for a Section 5309 Capital
                                Assistance Grand, and providing for an
                                appropriation to the Transit Department.
                                Repealing Bill No. R-138, Enactment No. 45-
97-1999  10-7-99  2-1-8         1975, providing for the City of Albuquerque
                                participation in a Joint City-Bernalillo County
                                Committee of Elected Officials.
                                Approving and authorizing filing of the
                                attached grant award for a Universal Hiring
98-1999  10-12-99  Not_Included Program Grant with the United States Department
                                of Justice, Bureau of Justice Assistance and
                                providing for an appropriation to the City of
                                Albuquerque Police Department.
                                Approving a grant application to the United
                                States Department of Health and Human Services,
                                Center for Substance Abuse Treatment, to expand
99-1999  10-12-99  Not_Included substance abuse intensive outpatient treatment
                                services through vouchers for treatment issued
                                by Albuquerque Metropolitan Central Intake and
                                providing an appropriation to the Department of
                                Family and Community Services.
                                Approving an application for Job Training
                                Partnership Act Funds, Income Generating
100-1999 10-12-99  Not_Included Activities; and providing an appropriation to
                                the Department of Family and Community
                                Services.
 
Res. No. Date Disposition Short Title
Res. No. Date     Disposition   Short Title
                                Approving and authorizing the filing of the
                                attached grant application for a Cops in
101-1999 10-12-99  Not_Included Schools Program Grant with the Department of
                                Justice, Office of Community Oriented Policing
                                Services and providing for an appropriation to
                                the City of Albuquerque Police Department.
                                Approving and authorizing the acceptance of
                                State of New Mexico Law Enforcement Protection
102-1999 10-12-99  Not_Included Act and Crime Lab Funds; and providing for an
                                appropriation to the Albuquerque Police
                                Department.
                                Setting an official list of regular City
103-1999 10-12-99  Not_Included Council meetings from October 4, 1999 through
                                December 18, 2000.
104-1999 10-12-99 3-2-4         Determining reasonable notice of public
                                meetings of the Council and Council committees.
                                Approving the development agreement for Old
105-1999 10-12-99  Not_Included Albuquerque High School and appropriating funds
                                for redevelopment.
                                Appropriating funds to the Parks and Recreation
106-1999 10-12-99  Not_Included Department for emergency drainage repair to the
                                Balloon Fiesta Park.
                                Approving and authorizing the filing of the
                                attached grant application for developing
107-1999 10-12-99  Not_Included municipal applications for solar powered LED
                                lighting and providing for an appropriation to
                                the Department of Finance and Administrative
                                Services.
                                Declaring the intent of the City of
                                Albuquerque, New Mexico, subject to the
                                satisfaction of certain conditions, to issue
                                industrial revenue bonds in an amount up to
                                $5,500,000, in connection with a proposed
108-1999 10-12-99  Not_Included project for the manufacture of circuit boards
                                and the assembly of wireless microphone systems
                                for the purpose of inducing Sennheiser New
                                Mexico, LLC to develop the project site in the
                                manner set forth in the preliminary project
                                plan.
109-1999 10-27-99  Not_Included Appropriating funds to Bernalillo County for
                                the Wheels Museum.
                                Approving amendments to Old Albuquerque High
110-1999 10-27-99 1-12-3        School Metropolitan Redevelopment Plan II and
                                making an appropriation.
                                Appropriating reserved funds for operating the
111-1999 10-27-99  Not_Included government of the City of Albuquerque for the
                                Fiscal Year 2000.
                                Approving and authorizing the filing of the
                                attached grant award for funds under the
                                current regulations governing the development
112-1999 10-27-99  Not_Included of a Metropolitan Medical Response System with
                                the Department of Health and Human Services and
                                providing for an appropriation to the Fire
                                Department.
                                Approving the Master Plan for the Alvarado
113-1999 10-27-99 3-8-7         Transportation Center Metropolitan
                                Redevelopment Project.
                                Approving the development agreement for the
114-1999 10-27-99 3-8-7         Alvarado Transportation Center Metropolitan
                                Redevelopment Project and appropriating funds
                                for redevelopment.
115-1999 10-27-99  Not_Included Appropriating funds in City support functions
                                for the Wheels Museum.
                                Formally terminating the Request for Proposal
                                (RFP) process for selection of the Independent
116-1999 11-2-99   Not_Included Review Officer (IRO) for Police Oversight;
                                terminating the services of the Interim IRO
                                and/or any proposed contract extension.
                                Establishing a policy for key decisions on land
                                use and transportation for the Westside-McMahon
                                Corridor; receiving the Westside-McMahon Land
117-1999 11-9-99  1-11-8, 3-8-8 Use and Transportation Guide; amending the West
                                Side Strategic Plan by adding a reference to
                                the Westside-McMahon Transportation and Land
                                Use Policy set forth herein.
                                Approving and authorizing the filing of the
                                attached grant application for the Gang
                                Resistance Education and Training (G.R.E.A.T.)
118-1999 11-9-99   Not_Included Program Grant from the Department of Treasury,
                                Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco & Firearms and
                                providing for an appropriation to the
                                Albuquerque Police Department.
                                Approving and authorizing the filing of the
                                attached grant application for Basic State
119-1999 11-9-99   Not_Included Grant-in-Aid with the New Mexico State Library;
                                and providing for an appropriation to the
                                Albuquerque Public Library.
                                Approving and authorizing the filing of the
                                attached grant application for a Real World
120-1999 11-9-99   Not_Included Assistance Program Grant from the Department of
                                Justice, National Institute of Justice and
                                providing for an appropriation to the
                                Albuquerque Police Department.
                                Establishing an Operations and Management
                                Advisory Board to provide input on the
121-1999 12-7-99  2-10-4        development of the Balloon Fiesta Park
                                Operations and Management Plan, and provide
                                continuing advice on operations and management
                                of the Park.
                                Adopting policies governing the dispensing of
122-1999 12-14-99 3-6-2         alcoholic beverages at municipal golf course
                                facilities.
                                Providing for the appropriation of Federal and
123-1999 12-15-99  Not_Included State Forfeiture Funds to the Police
                                Department.
                                Appropriating funds for the initial phases of
                                transportation and parks projects which
124-1999 12-14-99  Not_Included partially implement the Transportation
                                Infrastructure Tax, and amending the Capital
                                Implementation Program of the City of
                                Albuquerque by approving new projects.
 
 
 
Notes
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
2000 Resolutions
Res. No. Date Disposition Short Title
Res. No. Date     Disposition   Short Title
                                Establishing an Electric Industry Restructuring
                                Act Advisory Panel to investigate aggregation
1-2000   1-13-00  2-3-4         and other opportunities for residential and
                                small business consumers in conjunction with
                                the City of Albuquerque.
                                Approving and authorizing the Mayor to accept a
                                grant and sign any required documents for a
                                Section 108 loan from the United States
2-2000   1-13-00   Not_Included Department of Housing and Urban Development for
                                the Albuquerque Hispano Chamber of Commerce
                                Project and making an appropriation to the
                                Department of Family and Community Services.
                                Relating to the $25,600,000 City of
                                Albuquerque, New Mexico Variable Rate Taxable
                                Gross Receipts Tax Improvement Revenue Bonds,
                                Series 2000A authorized to be issued by City
                                Ordinance Enactment No. 22-1999; providing for
                                the maturity dates, interest rates, redemption,
                                tender, purchase, payment and other details
                                concerning the Series 2000A Bonds; providing
3-2000   1-13-00   Not_Included for the approval of a bond purchase agreement,
                                Series 2000A fiscal services and tender agent
                                agreement, a remarketing agreement, a standby
                                bond purchase agreement, a reimbursement
                                agreement, a from of official statement and the
                                purchase of a policy of bond insurance relating
                                to the Series 2000A Bonds; making certain
                                appropriations; ratifying certain actions
                                previously taken; and declaring an emergency.
                                Sector Development Plan Amendment SD-87-4-1 /
                                Z-99-58, Rescinding the Rio Bravo Sector
                                Development Plan and adopting a new, updated,
4-2000   1-13-00  1-7-33        revised Rio Bravo Sector Development Plan,
                                amending land use and transportation elements
                                to bring it into conformance with the West Side
                                Strategic Plan Policies, Priorities and
                                Suggestions.
                                Area Plan Amendment SPR-95-2-2 / Z-99-58,
                                amending the West Side Strategic Plan,
5-2000   1-13-00  1-11-8        specifically creating more detailed land use
                                guidance for the Bridge/Westgate and Gun Club
                                communities.
                                Declaring a moratorium on the approval of
6-2000   1-28-00   Not_Included development in the La Cueva Sector Development
                                Plan Area.
                                Adjusting Fiscal Year 1999 appropriations for
                                certain programs to provide for actual
7-2000   1-19-00*  Not_Included expenditures and adjust Fiscal Year 1999
                                appropriation to adjust cash balances and
                                improve working capital balances.
                                * Resolution No. 7-2000 was originally approved
                                on December 14, 1999, with a line-item veto by
                             the Mayor. The Mayor's line-item veto (EC-13)
                                was overridden at the City Council meeting of
                                January 19, 2000, by a vote of 7-2.
                                Amending the adopted Capital Implementation
                                Program of the City of Albuquerque by approving
8-2000   1-19-00*  Not_Included new projects, supplementing current
                                appropriations and changing the scope of
                                existing projects.
                                * Resolution No. 8-2000 was originally approved
                                on December 15, 1999, with a line-item veto by
IT+>                          the Mayor. The Mayor's line-item veto (EC-14)
                                was sustained at the City Council meeting of
                                January 19, 2000.
                                Relating to the proposed Albuquerque, New
                                Mexico Special Assessment District No. 222,
                                determining the advisability of constructing,
9-2000   2-10-00   Not_Included and the type and character of, certain street
                                improvements, water improvements, sanitary
                                sewer improvements, storm drainage improvements
                                therein and directing the City Clerk to call
                                for sealed bids on such improvements.
                                Sector Development Plan Amendment SD-80-3-6 /
                                Z-99-84, amending the University of Albuquerque
                                Sector Development Plan to change specific land
                                use elements for Tract A1A, Albuquerque Urban
                                Center (Parcel V) from Village Center Mixed
                                Use: multi-family residential (10-25 DU/Net
                                Acre), permissive uses in C-1 zone plus theater
                                and sale of alcoholic beverages for consumption
                                on or off premises, and land uses are to be
                                located as designated on the site development
                                plan for subdivision submitted as Case Number
                                Z-95-94. Sale of alcoholic beverages for off
10-2000  2-10-00  1-7-5         premises consumption will be set back at least
                                300 feet from the row lines of Western Trail
                                and Coors Boulevard, to mixed use: mixed uses
                                on this parcel shall include single family
                                residential (permissive R-LT uses), 6 to 10
                                dwelling units per acre, approximately 16.4
                                acres; office (permissive O-1 uses),
                                approximately 5.1 acres; commercial (permissive
                                C-1 uses including grocery store with package
                                liquor sales incidental to that use),
                                approximately 13.7 acres; and multi-family
                                (permissive R-2 uses), 18 to 24 dwelling units
                                per acre, approximately 18.8 acres; and
                                neighborhood park.
                                Establishing a legislative policy for the City
11-2000  2-10-00   Not_Included of Albuquerque for the 2000 Legislative Session
                                of the New Mexico Legislature.
                                Declaring a moratorium on the approval of
12-2000  2-10-00   Not_Included development in the La Cueva Sector Development
                                Plan Area.
                                Approving and authorizing the filing of the
                                attached grant application for a ridesharing
13-2000  2-28-00   Not_Included program with the Federal Highway Administration
                                and the New Mexico State Highway and
                                Transportation Department; and providing for an
                                appropriation to the Transit Department.
                                Approving and authorizing the filing of an
                                application for a summer food service program
14-2000  2-28-00   Not_Included for children with the New Mexico Children,
                                Youth and Families Department; providing an
                                appropriation to the Department of Family and
                                Community Services..
                                Authorizing the Mayor to execute a grant
                                agreement with the Levi Strauss Foundation to
                                provide a series of recreational programs
15-2000  2-28-00   Not_Included targeting "at-risk youth" ages 10-18 throughout
                                the City of Albuquerque and providing an
                                appropriation to the Parks and Recreation
                                Department.
                                Approving and authorizing the acceptance of the
                                attached grant award from the United States
                                Department of Energy for a Rebuild American
                                Partnership and authorizing the filing of a
16-2000  2-28-00   Not_Included grant application with Bernalillo County and
                                the State of New Mexico to support a Rebuild
                                America Partnership and providing an
                                appropriation to the Finance and Administrative
                                Services Department.
                                Amending the Fiscal Year 2000 - Fiscal Year
17-2000  2-28-00   Not_Included 2001 two-year urban enhancement program and
                                appropriating funds for the Anne Frank exhibit.
                                Declaring a moratorium on the approval of
                                development in the La Cueva Sector Development
18-2000  3-10-00   Not_Included Plan Area; repealing Council Bill No. R-19,
                                Enactment No. 6-2000 and Bill No. R-22,
                                Enactment No. 12-2000.
                                Providing for a joint powers agreement for the
19-2000  3-21-00   Not_Included provision of investment management services
                                from the State Investment Council to the City
                                of Albuquerque.
                                Approving and authorizing the filing of the
                                attached grant award for a bulletproof vest
20-2000  3-21-00   Not_Included partnership grant with the Department of
                                Justice, Office of Justice Programs and
                                providing for an appropriation to the City of
                                Albuquerque Police Department.
                                Authorizing the Mayor to execute a grant
                                agreement with the United States Department of
21-2000  3-21-00   Not_Included Justice, Bureau of Justice Assistance,
                                providing for an appropriation to the City of
                                Albuquerque Police Department.
                                Approving and Authorizing the filing of the
                                attached grant award for a traffic safety
                                education and enforcement grant with the State
22-2000  3-21-00   Not_Included of New Mexico Highway and Transportation
                                Department, Traffic Safety Bureau, and
                                providing for an appropriation to the City of
                                Albuquerque Police Department.
                                Approving and authorizing the filing of the
                                attached project agreement for an Operation
                                DWI/Operation Buckle Down enforcement grant
23-2000  3-21-00   Not_Included with the New Mexico State Highway and
                                Transportation Department, Traffic Safety
                                Bureau and providing for an appropriation to
                                the City of Albuquerque Police Department.
                                Sector Development Plan Amendment SD-95-3-1,
                                amending language in the Sawmills/Wells Park
                                Sector Development Plan, specifically language
                                for the S-DR Sawmill - developing residential
                                zone, S-MI Sawmill-Mixed Industrial zone, and
                                general SU-2 regulations. The set of amendments
                                to the S-DR zone will accomplish the following:
                                1) reduces the front yard building setback
                                distance from 15 to 9 feet; 2) establishes an
                                additional setback of 5 feet from the front
                                facade of buildings for building portions over
                                15 feet high facing the public right-of-way or
                                a private street; 3) removes references to
                                building setback requirements of the Sector
                                Plan's general SU-2 regulations now found under
                                C. Height; 4) includes a reference under C.
                                Height to the setback requirements of the S-DR
                                zone; 5) exempts permissive and conditional
24-2000  3-21-00  1-7-14        uses in the S-DR zone from general SU-
                                2 regulation 3.G. which requires garage fronts
                                to be set back 25 feet from the property line
                                abutting a public right-of-way or private
                                street and adds a requirement in the S-DR zone
                                setback regulations that garage fronts be set
                                back a minimum of 2 feet from the front facade
                                of the building; and 6) reduces the lot size
                                for townhouses from 3,200 square feet to 2,400
                                square feet. The amendment to the general SU-
                                2 regulation 3.J. reduces the amount of windows
                                required on residential building facades from
                                not less than 25 of the building facade facing
                                a public right-of way or private street to not
                                less than 12.5. The amendment to the S-MI zone
                                expands the area within which S-DR uses can be
                                developed adjacent to the S-DR zone. The
                                expanded area will continue to maintain
                                sufficient separation between residential
                                development and S-I zone industries.
                                Directing a process to develop infill
                                implementation strategies and mechanisms
25-2000  3-21-00  2-5-5         promoting infill development of vacant lands
                                located in urbanized areas of the city;
                                establishing an Infill Development Task Force.
 
Res. No. Date Disposition Short Title
Res. No. Date    Disposition   Short Title
                               Approving and authorizing the acceptance of a
                               1999 State Information Systems grant with the
26-2000  3-21-00  Not_Included State of New Mexico Department of Public Safety
                               and State of New Mexico DNA Funds, providing for
                               an appropriation to the City of Albuquerque
                               Police Department.
                               Amending the Uptown Sector Development Plan to
27-2000  3-21-00 1-7-19        reflect the addition of Lot A1, Block 16,
                               Miramontes Subdivision to the boundary of the
                               Uptown Sector Development Plan.
                               To approve a text amendment to the Uptown Sector
28-2000  3-21-00 1-7-19        Development Plan to allow pharmaceutical pick-
                               ups in the SU-2 zone for the periphery of
                               Uptown.
                               Approving the Program Year 2000 Program
                               Investment Summary for the Community Development
29-2000  3-21-00 3-4-1         Block Grant, Home, and Emergency Shelter Grant
                               Programs and providing an appropriation to the
                               Department of Family and Community Services; and
                               amending Resolution 56, Enactment No. 53-1992.
                               Approving the Cuarto Centenario Memorial
30-2000  3-21-00  Not_Included Maquette; locating the memorial at the
                               Albuquerque Museum; and amending F/S R-184,
                               Enactment No. 42-1999.
31-2000  3-24-00  Not_Included Adjusting Fiscal Year 2000 Appropriations for
                               certain programs.
32-2000  3-24-00 4-2-7         Approving the Transit Service Expansion Plan
                               using transportation tax revenues.
                               Approving the Memorandum of Understanding (MOU)
                               among the property owners for development of the
                               Sandia Science and Technology Park; providing
33-2000  3-24-00  Not_Included for participation by the City Council in
                               implementing the agreement; and reinforcing the
                               Council's legislative policy to seek funding for
                               improvement of the Park.
                               Approving and authorizing the filing of the
                               attached grant application for funds under the
34-2000  4-4-00   Not_Included current regulations governing the First
                               Responder Domestic Preparedness Initiative with
                               the U.S. Department of Justice and providing for
                               an appropriation to the Fire Department.
                               Authorizing the Mayor to execute a grant
                               agreement with the U.S. Department of Health and
                               Human Services, Early Head Start Program, and
35-2000  4-4-00   Not_Included providing an appropriation to the Department of
                               Family and Community Services and moving funds
                               from Operating Grants Fund 265 to Contract
                               Services Program.
                               Relating to Albuquerque, New Mexico Special
                               Assessment District No. 226; setting the time
36-2000  4-4-00   Not_Included and place of an assessment hearing when
                               objections to the assessment roll for such
                               District will be heard.
                               Awarding the construction contract for Special
37-2000  4-4-00   Not_Included Assessment District No. 226 to Construction
                               Contracting & Management, Inc.
                               Referring the petition for the Downtown
                               Albuquerque Business Improvement District to the
38-2000  4-20-00  Not_Included Downtown Planning Group to prepare the District
                               Plan and authorizing the City Clerk to give
                               notice of hearing for the proposed plan.
                               Approving and authorizing the filing of an
                               application with the U.S. Department of
                               Transportation for a Capital Assistance Grant, a
39-2000  5-8-00   Not_Included Surface Transportation Program - Urban (TPU)
                               Grant; and a Congestion Mitigation and Air
                               Quality (CMAQ) Grant. Expanding the Transit
                               Department bus fleet. Providing for an
                               appropriation to the Transit Department.
                               Authorizing the Mayor to execute a contract
                               agreement with the New Mexico Department of
40-2000  5-8-00   Not_Included Children, Youth and Families and providing an
                               appropriation to the Department of Family and
                               Community Services / Office of Child
                               Development, Teen Residence Program (TPR).
                               Appropriating funds for operating the government
41-2000  5-8-00   Not_Included of the City of Albuquerque for the Fiscal Year
                               Beginning July 1, 2000 and Ending June 30, 2001.
                               Approving and authorizing the filing of an
                               application with the U.S. Department of
42-2000  5-8-00   Not_Included Transportation for a Section 5309 Capital
                               Assistance Grant, and providing for an
                               appropriation to the Transit Department.
                               Establishing one-year objectives for the City of
43-2000  5-8-00   Not_Included Albuquerque in Fiscal Year 2001; to meet five-
                               year goals.
                               Declaring a moratorium on the approval of
44-2000  5-9-00   Not_Included development in the proposed La Cueva Sector
                               Development Plan Area.
                               Amending the adopted Capital Implementation
                               Program of the City of Albuquerque Public Works
45-2000  5-10-00  Not_Included Water and Sewer Enterprise Fund by supplementing
                               current appropriations and by creating projects
                               in a New Joint Water and Sewer Rehab Fund.
                               To support aesthetic improvements of the I-25
                               and I-40 Interstate Highway Corridors and direct
46-2000  5-10-00 1-13-5        the City to coordinate with the state, regional,
                               county and federal governments to enhance the
                               highways in keeping with the Interstate Corridor
                               Enhancement Plan.
                               Relating to Albuquerque, New Mexico, Special
                               Assessment District No. 216; setting the time
47-2000  5-10-00  Not_Included and place of an assessment hearing, when
                               objections to the assessment roll for such
                               District will be heard and making an
                               appropriation.
                               Approving and authorizing the filing of an
                               application with the U.S. Department of
                               Transportation for a Job Access and Reverse
48-2000  5-10-00  Not_Included Commute Grant under Section 3037 of the
                               Transportation Equity Act for the 21st Century
                               of 1998; and to provide for an appropriation to
                               the Transit Department.
                               Directing the administration to seek applicable
49-2000  5-4-00  3-5-60        permits to allow processing and recycling of
                               construction and demolition waste at Cerro
                               Colorado Landfill.
                               Adopting the Downtown 2010 Sector Development
                               Plan for an Urban Center, superseding the 1989
                               Downtown Core Revitalization Strategy (The
                               Center City Revitalization Strategy) adopted by
50-2000  5-22-00 1-4-1         Resolution 34-1989; and amending the boundaries
                               of the Downtown Neighborhood Area Sector
                               Development Plan, the Huning Castle and Raynolds
                               Addition Sector Development Plan, and the
                               McClellan Park Sector Development Plan.
 
Res. No. Date Disposition Short Title
Res. No. Date    Disposition   Short Title
                               Authorizing the giving of notice for bids for
                               the sale of City of Albuquerque, New Mexico
51-2000  6-5-00   Not_Included General Obligation Bonds consisting of
                               $44,080,000 General Purpose Bonds, Series 2000A
                               and $6,750,000 Storm Sewer Bonds, Series 2000B.
                               Authorizing the removal of certain uncollectible
52-2000  6-5-00   Not_Included accounts from the City's accounts receivable
                               records.
                               Approving and authorizing the filing of a grant
                               application with the New Mexico Forestry
53-2000  6-5-00   Not_Included Division under the Energy, Minerals and Natural
                               Resources Department and providing for an
                               appropriation to the Albuquerque Fire Department
                               in the Operating Grants Fund.
                               Approving and authorizing the filing of a grant
                               application for a Food Service Program for
54-2000  6-5-00   Not_Included Children with the New Mexico Department of
                               Children, Youth and Families and providing for
                               an appropriation to the Department of Family and
                               Community Services.
                               Approving and authorizing the filing of the
                               attached award for an Underage Drinking
                               Reduction Grant with the State of New Mexico
55-2000  6-5-00   Not_Included Highway and Transportation Department, Traffic
                               Safety Bureau, and providing for an
                               appropriation to the City of Albuquerque Police
                               Department.
                               Approving and authorizing the filing of grant
                               application with the Federal Emergency
                               Management Agency for funds under the National
56-2000  6-5-00   Not_Included Urban Search & Rescue (US&R) Response System
                               Cooperative Agreement and providing for an
                               appropriation to the Albuquerque Fire Department
                               in the Operating Grants Fund.
                               Relating to Albuquerque, New Mexico Special
57-2000  6-5-00   Not_Included Assessment District No. 226; modifying,
                               confirming, and approving the assessment roll
                               for such District; and making an appropriation.
                               Approving and authorizing the filing of the
                               attached award for a Safe Streets 2000 Grant
58-2000  6-5-00   Not_Included with the New Mexico State Highway and
                               Transportation Department, Traffic Safety Bureau
                               and providing for an appropriation to the City
                               of Albuquerque Police Department.
                               Approving and authorizing the filing of a grant
                               application for a Certified Local Government
59-2000  6-5-00   Not_Included Grant with the State Historic Preservation
                               Office and providing an appropriation to the
                               Planning Department.
                               Approving and authorizing the filing of the
                               attached award from the New Mexico State Highway
60-2000  6-5-00   Not_Included and Transportation Department, Traffic Safety
                               Bureau to the City of Albuquerque Police
                               Department for a Drug Recognition Expert Grant
                               Program.
61-2000  6-5-00   Not_Included Approving a Parking Unit Lease and Sale
                               Agreement.
                               Appropriating funds to the Corrections and
                               Detention Department for operating the
62-2000  6-15-00  Not_Included Bernalillo County Corrections and Detention
                               Center for the fiscal year beginning July 1,
                               2000 and ending June 30, 2001.
                               Appropriating funds for operating the
63-2000  6-15-00  Not_Included Albuquerque/Bernalillo County Government and Law
                               Enforcement Centers for the fiscal year
                               beginning July 1, 2000 and ending June 30, 2001.
                               Amending the adopted Capital Implementation
                               Program of the City of Albuquerque by approving
64-2000  6-15-00  Not_Included new projects, supplementing current
                               appropriations and changing the scope of
                               existing projects.
                               Amending the La Cueva High School Land Use Guide
                               (a Rank Three Plan, adopted in 1986), to
                               incorporate newly annexed properties into the
                               boundary of the plan; rezoning portions of the
65-2000  6-26-00 1-7-42        Land Use Guide; amending the governing concepts
                               of the Land Use Guide; renaming the Land Use
                               Guide to the La Cueva Sector Development Plan;
                               and amending the zone map for approximately 650
                               acres.
                               Establishing a process to determine
                               Albuquerque's and Bernalillo County's centers
                               and corridors and to designate certain activity
                               centers and linked transportation corridors as
                               locations where, by policy, the City will
66-2000  6-27-00 3-8-9         consider amending the Albuquerque/Bernalillo
                               County Comprehensive Plan and related
                               implementation instruments to create a system of
                               activity centers and corridors containing
                               significant employment and greater variety of
                               services and choice in housing.
                               Approving grant application to the State of New
67-2000  6-27-00  Not_Included Mexico to administer a Local DWI Grant Program
                               and providing an appropriation to the Department
                               of Family and Community Services.
                               Appropriating funds from Bernalillo County to
68-2000  6-27-00  Not_Included the Department of Family and Community Services
                               for a High School Dropout Prevention Program at
                               Rio Grande High School.
                               Awarding the construction contract for Special
69-2000  6-27-00  Not_Included Assessment District No. 225 (the "district")
                               improvements to Condore Construction Company.
                               Relating to Albuquerque, New Mexico Special
                               Assessment District No. 225; setting the time
70-2000  6-27-00  Not_Included and place of an assessment hearing when
                               objections to the assessment roll for such
                               District will be heard and making an
                               appropriation.
71-2000  6-27-00  Not_Included Approving the FY01 Audit Plan as submitted by
                               the Internal Audit Committee.
                               Providing for a Public/Private Partnership to
                               Fund, develop and implement a landscaping plan
                               for the Big-I (intersection of Interstate
72-2000  6-27-00 4-2-8         Highway 25 and Interstate Highway 40) and other
                               highway locations; creating a Big-I Pride Task
                               Force; contributing up to $1 Million of general
                               obligation bond monies if certain conditions are
                               met.
                               Appropriating funds needed for technical
                               adjustments to the operating budget for the
73-2000  7-3-00   Not_Included operation of the government of the City of
                               Albuquerque for the fiscal year beginning July
                               1, 2000, and ending June 30, 2001.
                               Amending Resolution 71-1998 which replaced the
                               Comprehensive Housing Affordability Strategy
74-2000  8-21-00 3-4-3         (CHAS) with the Consolidated Plan 1998-2002;
                               increasing the membership of the Affordable
                               Housing Committee to include a licensed
                               architect.
                               Approving and authorizing the acceptance of
                               funds for Albuquerque Highway Clean Up Program
75-2000  8-21-00  Not_Included through a cooperative agreement with the New
                               Mexico State Highway and Transportation
                               Department.
 
Res. No. Date Disposition Short Title
Res. No. Date     Disposition   Short Title
                                Appropriating funds for operating the
76-2000  6-6-00    Not_Included government of the City of Albuquerque for the
                                fiscal year beginning July 1, 2000 and ending
                                June 30, 2001.
                                Authorizing the Mayor to execute a contract
                                agreement with the New Mexico Department of
                                Children, Youth and Families and providing an
77-2000  8-21-00   Not_Included appropriation to the Department of Family and
                                Community Services/Office of Child Development,
                                Temporary Assistance for Needy Families Program
                                (TANF).
78-2000  8-21-00   Not_Included Appropriating funds to the Albuquerque Police
                                Department for the purchase of air tasers.
                                Amending the Vineyard Sector Development Plan,
79-2000  9-6-00   1-7-36        a Rank Three Plan, to rezone portions of the
                                plan; and amending the zone map for
                                approximately 30 acres.
                                Approving and authorizing a grant under the New
                                Mexico Litter Control and Beautification Act
80-2000  9-6-00    Not_Included with the New Mexico State Highway Department;
                                and providing for an appropriation to the City
                                of Albuquerque Solid Waste Management
                                Department.
                                Approving and authorizing the filing of the
                                attached grant application with the
                                Environmental Protection Agency for a 2000
81-2000  9-6-00    Not_Included Environmental Monitoring Public Access and
                                Community Tracking (EMPACT) Grant; and
                                providing for an appropriation to the Public
                                Works Department.
                                Approving and authorizing the filing of the
                                attached grant application for a Transportation
82-2000  9-6-00    Not_Included Community and System Preservation (TCSP) Grant,
                                with the U.S. Department of Transportation,
                                Federal Highway Administration and providing
                                for an appropriation to the Transit Department.
                                Approving and authorizing the application for
                                an EPA grant for pollution prevention for
83-2000  9-6-00    Not_Included medical facilities; and appropriating funds to
                                the Public Works Department, Wastewater Utility
                                Division.
84-2000  10-6-00  1-6-12        Approving the Near Heights Metropolitan
                                Redevelopment Plan.
                                Establishing a Night Sky Protection Task Force
85-2000  10-5-00  2-8-3         for the City of Albuquerque; requiring a
                                report.
                                Adopting the State of New Mexico, Educational
86-2000  10-5-00   Not_Included Retirement Association Deferred Compensation
                                Plan, approved and administered by the
                                Educational Retirement Board.
                                Relating to Albuquerque, New Mexico Special
87-2000  10-5-00   Not_Included Assessment District No. 225; modifying,
                                confirming and approving the assessment roll
                                for such district and making an appropriation.
                                Requesting that the Mayor evaluate the
88-2000  10-5-00   Not_Included organizational placement of the Office of
                                Neighborhood Coordination and report to the
                                City Council.
                                Approving a grant application to the United
                                States Department of Health and Human Services,
89-2000  10-18-00  Not_Included Center for Substance Abuse Treatment, to expand
                                adolescent outpatient treatment services and
                                providing an appropriation to the Department of
                                Family and Community Services.
                                Approving a grant application to the United
                                States Department of Health and Human Services,
                                Center for Substance Abuse Treatment, to expand
90-2000  10-18-00  Not_Included residential treatment for pregnant and post
                                partum addicted women and their children and
                                providing an appropriation to the Department of
                                Family and Community Services.
                                Determining that the building or structure at
                                1127 Major NW, within the city limits of
91-2000  10-18-00  Not_Included Albuquerque, New Mexico, is so ruined, damaged
                                and dilapidated as to be a menace to the public
                                comfort, health, peace or safety and that it be
                                required to be removed.
                                Providing for issuance of gross receipts tax
92-2000  10-18-00  Not_Included debt; making an appropriation for acquisition
                                of a police helicopter.
                                Approving a grant request to the United States
                                Department of Justice and providing
93-2000  10-18-00  Not_Included appropriations to the Department of Family and
                                Community Services and the Albuquerque Police
                                Department.
                                Approving and authorizing the filing of the
                                grant application for a STR Analysis of
94-2000  10-18-00  Not_Included Backlogged Convicted Offender Samples Grant
                                with the United States Department of Justice
                                and providing for an appropriation to the City
                                of Albuquerque Police Department.
                                Approving grant application to the State of New
95-2000  10-18-00  Not_Included Mexico to administer a Community DWI Grant
                                Program and providing an appropriation to the
                                Department of Family and Community Services.
                                Approving and authorizing the acceptance of
                                State of New Mexico Law Enforcement Protection
96-2000  10-18-00  Not_Included Act and Crime Lab Funds; and providing for an
                                appropriation to the Albuquerque Police
                                Department.
                                Requesting that Council Services and the Office
                                of Economic Development be directed to identify
97-2000  10-18-00  Not_Included and contract with an independent consultant to
                                conduct an analysis of the City's Industrial
                                Revenue Bond Program and make recommendations.
98-2000  10-18-00  Not_Included Appropriating funds to Bernalillo County for
                                the Wheels Museum.
                                Directing a process to develop infill
                                implementation strategies and mechanisms
                                promoting infill development of vacant and
99-2000  10-18-00 2-5-5         redevelopable lands located in the urbanized
                                areas of the city; establishing an Infill
                                Development Task Force; repealing Resolution
                                17, Enactment No. 25-2000.
                                Directing the City Attorney to withdraw the
100-2000 10-18-00  Not_Included condemnation of New Mexico Utilities; cease all
                                negotiations to acquire New Mexico Utilities;
                                and repealing Resolution No. 129-1998.
 
Res. No. Date Disposition Short Title
Res. No. Date     Disposition   Short Title
                                Directing the administration to place priority
101-2000 10-18-00  Not_Included on the installation of flashing lights in
                                school zones.
                                Authorizing the filing of a grant application
                                with the New Mexico State Agency on Aging for
102-2000 10-18-00  Not_Included Title III Older Americans Act Funds and HB-
                                2 Laws of New Mexico 2000, providing an
                                appropriation to Family and Community Services
                                Department.
                                Appropriating Metropolitan Redevelopment Funds
103-2000 10-31-00  Not_Included for the implementation of Redevelopment
                                Programs in Metropolitan Redevelopment Areas.
                                Approving a grant application to the Department
                                of Housing and Urban Development for a 2001
104-2000 10-31-00  Not_Included Continuum of Care Grant; and providing an
                                appropriation to the Department of Family and
                                Community Services.
                                Authorizing the Mayor to execute a contract
                                agreement with the New Mexico Department of
105-2000 10-31-00  Not_Included Children, Youth and Families and providing an
                                appropriation to the Department of Family and
                                Community Services.
                                Amending the adopted Capital Implementation
                                Program of the City of Albuquerque Public Works
                                Water and Wastewater Enterprise Fund and the
106-2000 10-31-00  Not_Included Water Master Plan Service Area, and creating a
                                new project to provide water service to the
                                Bernalillo County Metropolitan Detention
                                Center.
                                Setting an official list of regular City
107-2000 10-31-00  Not_Included Council meetings from October 16, 2000 through
                                December 17, 2001.
108-2000 10-31-00 3-2-4         Determining reasonable notice of public
                                meetings of the Council and Council committees.
                                Approving a Memorandum of Understanding between
                                the County of Bernalillo and the City of
109-2000 10-31-00  Not_Included Albuquerque and providing an appropriation to
                                the Department of Family and Community Services
                                to supplement the Neutral Corner Program.
                                Approving a Memorandum of Understanding between
                                the County of Bernalillo and the City of
110-2000 10-31-00  Not_Included Albuquerque and providing an appropriation to
                                the Department of Family and Community Services
                                to supplement the High School Dropout
                                Prevention Program at Rio Grande High School.
                                Directing the Mayor to implement the
                                requirements outlined in Bill No. R-308,
                                Enactment No. 103-1995 and in the Montano River
                                Crossing Independent Evaluation Report
                                concerning the Montano Bridge crossing, calling
111-2000 11-27-00  Not_Included for an evaluation of Montano east of 4th Street
                                and of 2nd and 4th Street intersections with
                                Montano; making Montano east of 2nd Street a
                                priority in the Transportation Infrastructure
                                Tax Expenditure Plan; and calling for an
                                evaluation of 4th Street for improved capacity.
                                Adopting the Albuquerque On-Street
112-2000 11-27-00 1-11-5        Comprehensive Bike Plan as a Rank Two Facility
                                Plan.
                                Changing the name of a one-block portion of
                                Ladera Drive NW, a designated minor arterial,
113-2000 11-27-00 6-1-1         to St. Joseph Drive NW for the portion of
                                Ladera Drive NW between Coors Boulevard NW and
                                Atrisco Drive NW.
                                Approving a grant application to the United
                                States Department of Housing and Urban
114-2000 11-27-00  Not_Included Development for the restoration, planning and
                                design of the Albuquerque Little Theatre and
                                providing an appropriation to the Department of
                                Family and Community Services.
                                Appropriating funds to the Department of Family
115-2000 11-27-00  Not_Included and Community Services for housing related
                                purposes.
                                Amending the facility plan: electric service
116-2000 11-27-00  Not_Included transmission and subtransmission facilities
                                (1995-2005), updating the description of
                                proposed electric facility projects.
                                Amending the adopted Capital Implementation
117-2000 11-27-00  Not_Included Program of the City of Albuquerque by approving
                                a new project and providing an appropriation.
                                Establishing priorities for the 2001 Capital
                                Improvements Plan; defining the criteria to be
118-2000 5-1-00    Not_Included used in rating project proposals; assigning
                                weights to the criteria; allocating amounts for
                                different purposes within the 2001 General
                                Obligation Bond Program.
119-2000 12-28-00  Not_Included Authorizing application by the City for the
                                designation of a Foreign Trade Zone.
                                Authorizing the Mayor to execute a contract
                                agreement with the New Mexico Youth
120-2000 12-28-00  Not_Included Conservation Corps Commission providing an
                                appropriation to the Department of Family and
                                Community Services.
                                Approving and authorizing the filing of the
                                attached application for a Methamphetamine /
121-2000 12-28-00  Not_Included Drug Hot Spots Grant Program from the
                                Department of Justice, Bureau of Justice
                                Assistance and providing an appropriation to
                                the Albuquerque Police Department.
                                Approving and authorizing the filing of the
                                attached grant award from the New Mexico State
122-2000 12-28-00  Not_Included Highway and Transportation Department, Traffic
                                Safety Bureau and providing for an
                                appropriation to the City of Albuquerque Police
                                Department.
                                Approving and authorizing the filing of the
                                attached grant application for the Gang
                                Resistance Education and Training (G.R.E.A.T.)
123-2000 12-28-00  Not_Included Program Grant from the Department of Treasury,
                                Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco and Firearms and
                                providing for an appropriation to the
                                Albuquerque Police Department.
                                Reaffirming the Albuquerque/Bernalillo County
124-2000 12-28-00 1-2-2         Comprehensive Plan as the policy to guide land
                                use in the City and County.
                                Designating the Los Candelarias Village Center
                                Metropolitan Redevelopment Area, making certain
                                findings and determinations pursuant to the
125-2000 12-28-00 1-12-12       Metropolitan Redevelopment Code, and
                                authorizing and directing the Metropolitan
                                Redevelopment Agency to issue a request for
                                proposals for the Prepare a Plan for the New
                                Metropolitan Redevelopment Area.
                                Approving and authorizing the filing of the
                                attached application worksheet for an Operation
                                DWI / Operation Buckle Down Enforcement Grant
126-2000 12-28-00  Not_Included with the New Mexico State Highway and
                                Transportation Department, Traffic Safety
                                Bureau and providing for an appropriation to
                                the City of Albuquerque Police Department.
                                Making an appropriation to the Department of
127-2000 12-28-00  Not_Included Family and Community Services to continue the
                                "Not Even One Project" to prevent youth firearm
                                violence.
                                Declaring the City of Albuquerque's intent to
                                issue Industrial Development Revenue Bonds in
                                an aggregate principal amount up to $42,500,000
                                in connection with a proposed project located
128-2000 12-28-00  Not_Included at 4200, 4240 and 4272 Balloon Park Road, N.E.
                                and 4401 Alexander Boulevard, N.E. in
                                Albuquerque, New Mexico, for the purpose of
                                inducing SP Pharmaceuticals, L.L.C. to develop,
                                construct and equip the project site in the
                                manner set forth in the plan.
                                Approving and authorizing the filing of the
                                attached grant application for Basic State
129-2000 12-28-00  Not_Included Grant-In-Aid with the New Mexico State Library;
                                and providing for an appropriation to the
                                Cultural Services Department for the
                                Albuquerque Public Library.
 
 
 
Notes
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
2001 Resolutions
Res. No. Date Disposition Short Title
Res. No. Date    Disposition   Short Title
                               Relating to Albuquerque, New Mexico Special
1-2001   1-10-01  Not_Included Assessment District No. 216; confirming and
                               approving the assessment roll for such district.
                               Identifying the design and construction of six
2-2001   1-10-01  Not_Included lanes on Eubank Boulevard south of Central
                               Avenue to Kirtland Air Force Base as a policy
                               priority.
                               Amending Resolution 89-1996, enhancing the
3-2001   1-10-01 4-3-16        Xeriscape Landscape Retrofit Incentive Program,
                               increasing the maximum and per square foot
                               rebate amounts.
                               Establishing a Task Force to develop a Drought
4-2001   1-10-01 2-8-4         Management Strategy for the City of Albuquerque
                               to be presented to the City Council by April 1,
                               2001.
                               Appropriating funds to the Fire Department for
5-2001   1-10-01  Not_Included unanticipated costs incurred in response to the
                               Cerro Grande fire in Los Alamos for Fiscal Year
                               2000.
                               Establishing City policy for information
6-2001   1-10-01 3-1-10        technology and providing public access to City
                               public records.
                               Authorizing the Mayor to execute a contract
                               agreement with the New Mexico Department of
                               Children, Youth and Families and providing an
7-2001   1-10-01  Not_Included appropriation to the Department of Family and
                               Community Services / Office of Child
                               Development, Temporary Assistance for Needy
                               Families Program (TANF).
                               Authorizing the Mayor to execute a contract
                               agreement with the New Mexico Department of
8-2001   1-10-01  Not_Included Children, Youth and Families and providing an
                               appropriation to the Department of Family and
                               Community Services / Office of Child
                               Development, Teen Residence Program (TPR).
                               Declaring the City of Albuquerque an immigrant-
                               friendly City; establishing City of Albuquerque
                               policies regarding immigrants and their
9-2001   1-11-01 3-1-11        families, regardless of immigration status;
                               establishing a City of Albuquerque Immigrant
                               Resource Program; and providing an
                               appropriation.
10-2001  1-10-01  Not_Included Providing for the appropriation of federal and
                               state forfeiture funds to the Police Department.
                               Directing the Administration and the Albuquerque
11-2001  1-10-01  Not_Included Development Commission to enforce the deadline
                               of December 31, 2000 for the Villa San Felipe
                               Project.
                               Approving and authorizing the filing of the
                               attached grant application for a Rural
                               Bernalillo County Job Access Program with the
12-2001  1-10-01  Not_Included New Mexico State Highway and Transportation
                               Department Public Transportation Programs
                               Bureau; and providing for an appropriation to
                               the Transit Department.
                               Amending the FY/01 Audit Plan; requiring the
13-2001  1-10-01  Not_Included Office of Internal Audit to audit the Fiscal
                               Year 2000 year-end close.
                               Relating to the $2,420,000 City of Albuquerque,
                               New Mexico Taxable Golf Course Net Revenue /
                               Gross Receipts Tax Revenue Bonds, Series 2001
                               authorized to be issued by City Ordinance
                               Fourteenth Council Bill No. F/S O-70; providing
                               certain terms of the bonds, awarding the Series
14-2001  1-25-01  Not_Included 2001 Bonds to, and providing the price to Be
                               paid for the Series 2001 Bonds by, the
                               investment bankers; providing other details
                               concerning the Series 2001 Bonds; approving
                               documents relating to the Series 2001 Bonds;
                               making certain appropriations; and ratifying
                               certain actions previously taken.
                               Requiring the Albuquerque Police Department to
15-2001  1-31-01 3-11-4        develop and implement a plan to increase the
                               actual number of sworn officers to the Fiscal
                               Year 2001 authorized level.
                               Approving the FY 2001 Program Investment Summary
                               for the Community Development Block Grant, Home
16-2001  1-31-01 2-5-3         and Emergency Shelter Grant Programs and
                               providing an appropriation to the Department of
                               Family and Community Services; and repealing
                               Section 2-5-3 of the Code of Resolutions.
                               Authorizing the conveyance of property on
17-2001  1-31-01  Not_Included Bluewater Road and Camino Azul to Yes Housing
                               for affordable housing.
                               Approving and authorizing the filing of the
                               attached grant award for funds under the Current
                               Regulations Governing the Development of a
18-2001  1-31-01  Not_Included Metropolitan Medical Response System with the
                               U.S. Department of Health and Human Services and
                               providing an appropriation to the Fire
                               Department.
                               Approving and authorizing the filing of the
                               attached grant application for an Air Pollution
19-2001  1-31-01  Not_Included Control Grant with the Environmental Protection
                               Agency and providing an appropriation to the
                               Environmental Health Department.
                               Appropriating funds to the Corrections and
                               Detention Department to fund increased
20-2001  1-31-01  Not_Included transportation of inmates to provide additional
                               space for the Bernalillo County Corrections and
                               Detention Center.
                               Authorizing the Mayor to execute a grant
                               agreement with the U.S. Department of Health and
21-2001  1-31-01  Not_Included Human Services, Early Head Start Program, and
                               providing an appropriation to the Department of
                               Family and Community Services.
22-2001  1-31-01  Not_Included Appropriating funds to the Downtown Albuquerque
                               Business Improvement District.
                               Establishing a legislative policy for the City
23-2001  1-31-01  Not_Included of Albuquerque for the 2001 Legislative Session
                               of the New Mexico Legislature.
                               Amending the adopted Capital Implementation
                               Program of the City of Albuquerque by approving
24-2001  2-8-01   Not_Included new projects, supplementing current
                               appropriations and changing the scope of
                               existing projects.
                               Directing the Administration to carry out
25-2001  2-16-01  Not_Included recommendations which would enhance animal
                               services facilities and operations.
 
Res. No. Date Disposition Short Title
Res. No. Date    Disposition   Short Title
                               Creating a Redistricting Committee to make
                               recommendations to the Council regarding the
26-2001  2-16-01 2-1-16        boundaries of the nine Council Districts;
                               specifying guidelines and a time frame for the
                               Committee.
                               Authorizing the Mayor to execute a grant
                               application with the Economic Development
27-2001  2-16-01  Not_Included Administration (The "EDA") and providing an
                               appropriation to the Department of Family and
                               Community Services for the Old Albuquerque High
                               School Brownfields Redevelopment Project.
                               Approving and authorizing the filing of the
                               attached grant application for a New Mexico Gang
28-2001  2-16-01  Not_Included Task Force Grant with the City of Rio Rancho and
                               providing for an appropriation to the City of
                               Albuquerque Police Department.
                               Consenting to the exercise of powers by
                               Bernalillo County, New Mexico, pursuant to
29-2001  2-16-01  Not_Included Sections 3-43-1 et Seq. NMSA 1978, the Municipal
                               Housing Law, within the City boundaries
                               regarding a multi-family residential housing
                               project to be located on Valencia Avenue SE.
                               Directing the Administration to appoint a
30-2001  2-16-01 2-7-3         Committee to review and revise current
                               Neighborhood Traffic Management Program
                               policies.
                               Appropriating funds in Fiscal Year 2001 to the
31-2001  3-12-01  Not_Included Environmental Health Department for an
                               additional noise abatement officer.
                               Sector Development Plan Amendment 00138-00000-
                               01074, Amending the Sawmill Wells Park Sector
                               Development Plan to change specific land use
                               elements of the Zoning Map for Tract 238C-1-A-2-
                               A, Stewart Walker Addition from S-MI to P-R. The
32-2001  3-12-01 1-7-14        text of Chapter 7 in the Plan is amended to
                               include the P-R Zone which designates lots
                               reserved for off-street parking required by the
                               Zoning Code (Sec. 14-16-3-1). The Zoning Code is
                               amended to allow the P-R Zone in the Sawmill
                               Wells Park Sector Development Plan.
                               Amending the West Route 66 Sector Development
                               Plan to revise Section V, the Design Overlay
                               Zone, for Sector One between the Rio Grande and
33-2001  3-12-01 1-7-31        Coors Boulevard NW only, to permit signs to be
                               sized according to C-2 Zoning, to permit and
                               encourage neon signs, and to revise the
                               requirements for outdoor storage and retailing
                               of merchandise.
                               Approving and authorizing Memorandum of
                               Agreement with Sandoval County for contract to
34-2001  3-12-01  Not_Included provide a Rural Sandoval County Job Access
                               Program; and providing for an appropriation to
                               the Transit Department.
                               Authorizing the Mayor to execute a grant
                               agreement with the United States Department of
35-2001  3-12-01  Not_Included Justice, Bureau of Justice Assistance, providing
                               for an appropriation to the City of Albuquerque,
                               Police Department.
                               Rescinding Bill No EC-366 (June 7, 1999) and
                               establishing City policy that the Bernalillo
                               County Detention Center shall be jointly
36-2001  3-12-01 3-11-12       operated by the City of Albuquerque and the
                               County of Bernalillo, under a City Corrections-
                               Detention Department, and managed by a Director
                               who reports to the City's Chief Administrative
                               Officer.
                               Establishing a moratorium on planning of the
                               relocation and on relocation of the Booking
                               Facility at the Bernalillo County Detention
37-2001  3-12-01  Not_Included Center; requiring the Corrections Department to
                               report on alternatives for prisoner booking to
                               minimize the time sworn officers will spend
                               booking prisoners and transporting prisoners to
                               the new West Side Jail Facility.
                               Determining that the building or structure at
                               713 7th St SW, within the city limits of
38-2001  4-2-01   Not_Included Albuquerque, New Mexico, is so ruined, damaged
                               and dilapidated as to be a menace to the public
                               comfort, health, peace or safety and required to
                               be removed.
                               Determining that the building or structure at
                               518 Pacific SE, within the city limits of
39-2001  4-2-01   Not_Included Albuquerque, New Mexico, is so ruined, damaged
                               and dilapidated as to be a menace to the public
                               comfort, health, peace or safety and that is to
                               be required to be removed.
40-2001  3-19-01  Not_Included Adjusting Fiscal Year 2001 appropriations for
                               certain program strategies.
                               Approving and authorizing the filing of an
                               application for a summer Food Service Program
41-2001  4-2-01   Not_Included for children with the New Mexico Children, Youth
                               and Families Department; providing an
                               appropriation to the Department of Family and
                               Community Services.
                               Authorizing the Mayor to execute a contract
42-2001  4-2-01   Not_Included agreement with the Bernalillo County Sheriff's
                               Office and providing an appropriation to the
                               Department of Family and Community Services.
                               Approving and authorizing the filing of the
                               attached grant award for funds under the
43-2001  4-2-01   Not_Included Emergency Medical Services Fund Act with the New
                               Mexico Department of Health, and providing an
                               appropriation to the Fire Department.
                               Approving a grant request to the Juvenile
                               Justice Advisory Committee, Children, Youth and
44-2001  4-2-01   Not_Included Families Department of the State of New Mexico
                               and providing an appropriation to the Department
                               of Family and Community Services.
45-2001  4-2-01   Not_Included Declaring the National Diamond Jubilee of
                               Historic Route 66 in the City of Albuquerque.
                               Declaring Fourth Street, Bridge and Isleta
46-2001  4-2-01  6-4-12        Boulevards in Albuquerque, also known
                               commemoratively as El Camino Real, as an
                               Historic Roadway of the City of Albuquerque.
                               Appropriating General Obligation Bond Funds for
47-2001  3-19-01  Not_Included the purpose of providing a system of new bicycle
                               parking facilities on Central between Girard and
                               Carlisle.
                               Approving a grant agreement with the New Mexico
                               Department of Finance and Administration and
48-2001  4-2-01   Not_Included providing an appropriation to the Department of
                               Family and Community Services for a Main Street
                               Construction Grant Program.
                               Directing the City Attorney to pursue
49-2001  4-2-01   Not_Included compensation from Cornell Corrections Inc. to
                               recover the costs associated with the manhunt
                               for and recapture of Byron Shane Chubbuck.
                               Amending the adopted Capital Implementation
                               Program of the City Public Works Streets and
50-2001  4-2-01   Not_Included Storm General Obligation Bond Fund Programs as
                               related to interim financing for Special
                               Assessment District (SAD) 216.
 
Res. No. Date Disposition Short Title
Res. No. Date    Disposition   Short Title
                               Approving and authorizing the filing of a grant
                               application for a Certified Local Government
51-2001  4-2-01   Not_Included Grant with the state Historic Preservation
                               Office and providing an appropriation to the
                               Planning Department.
                               Establishing city policy of City Council review
                               and approval of proposed metropolitan
52-2001  3-5-01  1-1-15        redevelopment condemnation proceedings and
                               conveyances of condemned property to
                               redevelopers.
                               Directing the Administration to restructure the
53-2001  4-2-01   Not_Included request for proposals solicitation number:
                               RFP2001-006-sv Albuquerque International Sunport
                               retail concessions.
54-2001  1-19-01  Not_Included Adjusting Fiscal Year 2000 and Fiscal Year 2001
                               appropriations for certain programs.
55-2001  3-26-01  Not_Included Making a financial commitment to host the 2002
                               Inc. 500 conference in Albuquerque.
                               Requesting that Council Services be directed to
                               identify and contract with a consultant to
                               conduct an analysis of telecommunications
                               antenna lease agreements which will include
56-2001  4-2-01   Not_Included recommended policies; declaring a 60-day
                               moratorium on all antenna leases until results
                               of the study can be considered; and
                               appropriating no more than $30,000 from the
                               Legal Department Utilities Franchise Office to
                               Council Services for execution of the contract.
                               Adopting a Development Agreement for the
                               Albuquerque Indian School property as the policy
                               of the City of Albuquerque and the City's offer
57-2001  4-3-01  1-8-13        to the Indian Pueblos Federal Development
                               Corporation and the 19 New Mexico pueblos with
                               regard to the development of the property,
                               adopting policy related to the closure of Ninth
                               Street south of Cutler.
                               Concerning a special municipal election to be
                               held in the City of Albuquerque, New Mexico, on
58-2001  4-5-01   Not_Included Wednesday, the 30th day of May, 2001; and
                               repealing Fourteenth Council Bill No. F/S R-01-
                               232.
                               Concerning a special municipal election to be
                               held in the city of Albuquerque, New Mexico, on
                               Wednesday, may 30, 2001; submitting to a vote of
                               the qualified, registered electors and
                               nonresident municipal electors at such election
                               a question for authorizing the issuance of
                               general obligation bonds for a municipal
59-2001  4-5-01   Not_Included baseball stadium and a question regarding
                               whether to renovate the existing municipal
                               baseball stadium or construct a new municipal
                               baseball stadium; providing the form of the
                               questions; prescribing other details in
                               connection with such election and bonds;
                               repealing Fourteenth Council Bill No F/S R-01-
                               233; and ratifying action previously taken in
                               connection therewith.
                               Providing for a public/private partnership to
                               fund, develop and implement a landscaping plan
                               for the Big-I (intersection of Interstate
                               Highway 25 and Interstate Highway 40) and other
60-2001  6-15-00  Not_Included highway locations; creating a Big-I Pride Task
                               Force; reserving gross receipts tax revenues
                               from reconstruction of the Big-I.*Resolution 60-
                               2001 was vetoed by the Mayor on 6-15-00. The
                               veto was not overridden pursuant to the City
                               Charter.
                               Directing the Administration to locate jail
61-2001  12-4-00  Not_Included space to house inmates in lieu of releasing them
                               into the community.
                               Imposing a temporary hiring freeze and
62-2001  4-27-01  Not_Included moratorium on unbudgeted purchases in city
                               government.
                               Directing the Administration to contract with a
                               professional baseball team for use of the sports
63-2001  9-28-00  Not_Included stadium beginning in late spring
                               2001.*Resolution 63-2001 was vetoed by the Mayor
                               on 9-28-00. The veto was not overridden pursuant
                               to the City Charter.
                               Establishing one-year objectives for the city of
64-2001  4-25-01  Not_Included Albuquerque in Fiscal Year 2002; to meet five-
                               year goals.
                               Approving the programming of funds and projects
65-2001  4-25-01  Not_Included for the 2001 - 2010 Decade Plan for Capital
                               Improvements including the 2001 two-year capital
                               budget.
                               Adopting the FY '02- FY '03 two-year Urban
66-2001  4-25-01  Not_Included Enhancement Program and appropriating funds for
                               the Urban Enhancement Program's projects.
                               Sector Development Plan amendment 00138-00000-
                               01363 / 00110 00000 01362, amending the west
                               Route 66 Sector Development Plan to change
                               specific land uses elements of the zoning map
67-2001  4-25-01 1-7-31        for lots 11 and 12, Barrett-VE Subdivision from
                               O-1 to R-T; and amending the City's official
                               zone map, adopted by section 14-16-1-1 et. seq.
                               R.O.A. 1994, from O-1 to R-T for lots 11 and 12,
                               Barrett-VE Subdivision.
                               Authorizing the Mayor to accept a grant from the
                               New Mexico Youth Conservation Corps Commission
68-2001  4-25-01  Not_Included for a Youth Conservation Corps summer project
                               and appropriating this grant to the Department
                               of Family and Community Services.
                               Approving and authorizing the filing of the
                               attached grant application for the 2001 New
                               Mexico Recreational Trails Program with the New
69-2001  4-25-01  Not_Included Mexico Energy, Minerals And Natural Resources
                               Department, State Parks Division; and providing
                               for an appropriation to the Parks and Recreation
                               Department.
                               Amending the adopted Capital Implementation
70-2001  4-25-01  Not_Included Program of the City of Albuquerque Public Works
                               Water and Sewer Enterprise Fund by supplementing
                               current appropriations.
                               Approving and authorizing the filing of a grant
                               application for a Rideshare/Transportation
                               Demand Management Program with the Federal
71-2001  4-25-01  Not_Included Highway Administration through the New Mexico
                               State Highway and Transportation Department; and
                               providing for an appropriation to the Transit
                               Department.
                               Approving grant application to the State of New
72-2001  4-25-01  Not_Included Mexico to administer a local DWI grant program
                               and providing an appropriation to the Department
                               of Family and Community Services.
                               Authorizing the Mayor to execute a contract with
73-2001  4-25-01  Not_Included the New Mexico Department of Children, Youth and
                               Families and providing an appropriation to the
                               Department of Family and Community Services.
                               Approving and authorizing a grant application,
                               submitted jointly by the City of Albuquerque and
                               Bernalillo county, for a 2000 U.S. Environmental
74-2001  4-25-01  Not_Included Protection Agency (EPA) National Brownfields
                               Cleanup Revolving Loan Fund and providing an
                               appropriation to the Department of Family and
                               Community Services in the amount of one million
                               dollars.
                               Concerning a special municipal election to be
75-2001  4-6-01   Not_Included held in the City of Albuquerque, New Mexico, on
                               Wednesday, the 30th day of May, 2001.
 
Res. No. Date Disposition Short Title
Res. No. Date    Disposition   Short Title
                               Relating to Albuquerque, New Mexico Special
                               Assessment District No. 222; setting the time
76-2001  4-25-01  Not_Included and place of an assessment hearing when
                               objections to the assessment roll for such
                               district will be heard.
                               Awarding the construction contract for Special
77-2001  4-25-01  Not_Included Assessment District 222 (the "District")
                               improvements to R.M.C.I., Incorporated.
                               Approving and authorizing the filing of the
                               attached grant agreement from the New Mexico
78-2001  4-25-01  Not_Included State Highway and Transportation Department,
                               Traffic Safety Bureau for a Drug Recognition
                               Expert Grant Program.
                               Approving and authorizing the filing of the
                               attached application for an Underage Drinking
                               Enforcement Grant with the State of New Mexico
79-2001  4-25-01  Not_Included Highway and Transportation Department, Traffic
                               Safety Bureau, and providing for an
                               appropriation to the City of Albuquerque Police
                               Department.
                               Creating a Redistricting Committee to make
                               recommendations to the Council regarding the
80-2001  4-25-01  Not_Included boundaries of the nine council districts;
                               specifying guidelines and a time frame for the
                               committee; and repealing R-01-203.
                               Appropriating funds for operating the government
81-2001  4-30-01  Not_Included of the City of Albuquerque for the Fiscal Year
                               beginning July 1, 2001 and ending June 30, 2002.
                               Designating the West Central Metropolitan
                               Redevelopment Area, making certain findings and
                               determinations pursuant to the Metropolitan
82-2001  5-19-01 1-12-13       Redevelopment Code, and authorizing and
                               directing the Metropolitan Redevelopment Agency
                               to prepare a Metropolitan Redevelopment Plan for
                               the West Central Metropolitan Redevelopment
                               Area.
                               Appropriating funds to the office of the city
                               clerk for the special municipal election on May
83-2001  5-19-01  Not_Included 30, 2001 to be held on the question for
                               authorizing the issuance of general obligation
                               bonds and choosing a location for a municipal
                               baseball stadium.
                               Authorizing the Mayor to execute the FY 2001
                               Albuquerque Business Education Compact
84-2001  5-19-01  Not_Included recommendations for the Philips Semiconductors'
                               At-Risk Youth Program and providing an
                               appropriation to the Department of Family and
                               Community Services.
                               Approving the binding letter of intent to lease
                               a AAA minor league baseball stadium which sets
                               forth the terms and conditions pursuant to which
                               the existing municipal baseball stadium may be
85-2001  5-23-01  Not_Included renovated or a new municipal baseball stadium
                               may be constructed; ratifying all prior actions
                               consistent with this Resolution; and repealing
                               all prior actions inconsistent with this
                               Resolution.
                               Relating to the $14,205,000 City of Albuquerque,
                               New Mexico Refuse Removal And Disposal Revenue
                               Bonds authorized to be issued by City Ordinance
                               Fourteenth Council Bill No. F/S 0-79 in two
                               series: (I) City of Albuquerque, New Mexico
                               Refuse Removal And Disposal Improvement Revenue
                               Bonds, Series 2001a, in the principal amount of
                               $3,385,000 for the purpose of extending,
                               repairing, replacing, equipping and improving
                               the city's solid waste and refuse disposal
                               system, and (II) City Of Albuquerque, New
                               Mexico, Refuse Removal And Disposal Refunding
                               Revenue Bonds, Series 2001b, in the principal
86-2001  5-30-01  Not_Included amount of $10,820,000 for the purpose of
                               refunding a portion of the city's outstanding
                               refuse removal and Disposal Revenue Bonds,
                               Series 1992; providing certain terms of the
                               Series 2001a bonds and the 2001b bonds, awarding
                               the Series 2001a bonds and the Series 2001b
                               bonds to, and providing the price to be paid for
                               the Series 2001a bonds and Series 2001b bonds
                               by, the investment bankers; providing other
                               details concerning the Series 2001a bonds and
                               the Series 2001b bonds; approving documents
                               relating to the Series 2001a bonds and Series
                               2001b bonds; making certain appropriations; and
                               ratifying certain actions previously taken.
                               Authorizing an appropriation from the Affordable
87-2001  6-1-01   Not_Included Housing Trust Fund for acquisition of land for
                               housing development in metropolitan
                               redevelopment areas.
                               Revising the City of Albuquerque Housing
                               Rehabilitation Loan program by incorporating a
                               category to leverage city funds; eliminating
                               forgivable loans; requiring revisions in the
                               Rehabilitation Loan Program guidelines through
88-2001  6-1-01  3-4-1         authorizing regulations; providing for a waiver
                               of the guidelines for sub-recipient agencies
                               receiving community development funds; calling
                               for sub-recipients to establish their own
                               guidelines, appeal process; and repealing
                               Resolution Enactment Number 53-1992.
89-2001  n/a     n/a           *Number not used.
                               Appropriating funds for operating the
90-2001  6-1-01   Not_Included Albuquerque/Bernalillo County Government and Law
                               Enforcement Centers for the Fiscal Year
                               beginning July 1, 2001 and ending June 30, 2002.
                               Appropriating funds to the Corrections and
                               Detention Department for operating the
91-2001  6-1-01   Not_Included Bernalillo County Corrections and Detention
                               Center for the Fiscal Year beginning July 1,
                               2001 and ending June 30, 2002.
                               Approving and authorizing the filing of a grant
                               application with the Federal Transit
                               Administration of the U.S. Department of
                               Transportation for Section 5307 capital
92-2001  6-1-01   Not_Included assistance, congestion mitigation and air
                               quality (CMAQ), surface transportation program-
                               urban (STPU) and transit enhancement funds and
                               providing for an appropriation to the Transit
                               Department.
                               Authorizing the Mayor to accept a grant from
                               United States Department of Energy, Public
93-2001  6-1-01   Not_Included Services Company of New Mexico Alternative Fuels
                               Program and various motor companies for the 5th
                               Annual 12 Western States Clean Cities Meeting
                               and appropriating funds to the Legal Department.
                               Approving and authorizing the filing of the
                               attached grant award for a bulletproof vest
94-2001  6-1-01   Not_Included partnership grant with the Department of
                               Justice, Office of Justice Programs and
                               providing for an appropriation to the City of
                               Albuquerque Police Department.
                               Establishing a council/administration task force
95-2001  6-1-01   Not_Included to review transit services and make
                               recommendations to the Council regarding transit
                               services for the Fiscal Year 2002.
                               Appropriating funds (General Fund) for operating
                               the government of the City of Albuquerque for
96-2001  5-21-01  Not_Included Fiscal Year 2002 beginning July 1, 2001 and
                               ending June 30, 2002; adjusting Fiscal Year 2001
                               appropriations.
                               Concerning the regular municipal election to be
97-2001  7-2-01   Not_Included held in the City of Albuquerque, New Mexico on
                               Tuesday, the 2 nd day of October, 2001.
                               Approving grant application to the State of New
98-2001  6-18-01  Not_Included Mexico to administer a community DWI grant
                               program and providing an appropriation to the
                               Department of Family and Community Services.
                               Approving grant application to the State of New
                               Mexico to administer a local DWI grant program
99-2001  6-18-01  Not_Included detoxification and treatment sobering service
                               and providing an appropriation to the Department
                               of Family and Community Services.
                               Authorizing the giving of notice for bids for
                               the sale of City of Albuquerque, New Mexico
100-2001 6-18-01  Not_Included general obligation bonds consisting of
                               $46,315,000 general purpose bonds, Series 2001A
                               and $4,510,000 storm sewer bonds, Series 2001B.
 
Res. No. Date Disposition Short Title
Res. No. Date    Disposition   Short Title
                               Approving and authorizing the filing of an
                               application with the Federal Transit
101-2001 6-18-01  Not_Included Administration of the U.S. Department of
                               Transportation for a Section 5309 Capital
                               Assistance Grant, and providing for an
                               appropriation to the Transit Department.
                               Amending the Tower/Unser sector development plan
102-2001 6-18-01 1-7-34        and zone map to change the zoning of northern
                               portion of Lots 2-5, Block 9, Town of Artrisco
                               grant from County A-1 to RD/9/DU/AC.
                               Concerning a municipal bond election at the
                               regular municipal election to be held in the
                               City of Albuquerque on October 2, 2001;
                               Submitting to a vote of the qualified,
                               registered electors and nonresident municipal
                               electors at such election certain questions for
                               authorizing the issuance of general obligation
103-2001 7-2-01   Not_Included bonds in varying principal amounts and for
                               specified public purposes; providing the form of
                               the bond questions, the emergency and absentee
                               paper ballots therefor and the designation
                               clause for such question on voting machines;
                               prescribing other details in connection with
                               such election and bonds; and ratifying action
                               previously taken in connection therewith.
                               Approving and authorizing the filing of a grant
                               application for a Transportation Community and
104-2001 6-18-01  Not_Included System Preservation (TCSP) grant with the U.S.
                               Department of Transportation, Federal Highway
                               Administration, and providing for an
                               appropriation to the Transit Department.
105-2001 6-18-01  Not_Included Approving the FY02 Audit Plan as submitted by
                               the Internal Audit Committee.
                               Amending the Adopted capital implementation
106-2001 6-18-01  Not_Included program of the City of Albuquerque by approving
                               new projects and supplementing current
                               appropriations of existing projects.
                               Extending the management of the Bernalillo
                               County Detention Center by the City of
                               Albuquerque until January 1, 2002 pending a
107-2001 6-18-01  Not_Included review and evaluation of the issues associated
                               with the transition into the new Metropolitan
                               Detention Center; creating a transition team;
                               and requesting the concurrence of Bernalillo
                               County.
                               Relating to the $42,550,000 City of Albuquerque,
                               New Mexico airport refunding revenue bonds,
                               Series 2001 (AMT) authorized to be issued by
                               city ordinance Fourteenth Council Bill No. F/
                               S 0-01-109; Enactment No. 33-2001; providing
108-2001 8-6-01   Not_Included certain terms of the bonds, awarding the bonds
                               to, and providing the price to be paid for the
                               bonds by, the original purchaser; providing
                               other details concerning the bonds; approving
                               documents relating to the bonds; making certain
                               appropriations; and ratifying certain actions
                               previously taken.
                               Providing authority to settle the Manzano Open
109-2001 8-6-01   Not_Included Space Condemnation Case, superseding Council
                               Bill R-142, Enactment Number 013-1999.
                               Authorizing the Mayor to enter into a contract
110-2001 8-20-01  Not_Included agreement with Albuquerque Convention and
                               Visitor's Bureau and providing an appropriation
                               of $300,000.00.
                               Relating to Albuquerque, New Mexico Special
111-2001 6-18-01  Not_Included Assessment District No. 222; confirming and
                               approving the assessment roll for such district;
                               and making appropriation.
                               Appropriating funds needed for technical
                               adjustments to the operating budget for
112-2001 6-18-01  Not_Included operating the government of the City of
                               Albuquerque for the Fiscal Year Beginning July
                               1, 2001 and ending June 30, 2002.
                               Amending Enactment R-99-2000 (Resolution No.
                               122) to extend the term of the Infill
113-2001 6-18-01  Not_Included Development Task Force and the term of its
                               members to January 31, 2002, to complete the
                               goals set forth in Enactment R-99-2000.
                               Directing the City Attorney to seek court
114-2001 7-2-01   Not_Included sanctioned mediation in an attempt to settle the
                               Manzano Open Space Condemnation litigation.
                               Authorizing the Mayor to execute a grant
                               agreement with the New Mexico State Highway and
                               Transportation Department for Inter-Modal
115-2001 8-20-01  Not_Included Surface Transportation Efficiency Act (ISTEA)
                               funding to operate a Bicycle Safety Education
                               Program in outdoor recreation and providing an
                               appropriation to the parks and recreation
                               department.
116-2001 8-20-01  Not_Included Approving a parking structure turnkey contract
                               of sale and agreement to ground lease.
117-2001 8-20-01  Not_Included Appropriating funds to De Colores for a Hispanic
                               Cultural Festival.
                               Directing the administration to locate and
118-2001 8-20-01  Not_Included provide temporary jail space to house inmates in
                               lieu of releasing them into the community.
                               Appointing precinct boards for each polling
119-2001 8-20-01  Not_Included place for the October 2, 2001 municipal
                               election.
                               Naming the banquet/meeting room facility at the
120-2001 8-20-01  Not_Included City of Albuquerque's Ladera Golf Course, The
                               Notah Begay III Room.
                               Concerning the designation of consolidated
                               precincts for the regular and special municipal
121-2001 8-6-01   Not_Included elections to be held in the City of Albuquerque,
                               New Mexico, on Tuesday, the 2 nd day of October,
                               2001.
                               Authorizing the Transit Department to proceed to
                               the National Environment Policy Act and U.S.
122-2001 8-20-01  Not_Included Department of Transportation, Federal Transit
                               Administration, new starts analysis for the high
                               capacity transit corridors.
                               Determining that the building or structure at
                               916 Candelaria NW (Rear), within the city limits
123-2001 9-17-01  Not_Included of Albuquerque, New Mexico, is so ruined and
                               dilapidated as to be a menace to the public
                               comfort, health, peace or safety and that it is
                               required to be removed.
                               Determining that the building or structure at
                               922 Candelaria NW, within the city limits of
124-2001 9-17-01  Not_Included Albuquerque, New Mexico, is so ruined and
                               dilapidated as to be a menace to the public
                               comfort, health, peace or safety and that it is
                               required to be removed.
                               Determining that the building or structure at
                               916 Candelaria NW, within the city limits of
125-2001 9-17-01  Not_Included Albuquerque, New Mexico, is so ruined and
                               dilapidated as to be a menace to the public
                               comfort, health, peace or safety and that it is
                               required to be removed.
 
Res. No. Date Disposition Short Title
Res. No. Date     Disposition   Short Title
                                Approving and authorizing the filing of a grant
                                application for a food service program for
126-2001 9-17-01   Not_Included children with the New Mexico Department of
                                Children, Youth and Families and providing for
                                an appropriation to the Department of Family
                                and Community Services.
                                Approving and authorizing the acceptance of
                                State of New Mexico Law Enforcement Protection
127-2001 9-17-01   Not_Included Act and Crime Lab funds; and providing for an
                                appropriation to the Albuquerque Police
                                Department.
                                Directing the Mayor to evaluate the City of
                                Albuquerque cellular telephone contract and
                                determine whether the best and most affordable
128-2001 9-17-01   Not_Included plan is being provided; whether a basic plan
                                without long distance service would be more
                                cost effective; and requiring a report to the
                                council.
                                Authorizing the filing of a grant application
                                with the New Mexico State Agency on Aging for
129-2001 9-17-01   Not_Included Title III Older Americans Act funds and HB-
                                2 Laws of New Mexico 2001, providing an
                                appropriation to Family and Community Services
                                Department.
                                Approving and authorizing the filing of the
                                attached grant application for an air pollution
130-2001 9-17-01   Not_Included control grant with the Environmental Protection
                                Agency and providing appropriation to the
                                Environmental Health Department.
                                Authorizing an amendment to Albuquerque, New
                                Mexico Special Assessment District No. 216
                                Ordinance Enactment No. 8-2001; changing the
                                date of the commencement of installment
131-2001 9-17-01   Not_Included payments; approving the proposed settlement of
                                litigation over Special Assessment District
                                216; modifying and making appropriations;
                                ratifying certain actions taken previously, and
                                repealing all actions inconsistent with this
                                resolution.
                                Establishing a pilot program to enforce against
132-2001 9-20-01   Not_Included teenage drinking parties; making an
                                appropriation.
                                Amending the Tower/Unser Sector Development
                                Plan and zone map to change the zoning of
133-2001 10-8-01  1-7-34        tractors 6 and 7 of Unit 2, Town of Atrisco
                                Grant from O-1 and C-1 to RD/9/DU/AC and SU-
                                1 for O-1 and C-1.
                                Amending the Tower/Unser Sector Development
134-2001 10-8-01  1-7-34        Plan to change the zone map for Tracts 44 and
                                45, Town of Atrisco Grant, Unit 2 from RD/R-
                                1 to 9/DU/AC.
                                Approving and authorizing the filing of the
                                attached award for a Safe Streets 2001 Grant
135-2001 10-8-01   Not_Included with the New Mexico State Highway and
                                Transportation Department, Traffic Safety
                                Bureau and providing for an appropriation to
                                the City of Albuquerque Police Department.
                                Authorizing the Mayor to execute a grant
                                agreement with the U.S. Department of Health
136-2001 10-8-01   Not_Included and Human Services, Early Head Start Program,
                                and providing an appropriation to the
                                Department of Family and Community Services.
                                Approving and authorizing the filing of an
                                application for a summer food service program
137-2001 10-8-01   Not_Included for children with the New Mexico Children,
                                Youth and Families Department; providing an
                                appropriation to the Department of Family and
                                Community Services.
                                Approving a grant application to the United
                                States Department of Health and Human Services,
                                Center for Substance Abuse Treatment, to
138-2001 10-8-01   Not_Included enhance the city's substance abuse assessment
                                and treatment services and providing an
                                appropriation to the Department of Family and
                                Community Services.
                                Approving a grant application to the United
                                States Department of Health and Human Services,
                                Center for Substance Abuse Treatment, to expand
139-2001 10-8-01   Not_Included and enhance residential treatment for pregnant
                                and post partum addicted women and their
                                children and providing an appropriation to the
                                Department of Family and Community Services.
                                Approving a grant application to the United
                                States Department of Health and Human Services,
140-2001 10-8-01   Not_Included Center for Substance Abuse Treatment to expand
                                adolescent outpatient treatment services and
                                providing an appropriation to the Department of
                                Family and Community Services.
                                Amending Resolution R 103-1986 and establishing
141-2001 10-8-01  2-4-4         a new Veterans Affairs Advisory Board which
                                shall be called the Veterans and Military
                                Affairs Advisory Board.
                                Authorizing the Mayor to execute a contract
                                agreement with the New Mexico Department of
142-2001 10-8-01   Not_Included Children, Youth and Families and providing an
                                appropriation to the Department of Family and
                                Community Services/Office of Child Development,
                                Teen Residence Program (TPR).
                                Authorizing the Mayor to execute a contract
                                with the New Mexico Department of Children,
143-2001 10-8-01   Not_Included Youth and Families and providing an
                                appropriation to the Department of Family and
                                Community Services.
                                Approving a memorandum of understanding between
                                the County of Bernalillo and the City of
144-2001 10-8-01   Not_Included Albuquerque, which provides an appropriation to
                                the Department of Family and Community
                                Services.
                                Albuquerque/Bernalillo County Comprehensive
                                Plan Amendment 01252 00000 00245, amending the
                                plan map of the comprehensive plan to change
145-2001 10-24-01 1-2-1         the land use designation of certain portions of
                                the unincorporated area of North Albuquerque
                                acres from developing urban and semi-urban to
                                rural.
                                Requestion the Administration to direct the
                                Albuquerque Police Department to collect date
                                regarding the relationship between cellular
146-2001 10-24-01  Not_Included telephone use and the incidence of motor
                                vehicle accidents, and to include such data in
                                a motor vehicle accident reports; requiring a
                                report.
                                Adopting policies to govern the dispensing of
147-2001 10-24-01  Not_Included alcohol beverages at municipal golf course
                                facilities and repealing and superseding R-266
                                (Enactment 122-1999).
                                * Repealed by Res. 40-2003.
                                Approving and authorizing the filing of the
                                attached grant award for a bulletproof vest
148-2001 10-24-01  Not_Included partnership grant with the United States
                                Department of Justice, Office of Justice
                                Programs and providing for an appropriation to
                                the city police department.
                                Approving and authorizing the acceptance of DNA
149-2001 10-24-01  Not_Included Act Funds; and providing for an appropriation
                                to the Albuquerque Police Department.
                                Requesting the approval of the tax increment
                                process for Old Albuquerque High School, the
                                Forest Service Building, the Social Security
                                Building, Villa de San Felipe apartments, the
                                HDIC theater block, the International
150-2001 10-25-01  Not_Included Marketplace and the property located at 1010
                                Candelaria Boulevard N.W.; requesting approval
                                of the tax increment process from other
                                participating units of government; and
                                requesting legislation adopting tax increment
                                financing districts in appropriate metropolitan
                                redevelopment areas.
 
Res. No. Date Disposition Short Title
Res. No. Date     Disposition   Short Title
                                Setting an official list of regular City
151-2001 10-24-01  Not_Included Council meetings from October 15, 2001 through
                                December 16, 2002.
152-2001 10-2-01  3-2-4         Determining reasonable notice of public
                                meetings of the Council and Council Committees.
153-2001 10-24-01  Not_Included Naming the gymnasium at Alamosa Community
                                Center the Rudy Otero Memorial Gymnasium.
                                Assigning positions to the Transportation
154-2001 10-24-01  Not_Included Coordinating Committee of the Middle Rio Grande
                                Council of Governments.
                                Extending the deadline for submission of proof
                                that Albuquerque Baseball Club, LLC has
155-2001 10-24-01  Not_Included acquired a Class AAA minor league professional
                                baseball team and has obtained approvals by the
                                Pacific Coast League, Major League Baseball and
                                Minor League Baseball.
                                Imposing a temporary hiring freeze and
156-2001 10-24-01  Not_Included moratorium on unbudgeted purchase in city
                                government.
                                Establishing city policy regarding access
157-2001 11-7-01   Not_Included through the Manzano Open Space and additional
                                land being acquired for the Manzano Open Space.
                                Supporting the right of M-Series White Collar
158-2001 11-2-01   Not_Included employees to move forward with union election
                                as ordered by the Labor Board.
                                *Resolution 158-2001 was vetoed by the Mayor on
                                11-2-01. The veto was not overridden pursuant
                                to the City Charter.
                                Directing the establishment of a garnishing
                                process to tap employee expertise to develop
                                more efficient and effective services; to
159-2001 11-14-01  Not_Included ensure that such process is consistent with
                                city budgetary requirements; to require an
                                annual evaluation and report council; to
                                acknowledge the work of the city's Fifth
                                Leadership Academy Class.
                                Amending the Tower/Unser Sector Development
160-2001 11-14-01 1-7-34        Plan to change the zone map for tracts 46, 47,
                                and 48, Town of Artrisco Grant, Unit 2, from
                                RD/R-1 to RD/9/DU/AC.
                                Authorizing the giving of notice for bids for
161-2001 11-14-01  Not_Included the sale of $10,000,000 City of Albuquerque,
                                New Mexico general obligation taxable baseball
                                stadium bonds.
                                Approving a plan of financing for the
                                renovation of the Albuquerque Sports Stadium
                                and declaring the city of Albuquerque's intent
                                to (1) issue city of Albuquerque, New Mexico
                                general obligation baseball stadium bonds in an
                                approximate principal amount of $10,000,000;
                                (2) adopt a stadium surcharge pursuant to
                                sections 3-65-1 through 10 NMSA 1978, as
                                amended; (3) to enter into a loan agreement
162-2001 11-14-01  Not_Included with the New Mexico finance authority secured
                                by the stadium surcharge and gross receipts tax
                                revenues in an approximate principal amount of
                                $9,000,000; and (4) to issue or otherwise
                                create an obligation in the approximate
                                principal amount of $6,000,000 which may be in
                                the form of revenue bonds or a loan agreement
                                with the New Mexico finance authority secured
                                by stadium lease revenues and gross receipts
                                tax revenues.
                                Approving and authorizing the filing of the
                                attached grant award for a drug control and
                                system improvement grant program from the New
163-2001 11-14-01  Not_Included Mexico department of public safety, office of
                                grants management and providing for an
                                appropriation to the City of Albuquerque Police
                                Department.
                                Authorizing the Mayor to execute a contract
                                agreement with the New Mexico Department of
                                Children, Youth and Families and providing an
164-2001 11-14-01  Not_Included appropriation to the Department of Family and
                                Community Services/Office of Child Development,
                                Temporary Assistance for Needy Families Program
                                (TANF).
                                Approving a Grant Request to the Juvenile
                                Justice Advisory Committee, Children, Youth and
165-2001 11-14-01  Not_Included Families Department of the State of New Mexico
                                and Providing Appropriations to the Department
                                of Family and Community Services.
                                Approving a grant request to the United States
166-2001 11-14-01  Not_Included Department of Justice and providing an
                                appropriation to the Department of Family and
                                Community Services.
167-2001 11-14-01  Not_Included Requesting to move forward with the baseball
                                stadium renovation project.
168-2001 11-14-01  Not_Included Adopting policy for the city of Albuquerque
                                with respect to the Legal Department.
169-2001 11-26-01  Not_Included Approving the Los Candelarias Village Center
                                and Metropolitan Redevelopment Plan.
                                Approving the FY 2002 program investment
                                summary for the Community Development Block
                                Grant, Home, Emergency Shelter Grant Programs
170-2001 11-30-01  Not_Included and Section 108 loan and providing an
                                appropriation to the Department Of Family And
                                Community Services and amending the citizen
                                participation plan.
                                Amending the Albuquerque/Bernalillo County
171-2001 11-30-01 1-2-1         Comprehensive Plan, adding and revising text,
                                policies and map, relating to community
                                identity.
                                Amending the Albuquerque/Bernalillo County
                                Comprehensive Plan, adding and revising text,
172-001  11-30-01 1-2-1         policies and map, relating to identifying and
                                enhancing activity centers and linking
                                transportation corridors.
                                Directing payment of health insurance benefits
173-2001 11-30-01  Not_Included and wage differential for city employees
                                serving on active military duty as a result of
                                the terrorist attack on September 11, 2001.
                                Approving and authorizing the filing of the
                                attached project agreement for an operation
                                DWI/Operation Buckle Down Enforcement Grant
174-2001 11-30-01  Not_Included with the New Mexico Highway And Transportation
                                Department, Traffic Safety Bureau and providing
                                for an appropriation to the City of Albuquerque
                                Police Department.
                                Amending the Master Development Agreement for
                                the Alvarado Transportation Center by
                                clarifying the intent of providing tax
175-2001 11-30-01  Not_Included abatement as set forth in the Master
                                Development Agreement, and authorizing a high
                                density residential project at the Phase I
                                residential site.
 
Res. No. Date Disposition Short Title
Res. No. Date     Disposition   Short Title
                                Appropriating district benefit fees to the
176-2001 11-30-01  Not_Included Downtown Business Improvement District in
                                accordance with the approved budget.
177-2001 11-30-01  Not_Included Naming the library at the South Broadway
                                Cultural Center, the Frances Parrish Library.
178-2001 11-30-01 2-1-17        Establishing an E-Government Task Force.
                                Authorizing the Mayor to execute an grant
                                agreement with the U.S. Department of Health
179-2001 11-30-01  Not_Included and Human Services, Early Head Start Program,
                                and providing an appropriation to the
                                Department of Family and Community Services.
                                Allowing the continuation of a Passenger
180-2001 12-12-01  Not_Included Facility Charge ("PFC") at Albuquerque
                                International Sunport.
                                Sector development plan amendment 01138 00748 /
                                01110 00747, amending the West Route 66 sector
                                development plan to change specific land uses
                                elements of the zoning map for tracts 90, 91
                                and 92, Town of Atrisco Grant Unit 6, from SU-
181-2001 12-12-01 1-7-31        1 for Mobile Home Park to SU-1 for C-
                                2 Permissive Uses; and amending the city's
                                official zone map, adopted by Section 14-16-1-
                                1 et. Seq. R.O.A. 1994, from SU-1 for Mobile
                                Home Park to SU-1 for C-2 Permissive Uses for
                                tracts 90, 91 and 92, Town of Atrisco Grant
                                Unit 6.
                                Relating to the $30,000,000 City Of
                                Albuquerque, New Mexico Joint Water And Sewer
                                System Revenue Bonds, Series 2001 authorized to
                                be issued by city ordinance fourteenth Council
                                Bill No. FS O-01-137; providing certain terms
                                of the bonds, awarding the Series 2001 Bonds
182-2001 12-12-01  Not_Included to, and providing the price to be paid for the
                                Series 2001 Bonds by, the original purchaser;
                                providing other details concerning the Series
                                2001 Bonds; approving documents relating to the
                                Series 2001 Bonds; making certain
                                appropriations; and ratifying certain actions
                                previously taken.
                                Authorizing the giving of notice for bids for
                                the sale of City of Albuquerque, New Mexico
183-2001 12-12-01  Not_Included general obligation bonds, Series 20002A,
                                $20,000,000 general purpose bonds, Series
                                2002B, and $5,600,000 storm sewer bonds, Series
                                2002C.
                                Amending the Interstate Corridor Enhancement
184-2001 12-27-01  Not_Included Plan (ICEPlan) to revise certain design
                                elements.
                                Adjusting Fiscal Year 2001 appropriations for
185-2001 12-27-01  Not_Included certain program strategies to provide for
                                estimated actual expenditures.
                                Approving and authorizing the filing of the
                                attached grant application for a Gang
                                Resistance Education and Training (G.R.E.A.T.)
186-2001 12-27-01  Not_Included program grant from the United States Department
                                of Treasury, Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco and
                                Firearms and providing for an appropriation to
                                the Albuquerque Police Department.
                                Approving and authorizing the filing of the
187-2001 12-27-01  Not_Included attached grant award from the New Mexico Gang
                                Task Force and providing for an appropriation
                                to the Albuquerque Police Department.
                                Approving and authorizing the filing of the
                                attached grant application for a no suspect
                                casework DNA backlog reduction program grant
188-2001 12-27-01  Not_Included with the United States Department of Justice,
                                National Institute of Justice and providing for
                                an appropriation to the Albuquerque Police
                                Department.
                                Directing the City Administration to intervene
189-2001 12-27-01  Not_Included and participate in various New Mexico Public
                                Regulation Commission proceedings encouraging
                                the use of renewable energy.
                                Amending the adopted capital implementation
                                program of the City of Albuquerque by approving
190-2001 12-31-01  Not_Included new projects, supplementing current
                                appropriations and changing the scope of
                                existing projects.
 
 
 
Notes
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
2002 Resolutions
Res. No. Date Disposition Short Title
Res. No. Date    Disposition   Short Title
                               Establishing a legislative policy for the City
1-2002   1-25-02  Not_Included of Albuquerque for the 2002 legislative session
                               of the New Mexico Legislature.
                               Appointing the City Clerk, Chief Deputy Clerk
2-2002   1-29-02  Not_Included and Deputy City Clerks; repealing Council Bill
                               No. R-1, Enactment No. 11-1998.
                               Relating to Albuquerque, New Mexico Special
3-2002   1-29-02  Not_Included Assessment District No. 216; confirming and
                               approving the assessment roll for such district;
                               and repealing Resolution Enactment No. 1-2001.
                               Repealing Bill No. F/S R-165 (2) (Enactment No.
                               57-2001), adopting a revised development
                               agreement for the Albuquerque Indian School
                               property as the policy of the City of
                               Albuquerque and the city's offer to the Indian
                               Pueblos Federal Development Corporation and the
4-2002   2-13-02  Not_Included 19 New Mexico Pueblos with regard to the
                               development of the property, adopting policy
                               related to the closure of Ninth Street south of
                               Cutler, declaring the policy of the City of
                               Albuquerque concerning entering into litigation
                               regarding the trust status of the former
                               Albuquerque Indian School property.
5-2002   2-13-02  Not_Included Providing for the appropriation of federal and
                               state forfeiture funds to the Police Department.
                               Requesting the mayor to direct city departments
6-2002   2-13-02  Not_Included to fully and cooperatively enforce the city's
                               Noise Control Ordinance.
                               Making an appropriation to the Legal Department
7-2002   2-13-02  Not_Included to provide operating funds for the Education and
                               Public Access channels.
                               Determining that the building or structure at
                               214 Alcazar NE #1-7, within the city limits of
8-2002   2-15-02  Not_Included Albuquerque, New Mexico is so ruined, damaged
                               and dilapidated as to be a menace to the public
                               comfort, health, peace or safety and that it is
                               to be required to be removed.
                               Adopting the recommended transportation projects
9-2002   2-15-02  Not_Included for federal funding assistance - 2003-2008
                               Transportation Improvement Program (TIP) report.
10-2002  2-25-02  Not_Included Adjusting Fiscal Year 2002 appropriations for
                               certain program strategies.
                               Declaring a moratorium on the permitting of any
11-2002  3-5-02   Not_Included new off-premise signs within a certain distance
                               of the right-of-way along Interstate 40 and
                               Interstate 25 within the city limits.
                               Approving a grant application to the United
                               States Department of Education for an
12-2002  3-14-02  Not_Included Albuquerque enterprise community technology
                               grant; and providing an appropriation to the
                               Department of Family and Community Services.
                               Requiring the Department of Finance and
                               Administration to review oversights in the
13-2002  3-14-02  Not_Included external audit of the Fiscal Year 2000 close and
                               to identify alternatives to improve the quality
                               of external audits.
                               Approving and authorizing the filing of the
                               attached application for an underage drinking
                               enforcement grant with the New Mexico State
14-2002  3-14-02  Not_Included Highway and Transportation Department, Traffic
                               Safety Bureau, and providing for an
                               appropriation to the City of Albuquerque Police
                               Department.
                               Approving and authorizing the filing of the
                               attached grant agreement from the New Mexico
15-2002  3-14-02  Not_Included State Highway and Transportation Department,
                               Traffic Safety Bureau and providing for an
                               appropriation to the City of Albuquerque Police
                               Department.
                               Authorizing the Mayor to execute a grant
                               agreement with the United States Department of
16-2002  3-14-02  Not_Included Justice, Bureau of Justice Assistance, providing
                               for an appropriation to the City of Albuquerque
                               Police Department.
17-2002  3-14-02  Not_Included Establishing a policy for the recycling of tires
                               by the Solid Waste Management Department.
18-2002  3-26-02  Not_Included Appropriating funds needed for technical
                               adjustments for fiscal year 2002.
                               Approving a grant application to the Department
19-2002  3-26-02  Not_Included of Housing and Urban Development for a 2002
                               continuum of care grant.
                               Directing the administration to construct a
20-2002  3-26-02  Not_Included memorial in observance of the September 11,
                               2001, or "9/11" terrorist attacks on America.
21-2002  4-10-02  Not_Included Adopting the Central Avenue Streetscape Master
                               Plan, 8th Street.
                               Approving and authorizing the filing of the
22-2002  4-10-02  Not_Included attached grant agreement from the state Highway
                               and Transportation Department.
23-2002  4-23-02 1-7-42        Amending the La Cueva Sector Development Plan.
24-2002  4-23-02 1-7-33        Amending the Rio Bravo Sector Development Plan
                               and Zone Map.
25-2002  4-23-02  Not_Included Establishing one-year objectives for the city in
                               FY2003.
 
Res. No. Date Disposition Short Title
Res. No. Date    Disposition   Short Title
26-2002  4-32-02 6-7-8         Naming the John Lewis Memorial Auditorium.
                               Developing a plan to redevelop Block 13 of the
27-2002  4-29-02  Not_Included New Mexico Town Company's Original Town site of
                               Albuquerque.
28-2002  4-29-02  Not_Included Appropriating funds for operating the city for
                               fiscal year beginning July 1, 2002.
                               Determining that the structure at 1228 8th St.
                               NW is so ruined, damaged and dilapidated as to
29-2002  5-13-02  Not_Included be a menace to the public comfort, health, peace
                               or safety and that it is to be required to be
                               removed.
                               Authorizing the removal of certain uncollectable
30-2002  5-13-02  Not_Included accounts from the city's accounts receivable
                               records.
                               Approving and authorizing the extension of the
31-2002  5-13-02  Not_Included PM 2.5 and toxics grant application ending
                               FY2000 with the Environmental Protection Agency
                               by the Environmental Health Department.
                               Approving and authorizing a grant under the New
                               Mexico litter control and beautification act
32-2002  5-13-02  Not_Included with the state Tourism Department; and providing
                               for an appropriation to the city Solid Waste
                               Management Department.
                               Approving a grant agreement from the Federal
                               Aviation Administration (FAA) for reimbursement
                               of funds to the Albuquerque International
33-2002  5-13-02  Not_Included Sunport (airport) for the direct costs
                               associated with new, additional, and revised
                               security requirements imposed on the airport by
                               the FAA on or after September 11, 2001.
34-2002  5-24-02  Not_Included Establishing priorities for the 2003 capital
                               improvements plan.
                               Adopting amendments to the West Side Strategic
35-2002  5-24-02  Not_Included Plan to help promote development of neighborhood
                               and community activity centers.
                               Amending the adopted Capital Implementation
36-2002  5-28-02  Not_Included Program of the City Public Works Water and Sewer
                               enterprise fund by supplementing current
                               appropriations.
                               Amending the University of Albuquerque Sector
37-2002  5-28-02 1-7-5         Development Plan, changing specific land use
                               elements.
                               Appropriating funds for operating the
38-2002  5-28-02  Not_Included Albuquerque/Bernalillo government and law
                               enforcement centers for FY2003.
39-2002  5-28-02  Not_Included Providing for the appropriation of state funds
                               to the Environmental Health Department.
                               Approving and authorizing the filing of the
                               attached grant award for funds under the
40-2002  5-28-02  Not_Included emergency medical services fund act with the
                               Department of Health and providing for an
                               appropriation to the Fire Department.
41-2002  6-10-02  Not_Included Appropriating funds (general fund) for operating
                               the Albuquerque government for FY2003.
                               Adopting the revised Southwest Area Plan as a
42-2002  6-10-02 1-11-02       Rank 2 Area Plan and repealing Enactment No.
                               139-1988 (R-32).
43-2002  6-10-02  Not_Included Approving the FY2003 audit plan as submitted by
                               the Internal Audit Committee.
                               Approving and authorizing the filing of an
                               application with the Federal Transit
44-2002  6-10-02  Not_Included Administration of the U.S. Department of
                               Transportation for a Section 5309 Capital
                               Assistance Grant, and providing for an
                               appropriation to the Transit Department.
                               Approving a grant application to the state to
                               administer a detoxification and treatment
45-2002  6-10-02  Not_Included program for public inebriates and providing an
                               appropriation to the Department of Family and
                               Community Services.
                               Approving a grant application to the state
                               Department of Health for a diabetes prevention
46-2002  6-10-02  Not_Included and control grant; and providing an
                               appropriation to the Department of Family and
                               Community Services.
                               Approving a grant application to the state to
47-2002  6-10-02  Not_Included administer a Local DWI Grant Program and
                               providing an appropriation to the Department of
                               Family and Community Services.
                               Approving and authorizing the filing of a grant
                               application for a food service program for
48-2002  6-10-02  Not_Included children with the state Department of Children,
                               Youth and Families and providing for an
                               appropriation to the Department of Family and
                               Community Services.
                               Appropriating funds for operating the
49-2002  5-28-02  Not_Included Albuquerque/Bernalillo County government and law
                               enforcement centers for FY2003.
                               Approving a memorandum of understanding between
50-2002  6-12-02  Not_Included the county and the city, providing an
                               appropriation to the Department of Family and
                               Community Services.
 
Res. No. Date Disposition Short Title
Res. No. Date    Disposition   Short Title
                               Authorizing the Mayor to execute the FY 2003
                               Albuquerque Business Education Compact
51-2002  6-12-02  Not_Included recommendations for the Philips Semiconductors'
                               At-Risk Youth Program and providing an
                               appropriation to the Department of Family and
                               Community Services.
                               Approving and authorizing the filing of the
                               attached grant application for basic state
52-2002  6-12-02  Not_Included grant-in-aid with the New Mexico State Library;
                               and providing for an appropriation to the
                               Cultural Services Department for the Albuquerque
                               Public Library.
                               Approving and authorizing the filing of a grant
                               application for a certified local government
53-2002  6-12-02  Not_Included grant with the State Historic Preservation
                               Office and providing an appropriation to the
                               Planning Department.
                               Consent to the transfer of control and internal
54-2002  6-12-02  Not_Included reorganization of the cable television
                               franchise.
                               Amending the Barelas Sector Development Plan,
55-2002  6-17-02 1-7-39        prohibiting new off-street commercial surface
                               parking lots as a permissive or condition use in
                               certain zones.
                               Amending the Huning Castle and Raynolds Addition
56-2002  6-17-02 1-7-18        Neighborhood Development Plan, prohibiting new
                               off-street commercial surface parking lots as a
                               permissive or condition use in certain zones.
                               Amending the McClellan Park Sector Development
57-2002  6-17-02 1-7-24        Plan, prohibiting new off-street commercial
                               surface parking lots as a permissive use in C-
                               2 Community Commercial Zones.
                               Amending the South Broadway Sector Development
58-2002  6-17-02 1-7-15        Plan, prohibiting new off-street commercial
                               surface parking lots as permissive or
                               conditional uses in certain zones.
                               Amending the Martineztown Sector Development
59-2002  6-17-02 1-7-40        Plan, prohibiting new off-street commercial
                               surface parking lots as a permissive or
                               conditional use in certain zones.
                               Amending the Martineztown-Santa Barbara Sector
60-2002  6-17-02 1-7-35        Development Plan, prohibiting new off-street
                               commercial surface parking lots as a permissive
                               or conditional use in certain zones.
61-2002  6-17-02  Not_Included Authorization to construct memorials or statues
                               of George Washington and Abraham Lincoln.
62-2002  6-17-02  Not_Included Authorization to implement a dog and cat spay
                               and neuter program for low income pet owners.
63-2002  6-17-02  Not_Included Request to create two committees to address
                               cruising issues and alternative.
64-2002  6-17-02 1-7-29        Amending the Riverview Sector Development Plan
                               to allow a zone map amendment.
                               Approving the filing of the attached application
65-2002  6-26-02  Not_Included for a retired and senior volunteer program
                               grant.
                               Authorizing the Mayor to execute a grant
66-2002  6-26-02  Not_Included agreement with the State Highway and
                               Transportation Department.
67-2002  6-26-02  Not_Included Authorizing the filing of an application for a
                               senior companion program grant.
68-2002  6-26-02  Not_Included Amending the capital implementation program of
                               the city.
69-2002  6-26-02  Not_Included Appropriating funds for technical adjustments to
                               the operating budget for FY 2002.
70-2002  8-5-02   Not_Included Requiring the structure at 752 56th St. NW be
                               removed.
71-2002  8-5-02   Not_Included Requiring the structure at 1322 15th St. NW be
                               removed
72-2002  8-5-02   Not_Included Requiring the structure at 8501 Zuni Rd. SE be
                               removed.
73-2002  8-5-02   Not_Included Requiring the structure at 513 Lewis SE be
                               removed.
74-2002  8-5-02   Not_Included Requiring the structure at 1415 Chester Ln. SW
                               #5 be removed.
75-2002  8-5-02   Not_Included Requiring the structure at 1509 Jesus St. SE be
                               removed.
 
Res. No. Date Disposition Short Title
Res. No. Date    Disposition   Short Title
76-2002  8-5-02   Not_Included Requiring the structure at 610 Anderson SE be
                               removed.
                               Approving an application for an EPA grant for
77-2002  8-5-02   Not_Included vulnerability assessments, emergency operations
                               plans, and security enhancement planning and
                               design at large drinking water utilities..
                               Approving the filing of the attached award for a
78-2002  8-5-02   Not_Included grant to encourage policies from the US Dept. of
                               Justice, Office of Justice Programs, and
                               Violence Against Women Grants Office.
                               Authorizing the filing of the attached
79-2002  6-26-02  Not_Included application for a foster grandparent program
                               grant with the Corporation for National Service.
80-2002  8-19-02 3-1-12        Requiring the Environmental Health Department to
                               publish restaurant inspections on the Internet.
                               Requesting the Mayor to designate a park area
81-2002  8-19-02  Not_Included within City Council District 8 as an exercise
                               ground for dogs.
                               Designating the Highland Central Metropolitan
82-2002  8-19-02 1-12-14       Area, making certain findings and determination
                               pursuant to the Metropolitan Redevelopment Code.
                               Authorizing settlement of condemnation case
83-2002  8-19-02  Not_Included involving Atrisco Terrace Open Space project
                               funded by 1/4 municipal gross receipts tax.
                               Appropriating funds to the Metropolitan
84-2002  5-20-02  Not_Included Detention Center Department for operating in
                               FY2003.
85-2002  8-19-02  Not_Included Providing for the appropriation of DWI seizure
                               funds to the Police Department.
                               Authorizing the filing of a grant application
86-2002  8-19-02  Not_Included with the State Agency on Aging for Title III
                               Older Americans Act funds and HB-2 Laws of the
                               the state, 2002.
                               Authorizing a contract agreement with the State
                               Department of Children, Youth and Families and
87-2002  8-19-02  Not_Included providing an appropriation to the Department fo
                               Family and Community Services for a temporary
                               assistance for needy families.
                               Approving a grant request to the US Department
88-2002  8-19-02  Not_Included of Justice, Office of Juvenile Justice and
                               Delinquency Prevention for the drug-free
                               communities support program.
                               Authorizing a contract agreement with the US
89-2002  8-19-02  Not_Included Department of Health and Human Services and
                               Children Youth and Families administration.
90-2002  8-19-02  Not_Included Authorizing the filing of the attached grant
                               application from the State Gang Task Force.
                               Authorizing the filing of the attached national
91-2002  8-19-02  Not_Included Criminal History improvement program grant
                               application the State Department of Public
                               Safety.
                               Authorizing the filing of a grant application
                               for a rideshare/ transportation demand
92-2002  8-19-02  Not_Included management program with the Federal Highway
                               Administration through the State Highway and
                               Transportation Department.
                               Authorizing the filing of an application with
93-2002  8-19-02  Not_Included the Federal Transit Administration of the US
                               Department of Transportation for a Section 5307
                               grant.
                               Approving a project corporation agreement
94-2002  8-19-02  Not_Included between the Army Corps of Engineers and the
                               city.
95-2002  8-19-02  Not_Included Naming the library at the Alamosa Community
                               Center the Alamosa - Robert L. Murphy Library.
96-2002  8-26-02  Not_Included Requiring the best practices report from the
                               City Attorney's Office.
                               Declaring a moratorium on the permitting of any
97-2002  8-26-02  Not_Included new on-premise signs within a certain distance
                               of the right-of-way along Interstate 40 and
                               Interstate 25 within the city limits.
                               Accepting a grant from the state Youth
98-2002  9-25-02  Not_Included Conservation Corps Commission for a Youth
                               Conservation Corps summer project.
99-2002  9-25-02  Not_Included Authorizing the Mayor to execute a contract
                               agreement with Albuquerque Public Schools.
                               Authorizing the Mayor to execute a contract
100-2002 9-25-02  Not_Included agreement with the New Mexico Department of
                               Children, Youth and Families.
 
Res. No. Date Disposition Short Title
Res. No. Date     Disposition   Short Title
                                Approving and authorizing the acceptance of
101-2002 9-25-02   Not_Included State Of New MexicoLaw Enforcement Protection
                                Act and Crime Lab Funds.
                                Approving and authorizing the filing of the
                                attached agreement for a red light running
102-2002 9-25-02   Not_Included enforcement grant with the New Mexico State
                                Highway and Transportation Department, Traffic
                                Safety Bureau.
                                Approving and authorizing the filing of the
                                attached agreement for a selective traffic
103-2002 9-25-02   Not_Included enforcement program grant with the New Mexico
                                State Highway and Transportation Department,
                                Traffic Safety Bureau.
                                Repealing R-40, Enactment No. 59-1996 requiring
                                the Mayor to establish a Community Restoration
                                Fee to be paid by prisoners who are convicted
                                and sentenced for a crime or prisoners who
104-2002 9-25-02  4-6-9         later became convicted of charges for which
                                they were originally incarcerated in the
                                Bernalillo County Detention Center and calling
                                for alternatives in lieu of payment, and
                                repealing R-41, Enactment No. 77-1998
                                reauthorizing the community restoration fee.
                                Approving a memorandum of understanding between
105-2002 9-25-02   Not_Included the State of New Mexico Athletic Commission and
                                the City of Albuquerque for the purchase of
                                safety athletic equipment.
                                Authorizing the execution of a grant agreement
106-2002 9-25-02   Not_Included with the US Department of Health and Human
                                Services.
107-2002 9-25-02   Not_Included Directing the Administration to waive park
                                reservation fees for Neighborhood Associations.
                                Clarifying the city's Water Management Policy,
108-2002 9-25-02   Not_Included calling for greater water conservation and a
                                mediated settlement of river flows.
109-2002 9-25-02   Not_Included Placing a moratorium on city housing
                                rehabilitation projects.
                                Directing the administration to implement a
                                trial program whereby eligible Albuquerque
110-2002 10-2-02   Not_Included sworn police officers who contractually defer
                                retirement will receive increased longevity
                                pay.
                                Declaring a moratorium on street connections,
111-2002 10-20-02  Not_Included utility connections and development along the
                                newly constructed section of Universe Boulevard
                                NW.
                                Receiving and accepting the Planned Growth
                                Strategy Report (PGS) as the comprehensive
                                guide for managing city urban growth, fostering
112-2002 10-11-02  Not_Included the establishment of new neighborhoods and
                                improving conditions in existing neighborhoods,
                                identifying and defining implementation
                                elements, and creating a planned growth
                                strategy implementation advisory structure.
                                Authorizing the filing of the application for a
113-2002 10-16-02  Not_Included foster grandparent program with the Corporation
                                for National Service.
                                Authorizing the filing of the application for a
114-2002 10-16-02  Not_Included retired and senior volunteer program grant with
                                the Corporation for National Service.
                                Authorizing the filing of the application for a
115-2002 10-16-02  Not_Included senior companion program grant with the
                                Corporation for National Service.
116-2002 10-16-02  Not_Included Approving a grant application to the state to
                                administer a community DWI grant program.
117-2002 10-16-02  Not_Included Directing the administration to end euthanasia
                                of owner impounded animals on demand.
                                Approving a notice of grant award from the US
                                Department of Health and Human Services ,
118-2002 10-16-02  Not_Included center for substance abuse treatment, for year
                                three of a grant to expand adolescent
                                outpatient treatment services.
                                Approving a notice of grant award from the US
                                Department of Health and Human Services, center
119-2002 10-16-02  Not_Included for substance abuse treatment, to enhance the
                                city's substance abuse assessment/treatment
                                services.
                                Approving a notice of grant award from the US
120-2002 10-16-02  Not_Included Department of Health and Human Services, center
                                for substance abuse treatment, to expand
                                residential treatment for women and children.
                                Establishing a Charter Commission to draft an
121-2002 10-16-02  Not_Included Albuquerque/Bernalillo County unification
                                Charter, and designating membership for the
                                city of Albuquerque.
122-2002 11-1-02   Not_Included Requiring the structure at 720 5th St. SW be
                                removed.
                                Authorizing the filing of the grant application
123-2002 11-1-02   Not_Included for an air pollution control grant with the
                                Environmental Protection Agency by the
                                Environmental Health Department.
124-2002 11-1-02   Not_Included Determining reasonable notice of public
                                meetings of the Council.
125-2002 11-1-02   Not_Included Setting official City Council meetings list
                                from 10-21-02 through 12-15-03.
 
Res. No. Date Disposition Short Title
Res. No. Date     Disposition   Short Title
                                Naming the Albuquerque Police Department
126-2002 11-1-02   Not_Included Montgomery and Tramway Substation the James
                                Joseph Dwyer Memorial Substation.
                                Directing the administration to review the
127-2002 11-8-02   Not_Included basis for the city's water billings and water
                                surcharges and to eliminate the process of
                                estimating water bills.
                                Sawmill/Wells Park sector development plan
                                amendment 02EPC-00815, amending language in the
                                Sawmill/Wells Park Sector Development plan,
128-2002 11-8-02  1-7-14        specifically adding to the S-Dr (Sawmill-
                                developing residential) Zone A permissive use,
                                its definition, and regulations for its lot
                                size, lot width, setbacks, off-street parking,
                                and usable open space.
                                Authorizing the filing of the grant award for
129-2002 11-8-02   Not_Included funds under the emergency medical services fund
                                act.
                                Authorizing the filing of the grant application
130-2002 11-8-02   Not_Included for a food service program for children with
                                the New Mexico Department of Children, Youth
                                and Families.
                                Approving a grant application to the Department
131-2002 11-8-02   Not_Included of Housing and Urban Development for a 2003
                                continuum of care grant.
                                Authorizing the execution and delivery of an
                                exchange act agreement relating to the city
132-2002 11-8-02   Not_Included Subordinate Lien Adjustable Rate Taxable
                                Airport Revenue Bonds Series 2000B for the
                                purpose of establishing a fixed interest rate
                                on the Series 2000B Bonds.
                                Establishing a vision statement, revising the
133-2002 11-8-02  4-7-1         five year goals for the city and adopting
                                desired community conditions for each goal.
                                Approving the filing of the negotiation
                                worksheet for an operation DWI/opertion buckle
134-2002 11-8-02   Not_Included down enforcement grant with the state Highway
                                and Transportation Department, Traffic Safety
                                Bureau.
                                Repealing Bill No. F/S R-01-380 (Enactment No.
135-2002 11-8-02   Not_Included 4-2002) and adopting a revised development
                                agreement for the Albuquerque Indian School
                                property.
                                Establishing a Charter Commission to draft an
                                Albuquerque/Bernalillo County unification
136-2002 11-8-02   Not_Included charter, designating membership for the city of
                                Albuquerque and repealing and superceding R-02-
                                156 (Enactment No. R121-2002).
                                Urging the administration to develop a protocol
                                for dealing with non-English inquiries and
137-2002 11-18-02  Not_Included establishing contact personnel within the city
                                that have the ability to communicate in
                                Spanish.
138-2002 11-18-02  Not_Included Requiring the structure at 445 Grove St. SE be
                                removed.
139-2002 11-18-02  Not_Included Adjusting Fiscal Year 2003 appropriations for
                                certain program strategies.
                                Establishing and prescribing powers and duties
140-2002 12-2-02   Not_Included to a committee to observe the 300th birthday of
                                Albuquerque.
                                Approving the housing and neighborhood economic
141-2002 12-2-02   Not_Included development fund for the use of Urban
                                Development Action Grant (UDAG).
                                Approving the filing of the grant application
142-2002 12-2-02   Not_Included for a 2002 US Environmental Protection Agency
                                (EPA) National Brownfields Assessment
                                Demonstration Pilot Continuation grant.
143-2002 12-2-02   Not_Included Requiring the structure at 415 Hudson NW be
                                removed.
                                Authorizing the removal of certain
144-2002 12-2-02   Not_Included uncollectible accounts from the city's accounts
                                receivable records.
145-2002 12-2-02   Not_Included Adopting the five-year consolidated plan 2003 -
                                2007.
                                Amending Capital Implementation Program by
146-2002 12-2-02   Not_Included approving new projects, supplementing current
                                appropriations and changing the scope of
                                existing projects.
147-2002 12-2-02   Not_Included Approving a grant request to the US Department
                                of Justice for operation week and seed.
                                Directing the administration to develop policy
                                recommendations concerning the city's
                                Industrial Revenue Bond program based on the
                                independent consultants report within 90 days;
148-2002 12-2-02   Not_Included requiring a work group comprised of
                                administrative and Council staff to determine
                                appropriate strategies to develop the policy
                                recommendations; and requiring legislation
                                amending the Industrial Revenue Bond Ordinance.
                                Approving the filing of an application for a
149-2002 12-2-02   Not_Included summer food service program for children with
                                the New Mexico Children, Youth and Families
                                Department.
                                Authorizing the filing of the grant agreement
150-2002 12-2-02   Not_Included from the state Highway and Transportation
                                Department, and the Traffic Safety Bureau.
 
Res. No. Date Disposition Short Title
Res. No. Date     Disposition   Short Title
                                Authorizing submission of an application for
                                financial assistance to the Federal Economic
151-2002 12-2-02   Not_Included Development Administration and accepting a
                                grant to support funding of infrastructure
                                construction at Double Eagle II Airport.
                                Providing that any meetings and hearings of the
152-2002 11-26-02  Not_Included Albuquerque Board of Ethics and Campaign
                                practices be televised live on the Government
                                access channel.
                                Adjusting Fiscal Year 2002 appropriations for
153-2002 12-11-02  Not_Included certain funds in program strategies to provide
                                for actual expenditures
                                Comprehensive Plan amendment #02EPC-00635,
154-2002 12-11-02  Not_Included amending the Albuquerque/ Bernalillo County
                                Comprehensive Plan to incorporate the Cultural
                                Plan update
                                Designating the Unser Boulevard Escarpment
                                Crossing as the city's highest priority
                                transportation project for the General
                                Obligation Bond program for 2003 and 2005, for
155-2002 12-11-02  Not_Included the year 2003 New Mexico legislative session,
                                for off-site impacts; and requiring that the
                                city form strategic partnerships with
                                landowners adjacent to the Unser Boulevard
                                Escarpment Crossing; and pursue funding from
                                the State Infrastructure Bank.
                                Authorizing the filing of the grant application
156-2002 12-11-02  Not_Included for the Emergency Tourism Advertising Grant
                                Program with the State Department of Tourism.
                                Requiring the administration to reactivate the
                                Energy Conservation Council as authorized in
157-2002 12-11-02  Not_Included Article 8 of Chapter 14 of the Albuquerque city
                                code and requiring an energy consumption status
                                report.
                                Rescinding Resolution R-01-293, which ordered
158-2002 12-26-02  Not_Included the condemnation and removal of the building at
                                916 Candelaria Rd. NW.
                                Rescinding Resolution R-01-291, which ordered
159-2002 12-26-02  Not_Included the condemnation and removal of the building at
                                916 Candelaria Rd. NW (rear).
                                Rescinding Resolution R-01-292, which ordered
160-2002 12-26-02  Not_Included the condemnation and removal of the building at
                                922 Candelaria Rd. NW.
                                Relating to proposed Special Assessment
                                District No. 227, authorizing Wilson & Company,
161-2002 12-30-02  Not_Included Engineers & Architects, to file with the Clerk
                                preliminary plans, establishing responsibility
                                for off-site improvements and requiring design
                                standards.
                                Recommending that the Administration foreclose
162-2002 12-23-02  Not_Included city liens and establish a city lien
                                foreclosure fund.
                                Approving a memorandum of understanding between
163-2002 12-30-02  Not_Included the county of Bernalillo and the city of
                                Albuquerque.
                                Approving and authorizing the filing of the
                                grant award from the Department of Justice,
164-2002 12-30-02  Not_Included Office of Community Oriented Policing Services
                                and providing for an appropriation to the city
                                Police Department.
                                Making an additional adjustment to FY 2003
165-2002 12-30-02  Not_Included appropriations for certain program strategies
                                to provided for an anticipated shortfall in the
                                collection of city general fund revenue.
                                Appropriating district benefit fees to the
166-2002 12-30-02  Not_Included downtown business improvement district in
                                accordance with the approved budget.
                                Designating the extension of University
                                Boulevard from Rio Bravo Boulevard south to
167-2002 12-30-02  Not_Included Mesa Del Sol as a priority transportation
                                project for the city's legislative agenda for
                                the 2003 New Mexico legislative session.
                                Directing the City of Albuquerque Transit
168-2002 10-21-02  Not_Included Department to provide free rides on all routes
                                for public transit passengers on election day
                                November 5, 2002.
 
 
 
Notes
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
2003 Resolutions
Res. No. Date Disposition Short Title
Res. Date Disposition Short Title
No.
     1-               Issuing metropolitan redevelopment bonds in an amount of $41,000,000 in
1-   16-   Not        connection with the acquisition, construction and equipping of the John Q.
2003 03   Included    Hammons-Embassy Suites Hotel project for the purpose of inducing John Q.
                      Hammons to locate and develop the project in the city.
2-   1-               Revising the city housing rehabilitation loan program by providing for a
2003 16-  3-4-1       modified bid process between the homeowner and the contractor.
     03
2-   1-    Not
2003 16-  Included    Adjusting FY2003 appropriation for Casa San Ysidro.
     03
                      Adopting a policy directing the city to take a proactive approach toward
4-   1-    Not        identifying and readying Office/Industrial Parks for future users; directing
2003 20-  Included    the Administration to take such an approach for the preparation and
     03               development of an airport related Office/Industrial Park in the area of the
                      Double Eagle II airport.
     1-               Amending the University of Albuquerque Sector Development Plan to change
5-   24-  1-7-5       specific residential density for tracts 1-4, Coors Village (parcel V), zoned
2003 03               SU-3, located south of Western Trail NW between Atrisco Drive and Coors Blvd
                      NW, containing approximately 57.09 acres.
6-   1-               Approving a text amendment and a zone map amendment for the Trumbull
2003 24-  1-7-17      Neighborhood Sector Development Plan to facilitate the development of the
     03               International Marketplace.
7-   1-    Not        Establishing a legislative policy for the city for the 2003 legislative
2003 24-  Included    session of the New Mexico Legislature.
     03
                      Requiring the Mayor to seat a staff committee within city government to
                      choose a capital implementation program project that includes constructing
8-   2-5-  Not        or remodeling a structure larger than 10,000 square feet to be designed,
2003 03   Included    engineered and built to the requirements of the leadership in energy &
                      environmental design (LEED) program and to obtain a LEED certification for
                      the project; requiring a report.
9-   2-5-  Not        Approving a memorandum of understanding between the county of Bernalillo and
2003 03   Included    the city of Albuquerque and providing an appropriation to the Department of
                      Family and Community Services.
10-  2-5-  Not        Approving a memorandum of understanding between the county of Bernalillo and
2003 03   Included    the city of Albuquerque and providing an appropriation to the Department of
                      Family and Community Services.
11-  2-5-  Not        Approving and authorizing the filing of a grant application with the United
2003 03   Included    States Department of Justice, Bureau of Justice assistance, providing for an
                      appropriation to the city Police Department.
                      Approving and authorizing the filing of a grant application for a gang
12-  2-5-  Not        resistance education and training (G.R.E.A.T.) program from the United
2003 03   Included    States Department of Treasury, Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco and Firearms and
                      providing for an appropriation to the city Police Department.
                      Requiring the Administration to intervene, on behalf of the city, PNM Gas
13-  2-5-  Not        Services, a division of Public Service Company of New Mexico, application
2003 03   Included    for a rate increase for natural gas service to be filed with the New Mexico
                      Public Regulation Commission.
     2-               Approving and authorizing the filing of the attached grant application for
14-  13-   Not        basic state grant-in-aid with the state library; and providing for an
2003 03   Included    appropriation to the Cultural Services Department for the Albuquerque Public
                      Library.
15-  2-    Not        Adopting policies regarding the city's parking division and related debt
2003 13-  Included    service obligations.
     03
16-  2-    Not
2003 26-  Included    Adopting the Double Eagle II Airport master plan.
     03
                      Amending the La Cueva Sector Development Plan to incorporate newly annexed
                      properties, lots 10-23, blocks 19 & 20, tract 3, unit 3, and lots 10-24,
     2-               block 18 and lots 3-30, block 20, tract 3, unit 1, north Albuquerque acres
17-  26-  1-7-42      and all of the right-of-way of Paseo Del Norte into the boundary of the plan
2003 03               and limiting land uses on lots 10 – 16, block 20, tract 3, unit 3; and
                      limiting access to Carmel NE from lots 10 – 16, block 19, tract 3, unit 3,
                      north Albuquerque acres, and from lots 10 – 16, block 18, tract 3, unit 1,
                      north Albuquerque acres.
18-  2-
2003 26-  1-11-13     Adopting the resource management plan for Los Poblanos Fields Open Space.
     03
     2-               Relating to a $3,600,000 loan for the purpose of defraying the cost of
19-  26-   Not        replacing the existing Duranes pump station; approving the form of and other
2003 03   Included    details concerning the Duranes additional loan agreement and determining the
                      exact terms of the agreement.
     2-               Determining that the building or structure at 5007 Ensenada Pl. NW within
20-  26-   Not        the city limits is so ruined, damaged and dilapidated as to be a menace to
2003 03   Included    the public comfort, health, peace or safety and that it is to be required to
                      be removed.
21-  3-    Not        Providing for the appropriation of federal and state forfeiture funds to the
2003 10-  Included    city Police Department.
     03
22-  3-    Not        Approving and authorizing the filing of a grant award with the Federal
2003 10-  Included    Emergency Management Agency for funds under the assistance to firefighters
     03               grant program.
     3-               Approving and authorizing the filing of a grant application for a crime
23-  10-   Not        laboratory improvement grant program with the United States Department of
2003 03   Included    Justice and the National Institute of Justice, and providing for a
                      appropriation to the city Police Department.
24-  3-    Not        Establishing on-year objectives for the city in FY2004; to meet five-year
2003 24-  Included    goals.
     03
25-  3-    Not        Making the city suite at the Albuquerque Sports Stadium available for youth,
2003 24-  Included    economic development and rental.
     03
 
Res. No. Date Disposition Short Title
Res. No. Date    Disposition   Short Title
                               Instructing the Administration in conjunction
                               with the county to conduct a public hearing
                               pertaining to the establishment of a regional
                               transit district 30 days after a New Mexico
                               regional transit district act is signed into law
                               and requesting that the Administration invite
26-2003  3-24-03  Not_Included the city of Rio Rancho, New Mexico, the town of
                               Bernalillo, New Mexico, the villages of
                               Corrales, Los Ranchos de Albuquerque and
                               Tijeras, New Mexico and the University of New
                               Mexico to become member governments in a
                               regional transit district. (Repealed by
                               Resolution No. 101-2004)
                               Instructing the Administration to conduct a
                               public hearing pertaining to the establishment
27-2003  3-24-03  Not_Included of a regional transit district 30 days after a
                               New Mexico Regional Transit District is signed
                               into law.
28-2003  4-2-03  4-2-5         The Albuquerque International Airport master
                               plan.
                               Amending Policy 5 and Figure 10 of the Coors
29-2003  4-7-03  1-7-27        Corridor Plan to authorize a traffic signal at
                               the intersection of Coors Boulevard and Los
                               Volcanes Road.
30-2003  4-25-03  Not_Included Approving Resolution R-30-1 from the Albuquerque
                               Metropolitan Area Water and Wastewater Board.
                               Determining that the building or structure at
                               1209 8th St. NW, within the city limits, is so
31-2003  4-21-03  Not_Included ruined, damaged and dilapidated as to be a
                               menace to the public comfort, health, peace or
                               safety and that it is to be required to be
                               removed.
                               Amending Resolution 3-2001, enhancing the
                               xeriscape landscape retrofit incentive program,
32-2003  4-25-03 4-3-16        increasing the maximum and square foot rebate
                               amounts for residential and commercial
                               conversions.
                               Adopting the Albuquerque drought management
                               strategy as the city of Albuquerque Drought
33-2003  4-25-03 4-6-16        Management Plan; and directing the Mayor to
                               implement the policies and projects identified
                               in the strategy.
                               Approving and authorizing the filing of the
                               attached grant agreement from the New Mexico
34-2003  4-25-03  Not_Included State Highway and Transportation Department,
                               Traffic Safety Bureau for a drug recognition
                               expert grant program.
                               Establishing the baseball stadium operating fund
35-2003  4-25-03  Not_Included 691 and providing an appropriation for
                               operations for the fiscal year ending June 30,
                               2003.
                               Relating to the proposed Albuquerque, New Mexico
                               Special Assessment District No. 227; accepting
                               preliminary plans, estimates of costs,
                               assessment plat with addendum and engineer's
                               report as to the methods used in determining
                               benefits with respect thereto; making a
36-2003  4-25-03  Not_Included provisional order that certain street and
                               associated storm drainage improvements, water
                               improvements, sanitary sewer improvements,
                               natural gas line improvements, and electric line
                               improvements, all within the proposed district,
                               shall be constructed; and directing that notice
                               of a hearing on the provisional order be given.
                               Supporting economic development in Albuquerque
                               by endorsing the right of businesses to
                               determine wages based on market considerations;
37-2003  4-25-03  Not_Included endorsing the efforts of municipal government to
                               promote free enterprise and partner with the
                               business community to foster a healthy economic
                               environment.
                               Requiring the city to consult with concerned
                               citizen groups, State of New Mexico, the County
38-2003  5-5-03  3-1-13        of Sandoval and the Village of Corrales about
                               the proposal to move the Minge collection of
                               Spanish colonial artifacts and requiring a
                               report.
                               Appropriating funds for operating the government
39-2003  5-13-03  Not_Included of the City of Albuquerque for the fiscal year
                               beginning July 1, 2003 and ending June 30, 2004.
                               Adopting policies to govern the dispensing of
                               alcoholic beverages at municipal golf course
40-2003  5-13-03  Not_Included facilities and repealing and superseding R-01-
                               326 (Enactment 147-2001). *Repealed by Res. 46-
                               2004
                               Adopting the FY '04 - FY '05 two-year urban
41-2003  5-13-03  Not_Included enhancement program and appropriating funds for
                               the urban enhancement program's projects.
                               Approving and authorizing the filing of a grant
                               application for a certified local government
42-2003  5-13-03  Not_Included grant with the state historic preservation
                               office and providing an appropriation to the
                               Planning Department.
                               Authorizing the giving of notice for bids for
                               the sale of City of Albuquerque, New Mexico
43-2003  5-13-03  Not_Included general obligation bonds consisting of
                               $8,750,000 equipment bonds, Series 2003a,
                               $81,805,000 general purpose bonds, Series 2003b
                               and $9,440,000 storm sewer bonds, Series 2003c.
                               Approving and authorizing the filing of the
44-2003  5-13-03  Not_Included attached grant agreement with the New Mexico
                               Department of Public Safety for an emergency
                               management performance grant.
                               Approving an amendment to the "Soldiers and
45-2003  5-12-03  Not_Included Sailors Park Metropolitan Redevelopment Area."
                               Map attached as "Exhibit A."
46-2003  5-12-03 1-6-13        Approving the Highland Central Metropolitan
                               Redevelopment Plan.
47-2003  5-19-03  Not_Included Providing for the appropriation of DWI seizure
                               funds to the Police Department.
                               Authorizing the Mayor to execute a grant
                               agreement with the New Mexico State Highway and
                               Transportation Department for Transportation
48-2003  5-23-03  Not_Included Equity Act for the 21st Century (TEA 21) funding
                               to operate a bicycle safety education program in
                               outdoor recreation and providing an
                               appropriation to the Parks and Recreation
                               Department.
                               Approving the programming of funds and projects
49-2003  5-27-03  Not_Included for the 2003- 2012 decade plan for capital
                               improvements including the 2003 two-year capital
                               budget.
                               Amending the adopted capital implementation
                               program of the City of Albuquerque by approving
50-2003  5-27-03  Not_Included new projects, supplementing current
                               appropriations and changing the scope of
                               existing projects.
 
Res. No. Date Disposition Short Title
Res. Date Disposition Short Title
No.
51-  5-    Not        Appropriating funds for operating the Albuquerque/Bernalillo County
2003 30-  Included    government and law enforcement centers for fiscal year 2004, beginning
     03               July 1, 2003 and ending June 30, 2004.
52-  5-    Not        Appropriating funds to the Metropolitan Detention Center Department for
2003 30-  Included    operating the metropolitan detention center in fiscal year 2004,
     03               beginning July 1, 2003 and ending June 30, 2004.
53-  5-    Not        Appropriating funds (general fund) for operating the government of the
2003 19-  Included    City of Albuquerque for fiscal year 2004, beginning July 1, 2003 and
     03               ending June 30, 2004; adjusting fiscal year 2003 appropriations.
                      Establishing that the City of Albuquerque encourages the protection of
54-  6-2-  Not        wilderness study areas for open space and urging the congressional
2003 03   Included    delegation to designate the Ojito wilderness as a fully protected
                      wilderness.
     6-               Authorizing the mayor to execute the FY 2004 Albuquerque business
55-  10-   Not        education compact recommendations for the Philips semiconductors' at-
2003 03   Included    risk youth program and providing an appropriation to the Department of
                      Family and Community Services.
     6-               Authorizing the Mayor to accept a grant from the New Mexico Youth
56-  10-   Not        Conservation Corps Commission for a youth conservation corps summer
2003 03   Included    project and providing an appropriation to the Department of Family and
                      Community Services.
                      Authorizing the Mayor to execute a contract agreement with the New
57-  6-    Not        Mexico Department of Children, Youth and Families and providing an
2003 10-  Included    appropriation to the Department of Family and Community Services/ Office
     03               of Child Development, Temporary Assistance for Needy Families Program
                      (TANF).
     6-               Approving and authorizing the filing of a grant application for a
58-  10-   Not        rideshare/transportation demand management program with the Federal
2003 03   Included    Highway Administration through the State Highway and Transportation
                      Department and providing for an appropriation to the Transit Department.
     6-               Authorizing the Mayor to execute a contract agreement with the New
59-  10-   Not        Mexico Department of Children, Youth and Families and providing an
2003 03   Included    appropriation to the Department of Family and Community Services/office
                      of Child Development, Teen Parent Residence Program (TPRP) for FY ‘04.
                      Approving an application to the United States Department of Health and
60-  6-2-  Not        Human Services, Center for Substance Abuse Treatment, for a grant to
2003 03   Included    enhance adolescent outpatient treatment services and providing an
                      appropriation to the Department of Family and Community Services.
                      Approving an application to the United States Department of Health and
61-  6-2-  Not        Human Services, Center for Substance Abuse Treatment, for a grant to
2003 03   Included    enhance adolescent outreach with brief intervention services in middle
                      schools and for providing an appropriation to the Department of Family
                      and Community Services.
62-  6-    Not        Authorizing the Mayor to execute a grant agreement with the U.S.
2003 10-  Included    Department of Health and Human Services, and providing an appropriation
     03               to the Department of Family and Community Services.
     6-               Approving and authorizing a grant under the New Mexico Litter Control
63-  10-   Not        and Beautification Act with the New Mexico State Tourism Department; and
2003 03   Included    providing for an appropriation to the City of Albuquerque Solid Waste
                      Management Department.
64-  6-    Not        Approving and authorizing the acceptance of funds for Albuquerque
2003 10-  Included    highway clean up program through a cooperative agreement with the New
     03               Mexico State Highway and Transportation Department.
65-  6-    Not        Approving the FY04 audit plan as submitted by the Internal Audit
2003 16-  Included    Committee.
     03
                      Sector development plan amendment, 02EPC-01344, amending the Rio Bravo
66-  6-    Not        sector development plan to include an additional 100.63-acres of an
2003 12-  Included    adjacent area in the plan boundary; and amending the sector development
     03               plan zone map to reflect new R-LT and C-1 zoning as established
                      concurrent to annexation.
67-  6-    Not        Adopting a proposition to be submitted to the voters at the next
2003 12-  Included    municipal election concerning the imposition of a quarter of one percent
     03               public safety gross receipts tax.
68-  6-    Not        Amending the La Cueva sector development plan, Section 5.4.5, SU-2/mixed
2003 12-  Included    use zone, provision #7 to allow drive-up facilities to occur on less
     03               than 1.75 acres if a corner lot is involved in the development scheme.
     6-               Amending policies governing the city's long-range water conservation
69-  19-  4-3-16      strategy for the area served by the city's water and wastewater utility;
2003 03               creating a water conservation task force; charging the task force with a
                      work program; requiring a report.
70-  6-    Not        Approving the filing of grant amendments with the Federal Transit
2003 27-  Included    Administration of the U.S. Department of Transportation for Section 5309
     03               Capital Assistance Funds.
71-  6-    Not        Approving the filing of attached grant application with Bernalillo
2003 16-  Included    County DWI program to provide a DWI addiction treatment program.
     03
72-  6-    Not        Approving the filing of attached grant application with Bernalillo
2003 27-  Included    County DWI program to operate the Albuquerque Metropolitan Community
     03               Sobering Services program.
                      Directing the legal department to file a declaratory judgment proceeding
73-  6-    Not        against the appropriate parties seeking a declaration that the joint
2003 23-  Included    powers agreement creating the Albuquerque Metropolitan Area Water and
     03               Waste Water Board may not abrogate the Albuquerque City Council's
                      exclusive authority to adopt water and wastewater rates.
                      Relating to proposed Special Assessment District No. 227, determining
74-  6-    Not        the advisability of constructing, and the type and character of, certain
2003 27-  Included    street and associated storm drainage, sanitary sewer, water, natural gas
     03               line and electric line improvements therein and directing the city clerk
                      to call for sealed bids on such improvements.
75-  6-    Not        Declaring a moratorium on the approval of zone map amendments and
2003 27-  Included    demolition permits for property zoned R-1 single-family residential in
     03               the East End Addition near Lomas, Vermont and Virginia NE.
 
Res. No. Date Disposition Short Title
Res. No. Date    Disposition   Short Title
                               Approving the acceptance of DNA Act Funds and
76-2003  6-27-03  Not_Included providing for an appropriation to the
                               Albuquerque Police Department.
                               Appropriating funds to the Fire Department for
77-2003  6-27-03  Not_Included unanticipated costs incurred in supporting the
                               search for debris from the Columbia Space
                               Shuttle disaster for fiscal year 2003.
                               Directing the City of Albuquerque to cooperate
                               with the Kirtland Air Force Base to develop a
78-2003  6-27-03  Not_Included perimeter fencing proposal for the Otero Canyon
                               withdrawal area to accommodate the public and
                               Kirtland Air Force Base.
                               Amending Council Bill No. R-03-215, which
                               approved the programming of funds and projects
79-2003  6-27-03  Not_Included for the 2003-2012 decade plan for capital
                               improvements including the 2003 two-year capital
                               budget.
                               Concerning the regular municipal election to be
80-2003  8-8-03   Not_Included held in the City of Albuquerque, New Mexico, on
                               Tuesday, October 28, 2003.
                               Concerning a municipal bond election to be held
                               in the City of Albuquerque; at the next city
                               general election submitting to a vote of the
                               qualified, registered electors and nonresident
                               municipal electors at such election certain
                               questions for authorizing the issuance of
81-2003  8-8-03   Not_Included general obligation bonds in varying principal
                               amounts and for specified public purposes;
                               providing the form of the bond questions, the
                               emergency and absentee paper ballots therefor
                               and the designation clause for such questions on
                               voting machines; and prescribing other details
                               in connection with such election and bonds.
                               Approving and authorizing the Memorandum of
                               Agreement (MOA) ending fiscal year 2004 between
                               the New Mexico Department of Health and the
82-2003  8-8-03   Not_Included Environmental Health Department of the City of
                               Albuquerque for the West Nile virus surveillance
                               and data management program and making an
                               appropriation.
                               Relating to the City of Albuquerque, industrial
                               revenue refunding bonds (MCT Industries, Inc.
                               project), Series 2003, in the amount of
83-2003  8-8-03   Not_Included $4,330,000; establishing the date, maturity
                               dates, interest payment dates, rates of interest
                               and redemption features with respect to such
                               bonds in accordance with the city ordinance
                               adopted on June 23, 2003 authorizing such bonds.
                               Comprehensive Plan amendment 03EPC-00268,
                               amending the Albuquerque/Bernalillo County
                               Comprehensive Plan development area designation
84-2003  8-18-03  Not_Included for the unincorporated south valley area from
                               developing urban to semi-urban, from a point
                               approximately 500 feet south of Woodward Road
                               (north); Prosperity Avenue (south); the Rio
                               Grande (west); and Second Street SW (east).
                               Area plan amendment 03EPC-00180, amending the
                               Sandia Foothills Area Plan to facilitate a zone
                               map amendment from C-1 to SU-1 for C-1 and
                               restaurant with full service liquor license for
85-2003  8-18-03  Not_Included on-premise consumption and an allowance of a
                               maximum building height of 36 feet for tract X-
                               1-A of plat of tract X-1-A and X-2-A, Glenwood
                               Hills Subdivision, located at the southeast
                               corner of Tramway Boulevard and Montgomery
                               Boulevard, containing approximately 2.05 acres.
                               Awarding construction contract for Special
86-2003  8-20-03  Not_Included Assessment District 227 to Salls Brothers
                               Construction, Inc.
                               Determining that the building or structure at
                               3409 Delamar NE, within the city limits of
87-2003  8-29-03  Not_Included Albuquerque, New Mexico is so ruined, damaged
                               and dilapidated as to be a menace to the public
                               comfort, health, peace or safety and that it is
                               to be required to be removed.
                               Determining that the building or structure at
                               1224 3rd St. NW, within the city limits of
88-2003  8-29-03  Not_Included Albuquerque, New Mexico is so ruined, damaged
                               and dilapidated as to be a menace to the public
                               comfort, health, peace or safety and that it is
                               to be required to be removed.
                               Determining that the building or structure at
                               1828 Los Luceros Rd. NW, within the city limits
89-2003  8-29-03  Not_Included of Albuquerque, New Mexico is so ruined, damaged
                               and dilapidated as to be a menace to the public
                               comfort, health, peace or safety and that it is
                               to be required to be removed.
                               Determining that the building or structure at
                               516 Chama Street SE, apartments A through F,
                               within the city limits of Albuquerque, New
90-2003  8-29-03  Not_Included Mexico is so ruined, damaged and dilapidated as
                               to be a menace to the public comfort, health,
                               peace or safety and that it is to be required to
                               be removed.
                               Determining that the building or structure at
                               518 Chama Street SE #A through #F, within the
                               city limits of Albuquerque, New Mexico is so
91-2003  8-29-03  Not_Included ruined, damaged and dilapidated as to be a
                               menace to the public comfort, health, peace or
                               safety and that it is to be required to be
                               removed.
                               Approving and authorizing the filing of the
92-2003  8-29-03  Not_Included attached grant application for an air pollution
                               control grant with the Environmental Protection
                               Agency by the Environmental Health Department.
                               Approving and authorizing the acceptance of
                               State of New Mexico Law Enforcement Protection
93-2003  8-29-03  Not_Included Act and Crime Lab Funds; and providing for an
                               appropriation to the Albuquerque Police
                               Department.
                               Approving and authorizing the filing of the
                               attached grant application for a
                               methamphetamine/drug hot spots program from the
94-2003  8-29-03  Not_Included United States Department of Justice, Bureau of
                               Justice Assistance and providing for an
                               appropriation to the City of Albuquerque Police
                               Department.
                               Approving and authorizing the filing of the
                               attached proposal for a red light running photo
95-2003  8-29-03  Not_Included enforcement grant with the New Mexico State
                               Highway and Transportation Department, Traffic
                               Safety Bureau and providing for an appropriation
                               to the City of Albuquerque Police Department.
96-2003  8-29-03  Not_Included Naming the southwest area maintenance building,
                               the Raymond Chavez Street Maintenance Facility.
                               Providing an appropriation for the Bosque
                               Rehabilitation Project and amending Council Bill
97-2003  8-29-03  Not_Included No. R-03-215 which approved the programming of
                               funds and projects for the 2003-2012 decade plan
                               for capital improvements including the 2003 two-
                               year capital budget.
                               Approving and authorizing the filing of the
98-2003  8-29-03  Not_Included attached grant agreement with the New Mexico
                               Department of Public Safety for an emergency
                               operations planning supplemental grant.
                               Clarifying the intent of the City Council in the
99-2003  9-5-03   Not_Included restoration of funding for social services
                               contracts in the approval of the city general
                               fund budget, R-03-224.
                               Amending the development area boundary on the
                               Albuquerque/Bernalillo County Comprehensive Plan
100-2003 9-19-03 1-2-1         Map from "rural" to "developing urban" for an
                               area either side of Montano Road NW, west of the
                               Corrales Riverside drain extension, and east of
                               Coors Blvd. NW.
 
Res. No. Date Disposition Short Title
Res. No. Date     Disposition   Short Title
                                Sector plan amendment 03EPC-00465, amending the
                                Coors Corridor Sector Development Plan, Issue
101-2003 9-19-03  1-7-27        4, Section D, signage, for segments 3 and 4 of
                                the Coors Corridor plan area along Coors
                                Boulevard between Western Trail NW and NM 528.
                                Concerning an election by all mailed ballots on
                                November 4, 2003 to be held in Bernalillo
102-2003 9-19-03   Not_Included County for the approval or disapproval of a
                                proposed charter for the single urban
                                government of Albuquerque-Bernalillo County.
                                Amending Chapter 5 of the La Cueva Sector
103-2003 9-19-03  1-7-42        Development Plan, to provide further
                                clarification of existing language.
                                Reaffirming the Bill of Rights, supporting
104-2003 9-26-03   Not_Included civil rights and denouncing terrorism in the
                                City of Albuquerque, New Mexico.
                                Determining that the building or structure at
                                517 Alcazar Street SE, within the city limits
105-2003 9-26-03   Not_Included of Albuquerque, New Mexico is so ruined,
                                damaged and dilapidated as to be a menace to
                                the public comfort, health, peace or safety and
                                that it is to be required to be removed.
                                Appropriating funds for operating the
106-2003 9-26-03   Not_Included Department of Municipal Development of the City
                                of Albuquerque for fiscal year 2004, beginning
                                July 1, 2003 and ending June 30, 2004.
107-2003 9-26-03  1-6-12        Approving the Near Heights Metropolitan Housing
                                Redevelopment project plan.
                                Approving and authorizing the filing of the
                                attached application for a senior companion
                                program grant with the Corporation for National
108-2003 9-26-03   Not_Included Service, including funds allocated by the State
                                Agency on Aging and providing for an
                                appropriation to the Department of Senior
                                Affairs.
                                Approving and authorizing the filing of the
                                attached application for a retired and senior
                                volunteer program grant with the Corporation
109-2003 9-26-03   Not_Included for National Service, including funds allocated
                                by the State Agency on Aging and providing for
                                an appropriation to the Department of Senior
                                Affairs.
                                Approving and authorizing the filing of the
                                attached application for a foster grandparent
                                program grant with the Corporation for National
110-2003 9-26-03   Not_Included Service, including funds allocated by the State
                                Agency on Aging and providing for an
                                appropriation to the Department of Senior
                                Affairs.
                                Relating to Albuquerque, New Mexico Special
                                Assessment District No. 227; setting the time
111-2003 9-26-03   Not_Included and place of an assessment hearing when
                                objections to the assessment roll for such
                                district will be heard.
                                Concerning the designation of consolidated
                                precincts for the regular and special municipal
112-2003 9-26-03   Not_Included elections to be held in the City of
                                Albuquerque, New Mexico, on Tuesday the 28th
                                day of October, 2003.
                                Resolution adopting a policy that the City of
                                Albuquerque issue a request for bid for
113-2003 10-22-03  Not_Included wireless telecommunication service in an effort
                                to secure service that is cost effective and
                                appropriate for city needs.
114-2003 10-22-03  Not_Included Urging appeal of San Juan Chama water decision.
                                Establishing the City of Albuquerque Public
                                Works Department Neighborhood Traffic
115-2003 10-22-03 3-8-10        Management Program (NTMP) as city policy,
                                adopting the NTMP Manual by reference, amending
                                the manual and establishing a NTMP Advisory
                                Board.
                                Approving a grant application to the United
                                States Interagency Council on Homelessness for
116-2003 10-22-03  Not_Included a 2004 grant; and providing an appropriation to
                                the Department of Family and Community
                                Services.
                                Approving an application to the County of
                                Bernalillo, Bernalillo County DWI program, for
117-2003 10-22-03  Not_Included a grant to provide substance abuse treatment
                                vouchers to DWI offenders and for providing an
                                appropriation to the Department of Family and
                                Community Services.
                                Amending the adopted capital implementation
118-2003 10-22-03  Not_Included program of the City of Albuquerque Public Works
                                Water and Sewer Enterprise Fund by
                                supplementing current appropriations.
                                Authorizing the filing of a grant application
                                with the New Mexico State Agency on Aging for
119-2003 10-22-03  Not_Included funding for services to senior citizens and
                                making an appropriation to the Department of
                                Family and Community Services.
                                Approving and authorizing the filing of a grant
                                amendment with the Federal Transit
120-2003 10-22-03  Not_Included Administration of the U.S. Department of
                                Transportation for section 5307 funding and
                                providing for an appropriation to the Transit
                                Department.
                                Approving and authorizing the filing of the
                                attached sub-grant agreement with the New
121-2003 10-22-03  Not_Included Mexico Department of Public Safety for a pre-
                                disaster mitigation program grant and providing
                                an appropriation to the Chief Administrative
                                Officer Department.
                                Approving and authorizing the attached grant
                                award for a No Suspect Casework DNA Backlog
122-2003 10-22-03  Not_Included Reduction Program grant with the United States
                                Department of Justice, National Institute of
                                Justice and providing for an appropriation to
                                the City of Albuquerque Police Department.
                                Appointing the City Clerk, Chief Deputy Clerk
123-2003 10-22-03  Not_Included and Deputy City Clerks; repealing Council Bill
                                No. F/S R-01-3, Enactment No. R.
                                Approving and authorizing the filing of the
                                attached National Criminal History Improvement
124-2003 10-22-03  Not_Included Program grant application from the New Mexico
                                Department of Public Safety and providing for
                                an appropriation to the City of Albuquerque
                                Police Department.
                                Approving a grant application to the Department
                                of Housing and Urban Development for a 2004
125-2003 10-22-03  Not_Included Continuum of Care grant; and providing an
                                appropriation to the Department of Family and
                                Community Services.
 
Res. No. Date Disposition Short Title
Res. No. Date     Disposition   Short Title
                                Creating a task force to develop and support an
                                effective, consistent and collaborative
126-2003 10-22-03 2-1-18        approach to the response to and reduction of
                                adult and child sexual assault in the City of
                                Albuquerque.
                                Directing the Legal Department to file suit
127-2003 10-6-03   Not_Included against the appropriate parties for injunctive
                                and other necessary relief regarding Senate
                                Bill 887.
                                Authorizing membership of the City of
                                Albuquerque in the establishment of a Regional
                                Transit District and requesting the Mid-Region
128-2003 10-24-03  Not_Included Council of Governments to develop the contract
                                for establishment of the Regional Transit
                                District as set forth in the Regional Transit
                                District Act, Sections 73-25-1 et seq. NMSA
                                1978.
129-2003 10-24-03  Not_Included Adjusting fiscal year 2004 appropriations for
                                the "FY/03 Bonus Program."
                                Adopting policies regarding the city's tourism
130-2003 10-20-03  Not_Included marketing contract with a focus on increasing
                                utilization of the Albuquerque Convention
                                Center.
                                Establishing an Operations and Management
131-2003 11-14-03 2-10-4        Policy Board to oversee the Balloon Fiesta
                                Park; repealing F/S R-159 Enactment Number 121-
                                1999; and making an appropriation.
                                Elimination of water conservation rebates for
                                households who switch from evaporative coolers
132-2003 10-20-03  Not_Included to refrigerated air conditioning; directing the
                                Administration to establish new rebate programs
                                and new construction standards for evaporative
                                coolers.
                                Determining that the building or structure at
                                152 Griegos Rd NW, within the city limits of
133-2003 11-3-03   Not_Included Albuquerque, New Mexico is so ruined, damaged
                                and dilapidated as to be a menace to the public
                                comfort, health, peace or safety and that it is
                                to be required to be removed.
                                Determining that the building or structure at
                                3803 11th St NW, within the city limits of
134-2003 11-3-03   Not_Included Albuquerque, New Mexico is so ruined, damaged
                                and dilapidated as to be a menace to the public
                                comfort, health, peace or safety and that it is
                                to be required to be removed.
                                Determining that the building or structure at
                                424 Tennessee St NE units A, B, & C, within the
                                city limits of Albuquerque, New Mexico is so
135-2003 11-3-03   Not_Included ruined, damaged and dilapidated as to be a
                                menace to the public comfort, health, peace or
                                safety and that it is to be required to be
                                removed.
                                Determining that the building or structure at
                                428 Tennessee St NE units A, B, & C, within the
                                city limits of Albuquerque, New Mexico is so
136-2003 11-3-03   Not_Included ruined, damaged and dilapidated as to be a
                                menace to the public comfort, health, peace or
                                safety and that it is to be required to be
                                removed.
                                Determining that the building or structure at
                                412 Espanola St SE, within the city limits of
137-2003 11-3-03   Not_Included Albuquerque, New Mexico is so ruined, damaged
                                and dilapidated as to be a menace to the public
                                comfort, health, peace or safety and that it is
                                to be required to be removed.
                                Approving a memorandum of understanding between
                                the County of Bernalillo and the city of
138-2003 11-3-03   Not_Included Albuquerque and providing an appropriation to
                                the Department of Family and Community
                                Services.
                                Approving a memorandum of understanding between
                                the County of Bernalillo and the City of
139-2003 11-3-03   Not_Included Albuquerque and providing an appropriation to
                                the Department of Family and Community
                                Services.
                                Providing an appropriation to the Legal
140-2003 11-3-03   Not_Included Department to support the D.W.I. vehicle
                                seizure program.
                                Approving a memorandum of understanding between
                                the County of Bernalillo and the City of
141-2003 11-3-03   Not_Included Albuquerque and providing an appropriation to
                                the Department of Family and Community
                                Services.
                                Directing the Public Works Department to
                                cooperate with and provide support to the
                                University of New Mexico Department of
                                Economics to design and conduct a survey of
142-2003 10-20-03  Not_Included water users in the city; encouraging input from
                                city water users on priorities and values
                                related to water use in the city; providing for
                                response confidentiality and use of collected
                                data; requiring a report; designating a funding
                                source.
                                Amending Policy 14 as set forth in Enactment
                                No. 20-1984 and Enactment No. 88-1992, the
143-2003 10-20-03 3-5-17        city's policy governing water and sewer system
                                extension and expansion outside the city
                                limits. Repealing Enactment No. 88-1992 and
                                Section 8 of Enactment No. 20-1984.
                                Approving a notice of grant award from the
                                United States Department of Health and Human
                                Services, Center for Substance Abuse Treatment,
144-2003 11-3-03   Not_Included to enhance the city's substance abuse
                                assessment/treatment services and providing an
                                appropriation to the Department of Family and
                                Community Services.
                                Repealing Enactment No. 56-2001, the moratorium
145-2003 11-14-03  Not_Included on telecommunications antenna lease agreements
                                for city property; receiving the results of the
                                survey.
                                Adopting the 2004 action plan and program
                                investment summary for 2004, providing an
146-2003 11-13-03  Not_Included appropriation to the Department of Family and
                                Community Services and adopting the residential
                                anti-displacement policy and relocation
                                assistance plan.
                                Adjusting fiscal year 2003 appropriations for
147-2003 11-14-03  Not_Included certain funds in program strategies to provide
                                for actual expenditures, and adjusting fiscal
                                year 2004 appropriations.
                                Approving and authorizing the filing of the
                                attached grant agreement from the State of New
148-2003 11-14-03  Not_Included Mexico Department of Finance and Administration
                                and providing for an appropriation to the City
                                of Albuquerque Police Department.
                                Approving and authorizing the filing of the
                                attached grant agreement from the State of New
149-2003 11-14-03  Not_Included Mexico Department of Finance and Administration
                                and providing for an appropriation to the City
                                of Albuquerque Police Department.
                                Approving and authorizing the filing of the
150-2003 11-14-03  Not_Included attached grant award from the Bernalillo County
                                DWI Program and providing for an appropriation
                                to the City of Albuquerque Police Department.
 
Res. No. Date Disposition Short Title
Res. No. Date     Disposition   Short Title
                                Approving and authorizing the filing of the
151-2003 11-14-03  Not_Included attached grant award from the Bernalillo County
                                DWI Program and providing for an appropriation
                                to the City of Albuquerque Police Department.
                                Approving and authorizing the filing of the
                                attached negotiation worksheet for an operation
                                DWI/Operation Buckle Down Enforcement grant
152-2003 11-14-03  Not_Included with the state of New Mexico Highway and
                                Transportation Department, Traffic Safety
                                Bureau and providing for an appropriation to
                                the City of Albuquerque Police Department.
                                Approving and authorizing the filing of the
                                attached grant award from the New Mexico Gang
153-2003 11-14-03  Not_Included and Terrorism Task Force and providing for an
                                appropriation to the City of Albuquerque Police
                                Department.
                                Approving and authorizing the filing of the
                                attached grant agreement from the New Mexico
154-2003 11-14-03  Not_Included State Highway and Transportation Department,
                                Traffic Safety Bureau and providing for an
                                appropriation to the City of Albuquerque Police
                                Department.
                                Approving and authorizing the filing of a grant
                                application for an Emergency Management
155-2003 11-14-03  Not_Included Performance grant with the New Mexico
                                Department of Public Safety and providing for
                                an appropriation to the Chief Administrative
                                Officer Department.
                                Approving and authorizing the filing of the
                                attached grant agreement from the State of New
156-2003 11-14-03  Not_Included Mexico Department of Public Safety and
                                providing for an appropriation to the City of
                                Albuquerque Police Department.
157-2003 11-3-03  3-2-4         Determining reasonable notice of public
                                meetings of the Council.
                                Setting an official list of City Council
158-2003 11-3-03   Not_Included meetings from November 3, 2003 through December
                                20, 2004.
                                Establishment and administration of water
                                conservation programs instituting a moratorium
                                on new rebate programs; directing the
159-2003 11-3-03   Not_Included Administration to establish a process for
                                prioritizing public information and rebate
                                programs and new construction standards for all
                                city administered water conservation programs.
                                Designating the Downtown Metropolitan
                                Redevelopment Area ("downtown MRA"), making
                                certain findings and determinations pursuant to
                                the Metropolitan Redevelopment Code, and
                                authorizing and directing the Metropolitan
                                Redevelopment Agency to prepare a Metropolitan
                                Redevelopment Plan for the area; amending the
160-2003 11-20-03 1-12-15       boundaries of McClellan Park Metropolitan
                                Redevelopment Area and the Railroad
                                Metropolitan Redevelopment Area that are
                                located partially within the downtown core
                                area; superceding the Alvarado Metropolitan
                                Redevelopment Area located fully within the
                                downtown core area; and specifically including
                                the entire downtown MRA for purposes of tax
                                increment financing.
                                Determining that the building or structure at
                                1207 8th St NW, within the city limits of
161-2003 12-2-03   Not_Included Albuquerque, New Mexico is so ruined, damaged
                                and dilapidated as to be a menace to the public
                                comfort, health, peace or safety and that it is
                                to be required to be removed.
                                Determining that the building or structure at
                                201 Mescalero Rd NW, within the city limits of
162-2003 12-2-03   Not_Included Albuquerque, New Mexico is so ruined, damaged
                                and dilapidated as to be a menace to the public
                                comfort, health, peace or safety and that it is
                                to be required to be removed.
                                Amending the adopted capital implementation
                                program of the City of Albuquerque by approving
163-2003 12-2-03   Not_Included new projects, supplementing current
                                appropriations and changing the scope of
                                existing projects.
                                Relating to Albuquerque, New Mexico Special
164-2003 12-2-03   Not_Included Assessment District No. 227; confirming, and
                                approving the assessment roll for such
                                district; and making an appropriation.
                                Determining that the building or structure at
                                1216 Buena Vista Dr SE, within the city limits
165-2003 12-2-03   Not_Included of Albuquerque, New Mexico is so ruined,
                                damaged and dilapidated as to be a menace to
                                the public comfort, health, peace or safety and
                                that it is to be required to be removed.
                                Approving and authorizing the filing of the
                                attached grant application from the State of
166-2003 12-2-03   Not_Included New Mexico Highway and Transportation
                                Department, Traffic Safety Bureau and providing
                                for an appropriation to the City of Albuquerque
                                Police Department.
167-2003 12-2-03   Not_Included Providing an appropriation for the UTB system
                                project positions.
168-2003 12-2-03   Not_Included Honoring the service of Vincent E. Griego by
                                naming the Council/ Commission in his behalf.
                                Approving the petition of Ventana West, LLC for
                                formation of the Ventana West Public
                                Improvement District pursuant to the Public
                                Improvement District Act, Sections 5-11-
                                1 through 5-11-27, NMSA 1978 and City Council
                                Ordinance Enactment No. 0-2003-012; making
                                findings in connection with the petition and
                                supporting documentation requesting approval of
                                the formation of the district; determining the
                                real property to be included within the
                                district and the purposes for which the
                                district is being formed; approving the general
169-2003 12-8-03   Not_Included plan, rate, method of apportionment and the
                                manner of collection of a special levy to be
                                imposed upon real property within the district;
                                approving a development agreement for
                                implementation of the district; approving
                                parameters for the issuance of district bonds;
                                providing for governance of the district;
                                providing that bonds and other obligations of
                                the district shall not be obligations of the
                                City of Albuquerque; ratifying certain actions
                                heretofore taken; repealing all actions
                                inconsistent with this resolution other than
                                Ordinance Enactment No. O-2003-012.
                                Determining that the building or structure at
                                1113 High SE, within the city limits of
170-2003 12-15-03  Not_Included Albuquerque, New Mexico is so ruined, damaged
                                and dilapidated as to be a menace to the public
                                comfort, health, peace or safety and that it is
                                to be required to be removed.
                                Providing for the appropriation of federal and
171-2003 12-15-03  Not_Included state forfeiture funds to the Albuquerque
                                Police Department.
                                Approving and authorizing the filing of the
                                attached grant award for funds under the
172-2003 12-15-03  Not_Included emergency medical services fund act with the
                                Department of Health and providing for an
                                appropriation to the Fire Department.
                                Appropriating district benefit fees to the
173-2003 12-15-03  Not_Included Downtown Business Improvement District in
                                accordance with the approved budget.
                                Extending time for the Legal Department to file
174-2003 12-15-03  Not_Included suit against the appropriate parties for
                                injunctive and other necessary relief regarding
                                Senate Bill 887.
                                Establishing a legislative policy for the City
175-2003 12-15-03  Not_Included of Albuquerque for the 2004 legislative session
                                of the New Mexico Legislature.
                                Encouraging the Albuquerque-Bernalillo County
176-2003 12-15-03  Not_Included Water Utility Authority to make the valley
                                utilities project a priority for its capital
                                program.
 
 
 
Notes
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
2004 Resolutions
Res. No. Date Disposition Short Title
Res. No. Date    Disposition   Short Title
                               Approving a grant request to the United States
                               Department of Justice, Executive Office of Weed
1-2004   1-5-04   Not_Included and Seed for the Eastside Weed and Seed Project
                               and providing an appropriation to the Department
                               of Family and Community Services.
                               Rescinding Resolution No. R-03-204, which
2-2004   1-5-04   Not_Included ordered the condemnation and removal of the
                               building at 1207 8th St. NW.
                               Determining that the building or structure at
                               725 Rim Dr. SW, within the city limits of
3-2004   1-5-04   Not_Included Albuquerque, New Mexico is so ruined, damaged
                               and dilapidated as to be a menace to the public
                               comfort, health, peace or safety and that it is
                               to be required to be removed.
                               Approving and authorizing the acceptance of
                               grant funds from the New Mexico State Library;
4-2004   1-5-04   Not_Included for the basic state grant-in-aid and providing
                               for an appropriation to the Cultural Services
                               department for the Albuquerque Public Library.
                               Appropriating funds to the Capital
5-2004   1-5-04   Not_Included Implementation Program for the 2003 General
                               Obligation Program.
                               Reaffirming the established city policy
6-2004   2-18-04 3-1-13        regarding Casa San Ysidro and establishing
                               renewed support for its continued operation.
                               Directing the administration to provide
7-2004   1-5-04   Not_Included information about adoptable pets during the City
                               Council meeting breaks.
                               Adopting a policy to initiate at least two new
8-2004   1-12-04  Not_Included small business incubators in the city by
                               December, 2005.
                               A resolution authorizing an election for
9-2004   1-21-04  Not_Included adoption of Municipal Detention Officer Member
                               Coverage Plan 1.
                               Authorizing the Mayor to execute a contract
                               agreement with the United States Department of
                               Health and Human Services, Administration for
10-2004  1-21-04  Not_Included Children and Families, and providing an
                               appropriation to the Department of Family and
                               Community Services/division of Child and Family
                               Development, La Madrugada Early Head Start
                               Program.
                               Approving a grant request to the United States
                               Department of Justice, Executive Office of Weed
11-2004  1-21-04  Not_Included and Seed for the Westside/South Valley Weed and
                               Seed Project and providing an appropriation to
                               the Department of Family and Community Services.
                               Approving and authorizing a grant under the New
                               Mexico Litter Control and Beautification Act
12-2004  1-21-04  Not_Included with the New Mexico State Tourism Department;
                               and providing for an appropriation to the City
                               of Albuquerque Solid Waste Management
                               Department.
                               Approving and authorizing the filing of the
                               attached grant application from the New Mexico
13-2004  1-21-04  Not_Included Department of Transportation, Traffic Safety
                               Bureau and providing for an appropriation to the
                               City of Albuquerque Police Department.
                               Approving and authorizing the filing of a grant
                               application for a food service program for
14-2004  1-21-04  Not_Included children with the New Mexico Department of
                               Children, Youth and Families and providing for
                               an appropriation to the Department of Family and
                               Community Services.
                               Approving and authorizing the filing of a grant
                               application for a food service program for
15-2004  1-21-04  Not_Included children with the New Mexico Department of
                               Children, Youth and Families and providing for
                               an appropriation to the Department of Family and
                               Community Services.
                               Approving and authorizing the filing of a grant
                               application with the United States Department of
16-2004  1-21-04  Not_Included Justice, Bureau of Justice Assistance, providing
                               for an appropriation to the City of Albuquerque,
                               Police Department.
                               Approving and authorizing the filing of the
                               attached grant agreement from the State of New
17-2004  1-21-04  Not_Included Mexico Department of Public Safety and providing
                               for an appropriation to the City of Albuquerque
                               Police Department.
                               Approving and authorizing the acceptance of
                               funds for Albuquerque Highway Clean Up Program
18-2004  2-2-04   Not_Included through a cooperative agreement with the New
                               Mexico State Highway and Transportation
                               Department and providing for an appropriation to
                               the Solid Waste Management Department.
                               Authorizing the Mayor to execute a grant
                               agreement with the New Mexico Department of
                               Public Safety and approve the acceptance of
19-2004  2-2-04   Not_Included grant funds to operate a program to capture
                               outstanding fugitives and remove them from our
                               community, and to provide an appropriation to
                               the Parks and Recreation Department.
                               Authorizing the Mayor to execute a grant
                               agreement with the New Mexico Department of
                               Public Safety and approve the acceptance of
20-2004  2-2-04   Not_Included grant funds to operate a program to capture
                               outstanding fugitives and remove them from our
                               community, and to provide an appropriation to
                               the Parks and Recreation Department.
                               Revising the official list of City Council
21-2004  2-2-04   Not_Included meetings from February 2, 2004 through December
                               20, 2004.
                               Directing the administration to reconstitute a
                               committee for the Municipal Art Project at the
22-2004  2-2-04   Not_Included interchange of Interstate 40 East and Louisiana
                               Boulevard; assigning a representative from the
                               City Council for future art selection sub-
                               committees.
                               Establishing a second Charter Commission to
23-2004  2-18-04  Not_Included draft an Albuquerque-bernalillo County
                               Unification Charter; designating membership for
                               the City of Albuquerque.
                               Establishing priorities for the 2005 Capital
                               Improvements Plan; defining the criteria to be
24-2004  2-18-04  Not_Included used in rating project proposals; assigning
                               weights to the criteria; allocating amounts for
                               different purposes within the 2005 General
                               Obligation Bond Program.
                               Repealing Enactment No. 127-2003 and Enactment
                               No. 174-2003 which directed the City Legal
25-2004  2-18-04  Not_Included Department to file suit for injunctive and other
                               relief regarding Senate Bill 887 by January 12,
                               2004.
 
Res. No. Date Disposition Short Title
Res. No. Date    Disposition   Short Title
                               Amending the development agreement between the
                               City of Albuquerque and Indian Pueblos Federal
26-2004  2-18-04 1-8-13        Development Corporation for the development of
                               the former Albuquerque Indian School property to
                               increase the acreage of the Office Tract from
                               11.1 acres to 18.1 acres.
                               Endorsing and pledging to work with the
                               Albuquerque Municipal School District Number 12
27-2004  3-1-04   Not_Included to support the creation of community schools by
                               forming a joint task force to study and make
                               recommendations on the development and
                               implementation of community schools.
                               Declaring a moratorium on the permitting of
                               fence and wall permits and certain development
                               approvals for parcels abutting principal
28-2004  3-1-04   Not_Included arterials, minor arterials, collector streets,
                               major local streets, public parks, major public
                               open space or designated public trails;
                               declaring an emergency.
                               Relating to the formation of the Ventana West
                               Public Improvement District; making findings in
                               connection with the district's resolution
                               authorizing the issuance and sale of district
                               bonds; ratifying and approving the issuance and
                               sale of the Ventana West Public Improvement
29-2004  3-1-04   Not_Included District Special Levy Revenue Bonds as
                               substantially consistent with the requirements
                               of City Council Ordinance Enactment No. O-2003-
                               012 and City Council Resolution No. 169-2003;
                               waiving inconsistent provisions of prior
                               enactments solely with respect to the approval
                               of the issuance and sale of district bonds.
                               Directing the administration to provide funding
30-2004  3-1-04   Not_Included for a study of the Northwest Area Escarpment
                               Plan.
                               Relating to the $50,610,000 City of Albuquerque,
                               New Mexico Airport Revenue Bonds, to be issued
                               in two series: (1) $20,610,000 City of
                               Albuquerque, New Mexico Subordinate Lien Taxable
                               Airport Refunding Revenue Bonds, Series 2004A,
                               and (2) $30,000,000 City of Albuquerque, New
                               Mexico Senior Lien Airport Improvement Revenue
                               Bonds, Series 2004B, authorized to be issued by
                               City Ordinance Sixteenth Council Bill No. F/S O-
31-2004  3-1-04   Not_Included 03-3, Enactment No. O-2004-5; providing certain
                               terms of the refunding bonds and improvement
                               bonds, awarding the refunding bonds and
                               improvement bonds to, and providing the price to
                               be paid for the refunding bonds and improvement
                               bonds by, the investment bankers; providing
                               other details concerning the refunding bonds and
                               improvement bonds; approving documents relating
                               to the refunding bonds and improvement bonds;
                               making certain appropriations; and ratifying
                               certain actions previously taken.
                               Declaring a moratorium on the permitting of any
32-2004  3-1-04   Not_Included new adult business use within the City of
                               Albuquerque.
                               Supporting the Downtown Albuquerque Civic Trust
                               and its goal of assisting the city's downtown
33-2004  3-15-04  Not_Included revitalization effort by providing continued
                               availability of affordable housing, commercial
                               spaces, spaces for the arts and public places.
                               Concerning the future management of water in the
                               Middle Rio Grande Region; acknowledging a
34-2004  3-15-04  Not_Included comprehensive water planning process; and
                               accepting the Middle Rio Grande Regional Water
                               Plan.
                               Adopting policies governing off leash dog
                               exercise areas including procedures for
35-2004  3-15-04 3-6-3         development, location criteria and site
                               considerations, planning, design, maintenance
                               and funding mechanisms.
                               Extending the moratorium on the permitting of
                               fence and wall permits and certain development
                               approvals for parcels abutting principal
36-2004  4-5-04   Not_Included arterials, minor arterials, collector streets,
                               major local streets, public parks, major public
                               open space or designated public trails;
                               declaring an emergency.
                               Directing the administration to initiate a
                               traffic study to address pedestrian traffic
                               concerns and safety issues in the city's Museum
37-2004  4-5-04   Not_Included District on Mountain Road between 18th and 20th
                               Street; designating funds from the Public Work
                               Streets Capital Acquisition Fund (305) Safety
                               and Intersection Improvements Project to
                               implement pedestrian safety mechanisms.
                               Directing the Department of Family and Community
                               Services to provide funding support to the
38-2004  4-5-04   Not_Included Albuquerque Public Schools Title I Homeless
                               Project; designating a funding source; requiring
                               a report.
39-2004  4-19-04  Not_Included Appropriating revenue to the Office of Council
                               Services, Special Projects Program.
                               Determining that the building or structure at
                               2846 Hermosa Dr NE, within the city limits of
40-2004  4-19-04  Not_Included Albuquerque, New Mexico is so ruined, damaged
                               and dilapidated as to be a menace to the public
                               comfort, health, peace or safety and that it is
                               to be required to be removed.
                               Establishing a task force to examine the
                               feasibility of building a new convention center
41-2004  4-19-04  Not_Included hotel in downtown Albuquerque and report its
                               recommendations to the council; directing the
                               preparation and issuance of a request for
                               information.
                               Determining that the building or structure at
                               3107 9th St NW, within the city limits of
42-2004  4-19-04  Not_Included Albuquerque, New Mexico is so ruined, damaged
                               and dilapidated as to be a menace to the public
                               comfort, health, peace or safety and that it is
                               to be required to be removed.
                               Approving and authorizing the appropriation of
                               funds as match to Corps of Engineers Water
43-2004  4-19-04  Not_Included Resource Development Act Grant funds for the
                               water and wastewater improvements at Double
                               Eagle II Airport.
                               Adopting the Downtown 2010 Sector Development
44-2004  5-3-04  1-7-43        Plan as the Metropolitan Redevelopment Plan for
                               the Downtown Metropolitan Redevelopment Area.
                               Appropriating funds for operating the government
45-2004  4-19-04  Not_Included of the city of Albuquerque for the fiscal year
                               beginning July 1, 2004 and ending June 30, 2005.
                               Adopting policies to govern the dispensing of
46-2004  4-19-04 3-6-2         alcoholic beverages at municipal golf course
                               facilities and repealing and superseding R-03-
                               220 (Enactment 40-2003).
                               Designating the Barrett Foundation as the
47-2004  4-19-04  Not_Included subrecipient for the Homeless Emergency Shelter
                               funding under the 2004 Action Plan.
48-2004  5-3-04   Not_Included Appropriating funds in the General Fund for the
                               acquisition of real property.
                               Authorizing the giving of notice for bids for
                               the sale of city of Albuquerque, New Mexico
                               General Obligation Taxable Bonds consisting of
49-2004  4-19-04  Not_Included $30,000,000 Short Term General Purpose Taxable
                               General Obligation Bonds, Series 2004A and
                               $5,800,000 General Purpose Taxable General
                               Obligation Bonds, Series 2004B.
                               Providing conditions for including the proposed
50-2004  5-3-04   Not_Included Paseo del Norte extension in the 2004 Road Bond
                               question.
 
Res. No. Date Disposition Short Title
Res. No. Date    Disposition   Short Title
                               Adopting procedural rules for the Impact Fee
51-2004  5-3-04   Not_Included Committee and requiring the Capital Improvement
                               plans to be submitted to the Impact Fee
                               Committee by a date certain.
                               Approving and authorizing the filing of the
                               attached grant agreement from the state of New
52-2004  5-3-04   Not_Included Mexico Department of Public Safety and providing
                               for an appropriation to the city of Albuquerque
                               Police Department.
                               Approving and authorizing the filing of a grant
                               award with the University of New Mexico Health
53-2004  5-3-04   Not_Included Sciences Center and providing for an
                               appropriation to the city of Albuquerque, Police
                               Department.
                               Declaring a ninety day extension of the
54-2004  5-3-04   Not_Included moratorium on the permitting of any new adult
                               business use within the city of Albuquerque.
                               Concerning the identification of funding for the
55-2004  4-19-04  Not_Included purchase and or renovation for emergency shelter
                               facilities for homeless men.
                               Declaring six month moratorium on issuance of
                               new pet shop and pet store permits pertaining to
56-2004  5-3-04   Not_Included the sale of dogs and cats and City Council
                               mandate concerning enforcement of laws
                               prohibiting persons from selling dogs and cats
                               in the city without a permit.
57-2004  5-17-04  Not_Included Approving the extension of Paseo del Norte and
                               establishing certain design criteria.
                               Directing the Administration to immediately
                               implement an aggressive campaign through the
58-2004  5-17-04  Not_Included Transit Department's Act Now Program,
                               encouraging Albuquerque's employers to implement
                               variable/flexible work schedules in order to
                               reduce peak hour auto travel.
                               Amending the adopted Capital Implementation
                               Program of the city of Albuquerque by approving
59-2004  5-17-04  Not_Included new projects, supplementing current
                               appropriations and changing the scope of
                               existing projects.
                               Approving and authorizing the filing of the
                               attached negotiation worksheet with the state of
60-2004  5-17-04  Not_Included New Mexico Department of Transportation, Traffic
                               Safety Bureau and providing for an appropriation
                               to the city of Albuquerque, Police Department.
                               Approving and authorizing the filing of the
                               attached grant agreement with the state of New
61-2004  5-17-04  Not_Included Mexico Department of Public Safety, Office of
                               Grants Management and providing for an
                               appropriation to the city of Albuquerque, Police
                               Department.
                               Appropriating funds to the Metropolitan
                               Detention Center Department for operating the
62-2004  5-17-04  Not_Included Metropolitan Detention Center in Fiscal Year
                               2005, beginning July 1, 2004 and ending June 30,
                               2005; adjusting Fiscal Year 2004 appropriations.
                               Appropriating funds (General Fund) for operating
                               the government of the city of Albuquerque for
63-2004  5-17-04  Not_Included Fiscal Year 2005, beginning July 1, 2004 and
                               ending June 30, 2005; adjusting Fiscal Year 2004
                               appropriations.
                               Establishing one-year objectives for the city of
64-2004  5-17-04  Not_Included Albuquerque in Fiscal Year 2005; to meet five-
                               year goals.
                               Appropriating funds for operating the
65-2004  5-17-04  Not_Included Albuquerque/Bernalillo County Government and Law
                               Enforcement Centers for Fiscal Year 2005,
                               beginning July 1, 2004 and ending June 30, 2005
                               Approving the West Central Metropolitan
                               Redevelopment Plan; and specifically including
66-2004  6-7-04  1-12-16       the entire West Central Metropolitan
                               Redevelopment Area (MRA) for purposes of tax
                               increment financing.
                               Approving and changing a grant appropriation
                               from the Department Of Family and Community
67-2004  6-7-04   Not_Included Services to the Planning Department for a U.S.
                               Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) National
                               Brownfields Cleanup Revolving Loan Fund in the
                               amount of one million dollars
                               Authorizing the Mayor to execute a grant
                               agreement with the New Mexico state Highway and
                               Transportation Department for Transportation
68-2004  6-7-04   Not_Included Equity Act for the 21st century (TEA 21) funding
                               to operate a Bicycle Safety Education Program in
                               outdoor recreation and providing an
                               appropriation to the Parks and Recreation
                               Department.
                               Authorizing the Mayor to execute a grant
                               agreement with the Department of Public Safety
69-2004  6-7-04   Not_Included (DPS), state of New Mexico, for a federally
                               funded Waste Isolation Pilot Project, (WIPP)
                               off-site concerns and providing an appropriation
                               to the Chief Administrative Officer Department.
                               Opposing the enactment of federal legislation
70-2004  6-7-04   Not_Included calling for state and local police to enforce
                               Federal Civil Immigration laws.
                               Determining that the building or structure at
                               408 Pennsylvania St SE, within the city limits
71-2004  6-21-04  Not_Included of Albuquerque, New Mexico is so ruined, damaged
                               and dilapidated as to be a menace to the public
                               comfort, health, peace or safety and that it is
                               to be required to be removed.
                               Approving and authorizing the filing of a grant
                               application with the state of New Mexico
72-2004  6-21-04  Not_Included Department Of Transportation, Traffic Safety
                               Bureau and providing for an appropriation to the
                               city of Albuquerque, Police Department.
                               Approving and authorizing the filing of a grant
                               amendment with the Federal Transit
73-2004  6-21-04  Not_Included Administration of the U.S. Department Of
                               Transportation for Section 5309 funding and
                               providing for an appropriation to the Transit
                               Department.
                               Naming the Albuquerque Police Department
74-2004  6-21-04  Not_Included Foothills Substation the Jeffrey Cole Russell
                               Memorial Substation.
                               Approving and authorizing the filing of the
                               attached grant application with the New Mexico
75-2004  6-21-04  Not_Included Children, Youth And Families Department and
                               providing for an appropriation to the city of
                               Albuquerque, Police Department.
 
Res. No. Date Disposition Short Title
Res. No. Date    Disposition   Short Title
                               Approving and authorizing the filing of a grant
                               application for a Rideshare/ Transportation
76-2004  6-21-04  Not_Included Demand Management Program with the Federal
                               Highway Administration through the State Highway
                               and Transportation Department and providing for
                               an appropriation to the Transit Department.
                               Authorizing the Mayor to execute a contract
                               agreement with the New Mexico Department of
                               Children, Youth and Families and providing an
77-2004  6-21-04  Not_Included appropriation to the Department of Family and
                               Community Services/ Office of Child Development,
                               Temporary Assistance for Needy Families Program
                               (TANF).
                               Authorizing the Mayor to execute a contract
                               agreement with the New Mexico Department of
78-2004  6-21-04  Not_Included Children, Youth and Families and providing an
                               appropriation to the Department of Family and
                               Community Services/Office of Child Development,
                               Teen Residence Program (TPRP).
                               Declaring the intent of the city of Albuquerque,
                               New Mexico, subject to the satisfaction of
                               certain conditions, to issue industrial revenue
                               bonds in an aggregate principal amount not to
                               exceed $35,000,000 in connection with the
79-2004  7-1-04   Not_Included acquisition, construction and equipping of a
                               downtown sports and entertainment arena project
                               for the purpose of inducing Albuquerque Sports &
                               Entertainment Development Agency to construct
                               and operate the project as described in the
                               project proposal.
                               Authorizing the Mayor to execute a grant
                               agreement with the U.S. Department of Health and
80-2004  7-1-04   Not_Included Human Services, and providing an appropriation
                               to the Department of Family and Community
                               Services.
                               Approving and authorizing the acceptance of
                               grant funds from the Federal Emergency
                               Management Agency under the regulations
81-2004  7-1-04   Not_Included governing phase two development of a
                               metropolitan medical response system and
                               providing for an appropriation to the
                               Environmental Health Department.
                               Approving and authorizing the filing of the
                               attached grant agreement for funds under the
                               regulations governing development of a
82-2004  7-1-04   Not_Included metropolitan medical response system with the
                               New Mexico Department of Health and providing
                               for an appropriation to the Environmental Health
                               Department.
                               Authorizing the filing of a grant application
                               with the New Mexico state agency on aging for
                               Title III Older Americans Act funds and HB-
83-2004  7-1-04   Not_Included 2 Laws of New Mexico funds to provide services
                               to senior citizens, and to provide an
                               appropriation to the Department of family and
                               Community Services.
                               Approving the memorandum of understanding among
84-2004  7-1-04   Not_Included the city, arena management & construction, LLC
                               and Albuquerque Sports & Entertainment
                               Development Agency regarding a downtown arena
85-2004  8-16-04  Not_Included Approving the FY05 audit plan as submitted by
                               the Internal Audit Committee.
                               Establishing a policy to require a nuisance
86-2004  8-16-04 5-1-2         prevention agreement prior to approval of the
                               issuance or transfer of a liquor license in
                               certain areas of the city.
                               Directing the administration to purchase and
87-2004  8-16-04  Not_Included install security cameras at both animal services
                               facilities in a timely manner; requiring a
                               report on the implementation of such.
                               Urging the Parks and Recreation Department to
                               immediately prohibit disc golfing at Wildflower
88-2004  8-2-04   Not_Included Neighborhood Park to protect the safety and well
                               being of Wildflower neighborhood residents and
                               of park users.
                               Amending Resolution R-04-72, Enactment Number
                               51- 2004, adopting procedural rules for the
89-2004  8-16-04  Not_Included Impact Fee Committee and requiring the capital
                               improvement plans to be submitted to the Impact
                               Fee Committee by a date certain, to change the
                               dates of the schedule.
                               Amending the approval of programming of funds
90-2004  8-23-04  Not_Included and projects for the 2003-2012 Decade Plan for
                               capital improvements including the 2003 two-year
                               capital budget.
                               Concerning an election on November 2, 2004 to be
                               held in Bernalillo County for the approval or
91-2004  8-23-04  Not_Included disapproval of a proposed charter for the single
                               urban government of Albuquerque-Bernalillo
                               County.
                               Concerning a special municipal bond election to
                               be held in the city of Albuquerque on November
                               2, 2004; submitting to a vote of the qualified,
                               registered electors and nonresident municipal
                               electors at such election a question for
                               authorizing the issuance of general obligation
                               bonds for municipal streets and roads,
                               interstate roadways and interchanges, trails,
92-2004  8-23-04  Not_Included bikeways, walkways, sidewalks, railroad
                               crossings and bridges; providing the form of the
                               bond question, the emergency and absentee paper
                               ballots therefor and the designation clause for
                               such questions on voting machines; designating
                               the location of the nonresident voting division
                               polling; prescribing other details in connection
                               with such election and bonds; and ratifying
                               action previously taken in connection therewith.
                               Concerning a special municipal election to be
93-2004  8-23-04  Not_Included held in the city of Albuquerque on Tuesday, the
                               2nd day of November.
                               Approving and authorizing the filing of the
                               attached grant agreement from the Bernalillo
94-2004  9-8-04   Not_Included County DWI Program and providing for an
                               appropriation to the city of Albuquerque Police
                               Department.
                               Determining that the building or structure at
                               1006 Walter SE Apts. # 1,2,3 within the city
95-2004  10-1-04  Not_Included limits of Albuquerque, New Mexico is so ruined,
                               damaged and dilapidated as to be a menace to the
                               public comfort, health, peace or safety and that
                               it is to be required to be removed.
                               Determining that the building or structure at
                               1008 Walter SE apts. # 1, 2, within the city
96-2004  10-1-04  Not_Included limits of Albuquerque, New Mexico is so ruined,
                               damaged and dilapidated as to be a menace to the
                               public comfort, health, peace or safety and that
                               it is to be required to be removed.
                               Determining that the building or structure at
                               608 Aztec Rd NW and 609 Altamonet Ave NW, within
                               the city limits of Albuquerque, New Mexico is so
97-2004  10-1-04  Not_Included ruined, damaged and dilapidated as to be a
                               menace to the public comfort, health, peace or
                               safety and that it is to be required to be
                               removed.
                               Approving and authorizing the acceptance of
                               state of New Mexico law Enforcement Protection
98-2004  10-1-04  Not_Included Act and crime lab funds; and providing for an
                               appropriation to the Albuquerque Police
                               Department.
                               Declaring driving while intoxicated an act of
                               moral turpitude in the private and social duties
99-2004  10-1-04  Not_Included owed to others and society in general and
                               contrary to the accepted and customary rules of
                               right and duty between people.
 
Res. No. Date Disposition Short Title
Res. No. Date     Disposition   Short Title
                                Repealing a policy that the city shall issue a
                                competitive solicitation to secure professional
100-2004 9-20-04   Not_Included services to market the convention center and
                                promote tourism in the city. (Effective October
                                1, 2005)
                                Directing that city employees shall accrue
101-2004 10-1-04  3-3-19        vacation and sick leave at their regular
                                accrual rate while serving on active military
                                duty.
                                Determining that the building or structure at
                                336 Vermont NE A, B, C within the city limits
102-2004 10-1-04   Not_Included of Albuquerque, New Mexico is so ruined,
                                damaged and dilapidated as to be a menace to
                                the public comfort, health, peace or safety and
                                that it is to be required to be removed.
                                Approving and authorizing the filing of the
                                attached grant application with the United
103-2004 10-1-04   Not_Included States Department of Justice, National
                                Institute of Justice and providing for an
                                appropriation to the city of Albuquerque,
                                Police Department.
                                Authorizing the issuance and sale of
                                $60,880,000 city of Albuquerque, New Mexico
                                gross receipts tax/lodgers' tax refunding
                                revenue bonds in two series: (i) city of
                                Albuquerque, New Mexico tax-exempt gross
                                receipts tax/lodgers' tax refunding revenue
                                bonds, series 2004A, in the principal amount of
                                $31,965,000 and (ii) city of Albuquerque, New
                                Mexico taxable gross receipts tax/lodgers' tax
                                refunding revenue bonds, series 2004B, in the
                                principal amount of $28,915,000, authorized to
104-2004 10-1-04   Not_Included be issued by city ordinance sixteenth council
                                Bill No. C/S O-04-47; providing certain terms
                                of the bonds, awarding the bonds to, and
                                providing the price to be paid for the bonds
                                by, the investment bankers; and providing for
                                the approval of a bond purchase agreement,
                                official statement and certain other documents
                                pertaining to the series 2004A bonds and series
                                2004B bonds; providing for insurance and other
                                details concerning the bonds; approving
                                documents relating to the bonds; making certain
                                appropriations; and ratifying certain actions
                                previously taken.
                                Declaring the City Council's intent to provide
105-2004 10-1-04   Not_Included financial support for the Albuquerque Isotopes
                                to host the 2007 Triple-A All-Star Game at
                                Isotopes Park.
                                Directing the relocation of prairie dogs from
                                joint use facilities, adjacent right-of-way and
106-2004 10-1-04   Not_Included private property to an appropriate location on
                                city open space property and providing an
                                appropriation to Albuquerque Program Support,
                                Environmental Health Department.
                                Providing an appropriation for the Women's
                                Community Association; requiring a procedure
                                for the certification of additional funding or
107-2004 10-1-04   Not_Included donations; establishing a reserve to be used to
                                match funding or donations from other sources,
                                and providing an additional appropriation for
                                the Rape Crisis Center.
                                Providing an appropriation to the emergency
                                shelter services program strategy in the
108-2004 10-1-04   Not_Included Department Of Family And Community Services;
                                specifying that one-time funding is to be
                                directed to the Albuquerque Opportunity Center.
                                Approving and authorizing the filing of the
                                attached grant application with the United
109-2004 10-4-04   Not_Included States Department Of Justice, National
                                Institute Of Justice and providing for an
                                appropriation to the City Of Albuquerque,
                                Police Department.
                                Approving and authorizing the filing of a grant
                                amendment with the federal Transit
110-2004 10-4-04   Not_Included Administration of the U.S. Department of
                                Transportation for Section 5307 funding and
                                providing for an appropriation to the Transit
                                Department.
                                Declaring a moratorium on the approval of
                                annexations in the City of Albuquerque;
                                exempting annexation applications that are for
111-2004 10-4-04   Not_Included fewer than four residential units and
                                applications that include a preannexation
                                agreement for the provision of certain
                                infrastructure facilities.
                                Directing the city of Albuquerque Transit
112-2004 10-4-04   Not_Included Department to provide free rides on all routes
                                for public transit passengers on election day
                                November 2, 2004.
                                Approving and authorizing the filing of grant
                                application for a food service program for
113-2004 10-4-04   Not_Included children with the New Mexico Department Of
                                Children, Youth And Families and providing for
                                an appropriation to the Department Of Family
                                And Community Services.
                                Supporting strong state regulations to protect
                                convenience store employees from violent crime
114-2004 10-4-04   Not_Included and setting forth a city policy to protect
                                convenience store employees and customers from
                                violent crimes including rape, assault and
                                homicide.
                                Declaring a six month moratorium on new
                                development within a specified plan area of the
115-2004 10-4-04   Not_Included northwest Mesa area (Volcano Cliffs area);
                                appropriating funds to prepare a study of the
                                area; declaring an emergency.
                                Requiring installation of a traffic signal at
116-2004 10-4-04   Not_Included the intersection of San Jose Avenue and
                                Broadway Avenue By December 31, 2004.
                                Establishing interim Council policy regarding
                                lower impact fees due to service efficiencies,
117-2004 11-15-04  Not_Included reductions/offsets of impact fees based on city
                                planning policies, and impact fee waivers for
                                affordable housing.
                                Reporting findings from the pedestrian and
                                traffic safety study for the City Museum
                                District as required by City Of Albuquerque
                                Resolution-04-69 (R-04-69). Requiring the
                                installation of a traffic signal at the
118-2004 11-15-04  Not_Included intersection of 18th Street and Mountain Road
                                by December 31, 2004, requiring as part of the
                                Tiguex Park redevelopment the planning and
                                design of a railing on Mountain Road between
                                20th Street and 18th Street and pedestrian
                                improvements to the intersection of 18th Street
                                and Mountain Road.
                                Declaring a six-month extension of the
                                moratorium on the issuance of new pet shop and
                                pet store permits pertaining to the sale of
119-2004 11-15-04  Not_Included dogs and cats and city Council mandate
                                concerning enforcement of laws prohibiting
                                persons from selling dogs and cats in the city
                                without a permit.
                                Approving and authorizing the filing of the
                                attached grant application for a Gang
                                Resistance Education And Training (G.R.E.A.T.)
120-2004 11-15-04  Not_Included program from the United States Department of
                                Justice, Bureau of Justice Assistance and
                                providing for an appropriation to the
                                Albuquerque Police Department.
                                Approving and authorizing the acceptance of the
                                attached grant with the Bernalillo County DWI
121-2004 11-15-04  Not_Included program to provide a DWI addiction treatment
                                program; and providing for an appropriation to
                                the Metropolitan Detention Center Department.
                                Approving and authorizing the acceptance of the
                                attached grant award with the Federal Emergency
122-2004 11-15-04  Not_Included Management Agency for funds under the
                                assistance to Firefighters Grant Program and
                                providing for an appropriation to the Fire
                                Department.
                                Authorizing the Mayor to execute a grant
                                agreement with the New Mexico Energy, Minerals,
                                and Natural Resources Department and approve
123-2004 11-15-04  Not_Included the acceptance of grant funds to operate a
                                program to control exotic species by
                                revegetation of burned areas with native plant
                                seeds, and to provide an appropriation to the
                                Parks and Recreation Department.
                                Approving and authorizing the filing of the
                                attached application for a foster grandparent
                                program grant with the Corporation for National
124-2004 11-15-04  Not_Included Service, including funds allocated by the State
                                Agency on Aging and providing for an
                                appropriation to the Department of Senior
                                Affairs.
                                Approving and authorizing the filing of the
                                attached application for a retired and senior
                                volunteer program grant with the Corporation
125-2004 11-15-04  Not_Included for National Service, including funds allocated
                                by the State Agency on Aging and providing for
                                an appropriation to the Department of Senior
                                Affairs.
 
Res. No. Date Disposition Short Title
Res. No. Date     Disposition   Short Title
126-2004 11-15-04  Not_Included Declaring a moratorium on the permitting of any
                                new off-premise signs.
                                Approving an agreement with the County Of
                                Bernalillo for a Bernalillo County Dwi Program,
127-2004 11-15-04  Not_Included for a grant to provide substance abuse
                                treatment vouchers to DWI offenders and for
                                providing an appropriation to the Department of
                                Family and Community Services.
                                Adopting the 2005 Action Plan and Program
128-2004 11-15-04  Not_Included Investment Summary for 2005 and providing an
                                appropriation to the Department of Family and
                                Community Services.
                                Approving and authorizing the filing of the
                                attached grant application for an air pollution
129-2004 11-15-04  Not_Included control grant with the Environmental Protection
                                Agency and providing an appropriation to the
                                Environmental Health Department.
                                Recognizing the flag of the former Republic of
130-2004 11-15-04  Not_Included Vietnam as the official symbol of the
                                Vietnamese-American community in the City of
                                Albuquerque.
                                Setting the official list of City Council
131-2004 11-15-04  Not_Included meetings from November 15, 2004 through
                                December 19, 2005.
132-2004 11-15-04  Not_Included Determining reasonable notice of public
                                meetings of the Council and Council Committees.
                                Directing the City of Albuquerque Department of
                                Public Safety to coordinate disaster
                                preparedness plans with the 377th underground
133-2004 11-15-04  Not_Included munitions storage and depot complex at Kirtland
                                Air Force base to protect the public health,
                                safety and security of the citizens of
                                Albuquerque.
                                Approving and authorizing the amendment to
                                contract # 05/665.0003.0062 ending FY2005 with
                                the New Mexico Department of Health and the
134-2004 11-15-04  Not_Included Environmental Health Department for the west
                                Nile virus surveillance and data management
                                program and providing an appropriation to the
                                Environmental Health Department.
                                Approving and authorizing the filing of an
                                application for a summer food service program
135-2004 11-15-04  Not_Included for children with the New Mexico Children,
                                Youth and Families Department and providing an
                                appropriation to the Department of Family and
                                Community Services.
                                Establishing a legislative policy for the City
136-2004 11-15-04  Not_Included of Albuquerque for the 2005 legislative session
                                of the New Mexico Legislature
                                Approving and authorizing the filing of the
                                attached application for a senior companion
                                program grant with the Corporation for National
137-2004 11-15-04  Not_Included Service, including funds allocated by the State
                                Agency on Aging and providing for an
                                appropriation to the Department of Senior
                                Affairs.
                                Approving and authorizing the filing of the
                                attached grant application with Bernalillo
138-2004 12-6-04   Not_Included County DWI program to operate the Albuquerque
                                Metropolitan Community Sobering Services
                                Program; and providing for an appropriation to
                                the Metropolitan Detention Center Department.
                                Appointing the City Clerk, Chief Deputy Clerk
139-2004 12-6-04   Not_Included and Deputy City Clerks; repealing Council Bill
                                No. R-03-328, Enactment No. R-2003-123.
                                Approving a grant application to the Department
                                of Housing and Urban Development for a 2005
140-2004 12-6-04   Not_Included continuum of care grant; and providing an
                                appropriation to the Department of Family and
                                Community Services
                                Authorizing an appropriation from the city
141-2004 12-6-04   Not_Included housing fund for administration, cash match,
                                and expansion of affordable housing
                                initiatives.
                                Adjusting fiscal year 2004 appropriations for
142-2004 12-6-04   Not_Included certain funds in program strategies to provide
                                for actual expenditures, and adjusting fiscal
                                year 2005 appropriations.
                                Approving and authorizing the filing of the
                                attached negotiation worksheet for acceptance
                                of operation DWI grant funds from the State of
143-2004 12-6-04   Not_Included New Mexico Department of Transportation,
                                Traffic Safety Bureau and providing for an
                                appropriation to the City of Albuquerque Police
                                Department.
                                Approving and authorizing the filing of the
                                attached grant application with the United
144-2004 12-6-04   Not_Included States Department of Justice, National
                                Institute of Justice and providing for an
                                appropriation to the City of Albuquerque Police
                                Department.
                                Approving and authorizing the filing of the
                                attached negotiation worksheet for the
                                acceptance of operation buckle down grant funds
145-2004 12-6-04   Not_Included from the State of New Mexico Department of
                                Transportation, Traffic Safety Bureau and
                                providing for an appropriation to the City of
                                Albuquerque Police Department.
                                Approving and authorizing the execution of a
                                memorandum of agreement with the New Mexico
                                Department of Transportation for the funding of
146-2004 12-20-04  Not_Included two bus routes to relieve congestion associated
                                with the reconstruction of the I-40 and Coors
                                Interchange and providing for an appropriation
                                to the Transit Department.
                                Appropriating district benefit fees to the
147-2004 12-20-04  Not_Included Downtown Business Improvement District in
                                accordance with the approved budget.
 
 
 
Notes
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
2005 Resolutions
Res. No. Date Disposition Short Title
Res. No.   Date    Disposition   Short Title
                                 Appropriating funds to the Planning Department
R-2005-001 1-19-05  Not_Included to establish and administer the collection of
                                 impact fees for Fiscal Year 2005.
                                 Approving a memorandum of understanding
                                 between the County of Bernalillo and the City
R-2005-002 1-19-05  Not_Included of Albuquerque and providing an appropriation
                                 to the Department of Family And Community
                                 Services.
                                 Determining that the building or structure at
                                 267 Gene NW within the city limits of
R-2005-003 1-19-05  Not_Included Albuquerque, New Mexico is so ruined, damaged
                                 and dilapidated as to be a menace to the
                                 public comfort, health, peace or safety and
                                 that it is to be required to be removed.
                                 Approving and authorizing the acceptance of
                                 State Of New Mexico litter control and
                                 beautification grant funds, a grant under the
R-2005-004 1-19-05  Not_Included New Mexico Litter Control And Beautification
                                 Act with the New Mexico State Tourism
                                 Department; and providing for an appropriation
                                 to the City of Albuquerque Solid Waste
                                 Management Department.
                                 Approving and authorizing the acceptance of
                                 the attached grant award from the new Mexico
R-2005-005 1-19-05  Not_Included Gang and Terrorism Task Force and providing
                                 for an appropriation to the City of
                                 Albuquerque Police Department.
                                 Providing an appropriation to the Cultural
R-2005-006 1-19-05  Not_Included Services Department for the implementation of
                                 the tricentennial commemoration from the Fy/05
                                 tricentennial reserve.
                                 Amending the boundaries of the hWestland
                                 Sector Development Plan to include the
R-2005-007 1-19-05  Not_Included northerly portion of Lots B-24 to B-28, Unit
                                 5, Town of Atrisco grant in the plan
                                 boundaries.
                                 Adopting a policy establishing gross vehicle
R-2005-008 1-19-05 3-8-11        weight restrictions on Carlisle Boulevard from
                                 Constitution to Copper Avenues NE.
                                 Approving and authorizing the filing of the
                                 attached grant agreement from the New Mexico
R-2005-009 1-19-05  Not_Included Department of Transportation, Traffic Safety
                                 Bureau and providing for an appropriation to
                                 the City of Albuquerque Police Department.
                                 Requiring a transportation feasibility study
R-2005-010 2-7-05   Not_Included of the 4th Street and Montano Road
                                 intersection; making an appropriation.
                                 Authorizing and approving the acceptance of
                                 grant funds from the New Mexico Department of
                                 Public Safety to provide a law enforcement -
R-2005-011 2-7-05   Not_Included multi-jurisdictional task force entitled the
                                 Southwestern Investigative Fugitive Team
                                 (SWIFT) Program, and to provide an
                                 appropriation to the Parks and Recreation
                                 Department.
                                 Supporting the location of a commuter rail
                                 station at the Alvarado Transportation Center;
                                 directing city departments and requesting the
R-2005-012 2-7-05   Not_Included mid-region council of governments to work
                                 together to provide for the needs of commuter
                                 rail patrons and commuter rail operations and
                                 maintenance at and/or near the Alvarado
                                 Transportation Center.
                                 Approving and authorizing the acceptance of
                                 the attached grant award for funds under the
R-2005-013 2-7-05   Not_Included Emergency Medical Services Fund Act with the
                                 Department Of Health and providing for an
                                 appropriation to the Fire Department.
                                 Appropriating funds for the purpose of hiring
R-2005-014 2-7-05   Not_Included and equipping animal control officers to
                                 enforce the Dangerous Dog Ordinance, otherwise
                                 known as "Angel's Law".
                                 Amending the adopted capital implementation
                                 program of the City of Albuquerque by
R-2005-015 2-7-05   Not_Included approving new projects, supplementing current
                                 appropriations and changing the scope of
                                 existing projects.
R-2005-016 2-7-05   Not_Included Determining reasonable notice of public
                                 meetings of the Council.
                                 Setting the official list of City Council
R-2005-017 2-7-05   Not_Included meetings from February 23, 2005 through
                                 December 19, 2005.
                                 Authorizing a community based update of the
                                 Nob Hill Sector Plan to pursue consistency
R-2005-018 2-23-05 1-7-32        between the sector plan and the Metropolitan
                                 Redevelopment Area Plan for Central-Highland
                                 Upper Nob Hill and appropriating funds to the
                                 Planning Department.
                                 Directing the Albuquerque Police Department to
                                 donate any surplus body armor to the New
R-2005-019 2-23-05  Not_Included Mexico National Guard and Reserve units that
                                 have been deployed to fight in Afghanistan and
                                 Iraq.
                                 Approving and authorizing the filing of the
                                 attached grant agreement from the New Mexico
R-2005-020 2-23-05  Not_Included Department of Transportation, Traffic Safety
                                 Bureau and providing for an appropriation to
                                 the City of Albuquerque Police Department.
                                 Approving and authorizing the filing of the
                                 attached grant agreement for a Metropolitan
                                 Forensic Science Center Training Grant with
R-2005-021 2-23-05  Not_Included the New Mexico Department of Public Safety,
                                 Crime Laboratory Bureau and providing for an
                                 appropriation to the City of Albuquerque,
                                 Police Department.
                                 Approving and authorizing the filing of the
                                 attached grant application for a solving cold
R-2005-022 2-23-05  Not_Included cases with dna grant with the United States
                                 Department of Justice, National Institute of
                                 Justice and providing for an appropriation to
                                 the City of Albuquerque Police Department.
                                 Approving and authorizing the acceptance of
                                 grant funds from the New Mexico State Library;
R-2005-023 2-23-05  Not_Included for the basic state grants in aid and
                                 providing for an appropriation to the Cultural
                                 Services Department for the Albuquerque Public
                                 Library.
                                 Approving and authorizing the filing of the
                                 attached grant application with the United
R-2005-024 2-23-05  Not_Included States Department of Justice, Bureau of
                                 Justice Assistance, and providing for an
                                 appropriation to the City of Albuquerque,
                                 Police Department.
                                 Approving and authorizing the filing of a
                                 grant application for an Emergency Management
R-2005-025 2-23-05  Not_Included Performance Grant with the New Mexico
                                 Department of Public Safety and providing for
                                 an appropriation to the Chief Administrative
                                 Officer Department.
 
Res. No. Date Disposition Short Title
Res. No.   Date    Disposition   Short Title
                                 Approving and authorizing the filing of the
                                 attached grant application with the New Mexico
R-2005-026 2-23-05  Not_Included Department of Transportation, Traffic Safety
                                 Bureau and providing for an appropriation to
                                 the City of Albuquerque, Police Department.
                                 Adopting a policy establishing gross vehicle
R-2005-027 2-23-05 3-8-11        weight restrictions on San Pedro Drive from
                                 Osuna Road to Claremont Avenue NE.
                                 Determining that the building or structure at
                                 1218 Hermosa Dr SE within the city limits of
R-2005-028 2-23-05  Not_Included Albuquerque, New Mexico is so ruined, damaged
                                 and dilapidated as to be a menace to the
                                 public comfort, health, peace or safety and
                                 that it is to be required to be removed.
                                 Authorizing the City of Albuquerque to join
                                 the Regional Transit District that is being
R-2005-029 3-7-05   Not_Included formed in the Mid-Region Council of
                                 Governments Area and authorizing the Mid-
                                 Region Transit District Governmental Unit
                                 contract.
                                 Adjusting fiscal year 2005 appropriations for
R-2005-030 2-23-05  Not_Included certain program strategies to provide for
                                 estimated expenditures.
                                 Rescinding Resolution No. R-04-103, which
R-2005-031 2-23-05  Not_Included ordered the condemnation and removal of the
                                 building at 608 Aztec NW and 609 Altamonte NW.
                                 Amending Enactment No. R-132-1980 which
                                 designated the Huning Highland Historic
                                 Overlay Zone and approved design guidelines;
                                 amending the boundary of the Huning Highland
                                 Historic Overlay Zone; identifying distinctive
                                 characteristics and general preservation
R-2005-032 3-7-05  1-10-1        guidelines for the "Huning Highland-East
                                 Downtown" area; establishing the Huning
                                 Highland-East Downtown Urban Conservation
                                 Overlay Zone; and adopting a regulatory plan,
                                 including architectural standards, for the
                                 Huning Highland-East Downtown Urban
                                 Conservation Overlay Zone.
                                 Amending the Huning Highland Sector
                                 Development Plan to establish the SU-2/CRZ
                                 corridor revitalization zone; amending the
R-2005-033 3-7-05  1-10-1        zoning map from SU-2/NCR to Su-2/CRZ for lots
                                 fronting on Central Avenue between Broadway
                                 Boulevard and Locust Street and fronting on
                                 Broadway Boulevard between Coal Avenue and
                                 Central Avenue.
                                 Determining that the building or structure at
                                 1414 Arno St SE within the city limits of
R-2005-034 3-7-05   Not_Included Albuquerque, New Mexico is so ruined, damaged
                                 and dilapidated as to be a menace to the
                                 public comfort, health, peace or safety and
                                 that it is to be required to be removed.
                                 Approving and authorizing the acceptance of
                                 funds for Albuquerque Highway Street Sweeping
                                 Program through a cooperative agreement with
R-2005-035 3-7-05   Not_Included the New Mexico State Highway and
                                 Transportation Department and providing for an
                                 appropriation to the Solid Waste Management
                                 Department.
                                 Revising and setting the official list of City
R-2005-036 3-7-05   Not_Included Council meetings from February 23, 2005
                                 through December 19, 2005.
                                 Recognizing city departments and city
R-2005-037 4-1-05  4-1-11        employees who outstandingly perform their
                                 duties.
                                 Approving and authorizing an agreement with
R-2005-038 4-1-05   Not_Included the New Mexico Children Youth and Families
                                 Department and making an appropriation to the
                                 Department of Family and Community Services.
                                 Approving and authorizing the U.S. Department
                                 of Housing and Urban Development Economic
R-2005-039 4-1-05   Not_Included Development Initiative (EDI) Grant for the
                                 John Marshall Renovation Project, Phase II and
                                 providing an appropriation to the Department
                                 of Family and Community Services.
                                 Approving a grant application with the United
                                 States Department of Justice for Operation
R-2005-040 4-1-05   Not_Included Weed and Seed and providing an appropriation
                                 to the Department of Family and Community
                                 Services.
                                 Approving a grant application with the United
                                 States Department of Justice for Operation
R-2005-041 4-1-05   Not_Included Weed and Seed and providing an appropriation
                                 to the Department of Family and Community
                                 Services.
                                 Adopting a rate order adjusting the equipment
                                 and installation charges Comcast is allowed to
R-2005-042 4-1-05   Not_Included assess against customers pursuant to the
                                 national FCC Form 1205 filing and the
                                 recommendations of City of Albuquerque
                                 consultants.
                                 Authorizing (I) the defeasance of the City of
                                 Albuquerque, New Mexico Municipal Refunding
                                 Collateralized Mortgage Obligations (MR CMO),
                                 Series 1988-A for the purpose of generating
                                 proceeds for the redemption of the City of
                                 Albuquerque, New Mexico Municipal
                                 Collateralized Mortgage Obligation Bonds,
                                 Series 1989 and (II) the redemption of the
                                 Series 1989 Bonds for the purpose of
R-2005-043 4-13-05  Not_Included permitting the sale of all or a portion of
                                 certain land originally purchased with the
                                 proceeds of the 1989 Bonds; providing for
                                 certain terms and other details of the
                                 defeasance of the Series 1988 Bonds and the
                                 redemption of the Series 1989 Bonds; providing
                                 for certain documents pertaining to the
                                 defeasance of the 1988 Bonds and the
                                 redemption of the 1989 Bonds; and making an
                                 appropriation.
                                 Approving and authorizing the acceptance of
                                 funds for Albuquerque Highway Clean Up Program
R-2005-044 4-13-05  Not_Included through a cooperative agreement with the New
                                 Mexico State Highway and Transportation
                                 Department and providing for an appropriation
                                 to the Solid Waste Management Department.
                                 Amending R-04-191 to appropriate, by project
R-2005-045 4-18-05  Not_Included and amount, the reallocated Gibson Boulevard
                                 Road Bonds.
                                 Authorizing the administration to purchase
R-2005-046 4-13-05  Not_Included text pagers for use in the Westside Area
                                 Command's Crime Alert Initiative and
                                 authorizing expenditure.
                                 Appropriating funds to the Albuquerque
R-2005-047 4-18-05  Not_Included Bernalillo County Water Utility Authority for
                                 facilities provided to the Balloon Fiesta
                                 Park.
                                 Extending the Albuquerque Convention and
                                 Visitors Bureau contract year and the
R-2005-048 4-18-05  Not_Included Albuquerque Hispano Chamber of Commerce
                                 contract year to June 30, 2005 to allow time
                                 for contract negotiation.
                                 Directing the administration to proceed to
R-2005-049 4-18-05  Not_Included contract negotiations with the Albuquerque
                                 Convention and Visitors Bureau contingent upon
                                 requirements established herein.
                                 Calling for the city's Affordable Housing
R-2005-050 4-18-05 3-4-3         Policy to be updated for legislative adoption,
                                 appropriating funds for the effort.
 
Res. No. Date Disposition Short Title
Res. No.   Date    Disposition   Short Title
                                 Acknowledging the application for a transfer
                                 of location and waiver for a governmental
R-2005-051 4-13-05  Not_Included license for the University of New Mexico UNM
                                 Faculty Club and directing the city hearing
                                 officer to determine whether a waiver should
                                 be granted.
                                 Receiving the Volcano Heights Planning Study
                                 Report, authorizing activities needed to begin
                                 to implement Volcano Heights planning,
R-2005-052 4-13-05  Not_Included establishing a priority of tasks, making an
                                 appropriation, continuing the moratorium on
                                 new development within a specified plan area
                                 on the Northwest Mesa, declaring an emergency.
                                 Declaring a moratorium until May 13, 2005 on
R-2005-053 4-22-05  Not_Included the issuance of building permits in the Nob
                                 Hill Sector Development Plan Area; declaring
                                 an emergency.
                                 Authorizing an update of the Coors Corridor
R-2005-054 4-29-05  Not_Included Plan; Providing for Coors/Montano Design
                                 Overlay Zone and appropriating funds to the
                                 Planning Department.
                                 Area Plan Amendment 04EPC-01152, amending the
                                 West Side Strategic Plan to remove the
                                 Neighborhood Activity Center designation from
                                 the northeast quadrant of the Unser/Dennis
R-2005-055 4-25-05 1-11-8        Chavez intersection (formerly Lots G, H, and
                                 I, Bulk Land Plat of Arrowood Ranch
                                 Development), located in the southwest area of
                                 Albuquerque, containing approximately 43
                                 acres.
                                 Sector Development Plan Amendment 04EPC-01151,
                                 amending the Rio Bravo Sector Development Plan
                                 to remove the Neighborhood Activity Center
                                 designation from the northeast quadrant of the
R-2005-056 4-25-05 1-7-33        Unser/Dennis Chavez intersection (formerly
                                 known as Lots G, H, and I, Bulk Land Plat of
                                 Arrowood Ranch Development), located in the
                                 southwest area of Albuquerque, and containing
                                 approximately 43 acres.
                                 Appropriating funds for the restoration of the
R-2005-057 4-28-05  Not_Included Community Mediation Program within the Legal
                                 Department, creating a position, and funding a
                                 mediation contract.
                                 Directing the administration to initiate a
R-2005-058 4-28-05  Not_Included traffic study to address traffic concerns and
                                 safety issues at Bosque Meadows NW and Coors
                                 Boulevard; considering traffic signalization.
                                 Directing the administration to initiate a bus
                                 rapid transit study on Coors Boulevard from
R-2005-059 4-28-05  Not_Included Cottonwood Mall to Central Avenue, to include
                                 queue jumping lanes, major intersection signal
                                 priority, and pedestrian crossing on Montano
                                 to access rapid transit on Coors.
                                 Establishing a policy to require a nuisance
R-2005-060 4-28-05 5-1-2         prevention agreement prior to approval of the
                                 issuance or transfer of a liquor license in
                                 specified areas of the city.
                                 Creating a MOVE Advisory Board that will
                                 provide advice and non-binding recommendations
                                 to the Mayor's Office for Volunteerism and
                                 Engagement ("MOVE") regarding recruiting and
R-2005-061 4-28-05 2-1-19        connecting volunteers to nonprofit volunteer
                                 efforts throughout the community, including to
                                 the volunteer efforts of city departments, and
                                 assisting in the promotion of volunteerism
                                 throughout the community.
R-2005-062 4-28-05  Not_Included Requesting a special audit of the Office of
                                 City Council Services.
                                 Mandating that the city meet the United States
R-2005-063 4-28-05 3-9-3         Green Building Council LEED Silver Standard
                                 for all city building construction projects
                                 over five thousand square feet.
                                 Amending Bill No. R-05-263 that relates to
R-2005-064 4-28-05  Not_Included continuing the moratorium on new development
                                 within a specified plan area on the Northwest
                                 Mesa.
                                 Declaring a moratorium until June 13, 2005 on
                                 the issuance of building permits in the
R-2005-065 4-28-05  Not_Included Community Commercial/Residential (CCR) Zone of
                                 the Nob Hill Sector Development Plan Area;
                                 declaring an emergency; repealing Council Bill
                                 R-05-262 (Res. R-2005-053).
                                 Authorizing the giving of notice for bids for
                                 the sale of City of Albuquerque, New Mexico
R-2005-066 4-28-05  Not_Included General Obligation Bonds consisting of
                                 $90,595,000 General Purpose Bonds, Series
                                 2005A and $11,575,000 Storm Sewer Bonds,
                                 Series 2005B.
                                 Requesting the Mayor to complete all necessary
R-2005-067 5-16-05  Not_Included procedures to utilize all four lanes of
                                 traffic capacity on the Montano Bridge and
                                 corridor.
                                 Approving and authorizing the filing of the
                                 attached application for a Home Services
R-2005-068 5-16-05  Not_Included Palmer Fund Grant and providing for an
                                 appropriation to the Department of Senior
                                 Affairs.
                                 Approving and authorizing the filing of the
                                 attached grant award for a Bulletproof Vest
R-2005-069 5-16-05  Not_Included Partnership Grant from the United States
                                 Department of Justice, Bureau of Justice
                                 Assistance and providing for an appropriation
                                 to the City of Albuquerque, Police Department.
                                 Approving and authorizing the filing of the
                                 attached application for a Drug Recognition
R-2005-070 5-16-05  Not_Included Expert Grant from the New Mexico Department of
                                 Transportation, Traffic Safety Bureau and
                                 providing for an appropriation to the City of
                                 Albuquerque, Police Department.
                                 Approving and authorizing the filing of the
                                 attached grant application with the United
                                 States Department of Justice, Bureau of
R-2005-071 5-16-05  Not_Included Justice Assistance for a Federal Fiscal Year
                                 2005 Edward Byrne Memorial Justice Assistance
                                 Grant (JAG) and providing for an appropriation
                                 to the City of Albuquerque, Police Department.
                                 Approving and authorizing the filing of a
                                 Section 5309 Grant for Funding from the
R-2005-072 5-16-05  Not_Included Federal Transit Administration of the U.S.
                                 Department of Transportation and providing for
                                 an appropriation to the Transit Department.
                                 Condemnation at 709 Towner Ave NW within the
                                 city limits of Albuquerque, New Mexico is so
R-2005-073 5-31-05  Not_Included ruined, damaged and dilapidated as to be a
                                 menace to the public comfort, health, peace or
                                 safety and that it is to be required to be
                                 removed.
                                 Approving and authorizing a joint powers
                                 agreement with the New Mexico Department of
R-2005-074 5-31-05  Not_Included Health for the Access to Recovery (ATR) Grant
                                 and providing an appropriation to the
                                 Department of Family and Community Services.
                                 Approving and authorizing the filing of the
                                 attached agreement for a Click It or Ticket
R-2005-075 5-31-05  Not_Included Grant from the New Mexico Department of
                                 Transportation, Traffic Safety Bureau and
                                 providing for an appropriation to the City of
                                 Albuquerque, Police Department.
 
Res. No. Date Disposition Short Title
Res. No.   Date    Disposition   Short Title
                                 Approving and authorizing the filing of the
                                 attached grant application for a Gang
                                 Resistance Education and Training (G.R.E.A.T.)
R-2005-076 5-31-05  Not_Included Program from the United States Department of
                                 Justice, Bureau of Justice Assistance and
                                 providing for an appropriation to the City of
                                 Albuquerque, Police Department.
R-2005-077 6-2-05   Not_Included Calling for the creation of a New Albuquerque
                                 Open Space; requiring a protection plan.
                                 Authorizing a community based update of the
                                 Barelas Sector Development Plan, a review of
R-2005-078 6-2-05   Not_Included Barelas Neighborhood Commercial Area
                                 Revitalization Plan, and appropriating funds
                                 to carry out these activities.
                                 Providing protection for areas of the
R-2005-079 6-13-05 1-5-3         Petroglyph National Monument not included in
                                 the Paseo Del Norte Extension Project.
                                 Requesting the U.S. Attorney to conduct an
R-2005-080 6-9-05   Not_Included independent investigation of the operation and
                                 oversight of the Albuquerque Police Department
                                 Evidence Room.
                                 Amending the adopted Capital Implementation
R-2005-081 6-9-05   Not_Included Program of the City of Albuquerque Aviation
                                 Department by approving new projects and
                                 supplementing current appropriations.
                                 Appropriating funds to the Capital
                                 Implementation Program for approved grants by
R-2005-082 6-9-05   Not_Included the 2005 State Legislature and contribution
                                 from the Anderson Abruzzo International
                                 Balloon Museum Foundation.
                                 Amending the boundaries of the Westland Sector
R-2005-083 6-17-05  Not_Included Development Plan to Include Tract 37, Town of
                                 Atrisco Grant, in the plan boundaries.
                                 Amending the boundaries of the Westland Sector
R-2005-084 6-17-05  Not_Included Development Plan to Include Tracts 30, 31, 32,
                                 and 33, Town of Atrisco Grant, in the plan
                                 boundaries.
                                 Appropriating funds for operating the
                                 Albuquerque/Bernalillo County Government and
R-2005-085 6-17-05  Not_Included Law Enforcement Centers for Fiscal Year 2006,
                                 beginning July 1, 2005 and ending June 30,
                                 2006.
                                 Appropriating funds to the Metropolitan
                                 Detention Center Department for operating the
R-2005-086 6-17-05  Not_Included Metropolitan Detention Center in Fiscal Year
                                 2006, beginning July 1, 2005 and ending June
                                 30, 2006.
                                 Establishing a Pedestrian Management Area on
                                 Avenida Cesar Chavez and University Boulevard
                                 in the vicinity of the University South
                                 Athletic Campus, Isotopes Park and the
R-2005-087 6-17-05 3-8-12        Proposed Velodrome & BMX Stadium. Establishing
                                 a policy to design and engineer safe
                                 pedestrian routes in the area; establishing
                                 priorities for seeking funding to construct a
                                 safe pedestrian environment in the area.
                                 Amending R-04-159 (Res. 117-2004) pertaining
R-2005-088 6-17-05  Not_Included to interim Council policy regarding lower
                                 impact fees due to city planning policies.
                                 Approving and authorizing the filing of
                                 Section 5307 Grants for funding with the
R-2005-089 6-17-05  Not_Included Federal Transit Administration of the U.S.
                                 Department of Transportation and providing for
                                 an appropriation to the Transit Department.
                                 Supporting the creation of a Technology Master
                                 Plan, contributing to the cost of the project
R-2005-090 6-17-05  Not_Included as carried out by the New Mexico Science and
                                 Technology Office and the General Services
                                 Department.
                                 Amending enactment No. 115-1998 (F/S R-121),
                                 to require a hearing on the application for a
R-2005-091 6-6-05  5-1-1         waiver of the distance requirement between a
                                 licensed premises and a school at 12th Street
                                 and Indian School Road NW.
                                 Appropriating funds for operating the
R-2005-092 5-2-05   Not_Included government of the City of Albuquerque for the
                                 Fiscal Year beginning July 1, 2005 and ending
                                 June 30, 2006.
                                 Appropriating funds (General Fund) for
R-2005-093 5-31-05  Not_Included operating the government of the City of
                                 Albuquerque for Fiscal Year 2006, beginning
                                 July 1, 2005 and ending June 30, 2006.
                                 Amending the Refuse Disposal Operating Budget
R-2005-094 6-23-05  Not_Included for the Fiscal Year beginning July 1, 2005 and
                                 ending June 30, 2006.
                                 Approving the development agreement for the
                                 Old Albuquerque High Manual Arts Building,
R-2005-095 6-23-05  Not_Included approving prior uses of Gross Receipts Tax
                                 Revenue Bond Funds, and appropriating funds
                                 for redevelopment.
                                 Amending F/S R-04-56, Enactment 66-2004;
                                 providing for an appropriation to the West
                                 Central Metropolitan Redevelopment Project;
                                 establishing procedures for management of the
                                 funding by the Alamosa Neighborhood
                                 Association; accepting a program of
                                 association between the Alamosa Neighborhood
R-2005-096 6-23-05 1-12-16       Association and the West Central Community
                                 Development Group (WCCDG); calling for the
                                 establishment of a new Community Development
                                 Corporation (CDC) to carry out projects in the
                                 Area; establishing requirements for training
                                 and the establishment of operating and
                                 financial procedures by the new CDC; and
                                 funding a Community Based Economic Development
                                 Training Program.
                                 Establishing one year objectives for the City
R-2005-097 6-23-05  Not_Included of Albuquerque in Fiscal Year 2006; to meet
                                 five year goals.
                                 Amending F/S R-04-159 (Enactment No. R-2004-
                                 117) regarding the interim Council policy to
                                 lower impact fees due to service efficiencies,
                                 reductions/offsets of impact fees based on
                                 city planning policies, and impact fee waivers
R-2005-098 6-23-05  Not_Included for affordable housing, to clarify the intent
                                 that reductions be calculated on the full fee,
                                 to clarify the definition of affordable
                                 housing cost and to evaluate the reduction
                                 policy when the impact fee ordinances are
                                 evaluated.
                                 Adopting a proposition to be submitted to the
                                 voters at the next municipal election
                                 concering a photo voter identification
R-2005-099 6-23-05  Not_Included requirement for Albuquerque municipal
                                 elections, providing for issuance of voter
                                 photo identification cards, providing for
                                 provisional ballots and designating the time
                                 for certification of election results.
                                 Requiring the conversion of the traffic
R-2005-100 6-23-05  Not_Included control at the intersection of 7th Street and
                                 Fruit Avenue to a four way stop.
 
Res. No. Date Disposition Short Title
Res.  Date Disposition Short Title
No.
R-    7-6-  Not        Concerning the municipal runoff election to be held in the City of
2005- 05   Included    Albuquerque, New Mexico, on Tuesday, the fifteenth day of November
101                    2005.
R-    7-6-  Not        Concerning the regular municipal election to be held in the City of
2005- 05   Included    Albuquerque, New Mexico, on Tuesday, the fourth day of October 2005.
102
R-    7-6-  Not        Approving the programming of funds and projects for the 2005-2014
2005- 05   Included    Component Capital Improvement Plans (CCIPs).
103
R-    7-    Not        Requesting a follow-up evaluation by the Human Society of the United
2005- 15-  Included    States.
104   05
R-    6-               Charter amendment proposal to be submitted to the voters on the
2005- 30-   Not        election ballot of the October 4, 2005 regular municipal election,
105   05   Included    amending Article XIII of the Charter of the City of Albuquerque to
                       provide for public campaign financing.
R-    7-    Not        Approving the FY06 Audit Plan as submitted by the Accountability in
2005- 15-  Included    Government Oversight Committee.
106   05
R-    7-    Not        Approving an appropriation from the Housing and Neighborhood Economic
2005- 15-  Included    Development Fund to the Department of Family and Community Services.
107   05
R-    7-               Approving a Memorandum of Understanding between the County of
2005- 15-   Not        Bernalillo and the City of Albuquerque and providing an appropriation
108   05   Included    to the Department of Family and Community Services to supplement the
                       Isshin Ryu Recreation Program.
R-    7-    Not        Adopting the FY '06 – FY '07 Two-Year Urban Enhancement Program and
2005- 15-  Included    appropriating funds for the Urban Enhancement Program's projects.
109   05
R-    7-               Amending R-04-112, Enactment No. 101-2004, directing that city
2005- 15-  3-3-19      employees shall accrue vacation and sick leave at their regular
110   05               accrual rate while serving on active military duty to include all
                       employees serving on active military duty since September 12, 2001.
                       Approving and authorizing a contract agreement with the Albuquerque
R-    7-               Public Schools to provide preschool services to 40 Temporary
2005- 15-   Not        Assistance for Needy Families (TANF) eligible children qualifying
111   05   Included    under TANF Pre-K Grant requirements and providing an appropriation to
                       the Department of Family and Community Services/Office of Child and
                       Family Development.
R-    7-               Approving and authorizing the filing of a grant application for a
2005- 15-   Not        Rideshare/Transportation Demand Management Program with the Federal
112   05   Included    Highway Administration through the State Department of Transportation
                       and providing for an appropriation to the Transit Department.
R-    7-               Approving and authorizing a grant application to the County of
2005- 15-   Not        Bernalillo, Bernalillo County DWI Program for a Public Detoxification
113   05   Included    and Treatment Program in Albuquerque and providing an appropriation
                       to the Department of Family and Community Services.
                       Authorizing the Mayor to execute a contract agreement with the New
R-    7-    Not        Mexico Department of Children, Youth and Families and providing an
2005- 15-  Included    appropriation to the Department of Family and Community Services/
114   05               Division of Child and Family Development, Temporary Assistance for
                       Needy Families Program (TANF).
R-    7-    Not        Authorizing the Mayor to execute a grant agreement with the U.S.
2005- 15-  Included    Department of Health and Human Services, and providing an
115   05               appropriation to the Department of Family and Community Services.
                       Authorizing the filing of a grant application with the New Mexico
R-    7-    Not        State Agency on Aging for Title III Older Americans Act Funds and HB-
2005- 15-  Included    2 Laws of New Mexico Funds to provide services to senior citizens,
116   05               and providing an appropriation to the Department of Family and
                       Community Services.
                       Authorizing the Mayor to execute a contract agreement with the New
R-    7-    Not        Mexico Department of Children, Youth and Families and providing an
2005- 15-  Included    appropriation to the Department of Family and Community Services/
117   05               Division of Child and Family Development, Teen Parent Residence
                       Program (TPRP).
                       Extending the moratorium on the issuance of building permits in the
R-    6-               Community Commercial/Residential (CCR) Zone of the Nob Hill Sector
2005- 30-   Not        Development Plan Area until December 13, 2005 for applications that
118   05   Included    would result in structures of certain heights or that do not comply
                       with the design guidelines in the Nob Hill Sector Development Plan;
                       declaring an emergency.
R-    7-6-  Not        Requiring the conversion of the traffic control at the intersection
2005- 05   Included    of 10th Street and Coal Avenue to a four way stop.
119
                       Amending the adopted Capital Implementation Program of the City of
R-    7-    Not        Albuquerque by approving new projects, supplementing current
2005- 30-  Included    appropriations and changing the scope of existing projects; amending
120   05               the General Fund budget to clean up an approved appropriation for the
                       West Central MRA Project contained in Bill No. F/S R-04-188 (4).
R-    7-6-  Not        Approving the programming of funds and projects for the 2005-2014
2005- 05   Included    Decade Plan for Capital Improvements including the 2005 Two-Year
121                    Capital Budget.
                       Concerning a municipal bond election to be held in the City of
                       Albuquerque at the next City general election; submitting to a vote
                       of the qualified, registered electors and nonresident municipal
R-    8-               electors at such election certain questions for authorizing the
2005- 11-   Not        issuance of general obligation bonds in varying principal amounts and
122   05   Included    for specified public purposes; providing the form of the bond
                       questions, the emergency and absentee paper ballots therefor and the
                       designation clause for such questions on voting machines; prescribing
                       other details in connection with such election and bonds; and
                       ratifying action previously taken in connection therewith.
R-    8-    Not        Approving and authorizing the filing of an Air Pollution Control
2005- 11-  Included    Program grant application and providing for an appropriation to the
123   05               Environmental Health Department.
R-    8-               Approving and authorizing the filing of the attached grant
2005- 11-   Not        application from Bernalillo County for a DWI Enforcement Program and
124   05   Included    providing for an appropriation to the City of Albuquerque Police
                       Department.
R-    8-               Requiring the City of Albuquerque to develop recommendations to
2005- 26-   Not        expand, make more efficient and improve transit service to people
125   05   Included    with disabilities and to assist with the Mid Region Council of
                       Governments study of paratransit services in Central New Mexico.
 
Res. No. Date Disposition Short Title
Res.  Date Disposition Short Title
No.
R-    8-               Approving and authorizing the filing of the attached grant application with
2005- 26-   Not        Bernalillo County DWI Program to provide a DWI Addiction Treatment Program;
126   05   Included    and providing for an appropriation to the Metropolitan Detention Center
                       Department in Fiscal Year 2006.
R-    8-    Not        Appointing the City Clerk, Chief Deputy Clerk and Deputy City Clerks;
2005- 26-  Included    repealing Council Bill No. R-04-148, Enactment No. R-2004-139.
127   05
                       Approving and authorizing the acceptance of grant funds from the U.S.
R-    8-    Not        Department of Homeland Security, Federal Emergency Management Agency (DHS-
2005- 26-  Included    FEMA), under the regulations governing phase two development of a
128   05               Metropolitan Medical Response System (MMRS) and providing for an
                       appropriation to the Environmental Health Department.
                       Approving and authorizing the filing of the attached Memorandum of Agreement
R-    8-    Not        between the City of Albuquerque Environmental Health Department, and the
2005- 26-  Included    State of New Mexico Department of Health, for the acceptance of funds to
129   05               enhance the Metropolitan Medical Response System (MMRS) and providing for an
                       appropriation to the Environmental Health Department.
R-    8-               Condemnation at 401 Alcazar St NE within the City limits of Albuquerque, New
2005- 26-   Not        Mexico is so ruined, damaged and dilapidated as to be a menace to the public
130   05   Included    comfort, health, peace or safety and that it is to be required to be
                       removed.
R-    8-    Not        Appointing Precinct Boards for each polling place for the Tuesday, October
2005- 26-  Included    4, 2005 regular municipal election for the City of Albuquerque.
131   05
R-    8-    Not        Appointing Precinct Boards for each polling place for the Tuesday, November
2005- 26-  Included    15, 2005 runoff municipal election for the City of Albuquerque.
132   05
                       Supplementing the development agreement between the City of Albuquerque and
R-    8-    Not        Indian Pueblos Federal Development Corporation concerning the development of
2005- 26-  Included    the former Albuquerque Indian School property to include law enforcement and
133   05               regulation of permitted activities by the City of Albuquerque as
                       contemplated by the development agreement.
R-    9-2-  Not        Concerning the designation of consolidated precincts for the regular
2005- 05   Included    municipal election to be held in the City of Albuquerque, New Mexico, on
134                    Tuesday the 4th day of October 2005.
R-    9-2-  Not        Concerning the designation of consolidated precincts for the municipal
2005- 05   Included    runoff election to be held in the City of Albuquerque, New Mexico, on
135                    Tuesday the 15th day of November 2005.
                       Amending the West Side Strategic Plan; Designation of a new neighborhood
                       activity center in the West Central Community Area for Lots 32-35, Hubble
                       Heights Subdivision, Tract 64, Town of Atrisco Grant Unit No. 6, the
                       southern portions of Tracts 59, 60, 61, 62, and 63, Town of Atrisco Grant
                       Unit No. 6, the east portion of the west 366.08 feet of the north 182.40
R-    9-               feet of Tract 110, Town of Atrisco Grant Unit No. 6, the westerly 366.08
2005- 12-  1-11-8      feet of the easterly 678.08 feet of the northerly 182 feet of Tract 110,
136   05               Town of Atrisco Grant Unit No. 6, Tracts A, B, C, Block T-1, Plat of Lots A-
                       D Block T-1 Carlos Rey Subdivision, Tracts D-1, D-2, D-3 of Replat of Lot D
                       Block T-1 Carlos Rey Subdivision, Tracts 1, 2, 3 Block T-1 Carlos Rey
                       Subdivision, Tract 111-A Plat of Tract 111-A Town of Atrisco Grant Unit No.
                       6, Tract 111-B Bulk Land Plat of Tracts 111-B and 111-C Town of Atrisco
                       Grant Unit No. 6, Tract 111-C Bulk Land Plat of Tracts 111-B and 111-C Town
                       of Atrisco Grant Unit No. 6.
R-    8-    Not        Directing the administration to investigate and identify available public or
2005- 29-  Included    private building space for the placement of a Family Justice Center.
137   05
R-    8-    Not        Requesting the Office of Internal Audit and Investigations to investigate
2005- 29-  Included    the actions of public officials and employees concerning the handling of
138   05               Council Bill O-05-107.
R-    8-               Establishing an expenditure plan for the basic service tax as contained in
2005- 29-   Not        Ordinance 20-1989 (Bill No. F/S O-89) regarding preventive street
139   05   Included    maintenance and rehabilitation, traffic engineering signs and markings,
                       storm drainage improvements, and storm drainage maintenance.
R-    8-    Not        Establishing a City Office of Music within the Office of Economic
2005- 29-  Included    Development.
140   05
R-    8-    Not        Establishing a procedure for appointment of City of Albuquerque Board
2005- 29-  Included    Members for the Board of Directors of the Regional Transit District.
141   05
R-    8-               Creating a project entitled "Sawmill/Wells Park Metropolitan Redevelopment
2005- 29-   Not        Area" in the Capital Acquisition Fund, and providing an appropriation to the
142   05   Included    Community Facilities / Planning – Metropolitan Redevelopment Agency in the
                       Capital Acquisition Fund.
R-    9-    Not        Concerning the designation of consolidated precincts for the regular
2005- 26-  Included    municipal election to be held in the City of Albuquerque, New Mexico, on
143   05               Tuesday the 4th day of October, 2005.
R-    9-    Not        Appointing Precinct Boards for each polling place for the Tuesday, October
2005- 26-  Included    4, 2005 regular municipal election for the City of Albuquerque.
144   05
R-    9-    Not        Concerning the designation of consolidated precincts for the municipal
2005- 26-  Included    runoff election to be held in the City of Albuquerque, New Mexico, on
145   05               Tuesday the 15th day of November, 2005.
R-    9-    Not        Appointing Precinct Boards for each polling place for the Tuesday, November
2005- 19-  Included    15, 2005 runoff municipal election for the City of Albuquerque.
146   05
R-    6-9-  Not        Directing the City of Albuquerque Transit Department to provide free rides
2005- 05   Included    on all routes for public transit passengers on election day October 4, 2005.
147
                       Sector Development Plan Amendment 04epc-01782; Amending the Tower/Unser
                       Sector Development Plan to change the Zoning Designation from Rd 9/Du/Acre
R-    9-               to Rd/R-1 for Lots 40, A, B, C, D, E, 3, 4, 2, 4a, 4b, 1b, 1a Town of
2005- 28-  1-7-34      Atrisco Grant, Unit 2; 1a & 1b M. Candelaria; 2a & 2b Andriano Candelaria;
148   05               Lot 3, Town of Atrisco Grant Unit 2 Division of Tract 41, Located South of
                       Sunset Gardens Between 94th Street and 90th Street SW containing
                       aproximately 14 acres.
                       Sector Development Plan Amendment 04epc-01826, Amending the Los Candelarias
                       Village Center and Metropolitan Redevelopment Plan to remove the Subject
R-    9-               Site, Lots 3 And 4, Major Acres Subdivision, from the Metropolitan
2005- 28-  1-12-12     Redevelopment Area and Village Core Boundary as shown on Exhibits 1, 10, and
149   05               11 and to change Zoning on the Subject Site from Su-2/Rt to R-1 as shown on
                       Exhibit 11; the subject site is an approximately 1.0 Acre Site located on
                       Major Avenue between 10th Street and 12th Street NW.
R-    9-    Not        Providing an appropriation to the Emergency Shelter Services Program
2005- 28-  Included    Strategy, Department of Family and Community Services for the Women's
150   05               Community Association.
 
Res. No. Date Disposition Short Title
Res. No.   Date     Disposition   Short Title
                                  Creating a Dr. Martin Luther King, JR.
R-2005-151 9-28-05  2-10-5        Memorial Committee; providing in-kind support
                                  and resources for the committee; calling for
                                  a report.
                                  Appropriating grant funds to the Capital
R-2005-152 9-28-05   Not_Included Implementation Program for the University
                                  Boulevard Road Construction Project.
                                  Adopting policies to establish and implement
R-2005-153 9-28-05  3-9-4         a City Renewable Energy Initiative; calling
                                  for progress reports by City Departments and
                                  the Energy Conservation Council.
                                  Amending the Land Use Map of the Seven Bar
                                  Ranch Sector Development Plan, Exhibit 3,
                                  Tract Mm, 05epc 00354 and amending the City's
R-2005-154 9-28-05  1-7-28        Official Zone Map for Tract H, Seven Bar
                                  Ranch, 05epc 00353, From Su-1/C-2, Ip &
                                  Bumper Boats to Su-1/Prd For 14 Acres and Su-
                                  1/C-2 & Ip for 2 Acres.
                                  Providing an Appropriation to the Department
R-2005-155 10-24-05  Not_Included of Family and Community Services for
                                  Emergency Shelter Services for Homeless Men.
                                  Concerning the Designation of consolidated
                                  precincts for the runoff Municipal Election
R-2005-156 10-24-05  Not_Included for City Council District 9 to be held in the
                                  City of Albuquerque, New Mexico, on Tuesday,
                                  the 15th day of November 2005.
                                  Appointing precinct boards for each polling
R-2005-157 10-24-05  Not_Included place in District 9 for the Tuesday, November
                                  15, 2005 runoff Municipal Election for the
                                  City of Albuquerque.
                                  Approving and authorizing the filing of the
                                  attached agreement for an Enforcing Underage
R-2005-158 10-31-05  Not_Included Drinking Laws Grant from the New Mexico
                                  Children, Youth And Families Department and
                                  Providing for an appropriation to the City of
                                  Albuquerque, Police Department.
                                  Establishing projects and funding to mitigate
                                  impacts in the West Mesa Neighborhoods south
R-2005-159 10-31-05  Not_Included of Interstate 40 created by the reconstructed
                                  interchange at Coors Boulevard and Interstate
                                  40.
                                  Adopting a proposition to be submitted to the
                                  voters on the regular municipal election
                                  ballot of the October 2, 2007, amending
R-2005-160 10-31-05  Not_Included Article II, Section 1 of the Charter of the
                                  City of Albuquerque, concerning the day on
                                  which regular municipal elections shall be
                                  held.
                                  Adjusting fiscal year 2006 appropriations for
                                  public safety quarter cent tax revenue
R-2005-161 10-31-05  Not_Included received in fiscal year 2005 above the
                                  appropriated level and appropriating unspent
                                  and reverted fiscal year 2005 public safety
                                  quarter cent tax balances.
                                  Approving a memorandum of understanding
                                  between the County of Bernalillo and the City
R-2005-162 10-31-05  Not_Included of Albuquerque and providing an appropriation
                                  to the Department of Family and Community
                                  Services.
                                  Approving and authorizing a Professional
                                  Service contract with the New Mexico
R-2005-163 10-31-05  Not_Included Department of Health for the West Nile Virus
                                  Surveillance and Data Management Program and
                                  making an appropriation to the Environmental
                                  Health Department.
                                  Requiring the City of Albuquerque to develop
                                  recommendations and a funding plan to expand,
                                  make more efficient and improve transit
                                  service to people with disabilities, to
                                  assist the Mid-Region Council of Governments
R-2005-164 10-31-05  Not_Included study of paratransit services in Central New
                                  Mexico and requesting that the Mid-Region
                                  Council of Governments begin planning for the
                                  provision of transit services for the
                                  disabled community by the Regional Transit
                                  Authority, repealing R-2005-125.
                                  Setting the official list of City Council
R-2005-165 10-31-05  Not_Included meetings from November 7, 2005 through
                                  December 18, 2006.
R-2005-166 10-31-05 3-2-4         Determining reasonable notice of public
                                  meetings of the Council.
                                  Approving and authorizing the acceptance of
                                  the attached grant award for funds from the
R-2005-167 10-31-05  Not_Included Federal Emergency Management Agency under the
                                  assistance to firefighters grant and
                                  providing for an appropriation to the Fire
                                  Department.
                                  Approving and authorizing the acceptance of
R-2005-168 11-10-05  Not_Included DNA Act funds and providing for an
                                  appropriation to the Albuquerque Police
                                  Department.
                                  Requesting the Administration to complete the
R-2005-169 11-10-05  Not_Included Tricentennial Towers project at the
                                  interchange of Interstate 40 and Rio Grande
                                  Boulevard.
                                  Approving and authorizing the filing of the
                                  attached negotiation worksheet for acceptance
                                  of operation DWI grant funds from the State
R-2005-170 11-10-05  Not_Included of New Mexico Department of Transportation,
                                  Traffic Safety Bureau and providing for an
                                  appropriation to the City of Albuquerque,
                                  Police Department.
                                  Approving and authorizing the filing of the
                                  attached negotiation worksheet for the
                                  acceptance of Operation Buckle Down grant
R-2005-171 11-10-05  Not_Included funds from the State of New Mexico Department
                                  of Transportation, Traffic Safety Bureau and
                                  providing for an appropriation to the City of
                                  Albuquerque, Police Department.
                                  Approving and authorizing the filing of the
                                  attached application for a fiscal year 2005
                                  Coverdell Forensic Science Grant with the
R-2005-172 11-10-05  Not_Included United States Department of Justice, National
                                  Institute of Justice and providing for an
                                  appropriation to the City of Albuquerque,
                                  Police Department.
                                  Approving and authorizing the filing of the
                                  attached application for a FY05 DNA Capacity
R-2005-173 11-10-05  Not_Included Enhancement grant from the United States
                                  Department of Justice, National Institute of
                                  Justice and providing for an appropriation to
                                  the City of Albuquerque, Police Department.
                                  Approving and authorizing the acceptance of
                                  the attached grant award for funds under the
R-2005-174 11-10-05  Not_Included Emergency Medical Services Fund Act with the
                                  State of New Mexico Department of Health and
                                  providing for an appropriation to the Fire
                                  Department.
                                  Approving and authorizing the filing of the
                                  attached application with the United States
R-2005-175 11-10-05  Not_Included Department of Justice, National Institute of
                                  Justice and providing for an appropriation to
                                  the City of Albuquerque Police Department.
 
Res. No. Date Disposition Short Title
Res. No.   Date     Disposition   Short Title
                                  Amending the Highland/Central Metropolitan
                                  Redevelopment Area (MRA) Plan as the Central-
R-2005-176 11-10-05 1-6-13        Highland-Upper Nob Hill Mra Plan; and
                                  specifically including the entire Central-
                                  Highland-Upper Nob Hill Mra for purposes of
                                  tax increment financing.
                                  Amending the West Side Strategic Plan to
                                  include a policy to discourage zone map
R-2005-177 12-05-05 1-11-8        amendments from non-residential uses to
                                  residential uses; providing requirements for
                                  such amendments.
                                  Approving and authorizing the filing of grant
                                  application for a food service program for
R-2005-178 12-05-05  Not_Included children with the New Mexico Department of
                                  Children, Youth and Families and providing
                                  for an appropriation to the Department of
                                  Family and Community Services.
                                  Approving and authorizing a contract
                                  agreement with the State of New Mexico
                                  Children, Youth, and Families Department to
                                  provide preschool services to 60 four (4)
R-2005-179 12-05-05  Not_Included year old eligible children qualifying under
                                  the State of New Mexico, Children, Youth, and
                                  Families Department requirements and
                                  providing an appropriation to the Department
                                  of Family and Community Services/Division of
                                  Child and Family Development.
                                  Approving and authorizing the filing of the
                                  attached agreement for an enhanced 911
                                  wireless grant from the New Mexico Department
R-2005-180 12-05-05  Not_Included of Finance and Administrative Services, Local
                                  Governments Division, and providing for an
                                  appropriation to the City of Albuquerque,
                                  Police Department.
                                  Adopting the 2006 action plan and program
                                  investment summary for 2006 for the
                                  expenditure of community development block
R-2005-181 12-05-05  Not_Included grant, home investment partnerships and
                                  emergency shelter block grant funds and
                                  providing an appropriation to the Department
                                  of Family and Community Services.
                                  Approving a settlement of the dispute with
                                  Comcast of New Mexico concerning its
                                  installation and equipment charges for 2004
                                  and 2005, agreeing to a methodology for the
                                  review of the charges for 2004, 2005 and
                                  2006, obtaining agreement of Comcast to
                                  withdraw its FCC appeal of the City's rate
R-2005-182 12-05-05  Not_Included order adjusting the equipment and
                                  installation charges, obtaining credits for
                                  subscribers, and adopting a rate order
                                  concerning Comcast's 2005 filed 1205
                                  adjusting the equipment and installation
                                  charges comcast is allowed to assess against
                                  customers from June 1, 2005 forward based on
                                  the settlement.
                                  Approving and authorizing acceptance of funds
                                  for a FY2004 Juvenile Accountability Block
                                  Grant (JABG) from the New Mexico Children,
                                  Youth and Families Department, providing for
R-2005-183 12-05-05  Not_Included an appropriation to the City of Albuquerque,
                                  Police Department and authorizing the
                                  execution of agreements with the County of
                                  Bernalillo and New Day Youth and Family
                                  Services.
R-2005-184 12-05-05 6-1-1         Changing the name of Squaw Road Northwest to
                                  Rosa Parks Road Northwest.
                                  Amending Bill No. F/S R-04-146 (Enactment No.
                                  R-2005-032), which designated the Huning
                                  Highland Historic Overlay Zone; Amending Bill
                                  No. F/S R-04-155 (Enactment No. R-2005-033),
                                  which amended the Huning Highland Sector
R-2005-185 12-14-05 1-10-1        Development Plan to establish the Su-2/Crz
                                  Community Revitalization Zone; correcting
                                  technical errors in order to make the Plan
                                  Area descriptions consistent with the adopted
                                  maps and attaching a map of the Su-2/Crz
                                  Zone.
                                  Endorsing the approval of the proposed $60
R-2005-186 12-27-05  Not_Included million bond issue to fund capital outlay
                                  projects for the Albuquerque Technical
                                  Vocational Institute.
                                  Extending the moratorium on the issuance of
                                  building permits in the community commercial/
                                  residential (ccr) zone of the Nob Hill Sector
                                  Development Plan area until June 13, 2006 for
R-2005-187 12-27-05  Not_Included applications that would result in structures
                                  of certain heights or that do not comply with
                                  the design guidelines in the Nob Hill Sector
                                  Development Plan and as specified herein;
                                  declaring an emergency.
                                  Appointing the City Clerk, Chief Deputy Clerk
R-2005-188 12-22-05  Not_Included and Deputy City Clerks; repealing Council
                                  Bill No. R-05-331.
                                  Declaring the intent of the City of
                                  Albuquerque, New Mexico, subject to the
                                  satisfaction of certain conditions, to issue
R-2005-189 12-22-05  Not_Included industrial revenue bonds in an aggregate
                                  principal amount not to exceed. $25,000,000
                                  in connection-with a proposed project for the
                                  manufacture of solar cells as described in
                                  the preliminary project plan.
                                  Requiring the City to issue requests for
R-2005-190 12-12-05  Not_Included information and proposals to provide
                                  affordable high capacity city-wide broadband
                                  and wireless internet access.
                                  Adjusting fiscal year 2005 appropriations for
R-2005-191 12-27-05  Not_Included certain funds in program strategies to
                                  provide for actual expenditures, and
                                  adjusting fiscal year 2006 appropriations.
                                  Amending the adopted Capital Implementation
                                  Program of the City of Albuquerque by
R-2005-194 1-2-06    Not_Included approving new projects, supplementing current
                                  appropriations and changing the scope of
                                  existing projects.
 
 
 
Notes
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
2006 Resolutions
Res. No. Date Disposition Short Title
Res. No.   Date    Disposition   Short Title
R-2005-192 1-30-06 3-8-13        Designating areas where cruising is not
                                 allowed.
                                 Establishing a legislative policy for the City
R-2005-193 1-30-06  Not_Included of Albuquerque for the 2006 legislative
                                 session of the New Mexico Legislature.
                                 Amending the adopted capital implementation
                                 prgoram of the City of Albuquerque by
R-2005-194 1-18-06  Not_Included approving new projects, supplementing current
                                 appropriations and changing the scope of
                                 existing projects.
                                 Approving and authorizing the Mayor to execute
                                 a sub-grant agreement for a traffic
R-2006-001 1-30-06  Not_Included enforcement program from the State of New
                                 Mexico Department of Public Safety and
                                 providing for an appropriation to the City of
                                 Albuquerque, Police Department.
                                 Approving and authorizing the Mayor to execute
                                 a sub-grant agreement for an anti-
                                 victimization and training for women program
R-2006-002 1-30-06  Not_Included from the State of New Mexico Department of
                                 Public Safety and providing for an
                                 appropriation to the City of Albuquerque,
                                 Police Department.
                                 Requesting that the administration review
                                 Community Center policies and procedures for
                                 community recreation and educational
R-2006-003 1-30-06  Not_Included initiatives to include a policy giving City of
                                 Albuquerque residents first priority to
                                 register for Community Center recreation
                                 programs; requiring proof of residency.
                                 Condemnation at 4501 Central Ave NE / American
                                 Inn Motel within the City limits of
R-2006-004 1-31-06  Not_Included Albuquerque, New Mexico is so ruined, damaged
                                 and dilapidated as to be a menace to the
                                 public comfort, health, peace or safety and
                                 that it is to be required to be removed.
                                 Adopting the level A Community Master Plan for
R-2006-005 1-31-06 1-11-9        Mesa Del Sol and approving a development
                                 agreement between Forest City Covington NM,
                                 LLC, and the City of Albuquerque.
                                 Declaring a moratorium until March 20, 2006 on
                                 the approval of dwelling units as a
R-2006-006 2-13-06  Not_Included conditional use in any C-1 zone (neighborhood
                                 commercial zone) or any C-2 zone (community
                                 commercial zone); declaring an emergency.
                                 Approving and authorizing the Mayor to execute
                                 a grant agreement for traffic safety education
R-2006-007 2-16-06  Not_Included and enforcement program from the State of New
                                 Mexico Department of Transportation and
                                 providing for an appropriation to the City of
                                 Albuquerque, Police Department.
                                 Approving and authorizing the filing of the
                                 attached grant award for an FY05 bulletproof
R-2006-008 2-16-06  Not_Included vest partnership grant from the United States
                                 Department of Justice, Office of Justice
                                 Programs and providing for an appropriation to
                                 the cCity of Albuquerque, Police Department.
                                 aApproving a grant application to the
                                 Department of Housing and Urban Development
R-2006-009 2-16-06  Not_Included for a 2006 continuum of care grant; and
                                 providing an appropriation to the Department
                                 of Family and Community Services.
                                 Approving and authorizing the Mayor to execute
                                 a sub-grant agreement for a 2005 Paul
                                 Coverdell Forensic Science Improvement Program
R-2006-010 2-16-06  Not_Included from the State of New Mexico Department of
                                 Public Safety and providing for an
                                 appropriation to the City of Albuquerque,
                                 Police Department.
                                 approving and authorizing the acceptance of a
                                 sub-grant agreement with the state of new
R-2006-011 2-16-06  Not_Included mexico department of public safety, office of
                                 emergency management and providing for an
                                 appropriation to the chief administrative
                                 officer department.
                                 Approving and authorizing the filing of the
                                 attached grant application from the New Mexico
R-2006-012 2-16-06  Not_Included Gang and Terrorism Task Force and providing
                                 for an appropriation to the City of
                                 Albuquerque, Police Department.
                                 Naming the banquet/meeting room facility at
R-2006-013 2-16-06 4-4-5         the City of Albuquerque's Los Altos Golf
                                 Course, the Billy Moya Sr. and Eddie Moya
                                 Room.
R-2006-014 2-21-06  Not_Included Regarding the selection of the Director of the
                                 Office of Internal Audit and Investigations.
                                 Adjusting fiscal year 2006 general fund
R-2006-015 3-7-06   Not_Included reserves for additional energy costs and
                                 potential land acquisitions.
                                 Approving and authorizing the filing of the
                                 attached application for a Retired and Senior
                                 Volunteer Program grant with the Corporation
R-2006-016 3-7-06   Not_Included for National Service, including funds
                                 allocated by the New Mexico Aging and Long -
                                 Term Services Department and providing for an
                                 appropriation to the Department of Senior
                                 Affairs.
                                 Approving and authorizing the filing of the
                                 attached application for a Senior Companion
                                 Program grant with the Corporation for
R-2006-017 3-7-06   Not_Included National Service, including funds allocated by
                                 the New Mexico Aging and Long - Term Services
                                 Department and providing for an appropriation
                                 to the Department of Senior Affairs.
                                 Approving and authorizing the grant
                                 application for the Summer Food Service
R-2006-018 3-7-06   Not_Included Program for Children with the New Mexico
                                 Children, Youth and Families Department and
                                 providing an appropriation to the Department
                                 of Family and Community Services.
                                 Approving and authorizing the filing of the
                                 attached application for a Foster Grandparent
                                 Program grant with the Corporation for
R-2006-019 3-7-06   Not_Included National Service, including funds allocated by
                                 the New Mexico Aging and Long - Term Services
                                 Department and providing for an appropriation
                                 to the Department of Senior Affairs.
                                 Approving and authorizing the Mayor to execute
                                 a grant agreement for a Selective Traffic
R-2006-020 3-7-06   Not_Included Enforcement Program from the State of New
                                 Mexico Department of Transportation and
                                 providing for an appropriation to the City of
                                 Albuquerque, Police Department.
                                 To protect and promote the health, safety and
                                 general welfare of the people of the City of
R-2006-021 3-7-06   Not_Included Albuquerque by advocating for the protection
                                 of the Valle Vidal and endorsing the core
                                 values of the Coalition for the Valle Vidal.
                                 Regarding the transfer of the operation and
R-2006-022 3-7-06   Not_Included administration of the Metropolitan Detention
                                 Center from the City to the County of
                                 Bernalillo.
                                 Approving and authorizing the Mayor to execute
                                 a grant agreement for an Expanded Underage
R-2006-023 3-7-06   Not_Included Drinking Enforcement Program from the State of
                                 New Mexico Department of Transportation and
                                 providing for an appropriation to the City of
                                 Albuquerque, Police Department.
R-2006-024 3-10-06  Not_Included Reducing impact fees for public schools by
                                 100; amending Enactment No. 117-2004.
                                 Amending Bill No. R-05-263 (Enactment No. R-
                                 2005-052) that relates to continuing the
R-2006-025 3-21-06  Not_Included moratorium on new development within a
                                 specified plan area (referred to as Volcano
                                 Heights) on the northwest mesa.
 
Res. No. Date Disposition Short Title
Res. No.   Date     Disposition   Short Title
                                  Requiring installation of a traffic signal at
R-2006-026 3-21-06   Not_Included the intersection of Griegos Road and San
                                  Isidro Street.
                                  Establishing one-year objectives for the City
R-2006-027 3-21-06  4-7-2         of Albuquerque in fiscal year 2007; to meet
                                  five-year goals.
                                  Authorizing the City to enter into a grant
                                  agreement with the State of New Mexico
                                  Department of Finance and Administration to
R-2006-028 3-21-06   Not_Included supplement after school programming in the
                                  Santa Barbara-Martineztown Neighborhood and
                                  providing an appropriation to the Department
                                  of Family and Community Services.
                                  Approving a process for a hearing on the
                                  objection to resolution R-05-303 regarding
R-2006-029 03-21-06  Not_Included the American Inn by the owner; authorizing
                                  the Director of Council Aervices to select a
                                  hearing officer.
                                  Approving a memorandum of understanding
                                  between the County of Bernalillo and the City
R-2006-030 3-21-06   Not_Included of Albuquerque and providing an appropriation
                                  to the Department of Family and Community
                                  Services.
                                  Approving and authorizing the acceptance of a
                                  sub-grant agreement with the State of New
R-2006-031 3-21-06   Not_Included Mexico Department of Public Safety, Office of
                                  Emergency Management and providing for an
                                  appropriation to the Chief Administrative
                                  Officer Department.
                                  Approving and authorizing the acceptance of a
                                  sub-grant agreement with the State of New
R-2006-032 3-21-06   Not_Included Mexico Department of Public Safety, Office of
                                  Emergency Management and providing for an
                                  appropriation to the Chief Administrative
                                  Officer Department.
                                  Requiring a Sector Plan for an area
                                  delineated in Exhibit A of this resolution;
                                  declaring a moratorium on the approval of any
                                  conditional uses that would allow dwelling
R-2006-033 3-31-06   Not_Included units in commercial zones pending the
                                  creation of interim development regulations;
                                  requiring the City to promulgate interim
                                  development regulations and appropriating
                                  funds to carry out these activities.
                                  Requiring a Metropolitan Redevelopment Plan/
                                  Sector Development Plan for an interim
                                  development management area delineated in
                                  Exhibit A of this resolution; defining an
                                  interim development management area;
                                  declaring an interim development management
                                  area for residential building permits and for
R-2006-034 3-31-06   Not_Included permit, license or other authorization for
                                  operation of mobile home sales enterprise or
                                  adult business. until such plan is adopted;
                                  postponing issuance of building permits for
                                  residential development and permits, licenses
                                  or other authorizaton for mobile home sales
                                  and adult businesses ; requiring the City to
                                  promulgate interim development regulations;
                                  making an appropriation.
                                  Amending Bill No. R-05-366 (Enactment No. R-
                                  2005-165) that relates to the official list
R-2006-035 3-31-06   Not_Included of City Council meetings; revising the
                                  official list of Council meetings from April
                                  2006 through December 2006.
                                  Appropriating funds to the Capital
R-2006-036 3-31-06   Not_Included Implementation Program for approved grants by
                                  the 2006 State Legislature.
                                  Authorizing the removal of certain
R-2006-037 3-31-06   Not_Included uncollectible accounts from the City's
                                  accounts receivable records.
                                  Approving and authorizing the filing of the
                                  attached grant application for a Drug
R-2006-038 3-31-06   Not_Included Recognition Expert Program with the State of
                                  New Mexico Department of Transportation and
                                  providing for an appropriation to the City of
                                  Albuquerque, Police Department.
                                  Establishing priorities for the 2007 Capital
                                  Improvements Plan; defining the criteria to
R-2006-039 4-14-06   Not_Included be used in rating project proposals;
                                  assigning weights to the criteria; allocating
                                  amounts for different purposes within the
                                  2007 General Obligation Bond program.
                                  Appropriating enterprise funds for operating
R-2006-040 5-11-06   Not_Included the Government of the City of Albuquerque for
                                  the fiscal year beginning July 1, 2006 and
                                  ending June 30, 2007.
                                  Appropriating district benefit fees to the
R-2006-041 5-11-06   Not_Included Downtown Business Improvement District in
                                  accordance with the approved budget.
                                  Approving and authorizing the filing of the
                                  attached grant application for a Gang
                                  Resistance Education and Training
R-2006-042 5-11-06   Not_Included (G.R.E.A.T.) program from the United States
                                  Department of Justice, Bureau of Justice
                                  Assistance, and providing for an
                                  appropriation to the City of Albuquerque
                                  Police Department.
                                  Amending Enactment No. R-2002-111 (R-02-124)
                                  in order to exempt public schools from the
R-2006-043 5-11-06   Not_Included moratorium on street connections, utility
                                  connections and development along the newly
                                  constructed section of Universe Boulevard NW.
                                  Amending the adopted Capital Implementation
                                  Program of the City of Albuquerque by
R-2006-044 5-11-06   Not_Included approving new projects, supplementing current
                                  appropriations and changing the scope of
                                  existing projects.
                                  Changing the name of 98th Street between
                                  Interstate 40 and Ladera Drive to Arroyo
                                  Vista Boulevard, changing the name of the old
R-2006-045 5-15-06  6-1-1         98th Street alignment between Unser Boulevard
                                  and Tierra Pintada Street to Tierra Pintada
                                  Boulevard, changing the name of Tierra
                                  Pintada Street to Tierra Pintada Boulevard.
                                  Resolution Approving a Pre-Development
R-2006-046 6-1-06   2-10-6; 4-7-2 Process for the Rail Yards Property; Making
                                  an Appropriation.
                                  Appropriating funds (General Fund and other
                                  Funds) for operating the goverment of the
                                  City of Albuquerque for fiscal year 2007,
R-2006-047 6-1-06    Not_Included beginning July 1, 2006 and ending June 30,
                                  2007; adjusting fiscal year 2006
                                  appropriations and adjusting capital
                                  acquisition fund projects.
                                  Appropriating funds for operating the
                                  Albuquerque/Bernalillo County Government and
R-2006-048 6-1-06    Not_Included Law Enforcement Centers for fiscal year 2007,
                                  beginning July 1, 2006 and ending June 30,
                                  2007.
                                  Approving and authorizing the filing of the
                                  attached negotiation worksheet for a Click It
R-2006-049 5-31-06   Not_Included or Ticket grant with the State of New Mexico
                                  Department of Transportation and providing an
                                  appropriation to the City of Albuquerque,
                                  Police Department.
                                  Redefining the boundaries of the community
                                  based update of the Nob Hill Sector Plan;
                                  establishing interim guidelines for C-1 and
R-2006-050 5-31-06  1-7-32        C-2 Zones within portions of that plan area;
                                  extending the time period for the current
                                  interim guidelines for property zoned CCR
                                  until November 30, 2006; declaring an
                                  emergency.
 
Res. No. Date Disposition Short Title
Res. No.   Date     Disposition   Short Title
                                  Establishing a prisoner transport program
                                  strategy in the Police Department in fiscal
R-2006-051 5-31-06   Not_Included year 2006 and making an appropriation from
                                  the General Fund Central Processing Reserve
                                  for prisoner transport.
                                  Establishing a policy pursant to the pre-
                                  development facility fee agreement to require
R-2006-052 6-9-06   1-1-16        plat review by Albuquerque Public Schools
                                  prior to City approval for preliminary plats
                                  and final plats containing residential uses;
                                  Repealing Enactment No. R-2005-177 (F/S R-05-
R-2006-052 6-9-06   1-11-8        297) regarding amendments to the West Side
                                  Strategic Plan.
                                  Allowing the continuation of a passenger
R-2006-053 6-14-06  6-6-4         facility charge ("PFC") at Albuquerque
                                  International Sunport (Legislative File
                                  Number R-01-347 - Version 1).
                                  Adopting interim design regulations for the
                                  Interim Development Management Area (IDMA)
                                  that exists generally in an area bounded by
                                  Eubank Boulevard, Tramway Road, Interstate 40
R-2006-054 6-14-06   Not_Included and one block south of Central Avenue as
                                  established in F/S (2) R-06-18 (Enactment No.
                                  R-2006-034); temporarily prohibiting approval
                                  of permits and business registrations for
                                  uses that are detrimental to the welfare of
                                  the IDMA.
                                  Declaring that emergency conditions exist due
                                  to severe fire conditions and authorizing the
R-2006-055 6-14-06   Not_Included Albuquerque Fire Department to apply for
                                  financial assistance to aid in fire
                                  prevention and preparedness.
                                  Approving and authorizing the acceptance of
                                  State of New Mexico litter control and
                                  beautification grant funds, a grant under the
R-2006-056 6-14-06   Not_Included New Mexico Litter Control and Beautification
                                  Act with the New Mexico State Tourism
                                  Department; and providing for an
                                  appropriation to the City of Albuquerque
                                  Solid Waste Management Department.
R-2006-057 6-23-06  6-7-8         Dedicating and renaming the Albuquerque Civic
                                  Plaza as the Harry E. Kinney Civic Plaza.
                                  Transferring Funds From The General Fund
R-2006-058 06-23-06  Not_Included (110) To The Capital Acquisition Fund (305);
                                  Appropriating Those Funds To The City Council
                                  Cip Project.
                                  Approving And Authorizing The Filing Of The
                                  Attached Grant Application For An Enforcing
                                  Underage Drinking Laws Program From The State
R-2006-059 07-05-06  Not_Included Of New Mexico Children, Youth And Families
                                  Department And Providing For An Appropriation
                                  To The City Of Albuquerque, Police
                                  Department.
                                  Approving And Authorizing The Filing Of The
                                  Attached Grant Application With The United
                                  States Department Of Justice, Bureau Of
R-2006-060 07-05-06  Not_Included Justice Assistance For A Fiscal Year 2006
                                  Edward Byrne Memorial Justice Assistance
                                  Grant (Jag) And Providing An Appropriation To
                                  The City Of Albuquerque, Police Department.
                                  Approving And Authorizing The Filing Of The
                                  Attached Grant Agreement For A Traffic
                                  Records Development And Improvement Program
R-2006-061 07-05-06  Not_Included With The State Of New Mexico Department Of
                                  Transportation And Providing For An
                                  Appropriation To The City Of Albuquerque,
                                  Police Department.
                                  Approving An Inter-Governmental Agreement
                                  Among The City Of Albuquerque, County Of
R-2006-062 07-05-06  Not_Included Bernalillo, And Albuquerque Public Schools,
                                  To Foster Community Schools; Making An
                                  Appropriation.
                                  Condemnation At 2716 Georgia St Ne Within The
                                  City Limits Of Albuquerque, New Mexico Is So
R-2006-063 07-05-06  Not_Included Ruined, Damaged And Dilapidated As To Be A
                                  Menace To The Public Comfort, Health, Peace
                                  Or Safety And That It Is To Be Required To Be
                                  Removed.
                                  Approving And Authorizing The Acceptance Of
                                  Funds For The Albuquerque Highway Clean Up
                                  Program Through A Cooperative Agreement With
R-2006-064 07-05-06  Not_Included The New Mexico State Highway And
                                  Transportation Department And Providing For
                                  An Appropriation To The Solid Waste
                                  Management Department.
                                  Approving And Authorizing The Filing Of The
                                  Attached Award For A Connect-To-Care Grant
R-2006-065 07-05-06  Not_Included With The United Way Of Central New Mexico And
                                  Providing For An Appropriation To The City Of
                                  Albuquerque Police Department.
                                  Approving And Authorizing The Acceptance Of
                                  Funds For The Albuquerque Highway Street
                                  Sweeping Program Through A Cooperative
R-2006-066 07-05-06  Not_Included Agreement With The New Mexico State Highway
                                  And Transportation Department And Providing
                                  For An Appropriation To The Solid Waste
                                  Management Department.
                                  Condemnation At 608 Aztec Rd Nw Within The
                                  City Limits Of Albuquerque, New Mexico Is So
R-2006-067 07-05-06  Not_Included Ruined, Damaged And Dilapidated As To Be A
                                  Menace To The Public Comfort, Health, Peace
                                  Or Safety And That It Is To Be Required To Be
                                  Removed.
                                  Adopting Interim Design Regulations Pursuant
                                  To Enactment No. R-2006-33 (R-06-53) For The
                                  Interim Development Management Area For The
                                  Area Around Gibson Boulevard Se And The South
R-2006-068 07-05-06  Not_Included Campus Of The University Of New Mexico;
                                  Prohibiting Certain Development Approvals For
                                  Properties Zoned C-1, C-2, C-3, O-1, R-C Or
                                  Su-1, Unless Interim Design Regulations Are
                                  Met.
                                  Approving And Authorizing The Acceptance Of
                                  An Emergency Management Performance Grant
R-2006-069 07-05-06  Not_Included With The New Mexico Department Of Public
                                  Safety And Providing For An Appropriation To
                                  The Chief Administrative Officer Department.
                                  Transfer Of Vacant Land Currently Owned By
                                  The City Of Albuquerque To Limary Investment
                                  L.L.C.. The Albuquerque Development
                                  Commission (Adc #05-04) Recommends To City
                                  Council Approval And Development Of The
R-2006-070 07-05-06  Not_Included International Village Gateway Redevelopment
                                  Project. The Subject Site Is .9 Acres Or
                                  41,119 Square Feet Located At The Southeast
                                  Corner Of Central Avenue And Alcazar S.E.,
                                  Block 11, Lots 1-8 And Lot A Of The La Mesa
                                  Addition Zoned Su2/Mixed Use. (Zone map page
                                  K-19)
                                  Approving And Authorizing The Filing Of The
                                  Attached Grant Application For An Air
R-2006-071 07-05-06  Not_Included Pollution Control Grant With The
                                  Environmental Protection Agency And Providing
                                  An Appropriation To The Environmental Health
                                  Department.
                                  Amending Bill No. R-05-263 (Enactment No. R-
                                  2005-052) As Amended By Bill No. R-06-44
                                  (Enactment No. R-2006-025) That Relates To
R-2006-072 08-08-06  Not_Included Continuing The Moratorium On New Development
                                  Within A Specified Plan Area (Referred To As
                                  Volcano Heights) On The Northwest Mesa;
                                  Declaring An Emergency
                                  Approving And Authorizing The Acceptance Of
                                  Grant Funds From The New Mexico State Library
R-2006-073 08-22-06  Not_Included For The Basic State Grants In Aid And
                                  Providing For An Appropriation To The
                                  Cultural Services Department In Fiscal Year
                                  2006.
                                  Approving A Change In The Alvarado
R-2006-074 08-22-06 3-8-7         Transportation Center Project Master
                                  Developer Team Pursuant To Enactment No. 47-
                                  1999 (F/S R-190).
                                  Approving And Authorizing The Filing Of A
                                  Grant Application For A Rideshare/
                                  Transportation Demand Management Program With
R-2006-075 08-22-06  Not_Included The Federal Highway Administration Through
                                  The State Department Of Transportation And
                                  Providing For An Appropriation To The Transit
                                  Department.
 
Res. No. Date Disposition Short Title
Res. No.   Date     Disposition   Short Title
                                  Adopting The Sawmill/Wells Park Metropolitan
                                  Redevelopment Area (Mra) Plan; And
R-2006-076 08-22-06 1-7-14        Specifically Including The Entire Sawmill/
                                  Wells Park For Purposes Of Tax Increment
                                  Financing.
                                  Approving And Authorizing The Acceptance Of
                                  Funds From The New Mexico Economic
R-2006-077 08-22-06  Not_Included Development Department For An International
                                  Digital Filmmaking Festival And Making An
                                  Appropriation To The Economic Development
                                  Department In Fiscal Year 2007.
                                  Requiring A Multi-Purpose Corridor Study For
                                  The Section Of The City South Of Central
R-2006-078 08-29-06  Not_Included Avenue And East Of Eubank Boulevard,
                                  Establishing A Moratorium On Subdivision
                                  Approvals In The Tijeras Arroyo Area To
                                  Conduct Open Space And Cultural Site Studies.
                                  Appropriating Funds From The General Fund
R-2006-079 09-27-06  Not_Included Reserve For Design And Construction Of Metro
                                  Park In Downtown Albuquerque In Fiscal Year
                                  2007.
                                  Authorizing The Mayor To Execute A Contract
                                  Agreement With The New Mexico Department Of
R-2006-080 08-29-06  Not_Included Children, Youth And Families And Providing An
                                  Appropriation To The Department Of Family And
                                  Community Services/Division Of Child And
                                  Family Development, Pre-Kindergarten Program.
                                  Authorizing The Mayor To Execute A Grant
                                  Agreement With The U.S. Department Of Health
R-2006-081 08-29-06  Not_Included And Human Services, And Providing An
                                  Appropriation To The Department Of Family And
                                  Community Services.
                                  Authorizing The Mayor To Execute A Contract
                                  Agreement With The New Mexico Department Of
                                  Children, Youth And Families And Providing An
R-2006-082 08-29-06  Not_Included Appropriation To The Department Of Family And
                                  Community Services/Division Of Child And
                                  Family Development, Teen Parent Residence
                                  Program (TPRP).
                                  Authorizing The Filing Of A Grant Application
                                  With The New Mexico Aging And Long-Term
                                  Services Department For Title Iii Older
R-2006-083 08-29-06  Not_Included Americans Act Funds And Hb-2 Laws Of New
                                  Mexico Funds To Provide Services To Senior
                                  Citizens, And Providing An Appropriation To
                                  The Department Of Family And Community
                                  Services.
                                  Authorizing The Mayor To Execute A Contract
                                  Agreement With The New Mexico Department Of
                                  Children, Youth And Families And Providing An
R-2006-084 08-29-06  Not_Included Appropriation To The Department Of Family And
                                  Community Services/Division Of Child And
                                  Family Development, Pre-Kindergarten
                                  Expansion Program.
                                  Establishing City Policy To Support And
                                  Enhance The Development Of Workforce Housing;
                                  Making An Appropriation To The Department Of
                                  Family And Community Services To Carry Out A
                                  Needs Assessment And Workforce Housing Plan;
                                  Requesting The Creation Of A Package Of
                                  Incentives For Development Of Workforce
                                  Housing; Providing Technical Assistance,
R-2006-085 09-01-06  Not_Included Training And Support To Expand The Capacity
                                  Of Non-Profit Housing Development
                                  Organizations To Carry Out The Production Of
                                  Workforce Housing; Requesting The Initiation
                                  Of A Demonstration Workforce Housing Project
                                  On City Land; Requesting The Albuquerque
                                  Bernalillo County Water Authority To Include
                                  The Utility Expansion Charge In The Package
                                  Of Incentives; Appropriating Funds For
                                  Community Education.
                                  Approving And Authorizing The Filing Of An
                                  Agreement Between The City Of Albuquerque
                                  Environmental Health Department, And The
R-2006-086 09-18-06  Not_Included State Of New Mexico Department Of Health, For
                                  The Acceptance Of Funds To Implement A Local
                                  Pandemic Influenza Preparedness Program And
                                  Providing For An Appropriation To The
                                  Environmental Health Department.
                                  Revising The Official List Of City Council
R-2006-087 09-18-06  Not_Included Meetings From October 2006 Through December
                                  2006.
                                  Calling On The Administration To Place The
                                  Highest Priority On Storm Drainage Renovation
                                  And Rehabilitation Projects That Directly
                                  Affect The Areas That Flooded During Recent
R-2006-088 09-18-06  Not_Included Rainstorms And To Work With The Albuquerque/
                                  Bernalillo County Water Utility Authority To
                                  Coordinate Testing, Maintenance And
                                  Responsibilities With Respect To The Storm
                                  Drainage System.
                                  Approving And Authorizing The Acceptance Of A
                                  Sub-Grant Agreement With The State Of New
R-2006-089 09-27-06  Not_Included Mexico Department Of Public Safety, Office Of
                                  Emergency Management And Providing For An
                                  Appropriation To The Chief Administrative
                                  Officer Department.
                                  Adopting The Volcano Heights Sector
                                  Development Plan As A Rank 3 Sector
                                  Development Plan; Amending The Zone Map As
R-2006-090 10-2-06   Not_Included Specified In The Volcano Heights Sector
                                  Development Plan; Approving Changes To
                                  Identified Plans; And Providing Guidance, A
                                  Work Program, And Potential Funding Sources
                                  To Carry Out These And Other Actions.
                                  Requesting The Administration To Explore
                                  Options To Acquire Part Or All Of The Del Rey
R-2006-91  10-13-06  Not_Included Mobile Home Park To Provide Low Income
                                  Housing, Which Action Shall Be Consistent
                                  With The "Stand Still" Agreement Approved By
                                  Property Owners And The City Of Albuquerque.
                                  Appropriating Funds From The General Fund
R-2006-92  10-13-06  Not_Included (110) For The Completion Of The Vista De
                                  Estrella Park.
                                  Declaring A Moratorium On The Permitting Of
                                  Any New Adult Business Use Within The
R-2006-093 10-13-06  Not_Included Boundaries Of The Downtown Core Of The 2010
                                  Sector Development Plan Of The City Of
                                  Albuquerque.
                                  Approving The Fy07 Audit Plan As Submitted By
R-2006-094 10-17-06  Not_Included The Accountability In Government Oversight
                                  Committee.
                                  Approving And Authorizing The Filing Of A
                                  Section 5307 Grant Application With The
R-2006-095 10-17-06  Not_Included Federal Transit Administration Of The U.S.
                                  Department Of Transportation And Providing
                                  For An Appropriation To The Transit
                                  Department.
                                  Approving And Authorizing The Filing Of The
                                  Attached Grant Agreement From Bernalillo
R-2006-096 10-17-06  Not_Included County For A Dwi Enforcement Program And
                                  Providing For An Appropriation To The City Of
                                  Albuquerque Police Department.
                                  Approving A Grant Request To The United
                                  States Department Of Justice For The Eastside
R-2006-097 10-17-06  Not_Included Operation Weed And Seed And Providing An
                                  Appropriation To The Department Of Family And
                                  Community Services.
                                  Approving A Grant Request To The United
                                  States Department Of Justice For The Westside
R-2006-098 10-17-06  Not_Included South Valley Weed And Seed Site And Providing
                                  An Appropriation To The Department Of Family
                                  And Community Services.
                                  Adopting A Policy To Make Railroad Crossings
                                  Within The City Limits "Quiet Zones" Within
                                  Three Years And To Collaborate And Coordinate
R-2006-099 10-17-06 3-8-14        With The New Mexico Department Of
                                  Transportation To Achieve This Goal,
                                  Requesting Legislative Funds, Establishing
                                  Implementation Priorities.
 
Res. No. Date Disposition Short Title
Res. No.   Date     Disposition   Short Title
                                  Condemnation At 433 Wisconsin Ne Within The
                                  City Limits Of Albuquerque, New Mexico Is So
R-2006-100 11-3-06   Not_Included Ruined, Damaged And Dilapidated As To Be A
                                  Menace To The Public Comfort, Health, Peace
                                  Or Safety And That It Is To Be Required To Be
                                  Removed.
R-2006-101 11-3-06  3-2-4         Determining Reasonable Notice Of Public
                                  Meetings Of The City Council.
                                  Setting The Official List Of City Council
R-2006-102 11-3-06   Not_Included Meetings From November 2006 Through December
                                  2007.
                                  Approving And Authorizing The Filing Of The
                                  Attached Negotiation Worksheet For Acceptance
                                  Of A Fiscal Year 2007 Operation Buckle Down
R-2006-103 11-20-06  Not_Included Grant From The State Of New Mexico Department
                                  Of Transportation, Traffic Safety Bureau And
                                  Providing For An Appropriation To The City Of
                                  Albuquerque, Police Department.
                                  Approving And Authorizing The Filing Of A
                                  Section 5309 Grant Application With The
R-2006-104 11-20-06  Not_Included Federal Transit Administration Of The U.S.
                                  Department Of Transportation And Providing
                                  For An Appropriation To The Transit
                                  Department.
                                  Approving And Authorizing The Filing Of The
                                  Attached Grant Application For An Expanded
                                  Underage Drinking Enforcement Program From
R-2006-105 11-20-06  Not_Included The State Of New Mexico Department Of
                                  Transportation, Traffic Safety Bureau And
                                  Providing For An Appropriation To The City Of
                                  Albuquerque, Police Department.
                                  Approving And Authorizing The Filing Of The
                                  Attached Application For A Drug Recognition
                                  Expert Grant Program With The State Of New
R-2006-106 11-20-06  Not_Included Mexico Department Of Transportation, Traffic
                                  Safety Bureau And Providing For An
                                  Appropriation To The City Of Albuquerque,
                                  Police Department.
                                  Approving And Authorizing The Filing Of The
                                  Attached Application For A 2006 Cops
                                  Technology Grant Program From The United
R-2006-107 11-20-06  Not_Included States Department Of Justice, Office Of
                                  Community Oriented Policing Services And
                                  Providing For An Appropriation To The City Of
                                  Albuquerque, Police Department.
                                  Approving And Authorizing The Filing Of The
                                  Attached Negotiation Worksheet For Acceptance
                                  Of A Fiscal Year 2007 Operation Dwi Grant
R-2006-108 11-20-06  Not_Included From The State Of New Mexico Department Of
                                  Transportation, Traffic Safety Bureau And
                                  Providing For An Appropriation To The City Of
                                  Albuquerque, Police Department.
                                  Approving And Authorizing The Filing Of The
                                  Attached Grant Application For An Fy2006
R-2006-109 11-20-06  Not_Included Forensic Casework Dna Backlog Reduction
                                  Program From The United States Department Of
                                  Justice And Providing For An Appropriation To
                                  The City Of Albuquerque, Police Department.
                                  Approving And Authorizing The Filing Of The
                                  Attached Grant Award Letter For A Drug
R-2006-110 11-20-06  Not_Included Control And System Improvement Grant Program
                                  With The New Mexico Department Of Public
                                  Safety And Providing For An Appropriation To
                                  The City Of Albuquerque Police Department.
                                  Amending The Adopted Capital Implementation
R-2006-111 11-20-06  Not_Included Program Of The City Of Albuquerque Aviation
                                  Department By Supplementing Current
                                  Appropriations.
                                  Condemnation At 2050 Wisconsin St Ne Within
                                  The City Limits Of Albuquerque, New Mexico Is
R-2006-112 11-20-06  Not_Included So Ruined, Damaged And Dilapidated As To Be A
                                  Menace To The Public Comfort, Health, Peace
                                  Or Safety And That It Is To Be Required To Be
                                  Removed.
                                  Approving A Grant Application With The New
                                  Mexico Department Of Children, Youth And
                                  Families And Providing An Appropriation To
R-2006-113 11-20-06  Not_Included The Department Of Family And Community
                                  Services/Division Of Child And Family
                                  Development, Temporary Assistance For Needy
                                  Families Program (Tanf).
                                  Approving And Authorizing The Filing Of A
                                  Section 5307 Grant Amendment With The Federal
R-2006-114 11-20-06  Not_Included Transit Administration Of The U.S. Department
                                  Of Transportation And Providing For An
                                  Appropriation To The Transit Department.
                                  Authorizing The Filing Of A Grant Application
                                  For A Food Service Program For Children With
                                  The New Mexico Department Of Children, Youth
R-2006-115 11-20-06  Not_Included And Families And Providing An Appropriation
                                  To The Department Of Family And Community
                                  Services/Division Of Child And Family
                                  Development.
                                  Authorizing An Agreement With Bernalillo
                                  County And Providing An Appropriation To The
R-2006-116 11-20-06  Not_Included Department Of Family And Community Services
                                  For The High School Dropout Prevention
                                  Program.
                                  Expanding The Scope Of The Parks And
                                  Recreation Open Space Land Acquisition
                                  Project To Include The Acquistion Of
                                  Approximately Sixty-Seven Acres Adjacent To
                                  The Tres Pistoles (Three Gun Springs) Open
                                  Space In The East Mountains, A Property
R-2006-117 11-20-06  Not_Included Commonly Known As The Hawkwatch Property, For
                                  Use As Open Space And Additionally Directing
                                  The Open Space Division To Pursue A Land Swap
                                  With The Canon De Carnuel Land Grant Board Of
                                  Trustees For Approximately One Third Of An
                                  Acre Of Land Adjacent To The Hawkwatch
                                  Property.
                                  Adopting Policy Declaring A Moratorium Of Up
                                  To Six Months On The Issuance Of Any Building
R-2006-118 11-20-06  Not_Included Permits For Dwelling Units Within The Silver
                                  Hills Portion Of The University Neighborhoods
                                  Sector Development Plan As More Specifically
                                  Defined Herein; Declaring An Emergency.
                                  Declaring The Intent Of The City Council Of
                                  The City Of Albuquerque To Consider For
                                  Adoption A Resolution Approving The Formation
                                  Of Mesa Del Sol Tax Increment Development
                                  Districts 1 Through 5; Approving, Subject To
                                  Further Proceedings Of The City Council In
                                  Considering Whether The Districts Should Be
                                  Formed, A Tax Increment Development Plan For
                                  Districts 1 Through 5 Which Includes A
                                  Description Of The Areas To Be Included
                                  Therein, The Purposes Of The Districts,
R-2006-119 11-20-06  Not_Included Identification Of Gross Receipts Tax
                                  Increment And Property Tax Increment
                                  Financing Mechanisms, And Bonds Secured By
                                  Gross Receipts Tax Increment Revenue And
                                  Property Tax Increment Revenue; Authorizing
                                  And Directing The Posting, Mailing And
                                  Publication, In A Newspaper Of General
                                  Circulation Within The County, Of A Notice Of
                                  Public Meeting And Hearing To Be Held On
                                  December 18, 2006 To Consider For Adoption
                                  The Resolution Approving The Formation Of The
                                  Districts.
                                  Approving The Development Agreement For The
R-2006-120 12-4-06   Not_Included Deanza Motor Lodge Metropolitan Redevelopment
                                  Project.
                                  Making An Appropriation To The Department Of
                                  Family And Community Services In Fiscal Year
R-2006-121 12-18-06  Not_Included 2007 From The Proceeds Resulting From The
                                  Sale Of Tracts B-9e-1 And B-9f For The
                                  Trumbull Village Redevelopment Project And
                                  Expansion Of Affordable Housing Initiatives.
                                  Establishing A Vision Statement, Revising The
R-2006-122 12-18-06 4-7-1         Five-Year Goals For The City Of Albuquerque,
                                  And Adopting Desired Community Conditions For
                                  Each Goal.
                                  Establishing A Legislative Policy For The
R-2006-123 12-18-06  Not_Included City Of Albuquerque For The 2007 Legislative
                                  Session Of The New Mexico Legislature.
                                  Extending The Expiration Date Of The Interim
                                  Guidelines, As Adopted In R-06-80, For
R-2006-124 12-18-06  Not_Included Property Within The Boundaries Of The
                                  Community Based Update Of The Nob Hill Sector
                                  Plan; Declaring An Emergency.
                                  Declaring The Buildings Or Structures Located
                                  At 2113 Eubank Ne Within The City Limits Of
                                  Albuquerque, New Mexico To Be So Ruined,
R-2006-125 12-13-06  Not_Included Damaged And Dilapidated That They Are A
                                  Menace To The Public Comfort, Health, Peace
                                  Or Safety And Are Required To Be Removed;
                                  Making An Appropriation For Demolition Funds.
                                  Approving The Petition Of Mesa Del Sol Llc
                                  For Formation Of The Mesa Del Sol Tax
                                  Increment Development Districts 1 Through 5
                                  Pursuant To The Tax Increment For Development
                                  Act, Sections 5-15-1 Through 5-15-28, Nmsa
                                  1978 And City Council Ordinance Enactment No.
                                  O-2006-036, Council Bill No. F/S O-06-44;
                                  Making Findings In Connection With The
                                  Petition And Supporting Documentation
                                  Requesting Approval Of The Formation Of The
                                  Districts; Determining The Real Property To
R-2006-126 12-19-06 1-14-1        Be Included Within The Districts And The
                                  Purposes For Which The Districts Are Being
                                  Formed; Approving The Application, Petition,
                                  And Financial Feasibility Study; Providing
                                  For Governance Of The Districts Through The
                                  Appointment Of Members Of The Governing
                                  Bodies Of The Districts; Providing That Tax
                                  Increment Bonds Of The Districts And Other
                                  Obligations Of The Districts Shall Not Be
                                  Obligations Of The City Of Albuquerque;
                                  Ratifying Certain Actions Heretofore Taken;
                                  Repealing All Actions Inconsistent With This
                                  Resolution.
                                  Providing For An Amendment To A Lease
                                  Agreement And A Mortgage And Indenture Of
R-2006-127 1-2-07    Not_Included Trust Entered Into In Connection With The
                                  $4,720,000 City Of Albuquerque, New Mexico
                                  Taxable Industrial Development Revenue Bonds
                                  (America Online, Inc. Project), Series 1996a.
                                  Approving An Amendment To The Master
                                  Development Agreement For The Alvarado
                                  Transportation Center Which Describes The
R-2006-128 1-2-07    Not_Included Second Street Sites That Will Serve As The
                                  Locations For One Or More Development
                                  Projects, Sets Times Of Performance, And Lays
                                  Out Public Improvements And Funding That The
                                  City Agrees To Provide.
                                  Adopting The 2007 Action Plan And Program
                                  Investment Summary For The Expenditure Of
                                  Community Development Block (Cdbg) Grant,
R-2006-129 1-3-07    Not_Included Home Investment Partnership (Home) And
                                  Emergency Shelter Block Grant Funds And
                                  Providing An Appropriation To The Department
                                  Of Family And Community Services.
                                  Amending The Adopted Capital Implementation
                                  Program Of The City Of Albuquerque By
R-2006-130 1-3-07    Not_Included Approving New Projects, Supplementing Current
                                  Appropriations And Changing The Scope Of
                                  Existing Projects.
 
 
 
Notes
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
2007 Resolutions
Res. No. Date Disposition Short Title
Res.  Date Disposition Short Title
No.
                       Relating To The Mesa Del Sol Tax Increment Development Districts 1
                       Through 5 Formed Pursuant To The Tax Increment For Development Act,
                       Sections 5-15-1 Through 5-15-28, Nmsa 1978, City Council Ordinance
                       Enactment No. O-2006-036, And City Council Resolution Enactment R-2006-
R-    1-               126; Dedicating 67 Of The Gross Receipts Tax Increment Revenue And 67 Of
2007- 29-  1-14-1      The Property Tax Increment Revenue For The Financing Of Public
001   07               Infrastructure For The Districts; Authorizing The Issuance Of Tax
                       Increment Revenue Bonds Upon Satisfaction Of No Net Expense Requirements;
                       Ratifying Certain Actions Heretofore Taken; Amending Enactment No. R-
                       2006-126; Repealing All Actions Inconsistent With This Resolution; Making
                       An Appropriation.
R-                     Approving The Grant Application With The New Mexico Governor's Commission
2007- 2-5-  Not        On Disability And Providing An Appropriation To The Department Of Family
002   07   Included    And Community Services To Create, Develop And Produce A Universal Design
                       In Housing Narrated Powerpoint Product For Community Education Purposes.
R-    2-5-  Not        Further Defining The Planning Department’s Downtown Redevelopment ’05
2007- 07   Included    Project To Include The Renovation Of Two Alleys In The Downtown District.
003
R-                     Approving And Authorizing The Filing Of The Attached Grant Application
2007- 2-5-  Not        For A Traffic Safety Education And Enforcement Program From The State Of
004   07   Included    New Mexico Department Of Transportation And Providing For An
                       Appropriation To The City Of Albuquerque, Police Department.
R-                     Approving And Authorizing The Filing Of The Attached Grant Award For An
2007- 2-5-  Not        FY06 Bulletproof Vest Partnership Grant From The United States Department
005   07   Included    Of Justice, Office Of Justice Programs And Providing For An Appropriation
                       To The City Of Albuquerque, Police Department.
R-    2-5-             Supporting Statewide Legislation Protecting Children, Workers, And People
2007- 07   3-10-3      With Breathing Problems By Eliminating Smoking In Workplaces, Including
006                    Restaurants, Bars, Offices And Other Indoor Public Places.
R-    2-5-  Not        Further Defining The Department Of Family And Community Services '05 Go
2007- 07   Included    Bond Community Revitalization Set-Aside Project To Include The Alvarado
007                    Mixed-Income Workforce Housing Project Parking Structure.
R-    2-5-  Not        Establishing A Debt Service Fund For The Transit Department And Making An
2007- 07   Included    Appropriation To Pay The Debt Service For Fiscal Year 2007.
008
R-    2-5-  Not        Declaring A Natural Disaster; Authorizing The Mayor To Request Aid,
2007- 07   Included    Assistance, Relief Programs, And Funding That May Be Available.
009
R-    2-               Adopting A Proposition To Be Submitted To The Voters On The Regular
2007- 27-   Not        Municipal Election Ballot Of October 2, 2007, Amending Article XIII Of
010   07   Included    The Charter Of The City Of Albuquerque, Concerning Campaign
                       Contributions.
R-    2-               Defining An Affordable Housing Policy; And Defining The Roles And
2007- 27-  3-4-3       Responsibilities Of The Affordable Housing Committee; And Repealing R-52,
011   07               Enactment No. 74-2000.
R-    2-               Approving And Authorizing The Filing Of The Attached Grant Application
2007- 27-   Not        For An Ambient Air Monitoring Grant With The Environmental Protection
012   07   Included    Agency And Providing An Appropriation To The Environmental Health
                       Department.
R-    2-               Approving And Authorizing The Filing Of The Attached Grant Application
2007- 27-   Not        For An Ambient Air Monitoring Grant With The Environmental Protection
013   07   Included    Agency And Providing An Appropriation To The Environmental Health
                       Department.
R-    2-    Not        Approving And Authorizing The Acceptance Of Grant Funds From The New
2007- 27-  Included    Mexico State Library For The Basic State Grants In Aid And Providing For
014   07               An Appropriation To The Cultural Services Department In Fiscal Year 2007.
R-    2-    Not        Establishing A Special Revenue Fund For The Environmental Health
2007- 27-  Included    Department And Making An Appropriation To Pay For Services As Designated
015   07               By The Humane And Ethical Animals Rules And Treatment ( Heart) Ordinance.
R-    2-               Condemnation Of That Portion Of The Premises At 13708 Poinsettia Court
2007- 27-   Not        S.E. Within The City Limits Of Albuquerque, New Mexico Which Constitutes
016   07   Included    A Menace To The Public Comfort, Health, Peace Or Safety And That It Is To
                       Be Required To Be Removed And The Excavation Filled.
                       Creating A Planning Study Area In The Area Highlighted On Attachment "A"
                       Hereto, Within Which There Will Be Developed Strategies To Prevent The
                       Construction Of Buildings On Commercial And High Density Residential
R-    2-               Properties When Such Buildings Are Incompatible With Surrounding
2007- 27-   Not        Neighborhoods Because Of A Combination Of Height And Setback; Imposing A
017   07   Included    Three Month Moratorium On The Issuance Of New Building Permits Within Any
                       C-1, C-2 And R-3 Zone Within The Defined Planning Study Area; Directing
                       The Creation Of Interim Development Guidelines That Provide For
                       Construction Of Buildings During The Period Of The Moratorium When Such
                       Buildings Are Compatible With Surrounding Neighborhoods.
R-    2-               Approving And Authorizing Of A Sub-Grant Agreement With The State Of New
2007- 27-   Not        Mexico Department Of Public Safety, Office Of Emergency Management And
018   07   Included    Providing For An Appropriation To The Chief Administrative Officer
                       Department.
R-                     Granting Authority To Enter An Agreement With The New Mexico Department
2007- 3-7-  Not        Of Public Safety For An Emergency Management Performance Grant For FY
019   07   Included    2007 And Providing For An Appropriation To The Chief Administrative
                       Officer Department.
R-    3-7-  Not        Adjusting Fiscal Year 2006 Appropriations For Certain Funds In Program
2007- 07   Included    Strategies To Provide For Actual Expenditures And Adjusting Fiscal Year
020                    2007 Appropriations.
R-                     Approving And Authorizing The Grant Application For The Summer Food
2007- 3-7-  Not        Service Program For Children With The New Mexico Children, Youth And
021   07   Included    Families Department And Providing An Appropriation To The Department Of
                       Family And Community Services.
R-    3-    Not        Providing An Appropriation To The Council Services Department In FY/07 To
2007- 16-  Included    Pay For The Development Of Design Regulations Associated With The North
022   07               Valley Area Plan.
R-    3-    Not        Approving The Programming Of Funds And Projects For The 2007-2016 Decade
2007- 28-  Included    Plan For Capital Improvements Including The 2007 Two-Year Capital Budget.
023   07
R-    3-    Not        Appropriating District Benefit Fees To The Downtown Business Improvement
2007- 28-  Included    District In Accordance With The Approved Budget.
024   07
R-    3-    Not        Approving And Authorizing The Acceptance Of The Attached Sub-Grant
2007- 28-  Included    Agreement From The New Mexico Department Of Public Safety And Providing
025   07               For An Appropriation To The City Of Albuquerque Police Department.
 
Res. No. Date Disposition Short Title
Res. No.   Date    Disposition   Short Title
                                 Approving And Authorizing The Mayor To Execute
                                 A Grant Agreement For A Selective Traffic
R-2007-026 3-28-07  Not_Included Enforcement Program From The State Of New
                                 Mexico Department Of Transportation And
                                 Providing For An Appropriation To The City Of
                                 Albuquerque, Police Department.
                                 Amending The Prohibited Uses Section Of The
R-2007-027 3-30-07 1-4-1         Downtown 2010 Sector Development Plan To
                                 Prohibit Adult Amusement Establishments And
                                 Adult Stores.
                                 Seven Bar Ranch Sector Development Plan Zone/
                                 Land Use Map Amendment (Sector Development
                                 Plan Exhibit 3, Portion Of Tract N1), 06EPC-
R-2007-028 3-30-07 1-7-28        01318 (Project #1005133), For 17 Acres More Or
                                 Less, Located At The Northwest Corner Of Coors
                                 Bypass Nw And Eagle Ranch Road, From Su-1 For
                                 Auto Park To SU-1 For C-2 Permissive Uses.
                                 Requesting The Albuquerque Metropolitan
                                 Planning Area Managed Lanes Study Include
                                 Analysis Of Managed Lanes On The Paseo Del
                                 Norte Corridor From Eubank Boulevard To The
                                 Eastern Alignment Of Paseo Del Vulcan
                                 Boulevard; Designating The Creation Of Two
R-2007-029 3-30-07 1-1-8         Additional Lanes In The Paseo Del Norte
                                 Corridor That Shall Be Managed Lanes As A
                                 Priority Transportation Project For The 2009
                                 Capital Implementation Program; Requesting
                                 Federal And State Funds For The Project;
                                 Preserving The Status Of Existing General
                                 Purpose Lanes In The Paseo Corridor.
                                 Further Defining The Department Of Family And
                                 Community Services '05 Go Bond Community
                                 Revitalization Set-Aside Project To Include
                                 The Acquisition Of The Railyard Property In
R-2007-030 3-30-07  Not_Included The Barelas Neighborhood; Unreserving Funds
                                 Set Aside In The General Fund For FY/06
                                 Expenses And Appropriating Them To The
                                 Acquisition Of The Railyard Property Project
                                 In Family And Community Services.
                                 Expressing The City Council's Intent To
R-2007-031 4-2-07  3-11-12       Appropriate $9.254 Million In The Fiscal Year
                                 2008 Operating Budget To Assist With Operating
                                 Costs Of The Metropolitan Detention Center.
                                 Adopting A Proposition To Be Submitted To The
                                 Voters On The Regular Municipal Election
R-2007-032 3-22-07  Not_Included Ballot Of October 2, 2007, Amending Article V,
                                 Section 4 Of The Charter Of The City Of
                                 Albuquerque, Concerning The Duties Of The
                                 Mayor.
                                 Amending The Resolution Adopted By Bill No. F/
                                 S R-06-66 (Enactment No. R-2006-078) That
R-2007-033 3-12-07  Not_Included Relates To A Multipurpose Corridor Study And
                                 Establishing A Moratorium On Subdivision
                                 Approvals In The Tijeras Arroyo; Extending The
                                 Moratorium.
                                 Authorizing The Review Of Speed Humps
R-2007-034 3-12-07  Not_Included Installed In The Four Hills Area; Making An
                                 Appropriation.
                                 Establishing The Open And Ethical Elections
R-2007-035 4-13-07  Not_Included Fund (232) And Making An Appropriation To The
                                 Legal Department From The General Fund Reserve
                                 For The Open And Ethical Elections Code.
                                 Approving A Grant Application To The
                                 Department Of Housing And Urban Development
R-2007-036 4-13-07  Not_Included For A 2007 Continuum Of Care Grant; And
                                 Providing An Appropriation To The Department
                                 Of Family And Community Services.
                                 Approving And Authorizing Of A Sub-Grant
                                 Agreement With The State Of New Mexico
R-2007-037 4-13-07  Not_Included Department Of Public Safety, Office Of
                                 Emergency Management And Providing For An
                                 Appropriation To The Chief Administrative
                                 Officer Department.
                                 Approving And Authorizing The Acceptance Of
                                 Grant Funds From The New Mexico Gang And
R-2007-038 4-13-07  Not_Included Terrorism Task Force And Providing For An
                                 Appropriation To The City Of Albuquerque
                                 Police Department.
                                 Approving And Authorizing The Filing Of An
                                 Agreement Between The City Of Albuquerque
                                 Environmental Health Department, And The State
                                 Of New Mexico Department Of Health, For The
                                 Acceptance Of Funds For A Cities Readiness
R-2007-039 4-13-07  Not_Included Initiative (Cri) To Increase The City Of
                                 Albuquerque's Capacity To Deliver Medicines
                                 And Medical Supplies During A Large-Scale
                                 Public Health Emergency And Providing For An
                                 Appropriation To The Environmental Health
                                 Department.
                                 Approving And Authorizing The Acceptance Of
                                 State Of New Mexico Litter Control And
                                 Beautification Grant Funds, A Grant Under The
R-2007-040 4-13-07  Not_Included New Mexico Litter Control And Beautification
                                 Act With The New Mexico State Tourism
                                 Department; And Providing For An Appropriation
                                 To The City Of Albuquerque Solid Waste
                                 Management Department.
                                 Approving And Authorizing The Acceptance Of A
                                 Grant Agreement From The New Mexico Children,
R-2007-041 4-13-07  Not_Included Youth And Families Department For A Juvenile
                                 Accountability Block Grant Program And
                                 Providing For An Appropriation To The City Of
                                 Albuquerque, Police Department.
                                 Creating The South Yale Sector Development
                                 Plan Project In The Capital Acquisition Fund
                                 (Fund 305); Unreserving $100,000 That Had Been
R-2007-042 4-13-07  Not_Included Reserved In The General Fund In FY/07 For The
                                 Victory Hills/Clayton Heights/Lomas Del Cielo
                                 MRA Plan And Appropriating Those Funds To The
                                 South Yale Sector Development Plan Project.
                                 Naming The Children's Library Of The West Mesa
R-2007-043 4-13-07 6-7-10        Community Center , The "John Elwell Children's
                                 Library."
                                 Creating A Balloon Fiesta Park - Land
                                 Acquisition Project In The Parks And
R-2007-044 4-13-07  Not_Included Recreation Department And Appropriating Funds
                                 To That Project For The Acquisition Of Land To
                                 Be Used For A Balloon Landing Site And
                                 Recreational Fields.
                                 Authorizing The Submittal Of A Grant
                                 Application To The New Mexico Department Of
                                 Transportation For Grip2 Funding In Support Of
R-2007-045 5-8-07   Not_Included Improvements To Unser Boulevard South Of
                                 Central Avenue; Committing The City Of
                                 Albuquerque To Provide The Required Local
                                 Matching Funds And Providing For An
                                 Appropriation.
                                 Approving And Authorizing Of A Sub-Grant
                                 Agreement With The State Of New Mexico
R-2007-046 5-30-07  Not_Included Department Of Public Safety, Office Of
                                 Emergency Management And Providing For An
                                 Appropriation To The Chief Administrative
                                 Officer Department.
                                 Approving And Authorizing The Mayor To Execute
                                 A Sub-Grant Agreement For A 2006 Paul
                                 Coverdell Forensic Science Improvement Program
R-2007-047 5-30-07  Not_Included From The State Of New Mexico Department Of
                                 Public Safety And Providing For An
                                 Appropriation To The City Of Albuquerque,
                                 Police Department.
                                 Approving And Authorizing Of A Sub-Grant
                                 Agreement With The State Of New Mexico
R-2007-048 5-30-07  Not_Included Department Of Public Safety, Office Of
                                 Emergency Management And Providing For An
                                 Appropriation To The Chief Administrative
                                 Officer Department.
                                 Approving And Authorizing The Acceptance Of
                                 Funds For Albuquerque Highway Clean Up Program
R-2007-049 5-30-07  Not_Included Through A Cooperative Agreement With The New
                                 Mexico State Highway And Transportation
                                 Department And Providing For An Appropriation
                                 To The Solid Waste Management Department.
                                 Approving And Authorizing The Acceptance Of
                                 Funds For The Albuquerque Highway Street
                                 Sweeping Program Through A Cooperative
R-2007-050 5-30-07  Not_Included Agreement With The New Mexico State Highway
                                 And Transportation Department And Providing
                                 For An Appropriation To The Solid Waste
                                 Management Department.
 
Res. No. Date Disposition Short Title
Res. No.   Date    Disposition   Short Title
                                 Approving And Authorizing The Filing Of The
                                 Attached Application For A Fiscal Year 2008
R-2007-051 5-30-07  Not_Included Bernaillo County Dwi Grant And Providing For
                                 An Appropriation To The City Of Albuquerque,
                                 Police Department.
                                 Imposing A Six Month Moratorium On The
R-2007-052 5-22-07  Not_Included Erection Of Wireless Telecommunications
                                 Facilities That Are Not Concealed Wireless
                                 Telecommunications Facilities.
                                 Designating The Improvements To The
                                 Interchange At Interstate 25 And Paseo Del
                                 Norte And The Intersection Of Paseo Del Norte
                                 And Jefferson Street A Priority Transportation
R-2007-053 5-22-07  Not_Included Project For The City Of Albuquerque's 2009
                                 Capital Implementation Program; Requesting
                                 Federal And State Funds For The Project;
                                 Establishing An Earmark In The 2007 Bond For
                                 Project Engineering.
                                 Approving And Authorizing The Mayor To Execute
                                 A Grant Agreement For A DWI Drunkbuster Grant
R-2007-054 5-22-07  Not_Included Program From The State Of New Mexico
                                 Department Of Transportation, Traffic Safety
                                 Bureau And Providing For An Appropriation To
                                 The City Of Albuquerque, Police Department.
                                 Providing For An Independent Audit Of All City
                                 Design Or Construction Contracts Relating To
                                 The Balloon Fiesta Park And Museum And All
R-2007-055 5-22-07  Not_Included City Contracts Involving Architect Marc
                                 Schiff; Calling For A Report To The Full
                                 Council; Appropriating Funds To Pay For The
                                 Audit.
                                 Appropriating Funds To The Capital
R-2007-056 5-22-07  Not_Included Implementation Program For The Shooting Range
                                 Park Improvements Grant Approved By The 2007
                                 State Legislature.
                                 Extending The Time Period For The
                                 Applicability Of Interim Guidelines Adopted In
R-2007-057 5-22-07  Not_Included R-06-80 Until October 31, 2007 Or Until The
                                 Nob Hill Highland Sector Plan Is Adopted,
                                 Whichever First Occurs; Declaring An
                                 Emergency.
                                 Approving And Authorizing The Acceptance Of A
                                 Pedestrian Safety Law Enforcement Grant From
R-2007-058 5-30-07  Not_Included The New Mexico Department Of Transportation,
                                 Traffic Safety Bureau And Providing For An
                                 Appropriation To The City Of Albuquerque,
                                 Police Department.
                                 Designating The Clayton Heights/Lomas Del
                                 Cielo Metropolitan Redevelopment Area, Making
                                 Certain Findings And Determinations Pursuant
R-2007-059 6-15-07  Not_Included To The Metropolitan Redevelopment Code, And
                                 Authorizing And Directing The Metropolitan
                                 Redevelopment Agency To Prepare A Metropolitan
                                 Plan For The Clayton Heights/Lomas Del Cielo
                                 Metropolitan Redevelopment Area.
                                 Authorizing The Giving Of Notice For Bids For
                                 The Sale Of City Of Albuquerque, New Mexico,
R-2007-060 6-18-07  Not_Included General Obligation Bonds Consisting Of
                                 $43,045,000 General Purpose Bonds, Series
                                 2007b, And $5,080,000 Storm Sewer Bonds,
                                 Series 2007c.
                                 Appropriating Funds For Operating The
                                 Government Of The City Of Albuquerque For
                                 Fiscal Year 2008, Beginning July 1, 2007 And
R-2007-061 5-31-07  Not_Included Ending June 30, 2008; Adjusting Fiscal Year
                                 2007 Appropriations; Adjusting Operating
                                 Grants And Capital Acquisition Fund Projects;
                                 And Amending Enactment No. R-2007-023 (Council
                                 Bill No. F/S R-07-175).
                                 Establishing One-Year Objectives For The City
R-2007-062 6-12-07 4-7-3         Of Albuquerque In Fiscal Year 2008; To Meet
                                 Five-Year Goals.
                                 Authorizing The Mayor To Execute The
                                 Albuquerque Business Education Compact
R-2007-063 6-18-07  Not_Included Recommendations And Providing An Appropriation
                                 To The Department Of Family And Community
                                 Services.
                                 Approving And Authorizing The Acceptance Of A
                                 Sub-Grant Agreement With The State Of New
R-2007-064 6-18-07  Not_Included Mexico Department Of Public Safety, Office Of
                                 Emergency Management And Providing For An
                                 Appropriation To The Chief Administrative
                                 Officer Department.
                                 Naming The Ceramics Room At The Barelas
                                 Community Center "The Theresa Alarid Ceramics
R-2007-065 6-18-07 6-7-11        Room"; Honoring The Memory Of Theresa Alarid
                                 And Recognizing Her Contributions To The City
                                 Of Albuquerque.
                                 Adopting A Proposition To Be Submitted To The
                                 Voters On The Regular Municipal Election
R-2007-066 6-18-07  Not_Included Ballot Of October 2, 2007, Article Iv, Section
                                 6 Of The Charter Of The City Of Albuquerque,
                                 Concerning The Compensation Of City
                                 Councilors.
                                 Adopting A Proposition To Be Submitted To The
                                 Voters On The Regular Municipal Election
                                 Ballot Of October 2, 2007, Amending Article
                                 Iii, Section 1 Of The Charter Of The City Of
R-2007-067 6-18-07  Not_Included Albuquerque, Concerning The Recall Procedures
                                 For Elected Officials; Adopting Procedures
                                 Consistent With The New Mexico Constitutional
                                 Provision For Recalling Bernalillo County
                                 Officials.
                                 Concerning A Municipal Bond Election To Be
                                 Held In The City Of Albuquerque At The Next
                                 City General Election; Submitting To A Vote Of
                                 The Qualified, Registered Electors And
                                 Nonresident Municipal Electors At Such
                                 Election Certain Questions For Authorizing The
R-2007-068 6-27-07  Not_Included Issuance Of General Obligation Bonds In
                                 Varying Principal Amounts And For Specified
                                 Public Purposes; Providing The Form Of The
                                 Bond Questions And The Designation Clause For
                                 Such Questions On The Ballot; Prescribing
                                 Other Details In Connection With Such Election
                                 And Bonds; And Ratifying Action Previously
                                 Taken In Connection Therewith.
                                 Proclaiming Hazardous Fire Conditions In The
                                 City Of Albuquerque That Endanger The Health
R-2007-069 6-27-07 3-9-5         Safety And Welfare Of The Citizens And
                                 Authorizing The Albuquerque Fire Department To
                                 Impose Restrictions On Open Fires And Smoking
                                 Within The City Of Albuquerque.
                                 Extending The Time Period Established In R-06-
                                 81 For The Prohibition On Certain Development
                                 Approvals For Properties Zoned C-1, C-2, C-3,
                                 O-1, R-C Or Su-1 In The Area Around Gibson
R-2007-070 7-2-07   Not_Included Boulevard Se And The South Campus Of The
                                 University Of New Mexico Unless Interim Design
                                 Regulations Are Met Until June 2, 2008 Or
                                 Until A New Sector Development Plan For The
                                 Area Is Adopted, Whichever First Occurs;
                                 Declaring An Emergency.
                                 For A Period Of Six Months, Or Until This
                                 Resolution Is Earlier Withdrawn, Prohibiting
                                 Any City Employee Or Any Party Acting Pursuant
R-2007-071 7-2-07   Not_Included To A Contract With The City From Removing Any
                                 Tree On City Land Or Under City Control
                                 Without The Written Authorization Of The City
                                 Forester; Declaring An Emergency.
                                 Nuisance Abatement At 3525 Cuervo Dr Ne Within
                                 The City Limits Of Albuquerque, New Mexico Is
R-2007-072 6-28-07  Not_Included So Ruined, Damaged And Dilapidated As To Be A
                                 Menace To The Public Comfort, Health, Peace Or
                                 Safety And That It Is To Be Required To Be
                                 Removed.
                                 Approving And Authorizing The Filing Of The
                                 Attached Grant Agreement From The New Mexico
R-2007-073 6-28-07  Not_Included Department Of Transportation, Traffic Safety
                                 Bureau And Providing For An Appropriation To
                                 The City Of Albuquerque Police Department.
                                 Concerning The Regular Municipal Election To
R-2007-074 6-28-07  Not_Included Be Held In The City Of Albuquerque, New Mexico
                                 On Tuesday, The Second Of October 2007.
R-2007-075 6-28-07 6-7-12        Naming The Sixteenth Hole At The Ladera Golf
                                 Course The "Frank Maestas Sixteenth Hole."
 
Res. No. Date Disposition Short Title
Res. No.   Date    Disposition   Short Title
                                 Adjusting Funding For The Council Services
R-2007-076 6-28-07  Not_Included Program Strategy For The 2007 And 2008 Fiscal
                                 Year General Fund Budgets.
                                 Amending The Adopted Capital Implementation
                                 Program Of The City Of Albuquerque By
R-2007-077 6-28-07  Not_Included Approving New Projects, Supplementing Current
                                 Appropriations And Changing The Scope Of
                                 Existing Projects.
                                 Directing The Administration To Reduce The
                                 Cost Of Low Income Housing By Eliminating The
R-2007-078 7-9-07   Not_Included Requirement For A Bond Under Circumstances
                                 Where The City's Interests Are Adequately
                                 Protected.
R-2007-079 7-9-07   Not_Included Supporting The Current Efforts To Redevelop
                                 The Del Rey Mobile Home Park.
                                 Naming The Sector Planning Area Established In
                                 F/S (2) R-06-18 And The Boundaries Of The
                                 Interim Development Management Area
                                 Established In F/S (2) R-06-67 The "East
R-2007-080 7-6-07  1-7-44        Gateway Sector Planning And Interim
                                 Development Management Area"; Readjusting The
                                 Boundary Of The Sector Planning Area As Shown
                                 In The Attachment; Updating The Interim Design
                                 Regulations For The Interim Development
                                 Management Area.
                                 Approving The Petition And Application Of Kb
                                 Home New Mexico Inc., Salls Brothers
                                 Construction, Inc., And Each And Every Other
                                 Owner Of All The Land Within The District, For
                                 Formation Of The Montecito Estates Public
                                 Improvement District Pursuant To The Public
                                 Improvement District Act, Sections 5-11-
                                 1 Through 5-11-27, Nmsa 1978 And City Council
                                 Bill No. Fs 0-03-84 Ordinance Enactment No. 0-
                                 2003-12; Making Findings In Connection With
                                 The Petition And Application And Supporting
                                 Documentation Requesting Approval Of The
                                 Formation Of The District; Determining The
R-2007-081 7-9-07   Not_Included Real Property To Be Included Within The
                                 District And The Purposes For Which The
                                 District Is Being Formed; Approving The
                                 General Plan, Rate, Method Of Apportionment
                                 And Manner Of Collection Of A Special Levy To
                                 Be Imposed Upon Real Property Within The
                                 District, And A Development Agreement For
                                 Implementation Of The District; Providing For
                                 Governance Of The District; Providing That
                                 Bonds And Other Obligations Of The District
                                 Shall Not Be Obligations Of The City Of
                                 Albuquerque; Ratifying Certain Actions
                                 Heretofore Taken; And Repealing All Actions
                                 Inconsistent With This Formation Resolution.
                                 Approving A Form Of Master Development
                                 Agreement For Implementation Of The Mesa Del
R-2007-082 8-17-07 1-14-1        Sol Tax Increment Development Districts 1
                                 Through 5; Repealing All Actions Inconsistent
                                 With This Resolution.
                                 Declaring The Extension Of The Paseo Del
                                 Volcan Eastern Alignment From Paseo Del Norte
                                 To Southern Boulevard In Rio Rancho As A
R-2007-083 8-17-07  Not_Included Priority In The Capital Implementation
                                 Program, The City Of Albuquerque's List Of
                                 Transportation Improvement Programs And As A
                                 Request To The 2008 State Legislature;
                                 Establishing A Technical Committee.
                                 Adopting The Fy '08 - Fy '09 Two-Year Urban
R-2007-084 8-17-07  Not_Included Enhancement Program And Appropriating Funds
                                 For The Urban Enhancement Program's Projects.
                                 Directing Family And Community Services And
                                 The Sexual Assault Prevention Community To
R-2007-085 8-17-07 2-1-20        Develop A Child Care Staff Training Plan And
                                 Report Back To The City Council; Creating A
                                 Sexual Violence Advisory Council.
                                 Approving And Authorizing The Filing Of The
                                 Attached Grant Application For Funds Under The
R-2007-086 8-17-07  Not_Included Emergency Medical Services Fund Act With The
                                 State Of New Mexico Department Of Health And
                                 Providing For An Appropriation To The Fire
                                 Department.
                                 Approving And Authorizing A Professional
                                 Service Contract With The New Mexico
R-2007-087 8-17-07  Not_Included Department Of Health For The West Nile Virus
                                 Surveillance And Data Management Program And
                                 Making An Appropriation To The Environmental
                                 Health Department.
                                 Establishing The East Gateway Interim Design
                                 Regulations Area For The East Gateway Sector
                                 Planning Area; Setting A Moratorium For
                                 Specified Uses In The C-2 And C-3 Zones;
R-2007-088 8-17-07  Not_Included Setting A Time Period For The Applicability Of
                                 Interim Design Regulations And Moratorium
                                 Until October 31, 2008 Or Until The East
                                 Central Sector Plan Is Adopted, Whichever
                                 First Occurs; Declaring An Emergency.
                                 Amending The Interim Design Regulations
R-2007-089 8-17-07  Not_Included Established In R-06-81 For The Area Around
                                 Gibson Boulevard Se And The South Campus Of
                                 The University Of New Mexico.
                                 Imposing A Short Moratorium On The Issuance Of
                                 New Building Permits On Property Fronting
                                 Menaul Boulevard Between Carlisle Boulevard
                                 And Morris Avenue Unless The Proposed
                                 Development Meets The Height And Setback
R-2007-090 8-24-07  Not_Included Requirements Set Forth In This Resolution And
                                 This Moratorium Shall Be In Effect Until
                                 February 29, 2008 Or Until The Menaul
                                 Boulevard View Preservation Study Is Presented
                                 To And Acted On By The City Council, Whichever
                                 First Occurs.
R-2007-091 8-28-07 2-1-21        Adopting The Bernalillo County And The City Of
                                 Albuquerque Hazard Mitigation Plan.
                                 Concerning The Amended Designation Of Polling
R-2007-092 8-28-07  Not_Included Places For The Regular Municipal Election To
                                 Be Held In The City Of Albuquerque, New Mexico
                                 On Tuesday, The Second Day Of October 2007.
                                 Approving And Authorizing The Acceptance Of
                                 The Attached Grant Award For Funds Under The
R-2007-093 8-28-07  Not_Included Emergency Medical Services Fund Act With The
                                 State Of New Mexico Department Of Health And
                                 Providing For An Appropriation To The Fire
                                 Department.
                                 Approving And Authorizing U.S. Marshall
                                 Service Funds To Provide For Overtime Hours
R-2007-094 8-28-07  Not_Included For The Purpose Of Locating And Arresting
                                 Fugitives And Providing For An Appropriation
                                 To The City Of Albuquerque, Police Department.
                                 Appointing Precinct Board Members For Each
R-2007-095 8-28-07  Not_Included Consolidated Precinct For The Tuesday, October
                                 2, 2007 Municipal Election For The City Of
                                 Albuquerque.
                                 Repeal Of The Nob Hill Sector Development Plan
                                 And Adoption Of The Nob Hill Highland Sector
                                 Development Plan (Nhhsdp) And Change Of Zoning
                                 For Certain Properties Within The Nhhsdp
R-2007-096 9-7-07  1-7-32        Boundary Area As Specified In Exhibit 3. The
                                 Area Is Bounded By Girard Boulevard To The
                                 West, Lomas Boulevard To The North, San Mateo
                                 To The East And Zuni Boulevard/Garfield Street
                                 To The South And Containing Approximately 770
                                 Acres.
                                 Amending The Adopted Capital Implementation
                                 Program Of The City Of Albuquerque By
R-2007-97  9-7-07   Not_Included Approving New Projects, Supplementing Current
                                 Appropriations And Changing The Scope Of
                                 Existing Projects.
                                 Listing The Projects To Be Included In The
                                 2030 Metropolitan Transportation Plan And The
                                 2008-2013 Transportation Improvement Program
R-2007-98  9-12-07 4-2-11        Of The Albuquerque Metropolitan Planning Area;
                                 Identifying The Policies Governing
                                 Transportation Projects; Establishing A Policy
                                 For Using A Portion Of The Funds For
                                 Transportation Projects In Activity Center.
                                 Nuisance Abatement At 8821 Central Nw Within
                                 The City Limits Of Albuquerque, New Mexico Is
R-2007-099 9-19-07  Not_Included So Ruined, Damaged And Dilapidated As To Be A
                                 Menace To The Public Comfort, Health, Peace Or
                                 Safety And That It Is To Be Required To Be
                                 Removed.
 
Res. No. Date Disposition Short Title
Res. No.   Date     Disposition   Short Title
                                  Approving And Authorizing The Acceptance Of
                                  Grant Funds From The Corporation For National
                                  Service And New Mexico Aging And Long Term
R-2007-100 9-19-07   Not_Included Services Department Providing For An
                                  Appropriation To The Department Of Senior
                                  Affairs Foster Grandparent Program In Fiscal
                                  Year 2007.
                                  Authorizing The Mayor To Execute A Grant
                                  Agreement With The U.S. Department Of Health
R-2007-101 9-19-07   Not_Included And Human Services, And Providing An
                                  Appropriation To The Department Of Family And
                                  Community Services.
                                  Authorizing The Mayor To Execute A Contract
                                  Agreement With The New Mexico Department Of
                                  Children, Youth And Families And Providing An
R-2007-102 9-19-07   Not_Included Appropriation To The Department Of Family And
                                  Community Services/Division Of Child And
                                  Family Development, Temporary Assistance For
                                  Needy Families Program (Tanf).
                                  Approving And Authorizing The Acceptance Of
                                  Grant Funds From The Corporation For National
                                  Service And New Mexico Aging And Long Term
R-2007-103 9-19-07   Not_Included Services Department Providing For An
                                  Appropriation To The Department Of Senior
                                  Affairs Retired And Senior Volunteer Program
                                  In Fiscal Year 2007.
                                  Expanding The Scope Of The Parks And
                                  Recreation Open Space Land Acquisition
                                  Project To Include The Acquisition Of
R-2007-105 9-21-07   Not_Included Approximately Four Hundred And Twenty Acres
                                  Of Land Adjacent To The City's Existing
                                  Gutierrez Canyon Open Space In The East
                                  Mountains For Use As Open Space.
                                  Requiring The Installation Of A Four Way Stop
                                  At The Intersection Of Rainbow Boulevard And
R-2007-106 9-24-07   Not_Included Ventana Village Road; Establishing The Posted
                                  Speed Limit At 30 Miles Per Hour On Rainbow
                                  Boulevard Between Paseo Del Norte And Irving
                                  Boulevard; Declaring An Emergency.
                                  Approving The Fy08 Audit Plan As Submitted By
R-2007-107 9-19-07   Not_Included The Accountability In Government Oversight
                                  Committee.
                                  Approving The Fy08 Investigation Plan As
R-2008-108 9-19-07   Not_Included Submitted By The Accountability In Government
                                  Oversight Committee.
                                  Establishing The Conversion Of Local Streets
                                  To Create Bike Boulevards, Providing An
                                  Appropriation To The Department Of Municipal
                                  Development In Fy/08 To Pay For The Design,
R-2007-109 9-21-07   Not_Included Engineering And Initial Implementation,
                                  Requiring An Amendment To The City Of
                                  Albuquerque's Comprehensive Bike Facilities
                                  Plan To Include Bike Boulevards, Requesting
                                  Consultation With Bike Advocacy
                                  Organizations.
                                  Providing Funding From The Housing And
                                  Neighborhood Economic Development Fund And
R-2007-110 9-19-07   Not_Included The Phillips Irb Settlement Reserve For The
                                  Acquisition Of The Railyard Property In The
                                  Barelas Neighborhood.
                                  Sector Development Plan Amendment 07epc-
                                  00122, Amending The West Side Strategic Plan
                                  To Designate Tracts X1a1, X1a2, And X2a,
                                  University Of Albuquerque Urban Center,
R-2007-111 9-24-07  1-11-8        Located On The North And South Sides Of St.
                                  Joseph's Drive Nw And West Of Coors Boulevard
                                  Nw, As A Community Activity Center For The
                                  Ladera Community And Amending The Text Of The
                                  Plan To Reflect The Designation.
                                  Sector Development Plan Amendment 07epc-
                                  00115, Amending The University Of Albuquerque
                                  Sector Development Plan To Change The Zoning
                                  Designation From Su-3 For Mixed Uses- A
                                  Minimum Of Approximately 30 Acres Within
                                  Tracts A And B Shall Be Developed As
                                  Apartments (R-3) At 24-30 Du/Ac; The Balance
                                  Of The Property Is To Be Developed As (C-2)
                                  Commercial Or (O-1) Office (Approximately 19
                                  Acres); And Church And Related Uses;
                                  Residential Uses (R-3) At 24-30 Du/Ac And/Or
R-2007-112 9-24-07  1-7-5         Joint Use Park And Ride Facility (Ten Acres
                                  Or Less) To Su-3 For Church And Related Uses
                                  For Approximately 10 Acres; A Minimum Of
                                  Approximately 17 Acres Shall Be Developed For
                                  Office (O-1), The Balance Of The Property Is
                                  To Be Developed As (C-2) Commercial Or (O-1)
                                  Office (Approximately 30 Acres). For All Or A
                                  Portion Of Parcels A And B (Tracts X1a1,
                                  X1a2, And X2a), University Of Albuquerque
                                  Urban Center, Located On Coors Boulevard Nw
                                  Between Western Trail Nw And Sequoia Road Nw,
                                  Containing Approximately 57 Acres.
                                  Approving The Programming Of Funds And
R-2007-113 9-24-07   Not_Included Projects For The 2005 - 2014 Component
                                  Capital Improvement Plan (Ccip); Amending
                                  Enactment No. R-2007-023.
R-2007-114 9-24-07  3-2-4         Determining Reasonable Notice Of Public
                                  Meetings Of The City Council.
                                  Authorizing The Mayor To Execute A Grant
                                  Agreement With The New Mexico Aging And Long-
R-2007-115 9-12-07   Not_Included Term Services Department, And Providing An
                                  Appropriation To The Department Of Family And
                                  Community Services.
                                  Amending The La Cueva Sector Plan To Clarify
R-2007-116 9-19-07  1-7-42        The Impact Of Public Rights-Of-Way And/Or
                                  Roadway Easements In Computing Densities In
                                  Rd Zones.
                                  Calling on the United States Congress to
                                  rescind the Iraq resolution and pass a
R-2007-117 9-28-07   Not_Included resolution calling for the phased
                                  redeployment of American troops from Iraq to
                                  commence immediately.
                                  Requiring The City To Develop A Master Plan
                                  For A Bio-Zone Preserve Within And Adjacent
                                  To The Tijeras Arroyo Between The Juan Tabo
R-2007-118 10-1-07   Not_Included Boulevard Right-Of-Way And The Eastern City
                                  Limit; Extending A Moratorium Within City
                                  Boundaries; Inviting Bernalillo County To
                                  Conduct A Joint Planning Effort.
                                  Setting The Official List Of City Council
R-2007-119 10-1-07   Not_Included Meetings From November 2007 Through December
                                  2008.
                                  Amending Resolution Number R-246-1991 Which
                                  Designated The Fourth Ward And Eighth And
                                  Forrester Historic Overlay Zones, Adopting
R-2007-120 10-10-07 1-10-2        Specific Design Guidelines For The Fourth
                                  Ward Historic Overlay Zone And Approving
                                  Guidelines For The Eighth And Forrester
                                  Historic Overlay Zone.
                                  Establishing A Policy That Homeschooled
R-2007-121 10-10-07 6-9-1         Children Shall Be Given Equal Access To City
                                  Sponsored Educational Programs.
                                  Transferring State Grant Funds From The
                                  Capital Acquisition Fund (305) To The Council
                                  Services Program Strategy In The General Fund
R-2007-122 10-10-07  Not_Included (110); Authorizing The Director Of Council
                                  Services To Sign And Enter Into An Agreement
                                  Or Agreements To Effectuate The Intent Of
                                  These Legislative Grants.
                                  Requiring The Mayor To Proceed With The
R-2007-123 10-29-07  Not_Included Transportation Study Authorized In R-06-66;
                                  Removing The Tijeras Arroyo From The Study
                                  Area; Making An Appropriation.
                                  Providing For A Long-Term Solution To The
                                  Issue Of Jail Funding And Setting Out A
                                  Process For Determining The Appropriate
R-2007-124 10-29-07  Not_Included Amount Of Funding To Provide To Bernalillo
                                  County In Fiscal Year 2008 To Assist With
                                  Operating Costs Of The Metropolitan Detention
                                  Center.
                                  Sector Development Plan Amendment 06epc-
                                  01304, Amending The North I-25 Sector
                                  Development Plan To Change The Zoning
                                  Designation From Su-2 Hospital And Medical
R-2007-125 10-29-07 1-7-30        Uses To Su-2 Hospital And Medical Uses And O-
                                  1 Permissive Uses For Tracts 1 And 4, Ihs
                                  Acquisition No. 120, Located On Alameda
                                  Boulevard Nw Between Balloon Museum Drive And
                                  The North Diversion Channel, Containing
                                  Approximately 14.25 Acres.
 
Res. No. Date Disposition Short Title
Res.  Date Disposition Short Title
No.
R-    10-   Not        Providing Funding For The Design Of A Memorial Honoring New Mexico’s Fallen
2007- 29-  Included    In The Wars In Afghanistan And Iraq.
126   07
                       Approving And Authorizing The Filing Of The Attached Grant Application With
R-    10-   Not        The U.S. Department Of Justice, Office Of Community Oriented Policing
2007- 29-  Included    Services (Cops) For A Federal Fiscal Year 2007 Methamphetamine Initiative
127   07               Grant And Providing For An Appropriation To The City Of Albuquerque, Police
                       Department.
R-    10-   Not        Declaring A Six Month Extension Of The Moratorium On The Erection Of Wireless
2007- 29-  Included    Telecommunications Facilities That Are Not Concealed Wireless
128   07               Telecommunications Facilities.
                       Designating The Eastern-Alvarado Metropolitan Redevelopment Area, Making
R-    11-   Not        Certain Findings And Determinations Pursuant To The Metropolitan
2007- 15-  Included    Redevelopment Code, And Designated The Area As Appropriate For A Metropolitan
129   07               Redevelopment Project Identifying The Activities To Be Carried Out To
                       Eliminate The Present Conditions.
R-    11-   Not        Approving A Grant Application With The United States Department Of Justice
2007- 15-  Included    For Operation Weed And Seed And Providing An Appropriation To The Department
130   07               Of Family And Community Services.
R-    11-   Not        Approving A Grant Application To The United States Department Of Justice For
2007- 15-  Included    Operation Weed And Seed And Providing An Appropriation To The Department Of
131   07               Family And Community Services.
R-    11-              Nuisance Abatement At 9505 Snow Heights Ne Within The City Limits Of
2007- 15-   Not        Albuquerque, New Mexico Is So Ruined, Damaged And Dilapidated As To Be A
132   07   Included    Menace To The Public Comfort, Health, Peace Or Safety And That It Is To Be
                       Required To Be Removed.
R-    11-              Reserving Certain Animal Services Funding Pending Approval And
2007- 15-   Not        Reappropriation By The City Council; Calling For A Written Report To The City
133   07   Included    Council On The Animal Services Reorganization Plan In Order To Ensure
                       Transparency And Accountability In Government Processes.
R-    11-   Not        Approving And Authorizing The Filing Of Section 5307 Grant Application With
2007- 15-  Included    The Federal Transit Administration Of The U.S. Department Of Transportation
134   07               And Providing For An Appropriation To Abq Ride.
R-    11-   Not        Approving And Authorizing The Filing Of Section 5307 Grant Amendment With The
2007- 15-  Included    Federal Transit Administration Of The U.S. Department Of Transportation And
135   07               Providing For An Appropriation To Abq Ride.
R-    11-   Not        Approving And Authorizing The Filing Of Section 5309 Grant Amendments With
2007- 15-  Included    The Federal Transit Administration Of The U.S. Department Of Transportation
136   07               And Providing For An Appropriation To Abq Ride.
R-    11-   Not        Approving And Authorizing An Agreement With Bernalillo County And Making An
2007- 15-  Included    Appropriation To The Department Of Family And Community Services For The High
137   07               School Dropout Prevention Program.
R-    11-              Approving And Authorizing The Grant Application For The Summer Food Service
2007- 15-   Not        Program For Children With The New Mexico Children, Youth And Families
138   07   Included    Department And Providing An Appropriation To The Department Of Family And
                       Community Services.
R-    11-   Not        Authorizing The City To Accept The Assignment Of The Option Agreement From
2007- 15-  Included    The Wheels Museum And To Exercise The Option; Authorizing The Use Of
139   07               Appropriated Monies For The Purchase Of The Railyard.
R-    11-   Not        Appropriating Funds To The Capital Implementation Program For The 2007
2007- 15-  Included    General Obligation Program.
140   07
R-    11-   Not        Approving And Authorizing The Filing Of The Attached Grant Application For An
2007- 15-  Included    Air Pollution Control Grant With The Environmental Protection Agency And
141   07               Providing An Appropriation To The Environmental Health Department.
R-    11-              Approving And Authorizing The Filing Of The Attached Grant Application With
2007- 21-   Not        The United States Department Of Justice, Bureau Of Justice Assistance For A
142   07   Included    Fiscal Year 2007 Edward Byrne Memorial Justice Assistance Grant And Providing
                       For An Appropriation To The City Of Albuquerque, Police Department.
R-    11-              Approving And Authorizing The Acceptance Of A Grant Award From The State Of
2007- 21-   Not        New Mexico, Office Of The Natural Resources Trustee For Bosque Restoration
143   07   Included    And Providing An Appropriation To The Parks And Recreation Department In
                       Fiscal Year 2008.
                       Relating To The Formation Of The Montecito Estates Public Improvement
                       District; Making Findings In Connection With The District’s Resolution
                       Authorizing The Issuance And Sale Of District Bonds; Ratifying And Approving
R-    11-   Not        The Issuance And Sale Of The Montecito Estates Public Improvement District
2007- 21-  Included    Special Levy Revenue Bonds As Substantially Consistent With The Requirements
144   07               Of City Council Ordinance Enactment No. 0-2003-012 And City Council
                       Resolution No. R-2007-081; Waiving Inconsistent Provisions Of Prior
                       Enactments Solely With Respect To The Approval Of The Issuance And Sale Of
                       District Bonds.
R-    12-   Not        Imposing A Moratorium On Roadway Facility Projects And The Issuance Of
2007- 3-07 Included    Building Permits For Significant Construction Or Demolition Along 4th Street
145                    Nw Between Marble Avenue And Solar Road; Providing For Certain Exemptions.
R-    11-              Unreserving And Reappropriating Animal Services Funding; Authorizing
2007- 30-   Not        Positions, The Purchase Of Equipment Necessary For Direct Animal Care, And A
146   07   Included    New Westside Adoption Center; Enumerating Restrictions On The Expenditure Of
                       FY/08 Animal Welfare Department Funding.
R-                     Directing The Administration To Initiate A Hydrology Study In The Quaker
2007- 12-   Not        Heights And Western Trail Neighborhoods, Investigate The Feasibility Of
147   4-07 Included    Extending Water And Sewer Lines And Providing Street Improvements Including
                       Paving And The Installation Of Curbs And Gutters.
R-    12-   Not        Unreserving Funds And Adjusting Appropriations Relating To Advance Planning
2007- 4-07 Included    For Fiscal Year 2008; Designating Funds To Be Used For Certain Projects.
148
R-    12-   Not        Creating A Volcano Heights/Petroglyph National Monument Open Space Land
2007- 4-07 Included    Acquisition Project In The Parks And Recreation Department And Appropriating
149                    Funds To That Project.
                       Approving The Petition Of Sapphire, Llc, A New Mexico Limited Liability
                       Company, Vantage Builders, Inc., A New Mexico Corporation, And Calabacillas
                       Properties Llc, A New Mexico Limited Liability Company For Formation Of
                       Saltillo Public Improvement District Pursuant To The Public Improvement
                       District Act, Sections 5-11-1 Et Seq. Nmsa 1978, And Sections 6-9-1 Et Seq.,
                       R.O.A. 1994, The Public Improvement District Ordinance; Making Findings In
                       Connection With The Petition And Supporting Documentation Requesting Approval
R-    12-              Of The Formation Of The District; Determining The Real Property To Be
2007- 4-07 1-15-1      Included Within The District And The Purposes For Which The District Is Being
150                    Formed; Approving The General Plan And The Rate And Method Of Apportionment
                       And The Manner Of Collection Of A Special Levy To Be Imposed Upon Real
                       Property Within The District; Approving A Development Agreement For
                       Implementation Of The District; Establishing Certain Parameters Relating To
                       The Issuance Of District Bonds; Providing For Governance Of The District;
                       Providing That Bonds And Other Obligations Of The District Will Not Be
                       Obligations Of The City Of Albuquerque; Repealing All Actions Inconsistent
                       With This Resolution Other Than Ordinance Enactment No. 0-2003-012. 
R-    12-              Requiring The Creation Of A Mariposa Park Safety Plan To Address Visibility,
2007- 13-   Not        Lighting And Other Potential Safety Issues At Mariposa Park; Calling For The
151   07   Included    Plan To Be Submitted To The Mayor And City Council No Later Than The End Of
                       The Second Quarter Of The 2008 Fiscal Year.
R-    12-              Approving And Authorizing The Filing Of The Attached Grant Application For A
2007- 13-   Not        Selective Traffic Enforcement Program (Step) From The New Mexico Department
152   07   Included    Of Transportation, Traffic Safety Bureau And Providing For An Appropriation
                       To The City Of Albuquerque, Police Department.
R-    12-              Approving And Authorizing The Filing Of The Attached Grant Application For An
2007- 13-   Not        Operation Driving While Impaired (Dwi) Program From The New Mexico Department
153   07   Included    Of Transportation, Traffic Safety Bureau And Providing For An Appropriation
                       To The City Of Albuquerque, Police Department.
R-    12-              Approving And Authorizing The Filing Of A Grant Application For A Food
2007- 14-   Not        Service Program For Children With The New Mexico Department Of Children,
154   07   Included    Youth And Families And Providing An Appropriation To The Department Of Family
                       And Community Services/Division Of Child And Family Development.
                       Adopting The 2008 – 2012 Consolidated Plan And The 2008 Action Plan And
R-    12-   Not        Program Investment Summary For The Expenditure Of Community Development Block
2007- 14-  Included    (Cdbg) Grant, Home Investment Partnership (Home) And Emergency Shelter Block
155   07               Grant Funds And Providing An Appropriation To The Department Of Family And
                       Community Services.
R-    12-              Authorizing A Grant Application And Contract Agreement With The New Mexico
2007- 14-   Not        Department Of Children, Youth And Families And Providing An Appropriation To
156   07   Included    The Department Of Family And Community Services/Division Of Child And Family
                       Development, Teen Parent Residence Program (Tprp).
R-    12-              Authorizing The Mayor To Execute A Contract Agreement With The New Mexico
2007- 14-   Not        Department Of Children, Youth And Families And Providing An Appropriation To
157   07   Included    The Department Of Family And Community Services/Division Of Child And Family
                       Development, Pre-Kindergarten Program.
 
 
 
Notes
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
2008 Resolutions
Res. No. Date Disposition Short Title
Res.  Date Disposition Short Title
No.
R-    12-              Approving And Authorizing The Filing Of The Attached Grant Application For An
2008- 24-   Not        Enforcing Underage Drinking Laws Program From The State Of New Mexico
001   07   Included    Children, Youth And Families Department And Providing For An Appropriation To
                       The City Of Albuquerque, Police Department.
R-    12-   Not        Approving And Authorizing The Filing Of The Attached Grant Application For An
2008- 24-  Included    Air Pollution Control Grant With The Environmental Protection Agency.
002   07
R-    12-   Not        Approving And Authorizing The Acceptance Of Grant Funds From The New Mexico
2008- 24-  Included    State Library For The Basic State Grants In Aid And Providing For An
003   07               Appropriation To The Cultural Services Department In Fiscal Year 2008.
R-    12-   Not        Approving And Authorizing A Joint Powers Agreement Among The County Of
2008- 24-  Included    Bernalillo, The Albuquerque Public Schools, And The City Of Albuquerque For
004   07               The Albuquerque-Bernalillo Community School Partnership.
R-    12-   Not        Appropriating State Funds For The Acquisition Of Approximately Four Hundred
2008- 24-  Included    And Twenty Acres Of Land Adjacent To The City's Existing Gutierrez Canyon Open
005   07               Space In The East Mountains For Use As Open Space.
                       Imposing A 6-Month Moratorium On Roadway Facility Projects Along Central
R-    12-   Not        Avenue Between 10th Street And Atrisco Drive; Adopting Interim Regulations For
2008- 24-  Included    The Issuance Of Building Permits For Properties Along The Corridor;
006   07               Prohibiting Certain Development Approvals Unless Interim Regulations Are Met;
                       Providing For Certain Exemptions.
R-    12-   Not        Reserving Net Revenues From The City's Safe Traffic Operations Program In The
2008- 31-  Included    2008 Fiscal Year General Fund Budget For The Purpose Of Funding Public Safety
007   07               Related Non-Recurring Expenditures.
R-    1-    Not        Establishing A Legislative Policy For The City Of Albuquerque For The 2008
2008- 18-  Included    Legislative Session Of The New Mexico Legislature.
008   08
R-    1-               Creating A Growers' Market Study Group To Examine Ways To Strengthen Local
2008- 22-  2-1-22      Growers' Markets And To Recommend Changes To Local Ordinances Or Regulations
009   08               Dealing With Growers' Markets.
R-    1-               Nuisance Abatement At 6205 Karlson Ne Within The City Limits Of Albuquerque,
2008- 15-   Not        New Mexico Is So Ruined, Damaged And Dilapidated As To Be A Menace To The
010   08   Included    Public Comfort, Health, Peace Or Safety And That It Is To Be Required To Be
                       Removed.
R-    1-               Approving And Authorizing The Filing Of The Attached Grant Agreement For An
2008- 15-   Not        Operation Buckle Down Enforcement Program From The New Mexico Department Of
011   08   Included    Transportation, Traffic Safety Bureau And Providing For An Appropriation To
                       The City Of Albuquerque, Police Department.
R-    1-    Not        Adjusting Fiscal Year 2007 Appropriations For Certain Funds In Program
2008- 15-  Included    Strategies To Provide For Actual Expenditures And Adjusting Fiscal Year 2008
012   08               Appropriations.
R-    1-               Nuisance Abatement At 1409 5th St Nw Within The City Limits Of Albuquerque,
2008- 15-   Not        New Mexico Is So Ruined, Damaged And Dilapidated As To Be A Menace To The
013   08   Included    Public Comfort, Health, Peace Or Safety And That It Is To Be Required To Be
                       Removed.
R-    1-    Not        Nuisance Abatement At 504 Edith Se Within The City Limits Of Albuquerque, New
2008- 15-  Included    Mexico Is So Ruined, Damaged And Dilapidated As To Be A Menace To The Public
014   08               Comfort, Health, Peace Or Safety And That It Is To Be Required To Be Removed.
R-    1-               Designating East Gateway A Metropolitan Redevelopment Area, Making Certain
2008- 15-   Not        Findings And Determinations Pursuant To The Metropolitan Redevelopment Code,
015   08   Included    And Authorizing And Directing The Metropolitan Redevelopment Agency To Prepare
                       A Metropolitan Plan For The East Gateway Metropolitan Redevelopment Area.
                       Supporting A Demonstration Workforce Housing Project On A Parcel Presently
R-    1-               Owned By The City; Transferring City Owned Property For The Purpose Of
2008- 29-   Not        Constructing A Workforce Housing Project; Requesting The Administration To
016   08   Included    Follow City Procedures To Transfer The Parcel To Be Used For The Purpose Of
                       Providing Affordable Housing For Very Low And Low And Moderate Income
                       Individuals And Families.
R-    1-               Establishing Priorities For The 2009 Capital Improvements Plan; Defining The
2008- 31-   Not        Criteria To Be Used In Rating Project Proposals; Assigning Weights To The
017   08   Included    Criteria; Allocating Amounts For Different Purposes Within The 2009 General
                       Obligation Bond Program.
R-    1-    Not        Approving And Authorizing The Filing Of The Attached Grant Application For An
2008- 31-  Included    Albuquerque Safe City (Fy/08) Program From The Target Corporation And
018   08               Providing For An Appropriation To The City Of Albuquerque, Police Department.
                       Approving The Petition And Application Of The Trails, Llc, Cantata At The
                       Trails, Inc., Sierra At The Trails, Inc., Taos At The Trails, Inc., Valle
                       Vista At The Trails, Inc. And Each And Every Other Owner Of All The Land
                       Within The District, For Formation Of The Trails Public Improvement District
                       Pursuant To The Public Improvement District Act, Nmsa 1978, §§ 5-11-1 To -27
                       (2001, As Amended) And City Ordinance Enactment No. 0-2003-12, Council Bill
                       No. Fs 0-03-84; Making Findings In Connection With The Petition And
R-    2-    Not        Application And Supporting Documentation Requesting Approval Of The Formation
2008- 11-  Included    Of The District; Determining The Real Property To Be Included Within The
019   08               District And The Purposes For Which The District Is Being Formed; Approving
                       The General Plan, Rate, Method Of Apportionment And Manner Of Collection Of A
                       Special Levy To Be Imposed Upon Real Property Within The District, And A
                       Development Agreement For Implementation Of The District; Providing For
                       Governance Of The District; Providing That Bonds And Other Obligations Of The
                       District Shall Not Be Obligations Of The City Of Albuquerque; Ratifying
                       Certain Actions Heretofore Taken; And Repealing All Actions Inconsistent With
                       This Formation Resolution.
                       Approving And Authorizing The Filing Of The Attached Grant Agreement For An
R-    2-    Not        Albuquerque Police Department Tracs Statewide Rollout (Citywide Dept.
2008- 11-  Included    Vehicles) Project From The New Mexico Department Of Transportation, Traffic
020   08               Safety Bureau And Providing For An Appropriation To The City Of Albuquerque,
                       Police Department.
R-    2-    Not        Amending The Adopted Capital Implementation Program Of The City Of Albuquerque
2008- 22-  Included    By Approving New Projects, Supplementing Current Appropriations And Changing
021   08               The Scope Of Existing Projects.
R-    2-               Approving And Authorizing The Filing Of The Attached Application For A Drug
2008- 13-   Not        Recognition Expert Grant Program With The State Of New Mexico Department Of
022   08   Included    Transportation, Traffic Safety Bureau And Providing For An Appropriation To
                       The City Of Albuquerque.
R-    2-               Approving And Authorizing The Filing Of A Grant Application For A Rideshare/
2008- 13-   Not        Transportation Demand Management Program With The Federal Highway
023   08   Included    Administration Through The State Department Of Transportation And Providing
                       For An Appropriation To The Transit Department.
R-    2-               Approving And Authorizing The Acceptance Of Grant Funds From The Corporation
2008- 13-   Not        For National Service And New Mexico Aging And Long Term Services Department
024   08   Included    Providing For An Appropriation To The Department Of Senior Affairs Senior
                       Companion Program In Fiscal Year 2008.
R-    2-               Approving And Authorizing The Acceptance Of Grant Funds From The Corporation
2008- 13-   Not        For National Service And New Mexico Aging And Long Term Services Department
025   08   Included    Providing For An Appropriation To The Department Of Senior Affairs Retired And
                       Senior Volunteer Program In Fiscal Year 2008.
 
Res. No. Date Disposition Short Title
Res. No.   Date    Disposition   Short Title
                                 Approving A Grant Application To The
                                 Department Of Housing And Urban Development
R-2008-026 2-13-08  Not_Included For A 2008 Continuum Of Care Grant; And
                                 Providing An Appropriation To The Department
                                 Of Family And Community Services.
                                 Approving And Authorizing The Acceptance Of
                                 Grant Funds From The Corporation For National
                                 Service And New Mexico Aging And Long Term
R-2008-027 2-13-08  Not_Included Services Department Providing For An
                                 Appropriation To The Department Of Senior
                                 Affairs Foster Grandparent Program In Fiscal
                                 Year 2008.
                                 Expanding The Purpose Of Funds Appropriated In
R-2008-028 2-13-08  Not_Included The General Fund (110) To The Code Enforcement
                                 Program Strategy Of The Planning Department As
                                 A Part Of The Fiscal Year 2008 Budget.
                                 Authorizing The Mayor To Execute A Grant
                                 Agreement With The New Mexico State Highway
                                 And Transportation Department For Safe,
                                 Accountable, Flexible, Efficient,
R-2008-029 2-19-08  Not_Included Transportation Equity Act: A Legacy For Users
                                 (Safetea-Lu) Funding To Operate A Bicycle
                                 Safety Education Program In Outdoor Recreation
                                 And Providing An Appropriation To The Parks
                                 And Recreation Department.
                                 Approving And Authorizing The Filing Of The
                                 Attached Grant Agreement For An Albuquerque
                                 Police Department Traffic Statistician From
R-2008-030 2-28-08  Not_Included The New Mexico Department Of Transportation,
                                 Traffic Safety Bureau And Providing For An
                                 Appropriation To The City Of Albuquerque,
                                 Police Department.
                                 Approving And Authorizing The Filing Of The
                                 Attached Grant Application For A Project Safe
R-2008-031 2-28-08  Not_Included Neighborhoods Program From The New Mexico
                                 Department Of Public Safety And Providing For
                                 An Appropriation To The City Of Albuquerque,
                                 Police Department.
                                 Approving and Authorizing the Filing of the
                                 Attached Grant Agreement for an Albuquerque
                                 Police Department Tracs Statewide Rollout
R-2008-032 2-28-08  Not_Included (Traffic/DWI Unit) Project from the New Mexico
                                 Department of Transportation, Traffic Safety
                                 Bureau and Providing For An Appropriation to
                                 the City of Albuquerque, Police Department.
                                 Declaring An Extension Until June 16, 2008 Of
                                 The Moratorium On The Issuance Of New Building
R-2008-033 3-7-08   Not_Included Permits On Property Fronting Menaul Boulevard
                                 Between Carlisle Boulevard And Morris Avenue
                                 Unless The Proposed Development Meets Certain
                                 Height And Setback Requirements.
                                 Establishing Interin Design Regulations Along
                                 4th Street NW Between Marble Avenue and Solar
                                 Road, Extending a Moratorium on Roadway
R-2008-034 3-14-08  Not_Included Facility Projects and the Issuance of Building
                                 Permits for Significant Construction or
                                 Demolition; Providing for Certain Exemptions;
                                 Declaring an Emergency.
                                 Creating A Mariposa Basin Park Restroom
R-2008-035 3-7-08   Not_Included Facilities Project In The Capital Acquisition
                                 Fund (305) And Transferring Funds To That
                                 Project.
                                 Providing An Appropriation To The Department
                                 Of Family And Community Services For
R-2008-036 3-21-08  Not_Included Albuquerque Business Education Compact
                                 Recommended Educational Project (Community
                                 Schools) Funded By Settlement Money Paid By
                                 Philips Semiconductor Contributions.
                                 Calling on the Administration to Create One or
                                 More Tax Increment Development Districts in
                                 the Core City for the Purpose of Providing a
R-2008-037 3-13-08  Not_Included Source of Funding for Infrastructure
                                 Improvements and Redevelopment of the
                                 Albuquerque Railyards, The Fourth Street Mass
                                 Transit Corridor, And The Downtown Area.
                                 Approving And Authorizing The Filing Of An
                                 Agreement Between The City Of Albuquerque
                                 Chief Administrative Officer Department, And
                                 The State Of New Mexico Department Of Health,
                                 For The Acceptance Of Funds For A Cities
R-2008-038 3-13-08  Not_Included Readiness Initiative (Cri) To Increase The
                                 City Of Albuquerque's Capacity To Deliver
                                 Medicines And Medical Supplies During A Large-
                                 Scale Public Health Emergency And Providing
                                 For An Appropriation To The Chief
                                 Administrative Officer Department.
                                 Appropriating District Benefit Fees To The
R-2008-039 3-13-08  Not_Included Downtown Business Improvement District In
                                 Accordance With The Approved Budget.
                                 Approving And Authorizing The Filing Of The
                                 Attached Grant Agreement For An Antigang
R-2008-040 3-13-08  Not_Included Subgrant From The New Mexico Department Of
                                 Public Safety And Providing For An
                                 Appropriation To The City Of Albuquerque,
                                 Police Department.
                                 Approving And Authorizing The Filing Of The
                                 Attached Sub-Grant Agreement For A Dna
R-2008-041 3-13-08  Not_Included Identification System Grant From The New
                                 Mexico Department Of Public Safety And
                                 Providing For An Appropriation To The City Of
                                 Albuquerque Police Department.
                                 Authorizing The Removal Of Certain
R-2008-042 3-13-08  Not_Included Uncollectible Accounts From The City's
                                 Accounts Receivable Records Fy 2003.
                                 Providing Funding For Affordable Housing
R-2008-043 3-13-08  Not_Included Development Capacity Building; Reserving Funds
                                 In The Department Of Family And Community
                                 Services.
                                 Sector Development Plan Amendments 07epc-40014
                                 & 07epc 40059, Amending The Text Of The
                                 Volcano Heights Sector Development Plan To
                                 Create A New Zoning Category, Su-2/Sr-Ml
R-2008-044 3-13-08 1-7-45        (Suburban Residential - Medium Lot) And
                                 Amending The Volcano Heights Sector
                                 Development Plan Land Use Map From Su-2/Sr-Ll
                                 (Suburban Residential - Large Lot To Su-2/Sr-
                                 Ml) For An Approximately 23-Acre Parcel Of
                                 Land.
                                 Approving The Petition Of Mesa Del Sol, Llc
                                 For Formation Of Mesa Del Sol Public
                                 Improvement Districts 1-5 Pursuant To The
                                 Public Improvement District Act, Sections 5-
                                 11-1 Through 5-11-27, Nmsa 1978 And City
                                 Council Ordinance Enactment No. O-2003-012;
                                 Making Findings In Connection With The
                                 Petition And Supporting Documentation
                                 Requesting Approval Of The Formation Of The
                                 Districts; Determining The Real Property To Be
                                 Included Within Each District And The Purposes
                                 For Which The Districts Are Being Formed;
                                 Approving The General Plan, Rate, Method Of
                                 Apportionment And The Manner Of Collection Of
                                 A Special Levy To Be Imposed Upon Real
                                 Property Within The Districts And The
                                 Supplementation Of The General Plan And
R-2008-045 3-13-08 1-15-2        Adjustment Of The Rate And Method Of
                                 Apportionment For Each Of The Districts;
                                 Approving A Master Pid Development Agreement
                                 For Implementation Of The Districts And The
                                 Supplementation Of The Master Pid Development
                                 Agreement For All The Districts With
                                 Supplemental Development Agreements For Each
                                 Of The Districts; Approving The Issuance Of
                                 District 1 Bonds And Parameters For The
                                 Issuance Of District Bonds By Districts 2
                                 Through 5; Providing For Governance Of The
                                 Districts; Providing That Bonds And Other
                                 Obligations Of The Districts Shall Not Be
                                 Obligations Of The City Of Albuquerque;
                                 Ratifying Certain Actions Heretofore Taken;
                                 Repealing All Actions Inconsistent With This
                                 Resolution Other Than Ordinance Enactment No.
                                 O-2003-012.
R-2008-046 3-27-08  Not_Included Approving a pre-development process for the
                                 rail yards property; making an appropriation.
                                 Relating To The Formation Of The Saltillo
                                 Public Improvement District; Making Findings
                                 In Connection With The District's Resolution
                                 Authorizing The Issuance And Sale Of District
                                 Bonds; Ratifying And Approving The Issuance
R-2008-047 4-17-08 1-15-1        And Sale Of The Saltillo Public Improvement
                                 District Special Levy Revenue Bonds As
                                 Substantially Consistent With The Requirements
                                 Of City Council Ordinance Enactment No. O-
                                 2003-012 And City Council Resolution No. R-
                                 2007-150.
                                 Creating a menaul boulevard corridor plan
R-2008-048 4-17-08  Not_Included project in the Capital Acquisition Fund 305;
                                 adjusting appropriations in the planning
                                 department to provide funding for the project.
                                 Rescinding Resolution No. R-07-313 Which
R-2008-049 4-17-08  Not_Included Transferred State Grant Funds From The Capital
                                 Acquisition Fund (305) To The Council Services
                                 Program Strategy In The General Fund (110).
                                 Approving And Authorizing The Mayor To Execute
                                 A Sub-Grant Agreement For A 2007 Paul
                                 Coverdell Forensic Science Improvement Program
R-2008-050 4-17-08  Not_Included From The State Of New Mexico Department Of
                                 Public Safety And Providing For An
                                 Appropriation To The City Of Albuquerque,
                                 Police Department.
 
Res. No. Date Disposition Short Title
Res. No.   Date    Disposition   Short Title
                                 Designating The Near Heights Boundary
                                 Expansion A Metropolitan Redevelopment Area,
                                 Including The Recently Formed Eastern/Alvarado
                                 Metropolitan Redevelopment Area (R-07-283).
R-2008-051 4-17-08 1-6-12        Making Certain Findings And Determinations
                                 Pursuant To The Metropolitan Redevelopment
                                 Code, And Authorizing And Directing The
                                 Metropolitan Redevelopment Agency To Prepare A
                                 Metropolitan Plan For The Near Heights
                                 Expansion Metropolitan Redevelopment Area.
                                 Creating An East Gateway Metropolitan
                                 Redevelopment Plan Project In The Capital
R-2008-052 4-17-08  Not_Included Acquisition Fund 305; Adjusting Appropriations
                                 In The Planning And City Council Services
                                 Departments To Provide Funding For The
                                 Project.
                                 Repealing The 1993 Barelas Sector Development
                                 Plan; Adopting The 2007 Barelas Sector
                                 Development Plan For The Area Bounded By
                                 Alcalde Place And Coal Avenue On The North,
                                 Commercial Street On The East, Avenida Cesar
R-2008-053 4-28-08 1-7-39        Chavez On The South, And The Albuquerque
                                 Riverside Drain On The West, Containing
                                 Approximately 383 Acres; Changing The Zone Map
                                 And/Or Text For Certain Properties Within The
                                 2007 Barelas Sector Development Plan Boundary
                                 As Specified In Exhibit A.
                                 Nuisance Abatement At 317 Rhode Island Se
                                 Within The City Limits Of Albuquerque, New
R-2008-054 5-6-08   Not_Included Mexico Is So Ruined, Damaged And Dilapidated
                                 As To Be A Menace To The Public Comfort,
                                 Health, Peace Or Safety And That It Is To Be
                                 Required To Be Removed.
                                 Nuisance Abatement At 301 Yucca Dr Nw Within
                                 The City Limits Of Albuquerque, New Mexico Is
R-2008-055 5-6-08   Not_Included So Ruined, Damaged And Dilapidated As To Be A
                                 Menace To The Public Comfort, Health, Peace Or
                                 Safety And That It Is To Be Required To Be
                                 Removed.
                                 Declaring The Intent Of The City Of
                                 Albuquerque, New Mexico, Subject To The
                                 Satisfaction Of Certain Conditions, To Issue
                                 Industrial Revenue Bonds In An Aggregate
R-2008-056 5-6-08   Not_Included Principal Amount Not To Exceed $27,000,000 In
                                 Connection With A Proposed Expansion Project
                                 For Emcore Corporation For The Manufacture Of
                                 Photovoltiac Products As Described In The
                                 Project Plan.
                                 Approving And Authorizing The Filing Of The
                                 Attached Agreement For A DWI Drunkbuster
R-2008-057 5-6-08   Not_Included Overtime Enforcement Program With The State Of
                                 New Mexico Department Of Transportation,
                                 Traffic Safety Bureau And Providing For An
                                 Appropriation To The City Of Albuquerque.
R-2008-058 5-6-08   Not_Included Supporting The Hardrock Mining And Reclamation
                                 Act Of 2007 (Hr 2262).
                                 Directing The Administration To Study And
                                 Determine The Financial Impact To The City Of
                                 Albuquerque Related To The Emergency Fuel
R-2008-059 5-8-08   Not_Included Clause Request By Public Service Company Of
                                 New Mexico's To The New Mexico Public
                                 Regulation Commission And Urging The Mayor To
                                 Oppose The Emergency Fuel Clause On Behalf Of
                                 The City Of Albuquerque.
                                 Authorizing The Giving Of Notice For Bids For
                                 The Sale Of City Of Albuquerque, New Mexico
R-2008-060 5-12-08  Not_Included General Obligation Bonds Consisting Of
                                 $39,000,000 General Purpose Bonds, Series
                                 2008a And $4,000,000 Storm Sewer Bonds, Series
                                 2008b.
                                 Approving And Authorizing U.S. Marshals
                                 Service Funds To Provide For Overtime Hours
R-2008-061 5-12-08  Not_Included For The Purpose Of Locating And Arresting
                                 Fugitives And Providing For An Appropriation
                                 To The City Of Albuquerque, Police Department.
                                 Approving And Authorizing The Filing Of The
                                 Attached Grant Application From The New Mexico
R-2008-062 5-12-08  Not_Included Gang Task Force And Providing For An
                                 Appropriation To The City Of Albuquerque
                                 Police Department.
                                 Approving And Authorizing The Filing Of The
                                 Attached Agreement For A 2008 Click It Or
R-2008-063 5-12-08  Not_Included Ticket Grant With The State Of New Mexico
                                 Department Of Transportation, Traffic Safety
                                 Bureau And Providing For An Appropriation To
                                 The City Of Albuquerque.
                                 Approving And Authorizing The Filing Of The
                                 Attached Agreement For A 100 Days And Nights
R-2008-064 5-12-08  Not_Included Of Summer Program With The State Of New Mexico
                                 Department Of Transportation, Traffic Safety
                                 Bureau And Providing For An Appropriation To
                                 The City Of Albuquerque.
                                 Approving And Authorizing The Filing Of The
                                 Attached Grant Application For A Traffic
                                 Safety Education And Enforcement Program From
R-2008-065 5-12-08  Not_Included The New Mexico Department Of Transportation,
                                 Traffic Safety Bureau, And Providing For An
                                 Appropriation To The City Of Albuquerque,
                                 Police Department.
                                 Sector Development Plan Amendment 07epc-40100,
                                 Amending The Huning Highland Sector
                                 Development Plan Map To Change The Zoning
                                 Designation From Su-2 For Ro To Su-2 / Su1 For
R-2008-066 5-15-08 1-7-12        Ro And Hotel With Related Alcohol Sales, For
                                 The Atchinson, Topeka Santa Fe Railroad
                                 Memorial Hospital Located On Central Ave. Se
                                 Between Elm St. And Locust Ave. (I-25 Ramp),
                                 Containing Approximately 2.27 Acres.
                                 Appropriating Funds For Operating The
                                 Government Of The City Of Albuquerque For
R-2008-067 5-30-08  Not_Included Fiscal Year 2009, Beginning July 1, 2008 And
                                 Ending June 30, 2009; Adjusting Fiscal Year
                                 2008 Appropriations; And Adjusting Operating
                                 Grants And Capital Acquistion Fund Projects.
R-2008-068 6-16-08  Not_Included Supporting A Federal Department Of Peace And
                                 Nonviolence.
                                 Approving And Authorizing The Filing Of The
R-2008-069 6-6-08   Not_Included Attached Grant Application For A Pm Fine
                                 Monitoring Grant With The Environmental
                                 Protection Agency.
                                 Extending The Time Period Established In R-06-
                                 81 For The Prohibition On Certain Development
                                 Approvals For Properties Zoned C-1, C-2, C-3,
                                 O-1, R-C Or Su-1 In The Area Around Gibson
R-2008-070 6-6-08   Not_Included Boulevard Se And The South Campus Of The
                                 University Of New Mexico Unless Interim Design
                                 Regulations Are Met Until December 15, 2008 Or
                                 Until The South Yale Sector Development Plan
                                 Is Adopted, Whichever First Occurs.
                                 Creating An Unser Crossing Offsite
                                 Improvements Project In The Capital
R-2008-071 6-6-08   Not_Included Acquisition Fund 305; Providing Funding For
                                 Certain Roadway Improvements Adjacent To Unser
                                 Crossing.
                                 Establishing One-Year Objectives For The City
R-2008-072 5-23-08 4-7-4         Of Albuquerque In Fiscal Year 2009; To Meet
                                 Five-Year Goals.
                                 Amending R-07-304, Which Creates A Mariposa
R-2008-073 6-9-08   Not_Included Basin Park Restroom Facilities Project In The
                                 Capital Acquisition Fund (305) To Make A
                                 Technical Correction.
                                 Adopting A Sector Development Plan Map
                                 Amendment, 06epc-00139, To Amend The Westland
                                 Sector Development Plan Zoning Map To Change
                                 The Zoning From Su-2/R-Lt, Su-2/R-2, Su-2/O-1,
                                 Su-2/Os And Su-2/Town Center To Su-2 For Tc
                                 (Town Center) And Su-2 For Tcv (Town Center
                                 Village) And To Create A New Zone Category,
R-2008-074 6-13-08  Not_Included Tcv (Town Center Village), For Parcels C, D,
                                 E, F, G And H Of Westland North, Approximately
                                 550 Acres, Located Between 98th Street And The
                                 Proposed 118th Street, North Of Interstate 40
                                 And South Of Arroyo Vista Drive, And To Amend
                                 The Westland Sector Development Plan Land Use
                                 Map (06epc-00141) To Correspond To The Zone
                                 Changes And To Incorporate Various Updates
                                 Based On The Conditions Of Approval.
                                 Adopting An Area Plan Amendment, 07epc-50069,
                                 To Amend The West Side Strategic Plan To
                                 Relocate The Westland Community Activity
                                 Center, Serving The Westland North Community,
                                 From Its Designated Location To A New Location
R-2008-075 6-13-08 1-11-8        Closer To Interstate 40, And Decreasing The
                                 Size Of The Activity Center From Approximately
                                 220 Acres To Approximately 161 Acres, For
                                 Parcels C, D, E, F, G And H, Westland North,
                                 Located Between 98th Street And The Proposed
                                 118th Street, North Of Interstate 40 And South
                                 Of Ladera Drive.
 
Res. No. Date Disposition Short Title
Res. No.   Date    Disposition   Short Title
                                 Adopting Sector Development Plan Map
                                 Amendments, 07epc-40071, To Revise The Land
                                 Use/Zoning Map For Parcels C, D, E, F, G And H
                                 Of Westland North To Be Consistent With Zone
                                 Changes Specified In The Sector Development
                                 Plan Map Amendment To The Westland Sector Plan
                                 (06epc-00139), And Amending The Text Of The
                                 Westland Master Plan To Establish Parameters
R-2008-076 6-13-08  Not_Included For The New Tcv (Town Center Village) Zone
                                 Category, And Adding Hotel As A Permissive Use
                                 In The Su-2/Tc Zone, And Amending The Rr
                                 (Residential Resort) Zone To Include Community
                                 Neighborhood Recreation Center As A Permissive
                                 Use, Approximately 1,050 Acres, Located
                                 Between 98th Street And The Proposed 118th
                                 Street, North Of Interstate 40 And South Of
                                 The Petroglyph National Monument.
                                 Approving And Authorizing The Filing Of A
                                 Grant Application For A Rideshare/
                                 Transportation Demand Management Program With
R-2008-077 6-13-08  Not_Included The Federal Highway Administration Through The
                                 State Department Of Transportation And
                                 Providing For An Appropriation To The Transit
                                 Department.
                                 Directing All City Department Directors To
R-2008-078 6-16-08  Not_Included Develop A Gasoline Use Reduction Plan And
                                 Report To The Full Council At The August 4,
                                 2008 Council Meeting.
                                 Approving And Authorizing The Filing Of The
                                 Attached Grant For An Albuquerque Police
                                 Department Dwi Underage Enforcement Grant From
R-2008-079 6-13-08  Not_Included The New Mexico Department Of Transportation,
                                 Traffic Safety Bureau, And Providing For An
                                 Appropriation To The City Of Albuquerque,
                                 Police Department.
                                 Transferring funding from various balloon
                                 fiesta park projects in the capital
                                 acquisition fund (305) to the city council
                                 projects project in the capital acquisition
R-2008-080 6-16-08  Not_Included fund for the purpose of acquiring land at the
                                 balloon fiesta park; authorizing the president
                                 of the city council to sign and enter into an
                                 agreement or agreements to effectuate the
                                 acquisition of the property.
                                 Proclaiming Hazardous Fire Conditions In The
                                 City Of Albuquerque That Endanger The Health
R-2008-081 6-26-08  Not_Included Safety And Welfare Of The Citizens And
                                 Authorizing The Albuquerque Fire Department To
                                 Impose Restrictions On Open Fires And Smoking
                                 Within The City Of Albuquerque.
                                 Creating A 12th And Menaul Great Streets
                                 Project And A Pedestrian & Bicycle Project
R-2008-082 6-27-08  Not_Included Within The Capital Acquisition Fund 305;
                                 Adjusting Appropriations To Provide Funding
                                 For The Projects.
                                 Approving And Authorizing The Filing Of A
                                 Section 5307 Grant Amendment With The Federal
R-2008-083 6-27-08  Not_Included Transit Administration Of The U.S. Department
                                 Of Transportation And Providing For An
                                 Appropriation To Abq Ride.
                                 Approving And Authorizing The Filing Of A
                                 Section 5309 Grant Amendment With The Federal
R-2008-084 6-27-08  Not_Included Transit Administration Of The U.S. Department
                                 Of Transportation And Providing For An
                                 Appropriation To Abq Ride.
                                 Relating To The Formation Of The Trails Public
                                 Improvement District; Making Findings In
                                 Connection With The District's Resolution
                                 Authorizing The Issuance And Sale Of District
                                 Bonds; Ratifying And Approving The Issuance
R-2008-085 6-27-08  Not_Included And Sale Of The Trails Public Improvement
                                 District Special Levy Revenue Bonds As
                                 Substantially Consistent With The Requirements
                                 Of City Council Ordinance Enactment No. O-
                                 2003-012 And City Council Resolution No. R-
                                 2008-019.
                                 Approving And Authorizing The Filing Of A
                                 Section 5309 Grant Amendment For Rapid Ride
R-2008-086 6-27-08  Not_Included Earmarks With The Federal Transit
                                 Administration Of The U.S. Department Of
                                 Transportation And Providing For An
                                 Appropriation To Abq Ride.
                                 Transferring Funds From The General Fund (110)
R-2008-087 6-27-08  Not_Included To The Capital Acquisition Fund (305);
                                 Appropriating Those Funds To The City Council
                                 Projects Project.
                                 Amending The Interim Design Regulations For
R-2008-088 6-27-08  Not_Included The East Gateway Sector Planning Area For Auto
                                 Repair Shops And Car Washes.
                                 Appropriating Twenty-Five Thousand Dollars
                                 ($25,000) From The General Fund (110) In
                                 Fiscal Year 2009 To The Economic Development
R-2008-089 6-27-08  Not_Included Department To Contract With The Steps/
                                 Southeast Team For Entrepreneurial Success
                                 (A.K.A. The Sirolli Project) For Operational
                                 Support.
                                 Calling For Strict Enforcement Of The
                                 Requirement For Wrecker And Tow Truck
R-2008-090 7-3-08   Not_Included Operators To Timely Respond To Calls For
                                 Service And Requesting The Administration To
                                 Post Signs About Removing Vehicles From
                                 Traffic Lanes Following Accidents.
                                 Extending The Time Period Established In R-07-
                                 10 For The Moratorium On Roadway Facility
                                 Projects And Interim Regulations For The
R-2008-091 7-3-08   Not_Included Issuance Of Building Permits For Properties
                                 Along Central Avenue Between 10th Street And
                                 Atrisco Drive Until December 15, 2008 Or Until
                                 A New Corridor Plan For The Area Is Adopted,
                                 Whichever First Occurs.
                                 Declaring An Extension Until December 15, 2008
                                 Of The Moratorium On The Issuance Of New
R-2008-092 7-3-08   Not_Included Building Permits On Property Fronting Menaul
                                 Boulevard Between Carlisle Boulevard And
                                 Morris Avenue Unless The Proposed Development
                                 Meets Certain Height And Setback Requirements.
                                 Creating A Working Group To Study The Issue Of
                                 The Formation Of A Regional Redevelopment
                                 Authority For The City Of Albuquerque And
R-2008-093 8-25-08  Not_Included Bernalillo County; Specifying Duties And
                                 Responsibilities; Defining Membership; Calling
                                 For A Report To The City On The Working
                                 Group's Findings By The End Of Calendar Year
                                 2008.
                                 Approving And Authorizing The Acceptance Of
                                 State Of New Mexico Litter Control And
                                 Beautification Grant Funds, A Grant Under The
R-2008-094 8-21-08  Not_Included New Mexico Litter Control And Beautification
                                 Act With The New Mexico State Tourism
                                 Department; And Providing For An Appropriation
                                 To The City Of Albuquerque Solid Waste
                                 Management Department.
                                 Approving And Authorizing The Acceptance Of
                                 Funds For Albuquerque Highway Clean Up Program
R-2008-095 8-21-08  Not_Included Through A Cooperative Agreement With The New
                                 Mexico State Highway And Transportation
                                 Department And Providing For An Appropriation
                                 To The Solid Waste Management Department.
                                 Authorizing The Mayor To Execute The
                                 Albuquerque Business Education Compact
R-2008-096 8-25-08  Not_Included Recommendations And Providing An Appropriation
                                 To The Department Of Family And Community
                                 Services.
                                 Approving And Authorizing The Acceptance Of
                                 Funds For The Albuquerque Highway Street
                                 Sweeping Program Through A Cooperative
R-2008-097 8-21-08  Not_Included Agreement With The New Mexico State Highway
                                 And Transportation Department And Providing
                                 For An Appropriation To The Solid Waste
                                 Management Department.
                                 Providing Additional Funding For A Memorial
R-2008-098 8-21-08  Not_Included Honoring New Mexico's Fallen In The Wars In
                                 Afghanistan And Iraq.
                                 Requesting The Mayor To Reconvene The Green
                                 Ribbon Task Force To Take Evidence And Make
R-2008-099 8-21-08  Not_Included Recommendations Regarding The Appropriate
                                 Standards For The Replacement Of Heating,
                                 Ventilation And Air Conditioning Equipment.
                                 Extending A Moratorium, Established In R-08-
                                 46, On Roadway Facility Projects And The
                                 Issuance Of Building Permits For Significant
                                 Construction Or Demolition Along 4th Street Nw
                                 Between Marble Avenue And Solar Road And
R-2008-100 8-21-08  Not_Included Extending The Applicability Of The Interim
                                 Design Regulations Until March 18, 2009 Or
                                 Until Final Consideration By The City Council
                                 Of The North 4th Street Redevelopment Study:
                                 Rank Iii Plan Or The Lifting Of The This
                                 Moratorium By The City Council, Whichever
                                 Shall First Occur.
 
Res. No. Date Disposition Short Title
Res. No.   Date     Disposition   Short Title
                                  Approving A Memorandum Of Understanding
                                  Between The City Of Albuquerque, The Downtown
                                  Action Team, And The New Mexico Mainstreet
                                  Program To Allow For The Creation Of A
R-2008-101 8-21-08   Not_Included Certified New Mexico Mainstreet Program
                                  Within The Downtown Business Improvement
                                  District; Supporting The Mainstreet Program's
                                  Four-Point Approach; Expressing The City's
                                  Willingness To Administer The Downtown Action
                                  Team Mainstreet Funds.
                                  Approving And Authorizing The Filing Of An
R-2008-102 9-4-08    Not_Included Application For A Certified Local Government
                                  Subgrant And Providing An Appropriation To
                                  The Planning Department.
                                  Declaring October 3rd, 2008 "Pete V. Domenici
R-2008-103 9-4-08    Not_Included Day" As A Recoginition Of Senator Pete V.
                                  Domenici's Accomplishments And Contributions.
                                  Sector Development Plan Map Amendment 08epc-
                                  40039, Amending The West Route 66 Sector
                                  Development Plan To Change The Zoning
                                  Designation From Su-1 For C-2 (Ten Acres), O-
R-2008-104 9-11-08  1-7-31        1, And Prd 20 Du/Ac (7 Acres) To C-2 For
                                  Tracts 1a, 1b, 2a, 2b, 3a, 3b, And 6, V.E.
                                  Barrett Subdivision, Located In The Southwest
                                  Quadrant Of The Unser Boulevard/Central
                                  Avenue Intersection, Containing Approximately
                                  36 Acres.
                                  Approving The Fy09 Audit Plan As Submitted By
R-2008-105 9-23-08   Not_Included The Accountability In Government Oversight
                                  Committee.
                                  Authorizing The Mayor To Execute A Contract
                                  Agreement With The New Mexico Department Of
                                  Children, Youth And Families And Providing An
R-2008-106 9-23-08   Not_Included Appropriation To The Department Of Family And
                                  Community Services/Division Of Child And
                                  Family Development, Temporary Assistance For
                                  Needy Families Program (Tanf).
                                  Authorizing The Mayor To Execute A Grant
                                  Agreement With The U.S. Department Of Health
R-2008-107 9-23-08   Not_Included And Human Services, And Providing An
                                  Appropriation To The Department Of Family And
                                  Community Services.
                                  Authorizing The Mayor To Execute A Contract
                                  Agreement With The New Mexico Department Of
R-2008-108 9-23-08   Not_Included Children, Youth And Families And Providing An
                                  Appropriation To The Department Of Family And
                                  Community Services/Division Of Child And
                                  Family Development, Pre-Kindergarten Program.
                                  Approving And Authorizing The Filing Of A
                                  Grant Application For A Food Service Program
                                  For Children With The New Mexico Department
R-2008-109 9-23-08   Not_Included Of Children, Youth And Families And Providing
                                  An Appropriation To The Department Of Family
                                  And Community Services, Division Of Early
                                  Childhood And Family Development.
                                  Creating Storm Drainage Projects In The
R-2008-110 9-23-08   Not_Included Capital Acquisition Fund 305; Adjusting
                                  Appropriations To Provide Funding For The
                                  Projects.
                                  Authorizing The Mayor To Execute A Contract
                                  Agreement With The New Mexico Department Of
                                  Children, Youth And Families And Providing An
R-2008-111 9-23-08   Not_Included Appropriation To The Department Of Family And
                                  Community Services/Division Of Child And
                                  Family Development, Teen Parent Residence
                                  Program (Tprp).
                                  Approving And Authorizing The Filing Of The
                                  Attached Grant Application For An Fy08-09
                                  Bulletproof Vest Partnership Grant From The
R-2008-112 9-23-08   Not_Included United States Department Of Justice, Office
                                  Of Justice Programs, And Providing For An
                                  Appropriation To The City Of Albuquerque
                                  Police Department.
                                  Amending The Adopted Capital Implementation
                                  Program Of The City Of Albuquerque By
R-2008-113 9-23-08   Not_Included Approving New Projects, Supplementing Current
                                  Appropriations And Changing The Scope Of
                                  Existing Projects.
                                  Making An Appropriation To The Police
R-2008-114 9-23-08   Not_Included Department For The City Of Albuquerque's
                                  Share In The Criminal Justice Collaborative
                                  Efforts For Fiscal Year 2009.
                                  Approving And Authorizing The Filing Of The
                                  Attached Grant Agreement For An Albuquerque
                                  Police Department Tracs Statewide Rollout
R-2008-115 9-23-08   Not_Included (Traffic Records Improvement) Project From
                                  The New Mexico Department Of Transportation,
                                  Traffic Safety Bureau And Providing For An
                                  Appropriation To The City Of Albuquerque,
                                  Police Department.
                                  Declaring The Intent Of The City Council Of
                                  The City Of Albuquerque To Consider For
                                  Adoption A Resolution Approving The Formation
                                  Of Quorum At Abq Uptown Tax Increment
                                  Development District; Approving, Subject To
                                  Further Proceedings Of The City Council, A
                                  Tax Increment Development Plan For The
                                  District Which Includes A Description Of The
                                  Areas To Be Included Therein, The Purposes Of
                                  The District, Identification Of Gross
R-2008-116 9-23-08   Not_Included Receipts Tax Increment And Property Tax
                                  Increment Financing Mechanisms, And Bonds
                                  Secured By Gross Receipts Tax Increment
                                  Revenue And Property Tax Increment Revenue;
                                  Authorizing And Directing The Posting,
                                  Mailing And Publication, In A Newspaper Of
                                  General Circulation Within The County, Of A
                                  Notice Of Public Meeting And Hearing To Be
                                  Held On October 6, 2008 To Consider For
                                  Adoption The Resolution Approving The
                                  Formation Of The District.
                                  Declaring The Intent Of The City Council Of
                                  The City Of Albuquerque, New Mexico To
                                  Consider For Adoption A Resolution Approving
                                  The Formation Of Winrock Town Center Tax
                                  Increment Development Districts 1 And 2;
                                  Approving, Subject To Further Proceedings Of
                                  The City Council, A Tax Increment Development
                                  Plan For The Districts, Which Includes A
                                  Description Of The Areas To Be Included
                                  Therein, The Purposes Of The Districts,
R-2008-117 9-23-08   Not_Included Identification Of Gross Receipts Tax
                                  Increment And Property Tax Increment
                                  Financing Mechanisms, And Bonds Secured By
                                  Gross Receipts Tax Increment Revenue And
                                  Property Tax Increment Revenue; Authorizing
                                  And Directing The Posting, Mailing And
                                  Publication, In A Newspaper Of General
                                  Circulation Within The County, Of A Notice Of
                                  Public Meeting And Hearing To Be Held On
                                  October 6, 2008 To Consider For Adoption The
                                  Resolution Approving The Formation Of The
                                  Districts.
R-2008-118 9-23-08   Not_Included Revising The Official List Of City Council
                                  Meetings For November 2008.
                                  Approving The Petition And Application Of
                                  Hunt Uptown Ii, Llc And Hunt Uptown Iv, Llc,
                                  For Formation Of The Quorum At Abq Uptown Tax
                                  Increment Development District (The
                                  "District" Or "Tidd") Pursuant To The Tax
                                  Increment For Development Act, Sections 5-15-
                                  1 Through 5-15-28, Nmsa 1978 And City Council
                                  Ordinance Bill No. F/S O-06-44; Making
                                  Findings In Connection With The Petition And
                                  Supporting Documentation Requesting Approval
                                  Of The Formation Of The District; Determining
                                  The Real Property To Be Included Within The
                                  District And The Purposes For Which The
                                  District Is Being Formed; Approving The
                                  Application, Petition, And A Financial
                                  Feasibility Study; Ratifying The Tax
R-2008-119 10-15-08 1-14-2        Increment Development Plan Approved For
                                  Consideration In Connection With The
                                  Formation Of The District; Dedicating 70 Of
                                  The Gross Receipts Tax Increment Revenue And
                                  75 Of The Property Tax Increment Revenue For
                                  The Financing Of Public Infrastructure For
                                  The District; Establishing Parameters For The
                                  Issuance Of Tax Increment Bonds By The
                                  District; Providing For Governance Of The
                                  District Through The Appointment Of Members
                                  Of The Governing Bodies Of The District;
                                  Providing That Tax Increment Bonds Of The
                                  District And Other Obligations Of The
                                  District Shall Not Be Obligations Of The City
                                  Of Albuquerque; Ratifying Certain Actions
                                  Heretofore Taken; Repealing All Actions
                                  Inconsistent With This Resolution Other Than
                                  City Council Ordinance Bill No. F/S O-06-44.
                                  Approving The Petition And Application Of
                                  Winrock Partners Llc, For Formation Of
                                  Winrock Town Center Tax Increment Development
                                  Districts 1 And 2 (The "Districts" Or
                                  "Tidds") Pursuant To The Tax Increment For
                                  Development Act, Sections 5-15-1 Through 5-
                                  15-28 Nmsa 1978 And City Council Ordinance
                                  Bill No. F/S O-06-44; Making Findings In
                                  Connection With The Petition And Supporting
                                  Documentation Requesting Approval Of The
                                  Formation Of The Tidds; Determining The Real
                                  Property To Be Included Within The Tidds And
                                  The Purposes For Which The Tidds Are Being
                                  Formed; Approving The Application, Petition
                                  And A Financial Feasibility Study; Ratifying
                                  The Tax Increment Development Plan Approved
R-2008-120 10-15-08 1-14-3        For Consideration In Connection With The
                                  Formation Of The Tidds; Dedicating 70 Of The
                                  Gross Receipts Tax Increment Revenue And 75
                                  Of The Property Tax Increment Revenue For The
                                  Financing Of Public Improvements For The
                                  Tidds; Establishing Parameters For The
                                  Issuance Of Tax Increment Bonds By The Tidds;
                                  Providing For Governance Of The Tidds Through
                                  The Appointment Of Members Of The Governing
                                  Bodies Of The Tidds; Providing That Tax
                                  Increment Bonds Of The Tidds And Other
                                  Obligations Of The Tidds Shall Not Be
                                  Obligations Of The City Of Albuquerque;
                                  Ratifying Certain Actions Heretofore Taken;
                                  Repealing All Actions Inconsistent With This
                                  Resolution Other Than City Council Ordinance
                                  Bill No. F/S O-06-44.
                                  Approving And Authorizing A Memorandum Of
                                  Agreement With The New Mexico Department Of
R-2008-121 10-17-08  Not_Included Health For The West Nile Virus Surveillance
                                  And Data Management Program And Making An
                                  Appropriation To The Environmental Health
                                  Department.
                                  Extending A Moratorium Established In C/S R-
R-2008-122 10-24-08  Not_Included 07-278 On Subdivision Approvals Within The
                                  Tijeras Arroyo.
                                  Setting The Official List Of City Council
R-2008-123 10-29-08  Not_Included Meetings From December 2008 Through December
                                  2009.
R-2008-124 10-29-08 3-2-4         Determining Reasonable Notice Of Public
                                  Meetings Of The City Council.
                                  Extending The Interim Design Regulations And
R-2008-125 11-03-08  Not_Included The Moratorium Adopted In R-07-276 For The
                                  East Gateway Sector Plan Area.
 
Res. No. Date Disposition Short Title
Res. No.   Date     Disposition   Short Title
                                  Recognizing The Urgency Of Stabilizing The
R-2008-126 10-29-08  Not_Included Climate As Well As The Role That Albuquerque
                                  Can Play In Such An Endeavor And Supporting
                                  The Mayor's Climate Action Task Force.
                                  Directing The Administration To Discontinue
R-2008-127 11-21-08  Not_Included The Transit Department's Bus Transfer Fee
                                  Charge Upon Adoption Of This Resolution.
                                  Approving And Authorizing The Acceptance Of A
                                  Grant Agreement With America's Promise
R-2008-128 11-21-08  Not_Included Alliance And Providing An Appropriation To
                                  The Department Of Family And Community
                                  Services.
R-2008-129 11-21-08  Not_Included Providing Funding For The New Mexico Symphony
                                  Guild; Making An Appropriation.
                                  Authorizing The Mayor To Execute A Contract
                                  Agreement With The New Mexico Department Of
R-2008-130 11-21-08  Not_Included Children, Youth And Families And Providing An
                                  Appropriation To The Department Of Family And
                                  Community Services/Division Of Child And
                                  Family Development, Pre-Kindergarten.
                                  Approving And Authorizing The Grant
                                  Application For The Summer Food Service
R-2008-131 11-21-08  Not_Included Program For Children With The New Mexico
                                  Children, Youth And Families Department And
                                  Providing An Appropriation To The Department
                                  Of Family And Community Services.
                                  Authorizing The Mayor To Execute A Grant
                                  Agreement With The New Mexico Aging And Long-
R-2008-132 11-21-08  Not_Included Term Services Department, And Providing An
                                  Appropriation To The Department Of Family And
                                  Community Services.
                                  City Of Albuquerque Project Proposals To The
                                  Mid-Region Council Of Governments For
                                  Consideration Of Federal Funding In The
R-2008-133 11-21-08  Not_Included Proposed Fy 2010 To Fy 2015 Transportation
                                  Improvement Program For The Albuquerque
                                  Metropolitan Planning Area As Required By
                                  Council Bill No. O-07-89.
                                  Requiring A Study To Obtain Data On Factors
                                  Related To Retail Development, Review The
R-2008-134 12-11-08  Not_Included Data And Provide Recommendations To Promote A
                                  Favorable Environment For Retail Development;
                                  Providing Funding.
                                  Adopting The 2009 Action Plan And Program
                                  Investment Summary For The Expenditure Of
                                  Community Development Block (Cdbg) Grant,
R-2008-135 12-11-08  Not_Included Home Investment Partnership (Home) And
                                  Emergency Shelter Block Grant Funds And
                                  Providing An Appropriation To The Department
                                  Of Family And Community Services.
                                  Directing The Acting City Clerk To Undertake
R-2008-136 12-11-08  Not_Included The Process To Amend The Regulations Of The
                                  Albuquerque City Clerk For The Open And
                                  Ethical Elections Code.
                                  Adjusting Fiscal Year 2008 Appropriation For
R-2008-137 12-11-08  Not_Included Certain Funds In Program Strategies To
                                  Provide For Actual Expenditures And Adjusting
                                  Fiscal Year 2009 Appropriations.
                                  Approving And Authorizing The Grant
                                  Application For The Robert Wood Johnson
R-2008-138 12-11-08  Not_Included Foundation's Sustainability Grant For The
                                  Albuquerque Alliance For Active Living And
                                  Providing An Appropriation To Council
                                  Services.
                                  Extending The Time Period Established In R-
                                  07-10 For The Moratorium On Roadway Facility
                                  Projects And Interim Regulations For The
R-2008-139 12-18-08  Not_Included Issuance Of Building Permits For Properties
                                  Along Central Avenue Between 10th Street And
                                  Atrisco Drive Until June 15, 2009 Or Until A
                                  New Corridor Plan For The Area Is Adopted,
                                  Whichever First Occurs.
                                  Extending The Time Period Established In R-
                                  06-81 For The Prohibition On Certain
                                  Development Approvals For Properties Zoned C-
                                  1, C-2, C-3, O-1, R-C Or Su-1 In The Area
R-2008-140 12-11-08  Not_Included Around Gibson Boulevard Se And The South
                                  Campus Of The University Of New Mexico Unless
                                  Interim Design Regulations Are Met Until
                                  March 16, 2009 Or Until The South Yale Sector
                                  Development Plan Is Adopted, Whichever First
                                  Occurs.
                                  Approving And Authorizing The Filing Of The
                                  Attached Grant Application For An Air
R-2008-141 12-11-08  Not_Included Pollution Control Grant With The
                                  Environmental Protection Agency And Providing
                                  An Appropriation To The Environmental Health
                                  Department.
                                  Determining That A Certain Building, Or
                                  Structure At 11301 Montgomery Ne, Within The
                                  City Limits Of Albuquerque, New Mexico, Is So
R-2008-142 12-11-08  Not_Included Ruined, Damaged, And Dilapidated As To Be A
                                  Menace To The Public Comfort, Health, Peace,
                                  Or Safety And That It Be Required To Be
                                  Removed.
                                  Approving And Authorizing The Filing Of The
                                  Attached Subgrant Agreement For A Dna
R-2008-143 12-11-08  Not_Included Identification System Grant From The New
                                  Mexico Department Of Public Safety And
                                  Providing For An Appropriation To The City Of
                                  Albuquerque, Police Department.
                                  Approving And Authorizing The Filing Of The
                                  Attached Grant Application For A Fy2009
R-2008-144 12-11-08  Not_Included Bernalillo County Dwi Grant From Bernalillo
                                  County And Providing For An Appropriation To
                                  The City Of Albuquerque, Police Department.
                                  Approving And Authorizing The Filing Of The
                                  Attached Agreement For An Operation Dwi Grant
R-2008-145 12-11-08  Not_Included With The State Of New Mexico Department Of
                                  Transportation, Traffic Safety Bureau And
                                  Providing For An Appropriation To The City Of
                                  Albuquerque.
                                  Approving And Authorizing The Filing Of The
                                  Attached Grant Application For A Project Safe
R-2008-146 12-11-08  Not_Included Neighborhoods Program From The New Mexico
                                  Department Of Public Safety And Providing For
                                  An Appropriation To The City Of Albuquerque,
                                  Police Department.
                                  Declaring the Third Saturday in June
                                  "Albuquerque Adoption Appreciation Day" to
R-2008-147 12-23-08  Not_Included Show Support for the Families of Children
                                  Youth and Families Department ("CYFD")
                                  Adoptions and for the Families that Adopt
                                  Children on National Adoption Day.
 
 
 
Notes
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
2009 Resolutions
Res. No. Date Disposition Short Title
Res. No.   Date    Disposition   Short Title
                                 For An Area Of Approximately 460 Acres As
                                 Depicted In Attachment B And Bordered
                                 Generally By Menaul NE On The North,
                                 Pennsylvania Ne And Espanola Ne On The East,
                                 Constitution Ne And Interstate 40 On The
R-2009-001 1-15-09 1-7-19        South, And San Pedro NE On The West; Repealing
                                 The 1995 Uptown Sector Development Plan;
                                 Adopting The Revised 2008 Uptown Sector
                                 Development Plan As A Rank 3 Plan; Changing
                                 Existing Zoning From SU-3; SU-2/R-2 O-1; SU-2/
                                 R-2 C-2; SUu-2/R-1; R-1 To SU-3/MU-UPT And SU-
                                 3/MU-UPT/Buffer.
                                 Establishing A Legislative Policy For The City
R-2009-002 1-15-09  Not_Included Of Albuquerque For The 2009 Legislative
                                 Session Of The New Mexico Legislature.
                                 Declaring An Extension Until October 19, 2009
                                 Of The Moratorium On The Issuance Of New
R-2009-003 1-22-09  Not_Included Building Permits On Property Fronting Menaul
                                 Boulevard Between Carlisle Boulevard And
                                 Morris Avenue Unless The Proposed Development
                                 Meets Certain Height And Setback Requirements.
                                 Amending The Interim Design Regulations For
R-2009-004 1-15-09  Not_Included The East Gateway Sector Planning Area To Allow
                                 Single Level Commercial Structures Along
                                 Arterial Streets.
                                 Approving A Form Of Master Development
                                 Agreement For Implementation Of The Winrock
R-2009-005 1-15-09 1-14-3        Town Center Tax Increment Development
                                 Districts 1 And 2; Repealing All Actions
                                 Inconsistent With This Resolution.
                                 Approving A Form Of Master Development
                                 Agreement For Implementation Of The Quorum At
R-2009-006 1-15-09 1-14-2        Abq Uptown Tax Increment Development District;
                                 Repealing All Actions Inconsistent With This
                                 Resolution.
                                 Approving And Authorizing The Filing Of The
                                 Attached Agreement For A 2008 Cops Technology
                                 Program Grant ($2m) From The United States
R-2009-007 1-15-09  Not_Included Department Of Justice, Office Of Community
                                 Oriented Policing Services And Providing For
                                 An Appropriation To The City Of Albuquerque,
                                 Police Department.
                                 Approving And Authorizing The Filing Of The
                                 Attached Grant For An Albuquerque Police
                                 Department Fy09 Underage Drinking Enforcement
R-2009-008 1-15-09  Not_Included Program "Party Patrol" Grant From The New
                                 Mexico Department Of Transportation, Traffic
                                 Safety Bureau, And Providing For An
                                 Appropriation To The City Of Albuquerque,
                                 Police Department.
                                 Approving And Authorizing The Filing Of The
                                 Attached Agreement For An Operation Buckle
R-2009-009 1-15-09  Not_Included Down Grant From The State Of New Mexico
                                 Department Of Transportation, Traffic Safety
                                 Bureau, And Providing For An Appropriation To
                                 The City Of Albuquerque.
                                 Approving And Authorizing The Filing Of The
                                 Attached Agreement For An Operation Dwi-Bat
R-2009-010 1-15-09  Not_Included Mobile Grant With The State Of New Mexico
                                 Department Of Transportation, Traffic Safety
                                 Bureau, And Providing For An Appropriation To
                                 The City Of Albuquerque.
                                 Approving And Authorizing The Acceptance Of An
                                 Agreement With The State Of New Mexico
R-2009-011 1-15-09  Not_Included Department Of Health Grant Funds For A Cities
                                 Readiness Initiative (Cri) And Making An
                                 Appropriation To The Chief Administrative
                                 Officer Department In Fiscal Year 2009.
                                 Approving And Authorizing The Filing Of The
                                 Attached Agreement For A 2008 Cops Technology
                                 Program Grant ($222k) From The United States
R-2009-012 1-15-09  Not_Included Department Of Justice, Office Of Community
                                 Oriented Policing Services And Providing For
                                 An Appropriation To The City Of Albuquerque,
                                 Police Department.
                                 Approving And Authorizing The Acceptance Of
                                 Grant Funds From The New Mexico State Library
R-2009-013 2-13-09  Not_Included For The Lsca Technology Showcase Grant And
                                 Making An Appropriation To The Cultural
                                 Services Department In Fiscal Year 2009.
                                 For An Area Of Approximately 519 Acres And
                                 Bordered Generally By St. Cyr On The North,
                                 Columbia And Girard On The East, Gibson On The
                                 South, And University On The West; Adopting
                                 The 2008 South Yale Sector Development Plan
                                 (Attachment A) As A Rank 3 Plan; Changing
                                 Existing Zoning From R-1, R-T, R-G, R-2, R-3,
                                 C-1, C-2, O-1, P-R, Su-1/Transit Facility, Su-
R-2009-014 2-13-09 1-7-46        1/Community Center And Park, Su-1/Tennis
                                 Court, Su-1/Trailer Court, Su-1/Housing
                                 Office, Su-1/Prd, Su-1 Prd And C-2 Permissive
                                 Uses With Exclusions, Su-1/Prd & Commercial
                                 (20000 Sq. Ft.) & Self-Serve Storage Facility,
                                 Su-1/Prd 600 Du Max To Su-1/Church, Yale
                                 Corridor Commercial (YCC), Residential Multi-
                                 Family (RMF 1 And RMF 2), Neighborhood And
                                 Mixed Use (NMX), Planned Neighborhood
                                 Residential (PNR).
                                 Approving And Authorizing The Acceptance Of
                                 Grant Funds From The Corporation For National
                                 Service And New Mexico Aging And Long Term
R-2009-015 2-13-09  Not_Included Services Department And Making An
                                 Appropriation To The Department Of Senior
                                 Affairs Senior Companion Program In Fiscal
                                 Year 2009.
                                 Approving And Authorizing The Acceptance Of
                                 Grant Funds From The Corporation For National
                                 Service And New Mexico Aging And Long Term
R-2009-016 2-13-09  Not_Included Services Department And Making An
                                 Appropriation To The Department Of Senior
                                 Affairs Foster Grandparent Program In Fiscal
                                 Year 2009.
                                 Approving And Authorizing The Acceptance Of
                                 Grant Funds From The Corporation For National
                                 Service And New Mexico Aging And Long Term
R-2009-017 2-13-09  Not_Included Services Department And Making An
                                 Appropriation To The Department Of Senior
                                 Affairs Retired And Senior Volunteer Program
                                 In Fiscal Year 2009.
                                 Approving And Authorizing The Filing Of The
                                 Attached Grant Agreement For An FY08 Forensic
R-2009-018 2-13-09  Not_Included Dna Backlog Reduction Program From The United
                                 States Department Of Justice And Providing For
                                 An Appropriation To The City Of Albuquerque,
                                 Police Department.
                                 Approving And Authorizing The Filing Of The
                                 Attached Grant For An Albuquerque Police
                                 Department Enforcing Underage Drinking Grant
R-2009-019 2-13-09  Not_Included From The New Mexico Children, Youth, And
                                 Families Department, And Providing For An
                                 Appropriation To The City Of Albuquerque,
                                 Police Department.
                                 Approving And Authorizing The Filing Of The
                                 Attached Grant Agreement For An Albuquerque
                                 Police Department Albuquerque Safe Streets
R-2009-020 2-13-09  Not_Included Hidta Gang Task Force Project From The Federal
                                 Bureau Of Investigation (FBI) And Providing
                                 For An Appropriation To The City Of
                                 Albuquerque, Police Department.
                                 Approving And Authorizing The Mayor To Execute
                                 A Sub-Grant Agreement For A 2008 Paul
                                 Coverdell Forensic Science Improvement Program
R-2009-021 2-13-09  Not_Included From The State Of New Mexico Department Of
                                 Public Safety And Providing For An
                                 Appropriation To The City Of Albuquerque,
                                 Police Department.
                                 Approving And Authorizing The Filing Of The
                                 Attached Grant Application With The United
                                 States Department Of Justice, Bureau Of
R-2009-022 2-13-09  Not_Included Justice Assistance For A Fiscal Year 2008
                                 Edward Byrne Memorial Justice Assistance Grant
                                 And Providing For An Appropriation To The City
                                 Of Albuquerque, Police Department.
                                 Amending F/S R-08-51, Enactment No. R-2008-
                                 093, Which Called For Creating A Working Group
                                 To Study The Issue Of The Formation Of A
                                 Regional Redevelopment Authority For The City
R-2009-023 2-17-09  Not_Included Of Albuquerque And Bernalillo County;
                                 Specifying Duties And Responsibilities; And
                                 Defining Membership; To Extend Time For A
                                 Report To The City On The Working Group's
                                 Findings To The End Of Calendar Year 2009.
                                 Declaring An Emergency; Directing The
                                 Administration To Expedite An Accounting Of
R-2009-024 2-17-09  Not_Included The Current Status And Funding For Incomplete
                                 And Uninitiated State Capital Outlay-Funded
                                 Projects.
                                 Adopting A Sector Development Plan Map
                                 Amendment, 08EPC-40037, To Amend The Seven Bar
                                 Ranch Sector Development Plan Zoning Map To
                                 Change The Zoning From SU-2/R-2 Uses To SU-
                                 1 For Housing For Older Persons With Limited
R-2009-025 3-5-09  1-7-28        Medical Facilities And SU-1 For C-1 Permissive
                                 Uses With No Drive-Up Service Windows, For All
                                 Or A Portion Of Tracts B-9E-1 And B-9F, Seven
                                 Bar Ranch, Approximately 27 Acres, Located On
                                 Ellison Drive Nw, Between West Cibola Loop And
                                 East Cibola Loop.
 
Res. No. Date Disposition Short Title
Res. No.   Date    Disposition   Short Title
                                 Authorizing The Mayor To Execute The
                                 Albuquerque Business Education Compact
R-2009-026 3-5-09   Not_Included Recommendations And Providing An Appropriation
                                 To The Department Of Family And Community
                                 Services.
                                 Creating A Census 2010 Complete Count
R-2009-027 3-5-09   Not_Included Committee To Promote A 2010 Census Awareness
                                 Campaign With The Goal Of Ensuring That Every
                                 Resident In Albuquerque Is Counted.
                                 Amending The Adopted Capital Implementation
R-2009-028 3-9-09   Not_Included Program Of The City Of Albuquerque Aviation
                                 Department By Supplementing Current
                                 Appropriations.
                                 Relating To Capital Expenditures; Expanding
R-2009-029 3-5-09   Not_Included The Scope Of The District 1 Community And
                                 Senior Center Enhancement Project To Allow For
                                 The Acquisition And Installation Of Equipment.
                                 Recognizing The Area In And Around Louisiana
                                 Blvd. Between Central Ave. And Zuni Ave.,
R-2009-030 3-5-09  6-1-4         Comprising The Communities Of La Mesa,
                                 Trumbull, South San Pedro, Elder Homestead,
                                 Fair West And Surrounding Areas, As The
                                 "International District".
                                 Approving And Authorizing The Acceptance Of
                                 State Of New Mexico Litter Control And
                                 Beautification Grant Funds, A Grant Under The
R-2009-031 3-16-09  Not_Included New Mexico Litter Control And Beautification
                                 Act With The New Mexico State Tourism
                                 Department; And Providing For An Appropriation
                                 To The City Of Albuquerque Solid Waste
                                 Management Department.
                                 Approving And Authorizing The Acceptance Of
                                 State Of New Mexico Refuse Container Cleaning,
                                 Deodorizing, And Sanitizing Grant Funds With
R-2009-032 3-16-09  Not_Included The New Mexico State Environment Department;
                                 And Providing For An Appropriation To The City
                                 Of Albuquerque Solid Waste Management
                                 Department.
                                 Requiring The Administration To Present
R-2009-033 2-16-09  Not_Included Evidence That The City's Safe Traffic
                                 Operations Program Contributes To Traffic
                                 Safety.
                                 Rescinding Certain Restrictions On The El
R-2009-034 3-23-09  Not_Included Encanto Funds Of The Housing And Economic
                                 Development Trust Funds.
                                 Amending The West Side Strategic Plan By
                                 Adding A New West Side Strategic Plan Chapter
                                 Consisting Of The Entire Southwest Albuquerque
                                 Strategic Action Plan Excepting Pages 3-11
R-2009-035 3-24-09 1-11-8        Through 3-39 That Contain Specific Text
                                 Amendments To Three Sector Development Plans
                                 And By Changing Existing Portions Of The West
                                 Side Strategic Plan With Text Amendments
                                 Described On Pages 3-3 To 3-7 Of The Southwest
                                 Albuquerque Strategic Action Plan.
                                 Amending The Rio Bravo Sector Development Plan
                                 With Text Amendments To Bring It Into
                                 Conformance With Southwest Albuquerque
R-2009-036 3-24-09 1-7-33        Strategic Action Plan And West Side Strategic
                                 Plan Policies, Priorities, And Suggestions As
                                 Proposed On Pages 3-21 To 3-30 Of The
                                 Southwest Albuquerque Strategic Action Plan.
                                 Amending The Tower/Unser Sector Development
                                 Plan To Bring It Into Conformance With
                                 Southwest Albuquerque Strategic Action Plan
R-2009-037 3-24-09 1-7-34        And West Side Strategic Plan Policies,
                                 Priorities, And Suggestions With Text
                                 Amendments As Proposed On Pages 3-11 To 3-20
                                 Of The Southwest Albuquerque Strategic Action
                                 Plan.
                                 Amending The West Route 66 Sector Development
                                 Plan To Bring It Into Conformance With
                                 Southwest Albuquerque Strategic Action Plan
R-2009-038 3-24-09 1-7-31        And West Side Strategic Plan Policies,
                                 Priorities, And Suggestions With Text
                                 Amendments As Proposed On Pages 3-31-3-39 Of
                                 The Southwest Albuquerque Strategic Action
                                 Plan.
                                 Amending Enactment No. R-2005-032 Which
                                 Established The Huning Highland-East Downtown
                                 Urban Conservation Overlay Zone And Adopted A
                                 Regulatory Plan, Including Architectural
R-2009-039 3-24-09 1-10-1        Standards, For The Overlay Zone; Incorporating
                                 Text Amendments To The Huning Highland-East
                                 Downtown Regulatory Plan; Correcting Technical
                                 Errors And Clarifying Application Of The
                                 Regulations In The Regulatory Plan.
                                 Adjusting Appropriations For The Job Access
R-2009-040 3-24-09  Not_Included Program To Provide For Actual Revenues And
                                 Expenditures.
                                 Approving And Authorizing The Acceptance Of
                                 Grant Funds From The New Mexico State Library
R-2009-041 3-24-09  Not_Included For The Basic State Grants In Aid And
                                 Providing For An Appropriation To The Cultural
                                 Services Department In Fiscal Year 2009.
                                 Imposing A Moratorium On Additional Access To
R-2009-042 3-24-09  Not_Included Four Hills Until The Completion Of The East
                                 Gateway Sector Development Plan.
                                 Extending A Moratorium Established In R-07-338
                                 On Roadway Facility Projects And The Issuance
                                 Of Building Permits For Significant
                                 Construction Or Demolition Along 4TH Street NW
                                 Between Marble Avenue And Solar Road And
R-2009-043 3-30-09  Not_Included Extending The Applicability Of The Interim
                                 Design Regulations Until September 30TH, 2009
                                 Or Until Final Consideration By The City
                                 Council Of The North 4th Street Redevelopment
                                 Study: Rank III Plan Or The Lifting Of The
                                 This Moratorium By The City Council, Whichever
                                 Shall First Occur.
                                 Repealing Enactment R-10-1991 Regarding The
                                 Requirement For A Fiscal Impact Analysis Of
                                 Certain Legislation; Establishing A Policy To
R-2009-044 4-16-09 3-2-12        Require A Fiscal Impact Analysis On All
                                 Ordinances, Resolutions, And Executive
                                 Communications, And To Require An Economic
                                 Impact Analysis On All Legislation Creating A
                                 Financial Impact On The Community.
                                 Appropriating District Benefit Fees To The
R-2009-045 4-16-09  Not_Included Downtown Business Improvement District In
                                 Accordance With The Approved Budget.
                                 Approving And Authorizing The Filing Of The
                                 Attached Agreement For A 2009 Salary Overtime
R-2009-046 4-16-09  Not_Included Reimbursement Program With The Bureau Of
                                 Alcohol, Tobacco, Firearms And Explosives
                                 (Atf) And Providing For An Appropriation To
                                 The City Of Albuquerque.
                                 Approving And Authorizing The Filing Of The
                                 Attached Grant Application For A Selective
                                 Traffic Enforcement Program (Step) From The
R-2009-047 4-16-09  Not_Included New Mexico Department Of Transportation,
                                 Traffic Safety Bureau And Providing For An
                                 Appropriation To The City Of Albuquerque,
                                 Police Department.
                                 Approving And Authorizing The Filing Of The
                                 Attached Agreement For A 2009 Dwi Drunkbuster
R-2009-048 4-16-09  Not_Included Overtime Enforcement Program With The State Of
                                 New Mexico Department Of Transportation,
                                 Traffic Safety Bureau And Providing For An
                                 Appropriation To The City Of Albuquerque.
                                 Approving and Authorizing The Acceptance of a
R-2009-049 4-16-09  Not_Included Grant Agreement With The State of New Mexico
                                 and Making An Appropriation To The Department
                                 of Finance & Administrative Services
R-2009-050 4-16-09  Not_Included Authorizing The Amendment Of City Ordinance
                                 Council Bill No. F/S O-06-33.
 
Res. No. Date Disposition Short Title
Res.  Date Disposition Short Title
No.
R-    4-    Not        Designating Previously Appropriated Funds For Co-Sponsorship Of The Annual
2009- 16-  Included    Cesar E. Chavez Day Celebration.
051   09
R-    4-    Not        Approving The Programming Of Funds And Projects For The 2005 - 2017 Component
2009- 17-  Included    Capital Improvement Plan (CCIP).
052   09
R-    5-5-  Not        Adopting The FY 2010 - FY 2011 Two-Year Urban Enhancement Program And
2009- 09   Included    Appropriating Funds For The Urban Enhancement Program's Projects.
053
R-    5-5-  Not        Approving A Grant Application To The Department Of Housing And Urban
2009- 09   Included    Development For A 2009 Continuum Of Care Grant; And Providing An Appropriation
054                    To The Department Of Family And Community Services.
R-    5-5-  Not        Extending A Moratorium Established In C/S R-07-278 And Extended By R-08-138 On
2009- 09   Included    Subdivision Approvals Within The Tijeras Arroyo.
055
R-                     Approving And Authorizing The Filing Of The Attached Grant Application For The
2009- 5-5-  Not        2009 Drug Recognition Expert (Dre) Program With The State Of New Mexico
056   09   Included    Department Of Transportation, Traffic Safety Bureau And Providing An
                       Appropriation To The City Of Albuquerque.
                       Adopting The 2009 Neighborhood Stabilization Plan Incorporated Into The State
R-    5-5-  Not        Of New Mexico's 2009 Action Plan Substantial Amendment For The U.S. Department
2009- 09   Included    Of Housing And Urban Development Neighborhood Stabilization Program For The
057                    Expenditure Of Neighborhood Stabilization Program (Nsp) Funds And Providing An
                       Appropriation To The Department Of Family And Community Services.
R-                     Approving And Authorizing Amendments To The 2008 - 2013 Transportation
2009- 5-5- 4-2-11      Improvement Program And Providing For An Appropriation Of American Recovery
058   09               And Reinvestment Act (Arra) Funding To The Department Of Municipal Development
                       Capital Program.
R-                     Amending The Adopted Capital Implementation Program Of The City Of Albuquerque
2009- 5-5-  Not        By Providing For Appropriations Of American Recovery And Reinvestment Act
059   09   Included    (Arra) And Federal Aviation Administration (Faa) Funding To The Aviation
                       Department Capital Program.
R-    5-    Not
2009- 18-  Included    Calling For The Initiation Of An Investigation.
060   09
R-    5-               Expressing The City's Support For The Nob Hill Mainstreet Project To
2009- 18-  1-7-32      Collaborate In A Community Development Revitalization Program.
061   09
R-    5-    Not        Authorizing The Giving Of Notice For Bids For The Sale Of City Of Albuquerque,
2009- 18-  Included    New Mexico General Obligation Bonds Consisting Of $54,970,000 General Purpose
062   09               Bonds, Series 2009a.
R-    5-    Not        Adopting The 2008 Action Plan Third Amendment For The Expenditure Of Homeless
2009- 18-  Included    Prevention And Rapid Re-Housing Program (Hprp) Stimulus Funds And Providing An
063   09               Appropriation To The Department Of Family And Community Services.
R-    5-               Approving And Authorizing The Filing Of The Attached Grant Application With
2009- 18-   Not        The United States Department Of Justice, Office Of Community Oriented Policing
064   09   Included    Services For A 2009 Recovery Act Cops Hiring Program Grant And Providing For
                       An Appropriation To The City Of Albuquerque, Police Department.
R-    5-               Adopting The Action Plan For The Expenditure Of Energy Efficiency And
2009- 18-   Not        Conservation Formula Block Grant American Recovery And Reinvestment Act Of
065   09   Included    2009 (Arra) Funds And Providing An Appropriation To The Department Of
                       Environmental Health Capital Fund.
R-    5-               Approving And Authorizing The Filing Of The Attached Grant Application With
2009- 18-   Not        The United States Department Of Justice, Office On Violence Against Women For
066   09   Included    A 2009 Stop Violence Against Women Grant And Providing For An Appropriation To
                       The City Of Albuquerque, Police Department.
R-    5-
2009- 18-  1-17-3      Amending F/S R-08-47; Adding A Member To The Rail Yards Advisory Board.
067   09
R-    4-    Not        Approving The Programming Of Funds And Projects For The 2009-2018 Decade Plan
2009- 17-  Included    For Capital Improvements Including The 2009 Two-Year Capital Budget; Making
068   09               Appropriations From The Transportation Infrastructure Tax Fund 340.
R-    5-    Not        Adopting The 2008 Action Plan Second Amendment For The Expenditure Of
2009- 18-  Included    Community Development Block Grant Recovery (CDBG-R) Stimulus Funds And
069   09               Providing An Appropriation To The Department Of Family And Community Services.
R-    5-               Resolution Proclaiming Hazardous Fire Conditions In The City Of Albuquerque
2009- 18-  3-9-5       That Endanger The Health Safety And Welfare Of The Citizens And Authorizing
070   09               The Albuquerque Fire Department To Impose Restrictions On Open Fires And
                       Smoking Within The City Of Albuquerque.
R-    5-               Directing The City Of Albuquerque To Expend No Additional Funds On
2009- 22-   Not        Construction At The Albuquerque Bicycle Park Until There Has Been A Cost-
071   09   Included    Benefit Analysis Completed, Made Available To And Reviewed By The City Council
                       With Respect To The Park.
R-    5-               Approving And Authorizing The Acceptance Of Funds For Albuquerque Highway
2009- 18-   Not        Clean Up Program Through A Cooperative Agreement With The New Mexico State
072   09   Included    Highway And Transportation Department And Providing For An Appropriation To
                       The Solid Waste Management Department.
R-                     Appropriating Funds For Operating The Government Of The City Of Albuquerque
2009- 6-2-  Not        For Fiscal Year 2010, Beginning July 1, 2009 And Ending June 30, 2010;
073   09   Included    Adjusting Fiscal Year 2009 Appropriations; And Adjusting Operating Grants And
                       Capital Funds.
R-    6-1-  Not        Approving And Authorizing The Filing Of The Attached Grant Award For A Dna Id
2009- 09   Included    System From The State Of New Mexico Department Of Public Safety And Providing
074                    An Appropriation To The City Of Albuquerque.
                       Approving The Appointment Of Directors And Officers To Fill The Vacancies On
R-    5-               The Governing Body Of The Montecito Estates Public Improvement District Caused
2009- 22-   Not        By The Resignation Of Directors And Officers, Pursuant To The Public
075   09   Included    Improvement District Act, Nmsa 1978, §§ 5-11-1 To -27 (2001, As Amended) And
                       City Ordinance Enactment No. 0-2003-12, Council Bill No. Fs 0-03-84; And
                       Repealing All Actions Inconsistent With This Resolution.
 
Res. No. Date Disposition Short Title
Res. No.   Date    Disposition   Short Title
                                 Amending Floor Substitute R-08-182 Approving
                                 The Programming Of Funds And Projects For The
R-2009-076 6-1-09   Not_Included 2009 Two-Year Capital Budget; Making
                                 Appropriations From The Transportation
                                 Infrastructure Tax Fund 340.
                                 Establishing One-Year Objectives For The City
R-2009-077 6-1-09  4-7-5         Of Albuquerque In Fiscal Year 2010; To Meet
                                 Five-Year Goals.
                                 Providing For The Retention Of Outside Counsel
                                 To Determine, Through Litigation, The Validity
                                 Of The City Council's Capital Improvements
                                 Program Adopted By Council Resolution On April
                                 6, 2009; Authorizing The President Of The City
R-2009-078 5-22-09  Not_Included Council To Sign And Enter Into An Agreement Or
                                 Agreements With Outside Counsel To Represent
                                 The City Council And Those City Councilors Who
                                 Choose To Be Separately Named In Their
                                 Capacity As Councilors; Designating Up To
                                 Fifty Thousand Dollars ($50,000) In Previously
                                 Appropriated Funds For That Purpose.
                                 Approving And Authorizing The Filing Of A
                                 Section 5307 Arra Grant With The Federal
R-2009-079 5-18-09 4-2-11        Transit Administration, Amending The 2008 -
                                 2013 Transportation Improvement Program And
                                 Providing For An Appropriation To The Transit
                                 Department.
                                 Approving And Authorizing The Filing Of The
R-2009-080 6-12-09  Not_Included Attached Grant Application For A Pm Fine
                                 Monitoring Grant With The Environmental
                                 Protection Agency.
                                 Approving And Authorizing An Agreement For Bus
                                 Stop Facilities With The New Mexico Department
R-2009-081 6-12-09  Not_Included Of Transportation For Federal Highway
                                 Administration (Fhwa) Funding And Providing
                                 For An Appropriation To The Transit
                                 Department.
                                 Amending The Adopted Capital Implementation
R-2009-082 6-12-09  Not_Included Program Of The City Of Albuquerque By
                                 Expanding The Scope Of Cip Activity Renovation
                                 Of Old Main Facility Phase 1 (7298050).
                                 Approving And Authorizing The Filing Of A
                                 Grant Application For A Rideshare/
                                 Transportation Demand Management Program With
R-2009-083 6-12-09  Not_Included The Federal Highway Administration Through The
                                 State Department Of Transportation And
                                 Providing For An Appropriation To The Transit
                                 Department.
                                 Relating To Capital Projects; Creating A 98th
R-2009-084 6-12-09 4-2-11        Street And Benavidez Improvements Project In
                                 The Transportation Infrastructure Tax Fund
                                 340.
                                 Approving And Authorizing The Filing Of Grant
                                 Applications With The United States Department
                                 Of Transportation Federal Aviation
                                 Administration (Faa) For An American Recovery
                                 And Reinvestment Act (Arra) Grant And An
R-2009-085 6-12-09  Not_Included Airport Improvement Program (Aip) Grant;
                                 Amending The Adopted Capital Implementation
                                 Program Of The City Of Albuquerque By
                                 Approving New Projects And Providing For
                                 Appropriations Of And Fund Balance Transfer To
                                 The Aviation Department Capital Program.
                                 Adopting The Action Plan For The Us
                                 Environmental Protection Agency's Clean Diesel
R-2009-086 6-12-09  Not_Included Campaign Funds Through The American Recovery
                                 And Reinvestment Act Of 2009 (Arra) Funds And
                                 Providing An Appropriation To The
                                 Environmental Health Department.
                                 Approving And Authorizing The Filing Of The
                                 Attached Grant Application With The United
                                 States Department Of Justice, Bureau Of
R-2009-087 6-12-09  Not_Included Justice Assistance For A 2009 Recovery Act
                                 Byrne Competitive Grant: Enhanced Crisis
                                 Outreach And Providing For An Appropriation To
                                 The City Of Albuquerque, Police Department.
                                 Approving And Authorizing The Filing Of The
                                 Attached Grant Application With The United
                                 States Department Of Justice, Bureau Of
R-2009-088 6-12-09  Not_Included Justice Assistance For A 2009 Recovery Act
                                 Combating Criminal Narcotics Activity Stemming
                                 From The Southern Border Program Grant And
                                 Providing For An Appropriation To The City Of
                                 Albuquerque, Police Department.
                                 Relating To Capital Projects; Expanding The
                                 Scope Of A Project For Design, Installation,
R-2009-089 6-12-09  Not_Included Replacement, Repair And Construction Of
                                 Improvements At Community And Senior Centers
                                 In Council District Three.
                                 Directing The Administration To Not Approve
                                 Any Modifications To Public Infrastructure Or
                                 Vacation Of Public Right-Of-Way On Or
                                 Adjoining University Boulevard Or Redondo
                                 Drive Between Central Avenue And Lomas
                                 Boulevard Requested By And For The Benefit Of
                                 The University Of New Mexico Until There Has
                                 Been A Facilitated Meeting Between The
R-2009-090 6-12-09  Not_Included University Of New Mexico, The City Engineer,
                                 The City Councilor Who Represents The Area
                                 Where The Application For Modification Is
                                 Being Made, And Representatives From The
                                 Spruce Park And Sycamore Neighborhood
                                 Associations To Assess The Impacts Of Unm
                                 Development On Adjacent Neighborhoods And
                                 Mitigation Plans Are Developed; Declaring An
                                 Emergency.
                                 Authorizing A Grant Application To The U.S.
                                 Department Of Health And Human Services, Early
R-2009-091 6-23-09  Not_Included Head Start Program And Providing An
                                 Appropriation To The Department Of Family And
                                 Community Services.
                                 Authorizing The Mayor To Execute A Contract
                                 Agreement With The New Mexico Department Of
                                 Children, Youth And Families And Providing An
R-2009-092 6-23-09  Not_Included Appropriation To The Department Of Family And
                                 Community Services/Division Of Child And
                                 Family Development, Teen Parent Residence
                                 Program (TPRP).
                                 Authorizing The Mayor To Execute A Contract
                                 Agreement With The New Mexico Department Of
                                 Children, Youth And Families And Providing An
R-2009-093 6-23-09  Not_Included Appropriation To The Department Of Family And
                                 Community Services/Division Of Child And
                                 Family Development, Temporary Assistance For
                                 Needy Families Program (TANF).
                                 Authorizing The Mayor To Execute A Contract
                                 Agreement With The New Mexico Department Of
R-2009-094 6-23-09  Not_Included Children, Youth And Families And Providing An
                                 Appropriation To The Department Of Family And
                                 Community Services/Division Of Child And
                                 Family Development, Pre-Kindergarten Program.
                                 Approving An Agreement For FY09 Cmaq Fixed
                                 Route Expansion With The New Mexico Department
R-2009-095 6-23-09  Not_Included Of Transportation For Federal Highway
                                 Administration (FHWA) Funding And Providing
                                 For An Appropriation To The Transit
                                 Department.
                                 Approving And Authorizing The Filing Of The
                                 Attached Grant Application For A 100 Days And
R-2009-096 6-23-09  Not_Included Nights Program From The New Mexico Department
                                 Of Transportation, Traffic Safety Bureau And
                                 Providing For An Appropriation To The City Of
                                 Albuquerque, Police Department.
                                 Approving And Authorizing New Mexico
                                 Department Of Transportation Funds For The
R-2009-097 6-23-09  Not_Included Purpose Of Conducting Traffic Safety Education
                                 And Enforcement And Providing For An
                                 Appropriation To The City Of Albuquerque,
                                 Police Department.
                                 Providing Support For The Albuquerque Gospel
R-2009-098 7-1-09   Not_Included Music Festival And Designating The Use Of
                                 $45,000 In Previously Appropriated Funds To
                                 The Cultural Services Department.
                                 Transferring Funds From The General Fund (110)
R-2009-099 7-2-09   Not_Included To The Capital Acquisition Fund (305);
                                 Appropriating Those Funds To The City Council
                                 Projects Project.
                                 Adopting A Proposition To Be Submitted To The
                                 Voters At The Next Municipal Election
R-2009-100 7-1-09   Not_Included Concerning The Imposition Of A Quarter Of One
                                 Percent Transportation Infrastructure Gross
                                 Receipts Tax.
 
Res. No. Date Disposition Short Title
Res.  Date Disposition Short Title
No.
R-    7-1-  Not        Concerning The Regular Municipal Election To Be Held In The City Of
2009- 09   Included    Albuquerque, New Mexico On Tuesday, The Sixth Of October 2009.
101
                       Concerning A Municipal Bond Election To Be Held In The City Of Albuquerque At
                       The Next City General Election; Submitting To A Vote Of The Qualified,
R-                     Registered Electors And Nonresident Municipal Electors At Such Election
2009- 7-7-  Not        Certain Questions For Authorizing The Issuance Of General Obligation Bonds In
102   09   Included    Varying Principal Amounts And For Specified Public Purposes; Providing The
                       Form Of The Bond Questions And The Designation Clause For Such Questions On
                       The Ballot; Prescribing Other Details In Connection With Such Election And
                       Bonds; And Ratifying Action Previously Taken In Connection Therewith.
R-    7-               Amending The East Gateway Interim Design Regulations, Extending The Moratorium
2009- 13-  1-7-44      And The Term Of The Interim Design Regulations For The Sector Planning Area.
103   09
R-                     Amending The Adopted Capital Implementation Program Of The City Of Albuquerque
2009- 7-7-  Not        By Approving A New Project And Providing For Appropriation Of Environmental
104   09   Included    Protection Agency (EPA) American Recovery And Reinvestment Act (ARRA) Funding
                       To The Aviation Department Capital Program.
R-    7-    Not        Amending The Adopted Capital Implementation Program Of The City Of Albuquerque
2009- 10-  Included    By Approving New Projects, Supplementing Current Appropriations And Changing
105   09               The Scope Of Existing Projects.
R-    7-               Authorizing The Director Of Council Services To Enter Into An Agreement With A
2009- 15-   Not        Firm Or Individual To Provide Rail Yard Project Management Services;
106   09   Included    Designating Up To Fifty Thousand Dollars ($50,000) In Previously Appropriated
                       Funds For That Purpose.
R-    8-               Approving And Authorizing The Acceptance Of The Attached Grant Award For Funds
2009- 20-   Not        Under The Assistance To Firefighters Grant With The Federal Emergency
107   09   Included    Management Agency And Making An Appropriation To The Fire Department In Fiscal
                       Year 2009.
R-    8-    Not        Making An Appropriation For The Department Of Senior Affairs, Operating Grants
2009- 20-  Included    Fund (265) For A Volunteer Recognition Event For Fiscal Year 2009.
108   09
R-    8-               Approving And Authorizing The Filing Of The Attached Grant Award For Funds
2009- 20-   Not        Under The Emergency Medical Services Fund Act With The State Of New Mexico
109   09   Included    Department Of Health And Providing For An Appropriation To The Fire
                       Department.
R-    8-    Not        Approving The FY10 Audit Plan As Submitted By The Accountability In Government
2009- 20-  Included    Oversight Committee.
110   09
R-    8-    Not        Relating To Capital Expenditures; Expanding The Scope Of A Project For
2009- 20-  Included    Designing, Constructing, Installing And Renovating Parks Within City Council
111   09               District One.
R-    8-    Not        Calling On The Administration To Develop Support For The Creation Of A City-
2009- 20-  Included    Wide Renewable Energy Financing District.
112   09
                       Authorizing The City Of Albuquerque To Submit Proposals To The Mid-Region
R-    8-    Not        Council Of Governments For Consideration Of Federal Transportation Enhancement
2009- 20-  Included    (STP-E) Funding In The Proposed FY 2010 To FY 2015 Transportation Improvement
113   09               Program For The Albuquerque Metropolitan Planning Area As Required By Council
                       Bill No. O-07-89.
R-    8-    Not        Approving And Authorizing The Filing Of The Attached Grant Agreement For A
2009- 20-  Included    Bernalillo County Dwi Program From Bernalillo County And Providing For An
114   09               Appropriation To The City Of Albuquerque, Police Department.
R-    8-    Not        Relating To Capital Projects; Making A Contingent Appropriation Of
2009- 20-  Included    Transportation Infrastructure Tax Funds For A Paseo Del Norte And I-25
115   09               Interchange Improvement Project.
R-    8-    Not        Providing For The Removal Of Certain Non-Native Trees And Illegally Dumped
2009- 28-  Included    Debris From The Tijeras Arroyo. Designating Previously Appropriated Funds For
116   09               The Purposes Of This Resolution.
R-    8-    Not        Relating To Capital Projects; Expanding The Scope Of The 2007 Open Space Land
2009- 28-  Included    Acquisition Project, Activity #7354180, To Set Aside $400,000 For The
117   09               Acquisition Of Open Space In The Tijeras Arroyo.
R-    8-    Not        Requesting That The Metropolitan Transportation Board Of The Albuquerque
2009- 28-  Included    Metropolitan Planning Area Reclassify Southern Avenue As An Urban Collector
118   09               Roadway Between Eubank Boulevard And Juan Tabo Boulevard.
                       Approving The Appointment Of A Director To Fill A Vacancy On The Governing
R-    8-               Body Of The Saltillo Public Improvement District Caused By The Resignation Of
2009- 28-   Not        A Director, Pursuant To The Public Improvement District Act, Nmsa 1978, §§ 5-
119   09   Included    11-1 To -27 (2001, As Amended), City Ordinance Enactment No. O-2003-12, And
                       City Council Enactment R-2007-150; And Repealing All Actions Inconsistent With
                       This Resolution.
R-    8-    Not        Calling For Transparency In The City Of Albuquerque's Affordable Housing
2009- 28-  Included    Program; Directing The Administration To Establish A Website.
120   09
                       Approving The Petition And Application Of Jth, Llc, For Formation Of The
                       Volterra Public Improvement District Pursuant To The Public Improvement
                       District Act, Nmsa 1978, §§ 5-11-1 To -27 (2001, As Amended) And City
                       Ordinance Enactment No. 0-2003-12, Council Bill No. Fs 0-03-84; Making
                       Findings In Connection With The Petition And Application And Supporting
                       Documentation Requesting Approval Of The Formation Of The District;
R-    8-               Determining The Real Property To Be Included Within The District And The
2009- 28-  1-15-3      Purposes For Which The District Is Being Formed; Approving The General Plan,
121   09               Rate, Method Of Apportionment And Manner Of Collection Of A Special Levy To Be
                       Imposed Upon Real Property Within The District, And Approving A Development
                       Agreement For Implementation Of The District; Providing For Governance Of The
                       District; Providing That Bonds And Other Obligations Of The District Shall Not
                       Be Obligations Of The City Of Albuquerque; Ratifying Certain Actions
                       Heretofore Taken; And Repealing All Actions Inconsistent With This Formation
                       Resolution.
R-    9-1-  Not        Concerning The Amended Designation Of Polling Places For The Regular Municipal
2009- 09   Included    Election To Be Held In The City Of Albuquerque, New Mexico On Tuesday, The
122                    Sixth Of October 2009.
R-    8-    Not        Designating Previously Appropriated Funds For An Appraisal And Title Search Of
2009- 28-  Included    The City View Mobile Home Park Property.
123   09
R-    9-1-  Not        Concerning The Appointment Of Precinct Boards For Each Polling Place For The
2009- 09   Included    Regular Municipal Election To Be Held In The City Of Albuquerque, New Mexico
124                    On Tuesday, The Sixth Of October 2009.
                       Authorizing The City Of Albuquerque To Submit A Request To The Mid-Region
R-    8-    Not        Council Of Governments To Add Federal Transportation Funding For The
2009- 28-  Included    Reconstruction Of Lead & Coal Avenues To The FY 2010 To FY 2015 Transportation
125   09               Improvement Program For The Albuquerque Metropolitan Planning Area As Required
                       By Council Bill No. O-07-89.
 
Res. No. Date Disposition Short Title
Res. No.   Date     Disposition   Short Title
                                  Requesting A Review Of Educational Access
                                  Television Services Previously Provided By
R-2009-126 9-1-09    Not_Included The Tal-Net Cable Television Channel;
                                  Reserving Funds And Designating Previously
                                  Appropriated Funds.
R-2009-127 9-1-09    Not_Included Revising The Official List Of City Council
                                  Meetings For October And November 2009.
                                  Approving And Authorizing Mothers Against
                                  Drunk Driving (Madd) Funds To Provide For
R-2009-128 9-22-09   Not_Included Overtime Hours For The Purpose Of Conducting
                                  Underage Drinking Enforcement Operations And
                                  Providing For An Appropriation To The City Of
                                  Albuquerque, Police Department.
                                  Approving And Authorizing The Filing Of The
                                  Attached Grant Application With The United
                                  States Department Of Justice, Bureau Of
R-2009-129 9-22-09   Not_Included Justice Assistance For A 2009 Recovery Act
                                  Byrne Jag Formula Grant And Providing For An
                                  Appropriation To The City Of Albuquerque,
                                  Police Department.
                                  Designating Council Project Funds For An Arts
R-2009-130 9-22-09   Not_Included Education Outreach Program For The Fiscal
                                  Year Beginning July 1, 2009.
                                  Designating Council Projects Funds To The
R-2009-131 9-22-09   Not_Included Albuquerque Historical Society For An
                                  Education Outreach Program For The Fiscal
                                  Year Beginning July 1, 2009.
                                  Approving And Authorizing The Filing Of The
                                  Attached Grant Application For An Air
R-2009-132 9-22-09   Not_Included Pollution Control Grant With The
                                  Environmental Protection Agency And Providing
                                  An Appropriation To The Environmental Health
                                  Department.
                                  Approving And Authorizing An Agreement For
                                  Park And Ride Facility Development With The
R-2009-133 9-22-09   Not_Included New Mexico Department Of Transportation For
                                  Federal Highway Administration (Fhwa) Funding
                                  And Providing For An Appropriation To The
                                  Transit Department.
                                  Declaring The Intent Of The City Council Of
                                  The City Of Albuquerque, New Mexico To
                                  Conduct A Public Hearing And To Consider For
                                  Adoption An Ordinance Approving The Formation
                                  Of A Renewable Energy Financing District
                                  Pursuant To The New Mexico Renewable Energy
                                  Financing District Act, Laws Of 2009,
R-2009-134 9-22-09   Not_Included Chapter 180; Making Statements In Accordance
                                  With Section 5(A) Of The Act; Authorizing And
                                  Directing Publication, In A Newspaper Of
                                  General Circulation Within The City, Of A
                                  Notice Of Public Meeting And Hearing To Be
                                  Held On October 7, 2009 To Consider For
                                  Adoption The Ordinance Approving The
                                  Formation Of The District.
R-2009-135 9-22-09   Not_Included Providing Fourth Quarter FY/10 Funding For A
                                  Rescue Unit To Be Located At Fire Station 8.
                                  Amending The Adopted Capital Implementation
R-2009-136 9-22-09   Not_Included Program Of The City Of Albuquerque To
                                  Appropriate And De-Appropriate Funding From
                                  Existing Projects And Approve New Projects.
                                  Concerning The Municipal Runoff Election To
                                  Be Held In The City Of Albuquerque, New
R-2009-137 9-22-09   Not_Included Mexico, On Tuesday, The Twenty Fourth Day Of
                                  November 2009 And Making A Contingent
                                  Appropriation.
                                  Requiring The City Of Albuquerque To Install
R-2009-138 9-22-09   Not_Included Traffic Signals At The Intersections Of
                                  Central Avenue And Morningside Drive And
                                  Central Avenue And Wellesley Drive.
                                  Expressing Support For The Albuquerque
R-2009-139 9-22-09   Not_Included International Festival And Designating The
                                  Use Of $18,000 In Previously Appropriated
                                  Funds To The Economic Development Department.
                                  Adopting A Policy Establishing The Need For
                                  Gross Vehicle Weight Restrictions And A Lower
R-2009-140 9-22-09   Not_Included Speed Limit On Mountain Road Ne From Broadway
                                  Boulevard To The I-25 Frontage Road;
                                  Declaring An Emergency.
                                  Approving And Authorizing The Filing Of The
                                  Attached Grant Agreement For An Albuquerque
                                  Police Department Tracs Statewide Rollout
R-2009-141 9-22-09   Not_Included (Traffic Records Improvement And Development)
                                  Project From The New Mexico Department Of
                                  Transportation, Traffic Safety Bureau And
                                  Providing For An Appropriation To The City Of
                                  Albuquerque, Police Department.
                                  Approving The Appointment Of Directors To
                                  Fill Vacancies On The Governing Body Of The
                                  Mesa Del Sol Tax Increment Development
                                  Districts 1 Through 5 Caused By The
                                  Resignation Of Certain Directors Pursuant To
R-2009-142 9-29-09   Not_Included The Tax Increment For Development Act, Nmsa
                                  1978, Sections 5-15-1 Through 28 Nmsa, As
                                  Amended; City Enactment No. O-2006-44; City
                                  Enactment R-2006-126; And City Enactment No.
                                  R-2007-174; And Repealing All Actions
                                  Inconsistent With This Resolution.
                                  Adopting Policy Declaring A Moratorium Of Up
                                  To Three Months On The Issuance Of Any
                                  Demolition Or Building Permits For Dwelling
R-2009-143 9-29-09   Not_Included Units Or Apartments Within The University
                                  Neighborhoods Sector Development Plan Area As
                                  More Specifically Defined Herein; Declaring
                                  An Emergency.
                                  Supporting The Incorporation Of Valle De
R-2009-144 10-5-09   Not_Included Atrisco Into A Municipality Upon An Election
                                  Approving The Incorporation.
                                  Declaring The City Council's Intent To Limit
                                  The Term Of The Quarter Cent Transportation
R-2009-145 9-29-09   Not_Included Infrastructure Tax To A Maximum Of Ten Years
                                  Should Voters Approve The Tax At The October
                                  6, 2009 Municipal Election.
                                  Calling On General Electric To Work With New
                                  Mexico's Congressional Delegation To Preserve
R-2009-146 9-29-09   Not_Included The General Electric Aviation Plant In The
                                  City Of Albuquerque And To Work On The
                                  Development Of New Product Lines For
                                  Manufacture In The City Of Albuquerque.
                                  Approving And Authorizing The Filing Of A
                                  Section 5307 Formula Grant With The Federal
R-2009-147 10-15-09  Not_Included Transit Administration (Fta) Of The U.S.
                                  Department Of Transportation And Providing
                                  For An Appropriation To The Transit
                                  Department.
                                  Creating A Community Gardens Study Group To
                                  Examine Ways To Strengthen And Expand
R-2009-148 10-15-09 2-8-5         Community Gardens In Albuquerque And To
                                  Recommend Changes To Local Ordinances Or
                                  Regulations That Will Enhance Development Of
                                  Community Gardens.
                                  Approving And Authorizing A Draft Memorandum
                                  Of Agreement With The New Mexico Department
R-2009-149 10-15-09  Not_Included Of Health For The West Nile Virus
                                  Surveillance And Data Management Program And
                                  Making An Appropriation To The Environmental
                                  Health Department.
                                  Approving And Authorizing The Acceptance Of
                                  Funds For Albuquerque Highway Clean Up
                                  Program Through A Cooperative Agreement With
R-2009-150 10-15-09  Not_Included The New Mexico State Highway And
                                  Transportation Department And Providing For
                                  An Appropriation To The Solid Waste
                                  Management Department.
 
Res. No. Date Disposition Short Title
Res. No.   Date     Disposition   Short Title
                                  Approving And Authorizing The Acceptance Of
                                  State Of New Mexico Litter Control And
                                  Beautification Grant Funds, A Grant Under The
R-2009-151 10-15-09  Not_Included New Mexico Litter Control And Beautification
                                  Act With The New Mexico State Tourism
                                  Department; And Providing For An
                                  Appropriation To The City Of Albuquerque
                                  Solid Waste Management Department.
                                  Amending The Adopted Capital Implementation
                                  Program Of The City Of Albuquerque By
R-2009-152 10-15-09  Not_Included Providing For Appropriations Of American
                                  Recovery And Reinvestment Act (Arra) Funding
                                  To The Fire Department Capital Program.
                                  Authorizing A Grant Application To The U.S.
                                  Department Of Health And Human Services,
R-2009-153 10-15-09  Not_Included Under The American Recovery And Reinvestment
                                  Act, Early Head Start Expansion Program And
                                  Providing An Appropriation To The Department
                                  Of Family And Community Services.
R-2009-154 10-15-09  Not_Included Authorizing A Sector Plan For An Area
                                  Delineated In Exhibit A Of This Resolution.
                                  Authorizing The Mayor To Execute A Grant
                                  Agreement With The New Mexico Aging And Long-
R-2009-155 10-15-09  Not_Included Term Services Department, And Providing An
                                  Appropriation To The Department Of Family And
                                  Community Services.
                                  Authorizing A Grant Application To The U.S.
                                  Department Of Health And Human Services,
R-2009-156 10-15-09  Not_Included Under The American Recovery And Reinvestment
                                  Act, Early Head Start Quality Improvement)
                                  Program And Providing An Appropriation To The
                                  Department Of Family And Community Services.
                                  Calling For Transparency In The City Of
                                  Albuquerque's Use Of Public Funds In The
R-2009-157 10-15-09 6-1-5         Areas Of Purchasing, Economic Development,
                                  Accounting, And Hiring Of Retired Employees;
                                  Directing The Administration To Expand Or Add
                                  New Information To The City Website.
                                  Relating To Capital Projects; Requiring The
                                  City Of Albuquerque To Install Traffic
R-2009-158 10-15-09  Not_Included Signals At The Intersection Of Claremont
                                  Avenue And San Pedro Road; Creating A Project
                                  Within The Transportation Infrastructure Tax
                                  Fund 340.
                                  Extending A Moratorium Established In R-07-
                                  338 On Roadway Facility Projects And The
                                  Issuance Of Building Permits For Significant
                                  Construction Or Demolition Along 4th Street
                                  Nw Between Marble Avenue And Solar Road And
R-2009-159 10-15-09  Not_Included Extending The Applicability Of The Interim
                                  Design Regulations Until January 1, 2010 Or
                                  Until Final Consideration By The City Council
                                  Of The North 4th Street Redevelopment Study:
                                  Rank Iii Plan Or The Lifting Of This
                                  Moratorium By The City Council, Whichever
                                  Shall First Occur.
                                  Appropriating Funds To The Capital
                                  Implementation Program For The Sixth Area
R-2009-160 10-22-09  Not_Included Command, Phase Ii, Which Was Approved By
                                  Voters As A Part Of The 2009 General
                                  Obligation Program.
                                  Setting The Official List Of City Council
R-2009-161 11-2-09   Not_Included Meetings From January 2010 Through December
                                  2010.
R-2009-162 11-2-09   Not_Included Determining Reasonable Notice Of Public
                                  Meetings Of The City Council.
                                  Designating Previously Appropriated Community
R-2009-163 11-2-09   Not_Included Development Block Grant Funds To The Sawmill
                                  Community Land Trust For Neighborhood
                                  Revitalization Planning Activities.
                                  Extending A Moratorium Established In C/S R-
R-2009-164 10-27-09  Not_Included 07-278 And Extended On Subdivision Approvals
                                  Within The Tijeras Arroyo.
                                  Directing The Administration To Create An
                                  Office Of Veteran's Affairs Serving Veterans
                                  Through Advocacy And Referrals; Post On The
R-2009-165 11-19-09 4-5-6         City's Website A List Of Resources For
                                  Transition Assistance Available To Returning
                                  Veterans From Combat; Develop A Comprehensive
                                  Resources Booklet For Jobs And Housing For
                                  Veterans.
                                  Relating To Capital Projects; Creating A
R-2009-166 11-10-09  Not_Included Gunnison Road Nw Improvement Project In The
                                  Transportation Infrastructure Tax Fund 340.
                                  Relating To Fund 305; Designating Council
R-2009-167 11-10-09  Not_Included Project Funds For The South Valley Economic
                                  Development Center.
                                  Relating To Capital Projects; Creating A
R-2009-168 11-10-09  Not_Included Sunset Gardens Road Sw Improvement Project In
                                  The Transportation Infrastructure Tax Fund
                                  340.
                                  Approving And Authorizing The Filing Of The
                                  Attached Grant Application With The United
                                  States Department Of Justice, Bureau Of
R-2009-169 11-10-09  Not_Included Justice Assistance For A Fy09 Congressionally
                                  Selected Award: Fac Forensic Interview
                                  Training And Crisis Support Psychiatrist And
                                  Providing For An Appropriation To The City Of
                                  Albuquerque, Police Department.
                                  Relating To The City Of Albuquerque, New
                                  Mexico Airport Refunding Revenue Bonds,
                                  Series 2009a; Authorizing The Sale Of The
                                  Series 2009a Bonds To The New Mexico Finance
                                  Authority, Establishing The Exact Aggregate
                                  Principal Amount Of The Series 2009a Bonds Of
R-2009-170 11-10-09  Not_Included $26,080,000, Maturity Dates, Rates Of
                                  Interest, Redemption Features, And Price With
                                  Respect To Such Series 2009a Bonds In
                                  Accordance With City Ordinance No. 09-88
                                  Adopted On October 7, 2009; Approving Other
                                  Documents Relating To The Series 2009a Bonds;
                                  And Ratifying Action Previously Taken In
                                  Connection Therewith.
                                  Calling For The City Of Albuquerque To Work
                                  With The Albuquerque Metropolitan Area Flood
                                  Control Authority (Amafca) And Other
                                  Governmental Entities To Commission A Study
                                  By Unm's Bureau Of Business And Economic
R-2009-171 11-10-09  Not_Included Research (Bber) To Determine The Impacts Of
                                  The Federal Emergency Management Agency's
                                  (Fema) Remapping Of The Rio Grande Valley
                                  Floodplain And Requirements To Reconstruct
                                  Levees In The Middle Rio Grande Valley In
                                  Order To Comply With New Federal Standards;
                                  Expanding The Scope Of A Capital Project.
                                  Approving And Authorizing The Filing Of The
                                  Attached Grant Application With New Mexico
R-2009-172 11-10-09  Not_Included Department Of Public Safety For A 2009
                                  Recovery Act Byrne Jag Formula Grant And
                                  Providing For An Appropriation To The City Of
                                  Albuquerque, Police Department.
                                  Approving And Authorizing The Filing Of The
                                  Attached Grant Agreement For An Albuquerque
                                  Police Department Tracs Statewide Rollout
R-2009-173 11-10-09  Not_Included Phase 2 Grant From The New Mexico Department
                                  Of Transportation, Traffic Safety Bureau And
                                  Providing For An Appropriation To The City Of
                                  Albuquerque, Police Department.
                                  Approving And Authorizing The Acceptance Of
                                  The Attached Grant Award With The United
                                  States Department Of Justice, Bureau Of
R-2009-174 11-10-09  Not_Included Justice Assistance For A 2009 Byrne Jag
                                  Formula Grant And Providing For An
                                  Appropriation To The City Of Albuquerque,
                                  Police Department.
                                  Approving And Authorizing The Filing Of The
                                  Attached Grant Application With New Mexico
R-2009-175 11-10-09  Not_Included Department Of Public Safety For A 2009 Jag
                                  Formula Grant And Providing For An
                                  Appropriation To The City Of Albuquerque,
                                  Police Department.
                                  Nuisance Abatement At 3301 Mateo Prado NW
                                  Within The City Limits Of Albuquerque, New
R-2009-176 11-24-09  Not_Included Mexico Is So Ruined, Damaged And Dilapidated
                                  As To Be A Menace To The Public Comfort,
                                  Health, Peace Or Safety And That It Is To Be
                                  Required To Be Removed.
                                  Naming The Fitness Center Of Los Volcanes
R-2009-177 11-30-09 6-7-13        Senior Center, "Joe O. Armijo Senior Fitness
                                  Center."
                                  Relating To Capital Projects; Requiring The
                                  City Of Albuquerque To Install A High-
R-2009-178 11-19-09  Not_Included Intensity Activated Cross Walk (Hawk) Traffic
                                  Signal On Lester Drive At Mid-Block; Creating
                                  A Project Within The Transportation
                                  Infrastructure Tax Fund 340.
                                  Relating To Fund 305; Designating Twenty-Five
                                  Thousand Dollars ($25,000) From The City
                                  Council Projects Activity In Fund 305 To Be
R-2009-179 12-7-09   Not_Included Used By The Economic Development Department
                                  To Contract With The Steps/Southeast Team For
                                  Entrepreneurial Success (A.K.A. The Sirolli
                                  Project) For Operational Support In Fiscal
                                  Year 2010.
 
 
 
Notes
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
2010 Resolutions
Res. No. Date Disposition Short Title
Res. No.   Date     Disposition   Short Title
                                  Nuisance Abatement At 406 Veranda Nw Within
                                  The City Limits Of Albuquerque, New Mexico Is
R-2010-001 12-18-09  Not_Included So Ruined, Damaged And Dilapidated As To Be A
                                  Menace To The Public Comfort, Health, Peace
                                  Or Safety And That It Is To Be Required To Be
                                  Removed.
                                  Adopting The 2010 Action Plan And Program
                                  Investment Summary For The Expenditure Of
                                  Community Development Block (Cdbg) Grant,
R-2010-002 12-18-09  Not_Included Home Investment Partnership (Home) And
                                  Emergency Shelter Block Grant (Esg) Funds And
                                  Providing An Appropriation To The Department
                                  Of Family And Community Services.
                                  Appropriating Funds To The Capital
R-2010-003 12-18-09  Not_Included Implementation Program For The 2009 General
                                  Obligation Program.
                                  Approving And Authorizing The Filing Of The
                                  Attached Grant Agreement For An Enforcing
                                  Underage Drinking Laws Program From The New
R-2010-004 12-18-09  Not_Included Mexico Children, Youth And Families
                                  Department (Cyfd) And Providing For An
                                  Appropriation To The City Of Albuquerque,
                                  Police Department.
                                  Relating to Capital Projects; Creating an
                                  Unser Boulevard Extension Project - Compass
R-2010-005 12-18-09  Not_Included Drive to Lyons Boulevard; Appropriating Funds
                                  in the Transportation Infrastructure Tax Fund
                                  340.
                                  Supporting City of Albuquerque Downtown
R-2010-006 12-18-09  Not_Included Action Team Mainstreet Project in Applying
                                  for New Mexico Mainstreet Appropriation FY 10
                                  Funds.
                                  Authorizing The Removal Of Certain
R-2010-007 1-4-10    Not_Included Uncollectible Accounts From The City's
                                  Accounts Receivable Records Fy 2004 & Prior.
                                  Designating Previously Appropriated Funds For
R-2010-008 1-4-10    Not_Included Co-Sponsorship Of The Annual Cesar E. Chavez
                                  Day Celebration.
                                  Determination That No Update Of Impact Fees
R-2010-009 1-4-10    Not_Included Or Component Capital Improvement Plan Is
                                  Needed Pursuant To The State Development Fees
                                  Act.
                                  Imposing An Extension Until June 20, 2010 On
                                  The Moratorium Provided For In R-09-288 On
R-2010-010 1-4-10    Not_Included The Issuance Of Demolition Or Building
                                  Permits For Dwelling Units Or Apartments
                                  Within The University Neighborhoods Sector
                                  Development Plan.
                                  Approving And Authorizing The Filing Of The
                                  Attached Grant Application With The United
                                  States Department Of Justice, Office On
R-2010-011 1-4-10    Not_Included Violence Against Women For A 2009 Recovery
                                  Act Stop Violence Against Women Grant And
                                  Providing For An Appropriation To The City Of
                                  Albuquerque, Police Department.
                                  Approving And Authorizing The Acceptance Of
                                  An Agreement With The State Of New Mexico
                                  Department Of Health Grant Funds For 2009
R-2010-012 1-4-10    Not_Included Novel H1N1 Vaccine And Related Response And
                                  Making An Appropriation To The Chief
                                  Administrative Officer Department In Fiscal
                                  Year 2010.
                                  Approving And Authorizing The Grant
                                  Application For The Summer Food Service
R-2010-013 1-14-10   Not_Included Program For Children With The New Mexico
                                  Children, Youth And Families Department And
                                  Providing An Appropriation To The Department
                                  Of Family And Community Services.
                                  Approving And Authorizing The Mayor To
                                  Execute A Sub-Grant Agreement For A Fy2010
                                  Paul Coverdell Forensic Science Improvement
R-2010-014 1-14-10   Not_Included Program From The State Of New Mexico
                                  Department Of Public Safety And Providing For
                                  An Appropriation To The City Of Albuquerque,
                                  Police Department.
                                  Adjusting Fiscal Year 2009 Appropriation For
R-2010-015 1-14-10   Not_Included Certain Funds In Program Strategies To
                                  Provide For Actual Expenditures And Adjusting
                                  Fiscal Year 2010 Appropriations.
                                  Approving And Authorizing The Filing Of The
                                  Attached Agreement For A 2009 Cops Technology
                                  Program Grant From The United States
R-2010-016 1-14-10   Not_Included Department Of Justice, Office Of Community
                                  Oriented Policing Services And Providing For
                                  An Appropriation To The City Of Albuquerque,
                                  Police Department.
                                  Nuisance Abatement At 813 John St Se Within
                                  The City Limits Of Albuquerque, New Mexico Is
R-2010-017 1-14-10   Not_Included So Ruined, Damaged And Dilapidated As To Be A
                                  Menace To The Public Comfort, Health, Peace
                                  Or Safety And That It Is To Be Required To Be
                                  Removed.
                                  Relating To Capital Projects; Creating A Mill
R-2010-018 1-14-10   Not_Included Pond Road Nw Development Project In The
                                  Transportation Infrastructure Tax Fund 340.
                                  Approving The Appointment Of Directors To
                                  Fill Vacancies On The Governing Body Of The
                                  Quorum At Abq Uptown Tax Increment
                                  Development District Caused By The
                                  Resignation Of Certain Directors Pursuant To
R-2010-019 1-14-10  1-14-2        The Tax Increment For Development Act, Nmsa
                                  1978, Sections 5-15-1 Through 28 Nmsa, As
                                  Amended; City Enactment No. O-2006-44; City
                                  Enactment R-2008-119; And City Enactment No.
                                  R-2009-006; And Repealing All Actions
                                  Inconsistent With This Resolution.
                                  Approving The Appointment Of Directors To
                                  Fill Vacancies On The Governing Body Of The
                                  Winrock Town Center Tax Increment Development
                                  Districts 1 And 2 Caused By The Resignation
                                  Of Certain Directors Pursuant To The Tax
R-2010-020 1-14-10  1-14-3        Increment For Development Act, Nmsa 1978,
                                  Sections 5-15-1 Through 28 Nmsa, As Amended;
                                  City Enactment No. O-2006-44; City Enactment
                                  R-2008-120; And City Enactment No. R-2009-
                                  005; And Repealing All Actions Inconsistent
                                  With This Resolution.
                                  Authorizing The City Of Albuquerque To Submit
                                  Proposals To The Mid-Region Council Of
                                  Governments For Consideration Of Federal
R-2010-021 1-14-10   Not_Included Highway Safety Improvement Program (Hsip)
                                  Funding In The Proposed Fy 2010 To Fy 2015
                                  Transportation Improvement Program For The
                                  Albuquerque Metropolitan Planning Area As
                                  Required By Council Bill No. O-07-89
                                  Creating A Neighborhood Traffic Management
R-2010-022 1-14-10  2-7-4         Policy Study Group To Examine Implementation
                                  Standards For Traffic Calming Measures Within
                                  Residential Neighborhoods.
                                  Extending A Moratorium Established In R-07-
                                  338 On Roadway Facility Projects And The
                                  Issuance Of Building Permits For Significant
                                  Construction Or Demolition Along 4th Street
                                  Nw Between Marble Avenue And Solar Road And
                                  Extending The Applicability Of The Interim
R-2010-023 1-14-10   Not_Included Design Regulations Until April 5, 2010 Or
                                  Until Final Consideration By The City Council
                                  Of The North 4th Street Rank Iii Corridor
                                  Plan Or The Lifting Of This Moratorium By The
                                  City Council, Whichever Shall First Occur;
                                  Expanding The Moratorium To Prohibit The
                                  Approval Of Zone Changes.
                                  Establishing A Legislative Policy For The
R-2010-024 1-14-10   Not_Included City Of Albuquerque For The 2010 Legislative
                                  Session Of The New Mexico Legislature.
                                  Supporting An Affordable Housing Project On A
                                  Parcel Presently Owned By The City; Conveying
                                  City Owned Property For The Purpose Of
                                  Constructing An Affordable Housing Project;
                                  Designating $1,000,000 In City Affordable
R-2010-025 1-29-10   Not_Included Housing Fund 240 For The Affordable Housing
                                  Project; Requesting The Administration To
                                  Follow City Procedures To Convey The Parcel
                                  And Approve A Contract For Funding To Be Used
                                  For The Purpose Of Providing Affordable
                                  Housing For Low- And Moderate-Income
                                  Individuals And Families.
 
Res. No. Date Disposition Short Title
Res. No.   Date    Disposition   Short Title
                                 Re-Establishing A Policy To Require A Nuisance
R-2010-026 2-5-10   Not_Included Prevention Agreement Prior To Approval Of The
                                 Issuance Or Transfer Of A Liquor License In
                                 Certain Areas Of The City.
                                 Relating To Capital Projects; Creating A
                                 Southern Boulevard, Traffic Safety, Traffic
                                 Management And Streetscape Project - Eubank
R-2010-027 2-3-10   Not_Included Boulevard To Juan Tabo Boulevard;
                                 Appropriating Funds In The Transportation
                                 Infrastructure Tax Fund 340 And To Project
                                 7100470.
                                 Adjusting Fiscal Year 2010 Appropriations For
R-2010-028 2-3-10   Not_Included Certain Funds And Program Strategies To
                                 Provide For A Reduction In Anticipated Gross
                                 Receipts And Other Revenues.
                                 Establishing Priorities For The 2011 Capital
                                 Improvements Plan; Defining The Critiera To Be
R-2010-029 2-3-10   Not_Included Used In Rating Project Proposals; Assigning
                                 Weights To The Criteria; Allocating Amounts
                                 For Different Purposes Within The 2011 General
                                 Obligation Bond Program.
R-2010-030 2-3-10   Not_Included Supporting And Joining The Leave No Child
                                 Inside Coalition Of New Mexico.
                                 Approving And Authorizing The Filing Of The
                                 Attached Agreement For A 2009 Cost
R-2010-031 2-3-10   Not_Included Reimbursement Program With The Federal Bureau
                                 Of Investigations (Fbi) And Providing For An
                                 Appropriation To The City Of Albuquerque.
                                 Approving And Authorizing The Filing Of The
                                 Attached Agreement For A 2010 Dwi Drunkbuster
R-2010-032 2-3-10   Not_Included Overtime Enforcement Program With The State Of
                                 New Mexico Department Of Transportation,
                                 Traffic Safety Bureau And Providing For An
                                 Appropriation To The City Of Albuquerque.
                                 Amending The East Gateway Interim Design
R-2010-033 2-3-10   Not_Included Regulations, Extending The Moratorium And The
                                 Term Of The Interim Design Regulations For The
                                 Sector Planning Area.
                                 Providing Partial Funding For The Construction
                                 Of Fire Stations 2 And 7 And Providing Funding
                                 For The Acquisition Of Marked Police Vehicles;
R-2010-034 2-8-10   Not_Included Providing Funding For The Continuation Of The
                                 Party Patrol Program For The Remainder Of
                                 Fy10; Making Appropriations Within The Photo
                                 Enforcement Fund 288, The Capital Acquisition
                                 Fund 305, And The General Fund 110.
                                 Declaring The City Of Albuquerque's Commitment
                                 To Developing A Strong "Town-Gown"
                                 Relationship And Engaging In An Ongoing,
                                 Cooperative Partnership With The Largest
                                 Higher Education Institutions In Albuquerque -
                                 The University Of New Mexico And Central New
R-2010-035 2-11-10  Not_Included Mexico Community College - And Bernalillo
                                 County For The Benefit Of The Institutions And
                                 Of The Citizens Of The Albuquerque
                                 Metropolitan Area; Resolving To Participate In
                                 The Development Of A Comprehensive
                                 Transportation Study; Designating Previously
                                 Appropriated Funds For The Purposes Of This
                                 Resolution.
                                 Amending The Adopted Capital Implementation
                                 Program Of The City Of Albuquerque By
R-2010-036 2-11-10  Not_Included Approving New Projects And Providing For
                                 Appropriations Of Federal Aviation
                                 Administration (Faa) Funding To The Aviation
                                 Department Capital Program.
                                 Approving And Authorizing The Filing Of The
                                 Attached Grant Application For A 2009
                                 Bulletproof Vest Partnership Grant From The
R-2010-037 2-11-10  Not_Included United States Department Of Justice, Office Of
                                 Justice Programs, And Providing For An
                                 Appropriation To The City Of Albuquerque
                                 Police Department.
                                 Amending The Adopted Capital Implementation
                                 Program Of The City Of Albuquerque By
R-2010-038 3-2-10   Not_Included Approving New Projects, Supplementing Current
                                 Appropriations And Changing The Scope Of
                                 Existing Projects.
                                 Approving And Authorizing The Filing Of The
                                 Attached Grant Application For The 2010-11
                                 Drug Recognition Expert (Dre) Program With The
R-2010-039 3-2-10   Not_Included State Of New Mexico Department Of
                                 Transportation, Traffic Safety Bureau And
                                 Providing An Appropriation To The City Of
                                 Albuquerque.
                                 Relating To Capital Projects; A Resolution
                                 Authorizing The City Of Albuquerque To Apply
R-2010-040 3-2-10   Not_Included For A Bus And Bus Facilities Livability
                                 Initiative Grant To Fund Development Of A Rail
                                 Runner Express Commuter Rail Station And Park
                                 And Ride.
                                 Repeal Of The 1986 North I-25 Sector
                                 Development Plan And Adoption Of The Revised
                                 North I-25 Sector Development Plan And
                                 Addition Of Design Standards And An Su-
                                 2 Prefix For Certain Property's Without A
                                 Sector Plan Designation Within The Revised
R-2010-041 3-19-10 1-7-30        North I-25 Sector Boundary As Specified In
                                 Exhibit 1. The Revised Sector Plan Boundaries
                                 Are Paseo Del Norte And San Bernardino Avenue
                                 To The South, Louisiana Boulevard To The East,
                                 The North Diversion Channel And Edith
                                 Boulevard To The West And Sandia Indian
                                 Reservation's Sovereign Line On The North And
                                 Contains Approximately 2,800 Acres.
                                 Approving And Authorizing The Filing Of The
                                 Attached Grant Application For A Selective
                                 Traffic Enforcement Program (Step) From The
R-2010-042 3-12-10  Not_Included New Mexico Department Of Transportation,
                                 Traffic Safety Bureau And Providing For An
                                 Appropriation To The City Of Albuquerque,
                                 Police Department.
                                 Supporting The Re-Establishment Of The
                                 Albuquerque/ Bernalillo County Government
R-2010-043 3-12-10  Not_Included Commission ("Abcgc") And Approving An
                                 Intergovernmental Agreement Between The City
                                 And The County Of Bernalillo.
                                 Directing The Administration Not To Enforce
R-2010-044 3-12-10  Not_Included Any Of The Provisions Of The "Plumbing Fixture
                                 Retrofit On Sale Ordinance" Pending City
                                 Council Review Of That Ordinance.
                                 Authorizing The Mayor To Execute A Grant
                                 Agreement With The New Mexico Aging And Long-
R-2010-045 3-26-10  Not_Included Term Services Department, And Providing An
                                 Appropriation To The Department Of Family And
                                 Community Services.
                                 Approving And Authorizing The Acceptance Of A
                                 Grant Award From The Corporation For National
                                 Service And The New Mexico Aging And Long Term
R-2010-046 3-26-10  Not_Included Services Department And Providing For An
                                 Appropriation To The Department Of Senior
                                 Affairs Foster Grandparent Program In Fiscal
                                 Year 2010.
                                 Approving And Authorizing The Acceptance Of A
                                 Grant Award From The Corporation For National
                                 Service And The New Mexico Aging And Long Term
R-2010-047 3-26-10  Not_Included Services Department And Providing For An
                                 Appropriation To The Department Of Senior
                                 Affairs Senior Companion Program In Fiscal
                                 Year 2010.
                                 Approving And Authorizing The Acceptance Of A
                                 Grant Award From The Corporation For National
                                 Service And The New Mexico Aging And Long Term
R-2010-048 3-26-10  Not_Included Services Department And Making An
                                 Appropriation To The Department Of Senior
                                 Affairs Retired And Senior Volunteer Program
                                 In Fiscal Year 2010.
                                 Approving And Authorizing The Filing Of The
                                 Attached Grant Award Agreement For A 2010 Teen
R-2010-049 3-26-10  Not_Included Seat Belt Demonstration Program With The State
                                 Of New Mexico Department Of Transportation,
                                 Traffic Safety Bureau And Providing An
                                 Appropriation To The City Of Albuquerque.
                                 Adopting The North 4th Street Corridor Plan As
                                 A Rank 3 Plan; For The Area Bordered Generally
                                 By The City Limit On The North, The Railroad
                                 Tracks On The East, Mountain Road On The South
R-2010-050 4-9-10  1-7-47        And 5th Street On The West And Establishing
                                 Overlay Zone Districts Including The North
                                 Fourth Mixed Use District, The North Fourth
                                 Transit Oriented Development District And The
                                 North Fourth Infill Development District And
                                 The Los Alamos Addition Historic District.
 
Res. No. Date Disposition Short Title
Res. No.   Date    Disposition   Short Title
                                 Approving And Authorizing The Filing Of A
                                 Grant Application For A Food Service Program
                                 For Children With The New Mexico Department Of
R-2010-051 4-9-10   Not_Included Children, Youth And Families And Providing An
                                 Appropriation To The Department Of Family And
                                 Community Services/Division Of Child And
                                 Family Development.
                                 Authorizing The Mayor To Execute A Grant
                                 Agreement With The New Mexico State Highway
                                 And Transportation Department For Safe,
                                 Accountable, Flexible, Efficient,
R-2010-052 4-9-10   Not_Included Transportation Equity Act: A Legacy For Users
                                 (Safetea-Lu) Funding To Operate A Bicycle
                                 Safety Education Program In Outdoor Recreation
                                 And Providing An Appropriation To The Parks
                                 And Recreation Department.
                                 Approving And Authorizing The Filing Of The
                                 Attached Grant Application For An E911 Grant
R-2010-053 4-9-10   Not_Included Program From The New Mexico Department Of
                                 Finance And Administration, Local Government
                                 Division And Providing For An Appropriation To
                                 The City Of Albuquerque, Police Department.
                                 Relating To Capital Projects; Amending
                                 Resolution R-10-20 To Adjust The Percentage Of
R-2010-054 4-9-10   Not_Included 2011 General Obligation Bond Proceeds That Are
                                 To Be Dedicated To Public Safety And Storm
                                 Drainage.
                                 Extending A Moratorium Established In C/S R-
R-2010-055 4-9-10   Not_Included 07-278 And Extended On Subdivision Approvals
                                 Within The Tijeras Arroyo.
                                 Relating To Capital Projects; Creating A
                                 Traffic And Pedestrian Safety Project On
                                 Rainbow Boulevard And Universe Boulevard
R-2010-056 5-12-10  Not_Included Within The Transportation Infrastructure Tax
                                 Fund 340; Directing The Administration To Make
                                 Lighting, Safety And Street Improvements;
                                 Appropriating And Designating Funds In The
                                 Transportation Infrastructure Tax Fund 340.
                                 Directing The Administration To Develop A
                                 Comprehensive Plan To Reduce The Escalating
R-2010-057 5-12-10  Not_Included Operational And Capital Costs Of Maintaining
                                 The Current Fleet Of Police Vehicles And To
                                 Provide A Report To The Council.
                                 Approving And Authorizing The Filing Of The
                                 Attached Agreement For A 2010 Reimbursement
R-2010-058 6-2-10   Not_Included Program With The Department Of Justice, U.S.
                                 Marshal's Office And Providing For An
                                 Appropriation To The City Of Albuquerque.
                                 Approving And Authorizing The Acceptance Of A
                                 Letter Of Award With The State Of New Mexico
                                 Department Of Homeland Security Grant Funds
R-2010-059 6-2-10   Not_Included For 2009 State Homeland Security Grant Program
                                 And Making An Appropriation To The Chief
                                 Administrative Officer Department In Fiscal
                                 Year 2010.
                                 Appropriating Funds For Operating The
                                 Government Of The City Of Albuquerque For
                                 Fiscal Year 2011, Beginning July 1, 2010 And
R-2010-060 6-3-10   Not_Included Ending June 30, 2011; Adjusting Fiscal Year
                                 2010 Appropriations; And Adjusting Operating
                                 Grants And Capital Funds; Stating The City
                                 Council's Intent With Regard To Wage Decreases
                                 And Unpaid Holidays.
                                 Establishing One-Year Objectives For The City
R-2010-061 6-2-10  4-7-6         Of Albuquerque In Fiscal Year 2011; To Meet
                                 Five-Year Goals.
                                 Approving An Agreement For Fy10 Cmaq Fixed
R-2010-062 6-2-10   Not_Included Route Expansion With The New Mexico Department
                                 Of Transportation For Federal Highway
                                 Administration (Fhwa) Funding.
                                 Approving And Authorizing The Mayor To Execute
                                 A Sub-Grant Agreement For A 2009 Paul
                                 Coverdell Forensic Science Improvement Program
R-2010-063 6-2-10   Not_Included From The State Of New Mexico Department Of
                                 Public Safety And Providing For An
                                 Appropriation To The City Of Albuquerque,
                                 Police Department.
                                 Establishing Policy Regarding A Fee Structure
R-2010-064 6-18-10  Not_Included For Renting Space In City Owned Community
                                 Centers, Health And Social Service Centers And
                                 Senior Centers.
R-2010-065 6-18-10 1-6-12        Approving The Near Heights Expansion
                                 Metropolitan Redevelopment Plan.
                                 Approving And Authorizing The Acceptance Of
                                 Grant Funds From The New Mexico State Library
R-2010-066 6-18-10  Not_Included For The Basic State Grants In Aid And
                                 Providing For An Appropriation To The Cultural
                                 Services Department In Fiscal Year 2010.
                                 Approving A Grant Application To The
                                 Department Of Housing And Urban Development
R-2010-067 6-18-10  Not_Included For A 2010 Continuum Of Care Grant; And
                                 Providing An Appropriation To The Department
                                 Of Family And Community Services.
                                 Approving And Authorizing The Filing Of A
                                 Grant Application For A Rideshare/
                                 Transportation Demand Management Program With
R-2010-068 6-18-10  Not_Included The Federal Highway Administration Through The
                                 State Department Of Transportation And
                                 Providing For An Appropriation To The Transit
                                 Department.
                                 Nuisance Abatement At 7104 Leander Ne, Within
                                 The City Limits Of Albuquerque, New Mexico Is
R-2010-069 6-18-10  Not_Included So Ruined, Damaged And Dilapidated As To Be A
                                 Menace To The Public Comfort, Health, Peace Or
                                 Safety And That It Is To Be Required To Be
                                 Removed.
                                 Nuisance Abatement At 6613 Jade Park Ne,
                                 Within The City Limits Of Albuquerque, New
R-2010-070 6-18-10  Not_Included Mexico Is So Ruined, Damaged And Dilapidated
                                 As To Be A Menace To The Public Comfort,
                                 Health, Peace Or Safety And That It Is To Be
                                 Required To Be Removed.
                                 Nuisance Abatement At 508 Aspen Nw, Within The
                                 City Limits Of Albuquerque, New Mexico Is So
R-2010-071 6-18-10  Not_Included Ruined, Damaged And Dilapidated As To Be A
                                 Menace To The Public Comfort, Health, Peace Or
                                 Safety And That It Is To Be Required To Be
                                 Removed.
                                 Relating To Capital Projects; Amending An
R-2010-072 6-18-10  Not_Included Appropriation Of Transportation Infrastructure
                                 Tax Funds Previously Designated For The Paseo
                                 Del Norte And I-25 Improvement Project.
                                 Imposing An Extension Until September 21, 2010
                                 On The Moratorium Provided For In R-09-288 On
R-2010-073 6-18-10  Not_Included The Issuance Of Residential Or Commercial
                                 Demolition Or Building Permits Within A
                                 Specified Area Within The University
                                 Neighborhoods Sector Development Plan.
                                 Approving And Authorizing The Filing Of The
                                 Attached Grant Agreement For An Albuquerque
                                 Police Department Traffic Statistician From
R-2010-074 6-18-10  Not_Included The New Mexico Department Of Transportation,
                                 Traffic Safety Bureau And Providing For An
                                 Appropriation To The City Of Albuquerque,
                                 Police Department.
                                 Approving And Authorizing The Filing Of The
                                 Attached Grant Agreement For A 2011 Bernalillo
R-2010-075 6-18-10  Not_Included County Dwi Program From Bernalillo County And
                                 Providing For An Appropriation To The City Of
                                 Albuquerque, Police Department.
 
Res. No. Date Disposition Short Title
Res. No.   Date    Disposition   Short Title
                                 Approving And Authorizing The Filing Of The
                                 Attached Grant Application For A 2010 100 Days
R-2010-076 6-18-10  Not_Included And Nights Program From The New Mexico
                                 Department Of Transportation, Traffic Safety
                                 Bureau And Providing For An Appropriation To
                                 The City Of Albuquerque, Police Department.
                                 Approving And Authorizing The Filing Of The
                                 Attached Grant Application For A 2010 Click It
R-2010-077 6-18-10  Not_Included Or Ticket Program From The New Mexico
                                 Department Of Transportation, Traffic Safety
                                 Bureau And Providing For An Appropriation To
                                 The City Of Albuquerque, Police Department.
                                 Approving And Authorizing The Acceptance Of
                                 Grant Award Funds From The New Mexico State
R-2010-078 6-18-10  Not_Included Interstate Stream Commission And Making An
                                 Appropriation To The Parks And Recreation
                                 Department In Fiscal Year 2010.
R-2010-079 6-18-10 6-7-14        Naming The I-40 Trail Crossing Bridge At The
                                 Rio Grande The "Gail Ryba Memorial Bridge."
R-2010-080 6-24-10 1-6-14        Approving the Clayton Heights Metropolitan
                                 Redevelopment Plan.
                                 Extending the moratorium and the term of the
R-2010-081 6-24-10  Not_Included interim Design Regulations for the Sector
                                 Planning Area.
                                 Authorizing the Mayor to execute the
                                 Albuquerque Business Education Compact
R-2010-082 7-2-10   Not_Included Recommendations and providing an appropriation
                                 to the Department of Family and Community
                                 Services.
                                 Applying the Historic Overlay Zone to the
R-2010-083 7-2-10  1-10-3        Silver Hill Historic District; identifying
                                 distinctive characteristics and providing
                                 general preservation guidelines.
                                 Creating A Task Force To Review And Recommend
R-2010-084 7-2-10   Not_Included Policies With Respect To Electronic Signs,
                                 Including Electronic Display Boards/Panels And
                                 Electronic Message Reader Boards.
                                 Approving An Extension Until April 1, 2011 Of
R-2010-085 7-2-10   Not_Included A Subdivision Improvements Agreement For The
                                 Completion Of Infrastructure, Including
                                 Approximately 800 Feet Of Unser Boulevard.
                                 Calling On The Administration To Enter Into An
                                 Agreement Or Agreements To Secure The First
R-2010-086 7-5-10   Not_Included Baptist Church Site At The Corner Of Central
                                 And Broadway As An Anchor And Catalyst For
                                 Future Economic Development Of Downtown And
                                 The Region.
                                 Appropriating District Benefit Fees To The
R-2010-087 8-8-10   Not_Included Downtown Business Improvement District In
                                 Accordance With The Approved Budget.
                                 Approving And Authorizing The Filing Of The
                                 Attached Agreement For A 2010 Solving Cold
R-2010-088 8-8-10   Not_Included Cases With Dna Grant With The Department Of
                                 Justice, U.S. Marshal's Office And Providing
                                 For An Appropriation To The City Of
                                 Albuquerque.
                                 Approving And Authorizing The Filing Of The
                                 Attached Grant Award Agreement For A 2009
R-2010-089 8-8-10   Not_Included Project Safe Neighborhoods Sid / Great Program
                                 With The State Of New Mexico Department Of
                                 Public Safety And Providing An Appropriation
                                 To The City Of Albuquerque.
                                 Nuisance Abatement At 2745 Jefferson Ne Within
                                 The City Limits Of Albuquerque, New Mexico Is
R-2010-090 8-8-10   Not_Included So Ruined, Damaged And Dilapidated As To Be A
                                 Menace To The Public Comfort, Health, Peace Or
                                 Safety And That It Is To Be Required To Be
                                 Removed.
                                 Approving And Authorizing The Filing Of The
                                 Attached Application For A Senior Companion
                                 Program Grant With The Corporation For
R-2010-091 8-8-10   Not_Included National Service And The New Mexico Aging And
                                 Long Term Services Department And Providing
                                 For An Appropriation To The Department Of
                                 Senior Affairs Senior Companion Program In
                                 Fiscal Year 2011.
                                 Approving And Authorizing The Acceptance Of
                                 Additional Grant Award Funds From The State Of
R-2010-092 8-8-10   Not_Included New Mexico, Office Of The Natural Resources
                                 Trustee For Bosque Restoration; Providing An
                                 Appropriation To The Parks And Recreation
                                 Department In Fiscal Year 2010
                                 Approving The FY2011 Audit Plan As Submitted
R-2010-093 8-8-10   Not_Included By The Accountability In Government Oversight
                                 Committee.
                                 Approving And Authorizing The Filing Of The
                                 Attached Application For A Foster Grandparent
                                 Program Grant With The Corporation For
R-2010-094 8-8-10   Not_Included National Service And The New Mexico Aging And
                                 Long Term Services Department And Providing
                                 For An Appropriation To The Department Of
                                 Senior Affairs Foster Grandparent Program In
                                 Fiscal Year 2011.
                                 Approving And Authorizing The Filing Of The
                                 Attached Application For A Grant From The
                                 Corporation For National Service And The New
R-2010-095 8-8-10   Not_Included Mexico Aging And Long Term Services Department
                                 And Providing For An Appropriation To The
                                 Department Of Senior Affairs Retired And
                                 Senior Volunteer Program In Fiscal Year 2011.
                                 Designating Ten Thousand Dollars ($10,000) In
                                 Previously Appropriated Funds To Be Used To
R-2010-096 8-8-10   Not_Included Provide Short Term Assistance To Indigent And
                                 Needy Clients Of The Crisis Outreach And
                                 Support Team (Coast).
                                 Designating Forty Thousand Dollars ($40,000)
                                 In Previously Appropriated Funds For The Use
R-2010-097 8-8-10   Not_Included Of The Real Property Division Of The
                                 Department Of Finance And Administration To
                                 Provide Funding For The Creation Of A Database
                                 Of All City-Owned Real Property.
                                 Nuisance Abatement At 1805 Morningrise Pl SE
                                 Within The City Limits Of Albuquerque, New
R-2010-098 8-30-10  Not_Included Mexico Is So Ruined, Damaged And Dilapidated
                                 As To Be A Menace To The Public Comfort,
                                 Health, Peace Or Safety And That It Is To Be
                                 Required To Be Removed.
                                 Nuisance Abatement At 1909 High St SE Within
                                 The City Limits Of Albuquerque, New Mexico Is
R-2010-099 8-30-10  Not_Included So Ruined, Damaged And Dilapidated As To Be A
                                 Menace To The Public Comfort, Health, Peace Or
                                 Safety And That It Is To Be Required To Be
                                 Removed.
                                 Nuisance Abatement At 2327 William St SE
                                 Within The City Limits Of Albuquerque, New
R-2010-100 8-30-10  Not_Included Mexico Is So Ruined, Damaged And Dilapidated
                                 As To Be A Menace To The Public Comfort,
                                 Health, Peace Or Safety And That It Is To Be
                                 Required To Be Removed.
 
Res. No. Date Disposition Short Title
Res. No.   Date     Disposition   Short Title
                                  Appropriating Funds To Implement The Second
                                  Phase Of The Transportation Infrastructure
R-2010-101 8-30-10   Not_Included Tax, And Amending The Capital Implementation
                                  Program Of The City Of Albuquerque By
                                  Approving New Projects.
                                  Repealing F/S R-334 Enactment No. 17-1991 And
R-2010-102 8-30-10   Not_Included Adopting Policy To Ensure The Organized And
                                  Systematic Offering And Administration Of
                                  Employee Benefits To City Employees.
                                  Establishing A Redistricting Committee
                                  Pursuant To Article IV, Section 3 Of The City
R-2010-103 8-30-10   Not_Included Charter To Review And Make Recommendations
                                  Concerning The Nine Council Districts;
                                  Repealing Enactment R-2001-080 (R-01-256).
                                  Approving The Appointment Of A Director To
                                  Fill A Vacancy On The Governing Body Of The
                                  Mesa Del Sol Tax Increment Development
                                  Districts 1 Through 5 Caused By The
                                  Resignation Of A Certain Director Pursuant To
R-2010-104 8-30-10  1-14-1        The Tax Increment For Development Act, Nmsa
                                  1978, Sections 5-15-1 Through 28 Nmsa, As
                                  Amended; City Enactment No. O-2006-44; City
                                  Enactments No. R-2006-126, R-2007-174; R-
                                  2009-266; And Repealing All Actions
                                  Inconsistent With This Resolution.
                                  Approving And Authorizing New Mexico
                                  Department Of Transportation Funds For The
R-2010-105 8-30-10   Not_Included Purpose Of Conducting A 2010 Traffic Safety
                                  Education And Enforcement Project And
                                  Providing For An Appropriation To The City Of
                                  Albuquerque, Police Department.
                                  Declaring April 28th Of Each Year As
R-2010-106 8-30-10   Not_Included "Albuquerque Post-Traumatic Stress Disorder
                                  Awareness Day."
                                  Approving And Authorizing An Agreement For
                                  Bus Stop Facilities With The New Mexico
R-2010-107 8-30-10   Not_Included Department Of Transportation For Federal
                                  Highway Administration (Fhwa) Funding And
                                  Providing For An Appropriation To The Transit
                                  Department.
                                  Relating To Capital Projects; Creating A
                                  Project And Providing Funding To Secure The
R-2010-108 8-30-10   Not_Included Triple-A Baseball National Championship Game
                                  In September Of 2011; Making Appropriations
                                  And Deappropriations And Modifying Project
                                  Scopes.
                                  Amending R-10-30 Which Provides Partial
                                  Funding For The Construction Of Fire Station
                                  7 From The Photo Enforcement Fund 288 To
R-2010-109 9-24-10   Not_Included Delete Contingent Funding Language; Directing
                                  The Administration To Pursue All Available
                                  Funding Options To Complete Funding For Fire
                                  Station 7.
                                  Approving An Extension Until September 27,
                                  2011 Of A Subdivision Improvements Agreement
R-2010-110 10-11-10  Not_Included For The Completion Of Infrastructure,
                                  Including Approximately 1500 Feet Of Paseo
                                  Del Norte Boulevard.
                                  Setting The Official List Of City Council
R-2010-111 10-11-10  Not_Included Meetings From January 2011 Through December
                                  2011.
R-2010-112 10-11-10  Not_Included Determining Reasonable Notice Of Public
                                  Meetings Of The City Council.
                                  Approving And Authorizing The Acceptance Of
                                  Us Epa Climate Communities Grant Funds,
R-2010-113 10-11-10  Not_Included Entering Into A Memorandum Of Understanding
                                  With Bernalillo County, And Providing For An
                                  Appropriation To The City Of Albuquerque
                                  Solid Waste Management Department.
                                  Extending The Date By Which The Electronic
                                  Sign Task Force Must Submit Its
R-2010-114 10-11-10  Not_Included Recommendations To The Mayor And City Council
                                  By Two Weeks: From October 4, 2010 To October
                                  18, 2010.
                                  Amending The Adopted Capital Implementation
                                  Program Of The City Of Albuquerque By
R-2010-115 10-13-10  Not_Included Approving New Projects, Supplementing Current
                                  Appropriations And Changing The Scope Of
                                  Existing Projects.
                                  Authorizing The Giving Of Notice For Bids For
                                  The Sale Of City Of Albuquerque, New Mexico
                                  General Purpose General Obligation Bonds In
                                  The Aggregate Principal Amount Of $99,310,000
R-2010-116 10-14-10  Not_Included In Two Series Consisting Of Tax-Exempt Bonds,
                                  Series 2010d And Federally Taxable Build
                                  America Bonds (Issuer Subsidy), Series 2010e;
                                  Providing For The Publication Of A Notice Of
                                  Bond Sale; And Other Related Matters.
                                  Approving And Authorizing The Filing Of The
                                  Attached Grant Application With The Federal
R-2010-117 10-14-10  Not_Included Emergency Management Agency (Fema) For Funds
                                  Under The Assistance To Firefighters Grant
                                  Program And Providing An Appropriation To The
                                  Fire Department.
                                  Approving And Authorizing The Filing Of Grant
                                  Applications And The Acceptance Of Potential
R-2010-118 10-14-10  Not_Included Grant Awards For Multiple Albuquerque Police
                                  Department Law Enforcement Programs From
                                  Associated Grantor Agencies And Providing For
                                  An Appropriation To The City Of Albuquerque.
                                  Approving And Authorizing The Filing Of The
                                  Attached Agreement For A 2010 Stop Violence
R-2010-119 10-14-10  Not_Included Against Women Grant Application With The U.S.
                                  Department Of Justice, Office On Violence
                                  Against Women And Providing For An
                                  Appropriation To The City Of Albuquerque.
                                  Approving And Authorizing The Acceptance Of
                                  Funds For Albuquerque Highway Clean Up
                                  Program Through A Cooperative Agreement With
R-2010-120 10-14-10  Not_Included The New Mexico State Highway And
                                  Transportation Department And Providing For
                                  An Appropriation To The Solid Waste
                                  Management Department.
                                  Authorizing The Mayor To Execute A Contract
                                  Agreement With The New Mexico Department Of
R-2010-121 10-14-10  Not_Included Children, Youth And Families And Providing An
                                  Appropriation To The Department Of Family And
                                  Community Services/Division Of Child And
                                  Family Development, Pre-Kindergarten Program.
                                  Approving And Authorizing The Acceptance Of
                                  State Of New Mexico Litter Control And
                                  Beautification Grant Funds, A Grant Under The
R-2010-122 10-14-10  Not_Included New Mexico Litter Control And Beautification
                                  Act With The New Mexico State Tourism
                                  Department; And Providing For An
                                  Appropriation To The City Of Albuquerque
                                  Solid Waste Management Department.
                                  Authorizing The Mayor To Execute A Grant
                                  Agreement With The New Mexico Aging And Long-
R-2010-123 10-14-10  112          Term Services Department, And Providing An
                                  Appropriation To The Department Of Family And
                                  Community Services.
                                  Authorizing The Mayor To Execute A Grant
                                  Agreement With The Albuquerque / Bernalillo
R-2010-124 10-14-10  Not_Included County Community Schools Partnership And
                                  Providing An Appropriation To The Department
                                  Of Family And Community Services/Division Of
                                  Child And Family Development.
                                  Approving And Authorizing A Draft Memorandum
                                  Of Agreement With The New Mexico Department
R-2010-125 10-14-10  Not_Included Of Health For The West Nile Virus
                                  Surveillance And Data Management Program And
                                  Making An Appropriation To The Environmental
                                  Health Department.
 
Res. No. Date Disposition Short Title
Res.  Date Disposition Short Title
No.
R-    10-   Not        Authorizing A Grant Application To The U.S. Department Of Health
2010- 14-  Included    And Human Services, Early Head Start Program And Providing An
126   10               Appropriation To The Department Of Family And Community Services.
                       Authorizing The Mayor To Execute A Grant Agreement With The U.S.
R-    10-   Not        Department Of Health And Human Services, Under The American
2010- 14-  Included    Recovery And Reinvestment Act, Early Head Start Program And
127   10               Providing An Appropriation To The Department Of Family And
                       Community Services.
                       Authorizing The Mayor To Execute A Contract Agreement With The
R-    10-   Not        New Mexico Department Of Children, Youth And Families And
2010- 14-  Included    Providing An Appropriation To The Department Of Family And
128   10               Community Services/Division Of Child And Family Development, Teen
                       Parent Residence Program (TPRP).
R-    11-              Repeal Of The 1983 Singing Arrow Neighborhood Plan And Adoption
2010- 7-10 1-7-23      Of The East Gateway Sector Development Plan.
129
R-    10-              Text Amendment To The Nob Hill Highland Sector Development Plan
2010- 28-  1-7-32      To Clarify Parking Requirements In The Ccr-1, -2 And -3 Zoning
130   10               Districts For Uses Allowed In The Underlying Zoning, But Not
                       Specifically Addressed In The Plan.
R-    10-   Not        Recognizing The Importance Of Kirtland Air Force Base And Sandia
2010- 28-  Included    National Laboratories In The Defense Of The United States And The
131   10               Economic Impact That It Has On The City Of Albuquerque.
R-    10-              Approving And Authorizing The Filing Of The Attached Grant
2010- 28-   Not        Application For An Air Pollution Control Grant With The
132   10   Included    Environmental Protection Agency And Providing An Appropriation To
                       The Environmental Health Department.
                       Approving And Authorizing The Acceptance Of Grant Funds From The
R-    11-              New Mexico Historical Records Advisory Board Through The
2010- 11-   Not        Commission Of Public Records - State Records Center And Archives
133   10   Included    For The Ernie Pyle Historical Records Grant And Making An
                       Appropriation To The Cultural Services Department In Fiscal Year
                       2011.
R-    11-              Approving And Authorizing The Filing Of A Section 5309 Grant
2010- 11-   Not        Amendment With The Federal Transit Administration Of The U.S.
134   10   Included    Department Of Transportation And Providing For An Appropriation
                       To Abq Ride.
R-    11-              Approving And Authorizing The Filing Of A Section 5307 Grant
2010- 11-   Not        Amendment With The Federal Transit Administration Of The U.S.
135   10   Included    Department Of Transportation And Providing For An Appropriation
                       To ABQ Ride.
R-    11-              Providing An Appropriation To Abq Ride For A Section 5309
2010- 11-   Not        Livability Initiative Grant With The Federal Transit
136   10   Included    Administration To Fund The Development Of The Montaño Intermodal
                       Facility.
R-    11-   Not        Approving An Agreement For The New Freedom Smart Travel
2010- 11-  Included    Technologies Project With The Mid-Region Council Of Governments
137   10               And Providing An Appropriation To ABQ Ride.
                       Approving And Authorizing The Acceptance Of Grant Funds From The
R-    11-              New Mexico State Department Of Transportation For Safe,
2010- 11-   Not        Accountable, Flexible, Efficient, Transportation Equity Act: A
138   10   Included    Legacy For Users (Safetea-Lu) Funding To Operate A Bicycle Safety
                       Education Program In Outdoor Recreation And Providing For An
                       Appropriation To The Parks And Recreation Department.
                       Approving And Authorizing The Acceptance Of Grant Funds From The
R-    11-              New Mexico State Department Of Transportation For Safe,
2010- 11-   Not        Accountable, Flexible, Efficient, Transportation Equity Act: A
139   10   Included    Legacy For Users (Safetea-Lu) Funding To Operate A Bicycle Safety
                       Education Program In Outdoor Recreation And Providing For An
                       Appropriation To The Parks And Recreation Department.
R-    11-              Appropriating Additional Revenue From The Rio Metro Regional
2010- 11-   Not        Transit District To The Transit Department In Fiscal Year 2011
140   10   Included    And Authorizing The Expenditure Of These Funds For Enhanced
                       Transit Services.
R-    11-              Amending The Downtown 2010 Sector Development Plan; Adding A
2010- 18-  1-4-1       Section To Specifically Define And Regulate Commercial Surface
141   10               Parking Lots.
R-    11-   Not        Approving And Authorizing The Acceptance Of The Attached Grant
2010- 29-  Included    Award For A 2010 Forensic DNA Backlog Reduction Program From The
142   10               United States Department Of Justice, Office Of Justice Programs.
                       Authorizing The Giving Of Notice For Bids For The Sale Of City Of
R-    11-              Albuquerque, New Mexico General Purpose General Obligation Bonds
2010- 29-   Not        In The Aggregate Principal Amount Of $135,000,000 In One Series
143   10   Included    Of Tax-Exempt Bonds, Series 2011a; Providing For The Publication
                       Of A Notice Of Bond Sale And Other Related Matters; And Repealing
                       Resolution No. F/S R-10-98.
R-    12-              Amending The Barelas Sector Development Plan; With Respect To
2010- 22-  1-7-39      Zoning Requirements For Walls And Fences, And To Specifically
144   10               Allow For Certain Pre-Existing Non-Compliant Carports.
                       Creating Panel, Establishing A Board Of Housing Commissioners To
R-    12-              Govern The Albuquerque Housing Authority, Adopting Policy Of
2010- 22-   Not        Delegating Certain Powers To Board To Conform To State Statutory
145   10   Included    Requirements, Changing The Name Of Albuquerque Housing Services
                       (Ahs) Division To Albuquerque Housing Authority (Aha), Repeal Of
                       R-1975-193.
R-    12-              Approving And Authorizing A Grant Application For The Summer Food
2010- 22-   Not        Service Program For Children With The New Mexico Children, Youth
146   10   Included    And Families Department And Providing An Appropriation To The
                       Department Of Family And Community Services.
R-    12-   Not        Deappropriating Funding From The Office Of Internal Audit And
2010- 22-  Included    Investigations And Reapproriating Those Funds To The Office Of
147   10               The Inspector General.
                       Declaring The Reaffirmation And Continuance Of The Downtown
R-    12-   Not        Business Improvement District In Accordance With Resolution 0-
2010- 22-  Included    2000-038 And Appropriating District Benefit Fees To The Downtown
148   10               Business Improvement District In Accordance With The Approved
                       Budget.
                       Adopting The 2010 Action Plan First Amendment And Program
R-    12-   Not        Investment Summary For The Expenditure Of Additional Community
2010- 22-  Included    Development Block Grant (Cdbg) And Emergency Shelter Grant (Esg)
149   10               Funds And Providing An Appropriation To The Department Of Family
                       And Community Services.
R-    12-              Approving And Authorizing The Acceptance Of A Grant Agreement
2010- 22-   Not        With The State Of New Mexico, Department Of Health For An
150   10   Included    Arthritis Program And Providing An Appropriation To The
                       Department Of Senior Affairs.
R-    12-              Establishing A Vision Statement, Revising The Five-Year Goals For
2010- 22-  4-7-1       The City Of Albuquerque, And Adopting Desired Community
151   10               Conditions For Each Goal.
R-    12-   Not        Approving And Authorizing The Filing Of The Attached Grant
2010- 22-  Included    Application For A Pm Fine Monitoring Grant With The Environmental
152   10               Protection Agency.
                       City Of Albuquerque Project Recommendations To The Mid-Region
R-    12-              Council Of Governments For Inclusion In The Proposed 2035
2010- 22-   Not        Metropolitan Transportation Plan, And For Consideration Of
153   10   Included    Federal Funding In The Proposed Fy 2012 To Fy 2017 Transportation
                       Improvement Program For The Albuquerque Metropolitan Planning
                       Area As Required By Council Bill No. O-07-89.
                       Approving And Authorizing The Filing Of The Attached Grant
R-    12-   Not        Application For An E911 Grant Program From The New Mexico
2010- 22-  Included    Department Of Finance And Administration, Local Government
154   10               Division And Providing For An Appropriation To The City Of
                       Albuquerque, Police Department.
R-    12-   Not        Relating To Capital Projects: Amending The Adopted Capital
2010- 22-  Included    Implementation Program Of The City Of Albuquerque By Approving
155   10               New Projects.
 
 
Notes
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
112          However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
2011 Resolutions
Res. No. Date Disposition Short Title
Res. No.   Date    Disposition   Short Title
                                 Adopting The 2011 Action Plan And Program
                                 Investment Summary For The Expenditure Of
                                 Community Development Block (Cdbg) Grant, Home
R-2010-156 1-4-11   Not_Included Investment Partnership (Home) And Emergency
                                 Shelter Block Grant (Esg) Funds And Providing
                                 An Appropriation To The Department Of Family
                                 And Community Services.
                                 Approving And Authorizing The Acceptance Of
                                 The Attached Grant Award For An Operation
                                 Driving While Impaired (Dwi) Program From The
R-2010-157 1-4-11   Not_Included New Mexico Department Of Transportation,
                                 Traffic Safety Bureau And Providing For An
                                 Appropriation To The City Of Albuquerque,
                                 Police Department.
R-2010-158 1-4-11   Not_Included Expressing Support Of Full Service Community
                                 Schools In The City Of Albuquerque.
                                 Amending R-10-109, Enactment No. R-2010-103,
                                 To Establish A New Timeline For The Completion
R-2010-159 1-4-11   Not_Included Of The Work Of The 2010 Redistricting
                                 Committee Regarding Redistricting The Nine
                                 Council Districts.
                                 Approving And Authorizing The Filing Of The
                                 Attached Grant Award Agreement For A 2011 Gang
                                 Resistance Education And Training (Great)
R-2011-001 1-7-11   Not_Included Program With United States Department Of
                                 Justice, Office Of Justice Programs And
                                 Providing An Appropriation To The City Of
                                 Albuquerque.
                                 Approving And Authorizing The Acceptance Of
                                 The Attached Grant Award For A DEA Task Force
R-2011-002 1-7-11   Not_Included Program From The Drug Enforcement Agency And
                                 Providing For An Appropriation To The City Of
                                 Albuquerque, Police Department.
                                 Approving And Authorizing The Filing Of The
                                 Attached Grant Application For Funds Under The
R-2011-003 2-1-11   Not_Included State Of New Mexico American Recovery And
                                 Reinvestment Act (ARRA) Government Services
                                 Fund And Making An Appropriation To The Fire
                                 Department.
                                 Establishing A Legislative Policy For The City
R-2011-004 2-3-11   Not_Included Of Albuquerque For The 2011 Legislative
                                 Session Of The New Mexico Legislature.
                                 Approving And Authorizing The Acceptance Of
                                 The Attached Grant Award For An FBI Safe
R-2011-005 2-16-11  Not_Included Streets Task Force Program From The Federal
                                 Bureau Of Investigations And Providing For An
                                 Appropriation To The City Of Albuquerque,
                                 Police Department.
                                 Requesting The Administration To Conduct An
R-2011-006 2-16-11  Not_Included Evaluation Of Costs Associated With The City's
                                 Washington Representative To Determine How It
                                 Compares To Other Jurisdictions.
                                 Approving And Authorizing The Filing Of A
                                 Grant Application For A Food Service Program
                                 For Children With The New Mexico Department Of
R-2011-007 2-16-11  Not_Included Children, Youth And Families And Providing An
                                 Appropriation To The Department Of Family And
                                 Community Services/Division Of Child And
                                 Family Development.
                                 Amending R-05-258 To Mandate That All New City
                                 Facilities And Major Remodels To City
R-2011-008 2-16-11  Not_Included Facilities Shall Meet The Requirements Of The
                                 2009 Interim Albuquerque Energy Conservation
                                 Code.
                                 Adopting The FY 2012 - FY 2013 Two-Year Urban
R-2011-009 2-16-11  Not_Included Enhancement Program And Appropriating Funds
                                 For The Urban Enhancement Program's Projects.
                                 Approving And Authorizing The Filing Of The
                                 Attached Grant Application With The New Mexico
R-2011-010 2-16-11  Not_Included Public Regulation Commission For Funds Under
                                 The Fire Protection Grant And Making An
                                 Appropriation To The Fire Department In Fiscal
                                 Year 2011.
                                 Approving And Authorizing The Filing Of The
                                 Attached Grant Award For Funds Under The
R-2011-011 2-16-11  Not_Included Emergency Medical Services Fund Act With The
                                 State Of New Mexico Department Of Health And
                                 Providing For An Appropriation To The Fire
                                 Department.
                                 Approving And Authorizing The Acceptance Of
                                 Grant Funds From The New Mexico State Library
R-2011-012 2-16-11  Not_Included For The Basic State Grants In Aid And
                                 Providing For An Appropriation To The Cultural
                                 Services Department In Fiscal Year 2011.
                                 Establishing A Moratorium Until June 30, 2011
                                 On The Approval Of Any New Electronic Sign,
R-2011-013 2-16-11  Not_Included Including Electronic Display Panels And
                                 Electronic Message Reader Boards; Exempting
                                 Certain Signs.
                                 Nuisance Abatement At 3106 Monroe St NE Within
                                 The City Limits Of Albuquerque, New Mexico Is
R-2011-014 3-9-11   Not_Included So Ruined, Damaged And Dilapidated As To Be A
                                 Menace To The Public Comfort, Health, Peace Or
                                 Safety And That It Is To Be Required To Be
                                 Removed.
                                 Approving The Programming Of Funds And
                                 Projects For The 2011-2020 Decade Plan For
R-2011-015 3-9-11   Not_Included Capital Improvements Including The 2011 Two-
                                 Year Capital Budget; Amending And Creating New
                                 Projects Within The Existing Capital
                                 Implementation Program.
                                 Pursuant To Section 3-13-1(B) NMSA 1978
R-2011-016 3-9-11   Not_Included Appointing The Chief Deputy City Clerk And
                                 Deputy City Clerks; Repealing Council Bill No.
                                 R-05-1, Enactment No. R-2005-188.
                                 Declaring A Natural Disaster; Authorizing The
R-2011-017 3-9-11   Not_Included Mayor To Request Aid, Assistance, Relief
                                 Programs, And Funding That May Be Available.
                                 Nuisance Abatement At 508 Aspen Ave NE NW
                                 Within The City Limits Of Albuquerque, New
R-2011-018 3-24-11  Not_Included Mexico Is So Ruined, Damaged And Dilapidated
                                 As To Be A Menace To The Public Comfort,
                                 Health, Peace Or Safety And That It Is To Be
                                 Required To Be Removed.
                                 Amending The West Side Strategic Plan By
R-2011-019 3-24-11 1-11-8        Adding A New Section For The "Volcano Mesa
                                 Area" To Section B.3, "Specific Westside
                                 Communities."
                                 Nuisance Abatement At 2423 Zickert Road NW
                                 Within The City Limits Of Albuquerque, New
R-2011-020 3-24-11  Not_Included Mexico Is So Ruined, Damaged And Dilapidated
                                 As To Be A Menace To The Public Comfort,
                                 Health, Peace Or Safety And That It Is To Be
                                 Required To Be Removed.
                                 Relating To The Proposed Albuquerque, New
                                 Mexico Special Assessment District No. 228,
                                 Authorizing Wilson & Company, Engineers &
                                 Architects, To Prepare, Submit And File With
R-2011-021 3-24-11  Not_Included The City Clerk Certain Preliminary Plans,
                                 Estimates Of Costs, And Assessment Plats With
                                 Addendum, All In Connection Therewith;
                                 Establishing Responsibility For Off-Site
                                 Improvements; And Making An Appropriation.
                                 Amending The Adopted Capital Implementation
                                 Program Of The City Of Albuquerque By
R-2011-022 3-24-11  Not_Included Approving New Projects, Supplementing Current
                                 Appropriations And Changing The Scope Of
                                 Existing Projects.
                                 Approving And Authorizing A Certified Local
R-2011-023 3-24-11  Not_Included Government Subgrant And Providing An
                                 Appropriation To The Planning Department.
                                 Calling On The Administration To Recognize
R-2011-024 3-24-11  Not_Included "Ghost Bikes" As "Descansos," Roadside
                                 Memorials Protected By State Law.
 
Res. No. Date Disposition Short Title
Res. No.   Date    Disposition   Short Title
R-2011-025 3-24-11  Not_Included Supporting A Proposed Urban Wildlife Refuge In
                                 Bernalillo County.
                                 Relating To Capital Projects: Expanding The
R-2011-026 3-24-11  Not_Included Scope Of Various Council Set-A-Side Projects;
                                 Providing Funding For Security Improvements At
                                 The New Mexico Veterans Memorial Park.
                                 Congressional Appropriation To The City Of
                                 Albuquerque For The Regional East/West Trail
                                 And Bikeway Project And Request To Include The
R-2011-027 4-5-11   Not_Included Project And Federal Appropriation In The FY
                                 2012 To FY 2017 Transportation Improvement
                                 Program For The Albuquerque Metropolitan
                                 Planning Area As Required By Council Bill No.
                                 O-07-89.
                                 Approving And Authorizing The Filing Of The
                                 Attached Grant Award Agreement For A 2011 New
R-2011-028 4-11-11  Not_Included Mexico Gang Task Force Program With The New
                                 Mexico Gang Task Force And Providing An
                                 Appropriation To The City Of Albuquerque.
                                 Relating To Capital Projects: Amending The
                                 Adopted Capital Implementation Program Of The
R-2011-029 4-11-11  Not_Included City Of Albuquerque By Deappropriating Funds
                                 In The 2009 Capital Program And Creating A New
                                 Project.
                                 Relating To Capital Projects: Amending The
                                 Adopted Capital Implementation Program Of The
R-2011-030 4-11-11  Not_Included City Of Albuquerque By Deappropriating Funds
                                 In The 2009 Capital Program And Creating A New
                                 Project.
                                 Relating To Capital Projects; Making
R-2011-031 4-11-11  Not_Included Appropriations And Deappropriations To Provide
                                 For Funding For Improvements To Fire Station
                                 13 In City Council District 7.
                                 Authorizing The Mayor To Execute The
                                 Albuquerque Business Education Compact
R-2011-032 4-11-11  Not_Included Recommendations And Providing An Appropriation
                                 To The Department Of Family And Community
                                 Services.
                                 Adjusting Fiscal Year 2010 Appropriation For
R-2011-033 4-11-11  Not_Included Certain Funds In Program Strategies To Provide
                                 For Actual Expenditures And Adjusting Fiscal
                                 Year 2011 Appropriations.
                                 Nuisance Abatement At 3100 San Joaquin Ave SE
                                 Within The City Limits Of Albuquerque, New
R-2011-034 5-6-11   Not_Included Mexico Is So Ruined, Damaged And Dilapidated
                                 As To Be A Menace To The Public Comfort,
                                 Health, Peace Or Safety And That It Is To Be
                                 Required To Be Removed.
                                 Relating To Capital Projects: Amending R-11-
R-2011-035 5-6-11   Not_Included 183, The 2011 Capital Improvements Program,
                                 Relating To The West Central Redevelopment
                                 Project.
                                 Relating To Capital Projects: Expanding The
                                 Scope Of Council Set-A-Side Project 7353120;
R-2011-036 5-6-11   Not_Included Providing Funding For Security Improvements To
                                 The New Mexico Veterans Memorial At Phil
                                 Chacon Park.
                                 Approving The Appointment Of Directors To Fill
                                 A Vacancy On The Governing Body Of The Winrock
                                 Town Center Tax Increment Development
                                 Districts 1 And 2 Caused By The Resignation Of
                                 A Certain Director Pursuant To The Tax
R-2011-037 5-26-11 1-14-3        Increment For Development Act, NMSA 1978,
                                 Sections 5-15-1 Through 28 NMSA, As Amended,
                                 City Enactment No. O-2006-44, City Enactment
                                 R-2008-120, City Enactment No. R-2009-005, And
                                 City Enactment No. R-2009-09; And Repealing
                                 All Actions Inconsistent With This Resolution.
                                 Text Amendment To The Trumbull Neighborhood
R-2011-038 5-26-11 1-7-17        Sector Development Plan; Amending The SU-
                                 2 Mixed Use Zone Category To Allow Mobile
                                 Carts As A Permissive Use.
                                 For An Area Of Approximately 2,327 Acres And
                                 Bordered Generally By The Petroglyph National
                                 Monument And City Of Albuquerque Major Public
                                 Open Space On The East, South And West, And By
                                 The Paseo Del Norte/Town Of Alameda Grant Line
                                 Alignment On The North, Adopting The Volcano
R-2011-039 5-26-11 1-7-48        Cliffs Sector Development Plan As A Rank 3
                                 Plan; Changing Existing Zoning From R-1 And R-
                                 D To SU-2 Volcano Cliffs Village Center, SU-
                                 2 Volcano Cliffs Mixed Use, SU-2 Volcano
                                 Cliffs Urban Residential, SU-2 Volcano Cliffs
                                 Large Lot, And SU-2 Volcano Cliffs Rural
                                 Residential.
                                 Appropriating Funds For Operating The
                                 Government Of The City Of Albuquerque For
R-2011-040 5-26-11  Not_Included Fiscal Year 2012, Beginning July 1, 2011 And
                                 Ending June 30, 2012; Adjusting Fiscal Year
                                 2011 Appropriations; And Adjusting Operating
                                 Grants And Capital Funds.
                                 Establishing One-Year Objectives For The City
R-2011-041 5-26-11 4-7-7         Of Albuquerque In Fiscal Year 2012; To Meet
                                 Five-Year Goals.
                                 Relating To The City Of Albuquerque, New
                                 Mexico Airport Refunding Revenue Bonds, Series
                                 2011A (AMT); Authorizing The Sale Of The
                                 Series 2011A Bonds To The New Mexico Finance
                                 Authority, Establishing The Exact Aggregate
                                 Principal Amount Of The Series 2011A Bonds Of
R-2011-042 5-26-11  Not_Included $15,375,000, Maturity Dates, Rates Of
                                 Interest, Redemption Features, And Price With
                                 Respect To Such Series 2011A Bonds In
                                 Accordance With City Ordinance No. O-11-51
                                 Adopted On April 18, 2011; Approving Other
                                 Documents Relating To The Series 2011A Bonds;
                                 And Ratifying Action Previously Taken In
                                 Connection Therewith.
                                 Approving And Authorizing The Acceptance Of A
                                 Letter Of Award With The United States
                                 Department Of Agriculture Agricultural
R-2011-043 6-7-11   Not_Included Marketing Service Grant Funds For The Farmers'
                                 Market Promotion Program (FMPP) And Making An
                                 Appropriation To The Cultural Services
                                 Department In Fiscal Year 2011.
                                 Approving A Grant Application To The
                                 Department Of Housing And Urban Development
R-2011-044 6-22-11  Not_Included For A 2011 Continuum Of Care Grant; And
                                 Providing An Appropriation To The Department
                                 Of Family And Community Services.
R-2011-045 6-22-11  Not_Included Providing Funding For The Party Patrol Program
                                 In FY/11.
R-2011-046 6-22-11  Not_Included Regarding The Selection Of The Inspector
                                 General.
                                 Authorizing And Directing The City Of
                                 Albuquerque, New Mexico To Hedge 1,800,000
                                 Gallons Of Its Gasoline Price Risk And
                                 2,300,000 Gallons Of Its Diesel Fuel Price
                                 Risk Within Certain Parameters For The
                                 Purposes Of Stabilizing The City's Fuel Costs
                                 And Paying Associated Fuel Hedging Transaction
R-2011-047 6-27-11  Not_Included Costs; Authorizing The Execution Of
                                 International Swap And Derivative Association
                                 Documents; Authorizing The Taking Of All Other
                                 Actions Necessary To The Consummation Of The
                                 Fuel Hedging Transaction Contemplated By This
                                 Resolution; Ratifying Prior Actions Consistent
                                 With This Resolution And Repealing Prior
                                 Inconsistent Action; Making An Appropriation;
                                 And Declaring An Emergency.
                                 Concerning The Regular Municipal Election To
R-2011-048 6-28-11  Not_Included Be Held In The City Of Albuquerque, New Mexico
                                 On Tuesday, The Fourth Of October 2011.
                                 Approving the FY2012 Audit Plan As Submitted
R-2011-049 7-1-11   Not_Included By The Accountability In Government Oversight
                                 Committee.
 
Res. No. Date Disposition Short Title
Res. No.   Date    Disposition   Short Title
                                 Adopting A Proposition To Be Submitted To The
R-2011-050 7-1-11   Not_Included Voters At The Next Municipal Election
                                 Concerning Continuation Of The Safe Traffic
                                 Operations ["Red Light"] Program
                                 Approving And Authorizing The Acceptance Of
                                 The New Mexico Environment Department's
R-2011-051 7-1-11   Not_Included Recycling And Illegal Dumping (RAID) Fund Tire
                                 Grant And Providing For An Appropriation To
                                 The City Of Albuquerque Solid Waste Management
                                 Department.
                                 Concerning A Special Municipal Bond Election
                                 To Be Held In The City Of Albuquerque At The
                                 Next City General Election; Submitting To A
                                 Vote Of The Qualified, Registered Electors And
                                 Nonresident Municipal Electors At Such Special
                                 Election Certain Questions For Authorizing (1)
                                 The Issuance Of General Obligation Bonds In
                                 Varying Principal Amounts And For Specified
                                 Public Purposes And, To The Qualified
R-2011-052 7-1-11   Not_Included Registered Electors (2) The Effectiveness Of
                                 An Ordinance Authorizing Issuance Of Gross
                                 Receipts Tax Revenue Bonds In The Principal
                                 Amount Of Up To $50,000,000 For Certain Public
                                 Purposes; Providing The Form Of The Bond
                                 Questions And The Designation Clause For Such
                                 Questions On The Ballot; Prescribing Other
                                 Details In Connection With Such Special
                                 Election And Bonds; And Ratifying Action
                                 Previously Taken In Connection Therewith.
                                 Transferring Funds From The General Fund (110)
R-2011-053 7-1-11   Not_Included To The Capital Acquisition Fund (305);
                                 Appropriating Those Funds To The City Council
                                 Projects Project.
R-2011-054 7-1-11   Not_Included Directing The Administration To Honor Free
                                 Passes At All City Operated Swimming Pools.
                                 Declaring A Two Month Extension, Until August
                                 30, 2011, Of The Moratorium On The Approval Of
R-2011-055 7-1-11   Not_Included Any New Electronic Sign, Including Electronic
                                 Display Panels And Electronic Message Reader
                                 Boards; Continuing The Exemption Of Certain
                                 Signs.
                                 Amending The Uptown Sector Development Plan
                                 For An Approximately 390 Acre Area Which
                                 Corresponds To The SU-3 For Mixed Use Uptown
                                 (MU-UPT) Zone, Which Is Generally Located
                                 South Of Menaul Boulevard, North Of Interstate
R-2011-056 8-22-11 1-7-19        40, East Of San Pedro Drive, And West Of
                                 Prospect Place, Uptown Loop Road And The
                                 Eastern Edge Of Winrock Mall, To Allow Single-
                                 Level, Single-User Retail Facilities In Excess
                                 Of 90,000 Square Feet, Provided That Certain
                                 Additional Criteria, As Specified Herein, Are
                                 Met.
                                 Approving And Authorizing The Acceptance Of A
                                 Letter Of Award With The State Of New Mexico
                                 Department Of Homeland Security Grant Funds
R-2011-057 8-22-11  Not_Included For 2010 State Homeland Security Grant Program
                                 And Making An Appropriation To The Chief
                                 Administrative Officer Department In Fiscal
                                 Year 2011.
                                 Approving And Authorizing The Filing Of Grant
                                 Applications And The Acceptance Of Potential
R-2011-058 8-22-11  Not_Included Grant Awards For Multiple Albuquerque Police
                                 Department Law Enforcement Programs From
                                 Associated Grantor Agencies And Providing For
                                 An Appropriation To The City Of Albuquerque.
                                 Approving The Appointment Of Directors To Fill
                                 A Vacancy On The Governing Body Of The Quorum
                                 At ABQ Uptown Tax Increment Development
                                 District Caused By The Resignation Of A
                                 Certain Director Pursuant To The Tax Increment
R-2011-059 8-22-11  Not_Included For Development Act, NMSA 1978, Sections 5-15-
                                 1 Through 28 NMSA, As Amended, City Enactment
                                 No. O-2006-44, City Enactment R-2008-119, City
                                 Enactment No. R-2009-006, And City Enactment
                                 No. R-2009-08; And Repealing All Actions
                                 Inconsistent With This Resolution.
                                 Approving The Appointment Of A Director To
                                 Fill A Vacancy On The Governing Body Of The
                                 Mesa Del Sol Tax Increment Development
                                 Districts 1 Through 5 Caused By The
                                 Resignation Of A Certain Director Pursuant To
R-2011-060 8-22-11  Not_Included The Tax Increment For Development Act, NMSA
                                 1978, Sections 5-15-1 Through 28 NMSA, As
                                 Amended, City Enactment No. O-2006-44, City
                                 Enactments No. R-2006-126, R-2007-174, R-2009-
                                 266, And R-10-110; And Repealing All Actions
                                 Inconsistent With This Resolution.
                                 Relating To Capital Projects; Expanding Scope
R-2011-061 8-22-11  Not_Included In Fund 305, Activity No. 7353120 To Include
                                 Land Acquisition.
                                 Concerning The Regular Municipal Election To
R-2011-062 8-22-11  Not_Included Be Held In The City Of Albuquerque, New Mexico
                                 On Tuesday, The Fourth Of October 2011;
                                 Amending R-11-240 (Enactment R-2011-048).
                                 Concerning The Special Municipal Bond Election
                                 To Be Held In The City Of Albuquerque At The
                                 Next City General Election; Amending The Text
                                 Of The Form Of Bond Question Relating To The
R-2011-063 8-22-11  Not_Included Issuance Of Gross Receipts Tax Revenue Bonds
                                 In The Principal Amount Of Up To $50,000,000
                                 For Certain Public Purposes; And Ratifying
                                 Action Previously Taken In Connection
                                 Therewith.
                                 Concerning The Appointment Of Precinct Boards
                                 For Each Consolidated Voting Center For The
R-2011-064 8-22-11  Not_Included Regular Municipal Election To Be Held In The
                                 City Of Albuquerque, New Mexico On Tuesday The
                                 Fourth Of October 2011.
                                 Appropriating And Adjusting Funds For
R-2011-065 8-22-11  Not_Included Operating The Government Of The City Of
                                 Albuquerque For Fiscal Year 2012.
                                 For An Area Of Approximately 446 Acres And
                                 Bordered Generally By Universe Boulevard To
                                 The East, State Land, APS School Sites And The
                                 Northern Geologic Window To The South, Vacant
                                 Bernalillo County Land To The West, And Paseo
                                 Del Norte To The North, Adopting The Volcano
R-2011-066 8-31-11 1-7-49        Trails Sector Development Plan As A Rank 3
                                 Plan; Changing Existing Zoning On Undeveloped
                                 Properties From RD To SU-2 Volcano Trails
                                 Village Center, SU-2 Volcano Trails Urban
                                 Residential, SU-2 Volcano Trails Residential
                                 Developing Area, SU-2 Volcano Trails Small
                                 Lot, SU-2 Volcano Trails Medium Lot, And SU-
                                 2 Volcano Trails Open Space.
                                 Appropriating Funds For The City Of
R-2011-067 8-31-11  Not_Included Albuquerque For Fiscal Year 2012 And Adjusting
                                 Fiscal Year 2012 Appropriations.
                                 Relating To The (i) City Of Albuquerque, New
                                 Mexico Gross Receipts Tax/Lodgers' Tax/
                                 Hospitality Fee Improvement And Refunding
                                 Revenue Bonds, Series 2011a, And (ii) City Of
                                 Albuquerque, New Mexico Gross Receipts Tax/
                                 Stadium Revenues Refunding Revenue Bonds,
                                 Taxable Series 2011B; Authorizing The Sale Of
                                 The Series 2011 Bonds To The New Mexico
                                 Finance Authority, Establishing The Exact
R-2011-068 8-31-11  Not_Included Aggregate Principal Amount Of The Series 2011A
                                 Bonds Of $22,660,000 And The Series 2011B
                                 Bonds Of $11,650,000, Maturity Dates, Rates Of
                                 Interest, Redemption Features, And Price With
                                 Respect To Such Series 2011 Bonds In
                                 Accordance With City Ordinance No. O-11-60
                                 Adopted On June 20, 2011; Approving Other
                                 Documents Relating To The Series 2011 Bonds;
                                 And Ratifying Action Previously Taken In
                                 Connection Therewith.
                                 Declaring A Moratorium Of Up To Six Months Or
                                 Until A Revised Los Duranes Sector Development
                                 Plan Is Finally Acted Upon By The City
R-2011-069 8-31-11  Not_Included Council, Whichever First Occurs, On Zone
                                 Changes And The Issuance Of Building Permits
                                 Within The 1976 Los Duranes Sector Development
                                 Plan Area.
                                 Relating To Capital Projects: Expanding The
                                 Scope Of Council Set-A-Side Project 7100240;
R-2011-070 8-31-11  Not_Included Establishing Funding For Transportation
                                 Projects Throughout The City That Benefit City
                                 Council District 4.
                                 Relating To Capital Projects: Expanding The
                                 Scope Of Council Set-A-Side Projects 7502120,
R-2011-071 8-31-11  Not_Included 7395190 And 7353130, To Include Community And
                                 Public Facility Projects Throughout The City
                                 That Benefit City Council Districts 1, 2 And
                                 6.
                                 Declaring A Moratorium Of Up To Three Months
                                 Or Until The Updated Downtown Neighborhood
                                 Area Sector Plan Is Finally Acted Upon By The
R-2011-072 8-31-11  Not_Included City Council, Whichever First Occurs, On Zone
                                 Changes And The Issuance Of Building Permits
                                 Within The Adopted Boundaries Of The Existing
                                 Downtown Neighborhood Area Sector Development
                                 Plan.
                                 Approving The Appointment Of Directors To Fill
                                 A Vacancy On The Governing Body Of The Winrock
                                 Town Center Tax Increment Development
                                 Districts 1 And 2 Caused By The Resignation Of
                                 A Certain Director Pursuant To The Tax
R-2011-073 8-31-11  Not_Included Increment For Development Act, NMSA 1978,
                                 Sections 5-15-1 Through 28 NMSA, As Amended,
                                 City Enactment No. O-2006-44, City Enactment
                                 R-2008-120, City Enactment No. R-2009-005,
                                 City Enactment No. R-2009-09 And Enactment No.
                                 R-11-217; And Repealing All Actions
                                 Inconsistent With This Resolution.
                                 Approving The Appointment Of Directors To Fill
                                 A Vacancy On The Governing Body Of The Quorum
                                 At ABQ Uptown Tax Increment Development
                                 District Caused By The Resignation Of A
                                 Certain Director Pursuant To The Tax Increment
R-2011-074 8-31-11  Not_Included For Development Act, NMSA 1978, Sections 5-15-
                                 1 Through 28 NMSA, As Amended, City Enactment
                                 No. O-2006-44, City Enactment R-2008-119, City
                                 Enactment No. R-2009-006, And City Enactment
                                 No. R-2009-08; And Repealing All Actions
                                 Inconsistent With This Resolution.
                                 Amending R-10-173 To Extend The Timeline For
                                 The Completion Of The Work Of The 2010
R-2011-075 8-31-11  Not_Included Redistricting Committee In Order To Provide
                                 For Public Participation In The Redistricting
                                 Process.
 
Res. No. Date Disposition Short Title
Res. No.   Date       Disposition   Short Title
                                    Nuisance Abatement At 4904 Central Ave SW
                                    Within The City Limits Of Albuquerque, New
R-2011-076 9-22-11     Not_Included Mexico Is So Ruined, Damaged And
                                    Dilapidated As To Be A Menace To The Public
                                    Comfort, Health, Peace Or Safety And That
                                    It Is To Be Required To Be Removed.
                                    Nuisance Abatement At 4814 Central Ave SW
                                    Within The City Limits Of Albuquerque, New
R-2011-077 9-22-11     Not_Included Mexico Is So Ruined, Damaged And
                                    Dilapidated As To Be A Menace To The Public
                                    Comfort, Health, Peace Or Safety And That
                                    It Is To Be Required To Be Removed.
                                    Nuisance Abatement At 119 Estancia Dr. NW
                                    Within The City Limits Of Albuquerque, New
R-2011-078 9-22-11     Not_Included Mexico Is So Ruined, Damaged And
                                    Dilapidated As To Be A Menace To The Public
                                    Comfort, Health, Peace Or Safety And That
                                    It Is To Be Required To Be Removed.
                                    Nuisance Abatement At 1427 Corriz Rd, SW
                                    Within The City Limits Of Albuquerque, New
R-2011-079 9-22-11     Not_Included Mexico Is So Ruined, Damaged And
                                    Dilapidated As To Be A Menace To The Public
                                    Comfort, Health, Peace Or Safety And That
                                    It Is To Be Required To Be Removed.
                                    Nuisance Abatement At 210 Charleston St NE
                                    Within The City Limits Of Albuquerque, New
R-2011-080 9-22-11     Not_Included Mexico Is So Ruined, Damaged And
                                    Dilapidated As To Be A Menace To The Public
                                    Comfort, Health, Peace Or Safety And That
                                    It Is To Be Required To Be Removed.
                                    Approving And Authorizing The Filing Of The
R-2011-081 9-22-11     Not_Included Attached Grant Application For A PM Fine
                                    Monitoring Grant With The Environmental
                                    Protection Agency.
                                    Authorizing The Mayor To Execute A Grant
                                    Agreement With The New Mexico State Highway
                                    And Transportation Department For Safe,
                                    Accountable, Flexible, Efficient,
R-2011-082 9-22-11     Not_Included Transportation Equity Act: A Legacy For
                                    Users (SAFETEA-LU) Funding To Operate A
                                    Bicycle Safety Education Program In Outdoor
                                    Recreation And Providing An Appropriation
                                    To The Parks And Recreation Department.
                                    Relating To The Proposed Albuquerque, New
                                    Mexico Special Assessment District No. 228,
                                    Accepting Preliminary Plans, Estimates Of
                                    Costs, Assessment Plats With Addendum, And
                                    Engineer's Report As To The Methods Used In
R-2011-083 9-22-11     Not_Included Determining Benefits With Respect Thereto;
                                    Making A Provisional Order That Certain
                                    Street, Storm Drainage, Sanitary Sewer,
                                    Water And Private Utility Improvements, All
                                    Within The Proposed District, Shall Be
                                    Constructed; And Directing That Notice Of A
                                    Hearing On The Provisional Order Be Given.
                                    Establishing Weight Restrictions On Fortuna
R-2011-084 9-22-11    3-8-11        Avenue North West Between 76th Street And
                                    900 Feet West Of 64th Street Northwest.
                                    Providing An Appropriation To The
                                    Department Of Family And Community Services
R-2011-085 9-22-11     Not_Included From Settlement Money Paid To The City By
                                    Philips Semiconductor For An Agreement With
                                    Excel Educational Enterprises, Inc.
                                    Establishing A Moratorium Until September
                                    30, 2011 On The Approval Of Any New
R-2011-086 9-22-11     Not_Included Electronic Sign, Including Electronic
                                    Display Panels And Electronic Message
                                    Reader Boards; Exempting Certain Signs.
                                    Providing An Appropriation To The
                                    Department Of Family And Community Services
R-2011-087 9-22-11     Not_Included From Settlement Money Paid To The City By
                                    Philips Semiconductor For An Agreement With
                                    The University Of New Mexico Center For
                                    Education Policy Research (CEPR).
                                    Repealing R-02-124 And Acknowledging The
R-2011-088 10-6-2011   Not_Included Metropolitan Transportation Board's
                                    Designation Of Universe Boulevard Nw As A
                                    Minor Arterial.
                                    Affirming That The City Council And The
                                    Mayor Will Work Cooperatively And
                                    Collaboratively With The Department Of
R-2011-089 10-6-2011   Not_Included Justice (Doj) Should It Choose To Conduct A
                                    Comprehensive Review Into Whether There Has
                                    Been A Pattern Or Practice Of Civil Rights
                                    Violations By The Albuquerque Police
                                    Department.
                                    Requesting The Administration To Comply
R-2011-090 10-6-2011   Not_Included With The City Charter And Appoint A City
                                    Attorney.
                                    Amending The Adopted Capital Implementation
                                    Program For The City Of Albuquerque By
                                    Approving New Projects And Providing For
                                    Appropriations Of The Federal Aviation
R-2011-091 10-6-2011   Not_Included Administration (Faa) Funding, New Mexico
                                    Department Of Transportation Aviation
                                    Division (Nmdot) Funding And Fund Balance
                                    Transfers To The Aviation Department
                                    Capital Program.
                                    Nuisance Abatement At 11105 Towner Ne
                                    Within The City Limits Of Albuquerque, New
R-2011-092 10-18-2011  Not_Included Mexico Is So Ruined, Damaged And
                                    Dilapidated As To Be A Menace To The Public
                                    Comfort, Health, Peace Or Safety And That
                                    It Is To Be Required To Be Removed.
                                    Nuisance Abatement At 301 59th St, Nw
                                    Within The City Limits Of Albuquerque, New
R-2011-093 10-18-2011  Not_Included Mexico Is So Ruined, Damaged And
                                    Dilapidated As To Be A Menace To The Public
                                    Comfort, Health, Peace Or Safety And That
                                    It Is To Be Required To Be Removed.
                                    Approving And Authorizing The Filing Of The
                                    Attached Agreement For A 2011 Stop Violence
R-2011-094 10-18-2011  Not_Included Against Women Grant Application With The
                                    U.S. Department Of Justice, Office On
                                    Violence Against Women And Providing For An
                                    Appropriation To The City Of Albuquerque.
                                    A Residential Substandard Dwelling, Or
                                    Structure In Need Of Abatement At 2605 12th
                                    St Nw Within The City Limits Of
R-2011-095 10-18-2011  Not_Included Albuquerque, New Mexico Is So Ruined,
                                    Damaged And Dilapidated As To Be A Menace
                                    To The Public Comfort, Health, Peace Or
                                    Safety And That It Is To Be Required To Be
                                    Removed.
                                    Approving And Authorizing The Acceptance Of
                                    State Of New Mexico Litter Control And
                                    Beautification Grant Funds, A Grant Under
R-2011-096 10-18-2011  Not_Included The New Mexico Litter Control And
                                    Beautification Act With The New Mexico
                                    State Tourism Department; And Providing For
                                    An Appropriation To The City Of Albuquerque
                                    Solid Waste Management Department.
                                    Authorizing The Removal Of Certain
R-2011-097 10-18-2011  Not_Included Uncollectible Accounts From The City's
                                    Accounts Receivable Records Fy 2007 &
                                    Prior.
                                    Approving And Authorizing The Filing Of The
                                    Attached Agreement For A 2011 Hidta Justice
R-2011-098 10-18-2011  Not_Included Assistance Grant (Jag) With The State Of
                                    New Mexico And Providing For An
                                    Appropriation To The City Of Albuquerque.
                                    Approving And Authorizing The Filing Of The
                                    Attached Agreement For A 2011 Hidta Middle
                                    Rio Grande Valley Task Force Grant With The
R-2011-099 10-18-2011  Not_Included Southwest Border High Intensity Drug
                                    Trafficking Area (Hidta) And Providing For
                                    An Appropriation To The City Of
                                    Albuquerque.
                                    Approving And Authorizing The Acceptance Of
                                    Funds For Albuquerque Highway Clean Up
                                    Program Through A Cooperative Agreement
R-2011-100 10-18-2011  Not_Included With The New Mexico State Highway And
                                    Transportation Department And Providing For
                                    An Appropriation To The Solid Waste
                                    Management Department.
 
Res. No. Date Disposition Short Title
Res. No.   Date       Disposition   Short Title
                                    Approving And Authorizing The Filing Of The
                                    Attached Agreement For A 2011 Hidta
                                    Investigative Support Center Grant With The
R-2011-101 10-18-2011  Not_Included Southwest Border High Intensity Drug
                                    Trafficking Area (Hidta) And Providing For
                                    An Appropriation To The City Of
                                    Albuquerque.
                                    Approving And Authorizing The Filing Of The
                                    Attached Grant Application For An Air
R-2011-102 10-18-2011  Not_Included Pollution Control Grant With The
                                    Environmental Protection Agency And
                                    Providing An Appropriation To The
                                    Environmental Health Department.
                                    Authorizing The Mayor To Execute A Grant
                                    Agreement With The Albuquerque / Bernalillo
                                    County Community Schools Partnership And
R-2011-103 10-18-2011  Not_Included Providing An Appropriation To The
                                    Department Of Family And Community
                                    Services/Division Of Child And Family
                                    Development.
                                    Authorizing The Mayor To Execute A Contract
                                    Agreement With The New Mexico Department Of
                                    Children, Youth And Families And Providing
R-2011-104 10-18-2011  Not_Included An Appropriation To The Department Of
                                    Family And Community Services/Division Of
                                    Child And Family Development, Pre-
                                    Kindergarten Program.
                                    Authorizing A Grant Agreement With The U.S.
                                    Department Of Health And Human Services,
R-2011-105 10-18-2011  Not_Included Early Head Start Program And Providing An
                                    Appropriation To The Department Of Family
                                    And Community Services.
                                    Amending The Adopted Capital Implementation
                                    Program Of The City Of Albuquerque By
R-2011-106 10-18-2011  Not_Included Approving New Projects, Supplementing
                                    Current Appropriations And Changing The
                                    Scope Of Existing Projects.
                                    Setting The Official List Of City Council
R-2011-107 10-18-2011  Not_Included Meetings From January 2012 Through December
                                    2012.
R-2011-108 10-18-2011 3-2-4         Determining Reasonable Notice Of Public
                                    Meetings Of The City Council.
                                    Amending R-10-173 To Extend The Timeline
                                    For The Completion Of The Work Of The 2010
R-2011-109 10-18-2011  Not_Included Redistricting Committee In Order To
                                    Consider Public Comments In The
                                    Redistricting Process.
                                    Establishing A Moratorium Until December
                                    30, 2011 On The Approval Of Any New
R-2011-110 10-18-2011  Not_Included Electronic Sign, Including Electronic
                                    Display Panels And Electronic Message
                                    Reader Boards; Exempting Certain Signs.
                                    Approving A Performance Based Payment
                                    Policy For Community Housing Development
R-2011-111 11-1-2011   Not_Included Organizations (Chdo) And Affordable Housing
                                    Development Organizations (Ahdo) When
                                    Developing Affordable Housing Using City
                                    Resources.
                                    Designating Workforce Housing Trust Funds
                                    And District 2 Set-Aside General Obligation
                                    Bond Funds To Acquire Property On North
R-2011-112 11-1-2011   Not_Included Fourth Street; Authorizing The Use Of
                                    Appropriated Monies For The Purchase Of The
                                    North Fourth Street Property For Affordable
                                    Housing And Related Development.
                                    Authorizing The Mayor To Execute A Grant
                                    Agreement With The New Mexico Aging And
R-2011-113 11-1-2011   Not_Included Long-Term Services Department, And
                                    Providing An Appropriation To The
                                    Department Of Family And Community
                                    Services.
                                    Approving And Authorizing A Draft
                                    Memorandum Of Agreement With The New Mexico
R-2011-114 11-1-2011   Not_Included Department Of Health For The West Nile
                                    Virus Surveillance And Data Management
                                    Program And Making An Appropriation To The
                                    Environmental Health Department.
                                    Reserving Three Million Dollars
                                    ($3,000,000) Within The Sales Tax Refunding
R-2011-115 11-3-2011   Not_Included Debt Service Fund (405) To Provide Bonding
                                    Capacity For The City's Cash Match For
                                    Paseo Del Norte/I-25 Interchange
                                    Improvements.
                                    Providing An Appropriation To The Cultural
                                    Services Department From Settlement Money
                                    Paid To The City By Philips Semiconductor
R-2011-116 11-18-2011  Not_Included For An Agreement With Explora Science
                                    Center And Children's Museum, Inc., And An
                                    Appropriation To The Department Of Family
                                    And Community Services For An Anti-Heroin
                                    Initiative.
                                    Relating To Capital Projects; Appropriating
                                    New Money For Fire Stations 2 And 7; De-
R-2011-117 11-18-2011  Not_Included Appropriating Operating Funds In The Fire
                                    Department; Re-Allocating Existing Money In
                                    Cip Projects For Fire Stations 2 And 7.
                                    Approving And Authorizing The Acceptance Of
                                    Grant Funds Based On The Attached Notice Of
                                    Grant Award For A Retired And Senior
                                    Volunteer Program From The Corporation For
R-2011-118 11-18-2011  Not_Included National And Community Service And The New
                                    Mexico Aging And Long Term Services
                                    Department And Providing For An
                                    Appropriation To The Department Of Senior
                                    Affairs Retired And Senior Volunteer
                                    Program In Fiscal Year 2012.
                                    Approving And Authorizing The Acceptance Of
                                    Grant Funds Based On The Attached Notice Of
                                    Grant Award For A Foster Grandparent
                                    Program With The Corporation For National
R-2011-119 11-18-2011  Not_Included And Community Service And The New Mexico
                                    Aging And Long Term Services Department And
                                    Providing For An Appropriation To The
                                    Department Of Senior Affairs Foster
                                    Grandparent Program In Fiscal Year 2012.
                                    Approving And Authorizing The Acceptance Of
                                    Grant Funds Based On The Attached Notice Of
                                    Grant Award For A Senior Companion Program
                                    Grant With The Corporation For National And
R-2011-120 11-18-2011  Not_Included Community Service And The New Mexico Aging
                                    And Long Term Services Department And
                                    Providing For An Appropriation To The
                                    Department Of Senior Affairs Senior
                                    Companion Program In Fiscal Year 2012.
                                    Approving And Authorizing The Filing Of A
                                    Grant Application For A Rideshare/
                                    Transportation Demand Management Program
R-2011-121 11-18-2011  Not_Included With The Federal Highway Administration
                                    Through The State Department Of
                                    Transportation And Providing For An
                                    Appropriation To The Transit Department.
                                    Authorizing And Directing The City Of
                                    Albuquerque, New Mexico To Hedge A Maximum
                                    Of 1,800,000 Gallons Of Its Gasoline Price
                                    Risk And A Maximum Of 3,850,000 Gallons Of
                                    Its Diesel Fuel Price Risk Within Certain
                                    Parameters For The Purposes Of Stabilizing
                                    The City's Fuel Costs And Paying Associated
                                    Fuel Hedging Transaction Costs; Authorizing
R-2011-122 11-18-2011  Not_Included The Execution Of International Swap And
                                    Derivative Association Documents;
                                    Authorizing The Taking Of All Other Actions
                                    Necessary To The Consummation Of The Fuel
                                    Hedging Transaction Contemplated By This
                                    Resolution; Ratifying Prior Actions
                                    Consistent With This Resolution And
                                    Repealing Prior Inconsistent Action; Making
                                    An Appropriation; And Declaring An
                                    Emergency.
                                    Approving And Authorizing The Acceptance Of
                                    State Of New Mexico Economic Development
                                    Grant Funds, A Grant Under The New Mexico
R-2011-123 11-18-2011  Not_Included Mainstreet Arts And Cultural District Act
                                    With The New Mexico State Economic
                                    Development Department; And Providing For
                                    An Appropriation To The City Of Albuquerque
                                    Cultural Services Department.
                                    Approving And Authorizing A Grant
                                    Application For The Albuquerque Heading
                                    Home Initiative With The Substance Abuse
                                    And Mental Health Services Administration
R-2011-124 11-18-2011  Not_Included (Samhsa), Providing An Appropriation To The
                                    Department Of Family And Community
                                    Services, And Authorizing The Department Of
                                    Family And Community Services To Enter Into
                                    A Contract With The Metropolitan
                                    Homelessness Project.
                                    Extending A Moratorium Established In R-11-
                                    264 On Zone Changes And The Issuance Of
                                    Building Permits For Significant
                                    Alterations Within The Adopted Boundaries
R-2011-125 11-18-2011  Not_Included Of The Existing Downtown Neighborhood Area
                                    Sector Development Plan For Up To An
                                    Additional Four Months Or Until The Updated
                                    Downtown Neighborhood Area Sector Plan Is
                                    Finally Acted Upon By The City Council,
                                    Whichever First Occurs.
 
Res. No. Date Disposition Short Title
Res. No.   Date      Disposition   Short Title
                                   Assigning Positions To The Metropolitan
R-2011-126 12-5-2011  Not_Included Transportation Board And Technical
                                   Coordinating Committee Of The Mid-Region
                                   Council Of Governments.
                                   Adopting The 2012 Action Plan And Program
                                   Investment Summary For The Expenditure Of
                                   Community Development Block (Cdbg) Grant,
R-2011-127 1-6-2012   Not_Included Home Investment Partnership (Home) And
                                   Emergency Shelter Block Grant (Esg) Funds
                                   And Providing An Appropriation To The
                                   Department Of Family And Community Services.
                                   Appropriating Funds From The Fiscal Year
                                   2012 General Fund (110) Available Fund
R-2011-128 1-6-2012   Not_Included Balance And Making An Appropriation To The
                                   Cultural Services Department For Black
                                   History Month.
                                   Amending R-11-248 To Allow The Issuance Of
                                   Building Permits For Certain Limited
                                   Alterations To Existing Structures And The
R-2011-129 1-6-2012  1-6-2         Construction Of Garages In The Los Duranes
                                   Sector Development Plan Area; Adopting
                                   Interim Regulations For The Issuance Of Such
                                   Building Permits.
                                   Imposing A Moratorium Of Up To Nine Months
                                   Or Until The Updated West Route 66 Sector
                                   Development Plan Is Finally Acted Upon By
R-2011-130 1-6-2012   Not_Included The City Council, Whichever Occurs First, On
                                   The Issuance Of Building Permits Related To
                                   Certain Automobile-Oriented Uses For
                                   Properties Along Central Avenue Between Rio
                                   Grande Boulevard And Atrisco Drive.
                                   Amending Enactment No. R-2011-122 (F/S R-11-
                                   299), Which Was Adopted By The City Council
                                   On November 7, 2011 And Which Authorized And
R-2011-131 1-6-2012   Not_Included Directed The City Of Albuquerque To Hedge A
                                   Maximum Amount Of Its Gasoline Price Risk
                                   And Its Diesel Fuel Price Risk, Among Other
                                   Actions, To Correct Two Recitals In The
                                   Enacted Resolution.
                                   Approving And Authorizing A Grant
                                   Application For The Summer Food Service
R-2011-132 1-6-2012   Not_Included Program For Children With The New Mexico
                                   Children, Youth And Families Department And
                                   Providing An Appropriation To The Department
                                   Of Family And Community Services.
                                   Authorizing The Mayor To Execute A Grant
                                   Agreement With The New Mexico State Highway
                                   And Transportation Department For Safe,
                                   Accountable, Flexible, Efficient,
R-2011-133 1-6-2012   Not_Included Transportation Equity Act: A Legacy For
                                   Users (Safetea-Lu) Funding To Operate An
                                   Adult Bicycle Safety Education Program In
                                   Outdoor Recreation And Providing An
                                   Appropriation To The Parks And Recreation
                                   Department.
                                   Expanding the Boundaries of the East Gateway
                                   Metropolitan Redevelopment Area as
                                   Established by F/S R-07-275, Making Certain
                                   Findings and Determinations Pursuant to the
R-2011-134 1-6-2012   Not_Included Metropolitan Redevelopment Code, and
                                   Authorizing and Directing the metropolitan
                                   Redevelopment Agency to Prepare a
                                   Metropolitan Plan for the East Gateway
                                   Metropolitan Redevelopment Area, as
                                   Expanded; Amending F/S R-07-275.
                                   Relating To The Proposed Albuquerque, New
                                   Mexico Special Assessment District No. 228,
                                   Determining The Advisability Of
                                   Constructing, And The Type And Character Of,
R-2011-135 1-6-2012   Not_Included Certain Streets And Associated Storm
                                   Drainage Improvements, Sanitary Sewer
                                   Improvements, Water Improvements, And Dry
                                   Utility Improvements Therein And Directing
                                   The City Clerk To Call For Sealed Bids On
                                   Such Improvements.
                                   Approving And Authorizing A Certified Local
R-2011-136 1-6-2012   Not_Included Government Subgrant And Providing An
                                   Appropriation To The Planning Department.
 
Notes
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
2012 Resolutions
Res. No. Date Disposition Short Title
Res.  Date Disposition Short Title
No.
R-    1-    Not        Relating To Capital Projects: Expanding The Scope Of Council Set-A-Side
2012- 17-  Included    Project 7357470; Providing Funding For Planning Corridor And Roadway Projects
001   2012             That Benefit City Council District 6.
R-    1-               Nuisance Abatement At 11101 Towner Ne Within The City Limits Of Albuquerque,
2012- 17-   Not        New Mexico Is So Ruined, Damaged And Dilapidated As To Be A Menace To The
002   2012 Included    Public Comfort, Health, Peace Or Safety And That It Is To Be Required To Be
                       Removed.
R-    1-    Not        Appropriating Funds To The Capital Implementation Program For The 2011 General
2012- 17-  Included    Obligation Program.
003   2012
R-    1-               Approving And Authorizing The Filing Of A Grant Application For A Food Service
2012- 17-   Not        Program For Children With The New Mexico Department Of Children, Youth And
004   2012 Included    Families And Providing An Appropriation To The Department Of Family And
                       Community Services/Division Of Child And Family Development.
                       Approving The Appointment Of A Director And Officer To Fill The Vacancies On
                       The Governing Body Of The Montecito Estates Public Improvement District,
R-    1-    Not        Caused By The Resignation Of A Director And The Expiration Of A Four-Year Term
2012- 17-  Included    To The Governing Body, Pursuant To The Public Improvement District Act, Nmsa
005   2012             1978, §§ 5-11-1 To -27 (2009, As Amended) And City Ordinance Enactment No. 0-
                       2003-12, Council Bill No. Fs 0-03-84; And Repealing All Actions Inconsistent
                       With This Resolution.
                       Approving The Appointment Of Directors And An Officer To Fill The Vacancies On
R-    1-               The Governing Body Of The Volterra Public Improvement District, Caused By The
2012- 17-   Not        Resignation Of Directors And An Officer, Pursuant To The Public Improvement
006   2012 Included    District Act, Nmsa 1978, §§ 5-11-1 To -27 (2009, As Amended) And City
                       Ordinance Enactment No. 0-2003-12, Council Bill No. Fs 0-03-84; And Repealing
                       All Actions Inconsistent With This Resolution.
R-    1-    Not
2012- 17-  Included    Assigning A Position To The Rio Metro Regional Transit District Board.
007   2012
R-    1-    Not        Adjusting Fiscal Year 2011 Appropriation For Certain Funds In Program
2012- 31-  Included    Strategies To Provide For Actual.
008   2012
                       Authorizing The Mayor To Execute An Intergovernmental Agreement With The
R-    1-    Not        Albuquerque Bernalillo County Water Utility Authority And The Parks And
2012- 31-  Included    Recreation Department, Open Space Division To Assist In The Operation Of The
009   2012             Southwestern Willow Flycatcher Habitat Restoration Project, And Providing An
                       Appropriation To The Parks And Recreation Department.
R-    1-               Establishing Priorities For The 2013 Capital Improvements Plan; Defining The
2012- 31-   Not        Criteria To Be Used In Rating Project Proposals; Assigning Weights To The
010   2012 Included    Criteria; Allocating Amounts For Different Purposes Within The 2013 General
                       Obligation Bond Program.
R-    1-    Not        Establishing A Legislative Policy For The City Of Albuquerque For The 2012
2012- 31-  Included    Legislative Session Of The New Mexico Legislature.
011   2012
R-    2-               Approving And Authorizing The Filing Of The Attached Grant Application With
2012- 23-   Not        The New Mexico Public Regulation Commission For Funds Under The Fire
012   2012 Included    Protection Grant And That Upon Award Providing An Appropriation To The Fire
                       Department In Fiscal Year 2012.
R-    2-    Not        Approving And Authorizing The Attached Grant Award For Funds Under The New
2012- 23-  Included    Mexico Department Of Homeland Security And Emergency Management And Making An
013   2012             Appropriation To The Fire Department In Fiscal Year 2012.
R-    2-    Not        Approving And Authorizing The Filing Of The Attached Grant Award Agreement For
2012- 23-  Included    A 2011 Dna Backlog Reduction Grant Program With The New Mexico Department Of
014   2012             Public Safety And Providing An Appropriation To The City Of Albuquerque.
R-    2-               Approving And Authorizing The Filing Of The Attached Grant Application With
2012- 23-   Not        The Federal Emergency Management Agency (Fema) For Funds Under The Assistance
015   2012 Included    To Firefighters Grant Program And That Upon Award Providing An Appropriation
                       To The Fire Department.
R-    2-    Not        Expressing Full Support For The Albuquerque-Bernalillo County (Abc) Community
2012- 23-  Included    Schools Partnership And For The Community Schools Initiative.
016   2012
R-    2-    Not        Approving The Program Management Of The Elementary And Mid School Initiative
2012- 23-  Included    (Emsi) By The Albuquerque-Bernalillo County (Abc) Community Schools
017   2012             Partnership.
R-    2-    Not        Expressing The City's Support For The Nob Hill Mainstreet Project To
2012- 23-  Included    Collaborate In A Community Development Revitalization Program.
018   2012
                       Relating To Capital Projects: Expanding The Scope Of Council Set-A-Side
R-    2-    Not        Project 7503190; Providing Funding For Parks Projects Throughout Albuquerque
2012- 23-  Included    That Benefit City Council District 2; Expanding The Scope Of Council Set-A-
019   2012             Side Project 7354320; Providing Funding For Parks Projects Throughout
                       Albuquerque That Benefit City Council District 6.
                       Extending A Moratorium Established In R-11-248 On Zone Changes And The
R-    2-    Not        Issuance Of Building Permits Within The 1976 Los Duranes Sector Development
2012- 23-  Included    Plan Area For Up To An Additional Three Months Or Until An Updated Los Duranes
020   2012             Sector Development Plan Is Finally Acted Upon By The City Council, Whichever
                       First Occurs.
R-    2-    Not        Relating To Capital Projects; Amending The Adopted Capital Implementation
2012- 23-  Included    Program Of The City Of Albuquerque By Appropriating A State Of New Mexico
021   2012             Grant For Improvements At Tower Park For The Westgate Little League.
R-    2-    Not        Amending The Scope Of The Reserve Within The Sales Tax Refunding Debt Service
2012- 23-  Included    Fund (405) To Strengthen The City's Commitment To Funding The Paseo Del Norte/
022   2012             I-25 Interchange Improvement Project.
R-                     Adopting The Facility Plan: Electric System Transmission And Generation (2010-
2012- 3-5-  Not        2020) (The "2010 Electric Facilities Plan") And Repealing The Facility Plan:
023   2012 Included    Electric Service Transmission And Subtransmission Facilities (1995-2005) (The
                       "1995 Electric Facilities Plan").
                       Authorizing Support For A Memorandum Of Understanding Among The City Of
R-                     Albuquerque, The Downtown Action Team, And The New Mexico Mainstreet Program
2012- 3-5-  Not        To Allow For The Creation Of A Certified New Mexico Mainstreet Program Within
024   2012 Included    The Downtown Business Improvement District; Supporting The Mainstreet
                       Program's Four-Point Approach; Expressing The City's Willingness To Administer
                       The Downtown Action Team Mainstreet Funds.
R-    3-    Not        Imposing A Moratorium On The Enforcement Of Section 14-16-3-4(A)(1)(A)1 Roa
2012- 16-  Included    1994 Regarding The Removal Schedule For Certain Buildings And Structures Which
025   2012             Did Not Violate Zoning Regulations When Erected.
 
Res. No. Date Disposition Short Title
Res.  Date Disposition Short Title
No.
                       Extending A Moratorium Established In R-11-264 On Zone Changes And The
R-    3-               Issuance Of Building Permits For Significant Alterations Within The Adopted
2012- 16-   Not        Boundaries Of The Existing Downtown Neighborhood Area Sector Development Plan
026   2012 Included    For Up To An Additional Three Months Or Until The Updated Downtown
                       Neighborhood Area Sector Plan Is Finally Acted Upon By The City Council,
                       Whichever First Occurs.
R-    3-    Not        Approving And Authorizing The Filing Of The Attached Grant Application For A
2012- 16-  Included    PM Fine And Ncore Monitoring Grant With The Environmental Protection Agency.
027   2012
R-    3-               Authorizing The Giving Of Notice For Bids For The Sale Of City Of Albuquerque,
2012- 28-   Not        New Mexico General Obligation Bonds Consisting Of $70,765,000 General
028   2012 Included    Obligation General Purpose Bonds, Series 2012a, And $8,100,000 General
                       Obligation Storm Sewer Bonds, Series 2012b.
R-    3-    Not        Amending The Adopted Capital Implementation Program Of The City Of Albuquerque
2012- 28-  Included    By Approving New Projects, Supplementing Current Appropriations And Changing
029   2012             The Scope Of Existing Projects.
R-    4-    Not        Approving And Authorizing The Acceptance Of Grant Funds From The New Mexico
2012- 13-  Included    State Library For The Basic State Grants In Aid And Providing For An
030   2012             Appropriation To The Cultural Services Department In Fiscal Year 2012.
R-    4-    Not        Approving And Authorizing The Acceptance Of A Grant Agreement With The State
2012- 13-  Included    Of New Mexico, Department Of Health For An Arthritis Program And Providing An
031   2012             Appropriation To The Department Of Senior Affairs.
R-    4-               DETERMINING THAT A CERTAIN BUILDING, OR STRUCTURE AT 620 To 636 14th St SW,
2012- 13-   Not        WITHIN THE CITY LIMITS OF ALBUQUERQUE, NEW MEXICO, IS AN ABANDONED PROJECT
032   2012 Included    RUINED, DAMAGED, AND DILAPIDATED AS TO BE A MENACE TO THE PUBLIC COMFORT,
                       HEALTH, PEACE, OR SAFETY AND THAT IT BE REQUIRED TO BE REMOVED.
                       For An Area Of Approximately 443 Acres (Including 290 Acres In The City And
                       The Remainder In Bernalillo County) And Bordered Generally By Parcels On Los
R-    4-               Anayas Road On The North, Rio Grande Blvd. , Indian School Rd. And The Alameda
2012- 30-  1-7-3       Drain On The East, Interstate 40 On The South And The Albuquerque Drain On The
033   2012             West, And, Adopting The Los Duranes Sector Development Plan As A Rank 3 Plan;
                       Changing Existing Zoning From Ra-1, Ra-2, R-1, R-Lt, R-T, R-2, O-1, C-1, C-2,
                       P, P-R, M-1, And Su-1 To Su-2/Ra-2, Su-2/Ra-1, Su-2/R-1, Su-2/R-Lt, Su-2/R-T,
                       Su-2/R-2, Su-2/Mud 1, Su-2/Mud 2, And Su-1.
R-    4-    Not        Approving And Authorizing Acceptance Of A Letter Of Award From The National
2012- 30-  Included    Endowment For The Arts And Making An Appropriation To The Cultural Services
034   2012             Department In Fiscal Year 2012.
                       Approving The Petition And Application Of Flash Resources, Llc, For Formation
                       Of The Boulders Public Improvement District Pursuant To The Public Improvement
                       District Act, Nmsa 1978, §§ 5-11-1 To -27 (2001, As Amended) And City
                       Ordinance Enactment No. 0-2003-12, Council Bill No. Fs 0-03-84; Making
                       Findings In Connection With The Petition And Application And Supporting
                       Documentation Requesting Approval Of The Formation Of The District;
R-    5-               Determining The Real Property To Be Included Within The District And The
2012- 23-  1-15-4      Purposes For Which The District Is Being Formed; Approving The General Plan,
035   2012             Rate, Method Of Apportionment And Manner Of Collection Of A Special Levy To Be
                       Imposed Upon Real Property Within The District, And Approving A Development
                       Agreement For Implementation Of The District; Providing For Governance Of The
                       District; Providing That Bonds And Other Obligations Of The District Shall Not
                       Be Obligations Of The City Of Albuquerque; Ratifying Certain Actions
                       Heretofore Taken; And Repealing All Actions Inconsistent With This Formation
                       Resolution.
R-    5-               Amending The North I-25 Sector Development Plan To Include A Revised
2012- 29-  1-7-30      Definition Of Su-2/Mud Zoning And To Include The Coronado Village Mobile Home
036   2012             Park Site In The Land Use District Overlay Map And To Amend The Su-2/Mud
                       Zoning Development Standards.
R-    5-    Not        Approving And Authorizing The Filing Of A State Of Good Repair Grant
2012- 29-  Included    Application With The Federal Transit Administration Of The U.S. Department Of
037   2012             Transportation And Providing For An Appropriation To The Transit Department.
R-    5-               Approving And Authorizing The Filing Of A Fy 2011 Transit Security Grant
2012- 29-   Not        Program Application With The Federal Emergency Management Agency Of The U.S.
038   2012 Included    Department Of Homeland Security And Providing For An Appropriation To The
                       Transit Department.
R-    5-    Not        Authorizing The Mayor To Execute The Albuquerque Business Education Compact
2012- 29-  Included    Recommendations And Providing An Appropriation To The Department Of Family And
039   2012             Community Services.
                       Approving And Authorizing The Albuquerque Pooled Opeb Trust Fund Agreement
R-    5-               Relating To The Funding Of Retiree Life Insurance Benefits Defined As Other
2012- 29-   Not        (Non-Pension) Post-Employment Benefits ("Opeb") In Accordance With
040   2012 Included    Governmental Accounting Standards Board ("Gasb") Standard 45; Creating An
                       Irrevocable Trust Called "Other Post Employment Benefits Fund"; And Providing
                       An Appropriation.
R-    5-               Appropriating Funds For Operating The Government Of The City Of Albuquerque
2012- 29-   Not        For Fiscal Year 2013, Beginning July 1, 2012 And Ending June 30, 2013;
041   2012 Included    Adjusting Fiscal Year 2012 Appropriations; And Adjusting Operating Grants And
                       Capital Funds.
R-    5-               Establishing One-Year Objectives For The City Of Albuquerque In Fiscal Year
2012- 29-  4-7-8       2013; To Meet Five-Year Goals.
042   2012
                       Relating To Albuquerque, New Mexico Special Assessment District No. 228;
R-    5-    Not        Conditionally Awarding The Construction Contract To Albuquerque Underground,
2012- 31-  Included    Inc.; Tentatively Approving The Assessment Roll; Setting The Time And Place Of
043   2012             An Assessment Hearing When Objections To The Assessment Roll For Such District
                       Will Be Heard; Providing Notice Of The Assessment Hearing.
                       Concerning A Special Municipal Bond Election To Be Held In The City Of
                       Albuquerque On November 6, 2012; Submitting To A Vote Of The Qualified,
                       Registered Electors At Such Special Election A Question Relating To The
R-    5-    Not        Issuance Of Gross Receipts Tax Revenue Bonds In The Principal Amount Of Up To
2012- 31-  Included    $50,000,000 For Improvements To The Paseo Del Norte And 1-25 Interchange;
044   2012             Providing The Form Of The Bond Question And The Designation Clause For Such
                       Question On The Ballot; Prescribing Other Details In Connection With Such
                       Special Election And Bonds; And Ratifying Action Previously Taken In
                       Connection Therewith.
R-    5-               Authorizing A Cooperative Agreement Between The United States Department Of
2012- 31-   Not        Interior, National Park Service, Petroglyph National Monument And The City Of
045   2012 Included    Albuquerque, Parks And Recreation Department And Providing An Appropriation To
                       The Parks And Recreation Department.
                       Consenting To The Termination And Dissolution Of The Quorum At Abq Uptown Tax
                       Increment Development District Formed Pursuant To The Tax Increment For
                       Development Act, Sections 5-15-1 Through 5-15-28, Nmsa 1978; Approving The
R-    5-    Not        Termination Of The Tidd Development Agreement; Making Findings In Connection
2012- 31-  Included    With The Termination And Dissolution Of The Tidd And The Termination Of The
046   2012             Tidd Development Agreement; Terminating The City Dedications Of 70% Of The
                       Gross Receipts Tax Increment Revenue And 75% Of The Property Tax Increment
                       Revenue On A Going Forward Basis; Repealing All Actions Inconsistent With This
                       Resolution.
R-    6-               Amending The Text Of The Nob Hill Highland Sector Development Plan To Add
2012- 12-  1-7-32      Alcohol Sales For Off-Premise Consumption For Establishments With A "Small
047   2012             Brewer's License" Or A "Winegrower's License" As A Conditional Use In The Su-
                       2/Ccr-1 And Su-2/Ccr-2 Zones.
R-    6-    Not        Relating To Capital Projects; Amending The Adopted Capital Implementation
2012- 12-  Included    Program Of The City Of Albuquerque By Deappropriating Funds In The 2009
048   2012             Capital Program And Creating A New Project.
                       Authorizing The Mayor To Execute A Grant Agreement With The New Mexico State
R-    6-    Not        Highway And Transportation Department For Safe, Accountable, Flexible,
2012- 12-  Included    Efficient, Transportation Equity Act: A Legacy For Users (Safetea-Lu) Funding
049   2012             To Operate An Adult Bicycle Safety Education Program In Outdoor Recreation And
                       Providing An Appropriation To The Parks And Recreation Department.
R-    6-               Approving And Authorizing The Acceptance Of Funds For Albuquerque Highway
2012- 12-   Not        Clean Up Program Through A Cooperative Agreement With The New Mexico State
050   2012 Included    Highway And Transportation Department And Providing For An Appropriation To
                       The Solid Waste Management Department.
 
Res. No. Date Disposition Short Title
Res. No.   Date      Disposition   Short Title
                                   Designating The Historic Central
                                   Metropolitan Redevelopment Area, Making
                                   Certain Findings And Determinations Pursuant
R-2012-051 6-12-2012 1-6-15        To The Metropolitan Redevelopment Code, And
                                   Authorizing And Directing The Planning
                                   Department To Prepare A Metropolitan
                                   Redevelopment Plan For The Historic Central
                                   Metropolitan Redevelopment Area.
                                   For An Area Of Approximately 280 Acres And
                                   Bordered Generally By 4th, 5th, 7th And 8th
                                   Streets On The East, Central Avenue On The
                                   South, 19th Street On The West, And Mountain
                                   Road On The North, Adopting The Downtown
                                   Neighborhood Area Sector Development Plan As
                                   A Rank 3 Plan; Changing Existing Zoning From
                                   Su-2/Single Family (Sf), Su-2/Townhouse
                                   (Th), Residential Townhouse (Rt), Su-2/
                                   Medium Density Apartment (Mda), Su-2/High
                                   Density Apartment (Hda), Su-2/Residential
                                   Commercial (Rc), Su-2/Office (O), Su-2/
                                   Neighborhood Commercial (Nc), Su-2/Community
R-2012-052 6-13-2012 1-7-4         Commercial (Cc), Su-2/Mixed Residential/
                                   Office (Mr/O), Su-2/Su-1, Su-2/Park (Pk),
                                   Su-3/Housing Focus, And Su-3/Mixed Use
                                   Corridor To Su-2/Downtown Neighborhood Area
                                   Single Family (Sf), Su-2/Downtown
                                   Neighborhood Area Townhouse (Th), Su-2/
                                   Downtown Neighborhood Area Mixed Residential
                                   (Mr), Su-2/Downtown Neighborhood Area Office
                                   Residential (Or), Su-2/Downtown Neighborhood
                                   Area Mixed Use Light (Mul), Su-2/Downtown
                                   Neighborhood Area Mixed Use Medium (Mum),
                                   Su-2/Downtown Neighborhood Area Neighborhood
                                   Commercial (Nc), Su-2/Downtown Neighborhood
                                   Area Central Corridor (Cc), Su-2/Park (Pk),
                                   And Su-2/Su-1.
                                   Approving A Grant Application To The
                                   Department Of Housing And Urban Development
R-2012-053 6-28-2012  Not_Included For A 2012 Continuum Of Care Grant; And
                                   Providing An Appropriation To The Department
                                   Of Family And Community Services.
                                   Nuisance Abatement At 323 Grove Ne, Within
                                   The City Limits Of Albuquerque, New Mexico
R-2012-054 6-28-2012  Not_Included Is So Ruined, Damaged And Dilapidated As To
                                   Be A Menace To The Public Comfort, Health,
                                   Peace Or Safety And That It Is To Be
                                   Required To Be Removed.
                                   Nuisance Abatement At 321 San Pablo Ne
                                   Within The City Limits Of Albuquerque, New
R-2012-055 6-28-2012  Not_Included Mexico Is So Ruined, Damaged And Dilapidated
                                   As To Be A Menace To The Public Comfort,
                                   Health, Peace Or Safety And That It Is To Be
                                   Required To Be Removed.
                                   Nuisance Abatement At 1224 Stone Ne, Within
                                   The City Limits Of Albuquerque, New Mexico
R-2012-056 6-28-2012  Not_Included Is So Ruined, Damaged And Dilapidated As To
                                   Be A Menace To The Public Comfort, Health,
                                   Peace Or Safety And That It Is To Be
                                   Required To Be Removed.
                                   Nuisance Abatement At 2327 1/2 William Se,
                                   Within The City Limits Of Albuquerque, New
R-2012-057 6-28-2012  Not_Included Mexico Is So Ruined, Damaged And Dilapidated
                                   As To Be A Menace To The Public Comfort,
                                   Health, Peace Or Safety And That It Is To Be
                                   Required To Be Removed.
                                   Approving And Authorizing A Draft Memorandum
                                   Of Agreement With The New Mexico Department
R-2012-058 6-28-2012  Not_Included Of Health For The West Nile Virus
                                   Surveillance And Data Management Program And
                                   Making An Appropriation To The Environmental
                                   Health Department.
                                   Amending The Adopted Capital Implementation
                                   Program Of The City Of Albuquerque By
R-2012-059 6-28-2012  Not_Included Approving New Projects, Supplementing
                                   Current Appropriations And Changing The
                                   Scope Of Existing Projects.
                                   Transferring Funds From The General Fund
R-2012-060 6-28-2012  Not_Included (110) To The Capital Acquisition Fund (305);
                                   Appropriating Those Funds To The City
                                   Council Projects Project.
                                   Approving The Fy2013 Audit Plan As Submitted
R-2012-061 8-15-2012  Not_Included By The Accountability In Government
                                   Oversight Committee.
                                   Approving And Authorizing The Filing Of
                                   Grant Applications And The Acceptance Of
                                   Potential Grant Awards For Multiple
R-2012-062 8-15-2012  Not_Included Albuquerque Police Department Law
                                   Enforcement Programs From Associated Grantor
                                   Agencies And Providing For An Appropriation
                                   To The City Of Albuquerque.
                                   Approving And Authorizing A Grant
                                   Application For The Running Start For
R-2012-063 8-15-2012  Not_Included Careers Program With The W. K. Kellogg
                                   Foundation, Providing An Appropriation To
                                   The Department Of Family And Community
                                   Services.
                                   Approving And Authorizing The Acceptance Of
                                   Grant Funds Based On The Attached Notice Of
                                   Grant Award For A Retired And Senior
                                   Volunteer Program From The Corporation For
R-2012-064 8-29-2012  Not_Included National And Community Service And The New
                                   Mexico Aging And Long Term Services
                                   Department And Providing For An
                                   Appropriation To The Department Of Senior
                                   Affairs Retired And Senior Volunteer Program
                                   In Fiscal Year 2013.
                                   Approving And Authorizing The Acceptance Of
                                   Grant Funds Based On The Attached Notice Of
                                   Grant Award For A Senior Companion Program
                                   Grant With The Corporation For National And
R-2012-065 8-29-2012  Not_Included Community Service And The New Mexico Aging
                                   And Long Term Services Department And
                                   Providing For An Appropriation To The
                                   Department Of Senior Affairs Senior
                                   Companion Program In Fiscal Year 2013.
                                   Approving And Authorizing The Acceptance Of
                                   Grant Funds Based On The Attached Notice Of
                                   Grant Award For A Foster Grandparent Program
                                   With The Corporation For National And
R-2012-066 8-29-2012  Not_Included Community Service And The New Mexico Aging
                                   And Long Term Services Department And
                                   Providing For An Appropriation To The
                                   Department Of Senior Affairs Foster
                                   Grandparent Program In Fiscal Year 2013.
                                   Approving And Authorizing The Filing Of The
                                   Attached Grant Award Agreement For A 2012
R-2012-067 8-29-2012  Not_Included Tracs Program Grant With The New Mexico
                                   Department Of Transportation And Providing
                                   An Appropriation To The City Of Albuquerque.
                                   Supporting Cooperation Among Councilors
R-2012-068 8-29-2012  Not_Included During The Transition To New City Council
                                   Districts.
                                   Approving And Authorizing A Cost-Share Grant
R-2012-069 8-29-2012  Not_Included And Providing An Appropriation To The
                                   Planning Department.
                                   Determining That A Certain Building, Or
                                   Structure At 906 John St Se, Within The City
                                   Limits Of Albuquerque, New Mexico, Is An
R-2012-070 9-26-2012  Not_Included Abandoned Project Ruined, Damaged, And
                                   Dilapidated As To Be A Menace To The Public
                                   Comfort, Health, Peace, Or Safety And That
                                   It Be Required To Be Removed.
                                   A Residential Substandard Dwelling, Or
                                   Structure In Need Of Abatement At 2216
                                   Desert Breeze Sw, Within The City Limits Of
R-2012-071 9-26-2012  Not_Included Albuquerque, New Mexico Is So Ruined,
                                   Damaged And Dilapidated As To Be A Menace To
                                   The Public Comfort, Health, Peace Or Safety
                                   And That It Is To Be Required To Be Removed.
                                   Amending The Adopted Capital Implementation
                                   Program Of The City Of Albuquerque By
R-2012-072 9-26-2012  Not_Included Approving New Projects, Supplementing
                                   Current Appropriations And Changing The
                                   Scope Of Existing Projects.
                                   Amending The Adopted Capital Implementation
                                   Program Of The City Of Albuquerque By
R-2012-073 9-26-2012  Not_Included Approving New Projects, Supplementing
                                   Current Appropriations And Changing The
                                   Scope Of Existing Projects.
                                   Adopting The Substantial Amendments To The
                                   2011 And 2012 Action Plans For The
R-2012-074 9-26-2012  Not_Included Expenditures Of The Second 2011 Emergency
                                   Solutions Grant (Esg) Allocation And The
                                   2012 Esg Allocation.
                                   Authorizing The Mayor To Execute An Amended
                                   Contract Agreement With The New Mexico
                                   Department Of Children, Youth And Families
R-2012-075 9-26-2012  Not_Included And Providing An Appropriation To The
                                   Department Of Family And Community Services/
                                   Division Of Child And Family Development,
                                   Pre-Kindergarten Program.
 
Res. No. Date Disposition Short Title
Res. No.   Date       Disposition   Short Title
                                    Authorizing A Grant Agreement With The U.S.
                                    Department Of Health And Human Services,
R-2012-076 9-26-2012   Not_Included Early Head Start Program And Providing An
                                    Appropriation To The Department Of Family
                                    And Community Services.
                                    Approving And Authorizing The Acceptance Of
                                    Letters Of Award With The State Of New
                                    Mexico Department Of Homeland Security
R-2012-077 9-26-2012   Not_Included Grant Funds For 2011 State Homeland
                                    Security Grant Program And Making An
                                    Appropriation To The Albuquerque Police
                                    Department In Fiscal Year 2012.
                                    Relating To Albuquerque, New Mexico Special
                                    Assessment District No. 228; Confirming,
R-2012-078 9-26-2012   Not_Included And Approving The Revised Assessment Roll
                                    For Such District; And Making An
                                    Appropriation.
                                    Approving And Authorizing The Filing Of A
                                    Fiscal Year 2013 Cmaq Fixed Route Expansion
                                    With The New Mexico Department Of
R-2012-079 9-26-2012   Not_Included Transportation For Federal Highway
                                    Administration (Fhwa) Funding And Providing
                                    For An Appropriation To The Transit
                                    Department.
                                    Approving And Authorizing The Filing Of A
                                    Fiscal Year 2012 Cmaq Fixed Route Expansion
                                    With The New Mexico Department Of
R-2012-080 9-26-2012   Not_Included Transportation For Federal Highway
                                    Administration (Fhwa) Funding And Providing
                                    For An Appropriation To The Transit
                                    Department.
                                    Extending A Moratorium Established By R-11-
                                    10 On The Issuance Of Building Permits
                                    Related To Certain Automobile-Oriented Uses
                                    For Properties Along Central Avenue Between
R-2012-081 9-26-2012   Not_Included Rio Grande Boulevard And Atrisco Drive
                                    Until April 30, 2013 Or Until The Updated
                                    West Route 66 Sector Development Plan Is
                                    Finally Acted Upon By The City Council,
                                    Whichever Occurs First.
                                    Approving The Appointment Of Directors To
                                    Fill Vacancies On The Governing Body Of The
                                    Mesa Del Sol Public Improvement Districts 1
                                    Through 5 Caused By The Resignation Of
R-2012-082 9-26-2012   Not_Included Certain Directors Pursuant To The Tax
                                    Increment For Development Act, Nmsa 1978,
                                    Sections 5-11-1 Through 27 Nmsa, As
                                    Amended, And City Enactment No. O-2003-012;
                                    And Repealing All Actions Inconsistent With
                                    This Resolution.
                                    Setting The Official List Of City Council
R-2012-083 9-26-2012   Not_Included Meetings From January 2013 Through December
                                    2013.
R-2012-084 9-26-2012  3-2-4         Determining Reasonable Notice Of Public
                                    Meetings Of The City Council.
                                    Text Amendment To The Nob Hill Highland
                                    Sector Development Plan To Further Clarify
                                    Parking Requirements In The Ccr-1, -2, And
R-2012-085 10-10-2012 1-7-32        -3 Zoning Districts For Specific Uses
                                    Allowed In The Underlying Zoning But Not
                                    Specifically Addressed In The Plan And To
                                    Provide Additional Guidance Regarding The
                                    Regulation Of Parking Lots.
                                    Authorizing The Mayor To Execute A Grant
                                    Agreement With The New Mexico State Highway
                                    And Transportation Department For Safe,
                                    Accountable, Flexible, Efficient,
R-2012-086 10-10-2012  Not_Included Transportation Equity Act: A Legacy For
                                    Users (Safetea-Lu) Funding To Operate A
                                    Bicycle Safety Education Program In Outdoor
                                    Recreation And Providing An Appropriation
                                    To The Parks And Recreation Department.
                                    Approving And Authorizing The Acceptance Of
                                    State Of New Mexico Litter Control And
                                    Beautification Grant Funds, A Grant Under
R-2012-087 10-10-2012  Not_Included The New Mexico Litter Control And
                                    Beautification Act With The New Mexico
                                    State Tourism Department; And Providing For
                                    An Appropriation To The City Of Albuquerque
                                    Solid Waste Management Department.
                                    Authorizing And Directing The City Of
                                    Albuquerque, New Mexico To Hedge A Maximum
                                    Of 1,950,000 Gallons Of Its Gasoline Price
                                    Risk And A Maximum Of 2,300,000 Gallons Of
                                    Its Diesel Fuel Price Risk Within Certain
                                    Parameters For The Purposes Of Stabilizing
                                    The City's Fuel Costs And Paying Associated
                                    Fuel Hedging Transaction Costs; Authorizing
R-2012-088 10-10-2012  Not_Included The Execution Of International Swap And
                                    Derivative Association Documents;
                                    Authorizing The Taking Of All Other Actions
                                    Necessary To The Consummation Of The Fuel
                                    Hedging Transaction Contemplated By This
                                    Resolution; Ratifying Prior Actions
                                    Consistent With This Resolution And
                                    Repealing Prior Inconsistent Action; Making
                                    An Appropriation; And Declaring An
                                    Emergency.
                                    Amending C/S R-12-41, Exhibit A, Which
                                    Provides Funding For The Workforce Ready/
                                    Rapid Remediation Ged Program And
R-2012-089 10-10-2012  Not_Included Designating Southwest Educational Partners
                                    For Training, Inc., As The Administrator Of
                                    The Program On Behalf Of The City Of
                                    Albuquerque.
                                    Amending The Barelas Sector Development
                                    Plan With Respect To The Su-2/Hls (Historic
                                    Locomotive Shops) Zone To Allow For Interim
R-2012-090 10-26-2012 1-7-39        Or Other Uses To Be Developed Prior To The
                                    Adoption Of A Master Plan For The City-
                                    Owned Rail Yards Site, Subject To City
                                    Council Review And Approval.
                                    A Residential Substandard Dwelling, Or
                                    Structure In Need Of Abatement At 1716
                                    Gerald Se, Within The City Limits Of
R-2012-091 10-26-2012  Not_Included Albuquerque, New Mexico Is So Ruined,
                                    Damaged And Dilapidated As To Be A Menace
                                    To The Public Comfort, Health, Peace Or
                                    Safety And That It Is To Be Required To Be
                                    Removed.
                                    Approving And Authorizing The Filing Of A
                                    Grant Application For A Rideshare/
                                    Transportation Demand Management Program
R-2012-092 10-26-2012  Not_Included With The Federal Highway Administration
                                    Through The State Department Of
                                    Transportation And Providing For An
                                    Appropriation To The Transit Department.
                                    Naming The North Diversion Channel Trail
R-2012-093 10-26-2012 6-7-15        Underpass At Comanche Boulevard The "Roy
                                    Sekreta Memorial Underpass."
                                    Adopting Sector Development Plan Map
                                    Amendments, 12epc-40028, To Amend The
                                    Westland Sector Development Plan, And
                                    Adopting Master Development Plan
                                    Amendments, 12epc-40029, To Amend The
                                    Westland Master Plan, Primarily To Respond
                                    To Future Development Plans For An
                                    Education Campus, Athletic Fields And A
                                    Regional Park, And Also To Modify Land Uses
                                    And Densities In Certain Areas, For Tracts
                                    A, J, K, L, M, N And P Watershed
R-2012-094 11-21-2012  Not_Included Subdivision; Tract A College Zone 2 West
                                    Reservoir Site; Tract B The Crossing;
                                    Parcels C, D, F And G Westland North;
                                    Parcel A W/In Secs 7 & 18t 10n R2e Town Of
                                    Atrisco Grant; All Of The Watershed And
                                    Stormcloud Residential Subdivisions;
                                    Portions Of The Sundoro, Sundoro South,
                                    Painted Sky And Parkway Residential
                                    Subdivisions, Approximately 1,700 Acres,
                                    Located South Of Petroglyph National
                                    Monument, North Of Interstate-40, And West
                                    Of Unser Boulevard To City Limits.
                                    Approving And Authorizing The Filing Of The
                                    Attached Agreement For A 2012 Stop Violence
R-2012-095 11-21-2012  Not_Included Against Women Grant Application With The
                                    U.S. Department Of Justice, Office On
                                    Violence Against Women And Providing For An
                                    Appropriation To The City Of Albuquerque.
                                    Approving And Authorizing The Filing Of The
                                    Attached Grant Application For An Air
R-2012-096 11-21-2012  Not_Included Pollution Control Grant With The
                                    Environmental Protection Agency And
                                    Providing An Appropriation To The
                                    Environmental Health Department.
                                    Amending Resolution 78-1995, Approved June
                                    2, 1995, And Codified At Section 3-3-15 Of
                                    The City Of Albuquerque Code Of
                                    Resolutions, Which Adopted The Employee
R-2012-097 11-21-2012 3-3-15        Substance Abuse And Alcohol And Drug
                                    Testing Policy, To Dissolve The Substance
                                    Abuse Policy
                                    Review And Appeals Board And Transfer Its
                                    Responsibilities.
                                    Approving And Authorizing The Mayor To
                                    Execute A Grant Agreement With The Office
R-2012-098 11-21-2012  Not_Included Of National Drug Control Policy And
                                    Providing For An Appropriation To The City
                                    Of Albuquerque, Police Department.
                                    Approving And Authorizing The Mayor To
                                    Execute A Grant Agreement With The State Of
R-2012-099 11-21-2012  Not_Included New Mexico Department Of Public Safety And
                                    Providing For An Appropriation To The City
                                    Of Albuquerque, Police Department.
 
Res. No. Date Disposition Short Title
Res. No.   Date       Disposition   Short Title
                                    Authorizing The Mayor To Execute A Grant
                                    Agreement With The New Mexico Aging And
R-2012-100 11-30-2012  Not_Included Long-Term Services Department, And
                                    Providing An Appropriation To The
                                    Department Of Family And Community
                                    Services.
                                    Approving The Appointment Of A Director To
                                    Fill A Vacancy On The Governing Body Of The
                                    Mesa Del Sol Tax Increment Development
                                    Districts 1 Through 5 Caused By The
                                    Redistricting Of City Council Districts
R-2012-101 11-30-2012  Not_Included Pursuant To The Tax Increment For
                                    Development Act, Nmsa 1978, Sections 5-15-
                                    1 Through 28 Nmsa, As Amended, City
                                    Enactment No. O-2006-44, City Enactments
                                    No. R-2006-126, R-2007-174, R-2009-266, R-
                                    2010-104 And R-2011-60; And Repealing All
                                    Actions Inconsistent With This Resolution.
                                    Adjusting Fiscal Year 2012 Appropriations
R-2012-102 12-28-2012  Not_Included For Certain Funds In Program Strategies To
                                    Provide For Actual Expenditures And
                                    Adjusting Fiscal Year 2013 Appropriations.
                                    Amending R-07-193 (Enactment No. R-2007-
                                    082) Regarding The Master Development
                                    Agreement For Implementation Of The Mesa
R-2012-103 1-8-2013   1-14-1        Del Sol Tax Increment Development Districts
                                    1 Through 5 To The Limited Extent Of
                                    Amending The Workforce Housing Plan
                                    Attached As Exhibit 3 To The Approved
                                    Master Development Agreement.
                                    Adopting The 2013 - 2017 Consolidated Plan
                                    And The 2013 Action Plan And Program
                                    Investment Summary For The Expenditure Of
                                    Community Development Block (Cdbg) Grant,
R-2012-104 1-8-2013    Not_Included Home Investment Partnership (Home) And
                                    Emergency Shelter Block Grant Funds And
                                    Providing An Appropriation To The
                                    Department Of Family And Community
                                    Services.
                                    Federal Appropriation To The City Of
                                    Albuquerque For The Northbound University
                                    Boulevard Over Los Picaros Road Project And
R-2012-105 1-8-2013    Not_Included Request To Include The Project And Federal
                                    Appropriation In The Fy 2012 To Fy 2017
                                    Transportation Improvement Program For The
                                    Albuquerque Metropolitan Planning Area As
                                    Required By Council Bill No. O-07-89.
                                    Establishing The Economic Development
                                    Action Account (Edact Account);
R-2012-106 1-8-2013    Not_Included Establishing The Economic Development
                                    Action Council; And Appropriating Funds For
                                    Economic Development.
                                    Approving An Amendment Of The Level A
                                    Community Master Plan For Mesa Del Sol;
                                    Approving An Amendment Of The Level A
                                    Development Agreement Between Forest City
R-2012-107 1-8-2013   1-11-9        Covington Nm, Llc And The City Of
                                    Albuquerque; And Approving The Release Of
                                    Tract 8 Upon Its Sale To The Pueblo Of
                                    Isleta From Land Use Entitlements And
                                    Covenants Running With The Land.
                                    Approving The Appointment Of A Director To
                                    Fill A Vacancy On The Governing Body Of The
                                    Mesa Del Sol Tax Increment Development
                                    Districts 1 Through 5 Caused By The
                                    Resignation Of A Certain Director Pursuant
R-2012-108 1-8-2013   1-14-1        To The Tax Increment For Development Act,
                                    Nmsa 1978, Sections 5-15-1 Through 28 Nmsa,
                                    As Amended, City Enactment No. O-2006-44,
                                    City Enactments No. R-2006-126, R-2007-174,
                                    R-2009-266, And R-10-110; And Repealing All
                                    Actions Inconsistent With This Resolution.
 
Notes
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
2013 Resolutions
Res. No. Date Disposition Short Title
Res. No.   Date      Disposition   Short Title
                                   Concerning A Special Municipal Election To
                                   Be Held In The City Of Albuquerque On March
                                   11, 2013; Submitting To A Vote Of The
                                   Qualified, Registered Electors At Such
                                   Special Municipal Election A Question
R-2013-001 1-7-2013   Not_Included Amending Article Ii, Section 7 And Section 8
                                   Of The Albuquerque City Charter; Providing
                                   The Form Of The Question And The Designation
                                   Clause For Such Question On The Ballot;
                                   Prescribing Other Details In Connection With
                                   Such Special Municipal Election.
                                   Authorizing The Mayor To Execute A Grant
                                   Agreement With The New Mexico Aging And
R-2013-002 1-18-2013  Not_Included Long-Term Services Department, And Providing
                                   An Appropriation To The Department Of Family
                                   And Community Services.
                                   Approving And Authorizing A Grant
                                   Application For The Summer Food Service
R-2013-003 1-18-2013  Not_Included Program For Children With The New Mexico
                                   Children, Youth And Families Department And
                                   Providing An Appropriation To The Department
                                   Of Family And Community Services.
                                   Amending R-10-97, Enactment No. R-2010-145,
R-2013-004 1-18-2013  Not_Included To Extend The Length Of Time Wherein City
                                   Employees Working At The Albuquerque Housing
                                   Authority Remain City Employees.
                                   Recognizing Charles Wells And Naming The
R-2013-005 1-18-2013 6-7-16        Wells Park Community Center Gymnasium The
                                   Johnny Tapia Gymnasium.
                                   Appropriating District Benefit Fees To The
R-2013-006 1-18-2013  Not_Included Downtown Business Improvement District In
                                   Accordance With The Approved Budget.
                                   Amending Resolution No. 92-1992 (R-295 Of
                                   The Tenth Council) To Remove The Crossroads
R-2013-007 1-18-2013  Not_Included Pedestrian Mall, Located Between Central
                                   Avenue And Tijeras Nw In The Former Right-
                                   Of-Way Of Fourth Street Nw, From The List Of
                                   Certain City Property.
                                   Approving And Authorizing The Filing Of The
                                   Attached Grant Award Agreement For A 2012
R-2013-008 1-31-2013  Not_Included Dna Backlog Reduction Program Grant With The
                                   New Mexico Department Of Public Safety And
                                   Providing An Appropriation To The City Of
                                   Albuquerque.
                                   City Of Albuquerque Project Recommendations
                                   To The Mid-Region Council Of Governments For
                                   Inclusion In The 2035 Metropolitan
                                   Transportation Plan, And For Consideration
R-2013-009 1-31-2013  Not_Included Of Federal Funding In The Proposed Fy 2014
                                   To Fy 2019 Transportation Improvement
                                   Program For The Albuquerque Metropolitan
                                   Planning Area As Required By Council Bill
                                   No. O-07-89.
                                   Establishing a Legislative Policy for the
R-2013-010 1-31-2013  Not_Included City of Albuquerque for the 2013 Legislative
                                   Session of the New Mexico Legislature.
                                   Stating The Regional Importance Of
                                   Developing The Paseo Del Volcan Corridor And
R-2013-011 2-19-2013  Not_Included Establishing The Development Of The Paseo
                                   Del Volcan Corridor As A High Priority
                                   Project In Future Allocations And Requests
                                   For Local, State Or Federal Funding.
                                   Adopting The Fy 2014 - Fy 2015 Two-Year
R-2013-012 2-19-2013  Not_Included Urban Enhancement Program And Appropriating
                                   Funds For The Urban Enhancement Program's
                                   Projects.
                                   Amending The Adopted Capital Implementation
                                   Program Of The City Of Albuquerque By
R-2013-013 2-19-2013  Not_Included Approving New Projects, Supplementing
                                   Current Appropriations And Changing The
                                   Scope Of Existing Projects.
                                   Authorizing The Giving Of Notices For Bids
                                   For The Sale Of City Of Albuquerque, New
                                   Mexico General Obligation Bonds Consisting
R-2013-014 2-19-2013  Not_Included Of $70,040,000 General Obligation General
                                   Purpose Bonds, Series 2013a And $4,980,000
                                   General Obligation Storm Sewer Bonds, Series
                                   2013b.
                                   Concerning The Appointment Of The Absentee
                                   Precinct Board For The Special Municipal
R-2013-015 2-19-2013  Not_Included Election To Be Held In The City Of
                                   Albuquerque, New Mexico On Monday, March 11,
                                   2013.
                                   Approving And Authorizing The Acceptance Of
                                   A Grant Agreement With The State Of New
R-2013-016 2-19-2013  Not_Included Mexico, Department Of Health For A Chronic
                                   Disease Prevention Program And Providing An
                                   Appropriation To The Department Of Senior
                                   Affairs.
                                   Supporting The Continuation Of The Current
                                   Route Of Amtrak's Southwest Chief Through
                                   Northern New Mexico And Calling On The Metro
R-2013-017 2-19-2013  Not_Included Region's State Legislative Delegation, The
                                   Governor, And The New Mexico Congressional
                                   Delegation To Support The Continued
                                   Operation Of The Southwest Chief On Its
                                   Present Route Alignment.
                                   Authorizing The Mayor To Execute An
R-2013-018 3-3-2013   Not_Included Agreement With The Downtown Action Team And
                                   Providing An Appropriation To The Department
                                   Of Finance And Administrative Services.
                                   Amending the 2013 Actio Plan and Program
R-2013-019 3-3-2013   Not_Included Investment Summary of the 2013-2018
                                   Consolidated Plan to Provide Funding to the
                                   National Dance Institute of New Mexico.
                                   Approving The Programming Of Funds And
R-2013-020 3-22-2013  Not_Included Projects For The 2013-2022 Decade Plan For
                                   Capital Improvements Including The 2013 Two-
                                   Year Capital Budget.
                                   Supporting House Bill 77, Legislation
R-2013-021 3-21-2013  Not_Included Requiring A Background Check For A Firearm
                                   Transfer At A Gun Show.
                                   Approving And Authorizing The Filing Of A
                                   Grant Application For A Food Service Program
                                   For Children With The New Mexico Department
R-2013-022 3-21-2013  Not_Included Of Children, Youth And Families And
                                   Providing An Appropriation To The Department
                                   Of Family And Community Services/Division Of
                                   Child And Family Development.
                                   Approving And Authorizing The Filing Of The
                                   Attached Grant Application With The New
R-2013-023 3-21-2013  Not_Included Mexico Public Regulation Commission For
                                   Funds Under The Fire Protection Grant And
                                   That Upon Award Providing An Appropriation
                                   To The Fire Department In Fiscal Year 2013.
                                   Providing Required Information on Proposed
R-2013-024 3-21-2013  Not_Included Interim Use of the Rail Yards Blacksmith
                                   Shop Building as Directed by R-2012-090.
                                   Authorizing the mayor to Execute the
                                   Albuquerque Business Education Compact
R-2013-025 3-21-2013  Not_Included Recommendations and Providing an
                                   Appropriation to the Department of Family
                                   and Community Services.
 
Res. No. Date Disposition Short Title
Res.  Date Disposition Short Title
No.
R-    3-    Not        Approving and Authorizing the Filing of the Revised Grant Application for A PM
2013- 21-  Included    Fine and NCORE Monitoring Grant with the Environmental Protection Agency.
026   2013
                       Authorizing The Issuance And Sale Of $42,030,000 City Of Albuquerque, New
                       Mexico Gross Receipts Tax Improvement Revenue Bonds, Series 2013, Authorized
                       To Be Issued By City Ordinance Twentieth Council Bill No. F/S O-12-17;
R-    3-               Providing Certain Terms Of The Bonds, Awarding The Bonds To, And Providing The
2013- 28-   Not        Price To Be Paid For The Bonds By, The Investment Bankers; And Providing For
027   2013 Included    The Approval Of A Bond Purchase Agreement, Official Statement, Continuing
                       Disclosure Agreement, And Certain Other Documents Pertaining To The Bonds;
                       Providing For Other Details Concerning The Bonds; Approving Documents Relating
                       To The Bonds; Making Certain Appropriations; And Ratifying Certain Actions
                       Previously Taken.
R-    3-    Not        Approving And Authorizing A Certified Local Government Subgrant And Providing
2013- 28-  Included    An Appropriation To The Planning Department.
028   2013
R-    3-               Nuisance Abatement At 345 Charleston St Se Within The City Limits Of
2013- 28-   Not        Albuquerque, New Mexico Is So Ruined, Damaged And Dilapidated As To Be A
029   2013 Included    Menace To The Public Comfort, Health, Peace Or Safety And That It Is To Be
                       Required To Be Removed.
R-    3-               Nuisance Abatement At 408 Chama St. Se Albuquerque, Nm, 87108 Within The City
2013- 28-   Not        Limits Of Albuquerque, New Mexico Is So Ruined, Damaged And Dilapidated As To
030   2013 Included    Be A Menace To The Public Comfort, Health, Peace Or Safety And That It Is To
                       Be Required To Be Removed.
R-    3-               Nuisance Abatement At 336 California St. Se Within The City Limits Of
2013- 28-   Not        Albuquerque, New Mexico Is So Ruined, Damaged And Dilapidated As To Be A
031   2013 Included    Menace To The Public Comfort, Health, Peace Or Safety And That It Is To Be
                       Required To Be Removed.
R-    3-               Nuisance Abatement At 11812 Lexington Ave. Ne, Within The City Limits Of
2013- 28-   Not        Albuquerque, New Mexico Is So Ruined, Damaged And Dilapidated As To Be A
032   2013 Included    Menace To The Public Comfort, Health, Peace Or Safety And That It Is To Be
                       Required To Be Removed.
R-    3-    Not
2013- 28-  Included    Supporting A Public-Private Economic Development Mainstreet Project
033   2013
R-    4-    Not        Providing Afd An Appropriation From The Fire Fund To Purchase Ekg Cardiac
2013- 17-  Included    Monitors And Related Equipment To Allow For The Expansion Of The Advanced Life
034   2013             Support Delivery System And Decreased Response Times.
R-    4-               Approving And Authorizing The Acceptance Of Letters Of Award With The State Of
2013- 17-   Not        New Mexico Department Of Homeland Security Grant Funds For 2012 State Homeland
035   2013 Included    Security Grant Program And Making An Appropriation To The Albuquerque Police
                       Department In Fiscal Year 2013.
R-    4-    Not        Approving A Grant Application To The Department Of Housing And Urban
2013- 17-  Included    Development For A 2013 Continuum Of Care Grant; And Providing An Appropriation
035   2013             To The Department Of Family And Community Services.
                       Requesting That The Mid-Region Council Of Governments Change The Timeline For
R-    4-               Funding A Road Safety Project In The Proposed FY 2014 To FY 2019
2013- 17-   Not        Transportation Improvement Program For The City Of Albuquerque. Authorizing
036   2013 Included    The Mayor To Enter Into An Agreement To Collect Any Necessary Additional Or
                       Updated Data And To Update The Rio Grande Boulevard And Candelaria Road
                       Intersection Evaluation; Calling For A Report; Designating Funding.
                       Extending A Moratorium Established By R-11-10 On The Issuance Of Building
R-    4-    Not        Permits Related To Certain Automobile-Oriented Uses For Properties Along
2013- 29-  Included    Central Avenue Between Rio Grande Boulevard And Atrisco Drive Until November
038   2013             30, 2013 Or Until The Updated West Route 66 Sector Development Plan Is Finally
                       Acted Upon By The City Council, Whichever Occurs First.
R-    4-               Nuisance Abatement At 10518 City Lights Dr. Ne Albuquerque Nm 87111 Within The
2013- 29-   Not        City Limits Of Albuquerque, New Mexico Is So Ruined, Damaged And Dilapidated
039   2013 Included    As To Be A Menace To The Public Comfort, Health, Peace Or Safety And That It
                       Is To Be Required To Be Removed.
R-    4-               Making An Appropriation To The Chief Administrative Office For The Creation Of
2013- 29-   Not        A Position To Provide Analysis And Data To The Independent Review Office And
040   2013 Included    The Police Oversight Commission In Furtherance Of The Goal Of Identifying
                       Long-Term Trends And Recommending Policy Reform.
R-    4-               Amending The East Gateway Sector Development Plan To Create Design Regulations
2013- 29-  1-7-23      To Protect A View Site Area.
041   2013
R-    5-    Not        Approving And Authorizing The Filing Of An Application For Federal Assistance
2013- 23-  Included    For A Pm Fine And Ncore Monitoring Grant With The Environmental Protection
042   2013             Agency.
R-    5-    Not        Authorizing The Removal Of Certain Uncollectible Accounts From The City's
2013- 23-  Included    Accounts Receivable Records For FY 2009 & Prior.
043   2013
R-    5-               Initiating A Process To Independently Review The City's Mechanisms Of Police
2013- 31-   Not        Oversight; Creating An Ad Hoc Police Oversight Task Force To Oversee That
044   2013 Included    Process And Make Recommendations To The City Council; Calling For Three Public
                       Forums To Be Held At Various Locations Throughout The City.
R-    5-               Establishing One-Year Objectives For The City Of Albuquerque In Fiscal Year
2013- 31-  4-7-9       2014; To Meet Five-Year Goals.
045   2013
                       Appropriating Funds For Operating The Government Of The City Of Albuquerque
R-    5-               For Fiscal Year 2014, Beginning July 1, 2013 And Ending June 30, 2014;
2013- 31-   Not        Adjusting Fiscal Year 2013 Appropriations; Appropriating Capital Funds; And
046   2013 Included    Amending Council Bill F/S R-13-125 (Enactment No. R-2013-020) To Increase
                       Funding For Capital Projects Related To Economic Development And
                       Revitalization.
R-    6-               Proclaiming Hazardous Fire Conditions And Severe Drought Conditions In The
2013- 13-   Not        City Of Albuquerque That Endanger The Health Safety And Welfare Of The
047   2013 Included    Citizens; Imposing Restrictions On The Sale Or Use Of Fireworks Within The
                       City Of Albuquerque.
                       Approving And Authorizing The Acceptance Of Fy12 - 2010 Go Bonds From The
R-    6-    Not        State Of New Mexico For Public Libraries/Albuquerque/Bernalillo County Library
2013- 13-  Included    System, State Of New Mexico Purchase Order Number 50500-0000020698, And
048   2013             Providing For An Appropriation To The Cultural Services Department In Fiscal
                       Year 2013.
R-    6-               A Residential Substandard Dwelling, Or Structure In Need Of Abatement At 8428
2013- 13-   Not        River St Ne, Within The City Limits Of Albuquerque, New Mexico Is So Ruined,
049   2013 Included    Damaged And Dilapidated As To Be A Menace To The Public Comfort, Health, Peace
                       Or Safety And That It Is To Be Required To Be Removed.
R-    6-    Not        Approving The FY2014 Audit Plan As Submitted By The Accountability In
2013- 26-  Included    Government Oversight Committee.
050   2013
R-    6-    Not        Transferring Funds From The General Fund (110) To The Capital Acquisition Fund
2013- 26-  Included    (305); Appropriating Those Funds To The City Council Projects Project.
051   2013
R-    6-    Not        Approving And Authorizing The Acceptance Of Grant Funds From The New Mexico
2013- 26-  Included    State Library For The Basic State Grants In Aid And Providing For An
052   2013             Appropriation To The Cultural Services Department In Fiscal Year 2013.
R-    6-               Approving And Authorizing A Grant Award From The New Mexico Mainstreet Program
2013- 26-   Not        To Support Nob Hill Mainstreet In Planning For The Establishment Of A Business
053   2013 Included    Improvement District And Providing An Appropriation To The Planning
                       Department.
R-    6-               Declaring The Fourth Saturday In June "Albuquerque Adoption Appreciation Day"
2013- 26-   Not        To Show Support For The Families Of Children Youth And Families Department
054   2013 Included    ("CYFD") Adoptions And For The Families That Adopt Children On National
                       Adoption Day.
                       Concerning A Special Municipal Bond Election To Be Held In The City Of
                       Albuquerque At The Next City General Election; Submitting To A Vote Of The
                       Qualified, Registered Electors And Nonresident Municipal Electors At Such
R-    7-3-  Not        Special Election Certain Questions For Authorizing The Issuance Of General
2013- 2013 Included    Obligation Bonds In Varying Principal Amounts And For Specified Public
055                    Purposes And, To The Qualified Registered Electors Providing The Form Of The
                       Bond Questions And The Designation Clause For Such Questions On The Ballot;
                       Prescribing Other Details In Connection With Such Special Election And Bonds;
                       And Ratifying Action Previously Taken In Connection Therewith.
R-    7-3-  Not        Concerning The Regular Municipal Election To Be Held In The City Of
2013- 2013 Included    Albuquerque, New Mexico On Tuesday, The Eighth Day Of October 2013.
056
R-                     Approving And Authorizing The Acceptance Of Funds For Albuquerque Highway
2013- 7-9-  Not        Clean Up Program Through A Cooperative Agreement With The New Mexico State
057   2013 Included    Highway And Transportation Department And Providing For An Appropriation To
                       The Solid Waste Management Department.
R-    7-9-  Not        Extending The Time Of Performance For The 2002 Housing And Neighborhood
2013- 2013 Included    Economic Development Plan, Appropriating El Encanto Funds And Designating
058                    Certain Projects Within The Barelas Neighborhood.
                       Approving The Petition And Application Of Western Albuquerque Land Holdings
                       Llc, For Formation Of The Lower Petroglyphs Public Improvement District
                       Pursuant To The Public Improvement District Act, Nmsa 1978, §§ 5-11-1 To -27
                       (2001, As Amended) And City Ordinance Enactment No. 0-2003-12, Council Bill
                       No. Fs 0-03-84; Making Findings In Connection With The Petition And
                       Application And Supporting Documentation Requesting Approval Of The Formation
R-    7-9-  Not        Of The District; Determining The Real Property To Be Included Within The
2013- 2013 Included    District And The Purposes For Which The District Is Being Formed; Approving
059                    The General Plan, Feasibility Study, Rate, Method Of Apportionment And Manner
                       Of Collection Of A Special Levy To Be Imposed Upon Real Property Within The
                       District, And Approving A Development Agreement For Implementation Of The
                       District; Providing For Governance Of The District; Providing That Bonds And
                       Other Obligations Of The District Shall Not Be Obligations Of The City Of
                       Albuquerque; Ratifying Certain Actions Heretofore Taken; And Repealing All
                       Actions Inconsistent With This Formation Resolution.
R-    7-9-  Not        Amending The Adopted Capital Implementation Program Of The City Of Albuquerque
2013- 2013 Included    By Approving New Projects, Supplementing Current Appropriations And Changing
060                    The Scope Of Existing Projects.
R-                     Establishing A Means For Open And Transparent Election Financing For Municipal
2013- 7-9-  Not        Elections; Directing The City Clerk To Provide Searchable Financial Reports
061   2013 Included    And A Link To Each Candidate's And Measure Finance Committee's Financial
                       Reports On The City's Website.
R-                     Amending The Downtown 2010 Sector Development Plan Regarding Existing Lighting
2013- 7-9-  Not        Fixtures On Commercial Surface Parking Lots; Allowing Existing On Site
062   2013 Included    Lighting Poles That Are Nonconforming As To Height And Lumens To Remain For
                       The Life Of The Fixture.
R-    1-    Not        Establishing The Boundary Of The Near North Valley Sector Development Plan
2013- 23-  Included    Area And Setting An Estimated Timeline For Public Review And Approval.
063   2013
R-    7-               Adopting A Text Amendment, 12epc-40076, To The Nob Hill Highland Sector
2013- 12-  1-7-32      Development Plan To Allow Freestanding Pole Mounted Signs For All Neon Signs
064   2013             Complying With The Requirements And Regulations Of The Central Avenue Neon
                       Design Overlay Zone (Can Doz).
                       Adopting A Zone Map Amendment, 12EPC-40077, To Establish The Central Avenue
                       Neon Design Overlay Zone (Can Doz). The Request Applies To All Properties That
R-    7-    Not        Have Direct Frontage On Central Avenue; And Sign Locations Within 300-Feet Of
2013- 12-  Included    The Edge Of Central Avenue Right-Of-Way On Properties That Front Tramway, Juan
065   2013             Tabo, Eubank, Wyoming, Louisiana, San Pedro, San Mateo, Yale, University, I-
                       25, Broadway, Atrisco, Old Coors, Coors, Unser, And 98th Street. The Can Doz
                       Will Be A Stand-Alone Document That Is An Extension Of The Zoning Code.
R-    8-    Not        Expressing the city's support for the Nob Hill Mainstreet Project to
2013- 14-  Included    collaborate in a Community Development Revitalization Program.
066   2013
R-
2013-                 
067
R-
2013-                 
068
R-
2013-                 
069
R-
2013-                 
070
R-
2013-                 
071
R-
2013-                 
072
R-
2013-                 
073
R-
2013-                 
074
R-
2013-                 
075
R-
2013-                 
076
R-
2013-                 
077
R-
2013-                 
078
R-
2013-                 
079
R-
2013-                 
080
R-
2013-                 
081
R-
2013-                 
082
R-
2013-                 
083
R-
2013-                 
084
R-
2013-                 
085
R-
2013-                 
086
R-
2013-                 
087
R-
2013-                 
088
                       Making findings in connection with the Boulders Public Improvement District's
R-    11-              resolution authorizing the issuance and sale of special levy revenue bonds;
2013- 1-    Not        ratifying and approving the issuance and sale of the Boulders Public
089   2013 Included    Improvement District special levy revenue bonds, series 2013, as substantially
                       consistent with the requirements of City Ordinance Enactment No. 0-2003-12 and
                       City Council Resolution No. R-2012-47, Enactment No. R 2012-35.
R-    11-   Not        Setting the official list of City Council Meetings from January 2014 through
2013- 1-   Included    December 2014
090   2013
R-    11-   Not
2013- 1-   Included    Determining the reasonable notice of public meetings of the City Council.
091   2013
R-    11-   Not        Creating a District 7 arterial and collector roadway system study project in
2013- 1-   Included    the Capital Acquisition Fund 305; Amending the scope of activity number
092   2013             7295330.
R-    11-              A residential substandard dwelling, or structure in need of abatement at 714
2013- 1-    Not        Summer Ave NW, within the city limits of Albuquerque, New Mexico is so ruined,
093   2013 Included    damaged and dilapidated as to be a menace to the public comfort, health, peace
                       or safety and that it is to be required to be removed.
R-    11-              A residential substandard dwelling, or structure in need of abatement at 2915
2013- 1-    Not        Topeka St SE, within the city limits of Albuquerque, New Mexico is so ruined,
094   2013 Included    damaged and dilapidated as to be a menace to the public comfort, health, peace
                       or safety and that it is to be required to be removed.
                       Authorizing and directing the City of Albuquerque, New Mexico to hedge a
                       maximum of 1,600,000 gallons of its gasoline price risk and a maximum of
                       2,000,000 gallons of its diseal fuel price risk within certain parameters for
R-    11-   Not        the purposes of stablizing the City's fuel costs; authorizing the execution of
2013- 1-   Included    International Swap and Derivative Association documents; authorizing the
095   2013             taking of all other actions necessary to the consummation of the fuel hedging
                       transaction contemplated by this Resolution; ratifying prior actions
                       consistent with the Resolution and repealing prior inconsistent action; making
                       an appropriation; and declaring an emergency.
R-    11-              Renaming the Trails Park to the Hailey Ratliff Trails Park In Remembrance of a
2013- 1-   6-7-17      Young Life Cut Short.
096   2013
R-    11-              A residential substandard dwelling, or structure in need of abatement at 1321
2013- 1-    Not        Bare Las Rd SW 87102 within the city limits of Albuquerque, New Mexico is so
097   2013 Included    ruined, damaged and dilapidated as to be a menace to the public comfort,
                       health, peace or safety and that it is to be required to be removed.
R-    11-              Renaming The Existing Carlos Rey Park As Bennie Aragon Park In Honor Of Former
2013- 1-   6-7-18      State Representative Bennie Aragon's Distinguished Service To The Citizens Of
098   2013             The Southwest Mesa And The City Of Albuquerque.
R-    11-   Not        Calling for a comprehensive accounting review of the City of Albuquerque
2013- 1-   Included    Housing and Neighborhood Economic Development Fund and designating funds to be
099   2013             used to contract with a qualified firm for completion of the review.
                       Relating To Capital Projects: Expanding The Scope Of Council Set-A-Side
                       Project 7502140; Providing Funding For Economic Development Improvement
                       Projects Within The Current Boundaries Of City Council District 2; Expanding
                       The Scope Of Council Set-A-Side Projects 7353110 And 7502130; Providing
R-    11-   Not        Funding For Community, Senior Center And Neighborhood Enhancement Projects
2013- 1-   Included    Within The Current Boundaries Of City Council District 2; Expanding The Scope
100   2013             Of Council Set -A-Side Project 7354270; Providing Funding For Parks Projects
                       Within The Current Boundaries Of City Council District 2; And Expanding The
                       Scope Of Council Set-A-Side Projects 7357440, 7506340, And 7100220; Providing
                       Funding For Street Projects Within The Current Boundaries Of City Council
                       District 2.
R-    11-              Concerning The Municipal Runoff Election To Be Held In The City Of
2013- 1-    Not        Albuquerque, New Mexico, On Tuesday, The Nineteenth Day Of November 2013;
101   2013 Included    Amending R-13-243 To Make The Voting Process And Locations On Exhibit A
                       Consistent With This Resolution.
R-    11-              Nuisance abatement at 1218 Los Tomases Dr NW 87102 within the city limits of
2013- 1-    Not        Albuquerque, New Mexico is so ruined, damaged and dilapidated as to be a
102   2013 Included    menace to the public comfort, health, peace or safety and that it is to be
                       required to be removed.
R-    11-   Not        Pursuant To Section 3-13-1(B) Nmsa 1978, Appointing The Chief Deputy City
2013- 1-   Included    Clerk And Deputy City Clerks; Repealing Bill No. R-11-187, Enactment No. R-
103   2013             2011-016.
R-    11-              Nuisance abatement at 1056 Betts St. NE within the city limits of Albuquerque,
2013- 1-    Not        New Mexico is so ruined, damaged and dilapidated as to be a menace to the
104   2013 Included    public comfort, health, peace or safety and that it is to be required to be
                       removed.
R-    11-   Not        Assigning Set A Side Funding To Complete The Tijeras Arroyo Bio-Zone Plan,
2013- 1-   Included    Establishing A Steering Committee To Assist In Implementing The Plan And
105   2013             Maintaining The Bio Zone.
R-    11-   Not        Reserving Funding Within The General Fund 110 to Provide For Salary Increases
2013- 1-   Included    and Recruitment And Retention Incentive Programs For Albuquerque's Police
106   2013             Officers, Subject to the Collective Bargaining Process.
R-    11-   Not        Appropriating FY/14 General Funds to the Fire Department to Establish A Rescue
2013- 3-   Included    Unit At Fire Station 2.
107   2013
R-    11-              Nuisance abatement at 1336 Michelle St. SW is within the city limits of
2013- 22-   Not        Albuquerque, New Mexico is so ruined, damaged and dilapidated as to be a
108   2013 Included    menace to the public comfort, health, peace or safety and that it is to be
                       required to be removed.
R-
2013-                Not Provided
109
R-
2013-                Not Provided
110
R-
2013-                Not Provided
111
R-
2013-                Not Provided
112
R-    11-              Nuisance abatement at 242 Vermont St NE within the city limits of Albuquerque,
2013- 22-   Not        New Mexico is so ruined, damaged and dilapidated as to be a menace to the
113   2013 Included    public comfort, health, peace or safety and that it is to be required to be
                       removed.
R-    11-              Establishing A Policy For The Timeframes For Purging Of License Plate Reader
2013- 22-  3-11-5      Records By The Albuquerque Police Department.
114   2013
R-    11-   Not        Relating To Capital Projects; Amending The Adopted Component Capital
2013- 22-  Included    Improvements Plan (Ccip) Of The City Of Albuquerque.
115   2013
R-    11-              Approving And Authorizing The Filing Of A Section 5307 Formula Grant
2013- 22-   Not        Application With The Federal Transit Administration (FTA) Of The U.S.
116   2013 Included    Department Of Transportation And Providing For An Appropriation To The Transit
                       Department.
R-    11-              Approving And Authorizing A Grant Application For The Summer Food Service
2013- 22-   Not        Program For Children With The New Mexico Children, Youth And Families
117   2013 Included    Department And Providing An Appropriation To The Department Of Family And
                       Community Services.
R-    11-   Not        Approving And Authorizing The Filing Of The Attached Grant Application For An
2013- 22-  Included    Air Pollution Control Grant With The Environmental Protection Agency And
118   2013             Providing An Appropriation To The Environmental Health Department.
R-    11-              Approving And Authorizing The Filing Of Grant Applications And The Acceptance
2013- 22-   Not        Of Potential Grant Awards For Multiple Albuquerque Police Department Law
119   2013 Included    Enforcement Programs From Associated Grantor Agencies And Providing For An
                       Appropriation To The City Of Albuquerque.
R-    11-              Authorizing The Mayor To Execute An Amended Contract Agreement With The New
2013- 22-   Not        Mexico Department Of Children, Youth And Families And Providing An
120   2013 Included    Appropriation To The Department Of Family And Community Services/Division Of
                       Child And Family Development, Pre-Kindergarten Program.
R-    11-              Approving And Authorizing The Flung Of The Attached Agreement For A 2013 Stop
2013- 22-   Not        Violence Against Women Grant Application With The U.S. Department Of Justice,
121   2013 Included    Office On Violence Against Women And Providing For An Appropriation To The
                       City Of Albuquerque.
R-    11-              Approving And Authorizing The Filing Of The Attached Grant Application With
2013- 22-   Not        The New Mexico Department Of Transportation, Transportation Alternatives
122   2013 Included    Program Grant And That Upon Award Providing An Appropriation To The Parks And
                       Recreation Department In Fiscal Year 2014.
R-    11-              Establishing A Women's Pay Equity Task Force To Study Compliance With The
2013- 22-  2-1-23      State Of New Mexico Fair Pay For Women Act; Providing An Appropriation For
123   2013             Conducting The Study.
                       Establishing A City Policy Of No Tolerance For Gender Pay Inequality;
                       Directing The Administration To Identify All Areas Of Pay Inequality Based On
R-    11-              Gender Occurring In City Of Albuquerque Government And To Prepare A Report To
2013- 22-  3-1-14      The City Council On The City's Action Plan For Correcting And Preventing Such
124   2013             Inequality; Directing The Administration To Implement A Policy For Requiring
                       Contractors And Vendors Doing Business With The City To Demonstrate Their
                       Compliance With The Federal Equal Pay Act; And Requiring The City's Action
                       Plan To End Pay Inequality On The City's Transparency Website.
R-    12-
2013- 13-  1-6-15      Approving The Historic Central Metropolitan Redevelopment Area Plan.
125   2013
                       Amending The East Gateway Sector Development Plan To:
                       Define The Process For Approving Major And Minor Changes Or Deviations From
                       The Building Types And Standards; Add A Process For Additions To Existing
R-    12-              Buildings That Cannot Meet The Standards Of The Plan; Remove The 9 Inch
2013- 13-  1-7-23      Maximum Letter Height For Signage; Amend The EG-C-2 Zone To Allow Sales Of
126   2013             Alcohol For On-Premise Consumption And Still Prohibit The Sale Of Alcohol For
                       Off-Premise Consumption; Remove The Minimum Height Requirement For Apartment
                       And Mixed Use Buildings; Clarify That The 26 Foot Maximum Building Height Is
                       Only Within 85 Feet Of Single Family Residential Uses.
R-    12-              Amending The 2008 Uptown Sector Development Plan: To Require Less Restrictive
2013- 13-  1-7-19      Requirements Of Organic Mulch In Landscape Areas; Separate Open Space
127   2013             Requirements For Residential And Non-Residential Land Uses; Allow Full Credit
                       For On-Street Parking; And Establish A Deviation Process.
R-    12-  1-7-39; 1-  Amending F/S R-08-47 With Respect To The Composition And Function Of The Rail
2013- 13-  17-3        Yards Advisory Board.
128   2013
                       Adopting The 2014 Action Plan And Program Investment Summary For The
                       Expenditure Of Community Development Block (Cdbg) Grant, Home Investment
R-    12-   Not        Partnership (Home) And Emergency Solution Grant Funds And Providing An
2013- 13-  Included    Appropriation To The Department Of Family And Community Services For Its 2014
129   2013             Program Investment Summary Funds, And; Providing An Appropriation To The
                       Department Of Family And Community Services In The Amount Of $150,000.00 In
                       2013 Community Development Block Grant Entitlement Funds.
R-    12-   Not        Approving And Authorizing Acceptance Of A Letter Of Award From The National
2013- 13-  Included    Endowment For The Arts (NEA) And Making An Appropriation To The Cultural
130   2013             Services Department In Fiscal Years 2014 And 2015.
R-    12-   Not        Appropriating Capital Improvement Funds Received Through An Intergovernmental
2013- 13-  Included    Agreement From The Albuquerque Bernalillo County Water Utility Authority
131   2013             (ABCWUA) For Open Space Land Improvements.
R-    12-   Not        Adjusting Fiscal Year 2013 Appropriations For Certain Funds In Program
2013- 13-  Included    Strategies To Provide For Actual Expenditures And Adjusting Fiscal Year 2014
132   2013             Appropriations.
R-    12-   Not        Appointing A Member To The Police Oversight Task Force To Replace A Member
2013- 13-  Included    That Has Resigned And Extending The Police Oversight Task Force Reporting
133   2013             Deadline To January 31, 2014.
R-    12-              Declaring The City Of Albuquerque's Commitment To Develop A Cooperative
2013- 17-   Not        Partnership With Albuquerque Public Schools For The Purpose Of Cooperative
134   2013 Included    Transportation Planning For The Benefit Of The Citizens Of The Albuquerque
                       Metropolitan Area.
R-    1-3-  Not        Approving And Authorizing The Acceptance Of A Grant Agreement With The State
2013- 2014 Included    Of New Mexico, Department Of Health For A Chronic Disease Prevention Program
135                    And Providing An Appropriation To The Department Of Senior Affairs.
R-    1-3-  Not        Approving And Authorizing The Mayor To Execute A Grant Agreement With The
2013- 2014 Included    Office Of National Drug Control Policy And Providing For An Appropriation To
136                    The City Of Albuquerque, Police Department.
R-                     A residential substandard dwelling, or structure in need of abatement at 409
2013- 1-3-  Not        Lewis Ave SE 87102 within the city limits of Albuquerque, New Mexico is so
137   2014 Included    ruined, damaged and dilapidated as to be a menace to the public comfort,
                       health, peace or safety and that it is to be required to be removed.
R-    1-3-  Not        Expressing The City's Support For The Downtown Albuquerque Mainstreet Project
2013- 2014 Included    To Collaborate In A Community Development Revitalization Program.
138
R-    1-3-  Not        Amending The Adopted Capital Implementation Program Of The City Of Albuquerque
2013- 2014 Included    By Approving New Projects, Supplementing Current Appropriations And Changing
139                    The Scope Of Existing Projects.
R-    1-3-  Not        Appropriating District Benefit Fees To The Downtown Business Improvement
2013- 2014 Included    District In Accordance With The Approved Budget.
140
R-    1-3-  Not        Approving And Authorizing The Mayor To Execute A Grant Agreement With New
2013- 2014 Included    Mexico Department Of Public Safety And Providing For An Appropriation To The
141                    City Of Albuquerque, Police Department.
R-    1-3-  Not        Appropriating Funds To The Capital Implementation Program For The 2013 General
2013- 2014 Included    Obligation Program.
142
                       Rescinding That Portion Of Resolution F/S R-11-259 Which Designated Workforce
R-                     Housing Trust Funds For Acquisition Of Property On North Fourth Street;
2013- 1-8-  Not        Redesignating Workforce Housing Trust Funds To Acquire Certain Property On
143   2014 Included    North Fourth Street; Authorizing The City To Enter Into An Intergovernmental
                       Agreement With The County Of Bernalillo; Calling For A Joint Planning
                       Collaboration Between The City And The County.
R-    1-3-  Not        Approving And Authorizing The Acceptance Of A Grant Agreement With The State
2013- 2014 Included    Of New Mexico, Department Of Health For A Chronic Disease Prevention Program
135                    And Providing An Appropriation To The Department Of Senior Affairs.
R-    1-3-  Not        Approving And Authorizing The Mayor To Execute A Grant Agreement With The
2013- 2014 Included    Office Of National Drug Control Policy And Providing For An Appropriation To
136                    The City Of Albuquerque, Police Department.
R-                     A residential substandard dwelling, or structure in need of abatement at 409
2013- 1-3-  Not        Lewis Ave SE 87102 within the city limits of Albuquerque, New Mexico is so
137   2014 Included    ruined, damaged and dilapidated as to be a menace to the public comfort,
                       health, peace or safety and that it is to be required to be removed.
R-    1-3-  Not        Expressing The City's Support For The Downtown Albuquerque Mainstreet Project
2013- 2014 Included    To Collaborate In A Community Development Revitalization Program.
138
R-    1-3-  Not        Amending The Adopted Capital Implementation Program Of The City Of Albuquerque
2013- 2014 Included    By Approving New Projects, Supplementing Current Appropriations And Changing
139                    The Scope Of Existing Projects.
R-    1-3-  Not        Appropriating District Benefit Fees To The Downtown Business Improvement
2013- 2014 Included    District In Accordance With The Approved Budget.
140
R-    1-3-  Not        Approving And Authorizing The Mayor To Execute A Grant Agreement With New
2013- 2014 Included    Mexico Department Of Public Safety And Providing For An Appropriation To The
141                    City Of Albuquerque, Police Department.
R-    1-3-  Not        Appropriating Funds To The Capital Implementation Program For The 2013 General
2013- 2014 Included    Obligation Program.
142
                       Rescinding That Portion Of Resolution F/S R-11-259 Which Designated Workforce
R-                     Housing Trust Funds For Acquisition Of Property On North Fourth Street;
2013- 1-8-  Not        Redesignating Workforce Housing Trust Funds To Acquire Certain Property On
143   2014 Included    North Fourth Street; Authorizing The City To Enter Into An Intergovernmental
                       Agreement With The County Of Bernalillo; Calling For A Joint Planning
                       Collaboration Between The City And The County.
                     
 
 
Notes
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
2014 Resolutions
Res. No. Date Disposition Short Title
Res. No.   Date       Disposition   Short Title
                                    Endorsing The Dr. Martin Luther King Jr.
                                    Memorial Center's Task Force For Public
R-2014-001 1-21-2014   Not_Included Safety Recommendations Regarding The
                                    Selection Of The New Chief Of Police For
                                    The City Of Albuquerque.
                                    Designating Workforce Housing Trust Funds
                                    And Home Investment Partnerships Funds For
R-2014-002 1-21-2014   Not_Included Affordable Housing Development Projects And
                                    Directing The Mayor To Execute Two
                                    Affordable Housing Development Agreements.
                                    Making Findings In Connection With The Vol
                                    Terra Public Improvement District's
                                    Resolution Authorizing The Issuance And
                                    Sale Of Special Levy Revenue Bonds;
                                    Ratifying And Approving The Issuance And
                                    Sale. Of The Vol Terra Public Improvement
R-2014-003 1-21-2014   Not_Included District Special Levy Revenue Bonds, Series
                                    2014, As Substantially Consistent With The
                                    Requirements Of City Ordinance Enactment
                                    No. 0-2003-12 And City Council Resolution
                                    No. R-2009-295, Enactment No. R 2009-121;
                                    And Confirming Certain Appointments To The
                                    Governing Body Of The District.
                                    Establishing A Legislative Policy For The
R-2014-004 1-30-2014   Not_Included City Of Albuquerque For The 2014
                                    Legislative Session Of The New Mexico
                                    Legislature.
                                    City Of Albuquerque Project Amendments To
                                    The Mid-Region Council Of Governments For
                                    Consideration Of Federal Funding In The
R-2014-005 1-30-2014   Not_Included Proposed Fy 2014 Transportation Improvement
                                    Program For The Albuquerque Metropolitan
                                    Planning Area As Required By Council Bill
                                    No. 0-07-89; Making An Appropriation.
                                    Reserving Funding Within The General Fund
                                    In Fy/14 To Provide For Salary Increases
R-2014-006 2-13-2014   Not_Included For Fire Fighters And Emergency Medical
                                    Personnel, Subject To Collective
                                    Bargaining.
                                    Approving The Attached Grant Agreement For
                                    The Fy2012 Assistance To Firefighters Grant
                                    With The Federal Emergency Management
R-2014-007 2-20-2014   Not_Included Agency (Fema) And The Department Of
                                    Homeland Security (Dhs) And Providing For
                                    An Appropriation To The Fire Department In
                                    Fiscal Year 2014.
                                    Appropriating Sixty Six Thousand Dollars
R-2014-008 2-20-2014   Not_Included ($66,000) In Funding For The Acquisition Of
                                    Water Rights For The Los Poblanos Fields
                                    Open Space.
                                    Approving The Attached Grant Agreement For
                                    The Fy2012 Assistance To Firefighters Grant
                                    With The Federal Emergency Management
R-2014-009 2-20-2014   Not_Included Agency (Fema) And The Department Of
                                    Homeland Security (Dhs) And Providing For
                                    An Appropriation To The Fire Department In
                                    Fiscal Year 2014.
                                    Approving And Authorizing The Filing Of A
                                    Grant Application For A Food Service
                                    Program For Children With The New Mexico
R-2014-010 2-20-2014   Not_Included Department Of Children, Youth And Families
                                    And Providing An Appropriation To The
                                    Department Of Family And Community
                                    Services/Division Of Child And Family
                                    Development.
                                    Amending The Adopted Capital Implementation
                                    Program Of The City Of Albuquerque By
R-2014-011 2-28-2014   Not_Included Approving New Projects, Supplementing
                                    Current Appropriations And Changing The
                                    Scope Of Existing Projects.
                                    Amending Resolution R-13-189 (Enactment No.
                                    R-2013-054) Which Declared The Fourth
                                    Saturday In June "Albuquerque Adoption
R-2014-012 3-12-2014   Not_Included Appreciation Day" To Show Support For The
                                    Families Of Children Youth And Families
                                    Department (Cyfd) Adoptions And For
                                    Families That Adopt Children On National
                                    Adoption Day.
                                    Stating The Position Of The City Council
                                    Strongly In Opposition To The Filming Of
                                    The Television Series Cops In The City Of
R-2014-013 3-12-2014   Not_Included Albuquerque And Urging The Bernalillo
                                    County Sheriff To Reconsider His Decision
                                    To Invite Cops To Film In Bernalillo
                                    County.
                                    Approving And Authorizing The Filing Of The
                                    Attached Grant Award Agreement For A 2013
R-2014-014 3-31-2014   Not_Included Dna Backlog Nmdis Program Grant With The
                                    New Mexico Department Of Public Safety And
                                    Providing An Appropriation To The City Of
                                    Albuquerque.
                                    Making An Appropriation To The Albuquerque
                                    Film & Media Experience Foundation And
R-2014-015 3-31-2014   Not_Included Authorizing The Mayor To Enter Into An
                                    Agreement With The Albuquerque Film & Media
                                    Experience Foundation For The Production Of
                                    The 2014 Festival.
                                    Amending The Adopted Capital Implementation
R-2014-016 4-18-2014   Not_Included Program Of The City Of Albuquerque By
                                    Changing The Scope Of Existing Projects.
                                    Authorizing The Giving Of Notices For Bids
                                    For The Sale Of City Of Albuquerque, New
                                    Mexico General Obligation Bonds Consisting
R-2014-017 4-18-2014   Not_Included Of $57,060,000 General Obligation General
                                    Purpose Bonds, Series 2014a And $5,375,000
                                    General Obligation Storm Sewer Bonds,
                                    Series 2014b.
                                    Approving And Authorizing The Flung Of The
                                    Attached Grant Award Agreement For A 2014
R-2014-018 4-18-2014   Not_Included Bernalillo County Party Patrol Grant With
                                    Bernalillo County "County" And Providing An
                                    Appropriation To The City Of Albuquerque.
                                    Approving And Authorizing The Filing Of A
                                    Section 5317 New Freedom Grant Application
R-2014-019 4-18-2014   Not_Included With The Mid-Region Council Of Governments
                                    And Providing For An Appropriation To The
                                    Transit Department.
                                    Approving And Authorizing Acceptance Of A
                                    Letter Of Award From The National Endowment
R-2014-020 4-18-2014   Not_Included For The Arts (Nea) And Making An
                                    Appropriation To The Cultural Services
                                    Department In Fiscal Year 2014.
                                    Appropriating El Encanto Funds Within The
R-2014-021 5-2-2014    Not_Included Housing And Neighborhood Economic
                                    Development Fund And Designating Certain
                                    Projects Within The Barelas Neighborhood.
                                    Evaluating And Updating The Comprehensive
                                    Plan Vision For Growth And Development In
R-2014-022 5-2-2014   1-2-1         The City Of Albuquerque; Revising Land Use,
                                    Transportation, And Development Regulations
                                    To Implement The Comprehensive Plan Vision.
                                    Amending The City Of Albuquerque Code Of
                                    Resolutions Sections Pertaining To The
R-2014-023 5-2-2014   6-5-1; 6-5-2  Consumption Of Alcohol In City Parks,
                                    Recreational Facilities And Open Space
                                    Lands.
                                    Appropriating Funds For Operating The
                                    Government Of The City Of Albuquerque For
R-2014-024 6-6-2014    Not_Included Fiscal Year 2015, Beginning July 1, 2014
                                    And Ending June 30, 2015; Adjusting Fiscal
                                    Year 2014 Appropriations; And Appropriating
                                    Capital Funds.
                                    Establishing One-Year Objectives For The
R-2014-025 6-6-2014   4-7-1         City Of Albuquerque In Fiscal Year 2015; To
                                    Meet Five-Year Goals.
                                    Establishing That The City Council Intends
                                    To Review The Downtown Albuquerque Business
R-2014-026 6-13-2014   Not_Included Improvement District At Its Next
                                    Opportunity To Consider Changes To Its
                                    Structure And Management Committee.
                                    Reaffirming The Policy Of The City Of
                                    Albuquerque That The Construction Of A
                                    Roundabout At Rio Grande And Candelaria Is
R-2014-027 6-13-2014   Not_Included A City Project; Amending Attachment 1 Of
                                    Resolution-13-128 To Increase Funds For The
                                    Rio Grande Boulevard And Candelaria Safety
                                    Improvements Project.
                                    Amending The Nob Hill Highland Sector
                                    Development Plan To Add The Demolition
                                    Review Process For Buildings In The Ccr-1,
                                    Ccr-2, Ccr-3, Or-1, Or-2, Sfhd, Rthd And
                                    Mrhd Zones; Add A Process For New Buildings
                                    That Cannot Meet The Plan Standards;
                                    Clarify The Measurement Of The Building
                                    Facade For Window Placement; Increase The
R-2014-028 6-13-2014  1-7-32        Front Building Setback To 10 Feet; Clarify
                                    Requirements For Building Stepbacks; Allow
                                    A Consistent Building Height Along Central
                                    Avenue; Decrease Parking For Multi-Family
                                    Development; Clarify Parking Reductions
                                    Near Transit Stops; Clarify Parking
                                    Exemptions For Businesses Under 3,000
                                    Square F'eet; Clarify That Walls And
                                    Carports Are Prohibited In Front Setbacks
                                    In The Historic Residential Zones.
                                    Amending The Downtown 2010 Sector
                                    Development Plan To Update The Name Of The
                                    Plan, Establish A Process For Deviation
                                    From Plan Standards; Establish Two New
                                    Permissive Uses In Commercial Areas;
                                    Incorporate Demolition Review Standards
R-2014-029 6-13-2014  1-4-1         Adopted By City In 2005; Clarify And Update
                                    Development Regulations And The Approval
                                    Process Chart; Clarify The Allowable
                                    Building Height For A Building Type;
                                    Replace A Building Type Illustration;
                                    Update The Catalytic Project List And Add
                                    An Appendix Item.
                                    Renaming The Existing Catch And Release
                                    Pond At Tingley Beach As The Bob Gerding
                                    Catch And Release Pond In Honor Of Bob
R-2014-030 6-13-2014  6-7-19        Gerding's Distinguished Legacy As A Fishing
                                    And Outdoor Enthusiast And Ambassador, And
                                    In Particular As A Steward And Advocate For
                                    Fishing At Tingley Beach.
                                    Approving And Authorizing A Certified Local
R-2014-031 6-13-2014   Not_Included Government Subgrant And Providing An
                                    Appropriation To The Planning Department.
                                    Appropriating A Transfer Of $108,603 Within
                                    The Photo Enforcement Fund 288 For The
R-2014-032 6-13-2014   Not_Included Purpose Of Closing The Fund Into The
                                    General Fund 110, And Appropriating
                                    $106,000 In The General Fund 110 For The
                                    Purchase Of Speed Enforcement Signs.
                                    Approving And Authorizing The Filing Of An
R-2014-033 6-13-2014   Not_Included Application For Federal Assistance For A
                                    Pm2.5-Fine Air Monitoring Grant With The
                                    Environmental Protection Agency.
                                    Approving And Authorizing The Acceptance Of
                                    The Attached Grant Award For A 2013 State
                                    Homeland Security Grant Program From The
R-2014-034 6-13-2014   Not_Included State Of New Mexico Department Of Homeland
                                    Security And Providing For An Appropriation
                                    To The City Of Albuquerque Police
                                    Department.
                                    Approving And Authorizing The Acceptance Of
                                    The Attached Grant Award For A Dea Task
R-2014-035 6-13-2014   Not_Included Force Program From The Drug Enforcement
                                    Agency And Providing For An Appropriation
                                    To The City Of Albuquerque Police
                                    Department.
                                    Approving And Authorizing The Acceptance Of
                                    The Attached Grant Award For An Fbi Safe
R-2014-036 6-13-2014   Not_Included Streets Task Force Program From The Federal
                                    Bureau Of Investigation And Providing For
                                    An Appropriation To The City Of Albuquerque
                                    Police Department.
                                    Establishing Priorities For The 2015
                                    Capital Improvements Plan; Defining The
                                    Criteria To Be Used In Rating Project
                                    Proposals; Assigning Weights To The
R-2014-037 6-13-2014   Not_Included Criteria; Allocating Amounts For Different
                                    Purposes Within The 2015 General Obligation
                                    Bond Program; Stating The Policy Of The
                                    Council With Regard To Senior And Community
                                    Centers, Parks And Recreation, And
                                    Workforce Housing Projects.
                                    Approving The Fy2015 Audit Plan As
R-2014-038 6-13-2014   Not_Included Submitted By The Accountability In
                                    Government Oversight Committee.
                                    Approving A Grant Application To The
                                    Department Of Housing And Urban Development
R-2014-039 6-13-2014   Not_Included For A 2014 Continuum Of Care Grant; And
                                    Providing An Appropriation To The
                                    Department Of Family And Community
                                    Services.
                                    Approving And Authorizing The Acceptance Of
                                    The Attached Grant Award For A Dea Task
R-2014-040 6-13-2014   Not_Included Force Program From The Drug Enforcement
                                    Agency And Providing For An Appropriation
                                    To The City Of Albuquerque Police
                                    Department.
                                    Nuisance Abatement At 714 Cromwell Ave. Sw
                                    Is Within The City Limits Of Albuquerque,
R-2014-041 6-27-2014   Not_Included New Mexico Is So Ruined, Damaged And
                                    Dilapidated As To Be A Menace To The Public
                                    Comfort, Health, Peace Or Safety And That
                                    It Is To Be Required To Be Removed.
                                    Authorizing The Mayor To Execute The
                                    Albuquerque Business Education Compact
R-2014-042 6-27-2014   Not_Included Recommendations And Providing An
                                    Appropriation To The Department Of Family
                                    And Community Services.
                                    Commissioning A Study To Assess The Gaps In
R-2014-043 6-27-2014   Not_Included The City, County And State's Funding For
                                    Certain Social Service Programs;
                                    Appropriating Funding For That Purpose.
                                    Approving And Authorizing The Acceptance Of
                                    Grant Funds From The New Mexico State
R-2014-044 6-27-2014   Not_Included Library For The Basic State Grants In Aid
                                    And Providing For An Appropriation To The
                                    Cultural Services Department In Fiscal Year
                                    2014.
                                    Expressing The City's Support For Nob Hill
R-2014-045 6-27-2014   Not_Included Main Street To Collaborate In A Community
                                    Development Revitalization Program.
                                    Relating To Public Service Company Of New
                                    Mexico's Plan To Replace 836 Megawatts At
R-2014-046 6-27-2014   Not_Included The San Juan Generating Station; Urging The
                                    New Mexico Public Regulation Commission To
                                    Modify Pnm's Plan And Claims For Cost
                                    Recovery.
                                    Concerning A Special Municipal Bond
                                    Election To Be Held In The City Of
                                    Albuquerque On November 4, 2014; Submitting
                                    To A Vote Of The Qualified, Registered
                                    Electors And Nonresident Municipal Electors
                                    At Such Special Election A Question
                                    Authorizing The Issuance Of General
R-2014-047 6-27-2014   Not_Included Obligation Bonds In A Certain Principal
                                    Amount For Metropolitan Redevelopment
                                    Purposes; Providing The Form Of The Bond
                                    Question And The Designation Clause For
                                    Such Question On The Ballot; Prescribing
                                    Other Details In Connection With Such
                                    Special Election; And Ratifying Action
                                    Previously Taken In Connection Therewith.
                                    Authorizing A Grant Agreement With The U.S.
                                    Department Of Health And Human Services,
R-2014-048 6-27-2014   Not_Included Early Head Start Program And Providing An
                                    Appropriation To The Department Of Family
                                    And Community Services.
                                    Authorizing The Mayor To Execute A Grant
                                    Agreement With The New Mexico State Highway
                                    And Transportation Department For Safe,
                                    Accountable, Flexible, Efficient,
R-2014-049 6-27-2014   Not_Included Transportation Equity Act: A Legacy For
                                    Users (Safetea-Lu) Funding To Operate A
                                    Bicycle Safety Education Program In Outdoor
                                    Recreation And Providing An Appropriation
                                    To The Parks And Recreation Department.
                                    Relating To The Repurposing Of
                                    Approximately $1,516,281 Of The Remaining
                                    Proceeds From The Issuance Of City Of
                                    Albuquerque, New Mexico Variable Rate
R-2014-050 6-27-2014   Not_Included Taxable Gross Receipts Tax Improvement
                                    Revenue Bonds Series 2000a Issued Pursuant
                                    To City Resolution Enactment Number 3-2000
                                    And Authorized Under City Ordinance
                                    Enactment Number 22-1999.
                                    Transferring Funds From The General Fund
R-2014-051 6-27-2014   Not_Included (11 0) To The Capital Acquisition Fund
                                    (305); Appropriating Those Funds To The
                                    City Council Projects Activity.
                                    Establishing A Community Outreach Process
                                    Known As The "Albuquerque Collaborative On
                                    Police-Community Relations" In Order To
                                    Reach Out To Community Members And
R-2014-052 6-27-2014  6-10-1        Stakeholders With The Intent Of Formalizing
                                    Overall Goals For Apd And The Community;
                                    Identifying Stakeholder Groups; Making An
                                    Appropriation For A Public Awareness/Public
                                    Outreach Program And Related Costs.
                                    Supporting A Project With Bernalillo County
                                    For The Purpose Of Implementing A Housing
R-2014-053 6-27-2014   Not_Included Assistance Program For Persons With Mental
                                    Illness Being Released From The Metopolitan
                                    Detention Center.
                                    Adopting A Rail Yards Master Development
                                    Plan And Accompanying Site Development Plan
R-2014-054 7-3-2014   1-6-16        For Subdivision To Provide The Appropriate
                                    Policy Framework And Regulations To Guide
                                    The Redevelopment Of The Rail Yards Site.
                                    Appropriating Funding Within The General
                                    Fund For Fiscal Year 2015 To Provide
R-2014-055 8-14-2014   Not_Included Incentive Pay For Arson Investigators
                                    Within The Albuquerque Fire Department,
                                    Subject To Collective Bargaining.
                                    Authorizing And Directing The City Of
                                    Albuquerque, New Mexico To Hedge A Maximum
                                    Of 1,427,074 Gallons Of Its Gasoline Price
                                    Risk And A Maximum Of 1,910,471 Gallons Of
                                    Its Diesel Fuel Price Risk Within Certain
                                    Parameters For The Purposes Of Stabilizing
                                    The City's Fuel Costs And Paying Associated
                                    Fuel Hedging Transaction Costs; Authorizing
R-2014-056 8-19-2014   Not_Included The Execution Of International Swap And
                                    Derivative Association Documents;
                                    Authorizing The Taking Of All Other Actions
                                    Necessary To The Consummation Of The Fuel
                                    Hedging Transaction Contemplated By This
                                    Resolution; Ratifying Prior Actions
                                    Consistent With This Resolution And
                                    Repealing Prior Inconsistent Action; Making
                                    An Appropriation; And Declaring An
                                    Emergency.
                                    Supporting National Climate Change
R-2014-057 8-29-2014   Not_Included Legislation To Reduce Greenhouse Gas
                                    Emissions.
                                    Expressing Support For Cornucopia Adult And
                                    Family Services Intent To Apply For Funding
                                    In Response To The New Mexico Department Of
R-2014-058 8-29-2014   Not_Included Transportation's Ffy 2016 Application Under
                                    Section 5310: Enhanced Mobility Of Seniors
                                    And Individuals With Disabilities To Meet
                                    The Transportation Needs Of The Elderly,
                                    Frail And Disabled Persons.
                                    Designating Fiscal Year 2015 General Fund
                                    Appropriations For The Heading Home
                                    Program. Authorizing The Mayor To Enter
R-2014-059 8-29-2014   Not_Included Into A Social Services Agreement With
                                    Albuquerque Heading Home For Case
                                    Management Services For Heading Home
                                    Clients.
                                    Changing The Name Of Ouray Road Between
R-2014-060 8-29-2014  6-7-20        Unser Boulevard And Ladera Drive To Bob
                                    Mccannon Road.
                                    Relating To Capital Projects: Expanding The
                                    Scope Of The Council District 6 Park
                                    Improvements And Amenities Project Within
R-2014-061 8-29-2014   Not_Included The 2009 General Obligation Bond Program;
                                    Providing Funding For Park Improvements And
                                    Amenities Projects Within City Council
                                    District 6 .
                                    Adopting The Downtown Neighborhood Area
R-2014-062 8-29-2014  1-4-1         (Dna) Traffic Study (2014) And Its Findings
                                    And Recommendations Regarding Neighborhood
                                    Traffic Management In The DNA.
                                    To Submit The Following Proposition And
                                    Authorization To The Voters Of The City Of
                                    Albuquerque: 1) A Proposition To Amend
                                    Article V, Section 4 Of The City Charter To
                                    Specify That Appointment Of The Chief Of
                                    Police And Fire Chief Will Require The
                                    Advice And Consent Of The City Council And
                                    That The Chief Of Police Or Fire Chief May
R-2014-063 9-4-2014    Not_Included Be Removed By The Council For Cause; 2) A
                                    Proposition To Amend Article Ill Section 3
                                    Of The City Charter Relating To The Voter
                                    Initiative Process; 3) A Bond Question For
                                    The Issuance Of General Obligation Bonds In
                                    Certain Principal Amount For Metropolitan
                                    Redevelopment Purposes; And Prescribing
                                    Other Details In Connection With The
                                    Special Municipal Election.
                                    Approving And Authorizing Acceptance Of
                                    Grant Award From The New Mexico Workforce
R-2014-064 9-16-2014   Not_Included Connection Of Central New Mexico And The
                                    City Of Albuquerque, Human Resources
                                    Department And Providing An Appropriation
                                    To The Human Resources Department.
                                    Designating Albuquerque A "Purple Heart
                                    City" In Order To Recognize And Honor The
R-2014-065 9-30-2014  6-7-21        Many Citizens In Our Community Who Have
                                    Been Wounded Or Who Have Made The Ultimate
                                    Sacrifice In Service To Their Country;
                                    Making An Appropriation.
                                    Approving And Authorizing The Acceptance Of
                                    Grant Funds Based On The Attached Notice Of
                                    Grant Award For A Retired And Senior
                                    Volunteer Program From The Corporation For
R-2014-066 9-30-2014   Not_Included National And Community Service And The New
                                    Mexico Aging And Long Term Services
                                    Department And Providing For An
                                    Appropriation To The Department Of Senior
                                    Affairs Retired And Senior Volunteer
                                    Program In Fiscal Year 2015.
                                    Approving And Authorizing The Acceptance Of
                                    Grant Funds Based On The Attached Notice Of
                                    Grant Award For A Foster Grandparent
                                    Program With The Corporation For National
R-2014-067 9-30-2014   Not_Included And Community Service And The New Mexico
                                    Aging And Long Term Services Department And
                                    Providing For An Appropriation To The
                                    Department Of Senior Affairs Foster
                                    Grandparent Program In Fiscal Year 2015.
                                    Approving And Authorizing The Filing Of A
                                    Grant Application For A Rideshare/
R-2014-068 9-30-2014   Not_Included Transportation Demand Management Program
                                    With The Federal Transit Administration
                                    (Fta) And Providing For An Appropriation To
                                    The Transit Department.
                                    Approving And Authorizing The Filing Of A
                                    Grant Application For A Rideshare/
R-2014-069 9-30-2014   Not_Included Transportation Demand Management Program
                                    With The Federal Transit Administration
                                    (Fta) And Providing For An Appropriation To
                                    The Transit Department.
                                    Approving And Authorizing The Acceptance Of
                                    Grant Funds Based On The Attached Notice Of
                                    Grant Award For A Senior Companion Program
                                    Grant With The Corporation For National And
R-2014-070 9-30-2014   Not_Included Community Service And The New Mexico Aging
                                    And Long Term Services Department And
                                    Providing For An Appropriation To The
                                    Department Of Senior Affairs Senior
                                    Companion Program In Fiscal Year 2015.
                                    Approving And Authorizing The Filing Of A
                                    Fiscal Year 2014 Cmaq Fixed Route Expansion
R-2014-071 9-30-2014   Not_Included With The Federal Transit Administration For
                                    Federal Highway Administration (Fhwa)
                                    Funding And Providing For An Appropriation
                                    To The Transit Department.
                                    Approving And Authorizing The Filing Of A
                                    Fiscal Year 2014 Stp-U Bus Stop Facilities
                                    Improvements With The New Mexico Department
R-2014-072 9-30-2014   Not_Included Of Transportation For Federal Highway
                                    Administration (Fhwa) Funding And Providing
                                    For An Appropriation To The Transit
                                    Department.
                                    Amending The Adopted Capital Implementation
                                    Program Of The City Of Albuquerque By
R-2014-073 9-30-2014   Not_Included Approving New Projects, Supplementing
                                    Current Appropriations And Changing The
                                    Scope Of Existing Projects.
                                    Approving And Authorizing The Funding Of A
                                    Section 5307 Grant With The Federal Transit
R-2014-074 9-30-2014   Not_Included Administration (Fta) Of The U.S. Department
                                    Of Transportation And Providing For An
                                    Appropriation To The Transit Department.
                                    Amending The Adopted Capital Implementation
                                    Program Of The City Of Albuquerque By
R-2014-075 9-30-2014   Not_Included Approving New Projects, Supplementing
                                    Current Appropriations And Changing The
                                    Scope Of Existing Projects.
                                    Amending The West Side Strategic Plan To
                                    Update The Volcano Mesa Road Network,
R-2014-076 9-30-2014  1-11-8        Recognize The Volcano Heights Major
                                    Activity Center, And Designate A
                                    Neighborhood Activity Center In Volcano
                                    Cliffs.
                                    Amending The Volcano Cuffs Sector
                                    Development Plan To Update The Road
R-2014-077 10-22-2014 1-7-48        Network, Reconcile Amendments Made To
                                    Adjacent Plans, And Make Minor
                                    Clarifications To Development Standards.
                                    Amending The Volcano Trails Sector
                                    Development Plan To Update The Road
R-2014-078 10-22-2014 1-7-49        Network, Reconcile Amendments Made To
                                    Adjacent Plans, And Make Minor
                                    Clarifications To Development Standards.
                                    Amending The Volcano Heights Sector
                                    Development Plan To Update The Road
R-2014-079 10-22-2014 1-7-45        Network, Reconcile Amendments Made To
                                    Adjacent Plans, And Make Minor
                                    Clarifications To Development Standards.
                                    Authorizing The Mayor To Execute An Amended
                                    Contract Agreement With The New Mexico
                                    Department Of Children, Youth And Families
R-2014-080 10-22-2014  Not_Included And Providing An Appropriation To The
                                    Department Of Family And Community
                                    Services/Division Of Child And Family
                                    Development, Pre-Kindergarten Program.
R-2014-081 10-22-2014  Not_Included Supporting Interest And Fee Caps On Non-
                                    Bank Lending Institutions In New Mexico.
                                    Appropriating Lodgers' Tax Funds To The
                                    National Hispanic Cultural Center
R-2014-082 10-22-2014  Not_Included Foundation For The Advertising, Publicizing
                                    And Promotion Of The National Hispanic
                                    Cultural Center.
                                    Approving And Authorizing The Mayor To
                                    Execute A Grant Agreement With The Office
R-2014-083 10-22-2014  Not_Included Of National Drug Control Policy And
                                    Providing For An Appropriation To The City
                                    Of Albuquerque, Police Department.
                                    Authorizing The Mayor To Execute A Grant
                                    Award With The United States Department Of
                                    The Interior, Fish And Wildlife Service For
                                    Urban Conservation Treaty For Migratory
R-2014-084 10-22-2014  Not_Included Birds (Urban Bird Treaty) Cfda Program
                                    #15.655- Migratory Bird Monitoring,
                                    Conservation, And Assessment And Providing
                                    For An Appropriation To The Parks And
                                    Recreation Department.
R-2014-085 10-22-2014  Not_Included Identifying Important Principles Of Law
                                    Enforcement For The City Of Albuquerque.
                                    Repealing Resolution R-05-236 (Enactment
                                    No. R-2005-061) Which Created The Mayor's
                                    Office Of Volunteer Engagement (Move)
                                    Advisory Board; Creating The Abq Volunteers
R-2014-086 10-22-2014 2-1-19        Advisory Board; Specifying The Mission Of
                                    The Abq Volunteers Advisory Board;
                                    Providing For Membership Appointment, Terms
                                    And Removal Of Members; Carrying Over The
                                    Members Of The Existing Move Advisory
                                    Board.
                                    Setting The Official List Of City Council
R-2014-087 10-22-2014  Not_Included Meetings From January 2015 Through December
                                    2015.
R-2014-088 10-22-2014 3-2-4         Determining Reasonable Notice Of Public
                                    Meetings Of The City Council.
                                    A Residential Substandard Dwelling, Or
                                    Structure In Need Of Abatement At 8519
                                    Brook St Ne Within The City Limits Of
R-2014-089 10-22-2014  Not_Included Albuquerque, New Mexico Is So Ruined,
                                    Damaged And Dilapidated As To Be A Menace
                                    To The Public Comfort, Health, Peace Or
                                    Safety And That It Is To Be Required To Be
                                    Removed.
                                    Authorizing The Mayor To Execute A Grant
                                    Agreement With The New Mexico Aging And
R-2014-090 10-22-2014  Not_Included Long-Term Services Department, And
                                    Providing An Appropriation To The
                                    Department Of Family And Community Services
                                    And To The Department Of Senior Affairs.
                                    Approving And Authorizing The Filing Of
                                    Grant Applications And The Acceptance Of
                                    Potential Grant Awards For Multiple
R-2014-091 11-3-2014   Not_Included Albuquerque Police Department Law
                                    Enforcement Programs From Associated
                                    Grantor Agencies And Providing For An
                                    Appropriation To The City Of Albuquerque.
                                    Approving And Authorizing The Acceptance Of
                                    A Grant Agreement With The State Of New
R-2014-092 11-3-2014   Not_Included Mexico, Department Of Health For A Chronic
                                    Disease Prevention Program And Providing An
                                    Appropriation To The Department Of Senior
                                    Affairs.
                                    Approving And Authorizing Acceptance Of A
                                    Letter Of Award From The National Endowment
R-2014-093 11-24-2014  Not_Included For The Arts (Nea) And Making An
                                    Appropriation To The Cultural Services
                                    Department In Fiscal Year 2015.
                                    Adopting The Route 66 Action Plan As A Rank
                                    Ii Facility Plan For Approximately 15 Miles
R-2014-094 11-24-2014  Not_Included Of Central Ave. Right-Of-Way Between
                                    Approximately Tramway Blvd. And 116th
                                    Street (Zone Atlas Pages L-6 To L-9, K-9 To
                                    K-20, J-12 To J-13, L-20 To L-23).
                                    Approving The Appointment Of A Director To
                                    Fill A Vacancy On The Governing Body Of The
                                    Mesa Del Sol Tax Increment Development
                                    Districts 1 Through 5 Caused By The
                                    Resignation Of A Certain Director Pursuant
R-2014-095 11-24-2014 1-14-1        To The Tax Increment For Development Act,
                                    Nmsa 1978, Sections 5-15-1 Through 28 Nmsa,
                                    As Amended, City Enactment No. 0-2006-44,
                                    City Enactments No. R-2006-126, R-2006-174,
                                    R-2009-266, R-2010-110, And R-2012-120; And
                                    Repealing All Actions Inconsistent With
                                    This Resolution.
                                    Adjusting Fiscal Year 2015 Appropriations
                                    For City Of Albuquerque Employee Wage
R-2014-096 11-24-2014  Not_Included Increases And Adjusting The Police
                                    Department Budget To Address The Retention
                                    Of Experienced Officers.
                                    Temporarily Authorizing Continuity Of A
R-2014-097 11-24-2014  Not_Included Citizen Police Complaint Review Process
                                    Until The First Meeting Of The Police
                                    Oversight Board.
                                    For An Area Of Approximately 684 Acres,
                                    That Includes The Tijeras Canyon And The
                                    Tijeras Arroyo For Approximately 3.7 Miles
                                    From The Carnuel Interstate-40 Interchange
R-2014-098 12-4-2014  1-11-14       Westward To The Boundary Of Kirtland Air
                                    Force Base; Adopting The Resource
                                    Management Plan For The Tijeras Arroyo
                                    Biological Zone (Rmp For The Tabz) As A
                                    Rank Ii Facility Plan.
                                    Recognizing The Significance Of The
                                    Historic Site Adjacent To The Singing Arrow
                                    Community Center, Known As Rancho De
                                    Carnue, In Order To Recognize And Preserve
                                    The Archaeological And Cultural
R-2014-099 12-3-2014  6-4-13        Significance Of The Site, And Designate It
                                    Worthy Of Additional Archaeological
                                    Investigations, Preservation, And
                                    Interpretation; Making An Appropriation To
                                    The Open Space Division Of The Parks And
                                    Recreation Department.
                                    Declaring The City Council's Intent To
                                    Issue $36 Million Of Gross Receipts Tax
R-2014-100 12-3-2014   Not_Included Revenue Bonds For The Purpose Of Funding
                                    Capital Projects As Determined By The City
                                    Council.
                                    Designating Fiscal Year 2015 General Fund
                                    Appropriations For Supportive Housing And
                                    Case Management Services; Authorizing The
                                    Mayor To Enter Into Social Services
                                    Agreements With The New Mexico Supportive
                                    Housing Coalition And Albuquerque Health
                                    Care For The Homeless; Authorizing The
R-2014-101 12-3-2014   Not_Included Mayor To Enter Into An Intergovernmental
                                    Agreement With Bernalillo County To
                                    Coordinate Housing And Case Management
                                    Services; And Directing The Department Of
                                    Family And Community Services To Issue A
                                    Request For Proposals For Additional
                                    Services To Assist Albuquerque Residents
                                    With Behavioral Health Needs.
                                    Amending The Su-2/Historic Locomotive Shop
                                    Zone In The Barelas Sector Development Plan
                                    To Reconcile The Provisions Of The Su2/Hls
R-2014-102 12-16-2014 1-7-39        Zone With A Rail Yards Master Development
                                    Plan And To Establish Certain Regulations
                                    Pertinent To Redevelopment Of The Su2/Hls
                                    Zone.
                                    Approving And Authorizing The Filing Of The
                                    Attached Agreement For A 2015 Stop Violence
R-2014-103 12-16-2014  Not_Included Against Women Grant Application With The
                                    U.S. Department Of Justice, Office On
                                    Violence Against Women And Providing For An
                                    Appropriation To The City Of Albuquerque.
                                    Approving And Authorizing The Acceptance Of
                                    State Of New Mexico Litter Control And
                                    Beautification Grant Funds, A Grant Under
R-2014-104 12-16-2014  Not_Included The New Mexico Litter Control And
                                    Beautification Act With The New Mexico
                                    State Tourism Department; And Providing For
                                    An Appropriation To The City Of Albuquerque
                                    Solid Waste Management Department.
                                    Approving And Authorizing A Grant
                                    Application For The Summer Food Service
                                    Program For Children With The New Mexico
R-2014-105 12-16-2014  Not_Included Children, Youth And Families Department And
                                    Providing An Appropriation To The
                                    Department Of Family And Community
                                    Services.
                                    Approving And Authorizing The Filing Of The
                                    Attached Grant Application For An Air
                                    Pollution Control Grant With The
R-2014-106 12-16-2014  Not_Included Environmental Protection Agency And
                                    Providing An Appropriation To The
                                    Environmental Health Department In Fiscal
                                    Year 2015.
                                    Approving And Authorizing The Filing Of The
                                    Attached Grant Application With The New
R-2014-107 12-16-2014  Not_Included Mexico State Fire Marshal's Office For
                                    Funds Under The Fire Protection Grant
                                    Program And Providing For An Appropriation
                                    To The Fire Department In Fiscal Year 2015.
                                    Approving And Authorizing The Filing Of The
                                    Attached Grant Application With The New
                                    Mexico Department Of Homeland Security And
R-2014-108 12-16-2014  Not_Included Emergency Management For Funds Under The
                                    State Homeland Security Grant And Providing
                                    For An Appropriation To The Fire Department
                                    In Fiscal Year 2015.
                                    Approving The Attached Grant Agreement For
                                    The Fy2014 Dot Hazardous Materials
R-2014-109 12-16-2014  Not_Included Emergency Preparedness Grant With The New
                                    Mexico Department Of Homeland Security And
                                    Providing For An Appropriation To The Fire
                                    Department In Fiscal Year 2015.
                                    Approving The Attached Grant Agreement For
                                    The Fy2015 Emergency Medical Services Fund
R-2014-110 12-16-2014  Not_Included Act With The New Mexico Department Of
                                    Health Providing For An Appropriation To
                                    The Fire Department In Fiscal Year 2015.
                                    City Of Albuquerque Project Recommendations
                                    To The Mid-Region Council Of Governments
                                    For Inclusion In The 2040 Metropolitan
                                    Transportation Plan, And For Consideration
R-2014-111 12-16-2014  Not_Included Of Federal Funding In The Proposed Fy 2016
                                    To Fy 2021 Transportation Improvement
                                    Program For The Albuquerque Metropolitan
                                    Planning Area As Required By Council Bill
                                    No. O-07-89.
                                    Adjusting Fiscal Year 2014 Appropriations
                                    For Certain Funds In Program Strategies To
R-2014-112 12-24-2014  Not_Included Provide For Actual Expenditures And
                                    Adjusting Fiscal Year 2015 Appropriations
                                    And Capital Appropriations.
                                    Amending Resolution F/S R-06-74 (Enactment
                                    No. R-2006-052) Which Established A Policy
                                    To Require Plat Review By Albuquerque
R-2014-113 12-24-2014 1-1-16        Public Schools And A Pre-Development Fee
                                    Agreement Between The Developer And
                                    Albuquerque Public Schools Prior To City
                                    Approval Of Preliminary Plats And Final
                                    Plats Containing Residential Uses.
                                    Adopting The 2015 Action Plan And Program
                                    Investment Summary For The Expenditure Of
                                    Community Development Block (Cdbg) Grant,
R-2014-114 12-24-2014  Not_Included Home Investment Partnerships Program (Home)
                                    And Emergency Solutions Grant (Esg) Funds;
                                    Providing An Appropriation To The
                                    Department Of Family And Community Services
                                    For 2015 Hud Entitlement Funds.
                                  
 
 
Notes
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
2015 Resolutions
Res. No. Date Disposition Short Title
Res. No.  Date       Disposition Short Title
                                 Amending Resolution R-226, Enactment No. 29-1993, to Change the Name of § 2-
                                 7-1 of the City of Albuquerque Code of Resolutions  From Mass Transit
R-2015-   1-26-2015  2-7-1       Citizens Advisory Board to Transit Advisory Boards, Change the Name of the
001                              Transit Citizens Advisory Board To the Transit Advisory Board, Change the
                                 Name of the Advisory Committee on Transit for the Mobility Impaired to the
                                 Paratransit Advisory Board, and to Remove References to the Parking Division.
R-2015-   1-26-2015   1          Establishing a Legislative Policy for the City of Albuquerque for the 2015
002                              Legislative Session of the New Mexico State Legislature.
                                 Authorizing the Mayor to Execute a Grant Agreement with the New Mexico
                                 Department of Workforce Solutions for the Mayor-governor Initiative
                                 Establishing an Americorps Program That Supplements the City of Albuquerque's
R-2015-                          Running Start for Careers Program; Authorizing the Use of Funds Received for
003       1-26-2015   2          Deploying 40 "Success Coaches" in Albuquerque High Schools in Order to
                                 Improve 9-12 Grade Academic Success, Financial Literacy and Economic
                                 Opportunity among the Student Populations They Will Serve in Targeted (Title
                                 1/SIG) Schools; and Providing an Appropriation to the Department of Family
                                 and Community Services.
                                 Directing the Albuquerque Police Department to Maintain a Separate Accounting
R-2015-   2-6-2015    3          of Expenditures Related to the Implementation of the U.S. Department of
004                              Justice Reform Recommendations and Requiring Quarterly Reporting of the
                                 Expenditures to the City Council.
R-2015-   2-6-2015   4-7-1       Adopting a Vision Statement, Revised Five-year Goals for the City of
005                              Albuquerque, and Adopting Desired Community Conditions for Each Goal.
R-2015-   2-6-2015    4          Naming the Children's Activity Room at the Central and Unser Library the
006                           "Lawrence Charles Vargas Children's Activity Room".
                                 Approving and Authorizing the Mayor to Execute a Sub-grant Agreement for a
R-2015-   2-9-2015    5          2014 Paul Coverdell Forensic Science Improvement Program from the State of
007                              New Mexico Department of Public Safety and Providing for an Appropriation to
                                 the City of Albuquerque, Police Department.
                                 Approving and Authorizing the Mayor to Execute a Sub-grant Agreement for a
R-2015-   2-9-2015    6          2014 Emergency Management Performance Grant (EMPG) from the New Mexico
009                              Department of Homeland Security and Emergency Management and Providing for an
                                 Appropriation to the City of Albuquerque, Police Department.
R-2015-   2-9-                   Establishing the Mile-Hi District and Creating a Mile-Hi/San Pedro
010       2015     7          Improvement Project to Improve Traffic Operations and Provide Bicycle and
                                 Pedestrian Facilities for the.purpose of Making Neighborhood Improvements.
R-2015-                          Adopting the City of Albuquerque Neighborhood Traffic Management Program
011       3-4-2015    8          (Ntmp) Policy Manual by Reference as the Traffic Calming Policy for the City
                                 of Albuquerque; Rescinding Resolution-03-314, Enactment No. 115-2003.
                                 Supporting the Joint Application of the Winrock Town Center Tax Increment
R-2015-   3-4-        9          Development Districts 1 and 2 (The "Districts") to Revise the Base Year Used
012       2015                to Determine the Districts' Gross Receipts Tax Increments from Calendar Year
                                 2007 to Calendar Year 2009.
R-2015-   3-4-2015   2-1-7       Creating a Task Force to Review the Charter of the City of Albuquerque and
013                              Make Recommendations on Certain Potential Revisions.
R-2015-   3-2-2015    10         Amending the East Gateway Sector Development Plan to Clarify the Language
014                              Regarding Illuminated Signage, and to Allow for Increased Sign Areas.
                                 Approving and Authorizing the Filing of the Attached Grant Application with
R-2015-   3-13-2015   11         the New Mexico Department of Health for Funds Under the Emergency Medical
015                              Services Fund Act Program and Providing for an Appropriation to the Fire
                                 Department in Fiscal Year 2016.
R-2015-                          Approving and Authorizing the Filing of the Attached Grant Agreement with the
016       3-13-2015   12         New Mexico Department of Public Safety And Providing for an Appropriation to
                                 the City of Albuquerque, Police Department.
                                 Approving and Authorizing the Filing of the Attached Grant Application with
R-2015-   3-13-2015   13         the U.S. Department of Homeland Security Federal Emergency Management Agency
017                              for Funds under the Assistance to Firefighters Grant Program and Providing
                                 for an Appropriation to the Fire Department in Fiscal Year 2015.
                                 Approving and Authorizing Funds Received from the New Mexico Department of
R-2015-   3-13-2015   14         Public Safety for the Administration of the New Mexico Dna Identification
018                              System Administrative Center and Providing for an Appropriation to the City
                                 of Albuquerque, Police Department.
                                 Approving and Authorizing the Filing of the Attached Grant Application with
R-2015-                          the New Mexico Energy, Minerals and Natural Resources Department for Funds
019       3-13-2015   15         under the Wildland/Urban Interface and Hazardous Fuels Reduction Grant
                                 Program and Providing for an Appropriation to the Fire Department in Fiscal
                                 Year 2015.
                                 Amending Resolution R-14-138, the City of Albuquerque Project Recommendations
                                 to the Mid-Region Council of Governments For Inclusion in the 2040
                                 Metropolitan Transportation Plan, And the FY 2016 to FY 2021 Transportation
                                 Improvement Program, Supporting the County of Bernalillo, Woodward Road
R-2015-   3-13-2015   16         Multimodal Improvement Project, Clarifying Using Transportation Improvement
020                              Program Funds for the Purchase Of Right of Way, Engineering and Construction
                                 for Projects Scheduled for the Metropolitan Transportation Plan; Creating a
                                 near South Valley Area Multimodal Study and an Interstate Corridor Bicycle
                                 Connections Project; Updating the City's List of Transportation Improvement
                                 Program Projects.
R-2015-   3-13-       17         Calling for a Comparative Survey of the Salaries of ABQ Ride Motorcoach
021       2015                Operators and Sunvan Chauffeurs.
R-2015-   3-13-2015   18         Adopting the FY 2016 - FY 2017 Two-Year Urban Enhancement Program and
022                              Appropriating Funds for the Urban Enhancement Program's Projects.
R-2015-                          Amending the Adopted Capital Implementation Program of the City of
023       3-13-2015   19         Albuquerque by Approving New Projects, Supplementing Current Appropriations
                                 and Changing the Scope of Existing Projects.
R-2015-   3-13-2015   20         Approving the Programming of Funds and Projects for the 2015-2024 Decade Plan
025                              for Capital Improvements Including the 2015 Two-Year Capital Budget.
                                 Designating Fiscal Year 2015 General Fund Appropriations for The Completion
R-2015-   3-27-2015   21         of a Survey of Albuquerque Police Officers Who Are Retired or Eligible for
026                              Retirement and Authorizing the Director of Council Services to Enter into an
                                 Agreement for This Purpose.
R-2015-                          Approving Certain Amendments to the Winrock Town Center Tax Increment
027       3-27-2015  1-14-3      Development Districts 1 and 2 (The "Districts") Master Development Agreement
                                 and the Tax Increment Development Plan.
R-2015-   3-27-2015   22         Adjusting a Fiscal Year 2015 Appropriation for Clean and Safe Services for
028                              the Downtown Area.
                               
                                 Special Election Resolution
                                 To submit to the voters of the City of Albuquerque an ordinance proposed
R-2015-                          pursuant to Article III, Section 3, the direct legislation provision of the
071       8-14-2015   23         City Charter, at a special municipal election to be held in the City of
                                 Albuquerque on October 6, 2015 to approve or disapprove the proposed
                                 ordinance as set forth herein; prescribing other details in connection with
                                 the special municipal election
                               
 
 
Notes
   This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions. However,
1  if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit the City's Legistar
   portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/legportal.html.
   This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions. However,
2  if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit the City's Legistar
   portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/legportal.html.
   This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions. However,
3  if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit the City's Legistar
   portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/legportal.html.
   This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions. However,
4  if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit the City's Legistar
   portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/legportal.html.
   This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions. However,
5  if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit the City's Legistar
   portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/legportal.html.
   This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions. However,
6  if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit the City's Legistar
   portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/legportal.html.
   This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions. However,
7  if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit the City's Legistar
   portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/legportal.html.
   This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions. However,
8  if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit the City's Legistar
   portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/legportal.html.
   This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions. However,
9  if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit the City's Legistar
   portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/legportal.html.
   This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions. However,
10 if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit the City's Legistar
   portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/legportal.html.
   This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions. However,
11 if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit the City's Legistar
   portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/legportal.html.
   This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions. However,
12 if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit the City's Legistar
   portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/legportal.html.
   This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions. However,
13 if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit the City's Legistar
   portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/legportal.html.
   This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions. However,
14 if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit the City's Legistar
   portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/legportal.html.
   This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions. However,
15 if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit the City's Legistar
   portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/legportal.html.
   This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions. However,
16 if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit the City's Legistar
   portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/legportal.html.
   This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions. However,
17 if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit the City's Legistar
   portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/legportal.html.
   This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions. However,
18 if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit the City's Legistar
   portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/legportal.html.
   This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions. However,
19 if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit the City's Legistar
   portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/legportal.html.
   This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions. However,
20 if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit the City's Legistar
   portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/legportal.html.
   This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions. However,
21 if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit the City's Legistar
   portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/legportal.html.
   This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions. However,
22 if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit the City's Legistar
   portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/legportal.html.
   This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions. However,
23 if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit the City's Legistar
   portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/legportal.html.
2016 Resolutions
 
Res. No.   Date       Disposition   Short Title
                                    Adopting a Zone Map Amendment, 15EPC-40034,
                                    to Establish Special Use Zoning, and Sector
                                    Development Plan Map Amendments, 15EPC-
                                    40036, to Amend the Westland Master Plan
                                    Primarily to Respond to Future Development
R-2016-007 2-5-2016    Not_Included Plans for a Regional Sports Facility to
                                    Fulfill a Public Need for Additional
                                    Recreational Opportunities, for Parcels C-
                                    2-a, C-3-a and C-3-c, Westland North,
                                    Approximately 82 Acres, Located South of
                                    Arroyo Vista Boulevard, North of Ladera
                                    Drive and East of 118th Street.
R-2016-025 4-22-2016  1-12-25       Approving the East Gateway Metropolitan
                                    Redevelopment Area Plan.
                                    Designating the Coronado Metropolitan
                                    Redevelopment Area, Making Certain Findings
                                    and Conclusions Pursuant to the
R-2016-095 11-21-2016  2            Metropolitan Redevelopment Code, and
                                    Authorizing and Directing the Metropolitan
                                    Redevelopment Agency to Prepare A
                                    Metropolitan Redevelopment Plan for the
                                    Coronado Metropolitan Redevelopment Area.
R-2016-096 11-21-2016 1-12-24       Approving the Coronado Metropolitan
                                    Redevelopment Area Plan.
                                  
 
 
Notes
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
2            However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
2017 Resolutions
 
Res. No.   Date     Disposition   Short Title
                                  Appropriating Funds to the Capital
R-2017-117 1-4-2018  Not_Included Implementation Program for The 2017 General
                                  Obligation Program.
                                
 
 
Notes
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
2018 Resolutions
 
Res. No. Date Disposition Short Title
None                     
                        
 
2019 Resolutions
Res. No. Date Disposition Short Title
Res. No.   Date        Disposition   Short Title
                                     Adopting a Proposition to Be Submitted to
                                     the Voters at the Next Municipal Election
R-2019-052 8-22-2019    Not_Included Concerning the Renewal of a Quarter Of One
                                     Percent Transportation Infrastructure
                                     Gross Receipts Tax.
                                     Concerning a Bond Election to Be Held in
                                     the City of Albuquerque at the next
                                     Regular Local Election on November 5,
                                     2019; Submitting to a Vote of the
                                     Qualified Electors at Such Regular Local
                                     Election Certain Questions for Authorizing
                                     the Issuance of General Obligation Bonds
R-2019-053 8-22-2019    2            in Varying Principal Amounts and for
                                     Specified Public Purposes And, Providing
                                     the Form of the Bond Questions and the
                                     Designation Clause for Such Questions on
                                     the Ballot; Prescribing Other Details in
                                     Connection with Such Bond Election and
                                     Bonds; and Ratifying Action Previously
                                     Taken in Connection Therewith.
                                     Adopting Propositions to Be Submitted to
                                     the Voters at the Next Local Election to
                                     Be Held in the City of Albuquerque
                                     Concerning Questions Amending Article Ii,
                                     Sections 2 and 3; Article Iv, Section 4;
R-2019-054 8-22-2019    3            Article V, Section 2; and Article XVI,
                                     Sections 3, 4, 6, 7, 8, 10, 12, 15, and
                                     21, of the Albuquerque City Charter; and
                                     Adding Section 22 to Article XVI of the
                                     Albuquerque City Charter, Providing the
                                     Form of the Questions And the Designation
                                     Clause for Such Questions on the Ballot.
                                     Concerning the Local Election to Be Held
R-2019-055 8-22-2019    4            in the City of Albuquerque on November 5,
                                     2019.
                                     Rescinding R-19-164 and Concerning a Bond
                                     Election to Be Held in The City of
                                     Albuquerque at the next Regular Local
                                     Election on November 5, 2019; Submitting
                                     to a Vote of the Qualified Electors At
                                     Such Regular Local Election Certain
                                     Questions for Authorizing the Issuance of
R-2019-056 8-22-2019    5            General Obligation Bonds in Varying
                                     Principal Amounts and for Specified Public
                                     Purposes And, Providing the Form of the
                                     Bond Questions and the Designation Clause
                                     for Such Questions on the Ballot;
                                     Prescribing Other Details in Connection
                                     with Such Bond Election and Bonds; and
                                     Ratifying Action Previously Taken in
                                     Connection Therewith.
                                     Rescinding Section 1 of R-19-166
                                     Concerning the Local Election To Be Held
R-2019-057 8-22-2019    6            in the City of Albuquerque on November 5,
                                     2019 and Setting the Date of the Run-off
                                     Election for December 10, 2019.
                                     A Nuisance, Substandard Dwelling or
                                     Structure in Need of Abatement at 113
                                     Eubank Blvd NE 87123 Within the City
R-2019-058 8-22-2019    7            Limits of Albuquerque, New Mexico Is So
                                     Ruined, Damaged and Dilapidated As to Be a
                                     Menace to the Public Comfort, Health,
                                     Peace or Safety and That it Is to Be
                                     Required to Be Removed.
                                     A Nuisance, Substandard Dwelling or
                                     Structure in Need of Abatement at 516
                                     Kentucky St SE 87108 Within the City
R-2019-059 8-22-2019    8            Limits of Albuquerque, New Mexico Is So
                                     Ruined, Damaged and Dilapidated As to Be a
                                     Menace to the Public Comfort, Health,
                                     Peace or Safety and That it Is to Be
                                     Required to Be Removed.   
                                     A Nuisance, Substandard Dwelling or
                                     Structure in Need of Abatement at 247
                                     Espanola St Ne 87108 Within the City
R-2019-060 8-22-2019    9            Limits of Albuquerque, New Mexico Is So
                                     Ruined, Damaged and Dilapidated As to Be a
                                     Menace to the Public Comfort, Health,
                                     Peace or Safety and That it Is to Be
                                     Required to Be Removed.
                                     Adopting Interim Regulations for the North
                                     4th Corridor to Implement Development
R-2019-061 8-22-2019    10           Regulations until the Integrated
                                     Development Ordinance Is Updated with
                                     Permanent Regulations For the Area.
                                     Calling upon the State of New Mexico to
                                     Establish a Process That Provides for the
R-2019-062 8-22-2019    11           Issuance of Court Orders That Would
                                     Require the Relinquishment of Firearms for
                                     Some Period of Time Under Circumstances of
                                     Extreme Risk.
                                     Approving the Major Expansion of the Old
                                     Albuquerque High School Metropolitan
                                     Redevelopment Area and Renaming the
R-2019-063 9-11-2019    12           Expanded Area as the East Downtown/ Huning
                                     Highlands/ South Martineztown Metropolitan
                                     Redevelopment Area, Making Certain
                                     Findings and Conclusions Pursuant to the
                                     Metropolitan Redevelopment Code.
                                     Approving and Authorizing the Mayor to
                                     Execute a Grant Agreement with the U.S.
                                     Department of Health and Human Services,
R-2019-064 9-23-2019    13           Early Head Start Program and Providing an
                                     Appropriation to the Department of Family
                                     and Community Services Beginning in Fiscal
                                     Year 2020.
                                     Adopting the Double Eagle II Airport
R-2019-065 9-23-2019    14           Master Plan, Project Number 1001656,
                                     18EPC-40028, as an Official City Document.
                                     Approving and Authorizing the Filing of
                                     Grant Applications and The Acceptance of
R-2019-066 9-23-2019    15           Potential Grant Awards for Multiple City
                                     Departments from Associated Grantor
                                     Agencies and Providing For an
                                     Appropriation to the City of Albuquerque.
                                     Amending the City of Albuquerque Component
                                     Capital Implementation Program to Include
R-2019-067 9-23-2019    16           a Roadway Facilities Project, Paseo Del
                                     Norte Widening (IV)-Universe to the
                                     Western City Limits.
                                     Approving the East Downtown/ Huning
R-2019-068 9-23-2019    17           Highlands/ South Martineztown Metropolitan
                                     Redevelopment Area Plan.
                                     Approving the Attached Grant Application
                                     for the FY19 Walmart Foundation Grant and
R-2019-069             18           Providing for an Appropriation To
                                     Albuquerque Fire Rescue in Fiscal Year
                                     2019.
                                     Approving and Authorizing the Filing of
                                     the Attached Grant Application for a Clean
R-2019-070 9-23-2019    19           Diesel Grant with the U.S. Environmental
                                     Protection Agency and Providing an
                                     Appropriation to the Environmental Heath
                                     Department in Fiscal Year 2020.
                                     Renaming the Albuquerque Regional Sports
                                     Complex as the Jennifer Riordan Spark
                                     Kindness Sports Complex in Honor of
R-2019-071 9-23-2019    20           Jennifer Riordan, a Baseball Mom,
                                     Volleyball Mom and Community Advocate in
                                     the City of Albuquerque, Who Believed And
                                     Exhibited Being Kind, Loving, Caring and
                                     Sharing.
                                     Setting the Official List of City Council
R-2019-072 10-3-2019    21           Meetings from January 2020 Through
                                     December 2020.
R-2019-073 10-3-2019   3-2-4         Determining Reasonable Notice of Public
                                     Meetings of the City Council.
                                     Endorsing the Declaration of a Climate
                                     Emergency, Creating a Climate Action Plan
R-2019-074 10-3-2019    22           for the City of Albuquerque, and
                                     Requesting Regional Collaboration on a
                                     Just Transition and Emergency Mobilization
                                     Effort to Restore a Safe Climate.
                                     Approving and Authorizing the Acceptance
                                     of Grant Funds Based on the Attached
                                     Applications for Federal and State
                                     Assistance for the Senior Corps Programs
                                     Including the Foster Grandparent Program
                                     (FGP), the Retired and Senior Volunteer
R-2019-075 10-24-2019   23           Program (RSVP), and the Senior Companion
                                     Program (SCP), with the Corporation for
                                     National and Community Service (CNCS) and
                                     the New Mexico Aging and Long Term
                                     Services Department (ALTSD) and Providing
                                     for an Appropriation to the Department of
                                     Senior Affairs in Fiscal Year 2020.
                                     Extending the Moratorium Established for
R-2019-076 10-24-2019   24           the Section of Irving Boulevard from
                                     Kayenta Place to Rio Los Pinos Drive
                                     Through December 31st 2020.
                                     Amending the Adopted Capital
                                     Implementation Program of the City of
                                     Albuquerque by Approving New Projects from
R-2019-077 10-24-2019   25           the Proceeds of City of Albuquerque, New
                                     Mexico Gross Receipts Tax/lodgers' Tax
                                     Refunding and Improvement Revenue Bonds
                                     Series 2019A.
                                     Approving Grant Funds Awarded for the
                                     FY2020 EMS Fund Act With the New Mexico
R-2019-078 11-12-2019   26           Department of Health and Providing for an
                                     Appropriation to Albuquerque Fire Rescue
                                     in Fiscal Year 2020.
                                     Authorizing the Removal of Certain
R-2019-079 (11-4-2019)  27           Uncollectible Accounts From the City's
                                     Accounts Receivable Records for FY 2015 &
                                     Prior.
                                     Naming the North Domingo BACA
R-2019-080 11-12-2019   28           Multigenerational Center Gymnasium and
                                     Indoor Track the "Brad Winter Gymnasium".
                                     A Nuisance, Substandard Dwelling or
                                     Structure in Need of Abatement at 8400
                                     Chico Rd NE 87108 Within the City Limits
R-2019-081 11-7-2019    29           of Albuquerque, New Mexico Is So Ruined,
                                     Damaged and Dilapidated As to Be a Menace
                                     to the Public Comfort, Health, Peace or
                                     Safety and That it Is to Be Required to Be
                                     Removed.
                                     Changing the Name of Gallatin Place
R-2019-082 11-7-2019    30           Northwest Between Fortuna Road and Los
                                     Volcanes Road to Ben E. Keith Way.
                                     Adjusting Fiscal Year 2020 General Fund
R-2019-083 11-7-2019    31           Appropriations to Provide Funding for the
                                     Albuquerque Police Department Party
                                     Intervention Team (PIT) Program.
                                     Declaring the Property at 3801 Central
                                     Avenue North East a Public Nuisance;
                                     Directing the Owner Enter into a Nuisance
R-2019-084 11-18-2019   32           Abatement Agreement with the City;
                                     Directing the City Attorney To File
                                     Nuisance Proceedings with the Court for
                                     Noncompliance.
                                     Declaring the Property at 5401 Kathryn
                                     Avenue Southeast a Public Nuisance;
                                     Directing the Owner Enter into a Nuisance
R-2019-085 11-18-2019   33           Abatement Agreement with the City;
                                     Directing the City Attorney To File
                                     Nuisance Proceedings with the Court for
                                     Noncompliance.
                                     Establishing Legislative and Budget
R-2019-086 12-2-2019    34           Priorities for the City of Albuquerque for
                                     the 2020 New Mexico State Legislature.
                                     Approving a Non-Binding Intent to Form at
                                     Tax Increment for Development District
                                     Comprised of the University of New
                                     Mexico's "South Campus", Thus Promoting
                                     Economic Development, Continued
R-2019-087 12-16-2019   35           Cooperation Between the City of
                                     Albuquerque and the University of New
                                     Mexico, Incenting Potential Transit and
                                     Wise Energy Use, and Creating a
                                     Destination Sports and Entertainment
                                     District.
                                     Approving Grant Funds Awarded for the 2018
                                     Staffing for Adequate Fire and Emergency
                                     Response (Safer) Grant in Compliance with
R-2019-088 12-16-2019   36           the U.s. Department of Homeland Security
                                     Federal Emergency Management Agency and
                                     Providing for an Appropriation to
                                     Albuquerque Fire Rescue in Fiscal Year
                                     2020 Through Fiscal Year 2024.
                                     Adjusting Fiscal Year 2019 Appropriations
                                     for Certain Funds And Programs to Provide
R-2019-089 12-16-2019   37           for Actual Expenditures and Adjusting
                                     Fiscal Year 2020 Operating and Capital
                                     Appropriations.
                                   
 
 
Notes
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
2            However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
3            However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
4            However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
5            However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
6            However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
7            However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
8            However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
9            However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
10           However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
11           However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
12           However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
13           However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
14           However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
15           However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
16           However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
17           However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
18           However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
19           However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
20           However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
21           However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
22           However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
23           However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
24           However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
25           However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
26           However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
27           However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
28           However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
29           However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
30           However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
31           However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
32           However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
33           However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
34           However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
35           However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
36           However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
37           However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
2020 Resolutions
Res. No. Date Disposition Short Title
Res. No.     Date             Disposition Short Title
                                          Amending the Adopted Capital Implementation Program for the City of
R-2020-001   1-10-2020         1          Albuquerque-Aviation Department by Supplementing Existing Projects, Closing
                                          Projects, Approving New Projects And Grant Acceptance.
                                          Approving and Authorizing the Filing of the Attached Grant Application for
R-2020-002   1-10-2020         2          an Air Pollution Control Grant with the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency
                                          and Providing an Appropriation To the Environmental Health Department in
                                          Fiscal Year 2020.
                                          A Resolution Relating to the Proposed Relationship Between The City of
                                          Albuquerque's Departments of Economic Development and Aviation and the New
                                          Mexico Small Business Investment Corporation for the Purpose of Promoting
                                          Economic Development at the Albuquerque International Sunport's Aviation
                                          Center for Excellence (Ace) Business Park; Declaring the Intent of the City
R-2020-003   1-10-2020         3          of Albuquerque to Consider For Adoption an Ordinance Authorizing the Pledge
                                          of Certain Aviation Department Revenues Previously Appropriated for Local
                                          Economic Development Purposes to Leverage a Revolving Loan Program with the
                                          New Mexico Small Business Investment Corporation for the Benefit of Eligible
                                          Private Entities Seeking to Locate at the Albuquerque International
                                          Sunport's Ace Business Park.
                                          Amending R-17-233, Enactment Number R-2017-095, to Extend the Effective Date
R-2020-004   1-10-2020         4          of the Interim Procedures While the Neighborhood Association Recognition
                                          Ordinance Is Updated.
                                          A Nuisance, Substandard Dwelling or Structure in Need of Abatement at 2405
                                          Quincy NE, Albuquerque NM 87110 Within the City Limits of Albuquerque, New
R-2020-005   2-6-2020          5          Mexico Is So Ruined, Damaged and Dilapidated as to Be a Menace to the Public
                                          Comfort, Health, Peace or Safety and That it Is to Be Required to Be
                                          Removed.
                                          Approving and Authorizing the Filing of a Grant Application for Revenue
R-2020-006   2-5-2020          6          Vehicle Purchase with the Federal Transit Administration (FTA) of the U.S.
                                          Department of Transportation And Providing for an Appropriation to the
                                          Transit Department.
R-2020-007   Passage Date: 1-  7          Supplementing Fiscal Year 2019 General Fund Appropriations to Provide
             22-2020                      Additional Resources for Voluntary Zone Conversions.
R-2020-      2-5-2020          8          Naming the City of Albuquerque Fire Station 7 the "Ken Sanchez Fire Station
008                                    7"
                                          Amending the Adopted Capital Implementation Program of the City of
R-2020-009   2-10-2020         9          Albuquerque by Approving New Projects, Supplementing Current Appropriations
                                          and Changing the Scope of Existing Projects.
R-2020-010   2-10-2020         10         Directing the Administration to Prepare an Update to the City's
                                          International Energy Conservation Code (Iecc) to Adopt the 2018 Version.
                                          Establishing Priorities for the 2021 Capital Improvements Plan; Defining the
R-2020-011   2-10-2020         11         Criteria to Be Used in Rating Project Proposals; Assigning Weights to the
                                          Criteria; Allocating Amounts for Different Purposes Within the 2021 General
                                          Obligation Bond Program.
R-2020-012   2-10-2020         12         Appropriating Funds to the Capital Implementation Program for The 2019
                                          General Obligation Program.
                                          Making Findings in Connection with the Resolution of Winrock Town Center Tax
                                          Increment Development District 1 Authorizing the Issuance and Sale of Senior
                                          Lien Tax Increment Bonds and Subordinate Lien Tax Increment Bonds; Ratifying
                                          and Approving the Issuance and Sale of the Winrock Town Center Tax Increment
                                          Development District 1 Senior Lien Gross Receipts Tax Increment Bonds,
R-2020-013   2-10-2020         13         Series 2020a and the Winrock Town Center Tax Increment Development District
                                          1 Subordinate Lien Gross Receipts Tax Increment Bonds, Series 2020b, as
                                          Substantially Consistent with the Requirements of City Ordinance Enactment
                                          No. 0-2006-036 and City Council Resolution No. R-2008-126, Enactment No. R
                                          2008-120; and Authorizing Amendments to the Operation Agreement and the
                                          Construction Agreement Previously Entered into by the City with Respect to
                                          Such District.
                                          Approving the Appointment of Directors to Fill Vacancies on The Governing
                                          Body of the Trails Public Improvement District Caused by the Resignation of
R-2020-014   2-10-2020         14         an Elected Director Before the End of His Term Pursuant to the Public
                                          Improvement District Act, NMSA 1978, Sections 5-11-1 Through 27, as Amended,
                                          and City Enactment No. 0-2003-012; and Repealing All Actions Inconsistent
                                          with this Resolution.
                                          Approving the Appointment of a Director to Fill a Vacancy on The Governing
                                          Body of Mesa Del Sol Public Improvement District 1 and to Fill a Vacancy on
                                          the Governing Body of Mesa Del Sol Public Improvement Districts 2 Through 5
R-2020-015   2-10-2020         15         Caused by the Inability of an Elected Director to Discharge the Duties of
                                          Director for the Remainder of His Unexpired Term; Taking Action Pursuant to
                                          the Public Improvement District Act, NMSA 1978, Sections 5-11-1 Through 27,
                                          as Amended, and City Enactment No. 0- 2003-012; and Repealing All Actions
                                          Inconsistent with this Resolution.
R-2020-016   2-10-2020         16         Renaming Bridge Boulevard Within the Albuquerque City Limits, From 4th
                                          Street SW to the West Side of the Rio Grande River, Avenida Dolores Huerta.
                                          Declaring the Intent of the City of Albuquerque, New Mexico, Subject to the
                                          Satisfaction of Certain Conditions, to Issue Metropolitan Redevelopment
                                          Bonds in an Aggregate Principal Amount Not to Exceed $10,000,000.00 in
R-2020-017   3-4-2020          17         Connection with the Acquisition, Construction and Equipping of the Franz
                                          Project For the Purpose of Inducing 1716 Central Avenue, Llc or its
                                          Successors and Assigns, to Locate the Project in the City and To Develop the
                                          Project in the City as Described in the Project Plan.
R-2020-018   3-4-2020          18         Adopting the Albuquerque International Sunport Sustainable Airport Master
                                          Plan, Project Number 1000270, 18EPC-40029, as An Official City Document.
R-2020-019   3-4-2020          19         Establishing a Process to Gather and Include Neighborhood Input in the
                                          Development of the Capital Improvement Program Of the City of Albuquerque.
                                          Approving the Attached Grant Application for the NRPA 10-Minute Walk
R-2020-020   3-4-2020          20         Planning Grant and Technical Assistance and Providing for an Appropriation
                                          to the Parks and Recreation Deparment in Fiscal Year 2020.
                                          Approving and Authorizing the Acceptance of Grant Funds from The New Mexico
R-2020-021   3-4-2020          21         State Library for the Basic State Grants in Aid And Providing for an
                                          Appropriation to the Cultural Services Department in Fiscal Year 2020.
                                          Approving and Authorizing a Grant Application from the Dennis Friends
R-2020-022   3-4-2020          22         Foundation and Providing an Appropriation to the City Of Albuquerque Animal
                                          Welfare Department in Fiscal Year 2020 & 2021.
                                          Authorizing the Giving of Notices for Bids for the Sale of City of
                                          Albuquerque, New Mexico General Obligation Bonds Consisting of $67,830,000
R-2020-023   3-4-2020          23         General Obligation General Purpose Bonds, Series 2020a, $11,210,000 General
                                          Obligation Storm Sewer Bonds, Series 20208 and $57,430,000 General
                                          Obligation Refunding Bonds, Series 2020d.
                                          A Nuisance, Substandard Dwelling or Structure in Need of Abatement at 5404
R-2020-024   3-11-2020         24         Alvarado Pl NE 87110 Within the City Limits of Albuquerque, New Mexico Is So
                                          Ruined, Damaged and Dilapidated As to Be a Menace to the Public Comfort,
                                          Health, Peace or Safety and That it Is to Be Required to Be Removed.
                                          Approving and Authorizing the Acceptance of Grant Funds From the New Mexico
R-2020-025   3-11-2020         25         State Highway and Transportation Department and Providing an Appropriation
                                          to the Parks and Recreation Department for Fiscal Years 2020 and 2021.
                                          A Nuisance, Substandard Dwelling or Structure in Need of Abatement at 1308
R-2020-026   3-11-2020         26         8th St SW 87102 Within the City Limits of Albuquerque, New Mexico Is So
                                          Ruined, Damaged and Dilapidated As to Be a Menace to the Public Comfort,
                                          Heal Th, Peace or Safety and That it Is to Be Required to Be Removed.
                                          A Nuisance, Substandard Dwelling or Structure in Need of Abatement at 1112
R-2020-027   3-11-2020         27         Iron Ave SW 87102 Within the City Limits of Albuquerque, New Mexico Is So
                                          Ruined, Damaged and Dilapidated As to Be a Menace to the Public Comfort,
                                          Health, Peace or Safety and That it Is to Be Required to Be Removed.
                                          Approving Grant Funds Awarded for the FY2020 Fire Protection Grant with the
R-2020-028   3-11-2020         28         New Mexico State Fire Marshal's Office and Providing for an Appropriation to
                                          Albuquerque Fire Rescue in Fiscal Year 2020.
                                          Adjusting Fiscal Year 2020 General Fund Appropriations to Provide Funding
R-2020-029   3-11-2020         29         for a Gun Buy-Back Program Through a Collaborative Effort Between the City
                                          Council, Mayor's Office, Albuquerque Police Department and Albuquerque Metro
                                          Crimestoppers.
R-2020-030   Passage date 3-   30         Establishing the City Council's Budget Priorities for the Fiscal Year 2021
             2-2020                       City Budget.
                                          Approving and Authorizing the Acceptance of FY2020 - 2018 Go Bonds from the
R-2020-031   3-31-2020         31         State of New Mexico for Public Libraries/Albuquerque/Bernalillo County
                                          Library System, and Providing for an Appropriation to the Cultural Services
                                          Department in Fiscal Year 2020.
                                          Amending the Adopted Capital Implementation Program of the City of
R-2020-032   4-10-2020         32         Albuquerque by Supplementing Current Appropriations for Contributions
                                          Received from Bernalillo County.
R-2020-033                                Approving Grant Funds Awarded for the FY2020 Cities of Service, Experience
          4-10-2020         33         Matters Grant with Fund for Cities of Service, Inc. Providing for an
                                          Appropriation to the Mayor's Office in Fiscal Year 2020.
R-2020-034   4-22-2020         34         Adjusting Fiscal Year 2020 General Fund Appropriations to Establish a
                                          Coronavirus Community Support and Recovery Fund.
                                          Appropriating Funds for Operating the Government of the City of Albuquerque
R-2020-035   4-22-2020         35         for Fiscal Year 2021, Beginning July 1, 2020 and Ending June 30, 2021 and
                                          Appropriating Capital Funds.
R-2020-036   4-28-2020         36         Approving and Authorizing a Certified Local Government SubGrant and
                                          Providing an Appropriation to the Planning Department.
                                          Adopting the 2020 Action Plan and Program Investment Summary For the
                                          Expenditure of Community Development Block Grant (CDBG), Home Investment
R-2020-037   4-28-2020         37         Partnerships Program (HOME) and Emergency Solutions Grant (ESG) Funds;
                                          Providing an Appropriation to the Department of Family and Community
                                          Services for 2020 U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development (HUD)
                                          Entitlement Funds.
                                          Approving the Application and Petition of PULTE Homes of New Mexico, Inc.
                                          for Formation of the Inspiration Public Improvement District Pursuant to the
                                          Public Improvement District Act, NMSA 1978, §§ 5-11-1 to -27 (2001, as
                                          Amended Through 2019) and City Ordinance Enactment No. 0-2003-12, Council
                                          Bill No. FS 0-03-84; Making Findings in Connection with the Application and
                                          Petition and Supporting Documentation Requesting Approval of the Formation
                                          of the District; Determining the Real Property to Be Included Within the
                                          District and the Purposes for Which the District Is Being Formed; Approving
                                          the General Plan, Feasibility Study, Rate, Method of Apportionment and
R-2020-038   4-28-2020         38         Manner of Collection of a Special Levy to Be Imposed upon Real Property
                                          Within the District, and Approving a Development Agreement for the District;
                                          Establishing Parameters for the Issuance of Special Levy Bonds; Authorizing
                                          the District to Issue Subordinate Obligations; Providing for Governance of
                                          the District; Providing That Bonds and Other Obligations of the District
                                          Shall Not Be Obligations of the City; Waiving and Canceling Certain
                                          Requirements to Formation of a Public Improvement District; Ratifying
                                          Certain Actions Heretofore Taken; Repealing All Actions Inconsistent with
                                          this Formation Resolution; Directing The Mailing of a Notice of Adoption of
                                          this Formation Resolution By the City Clerk; and Taking Related Action.
                                          Urging the United States Congress to Amend or Enact Provisions of the Cares
R-2020-039   4-28-2020         39         Act to Allow for Reimbursement to Local Governments for the Recapture of
                                          Lost Revenues Due to the Corona Virus Pandemic.
R-2020-040   5-12-2020         40         Establishing Federal Programming and Policy Priorities for The City of
                                          Albuquerque for Federal Fiscal Year 2021.
                                          Approving and Authorizing the Request of Direct Funding from The United
R-2020-041   5-12-2020         41         States Secretary of the Treasury and Providing for An Appropriation to the
                                          Finance and Administration Department In Fiscal Year 2020 and 2021.
                                          Approving and Authorizing a Grant Application from the PetSmart Charities
R-2020-042   5-12-2020         42         and Providing an Appropriation to the City of Albuquerque Animal Welfare
                                          Department in Fiscal Year 2020.
                                          Approving the First Amendment to the Resolution Approving The Formation of
                                          Mesa Del Sol Tax Increment Development Districts 1 Through 5 (The
                                          UDistricts"), Pursuant to the Tax Increment for Development Act, Sections 5-
                                          15-1 Through 5-15-29 NMSA 1978, as Amended by Senate Bill 566 of the First
                                          Session of The Fifty Fourth Legislature (Collectively, the UTIDD Act");
                                          Approving the First Amendment to the Resolution Dedicating Certain Gross
                                          Receipts Tax Increment Revenue and Property Tax Increment Revenue for the
R-2020-043   5-12-2020         43         Financing of Public Infrastructure for the Districts Pursuant to the TIDD
                                          Act; Approving the Second Amendment to Master Development Agreement by and
                                          among the City of Albuquerque, New Mexico, MOS Investments, Llc, as
                                          Successor in Interest to Mesa Del Sol, LLC, and the Districts, Pursuant to
                                          the TIDD Act; Consenting to The First Amendment to Tax Increment Development
                                          Plan Ratified in Connection with the Formation of Districts, Pursuant to the
                                          TIDD Act; Ratifying Certain Actions Heretofore Taken; and Repealing All
                                          Actions Inconsistent with this Resolution.
R-2020-044   5-8-2020          44         Adopting the FY 2021 Urban Enhancement Trust Fund Program and Appropriating
                                          Funds for the Urban Enhancement Program's Projects.
                                          Considering Whether R-20-5 (Enactment R-2020-027), Which Determined That a
                                          Nuisance, Substandard Dwelling or Structure in Need of Abatement at 1112
R-2020-045   5-18-2020         45         Iron Ave SW 87102 Within The City Limits of Albuquerque, New Mexico, Is So
       (Passage date)               Ruined, Damaged and Dilapidated as to Be a Menace to the Public Comfort,
                                          Health, Peace or Safety and That it Is to Be Required To Be Removed, Should
                                          Be Enforced or Rescinded.
                                          Approving and Authorizing the Acceptance of Grant Funds From the W.K.
R-2020-046   5-29-2020         46         Kellogg Foundation and Providing an Appropriation to the Economic
                                          Development Department for Fiscal Years 20201 2021 and 2022
                                          Approving the Appointment of a Director to Fill a Vacancy on The Governing
                                          Body of the Boulders Public Improvement District, Caused by the Resignation
R-2020-047   5-29-2020         47         of a Director, Pursuant to The Public Improvement District Act, NMSA 1978,
                                          §§ 5-11-1 to -27 (2009, as Amended) and City Enactment No. R-2012-035; and
                                          Repealing All Actions Inconsistent with this Resolution.
                                          Approving the Appointment of a Director to Fill a Vacancy on The Governing
                                          Body of the Montecito Estates Public Improvement District, Caused by the
R-2020-048   5-29-2020         48         Resignation of a Director, Pursuant to the Public Improvement District Act,
                                          NMSA 1978, §§ 5-11-1 To -27 (2009, as Amended) and City Enactments No. R-
                                          2007-081, R-2009-075, R-2012-005, and Repealing All Actions Inconsistent
                                          with This Resolution.
                                          Approving and Authorizing the Mayor to Execute a Grant Agreement with the
R-2020-049   5-29-2020         49         U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, Early Head Start Program and
                                          Providing an Appropriation to the Department of Family and Community
                                          Services Beginning in Fiscal Year 2021.
R-2020-050   5-29-2020         50         Appropriating Funds for the Coronavirus Community Support And Recovery
                                          Program.
R-2020-051   5-29-2020         51         Requesting a Cost-Benefit Analysis of a Staff Telecommuting Model for
                                          Certain City Employees.
                                          Amending the Composition of the Governing Body of the Inspiration Public
                                          Improvement District; Approving the Appointment of Directors to the
R-2020-052   5-29-2020         52         Governing Body, Pursuant to The Public Improvement District Act, NMSA 1978,
                                          §§ 5-11-1 to -27 (2001, as Amended Through 2019) and City Enactment No. R-
                                          2020-038; and Repealing All Actions Inconsistent with this Resolution.
                                          Calling on the Mayor to Establish a Pool of Contractors to Provide Grant
                                          Writing Services for the Procurement of Available Coronavirus Support and
R-2020-053   5-29-2020         53         Relief Funding; Adjusting Fiscal Year 2020 and 2021 Appropriations; and
                                          Calling for a Feasibility Study for the Creation of a Dedicated City Grant
                                          Management Unit.
                                          Approving the First Amendment to the Resolution Approving The Formation of
                                          Winrock Town Center Tax Increment Development Districts 1 and 2 (The
                                          "Districts"), Pursuant to the Tax Increment for Development Act, Sections 5-
                                          15-1 Through 5-15-29 NMSA 1978, as Amended by Senate Bill 566 of the First
                                          Session of the Fifty Fourth Legislature (Collectively, the "TIDD Act");
R-2020-054   6-8-2020          54         Approving the Amended and Restated Development Agreement by and among the
                                          City of Albuquerque, New Mexico, Winrock Partners, LLC, and the Districts,
                                          Pursuant to the TIDD Act; Consenting to the Second Amendment to Tax
                                          Increment Development Plan Ratified in Connection with the Formation of
                                          Districts, Pursuant to the Tidd Act; Ratifying Certain Actions Heretofore
                                          Taken; and Repealing All Actions Inconsistent with This Resolution.
                                          Approving and Authorizing a Grant Application For, and Acceptance Of, Grant
R-2020-055   6-8-2020          55         Funds from the Cities for Financial Empowerment Fund, Inc. and Providing an
                                          Appropriation to the City of Albuquerque Legal Department for a COVID
                                          Financial Navigators Program for Fiscal Years 2020 and 2021.
                                          Accepting and Appropriating a Federal Aviation Administration Grant of
R-2020-056   6-8-2020          56         Coronavirus Aid, Relief, and Economic Security Act Funding for the City of
                                          Albuquerque Aviation Department Operational Expenses.
                                          Urging the New Mexico Department of Regulation and Licensing to Provide a
R-2020-057   6-6-2020          57         Method for Temporary Expansion of Liquor Service Areas for Restaurants and
                                          Bars; Establishing Policy for the City to Similarly Authorize Such
                                          Expansions Through its Local Option Authority
                                          Approving and Authorizing the Filing of the Attached Grant Application for a
R-2020-058   6-3-2020          58         Fine Particulate Matter Air Monitoring Grant With the U.s. Environmental
                                          Protection Agency and Providing an Appropriation to the Environmental Health
                                          Department in Fiscal Year 2020.
                                          Approving and Authorizing a Grant Application to the U.S. Department of
R-2020-059   6-8-2020          59         Housing and Urban Development for a 2020 Continuum of Care Grant; and
                                          Providing an Appropriation to The Department of Family and Community
                                          Services Beginning in Fiscal Year 2020.
R-2020-060   6-8-2020          60         Adopting City Policy to Allow for the Establishment of Parklets.
                                          Directing the Administration to Create an "Active Streets Initiative" to
R-2020-061   6-8-2020          61         Facilitate Safe, Socially-distanced Outdoor Recreation and Active
                                          Transportation Opportunities on Neighborhood Streets During Health
                                          Emergencies.
             6-15-2020                    Amending R-17-233, Enactment Number R-2017-095, to Extend the Effective Date
R-2020-062   (passed)          62         of the Interim Procedures While the Neighborhood Association Recognition
                                          Ordinance Is Updated.
                                          Directing That the City Administration Afford a Presumption of Compensable
R-2020-063   6-26-2020         63         Workers Compensation Injury, and to Award Service Credit to Certain City
                                          Employees Who Contract COVID-19.
R-2020-064   6-26-2020         64         Approving the Family and Community Services Contract Listing For Fiscal Year
                                          2021
                                          Approving and Authorizing the Filing of the Attached Grant Application for
R-2020-065   6-26-2020         65         the Light Duty Electric Vehicle Supply Equipment Program Grant with the New
                                          Mexico Environment Department's Volkswagen Settlement Trust and Providing an
                                          Appropriation to The Environmental Health Department in Fiscal Year 2020.
                                          Adjusting Fiscal Year 2020 Appropriations to Provide Needed Equipment to
R-2020-066   6-26-2020         66         Small Businesses to Implement Public Health Emergency Guidelines Related to
                                          the COVID-19 Pandemic.
R-2020-067   6-26-2020         67         Establishing Policy for the Recognition of Juneteenth in the City of
                                          Albuquerque.
                                          Requesting That the New Mexico Congressional Delegation Submit Legislation
R-2020-068   6-26-2020         68         to Provide Assistance to Small Businesses That Were Damaged in the Recent
                                          Rioting.
                                          Requesting the Adoption of Federal Aid to Provide Local and State
R-2020-069   6-26-2020         69         Governments Fair, Direct Federal Emergency Support to Prevent Disruption to
                                          Government Services and to Enable the Reopening and Rebuilding of America's
                                          Local Economies.
R-2020-070   6-29-2020         70         Establishing the Order of Community Planning Area Assessments for 2021- 2025
             (Passed)                     and Establishing a Capacity Building Process for 2020.
R-2020-071   7-8-2020          71         Approving the North Corridor Metropolitan Redevelopment Area Plan.
R-2020-072   7-8-2020          72         Approving the Transit Department's Public Transit Agency Safety Plan.
                                          Authorizing Support for a Memorandum of Understanding Among the City of
                                          Albuquerque, the County of Bernalillo, and The Board of Regents of the
                                          University of New Mexico to Allow For the Creation and Operation of a
R-2020-073   7-8-2020          73         Homeless Coordinating Council; Supporting Solutions to End Homelessness;
                                          Expressing the City's Willingness to Provide Resources and Support to
                                          Maximize the Effectiveness, Efficiency, and Fairness Of Homelessness
                                          Solution Systems.
                                          Adjusting Fiscal Year 2020 Appropriations for Certain Funds And Programs Due
R-2020-074   7-9-2020          74         to the Fiscal Impact of the COVID-19 Public Health Emergency on City
                                          Revenues and Expenses.
                                          Approving and Authorizing the Filing of Grant Applications and The
                                          Acceptance of Potential Grant Awards for Multiple City Departments from
R-2020-075   7-8-2020          75         Associated Grantor Agencies and Providing For an Appropriation to the City
                                          of Albuquerque for Fiscal Year 2021 and Adjusting Fiscal Year 2020
                                          Appropriations; and Appropriating Capital Funds.
                                          Approving and Authorizing the Filing of a Grant Application for Emergency
R-2020-076   7-8-2020          76         Relief Funding with the Federal Transit Administration (FTA) of the U.S.
                                          Department of Transportation by the Transit Department.
                                          A Nuisance, Substandard Dwelling or Structure in Need of Abatement at 615
R-2020-077   8-17-2020     77�       Arno St SE 87102 Within the City Limits of Albuquerque, New Mexico Is So
                                          Ruined, Damaged and Dilapidated As to Be a Menace to the Public Comfort,
                                          Health, Peace or Safety and That it Is to Be Required to Be Removed.
                                          A Nuisance, Substandard Dwelling or Structure in Need of Abatement at 318
R-2020-078   8-17-2020         78         Mesilla St NE 87108 Within the City Limits of Albuquerque, New Mexico Is So
                                          Ruined, Damaged and Dilapidated As to Be a Menace to the Public Comfort,
                                          Health, Peace or Safety and That it Is to Be Required to Be Removed.
                                          Adopting the Silver Avenue Bike Boulevard Review, Making the Recommendations
R-2020-079   8-17-2020         79         Within the Plan Policy Priorities for the Silver Avenue Bike Boulevard
                                          Between Yale Boulevard and the Paseo Del Bosque Trail.
R-2020-080   8-17-2020         80         Amending Appropriations For The Coronavirus Support And Recovery Program.
                                          Approving Fiscal Year 2021 Appropriations to Provide for Outdoor Dining and
R-2020-081   8-17-2020         81         Outdoor Retail Grants to Local Businesses During the Public Health
                                          Emergency.
                                          Directing the Administration to Expand the "Active Streets Initiative"
                                          Established by R-20-59 in Order to Also Facilitate Safe, Socially-distanced
R-2020-082   8-17-2020         82         Outdoor Commercial Food and Beverage Service Opportunities on Certain
                                          Streets During the Present Public Health Emergency; Approving the Use of
                                          Cares Act Funding for Related Costs.
                                          Extending Interim Regulations for the North 4th Corridor to Implement
R-2020-083   8-25-2020         83         Development Regulations until the Integrated Development Ordinance Is
                                          Updated with Permanent Regulations For the Area.
                                          Making Findings in Connection with the Juan Tabo Hills Estates Public
                                          Improvement District's Resolution Authorizing the Issuance and Sale of
R-2020-084                                Special Levy Revenue Bonds; Ratifying and Approving the Issuance and Sale of
          8-25-2020         84         the Juan Tabo Hills Estates Public Improvement District Special Levy Revenue
                                          Bonds, Series 2020, as Substantially Consistent with the Requirements of
                                          City Ordinance Enactment No. 0-2003-12 and City Council Resolution Enactment
                                          No. R- 2017-098.
R-2020-085   8-25-2020         85         Directing That the City of Albuquerque Explore Opportunities For Promoting
                                          Diversity and Decreasing Barriers to Serving on City Boards and Commissions.
                                          Directing the City of Albuquerque's Office of Equity and Inclusion, Human
R-2020-086   8-25-2020         86         Resources Department, and the Economic Development Department to Collaborate
                                          with Local Disability Employment Providers to Explore Opportunities for
                                          Creating Supported Employment Opportunities among Persons with Disabilities.
R-2020-087   8-25-2020         87         Calling for a Stay-of-enforcement on the Prohibition of Mobile Food Trucks
                                          and Mobile Vending Carts in the NR- PO-A-ZONE District.
R-2020-088   8-25-2020         88         Amending Appropriations For The Coronavirus Support And Recovery Program.
R-2020-089   8-25-2020         89         Approving Fiscal Year 2021 Appropriations to Supplement Funding for Eviction
                                          Prevention Assistance Programs During The Public Health Emergency.
                                        
                                          Appropriating Funds to Implement Third Phase of the Transportation
R-2020-091   9-23-2020         90         Infrastructure Tax, and Amending the Capital Implementation Program of the
                                          City of Albuquerque by Approving New Projects.
R-2020-092   9-23-2020         91         Establishing a Community Based Process to Find Solutions For the La Jornada
                                          Installation.
                                          Approving and Authorizing a Grant Agreement from the U.S. Department of
R-2020-093   9-23-2020         92         Justice, Office of Community Oriented Policing Services (COPS Office) and
                                          Providing an Appropriation to the Albuquerque Police Department (APD) for
                                          Fiscal Year 2021.
R-2020-094   9-26-2020         93         Strengthening and Re-affirming the City of Albuquerque's Commitment to
                                          Addressing Racial and Social Inequity.
                                          A Nuisance, Substandard Dwelling or Structure in Need of Abatement at 8411
R-2020-095   10-1-2020         94         Central Ave Ne 87108 Within the City Limits of Albuquerque, New Mexico Is So
                                          Ruined, Damaged and Dilapidated as to Be a Menace to the Public Comfort,
                                          Health, Peace or Safety and That it Is to Be Required to Be Removed.
                                          Creating a Grace Period for the Implementation of the 2018 International
R-2020-096   10-1-2020         95         Energy Conservation Code; and Designating Fiscal Year 2021 Appropriations to
                                          Provide for an Energy Efficiency Retrofit Assistance Program for Low Income
                                          Households.
                                          Approving Fiscal Year 2021 Appropriations to Provide Economic Relief to
R-2020-097   10-1-2020         96         Small and Local For-profit Organizations Negatively Impacted by the Covid-19
                                          Pandemic Through the Coronavirus, Aid, Relief, and Economic Security Act
                                          (Cares Act).
                                          Amending the Adopted Capital Implementation Program of the City of
R-2020-098   10-1-2020         97         Albuquerque by Approving New Projects, Supplementing Current Appropriations
                                          and Changing the Scope of Existing Projects.
                                          Approving and Authorizing the Acceptance of Grant Funds From the Department
R-2020-099   10-1-2020         98         of Commerce Minority Business Development Agency and Providing an
                                          Appropriation to the Economic Development Department for Fiscal Years 2021
                                          and 2022.
                                          Renaming the Four Hills Park in Four Hills Village to the Ed Barsis Park at
                                          Four Hills Village (Located at Running Water Circle Southeast and Stagecoach
R-2020-100   10-13-2020        99         Road Southeast) to Honor Edwin Barsis, an Esteemed and Effectual Four Hills
                                          Village Leader Who Earnestly Championed the Four Hills Neighborhood and the
                                          City of Albuquerque.
R-2020-101   10-13-2020        100        Prohibiting the Police Department from Applying for or Receiving Certain
                                    Surplus Military Equipment for Civilian Law Enforcement Use.
                                          Amending the Adopted Capital Implementation Program for the City of
R-2020-102   10-13-2020        101        Albuquerque - Aviation Department by Transfering Funds from Existing
                                          Projects, Closing Projects, Approving New Projects, and Accepting Federal
                                          and State Grants.
R-2020-103   10-13-2020        102        Setting the Official List of City Council Meetings from January 2021 Through
                                          December 2021.
R-2020-104   10-13-2020       3-2-4       Determining Reasonable Notice of Public Meetings of the City Council.
R-2020-105   10-29-2020        103        Designating Workforce Housing Trust Funds for the Acquisition Of Single-
                                          family Residence on the Sawmill Community Land Trust
R-2020-106   10-29-2020        104        Approving Submittal of Grant Applications by the Parks and Recreation
                                          Department to the New Mexico Finance Authority, Water Trust Board.
                                          Making Findings in Connection with the Resolution of Winrock Town Center Tax
                                          Increment Development District 1 Authorizing The Issuance and Sale of
                                          Subordinate Lien Tax Increment Bonds; Ratifying and Approving the Issuance
                                          and Sale of the Winrock Town Center Tax Increment Development District 1
                                          Subordinate Lien Gross Receipts Tax Increment Bonds, Series 2020, as
R-2020-107   10-29-2020        105        Substantially Consistent with the Requirements of City Ordinance Enactment
                                          No. 0-2006-036 and City Council Resolution No. R-2008-126, Enactment No. R-
                                          2008-120; Authorizing Amendments To the Operation Agreement and the
                                          Construction Agreement Previously Entered into by the City with Respect to
                                          Such District; and Repealing City Council Resolution No. R-20-7, Enactment
                                          No. R-2020-013.
                                          Adjusting Appropriating Funds for Operating the Government of the City of
R-2020-108   11-6-2020         106        Albuquerque for Fiscal Year 2021, Beginning July 1, 2020 and Ending June 30,
                                          2021 and Appropriating Capital Funds.
R-2020-109   11-6-2020        4-7-10      Establishing One-year Objectives for the City of Albuquerque In Fiscal Year
                                          2021; to Meet Five-year Goals.
R-2020-110   11-10-2020        107        Adopting the 2020 Update of the Neighborhood Traffic Management Program
                                          Manual.
R-2020-111   11-10-2020        108        Amending the Adopted Capital Implementation Program of the City of
                                          Albuquerque by Supplementing Current Appropriations.
                                          Removing the Aggregate Maximum Limit of Economic Relief Grants Provided to
R-2020-112   11-20-2020        109        Small and Local For-Profit Organizations Negatively Impacted by the COVID-19
                                          Pandemic Through the Coronavirus, Aid, Relief, and Economic Security Act
                                          (CARES Act).
                                          Extending the Council's Appreciation for the Professionalism Of the City of
                                          Albuquerque's Employees in Addressing the Complex Challenges They Encounter
                                          in Their Positions, Acknowledging the Efforts of City Employees to Obtain
R-2020-113   11-20-2020        110        and Maintain Their Professional Reputations, Appointing a Task Force to
                                          Identify Methods to Improve and Expand the Opportunities for City Employees
                                          to Obtain and Maintain Certifications and Degrees, and Requiring a Final
                                          Report to City Council.
R-2020-114   11-20-2020        111        Approving the Transit Department's 2020 Title VI Program for Submission to
                                          the Federal Transit Administration.
R-2020-115   12-16-2020        112        Revising the Reporting Requirements Regarding the Efforts of The Homeless
                                          Coordinating Council.
R-2020-116   12-16-2020        113        Approving the Fy2021 Audit Plan as Submitted by the Accountability in
                                          Government Oversight Committee.
R-2020-117   12-16-2020        114        Establishing Legislative and Budget Priorities for the City of Albuquerque
                                          for the 55th New Mexico State Legislature.
                                          Requesting That the Congress of the United States of America Continue the
R-2020-118   12-16-2020        115        Public Heal The Emergency Leave Provisions of the Emergency Family and
                                          Medical Leave Expansion Act Through December 31st, 2021.
                                          Amending R-17-233, Enactment Number R-2017-095, to Extend the Effective Date
R-2020-119   12-16-2020        116        of the Interim Procedures While the Neighborhood Association Recognition
                                          Ordinance Is Updated.
                                          Adjusting Fiscal Year 2020 Appropriations for Certain Funds and Programs to
R-2020-120   12-16-2020        117        Provide for Actual Expenditures and Adjusting Fiscal Year 2021 Operating and
                                          One-year Objectives.
                                          Amending the Adopted Capital Implementation Program of the City of
R-2020-121   12-16-2020        118        Albuquerque by Approving New Projects, Supplementing Current Appropriations
                                          and Changing the Scope of Existing Projects.
                                        
 
 
Notes
    This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions. However,
1   if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit the City's
    Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/legportal.html.
    This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions. However,
2   if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit the City's
    Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/legportal.html.
    This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions. However,
3   if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit the City's
    Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/legportal.html.
    This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions. However,
4   if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit the City's
    Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/legportal.html.
    This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions. However,
5   if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit the City's
    Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/legportal.html.
    This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions. However,
6   if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit the City's
    Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/legportal.html.
    This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions. However,
7   if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit the City's
    Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/legportal.html.
    This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions. However,
8   if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit the City's
    Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/legportal.html.
    This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions. However,
9   if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit the City's
    Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/legportal.html.
    This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions. However,
10  if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit the City's
    Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/legportal.html.
    This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions. However,
11  if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit the City's
    Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/legportal.html.
    This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions. However,
12  if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit the City's
    Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/legportal.html.
    This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions. However,
13  if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit the City's
    Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/legportal.html.
    This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions. However,
14  if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit the City's
    Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/legportal.html.
    This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions. However,
15  if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit the City's
    Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/legportal.html.
    This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions. However,
16  if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit the City's
    Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/legportal.html.
    This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions. However,
17  if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit the City's
    Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/legportal.html.
    This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions. However,
18  if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit the City's
    Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/legportal.html.
    This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions. However,
19  if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit the City's
    Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/legportal.html.
    This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions. However,
20  if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit the City's
    Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/legportal.html.
    This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions. However,
21  if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit the City's
    Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/legportal.html.
    This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions. However,
22  if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit the City's
    Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/legportal.html.
    This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions. However,
23  if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit the City's
    Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/legportal.html.
    This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions. However,
24  if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit the City's
    Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/legportal.html.
    This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions. However,
25  if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit the City's
    Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/legportal.html.
    This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions. However,
26  if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit the City's
    Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/legportal.html.
    This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions. However,
27  if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit the City's
    Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/legportal.html.
    This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions. However,
28  if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit the City's
    Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/legportal.html.
    This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions. However,
29  if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit the City's
    Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/legportal.html.
    This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions. However,
30  if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit the City's
    Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/legportal.html.
    This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions. However,
31  if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit the City's
    Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/legportal.html.
    This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions. However,
32  if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit the City's
    Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/legportal.html.
    This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions. However,
33  if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit the City's
    Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/legportal.html.
    This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions. However,
34  if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit the City's
    Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/legportal.html.
    This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions. However,
35  if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit the City's
    Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/legportal.html.
    This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions. However,
36  if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit the City's
    Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/legportal.html.
    This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions. However,
37  if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit the City's
    Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/legportal.html.
    This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions. However,
38  if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit the City's
    Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/legportal.html.
    This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions. However,
39  if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit the City's
    Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/legportal.html.
    This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions. However,
40  if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit the City's
    Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/legportal.html.
    This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions. However,
41  if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit the City's
    Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/legportal.html.
    This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions. However,
42  if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit the City's
    Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/legportal.html.
    This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions. However,
43  if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit the City's
    Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/legportal.html.
    This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions. However,
44  if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit the City's
    Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/legportal.html.
    This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions. However,
45  if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit the City's
    Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/legportal.html.
    This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions. However,
46  if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit the City's
    Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/legportal.html.
    This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions. However,
47  if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit the City's
    Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/legportal.html.
    This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions. However,
48  if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit the City's
    Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/legportal.html.
    This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions. However,
49  if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit the City's
    Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/legportal.html.
    This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions. However,
50  if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit the City's
    Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/legportal.html.
    This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions. However,
51  if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit the City's
    Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/legportal.html.
    This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions. However,
52  if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit the City's
    Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/legportal.html.
    This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions. However,
53  if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit the City's
    Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/legportal.html.
    This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions. However,
54  if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit the City's
    Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/legportal.html.
    This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions. However,
55  if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit the City's
    Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/legportal.html.
    This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions. However,
56  if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit the City's
    Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/legportal.html.
    This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions. However,
57  if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit the City's
    Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/legportal.html.
    This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions. However,
58  if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit the City's
    Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/legportal.html.
    This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions. However,
59  if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit the City's
    Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/legportal.html.
    This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions. However,
60  if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit the City's
    Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/legportal.html.
    This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions. However,
61  if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit the City's
    Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/legportal.html.
    This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions. However,
62  if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit the City's
    Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/legportal.html.
    This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions. However,
63  if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit the City's
    Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/legportal.html.
    This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions. However,
64  if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit the City's
    Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/legportal.html.
    This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions. However,
65  if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit the City's
    Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/legportal.html.
    This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions. However,
66  if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit the City's
    Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/legportal.html.
    This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions. However,
67  if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit the City's
    Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/legportal.html.
    This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions. However,
68  if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit the City's
    Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/legportal.html.
    This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions. However,
69  if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit the City's
    Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/legportal.html.
    This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions. However,
70  if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit the City's
    Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/legportal.html.
    This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions. However,
71  if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit the City's
    Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/legportal.html.
    This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions. However,
72  if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit the City's
    Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/legportal.html.
    This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions. However,
73  if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit the City's
    Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/legportal.html.
    This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions. However,
74  if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit the City's
    Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/legportal.html.
    This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions. However,
75  if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit the City's
    Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/legportal.html.
    This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions. However,
76  if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit the City's
    Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/legportal.html.
    This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions. However,
77  if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit the City's
    Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/legportal.html.
    This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions. However,
78  if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit the City's
    Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/legportal.html.
    This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions. However,
79  if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit the City's
    Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/legportal.html.
    This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions. However,
80  if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit the City's
    Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/legportal.html.
    This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions. However,
81  if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit the City's
    Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/legportal.html.
    This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions. However,
82  if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit the City's
    Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/legportal.html.
    This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions. However,
83  if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit the City's
    Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/legportal.html.
    This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions. However,
84  if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit the City's
    Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/legportal.html.
    This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions. However,
85  if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit the City's
    Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/legportal.html.
    This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions. However,
86  if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit the City's
    Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/legportal.html.
    This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions. However,
87  if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit the City's
    Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/legportal.html.
    This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions. However,
88  if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit the City's
    Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/legportal.html.
    This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions. However,
89  if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit the City's
    Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/legportal.html.
    This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions. However,
90  if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit the City's
    Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/legportal.html.
    This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions. However,
91  if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit the City's
    Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/legportal.html.
    This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions. However,
92  if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit the City's
    Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/legportal.html.
    This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions. However,
93  if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit the City's
    Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/legportal.html.
    This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions. However,
94  if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit the City's
    Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/legportal.html.
    This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions. However,
95  if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit the City's
    Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/legportal.html.
    This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions. However,
96  if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit the City's
    Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/legportal.html.
    This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions. However,
97  if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit the City's
    Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/legportal.html.
    This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions. However,
98  if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit the City's
    Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/legportal.html.
    This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions. However,
99  if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit the City's
    Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/legportal.html.
    This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions. However,
100 if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit the City's
    Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/legportal.html.
    This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions. However,
101 if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit the City's
    Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/legportal.html.
    This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions. However,
102 if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit the City's
    Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/legportal.html.
    This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions. However,
103 if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit the City's
    Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/legportal.html.
    This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions. However,
104 if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit the City's
    Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/legportal.html.
    This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions. However,
105 if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit the City's
    Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/legportal.html.
    This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions. However,
106 if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit the City's
    Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/legportal.html.
    This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions. However,
107 if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit the City's
    Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/legportal.html.
    This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions. However,
108 if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit the City's
    Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/legportal.html.
    This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions. However,
109 if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit the City's
    Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/legportal.html.
    This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions. However,
110 if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit the City's
    Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/legportal.html.
    This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions. However,
111 if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit the City's
    Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/legportal.html.
    This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions. However,
112 if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit the City's
    Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/legportal.html.
    This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions. However,
113 if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit the City's
    Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/legportal.html.
    This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions. However,
114 if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit the City's
    Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/legportal.html.
    This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions. However,
115 if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit the City's
    Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/legportal.html.
    This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions. However,
116 if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit the City's
    Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/legportal.html.
    This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions. However,
117 if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit the City's
    Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/legportal.html.
    This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions. However,
118 if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit the City's
    Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/legportal.html.
2021 Resolutions
Res. No. Date Disposition Short Title
Res.  Date     Disposition Short Title
No.
R-    1-14-     Not        Establishing Federal Programming and Policy Priorities for The City of
2021- 2021     Included    Albuquerque for Federal Fiscal Years 2021/2022
001
R-    1-14-     Not        Requiring Communication of Intra-Year Administrative Rate and Fee Adjustments
2021- 2021     Included    to the City Council Prior to Implementation
002
R-    1-14-     Not        Amending the Adopted Capital Implementation Program of the City of
2021- 2021     Included    Albuquerque by Supplementing Current Appropriations
003
                           Requesting the New Mexico Department of Transportation and the New Mexico
                           State Legislature, to Establish as a Priority the Development of New Mexico
                           State Highway 45, (Coors Boulevard) Between Central Avenue and Gun Club Road
R-    1-25-     Not        to Urban Arterial Standards. Requiring the City of Albuquerque to Work with
2021- 2021     Included    the New Mexico Department of Transportation to Improve the Sections of New
004                        Mexico 45 South of Central Avenue Within the City Limits and Encouraging the
                           County of Bernalillo to Work with the New Mexico Department of Transportation
                           to Improve the Section of Coors Boulevard Between Old Coors Drive and Gun
                           Club Road
R-    1-25-     Not        Extending the Moratorium Established for the Section of Irving Boulevard from
2021- 2021     Included    Kayenta Place to Rio Los Pinos Drive Through December 31st 2021
005
R-              Not        Establishing Permanent Funding from the Transportation Infrastructure Tax for
2021- 2-5-2021 Included    the Neighborhood Traffic Management Program, Voiding Section Three of
006                        Resolution-20-47
R-    2-26-     Not        Supplementing Priorities for the Capital Implementation Program of the City
2021- 2021     Included    of Albuquerque by Implementing a Community Equity Criterion to Be Used in the
007                        Development of The Plan
R-    2-17-                Directing That a Policy or Procedure Be Developed to Address Instances of
2021- 2021      Not        Unexpected Departure, Unavailability or Incapacity of the Albuquerque Police
008   (passed) Included    Chief; Requiring Recruitment Updates for a Permanent Chief When a Vacancy
                           Exists
R-              Not        Approving and Authorizing the Acceptance of Grant Funds from Living Cities
2021- 3-9-2021 Included    and Providing an Appropriation to the Legal Department for Fiscal Years 2021
009                        and 2022.
R-              Not        Commissioning an Update to the 2014 Social Service Gap Analysis Study and
2021- 3-9-2021 Included    Adjusting Fiscal Year 2021 General Fund Appropriations to Provide Funding for
010                        That Purpose
R-              Not        Establishing a Priorities List for the City of Albuquerque's Future Open
2021- 3-9-2021 Included    Space Land Acquisitions; Identifying Immediate Priorities and Special
011                        Provisions for Certain Properties
R-    3-23-     Not        Approving the Programming of Funds and Projects for the 2021-2030 Decade Plan
2021- 2021     Included    for Capital Improvements Including the 2021 Two-year Capital Budget
012
R-    3-22-     Not        Approving Grant Funds Awarded for the FY21 Waste Isolation Pilot Program with
2021- 2021     Included    the New Mexico Energy, Minerals and Natural Resources Department and
013                        Providing for an Appropriation to Albuquerque Fire Rescue in Fiscal Year 2021
R-    3-22-     Not        Amending the City of Albuquerque Component Capital Implementation Program to
2021- 2021     Included    Include a Roadway Facilities Project, Ventura Street and Holly Avenue Traffic
014                        Circle
R-                         Authorizing the Giving of Notices for Bids for the Sale of City of
2021- 3-22-     Not        Albuquerque, New Mexico General Obligation Bonds Consisting of $22,960,000
015   2021     Included    General Obligation General Purpose Bonds, Series 2021A and $27,980,000
                           General Obligation Refunding Bonds, Series 2021B
R-    3-15-                Declaring a Moratorium of up to Six Months or until the 2020 Integrated
2021- 2021      Not        Development Ordinance (100) Annual Update Is Finally Acted upon by the City
016   (passed) Included    Council, Whichever First Occurs, on Walls and Fences Sections 5-7(d)(3)(F)
                           and 5-7(d)(3)(G) of the 100
R-    3-15-     Not        Declaring a Stay of Enforcement on Section 6-4(l)(2) of the Integrated
2021- 2021     Included    Development Ordinance Related to the Delay of a Final Decision by the
017   (passed)             Planning Department on Applications for Administrative Decisions
R-                         Establishing a Temporary Halt to the Creation of New Residential Parking
2021- 4-5-2021  Not        Permit Areas; Directing That the City Stay Enforcement of the Residential
018   (passed) Included    Parking Permit Area Established for That Area of Trellis Drive and Decker
                           Road Between Campbell Road and Candelaria Road
                         
                         
R-    5-13-     Not        Calling for Additional Community Input and Good Neighbor Measures by the City
2021- 2021     Included    for the Proposed Gateway Center at the Former Lovelace Hospital Site.
021
R-    5-15-     Not        Adopting a Policy to Create a "Safe Harbor" for Victims of Domestic Violence
2021- 2021     Included    and Other Violence to Engage with the Police Department Without Fear of
022                        Arrest.
R-    5-19-     Not        Adopting the Juan Tabo Connectivity Study, Making the Recommendations Within
2021- 2021     Included    the Study Policy Priorities for Juan Tabo Boulevard in the Vicinity of Eubank
023                        Boulevard, Southern Boulevard and the Tijeras Arroyo.
R-                         Approving and Authorizing the Filing of Grant Applications and The Acceptance
2021- 5-13-     Not        of Potential Grant Awards for Multiple Transit Department Programs from the
024   2021     Included    Federal Transit Administration (FTA) of the U.S. Department of Transportation
                           and Providing for An Appropriation to the Transit Department.
R-                         Amending the Adopted Capital Implementation Program for the City of
2021- 5-12-     Not        Albuquerque - Aviation Department by Transferring Funds from Existing
025   2021     Included    Projects, Closing Projects, Approving New Projects, and Accepting Federal and
                           State Grants.
R-              Not        Appropriating Funds for Operating the Government of the City of Albuquerque
2021- 6-1-2021 Included    for Fiscal Year 2022, Beginning July 1, 2021 and Ending June 30, 2022;
026                        Adjusting Fiscal Year 2021 Appropriations; and Appropriating Capital Funds.
R-                         Establishing One-year Objectives for the City of Albuquerque in Fiscal Year
2021- 6-2-2021 4-7-11      2022; to Meet Five-year Goals.
027
R-                         Approving the Request and Authorizing the Use of Direct Funding Available
2021- 6-1-2021  Not        from the American Rescue Plan Act of 2021 for the Purposes of Pandemic
028            Included    Response, Pandemic Recovery Investments, And Support for Vulnerable
                           Populations.
R-                         A Nuisance, Substandard Dwelling or Structure in Need of Abatement at 5912
2021- 6-14-     Not        Sweet Water Dr NW Within the City Limits of Albuquerque, New Mexico Is So
029   2021     Included    Ruined, Damaged and Dilapidated as to Be a Menace to the Public Comfort,
                           Health, Peace or Safety and That it Is to Be Required to Be Removed.
R-                         Approving and Authorizing the Mayor to Execute a Grant Agreement with the
2021- 6-14-     Not        U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, Early HeadStart Program and
030   2021     Included    Providing an Appropriation to the Department of Family and Community Services
                           Beginning in Fiscal Year 2022.
R-                         A Nuisance, Substandard Dwelling or Structure in Need of Abatement at 400
2021- 6-14-     Not        Mesilla St SE Within the City Limits of Albuquerque, New Mexico Is So Ruined,
031   2021     Included    Damaged and Dilapidated as to Be a Menace to the Public Comfort, Health,
                           Peace or Safety and That it Is to Be Required to Be Removed.
R-                         A Nuisance, Substandard Dwelling or Structure in Need of Abatement at 404
2021- 6-14-     Not        Mesilla St SE Within the City Limits of Albuquerque, New Mexico Is So Ruined,
032   2021     Included    Damaged and Dilapidated as to Be a Menace to the Public Comfort, Health,
                           Peace or Safety and That it Is to Be Required to Be Removed.
R-                         Approving Renewal Awards from the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban
2021- 6-14-     Not        Development for the 2021 Continuum of Care Grant and Providing an
033   2021     Included    Appropriation to the Department of Family and Community Services, Beginning
                           in Fiscal Year 2021.
                           Adopting the 2021 Action Plan and Program Investment Summary For the
R-                         Expenditure of Community Development Block Grant (CDBG), Home Investment
2021- 6-14-     Not        Partnerships Program (HOME) and Emergency Solutions Grant (ESG) Funds;
034   2021     Included    Providing an Appropriation to the Department of Family and Community Services
                           for 2021 U.S Department of Housing and Urban Development (HUD) Entitlement
                           Funds.
R-    6-14-     Not        Establishing Complete Street, Pedestrian, and Streetscape Improvements on San
2021- 2021     Included    Pedro Drive from Central Avenue to Haines Avenue as a Priority for the City
035                        of Albuquerque.
R-    6-7-2021  Not        Amending the Adopted Capital Implementation Program of the City of
2021- (Passed) Included    Albuquerque by Approving New Projects and Changing The Scope of Existing
036                        Projects Relating to District 2 Council Neighborhood Set-Asides.
R-                         A Nuisance, Substandard Dwelling or Structure in Need of Abatement at 6816
2021- 6-29-     Not        Ina Dr NE 87109 Within the City Limits of Albuquerque, New Mexico Is Ruined,
037   2021     Included    Damaged and Dilapidated as To Be a Menace to the Public Comfort, Health,
                           Peace or Safety And That it Is to Be Required to Be Removed.
R-    6-29-     Not        Establishing Traffic Management and Safety Improvements to Universe Boulevard
2021- 2021     Included    from Irving Boulevard to Ventana Hills Road as a Priority for the City of
038                        Albuquerque.
R-    6-29-     Not        Concerning the Local Election to Be Held in the City of Albuquerque on
2021- 2021     Included    November 2, 2021.
039
R-                         Establishing a Moratorium to Prohibit Cannabis Retail, Cannabis Cultivation,
2021- 6-29-     Not        and Cannabis Manufacturing Uses in the Old Town Historic Protection Overlay
040   2021     Included    Zone until the sooner of July 1, 2022 or when the 2021 Integrated Development
                           Ordinance Annual Update Becomes Effective.
R-    6-21-     Not        Amending R-17-233, Enactment Number R-2017-095, to Extend the Effective Date
2021- 2021     Included    of the Interim Procedures While the Neighborhood Association Recognition
041   (Passed)             Ordinance Is Updated.
R-    6-29-     Not        Approving an Award from the U.S. Department of Treasury for Emergency Rental
2021- 2021     Included    Assistance and Providing an Appropriation to The Department of Family and
042                        Community Services, Beginning in Fiscal Year 2021.
R-                         Approving and Authorizing the Filing of Grant Application and Acceptance of
2021- 6-29-     Not        Potential Grant Awards from the Federal Health and Human Services Department
043   2021     Included    (HHS) and Providing for An Appropriation to the Legal Department for Fiscal
                           Years 2022 and 2023.
                           Concerning a Bond Election to Be Held in the City of Albuquerque at the next
                           Regular Local Election on November 2, 2021; Submitting to a Vote of the
R-                         Qualified Electors at Such Regular Local Election Certain Questions for
2021- 6-29-     Not        Authorizing the Issuance of General Obligation Bonds in Varying Principal
044   2021     Included    Amounts and for Specified Public Purposes and, Providing the Form of the Bond
                           Questions and the Designation Clause for Such Questions on the Ballot;
                           Prescribing Other Details in Connection with Such Bond Election and Bonds;
                           and Ratifying Action Previously Taken in Connection Therewith.
                           Approving and Authorizing the Mayor to Execute a One-Time Grant Agreement
R-    6-29-     Not        with the New Mexico Early Childhood Education and Care Department Services in
2021- 2021     Included    Partnership with Central Region Education Cooperative, and Providing an
045                        Appropriation to the Department of Family and Community Services Division of
                           Child & Family Development for Fiscal Year 2021.
R-    6-29-     Not        Amending the Adopted Capital Implementation Program of the City of
2021- 2021     Included    Albuquerque by Supplementing Current Appropriations.
046
R-    6-29-     Not        Adopting the FY 2022 - FY 2023 Two-Year Urban Enhancement Trust Fund Program
2021- 2021     Included    and Appropriating Funds for the Urban Enhancement Program's Projects.
047
R-    6-29-     Not        Amending the Adopted Capital Implementation Program of the City of
2021- 2021     Included    Albuquerque by Approving New Projects, Supplementing Current Appropriations
048                        and Changing the Scope of Existing Projects.
R-    6-29-     Not        Approving the Attached Memorandum of Agreement Between City of Albuquerque
2021- 2021     Included    Parks and Recreation and New Mexico Department of Agriculture in Fiscal Year
049                        2021.
R-                         Dedicating the Section of Coors Boulevard from Central Avenue South to
2021- 6-29-     Not        Bernalillo County Limits to Honor the Life and Service of Father Graham R.
050   2021     Included    Golden, O. Praem and to Urge the New Mexico Legislature and the New Mexico
                           Department of Transportation to Make the Same Dedication.
R-    8-10-     Not
2021- 2021     Included    Accepting the Recommendations of the Balloon Landing Task Force.
051
R-                         Declaring the City Council's Support of the Route 66 Centennial Celebration
2021- 8-8-2021  Not        in 2026; Directing the Arts and Culture Services Department to Begin the
052            Included    Planning Process for a Centennial Celebration Event in the City of
                           Albuquerque.
R-    8-10-     Not        Establishing Federal Priorities for the City of Albuquerque For 2021 (FY21-
2021- 2021     Included    FY22) to the Community Project Program Funds of The 117th Congress of the
053                        United States.
                           Concerning a Bond Election to Be Held in the City of Albuquerque at the next
                           Regular Local Election on November 2, 2021; Submitting to a Vote of the
                           Qualified, Registered Electors At Such Regular Local Election a Question
                           Relating to the Issuance of Gross Receipts Tax Revenue Bonds in the Principal
R-    8-19-     Not        Amount of up to $50,000,000 to Acquire Property For, and to Design, Develop,
2021- 2021     Included    Erect, Construct and Otherwise Improve a Public Stadium for Multiple Uses,
054                        Including, but Not Limited To, Professional Soccer Events; Providing the Form
                           of the Bond Question and the Designation Clause for Such Question on the
                           Ballot; Prescribing Other Details in Connection with Such Regular Local
                           Election and Bonds; and Ratifying Action Previously Taken in Connection
                           Therewith.
R-                         A Nuisance, Substandard Dwelling or Structure in Need of Abatement at 832
2021- 8-24-     Not        Estancia Dr NW Within the City Limits of Albuquerque, New Mexico Is So
055   2021     Included    Ruined, Damaged and Dilapidated As to Be a Menace to the Public Comfort,
                           Health, Peace or Safety and That it Is to Be Required to Be Removed.
                           Declaring the Intent of the City Council of the City of Albuquerque, New
                           Mexico to Consider for Adoption a Resolution Approving the Formation of South
                           Campus Tax Increment Development District; Approving, Subject to Further
                           Proceedings of the City Council, a Tax Increment Development Plan for the
R-                         District, Which Includes a Description of the Areas to Be Included Therein,
2021- 8-24-     Not        the Purposes of the District, Identification of Gross Receipts Tax Increment
056   2021     Included    and Property Tax Increment Financing Mechanisms, and Bonds Secured by Gross
                           Receipts Tax Increment Revenue and Property Tax Increment Revenue;
                           Authorizing and Directing the Posting, Mailing and Publication, in a
                           Newspaper of General Circulation Within the County, of a Notice of Public
                           Meeting and Hearing to Be Held on October 4, 2021 to Consider for Adoption
                           the Resolution Approving the Formation of the District.
                           Encouraging the Albuquerque Ditch and Water Safety Task Force to Conduct a
R-    8-24-     Not        Study to Improve the Safety of Storm Water Channels, Arroyos and Irrigation
2021- 2021     Included    Canals; Requesting That the Administration of the City of Albuquerque
057                        Consider the Study Reports Capital Recommendations in the City of Albuquerque
                           2023 Capital Implementation Plan Program.
R-    8-24-     Not        Accepting and Appropriating Federal Aviation Administration Grant Funding
2021- 2021     Included    from the American Rescue Plan Act (ARPA) for the City of Albuquerque Aviation
058                        Department.
R-    9-21-     Not        Concerning the Future Management of Candelaria Nature Preserve and the
2021- 2021     Included    Approval of the 2020 Resource Management Plan.
059
R-    9-24-     Not        Approving the FY2022 Audit Plan as Submitted by the Accountability in
2021- 2021     Included    Government Oversight Committee.
060
                           Approving the Application and Petition of Success Land Holdings, LLC and
                           Heritage Trails Development I, LLC, for Formation of the Aspire Public
                           Improvement District Pursuant to the Public Improvement District Act, NMSA
                           1978, §§ 5·11-1 to -27 (2001, as Amended Through 2019) and City Ordinance
                           Enactment No. 0-2003-12, Council Bill No. FS 0·03-84; Making Findings in
                           Connection with the Application and Petition and Supporting Documentation
                           Requesting Approval of the Formation of the District; To Determining the Real
                           Property to Be Included Within the District And the Purposes for Which the
R-                         District Is Being Formed; Approving the General Plan, Feasibility Study,
2021- 9-21-     Not        Rate, Method of Apportionment and Manner of Collection of a Special Levy to
061   2021     Included    Be Imposed upon Real Property Within the District, and Approving a
                           Development Agreement for the District; Establishing Parameters for the
                           Issuance of Special Levy Bonds; Authorizing The District to Issue Subordinate
                           Obligations; Providing for Governance of the District; Providing That Bonds
                           and Other Obligations of the District Shall Not Be Obligations of the City;
                           Waiving and Cancelling Certain Requirements to Formation of a Public
                           Improvement District; Ratifying Certain Actions Heretofore Taken; Repealing
                           All Actions Inconsistent with this Formation Resolution; Directing the
                           Mailing of a Notice of Adoption of this Formation Resolution by the City
                           Clerk; and Taking Related Action.
R-    9-21-     Not        Approving and Authorizing the Acceptance of Grant Funds From the New Mexico
2021- 2021     Included    State Highway and Transportation Department and Providing an Appropriation to
062                        the Parks and Recreation Department in Fiscal Year 2022.
R-                         Approving and Authorizing the Mayor to Execute a One-time Grant Agreement
2021- 9-21-     Not        with the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, Early Head Start
063   2021     Included    Program and Providing an Appropriation to the Department of Family and
                           Community Services Retroactively for Fiscal Year 2021.
R-    9-27-     Not        Amending Resolution-21-148, Establishing One-year Objectives For the City of
2021- 2021     Included    Albuquerque in Fiscal Year 2022; to Include a Zero Fare Transit Pilot
064                        Objective to Meet Five-year Goals.
R-    9-27-     Not        Amending the City Operating Budget Language to Clarify the Intent of the City
2021- 2021     Included    Council to Implement a Comprehensive Zero Fare Pilot.
065
R-                         Requiring the City of Albuquerque to Initiate a Community Benefits Agreement
2021- 9-27-     Not        with Representatives and/or Residents of The Neighborhood(s) Directly
066   2021     Included    Impacted by Any New Soccer Stadium, and the United Soccer Franchise (Or
                           Relevant Named Tenant) Before a Zone Change Application is Submitted.
                           Directing That the Civilian Police Oversight Agency Provide a Training
R-    10-15-    Not        Compliance Report for Members of the Civilian Police Oversight Agency Board
2021- 2021     Included    with Respect to the Training Requirements under the Court Approved Settlement
067                        Agreement With the United States Department of Justice, and the Civilian
                           Police Oversight Ordinance.
R-    10-15-    Not
2021- 2021     Included    Determining Reasonable Notice of Public Meetings of the City Council.
068
R-    10-15-    Not        Setting the Official List of City Council Meetings from January 2022 Through
2021- 2021     Included    December 2022.
069
R-                         Approving and Authorizing the Acceptance of Grant Funds From the Department
2021- 10-15-    Not        of Commerce Minority Business Development Agency and Providing an
070   2021     Included    Appropriation to the Economic Development Department for Fiscal Years 2022
                           Through 2026.
R-                         Approving Submittal of Grant Applications by the Parks and Recreation
2021- 10-15-    Not        Department to the New Mexico Finance Authority, Water Trust Board and
071   2021     Included    Providing an Appropriation to the Parks and Recreation Department for Fiscal
                           Year 2022.
                           Approving the Petition of the Regents of the University of New Mexico by and
                           Through Lobo Development Corporation, a New Mexico Nonprofit Corporation
                           Formed under the Research Park and Economic Development Act, and the City of
                           Albuquerque, New Mexico for Formation of the South Campus Tax Increment
                           Development District (The "District" or "TIDD") Pursuant to the Tax Increment
                           for Development Act, Sections 5-15-1 Through 5-15-29, NMSA 1978 and City
                           Council Ordinance, Chapter 4, Article 10; Making Findings in Connection with
                           the Petition and Supporting Documentation Requesting Approval of the
                           Formation of the TIDD; Determining the Real Property to Be Included Within
R-                         the TIDD and the Purposes for Which the Tidd Is Being Formed; Approving the
2021- 10-15-    Not        Joint Application, Petition, and Financial Feasibility Study for the TIDD;
072   2021     Included    Ratifying the Tax Increment Development Plan Approved for Consideration in
                           Connection with the Formation of The Tidd; Dedicating 75% of the Gross
                           Receipts Tax Increment and 75% of the Property Tax Increment Generated Within
                           the Boundaries of the District for the Financing of Public Improvements for
                           the TIDD, and Related Purposes under the TIDD Act; Approving Parameters for
                           the Issuance of Tax Increment Bonds by the TIDD; Providing for Governance of
                           the TIDD Through The Appointment of Members of the Governing Body of the
                           TIDD; Providing That Tax Increment Bonds of the Tidd and Other Obligations of
                           the TIDD Shall Not Be Obligations of the City of lbuquerque or the University
                           of New Mexico; Ratifying Certain Actions Heretofore Taken; Repealing All
                           Actions Inconsistent With this Resolution.
                           Acknowledging and Recognizing the Albuquerque Indian School Cemetery at 4h
R-                         Park as a Historical and Sacred Burial Site; Acknowledging the Historical and
2021- 10-11-    Not        Ongoing Intergenerational Trauma Experienced by Native American Individuals,
073   2021     Included    Families, and Tribal Nations as a Result of Indian Boarding School Policies;
                           and Committing to Work with Tribal Nations and Local Native Americans Toward
                           Reconciliation and Healing.
R-    10-27-    Not        Amending the Attached Memorandum of Agreement Between City Of Albuquerque
2021- 2021     Included    Parks and Recreation and New Mexico Department of Agriculture in Fiscal Year
074                        2021.
R-    10-27-    Not        Approving and Authorizing the Acceptance of Grant Funds From the Dennis
2021- 2021     Included    Friends Foundation and Providing an Appropriation to the City of Albuquerque
075                        Animal Welfare Department in Fiscal Year 2022.
                           Approving and Authorizing the Acceptance of Grant Funds Based on an
R-                         Application from the New Mexico Aging and Long Term Services Department for
2021- 10-27-    Not        State Assistance from the New Mexico Local Grown Produce Grant for the
076   2021     Included    Purpose of Providing Seniors with Nutritious Meals from Food That Is Grown in
                           New Mexico and Providing for an Appropriation to the Department of Senior
                           Affairs in Fiscal Year 2022.
R-    10-27-    Not        Approving and Authorizing the Acceptance of $75,000 in Legislative Funds for
2021- 2021     Included    "It Takes a Village" Mentorship Program And Providing an Appropriation to the
077                        Legal Department for Fiscal Year 2022.
                           Making Findings in Connection with the Trails Public Improvement District's
                           Resolution Authorizing the Issuance and Sale of Special Levy Refunding
R-    10-27-    Not        Revenue Bonds; Ratifying and Approving The Issuance and Sale of the Trails
2021- 2021     Included    Public Improvement District Special Levy Refunding Revenue Bonds, Series
078                        2021, as Substantially Consistent with the Requirements of City Ordinance
                           Enactment No. 0-2003-12 and City Council Resolution No. R-07-13 Enactment No.
                           R-2008-019.
R-    11-12-    Not
2021- 2021     Included    Adopting the Menaul Redevelopment Study Recommendations as City Policy
079
                           Establishing Corridor Improvements for 118th Street from Ladera Drive to
R-    11-15-               Senator Dennis Chavez Boulevard as a Priority For the City of Albuquerque
2021- 2021      Not        Funding Processes, Encouraging The New Mexico Department of Transportation to
080   (Passed) Included    Prioritize the Approval and Construction of an Interchange at Ladera Drive
                           and 11th Street, Forming a Partnership with the County of Bernalillo to
                           Develop 11th Street.
R-    11-22-    Not        Approving the Transit Department's 2021 Updated Public Transit Agency Safety
2021- 2021     Included    Plan.
081
                           Providing for the Authorization, Execution and Delivery of the Amendment of
                           That Certain Lease Between the City of Albuquerque, New Mexico and Kairos
                           Power LLC in Connection with the Previously Issued City of Albuquerque, New
R-                         Mexico Taxable Industrial Revenue Bonds (Kairos Power Project) Series 2020 in
2021- 11-22-    Not        the Amount of $125,000,000 to Revise the Description of the Project Site
082   2021     Included    Based on the Termination of a Certain Condominium; Authorizing the
                           Termination of a Certain Condominium; Authorizing the Taking of Other Action
                           in Connection with the Amendment and Termination of a Certain Condominium;
                           Ratifying Certain Actions Taken Previously; and Repealing All Actions
                           Inconsistent with this Resolution.
R-    11-22-    Not        Amending the Adopted Capital Implementation Program of the City Of
2021- 2021     Included    Albuquerque by Approving New Projects, Supplementing Current Appropriations
083                        and Changing the Scope of Existing Projects.
R-    11-15-    Not        Declaring a Stay of Enforcement of the Albuquerque Tax Preparer and Consumer
2021- 2021     Included    Rights Ordinance.
084   (Passed)
R-    11-22-    Not        Concerning the Municipal Runoff Election to Be Held in the City Of
2021- 2021     Included    Albuquerque, New Mexico, on Tuesday, the Seventh Day of December, 2021.
085
                           Making Findings in Connection with the Resolution of Winrock Town Center Tax
                           Increment Development District 1 Authorizing The Issuance and Sale of Senior
R-    12-15-    Not        Lien Tax Increment Bonds; and Ratifying and Approving the Issuance and Sale
2021- 2021     Included    of the Winrock Town Center Tax Increment Development District 1 Senior Lien
086                        Gross Receipts Tax Increment Bonds, Series 2022, as Substantially Consistent
                           with the Requirements of City Ordinance Enactment No. 0-2006-036 and City
                           Council Resolution No. R-2008-126, Enactment No. R 2008-120.
                           Approving the Appointment of a Director to Fill the Vacancy on The Governing
R-                         Body of the Inspiration Public Improvement District, Caused by the
2021- 12-15-    Not        Resignation of a Director, Pursuant to The Public Improvement District Act,
087   2021     Included    NMSA 1978 § § 5-11-1 to -27 (2019, as Amended) and City Enactment No. 0-2003-
                           12, City Enactment No R-2007-150, and Repealing All Actions Inconsistent With
                           this Resolution.
                           Approving the Appointment of a Director to Fill the Vacancy on The Governing
R-                         Body of the VolTerra Public Improvement District, Caused by the Resignation
2021- 12-15-    Not        of a Certain Director, Pursuant to the Public Improvement District Act, NMSA
088   2021     Included    1978 § § 5-11-1 to -27 (2019, as Amended) and City Enactment No. 0-2003-12,
                           City Enactment No R-2007-150, and Repealing All Actions Inconsistent With
                           this Resolution.
                           Approving the Appointment of Directors to Fill the Vacancies On the Governing
R-                         Body of the Juan Tabo Hills Estates Public Improvement District, Caused by
2021- 12-15-    Not        the Expiration of Terms of Directors, Pursuant to the Public Improvement
089   2021     Included    District Act, NMSA 1978 §§ 5-11-1 to -27 (2019, as Amended) and City
                           Enactment No. 0-2003-12, City Enactment No R-2007-150, and Repealing All
                           Actions Inconsistent with this Resolution.
R-    12-15-    Not        Establishing Legislative and Budget Priorities for the City of Albuquerque
2021- 2021     Included    for the Second Session of the 55th New Mexico State Legislature.
090
R-    12-15-    Not        Adjusting Fiscal Year 2021 Appropriations for Certain Funds and Programs to
2021- 2021     Included    Provide for Actual Expenditures and Adjusting Fiscal Year 2022 Operating
091                        Appropriations.
                         
 
 
Notes
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
2022 Resolutions
Res. No. Date Disposition Short Title
Res.  Date     Disposition Short Title
No.
                           Approving and Authorizing the Mayor to Execute a One-Time Grant Agreement with
R-    12-30-    Not        the New Mexico Early Childhood Education and Care Department Services in
2022- 2021     Included    Partnership with Southwest Region Education Cooperative, and Providing an
001                        Appropriation to the Department of Family and Community Services Division of
                           Child & Family Development for Fiscal Year 2022.
R-    12-30-    Not        Appropriating Funds to the Capital Implementation Program for The 2021 General
2022- 2021     Included    Obligation Program.
002
R-    12-30-    Not        The City of Albuquerque Expresses its Appreciation for the Acquisition of the
2022- 2021     Included    La Cuentista Open Space, Encourages the Conservation of the Site and Directs
003                        the Administration to Prepare a West Mesa Open Space Trails Plan.
R-    12-27-    Not        Denouncing Xenophobia, Anti-Asian American Pacific Islander (AAPI) Sentiments
2022- 2021     Included    and Condemning Harmful Rhetoric, Racist Acts, and Hate Crimes Targeting Asian-
004                        Pacific Americans Stemming from People's Reaction to the COVID-19 Pandemic.
R-    12-30-    Not        Appropriating Federal Funds for an Intelligent Transportation System Traffic
2022- 2021     Included    Signal Project on Louisiana Boulevard.
005
R-    12-27-   3-1-10, 3-  Directing the City of Albuquerque to Provide Language Access To Make
2022- 2021     1-11        Information and Services More Accessible to All City Residents, Regardless of
006                        Their Ability or English Proficiency.
R-              Not        Approving the Transit Department's Equity Analysis for the Zero Fare Pilot
2022- 1-1-2022 Included    Beginning on January 1, 2022.
007
R-              Not        Approving the One Albuquerque Age-friendly Action Plan and Directing the City
2022- 2-1-2022 Included    of Albuquerque's Department of Senior Affairs to Use the Aging Population
008                        Study to Implement the Plan.
R-              Not        Approving a Form of Master Development Agreement for Implementation of the
2022- 2-1-2022 Included    South Campus Tax Increment Development District; Repealing All Actions
009                        Inconsistent with this Resolution.
R-              Not        Establishing a Redistricting Committee Pursuant to Article IV, Section 3 of
2022- 2-1-2022 Included    the City Charter to Review and Make Recommendations Concerning the Nine
010                        Council Districts; Repealing Enactment R-2010-103 (R-10-109).
R-              Not        Referring the Petition for the Albuquerque Tourism Marketing District to the
2022- 2-1-2022 Included    Planning Group to Prepare the District Plan and Authorizing the City Clerk to
011                        Give Notice of Hearing for the Proposed Plan.
R-              Not        Adopting the Multi-jurisdictional Hazard Mitigation Plan for The City of
2022- 2-1-2022 Included    Albuquerque and Bernalillo County.
012
R-    2-15-     Not        Establishing Federal Programming and Policy Priorities for The City of
2022- 2022     Included    Albuquerque for Federal Fiscal Years 2022/2023.
013
R-                         Approving and Authorizing the Filing of a Grant Application for The Healthy
2022- 2-15-     Not        Environmental Living Program Grant with the United States Environmental
014   2022     Included    Protection Agency and Providing An Appropriation to the Environmental Health
                           Department in Fiscal Year 2022/2023.
R-                         Approving and Authorizing the Filing of Grant Applications and The Acceptance
2022- 3-22-     Not        of Potential Grant Awards for Multiple City Departments from Associated
015   2022     Included    Grantor Agencies and Providing For an Appropriation to the City of
                           Albuquerque.
R-    3-7-2022  Not        Directing the City Administration to Evaluate Recent Attorney General Guidance
2022- (Passed) Included    and Assess Reopening and Renegotiating the Court Approved Settlement Agreement
016                        Between the City of Albuquerque and the U.S. Department of Justice.
R-    3-22-     Not        Approving and Authorizing the Acceptance of Grant Funds From the New Mexico
2022- 2022     Included    State Library for the Basic State Grants In Aid and Providing for an
017                        Appropriation to the Department of Arts & Culture in Fiscal Year 2022.
                           Authorizing the Giving of Notices for Bids for the Sale of City of
R-    3-22-     Not        Albuquerque, New Mexico General Obligation Bonds Consisting of $76,395,000
2022- 2022     Included    General Obligation General Purpose Bonds, Series 2022A, $4,305,000 General
018                        Obligation Storm Sewer Bonds, Series 2022C and $23,615,000 General Obligation
                           Refunding Bonds, Series 2022D.
                           Enabling and Directing the Parks and Recreation Department To Review and Make
R-                         Recommendations for the Management of The Open Space Trust Fund, Review and
2022- 4-14-     Not        Recommend Updates to Sections One and Two of the Rank 2 Albuquerque Major
019   2022     Included    Public Open Space Facility Plan, and Make Recommendations for Increasing
                           Equitable Access to Parks, Open Space, and to Provide Outdoor Environmental
                           Education Programs.
R-    4-14-     Not        Appropriating and Authorizing the Success Express: African American Youth
2022- 2022     Included    Leadership Program and the Acceptance of State Monies to the Office of Equity
020                        and Inclusion and Providing An Appropriation to the City of Albuquerque.
R-    4-19-     Not        Staying Enforcement of the Provisions of the Alcoholic Liquor Ordinance That
2022- 2022     Included    Limit the Availability of Public Celebration Permits to Certain License
021                        Holders.
R-    4-29-     Not        Amending the Adopted Capital Implementation Program of the City of Albuquerque
2022- 2022     Included    by Supplementing Current Appropriations For New Federal Funds Received Through
022                        the New Mexico Department of Transportation.
R-                         Approving and Authorizing the Mayor to Execute a One-time Grant Agreement with
2022- 4-29-     Not        the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, Early Head Start Program and
023   2022     Included    Providing an Appropriation to the Department of Family and Community Services
                           for Fiscal Year 2021 for the Grant Term of 4/1/2021 Through 3/31/2023.
R-    4-29-     Not        Approving and Authorizing the Acceptance of Grant Funds From the New Mexico
2022- 2022     Included    State Library for the American Rescue Plan (ARPA) State Grant Providing for an
024                        Appropriation to the Department of Arts & Culture in Fiscal Year 2022.
                           Approving and Authorizing the Mayor to Execute a One-Time Grant Agreement with
R-    4-29-     Not        the New Mexico Early Childhood Education and Care Department Services via
2022- 2022     Included    American Rescue Plan Federal Funds, and Providing an Appropriation to the
025                        Department of Family and Community Services-Division of Child & Family
                           Development for Fiscal Year 2022, for the Grant Term 9/21/2021 to 9/30/2023.
R-    4-29-     Not        Approving and Authorizing a Certified Local Government Subgrant and Providing
2022- 2022     Included    an Appropriation to the Planning Department.
026
R-    5-19-     Not        Directing the Department of Arts and Culture to Create a Program to Offer
2022- 2022     Included    Reduced Rate Biopark and Musuem Ticket Prices to Low Income New Mexico
027                        Residents.
R-    5-19-                Directing the City to Develop an Enhanced Recycling Program, Creating a
2022- 2022     2-3-10      Plastic Bag Task Force, Calling for a Monthly Solid Waste Management Recycling
028                        Report, and Expanding Litter Removal Services.
R-    5-19-     Not        Second Update to Attachment 1 to R-20-47 Appropriating Transportation
2022- 2022     Included    Infrastructure Tax Funds to Expand the Scope Of the Paseo Del Norte Project.
029
                           Adopting the 2022 Action Plan and Program Investment Summary For the
R-                         Expenditure of Community Development Block Grant (CDBG), Home Investment
2022- 5-19-     Not        Partnerships Program (HOME) and Emergency Solutions Grant (ESG) Funds;
030   2022     Included    Providing an Appropriation to the Department of Family & Community Services
                           for 2022 U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development (HUD) Entitlement
                           Funds.
R-                         Establishing the City of Albuquerque's Automated Speed Enforcement Fund to
2022- 5-19-     Not        Monitor the Speed of Travel and Enforce The Speed Limit Through Speed
031   2022     Included    Enforcement Systems, Creating a New Automated Speed Enforcement Fund 289, in
                           Fiscal Year 2023.
R-    5-19-     Not        Approving and Authorizing the Acceptance of Grant Funds From the New Mexico
2022- 2022     Included    State Highway and Transportation Department and Providing an Appropriation to
032                        the Parks and Recreation Department in Fiscal Year 2023.
R-                         Approving and Authorizing a Grant Application to the U.S. Department of
2022- 5-19-     Not        Housing and Urban Development for the 2022 Continuum of Care Grant and
033   2022     Included    Providing an Appropriation to the Department of Family and Community Services,
                           for Fiscal Year 2022 and Fiscal Year 2023.
R-                         Designating the Menaul Metropolitan Redevelopment Area, Making Certain
2022- 5-31-     Not        Findings and Conclusions Pursuant to the Metropolitan Redevelopment Code, and
034   2022     Included    Authorizing and Directing the City to Prepare a Metropolitan Redevelopment
                           Plan for the Menaul Metropolitan Redevelopment Area.
                           Adjusting Fund and Program Appropriations for Operating the Government of the
R-    5-31-     Not        City of Albuquerque, Appropriating Capital Funds, and Authorizing Changes to
2022- 2022     Included    the American Rescue Plan Act of 2021 Appropriations for the Purposes of
035                        Pandemic Response, Pandemic Recovery Investments, and Support for Vulnerable
                           Populations.
R-              Not        Appropriating Funds for Operating the Government of the City Of Albuquerque
2022- 6-1-2022 Included    for Fiscal Year 2023, Beginning July 1, 2022 and Ending June 30, 2023;
036                        Adjusting Fiscal Year 2022 Appropriations; And Appropriating Capital Funds.
R-    5-31-     Not        Establishing One-year Objectives for the City of Albuquerque in Fiscal Year
2022- 2022     Included    2023; to Meet Five-year Goals.
037
R-    5-31-     Not        Approving and Authorizing the Acceptance of Grant Funds From the Thornburg
2022- 2022     Included    Foundation and Providing an Appropriation to the City Clerks Office for Fiscal
038                        Years 2022 And 2023.
R-                         Approving and Authorizing the Filing of Grant Applications and The Acceptance
2022- 5-31-     Not        of Potential Grant Awards for Multiple City Departments from Associated
039   2022     Included    Grantor Agencies and Providing For an Appropriation to the City of
                           Albuquerque.c
R-    5-31-     Not        Creating the City of Albuquerque LG Abatement Fund 201 to Account for Opioid
2022- 2022     Included    Settlement Proceeds and Related Expenditures.
040
R-                         Approving and Authorizing a Grant Application for, and Acceptance of, Grant
2022- 5-31-     Not        Funds from the Cities for Financial Empowerment Fund, Inc. and Providing an
041   2022     Included    Appropriation to the City of Albuquerque Legal Department for Fiscal Years
                           2023-2024.
                           Approving the Appointment of a Director to Fill a Vacancy on The Governing
R-                         Body of the Winrock Town Center Tax Increment Development Districts 1 and 2
2022- 5-31-     Not        (Collectively, the "District") Caused by the Resignation of a Certain Director
042   2022     Included    Pursuant to The Tax Increment for Development Act, NMSA 1978, Sections 5-15-
                           1 Through 28 NMSA, as Amended; and Repealing All Actions Inconsistent with
                           this Resolution.
R-    6-21-                Staying the Enforcement of § 2-6-1-4 (B)(1) & (5) and Creating a Working Group
2022- 2022     2-6-1-4     to Study the Effects of Remote Meetings of Public Boards, Commissions, and
043                        Committees.
R-                         Establishing Priorities for the 2023 Capital Improvements Plan; Defining the
2022- 6-21-     Not        Critiera to Be Used in Rating Project Proposals; Assigning Weights to the
044   2022     Included    Criteria; Allocating Amounts for Different Purposes Within the 2023 General
                           Obligation Bond Program.
R-                         Amending the Adopted Capital Improvement Program for the City of Albuquerque -
2022- 6-21-     Not        Aviation Department by Appropriating Funds for Investment Income and Passenger
045   2022     Included    Facility Charge Revenues, and Transferring Funds Between Existing Projects,
                           Closing Projects, Approving New Projects, and Accepting Grant Funding.
R-    6-21-     Not        Amending the Adopted Capital Implementation Program of the City of Albuquerque
2022- 2022     Included    by Approving New Projects from the Proceeds of City of Albuquerque, New Mexico
046                        Gross Receipts Tax Improvement Revenue Bonds Series 2022.
R-    6-21-     Not        Approving and Authorizing the Acceptance of Grant Funds From the Department of
2022- 2022     Included    Commerce Minority Business Development Agency and Providing an Appropriation
047                        to the Economic Development Department for Fiscal Year 2023.
R-                         Approving and Authorizing the Mayor to Execute a Grant Agreement with the U.S.
2022- 6-21-     Not        Department of Health and Human Services, Early Head Start Program and
048   2022     Included    Providing an Appropriation to the Department of Family and Community Services
                           Beginning in Fiscal Year 2023.
R-              Not        Creating a Pilot Program to Test and Review a Priority-Based Budgeting
2022- 7-6-2022 Included    Approach in the Development of the Annual Operating Budget.
049
R-                         Extending a Moratorium Established by R-21-165 to Prohibit Cannabis Retail,
2022- 6-29-     Not        Cannabis Cultivation, and Cannabis Manufacturing Uses in the Old Town Historic
050   2022     Included    Protection Overlay Zone until the Sooner of October 1, 2022 or When the 2021
                           Integrated Development Ordinance Annual Update Becomes Effective.
R-    6-29-     Not        Designating as City Federal Priorities the City of Albuquerque's Fiscal Year
2022- 2022     Included    2023 Congressionally Directed Spending Requests to the 117th Congress of the
051                        United States.
R-    6-29-     Not        Approving and Authorizing the Acceptance of Grant Funds From the New Mexico
2022- 2022     Included    State Highway and Transportation Department and Providing an Appropriation to
052                        the Parks and Recreation Department in Fiscal Year 2023.
R-    6-29-     Not        Appropriating Funding from the Second Tranche of the American Rescue Plan Act
2022- 2022     Included    of 2021 for the Purposes of Pandemic Response, Pandemic Recovery Investments,
053                        and Support for Vulnerable Populations.
                           Approving the Appointment of Director to Fill Vacancies on the Governing Body
R-                         of the Montecito Estates Public Improvement District, Caused by the Lack
2022- 7-6-2022  Not        Declaration of Candidates to Serve on the Board in the Local Election,
054            Included    Pursuant to the Public Improvement District Act, NMSA 1978, §§ 5-11-1 T0-27
                           (2013, As Amended) and City Ordinance Enactment No. 0-2003-12, Council Bill
                           No. FS 0-03-84; and Repealing All Actions Inconsistent with This Resolution
R-    6-29-     Not        Amending the Adopted Capital Implementation Program of the City of Albuquerque
2022- 2022     Included    by Approving New Projects, Supplementing Current Appropriations and Changing
055                        the Scope of Existing Projects.
R-    6-29-     Not        Adopting the El Camino Real De Tierra Adentro National Historic Trail (NHT)
2022- 2022     Included    Development Concept Plan (DCP).
056
                           Approving the Appointment of Directors to Fill Vacancies on The Governing Body
R-              Not        of the Trails Public Improvement District Caused by the Resignation of Certain
2022- 7-6-2022 Included    Directors, Pursuant to The Public Improvement District Act, NMSA 1978,
057                        Sections 5-11-1 Through 27, as Amended, and City Enactment No. 0-2003-012; and
                           Repealing All Actions Inconsistent with this Resolution.
                           Approving the Appointment of a Director to Fill a Vacancy on The Governing
                           Body of the Mesa Del Sol Public Improvement District 1 and to Fill a Vacancy
R-    6-29-     Not        on the Governing Body of Mesa Del Sol Public Improvement District 2 Through 5
2022- 2022     Included    Caused by the Resignation of a Certain Director, Pursuant to the Public
058                        Improvement District Act, NMSA 1978, Sections 5-11-1 through 271 As Amended,
                           and City Enactment No. 0-2003-012; and City Enactment No R-2008-045; and
                           Repealing All Actions Inconsistent With this Resolution.
R-              Not        Extending the Stay of Enforcement of the Albuquerque Tax Preparer and Consumer
2022- 7-6-2022 Included    Rights Ordinance.
059
                         
R-    8-26-     Not        Rescinding R-20-27 and Establishing the Order of Community Planning Area
2022- 2022     Included    Assessments for 2022-2027.
061
R-    8-26-     Not        Resolution Adjusting Appropriating Funds for Operating the Government of the
2022- 2022     Included    City of Albuquerque for Fiscal Year 2023, Beginning July 1, 2022 and Ending
062                        June 30, 2023.
                           Resolution Approving the Appointment of Director to Fill the Vacancy on the
R-                         Governing Body of the Inspiration Public Improvement District, Caused by the
2022- 8-26-     Not        Resignation of a Director, Pursuant to The Public Improvement District Act,
063   2022     Included    NMSA 1978, §§ 5-11-1 to -27 (2013, as Amended) and City Ordinance Enactment
                           No. 0-2003-12, Council Bill No. FS 0-03-84; and Repealing All Actions
                           Inconsistent with this Resolution.
R-    8-26-     Not        Resolution Approving and Authorizing the Filing of a Grant Application for The
2022- 2022     Included    Choice Neighborhoods Planning Grant with the Federal Department of Housing and
064                        Urban Development, for Fiscal Year 2023 Through Fiscal Year 2024.
                           Resolution Relating to the Redevelopment, Leasing and Sale of a Metropolitan
                           Redevelopment Project Within the Downtown 2025 Metropolitan Redevelopment Area
                           Consistent with the Terms of The Downtown 2025 Metropolitan Redevelopment
                           Plan; Approving The Metropolitan Redevelopment Application Entitled "Villa
                           Agave, LLC; the Downtown 2025 Metropolitan Redevelopment Application";
R-    8-26-     Not        Authorizing the Acquisition of Land and Existing Improvements and Construction
2022- 2022     Included    of a Building Within the Downtown 2025 Metropolitan Redevelopment Area;
065                        Authorizing the Disposition by Lease and Sale of the City's Interest in Such
                           Project To Villa Agave, LLC, its Successors and Assigns; Authorizing the
                           Execution and Delivery of a Lease Agreement and Other Documents In Connection
                           with the Project; Making Certain Determinations and Findings Relating to the
                           Project; Ratifying Certain Actions Taken Previously; and Repealing All Actions
                           Inconsistent with this Resolution.
R-                         Resolution Directing the Department of Finance and Administrative Services to
2022- 8-26-     Not        Work in Conjunction with the Department of Family And Community Services to
066   2022     Included    Repay Funds to the Federal Department of Housing and Urban Development Related
                           to the Cibola Loop Affordable Housing Project; Making an Appropriation.
R-    9-19-     Not        Resolution Establishing a Community Improvement Program for Route 66 (Central
2022- 2022     Included    Avenue) along its Entire Length Through the City; Making an Appropriation.
067
R-    9-19-     Not        Resolution Third Update to Attachment One to R-20-47 Appropriating
2022- 2022     Included    Transportation Infrastructure Tax Funds to Expand the Scope of the Rio Grande
068                        Complete Streets Project
R-                         Resolution Calling for a Stay of Enforcement on Section 14-16-4-3(b)(6)(C)
2022- 9-22-     Not        Related to Townhouse Development in the Integrated Development Ordinance (IDO)
069   2022     Included    for a Time Period of One Year or Until the 2022 IDO Annual Update Has Been
                           Enacted, Whichever Occurs First.
R-    10-7-     Not        Resolution Determining Reasonable Notice of Public Meetings of the City
2022- 2022     Included    Council.
070
                         
R-    10-17-    Not        Resolution Authorizing the Removal of Certain Uncollectible Accounts from the
2022- 2022     Included    City's Accounts Receivable Records for FY 2018 & Prior.
072
R-                         Resolution Approving and Authorizing a Grant Application For, and Acceptance
2022- 10-17-    Not        Of, Grant Funds from the Cities for Financial Empowerment Fund, Inc. and
073   2022     Included    Providing an Appropriation to the City of Albuquerque Legal Department for
                           Fiscal Year 2023.
                         
R-                         Resolution Approving and Authorizing the Acceptance of Grant Funds From U.S.
2022- 11-28-    Not        Department of Agriculture/Natural Resources Conservation Service (NRCS) and
075   2022     Included    Providing an Appropriation to The Parks and Recreation Department in Fiscal
                           Year 2023.
                           Resolution Approving and Authorizing the Acceptance of Grant Funds Based on
R-                         the Attached Application from the New Mexico Aging And Long Term Services
2022- 11-28-    Not        Department for State Assistance from The New Mexico Local Grown Produce Grant
076   2022     Included    for the Purpose of Providing Seniors with Nutritious Meals from Food that is
                           Grown in New Mexico and Providing for an Appropriation to the Department of
                           Senior Affairs in Fiscal Year 2023.
R-    11-29-    Not        Resolution Approving the FY2023 Audit Plan as Submitted by the Accountability
2022- 2022     Included    in Government Oversight Committee.
077
R-                         Resolution Directing the Animal Welfare Department to Work with the University
2022- 11-28-    Not        of New Mexico Science Center College of Nursing to Collect Otherwise Disposed
078   2022     Included    of Animal Tissues in City-owned or City-sponsored Spay and Neuter Clinics for
                           Donation to the UNM Health Science Center.
R-    11-28-    Not        Resolution Establishing the City Council's Budget Priorities and Strategies
2022- 2022     Included    for the Fiscal Year 2024 Operating Budget and the 2023 General Obligation
079                        Program.
R-    11-28-    Not
2022- 2022     Included    Resolution Formalizing the City's Urban Tree Canopy Grant Program.
080
R-    12-14-    Not
2022- 2022     Included    Resolution Approving the University Metropolitan Redevelopment Area Plan.
081
R-    12-14-    Not        Resolution Directing the City Administration to Develop a Pilot Program
2022- 2022     Included    Utilizing Noise Cameras for Automated Vehicle Noise Enforcement.
082
R-    12-19-    Not        Resolution Approving an Award from the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban
2022- 2022     Included    Development for Community Development Block Grant Cares Act Funding and an
083                        Award from the State of New Mexico, Beginning in Fiscal Year 2023.
R-    12-19-    Not        Resolution Establishing Legislative and Budget Priorities for the City of
2022- 2022     Included    Albuquerque for the First Session of the 56th New Mexico State Legislature.
084
 
 
Notes
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
2023 Resolutions
Res. No. Date Disposition Short Title
Res.  Date     Disposition Short Title
No.
R-    1-13-     Not        Resolution Establishing Federal Programming and Policy Priorities for the
2023- 2023     Included    City of Albuquerque for Federal Fiscal Years 2023/2024.
001
R-    1-13-     Not        Resolution Approving the Transit Department's Fare Equity Analysis of the
2023- 2023     Included    Proposal (0-22-47) to Resume Fare Collection and Provide Longterm Free
002                        Passes.
R-                         Resolution Accepting an Award from Bernalillo County to Increase Emergency
2023- 1-13-     Not        Shelter Beds for Families with Children Experiencing Homelessness in
003   2023     Included    Albuquerque and Providing an Appropriation to the Department of Family and
                           Community Services, Beginning in Fiscal Year 2023.
R-    1-26-     Not        Resolution Approving the Transit Department's 2022 Updated Public Transit
2023- 2023     Included    Agency Safety Plan.
004
R-                         A Nuisance, Substandard Dwelling or Structure in Need of Abatement at 158
2023- 1-26-     Not        Chama St NE, Within the City Limits of Albuquerque, New Mexico is so
005   2023     Included    Ruined, Damaged and Dilapidated as to Be a Menace to the Public Comfort,
                           Health, Peace or Safety and That it Is to Be Required to Be Removed.
R-    1-26-     Not        Resolution Amending the Adopted Capital Implementation Program of the City
2023- 2023     Included    of Albuquerque by Approving New Projects, Supplementing Current
006                        Appropriations and Changing the Scope of Existing Projects.
R-                         A Nuisance, Substandard Dwelling or Structure in Need of Abatement at 1301
2023- 1-26-     Not        Gerald Ave SE Within the City Limits of Albuquerque, New Mexico Is So
007   2023     Included    Ruined, Damaged and Dilapidated As to Be a Menace to the Public Comfort,
                           Health, Peace or Safety and That it Is to Be Required to Be Removed.
                           Resolution Relating to the Redevelopment, Leasing and Sale of a
                           Metropolitan Redevelopment Project Within the Central/Highland/Upper Nob
                           Hill Metropolitan Redevelopment Area Consistent with the Terms of the
                           Central/Highland/Upper Nob Hill Redevelopment Plan; Approving the
                           Metropolitan Redevelopment Application Entitled "Silver Townhomes, LLC; The
                           Central/Highland/Upper Nob Hill Metropolitan Redevelopment Application";
R-    1-26-     Not        Authorizing the Acquisition of Land and Existing Improvements and
2023- 2023     Included    Construction of 20 Townhome Units Within the Metropolitan Redevelopment
008                        Area; Authorizing the Disposition by Lease and Sale of the City's Interest
                           in Such Project to Silver Townhomes, LLC, its Successors and Assigns;
                           Authorizing the Execution and Delivery of a Lease Agreement, in Form, and
                           Other Documents in Connection with the Project; Making Certain
                           Determinations And Findings Relating to the Project; Ratifying Certain
                           Actions Taken Previously; and Repealing All Actions Inconsistent with This
                           Resolution.
R-    1-26-     Not        Resolution Amending the Adopted Capital Implementation Program of the City
2023- 2023     Included    of Albuquerque by Supplementing Current Appropriations.
009
R-                         Resolution Approving and Authorizing the Acceptance of Grant Funds from
2023- 1-26-     Not        U.S. Department of Treasury and Amending the Adopted Capital Program of the
010   2023     Included    City of Albuquerque to Provide an Appropriation to the Parks and Recreation
                           Department.
R-                         Resolution Amending the Adopted Capital Improvement Program for the City of
2023- 2-13-     Not        Albuquerque Aviation Department by Transferring Funds to Existing Projects,
011   2023     Included    Approving New Projects, Closing Projects, and Accepting Federal Grant
                           Funding.
R-    2-13-     Not        Resolution Approving and Authorizing the Filing of a Grant Application for
2023- 2023     Included    the Covid-19 and Influenza Vaccine Uptake Initiative with the National
012                        Council on Aging, for Fiscal Year 2023 Through Fiscal Year 2024.
R-                         Resolution Approving and Authorizing the Filing of a Grant Application for
2023- 3-9-2023  Not        Rapid Transit Operating Costs with the Federal Transit Administration (FTA)
013            Included    of the U.S. Department of Transportation and Providing for an Appropriation
                           to the Transit Department.
R-              Not        Resolution Amending the Level A Community Master Plan for Mesa Del Sol to
2023- 3-9-2023 Included    Designate an Approximately 500 Acre Site as a Portion of the Employment
014                        Center.
R-              Not        Resolution Approving and Authorizing a Certified Local Government Subgrant
2023- 3-9-2023 Included    and Providing an Appropriation to the Planning Department.
015
R-                         Resolution Amending the Adopted Capital Implementation Program of the City
2023- 3-9-2023  Not        of Albuquerque by Supplementing Current Appropriations for New Federal
016            Included    Funds Received Through the Mid Region Council of Governments Metropolitan
                           Planning Organization and the New Mexico Department of Transportation.
                           Resolution Declaring the City's Intent to Collaborate with Bernalillo
                           County in the Acquisition, Construction, Rehabilitation, and Provision of
R-              Not        Affordable Housing for the Greater Benefit of All Residents of the City of
2023- 3-9-2023 Included    Albuquerque and Bernalillo County; Identifying Future Actions to Include
017                        Exploring the Viability of Combining the City's Housing Authority and
                           Programs with the Bernalillo County Housing Department; and Adjusting
                           Fiscal Year 2023 Operating Appropriations.
R-              Not        Resolution Approving and Authorizing a Certified Local Government Subgrant
2023- 3-9-2023 Included    and Providing an Appropriation to the Planning Department.
018
R-              Not        Resolution Approving the Transit Department's Service Equity Analysis of
2023- 3-9-2023 Included    Proposed Service Suspensions Due to Staffing Shortages.
019
                           Resolution Naming the Pillar Adjacent to the Auxiliary Stage on the West
R-              Not        End of Civic Plaza as the "Ken Sanchez Pillar of the Community" In Honor of
2023- 3-9-2023 Included    the Late City Councilor Ken Sanchez for His Dedication and Commitment to
020                        Our Great City as an Albuquerque City Councilor, Bernalillo County
                           Commissioner and Community Leader.
                           Resolution A Nuisance, Substandard Dwelling or Structure in Need of
R-    3-13-     Not        Abatement at 629 San Mateo Blvd SE Within the City Limits of Albuquerque,
2023- 2023     Included    New Mexico is so Ruined, Damaged and Dilapidated as to be a Menace to the
021                        Public Comfort, Health, Peace or Safety and That it Is to Be Required to Be
                           Removed.
R-              Not        Resolution Prioritizing the Maintenance, Restoration, and Active Use of the
2023- 3-9-2023 Included    Atchison, Topeka, and Santa Fe Railway Fire Station.
022
                         
                         
                           Resolution Relating to the Redevelopment, Leasing and Sale of a
                           Metropolitan Redevelopment Project Within the Downtown 2025 Metropolitan
                           Redevelopment Area Consistent with the Terms Of the Downtown 2025
                           Metropolitan Redevelopment Plan; Approving the Metropolitan Redevelopment
                           Application Entitled "The Downtowner Redevelopment Tax Abatement
R-                         Application"; Authorizing the Acquisition of Land and Existing Improvements
2023- 3-28-     Not        and Construction of a Building Within the Downtown 2025 Metropolitan
025   2023     Included    Redevelopment Area; Authorizing The Disposition by Lease and Sale of the
                           City's Interest in Such Project to Alb. Downtowner, Llc, its Successors and
                           Assigns; Authorizing the Execution and Delivery of a Lease Agreement, In
                           Form, and Other Documents in Connection with the Project; Making Certain
                           Determinations and Findings Relating to the Project; Ratifying Certain
                           Actions Taken Previously; and Repealing All Actions Inconsistent with this
                           Resolution.
R-    3-29-     Not        Resolution Approving and Authorizing the Acceptance of Grant Funds from the
2023- 2023     Included    New Mexico Economic Development Department and Providing an Appropriation
026                        to the Parks and Recreation Department.
                           Resolution City of Albuquerque Project Recommendations to the Mid·Region
R-    3-30-     Not        Council of Governments for Inclusion in the 2040 and 2045 Metropolitan Plan
2023- 2023     Included    and for Consideration for Federal Funding in the Proposed FY 2020 to FY
027   (Passed)             2025 Transportation Improvement Program for the Albuquerque Metropolitan
                           Planning Area.
R-    3-28-     Not        Resolution Authorizing the Giving of Notices for Bids for the Sale of the
2023- 2023     Included    $19,300,000 City of Albuquerque, New Mexico General Obligation General
028                        Purpose Bonds, Series 2023A.
                           Resolution Approving and Authorizing the Acceptance and Use of the
R-    4-17-     Not        Department of Justice, Office for Victims of Crime, Byrne Discretionary
2023- 2023     Included    Community Project Funding/Byrne Discretionary Grants Program Award
029                        Providing an Appropriation to the Albuquerque Community Safety Department
                           Beginning in Fiscal Year 2023.
R-    4-17-     Not        Resolution Approving and Authorizing the Filing of a Grant Application for
2023- 2023     Included    the Route 66 Corridor Preservation Program, for Fiscal Year 2023 Through
030                        Fiscal Year 2024.
R-    4-17-     Not        Resolution Approving the Transit Department's Fare Equity Analysis of the
2023- 2023     Included    Proposal (0-23-71) for Permanent Zero Fares for Art and Sunvan Service.
031
R-              Not        Resolution Approving the Programming of Funds and Projects for the 2023-
2023- 5-1-2023 Included    2032 Decade Plan for Capital Improvements Including the 2023 Two-year
032                        Capital Budget.
R-    4-24-     Not        Resolution Directing the Human Resources and Finance and Administrative
2023- 2023     Included    Departments to Evaluate Bilingual Pay Differential Programs for City
033                        Employees.
R-                         Resolution Approving and Authorizing the Acceptance of Grant Funds from the
2023- 4-24-     Not        New Mexico State Library for the Basic State Grants In Aid and Providing
034   2023     Included    for an Appropriation to the Department of Arts & Culture in Fiscal Year
                           2023.
R-    4-24-     Not        Resolution Approving Two Awards from Bernalillo County Beginning in Fiscal
2023- 2023     Included    Year 2023.
035
R-                         Resolution Approving and Authorizing a Grant Application to the U.S.
2023- 4-24-     Not        Department of Housing and Urban Development for the 2023 Continuum of Care
036   2023     Included    Grant and Providing an Appropriation to the Department of Family and
                           Community Services, for Fiscal Year 2023 and Fiscal Year 2024.
R-    5-18-     Not
2023- 2023     Included    Resolution Approving the Menaul Metropolitan Redevelopment Area Plan.
037
                           Resolution Adopting the 2023-2027 Consolidated Plan, Program Year 2023
R-                         Action Plan and Program Investment Summary for the Expenditure of Community
2023- 5-18-     Not        Development Block Grant (CDBG), Home Investment Partnerships Program (HOME)
038   2023     Included    and Emergency Solutions Grant (ESG) Funds; Providing an Appropriation to
                           the Department of Family & Community Services for 2023 U.S. Department of
                           Housing and Urban Development (HUD) Entitlement Funds.
                           Resolution Declaring the City's Intent to Collaborate with Albuquerque
                           Public Schools to Create a Program to Prevent Children's Exposure to Trauma
R-    5-18-     Not        and Violence, Mitigate Negative Effects of Childhood Exposure to Trauma,
2023- 2023     Included    and to Increase Knowledge and Awareness of this Issue; Directing the
039                        Albuquerque Police Department, Albuquerque Fire and Rescue, and the
                           Albuquerque Community Safety Department to Enact Protocols for First
                           Responder Scenarios That Involve School-aged Youth.
R-    5-26-     Not        Resolution Establishing One-Year Objectives for the City of Albuquerque in
2023- 2023     Included    Fiscal Year 2024; to Meet Five-Year Goals.
040
R-                         Resolution Appropriating Funds for Operating the Government of the City of
2023- 5-26-     Not        Albuquerque for Fiscal Year 2024, Beginning July 1, 2023 and Ending June
041   2023     Included    30, 2024; Adjusting Fiscal Year 2023 Appropriations; and Appropriating
                           Capital Funds.
R-                         Resolution Declaring an Interim Stay-of-Enforcement on Certain Temporary
2023- 5-26-     Not        Use Restrictions in the Integrated Development Ordinances as They Apply to
042   2023     Included    Film Production; Directing Staff to Propose an Amendment to the Integrated
                           Development Ordinance to Create a Temporary Use for Film Production.
R-    5-15-     Not        Resolution Establishing the City Council President or Their Designee as the
2023- 2023     Included    City Representative on the Albuquerque Regional Economic Alliance (AREA)
043   (passed)             Board of Directors.
R-    5-18-     Not        Resolution Declaring a Position on Albuquerque-Bernalillo County Air
2023- 2023     Included    Quality Control Board Petition 2022-3.
044
R-    6-20-     Not        Resolution Approving and Authorizing the Acceptance of Grant Funds from the
2023- 2023     Included    New Mexico State Highway and Transportation Department and Providing an
045                        Appropriation to the Parks and Recreation Department in Fiscal Year 2023.
R-    6-20-     Not        Resolution to Support Pollinator Conservation Efforts and to Recommit to
2023- 2023     Included    Bee City USA Standards
046
R-    6-20-     Not        Resolution Requiring the Solid Waste Management Department to Submit a
2023- 2023     Included    Report on the Shopping Cart Collection Pilot.
047
R-                         Resolution Approving and Authorizing the Filing of Grant Applications and
2023- 6-20-     Not        the Acceptance of Potential Grant Awards for Multiple City Departments from
048   2023     Included    Associated Grantor Agencies and Providing for an Appropriation to the City
                           of Albuquerque.
                           Resolution a Nuisance, Substandard Dwelling or Structure in Need of
R-    6-30-     Not        Abatement at 3709 Lombardy Rd NW 87105, AKA: 3711 Lombardy Rd NW 87105
2023- 2023     Included    Within the City Limits of Albuquerque, New Mexico is so Ruined, Damaged and
049                        Dilapidated as to Be a Menace to the Public Comfort, Health, Peace or
                           Safety and that it is to Be Required to Be Removed.
R-                         Resolution Approving and Authorizing the Filing of a Grant Application for
2023- 6-30-     Not        Broadband Marketing and Outreach Costs with the Federal Communications
050   2023     Included    Commission/Consumer and Governmental Affairs Bureau and Providing for an
                           Appropriation to the Department of Technology and Innovation.
R-                         Resolution Approving and Authorizing the Acceptance of Grant Funds from the
2023- 6-30-     Not        Department of Housing and Urban Development (HUD) Community Project Funding
051   2023     Included    Grant and Providing an Appropriation to the Parks and Recreation Department
                           in Fiscal Year 2023.
R-    6-30-     Not        Resolution Approving and Authorizing a Grant Application from the Petsmart
2023- 2023     Included    Charities and Providing an Appropriation to the City of Albuquerque Animal
052                        Welfare Department in Fiscal Year 2023/2024.
R-    6-30-     Not        Resolution Appropriating State Funds from the New Mexico Environment
2023- 2023     Included    Department's Volkswagen Environmental Mitigation Trust Program for Diesel
053                        Emission Reduction Projects Throughout New Mexico.
R-    6-30-     Not        Resolution Concerning the Local Election to Be Held in the City of
2023- 2023     Included    Albuquerque on November 7, 2023.
054
                           Resolution Relating to the Redevelopment, Leasing and Sale of a
                           Metropolitan Redevelopment Project Within the Historic Central Metropolitan
                           Redevelopment Area Consistent with the Terms of the Historic Central
                           Metropolitan Redevelopment Plan; Approving the Metropolitan Redevelopment
                           Application Entitled "The Pearl Redevelopment Tax Abatement Application";
R-                         Authorizing the Acquisition of Land and Existing Improvements And
2023- 6-30-     Not        Construction of a Building Within the Historic Central Metropolitan
055   2023     Included    Redevelopment Area; Authorizing the Disposition By Lease and Sale of the
                           City's Interest in Such Project to Rembe Silver Lofts, LLC, its Successors
                           and Assigns; Authorizing the Execution and Delivery of a Lease Agreement,
                           in Form, and Other Documents in Connection with the Project; Making Certain
                           Determinations and Findings Relating to the Project; Ratifying Certain
                           Actions Taken Previously; and Repealing All Actions Inconsistent with this
                           Resolution.
R-    6-30-     Not
2023- 2023     Included    Resolution Approving the Transit Department's 2023 Title VI Program.
056
                           Resolution Relating to the Redevelopment, Leasing and Sale of a
                           Metropolitan Redevelopment Project Within the University Metropolitan
                           Redevelopment Area Consistent with the Terms Of the University Metropolitan
                           Area Redevelopment Plan; Approving the Metropolitan Redevelopment
                           Application Entitled "El Parador Redevelopment Tax Abatement Application";
R-    6-30-     Not        Authorizing the Acquisition of Land and Existing Improvements and
2023- 2023     Included    Construction of a Building Within the University Metropolitan Redevelopment
057                        Area; Authorizing the Disposition by Lease and Sale of the City's Interest
                           in Such Project to 201 Yale, LLC, its Successors and Assigns; Authorizing
                           the Execution and Delivery of a Lease Agreement, in Form, and Other
                           Documents in Connection with the Project; Making Certain Determinations and
                           Findings Relating to the Project; Ratifying Certain Actions Taken
                           Previously; and Repealing All Actions Inconsistent with this Resolution.
R-    6-30-     Not        Resolution Adopting the FY 2024 - FY 2025 Two-Year Urban Enhancement Trust
2023- 2023     Included    Fund Program and Appropriating Funds for the Urban Enhancement Program's
058                        Projects.
                           Resolution Directing the Administration to Convert Tijeras Avenue and
R-                         Marquette Avenue from One-Way Roadways to Two-Way Roadways Between Fourth
2023- 6-30-     Not        Street and Sixth Street, to Conduct A Study to Convert the Sections East of
059   2023     Included    Fourth Street to Two-Way Streets and Directing That a Four-Way Stop Replace
                           the Traffic Signal at Silver Street and Third Street as is Consistent with
                           Adopted City Policy; Providing an Appropriation for Necessary Improvements.
                           Resolution Approving a Joint Powers Agreement Between the City of
R-    6-30-     Not        Albuquerque and the County Commissioners of Bernalillo County Establishing
2023- 2023     Included    the Middle Rio Grande Housing Collaborative and Adjusting Fiscal Year 2023
060                        Operating Appropriations to Support the Middle Rio Grande Housing
                           Collaborative.
R-    6-30-     Not        Resolution Approving and Authorizing the Filing of a Grant Application for
2023- 2023     Included    the Choice Neighborhoods Planning Grant with the U.S. Department of Housing
061                        and Urban Development (HUD), for Fiscal Year 2023 Through Fiscal Year 2024.
                           Resolution Concerning a Bond Election to Be Held in the City of Albuquerque
                           at the next Regular Local Election on November 7, 2023: Submitting to a
                           Vote of the Qualified Electors at Such Regular Local Election Certain
R-    6-30-     Not        Questions for Authorizing the Issuance of General Obligation Bonds in
2023- 2023     Included    Varying Principal Amounts and for Specified Public Purposes And, Providing
062                        the Form of the Bond Questions and the Designation Clause for Such
                           Questions on the Ballot; Prescribing Other Details in Connection with Such
                           Bond Election and Bonds: and Ratifying Action Previously Taken in
                           Connection Therewith.
R-    6-30-     Not        Resolution Approving and Authorizing the Filing of a Grant Application for
2023- 2023     Included    American Rescue Plan (ARP) Funding with the Federal Transit Administration
063                        (FTA) of the U.S Department of Transportation by the Transit Department.
R-    8-18-     Not        Resolution Declaring the City's Intent to Collaborate with Bernalillo
2023- 2023     Included    County to Revitalize Sunset Road and Isleta Boulevard, from Central Avenue
064                        to Isleta Pueblo.
R-    8-18-     Not        Resolution Updating the 2014 Rail Yards Master Plan Which Provides the
2023- 2023     Included    Policy Framework and Regulations to Guide the Redevelopment of the Rail
065                        Yards Site.
R-                         Resolution Directing the Transit Department to Establish a Policy for
2023- 9-5-2023  Not        Removing Bus Wraps from Buses and Developing a Plan to Provide Adequate
066            Included    Advertising Space Inside of Buses, at Bus Stops, and Other Locations Where
                           it Is Most Appropriate.
                           Resolution Amending the Level a Community Framework Plan for Mesa Del Sol
R-                         to Change the Allowable Maximum Building Height in the 92-acre Urban Center
2023- 9-1-2023  Not        from 60-feet to 80-feet and up to 128-feet with Applicable Height Bonuses
067            Included    and Would Not Change the Maximum Building Height in the 88-acre Community
                           Center of 60-feet, but Would Allow up to 84-feet with Applicable Height
                           Bonuses.
R-    9-20-     Not        Resolution Approving the FY2024 Audit Plan as Submitted by the
2023- 2023     Included    Accountability in Government Oversight Committee
068
R-                         Resolution Amending the Adopted Capital Improvement Program for the City of
2023- 9-20-     Not        Albuquerque-Aviation Department by Transferring Funds to Existing Projects,
069   2023     Included    Approving New Projects, Closing Projects, and Accepting Federal and State
                           Grant Funding.
                           Resolution Approving and Authorizing the Filing of a Grant Application to
R-    9-20-     Not        Rebuild the Uptown Transit Center as a Joint Development Project with the
2023- 2023     Included    U.S. Department of Transportation "Rebuilding American Infrastructure with
070                        Sustainability and Equity" (RAISE) Grant Program and Providing for an
                           Appropriation to the Transit Department.
R-    9-20-     Not        Resolution Assessing District Benefit Fees for the Albuquerque Tourism
2023- 2023     Included    Marketing District in Accordance with the Approved Budget.
071
R-    9-20-     Not        Resolution Supporting a Public-Private Economic Development Mainstreet
2023- 2023     Included    Project with the Revitalize San Pedro Partnership.
072
R-    9-22-                Resolution Amending F/S R-08-47 with Respect to the Composition of the Rail
2023- 2023     1-17-3      Yards Advisory Board.
073
R-    9-20-     Not        Resolution Amending the City of Albuquerque Component Capital
2023- 2023     Included    Implementation Program to Amend the Project Value for the Ventura Street
074                        and Holly Avenue Traffic Circle Project.
R-    Unsigned  Not        Resolution Directing the Administration of the City of Albuquerque to
2023- by Mayor Included    Install Street Trees at the Albuquerque Bio Park, Making an Appropriation.
075
R-    10-15-    Not        Resolution Supporting an Application to the New Mexico Water Trust Fund
2023- 2023     Included    Board for a Grant for the Construction of a Stormwater Pond On John Street
076                        Southwest.
R-                         Resolution Approving and Authorizing the Filing of a Grant Application for
2023- 10-16-    Not        Transit Buses Purchase with the Federal Transit Administration (FTA) of the
077   2023     Included    U.S. Department of Transportation and Providing for an Appropriation to the
                           Transit Department.
R-                         Resolution Approving and Authorizing the Acceptance of 2020 Go Bonds from
2023- 10-16-    Not        the State of New Mexico for Public Libraries Albuquerque/Bernalillo County
078   2023     Included    Library System, and Providing For an Appropriation to the Department of
                           Arts & Culture in Fiscal Year 2024.
R-    10-15-    Not        Resolution Approving and Authorizing the Application for and Use of Grant
2023- 2023     Included    Funds for the Carbon Pollution Reduction Grant and Authorizing an
079                        Appropriation to the General Services Department in Fiscal Year 2024.
R-                         Resolution Directing the City of Albuquerque Transit Department and Rio
2023- 10-15-    Not        Metro Regional Transit District to Conduct a Study for Consolidating ABQ
080   2023     Included    RIDE and Rio Metro and Develop a Consolidation Plan; Appropriating Funding
                           to Fund the Study and Plan.
R-    10-23-
2023- 2023     3-2-4       Resolution Determining Reasonable Notice of Public Meetings of the City
081   Unsigned             Council.
      by Mayor
R-    10-23-
2023- 2023      Not        Resolution Setting the Official List of City Council Meetings from January
082   Unsigned Included    2024 Through December 2024.
      by Mayor
R-    10-15-    Not        Resolution Renaming the East Central Health & Social Service Center in
2023- 2023     Included    Honor of Former City Councilor Ruth Adams.
083
R-    10-15-    Not        Resolution Urging Comprehensive Legislative Action for Public Safety and
2023- 2023     Included    Behavioral Health Improvement at the next Legislative Session.
084
      10-23-               Resolution Affirming Support for the Fundamental Right to Keep and Bear
R-    2023      Not        Arms, to Urge the Governor to Take No Actions That Violate Constitutional
2023- Unsigned Included    Rights, and to Uphold the Duty of Government Officials to Support the
085   by Mayor             Constitution and Laws of the State of New Mexico and the United States of
                           America.
R-    10-15-    Not        Resolution Approving and Authorizing the Filing of a Grant Application for
2023- 2023     Included    Section 5307 Federal Transit Administration Funds for Planning and Design
086                        of the Uptown Transit Center (Uptown Connect) Joint Development Project.
R-                         Resolution Approving and Authorizing the Acceptance of a Lease Between the
2023- 10-15-    Not        Albuquerque Hispano Chamber of Commerce ("AHCC" or "Landlord"), and the
087   2023     Included    City of Albuquerque, a New Mexico Municipal Corporation ("City" or
                           "Tenant").
R-                         Resolution Directing the Department of Family and Community Services to
2023- 10-20-    Not        Enter into a Memorandum of Understanding with Bernalillo County to Allocate
088   2023     Included    Funds to the Metropolitan Detention Center for Opioid Treatment and
                           Recovery.
R-    10-24-    Not        Resolution Amending the Adopted Capital Implementation Program of the City
2023- 2023     Included    of Albuquerque by Approving New Projects, Supplementing Current
089                        Appropriations and Changing the Scope of Existing Projects.
R-    10-26-
2023- 2023      Not        Resolution Establishing a Policy for the Expenditure of Opioid Settlement
090   Unsigned Included    Monies.
      by Mayor
R-    10-26-               Resolution Directing the City of Albuquerque to Maintain Landscaping,
2023- 2023      Not        Streetscaping, Signage, Transit Facilities and Other Associated Assets
091   Unsigned Included    along Central Avenue/Route 66 Throughout City Limits.
      by Mayor
R-    11-22-
2023- 2023      Not        Resolution Designating Fund ‘305 Misc.' as the 'Housing Forward Fund' and
092   Unsigned Included    Requiring the Administration to Provide an Annual Report.
      by Mayor
R-                         Resolution Approving and Authorizing the Acceptance of Grant Awards From
2023- 11-21-    Not        the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) and Providing for an
093   2023     Included    Appropriation to the Department of Finance And Administration for Fiscal
                           Years 2024, 2025 and 2026.
R-    11-21-    Not        Resolution Directing the City of Albuquerque Transit Department and Rio
2023- 2023     Included    Metro Regional Transit District to Conduct a Study for Considering
094                        Consolidation; Appropriating Funding for the Study.
R-    11-21-    Not        Resolution Establishing Legislative and Budget Priorities for the City of
2023- 2023     Included    Albuquerque for the Second Session of the 55th New Mexico State
095                        Legislature.
R-    11-21-    Not        Resolution Concerning the Municipal Runoff Election to Be Held in the City
2023- 2023     Included    of Albuquerque, New Mexico, on Tuesday, the Twelfth Day of December, 2023.
096
R-    11-22-    Not        Resolution Establishing a Moratorium for the Albuquerque-Bernalillo County
2023- 2023     Included    Air Quality Control Board to Act under Chapter 9, Article 5, Part 1 ROA
097                        1994, the Joint Air Quality Control Board Ordinance until February 1, 2024.
R-    12-5-     Not        Resolution Approving and Authorizing the Gary John Gartshore Estate
2023- 2023     Included    Distribution and Providing an Appropriation to the City of Albuquerque
098                        Animal Welfare Department in Fiscal Year 2024.
R-              Not        Resolution Requiring the Department of Family and Community Services to
2023-         Included    Plan, Design, and Construct an Outdoor Recreational Space at the Westside
099                        Emergency Housing Center. Providing an Appropriation to the Department.
R-    12-5-     Not        Resolution Commissioning Commemorative Service Plaques and Dedicating Space
2023- 2023     Included    in City Hall for Honoring City of Albuquerque City Councilors.
100
R-                         A Resolution Relating to the Proposed Agreement Between the City of
2023- 12-5-     Not        Albuquerque's Economic Development Department and the State Economic
101   2023     Included    Development Department to Accept a Grant for an Advanced Waste Water
                           Facility at Mesa Del Sol.
                           Resolution Amending Bill Number R-13-220, Enactment Number R-2013-114,
R-    12-20-               Titled: Establishing a Policy for the Timeframes for Purging of License
2023- 2023     3-11-5      Plate Reader Records by the Albuquerque Police Department; to Extend the
102                        Time Period the Albuquerque Police Department May Keep Information from
                           License Plate Readers Before Purging the Information.
                           Resolution Approving the Application and Petition of Pulte Homes of New
                           Mexico, Inc. for Formation of the Estates at La Cuentista Public
                           Improvement District Pursuant to the Public Improvement District Act, NMSA
                           1978, §§ 5-11-1 to -27 (2001, as Amended Through 2019) and Chapter 5,
                           Article 9, ROA 1994, as Amended; Making Findings in Connection with the
                           Application and Petition and Supporting Documentation Requesting Approval
                           of the Formation of the District; Determining the Real Property to Be
                           Included Within the District and the Purposes for Which the District Is
                           Being Formed; Approving the General Plan, Feasibility Study, Rate, Method
R-                         of Apportionment and Manner of Collection of a Special Levy to Be Imposed
2023- 12-20-    Not        upon Real Property Within the District, and Approving a Development
103   2023     Included    Agreement for the District; Establishing Parameters for the Issuance of
                           Special Levy Bonds; Authorizing the District to Issue Subordinate
                           Obligations; Providing for Governance of the District; Providing That Bonds
                           and Other Obligations of the District Shall Not Be Obligations of the City;
                           Waiving and Canceling Certain Requirements to Formation of a Public
                           Improvement District; Incorporating Contingencies Excluding Certain Land
                           from the District If and to the Extent Not Acquired by the Applicant by a
                           Date Certain; Ratifying Certain Actions Heretofore Taken; Repealing All
                           Actions Inconsistent with this Formation Resolution; Directing the Mailing
                           of a Notice of Adoption of this Formation Resolution by the City Clerk; and
                           Taking Related Action.
R-    12-22-
2023- 2023      Not        Resolution Amending Resolution R-23-152 to Establish a Policy Prohibiting
104   Unsigned Included    Advertising on the Exterior of Transit Buses and Paratransit Vehicles.
      by Mayor
                           Resolution Approving and Authorizing the Filing of the Attached Grant
R-                         Application for the American Rescue Plan Air Quality Monitoring Grant with
2023- 12-20-    Not        the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency and Providing an Appropriation to
105   2023     Included    the Environmental Health Department in Fiscal Year 2023-2024. This Grant
                           Was Applied for April 4, 2022, and the Funds Were Received July 1, 2022. No
                           Grant Funds Have Been Spent.
R-    12-20-    Not        Resolution Approving the Transit Department's 2023 Updated Public Transit
2023- 2023     Included    Agency Safety Plan.
106
                           Resolution Relating to the Redevelopment, Leasing and Sale of a
                           Metropolitan Redevelopment Project Within the Central/Highland/Upper Nob
                           Hill Metropolitan Redevelopment Area Consistent with the Terms of the
                           Centrauhighland/Upper Nob Hill Metropolitan Redevelopment Plan; Approving
                           the Metropolitan Redevelopment Application Entitled "The Sixty-six
                           Redevelopment Tax Abatement Application"; Authorizing the Acquisition of
R-    12-20-    Not        Land and Existing Improvements and Construction of a Building Within the
2023- 2023     Included    Central/Highland/Upper Nob Hill Metropolitan Redevelopment Area;
107                        Authorizing the Disposition by Lease and Sale of the City's Interest in
                           Such Project to Fundero Development, Inc., its Successors and Assigns;
                           Authorizing the Execution and Delivery of a Lease Agreement, in Form, and
                           Other Documents in Connection with The Project; Making Certain
                           Determinations and Findings Relating to the Project; Ratifying Certain
                           Actions Taken Previously; and Repealing All Actions Inconsistent with this
                           Resolution.
R-    12-20-    Not        Resolution Adjusting Fiscal Year 2023 Appropriations for Certain Funds and
2023- 2023     Included    Programs to Provide for Actual Expenditures; and Adjusting Fiscal Year 2024
108                        Operating, Grant, and Capital Appropriations.
R-    12-20-    Not        Resolution Appropriating Funds to the Capital Implementation Program for
2023- 2023     Included    The 2023 General Obligation Program.
109
 
 
Notes
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
2024 Resolutions
Res. No. Date Disposition Short Title
Res.  Date     Disposition Short Title
No.
R-                         Resolution Amending the Level a Community Framework Plan for Mesa Del Sol to
2024- 1-22-     Not        Change the Allowable Maximum Building Height from 80-feet to 110-feet and
001   2024     Included    Allow NR-GM Land Uses on Specific Properties in the Employment Center on a
                           Case-by-case Basis as Approved by the EPC.
                           Resolution to Approve and Authorize the Filing of a Grant Application and
                           the Acceptance of the Grant Award for the Department of Family & Community
                           Services Providing for an Appropriation to The City of Albuquerque, for the
R-    1-31-     Not        City of Albuquerque Medical Sobering Center with the U.S. Department of
2024- 2024     Included    Health and Human Services, Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services
002                        Administration for the Medical Sobering Center and Providing An
                           Appropriation to the Department of Family & Community Services Beginning
                           Fiscal Year 2024.
                           R-2024-049 Rescinds Priorities List of R-2024-002.
R-                         Resolution Establishing Priorities for the 2025 Capital Improvements Plan;
2024- 1-31-     Not        Defining the Criteria to Be Used in Rating Project Proposals; Assigning
003   2024     Included    Weights to the Criteria; Allocating Amounts for Different Purposes Within
                           the 2025 General Obligation Bond Program.
R-    1-31-     Not        Resolution Establishing Federal Programming and Policy Priorities for the
2024- 2024     Included    City of Albuquerque for Federal Fiscal Years 2024/2025.
004
R-    2-12-     Not        Resolution Creating a Working Group to Explore Options and Make
2024- 2024     Included    Recommendations to Reimagine the Motel Voucher Program Within the City, to
005                        Be Known as the Hospitality Renewal Initiative Working Group.
R-                         Resolution Approving and Authorizing the Acceptance of Rural Supplemental
2024- 2-12-     Not        Grant Funds from the Department of Commerce Minority Business Development
006   2024     Included    Agency and Providing an Appropriation to the Economic Development Department
                           for Fiscal Year 2024.
R-    2-26-     Not        Resolution Amending the Adopted Capital Implementation Program of the City
2024- 2024     Included    of Albuquerque by Supplementing Current Appropriations.
007
R-    2-29-
2024- 2024      Not        Resolution Directing the Administration to Create a Program for the Disposal
008   Unsigned Included    of Human Feces on Properties in the City of Albuquerque.
      by Mayor
R-                         Resolution Creating a Central Avenue Right of Way Improvements Project
2024- 2-26-     Not        Between 1st and 8th Streets, Creating a Project to Convert Marquette and
009   2024     Included    Tijeras Avenues to Two-Way Roadways, Establishing Priorities, and Rescinding
                           Resolution 23-143.
                           Resolution Directing the Albuquerque Police Department, the Albuquerque
R-    2-29-                Community Safety Department, and the Albuquerque Planning Department to
2024- 2024      Not        Report and Present to the City Council on a Quarterly Basis on Initiatives
010   Unsigned Included    to Prepare Central Avenue Throughout City Limits for the Route 66 Centennial
      by Mayor             Celebration; Establishing the Method for Reporting and Presenting as
                           Mandated in Resolution-23-175.
                           Resolution Approving and Authorizing the Filing of the Attached Grant
R-    3-14-     Not        Application for a Byrne Discretionary Community Project Grant with the U.S.
2024- 2024     Included    Department of Justice, Bureau of Justice Affairs and Providing an
011                        Appropriation to the Albuquerque Community Safety Department in Fiscal Year
                           2024.
R-    3-14-     Not        Resolution Approving and Authorizing Application for a Grant from the State
2024- 2024     Included    Cultural Properties Restoration Fund.
012
R-                         Resolution Approving and Authorizing the Application for and Use of Grant
2024- 3-14-     Not        Funds for the Community Energy Efficiency Development (Ceed) Block Grant and
013   2024     Included    Authorizing an Appropriation to the General Services Department in Fiscal
                           Year 2025.
                           Resolution Establishing the Route 66 Centennial Celebration 2025-2026
R-    3-14-     Not        Project Plan as a Policy Plan; Designating the Department of Arts and
2024- 2024     Included    Culture as the Project Plan Coordinator; Directing The Department of Arts
014                        and Culture to Provide City Council With Quarterly Updates per R-23-175 and
                           R-24-11.
R-    3-22-
2024- 2024      Not        Resolution Amending the Official List of City Council Meetings from January
015   Unsigned Included    2024 Through December 2024.
      by Mayor
R-    3-28-     Not        Resolution Approving and Authorizing Certified Local Government Subgrants
2024- 2024     Included    and Providing an Appropriation to the Planning Department.
016
R-                         Resolution Approving and Authorizing the Application for and Use of Grant
2024- 3-28-     Not        Funds for Phase 2 Funding under the Climate Pollution Reduction Grant
017   2024     Included    Program (CPRP), the Implementation Grant, and Authorizing an Appropriation
                           to the General Services Department in Fiscal Year 2025.
R-                         Resolution Authorizing the Giving of Notices for Bids for the Sale of City
2024- 4-4-2024  Not        of Albuquerque, New Mexico General Obligation Bonds Consisting of
018            Included    $102,850,000 General Obligation General Purpose Bonds, Series 2024A, and
                           $9,000,000 General Obligation Storm Sewer Bonds, Series 20248.
R-    3-19-     Not        Resolution Amending the Adopted Capital Implementation Program of the City
2024- 2024     Included    of Albuquerque by Approving New Projects, Supplementing Current
019                        Appropriations and Changing the Scope of Existing Projects.
R-                         Resolution Approving and Authorizing the Filing of an Application for a
2024- 4-12-     Not        Federal Land and Water Conservation Fund Grant for Acquistion of the
020   2024     Included    Northern Sand Dunes Property for Protection and Management in the Major
                           Public Open Space Program.
R-    4-12-     Not
2024- 2024     Included    Resolution Approving City of Albuquerque Alignment of the Rio Grande Trail.
021
R-    4-12-     Not        Resolution Approving and Authorizing the Filing of a Grant Application for a
2024- 2024     Included    2024 State Outdoor Recreation Division Trails + Grant for Expanding and
022                        Improving Disc Golf Facilities.
R-    4-12-     Not        Resolution Approving and Authorizing a Grant Application for Funds from the
2024- 2024     Included    Cities for Financial Empowerment Fund, Inc. by the City of Albuquerque Legal
023                        Department.
R-                         Resolution Establishing a Two-year Policy for the Priority Site Plan
2024- 4-26-     Not        Approval and Construction Permitting of Development Projects That Will
024   2024     Included    Result in Permanent Housing in Centers and Corridors and Development
                           Projects Within Metropolitan Redvelopment Areas.
R-    4-26-     Not
2024- 2024     Included    Resolution Appropriation of Opioid Settlement Funds.
025
R-    4-30-                Resolution Directing the Department of Family and Community Services, Now
2024- 2024      Not        Identified as the Department of Health, Housing and Homelessness, to Prepare
026   Unsigned Included    and Present to the City Council a Report Regarding the Expenditure of City
      by Mayor             Funds on Services to The Unhoused Community.
R-                         Resolution Approving and Authorizing the Filing of a Grant Application for
2024- 4-26-     Not        the New Mexico Tourism Department's Destination Forward Grant Program, for
027   2024     Included    the Route 66 East Gateway Sign Project, For Fiscal Year 2024 Through Fiscal
                           Year 2025.
R-    4-26-     Not        Resolution Approving and Authorizing a Grant Application for Funds from the
2024- 2024     Included    Cities for Financial Empowerment Fund, Inc. by the City of Albuquerque Legal
028                        Department.
                           Resolution Approving and Authorizing the Filing of the Attached Grant
R-    5-17-     Not        Application for a Violence Intervention Fund Grant with the New Mexico
2024- 2024     Included    Department of Health Office of Gun Violence Prevention and Providing an
029                        Appropriation to the Albuquerque Community Safety Department in Fiscal Year
                           2024.
R-    5-31-     Not        Resolution Repealing Article 9 of Chapter 3 of the Code of Resolutions and
2024- 2024     Included    Replacing it with the Sustainability Resolution.
030
R-    5-17-     Not        Resolution Approving and Authorizing the Acceptance of Grant Funds from the
2024- 2024     Included    New Mexico State Library for the Basic State Grants in Aid and Providing for
031                        an Appropriation to the Department of Arts & Culture in Fiscal Year 2024.
R-    5-17-     Not        Resolution Approving and Authorizing the Filing of an Application for a
2024- 2024     Included    Federal Outdoor Recreation Legacy Partnership Program Grant for the
032                        Renovation of Mesa Verde Park.
R-    5-17-     Not        Resolution Adopting an Updated Albuquerque/Bernalillo County Comprehensive
2024- 2024     Included    Plan.
033
R-                         Resolution Approving and Authorizing the Filing of a Grant Application for a
2024- 5-17-     Not        2023 United States Department of Agriculture Forest Service Urban and
034   2024     Included    Community Forestry Inflation Reduction Grant for the Continued Stewardship
                           and Expansion of the Urban Tree Canopy Cover.
                           Resolution Approving the Appointment of a Director to Fill a Vacancy on the
                           Governing Body of the Mesa Del Sol Tax Increment Development Districts 1
R-                         Through 5 Caused by the Resignation of a Certain Director Pursuant to the
2024- 5-17-     Not        Tax Increment for Development Act, NMSA 1978, Sections 5-15-1 Through 28
035   2024     Included    NMSA, as Amended, City Enactment No. 0-2006-44, City Enactments No. R-2006-
                           126, R-2007-001, R-2009-142, R-2010-104, R-2011-060, R-2012-101, R-2012-108,
                           R-2014-095, R-2018-040, and R-2019-014; and Repealing all Actions
                           Inconsistent with this Resolution.
R-                         Resolution Appropriating Funds for Operating the Government of the City of
2024- 5-31-     Not        Albuquerque for Fiscal Year 2025, Beginning July 1, 2024 and Ending June 30,
036   2024     Included    2025; Adjusting Fiscal Year 2024 Appropriations; and Appropriating Capital
                           Funds.
R-    5-31-     Not        Resolution Establishing One-Year Objectives for the City of Albuquerque in
2024- 2024     Included    Fiscal Year 2025; to Meet Five-Year Goals.
037
R-                         Resolution Approving and Authorizing the Filing of Grant Applications and
2024- 5-31-     Not        the Acceptance of Potential Grant Awards for Multiple City Departments from
038   2024     Included    Associated Grantor Agencies and Providing for an Appropriation to the City
                           of Albuquerque; and Appropriating Capital Funds.
                           Resolution Adopting the 2024 Action Plan and Program Investment Summary for
R-                         the Expenditure of Community Development Block Grant (CDBG), Home Investment
2024- 6-14-     Not        Partnerships Program (HOME) and Emergency Solutions Grant (ESG) Funds;
039   2024     Included    Providing an Appropriation to the Department of Family & Community Services
                           for 2024 U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development (HUD) entitlement
                           funds.
                           Resolution Amending the Adopted Capital Improvement Program for the City of
R-    6-14-     Not        Albuquerque - Aviation Department by Transferring Funds to Existing
2024- 2024     Included    Projects, Appropriating Funds for Passenger Facility Charges ("PFC"),
040                        Approving New Projects, Closing Projects, and Accepting Federal and State
                           Grants.
R-                         Resolution Approving and Authorizing a Grant Application to the U.S.
2024- 6-14-     Not        Department of Housing and Urban Development for the Federal Fiscal Year 2023
041   2024     Included    Continuum of Care Grant and Providing an Appropriation to the Department of
                           Family and Community Services, for City Fiscal Years 2024 and 2025.
R-    6-14-     Not        Resolution Approving and Authorizing the Filing of a Grant Application for
2024- 2024     Included    The New Mexico Tourism Department's Destination Forward Grant Program, for
042                        Fiscal Year 2024 Through Fiscal Year 2025.
R-    6-14-     Not        Resolution Directing the Department of Health, Housing, and Homelessness to
2024- 2024     Included    Develop a Pilot and a Budget for a Program To Provide Day Labor for People
043                        Experiencing Homelessness For Fiscal Year 2025.
R-                         Resolution Directing the City Administration to Develop Anti-Human
2024- 6-14-     Not        Trafficking Training and Outreach Programming for City of Albuquerque
044   2024     Included    Employees; Creating Anti-Human Trafficking Public Awareness Campaign;
                           Requiring Anti-Human Trafficking Signs at Major Transportation Hubs.
R-    6-14-     Not        Resolution Confirming the Authority of the Metropolitan Redevelopment
2024- 2024     Included    Agency's Ability to Pursue Tax Increment Financing as Empowered by Companion
045                        Ordinance 0-24-22.
R-    6-14-     Not        Resolution Approving the Attached Grant Application for the State of New
2024- 2024     Included    Mexico Grant Funds in Fiscal Year 2024.
046
                           Resolution Approving an Intergovernmental Agreement Between the City Of
R-                         Albuquerque, the County of Bernalillo, and the Albuquerque Public School
2024- 6-14-     Not        District Board of Education to Reform the Albuquerque Bernalillo County
047   2024     Included    Government Commission as the Local Government Coordinating Commission To
                           Include the City of Albuquerque, the County of Bernalillo, And the
                           Albuquerque Public Schools as the Voting Members.
R-    6-14-     Not        Resolution Allowing the Bernalillo County Improvement Special Assessment
2024- 2024     Included    Program to Operate Within the City of Albuquerque.
048
R-    6-14-     Not        Resolution Adopting the Federal Projects Priorities List for Federal Fiscal
2024- 2024     Included    Years 2024 and 2025. Rescinding the Priorities List Attached to Resolution-
049                        24-2.
                           Resolution Making Findings in Connection with the Aspire Public Improvement
R-                         District's Resolution Authorizing the Issuance and Sale of Special Levy
2024- 6-14-     Not        Revenue Bonds; Ratifying and Approving the Issuance and Sale Of the Aspire
050   2024     Included    Public Improvement District Special Levy Revenue Bonds, Series 2024, as
                           Substantially Consistent with the Requirements of City Ordinance Enactment
                           No. 0-2003-12 and City Council Resolution Enactment No. F/S R-21-184.
R-                         Resolution Approving and Authorizing the Filing of Grant Application and
2024- 6-14-     Not        Acceptance of Grant Awards from the Federal Emergency Management Agency
051   2024     Included    (FEMA) and Providing for an Appropriation To the Department of Finance and
                           Administration for Fiscal Years 2025, 2026 and 2027.
R-    6-14-     Not
2024- 2024     Included    Resolution Assigning Funds from the Sale of the Coronado Dog Park Property.
052
R-    6-17-                Resolution Adopting a Proposition to Be Submitted to the Voters at the next
2024- 2024      Not        General Election to Be Held in the City of Albuquerque Concerning Amending
053   Unsigned Included    Article XIX of the Albuquerque City Charter; Providing the Form of the
      by Mayor             Question and the Designation Clause for Such Question on the Ballot.
R-                         Resolution Establishing a Three-Month Moratorium on Specific Language in
2024- 7-2-2024 Chapter 14, Chapter 14, Article 23 Related to Processes Associated with the Demolition
054            Article 23  of Buildings or Structures to Allow the City Council Time to Consider an
                           Amendment to Rectify Conflicting Language.
R-                         Resolution Adopting a Proposition to Be Submitted to the Voters at the next
2024- 7-3-2024  Not        General Election to Be Held in the City of Albuquerque Concerning Amendments
055            Included    to Article V of the Albuquerque City Charter; Providing the Form of the
                           Question and the Designation Clause for Such Question on the Ballot.
R-                         Resolution Approving and Authorizing the Acceptance of Grant Funds from the
2024- 8-13-     Not        New Mexico State Highway and Transportation Department and Providing an
056   2024     Included    Appropriation to the Parks and Recreation Department in Fiscal Year 2024 and
                           2025.
R-    8-13-     Not        Resolution Rescinding Resolutions-23-152 and Resolution-23-184, Establishing
2024- 2024     Included    a Policy to Allow Advertisements to Be Placed in Appropriate Locations on
057                        Transit Vehicles, Establishing an Advertising Revenue Account.
R-    8-13-     Not        Resolution Amending R-24-8, the Adopted Capital Implementation Program of
2024- 2024     Included    the City of Albuquerque, Related to the Location of the Westside Sports
058                        Complex.
                           Resolution Amending the Rank 3 Master Plan for the Double Eagle II (DeII)
R-    8-13-     Not        Airport to Allow Non-Aeronautical Land Uses, Including Commercial, Lodging,
2024- 2024     Included    Light Industrial, Education, Film Studio, And Renewable Energy Generation,
059                        as Permissive Uses under a New Section of the Master Plan "3.7 Appropriate
                           Land Uses."
                           Resolution Making Findings in Connection with the Inspiration Public
                           Improvement District's Resolution Authorizing the Issuance and Sale of
R-    8-27-     Not        Special Levy Revenue Bonds; Ratifying and Approving the Issuance and Sale of
2024- 2024     Included    the Inspiration Public Improvement District Special Levy Revenue Bonds,
060                        Series 2024, as Substantially Consistent with the Requirements of City
                           Ordinance Enactment No. 0-2003-12 and City Council Resolution No. R-20-33,
                           Enactment No. R-2020-038.
                           Resolution Approving and Authorizing the Acceptance of Grant Funds from the
R-    9-10-     Not        New Mexico Department of Public Safety, 2024 LT Fred Beers Ill Honor Guard
2024- 2024     Included    Distribution Program For Equipment Needed By the Albuquerque Fire Rescue
061                        Honor Guard and Providing an Appropriation to the Albuquerque Fire
                           Department in Fiscal Year 2024.
R-                         Resolution Approving and Authorizing the Acceptance of Grant Funds from the
2024- 9-10-     Not        New Mexico Department of Public Safety, 2024 Executive Order Funds
062   2024     Included    Distribution and Providing an Appropriation to the Albuquerque Fire Rescue
                           Department in Fiscal Year 2024 and 2025.
R-    9-10-     Not        Resolution Approving and Authorizing Acceptance of a Federal Grant for
2024- 2024     Included    Acquisition of the Diamond Rock Property for Protection and Management in
063                        the Major Public Open Space Program.
R-    9-10-     Not        Resolution Amending the Adopted Capital Implementation Program of the City
2024- 2024     Included    of Albuquerque by Approving New Projects, Supplementing Current
064                        Appropriations and Changing the Scope of Existing Projects.
R-                         Resolution Approving and Authorizing the Acceptance of a Grant Award from
2024- 9-10-     Not        the International Rescue Committee (IRC) and Providing for an Appropriation
065   2024     Included    to the Office of Equity and Inclusion in the Department of Finance and
                           Administrative Services for the Fiscal Years 2025-2026.
R-    9-10-     Not        Resolution Relating to the Approval of a Redevelopment Tax Abatement on the
2024- 2024     Included    Park Central Apartments, Developed by Route 66 Multifamily, LLC.
066
R-    9-10-     Not        Resolution Relating to the Approval of a Redevelopment Tax Abatement on the
2024- 2024     Included    Somos Affordable Housing Project, Being Developed by SOL Housing.
067
R-    9-10-     Not        Resolution Relating to the Approval of a Redevelopment Tax Abatement on the
2024- 2024     Included    Highlands Residence Inn & Food Hall, Being Developed by Titan Development.
068
R-    9-10-     Not        Resolution Relating to the Approval of a Redevelopment Tax Abatement on the
2024- 2024     Included    Garfield Townhomes, Developed by Garfield Townhomes LLC and Sunlight
069                        Properties LLC.
                           Resolution Making Findings in Connection with the Vol Terra Public
                           Improvement District's Resolution Authorizing the Issuance and Sale of
R-    9-10-     Not        Special Levy Refunding Revenue Bonds; Ratifying and Approving the Issuance
2024- 2024     Included    and Sale of the Vol Terra Public Improvement District Special Levy Refunding
070                        Revenue Bonds, Series 2024, as Substantially Consistent with the
                           Requirements of City Ordinance Enactment No. 0-2003-12 and City Council
                           Resolution No. R-09-295 Enactment No. R-2009-121.
R-    9-10-     Not        Resolution Supporting an Application to the New Mexico Water Trust Fund
2024- 2024     Included    Board for a Grant for the Construction of a Stormwater Pond On John Street
071                        Southwest.
R-    10-7-     Not        Approving submittal of a grant application by the Parks and Recreation
2024- 2024     Included    Department to the New Mexico Finance Authority, Water Trust Board.
072
R-    10-7-     Not        Directing the Administration to create an action plan to ensure local
2024- 2024     Included    policies are prioritizing the best interests of children and youths.
073
R-    10-7-     Not        Approving the FY2025 Audit Plan as submitted by the Accountability in
2024- 2024     Included    Government Oversight Committee.
074
R-                         Approving and authorizing the acceptance of grant funds from the New Mexico
2024- 10-7-     Not        Department of Public Safety, Firefighter and EMT recruitment and providing
075   2024     Included    an appropriation to the Albuquerque Fire Rescue Department beginning in
                           fiscal year 2025 through fiscal year 2027.
R-    10-7-     Not
2024- 2024     Included    Determining reasonable notice of public meetings of the City Council.
076
R-    10-7-     Not        Setting the official list of City Council meetings from January 2025 through
2024- 2024     Included    December 2025
077
R-                         Approving and authorizing the acceptance of 2022 Go Bonds from Bernalillo
2024- 10-7-     Not        County for the Explora Museum's Brillante Early Learning Center, and
078   2024     Included    providing for an appropriation to the Department of Arts & Culture in Fiscal
                           Year 2025.
R-                         Directing the City Administration to create an Artifical Intelligence Policy
2024- 10-21-    Not        Working Group, requiring development of a City of Albuquerque Artifical
079   2024     Included    Intelligence Policy, providing an appropriation to the Department of
                           Technology and Innovation.
R-    10-21-    Not        Approving the Transit Department's 2024 updated Public Transportation Agency
2024- 2024     Included    Safety Plan.
080
R-    10-21-    Not        Relating to the City Council of the City of Albuquerque celebrating the 75th
2024- 2024     Included    anniversary of Sandia National Laboratories.
081
R-    11-18-    Not        Directing the City Administration to develop a social meedia policy that
2024- 2024     Included    ensures appropriate use of official social media accounts.
082
R-    11-18-    Not        Assessing district benefit fees for the Albuquerque Tourism Marketing
2024- 2024     Included    District in accordance with the approved budget.
083
R-                         Approving and authorizing the acceptance of grant funds from the Aspen
2024- 12-2-     Not        Institute Economic Opportunities Program and funds from supporting community
084   2024     Included    partners and providing an appropriation to the Economic Development
                           Department for fiscal year 2025.
R-    12-16-               Amending § 1-16-1 of the City of Albuquerque Code of Resolutions to adopt a
2024- 2024     1-16-1      Citywide Rank 2 Bikeway and Trail Facilities Plan (2024) and repeal the
085                        Bikeways & Trails Facility Plan (2015).
R-    12-16-    Not        Amending the adopted Capital Implementation Program of the City of
2024- 2024     Included    Albuquerque by supplementing current appropriations.
086
R-                         Approving and authorizing the acceptance of grant awards from the US
2024- 12-16-    Not        Department of Homeland Security, Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA)
087   2024     Included    and providing for an appropriation to the Department of Finance and
                           Administration for fiscal year 2025 through fiscal year 2027.
R-                         Approving and authorizing the acceptance of 2022 GO Bonds from the State of
2024- 12-16-    Not        New Mexico for public libraries Albuquerque/Bernalillo County library
088   2024     Included    system, and providing for an appropriation to the Department of Arts &
                           Culture in fiscal year 2025.
R-    12-16-    Not        Establishing funding for affordable housing as a citywide priority for the
2024- 2024     Included    City of Albuquerque for the first session of the 57th New Mexico State
089                        Legislature.
R-                         Approving and authorizing a grant agreement from the U.S. Department of
2024- 12-16-    Not        Justice, Office of Community Oriented Policing Services (Cops Office) and
090   2024     Included    providing an appropriation to the Albuquerque Police Department (APD) for
                           fiscal year 2025.
R-                         Expanding the downtown 2025 Metropolitan Redevelopment Area to include the
2024- 12-16-    Not        northernmost parcel of the 1998 Railroad Metropolitan Redevelopment Area for
091   2024     Included    gross receipts tax increment financing; approving the 2004 West Central
                           Metropolitan Redevelopment Area for gross receipts tax increment financing.
R-                         Expanding the Downtown 2025 Metropolitan Redevelopment Area to include the
2024- 12-16-    Not        northernmost parcel of the 1998 Railroad Metropolitan Redevelopment Area for
092   2024     Included    property tax increment financing; approving the 2004 West Central
                           Metropolitan Redevelopment Area for property tax increment financing.
R-    12-16-    Not        Approving and authorizing the acceptance of a grant from Bernalillo County
2024- 2024     Included    for the Sawmill Community Land Trust Technical Plan Development project and
093                        providing an appropriation to the Office of Equity and Inclusion.
R-    12-16-    Not        Approving and authorizing the acceptance of grant funds from the Natural
2024- 2024     Included    Resources Defense Council (NRDC) and providing an appropriation to the
094                        General Services Department beginning in fiscal year 2025.
R-    12-16-    Not        Approving and authorizing the acceptance of grant funds from Bernalillo
2024- 2024     Included    County and the state of New Mexico and adjusting fiscal year 2025 Grant and
095                        Capital Appropriations.
                         
 
 
Notes
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
2025 Resolutions
 
Res. No. Date Disposition Short Title
Res. No.   Date       Disposition   Short Title
R-2025-001 1-6-2025    Not_Included Adjusting Fiscal Year 2025 Operating and
                                    Grant Appropriations
                                    Adjusting Fiscal Year 2024 appropriations
                                    for certain funds and programs to provide
R-2025-002 1-6-2025    Not_Included for actual expenditures; and adjusting
                                    fiscal year 2025 operating and grant
                                    appropriations
                                    Directing the Department of Health,
R-2025-003 1-6-2025    Not_Included Housing, and Homelessness to make the
                                    Housing Voucher Program more efficient and
                                    transparent
                                    Adding funding for an outdoor playscape
                                    exhibit at the Anderson Abruzzo Albuquerque
R-2025-004 1-22-2025   Not_Included International Balloon Museum as a City
                                    Council District Four Captial Outlay
                                    request to the first session of the 57th
                                    New Mexico State Legislature
                                    Amending the adopted Capital Improvement
                                    Program for the City of Albuquerque -
                                    Aviation Department by transferring funds
R-2025-005 2-3-2025    Not_Included to existing projects, appropriating funds
                                    for Customer Facility Charges ("CFC"),
                                    approving new projects, closing projects,
                                    and accepting federal grants.
                                    Amending the adopted Capital Implementation
                                    Program of the City of Albuquerque by
R-2025-006 2-3-2025    Not_Included approving new projects, supplementing
                                    current appropriations and changing the
                                    scope of existing projects.
                                    Requesting a Masterplan for the historic
                                    route 44 area of the historic Atrisco Land
                                    Grant to improve public rights-of-ways,
R-2025-007 2-19-2025   Not_Included establish future land uses, and create
                                    development concepts for city owned land,
                                    all based upon cultural, historical,
                                    recreational, environmental, and economic
                                    development goals.
                                    Adjusting fiscal year 2025 appropriations
R-2025-008 3-3-2025    Not_Included for the marijuana equity and community
                                    reinvestment fund 202
                                    Approving the first amendment to the South
                                    Campus Tax Increment Development District
R-2025-009 3-3-2025    Not_Included formation resolution (Council Bill No. F/
                                    S R-21-202 / Enactment No. R-2021-072),
                                    regarding Tidd Governance
                                    Adopting a proposition to be submitted to
                                    the voters at the next election to be held
                                    in the City of Albuquerque concerning an
R-2025-010 3-3-2025    Not_Included amendment to Article XI, section 7 of the
                                    Albuquerque city charter; providing the
                                    form of the question and the designation
                                    clause for such question on the ballot
                                    Establishing minimum staffing requirements
R-2025-011 3-3-2025    Not_Included for Albuquerque Fire Rescue, rescue
                                    apparatus
                                    Amending the adopted Capital Implementation
R-2025-012 3-3-2025    Not_Included Program for the City of Albuquerque by
                                    supplementing current appropriations
                                    Directing the City Administration to
R-2025-013 3-17-2025   Not_Included enhance enforcement efforts related to
                                    existing rental unity habitability
                                    standards
                                    Approving the programming of funds and
R-2025-014 4-7-2025    Not_Included projects for the 2025-2034 decade plan for
                                    capital improvements including the 2025
                                    two-year capital budget
                                    Approving and adopting the local government
R-2025-015 4-7-2025    Not_Included coordinating commission joint opioid
                                    settlement implementation plan; and
                                    appropriating opioid settlement funds
                                    Approving the expansion of the Downtown
                                    2025 Metropolitan Redevelopment Area
                                    boundary to include the McClellan Park and
R-2025-016 4-21-2025   Not_Included Railroad Metropolitan Redevelopment Areas
                                    and property at Broadway and Lomas,
                                    repealing the McClellan Park and Railroad
                                    Metropolitan Redevelopment Area boundaries
                                    and plans.
                                    Project recommendations to mid-regioun
                                    Council of Governments for inclusion in the
R-2025-017 4-21-2025   Not_Included 2045 Metropolitan Plan for consideration of
                                    future federal funding for the Albuquerque
                                    Metropolitan Planning Area.
                                    Adopting the 2025 Action Plan and Program
                                    Investment Summary for the expenditure of
                                    Community Development Block Grant (CDBG),
                                    Home Investment Parternerships Program
R-2025-018 5-5-2025    Not_Included (HOME) and Emergency Solutions Grant (ESG)
                                    funds; providing an appropriation to the
                                    Department of Health, Housing and
                                    Homelessness for 2025 U.S. Department of
                                    Housing and Urban Development (HUD)
                                    Entitlement Funds
                                    Approving an amendment to the boundary of
R-2025-019 5-5-2025    Not_Included the Sycamore Metropolitan Redevelopment
                                    Area to include approximately 5 additional
                                    adjacement lots totaling 0.80 +/- acres
R-2025-020 5-5-2025    Not_Included Adjusting fiscal year 2025 operating
                                    appropriations
                                    Approving the appointment of Director to
R-2025-021 5-5-2025    Not_Included fill vacancies on the governing body of the
                                    Boulders Public Improvement District caused
                                    by the resignation of board members
                                    Approving the appointment of Director to
                                    fill vacancies on the governing body of the
R-2025-022 5-5-2025    Not_Included Montecito Estates Public Improvement
                                    District caused by the resignation of a
                                    board member
                                    Approving and authorizing the filing of
                                    grant applications and the acceptance of
R-2025-023 5-5-2025    Not_Included potential grant awards for multiple City
                                    departments from associated grantor
                                    agencies and providing for an appropriation
                                    to the City of Albuquerque
                                    Approving the appointment of Director to
R-2025-024 5-5-2025    Not_Included fill vacancies on the governing body of the
                                    Petroglyphs Public Improvement District
                                    caused by the resignation of board members
R-2025-025 5-5-2025    Not_Included Appropriating funds to serve individuals
                                    experiencing substance abuse disorder
                                    Directing the Human Resources Department to
R-2025-026 5-5-2025    Not_Included conduct a survey of employee satisfaction
                                    with the City's benefits package
R-2025-027 5-19-2025   Not_Included Concerning the local election to be held in
                                    the City of Albuquerque on November 4, 2025
                                    Approving the appointment of Director to
R-2025-028 5-19-2025   Not_Included fill vacancy on the governing body of the
                                    Volterra Public Improvement District,
                                    caused by the resignation of a board member
                                    Approving and authorizing a grant
                                    application to the U.S. Department of
                                    Housing and Urban Development for the
R-2025-029 5-19-2025   Not_Included federal fiscal year 2024 continuum of Care
                                    Grant and providing for an appropriation to
                                    the Department of Health, Housing and
                                    Homelessness, for City fiscal year 2026
                                    Approving the appointment of Directors to
R-2025-030 5-19-2025   Not_Included fill vacancies on the governing body of the
                                    Trails Public Improvement District caused
                                    by the resignation of certain directors
                                    Approving the appointment of a Director to
R-2025-031 5-19-2025   Not_Included fill a vacancy on the governing body of the
                                    Saltillo Public Improvement District caused
                                    by the resignation of a director
                                    City of Albuquerque private project
                                    recommendations to the Mid-Region Council
R-2025-032 5-19-2025   Not_Included of Governments for inclusion in the 2045
                                    Metropolitan Plan for the Albuquerque
                                    Metropolitan Planning Area
                                    Establishing one-year objectives for the
R-2025-033 5-19-2025   Not_Included City of Albuquerque in fiscal year 202g; to
                                    meet five-year goals
                                    Establishing a moratorium on fiber internet
R-2025-034 5-19-2025   Not_Included installation permits and creating a working
                                    group to reevaluate permitting criteria and
                                    other required standards
                                    Establishing a polit program to provide gas
                                    cards for police vehicles at the Northwest
R-2025-035 5-19-2025   Not_Included and Southwest Area Commands to improve
                                    operational efficiency and reduce response
                                    times
                                    Amending the 2025 Action Plan and Program
                                    Investment summary of the 2023-2027
R-2025-036 5-19-2025   Not_Included consolidated plan to provide funding for
                                    the development of a Senior Stability
                                    Cottage Development in District Six; making
                                    an appropriation
                                    Establishing the City's Infrastructure
R-2025-037 6-2-2025    Not_Included Capital Improvements Plan (ICIP) priorities
                                    for 2025
                                    Amending the adopted Capital Implementation
R-2025-038 6-2-2025    Not_Included Program for the City of Albuquerque by
                                    supplementing current operating grant
                                    appropriations and approving new projects.
                                    Approving and authorizing the filing of the
                                    attached grant application for a POHLAD
R-2025-039 6-2-2025    Not_Included Foundation Grant and providing an
                                    appropriation to the Albuquerque Community
                                    Safety Department in fiscal year 2025
                                    Approving the Transit Department's Service
R-2025-040 6-2-2025    Not_Included Equity Analysis of the proposed ABQ Ride
                                    Forward Recovery Network.
                                    Authorizing the filing of applications with
                                    the Federal Transit Administration, and
R-2025-041 6-2-2025    Not_Included operating Administration of the United
                                    States Department of Transportation, for
                                    federal transportation assistance
                                    Appropriating funds for operating the
                                    government of the City of Albuquerque for
R-2025-042 5-19-2025   Not_Included fiscal year 2026, beginning July 1, 2025
                                    and ending June 30, 2026; adjusting fiscal
                                    year 2025 appropriations and appropriating
                                    capital funds
                                    Adopting the FY2026-FY2027 two-year Urban
R-2025-043 6-16-2025   Not_Included Enhancement Trust Fund program and
                                    appropriating funds
                                    Approving and authorizing the acceptance of
                                    grant funds from a New Mexico Outdoor
R-2025-044 6-16-2025   Not_Included Recreation Division Trails+ grant and
                                    providing appropriation to the Metropolitan
                                    Redevelopment Agency in FY2025
                                    Adjusting FY2026 Operating Appropriations
                                    and Reserves to enhance the Planning
R-2025-045 6-16-2025   Not_Included Department's efforts to increase plan
                                    review and permitting efficiency for the
                                    betterment of the City of Albuquerque
                                    Considering a Bond Election to be held at
R-2025-046 6-16-2025   Not_Included the next regular local election on November
                                    4, 2025
                                    Relating to the approval of a Redevelopment
R-2025-047 6-16-2025   Not_Included Tax Abatement on the Sycamore Plaza Mixed-
                                    Use project
                                    Relating to the approval of a Redevelopment
R-2025-048 6-16-2025   Not_Included Tax Abatement on the Vassar & Phoenix
                                    Warehouse Development
                                    Amending the adopted Capital Implementation
R-2025-049 6-16-2025   Not_Included Program by approving new projects,
                                    supplementing current appropriations and
                                    changing the scope of existing projects
                                    Approving and authorizing the mayor to
                                    execute a grant agreement with the New
                                    Mexico Early Childhood Education and Care
R-2025-050 8-4-2025    Not_Included Department and providing an appropriation
                                    to the Department of Youth & Family
                                    Services in Fiscal Years 2026, 2027, 2028,
                                    and 2029
                                    Placing a reserve on the proceeds of the
                                    City of Albuquerque, New Mexico Short-Term
R-2025-051 8-4-2025    Not_Included Lodgers' Tax Improvement Revenue Bonds,
                                    Taxable Series 2025, and requiring Council
                                    approval of a detailed spending plan prior
                                    to the expenditure of funds.
                                    Approving and authorizing a grant agreement
                                    from the New Mexico Environment Department,
R-2025-052 8-4-2025    Not_Included Recycling and Illegal Dumping Fund (RAID)
                                    and providing an appropriation to the solid
                                    waste department for Fiscal Year 2025
                                    Approving the appointment of Directors to
                                    the District Board of the Ventana West
                                    Public Improvement District pursuant to the
R-2025-053 8-4-2025    Not_Included Public Improvement District Act, NMSA 1978,
                                    sections 5-11-1 through -27, as amended,
                                    and City Council Bill F/S R-03-372
                                    (Enactment No. 169-2003); and repealing all
                                    actions inconsistent with this resolution
                                    Appropriating funding to specific
                                    affordable housing projects in City Council
R-2025-054 8-4-2025    Not_Included District 2 and directing the City
                                    Administration to facilitate the
                                    determination that these projects are
                                    qualifying grantees
                                    Rescinding R-25-154, which established a
                                    morotorium on fiber internet installation
R-2025-055 8-18-2025   Not_Included permits and established a working group to
                                    reevaluate permitting criteria and other
                                    required standards
                                    Adopting an amendment to the Albuquerque/
                                    Bernalillo County Comprehensive Plan to
R-2025-056 9-3-2025    Not_Included change the designation of segments of Rio
                                    Grand Boulevard NW, Indian School Road NW,
                                    and Menaul Boulevard from multi-modal
                                    corridors to major transit corridors.
                                    Adopting a new section 3-2-16 in the Code
R-2025-057 9-3-2025   3-2-16        of Resolutions to require a Comprehensive
                                    Plan Accountability Analysis for certain
                                    legislative items.
                                    Designating approximately 23 acres in the
                                    San Mateo Boulevard Area between Central
                                    Avenue and Lomas Boulevard as blighted;
                                    approving an amendment to the boundary of
R-2025-058 9-3-2025    Not_Included the Central/Highland/Upper Nob Hill
                                    Metropolitan Redevelopment Area to include
                                    approximately 23 acres; approving a
                                    corresponding non substantial amendment to
                                    the Central/Highland/Upper Nob Hill
                                    Metropolitan Redevelopment Area.
                                    Authorizing the acceptance of funds from
                                    the State of New Mexico and appropriating
R-2025-059 9-15-2025   Not_Included funding for specific homeless services
                                    programs and facility improvements and to a
                                    specific affordable housing project
                                    Establishing a continuing sobriety housing
                                    voucher pilot program for individuals
R-2025-060 9-15-2025   Not_Included experiencing homelessness; directing the
                                    Department of Health, Housing, and
                                    Homelessness to develop a plan to implement
                                    a pilot program and report on outcomes.
                                    Amending the adopted capital improvement
                                    program for the City of Albuquerque -
                                    Aviation Department by transferring funds
R-2025-061 10-6-2025   Not_Included to existing projects, appropriating funds
                                    for passenger facility charges (PFC),
                                    appropriating investment funds, approving
                                    new projects, closing projects, and
                                    accepting federal and state grant funding.
                                    Approving and authorizing the filing of an
                                    application for a State Department of
                                    Finance and Administration (DFA) New Mexico
R-2025-062 10-6-2025   Not_Included match fund grant to use with the Federal
                                    Outdoor Recreation Legacy Partnership
                                    Program Grant for the renovation of Mesa
                                    Verde Park.
                                    Naming the new multigenerational center in
R-2025-063 10-6-2025   Not_Included district 5 the "Conway Wood Northwest
                                    Multigenerational Center".
                                    Amending the adopted Capital Implementation
R-2025-064 10-6-2025   Not_Included Program of the City of Albuquerque by
                                    supplementing current appropriations.
R-2025-065 10-6-2025   Not_Included Appropriating funds to serve individuals
                                    experiencing substance use disorder.
R-2025-066 10-6-2025   Not_Included Determining reasonable notice of public
                                    meetings of the City Council.
                                    Betting the official list of City Council
R-2025-067 10-6-2025   Not_Included meetings from January 2026 through December
                                    2026
                                    Approving a detailed spending plan for City
R-2025-068 10-6-2025   Not_Included of Albuquerque, New Mexico short-term
                                    lodgers' tax improvement revenue bonds,
                                    taxable series 2025.
                                    Establishing priority of residential solar
R-2025-069 10-20-2025  Not_Included permits until the start of 2026 due to
                                    expiration of residential solar tax credits
                                    upon January 1, 2026
                                    Approving the adoption of the Downtown
                                    Metropolitan Redevelopment Area Plan -
R-2025-070 10-20-2025  Not_Included Downtown 2050 and repealing the Downtown
                                    2025 Metropolitan Redevelopment Area Plan
                                    for the Downtown Metropolitan Redevelopment
                                    Area
                                    Taking measures to improve safety for
R-2025-071 11-5-2025   Not_Included bicyclists, pedestrians, and other
                                    vulnerable road users
                                    Concerning the municipal runoff election to
R-2025-072 11-17-2025  Not_Included be held in the City of Albuquerque, New
                                    Mexico, on Tuesday, the ninth day of
                                    December, 2025
R-2025-073 11-17-2025  Not_Included Preserving the name "Juniper Flats" for the
                                    property located at 25 Hotel Circle NE.
                                    Appropriating funds to the Capital
R-2025-074 11-17-2025  Not_Included Implementation Program for the 2025 General
                                    Obligation Program.
                                    Amending language of the Fiscal Year 2026
R-2025-075 11-17-2025  Not_Included Operating Budget, to include Pro-Am Sports
                                    and Recreation support in tourism projects.
                                    Directing the Administartion to support
R-2025-076 11-17-2025  Not_Included Youth Development through Teen-Focused
                                    Programing at the Heights Community Center.
                                    Amending the City of Albuquerque component
R-2025-077 11-17-2025  Not_Included Capital Implementation Program to include a
                                    roadway facilities project, Unser Boulevard
                                    between Anderson Hills Road and Blake Road.
                                    Approving and authorizing the filing of
                                    grant funds from the New Mexico Department
R-2025-078 11-17-2025  Not_Included of Finance and Administration, Firefighter
                                    and EMT Recruitment and providing an
                                    appropriation to the Albuquerque Fire
                                    Rescue Department in Fiscal Year 2026.
                                    Approving and authorizing the acceptance of
                                    grant funds from the new Mexico Department
                                    of Public Safety, 2025 LT Fred Beers III
R-2025-079 11-17-2025  Not_Included Honor Guard Distribution program for
                                    equipment needed by the Albuquerque Fire
                                    Rescue Honor Guard and providing an
                                    appropriation to the Albuquerque Fire
                                    Department in Fiscal Year 2026.
                                    Requiring Council approval for the
R-2025-080 11-17-2025  Not_Included disposition of City-Owned real property
                                    located in the Central Community Planning
                                    Area.
                                    Approving the FY2026 Audit Plan as
R-2025-081 11-17-2025  Not_Included submitted by the accountability in
                                    Government Oversight Committee.
                                    Adopting a text amendment to the Westland
                                    Master Plan (Framework Plan) to change the
                                    land use designation from Education to
                                    Residential on tract N-1-B containing
R-2025-082 11-17-2025  Not_Included approximately 60 undeveloped acres,
                                    including changes to land use and exhibits,
                                    and to update maps to reflect a bulk land
                                    plat that split tract N-1 into tract N-1-
                                    A and N-1-B.
                                    Amending the adopted Capital Improvement
                                    program for the City of Albuquerque -
R-2025-083 12-1-2025   Not_Included Aviation Department by transferring funds
                                    to existing projects, approving new
                                    projects, and accepting state grant
                                    funding.
                                    Assessing District Benefit Fees for the
R-2025-084 12-1-2025   Not_Included Albuquerque Tourism Marketing District in
                                    accordance with the approved budget.
                                    Establishing funding for affordable housing
R-2025-085 12-1-2025   Not_Included as a citywide priority for the City of
                                    Albuquerque for the second session of the
                                    57th New Mexico State Legislature.
                                    Repealing the St. Joseph Hospital
R-2025-086 12-1-2025   Not_Included Metropolitan Redevelopment Area designation
                                    and plan and amending the Code of
                                    Resolutions
                                    Adopting a proposition to be submitted to
                                    the voters at the next election to be held
                                    in the City of Albuquerque concerning an
R-2025-087 12-1-2025   Not_Included amendment to Article XI, section 7 of the
                                    Albuquerque City Charter; providing the
                                    form of the question and the designation
                                    clause for such question on the ballot.
                                    Establishing an emergency parks grass and
R-2025-088 12-1-2025   Not_Included turf replacement funding source to address
                                    the dying turf grass in parks city-wide.
                                    Amending R-25-169 to extend the deadline
                                    for implementation of a working web-based
R-2025-088 12-15-2025  Not_Included tool for use when submitting a
                                    Comprehensive Plan Analysis for relevant
                                    legislative items.
                                  
 
 
Notes
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
2026 Resolutions
 
Res. No.   Date     Disposition   Short Title
                                  Adjusting Fiscal Year 2025 Appropriations for
R-2026-001 1-5-2026  Not_Included certain funds and programs to provide for
                                  actual expenditures; and adjusting Fiscal
                                  Year 2026 Operating Appropriations
                                
                                
                                
                                
 
 
 
Notes
             This resolution is not included in the City's Code of Resolutions.
Not_Included However, if you wish to view the resolution in full, please visit
             the City's Legistar portal at http://www.cabq.gov/council/
             legportal.html.
   City of Albuquerque, New Mexico
Code Of Resolutions
This code contains selected City Resolutions,
current through Res. No. R-2025-086, passed 12-1-2025
 
Published by:
American Legal Publishing
525 Vine Street Suite 310
Cincinnati, Ohio 45202
Tel: (800) 445-5588
Internet: http://www.amlegal.com
[City_of_Albuquerque,_NM_Home_Page]
CHAPTER 1: LAND USE
   Article
      
1.   GENERAL PROVISIONS
      
2.   COMPREHENSIVE POLICIES PLAN
      
3.   METROPOLITAN AREAS AND URBAN CENTERS PLAN
      
4.   REVITALIZATION STRATEGIES
      
5.   OPEN SPACE AND NATURAL RESOURCE AREAS
      
6.   REDEVELOPMENT PLANS
      
7.   SECTOR DEVELOPMENT AND COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT PLANS
      
8.   DEVELOPMENT AREAS AND PROGRAMS
      
9.   LAND ACQUISITIONS, EXCHANGES, AND DONATIONS
      
10.   OVERLAY ZONES
      
11.   AREA PLANS
      
12.   METROPOLITAN REDEVELOPMENT AREAS
      
13.   CORRIDOR PLANS
      
14.   TAX INCREMENT DEVELOPMENTS
      
15.   PUBLIC IMPROVEMENT DISTRICTS
      
16.   RANK 2 FACILITY PLANS
      
17.   RANK 3 MASTER PLANS AND RESOURCE MANAGEMENT PLANS
      
18.   RANK 3 FRAMEWORK PLANS
ARTICLE 1: GENERAL PROVISIONS
Section
   
1-1-1   Rehabilitation standards for residential properties in conjunction with
the Community Development Block Grant Program
   
1-1-2   Policies for zone map change applications
   
1-1-3   Plan recommendations of the City Edges (Bosque) Study for the use of
the Rio Grande floodway and adjacent Bosque areas
   
1-1-4   Annexation policies
   
1-1-5   Withdrawal of petitioners for annexation
   
1-1-6   Annual revised program of planning priorities
   
1-1-7   La Cueva High School Land Use Guide
   
1-1-8   Access control and right-of-way acquisition policy for Paseo del Norte
   
1-1-9   Procedures on special warranty deeds and quitclaim deeds on foreclosed
property
   
1-1-10   Criteria to guide the planning and development of planned communities
in the reserve area
   
1-1-11   Bed and breakfast establishments in residential areas
   
1-1-12   High quality in site development type plans
   
1-1-13   Development impact fees, land use assumptions
   
1-1-14   City Council's prior notice of annexations required
   
1-1-15   City Council review and approval required for proposed Metropolitan
Redevelopment condemnation proceedings and conveyances of condemned property to
redevelopers
   
1-1-16   Establishing a policy pursant to the Pre-Development Facility Fee
Agreement to require plat review by Albuquerque Public Schools prior to City
approval for preliminary plats and final plats containing residential uses
§ 1-1-1 REHABILITATION STANDARDS FOR RESIDENTIAL PROPERTIES IN CONJUNCTION WITH
THE COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT BLOCK GRANT PROGRAM.
   (A)   The minimum standards for residential property rehabilitation in
community development areas, are hereby in all respects approved and adopted by
reference.
   (B)   The minimum standards for residential property rehabilitation in
community development areas shall be known as and cited as “Community
Development Rehabilitation Standards.”
   (C)   All residential rehabilitation undertaken with financial assistance
from the city shall result in compliance with the minimum standards herein
established notwithstanding any other provisions of local law or rule and
assurance on the part of the recipient that rehabilitated properties will be
adequately maintained.
   (D)   The minimum standards herein established may be modified only by
appropriate City Council action citing the change or modification in a
community development plan as approved by the City Council.
(Res. 143-1975, approved 7-30-75)
§ 1-1-2 POLICIES FOR ZONE MAP CHANGE APPLICATIONS.
(Res. 270-1980, approved 12-30-80; Res. 2017-102, approved 11-13-17)
Editor's note: Section 1-1-2 Policies for Zone Map Change Application was
updated, incorporated into, and replaced by the Integrated Development
Ordinance, Ord. 14-16, et seq., Council Bill O-17-49 (Enactment No. 2017-025),
approved 11-13-17. See now ROA § 14-16-6-7(F) and ROA § 14-16-6-7(G).
§ 1-1-3 PLAN RECOMMENDATIONS OF THE CITY EDGES (BOSQUE) STUDY FOR THE USE OF
THE RIO GRANDE FLOODWAY AND ADJACENT BOSQUE AREAS.
   The plan recommendations of the City Edges (Bosque) Study as contained in
Vol. 1, Plan Recommendations, are adopted as an implementation guide to the
open space element of the comprehensive master plan for the city and the county
of Bernalillo with the following provisions:
   (A)   The “Nature Preserve System” that is recommended shall have as its
general purpose the preservation and management of the river's floodway and
adjacent public lands.
   (B)   The “Recreation System” that is recommended shall have as its general
purpose the use of river-related areas for public recreation and enjoyment.
   (C)   Public participation in the development, revision, and enforcement of
any recommended plan or program shall be provided for, encouraged, and assisted
at the earliest possible time in the planning process.
(Res. 95-1975, approved 6-5-75)
§ 1-1-4 ANNEXATION POLICIES.
(Res. 54-1990, approved 5-25-90; Res. 2017-102, approved 11-13-17)
Editor's note: Section 1-1-4 Annexation Policies was updated, incorporated
into, and replaced by the Integrated Development Ordinance, Ord. 14-16, et
seq., Council Bill O-17-49 (Enactment No. 2017-025), approved 11-13-17. See now
ROA § 14-16-6-7(E).
§ 1-1-5 WITHDRAWAL OF PETITIONERS FOR ANNEXATION.
(Res. 146-1983, approved 8-29-83; Res. 2017-102, approved 11-13-17)
Editor's note: Section 1-1-5 Withdrawal of Petitioners for Annexation Policies
was updated, incorporated into, and replaced by the Integrated Development
Ordinance, Ord. 14-16, et seq., Council Bill O-17-49 (Enactment No. 2017-025),
approved 11-13-17. See now ROA § 14-16-6-7(E).
§ 1-1-6 ANNUAL REVISED PROGRAM OF PLANNING PRIORITIES.
(Res. 33-1983, approved 2-17-83; Res. 2017-102, approved 11-13-17)
Editor's note: Section 1-1-6 Annual Revised Program of Planning Priority
Policies was updated, incorporated into, and replaced by the Integrated
Development Ordinance, Ord. 14-16, et seq., Council Bill O-17-49 (Enactment No.
2017-025), approved 11-13-17. See now ROA § 14-16-6-3.
§ 1-1-7 LA CUEVA HIGH SCHOOL LAND USE GUIDE.
(Res. 80-1986, approved 6-16-86; Am. Res. 81-1996, approved 7-17-96; Am. Res.
65-2000, approved 6-26-00)
Editor's note: The La Cueva High School Land Use Guide was replaced by the La
Cueva Sector Development Plan by Res. 65-2000, approved 6-26-00. See now §
1-7-42.
§ 1-1-8 ACCESS CONTROL AND RIGHT-OF-WAY ACQUISITION POLICY FOR PASEO DEL NORTE.
   (A)   It is the policy of the city to acquire the necessary right-of-way to
accommodate a future freeway type facility with “urban interchanges” at
appropriate points in the Paseo del Norte Corridor between Paseo del Volcan and
Tramway Boulevard. This right-of-way shall be a minimum of 156 feet.
   (B)   Access to Paseo del Norte between Paseo del Volcan and Tramway
Boulevard shall be permitted only as specified by resolution of the UTPPB and
shown on the Long Range Major Street Plan. At this time, such approved access
types and locations are limited to the following:
      (1)   Access to Paseo del Norte shall be limited to one of the following
three type of interchange/intersections:
         (a)   Interchange configuration;
         (b)   At-grade dedicated street intersection with median opening; and
         (c)   At-grade dedicated street intersection without median opening.
      (2)   Access via an interchange configuration (Type A) shall be initially
provided at Coors Boulevard and Interstate 25, with a subsequent interchange
identified for Second Street.
      (3)   Access via an at-grade intersection with a median opening (Type B),
and traffic signalization as warranted, shall be provided at approximately one-
half mile intervals:
         (a)   Paseo del Volcan;
         (b)   Boulevard de la Oesta, extended;
         (c)   Rainbow Boulevard;
         (d)   Universe Boulevard;
         (e)   Urraca Street/La Paz Drive Connection;
         (f)   Unser Boulevard;
         (g)   Golf Course Road;
         (h)   An Unnamed Collector Between Golf Course Road and Eagle Ranch
Road;
         (i)   Eagle Ranch Road;
         (j)   Fourth Street (temporary);
         (k)   Second Street (temporary);
         (l)   Jefferson Street;
         (m)   San Pedro Drive;
         (n)   Louisiana Boulevard;
         (o)   Wyoming Boulevard;
         (p)   Barstow Street;
         (q)   Ventura Street;
         (r)   Holbrook Street;
         (s)   Eubank Boulevard;
         (t)   Browning Street;
         (u)   Lowell Street; and
         (v)   Tramway Boulevard.
      (4)   Right-in/right-out access (Type C) shall be provided at:
         (a)   Rancho de Palomas (south side of Paseo del Norte between Wyoming
and Louisiana);
         (b)   Midway between Eagle Ranch Road and Golf Course Road (per the
Riverview Sector Plan); and
         (c)   Between I-25 and San Pedro Boulevard, to serve the south side
parcel.
      (C)   Amendments.
         (1)   The City requests that the managed lane study conducted by the
Mid-Region Council of Governments for the Albuquerque Metropolitan Planning
Area should include an analysis of managed lanes along the Paseo Del Norte
Corridor from Eubank Boulevard to the Eastern Alignment of Paseo Del Vulcan.
         (2)   The City of Albuquerque hereby designates creation of two
additional lanes along the Paseo Del Norte Corridor from Eubank Boulevard to
Paseo Del Vulcan’s Eastern Alignment, that are to be managed lanes, as the
highest priority for funding among transportation projects within the City to
be funded from the United States Department of Transportation, the State of New
Mexico and the 2009 City of Albuquerque General Obligation Bonds.
         (3)   Scoping and planning for this project should include an analysis
of constructing the managed lanes as reversible lanes.
         (4)   The existing general purpose lanes should remain as such and
should not be converted to managed lanes. Between Edith Boulevard and Unser
Boulevard the managed lanes should be located within the existing built cross
section of Paseo Del Norte. The planning and design of the managed lanes should
adhere to applicable policies within adopted corridor and sector plans that
overlay the Paseo Del Norte corridor.
(Res. 153-1986, approved 10-23-86; Am. Res. R-2007-029, approved 3-30-07)
§ 1-1-9 PROCEDURES ON SPECIAL WARRANTY DEEDS AND QUITCLAIM DEEDS ON FORECLOSED
PROPERTY. 
   (A)   The Mayor or his designated representative is hereby authorized to
execute on behalf of the city, a Special Warranty Deed or a Quitclaim Deed to
the former owner of foreclosed property upon it being shown to the Mayor or his
representative satisfaction that the sum due, as agreed upon, for the
redemption has been paid in full.
   (B)   The City Commission Resolution of March 19, 1973, granting the former
owner of foreclosed property an additional year of redemption, be and is hereby
rescinded; provided, that such rescission shall not be effective as to those
properties for which the city has received a Special Master's Deed prior to the
effective date of this section, it being the intention of the Council in
rescinding said resolution that the redemption policy of the city be in
agreement with the statutory period of redemption of one year for foreclosed
property.
(Res. 57-1974, approved 1-2-75)
§ 1-1-10 CRITERIA TO GUIDE THE PLANNING AND DEVELOPMENT OF PLANNED COMMUNITIES
IN THE RESERVE AREA.
   (A)   Acceptance of planned communities criteria: policy element. The
Planned Community Criteria: Policy Element, attached to Resolution No. 151-1990
are accepted and approved in fulfillment of Subsection 2.D of Resolution 138-
1988, conditioned upon public hearing and approval by the Albuquerque City
Council and the Bernalillo County Commission.
   (B)   Intent of policy element.
      (1)   These criteria provide intermediate level policy guidance and
should be used to guide the process as well as the size, configuration, land
use mix, densities, and other features of individual planned communities.
      (2)   Implementing regulations should be prepared by the City Planner,
consistent with this section.
   (C)   Development agreements.  Phasing of planned communities through
development agreements between the communities developers and the City as well
as other appropriate units of local government should be established as an
appropriate mechanism to assure reasonable and equitable allocation of
financial responsibility for capitalization, operation, maintenance, and
rehabilitation of public services and facilities in the planned communities.
   (D) Plan ranking. Planned community master plan ranking relationships are as
follows:
      (1)   Planned community master plans will implement and be compatible
with the Rank 1 Comprehensive Plan.
      (2)   Planned community master plans will implement and be compatible
with relevant Rank 2 plans. However, planned community Level A Community Master
Plans may, when specifically so adopted constitute or contain an amendment to a
Rank 2 Area Plan previously adopted.
      (3)   Planned community Level B Village Plans shall not conflict with
other Rank 2 or Rank 3 plans affecting the same area.
(Res. 151-1990, approved 11-5-90; Am. Res. 32-1991, approved 2-27-91; Am. Res.
33-1991, approved 2-27-91; Res. 2017-102, approved 11-13-17)
Editor's note: The Albuquerque-Bernalillo County Comprehensive Plan policies
were substantially amended in 2017 by Council Bill R-16-108 (Enactment No. R-
2017-026), approved 4-7-17. Section 1-1-10 Criteria to Guide the Planning and
Development of Planned Communities in the Reserve Area was updated,
incorporated into, and replaced by the Integrated Development Ordinance, Ord.
14-16, et seq., Council Bill O-17-49 (Enactment No. 2017-025), approved 11-13-
17. See now ROA § 14-16-2-6(B).
§ 1-1-11 BED AND BREAKFAST ESTABLISHMENTS IN RESIDENTIAL AREAS.
(Res. 138-1992, approved 10-2-92; Res. 2017-102, approved 11-13-17)
Editor's note: Section 1-1-11 Bed and Breakfast Establishment in Residential
Areas Policies was updated, incorporated into, and replaced by the Integrated
Development Ordinance, Ord. 14-16, et seq., Council Bill O-17-49 (Enactment No.
2017-025), approved 11-13-17. See now ROA § 14-16-4, et seq.
§ 1-1-12 HIGH QUALITY IN SITE DEVELOPMENT TYPE PLANS.
(Res. 88-1993, approved 6-30-93; Res. 2017-102, approved 11-13-17)
Editor's note: Section 1-1-12 High Quality in Site Development Type Plans
Policies was updated, incorporated into, and replaced by the Integrated
Development Ordinance, Ord. 14-16, et seq., Council Bill O-17-49 (Enactment No.
2017-025), approved 11-13-17. See now ROA § 14-16-5, et seq.
§ 1-1-13 DEVELOPMENT IMPACT FEES, LAND USE ASSUMPTIONS.
   (A)   The “Development Impact Fees, Land Use Assumptions,” attached to
Resolution No. 7-1995 is hereby adopted as the Land Use Assumptions of the
city.
   (B)   The policy of the city shall be that when there are significant
differences with respect to location in the cost of the provision of capital
improvements the cost of which may be recovered through development impact fees
as provided in the Act, service areas shall be established and development
impact fees proposed to reflect these cost differentials. Should the deadline
for compliance with the Act be extended for approximately one year or longer,
the Mayor shall develop proposed impact fees which follow the policy contained
in this section. Should the deadline for compliance not be extended for
approximately one year or longer, the development impact fees initially adopted
shall be immediately reviewed to follow the policy contained in this section.
   (C)   The city shall develop evaluative criteria and policy direction with
regard to growth which shall incorporate, but shall not be limited to, the
following elements: the real estate market, capacity of the transportation
system, capacity of the public schools, environmental impacts, water quantity
and quality. These criteria and policy direction shall be incorporated into the
land use assumptions required by the Development Fees Act. The development of
the evaluative criteria and policy direction and their incorporation into the
land use assumptions shall be conducted with ample opportunity for public
hearings and involvement and shall include the usual planning and land use
entities and procedures. Should the deadline for compliance with the Act be
extended for approximately one year or longer, the Mayor shall develop revised
land use assumptions which follow the policy contained in this section. Should
the deadline for compliance not be extended for approximately one year or
longer, the Land Use Assumptions initially adopted shall be reviewed
immediately to follow the policy contained in this section.
   (D)   The employment land use assumptions shall be reviewed as soon as
practical after the city obtains recent, actual employment totals by Planning
Information Area. This review shall determine whether revisions to the
employment forecasts contained in the adopted Land Use Assumptions are
necessary.
(Res. 7-1995, approved 1-9-95)
§ 1-1-14 CITY COUNCIL'S PRIOR NOTICE OF ANNEXATIONS REQUIRED.
(Res. 39-1996, approved 3-21-96; Res. 2017-102, approved 11-13-17)
Editor's note: Section 1-1-14 City Council’s Prior Notice of Annexations
Required, whose purpose has been invalidated by state law, is repealed. See
Council Bill R-17-213 (Enactment No. 2017-102), approved 11-13-17.
§ 1-1-15 CITY COUNCIL REVIEW AND APPROVAL REQUIRED FOR PROPOSED METROPOLITAN
REDEVELOPMENT CONDEMNATION PROCEEDINGS AND CONVEYANCES OF CONDEMNED PROPERTY TO
REDEVELOPERS.
   (A)   No agreement shall be entered into by the city or the Metropolitan
Redevelopment Agency which provides for the acquisition or condemnation of real
estate by the city and a subsequent conveyance of such real property to a
private entity, without prior review and approval by the City Council of the
terms and conditions of each particular acquisition or condemnation.
   (B)   The City Council may require, as a condition of its approval and
without limitation, such terms and conditions as are reasonably necessary to
protect the interests of the public, including any condemnee. Furthermore and
in determining whether to approve the exercise of the power of eminent domain,
the Council shall consider whether there exists a genuine need to acquire real
property in order to accomplish the goals of a metropolitan redevelopment plan,
and before approving the subsequent conveyance of such property to a private
developer, the Council shall consider whether the property is being sold,
leased, or transferred at not less than fair value for uses in accordance with
the Metropolitan Redevelopment Code.
   (C)   Any applicable condemnation in process shall be stayed pending
compliance with this resolution.
(Res. 52-2001, approved 3-5-01)
§ 1-1-16   ESTABLISHING A POLICY PURSUANT TO THE PRE-DEVELOPMENT FACILITY FEE
AGREEMENT TO REQUIRE PLAT REVIEW BY ALBUQUERQUE PUBLIC SCHOOLS PRIOR TO CITY
APPROVAL FOR PRELIMINARY PLATS AND FINAL PLATS CONTAINING RESIDENTIAL USES
(Res. R-2006-052, approved 6-9-2006; Am. Res. R-2014-113, approved 12-24-2014;
Res. 2017-102, approved 11-13-17)
Editor's note: Section 1-1-16 Establishing a Policy Pursuant to the Pre-
Development Facility Fee Agreement to Require Plat Review by Albuquerque Public
Schools Prior to City Approval for Preliminary Plats and Final Plats Containing
Residential Uses was updated, incorporated into, and replaced by the Integrated
Development Ordinance, Ord. 14-16, et seq., Council Bill O-17-49 (Enactment No.
2017-025), approved 11-13-17. See now ROA § 14-16-6-4(I).
ARTICLE 2: COMPREHENSIVE POLICIES PLAN
Section
   
1-2-1   Comprehensive Plan for Albuquerque and Bernalillo County
   
1-2-2   Application to Unified Government
§ 1-2-1 COMPREHENSIVE PLAN FOR ALBUQUERQUE AND BERNALILLO COUNTY.
   (A)   The 1987 Comprehensive Plan, attached to Resolution No. 138-1988,
including the plan map, but excluding the segments of the plan cited in
divisions (B)(1) and (B)(2), is adopted as the Rank One Plan for the city and
the County of Bernalillo. It shall hereafter be designated as the 1988
Comprehensive Plan.
      (1)   The overall densities, character and design of all land uses and
development, including residential, agricultural, commercial, industrial, and
recreational and open space shall be in accordance with the goals and policies
of this Comprehensive Plan.
      (2)   The regional network of open space identified on the plan map, and
the Open Space Network goals and policies shall be the basis for preservation,
protection, acquisition, and coordination of open space to meet the present and
future needs of all residents of the area.
      (3)   Environmental protection and heritage conservation shall be pursued
in accordance with the goals and policies of this Comprehensive Plan.
      (4)   The provision, maintenance, and design of public and private
facilities and services, including roads, public transit, bikeways, trail
corridors, public safety, education, employment, solid waste disposal,
drainage, and water and sewer systems shall be in accordance with the goals and
policies of the Comprehensive Plan.
      (5)   The Comprehensive Plan Map consisting of a map and an overlay map
of Major Open Space, is adopted as a constituent part of the Comprehensive
Plan.
   (B)   Comprehensive Plan goals and policies shall serve as general
guidelines for land use, environmental, and resource management decisions and
shall form the foundation for lower ranking plans and land use regulations.
      (1)   The Introduction and Context Section shall serve to interpret the
origin and intent of goals and policies rather than as adopted Comprehensive
Plan policy in itself.
      (2)   The possible techniques may serve to implement policies, but are
not adopted Comprehensive Plan policies in themselves. They shall be reviewed
periodically and revised, if necessary, to achieve general policy objectives.
      (3)   All city regulations and ordinances affecting land use,
environmental quality, heritage conservation, and community resource management
shall conform to general policies of the Comprehensive Plan.
   (C)   The Implementation Chapter shall be used as a foundation for
procedures to evaluate accomplishments and recommend amendments to the plan and
revisions to the work priorities associated with implementation; and such
evaluation and adjustment shall be done at least every 5 years.
   (D) The Albuquerque/Bernalillo County Comprehensive Plan is hereby replaced
in its entirety by the 2016 Updated Comprehensive Plan. The City Council adopts
the following findings as recommended by the Environmental Planning Commission
(EPC):
      (1)   The request is for an update to the Albuquerque/Bernalillo County
Comprehensive Plan (1989, as subsequently amended, the “Comp Plan”). The
update, which will reflect new demographic trends and anticipated growth in the
region, is designed to more effectively coordinate land use and transportation
and to leverage and enhance a sense of place.
      (2)   The Comp Plan applies to land within the City of Albuquerque
municipal boundaries and to the unincorporated area of Bernalillo County (the
“County”). Incorporated portions of the County that are separate municipalities
are not included.
      (3)   Council Bill R-14-46 (Enactment R-2014-022) became effective on May
7, 2014, which directed the City to update the Comp Plan.
      (4)   The EPC’s task is to make a recommendation to the City Council
regarding the Comp Plan update. As the City’s Planning and Zoning Authority,
the City Council will make the final decision. The EPC is the Council’s
recommending body with important review authority. Adoption of an updated City
Master Plan (Comp Plan) is a legislative matter.
      (5)   The existing, key concept of Centers and Corridors will remain the
same, as will the boundaries of existing Centers. In the City, the existing
development areas (Central Urban, Developing & Established Urban, Semi-Urban,
and Rural) will be replaced with Areas of Change and Areas of Consistency. In
the County, the development areas will remain the same.
      (6)   The 2016 Comp Plan update incorporates changes in the narrative
descriptions as well as the goals, policies, and actions of each existing
chapter. Approximately 90% of existing Goals and policies from the City’s
various Sector Plans (Rank III) and Area Plans (Rank II), except for facility
plans and Metropolitan Redevelopment Area (MRA) plans, have been integrated
into the updated Comp Plan. Many of these Goals and policies address similar
topics and/or can be expanded to apply City-wide.
      (7)   The State Constitution and Statutes, the ROA 1994 (which includes
the City of Albuquerque Charter and the Planning Ordinance), the Albuquerque/
Bernalillo County Comprehensive Plan, and the City of Albuquerque Comprehensive
Zoning Code are incorporated herein by reference and made part of the record
for all purposes.
      (8)   State Constitution and Statutes: The Constitution of the State of
New Mexico allows municipalities to adopt a charter, the purpose of which is to
provide for maximum local self-government (see Article X, Section 6- Municipal
Home Rule). The City of Albuquerque is a home rule municipality and has the
authority to adopt a comprehensive plan as granted under Chapter 3, Article 19,
Section 9 NMSA 1978 (3-19-9 NMSA 1978) and by the City Charter.
      (9)   The request is consistent with the intent of City Charter Article
XVII, Planning, as follows:
         a.   Section 1 - The review and adoption of an updated Comp Plan is an
instance of the Council exercising its role as the City's ultimate planning and
zoning authority. The updated Comp Plan is written and formatted to help inform
the Mayor and the Council about community priorities for the formulation and
review of Capital Improvement Plans.
         b.   Section 2 - The updated Comp Plan will help guide the
implementation, enforcement, and administration of land use plans and
regulations that reflect current trends and priorities as well as the future
vision for growth and development. The Plan’s implementation strategies are to:
build public awareness and engagement; improve inter-governmental coordination;
promote growth, development and conservation; and create an ongoing process for
monitoring progress toward the vision, which will give the Council and the
Mayor a common and effective framework to build upon.
      (10)   Intent of the City Charter - Related Sections:
         a.   Article I, Incorporation and Powers- Updating the Comprehensive
Plan is an act of maximum local self -government and is consistent with the
purpose of the City Charter. The updated policy language of the Comp Plan will
help guide legislation and provide support for necessary changes to ordinances
and standards.
         b.   Article IX, Environmental Protection- The updated Comprehensive
Plan reflects recent best practices for policy to guide the proper use and
development of land coordinated with transportation. The update will help
protect and enhance quality of life for Albuquerque's citizens by promoting and
maintaining an aesthetic and humane urban environment. Committees will have up-
to-date guidance to better administer City policy.
      (11)   Intent of the Zoning Code (Section 14-16-1-3): The update to the
Comp Plan will provide up-to-date guidance for amendments and changes to land
use regulations in the Zoning Code. This will allow the Zoning Code to better
implement the city's master plan -in particular the master plan documents that
comprise the Comp Plan. This updated Comp Plan will facilitate a comprehensive
review of land use regulations and regulatory processes to ensure that they
reflect the most recent best practices and the vision for future growth and
development in the city to promote the health, safety and general welfare of
Albuquerque's citizens.
      (12)   Intent of the Planning Ordinance (Section 14-13-2-2): Updating the
Comp Plan will ensure that it will reflect recent best practices for land use
and transportation planning, the priority needs and desires of residents and
businesses, and a vision of sustainable growth and development for the next
twenty years. This will also help ensure that lower ranking plans reflect
current ideas, technologies, and up-to-date demographic and market trends. The
Comp Plan update process identified several conflicting provisions in lower
ranking Plans that require an updated long-range planning process. The proposed
Community Planning Area (CPA) assessments will address planning issues City-
wide as well as within each CPA on an on-going, proactive basis.
      (13)   The Comp Plan update addresses the main topics in Section 14-13-1,
the Planned Growth Strategy (PGS), such as natural resources conservation,
traffic congestion, and infrastructure provision, as follows:
         a.   Sustainable development is a key to the region’s long-term
viability. The 2016 Comp Plan promotes sustainable development best practices
related to water resources, storm water management, multi-modal transportation,
and urban design. A new chapter on Resilience and Sustainability (Chapter 13)
has been added and includes sections on water quality and air quality, and
discusses the importance of becoming more resource-efficient.
         b.   The update addresses transportation and traffic on a regional
basis. A priority is to improve mobility and transportation options (p. 1-11).
The Transportation chapter (Chapter 6) discusses the importance of balancing
different travel modes and providing complete and well-connected streets to
provide a variety of travel options.
         c.   The Land Use chapter (Chapter 5) includes policies to encourage a
development pattern that will foster complete communities, where residents can
live, work, learn, shop, and play, and that will maximize public investment in
denser areas. One primary goal is to improve the balance of jobs and housing on
each side of the river to help reduce traffic congestion and bring jobs to
where people already live.
         d.   The Infrastructure, Community Facilities & Services chapter
(Chapter 12) covers a wide range of infrastructure systems, community
facilities and public services that support the existing community and the Comp
Plan’s vision for future growth. The chapter emphasizes increased inter agency
planning and coordination, and ways for pooling resources to maximize
efficiencies, bridge service gaps, and provide added value. The guiding
principle of equity helps identify gaps in service provision and how they might
be addressed.
      (14)   City language that refers to the Comp Plan is found in various
locations of ROA 1994. This language will need to be correspondingly revised
with the adoption of the 2016 Comp Plan in order to maintain the intent of the
policies and to maintain internal consistency in ROA 1994.
      (15)   The 2016 Comp Plan update improves coordination with the Mid-
Region Metropolitan Planning Organization (MRMPO) and the Metropolitan
Transportation Plan (MTP), which includes a new growth forecast to 2040 and a
preferred growth scenario. The Comp Plan update responds to the MTP by updating
Comp Plan Corridors to be consistent with MTP corridors, coordinating Center
designations with MTP center designations used to develop a preferred future
growth scenario, and developing an analysis tool to analyze performance metrics
based on different growth scenarios.
      (16)   A number of elements of the existing Comp Plan will remain the
same with the 2016 Comp Plan update, including:
         a.   The Comp Plan’s geographic scope, which includes the area in
Albuquerque’s municipal limits and the unincorporated areas in Bernalillo
County.
         b.   The Centers and Corridors framework as a means to encourage
future growth and density in appropriate areas while protecting existing
neighborhoods, natural resources, and open space lands.
         c.   Most of the goals, policies, and actions in the current Comp
Plan, supplemented by those in Sector Development Plans and Area Plans adopted
by the City. Approximately 90% of the City’s existing 1,200 policies in these
plans are represented in the 800 policies and sub policies of the Comp Plan
update.
         d.   The County’s Development Areas (Rural, Reserve, Semi-Urban,
Developing Urban, and Established Urban) from the existing Comp Plan will
continue to be used in the unincorporated area, and their associated policies
will remain unchanged.
      (17)   The 2016 Comp Plan update has reorganized and reworded the
existing Comp Plan to reflect new data and trends, be more user-friendly and
provide clearer guidance to decision-makers. The most significant changes in
the 2016 Comp Plan update are:
         a.   The inclusion of a Vision chapter (Chapter 3), which serves as a
“People’s Summary” of the plan and provides an overview.
         b.   Modifications to the Center and Corridor descriptions and the
introduction of new Center and Corridor types.
            i.   Three Major Activity Centers have been re-designated as
Downtown or as Urban Centers (Uptown and Volcano Heights).
            ii.   The remaining Major and Community Activity Centers have been
re designated as Activity Centers or Employment Centers.
            iii.   The new Employment Center type reflects the need for
concentrated job centers.
            iv.   Certain corridors have been designated as Premium Transit
corridors to be consistent with MRCOG’s MTP; Enhanced Transit Corridors have
been re-named and designated as Multi-Modal Corridors, and Express Corridors
are renamed and designated as Commuter Corridors. Main Street Corridors have
been introduced as a new Corridor type.
         c.   Reorganization of the Comp Plan into ten Elements (Chapters) that
reflect more recent best practices in planning as well as the needs of area
residents:
            i.   Community Identity and Heritage Conservation (Chapters 4 and
11, respectively) in response to public comments about the importance of
neighborhood character, preserving traditional communities, and cultural
landscapes.
            ii.   A new chapter, Urban Design (Chapter 7) describes design
elements that support and/or constitute good design for our community, in
distinct rural, suburban, and urban contexts.
            iii.   A new chapter, Resilience and Sustainability (Chapter 13),
reflects community concerns about conserving natural resources, preparing for
climate change and natural hazards, and creating healthy environments for
people.
         d.   The introduction of six guiding principles that indicate what is
particularly important to residents.
         e.   A new focus on coordinating land use and transportation to
strengthen Centers and Corridors and to address traffic congestion on river
crossings by improving the jobs-housing balance west of the Rio Grande.
         f.   Two Development Areas in the City, Areas of Change and Areas of
Consistency, will replace the six current Development Areas.
         g.   Updated City and County Community Planning Areas (CPAs) and
policies that guide the City Planning Department regularly to engage with
residents and other stakeholders in 12 City CPAs on a five-year cycle of
assessments.
         h.   An Implementation chapter (Chapter 14) with strategic actions,
performance metrics, and policy actions to be updated on a five-year cycle.
      (18)   In 2017, City Planning Staff intend to initiate an ongoing,
proactive engagement and assessment process (Community Planning Area
Assessments) to work with communities throughout the City to address planning
issues and develop solutions. Performance measures will be used to track
progress toward Comp Plan Goals over time.
      (19)   The public engagement process, which offered a range of
opportunities for input, discussion, and consensus-building, featured a series
of workshops and public meetings that included daytime focus groups organized
by topic and evening meetings with a more traditional presentation and a
question and answer session. The project team was invited to speak at over 100
meetings and local conferences. To reach more people and a broader cross-
section of the community, the project team staffed booths and passed out
promotional material at community events and farmers markets.
      (20)   Articles about the ABC-Z project appeared regularly in the City’s
Neighborhood News and ads specifically for the Comp Plan update were placed in
print and social media. There is also a social media page for the ABC-Z project
on Facebook.
      (21)   Staff received official written comments from agencies and
interested parties. Agencies that commented include the ABCWUA, the AMAFCA,
Bernalillo County, the City Parks and Recreation Department, and PNM. Their
comments suggest specific revisions to clarify topics related to their agency’s
charge. Staff is considering all comments carefully and addressing them.
      (22)   The comments submitted by interested parties cover a variety of
topics, including but not limited to time for public review and comment,
annexation, effect on vulnerable populations, and the focus on centers and
corridors. Some comments express significant concerns that policies crafted to
address localized issues are applied broadly and that sector plans are being
replaced. Staff is considering all comments carefully and addressing them.
      (23)   The EPC held two advertised and noticed public hearings, on August
4 and August 25, 2016, to elicit public comments and participation for the
record.
      (24)   Planning Department Staff and City Council Staff will continue to
collaborate regarding themes raised in the August 2016 Staff Report, and in
public, departmental, and agency comments, to consider any additional
information that should be included in the Comp Plan update.
   (E)   The Albuquerque/Bernalillo County Comprehensive Plan, adopted by
Resolutions 49-1975, 69-1975, 153-1975, and as subsequently amended, are hereby
repealed.
   (F)   The Albuquerque/Bernalillo County Comprehensive Plan, adopted by
Resolutions 138-1988, 25-1989, 215-1989, 160-1991, 12-1992, 150-1993, 56-1993,
58-1995, 1-1999, 145-2001, 171-2001, 172-2001, 154-2002, 84-2003, 100-2003, 22-
2014, and 26-2017, are hereby repealed.
   (G)   In the event of conflicts between this Comprehensive Plan and any
already-adopted Rank Two or Rank Three Plans, this Comprehensive Plan shall
govern.
(Am. Res. 2017-026, adopted 3-20-17; Res. 2017-102, approved 11-13-17)
Editor's note: The Albuquerque-Bernalillo County Comprehensive Plan policies
were substantially amended in 2017 by Council Bill R-16-108 (Enactment No. R-
2017-026), approved 4-7-17.
§ 1-2-2 APPLICATION TO UNIFIED GOVERNMENT.
   Land use controls proposed for the unified government shall be consistent
with the Albuquerque/Bernalillo County Comprehensive Plan and land use
designations within the Albuquerque/Bernalillo County Comprehensive Plan will
continue to serve as a guide for establishing potential service areas for
planning and delivery of public services and infrastructure.
(Res. 124-2000, approved 12-28-00)
ARTICLE 3: METROPOLITAN AREAS AND URBAN CENTERS PLAN
   The City hereby repeals Article § 1-3, Metropolitan Areas and Urban Centers
Plan, whose policies have been replaced by the ABC Comp Plan Centers and
Corridors Map via Council Bill R-16-108 (Enactment No. R-2017-026), approved 4-
7-17, and whose regulatory intent has been replaced by the Integrated
Development Ordinance via Council Bill O-17-49 (Enactment No. 2017-025),
approved 11-13-17.
(Res. 2017-102, approved 11-13-17)
§ 1-3-1 METROPOLITAN AREAS AND URBAN CENTERS PLAN; BOUNDARY AMENDMENTS.
(Res. 1-1981, approved 1-2-81; Res. 2017-102, approved 11-13-17)
Editor's note: Section 1-3-1 Metropolitan Areas and Urban Centers Plan was
replaced in the Albuquerque-Bernalillo County Comprehensive Plan with
“Development Areas” and “Centers and Corridors” policies and maps. The
Albuquerque-Bernalillo County Comprehensive Plan policies were substantially
amended in 2017 by Council Bill R-16-108 (Enactment No. R-2017-026), approved
4-7-17. See §
1-2-1.
§ 1-3-2 DEVELOPMENT OF THE DOWNTOWN AREA AS AN URBAN CENTER.
(Res. 65-1979, approved 4-10-79; Res. 2017-102, approved 11-13-17)
Editor's note: Section 1-3-2 Development of the Downtown Area as an Urban
Center was replaced in the Albuquerque-Bernalillo County Comprehensive Plan
with “Development Areas” and “Centers and Corridors” policies and maps. The
Albuquerque-Bernalillo County Comprehensive Plan policies were substantially
amended in 2017 by Council Bill R-16-108 (Enactment No. R-2017-026), approved
4-7-17. See §
1-2-1.
ARTICLE 4: REVITALIZATION STRATEGIES
The City hereby severs and invalidates the regulatory content of the jointly
adopted Rank 3 Sector Development Plans and Metropolitan Redevelopment Plans,
which will no longer serve as Sector Development Plans but will continue to
serve as Metropolitan Redevelopment Plans to guide the Metropolitan
Redevelopment Agency on redevelopment efforts, catalytic projects, and public/
private partnerships, subject to amendment pursuant to the Metropolitan
Redevelopment Agency Ordinance (§ 14-8-4-3(B)).
The following Metropolitan Redevelopment Plan resolutions are amended to update
their citation reference in the Code of Resolutions and amended with the
following changes.
(Res. 2017-102, approved 11-13-17)
§ 1-4-1 DOWNTOWN 2025 SECTOR DEVELOPMENT PLAN.
(Res. 34-1989, approved 3-2-89; Am. Res. 44-1990, approved 4-27-90; Am. Res.
96-1991, approved 6-11-91; Am. Res. 142-1991, approved 9-30-91; Am. Res. 125-
1992, approved 9-30-92; Am. Res. 69-1995, approved 5-18-95; Am. Res. 98-1998,
approved 10-20-98; Am. Res. 50-2000, approved 5-22-00; Am. Res. R-2007-027,
approved 3-30-07; Am. Res. R-2010-141, effective 11-18-10, R-2014-062, approved
8-29-2014, Am. Res. R-2014-029, approved 6-13-2014; Res. 2017-102, approved 11-
13-17)
Cross-reference:
   Downtown 2025 Metropolitan Redevelopment Plan, now §
1-12-15 (formerly § 1-4-1 and § 1-7-43)
Editor's note: The Downtown 2025 Sector Development Plan, its contents, and its
boundaries are repealed. The Metropolitan Redevelopment Plan aspect of the
document remains valid to guide the Metropolitan Redevelopment Agency’s work,
including infrastructure and catalytic projects, and public/private
partnerships, subject to amendment per the Metropolitan Redevelopment Agency
Ordinance (§ 14-8-4-3(B)); however, the regulations are now void. See now §
1-12-15.
§ 1-4-2 SAWMILL REVITALIZATION STRATEGY.
(Res. 27-1996, approved 2-14-96; Res. 2017-102, approved 11-13-17)
Cross-reference:
   Sawmill/Wells Park Metropolitan Redevelopment Plan, §
1-12-10 (formerly also § 1-6-26)
   Sawmill/Wells Park Sector Development Plan, §
1-7-14, repealed
Editor's note: The Sawmill Revitalization Strategy, its contents, and its
boundaries are repealed. The Sawmill Revitalization Strategy was updated,
incorporated into, and replaced by the Sawmill Metropolitan Redevelopment Plan.
The Sawmill Metropolitan Redevelopment Plan remains valid to guide the
Metropolitan Redevelopment Agency’s work, including infrastructure and
catalytic projects, and public/private partnerships, subject to amendment per
the Metropolitan Redevelopment Agency Ordinance (§ 14-8-4-3(B)). See now §
1-12-10.
§ 1-4-3 BRIDGE/ISLETA REVITALIZATION PLAN.
(Res. 100-1997, approved 10-15-97; Res. 2017-102, approved 11-13-17)
Cross-reference:
   Moved to §
1-12-20
Editor's note: The Bridge/Isleta Revitalization Plan is hereby renamed as
Bridge/Isleta Metropolitan Redevelopment Plan, with identical content and
boundaries. See now §
1-12-20.
ARTICLE 5: OPEN SPACE AND NATURAL RESOURCE AREAS
Section
   
1-5-1   Policies for the protection, management and development of open space
lands, regional preserved and natural resource areas
   
1-5-2   Protection and preservation of the West Mesa Volcanic Escarpment Native
American rock art
   
1-5-3   Protection for areas of the Petroglyph National Monument
§ 1-5-1 POLICIES FOR THE PROTECTION, MANAGEMENT AND DEVELOPMENT OF OPEN SPACE
LANDS, REGIONAL PRESERVED AND NATURAL RESOURCE AREAS.
   (A)   The following Open Space Management Plan shall be adopted as the basis
for the protection, management, and development of Open Space Lands, Regional
Preserves, or Natural Resource areas presently owned or acquired by the city in
the future.
   (B)   The lands categorized below shall be officially designated and posted
accordingly:
      (1)   Open Space.
         (a)   Sandia Foothills;
         (b)   Bear Canyon;
         (c)   Volcanoes - Volcano Park;
         (d)   Bond Ranch;
         (e)   Four Hills; and
         (f)   That Land on Either Side of the River Lying Between the levies.
      (2)   Regional Preserves/Natural Resource Areas.
         (a)   Candelaria Farms;
         (b)   La Boca Negra Park;
         (c)   Volcano Ranch Park;
         (d)   Montessa Park;
         (e)   Golden Park;
         (f)   San Antonio Park;
         (g)   Carolino Canyon Park;
         (h)   Gutierrez Canyon Nature Center; and
         (i)   Petroglyph State Park.
   (C)   Future purchases, easements, leases or dedications of lands meeting
Open Space, Regional Preserves or Natural Area criteria be designated
appropriately and posted as such immediately upon acquisition.
   (D)   The Parks and Recreation Department shall be responsible for
coordinating the development of individual programs comprising the
comprehensive Open Space Management Plan and insuring their review by the
appropriate departments and review bodies by September 1, 1980.
(Res. 77-1980, approved 4-8-80)
§ 1-5-2 PROTECTION AND PRESERVATION OF THE WEST MESA VOLCANIC ESCARPMENT NATIVE
AMERICAN ROCK ART.
   (A)   The Mayor and his staff shall not approve, commit to, or cause the
construction of any public improvement which would have significant adverse
impact on the West Mesa Escarpment and its vicinity; this area of concern is
defined in Attachment A of Resolution No. 22-1987, which is made a part hereof.
Notwithstanding the above, an exception may be made for compelling public need
as described in division (B).
   (B)   If the director of a city department which is considering approval,
commitment, or preparation of work of the type and location described above
concludes that it is or may be justified to proceed with such work, he shall
ask the Director of the Parks and Recreation Department and the Director of the
Planning Department for their evaluations. The opinions of the approving or
initiating department, the Director of the Parks and Recreation Department, and
the Director of the Planning Department shall be sent to the Mayor who shall
personally decide if the plan or construction shall be approved prior to
October 1, 1987. Approval shall be given only when:
      (1)   There is no significant adverse impact on the escarpment, important
views of the escarpment, or the quiet atmosphere at the escarpment; or
      (2)   There is compelling indication of public need for the work on the
public improvement within the time specified.
   (C)   In the event the Mayor approves work as described above, he shall
immediately send an executive communication to the Council indicating the
character of the action and his evaluation which justified going forward.
Material conveyed shall include the staff evaluations sent to the Mayor.
   (D)   Prior to October 1, 1987, the Council will not approve steps to
implement special assessment districts for work in the area described in
Attachment A of Resolution No. 22-1987.
   (E)   Attachment A of Resolution No. 22-1987 shall not be interpreted to
limit review of development in this general area mandated by Resolution No.
104-1986.
(Res. 22-1987, approved 3-25-87)
§ 1-5-3 PROTECTION FOR AREAS OF THE PETROGLYPH NATIONAL MONUMENT.
   (A)   The city's right-of-way for Paseo del Norte west, between the northern
and southern parts of the Monument which are determined by the city's
Department of Municipal Development, not to be needed for the actual road
construction or maintenance of the area shall, along with cultural and
archaeological resources therein, be preserved to the extent possible and shall
be designated as part of the City of Albuquerque major public open space
system. It shall be the policy of the City of Albuquerque to permanently
protect and preserve this unused right-of-way as city open space.
   (B)   It shall be the policy of the City of Albuquerque to acquire, as soon
as reasonably practicable, additional land for buffer land or open space
adjacent to the Monument, including land in the Volcano Cliffs area and the
Northern Geological Window area, and the city shall petition the National Park
Service to include these lands within the Monument.
   (C)   Designated bicycle lanes and pedestrian trails within the Paseo del
Norte project and connections to existing trails adjacent to the Paseo del
Norte project shall be implemented concurrently with the completion of the road
project.
   (D)   The design for Paseo del Norte shall include the following design
features:
      (1)   Low noise asphalt and a high quality sound wall. The sound walls
shall be designed to protect the surrounding neighborhoods and shall be
aesthetically pleasing to blend with the natural vegetation and landscape of
the area, using native materials where possible;
      (2)   Appropriate landscaping that recognizes the environmental and
cultural amenities in the area;
      (3)   Consultation with an environmental scientist and archaeologist
regarding preservation of the natural drainage and ecological corridors that
promote area wildlife and plant habitat, the mitigation of the impact on
cultural resources, and the provision of recreation trails and trail
connections along the escarpment;
      (4)   Construction of the road, to the extent reasonably possible, shall
consider cultural and archaeological resources within the right-of-way;
      (5)   Design of the road shall incorporate a method of construction such
that the road way is as inconspicuous as reasonably possible from the Monument,
as determined by the city's Department of Municipal Development.
   (E)   After the completion of the Paseo del Norte extension and the Unser
Boulevard projects, it shall be the policy of the City of Albuquerque that no
other roads traversing the Monument shall be built.
   (F)   The City of Albuquerque shall seek to obtain the advice of various
Native American communities regarding the relocation and disposition of any
archaeological resources displaced as a result of the road construction.
   (G)   Within 60 days of the adoption of this resolution, the city shall make
a reasonable effort to implement a formal process for seeking consultation from
local federally recognized tribes throughout the implementation of this
resolution. The city shall work with the All Indian Pueblo Council to develop
the formal process.
   (H)   In accordance with the ordinance providing for 1% of each bond purpose
to be included as an amount for works of art, that 1% of the bond amount for
the Paseo del Norte extension project shall be spent for art within the project
area and such public art projects shall include environmental, cultural and
archaeological aspects of the area.
   (I)   Upon the completion of the Unser extension called for in the 2004
street bond proposal, the existing Atrisco Boulevard roadway through Boca Negra
Canyon shall be disconnected as a through street for vehicular traffic and may
be used as a bicycle and pedestrian trail. All automobile traffic, except
emergency vehicles and Open Space Division vehicles, shall be prohibited.
   (J)   It shall be the policy of the City of Albuquerque that no residential,
industrial or commercial development, including new roadways and utility
easements, shall be allowed on land owned by the City of Albuquerque within the
Petroglyph National Monument, except for roadways and utility easements that
solely serve the Monument. Land owned by the City of Albuquerque within the
Monument shall not be sold or traded for development. This section is not
intended to apply to the construction of the Paseo del Norte extension or Unser
Boulevard.
(Res. R-2005-079, approved 6-13-05)
ARTICLE 6: REDEVELOPMENT PLANS
The City hereby severs and invalidates the regulatory content of the jointly
adopted Rank 3 Sector Development Plans and Metropolitan Redevelopment Plans,
which will no longer serve as Sector Development Plans but will continue to
serve as Metropolitan Redevelopment Plans to guide the Metropolitan
Redevelopment Agency on redevelopment efforts, catalytic projects, and public/
private partnerships, subject to amendment pursuant to the Metropolitan
Redevelopment Agency Ordinance (§ 14-8-4-3(B)). Code of Resolutions Land Use –
Article 6: Redevelopment Plans is hereby repealed.
(Res. 2017-102, approved 11-13-17)
Section
   
1-6-1   Downtown Neighborhood Area Redevelopment Plan
   
1-6-2   Los Duranes Area Redevelopment Plan
   
1-6-3   Martineztown-Santa Barbara Area Redevelopment Plan
   
1-6-4   North Barelas Area Redevelopment Plan
   
1-6-5   Brotherhood Awareness Center Area Redevelopment Plan
   
1-6-6   Alvarado Metropolitan Redevelopment Plan
   
1-6-7   McClellan Park Metropolitan Redevelopment Plan
   
1-6-8   Soldiers and Sailors Park Metropolitan Redevelopment Plan
   
1-6-9   South Broadway Neighborhoods Metropolitan Redevelopment Plan
   
1-6-10   South Barelas Industrial Park Redevelopment Plan
   
1-6-11   Barelas Neighborhood Commercial Area Revitalization and Metropolitan
Redevelopment Plan
   
1-6-12   Near Heights Metropolitan Redevelopment Plan
   
1-6-13   Highland Central Metropolitan Redevelopment Plan
   
1-6-14   Clayton Heights Metropolitan Redevelopment Plan
   
1-6-15   Historic Central Metropolitan Redevelopment Area
   
1-6-16   Rail Yards Master Development Plan
§ 1-6-1 DOWNTOWN NEIGHBORHOOD AREA REDEVELOPMENT PLAN.
(Res. 163-1975, approved 9-8-75; Res. 2017-102, approved 11-13-17)
Cross-reference:
   Downtown Neighborhood Area Sector Development Plan and Community Development
Plan, §
1-7-4, repealed
Editor’s note:  The Downtown Neighborhood Area Redevelopment Plan, its
contents, and its boundaries are repealed.
§ 1-6-2 LOS DURANES AREA REDEVELOPMENT PLAN.
(Res. 166-1975, approved 9-8-75; Am. Res. 42-1976, approved 3-27-76; Am. Res.
R-11-248, approved 1-6-2012; Res. 2017-102, approved 11-13-17)
Cross-reference:
   Los Duranes Sector Development Plan, §
1-7-3, repealed
Editor’s note: The Los Duranes Area Redevelopment Plan, its contents, and its
boundaries are repealed.
§ 1-6-3 MARTINEZTOWN-SANTA BARBARA AREA REDEVELOPMENT PLAN.
(Res. 176-1975, approved 9-17-75; Res. 2017-102, approved 11-13-17)
Cross-reference:
   Martineztown-Santa Barbara Neighborhoods Sector Development Plan, §
1-7-35, repealed
   Martineztown-Santa Barbara Metropolitan Redevelopment Area, §
1-12-9
Editor’s note: The Planning Department has no record of this plan; it may have
been superseded by the Martineztown-Santa Barbara Sector Development Plan. The
Martineztown-Santa Barbara Redevelopment Plan and its contents are repealed.
§ 1-6-4 NORTH BARELAS AREA REDEVELOPMENT PLAN.
(Res. 194-1975, approved 10-29-75; Res. 2017-102, approved 11-13-17)
Cross-reference:
   North Barelas Sector Development Plan and Community Development Plan, §
1-7-10, repealed
   Barelas Sector Development Plan, §
1-7-39, repealed
   Barelas Neighborhood Commercial Area Revitalization and Metropolitan
Redevelopment Plan, §
1-12-19 (formerly §
1-6-11)
   Rail Yards Master Plan, §
1-17-3 (formerly §
1-6-16)
Editor’s note: This Plan was superseded by the North Barelas Sector Development
and Community Development Plan and then the Barelas Sector Development Plan.
The North Barelas Area Redevelopment Plan, its contents, and its boundaries are
repealed.
§ 1-6-5 BROTHERHOOD AWARENESS CENTER AREA REDEVELOPMENT PLAN.
(Res. 62-1976, approved 4-15-76; Res. 2017-102, approved 11-13-17)
Editor’s note: The Planning Department has no record of this plan. The
Brotherhood Awareness Center Area Redevelopment Plan, its contents, and its
boundaries are repealed.
§ 1-6-6 ALVARADO METROPOLITAN REDEVELOPMENT PLAN.
(Res. 85-1983, approved 6-8-83; Res. 2017-102, approved 11-13-17)
Cross-reference:
   Moved to §
1-12-1
   Alvarado Development Area, see §
1-8-4
   Downtown 2025 Metropolitan Redevelopment Area, §
1-12-15
§ 1-6-7 MCCLELLAN PARK METROPOLITAN REDEVELOPMENT PLAN.
(Res. 9-1984, approved 2-8-84; Am. Res. 225-1989, approved 12-28-89; Res. 2017-
102, approved 11-13-17)
Cross-reference:
   Moved to §
1-12-16
   McClellan Park District Sector Development Plan, see §
1-7-24, repealed
§ 1-6-8 SOLDIERS AND SAILORS PARK METROPOLITAN REDEVELOPMENT PLAN.
(Res. 159-1985, approved 9-6-85; Res. 2017-102, approved 11-13-17)
Cross-reference:
   Moved to §
1-12-8
§ 1-6-9 SOUTH BROADWAY NEIGHBORHOODS METROPOLITAN REDEVELOPMENT PLAN.
(Res. 106-1986, approved 7-7-86; Res. 2017-102, approved 11-13-17)
Cross-reference:
   Moved to §
1-12-17
   South Broadway Neighborhoods Sector Development Plan, §
1-7-15, repealed
Editor's note: The South Broadway Neighborhoods Sector Development Plan land
use and development policies were updated, incorporated into, and replaced by
the 2017 Albuquerque-Bernalillo Comprehensive Plan, Council Bill R-16-108
(Enactment No. R-2017-026), approved 4-7-17. See §
1-2-1. The South Broadway Neighborhoods Sector Development Plan land use and
development regulations was updated, incorporated into, and replaced by the
Integrated Development Ordinance, Ord. 14-16, et seq., Council Bill O-17-49
(Enactment No. 2017-025), approved 11-13-17. See ROA § 14-16 et seq.
Editor's note: The Metropolitan Redevelopment Plan aspect of the document
remains valid to guide the Metropolitan Redevelopment Agency’s work, including
infrastructure and catalytic projects, and public/private partnerships, subject
to amendment per the Metropolitan Redevelopment Agency Ordinance (§ 14-8-4-3
(B)); however, the regulations are now void.
§ 1-6-10 SOUTH BARELAS INDUSTRIAL PARK REDEVELOPMENT PLAN.
(Res. 62-1976, approved 4-15-76; Res. 2017-102, approved 11-13-17)
Cross-reference:
   Moved to §
1-12-18
   Barelas Sector Development Plan, §
1-7-39, repealed
   Rail Yards Master Plan, §
1-17-3 (formerly §
1-6-16)
§ 1-6-11 BARELAS NEIGHBORHOOD COMMERCIAL AREA REVITALIZATION AND METROPOLITAN
REDEVELOPMENT PLAN.
(Res. 69-1993, approved 6-18-93; Res. 2017-102, approved 11-13-17)
Cross-reference:
   Moved to §
1-12-19
   Barelas Sector Development Plan, §
1-7-39, repealed
§ 1-6-12 NEAR HEIGHTS METROPOLITAN REDEVELOPMENT PLAN.
(Res. 84-2000, approved 10-6-00; Am. Res. 107-2003, approved 9-26-03; Am. Res.
R-2008-051, approved 4-17-08; Am. Res. R-2010-065, approved 6-18-10; Res. 2017-
102, approved 11-13-17)
Cross-reference:
   Moved to §
1-12-11
§ 1-6-13 HIGHLAND CENTRAL METROPOLITAN REDEVELOPMENT PLAN.
(Res. 46-2003, approved 5-23-03; Am. Res. R-2005-176, approved 11-10-05; Res.
2017-102, approved 11-13-17)
Cross-reference:
   Moved to §
1-12-14
§ 1-6-14 CLAYTON HEIGHTS METROPOLITAN REDEVELOPMENT PLAN
(Res. R-2010-080, approved 6-24-10; Res. 2017-102, approved 11-13-17)
Cross-reference:
   Moved to §
1-12-21
§ 1-6-15 HISTORIC CENTRAL METROPOLITAN REDEVELOPMENT AREA.
(R-2012-051, approved 6-12-2012, Am. R-2013-125, approved 12-13-2013; Res.
2017-102, approved 11-13-17)
Cross-reference:
   Moved to §
1-12-23
§ 1-6-16 RAILYARDS MASTER DEVELOPMENT PLAN.
(R-2014-054, approved 7-3-2014; Res. 2017-102, approved 11-13-17)
Cross Reference:
   Moved to §
1-17-3
   Barelas Neighborhood Commercial Area Revitalization Plan, §
1-12-17 (formerly §
1-6-11)
   Barelas Sector Development Plan, §
1-7-39, repealed
ARTICLE 7: SECTOR DEVELOPMENT AND COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT PLANS
The City hereby repeals the existing Rank 3 Sector Development Plans as
regulatory documents whose purposes are replaced by the Integrated Development
Ordinance, whose regulatory content has been updated, incorporated into, and
replaced by the Integrated Development Ordinance, Ord. 14-16, via Council Bill
O-17-49 (Enactment No. 2017-025), approved 11-13-17, and whose policy content
has been updated, incorporated into and replaced by the 2017 ABC Comp Plan via
Council Bill R-16-108 (Enactment No. R-2017-026), approved 4-7-17. The Code of
Resolutions Land Use – Article 7: Sector Development and Community Development
Plans is hereby repealed.
(Res. 2017-102, approved 11-13-17)
Editor's note: The Sector Development Plans were included by reference in the
2017 Albuquerque-Bernalillo Comprehensive Plan Appendix D as a historical
document to be used for information purposes and to inform future planning in
this area.
Section
   
1-7-1   Designation of Community Development Areas
   
1-7-2   Academy-Tramway-Eubank Sector Development Plan
   
1-7-3   Los Duranes Sector Development Plan and Community Development Plan
   
1-7-4   Downtown Neighborhood Area Sector Development Plan and Community
Development Plan
   
1-7-5   University of Albuquerque Sector Development Plan
   
1-7-6   La Mesa Sector Development Plan and Community Development Plan
   
1-7-7   West Mesa Sector Development Plan and Community Development Plan
   
1-7-8   Los Griegos Sector Development Plan and Community Development Plan
   
1-7-9   Boys' Club Sector Development Plan
   
1-7-10   North Barelas Sector Development Plan and Community Development Plan
   
1-7-11   Old Town Sector Development Plan and Community Development Plan
   
1-7-12   Huning Highland Sector Development Plan
   
1-7-13   University Neighborhoods Area Sector Development Plan
   
1-7-14   Sawmill/Wells Sector Development Plan
   
1-7-15   South Broadway Neighborhoods Sector Development Plan
   
1-7-16   St. Joseph Hospital/Civic Auditorium Area Sector Development Plan
   
1-7-17   Trumbull Neighborhood Sector Development Plan
   
1-7-18   Huning Castle and Raynolds Addition Neighborhood Sector Development
Plan
   
1-7-19   Uptown Sector Development Plan
   
1-7-20   El Rancho Atrisco Sector Development Plan
   
1-7-21   La Cuesta Sector Development Plan
   
1-7-22   Heritage Hills East Sector Development Plan
   
1-7-23   East Gateway Sector Development Plan
   
1-7-24   McClellan Park District Sector Development Plan
   
1-7-25   Lava Shadows Sector Development Plan
   
1-7-26   East Atrisco Sector Development Plan
   
1-7-27   Coors Corridor Sector Development Plan
   
1-7-28   Seven Bar Ranch Neighborhood Sector Development Plan
   
1-7-29   Riverview Neighborhood Sector Development Plan
   
1-7-30   North Interstate 25 Sector Development Plan
   
1-7-31   West Route 66 Sector Development Plan
   
1-7-32   Nob Hill Sector Development Plan
   
1-7-33   Rio Bravo Sector Development Plan
   
1-7-34   Tower/Unser Sector Development Plan
   
1-7-35   Martineztown/Santa Barbara Neighborhoods Sector Development Plan
   
1-7-36   Vineyard Sector Development Plan
   
1-7-37   High Desert Sector Development Plan
   
1-7-38   Quintessence Sector Development Plan
   
1-7-39   Barelas Sector Development Plan
   
1-7-40   South Martineztown Sector Development Plan
   
1-7-41   Window G Sector Development Plan
   
1-7-42   La Cueva Sector Development Plan
   
1-7-43   Downtown 2010 Sector Development Plan
   
1-7-44   East Gateway Sector Planning and Interim Development Management Area
   
1-7-45   Volcano Heights Sector Development Plan
   
1-7-46   2008 South Yale Sector Development Plan
   
1-7-47   North 4th Street Corridor Plan
   
1-7-48   Volcano Cliffs Sector Development Plan
   
1-7-49   Volcano Trails Sector Development Plan
§ 1-7-1 DESIGNATION OF COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT AREAS.
(Res. 127-1975, approved 7-18-75; Am. Res. 42-1976, approved 3-27-76; Am. Res.
127-1976, approved 9-21-76; Am. Res. 99-1978, approved 5-3-78; Res. 2017-102,
approved 11-13-17)
Editor's note: Community Development Area guidance was updated, incorporated
into, and replaced by Metropolitan Redevelopment Area Plans. See § 1-12.
§ 1-7-2 ACADEMY-TRAMWAY-EUBANK SECTOR DEVELOPMENT PLAN.
(Res. 120-1996, approved 10-18-96; Res. 2017-102, approved 11-13-17)
Editor’s note: The Academy-Tramway-Eubank Sector Development Plan, its
contents, and its boundaries are repealed.
§ 1-7-3 LOS DURANES SECTOR DEVELOPMENT PLAN AND COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT PLAN.
(Res. 83-1976, approved 6-9-76; Am. Res. 100-1978, approved 5-3-78; Am. Res.
62-1981, approved 3-23-81; Am. Res. R-2012-033, approved 4-30-2012; Res. 2017-
102, approved 11-13-17)
Cross-reference
   Los Duranes Area Redevelopment Plan, see §
1-6-2, repealed
Editor’s note: The Los Duranes Sector Development Plan and Community
Development Plan, its contents, and its boundaries are repealed.
§ 1-7-4 DOWNTOWN NEIGHBORHOOD AREA SECTOR DEVELOPMENT PLAN AND COMMUNITY
DEVELOPMENT PLAN.
(Res. 158-1976, approved 10-28-76; Am. Res. 105-1978, approved 5-3-78; Am. Res.
46-1983, approved 4-8-83; Am. Res. 11-1984, approved 2-8-84; Am. Res. 12-1984,
approved 2-9-84; Am. Res. 27-1985, approved 2-13-85; Am. Res. 2-1988, approved
1-5-88; Am. Res. 35-1999, approved 3-19-99; Am. Res. 50-2000, approved 5-22-00;
Am. Res. R-2012-052, approved 6-13-2012; Res. 2017-102, approved 11-13-17)
Cross-reference
   Downtown Neighborhood Area Redevelopment Plan, §
1-6-1, repealed
Editor’s note: The Downtown Neighborhood Area Sector Development Plan and
Community Development Plan, its contents, and its boundaries are repealed.
§ 1-7-5 UNIVERSITY OF ALBUQUERQUE SECTOR DEVELOPMENT PLAN.
(Res. 26-1996, approved 2-2-96; Am. Res. 78-1996, approved 7-3-96; Am. Res. 79-
1996, approved 7-3-96; Am. Res. 30-1997, approved 4-18-97; Am. Res. 19-1998,
approved 2-24-98; Am. Res. 10-2000, approved 2-10-00; Am. Res. 37-2002,
approved 5-28-02; Am. Res. 5-2003, approved 1-24-03; Am. Res. R-2007-112,
approved 9-24-07; Res. 2017-102, approved 11-13-17)
Editor’s note: The University of Albuquerque Sector Development Plan, its
contents, and its boundaries are repealed.
§ 1-7-6 LA MESA SECTOR DEVELOPMENT PLAN AND COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT PLAN.
(Res. 190-1976, approved 11-16-76; Am. Res. 102-1978, approved 5-3-78; Res.
2017-102, approved 11-13-17)
Editor’s note: The La Mesa Sector Development Plan and Community Development
Plan, its contents, and its boundaries are repealed.
§ 1-7-7 WEST MESA SECTOR DEVELOPMENT PLAN AND COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT PLAN.
(Res. 191-1976, approved 11-16-76; Am. Res. 104-1978, approved 5-3-78; Res.
2017-102, approved 11-13-17)
Editor’s note: The West Mesa Sector Development Plan and Community Development
Plan, its contents, and its boundaries are repealed.
§ 1-7-8 LOS GRIEGOS SECTOR DEVELOPMENT PLAN AND COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT PLAN.
(Res. 216-1976, approved 1-4-77; Am. Res. 101-1978, approved 5-3-78; Res. 2017-
102, approved 11-13-17)
Cross-reference:
   Los Griegos Design Overlay Zone, see §
1-10-20, repealed
Editor’s note: The Los Griegos Sector Development Plan and Community
Development Plan, its contents, and its boundaries are repealed.
§ 1-7-9 BOYS' CLUB SECTOR DEVELOPMENT PLAN.
(Res. 63-1976, approved 4-15-76; Am. Res. 103-1978, approved 5-3-78; Res. 2017-
102, approved 11-13-17)
Editor’s note: The Boys’ Club Sector Development Plan, its contents, and its
boundaries are repealed.
§ 1-7-10 NORTH BARELAS SECTOR DEVELOPMENT PLAN AND COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT PLAN.
(Res. 112-1976, approved 7-23-76; Am. Res. 106-1978, approved 5-3-78; Am. Res.
72-1981, approved 4-1-81; Res. 2017-102, approved 11-13-17)
Cross-reference:
   North Barelas Area Redevelopment Plan, see §
1-6-4, repealed
   Barelas Sector Development Plan, see §
1-7-39, repealed
Editor’s note: The North Barelas Sector Development Plan and Community
Development Plan, its contents, and its boundaries are repealed.
§ 1-7-11 OLD TOWN SECTOR DEVELOPMENT PLAN AND COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT PLAN.
(Res. 3-1977, approved 2-3-77; Am. Res. 93-1988, approved 6-16-88; Am. Res. 44-
1994, approved 6-8-94; Am. Res. 80-1997, approved 8-21-97; Am. Res. 22-1999,
approved 2-18-99; Res. 2017-102, approved 11-13-17)
Editor’s note: The Old Town Sector Development Plan and Community Development
Plan n, its contents, and its boundaries are repealed.
§ 1-7-12 HUNING HIGHLAND SECTOR DEVELOPMENT PLAN.
(Res. 3-1988, approved 1-5-88; Am. Res. R-2008-066, approved 5-15-08; Res.
2017-102, approved 11-13-17)
Cross-reference:
   Huning Highland Historic Overlay Zone, see §
1-10-1, repealed
Editor’s note: The Huning Highland Sector Development Plan, its contents, and
its boundaries are repealed.
§ 1-7-13 UNIVERSITY NEIGHBORHOODS AREA SECTOR DEVELOPMENT PLAN.
(Res. 102-1986, approved 7-25-86; Am. Res. 95-1991, approved 6-11-91; Res.
2017-102, approved 11-13-17)
Editor’s note: The University Neighborhoods Sector Development Plan, its
contents, and its boundaries are repealed.
§ 1-7-14 SAWMILL/WELLS PARK SECTOR DEVELOPMENT PLAN.
(Res. 20-1996, approved 2-7-96; Am. Res. 24-2000, approved 3-21-00; Am. Res.
32-2001, approved 3-12-01; Am. Res. 128-2002, approved 11-8-02; Am. Res. R-
2006-076, approved 08-22-06; Res. 2017-102, approved 11-13-17)
Cross-reference:
   Sawmill/Wells Park Metropolitan Redevelopment Area Plan, §
1-6-26
   Sawmill Metropolitan Redevelopment Plan, §
1-12-10 (formerly also §
1-6-26)
Editor’s note: The Sawmill/Wells Park Sector Development Plan, its contents,
and its boundaries are repealed.
§ 1-7-15 SOUTH BROADWAY NEIGHBORHOODS SECTOR DEVELOPMENT PLAN.
(Res. 106-1986, approved 7-7-86; Am. Res. 58-2002, approved 6-17-02; Res. 2017-
102, approved 11-13-17)
Cross-reference:
   South Broadway Neighborhoods Metropolitan Redevelopment Area and Plan, §
1-12-17 (formerly also §
1-6-9)
Editor’s note: The South Broadway Sector Development Plan, its contents, and
its boundaries are repealed.
Editor's note: The Metropolitan Redevelopment Plan aspect of the document
remains valid to guide the Metropolitan Redevelopment Agency’s work, including
infrastructure and catalytic projects, and public/private partnerships, subject
to amendment per the Metropolitan Redevelopment Agency Ordinance (§ 14-8-4-3
(B)); however, the regulations are now void. See §
1-6-9.
§ 1-7-16 ST. JOSEPH HOSPITAL/CIVIC AUDITORIUM AREA SECTOR DEVELOPMENT PLAN.
(Res. 149-1979, approved 10-22-79; Res. 2017-102, approved 11-13-17)
Cross-reference:
   Moved to §
1-12-4 (formerly also §
1-6-27)
Editor’s note: The St. Joseph Hospital/Civic Auditorium Area Sector Development
Plan, its contents, and its boundaries are repealed.
Editor's note: The Metropolitan Redevelopment Plan aspect of the document
remains valid to guide the Metropolitan Redevelopment Agency’s work, including
infrastructure and catalytic projects, and public/private partnerships, subject
to amendment per the Metropolitan Redevelopment Agency Ordinance (§ 14-8-4-3
(B)); however, the regulations are now void. See §
1-12-4.
§ 1-7-17 TRUMBULL NEIGHBORHOOD SECTOR DEVELOPMENT PLAN.
(Res. 13-1981, approved 1-20-81; Am. Res. 6-2003, approved 1-24-03; Am. Res.
2011-038, passed 5-26-11; Res. 2017-102, approved 11-13-17)
Editor’s note: The Trumbull Neighborhood Sector Development Plan, its contents,
and its boundaries are repealed.
§ 1-7-18 HUNING CASTLE AND RAYNOLDS ADDITION NEIGHBORHOOD SECTOR DEVELOPMENT
PLAN.
(Res. 22-1981, approved 1-30-81; Am. Res. 179-1993, approved 12-22-93; Am. Res.
50-2000, approved 5-22-00; Am. Res. 56-2002, approved 6-17-02; Res. 2017-102,
approved 11-13-17)
Editor’s note: The Huning Castle and Raynolds Addition Neighborhood Sector
Development Plan, its contents, and its boundaries are repealed.
§ 1-7-19 UPTOWN SECTOR DEVELOPMENT PLAN.
(Res. 94-1995, approved 6-19-95; Am. Res. 24-1999, approved 2-18-99; Am. Res.
27-2000, approved 3-21-00; Am. Res. 28-2000, approved 3-21-00; Am. Res. R-2009-
001, approved 1-15-2009; Am. Res. R-2011-056, approved 8-22-2011; Am. R-2013-
127, approved 12-13-2013; Res. 2017-102, approved 11-13-17)
Editor’s Note: The Sector Development Plan, its contents, and its boundaries
are repealed.
§ 1-7-20 EL RANCHO ATRISCO SECTOR DEVELOPMENT PLAN.
(Res. 37-1985, approved 3-5-85; Res. 2017-102, approved 11-13-17)
Editor’s note: The El Rancho Atrisco Sector Development Plan, its contents, and
its boundaries are repealed.
§ 1-7-21 LA CUESTA SECTOR DEVELOPMENT PLAN.
(Res. 35-1982, approved 3-11-82; Res. 2017-102, approved 11-13-17)
Editor’s note: The La Cuesta Sector Development Plan, its contents, and its
boundaries are repealed.
§ 1-7-22 HERITAGE HILLS EAST SECTOR DEVELOPMENT PLAN.
(Res. 174-1982, approved 10-20-82; Res. 2017-102, approved 11-13-17)
Editor’s note: The Heritage Hills Sector Development Plan, its contents, and
its boundaries are repealed.
§ 1-7-23 EAST GATEWAY SECTOR DEVELOPMENT PLAN.
(Res. 2010-129, effective 11-7-10; Res. 2013-041, effective 4-29-13, R-2013-
126, approved 12-13-2013; Res. 2017-102, approved 11-13-17)
Cross-reference:
   East Gateway Metropolitan Redevelopment Plan, §
1-12-20
Editor’s note: The East Gateway Sector Development Plan, its contents, and its
boundaries are repealed.
§ 1-7-24 MCCLELLAN PARK DISTRICT SECTOR DEVELOPMENT PLAN.
(Res. 10-1984, approved 2-8-84; Am. Res. 69-1995, approved 5-18-95; Am. Res.
50-2000, approved 5-22-00; Am. Res. 57-2002, approved 6-17-02; Res. 2017-102,
approved 11-13-17)
Cross-reference:
   McClellan Park Metropolitan Redevelopment Plan, §
1-12-16 (formerly §
1-6-7)
Editor’s note: The McClellan Park District Sector Development Plan, its
contents, and its boundaries are repealed.
Editor's note: The Metropolitan Redevelopment Plan aspect of the document
remains valid to guide the Metropolitan Redevelopment Agency’s work, including
infrastructure and catalytic projects, and public/private partnerships, subject
to amendment per the Metropolitan Redevelopment Agency Ordinance (§ 14-8-4-3
(B)); however, the regulations are now void. See §
1-12-17.
§ 1-7-25 LAVA SHADOWS SECTOR DEVELOPMENT PLAN.
(Res. 191-1984, approved 11-15-84; Res. 2017-102, approved 11-13-17)
Editor’s note: The Lava Shadows Sector Development Plan, its contents, and its
boundaries are repealed.
§ 1-7-26 EAST ATRISCO SECTOR DEVELOPMENT PLAN.
(Res. 196-1984, approved 11-21-84; Res. 2017-102, approved 11-13-17)
Editor’s note: The East Atrisco Sector Development Plan, its contents, and its
boundaries are repealed.
§ 1-7-27 COORS CORRIDOR SECTOR DEVELOPMENT PLAN.
(Res. 72-1984, approved 5-16-84; Am. Res. 56-1986, approved 4-29-86; Am. Res.
102-1987, approved 9-30-87; Am. Res. 163-1989, approved 10-12-89; Am. Res. 191-
1989, approved 11-27-89; Am. Res. 67-1995, approved 5-15-95 Am. Res. 29-2003,
approved 4-7-03; Am. Res. 1001-2003, approved 9-19-03; Res. 2017-102, approved
11-13-17)
Editor’s note: The Coors Corridor Sector Development Plan, its contents, and
its boundaries are repealed.
§ 1-7-28 SEVEN BAR RANCH NEIGHBORHOOD SECTOR DEVELOPMENT PLAN.
(Res. 74-1985, approved 5-3-85; Am. Res. 57-1986, approved 4-29-86; Am. Res.
78-1997, approved 7-16-97; Am. Res. 108-1998, approved 11-25-98; Am. Res. 121-
1998, approved 11-25-98; Am. Res. 14-1999, approved 2-4-99; Am. Res. R-2005-
154, approved 9-28-05; Am. Res. R-2007-028, approved 3-30-07; Am. Res. R-2009-
025, approved 3-5-09; Res. 2017-102, approved 11-13-17)
Editor’s note: The Seven Bar Ranch Neighborhood Sector Development Plan, its
contents, and its boundaries are repealed.
§ 1-7-29 RIVERVIEW NEIGHBORHOOD SECTOR DEVELOPMENT PLAN.
(Res. 217-1985, approved 12-20-85; Am. Res. 64-2002, approved 6-17-02; Res.
2017-102, approved 11-13-17)
Editor’s note: The Riverview Neighborhood Sector Development Plan, its
contents, and its boundaries are repealed.
§ 1-7-30 NORTH INTERSTATE 25 SECTOR DEVELOPMENT PLAN.
(Res. R-2010-041, approved 3-16-10; Am. Res. R-2012-036, approved 5-29-2012;
Res. 2017-102, approved 11-13-17)
Editor’s note: The North Interstate 25 Sector Development Plan, its contents,
and its boundaries are repealed.
§ 1-7-31 WEST ROUTE 66 SECTOR DEVELOPMENT PLAN.
(Res. 120-1987, approved 11-24-87; Am. Res. 98-1988, approved 6-16-88; Am. Res.
33-2001, approved 3-12-01; Am. Res. 67-2001, approved 4-25-01; Am. Res. 181-
2001, approved 12-12-01; Am. Res. R-2008-104, approved 9-11-2008; Am. Res. R-
2009-038, approved 3-24-09; Res. 2017-102, approved 11-13-17)
Editor’s note: The West Route 66 Sector Development Plan, its contents, and its
boundaries are repealed.
§ 1-7-32 NOB HILL SECTOR DEVELOPMENT PLAN.
(Res. 12-1988, approved 1-5-88; Am. Res. 76-1992, approved 6-8-92; Am. Res. 79-
1992, approved 6-8-92; Am. Res. R-2005-018, approved 2-23-2005; Am. Res R-2006-
050, approved 5-31-2006; Am. Res. R-2007-96, approved 9-7-2007; Am. Res. R-
2009-061, approved 5-18-2009; Am. Res. R-2010-130, approved 10-28-2010; Am.
Res. R-2012-47, approved 6-12-2012; Am. Res. R-2012-085, approved 10-10-2012;
R-13-164, approved 7-12-2013;Am. Res. R-2014-028, approved 6-13-2014; Res.
2017-102, approved 11-13-17)
Editor’s note: The Nob Hill Sector Development Plan, its contents, and its
boundaries are repealed.
§ 1-7-33 RIO BRAVO SECTOR DEVELOPMENT PLAN.
(Res. 215-1988, approved 12-22-88; Am. Res. 4-2000, approved 1-13-00; Am. Res.
24-2002, approved 4-23-02; Am. Res. R-2005-056, approved 4-25-05; Am. Res. R-
2009-036, approved 3-24-09; Res. 2017-102, approved 11-13-17)
Editor’s note: The Rio Bravo Sector Development Plan, its contents, and its
boundaries are repealed.
§ 1-7-34 TOWER/UNSER SECTOR DEVELOPMENT PLAN.
(Res. 129-1989, approved 8-31-89; Am. Res. 40-1996, approved 4-1-96; Am. Res.
28-1997, approved 3-19-97; Am. Res. 37-1997, approved 4-28-97; Am. Res. 48-
1997, approved 6-10-97; Am. Res. 5-1999, approved 1-5-99; Am. Res. 39-1999,
approved 3-30-99; Am. Res. 102-2001, approved 7-17-01; Am. Res. 133-2001,
approved 10-8-01; Am. Res. 134-2001, approved 10-8-01; Res. 160-2001, approved
11-14-01; Am. Res. R-2005-148, approved 9-28-05; Am. Res. R-2009-037; approved
3-24-09; Res. 2017-102, approved 11-13-17)
Editor’s note: The Tower/Unser Sector Development Plan, its contents, and its
boundaries are repealed.
§ 1-7-35 MARTINEZTOWN/SANTA BARBARA NEIGHBORHOODS SECTOR DEVELOPMENT PLAN.
(Res. 22-1990, approved 3-5-90; Am. Res. 123-1993, approved 8-25-93; Am. Res.
60-2002, approved 6-17-02; Res. 2017-102, approved 11-13-17)
Cross-reference
   Martineztown-Santa Barbara Area Redevelopment Plan, see §
1-6-3, repealed
   Martineztown-Santa Barbara Neighborhood Metropolitan Redevelopment Area, see
§
1-12-9
Editor’s note: The Martineztown/Santa Barbara Sector Development Plan, its
contents, and its boundaries are repealed.
§ 1-7-36 VINEYARD SECTOR DEVELOPMENT PLAN.
(Res. 70-1991, approved 5-24-91; Am. Res. 55-1994, approved 7-6-94; Am. Res.
79-2000, approved 9-6-00; Res. 2017-102, approved 11-13-17)
Editor’s note: The Vineyard Sector Development Plan, its contents, and its
boundaries are repealed.
§ 1-7-37 HIGH DESERT SECTOR DEVELOPMENT PLAN.
(Res. 50-1993, approved 5-26-93; Am. Res. 73-1993, approved 6-18-93; Am. Res.
155-1993, approved 10-25-93; Am. Res. 118-1995, approved 10-5-95; Am. Res. 119-
1995, approved 10-5-95; Am. Res. 36-1999, approved 3-19-99; Res. 2017-102,
approved 11-13-17)
Editor’s note: The High Desert Sector Development Plan, its contents, and its
boundaries are repealed.
§ 1-7-38 QUINTESSENCE SECTOR DEVELOPMENT PLAN.
(Res. 68-1993, approved 6-18-93; Res. 2017-102, approved 11-13-17)
Editor’s note: The Quintessence Sector Development Plan, its contents, and its
boundaries are repealed.
§ 1-7-39 BARELAS SECTOR DEVELOPMENT PLAN.
(Res. 74-1993, approved 6-18-93; Am. Res. 55-2002, approved 6-17-02; Am. Res.
R-2008-053, approved 4-28-08; Am. Res. R-2010-144, effective 12-24-10; Am. Res.
R-2012-090, approved 10-26-2012, Am. Res. R-2013-128, approved 12-13-2013; Am.
Res. R-2014-102, approved 12-16-2014; Res. 2017-102, approved 11-13-17)
Cross-reference:
   North Barelas Area Redevelopment Plan, see §
1-6-4, repealed
   North Barelas Sector Development Plan and Community Development Plan, see §
1-7-10, repealed
   Barelas Neighborhood Commercial Area Revitalization and Metropolitan
Redevelopment Plan, §
1-12-19 (formerly §
1-6-11)
   Rail Yards Master Development Plan, §
1-17-3 (formerly §
1-6-16)
Editor’s note: The Barelas Sector Development Plan, its contents, and its
boundaries are repealed.
§ 1-7-40 SOUTH MARTINEZTOWN SECTOR DEVELOPMENT PLAN.
(Res. 138-1995, approved 11-1-95; Am. Res. 59-2002, approved 6-17-02; Res.
2017-102, approved 11-13-17)
Editor’s note: The South Martineztown Sector Development Plan, its contents,
and its boundaries are repealed.
§ 1-7-41 WINDOW G SECTOR DEVELOPMENT PLAN.
(Res. 58-1996, approved 6-7-96; Res. 2017-102, approved 11-13-17)
Editor’s note: The Window G Sector Development Plan, its contents, and its
boundaries are repealed.
§ 1-7-42 LA CUEVA SECTOR DEVELOPMENT PLAN.
(Res. 65-2000, approved 6-26-00; Am. Res. 24-2002, approved 4-23-02; Am. Res.
17-2003, approved 2-26-03; Am. Res. 103-2002, approved 9-19-03; AM. Res. R-
2007-116, approved 9-19-07; Res. 2017-102, approved 11-13-17)
Editor’s note: The La Cueva Sector Development Plan, its contents, and its
boundaries are repealed.
§ 1-7-43 DOWNTOWN 2010 SECTOR DEVELOPMENT PLAN.
(Res. 44-2004, approved 5-11-04; Res. 2017-102, approved 11-13-17)
Cross-reference:
   Downtown 2025 Metropolitan Redevelopment Area Plan, §
1-12-15 (formerly also §
1-4-1)
Editor’s note: The Downtown 2010/2025 Sector Development Plan, its contents,
and its boundaries are repealed.
Editor's note: The Metropolitan Redevelopment Plan aspect of the document
remains valid to guide the Metropolitan Redevelopment Agency’s work, including
infrastructure and catalytic projects, and public/private partnerships, subject
to amendment per the Metropolitan Redevelopment Agency Ordinance (§ 14-8-4-3
(B)); however, the regulations are now void. See §
1-6-21.
§ 1-7-44   EAST GATEWAY SECTOR PLANNING AND INTERIM DEVELOPMENT MANAGEMENT
AREA.
(R-2007-080, approved 7-6-07; Am. Res. R-2009-103, approved 7-13-09; Res. 2017-
102, approved 11-13-17)
Cross-reference:
   East Gateway Metropolitan Redevelopment Plan, §
1-12-25
Editor’s note: The East Gateway Sector Planning and Interim Development
Management Area, its contents, and its boundaries are repealed.
§ 1-7-45 VOLCANO HEIGHTS SECTOR DEVELOPMENT PLAN
(Am. Res. R-2014-079, approved 10-22-2014; Res. 2017-102, approved 11-13-17)
Editor’s note: The Volcano Heights Sector Development Plan, its contents, and
its boundaries are repealed.
§ 1-7-46 2008 SOUTH YALE SECTOR DEVELOPMENT PLAN
(Am. Res. R-2009-014, approved 2-13-09; Res. 2017-102, approved 11-13-17)
Editor’s note: The South Yale Sector Development Plan, its contents, and its
boundaries are repealed.
§ 1-7-47 NORTH 4TH STREET CORRIDOR PLAN
(Res. R-2010-050, approved 4-9-10; Res. 2017-102, approved 11-13-17)
Editor’s note: The North 4th Street Sector Development Plan, its contents, and
its boundaries are repealed.
§ 1-7-48 VOLCANO CLIFFS SECTOR DEVELOPMENT PLAN.
(Res. R-2011-039, passed 5-26-11, Am. Res. R-2014-077, approved 10-22-2014;
Res. 2017-102, approved 11-13-17)
Editor’s note: The Volcano Cliffs Sector Development Plan, its contents, and
its boundaries are repealed.
§ 1-7-49 VOLCANO TRAILS SECTOR DEVELOPMENT PLAN.
(Res. R-2011-066, passed 8-31-11; Am. Res. R-2014-078, approved 10-22-2014;
Res. 2017-102, approved 11-13-17)
Editor’s note: The Volcano Trails Sector Development Plan, its contents, and
its boundaries are repealed.
ARTICLE 8: DEVELOPMENT AREAS AND PROGRAMS
Section
Development Areas
   
1-8-1   Albuquerque High School Urban Development Area
   
1-8-2   Robinson Urban Development Area
   
1-8-3   Tijeras Urban Renewal Plan; amendment
   
1-8-4   Alvarado Development Area
   
1-8-5   University Neighborhood Development Area
Development Programs
   
1-8-10   Approving Amendment No. 3 to Urban Renewal Plan for NDP A-1-2
   
1-8-11   Development Program for NM1-13A-housing for low income families
   
1-8-12   Development Program for NM1-10A housing for the elderly
   
1-8-13   Development Agreement for the Albuquerque Indian School property
DEVELOPMENT AREAS
§ 1-8-1 ALBUQUERQUE HIGH SCHOOL URBAN DEVELOPMENT AREA.
   (A)   The area described as the Albuquerque High School Development Area is
hereby determined and declared to be a blighted area as that term is defined by
the Urban Development Law of the state of New Mexico.
   (B)   The Urban Development Agency of the city, by this action, is hereby
authorized to prepare or cause to be prepared detailed urban renewal plans for
activities to be carried out or encouraged in the area herein designated in
accordance with the Urban Development Law of the state of New Mexico. Provided,
however, no urban development activities or urban renewal activities shall be
carried out or conducted until such time as said urban renewal plan has been
presented to and approved by the City Council, as provided by law.
(Res. 73-1977, approved 5-16-77)
Cross-reference:
   
Purchase of Old Albuquerque High School, see § 1-9-17
   
Acquisition of Old Albuquerque High School, see § 1-9-19
§ 1-8-2 ROBINSON URBAN DEVELOPMENT AREA.
   (A)   The area described as the Robinson Urban Development Area is hereby
determined and declared to be a blighted area as that term is defined by the
Urban Development Law of the State of New Mexico.
   (B)   The Urban Development Agency of the city, by this action, is hereby
authorized to prepare or cause to be prepared detailed urban renewal plans for
activities to be carried out or encouraged in the area herein designated in
accordance with the Urban Development Law of the state of New Mexico. Provided,
however, no urban development activities or urban renewal activities shall be
carried out or conducted until such time as said urban renewal plan has been
presented to and approved by the City Council, as provided by law.
(Res. 74-1977, approved 5-16-77)
Cross-reference:
   Inclusion into Alvarado Metropolitan Redevelopment Area, see §
1-12-1(K)
§ 1-8-3 TIJERAS URBAN RENEWAL PLAN; AMENDMENT.
   (A)   The Tijeras Urban Renewal Plan adopted on November 3, 1969 is hereby
amended by designating a disposition parcel to be known as “Disposition Parcel
No. 10-C” the description and location of which is adopted by reference.
   (B)   Disposition Parcel No. 10-C, as herein provided for, shall be subject
to the restrictions of the Tijeras Urban Renewal Plan titled “General District”
rather than restricted to public use as heretofore provided.
(Res. 75-1977, approved 5-16-77)
§ 1-8-4 ALVARADO DEVELOPMENT AREA.
   (A)   The area described as the Alvarado Development Area, is hereby
determined and declared to be a blighted area, as that term is defined by the
Urban Development Law of the state of New Mexico.
   (B)   The Urban Development Agency of the city, by this action, is hereby
authorized to prepare, or cause to be prepared, detailed urban renewal plans
for activities to be carried out or encouraged in the area herein designated in
accordance with the Urban Development Law of the state of New Mexico. The Board
of Commissioners of the Urban Development Agency is hereby authorized to
utilize, for the purpose of preparing or causing the preparation of said urban
renewal plans, funds in the amount of $35,000 from the “Urban Development Fund”
as established by the alternate method of financing urban renewal projects.
However, no urban development activities or urban renewal activities shall be
carried out or conducted until such time as said urban renewal plan has been
presented to and approved by the City Council, as provided by law.
(Res. 189-1977, approved 9-28-77)
Cross-reference:
   
Alvarado Metropolitan Redevelopment Plan, see § 1-6-6
   
Alvarado Metropolitan Redevelopment Area, see § 1-12-1
§ 1-8-5 UNIVERSITY NEIGHBORHOOD DEVELOPMENT AREA.
   (A)   The area described as the University Neighborhood Area is hereby
determined and declared to be a blighted area, as that term is defined by the
Community Development Law of the state of New Mexico, appropriate for community
development projects.
   (B)   The city, by this action, is hereby authorize to prepare or cause to
be prepared detailed community development plans for activities to be carried
out in the area herein designated in accordance with the Community Development
Law of the state of New Mexico, provided that no community development
activities shall be conducted until said plans have been approved by the City
Council, as provided by the Community Development Law.
   (C)   The redevelopment activities to be undertaken in the area herein
designated under community development plans to be subsequently adopts are
hereby determined and declared to be necessary in the interest of the health,
safety and welfare of the residents of the city.
(Res. 192-1978, approved 9-5-78)
DEVELOPMENT PROGRAMS
§ 1-8-10 APPROVING AMENDMENT NO. 3 TO URBAN RENEWAL PLAN FOR NDP A-1-2.
   (A)   It is found and determined that there exists a feasible method for the
location of families who will be displaced by this project from the
Neighborhood Development Program, A-1-2 Area, in decent, safe and sanitary
dwelling accommodations within their means and without undue hardship to such
families.
   (B)   The amended Neighborhood Development Program Urban Renewal Plan for
the NDP A-1-2 Area conforms to the General Plan of the city as a whole.
   (C)   The amended Neighborhood Development Program Urban Renewal Plan for
the NDP A-1-2 Area will afford maximum opportunity consistent with the sound
needs of the city as a whole, for the rehabilitation or redevelopment of the A-
1-2 Area by private enterprise;
   (D)   The Urban Renewal Plan for the Neighborhood Development Program, as
amended, is hereby in all respects approved and the Executive Director of the
Urban Development Agency is hereby directed to file a certified copy of said
amendment entitled, “Amendment No. 3-1974 to the Modified General Urban Renewal
Plan for Neighborhood Development Program of Albuquerque, New Mexico” with the
minutes of this meeting.
(Res. 20-1974, approved 9-30-74)
§ 1-8-11 DEVELOPMENT PROGRAM FOR NM1-13A-HOUSING FOR LOW INCOME FAMILIES.
   (A)   The development program for 67 Operation Breakthrough Turnkey dwelling
units for NM1-13A is hereby approved.
   (B)   The Mayor, or the Chief Administrative Officer is hereby authorized to
execute all documents necessary for carrying out the development of these 67
Operation Breakthrough Turnkey dwelling units.
(Res. 21-1974, approved 10-21-74)
§ 1-8-12 DEVELOPMENT PROGRAM FOR NM1-10A HOUSING FOR THE ELDERLY.
   (A)   The attached development program for 101 Operation Breakthrough
Turnkey dwelling units for NM1-10A, is hereby approved.
   (B)   The Mayor, or the Chief Administrative Officer, is hereby authorized
to execute all documents necessary for carrying out the development of these
101 Operation Breakthrough Turnkey dwelling units.
(Res. 22-1974, approved 10-21-74)
§ 1-8-13 DEVELOPMENT AGREEMENT FOR THE ALBUQUERQUE INDIAN SCHOOL PROPERTY.
   (A)   The Development Agreement relating to the former Albuquerque Indian
School Property (the "Property") and attached to Resolution No. 57-2001 shall
constitute the policy of the city.
   (B)   The Development Agreement must be agreed to by the Indian Pueblos
Federal Development Corporation and the 19 New Mexico Pueblos in order to take
effect.
   (C)   The execution of the Development Agreement shall be the condition for
providing city services for the Property including, but not limited to, police
and fire protection, water, wastewater, health and safety services.
   (D)   The city shall inform the U.S. Department of the Interior, pursuant to
the participation of local government in the decision to transfer the Property
into trust, that the support of the City of Albuquerque for such action is
conditional on the execution of the Development Agreement.
   (E)   At or before the first substantial development on the Property, a cul-
de-sac shall be created on 9th Street, south of Cutler, to provide access to
the park but close off access to Indian School Rd. The Public Works Department
shall investigate providing parking for park users in the former 9th Street
right of way as part of this project. No access to the Albuquerque Indian
School property shall be provided from the east side of the Property.
(Res. 57-2001, approved 4-3-01; Am. Res. 26-2004, approved 2-18-04)
ARTICLE 9: LAND ACQUISITIONS, EXCHANGES, AND DONATIONS
Section
   
1-9-1   Purchase of open land in the Sandia foothills
   
1-9-2   Acquisition of land for the Museum of Albuquerque
   
1-9-3   Acquisition of certain portions of land in the Mid-North Valley for use
as open space
   
1-9-4   Acquisition of property for new county-city criminal justice complex
   
1-9-5   Exercise of eminent domain to condemn easements needed to construct a
water line in the Valley Gardens South Addition
   
1-9-6   Desire to accept ownership of privately owned lands along the Rio
Grande
   
1-9-7   Exchange of surplus land for property owned by the Albuquerque Public
Schools
   
1-9-8   Acquisition of the Sunport swimming pool and related improvements
   
1-9-9   Exchange of surplus land for property owned by the Spyrok Corporation
   
1-9-10   Exchange of surplus land for property owned by the County Board of
Education
   
1-9-11   Donation of real property to the New Mexico State Highway Department
   
1-9-12   Acquisition of the Elena Gallegos Land Grant Area
   
1-9-13   Purchase of land from the University of New Mexico
   
1-9-14   Purchase of land between San Pedro and Louisiana Blvds.
   
1-9-15   Exchange of real estate with Presley
   
1-9-16   Acquisition of open space in the Piedras Macadras Unit
   
1-9-17   Purchase of Old Albuquerque High School
   
1-9-18   Purchase of land for Cerro Colorado Landfill
   
1-9-19   Acquisition of Old Albuquerque High School
§ 1-9-1 PURCHASE OF OPEN LAND IN THE SANDIA FOOTHILLS.
   (A)   The city shall conduct appraisals and commence negotiations for the
purchase of available open, space in the Sandia Foothills, as defined by the
Sandia Foothills Master Plan approved July 23, 1973 to the extent of available
money for open space acquisition including possible Bureau of Outdoor
Recreation matching grants.
   (B)   Priorities for acquisition of open space as indicated on the Sandia
Foothills Master Plan, May 1973, are approved.
(Res. 121-1975, approved 7-16-75)
§ 1-9-2 ACQUISITION OF LAND FOR THE MUSEUM OF ALBUQUERQUE.
   (A)   The city shall purchase the northern portion of the Navajo Freight
Yard site, bounded on the north by Mountain Road, on the south by the proposed
Old Town Parking Lot, and between 19th Street and the east property line of Old
Town Shops along San Felipe Street, N.W. as the site for the new Museum of
Albuquerque.
   (B)   The cost of design and construction of the Museum is to be included in
the Capital Improvement Program to be submitted to the voters in October, 1975.
(Res. 145-1975, approved 7-30-75)
§ 1-9-3 ACQUISITION OF CERTAIN PORTIONS OF LAND IN THE MID-NORTH VALLEY FOR USE
AS OPEN SPACE.
   (A)   The city shall acquire as large a portion of the area described in
division (B) below for open space as possible.
   (B)   The city shall explore various means to acquire the land, or portions
thereof, for usable open space in the area in the Mid-North Valley, which is
defined as follows:
      On the east side of the Rio Grande, on the north side of Candelaria
Boulevard and between Matthew Avenue and Candelaria Road, the Griegos Drain and
the Griegos Lateral, which exact boundaries are shown on the map attached to
Resolution 149-1975.
(Res. 149-1975, approved 8-6-75)
§ 1-9-4 ACQUISITION OF PROPERTY FOR NEW COUNTY-CITY CRIMINAL JUSTICE COMPLEX.
   (A)   The Mayor is hereby authorized to acquire the real property in the
block bounded by Fourth Street, Roma Street, Fifth Street and Fruit Street for
public purposes at the appraised price.
   (B)   The Mayor is authorized to acquire this real property by condemnation
if the property owners will not sell for the appraised price.
   (C)   The funds for the acquisition of the real property are hereby
appropriated from the Sales Tax Revenue Bond Fund.
   (D)   The Sales Tax Revenue Bond Fund shall be reimbursed up to the sum of
$1,000,000 from the Court Building bonds when and if same is approved by the
voters.
(Res. 183-1975, approved 9-30-75)
§ 1-9-5 EXERCISE OF EMINENT DOMAIN TO CONDEMN EASEMENTS NEEDED TO CONSTRUCT A
WATER LINE IN THE VALLEY GARDENS SOUTH ADDITION.
   The City Attorney is hereby authorized and directed to file in the District
Court of Bernalillo County, an action in eminent domain condemning the
easements needed for the installation of the water line in the Valley Gardens
South Addition.
(Res. 201-1975, approved 11-26-75)
§ 1-9-6 DESIRE TO ACCEPT OWNERSHIP OF PRIVATELY OWNED LANDS ALONG THE RIO
GRANDE.
   The city hereby expresses its desire to accept ownership in a form which is
mutually agreeable to the city and the grantor of privately owned lands north
of property owned by the Albuquerque Public Schools at the “oxbow site” and
from the bank of the Rio Grande to the Eastern boundary of the property rich is
a portion of the SW/4 SE/4 NW/4 SW/4 of Section 36, T 11 N, R2E N.M.P.M.
Provided that this conveyance is made subject to the express condition and
limitation that the premises herein described shall be held as a natural
preserve for scientific, educational and aesthetic purposes, and shall be kept
entirely in its natural state except for construction and maintenance of such
fences and foot trails is may be appropriate to effectuate the foregoing
purposes without impairing the essential natural character of the premises.
(Res. 210-1975, approved 12-5-75)
§ 1-9-7 EXCHANGE OF SURPLUS LAND FOR PROPERTY OWNED BY THE ALBUQUERQUE PUBLIC
SCHOOLS.
   (A)   Exchange of portions of Nanzano Mesa Park, Hoover-Baker Park and
Matheson Park for John Marshall School.
      (1)   The property known as portions of Nanzano Mesa Park, Hoover-Baker
Park and Matheson Park further described in Exhibits “A,” “B,” and “C” is
declared surplus. Such exhibits are made a part of this section by reference.
      (2)   The land described in (A) above shall be exchanged for property
owned by the Albuquerque Public Schools known as John Marshall School further
described in Exhibit “D.” Such exhibit is made a part of this section by
reference.
(Res. 219-1975, approved 12-23-75)
   (B)   Exchange of Campus Dam for Riverview Elementary School.
      (1)   The property known as Campus Dam, as further described in Exhibit
“A,” is declared surplus. Exhibit “A” is made a part of this section by
reference.
      (2)   The property described in division (A) above shall be exchanged for
the Riverview Elementary School property owned by the Albuquerque Public
Schools as further described in Exhibit “B.” Exhibit “B” is made a part of this
section by reference.
(Res. 15-1976, approved 1-27-76)
§ 1-9-8 ACQUISITION OF THE SUNPORT SWIMMING POOL AND RELATED IMPROVEMENTS.
   (A)   The decision by the City Council to acquire the Sunport Swimming Pool
and related facilities as part of the first year Community Development Program
is hereby in all respects approved and affirmed.
   (B)   The City Council hereby finds and declares that Councillor Ray Baca
did in fact act properly by abstaining from voting on the question of
acquisition of that property by the city; further, the fact he was an owner of
the Sunport Pool had no influence on the decision to acquire the Sunport Pool.
   (C)   The U. S. Department of Housing and Urban Development is hereby urged
to approve the acquisition of the Sunport Pool and related improvements as part
of the first year Community Development Program of the city.
(Res. 47-1976, approved 3-30-76)
§ 1-9-9 EXCHANGE OF SURPLUS LAND FOR PROPERTY OWNED BY THE SPYROK CORPORATION.
   (A)   The property known as a portion of the Lomas Dam Site further
described in Exhibit “A,” which exhibit is made a part of this section by
reference, is declared surplus.
   (B)   The land described in division (A) above shall be exchanged for
property owned by Spyrok Corporation known as Embudo Arroyo Project area
further described in Exhibit “B,” which exhibit is made a part of this section
by reference.
   (C)   Any difference in value between the property described in Exhibit “B”
and that described in Exhibit “A” after eight acres of drainage right-of-way
easements in Exhibit “B” have been granted by the Spyrok Corporation to public
authority shall be credited towards the Park Development Fee as required by
Ordinance No. 7-1976 for properties belonging to Spyrok Corporation or
companies or persons affiliated with Spyrok Corporation within ½ mile radius of
Exhibit “B.” The value of the properties shall be determined by an appraisal
obtained by Spyrok Corporation at the time of the exchange, such appraisal to
be made by an appraiser mutually agreed upon by the city and the Spyrok
Corporation. The decision of the appraiser shall be final and is not subject to
appeal.
(Res. 76-1976, approved 5-25-76)
§ 1-9-10 EXCHANGE OF SURPLUS LAND FOR PROPERTY OWNED BY THE COUNTY BOARD OF
EDUCATION.
   (A)   The property known as the Civic Auditorium further described in
Exhibit “A,” which exhibit is made a part of this section by reference, is
declared surplus.
   (B)   The Mayor is authorized to prepare and execute appropriate deeds for
exchanging the lands described in division (A) above for lands presently owned
by the Board of Education of the County of Bernalillo, the legal description of
said lands being contained in Exhibit “B,” which is made a part of this section
by reference.
(Res. 95-1976, approved 6-25-76)
§ 1-9-11 DONATION OF REAL PROPERTY TO THE NEW MEXICO STATE HIGHWAY DEPARTMENT.
   (A)   The donation to the New Mexico State Highway Department of
approximately 2.670 acres of real property owned by the city and located along
Gibson Boulevard, all as more fully described in Exhibit “A,” which is made a
part of this section by reference, is determined to be in the best interests of
the city and is hereby approved.
   (B)   The Mayor and/or the Chief Administrative Officer are/is hereby
authorized to execute all documents relating said donation.
(Res. 148-1976, approved 10-7-76)
§ 1-9-12 ACQUISITION OF THE ELENA GALLEGOS LAND GRANT AREA.
   The undeveloped portions of the Elena Gallegos land grant area shall be
acquired by public authority and be designated as open space for public use n
the Master Recreation Plan for the Sandia Mountains presently being developed
by the State Parks and Recreation Commission.
(Res. 204-1977, approved 10-26-77)
§ 1-9-13 PURCHASE OF LAND FROM THE UNIVERSITY OF NEW MEXICO.
   The Council approves:
   (A)   The land purchase agreement with the University of New Mexico attached
to Resolution 105-1982 for the immediate purchase from the University of New
Mexico of 2.639 acres of land, an option to purchase 3.361 acres by July 31,
2012, and an option to purchase 6.224 acres by July 31, 1984. The entire tract
of land is located at the northeast corner of the intersection of Louisiana
Boulevard and Constitution Avenue, N.E., with the 2.639 acres located in the
easterly portion of the tract, the 3.361 acres in the middle of the tract, and
the 6.224 acres in the westerly portion of the tract; and
   (B)   The related 30-year lease agreement for the aforesaid 3.361 acres,
which agreement is attached to Resolution 105-1982 and made a part hereof.
(Res. 105-1982, approved 6-24-82)
§ 1-9-14 PURCHASE OF LAND BETWEEN SAN PEDRO AND LOUISIANA BLVDS.
   The Council approves the Land Purchase Option Agreement with the Beverly
Wood Associates attached to Resolution 133-1982 for the immediate purchase from
Beverly Wood Associates of 2.509 acres of land, which land is located to the
south of I-40, between San Pedro Boulevard and Louisiana Boulevard.
(Res. 133-1982, approved 7-28-82)
§ 1-9-15 EXCHANGE OF REAL ESTATE WITH PRESLEY.
   (A)   Tracts E and F of Forest Hills Subdivision and the 1.3213 acres, more
or less, of vacated right-of-way for Forest Hills Drive, being the northerly 34
feet of the original right-of-way from the west right-of-way line of Louisiana
Boulevard westward to Tract F, are declared non-essential for Municipal
purposes.
   (B)   The exchange, as proposed in the seven-page Agreement and Exchange of
Real Estate attached to Resolution No. 175-1986, is approved allowing signature
of a formal agreement, which:
      (1)   Conveys from the city to Presley Tracts E and F of Forest Hills
Subdivision and the vacated portion of Forest Hills Drive. Presley Company of
New Mexico's obligation under the city's Subdivision Ordinance to participate
in the cost of improvements to San Antonio Avenue and the South Pino Arroyo, as
it relates to Academy Acres Unit 16, is waived.
      (2)   Conveys from Presley to the city Tract “A” Academy Acres Unit 16,
the South Pino Arroyo right-of-way, the San Antonio Avenue right-of-way, and
the Louisiana Boulevard right-of-way.
(Res. 175-1986, approved 12-10-86)
§ 1-9-16 ACQUISITION OF OPEN SPACE IN THE PIEDRAS MACADRAS UNIT.
   The city is authorized to take all steps necessary to acquire property in
the Piedras Marcadas Unit of the proposed Petroglyph National Monument
including the exercise of the city's power of eminent domain.
(Res. 205-1989, approved 11-27-89)
§ 1-9-17 PURCHASE OF OLD ALBUQUERQUE HIGH SCHOOL.
   (A)   The Mayor is authorized to enter into a binding option, with the
consideration being the final report/s received by the city that results from
the studies conducted by the city concerning Old Albuquerque High School, to
purchase the Old Albuquerque High School at a price determined by the Real
Property Division of the city's Planning Department but not in excess of
$2,175,000 which shall include hazardous materials removal to be performed by
the owner. This sale price is supported by the appraisal provided by Brooks,
Lomax, and Fletcher to the city. The option to purchase may contain a price
which exceeds this amount if approved by the City Council. The option shall
comply with the process and provisions of the city's “Manual of Policies and
Procedures for Acquisition of Real Property,” effective September 1, 1989,
except the minimum period for the option shall be four months.
   (B)   The option shall not be exercised and a final purchase agreement
entered into except by vote of the Council; transmittal of such proposal to
purchase the Old Albuquerque High School property shall only be conveyed to the
Council accompanied by:
      (1)   The final Advisory Task Force report, which shall include proposals
on how the improvement of the property could include substantial opportunity
for other public agencies and private parties to share substantially in the
project through a public-private or public-public partnership; and
      (2)   A report from the Mayor on the proposed source of the funds to
purchase the property.
(Res. 221-1989, approved 12-28-89)
Cross-reference:
   
Albuquerque High School Urban Development Area, see § 1-8-1
   
Acquisition of Old Albuquerque High School, see §
1-9-19
§ 1-9-18 PURCHASE OF LAND FOR CERRO COLORADO LANDFILL.
   (A)   The city Solid Waste Department hereby purchases from the Open Space
Fund Section 18, or 470 acres of property known as the Cerro Colorado and 65
acres of Section 17, and all property necessary for access right-of-way to be
developed as a regional sanitary landfill.
   (B)   It is the intent of the Council that the city apply for the maximum
number of years allowable by state law, preferably for the entire life
expectancy of the entire Cerro Colorado site, which is estimated to be 28
years.
(Res. 117-1989, approved 8-17-89)
§ 1-9-19 ACQUISITION OF OLD ALBUQUERQUE HIGH SCHOOL.
   (A)   The policy of the city shall be to acquire the Old Albuquerque High
School facility. The city shall negotiate for the purchase of Old Albuquerque
High School and is authorized to exercise the city's power of eminent domain if
necessary. The property shall be acquired by the city to improve and maintain
the structures, to protect them, and to cause them to be rehabilitated to a
beneficial reuse.
   (B)   The Real Property Division of the Finance and Management Department,
the Albuquerque Development Services Division of the Family and Community
Services Department, the Legal Department, and other offices of the city are
charged with obtaining the materials and services necessary to proceed with a
possible eminent domain action in order for the city to acquire the Old
Albuquerque High School property. Furthermore, the Legal Department is directed
to file a condemnation action in a court of appropriate jurisdiction if
negotiations are unsuccessful.
   (C)   The amount of $1,500,000 is appropriated from the Metropolitan
Redevelopment Fund (Fund 275) to the Albuquerque Development Services Program
(Program 31003) of the Family and Community Services Department for the purpose
of acquiring Old Albuquerque High School and for costs ancillary to this
purpose.
   (D)   The Department of City Council Services shall be included in all steps
of this activity.
   (E)   If the city purchases Old Albuquerque High School property through
negotiations and the purchase price exceeds the amount of $1,500,000
appropriated in division (C), further approval by the City Council is required.
Once the city acquires the Old Albuquerque High School property, any reuse
plan, change in ownership or use of the property shall require further approval
by the City Council.
(Res. 10-1995, approved 1-20-95)
Cross-reference:
   
Albuquerque High School Urban Development Area, see § 1-8-1
   
Purchase of Old Albuquerque High School, see § 1-9-17
ARTICLE 10: OVERLAY ZONES
The City hereby repeals Article 10: Overlay Zones, including the Historic
Overlay Zones resolutions (§
1-10-1 through §
1-10-3), the Design Overlay Zones (§
1-10-20 through §
1-10-23), and the Airport Overlay Zone resolutions (§
1-10-30), whose regulatory purpose has been replaced by the Integrated
Development Ordinance via Council Bill O-17-49 (Enactment No. 2017-025),
approved 11-13-17.
(Res. 2017-102, approved 11-13-17)
Section
Historic Overlay Zones
   
1-10-1   Huning Highland Historic Overlay Zone
   
1-10-2   Fourth Ward and Eighth/Forrester Historic overlay zones
   
1-10-3   Silver Hill Historic District
Design Overlay Zones
   
1-10-20   Los Griegos Design Overlay Zone
   
1-10-21   Unser Boulevard Design Overlay Zone
   
1-10-22   Sunport Boulevard Design Overlay Zone
   
1-10-23   Alameda Design Overlay Zone.
Airport Overlay Zones
   
1-10-30   Airport Protection Overlay Zone
HISTORIC OVERLAY ZONES
§ 1-10-1 HUNING HIGHLAND HISTORIC OVERLAY ZONE.
(Res. 132-1980, approved 6-17-80; Am. Res. R-2005-032, approved 3-7-05; Am.
Res. R-2005-033, approved 3-7-05; Res. 2017-102, approved 11-13-17)
Cross-reference:
   Huning Highland Sector Development Plan, see §
1-7-12, repealed
Editor's note: The Huning Highland Historic Overlay Zone is repealed; the
regulations and boundary were incorporated into the Integrated Development
Ordinance, Ord. 14-16, Council Bill O-17-49 (Enactment No. 2017-025), approved
11-13-17.
§ 1-10-2 FOURTH WARD AND EIGHTH/FORRESTER HISTORIC OVERLAY ZONES.
(Res. 46-1991, approved 4-2-91; Am. Res. 45-1994, approved 6-7-94; Am. Res. R-
2007-120, approved 10-10-2007; Res. 2017-102, approved 11-13-17)
Editor's note: The Fourth Ward and Eighth/Forrester Historic Overlay Zone is
repealed; the regulations and boundary were incorporated into the Integrated
Development Ordinance, Ord. 14-16, Council Bill O-17-49 (Enactment No. 2017-
025), approved 11-13-17.
§ 1-10-3 SILVER HILL HISTORIC DISTRICT
(Res. R-2010-083, approved 7-2-10; Res. 2017-102, approved 11-13-17)
Editor's note: The Silver Hill Historic Overlay Zone is repealed; the
regulations and boundary were incorporated into the Integrated Development
Ordinance, Ord. 14-16, Council Bill O-17-49 (Enactment No. 2017-025), approved
11-13-17.
DESIGN OVERLAY ZONES
§ 1-10-20 LOS GRIEGOS DESIGN OVERLAY ZONE.
(Res. 9-1992, approved 1-21-92; Res. 2017-102, approved 11-13-17)
Cross-reference:
   Los Griegos Sector Development Plan and Community Development Plan, see § 1-
7-8, repealed
Editor's note: The Los Griegos Design Overlay Zone is repealed; the regulations
and boundary were updated and incorporated into the Integrated Development
Ordinance, Ord. 14-16, Council Bill O-17-49 (Enactment No. 2017-025), approved
11-13-17.
§ 1-10-21 UNSER BOULEVARD DESIGN OVERLAY ZONE.
(Res. 95-1992, approved 7-9-92; Res. 2017-102, approved 11-13-17)
Editor's note: The Unser Boulevard Design Overlay Zone is repealed; the
regulations and boundary were updated and incorporated into the Integrated
Development Ordinance, Ord. 14-16, Council Bill O-17-49 (Enactment No. 2017-
025), approved 11-13-17.
§ 1-10-22 SUNPORT BOULEVARD DESIGN OVERLAY ZONE.
(Res. 110-1992, approved 8-12-92; Res. 2017-102, approved 11-13-17)
Editor's note: The Sunport Boulevard Design Overlay Zone is repealed; the
regulations and boundary were updated and incorporated into the Integrated
Development Ordinance, Ord. 14-16, Council Bill O-17-49 (Enactment No. 2017-
025), approved 11-13-17.
§ 1-10-23 ALAMEDA DESIGN OVERLAY ZONE.
(Res. 36-1998, approved 4-28-98; Res. 2017-102, approved 11-13-17)
Editor's note: The Alameda Design Overlay Zone is repealed; the regulations and
boundary were updated and incorporated into the Integrated Development
Ordinance, Ord. 14-16, Council Bill O-17-49 (Enactment No. 2017-025), approved
11-13-17.
AIRPORT OVERLAY ZONES
§ 1-10-30 AIRPORT PROTECTION OVERLAY ZONE.
(Res. 71-1996, approved 7-1-96; Res. 2017-102, approved 11-13-17)
Cross-references:
   Airport Master Plan, §
1-17-1 (formerly §
1-11-7)
   Albuquerque International Airport Master Plan and Airport Noise
Compatibility Program, §
1-17-1 (formerly §
4-2-5)
Editor's note: The Airport Protection Overlay Zone is repealed; the regulations
and boundary were updated and incorporated into the Integrated Development
Ordinance, Ord. 14-16, Council Bill O-17-49 (Enactment No. 2017-025), approved
11-13-17.
Editor's note: The Airport Master Plan has been moved to a new Article 17, Rank
3 Master Plans and Resource Management Plans.
ARTICLE 11: AREA PLANS
The City hereby repeals the Rank 2 Area Plans, whose policy content has been
updated, incorporated into, and replaced by the 2017 ABC Comp Plan via Council
Bill R-16-108 (Enactment No. R-2017-026), approved 4-7-17, and whose policy
purpose has been invalidated by the amendments to the Planning Ordinance in the
companion legislation adopting the Integrated Development Ordinance via Council
Bill O-17-49 (Enactment No. 2017-025), approved 11-13-17. The Code of
Resolutions Land Use – Article 11: Area Plans is hereby repealed.
(Res. 2017-102, approved 11-13-17)
Section
   
1-11-1   Northwest Mesa Area Plan
   
1-11-2   Southwest Area Plan
   
1-11-3   East Mountain Area Plan
   
1-11-4   North Valley Area Plan
   
1-11-5   Trails and Bikeways Plan; On-Street Comprehensive Bike Plan
   
1-11-6   Bosque Action Plan
   
1-11-7   Airport Master Plan
   
1-11-8   West Side Strategic Plan
   
1-11-9   Interim Level A Community Master Plan for Mesa del Sol
   
1-11-10   Sandia Foothills Area Plan
   
1-11-11   Northwest Mesa Escarpment Plan
   
1-11-12   Westland Master Plan
   
1-11-13   Los Poblanos Fields Open Space Resource Management Plan
   
1-11-14   Tijeras Arroyo Biological Zone Resource Management Plan
§ 1-11-1 NORTHWEST MESA AREA PLAN.
   The Northwest Mesa Area Plan, its contents and its boundaries are hereby
rescinded.
(Res. 9-1981, approved 1-9-81; Am. Res. 14-1981, approved 1-27-81; Am. Res. 96-
1983, approved 6-15-83; Am. Res. 221-1983, approved 12-27-83; Am. Res. 72-1985,
approved 4-19-85; Am. Res. 138-1986, approved 10-8-86; Am. Res. 7-1999,
approved 1-15-99; Res. 2017-102, approved 11-13-17)
§ 1-11-2 SOUTHWEST AREA PLAN.
(Res. 42-2002, approved 6-10-02; Res. 2017-102, approved 11-13-17)
Editor's note: The Southwest Area Plan, its contents, and its boundaries are
repealed. The Southwest Area Plan is not applicable within the Municipal
Boundaries.
§ 1-11-3 EAST MOUNTAIN AREA PLAN.
(Res. 118-1992, approved 8-27-92; Res. 2017-102, approved 11-13-17)
Editor's note: The East Mountain Area Plan, its contents, and its boundaries
are repealed. The East Mountain Area Plan is not within the Municipal
Boundaries.
§ 1-11-4 NORTH VALLEY AREA PLAN.
(Res. 60-1993, approved 6-2-93; Res. 2017-102, approved 11-13-17)
Editor's note: The North Valley Area Plan, its contents, and its boundaries are
repealed. The North Valley Area Plan was included by reference in the 2017
Albuquerque-Bernalillo Comprehensive Plan Appendix D as a historical document
to be used for informational purposes and to inform future planning in this
area.
§ 1-11-5 TRAILS AND BIKEWAYS PLAN; ON-STREET COMPREHENSIVE BIKE PLAN.
(Res. 112-2000, approved 11-27-00, Council Bill R-14-142, approved 5-18-2015;
Res. 2017-102, approved 11-13-17)
Cross-reference:
   Bikeways and Trails Facility Plan, §
1-16-1
   Bikeway Network plan, §
4-2-1, repealed
   Trails and Bikeways Facility Plan; On-Street Comprehensive Bike Plan, §
4-2-9, repealed
Editor’s note: The Trails and Bikeways Facility Plan and the On-Street
Comprehensive Bike Plan, are repealed and replaced with the 2015 Bikeways &
Trails Facility Plan. See now §
1-16-1.
§ 1-11-6 BOSQUE ACTION PLAN.
(Res. 111-1993, approved 10-14-93; Res. 2017-102, approved 11-13-17)
Cross-reference:
   Moved to §
1-17-22
§ 1-11-7 AIRPORT MASTER PLAN.
(Res. 105-1994, approved 10-25-94; Res. 2017-102, approved 11-13-17)
Cross-references:
   Moved to §
1-17-1
   Albuquerque International Airport Master Plan and Airport Noise
Compatibility Program, §
1-17-1 (formerly §
4-2-5)
   Airport Protection Overlay Zone, §
1-10-30, repealed
Editor's note: The Airport Master Plan has been moved to a new
Article 17, Rank 3 Master Plans and Resource Management Plans.
§ 1-11-8 WEST SIDE STRATEGIC PLAN.
(Res. 35-1997, approved 4-25-97; Am. Res. 117-1999, approved 11-9-99; Am. Res.
5-2000, approved 1-13-00; Am. Res. R-2005-055, approved 4-25-05; Am. Res. R-
2005-136, approved 9-12-05; Am. Res. R-2005-177, approved 12-5-05; Am. Res. R-
2006-052, approved 6-9-2006; Am Res. R-2007-111, approved 9-24-07; Am. Res. R-
2008-075, approved 6-13-08; Am. Res. R-2009-035, approved 3-24-09; Am. Res. R-
2011-019, approved 3-24-11, R-2014-076, approved 9-30-2014; Res. 2017-102,
approved 11-13-17)
Editor's note: The West Side Strategic Plan, its contents, and its boundaries
are repealed. The West Side Strategic Plan was included by reference in the
2017 Albuquerque-Bernalillo Comprehensive Plan Appendix D as a historical
document to be used for informational purposes and to inform future planning in
this area.
§ 1-11-9 LEVEL A COMMUNITY MASTER PLAN FOR MESA DEL SOL.
(Res. 8-1997, approved 1-21-97; Am. Res. R-2006-005, approved 1-31-06; Res.
2017-102, approved 11-13-17)
Cross reference:
   Moved to §
1-18-1
   Mesa Del Sol Tax Increment Development Districts 1 through 5, see §
1-14-1
§ 1-11-10 SANDIA FOOTHILLS AREA PLAN.
(Res. 101-1983, approved 6-16-83; Res. 2017-102, approved 11-13-17)
Editor's note: The Sandia Foothills Area Plan, its contents, and its boundaries
are repealed. The Sandia Foothills Area Plan was included by reference in the
2017 Albuquerque-Bernalillo Comprehensive Plan Appendix D as a historical
document to be used for informational purposes and to inform future planning in
this area.
§ 1-11-11 NORTHWEST MESA ESCARPMENT PLAN.
(Res. 4-1988, approved 1-5-88; Am. Res. 97-1989, approved 6-28-89 Res. 2017-
102, approved 11-13-17)
Editor's note: The Northwest Mesa Escarpment Plan, its contents, and its
boundaries are repealed. The Northwest Mesa Escarpment Plan was included by
reference in the 2017 Albuquerque-Bernalillo Comprehensive Plan Appendix D as a
historical document to be used for informational purposes and to inform future
planning in this area. The regulations were updated and incorporated into the
Integrated Development Ordinance, Ord. 14-16, Council Bill O-17-49 (Enactment
No. 2017-025), approved 11-13-17.
§ 1-11-12 WESTLAND MASTER PLAN
(Res. 51-1998, approved 5-19-98; Res. 2017-102, approved 11-13-17)
Cross reference:
   Moved to §
1-18-2
§ 1-11-13 LOS POBLANOS FIELDS OPEN SPACE RESOURCE MANAGEMENT PLAN.
(Res. 18-2003, approved 2-26-03; Res. 2017-102, approved 11-13-17)
Cross reference:
   Moved to §
1-17-23
§ 1-11-14 TIJERAS ARROYO BIOLOGICAL ZONE RESOURCE MANAGEMENT PLAN.
(R-2014-098, approved 11-17-2014; Res. 2017-102, approved 11-13-17)
Cross reference:
   Moved to §
1-17-26
ARTICLE 12: METROPOLITAN REDEVELOPMENT AREAS AND PLANS
Editor’s note: The Metropolitan Redevelopment Area designations and Plan
adoptions codified in Articles 6, 7, and 12 are consolidated in this Article
12, Metropolitan Redevelopment Area. Adopted Metropolitan Redevelopment Area
Plans will continue to serve to guide the Metropolitan Redevelopment Agency on
redevelopment efforts, catalytic projects, and public/private partnerships,
subject to amendment pursuant to the Metropolitan Redevelopment Agency
Ordinance (§
14-8-4-3(B)).
Section
   
1-12-1   Alvarado Metropolitan Redevelopment Area and Plan
   
1-12-2   Railroad Metropolitan Redevelopment Area and Plan
   
1-12-3   Old Albuquerque High School Metropolitan Redevelopment Area and Plan
   
1-12-4   St. Joseph's Hospital Metropolitan Redevelopment Area and Plan
   
1-12-5   Sycamore Metropolitan Redevelopment Area and Plan
   
1-12-6   University Neighborhoods Area
   
1-12-7   Tingley Beach Metropolitan Redevelopment Area and Plan
   
1-12-8   Soldiers and Sailors Park Metropolitan Redevelopment Area and Plan
   
1-12-9   Martineztown/Santa Barbara Neighborhood Metropolitan Redevelopment
Area
   
1-12-10   Sawmill Metropolitan Redevelopment Area and Plan
   
1-12-11   Near Heights Metropolitan Redevelopment Area and Plan
   
1-12-12   Los Candelarias Village Center Metropolitan Redevelopment Area and
Plan
   
1-12-13   West Central Metropolitan Redevelopment Area and Plan
   
1-12-14   Central/Highland/Upper Nob Hill Metropolitan Redevelopment Area and
Plan
   
1-12-15   Downtown 2025 Metropolitan Redevelopment Area and Plan
   
1-12-16   McClellan Park Metropolitan Redevelopment Area and Plan
   
1-12-17   South Broadway Neighborhoods Metropolitan Redevelopment Area and Plan
   
1-12-18   South Barelas Industrial Park Metropolitan Redevelopment Area and
Plan
   
1-12-19   Barelas Neighborhood Commercial Area Revitalization and Metropolitan
Redevelopment Area and Plan
   
1-12-20   Bridge/Isleta Metropolitan Redevelopment Area and Plan
   
1-12-21   Clayton Heights/Lomas del Cielo Metropolitan Redevelopment Area and
Plan
   
1-12-22   North Fourth Street Metropolitan Redevelopment Area and Plan
   
1-12-23   Historic Central Metropolitan Redevelopment Area and Plan
   
1-12-24   Coronado Metropolitan Redevelopment Area and Plan
   
1-12-25   East Gateway Metropolitan Redevelopment Area and Plan
§ 1-12-1 ALVARADO METROPOLITAN REDEVELOPMENT AREA AND PLAN.
   (A)   Metropolitan Redevelopment Project XIII, Occidental Building.
      (1)   The City Council, after having conducted a public hearing, finds
that:
         (a)   The proposed Occidental Building redevelopment will aid in the
elimination and prevention of blight;
         (b)   The Project Plan does not require the relocation of any families
and individuals from their dwellings; therefore, a method for providing
relocation assistance is not required for the project;
         (c)   The Project Plan complements the Albuquerque/ Bernalillo County
Comprehensive Plan and the Plan affords maximum opportunity, consistent with
the sound needs of the city, for the rehabilitation and redevelopment of the
Alvarado Metropolitan Redevelopment Area by private enterprise; and the
objectives of the Plan justify the proposed activities as public purposes and
needs.
      (2)   The Metropolitan Redevelopment Project XIII, Occidental Building of
the Alvarado Metropolitan Redevelopment Area, dated January, 1981, is hereby
approved in all respects.
(Res. 31-1981, approved 2-16-81)
   (B)   Metropolitan Redevelopment Project XVII, 8th and Central Commercial
Area.
      (1)   The City Council, after having conducted a public hearing, finds
that:
         (a)   The proposed Project XVII will aid in the elimination and
prevention of blight;
         (b)   The Project Plan does not require the relocation of any families
and individuals from their dwellings; therefore, a method for providing
relocation assistance is not required for the project;
         (c)   The Project Plan complements the Albuquerque/Bernalillo
Comprehensive Plan, and the Plan affords maximum opportunity, consistent with
the sound needs of the city, for the rehabilitation and redevelopment of the
Alvarado Metropolitan Redevelopment Area by private enterprise; and the
objectives of the Plan justify the proposed activities as public purposes and
needs.
      (2)   The Metropolitan Redevelopment Project XVII, 8th and Central
Commercial Area of the Alvarado Metropolitan Redevelopment Area is hereby
approved in all respects.
      (3)   The property defined by the shaded proposed addition area shown in
Exhibit “B” attached to Resolution No. 116-1992 is hereby designated as
appropriate for inclusion in the 8th and Central Commercial Project, a
Metropolitan Redevelopment Plan Area and is appropriate for a Metropolitan
Redevelopment Project, as defined in the code; and the boundaries of the
Alvarado Metropolitan Area Project XVII, 8th and Central Commercial Project
Metropolitan Redevelopment Plan Area are hereby amended to include the area
described in Exhibit “B” attached to Resolution No. 116-1992 and made a part
hereof.
      (4)   Project XVII, 8th and Central Commercial Project Metropolitan
Redevelopment Plan Section II, the Plan, B. Project Activities, 2. Land
Disposition, paragraph two is amended to now read, “the Agency may sell or
lease Parcel 21-2 and Parcel 45-1 for a suitable and compatible reuse,
consistent with the development activities of the Alvarado Project Area.
(Res. 114-1981, approved 6-17-81; Am. Res. 116-1992, approved 8-27-92)
   (C)   Metropolitan Redevelopment Plan XI, Public Service Company Area.
      (1)   The City Council, after having conducted a public hearing, finds
that:
         (a)   The proposed Redevelopment Plan XI will aid in the elimination
and prevention of blight;
         (b)   The Project Plan does not require the relocation of any families
and individuals from their dwellings; therefore, a method for providing
relocation assistance is not required for the project;
         (c)   The Project Plan complements the Albuquerque/Bernalillo
Comprehensive Plan, and the Plan affords maximum opportunity consistent with
the sound needs of the city, for the rehabilitation and redevelopment of the
Alvarado Metropolitan Redevelopment Area by private enterprise; and the
objectives of the Plan justify the proposed activities as public purposes and
needs.
      (2)   The Metropolitan Redevelopment Plan XI, Public Service Company Area
of the Alvarado Metropolitan Redevelopment Area is hereby approved in all
respects.
(Res. 115-1981, approved 6-17-81)
   (D)   Metropolitan Redevelopment Plan XVI, Albuquerque Bell Federal Credit
Union Project.
      (1)   The City Council, after having conducted a public hearing, finds
that:
         (a)   The proposed Redevelopment Plan XVI will aid in the elimination
and prevention of blight;
         (b)   The Project Plan does not require the relocation of any families
and individuals from their dwellings; therefore, a method for providing
relocation assistance is not required for the project;
         (c)   The Project Plan complements the Albuquerque/Bernalillo
Comprehensive Plan, and the Plan affords opportunity, consistent with the sound
needs of the city, for the rehabilitation and redevelopment of the Alvarado
Metropolitan Redevelopment Area by private enterprise; and the objectives of
the Plan justify the proposed activities as public purposes and needs.
      (2)   The Metropolitan Redevelopment Plan XVI, Albuquerque Bell Federal
Credit Union Project of the Alvarado Metropolitan Redevelopment Area is hereby
approved in all respects.
(Res. 147-1981, approved 7-8-81)
   (E)   Metropolitan Redevelopment Plan XIX, New Mexico Pacific Building
Project.
      (1)   The City Council, after having conducted a public hearing, finds
that:
         (a)   The proposed Redevelopment Plan XIX will aid in the elimination
and prevention of blight;
         (b)   The Project Plan does not require the relocation of any families
and individuals from their dwellings; therefore, a method for providing
relocation assistance is not required for the project;
         (c)   The Project Plan complements the Albuquerque/Bernalillo
Comprehensive Plan, and the Plan affords opportunity, consistent with the sound
needs of the city, for the rehabilitation and redevelopment of the Alvarado
Metropolitan Redevelopment Area by private enterprise; and the objectives of
the Plan justify the proposed activities as public purposes and needs.
      (2)   The Metropolitan Redevelopment Plan XIX, New Mexico Pacific
Building Project of the Alvarado Metropolitan Redevelopment Area is hereby
approved in all respects.
(Res. 212-1981, approved 10-12-81)
   (F)   Project XX, Bradford Hotel (Old Plaza).
      (1)   The City Council, after having conducted a public hearing, finds
that:
         (a)   The proposed Bradford Hotel (Old Plaza Hotel) redevelopment will
aid in the elimination and prevention of blight;
         (b)   The Project Plan does not require the relocation of any families
and individuals from their dwellings; therefore, a method for providing
relocation assistance is not required for the project;
         (c)   The Project Plan complements the Albuquerque/Bernalillo County
Comprehensive Plan and the Plan affords maximum opportunity, consistent with
the sound needs of the city, for the rehabilitation and redevelopment of the
Alvarado Metropolitan Redevelopment Area by private enterprise; and the
objectives of the Plan justify the proposed activities as public purposes and
needs.
      (2)   The Metropolitan Redevelopment Project XX, Bradford Hotel (Old
Plaza) in the Alvarado Metropolitan Redevelopment Area is hereby approved in
all respects.
(Res. 108-1982, approved 7-7-82)
   (G)   Project XXII, Marquette and Sixth Parking Structure.
      (1)   All action (not inconsistent with the provisions hereof) heretofore
taken by the City Council, the Metropolitan Redevelopment Agency, and the
officers of the city, directed toward the Plan, the acquisition of Project
XXII, be and the same hereby is ratified, approved and confirmed.
      (2)   The City Council, after having conducted a public hearing, finds
that:
         (a)   The Plan, and the proposed activities under the Plan, including
the construction of the Parking Structure, will aid in the elimination and
prevention of blight; and
         (b)   The Plan does not require the displacement or relocation of any
families or individuals from their dwellings; therefore, a method for providing
relocation assistance is not required for the Plan; and
         (c)   The Plan conforms to general plans of the city as a whole; and
         (d)   The Plan will assist in the rehabilitation and development of
the Alvarado Metropolitan Redevelopment Area by private enterprise; and the
objectives of the Plan justify the proposed activities as public purposes and
needs.
      (3)   The Plan Project XXII Redevelopment Plan for the Alvarado
Metropolitan Redevelopment Area is hereby approved in all respects.
(Res. 12-1983, approved 1-7-83)
      (4)   The Project XXII Plan, Marquette and Sixth Parking Structure,
Alvarado Metropolitan Redevelopment Area, attached to Resolution No. 4-1984 as
Exhibit A, and including proposed deletions and additions, is in accordance
with the Albuquerque/Bernalillo County Comprehensive Plan, the Downtown Core
Area Interim Sector Development Plan, and the 1975 Downtown Plan Revision.
      (5)   The amended Plan affords maximum opportunity for redevelopment of
the project area either by the city or by private enterprise.
(Res. 4-1984, approved 1-5-84)
      (6)   Section II.B.2 of “Project XXII, Alvarado Metropolitan
Redevelopment Area Marquette and Sixth Parking Structure,” adopted by
Resolution No. 12-1983, is hereby amended as follows:
“2. LAND USE
The land will be developed with a multi-story parking structure to be owned by
the City of Albuquerque. The parking structure will contain approximately 650
spaces. The parking structure is planned, in part, to support the new City-
County office building to be constructed on Fourth Street. The parking
structure will also serve existing nearby development and any new development
which may be built on the vacant land to the east of the parking structure.”
(Res. 89-1984, approved 6-20-84)
   (H)   Project XXIII, Sun Countryplex Redevelopment Plan.
      (1)   All action (not inconsistent with the provisions hereof) heretofore
taken by the City Council, the Metropolitan Redevelopment Agency, and the
officers of the city, directed toward the Plan, the acquisition of Project
XXIII, and the sale and issuance of the bonds therefore, be and the same hereby
is ratified, approved and confirmed.
      (2)   The City Council, after having conducted a public hearing, finds
that:
         (a)   The Plan, and the proposed activities under the Plan, including
the renovation of the building at the northeast corner of Copper and Fifth
Street, N.W. will aid in the elimination and prevention of blight; and
         (b)   The Plan does not require the displacement or relocation of any
families or individuals from their dwellings; therefore, a method for providing
relocation assistance is not required for the Plan; and
         (c)   The Plan conforms to general plans of the city as a whole; and
         (d)   The Plan affords maximum opportunity, consistent with the needs
of the community, for the rehabilitation and development of the Alvarado
Metropolitan Redevelopment Area by private enterprise; and the objectives of
the Plan justify the proposed activities as public purposes and needs.
      (3)   The Plan (Project XXIII Redevelopment Plan for the Alvarado
Metropolitan Redevelopment Area) is hereby approved in all respects.
(Res. 38-1983, approved 3-11-83)
   (I)   Project XXV, Ocho Building Redevelopment Plan.
      (1)   All action (not inconsistent with the provisions hereof) heretofore
taken by the City Council, the Metropolitan Redevelopment Agency, and the
officers of the city, directed toward the Plan, the acquisition of Project XXV,
and the sale and issuance of the bonds therefore, shall be and the same hereby
is ratified, approved and confirmed.
      (2)   The City Council, after having conducted a public hearing, finds
that:
         (a)   The Plan, and the proposed activities under the Plan, including
renovation of the Ocho Building, will aid in the elimination and prevention of
blight; and
         (b)   The Plan requires the relocation of seven households from their
dwellings; therefore, a method for providing relocation assistance is provided
in the Plan; and
         (c)   The Plan conforms to general plans of the city as a whole; and
         (d)   The Plan affords maximum opportunity, consistent with the needs
of the community, for the rehabilitation and development of the Alvarado
Metropolitan Redevelopment Area by private enterprise; and the objectives of
the Plan justify the proposed activities as public purposes and needs.
      (3)   The Plan (Project XXV Redevelopment Plan for the Alvarado
Metropolitan Redevelopment Area) is hereby approved in all respects.
(Res. 59-1983, approved 4-15-83)
   (J)   Project XXXIII, 500 Marquette Project.
      (1)   The City Council, after having conducted a public hearing, finds
that:
         (a)   The Project, “500 Marquette Project” will aid in the elimination
and prevention of blight;
         (b)   The Project Plan does not require the relocation of any families
and individuals from their dwellings; therefore, a method for providing
relocation assistance is not required for the project;
         (c)   The Project Plan compliments the Albuquerque/Bernalillo
Comprehensive Plan and the Plan affords maximum opportunity, consistent with
the sound needs of the city, for the rehabilitation and redevelopment of the
Alvarado Metropolitan Redevelopment Area by private enterprise; and the
objectives of the Plan justify the proposed activities as public purposes and
needs.
      (2)   The Metropolitan Redevelopment Project XXXIII Plan of the Alvarado
Metropolitan Redevelopment Area, attached to Resolution No. 188-1985, is hereby
approved in all respects.
      (3)   The alternative method of financing (tax increment) as provided by
§§ 3-60A-19 to 3-60A-25 N.M.S.A. 1978 is hereby in all respects approved, with
the 1985 tax year being the base year. The specific source of the Tax Increment
funds to which this section applies is more commonly known as “500 Marquette
Project,” located at Fifth Street and Marquette, N.W., contained in the area of
both Plan XXII and Plan XXXIII.
      (4)   A request to other applicable units of government which participate
in property tax revenues from the affected areas, for approval of the tax
increment method, is hereby made.
      (5)   The City Council approved the use of the tax increment method of
financing for Project XXXIII of the Alvarado Metropolitan Redevelopment Area
for a second five-year continuation period, beginning with property tax year
1994 and continuing through 1999.
(Res. 188-1985, approved 11-6-85; Am. Res. 15-1992, approved 1-21-92; Am. Res.
73-1994, approved 8-9-94)
   (K)   Robinson Urban Development Area. The Council hereby finds and
determines that the inclusion of the Robinson Urban Development Area (as more
specifically described as the Proposed Addition in Exhibit “A” attached to
Resolution No. 116-1992) in the Alvarado Metropolitan Redevelopment Area is
essential to meeting the planning and redevelopment goals and objectives, and
to the elimination or prevention of blight or conditions which lead to blight
within the Area and hereby amends the Alvarado Metropolitan Redevelopment Plan
Area boundaries to include the area described in Exhibit “A” attached to
Resolution No. 116-1992 and made a part hereof.
(Res. 116-1992, approved 8-27-92)
   (L)   Project XXXV Redevelopment Plan.
      (1)    The City Council, after having conducted a public hearing,
pursuant to the Code, finds that:
         (a)   The Plan for the proposed redevelopment of the Area will aid in
the elimination and prevention of blight conditions which lead to the
development of blight;
         (b)   The Plan does not require the relocation of any families and
individuals from their dwellings; therefore, a method for providing relocation
assistance is not required for the project;
         (c)   The Plan complements the Albuquerque/Bernalillo County
Comprehensive Plan and affords maximum opportunity consistent with the needs of
the community for the rehabilitation and redevelopment of the Alvarado
Metropolitan Area by public activities and private enterprise; and the
objectives of the Plan justify the proposed activities as public purposes and
needs; and
         (d)   The Plan, attached to Resolution No. 130-1998, is approved in
all respects.
      (2)   If any section, paragraph, clause or provision of this Resolution
shall for any reason be held to be invalid or unenforceable, the invalidity or
unenforceability of such section, paragraph, clause or provision shall not
affect any of the remaining provisions of this resolution.
      (3)   All orders and resolutions, or parts thereof, in conflict with this
division (L) are hereby repealed; this repealer shall not be construed to
revive any order, resolution, or part thereof, theretofore repealed.
      (4)   The selection of a master developer shall be subject to a
competitive process requiring the approval of the master developer by the City
Council.
(Res. 130-1998, approved 12-9-98)
(M)   Project XXXVI Redevelopment Plan.
      (1)    The City Council, after having conducted a public hearing,
pursuant to the Code, finds that:
         (a)   The Plan for the proposed redevelopment of the Area will aid in
the elimination and prevention of blight conditions which lead to the
development of blight;
         (b)   The Plan does not require the relocation of any families and
individuals from their dwellings; therefore, a method for providing relocation
assistance is not required for the project;
         (c)   The Plan complements the Albuquerque/Bernalillo County
Comprehensive Plan and affords maximum opportunity consistent with the needs of
the community for the rehabilitation and redevelopment of the Alvarado
Metropolitan Area by public activities and private enterprise; and the
objectives of the Plan justify the proposed activities as public purposes and
needs; and
         (d)   The Plan, attached to Resolution No. 8-1999, is approved in all
respects.
      (2)   If any section, paragraph, clause or provision of this Resolution
shall for any reason be held to be invalid or unenforceable, the invalidity or
unenforceability of such section, paragraph, clause or provision shall not
affect any of the remaining provisions of this resolution.
      (3)   All orders and resolutions, or parts thereof, in conflict with this
division (M) are hereby repealed; this repealer shall not be construed to
revive any order, resolution, or part thereof, theretofore repealed.
(Res. 8-1999, approved 1-15-99)
   (N)   The Phase I Alvarado Metropolitan Redevelopment Plan attached to
Resolution No. 85-1983 as Exhibit A, and including proposed deletions and
additions, is in accordance with the general plan for the development of the
municipality as a whole, the Downtown Core Area Sector Development Plan, the
1975 Downtown Plan Revision, and the Urban Center Policy Statement.
   (O)   The amended Plan affords maximum opportunity for the redevelopment of
the area by private enterprise.
   (P)   The Phase I Alvarado Metropolitan Redevelopment Plan is approved as
amended.
   (Q)   Acquisition of the property described as the north 48 feet of lots 9
through 12 and the north 48 feet of the west 15 feet of lot 8 in Block 41 of
the New Mexico Town Company Original Townsite, and known as Parcel AV/41-3 is
hereby approved.
   (R)   In order to provide funds for the acquisition of said property, a sum
not to exceed $66,000 is hereby appropriated to the Metropolitan Redevelopment
Agency of the city from the Trust and Agency Urban Renewal Property Tax
account.
(Res. 31-1981, approved 2-16-81; Res. 2017-102, approved 11-13-17)
Cross-reference:
   Alvarado Development Area, see §
1-8-4
   Formerly also codified as §
1-6-6
§ 1-12-2 RAILROAD METROPOLITAN REDEVELOPMENT AREA AND PLAN.
   (A)   Council findings.
      (1)   The Council hereby finds that one or more “slum areas” or “blighted
areas” (as defined in the Metropolitan Redevelopment Code) exist within the
city.
      (2)   The Council hereby finds that the rehabilitation, conservation,
development and redevelopment of and in the area proposed to be included within
the Railroad Metropolitan Redevelopment Area is necessary in the best interest
of the public health, safety, morals and welfare of the residents of the city.
      (3)   The Council hereby finds and determines that the aforementioned
area identified on Exhibit “A” attached to Resolution 54-1982 exhibits low
levels of commercial and industrial activity and redevelopment because a large
portion of the property is used for surface parking, which condition is an
extension of the conditions existing in the Railroad Metropolitan Redevelopment
Area and which substantially impairs and arrests the sound growth and economic
well-being of the city as a whole, and also the proposed addition area, as
shown in Exhibit “A” of Resolution 54-1982 (Block E and the west half of Block
H of the Mandell Business and Residence Addition, constitutes an economic and
social burden, is a menace to the public health, safety, morals and welfare in
its present condition and use, and is a blighted area.
      (4)   The aforementioned area is hereby designated as appropriate for a
“Metropolitan Redevelopment Project” (as defined in the Metropolitan
Redevelopment Code).
      (5)   The Agency is hereby authorized and directed to prepare or to cause
to be prepared a detailed Metropolitan Redevelopment plan for the Roma
Northwest Building, lots 19-24 of Block H of the Mandell Business and Residence
Addition which, without limitation, shall seek to eliminate the problems
created by the blighted area, shall conform to any general plan for the city as
a whole, and shall be sufficient to indicate the proposed activities to be
carried out or encouraged in the blighted area and the plan's relationship to
definite local objectives respecting land uses, improved traffic patterns and
controls, public transportation, public utilities, recreational and community
facilities, housing facilities, commercial activities or enterprises,
industrial or manufacturing use, and other public improvements.
      (6)   The Railroad Metropolitan Redevelopment Area as set forth in City
Council Resolution 87-1980 is hereby amended to include the area described on
Exhibit “A” of Resolution 54-1982 and incorporated herein by reference.
      (7)   The Railroad Metropolitan Redevelopment Area as set forth in City
Council Resolution 87-1980 is hereby amended to include the area described on
Exhibit “A” of Resolution 84-1982 and incorporated herein by reference.
      (8)   Greyhound Bus Station property. The City Council, after having
conducted a public hearing, pursuant to the Code, finds that:
         (a)   The amendment of the boundaries of the Railroad Metropolitan
Redevelopment Area will aid in the elimination and prevention of blight or
conditions which lead to the development of blight and is essential to the
overall success of the redevelopment goals and objectives of the Alvarado
Transportation Center Metropolitan Redevelopment Plan (the Plan); and
         (b)   For the foregoing reasons, the Greyhound Bus Station property is
hereby designated as appropriate for inclusion in the Railroad Metropolitan
Redevelopment Area and is appropriate for a metropolitan redevelopment plan as
defined in the Metropolitan Redevelopment Code; and
         (c)   The boundaries of the Railroad Metropolitan Redevelopment Area
as set forth in City Council Resolution 87-1980 is hereby amended to include
the area described on Exhibit “A” of Resolution 120-1998 and incorporated
herein by reference.
         (d)   The selection of a master developer shall be subject to a
competitive process requiring the approval of the master developer by the City
Council.
(Res. 87-1980, approved 4-18-80; Am. Res. 54-1982, approved 4-12-82; Am. Res.
84-1982, approved 5-28-82; Am. Res. 85-1982, approved 5-28-82; Am. Res. 120-
1998, approved 11-25-98)
   (B)   Metropolitan Redevelopment Project Plan for the Crane Warehouse
Building.
      (1)   The City Council, after having conducted a public hearing, finds
that:
         (a)   The proposed rehabilitation of the Crane Warehouse Building will
aid in the elimination and prevention of blight;
         (b)   The Project Plan does not require the relocation of any families
and individuals from their dwellings; therefore, a method for providing
relocation assistance is not required for the project;
         (c)   The Project Plan complements the Albuquerque/Bernalillo County
Comprehensive Plan, and the Plan affords maximum opportunity consistent with
the sound needs of the city, for the rehabilitation and redevelopment of the
Railroad Metropolitan Redevelopment Area by private enterprise and the
objectives of the Project Plan justify the proposed activities as public
purposes and needs; and
      (2)   The Metropolitan Redevelopment Project Plan for the rehabilitation
of the Crane Warehouse Building of the Railroad Metropolitan Redevelopment Area
is approved in all respects.
(Res. 238-1981, approved 11-18-81)
   (C)   Metropolitan Redevelopment Project II, Union Square.
      (1)   The City Council, after having conducted a public hearing, finds
that:
         (a)   The proposed Union Square redevelopment will aid in the
elimination and prevention of blight;
         (b)   The Project Plan does not require the relocation of any families
and individuals from their dwellings; therefore, a method for providing
relocation assistance is not required for the project;
         (c)   The Project Plan complements the Albuquerque/Bernalillo County
Comprehensive Plan and the Plan affords maximum opportunity consistent with the
sound needs of the city, for the rehabilitation and redevelopment of the
Railroad Metropolitan Redevelopment Area by private enterprise; and the
objectives of the Plan justify the proposed activities as public purposes and
needs.
      (2)   The Metropolitan Redevelopment Project III, Union Square in the
Railroad Metropolitan Redevelopment Area is hereby approved in all respects.
(Res. 10-1982, approved 2-1-82)
   (D)   Project IV Redevelopment Plan.
      (1)   The City Council, after having conducted a public hearing, finds
that the amendments to the Plan will aid in the elimination and prevention of
blight or the conditions which lead to the development of blight.
      (2)   The City Council finds that the amendments to the Plan do not
change the objectives of the Plan to construct an office building.
      (3)   The amended Plan (Project IV Redevelopment Plan for the Railroad
Metropolitan Redevelopment Area) attached to Resolution 85-1982 is hereby
approved in all respects.
(Res. 85-1982, approved 5-28-82)
   (E)   Project VIII, 7th Broadway Place.
      (1)   The City Council, after having conducted a public hearing, finds
that:
         (a)   The Project, 7th Broadway Place will aid in the elimination and
prevention of blight;
         (b)   The Project Plan does not require the relocation of any families
and individuals from their dwellings; therefore, a method for providing
relocation assistance is not required for the project;
         (c)   The Project Plan compliments the Albuquerque/Bernalillo
Comprehensive Plan and the Plan affords maximum opportunity, consistent with
the sound needs of the city, for the rehabilitation and redevelopment of the
Railroad Metropolitan redevelopment Area by private enterprise; and the
objectives of the Plan justify the proposed activities as public purposes and
needs.
      (2)   The Metropolitan Redevelopment Project VIII Plan of the Railroad
Metropolitan Redevelopment Area, attached to Resolution No. 196-1985 and made a
part hereof, is hereby approved in all respects.
      (3)   The Alternative Method of Financing (Tax Increment) as provided by
§§ 3-60A-19 to 3-60A-25 N.M.S.A. 1978 is hereby in all respects approved, with
the 1985 tax year being the base year. The specific source of the Tax Increment
funds to which this section applies is more commonly known as 7th Broadway
Place, located at Broadway and Lomas.
      (4)   A request to other applicable units of government which participate
in property tax revenues from the affected area, for approval of the tax
increment method, is hereby made.
      (5)   The City Council approved the use of the tax increment method of
financing for Project XXXIII of the Alvarado Metropolitan Redevelopment Area
for a second five-year continuation period, beginning with property tax year
1994 and continuing through 1999.
(Res. 196-1985, approved 11-8-85; Am. Res. 15-1992, approved 1-21-92; Am. Res.
73-1994, approved 8-9-94)
   (F)   Project X, Downtown Convention Center. The City Council, after having
conducted a public hearing, pursuant to the code, finds and confirms that the
amended plan:
      (1)   Is consistent with the policies and objectives established for the
Plan area and with the intent of the Code;
      (2)   The amended Plan and proposed redevelopment of the Plan area will
aid in the elimination and prevention of blight or conditions which lead to the
development of blight;
      (3)   The amended Plan does not require the relocation of any families
and individuals from their dwellings and, therefore, a method for providing
relocation assistance is not required;
      (4)   The amended Plan complements the Albuquerque/Bernalillo County
Comprehensive Plan and affords maximum opportunity consistent with the needs of
the community for the rehabilitation and redevelopment of the Alvarado and
Railroad Metropolitan Redevelopment Areas by public activities and private
enterprise, and the objectives of the Plan justify the proposed activities as
public purposes and needs; and
      (5)   The amended Plan attached as Exhibit A to Resolution No. 183-1988
is hereby approved in all respects.
      (6)   The Council hereby finds and determines that the inclusion of the
Civic Plaza and Convention Center properties (as more specifically described in
Exhibit “A” attached to Resolution No. 184-1988) in the Alvarado Metropolitan
Redevelopment Area and the Convention Center/Hotel Metropolitan Redevelopment
Plan area is essential to meeting the planning and redevelopment goals and
objectives of, and to the accomplishment of the program adopted in the Plan and
is necessary for the overall success of the Plan and to the elimination or
prevention of blight or conditions which lead to blight within the Area.
      (7)   The Civic Plaza and Convention Center properties are hereby
designated as appropriate for inclusion in a metropolitan redevelopment area
and are appropriate for a metropolitan redevelopment project, as defined in the
Code; and the boundaries of the Alvarado Metropolitan Redevelopment Area are
hereby amended to include the area described in Exhibit “A” attached to
Resolution No. 184-1988 and made a part hereof.
   (G)   Project XI Redevelopment Plan.
      (1)    The City Council, after having conducted a public hearing,
pursuant to the Code, finds that:
         (a)   The Plan for the proposed redevelopment of the Area will aid in
the elimination and prevention of blight conditions which lead to the
development of blight;
         (b)   The Plan does not require the relocation of any families and
individuals from their dwellings; therefore, a method for providing relocation
assistance is not required for the project;
         (c)   The Plan complements the Albuquerque/Bernalillo County
Comprehensive Plan and affords maximum opportunity consistent with the needs of
the community for the rehabilitation and redevelopment of the Railroad
Metropolitan Redevelopment Area by public activities and private enterprise;
and the objectives of the Plan justify the proposed activities as public
purposes and needs; and
         (d)   The Plan, attached to Resolution No. 130-1998, is approved in
all respects.
      (2)   If any section, paragraph, clause or provision of this Resolution
shall for any reason be held to be invalid or unenforceable, the invalidity or
unenforceability of such section, paragraph, clause or provision shall not
affect any of the remaining provisions of this resolution.
      (3)   All orders and resolutions, or parts thereof, in conflict with this
division (G) are hereby repealed; this repealer shall not be construed to
revive any order, resolution, or part thereof, theretofore repealed.
      (4)   The selection of a master developer shall be subject to a
competitive process requiring the approval of the master developer by the City
Council.
(Res. 65-1986, approved 5-21-86; Am. Res. 81-1987, approved 8-21-87; Am. Res.
183-1988, approved 11-3-88; Am. Res. 184-1988, approved 11-3-88; Am. Res. 130-
1998, approved 12-9-98)
§ 1-12-3 OLD ALBUQUERQUE HIGH SCHOOL METROPOLITAN REDEVELOPMENT AREA AND PLAN.
   (A)   Metropolitan Redevelopment Plan I.
      (1)   The City Council, after having conducted a public hearing, finds
that:
         (a)   The proposed Old Albuquerque High School redevelopment will aid
in the elimination and prevention of blight;
         (b)   The Project Plan does not require the relocation of any families
and individuals from their dwellings; therefore, a method for providing
relocation assistance is not required for the project;
         (c)   The Project Plan conforms to the Albuquerque/Bernalillo County
Comprehensive Plan, and the Plan affords maximum opportunity, consistent with
the sound needs of the city, for the rehabilitation and redevelopment of the
Old Albuquerque High School Metropolitan Redevelopment Area by private
enterprise; and the objectives of the Plan justify the proposed activities as
public purposes and needs.
      (2)   The Metropolitan Redevelopment Plan I in Old Albuquerque High
Metropolitan Redevelopment Area is hereby approved in all respects.
(Res. 116-1981, approved 6-17-81)
   (B)   Metropolitan Redevelopment Plan II.
      (1)   The City Council, after having conducted a public hearing, pursuant
to the Code, finds that:
         (a)   The Plan for the proposed redevelopment of the Old Albuquerque
High School will aid in the elimination and prevention of blight or conditions
which lead to the development of blight;
         (b)   The Plan does not require the relocation of any families and
individuals from their dwellings; therefore, a method for providing relocation
assistance is not required for the project;
         (c)   The Plan complements the Albuquerque/Bernalillo County
Comprehensive Plan and affords maximum opportunity consistent with the needs of
the community for the rehabilitation and redevelopment of the Old Albuquerque
High School Metropolitan Redevelopment Area by public activities and private
enterprise; and the objectives of the Plan justify the proposed activities as
public purposes and needs.
      (2)   The Plan, attached as Exhibit A to Resolution 22-1998 and made a
part hereof, and as amended by Resolution 110-1999, is approved in all
respects.
(Res. 22-1998, approved 2-24-98; Am. Res. 110-1999, approved 10-27-99)
§ 1-12-4 ST. JOSEPH'S HOSPITAL METROPOLITAN REDEVELOPMENT AREA AND PLAN.
(Res. 149-1979, approved 10-22-79; Res. 2017-102, approved 11-13-17; repealed
by Res. 2025-086, approved 12-1-25)
Cross References:
   St. Joseph/Civic Auditorium Area Sector Development Plan, §
1-7-16, repealed
   Formerly also codified as §
1-7-16
Editor's Note: The St. Joseph Hospital Metropolitan Redevelopment Area and
Plan, its contents, and its boundaries are repealed.
§ 1-12-5 SYCAMORE METROPOLITAN REDEVELOPMENT AREA AND PLAN.
   (A)   Council findings.
      (1)   The Council hereby finds and determines that the Sycamore
Metropolitan Redevelopment Area is an area which, by reason of deterioration of
site or other improvements; faulty lot layout in relation to size, inadequate
accessibility or usefulness; diversity of ownership; lack of adequate housing
facilities; low levels of commercial activities or redevelopment; significant
number of commercial or mercantile businesses which have closed or
significantly reduced their operations due to economic losses or loss of profit
due to operating in the area, low levels of commercial or industrial activity
or redevelopment, or any combination of such factors, which substantially
impairs and arrests the sound growth and economic health and well-being of the
city and the Sycamore Metropolitan Redevelopment Area; constitutes an economic
and social burden, is a menace to the public health, safety, morals and welfare
in its present condition and use, is a blighted area and is appropriate for a
Metropolitan Redevelopment Project(s).
      (2)   The Council hereby finds that the rehabilitation, conservation,
development and redevelopment of and in the Sycamore Metropolitan Redevelopment
Area is necessary in the interest of the public health, safety, morals and
welfare of the residents of the city.
      (3)   The Council hereby declares the area identified and attached to
Resolution 170-1982 to be the Sycamore Redevelopment Area.
      (4)   The Agency is hereby authorized and directed to prepare or to cause
to be prepared a Metropolitan Redevelopment Plan for the Sycamore Metropolitan
Redevelopment Area which, without limitation, shall seek to eliminate the
problems created by the blighted area, shall conform to any general plan for
the city as a whole, and shall be sufficient to indicate the proposed
activities to be carried out or encouraged in the blighted area and the Plan's
relationship to definite local objectives respecting land uses, improved
traffic patterns and controls, public transportation, public utilities,
recreational and community facilities, housing facilities, commercial
activities or enterprises, institutional uses, industrial or manufacturing use,
and other public improvements.
(Res. 170-1982, approved 9-29-82)
§ 1-12-6 UNIVERSITY NEIGHBORHOODS AREA.
   (A)   The area described on the exhibit attached to Resolution 161-1982 as
an expansion to the University Neighborhoods Area is hereby determined and
declared to be a blighted area, as that term is defined by the Community
Development Law of the State of New Mexico, appropriate for community
development projects.
   (B)   The city, by this action, is hereby authorized to prepare or cause to
be prepared detailed community development plans for activities to be carried
out in the area herein designated in accordance with the Community Development
Law of the State of New Mexico, provided that no community development
activities shall be conducted until said plans have been approved by the City
Council, as provided by the Community Development Law.
   (C)   The redevelopment activities to be undertaken in the area herein
designated under community development plans to be subsequently adopted are
hereby determined and declared to be necessary in the interest of the health,
safety and welfare of the residents of the city.
(Res. 161-1982, approved 9-29-82)
§ 1-12-7 TINGLEY BEACH METROPOLITAN REDEVELOPMENT AREA AND PLAN.
   (A)   Project I, Beach Property Redevelopment Plan.
      (1)   All action (not inconsistent with the provisions hereof) heretofore
taken by the City Council, the Metropolitan Redevelopment Agency, and the
officers of the city, directed toward the Plan, the construction of Project I,
and the sale and issuance of the bonds therefore, be and the same hereby is
ratified, approved and confirmed.
      (2)   The City Council, after having conducted a public hearing, finds
that:
         (a)   The Plan, and the proposed activities under the Plan, including
the construction of apartments and offices, will aid in the elimination and
prevention of blight; and
         (b)   The redevelopment of the Beach Property will displace four
households from their dwellings; therefore, a method for providing relocation
assistance is included in the Plan; and
         (c)   The Plan conforms to general plans of the city as a whole; and
         (d)   The Plan affords maximum opportunity, consistent with the needs
of the community, for the rehabilitation and development of the Tingley Beach
Metropolitan Redevelopment Area by private enterprise; and the objectives of
the Plan justify the proposed activities as public purposes and needs.
      (3)   The Plan (Project I Redevelopment Plan for the Tingley Beach
Metropolitan Redevelopment Area) attached and made a part hereof, is hereby
approved in all respects.
      (4)   In order to promote the local health and general welfare, safety,
convenience and prosperity of the inhabitants of the city, it is the City
Council's intent to take all necessary and advisable steps to effect the
issuance of bonds pursuant to the Redevelopment Bonding Law in a principal
amount up to $5,000,000 in order to defray part or all of the costs of Project
I Beach Property, such Project to be located within the Tingley Beach
Metropolitan Redevelopment Area of the city; provided that this expression of
intent is conditioned upon the issuance of bonds on or before June 1, 1984.
      (5)   Nothing contained in this section, nor in any other instrument
shall be considered as obligating the city to any pecuniary liability or a
charge upon the general credit of the city or against its taxing power, it
being understood that no costs are to be borne by the city except what is paid
out of the proceeds of the proposed bond issue; all expenses reasonably
incurred by the city in connection therewith are to be promptly reimbursed by
the company.
(Res. 81-1983, approved 6-8-83)
§ 1-12-8 SOLDIERS AND SAILORS PARK METROPOLITAN REDEVELOPMENT AREA AND PLAN.
   (A)   The Council hereby finds and determines that the Soldiers and Sailors
Park Metropolitan Redevelopment Area is an area which, by reason of presence of
a substantial number of deteriorated or deteriorating buildings; faulty lot
layout in relation to size, adequacy, accessibility, or usefulness; unsanitary
or unsafe conditions; deterioration of site or other improvements; low levels
of commercial activities or redevelopment; and the combination of the above
factors, substantially impairs and arrests the sound growth and economic health
and well-being of the city and the Soldiers and Sailors Park Metropolitan
Redevelopment Area; constitutes an economic and social burden; is a menace to
the public health, safety, morals and welfare in its present condition and use;
is a blighted area and is appropriate for a Metropolitan Redevelopment Project
(s).
   (B)   The Council hereby finds that the rehabilitation, conservation,
development and redevelopment of and in the Soldiers and Sailors Park
Metropolitan Redevelopment Area is necessary in the interest of the public
health, safety, morals and welfare of the residents of the city.
   (C)   The Council hereby declares the area identified in Exhibit A attached
to Resolution No. 155-1985 to be the Soldiers and Sailors Park Metropolitan
Redevelopment Area.
(Res. 155-1985, approved 9-6-85)
   (D)   The City Council, after having conducted a public hearing, finds that:
      (1)   The Plan, and the proposed activities under the Plan, will aid in
the elimination and prevention of blight; and
      (2)   The Plan conforms to the general plans of the city as a whole; and
      (3)   The Plan affords maximum opportunity, consistent with the needs of
the community, for the rehabilitation and redevelopment of the Soldiers and
Sailors Park Metropolitan Redevelopment Area by private enterprise; and the
objectives of the Plan justify the proposed activities as public purposes and
needs.
   (E)   The Soldiers and Sailors Park Metropolitan Redevelopment Plan for the
Soldiers and Sailors Park Metropolitan Redevelopment Area, attached to
Resolution No. 159-1985, is hereby approved in all respects.
(Res. 159-1985, approved 9-6-85; Res. 2017-102, approved 11-13-17)
Cross-reference:
   Formerly also codified as §
1-6-8
§ 1-12-9 MARTINEZTOWN/SANTA BARBARA NEIGHBORHOOD METROPOLITAN REDEVELOPMENT
AREA.
   (A)   The Council hereby finds and determines that the proposed
Martineztown/Santa Barbara Neighborhood Metropolitan Redevelopment Area is an
area which, by reason of presence of a substantial number of deteriorated or
deteriorating buildings; predominance of defective or inadequate street layout;
faulty lot layout in relation to size, adequacy, accessibility, or usefulness;
unsanitary or unsafe conditions; deterioration of site or other improvements;
obsolete or impractical planning and platting special assessment delinquency
exceeding the fair value of the land, defective or unusual conditions of title,
improper subdivisions or lack of adequate housing facilities in the area, or an
area where a significant number of commercial or mercantile businesses have
closed or significantly reduced their operations due to the economic losses or
loss of profit due to operating in the area; low levels of commercial or
industrial activities or redevelopment; or any combination of the above
factors, substantially impairs and arrests the sound growth and economic health
and well-being of the city and the proposed Martineztown/Santa Barbara
Neighborhood Metropolitan Redevelopment Area; constitutes an economic and
social burden; is a menace to the public health, safety, morals and welfare in
its present condition and use; is a blighted area and is appropriate for a
Metropolitan Redevelopment Project(s).
   (B)   The Council hereby finds that the rehabilitation, conservation,
development and redevelopment of and in the proposed Martineztown/Santa Barbara
Neighborhood Metropolitan Redevelopment Area is necessary in the interest of
the public health, safety, morals and welfare of the residents of the city.
   (C)   The Council hereby declares the area identified in Exhibit A attached
to Resolution No. 9-1990 to be the Martineztown/Santa Barbara Neighborhood
Metropolitan Redevelopment Area.
(Res. 9-1990, approved 1-19-90)
Cross-reference:
   Martineztown-Santa Barbara Neighborhoods Sector Development Plan, §
1-7-35, repealed
   Martineztown-Santa Barbara Metropolitan Redevelopment Plan, §
1-6-3, repealed
§ 1-12-10 SAWMILL METROPOLITAN REDEVELOPMENT AREA AND PLAN.
   (A)   The Council hereby finds and determines that the Sawmill Redevelopment
Area, as described and shown on the map which is Exhibit C of Resolution No.
164-1993, is an area, by reason of the presence of a substantial number of
deteriorated and deteriorating structures, unsafe conditions, deterioration of
site and other improvements, lack of adequate housing facilities, obsolete and
impractical planning and platting, low levels of commercial and industrial
activity and redevelopment which substantially impairs and arrests the sound
growth and economic health and well-being of the city and the Sawmill
Metropolitan Redevelopment Area, constitutes an economic and social burden, is
a menace to the public health, safety and welfare in its present condition and
use, is a blighted area and is appropriate for one or more Metropolitan
Redevelopment Projects.
   (B)   The Council hereby finds that the rehabilitation, conservation,
development and redevelopment of and in the Sawmill Metropolitan Redevelopment
Area is necessary in the interest of the public health, safety, and welfare of
the residents of the city.
(Res. 164-1993, approved 11-15-93)
Cross-reference:
   Sawmill/Wells Park Sector Development Plan, §
1-7-14, repealed
   Sawmill Revitalization Strategy, §
1-4-2, repealed
§ 1-12-11 NEAR HEIGHTS METROPOLITAN REDEVELOPMENT AREA AND PLAN.
   (A)   The Council hereby finds and determines that the Near Heights
Metropolitan Redevelopment Area is an area which, by reason of the presence of
a substantial number of deteriorated and deteriorating structures, unsafe
conditions, deterioration of site and other improvements, lack of adequate
zoning enforcement, obsolete and impractical planning and platting, and low
levels of commercial activity and redevelopment, substantially impairs and
arrests the sound growth and economic well-being of the city and the Near
Heights Metropolitan Area, constitutes an economic and social burden, is a
menace to the public health, safety and welfare in its present condition and
use, is a blighted area and it is appropriate for a Metropolitan Redevelopment
Project.
   (B)   The Council hereby finds that the rehabilitation, conservation,
development and redevelopment of and in the Near Heights Metropolitan Area is
necessary in the interests of the public health, safety, morals and welfare of
the residents of the city.
   (C)   The Agency is hereby authorized and directed to prepare or to cause to
be prepared a detailed Metropolitan Redevelopment Plan for the Near Heights
Metropolitan Area which, without limitation, shall seek to eliminate the
problems created by the blighted area, shall conform to any general plan for
the city as a whole, and shall be sufficient to indicate the proposed
activities to be carried out or encouraged in the blighted area and the Plan's
relationship to define local objectives respecting land uses, improved traffic
patterns and controls, public transportation, public utilities, recreational
and community facilities, housing facilities, commercial activities or
enterprises, and other public improvements.
(Res. 110-1998, approved 11-25-98)
   The City Council, after having conducted a public hearing pursuant to the
code, finds that:
   (D)   The Plan and the proposed redevelopment of the Near Heights
Metropolitan Redevelopment Area will aid in the elimination and prevention of
blight or conditions that lead to the development of blight.
   (E)   The Plan does not require the relocation of any families or
individuals from their dwellings; therefore, a method for providing relocation
assistance is not required for the project.
   (F)   The Plan complements the Albuquerque/Bernalillo County Comprehensive
Plan and affords maximum opportunity consistent with the needs of the community
for the rehabilitation and redevelopment of the Near Heights Metropolitan
Redevelopment Area by public activities.
   (G)   Section B, Item 5 in the Plan, attached to Resolution No. 107-2003 as
Exhibit A, labeled "Vacation of Public Rights of Way and Road Alignments" is
deleted, to maintain the Plan's emphasis on purchasing, demolishing and
reconstructing dilapidated properties.
   (H)   The Plan, attached to Resolution No. 107-2003 as Exhibit A and made a
part hereof, is approved in all respects as described in Section 1, Items A
through D.
   (I)   Amendments.
      (1)   The area from the commercial corridor along San Mateo Blvd. from
Bell Street to Gibson Blvd. and the commercial corridor along Gibson Blvd. from
San Mateo Blvd. to Kentucky Street, near Louisiana Blvd. is hereby included
into the Near Heights Metropolitan Redevelopment Area. The boundary excludes
recently redeveloped properties on the south side of Gibson Blvd. from Dakota
Street to Kentucky Street. It includes the shopping center along the west side
of San Pedro Blvd, which is bounded on the north by Kathryn Ave. and the south
by Anderson Ave., and is adjacent to the existing Near Heights Metropolitan
Redevelopment Area. The Near Heights Expansion area further described in
Exhibit A to this Resolution, is, by reason of the presence of a substantial
number of deteriorated structures, unsafe conditions, deterioration of site and
other improvements, obsolete and impractical planning and platting and low
levels of commercial activity and redevelopment which substantially impair and
arrest the sound growth and economic well-being of the City and the Near
Heights Metropolitan Redevelopment Area, constitute an economic and social
burden and a menace to the public health, safety, and welfare in its present
condition and use, the blighted areas that are appropriate for a metropolitan
redevelopment project or projects and are hereby designated the Near Heights
Metropolitan Redevelopment Expansion area.
      (2)   The expanded Plan complements the Albuquerque/Bernalillo County
Comprehensive Plan and affords maximum opportunity consistent with the needs of
the community for the rehabilitation and redevelopment of the Near Heights
Expansion Metropolitan Redevelopment Area by the public activities and the
private enterprise; and the objectives of the Plan justify the proposed
activities as public purposes and needs.
      (3)   The expanded Plan, attached as Exhibit A, and made a part hereof,
is approved in all respects.
      (4)   The entire Near Heights Expansion Metropolitan Redevelopment Area
is specifically included for purposes of tax increment financing, and the
creation of a tax increment district.
(Res. 84-2000, approved 10-6-00; Am. Res. 107-2003, approved 9-26-03; Am. Res.
R-2008-051, approved 4-17-08; Am. Res. R-2010-065, approved 6-18-10; Res. 2017-
102, approved 11-13-17)
Cross-reference:
   Formerly also codified as §
1-6-12
§ 1-12-12 LOS CANDELARIAS VILLAGE CENTER METROPOLITAN REDEVELOPMENT AREA AND
PLAN.
   (A)   The Council hereby finds and determines that the Los Candelarias
Village Center MRA is an area which, by reason of the presence of a substantial
number of deteriorated and deteriorating structures, unsafe conditions,
deterioration of site and other improvements, lack of adequate zoning
enforcement, obsolete and impractical planning and platting, and low levels of
commercial activity and redevelopment, substantially impairs and arrests the
sound growth and economic well-being of the City and the Los Candelarias
Village Center MRA, constitutes an economic and social burden, is a menace to
the public health, safety, and welfare in its present condition and use, is a
blighted area and it is appropriate for a Metropolitan Redevelopment Project
(s).
   (B)   The Council hereby finds that the rehabilitation, conservation,
development and redevelopment of and in the Los Candelarias Village Center MRA
is necessary in the interests of the public health, safety, morals and welfare
of the residents of the City.
   (C)   The Agency is hereby authorized and directed to prepare or to cause to
be prepared a detailed Metropolitan Redevelopment Plan(s) for the Los
Candelarias MRA which, without limitation, shall seek to eliminate the problems
created by the blighted area, shall conform to any general plan for the City as
a whole, and shall be sufficient to indicate the proposed activities to be
carried out or encouraged in the blighted area and the Plan's relationship to
define local objectives respecting land uses, improved traffic patterns and
controls, public transportation, public utilities, recreational and community
facilities, housing facilities, commercial activities or enterprises, and other
public improvements.
   (D)   Amendments. The Metropolitan Redevelopment Area Plan is amended to
remove the subject site, Lots 3 and 4, Major Acres Subdivision, an
approximately 1.0 acre site located on Major Avenue, between 10th St. NW and
12th St. NW, from the Metropolitan Redevelopment Area and Village Core boundary
as shown on Exhibit 1 (page 9), Exhibit 10 (page 42) and Exhibit 11 (page 43)
and to change the zoning designation of the subject site on Exhibit 11 (page
43) from SU-2/RT to R-1.
(Res. 125-2000, approved 12-28-00; Am. Res. R-2005-149, approved 9-28-05; Res.
2017-102, approved 11-13-17)
§ 1-12-13 WEST CENTRAL METROPOLITAN REDEVELOPMENT AREA AND PLAN.
   (A)   The Council finds and determines that the area from the intersection
of Central SW and the Rio Grande River west on Central SW to slightly west of
Unser, north on Unser to I-40, including the Atrisco Business Park and the node
at Airport Road and Central SW, and the area from Central SW on Old Coors Road
south to Bridge Street SW, which areas include the commercial properties north
and south of Central SW and east and west of Old Coors Boulevard as shown on
Exhibit A to the West Central Metropolitan Redevelopment Report, which is
attached as Exhibit A to Resolution No. 82-2001, are, by reason of the presence
of a substantial number of deteriorated structures, unsafe conditions,
deterioration of site and other improvements, lack of adequate zoning
enforcement, obsolete and impractical planning and platting, and low levels of
commercial activity and redevelopment which substantially impair and arrest the
sound growth and economic well-being of the City and the west Central and Old
Coors areas, constitute an economic and social burden and a menace to the
public health, safety, and welfare in its present condition and use, blighted
areas that are appropriate for a metropolitan redevelopment project or projects
and are hereby designated the West Central Metropolitan Redevelopment Area.
   (B)   The Council finds that the rehabilitation, conservation, development
and redevelopment of and in the West Central Metropolitan Redevelopment Area is
necessary in the interests of the public health, safety, morals and welfare of
the residents of the City.
   (C)   The Metropolitan Redevelopment Agency is hereby authorized and
directed to prepare a Metropolitan Redevelopment Plan or Plans for the West
Central Metropolitan Redevelopment Area which, without limitation, shall seek
to eliminate the problems created by the blighted conditions in the area, shall
conform to any general plan for the City as a whole, and shall be sufficient to
indicate the proposed activities to be carried out or encouraged in the area
and the Plan's relationship to defined local objectives respecting land uses,
improved traffic patterns and controls, public transportation, public
utilities, recreational and community facilities, housing facilities,
commercial activities or enterprises, and other public improvements.
   (D)   The City Council, after having conducted a public hearing pursuant to
the Code, adopts the West Central Metropolitan Redevelopment Plan, as amended
by Res. R-2005-096, as attached hereto and incorporated herein.
   (E)   The entire West Central MRA is specifically included for purposes of
tax increment financing.
   (F)   That Two Hundred Thousand Dollars ($200,000) of the uncommitted
Metropolitan Redevelopment Fund (Fund 275) balance and Two Hundred Thousand
Dollars ($200,000) of the Community and Economic Development Reserve Fund be
appropriated to Albuquerque Development Services in order to fund land assembly
and public improvements needed to facilitate the West Central redevelopment.
   (G)   The City Council, after having conducted a public hearing pursuant to
the Code, finds that:
      (1)   The Plan proposes activities for the redevelopment of the West
Central MRA that will aid in the elimination and prevention of slum and blight
or conditions, which lead to the development of slum and blight; and
      (2)   The Plan does not require the relocation of any families and
individuals from their dwellings and a method for providing relocation
assistance is not needed; and
      (3)   The Plan conforms to and complements the Albuquerque/Bernalillo
County Comprehensive Plan; and
      (4)   The Plan affords maximum opportunity consistent with the needs of
the community for the rehabilitation or redevelopment of the West Central MRA
by private enterprise or persons, and the objectives of the Plan justify the
proposed activities as public purposes and needs.
   (H)   The Plan is hereby approved in all respects.
   (I)   The City shall support the creation of a West Central Community
Development Corporation (WCCDC) for the purpose of obtaining funding for
redevelopment activities and providing guidance and technical assistance to
businesses wishing to open, operate and/or expand within the WCMDA.
   (J)   The City shall support the proposed WCCDC to provide technical
assistance to businesses within the WCMDA including, without limitation,
training in business practices, market and product research, marketing, access
to capital and facility improvements.
   (K)   The City shall support efforts to establish programs such as
Mainstreet and/or Transit Related Development programs to enhance redevelopment
efforts in the WCMRA.
   (L)   The City shall support efforts to create a family recreation complex
on the west side of the Rio Grande within the WCMRA. The proposed complex shall
be designed to integrate with neighboring land uses.
   (M)   The City shall support efforts to attract businesses that provide high
paying jobs to the Atrisco Business Park. For these purposes, "high paying
jobs" shall be defined as jobs with average wages 20% above the average wages
for the census tracts within the WCMRA.
(Res. 66-2004, adopted 6-7-04; Am. Res. R-2005-096, approved 6-23-05; Res.
2017-102, approved 11-13-17)
Cross-reference:
   Formerly also codified as §
1-12-16
§ 1-12-14 CENTRAL/HIGHLAND/UPPER NOB HILL METROPOLITAN REDEVELOPMENT AREA AND
PLAN.
   (A)   The Council finds and determines that the area surrounded by Copper
between Carlisle and San Mateo; on Carlisle between Copper and Silver; on
Silver between Carlisle and Aliso; on Aliso between Silver and Lead-Zuni; on
Lead-Zuni between Aliso and Jefferson; on Jefferson between Lead-Zuni and
Silver; on Silver between Jefferson and Jackson; on Jackson between Silver and
Zuni; on Zuni between Jackson and San Mateo; and on San Mateo between Zuni and
Copper as shown on the map attached to this Resolution as Exhibit A, is by
reason of the presence of a substantial number of deteriorated structures,
unsafe conditions, deterioration of site and other improvements, lack of
adequate zoning enforcement, obsolete and impractical planning and platting,
and low levels of commercial activity and redevelopment which substantially
impair and arrest the sound growth and economic well-being of the City;
constitute an economic and social burden and a menace to the public health,
safety, and welfare in its present condition and use, is determined to be
blighted, and appropriate for a metropolitan redevelopment project or projects
and is hereby designated the Highland-Central Metropolitan Redevelopment Area.
   (B)   The Council finds that the rehabilitation, conservation, development,
and redevelopment of and in the Highland-Central Metropolitan Redevelopment
Area is necessary in the interests of the public health, safety, morals and
welfare of the residents of the City.
   (C)   The Metropolitan Redevelopment Agency is hereby authorized and
directed to prepare or to cause to be prepared a Metropolitan Redevelopment
Plan or Plans for the Highland-Central Metropolitan Redevelopment Area which,
without limitation, shall seek to eliminate the problems created by the
blighted conditions in the area, shall conform to any general plan for the City
as a whole, and shall be sufficient to indicate the proposed activities to be
carried out or encouraged in the area and the Plan's relationship to defined
local objectives respecting land use, improved traffic patterns and controls,
public transportation, public utilities, recreational and community facilities,
housing facilities, commercial activities or enterprises, and other public
improvements.
(Res. 82-2002, approved 8-19-02)
   The City Council, after having conducted a public hearing pursuant to the
code, finds that:
   (A)   The Plan and the proposed redevelopment of the Highland Central
Metropolitan Redevelopment Area will aid in the elimination and prevention of
blight or conditions, which lead to the development of blight.
   (B)   The Plan does not require the relocation of any families or
individuals from their dwellings; therefore, a method for providing relocation
assistance is not required for the project.
   (C)   The Plan complements the Albuquerque/ Bernalillo County Comprehensive
Plan and affords maximum opportunity consistent with the needs of the community
for the rehabilitation and redevelopment of the Highland Central Metropolitan
Redevelopment Area by public activities as public purposes and needs.
   (D)   The Plan, attached to Res. 46-2003, and made a part hereof, is
approved in all respects.
   (E)   Amendments.
      (1)   The Highland/Central MRA Plan is hereby amended to adopt the
Central-Highland-Upper Nob Hill MRA Plan.
      (2)   The entire Central-Highland-Upper Nob Hill MRA Plan is specifically
included for purposes of tax increment financing.
      (3)   The City shall support efforts to establish programs such as a
Business Improvement District, a Community Development Corporation, Mainstreet
and/or Transit Related Development programs, and other programs.
      (4)   The City shall support these programs in providing technical
assistance to businesses within the Central-Highland-Upper Nob Hill MRA for the
purpose of obtaining funding for redevelopment activities and providing
guidance and technical assistance to businesses wishing to open, operate and/or
expand with the Central-Highland-Upper Nob Hill MRA.
(Res. 46-2003, approved 5-23-03; Am. Res. R-2005-176, approved 11-10-05 Res.
2017-102, approved 11-13-17)
Cross-reference:
   Formerly also codified as §
1-6-13
§ 1-12-15 DOWNTOWN 2025 METROPOLITAN REDEVELOPMENT AREA AND PLAN.
   (A)   The City Council finds and determines that the area bounded by Marble/
Slate/Lomas Boulevard on the north, the AT&SF railroad tracks/Broadway
Boulevard on the east, Coal Avenue on the south, and Tenth/Ninth/Seventh
Streets on the west, containing approximately 321 acres, as shown on the map
attached to this resolution as Exhibit A, is a slum and blighted area, that
redevelopment of the area is necessary in the interest of the public health,
safety, and welfare of the residents of the municipality and designates the
area as appropriate for metropolitan redevelopment projects.
   (B)   The Downtown Core, which is described in Section 1, is hereby
designated as the Downtown Metropolitan Redevelopment Area.
   (C)   The Downtown MRA designation supercedes the designation of the
Alvarado MRA, which is entirely located within the boundaries of the Downtown
MRA, and the boundaries of the McClellan Park MRA and the Railroad MRA are
hereby amended to exclude the portions of those metropolitan redevelopment
areas that are located within the Downtown MRA.
   (D)   The entire Downtown MRA is specifically included for purposes of tax
increment financing.
   (E)   The Metropolitan Redevelopment Agency is hereby authorized and
directed to prepare or cause to be prepared a Metropolitan Redevelopment Plan
for the Downtown Metropolitan Redevelopment Area which, without limitation,
shall seek to eliminate the problems created by the slum and blight conditions
in the area, shall conform to any general plan for the City as a whole, and
shall be sufficient to indicate the proposed activities to be carried out or
encouraged in the area and the Plan's relationship to defined local objectives
respecting land use, improved traffic patterns and controls, public
transportation, public utilities, recreational and community facilities,
housing facilities, commercial activities or enterprises, and other public
improvements.
(Res. 160-2003, approved 11-20-03)
   (F)   The City Council, after having conducted a public hearing pursuant to
the Code, adopts the Downtown 2025 Metropolitan Redevelopment Plan for the
Downtown MRA.
   (G)   The City Council, after having conducted a public hearing pursuant to
the Code, finds that:
      (1)   The Plan proposes activities for the redevelopment of the Downtown
MRA that will aid in the elimination and prevention of slum and blight or
conditions, which lead to the development of slum and blight;
      (2)   The Plan does not require the relocation of any families and
individuals from their dwellings and a method for providing relocation
assistance is not needed;
      (3)   The Plan conforms to and complements the Albuquerque/Bernalillo
County Comprehensive Plan; and
      (4)   The Plan affords maximum opportunity consistent with the needs of
the community for the rehabilitation or redevelopment of the Downtown MRA by
private enterprise or persons, and the objectives of the Plan justify the
proposed activities as public purposes and needs.
(Res. 44-2004, approved 5-11-04; Res. 2017-102, approved 11-13-17)
Cross-reference:
   Formerly also codified as §
1-7-43
   Alvarado Metropolitan Redevelopment Plan, §
1-12-1 (formerly also §
1-6-6)
   Downtown 2010 Sector Development Plan, §
1-7-43, repealed
    Downtown 2025 Sector Development Plan, §
1-4-1, repealed
   Downtown Neighborhood Area Redevelopment Plan, §
1-6-1, repealed
   Downtown Neighborhood Area (DNA) Sector Development Plan, see §
1-7-4, repealed
   Huning Castle and Raynolds Addition Neighborhood Sector Development Plan,
see §
1-7-18, repealed
   McClellan Park Metropolitan Redevelopment Plan, §
1-12-16 (formerly also §
1-6-7)
   McClellan Park Sector Development Plan, §
1-7-24, repealed
Editor's note: The Downtown 2025 Sector Development Plan land use and
development Policies were updated, incorporated into, and replaced by the 2017
Albuquerque-Bernalillo Comprehensive Plan, Council Bill R-16-108 (Enactment No.
R-2017-026), approved 4-7-17. See §
1-2-1. The Downtown 2025 Sector Development Plan land use and development
Regulations was updated, incorporated into, and replaced by the Integrated
Development Ordinance, Ord. 14-16, et seq., Council Bill O-17-49 (Enactment No.
2017-025), approved 11-13-17. See ROA § 14-16-2-4(E).
Editor's note: The Downtown 2025 Metropolitan Redevelopment Plan aspect of the
document remains valid to guide the Metropolitan Redevelopment Agency’s work,
including infrastructure and catalytic projects, and public/private
partnerships, subject to amendment per the Metropolitan Redevelopment Agency
Ordinance (§ 14-8-4-3(B)); however, the regulations are now void.
§ 1-12-16 MCCLELLAN PARK METROPOLITAN REDEVELOPMENT AREA AND PLAN.
   (A)   The City Council, after having conducted a public hearing, finds that:
      (1)   The Plan, and the proposed activities under the Plan, will aid in
the elimination and prevention of blight; and
      (2)   The Plan affords maximum opportunity, consistent with the needs of
the community, for the rehabilitation and redevelopment of the McClellan Park
Metropolitan Redevelopment Area by private enterprise; and the objectives of
the Plan justify the proposed activities as public purposes and needs.
   (B)   The McClellan Park Metropolitan Redevelopment Plan for the McClellan
Park Metropolitan Redevelopment Area, Section III of the McClellan Park Plan,
as amended, attached to Resolution No. 9-1984 and made a part hereof, is hereby
approved in all respects.
   (C)   The McClellan Park Metropolitan Redevelopment Plan is a Rank III plan
as specified in Ordinance 45-1982.
   (D)   Project II, National Bank of Albuquerque Building Project. The City
Council, after having conducted a public hearing, finds that:
      (1)   The Project, “The National Bank of Albuquerque Building Project”
will aid in the elimination and prevention of blight;
      (2)   The Project Plan does not require the relocation of any families
and individuals from their dwellings; therefore, a method for providing
relocation assistance is not required for the project;
      (3)   The Project Plan compliments the Albuquerque/Bernalillo
Comprehensive Plan, the 1989 Downtown Core Revitalization Strategy and the plan
affords maximum opportunity for the rehabilitation and redevelopment of the
McClellan Park Metropolitan Redevelopment Area by private enterprise; and the
objectives of the Plan justify the proposed activities as public purposes and
needs.
      (4)   The Metropolitan Redevelopment Project II Plan of the McClellan
Park Metropolitan Redevelopment Area is hereby approved in all respects.
      (5)   The Alternative Method of financing (Tax Increment) as provided by
Sections 3-60A-19 to 3-60A-25, NMSA 1978, as amended is hereby in all respects
approved, with the 1989 tax year being the base year. The specific source of
the tax increment funds to which this section applies is more commonly known as
the “National Bank of Albuquerque Building Project,” located at 111 Lomas Blvd.
N.W., contained in the area of Plan II.
      (6)   A request to other applicable units of government which participate
in property tax revenues for the affected area, for approval of the tax
increment method, is hereby made.
(Res. 9-1984, approved 2-8-84; Am. Res. 225-1989, approved 12-28-89; Res. 2017-
102, approved 11-13-17)
Cross-reference:
   Moved from §
1-6-7
   McClellan Park District Sector Development Plan, see §
1-7-24, repealed
§ 1-12-17 SOUTH BROADWAY NEIGHBORHOODS METROPOLITAN REDEVELOPMENT AREA AND
PLAN.
The South Broadway Neighborhoods Metropolitan Area Redevelopment Plan is hereby
approved in all respects.
   (A)   The City Council, after having conducted a public hearing, finds that:
      (1)   The Plan, and the proposed activities under the Plan, will aid in
the elimination and prevention of blight; and
      (2)   The Plan conforms to the general plans of the city as a whole, and
to the South Broadway Neighborhoods Sector Development Plan; and
      (3)   The Plan affords maximum opportunity, consistent with the needs of
the community for the rehabilitation and redevelopment of the South Broadway
Neighborhoods Metropolitan Redevelopment Area by private enterprise; and the
objectives of the Plan justify the proposed activities as public purposes and
needs.
   (E)   No individuals, families or business will be displaced by the
activities outlined in the proposed Metropolitan Redevelopment Plan.
(Res. 106-1986, approved 7-7-86; Am. Res. 58-2002, approved 6-17-02; Res. 2017-
102, approved 11-13-17)
Cross-reference:
   Moved from §
1-6-9
   South Broadway Neighborhoods Sector Development Plan, see §
1-7-15, repealed
§ 1-12-18 SOUTH BARELAS INDUSTRIAL PARK METROPOLITAN REDEVELOPMENT AREA AND
PLAN.
   (A)   The City Council, after having conducted a public hearing, finds that:
      (1)   The Plan, and the proposed activities under the Plan, will aid in
the elimination and prevention of blight; and
      (2)   The Plan conforms to the general plans of the city as a whole; and
      (3)   The Plan affords maximum opportunity, consistent with the needs of
the community, for the redevelopment of the South Barelas Industrial Park
Metropolitan Redevelopment Plan Area by private and public enterprise; and the
objectives of the Plan justify the proposed activities as public purposes and
needs.
   (B)   The South Barelas Industrial Park Metropolitan Redevelopment Plan for
the Barelas Metropolitan Redevelopment Area is hereby approved in all respects.
(Res. 30-1992, approved 3-10-92; Res. 2017-102, approved 11-13-17)
Cross-reference:
   Moved from §
1-6-10
§ 1-12-19 BARELAS NEIGHBORHOOD COMMERCIAL AREA REVITALIZATION AND METROPOLITAN
REDEVELOPMENT AREA AND PLAN.
   (A)   The City Council, after having conducted a public hearing, finds that:
      (1)   The Plan, and the proposed activities under the Plan, will aid in
the elimination and prevention of blight; and
      (2)   The Plan conforms to the general plans of the city as a whole; and
      (3)   The Plan affords maximum opportunity, consistent with the needs of
the community, for the redevelopment of the Barelas Commercial Revitalization
and Metropolitan Redevelopment Plan Area by private and public enterprise; and
the objectives of the Plan justify the proposed activities as public purposes
and needs.
   (B)   The Barelas Commercial Revitalization and Metropolitan Redevelopment
Plan for the Barelas Metropolitan Redevelopment Area, attached to Resolution
No. 69-1993 and made a part hereof, is hereby approved in all respects.
(Res. 69-1993, approved 6-18-93; Res. 2017-102, approved 11-13-17)
Cross-reference:
   Moved from §
1-6-11
§ 1-12-20 BRIDGE/ISLETA METROPOLITAN REDEVELOPMENT AREA AND PLAN.
   (A)   The City Council, after having conducted a public hearing pursuant to
the Code, finds that:
      (1)   The Plan and the proposed redevelopment of the Bridge/Isleta Area
will aid in the elimination and prevention of blight or conditions which lead
to the development of blight.
      (2)   The Plan does not require the relocation of any families or
individuals from their dwellings; therefore, a method for providing relocation
assistance is not required for the project.
      (3)   The Plan complements the Albuquerque/Bernalillo County
Comprehensive Plan and affords maximum opportunity consistent with the needs of
the community for the rehabilitation and redevelopment of the Bridge/Isleta
Redevelopment Area by public activities and private enterprise; and the
objectives of the Plan justify the proposed activities as public purposes and
needs.
      (4)   The Plan, attached as to Resolution 100-1997 as Exhibit A, and made
a part hereof, is approved in all respects.
   (B)   If any section, paragraph, clause or provision of this Resolution
shall for any reason be held to be invalid or unenforceable, the invalidity or
unenforceability of such section, paragraph, clause or provision shall not
affect any of the remaining provisions of this resolution.
   (C)   Those portions of R-32-1996 in conflict with this resolution are
hereby repealed.
(Res. 100-1997, approved 10-15-97; Res. 2017-102, approved 11-13-17)
Cross-reference:
   Moved from §
1-4-3
§ 1-12-21 CLAYTON HEIGHTS/LOMAS DEL CIELO METROPOLITAN REDEVELOPMENT AREA AND
PLAN.
   (A)   The City Council, after having conducted a public hearing pursuant to
the code, finds that:
      (1)   The Plan and the proposed redevelopment of the Clayton Heights
Metropolitan Redevelopment Area will aid in the elimination and prevention of
blight or conditions which lead to development of blight.
      (2)   The Plan does not require the relocation of any families or
individuals from their dwellings; therefore, a method for providing relocation
assistance is not required.
      (3)   The Plan complements the Albuquerque/Bernalillo County
Comprehensive Plan and affords maximum opportunity consistent with the needs of
the community for the rehabilitation and redevelopment of the Clayton Heights
Metropolitan Redevelopment Area by the public activities and the private
enterprise; and the objectives of the Plan justify the proposed activities as
public purposes and needs.
      (4)   The Plan, attached as Exhibit A, and made a part hereof, is
approved in all respects.
   (B)   The entire Clayton Heights Metropolitan Redevelopment Area is
specifically included for purposes of tax increment financing.
   (C)   The City shall support efforts to establish other plans and studies to
further the objectives of the Plan specifically an updated Master Plan for the
Korean War Veterans Park and the Loma Linda Community Center and related street
improvements.
   (D)   SEVERABILITY CLAUSE. If any section, paragraph, sentence, clause, word
or phrase of this resolution is for any reason held to be invalid or
unenforceable by any court of competent jurisdiction, such decision shall not
affect the validity of the remaining provisions of this resolution. The Council
hereby declares that it would have passed this resolution and each section,
paragraph, sentence, clause, word or phrase thereof irrespective of any
provisions being declared unconstitutional or otherwise invalid.
(Res. R-2010-080, approved 6-24-10; Res. 2017-102, approved 11-13-17)
Cross-reference:
   Moved from §
1-6-14
§ 1-12-22 NORTH FOURTH STREET METROPOLITAN REDEVELOPMENT AREA AND PLAN.
   (A)   The City Council makes the following findings:
      (1)   The North Fourth Street Corridor Plan Overlay Zone supports the
policies listed in the adopted Comprehensive Plan including policies listed
herein. Specifically, the Plan is in compliance with applicable land use goals
and policies for Established Urban Areas as follows:
         (a)   Policy II.B.5.a. of the Comprehensive Plan states: "The
Developing Urban and Established Urban Areas as shown by the Plan map shall
allow a full range of urban land uses, resulting in an overall gross density up
to 5 dwelling units per acre." The Corridor Plan implements the policy by
providing a variety of zones that allow for residential, commercial or mixed
use, and utilitarian building forms.
         (b)   Policy II.B.5.d. of the Comprehensive Plan states: "The
location, intensity and design of new development shall respect existing
neighborhood values, natural environmental conditions and carrying capacities,
scenic resources, and resources of other social, cultural, recreational
concern." The newly created zones in the Corridor Plan are tailored to promote
economic vitality and stable land uses while respecting the existing
development
         (c)   Policy II.B.5.e. of the Comprehensive Plan states: "New growth
shall be accommodated through development in areas where vacant land is
contiguous to existing or programmed urban facilities and services and where
the integrity of existing neighborhoods can be ensured." The Corridor Plan area
is fully served with urban infrastructure, and new developments will add to the
efficiency of these services.
         (d)   Policy II.B.5.h. of the Comprehensive Plan states: "Higher
density housing is most appropriate in designated Activity Centers, in areas
with excellent access to the major street network, in areas where a mixed
density pattern is already established, and in areas where a transition is
needed between single-family homes and much more intensive development." The
NFTOD, NFMXD, and NFID districts allow for higher density housing, which is
appropriate to the corridor.
         (e)   Policy II.B.7.a. of the Comprehensive Plan states: "Existing and
proposed Activity Centers are designated by a Comprehensive Plan map where
appropriate to help shape the built environment in a sustainable development
pattern, create mixed use concentrations of interrelated activities that
promote transit and pedestrian access both to and within the Activity Center,
and maximize cost-effectiveness of City services." Further, policy II.B.7.i.
states: "Multi-unit housing is an appropriate use in Neighborhood, Community
and Major Activity Centers." The NFTOD, NFMXD, NFID and LAAHD districts allow
for a mix of multi-family, residential and non-residential uses.
         (f)   Policy II.B.5.k.of the Comprehensive Plan states: "Land adjacent
to arterial streets shall be planned to minimize harmful effects of traffic;
livability and safety of established residential neighborhoods shall be
protected in transportation planning and operation." In addition, policy
II.B.5.l. states: "Quality and innovation in design shall be encouraged in all
new development; design shall be encouraged which is appropriate to the Plan
area." Design standards contained in the Corridor Plan will control uses and
are intended to promote a quality environment by the incorporation of design
elements for buildings and sites and the encouragement of a pedestrian
environment.
   (B)   All development and redevelopment activities within the area shall be
guided and regulated by the provisions of the North Fourth Street Corridor
Plan, including the recommendation that an engineering study be conducted prior
to any major reconstruction of the street or streets affected by the Plan.
   (C)   The Zone Map, adopted by Article 14-16-4-9 ROA 1994 is hereby amended
to reflect the overlay zone districts in the map shown in Attachment A hereto,
and the North Fourth Street Rank III Corridor Plans (first volume from Mountain
Road to Douglas MacArthur NW and second volume from Douglas MacArthur to
Vineyard NW) attached hereto are approved and incorporated herein.
(Res. R-2010-050, approved 4-9-10; Res. 2017-102, approved 11-13-17)
Cross-reference:
   Moved from §
1-7-47
§ 1-12-23 HISTORIC CENTRAL METROPOLITAN REDEVELOPMENT AREA AND PLAN.
   (A)   The Council makes the following findings of fact with respect to the
designation of the Historic Central Metropolitan Redevelopment Area (MRA):
      (1)   The area that consists of Central Avenue and the premises that
front it between Laguna Boulevard and the west side of the Central Avenue
Bridge, shown in the official Historic Central MRA boundary map attached hereto
as Exhibit B, is found to be blighted for the following reasons: (1) because of
the presence of a substantial number of deteriorated or deteriorating
structures, unsafe conditions, deterioration of site or other improvements, and
obsolete and impractical planning and platting; (2) because a significant
number of commercial or mercantile businesses have closed or significantly
reduced their operations due to the economic losses or loss of profit due to
operating in the area; (3) because of low levels of commercial activity or
redevelopment; and (4) because the area constitutes an economic or social
burden and is a menace to the public health, safety, morals or welfare in its
present condition and use.
      (2)   The rehabilitation, conservation, redevelopment or development, or
a combination thereof, of and in the Historic Central MRA is necessary in the
interest of the public health, safety, morals or welfare of the residents of
Albuquerque.
   (B)   In accordance with the requirements of 3-60A-8 NMSA 1978, the Council
hereby designates the area that consists of Central Avenue and the premises
that front it between Laguna Boulevard and the west side of the Central Avenue
Bridge, shown in the official Historic Central MRA boundary map attached hereto
as Exhibit B, as the Historic Central Metropolitan Redevelopment Area and finds
it to be appropriate for a metropolitan redevelopment project or projects.
   (C)   The Planning Department is hereby authorized and directed to prepare a
Metropolitan Redevelopment Plan for the Historic Central MRA, which, without
limitation, shall (1) seek to eliminate the problems created by the blighted
conditions of the area, (2) conform to and coordinate with the Albuquerque/
Bernalillo County Comprehensive Plan, any applicable Rank 2 and 3 plans, and
any other applicable plans or policies, and (3) be sufficient to indicate the
proposed activities to be carried out in the area, including, but not limited
to, any proposals for land acquisition; redevelopment; proposals for
improvements, rehabilitation and conservation; and the plan’s relationship to
definite local objectives respecting land uses, improved traffic patterns and
controls, public transportation, public utilities, recreational and community
facilities, housing facilities, commercial activities or enterprises, and other
public improvements.
   (D)   The City Council, after having conducted a public hearing pursuant to
the code, find that:
      (1)   The proposed redevelopment of the Historic Central Metropolitan
Redevelopment Area will aid in the elimination and prevention of blight or
conditions which lead to development of blight.
      (2)   The Historic Central Metropolitan Redevelopment Area Plan does not
require the relocation of any families or individuals from their dwellings;
      (3)   The Historic Central Metropolitan Redevelopment Area Plan
complements the Albuquerque/Bernalillo County Comprehensive Plan and affords
maximum opportunity consistent with the needs of the community for the
rehabilitation and redevelopment of the Historic Central Metropolitan
Redevelopment Area by the public activities and the private enterprise; and the
objectives of the Plan justify the proposed activities as public purposes and
needs;
      (4)   The Historic Central Metropolitan Redevelopment Area Plan is
approved in all respects.
(R-2012-051, approved 6-12-2012, Am. R-2013-125, approved 12-13-2013; Res.
2017-102, approved 11-13-17)
Cross-reference:
   Moved from §
1-6-15
§ 1-12-24 CORONADO METROPOLITAN REDEVELOPMENT AREA AND PLAN.
   (A)   The City Council makes the following Findings of Fact with respect to
the designation of the Coronado MR Area:
      (1)   The Coronado MR Area is shown on the map attached hereto as Exhibit
A. The boundary of the Coronado MR Area includes the privately-owned property
located at 9201 Pan American Freeway, that is not zoned residentially for
single-family use within the area bounded by San Diego Avenue to the north, the
southbound frontage road of Interstate 25 (“I-25”) to the east, Modesto Avenue
to the south and San Mateo Boulevard to the west, in addition to the public
right-of-way along San Mateo boulevard between Modesto Avenue and Alameda
Boulevard.
      (2)   The Coronado MR Area had exhibited the following conditions:
         (a)   Poor and Aging Public Infrastructure: The Coronado MR Area is
lacking in public infrastructure. The overall condition of the roads is poor
due to settling and compaction of the land they were constructed on.
Additionally, there are no sidewalks present in the MR Area creating an unsafe
environment for pedestrians and motorists. The South La Cueva Channel was built
to temporary standards and is maintained with temporary erosion and control
measures.
         (b)   Environmental Issues: The MR Area is in the location of a former
landfill that was operated by the City of Albuquerque from 1963 to 1965. Much
of the trash and debris has been removed and additional remediation and
monitoring efforts are needed.
         (c)   Low Levels of Commercial or Industrial Activity: There currently
exist large amounts of vacant land and obsolete buildings in the area. These
conditions have led to blight within the Coronado MR Area as defined by the MR
code: (1) Low levels of commercial activity or redevelopment or any combination
of such factors; (2) Deterioration of site or other improvements; (3)
Insanitary and unsafe conditions; and (4) Area where a significant number of
commercial or mercantile businesses have closed or significantly reduced their
operations due to the economic losses or loss of profit due to operating in the
area and low levels of commercial or industrial activity or redevelopment.
      (3)   The rehabilitation, conservation, redevelopment or development, or
a combination thereof, of and in the Coronado MR Area is necessary in the
interests of public health, safety, orals or welfare of the residents of
Albuquerque.
   (B)   In accordance with the requirements of Section 3-60A-8 NMSA 1978, the
Council hereby designates the area that is described in Section (A)(1) above,
and shown in the official Coronado MR Boundary map attached hereto as Exhibit
A, to be a “metropolitan redevelopment area” as defined by Section 3-60A-4(M)
NMSA 1978 and finds it to be appropriate for a metropolitan redevelopment
project or projects. This area shall be referred to as the Coronado MR Area to
distinguish it from other metropolitan redevelopment areas.
   (C)   The MRA of the Planning Department is hereby authorized and directed
to prepare a Metropolitan Redevelopment Plan, as defined by Section 3-60A-4(M)
NMSA 1978, for the Coronado MR Area, which, without limitation, shall:
      (1)   Seek to eliminate the problems created by the blighted conditions
of the area;
      (2)   Conform to and coordinate with the Albuquerque/Bernalillo County
Comprehensive Plan, any applicable Rank 2 and 3 Plans, and any other applicable
plans or policies; and
      (3)   Be sufficient to indicate the proposed activities to be carried out
in the area, including, but not limited to, any proposals for land acquisition,
redevelopment, improvements, rehabilitation and conservation and the plan’s
relationship to definite local objectives respecting land uses, improved
traffic patterns and controls, public transportation, public utilities,
recreational and community facilities, housing facilities, commercial
activities or enterprises, and other public improvements.
(Res. 2016-095, approved 11-21-16)
   (D)   The City Council, after having conducted a public hearing pursuant to
the code, finds that:
      (1)   The proposed redevelopment of the Coronado Metropolitan
Redevelopment Area will aid in the elimination and prevention of blight or
conditions which lead to the development of blight.
      (2)   The Coronado Metropolitan Redevelopment Plan does not require the
relocation of any families or individuals from their dwellings; therefore a
method for providing relocation assistance is not required.
      (3)   The Coronado Metropolitan Redevelopment Plan complements the
Albuquerque/Bernalillo County Comprehensive Plan and affords maximum
opportunity consistent with the needs of the community for the rehabilitation
and redevelopment of the Coronado Metropolitan Redevelopment Area by public
activities and private enterprise; and the objectives of the Plan justify the
proposed activities as public purposes and needs.
      (4)   The Coronado Metropolitan Redevelopment Plan, as attached as
Exhibit A, and made a part hereof, is approved in all respects.
(Res. 2016-096, approved 11-21-16; Res. 2017-102, approved 11-13-17)
§ 1-12-25 EAST GATEWAY METROPOLITAN REDEVELOPMENT AREA AND PLAN.
   (A)   The Council finds and determines that the area from the commercial
corridor along Interstate-40 at the Juan Tabo exit one block North of Copper;
East on I-40 to the Tramway off ramp; South of I-40 along Central Ave.; West
with the Southern-most boundary running from Cochiti and Acoma. It also
includes the unattached island South of Wenonah; West of Four Hills Road. The
East Gateway Designation area further described in Exhibit A to this
Resolution, is, by reason of the presence of a substantial number of
deteriorated structures, unsafe conditions, deterioration of site and other
improvements, obsolete and impractical planning and platting and low levels of
commercial activity and redevelopment which substantially impair and arrest the
sound growth and economic well-being of the City and the East Gateway
Metropolitan Redevelopment Area, constitute an economic and social burden and a
menace to the public health, safety, and welfare in its present condition and
use, the blighted areas that are appropriate for a metropolitan redevelopment
project or projects and are hereby designated the East Gateway Metropolitan
Redevelopment Area.
   (B)   The Council finds that the rehabilitation, conservation, development
and redevelopment of and in the East Gateway Redevelopment Area are necessary
in the interests of the public health, safety, morals and welfare of the
residents of the City.
   (C)   The Metropolitan Redevelopment Agency is hereby authorized and
directed to prepare a Metropolitan Redevelopment Plan or Plans for the East
Gateway Area which, without limitation, shall seek to eliminate the problems
created by the blighted conditions in the area, shall conform to any general
plan for the City as a whole, and shall be sufficient to indicate the proposed
activities to be carried out or encouraged in the area and the Plan’s
relationship to defined local objectives respecting land uses, improved traffic
patterns and controls, public transportation, public utilities, recreational
and community facilities, housing facilities, commercial activities or
enterprises, and other public improvements.
(R-2008-015, approved 1-7-08)
   (D)   The proposed redevelopment of the East Gateway Metropolitan
Redevelopment Area will aid in the elimination and prevention of blight or
conditions which lead to development of blight.
   (E)   The East Gateway Metropolitan Redevelopment Plan does not require the
relocation of any families or individuals from their dwellings; therefore, a
method for providing relocation assistance is not required.
   (F)   The East Gateway Metropolitan Redevelopment Plan complements the
Albuquerque/Bernalillo County Comprehensive Plan and affords maximum
opportunity consistent with the needs of the community for the rehabilitation
and redevelopment of the East Gateway Metropolitan Redevelopment Area by public
activities and private enterprise; and the objectives of the Plan justify the
proposed activities as public purposes and needs.
   (G)   The East Gateway Metropolitan Redevelopment Area Plan, attached as
Exhibit A, and made a part hereof, is approved in all respects.
(R-2016-025, approved 4-4-16; Res. 2017-102, approved 11-13-17)
ARTICLE 13: CORRIDOR PLANS
The City hereby severs and invalidates the regulatory content of the Rank 3
Arroyo Corridor Plans, which has been included or updated in the Integrated
Development Ordinance, and shall consider these Plans as Resource Management
Plans that provide policy guidance to the implementing department(s). Code of
Resolutions Land Use – Article 13: Corridor Plans is repealed.
(Res. 2017-102, approved 11-13-17)
Section
   
1-13-1   Rio Grande Boulevard Corridor Plan
   
1-13-2   Pajarito Arroyo Corridor Plan
   
1-13-3   Bear Canyon Arroyo Corridor Plan
   
1-13-4   Amole Arroyo Corridor Plan
   
1-13-5   Interstate Corridor Enhancement Plan
§ 1-13-1 RIO GRANDE BOULEVARD CORRIDOR PLAN.
(Res. 35-1989, approved 3-2-89; Res. 2017-102, approved 11-13-17)
Editor's note: The Rio Grande Boulevard Corridor Plan, its contents, and its
boundaries are repealed. The Rio Grande Boulevard Corridor Plan policies were
updated, incorporated into, and replaced by the 2017 Albuquerque-Bernalillo
Comprehensive Plan, Council Bill R-16-108 (Enactment No. R-2017-026), approved
4-7-17. See §
1-2-1. The Rio Grande Boulevard Corridor Plan was included by reference in the
2017 Albuquerque-Bernalillo Comprehensive Plan Appendix D as a historical
document to be used for information purposes and to inform future planning in
this area. The Rio Grande Boulevard Corridor Plan regulations were updated,
incorporated into, and replaced by the Integrated Development Ordinance, Ord.
14-16, Council Bill O-17-49 (Enactment No. 2017-025), approved 11-13-17. See
ROA § 14-16 et seq.
§ 1-13-2 PAJARITO ARROYO CORRIDOR PLAN.
(Res. 115-1990, approved 9-4-90; Res. 2017-102, approved 11-13-17)
Editor's note: The Pajarito Arroyo Corridor Plan is hereby designated as a Rank
3 Resource Management Plan. The Pajarito Arroyo Corridor Plan regulations were
updated, incorporated into, and replaced by the Integrated Development
Ordinance, Ord. 14-16, Council Bill O-17-49 (Enactment No. 2017-025), approved
11-13-17. ROA § 14-16, et seq.
Cross Reference:
   Moved to §
1-17-24
§ 1-13-3 BEAR CANYON ARROYO CORRIDOR PLAN.
(Res. 100-1991, approved 6-21-91; Res. 2017-102, approved 11-13-17)
Editor's note: The Bear Canyon Arroyo Corridor Plan is hereby designated as a
Rank 3 Resource Management Plan. The Bear Canyon Arroyo Corridor Plan
regulations were updated, incorporated into, and replaced by the Integrated
Development Ordinance, Ord. 14-16, Council Bill O-17-49 (Enactment No. 2017-
025), approved 11-13-17. See ROA § 14-16, et seq.
Cross Reference:
   Moved to §
1-17-22
§ 1-13-4 AMOLE ARROYO CORRIDOR PLAN.
(Res. 165-1991, approved 10-25-91; Res. 2017-102, approved 11-13-17)
Editor's note: The Amole Arroyo Corridor Plan is hereby designated as a Rank 3
Resource Management Plan. The Amole Arroyo Corridor Plan regulations were
updated, incorporated into, and replaced by the Integrated Development
Ordinance, Ord. 14-16, Council Bill O-17-49 (Enactment No. 2017-025), approved
11-13-17. See ROA § 14-16, et seq.
Cross Reference:
   Moved to §
1-17-21
§ 1-13-5 INTERSTATE CORRIDOR ENHANCEMENT PLAN.
(Res. 46-2000, approved 5-10-00; Res. 2017-102, approved 11-13-17) 
Cross-reference:
   Moved to §
4-2-11
ARTICLE 14: TAX INCREMENT DEVELOPMENTS
Section
   
1-14-1    Mesa Del Sol Tax Increment Development Districts 1 through 5
   
1-14-2   Quorum at ABQ Uptown Tax Increment Development District
   
1-14-3   Winrock Town Center Tax Increment Development Districts 1 and 2
§ 1-14-1   MESA DEL SOL TAX INCREMENT DEVELOPMENT DISTRICTS 1 THROUGH 5
   (A)   Defined Terms. As used in this Resolution, the following terms shall
have the meanings specified, unless the context clearly requires otherwise
(such meanings to be equally applicable to both the singular and the plural
forms of the terms defined):
      ACT means Sections 5-15-1 through 5-15-28, NMSA 1978, as supplemented and
amended, the Home Rule Powers and all enactments of the City's Governing Body,
including the TIDD Ordinance and this Resolution.
      APPLICANT means Mesa del Sol, LLC.
      APPLICATION means the petition for formation of the Mesa del Sol Tax
Increment Development Districts 1 through 5 and documentation incorporated by
reference in the Application and submitted to the City pursuant to the Act and
the TIDD Ordinance.
      BONDS or DISTRICT BONDS means Tax Increment Bonds issued by Districts 1
through 5, collectively or individually.
      CITY means the City of Albuquerque, New Mexico.
      DISTRICT or DISTRICTS means, as the context requires, all or any one of
the Districts 1 through 5.
      DISTRICT BOUNDARY MAP means the map attached as Exhibit 1 to the Tax
Increment Development Plan.
      DISTRICTS 1 THROUGH 5 means the Mesa del Sol Tax Increment Development
Districts 1 through 5.
      FINANCIAL FEASIBILITY STUDY means the study of the estimated costs and
financing methods of the TIDD Infrastructure Improvements submitted by the
Applicant in connection with its Petition for formation of the Mesa del Sol Tax
Increment for Development Districts 1 through 5.
      FORMATION DOCUMENTS means the Application and such other documents as are
required by the Act and the TIDD Ordinance to be submitted by a petitioner in
connection with a petition for the formation, implementation and governance of
the District.
      FORMATION RESOLUTION means Resolution Enactment R-2006-126 adopted by the
City in connection with its approval of the formation of the Districts.
      GROSS RECEIPTS TAX INCREMENT means the gross receipts taxes collected
within a District in excess of the base gross receipts taxes, excluding the
Transportation Infrastructure Tax, collected for the duration of the existence
of that District and distributed to that District in the same manner as
distributions are made under the provisions of the State Tax Administration
Act.
      MASTER DEVELOPMENT AGREEMENT  means the master development agreement by
and between the Applicant and the City in accordance with Section 4(I) of the
TIDD Ordinance, which Development Agreement shall be ratified by the Districts
and supplemented by Supplemental District Development Agreements entered into
by each District, the Applicant and the City, in accordance with the provisions
of the Development Agreement.
      PETITION means the petition for formation of Districts 1 through 5
submitted pursuant to the Act and the TIDD Ordinance.
      PROPERTY TAX INCREMENT means all property tax collected on real property
within a District that is in excess of the base property tax until termination
of that District and distributed to that District in the same manner as
distributions are made under the provisions of the State Tax Administration
Act.
      REAL PROPERTY means the real property described in the District Boundary
Map.
      STATE means the State of New Mexico.
      SUPPLEMENTAL DISTRICT DEVELOPMENT AGREEMENT means those development
agreements required by the Planned Communities Criteria along with any
agreement supplementing the Development Agreement to be entered into by each
District, the Applicant and the City to provide more specific details
concerning the development, construction and financing of TIDD Infrastructure
Improvements for that District through the issuance of Tax Increment Bonds by
that District.
      TAX INCREMENT BONDS means bonds issued by a District in accordance with
the Act and secured by 67% of the revenues of the Gross Receipts Tax Increment,
and 67% of the revenues of the Property Tax Increment.
      TAX INCREMENT DEVELOPMENT PLAN means the tax increment development plan
for Districts 1 through 5, including a map depicting the boundaries of the
District, as required by the TIDD Ordinance and Section 5-15-5 of the Act.
      TIDD INFRASTRUCTURE IMPROVEMENTS means the public infrastructure
improvements to be financed with proceeds of District Bonds as described and in
the approximate locations shown in Exhibit 1 to the Tax Increment Development
Plan.
      TIDD ORDINANCE means City Council Ordinance Bill No. F/S O-06-44,
Enactment No. O-36-2006.
      TRANSPORTATION INFRASTRUCTURE TAX means the 0.25% increment of local
option gross receipts taxes enacted by the City pursuant to Sections 4-3-7-1 et
seq., ROA 1994.
   (B)   Construction of Formation Resolution. Except as otherwise expressly
provided in this Resolution, or unless the context otherwise requires:
      (1)   The singular includes the plural and the plural includes the
singular.
      (2)   All accounting terms not otherwise defined in this Resolution have
the meanings assigned to them in accordance with generally accepted accounting
principles in the United States.
      (3)   All references to Sections shall refer to Sections of this
Resolution, unless otherwise stated.
      (4)   Words importing any gender include the other gender.
      (5)   "Herein," "hereby," "hereunder," "hereof," "hereinbefore" and
"hereafter" refer to this Resolution and not solely to the particular portion
of this Resolution in which such word is used.
      (6)   All times will be local time in the City unless otherwise
designated in this Resolution.
   (C)   Findings. The City hereby declares that it has considered the
Application, Master Development Agreement and all other relevant information
and data, and hereby makes the following findings:
      (1)   As planned and proposed by the Master Development Agreement, the
Applicant will construct the TIDD Infrastructure Improvements in multiple
phases, in accordance with the estimated construction schedule included in the
Application, the City’s rules and regulations and the Master Development
Agreement. The TIDD Infrastructure Improvements will be constructed to City
specifications, and will be subject to inspection, approval and acceptance by
the City prior to dedication to the City (other than certain water and
wastewater improvements that will be dedicated to the Albuquerque Bernalillo
County Water Utility Authority, and certain road improvements that will be
dedicated to the State).
   (D)   Approval of Master Development Agreement. The Master Development
Agreement is hereby accepted and approved. The Chief Administrative Officer of
the City is authorized and directed to execute the Master Development Agreement
on behalf of the City, with such changes as are consistent with the provisions
of this Resolution, and to execute Supplemental District Development
Agreements, as contemplated by the Master Development Agreement, with terms and
provisions that are consistent with the Master Development Agreement and this
Resolution. In the event of a discrepancy in the terms thereof, the Master
Development Agreement shall control over the Tax Increment Development Plan and
such other Supplemental District Development Agreements as may be executed from
time to time.
   (E)   Amendments. This Resolution may be amended or supplemented by
ordinance or resolution adopted by the City Council in accordance with the laws
of the City and the State.
      (1)   The Workforce Housing Plan that was attached as Exhibit 3 to the
approved Master Development Agreement is replaced with the Amended and Restated
Housing Plan for Mesa del Sol that is attached to this resolution.
      (2)   The Districts' governing body shall be composed of the following
five voting members and one ex officio, nonvoting member:
         a.    The City Councilor from District 6, who is currently Rey
Garduño;
         b.   The President and Vice President of the City Council, who are
currently Ken Sanchez and Trudy Jones, respectively;
         c.   Gilbert Montaño, the Deputy Chief Administrative Officer of the
City of Albuquerque; and
         d.   The Secretary of Finance and Administration or his designee.
         e.   A representative of the Applicant who is currently Brent Dupes;
(Non Voting Ex Officio member)
      Gilbert Montaño continues as the appointed clerk of Districts 1 through 5
and Brent Dupes is appointed treasurer of Districts 1 through 5.
   In the event that the Councilor from District 6 is elected to serve as
either the President or Vice-President of the City Council, the Councilor from
District 2 shall fill the vacancy created on the District's governing board.
   Within six years following the formation of Districts 1 through 5, the board
shall hold an election of new directors by majority vote of owners and
qualified resident electors in accordance with the Act."
   (F)   Repealer. All resolutions, or parts thereof in conflict with the
provisions of this Resolution, are hereby repealed to the extent only of such
inconsistency. To the extent, if any, that this Resolution conflicts with any
provision of the TIDD Ordinance, that provision is waived solely with respect
to the formation of and other matters concerning Districts 1 through 5, and the
TIDD Ordinance shall remain in full force and effect in connection with any
other application or project to which the TIDD Ordinance applies or may apply
in the future. This repealer shall not be construed to revive any resolution,
or part thereof, heretofore repealed.
   (G)   Severability.  If any section, paragraph, clause or provision of this
Resolution shall for any reason be held to be invalid or unenforceable, the
invalidity or unenforceability of such section, paragraph, clause or provision
shall in no manner affect any remaining provisions of this Resolution.
(Am. Res. R-2007-001, approved 1-29-07; Am. Res. R-2007-82, approved 8-17-07;
Am. Res. R-2010-104, approved 8-30-10, Am. Res. R-2012-103, approved 1-8-13,
Am. Res. R-2012-108, approved 1-8-13; Am. Res. R-2014-095, approved 11-24-2014)
Cross reference:
   Mesa del Sol Master Plan, see §
1-11-9, repealed
   Mesa del Sol Master Plan, see now §
1-18-1
§ 1-14-2   QUORUM AT ABQ UPTOWN TAX INCREMENT DEVELOPMENT DISTRICT
   (A)   Defined Terms. As used in this Formation Resolution and the recitals
above, the following terms shall have the meanings specified, unless the
context clearly requires otherwise (such meanings to be equally applicable to
both the singular and the plural forms of the terms defined):
      ACT  means the Tax Increment for Development Act, Sections 5-15-1 through
5-15-28, NMSA 1978, as supplemented and amended, the Home Rule Powers and all
enactments of the City’s Governing Body, including the TIDD Ordinance and this
Resolution.
      APPLICANT means Hunt Uptown II, LLC, a New Mexico limited liability
company and Hunt Uptown IV, LLC, a New Mexico limited liability company,
collectively.
      APPLICATION means the petition for formation of the Quorum at ABQ Uptown
Tax Increment Development District and documentation incorporated by reference
in the Application and submitted to the City pursuant to the Act and the TIDD
Ordinance.
      BONDS or DISTRICT BONDS or TIDD BONDS means Tax Increment Bonds issued by
the District.
      CITY means the City of Albuquerque, New Mexico.
      DISTRICT means the Quorum at ABQ Uptown Tax Increment Development
District.
      DISTRICT BOUNDARY MAP means the map attached as Attachment 1 to the Tax
Increment Development Plan.
      FINANCIAL FEASIBILITY STUDY means the study of the estimated costs and
financing methods of the TIDD Infrastructure Improvements submitted by the
Applicant in connection with its Petition for formation of the Quorum at ABQ
Uptown Tax Increment for Development District.
      FORMATION DOCUMENTS means the Application and such other documents as are
required by the Act and the TIDD Ordinance to be submitted by a petitioner in
connection with a petition for the formation, implementation and governance of
the District.
      FORMATION RESOLUTION means City Council Bill No. F/S R-08-125, Enactment
No. R-2008-119 adopted by the City in connection with its approval of the
formation of the District.
      GROSS RECEIPTS TAX INCREMENT means the gross receipts taxes collected
within the District in excess of the base gross receipts taxes collected for
the duration of the existence of the District and distributed to the District
in the same manner as distributions are made under the provisions of the State
Tax Administration Act.
      MASTER DEVELOPMENT AGREEMENT means the master development agreement by
and between the Applicant and the City in accordance with Section 5(L) of the
TIDD Ordinance, which Master Development Agreement shall be ratified by the
District and entered into by the District, the Applicant and the City, in
accordance with the provisions of the Master Development Agreement.
      PETITION means the petition for formation of the District submitted
pursuant to the Act and the TIDD Ordinance.
      PROPERTY TAX INCREMENT means all property tax collected on real property
within the District that is in excess of the base property tax until
termination of the District and distributed to the District in the same manner
as distributions are made under the provisions of the State Tax Administration
Act.
      PUBLIC SAFETY TAX means the 0.25% increment of local gross receipts taxes
enacted by the City pursuant to sections 4-3-8-1 et seq., ROA 1994.
      REAL PROPERTY means the real property described in the District Boundary
Map.
      STATE means the State of New Mexico.
      TAX INCREMENT BONDS means bonds issued by a District in accordance with
the Act and secured by 70% of the revenues of the Gross Receipts Tax Increment,
and 75% of the revenues of the Property Tax Increment.
      TAX INCREMENT DEVELOPMENT PLAN means the tax increment development plan
for the District, including a map depicting the boundaries of the District, as
required by the TIDD Ordinance and Section 5-15-5 of the Act.
      TIDD INFRASTRUCTURE IMPROVEMENTS  means the public infrastructure
improvements to be financed with proceeds of District Bonds as described and in
the approximate locations shown in Exhibit 1 to the Tax Increment Development
Plan.
      TIDD ORDINANCE means City Council Ordinance Bill No. F/S O-06-44,
Enactment No. O-36-2006.
      TRANSPORTATION INFRASTRUCTURE TAX means the 0.25% increment of local
option gross receipts taxes enacted by the City pursuant to Sections 4-3-7-1 et
seq., ROA 1994.
   (B)   Construction of Formation Resolution. Except as otherwise expressly
provided in this Resolution, or unless the context otherwise requires:
      (1)   The singular includes the plural and the plural includes the
singular.
      (2)   All accounting terms not otherwise defined in this Resolution have
the meanings assigned to them in accordance with generally accepted accounting
principles in the United States.
      (3)   All references to Sections shall refer to Sections of this
Resolution, unless otherwise stated.
      (4)   Words importing any gender include the other gender.
      (5)   “Herein,” “hereby,” “hereunder,” “hereof,” “hereinbefore” and
“hereafter” refer to this Resolution and not solely to the particular portion
of this Resolution in which such word is used.
      (6)   All times will be local time in the City unless otherwise
designated in this Resolution.
   (C)   Findings. The City hereby declares that it has considered the
Application, Master Development Agreement and all other relevant information
and data, and hereby makes the following findings:
      (1)   As planned and proposed by the Master Development Agreement, the
Applicant will construct the TIDD Infrastructure Improvements in accordance
with the estimated construction schedule included in the Application, the
City’s rules and regulations and the Master Development Agreement. The TIDD
Infrastructure Improvements will be constructed to City specifications, and
will be subject to inspection, approval and acceptance by the City prior to
dedication to the City.
   (D)   Approval of Master Development Agreement. The Master Development
Agreement is hereby accepted and approved. The Chief Administrative Officer of
the City is authorized and directed to execute the Master Development Agreement
on behalf of the City, with such changes as are consistent with the provisions
of this Resolution, as contemplated by the Master Development Agreement, with
terms and provisions that are consistent with the Master Development Agreement
and this Resolution. In the event of a discrepancy in the terms thereof, the
Master Development Agreement shall control over the Tax Increment Development
Plan.
   (E)   Appointments to the Governing Body of the District.   
      (1)   The District's governing body shall be composed of the following
five voting members and two ex officio, non-voting members:
         (a)   The City Councilor from District 7, who is currently Michael
Cook;
         (b)   The City's Chief Administrative Officer, who is currently David
S. Campbell;
         (c)   A representative of Bernalillo County, who is currently Dennis
Chavez;
         (d)   A representative of the Applicants, who is currently James
Dobbie; and
         (e)   he designee for the Secretary of Finance and Administration, who
is currently Laird Graeser.
      (2)   Non-voting Ex Officio members:
         (a)   The State Representative for District 26 (the District in which
the Real Property is located), who is currently Al Park; and
         (b)   The State Senator for District 15 (the District in which the
Real Property is located), who is currently Tim Eichenberg.
      (3)   The City Councilor sitting on the Board shall be the Chair of the
Board, the Chief Administrative Officer sitting on the Board shall be the clerk
of District and James Dobbie, so long as he is a Board member, is appointed
treasurer of District.
   Within six years following the formation of District, the board shall hold
an election of new directors by majority vote of owners and qualified resident
electors in accordance with the Act or governance of the District shall then
revert to the City Council.
   (F)   Amendments. This Resolution may be amended or supplemented by
ordinance or resolution adopted by the City Council in accordance with the laws
of the City and the State.
   (G)   Repealer.  All resolutions, or parts thereof in conflict with the
provisions of this Resolution, are hereby repealed to the extent only of such
inconsistency. To the extent, if any, that this Resolution conflicts with any
provision of the TIDD Ordinance, that provision is waived solely with respect
to the formation of and other matters concerning the District, and the TIDD
Ordinance shall remain in full force and effect in connection with any other
application or project to which the TIDD Ordinance applies or may apply in the
future. This repealer shall not be construed to revive any resolution, or part
thereof, heretofore repealed.
   (H)   Severability. If any section, paragraph, clause or provision of this
Resolution shall for any reason be held to be invalid or unenforceable, the
invalidity or unenforceability of such section, paragraph, clause or provision
shall in no manner affect any remaining provisions of this Resolution.
(Am. Res. R-2008-119, approved 10-15-08; Am. Res. R-2009-006, approved 1-15-09;
Am. Res. R-2010-019, approved 1-14-10)
§ 1-14-3   WINROCK TOWN CENTER TAX INCREMENT DEVELOPMENT DISTRICTS 1 AND 2
   (A)   Defined Terms. As used in this Formation Resolution and the recitals
above, the following terms shall have the meanings specified, unless the
context clearly requires otherwise (such meanings to be equally applicable to
both the singular and the plural forms of the terms defined):
      ACT means the Tax Increment for Development Act, Sections 5-15-1 through
5-15-28, NMSA 1978, as supplemented and amended, the Home Rule Powers and all
enactments of the City’s Governing Body, including the TIDD Ordinance and this
Resolution.
      APPLICANT means Winrock Town Center LLC, a Delaware limited liability
company.
      APPLICATION means the petition for formation of the Winrock Town Center
Tax Increment Development Districts 1 and 2 and documentation incorporated by
reference in the Application and submitted to the City pursuant to the Act and
the TIDD Ordinance.
      BONDS or DISTRICT BONDS or TIDD BONDS means Tax Increment Bonds issued by
Districts 1 and 2, collectively or individually.
      CITY means the City of Albuquerque, New Mexico.
      DISTRICT or DISTRICTS or TIDD or TIDDS means, as the context requires,
both or either one of Districts 1 and 2.
      DISTRICT BOUNDARY MAP means the map attached as Attachment 1 to the Tax
Increment Development Plan.
      DISTRICTS 1 and 2 or TIDDS 1 and 2 means the Winrock Town Center Tax
Increment Development Districts 1 and 2.
      FINANCIAL FEASIBILITY STUDY means the study of the estimated costs and
financing methods of the TIDD Infrastructure Improvements submitted by the
Applicant in connection with its Petition for formation of the Winrock Town
Center Tax Increment for Development Districts 1 and 2.
      FORMATION DOCUMENTS means the Application and such other documents as are
required by the Act and the TIDD Ordinance to be submitted by a petitioner in
connection with a petition for the formation, implementation and governance of
the District.
      FORMATION RESOLUTION means City Council Bill No. F/S R-08-126, Enactment
No. R-2008-120 adopted by the City in connection with its approval of the
formation of the Districts.
      GROSS RECEIPTS TAX INCREMENT means the gross receipts taxes collected
within a District in excess of the base gross receipts taxes collected for the
duration of the existence of that District and distributed to that District in
the same manner as distributions are made under the provisions of the State Tax
Administration Act.
      MASTER DEVELOPMENT AGREEMENT means the master development agreement by
and between the Applicant and the City in accordance with Section 5(L) of the
TIDD Ordinance, which Master Development Agreement shall be ratified by the
Districts and entered into by each District, the Applicant and the City, in
accordance with the provisions of the Master Development Agreement.
      PETITION means the petition for formation of Districts 1 and 2 submitted
pursuant to the Act and the TIDD Ordinance.
      PROPERTY TAX INCREMENT means all property tax collected on real property
within a District that is in excess of the base property tax until termination
of that District and distributed to that District in the same manner as
distributions are made under the provisions of the State Tax Administration
Act.
      PUBLIC SAFETY TAX means the 0.25% increment of local gross receipts taxes
enacted by the City pursuant to sections 4-3-8-1 et seq., ROA 1994.
      REAL PROPERTY means the real property described in the District Boundary
Map.
      STATE means the State of New Mexico.
        TAX INCREMENT BONDS means bonds issued by a District in accordance with
the Act and secured by 70% of the revenues of the Gross Receipts Tax Increment,
and 75% of the revenues of the Property Tax Increment.
      TAX INCREMENT DEVELOPMENT PLAN means the tax increment development plan
for Districts 1 and 2, including a map depicting the boundaries of the
District, as required by the TIDD Ordinance and Section 5-15-5 of the Act.
      TIDD INFRASTRUCTURE IMPROVEMENTS means the public infrastructure
improvements to be financed with proceeds of TIDD Bonds as described and in the
approximate locations shown in Exhibit 1 to the Tax Increment Development Plan.
      TIDD ORDINANCE means City Council Ordinance Bill No. F/S O-06-44,
Enactment No. O-36-2006.
      TRANSPORTATION INFRASTRUCTURE TAX means the 0.25% increment of local
option gross receipts taxes enacted by the City pursuant to Sections 4-3-7-1 et
seq., ROA 1994.
   (B)   Construction of Formation Resolution. Except as otherwise expressly
provided in this Resolution, or unless the context otherwise requires:
      (1)   The singular includes the plural and the plural includes the
singular.
      (2)   All accounting terms not otherwise defined in this Resolution have
the meanings assigned to them in accordance with generally accepted accounting
principles in the United States.
      (3)   All references to Sections shall refer to Sections of this
Resolution, unless otherwise stated.
      (4)   Words importing any gender include the other gender.
      (5)   “Herein,” “hereby,” “hereunder,” “hereof,” “hereinbefore” and
“hereafter” refer to this Resolution and not solely to the particular portion
of this Resolution in which such word is used.
      (6)   All times will be local time in the City unless otherwise
designated in this Resolution.
   (C)   Findings. The City hereby declares that it has considered the
Application, Master Development Agreement and all other relevant information
and data, and hereby makes the following findings:
      (1)   As planned and proposed by the Master Development Agreement, the
Applicant will construct the TIDD Infrastructure Improvements in accordance
with the estimated construction schedule included in the Application, the
City’s rules and regulations and the Master Development Agreement. The TIDD
Infrastructure Improvements will be constructed to City specifications, and
will be subject to inspection, approval and acceptance by the City prior to
dedication to the City.
   (D)   Approval of Master Development Agreement. The Master Development
Agreement is hereby accepted and approved. The Chief Administrative Officer of
the City is authorized and directed to execute the Master Development Agreement
on behalf of the City, with such changes as are consistent with the provisions
of this Resolution, as contemplated by the Master Development Agreement, with
terms and provisions that are consistent with the Master Development Agreement
and this Resolution. In the event of a discrepancy in the terms thereof, the
Master Development Agreement shall control over the Tax Increment Development
Plan.
   (E)   Appointments to the Governing Body of the District.   
      (1)   The District's governing body shall be composed of the following
five voting members and two ex officio, non-voting members:
         (a)   The City Councilor from District 7, who is currently Michael
Cook;
         (b)   The City's Deputy Chief Administrative Officer, Gilbert Montaño;
         (c)   A representative of Bernalillo County, who is currently Dennis
Chavez;
         (d)   A representative of the Applicant, who is currently Debbie
Bonsignore; and
         (e)   The Secretary of Finance and Administration or his designee.
      (2)   Non-voting Ex Officio members:
         (a)   The State Representative for District 26 (the District in which
the Real Property is located), who is currently Al Park; and
         (b)   The State Senator for District 15 (the District in which the
Real Property is located), who is currently Tim Eichenberg.
      (3)   The City Councilor sitting on the Board shall be the Chair of the
Board, Gilbert Montaño, so long as he is a board member, shall be the clerk of
District and Debbie Bonsignore, so long as she is a Board member, is appointed
treasurer of District.
   Within six years following the formation of District, the board shall hold
an election of new directors by majority vote of owners and qualified resident
electors in accordance with the Act or governance of the District shall then
revert to the City Council.
   (F)   Amendments. This Resolution may be amended or supplemented by
ordinance or resolution adopted by the City Council in accordance with the laws
of the City and the State.
   (G)   Repealer. All resolutions, or parts thereof in conflict with the
provisions of this Resolution, are hereby repealed to the extent only of such
inconsistency. To the extent, if any, that this Resolution conflicts with any
provision of the TIDD Ordinance, that provision is waived solely with respect
to the formation of and other matters concerning Districts 1 and 2, and the
TIDD Ordinance shall remain in full force and effect in connection with any
other application or project to which the TIDD Ordinance applies or may apply
in the future. This repealer shall not be construed to revive any resolution,
or part thereof, heretofore repealed.
   (H)   Severability. If any section, paragraph, clause or provision of this
Resolution shall for any reason be held to be invalid or unenforceable, the
invalidity or unenforceability of such section, paragraph, clause or provision
shall in no manner affect any remaining provisions of this Resolution.
(Am. Res. R-2008-120, approved 10-15-08; Am. Res. R-2009-005, approved 1-15-09;
Am. Res. R-2010-020, approved 1-14-10; Am. Res. R-2011-037, passed 5-26-11)
ARTICLE 15: PUBLIC IMPROVEMENT DISTRICTS
Section
   
1-15-1   Saltillo Public Improvement District.
   
1-15-2   Mesa Del Sol Public Improvement District.
   
1-15-3   Volterra Public Improvement District.
   
1-15-4   Boulders Public Improvement District.
§ 1-15-1   SALTILLO PUBLIC IMPROVEMENT DISTRICT.
   (A)   Defined Terms. As used in this Formation Resolution, the following
terms will have the meanings specified, unless the context clearly requires
otherwise (such meanings to be equally applicable to both the singular and the
plural forms of the terms defined):
      “Act” means Sections 5-11-1 through 5-11-27 NMSA 1978, as supplemented
and amended, the home rule powers and all enactments of the City Council,
including this Formation Resolution.
      “Bond Resolution” means a resolution authorizing issuance of District
Bonds in an aggregate principal amount not to exceed $5,345,000 for the purpose
of financing the District Improvements and containing certain provisions set
forth in Section 6 of this Formation Resolution.
      “City” means the City of Albuquerque, New Mexico.
      “Clerk” means the City Clerk.
      “Developer Improvements” means the infrastructure improvements to be
constructed by the Petitioner, through financing or resources other than the
proceeds of District Bonds, as described in and according to the construction
schedule provided in the Feasibility Study.
      “Development Agreement” means the development agreement entered by and
between the City and the Petitioner in accordance with Section 6-9-4(I), ROA
1994, of the PID Ordinance.
      “District” means Saltillo Public Improvement District.
      “District Bonds” means bonds proposed to be issued by the District
pursuant to the Act.
      “District Boundary Map” means the map attached as Exhibit A to the
General Plan.
      “District Improvements” means the infrastructure improvements to be
financed with the proceeds of District Bonds as described and in the
approximate locations set forth in the Feasibility Study
      “Expenses” means the City’s costs of reviewing the Petition and other
documentation related to the Petition, including legal fees.
      “Feasibility Study” means the report of the study of the estimated costs
and financing methods of the District Improvements submitted by the Petitioner
in connection with its Petition.
      “Formation Documents” means the Petition and such other documents as are
required by the Act and the PID Ordinance to be submitted by a petitioner in
connection with a petition for the formation, implementation and governance of
the District.
      “Formation Resolution” means this resolution adopted by the City in
connection with its approval of the formation of the District.
      “Infrastructure Improvements” means the Developer Improvements and the
District Improvements.
      “General Plan” means the general plan submitted by the Petitioner in
connection with the Petition.
      “Land” means the real property described in the District Boundary Map.
      “Petition” means the petition for formation of Saltillo Public
Improvement District, including all supporting documentation, submitted to the
City pursuant to the Act and the PID Ordinance for formation of the proposed
District.
      “Petitioner” means Sapphire, LLC, a New Mexico limited liability company,
Vantage Builders, Inc., a New Mexico corporation, and Calabacillas Properties
LLC, a New Mexico limited liability company, collectively.
      “PID Ordinance” means Albuquerque Ordinance 12-2003, codified at Sections
6-9-1 et seq., ROA 1994, the City’s Public Improvement District Ordinance.
      “Rate and Method of Special Levy Apportionment” means the rate, method of
apportionment and manner of collection of the Special Levy, the proposed form
of which was submitted by the Petitioner in connection with the Petition.
      “Special Levy” means the special levy to be imposed on the Land pursuant
to Section 5-11-20 NMSA 1978.
      “State” means the State of New Mexico.
   (B)   Construction of Formation Resolution. Except as otherwise expressly
provided in this Formation Resolution, or unless the context otherwise
requires:
      (1)    The singular includes the plural and the plural includes the
singular.
      (2)    All accounting terms not otherwise defined in this Formation
Resolution have the meanings assigned to them in accordance with generally
accepted accounting principles in the United States.
      (3)    All references to Sections will refer to Sections of this
Formation Resolution, unless otherwise stated.
      (4)    Words importing any gender include the other gender.
      (5)    “Hereby” refers to this Formation Resolution and not solely to the
particular portion of this Formation Resolution in which such word is used. All
times will be local time in the City unless otherwise designated in this
Resolution.
   (C)   Findings. The City hereby declares that it has considered the Petition
and all other relevant information and data, and makes the following findings:
      (1)    The persons named as the owners of the Land in the Petition own
100% of the Land located within the District.
      (2)    As planned and proposed by the Petitioner, the District
Improvements will be constructed to City specifications and will be subject to
inspection, approval and acceptance by the City as provided in the Development
Agreement.
      (3)    The District Bonds proposed to be issued by the District will be
the obligations solely of the District, and will not be backed by the faith,
credit, general funds or resources of the City in any manner. Owners of
District Bonds will have no right to require that the City or the District
impose ad valorem property taxes to pay District Bonds.
      (4)    The District will serve the interests, convenience and necessity
of Petitioner, future owners of parcels located within the District and the
citizens of the City, as follows:
         (a)    The cost of constructing the District Improvements will be
allocated in a fair and equitable manner to the owners of Land who will utilize
the District Improvements, and will not be passed on to the citizens of the
City or the City itself; and
         (b)    The City will receive the benefit of the District Improvements
through dedication of the District Improvements as described in the Development
Agreement.
      (5)    The financing of the District Improvements is feasible and, based
upon the Feasibility Study, will not impose an undue burden on the future
owners of property located within the District or served by the District
Improvements.
      (6)    The financing of the District Improvements will enable the
District to construct those improvements in a cost-effective manner.
      (7)    The District is planned and will be implemented in a manner that
provides for the Expenses to be paid by the District.
      (8)    As planned, the District Improvements and the Developer
Improvements are consistent with the City’s development goals and growth
control policies.
      (9)    The formation of the District, subject to the requirements and
limitations specified in this Formation Resolution, is consistent with the
requirements of the PID Ordinance.
   (D)    Waiver of Additional Hearing and Election. Based on the information
provided by the Petitioner in the Petition, the Petition has been signed by and
on behalf of the owners of 100% of the Land to be included in the proposed
District, and on that basis the City waives the requirements for posting,
publication, mailing, notice, hearing and owner election, as authorized by
Section 5-11-7(I) NMSA 1978.
   (E)   Approval of Petition and Formation Documents; Formation of District;
Approval of District Foreclosure Procedures for Delinquent Special Levy
Installments.
      (1)   Approval of Petition. The Petition is hereby accepted and approved.
      (2)    Approval of District pursuant to submitted documents. Saltillo
Public Improvement District is hereby ordered approved and formed to carry out
the purposes set forth in, and according to the provisions of, this Formation
Resolution.
         (a)    The General Plan is hereby accepted and approved.
         (b)    The Development Agreement is hereby accepted and approved.
         (c)    The Rate and Method of Special Levy Apportionment, and the
apportionment and manner of collection of Special Levy, is hereby accepted and
approved.
         (d)    The Notice of Special Levy attached to the Petition is hereby
approved.
         (e)    The District will have the powers necessary and convenient to
finance and construct the District Improvements as provided in the General
Plan, the Feasibility Study, the Rate and Method of Special Levy Apportionment
and the Development Agreement, as those documents may be amended or modified
with the approval of the City. The District and the City shall be bound by the
terms of those documents.
      (3)   The purpose of the District will be to provide financing of the
District Improvements set forth in the Petition.
      (4)    The District Bonds will not exceed the principal amount set forth
in the Petition and will be within the value-to-lien ratio described in the
Petition.
      (5)   The Special Levy will not exceed the amounts set forth in the
Petition, except as otherwise approved by the City Council in this Formation
Resolution.
      (6)   The District will be self-supporting, as provided in Section 6-9-1
(F), ROA 1994, of the PID Ordinance.
      (7)   The District shall comply with existing City policies for
development, growth management and conservation, as provided in Sections 6-9-1
(A) and -1(I) of the PID Ordinance.
      (8)   Compliance with PID Ordinance. The PID financing proposed in the
Petition and other Formation Documents meets the applicable requirements of
Sections 6-9-5 and 6-9-6, ROA 1994, of the PID Ordinance.
      (9)   Development Agreement. The Mayor and the Chief Administrative
Officer of the City, on behalf of the City, are hereby authorized and directed
to execute and deliver the Development Agreement to the Petitioners, and any
agreement between the City and the Petitioners, and any extension of or
amendments to any of those documents or any substitutions therefore, with such
terms and changes as are not inconsistent with this Formation Resolution and as
are approved by the Mayor or Chief Administrative Officer of the City, whose
execution of any such document, or any extensions thereof or substitutions
therefore, in their final forms shall constitute conclusive evidence of the
executing officer's approval and compliance with this Section with respect to
such documents. The Clerk is authorized to affix the seal of the City and to
attest those documents signed by an Authorized Officer, as necessary.
      (10)   Execution of Documents. The officers, agents and employees of the
City are hereby authorized and empowered to take all actions necessary and to
execute and deliver all documents relating to or requested by the District to
carry out and comply with the provisions of the Formation Documents.
      (11)   District Governing Body Initial Meeting. As provided in the
Development Agreement, the District’s governing body will hold a public meeting
within 40 days after the date of adoption of this Formation Resolution. At that
meeting, the District’s governing body will adopt an open meetings policy and
bylaws for the District and will take such other action toward or in connection
with the issuance of District Bonds as is authorized by this Formation
Resolution.
      (12)   District Procedures for Foreclosure in Connection with Delinquent
Special Levy Installments. The District will establish procedures for
foreclosure of delinquent Special Levies and for redemption of foreclosed
property, which procedures will comply with Sections 5-11-20(G) and 5-11-23(F)
NMSA 1978 and will be substantially similar to the foreclosure and redemption
procedures applicable to Municipal Improvement Districts set forth in Sections
3-33-28 through 3-33-30 NMSA 1978, and as set forth for the District in the
Development Agreement approved by this Formation Resolution.
   (F)   Authorization of District Bonds. The District may issue District Bonds
pursuant to the Bond Resolution in the amounts and subject to the requirements
and limitations set forth in this Formation Resolution.
      (1)   The Bond Resolution will be approved by the City’s Debt Committee
before its enactment by the District.
      (2)   The Bond Resolution will include, at minimum, the following
provisions for the protection of owners of the District Bonds:
         (a)    Reasonably Required Reserve Fund. The Bond Resolution will
provide for the establishment of a debt service reserve fund in an amount, on
the date of issuance of the District Bonds, equal to the least of (i) the
maximum annual debt service requirements on the District Bonds; (ii) 125% of
the average annual debt service requirements on the District Bonds; or (iii)
10% of the aggregate principal amount of the District Bonds;
         (b)    Developer Contribution. The Bond Resolution will include
provisions for a contribution agreement or a credit facility to be provided by
the Petitioner (either, the “Developer Contribution”), in an amount deemed
appropriate by the City’s Debt Committee and shall provide, at a minimum, for
payment from the Petitioner of a Developer Contribution in an amount equal to
the maximum annual principal and interest due in connection with the District
Bonds in the event the amount on deposit in the debt service reserve fund
established in connection with the District Bonds is not sufficient at any time
while the Petitioner is obligated to maintain the Developer Contribution to
meet the debt service requirements next coming due. The Developer Contribution
will be provided by the Petitioner in the form of a letter of credit, through
the Petitioner’s covenant to maintain a cash reserve of the required amount,
through a combination of those methods, or through alternative methods
satisfactory to the City’s Debt Committee. The Developer Contribution will be
in addition to the debt service reserve fund.
         (c)    Public Offering; Minimum Denominations. The Bond Resolution
will provide that the District Bonds will be sold pursuant to a public offering
and issued in minimum amounts of $25,000.
         (d)    Maximum Maturity. The final maturity date for the District
Bonds will not be more than 30 years after the date of issuance.
         (e)    Appointment of Trustee. The Bond Resolution will include
provisions for appointment of a trustee pursuant to an indenture of trust or
other similar instrument.
         (f)    Exercise of District Rights and Remedies by Trustee. The Bond
Resolution will provide that the trustee may exercise the rights and remedies
of the District for the protection of bondholders, including without limitation
the trustee’s collection of Special Levy revenues, the trustee’s foreclosure of
delinquent Special Levy installments, and the trustee’s appointment of a
receiver or other agent to complete the construction of the District
Improvements in the event of a default in the payment of debt service on the
District Bonds, which default cannot be cured (x) by drawing on the debt
service reserve fund established for the District Bonds, or (y) through payment
pursuant to the Developer Contribution, which appointment may be made
irrespective of whether foreclosure remedies are exercised.
   (G)   City Ratification of District Bond Resolution. Before the issuance of
District Bonds, the District’s Bond Resolution shall be presented to the City
Council for approval as being consistent with the provisions of Section 6 of
this Resolution.
   (H)   District Governance.
      (1)   The District’s governing body will be composed of five members,
including:
         (a)    two members appointed by the Council, one of which will be a
City Official employed in the Department of Municipal Development, and one of
which will be a City Official employed in the Department of Finance and
Administration; which members will initially be the current City Treasurer and
the current Director of the City Department of Municipal Development, a
position that is currently held by John Castillo;
         (b)    two members appointed by Petitioner, and consented to by the
City Council, which members will be initially be Rex Wilson, member of
Petitioner, and Vincent Pizzonia, member of a member of Petitioner; and
         (c)    one member agreed upon by the City Council and by Petitioner,
which member may be the current District 5 City Councilor, a position that is
currently held by Jon Zaman.
      (2)   Vincent Pizzonia, the current City Treasurer, and the current
Director of the Department of Municipal Development will serve 6-year terms.
      (3)   Rex P. Wilson and the current District 5 City Councilor will serve
4-year terms.
      (4)   Pursuant to Section 5-11-6 of the Act, Cilia Aglialoro is appointed
to be the clerk of the District and Rex Wilson is appointed to be treasurer of
the District.
      (5)   Within six years following the date of formation of the District,
the District will hold an election of members of the governing body of the
District as required by law, unless no District Bonds are then outstanding, in
which case the Council may, at the request of the District, appoint five then-
sitting City Councilors to serve as the governing body.
   (I)   Amendments. This Formation Resolution may be amended or supplemented
by ordinance or resolution adopted by the City Council in accordance with the
laws of the City and the State.
   (J)   Repealer. All resolutions, or parts thereof in conflict with the
provisions of this Formation Resolution, are hereby repealed to the extent only
of such inconsistency. To the extent, if any, that this Formation Resolution
conflicts with any provision of the PID Ordinance, that provision is waived
solely with respect to the formation of and other matters concerning the
District, and the PID Ordinance will remain in full force and effect in
connection with any other application or project to which the PID Ordinance
applies or may apply in the future. This repealer will not be construed to
revive any resolution, or part thereof, heretofore repealed.
   (K)   Severability. If any section, paragraph, clause or provision of this
Formation Resolution will for any reason be held to be invalid or
unenforceable, the invalidity or unenforceability of such section, paragraph,
clause or provision will in no manner affect any remaining provisions of this
Formation Resolution.
   (L)   Publication of Notice of Adoption of Formation Resolution. The Clerk
is hereby directed to publish a notice of this Formation Resolution, in
substantially the following form:
“Notice is hereby given of the title and general summary of the subject matter
contained in a resolution duly adopted and approved by the City Council of the
City of Albuquerque, New Mexico, relating to the approval of Saltillo Public
Improvement District. Complete copies of the resolution are available for
public inspection during the regular business hours of the City Clerk, City of
Albuquerque, New Mexico.
(Res. R-2007-150, approved 12-4-07; Am. Res. R-2008-047, approved 4-17-08)
§ 1-15-2 MESA DEL SOL PUBLIC IMPROVEMENT DISTRICT.
   (A)   Defined Terms. As used in this Formation Resolution, the following
terms shall have the meanings specified, unless the context clearly requires
otherwise (such meanings to be equally applicable to both the singular and the
plural forms of the terms defined):
      ACT means Sections 5-11-1 through 5-11-27, NMSA 1978, as supplemented and
amended, the Home Rule Powers and all enactments of the City's Governing Body,
including this Resolution.
      ADDITIONAL IMPROVMENTS means the infrastructure improvements to be
constructed by the Applicant, through financing or resources other than the
proceeds of District Bonds, as described in and according to the construction
schedule provided in the Application and as described, and in the approximate
locations shown, in the Master General Plan and Supplemental General Plans.
      ADJUSTED MAXIUM SPECIAL LEVY  means the maximum Special Levy that may be
imposed by each District on specific categories of Levyable Property, as
determined by the Adjusted Rate and Method applicable to that District, which
Adjusted Maximum Special Levy shall, at the time of imposition, not exceed the
1.95% maximum tax and assessment burden, as provided in Section 5(g) of the PID
Ordinance and in accordance with State law and City policies and procedures in
effect at that time.
      ADJUSTED RATE AND METHOD means an adjusted Rate and Method of Special
Levy Apportionment to be implemented in connection with a specific District
prior to the issuance of Bonds by that District, for the purpose of
establishing the Adjusted Maximum Special Levy amounts for that District.
      APPLICANT means Mesa del Sol, LLC.
      APPLICATION means the petition for formation of the Mesa del Sol Public
Improvement District Nos. 1-5 and documentation incorporated by reference in
the revised Application submitted to the City on November 14, 2007 pursuant to
the Act and the PID Ordinance.
      BOND RESOLUTION means a resolution of each District authorizing issuance
of District Bonds in an aggregate principal amount for Districts 1 through 5
not to exceed the costs of Public Infrastructure serving Districts 1 through 5,
for the purpose of financing the PID Infrastructure Improvements and containing
certain provisions set forth in Section 6 of this Formation Resolution.
      CITY means the City of Albuquerque, New Mexico.
      CLERK means the City Clerk.
      COUNTY means Bernalillo County, New Mexico.
      DISTRICT or DISTRICTS means, as the context requires, all or any one of
the Mesa del Sol Public Improvement Districts 1 through 5.
      DISTRICT BONDS means bonds proposed to be issued by Districts 1 through 5
collectively or individually pursuant to the Act.
      DISTRICT BOUNDARY MAP means the map attached as Exhibit 1 to the General
Plan.
      DISTRICT SPECIAL LEVIES or SPECIAL LEVIES means the special levies to be
imposed on the Real Property pursuant to Section 5-11-20, NMSA 1978."Expenses"
means the City's costs of reviewing the Application and other documentation
related to the Application, including legal fees.
      FEASIBILITY STUDY means the study of the estimated costs and financing
methods of the PID Infrastructure Improvements and Additional Improvements
submitted by the Applicant in connection with its Petition for formation of
Mesa del Sol Public Improvement Districts 1 through 5.
      FORMATION DOCUMENTS means the Application and such other documents as are
required by the Act and the PID Ordinance to be submitted by a petitioner in
connection with a petition for the formation, implementation and governance of
the Districts.
      FORMATION RESOLUTION means this resolution adopted by the City in
connection with its approval of the formation of the Districts.
      MASTER GENERAL PLAN means the Master General Plan submitted by the
Applicant in connection with the Application.
      MASTER PID DEVELOPMENT AGREEMENT  means the development agreement dated
March 3, 2007 by and between the City and the Applicant in accordance with
Section 4(I) of the PID Ordinance, which Development Agreement shall be
ratified by the Districts and supplemented by Supplemental PID Development
Agreements entered into by each District, the Applicant and the City, in
accordance with the provisions of the Master PID Development Agreement.
      PETITION means a petition for formation of the Districts submitted
pursuant to the Act and the PID Ordinance for formation of the proposed
Districts.
      PID INFRASTRUCTURE IMPROVEMENTS  means the infrastructure improvements to
be financed with the proceeds of District Bonds or special levy revenue, if
applicable, as described and in the approximate locations shown in the Master
Development Agreement and Supplemental Development Agreements.
      PID ORDINANCE means City Council Ordinance Enactment No. O-2003-012.
      RATE AND METHOD OF SPECIAL LEVY APPORTIONMENT means the rate, method of
apportionment and manner of collection of the District Special Levies submitted
by the Applicant in connection with the Application.
      REAL PROPERTY means the real property described in the District Boundary
Map.
      STATE means the State of New Mexico.
      SUPPLEMENTAL GENERAL PLAN means the supplemental general plans for each
District to be authorized in accordance with the terms of this Formation
Resolution and supplemental to the Master General Plan.
      SUPPLEMENTAL PID DEVELOPMENT AGREEMENT means an agreement supplementing
the Master PID Development Agreement to be entered into by each District, the
Applicant and the City to provide more specific details concerning the
development, construction and financing of PID Infrastructure Improvements for
that District through the issuance of District Bonds or special levy revenue,
if applicable, by that District.
      WATER AND WASTEWATER IMPROVEMENTS means water and/or wastewater
improvements that are dedicated to the Albuquerque Bernalillo County Water
Utility Authority.
   (B)   Construction of Formation Resolution. Except as otherwise expressly
provided in this Resolution, or unless the context otherwise requires:
      (1)   The singular includes the plural and the plural includes the
singular.
      (2)   All accounting terms not otherwise defined in this Formation
Resolution have the meanings assigned to them in accordance with generally
accepted accounting principles in the United States.
      (3)   All references to Sections shall refer to Sections of this
Formation Resolution, unless otherwise stated.
      (4)   Words importing any gender include the other gender.
      (5)   "Herein," "hereby," "hereunder," "hereof," "hereinbefore" and
"hereafter" refer to this Formation Resolution and not solely to the particular
portion of this Formation Resolution in which such word is used.
      (6)   All times will be local time in the City unless otherwise
designated in this Resolution.
   (C)   Findings. The City hereby declares that it has considered the
Application and all other relevant information and data, and hereby makes the
following findings:
      (1)   The Applicant and persons who have authorized the Applicant to
submit the Application on their behalf own 100% of the real property located
within the Districts.
      (2)   As planned and proposed by the Applicant, the PID Infrastructure
Improvements (other than the Water and Wastewater Improvements which will be
dedicated to the Albuquerque Bernalillo County Water Utility Authority, certain
drainage improvements to be dedicated to the Albuquerque Metropolitan Arroyo
Flood Control Authority and certain road and related improvements that will be
dedicated to the State and the County) will be constructed to City
specifications, will be subject to inspection, approval and acceptance by the
City prior to dedication to the City.
      (3)   The District Bonds proposed to be issued by Districts 1 through 5
will be the obligations solely of the respective Districts, and will not be
backed by the faith, credit, general funds or resources of the City in any
manner. Owners of District Bonds will have no right to require that the City or
the Districts impose ad valorem property taxes to pay District Bonds.
      (4)   The Districts will serve the interests, convenience and necessity
of Applicant, future owners of parcels located within the Districts and the
citizens of the City:
         (a)   The cost of constructing the PID Infrastructure Improvements
will be allocated to the owners of Real Property who will utilize the PID
Infrastructure Improvements, in a fair and equitable manner, and will not be
passed on to the citizens of the City or the City itself; and
         (b)   The City will receive the benefit of the PID Infrastructure
Improvements (other than Water and Wastewater Improvements, certain road and
related improvements that will be dedicated to the State and the County and
certain drainage improvements that will be dedicated to the Albuquerque
Metropolitan Arroyo Flood Control Authority) through dedication of the PID
Infrastructure Improvements.
      (5)   The financing of the PID Infrastructure Improvements is feasible
and, based upon the Feasibility Study, will not impose an undue burden on the
future owners of property located within the Districts or served by the PID
Infrastructure Improvements.
      (6)   The financing of the PID Infrastructure Improvements will enable
the Districts to construct those improvements in a cost-effective manner.
      (7)   The Districts are planned and will be implemented in a manner which
provides for the Expenses to be paid by the Districts.
      (8)   As planned, the PID Infrastructure Improvements and Additional
Improvements are consistent with the City's development goals and growth
control policies.
      (9)   The formation of the Districts and the issuance of District Bonds
subject to the requirements and limitations specified in this Formation
Resolution are consistent with the requirements of the PID Ordinance.
   (D)   Waiver of Additional Hearing and Election.
      Based on the information provided by the Applicant in the Application,
the Petition has been signed by and on behalf of the owners of 100% of the Real
Property to be included in the proposed Districts, and on that basis the City
waives the requirements for posting, publication, mailing, notice, hearing and
owner election, as authorized by Section 5-11-7(I), NMSA 1978.
   (E)   Approval of Application and Formation Documents; Formation of
Districts; Approval of District Foreclosure Procedures for Delinquent Special
Levies.
      (1)   The Petition is hereby accepted and approved.
      (2)   The Mesa del Sol Public Improvement Districts 1-5 are hereby
ordered approved and formed to carry out the purposes set forth in, and
according to the provisions of, this Formation Resolution.
         (a)   The Master General Plan and the Supplemental General Plan
relating to District 1 and attached hereto as Exhibit 1 are hereby accepted and
approved. Supplemental General Plans relating to Districts 2-5 must be approved
by the City Council unless otherwise provided in the City PID Ordinance in
effect at that time. The Districts shall include the Real Property.
         (b)   The Master PID Development Agreement attached hereto as Exhibit
2, and the Supplemental PID Development Agreement relating to District 1
attached hereto as Exhibit 3 are hereby accepted and approved. The Chief
Administrative Officer of the City is authorized and directed to execute the
Master PID Development Agreement and the Supplemental PID Development Agreement
relating to District 1 on behalf of the City, with such changes as are
consistent with the provisions of this Formation Resolution. Supplemental PID
Development Agreements relating to Districts 2-5 must be approved by the City
Council and Chief Administrative Officer of the City unless otherwise provided
in the City PID Ordinance in effect at that time.
         (c)   The Rate and Method of Special Levy Apportionment attached
hereto as Exhibit 4, and the Adjusted Rate and Method of Special Levy
Apportionment relating to District 1, attached hereto as Exhibit 5, are hereby
accepted and approved. The provisions for implementation of an Adjusted Rate
and Method in connection with Districts 2-5 and for establishment of sufficient
Adjusted Maximum Special Levies, and the apportionment and manner of collection
of District Special Levies, are hereby accepted and approved.
         (d)   The Notice of Special Levy substantially in the form attached
hereto as Exhibit 6 is hereby approved.
         (e)   The Districts shall have the powers necessary and convenient to
finance and construct the PID Infrastructure Improvements as provided in the
Master General Plan, Supplemental General Plans, Feasibility Study, Rate and
Method of Apportionment, Master PID Development Agreement and Supplemental PID
Development Agreements, as those documents may be amended or modified with the
approval of the City. The Districts and the City shall be bound by the terms
thereof.
      (3)   The purpose of the Districts shall be to provide financing of the
PID Infrastructure Improvements set forth in the Application.
      (4)   The District Bonds shall not exceed the principal amount set forth
in the Application and shall be within the value to lien ratio described in the
Application, except as otherwise approved in a supplemental resolution by a
District's governing board and, to the extent required by the PID Ordinance
then in effect, the City Council, and provided further that the value to lien
ratio must be in compliance with Section 5 of the PID Ordinance or as otherwise
provided in the PID Ordinance then in effect.
      (5)   The District Special Levies shall not exceed the amounts set forth
in the Adjusted Rate and Method for each District at the time that Bonds are
issued.
      (6)   The Districts shall be self-supporting, as provided in Section 1(F)
of the PID Ordinance.
      (7)   The Districts shall comply with existing City policies for
development, growth management and conservation, as provided in Sections 1(A)
and 1(I) of the PID Ordinance.
      (8)   The public improvement district financing proposed in the Petition
and other Formation Documents meet the applicable requirements of Sections 5
and 6 of the PID Ordinance.
      (9)   The officers, agents and employees of the City are hereby
authorized and empowered to take all actions necessary and to execute and
deliver all documents relating to or requested by the Districts to carry out
and comply with the provisions of the Formation Documents.
      (10)   The governing body of each District shall hold a public meeting
following the date of adoption of this Formation Resolution. At that meeting,
the governing body shall adopt an open meetings policy and by-laws for the
Districts and shall take such other action, toward or in connection with the
issuance of District Bonds, as authorized by this Formation Resolution.
      (11)   Pursuant to the authority granted by sections 5-11-23(F) and 5-11-
20(G), NMSA 1978, the Districts shall establish procedures for foreclosure of
delinquent Special Levies and for redemption of foreclosed property, which
procedures shall be substantially similar to the foreclosure and redemption
procedures applicable to Municipal Improvement Districts set forth in sections
3-33-28 through 3-33-30, NMSA 1978, and as set forth for the Districts in the
Master PID Development Agreement approved by this Resolution.
   (F)   Authorization of District Bonds. Districts 1 through 5 are hereby
authorized to issue Bonds pursuant to Bond Resolutions in a maximum principal
amount not to exceed the costs of public infrastructure allocated as provided
in the Rate and Method of Apportionment of the Special Levy and the Adjusted
Rate and Method of Apportionment of the Special Levy for each of Districts 1
through 5, which amount is $528,849,646, which amount may be adjusted for
inflation as provided in the Master Development Agreement, and which shall
further be subject to the requirements set forth in this Formation Resolution,
including the limitation that the financing of District PID Infrastructure
Improvements to be dedicated to governmental entities other than the City,
including without limitation the Albuquerque Bernalillo County Water Utility
Authority, shall not exceed the greater of $80,000,000 or 25% of the aggregate
costs of public infrastructure eligible for financing by PIDs 1-5. Mesa del Sol
or its designee shall be entitled to a construction management fee not to
exceed 5% of the contract price for the PID Infrastructure Improvements which
may be payable from proceeds of District Bonds to the extent permitted by
applicable state and federal law. Any construction management fee payable from
proceeds of District Bonds shall be disclosed by Mesa del Sol or its designee
in connection with a requisition of District Bond proceeds to be used to pay
such fees.
      (1)   Except as provided in Section 6(B) of this Formation Resolution, or
as otherwise provided by the PID Ordinance then in effect, each Bond Resolution
shall be approved by the City's Debt Committee and the City Council and shall
include, at minimum, the following provisions for the protection of owners of
the Bonds:
         (a)   Reasonably Required Reserve Fund. Each Bond Resolution shall, if
necessary, provide for the establishment of a debt service reserve fund in an
amount, on the date of issuance of the District Bonds, equal to the least of
(i) the maximum annual debt service requirements on all outstanding District
Bonds; (ii) 125% of the average annual debt service requirements on the
District Bonds; or (iii) 10% of the aggregate principal amount of the District
Bonds;
         (b)   Each Bond Resolution shall include provisions for the public
offering or private placement of District Bonds in accordance with Section 5(E)
(5) of the PID Ordinance unless, in accordance with the PID Ordinance then in
effect, the City's Debt Committee and the City Council, determines otherwise,
based upon the recommendations made by underwriters or financial consultants to
the City.
         (c)   Minimum Denomination. Each Bond Resolution shall provide that
District Bonds sold pursuant to a limited public offering or a private
placement must be issued in minimum denominations of at least $100,000.
         (d)   Maximum Maturity. The final maturity date for any series of
District Bonds shall not be more than 30 years after the date of issuance of
that series.
         (e)   Appointment of Trustee. Each Bond Resolution shall include
provisions for appointment of a trustee pursuant to an indenture of trust or
other similar instrument.
         (f)   Exercise of District Rights and Remedies by Trustee. Each Bond
Resolution shall provide that the trustee may exercise the rights and remedies
of the Districts for the protection of bondholders, including, without
limitation, the following:
            1.   the trustee's collection of Special Levies;
            2.   the trustee's foreclosure of delinquent Special Levies; and
            3.   the trustee's appointment of a receiver or other agent to
complete the construction of the PID Infrastructure Improvements in the event
of a default in the payment of debt service on the District Bonds, which
default cannot be cured by either (x) drawing on the debt service reserve fund
established for the District Bonds, (y) through payment pursuant to a letter of
credit or other guaranty provided by the Applicant or (z) through the
Applicant's direct payment of the amount necessary to pay the debt service on
the District Bonds then due, which appointment may be made irrespective of
whether foreclosure remedies are exercised.
      (2)   This Formation Resolution hereby approves the issuance and sale of
one series of senior lien bonds and one series of subordinate lien bonds by
District 1 (the "District 1 Bonds"). The following parameters with respect to
District 1 Bonds are established:
         (a)   The maximum principal amount of the senior lien District 1 Bonds
shall not exceed $25,000,000 and the maximum principal amount of the
subordinate lien District 1 Bonds shall not exceed $3,000,000.
         (b)   The District 1 Bonds shall be sold to "qualified institutional
buyers" (as such term is defined in Rule 144A of the Securities and Exchange
Commission) and may not be resold except to "qualified institutional buyers" in
a private placement.
         (c)   The District 1 Bonds shall be issued in minimum denominations of
at least $100,000.
         (d)   The maximum net effective interest shall not exceed 12 percent
per annum, which rates will be specifically determined in connection with the
sale of the District 1 Bonds and approved in the sale resolution adopted by
District 1.
         (e)   The value to lien ratio on senior lien District 1 Bonds, after
the completion of the PID Infrastructure Improvements and the Additional
Improvements, shall be at least 3 to 1.
         (f   The issuance and sale of District 1 Bonds shall satisfy in all
respects the requirements provided in this Formation Resolution, the PID
Ordinance and the Act for the issuance of District Bonds.
   (G)   District Governance.
      (1)   The Districts' governing body shall initially be composed of five
members, including:
         (a)   Isaac Benton, Jacques Blair, Jon Zaman, Cilia Aglialoro and
Sheila Duffy.
      (2)   Sheila Duffy, Cilia Aglialoro and Jacques Blair shall serve 6-year
terms.
      (3)   Isaac Benton and Jon Zaman shall serve 4-year terms.
      (4)    Pursuant to Section 5-11-6 of the Act, Jon Zaman is appointed to
be the clerk of the Districts and Sheila Duffy is appointed to be treasurer of
the Districts.
      (5)   Within six years following the date of formation of the Districts
the Council shall serve as the governing body, or, at the Council's option,
hold an election of new directors by majority vote of the residents of the
district.
   (H)   Prior Agreements. Pursuant to Sections 5-15-1 through 5-15-28 NMSA
1978, City Ordinance Bill No. F/S O-06-44, Enactment No. O-36-2006 (the "TIDD
Ordinance"), City Council Bill F/S R-06-146, Enactment No. R-2006-126, and City
Council Enactment R-2007-0001 (collectively, the "TIDD Legislation"), the City
also has formed tax increment development districts ("TIDDs 1-5") for the
financing of public infrastructure to serve the Property and established the
tax increment revenue available in each financing, and has entered into a
Master Tax Increment Development Agreement (the "TIDD Master Development
Agreement") and other agreements, for the implementation of TIDDs 1-5. Nothing
in the Master PID Development shall be considered to diminish the rights or
obligations of Mesa del Sol or the City in connection with the TIDD Legislation
or the TIDD Master Development Agreement, including, without limitation, rights
and obligations concerning workforce housing, transportation and school
facilities in connection with TIDDs 1-5. No workforce housing is contained
within the boundaries of District 1.
   (I)   Amendments. This Formation Resolution may be amended or supplemented
by ordinance or resolution adopted by the City Council in accordance with the
laws of the City and the State.
   (J)   Repealer. All ordinances or resolutions, or parts thereof in conflict
with the provisions of this Formation Resolution, are hereby repealed to the
extent only of such inconsistency. This repealer shall not be construed to
revive any ordinance or resolution, or part thereof, heretofore repealed.
   (K)   Severability. If any section, paragraph, clause or provision of this
Formation Resolution shall for any reason be held to be invalid or
unenforceable, the invalidity or unenforceability of such section, paragraph,
clause or provision shall in no manner affect any remaining provisions of this
Resolution.
§ 1-15-3 VOLTERRA PUBLIC IMPROVEMENT DISTRICT.
   (A)   As used in this Formation Resolution, the following terms shall have
the meanings specified, unless the context clearly requires otherwise (such
meanings to be equally applicable to both the singular and the plural forms of
the terms defined):
      (1)   “Act” means collectively NMSA 1978, §§ 5-11-1 to -27 (2001, as
amended), the home rule powers and all enactments of the City Council,
including this Formation Resolution.
      (2)   “AMAFCA” means the Albuquerque Metropolitan Arroyo Flood Control
Authority.
      (3)   “City” means the City of Albuquerque, New Mexico.
      (4)   “Clerk” means the City Clerk.
      (5)   “Council” means the City Council of the City.
      (6)   “Development Agreement” means the development agreement dated
____________, 2009 by and between the City, the District, the Petitioner, and
Vantage Builders, Inc., a New Mexico corporation, in accordance with § 4(I) of
the PID Ordinance, in the form attached as Exhibit 10 to the Petition, which
Development Agreement shall be joined and ratified by the District.
      (7)   “District” or “PID” means the Volterra Public Improvement District.
      (8)   “District Bonds” means one or more series of bonds proposed to be
issued by the District pursuant to the Act.
      (9)   “District Boundary Map” means the map attached as Exhibit B to the
General Plan.
      (10)   "District Special Levy" or "District Special Levies" means the
special levy or special levies to be imposed on the Land pursuant to NMSA 1978,
§ 5-11-20 (2001).
      (11)   “Feasibility Study” means the study of the estimated costs and
financing methods of the Infrastructure Improvements submitted by the
Petitioner in connection with the Petition, in the form attached as Exhibit 5
to the Petition.
      (12)   “Formation Documents” means the Petition, the General Plan, the
Development Agreement, and such other documents as are required by the Act and
the PID Ordinance to be submitted by an applicant in connection with an
application for the formation, implementation and governance of the District.
      (13)   “Formation Resolution” means this resolution adopted by the City
in connection with its approval of the formation of the District, as
supplemented or amended from time to time.
      (14)   “General Plan” means the General Plan submitted by the Petitioner
in the form attached as Exhibit 3 to the Petition, which includes a map
depicting the boundaries of the district and the real property proposed to be
included in the district; a general description of anticipated improvements and
their locations; and general cost estimates, proposed financing methods and
anticipated special levies.
      (15)   “Infrastructure Improvements” means the PID Funded Infrastructure
Improvements and such other improvements, which are collectively all of the
improvements on the Land, whether funded directly by the Petitioner or with the
proceeds of the District Bonds, described and in the approximate locations
shown on Exhibit B to the Feasibility Study.
      (16)   “Land” means the real property described in the District Boundary
Map.
      (17)   “MAI Appraisal” means the valuation of the Land as of January 20,
2009, as prepared by David Pearson, MAI.
      (18)   “Petition” means the Petition and Application filed with the City
for the formation of the Volterra Public Improvement District and all
documentation incorporated by reference in the Petition, submitted to the City
pursuant to the Act and the PID Ordinance.
      (19)   “Petitioner” means JTH, LLC, a New Mexico limited liability
company.
      (20)   “PID Funded Infrastructure Improvements” means the portion of the
Infrastructure Improvements financed with the proceeds of the District Bonds,
as identified in Table 1 in Section IV of the General Plan.
      (21)   “PID Ordinance” means City Ordinance Enactment No. 0-2003-12,
Council Bill No. F/S 0-03-84.
      (22)   “Rate and Method of Special Levy Apportionment” means the rate,
method of apportionment and manner of collection of the District Special Levy
submitted by the Petitioner in the form attached as Exhibit E to the General
Plan.
      (23)   “State” means the State of New Mexico.
   (B)   Construction of Formation Resolution. Except as otherwise expressly
provided in this Formation Resolution, or unless the context otherwise
requires:
      (1)   The singular includes the plural and the plural includes the
singular.
      (2)   All accounting terms not otherwise defined in this Formation
Resolution have the meanings assigned to them in accordance with generally
accepted accounting principles in the United States.
      (3)   All references to Sections shall refer to Sections of this
Formation Resolution, unless otherwise stated.
      (4)   Words importing any gender include the other gender.
      (5)   “Herein,” “hereby,” “hereunder,” “hereof,” “hereinbefore" and
“hereafter” refer to this Formation Resolution and not solely to the particular
portion of this Formation Resolution in which such word is used.
      (6)   All times will be local time in the City unless otherwise
designated in this Formation Resolution.
   (C)   Findings. The City hereby declares that it has considered the Petition
and all other relevant information and data, and hereby makes the following
findings:
      (1)   The Petitioner, together with those parties consenting to the
Petition, own 100% of the Land and no resident qualified electors or any other
persons are located on the Land.
      (2)   As planned and proposed by the Petitioner, the Infrastructure
Improvements have been or will be constructed to City or AMAFCA specifications,
as applicable, and will be subject to inspection, approval and acceptance by
the City or AMAFCA, as applicable, prior to dedication to the City or AMAFCA,
as provided in the Development Agreement.
      (3)   The District Bonds will be the sole obligations of the District,
and will not be backed by the credit, general funds or resources of the City in
any manner. Owners of the District Bonds will have no right to require the City
or the District to impose ad valorem property taxes to pay District Bonds.
      (4)   The District will serve the interests, convenience and necessity of
Petitioner, future owners of the Land and the citizens of the City:
         (a)   The cost of constructing the PID Funded Infrastructure
Improvements will be allocated to the owners of Land within the District who
will utilize the PID Funded Infrastructure Improvements, in a fair and
equitable manner, and will not be passed on to the citizens of the City, other
than the Petitioner and the future owners of the Land, or the City itself; and
         (b)   The City will receive the benefit of the Infrastructure
Improvements through dedication of those Infrastructure Improvements not
otherwise dedicated to AMAFCA.
      (5)   The financing of the PID Funded Infrastructure Improvements is
feasible and, based upon the Feasibility Study, will not impose an undue burden
on the future owners of the Land or served by the PID Funded Infrastructure
Improvements.
      (6)   The financing of the PID Funded Infrastructure Improvements will
enable the District to construct or acquire those improvements in a cost-
effective manner.
      (7)   The District is planned and will be implemented in a manner which
provides for the expenses to be paid by the District.
      (8)   As planned, the Infrastructure Improvements are consistent with the
City's development goals, growth management policies, and conservation
policies.
      (9)   The formation of the District and the issuance of District Bonds,
subject to the requirements and limitations specified in this Formation
Resolution, are consistent with the requirements of the PID Ordinance.
   (D)   Approval of the Formation Documents; Formation of District; Approval
of District Foreclosure Procedures for Delinquent Special Levies.
      (1)   The Volterra Public Improvement District is hereby ordered approved
and formed to carry out the purposes set forth in, and according to the
provisions of, this Formation Resolution.
      (2)   The Petition is hereby accepted and approved.
      (3)   The General Plan is hereby accepted and approved. The District
shall include the Land, which is the real property described in the General
Plan's District Boundary Map and more particularly identified in the legal
descriptions attached as Exhibit 2 to the Petition.
      (4)   The Development Agreement is hereby accepted and approved, and
shall be an agreement or condition pertaining to the District, as contemplated
by §4(D) of the PID Ordinance, so that any existing agreements with the
Petitioner or other developers and landowners regarding the provision of PID
Eligible Infrastructure Improvements proposed to be furnished to the City shall
be deemed amended to reflect the terms of the Development Agreement.
      (5)   The Rate and Method of Special Levy Apportionment, establishing the
apportionment and manner of collection of District Special Levy, is hereby
accepted and approved.
      (6)   The Notice of District Special Levy substantially in the form
attached as Exhibit 8 to the Petition is hereby approved.
      (7)   The District shall have the powers necessary and convenient to
finance and acquire the PID Funded Infrastructure Improvements as provided in
the General Plan, Feasibility Study, Rate and Method of Special Levy
Apportionment and Development Agreement, as those documents may be amended or
modified with the approval of the City. The District and the City shall be
bound by the terms thereof.
      (8)   The purpose of the District shall be to provide financing of the
PID Funded Infrastructure Improvements set forth in the Petition.
      (9)   The District Bonds shall not exceed the maximum principal amount
set forth in the Petition and shall be within the value to lien ratio described
in the Petition, except as otherwise approved in a supplemental resolution by
the Governing Body (as defined below) and the City Council.
      (10)   The District Special Levies to be imposed by the District shall
not exceed the amounts set forth in the Petition, subject to adjustment
consistent with the terms of the Act and the Rate and Method of Special Levy
Apportionment.
      (11)   The District shall be self-supporting, as provided in § 1(F) of
the PID Ordinance.
      (12)   The District shall comply with existing City policies for
development, growth management and conservation, as provided in §§ 1(A) and 1
(I) of the PID Ordinance.
      (13)   The PID financing proposed in the Petition and other Formation
Documents meet the applicable requirements of §§ 5 and 6 of the PID Ordinance.
      (14)   The officers, agents and employees of the City are hereby
authorized and empowered to do all acts and things and to execute and deliver
all documents relating to or requested by the District to carry out and comply
with the provisions of the Formation Documents.
      (15)   The District’s governing body shall hold a public meeting within
45 days following the date of adoption of this Formation Resolution. At that
meeting, the District’s governing body shall adopt an open meeting policy and
by-laws for the District, approve and execute the Development Agreement, and
shall take such other action toward or in connection with the issuance of the
District Bonds, as authorized by this Formation Resolution.
      (16)   Pursuant to the authority granted in §§ 5-11-20(G) and 5-11-23(F)
of the Act, the District shall establish procedures for foreclosure of
delinquent District Special Levies and for redemption of foreclosed property,
which procedures shall be substantially similar to the foreclosure and
redemption procedures applicable to Municipal Improvement Districts set forth
in NMSA 1978, §§ 3-33-28 to -30 (1965, as amended), and as set forth for the
District in the Development Agreement approved by this Formation Resolution.
   (E)   Authorization of District Bonds. The District may issue District Bonds
pursuant to a resolution of the District’s governing body authorizing issuance
of one or more series of District Bonds in an estimated maximum aggregate
principal amount of $9,030,000 for the purpose of financing the PID Funded
Infrastructure Improvements subject to the requirements set forth in this
Formation Resolution (the “Bond Resolution”).
      (1)   The Bond Resolution shall be approved by the City's Debt Committee
prior to its enactment by the District.
      (2)   The Bond Resolution shall include, at minimum, the following
provisions for the protection of owners of the Bonds:
         (a)   The Bond Resolution shall provide for the establishment of a
debt service reserve fund in an amount, on the date of issuance of the District
Bonds, equal to the least of (a) the maximum annual debt service requirements
on all outstanding District Bonds; (b) 125% of the average annual debt service
requirements on the District Bonds; or (c) 10% of the aggregate principal
amount of the District Bonds.
         (b)   The Bond Resolution shall include provisions for the public
offering or private placement of District Bonds in accordance with § 5(E)(5) of
the PID Ordinance unless, in accordance with the PID Ordinance, the City's Debt
Committee, determines otherwise, based upon the recommendations made by
underwriters or financial consultants to the City, and, in particular, shall
provide, at a minimum, for a payment by the Petitioner of a developer
contribution in an amount initially equally to the maximum annual principal and
interest due in connection with District Bonds, in the form of a letter of
credit or other third-party guarantee of the District Bonds provided by the
Petitioner and/or Vantage Builders, Inc., a New Mexico corporation, the terms
of which shall be consistent with the parameters established by the City's Debt
Committee.
         (c)   The Bond Resolution shall provide that the District Bonds shall
be sold pursuant to a limited public offering and issued in minimum
denominations of at least $25,000.
         (d)   The final maturity date for the District Bonds shall not be more
than 30 years after the date of issuance.
         (e)   The Bond Resolution shall include provisions for appointment of
a trustee pursuant to an indenture of trust or other similar instrument.
         (f)   The Bond Resolution shall provide that the trustee may exercise
the rights and remedies of the District for the protection of bondholders,
including, without limitation, the following:
            (i)   the trustee's collection of District Special Levies;
            (ii)   the trustee's foreclosure of delinquent District Special
Levies; and
            (iii)   the trustee's appointment of a receiver or other agent to
complete the construction of the Infrastructure Improvements in the event of a
default in the payment of debt service on the District Bonds, which default
cannot be cured by either (I) drawing on the debt service reserve fund
established for the District Bonds, (II) through payment pursuant to a letter
of credit or other guaranty provided by the Petitioner or (III) through the
Petitioner’s direct payment of the amount necessary to pay the debt service on
the District Bonds then due, which appointment may be made irrespective of
whether foreclosure remedies are exercised.
      (3)   Prior to the issuance of District Bonds, the District's Bond
Resolution shall be presented to the City Council for approval as being
consistent with the provisions of Section 5 of this Resolution.
   (F)   District Governance.
      (1)   The District's governing body (the “Governing Body”) shall be
composed of:
         (a)   two members appointed by the Council, one of whom shall be the
Director or Acting Director of the Department of Municipal Development and one
of whom shall be a certified public accountant employed in the Department of
Finance and Administration, which members shall initially be Michael Riordan
and Greg Strickland;
         (ii)   two members nominated by the Petitioner, and consented to by
the City Council, which members shall initially be Scott Grady and Vincent
Pizzonia;
         (iii)   the Councilor for the City Council District 9, which member
shall initially be Don Harris;
      (2)   Michael Riordan, Greg Strickland and Vincent Pizzonia shall serve
6-year terms;
      (3)   Don Harris and Scott Grady shall serve 4-year terms.
      (4)   Pursuant to § 5-11-6 of the Act, Scott Grady is appointed to be the
clerk of the District and Vincent Pizzonia is appointed to be treasurer of the
District.
      (5)   Within six years following the date of formation of the District,
either the District shall hold an election of members of the Governing Body as
required by law, or the City Council shall serve as the Governing Body.
   (G)   Waiver of Additional Hearing and Election. Based on the information
provided by the Petitioner in the Petition, the Petition has been signed by and
on behalf of the owners of 100% of the Land to be included in the proposed
District and no resident qualified electors or any other persons are located on
the Land, and on that basis the City waives the requirements for posting,
publication, mailing, notice, hearing and owner election, as authorized by NMSA
1978, § 5-11-7(I) (2001).
   (H)   Amendments. This Formation Resolution may be amended or supplemented
by ordinance or resolution adopted by the City Council in accordance with the
laws of the City and the State.
   (I)   Repealer. All ordinances or resolutions, or parts thereof in conflict
with the provisions of this Formation Resolution, are hereby repealed to the
extent only of such inconsistency. This repealer shall not be construed to
revive any ordinance or resolution, or part thereof, heretofore repealed.
   (J)   Severability. If any section, paragraph, clause or provision of this
Formation Resolution shall for any reason be held to be invalid or
unenforceable, the invalidity or unenforceability of such section, paragraph,
clause or provision shall in no manner affect any remaining provisions of this
Formation Resolution.
   (K)   Publication of Notice of Adoption of Formation Resolution. The Clerk
is hereby directed to publish a notice of this Formation Resolution, in
substantially the following form:
      Notice is hereby given of the title and general summary of the subject
matter contained in a resolution duly adopted and approved by the City Council
of the City of Albuquerque, New Mexico relating to the approval of the Volterra
Public Improvement District. Complete copies of the resolution are available
for public inspection during the regular business hours of the City Clerk, City
of Albuquerque, New Mexico.
§ 1-15-4 BOULDERS PUBLIC IMPROVEMENT DISTRICT.
   (A)   As used in this Formation Resolution, the following terms shall have
the meanings specified, unless the context clearly requires otherwise (such
meanings to be equally applicable to both the singular and the plural forms of
the terms defined):
      (1)   “ABCWUA” means the Albuquerque Bernalillo County Water Utility
Authority.
      (2)   “Act” means collectively NMSA 1978, §§ 5-11-1 to -27 (2001, as
amended), the home rule powers and all enactments of the City Council,
including this Formation Resolution.
      (3)   “City” means the City of Albuquerque, New Mexico.
      (4)   “Clerk” means the City Clerk.
      (5)   “Council” means the City Council of the City.
      (6)   “Development Agreement” means the development agreement dated on or
about May 21, 2012 by and between the City, the District, and the Petitioner,
in accordance with § 4(I) of the PID Ordinance, in the form attached as Exhibit
10 to the Petition, which Development Agreement shall be joined and ratified by
the District.
      (7)   “District” or “PID” means The Boulders Public Improvement District.
      (8)   “District Bonds” means one or more series of bonds proposed to be
issued by the District pursuant to the Act.
      (9)   “District Boundary Map” means the map attached as Exhibit A to the
General Plan.
      (10)   "District Special Levy" or "District Special Levies" means the
special levy or special levies to be imposed on the Land pursuant to NMSA 1978,
§ 5-11-20 (2001).
      (11)   “Feasibility Study” means the study of the estimated costs and
financing methods of the Infrastructure Improvements submitted by the
Petitioner in connection with the Petition, in the form attached as Exhibit 5
to the Petition.
      (12)   “Formation Documents” means the Petition, the General Plan, the
Development Agreement, and such other documents as are required by the Act and
the PID Ordinance to be submitted by an applicant in connection with an
application for the formation, implementation and governance of the District.
      (13)   “Formation Resolution” means this resolution adopted by the City
in connection with its approval of the formation of the District, as
supplemented or amended from time to time.
      (14)   “General Plan” means the General Plan submitted by the Petitioner
in the form attached as Exhibit 3 to the Petition, which is on file with the
Clerk and includes a map depicting the boundaries of the district and the real
property proposed to be included in the district; a general description of
anticipated improvements and their locations; and general cost estimates,
proposed financing methods and anticipated special levies.
      (15)   “Infrastructure Improvements” means the PID Funded Infrastructure
Improvements and such other improvements, which are collectively all of the
improvements on the Land, whether funded directly by the Petitioner or with the
proceeds of the District Bonds, described and in the approximate locations
shown on Exhibit B to the Feasibility Study.
      (16)   “Land” means the real property described in the District Boundary
Map.
      (17)   “MAI Appraisal” means the valuation of the Land as of March 28,
2012, as prepared by David Pearson, MAI.
      (18)   “Petition” means the Petition and Application filed with the City
for the formation of The Boulders Public Improvement District and all
documentation incorporated by reference in the Petition, submitted to the City
pursuant to the Act and the PID Ordinance.
      (19)   “Petitioner” means Flash Resources, LLC, a Nevada limited
liability company.
      (20)   “PID Funded Infrastructure Improvements” means the portion of the
Infrastructure Improvements financed with the proceeds of the District Bonds,
as identified in Table 1 in Section IV of the General Plan.
      (21)   “PID Ordinance” means City Ordinance Enactment No. 0-2003-12,
Council Bill No. F/S 0-03-84.
      (22)   “Rate and Method of Special Levy Apportionment” means the rate,
method of apportionment and manner of collection of the District Special Levy
submitted by the Petitioner in the form attached as Exhibit C to the General
Plan.
      (23)   “State” means the State of New Mexico.
   (B)   Construction of Formation Resolution. Except as otherwise expressly
provided in this Formation Resolution, or unless the context otherwise
requires:
      (1)   The singular includes the plural and the plural includes the
singular.
      (2)   All accounting terms not otherwise defined in this Formation
Resolution have the meanings assigned to them in accordance with generally
accepted accounting principles in the United States.
      (3)   All references to Sections shall refer to Sections of this
Formation Resolution, unless otherwise stated.
      (4)   Words importing any gender include the other gender.
      (5)   “Herein,” “hereby,” “hereunder,” “hereof,” “hereinbefore" and
“hereafter” refer to this Formation Resolution and not solely to the particular
portion of this Formation Resolution in which such word is used.
      (6)   All times will be local time in the City unless otherwise
designated in this Formation Resolution.
   (C)   Findings. The City hereby declares that it has considered the Petition
and all other relevant information and data, and hereby makes the following
findings:
      (1)   The Petitioner, together with those parties consenting to the
Petition, own 100% of the Land and no resident qualified electors or any other
persons are located on the Land.
      (2)   As planned and proposed by the Petitioner, the Infrastructure
Improvements have been or will be constructed to City specifications and will
be subject to inspection, approval and acceptance by the City prior to
dedication to the City, as provided in the Development Agreement.
      (3)   The District Bonds will be the sole obligations of the District,
and will not be backed by the credit, general funds or resources of the City in
any manner. Owners of the District Bonds will have no right to require the City
or the District to impose ad valorem property taxes to pay District Bonds.
      (4)   The District will serve the interests, convenience and necessity of
Petitioner, future owners of the Land and the citizens of the City:
         (a)   The cost of constructing the PID Funded Infrastructure
Improvements will be allocated to the owners of Land within the District who
will utilize the PID Funded Infrastructure Improvements, in a fair and
equitable manner, and will not be passed on to the citizens of the City, other
than the Petitioner and the other owners of the Land, or the City itself; and
         (b)   The City will receive the benefit of the Infrastructure
Improvements through dedication of the Infrastructure Improvements not
otherwise dedicated to the ABCWUA.
      (5)   The financing of the PID Funded Infrastructure Improvements is
feasible and, based upon the Feasibility Study, will not impose an undue burden
on the future owners of the Land or served by the PID Funded Infrastructure
Improvements.
      (6)   The financing of the PID Funded Infrastructure Improvements will
enable the District to construct or acquire those improvements in a cost-
effective manner.
      (7)   The District is planned and will be implemented in a manner which
provides for the expenses to be paid by the Petitioner and the District, as
applicable.
      (8)   As planned, the Infrastructure Improvements are consistent with the
City's development goals, growth management policies, and conservation
policies.
      (9)   The formation of the District and the issuance of District Bonds,
subject to the requirements and limitations specified in this Formation
Resolution, are consistent with the requirements of the PID Ordinance.
   (D)   Approval of the Formation Documents; Formation of District; Approval
of District Foreclosure Procedures for Delinquent Special Levies.
      (1)   The Boulders Public Improvement District is hereby ordered approved
and formed to carry out the purposes set forth in, and according to the
provisions of, this Formation Resolution.
      (2)   The Petition is hereby accepted and approved.
      (3)   The General Plan is hereby accepted and approved. The District
shall include the Land, which is the real property described in the General
Plan's District Boundary Map and more particularly identified in the legal
descriptions attached as Exhibit 2 to the Petition.
      (4)   The Development Agreement is hereby accepted and approved, and
shall be an agreement or condition pertaining to the District, as contemplated
by §4(D) of the PID Ordinance, so that any existing agreements with the
Petitioner or other developers and landowners regarding the provision of
Infrastructure Improvements proposed to be furnished to the City shall be
deemed amended to reflect the terms of the Development Agreement.
      (5)   The Rate and Method of Special Levy Apportionment, establishing the
apportionment and manner of collection of District Special Levy in sufficient
detail to enable each owner of all or a portion of the Land or resident within
the District to estimate the maximum amount of the proposed District Special
Levy, is hereby accepted and approved.
      (6)   The Notice of District Special Levy substantially in the form
attached as Exhibit 8 to the Petition is hereby approved.
      (7)   The District shall have the powers necessary and convenient to
finance and acquire the PID Funded Infrastructure Improvements as provided in
the General Plan, Feasibility Study, Rate and Method of Special Levy
Apportionment and Development Agreement, as those documents may be amended or
modified with the approval of the City. The District and the City shall be
bound by the terms thereof.
      (8)   The purpose of the District shall be to provide financing of the
PID Funded Infrastructure Improvements set forth in the Petition.
      (9)   The District Bonds shall not exceed the maximum principal amount
set forth in the Petition and shall be within the value to lien ratio described
in the Petition, except as otherwise approved in a supplemental resolution by
the District’s governing body and the City Council.
      (10)   The District Special Levies to be imposed by the District shall
not exceed the amounts set forth in the Petition, subject to adjustment
consistent with the terms of the Act and the Rate and Method of Special Levy
Apportionment.
      (11)   The District shall be self-supporting, as provided in § 1(F) of
the PID Ordinance.
      (12)   The District shall comply with existing City policies for
development, growth management and conservation, as provided in §§ 1(A) and 1
(I) of the PID Ordinance.
      (13)   The PID financing proposed in the Petition and other Formation
Documents meet the applicable requirements of §§ 5 and 6 of the PID Ordinance.
      (14)   The officers, agents and employees of the City are hereby
authorized and empowered to do all acts and things and to execute and deliver
all documents relating to or requested by the District to carry out and comply
with the provisions of the Formation Documents.
      (15)   The District’s governing body shall hold a public meeting within
45 days following the date of adoption of this Formation Resolution. At that
meeting, the District’s governing body shall adopt an open meeting policy and
by-laws for the District, approve and execute the Development Agreement, and
shall take such other action toward or in connection with the issuance of the
District Bonds, as authorized by this Formation Resolution.
      (16)   Pursuant to the authority granted in §§ 5-11-20(G) and 5-11-23(F)
of the Act, the District shall establish procedures for foreclosure of
delinquent District Special Levies and for redemption of foreclosed property,
which procedures shall be substantially similar to the foreclosure and
redemption procedures applicable to Municipal Improvement Districts set forth
in NMSA 1978, §§ 3-33-28 to -30 (1965, as amended), and as set forth for the
District in the Development Agreement approved by this Formation Resolution.
   (E)   Authorization of District Bonds. The District may issue District Bonds
pursuant to a resolution of the District’s governing body authorizing issuance
of one or more series of District Bonds in an estimated maximum aggregate
principal amount of $3,902,000 for the purpose of financing the PID Funded
Infrastructure Improvements subject to the requirements set forth in this
Formation Resolution (the “Bond Resolution”).
      (1)   The Bond Resolution shall be approved by the City's Debt Committee
prior to its enactment by the District and, as part of the review and approval
process, the City's Debt Committee shall determine that the Petitioner is in
compliance with its outstanding agreements with the City, including all
subdivision improvement agreements.
      (2)   The Bond Resolution shall include, at minimum, the following
provisions for the protection of owners of the Bonds:
         (a)   The Bond Resolution shall provide for the establishment of a
debt service reserve fund in an amount, on the date of issuance of the District
Bonds, equal to the lesser of (a) the maximum annual debt service requirements
on all outstanding District Bonds; (b) 125% of the average annual debt service
requirements on the District Bonds; or (c) 10% of the aggregate principal
amount of the District Bonds.
         (b)   The Bond Resolution shall include provisions for the public
offering or private placement of District Bonds in accordance with § 5(E)(5) of
the PID Ordinance; and in accordance with the PID Ordinance, the City's Debt
Committee has determined, based upon recommendations made by underwriters and
financial consultants to the City, that in lieu of a contribution agreement,
the District Bonds shall be subject to the following diversity of ownership
requirements and limitations:
            1.   The District Special Levies assessed on the Land, owned by
parties other than the Petitioner or other related interests, shall be in
amounts equal to or greater than 110% of the maximum annual debt service
requirements of all District Bonds outstanding and proposed to be issued; and
            2.   The aggregate principal amount of the District Bonds shall
constitute no more than 25% of the total value of the Land, owned by parties
other than the Petitioner or other related interests, following the completion
of construction of the PID Funded Infrastructure Improvements.
         (c)   The Bond Resolution shall provide that the District Bonds shall
be sold pursuant to a limited public offering and issued in minimum
denominations of at least $25,000.
         (d)   The final maturity date for the District Bonds shall not be more
than 30 years after the date of issuance.
         (e)   The Bond Resolution shall include provisions for appointment of
a trustee pursuant to an indenture of trust or other similar instrument.
         (f)   The Bond Resolution shall provide that the trustee may exercise
the rights and remedies of the District for the protection of bondholders,
including, without limitation, the following:
            1.   the trustee's collection of District Special Levies;
            2.   the trustee's foreclosure of delinquent District Special
Levies; and
            3.   the trustee's appointment of a receiver or other agent to
complete the construction of the Infrastructure Improvements in the event of a
default in the payment of debt service on the District Bonds, which default
cannot be cured by either (I) drawing on the debt service reserve fund
established for the District Bonds, (II) through payment pursuant to a letter
of credit or other guaranty that may be provided by the Petitioner, if
required, or (III) through the Petitioner’s direct payment of the amount
necessary to pay the debt service on the District Bonds then due, which
appointment may be made irrespective of whether foreclosure remedies are
exercised.
      (3)   Prior to the issuance of District Bonds, the District's Bond
Resolution shall be presented to the City Council for approval as being
consistent with the provisions of Section 5 of this Resolution.
   (F)   District Governance.
      (1)   The District's governing body (the “Governing Body”) shall be
composed of:
         (a)   one of whom shall be a licensed engineer employed in the
Department of Municipal Development, which member shall initially be Rhonda
Methvin;
         (b)   one of whom shall be a certified public accountant employed in
the Department of Finance and Administration, which member shall initially be
Pamela Berry;
         (c)   one of whom shall be a employed in the City Planning Department,
which member shall initially be Russell Brito; and
         (d)   two members nominated by the Petitioner, and consented to by the
City Council, which members shall initially be Pierre Amestoy and Christine
Amestoy;
      (2)   Pierre Amestoy, Pamela Berry, and Russell Brito shall serve 6-year
terms.
      (3)   Christine Amestoy and Rhonda Methvin shall serve 4-year terms.
      (4)   Pursuant to § 5-11-6 of the Act, Pierre Amestoy is appointed to be
the clerk of the District and Christine Amestoy is appointed to be treasurer of
the District.
      (5)   Within six years following the date of formation of the District,
the District shall hold an election of members of the Governing Body in
conformance with Act and the PID Ordinance.
(R2012-035, approved 5-23-2012)
ARTICLE 16: RANK 2 FACILITY PLANS
   
1-16-1   Bikeways & Trails Facility Plan
   
1-16-2   Facility Plan: Electric System Transmission and Generation (2010-2020)
   
1-16-3   Facility Plan for Arroyos
   
1-16-4   Major Public Open Space Facility Plan
   
1-16-5   Route 66 Action Plan
§ 1-16-1 BIKEWAYS & TRAILS FACILITY PLAN.
   (A)   The City Council adopts the EPC's Findings #1-17 and Conditions of
Approval #1-6 related to the 2024 Bikeway & Trail Facilities Plan.
   (B)   The City Council adopts the following additional findings:
      (1)   The Rank 2 2024 Bikeway and Trail Facilities Plan updates,
consolidates, and replaces the Bikeways & Trails Facility Plan (2015). Rank 2
Facility Plans describe existing facilities, policies, recommendations, and
proposed projects.
      (2)   The scope of the 2024 Bikeway and Trail Facilities Plan is
Citywide. It also shows trails within Bernalillo County's jurisdiction to
demonstrate regional connectivity that are not included as proposed City
projects.
      (3)   The purpose of the plan is to ensure a well-connected, enjoyable,
and safe non-motorized transportation and recreation system throughout the
metropolitan area. Updating the Plan is a reasonable exercise in local self-
government consistent with the City Charter.
      (4)   The Albuquerque/Bernalillo County Comprehensive Plan, the
Integrated Development Ordinance, the Complete Streets Ordinance, Vision O Zero
Action Plan and Year in Review, and Climate Action Plan are incorporated herein
by reference and made part of the record for all purposes.
      (5)   The plan is generally consistent with the key themes of the
Connections: 2040 Metropolitan Transportation Plan (MTP) through its multi-
modal vision, policies, and proposed facilities for pedestrians and cyclists
throughout the City. The proposed facility map is consistent with the current
Long Range Bicycle System (LRBS) map and will provide updates to the LRBS map
when it is amended for the Transitions 2045 MTP.
      (6)   Key City Departments, including Municipal Development, Parks &
Recreation, and Planning, coordinated as part of this facility planning effort.
      (7)   There is general support among the reviewing agencies and members
of the public that the City should adopt the proposed Bikeway and Trail
Facilities Plan.
(R-2024-085, passed 12-16-2024)
Cross-reference:
   Bikeway Network plan, §
4-2-1, repealed
   Trails and Bikeways Facility Plan; On-Street Comprehensive Bike Plan, §
4-2-9 (formerly codified as §
1-11-5), repealed
§ 1-16-2 FACILITY PLAN: ELECTRIC SYSTEM TRANSMISSION AND GENERATION (2010-
2020).
   (A)   The Facility Plan: Electric Service Transmission and Subtransmission
Facilities Plan (1995-2005) (the “1995 Electric Facilities Plan”), adopted in
1996, is hereby repealed and replaced with the Facility Plan: Electric System
Transmission and Generation (2010-2020) (the “2010 Electric Facilities Plan”).
In the event of conflicting statements between the two Plans, the newer
attached Plan shall govern.
   (B)   The City Council Adopts the following findings as recommended by the
Environmental Planning Commission (EPC):
      (1)   This request is for a recommendation to the City Council regarding
text amendments to the Electric Service Transmission and Subtransmission
Facilities Plan (1995-2005) (the “1995 Electric Facilities Plan”), a Rank II
facilities plan which describes the electric transmission system serving the
City of Albuquerque and unincorporated Bernalillo County.
      (2)   The proposed text amendments consist of the following: a list of
proposed electric facility projects for 2010-2020, a description and
clarification of the review process, the addition of generation technologies
such as solar and wind, a glossary of technical terms and an appendix of photo
examples. Some language, organizational, and graphic improvements are also
included.
      (3)   The proposed text amendments have been incorporated into an updated
version of the 1995 Electric Facilities Plan entitled Facility Plan: Electric
System Transmission & Generation (2010-2020) (the “2010 Electric Facilities
Plan”).
      (4)   The EPC’s task is to make a recommendation to the City Council
regarding the proposed text amendments. The City Council is the City’s Zoning
Authority and therefore will make the final decision. The EPC is a recommending
body.
      (5)   The 2010 Electric Facilities Plan is being considered concurrently
through Bernalillo County’s development review process (ZSPR-20110001). The
County Planning Commission (CPC) held a public hearing on July 6, 2011 and
deferred the County request for three months. The date of the subsequent
Bernalillo County Commission (BCC) hearing is undetermined as of this writing.
      (6)   The Albuquerque/Bernalillo County Comprehensive Plan, the City of
Albuquerque Integrated Development Ordinance and the 1995 Electric Facilities
Plan are incorporated herein by reference and made part of the record for all
purposes.
      (7)   Intent of the City Charter. Establishing and subsequently amending
a Rank II Facility Plan to address electric system transmission and generation
is an exercise in local self-government (City Charter, Article 1). Standards
for transmission line corridors and transmission/substation facilities, which
address location, siting, environmental considerations and landscaping,
generally express the Council’s desire to ensure the proper use and development
of land, and to promote and maintain a humane urban environment (City Charter,
Article IX).
      (8)   Purpose of the Integrated Development Ordinance (Section 14-16-1-
3). The proposed text amendments generally further the intent of the Integrated
Development Ordinance because they would update and improve a Rank II facility
plan, the general purpose of which is to promote and maintain the health,
safety, and general welfare of the public.
      (9)   The request furthers the following Comprehensive Plan Goals
regarding Land Use and Environmental Protection & Heritage Conservation,
respectively:
         a.   Developing and Established Urban Area Goal (Section B.5): The
proposed text amendments would generally contribute to creating a quality urban
environment. Clarification of the process would help ensure adequate review of
projects, which must follow design standards to minimize impacts and contribute
to a visually pleasing built environment.
         b.   Developed Landscape Goal (Section C.8): The proposed text
amendments would not substantially alter existing design standards. Quality of
the developed landscape would be maintained, and may generally improve due to
the addition of a process to address generation technologies.
      (10)   The request furthers the following Community Resource Management
Goals of the Comprehensive Plan:
         a.   Service Provision Goal (Section D.1): The electric system can be
managed in part through land use planning. The Electric Facilities Plan already
provides a mechanism to link facilities planning to land use planning goals and
policies. The proposed text amendments strengthen this mechanism by addressing
generation technologies and making the approval process more transparent.
         b.   Energy Management (Section D.3): The proposed text amendments
would contribute to maintaining an adequate supply of electric energy; projects
serve to expand and maintain the electric transmission and generation system.
         c.   Economic Development (Section D.6): The proposed text amendments
would add an economic development section. Electric facilities projects
generally support economic development efforts. The existing design and
location standards will continue to help ensure that electric projects are
balanced with visual, ecological, and land use considerations, which promote
overarching environmental and social goals.
      (11)   The request furthers the following applicable Comprehensive Plan
policies:
         a.   Policy II.C.4a, noise considerations/planning process. The
proposed text amendments would update the Electric Facilities Plan with respect
to noise. Noise levels shall not exceed National Electrical Manufacturers
Association guidelines. This regulation, and the fact that electric facility
location is planned according to standards, helps prevent land use/noise
conflicts.
         b.   Policy II.C.8c, incidental structures/visual intrusion. The
existing design standards serve to minimize adverse visual effects. The
proposed text amendments would not substantially alter the design standards;
minimization of visual intrusion would continue. The siting study required for
generation facilities would address visual considerations.
         c.   Policy II.D. 3c, alternative/renewable energy sources. The
Electric Facilities Plan is a mechanism for land use planning. Addressing
alternative generation technologies, such as solar and wind, is a key reason
for updating the Plan. The proposed text amendments are a step toward
maximizing the potential for efficient use of alternative and renewable energy
sources.
      (12)   The revision process began in January 2010 with the need to update
the project list and address generation technologies. Staff from the City of
Albuquerque, Bernalillo County, and the Public Service Company of New Mexico
(PNM) collaborated. A Technical Team was formed; members reviewed a draft
version of the Plan and provided comments.
      (13)   The proposed 2010 Electric Facilities Plan features two
significant improvements in addition to the standard updating of the Electric
Projects list: clarification of the review and approval process and
incorporation of generation technologies such as solar and wind.
      (14)   The proposed text amendments warrant revision in places to improve
clarity and remedy minor errors. The proposed conditions of approval are
intended to achieve this.
      (15)   The proposed text amendments were announced in the Albuquerque
Journal, the Neighborhood News, and on the Planning Department’s web page. The
Office of Neighborhood Coordination (ONC) sent email notification on June 9,
2011 to neighborhood representatives. As of this writing, Staff has received a
few informational inquiries and phone calls. There is no known opposition to
the request.
   (C)   Conditions of Approval. As recommended by the Environmental Planning
Commission (EPC), the City Council adopts the Conditions of Approval. These
conditions provide further clarification, reorganize some text, make minor
editorial revisions, and correct referencing.
(R-2012-023, approved 2-22-12; Res. 2017-102, approved 11-13-17)
Cross-reference:
   Facility Plan: Electric Service Transmission and Sub-transmission Facilities
(1995-2005), §
4-3-1, repealed.
§ 1-16-3 FACILITY PLAN FOR ARROYOS.
   (A)   In order to further detail and implement the concepts of the
Albuquerque/Bernalillo County Comprehensive Plan, the Facility Plan for Arroyos
attached as part of this resolution is adopted for the area within the planning
jurisdiction of the City of Albuquerque.
   (B)   The Facility Plan for Arroyos attached as part of this resolution is
commended to the City of Rio Rancho and the Paradise Hills Special Zoning
District for their planning jurisdiction.
   (C)   The Mayor, in coordination with the Municipal Development Department,
is requested to:
      (1)   Begin the development of Rank Three Arroyo Corridor Plans
implementing the Rank Two Facility Plan for Arroyos according to the policies,
priorities, and scheduling contained in the facility plan.
      (2)   Adjust the Multi-Year Planning Program for Albuquerque and
Bernalillo County, to reflect the priorities and scheduling of specific arroyo
corridor plans as outlined in the Facility Plan for Arroyos.
      (3)   Beginning in Fiscal Year 1987, to conduct an annual review of the
Facility Plan for Arroyos to determine the effectiveness of the policies set
forth in the plan and the efficiency of joint-maintenance programs, to review
the safety record of existing joint-use facilities, to present new
technological information regarding the design of drainage facilities, and to
request and review citizen input.
   (D)   The Mayor, in coordination with the Parks and Recreation Department,
is requested to: Undertake revisions to the Park Dedication and Development
Ordinance, “Article 7-18 ROA 1974,” which are necessary to bring this document
into conformance with the policies contained in the Facility Plan for Arroyos.
(Res. without a number, approved 2-27-86; Res. 2017-102, approved 11-13-17)
§ 1-16-4 MAJOR PUBLIC OPEN SPACE FACILITY PLAN.
   (A)   The Open Space Facility Plan, attached hereto and made a part hereof,
is hereby adopted as general guide to management for the City of Albuquerque
Open Space Network pursuant to the Albuquerque/Bernalillo County Comprehensive
Plan and in response to Council Bill No. M-11.
   (B)   Other plans in place affecting the Open Space Network shall be
reviewed and amended as necessary for consistency with the Open Space Facility
Plan.
   (C)   Work on the implementation of policies called out in the Open Space
Facility Plan shall begin immediately and be carried out in a timely manner as
a high priority for all involved City departments.
(R-1-1999, approved 1-5-99; Res. 2017-102, approved 11-13-17)
§ 1-16-5 ROUTE 66 ACTION PLAN.
   (A)   The City Council adopts the following findings:
      (1)   The proposed Route 66 Action Plan area compromises approximately 15
miles of Central Avenue/Route 66 within Albuquerque city limits from 116th
Street to just east of Tramway Boulevard.
      (2)   The Plan provides goals and policies for City departments and other
stakeholders to use in the revitalization of Route 66/Central Avenue and does
not change zoning or provide technical drawings.
      (3)   The Plan has been vetted by the public and a Route 66 Working Group
that was formed to support the development of the Plan.
      (4)   The Albuquerque/Bernalillo County Comprehensive Plan, the City of
Albuquerque Integrated Development Ordinance, and the Route 66 Action Plan are
incorporated herein by reference and made part of the record for all purposes.
      (5)   The Plan is intended to enhance and coordinate with capital
projects outlined in the Rank III Sector Development Plans that exist along the
Route 66 corridor.
      (6)   The Plan is consistent with the City Charter, which empowers the
City to ensure proper land use and development (City Charter, Article I) and
support a high-quality urban environment (City Charter, Article IX) by
establishing a strategy to guide improvements in the built environment. The
Plan implements and furthers the applicable Goals and Policies of the Rank I
Comprehensive Plan as follows:
         a)   The Route 66 Action Plan contains policies, objectives, and
actions to create attractive and meaningful public spaces along Route 66 to be
enjoyed daily by locals and visitors. The Plan considers streetscapes, enhanced
public spaces, signage, wayfinding, and public art as part of this effort
(Policy II.B.6, Central Urban Area).
         b)   The Plan outlines measures to create a strong and diverse
business economy. The Major Activity Centers along the Corridor, Unser to
Coors, the BioPark, Old Town, and UNM are also seen as primary nodes. They are
seen as assets to build upon. The Plan also looks at ways to support mixed-use
and high-density residential projects, where appropriate, which will help
promote multi-modal transportation and effective provision of City services
(Policy II.B.7, Activity Centers).
         c)   The Plan supports protection and enhancements of significant
historic districts and buildings with policies that preserve and protect Route
66 assets by recognizing Route 66 era buildings and celebrating key sites and
historic places on Route 66 (Policy II.C.5, Historic Resources).
         d)   The Plan supports the arts, community events, and cultural
traditions as incremental in the continued traditions of the “Mother Road” and
the community’s well-being (Policy II.C.7, Cultural Traditions and the Arts).
         e)   Improvement of the developed landscape’s quality is a key element
of the Action Plan as it makes recommendations for urban public spaces, natural
open spaces, and a unified streetscape (Policy II.C.8, Developed Landscape).
         f)   The Plan focuses on the City right-of-way and makes suggestions
for private property uses to create a better natural environment and built
environment. The Plan will promote local history, culture, and traditions,
while preserving the identity, character, and connectivity of each community
within the corridor (Policy II.C.9, Community Identity and Urban Design).
         g)   The Plan proposes infrastructure improvements to storm water and
drainage facilities and high speed digital services. The Plan outlines
priorities for capital spending in existing service areas that reflect regional
and local systems (Policy II.D.1, Service Provision).
         h)   The Plan, in conjunction with lower-ranking plans and ongoing
efforts such as Bus Rapid Transit (BRT), will help develop a balanced
circulation system thorough focused and coordinated capital expenditures with a
primary goal to develop and support an attractive, comfortable, efficient, and
easily accessible multi-modal transportation system (Policy II.D.4,
Transportation and Transit).
         i)   The Plan supports catalytic opportunities for a strong and
diverse business economy. It looks at ways to minimize gaps (undeveloped areas
along Central Avenue) by promoting affordable housing projects, mixed use
housing, and senior living facilities on undeveloped areas and increase density
on Central Avenue. It also recommends coordination between internal departments
before a building can be demolished (Policy II.D.5, Housing).
         j)   The Plan calls for City resources to demonstrate a strong
commitment and investment in Central Avenue, giving high priority to City
projects. Encouragement to locate new housing and jobs along Central Avenue may
reduce the need to travel and/or focus travel to the corridor. The Plan calls
for incentives for Route 66 businesses and development, attracting a diversity
of business types and employment opportunities. The Plan encourages tourism by
offering diverse attractions, lodging, restaurants, sights and sounds,
businesses and events, along with unique marketing and branding of Route 66 and
Albuquerque. The Plan suggests coordination with public and private partners
for economic development, branding, and tourism purposes (Policy II.D.6,
Economic Development).
         k)   The Plan makes recommendations for a safer and more secure
community using tools such as CPTED (Crime Prevention Through Environmental
Design) strategies in new and existing development, as well as in publicly
funded projects. It also discusses the location of future police facilities,
encouraging more pedestrian activity and expanding the Clean City program
(Policy II.D.9, Public Safety).
         l)   The Plan supports the following applicable goals and policies of
other Rank 2 Area/Facility Plans, Rank 3 Sector Plans and Metropolitan
Redevelopment Area (MRA) Plans, and other city plans, as listed in Appendix D
of the Plan.
      (7)   There were no adverse comments from the reviewing agencies.
Comments have been addressed in the Plan.
      (8)   There were no adverse comments from the public. The public
involvement process included 5 community meetings. A Route 66 Working Group was
formed and continues to meet regularly to advise staff on the Plan. Information
was also made available on the City website and in neighborhood newsletters.
There is no known opposition to the Plan.
   (B)   The Route 66 Action Plan, attached hereto and made a part hereof, is
adopted as a Rank 2 Facility Plan and regulatory guide to the implementation of
the Rank 1 Albuquerque/Bernalillo County Comprehensive Plan and applicable Rank
2 and Rank 3 Plans as cited above.
(R-2014-094, approved 11-3-14; Res. 2017-102, approved 11-13-17)
ARTICLE 17: RANK 3 MASTER PLANS AND RESOURCE MANAGEMENT PLANS
Master Plans
   
1-17-1   Albuquerque International Airport Master Plan and Airport Noise
Compatibility Program
   
1-17-2   Rio Grande Zoological Park Master Plan
   
1-17-3   Rail Yards Master Plan
Resource Management Plans
   
1-17-20   Amole Arroyo Resource Management Plan
   
1-17-21   Bear Canyon Resource Management Plan
   
1-17-22   Bosque Action Resource Management Plan
   
1-17-23   Los Poblanos Fields Open Space Resource Management Plan
   
1-17-24   Pajarito Arroyo Resource Management Plan
   
1-17-25   Rio Grande Valley State Park Resource Management Plan
   
1-17-26   Tijeras Arroyo Biological Zone Resource Management Plan
Master Plans
§ 1-17-1 ALBUQUERQUE INTERNATIONAL AIRPORT MASTER PLAN AND AIRPORT NOISE
COMPATIBILITY PROGRAM.
   (A)   The Airport Master Plan for the Albuquerque International Sunport is
approved as a Rank Two Facilities Plan, pursuant to the Planning Ordinance.
This approval is contingent on the Mayor initiating and pursuing a Federal
Aviation Regulation Part 150 Noise and Land Use Compatibility Study.
   (B)   The Albuquerque International Airport Master Plan is adopted by the
city. The Plan and the Airport Noise Compatibility Program are approved as a
Rank Two facilities plans.
   (C)   The Mayor shall seek to achieve full implementation of the Airport
Noise Compatibility Program, including necessary ordinance revisions, during
fiscal year 1986.
(Res. 144-1985, approved 8-8-85; Res. 105-1994, approved 10-25-94; Am. Res. 28-
2003, approved 4-2-03; Res. 2017-102, approved 11-13-17)
Cross-references:
   Formerly codified as §
1-11-7 and §
4-2-5
§ 1-17-2 RIO GRANDE ZOOLOGICAL PARK MASTER PLAN.
The Master Plan, Rio Grande Zoo, dated January 3, 1980, is hereby adopted as
the basis for the future development of the Rio Grande Zoological Park.
(Res. 68-1980, approved 3-25-80; Res. 2017-102, approved 11-13-17)
Cross-references:
   Formerly codified as §
4-4-2
§ 1-17-3 RAIL YARDS MASTER PLAN.
   (A)   The Rail Yards Master Plan and accompanying Site Plan (attached hereto
as Exhibit A) are hereby approved and adopted.
   (B)   The City Council adopts the following Findings as recommended by the
Environmental Planning Commission:
      (1)   This is a request for a Master Plan and Site Plan for Tract A of
the Plat of Tract A of AT&SF Railway Co. Machine Shop located on 2nd Street SW
between Cromwell Avenue and Hazeldine Avenue and containing approximately 27.3
acres.
      (2)   The Rail Yards are zoned PD. The Master Plan allows for a wide
range of permissive uses, including multifamily residential (R-MH), community
commercial uses such as retail, restaurants, services (MX-M), and light
industrial (NR-BP) each with some limited exceptions. The Master Plan reviewed
by the EPC and approved by the City Council prior to the issuance of a building
permit for the site (with very limited exceptions).
      (3)   The Master Plan as submitted contains a site development plan for
subdivision with an accompanying Master Plan document. The Master Plan is the
document that will guide redevelopment of the City-owned Albuquerque Rail Yards
site. The Albuquerque Rail Yards are located within the Barelas neighborhood
and adjacent to the South Broadway neighborhood.
      (4)   The City of Albuquerque purchased the Rail Yards in 2007 (R-07-202,
R-07-274, R-07-332) through a mixture of state and local funding. The Rail
Yards Advisory Board (RYAB) was established in March 2008 pursuant to City
Council Resolution (F/SR-08-47). The responsibilities of the RYAB included the
creation of a Request for Proposals (RFP) for a master developer for the site,
and the selection of a master developer. An RFP, for a Master Developer was
issued in 2010 and in June 2012 Samitaur Constructs was selected as the Master
Developer. Per the subsequent Master Plan Agreement, the Master Developer was
charged with creating a Master Plan for the project area in cooperation with
the City and the community.
      (5)   The Rail Yards property is located within the Area of Change
Development Area of the Albuquerque Bernalillo County Comprehensive Plan
(2017).
      (6)   The Fire Station building on the site was designated a City
Landmark on May 18th 1987 (0-1119) and on August 1st 1990 development
guidelines for the Fire Station were adopted.
      (7)   The request furthers a preponderance of relevant goals and policies
in the Albuquerque Bernalillo County Comprehensive Plan (2003) as it could lead
to the redevelopment of a historically significant site that is located close
to the downtown core, in the Barelas neighborhood. Redevelopment of the Rail
Yards could provide a catalytic opportunity to spur economic development and
provide jobs for the Barelas neighborhood and the wider downtown community.
Section 5 of Master Development Plan provides Goals and Policies by which
development decisions and City approvals will be evaluated, this sections
addresses economic development, housing, community connections, land use,
architecture and historic rehabilitation and art and culture. (Albuquerque
Bernalillo Comprehensive Plan Goals and Policies II.B.6; II.B.6.a, b; II.B.5;
II.B.5.d, i, o; II.C.5; II.C.5.b; II.C.9; II.C.9.b; II.D.6.a, b).
      (8)   The request furthers a preponderance of relevant policies and
actions in the Barelas Sector Development Plan (2008). Rehabilitation of the
site furthers policies addressing historic preservation, economic development
and job creation for the Barelas community. Section 5 of Master Development
Plan provides Goals and Policies by which development decisions and City
approvals will be evaluated, this section addresses economic development,
housing, community connections, land use, architecture and historic
rehabilitation and art and culture. (Barelas Sector Development Plan LUZ1,
LUZ3, LUZ7, Action 1.2.2.c, Action 4.6.1.e, E1, Action 5.2.1.a).
      (9)   Section 10.4 of the Master Plan requests delegation of Site Plan to
the Development Review Board with its review to include historic preservation
planner and a Metropolitan Redevelopment planner.
      (10)   The Draft Master Plan was submitted to the Rail Yards Advisory
Board for their review and recommendation. The RYAB unanimously voted to send
the draft master plan to the EPC with a recommendation of approval with 7
amendments. The amendments address location of housing on the site, permit
parking, amended language related to the WHEELS Museum, language to address the
creation of a memorial onsite, language requiring a financial plan, addressing
rail maintenance and related rail facilities and finally an amendment that
would editing to clarify which aspects of the Master Development Plan are to be
considered compulsory and which elements which are advisory.
      (11)   The Barelas Neighborhood Association, the Broadway Central
Corridors Partnership, the Citizens Information Committee of Martineztown, the
Downtown Neighborhoods Association, the Huning Highland Historic District
Association, the Martineztown Work Group, the Raynolds Addition Neighborhood
Association, the Santa Barbara Martineztown Association, the South Broadway
Neighborhood Association and the Downtown Action Team were notified of this
application. No facilitated meeting was held, though a number of well attended
public meetings were held during the planning process and the Barelas and South
Broadway Neighborhood Association, those most directly impacted by the re-
development, were and continue to be participants on the Rail Yards Advisory
Board. There is no known opposition to a recommendation of approval.
      (12)   Staff has received a number of emails through the online contact
form on the City website for the Rail Yards. A number of the emails received
discuss a desire for a public market to be located in the Blacksmith Shop or a
similar building. The current use of the Blacksmith Shop as a special event
space is intended as an interim use. The Master Plan proposes the final use for
the Blacksmith Shop as office uses. While the Master Plan does not specifically
prohibit the eventual use of the space as a market, it does not provide policy
guidance for the use of the Blacksmith Shop as a market.
   (C)   Severability Clause. If any section, paragraph, sentence, clause, word
or phrase of this resolution is for any reason held to be invalid or
unenforceable by any court of competent jurisdiction, such decision shall not
affect the validity of the remaining provisions of this resolution. The Council
hereby declares that it would have passed this resolution and each section,
paragraph, sentence, clause, word or phrase thereof irrespective of any
provision being declared unconstitutional or otherwise invalid.
   (D)   Effective Date. This resolution shall take effect five days after
publication by title and general summary.
(Res. 2006-046, approved 6-1-2006; Res. 2009-067, approved 5-18-2009; Res.
2013-128, approved 12-13-2013; Res. 2014-054, approved 7-3-2014; Res. 2017-102,
approved 11-13-17; Res. 2023-073, approved 9-22-2023)
Cross Reference:
   Formerly codified as §
1-6-16
   Barelas Neighborhood Commercial Area Revitalization Plan, §
1-12-17 (formerly codified as §
1-6-11)
   Barelas Sector Development Plan, §
1-7-39, repealed
Editor's note: The Albuquerque-Bernalillo County Comprehensive Plan policies
were substantially amended in 2017 by Council Bill R-16-108 (Enactment No. R-
2017-026), approved 4-7-17. Earlier policies have been retained in this
resolution for historical context; however, policy references and development
area names may have been changed for consistency with the 2017 Albuquerque-
Bernalillo County Comprehensive Plan.
Resource Management Plans
§ 1-17-20 AMOLE ARROYO RESOURCE MANAGEMENT PLAN.
   (A)   The Amole Arroyo Corridor Plan, attached to Resolution No. 165-1991 is
hereby adopted as a Rank Three Plan. All management, operations, and
improvement activities within the corridor and the adjacent design overlay zone
shall be guided by this plan.
   (B)   The Design Overlay Zone is hereby mapped as an amendment to the city
zone map with the boundary specified on the Amole Arroyo Corridor Plan pocket
map.
(Res. 165-1991, approved 10-25-91; Res. 2017-102, approved 11-13-17)
Cross-references:
   Formerly codified as §
1-13-4
§ 1-17-21 BEAR CANYON RESOURCE MANAGEMENT ARROYO PLAN.
   (A)   The Bear Canyon Arroyo Corridor Plan, attached to Resolution No. 100-
1991 is hereby adopted as a Rank 3 Plan. All management, operations, and
improvement activities within the corridor and the adjacent design overlay zone
shall be guided by this plan.
   (B)   The Design Overlay Zone, which includes all properties abutting the
corridor is hereby mapped as an amendment to the city of Albuquerque Zone Map.
(Res. 100-1991, approved 6-21-91; Res. 2017-102, approved 11-13-17)
Cross-references:
   Formerly codified as §
1-13-3
§ 1-17-22 BOSQUE ACTION RESOURCE MANAGEMENT PLAN.
The Bosque Action Plan, attached to Resolution No. 111-1993 and made a part
hereof, is hereby adopted as a Rank 2 Resource Management Plan.
(Res. 111-1993, approved 10-14-93; Res. 2017-102, approved 11-13-17)
Cross-references:
   Formerly codified as §
1-11-6
Editor's note: The Bosque Action Plan is now considered a Resource Management
Plan per Res. 2017-102.
§ 1-17-23 LOS POBLANOS FIELDS OPEN SPACE RESOURCE MANAGEMENT PLAN.
   The Resource Management Plan for Los Poblanos Fields Open Space is approved
and adopted for Tracts 8A1A2B2, 6B2, 42A2, 73A1, 41A, 1, 218B, 39E, 39D, 39C,
39B, 173, 174, 175, Los Poblanos Ranch Addition & Tract A, Anderson Fields. The
Environmental Planning Commission findings are attached to Resolution 18-2003.
(Res. 18-2003, approved 2-26-03; Res. 2017-102, approved 11-13-17)
Cross-references:
   Formerly codified as §
1-11-13
§ 1-17-24 PAJARITO ARROYO RESOURCE MANAGEMENT PLAN.
   The Pajarito Arroyo Corridor Plan, attached to Resolution No. 115-1990 is
hereby adopted as a Rank 3 Plan. All management, operations, and improvement
activities within the design overlay zone shall be guided by this plan.
(Res. 115-1990, approved 9-4-90; Res. 2017-102, approved 11-13-17)
Cross-references:
   Formerly codified as §
1-13-2
§ 1-17-25 RIO GANDE VALLEY STATE PARK RESOURCE MANAGEMENT PLAN.
   (A)   Adoption. In order to realize the objectives of the RGVSP Act and to
enable people to enjoy the recreational, environmental, educational and
wildlife benefits of the river, that the Rio Grande Valley State Park
Management Plan attached to Resolution No. 37-1986 is hereby adopted as a Park
Management Plan and shall be submitted to the State Parks and Recreation
Division of the Natural Resources Department.
   (B)   Amendments.
      (1)   The following special conditions be incorporated into the
Management Plan and be made a part thereof:
         (a)   All temporary fills shall be removed from the waterway upon work
completion, and the banks and river bed returned to approximate original
contours.
         (b)   No toxic pollutants shall be released into the Rio Grande during
construction of the project.
         (c)   The cofferdams shall not unduly restrict normal or flood flows
of the Rio Grande. Should undue restriction of flows occur, the permittee shall
remove portions or all of the cofferdams at the permittee's discretion or as
directed by the District Engineer.
         (d)   The removal of Kellner jack lines or tie-back lines shall be
coordinated with the Corps of Engineers and the Bureau of Reclamation.
Remaining jack line segments shall be adequately re-anchored prior to project
completion.
         (e)   Destruction of bosque shall be avoided as much as possible
during construction. Borrow material shall not be taken from bosque areas.
Clearing of rights-of-way shall be limited to the minimum needed. Work roads
adjacent to the bosque shall be temporarily fenced during the construction
period to prevent equipment entry into the bosque.
         (f)   Dredged or fill material, downed trees, brush or other debris
shall not be dumped or placed in riparian areas except as noted in condition
“G” below.
         (g)   Disturbed bosque, approachway and depression embankments, areas
under the bridge, and work areas shall be revegetated to minimize erosion and
encourage habitat re-establishment. Trees shall be planted along the north and
south roadway rights-of-way between Taylor Ranch Road and Rio Grande Boulevard
to reduce visual and noise impacts to adjacent properties. Brush piles shall be
placed under the bridge for habitat improvement. A detailed revegetation plan
incorporating these requirements shall be submitted to and approved by the
District Engineer prior to the start of construction.
         (h)   An archeological survey of all impacted areas shall be
performed. Impacted areas include rights-of-way, ancillary parking lots,
storage areas, staging areas, and borrow and waste areas. Two copies of the
survey report shall be submitted to the District Engineer. The Corps will
coordinate Section 106 consultation requirements with the State Historic
Preservation Office. Construction of the project shall not begin until after
the Corps notifies the city that the coordination is complete. Archeological
monitoring of the initial earth-moving stages of construction shall be
performed by a qualified archeologist to reduce loss of archeological
resources.
         (i)   The city shall comply with the provisions and stipulations of
the Memorandum of Agreement regarding cultural resources dated June 16, 1987,
between the Corps of Engineers and the New Mexico State Historic Preservation
Office, concurred in by the city and accepted by the Advisory Council on
Historic Preservation.
         (j)   Unavoidable impacts to riparian habitat will be mitigated by
procuring not less than four acres of private riparian or wetland bosque within
the Albuquerque reach of the Rio Grande. The mitigation lands will be
specifically identified by the permittee and the site designation submitted to
and approved by the District Engineer prior to acquisition. The mitigation
lands shall be deeded to the Rio Grande Valley State Park or otherwise
permanently placed in the public domain and managed for the primary purpose of
wildlife habitat. The permittee will develop a plan for management of the
mitigation lands in coordination with the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service, the
New Mexico Natural Resources Department and the District Engineer. The plan
shall be submitted to and approved by the District Engineer prior to start of
construction.
         (k)   The permittee shall insure that vehicular access by the general
public to the bosque is prohibited during and after construction. Work roads
shall be eradicated upon project completion.
         (l)   Flows to the “oxbow” wetland via the Corrales Riverside Drain
shall not be interrupted during project construction. The quality and quantity
of flows in the two riverside drains shall not be significantly altered as a
result of the project construction.
         (m)   Noise walls shall be installed as shown on Sheet 4 of the
Montano Crossing Plans to reduce noise impacts to the Simms property and the
Dietz Farms residential area.
      (2)   The following additional special conditions shall be incorporated
into the Rio Grande State Park Management Plan and shall be made a part
thereof.
         (a)   Maintain or replace/reinstall in-stream debris which existed
prior to construction. Consult with the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service on
replacement of in-stream debris-piles prior to initiation of in-river
construction (i.e., before the winter season). These debris-piles provide
refuge and habitat which is particularly important during winter months.
         (b)   Limit disturbance of stream channel morphology and substrate to
the area occupied by cofferdams and work platforms. Cofferdam construction
methods will be used that limit channel constriction, will not create
accelerated current velocities, and will minimize disruption of substrate and
suspension of sediments.
         (c)   Limit development of low-velocity, depositional areas by
restoring the stream channel to preconstruction configuration, exclusive of the
in-stream changes caused by the bridge piers. Removal of cofferdams and work
platforms must not result in the creation of deep, low velocity backwater pools
that provide habitat for non-native predatory fish species. Minnow eggs may be
deposited in these areas, where they settle to the substrate, are covered with
silt, and are smothered.
         (d)   Implement best management practices, such as silt fences, non-
erosive cofferdams, and site drainage, to prevent erosion and transport of
sediment to the river. Introduction of sediment causes degradation of in-stream
habitat.
         (e)   Prevent the introduction of toxic construction related materials
into the river, particularly waste concrete and petroleum. These materials can
directly and indirectly result in the death of the fishes and other aquatic
communities. Obtain temporary fills from clean upland sources.
         (f)   Prohibit refueling of vehicles in the river channel, store and
site hazardous substances and refueling areas in bermed and lined locations
outside of the 100-year floodplain in an environmentally suitable area, control
the release of slurry materials, and reduce the creation and discharge of
sediment into the river. Equipment entering the river shall be cleaned of
petroleum and lubricants daily before entering the river channel. Any equipment
entering the river shall carry an emergency oil spill sit and blanket. The
contractor shall have an oil spill contingency plan in place prior to
initiation of the project. Waste materials will not be dumped into acequias,
drainage ditches and vacant areas. Concrete trucks will not clean-out in these
areas. Waste materials will be deposited in disposal sites designated for
construction debris.
         (g)   Contain all lubricating slurries, drilling muds, and waste in a
steel cofferdam approximately 6 to 10 feet in diameter at the bore hole. The
cofferdam will be sealed to isolate the contents from the river. Elected and
waste drilling materials will be collected and trucked from the construction
site for appropriate disposal. No slurry material shall be released into the
river channel or adjoining terrestrial areas.
         (h)   Limit in-river construction activities to the low-flow period
(i.e., late- July through early-March) to minimize impact to the aquatic
community. Divert remaining river flow to the opposite river half, allowing the
normal braiding effect. Maintain at least one half of the river width available
for flows.
         (i)   Implement a monitoring plan designed to gather data on the
potential impacts of the proposed Montano bridge on the Rio Grande Silvery
Minnow.
         (j)   Use culverts and stable materials (e.g., gravel, rubber bladder,
gabions, Jersey barriers, flexible armoring, geo-fabric, etc.) for cofferdams
and work platforms to minimize siltation and possible downstream impacts of
egg/larvae smothering. Whenever possible, sandbars should be used for
construction activities to reduce fill amounts in the river channel. (Note:
minimize vegetation destruction on sand bars.)
         (k)   Ensure that public access, particularly during winter (December
through February), from the new road and bridge is prohibited and prevented
through fencing and/or signing. This will minimize disturbance to bald eagles
and their avian prey.
         (l)   Plant cottonwood poles at a 4:1 replacement ratio for the
estimated 22 mature cottonwoods greater than 18 inches in diameter that will be
lost during construction. Monitor the plantings for a minimum of four years to
insure a minimum of 80% survival of the trees by the end of the fourth year
following planting.
         (m)   Protect remaining mature cottonwoods near (within 100 feet) the
road right-of-way from beaver damage.
         (n)   Regularly monitor (one day/week-December through February) the
river one half mile above and below the bridge during construction for bald
eagle use. Attempt to determine roost site(s)   of any eagle seen from the
construction site. Regularly inform the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service of the
results of this monitoring effort. Additionally, if a bald eagle is observed
perching or roosting in the project area (0.25 mile either north or south of
the proposed bridge site) from December through February, the contractor will
postpone all project-related construction. Construction will be postponed until
the eagle leaves the area of its own volition or, after consultation with the
Army Corps of Engineers and the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service, it is
determined that the potential for harassment caused by the postponed
construction activity is minimal, whichever comes first. This provision shall
not apply to eagles that move with the 0.25-mile limit while construction is
occurring.
         (o)   Work areas will be fenced to restrict equipment from accessing
riparian areas other than the project right-of-way, and to keep equipment from
the oxbow wetland.
         (p)   To mitigate any possible noise effects by traffic, noise walls
no less than 32 inches high should be installed on both sides of the bridge and
approachways.
         (q)   During the cutting and clearing of the proposed bridge corridor,
some of the cut trees and brush can be pushed up against the edge of the bosque
(to the extent that fire hazards are not increased). These brush piles will
reduce visibility into the bosque and thereby reduce potential effects on
neotropical migrants such as the southwestern willow flycatcher.
         (r)   To preclude effects to the southwestern willow flycatcher and to
evaluate the suitability of willow-vegetated islands for southwestern willow
flycatcher nesting habitat, intensive surveys (using established U.S. Fish and
Wildlife Service protocol) for the subspecies will be conducted before, during,
and after construction along the bosque river and levee edges and on the
islands within 1,500 feet of the bridge. If southwestern willow flycatchers are
documented in the area, the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service will be contacted to
determine potential effects and recommend appropriate mitigative measures.
         (s)   A wetland/willow complex suitable as nesting habitat for the
southwestern willow flycatcher will be developed on the 18.4-acre mitigation
lands as described in the management plan for the mitigation land.
         (t)   Develop and implement an overall monitoring plan to assure that
all of the above conditions are implemented. The monitoring plan will be
approved by the Corps of Engineers prior to project construction.
      (3)   This legislation will become effective upon City Council approval
of the following:
         (a)   A resolution (to be submitted to the City Council for
introduction and final action at its next regularly scheduled meeting)
providing evidence that good faith negotiations to consummate an agreement with
Los Ranchos have occurred; providing the elements of the agreement, if one has
been negotiated; and identifying the recommendations of the City Council's
Montano consultants that the Administration proposes to follow, and how each of
these recommendations would be carried out.
         (b)   A resolution committing specified funding from defined revenue
sources to fund the entire Montano Bridge Project. This may occur at the next
regularly scheduled City Council Meeting.
(Res. 37-1986, approved 3-17-86; Am. Res. 97-1995, approved 7-21-95; Res. 2017-
102, approved 11-13-17)
Cross-references:
   Formerly codified as §
4-4-3
§ 1-17-26 TIJERAS ARROYO BIOLOGICAL ZONE RESOURCE MANAGEMENT PLAN.
   (A)   The Tijeras Arroyo Biological Zone includes the Tijeras Canyon and the
Tijeras Arroyo for approximately 3.7 miles from the Carnuel interstate-40
westward to the boundary of Kirtland Air Force Base, containing approximately
684 acres that is made up of City, State, Albuquerque Metropolitan Arroyo Flood
Control Authority, and privately owned parcels. The Plan provides goals and
policies for City departments and other stakeholders to use in the conservation
and preservation of the Tijeras Arroyo.
   (B)   The primary goal of the Plan is to provide guidance and outline
measures that will aid the conservation of natural and cultural resources and
identify opportunities for public recreation. The Plan: does not change zoning;
calls for the City Open Space Division to acquire private lands within Tijeras
Arroyo to consolidate public ownership; and, provides goals and policies that
align with the Comprehensive Plan, and other city plans to better coordinate
the preservation and conservation of the Tijeras Arroyo.
   (C)   The Albuquerque/Bernalillo County Comprehensive Plan, the City of
Albuquerque Zoning Code, the Major Open Space Facility Plan, the Facility Plan
for Arroyos, and the East Gateway Sector Development Plan are incorporated
herein by reference and made part of the record for all purposes.
   (D)   The proposed plan supports the following applicable Goals and Policies
of the Rank I Comprehensive Plan:
      (1)   Open Space Network Goal and Policies. The request is consistent
with the Open Space Network Goal and furthers Policy II.B.1.a because the RMP
for the TABZ strengthens the City's commitment to acquire important open space
lands and waters in the Tijeras Arroyo conserve natural resources and
environmental features, provide opportunities outdoor education and recreation,
conserve archaeological resources, provide trail corridors and help protect the
public from flooding. It does this by stating the intent to acquire specific
parcels in the Bio-Zone by various methods, prioritizing those parcels, and by
providing policy objectives best management practices that will help accomplish
these purposes.
The request furthers Policy II.B.1.f because the RMP for the TABZ calls for the
closing of makeshift trails along the Arroyo and creating and managing formal,
sustainable trails that will protect natural features, views, drainage and
other functions, as well as link to other areas within the Open Space network.
      (2)   Rural Area Policies. The request is consistent with the Rural Area
Goal and furthers Policy II.B.3.c because implementation of RMP for the TABZ
policies -- particularly land acquisition for open space- will help to curb
inappropriate development in the floodplain and valley areas where flood
danger, high water table, and soils inhibit extensive urbanization.
      (3)   Developing and Established Urban Area Policies. The request is
consistent with the Developing and Established Urban Area Goal and furthers
Policy II.8.5.d because approval and implementation of the RMP for the TABZ
will help ensure that new development respects existing natural environmental
conditions and carrying capacities, scenic resources, and cultural and
recreational resources by listing and describing those conditions and resources
in detail and providing policies and best practices for managing them.
      (4)   Archaeological Resource Policies. The request is consistent with
the Archaeological Resource Goal and furthers Policies II.C.6.a, band c because
the Plan surveys and evaluates the significance of several archaeological and
paleontological sites and presents strategies for preserving and managing them
for research and education.
The request furthers Policy IIC.8.a because the RMP for the TABZ inventories
important visual and environmental resources unique to the Tijeras Arroyo
floodplain and notes their significance, facilitating their being taken account
development decisions.
      (5)   Water Management. Water Management furthers Policy ILD.2.b because
the RMP for the TABZ policies encourage the maximum absorption of through
arroyo (the Tijeras Arroyo) and conservation run-off within the context of
overall water resource management
      (6)   Education Policies. The request is consistent with the Education
Goal and furthers Policy IID.7.d because the RMP for the TABZ policies call for
interpretive signs and programs to integrate educational programs with the
natural and cultural environments.
   (E)   The proposed plan supports the following applicable goals and policies
of the following Rank II Area/Facility Plans:
      (1)   The Major Public Open Space (MPOS) Facility Plan. The request is
consistent with the Major Public Open Space Facility Plan Mission and furthers
Policy A.2.C because the MPOS Facility Plan specifically calls for a Resource
Management Plan to be developed for the Tijeras Arroyo, a directive fulfilled
by the TABZ. These plans protect vegetation, wildlife habitat, and
archaeological resources from damage while making major public open space
accessible to people.
      (2)   The Facility Plan for Arroyos. This request is consistent with the
Facility Plan for Arroyos Goal and furthers Policy 1 one of the main objectives
of the RMP for the TABZ is to acquire and incorporate into the City of
Albuquerque Open Space Network, as many parcels as possible that are owned
privately or by various agencies to maximize ecological protection and
facilitate management of the TABZ.
   (F)   This request is consistent with the Rank Ill East Gateway Sector
Development Plan, Goal 5, because the RMP for TABZ outlines strategies to
prioritize land acquisition by significance of resource value and development
pressure. The RMP for TABZ also recommends that the Open Space Division acquire
the arroyo channel in its entirety. This request furthers the Major Public
Space Recommendation the East Gateway Sector Development Plan.
   (G)   There were no adverse comments from the reviewing agencies. The
Hydrology Development Division commented that reserving floodplains for Open
Space will help the City improve their National Flood Insurance Program
Community Rating which may result in a greater discount on flood insurance
premiums for the citizens of Albuquerque.
   (H)   There were no adverse comments from the public. All affected
Neighborhood Associations, Homeowner Associations and Coalitions were notified
by certified mail and, all property owners within the Plan boundaries were
notified by mail. There is no known opposition to the Plan.
   (I)   The Resource Management Plan for the Tijeras Arroyo Biological Zone,
attached hereto and made a part hereof, is adopted as a Rank II Facility Plan
and regulatory guide to the implementation of the Rank I Albuquerque/Bernalillo
County Comprehensive Plan and applicable Rank II and Rank III Plans.
(R-2014-098, approved 11-17-2014; Res. 2017-102, approved 11-13-17)
Cross-reference:
   Formerly codified as §
1-11-14
ARTICLE 18: RANK 3 FRAMEWORK PLANS
   
1-18-1   Level A Community Framework Plan for Mesa Del Sol
   
1-18-2   Westland Framework Plan
§ 1-18-1 LEVEL A COMMUNITY FRAMEWORK PLAN FOR MESA DEL SOL.
   (A)   The Mesa del Sol Level A Community Framework Plan (attached hereto as
Exhibit A) is hereby approved and adopted.
   (B)   The findings of the Environmental Planning Commission (attached hereto
as Exhibit B) are accepted, and the conditions have been met.
   (C)   The Mesa del Sol Level A Development Agreement between Forest City
Covington NM, LLC, and the City of Albuquerque (attached hereto as Exhibit C)
is hereby approved.
   (D)   Amendments.
      (1)   Upon the consummation of the sale of Tract 8 (as described in this
resolution) from Mesa del Sol, LLC to the Pueblo of Isleta, and the release by
the Pueblo of Isleta of all obligations of the City of Albuquerque regarding
Tract 8 including those obligations in the Level A Community Master Plan, the
Level A Development Agreement, the Level B Master Plan and the Level B
Development Agreement, the Council approves the release of Tract 8 from the
Land Use Entitlements, including the Level A Community Master Plan, the Level A
Development Agreement, the Level B Master Plan and the Level B Development
Agreement.
(Res. 8-1997, approved 1-21-97; Am. Res. R-2006-005, approved 1-31-06; Res.
2017-102, approved 11-13-17)
Cross references:
   Formerly codified as §
1-11-9
   Mesa Del Sol Tax Increment Development Districts 1 through 5, see §
1-14-1
§ 1-18-2 WESTLAND FRAMEWORK PLAN.
   (A)   The application SPR-96-02, "Westland Framework Plan," located in the
extraterritorial jurisdiction of the City of Albuquerque, north of Interstate
25, south of the Petroglyph National Monument, west of Unser Boulevard and east
of a line one-quarter mile west of Paseo del Volcan, attached to Resolution No.
51-1998 and made a part hereof, is hereby adopted as the guiding document for
the development of land within the identified plan boundaries based on the
findings and subject to the conditions contained in the Environmental Planning
Commission's Official Notice of Decision dated May 16, 1997 but with the
following amendments to the conditions:
      (1)   Condition 8 shall be modified to restrict a third corridor (middle)
crossing of the Atrisco Terrace to utilities, drainage and trails; however,
roadway and other transportation facilities may be added to this corridor at a
future date if the City Council determines that they are required to serve the
area's transportation needs and the City Council expressly approves the
expansion of the corridor for transportation needs.
      (2)   Conditions 12 and 15 shall be modified to reflect that the
Framework Plan has not indicated scheduling and funding sources or a strategy
for funding of infrastructure, and Conditions 12 and 15 shall continue to be
required to be met prior to further approvals by the city.
      (3)   Condition 14 shall be modified to delete “preceding” and insert in
lieu thereof “proceeding.”
      (4)   Condition 5 shall be modified to delete the last sentence and
insert in lieu thereof: “Public acquisition is expected to proceed in
accordance with the 1/4 cent tax and priorities; however, the Master Plan shall
be amended to conform with the Comprehensive Plan if the area is removed from
the acquisition process.”
   (B)   The Westland Framework Plan is not, by this action, being adopted as a
city sector development plan.
   (C)   The Westland Framework Plan is amended to change to zoning designation
of the affected property from SU-2 for Town Center Village to SU-2/SU-1 for
Regional Sports Complex and Related Facilities for Parcels C-2-A, C-3-A, and C-
3-C, Westland North, and associated updates to maps, a table and text, and to
incorporate changes based on the conditions of approval.
(Res. 51-1998, approved 5-19-98, Res. 2016-007, approved 2-5-16; Res. 2017-102,
approved 11-13-17)
Cross-references:
   Formerly codified as §
1-11-12
CHAPTER 2: BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS
   Article
      
1.   GENERAL PROVISIONS
      
2.   ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT
      
3.   UTILITIES
      
4.   PUBLIC HEALTH AND WELFARE
      
5.   PLANNING AND ZONING
      
6.   HOUSING
      
7.   TRANSPORTATION
      
8.   ENVIRONMENT
      
9.   LAW ENFORCEMENT
      
10.   CULTURE AND ENTERTAINMENT
ARTICLE 1: GENERAL PROVISIONS
Section
   
2-1-1   Abolishing certain city-created commissions and committees
   
2-1-2   Internal Management Team
   
2-1-3   Financial Planning Board
   
2-1-4   Goals Commission
   
2-1-5   Animal Issues Advisory Board
   
2-1-6   Task Force to study Parks and Recreation needs
   
2-1-7   Charter Review Task Force
   
2-1-8   [Repealed]
   
2-1-9   International Coordinating Council
   
2-1-10   Joint City/County Unification Charter Study Committee
   
2-1-11   Capital Improvements Advisory Committee
   
2-1-12   Committee for guidance of Legal Department in the negotiation of
utility franchises
   
2-1-13   Indicators Progress Commission
   
2-1-14   Task Force on Governmental Efficiency and Results
   
2-1-15   Program and Budget Planning Task Force
   
2-1-16   Redistricting Committee
   
2-1-17   E-Government Task Force
   
2-1-18   Sexual Assault Task Force
   
2-1-19   ABQ Volunteers Advisory Board
   
2-1-20   Sexual Violence Advisory Council
   
2-1-21   Hazard Mitigation Plan
   
2-1-22   Growers' Market Study Group
   
2-1-23   Women's Pay Equity Task Force
§ 2-1-1 ABOLISHING CERTAIN CITY-CREATED COMMISSIONS AND COMMITTEES.
   The following committees and commissions previously established by the city
be and they are hereby abolished and deactivated:
   (A)   Joint City/County Metropolitan Airport Development Committee.
   (B)   Ad Hoc Committee on the Environment.
   (C)   Joint Traffic Safety Commission.
   (D)   Baseball Stadium Committee.
   (E)   Albuquerque Motion Picture Exhibitors Committee - Commission
Appointment January 11, 1966.
(Res. 182-1975, approved 9-30-75)
§ 2-1-2 INTERNAL MANAGEMENT TEAM.
   (A)   An Internal Management Team shall be established to oversee and
monitor the implementation process of the goals and objectives process pursuant
to Ordinance O-119, Enactment 48-1995, including:
      (1)   Applying resources needed to ensure completion and continuity of
the phases;
      (2)   Ensuring performance of city objectives and creating a framework to
measure and communicate progress;
      (3)   Ensure the development of outcome and output based on performance
measures related to the objectives; and
      (4)   Making recommendations for future objectives.
   (B)   The Internal Management Team shall consist of the following members:
      (1)   Chief Administrative Officer, Chair;
      (2)   Deputy Chief Administrative Officer;
      (3)   Director of the Office of Management and Budget;
      (4)   Director of the Office of Economic Development;
      (5)   Director of the Office of Management and Operations Improvement;
      (6)   Director of the Planning Department;
      (7)   Two at-large department directors appointed by the Chief
Administrative Officer on a rotating basis; and
      (8)   Director of City Council Services.
   (C)   A coordinator shall be assigned by the Chief Administrative Officer to
serve as external liaison between the Internal Management Team and community
entities regarding implementation of their respective roles.
   (D)   The initial vision statement for the city of Albuquerque is: “A
dynamic and diverse community celebrating its heritage, committed to sharing
power and opportunity and working in harmony to sustain our environment and
create economic vitality for this and future generations.”
   (E)   The O-119 Goals and Objectives two-year cycle shall begin in the
summer of 1996 with a progress report and holding of a civic forum.
(Res. 1-1996, approved 1-12-96)
§ 2-1-3 FINANCIAL PLANNING BOARD.
   (A)   A seven member citizens committee entitled the “Albuquerque Financial
Planning Board” is hereby created.
   (B)   The members of this Board shall serve six year terms except that three
initial members of the committee shall serve two year terms, and two initial
members of the Committee shall serve four year terms.
   (C)   The Council shall nominate for appointment by the Mayor four members
of the Board, two members for a two year term, one for a four year term, and
one for a six year term and the Mayor shall appoint three members of the Board,
one for a two year term, one for a four year term and one for a six year term.
   (D)   As terms of Board members expire subsequent committee members shall be
nominated by the Mayor or Council depending on the source of the original
nomination and shall be appointed by the Mayor for six year terms of office.
   (E)   Appointments to fill vacancies on the Board shall be made by the Mayor
or by nomination of the Council depending on the source of the original
appointment to serve out the unexpired term of the committee member leaving.
   (F)   The Board shall work with the administration and Council providing
staff assistance in the preparation and updating of a five year financial plan
for the city. This plan shall include all city receipts and disbursements,
including enterprise funds and trust and agency accounts.
   (G)   The Board shall recommend to the Mayor and the Council not later than
January 1 of each year the revised financial program for the city. However, the
first five year plan shall be presented to the Mayor and the Council not later
than February 1, 1982.
(Res. 241-1981, approved 12-1-81)
§ 2-1-4 GOALS COMMISSION.
   (A)   A Goals Commission is hereby established.
   (B)   Initially, the Commission shall be composed of 15 members from the
Goals Committee or from one of the regular task forces of the Goals Committee.
   (C)   The members and chairman of the Goals Commission shall be appointed by
the Mayor with the advice and consent of the Council as follows:
      (1)   At least one of the members shall reside in each of the Council
districts;
      (2)   Three of the members shall be appointed from a list submitted by
the Bernalillo County Commission;
      (3)   Three of the members shall be representative of local private and
public educational institutions;
      (4)   Of the original members, five shall have terms ending June 30,
1985; five shall have terms ending June 30, 1986, and five shall have terms
ending June 30, 1987, as determined by the Mayor. In addition, one each of the
original members appointed fulfilling the standards of divisions (C)(2) and (C)
(3) shall have terms ending June 30, 1985, one each shall have terms ending
June 30, 1986, and one each ending June 30, 1987. Thereafter, all members shall
be appointed to three-year terms.
   (D)   The following duties and responsibilities shall be delegated to the
Commission:
      (1)   The Commission shall act as a liaison to those entities designated
to implement the goals and objectives set forth in the Goals for Albuquerque
1983 - 1984, and shall act as a point of clarification on the written goals and
objectives as well as serving in the capacity of constructive advocate of the
changes recommended by the citizen participants in the goals process.
      (2)   The Commission shall comply with all applicable policies,
ordinances, resolutions and regulations of the city.
      (3)   The Commission shall cooperate with other city boards and
commissions.
(Res. 100-1984, approved 7-3-84; Am. Res. 155-1986, approved 10-27-86)
§ 2-1-5 ANIMAL ISSUES ADVISORY BOARD.
   (A)   Animal Issues Advisory Board.  
      (1)   There is hereby created the Animal Issues Advisory Board,
hereinafter referred to as the “Board” which will consist of 13 members. The
Board shall include nine at-large citizen representatives and one
representative or a designee from each of the following categories:
         (a)   A veterinarian;
         (b)   A humane association located within the city;
         (c)   An educational institution representative;
         (d)   A kennel club located within the city.
      (2)   The standard term of each member shall be three years.
      (3)   The Board shall operate under the guidance of Animal Control.
   (B)   Duties and powers. The Board shall promote and encourage private and
public programs to further develop public awareness of animal issues. In
carrying out its duties and powers, the Board shall:
      (1)   Serve as a public forum for discussion of animal issues, including
protection of citizens from injuries caused by animals and protection of
animals from citizen neglect and abuse.
      (2)   Recommend to the Mayor policies which relate to animal issues.
      (3)   Keep itself informed of the needs of the city's Environmental
Health Department Animal Control Division (“Animal Control”) and work with
Animal Control in formulating short-term and long-term goals.
      (4)   Identify appropriate public education issues and assist Animal
Control in educating the public through programs which promote responsible pet
ownership, including programs which provide information regarding appropriate
care, treatment, training and control of animals and limitation of unwanted
animal populations by spaying and neutering procedures.
      (5)   Assist Animal Control in disseminating educational materials
through the media, the educational system, veterinary clinics, pet shops, and
other appropriate locations.
      (6)   Conduct fund raising activities, with proceeds being utilized to
support Animal Control programs in need of additional funds.
   (C)   Membership and organization. The Mayor will seek recommendations from
the Albuquerque Veterinary Association, Albuquerque humane associations and
Albuquerque kennel clubs regarding appropriate appointments to the Board. An
official representative from the Albuquerque Animal Control Division, appointed
by the Manager of that Division, will be an ex officio member of the Board.
   (D)   Staff. Animal Control will provide staff services to assist the Board
in its educational activities.
   (E)   General provisions. This Board shall be subject to the provisions of
the Revised Ordinances of Albuquerque, New Mexico.
(Res. 111-1989, approved 7-27-89)
§ 2-1-6 TASK FORCE TO STUDY PARKS AND RECREATION NEEDS.
   (A)   An ad hoc task force on the Parks and Recreation System is established
for a period of one year from the date of its formulation. The task force shall
be comprised of 17 members appointed by the Mayor, with the advice and consent
of the Council, the appointments to be made in the following manner:
      (1)   The chairperson to be appointed after consultation with the Parks
and Recreation Advisory Board.
      (2)   Two members to be from nominations of the Albuquerque Public
Schools.
      (3)   Five members to be appointed at large.
      (4)   Nine members to be appointed to represent each of the nine Council
districts from nominations of the respective district Councilors.
   (B)   The task force shall, within one year, submit a report to the Parks
and Recreation Advisory Board on results of its study on parks and recreation
needs and priorities, to expedite funding for further development, operation
and maintenance of the parks and recreation system including possible
alternative modes to those currently used, and other recommendations on the
scope and use of the parks and recreation system which they deem desirable.
   (C)   The task force shall actively seek citizen input and shall hold
publicized hearings in each district in formulating its report. The task force
shall utilize all available information from appropriate city departments and
other agencies in acquiring pertinent background and support data.
   (D)   Staff assistance in recording activities of the task force and
preparation of status reports and final report shall be provided by the Parks
and Recreation Department. Professional staff assistance may be periodically
obtained with the approval of the Mayor from Parks and Recreation Department,
Planning Department or other city departments as need may arise.
   (E)   All meetings of the task force shall be publicly announced 72 hours in
advance and shall be open to the public.
(Res. 20-1975, approved 2-13-75)
§ 2-1-7 CHARTER REVIEW TASK FORCE.
   (A)   A seven-member City Charter Review Task Force shall be appointed by
the Mayor with the advice and consent of the Council to review and evaluate all
areas of the City Charter, including those sections which have been challenged
as well as the unchallenged sections. The Task Force shall be a blue ribbon
group, whose members are well respected in the community. Among the members
shall be citizens who are knowledgeable as to municipal government organization
in Albuquerque and/or in general. Membership shall include attorneys respected
in the area of municipal and constitutional law.
   (B)   The Task Force shall be governed by Chapter 2, Article 6, R.O.A. 1994,
except the term of appointment shall be six months, or until its final report
is presented.
   (C)   The charge of the Task Force, which shall be liberally construed,
shall be to examine any and all articles, sections, and provisions of the City
Charter for the purpose of recommending any amendments to the Charter deemed
appropriate.
   (D)   The Task Force shall present its recommendations to the Mayor and the
Council in the form of a final report.
   (E)   The Task Force shall hold one or more public hearings at which the
citizens of the city shall be encouraged to give their views on the Charter.
   (F)   The Office of the Mayor and the Council Services Department shall
cooperate in providing staff and financial support necessary to assist the Task
Force.
(Res. 47-1988, approved 3-30-88; Am. Res. 89-1998, approved 9-28-98)
§ 2-1-8 [REPEALED].
(Res. 45-1975, approved 3-11-75; repealed by Res. 97-1999, approved 10-7-99)
§ 2-1-9 INTERNATIONAL COORDINATING COUNCIL.
   (A)   The Intergovernmental Coordinating Council (the Council) shall be
established and consist of the following members: the Mayor of the City of
Albuquerque and the President of the Albuquerque City Council; the
Superintendent of the Albuquerque Public Schools (APS) and the President of the
APS School Board; the President of the University of New Mexico and the
President of the Board of Regents of the University of New Mexico; the Chairman
of the Bernalillo County Commission and the County Manager of Bernalillo
County; and the President of the Albuquerque Technical-Vocational Institute (T-
VI) and the Chairman of the Governing Board of Albuquerque T-VI. The members of
the Council shall meet on a quarterly basis, which shall be organized initially
by the Mayor of the City of Albuquerque. These meetings will provide an
opportunity to propose joint projects, consider the feasibility of previously
proposed projects, evaluate the effectiveness of on-going projects, and address
other topics of concern to the members.
   (B)   The staff shall be drawn from the different organizations
participating in the Council to work, on an ad hoc basis, on joint projects
agreed upon by members of the Council.
   (C)   A top executive aide of each member organization of the Council shall
be directly responsible to the Council members for carrying out projects. This
responsibility shall include organizing appropriate staff members, overseeing
the activities of these individuals, and insuring that their work produces
tangible results within a reasonable period of time. This aide shall be
appointed by the Council members from the respective organizations. The aides,
or their designees, shall carry out the above activities and meet on a monthly
basis or more frequently as appropriate.
   (D)   The Intergovernmental Coordinating Council shall act as a forum to:
      (1)   Increase communication and cooperation among the principal
educational and governmental organizations in the Albuquerque metropolitan
area;
      (2)   Identify initiatives with regard to joint governmental and
educational programs;
      (3)   Increase the operational efficiency of each of the Council
organizations by emphasizing joint programs and uses of facilities and,
thereby, obtain greater benefit from the taxpayer's money and reduce the need
for more taxation; and
      (4)   Insure that joint programs are implemented properly and monitor the
effectiveness of joint operations.
(Res. 96-1990, approved 6-26-90)
§ 2-1-10 JOINT CITY/COUNTY UNIFICATION CHARTER STUDY COMMITTEE.
   (A)   The Joint City/County Unification Charter Study Committee shall hold a
minimum of six public hearings, at least three in the city of Albuquerque and
three in the unincorporated area; the sole purpose of the public hearings shall
be ascertaining the major needs and concerns of city and county residents
before considering any specific action or making any final judgments. These
hearings shall be held at differing geographic locations around the community.
   (B)   The Joint City/County Unification Charter Study Committee shall
collect and catalogue information from other communities which have attempted
some form of unification or consolidation. If members of the Committee wish to
conduct visits to communities which have faced problems similar to those faced
by Albuquerque and Bernalillo County, such visits may occur at government
expense upon approval of funds for the travel by the City Council and/or County
Commission.
   (C)   Upon completing the initial hearings, the Joint City/County
Unification Charter Study Committee shall consider both the pros and cons of
the formation of a combined City/County metropolitan government. These
deliberations should include, but not be limited to the following:
      (1)   A sensitive exploration and cataloging of citizen concerns in the
areas of quality of life, zoning, land use, delivery of services taxation and
fiscal impacts of unification;
      (2)   A sensitive exploration and cataloging of city and county employee
concerns, such as salary and benefits, supervision policies, and issues
involving the transition to consolidated government; and
      (3)   A cataloging of all the various local governmental entities and
their functions which exist within or impact upon governmental functions of the
city of Albuquerque and Bernalillo County.
   (D)   In addition, the Joint City/County Unification Charter Study Committee
shall thoroughly explore and make recommendations on how a transition towards
unified metropolitan government might be made with minimum disruption to
citizens, employees and elected officials. The Committee's inquiry in this
regard should include, but not be limited to, consideration of the following:
      (1)   How unification can occur selectively and gradually;
      (2)   How a board or committee could coordinate and smooth the transition
process;
      (3)   What other regionalization efforts might be considered;
      (4)   What statutory changes might be necessary to effectuate a unified
metropolitan government, given the existence of various statutory mandated
offices within local governmental structure;
      (5)   Which governmental departments or services might receive first
priority in a possible unification; and
      (6)   Which functions of local government might best be left unchanged by
unification.
   (E)   The Joint City/County Unification Charter Study Committee shall
attempt to formulate a unification plan which allows for and encourages
diversity in lifestyles with particular attention to the possibility of
allowing different zoning service, and fee levels for different geographic
areas within the entire area to be served by the unified metropolitan
government. The Committee shall also examine unification options which provide
flexibility for services to be improved as the needs of incorporated and
unincorporated area citizens change and grow.
   (F)   The Joint City/County Unification Charter Study Committee shall draft
a charter for a combined City/County metropolitan government, considering the
input from citizens at the public hearings and the pros and cons identified in
the subsequent Committee deliberations. The proposed charter shall be delivered
to the Albuquerque City Council and the Bernalillo County Commission for
placement on the ballot along with the question of unification. The Committee
may include recommendations regarding whether to place the proposed charter and
question of unification on the ballot.
(Res. 89-1991, approved 6-13-91)
§ 2-1-11 CAPITAL IMPROVEMENTS ADVISORY COMMITTEE.
   (A)   A Capital Improvements Advisory Committee (Advisory Committee) is
hereby established, in conformance with the New Mexico Development Fees Act.
   (B)   The Advisory Committee shall advise and assist the municipality and
county in adopting land use assumptions, review the capital improvements plan
and file written comments, monitor and evaluate implementation of the capital
improvements plan, file annual reports with respect to the progress of the
capital improvements plan and report to the municipality and county any
perceived inequities in implementing the plan or imposing the impact fees, and
advise the municipality and county of the need to update or revise the land use
assumptions, capital improvements plan and impact fees.
   (C)   The Mayor and the Board of County Commissioners shall make available
to the Advisory Committee any existing professional reports requested by the
Advisory Committee that pertain to developing and implementing the capital
improvements plan.
   (D)   No members of the Advisory Committee shall be employees or officials
of a municipality or county or other governmental entity.
   (E)   Not less than 40% of the voting membership of the Advisory Committee
shall be representative of the real estate, development or building industries.
At least two of the voting members satisfying this requirement shall be
appointed by the Board of County Commissioners.
   (F)   (1)   After the requirement of division (E) has been met, the
remaining Advisory Committee membership shall be drawn from:
         (a)   Community representatives (such as neighborhood organizations);
and
         (b)   Professionals dealing with land use matters (such as
professional engineers, architects, landscape architects and land use
planners);
      (2)   Of the people appointed by the Mayor under the provisions of this
section:
         (a)   No more than one may receive the majority of his or her income
through the provision of services to people In the real estate, development and
building industries; and
         (b)   At least two shall be current or recent officers of neighborhood
associations.
   (G)   The Advisory Committee initially shall be comprised of ten voting
members. Of the ten voting members, six shall be appointed by the Mayor of the
city, with the advice and consent of the City Council, and four shall be
appointed by the Board of County Commissioners. The term of each member shall
be three years unless the appointment is to fill a vacancy. The initial terms
of the voting members shall be staggered so that at least one member from each
of the three above-mentioned groups (i.e. developers, community
representatives, professionals) is eligible for re-appointment or replacement
each year.
   (H)   The Advisory Committee shall include six non-voting members, from whom
a replacement to the voting membership of the Committee will be chosen in case
of vacancy. Of the six non-voting members, three shall be appointed by the
Mayor, with the advice and consent of the City Council, and three shall be
appointed by the Board of County Commissioners.
   (I)   The Advisory Committee shall elect a chairperson and adopt rules and
procedures in keeping with the ordinances governing public boards, commissions
and committees.
(Res. 69-1994, approved 8-9-94; Am. Res. 59-1995, approved 4-28-95)
§ 2-1-12 COMMITTEE FOR GUIDANCE OF LEGAL DEPARTMENT IN THE NEGOTIATION OF
UTILITY FRANCHISES.
   (A)   A committee shall be established to be responsible for the review,
assessment and guidance of the Legal Department in areas concerning the
negotiation of utility franchises.
   (B)   The committee shall consist of four members:
      (1)   The Chief Administrative Officer;
      (2)   The City Attorney;
      (3)   The Director of Council Services; and
      (4)   The Director of Public Works.
(Res. 13-1996, approved 1-30-96)
§ 2-1-13 INDICATORS PROGRESS COMMISSION.
   (A)   An Indicators Progress Commission is hereby established which shall be
composed of 12 members appointed by the Mayor with the advice and consent of
the City Council. Of the initial appointments, four members shall be appointed
for terms expiring at one year, four members for terms expiring at two years,
and four members for terms expiring at three years. Appointments after the
initial group will have terms of three years.
   (B)   The members should be representatives from a cross section of private
and public organizations representing community-based organizations, business
organizations, educational institutions, community service organizations and
others and that these representatives shall actively convey to their respective
organization members or constituents the work of the Commission. Every two
years, membership shall be reviewed by the Mayor and City Council with
organizations added and/or deleted as necessary to accommodate changing
conditions and needs.
   (C)   The Indicators Progress Commission shall be responsible for
coordinating the review of indicators of important community conditions
relating to the City's five-year goals and to the community's sustainability
characteristics in order to monitor results and evaluate the progress of our
community. It will:
      (1)   Develop and integrate factual information on community conditions
and trends including sustainability indicators, goal progress indicators,
census data, locally generated socioeconomic data, citizen satisfaction survey
information, and other data indicating the current situation and progress in
reaching the five-year City goals.
      (2)   Analyze this data on community conditions and recommend goals and
other means to respond to changing conditions and the community's long-term
sustainability.
   (D)   The Indicators Progress Commission shall incorporate indicators
developed by the Sustainable Community Committee with consideration of the
results of major consensus building events such as town halls and civic forums.
In reporting the status of progress toward goal and sustainability achievement,
the Indicators Progress Commission will recommend revisions to the five-year
City goals.
   (E)   The Indicators Progress Commission shall produce a goals progress
report every two years which communicates the results of the above activities
to the Mayor and City Council and to participants in a civic or goals forum
every four years. The Indicators Progress Commission will also report on
sustainability progress at least every two years.
   (F)   The Chief Administrative Officer will assign appropriate city staff to
support the activities and direction of the Indicators Progress Commission.
(Res. 104-1997, approved 11-10-97)
§ 2-1-14 TASK FORCE ON GOVERNMENTAL EFFICIENCY AND RESULTS.
   (A)   To institutionalize and strengthen city government's ongoing quest for
efficiency and cost-effectiveness, the City of Albuquerque shall develop a
policy framework for assessing and selecting the most appropriate means of
service delivery for any particular city-provided service, including but not
limited to in-house provision, intergovernmental agreements, volunteerism,
public-private competition, grants, concessions, and public-private
partnerships.
   (B)   To develop this policy framework, a Task Force on Governmental
Efficiency and Results (G.E.A.R.) shall hereby be established which shall be
composed of eleven members appointed by the Mayor with the advice and consent
of the City Council. The membership of the Task Force shall include one
representative from Office of the Mayor/CAO, the City Purchasing Officer, one
member of the City Council, one representative from the City Council staff, two
representatives from city departments, two representatives from city unions,
two representatives from the private sector, and one representative from the
non-profit sector.
   (C)   The Governmental Efficiency and Results Task Force shall be
responsible for developing recommendations for a city policy framework on
governmental efficiency and cost-effective delivery of services, including a
methodology for determining the most appropriate means for delivering a
specific service, and then reporting these recommendations to the Mayor and the
City Council. These recommendations shall address the following topics:
      (1)   A competition component shall be included in this policy framework
that seeks to engage city departments and employees in competition with private
contractors within a public bid process that will provide a mechanism for
determining who can best provide services to the City's customers;
      (2)   A strategic process shall be developed that gives policy makers
accurate information with which they can determine which service delivery
method or methods will yield the greatest benefits as measured against specific
goals and objectives for the particular function;
      (3)   The city's policy shall be designed so as to ensure an accurate and
fair assessment of various methods of delivering services, be it through city
departments or the private sector;
      (4)   Any city policy on service delivery methods shall ensure a level
playing field which will neither favor nor penalize any type of competitor
submitting proposals in the process, including city departments.
   (D)   The policy framework shall include a “Competitive Assessment” to
determine and improve, if necessary, the competitiveness of the in-house
service. This will be accomplished by comparing city operations to best
practices in the public and/or private sectors. The policy shall also provide
city employees with the opportunity to develop and implement readily achievable
efficiency and effectiveness improvements prior to any decision to pursue
competitive bid.
      (1)   The “Competitive Assessment” shall include but not be limited to:
         (a)   Customer analysis to identify the customers, their needs, and
their satisfaction with service;
         (b)   Evaluation of the missions and goals of a program to ensure that
they will be appropriate to a changing environment;
         (c)   Identification of actual costs for providing the service;
         (d)   Assessment of current performance measures on efficiency,
effectiveness, and customer satisfaction;
         (e)   Identification of areas for improvement and implementation of
improvements to become more competitive.
      (2)   A sound competitive service delivery model aims to produce the best
service at the lowest possible cost. A fair assessment of competitive proposals
for alternative service delivery requires accurate cost data for determining
whether city service costs are competitive with those in the marketplace. The
Competitive Assessment shall develop methodologies for identifying all current
costs of providing particular services. An “avoidable cost” methodology shall
be utilized to identify any costs which would remain even if the service were
to be provided by a private company, and therefore would not be included in any
cost proposal submitted by city departments.
      (3)   A process shall be developed for fairly assessing any service
delivery proposals submitted by a city department from the standpoint of
promised cost reductions and/or efficiency and productivity gains contained
therein.
      (4)   City policy shall require contractual mechanisms to ensure that
performance meets service standards.
   (E)   As a critical first step in establishing an adequate data bank for
such any competitive assessment, the work currently underway by the City of
Albuquerque to develop a comprehensive set of performance measures of the
city's service programs shall be completed, and in addition, performance
measures for contracted services shall be developed.
   (F)   The framework to foster greater governmental efficiency and cost-
effective delivery of services shall ensure the fair and respectful treatment
of employees by involving employees and unions throughout its development and
implementation. The policy framework shall reflect the commitment of the City
Council and the Mayor to employment stability for city employees affected by
the implementation of any competition process.
   (G)   The Governmental Efficiency and Results Task Force shall produce a
policy framework recommendations report no later than six months after the
appointment of its membership.
   (H)   The Chief Administrative Officer will assign appropriate city staffs
to support the activities and direction of the Governmental Efficiency and
Results Task Force.
   (I)   The City Council budget shall support any consulting services and/or
research functions up to an amount of $10,000 in support of this task force.
(Res. 48-1998, approved 5-5-98)
§ 2-1-15 PROGRAM AND BUDGET PLANNING TASK FORCE.
   (A)   The initial step toward considering program and multi-year budget
planning for Albuquerque is to form a Program and Budget Planning Task Force
composed of the Chief Administrative Officer, Deputy Chief Administrative
Officers, the city's Budget Officer, the CIP Official, the Finance and
Administrative Services Department Director, the Office of Management and
Operations Improvement Manager, and the City Council Services Director.
   (B)   This Program and Budget Planning Task Force shall confirm the
feasibility of converting to this new budget preparation methodology and
benchmark best practices in other cities using multi-year budgeting.
   (C)   The Program and Budget Planning Task Force shall develop an
implementation plan which shall include policy guidelines to convert to
biennial budgeting and shall submit them to the Mayor and City Council within
six months for consideration and appropriate action.
   (D)   Further, this Task Force shall also develop enabling legislation to
submit to the Mayor and City Council for consideration and appropriate action.
(Res. 78-1998, approved 8-17-98)
§ 2-1-16 REDISTRICTING COMMITTEE.
   (A)   A Redistricting Committee of consisting of nine members, one from each
Council District, is hereby created. Committee members shall be electors and
residents of the district represented. In addition, there shall be nine
alternate members of the Committee, one from each Council District, who are
electors and residents of the district represented. Each Councillor shall
appoint the Committee member and alternate from his or her district. Each
alternate may attend and participate in all meetings and functions of the
Committee, but may not vote on any question, except that at a meeting at which
a regular member is absent the alternate from the absented member's district
may vote.
   (B)   The members and alternate members of the Redistricting Committee
attached to Resolution No. 26-2001 as "Exhibit A" are hereby approved.
   (C)   The task of this Committee is to use the population data from the
official 2000 U. S. Census along with any other pertinent information to make a
report recommending changes in the Council District boundaries that the
Committee decides are necessary and or desirable, taking into account the
following considerations:
      (1)   The necessity to comply with constitutional principles governing
voting rights, population and other related factors;
      (2)   Minimization of changes in existing Council boundaries;
      (3)   The desirability of Council Districts that are relatively compact
with as few geometric extremes as possible; and
      (4)   Adherence to existing precinct boundary lines.
   (D)   The Committee shall be provided staff support from Council Services,
the City Attorney and the State of New Mexico's consultant on redistricting to
carry out the tasks outlined in this legislation.
   (E)   The Committee shall make every effort to send its final
recommendations to the Council by May 2001.
(Res. 26-2001, approved 2-16-01)
§ 2-1-17 E-GOVERNMENT TASK FORCE.
   (A)   The City's Chief Information Officer shall create a task force
comprised of staff from several departments to identify, define and document
the various elements and issues of e-commerce and e-government which may impact
the City of Albuquerque.
   (B)   The task force shall include members from the information services
division, the water customer service division, solid waste department, the
environmental health department, the police department, the traffic engineering
division, the treasury division, the purchasing office, the planning
department, City Council, and any other department that issues licenses and
permits.
   (C)   The task force shall look at areas of electronic City-related business
transactions, such as but not limited to obtaining City services, obtaining and
online payment of City permits and business licenses, online building permit
and plans checking, enrolling in City programs, and online payments of tickets,
fines and utility bills.
   (D)   The task force shall develop an Enterprise wide approach that includes
the following:
      (1)   Provides the foundation for integrated, cross-agency solutions.
      (2)   Presents a hardware-independent, non-proprietary solution designed
for maximum flexibility.
      (3)   Incorporates highly scalable and highly available architecture.
      (4)   Includes infrastructure components such as payment processing,
payment tracking, security, authentication, e-forms, business rules,
authorization and host integration.
      (5)   Developed on open standards for interoperability with other
platforms and applications.
      (6)   Exceeds requirements for users with visual impairment as
established by the ADA and Section 508 for accessibility.
      (7)   Integrates a common Internet architecture and common business logic
into all delivery channels. Internet, Interactive Voice Response (IVR) and
Wireless interfaces should be supported.
   (E)   The task force shall develop goals for online transactional services
and provide a Request for Proposal (RFP) to the Information Services Committee
by February 9, 2002 for approval.
   (F)   The task force shall work with the Purchasing Office to form a
selection committee to review the proposals.
(Res. 178-2001, approved 11-30-01)
§ 2-1-18 SEXUAL ASSUALT TASK FORCE.
   (A)   The Administration hereby creates a task force to develop and support
an effective, consistent and collaborative approach to the response and
reduction of adult and child sexual assault in the City of Albuquerque.
   (B)   The Mayor shall appoint, with advice and consent of the Council, a 16
member task force including representatives from local sexual assault
intervention and prevention agencies, criminal justice professionals, advocacy
groups and citizens.
   (C)   The City Council shall appoint one council staff member to serve on
the sexual assault task force.
   (D)   The task force shall develop a strategic plan to address and
formulate:
      (1)   Recommendations on how to reduce incidents of sexual assault;
      (2)   Recommendations on how to coordinate existing resources; including
specific proposals on how these entities may better cooperate;
      (3)   Recommendations for changes in policies and laws to reduce
incidents of sexual assault;
      (4)   Recommendations on the need for increased services and resources to
reduce incidents of sexual assault; and
      (5)   Other items deemed appropriate by the task force.
   (E)   The task force shall be appointed within one month after this
resolution is in effect.
   (F)   The task force shall report its findings to the City Council within
six months after this resolution is in effect.
(Res. 126-2003, approved 10-22-03)
§ 2-1-19 ABQ VOLUNTEERS ADVISORY BOARD.
   (A)   Creation of Board. A City of Albuquerque ABQ Volunteers Advisory Board
is created and shall be staffed by the Office of the Mayor.
   (B)   Purpose of Board. The sole purpose of the ABQ Volunteers Advisory
Board or "Board" will be to advise and support volunteer activities, as defined
by its mission statement. The Board will provide non-binding recommendations to
the Mayor's Office regarding its ongoing and potential activities, and
regarding its use of a City website that will be used as its primary tool for
promoting and connecting volunteers.
   (C)   Mission. To provide programs to mobilize support, connect volunteers
and assist organizations in building capacity to enhance the quality of life in
greater Albuquerque.
   (D)   Meetings. The Board's Meetings are subject to The Open Meetings Act,
Chapter 10, Article 15 NMSA 1978, as amended and supplemented from time, and
shall be open to the public.
   (E)   Requirements and Limitations. The Board shall be subject to, and shall
comply with the requirements of the City of Albuquerque Public Boards,
Commissions and Committees Ordinance, Chapter 2, Article 6, Part 1 ROA 1994
("Ordinance"), regarding qualifications, appointment and conduct of members of
the Board, except to the extent a specific provision of this Resolution
conflicts with the Ordinance, in which case the specific provision in this
Resolution shall control. However, the Board shall have no authority to make
city policy, and shall have no authority to make rules and regulations that are
binding on the City of Albuquerque or the people of the City of Albuquerque.
The Board may adopt rules and regulations pertaining to the operation of the
Board.
   (F)   Members. The Board shall consist of up to 16 members. Members shall be
appointed from the broadest possible base of the community at large, and to the
fullest extent possible, the Mayor will seek information from the volunteer
community regarding potential appointees.
   (G)   Terms of members. Members shall be appointed for three year terms. No
member shall serve more than two consecutive terms at a time. Members whose
terms expire may continue to serve until a successor member is appointed. In
such case when a new member is appointed, the term shall relate back to the
time of expiration of the previous term. Service for a partial term of greater
than two years constitutes a term for the purpose of determining the
consecutive number of terms permissible. The terms of the members of the Board
shall be staggered so that three members' terms shall expire each calendar
year.
   (H)   Removal. A member of the Board may be removed from office by a
majority vote of Board members for any one or more of the following reasons:
      (1)   The member has been absent from three consecutive meetings, unless
the absence was excused by the Chair or Vice Chair. For this purpose, being
absent is defined as not being in attendance for 75% or more of the duration of
each officially called meeting. Attendance by telephone is authorized and will
count toward quorum for voting purposes. Attendance and absences will be noted
in official minutes.
      (2)   The member has been absent without an approved absence from more
than 25% of the meetings during any twelve consecutive months.
      (3)   The member is incapacitated, neglectful of duty, or commits
malfeasance in office as determined by the Board and approved by the Mayor.
   (I)   Officers. The officers of the Board shall be the Chairperson and the
Vice-Chairperson.
   (J)   Current members. The current members of the Mayor's Office of
Volunteer Engagement (MOVE) Advisory Board shall continue to serve on the ABQ
Volunteers Advisory Board.
(R-2014-086, approved 10-22-2014)
§ 2-1-20   SEXUAL VIOLENCE ADVISORY COUNCIL
   (A)   That the Administration shall create an advisory council to continue
the work of the Sexual Assault Task Force to advise the administration and the
City Council on ways to reduce adult and child sexual assault in the City of
Albuquerque.
   (B)   That the Mayor appoint, with advice and consent of the Council, a nine
member advisory council including representatives from local sexual assault
intervention and prevention agencies, criminal justice professionals, advocacy
groups and citizens.
(R-2007-85, approved 8-17-07)
§ 2-1-21   HAZARD MITIGATION PLAN
   (A)   The Bernalillo County and City of Albuquerque Hazard Mitigation Plan,
attached hereto, is adopted.
   (B)   The Bernalillo County/City of Albuquerque Mitigation Planning Team or
its successor is the official body for hazard mitigation planning and related
activities throughout Bernalillo County.
   (C)   The City’s Office of Emergency Management shall be the City’s
representative to the Mitigation Planning Team and shall be responsible for
coordinating the related actions and programs of the City of Albuquerque
accordingly.
   (D)   No later than August 31 of each year, the City’s Office of Emergency
Management shall prepare and present an annual evaluation report to the City
Council and the Mitigation Planning Team which shall include an assessment of
progress made toward meeting the goals and objectives and implementing specific
actions identified in the Hazard Mitigation Plan. The report shall also include
targets for the following year, including recommendations for any appropriate
revisions to the Hazard Mitigation Plan.
(R-2007-91, approved 8-28-07)
§ 2-1-22 GROWERS' MARKET STUDY GROUP
   (A)   There is hereby created a "Growers' Market Study Group" whose purpose
is to study local ordinances and regulations as they apply to Growers' Markets
and suggest regulatory changes to improve and strengthen local markets.
   (B)   The Growers' Market Study Group shall meet during the second and third
quarters of FY/08, and make recommendations to the Mayor and City Council at
the beginning of the fourth quarter of FY/08, in advance of the growing season.
   (C)   The Growers' Market Study Group shall be appointed by the Council
President and shall consist of the following members:
      (1)   A representative of the Mid-Region Council of Governments who is
active in growers' market issues;
      (2)   A representative of local farmers who has experience with growers'
markets;
      (3)   A manager of a local growers' market;
      (4)   A representative of the New Mexico Farmers' Marketing Association;
      (5)   A representative of a local neighborhood association, selected by
the Office of Neighborhood Coordination;
   (D)   The Growers' Market Study Group shall be staffed by Council Services
who shall work in coordination with the Administration and include
representatives of the Environmental Health Department, the Parks Department,
the Planning Department, and the Fire Department in these study group
discussions.
§ 2-1-23 WOMEN'S PAY EQUITY TASK FORCE.
   (A)   The Women's Pay Equity Task Force shall be established to meet, hold
public hearings and make recommendations to the Mayor and City Council no later
than March 31, 2014.
   (B)   The Women's Pay Equity Task Force shall be composed of five members:
      (1)   Three members appointed by the Mayor;
      (2)   Two members appointed by the President of the Council.
   (C)   All members should bring expertise and insight on both Women's Pay
Equity issues and successful compliance implementation processes.
   (D)   Upon completion of the Pay Equity study by the Task Force, the report
should:
      (1)   Indentify areas and industries failing to comply with this law;
      (2)   Indentify why compliance is problematic;
      (3)   Indentify policies, procedures and methods to shrink the gap in the
pay equity of women to men; and
      (4)   Indentify current pay equity benchmarks and pursue opportunities to
ensure those pay equity benchmarks are successful.
(R-2013-123, approved 11-22-2013)
ARTICLE 2: ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT
Section
   
2-2-1   Greater Albuquerque Economic Action Council
   
2-2-2   Construction Industry Advisory Committee
   
2-2-3   Small Business Task Force
   
2-2-4   Convention and Visitors Bureau
   
2-2-5   Multi-year Forecasting Advisory Committee
Cross-reference:
   
Council recommendations; economic development, see Ch. 6, Art. 6
§ 2-2-1 GREATER ALBUQUERQUE ECONOMIC ACTION COUNCIL.
   (A)   The Greater Albuquerque Economic Action Council (hereafter called the
“Action Council”) is established.
      (1)   The Mayor or a member of his or her office; the President of the
Albuquerque City Council; the Chairman of the Bernalillo County Commission; the
President of Albuquerque Technical-Vocational Institute, the President of the
University of New Mexico, the Superintendent of the Albuquerque Public Schools;
the Chairman of the All Indian Pueblo Council; and the volunteer presidents or
chairmen of Albuquerque Economic Development, Inc., Albuquerque Convention and
Visitors Bureau, the Albuquerque Hispano Chamber of Commerce, the Economic
Forum, the Greater Albuquerque Chamber of Commerce, two neighborhood
associations, the New Mexico Federation of Labor-AFL-CIO, and a member of the
board of the New Mexico Association of Commerce and Industry who resides in the
city shall constitute the Action Council.
      (2)   The Action Council may form working subgroups as needed.
      (3)   Where a specific position is not specified, representatives of the
named organizations shall be suggested for appointment by those organizations
to the Mayor. Appointment of members of the Action Council who do not
automatically become members by virtue of their position shall be submitted by
the Mayor to the City Council for advice and consent. Neighborhood association
representatives also shall be appointed by the Mayor with the advice and
consent of the City Council.
      (4)   Membership on the Action Council is conditional on keeping in
confidence information on specific business relocations until the information
is made public by that business.
   (B)   The Action Council is charged with addressing the oversight,
coordination and implementation of the following components of economic
development:
      (1)   Expansion of the manufacturing and technical services sectors of
the local economy;
      (2)   Recruitment of new businesses to the Albuquerque area;
      (3)   Retention and expansion of existing businesses and industry in the
Albuquerque area;
      (4)   Convention and tourism promotion;
      (5)   Education and employee and management training;
      (6)   Technology transfer from federal research laboratories to local
businesses;
      (7)   Neighborhood-based economic development;
      (8)   Business financing;
      (9)   Border and international business and trade opportunities;
      (10)   Entrepreneurial activity including business start-up;
      (11)   Small business expansion; and
      (12)   Development of quality job opportunities for Albuquerque
residents.
   (C)   The Action Council be charged with the oversight, coordination add
communication of a process that:
      (1)   Delineates the duties and responsibilities of public and private
sector organizations involved in economic development;
      (2)   Establishes an economic development goals-setting process involving
the city, other affiliated public agencies and private economic development
organizations;
      (3)   Establishes a process for implementing economic development goals;
      (4)   Establishes a process for measuring and reporting progress toward
meeting economic development goals; and
      (5)   Keeps city elected officials fully informed of and involved in
economic development programs and activities in the public and private sectors.
   (D)   The Action Council is charged with working with the Office of
Community Economic Development of the city in the development of a strategic
planning process for the city's Economic Development Target Area, which is an
area of economic distress, chronic high unemployment and low per capita income.
The Office of Community Economic Development will report progress on the
strategic planning process at appropriate intervals to the Action Council.
   (E)   The Mayor shall form a staff economic development policy group which
shall consist of representatives of the following city departments: Planning,
Community Services, Public Works, Mayor/CAO, and Council Services. The economic
development policy group shall work closely with the Action Council in the
formulation of the economic development strategy for the city government. The
Action Council shall receive a draft of the city government's strategy plan and
be asked to review the draft and provide written comments and recommendations
concerning it. The policy group shall make a positive effort to incorporate the
comments and recommendations from the Action Council in the city government's
strategy plan. Such city strategy plan shall not take effect until adopted by
the City Council.
   (F)   The Action Council is charged with developing and implementing a
process by which economic development opportunities and obstacles are addressed
in a coordinated manner by the private and public sector organizations of
jurisdiction.
      (1)   The members of the Action Council will determine what action is
necessary to address a specific economic development opportunity or obstacle
and assign staff from one or more of the organizations represented on the
Action Council with the consent of those organizations.
      (2)   The members of the Action Council will assign staff from one or
more of the organizations represented on the Action Council, with the consent
of those organizations, to establish and maintain regular contact with public
and private organizations involved in economic development for the purpose of
gaining familiarity with economic development programs and activities underway
in the public and private sector, where appropriate inventorying and evaluating
such activities and programs, fostering communication among organizations with
economic development responsibilities and identifying economic development
opportunities and obstacles for appropriate follow-up action.
      (3)   One economic development professional in the employ of the city
shall be assigned to work with the Action Council.
   (G)   In order to carry out the functions specified in this legislation, a
planner position with emphasis on economic development is created in the
Planning Program of the Planning Department. The amount of $40,400 is
appropriated from the Operating Fund Reserve of the General Fund to the
Planning Program to fund this new position.
(Res. 117-1992, approved 8-4-92; Am. Res. 156-1992, approved 10-23-92)
§ 2-2-2 CONSTRUCTION INDUSTRY ADVISORY COMMITTEE.
   (A)   The Mayor shall cause a study to be conducted of building, plan
checking and inspection services provided by those city departments having
jurisdiction over these services, and of the allocation of the cost of such
services.
      (1)   The study shall analyze:
         (a)   Current building and inspection productivity and possible
productivity improvements, such as a single inspector inspecting multiple
functions (i.e. - structural, gas, plumbing).
         (b)   Allocation of the costs of building and inspection services.
         (c)   Relationship between the Building and Inspection Division and
other departments, including Public Works, insofar as building, plan checking
and inspection procedures are concerned.
         (d)   Alternative permit fee procedures, such as a single permit per
structure or an escrow account for any permit revenues in excess of building
and inspection service costs in a given fiscal year.
         (e)   Adjustment of building and inspection service charges.
         (f)   Other pertinent matters.
      (2)   For purposes of the study, accurate data on building and inspection
operations shall be kept, and if possible, means of increasing productivity
shall be tested. The Mayor shall consult with the construction industries about
operational improvements and matters covered by the studies.
   (B)   The Mayor, with the advice and consent of the Council, shall appoint a
permanent Construction Industry Advisory Committee. The Advisory Committee
shall not exceed 12 members and shall consist of representatives of the
construction industry and design professions. The committee shall make
recommendations to the Mayor about the study of building, plan checking and
inspection services which is called for in this section and shall oversee the
provisions of such services on a continuing basis and periodically shall make
recommendations to the Mayor on improvements in service delivery and
adjustments to the fees charged for services.
   (C)   The study shall include recommendations about productivity
improvements, allocation of building and inspection service costs and
adjustments of building and inspection service charges. The study and the
recommendations for productivity improvements shall be completed by December 1,
1978, and shall be transmitted to the Council and other interested parties for
their review by that date. The analysis and recommendations regarding
alternative permit fee procedures and adjustment of service charges shall be
completed and transmitted to the Council within six months after initiation of
the centralized building plan checking/permit issuance process, but no later
than March 15, 1979.
(Res. 175-1977, approved 9-22-77; Am. Res. 188-1978, approved 9-1-78)
§ 2-2-3 SMALL BUSINESS TASK FORCE.
   (A)   A task force of two councilors, two city staff and four citizens with
extensive business experience to be called the Small Business Advisory
Committee is hereby formed.
   (B)   The city staff and citizens Task Force members shall be nominated by
the Mayor and confirmed by the Council. The Council shall dominate and confirm
its own members.
   (C)   The Council Small Business Task Force shall meet as often as it deems
necessary to review all aspects of city government to determine those programs
and services which may be provided at less cost or more efficiently by private
enterprise.
   (D)   The Council Small Business Task Force shall report to the Council and
the Mayor those changes in city procurement of programs and services which
might result in more efficient service and cost savings to the taxpayer.
   (E)   The Council Small Business Task Force shall continue for a period of
one year from the date of confirmation of its members and may be continued by
subsequent council resolution.
(Res. 71-1981, approved 4-1-81)
§ 2-2-4 CONVENTION AND VISITORS BUREAU.
   (A)   The establishment of an independent Albuquerque Convention and
Visitors Bureau is hereby supported.
   (B)   The Council recommends that the Board of Directors of an independent
Albuquerque Convention and Visitors Bureau be representatives of the lodging
industry, the hospitality industry and the general business community, and that
the Council further recommends that seats be reserved on the Board for
representatives from the Greater Albuquerque Chamber of Commerce and
Albuquerque Hispano Chamber of Commerce in order to maintain channels of
communication and cooperation.
   (C)   The Council recommends that the Board of Directors of an independent
Albuquerque convention and visitors bureau be solely responsible for the
policy, direction and personnel of that body.
   (D)   The policy of the city is to contract with an independent Albuquerque
Convention and Visitors Bureau for the convention and tourist promotion
services that are funded by the city.
   (E)   The Greater Albuquerque Chamber of Commerce is urged to cooperate
fully in transitioning the existing Albuquerque Convention and Visitors Bureau
into an independent organization, including transfer of personnel, salaries,
employee fringe benefits, files and the temporary provision of office space.
(Res. 253-1980, approved 11-20-80)
§ 2-2-5 MULTI-YEAR FORECASTING ADVISORY COMMITTEE.
   (A)   A Multi-year Forecasting Advisory Committee (Committee) shall be
created with seven members. The Committee shall include the City Economist and
the city Budget Officer from the Department of Finance and Management, one
representative from the city other than employees of the Department of Finance
and Management, one staff member of the Office of Council Services, one person
from the University of New Mexico and two representatives of private business
or other governmental agencies. All members of the Committee should be
knowledgeable in forecasting governmental revenues and expenditures. The
Council staff representative shall be recommended by the President of the
Council and the Mayor shall appoint the members of the Committee with the
consent of the Council.
      (1)   The Committee shall meet at least once prior to the finalization of
each forecast and shall be given adequate opportunity to understand the
assumptions of the forecasts and make suggestions for modifications and
improvements.
      (2)   The first priority of the Committee is to advise the Mayor and the
Council on multi-year forecasting for the General Fund and related funds. The
broader objective of the Committee is to evaluate and make recommendations on
long-range forecasting for all major expenditure areas. The intent being to
improve the usefulness, credibility and accuracy of forecasting as a planning
tool.
      (3)   A thorough explanation of the gross receipts tax revenue projection
approach including: the factors used to predict the tax revenues, the
mathematical relationship between changes in these factors and the tax
revenues, predictions for future values of these factors, and explanations of
how these predictions were determined shall be provided to the Committee in
written form as part of each forecast.
      (4)   The Committee, in compliance with the Revised Ordinances of the
City of Albuquerque shall at least annually submit a written report of its
activities and any recommendations to the Mayor and the Council.
      (5)   The Department of Finance and Management shall provide staff
support for the Committee.
   (B)   A multi-year forecast shall be provided to the City Council. The
forecast shall include a detailed five-year estimate of the operating needs and
revenues of the General Fund and funds which are dependent on the General Fund.
The five-years will include an estimate of the current year.
      (1)   The forecast for each fund shall include the following:
         (a)   Operating cost estimates of capital projects expected to come on
line within the time frame of the forecast.
         (b)   Inflation factors.
         (c)   Optimistic, pessimistic and control scenarios with regard to the
revenue forecasts.
         (d)   Updated fund balances.
         (e)   Growth factors.
         (f)   Estimates of reversions, reappropriated encumbrances and
reserves.
         (g)   Recurring and non-recurring revenues and expenditures.
         (h)   Comparison of forecasted versus actual revenues by revenue
source and forecasted expenditures versus actual expenditures over the past
five years.
         (i)   The history of actual expenditures and revenues over the past
three years.
      (2)   The multi-year forecast shall be presented to the Council in
December of each year as part of the series of pre-budget meetings required by
the Administration Ordinance. In addition, the forecast shall be forwarded to
the Council along with the Mayor's Budget Proposal on April 1 of each year. The
December presentation shall include final year end actual expenditures and
revenues from the previous fiscal year. The April forecast shall include
updated current year estimates and expenditures and revenues as reflected in
the Mayor's Proposed Budget. The forecast shall be run a third time at the
discretion of the Director of the Finance and Management Department, after the
adoption of the annual budget if in the opinion of the Director there have been
significant changes compared to the Mayor's Proposed Budget.
(Res. 140-1990, approved 10-25-90)
ARTICLE 3: UTILITIES
Section
General Provisions
   
2-3-1   Office of Utilities Management
   
2-3-2   Water Resources Planning Customers Advisory Committee
   
2-3-3   Utility Oversight Committee
   
2-3-4   Albuquerque Restructuring Act Advisory Panel
Recycling
   
2-3-10   Office of Recycling
   
2-3-11   Employee Recycling Committee
Cross-reference:
   
Utilities; policies and procedures, see Ch. 3, Art. 5
   
Utilities; programs and plans, see Ch. 4, Art. 3
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 2-3-1 OFFICE OF UTILITIES MANAGEMENT.
   (A)   An Office of Utilities Management shall be established from all
existing city staff whose primary duties and tasks involve the control and
management of electricity, telephones, natural gas, utility legal matters,
water consumption, and cable television, and who regularly communicate with the
utility companies/operations.
   (B)   The Office of Utilities Management shall report directly to the Chief
Administrative Officer.
   (C)   The Office of Utilities Management shall be composed of all existing
city staff whose primary duties and tasks involve the control and management of
electricity, telephones, natural gas, utility legal matters, water consumption,
and cable television, and who regularly communicate with the utility companies
and/or their operations.
   (D)   The Office of Utilities Management shall review requests of any City
Council mandated task force assembled for the purpose of studying policies
involving utilities, shall provide research, technical analysis, and other
staffing needs upon request, and shall share the same objectives and goals.
   (E)   The city franchise issue shall address, at a minimum, generalized
negotiation and renegotiation strategies, regular utility auditing provisions
and potential areas for municipal regulation.
   (F)   The Office of Utilities Management shall commence operation no later
than March 30, 1989.
(Res. 22-1989, approved 2-6-89)
§ 2-3-2 WATER RESOURCES PLANNING CUSTOMERS ADVISORY COMMITTEE.
   (A)   A twelve member Water Resources Planning Customer's Advisory Committee
shall be established. Members shall be representative of a broad range of
interests and of the geographical area served by the city.
   (B)   The Customer's Advisory Committee shall be comprised of one
representative from each of the following organizations: the Albuquerque
Economic Forum, the Greater Albuquerque Chamber of Commerce, The Coalition of
Neighborhoods, the Albuquerque Hispano Chamber of Commerce, the League of Women
Voters, the Sierra Club and Shared Vision. Additionally, the Committee shall
include two representatives from the League of Neighborhoods, one from each
side of the Rio Grande, two members at-large to represent the interests of the
general public and one member to represent the interests of the unincorporated
portion of Bernalillo County. Each member shall be a residential customer of
the City of Albuquerque municipal water system. The Customer's Advisory
Committee should be represented by at least one member of each City Council
District..
   (C)   The members of the Customer's Advisory Committee herein shall be
appointed by the Mayor with advice and consent of the Council, and shall be
governed according to the Public Boards, Commissions and Committees Ordinance
Section 2-6-1-1 et seq. RO 1994.
   (D)   All appointments shall be for terms of three years unless the
appointment is to fill a vacancy; provided that the initial terms of newly
established members shall be staggered and shall be for either one, two, or
three years.
   (E)   The Committee chair shall be selected by and from the Committee
membership.
   (F)   The Committee is authorized to assist in the implementation of the
Albuquerque Water Resources Management Strategy by providing advice from the
perspective of municipal water system customers to the Public Works
Department's water resources strategy implementation team and to the Mayor and
City Council. The Committee will meet as often as it deems necessary in order
to fulfill its charge to assist with implementation of the strategy.
   (G)   Staff and consultants will keep the committee informed of the status
of the implementation process and upcoming potentially controversial issues,
and will provide information requested or needed by the Committee to understand
the facts and issues related to implementation.
   (H)   Active participation by the Committee members is important to the
eventual successful implementation of the water supply strategy and is a
condition of continued membership on the Committee.
   (I)   The Committee will assist and advise staff in addressing any issues
related to implementation of the Albuquerque Water Resources Management
Strategy, including but not limited to needed additional data and analyses,
implications for public and customer acceptability, and effective ways of
educating the public.
   (J)   The Committee will report their activities and project progress to the
Administration and the City Council semi-annually.
(Res. 36-1996, approved 3-28-96; Am. Res. 74-1996, approved 7-3-96; Am. Res. 2-
1998, approved 1-6-98)
§ 2-3-3 UTILITY OVERSIGHT COMMITTEE.
   (A)   A city Utility Oversight Committee is created; it shall consist of
seven members, all appointed ex-officio: two members of the Council, appointed
by the Council President; the Chief Administrative Officer or his designee; and
the directors of the following departments or their designees: Legal
(Chairperson), Finance and Management, General Services, and Public Works.
   (B)   Administrative and preliminary policy analyses as to the city's
utility representation function will be governed by the utility oversight
Committee except as to PNM's restructuring and the electric utility franchise.
      (1)   In making utility policy recommendations to the Council, the
Committee shall consider financial impact on the city government, effect on the
long-term economic well-being of the community and its residents, and the
immediate economic effect on the residents of the city.
      (2)   No decisions of the Utility Oversight Committee shall set city
policy on utilities; policy positions of the city shall be set by resolution of
the Council.
   (C)   The city's positions in the utility representation function regarding
the New Mexico Public Service Commission Case No. 2146 (PNM's proposed
restructuring plan) and the electric franchise are not within the purview of
the Utility Oversight Committee but are policy matters and shall be governed by
actions of the City Council.
(Res. 71-1988, approved 5-3-88)
§ 2-3-4 ALBUQUERQUE RESTRUCTURING ACT ADVISORY PANEL.
   (A)   There is hereby established a City of Albuquerque Restructuring Act
Advisory Panel ("ARAAP") to investigate load aggregation and other
opportunities for residential and small business consumers in conjunction with
the City of Albuquerque.
   (B)   The ARAAP shall be composed of no more than eight members to include
the Chief Administrative Officer of the City, the Director of Council Services,
a City employee involved in the procurement of utility services, one
representative from the transmission and distribution company serving the City
of Albuquerque, two representatives from the residential community and two
representatives from the small business community. The City Legal Department
and Council Services shall provide staff support to the ARAAP.
   (C)   The ARAAP is charged with conducting open meetings, including
presentations from interested parties, to:
      (1)   Investigate local government aggregation opportunities in
conjunction with residential and small business consumer interests, as may be
contemplated by the Restructuring Act;
      (2)   Investigate other local government opportunities in conjunction
with residential and small business consumer interests, as may be contemplated
by the Restructuring Act;
      (3)   Investigate what functions, i.e. generation services, ancillary
services, facilitator, educator, etc., the City of Albuquerque might best
perform;
      (4)   Investigate limitations on the City's ability to act as may be
contemplated in divisions (C)(1) through (3) above;
      (5)   Recommend to the City Council any proposed course of action; and
      (6)   Serve as a liaison with the New Mexico Public Regulation
Commission.
   (D)   The ARAAP shall submit its written findings and recommendations to the
City Council no later than August 1, 2000.
(Res. 1-2000, approved 1-13-00)
RECYCLING
§ 2-3-10 OFFICE OF RECYCLING.
   (A)   An Office of Recycling is hereby established as an integral function
of the Solid Waste Department.
   (B)   The Office of Recycling will endeavor to accomplish the following
objectives:
      (1)   Encourage the participation by the entire community in recycling
efforts;
      (2)   Develop and implement a detailed plan for city government recycling
of its own waste materials as a way to generate revenues to pay for the Office
of Recycling and as an example and model to other governmental entities and
private organizations;
      (3)   Develop and implement a curbside recycling program to be
implemented in conjunction with improved collection technologies;
      (4)   Pursue opportunities for grants and donations from state, federal
and private sources in order to promote and support the objectives of the
Office;
      (5)   Coordinate with other communities in New Mexico to promote
recycling efforts;
      (6)   Coordinate planning and programs with the private recycling
industry, non-profit organizations, neighborhood groups and other concerned
groups and individuals;
      (7)   Develop legislative positions for city consideration on recycling
issues;
      (8)   Promote economic opportunities through recycling resulting in
additional revenues for the city and non-profit groups and employment
opportunities for residents of Albuquerque.
   (C)   The Office of Recycling will prepare a detailed plan for the
accomplishment of these objectives and will formally submit such plan to the
Mayor and the City Council not later than April 1, 1989.
(Res. 172-1988, approved 10-28-88)
Cross-reference:
   
Employee Recycling Committee, see § 2-3-11
   
Recycling and long-term solid waste plan, see § 3-5-60
   
Solid waste management, recycling, and waste reduction plan,see § 3-5-61
   
Recycling educational program, see § 4-3-31
   
Residential curbside recycling program, see § 4-3-32
§ 2-3-11 EMPLOYEE RECYCLING COMMITTEE.
   (A)   An Employee Recycling Committee shall be established to design and
implement a workable waste management plan for city government. The Mayor shall
appoint representatives to the Committee from each department based solely on
knowledge of recycling and enthusiasm rather than job classification. The Solid
Waste Management Department, the Purchasing Division of the Department of
Finance, and the Environmental Health Department shall be instructed by the
Mayor to coordinate the appropriate staffing needs of the Committee.
   (B)   The Employee Recycling Committee shall develop specific waste
management plans for each city facility and/or separate office locations within
the city government complex, and also undertake the following activities:
      (1)   Establish a paper recycling program for each city facility to be
developed and implemented no later than January 1, 1993.
      (2)   Review the current purchasing ordinance and procurement guidelines
for specialty paper and other waste-generating supplies utilized by each
department, develop a plan for minimizing waste generation, and promote the use
of recycled and environmentally sound products. Any necessary revisions to the
purchasing ordinance and/or procurement guidelines be completed no later than
January 1, 1993.
      (3)   Review all cleaning and sanitary products currently utilized by all
departments to determine whether they are environmentally safe and make
recommendations about product substitutes or alternatives. Reported suggestions
shall be submitted no later than January 1, 1993.
      (4)   Review the city's discard and surplus property policy to encourage
use and reuse of discards within city government, and to establish a mechanism
for making these items available for a nominal fee to non-profit organizations
within the community.
      (5)   Solicit suggestions and recommendations from city employees on
waste reduction possibilities, and consider establishing an incentive program
for “waste busters” to encourage employees to actively pursue recycling and
waste reduction opportunities which result in cost-savings to the city.
      (6)   Address the issue of waste reduction comprehensively, including
such issues as increasing the city's use of electronic mail and phone mail vs.
paper messages; use of duplex copiers; reduction in supply budgets to encourage
conservation efforts; and any other creative and innovative ways to reduce the
waste stream and city supply expenditures.
   (C)   The Employee Recycling Committee shall present an interim report to
the Council by November 15, 1992, that it be given an ongoing function in City
government, that the members be appointed to staggered terms as deemed
appropriate by the Mayor, and that semi-annual status reports be presented to
the Mayor and City Council about the employee's progress in departmental waste
reduction, reuse, and recycling programs.
(Res. 82-1992, approved 6-9-92)
Cross-reference:
   
Office of Recycling Committee, see § 2-3-10
   
Recycling and long-term solid waste plan, see § 3-5-60
   
Solid waste management, recycling, and waste reduction plan, see § 3-5-61
   
Recycling educational program, see § 4-3-31
   
Residential curbside recycling program, see § 4-3-32
ARTICLE 4: PUBLIC HEALTH AND WELFARE
Section
   
2-4-1   Office of Substance Abuse Coordination
   
2-4-2   Office of Violence Against Women
   
2-4-3   Commission on Adult Literacy
   
2-4-4   Veterans Affairs Advisory Board
   
2-4-5   Advisory Committee on the Homeless
   
2-4-6   Joint Advisory Commission on Persons with Disabilities
   
2-4-7   Alcohol Abuse Task Force
Cross-reference:
   
Public Health; policies and procedures, see Ch. 3, Art. 10
   
Social Services, see Ch. 4, Art. 5
§ 2-4-1 OFFICE OF SUBSTANCE ABUSE COORDINATION.
   (A)   A permanent Office of Substance Abuse Coordination shall be
established to plan and implement a comprehensive, city-wide drug-free program
with particular focus and attention on neighborhoods, schools, families,
businesses, and other private sector parties with the following goals.
      (1)   To develop a comprehensive plan for the prevention and treatment of
substance abuse which is focused on youth and parents by making use of the
services of existing organizations but identifying areas where alternative
programs need to be developed and existing programs strengthened.
      (2)   To implement a formalized method of information collection on
movement of illicit drugs and alcohol which has the goal to cause a major
reduction in the use and demand of alcohol and illicit drugs.
      (3)   To coordinate a comprehensive city-wide drug enforcement network by
July 1991 which will assist local law enforcement agencies in their efforts to
increase the rate of detection, seizure, arrest and prosecution in Albuquerque.
      (4)   To create better cooperation between our judicial system, police
force and neighborhoods to eradicate drug sales from our neighborhoods by
providing a forum to receive information and assist in the resolution of these
problems.
      (5)   To recommend appropriate legislation be considered by the City
Council and state legislature.
      (6)   To create an ongoing advisory council composed of representatives
of both the public and private sector, to include but not be limited to the
Albuquerque Police Department, Albuquerque Public Schools, Bernalillo County
Sheriff's Department, the District Attorney's Office, private non-profit
organizations focused on substance abuse issues, treatment facilities, the
Economic Forum, New Mexico Hospital Association, University of New Mexico,
religious organizations, other adjacent communities and governments in the
metropolitan area and others as deemed necessary.
      (7)   To initiate and strengthen policies which promote a drug-free work
environment in city government.
   (B)   The duties of the Substance Abuse Coordinator shall include, but not
be limited to the following:
      (1)   To focus, integrate and accommodate the appropriate efforts of both
the private and public sector against substance abuse at the federal, state,
and local levels.
      (2)   To initiate and strengthen programs that emphasize prevention,
intervention, education and treatment of substance abuse.
      (3)   To identify additional enforcement methods, such as the use of
civilian neighborhood watch programs to augment regular police patrols, mobile
police substations, special code enforcement teams, investigation of tougher
penalties around a school's grounds and loading zones, the feasibility of
creating “Drug-Free Zones” in designated areas, and how to increase special law
enforcement units such as drug and gang control units.
      (4)   To coordinate community-wide prevention methods, such as extended
latchkey programs, the encouraged use of crimes stoppers to report suspicious
activities and drug related matters, place a broader emphasis on the Drug
Awareness Resistance Education (DARE) program, and development of a proper
forum to receive public input on plans for specific areas.
      (5)   To devise drug-free education plans for community businesses,
organizations, and students that provide information on the physical,
psychological, and legal implications of drug use, as well as observable
indications of illicit drug activity and make these programs available to the
community as needed.
      (6)   To identify all pertinent public and private funding, including in-
kind contributions, grant funds, and donations available for the operational
expenses of implementing plans.
      (7)   To develop a public information campaign and marketing strategy by
consulting with the local media and the city and county public information
officers.
      (8)   To hold meetings with neighborhood and business groups around the
city to receive input on how to tailor the drug-free program to each
neighborhood and business.
   (C)   The Substance Abuse Coordinator shall make semi-annual status reports
to advise the Mayor and Council on the progress of the program and receive
input regarding policy matters.
   (D)   During the budget process for fiscal year 1991, the administration is
requested to present its recommendation on the funding level necessary for this
position. The Administration is requested to identify grant funds which can be
used for this purpose as well as a plan for contributions from participating
agencies.
(Res. 36-1990, approved 4-16-90)
§ 2-4-2 OFFICE OF VIOLENCE AGAINST WOMEN.
   (A)   The city hereby establishes an Office of Violence Against Women as a
part of the Family and Community Services Department.
   (B)   A city position shall be created to act as a Program Coordinator for
all agencies and non-profits currently offering services to the victims and
families of violence against women.
   (C)   The Coordinator of the Office of Violence Against Women shall report
to the Director of the Family and Community Services Department.
   (D)   The city shall apply for a federal grant and a 50/50 funding
arrangement with the U.S. Department of Justice in conjunction with the Federal
Violence Against Women Act.
(Res. 10-1997, approved 2-13-97)
§ 2-4-3 COMMISSION ON ADULT LITERACY.
   (A)   A Commission on Adult Literacy is hereby established.
   (B)   The Mayor's Commission on Adult Literacy shall consist of 15 members,
appointed by the Mayor with the advice and consent of the Council. The members
shall be selected from the community at large, and the initial members shall
serve staggered one, two and three year terms. After expiration of the initial
terms, all appointments shall be for three year terms from the dates of their
appointments.
   (C)   The Mayor shall appoint a Chairperson from among the 15 members of the
Commission.
   (D)   The following duties and responsibilities are hereby delegated to the
Commission:
      (1)   The Commission shall establish a program to train volunteers to
serve as tutors to adults who have a desire to learn to read.
      (2)   The Commission shall coordinate all the volunteer efforts of the
program and meet as necessary to monitor the progress of the program.
   (E)   Upon request, the Mayor shall provide such staff assistance as is
needed and within existing budget limitations.
(Res. 201-1984, approved 11-21-84)
§ 2-4-4 VETERANS AFFAIRS ADVISORY BOARD.
   (A)   Purpose.
      (1)   To identify issues concerning Veterans and their dependents
residing in the Albuquerque metropolitan area a Veterans and Military Affairs
Advisory Board (“Board”) is hereby established.
      (2)   The Board shall function in an advisory capacity, assisting the
Mayor in developing and implementing programs to resolve issues, alleviate
conditions and improve the quality of life for our Veterans to the extent
possible. The Board serves as a network for the exchange of information
relative to Veterans activities.
   (B)   Membership.
      (1)   The Veterans Affairs and Military Advisory Board shall be made up
of twelve (12) members and one ex officio member who shall be the Mayor’s
Veterans Liason Officer. Members shall be involved Veterans or representatives
of Veteran Organizations providing services directly to Veterans or active
military representing Veteran interests within military units, operating within
the Albuquerque Metropolitan Area.
      (2)   The Mayor with the advice and consent of the Council shall appoint
the members of the Board, seeking nominations from, but not limited to, the
Veterans and Military Advisory Board, Veterans Organizations and Veteran
Service Providers within the Albuquerque Metropolitan Area.
      (3)   The Mayor’s Veterans Liasion Officer shall be an ex officio member
of the Board, and shall serve as executive chairman with full voting
privileges. He or she shall be a Veteran.
      (4)   The Board may promulgate rules including rules to govern the
conduct and attendance of the members.
   (C)   Term of office.
      (1)   Each member shall serve a term of three (3) years except as
follows:
         (a)   for the initial Board, four (4) members shall serve for a three
(3) year term;
         (b)   four (4) members shall serve a two (2) year term; and
         (c)   four (4) members shall serve a one (1) year term.
      (2)   Members may not be appointed for more than two (2) consecutive
terms.
   (D)   Officers. The members of the Board shall elect officers as follows:
      (1)    a vice-chairperson
      (2)   vice-chair Pro-Tem
      These officers shall be elected for a term of one (1) year.
   (E)   Duties and responsibilities.
      (1)   The Veterans Affairs and Military Advisory Board shall meet
regularly, not less than once per quarter.
      (2)   Meetings may be called by the Chairperson or by majority of the
Board members.
      (3)   The Board shall report to the Mayor on a regular basis and shall
submit to the Mayor and Council a yearly report on its activities.
   The Board may appoint standing and ad hoc committees as necessary.
(Res. 103-1986, approved 7-25-86; Am. Res. 141-2001, approved 10-8-01)
§ 2-4-5 ADVISORY COMMITTEE ON THE HOMELESS.
   (A)   There is hereby created the Advisory Committee on the Homeless,
hereinafter referred to as the “Committee” which shall consist of 15 members.
The Committee shall include seven representatives from the homeless provider
agencies, the Governor or a designee, a member of the New Mexico First
Congressional Delegation or a designee, a member of the Albuquerque City
Council or a designee, a member of the Conference of Churches, and four members
at large. The term of each member shall be three years.
   (B)   The Committee shall act in an advisory capacity to the city in
connection with the assessment of homelessness and development of
recommendations and programs to address the problem. The Committee shall:
      (1)   Advise the city in reviewing and updating the number and
characteristics of the homeless population.
      (2)   Encourage private efforts to assist the homeless, including
business, religious and social organizations.
      (3)   Identify local, state, federal and private financial resources.
      (4)   Recommend programs and facilities for further development of ways
to address homelessness in the city. Recommendations shall include means of
financing them.
      (5)   Seek input from and work with other agencies, including but not
limited to those in the areas of providing support services to the homeless.
   (C)   Except as provided in this section, the qualifications, appointment
and conduct of the members of the Committee and the organization structure of
the Committee shall be governed by the Revised Ordinances of Albuquerque, New
Mexico.
   (D)   The Mayor shall provide the staff assistance as may be required by the
Committee.
(Res. 75-1988, approved 5-12-88)
§ 2-4-6 JOINT ADVISORY COMMISSION ON PERSONS WITH DISABILITIES.
   (A)   There is hereby established the Joint Advisory Commission on Persons
with Disabilities, hereinafter referred to as the “Commission,” which shall be
composed of 10 members to be appointed as follows:
      (1)   Four members shall be residents of Bernalillo County and shall be
appointed by the Bernalillo County Commission.
      (2)   Six members shall be residents of the city and shall be appointed
by the Mayor with the advice and consent of the Council.
      (3)   At least two of the members appointed by the Bernalillo County
Commission and four of the members appointed by the Mayor shall be persons with
a disability.
   (B)   The terms of the members of the Commission shall be for three years;
provided, however, of the members first appointed, one member appointed by the
Bernalillo County Commission and two members appointed by the Mayor shall have
terms expiring on October 1, 1988, one member appointed by the Bernalillo
County Commission and two members appointed by the Mayor shall have terms
expiring October 1, 1989, and one member appointed by the Bernalillo County
Commission, and two members appointed by the Mayor shall have terms expiring
October 1, 1990. The Bernalillo County Commission shall determine which members
appointed by it shall have which terms and the Mayor shall determine which
members appointed by the Mayor shall have which terms. Any additional members
added to the Joint Advisory Commission on Persons with Disabilities subsequent
to the February 23, 1988 adoption date of this resolution shall have a term
concurrent with that of the members whose terms expire October 1, 1993.
   (C)   Except as otherwise provided herein, the city members of the
Commission shall be governed by the provisions of the Revised Ordinances of
Albuquerque, New Mexico, which governs all boards, commissions and committees.
   (D)   The powers and duties of this Commission shall be as follows:
      (1)   The Commission shall study the problems and the programs for people
with disabilities, including, but not limited to, those in the areas of
housing, human rights, employment, recreation, and transportation.
      (2)   The Commission shall review and recommend program funding sources.
      (3)   The Commission shall advise the Mayor, Council, and the Bernalillo
County Commission on programs to provide services to persons with disabilities,
including but not limited to the areas outlined in division (D)(1) above. The
Commission shall make recommendations regarding short and long range priorities
in these areas, regarding a comprehensive program for persons with
disabilities, and regarding coordination of programs funded by different
sources.
      (4)   The Commission shall promote the understanding of the problems of
and the programs for persons with disabilities among public officials,
volunteer agencies, and residents of the city and county.
      (5)   The Commission shall comply with all applicable policies,
ordinances, resolutions, and rules and regulations of the city and the county
of Bernalillo.
      (6)   The Commission shall cooperate with other Boards, Commissions and
Committees to further the cause of persons with disabilities.
      (7)   The Commission shall make written annual reports to the Bernalillo
County Commission, Council and the Mayor.
   (E)   The organizational structure of the Commission shall be as follows:
      (1)   Officers.
         (a)   The minimum number of officers of the Commission shall be not
less than two officers (such as the Chairperson and Vice-Chairperson) and such
other officers as the Commission may deem necessary.
         (b)   All officers shall be elected by the members for a term of one
year and no officer shall serve more than two consecutive terms.
      (2)   Meetings.
         (a)   All meetings of the Commission shall be open to the public and
insofar as possible, shall be held at a facility owned either by the city or
Bernalillo County.
         (b)   Reasonable notice shall be given to the public prior to any
meeting of the Commission. At least once a year, the Commission shall determine
what is reasonable notice to the public of its meetings; provided that in no
event shall notice be less than the notice required for Council meetings.
         (c)   Minutes shall be kept of each meeting and filed with the City
Clerk and copies of the minutes shall be sent to the Mayor and the Bernalillo
County Commission.
         (d)   The Commission shall meet at least quarterly.
         (e)   A majority of all the members of the Commission shall constitute
a quorum for the transaction of business. A motion shall carry upon the
alternative vote of the majority of the members present at any meeting.
      (3)   Rules and regulations.
         (a)   The Commission may promulgate such rules and regulations for its
conduct as may be deemed necessary.
   (F)   Upon request, the Bernalillo County Manager and the Mayor shall
provide assistance for such staff and resources as is feasible and within
existing budget limitations.
   (G)   An evaluation will be made every year as to the effectiveness and
viability of the Commission. Recommendations will be made for possible changes
in the membership makeup, agenda, format and/or purpose of the Commission.
(Res. 61-1994, approved 7-18-94)
§ 2-4-7 ALCOHOL ABUSE TASK FORCE.
   (A)   The Mayor shall appoint and the Council approve a thirty member
citizen committee made up of individuals familiar with and interested in
addressing the issue of alcohol and substance abuse. On or before July 15,
1986, the Committee shall:
      (1)   Assess the overall societal problems resulting primarily from
alcohol abuse and substance abuse in Albuquerque.
      (2)   Research and review the five basic components of the enforcement
system as it relates to alcohol and substance misuse: legislation, enforcement,
prosecution, the judicial process, and corrections.
      (3)   Review existing educational, informational, and rehabilitation
programs relative to the issue.
      (4)   Recommend solutions, the implementation of which would reduce
alcohol-abuse related crime in the city.
      (5)   Make available to all identified affected agencies and institutions
the findings of their research.
   (B)   The Mayor shall appoint a staff person to coordinate the City's
Alcohol Abuse Task Force and provide staff services to the citizen committee.
(Res. 141-1985, approved 8-6-85)
Cross-reference:
   
Employee substance abuse; alcohol and drug testing, see § 3-3-15
   
Sale of alcohol through drive-up windows; abatement, see § 4-6-15
   
Licensing; alcoholic beverages, see Ch. 5, Art 1
   
Sale of alcohol near schools and churches, see § 5-1-1
   
Public areas where alcohol is permitted, see § 6-5-2
ARTICLE 5: PLANNING AND ZONING
Section
   
2-5-1   Extraterritorial Zoning Commission
   
2-5-2   Metropolitan Planning Coordinating Commission
   
2-5-3   [Repealed]
   
2-5-4   Community Residential Program Committee
   
2-5-5   Infill Development Task Force
§ 2-5-1 EXTRATERRITORIAL ZONING COMMISSION.
(Res. 202-1976, approved 11-26-76; Res. 2017-102, approved 11-13-17)
Editor's note: Section 2-5-1 Extraterritorial Zoning Commission, whose purpose
has been invalidated by state law, is repealed. See Council Bill R-17-213
(Enactment No. R-2017-102), approved 11-13-17.
§ 2-5-2 METROPOLITAN PLANNING COORDINATING COMMISSION.
   (A)   Creation of the Metropolitan Planning Coordinating Commission. There
is hereby created a Metropolitan Planning Coordinating Commission. The
Commission shall be composed of 11 members, including one City Councillor, the
Mayor, one Environmental Planning Commissioner, the City Planning Director, two
members of the Board of Education-Albuquerque Public Schools, the
Superintendent of Albuquerque Public Schools, the Building and Planning
Director for Albuquerque Public Schools, one County Commissioner, one County
Planning Commissioner, and the Executive Director of the Middle Rio Grande
Council of Governments. The members representing the City Council,
Environmental Planning Commission, Board of Education, County Commission, and
County Planning Commission shall be appointed by the entity they represent for
a term to be determined by said entity. The members of the Commission shall
elect a chairperson who shall serve a one year term. No member shall serve as
chairperson for more than two consecutive terms.
   (B)   Powers and duties. The Commission shall:
      (1)   Exchange information regarding planning activities and growth and
development patterns and trends.
      (2)   Encourage and facilitate the development of longer-range planning
capabilities within the respective jurisdictions.
      (3)   Exchange information about capital projects, so that projects
undertaken by one jurisdiction may be coordinated with other jurisdictions.
      (4)   Provide information to each other to aid in the coordination of
school locations, transportation and other land use parameters.
      (5)   Study and recommend the development of joint projects and joint use
programs, including equitable financing of such efforts.
      (6)   Make efforts to find constructive and beneficial uses for school
sites which are no longer needed as such.
      (7)   Make recommendations to the bodies they represent relating to
project coordination and to any of the other matters listed in this section.
   (C)   Organization.
      (1)   All meetings of the Commission shall be open to the public and
insofar as possible, shall be held at a publicly-owned facility.
      (2)   Reasonable notice shall be given to the public prior to any meeting
of the Commission.
      (3)   The Commission shall normally meet at least monthly.
      (4)   The Commission may promulgate such rules and regulations for its
conduct as may be deemed necessary.
(Res. 172-1977, approved 9-14-77)
§ 2-5-3 [REPEALED].
(Res. 240-1978, approved 11-17-78; repealed by Res. 16-2001, approved 1-31-01)
§ 2-5-4 COMMUNITY RESIDENTIAL PROGRAM COMMITTEE.
   (A)   The City Council shall immediately enter into an agreement for an
external independent audit of the City's Community Residential Program
regulations. The audit should be completed within 30 days of the award of the
contract to the entity that will perform the audit, and the results of the
audit shall be immediately thereafter reported to the Council.
   (B)   A Community Residential Program Committee shall be created to review
Community Residential Program applications and to work with the applicants and
the neighborhood and facilitate effective and positive communication between
the program and the neighborhood.
   (C)   The Committee shall be composed of five members appointed by the Mayor
with the advice and consent of the Council. Two members shall be residents of
neighborhoods in which community residential programs exist or were in
operation at the time the member was appointed. The Committee shall be governed
by the provisions of Sections 2-6-1-1 et seq.
(Res. 62-1997, approved 7-7-97)
§ 2-5-5 INFILL DEVELOPMENT TASK FORCE.
   (A)   The advisory group called the Infill Development Task Force (Task
Force) that was appointed pursuant to Resolution 17 (25-2000) shall continue to
meet to develop policies which encourage appropriate infill development and
recommend strategies for overcoming barriers to appropriate infill development.
      (1)   The Task Force is composed of fifteen members representing various
organizations involved in or most affected by infill development, who are
recognized as leaders by their peer group.
      (2)   Members who were appointed to the Task Force by the Mayor with the
advice and consent of the City Council pursuant to Resolution 17 (25-2000)
shall continue their appointment. The Mayor may replace members who are unable
to complete their term.
      (3)   Members of the Task Force are as follows: Six members of recognized
neighborhood associations within the city, one member representing the
financial profession, one member representing the real estate profession, two
members representing the development profession, one member of the City
Environmental Planning Commission, two members representing environmental
advocacy groups, one member of the design profession from either the fields of
architecture, land planning, or engineering, and one member from the
homebuilding profession.
      (4)   The Task Force shall continue to be appointed for one year from the
original appointment pursuant to Resolution 17 (25-2000). The Planning
Department, with assistance of other City staff will continue to be designated
to assist the group.
   (B)   The Task Force shall do the following by June 6, 2001:
      (1)   Develop recommendations for mechanisms which will encourage the
development of infill sites where appropriate. Recommendations could include
additional policies supporting appropriate infill development or changes in
procedures which assist and support infill development, such as expediting the
review/approval process, providing special staff help in the city review
process, assistance in the review of proposals with neighborhoods and adjacent
property owners, assistance in financing to correct infrastructure deficiencies
in the older parts of the city, and any other time saving or cost saving
methods which would encourage the development of infill sites. The Task Force's
recommendations should distinguish between areas in the city where there are
specific impediments to infill development and areas where such impediments do
not occur. The Task Force should review the city's 1988 Infill Development
Study prior to making its recommendations and should incorporate, where
possible, that study's recommendations.
      (2)   Select at least two but no more than three infill sites from
various sources (including the city vacant land inventory for any vacant
sites), that, through a joint public/private effort, could be developed as a
demonstration project in three years through a public process. The sites should
include a mix of various land uses such as housing, commercial, office, and
manufacturing/industrial. The Task Force shall develop a definition of
"redevelopable" land for the purpose of carrying out the goals of this
Resolution.
      (3)   Initiate a public education program by holding a minimum of two
public forums using the demonstration site program to inform and educate the
general public on the issues surrounding infill development from the various
viewpoints such as, opportunities / constraints, neighborhood desires/concerns,
governmental opportunities / constraints, and market considerations /
affordability.
      (4)   Recommend amendments to the various plans, policies, resolutions,
ordinances, and processes that contain unnecessary obstacles to appropriate
infill development including but not limited to, the Zoning Code and
Subdivision Ordinances, and the Development Process Manual. The amendments
would assist the City Council, the Environmental Planning Commission, and the
city staff when considering zone map amendments and other factors for infill
sites.
   (C)   Resolution 17, Enactment No. 25-2000, is hereby repealed, but the Task
Force appointed under, and the deadlines set forth in, Resolution 17, Enactment
25-2000, shall remain in effect as described or modified herein.
(Res. 25-2000, approved 3-21-00; Am. Res. 100-2000, approved 10-18-00)
ARTICLE 6: HOUSING
Section
   
2-6-1   Housing Commission
   
2-6-2   Housing Finance Corporation
Cross-reference:
   
Housing; policies and procedures, see Ch. 3, Art. 4
§ 2-6-1 HOUSING COMMISSION.
   The Housing Commission shall, undertake the following activities and present
a status report on each activity to the Mayor and Council within one year of
its formation:
   (A)   Investigate new and innovative methods of financing new housing
construction for low and moderate income families, including possible new
construction and/or financial consortiums, and recommend specific methods of
securing voluntary participation of developers in such construction.
   (B)   Investigate new construction methods and changes in the building code
which would lead to lower construction costs while maintaining good quality
housing for low and moderate income families.
   (C)   Investigate legal and economic feasibility of an Urban Homestead
Program in the city utilizing the physical and financial resources of:
      (1)   The city of Albuquerque;
      (2)   The state of New Mexico;
      (3)   Bernalillo County;
      (4)   Federal Department of Housing and Urban Development;
      (5)   Local financial institutions.
   (D)   Investigate redlining by financial institutions and recommend specific
methods of securing voluntary participation of such institutions to provide
financing for homes in geographic areas of the city where it is not presently
available.
   (E)   Investigate and recommend methods of better assisting low income
housing tenants who have social and physical problems. Method of financing such
solutions should also be recommended.
   (F)   Investigate problems of delinquent rents and upkeep of existing city-
owned housing for low income families; what changes should be made, if any, in
maintenance programs and maintenance responsibility; and methods of financing
any such recommendations.
   (G)   Investigate and recommend methods of cooperation between the city
Department of Housing and Development, the state Mortgage Finance Agency, and
the state Housing Authority and other Housing Groups, with regard to the
financing and production of more housing for low and moderate income families.
   (H)   Hold dialogue with the Environmental Planning Commission, the
Albuquerque Home Builders Association, low income people or their advocates,
financial institutions, real estate groups and construction groups, and
recommend how these individual groups' interests and efforts can be more
effectively coordinated in the future for furtherance of the city's housing
program.
   (I)   Prepare recommendations on matters of interest to the state Housing
Authority.
(Res. 193-1975, approved 10-29-75)
§ 2-6-2 HOUSING FINANCE CORPORATION.
   (A)   It is hereby found and determined that the plan of the Corporation
with respect to the Projects will tend to provide decent, safe and sanitary
housing for persons and families of low and moderate income and is hereby
approved.
   (B)   The filing of Articles of Incorporation and By-laws of the Corporation
and the activity of the Corporation in furtherance of its corporate purposes
are hereby ratified and approved in general concept. The Executive Director of
the Housing Authority is authorized to review and give final approval and
ratification to any necessary corporate document on behalf of the city and the
Authority.
   (C)   The initial Board of Directors of the Corporation will be: Juan Vigil,
Thomas Ortiz, and Robert Strell.
   (D)   The Directors of the Corporation will have a Certification of
Incorporation issued by the Secretary of the State of New Mexico. The Directors
of the Corporation will be authorized and directed to issue, sell and deliver
the Notes of the Corporation pursuant to the applicable laws of the State of
New Mexico and will permit the assignment and/or pledge of any security
interest in the immovable and movable, and tangible and intangible, properties
so acquired by the Corporation for the purpose of constructing the Projects and
will enter into a Contract for the sale of the Notes and, upon payment or
defeasance of all indebtedness, will convey title to any property or property
rights owned by the Corporation to the city or to its lawful successor or
assign for public purposes.
   (E)   The city and the Authority will be presented with a Note Resolution of
the Corporation which will include provisions for the issuance and sale of the
Notes, the form of Loan Agreements (including the restrictions on the loan to
the developers of the Projects), the form of documents offering the Notes for
sale, and such other documents and miscellaneous materials and certificates
relating to the authorization and issuance of the Notes. Such activity is
hereby approved in general principle and the Corporation is authorized to adopt
and execute such documents and any other documents necessary and proper to
carry out its purposes. The Executive Director is authorized to give final
approval on behalf of the city and the Authority to such documents upon their
presentation in final form.
   (F)   It is hereby further found and determined that the issuance of the
Notes by the Corporation pursuant to the Note resolution will serve to enable
the Corporation to carry out its public purposes and is hereby approved.
   (G)   The Executive Director is hereby authorized to execute much documents
as are deemed necessary and proper to implement the construction, financing and
leasing of the housing units of the Projects.
   (H)   The Notes of the Corporation shall not constitute a debt of the
Authority, the city or the state of New Mexico or any of its political
subdivisions.
   (I)   The city agrees to accept title to any and all assets of the
Corporation, free and clear of any liens, charges or encumbrances of any rights
or claims of any creditors, upon payment of the Notes in full, free and clear
of all liens and encumbrances, and if the city is unable to accept such gift,
conveyance and distribution, then the city will designate a body corporate and
politic for political subdivision of the state of New Mexico to accept such
gift, conveyance and distribution.
   (J)   The provision of construction financing for the Projects, and the
Projects, are in the public interest of the citizens of the city, and are
proper public purposes, and the city and the Authority desire to cooperate with
agencies of the Federal Government and other public and private bodies to
fulfill such public purposes.
   (K)   The Executive Director is authorized and empowered to execute any
documents to accomplish the purposes of this section.
   (L)   If any division, paragraph or provision of this section shall be held
to be invalid or unenforceable for any reason, the invalidity or
unenforceability of such section, paragraph or provision shall not affect any
of the remaining provisions of the section.
   (M)   All prior resolutions and orders or parts thereof in conflict herewith
are, to the extent of such conflict, hereby repealed and this section shall
take effect from and after its passage, the public welfare requiring it.
   (N)   This section shall be in full force and effect from and after its
passage in accordance with the laws of the state of New Mexico.
(Res. 155-1981, approved 7-21-81)
ARTICLE 7: TRANSPORTATION
Section
   
2-7-1   Mass Transit Citizens Advisory Board
   
2-7-2   Transportation Evaluation Study Advisory Committee
   
2-7-3   Neighborhood Traffic Management Program Committee
   
2-7-4   Neighborhood Traffic Management Policy Study Group
Cross-reference:
   
Transportation; policies and procedures, see Ch. 3, Art. 8
   
Transportation; programs and plans, see Ch. 4, Art. 2
§ 2-7-1 MASS TRANSIT CITIZENS ADVISORY BOARD.
   (A)   The Transit Citizens Advisory Board, hereinafter referred to as
“Board,” shall consist of 12 members. The term of each member shall be three
years. The official dates of when each member shall begin and end his/her term
shall be determined by the Mayor.
   (B)   The Board shall act in an advisory capacity to the Transit and Parking
Department in connection with the development and promotion of mass transit
services in the city.
      (1)   The Board shall:
         (a)   Advise the Department on means of improving the mass transit
system and increasing its utilization, including but not limited to scheduling,
routing, marketing, fares, and public amenities;
         (b)   Serve as a vehicle for citizen input on the mass transit system
and for public education about the system. The Board shall seek to increase the
community involvement in the transit system's public relations programs;
         (c)   Encourage private efforts to foster energy conserving
transportation to employment or commercial centers;
         (d)   Recommend to the Department programs and facilities for further
development of the mass transit system. The recommendations shall include means
of financing them; and
         (e)   Seek input from and work cooperatively with other appropriate
city boards and commissions, including but not limited to those in the area of
air quality, environmental and transportation planning, the disabled, and low
income housing.
   (C)   A committee exists and is to be known as the Advisory Committee on
Transit for the Mobility Impaired.
      (1)   The Advisory Committee on Transit for the Mobility Impaired shall
consist of 12 members, six of whom shall be mobility impaired, and six of whom
shall be representatives of agencies that work with the mobility impaired.
Members currently serving on the committee shall continue until the end of
their term.
      (2)   The term of each member of the Committee shall be three years. The
official dates when each member shall begin and end his/her term shall be
determined by the Mayor. Of the new Committee members, four shall have terms
ending January 31, 1998, and the rest shall have terms ending January 31, 1999.
      (3)   The Committee shall meet at least monthly to perform, at a minimum,
the following tasks:
         (a)   Provide recommendations to the Transit and Parking Department
regarding the city's short and long range plans to enhance public
transportation services for the mobility impaired in accordance with the ADA.
         (b)   Review ADA-related public transportation plans, review progress
toward goals outlined in the plans, and recommend modifications to plans as
appropriate.
         (c)   Assist the Transit and Parking Department in identifying and
obtaining new funding sources for specialized mass transit services.
         (d)   Consider passenger complaints and appeals concerning paratransit
service and ADA issues related to fixed-route service.
         (e)   Study the systematic problems facing the mobility impaired
utilizing fixed-route and paratransit services, and make recommendations to
resolve such problems.
         (f)   Prepare an annual report to be submitted to the Mayor and City
Council, reporting activities and concerns of the Committee.
   (D)   The Transit and Parking Department shall cooperate fully with the
Committee, including providing access to statistical reports and ADA plans.
   (E)   All meetings of the Committee shall be open to the public.
   (F)   That except as provided in this section, the qualifications,
appointment, and conduct of the members of the Committee shall be governed by
Article 6 of Chapter 2 of the Revised Ordinances of Albuquerque, New Mexico,
1994.
(Res. 29-1993, approved 3-10-93; Am. Res. 24-1996, approved 2-2-96)
§ 2-7-2 TRANSPORTATION EVALUATION STUDY ADVISORY COMMITTEE.
   (A)   An Advisory Committee shall be appointed by the Mayor, with the advice
and consent of the Council. The Committee will serve in an advisory capacity to
the Transportation Evaluation Study project management team and represent a
broad base of interests in the community in the following manner:
      (1)   Each committee member is to draw on his or her education and
experience in transportation and land use issues to focus on the needs of the
community as a whole.
      (2)   Each committee member is to convey various constituencies'
interests and concerns to the study project management team.
      (3)   Each committee member is to work actively to communicate the
progress and recommendations of the study to the various constituencies.
   (B)   The Committee shall consist of 15 members representing the following
constituencies:
      (1)   One member representing developers with an interest in relating
transportation to land use policies; and
      (2)   One member representing the League of Neighborhoods representing
neighborhood associations or coalitions thereof; and
      (3)   One member representing the disabled community; and
      (4)   One member representing the Central Business District; and
      (5)   One member representing the Uptown area; and
      (6)   One member representing senior citizens; and
      (7)   One member representing environmentalists/conservationists; and
      (8)   One member representing the economic development community; and
      (9)   One member representing low income, public transit dependent
people; and
      (10)   Two members representing large educational institutions; and
      (11)   Two members representing major employers; and
      (12)   One member representing the League of Women Voters; and
      (13)   One member representing the hotel, convention and tourist
industry.
   (C)   Except as may otherwise be provided herein, the Committee shall be
subject to the Public Boards, Commissions and Committees Ordinance.
   (D)   Staff support for the Committee shall be supplied by the Public Works
Department.
   (E)   The Committee shall remain responsible for fulfilling its assigned
tasks until disbanded by the Mayor, or 30 days after the acceptance of the
Final Report of the Transportation Evaluation Study by the Council whichever
event occurs first.
(Res. 87-1995, approved 6-28-95)
§ 2-7-3 NEIGHBORHOOD TRAFFIC MANAGEMENT PROGRAM COMMITTEE.
   (A)   The Administration shall appoint a committee consisting of
representatives from the Public Works Department, Albuquerque Police
Department, Office of Community and Neighborhood Coordination, Mayor's Office,
Council Staff and three citizens to review and revise the policies of the
Neighborhood Traffic Management Program to accommodate neighborhoods with
special situations in determining the need for speed humps.
   (B)   The Committee shall report its findings and recommendations to the
City Council within three months of the date of the adoption of this
legislation.
(Res. 30-2001, approved 2-16-01)
§ 2-7-4 NEIGHBORHOOD TRAFFIC MANAGEMENT POLICY STUDY GROUP.
   (A)   There is hereby created a "Neighborhood Traffic Management Policy
Study Group" (Study Group) and shall be made up of the following members:
      (1)   A representative from the Institute of Transportation Engineers
(ITE), who shall serve as Chair of the Study Group.
      (2)   A representative from the City Traffic Engineering Division.
      (3)   A representative from the City Street Maintenance Division.
      (4)   A representative from the Albuquerque Fire Department.
      (5)   A representative from the Albuquerque Police Department.
      (6)   A representative from the Planning Department.
      (7)   The City Councilors from District 3 and District 8 or their
designees.
      (8)   The Study Group shall also have an advisor from the City Legal
Department and may request input from other appropriate entities.
   (B)   The Study Group shall:
      (1)   Review existing neighborhood traffic management policies and
locations where traffic calming devices have been implemented.
      (2)   Identify and map the primary emergency response routes to or within
residential subdivisions or commercial properties.
      (3)   Review existing data regarding the effectiveness of traffic calming
devices, including their effect on emergency response routes.
      (4)   Review and discuss new methods of traffic calming within
residential neighborhoods.
      (5)   Examine available funding sources and limitations.
      (6)   Examine present neighborhood involvement procedures.
      (7)   Develop outreach opportunities for educating the public on traffic
safety and traffic calming devices.
      (8)   Discuss any other matter deemed appropriate by the Study Group.
   (C)   Within three months of formation, the Study Group shall provide draft
recommendations to be circulated to all affected departments for review and
comment. Additionally, the City shall hold four public meetings, one in each
quadrant of the city, in order to present the draft recommendations to and
receive comments from the general public. Comments shall be reviewed by the
Study Group, and a final recommendation shall be submitted to the Mayor for
transmission to the Council within six months of the date of this Resolution
being passed.
   (4)   The Neighborhood Traffic Management Policy Study Group will be staffed
by the Mayor or his designee with support from Council Services as needed.
(Res. R-2010-022, approved 1-14-10)
ARTICLE 8: ENVIRONMENT
Section
   
2-8-1   Constructed Wetlands Study Group
   
2-8-2   City/Middle Rio Grande Conservancy District Advisory Committee
   
2-8-3   Night Sky Protection Task Force
   
2-8-4   Drought Management Task Force
   
2-8-5   Community Gardens Study Group
Cross-reference:
   
Environment; policies and procedures, see Ch. 3, Art. 9
§ 2-8-1 CONSTRUCTED WETLANDS STUDY GROUP.
   (A)   A city of Albuquerque/Bernalillo County Constructed Wetlands Study
Group (the “Study Group”) shall be formed to evaluate the feasibility of using
constructed wetlands in a variety of situations, to communicate with and
educate the public concerning constructed wetlands, and to prepare one or more
reports for the Mayor, City Council and County Commission.
   (B)   The Constructed Wetlands Study Group shall undertake the following
tasks:
      (1)   Examine constructed wetlands techniques and their uses, and provide
a description of their designs and applications including examples from around
the country;
      (2)   Evaluate the extent and impact of the loss of wetlands along the
Rio Grande in the Albuquerque area;
      (3)   Ascertain the impact of new NPDES permit requirements, Pueblo of
Isleta stream standards, and endangered species protection requirements on the
city's wastewater treatment process;
      (4)   Analyze and identify feasible applications of constructed wetlands
in relation to the following:
         (a)   Open space development;
         (b)   Parks development;
         (c)   Urban, semi-urban and rural growth, especially with regard to
the city's planned communities policies;
         (d)   The Ground Water Protection Plan, especially related to septage
treatment in mountain areas of Bernalillo County,
         (e)   Wastewater treatment, especially in light of new NPDES discharge
requirements, Pueblo of Isleta stream standards, and the endangered species
protection requirements, including a comparison of wetlands to other
alternatives;
         (f)   Other situations as determined by the Study Group.
      (5)   Develop and submit grant applications for constructed wetlands
demonstration projects as appropriate;
      (6)   Identify changes to existing plans and policies which follow from
the findings of the Study Group;
      (7)   Provide the Mayor, Council, and Commission with study scoping
information, including a cost estimation, for a contract to evaluate the costs
and benefits of alternative methods of meeting new wastewater discharge
requirements, which would include the use of constructed wetlands;
      (8)   Determine the impact of constructed wetlands projects on the
adequacy of the city's water rights and other regulatory requirements with
regard to water;
      (9)   Hold meetings to inform the public and potentially affected parties
about constructed wetlands and to solicit their ideas and concerns;
      (10)   Perform additional activities as appropriate.
   (C)   The Constructed Wetlands Study Group shall include the representatives
of the following: City Public Works Department - Wastewater Division; City
Public Works Department - Water Utility Division; City Planning Department;
City Parks and General Services Department - Parks Design and Development
Division; City Parks and General Services Department - Open Space Division; a
representative of the village of Los Ranchos; a representative of the Pueblo
Office of Environmental Protection of the All Indian Pueblo Council; a biology
professor and an environmental engineering professor from the University of New
Mexico; Bernalillo County Environmental Health Department; Bernalillo County
Public Works Department; Bernalillo County Parks and Recreation Department; two
public members appointed by the city and two public members appointed by
Bernalillo County. The city members, the UNM professors, the representative of
the village of Los Ranchos, and the representative of the All Indian Pueblo
Council shall be appointed by the Mayor with the advice and consent of the City
Council. The UNM professors shall represent the interests of the entire county.
   (D)   The Constructed Wetlands Study Group shall produce the following
products:
      (1)   If needed, the wastewater treatment study scoping report, as
described in division (B)(7), to be delivered as soon as feasible;
      (2)   A final report to be completed within six months of the approval of
its membership;
      (3)   Grant applications for constructed wetlands demonstration projects
as appropriate;
      (4)   Other reports and materials as determined by the Study Group.
   (E)   The Study Group shall perform primary oversight and monitoring with
regard to the wastewater treatment study should it be conducted.
   (F)   The Constructed Wetlands Study Group may obtain consultant and intern
assistance to carry out its work program.
(Res. 150-1992, approved 10-16-92; Am. Res. 41-1993, approved 4-30-93; Am. Res.
132-1993, approved 9-7-93)
§ 2-8-2 CITY/MIDDLE RIO GRANDE CONSERVANCY DISTRICT ADVISORY COMMITTEE.
   (A)   An advisory committee (the Committee) shall be formed to provide
oversight on policy matters and review topics of mutual interest and benefit
concerning the city and the Middle Rio Grande Conservancy District (MRGCD), a
special district organized pursuant to NMSA Section 73-14-1 et seq.
   (B)   The Committee's purposes include the discussion of topics of common
interest, long-range goals, community needs and other items as requested by the
respective bodies, and to subsequently make recommendations to those bodies.
   (C)   The city representation to the Committee shall be the Mayor, or his
representative, and two City Councillors to be named by the City Council
President, subject to approval of the City Council.
   (D)   The Middle Rio Grande Conservancy District representation to the
Committee shall be the MRGCD Chief Engineer, or his representative, and two
Conservancy District Board members to be named by the Chairman of the MRGCD,
subject to approval of the Conservancy District Board.
   (E)   The Chairman of the City-MRGCD Advisory Committee shall be elected by
the Committee, provided that the chair position alternate between city and
MRGCD representation annually at the first meeting following January 1 of each
year. A quorum of the Committee shall be four members, provided at least two
members from both the City and the MRGCD are present. The Council and the
Conservancy Board shall each appoint a non-member from its body who may sit on
the Committee with full powers at any Committee meeting if a member from the
Council or the MRGCD is absent. The city alternate may sit if a Council member
is absent and the MRGCD alternate may sit if a Conservancy Board member is
absent. The Committee shall promulgate rules for its conduct.
(Res. 2-1994, approved 1-3-94)
§ 2-8-3 NIGHT SKY PROTECTION TASK FORCE.
   (A)   In order to assess whether the City of Albuquerque should enact
legislation similar to the state's Night Sky Protection Act, the matter should
be evaluated carefully by City staff with the appropriate expertise.
   (B)   All aspects of the Night Sky Protection Act including enforcement,
non-conformance, and penalties should be carefully identified and evaluated.
   (C)   The Night Sky Protection Task Force shall be appointed by the Mayor
and will consist of representatives from the City's Zoning Enforcement
Division, the Electrical Section of the Building Inspection Division, the
Planning Manager of the Planning Department, two interested citizens, a
representative from the lighting industry, a representative from the Mayor's
Office, and a member of the City Council staff.
   (D)   The Task Force shall make every effort to solicit and encourage
citizen input on this issue, and shall hold a minimum of one public meeting
prior to its final recommendations.
   (E)   The Task force shall submit a report to the Mayor and Council
containing findings and recommendations no later than January 1, 2001.
(Res. 85-2000, approved 10-5-00)
§ 2-8-4 DROUGHT MANAGEMENT TASK FORCE.
   (A)   A Drought Management Strategy shall be developed for the City of
Albuquerque.
   (B)   A Drought Management Task Force shall be created to develop and
finalize this Drought Management Strategy. This Drought Management Task Force
will include representatives of the Water Resources Division of the Public
Works Department and the Albuquerque Economic Development Office, as well as
the League of Women Voters, the Sierra Club, the Economic Forum, the Chamber of
Commerce, the Hispano Chamber of Commerce, the Utility's Customers' Advisory
Committee, and the Middle Rio Grande Council of Governments Water Board.
Additional members will be added as needed. The Task Force will be staffed by
the Water Resources Division of the Public Works Department.
   (C)   The Drought Management Strategy will include four different levels of
measures that will apply when certain thresholds related to precipitation,
surface water availability, and conservation program progress are reached. The
four different levels will include increasingly stringent measures to reduce
demand on the City's municipal water system.
   (D)   The Drought Management Strategy will recognize and coordinate with the
state of New Mexico's recommendations regarding "Water Conservation Guidelines
for Public Water Supply," to the extent practical, such as:
      (1)   A four-phased approach consisting of:
         (a)   Advisory/voluntary conservation,
         (b)   Watch/mandatory conservation,
         (c)   Warning/mandatory conservation, and
         (d)   Emergency/rationing.
      (2)   Determination of how measures will be implemented and by whom.
   (E)   Water Resources Division of the Public Works Department will prepare
three draft drought management strategies prior to the first hearing of the
task force.
   (F)   The Drought Management Strategy shall be presented to the City Council
by April 1 of 2001. In order to meet this deadline, participating agencies and
organizations will be expected to select their representatives by the end of
December, 2000. While meetings will be scheduled at the convenience of Task
Force members, meetings will proceed without full attendance when necessary.
(Res. 4-2001, approved 1-10-01)
§ 2-8-5 COMMUNITY GARDENS STUDY GROUP.
   (A)   There is hereby created a “Community Gardens Study Group” whose
purpose is to research community gardening programs in Albuquerque and other
cities and recommend best methods for Albuquerque. This may include, but is not
limited to, identifying barriers to the development of community gardens,
recommending solutions to the identified barriers and developing
recommendations regarding regulatory changes to improve and strengthen
community gardens.
   (b)   The Community Gardens Study Group shall meet during the first, second
and third quarters of FY/10 and make recommendations to the Mayor and City
Council at the beginning of the fourth quarter of FY/10, in advance of the
growing season. The Community Gardens Study Group may meet thereafter as
needed.
   (C)   The Community Gardens Study Group shall be appointed by the Council
President and shall consist of the following members:
      (1)   A representative of the Albuquerque Bernalillo County Water
Authority;
      (2)   A representative of the Mid-Region Council of Governments;
      (3)   A representative of the Middle Rio Grande Conservancy District;
      (4)   A representative of the New Mexico State University Cooperative
Extension Services, Bernalillo County;
      (5)    A representative of the Rio Grande Community Farm (Los Poblanos);
      (6)   A representative of the Sawmill Community Gardening project;
      (7)   A representative of the SouthWest Organizing Acequia/Community
Garden project;
      (8)   A representative of the Sage Council, Urban Native American Gardens
project;
      (9)   A representative of the Albuquerque Growers Market;
      (10)   A representative of Sandia Laboratories knowledgeable in hot and
cold houses;
      (11)   A representative of the Native Seed Bank;
      (12)   A representative of the Alley Gardens/Mural project;
      (13)   A representative of the National Hispanic Cultural Center, Field
to Table project;
      (14)   A representative of the Gardener’s Guild.
   (D)   The Community Gardens Study Group will be staffed by Council Services
who shall work in coordination with the Administration and include
representatives of the Environmental Health Department, the Parks and
Recreation Department and the Open Space Division, the Department of Municipal
Development/Storm Water Division, the Legal Department/Real Property Division,
and the Planning Department in these study group discussions, as necessary.
(Res. R-2009-148, approved 10-15-09)
ARTICLE 9: LAW ENFORCEMENT
Section
   
2-9-1   Law Enforcement Consolidation Task Force
   
2-9-2   Joint Jail Population Review Task Force
§ 2-9-1 LAW ENFORCEMENT CONSOLIDATION TASK FORCE.
   (A)   The Law Enforcement Consolidation Task Force is hereby established.
The task force shall consist of 19 members, as follows:
      (1)   Nine citizens appointed by the Mayor of Albuquerque with the advice
and consent of the Council.
      (2)   Seven citizens appointed by the Bernalillo County Commission.
      (3)   One citizen appointed by the Mayor of the Village of Los Ranchos de
Albuquerque subject to the confirmation and consent of the trustees.
      (4)   One citizen appointed by the Mayor of the Village of Tijeras with
the advice and consent of the Village Council.
      (5)   The Chairman shall be a citizen appointed jointly by the Bernalillo
County Commission and the Mayor of Albuquerque with the advice and consent of
the Council. The members of the Task Force shall be appointed from the broadest
possible base of the community at large.
   (B)   The task force shall study the feasibility of establishing a single
law enforcement agency to serve the county of Bernalillo, the city of
Albuquerque, and the villages of Los Ranchos de Albuquerque and Tijeras. The
task force shall identify problems inherent in consolidation, and if
consolidation seems feasible, it shall examine alternative approaches to these
problems. The task force's final report shall indicate their findings and
recommendations, alternatives studied, and any other matter of concern to the
task force.
   (C)   All meetings of the task force shall be open to the public. Reasonable
notice shall be given to the public prior to any meeting. Opportunities shall
be provided for public input.
   (D)   The task force shall make periodic reports on its progress to the
Joint City-County Intergovernmental Committee. Upon completion of the study,
the task force shall transmit copies of the final report to the governing
bodies of the county of Bernalillo, the city of Albuquerque, and the villages
of Los Ranchos de Albuquerque and Tijeras. The study and the final report shall
be completed by January 1, 1979. The task force shall continue in existence
until April 1, 1979 , for the purpose of explaining its recommendations, as
requested.
(Res. 66-1978, approved 3-20-78)
§ 2-9-2 JOINT JAIL POPULATION REVIEW TASK FORCE.
   (A)   The city agrees to participate in the blue ribbon Joint Jail
Population Review Task Force initiated by the county of Bernalillo.
   (B)   At least each three months, starting as soon as possible, the Director
of the Corrections Detention Department shall furnish the City Council and the
Joint Jail Population Review Task Force with current data on the population of
the Joint Corrections Detention Operation. The prisoner breakdowns, with
appropriate cross correlations, should include the following:
      (1)   Felony/misdemeanor/civil/protective custody/holding (state and
federal);
      (2)   Transient;
      (3)   DWI;
      (4)   Work release/weekender/regular resident;
      (5)   Pre-sentence/post-sentence;
      (6)   Length of confinement;
      (7)   Gender;
      (8)   Satellite facility/other;
      (9)   Arrested under state statute/city ordinance;
      (10)   Arrest by city officer/sheriff/other;
      (11)   Length of stay by type of release.
(Res. 118-1988, approved 7-20-88)
ARTICLE 10: CULTURE AND ENTERTAINMENT
Section
   
2-10-1   Ad hoc Performing Arts Advisory Board
   
2-10-2   Cable Television Advisory Board
   
2-10-3   Balloon Fiesta Park: Planning and Management Oversight Committee
   
2-10-4   Balloon Fiesta Park: Operations and Management Advisory Board
   
2-10-5   Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr. Memorial Committee
§ 2-10-1 AD HOC PERFORMING ARTS ADVISORY BOARD.
   (A)   The Mayor's Ad Hoc Performing Arts Advisory Board is hereby empowered
to begin implementation of the “City Spirit” grant by:
      (1)   Selecting grant personnel;
      (2)   Providing advisory board leadership; and
      (3)   Generally directing the “City Spirit” effort until a permanent
Performing Arts Advisory Board is selected or other appropriate action is
taken.
   (B)   The Mayor's Ad Hoc Performing Arts Advisory Board shall relinquish all
“City Spirit” responsibilities to a permanent Performing Arts Advisory Board,
in the event the latter is established by the city during the life of the grant
(October 1, 1975 through September 30, 1976).
(Res. 200-1975, approved 11-19-75)
§ 2-10-2 CABLE TELEVISION ADVISORY BOARD.
   The Albuquerque Cable Television Advisory Board is hereby initially charged
with the following responsibilities:
   (A)   Maintaining an informed and educated citizenry regarding the resources
of the cable system;
   (B)   Maintaining an informed and educated city government with regard to
cable/community issues;
   (C)   Maintaining an informed and accountable franchise holder through
communications with the citizens and city government;
   (D)   Conducting forums periodically to help determine needs and uses of
local access channels; and
   (E)   Keeping the franchisee in touch with the community.
(Res. 189-1982, approved 11-23-82)
§ 2-10-3 BALLOON FIESTA PARK: PLANNING AND MANAGEMENT OVERSIGHT COMMITTEE.
   (A)   The Planning and Management Oversight Committee for the Balloon Fiesta
Park is hereby established and shall consist of nine members, each to be
appointed by the Mayor from each of the following organizations with the advice
and consent of the Council:
      (1)   State of New Mexico, Energy, Minerals and Natural Resources
Department;
      (2)   Board of Directors for the Albuquerque International Balloon
Fiesta;
      (3)   Three representatives from the surrounding, recognized neighborhood
associations, one from the Wildflower Neighborhood Association and two from the
Alameda North Valley Association;
      (4)   Sandia Pueblo;
      (5)   AMAFCA;
      (6)   Bernalillo County government; and
      (7)   Local industry located near the park.
   (B)   The Mayor and Council will appoint staff members to coordinate with
the Planning and Management Oversight Committee and appropriate city
departments will provide information.
   (C)   The responsibilities of the Planning and Management Oversight
Committee shall be to:
      (1)   Advise the design team concerning strategies to deal with the
following issues in the master plan:
         (a)   Possible neighborhood impacts;
         (b)   Development of a multiple use recreation and cultural
facilities;
         (c)   Funding strategies;
         (d)   Sensible use of water;
         (e)   Operations and maintenance;
         (f)   Privately funded activities and buildings; and
         (g)   Access and traffic control (pedestrian, vehicular and bicycle).
      (2)   Serve in an advisory and oversight capacity to the design team
throughout the preparation and implementation of the master plan.
   (D)   The Planning and Management Oversight Committee will coordinate with
the Anderson/Abruzzo International Balloon Museum Board of Trustees and the
Metropolitan Parks and Recreation Advisory Board throughout the review of the
master plan.
   (E)   The Planning and Management Oversight Committee will work with the
Parks and Recreation Department, the Anderson/Abruzzo International Balloon
Museum Board of Trustees and other private and public entities on issues
concerning the continued management, operation and maintenance of the Balloon
Fiesta Park.
   (F)   The Planning and Management Oversight Committee shall be governed
according to the Public Boards, Commissions and Committees Ordinance, § 2-6-1-
1 et seq. R.O.A. 1994.
   (G)   The City Council shall approve the Balloon Fiesta Park Master Plan
through a resolution. Furthermore, the City Council shall approve the renewal
of the agreement between the city and the Albuquerque International Balloon
Fiesta.
   (H)   The Planning and Management Oversight Committee shall serve until the
final determination of governance of the Balloon Fiesta Park is made by the
Mayor and City Council. At that time, the membership and functions of the
Planning and Management Oversight Committee may be included in a new governance
structure.
(Res. 104-1996, approved 9-24-96)
§ 2-10-4 BALLOON FIESTA PARK: OPERATIONS AND MANAGEMENT POLICY BOARD.
   (A)   Establishment of the Board. An Operations and Policy Board for the
Balloon Fiesta Park is hereby established. The Board shall recognize, promote
and develop the uniqueness of the Balloon Fiesta Park, oversee the
implementation and vision of the Balloon Fiesta Park Master Development Plan
and develop a world-class ballooning and park facility for the citizens of
Albuquerque and the State of New Mexico. The Board is charged with assuring the
balance of public and private uses and for securing unrealized financial
funding for the operation and development of the Park. The Board shall consist
of nine members. The Board may not include any elected officials. Each Board
member will be appointed by the Mayor from each of the following organizations
with the advice and consent of the City Council:
      (1)    Two representatives from the Board of Directors of the Albuquerque
International Balloon Fiesta;
      (2)    One representative from the Wildflower Neighborhood Association;
      (3)    One representative from the Alameda North Valley Association;
      (4)    A person representing the interest of the Metropolitan Parks and
Recreation Advisory Board;
      (5)   A person representing the Pueblo of Sandia;
      (6)    A person representing local industry located near the Park;
      (7)    A person representing the interests of Balloon Fiesta Park
tenants; and
      (8)    One representative of the Albuquerque Convention and Visitors
Bureau.
   All members in filled positions of the Operations and Management Advisory
Board established in F/S R-159 shall be appointed as new members of the
Operations and Policy Board established herein. Members shall serve four-year
staggered terms.
   (B)   Balloon Fiesta Park Boundaries. The Boundaries of the Park are as
indicated in Exhibit A attached hereto.
   (C)    Board Authority. The responsibilities and authority of the Board will
be as follows:
      (1)   Establish policy, including fees, reservations and usage of the
Park.
      (2)   Oversee the operation and management of the Park.
      (3)   Negotiate leases with existing and future tenants of the Park.
      (4)   Review, negotiate and recommend revisions to existing leases,
licenses and other agreements for use of the Park.
      (5)   Negotiate sponsorship for the Park and events at the Park.
      (6)   Contract with, recommend and hire employees to perform the duties
of the Board not provided for by the City.
      (7)   Coordinate reservations for and scheduling of events at the Park.
      (8)   Undertake conflict resolution concerning issues at the Park,
      (9)   Work collaboratively in public relations regarding the Park.
      (10)   Oversee the implementation of the Master Development Plan for the
Park.
      (11)   Report annually to the Mayor and the City Council on its
activities, progress made in implementing the Master Development Plan and any
recommendations for additional policies or ordinances for the operation and
management of the Park.
      (12)   Recommend to the Mayor and City Council an annual operating and
capital budget.
      (13)   To engage in a long term planning process for the operation,
development and management of the Park through which it identifies major
problems and establishes a program of policy suggestions.
      (14)   To conduct regularly scheduled open public meetings.
      (15)   Adopt, promulgate, publish, amend and repeal regulations for the
use of the Park.
      (16)   Establish such policies as are deemed necessary for the operation,
management and maintenance of the Park.
      (17)   Adopt and amend bylaws governing the activities of the Board.
      (18)   Serve as the planning authority for the design, construction, use
and operation of the Park.
      (19)   To review and recommend the selection of all consultants other
than those hired pursuant to Section 14-7-2-1 et seq., Selection Advisory
Committee.
      (20   Establish annual fee and rental schedule for uses of the Park.
      (21)   To adopt guidelines procedures for selecting the resident tenants
and concessionaires of the Park and for allocating the facilities of the Park
to all other potential users.
      (22)   Develop a plan by the FY/05 budget to have the Park become self-
sustaining without City operating support within a three-year period.
      (23)   Develop a tenant association.
   (D)   Staff. The May or shall appoint a senior staff member to serve as the
full-time employee to coordinate the activities of the Board and Park. The
Mayor shall seek the advice and consent of the Board on the assignment of 10
personnel.
   (E)   Revenues. All revenues generated directly by activities at the Park
shall be deposited into the Balloon Park Fund, which shall require a budget and
appropriation by the City Council prior to any expenditure.
   (F)   Leases and Agreements. The Board shall not have the authority to
approve leases and agreements. However; all leases and agreements must be
reviewed and recommended to the Mayor and City Council for approval.
   (G)   Administrative Operations. The City and the Board shall develop a
current inventory of services and costs to establish a baseline for budget
purposes beginning in FY/04. This baseline shall be provided in the FY/05
budget. The Board shall develop a procedure for members of the Board to abstain
whenever a conflict of interest arises.
   (H)   Limitations. The Board shall act on behalf of the City regarding the
Park. However, no contract, agreement, license may be approved without the
Mayor and City Council approval. Conversely, the Mayor or City Council may not
unilaterally approve any contract, agreement, license, lease or budget without
the review and recommendation of the Board as provided in §
2-10-4(C). All scheduling for the Park must be reviewed and approved by the
Board. The City reserves the right to block out dates for citywide public
events.
   (I)   Appropriation. Revenue in the amount of $126,000 currently in the
Capital Implementation Program Fund 230, Field Improvements Project is hereby
appropriated to the Balloon Park Fund.
   (J)   Sunset. This legislation shall sunset five years after the adoption of
this legislation. The sunset is intended to be an evaluation benchmark of this
governance structure.
   (K)   Severability Clause. If any section, paragraph, sentence, clause, word
or phrase of this resolution is for any reason held to be invalid or
unenforceable by any court of competent jurisdiction, such decision shall not
affect the validity of the remaining provisions of this resolution. The Council
hereby declares that it would have passed this resolution and each section,
paragraph, sentence, clause, word or phrase thereof irrespective of any
provisions being declared unconstitutional or otherwise invalid.
(Res. 121-1999, approved 12-7-99; Am. Res. R-131-2003, approved 11-14-03)
§ 2-10-5 DR. MARTIN LUTHER KING, JR. MEMORIAL COMMITTEE
   (A)   The Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr. Memorial Committee will be responsible
for creating a recommendation for a location, design guidelines and budget for
the memorial;
   (B)   Upon acceptance by the City Council and the Mayor, the Committee will
create a Request for Proposal for the design and construction of such a
memorial at the recommended location, with the recommended design guidelines
and within the recommended budget.
(Res. R-2005-151, approved 9-28-05)
CHAPTER 3: POLICIES AND PROCEDURES
   Article
      
1.   GENERAL PROVISIONS
      
2.   LEGISLATIVE
      
3.   CITY EMPLOYEES
      
4.   HOUSING
      
5.   UTILITIES
      
6.   PARKS AND RECREATION
      
7.   SPECIAL ASSESSMENT DISTRICTS (REPEALED)
      
8.   TRANSPORTATION
      
9.   ENVIRONMENT
      
10.   PUBLIC HEALTH
      
11.   POLICE AND FIRE DEPARTMENTS
ARTICLE 1: GENERAL PROVISIONS
Section
   
3-1-1   Terms and conditions for the sale of surplus personal property and
unclaimed personal property of the city
   
3-1-2   Management of risk
   
3-1-3   Efficient government policy
   
3-1-4   Alternative dispute resolution
   
3-1-5   Release of billing materials in connection with city litigation
   
3-1-6   Competitive bidding for airport parking lease
   
3-1-7   Controlled bidding process for purchase of insurance
   
3-1-8   Euthanasia of animals; sodium pentobarbital
   
3-1-9   Sponsorship of city properties and events
   
3-1-10   Information technology and providing public access to public records
   
3-1-11   Immigrants and their families
   
3-1-12   Restaurant inspections on the Internet
   
3-1-13   Discussions on movement of Minge collection.
   
3-1-14   No tolerance for gender pay inequality.
§ 3-1-1 TERMS AND CONDITIONS FOR THE SALE OF SURPLUS PERSONAL PROPERTY AND
UNCLAIMED PERSONAL PROPERTY OF THE CITY.
   (A)   Surplus personal property of a value of more than $500 and unclaimed
personal property be sold at public auction conducted by a licensed auctioneer
under the terms of sale as follows:
      (1)   For cash, cashier's check, certified check, or letters of credit.
      (2)   The personal property is sold to the highest bidder “as is, where
is.”
      (3)   After an item is sold, it is the sole responsibility of the
purchaser.
      (4)   Items may be paid for and claimed during or after the sale, but no
item may be removed until complete settlement is made.
      (5)   Full settlement must be made on the day of the sale.
      (6)   Items may be inspected in accordance with provisions in the “Notice
of Sale” published in accordance with state statutes.
      (7)   Right to reject any bids as stated in public notice.
   (B)   This section shall govern all sales of surplus personal property of a
value of more than $500 and unclaimed personal property of the city.
(Res. 51-1974, approved 12-19-74)
§ 3-1-2 MANAGEMENT OF RISK.
   (A)   All departments and employees of the city are charged with the
responsibility to identify and report loss exposures or potentially dangerous
situations which could lead to an incident or occurrence having an adverse
fiscal impact upon the city's assets, its employees, or the general public. All
identified exposures shall be reported in writing to the city's Risk Manager
who is currently the Director of Risk Management. The Risk Manager shall
develop an education campaign for city employees to help them identify
dangerous situations and an incentive program to encourage employees to report
them.
   (B)   The city's Risk Manager shall evaluate the potential fiscal impact of
all identified exposures by line of coverage (ex. Workers' Compensation;
General Liability; Law Enforcement; Auto Liability; City Property; etc.).
   (C)   The city's Risk Manager shall determine whether to self insure the
risk of loss or transfer it to a third party through the acquisition of
insurance.
      (1)   In making this determination, the Risk Manager shall, at a minimum,
consider the following:
         (a)   The availability of the desired insurance coverage;
         (b)   The deductibles, aggregate limits, and other terms and
conditions of any available policy;
         (c)   The insurance premium vs. the potential fiscal impact of
incurred losses;
         (d)   The potential for catastrophic loss through a single occurrence
or in the aggregate of all occurrences;
      (2)   Insurance policies shall not be acquired unless the following
provisions are complied with:
         (a)   Funding for insurance policies has been obtained through the
city's appropriation process; and
         (b)   The line of coverage and rate of commission is specified in the
city's contract with its Insurance Agent of Record; or specifications will be
prepared and bids solicited for the insurance policy(ies) in accordance with
the Public Purchase Ordinance and the Agent of Record contract.
   (D)   The city's Risk Manager shall, in conjunction with the preparation of
the city's annual operating budget, prepare a Cost of Risk Allocation Plan to
equitably distribute the anticipated expense of the Risk Management Fund to all
departments, agencies, or funds benefiting from the operations of Risk
Management. It is the intent of the Council that this plan is to be used to
assure that adequate resources are available to provide for the fiscal impact
of incurred losses (including adequate reserves therefore) and all other
appropriated expenditures of the Risk Management Fund. Therefore, the
assessments (allocations) derived through the plan as well as any deviations
shall be disclosed to the Council prior to the adoption of the city's annual
operating budget.
   (E)   The City Council hereby adopts a policy to meet its financial
obligations on unforeseen incurred losses which arise from court judgments. In
those situations where the payment of a claim would significantly overextend
the budget or severely undermine the plan to fully reserve for claims then the
city's Risk Manager shall prepare legislation with the Mayor's endorsement for
submission to the City Council for their consideration. Accompanying such
legislation shall be a full explanation of the claim and judgment and the
reasons why it cannot be paid for out of the funds available in the Risk
Management Fund. The Council, after full deliberation, will determine through
its normal legislative process whether or not the judgment shall be placed on
the property tax rolls. Only those judgments shall be considered for incidents
occurring after July 1, 1990 or prior, providing a judgment against the city is
rendered by a court and that judgment exceeds the limits of the Tort Claims
Act. Judgments meeting the above requirements and eligible for such treatment
in accordance with the provisions of the Tort Claims Act of the state of New
Mexico shall be considered; provided however that there must be a 2/3 vote of
those voting for approval to place such losses on the property tax roles.
   (F)   The administration is hereby requested to research and evaluate
alternatives for complying with the requirements promulgated by the Government
Accounting Standards Board (GASB) to implement a plan by 1995 to eliminate the
deficit in the Risk Management Fund. Included, as part of this analysis, should
be an evaluation of the costs of non-compliance, a survey of the plans and
actions taken by other governmental entities relative to the GASB ruling and
the potential for city assets being placed in the Risk Management Fund in lieu
of a cash transfer. In evaluating the asset transfer alternative a set of
criteria should be developed and current and future city assets systematically
assessed against these criteria. A formal report on the results of the research
and alternatives should be made to the Council prior to July 1, 1991.
(Res. 133-1990, approved 10-15-90)
§ 3-1-3 EFFICIENT GOVERNMENT POLICY.
   (A)   It shall be the policy of city government to attempt continually to
operate as efficiently as possible and that pursuant to this end on-going
studies should be conducted to help achieve efficient and effective government
functioning.
   (B)   The City Council supports the Department of Internal Audit in
conducting regular management studies and audits to evaluate the efficiency of
city operations and offer recommendations.
   (C)   The City Council shall identify specific management studies and audits
consistent with this policy. These projects shall be submitted to the Internal
Audit Committee as requests for special audits.
   (D)   An ad hoc committee shall be established by the Department of Internal
Audit for these government efficiency studies and a member of the City Council
staff shall be a member of this committee.
   (E)   The Internal Audit Department shall assign sufficient staff to these
studies so that preliminary or final project reports may be submitted to the
City Council and the Mayor prior to March 1, 1992 and by May 8, 1992.
   (F)   A management consulting firm may be hired to assist the Department of
Internal Audit in conducting these management studies and audits.
   (G)   $25,000 is appropriated to the Department of Internal Audit from the
General Fund Reserve to secure the assistance of the management consulting
firm.
(Res. 50-1992, approved 1-22-92)
§ 3-1-4 ALTERNATIVE DISPUTE RESOLUTION.
   (A)   The city shall consistently evaluate potential and existing conflicts
for the possibility of efficient and constructive resolution through the use of
alternative dispute resolution (ADR) at the first appropriate administrative
level.
   (B)   The city shall encourage the use of ADR in all appropriate situations.
   (C)   The Administration shall coordinate efforts to encourage and enhance
the use of ADR techniques.
   (D)   Council staff should continue to work with the Administration and
private mediators to expeditiously develop guidelines for the use of ADR to
accomplish appropriate, cost effective resolution of disputes relating to site-
specific land use regulation changes, recognizing that the city cannot finally
decide such matters outside the system required by Constitutional due process,
statutes and ordinances. Proposed guidelines shall be approved by the
Environmental Planning Commission and the Council before being implemented for
a test period.
(Res. 164-1992, approved 11-13-92)
§ 3-1-5 RELEASE OF BILLING MATERIALS IN CONNECTION WITH CITY LITIGATION.
   (A)   As to all bills for litigation completed prior to the effective date
of this section, submitted to the city for defense of the city as a party, the
bills will be made available for review by individual City Councillor in the
offices of the City Attorney. Such City Councillor shall, prior to review of
the bills, state in writing that they will keep the information obtained
confidential. That upon written or oral request by any person other than a City
Councillor, bills will be made available for release to the public. When a
privilege or request for continued confidentiality is asserted, redactions of
bills, deleting those privileged or confidential materials, will be made
available. The redacted bills will include identification of all work performed
and by whom it has been performed. Redactions will be done under the direct
supervision of the City Attorney. Privilege and confidentiality are used herein
as established in the Rules of Evidence for the courts of New Mexico and the
United States and as the terms may be construed by those courts. The City
Attorney shall establish an informal dispute resolution process for disputes
concerning whether redacted material is privileged or confidential.
   (B)   As to all bills previously submitted to the city for litigation
completed prior to the effective date of this section for defense of a city
employee, appointed or elected official, sued in his or her individual
capacity, as opposed to official capacity, the bills that include privileged
communication or confidential communications between the attorney and the
individual will not be made available to anyone other than the represented
individual. However, upon written request by any person, redactions of the
bills, deleting privileged or confidential materials, will be made available.
The redacted bills will include identification of all work performed and by
whom it has been performed. Redactions will be done under the direct
supervision of the City Attorney. Privilege and confidentiality are used herein
as established in the Rules of Evidence for the courts of New Mexico and the
United States and as the terms may be construed by those courts.
   (C)   As for all bills submitted to the city following the effective date of
this section for defense of the city as a party, members of the City Council
and authorized members of the City Council staff, shall have unrestricted
access to outside counsel billings during the course of the legal work and
after its conclusion. The bills will detail all work done by outside counsel
and shall be available to the public upon submission to the city for payment.
Any privileged or confidential communications deemed necessary in the conduct
of the litigation shall be submitted separately from the bills and included in
an explanatory letter. Any attorney or law firm who shall have an outside
counsel contract shall agree not to assert a work product privilege against the
city for information contained in any bill or invoice.
   (D)   All bills submitted to the city shall comply with such rules and
regulations the City Attorney may deem necessary.
(Res. 59-1994, approved 7-6-94)
§ 3-1-6 COMPETITIVE BIDDING FOR AIRPORT PARKING LEASE.
   (A)   The Mayor shall ensure that any renewal of the lease for airport
parking or any new lease agreement for this parking shall be executed through a
competitive bidding process.
   (B)   To preserve competitive prices for airport parking, the parking fees
to be charged by the operator or the airport parking facility shall be approved
by the city.
(Res. 152-1982, approved 9-16-82)
§ 3-1-7 CONTROLLED BIDDING PROCESS FOR PURCHASE OF INSURANCE.
   The city ratifies and affirms the controlled bidding process through an
agent of record for the purchase of insurance.
(Res. 191-1982, approved 11-23-82)
§ 3-1-8 EUTHANASIA OF ANIMALS; SODIUM PENTOBARBITAL.
   (A)   The disposal of all stray or abandoned animals by the Animal Control
Division of the city shall be accomplished by injection of sodium pentobarbital
or a derivative thereof.
   (B)   Personnel administering the injections shall be trained and instructed
in proper humane animal disposal procedures.
   (C)   Sodium pentobarbital shall be purchased, stored, and controlled under
applicable federal, state, and city regulations.
   (D)   Necessary equipment shall be purchased and facilities shall be
prepared for administering euthanasia by injection for stray or abandoned
animals.
   (E)   Such devices as a decompression chamber, for the euthanasia of
animals, shall not be used for the destruction of animals.
   (F)   A representative of the Mayor shall maintain accurate records and
security for the use of all drugs, including sodium pentobarbital, used in the
humane destruction of animals.
(Res. 156-1977, approved 9-1-77)
§ 3-1-9 SPONSORSHIP OF CITY PROPERTIES AND EVENTS.
   (A)   To institutionalize and strengthen the City of Albuquerque's ongoing
quest for cost-effective service delivery, an organization-wide policy shall be
developed by the city administration incorporating the principles in the
following divisions. This policy shall be transmitted by executive
communication to the City Council within six months of passage of this
resolution.
   (B)   The policy shall create a framework for developing and managing
sponsorships of appropriate city properties, events, and services and shall
include a means for assessing and selecting the most appropriate and effective
approach of sponsorship management, including centralized, in-house
administration and/or professional sponsorship management services.
   (C)   To provide both appropriate incentives for city departments to pursue
sponsorships as well as to create more tangible benefits to sponsors, a
representative portion of any net revenues developed by the sponsorship of any
city property, event, or service shall be applied to capital improvements and/
or service enhancements for the respective property, event, or service. The
Chief Administrative Officer shall address the method to determine the amounts
to be used for property or service improvements in the citywide policy.
   (D)   To ensure that sponsorships do not lead to any appearances of
conflicts of interest between government and business or between government and
the public good, sponsorships shall not be pursued by city agencies which are
responsible for law enforcement or regulatory functions, or which perform
general governance functions without the specific approval of the Mayor and
City Council.
   (E)   This policy shall comply with the city's purchasing ordinance,
specifically in regards to any contract which generates over $55,000 in
revenues per year and thus requires City Council approval.
   (F)   This policy shall establish appropriate design guidelines that
emphasize generally acceptable community standards of decorum and good taste
when any sponsorship association exists on a city property or during city
events.
   (G)   The city policy shall acknowledge the significant contributions of
non-profit support groups, organized to assist certain city functions to better
deliver services, and shall equitably establish proper roles and coordination
with them regarding the development of sponsorships and the subsequent uses of
sponsorship revenues.
   (H)   The city policy shall encourage the use of existing customer
representative committees (for example, the Golf Advisory Committee) to develop
sponsorship strategies for a specific property or event.
   (I)   When the city has previously named a public facility or property in
honor of or memorializing an individual or individuals, that facility or
property shall not be eligible for a title sponsorship association.
   (J)   The Chief Administrative Officer shall report on the status of
sponsorship activities, policy needs, and sponsorship revenue development to
the City Council within one year of the passage of this resolution and annually
thereafter for two subsequent years as part of the Mayor's operating budget
transmittal to City Council.
   (K)   The Chief Administrative Officer shall assign appropriate city staff
to support the coordination of sponsorship activities within the City of
Albuquerque.
(Res. 34-1999, approved 3-19-99)
Cross-reference:
   
Sponsorship of the International Balloon Fiesta, see § 6-8-1
   
Sponsorship of the Lovelace Duke City Marathon, see § 6-8-2
§ 3-1-10 INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY AND PROVIDING PUBLIC ACCESS TO PUBLIC RECORDS.
   (A)   The following policies and guidelines are established for the
development of the City information technology and electronic commerce:
      (1)   City information, not specifically excluded from the public domain
by other ordinances or laws, should be made available to the public via the
World Wide Web (web), with an emphasis on usability and friendliness to
residents.
      (2)   The City shall create the infrastructure necessary to enable web
and other electronic City-related business transactions, such as but not
limited to obtaining City services, obtaining City permits, enrolling in City
programs, and paying bills for City services. The City shall also establish a
customer relations management system to handle non-emergency incoming calls for
City services. This system shall be connected to the City's website so that the
public can conduct more business on the Internet.
      (3)   The City shall continue to protect the integrity of its internal
information infrastructure from external malicious attempts to disrupt
operations or otherwise corrupt data.
      (4)   The City shall in franchise negotiations encourage
telecommunication and cable providers to connect all City households and
businesses to broadband access as soon as reasonably possible.
      (5)   In general, the City views electronic information, dissemination
and commerce services as an important basic municipal service, and the Council
wants the City to be in the first rank of municipalities in providing such
services.
   (B)   The City's Information Services Committee (ISC) shall undertake a
survey of municipal e-commerce services nationwide and identify such services,
and perhaps other ideas developed by ISC, that are appropriate to the policies
set out in this Resolution. The ISC shall also create a sub-task force made up
of City staff, City residents and business people to determine what information
would be useful to the public. The ISC shall by March 15, 2001 provide to
Council a list and proposed timetable, with estimated costs to the extent
possible, for establishing the City as among the most effective municipalities
in providing electronic information access and services.
(Res. 6-2001, approved 1-10-01)
§ 3-1-11 IMMIGRANTS AND THEIR FAMILIES.
   (A)   The Council declares Albuquerque to be an immigrant-friendly City. The
Council welcomes and encourages immigrants to live, work, and study in
Albuquerque and to participate in community affairs, and recognizes immigrants
for their important contributions to our culture and economy.
   (B)   The Council establishes the following policies for the City of
Albuquerque:
      (1)   To the fullest extent allowed by federal and state law, immigrants
who live within the City limits of Albuquerque and their families shall have
access to all City services and programs.
      (2)   The City encourages all public agencies to facilitate the access of
immigrants and their families to basic services, including but not limited to
legal driver's licenses, health care, and education, including Albuquerque
Technical Vocational Institute and the University of New Mexico, to the fullest
extent allowable by law.
      (3)   The City will include in its legislative agenda requests that
Congress enact just and humane immigration reforms that provide immigrants and
their families with rights in this country that are commensurate with human
dignity and their status as taxpayers and contributing members of our
community, and that the State of New Mexico Legislature revise its laws and
policies for health care, education, and drivers' licenses to such that
immigrants and their families will have fair access to those services and
privileges.
      (4)   The City shall not discriminate on the basis of a person's national
origin and will treat all persons with respect and dignity, regardless of
immigration status. The Human Rights Commission shall oversee the
implementation of this policy.
      (5)   No municipal resources shall be used to identify individuals'
immigration status or apprehend persons on the sole basis of immigration
status, unless otherwise required by law to do so.
   (C)   Each City department shall develop operational procedures consistent
with the policies set out in this section.
   (D)   An Immigrant Resource Program is established, to provide information
and referral in the areas of English as a Second Language education,
citizenship classes, housing, health care, secondary vocational and higher
education and other areas. The Administration will recommend to the Council
whether this program should be administered by a City department or by
contract.
(Res. 9-2001, approved 1-11-01)
§ 3-1-12 RESTAURANT INSPECTIONS ON THE INTERNET.
   (A)   The Environmental Health Department shall develop a state-of-the-art
online reporting system and place the latest health inspector records of any
restaurant establishment within the city limits on the city's website.
   (B)   The restaurant inspection information shall be presented in an easy to
understand format.
   (C)   The restaurant inspection information shall be organized by zip code
and/or other local community areas or zones.
   (D)   Users shall be able to call up a history of past restaurant
inspections at a particular establishment and get a good idea of its reputation
for health and sanitation.
(Res. 80-2002, approved 8-19-02)
§ 3-1-13 DISCUSSION ON MOVEMENT OF MINGE COLLECTION.
   (A)   The city shall consult with concerned citizen groups that are
interested in the preservation of the Minge collection and the State of new
Mexico, County of Sandoval and the Village of Corrales to develop a plan which
addresses the concerns and suggestions for preserving the collection housed at
Casa San Ysidro.
   (B)   The Administration shall report to the Council concerning its
consultations with concerned citizen groups, State of New Mexico, the County of
Sandoval and the Village of Corrales and the plan developed by the city as a
result of the consultations to keep the Minge collections at Casa San Ysidro
within 30 days.
   (C)   Any plan which entails the movement of the collection from the current
Casa San Ysidro site shall require the approval of the City Council.
(Res. 38-2003, adopted 5-5-03; Am. Res. 6-2004, adopted 1-5-04)
§ 3-1-14 NO TOLERANCE FOR GENDER PAY INEQUALITY.
   (A)   The Administration is directed to indentify all areas and instances of
gender pay inequality within City of Albuquerque government and to prepare a
report to be presented to the City Council within 120 days from the adoption of
this resolution that sets forth the City's action plan for correcting and
preventing gender pay inequality within City government.
   (B)   The Administration is directed to develop and implement a policy for
requiring contractors and vendors doing business with the City to demonstrate
that they are in compliance with the Federal Equal Pay Act prior to their
selection by the City.
   (C)   The Administration is directed to place the City's gender pay equality
action plan and progress reports on the City's Transparency website.
(R-2013-124, approved 11-22-2013)
ARTICLE 2: LEGISLATIVE
Section
   
3-2-1   Procedures on presentation of ordinances and resolutions by and between
Mayor and Council
   
3-2-2   Procedures for distribution of bills which have been introduced to the
Council
   
3-2-3   Use of the official seal of the city
   
3-2-4   Reasonable notice of public meetings of the Council
   
3-2-5   Relationship between the City Council and City Attorney
   
3-2-6   Guidelines and financial policies for programs which receive federal
funds, operating funds and bonding matters
   
3-2-7   Interim guidelines and policies for the use of public financing in
urban development
   
3-2-8   Guidelines and policies for implementing funding reductions for city
services
   
3-2-9   Procedures and fees for distribution of bills introduced to Council
   
3-2-10   Establishment and revision of city fees
   
3-2-11   Publication of legal notices
   
3-2-12   Fiscal impact analysis of bills greater than $25,000
   
3-2-13   Continuous sequential numbering of city charter amendments
   
3-2-14   Designated fund balance policy
   
3-2-15   Industrial revenue bond projects
   
3-2-16   Comprehensive plan accountability analysis
§ 3-2-1 PROCEDURES ON PRESENTATION OF ORDINANCES AND RESOLUTIONS BY AND BETWEEN
MAYOR AND COUNCIL.
   (A)   Whenever the City Council shall have enacted proposed ordinances and
resolutions said proposed resolutions and ordinances shall be sent from the
Council to the Mayor accompanied by a letter of transmittal indicating the date
on which it is being presented to the Mayor by the Council.
   (B)   When the Council has forwarded a proposed ordinance or resolution as
set forth above, then if the Mayor approves the proposed ordinance or
resolution or if the Mayor fails to act within 10 days from the date of
presentation by the Council, the Mayor shall then forward said proposed
ordinance or resolution to the City Clerk and concurrent with this action, the
Mayor shall notify the City Council, in writing, of the action taken and the
date of the action by the Mayor. The City Clerk shall assign a number to the
ordinance or resolution and shall send a copy of the same to the Council.
   (C)   If the Mayor disapproves all or part of any proposed ordinance or
resolution, said proposed ordinance or resolution shall be returned to the
Council, accompanied by a message indicating the reason for the Mayor's
disapproval and the date of the Mayor's action. For the purposes of this
section, the date of return shall be the next regularly scheduled meeting of
the Council held after receipt of the message in the office of the Clerk of the
Council.
   (D)   In the event the Mayor disapproves all or any part of a proposed
ordinance or resolution and the Council shall pass the proposed ordinance or
resolution over the Mayor's veto, the ordinance or resolution shall be
transmitted by the Council to the City Clerk and concurrent with said
transmittal shall by message inform the Mayor of the action of the Council. The
City Clerk shall assign a number to the ordinance or resolution and shall send
a copy of the same to the Council.
   (E)   In the event the Council fails to pass a proposed ordinance or
resolution over the Mayor's veto within 10 days of its return by the Mayor, the
proposed ordinance or resolution shall be dead.
   (F)   Council memorials shall be numbered by the Clerk of the Council and
transmitted to the appropriate parties.
   (G)   Charter amendment proposals that emanate from the City Council shall
be sent to the City Clerk, who shall assign a proposition number to the Charter
Amendment Proposal.
(Res. 10-1974, approved 9-30-74)
§ 3-2-2 PROCEDURES FOR DISTRIBUTION OF BILLS WHICH HAVE BEEN INTRODUCED TO THE
COUNCIL.
   (A)   All bills shall be ready for distribution at the Council office 48
hours after they have been introduced to the Council.
   (B)   The Director of Council Services shall maintain a complete file of
bills introduced to the Council.
   (C)   Copies of bills shall be provided free of charge to the following:
      (1)   All Councilors;
      (2)   The Mayor;
      (3)   City Attorney;
      (4)   Bernalillo County Clerk;
      (5)   News media; and
      (6)   Albuquerque Public Library.
   (D)   Upon written request, one copy shall be provided free-of-charge to:
      (1) UNM Law School Library;
      (2)   Elected state officials;
      (3)   Incorporated municipalities within Bernalillo County;
      (4)   School districts within Bernalillo County; and
      (5)   District Attorney - Second Judicial District.
   (E)   Any organization or person may obtain from Council Services a copy of
all bills introduced to the Council by the payment of an annual fee of $100.
   (F)   Single copies of bills may be obtained at the rate of $0.35 per copy
or $0.50 if mailed.
   (G)   Payment of all fees for copies of bills shall be made to the City
Treasurer. Council Services will issue copies of bills upon presentation of a
receipt from the City Treasurer.
   (H)   All funds collected under the provisions of this section are to be
deposited in the General Fund of the city.
(Res. 26-1975, approved 3-5-75)
§ 3-2-3 USE OF THE OFFICIAL SEAL OF THE CITY.
   (A)   The official seal of Albuquerque, as attached hereto and made a part
hereof, will be the only symbol of this city displayed on municipally-owned
property.
   (B)   All city stationery, excepting the supplies of stationery already in
existence and any other items specified by the Mayor or the Council, must
display, so as to be clearly visible, the official seal of the city.
(Res. 54-1975, approved 4-10-75)
§ 3-2-4 REASONABLE NOTICE OF PUBLIC MEETINGS OF THE COUNCIL.
   (A)   Location of Meetings. Meetings of the full Council shall normally be
held at the Vincent E. Griego Chambers, basement level of the Albuquerque/
Bernalillo County Government Center at One Civic Plaza NW, near the
intersection of Fifth Street and Marquette Avenue NW, Albuquerque, New Mexico.
In the event that meetings with in-person, physical attendance is not possible
or advisable due to a public health emergency or otherwise, virtual meetings
will be held and available for viewing at www.cabg.gov/govtv and https://
www.youtube.com/c/GOVTVBoardsCommissionMeatings.
   (B)   Regular Meetings. Meetings will be held each month on the dates
specified by Council resolution, as provided in Section 2-1-1 of the Revised
Ordinances of Albuquerque, 1994. Generally, Council meetings are held at 5:00
p.m. on the first and third Mondays of each month. The final agenda will be
available 72 hours prior to the meeting from the Clerk of the Council, whose
office is located in the Albuquerque/Bernalillo County Government Center, One
Civic Plaza NW, 9th Floor, Suite 9087. The Clerk of the Council shall post, if
possible, a draft listing of agenda items to come before the full Council on
the Albuquerque City Council web site (www.cabq.gov/council) at least five days
prior to the meeting, subject to revision until the agenda is deemed final.
   (C)   Special Meetings. Special meetings may be called by the President of
the Council or by three Councilors upon 72 hours' notice. The notice shall
include information on how members of the public may obtain a copy of the
agenda. The agenda shall be available to the public at least 72 hours before
any special meeting.
    (D)   Emergency Meetings. Emergency meetings will be called in accordance
with Section 2-1-4 ROA 1994. The Council will avoid emergency meetings whenever
possible. Emergency meetings may be called by the President of the Council upon
24 hours' notice, unless the threat of personal injury or property damage
requires less notice. The notice for all emergency meetings shall include an
agenda for the meeting or information on how the public may obtain a copy of
the agenda.
   (E)   Committee Meetings. City Council Committee meetings may be called by
the chair of a committee upon reasonable notice. The notice shall include
information on how members of the public may obtain a copy of the agenda. The
agenda shall be available to the public at least 72 hours before any committee
meeting. Council committees do not hold emergency meetings.
   (F)   Location of Notice for all Meetings. For the purpose of meetings
described in Divisions (B), (C), (D) and (E) of this section, notice
requirements are met by posting a notice of the date, time, location and the
agenda in the lobby of the Albuquerque/Bernalillo County Government Center and
posted on the Albuquerque City Council web site (www.cabq.gov/council). The
Clerk of the Council shall also provide copies of the agendas to those
broadcast stations licensed by the Federal Communications Commission and
newspapers of general circulation in Albuquerque, which entities have made a
written request for notice of public meetings. Such notice shall be provided to
the Government Access Cable TV Channel.
   (G)   Accessibility. Public documents, including the agendas and minutes,
can be provided in various accessible formats. Please contact the Clerk of the
Council at the Council Office if a certain type of accessible format is needed.
In addition to the information specified above, all notices shall include the
following language:
      "NOTICE TO PERSONS WITH DISABILITIES: If you have a disability and
require special assistance to participate in this meeting, please contact the
Council Office as soon as possible before the meeting date at 505-768-3100.
Those in need of hearing assistance may call 711."
   (H)   Cancellations and Different Meeting Times and Places. Meetings may be
cancelled or scheduled at different times and locations than set forth herein.
The announcement of such changes should be made, when possible, at a prior
meeting of the full Council or Council Committee.
(Res. 145-1993, approved 10-14-93; Am. Res. 72-1994, approved 8-9-94; Am. Res.
105-1995, approved 8-25-95; Am. Res. 88-1996, approved 8-22-96; Am. Res. 81-
1997, approved 8-28-97; Am. Res. 103-1998, approved 10-20-98; Am. Res. 104-
1999, approved 10-12-99; Res. 108-2000, approved 10-31-00; Res. 152-2001,
approved 10-24-01; Res. 157-2003, approved 11-14-03; Am. Res. R-166-2005,
approved 10-31-05; Am. Res. R-2006-101, approved 11-3-06; Am. Res. R-2007-114,
approved 9-24-07; Am. Res. R-2008-124, approved 10-29-08; Am. Res. R-2011-108,
approved 10-18-2011; Am. Res. R-2019-073, approved 10-3-2019; Am. Res. R-2020-
104, approved 10-13-2020)
§ 3-2-5 RELATIONSHIP BETWEEN THE CITY COUNCIL AND THE CITY ATTORNEY.
   (A)   It is the duty of the City Attorney, in addition to other duties
prescribed by law, City Charter and City Ordinances, and imposed thereon by the
executive, to attend all meetings of the City Council both regular and special.
   (B)   The City Attorney is the legal advisor of the City Council, and shall
render advice on all legal questions affecting the city, whenever requested to
do so by the City Council.
   (C)   It is the duty of the City Attorney to draft or review upon request of
the City Council, ordinances, resolutions or acts creating rights covering any
subjects within the power of the city.
   (D)   All duties herein specified may be delegated by the City Attorney in
his discretion to qualified members of the Legal Department.
   (E)   Notwithstanding the provision of divisions (B) and (C) above, the City
Attorney may decline to represent both the executive and the Council, when in
his opinion stated in writing to both, he declares himself unable to do so
because the legal positions of the parties are in conflict. In such case, the
Council will provide for representation by other attorneys of their selection.
(Res. 33-1975, approved 3-3-75)
§ 3-2-6 GUIDELINES AND FINANCIAL POLICIES FOR PROGRAMS WHICH RECEIVE FEDERAL
FUNDS, OPERATING FUNDS AND BONDING MATTERS.
   (A)   The following guidelines and policies relating to programs which
receive federal funds be utilized by the Mayor and City Council as part of
their decision-making process in the approval of programs which receive federal
funds.
      (1)   Guidelines for programs which receive federal funds.
         (a)   Many federal programs, including federal projects and federal
seed money programs, which are available to local governmental units, are not
necessarily consistent with local priorities.
         (b)   The local community, through its elected and community
leadership is better equipped to set its own priorities than are other levels
of government.
         (c)   The city cannot afford to support national priorities with local
resources.
      (2)   Financial policy for programs which receive federal funds.
         (a)   The city should not accept funding from other levels of
government for programs which do not meet local objectives.
         (b)   The city does not support the initiation of pilot projects which
are inconsistent with local objectives.
         (c)   The city supports the continuance of federal and state funds for
use by local government where local priorities are met.
   (B)   The following guidelines and policies relating to operating programs
be utilized by the Mayor and City Council as part of their decision-making
process in the selection of operating programs:
      (1)   Operating program guidelines.
         (a)   Local government has the primary responsibility for insuring the
adequacy of traditional city services.
         (b)   Local government also must assume the primary responsibility for
such other operating programs as its local community may demand and be willing
to finance.
         (c)   Enterprise operations of the city should be run on a self-
sustaining basis.
      (2)   Operating program financial policy.
         (a)   The city accepts as its first priority for funding those
traditional city services which have been established as the primary
responsibility of local government. For the purposes of this resolution,
traditional city services shall mean those services which have been established
by virtue of precedence as essential to the preservation of the health, safety
and general welfare of the citizens of the city.
         (b)   The city accepts responsibility for other programs which the
governing body of the city determines to have a high local public purpose.
Inherent in such a local policy determination is the explicit recognition that
the city need not accept the responsibility for programs which are based on a
statewide, regional or national public purpose. Also inherent in this policy
statement is the recognition that even where a high local public purpose can be
demonstrated, the city need not assume responsibility for programs which have
traditionally been the responsibility of other organizations within the
community.
         (c)   Fees which are charged in connection with existing city programs
should be studied on a periodic basis and adjusted when appropriate. Programs
which are defined as enterprise operations should include charges which will
insure that the program is self-sustaining.
   (C)   The following guidelines and policies relating to bonding should be
utilized by the Mayor and City Council as part of their decision-making process
as it relates to bonding matters:
      (1)   Bonding guidelines.
         (a)   The city has supported a tradition of stability in the ad
valorem tax rate for capital improvements.
         (b)   Debt service should be included as a cost of operation for
enterprise functions.
         (c)   The city should limit its capital projects to funds available
for capital purposes.
      (2)   Bonding financial policy.
         (a)   The ad valorem tax rate should not be increased to support new
bond issues.
         (b)   Fees charges for services in enterprise operations should
generate revenues sufficient to cover debt service resulting from the issuance
of bonds for capital improvements and assure the continued financial self-
sufficiency of the enterprise function.
         (c)   Capital projects which would require the continuing use of
general operating funds and thereby reduce amounts available to support basic
services should be discouraged.
(Res. 2-1977, approved 2-3-77)
§ 3-2-7 INTERIM GUIDELINES AND POLICIES FOR THE USE OF PUBLIC FINANCING IN
URBAN DEVELOPMENT.
   (A)   The city hereby assigns high priority to increasing the means of
financing redevelopment and rehabilitation of older inner-city areas. The city
hereby adopts the policy that industrial revenue bonds and revenue bonds may be
used for projects designed to rehabilitate redeveloping areas, in accordance
with the standards established herein.
   (B)   The city hereby adopts the Interim Guidelines and Policies, which are
contained herein, for the use of public financing in the redevelopment of
designated redeveloping areas. The city may utilize singularly or in
combination one or more of the following development tools: tax increment
funds, urban development bonds, community development bonds, industrial revenue
bonds, revenue bonds, and community development funds, for projects located in
designated urban renewal areas, designated community development areas or
special economic development areas designated by the City Council, provided the
proposed project complies with the following standards:
      (1)   The project meets the requirements of the laws governing the use of
the bonds or funds proposed to be utilized.
      (2)   The project helps accomplish the objectives outlined in the city's
Comprehensive Policies Plan, especially the policies that “redevelopment and
rehabilitation of older neighborhoods should be continued and expanded” and
“compatible mixing of residential, commercial, light industrial, and
educational activities on an area-wide basis shall be encouraged where
desirable and appropriate to lessen the need for travel.”
      (3)   The project helps fulfill the objectives of any adopted urban
renewal plan, land development plan, sector development plan, or community
development plan for the area where it is located.
   (C)   The city may require an agreement with the owners of a development
otherwise eligible for assistance in the form of industrial revenue bonds or
urban development bonds to provide for payment in lieu of property taxes,
during the life of the bonds or a portion thereof.
   (D)   A screening committee consisting of the Mayor or his designated
representative, a City Councillor, and a member of the Urban Development
Commission shall be established to review any private sector project which
requests assistance in one of the forms listed herein. Committee members shall
be appointed by the entity they represent to serve a term which is designated
by said entity. The Committee shall advise any person interested in such public
assistance on whether the proposed project appears to comply with the
guidelines adopted herein and shall assist interested persons, as may be
feasible, in developing projects which will implement the objective of this
resolution and the relevant portions of the city's Comprehensive Policies Plan.
   (E)   The Mayor shall cause studies to be conducted and a legislative
package to be developed to facilitate the redevelopment of designated
redeveloping areas through public financing mechanisms. The legislative package
shall consist of state and local legislation, and may address such matters as
using tax increment funds for loans and grants to private sector projects, ad
valorem tax abatement for private sector redevelopment efforts, creation of an
additional revenue source from redeveloping areas, provision of additional
taxes or assessments to pay for downtown improvements, and other financing
mechanisms available for municipal participation.
   (F)   The interim guidelines and policies established herein shall remain in
effect until this section is repealed or amended.
(Res. 190-1977, approved 9-28-77)
§ 3-2-8 GUIDELINES AND POLICIES FOR IMPLEMENTING FUNDING REDUCTIONS FOR CITY
SERVICES.
   (A)   The following guidelines and policies be incorporated as a part of a
financial plan of the city:
      (1)   The city will not accept funding from other levels of government
far programs which do not meet local objectives.
      (2)   The city does not support the initiation of pilot projects which
are inconsistent with local objectives.
      (3)   The city accepts as its first priority for funding those
traditional city services which have been established as the primary
responsibility of local government. Traditional city services shall mean those
services which have been established by virtue of precedence as essential to
the preservation of the health, safety and general welfare of the citizens of
the city.
      (4)   Fees for services should be charged wherever equitable and should
be adjusted periodically to compensate for actual costs of services. Separate
resident and non-resident fees for city services should be considered.
   (B)   The city take the following actions to assist in determining funding
reductions for city services:
      (1)   Explore possibilities of levying charges to other governmental
bodies for costs to city resulting from mandates from those governmental
bodies.
      (2)   Undertake specific studies to identify areas where increased
productivity would nullify the need for additional positions on the filling of
vacant positions.
      (3)   For each federal grant application a statement be prepared citing
the city's long-term financial responsibilities if the grant program is
approved.
      (4)   Identify facilities the renovation or replacement of which might
reduce operating costs.
      (5)   Assign a high priority to the collection of all overdue fees and
charges for city services.
      (6)   Prepare an analysis of rental costs incurred by the city and the
possibility of reducing these costs through the relocation of certain city
operations.
      (7)   Review all human services funded by the city in order to establish
priorities and then ascertain the feasibility of obtaining other sources of
funding for these programs.
      (8)   Establish a requirement that employees hired for programs funded by
federal and state grants be hired as term employees whose continued employment
is conditional upon the continuation of the relevant grant.
(Res. 29-1979, approved 2-22-79)
§ 3-2-9 PROCEDURES AND FEES FOR DISTRIBUTION OF BILLS INTRODUCED TO COUNCIL.
   (A)   All bills shall be ready for distribution at the Council Office 48
hours after they have been introduced.
   (B)   Any organization or person may obtain a copy of all bills introduced
to the Council by paying an annual fee of $150.
   (C)   Single copies of bills may be obtained at the rate of $0.10 per page.
   (D)   Payment of all fees for copies of bills shall be made to the City
Treasurer and that Council Services will issue copies of bills upon
presentation of a receipt from the City Treasurer;
   (E)   All funds collected under the provisions of this section are to be
deposited in the General Fund of the city.
(Res. 2-1981, approved 1-2-81)
§ 3-2-10 ESTABLISHMENT AND REVISION OF CITY FEES.
   (A)   All fees charged by the city shall be reviewed by the Mayor
periodically as necessary to keep charges at levels consistent with city
policies; where appropriate, fee revisions shall be promptly proposed to the
Council.
   (B)   Fees shall be set at a level approximately equal to city cost of
providing the services, including overhead costs, except:
      (1)   Fees may be set lower than city cost where the fee would otherwise
be likely to deprive citizens means of having their concerns officially
considered; and
      (2)   Fees shall be set higher than city cost where the city service
given for the fee is commonly rendered by private enterprise and the free
market price is higher than city cost. City fees shall not undercut the usual
and customary fees charged by private enterprise.
   (C)   It is appropriate to enact ordinances and amend existing ordinances so
as to allow the Mayor to set fee levels, after considering public input on the
proposed fees, in the following situations:
      (1)   The fee is low and will not have a major impact on the payor; or
      (2)   The fee is for a service which the city is willing to provide but
which can alternatively be obtained from private enterprise.
(Res. 196-1981, approved 9-16-81)
§ 3-2-11 PUBLICATION OF LEGAL NOTICES.
   (A)   Whenever providing legal notice to Albuquerque residents by
publication in a local newspaper, the city shall observe the following
policies:
      (1)   In publishing notice of proposed ordinances by title and subject
matter, the city will use the two daily newspapers of general circulation among
Albuquerque residents;
      (2)   In publishing notice of enacted ordinances in their entirety or by
title and a general summary, the city will use any newspaper which seems
effective in getting out the legal notice to the interested public; the city
will periodically change newspapers, but such change will not be more frequent
than each six months;
      (3)   The city will also publish the titles of enacted ordinances in
Spanish in an appropriate newspaper in general circulation in Albuquerque; this
will be for the convenience of citizens and not as official notice.
   (B)   Whenever providing legal notice to another geographic area by
publication in a local newspaper, the city shall use the newspaper with the
highest circulation among the residents of that other geographic area.
(Res. 122-1990, approved 9-26-90)
§ 3-2-12 FISCAL IMPACT ANALYSIS.
   (A)   DEFINITIONS: The following Definitions shall apply to this Resolution
unless a different meaning is clearly intended:
   COUNCIL ACTION: The following shall constitute a Council action for purposes
of this Resolution: the adoption of an Ordinance or Resolution; the approval of
an Executive Communication or Other Communication with any financial
implications including approval of a contract or memorandum of understanding or
joint powers agreement or acceptance of a grant; any similar actions that
involve any obligation of City funds or impose any obligation to take any
action by an impacted community. COUNCIL ACTION does not include the receipt of
information, the approval of the appointment of any person to a board,
committee or commission, a land use appeal or protest or the adoption of
Council rules.
   ECONOMIC IMPACT ANALYIS or EIA: A written statement providing the
information required for an FIA. In addition an EIA shall contain: the
estimated costs imposed on the impacted community if the City Council takes
action on a matter. The EIA shall be in a manner that provides an understanding
of the effect on the impacted community. This cost may be estimated in any of a
number of ways including but not limited to:
      (1)   determining the size of the impacted community and estimating the
impact on a representative sample;
      (2)   where specific numbers are not readily available, by a thorough
explanation of the steps necessary for the impacted community to comply with
the Council action;
      (3)   presenting the position of a representative(s) of the impacted
community on the issue of cost. No EIA shall be prepared without an attempt by
the Responsible Party to contact and receive input from some segment of the
Impacted Community.
   FISCAL IMPACT ANALYSIS  or  FIA: A written statement providing an estimation
of the expenditures by, and revenues to, the City of Albuquerque in the present
and at least two subsequent fiscal years if the City Council takes action on a
matter, together with the projected source of those funds. The FIA shall
include a statement of the individual primarily responsible for its preparation
and, at a minimum, a short statement of the basis for the estimation including
any assumptions.
   IMPACTED COMMUNITY: Either:
      (1)   a person or category of business directly regulated by a proposed
City Council action; or
      (2)   a person who will be economically impacted, more than incidentally,
by a proposed City Council action.
   PERSON:  Any individual, cooperative association, club, corporation, city
department, company, firm, partnership, joint venture, syndicate, profit or
nonprofit organization, or other entity.
   REASONABLY AVAILABLE INFORMATION: The amount of information that is
necessary for a Councilor and any person to make an informed decision on the
degree to which a Council action will adversely affect the impacted community.
The determination of what is Reasonably Available Information involves a
balancing between the potential impact and the cost in time and effort to
obtain additional information.
   RESPONSIBLE PARTY:  The person responsible for the preparation of an EIA or
FIA. In the case of a proposed Council action that originates in the
Administration and is communicated either by an Executive Communication or by
request for a councilor to sponsor, the Mayor shall determine the Responsible
Party from within the Administration. In the case of a proposed Council action
that originates with a Councilor or from within the Council offices, the
Director of Council Services shall determine the Responsible Party who shall be
on Council staff unless the Mayor agrees to appoint a Responsible Party from
within the Administration. 
   (B)   REQUIREMENT FOR ANALYSIS: 
      (1)   Every proposed Council action shall, at the time of introduction,
be accompanied by either an EIA or FIA. The EIA or FIA shall be on forms
created by the Director of Council Services. The EIA or FIA shall be signed by
the Responsible party and at least one person at the level of Department
Director who shall certify that the EIA or FIA has been reviewed and to the
best of their knowledge is accurate and complete.
      (2)   Council staff will work with the Council President at the time of
creation of the Letter of Introduction to determine if an FIA should be
replaced by an EIA and whether a submitted FIA or EIA is adequate. The Council
President may request that an EIA be prepared or may request that an FIA or EIA
be rewritten. To the extent possible the Council President should explain the
deficiencies if any in the EIA or FIA.
      (3)   Following receipt of the letter of introduction any Councilor may
request a copy of any item together with the accompanying EIA or FIA. For any
proposed Council action that is accompanied by an FIA any Councilor may request
that an EIA be prepared or that an EIA or FIA be rewritten to provide greater
information. To the extent possible the Councilor shall explain the
deficiencies if any in the EIA or FIA. The request shall be honored for any
such request made after introduction up until the end of the first Council
Committee meeting where the proposed Council action is considered. Following
the end of the first Council Committee where the Council action is considered,
until final Council action on the matter by the full City Council, it shall
take a request from three Councilors to impose a requirement for the
preparation of an EIA or to request a rewrite of an EIA or FIA.
   (C)   ADEQUACY OF COMPLIANCE WITH COUNCILOR’S REQUEST:
      (1)   Any Councilor who has made a request for EIA or for the rewrite of
an FIA or EIA, and any other Councilor who has notified the Responsible Party
that they agree with the need for the EIA or the rewrite shall be immediately
provided with the document created in response to that request.
      (2)   Any Councilor receiving a revised document pursuant to (C)(1) shall
have three days to raise concerns with the revised document. That concern shall
be raised with the Responsible Party. The Responsible Party shall either
attempt to resolve the concerns raised or take the position that all reasonably
available information has been provided. If the Responsible Party takes the
position that all reasonably available information has been provided any
Council Committee or the entire City Council shall have the authority to
determine if the FIA or EIA is adequate.
   (D)   EMERGENCY RESOLUTIONS, MORATORIA AND IMMEDIATE ACTION ITEMS: Any
matter that is presented to the City Council for immediate action does not
require an EIA or FIA. At the request of any Councilor at the time of adoption
of the matter, the matter will be placed on the agenda of the next regularly
scheduled City Council meeting for repeal. The City Councilor requesting that
the matter be considered for repeal shall direct that either an EIA or FIA
shall be prepared and distributed prior to that Council meeting.
(Res. 10-1991, approved 1-24-91; Am. Res. 2009-044, approved 4-16-09)
§ 3-2-13 CONTINUOUS SEQUENTIAL NUMBERING OF CITY CHARTER AMENDMENTS.
   The City Charter amendment called Proposition 1 on the municipal election
ballot of October 8, 1991, shall be the first in a continuous sequential
numbering of Charter amendments at all elections thereafter.
(Res. 166-1991, approved 11-8-91)
§ 3-2-14 DESIGNATED FUND BALANCE POLICY.
   (A)   The intent of this legislation is that any revenue received in any
given fiscal year from the Public Safety and Community Policing Quarter Percent
Tax shall be expended only for the purposes contained in the Expenditure Plan
for the Public Safety and Community Policing Tax and in the amounts specified
in the Expenditure Plan.
   (B)   In order to insure that the Expenditure Plan is implemented as
legislated by the City Council, there shall be created a Designated Fund
Balance in the General Fund which shall account for, reserve, and designate,
any revenues received and specified by purpose in the Expenditure Plan in
excess of planned appropriations for every fiscal year.
   (C)   The table of Designated Percentages for Public Safety/Community
Policing Quarter Percent Tax Revenues, attached to Resolution No. 124-1995,
shall be used for this purpose. This table contains the percentages
representing the planned expenditures by purpose in the Expenditure Plan. As
specified in Bill No. 0-111, Enactment No. 43-1995, the expenditures for Year 3
are recurring and the percentages specified for Year 3 in the accompanying
table shall be used for all subsequent years of tax revenue.
   (D)   Actual total revenue received each year from the Public Safety and
Community Policing Tax shall be allocated to the spending purposes contained in
the table according to the percentages contained in the table. If expended and
encumbered funds for each purpose are less than the dollar amount allocated for
that purpose, the remaining funds shall be accounted for in a Designated Fund
Balance in the General Fund. These designated funds may only be expended
subsequently for the purposes specified in Bill No. 0-111, Enactment No. 43-
1995. However, if actual revenues received from the Public Safety and Community
Policing Tax by purpose are less than the programmed expenditures contained in
the Expenditure Plan by purpose, the spending requirement only extends up to
the amount actually received for the given year, except as funds are available
in the Designated Fund Balance.
   (E)   This accounting shall take place after the general ledger accounts are
closed for a given fiscal year. A detailed accounting schedule of the
Designated Fund Balance by purpose shall be included in the annual operating
budget document and the Comprehensive Annual Financial Report.
(Res. 124-1995, approved 10-5-95)
§ 3-2-15 INDUSTRIAL REVENUE BOND PROJECTS
   (A)   Definitions.
      (1)   Bonds means any bond, debenture, note, refunding or renewal bond or
note, warrant or other security evidencing an obligation the proceeds of which,
or a major portion thereof, are to be used in the trade or business carried on
by someone other than the City and which are authorized to be issued by the
City pursant to: the Industrial Revenue Bond Act (sections 3-32-1 to 3-32-16,
NMSA, 1978, as amended from time to time); the Metropolitan Redevelopment Code
(Sections 3-60A-1 to 3-60A-48 NMSA 1978, as amended from time to time); or,
pursant to the home rule powers of the City given by Article X, Section 6 of
the New Mexico Constitution and the City's Charter.
      (2)   City means the City of Albuquerque, New Mexico;
      (3)   Commission means the Development Commission or any successor
thereto;
      (4)   Council means the Council of the City, or any succeeding
legislative body of the City, as such governing body from time to time may be
constituted;
      (5)   Inducement resolution means a resolution of the Council setting
forth the good-faith intent of the Council to issue bonds upon the prior
satisfaction of all applicable land use and development requirements of the
City, other than the issuance of a building permit;
      (6)   Project plan means the plan describing a project which shall
include:
         (a)   a general description and location of the project;
         (b)   the number and type of new jobs to be created;
         (c)   the estimated percentage of jobs to be filled by persons who are
residents of the City on the date of the project plan submission;
         (d)   identification and the processing of any product associated with
the project;
         (e)   any relocation of individuals or businesses;
         (f)   the present use of conditions of the project site;
         (g)   the present assessed value of the project, if available;
         (h)   the estimated value of the project site after completion of the
project;
         (i)   the maximum amount of the bonds to be issued;
         (j)   the present and proposed zoning;
         (k)   a proposed construction schedule;
         (l)   information relating to the feasibility of the proposed project
including information relating to the ability of the project to generate
revenues to render the project self-liquidating;
         (m)   the competition in the type of commerce or industry already
existing within the City and its environs;
         (n)   the effect on existing industry and commerce in the city
including during and after the construction period;
         (o)   the amount of private investment in the project in addition to
bond financing;
         (p)   the total dollar amount of the proposed improvements included as
part of the project;
         (q)   a statement of when the bonds are proposed to be issued;
         (r)   resumes showing the experience of the development entity or
principals, and the experience of the architect, contractor, and leasing agent,
if relevant;
         (s)   a statement of plans for project management;
         (t)   conceptual site plans for the project;
         (u)   a map locating the project area; and
         (v)   other matters which may be reasonably requested by the
commission.
      (7)   User means one or more persons or entities, or their successors,
assigns or agents, who propose to acquire or construct a project financed by or
proposed to be financed by the proceeds of bonds.
   (B)   Preliminary review of proposed project.
      (1)   The Mayor shall review all bond projects except those defined in
Section (2) below to determine that proposed project plans are complete.
      (2)   Requests for refunding or renewal bonds which do not require the
allocation of a portion of the State of New Mexico private activity bonds
permitted to be issued pursuant to federal law for calendar years subsequent to
1984 shall be made directly to the City Council
      (3)   A request to issue bonds for a project, except those projects
defined in Section B. above shall be made by filing with the Mayor an
inducement resolution, a project plan and the fee and deposit required by this
Resolution. The Mayor shall cause to be submitted no more than ten days after
receipt of the plan and no less than five days before the regularly scheduled
meeting of the commission a copy of the documents received to the commission
together with a statement describing any other project plans which have been
submitted to the commission requesting bonds be issued during the same calendar
year.
   (C)   Approval of project plans; recommendations to City Council; protest.
      (1)   The commission shall recommend to the Council approval, conditional
approval or disapproval of a project plan or portion thereof submitted for its
review.
      (2)   The commission's recommendation for, and the Council's final action
regarding approval, conditional approval, or disapproval of a project plan and
inducement resolution, shall take into consideration the City's development
plans and policies and the promotion of the health, safety, security and
general welfare of the citizens of the City and the State of New Mexico.
      (3)   Any person may protest any decision of the commission which protest
shall be considered by the City Council prior to consideration of the
inducement resolution of the project. Any protest shall be filed with the
Council within ten calendar days after the decision of the commission.
   (D)   Zoning compliance.
      (1)   After adoption of the inducement resolution by the Council and
prior to the Council adopting an Ordinance authorizing the issuance of the
bonds, the following steps shall be followed:
         (a)   Any required site development or landscape plans shall be
submitted to the planning division of the Municipal Development Department and
shall be reviewed in accordance with established zoning procedures;
         (b)   As evidence of compliance with all zoning requirements, the user
shall provide to the preliminary review committee at any time prior to the
issuance of the bonds a certificate of zoning compliance signed by the zoning
enforcement office or his designee.
   (E)   Industrial revenue bonds; multi-family housing projects; additional
requirements.
   Although the Council finds that the private sector is adequately meeting
most moderate and upper income multi-family housing needs in the City, the
Council recognizes that there is a need for multi-family housing for low income
families and elderly persons, and that in futherance of the City policy to
assure low income housing is dispersed throughout the City, multi-family
housing projects financed with bond proceeds should be accessible to families
of low income. The Council will consider the issuance of bonds for a multi-
family project when a user can demonstrate to the commission and the Council
sufficient facts:
      (1)   that the project will further the City's redevelopment policies;
and
      (2)   that the private sector is not meeting the low or moderate income
family housing needs in the immediate area of the City for which the project is
proposed; or
      (3)   that the private sector is not meeting the housing needs of elderly
persons in the immediate area of the City for which the project is proposed.
   In addition to the submission of the information required by (B) and (C) of
this Resolution, if the bonds to be issued are to be used to acquire or
construct a multi-family housing projects, the user shall submit to the
commission satisfactory information:
         (a)   that the proposed project will promote the health, safety,
security, and welfare of the citizens of the City;
         (b)   that the proposed project is located within the City;
         (c)   that the proposed project is not inconsistent with the long-term
development plans of the City;
         (d)   that all tenants will be offered comparable services without any
descrimination as to income of the tenant;
         (e)   relating to the financing of the project and the purchase of the
bonds;
         (f)   that the proposed project will not adversely affect existing
multi-family housing in the area of the proposed project;
         (g)   that the proposed project will generate revenues sufficient to
pay the debt service in the bonds and to otherwise render the proposed project
self-liquidating;
         (h)   that the user will be required to submit to the trustee of the
bonds at least annually evidence that the percentage of low and moderate income
tenants is in compliance with the requirements of federal law for tax exempt
bonds;
         (i)   that the bonds, including any refunding bonds, shall mature in
not more than twenty years from the date of issuance; and
         (j)   that, notwithstanding section (K) of this resolution, as a
condition of the issuance of the bonds, the financing agreement will be
structured so that the user will pay all ad valorem taxes and special
assessments and gross receipts and compensating use taxes on the project and
that the user will access the land and premises in the name of the user.
   (F)   City Attorney review.
   All resolutions and ordinances, financing agreements, closing documents and
other documents relating to the City and relating to the bonds and the issuance
thereof shall be submitted to the City Attorney, or another attorney or
attorneys designated by the City Attorney, in sufficient time for review by
such attorneys prior to the commission or the Council taking any required
action on such documents or execution of the documents by City Officials, as
applicable.
   (G)   Rules.
   The commission may establish such rules, not inconsistent with City
ordinance or this resolution, as it shall deem necessary to carry out the
powers granted to it hereunder.
   (H)   Status of bonds.
   The principal and interest of the bonds approved by the City Council shall
be payable solely out of the revenues derived from the financing, sale, or
leasing of the project with respect to which the bonds are issued or from a
guarantee agreement or agreements or a credit enhancement device or devices
upon which the guarantor or obligor is other than the City. The bonds shall
never constitute a debt or indebtedness of the City within the meaning of any
provision or limitation of the New Mexico Constitution, statutes of the State
of New Mexico or the City's Charter and such bonds shall not constitute nor
give rise to a pecuniary liability of the City of a charge against its general
credit or taxing powers.
   (I)   Fee.
   In addition to any other fee imposed pursant to ordinance or resolution, the
user shall pay to the City a fee equal to one-tenth of one percent of the face
amount of the bonds to be issued to compensate the City for its reasonable
administration expenses incurred in the approval of the project and the
issuance of the bonds provided that the fee shall not be less than $500.00 nor
more than $2,500.00 plus a deposit of $500.00 to be applied against the payment
of attorney fees. In addition to the fees set forth in this section, the user
shall pay all attorneys fees and expenses of the attorneys reviewing the bond
documents, including any refunding bond documents whether or not the bonds are
issued.
   (J)   Sunset date -- date of issue.
      (1)   The inducement resolution shall set a final date for issuance of
the proposed bonds, which shall constitute a "sunset date" or termination date
for the inducement resolution if the bonds are not issued within the specified
time. The "sunset date" may be extended if the user presents a revised project
schedule with supporting evidence to the satisfaction of the Council that the
extension is justified for good cause and necessary project completion.
      (2)   The ordinance shall state the year in which the bonds will be
issued and the bonds shall not be issued in a year other than that stated in
the ordinance except upon approval by the Council.
   (K)   Tax abatement.
      (1)   No property tax abatement shall be given for any bond project
exceeding:
         (a)   if the bonds are industrial revenue bonds, twenty (20) years
from the date the bonds are issued; or
         (b)   if the bonds are metopolitan redevelopment bonds, seven (7)
years from the date the bonds are issued.
      (2)   The financing agreement relating to the industrial revenue bonds
shall contain agreements that, as a condition for the issuance of the bonds:
         (a)   the user will pay all special assessments on the project; and
         (b)   the user will have the property assessed in the user's name on
or before the first January following twenty years from the date the bonds were
originally issued and the user wil pay all ad valorem taxes in the project from
and after the first January.
      (3)   {'{'}missing{'}'} transaction certificates of the City shall not be
used for Metropolitan Redevelopment bond projects. In no project may such
certificate be used for a purpose other than capital equipment to be used in a
bond project, nor shall it be used by the user after the completion of the
project financed by the bonds issued by the "City".
   (L)   Repeal clause.
      Resolution No. 182-1981, which became effective on August 17, 1981 is
hereby rescinded.
   (M)   Temporary Provision.
   This resolution shall govern
      (1)   any project for which an inducement resolution has been introduced
or adopted by the City Council after January 15, 1985, and/or
      (2)   any project which requires the allocation of a portion of the State
of New Mexico private activity bonds permitted to be issued pursuant to federal
law for calendar years subsequent to 1984, unless a resolution relating to such
allocation was introduced by the City Council prior to January 15, 1985, or
unless the project is a project for which an inducement resolution or extension
thereof was adopted by the Council after December 15, 1984, but prior to
January 15, 1985.
   (N)   Severability clause.
   If any section, subsection, sentence, clause, word or phrase of this
resolution is for any reason held to be unconstitutional or otherwise invalid
by any court of competent jurisdiction, such decision shall not affect the
validity of the remaining portions of this resolution. The Council, the
Governing Body of the City of Albuquerque, hereby declares that it would have
passed this resolution and such section, subsection, sentence, clause, word or
phrase thereof irrespective of any one or more sections, subsections,
sentences, clauses, words or phrases being declared unconstitutional or
otherwise invalid.
(Ord. 16-1985, passed 01-30-1985; Am. Res. 91-1985, passed 05-22-1985)
§ 3-2-16 COMPREHENSIVE PLAN ACCOUNTABILITY ANALYSIS.
   (A)   Definitions: The following definitions shall apply to this Resolution
unless a different meaning is clearly intended:
      (1)   COMPREHENSIVE PLAN ANALYSIS (CPA):  A written analysis that is used
to determine whether a proposed Council Action furthers the City of
Albuquerque's Comprehensive Plan.
      (2)   COUNCIL ACTION:  The following shall constitute a Council Action
for purposes of this Resolution: the adoption of an Ordinance or Resolution;
the approval of an Executive Communication or Other Communication. COUNCIL
ACTION  does not include the receipt of information, the approval of an
appointment of any person to a board, committee or commission, a land use
appeal, a Memorial, a Proposal or the adoption of Council Rules.
      (3)   RESPONSIBLE PARTY: The person responsible for the preparation of a
CPA. In the case of a proposed Council Action that originates in the
Administration and is communicated either by an Executive Communication or by
request for a Councilor to sponsor, the Mayor shall determine the Responsible
Party from within the Administration. In the case of a proposed Council Action
that originates with a Councilor or from within the Council offices, the
Director of Council Services shall determine the Council staff member who shall
be the Responsible Party.
   (B)   Requirement for analysis:
      (1)   Every proposed Council Action shall, at the time of introduction,
be accompanied by a Comprehensive Plan Analysis. The CPA shall be signed by the
Responsible Party and at least one person at a Director level position who
shall certify that the CPA has been reviewed and to the best of their knowledge
is accurate and complete.
      (2)   The CPA shall include Comprehensive Plan policies, goals and
actions, and may also reference any other relevant policies and actions from
Rank 2 and 3 plans, reports, studies or other documents relevant to the
proposed Council Action item being introduced. The Responsible Party may submit
other documents or attachments that provide evidence of other Comp Plan
furthering.
(Res. 2025-057, passed 9-3-2025)
ARTICLE 3: CITY EMPLOYEES
Section
   
3-3-1   Policy to reduce vehicle miles traveled
   
3-3-2   Method of payment for unemployment compensation
   
3-3-3   Compliance with Americans with Disabilities Act
   
3-3-4   Voluntary 20-year retirement for municipal sworn members of the police
department
   
3-3-5   Voluntary retirement for Fire Department
   
3-3-6   Automatic salary adjustments for the Mayor
   
3-3-7   Payment of attorney's fees of city officials in matters before the
Ethics Commission
   
3-3-8   Sexual harassment
   
3-3-9   Employees' member contributions
   
3-3-10   Settlement of lawsuits with collective bargaining units
   
3-3-11   Use of severance pay
   
3-3-12   Salary payments to city employees who are elected officials
   
3-3-13   Sick leave incentive policy for city employees
   
3-3-14   Intra-year personnel positions
   
3-3-15   Employee substance abuse; alcohol and drug testing
   
3-3-16   Health and dental benefits for city employees
   
3-3-17   Tuition assistance for city employees
   
3-3-18   Collective bargaining and fair share provisions
   
3-3-19   Vacation and sick leave policy while serving on active military duty.
Cross-reference:
   
Personnel; programs and plans, see Ch. 4, Art. 1
§ 3-3-1 POLICY AND PROGRAMS TO REDUCE VEHICLE MILES TRAVELED.
   (A)   It shall be the policy of the city to consider and implement, where
feasible, programs contributing to the reduction of vehicle miles traveled. As
a major employer in the downtown area, the city can contribute to and encourage
other downtown employers to give high priority to plans to reduce the vehicle
miles traveled of employees.
   (B)   Toward the goal of reduction of vehicle miles traveled, the Council
requests the Mayor to compile completed studies and to cause studies of, and if
favorable, to implement the following, as well as other strategies that the
Mayor may deem desirable:
      (1)   Develop an active public information and public relations program
relative to the urgency of the problem of air quality in the city.
      (2)   A computer automated carpool program with incentives, such as
significantly reduced parking fee or preferential parking for those
participating.
      (3)   Provide automated carpool service to other employers who will
develop incentives and encourage their employees to participate.
      (4)   Expand and promote fleet discount sale of bus tokens both to city
employees and other employers and employee groups.
      (5)   Develop a program of staggering work shifts so as to reduce peak
traffic congestion and improve traffic flow.
      (6)   A program of automatic deposit of employee paychecks in various
banks and encourage other employers not yet doing this to initiate such a
program.
      (7)   Seek the counsel of and work with the business community to develop
educational and action programs on reducing vehicle miles traveled. The
Transportation Department of the city shall develop and submit to the Council,
a study of the real needs for public transportation within the city including
alternatives to the present bus service such as, but not limited to, mini-
buses, jitney service, expresses, “park/ride” systems, and innovative marketing
techniques. This study is not to duplicate the current study of bus fares,
routing, special uses, currently underway.
   (C)   As implementation of the pilot bikeways program begins and as the
master plan for bikeways is adopted, a plan shall be developed with the
business community to encourage the use of the bikeways for commuting. This
program shall include but not be limited to, positive information as to
availability of bikeways, public school-centered bicycle education and safety
programs, incentives for use of bicycles, and development of programs for
general bicycle security and convenient and secure bicycle parking facilities
with particular emphasis on city-ordinance programs.
   (D)   The Mayor's recommendation on the selection of engineers for the
Computerized Traffic Signal System Feasibility Study in accordance with
Ordinance No. 48-1974 is noted. Traffic flow can be improved providing the
cost/benefit analysis shows feasibility. The Mayor is requested to have a
feasibility study made of improvement of traffic flow by the elimination or
curtailment of on-street parking.
   (E)   The city shall continue to develop and place major emphasis on land
use planning as a means of reducing and/or stabilizing necessary transportation
and, in particular, the vehicle miles traveled.
(Res. 53-1974, approved 12-2-74)
§ 3-3-2 METHOD OF PAYMENT FOR UNEMPLOYMENT COMPENSATION.
   The city elects to pay for unemployment compensation by the reimbursement
method and the Mayor is authorized to notify the Employment Security Commission
of this election.
(Res. 213-1977, approved 11-16-77)
§ 3-3-3 COMPLIANCE WITH AMERICANS WITH DISABILITIES ACT.
   (A)   The city shall identify potential barriers to accessibility in city
government in regard to the Americans With Disabilities Act of 1990 (ADA) and
develop and implement a proactive plan for compliance by January 26, 1992. The
barriers and accommodations to be addressed include, but are not limited to
accessibility to employment by new applicants, retention of employees with a
disability, the rehiring of those terminated due to injuries or other
disabilities, physical accessibility issues, public access to city facilities,
building codes, transportation, and communication barriers. The goal shall be
for the city to serve as the model for the Albuquerque area in regard to
compliance with the ADA, and shall therefore make every reasonable
accommodation to insure the city is accessible to persons with disabilities.
   (B)   The Mayor shall, in the course of fulfilling the requirements of
division (A) above, actively seek the inputs of the current Access Task Force
For Person's with Disabilities and the Commission for Person's with
Disabilities, the Department Directors, city employees, and citizens of
Albuquerque. Efforts should also be taken to coordinate these activities with
Bernalillo County wherever practical.
   (C)   A report identifying the information compiled, the development and
implementation of the city's implementation plan shall be provided to the City
Council for approval on or before January 26, 1992.
(Res. 181-1991, approved 12-3-91)
§ 3-3-4 VOLUNTARY 20-YEAR RETIREMENT FOR MUNICIPAL SWORN MEMBERS OF THE POLICE
DEPARTMENT.
   The city does hereby elect to institute voluntary 20-year retirement for
municipal sworn members of the Albuquerque Police Department.
(Res. 172-1979, approved 11-15-79)
§ 3-3-5 VOLUNTARY RETIREMENT FOR FIRE DEPARTMENT.
   The city does hereby elect to institute a voluntary 20-year retirement for
full-time firemen of the Albuquerque Fire Department.
(Res. 153-1980, approved 7-17-80)
§ 3-3-6 AUTOMATIC SALARY ADJUSTMENTS FOR THE MAYOR.
   (A)   For purposes of this section, SALARY shall mean salary and all
benefits as set forth in Section 2-9-6(D) R.O. 1974 except for vacation and
sick leave.
   (B)   The salary of the position of Mayor shall be automatically increased
July 1 of each fiscal year in the amount equal to the across the board
percentage increase granted to city M-series employees.
(Res. 245-1981, approved 11-25-81; Am. Res. 200-1988, approved 11-28-88)
§ 3-3-7 PAYMENT OF ATTORNEY'S FEES OF CITY OFFICIALS IN MATTERS BEFORE THE
ETHICS COMMISSION.
   (A)   The city shall indemnify any city official to the extent of his or her
attorney's fees for successful defense of charged violations of the provisions
of the Code of Ethics before the Board. However, if the Board finds the
official guilty of such a violation, the city shall not indemnify the official.
Defense expenses that are indemnifiable are restricted to those incurred after
the Board finds that charges are legally sufficient on their face.
   (B)   Payment of attorney's fees, as specified by division (A) above, are
hereby authorized from the Risk Management Fund.
   (C)   This policy is effective as to expenses incurred subsequent to the
beginning of the Sixth Council.
(Res. 210-1985, approved 11-27-85)
§ 3-3-8 SEXUAL HARASSMENT.
   (A)   For the purposes of this policy, SEXUAL HARASSMENT is defined as “any
unwelcome sexual advances, requests for sexual favors, or other verbal or
physical conduct of a sexual nature.”
   (B)   The policy of the city is to not tolerate discrimination, restraint,
coercion, or reprisals on the part of any city supervisor or employee that
result from sexual harassment.
   (C)   The Chief Administrative Officer and subsequently each department
director shall provide worksites free of sexual harassment.
   (D)   Allegations of sexual harassment shall be promptly investigated and
corrective or disciplinary action shall promptly be taken as warranted.
   (E)   A city official shall neither induce, entice, solicit nor coerce a
city employee to withdraw, drop or amend charges of sexual harassment in
exchange for promotions, salary increases or other job-related benefits.
   (F)   It shall be the policy of the city that in all instances, when sexual
harassment is brought to the attention of the Mayor, the Chief Administrative
Officer and his assistants, department directors or supervisors, said
individuals shall immediately report the notice and information of alleged
sexual harassment to the Affirmative Action Officer. The Affirmative Action
Officer shall monitor departments where instances of sexual harassment has been
alleged to ensure that appropriate action has been taken.
   (G)   The details of all complaints alleging sexual harassment shall be kept
confidential.
   (H)   The investigation and disposition of sexual harassment cases as
referred by the Mayor, Chief Administrative Officer and assistants, department
directors and supervisors to the Human Rights Department shall conform and
comply with all the requirements and procedures as dictated by the Albuquerque
Affirmative Action Ordinance as amended.
   (I)   The Administration shall develop standard procedures for handling
sexual harassment cases which shall incorporate the policies stated in this
section.
(Res. 171-1986, approved 12-10-86)
§ 3-3-9 EMPLOYEES' MEMBER CONTRIBUTIONS.
   (A)   Pursuant to 10-11-5 of the New Mexico State Statutes, the city hereby
elects to be responsible for making contributions of 75% of its employees'
member contributions in the AFSCME Local 624 Bargaining Unit (Blue Collar
Unit). (Res. 131-1988, approved 8-18-88)
   (B)   Pursuant to 10-11-5 of the New Mexico State Statutes, the city hereby
elects to be responsible for making contributions of 75% of its employees'
member contributions in the Management Series. (Res. 132-1988, approved 8-18-
88)
   (C)   Pursuant to 10-11-5 of the New Mexico State Statutes, the city hereby
elects to be responsible for making contributions of 75% of its employees'
member contributions in the AFSCME Local 1888 Bargaining Unit (J-Series).
   (D)   The city's contributions shall not be deducted from the city's
operating reserve. (Res. 197-1988, approved 11-23-88)
   (E)   Pursuant to 10-11-5 of the New Mexico State Statutes, the city hereby
elects to be responsible for making contributions of 75% of its employees'
member contributions in the AFSCME Local 2962 Bargaining Unit (White Collar
Unit). (Res. 125-1989, approved 8-17-89)
§ 3-3-10 SETTLEMENT OF LAWSUITS WITH COLLECTIVE BARGAINING UNITS.
   (A)   It is the basic policy of the city not to enter into any agreement to
settle lawsuits with any collective bargaining unit which requires or appears
to commit to an increase in recurring expenditures for wages now or at some
time in the future.
   (B)   Should the Mayor and the City Attorney conclude that exceptional
circumstances make it clearly in the interest of the city to settle a lawsuit
with a employee collective bargaining unit by offering wage increases as
described in division (A) above, then the settlement shall be brought before
the City Council for approval prior to its becoming effective.
   (C)   If settlement of a suit which involves $25,000 or more is drafted and
if a City Councillor makes a written request for an analysis of the costs of
the settlement versus the costs of proceeding with litigation, such analysis
shall be provided in a timely manner by the City Attorney.
(Res. 105-1989, approved 7-7-89)
§ 3-3-11 USE OF SEVERANCE PAY.
   It is the policy of the city to prohibit the use of severance pay for city
employees beyond that already provided for in the Merit System Ordinance and
the Personnel Rules and Regulations in the form of payment for accrued vacation
hours and by labor contracts as authorized under the Labor Relations Ordinance.
(Res. 139-1989, approved 8-31-89)
§ 3-3-12 SALARY PAYMENTS TO CITY EMPLOYEES WHO ARE ELECTED OFFICIALS.
   (A)   City employees who are elected officials will take “leave without pay”
or sufficient recorded compensation time or vacation time for performance of
their duties as elected officials during normal city work time.
   (B)   Such employees may at their option have their regular paychecks
adjusted on an annualized basis to reflect the normal city work time spent on
elected official duties.
   (C)   The policy stated in this section may be modified or supplemented by a
reasonable compensation time policy if such is developed and implemented by the
Administration.
(Res. 142-1989, approved 9-14-89)
§ 3-3-13 SICK LEAVE INCENTIVE POLICY FOR CITY EMPLOYEES.
   (A)   The Council hereby adopts the following Sick Leave Incentive Policy to
reduce employee absenteeism, improve productivity, and ensure that all city
employees are treated equally:
      (1)   Employees utilizing zero hours of sick leave over six consecutive
months will be awarded with one day of leave or the proportional equivalent for
part-time employees;
      (2)   Employees utilizing less than or equal to 12.5% but greater than 0%
of sick leave over six consecutive months will be awarded four hours of leave
or the proportional equivalent for part-time employees;
      (3)   Only permanent city employees are eligible for participation in the
sick leave incentive plan;
      (4)   For the purpose of making awards under the sick leave plan,
departments will conduct sick leave usage evaluations biannually for the
periods of July through December and January through June;
      (5)   For the purposes of the sick leave incentive plan, sick leave means
all absences, for whatever purpose, charged to an employee's accumulation. The
only exception is for sick leave hours donated to another employee or leave
bank should a sick leave donation program be established by the city.
   (B)   The Sick Leave Incentive Plan will become effective beginning with the
six month period January 1, 1992 through June 30, 1992.
(Res. 168-1991, approved 11-14-91)
§ 3-3-14 INTRA-YEAR PERSONNEL POSITIONS.
   (A)   New positions proposed to be created between the adoption of the
annual operating budget of the city, or intra-year positions, shall be
temporary positions and shall not be identified as part of the base budget for
the current fiscal year contained in the Mayor's proposed annual operating
budget for the fiscal year commending on July 1 of the year in which the budget
proposal is submitted.
   (B)   The city's adopted policy contained in Resolution No. 102-1985
providing for quarterly reports to the City Council on intra-year positions,
shall be amended to require bi-annual reports. These reports shall identify
each position with regard to job title, grade, step, department, program,
activity, funding source, and other information which shall describe the need
to create such position.
   (C)   The bi-annual reports to the City Council on intra-year positions,
shall be expanded to include a section addressing position reclassification or
upgrades. This section shall specify each position which has been reclassified
or upgraded by job title; the grade and step prior to and after
reclassification or upgrade; the salary prior to and after reclassification or
upgrade; the budget department, program, and activity; and funding source.
(Res. 82-1994, approved 8-19-94)
§ 3-3-15 EMPLOYEE SUBSTANCE ABUSE; ALCOHOL AND DRUG TESTING.
   (A)   It shall be the policy of the City to have a substance abuse policy
addressing both alcohol and other substances, which policy shall be applicable
to all City employees generally, as well as containing provisions appropriate
to employees in positions which perform a "safety sensitive" function as
designated by the US Department of Transportation (DOT) or other federal
regulations or by the Director of the City Human Resources Department and to
require testing of:
      (1)   All employees based on a reasonable suspicion that the employee's
alcohol or drug use could impair either job performance or public safety;
      (2)   Employees in positions which perform a "safety sensitive" function
as designated by the DOT Regulations or by the Director of the City Human
Resources Department;
      (3)   All applicants for employment in a "safety sensitive" function;
      (4)   Employees in a non-safety sensitive function before transferring
into a safety sensitive function; and
      (5)   As part of the treatment program for employees enrolled with the
Employee Assistance Program.
   (B)   The Chief Administrative Officer shall implement this resolution by
promulgating within the City's personnel rules and regulations and adopted in
accordance with §§ 2-15-1 et seq. ROA 1994 (Rules and Regulations), a policy
consistent with the requirements of this resolution and which shall at a
minimum:
      (1)   Define reasonable suspicion; and
      (2)   Designate a process for employees to contest before a City Hearing
Officer the identification of a position as performing a safety sensitive
function which was not identified in the US Department of Transportation (DOT)
or other federal regulations or is not performing duties as a police officer,
corrections officer or firefighter. There shall be no City administrative
appeal
process from the decision of the City Hearing Officer and any review shall be
in the District Court.
   (C)   For the purposes of the policy so promulgated:
      (1)   Except for voluntary self referral participants in an Employee
Assistance Program for substance abuse, the first instance in which an employee
submits a sample for alcohol/drug testing which is found to contain alcohol or
drugs or their metabolites shall be considered justifiable cause for discipline
up to, and including, termination from employment with the city;
      (2)   The first instance in which an employee who is a voluntary self
referral participant in an Employee Assistance Program for substance abuse
submits a sample for alcohol/drug testing which is found to contain alcohol or
drugs or their metabolites shall result in the employee being removed from any
position performing a safety sensitive function;
      (3)   The second instance in which an employee who is a voluntary self
referral participant in an Employee Assistance Program for substance abuse
submits a sample for alcohol/drug testing which is found to contain alcohol or
drugs or their metabolites shall be considered justifiable cause for discipline
up to, and including, termination from employment with the city;
      (4)   Any employee's refusal to submit an unaltered sample for alcohol/
drug testing shall be considered justifiable cause for discipline up to, and
including, termination from employment with the city;
      (5)   An employee who submits a sample for alcohol/drug testing which is
found to contain alcohol or drugs or their metabolites shall not perform any
safety sensitive function until successfully completing an evaluation and being
released for duty by the city's medical officer;
      (6)   Safety sensitive employees of the Police Department, Corrections
Department and Fire Department shall be normal participants in the city's pre-
employment and random alcohol and drug testing, counseling, and treatment
program; and
      (7)   The city's Employee Assistance Program for alcohol and drug
counseling and treatment shall be evaluated by a task force of substance abuse
professionals, who shall submit a report detailing findings and program
recommendations to the Mayor and City Council within nine months of the
enactment date of this legislation.
   (D)   There is hereby created a Substance Abuse Policy Review and Appeals
Board which shall be composed of five members, two of whom shall be appointed
by the Mayor, one of whom shall be appointed by the City Council, one of whom
shall be recommended by labor organizations and one of whom shall be
recommended by the supervisor's organization. The Board shall hear and decide
objections (except as provided herein) to the designation of positions as
“safety sensitive,” shall review all administrative policies promulgated to
implement this legislation, and shall advise the Mayor and the City Council
regarding such policies.
(Res. 65-1995, approved 5-9-95; Am. Res. 78-1995, approved 6-2-95; Am. Res. R-
2012-097, approved 11-21-12)
Cross-reference:
   
Alcohol Abuse Task Force, see § 2-4-7
   
Sale of alcohol through drive-up windows; abatement, see § 4-6-15
   
Licensing; alcoholic beverages, see Ch. 5, Art 1
   
Sale of alcohol near schools and churches, see § 5-1-1
   
Public areas where alcohol is permitted, see § 6-5-2
§ 3-3-16 HEALTH AND DENTAL BENEFITS FOR CITY EMPLOYEES.
   (A)   The administration is authorized to negotiate health and dental
insurance at a rate of up to 80% by the city.
   (B)   The costs to change the city's share shall be paid by the employees
through the normal allocation of salary and benefits as negotiated by the
bargaining group or representatives.
(Res. 72-1996, approved 7-3-96)
§ 3-3-17 TUITION ASSISTANCE FOR CITY EMPLOYEES.
   (A)   The policy for tuition assistance is hereby amended to allow tuition
assistance funds to be used for employees pursuing a degree that is job-related
and at a level no higher than a Master's degree.
   (B)   Employees pursuing undergraduate degrees shall continue to be given
priority when allocating tuition assistance funds.
(Res. 102-1996, approved 9-9-96)
§ 3-3-18 COLLECTIVE BARGAINING AND FAIR SHARE PROVISIONS.
   (A)   It shall be the policy of the city that collective bargaining
agreements with city employee unions may include fair share provisions if at
least 50% of the recognized bargaining unit are union members. Fair share
provisions may require as a condition of city employment that every permanent,
non-probationary employee in a recognized bargaining unit pay a fair share fee.
The fair share fee shall be an employee's proportionate share of the union's
costs of negotiating and administering the collective bargaining agreement and
adjusting the grievances and disputes of bargaining unit employees.
   (B)   Any collective bargaining agreement which contains a fair share
provision shall provide:
      (1)   Any contract provisions negotiated pursuant to this section shall
fully comply with all state and federal constitutional requirements.
      (2)   The signatory union will indemnify and hold the city harmless from
any claim or challenge to a fair share provision or the imposition of a fair
share fee.
(Res. 126-1996, approved 11-12-96)
§ 3-3-19 VACATION AND SICK LEAVE PLOLICY WHILE SERVING ON ACTIVE MILITARY DUTY.
   (A)   A City employee called to active military duty shall accrue vacation
and sick leave at the same accrual rate as if the employee was not on active
military duty.
   (B)   This accrual will continue while the employee serves on active
military duty and until the employee returns to City employment at which time
he or she will resume accruing leave as a regular City employee.
   (C)   A City employee called to active military duty between September 12,
2001 and October 1, 2004 shall retroactively accrue vacation and sick leave at
the same accrual rate as if the employee had not been on active military duty.
      (1)   This division (C) shall apply only to current City employees having
served on active military duty since September 12, 2001.
      (2)   Retroactive sick and vacation leave accrual not be converted to
cash upon the completion of the person's employment with the City of
Albuquerque.
(Res.101-2004, approved 10-1-04; Am. Res. R-2005-110, approved 7-15-05)
ARTICLE 4: HOUSING
Section
   
3-4-1   Community development block grant housing rehabilitation loan program
guidelines
   
3-4-2   Housing policies addressing the needs of low-income and physically
disabled and mentally handicapped persons
   
3-4-3   Affordable housing policy
   
3-4-4   Ten-year comprehensive neighborhood development plan for housing and
economic development in the pocket of poverty
Cross-reference:
   
Housing; boards and commissions, see Ch. 2, Art. 6
§ 3-4-1 COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT BLOCK GRANT HOUSING REHABILITATION LOAN PROGRAM
GUIDELINES.
   (A)   General Loan Funds. General Housing and Community Development Loan
Funds are derived from Federal and State sources.
   (B)   Approval. That "Exhibit A" to Resolution No. 88-2001, the Community
Development Block Grant Housing Rehabilitation Loan Program including the
"Pilot" Eligibility Category to leverage City funds and which will be tested
for one year to determine if it should become permanent, is adopted for use by
the city.
   (C)   Housing Advisory and Appeals Committee. The same Housing Advisory and
Appeals Committee ("HAAC") established in the Housing Code shall continue to
have, in addition to the authority, functions, and procedures provided therein,
the following duties and responsibilities as established by previous
Resolutions:
      (1)   Advise and provide guidance to the staff of the Department of
Family and Community Services in the areas of the Housing Rehabilitation
Program and Planning Housing Code Enforcement.
      (2)   Make recommendations to the Mayor, Chief Administrative Officer and
City Council in said areas.
      (3)   Consider waivers for the Community Development Housing Program as
set forth in "Exhibit A" attached to Resolution No. 88-2001 and the Regulations
promulgated pursuant to this section (the "Regulations") in the following
respects:
         (a)   Waiver of the income limits may be granted in those
circumstances after the execution of the note and mortgage where there is
evidence that the mortgagor has been unable to make the full amount of the
payments over a period of one hundred and twenty (120) days and there has been
a substantial change in financial ability to make such payments from the time
the loan was granted. Further, the modification to the loan agreement cannot
jeopardize or impair the security given. Loan modification agreements that do
not reduce the interest rate or extend the term of the loan beyond the maximum
period provided for in "Exhibit A" and the Regulations are not required to be
reviewed by the Committee.
         (b)   Increase of the maximum loan limit. This limitation may be
increased provided that the additional funds are necessary to eliminate a
serious health and/or safety hazard to occupants and/or neighborhood and the
total amount loaned shall not exceed the amount allowed to be approved by HAAC
pursuant to the Regulations.
         (c)   Increase of the 90% loan to value ratio underwriting standard,
up to a maximum of 97% for low interest loans.
      (4)   Hear appeals of contractors who have been removed from the Active
Contractor's List. Appellants shall provide and pay for the cost of all
services required to transcribe the proceedings of such appeals for the benefit
of the Committee, and to provide a record of the proceedings to the City.
      (5)   Hear disputes between the property owner and the contractor
concerning the rehabilitation of the property that cannot be resolved by the
Rehabilitation Section.
      (6)   Review all applications for loans to City employees in order to
ascertain that they conform to the Rehabilitation Program Regulations.
      (7)   Review such other functions that may be assigned by the Mayor or
Chief Administrative Officer or provided for by City Council action.
      (8)   Review reports and guidelines of non-governmental sub-recipient
agencies and hear and determine appeals brought to the Committee by
participants in such programs for which appropriations from Community
Development funds are made by the City Council.
      (9)   The Housing Advisory and Appeals Committee may establish
appropriate rules and regulations for carrying out the functions set out
herein.
   (D)   (1)   It is the intent of the City Council in appropriating funds to
sub-recipient agencies that such funds shall be utilized to benefit low and
moderate income persons as the same are defined by the U.S. Department of
Housing and Urban Development and to upgrade existing housing stock in the
program area in accordance with the Housing and Community Development Act of
1974, as amended, and that such intent shall be strictly construed.
      (2)   Except as provided herein, non-governmental sub-recipient agencies
operating programs for which appropriations from Community Development funds
are made by the City Council are not required to comply with the Rehabilitation
Program requirements. However, such sub-recipient agencies shall:
         (a)   Develop loan policies and guidelines, which shall govern the
operation of such programs and provide copies to the City's Housing Advisory
and Appeals Committee for their review and approval.
         (b)    Certify to the City that their loan policies, guidelines and
their program operations are in compliance with all applicable federal, state
and local laws, regulations and ordinances.
         (c)   Certify that the amount of a loan to a program participant plus
the total of all encumbrances against the property securing the loan shall not
exceed the appraised market value of the property as determined by a qualified
appraiser.
         (d)   Maintain a fidelity bond in the amount specified by the Mayor or
his designee naming the City as a Loss Payee.
         (e)   Grant the City, U.S. Department of Housing and Urban
Development, and the Comptroller General access to all of its records with
respect to its program operations.
      (3)   The Mayor or his designee shall, by contract with such sub-
recipient agency, establish procedures, policies and requirements as necessary
to insure compliance with this section and with applicable laws, regulations
and ordinances.
      (4)   The City's Housing Advisory and Appeals Committee shall be provided
with all required reports submitted by sub-recipient agencies. The Committee
shall hear appeals of program participants when such participants are unable to
resolve complaints or disputes with the sub-recipient agency. Such sub-
recipient agencies shall develop appeal procedures for appeals to the Committee
and shall disseminate same to its program participants. The conduct of such
appeals before the committee shall be in accordance with the Committee's
standard procedures. The agency whose decision is appealed to the Committee
shall furnish to the Committee all information contained in its records
pertaining to the appellant. Such agency shall provide a representative to
present its side of the appeal to the Committee and shall further have
available any other persons necessary to present the facts of the case. The
decision of the Committee in all such appeals shall be final.
   (E)   Modified bid process.
      (1)   The City Rehabilitation Loan Program shall establish a modified bid
process for the selection of rehabilitation contractors by homeowners
participating in the program. The bid process shall provide that contractors on
the active contractors list will receive notice of all rehabilitation projects
financed through the program and those who desire to carry out a project must
submit a sealed bid on the project that conforms to the specifications prepared
by program staff. Any responsive contractor whose bid is within 10% of the
city's cost estimate will be eligible for selection by the homeowner. The
contract for the project will be between the homeowner and the contractor that
has been selected.
      (2)   This division shall be effective for all rehabilitation loans
closed subsequent to enactment of Res. 2-2003.
      (3)   The Department of Family and Community Services shall promulgate
regulations to effectuate the provisions division.
(Res. 53-1992, approved 5-12-92; Am. Res. 23-1994, approved 3-11-94; Am. Res.
29-2000, approved 3-21-00; Am. Res. 88-2001, approved 6-1-01; Am. Res. 2-2003,
approved 1-16-03)
Editor's note:   Program History: The city's Housing Rehabilitation Loan
Program was initiated by the passage of Resolution 139-1975. The program was
subsequently completely revised and updated by Resolution 74-1986, and again by
Resolution 88-2001, which repealed the prior resolutions defining the Program.
§ 3-4-2 HOUSING POLICIES ADDRESSING THE NEEDS OF LOW-INCOME AND PHYSICALLY
DISABLED AND MENTALLY HANDICAPPED PERSONS.
   (A)   The city shall require all new construction of publicly subsidized
housing to be designed and constructed to accommodate the needs of the
handicapped as outlined in the applicable provisions of Chapter 41 of the New
Mexico Uniform Building Code and as illustrated in Removing Architectural
Barriers, published by the New Mexico Department of Education, Division of
Vocational Rehabilitation, as attached. The provisions of this section are not
applicable to publicly subsidized housing which has progressed beyond the
schematic stage as of the effective date of this section.
   (B)   The city shall make at least 3% and up to 10% of its publicly
subsidized housing available for congregate or group use, suitably designed to
meet the needs of the mentally and/or physically handicapped.
   (C)   The city shall make housing rehabilitation funds available to low and
moderate income handicapped persons or low and moderate income families with a
handicapped member who are living within a Community Development Area
designated as such under the New Mexico Community Development Law. Housing
rehabilitation funds may be used to bring current housing up to the adopted
Rehabilitation Standards for Community Development Areas and to modify the
existing dwelling unit to meet the special design needs of the handicapped
person or member of the family as illustrated in Removing Architectural
Barriers, published by the New Mexico Department of Education, Division of
Vocational Rehabilitation.
   (D)   The city shall seek additional housing rehabilitation funds to be made
available on a city-wide basis to low and moderate income handicapped persons
or families with a handicapped member in order to bring their current home up
to code and to modify it to meet the special design needs of the handicapped
persons as illustrated in Removing Architectural Barriers, published by the New
Mexico Department of Education, Division of Vocational Rehabilitation.
   (E)   The city shall seek the advice of handicapped citizens and service
agencies to help evaluate housing and related services and to develop a program
to aid the handicapped in our community.
(Res. 77-1976, approved 5-25-76)
§ 3-4-3 AFFORDABLE HOUSING POLICY.
   (A)   Resolution repeal. This Resolution shall repeal R-52, Enactment 74-
2000.
   (B)   Policy objectives. The objectives of the City of Albuquerque's
affordable housing policy are to:
      (1)   Implement the policy (D-5-a) established by the Albuquerque/
Bernalillo County Comprehensive Plan, that the opportunity to obtain standard
housing for a reasonable proportion of income be assured for Albuquerque
residents;
      (2)   Increase the supply of rental and home ownership housing that is
affordable to very low-income, low-income and moderate-income households; and
      (3)   Support and enhance the development of Workforce Housing as spelled
out in F/S(3) O-06-8, The Workforce Housing Opportunity Act; and
      (4)   Ensure equal treatment of all residents, especially very low-
income, low-income and moderate-income households, in pursuing affordable
housing opportunities; and
      (5)   Mitigate homelessness by adopting effective housing relocation
strategies.
   (C)   Defining an affordable housing policy.
      (1)   The City shall have a housing policy that identifies all City
actions that impact affordable housing including decisions regarding
residential development made by any Department or Board, Commission, or
Committee convened by the City. This shall include but not be limited to
development of Sector Plans, implementation of the Planned Growth Strategy,
downtown development, redevelopment, development of the 5-year Consolidated
Plan, Albuquerque Housing Services 1-Year and 5-Year Plans, and Planned
Communities such as Mesa del Sol; and
      (2)   The City shall establish percentages and types of affordable
housing required in developments that receive an injection of local, state, or
federal resources, or material assistance; and
      (3)   The City shall consider establishing the number of units and types
of affordable housing required in each City quadrant, or identify some other
type of formula to distribute affordable housing throughout the City to meet
the affordable housing need; and
      (4)   The City shall establish an effective relocation strategy to help
mitigate homelessness.
   (D)   Definition of affordable rental and for-purchase housing.
      (1)   Rental housing shall be considered affordable if: (1) the rent does
not exceed the fair market rents established for the Section 8 program of the
City of Albuquerque or rent levels established by other federal, state or local
affordable housing programs currently in existence or that may come into
existence in the future; and (2) households are required to spend no more than
30% of household income on rent and utilities.
      (2)   Homeownership housing shall be considered affordable if households
are required to spend no more than 30% of household income, adjusted for family
size, on monthly housing costs, or 35% under special conditions to be defined
in the Workforce Housing Plan.
   (E)   Investment of City resources in affordable housing.
      (1)   Investment of City resources in affordable rental housing is
appropriate if the housing is affordable to low- and moderate-income households
throughout its useful life.
      (2)   Investment of City resources in affordable, for-purchase housing is
appropriate if the project increases homeownership opportunities for low-income
households and for moderate-income households who are first-time homebuyers or
households who have not owned a home for three years.
   (F)   Revised income definitions.
      (1)   Following are income categories for the HOME Program in the
Department of Housing and Urban Development (HUD):
         (a)   “Extremely Low-income” households have incomes that do not
exceed 30% of the median family income for the Albuquerque Metropolitan
Statistical Area (MSA) adjusted for family size.
         (b)   “Very Low-Income” households have incomes between 31% and 50% of
the median family income for the Albuquerque MSA adjusted for family size.
         (c)   “Low-income” households have incomes between 51% and 60% of the
median family income for the Albuquerque MSA adjusted for family size.
         (d)   “Moderate-income” households have incomes between 61% and 80% of
the median family income for the Albuquerque MSA adjusted for family size.
      (2)   Households whose incomes do not exceed those as defined by other
federal, state, or local programs currently in existence or that may come into
existence that provide affordable ownership and rental housing to targeted
groups are covered under this Section.
   (G)   Defining the roles and responsibilities of the Affordable Housing
Committee.
      (1)   The primary responsibility of the Affordable Housing Committee (AHC
or Committee) shall be to advise the City on policies and activities related to
affordable housing. The AHC shall carry out these responsibilities as follows:
(1) recommend City policy and strategy initiatives aimed at increasing access
to safe, decent and affordable housing for all residents, especially low- and
moderate-income households; (2) recommend ways to increase production of
affordable housing by all sectors of the economy; (3) serve as the advisory
committee to the Albuquerque Citizen's Team (ACT) to develop the Workforce
Housing Plan and Needs Assessment and conduct an annual review of Plan
progress; (4) work with city staff to develop methods to mitigate and reduce
homelessness, and to develop effective housing relocation strategies to
mitigate homelessness; (5) assist in efforts to streamline the City’s
regulatory system.
      (2)   The City may request and consider recommendations from the
Affordable Housing Committee to address the impact on affordable housing
production or lack thereof when decisions regarding residential development are
made by any Department or Board, Commission, or Committee convened by the City.
This shall include but not be limited to development of Sector Plans,
implementation of the Planned Growth Strategy, downtown development,
redevelopment, development of the 5-year Consolidated Plan, Albuquerque Housing
Services 1-Year and 5-Year Plans, and Planned Communities such as Mesa del Sol;
and
      (3)   The City shall request and consider recommendations from the
Affordable Housing Committee to establish percentages and types of affordable
housing required in developments that receive an injection of local, state, or
federal resources, or material assistance; and
      (4)   The City shall request and consider recommendations from the
Affordable Housing Committee at such time as the City may begin consideration
of establishing a means to distribute affordable housing throughout the City to
meet the affordable housing need; and
      (5)   The City shall request and consider recommendations from the
Affordable Housing Committee to establish an effective housing relocation
strategy to help mitigate homelessness for consideration by the Mayor and
Council.
       (6)   The Mayor shall appoint the members of the Committee with the
advice and consent of the Council. The AHC may make recommendations to the
Mayor for appointment and reappointment to the Committee at the expiration of
member terms or upon their resignation. The AHC shall select a Chairperson who
shall be a Committee member from the private for-profit or not-for-profit
sector.
      (7)   The AHC shall consist of 12 members representing the following
industries and community sectors: two low- and moderate-income residents or
advocates, one of whom may represent the legal and Fair Housing sector; one
representative from the housing building industry; two representatives of the
housing lending industry; one representative of the not-for-profit housing
development sector; one individual who represents housing needs of people with
disabilities; one senior citizen advocate; two representatives from the
Department of Family and Community Services, one of whom represents Albuquerque
Housing Services; one representative from the Department of Planning; and one
representative from the Department of Municipal Development. Non-City staff
members shall be appointed for staggered three-year terms. The Committee may
recommend Subcommittees that may include non-AHC members. Each Subcommittee
shall include at least one member of the AHC who shall serve as the
Subcommittee Chairperson.
      (8)   The Department of Family and Community Services or the Planning
Department shall provide staff assistance to the AHC and its Subcommittees.
(Res. 134-1992, approved 9-30-92; Am. Res. 71-1998, approved 8-17-98; Am. Res.
74-2000, approved 8-21-00; Am. Res. R-2005-050, approved 4-18-05; Am. Res. R-
2007-011, approved 2-27-07)
§ 3-4-4 TEN-YEAR COMPREHENSIVE NEIGHBORHOOD DEVELOPMENT PLAN FOR HOUSING AND
ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT IN THE POCKET OF POVERTY.
   (A)   The Ten-Year Comprehensive Neighborhood Development Plan for Housing
and Economic Development in the Pocket of Poverty attached to Resolution No.
108-1993 is hereby adopted.
   (B)   The Ten-Year Comprehensive Neighborhood Development Plan for Housing
and Economic Development in the Pocket of Poverty shall be used by the
Committee as a guide for development of two-year programs for utilization of
fund income.
   (C)   $50,000 of the uncommitted fund balance is hereby appropriated to the
Convention Hotel (Legal Services/Miscellaneous) Project in the Metropolitan
Redevelopment Fund (275) and that any expenditures from this project will be
reimbursed when paybacks from the Albuquerque Plaza UDAG are received.
(Res. 108-1993, approved 8-2-93)
ARTICLE 5: UTILITIES
Section
General Provisions
   
3-5-1   Energy policies
   
3-5-2   Joint water/sewer fund and refuse fund financial management and rate
setting guidelines
   
3-5-3   Solid waste convenience centers; neighborhood meetings
   
3-5-4   Ground Water Protection Policy and action plan
   
3-5-5   Guidelines for public systems for a portion of the area west of the Rio
Grande
   
3-5-6   Expansion of utilities and development within the Petroglyph National
Monument
   
3-5-7   Water Resources Management Strategy
Water and Sewer System Expansion Policies
   
3-5-10   Preface
   
3-5-11   Definitions
   
3-5-12   Location and construction standards
   
3-5-13   Water and sewer connection requirements
   
3-5-14   Private systems
   
3-5-15   Financing and allocation of costs of construction
   
3-5-16   Pro rata
   
3-5-17   Extension of or connection to lines outside city limits
Drainage
   
3-5-30   Drainage policy
   
3-5-31   Upgrade of North Glenwood Hills Arroyo storm drainage project
Flood Control
   
3-5-40   Reports on flood control projects
   
3-5-41   North and South Valleys flood control projects
   
3-5-42   Development of flood control protection in the Rio Grande Valley
Reservoirs
   
3-5-50   Storage of water at Abiquiu Reservoir
   
3-5-51   Domestic Water Reservoirs Planning Policy
Recycling
   
3-5-60   Recycling and long-term solid waste planning
   
3-5-61   Solid Waste Management, Recycling, and Waste Reduction Plan
Cross-reference:
   
Utilities; boards and commissions, see Ch. 2, Art. 3
   
Utilities; programs and plans, see Ch. 4, Art. 3
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 3-5-1 ENERGY POLICIES.
   The following goal is adopted: to provide leadership to promote a
sustainable energy future that improves the environment and economy through
increasing community energy efficiency by 10% by 1997. The following policies
and strategies are adopted as the energy policy for the city.
   (A)   The role of the city.  
      (1)   The Parks and General Services Department through the Resource
Management Division, shall take the lead in developing energy saving programs
and help other city agencies with energy programs and policies. Programs and
activities should be coordinated through the Parks and General Services
Department where possible and then integrated into budgets of the appropriate
city departments with assistance and concurrence from the Department of Finance
and Management. The city shall consider public and private benefits in terms of
energy savings and cost savings.
      (2)   The Energy Conservation Council shall advise the Mayor and City
Council on the city's energy policies and programs and will monitor the
progress toward the goal on a regular basis in conjunction with the city's
Energy Conservation Goals Committee.
 
      (3)   The energy policies will be reviewed and revised as needed,
according to the advice and recommendations of the Mayor, City County, and/or
Energy Conservation Council.
      (4)   Strategies.
         (a)   Fiscal years 1993-1994.
            1.   Establish a community energy database to assist with
implementation of Energy Strategy programs by influencing decisions made by
builders, commuters, businesses, and residents.
            2.   Identify and implement one cost-effective demonstration
project that translates to the private sector.
            3.   Solicit outside funding sources for energy efficiency projects
to leverage City funds.
            4.   Participate in and report semi-annually the New Mexico Public
Service Commission's efforts to induce Integrated Resource Planning to
determine optimal methods of obtaining electricity supplies.
            5.   Review and update the Energy Policies and Strategies every two
years.
            6.   Establish a method of converting streetlights to high pressure
sodium bulbs on a larger scale than is currently being achieved.
         (b)   Fiscal years 1995-1997.
            1.   Support state of New Mexico efforts to provide energy
education and energy assistance among local government, state agencies,
utilities, and other public and private entities.
            2.   Investigate opportunities to finance municipal activities
through utility franchise agreements.
            3.   Prepare 5-year evaluation of Energy Policies in terms of
progress toward the goal of reducing per capita energy consumption by 10%.
   (B)   Energy efficiency in city buildings.  
      (1)   The city shall support energy efficiency projects of municipal
operations where life cycle costing supports the expenditure as cost-effective.
      (2)   Strategies.
         (a)   Fiscal years 1993-1994.
            1.   Determine costs involved with participation in U.S. EPA's
Greenlights program to increase lighting efficiencies in city facilities.
            2.   Compile comprehensive energy use data for municipal facilities
and review administrative instructions to establish clear energy use guidelines
in buildings.
            3.   Enhance the enforcement of the Life Cycle Costing Ordinance
and distribute a manual to architects and engineers who design new and
remodelled facilities for the city.
            4.   Develop an energy efficiency improvements plan for selected
city facilities as part of the Capital Improvement Project (CIP) Decade Plan.
            5.   Identify applications for co-generation, self-generation,
solar absorption air conditioning, renewable energy, and energy savings/
performance contracting.
            6.   Compile a list of the most cost-effective energy efficient
construction practices, particularly natural lighting and other solar elements,
that could be included in a code for municipal buildings.
            7.   a.   Explore the feasibility of purchasing energy services
and/or supplies from energy management service companies and independent power
producers. This would apply to energy savings or performance contracts and
projects involving co-generation and self-generation.
               b.   Establish appropriate payback criteria for energy
efficiency projects funded by: general fund; enterprise funds (rates); general
obligation bonds; and revenue bonds.
            8.   Establish an In-House Energy Management Committee to achieve
and coordinate all energy efficiency improvements to facilities submitted to
the Capital Improvement Program and to control energy consumption in
operations.
         (b)   Fiscal years 1995-1997.
            1.   Obtain a 10% energy reduction in city facilities in five
years.
            2.   Develop justification for the creation of an Energy Savings
Payback Fund to support an on-going energy management program to make continual
energy efficiency improvements to municipal facilities.
   (C)   Energy efficiency in residential/commercial buildings and land use.
      (1)   The city shall encourage cost-effective energy savings in
residential and commercial buildings, and associated development, by helping to
develop or participate in federal, state and local programs, and modifying
local building codes and land use zoning regulations towards that end.
      (2)   Strategies.
         (a)   Fiscal years 1993-1994.
            1.   Develop a coalition of professional, technical and
environmental organizations, builders, developers, lenders and city staff to
evaluate and demonstrate the effectiveness of solar and energy conservation
measures in affordable housing projects and to offer an amendment to the
Building Code encouraging the most cost-effective energy efficiency and solar
measures.
            2.   Evaluate Home Energy Rating Systems (HERS), and implement a
program for the Albuquerque area with cooperation from local realtors and
mortgage lenders.
            3.   Determine and report on method(s) through franchised utilities
to effect Demand Side Management, or energy efficiency programs and track their
effectiveness.
            4.   Review sidewalk improvement/expansion requirements and
ordinances to facilitate pedestrian use and allow public funding of sidewalks.
            5.   Demonstrate the energy and land use connection. As part of the
community identity/sub-areas planning effort, designate one area as a
demonstration project for energy-efficient buildings and transportation
alternatives.
            6.   Identify infill opportunities by planning sub-areas and
identify specific parcels within the sub-areas for possible rezoning or
recommended energy-efficient project designs.
            7.   Establish requirements for bicycle, pedestrian paths, and
park-and-ride criteria in new development permits.
         (b)   Fiscal years 1994-1997.
            1.   Construct at least ten miles per year of additional commuter
bicycle/pedestrian paths with associated parking and bicycle lockers.
            2.   Establish an economic development infrastructure plan to
promote energy efficiency in commercial, industrial, and residential
developments.
            3.   Develop criteria for adopting a mandatory energy retrofit
program on resale and rental properties.
   (D)   Energy efficient transportation.
      (1)   The city shall develop incentives for more energy efficient
transportation modes and support activities to reduce gasoline and diesel fuel
consumption throughout the community. The city shall do this primarily through
promotion of alternatives to the private vehicle; where necessary, the city
will also make the use of streets by private vehicles more energy-efficient.
      (2)   Strategies - High occupancy mobility.
         (a)   Fiscal year 1993-1994.
            1.   Expand transit service by providing a variety of transit user
inducements including new routes, reduced headways, additional express service,
fare reductions, free-fare zones, increased service hours, etc.
            2.   Promote greater transit ridership through an aggressive, on-
going marketing and advertising campaign.
            3.   Promote increased ridership through enhanced service
reliability, quality, and convenience through bus shelters, benches, and on-
board rider amenities.
            4.   Expand efforts to support carpooling, ride sharing, and other
high-occupancy vehicle (HOV) programs through various inducements such as
employer subsidized parking fees, auto insurance, or auto maintenance
allowances.
            5.   Develop a Downtown Core Parking Policy to balance
redevelopment and parking requirements.
         (b)   Fiscal year 1995-1997.
            1.   Develop high capacity corridors by constructing and converting
arterials to provide for priority HOV lanes and other such improvements.
      (3)   Strategies - Alternate mobility.
         (a)   Fiscal years 1993-1994.
            1.   Expand efforts to develop facilities designated on the
Bikeways Master Plan, such as bike lanes, trails, and crossings.
            2.   Provide bicycle user incentives, such as lockers, bus carrier
racks, and the elimination of barriers, including policy barriers to bicycle
users.
            3.   Expand efforts to develop pedestrian facilities, such as
sidewalks and pedestrian trails and crossings.
      (4)   Strategies - Trip reduction.
         (a)   Fiscal years 1993-1994.
            1.   Develop a city-wide policy for telecommuting for internal
applications and promote the concept throughout the community. Demonstrate
through a pilot project.
            2.   Work with employers on trip reduction strategies for employees
and customers, and to establish day-care services within or in proximity to
places of employment.
         (b)   Fiscal years 1995-1997.
            1.   Study auto facility pricing methods to reduce rush-hour
travel, as well as the number of single occupant autos using street facilities,
methods such as increased gas taxes, tolls, parking fees, and other congestion
management measures.
            2.   Continue to support efforts to establish a rail link between
Albuquerque and Santa Fe.
      (5)   Strategies - Vehicle efficiency.
         (a)   Fiscal years 1993-1994.
            1.   Support efforts to offer tax or purchase rebate incentives for
vehicles having an EPA, city-average fuel economy of 20 miles per gallon or
better.
            2.   Expand, where appropriate, efforts to convert the municipal
fleet from gasoline and diesel to compressed natural gas, electricity, and
other alternative fuels.
            3.   Develop criteria for replacing municipal vehicles with those
designed to consume alternative fuels.
         (b)   Fiscal years 1995-1997.
            1.   Support state and national efforts to increase vehicle
efficiencies and provide inducements for the production of vehicle engines
designed to consume alternative fuels.
      (6)   Strategies - Roadway efficiency.
         (a)   Fiscal years 1993-1994.
            1.   Improve the system efficiency of the urban street network by
reducing vehicle delay and out-of-direction travel. The types of projects
involved include major intersection reconstruction, lane additions to
arterials, and construction of new arterial roadways. Coordinate this through
the Transportation Improvement Program to achieve a balance between high
occupancy/alternate mobility and expansion projects. Priority will be given to
road projects which support the city's goal of alternate modes of
transportation and/or which are in high air pollution locations.
         (b)   Fiscal years 1995-1997.
            1.   Provide a smoother, more fuel-efficient surface for arterial
and collector streets. Make this a high priority to the Transportation
Improvement Program.
            2.   Implement a variety of roadway efficiency measures, such as
the addition of left-turn lanes, signal coordination upgrades, bus bays and
other congestion mitigation.
            3.   Consider the feasibility of making expressway/access
management improvements such as upgrading existing arterials, within existing
rights-of-way, and through measures such as limiting access to connecting
cross-streets, including grade-separating facilities.
            4.   Promote and provide the opportunity for greater use of
flextime, staggered work hours, and compressed work-week programs on a
community-wide basis.
   (E)   Energy consumer education.
      (1)   The City shall encourage energy conservation and efficiency in the
community through assertive, specifically targeted, education programs to
develop a broad based energy awareness.
      (2)   Strategies.
         (a)   Fiscal years 1993-1994.
            1.   Determine consumer priorities and the level of public
awareness of energy conservation measures through a needs survey or from
existing state or regional information.
            2.   Increase public awareness on energy conservation and
efficiency and renewable energy uses through displays, workshops and media
publicity.
            3.   Develop and distribute an energy consumer guide listing the
most cost-effective energy actions and energy-efficient appliances and where
and how to obtain the products and/or services. Coordinate with utilities as a
measured demand side management activity.
            4.   Conduct targeted workshops for citizens, realtors, buildings
and designers on cost-effective energy efficiency and renewable energy
technologies and proposed city initiatives such as the community identity
program promoting infill development.
         (b)   Fiscal year 1995-1997.
            1.   Develop a coalition and infrastructure to promote Albuquerque
as an energy-efficient and environmentally clean city in order to increase
economic development.
(Res. 14-1994, approved 1-26-94)
§ 3-5-2 JOINT WATER/SEWER FUND AND REFUSE FUND FINANCIAL MANAGEMENT AND RATE
SETTING GUIDELINES.
   (A)   All future financial actions taken by the Joint Water/Sewer Fund and
Refuse Fund be taken in conformance with the Financial Management and Rate
Setting Guidelines, attached to Resolution No. 167-1986.
   (B)   This section shall become effective upon adoption and be applicable to
the fiscal year 1988 and subsequent budgets.
   (C)   Definitions.
      A or A-. A Moody's credit rating, or equivalent, for a bond which is
considered an “upper medium” grade credit risk.
      AA or AA-. A Moody's credit rating, or equivalent, for bond which is
considered an “excellent” grade credit risk.
      DEBT SERVICE COVERAGE. Income available for debt service divided by total
debt service for the same period.
      FAIR MARKET VALUE. The price an asset would bring if well advertised and
sold competitively in the open market.
      INCOME TRANSFER PAYMENT. Use of governmental revenues, derived from one
sector of the population or the population in general, to provide economic
support for another group or classification of citizens.
      INTERGENERATIONAL EQUITY. The concept that presumes users of utility
services from one generation or period will not be required to invest any more
than is required to maintain services of adequate quality and reliability for
their own use; and that future users of that same service will not be burdened
with costs which represent costs of doing business from an earlier period.
      INTERCLASS SUBSIDIZATION. A circumstance where one group or
classification of customers is supporting the cost of providing services to
another group by being required to pay more than their fair share of costs.
      INTRACLASS SUBSIDIZATION. Refers to an instance where one subset of a
class customers is subsidizing the cost of service to others within their same
group.
      LONG TERM DEBT. Debt with a maturity of more than one year after the date
of issuance.
   (D)   Financial management and rate setting guidelines.
      (1)   Financial management.
         (a)   Accounting practices applied to enterprise funds must make it
possible to determine whether they are operated at a profit or loss similar to
comparable private enterprises;
         (b)   All services rendered by an enterprise fund to other funds of
the city shall be billed for on the same basis that other users are charged,
and all services received by the enterprise fund from other funds shall be paid
for on the same basis that other users are charged;
         (c)   Enterprise funds must be reimbursed, at book value, for assets
transferred to other city purposes; and at book or market value, which ever is
higher, for assets sold for private use;
         (d)   A ceiling shall be established with respect to the maximum
amount of annual revenue from utility expansion charges that will be treated as
recurring income for the purpose of establishing rate requirements for the
Joint Water/Sewer Fund. The amount of this ceiling shall be established on the
basis of a study to be provided by the Fund for Council approval during its
fiscal year 1988 budget hearing. The amount of this ceiling will be determined
as a fixed amount, to be updated annually;
         (e)   Operating income should be sufficient to:
            1.   Ensure payment of obligations on a current basis, including
adequate maintenance and repair;
            2.   Maintain credit ratings of “AA-” for the Joint Water/Sewer
Fund and “A” for the Refuse Fund; and
            3.   Provide for minimum working capital balances and contingency
reserves.
         (f)   Cash and investments in excess of the level required to maintain
minimum working capital balances should be used for capital expenditures and
maintenance of contingency reserves, as required;
         (g)   In addition to the maintenance of minimum working capital
balances, contingency reserves will be appropriated and maintained at a level
sufficient to provide for unanticipated, non-recurring events or emergencies.
The amount of this reserve shall be established on the basis of a liability
study to be provided by the departments for Council approval during its fiscal
year 1988 budget hearing. The amount of the appropriation will be determined as
a fixed amount, to be updated annually, or as a percent of projected annual
operating revenues;
         (h)   Minimum annual operating fund transfers to the departments'
capital improvement programs will be established. The amount of these
appropriations shall be established on the basis of a cost/benefit study to be
provided by the departments for Council approval during its fiscal year 1988
budget hearing. The amount of these appropriations will be determined as a
fixed amount, to be updated annually, or as a percent of property and equipment
in service, as of June 30 of the immediately preceding fiscal year;
         (i)   Operating transfers to capital will be included in a fund's cost
base for the purpose of establishing rates;
         (j)   Long term debt will be executed only for the purposes of capital
acquisition, including water rights purchases, replacement and refurbishment of
plant;
         (k)   The Administration shall propose policies and procedures by
which debt issued to finance enterprise fund capital projects will be sized and
timed to meet annual capital improvement program cash flow requirements, rather
than total project appropriations;
         (l)   The Administration will recommend to the Council increases in
charges for services, or other effective measures, if prospective debt service
coverage tests for proposed and outstanding bonds will not be met within the
planning horizon of the departments' annual combined rate and budget proposal;
         (m)   Long term debt will not extend past the expected useful life of
the facilities financed, and will not be so high relative to total operating
expenses as to jeopardize a fund's credit rating;
         (n)   The impact on rates for existing customers from an expansion of
services will be minimized. For this purpose, policies shall be established for
the recovery of just and reasonable costs from those parties causing or
directly benefiting from system expansion and growth. Existing policies
together with any proposed changes, in this regard, will be summarized and
provided by the departments for Council review during the fiscal year 1988
Budget Hearing.
      (2)   Rate design.
         (a)   Both inter- and intraclass subsidization should be minimized.
Optimally, a customer or class of customers benefiting from a service should
pay the full cost of such service, no more, no less. Generally, rates
representing fully allocated costs of service should be maintained for all
services in order to send clear economic signals regarding the cost and
efficient use of those services. Where differences among users are significant
and determinate, charges should, to the extent possible, reflect differences in
the cost of providing service;
         (b)   Intergenerational equity should be maintained. Future rate
payers should not be expected to pay for costs incurred to serve current
customers and vice versa;
         (c)   City residents should not subsidize enterprise fund services
provided to entities outside of the incorporated city limits and vice versa.
However, the city reserves the right to earn a fair economic return on its
capital investment to serve those entities, as compensation for financial risk
incurred as a result of providing those services. A minimum charge of a 5%
return on the investment allocated to provide such service is hereby
established. Higher rates of return are permitted, if justified by prevailing
market rates of interest and/or the value of service to those customers;
         (d)   Revenue stability should be protected. Rate adjustments should
be adopted regularly, in small increments, in order to avoid revenue losses
associated with reduced demand for services which can be precipitated by large,
infrequent rate adjustments;
         (e)   When special situations require that factors other than the cost
of service be considered in the final determination of rates, steps should be
taken to minimize any discriminatory effect:
            1.   Concerns for the socio-economic impact of charges for services
on individuals can best be resolved through the implementation of explicit,
specifically targeted income transfer payments or credits which are to be
reimbursed by the General Fund (as is the current practice for both the Water
and Refuse Funds); and
            2.   Presentation of all annual budget/rate proposals shall include
historical tables which show average bills and actual costs per unit of
service. Comparative data from similar communities should also be provided, as
available. Also, a department requesting a rate change must indicate likely
effects of the new rates on the relative level of utilization of service by
class of customer, and assuming utilization remains unchanged, calculate the
percentage changes in average monthly billings and marginal rates to be paid
for each class of service; and
            3.   Every request for a rate adjustment should also be accompanied
by a qualitative assessment, where possible, of the impact of the rate change
on incentives and disincentives to: conserve water, recover resources, and
utilize city services instead of other alternatives such as using well water,
septic tanks and disposing of wastes illegally.
      (3)   Financial performance ratios. The Joint Water/Sewer Fund and the
Refuse Fund will also annually report their performance with regard to the
following ratios over a five year period ending with the projected budget year,
as part of each year's combined budget and rate proposal to the Council:
ENTERPRISE FUND FINANCIAL PERFORMANCE INDICATORS
 
   Category      Description
   Liquidity      a. Debt service coverage
            b. Working capital as % of operating income
            c. Liquid assets/current liabilities
            d. Current assets/net assets
   Leverage      a. Long-term debt as % of net assets
            b. Annual debt service as % of total expenses
   Activity      a. Operating ratio, i.e., total income/total operating
expenses
(Res. 167-1986, approved 11-19-86)
§ 3-5-3 SOLID WASTE CONVENIENCE CENTERS; NEIGHBORHOOD MEETINGS.
   (A)   The Solid Waste Department with the cooperation and assistance of the
Office of Neighborhood Services shall conduct quarterly neighborhood meetings
with neighborhood groups and other interested parties, beginning in January of
each year, in order to determine:
      (1)   Possible problems which may arise with respect to health issues
associated with the convenience centers.
      (2)   Traffic congestion and other related issues which may affect the
neighborhoods.
      (3)   Problems pertaining to litter associated with the area in and
around the convenience centers.
      (4)   Possible ways to make the convenience centers fit into the
neighborhood by enhancing the aesthetic qualities of the centers.
   (B)   The Solid Waste Department shall provide the City Council with a
report on the meeting required herein, and shall provide responses to
neighborhood concerns, within 30 days of the meetings.
(Res. 164-1990, approved 11-15-90)
§ 3-5-4 GROUND WATER PROTECTION POLICY AND ACTION PLAN.
   (A)   The Ground Water Protection Policy and Action Plan (GPPAP), attached
to Resolution No. 81-1994, is hereby adopted.
   (B)   The Mayor, through the Policy Coordinating Committee (PCC), will begin
implementation of the GPPAP by drafting and submitting for approval the city
and county ordinances establishing an advisory Ground-Water Protection Board,
the Board's structure and tasks, and the Board's level of authority. These
Board issues will be reevaluated three years after the adoption of this
section.
   (C)   The PCC, in consultation with the City and County Attorneys, will also
draft aid submit for approval a joint Powers Agreement between the city and the
county which outlines administrative and financial responsibility for
implementation of the GPPAP.
   (D)   The members of the citizens' Ground-Water Protection Advisory
Committee are hereby thanked for their active participation in the development
and adoption of this Plan. Committee members who wish to remain involved in the
GPPAP process will be invited to serve as a citizens' review committee for the
proposed ordinances and Joint Powers Agreement.
   (E)   Amendments of the Albuquerque/Bernalillo County Comprehensive Plan to
designate the Crucial Area on the map and to define Crucial Area in the Water
Quality policies will be proposed following adoption of the GPPAP.
   (F)   The county Departments of Public Works and Zoning, Building, and
Planning will be invited to participate in the PCC.
(Res. 81-1994, approved 8-12-94)
§ 3-5-5 GUIDELINES FOR PUBLIC SYSTEMS FOR A PORTION OF THE AREA WEST OF THE RIO
GRANDE.
   (A)   The Guidelines for Public Systems for a Portion of the Area West of
the Rio Grande, dated September 24, 1974, is adopted as the official guidelines
for orderly development for the purpose of coordination and efficiency in the
provision of public facilities and services for the area described and the
Priority Area for development shall be within the area defined by the portions
of Water Zones 1W, 2AW and 32RW below elevation 5255 MSL served by the Atrisco,
College and Volcano trunks of the Master Plan for Water Supply of the city 1963
as amended in 1972.
   (B)   The 1985 Land Use Plan and the simultaneously-adopted Master Plans for
Water Supply, Drainage, Sanitary Sewer, and Sewerage Treatment Works and the
subsequently adopted Major Street and Highway Plan be amended as appropriate to
accommodate the elements of the Plan as well as the following specific
policies:
      (1)   Water supply. All land development shall be consistent with the
Master Plan for Water Supply, adopted on September 8, 1965 and revised in 1972.
Implementation shall be coordinated through the annual Capital Improvement
Program and in accordance with the policies of “Water & Sewer Line Extensions”
adopted by resolution by the City Commission on May 23, 1961, and as
subsequently amended.
      (2)   Sanitary sewers. All land development shall conform to the Master
Plan for Sanitary Sewers, adopted on September 8, 1964 and as subsequently
amended. Implementation shall be in accordance with orderly development in the
public interest coordinated through the Capital Improvement Program and in
accordance with the policies for extensions adopted by the City Commission on
May 23, 1961, and as subsequently amended.
      (3)   Transportation. All land development, including all public streets,
access ways, and transit facilities shall be in accordance with the Major
Street and Highway Plan (adopted on October 12, 1965) and since amended, and
the Metronet (adopted in concept on September 15, 1969) and with the
modifications included in the Guidelines for Public Systems, adopted as a part
of this section, including recommendations for bikeways, regional trails, and a
pedestrian access system. Implementation shall be consistent with the public
interest as determined by the 1975 Transportation Priority Program (MRGCOG
adopted June 1974) and as subsequently amended.
      (4)   Drainage. All land development, including streets and public
facilities, shall comply with the requirements of the Albuquerque Metropolitan
Arroyo Flood Control Authority (AMAFCA) Resolution No. 1972-2, adopted on July
13, 1972, and with the Western Albuquerque Metropolitan Area Drainage
Management Plan (William A. Matotan & Associates, June, 1974) as adopted by the
Board of AMAFCA on August 22, 1974, and as subsequently amended, and in concept
and intent shall be in accordance with the performance objectives of the
Guidelines for Public Systems for the area described, adopted as a part of this
section.
      (5)   Parks and Recreation. The acquisition and development of lands and
facilities for public parks and recreation and for the regional community and
local public open space and trail system for the area west of the Rio Grande
shall be in accordance with the policies of the Guidelines for Public Systems
adopted as a part of this section. Existing policies for dedication of land for
parks and recreational purposes for the affected area shall be amended
accordingly. Implementation shall be consistent with public priorities as
coordinated through the Capital Improvement Program. Responsibility for
operation and maintenance of multi-use public facilities shall be according to
functional responsibility and in proportion to use.
(Res. 31-1975, approved 3-5-75)
§ 3-5-6 EXPANSION OF UTILITIES AND DEVELOPMENT WITHIN THE PETROGLYPH NATIONAL
MONUMENT.
   (A)   The city shall not extend city infrastructure or allow grading to
properties within water pressure Zone 2W and also within the proposed
boundaries of the Petroglyph National Monument; however, improvements to the
Unser Boulevard right of way may be undertaken if the alignment and
improvements are approved by the Council.
   (B)   The city shall not issue building permits for properties within water
pressure Zone 2W and also within the proposed boundaries of the Petroglyph
National Monument.
   (C)   The city shall not grant approval of site development plans or approve
final subdivision plats, except bulk land plats, which are within water
pressure Zone 2W and also within the proposed boundaries for the Petroglyph
National Monument.
   (D)   For the purposes of this section, the proposed boundaries of the
Petroglyph National Monument include all properties designated by Congressional
action as within the Monument and all additions to the Monument made
administratively by the National Park Service pursuant to authority granted to
it by Congress.
   (E)   Property owners who have received city approval for development plans
and in addition either have utilities extended to their site or have secured
all approvals for well and septic service may make application for building
permits and approvals of specific development plans.
      (1)   Upon such application, the city shall notify the National Park
Service if the property is designated for acquisition by the United States.
      (2)   If after a period of 12 months from the date of the application for
building permits the United States or other agency has not acquired the
property or initiated condemnation proceedings, the city shall issue a building
permit to the property owner if the property owner has received all other
approvals from the city which entitle the owner to a building permit.
   (F)   The plans for construction of Unser Boulevard from Ouray to St.
Joseph's Ave. as it may be located in Water Pressure Zone 2-W and the
Petroglyph National Monument, which are attached to Resolution No. 42-1991 as
Exhibit A, are approved. This includes none of the Unser Boulevard paving but
does include some related berming, wing-wall and outlet work.
   (G)   City policy on grading within the boundaries of the Petroglyph
National Monument, is amended to also allow grading and related improvements
within public easements adjacent to the Unser Boulevard right of way if the
improvements are approved by the Council. The National Park Service should have
some flexibility in directing construction of the noise berms to make them more
naturalistic.
(Res. 155-1990, approved 11-9-90; Am. Res. 42-1991, approved 4-2-91)
§ 3-5-7 WATER RESOURCES MANAGEMENT STRATEGY.
   (A)   The Albuquerque Water Resources Management Strategy is hereby adopted
as the city's water supply policy.
   (B)   The incremental water and sewer enterprise rate increase to be adopted
to implement the Albuquerque Water Resources Management Strategy shall be as
follows: FY/1998 - 4.7%; FY/1999 - 4.7%; FY/2000 - 4.5%; FY/2001 - 4.5%; FY/
2002 - 4.5%; FY/2003 - 4.5%; FY/2004 - 4.5%. The Mayor shall insure that
funding for on-going operations, maintenance, capital, and fund management
policies of the Water and Sewer Enterprise are not compromised through
dedicated rate increases to implement the Water Resources Management Strategy.
The Water Resources Management Strategy document shall be amended as
appropriate to reflect these policies.
   (C)   The Mayor is directed to implement the policies and projects
identified in the strategy.
   (D)   The Mayor is directed to report to the City Council semi-annually
regarding progress on the implementation of the Albuquerque Water Resources
Management Strategy.
(Res. 40-1997, approved 5-19-97)
WATER AND SEWER SYSTEM EXPANSION POLICIES
§ 3-5-10 PREFACE.
   (A)   The policies set forth herein with the exception of Policy 14 are
generally to regulate and control the development, extension and expansion,
including connection, of water and sewer facilities within the city limits,
although some may also be applicable outside the city limits.
   (B)   Some of these policies may be affected by other policies and
ordinances including but not limited to the Development Process Manual (DPM),
Standby Ordinances and Policies, various Master Plans and the Water and Sewer
Ordinance. In the event there are any apparent conflicts between such
ordinances, and/or policies and this policy, there shall first be an attempt to
construe, them together in order to resolve any such conflict. If such
construction cannot resolve the conflict then any applicable ordinance shall
control and then this policy shall be applied.
(Res. 20-1984, approved 2-28-84)
§ 3-5-11 DEFINITIONS.
   (A)   The following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly
indicates or requires a different meaning.
   CHIEF ADMINISTRATIVE OFFICER. Chief Administrative Officer of the city or
his designated representative.
   DEPARTMENT. Water Resources Department of the city.
   EASEMENT. Includes legally dedicated streets, rights-of-way, city-owned
property and easements.
   LOOP LINES. A water line installed between lines for the purpose of
equalizing water pressure and increasing water flow.
   MAIN LINE. Water Master Plan Line or a Sanitary Sewer Master Plan Line.
   MAJOR FACILITIES. Includes but is not limited to reservoirs, wells, pump
stations, master plan lines, lift stations, water and liquid waste treatment
facilities.
   MAYOR. The Mayor of the city of Albuquerque, or his designated
representative.
   PRIVATE SYSTEM. A privately owned and operated water and/or sewer system.
   PETITIONER. Person or his authorized representative requesting design and/or
construction of water and/or sewer system additions.
   SANITARY SEWER SYSTEM MASTER PLAN. The overall plan of the liquid waste
system within the city and surrounding areas, as adopted by the City Council
and modified administratively, including but not limited to existing and
proposed interceptors, lift stations, waste water treatment facilities, odor
control facilities and on-site systems.
   SANITARY SEWER MASTER PLAN LINE. Major interceptor or collector lines as
indicated on Sanitary Sewer System Master Plan or those lines determined to be
needed by system analysis or calculation.
   SEWER COLLECTOR LINE. The sanitary sewer line from which direct liquid waste
service is available.
   SEWER SERVICE LINE. The sanitary sewer line that runs from the property line
to the sewer collector line.
   WATER DISTRIBUTION LINE. The water line from which direct consumer service
is available.
   WATER SYSTEM MASTER PLAN. The overall plan of the water system within the
city and surrounding areas, as adopted by the City Council and modified
administratively, including but not limited to existing and proposed
transmission and major water distribution lines, storage facilities, booster
pump stations and wells.
   WATER MASTER PLAN LINE. Major transmission or distribution lines as
indicated on Water System Master Plan, or those lines determined to be needed
by system analysis or calculation.
   WATER SERVICE LINE. The water line that runs from the water meter to the
water distribution line.
   WELL COLLECTOR LINE. The water line that conveys water from a well to a
reservoir.
   (B)   Words not defined herein but which are defined in the Zoning Code of
the city are to be construed as defined therein.
(Res. 20-1984, approved 2-28-84)
§ 3-5-12 LOCATION AND CONSTRUCTION STANDARDS.
   (A)   Policy No. 1 - Location of water and sanitary sewer lines. Water and
sanitary sewer lines must be installed only in easements acceptable to the
city. The topography, alignment, width, location, access and owner use of any
such easements must be suitable for such line installation and maintenance as
determined by the Department. In the event easements are not available,
Petitioner shall provide same at his expense.
   (B)   Policy No. 2 - Installation of water and sanitary sewer lines. All
water and sanitary sewer lines must be installed pursuant to and in conformance
with the city's standards and the following:
      (1)   The size and location of all water and sanitary sewer lines which
are to be installed shall be determined by the Department and shall be large
enough to provide adequate service and fire protection to the area to be
served.
      (2)   All water and sanitary sewer lines must be installed in trenches
containing no other utilities. Variances may be granted by the Department at
its discretion under the following circumstances:
         (a)   Construction conditions make it impractical or impossible to
maintain separate trenches;
         (b)   Construction access to the easement is limited;
         (c)   The size, width or location of the easement precludes the use of
separate trenches;
         (d)   Other utility lines may be allowed to cross water and/or
sanitary sewer lines.
      (3)   No such variance shall constitute a hazard to public health and
safety and appropriate conditions for such variances shall be set by the
Department.
   (C)   Policy No. 3 - Installation of water and sanitary sewer lines prior to
construction of paving or other public improvements. Water and/or sanitary
sewer lines required by the applicable Master Plan or known by the Department
to be needed must be installed prior to construction of paving or other public
improvements which by their nature should be installed subsequent to said
lines.
(Res. 20-1984, approved 2-28-84)
§ 3-5-13 WATER AND SEWER CONNECTION REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   Policy No. 4 - Water service line connections. Water service lines may
be connected to water lines if the Department finds that size, type function
and feasibility of connection to the line permits connection; such connection
is usually not workable on lines over 16 inches in diameter. Lines used as
transmission lines or well collector lines shall not be connected to for
service. All connection shall comply with city standards and specifications.
   (B)   Policy No. 5 - Sewer service line connections. Service connections
shall be made at right angles to the sewer collector line and such connection
shall not be made to lines with design capacities (peak flow conditions) at
point of connection, greater than 3.0 MGD, velocities of less than two feet per
second or lines with a nominal diameter of 15 inches or larger. All sewer
service line connections must conform to city standards and specifications.
(Res. 20-1984, approved 2-28-84)
§ 3-5-14 PRIVATE SYSTEMS.
   (A)   Policy No. 6 - Private systems. Private system additions to existing
system facilities, that are required for provision of service to a development
or a proposed development will be allowed, provided that the following
conditions are met:
      (1)   The private system meets all specifications, design requirements
and applicable health standards as established by the Department or otherwise
required by law;
      (2)   The total system design and construction costs shall be the
responsibility of the petitioner;
      (3)   Maintenance, operation and power costs of the added facility shall
be an additional responsibility of the ultimate users within the development;
      (4)   Private system additions shall basically be allowed only one
connection point to the city system. Developments requiring connection at more
than one point, due to service requirements, pressure considerations and/or
fire flow requirements, may be allowed, provided that separately metered areas
are not interconnected;
      (5)   Water lines for private fire protection will be allowed only one
connection;
      (6)   Manifolding of meters will not be permitted; and
      (7)   The subject development conforms to the Albuquerque/ Bernalillo
County Comprehensive Plan and related policy instruments as determined by the
city.
(Res. 20-1984, approved 2-28-84)
§ 3-5-15 FINANCING AND ALLOCATION OF COSTS OF CONSTRUCTION.
   (A)   Policy No. 7 - Financing of construction.
      (1)   Property owners shall be responsible for the equivalent cost of
water and/or sewer lines that are accessible to or can serve the property:
         (a)   The cost of eight inch water and/or sanitary sewer lines shall
be assumed for land zoned to allow and proposed to be used for residences which
are single family detached, townhouses, duplexes or triplexes served by common
or individual meters; and mobile homes served by individual meters;
         (b)   The cost of 12 inch water and/or sanitary sewer lines shall be
assumed for all other land.
      (2)   In situations not covered by other policies herein, the cost or
design and construction of water and sewer lines will be paid for by the
petitioner or property owner.
   (B)   Policy No. 8 - Master plan lines sizes 14 inches and larger. Master
plan water and sanitary sewer lines in sizes 14 inches and larger shall be
installed as follows:
      (1)   Master plan lines when installed primarily for the purpose of
facilitating the use of any existing master plan facilities by completion of a
portion of the Master Plan System, will be installed by the city.
      (2)   Master plan lines requested in advance of funding in the Capital
Improvement Program or unprogrammed Master plan line extensions of either water
lines or sanitary sewer lines estimated to cost the city more than $20,000 may
be designed and constructed, provided there are city funds available, with the
petitioner advancing that portion of the estimated cost in excess of $20,000.
If applicable, the equivalent cost of lines as set forth in Policy 7(1) will be
prorated as provided herein. Upon receipt of 80% of the prorated design and
construction cost of the line serving the intervening abutting property, the
petitioner will be reimbursed for the remaining cost of the Master Plan Line.
   (C)   Policy No. 9 - City owned property. Water or sewer lines which are
installed in streets or easements abutting or accessible to city property shall
obligate the Department to pay the city's share of the installation cost, as
would be required of any other property owner. Payment shall be from a special
line item of the operating or capital improvements budget; this expense shall
not be borne by the water and/or sewer rates.
   (D)   Policy No. 10 - Increase in system.
      (1)   This policy applies to any petitioner who proposes a development
which:
         (a)   Would require water and/or sanitary sewer line construction in
order to meet the increase in anticipated domestic water and/or sanitary sewer
usage or in order to meet required fire flows beyond available system
capacities, as determined by the Department; or
         (b)   Would require shoestring extension of the water system that
could not provide standard city service, as determined by the Department; or
         (c)   Would require construction of major facilities for water system
production, storage and distribution, or for pumping and collection facilities
for sewage treatment works, which major improvements would be needed in advance
of funding called for in the Capital Improvements Program.
      (2)   Development of such water and/or sewer system improvements shall be
accomplished by:
         (a)   Design and construction supplied by petitioner through city
turnkey procedure; or
         (b)   Funds for design and construction advanced to the city by the
petitioner; petitioner shall be reimbursed by the city for the facilities cost
in excess of those costs for which petitioner is otherwise obligated;
reimbursement, without interest, will be made when such system facilities are
approved as city projects in the Capital Improvements Program and are funded,
whether through sale of bonds or otherwise.
   (E)   Policy No. 11 - Criteria for apportionment of charges. In those
situations where the property owner may be responsible for part or all of the
cost of main lines, sewer collector lines and water distribution lines, the
following criteria shall be used in determining the extent of such
responsibility:
      (1)   Generally.
         (a)   The property may be either improved or unimproved;
         (b)   Water and/or sewer lines must adjoin the property or be
otherwise accessible to it;
         (c)   The line(s) must be able to service the property, i.e., proper
size, proper elevation, pressure, etc.;
         (d)   The present or future use of the property must indicate a
necessity for water and/or sewer service.
         (e)   In determining the use of the property, there shall be taken
into consideration the highest and best use for which the property may be
reasonably and legitimately adapted whether it be present or future use.
However, any such future use must be more than merely speculation or
conjecture. Factors to be taken into consideration in making this determination
are:
            1.   Size of the property;
            2.   Present use;
            3.   Future use:
               a.   Zoning;
               b.   Platting;
               c.   Development and relationship of surrounding area;
               d.   Growth patterns;
               e.   Access;
               f.   Adopted city/county plans;
               g.   Other.
         (f)   The method of determining such charge may be on a front foot,
area or other equitable basis.
      (2)   Residential zoned property whether platted, unplatted, subdivided,
or unsubdivided that has water and/or sewer lines on more than one side.
         (a)   The charge is to be based upon the shortest side of the lot
adjoining such line unless service is to be taken from more than one line, then
the charge shall be for all such lines connected to.
         (b)   In the event the property is unsubdivided or unplatted, it will
be assumed to be divided to provide five dwelling units per acre.
         (c)   In the event the lines are not installed concurrently, then the
charge is to be based upon the first line installed.
         (d)   The cost of installation of such water and sewer lines that are
exempted herein shall be prorated among the other properties benefited
therefrom.
      (3)   Other property that has water and/or sewer lines on more than one
side. Such property shall be charged for all adjoining lines as provided for
herein.
      (4)   Loop lines and fire protection. Notwithstanding the provisions
herein, if water loop lines or lines for fire protection are necessary to
provide adequate service and/or fire protection to the property, it shall be
charged for such lines.
(Res. 20-1984, approved 2-28-84)
§ 3-5-16 PRO RATA.
   (A)   Policy No. 12 - Pro rata. Under some circumstances the city or a
private developer may advance the cost of the installation of main lines, water
distribution or sewer collector lines for which abutting or accessible property
owners may be obligated under these policies to contribute a portion of the
cost. When such obligation arises, the property owner shall pay to the city the
appropriate pro rata share of the installation cost at the time application for
service connection permits are made. Pro rata charges established prior to the
adoption of this policy shall remain in full force and effect.
   (B)   Policy No. 13 - Method of determining pro rata share. Pro rata share
of total costs shall be based on an equitable method of determining benefit
which may include a front foot, area or other equitable method.
(Res. 20-1984, approved 2-28-84)
§ 3-5-17 EXTENSION OF OR CONNECTION TO LINES OUTSIDE CITY LIMITS.
   (A)   Policy No. 14 - Lines outside city limits.
      (1)   Except as provided below, City water and sanitary sewer lines may
be extended into the County, or existing City lines located outside the City
limits, may be connected to, at the Petitioner's expense, if the following
applicable conditions are satisfied:
         (a)   Property is located within the area described in the Sanitary
Sewer System Master Plan and Master Plan of Water Supply for City of
Albuquerque & Environs, 1982.
         (b)   Upon application for connection, there shall be paid to the City
either the established Pro Rata cost, or if there is no Pro Rata cost
established, no more than the Petitioner's share of the cost of lines
referenced in Policy 7A based on the current City Engineer's Estimated Unit
Prices for Contract Items shall be applied.
         (c)   The Petitioner must provide all licenses and easements for all
line installations necessary to serve the property.
         (d)   In the event it is necessary to extend existing lines that are
located outside the city limits in order to provide the service requested, the
cost of such lines shall be paid for by the Petitioner. Such lines may be
prorated according to Pro Rata policies.
      (2)   Within the capacity of the system as determined by the City, water
and sanitary sewer lines may be extended into the County at the Petitioner's
expense if the following applicable conditions are satisfied:
         (a)   Water Master Plan Lines and Sewer Master Plan Lines are
available or will be extended at the expense of the Petitioner; and
         (b)   The Petitioner advances the money to the City for water and
sewer extensions and the cost may be prorated as provided in the Pro Rata
policies; and
         (c)   The City of Albuquerque will not advance funds nor participate
in the cost of extensions outside of City limits except when the water and
sewer lines are also constructed to improve or reinforce in-City facilities or
when the lines abut City property. The City will pay for its portion of the
expanded system provided funds are available; and
         (d)   For water extensions, the Petitioner makes declaration of his
existing water source and shall not connect said water source to the service
provided by the extension; and
         (e)   Design and construction of the extension(s) shall be in
accordance with City of Albuquerque Standards, Specifications and Procedures;
and
         (f)   The Petitioner obtains and provides all necessary licenses and
easements at no cost to the City of Albuquerque; and
         (g)   The Petitioner secures the approval of other government
agencies, if such approval is required.
         (h)   The extension complies with all of the City's and County's
adopted land use plans, policies and ordinances.
      (3)   Within the capacity of the system's water and sanitary sewer lines
as determined by the City, service connections may be made to existing water
and sewer lines outside the City limits at the Petitioner's expense within the
existing service area, and including sanitary sewer service only for the
Tijeras Canyon drainage area tributary to the Albuquerque Basin of the Rio
Grande Basin, if the following applicable conditions are satisfied:
         (a)   The property abuts or is traversed by an existing water or sewer
line from which service is available; and
         (b)   Upon application for service there shall be paid to the City the
established Pro Rata cost and the established utility expansion charges and
service costs; and
         (c)   The existing lines occupy the total length of all streets or
public easements abutting the property to be connected or an agreement has been
executed for extension or extensions in accordance with Policy 14B; and
         (4)   For water service, the Petitioner makes a declaration of his
existing water source and shall not connect said water source to the service
provided by the extension(s).
      (4)   All extensions or connections referred to in Policy 14 to provide
water service requiring up to a maximum of 1,000,000 gallons per day or sewer
service requiring up to a maximum of 500,000 gallons per day shall require
review and approval of the Department. All extensions or connections in excess
of these quantities shall require approval of the governing body.
(Res. 20-1984, approved 2-28-84; Am. Res. 88-1992, approved 6-30-92; Am. Res.
143-2003, approved 10-20-03)
§ 3-5-18 SEWAGE TREATMENT SERVICE TO SANDIA HEIGHTS.
   Policy 16. Sewage Treatment Service to Sandia Heights:
   (A)   The city of Albuquerque (hereinafter referred to as “city”) may enter
into a contractual agreement with the Sandia Peak Tram Company (hereinafter
referred to as the “Company”) to treat sanitary sewer effluent from up to 1360
units in the portion of Sandia Heights shown on Exhibit A which is attached to
Resolution No. 141-1978, provided that the agreement complies with the
provisions of this Policy. The Mayor shall make the determination that such a
contract achieves the goal set out in this section. The Company shall transport
the sewage effluent to an approved point of connection with the city sewage
system via a lift station and forced main, the design of which is to be
approved by the city's Water Resources Department. The type and location of the
Company's sewage collection and transmission system shall not be conducive to,
or used for development which does not accord with applicable city ordinances,
resolutions, policies, or plans.
   (B)   The Company shall be responsible for:
      (1)   Constructing and maintaining the sewage collection and transmission
facilities necessary to deliver the sewage to the point of connection. The
Company shall pay the entire cost of such facilities and of such delivery.
      (2)   Delivering sewage of a quality to conform to the, requirements of
the Plumbing-Gas Code of the city, the Albuquerque City Industrial Liquid Waste
Ordinance, and all applicable federal, state, and city laws and regulations.
      (3)   Paying the city for its sewer services at a reasonable rate
established by the City Council. The current rate study, and any future rate
studies, shall be taken into account in establishing the rate. The monthly rate
is subject to change.
      (4)   Stating in the disclosure statement required by the New Mexico
Subdivision Act for any property within the area shown in Exhibit A of
Resolution No. 141-1978 which is owned by the Company that Affirmative
Covenants relative to annexation run with the land and that property owners may
be required to pay their proportionate share of bringing the Sandia Heights
water and sewer system into compliance with all applicable standards at the
time of annexation to the city, if ever.
      (5)   Complying with all applicable federal, state and local regulations
and requirements.
   (C)   The Company, its principal, assignee and successors in interests, in
consideration of this provision of sewer services, shall expressly contract
with the city that:
      (1)   Any future improvement, expansion, addition, or alteration of the
present Sandia Heights Water System shall comply with the standards for the
city's Municipal Water System. The standards shall be those in existence at the
time that such alterations, additions or expansions take place. Expressly
excluded from this requirement are:
         (a)   The city's requirements with respect to the type of water pipe
installed shall not now or in the future prevent the Tram Company or other
persons entering into this agreement from using Poly Vinyl Chloride (PVC) water
pipe, meeting extra strength minimum of SDR-35 of the requirements of ASTM
specification D3034-74 even if such pipe does not meet the standards of the
city.
         (b)   By agreement of the parties, the size (diameter) of water pipe
installed shall be proportionately reduced due to the lower density of the
Sandia Heights area. Water lines shall not be extended to an elevation higher
than the higher of either (1) the highest existing zone elevation existing in
the city at the time of expansion or (2) the highest elevation of water service
in Sandia Heights on the date of this contract (6,560 feet).
      (2)   The Company's sewage facilities in the system connected or to be
connected to the city's sewage system shall comply with all applicable federal
and state regulations. Hereafter any gravity line shall be built to city
standards and specifications if it can be reasonably anticipated that said line
would become a permanent part of the city system at a future date with the
exception that Poly Vinyl Chloride pipe meeting or exceeding the SDR-35 of the
requirements of ASTM specification D3034-74 standard may be used. No conditions
in this section shall be construed to require compliance with city policies
regarding sanitary sewers outside of the area of Sandia Heights not connected
with the city system.
      (3)   Any future development in Sandia Heights or in nearby or adjacent
areas under control or ownership of the Tram Company or of the principals of
the Tram Company shall comply with all city ordinances, resolutions, policies
and plans including the Foothills development plan as they may exist and, may
be amended from time to time so that development is regulated as if these areas
were annexed into the city.
   (D)   The city shall be responsible for accepting, at the point of
connection, all the sewage delivered by the Company, and processing and
disposing of the same to the same extent and with the same efficiency and
according to the same environmental health standards as sewage effluent
originating within the city limits is treated and disposed.
   (E)   Timing. The city shall not provide sewage services to the elected
point of connection at either Tramway Boulevard and Academy Road or Tramway
Boulevard and Spain Road more rapidly than is programmed by the city. The city
shall not provide such services until the total design capacity of the existing
Sandia Heights package sewage treatment facilities has been committed. When the
design capacity of 220 units is totally committed, the city may commit to
service for other areas within the area shown in Exhibit “A” of Resolution No.
141-1978; provided, however, that under no conditions shall the city actually
provide such sewage services prior to actual hook-up of the Sandia Heights
transmission line. When city sewage services are available to Sandia Heights,
the Company shall abandon the existing package sewage treatment facility.
   (F)   Annexation Requirements.
      (1)   As a condition of providing sewage service, the city shall require
the Company to enter into and file with the Bernalillo County Clerk an
Affirmative Covenant on all parcels which it owns within the area shown on
Exhibit A of Resolution No. 141-1978; legal descriptions and a map defining the
boundaries of said properties are contained in Exhibit B of Resolution No. 141-
1978.
      (2)   The Affirmative Covenants, which shall run with the land shall
obligate the owners, their heirs, assigns and successors in interest to
petition for annexation to the city under applicable state law at such time as
the property meets the statutory requirements for annexation, and to refrain
from incorporating into or consenting to annexation into any municipality other
than the city.
      (3)   The Company shall be responsible for enforcing said Affirmative
Covenants.
      (4)   The Company shall, by its best efforts in the enforcement of the
Affirmative Covenants, insure that the territory covered by such covenants is
annexed into the city if and when it meets statutory annexation requirements.
   (G)   Amendments. This policy may be amended from time to time. There shall
be no change in the area or number of units to be served unless the policy is
amended.
   (H)   Termination. This policy shall be considered to be terminated when the
city develops to the point that a suitable gravity connection to the Sandia
Heights system is possible. At that time the connection will be made and the
lift station and force main will be abandoned. The relevant city water and
sewer line extension policies will apply to Sandia Heights when the gravity
connection to the city system is possible. The property owners may be required
to pay a pro-rata share of the costs of bringing the Sandia Heights water and
sewer systems into compliance with all federal, state and local standards at
the time of annexation, if ever.
   (I)   This policy is not intended to set a precedent for other areas outside
the city limits.
   (J)   All provisions in this Policy and any contractual agreement made
pursuant to it shall be specifically enforceable by the city without limitation
on the other remedies available to the city. Each restriction on the Company
shall be deemed separable from each other restriction.
   (K)   Any contractual agreement with the Company shall be drafted and
executed so as to bind the Company, its successors, assigns, vendees, officers,
directors, principal shareholders or owners of beneficial interest, parent
entities, affiliate entities, subsidiary entities, entities having ownership in
common, joint adventurers, partners, all persons or entities working with the
Company in the development of Sandia Heights and the adjacent or nearby areas.
This provision is intended to prevent evasion of the spirit and substance of
this section by any persons or entities in any way or degree connected with the
Company.
(Res. 141-1978, approved 6-19-78; Am. Res. 99-1986, approved 7-21-86)
DRAINAGE
§ 3-5-30 DRAINAGE POLICY.
   (A)   Purpose. The purpose of this Drainage Policy is to delineate
responsibilities and set forth standards regarding planning, design, financial
responsibility, construction, operation, and maintenance of storm drainage
facilities within the Albuquerque Metropolitan Arroyo Flood Control Authority.
   (B)   General. Surface drainage is a characteristic which is a part of the
land. Property owners who change the use of land have an inherent
responsibility to deal with surface runoff passing through or originating on
their land so that other property is not adversely affected by the change in
use.
   (C)   Planning.  
      (1)   Preservation of life and protection of property shall be the major
considerations in the planning of drainage and flood control systems. Storm
drainage management and flood control systems are necessary and should optimize
the social, environmental, and economic benefits to the community.
      (2)   Continuing cooperative efforts shall be made to expand community
drainage management planning, including provisions for adequate mapping,
comprehensive studies, analyses and implementation.
   (D)   Design.  
      (1)   Drainage and flood control systems shall be designed for runoff
generated during the 100-year frequency flood. Hydrologic criteria shall be as
set forth in the “Master Plan of Drainage, City of Albuquerque, New Mexico and
Environs, 1963” prepared by Gordon Herkenhoff and Associates; “Northeast
Heights Drainage Management Plan” prepared by Leonard Rice Consulting Water
Engineers, Inc.; and “Drainage Management Plan Western Albuquerque Metropolitan
Area” prepared by William Matotan and Associates; and any plans adopted
subsequent to the enactment of identical resolutions by the city, Bernalillo
County, MRGCD and AMAFCA which supersede all or any portion of those plans
listed above. Where adequate hydrologic data is unavailable or there is
substantial justification for deviation from such data, the analysis and
determination of hydrologic and hydraulic criteria shall adhere to professional
engineering techniques using the manuals of the American Society of Civil
Engineers, other competent manuals, and reports and plans acceptable to the
appropriate local official. The approval of the appropriate local official is
required on all drainage reports and construction plans and shall comply with
current standards and specifications adopted by the local governmental
subdivision.
      (2)   Ponding areas, dams, and their appurtenances shall meet
requirements of the State Engineer.
   (E)   Financial responsibilities and construction.  
      (1)   When public or private requirements necessitate the development of
storm drainage facilities, all drainage easements required to implement
approved drainage plans for preservation or modification of arroyos shall be
granted to public authority by the owner without compensation; provided,
however, that in those instances where requirements relating to such drainage
easements exceed existing 100-year flood boundaries or where such drainage
easements will not be compatible with existing development, the owner shall
only grant to the public authority such drainage easements as are necessary to
meet existing 100-year flood boundaries or to be compatible with existing
development, whichever is applicable.
      (2)   Costs of providing crossing structures for arterials and collectors
shall be paid for by public authority.
      (3)   For reaches in an arroyo where flows are under 2,000 CFS from a
100-year storm, including reaches where flows have been or hereafter are
reduced below 2,000 CFS by upstream facilities, the landowner shall pay the
entire cost of design and construction of arroyo modification or alteration.
Design and construction will be performed in compliance with drainage plan
standards of public authority.
      (4)   For reaches in an arroyo where flows are over 2,000 CFS from a 100-
year storm, and development has not infringed upon 100-year flood boundaries,
the entire cost of design and construction of arroyo modification, alteration
or preservation shall be paid for by public authority. In these instances where
the landowner desires modification or alteration of such a reach with the
result that development would be allowed within the master planned 100-year
flood boundaries, the cost of such modification or alteration including
entrance and exit structures, shall be paid for by the owner. In those
instances where infringement occurred and drainage facility easement
requirements were established and complied with prior to the adoption of AMAFCA
Resolution 1972-2, arroyo improvement to meet the 100-year frequency standard
shall be paid for by public authority, subject to available funds. In those
instances where development is to commence in advance of scheduled arroyo
improvement by public authority, and an interim solution is available, the cost
of implementing such interim solution shall be paid for by the owner.
   (F)   Maintenance and operation.  
      (1)   A particular property may be taxed to provide revenues for one or
more agencies performing similar or identical functions; therefore maintenance
and operation responsibilities must be defined in order to provide maximum
benefits to the taxpayer.
      (2)   Annexation causes changes in boundaries, and the responsibility for
drainage and flood control facilities can shift from one jurisdiction to
another. Maintenance and operation responsibilities shall shift as jurisdiction
changes except as otherwise designated in this policy.
      (3)   The Middle Rio Grande Conservancy District (MRGCD) and agencies of
the Federal Government have primary responsibilities associated with the Rio
Grande, major irrigation facilities, and ground water drainage systems. Since
the Rio Grande is higher than much of the valley through which it passes,
appropriate valley drains shall be utilized to serve the surface drainage
function that the undiked river would provide. All agencies shall financially
assist in upgrading the drains to serve the drainage and flood control function
in conjunction with their normal use. Under the terms of negotiated agreement,
routine maintenance of MRGCD facilities would continue to be the responsibility
of the MRGCD.
      (4)   AMAFCA shall have the maintenance responsibility for the North and
South Diversion Channels and other facilities constructed using AMAFCA funds.
      (5)   The city of Albuquerque and/or Bernalillo County within the area of
their governmental jurisdiction shall have maintenance and operation
responsibilities for drainage and flood control facilities within their
geographic boundaries that are not otherwise assigned in this statement.
(Res. 59-1976, approved 4-15-76)
§ 3-5-31 UPGRADE OF NORTH GLENWOOD HILLS ARROYO STORM DRAINAGE PROJECT.
   The city hereby adopts the policy that the existing Sunset Canyon Basin
canal trainer dike will be upgraded to satisfy the requirements of Forest
Service FSM 7540 and that the North Glenwood Hills Arroyo channel will be lined
with concrete.
(Res. 155-1980, approved 7-17-80)
FLOOD CONTROL
§ 3-5-40 REPORTS ON FLOOD CONTROL PROJECTS.
   (A)   The Public Works Department shall present to the City Council biannual
reports detailing the progress of Albuquerque and surrounding area flood
control projects. this report, at a minimum, should contain the following
information for each project:
      (1)   Short project description which includes the physical location of
the project;
      (2)   Project identification number which is consistent over documents
provided by the Public Works Department;
      (3)   Total project cost, amount appropriated, legislation containing the
appropriation, amount encumbered, planned and actual expenditures for current
fiscal year and cumulative to date, planned expenditures for future fiscal
years until completion of the project, document containing the project plan;
      (4)   A calendar schedule for completion of the different stages of
project and identification of the current stage of the project;
      (5)   Such other information which the Department of Public Works and the
City Council determine is appropriate for inclusion.
   (B)   If feasible, it is suggested that the Public Works Department use the
Albuquerque Geographic information System (AGIS) to store and display
information concerning these projects.
   (C)   The first report be presented in January of 1991 and thereafter.
(Res. 136-1990, approved 10-15-90; Am. Res. 26-1993, approved 3-4-93)
§ 3-5-41 NORTH AND SOUTH VALLEYS FLOOD CONTROL PROJECTS.
   It is the policy of the city that development and maintenance of flood
control projects capable of providing 100-year flood protection in the North
Valley and the South Valley shall be recognized as the chief priority of the
Capital Implementation Program.
(Res. 165-1990, approved 11-27-90)
§ 3-5-42 DEVELOPMENT OF FLOOD CONTROL PROTECTION IN THE RIO GRANDE VALLEY.
   (A)   The city supports the development of flood control protection for the
Bernalillo to Belen portion of the Rio Grande at least equal to that currently
provided by the Corps of Engineers for the city consistent with the various
local government policies and concerns and including the environmental aspects
of the proposed Plan B for the areas outside of Albuquerque.
   (B)   The city has an acceptable level of flood protection and believes that
the costs of constructing a flood control system to protect the city from the
Standard Project Flood of 70,000 cfs exceed the benefits to be derived from the
lower risk of flooding.
   (C)   It shall be the policy of the city that all new river crossings or the
replacement, rebuilding or significant alteration of currently existing
crossings shall be so constructed as to allow the safe passage of the Standard
Project Flood.
   (D)   The city urges the Congress of the United States to require the
integration of flood control projects with watershed management for both flood
control and conservation.
(Res. 43-1979, approved 3-12-79)
RESERVOIRS
§ 3-5-50 STORAGE OF WATER AT ABIQUIU RESERVOIR.
   (A)   The city should not obtain additional storage for its water in Abiquiu
Reservoir in the absence of a clear economic justification and a determination
that the benefits of such storage to the city outweighs any adverse effects.
   (B)   The Public Works Department shall investigate alternatives for use and
disposition of the city's annual allotment of San Juan-Chama water. These
alternatives shall include but are not limited to: aquifer recharge and the
selling of water for industrial, agricultural and municipal uses.
(Res. 177-1986, approved 12-29-86)
§ 3-5-51 DOMESTIC WATER RESERVOIRS PLANNING POLICY.
   (A)   Reservoir plan. No domestic water reservoir shall be built by the city
except on a site authorized for it by a Rank Two Facility Plan hereafter
approved by the City Council. The plan, which may be part of a broader water
utility plan, shall address water system needs, storage capacity needed on
specified sites, location and general size of reservoir sites, elevation of
reservoirs, and the prudent use of city funds. The guidelines which follow
shall generally be followed, but may be varied when justified by balancing cost
against the amount of impact inflicted on residents and the number of dwellings
impacted.
      (1)   New sites. The following evaluation and standards apply to sites
not now occupied by city water reservoirs:
         (a)   Evaluations of site alternatives shall be performed and shall
include consideration of the following: underground installation, aesthetics,
multi-uses of the sites, environmental concerns, economic factors, and the
requirements of this policy and the zoning code.
         (b)   Reservoir sites which will not abut residential development are
preferred, and reservoir sites which do not abut zoning code residential zones
with height limits of 26 feet are strongly preferred, unless the reservoirs
will be completely or nearly completely below grade. In planning reservoir
sites in a water pressure zone previously undeveloped with reservoirs, planning
for all the needed reservoir sites in the zone should be considered so as to
avoid later sites in the water pressure zone which would contradict the above
standard.
         (c)   If a site for an above-grade reservoir is in a location which is
reasonably likely to be adjacent to residential development, a large site
should be secured so that a reservoir will not be too close to residences. The
excess land should be planned for public purposes, including but not limited to
park, library, or police substation. If non-residential development is later
built next to such a site, the reservoir site may then be reduced in size.
      (2)   Partially developed sites. The following evaluation and standards
apply to sites which are already occupied by above-grade city water reservoirs
and which currently have available space for additional reservoirs:
         (a)   If the partially developed site can contain an additional
reservoir structure which will not be within 150 feet of a residentially zoned
lot which is available for residences, an at-grade reservoir shall be built on
the site; where the site can be enlarged at modest cost to accomplish this,
that may be pursued.
         (b)   In cases other than above, the second reservoir shall be built
on a different site rather than the partially developed site in the following
circumstances:
            1.   There is an appropriate alternative site for the second
reservoir; such site does not exist unless:
               a.   It is essentially vacant and owned by the city or available
to the city at modest cost; and
               b.   It is located within about on-quarter mile of the existing
reservoir site; and
               c.   It will be the site of a below-grade reservoir or an at-
grade reservoir structure 150 feet or more from any residentially zoned lot
which is available for residences (a policy more permissive of above-grade
reservoirs than is the general policy, division (A)(1)(b) of this section); and
            2.   Placing the reservoir on the new site not unreasonably
interfere with plans adopted by the City Council; and
            3.   The new reservoir would have the same overflow level as the
existing reservoir which needs to be supplemented; and
            4.   Where it is quite costly to acquire the alternate site and to
build on it, the amount of visual impact the new reservoir on the existing site
would have on nearby residents and the number of such residents shall be
weighed against the cost of going to a new reservoir site.
         (c)   In cases other than (A)(2)(a) or (A)(2)(b) above, the second at-
grade reservoir shall be built on the partially developed site.
   (B)   Site development standards. Once sites and their general development
character have been selected by the Rank Two Facility Plan, detailed site
development plans shall be developed as follows:
      (1)   Evaluation. An evaluation of site development alternatives shall be
performed and shall include consideration of the following: aesthetics, multi-
uses of the sites, environmental concerns, engineering factors, economic
factors, and the requirements of the zoning code.
      (2)   Site development standards for new sites.
         (a)   Reservoir sites shall be well landscaped. Earthen berms will
often be appropriate in order to minimize the apparent mass of a reservoir
which is visible to view by many people.
         (b)   For reservoirs in or abutting Zoning Code residential zones,
reservoirs shall be constructed completely or nearly completely underground,
except in situations where there is a compelling need to use a given site, and
below-grade development is deemed economically unreasonable for the city;
factors which might justify that reservoir burial is unreasonable include but
are not limited to major rock deposits, high water table, and need to match the
water overflow level in use in the pressure zone. In such situations,
reservoirs in or abutting residential zones with height limitations of no more
than 26 feet shall be set well back from their sites' property line(s) abutting
such residential zoning. If applicable, variances shall be obtained.
      (3)   Site development standards for partially developed sites.
         (a)   If justified by other portions of this section, needed
additional reservoirs may be above ground with overflow elevations matching
that of the existing reservoir.
         (b)   Reservoir sites shall be well landscaped. Earthen berms will
often be appropriate in order to minimize the apparent mass of a reservoir
which is visible to view by many people. Berms around non-buried reservoirs
abutting residential zones shall be used wherever site area allows it.
         (c)   Every attempt shall be made to select the material and color
that most aesthetically matches or pairs with the existing reservoir and the
surrounding environment while providing a satisfactory engineering design.
         (d)   As to sites in or abutting zoning code residential zones with
height limits of no more than 26 feet: Reservoirs shall be set back from their
sites' property line(s) abutting such residential zoning as much as is
reasonably possible, consistent with system needs of the water utility.
      (4)   Procedures. Procedures for review and approval of city water
reservoir site plans shall be as follows:
         (a)   During the planning and design phase for reservoirs, the Public
Works Department shall meet and confer with any affected recognized
neighborhood association and with surrounding property owners to provide
information, assure coordination, and provide opportunity for comment.
         (b)   In addition to other requirements of the Zoning Code, where the
site is in or abuts a residential zone, as specified by the zoning code, the
site development plan shall be submitted to the Environmental Planning
Commission and construction shall not take place without the approval of the
Environmental Planning Commission, or the City Council on appeal. The zoning
code applies, and any needed variances or zone changes shall be obtained prior
to approval by the Environmental Planning Commission. Notice of such
consideration at a public meeting shall be given as is required for zone
changes.
   (C)   Reservoir site signs. Where above-grade reservoir(s) are planned for a
city-owned site, the city water utility shall keep posted there one or more
signs which give clear public notice of the city's plans for the site.
   (D)   Exceptions. Notwithstanding division (A) of this section:
      (1)   The second reservoir at the Ponderosa Site may be built prior to
all approval of a Rank Two Plan.
      (2)   The second reservoir on or in the vicinity of the Simms Reservoir
site (east of the Glenwood Hills North Addition) may be constructed based on a
single-site plan approved by the City Council, prior to approval of a general
Rank Two Plan.
      (3)   Two new primary reservoirs: the Volcano Cliffs Reservoir located in
the vicinity of the intersection of Montano Road and Unser Boulevard N.W. and
the Gonzales Reservoir located northwest of the intersection of Coors Road and
I-40 may be constructed based on site development plans approved by the
Environmental Planning Commission prior to approval of a general Rank Two Plan.
(Res. 1-1988, approved 1-5-88; Am. Res. 70-1990, approved 6-11-90)
RECYCLING
§ 3-5-60 RECYCLING AND LONG-TERM SOLID WASTE PLANNING.
   (A)   Recycling solid waste shall be a fundamental goal of the city Solid
Waste Department (“Department”).
   (B)   Beginning in fiscal year 1991 and thereafter city-wide recycling shall
be included in and planned for in the Department's budget. In fiscal year 1992
and thereafter the Department shall use its best efforts to recycle at least
25% of the solid waste collected by the Department.
   (C)   In fiscal year 1991, the Department shall solicit and encourage
increased commercial recycling in which local businesses separate recyclables
and the Department provides transport. The Department shall continue and expand
its assistance to neighborhood association and other community recycling
programs. The Department shall forward to the Council monthly summaries of its
recycling activities, including percentages of materials recycled.
   (D)   The Solid Waste Recycling Advisory Committee (“Committee”) shall
recommend a long-term solid waste disposal plan by March 1, 1991 under which at
least 25% of the solid waste collected by the Department is recycled.
   (E)   The Committee shall hold at least three public hearings for the
purpose of obtaining public input on this matter. The Department shall present
its plan for recycling to the Committee.
   (F)   The Administration and the Committee shall consider a recycling goal
of 25% or more in order to reduce transportation and landfill costs and promote
economic development through the following recycling related activities:
      (1)   Materials recovery facilities.
      (2)   Curbside residential separation of recyclables.
      (3)   Commercial source separation of recyclables.
      (4)   Creation of an organic waste facility.
      (5)   Involvement of the private sector in providing some or all of the
functions required for recycling.
      (6)   Incentives for businesses involved in processing recyclables or
using recyclables.
      (7)   Special neighborhood recycling programs.
      (8)   Transfer stations.
      (9)   Convenience centers.
      (10)   Concerns of residents of the greater metropolitan area.
      (11)   Such other matters as are appropriate to the policy set out in
this section.
      (12)   Incentives for household sorting of recyclables.
   (G)   The Administration is directed to seek applicable permits to allow
processing and recycling of construction and demolition waste at the Cerro
Colorado Landfill.
(Res. 97-1990, approved 6-26-90; Am. Res. 49-2000, approved 5-4-00)
Cross-reference:
    
Office of Recycling, see § 2-3-10
   
Employee Recycling Committee, see § 2-3-11
   
Solid waste management, recycling, and waste reduction plan, see § 3-5-61
   
Recycling educational program, see § 4-3-31
   
Residential curbside recycling program, see § 4-3-32
§ 3-5-61 SOLID WASTE MANAGEMENT, RECYCLING, AND WASTE REDUCTION PLAN.
   (A)   Natural resource limitations and protection of the environment require
development of a comprehensive city-wide Solid Waste Management, Recycling, and
Waste Reduction Plan which incorporates the following five-year goals:
      (1)   To establish recycling, precycling, composting, waste-to- energy,
waste reduction strategies, and safe disposal of hazardous waste as the core of
the city's plan; and
      (2)   To limit infrastructure and transportation costs, and maintain
energy efficiency and environmental integrity by reducing the waste taken to
the landfill by 50% by 1995 and 70% by 2000, but not less than 25% by 1995 and
50% by 2000; and
      (3)   To involve every household and every business in the city in some
component of recycling, and to encourage the unincorporated areas in Bernalillo
County to cooperate in an integrated recycling and waste reduction plan; and
      (4)   To consider legislative changes and economic incentives to make
precycling a fundamental component of solid waste management by the city and
the surrounding areas; and
      (5)   To establish recycling, precycling, waste-to-energy programs, waste
reduction strategies, and the associated jobs and economic development as a
major clean industry in the city; and
      (6)   To achieve national status for the city as a model developmental
center for recycling, precycling, composting, waste-to-energy, waste reduction
strategies, safe disposal of hazardous waste, and innovative and effective and
community involvement.
   (B)   The Council finds it necessary for the city to construct a materials
recovery facility (MRF) in order to implement a city-wide recycling program.
That if a determination is made to privatize this facility, the following
policy guidelines shall be established:
      (1)   An expert consultant shall be hired for the purpose of preparing a
detailed request for proposal (RFP) for a MRF that is compatible with the
city's approved Solid Waste Management, Recycling, and Waste Reduction Plan and
all state and federal regulations.
      (2)   The RFP shall be issued within 60 days from passage of this bill
with a 90-day bid response period. The Mayor's recommendation of a contractor
shall be presented to the Council within 120 days from receipt of the
proposals.
      (3)   The Mayor shall establish a contract negotiation team composed of
appropriate city staff and expert consultants.
      (4)   One non-City employee member of the Recycling Advisory Committee
shall be appointed by the Mayor to assist in the planning process for
negotiating the MRF contract.
      (5)   The Council shall approve any and all agreements reached with a
private company for construction and/or operation of a MRF.
   (C)   Prior to any negotiation for construction of materials recovery
facility (MRF), a fiscal impact analysis shall be conducted on the various
levels of private or public ownership including, but not limited to, tipping
fees, projected income and rate increases, in an effort to determine the most
cost effective program over the long term.
   (D)   A Public Forum Committee will be organized to react to the goals and
objectives contained herein and shall hold two public meetings during the
months of July and August 1991. The Committee shall be composed of two City
Councillors, two members of the Recycling Advisory Committee, the Environmental
Health Department Director, the City Attorney, and one member of the Economic
Forum. The Mayor shall appoint all members with exception of the two
Councillors. The Solid Waste Management Department shall provide staff support
and information to the Committee.
   (E)   The city shall develop descriptive data from an audit of the
components of our waste stream, an initial recycling related data collection
system, and a data bank to provide cost evaluation and program information
which integrates with data on solid waste management programs and activities
beginning in fiscal year 1992-93.
   (F)   The city shall design a residential curbside collection program such
as the two different colored bag system for pick-up each week. One bag would
contain mixed waste and the other would contain separated recyclables. Each bag
will be collected by the city on designated days; however, residents should be
encouraged to only place their recyclable bag out for collection when full.
   (G)   Residents be asked to separate their glass from the other recyclables
and deposit it periodically in an appropriate city provided receptacle, such as
“igloos” located conveniently throughout the city. The city or its MRF
operator, if other than the city, also have the ability to hand sort glass at
the facility.
   (H)   The Solid Waste Management Department will consider and present to the
Council a financial plan for recycling which offers economic incentives for
waste reduction.
   (I)   The city's participation in the current voluntary recycling programs
shall be operated in conjunction with the neighborhood associations be
increased to the maximum extent possible during the interim period prior to
construction of a MRF.
   (J)   The city design a commercial recycling system based on collection of
commingled waste. High volume glass users, such as certain bars and
restaurants, will be asked to separate their glass for direct haul to the MRF
rather than placing them in temporary receptacles, such as “igloos.” Because of
contamination the Solid Waste Management Department should consider hauling
certain restaurants' waste directly to the landfill.
   (K)   The city shall design a centralized household hazardous waste
collection program.
   (L)   The city shall develop a comprehensive marketing plan for all
recovered materials. The plan shall include all costs and revenues plus
possible price fluctuations, and shall analyze the feasibility of extending a
competitive preference to local and New Mexico recycling companies and/or shall
participate fully in Southwest Regional Recycling cooperative efforts. This
plan be undertaken coincident with the other planning activities described
hereinabove, and shall be presented to the Council for approval.
   (M)   The city shall develop a pilot residential composting program to
initially include 1500 homes. A federal or state grant shall be pursued to fund
the purchase of an equal number of residential composters for resale to the
residents at an amount not over $30 each. This pilot program shall be carefully
analyzed prior to expansion.
   (N)   Any city or privately owned MRF located within the city limits of the
city will not accept solid waste from any out-of-state entity, nor accept solid
waste from other cities or counties within the state without Council approval.
   (O)   The city shall continue to offer low income discounts on refuse bills
for those families that qualify. The discounts shall be calculated on the
entire refuse rate which will additionally include the cost of the new
recycling program.
   (P)   The city shall consider making appropriate arrangements for residents
and organized groups or businesses to utilize drop-off centers and/or buy-back
provisions within the MRF operations for separated recyclables in addition to
the curb-side collection system.
   (Q)   The city's energy efficiency and/or environmental integrity not be
adversely impacted due to implementation of the recycling program.
   (R)   The city shall design a comprehensive education and public awareness
program on all recycling activities, involving but not limited to, members of
the Solid Waste Advisory Committee and Sierra Club.
   (S)   The city shall make every effort to reach the goal of reducing the
waste taken to the landfill by 50% by 1995 and 70% by 2000, but not less than
25% by 1995 and 50% by 2000.
   (T)   The Solid Waste Management Department shall provide the City Council
with up-to-date quarterly progress reports based on the calendar year, and an
evaluation of the recycling program which includes the status of first-year
objectives, identification of problem areas and recommended solutions. The
first report shall be due October 15, 1991.
   (U)   The Solid Waste Management Department shall submit an annual report to
the City Council beginning with the fiscal year 1993 budget cycle that details
second-year, third-year, fourth-year, and fifth-year objectives necessary to
achieve the five-year goals herein stated. All proposed rate adjustments shall
be included in the report. The appropriate quarterly report can be included in
the annual report.
   (V)   $100,000 shall be appropriated from the Refuse Disposal Operating Fund
(651) to the Office of Recycling Program for the purpose of selecting and
hiring a recycling consultant to assist the Solid Waste Management Department
in implementing the directives contained herein.
   (W)   The Citizen's Solid Waste Recycling Advisory Committee shall continue
to provide public input, and shall present a quarterly status report to the
City Council on the City's Solid Waste Management, Recycling, and Waste
Reduction Plan.
   (X)   The city encourages the Bernalillo County Commission, other New Mexico
cities and counties, and the state legislature to give serious consideration to
a recycling program.
(Res. 76-1991, approved 5-30-91)
Cross-reference:
   
Office of Recycling, see § 2-3-10
   
Employee Recycling Committee, see § 2-3-11
   
Recycling and long-term solid waste planning, see § 3-5-60
   
Recycling educational program, see § 4-3-31
   
Residential curbside recycling program, see § 4-3-32
ARTICLE 6: PARKS AND RECREATION
Section
   
3-6-1   Goals for park development
   
3-6-2   Policies governing dispensing alcoholic beverages at municipal golf
course facilities
   
3-6-3   Off leash dog exercise areas
Cross-reference:
   
Parks and Recreation; programs and plans, see Ch. 4, Art. 4
   
City Parks and Facilities, see Ch. 6, Art. 5
§ 3-6-1 GOALS FOR PARK DEVELOPMENT.
   The following standards and policies be adopted as goals for park
development:
   (A)   Standards for park space.
      Type of Park            Standard
      Neighborhood Park         1.5 acres/1,000 people
      District and other large
      urban parks            2 acres/1,000 people
   (B)   Standards for recreation facilities.
      Type of Facility         Standard
      Multi-purpose court         1/1,000 people
      Tennis court            1/2,000 people
      Softball diamond-lighted      1/3,000 people
      Baseball diamond         1/12,000 people
      Multipurpose center         1/30,000 people
      Golf course - 18 hole
      (municipal)            1/50,000 people
      Swimming pool         15 sq. ft. water/ person for 3% of population
   (C)   Park design policies.
      (1)   Whenever practicable, neighborhood parks will be between one and
four acres in size, and located near the center of a neighborhood. District
parks will range from five to 20 acres in size and be located adjacent to
residential areas.
      (2)   Whenever possible, parks will be located so as to optimize open
space uses within the system of regional open space.
      (3)   Joint use of park land or recreation facilities by the Albuquerque
Public Schools and the city will occur when appropriate.
      (4)   Floodways which are dedicated to the city may be used for
recreation purposes, but shall not be counted as part of any park dedication
requirement. Land within flood fringe areas may be dedicated for parks, where
appropriate, as determined by the Department of Parks and Recreation.
(Res. 28-1976, approved 2-24-76)
§ 3-6-2 POLICIES GOVERNING DISPENSING ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES AT MUNICIPAL GOLF
COURSE FACILITIES.
   (A)   Alcoholic beverages shall be dispensed in the area designated by the
State Alcohol & Gaming Division as the licensed premises;
   (B)   All liquor license operators, lessees and alcohol servers at municipal
golf course facilities shall complete all training required pursuant to the
State Liquor Control Act and the Alcohol Server Education Act;
   (C)   Pursuant to the State Liquor Control Act, only beer and wine may be
dispensed at the City's municipal golf course facilities and the City shall
further require that beer and wine be served:
      (1)   Only by trained alcohol servers;
      (2)   In the licensed premises at all municipal golf course facilities,
other than Ladera Golf Course, not prior to noon on Sundays and 11:00 a.m. on
all other days or after 9:00 p.m.;
      (3)   At Ladera Golf Course:
         (a)   In all areas of the licensed premises, other than the restaurant
and banquet facilities, not prior to noon on Sundays and 11:00 a.m. on all
other days or after 9:00 p.m.;
         (b)   In the restaurant, not prior to noon on Sundays and 11:00 a.m.
on all other days or after 9:00 p.m.;
         (c)   At special events in the banquet facilities not prior to noon on
Sundays and 11:00 a.m. on all other days or after midnight; and
      (4)   At Los Altos Golf Course, liquor shall not be sold while the
adjacent school facility is in session, or one half hour thereafter; and
      (5)   Only by the drink.
   (D)   The City shall be indemnified and held harmless by the operator and/or
lessee of the governmental liquor license against all liability, claims,
damages, losses or expenses resulting from the lease or operation of the
license. The City shall require a liquor license liability policy with
liability limits in an amount not less than one million dollars, and the City
shall be named an additional insured on the policy.
   (E)   Each agreement to operate and/or lease a governmental liquor license
for a municipal golf course facility shall be subject to an annual audit.
   (F)   Each agreement to operate and/or lease a governmental liquor license
for a municipal golf course facility shall be coordinated and evaluated with
any other agreement regarding the operation of that municipal golf course,
including the Concession Agreement. The agreements shall not be inconsistent
with regard to duration of the agreements and termination and renewal clauses,
though the term of the agreement to operate and/or lease a governmental liquor
license may be shorter than the term of other agreements for the operation of
the golf course.
   (G)   The City has negotiated with the concessionaires at the licensed
municipal golf courses and amended the various Concession Agreements to provide
that the City shall receive no less than 20% of gross revenues received from
the sale and dispensing of alcoholic beverages at municipal golf course
facilities as consideration for expansion of the authorized premises for the
sale and service of alcoholic beverages.
(Res. 46-2004, adopted 4-19-04)
§ 3-6-3 OFF LEASH DOG EXERCISE AREAS.
   The following policies are established for Off Leash Dog Exercise Areas:
   Policy 1. DEVELOPMENT PROCEDURES. Development procedures, design guidelines,
location criteria and space criteria for Off Leash Dog Exercise Areas are to be
set forth in Administrative Instruction.
   Policy 2. IDENTIFICATION OF OFF LEASH DOG EXERCISE AREA LOCATIONS. A
committee of citizens and staff have identified a list of potential sites for
Off Leash Dog Exercise Parks that do not displace current activities within
parks and are located throughout the City to provide reasonable travel times
from all points within the City. The Administration shall communicate to the
City Council by December 31, 2004, a list of at least 6 designated Off Leash
Dog Exercise Areas. If the Administration is unable to identify 6 such areas by
that date they shall submit a list of areas that are eligible and proceed to
identify other areas and communicate a list of these areas by June 30, 2005.
   Policy 3. MAINTAINING EXISTING RECREATIONAL ACTIVITIES. As Off Leash Dog
Exercise Areas are implemented into a park the City will not displace existing
activities already provided in the park.
   Policy 4. NEW PARK DEVELOPMENT FOR OFF LEASH DOG EXERCISE AREAS. When
existing parks are renovated and new parks are planned, the inclusion of an Off
Leash Dog Exercise Area is to be provided as an option during the public input
process pertaining to the development or renovation of the park.
   Policy 5. FUNDING DEVELOPMENT OF OFF LEASH DOG EXERCISE AREAS. Funding for
the design and construction of Off Leash Dog Exercise Areas should occur
through those means established for park development including but not limited
to impact fees, developer dedications, public improvement districts, City
general obligation bonds and federal, private and state grants, or any other
means acceptable to the City.
   Policy 6. MAINTENANCE OF OFF LEASH DOG EXERCISE AREAS. The City of
Albuquerque shall be responsible for maintenance and upkeep of Off Leash Dog
Exercise Areas. If the City exercises the option to provide for the expense, by
imposing a fee and prior to imposing such fee the Office of Internal Audit
shall conduct a cost analysis of the task and associated costs to determine a
per acre cost for maintenance of Off Leash Dog Exercise Areas versus per acre
cost for maintenance of neighborhood parks. This would establish the basis for
value of the fee. The Department overseeing maintenance of Off Leash Dog
Exercise Areas shall include such expenditures in their annual budget and shall
develop appropriate performance measures to gauge the effectiveness of this
activity.
   Policy 7. LARGE OFF LEASH DOG EXERCISE AREAS. The administration shall
provide by December 1, 2004 a study identifying a tract of land on City owned
property in the East Mountain Area that is scheduled for sale and a tract of
land on City owned property west of the City Limits, scheduled for sale. These
lands are to be designated as Large Off Leash Dog Exercise Areas. The Open
Space Division shall identify the land best able to serve such a function with
the least impact to the goals and objectives of the open space program. The
Administration by December 1, 2005 shall issue a plan for the operation of
these areas and assign responsibility to the Department best able to manage
such a facility. If the land is not sold, Open Space is to be reimbursed by the
appropriate user Department, for the land no later than Fiscal Year 2006. The
Open Space Division may continue to market the land for sale until such time as
funding is committed in the City Budget or by other means to reimburse the Open
Space Trust fund for the land for use as a Large Off Leash Dog Exercise Area.
(Res. 35-2004, 3-15-04)
ARTICLE 7: SPECIAL ASSESSMENT DISTRICTS (REPEALED)
Editors note: This Article was repealed by Ordinance 44-1996.
ARTICLE 8: TRANSPORTATION
Section
   
3-8-1   Transit system
   
3-8-2   Operation of Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr. Avenue
   
3-8-3   Buses to be handicapped accessible
   
3-8-4   Municipal airport system
   
3-8-5   User fees on commercial ground transporters
   
3-8-6   Growth policy framework regarding land use and transportation planning
and development processes
   
3-8-7   Policy for the process of developing the Alvarado Transportation Center
Project
   
3-8-8   Policy for key decisions on land use and transportation for the
Westside-McMahon Corridor
   
3-8-9   Process to determine centers and corridors and designate activity
centers and transportation corridors
   
3-8-10   Neighborhood Traffic Management Program Adopted as the Neighborhood
Traffic Management Policy
   
3-8-11   Gross vehicle weight restrictions
   
3-8-12   Pedestrian Management Areas
   
3-8-13   Cruising prohibited
   
3-8-14   Quiet Zones
Cross-reference:
   
Transportation; boards and commissions, see Ch. 2, Art. 7
   
Transportation; programs and plans, see Ch. 4, Art. 2
§ 3-8-1 TRANSIT SYSTEM.
   (A)   The policy of the city is that the transit system shall be
restructured in order to place primary emphasis on developing and maintaining a
commuter system during heavy commuter hours.
   (B)   The commuter system developed shall emphasize the following:
      (1)   Providing transportation to those desiring to use the system during
the peak traffic hours of 5:45 a.m. to 9:00 a.m., and 3:00 p.m. to 6:45 p.m.
      (2)   Establishing hub and express routes.
      (3)   Providing greater transportation opportunities to those attending
evening events by offering park and ride services for sporting events,
Christmas shoppers, concerts and other similar special events.
      (4)   Providing specialized transportation opportunities for businesses,
educational institutions, government employers and other entities that employ
substantial numbers of people.
   (C)   The Mayor and Transit Department shall take steps to encourage
organizations that have daytime parking to offer or volunteer as park-and-ride
locations if they are in high density routes.
   (D)   The Mayor and Transit Department shall encourage local media to help
promote public transportation.
   (E)   The Mayor and Transit Department shall encourage business and
community leaders to use the city buses for their transportation needs.
   (F)   The Mayor and Transit Department shall develop and employ a market
strategy aimed at identifying large concentrations of potential bus users and
ways in which they may be encouraged and otherwise provided with incentives to
use the city transit system.
   (G)   It is the policy of the city that the transit system increase its
revenues in order to support more regular and special routes and more days and
longer hours of operation.
   (H)   It is the policy of the city to aggressively seek funds from all
available sources, such as the state of New Mexico, the federal government,
private organizations, etc. to enable the city to retrofit its entire fleet of
Sun Tran buses in order to provide accessible public transportation to persons
with mobility impairment.
(Res. 181-1990, approved 12-5-90)
§ 3-8-2 OPERATION OF DR. MARTIN LUTHER KING, JR. AVENUE.
   The City of Albuquerque will continue to operate Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.
Avenue between Interstate 25 and University Boulevard as a two-lane roadway,
with one travel lane in each direction, and this policy will be communicated by
the Public Works Director to the Urban Transportation Planning Policy Board of
the Middle Rio Grande Council of Governments so that modifications may be made
to the Long Range Major Street Plan and other transportation policy documents,
as appropriate.
(Res. 122-1994, approved 11-23-94)
§ 3-8-3 BUSES TO BE HANDICAPPED ACCESSIBLE.
   The city hereby adopts the policy that any new transit buses purchased by
the city after October 1, 1978, specially equipped for accessibility to the
handicapped and mobility impaired, shall not in any way jeopardize the present
or future operation and possible expansion of the special demand-response van
service for those physically handicapped individuals who are unable to
effectively utilize even an accessible fixed-route bus system.
(Res. 235-1978, approved 10-16-78)
§ 3-8-4 MUNICIPAL AIRPORT SYSTEM.
   It is the policy of the city that all separate airport facilities operated
by the city constitute a municipal airport system and that net income from one
facility may be pledged to pay revenue bonds for projects at a different
facility, provided the following conditions are met:
   (A)   Each new airport facility shall become self-supporting as quickly as
possible.
   (B)   The funding needs of the Albuquerque International Airport shall have
a higher priority for funds generated by the International Airport than those
of any other facility.
   (C)   Prior to the opening of any new airport facility, a financial plan
shall be presented to the Council for its approval. The plan shall include
projected revenues and expenditures for each component of the system.
(Res. 21-1980, approved 1-30-80)
§ 3-8-5 USER FEES ON COMMERCIAL GROUND TRANSPORTERS.
   The City Council hereby establishes a policy rejecting the imposition of
user fees on commercial ground transporters engaged in the business of
transporting airline travelers from the Albuquerque International Airport.
(Res. 146-1989, approved 9-28-89)
§ 3-8-6 GROWTH POLICY FRAMEWORK REGARDING LAND USE AND TRANSPORTATION PLANNING
AND DEVELOPMENT PROCESSES.
   (A)   The Final Report of the Transportation Evaluation Study is hereby
received, along with the Findings and Recommendations of the Environmental
Planning Commission regarding the report, recommending policy and strategies
for the city's land use and transportation planning and development processes.
   (B)   The following policy framework establishes an overall direction for
implementation of the city's growth policies.
      (1)   Through a public review process, the city, with input from
Bernalillo County and the general public, shall fully develop the concept of
community and regional centers and major transportation corridors city-wide
that will serve as a basis for Comprehensive Plan amendments. Development of
these concepts should also evaluate how the concepts relate to the current
Comprehensive Plan area boundaries, the Planned Communities Criteria, the
Sustainability Indicators Report, Long Range Transportation Plan, Regional
Transit Authority Service Plan, and the Middle Rio Grande Council of
Governments Regional Transportation Plan.
      (2)   The city shall work with neighboring jurisdictions to establish a
regional consensus regarding the nature and extent of urban growth and shall
establish a coordinated response to regional planning efforts; this should
include strengthening the city's relationship with the Middle Rio Grande
Council of Governments to develop continuous, comprehensive, and cooperative
land use and transportation planning.
      (3)   The city shall structure its Capital Implementation Program,
Community "Blueprints" and Long Range Transportation Plan to support the
Centers and Corridors principles identified and prioritized through a public
review process, both in long-range, city-wide planning and in short-range
project planning. The city shall ensure that the decade plan for capital
improvements is consistent with the goals and objectives of the Comprehensive
Plan as it may be amended. Emphasis shall be placed on maintenance,
enhancements and upgrades of roads and utilities in the core area, to prevent
deterioration of existing communities and to encourage infill.
      (4)   The city shall establish a development impact fee system based on
the actual costs of providing services and tied to the Comprehensive Plan's
tiered system of development areas, with impact fees providing incentives for
infill and development consistent with growth policies and the Capital
Implementation Program.
      (5)   The city shall utilize its existing development incentives and
create new incentives, including but not limited to density bonuses, lowered
impact fees, and economic development incentives such as industrial development
bonds and metropolitan redevelopment bonds, to facilitate appropriate
development in community and regional centers and along major transportation
corridors as identified by the city.
      (6)   The city shall restructure its development process to better meet
the goals of the city's growth policies and shall ensure public participation
in the planning process; all city departments, particularly Environmental
Health, Planning,
Public Works, and Transit, shall work together toward accomplishing
Comprehensive Plan goals and objectives.
      (7)   The city shall tie its Economic Development Program to the
promotion, development and redevelopment of a Downtown Core and other major
activity centers as identified by the city. These areas should be strong and
functionally diverse as well as physically compact with a concentration of
complementary uses.
      (8)   The city shall continue to enlist the assistance of the state,
county, school district and other governmental entities to diversify the
downtown land use mix with public facilities, hotels, office and retail
development, more and higher density housing, through the use of joint powers
agreements, memoranda of understanding, enhanced multi-modal opportunities and
other formal instruments as appropriate.
      (9)   The city shall identify the most significant steps that can be
taken to generate more activity and attract more private investment in the
downtown area, while simultaneously continuing existing efforts to create
complementary functions and relationships among existing and future uses in
other community and regional activity centers.
      (10)   The city shall encourage increased densities and mixed uses in
major community activity centers and corridors as identified by the city, and
development of identifiable communities with facilities that meet the daily
needs of residents closer to their homes or employment in order to decrease
vehicle miles traveled and dependence on the private automobile.
      (11)   The city shall plan for the long-term development of high capacity
corridors, through a process involving the affected communities and
neighborhoods and should consider incorporating more outlying areas into the
network of high capacity corridors.
      (12)   The city's growth policies shall be incorporated into the city's
design standards and long-range facility plans.
      (13)   The city shall increase the level of transit service and provide
related improvements to enhance performance of the transit system, consistent
with the principles of a compact urban form and a network of centers and
corridors, to improve the viability of transit as an alternative to the single-
occupancy vehicle and to reduce vehicle miles traveled; the city should also
consider increasing transportation demand management programs by supporting and
enhancing the current Major Employer and Transportation Management programs.
The city should coordinate such programs with the Middle Rio Grande Council of
Governments.
      (14)   To enhance the mode share, the city shall improve pedestrian
mobility and the character of the pedestrian environment city-wide, with
special attention to facilities and amenities for pedestrian and the mobility-
impaired, as well as transit orientation and bicycle connections, within
identified centers and corridors.
      (15)   The city shall plan the timing of road and utility construction to
ensure orderly growth, and coordinate capacity increases and street extensions
to areas of planned growth in the Comprehensive Plan. The city shall work
cooperatively with Bernalillo County in planning the timing of road and utility
construction.
      (16)   The city must carefully consider whether, within the context of an
amended Comprehensive Plan, the concept of urban service areas is, on balance,
beneficial to the quality of life in Albuquerque, and, if so, determine the
most appropriate areas for urban services. Such a determination would be based
on an accurate and publicly reviewed inventory of available and developable
land and planned in conjunction with projections of the resources available for
expansion.
      (17)   Any transportation improvement programs must recognize the
significance of our irreplaceable natural, historic, and cultural resources and
include strategies for minimizing adverse impacts on these resources.
   (C)   The Comprehensive Plan shall be amended in coordination with
Bernalillo County to serve as the single planning document to address growth
management issues for the Plan area, and to include city-wide planning for
facility systems and long-range capital improvements programming; all other
city-wide plans and policy statements, including facility plans and related
initiatives must be integrated elements of the Comprehensive Plan.
   (D)   The Comprehensive Plan shall be amended to incorporate the most
appropriate elements addressing matters of city-wide importance found in
facility plans, area plans, and strategic plans; the system-level assumptions,
projections, and networks used for city-wide planning must be consistent among
all Comprehensive Plan elements.
   (E)   The city shall evaluate its Comprehensive Zoning Code and revise the
Code to meet the goals of the city's growth policies.
(Res. 91-1998, approved 10-7-98)
§ 3-8-7 POLICY FOR THE PROCESS OF DEVELOPING THE ALVARADO TRANSPORTATION CENTER
PROJECT.
   (A)   An Alvarado Transportation Center Project Task Force is established
which will be charged with reviewing all aspects of the Alvarado Transportation
Center Project. The Task Force shall consist of one or two City Councillors,
the Chief Administrative Officer, the Director of Council Services and the
Chair of the Albuquerque Development Commission. The Task Force shall be
charged with making recommendations to the City Council on the Alvarado
Transportation Center Projects.
   (B)   The agreement between the city and the master developer shall be
approved by the City Council and need not be submitted to the Albuquerque
Development Commission.
   (C)   A neutral third party consultant(s) with expertise and national
experience in urban redevelopment may be retained by the city to advise the
Alvarado Transportation Center Project Task Force and the city on downtown
redevelopment, the development agreement, market feasibility of planned
developments, likelihood that the project developer will complete the project.
   (D)   The intent of the city is to stimulate the revitalization of downtown
and encourage long-term investments in the area. Therefore, the following will
require City Council approval:
      (1)   Any transaction in which a master developer is utilizing the city's
assets to collateralize a loan and in effect subordinating the asset.
      (2)   Any transaction which requires the city to subsidize the project by
waiving fees or policies or by investing public resources.
      (3)   Any transaction which pledges the city in some form for future
payment.
      (4)   Any transactions which involves the city making a loan guarantee.
      (5)   Any change in a member of the master development team.
         (a)   The Council hereby approves the change to the master developer
team within HDIC, specifically, HDIC's acquisition of the interests of Arcadia
Land Company and the Downtown Action Team. (Am. Res. R-2006-074, passed 08-22-
06)
   (E)   Any proceeds received from the development of the city's assets shall
be dedicated for the reinvestment in the revitalization of downtown.
   (F)   The policy of the city shall be to select the projects brought forward
by the master developer which are in the best interest of the city.
   (G)   The master plan shall identify project stages and shall establish time
frames for development of each activity. The master plan shall be submitted to
the city within 90 days. Firm financial commitments for the first development
stage shall be submitted to the city within 120 days.
(Res. 47-1999, approved 4-27-99)
Editor's note:
   For approval of the master plan for the Alvarado Transportation Center
Metropolitan Redevelopment Project, see Res. 113-1999, approved 10-27-99. For
approval of the development agreement for the Alvarado Transportation Center
Metropolitan Redevelopment Project, see Res. 114-1999, approved 10-27-99
§ 3-8-8 POLICY FOR KEY DECISIONS ON LAND USE AND TRANSPORTATION FOR THE
WESTSIDE-McMAHON CORRIDOR.
   (A)   The Transportation and Land Use Guide, April 1999, developed for the
Westside-McMahon Corridor is hereby received. This guide, which is background
information supporting the policy below, provides the user with an
understanding of the problem and need for such guidance.
   (B)   The concepts and development parameters identified within the
Westside-McMahon Transportation and Land Use Policy establishes a desirable
direction for promoting the opportunity for reduced automobile travel and
encourages the use of transit, bicycle and pedestrian modes.
   (C)   The land use concepts set forth herein are not intended to imply
zoning or supersede existing zoning and/or development plans.
   (D)   The map included as Attachment A to Res. 117-1999, Transportation and
Land Use Concept for the Westside-McMahon Corridor, which map is adopted herein
in full, and the performance measures listed below establishes the policy that
will be used by the Environmental Planning Commission and the City Council in
their review of development and rezoning proposals for properties located
within the Westside-McMahon corridor.
      (1)   Such proposals should be generally consistent with density, type
and hierarchy of uses as illustrated in Attachment A. For the purposes of
Attachment A, the following definitions shall apply:
         (a)   Low density residential is less than 7 dwelling units per acre
(du’s/acre). Medium density is 7 to 15 du’s/acre and high density is greater
than 15 du’s/acre.
         (b)   Low Commercial includes neighborhood scale commercial
development as allowed under the C-1 zone category of the City of Albuquerque
Comprehensive Zoning Code.
         (c)   Medium Commercial includes community scale commercial
development as allowed under the C-2 zone category of the City of Albuquerque
Comprehensive Zoning Code.
         (d)   Mixed Use refers to a mixture of neighborhood and village scale
commercial, office, community service and other employment associated uses, and
high density residential developments.  Where designated mixed use areas
involve multiple parcels, the mixture and distribution of uses should be
achieved for the area as a whole and are not a goal for any single parcel.
         (e)   Village Core may include a mixture of commercial, office,
community services, other employment associated uses and residential
developments, consistent with the concepts described in Westside Strategic
Plan.
         (f)   Institutional uses include public and private institutions such
as schools, hospitals and churches.
         (g)   Public facilities include uses such as, but not limited to,
parks, water and sewer facilities, and publicly operated park and ride lots.
      (2)   Residential uses should be located in a hierarchy with the highest
densities adjacent to the commercial/office centers and the lowest densities
between the nodes of non-residential development.
      (3)   Connections that provide safe and efficient pedestrian movements to
enhance mobility within the corridor and encourage the use of transit, bicycle
and pedestrian modes as an alternative to automobile travel should be provided
between adjoining uses and between developments and the transportation system.
      (4)   The approximate access points for Ellison Drive, McMahon Boulevard,
Westside Boulevard and Unser Boulevard, within the Westside-McMahon Corridor,
will be located as illustrated in attachment A, and as follows:
         (a)   The approximate access points for McMahon Boulevard are shown in
Attachment A. Full intersections should be limited to approximately one
thousand foot intervals. Additional partial accesses will be considered,
consistent with the criteria in the City’s Development Process Manual, provided
they are a distance of approximately 400 feet from adjacent intersections.
         (b)   The approximate access points for Westside Boulevard are shown
in Attachment A. Full intersections should be limited to approximately one-half
mile intervals with partial access at approximately one-quarter mile intervals.
Additional partial accesses will be considered, consistent with the criteria in
the City’s Development Process Manual, provided they are a distance of
approximately 400 feet from adjacent intersections.
         (c)   The proposed additional access points for Unser Boulevard are
shown in Attachment A. The additional access is a trade-off in support of the
higher density, mixed use development proposed by the McMahon/Unser Village
Center. One additional full access is proposed between Westside Boulevard and
McMahon Boulevard.
            1.   Access from Unser boulevard at the collector streets
immediately north and south of McMahon Boulevard may be allowed conditioned on
the following: 1) traffic operations on Unser Boulevard within the Unser/
McMahon village center are not degraded as demonstrated by a traffic impact
analysis performed to the satisfaction of the city traffic engineer based on a
35 mph speed limit through the village center; and 2) the additional access is
approved by the Urban Transportation Planning Policy Board (UTPPB) of the
middle Rio Grande Council of Governments.
      (5)   Transit facilities should be located as illustrated in Attachment
A, and as follows:
         (a)   The Town Center and park and ride facility located in the
northwest quadrant of Ellison Boulevard and the Coors Bypass, which will
include a parking area, shelter, lighting, landscaping, bicycle storage
facilities, and kiosks, should be served by several express and local bus
routes; and
         (b)   The Village Core at the southwest quadrant of the Unser
Boulevard/McMahon Boulevard intersection should include an on-site transit
facility as an integral component of the development. This facility should
include benches, covered area within the development or free-standing shelter,
bicycle storage facilities, and shared parking that can be used by park and
ride patrons, and
         (c)   Village Center and designated neighborhood transit facilities
should be located as follows:
            1.   Village Center bus stop locations with shelter, benches,
lighting, bicycle storage facilities, and landscaping should be located near
the intersections of McMahon Boulevard and Golf Course Road, McMahon Boulevard
and Unser Boulevard, and McMahon Boulevard and Rainbow Boulevard. (see
Attachment A); and
            2.   A full bus stop with shelter, benches, lighting, bicycle
storage facilities, and landscaping should be located adjacent to McMahon
Boulevard approximately six hundred feet west of Bandelier Street (see
Attachment A); and
            3.   Provision for shared parking that can be used by park and ride
patrons, should also be considered at each of these centers and designated
stops, at the discretion of the City Traffic Engineer.
         (d)   Bus stops with shelter and bench facilities, outside designated
centers, should be provided along the arterial street system at intervals of
approximately 1/4 mile, or as otherwise determined by the City’s Transit
Department.
      (6)   In consideration of the more intense development and potential for
increased traffic congestion at designated activity centers along McMahon
Boulevard, the extension of bus service should be considered a high priority in
the City of Albuquerque’s financial planning for expanded transit service. The
provision of this service should be triggered by the completion of any one of
the major stop facilities at the Unser/McMahon and Rainbow/McMahon centers.
      (7)   Bicycle, trail and pedestrian facilities and linkages should be
located as illustrated in Attachment A, and as follows:
         (a)   Bicycle, trail and pedestrian facilities parallel to Ellison
Road, McMahon Boulevard and Westside Boulevard; and
         (b)   A trail facility parallel to the Calabacillas Arroyo; and
         (c)   A trail connection at the Calabacillas Arroyo and McMahon
Boulevard crossing; and
         (d)   A trail and bicycle undercrossing of Ellison Road at the Black
Arroyo and connection to the Ellison Road facilities; and
         (e)   Well lighted and landscaped pedestrian connections between
residential areas and the arterial street system, should occur at intervals no
greater than 1/4 mile. Where consistent with the other elements of this
resolution and where substantial out-of-direction travel is not required,
sidewalks that are part of the residential and collector street system may be
used to fulfill this provision; and
         (f)   Commercial and office developments should include designated
pedestrian and bicycle facilities that link the developed site with the
pedestrian and bicycle facilities on the adjacent arterial street system. Well
lighted and landscaped pedestrian facilities connecting residential and
commercial developments, should also connect to transit routes and major stop
facilities; and
         (g)   Off-street bicycle, trail or pedestrian facilities, extending
through residential developments, should be built within a public right-of-way
and maintained by the City of Albuquerque.
   (E)   The West Side Strategic Plan is hereby amended on page 55 to include a
footnote referring to the land use and transportation policy for the Westside-
McMahon Corridor established in this resolution, which reads: “A more specific
land use and transportation policy for a large portion of the Seven Bar Ranch
Community was developed in the ‘Westside-McMahon Corridor Study’ in 1999 and is
included in City Council Enactment No. ___________ printed with the West Side
Strategic Plan adopting resolutions at the front of this document.”
   (F)   The City of Albuquerque, Bernalillo County and City of Rio Rancho
governments, all having jurisdiction within the Westside-McMahon Corridor, are
encouraged to work closely together to ensure the consistent application of
said guidance.
(Res. 117-1999, approved 11-9-99)
§ 3-8-9 PROCESS TO DETERMINE CENTERS AND CORRIDORS AND DESIGNATE ACTIVITY
CENTERS AND TRANSPORTATION CORRIDORS.
   (A)   The Planning Department shall release draft maps for public review and
comment in order to develop the concept designating activity centers and
linking corridors which may be included in the Albuquerque Bernalillo County
Comprehensive Plan as a key growth management policy.
   (B)   The policy objectives for defining and creating activity centers are:
      (1)   Mixed Use: For Major Centers, significant employment and relatively
high floor area ratios; multi-unit housing; region serving as well as
supporting retail/commercial uses. For Community Scale Centers, lower
employment levels; smaller scale multi-unit housing.
      (2)   Buildings well connected to the street and pedestrian ways, with
shade and seating. Relatively large, automobile-dominated retail/commercial
buildings should not be in activity centers, but rather in other commercial
areas easily accessible by major streets, unless designed to mitigate negative
effects on pedestrian movement and community scale.
      (3)   Parking which is visually unobtrusive, supportive of pedestrian
connections and shared among adjacent uses where possible.
      (4)   Convenient, visible, high-amenity transit service/facilities
connected with pedestrian movement; pedestrian ways should be designed to
attract and encourage pedestrian activity.
      (5)   Design of streets in Activity Centers, Major Transit and Enhanced
Transit Corridors should emphasize transit and pedestrian access and safety.
Convenient bicycle access should also be promoted, especially in Activity
Centers, Major Transit and Enhanced Transit corridors.
      (6)   Transit Service. For Major Centers, should be highest level,
especially during peak, and significant level off-peak through midnight as
well. For Community Scale Centers, level of service should be less than for
major centers but still a significant level, especially during peak
   (C)   The policy objectives for defining and creating corridors are:
      (1)   Express Corridor
       -   Full Access Control
       -   Faster travel speeds for auto and limited stop transit
       -   Development focused in activity nodes
      (2)   Major Transit Corridor
       -   Transit service with short headways
       -   Dedicated bus lane
       -   Development densities and form promote walking to transit
      (3)   Enhanced Transit Corridor
       -   Peak hour transit travel speeds competitive with automobile
       -   Priority treatments for buses at intersections
       -   Development densities and form promote use of transit, especially at
activity nodes
   (D)   Opportunities for public review and response to the proposed study and
policy concepts will be scheduled and organized by the City Planning
Department, in cooperation with Bernalillo County Zoning/Building and Planning
Department and the Public Works Policy Planning and Development Department and
with other City departments, including the Office of Neighborhood Coordination
as well as with Shared Vision, Inc. and its Comprehensive Plan Public Advisory
Committee. Special effort shall be made to be inclusive in obtaining public
comment.
   (E)   Design concepts developed for several locations along Central Avenue
by charettes during the Shared Vision Town Hall November 12-13, 1999 should be
used as more specific illustrations of possible infill and redevelopment
associated with the centers and corridors policy objectives.
   (F)   Upon completion of the public review process, the Planning Department
will assemble the results into proposed amendments to the Comprehensive Plan
consistent with findings of the process. Any proposed amendments resulting from
this process shall consider impacts to the entire Comprehensive Plan area and
its residents. Working with Bernalillo County and other jurisdictions that may
wish to participate, the City shall find ways of deciding how corridors and
centers outside the City should be linked to the City's system of centers and
corridors. The Comprehensive Plan may be amended in coordination with
Bernalillo County to serve as the single planning document to address growth
management issues for the Plan area, and to include City-wide planning for
facility systems and long-range capital improvements programming.
(Res. 66-2000, approved 6-27-00)
§ 3-8-10 NEIGHBORHOOD TRAFFIC MANAGEMENT PROGRAM ADOPTED AS THE NEIGHBORHOOD
TRAFFIC MANAGEMENT POLICY.
   The City of Albuquerque Public Works Department Neighborhood Traffic
Management Program (NTMP) is hereby adopted as the City of Albuquerque
Neighborhood Traffic Management Policy (NTMP). The manual for the NTMP is
hereby renamed the Neighborhood Traffic Management Policy (NTMP) Manual and
shall serve as the administrative, organizational and enforcement rules and
regulations. This manual and all subsequent amendments are adopted by
reference.(Res. 115-2003, adopted 10-22-03)
§ 3-8-11 GROSS VEHICLE WEIGHT
   (A)   The city adopts a policy to require gross vehicle weight restrictions
on the following:
      (1)   Carlisle Boulevard between Constitution Avenue and Copper Avenue
NE, prohibiting vehicles with a gross weight of 8 tons or over from using this
segment of Carlisle as a through street, excluding vehicles used for official
government business.
         (a)   This division does not prohibit vehicles over a gross weight of
8 tons from traveling on Lomas Boulevard NE across Carlisle Boulevard NE.
         (b)   This section does not prohibit vehicles weighing over 8 tons
from using Carlisle Boulevard between Constitution Avenue and Copper Avenue NE
to make deliveries or pick ups within the restricted area.
      (2)   San Pedro Drive between Osuna Road and Claremont Avenue NE
prohibiting vehicles with a gross weight of 8 tons or over from using this
segment of San Pedro Drive NE as a through street, excluding vehicles used for
official government business.
         (a)   This division does not prohibit vehicles over a gross weight of
8 tons from traveling on any minor arterial or collector street across San
Pedro Street NE.
         (b)   This division does not prohibit vehicles weighing over 8 tons
from using San Pedro Drive between Osuna Road and Claremont Avenue NE to make
deliveries or pick ups within the restricted area.
      (3)   Fortuna Avenue Northwest between 76th Street Northwest and a
location approximately 900 feet west of 64th Street Northwest is restricted to
vehicles of a gross maximum weight of 5000 pounds or less, except if the
destination of such vehicles is located within the Cedar Ridge or West Mesa
Manor subdivisions.
(Res. R-2005-008, approved 1-19-05; Am. Res. R-2005-027, approved 2-23-05; Am.
Res. R-2011-084, approved 9-22-11)
§ 3-8-12 PEDESTRIAN MANAGEMENT AREAS.
   (A)   A pedestrian management area along Avenida Cesar Chavez is hereby
established from the over-crossing of the Albuquerque Metropolitan Flood
Control Authority South Diversion Channel to Buena Vista Drive and along
University Boulevard from Basehart to Sunshine Terrace Avenue SE. The City
shall also study the effects of traffic from sporting events on pedestrians in
the neighborhoods surrounding the established pedestrian management area, and
shall make recommendations for protecting pedestrians in the surrounding
neighborhoods before, during and after such events.
   (B)   A policy is established to designate funding in the 2005 General
Obligation Bond Program for the construction of safe high capacity pedestrian
routes within the critical pedestrian management area.
   (C)   The City will work with the Mid-Region Council of Governments
Metropolitan Transportation Board and the Board of Regents of the University of
New Mexico to seek funding to develop safe high capacity pedestrian routes
within this pedestrian management area.
(Res. R-2005-087, approved 6-17-05)
§ 3-8-13 CRUISING PROHIBITED.
   (A)   The following area is designated as a no cruising area: the following
streets and all streets located within the following streets: Copper Ave. NW
from 1st Street to 8th Street; 1st Street from Copper Ave. to Silver Ave.;
Silver Ave. from First Street to 8th Street, and 8th Street from Silver to
Copper Ave.
   (B)   The following times are designated as no cruising times for the no
cruising area designated above: 8:00 o'clock p.m. every Friday until 3:00
o'clock a.m. Saturday; 8:00 o'clock p.m. every Saturday until 3:00 o'clock a.m.
Sunday and 8:00 p.m. every Sunday until 3:00 a.m. Monday.
(R-2005-192, approved 1-30-06)
§ 3-8-14 QUIET ZONES
   (A)   It is the policy of the City that the owner/operator of railroad
crossings within the City limits shall implement "Quiet Zones" within three
years from the effective date of this resolution.
   (B)   Subsequent to the New Mexico Department of Transportation implementing
"quiet zones" and when, pursuant to the City's Capital Improvements Program, a
railroad crossing within the City limits is scheduled for construction,
maintenance, rehabilitation or replacement, any improvements shall be
consistent with the goal of creating a "Quiet Zone" at that crossing.
   (C)   The City shall coordinate and collaborate with the New Mexico
Department of Transportation to implement this Quiet Zone policy.
   (D)   It shall be a City of Albuquerque, 2007 state legislative priority to
pursue funding for Quiet Zones. The Administration, before the commencement of
the 2007 New Mexico Legislature, shall coordinate with the New Mexico
Department of Transportation to identify the expense to convert the rail
crossings within the City limits, on the main north south rail line to Quiet
Zones.
   (E)   The rail crossings at Candelaria Road, Claremont Avenue Menaul
Boulevard and Lomas Boulevard shall have priority for creating Quiet Zones.
(R-2006-099, approved 10-17-06)
ARTICLE 9: ENVIRONMENT
Section
   
3-9-1   Air pollution abatement
   
3-9-2   Pro-environmental quality economic growth policy
   
3-9-3   Green Building Council Leadership in Energy and Environmental Design
(LEED) Silver Standard
   
3-9-4   Renewable Energy Policy
   
3-9-5   Hazardous Fire Conditions
Cross-reference:
   
Environment; boards and commissions, see Ch. 2, Art. 8
§ 3-9-1 AIR POLLUTION ABATEMENT.
   (A)   The Mayor, the Metropolitan Environmental Health Advisory Board, the
Environmental Planning Commission, and the Bernalillo County Planning
Commission shall be charged with monitoring of the implementation of the
Comprehensive Policies Plan previously adopted by the City Council and the
Board of Commissioners. Said implementation shall be aggressively pursued in
light of worsening air pollution in the area. Furthermore, the enforcement and
monitoring of this effort shall be instituted immediately and rated as high
priority. The Mayor and others charged by this section are furthermore urged to
support and encourage the many efforts that are already part of the city's
governmental planning process which includes:
      (1)   The Metropolitan Environmental Health Advisory Board's role in
advising the Environmental Planning Commission on matters that may have an
impact on air quality such as major residential, commercial, or industrial
development plans and master plan review.
      (2)   Enhancement of traffic flow by the implementation of designs to
maximize the available resources in the incorporation of synchronized traffic
signals to reduce travel times and delays which would otherwise add to the air
pollution burden.
      (3)   Required paving of streets and parking lots to minimize dust
emissions within the planning and air pollution control jurisdiction.
      (4)   Discouragement of strip zoning and developments which proliferate
urban sprawl by carefully administering zoning codes and laws.
      (5)   Providing alternate modes of transportation through expansion of
the transit system, encouraging use of car pools, and construction and design
of a bicycle lane network.
   (B)   By the adoption of this section, the City Council is going on record
as re-enforcing the Comprehensive Policies Plan, and particularly portions
excerpted from it and attached as part of Resolution No. 36-1980 shall be
recognized as essential policies necessary to reduce air pollution. Be it
hereby acknowledged that each of these excerpted policies are presently in
force throughout all planning activities by the city. It is further resolved
that the Council desires that these specific policies be followed closely by
staff departments of the city to assure compliance with the spirit and intent
of the Comprehensive Policies Plan.
   (C)   Those departments designated by the Mayor's Chief Administrative
Officer as individual or joint lead cognizant organizations responsible for
each section of the Comprehensive Policies Plan herein emphasized as necessary
to reduce air pollution shall monitor the compliance with these aforementioned
policies and report at least once each year to the CAO as to the status of
major actions and developments occurring in the city and county. Said report
shall detail those projects which compliment these policies or identify those
that were denied or significantly modified in order to comply with said
policies plan subsections.
(Res. 36-1980, approved 2-12-80)
§ 3-9-2 PRO-ENVIRONMENTAL QUALITY ECONOMIC GROWTH POLICY.
   (A)   The city shall take concerted actions to enhance manufacturing,
technical services (including research and development) and diversified job
opportunities within the metropolitan area, such actions to be consistent with
maintaining high level air quality, water quality and quality of life standards
as articulated in the Albuquerque/Bernalillo County Comprehensive Plan.
   (B)   The city intends to work with a positive problem solving attitude and
sense of urgency to attract and establish new and diverse industries to this
community.
   (C)   The Administration is encouraged to initiate or continue activities
aimed at creating a positive business climate, including but not limited to the
following:
      (1)   Identify and articulate the city's role in supporting industrial
recruitment; and
      (2)   Review existing city legislation and resultant rules and make
recommendations intended to provide a more responsive environment for
manufacturing and technical services job growth; and
      (3)   Strive to improve the city's land use regulation planning process
by making it more understandable, concise and timely by applying quality
management principles; and
      (4)   Review of the sector planning process to make it more flexible and
timely to fit specific planning needs of areas and to more clearly encourage
quality growth and development; and
      (5)   Identify areas of potential industrial development and seek to
provide infrastructure development in those areas through appropriate use of
the capital improvement program, including water and sewer capital projects.
   (D)   The rights and interests of the residents in areas surrounding new
areas of employment shall be balanced with the above efforts to expand
employment opportunities.
   (E)   The Administration shall prepare an annual report to the Council on
progress toward creating a business climate that enables industrial
manufacturing and technical services job growth. It shall be submitted to the
City Council by December 31 of each year.
(Res. 83-1992, approved 6-9-92)
§ 3-9-3 GREEN BUILDING COUNCIL LEADERSHIP IN ENERGY AND ENVIRONMENTAL DESIGN
(LEED) SILVER STANDARD.
   (A)   All city building construction projects and major remodels over 5,000
square feet, with a 341,300 BTU per hour connected energy load or with a 50
kilowatt or greater service capacity entering the pre-design phase shall be
built and certified to the United States Green Building Council Leadership in
Energy and Environmental Design (LEED) Silver Standard. In achieving its LEED
Silver Standard the city shall earn at least five points under Energy &
Atmosphere Credit 1, one point under Energy & Atmosphere Credit 3 and at least
one point under Indoor Environmental Quality Credit 8.
   (B)   The Municipal Development Department shall develop processes and
procedures to ensure that green building practices are integrated into the
design and construction processes for all new construction and remodels.
   (C)   The Municipal Development Department shall insure that requests for
proposals and bids shall explain the processes for new city facilities and
major remodels over 5,000 square feet.
   (D)   The Municipal Development Department shall report to Council on the
processes and procedures it develops within six months of the enactment of this
Resolution.
(Res. R-2005-063, approved 4-28-05)
§ 3-9-4 RENEWABLE ENERGY POLICY.
   (A)   Renewable Energy is any energy resource that is naturally regeneration
over a short time scale and is:
      (1)   Generated by use of low- or zero-emissions generation technology
with substantial long-term production potential; and
      (2)   Generated by use of renewable energy resouces that may include:
         (a)   Solar, wind, hydropower and geothermal resources;
         (b)   Fuel cells that are not fossile fueled; and
         (c)   Biomass resources, such as agriculture or animal waste, small
diameter timber, salt cedar and other phreatophyte or woody vegetation removed
from river basins or watersheds in New Mexico, landfill gas and anaerobically
digested waste biomass; but
      (3)   Does not include electric energy generated by use of fossil fuel,
waste products from fossil sources, waste products from inorganic sources or
nuclear energy.
   (B)   A Renewable Energy Policy is adopted for the City and shall include
the following elements:
      (1)   Solar Energy Incentives. The City Office of Economic Development
and the Energy Conservation Council shall develop within 9 months from the
effective date of this Resolution a program for providing incentives and tax
credits for entities located within the city that manufacture solar energy
products or that create solar energy technology. Upon approval of the program,
the Council's intent is that up to $1,000,000 will initially be appropriated to
fund the program from the City's CIP Decade Plan and Energy Conservation
Grants.
      (2)   City-Owned and Constructed Buildings. The City Department of
Municipal Development, in consultation with the Energy Conservation Council,
shall begin a process to equip or retrofit all City-owned buildings and
developenergy procurement policies to achieve the goal of securing 15% of the
power for City-owned facilities from renewable sources, solar energy, in
particular, within 7 years from the effective date of this Resolution. A
minimum of 33% of the power acquired from renewable sources shall come from on-
site renewable energy. The on-site power generation may be funded through third
party financing, City funds, Federal and State Grants and sources as available.
      (3)   New City-Owned and Constructed Building and Additions over 50,000
Square Feet. All new buildings and additions built for or by the City that are
over 50,000 square feet shall have 15% of the power to the building generated
by on-site renewable energy.
      (4)   Energy Efficiency Upgrades. The Department of Municipal Development
and the Energy Conservation Council, shall report back within 6 months of the
enactment of this legislation on the progress of the 1% for Energy Conservation
bond program, and make recommendations to extend the program beyond the 2007
bond cycle and for expansion of the program to increase energy efficiency and
add investment in renewable technologies, pursuant to subsection 2 of this
section.
      (5)   Energy Efficient Design Standards for City Owned Buildings. The
Department of Municipal Development in consultation with the Energy
Conservation Council shall within 2 years of the effective date of this
Resolution adopt energy efficient design standards for new City buildings,
additions to City buildings and remodels of City buildings that reduce energy
consumption 10% below that required by the State Building Code.
      (6)   Renewable Fleet Fuels. The City fleet shall be fueld with a minimum
of 20% non-petroleum based fuels within 5 years.
      (7)   Rebate Program. The City, through the Finance Department, the
Municipal Development and the Energy Conservation Council, shall develop a
rebate program, similar to that of the City's water conservation program, to
encourage the use of renewable energy, including solar panels, by city
residents and present it to the Council.
      (8)   Natural Design Energy Management. The City Department of
Environmental Health, Parks and Recreation Department and the Planning
Department shall within 12 months of the effective date of this resolution,
develop landscape deisgn guidelines, and a program to disseminate these
guidelines, that promote the use of natural plants and material to enhance
energy conservation and quality of life.
      (9)   The Energy Conservation Council, by March 30, 2006, shall submit to
the Administration and to the City Council a 5 year education plan that
includes a budget component, to fulfill the education mandate set forth in 14-
8-5-4 ROA 1994.
      (10)   IRB Scoring for Renewable Energy and Demand Side Supply via Energy
Efficiency.  The City shall amend the scoring criteria for approving Industrial
Revenue Bond applications to provide added points for creating, producing or
using renewable energy and renewable energy technology.
      (11)   Development Standards and Incentives. The City, Planning
Department and the Energy Conservation Council in cooperation with the New
Mexico Chapter of the United States Green Building Council shall propose to the
Council within 9 months of the enactment of this legislation revised
development standards or incentives for new residential developments based on
energy efficiency.
      (12)   Application for State Funds. The City, through the Department of
Municipal Development and the Energy Conservation Council, shall apply for a
"Clean Energy Grant" pursuant to the Advanced Energy Technologies Economic
Development Act, Sections 71-7-1 et seq. NMSA 1978, to obtain funding to
develop efficiency technology for the City.
      (13)   Purchase of Environmentally Safe Products. The City, through the
Department of Finance and Administration, in consultation with the Energy
Conservation Council shall propose to the Council within one year of the
enactment date of this Resolution amendments to the Purchasing Ordinance which
develop specifications for City purchases that reduce exposure of city
residents and visitors to potentially toxic chemicals, reduce greenhouse gas
emissions and other air pollutants, protect the ground and surface waters,
maximize water and energy efficiency, favor renewable energy sources, maximize
post consumer recycled content and readily recyclable or compostable materials,
favor long-term use through product durability, repairability, and reuse, and
consider life cycle economics of a product including its manufacture,
transportation, use and disposal.
      (14)   Net Metering. The City, as part of its legislation priorities for
the 2006 state legislature shall lobby for adoption of the Public Reglation
Commission's net-metering measure that will provide the City with opportunities
to sell back to utility companies any excess renewable energy and renewable
energy credits produced by installations on City-owned facilities.
   (C)   The Administration and the Energy Conservation Council in the
development of the policies and programs established in this Resolution shall
consult with, and when possible, include the participation of, other interested
parties.
   (D)   The Administration shall provide a report to the Council within 6
months of the effective date of this Resolution regarding the status of the
development of the policies and programs set forth herein and shall continue to
provide reports every 6 months until the policies and programs set forth in
this Resolution are implemented.
(Res. R-153-2005, approved 9-28-05)
§ 3-9-5   HAZARDOUS FIRE CONDITIONS
   (A)   The Council proclaims that a dangerous situation currently exists
within the City of Albuquerque, with the lack of precipitation and abundance of
light fire fuels represents a fire hazard and a significant and immediate
threat to the safety, health and welfare of the citizens of the City of
Albuquerque. The Council therefore authorizes the Chief of the Albuquerque Fire
Department to work cooperatively with community groups and other government
agencies to promote public awareness of fire prevention techniques and to
maintain a state of preparedness in the event of a wildland fire that may
endanger the citizens and property of the City of Albuquerque.
   (B)   The Council authorizes the Albuquerque Fire Department to prohibit
campfires, open fires, open burning of rubbish and vegetation including but not
limited to all weeds within the City and in any Open Space recreation area or
campground, or Bosque; and prohibit smoking and the unauthorized use of off-
road vehicles, motor bikes and chain saws within campgrounds, wildlands, and
other public areas, including but not limited to the Bosque area, and the
issuances of licenses or permits for burning. These prohibitions shall remain
in effect until the City Fire Chief determines that the fire danger has been
alleviated or for a period of 140 days, whichever comes first.
(R-2007-069, approved 6-27-07; Am. Res. R-2009-070, approved 5-18-09)
ARTICLE 10: PUBLIC HEALTH
Section
   
3-10-1   Private methadone clinics
   
3-10-2   Hypothermia emergency procedures
   
3-10-3   Prohibited smoking
Cross-reference:
   
Public Health and Welfare; boards and commissions, see Ch. 2, Art. 4
   
Social Services, see Ch. 4, Art. 5
§ 3-10-1 PRIVATE METHADONE CLINICS.
   The city will carefully review and comment on applications for proposed
private methadone clinics in the city when such applications are referred to
the city by the state of New Mexico.
(Res. 198-1984, approved 11-21-84)
§ 3-10-2 HYPOTHERMIA EMERGENCY PROCEDURES.
   (A)   General. The procedures established herein shall be in effect between
the period of November 1 through March 31. At any other times when temperatures
are expected to fall below 32 degrees Fahrenheit or when temperatures combined
with wind and/or precipitation create weather conditions under which exposed
persons are likely to experience hypothermia or other serious threats to life
or health, the Director of the Department of Human Services or his/her designee
shall declare a hypothermia emergency during which time the procedures shall
also be in effect.
   (B)   Police Department procedures. When this policy is in effect, members
of the Albuquerque Police Department, will be especially alert for persons who
appear to be without adequate shelter. In the event that officers identify
individuals in need of shelter, they will take the following actions:
      (1)   If the shelterless person appears to be unconscious or comatose,
officers will request an ambulance and remain at the scene until it arrives.
      (2)   If the shelterless person appears to be extremely intoxicated or
otherwise is clearly unable to provide for his/her own safety, the person will
be placed into civil protective custody and transported by police to
appropriate medical or detention facilities.
      (3)   If no medical emergency exists, and there appear to be no grounds
for placing the person into civil protective custody, the officer will contact
the dispatcher, providing the location, description and, if available, the name
of the person in need of shelter. This information will be communicated to an
Emergency Shelter Services (ESS) van. The officer need not remain at the scene
unless extraordinary circumstances require it.
   (C)   Emergency Shelter Services procedures.
      (1)   The Department of Human Services will provide for the operation of
an Emergency Shelter Services van which will respond to police or other
identification of persons in need of shelter. In addition, the van will
periodically patrol areas of the city in which there are concentrations of
homeless persons in an effort to locate persons without shelter, and transport
those who voluntarily request it to shelter facilities.
      (2)   If a person without shelter appears to be unconscious or comatose,
ESS staff will request an ambulance and remain at the scene until it arrives.
      (3)   If the shelterless person appears to be extremely intoxicated or
otherwise mentally incompetent as set forth in state law and refuses to accept
transportation to an appropriate facility, ESS staff will summon police and
remain at the scene until officers arrive.
      (4)   If the shelterless person appears mentally competent, but refuses
transportation to shelter, ESS staff will attempt to explain means to prevent
hypothermia and provide information about where to obtain assistance or shelter
if so desired at a later time.
      (5)   The ESS van will operate from 8:00 p.m. until approximately 4:00
a.m. or as weather conditions dictate.
   (D)   Shelter services. Persons served through this program will be
transported to existing private, nonprofit shelter facilities so long as
appropriate bed space remains available in these facilities. The Bernalillo
County Detention Center Satellite Facility will serve as the city's emergency
shelter of last resort for adult males. Women and children will be provided
shelter separate from adult males, available through the resources or private,
nonprofit agencies. During the period November 1 through March 31, the
Bernalillo County Detention Center Satellite facility will provide shelter to
those referred through other agencies, and to those transported through the ESS
van program.
(Res. 174-1986, approved 12-10-86)
§ 3-10-3 PROHIBITED SMOKING
   (A)   The City Council supports the American Cancer Society, American Heart
Association, American Lung Association, and New Mexicans Concerned About
Tobacco in supporting a strong statewide law that protects children, workers,
and people with breathing problems from secondhand smoke in public places and
workplaces, including restaurants and bars, and which does not preempt local
communities from adopting local policies expanding statewide secondhand smoke
protections.
   (B)   The City Council further urges the New Mexico Legislature and Governor
to pursue an amendment to Tribal Gaming Compacts prohibiting smoking in casinos
and other Tribal enterprises.
(Res. 2007-006, approved 2-5-07)
ARTICLE 11: POLICE AND FIRE DEPARTMENTS
Section
General Provisions
   
3-11-1   Applications for police and fire cadets
   
3-11-2   Fire Department review of national and uniform fire codes
   
3-11-3   Deployment of the police department's mobile command post
   
3-11-4   Plan to increase the actual number of sworn police officers
   
3-11-5   Timeframe for purging license plate reader records
Corrections and Detention Facilities
   
3-11-10   Opposing the use of private jails
   
3-11-11   Corrections/detention facility
   
3-11-12   Joint operation of the Bernalillo County Detention Center
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 3-11-1 APPLICATIONS FOR POLICE AND FIRE CADETS.
   The city hereby adopts the policy that new applications will be taken for
each police and fire class. The applications will not be accepted more than six
months prior to the date on which the class begins. All applicants will be
adequately notified of what they must do to be accepted as a member of the
class.
(Res. 21-1977, approved 2-24-77)
§ 3-11-2 FIRE DEPARTMENT REVIEW OF NATIONAL AND UNIFORM FIRE CODES.
   It is hereby the policy of the city that the City Fire Department routinely
review supplements to the Uniform Fire Code and the National Fire Code and
other uniform codes, as appropriate, and to annually provide the City Council
with a report based upon such review accompanied by recommended amendments to
the City Fire Code that might result from such review.
(Res. 24-1984, approved 2-29-84)
§ 3-11-3 DEPLOYMENT OF THE POLICE DEPARTMENT'S MOBILE COMMAND POST.
   (A)   The Community Policing Steering Committee shall consider the
deployment of the mobile command post as a resource to be used in the city's
community based policing program. The Task Force shall consider co-locating the
mobile command post and mini-substations with school facilities in
neighborhoods.
   (B)   Any problem with staffing the mobile command post shall be addressed
through the appropriate assignment of the new officers in the current Police
Academy class.
   (C)   The Community Policing Steering Committee shall prepare semiannual
reports to the Mayor and the City Council on progress in implementing the
Community Policing philosophy within the Albuquerque Police Department.
(Res. 34-1995, approved 3-3-95)
§ 3-11-4 PLAN TO INCREASE THE ACTUAL NUMBER OF SWORN POLICE OFFICERS.
   (A)   The Chief Administrative Officer Department and the Albuquerque Police
Department shall develop and implement a plan to increase the actual number of
sworn officers to the authorized level of 930 by the end of calendar year 2001.
This plan shall be presented to the City Council for approval by February 1,
2001.
   (B)   The Albuquerque Police Department shall submit quarterly progress
reports on implementation of this plan to the City Council on July 1, 2001,
October 1, 2001 and January 1, 2002.
(Res. 15-2001, approved 1-31-01)
§ 3-11-5 TIMEFRAME FOR PURGING LICENSE PLATE READER RECORDS.
   It shall be the policy of the City that the Albuquerque Police Departmnet
shall purge each license plate image and all associated information from its
databases within fourteen (14) days from the date of collection unless a longer
period of retention is required for a particular license plate image, images or
information because of an ongoing criminal investigation.
(R-2013-114, approved 11-22-2013)
CORRECTIONS AND DETENTION FACILITIES
§ 3-11-10 OPPOSING THE USE OF PRIVATE JAILS.
   (A)   The city has no intention of allowing persons being held for violation
of city ordinances to be housed in a privately operated jail.
   (B)   A jail is not an institution or a customer, personal, or business
service allowed in the conventional zoning categories of the zoning code;
jails, whether publicly or privately operated, are intended to be allowed only
in SU Special Use zones where such use is specifically and affirmatively
indicated in the text of the zone as an allowed use.
   (C)   It is not policy of the city to sell or sell-and-lease back city-
operated land for use as a privately owned jail.
   (D)   The city does not endorse privately operated county jails except when
it is to the advantage of the taxpayer to provide:
      (1)   Privately operated special incarceration programs and facilities
for the mentally ill and/or DWI offenders; or
      (2)   Specific housekeeping functions such as medical, dental, or food
services.
   (E)   The city recommends the financing of jail facilities through voter-
approved bond issues except when lease or lease-purchase-option contracts with
the private sector can provide space to relieve jail overcrowding in
emergencies or brief periods at reasonable costs to the taxpayer.
(Res. 72-1988, approved 5-3-88)
§ 3-11-11 CORRECTIONS/DETENTION FACILITY.
   (A)   The City/County Corrections Facility currently under lease and
administratively operated by the city Department of Corrections will not be
closed without direction from the City Council at a public hearing wherein
discussions regarding a cost-benefit analysis and long-term suitability shall
be undertaken and considered.
   (B)   It is the intention of the city to maintain this facility as a backup
for overcrowding of inmate population and consider its renovation.
(Res. 193-1988, approved 11-21-88)
§ 3-11-12 JOINT OPERATION OF THE BERNALILLO COUNTY DETENTION FACILITY.
   (A)   Bill No. EC-366, 13th Council, adopted June 7, 1999, which provides
that the County of Bernalillo will have the "sole responsibility" to manage the
Bernalillo County Detention Center effective July 1, 2001, is rescinded.
   (B)   The policy of the City is that the Bernalillo County Detention Center
shall be jointly operated by the City of Albuquerque and the County of
Bernalillo, staffed by a City Corrections-Detention Department, and managed by
a Director who reports to the City's Chief Administrative Officer, as has been
the case under a Joint Powers Agreement between the two governments since 1978.
      (1)   That the City Council hereby expresses its intent to appropriate
$9.254 million in the FY/08 City of Albuquerque General Fund operating budget
to assist with the operating costs of the Metropolitan Detention Center,
subject to the City’s review of legislation enacted by the New Mexico State
Legislature relating to detention center financing.
   (C)   The City reaffirms its commitment to the current Joint Powers
Agreement with the County of Bernalillo for the operation of the Bernalillo
County Detention Center.
(Res. 36-2001, approved 3-12-01; Am. Res. R-2007-031, approved 4-2-07)
 
CHAPTER 4: PROGRAMS AND PLANS
   Article
      
1.   PERSONNEL
      
2.   TRANSPORTATION
      
3.   UTILITIES
      
4.   PARKS AND RECREATION
      
5.   SOCIAL SERVICES
      
6.   COMMUNITY IMPROVEMENT
      
7.   FIVE YEAR GOALS AND ONE YEAR OBJECTIVES
   Cross-reference:
      
For plans concerning land use, see Chapter 1
ARTICLE 1: PERSONNEL
Section
General Provisions
   
4-1-1   Manpower Program and the Comprehensive Employment Training Act
   
4-1-2   Affirmative Action Plan
   
4-1-3   Minority Business Enterprise Program
   
4-1-4   Deferred Compensation Plan
   
4-1-5   ICMA Retirement Trust Program
   
4-1-6   Employee paid benefit programs
   
4-1-7   Annual employee safety awards
   
4-1-8   City employee award program
   
4-1-9   Clean community systems program
   
4-1-10   Troubled employee assistance program
   
4-1-11   Recognizing City Departments and City Employees
PERA Municipal General Member Coverage
   
4-1-20   Management, paraprofessional and unclassified members
   
4-1-21   Blue collar employees
   
4-1-22   White collar employees
   
4-1-23   Transportation employees
   
4-1-24   Albuquerque Officers Association
Cross-reference:
   
City employees; policies and procedures, see Ch. 3, Art. 3
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 4-1-1 MANPOWER PROGRAM AND THE COMPREHENSIVE EMPLOYMENT TRAINING ACT.
   (A)   The basic and ultimate purpose of CETA programs is to get persons into
permanent jobs. Other functions such as training, supportive services, job
development, et al, are the means by which the goals of jobs are attained.
   (B)   The major thrust of the fiscal year 1977 manpower program shall be
directed toward the economically disadvantaged family unit strategy. The
strategy shall first place primary wage earners into jobs under all CETA
Titles. Title I funds primary emphasis will be directed for economically
disadvantaged families and the funds are to get the family income above the
poverty level by bringing into the program a second family member.
   (C)   Quality, long-term training shall be offered in occupational fields
which are projected to have a future demand by city business and industry. Such
quality, long-term training shall be funded by the federal government under the
appropriate CETA Title(s).
   (D)   Other CETA special target-groups among the economically disadvantaged,
unemployed and underemployed shall be afforded services and placement as
available with preference to Special and Vietnam era veterans. Other special
target groups include the handicapped, youth, elderly, and ex-offenders. The
goals for the ethnic mix of all target groups as a whole shall be based on
their proportionate representation of the total economically disadvantaged
population with resources allocated accordingly.
   (E)   A Request for Proposal (RFP) system will be utilized in accordance
with the Comprehensive Employment and Training Act.
   (F)   An effective and comprehensive evaluation and analysis system shall
continue to be developed by which the effectiveness and impact of the manpower
program may be measured in a continuing way.
   (G)   A comprehensive plan covering the above objectives in detail with
recommended goals, shall be developed by the OCETA Planning Board and submitted
to the Council for consideration and approval. Subsequently the approved plan
will be submitted to the U.S. Department of Labor in conformance to the fiscal
year 1977 planning schedule.
   (H)   Equal Employment Opportunity provisions including affirmative action
plans as specified under CETA will be enforced by the prime sponsor.
(Res. 67-1975, approved 4-21-75; Am. Res. 66-1976, approved 4-29-76)
§ 4-1-2 AFFIRMATIVE ACTION PLAN.
   (A)   The city's Affirmative Action Plan attached to Resolution No. 3-1981
is hereby adopted by the city.
   (B)   Responsibility for the Equal Opportunity/Affirmative Action Program of
the city, under the present Charter, shall be assigned as follows:
      (1)   Policy. City Council, Mayor Administration: Chief Administrative
Officer and Affirmative Action Officer with support of the Personnel Department
and each city department director.
      (2)   Monitoring.
         (a)   Affirmative Action Office. Overall and general monitoring,
internal investigation, and result-oriented action.
         (b)   Human Rights Board. Recommendations to the Mayor, or Chief
Administrative Officer and formal investigations.
         (c)   OCETA. Selective monitoring through contract compliance
activities.
      (3)   Evaluation. Affirmative Action Task Force and the Human Rights
Board (as empowered by the Human Rights Ordinance).
      (4)   Enforcement.  Mayor, Chief Administrative Officer, and Affirmative
Action Officer.
   (C)   It shall be the responsibility of the Affirmative Action Officer,
under the direction of the Chief Administrative Officer and with the review and
recommendations of the Affirmative Action Task Force, to prepare and submit to
the City Council for approval, guidelines setting forth standards and
procedures for the city's Equal Opportunity/Affirmative Action Program. The
guidelines shall comply with applicable federal, state and local laws,
regulations and guidelines prohibiting discrimination in employment, and will
take into account problems and progress in the city's effort to provide equal
opportunity.
   (D)   It shall be the responsibility of each city department director to
review and analyze the composition of its work force as required by equal
employment opportunity laws and regulations, and its policies, practices and
procedures. The review and analysis shall be based upon the standards and
procedures contained in the approved City Affirmative Action Program.
   (E)   It shall be the responsibility of the Affirmative Action Office to
prepare and submit for the approval of the Mayor, Chief Administrative Officer
and the City Council, a city Affirmative Action Plan. The Affirmative Action
Task Force and Human Rights Board shall review the Plan and make
recommendations for appropriate changes.
   (F)   In support of the Affirmative Action Program, the City Council and
Mayor will ensure that adequate city resources are assigned to implement the
program and the Mayor shall closely review and hold city management personnel
accountable for the program's progress within their respective departments.
   (G)   All city departments shall work closely with the Affirmative Action
Office to develop and implement effective Affirmative Action Programs.
   (H)   The Affirmative Action Task Force will evaluate and report through the
Affirmative Action Officer to the Chief Administrative Officer, on a quarterly
basis its findings and recommendations regarding progress under the City's
Affirmative Action Program.
   (I)   The Affirmative Action Goals for Employment are hereby adopted by the
city.
   (J)   The authority to amend the Affirmative Action Program and Affirmative
Action Goals for Employment as necessary is hereby vested in the Chief
Administrative Officer.
   (K)   The Affirmative Action Officer shall prepare an annual Affirmative
Action progress report for the council in January of each year.
(Res. 3-1981, approved 1-2-81; Am. Res. 58-1981, approved 3-17-81)
§ 4-1-3 MINORITY BUSINESS ENTERPRISE PROGRAM.
   (A)   The city's Minority Business Enterprise Plan dated March, 1981, is
hereby adopted by the city to be applied to projects receiving financial
assistance from the Department of Transportation.
   (B)   Responsibility for the Minority Business Enterprise Program shall be
assigned as follows:
      (1)   Policy. City Council, Mayor Administration: Chief administrative
Officer and Minority Business Enterprise Officer with the support of the
Affirmative Action Division, Purchasing Division and Transportation Department.
      (2)   Monitoring.
         (a)   Minority Business Enterprise Office - overall and general
monitoring, internal investigation, and action.
         (b)   Purchasing Division and Affirmative Action Division -
recommendations to the Mayor or Chief Administrative Officer.
         (c)   OCETA and Human Rights Office - selective monitoring through
contract compliance activities.
      (3)   Evaluation.  Minority Business Enterprise Task Force and Human
Rights Board (as empowered by Human Rights Ordinance).
      (4)   Enforcement. Mayor, Chief Administrative Officer, and Minority
Business Enterprise Officer.
   (C)   It shall be the responsibility of the Minority Business Enterprise
Officer, under the direction of the Chief Administrative Officer and with the
review and recommendations of the Minority Business Enterprise Task Force, to
prepare and submit to the City Council for approval, guidelines setting forth
standards and procedures for the city's Minority Business Enterprise Program.
The guidelines shall comply with applicable federal, state and local laws,
regulations and guidelines prohibiting discrimination in employment, and will
take into account problems and progress in the city's effort to provide equal
opportunity.
   (D)   It shall be the responsibility of the Minority Business Enterprise
Officer to prepare and submit for the approval of the Mayor, Chief
Administrative Officer and the City Council, a city Minority Business Plan. The
Minority Business Enterprise Task Force shall review the plan and make
recommendations for appropriate changes.
   (E)   It shall be the responsibility of the Chief Administrative Officer to
amend the plan as necessary.
   (F)   In support of the Minority Business Enterprise Program, the City
Council and the Mayor will ensure that adequate city resources are assigned to
implement the program and the Mayor shall closely review and hold pertinent
city management personnel accountable for the program's progress within their
respective departments.
(Res. 57-1981, approved 3-16-81)
Cross-reference:
   
Intent to support the efforts of minority entrepreneurs, see § 6-6-1
   
Minority business enterprise participation goals, see § 6-6-5
§ 4-1-4 DEFERRED COMPENSATION PLAN.
   The city hereby adopts the state of New Mexico Deferred Compensation Plan
approved and administered by the Public Employees' Retirement Board for
participation by state and local public employees as an additional plan
available to city employees.
(Res. 205-1988, approved 12-1-88)
§ 4-1-5 ICMA RETIREMENT TRUST PROGRAM.
   (A)   The city hereby executes the Declaration of Trust of the ICMA
Retirement Trust attached to Resolution No. 31-1988 as Appendix B and made a
part hereof.
   (B)   The Personnel Services Department Director is hereby designated as the
coordinator for this program and shall receive necessary reports, notices, and
other information from the ICMA Retirement Corporation or the ICMA Retirement
Trust, and shall cast, or behalf of the city, any required votes under the
program. Administrative duties to carry out the plan may be assigned to the
appropriate departments.
(Res. 212-1988, approved 12-22-88)
§ 4-1-6 EMPLOYEE PAID BENEFIT PROGRAMS.
   (A)   Vendors wishing to offer 100% employee paid benefit programs may
solicit city employees under the following conditions:
      (1)   Employees may be solicited at their work site during coffee breaks,
lunch periods, and before and after work. Prior approval of these solicitations
must be obtained from the Chief Administrative Officer and the Department
Director to insure that no disruption of work occurs;
      (2)   Only an area predesignated by the Department Director may be used
for these purposes;
      (3)   Any material to be passed out should be reviewed by the Personnel
Department to determine that there is no implied or direct endorsement by the
city of the product or services being offered;
      (4)   Vendors must present a disclaimer to employees at the time of
solicitation which states that the city makes no representation as to the
quality of programs being offered.
   (B)   When a vendor submits proof to the Personnel Department that at least
1% of current permanent city employees wish to enroll in a 100% employee paid
benefit program, a payroll deduction will be initiated. A fee may be assessed
to recover administrative costs associated with the payroll deduction process.
   (C)   The Personnel Department will make every effort to allow employee
benefit programs authorized to collect premiums through payroll deduction to
participate in presenting their programs during the annual open enrollment
process.
(Res. 71-1991, approved 5-29-91)
§ 4-1-7 ANNUAL EMPLOYEE SAFETY AWARDS.
   (A)   Each year the City Council shall recognize publicly city government
programs which show the most progress in increasing safety and reducing
injuries. The Council shall do so by awarding formal proclamations at a City
Council meeting. Proclamations shall be awarded to the three programs showing
the greatest improvement during the previous year.
   (B)   The Risk Management Program of the Department of Finance and
Management shall be responsible for this project.
   (C)   The Risk Management Program shall monitor the success of this and
other projects to increase safety and reduce workers' compensation costs,
report on the projects' progress to the City Council, and make suggestions with
regard to ways of improving the Council's safety recognition project.
(Res. 81-1992, approved 6-9-92)
§ 4-1-8 CITY EMPLOYEE AWARD PROGRAM.
   (A)   The Mayor shall develop a City Employee Award Program.
   (B)   A method of selection and eligibility requirements, including
appropriate incentives, shall be developed for such a program.
   (C)   As part of the incentive program, the person selected as award
recipient shall be granted certain benefits as determined by the Mayor.
   (D)   Such persons receiving the award shall be given the appropriate
acknowledgement and publicity, both internally and externally, in order to
build incentive on the part of other employees.
(Res. 51-1978, approved 2-24-78)
§ 4-1-9 CLEAN COMMUNITY SYSTEMS PROGRAM.
   The city's participation in the Clean Community System and city support for
the program are hereby endorsed.
(Res. 175-1976, approved 10-28-76)
§ 4-1-10 TROUBLED EMPLOYEE ASSISTANCE PROGRAM.
   The proposed “Troubled Employee Assistance Program” is hereby endorsed, and
all employees of the city who are faced with disabling problems, such as
alcohol abuse and alcoholism, are encouraged to take advantage of this program.
(Res. 141-1975, approved 7-25-75)
§ 4-1-11 RECOGNIZING CITY DEPARTMENTS AND CITY EMPLOYEES.
   (A)   The Mayor with the consent of Council shall select an employee on the
first day of each month, based on the outcome of the performance evaluation
conducted pursuant to Section 3-1-9, ROA 1994, to be honored as the Employee of
the Month at the next scheduled Council meeting.
   (B)   The Employee of the Month shall be the subject of a Council
Proclamation and shall be recognized at the Council Meeting.
   (C)   At the end of the year, the Council shall select the Employee of the
Year from the twelve employees honored each month. The Employee of the Year
shall receive a bonus in the amount of $1,000.
   (D)   The Mayor with the consent of Council shall select a City Department
to be acknowledged each month by the Council based on the Department's efforts,
innovation and responsiveness.
(Res. R-2005-037, approved 4-1-05)
PERA MUNICIPAL GENERAL MEMBER COVERAGE
§ 4-1-20 MANAGEMENT, PARAPROFESSIONAL AND UNCLASSIFIED MEMBERS.
   (A)   PERA Municipal General Member Coverage Plan 3 is hereby adopted as the
retirement plan for the Management, Paraprofessional and Unclassified members
as required by law.
   (B)   An election shall be held on August 18, 1993 upon the question of
adoption of such plan pursuant to the requirements of Section 10-11-55.1 NMSA
1978.
   (C)   If such plan shall be approved, compensation of the Management,
Paraprofessional and Unclassified employees will be appropriately adjusted to
provide for an increase in the amount of the employees contribution as required
by Municipal General Member Coverage Plan 3 pursuant to action of the City
Council as reflected in the City of Albuquerque minutes of June 21, 1993.
   (D)   The Director of Personnel Services or his/her designee is designated
as the representative of the city who is responsible for the conduct of the
election and for the purpose of canvassing and verifying the results of such
election and is authorized to certify the results of such election to the
Public Employees Retirement Board immediately following the election upon such
coverage plan in order that it may be effective on the first day of the month
following the election.
   (E)   Pursuant to Section 10-11-5 NMSA 1978, the city hereby elects to be
responsible for making contributions of 75% of its employees' member
contributions in the Management, Paraprofessional and Unclassified division
under Municipal General Member Coverage Plan 3.
   (F)   This section shall be irrevocable with respect to the payment of the
employee contributions under the current coverage plan contribution rates
stated in division (E).
   (G)   Division (E) and (F) above shall be effective with the first pay
period of the month in which Municipal General Member Coverage Plan 3 becomes
effective for the Management, Paraprofessional, and Unclassified division
employees.
(Res. 79-1993, approved 6-23-93)
§ 4-1-21 BLUE COLLAR EMPLOYEES.
   (A)   PERA Municipal General Member Coverage Plan 3 is hereby adopted as the
retirement plan for the Blue Collar employee member group as required by law.
   (B)   An election shall be held on October 20, 1993 upon the question of
adoption of such plan pursuant to the requirements of Section 10-11-55.1 NMSA
1978; and
   (C)   If such plan shall be approved, compensation of members of the Blue
Collar employee group will be appropriately adjusted to provide for an increase
in the amount of the employees contribution as required by Municipal General
Member Coverage Plan 3 pursuant to action of the City Council as reflected in
the record of the City Council meeting of August 30, 1993.
   (D)   The Director of the Employee Relations Department or his/her designee
is designated as the representative of the city who is responsible for the
conduct of the election and for the purpose of canvassing and verifying the
results of such election and that he/she is authorized to certify the results
of such election to the Public Employees Retirement Board immediately following
the election upon such coverage plan in order that it may be effective on the
first day of the month following the election.
   (E)   Pursuant to Section 10-11-55 NMSA 1978, the city hereby elects to be
responsible for making contributions of 75% of its employees' member
contributions in the Blue Collar employee member group under Municipal General
Member Coverage Plan 3.
   (F)   This section shall be irrevocable with respect to the payment of the
employee contributions under the current coverage plan contribution rates
stated in division (E).
   (G)   Divisions (E) and (F) above shall be effective with the first pay
period of the month in which Municipal General Member Coverage Plan 3 becomes
effective for the Blue Collar employee member group.
(Res. 133-1993, approved 9-7-93)
§ 4-1-22 WHITE COLLAR EMPLOYEES.
   (A)   PERA Municipal General Member Coverage Plan 3 is hereby adopted as the
retirement plan for the White Collar employee member group as required by law.
   (B)   An election shall be held on November 10, 1993 upon the question of
adoption of such plan pursuant to the requirements of Section 10-11-55.1 NMSA
1978.
   (C)   If such plan shall be approved, compensation of members of the White
Collar employee group will be appropriately adjusted to provide for an increase
in the amount of the employees contribution as required by Municipal General
Member Coverage Plan 3 pursuant to action of the City Council as reflected in
the record of the City Council meeting of September 20, 1993.
   (D)   The Director of the Employee Relations Department or his/her designee
is designated as the representative of the city who is responsible for the
conduct of the election and for the purpose of canvassing and verifying the
results of such election and that he/she is authorized to certify the results
of such election to the Public Employees Retirement Board immediately following
the election upon such coverage plan in order that it may be effective on the
first day of the month following the election.
   (E)   Pursuant to Section 10-11-55 NMSA 1978, the city hereby elects to be
responsible for making contributions of 75% of its employees' member
contributions in the White Collar employee member group under Municipal General
Member Coverage Plan 3.
   (F)   This section shall be irrevocable with respect to the payment of the
employee contributions under the current coverage plan contribution rates
stated in division (E).
   (G)   Divisions (E) and (F) above shall be effective with the first pay
period of the month in which Municipal General Member Coverage Plan 3 becomes
effective for the White Collar employee member group.
(Res. 137-1993, approved 9-29-93)
§ 4-1-23 TRANSPORTATION EMPLOYEES.
   (A)   PERA Municipal General Member Coverage Plan 3 shall be, and is hereby
adopted as the retirement plan for the transportation worker employee member
group as required by law.
   (B)   An election shall be held on June 28, 1994 upon the question of
adoption of such plan pursuant to the requirements of Section 10-11-55.1 NMSA
1978.
   (C)   If such plan shall be approved, compensation of members of the
transportation worker employee group will be adjusted to provide for an
increase of 4% in the amount of the employee's contribution as required by
Municipal General Member Coverage Plan 3 pursuant to action of the City Council
as reflected in the record of the City Council meeting of May 16, 1994.
   (D)   The Director of the Employee Relations Department or his/her designee
is designated as the representative of the city who is responsible for the
conduct of the election and for the purpose of canvassing and verifying the
results of such election and that he/she is authorized to certify the results
of such election to the Public Employees Retirement Board immediately following
the election upon such coverage plan in order that it may be effective on the
first day of the month following the election.
   (E)   The section shall be irrevocable with respect to employee
participation in Municipal General Member Coverage Plan 3 should the employees
in the transportation worker employee member group vote in favor of Plan 3 in
the election held on June 28, 1994.
   (F)   Divisions (C) and (E) shall be effective with the first pay period of
the month in which Municipal General Member Coverage Plan 3 becomes effective
for the transportation worker employee member group.
(Res. 42-1994, approved 5-31-94)
§ 4-1-24 ALBUQUERQUE OFFICERS ASSOCIATION.
   (A)   PERA Municipal General Member Coverage Plan 3 is hereby adopted as the
retirement plan for the Albuquerque Officers Association employee member group
as required by law.
   (B)   An election shall be held on November 22, 1994 upon the question of
adoption of such plan pursuant to the requirements of Section 10-11-55.1 NMSA
1978.
   (C)   If such plan shall be approved, compensation of members of the
Albuquerque Officers Association employee group shall be appropriately adjusted
to provide for an increase in the amount of the employees contribution as
required by Municipal General Member Coverage Plan 3 pursuant to action of the
City Council as reflected in the record of the City Council meeting of October
17, 1994.
   (D)   The Director of the Employee Relations Department or his/her designee
is designated as the representative of the city who is responsible for the
conduct of the election and for the purpose of canvassing and verifying the
results of such election and that he/she is authorized to certify the results
of such election to the Public Employees Retirement Board immediately following
the election upon such coverage plan in order that it may be effective on the
first day of the month following the election.
   (E)   Pursuant to Section 10-11-55 NMSA 1978, the city hereby elects to be
responsible for making contributions of 75% of its employees' member
contributions in the Albuquerque Officers Association employee member group
under Municipal General Member Coverage Plan 3.
   (F)   The section shall be irrevocable with respect to the payment of the
employee contributions under the current coverage plan contribution rates
stated in division (E).
   (G)   Divisions (E) and (F) above shall be effective with the first pay
period of the month in which Municipal General Member Coverage Plan 3 becomes
effective for the Albuquerque Officers Association employee member group.
(Res. 98-1994, approved 10-19-94)
ARTICLE 2: TRANSPORTATION
Section
General Provisions
   
4-2-1   Bikeway network plan
   
4-2-2   Transit development program
   
4-2-3   Auto emissions pollution control program
   
4-2-4   Auto emissions inspection program
   
4-2-5   Airport noise compatibility program
   
4-2-6   1991 Transit Development Program
   
4-2-7   Transit Service Expansion Plan
   
4-2-8   Landscaping Plan for the Big-I; Big-I Pride Task Force
   
4-2-9   International airport master plan
Transportation Programs
   
4-2-10   1996 - 2001 Transportation Program
   
4-2-11   Interstate Corridor Enhancement Plan
Cross-reference:
   
Transportation; boards and commissions, see Ch. 2, Art. 7
   
Transportation; policies and procedures, see Ch. 3, Art. 8
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 4-2-1 BIKEWAY NETWORK PLAN.
(Res. 32-1974, approved 11-4-74)
   Bikeways & Trails Facility Plan, §
1-16-1
   Trails & Bikeways Facility Plan, §
1-11-5, repealed
Editor’s note: This Plan was repealed and replaced by the Bikeways & Trails
Facility Plan, §
1-16-1.
§ 4-2-2 TRANSIT DEVELOPMENT PROGRAM.
   (A)   (1)   The Transit Development Program for Albuquerque prepared for the
Middle Rio Grande Council of Governments and the city by Simpson & Curtin,
Transportation Engineers, and transmitted to the Council on February 24, 1975,
is adopted as the basis for seeking federal assistance for capital improvements
and operations in order to improve the public transportation system which
serves the Albuquerque Urban Area; and that the following provisions contained
in said Transit Development Program be accepted as a basis for the city's
Development Program; provided that the program be subject to annual
modification based on funds available and the ongoing transportation planning
process.
      (2)   Continued reliance on a bus transit system is the best way to meet
the city's mobility needs now and in the foreseeable future.
      (3)   The Transit Service Improvement Program shall conform to the
following guidelines:
         (a)   Existing routes should be modified and new routes created in an
evolutionary manner;
         (b)   The design of both regular routes and special service
improvements should recognize and accommodate travel movements which are
oriented to four principal focal points of activity in the metropolitan area:
Downtown Albuquerque, University of New Mexico, Kirtland East (including Sandia
Laboratories) and adjoining Kirtland West, and Coronado-Winrock Regional
Shopping Centers;
         (c)   Frequency of service should be based on a reasonable level of
ridership;
         (d)   Radial routes passing through the Central Business District may
be combined and “through routed;”
         (e)   Pulse scheduling (i.e. all buses in a given network begin
service at the same time and place, circulate on their respective route's and
return to the starting of terminal point simultaneously), should be implemented
with Winrock Regional Shopping Center as the suggested focal point for
operation;
         (f)   Special transit services be instituted, such as demand actuated
services for the elderly and handicapped and when feasible club or subscription
buses and park and ride express.
      (4)   Low capital intensive alternatives be explored to enhance the
utilization of public transit, including, but not limited to the following:
         (a)   Traffic signalization techniques which maximize the flow of
people rather than vehicles;
         (b)   Special bus turns at key-intersections;
         (c)   Bus stop lengths which vary in accordance with demand as
represented by the number of buses using particular stops;
         (d)   Improvement of area-wide roadways;
         (e)   Differential parking policies in downtown Albuquerque to
discourage parking for long periods of time;
      (5)   The Five-Year Capital Improvement Program described in Table IV-
5 of said Transit Development Program shall be accepted, subject to
modifications as a result of availability of funds and the ongoing
transportation planning process.
      (6)   Albuquerque Transit System should be continued as a City Division
under the Department of Traffic and Transit (surface transportation) and that
the Mayor and Council shall adopt appropriate policy guidelines for the
service.
      (7)   Albuquerque Transit should institute appropriate management
improvements, including an aggressive marketing program.
      (8)   The extent of local financial commitments to the Albuquerque
Transit System shall be based on an effort to assure a balance between
community desires and the ability of the transit system to economically provide
the service.
      (9)   The proposed Implementation Plan in said Transit Development
Program be annually reviewed and approved by the Council.
   (B)   Local staff shall be directed to proceed with the following actions
addressed in the Transit Study:
      (1)   Modifications of buses and loading points to facilitate the elderly
and handicapped getting on and off public transportation be encouraged;
      (2)   Park and ride express service shall become operational as soon as
possible;
      (3)   A more complete analysis shall be included of the ramifications of
mass transit alternatives in the next five year period, on air quality
requirements and capital improvements and parking facilities required by the
annual increase in vehicle miles traveled in the city;
      (4)   More emphasis shall be placed on means of complementing the present
bus system, such as jitneys, mini-buses, taxis, and bus/bike systems;
      (5)   Specific proposals for justifiable grid system routes shall be
made; and
      (6)   New routes in the area between Eubank and Tramway and Montgomery
and Lomas shall be implemented as soon as possible.
   (C)   A representative Mass Transit Citizens Advisory Board shall be
established to advise the Department of Traffic and Transit (surface
transportation) regarding improving services and ridership.
   (D)   The Transit Development Program and the Transportation Improvement
Program, insofar as they affect the city, shall be approved by the Council
before endorsement and transmittal to the Urban Mass Transportation Agency by
the Urban Transportation Planning Policy Board.
(Res. 82-1975, approved 5-16-75)
§ 4-2-3 AUTO EMISSIONS POLLUTION CONTROL PROGRAM.
   (A)   The Council hereby adopts the Centralized Contractor Operated Program
for inspection and maintenance as the auto emissions pollution control program
for the city.
   (B)   The Council hereby approves the contract attached to Resolution 16-
1982 with Hamilton Test Systems.
   (C)   The Mayor shall develop an ongoing committee to monitor the process of
implementing the Inspections and Maintenance Program. This committee shall set
deadlines for development of amended enforcement ordinances, monitor the public
relations and contract process, in a report monthly to the Council and the
Mayor on the progress of the program and necessary actions to improve the
implementation process.
   (D)   The Mayor shall make semi-annual reports to the City Council on the
status of the vehicle emissions testing program and discuss any policy
recommendations, if necessary.
(Res. 16-1982, approved 2-2-82; Am. Res. 53-1989, approved 4-14-89)
§ 4-2-4 AUTO EMISSION INSPECTION PROGRAM.
   (A)   The state legislature in the 1985 Legislature shall pass legislation
that would make as a pre-condition of the purchaser's obtaining a New Mexico
automobile registration or re-registration for an automobile in Bernalillo
County, the requirement that the vehicle complied with the provisions of the
city and the county of Bernalillo's Auto Emission Inspection Ordinance and
passed the required auto emission inspection.
   (B)   The state legislature in the 1985 Legislature pass legislation giving
the city an county of Bernalillo a funding source to pay the cost of conducting
auto emission inspections for all automobiles registered or proposed to be
registered in Bernalillo County without charging an auto emission inspection
fee per se. The city and the county of Bernalillo request the state legislature
to grant them the authority to impose, by ordinance, a tax of up to two cents
per gallon of gasoline sold in the county. (Alternatively, the city and the
county of Bernalillo request the state legislature to pass legislation raising
the automobile registration and re-registration fee for automobiles registered
in Bernalillo County a sufficient amount to pay for the cost of the auto
emission inspection program.) Any excess proceeds from the funding source
listed in this paragraph after paying the costs of operation of the auto
emissions inspection program and the capital costs of the auto emissions
inspection program, shall be applied to provide for costs of the city of
Albuquerque municipal transit system to include bus service in the county of
Bernalillo outside of the city or for the costs of maintaining roads and
streets in the city and the county of Bernalillo.
   (C)   The Department of Transportation of the state of New Mexico shall
enter into an agreement with the city to enable the city to act as an agent for
the state of New Mexico in registering automobiles in Bernalillo County and
that the department assist the city in implementing a registration-auto
emission inspection program that fits into the staggered and annual
registration program of the state of New Mexico while allowing for auto
emission inspection programs year round.
   (D)   The Albuquerque Environmental Health and Energy Department develop the
facts and suitable rationale for incorporation into local ordinances and air
quality control regulations that can be used to reinstitute an I/M program
based on non-fee inspections for all of Bernalillo County to include the
following:
      (1)   Inspection of all Bernalillo County registered motor vehicles
10,000 pounds GVW or less, and that city vehicles of all Gross Vehicle Weights,
including buses and refuse vehicles, shall be subject to inspection.
      (2)   Inspection of vehicles with spark ignition engines for acceptable
carbon monoxide emissions.
      (3)   Inspection of vehicles with compression ignition engines for
acceptable levels of visible emissions under load.
      (4)   Exterior inspection of spark ignition vehicles which are designed
by the manufacturer for the exclusive use of unleaded fuels for pollution
control device tampering.
   (E)   It is the purpose and resolve of this Council to achieve the federal
standards in Albuquerque as originally planned and committed in the 1982 Urban
Implementation Plan. Therefore, if necessary the Council desires the I/
M program to be sufficient stringency as to make up for the time and progress
that has been lost during the period that the I/M program has been interrupted.
No tests should be performed until after tampering has been apparently
corrected as determined by exterior inspection of the vehicle.
   (F)   The state legislature shall include in the enforcement area for the
Auto Emission Inspection Program, all of Bernalillo County, the urbanized areas
in northeast Valencia County, and the urbanized areas in southern Sandoval
County. If it is the will of the Legislature, the city is willing to conduct
the inspection programs for the entire enforcement area.
(Res. 202-1984, approved 12-10-84)
§ 4-2-5 ALBUQUERQUE INTERNATIONAL AIRPORT MASTER PLAN AND AIRPORT NOISE
COMPATIBILITY PROGRAM.
(Res. 144-1985, approved 8-8-85; Am. Res. 28-2003, approved 4-2-03; Res. 2017-
102, approved 11-13-17)
Cross-reference:
   Moved to §1-17-1
   Airport Master Plan, §1-17-1 (formerly §1-11-7)
   Albuquerque International Airport Master Plan and Airport Noise
Compatibility Program, §1-17-1 (formerly §4-2-5)
   Airport Protection Overlay Zone, §1-10-30, repealed
Editor's note: The Airport Master Plan has been moved to a new Article 17, Rank
3 Master Plans and Resource Management Plans.
§ 4-2-6 1991 TRANSIT DEVELOPMENT PROGRAM.
   (A)   The Transit and Parking Department's 1991 Transit Development Program
shall be adopted as the city document containing the approved goals and
policies for the city mass transit system, Part I being adopted as a revised
Rank Two plan, superseding earlier Rank Two transit plans.
   (B)   The Transit and Parking Department on an annual basis shall issue an
annual report that details information regarding the Department's efforts
towards the achieving of the goals and objectives outlines in the Transit
Development Program, which contains a status report on major transit
activities, and contains a report on future activities.
   (C)   Copies of the Transit and Parking Department's annual report be sent
to the City Council, the Environmental Planning Commission, the Transit
Advisory Board, and made available to the city's neighborhood associations, and
other interested entities and individuals.
(Res. 111-1991, approved 7-23-91)
§ 4-2-7 TRANSIT SERVICE EXPANSION PLAN
   The Transit Service Expansion Plan in Attachment I to Res. 32-2000 is hereby
approved for implementation in three phases.
   (A)   Phase One: The Administration is hereby directed to implement all
expansions specified in Attachment I but not included in Subsections (B) or (C)
below on April 1, 2000. These expansions can be made without adding buses to
the existing fleet.
   (B)   Phase Two: The Administration is hereby directed to implement the peak
hour service expansions specified in Attachment I for the following routes by
September 1, 2000 to allow sufficient time to expand the bus fleet through
acquisition of smaller vehicles or used vehicles, leasing of vehicles, or an
alternative method identified by the Transit Department: Louisiana (Route 3),
San Mateo (Route 4), Airport/UNM Loop (Route 14), Wyoming (Route 31), and
Atrisco Circulator.
   (C)   Phase Three: The Administration is hereby directed to implement
service expansions specified in Attachment I on Fourth Street (Route 10) and on
Isleta (Route 53) by September 1, 2000, contingent upon conclusion of
negotiations with Bernalillo County regarding cost-sharing for these routes. If
negotiations with Bernalillo County are not concluded by September 1, 2000,
these service expansions shall be implemented six months after conclusion of
these negotiations.
(Res. 32-2000, approved 3-24-00)
§ 4-2-8 LANDSCAPING PLAN FOR THE BIG-I; BIG-I PRIDE TASK FORCE.
   (A)   The City of Albuquerque shall contribute up to $1 million from its
General Obligation Bond Program in order to provide landscaping at the Big-
I and along portions of Interstate Highway 25 and Interstate Highway 40.
Expenditure of these funds shall be contingent upon contributions and grants
from private, state or federal funds in an amount equal to the total cost of
the Landscaping Plan as developed by the New Mexico State Highway and
Transportation Department, or the total cost as estimated by the Big-I Pride
Task Force (defined below). Appropriations of these funds shall be made
according to the City's appropriations procedure. Once the funds have been
accumulated and the Landscaping Plan implemented, the City of Albuquerque
desires to maintain the landscaping at the Big-I and along portions of
Interstate Highway 25 and Interstate Highway 40 in an amount not to exceed
$300,000 per fiscal year which would result in City expenditures of 4.5 million
over the next 15 years.
   (B)   A Big-I Pride Task Force is hereby created to identify funds for and
develop and implement a landscaping plan for the Big-I interchange of
Interstate Highways 25 and 40 and for other locations on I-25 and I-40 in
Albuquerque. The Big-I Pride Task Force shall be comprised of 11 members
appointed by the Mayor with the advice and consent of the City Council from a
list of nominees provided by the City Council. The Big-I Pride Task Force
membership shall include representatives from the following organizations: one
member from the Albuquerque Economic Forum, one member from Albuquerque
Economic Development, one member from the Greater Albuquerque Chamber of
Commerce, one member from the Hispano Chamber of Commerce, two members from the
Albuquerque City Council, two members who are elected officials from local,
state or federal governments other than the City of Albuquerque, two members
from community advocacy organizations, and the Mayor of Albuquerque. The Big-
I Pride Task Force shall determine its own organization and meeting rules, with
the exception that every Big-I Pride Task Force meeting shall be open to the
public. The Big-I Pride Task Force shall be staffed by volunteers and by
Council Services.
   (C)   The Big-I Pride Task Force shall review existing landscaping at the
Big-I to identify any plants that should be preserved and integrated into the
new Landscaping Plan.
   (D)   The Big-I Pride Task Force shall assist with the effort to secure
private, federal, state and local funds for landscaping the Big-I and any other
locations on Interstate Highway 25 and 40.
   (E)   The Big-I Pride Task Force shall assist the City in the effort to
identify private, federal, state and local funds to maintain proposed
landscaping at the Big-I and any other locations on Interstate Highway 25 and
40.
   (F)   The Big-I Pride Task Force shall encourage volunteers to participate
in planting and other activities to carry out landscaping plans.
(Res. 72-2000, approved 6-27-00)
TRANSPORTATION PROGRAMS
§ 4-2-10 1996 - 2001 TRANSPORTATION PROGRAM.
   (A)   The fiscal year 1996 - 2001 Transportation Program for the Albuquerque
Urban Area is approved as recommended by the Environmental Planning Commission.
   (B)   This section shall be transmitted to all members of the Urban
Transportation Planning Policy Board, the Executive Director of the Middle Rio
Grande Council of Governments, and to the New Mexico Highway and Transportation
Department.
(Res. 91-1996, approved 9-9-96)
§ 4-2-11 INTERSTATE CORRIDOR ENHANCEMENT PLAN.
   (A)   The City Council supports and endorses the Interstate Corridor
Enhancement Plan – A Conceptual Framework including design themes and concepts
for the enhancement of I-25 and I-40, and supports its implementation.
   (B)   The Council recognizes the importance of cooperation among the NMSHTD,
MRGCOG, Bernalillo County, City Planning and other City departments, the
private sector, the community at large, in developing and implementing the ICE
Plan.
   (C)   The City shall forward the ICE Plan to the MRGCOG (the Metropolitan
Planning Organization) to obtain support of the Urban Transportation Planning
and Policy Board (UTPPB) and incorporate the implementation of the ICE Plan
into the Metropolitan Transportation Plan.
   (D)   The City shall forward the ICE Plan to the New Mexico State Highway
Department and the New Mexico State Highway Commission for their endorsement
and support, and inclusion of the Plan into the Highway Upgrade Program for
capital and maintenance funding.
   (E)   The City will work with the NMSHTD and the MRGCOG/UTPPB to program a
portion of the Transportation Equity Act for the 21st Century (TEA 21) money as
multi-year capital funding for implementation of the ICE Plan as part of the
Highway Upgrade Program. Other sources of funding will also be identified and
Included in a funding strategy for integration of the ICE Plan into the Highway
Upgrade Program.
   (F)   The City shall continue to work with the NMSHTD, the MRGCOG/UTPPB, and
other appropriate agencies to develop a maintenance program that identifies
costs, funding sources and commitments. This maintenance program will be
submitted to the Council and other parties for approval.
(Res. 46-2000, approved 5-10-00; Res. 2017-102, approved 11-13-17)
Cross-reference:
   Formerly codified as §1-13-5
ARTICLE 3: UTILITIES
Section
Electrical Service
   
4-3-1   Facility plan: electric service transmission and subtransmission
facilities (1995-2005)
Water and Sewer
   
4-3-10   Facilities plan for the engineering and construction of the South
Valley Sewers Phase I
   
4-3-11   Wastewater collection and treatment facilities plan
   
4-3-12   Master drainage plan
   
4-3-13   Wastewater pretreatment program
   
4-3-14   Facilities plan for reservoir siting
   
4-3-15   Short-term water conservation strategy
   
4-3-16   Long-term water conservation strategy
Solid Waste and Recycling
   
4-3-30   Formation of an association of cities to develop a regional program to
support local recycling efforts
   
4-3-31   Recycling educational program
   
4-3-32   Residential commingled curbside recycling program
Cross-reference:
   
Utilities; boards and commissions, see Ch. 2, Art. 3
   
Utilities; policies and procedures, see Ch. 3, Art. 5
ELECTRICAL SERVICE
§ 4-3-1 FACILITY PLAN: ELECTRIC SERVICE TRANSMISSION AND SUBTRANSMISSION
FACILITIES (1995-2005).
(Res. 38-1996, approved 3-28-96; Res. 2017-102, approved 11-13-17)
    Cross-reference:
   Facility Plan: Electric System Transmission and Generation (2010-2020), §1-
16-2
Editor's note: This Plan was repealed and replace by the Facility Plan:
Electric System Transmission and Generation (2010-2020).
WATER AND SEWER
§ 4-3-10 FACILITIES PLAN FOR THE ENGINEERING AND CONSTRUCTION OF THE SOUTH
VALLEY SEWERS PHASE I.
   (A)   The Facilities Plan for the South Valley Sewers Phase I, Priority I
Project and the Application for Step 2 of said Project is hereby approved for
submission to the New Mexico Environmental Improvement Agency and the United
States Environmental Protection Agency.
   (B)   The Facilities Plan for the aforesaid project is accepted and adopted
as an integral part of the Master Plan for the city in accordance with N.M.S.A.
§ 14-18-11, (1953 Comp.).
(Res. 84-1975, approved 5-20-75)
§ 4-3-11 WASTEWATER COLLECTION AND TREATMENT FACILITIES PLAN.
   (A)   Adoption.
      (1)   The Albuquerque Areawide Wastewater Collection and Treatment
Facilities Plan is adopted as an element of the Comprehensive Master Plan for
the city and county of Bernalillo for the purpose of providing guidance for the
provision of wastewater management facilities in accordance with the land use
policies as adopted in the Metropolitan Areas and Urban Center Plan, the Plan
for Major Open Space, the East Mountain Area Plan, and the adopted sector
development plans.
      (2)   The Albuquerque Areawide Wastewater Collection and Treatment
Facilities Plan is adopted for the purpose of serving as a guide to the city in
the preparation of the Capital Improvements Program and the annual capital
budget.
      (3)   The city shall review the Albuquerque Areawide Wastewater
Collection and Treatment Facilities Plan from time to time. The City Council
shall approve any amendment to the plan after review by the Environmental
Planning Commission.
   (B)   Amendments. The Wastewater Collection and Treatment Facilities Plan,
as adopted on May 9, 1977, shall be amended as follows:
      (1)   Incorporation of the text attached as Exhibit A to Resolution No.
35-1983.
      (2)   Add to the Table of Contents and to the Appendices “Appendix P -
City of Albuquerque Sludge Disposal Study” as prepared by Molzen Corbin Stanley
Consultants. Appendix P consists of three volumes with Volume I and II dated
June 1986 and Volume III revised and dated June 1987, attached to Resolution
No. 45-1988 and made a part hereof.
      (3)   On Page 36 and 37 delete Paragraph IV “Sludge Disposal” and insert
the following paragraph in lieu thereof: “IV Sludge Disposal - Common to
alternatives for treatment of liquid waste at Plant No. 2 is the requirement to
ultimately dispose of, or reuse the sludge in accordance with state and federal
regulations. Sludge disposal or reuse options are analyzed in detail in
Appendix P.”
      (4)   Delete Paragraph (c) on Page 37 as amended in 1982 and insert new
Paragraph (c) on Page 37 as follows: “(c) Description of Treatment
Alternatives. A complete description of treatment alternatives at Plant No. 2
is contained in Appendix N. Alternatives examine different methods of both
primary and secondary treatment as well as disinfection. Appendix N also
addresses Plant No. 2 sludge processing including sludge thickening and sludge
digestion. Alternatives for sludge dewatering, sludge disposal and sludge reuse
are examined in detail in Appendix P.”
      (5)   To Section IX on Page 52 “Sludge Handling Alternatives at Plant No.
2” add the following introductory paragraph prior to Paragraph ((a)): “All
needed sludge handling facilities for Plant No. 2 recommended in this
Facilities Plan as amended in 1982 have been constructed or are under design
and soon to be constructed as of 1987. A complete description of existing and
proposed sludge handling facilities is contained in Appendix P. Additional
sludge handling facilities at Plant No. 2 are not envisioned for the planning
period of the Facilities Plan. The city also completed construction of sludge
dewatering units in 1987. The city is currently phasing out the use of Sludge
Drying Beds as per the intent of the 1982 amendment to the Facilities Plan.”
      (6)   Delete Paragraph ((h)) on Page 57 as added in the 1982 amendment.
      (7)   Add to Section X “Summary” on Page 57 the following additional
paragraph: Appendix P summarizes the available alternatives for sludge disposal
and/or reuse. Appendix P contains the latest and best available information on
options and cost estimates and supersedes earlier information provided in Table
59 and Table 60.”
      (8)   Delete Paragraph 2, and insert new paragraph 2 on Page 182 as
follows: “2. Description of Proposed Complete Sewer System. The existing
interceptor system and proposed collectors and interceptors are shown on Maps A
through S. The city has prepared an extensive sewer line atlas indicating the
size and alignments of all existing sanitary sewer lines owned and maintained
by the city. This atlas is referenced, but no included as a component of the
Facility Plan. Treatment Plant No. 2 expansion will consist of expanding the
activated sludge plant, renovating the existing trickling filter facilities,
expanding digester capacity, expanding sludge thickening facilities, expanding
pumping facilities, improving existing digesters, expanding cogeneration
facilities and providing necessary support facilities such as laboratory,
maintenance buildings and administrative space and associated odor control
facilities. All of these facilities are as recommended in Appendix N which
amended the Facility Plan in 1982. The plant expansion also should include a
fully enclosed sludge centrifuge unit designed to dewater the sludge so as to
minimize odors and sludge quantities that must be disposed of. Sludge disposal
and sludge reuse will be conducted off of the plant site. As recommended by
Appendix P, the city will use a combination of dedicated sludge disposal and
sludge reuse at a new Soils Amendment Facility. Initial construction will be
for facilities to dispose of the sludge at a dedicated land disposal site. The
second phase of construction will include a pilot sludge composting facility
with the resulting end product marketed as a soil conditioner. The intent is to
gradually expand the composting operation, decreasing dependency on the
dedicated sludge disposal site.”
      (9)   Delete Paragraph d and insert a new Paragraph d on Page 183 as
follows: “d. General Location. The location of Treatment Plant No. 2 and its
discharge location are as shown on Figure 7. The sludge disposal/reuse facility
will be adjacent to the Double Eagle airport as shown in Appendix P:
specifically, the site shown on Page E-19, Volume M, the areas designated `site
to be acquired by Public Works Dept.' and `100 acre parcel traded to City Open
Space Program;' the area designated `100 acre parcel traded to Public Works
Dept.' is approved subject to the approval of the Chief Administrative Officer.
Composted sludge will be marketed for use in areas throughout the metropolitan
area.”
(Res. 72-1977, approved 5-9-77; Am. Res. 35-1983, approved 2-18-83; Am. Res.
45-1988, approved 3-17-88)
§ 4-3-12 MASTER DRAINAGE PLAN.
   (A)   The name of the documents which has been known as the “Albuquerque
Master Drainage Study, January 1981” and as the “Albuquerque Master Drainage
Plan Study” shall hereafter be known as the “Albuquerque Master Drainage Plan.”
This document is appended hereto.
   (B)   The Master Drainage Plan's drainage policy concepts, consisting of
“Study Assumptions” and “Operations and Maintenance” proposals, are accepted
and adopted for the area covered by this plan: the area between the Rio Grande
and Tram way Boulevard and between the Tijeras and Bear Canyon Arroyos. There
is no presumption that the same policy concepts apply to other areas.
   (C)   The Master Drainage Plan's storm drainage projects are adopted.
   (D)   Chance of the concepts of the Master Drainage Plan and major changes
of projects are amendments of the plan and must be approved by the Council.
Detailed design drawings and minor deviations in projects, such as exact
location, pipe system resizing, or pipe system realignments, are not amendments
of the plan and do not require approval of the City Council.
   (E)   The capital projects proposed in the Master Drainage Plan are subject
to the capital improvements programming process of the city; normally they are
to be provided in the priority established in the plan.
(Res. 63-1981, approved 4-1-81)
§ 4-3-13 WASTEWATER PRETREATMENT PROGRAM.
   The City Council hereby endorses and approves the wastewater pretreatment
program of the city as set forth in the Sewer Use and Wastewater Control
Ordinance.
(Res. 64-1985, approved 3-29-85)
§ 4-3-14 FACILITIES PLAN FOR RESERVOIR SITING.
   (A)   The Facilities Plan for Reservoir Siting attached to Resolution No.
34-1992 is hereby adopted, as amended by the “Plan Amendment Exhibit to R-7”
attached to Resolution No. 34-1992, both items being a part hereof.
   (B)   The city Departments of Public Works and Parks and Recreation are
requested to jointly develop a joint-use-policy amendment to this facilities
plan within the next 12 months.
(Res. 34-1992, approved 3-20-92)
§ 4-3-15 SHORT-TERM WATER CONSERVATION STRATEGY.
   The following Short-Term Water Conservation Program is adopted:
   (A)   A city employee should be named Conservation Officer by the end of
this fiscal year. The Conservation Officer shall oversee the water conservation
program of the city and shall initiate action on the following recommended
measures and ensure these actions are coordinated with the Public Works
Department's efforts to model and quantify the water resource. This effort
should address all aspects of conservation, should examine the costs and
benefits of recommended actions, should include input by affected agencies and
the public and should develop high, medium and low reduction scenarios. The
Conservation Officer shall ensure that all affected city departments,
particularly the Public Works Department, the Environmental Health Department,
the Parks and General Services Department and the Planning Department are
involved in the process of developing a water conservation strategy. The
Conservation Officer's duties shall be generally as set out in the attached
Task Force report. The Conservation Officer shall report to the Council on
progress in the conservation program every January and July.
   (B)   Within the next 30 months, develop the groundwater flow model in
cooperation with the U.S. Geological Survey, and interpret the model simulation
of groundwater quantity with regard for the need to define and implement water
conservation measures.
   (C)   Water rates shall be modified to encourage conservation. Rates are key
to a successful conservation program. The Conservation Officer and the Public
Works Department will jointly develop a contract for a conservation related
rate analysis by early 1993. At least one public meeting will be held. The
current Rate Committee proposal to lower the summer surcharge threshold rate
from 400% of the median winter average usage to 300% for residential and
institutional uses and 200% for commercial and industrial uses is supported.
   (D)   City landscaping requirements shall be altered to reduce water used
for irrigation on both public and private properties. The Planning Department
will identify all city landscaping requirements or guidelines which apply to
development proposals. The Parks and General Services Department and the Public
Works Department will identify all departmental policies and procedure for
landscaping public lands. The Conservation Officer will form a committee
involving the Planning Department, Parks and General Services Department,
Public Works Department and private sector landscaping interests by the Fall of
1992. This committee will examine these requirements and procedures and
recommend changes. The committee's recommendations will be developed by July of
1993. The Conservation Officer will ensure that other public agencies
responsible for landscaping public lands, such as the Albuquerque Public
Schools, are informed of the committee's activities and are allowed to provide
input. Non-city public agencies will be encouraged to adopt similar guidelines.
   (E)   Development proposals shall be examined to determine if appropriate
water saving design and techniques have been utilized. The Conservation Officer
will be added to the distribution list for cases before the Environmental
Planning Commission and will comment as appropriate on development proposals.
The Conservation Officer will also be available to the Development Review Board
to comment on proposals or to attend hearings upon request.
   (F)   Public education programs shall be instituted:
      (1)   Low water use landscaping shall be promoted. The Conservation
Officer will work with city staff, other affected public agencies and the
private sector to develop promotional information, seminars and workshops to
promote the use of low water use landscaping (not equivalent to “natural
landscaping”). Promotional materials will be available by early 1993 and
seminars and workshops will be scheduled by the middle of fiscal year 1993.
These activities will be coordinated with other agencies providing similar
services, such as the County Extension Office.
      (2)   A public awareness campaign shall be conducted. The Conservation
Officer will organize and oversee a program to inform and get comments from the
public. At least three public meetings will be organized: near the beginning of
the program (Fall of 1992), during development of the rate modification
proposals, and following development of recommended conservation strategies
(Fall of 1994). Other methods for information distribution, such as water bill
inserts, will also be utilized. This effort will be coordinated with the Office
of Neighborhood Services.
      (3)   Children shall be informed and taught about water conservation. The
Conservation Officer should work with the Albuquerque Public Schools to
determine when and how the conservation goals and program can be integrated
into school programs.
      (4)   City development boards and commissions shall be informed of the
changes in development policies and regulations. Boards and commissions which
address building, landscaping and planning issues will be informed of
conservation goals and policies, proposed changes in landscaping requirements,
proposed building and plumbing code changes and conservation strategy during
and after development of these proposals. This will be coordinated by the
Conservation Officer.
   (G)   City building and plumbing codes shall encourage water conservation.
The Planning Department should identify changes that should be made to the
plumbing and building codes to encourage conservation. These should coincide
with the probable changes to the Uniform Plumbing Code and adopted federal
legislation. These recommended changes will be submitted to the Conservation
Officer by June of 1993 to be incorporated into the policy changes recommended
in the conservation strategy. The Conservation Officer should obtain
information on other cities' retrofit programs to consider for incorporation in
the conservation strategy.
   (H)   Wasted water shall be reduced. The Conservation Officer will chair an
interdepartmental committee to evaluate the enforcement program in the Fall of
1993. If additional staff enforcement is needed, this will be included in the
fiscal year 1995 budget proposal. A similar committee will be organized to
develop methods to reduce parks water usage. The Conservation Officer will
ensure that the committee's recommendations are integrated with the remainder
of the conservation program/strategies. The Public Works Department will
continue its well metering and accounting of “lost” water, attempting to
minimize wasted and unaccounted-for water.
(Res. 49-1992, approved 5-12-92)
§ 4-3-16 LONG-TERM WATER CONSERVATION STRATEGY.
   (A)   Nothing in Resolution 69-2003 shall require or permit the use of the
City of Albuquerque's San Juan-Chama Project allocations for purposes other
than those specified in the City of Albuquerque's San Juan-Chama contract,
interstate compacts, the San Juan-Chama Project Act, and the policies of the
city's Water Resources Management Strategy.
   (B)   Water Conservation Task Force.
      (1)   A Water Conservation Task Force shall be established to study, hold
hearings, make recommendations, and otherwise carry out the provisions of this
resolution, and shall report to the City Council and Mayor no later than March
2004. The Task Force shall be comprised of a representative or delegate from
each of the following organizations and offices:
         (a)   City of Albuquerque Water Resources Customer Advisory Committee;
         (b)   City of Albuquerque/County of Bernalillo Ground Water Protection
Advisory Board;
         (c)   Albuquerque Metropolitan Parks Advisory Board;
         (d)   Albuquerque Public Schools Facilities, Planning and Construction
Division;
         (e)   Bernalillo County;
         (f)   Village of Los Ranchos;
         (g)   University of New Mexico Department of Economics;
         (h)   University of New Mexico Water Resources Program;
         (i)   University of New Mexico Community and Regional Planning
Program;
         (j)   The Executive Committee of the Middle Rio Grande Water Assembly;
         (k)   New Mexico Acequia Association;
         (l)   New Mexico Irrigation Association;
         (m)   American Society of Landscape Architects;
         (n)   Greater Albuquerque Chamber of Commerce or the National 16
Association of Industrial and Office Properties;
         (o)   Association of General Contractors or Homebuilders Association
of Central New Mexico;
         (p)   New Mexico Apartment Association;
         (q)   1,000 Friends of New Mexico;
         (r)   Xeriscape Council of New Mexico;
         (s)   Sustainable Futures Task Force;
         (t)   A Hydrologist Certified in Drought Management; and
         (u)   A professional river advocate from a non-profit public 25
advocacy organization.
      (2)   The Task Force shall be staffed by the Water Conservation Program
Officer of the Water Resources Management Program of the City Public Works
Department or his or her designate, the Parks Management Division of the Parks
and Recreation Department, the lead staff person for the Planned Growth
Strategy Management Committee, and the Performance Improvement Program in the
Office of Management and Budget in the Office of the Mayor.
   (C)   Establishing a New Water Conservation Goal. 
      (1)   The Water Conservation Task Force shall develop water conservation
measures to achieve an overall reduction of 40% as compared to the baseline
water usage established between 1987 and 1993. The Task Force shall evaluate
and recommend an appropriate time frame for reaching the new goal.
      (2)   Goal Measurement. The Water Conservation Task Force shall work with
the Water Conservation program Officer to recommend methods of measuring water
consumption.
   (D)   Equitable Distribution of Water Conservation Strategy. The Task Force
shall balance the water conservation savings required from all customer classes
including residential, commercial, institutional and industrial, proportional
to percentage of total use, such that the water conservation measures
requirements do not fall solely on the residential class.
   (E)   Water Budget. A water budget shall be developed by the Water
Conservation Task Force in accordance with the contractual obligations policies
and ordinances of the City of Albuquerque for the Water Service Area
(Management Area) of the City of Albuquerque's water and wastewater utility.
The water budget shall be a summary showing the balance in the hydrologic
system between water supplies (inflow) to the system and water loss (outflow)
from the system. The water budget shall be a reporting, planning, and
management tool for the water resource system. Calculation of net gain or loss
of water shall be made to indicate the sustainability of water use. The budget
shall include recognition that the Management Area is one in a hierarchy of
watershed management units that includes the Middle Rio Grande Basin. The water
budget shall incorporate, but not be limited to, the following elements:
      (1)   Water supplies shall include, among others, the San Juan Chama
allocation, the native Rio Grande water rights, reused effluent, and the
aquifer.
      (2)   Water uses shall include, among others, current urban users with
subcategories including (at a minimum) residential, industrial, golf courses,
public facilities (other than golf courses), institutional and commercial
users; future urban users within the same categories; and aquifer recharge.
Water consumption from different sources, e.g., private wells, shall be
separately quantified.
      (3)   The management goals of the water budget to be achieved include,
but are not limited to, the following goals:
         (a)   "Safe yield" in which groundwater use does not exceed recharge,
         (b)   Sustainability in which water supplies are balanced with water
consumption and does not involve "mining" the aquifer,
         (c)   Restoration of water levels in the aquifer,
         (d)   Protection of valued environmental resources of the region,
including both the shallow and deep aquifer; the bosque and valley; the Rio
Grande stream system; and the recreational, historical and cultural values;
provided, however, that none of the City's San Juan-Chama project allocation
shall be dedicated to accomplishing that goal,
         (e)   Preservation of water quality,
         (f)   Design and maintenance of public spaces that conserve water
while maintaining and increasing public usefulness,
         (g)   Achievement of the community's policy objectives such as
affordable housing, economic development and urban growth,
         (h)   To the extent possible, consistency with the regional budget and
plan, and
         (i)   Coordination with adjacent jurisdictions.
      The Water Conservation Task Force shall recommend a schedule for
achieving the above goals. The work program for goals C.1 and C.2 shall begin
when the San Juan-Chama surface water facility becomes operational and shall
continue indefinitely into the future.
      (4)   The water budget should be a tool in which several water management
scenarios are developed, tested, and offered for policy adoption. Periodic
review and modification of the budget shall be scheduled.
      (5)   The Water Conservation Task Force will recognize that water
supplies are highly variable, and shall prepare budget scenarios that reflect
the reality of drought conditions.
   (F)   Review and prepare recommendations for amending the Subdivision and
Development Process Manual Standards:
      (1)   The Mayor shall review land use regulatory methods and by January,
2004, recommend methods to connect applications for new development with the
development's impact on available water supplies, integrating water
conservation into urban development standards in the Subdivision Ordinance and
the Development Process Manual, and other land use ordinances, policies,
regulations and current practices. The review should include, but not be
limited to, how to include maximizing permeability, minimizing directly
connected impervious areas, integration of open space, narrowing streets, and
integrating roadside swales. The review and subsequent recommendations will
also include how to reduce mass grading in new developments to protect existing
vegetation, maintain the native xeric landscape, and reduce watering to
reestablish new landscape elements.
      (2)   The water conservation strategy shall include a review of new
development applications regarding the impact of the development on available
water supplies based upon a rating system to be developed that prioritizes
development applications consistent with the City's goals and policies set
forth in the City/County Comprehensive Plan and the Planned Growth Strategy.
The Task Force will use the information obtained in the review to develop a
recommended rating system by June, 2004.
   (G)   Evaluate and prepare recommendations for updating the Water
Conservation Program. The Water Conservation Task Force shall evaluate the
Long-Range Water Conservation Strategy and implementation measures.
Recommendations shall be provided to guide the enhancement of the water
conservation program. The evaluation shall address but not be limited to the
following measures:
      (1)   Establishment of "per-customer" water budgets for new and existing
consumers that vary by factors such as type of use, parcel size, number of
fixtures, household size, and month of year. Modification of the summer
surcharge system should be considered based on per-customer standards.
      (2)   Design regulations, planting restrictions, and irrigation system
standards (such as contained in Sections 6-1-1-8, 6-1-1-9, and 6-1-1-10 ROA
1994) for existing and new development, parks, golf courses, and related uses.
Special attention shall be given to soil preparation and design standards for
the use of high water use turf in parks, playgrounds, and golf courses as
allowed in the Water Conservation Landscaping and Water Waste Ordinance.
      (3)   Establishment of a water conservation program for private wells as
set forth in the Water Conservation Landscaping and Water Waste Ordinance and
authorized by Chapter 3-53-1 of the New Mexico State Statutes. The evaluation
and subsequent recommendations, will include, but not be limited to:
consideration of a permit system for new and existing private wells, metering
for new and existing private wells, exemptions from the private well program
based on a maximum water use standard, customer and system-wide reporting,
rates and fees, summer use surcharges and water rights, coordination with the
County of Bernalillo, the State of New Mexico and other public and private
agencies and entities.
      (4)   Enhanced water conservation approaches including, but not limited
to, the following possible approaches:
         (a)   Modifying the current incentive system to encourage retrofitting
fixtures to low consumption devices, xeriscape landscaping, and other water
conservation approaches, and encouraging more recycling options;
         (b)   Creating financial incentives in the rate structure for water
conservation;
         (c)   Developing a "drought conditions" conservation program;
         (d)   Reviewing the current Water Conservation Strategy policy that
encourages use of the shallow aquifer for non-potable purposes;
         (e)   Reviewing the effectiveness of the current water conservation
program related to private wells tapping the deep aquifer;
         (f)   Promoting low consumption fixtures upon the resale of homes and
businesses;
         (g)   Encouraging outdoor pool covers;
         (h)   Minimizing the percentage of parcel area to be landscaped with
turf;
         (i)   Setting standards for evaporative cooler efficiency such as
minimizing continuous "bleed-off" lines and "dump trays";
         (j)   Residential gray water systems;
         (k)   Rainwater and rooftop harvesting;
         (l)   Investigating and reporting upon the suitability and
effectiveness of on-demand water heaters for new development by June 1, 2003;
         (m)   Investigating the possibility of limiting irrigation on an
identified day or days of the week;
         (n)   Reviewing the possibility of establishing water conservation
design standards for ponds and fountains exceeding 100 square feet;
         (o)   Phasing out the use of water-cooled ice machines and identifying
an implementation period;
         (p)   Commercial carwash recycling standards;
         (r)   Requiring multiple-cycling of water in cooling towers and
systems and identifying an implementation period;
         (s)   Submetering options, including requiring and/or providing
incentives for irrigation-only meters for new and existing water users;
         (t)   Phasing out multiple head showers in new development and
requiring and/or providing incentives to "swap out" such fixtures upon property
resale; and
         (u)   Reviewing whether to strengthen existing regulations for timely
repair of water leaks.
      (5)   Utility Rate Structures Evaluation and Report. The Water
Conservation Task Force, in collaboration with the Public Works Department and
Department of Finance and Administration, shall evaluate the existing water
rate structure in comparison with other regional and southwestern
municipalities to determine if alternative rate structures will promote water
conservation. The evaluation and report shall be consistent with the current
billing evaluation study, but shall incorporate the potential for water
conservation incentives for low water users and alternative structures tiered
structure with pricing incentives and penalties for high water users. The
evaluation should include a provision to utilize a portion of the water
conservation surcharges to fund incentives and rebates to promote further water
conservation.
      (6)   Unaccounted for Water (UAW). The Mayor shall develop, and the Water
Conservation Task Force shall review and make recommendations on, a UAW
reduction plan by March 2004 to reduce unaccounted for water to less than 10%
of overall water production. Effective upon adoption by the City Council, the
Public Works Department shall implement the UAW reduction plan within five
years. The UAW reduction plan shall include, at a minimum, reduction of well
wash water, leak detection, meter repairs and maintenance, and other measures
as necessary to achieve the goal.
      (7)   Water Conservation Plan for Municipal Services. The Mayor shall
develop and the Water Conservation Task Force shall review and make
recommendations on a Water Conservation Plan for Municipal Services by March
2004. The Water Conservation Plan for Municipal Services shall be consistent
with the water conservation goal in Section (B) with the exception of the Parks
and Recreation Department. For a period of ten years beginning January 2005,
the Parks Management Division shall provide a plan to maintain the 2004 level
of water usage as new parks are added by reducing the amount of turf at
existing facilities or through irrigation efficiencies. The plan shall include
the capital funding for renovation to remove existing turf. In addition, the
Parks Management Division shall develop design standards for soil preparation,
irrigation systems, weather monitoring and central control systems for all new
parks and golf courses.
      (8)   Irrigation Management and Efficiency. The Mayor shall develop a
licensing and certification program for landscape architects, landscape
designers and maintenance companies, and other identified professionals in the
landscape industry. The program shall be developed by working with the
landscape industry and the Water Conservation Task Force and must be
implemented by January 2005. The city in conjunction with local landscape
professionals, plant suppliers and nurseries shall provide training and
certification courses and materials to efficiently manage outdoor watering. As
part of the training, licensing and certification program, the city shall
provide weather measuring devices capable of monitoring relative humidity,
temperature, and other parameters necessary to monitor and adapt to local
weather conditions. The weather measuring devices shall be connected to or
combined with irrigation timers to reduce water waste and match plant needs
with irrigation application rates. The program shall be developed in a manner
that promotes xeriscaping and water efficient landscaping and fosters a healthy
native landscaping industry. The Task Force shall also address water efficiency
measures relating to agricultural uses.
   (H)   New Sources of Water. The Water Conservation Task Force shall make
recommendations to Council and the Administration identifying strategies to
acquire or pursue new resources of water.
   (I)   Cooperation with other Jurisdictions. The water conservation program
for the Management Area served by the city's water and wastewater utility
recognizes that the area is within the Middle Rio Grande Basin. The Water
Conservation Task Force shall address the following:
      (1)   Water consumption rates and conservation programs of other
utilities within the Middle Rio Grande Basin shall be reviewed and evaluated;
      (2)   New Mexico State restrictions on gray water reuse shall be reviewed
and evaluated. Suggestions for modifying these restrictions, if appropriate,
shall be developed and communicated for inclusion in the lobbying programs of
the City of Albuquerque;
      (3)   Alternatives to the surface storage of Middle Rio Grande Basin
water that reduce evaporation loss shall be identified and evaluated;
      (4)   Adoption and implementation of the Middle Rio Grande Regional Water
Plan, once completed; and
      (5)   Other intergovernmental coordination issues deemed by the task
force to be relevant to water policy.
   (J)   Consistent with the Ground Water Protection Policy and Action Plan,
the city and Bernalillo County should cooperate to preserve and protect the
aquifer Regional Cooperation. Consistent with the Ground Water Protection
Policy and Action Plan, the city and Bernalillo County should cooperate to
preserve and protect the aquifer. The Mayor shall work cooperatively with
Bernalillo County to develop a comprehensive water conservation program for the
unincorporated areas of the county. The water conservation plan may provide for
enforcement of water waste, private well metering and restrictions, well
construction standards, and other water conservation measures adopted by the
Bernalillo County Commission.
   (K)   Review of the Water Conservation Program Administration and recommend
improvements. The Water Conservation Task Force shall review and recommend
improvements to the performance of the City water conservation program since
the adoption of the Long Range Water Conservation Strategy and Water
Conservation Landscaping and Water Waste Ordinance in 1995. The review shall
include, but not be limited to, the strengths and weaknesses of the program's
implementation and administration, possible causes for the weaknesses, and
recommendations to improve the administration of the program. The Task Force
shall consider whether the water conservation program should be housed in a
different department or agency to ensure independent operation and whether a
"population based standard" should be created for enforcement staff levels.
   (L)   Report of the Water Conservation Task Force. A report summarizing the
review and recommendations stipulated in Sections (C), (E), (G), (I) and (K) of
this resolution shall be communicated to the Council by Wednesday, March 31,
2004. The report regarding the recommended rating system developed pursuant to
Section (F)(2) herein shall be communicated to the Council by June 30, 2004.
   (M)   Financial Support for Water Conservation Task Force. Funding to
support the work of the Water Conservation Task Force shall be allocated by the
Council.
(Res. 40-1995, approved 3-24-95; Am. Res. 89-1996, approved 8-23-96; Am. Res.
31-1998, approved 3-5-98; Am. Res. 3-2001, approved 1-10-2001; Am. Res. 32-
2003, approved 5-25-03; Am. Res. 69-2003, 6-19-03)
SOLID WASTE AND RECYCLING
§ 4-3-30 FORMATION OF AN ASSOCIATION OF CITIES TO DEVELOP A REGIONAL PROGRAM TO
SUPPORT LOCAL RECYCLING EFFORTS.
   (A)   The city shall join in the formation of a voluntary association of
municipalities which shall have as its primary focus the accomplishment of the
above enumerated objectives with the ultimate goal of developing a broad base
of private sector entities throughout the Southwestern United States to serve
as major purchasers of recycled materials generated by member cities of the
association.
   (B)   The city shall furnish a financial stipend to the association in an
amount equal to one cent per capita population of the city as established by
the most recent federal decennial census. Such stipend shall be provided to the
association as soon as possible after the effective date of the compact, but in
any event not later than July 1, 1991.
   (C)   As a member of the association, the city shall be entitled to utilize
the resources of the association to promote the development of a recycling
program tailored to the specific needs of the city while at the same time
providing recyclable materials which meet the standards set by the association
for purchase by regional recycling entities. The association shall provide the
member cities with brokering, negotiating, information sharing and other
services in accordance with the association's identified objectives.
   (D)   The Mayor shall be authorized to execute the compact on behalf of the
city for the formation of the Southwestern Municipal Recycling Association.
(Res. 41-1991, approved 4-2-91)
§ 4-3-31 RECYCLING EDUCATIONAL PROGRAM.
   (A)   The Council hereby directs the Department to prepare a recycling
education program that can be used in the schools, civic groups, neighborhood
organizations, local businesses, and others. The program will educate the
public about a recycling drop-off program, a Materials Recovery Facility,
curbside, commercial and other types of recycling programs. The education
program shall include a strong source reduction component to encourage
residents and local businesses to reduce both the amount and toxicity of waste.
   (B)   The Council directs that the expanded recycling education program
begin by no later than March 1, 1991. That a school recycling curriculum,
business information and education program, and other educational programs be
planned and developed between March 1 through June 30, 1991. Finally, that the
expanded education program be provided to schools, local businesses, civic
groups, churches, neighborhood organizations and others starting on July 1,
1991 and thereafter continue as an ongoing activity. This education program
shall include a strong, pro-active effort to promote the recycling program to
the community as a whole.
   (C)   The Council approves the Expanded Education Program and appropriates
funds to develop and implement the Program. $100,000 are appropriated from the
Refuse Disposal Operating Fund (651) Fund Balance to hire two Educational
Specialists, purchase two automobiles and provide operating cost support for
the Expanded Recycling Education Program.
(Res. 36-1991, approved 3-13-91)
Cross-reference:
    
Office of Recycling, see § 2-3-10
   
Employee Recycling Committee, see § 2-3-11
   
Recycling and long-term solid waste planning, see § 3-5-60
   
Solid waste management, recycling, and waste reduction plan,see § 3-5-61
   
Residential curbside recycling program, see § 4-3-32
§ 4-3-32 RESIDENTIAL COMMINGLED CURBSIDE RECYCLING PROGRAM.
   (A)   The Solid Waste Management Department shall implement a weekly
commingled curbside recycling program for all residents of the city.
   (B)   The collection of commingled recyclables shall be additionally tested
in conjunction with the implementation of a 5,000 home fully-automated
collection pilot program.
   (C)   The curbside recycling program shall collect newspaper, PET and HDPE
plastic, tinned food cans, and aluminum beverage cans in plastic bags, and that
each household shall be issued 26 colored plastic bags for recyclables. Also,
cardboard shall be placed next to the bag for collection.
   (D)   Due to the difficulty of marketing, the hazards of manual separation,
and the contamination of other materials, glass shall not be collected for
recycling at this time.
   (E)   All neighborhoods are encouraged to participate in the curbside
collection program. If appropriate and as needed, weekend recycling “pick-up”
programs shall be available for neighborhood use.
   (F)   The drop-off program, which was approved as part of the fiscal year
1992 budget, shall not be implemented because it will provide duplicative
residential recycling services and that the operating funding and staff
designated for this program shall be applied to the curbside recycling program.
   (G)   The curbside recycling program shall be implemented based upon the
availability of processing capability and markets for the materials collected.
   (H)   A residential rate increase of approximately $0.64 per household per
month will be submitted for Administration and Council approval during the
fiscal year 1993 Solid Waste Management Department Operating and Capital Budget
requests to provide ongoing funding for the program.
(Res. 11-1992, approved 1-21-92; Am. Res. 30-1993, approved 3-23-93)
Cross-reference:
    
Office of Recycling, see § 2-3-10
   
Employee Recycling Committee, see § 2-3-11
   
Recycling and long-term solid waste planning, see § 3-5-60
   
Solid waste management, recycling, and waste reduction plan,see § 3-5-61
   
Recycling educational program, see § 4-3-31
ARTICLE 4: PARKS AND RECREATION
Section
   
4-4-1   Cooperative Gardening Program for senior citizens and recipients of
public assistance
   
4-4-2   Rio Grande Zoological Park master plan
   
4-4-3   Rio Grande Valley State Park Management Plan
   
4-4-4   Project Treestart
   
4-4-5   Billy Moya Sr. and Eddie Moya Room at Los Altos Golf Course
Cross-reference:
   
Parks and Recreation; policies and procedures, see Ch. 3, Art. 6
   
City Parks and Facilities, see Ch. 6, Art. 5
§ 4-4-1 COOPERATIVE GARDENING PROGRAM FOR SENIOR CITIZENS AND RECIPIENTS OF
PUBLIC ASSISTANCE.
   (A)   The Department of Parks and Recreation is hereby requested to provide
a list of available sites, which might be used by the senior citizens and
recipients of public assistance of this community for cooperative gardens, and
to provide the staff time necessary to coordinate this program. The department
is encouraged to use citizens input and participation in carrying out this
project. The Department of Parks and Recreation will also endeavor to obtain
sludge from the sewage treatment facility for fertilizer and other items
necessary for the success of this program, such as seeds.
   (B)   The city shall provide water at no cost to said gardens but shall keep
a record of cost of water and all hookups so that record of expense to the City
be accurately recorded.
   (C)   The Council goes on record as dedicating itself to programs to help
the senior citizens, handicapped, and the poor.
(Res. 41-1975, approved 3-14-75)
§ 4-4-2 RIO GRANDE ZOOLOGICAL PARK MASTER PLAN.
(Res. 68-1980, approved 3-25-80; Res. 2017-102, approved 11-13-17)
Cross-reference:
   Moved to §
1-17-2
§ 4-4-3 RIO GRANDE VALLEY STATE PARK MANAGEMENT PLAN.
(Res. 37-1986, approved 3-17-86; Am. Res. 97-1995, approved 7-21-95; Res. 2017-
102, approved 11-13-17)
Cross-reference:
   Moved to §
1-17-25
§ 4-4-4 PROJECT TREESTART.
   (A)   The “Project Treestart” Advisory Committee shall be formed to plan and
maintain a related community awareness campaign to extend for the length of the
ten year program to provide information about the importance and relevance of
city-wide tree planting, and that the responsibilities and duties of the
Committee shall include, but not be limited to the following:
      (1)   Identification of acceptable tree types, i.e., non-allergy causing
trees and shrubs, trees and plant-life requiring minimal maintenance and water,
and low cost trees and landscaping materials.
      (2)   Identification of exact locations to plant trees, shrubs and
indigenous plant-life within the city limits, i.e., acceptable medians,
designated neighborhoods, Albuquerque Public Schools, freeways, to be
coordinated with other public and private landscaping efforts with the city.
      (3)   Identification of the availability of resources for the funding of
“Project Treestart,” to include individual, civic and corporate contributions,
as well as contacts for the low-cost purchase of trees, shrubs and other
landscaping materials.
      (4)   Development of marketing and fundraising strategies for the purpose
of keeping “Project Treestart” a unique and vital program within the local
community, to include work with the local media and the city's Public
Information Office, assisting in the creation of appropriate slogans, messages
and information to be disseminated in PSA's and related efforts.
      (5)   Develop public and private partnerships to secure any necessary
funds to cover the cost of planting trees and shrubs.
      (6)   Identification, on a yearly basis, of the individual and group
participants to assist in the planting of the trees, shrubs and indigenous
plant-life within the designated locations outlined by the Advisory Committee.
   (B)   The Mayor shall appoint, with the advice and consent of the City
Council, a “Project Treestart” Advisory Committee consisting of nine members,
inclusive of a committee coordinator from the Parks and Recreation Department,
appointed for a minimum term of two years. The Committee shall include a
representative from the following organizations and city agencies: the
University of New Mexico, Albuquerque Public Schools, Office of Neighborhood
Services, Environmental Health, the Sierra Club, the Albuquerque Chamber of
Commerce, the American Society of Landscape Architects and the New Mexico
Association of Nursery Industries.
   (C)   The “Project Treestart” Advisory Committee shall make regular, annual
written reports to the Mayor and the City Council regarding the progress on
tree and shrub planting efforts within the city and its organized fundraising
activities.
(Res. 179-1989, approved 10-26-89)
§ 4-4-5 BILLY MOYA SR. AND EDDIE MOYA ROOM AT LOS ALTOS GOLF COURSE.
   The banquet/meeting room at the City of Albuquerque's Los Altos Golf Course
is herby named the Billy Moya Sr. and Eddie Moya Room.
(R-2006-013, approved 2-16-06)
ARTICLE 5: SOCIAL SERVICES
Section
   
4-5-1   Public library comprehensive plan
   
4-5-2   Human Needs Strategic Plan
   
4-5-3   Voter Assistance Program
   
4-5-4   Enhance 911 Fund
   
4-5-5   Sexual Assault Nurse Examiner (SANE) Program
   
4-5-6   Office of Veteran's Affairs
Cross-reference:
   
Public Health and Welfare; boards and commissions, see Ch. 2, Art. 4
   
Public Health; policies and procedures, see Ch. 3, Art. 10
§ 4-5-1 PUBLIC LIBRARY COMPREHENSIVE PLAN.
   The Albuquerque Public Library Comprehensive Plan is hereby adopted by
reference and is adopted as part of the city's guide for library development.
(Res. 117-1980, approved 5-22-80)
§ 4-5-2 HUMAN NEEDS STRATEGIC PLAN.
   (A)   The Human Needs Strategic Plan, attached as Exhibit A of Resolution
No. 87-1993, is hereby adopted as the long-term plan for human services as
required under of the City of Albuquerque Revised Ordinances.
   (B)   The Mayor shall take such steps as are necessary and feasible to meet
the goals established by this plan.
   (C)   Adoption of this plan shall imply no obligation on the part of the
city to provide appropriations to carry out activities called for under the
Plan. However, any requests for appropriations for human services activities
presented to the Council must meet at least one of the priorities established
in the Plan or be establishing new goals to be incorporated into the Plan.
   (D)   The Department of Community Services shall be the lead agency in city
government responsible for the implementation of the Plan. Where the Department
does not have administrative authority over certain activities, it shall be
responsible to review and coordinate with other city departments relative to
the Plan.
   (E)   The Department of Community Services shall report to the Council
biennially on the implementation of the Plan.
(Res. 87-1993, approved 6-25-93)
§ 4-5-3 VOTER ASSISTANCE PROGRAM.
   (A)   There is hereby established a Voter Assistance Program which shall be
administered by the City Clerk. The responsibilities of the office of the City
Clerk shall include: the planning and coordination of employee training and the
distribution of voter registration affidavits to appropriate employees;
overseeing the amendment of all intake forms as specified in division (E);
developing and coordinating a system to insure that completed voter
registration affidavits are submitted to the Bernalillo County Clerk; preparing
a regular evaluation and progress report on the Voter Assistance Program
including the number of new voter registered.
   (B)   City agencies which regularly come into face-to-face contact with the
public, including, but not limited to the Library Department, the Parks and
Recreation Department, the Personnel Services Department, the Public Works
Department, the Transit/Parking Department, and the Human Services Department,
shall be considered for inclusion in the Voter Assistance Program. The City
Clerk shall specify which city agencies will participate in the Voter
Assistance Program and how the program will operate within each of the
agencies. The City Clerk shall explore the possibility of including agencies
contracted to provide public services by the city Human Services Department in
the Voter Assistance Program.
   (C)   During the hours and at the locations which the agencies are open to
the public, specified employees of these agencies shall, as a part of their
regular duties, assist persons in registering to vote by:
      (1)   Routinely asking persons using the agency if they want to register
to vote;
      (2)   Providing those persons who want to register with voter
registration affidavits;
      (3)   Assisting persons in completing voter registration affidavits and
registering them to vote;
      (4)   Collecting completed affidavits and insuring their conveyance to
the Bernalillo County Clerk's Office.
   (D)   Agency employees who are qualified electors and who participate in the
Voter Assistance Program shall receive training from the Bernalillo County
Clerk to be certified as Deputy Registration Officers and shall be certified as
Deputy Registration Officers.
   (E)   All routine intake, application, and registration forms used by
participating agencies shall be amended to include the following questions:
      (1)   Are you registered to vote where you now live?
               Yes          No       .
      (2)   Would you like to register to vote?
               Yes          No       .
   (F)   All agency employees shall maintain strict neutrality with respect to
a person's political party affiliation. During all phases of the Voter
Assistance Program, agency employees shall make it clear whenever necessary
that the receipt of services does not depend in any way on whether a person is
registered to vote or whether and how the person answers the questions in
division (E).
   (G)   The City Clerk shall explore with the city Public Works Department the
possibility of incorporating materials and advertisements in regular utility
bills for the Voter Assistance Program, including appraising citizens of the
many voter registration locations available.
   (H)   The City Clerk shall work with Bernalillo County officials to
incorporate agencies into the Voter Assistance Program. Furthermore, the City
Clerk shall explore joint voter registration programs with other private,
public, and non-profit organizations such as the Albuquerque Public Schools,
the University of New Mexico, and the League of Women Voters.
   (I)   City officials shall work with officials of the state of New Mexico to
facilitate voter registration. These activities shall include, but not be
limited to:
      (1)   Investigation of the following techniques to increase voter
registration: mail-in registration, “motor” registration at the Motor Vehicle
Division of the Taxation and Revenue Department, and the expansion of the
city's Voter Assistance Program — as specified in divisions (C), (D), and (E) —
to state agencies which come into face-to-face contact with the public.
      (2)   Exploration of the feasibility of “same day” registration and
voting with the proper identification.
      (3)   Identification of administrative and legal barriers to voter
registration and methods for eliminating them.
(Res. 50-1989, approved 4-14-89)
§ 4-5-4 ENHANCE 911 FUND.
   (A)   The City Council finds that participation in the “Enhance 911 Fund”
and implementation of an enhanced 911 system is in the best interest of the
citizens of the city and therefore the city elects to participate in the
“Enhance 911 Fund.”
   (B)   The boundaries of the enhanced 911 service area shall be the
boundaries of the city as shown on the map attached to Resolution No. 195-1989.
   (C)   The estimated cost of purchasing, installing and maintaining the
equipment for one year for the city is $575,000.
   (D)   The proposed schedule for the purchase and installation of the
equipment is shown on the attached schedule.
(Res. 195-1989, approved 11-27-89)
§ 4-5-5 SEXUAL ASSAULT NURSE EXAMINER (SANE) PROGRAM.
   (A)   The city and SANE jointly develop a SANE Program and coordinate the
certification and training of an appropriate number of registered nurses to
work in this program.
      (1)   Funding for the program shall be appropriated to the Albuquerque
Police Department Criminal Investigation Division, and these funds shall be
used, in whole or in part, to hire a Coordinator for the SANE program.
      (2)   The SANE Board of Directors shall hire a Coordinator for the SANE
program who shall be accountable to the SANE Board of Directors.
   (B)   The following shall be the primary goal of Albuquerque's SANE Program
for local sexual assault victims:
      (1)   To minimize the trauma of the forensic exam by initially having
twenty highly trained nurse examiners conduct the examination with the
assistance of Rape Crisis representatives, a physician director and various
hospital staffs.
      (2)   To reduce the waiting time for the emergency evaluation and
forensic evidence collection phases of care, to increase continuity of
treatment, reduce fragmentation of care which victims currently experience.
      (3)   To ensure that appropriate follow-up care for the victim is
coordinated and that clinical treatment is standardized through use of clinical
pathways.
      (4)   To increase the number of victims who consent to the forensic exam,
improve the quality of the forensic evidence collected, and improve the quality
of clinical courtroom testimony to increase conviction rates, while at the same
time giving the victim the choice about whether to report the crime to the
Albuquerque Police Department or the Bernalillo County Sheriff's Office.
      (5)   To provide crime prevention and a safer community by means of
higher conviction/plea offer rates in order to get repeat violent offenders off
our streets.
      (6)   Provide primary crime prevention through public education utilizing
the community services collaboration.
   (C)   The initial SANE training will consist of a core group of registered
nurses and a Nurse Coordinator involving a two-part program composed of
classroom instruction and applied clinical experience with supervised forensic
sexual assault exams and case management.
   (D)   The state of New Mexico currently provides funding for sexual assault
nurse examinations in the approximate amount of $140,000 per year; that
tentative financial commitments have also been received from local hospitals
and other interested groups which commitments are expected to provide a
substantial amount of funding for this program. Outside funding combined with
city funds will be sufficient to implement the program.
   (E)   All avenues of additional funding, including grant funds, will be
explored for future funding needs of this program.
   (F)   Although time is of essence in implementing an Albuquerque SANE
Program, sufficient time is needed for collaboration between all interested
organizations and completion of the appropriate nurse certification and
training. All efforts to begin this program at the earliest possible date shall
be pursued.
(Res. 49-1996, approved 4-30-96)
§ 4-5-6 OFFICE OF VETERAN'S AFFAIRS
   (A)   That the administration, using volunteers and existing resources,
create an Office of Veteran’s affairs for the purpose of assisting veterans of
the US Armed Forces through advocacy and referrals to ensure they and their
families are not denied access to entitlements promised to them by our nation.
   (B)   That within 90 days of enactment hereof the Veterans Liaison post on
the city’s website a list of services available to veterans and resources for
transition assistance for veterans returning from combat, including housing,
education, health care, employment, mental health, mentoring and networking.
   (C)   That the administration develop a comprehensive resource booklet for
addressing the needs of returning vets, including housing, PTSD treatment,
brain injury treatment, counseling, job placement and retraining.
   (D)   That the administration foster collaboration with community partners
and veteran organizations to ensure returning veterans and their families have
the tools necessary to access available federal, state, city, county, nonprofit
and faith based resources.
   (E)   That the Administration report to the Council within six months
regarding progress on the above and on the status of housing, counseling and
job placement for returning veterans.
(R-2009-165, effective 11-19-09)
ARTICLE 6: COMMUNITY IMPROVEMENT
Section
   
4-6-1   Program of volunteer services to animals
   
4-6-2   Downtown beautification
   
4-6-3   Woodburning education plan
   
4-6-4   Implementation plan for the Performing Arts Center
   
4-6-5   Graffiti removal
   
4-6-6   Cultural plan
   
4-6-7   Economic development program
   
4-6-8   Community identity program
   
4-6-9   [Repealed]
   
4-6-10   Music of New Mexico project
   
4-6-11   Alternative pilot suspension program
   
4-6-12   Automated victim notification service and inmate information line
   
4-6-13   Use of cable television channel 30 to inform voters as to municipal
elections
   
4-6-14   City's internet presence; home page development
   
4-6-15   Sale of alcoholic beverages through drive-up windows; abatement
   
4-6-16   Drought management plan
   
4-6-17   Workforce Housing Opportunity Act
§ 4-6-1 PROGRAM OF VOLUNTEER SERVICES TO ANIMALS.
   (A)   A program of volunteer services to animals is hereby established. The
Mayor or his designated representative and the Animal Control Citizens Advisory
Committee shall cause such a program to be organized. Existing animal humane
organizations shall be consulted and involved in the program. The volunteer
services to animals shall be an independent voluntary auxiliary to the City
Animal Control Program, established under its own by-laws with an appropriate
name chosen by the founders.
   (B)   The purpose of the volunteer services to animals program is to
increase the effectiveness of the City Animal Control Program and to provide a
mechanism for volunteers to contribute to the accomplishment of the Animal
Control Program's objectives. The volunteer services to animals program shall
include fund raising, humane education, promotion of spaying and neutering of
animals, location of humane homes for impounded animals in lieu of destruction,
recruitment of all new members, and other services which further the objectives
of the Animal Control Program and serve the citizens of Albuquerque.
(Res. 18-1978, approved 1-24-78)
§ 4-6-2 DOWNTOWN BEAUTIFICATION.
   (A)   The report on Albuquerque Downtown Beautification, Zuchelli Hunter and
Associates, Inc. as amended by a report prepared by the Downtown Beautification
Task Force is approved for adoption.
   (B)   Tax increment funds generated from adjacent private development shall
be used to finance the first phase of downtown beautification improvements to
Fourth Street between Central and Tijeras Avenues.
   (C)   Programming information contained within the Downtown Beautification
Task Force report shall be used as a guide to design development for the Fourth
Street pedestrianway.
(Res. 30-1982, approved 3-1-82)
§ 4-6-3 WOODBURNING EDUCATION PLAN.
   (A)   The Woodburning Education Plan, attached to Resolution No. 36-1988 is
hereby adopted.
   (B)   The city staff shall coordinate the implementation of the plan.
   (C)   Community businesses, organizations and public agencies are encouraged
to assist with the education program by working with city staff to promote
proper woodburning techniques and the use of energy-efficient woodburning
equipment.
(Res. 36-1988, approved 3-17-88)
§ 4-6-4 IMPLEMENTATION PLAN FOR THE PERFORMING ARTS CENTER.
   (A)   Given the current and projected economic trends, a prudent strategy is
necessary to provide resources for both capital and operations within the
current structure of the ¼ Cent Quality of Life Fund.
   (B)   The Center's “program” shall be comprised of a broad mix of different
types of performances and educational programs reflecting the wide variety of
interests and the multi-cultural makeup of Albuquerque and the state of New
Mexico. Potential local users include Youth and Family Concerts, Zarzuelas and
Ethnic Dance Festival, Contemporary/Modern Dance Companies, the New Mexico
Symphony Orchestra, the Civic Light Opera, Barber Shop Singing Groups, Public
School Bands and other musical events.
   (C)   An “Arts District” approach affords the best opportunity to implement
programming objectives and the City Council adopted policy goal for a
“business, arts and entertainment district” as part of the revitalization
strategy for the Central Business District.
   (D)   The Center shall be composed of:
      (1)   One 1,500 seat theater with appropriate public and support areas.
      (2)   This facility shall be located on the designated site North of
Civic Plaza.
      (3)   The capital budget is not to exceed $30,500,000 of city funds.
      (4)   The capital budget shall also include $2,000,000 in matching funds
from the state of New Mexico.
   (E)   An operating endowment, to help offset the operating costs associated
with the projects in the Quality of Life Program, shall be established as
follows:
      (1)   At least $18,000,000 will be allocated to the endowment from
Quality of Life Funds utilizing a portion of the savings in the construction
budget for the Center.
      (2)   Ninety percent of the interest revenues from the endowment shall be
utilized to offset the operating subsidy requirement for the Quality of Life
Projects and 10% shall be allocated to increasing the size of the endowment
fund.
   (F)   Council reaffirms the provisions made in Ordinance No. 46-1987 with
respect to contributions of private funds towards the Center project.
(Res. 127-1993, approved 8-31-93)
§ 4-6-5 GRAFFITI REMOVAL.
   (A)   Five teams shall be established to remove graffiti which is visible
from public property. The teams shall give priority to removal of graffiti in
high traffic areas, bus stops and situations reported to the Anti-Graffiti
Hotline.
   (B)   The Office of Anti-Graffiti shall coordinate the work assignments of
the teams. Each team shall normally be assigned to a specific area of the city.
The five areas are as follows:
      (1)   Northeast. East of I-25 and north of I-40 to the city limits.
      (2)   Southeast. East of I-25 and south of I-40 to the city limits.
      (3)   Downtown. West of I-25 to the Rio Grande and south of Lomas Blvd.
to the city limits.
      (4)   North Valley. West of I-25 to the Rio Grande and north of Lomas
Blvd to the city limits.
      (5)   Westside. West of the Rio Grande extending to the city limits.
   (C)   Funds in the amount of $44,000 are hereby appropriated from the
unreserved fund balance of the General Fund to the Neighborhood Coordination
Program (30002) In the Community Services Department for the Office of Anti-
Graffiti. The funds shall be used for hiring the necessary temporary personnel,
and operating expenses associated with graffiti removal activities including
paint, paint supplies, fuel and vehicle maintenance. This appropriation
represents funding for a four-month period for a pilot program.
   (D)   This program shall begin immediately following the adoption of this
legislation.
   (E)   The Office of Anti-Graffiti shall report to the Council at the end of
the four-month period summarizing the activities, accomplishments and
effectiveness of the program. The report shall also provide recommendations
regarding the continuance of the graffiti removal teams.
(Res. 95-1993, approved 7-29-93)
§ 4-6-6 CULTURAL PLAN.
   (A)   The Albuquerque Cultural Plan attached to Resolution No. 27-1995 as
Exhibit A shall be recognized and adopted by the city.
   (B)   A designated local arts agency shall be identified by the city through
an RFP process by April 1, 1995 to assist with the execution of the Cultural
Plan, ensure funding sources for the ongoing implementation of Cultural Plan
action agendas, develop the city's ability to be an arts city, and provide
feedback and evaluation on progress on implementing the Cultural Plan action
agendas.
   (C)   The Administration shall prepare a plan for executing the
implementation of the Cultural Plan to include appropriate departmental
oversight by the CIP Division of the Mayor/CAO Department and an appropriation
in the fiscal year 1996 budget.
   (D)   The Cultural Plan for Albuquerque is consistent with the adopted
priority goal identified as “Enhance Cultural Development.”
(Res. 27-1995, approved 2-16-95)
§ 4-6-7 ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT PROGRAM.
   (A)   The following definition of ECONOMIC VITALITY is adopted: “Economic
vitality is an active process of developing a sustainable economy that
conserves our natural resources, environment, natural beauty and cultural
diversity in order to achieve an optimal way of life for everyone within the
Albuquerque region.”
   (B)   The following strategies are adopted as the basis for the city of
Albuquerque/Bernalillo County economic development program. These 11 strategies
represent a consolidation of the 14 categories of action steps proposed in the
June 1994 Town Hall report (“Writing the Community's Blueprint for Economic
Vitality”).
      (1)   Encourage the attraction, development and retention of responsible
and responsive businesses; nurture the expansion of existing and new local
businesses.
      (2)   Develop industries that increase Albuquerque's competitiveness in
the global economy.
      (3)   Take advantage of growth opportunities afforded by the North
American Free Trade Agreement (NAFTA).
      (4)   Provide the high quality education and training programs essential
for our residents and businesses to effectively compete in a rapidly changing
global economy.
      (5)   Involve neighborhood associations and other community based
organizations in creating economic vitality by undertaking community-based
economic development planning and implementation, especially in targeted areas.
      (6)   Reinvest increased wealth back into the community, particularly in
the educational system and cultural life, to enhance Albuquerque's economic
competitiveness, reduce discrimination in the workplace, and ensure full
participation in the economy by all citizens.
      (7)   Develop adequate physical and cultural infrastructure to elevate
Albuquerque to world class business community status, accommodate business
expansion, and maintain and enhance quality of life.
      (8)   Make quality urban design and the built environment a high priority
to promote economic vitality.
      (9)   Foster economic sustainability by committing to the stewardship of
the environment and natural resources.
      (10)   Create a positive environment in the community regarding business
growth and development.
      (11)   Develop an ongoing process to implement the Economic Development
Strategy.
   (C)   The following strategies also are adopted as proposed by the City
Council to be the basis for the city of Albuquerque/Bernalillo County economic
development program:
      (1)   Assist and recruit businesses that create jobs which provide
somewhat higher wages and a reasonable benefit package to employees.
      (2)   Achieve community economic growth rates which are compatible with
the ability of the public sector to provide associated services and
infrastructure.
      (3)   Provide technical and other assistance to community-based
organizations to increase their capacity to undertake economic development
activities.
   (D)   The Mayor will direct the Office of Economic Development to work with
leaders of Albuquerque/Bernalillo County's business community, educational
institutions, community-based organizations, Council and other appropriate city
and county staff to prepare an Action Plan to implement and monitor the adopted
strategies.
      (1)   The Action Plan will be ready for presentation to the Council and
County Commission by June 1, 1995.
      (2)   The Action Plan will evaluate and prioritize the action steps
proposed in the report entitled “Writing the Community's Blueprint for Economic
Vitality” (June 1994 Town Hall report).
      (3)   The Action Plan will indicate the organization(s) that will be
responsible for each priority action step, the resources necessary to implement
it, the timeline for completion, and the benchmarks or indicators that will be
used to measure progress.
   (E)   The city will work in partnership with the appropriate organizations
to implement the Action Plan.
(Res. 41-1995, approved 3-24-95)
§ 4-6-8 COMMUNITY IDENTITY PROGRAM.
   (A)   The Community Identity Program as described in the accompanying report
addresses the goals and concerns of City Council, Administration and the
public.
   (B)   The Community Planning Areas delineated with public and City Council
input during the course of the Community Identity design phase and illustrated
on the attached map will be the initial areas used for implementing the
community planning program.
   (C)   Planning and other departments will facilitate the organization and
training of community action partnerships, to include appropriate city
departments staff and representatives from the community. The City Councilor
whose district represents the largest part of each Community Planning Area
shall be actively involved with the community action partnership and shall be a
co-chairperson of that community action partnership. In the circumstance that a
significant portion of different Council districts are within a Community
Planning Area, the affected Councilors shall devise a plan for their
participation in the community action partnerships.
   (D)   As coordinated by the Community Based Planning Section, City
Councilors shall meet semi-annually, or at the call of the President of the
Council, with department directors and other representatives of the Mayor in
order to insure the effectiveness of the community based planning program.
   (E)   All city agencies which are part of or affected by planning and
delivery of municipal services will need to provide resources and actively
participate in the community action partnerships.
   (F)   The City Council has created new positions, appropriated funds and
provided policy direction starting in fiscal year 1996 for the creation of the
Community Based Planning Section within the Planning Department. The staffing
to be assigned to the community based planning effort shall be sufficient to
satisfy the demands of the program and shall consist, at a minimum, of one
MPO6, nine MP-O5s, one MPO2, and one CL16 within the Planning Department, and
one MPO5 in each of the following divisions, Family and Community Services
Department, Albuquerque Development Services Division; Parks and General
Services Department, Design and Development Division; and Public Works
Department, Transportation Development Division. One professional staff member
from the Planning Department, at a minimum, shall be assigned permanently to
each Community Planning Area and his or her duties shall be related entirely to
the community based planning effort. The community based planning positions in
the departments other than the Planning Department shall serve the community
action partnerships city-wide and their duties also shall be related entirely
to the community based planning effort. Community based planning efforts shall
be directed to more immediate and short term community goals, objectives, and
strategies and shall focus on implementation.
   (G)   The community planning effort will be carefully coordinated across
partnerships and with other community-based service delivery such as policing,
fire protection, etc.
   (H)   The community action partnerships shall be housed in, and made a
functional part of, the Community Policing Mini-Substations/Community Centers
which shall be constructed in each Community Planning Area/Council District.
Funds already have been appropriated for this purpose in Bill No. F/S R-183
(Enactment No. 46-1995).
   (I)   The Community Policing program shall be integrated into the program of
community planning and service delivery which shall include other functions of
city government and include coordination with other public sector service
providers. The Planning Department shall coordinate these efforts.
   (J)   The Community Planning Program will establish a forum for creating
infill and redevelopment strategies appropriate to each community planning
area.
   (K)   City agencies will endeavor to develop projects and programs which
enhance and reinforce special character of each community.
   (L)   Each community action partnership will meet periodically to discuss
issues and priorities for consideration by the Administration and City Council
in the Goals Program.
   (M)   Longer term issues may be developed into a Rank Two plan for the
respective Community Planning Area. Detailed neighborhood level planning needs
within the area may also be identified and scoped by the partnership.
   (N)   Existing sector and corridor plans will be reviewed in each Community
Planning Area for validity and effectiveness.
   (O)   The city will prepare a “Community Journal” of key information for
each community planning area to serve as its guide for planning and priority
development.
   (P)   In addition to serving as a communication conduit for coordinated
local government planning and service delivery, the partnerships will provide a
forum for discussion and resolution of major community issues among various
interests.
   (Q)   The document entitled “Albuquerque - Community Identity Program” is
hereby adopted by the City Council as the guiding policy for inter-
departmental, community-based sub-area planning. This document is amended by
reference to all adopted provisions of this legislation. The process of inter-
departmental, community-driven priority development that it establishes is the
foundation for the “Program of Planning Priorities” or Multi-Year Planning
Program (MYPP) established in Article 7-4 R.O. 1974 and amended by Council
Enactment No. 24-1990; the MYPP will henceforth be known as the “Community-
Based Planning Program.”
   (R)   Schedule for annual community input. Community input on priorities to
be reflected in both the “Community-Based Planning Program” and the Five Year
Goals/Annual Objectives shall be received by the Administration and Council
offices on or before August 1 of each year for consideration in developing the
following fiscal year's annual budget.
   (S)   Administrative and legislative intent for the operation of the
Community-Based Planning Program in Fiscal Year 2000.
      (1)   Funding for the Community-Based Planning Program in its current
structure will be continued through the end of fiscal year 1999. Beginning in
fiscal year 2000, the community planning elements and staff positions will be
reallocated and reorganized.
      (2)   The balance of the fiscal year 1999 Community Based Reserve
appropriation of $119,000 is hereby appropriated to the Planning Department
Office of Community-Based Planning Program to fund fiscal year 1999 fourth
quarter appropriation of the Program.
      (3)   During the fiscal year 2000 General Fund Budget process, the
Administration and City Council will work to create a Joint Office of Community
and Neighborhood Coordination which will be responsible for focusing on
inclusive government. This Office will provide forums for fostering and
maintaining stable communities and neighborhoods through citizen participation,
project authorization, coordination and implementation. The Office will also
coordinate constituent concerns and provide supportive City Council field
services. The Office will also preserve the concept of Community Based
Planning.
      (4)   The Office shall be established with joint oversight from the
Administration and City Council.
      (5)   A complete plan will be developed and amended into the fiscal year
2000 General Fund Budget.
(Res. 102-1995, approved 8-7-95; Am. Res. 53-1999, approved 6-3-99)
§ 4-6-9 [REPEALED].
(Res. 59-1996, approved 6-7-96; Res. 77-1998, approved 6-1-98; repealed by Res.
104-2002, approved 9-25-02)
§ 4-6-10 MUSIC OF NEW MEXICO PROJECT.
   (A)   The Albuquerque Museum shall establish a new project to preserve the
folk music cultures of Albuquerque and New Mexico by causing the music of
traditional artists to be recorded and distributed locally, nationally and
internationally. This project shall involve establishing a new recording label
entitled “The Albuquerque Museum - Music of New Mexico/Museo de Albuquerque -
Musica de Nuevo Mexico,” should a legal search indicate that this name is
available.
   (B)   This project shall record the traditional music of New Mexico's
cultures, especially that which might be lost otherwise. All traditional New
Mexico music shall be encompassed by this project. The project shall not be
limited to any specific culture or cultures. This project shall not involve
itself with commercially viable music at-he time it is recorded or produced by
the project. The financial goal of the Music of New Mexico project is to
recover costs rather than to generate profits. The project shall consider for
release previously recorded music. Artists shall be compensated by a fair and
equitable flat fee and/or royalties as appropriate. Songwriters shall be
compensated pursuant to mechanical license fees when applicable. Fees shall be
scheduled for payment according to modern standards of practice in the
recording industry.
   (C)   An advisory committee shall be formed to help guide the Albuquerque
Museum with the Music of New Mexico project. The advisory committee shall
consist of scholars, performers, promoters and other individuals knowledgeable
about the traditional music of Albuquerque and New Mexico. One of the
committee's members shall be the owner of a commercial recording studio. The
project manager shall consider the following individuals, among others, as
initial members of this committee: Enrique La Madrid University of New Mexico;
James Leger, Highlands University; Brenda Romero, University of Colorado;
Cipriano Vigil, Northern New Mexico Community College; Jack Loeffler Manuel
Rettinger; and Jeanie McLerie. At the time an individual serves as a member of
the advisory committee, he or she shall not have any recording or producing
contracts with the Music of New Mexico project.
   (D)   The advisory committee shall assist the Albuquerque Museum in the
following tasks:
      (1)   Establishing written criteria for the selection of artists and
music including insuring that project not be involved with commercially viable
music as specified in this legislation;
      (2)   Developing written standards for the selection of recording studios
which shall be done by a formal city contract process;
      (3)   Guiding the Albuquerque Museum in establishing the financial
relationships with artists; and
      (4)   Engaging in such other tasks as may be needed to insure the success
of the project.
   (E)   The Albuquerque Museum shall be responsible for the following with
regard to this operation:
      (1)   Providing program staffing, operating and accounting support;
      (2)   Selecting artists and interpreting the music to be used in the
preparation of liner notes;
      (3)   Being responsible for any copyright issues and other contractual
matters;
      (4)   Assisting in the distribution of the recordings and the
dissemination of the music especially for educational purposes; and
      (5)   Conducting such other tasks as are necessary for the successful
operation of this project.
   (F)   The Albuquerque Museum shall not establish a recording studio, but
shall utilize the services of commercial recording studios for this project.
   (G)   A “Music of New Mexico” Trust and Agency account shall be established
within the Museum Program (Program 23004) of the Cultural and Recreational
Services Department. This account shall be the repository of funds appropriated
or granted to this project by government agencies and other sources and
revenues earned by the sale of recordings and related materials.
   (H)   The amount of $25,000 is appropriated from the Unreserved Balance of
the General Fund (Fund 110) to the “Music of New Mexico” Trust and Agency
account for the purpose of supporting this project. It is the intent of the
City Council that the same amount shall be appropriated to this account for
five consecutive fiscal years, at which time it will be determined whether the
project is self-supporting. Future appropriations shall be based upon this
review.
   (I)   The Albuquerque Museum also shall seek funds from other government
foundation, and private sources to expand its activities within the scope of
this project.
(Res. 60-1996, approved 6-7-96)
§ 4-6-11 ALTERNATIVE PILOT SUSPENSION PROGRAM.
   (A)   An Alternative Pilot Suspension Program shall be established in
partnership with Manzano High School by offering suspended students the option
of participating in a community service program. This program is designed to
create an out of school suspension program that is both punitive and proactive
and will allow students the opportunity to more realistically view work
environments and instill a sense of responsibility, accountability and self
worth.
   (B)   Funds in the amount of $6,000 are hereby appropriated from the
Unreserved Fund Balance of the General Fund (Fund 110) to the Contract Services
Program of the Department of Family and Community Services in Fiscal Year 1997
for the purpose of funding a contract with Albuquerque Public Schools for an
Alternative Pilot Suspension Program at Manzano High School.
(Res. 138-1996, approved 12-3-96)
§ 4-6-12 AUTOMATED VICTIM NOTIFICATION SERVICE AND INMATE INFORMATION LINE.
   (A)   The Bernalillo County Corrections and Detention Center shall establish
and operate an automated multi-lingual victim notification service via contract
with the VINE Company, as the sole source provider of the only automated system
for victim information and notification in the United States.
   (B)   The Bernalillo County Corrections and Detention Center shall
additionally establish and operate an inmate information line for use by the
public via a contract with the VINE Company.
   (C)   Callers utilizing the inmate information line will be charged a
nominal fee to access the information, which fees are expected to generate
sufficient revenues to fund the costs of both the victim information line and
the victim notification program. That governmental entities and lawyers who
utilize the victim information line during the course of their involvement in
the criminal justice system shall be exempted from access fees. For any costs
not covered by revenues generated by access fees for the inmate information
line, it is assumed that revenues generated by inmate pay-phones are sufficient
to cover remaining costs.
   (D)   A one-time set-up fee of $13,500 shall be appropriated from the
unreserved balance of the General Fund into the Transfer to the Corrections/
Detention Program, Fund 110, and $13,500 shall be appropriated from New Revenue
to the Corrections/Detention Program, Fund 260, for FY/97 to set up the Victim
Notification Program.
   (E)   The Corrections and Detention Center management shall promulgate
administrative regulations for implementation of these programs.
   (F)   These programs should be initiated at the earliest possible date.
(Res. 19-1997, approved 2-18-97; Am. Res. 64-1997, approved 7-7-97)
§ 4-6-13 USE OF CABLE TELEVISION CHANNEL 30 TO INFORM VOTERS AS TO MUNICIPAL
ELECTIONS.
   (A)   It is the policy of the city to use cable channel 30 for a reasonable
amount of programming of debates and interviews for candidates in municipal
elections; such programming shall offer equal exposure to all candidates on the
ballot for Councillor and for Mayor, but the amount of air time for each
mayoral candidate may be greater than the amount for each Councillor candidate.
   (B)   It is the policy of the city to use cable channel 30 for a reasonable
amount of programming on ballot issues other than the election of municipal
officials; however, channel 30 will not be used to urge passage or non-passage
of such issues.
(Res. 120-1989, approved 8-22-89)
§ 4-6-14 CITY'S INTERNET PRESENCE; HOME PAGE DEVELOPMENT.
   (A)   It is the policy of the city to support development and maintenance of
a city's Home Page on the World Wide Web for fast and easy access of its
citizens to government information and services.
   (B)   It Is further the policy of the city to locate computers in many of
its facilities for the access of those residents without online services.
   (C)   The Mayor and Council agree to support the ongoing continuation of the
project for easy accessibility to City Hall and government services.
(Res. 61-1996, approved 6-7-96)
§ 4-6-15 SALE OF ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES THROUGH DRIVE-UP WINDOWS; ABATEMENT.
   (A)   It is the policy of the city to actively abate the public nuisance of
premises using drive-up windows for the sale of alcoholic beverages to minors
and intoxicated persons. This policy of abatement shall be to abate only the
nuisance of the drive-up window rather than the entire premises.
   (B)   The City Attorney is directed to initiate actions to abate all such
public nuisances where the Superintendent of Licensing and Regulations has
revoked or suspended a liquor license or has imposed a fine upon the licensee
for violating the prohibition against selling, serving, or delivering alcoholic
beverages to a minor or intoxicated person through a drive-up window. The City
Attorney is directed to commence such abatement actions following the effective
date of the revocation, suspension, or fine at the completion of the
administrative proceedings and hearings provided to the licensee by the
Department of Public Safety.
   (C)   The Mayor shall establish a reporting and monitoring mechanism so that
the City Attorney is informed, at least on a monthly basis, of actions taken by
the New Mexico Department of Regulation and Licensing to enforce the Liquor
Control Act with regard to the sale or service of an alcoholic beverage to an
intoxicated person or to a minor through a drive-up window.
   (D)   The City Attorney shall review cases occurring since the adoption into
law of Resolution No. 106-1995 in which the Superintendent of Licensing and
Regulation has revoked or suspended a liquor license or has imposed a fine upon
a licensee for violation of the prohibition against selling, serving, or
delivering alcoholic beverages to a minor or intoxicated person through a
drive-up window. Each case review shall determine whether the conditions
established in Resolution No. 106-1995 have been met with regard to the City
Attorney initiating legal action to abate such public nuisance.
   (E)   In those cases in which it has been determined that nuisance abatement
action is called for by city law, the City Attorney shall initiate such action
in a timely way in District Court.
   (F)   The City Attorney shall review all such cases to determine whether
there is a basis for establishing in court that drive-up windows in the city
constitute a nuisance, per se, to be abated through their closure.
(Res. 106-1995, approved 8-25-95; Am. Res. 137-1996, approved 12-3-96)
Cross-reference:
   
Alcohol Abuse Task Force, see § 2-4-7
   
Employee substance abuse; alcohol and drug testing, see § 3-3-15
   
Sale of alcohol near schools and churches, see § 5-1-1
   
Public areas where alcohol is permitted, see § 6-5-2
§ 4-6-16 DROUGHT MANAGEMENT PLAN
   (A)   The Drought Management Strategy is hereby adopted as the City's
Drought Management Plan.
   (B)   The Mayor is directed to implement the policies and drought measures
identified in the Strategy.
   (C)   The Mayor is directed to report to the City Council once a drought is
declared and as each subsequent stage of drought is declared.
(Res. 33-203, adopted 5-25-03)
§ 4-6-17 WORKFORCE HOUSING OPPORTUNITY ACT
   (A)   The effective implementation of the Workforce Housing Opportunity Act
is the policy of the City of Albuquerque. It is hereby acknowledged that in
order to achieve the production of housing to serve the city workforce an
inter-related set of organizations and interests must work collaboratively to
utilize the scarce resources available to carry out this policy.
   (B)    The amount of Seventy Five Thousand Dollars ($75,000) is hereby
appropriated from the unreserved fund balance of the General Fund to the
Department of Family and Community Services (DFCS) for the Workforce Housing
Plan and Needs Assessment as required by the Workforce Housing Opportunity Act.
The Plan will serve as the affordable housing component of the Five Year
Consolidated Plan.
   (C)   The Mayor is requested to develop a package of incentives to support
the goals of the Workforce Housing Opportunity Act including but not limited
to: a density bonus, fast-tracking of development review for Workforce Housing
Projects and Subdivisions, fee waivers and an ombudsman program. After review
and analysis by the appropriate City agencies and Commissions the Mayor shall
make recommendations to the Council for legislation as needed.
   (D)   The amount of Two Hundred and Fifty Thousand Dollars ($250,000) is
hereby appropriated from the unreserved fund balance of the General Fund to the
Department of Family and Community Services for the purpose of providing
research and legal services as needed to set up the Workforce Housing Trust
Fund, developing a collaborative model of decision-making for DFCS and the non-
profit housing developers: increasing capacity of the housing delivery system
to utilize City and non-City available resources; supporting a coalition of
non-profit housing development organizations; developing recommendations for
expanding operating funding for non-profit housing developers; involving
constituencies being served to participate in development and policy-making;
enhancing the capacity for non-profits to carry out their role as advocates and
developing a system of accountability all for City agencies and non-profit
housing development organizations. Recommendations and principles resulting
from this work shall be considered for inclusion in the Workforce Housing Plan.
   (E)   The Mayor is hereby requested to initiate a model Workforce Housing
project meeting the requirements of the Workforce Housing Opportunity Act on
City owned land to demonstrate collaboration among the City, non-profit housing
development organizations, private sector builders and the neighborhood(s), the
utilization of quality design as applied to mixed-use and mixed-income
development and the leveraging of non-City resources to creatively finance the
project.
   (F)   The Affordable Housing Committee is hereby requested to determine a
means by which housing lost to use by low income families as the result of
actions by the City Nuisance Abatement Team can be replaced or rehabilitated
and that such actions be made a high priority in the Workforce Housing Plan.
   (G)   The City hereby requests the Albuquerque Bernalillo County Water
Authority to implement a program where its Utility Expansion Charge is waived
for projects meeting the requirements of the Workforce Housing Opportunity Act.
   (H)   The amount of Seventy Five Thousand Dollars ($75,000) is hereby
appropriated from the unreserved fund balance of the General Fund to the
Department of Family and Community Services to develop and implement, in
collaboration with the UNM School of Architecture and Planning and the City
Planning Department, a community educational program supporting the Workforce
Housing Opportunity Act.
ARTICLE 7: FIVE YEAR GOALS AND ONE YEAR OBJECTIVES
Section
   
4-7-1   Five-year goals
   
4-7-2   One-year objectives for Fiscal Year 2007
   
4-7-3   One-year objectives for Fiscal Year 2008
   
4-7-4   One-year objectives for Fiscal Year 2009
   
4-7-5   One-year objectives for Fiscal Year 2010
   
4-7-6   One-year objectives for Fiscal Year 2011
   
4-7-7   One-year objectives for Fiscal Year 2012
   
4-7-8   One-year objectives for Fiscal Year 2013
   
4-7-9   One-year objectives for Fiscal Year 2014
   
4-7-10   One-year objectives for Fiscal Year 2020
   
4-7-11   One-year objectives for Fiscal Year 2021
§ 4-7-1 FIVE-YEAR GOALS.
   (A)   The City of Albuquerque adopts the following Vision Statement:
Albuquerque is an active, thriving, culturally rich, sustainable, high desert
community.
   (B)   The City of Albuquerque adopts the following five-year goals and
related desired community conditions commencing in Fiscal Year 2012 to be used
in conjunction with the development of the Fiscal Year 2012 Budget and
subsequent annual budgets thereafter:
      (1)   Human and Family Development. All residents have the opportunity to
participate in the community and economy, and are well sheltered, safe,
healthy, and educated.
         (a)   Residents are literate and educated.
         (b)   Youth achieve desired educational outcomes.
         (c)   Youth achieve responsible social development..
         (d)   Residents are active and healthy.
         (e)   Residents have access to physical and mental health care.
         (f)   Families are secure and stable.
         (g)   Safe, decent, and affordable housing is available.
         (h)   Senior citizens live and function in optimal environments.
         (i)   Residents are safe from public health risks.
         (j)   Residents have a balance of means, opportunity, and avenues of
support needed to provide for their basic needs.
      (2)   Public Safety. The public is safe and secure, and shares
responsibility for maintaining a safe environment.
         (a)   The public is safe.
         (b)   The public feels safe.
         (c)   Travel in the city is safe.
         (d)   The public trusts its public safety agencies.
         (e)   Residents, businesses, and public safety agencies work together
for a safe community.
         (f)   Domestic animals are responsibly cared for and provided safe and
healthy home environments.
         (g)   The community is prepared to respond to emergencies, natural
disasters, catastrophic acts, and other events that threaten the health and
safety of the public.
      (3)    Public Infrastructure. Existing communities are adequately and
efficiently served with well planned, coordinated, and maintained
infrastructure. New development is efficiently integrated into existing
infrastructure and the costs are balanced with the revenues generated.
         (a)   A reliable water system meets health and safety standards.
         (b)   Wastewater systems meet quality standards.
         (c)   The storm water system protects lives, property, and the
environment.
         (d)   Information technology infrastructure is accessible throughout
the community.
         (e)   Safe and affordable integrated transportation options meet the
public's needs.
         (f)   The street system is well designed and maintained.
         (g)   Existing communities are adequately and efficiently served with
well planned, coordinated, and maintained infrastructure.
         (h)   New development is efficiently integrated into existing or
approved infrastructure and its costs are balanced with the revenues generated
and adopted city development policies.
         (i)   Sustainable, environmentally sensitive supplies of energy are
available.
         (j)   The infrastructure is efficient and environmentally sensitive.
      (4)    Sustainable Community Development. Guide growth to protect the
environment and the community's economic vitality, and create a variety of
livable, sustainable communities throughout Albuquerque.
         (a)   Parks, open space, recreation facilities, and public trails are
available, accessible, and strategically located, designed, and maintained.
         (b)   Albuquerque's built environments are safe, habitable, well
maintained, and sustainable.
         (c)   A balance of densities, land uses, and pedestrian friendly
environments is available throughout Albuquerque.
         (d)   The downtown area is vital, active, safe, and accessible.
         (e)    Safe and accessible mixed-use areas with housing, employment,
civic functions, recreation, and entertainment exist throughout Albuquerque.
      (5)    Environmental Protection and Enhancement. Protect and enhance
Albuquerque's natural environments - its mountains, river, bosque, volcanoes,
arroyos, air, and water.
         (a)   Air, water, and land are protected from conditions that are
harmful to people and the environment.
         (b)   Water resources are sustainably managed, conserved, and
protected to provide a long term supply and drought reserve.
         (c)   Solid wastes are generated no faster than natural systems and
technology can process them.
         (d)   Open Space, Bosque, the River, and Mountains are preserved and
protected.
         (e)   Residents participate in protecting the environment and
sustaining energy and natural resources.
         (f)   The public is well informed about and appreciates the natural
environment and its biodiversity.
      (6)   Economic Vitality. Achieve a vital, diverse, and sustainable
economy in which businesses and residents have opportunities for success.
         (a)   The economy is diverse and broad-based.
         (b)   The economy is vital, prosperous, and consistent with local and
regional resources.
         (c)   There are abundant, competitive, career oriented employment
opportunities.
         (d)   Entrepreneurs and businesses of all sizes develop and prosper.
      (7)   Community and Cultural Engagement. Residents participate in the
life and decisions of the community to promote and enhance pride, cultural
values and resources, and ensure that Albuquerque's community institutions are
effective and responsive.
         (a)   Residents actively participate in civic and public affairs.
         (b)   Residents participate in community organizations, activities,
and events.
         (c)   Residents have an accurate understanding of community
conditions.
         (d)   Residents appreciate, foster, and respect Albuquerque's arts and
cultures.
         (e)   Relations among Albuquerque's cultures and races are positive
and respectful.
      (8)   Governmental Excellence and Effectiveness. Government is ethical,
transparent, and responsive to its citizens. Every element of government
contributes effectively to meeting public needs.
         (a)   Leaders work together for the good of Albuquerque.
         (b)   All city employees and officials behave ethically.
         (c)   Leaders cooperate and coordinate with the other governments in
the MRCOG region.
         (d)   Albuquerque participates in mutually beneficial cooperative
relationships with other governments.
         (e)   Government and its leaders are responsive to changing community
and customer conditions.
         (f)   City government and its leaders serve, and are responsive to,
Albuquerque's citizens.
         (g)   Government protects the civil and constitutional rights of
citizens.
         (h)   Customers conveniently access city services, officials, public
records, and information.
         (i)   Citizens participate in their governance.
         (j)   Financial assets are maximized and protected, and analyzed and
reported accurately, understandably, and usefully.
         (k)   City assets are protected while responding fairly to
inappropriate city actions.
         (l)   Products, services, and materials are obtained efficiently,
fairly, and in a timely manner.
         (m)   City services, operations, and finances are measured and audited
as needed and meet customer needs.
         (n)   Competent, well-trained, motivated, and empowered employees
contribute to the achievement of city goals and objectives.
         (o)   The work environment for employees is healthy, safe, and
productive.
         (p)   City staff is empowered with information and have information
processing capacity.
         (q)   Rights of way are obtained and managed and their use optimized
for the public's benefit with fair compensation for use.
         (r)   City real property is effectively obtained and managed in the
public's interest, and disposed of when public purpose has changed.
         (s)   City fixed assets, property, and infrastructure meet city goals
and objectives.
         (t)    Departmental human and financial resources and fixed assets are
managed efficiently and effectively.
   (C)   That the Mayor and the Council, in accordance with the City Charter
and Section 2-11-3 (D) (1) of the City Code ROA 1994 shall jointly develop one-
year objectives consistent with the five-year goals. These objectives shall be
specific and measurable efforts for Fiscal Year 2012 and subsequent fiscal
years to achieve the goals adopted herein and shall be incorporated in the FY
2012 Budget, which, pursuant to Section 2-11-3 of the City Code ROA 1994, shall
continue to focus on performance of city services in the context of achieving
the five-year goals.
(Res. 133-2002, approved 11-8-02; Am. Res. R-2006-122, approved 12-18-06; Am.
Res. R-2010-151, approved 12-22-10)
§ 4-7-2 ONE-YEAR OBJECTIVES FOR FISCAL YEAR 2007.
   (A)   That the City of Albuquerque adopts the following one-year objectives
for FY/07, grouped under the eight five-year goals of the City.
      (1)   Human and Family Development Goal: People of all ages have the
opportunity to participate in the community and economy and are well sheltered,
safe, healthy, and educated.
         OBJECTIVE 1.    (Superseded by Objective 24 below, R-2006-046,
approved 6-1-06)
         OBJECTIVE 2.    Increase the number of children and families
participating in the 2006 Summer Reading Program by 5.5% from 18,000 to 19,000.
(Cultural Services)
         OBJECTIVE 3.    Develop a technology master plan for enhancing library
services to customers. Integrate this plan with the facilities master plan and
include costs for systems, networks, hardware, applications, maintenance, etc.
(Cultural Services)
         OBJECTIVE 4.    Initiate construction of 60 new owner occupied homes
in the Trumbull Redevelopment area by the end of the second quarter, FY/07;
complete construction of all units by the end of FY/09. Submit a progress
report to the Mayor and City Council by the end of the third quarter, FY/07.
(Family and Community Services)
         OBJECTIVE 5.   Complete construction, furnish, equip, and reopen the
West Mesa Community Center with existing resources and submit a report to the
Mayor and City Council by the end of the first quarter, FY/07. (Family and
Community Services)
         OBJECTIVE 6.   Complete the exterior renovations of the Thomas Bell
Community Center and dependent on resources, design and go to bid on the
construction of a gymnasium by the end of the third quarter of FY/07. Provide a
report to the Mayor and Council as soon as a determination is made on the
adequacy of resources to accomplish these tasks or no later than the end of the
third quarter, FY/07. (Family and Community Services)
         OBJECTIVE 7.   Complete a preliminary evaluation of the Assertive
Community Treatment Program and provide a report to the Mayor and City Council
by the end of the second quarter of FY/07. (Family and Community Services)
         OBJECTIVE 8.   Complete a preliminary evaluation of the Child and
Adolescent Early Intervention Program, establish baselines, and provide a
report to the Mayor and City Council by the end of the second quarter of FY/07.
(Family and Community Services)
         OBJECTIVE 9.   Complete a preliminary evaluation of the Adolescent Day
Treatment Program, establish baselines, and provide a report to the Mayor and
City Council by the end of the second quarter of FY/07. (Family and Community
Services)
         OBJECTIVE 10.   Complete a preliminary evaluation of the Housing First
Program, establish baselines, and provide a report to the Mayor and City
Council by the end of the second quarter of FY/07. (Family and Community
Services)
         OBJECTIVE 11.   Dependent upon results of the cost benefit analysis to
be completed in FY/06, including both service improvement and cost
effectiveness, develop a master plan to construct a centralized kitchen by the
end of FY/07; submit the analysis by the end of the first quarter, FY/07;
submit the plan, if supported by the ROI analysis, by the end of FY/07. (Senior
Affairs)
         OBJECTIVE 12.    Improve turf conditions at the Ladera Golf Course
through soil amendment, irrigation system renovations and more intensive
attention to maintenance. Submit a status report to the Mayor and City Council
by the end of the fourth quarter FY/07. (Parks and Recreation)
         OBJECTIVE 13.    Develop a business plan for the use of the Indoor
Mondo Track, including location, operation, and maintenance. Consult with
partners and major customers, like the Convention Center facility managers,
ACVB, and UNM. Submit the plan to the Mayor and City Council by the end of the
second quarter, FY/07. (Parks and Recreation)
         OBJECTIVE 14.    Using existing resources and revenues from sponsors,
reinstate the Great Raft Race down the Rio Grande. Involve appropriate City
departments, sponsoring entities, and businesses. Evaluate the event, including
ROI and participation, and make recommendations on the efficacy of future races
by the end of the second quarter, FY/07. (Parks and Recreation)
         OBJECTIVE 15.   Develop a business case of the current practices of
food borne illness mitigation and consumer health protection and compare to a
risk based approach. Analyze the sites and causes of illnesses and align to
City services. Submit the analysis to the Mayor and City Council by the end of
the second quarter, FY/07. (Environmental Health)
         OBJECTIVE 16.   Work with APS and the State of New Mexico to develop
and address capital needs of Charter Schools as an essential element of the
Albuquerque educational system. Report on progress to the Mayor and City
Council by the end of the third quarter, FY/07. (Office of Economic
Development)
         OBJECTIVE 17.   Using existing resources study and develop options to
encourage the preservation of existing affordable housing stock to prevent
unnecessary demolition. Develop legislation as appropriate by the end of the
second quarter, FY/07. (Family and Community Services and Planning)
         OBJECTIVE 18.    Increase public awareness of and accessibility to the
existing program for rehabilitation loans for affordable housing concentrating
on neighborhoods affected by the Safe City Strike Force. Analyze the use of the
program and report to the Mayor and City Council by the end of FY/07. (Family
and Community Services)
         OBJECTIVE 19.   Using available resources and the community center
study reserve established in FY/06, analyze and establish demand for community
center services and, if necessary, align hours of operations to customer needs.
Report to the Mayor and City Council on proposed adjustments by the end of the
second quarter, FY/07. (Family and Community Services)
         OBJECTIVE 20.   Analyze and implement enhanced programming and
security at the Taylor Ranch Community Center. Implement the improvements by
the end of the first quarter, FY/07 and report to the Mayor and City Council by
the end of the third quarter FY/07. (Family and Community Services)
         OBJECTIVE 21.   Analyze community resources and programs to address
the needs of rape victims and enhance City programs and support to serve their
needs. Submit the action plan to the Mayor and City Council by the end of the
first quarter, FY/07. (Family and Community Services)
         OBJECTIVE 22.   Using existing resources, develop an implementation
plan to meet the needs of “Baby Boomers” by maximizing program content and
funding improvements by expanding memberships and fees for services at Senior
Centers. Submit the plan by the end of the first quarter, FY/07. (Senior
Affairs)
         OBJECTIVE 23.   Acquire the assets, develop programming, and operate
the Albuquerque Golf Training Center. Include appropriate measures in the
City’s Performance Plan and provide an initial evaluation of operations by the
end of FY/07. (Parks and Recreation)
(R-2006-046, approved 6-1-06)
         OBJECTIVE 24.   Develop a facilities master plan, with related
technology, to guide the planning for new, expanded or enhanced library
facilities to meet the need for library services Citywide, with particular
attention to growth areas on the West side and far NE heights. Include
estimated construction and operating costs. Submit the plan to the Mayor and
City Council by the end of FY/07. (Cultural Services with ISD) (This objective
replaces Goal 1 Objective 1 of F/S R-06-20.)
(R-2006-046, approved 6-1-06)
         OBJECTIVE 25.   Utilizing funding provided in the FY/07 budget, expand
the low income spay and neuter program to include applicants with household
incomes of up to 85% of the median household income for the Albuquerque MSA.
(Environmental Health)
(R-2006-046, approved 6-1-06)
         OBJECTIVE 26.   Prepare a report analyzing the transportation and
other outreach needs of seniors. Compare the transportation needs of seniors to
the population which utilizes public transportation. The intent of the plan
should be focused on the provision of outreach services provided by the
Department of Senior Affairs, with emphasis on providing transportation to
seniors who do not drive, have difficulty with public transit, or need other
assistance such as carrying shopping bags. Submit the plan with recommendations
to the Mayor and City Council prior to the end of the second quarter of FY/07.
(Senior Affairs)
(R-2006-046, approved 6-1-06)
      (2)   Public Safety Goal: Citizens are safe, feel safe and secure, and
have trust and shared responsibility
         OBJECTIVE 1.   Cooperate with AFD in preparation of the to-be-approved
Fire Master Plan and include a Double Eagle II facility that addresses
specialized airport rescue, structural firefighting, and EMS rescue
capabilities by the end of the second quarter, FY/07. (Aviation)
         OBJECTIVE 2.    Based on the results of the Fire Department Master
Plan, develop a long-term implementation plan using public safety and
other revenues to address needs of underserved areas, including anticipated
growth patterns. Provide the plan to the Mayor and City Council by the end of
the second quarter, FY/07. (Fire)
         OBJECTIVE 3.    Implement a Mental Health Intervention Team that will
provide follow-up services on CIT mental health crisis calls, based on pilot
projects in FY/06 in order to provide civilian clinical backup services to CIT
officers on cases where non-law enforcement intervention and follow-up is
required. Provide a report to the Mayor and City Council on the number of
incidents and the effectiveness of response by the end of FY/07. (Police and
Family and Community Services)
         OBJECTIVE 4.   Expand the Red Light Photo Enforcement Program by
identifying the highest impact intersections and implementing a Mobile Photo
Traffic Speed Enforcement Program in school zones to the extent possible with
revenues produced from existing and planned Enforcement sites. Provide a report
to the Mayor and City Council at the end of the second and fourth quarters, FY/
07. (Police)
         OBJECTIVE 5.   Work through the Public Safety Partnership and its
members to train neighborhood associations and other community groups on how to
use City resources to address reoccurring neighborhood crime and quality of
life issues. Include appropriate output and quality measures in the Officer and
Department Support Program Strategy for FY/07 and beyond. (Police)
         OBJECTIVE 6.   Evaluate the effectiveness of programmatic responses to
improve safety in the downtown area, including those done in partnership with
other groups; report to the Mayor and City Council by the end of FY/07.
(Police)
         OBJECTIVE 7.   Complete the design phase for the Sixth Area Command
near Cibola High School, identify funding sources for construction, and
estimate operating expenses by the end of second quarter, FY/07 and submit a
report to the Mayor and City Council. (Police)
         OBJECTIVE 8.   Establish an animal intake classification system;
increase live exits of adoptable animals, as defined by the classification
system, at the AACC to 80% for FY07, 90% for FY08 and 100% for FY09. Report
results in the City’s Performance Plan. (Environmental Health)
         OBJECTIVE 9.   By area command, assess the need for more bicycle
patrols and develop a plan to implement more patrols as needed. Ensure that
existing officers are trained. Report on current policies and patrols and make
recommendations for changes to the Mayor and City Council by the end of the
second quarter, FY/07. (Police)
         OBJECTIVE 10.   (Superseded by Objective 14 below, R-2006-046,
approved 6-1-06)
         OBJECTIVE 11.   (Superseded by Objective 22 below, R-2006-046,
approved 6-1-06)
         OBJECTIVE 12.   Initiate programming to increase adoptions of
adoptable and rehabilitatable pets; reach out to and educate the community
about the need for pet alteration, make alteration more convenient and
affordable, especially to lower income residents, and begin to enforce
alteration requirements; increase microchipping of the Albuquerque pet
population; reach annual targets to achieve community 100% Live Exit status by
FY/09; report on progress to the Mayor and City Council by the end of the third
quarter, FY/07 and in the City’s Performance Plan. (Environmental Health)
(R-2006-046, approved 6-1-06)
         OBJECTIVE 13.   Implement the first phase of the APD technology
strategic plan to guide policy and resource allocation decisions for the
development, purchase, allocation, implementation and maintenance of technology
for the Albuquerque Police Department. Upgrade the record management and
computer-aided dispatching systems; implement field reporting; modernize
hardware and network infrastructure; coordinate information sharing with other
agencies, and streamline business processes to eliminate redundancies and
inefficiencies within the department. Submit progress reports biannually to the
Mayor and City Council starting at the end of the second quarter, FY/07, and in
the City’s Performance Plan. (DFAS and APD)
(R-2006-046, approved 6-1-06)
         OBJECTIVE 14.   Using State university resources, conduct a regional
competitiveness analysis of APD focusing on officer compensation, types of
calls for service, management structure and substation staffing, and community
policing approaches by the end of the second quarter, FY/08. Submit the scope
of services to the mayor and City Council before entering into
intergovernmental agreements by the end of the second quarter, FY/07. (CAO)
(This objective replaces Goal 2 Objective 10 of F/S R-06-20.)
(R-2006-046, approved 6-1-06)
         OBJECTIVE 15.   To enhance the physical safety of students and other
school populations, expand the current pilot program of fire safety code
inspections of schools in Albuquerque and continue to seek State reimbursement
for performing this State obligation. Report on the progress of both by the end
of the second quarter, FY/07. (Fire)
(R-2006-046, approved 6-1-06)
         OBJECTIVE 16.   Implement an arrestee transport program to increase
police officer patrol time. Evaluate the effectiveness and cost benefits in a
report to the Mayor and City Council by the end of the third quarter, FY/07.
(APD)
(R-2006-046, approved 6-1-06)
         OBJECTIVE 17.   Track police overtime by type and continue efforts to
control police overtime. Report on overtime trends to the Mayor and City
Council by the end of the second quarter, FY/07. Report on police overtime in
the Performance Plan. (APD)
(R-2006-046, approved 6-1-06)
         OBJECTIVE 18.   Building on the evaluation of the Assertive Community
Treatment Program, establish a second ACT team by the end of the second
quarter, FY/07, and report to the Mayor and City Council by the end of the
third quarter of FY/07. Include measures in the City’s Performance Plan for FY/
08 and thereafter. (Family and Community Services)
(R-2006-046, approved 6-1-06)
         OBJECTIVE 19.   Develop and submit to the Mayor and City Council a
proposal which will include planning, funding and staffing a Family Advocacy
Center to be placed within the Albuquerque Police Department by the end of the
second quarter of FY/07. A Family Advocacy Center provides a facility where law
enforcement, crisis intervention, medical support, and victim's assistance
personnel come together to assist individuals and families affected by crime.
The program services offered within a Family Advocacy Center may include
support for persons who are victims of domestic violence, rape and other sex
offenses, elder abuse, child abuse and neglect, suicide prevention, death
related issues, and other mental health related needs. This Family Advocacy
Center will be modeled after similar successful facilities located in other
cities. (APD)
(R-2006-046, approved 6-1-06)
         OBJECTIVE 20.   Prepare a report which describes the progress of the
Police Comprehensive Information System and Technology Plan, including an
evaluation of technical support provided by staff outside of the Police
Department. Submit the report to the Mayor and City Council by the end of the
fourth quarter of FY/07. (APD)
(R-2006-046, approved 6-1-06)
         OBJECTIVE 21.   In order to provide more direct officer support and
thereby enhance the efficiency of the Department, the APD will endeavor to hire
up to an additional fifteen (15) public service aides (PSA) by the end of the
second quarter of FY/07. This will result in a maximum of forty (40) PSA
positions authorized. The Department will report to the Mayor and City Council
on the progress of hiring these PSAs by the end of the third quarter, FY/07.
(APD)
(R-2006-046, approved 6-1-06)
         OBJECTIVE 22.   Conduct a study on intergovernmental mutual aid
agreements; include the number of incidents responded to by the Albuquerque
Fire Department outside the City’s jurisdiction as well as other jurisdictions
responding to City needs. Estimate costs to the City, including administrative,
operating and capital costs and the jurisdiction’s ability to pay, and
recommend changes in the City’s policy to equalize the jurisdictional benefits.
Notify neighboring jurisdictions that the City may be implementing a fee for
service charge beginning in FY/08. Use the costs identified in the study as the
basis for negotiations with neighboring jurisdictions for payment for services.
Provide a report to the Mayor and City Council prior to the end of the second
quarter FY/07. (Fire) (This objective replaces Goal 2, Objective 11 of F/S R-
06-20.)
(R-2006-046, approved 6-1-06)
         OBJECTIVE 23.   Conduct a study to determine the feasibility of
creating the equivalent of public safety aides within the AFD and utilizing
those aides for non-medical transport and dispatch. Based on the results of the
study, develop a plan and report to the Mayor and City Council by the end of
the second quarter, FY/07.
(R-2006-046, approved 6-1-06)
      (3)   Public Infrastructure Goal: Ensure that all existing communities
are adequately and efficiently served with well-planned, coordinated, and
maintained sewer, storm, water and road systems and an integrated multi-modal
regional transportation system. Ensure that new development is efficiently
integrated into existing infrastructures and that the costs are balanced with
the revenues generated.
         OBJECTIVE 1. Building on the lessons learned from the 2001 process,
encouraging local business participation, especially DBE businesses, implement
the Sunport Food and Beverage program, including the maximization of space to
provide more concession opportunities and the selection of concessionaires
through an RFP process. Report on progress to the Mayor and City Council by the
end of the second quarter, FY/07. (Aviation)
         OBJECTIVE 2. Construct 7 miles of median landscaping on arterial
streets and provide a status report by the end of FY/07. (Municipal
Development)
         OBJECTIVE 3. Pursuant to the Long Range Bikeway System, construct or
rehabilitate 10 miles of bicycle facilities and analyze the provision of
pedestrian crossings over Montano Boulevard at appropriate connections with
ditch and levee trails and provide a report to the Mayor and City Council on
progress by the end of FY/07. (Municipal Development)
         OBJECTIVE 4. Begin construction of storm drainage projects (Moon
Street from Central to I-40, San Mateo Place North of I-40, and Hotel Circle
from I-40 to Lomas Boulevard) and complete the projects by the end of the
second quarter, FY/08. Provide a status report to the Mayor and City Council by
the end of FY/07. (Municipal Development)
         OBJECTIVE 5. Complete construction of Paseo del Norte extension from
Golf Course Road to Kimmick by the end of FY/07 and provide a progress report
to the Mayor and City Council at that time. (Municipal Development)
         OBJECTIVE 6. If required, gain approval of the Draft Environmental
Impact Statement and financial plan for the Rapid Transit Project by the
Federal Transit Administration in order to proceed to the preliminary
engineering phase of the project; report status to the Mayor and City Council
by the end of the second quarter, FY/07, and as major milestones dictate.
(Transit)
         OBJECTIVE 7. Evaluate paratransit service demand for the next 2, 5,
and 10 year periods to prepare ABQ RIDE to meet changing conditions and
requirements and present a report to the Mayor and City Council by the end of
the second quarter, FY/07. (Transit)
         OBJECTIVE 8. Develop an enhanced ADA certification process for Mini
Ride to meet changing mandates and community needs efficiently and effectively.
Present the cost benefit analysis to the Mayor and City Council by the end of
the second quarter, FY/07. (Transit)
         OBJECTIVE 9. Prioritize opportunities to improve pedestrian safety and
friendliness in Council District 3 and report on these priorities and funding
strategies to the Mayor and City Council by the end of the third quarter, FY/
07. (Municipal Development)
         OBJECTIVE 10. Identify low ridership routes and times and assign
smaller buses to serve these routes. Prepare a plan and submit it to the Mayor
and City Council by the end of the second quarter, FY/07. Adjust any current
bus purchasing processes to ensure that larger buses are not procured for these
routes. (Transit)
          OBJECTIVE 11. Complete construction of a traffic signal at 18 th and
Mountain, utilizing existing federal funds by the end of FY/07. (Municipal
Development)
         OBJECTIVE 12. Evaluate the opportunity to add mid block street lights
in the Bell Air community; determine consistency with standards; assess
operating costs and means to lower operating costs. Report to the Mayor and
City Council by the end of the first quarter, FY/07.
         OBJECTIVE 13. Evaluate the costs and benefits of a modified Rapid Ride
route on Coors as well as expansion of bus service into the Westgate area.
Provide the evaluation to the Mayor and City Council by the end of the second
quarter, FY/07. (Transit)
(R-2006-046, approved 6-1-06)
         OBJECTIVE 14. Utilizing existing funding and per Federal Aviation
Administration mandate, relocate in a humane and efficient manner existing
prairie dog populations at the Sunport and Double Eagle II airports and report
back to the Mayor and City Council on the progress of the relocations by the
end of the second quarter of FY/07. (Aviation)
(R-2006-046, approved 6-1-06)
      (4)   Sustainable Community Development Goal: Guide growth to protect the
environment and the community's economic vitality and create a variety of
livable, sustainable communities throughout Albuquerque.
         OBJECTIVE 1. Complete construction of the following park projects:
Roosevelt Park Phase 3 (irrigation and site improvements), Pat Hurley Phase 2
(hillside development) and Phil Chacon Park Phase 8 (New Mexico Veterans
Memorial) and provide a report to the Mayor and City Council by the end of FY/
07. (Municipal Development)
         OBJECTIVE 2. Request state grant resources to design and construct a
Heroes Park to honor police and firefighters who have lost their lives in the
line of duty. Report to the Mayor and City Council on the status of the request
by the end of the first and third quarters of FY/07. (Parks and Recreation)
         OBJECTIVE 3. Convert at least 6 acres of non-functional turf and
outdated landscapes throughout the urban park system to low water use
landscapes to meet the City's Water Conservation Mandate by the end of FY/07
and report on results to the Mayor and City Council. (Parks and Recreation)
         OBJECTIVE 4. Develop a Five-Year Implementation Plan for all park
facilities with a goal of planting an additional 2,200 trees/year or as funds
allow resulting in a 4-5% increase in park tree inventory per year. Develop a
Citizen Tree Watch Program to identify sick trees. Report on results of both
initiatives by the end of FY/07 to the Mayor and City Council. (Parks and
Recreation)
         OBJECTIVE 5. Develop a Five-Year Park Play Equipment Improvement Plan
to identify the deficiencies and existing condition of play equipment in city
parks and report to the Mayor and City Council by the end of the second
quarter, FY/07. (Parks and Recreation)
         OBJECTIVE 6. Complete conversion of all existing Planning Department
applications (EPC, DRB, LUCC) to KIVA as well as the vacant building
registration process by the end of the fourth quarter of FY07 and provide a
report to the Mayor and City Council by the end of FY/07. (Planning)
         OBJECTIVE 7. Pending partial State funding, complete construction of
Phase I (BMX Pavilion) of the Albuquerque Bicycle Park (Veloport) in time for
the American Bicycle Association (ABA) Nationals Race in October 2006 and
report to the Mayor and City Council by the end of the second quarter, FY/07.
(Planning)
         OBJECTIVE 8. Administer the transition from exactions to impact fees.
Track credits and waivers of impact fees and report on this and the overall
status of the transition to the Mayor and City Council within one month of the
end of the first and third quarters, FY/07. (Planning)
         OBJECTIVE 9. Complete property acquisition and streetscape design in
the Near Heights Metropolitan Redevelopment Area, and design of Trumbull Phase
II housing and report to the Mayor and City Council by the end of the fourth
quarter of FY 07. (Planning)
         OBJECTIVE 10. Complete pedestrian-friendly design of priority
streetscapes identified in the Highland Central / Upper Nob Hill Plan by the
end of the fourth quarter of FY 07 and report to the Mayor and City Council.
(Planning)
         OBJECTIVE 11. Develop a design concept and select a developer for the
Central / Unser mixed- use transit-oriented, pedestrian friendly development
and report to the Mayor and City Council by the end of the first quarter of FY
07. (Planning)
         OBJECTIVE 12. Conduct a market analysis for reuse of the Central -
Atrisco Area as a transit-oriented, pedestrian friendly environment within the
West Central Metropolitan Redevelopment Area by the end of the first quarter of
FY 07 and report to the Mayor and City Council. (Planning)
         OBJECTIVE 13. Complete and introduce to City Council the Westside/
Double Eagle II Planning Study, Balloon Fiesta / North I-25 Gateway Plan and
the Southwest Heights Action Plan by the end of the fourth quarter of FY/07.
(Planning)
         OBJECTIVE 14. Complete and introduce to City Council the Uptown, Coors
Corridor, Nob Hill/Highlands, Barelas, Near North Valley and Volcano Heights
plans by the end of FY 07. (Planning)
         OBJECTIVE 15. Complete and introduce to City Council design standards
and a plan of prioritized capital improvements for strategically located urban
districts (intense mixed use areas that strongly support transit and pedestrian
activity) by the end of the third quarter of FY 07. (Planning)
         OBJECTIVE 16. Complete and submit to City Council revisions to
appropriate codes and ordinances that require development of walkable,
connected neighborhoods of which public schools are a key place-making element
by the end of the fourth quarter of FY 07. (Planning)
         OBJECTIVE 17. Determine the approach to conducting the corridor
planning in the East Central area and develop a contract by the end of the
second quarter, FY/07, using existing corridor planning funding. Conclude the
plan by the end of the second quarter, FY/08. (Planning)
         OBJECTIVE 18. Utilizing existing state funds, design and construct
improvements and purchase related equipment at Los Duranes Park by the end of
FY/07. (Municipal Development)
         OBJECTIVE 19. Utilizing existing state funds, design and construct
improvements and purchase related equipment at Valley Neighborhood Park by the
end of FY/07. (Municipal Development)
         OBJECTIVE 20. Utilizing existing state funds, design and construct
improvements and purchase related equipment at Graves Park by the end of FY/07.
(Municipal Development)
         OBJECTIVE 21. Utilizing existing state funds, design and construct
improvements and purchase related equipment at Vista del Norte Park by the end
of FY/07. (Municipal Development)
         OBJECTIVE 22. Replace playground equipment at Rotary Park by the end
of FY/07. (Municipal Development)
         OBJECTIVE 23. Submit a detailed plan that addresses the schedule,
estimated costs, and scope of efforts to address the parking structure and
other means to mitigate overflow parking at the Zoo by the end of the first
quarter, FY/07. (Cultural Services)
         OBJECTIVE 24. Survey neighborhood groups and meet with representative
associations on a Council district basis to determine the needs for zoning code
enforcement; use these meetings to educate citizens on zoning issues pertinent
to neighborhood concerns. Capture future needs for FY/08 budget development.
(Planning, Police, Council Services)
         OBJECTIVE 25. Utilizing state funding, if available, rescope the 12 th
and Menaul streetscape recommendations, in collaboration with the original
planning firm, to meet original HOK cost projections and begin design and
engineering of streetscapes by the end of FY/07. (Planning)
         OBJECTIVE 26. Create and adopt urban design and zoning standards using
a charette or other techniques for the MacArthur and Solar area of north Fourth
Street. (Planning)
         OBJECTIVE 27. Select the consultant and complete the design for the
Big I Landscaping project by the end of FY/07. (DMD)
(R-2006-046, approved 6-1-06)
         OBJECTIVE 28. Identify, prioritize, schedule, and report on progress
on ongoing or planned sector, area, corridor, site, transit oriented
development and streetscape plans in inventory. Report on the status of this
objective to the Mayor and City Council at the end of each quarter in FY/07.
(Planning)
(R-2006-046, approved 6-1-06)
         OBJECTIVE 29. Increase the number of proactive neighborhood community
code "canvasses" (sweeps) from an anticipated 20 in FY/06 to at least 30 in FY/
07. Report to the Mayor and City Council at the end of each quarter on the
canvasses conducted during the respective quarter. (Planning)
(R-2006-046, approved 6-1-06)
      (5)   Environmental Protection and Enhancement Goal: Protect and enhance
Albuquerque's places and natural environment - its mountains, river, Bosque,
volcanoes, arroyos, clean air and underground water supply.
         OBJECTIVE 1. Develop a plan to acquire land surrounding the Cerro
Colorado Landfill for future expansion and for acquisition of land for a new
Westside convenience center and submit the plan and a status report to the
Mayor and City Council by the second quarter, FY/07. (Solid Waste Management)
         OBJECTIVE 2. Using in house resources, develop a business plan for an
expanded Intermediate Processing Facility to increase processing and storage
capacity of recyclable material and submit it to the Mayor and City Council by
the end of the second quarter, FY/07. (Solid Waste Management)
          OBJECTIVE 3. Using in house resources, develop a business plan to
implement an automated recycling collection system and submit it to the Mayor
and City Council by the end of the third quarter, FY/07. (Solid Waste
Management)
         OBJECTIVE 4. Using in house resources, develop a feasibility analysis
of moving the present SWMD administrative office on Edith and purchasing a new
facility to accommodate past and future growth and submit the analysis to the
Mayor and City Council by the end of FY/07. (Solid Waste Management)
         OBJECTIVE 5. Monitor performance and effectiveness of the Los Angeles
landfill groundwater remediation and landfill gas-to-energy systems and report
progress to the Mayor and City Council by the end of FY07. (Environmental
Health)
         OBJECTIVE 6. Conduct a technical analysis of air quality to evaluate
select peak ground-level ozone formation episode(s) in the Greater Albuquerque
Area that reach an Air Quality Index in the Unhealthy for Sensitive Groups
Category. Include external contributing factors, as well as ozone prevention
approaches. Submit an executive summary of the analysis to the Mayor and City
Council by the end of FY/07. (Environmental Health)
         OBJECTIVE 7. (Superseded by Objective 16 below, R-2006-046, approved
6-1-06)
         OBJECTIVE 8. As the first step in reducing greenhouse gases created by
the City, inventory departments generating greenhouse gases and propose an
approach to analyze mitigation options. Submit the inventory and proposed
approach to the Mayor and City Council by the end of FY/07. (Environmental
Health)
         OBJECTIVE 9. Coordinate development of plans in each City department
to reduce water use. Evaluate existing goals and strategies and monitor
outcomes to assure the overall city institutional water usage is reduced by 3%.
Report results to the Mayor and City Council by the end of the fourth quarter
FY/07. (Environmental Health)
         OBJECTIVE 10. Utilizing existing resources, open to the public the
Open Space Visitors Center by December 2006. (Parks and Recreation)
         OBJECTIVE 11. Conduct a study to determine the feasibility of a
conservation easement program to conserve open space and agricultural lands in
the City of Albuquerque by the end of the third quarter, FY/07. (Council
Services)
         OBJECTIVE 12. Expand the Neighbor to Neighbor war on weeds program to
additional neighborhoods. Report on the status of the program by the end of the
second quarter, FY/07. (Solid Waste Management)
         OBJECTIVE 13. Using departmental resources, develop a feasibility
analysis and report to extend the life of the Cerro Colorado Landfill that
assesses the City’s waste stream, integrates collection and operational
improvements and efficiencies for both recycling and curbside solid waste, and
explores alternatives to land filling; submit the report to the Mayor and City
Council by the end of the second quarter, FY/07, with recommendations for
inclusion in the FY/08 budget. (Solid Waste Management)
         OBJECTIVE 14. Develop a conceptual plan to address recreational trails
on the west side of the Bosque. Submit the plan to the Mayor and City Council
by the end of the third quarter, FY/07. (Municipal Development)
         OBJECTIVE 15. Develop a plan to address current and alternative means
of managing, collecting, and disposing of household hazardous wastes, including
using convenience centers as collection points. Include a cost benefit analysis
for each alternative. Identify and measure current users and potential demand.
Assess the impacts of household hazardous wastes on Albuquerque’s environment.
Provide the business plan to the Mayor and City Council by the end of the
second quarter, FY/07. (Solid Waste Management and Environmental Health)
(R-2006-046, approved 6-1-06)
         OBJECTIVE 16. Evaluate the impact and costs of alternative methods of
initiating a ‘commuter rule’ program on air quality. Coordinate with the Middle
Rio Grande Council of Governments on ways to increase cooperation and
participation amongst all governmental entities in the Albuquerque MSA air
shed. Submit the evaluation to the Mayor and City Council by the end of FY/07.
(Environmental Health) (This objective replaces Goal 5, Objective 7 of F/S R-
06-20.)
(R-2006-046, approved 6-1-06)
         OBJECTIVE 17. The Solid Waste Management Department shall work with
the Office of Management and Budget and Council Services to conduct a study to
evaluate and recommend ways of reducing Solid Waste program costs and
increasing the services, quality, customer satisfaction and operational
efficiency of existing Solid Waste programs. Submit the evaluation and
recommendations to the Mayor and City Council by the end of the second quarter
FY/07. (Solid Waste)
(R-2006-046, approved 6-1-06)
      (6)   Economic Vitality Goal:  Achieve a vital, diverse, and sustainable
economy in which businesses and residents have opportunities for success.
         OBJECTIVE 1. Continue marketing and complete activation of the Foreign
Trade Zone to promote international commerce and activity at the Sunport.
Submit a report to the Mayor and City Council by the end of the third quarter,
FY/07. (Aviation)
         OBJECTIVE 2. Design and construct the Aerospace Training Center in the
Aerospace Technology Park at Double Eagle II by the third quarter, and report
to the Mayor and City Council on progress by the end of FY/07. (Aviation)
         OBJECTIVE 3. Develop a prototype development-ready certified sites
program for the Aerospace Technology Park at Double Eagle II and the Foreign
Trade Zone at the Sunport by the end of second quarter FY/07 and begin an
evaluation of the program in third and fourth quarter FY/07. Create a prototype
database of information regarding development-ready sites at ATP and the FTZ,
evaluate the prototype, then establish the database and make the information
available to the public by the close of FY/07. (Aviation)
         OBJECTIVE 4. Complete design for Phase I of the Air Cargo Site
Development plan by the end of the second quarter, FY/07. Continue marketing
activities and include the status in the report to the Mayor and City Council
by the end of the third quarter, FY/07. (Aviation)
         OBJECTIVE 5. Begin utility, pedestrian trail, bike trail, transit
facility and roadway distribution throughout the Aerospace Technology Park at
Double Eagle II and provide a status report to the Mayor and City Council by
the end of FY/07. (Aviation)
         OBJECTIVE 6. Continue efforts to develop direct international flights
to Mexico and explore opportunities to develop direct international flights
with Canadian destinations. Develop and promulgate the business case for these
flights. Submit a progress report to the Mayor and City Council by the end of
the second quarter, FY/07. (Aviation and Office of Economic Development)
         OBJECTIVE 7. Establish and coordinate quarterly international trade
development seminars for Albuquerque companies regarding international trade
opportunities, processes, and procedures. Report on attendance and business
results in the City's Performance Plan for FY/08 and beyond. (Office of
Economic Development)
         OBJECTIVE 8. Create an "International Business Resource Center" at the
Office of Economic Development, to include market research literature on
foreign industries and markets, online databases, and business meeting space
for the purpose of initiating and facilitating international business
development. Include performance measures on its use in the City's Performance
Plan for FY/08 and beyond. (Office of Economic Development)
         OBJECTIVE 9. Complete the plan for science and technology-based
economic development initiatives with stakeholders, including SNL, UNM, the Air
Force Research Lab and others. Submit the plan to the Mayor and City Council by
the end of the third quarter, FY/07. (Office of Economic Development)
         OBJECTIVE 10. Complete the plan for sustainable economic development
for Albuquerque and submit it to the Mayor and City Council by the end of the
second quarter, FY/07. Include implementation milestones and priorities in the
plan. (Office of Economic Development)
         OBJECTIVE 11. Develop the business case for an outdoor "backlot" for
film locations in the Albuquerque area and submit the plan to the Mayor and
City Council by the end of the second quarter, FY/07. (Office of Economic
Development)
         OBJECTIVE 12. Increase the entries and attendance at Albuquerque film
festivals in FY/07. Include specific performance measures in the City's
Performance 13.
         OBJECTIVE 13. Building on our diverse cultural assets, promote city
museums, the Biopark, and other City assets to potential visitors to
Albuquerque. (DFAS)
(R-2006-046, approved 6-1-06)
      (7)   Community and Cultural Engagement Goal: Residents are fully and
effectively engaged in the life and decisions of the community to: promote and
enhance our pride, cultural values and resources; and, ensure that
Albuquerque's community institutions are effective, accountable and responsive.
         OBJECTIVE 1. With approved bond resources, complete construction
drawings and all reviews for Phase II Renovation of the education center,
history gallery, west gallery and administration offices of the Albuquerque
Museum by March of 2007. Provide a progress report to the Mayor and City
Council by the end of the second quarter, FY/07. (Cultural Services)
         OBJECTIVE 2. With approved bond resources, acquire collections, write
scripts, and develop design for the renovation of the history exhibit at the
Albuquerque Museum by the end of FY/07. Provide a progress report to the Mayor
and City Council by the end of the second quarter, FY/07. (Cultural Services)
         OBJECTIVE 3. With approved State resources and within the existing
scope, complete the master plan for site development and construction drawings
for visitor center and vehicular access for Casa San Ysidro by April of 2007.
Provide a progress report to the Mayor and City Council by the end of the
second quarter, FY/07. (Cultural Services)
         OBJECTIVE 4. (Superseded by Objective 8 below, R-2006-046, approved 6-
1-06)
         OBJECTIVE 5. Using existing resources, conduct a cost/benefit analysis
associated with entering into a long-term lease of the Freed Building as well
as the feasibility of adding touring shows to the KiMo Theatre vs. maintaining
it as a rental facility. Assess the feasibility of using the KiMo to strengthen
the non-profit artistic and cultural organizations in Albuquerque to better
serve the community with accessible and affordable artistic and cultural
events. Provide a report to the Mayor and City Council by the end of the second
quarter, FY/07. (Cultural Services)
         OBJECTIVE 6. Recommend to the Mayor and City Council new Five Year
Goals and Desired Community/Customer Conditions by October 2006 and adopt Goals
and Desired Conditions by December 15, 2006. (Office of Management and Budget)
         OBJECTIVE 7. Start construction of the Insectarium by the end of the
first quarter, FY/07, develop exhibits, and open it by the end of FY/07.
(Cultural Services)
(R-2006-046, approved 6-1-06)
         OBJECTIVE 8. Develop a Balloon Center Strategic Plan as part of an
overall policy review for operations of City supported or subsidized museums.
Include projections of annual operating, capital, and exhibit/program costs and
staffing needs for museums operated, supported, or subsidized by the City of
Albuquerque, including the Albuquerque Museum, the Balloon Center, Explora, and
Casa San Ysidro. Identify sources and levels of revenues to cover these costs.
Identify original operating assumptions and how these have changed. Assess
governance structures to recommend the most sustainable, long term operating
approach. Provide a report to the Mayor and City Council by the end of the
second quarter, FY/07. (CAO with Cultural Services) (This objective replaces
Goal 7 Objective 4 of F/S R-06-20.)
(R-2006-046, approved 6-1-06)
      (8)   Governmental Excellence and Effectiveness Goal: Government is
ethical and accountable; every element of government contributes effectively to
meeting public needs.
         OBJECTIVE 1. As part of a plan to improve the operations and services
of the Purchasing Division, achieve professional certification of all Senior
Buyers by the end of FY/07. Report on the status of this objective in a report
to the Mayor and City Council by the end of FY/07. (Finance and Administrative
Services)
         OBJECTIVE 2. As part of the ERP process, complete review and submit
recommendations for updating the Public Purchasing Ordinance to bring it
current and correct with today's modern procurement and business practices by
the end of the first quarter, FY/07. (Finance and Administrative Services)
         OBJECTIVE 3. Develop an on-line training program on "City Public
Procurement and Contracting Process" for access by user departments and vendors
by the third quarter, FY07. Report on its use in the City's Performance Plan,
starting in FY/08. (Finance and Administrative Services)
         OBJECTIVE 4. Conduct a CRM phase 2 pilot that incorporates
transactions, like work orders, preventive maintenance and dispatch. Develop a
business case based on the results of the pilot and submit it to the Mayor and
City Council by the end of FY/07. (Finance and Administrative Services)
         OBJECTIVE 5. Monitor contractors' performance and provide
recommendations regarding the contract renewal process for destination and
convention marketing and support by the end of the second quarter, FY/07.
(Finance and Administrative Services)
         OBJECTIVE 6. Assess the city's point of sale applications and their
systemization in order to consider the potential for consolidation or
automation of cash sites (e.g., kiosks) and the use of alternative payment
media. Provide a summary report to the Mayor and City Council by the end of the
second quarter, FY/07. (Finance and Administrative Services)
         OBJECTIVE 7. Initiate a tire testing program to identify brands and
models that provide the most cost effective life. Reduce tire costs by 10%.
This objective is continued from FY06. (Finance and Administrative Services)
         OBJECTIVE 8. Conduct a cost benefit analysis of warehousing operations
in the City of Albuquerque, compare operations to best practices, and make
recommendations for improvement in a report to the Mayor and City Council by
the end of the second quarter, FY/07. (Finance and Administrative Services)
         OBJECTIVE 9. Evaluate the efficiency and effectiveness of outside
legal services in regard to Workers Compensation claims and compare to using
internal City legal staff. Submit a report to the Mayor and City Council by the
end of the first quarter of FY07 with recommendations. (Legal and Finance and
Administrative Services)
         OBJECTIVE 10. Use all available administrative processes to advance
PNM funding of underground utilities. Report on progress to the Mayor and City
Council at the end of FY/07 and FY/08. (Legal)
         OBJECTIVE 11. Develop a transition plan for FY/08 that documents
vacant and filled positions currently compensated at less than $7.50 per hour
and determine financial and policy impacts resulting from this transition.
Submit the report to the Mayor and City Council by the end of November 2006.
(CAO)
         OBJECTIVE 12. Create and operate a centralized office to conduct
administrative hearings to include existing hearing caseloads from APD,
Planning, and other sources and anticipated decriminalized violations from
Environmental Health and other City ordinances. Report on the status of the
creation and operations to the Mayor and City Council by the end of the third
quarter, FY/07, and include pertinent performance measures in the City’s
Performance Plan. (CAO)
(R-2006-046, approved 6-1-06)
         OBJECTIVE 13. Configure, test, and implement the following ERP modules
by the end of the second quarter, FY/08: Human Resources (employment, benefits,
and payroll), General Ledger, and Budget/Enterprise Performance Management.
Provide a status report to the Mayor and City Council by the end of FY/07.
(DFAS)
(R-2006-046, approved 6-1-06)
         OBJECTIVE 14. Evaluate City contributions to MRCOG to determine the
consistency and equity of funding with City representation on MRCOG programs
and services. Provide a report to the Mayor and City Council by the end of the
first quarter, FY/07. (CAO)
(R-2006-046, approved 6-1-06)
   (B)   That the Mayor shall submit a report by Goal to the City Council at
least semi-annually summarizing the progress made toward implementation of all
the one-year objectives, including those in this resolution and F/S R-06-20 and
that any report called for in this resolution shall be in the form of an
Executive Communication from the Mayor to the City Council, unless otherwise
specifically noted.
(R-2006-027, approved 3-21-06; Am. R-2006-046, approved 6-1-06)
§ 4-7-3 ONE-YEAR OBJECTIVES FOR FISCAL YEAR 2008.
   (A)   That the City of Albuquerque adopts the following one-year objectives
for FY/08, grouped under the eight five-year goals of the City.
      (1)   HUMAN AND FAMILY DEVELOPMENT GOAL: People of all ages have the
opportunity to participate in the community and economy and are well sheltered,
safe, healthy, and educated.
         OBJECTIVE 1. Increase the number of early childhood literacy
participants by 50% from an estimated 300 in FY/07 to 450 in FY/08 to give
children a head start on a life of learning, enhance children's development and
increase pre-reading skills. Report results annually in the City's Performance
Plan (CSD/Library).
         OBJECTIVE 2. Increase the number of teens in the Summer Reading
Program by 5% from 2,514 to 2,640 by targeting outreach programs specifically
to that age group to increase economic opportunities for our youth and to
encourage a literate and well educated community. Report results annually in
the City's Performance Plan (CSD/ Library).
         OBJECTIVE 3. Increase circulation, turnstile count and computer usage
15% by adding 64 per week library system hours by the end of FY/08 to low hour
branches and branches located on major thoroughfares. Report results in the
Performance Plan. Provide a status report to the Mayor and City Council by the
third quarter of FY/08 (CSD/Library).
         OBJECTIVE 4. Continue to implement risk-based consumer health
protection inspection strategy and report on inspections and food-borne illness
in the Performance Plan. (EHD/Consumer Health)
         OBJECTIVE 5. Utilizing existing or available grants, funding and
resources, select the developer for Phase II Trumbull Development by end of
first quarter FY/08 and submit site plan to DRB by end of second quarter FY/08.
Begin construction by the end of FY/08. Report on progress of Phase II
Development to the Mayor and City Council by end of FY/08. (FCS/Community
Development and Plan and Coordinate)
         OBJECTIVE 6. Utilizing existing or available start-up funding and
resources, contract with an operator for the Albuquerque Teen Arts and
Entertainment Center, begin programmatic planning and planning for renovation
of the Ice House building, and seek a broad group of partners from the arts and
youth-services community by the end of the second quarter of FY/08. Utilizing
CIP funding that is scheduled to come on line in the third quarter of FY/08,
complete design and begin renovation of the Ice House building by the end of
the third quarter of FY/08. Using outside funding sources, hold an event in the
renovated facility by the end of FY/08. Report to the Mayor and City Council at
the end of the second, third, and fourth quarters of FY/08. (FCS)
         OBJECTIVE 7. Work with the property manager, Treasury Division of
DFAS, and Bond Counsel to examine all options available including the sale of
the properties or restructuring of the debt on the 2000 Series Multi-Family
Revenue Bonds which were sold to purchase the affordable housing/mixed income
apartment complexes now managed on contract by Monarch Properties. Provide the
analysis of these options to the Mayor and City Council by the end of the
second quarter of FY/08. (FCS/Plan and Coordinate)
         OBJECTIVE 8. Complete land acquisition and identify funding for Phase
I (Centralized Kitchen) of the Centralized Kitchen and Social Services
facility. Submit a report/plan by the end of FY/08 to the Mayor and the City
Council. (Senior Affairs/Senior Social Services)
         OBJECTIVE 9. Building on the results of the client surveys and needs
assessments, develop an outreach and recruitment program to educate and inform
seniors not using DSA services of the benefits of utilizing and participating
in Senior Affairs services by year-end, FY/08. Submit a report/plan by the end
of FY/08 to the Mayor and the City Council. (Senior Affairs/Senior Well Being)
         OBJECTIVE 10. Develop a strategic plan to address the renovation and/
or modernization and operation of the City's aging swimming pools to
effectively meet customer needs and environmental health and building code
standards, correct facility deficiencies, and manage risks. Identify future
operating/capital costs and anticipated revenue streams (including fee
schedule). Submit the plan to the Mayor and City Council by the end of the
fourth quarter FY/08. (Parks and Recreation Department, Provide Quality
Recreation)
         OBJECTIVE 11. Identify a suitable location, move, and begin operating
the City's Indoor Mondo Track at an alternate location by the end of the second
quarter FY/08 using existing resources. If a suitable site cannot be
identified, suspend use of the track. Begin reporting pertinent performance
measures of track utilization in the FY/09 Performance Plan. Submit a status
report to the Mayor and City Council by the end of the second quarter FY/08.
(Parks and Recreation Department, Provide Quality Recreation)
         OBJECTIVE 12. Identify opportunities to develop larger regional sports
facilities that will accommodate both the growing demand for local youth
activities and larger national amateur competitions by the end of the fourth
quarter FY/08. Include the sports to be added, potential markets, the
availability of partners, options for operating models, capital and operating
costs, and potential funding sources and revenue streams. Submit the report to
the Mayor and City Council by the end of the fourth quarter, FY/08. (Parks and
Recreation Department, Provide Quality Recreation)
         OBJECTIVE 13. Using existing resources, improve and expand facilities
at the Balloon Fiesta Park by the end of FY/08 for recreation to include
soccer, sand volleyball, cricket, bicycle racing, disc golf, other suitable
sports, and group reservations. Identify costs and how they will be absorbed
into existing department budgets. Submit a status report to the Mayor and City
Council by the end of the fourth quarter, FY/08. (Parks and Recreation
Department, Provide Quality Recreation)
         OBJECTIVE 14. Provide monitoring by the end of the second quarter FY/
08 for security systems at 12 swimming pools, the 6th and Aspen and Los Altos
Park Management Satellites, the Balloon Fiesta Park Golf Training Center and
Maintenance Shop, the Veterans Memorial Visitor Center, the Open Space Visitor
Center, and the Sierra Vista Tennis Complex. Submit a status report to the
Mayor and City Council by the end of the second quarter, FY/08. (Parks and
Recreation Department, Provide Quality Recreation)
         OBJECTIVE 15. Using funds available from the State and the FY/07
General Obligation Bond election, renovate and enhance the Shooting Range Park
by the end of FY/08 to accommodate the NRA Police National Shooting
Championships and the US Open National Skeet Shooting Championships, and to
provide improved amenities for local patrons. Submit a report to the Mayor and
City Council by the end of FY/08. (DMD)
         OBJECTIVE 16. Develop a Golf Course Equipment Replacement Schedule,
based on equipment life expectancy, by the end of the first quarter FY/08 to
ensure up-to-date equipment is available for the efficient maintenance of City
golf courses. Begin reporting the average age of equipment in the City's FY/09
Performance Plan. Submit a status report to the Mayor and the City Council by
the end of the third quarter, FY/08. (Parks and Recreation Department,
Affordable and Quality Golf)
         OBJECTIVE 17. Create an Adopt-A-Hole Volunteer Program at each City
golf course by the end of the first quarter FY/08. Work with the Golf
Associations at each course to coordinate volunteers to assist with planting
flowers, trimming trees, cleaning the course, hand watering, painting, etc.
Begin reporting pertinent performance measures, including volunteer hours and
incentives/reimbursements provided, in the City's FY/09 Performance Plan.
Submit a status report to the Mayor and City Council by the end of the third
quarter, FY/08. (Parks and Recreation Department, Affordable and Quality Golf)
         OBJECTIVE 18. Prepare a study to analyze costs and benefits associated
with a patient exchange program with other communities for the treatment of
drug and alcohol addiction. Submit a report to the Mayor and City Council by
the end of the second quarter of FY/08. (FCSD/ Substance Abuse Treatment and
Prevention)
         OBJECTIVE 19. Implement the recommendations of the City of Albuquerque
Housing Task Force’s report of May 2006. The report includes eleven
recommendations to improve the existing housing rehabilitation program and five
recommendations to change program delivery strategies. Particular emphasis
should be placed on the recommendations related to the focus, management, and
productivity of the Housing Rehabilitation Program. Provide a progress report
to the Mayor and City Council by the end of the second quarter of FY/08.
(Family and Community Services)
         OBJECTIVE 20. Complete design and bidding on the Thomas Bell Community
Center gymnasium by the end of the second quarter of FY/08 and begin
construction in the third quarter of FY/08. Provide a progress report to the
Mayor and City Council by the end of the second quarter of FY/08. (Family and
Community Services/DMD)
         OBJECTIVE 21. Initiate construction of affordable housing units in
Barelas on vacant lots purchased by the Barelas Community Development
Corporation. Provide a progress report to the Mayor and City Council by the end
of the second quarter of FY/08. (Family and Community Services)
      (2)   PUBLIC SAFETY GOAL: Citizens are safe, feel safe and secure, and
have trust and shared responsibility for maintaining a safe environment.
         OBJECTIVE 1. Utilizing existing funding, and in accordance with State
regulations, develop a pilot program of temporary administrative changes in
order to immediately staff empty paramedic driver positions with current AFD
personnel. Partner with OMB to study the effects of the pilot program and
recommend changes to existing personnel policies in order to affect permanent
solutions. Submit a report to the Mayor and City Council by the end of the
second quarter, FY/08. (AFD/Headquarters)
         OBJECTIVE 2. Partner with FCS and United Way to open and operate a
Family Advocacy Center for victims of domestic violence, sexual assault and
crimes against children by the end of second quarter, FY/08. Report to Mayor
and City Council by end of FY/08. (APD/Family Advocacy Center)
         OBJECTIVE 3. Implement the first phase of the APD technology strategic
plan to guide policy and resource allocation decisions for the development,
purchase, allocation, implementation and maintenance of technology for the
Albuquerque Police Department. Upgrade the record management and computer-aided
dispatching systems; implement field reporting; modernize hardware and network
infrastructure; coordinate information sharing with other agencies, and
streamline business processes to eliminate redundancies and inefficiencies
within the department. Submit progress reports biannually to the Mayor and City
Council starting at the end of the second quarter, FY/08, and in the City’s
Performance Plan. (DFAS/ISD and APD/Officer and Dept Support)
         OBJECTIVE 4. Evaluate the Red Light Photo Enforcement Program by
analyzing trends in violations, appeals, accidents, etc. by intersection.
Identify the unserved, highest impact intersections and provide an
implementation schedule. Evaluate the Mobile Photo Traffic Speed Enforcement
Program in school zones by analyzing trends in violations and appeals. Provide
a report to the Mayor and City Council at the end of the second and fourth
quarters, FY/08. (APD, Legal, OMB)
         OBJECTIVE 5. Increase live exits of adoptable animals at AACC, as
defined by the AACC classification system, to 90% for FY08 and 100% for FY09.
Report results in the City’s Performance Plan. (EHD/AACC)
         OBJECTIVE 6. Initiate programming to increase adoptions of adoptable
and rehabilitatable pets; reach out to and educate the community about the need
for pet alteration and make alteration more convenient and affordable,
especially to lower income residents and senior citizens; continue enforcement
of alteration and microchip requirements and increase microchipping of the
Albuquerque pet population; report on progress to the Mayor and City Council by
the end of the third quarter, FY/08, and in the City’s Performance Plan. (EHD/
AACC)
         OBJECTIVE 7. In conjunction with the Public Safety Partnership,
develop a training module to teach problem solving techniques to community
groups, city department staff, neighborhood associations and coalitions, and
other interested parties by the third quarter, and will provide a report on the
status of this objective by the end of the third quarter of FY/08. Report on
the participation in this training and the results achieved in the City’s
Performance Plan. (APD/Neighborhood Policing)
         OBJECTIVE 8. Build on the pilot West Side Crime Alert system and
expand it throughout the city by transferring its platform to a web-based
system. Report on system activities to the Mayor and City Council by the end of
the third quarter, FY/08. (APD/Neighborhood Policing)
         OBJECTIVE 9. Create a Fraud Division to include a Cyber Crimes Unit
that will specifically address cases of fraud, identify theft, and computer
related crimes by the end of the fourth quarter, FY/08; provide a status report
on activities to the Mayor and City Council within 6 months of its creation and
report results in the Performance Plan. (APD/Investigative Services)
         OBJECTIVE 10. Increase law enforcement effectiveness by expanding the
problem solving model regionally by supporting and training regional agencies
on its use; collaborate regionally in its application to reduce crime. Provide
a status report to the Mayor and City Council on this effort by the end of FY/
08. (APD/Officer and Dept Support)
         OBJECTIVE 11. Increase APD’s ability to link suspects and crimes
together by improving CAPTURE information dissemination to all investigators
and their chain of command. Provide a status report to the Mayor and City
Council on this effort by the end of the second quarter, FY/08. (APD/
Neighborhood Policing)
         OBJECTIVE 12. Form a committee to establish design priorities (“pre-
design”) for the Double Eagle hangar / substation in preparation for the funded
DE design and construction. Provide a report to the Mayor and City Council by
the end of FY/08. (APD/Officer and Dept Support and AFD/Headquarters)
         OBJECTIVE 13. Develop a plan for the interim provision of public
safety services for Mesa del Sol, including facilities, staffing, and
milestones. Provide a report to the Mayor and City Council by the end of the
second quarter, FY/08. (APD/Officer and Dept Support and AFD/Headquarters)
         OBJECTIVE 14. Prepare for the CALEA onsite assessment for the 6th
reaccreditation of the Albuquerque Police Department in FY/09 by preparing the
application and conducting a mock assessment. Provide milestones for the
reaccreditation in a report to the Mayor and City Council by the end of the
third quarter, FY/08. (APD/Professional Standards)
         OBJECTIVE 15. Develop a design for the 6th Area Command facility that
meets or exceeds the silver level Leadership In Energy and Environmental Design
(LEED) rating criteria. Provide a report to the Mayor and City Council by the
end of FY/08. (APD/Officer and Dept Support)
         OBJECTIVE 16. Increase efforts to promptly and appropriately dispose
of property held by the Evidence Unit which has no further evidentiary value,
through the creation and utilization of an Evidence Disposition Unit. Report
progress in the City's Performance Plan, beginning in FY08. (APD/Investigative
Services)
         OBJECTIVE 17. Conduct a study to consider the feasibility of merging
the Albuquerque Fire Department with the Bernalillo County Fire Department in
terms of providing more efficient service and to generate cost savings. Provide
a report to the Mayor and City Council by the end of the second quarter of FY/
08. (Albuquerque Fire Department)
         OBJECTIVE 18. Co-locate City and County fire services at Station 3 on
Barcelona. Provide a report defining operational and financial impacts to the
Mayor and City Council by the end of the first quarter of FY/08. (AFD)
         OBJECTIVE 19. Prepare a study to analyze the types of calls to which
police officers are currently responding. Determine the potential of
eliminating the necessity of police officers responding to calls that others,
such as Public Safety Officers, could respond to, without jeopardizing public
safety. In addition, as part of this analysis, determine which calls do not
necessitate a response by any APD personnel. Provide a report of findings and
recommendations to the Mayor and City Council by the end of the second quarter
of FY/08. (APD)
         OBJECTIVE 20. Conduct a study to consider the feasibility of merging
the Albuquerque Fire Department Dispatch with the Bernalillo County Fire
Department Dispatch in terms of providing more efficient service and improving
response times. Provide a report to the Mayor and City Council by the end of
the second quarter of FY/08. (Albuquerque Fire Department)
      (3)   PUBLIC INFRASTRUCTURE. Ensure that all existing communities are
adequately and efficiently served with well planned, coordinated, and
maintained infrastructure. Ensure that new development is efficiently
integrated into existing infrastructures and that the costs are balanced with
the revenues generated.
         OBJECTIVE 1. Continue construction of the Terminal Optimization
project, which includes reconstruction of food and beverage areas, enlarge and
modernize restrooms; enlarge passenger holdrooms; enhance special systems; and
modify communication center. Report to the Mayor and City Council on the
progress of actions by the end of the fourth quarter, FY/08. (Aviation)
         OBJECTIVE 2. Reconstruct and rehabilitate the General Aviation Apron
by fourth quarter of FY/08 and report to the Mayor and City Council on the
progress of actions by the end of the fourth quarter, FY/08. (Aviation)
         OBJECTIVE 3. Reconstruct and rehabilitate the Terminal Apron by 1st
quarter of FY/08 and report to the Mayor and City Council on the progress of
actions by the end of the second quarter, FY/08. (Aviation)
         OBJECTIVE 4. Utilizing approved CIP funds, complete landscaping of 5
miles of medians by June 30, 2008. Report to the Mayor and City Council on
progress by the end of third quarter, FY/08. (DMD/Design Recovered Parks)
         OBJECTIVE 5. Evaluate the benefits of short-term storm drain
improvements and begin implementation of long-term improvements in the Barelas
and Martineztown areas. Report on progress to the Mayor and City Council by the
end of fourth quarter, FY/08. (DMD/Design Recovered Storm)
         OBJECTIVE 6. Utilizing approved CIP funding, begin phased construction
of the Big I landscaping. Report on progress of phases 1 & 2 (of 5) to Mayor
and Council by end of fourth quarter, FY/08. (DMD/Design Recovered Parks)
         OBJECTIVE 7. Utilizing existing resources, evaluate the effectiveness
of the new global positioning system base stations that provide readily
available data to subscribing survey users in the greater metropolitan area.
Report in the Performance Plan beginning first quarter, FY/08. (DMD/
Construction)
         OBJECTIVE 8. Reactivate the GIS Task Force to evaluate existing GIS
resources and develop a proposal for a comprehensive, integrated GIS system for
the City to better coordinate physical assets, projects, and strategic planning
efforts. Report to the Mayor and City Council by the end of second quarter, FY/
08. (DMD/Strategic Support and Planning)
         OBJECTIVE 9. Improve response to citizen concerns and increase
efficiency of existing street maintenance and traffic signalization by
obtaining equipment, training, software, and access required to provide real
time in-vehicle access to the City's 311 Service Order software. Develop
baseline and performance measures to be included in the FY/09 Performance Plan.
(DMD/Street Services)
         OBJECTIVE 10. Utilizing the pavement rating system report, identify
and implement a methodology that will allow for timely and regular monitoring
of street conditions to facilitate the identification of priorities for
rehabilitation, renovation and construction and reconstruction. Report in the
Performance Plan beginning second quarter, FY/08. (DMD/Street Services)
         OBJECTIVE 11. Begin construction of the following storm drain
projects: Osuna Blvd from the North Diversion Channel to Jefferson St., Wyoming
Blvd. crossing of the La Cueva Arroyo, and San Mateo Blvd from the Hahn Arroyo
south to Aztec Street. Report progress to the Mayor and City Council by the end
of fourth quarter, FY/08. (DMD/Design Recovered Storm)
         OBJECTIVE 12. Improve pavement markings on City roadways. This will
include striping on arterials and collectors, painting of median noses, and
painting of existing marked cross walks. Also, install and maintain marked
parking stalls as deemed necessary. Report to the Mayor and City Council by end
of the fourth quarter, FY/08. (DMD/Street Services)
         OBJECTIVE 13. Utilizing Federal funding, and existing/available
revenue, award and complete the construction of a park and ride facility at 7
Bar Loop. This facility is required to serve the several routes that emanate
from the various neighborhoods in the Northwest Mesa area. Report on progress
to the Mayor and City Council by the end of second quarter, FY/08. (Transit/ABQ
Ride)
         OBJECTIVE 14. Utilizing existing or available revenue or funding,
award a construction contract for the development of the Central and Unser Park
and Ride/Southwest Transit Center. This facility will act as a major intermodal
interchange for several routes, provide private vehicle parking and secure
bicycle storage. Report to the Mayor and City Council by the end of fourth
quarter, FY/08. (Transit/ABQ Ride)
         OBJECTIVE 15. Utilizing existing or available revenue or funding,
determine the feasibility of establishing a park and ride facility in the area
of Coors and Montano to serve as a transfer point for routes serving Coors (N/
S) and Montano/Montgomery (E/W). Report progress to the Mayor and City Council
at the end of fourth quarter, FY/08. (Transit/ABQ Ride)
         OBJECTIVE 16. Utilizing existing or available revenue or funding, and
in-house resources, develop a Park and Ride/ Transit Center Strategic Plan for
facilities beyond FY/08. Submit the plan to the Mayor and City Council by the
end of FY/08. (Transit/ABQ Ride)
         OBJECTIVE 17. Utilizing Congestion Mitigation and Air-Quality (CMAQ)
funding, and other additional revenue, if available, extend Rapid Ride service
along Central Avenue east of Wyoming or on other high capacity corridors and
commuter routes. Report progress to the Mayor and City Council by the end of
second quarter, FY/08. (Transit/ABQ Ride)
         OBJECTIVE 18. Utilizing Congestion Mitigation and Air-Quality (CMAQ)
funding, and other additional revenue, if available, establish at least 2 new
fixed routes in both the Southwest and Northwest Mesa areas to meet increased
need for service. Report to Mayor and City Council by the end of second
quarter, FY/08. (Transit/ABQ Ride)
         OBJECTIVE 19. Utilizing existing or available revenue or funding, and
in-house resources, update the 2006-2011 Short Range Transit Plan (SRTP).
Submit the plan by the end of FY/08 to the Mayor and City Council. (Transit/
Strategic Support)
         OBJECTIVE 20. Utilizing existing or available revenue or funding, and
in-house resources, develop a 10 year Capital Needs Assessment for all capital
assets necessary for the appropriate and efficient operation of the Albuquerque
Transit Department. This Needs Assessment will become the basis for requests
for capital funding from all sources. Report progress to the Mayor and City
Council by the fourth quarter, FY/08. (Transit/Strategic Support)
         OBJECTIVE 21. Utilizing existing or available revenue or funding, and
in-house resources, develop a detailed, integrated service plan to provide
services to both the Northwest and Southwest Mesa areas. Capital equipment
necessary to implement the Westside Service Plan will be included in the
Capital Needs Assessment. Report progress to the Mayor and City Council by the
fourth quarter, FY/08. (Transit/ABQ Ride)
         OBJECTIVE 22. Improve maintenance and security for all park and ride
facilities. Report on activities and effectiveness in the City’s Performance
Plan and provide an initial assessment to the Mayor and City Council by the end
of FY/08. (Transit/Facility Maintenance/Strategic Support)
         OBJECTIVE 23. Based on the FTA assessment and subsequent improvements,
develop and implement a plan to improve the quality, availability, and
efficiency of the SunVan (paratransit) service. Report on activities and
effectiveness in the City’s Performance Plan and provide an initial assessment
to the Mayor and City Council by the end of FY/08. (Transit/Paratransit
Services)
         OBJECTIVE 24. Develop a conceptual plan to address connectivity and
potential improvements for trail surfacing on the west side of the Bosque from
Alameda to Central. Provide a report, with submittal of the Plan, to the Mayor
and City Council by the third quarter of FY/08. (DMD/Transportation)
      (4)   SUSTAINABLE COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT. Guide growth to protect the
environment and the community's economic vitality and create a variety of
livable, sustainable communities throughout Albuquerque.
         OBJECTIVE 1. Design and construct Phase 5 improvements at Balloon
Fiesta Park as funds allow; improvements may include: southern entry at Balloon
Museum Drive and Jefferson; pedestrian improvements such as shade and seating
along the concourse and vendors row; outdoor exhibits and landscaping at the
north side of the Balloon Museum; improvements to the command center/safety
building; restrooms; purchasing and installing balloon ride simulator at the
Balloon Museum. Report to the Mayor and City Council by end of second and
fourth quarters, FY08. (DMD/Construction)
         OBJECTIVE 2. Construct Phase 5 improvements at Tower Park/Pond as
funds allow, including off-leash dog exercise area, irrigated turf recreation
field(s), and perimeter landscaping. Report to the Mayor and City Council by
end of FY/08. (DMD/Design Recovered Parks and CIP)
         OBJECTIVE 3. Adopt a revised Metropolitan Redevelopment Plan for the
expanded Near Heights Metropolitan Redevelopment Area (Gibson, San Mateo and
Central corridors) and submit a status report to the Mayor and City Council by
the end of the second quarter, FY/08. (Planning Department, Community
Revitalization)
         OBJECTIVE 4. Complete a charrette for the Central / Unser mixed use
transit oriented development and submit a status report to the Mayor and City
Council by the end of the first quarter, FY/08. (Planning Department, Community
Revitalization)
         OBJECTIVE 5. Complete conversion of the Planning Department's
applications (DRB, EPC and LUCC) to KIVA and submit a status report to the
Mayor and the City Council by the end of the third quarter, FY/08. (Planning
Department, Strategic Support and GIS)
         OBJECTIVE 6. In collaboration with the design and building community,
develop and adopt "Green” amendments to the Uniform Administrative Building
Code for the City and submit a status report to the Mayor and the City Council
by the end of the second quarter, FY/08. (Planning Department, One Stop Shop)
         OBJECTIVE 7. Identify staffing and training needs to implement “Green”
amendments to the Uniform Administrative Code and other green building
legislation. Submit a report to the Mayor and City Council by the end of the
second quarter of FY/08. (Planning)
         OBJECTIVE 8. Present to City Council for adoption an East Central
Metropolitan Redevelopment / Sector Plan by the end of the third quarter, FY/
08. (Planning Department, Community Revitalization)
         OBJECTIVE 9. Present to City Council for adoption a South Yale
Metropolitan Redevelopment / Sector Plan by the end of the third quarter, FY/
08. (Planning Department, Community Revitalization)
         OBJECTIVE 10. Present to City Council for adoption design overlay
standards for Menaul Boulevard within Council District 7 by the end of the
second quarter, FY/08. (Planning Department, Community Revitalization)
         OBJECTIVE 11. Conduct a charrette in District 8 to determine if there
is a need for changes in land use and/or zoning in the district. Report to the
Mayor and City Council on the status by the end of the third quarter, FY/08.
(Planning Department, Community Revitalization)
         OBJECTIVE 12. Complete the programming and design of the International
Gateway Streetscape (Phase II Alcazar & Central) and submit a report to the
Mayor and City Council by the end of the first quarter, FY/08. (Planning
Department, Community Revitalization)
         OBJECTIVE 13. Complete the programming and design of Phase II of the
Albuquerque Bicycle Park (Veloport) and submit a status report to the Mayor and
City Council by the end of the second quarter, FY/08. (DMD/Construction)
         OBJECTIVE 14. Using existing resources, reduce litter in City parks by
the end of FY/08 by increasing the frequency of refuse removal, adding
functional and attractive trash receptacles, implementing pack-it-out
requirements for group use reservations, installing better signage, using
volunteers, and educating the public. Begin reporting pertinent performance
measures in the FY/09 Performance Plan. Submit a status report to the Mayor and
City Council by the end of the fourth quarter, FY/08. (Parks and Recreation
Department, Parks and Landscape Management)
         OBJECTIVE 15. Using existing resources, provide five (5) additional
dog off-leash areas in City parks and add amenities in existing dog parks so
that they are user friendly and submit a status report to the Mayor and City
Council by the end of the fourth quarter, FY/08. (Parks and Recreation/Parks
Management)
         OBJECTIVE 16. Develop a joint use agreement with APS for the
operation, maintenance and use of the new Highland High School lighted
synthetic turf soccer field by the end of the first quarter, FY/08; add the CNM
soccer complex and the LBJ Middle School athletic fields to the joint use
agreement. Submit a status report to the Mayor and City Council by the end of
the first quarter, FY/08. (Parks and Recreation/Parks Management)
         OBJECTIVE 17. Complete the training for and conversion to project
management environment for all Planning projects to allow all stakeholders to
be aware of progress. Provide weekly reports to stakeholders beginning January
1, 2008. (Planning/Strategic Support)
         OBJECTIVE 18. Investigate and propose planning alternatives to new
Sector Development Plans in order to provide assistance in addressing small
opportunity areas and planning challenges in established areas of the city.
Determine other effective planning tools that can be used to protect
neighborhoods and help them plan for their own future. Submit a report to the
Mayor and City Council by the end of the second quarter of FY/08. (Planning)
         OBJECTIVE 19. Improve coordination and communication between the
Planning, Transit, and Municipal Development departments for the purpose of
ensuring sustainable development and redevelopment. Tie key capital and
planning decisions to expected fossil fuel consumption, carbon emissions, and
water consumption in order to maximize efficiency. Provide a progress report to
the Mayor and City Council by the end of the second quarter of FY/08. (CAO,
Planning, Transit, DMD)
      (5)   ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION and ENHANCEMENT. Protect and enhance
Albuquerque's natural environments - its mountains, river, bosque, volcanoes,
arroyos, air, and water.
         OBJECTIVE 1. Pending approval and appropriation of funds from 2007
G.O. bonds, implement renewable energy projects in support of the 2030
resolution, reducing carbon based energy use 10% every 5 years in order to
become carbon neutral by 2030. Report progress in the Performance Plan
annually. (DMD/City Buildings)
         OBJECTIVE 2. Update annually the inventory of departments generating
greenhouse gases and use it to continue identification of mitigation options to
reduce greenhouse gases and to track progress of greenhouse gas reductions.
Submit the inventory update and proposed mitigation options to the Mayor and
the City Council by the end of FY/08. (EHD/Air Quality)
         OBJECTIVE 3. Implement an electronic waste recycling program and
submit a status report to the Mayor and City Council by the second quarter, FY/
08. (SWMD/Recycling)
         OBJECTIVE 4. Design and construct the landfill gas system for cell #6
by the third quarter, FY08, and provide appropriate measures in the Performance
Plan on system outputs and unit costs and revenues. (SWMD/Disposal)
         OBJECTIVE 5. Initiate a full-scale compost operation and marketing
plan; submit a report to the Mayor and City Council by the end of FY08,
detailing green waste diversion volume and tonnage, product production, costs
and revenues, marketing approaches, etc. Provide appropriate measures in the
Performance Plan on compost outputs and unit costs and revenues. (SWMD/
Recycling)
         OBJECTIVE 6. Establish a Solid Waste Management Operations Review
Section by the second quarter of FY/08 to assist the department in the
reduction of risk costs and to enhance operational efficiencies; report to the
Mayor and City Council by the third quarter, FY/08, on activities and results.
(SWMD/Collections)
         OBJECTIVE 7. Develop a plan for the permitting, design and
construction of a transfer station and release an RFP by the end of FY/08.
Submit a status report to the Mayor and City Council by the end of FY/08.
(SWMD/Disposal)
         OBJECTIVE 8. As funding is available, acquire properties for Major
Public Open Space (MPOS) as identified in the Albuquerque/Bernalillo County
Comprehensive Plan and any Subdivision Master Plan. Continue to report
pertinent performance measures in the Performance Plan. (Parks and Recreation
Department, Open Space Management)
         OBJECTIVE 9. Conduct a study to consider the feasibility of converting
the Ladera Golf Course to a target or desert golf course. Present the findings
to the Mayor and City Council by the end of the first quarter of FY/08. (Parks
and Recreation Department/Golf)
         OBJECTIVE 10. Complete a city-wide canopy cover and pervious/
impervious satellite data inventory. Provide a report to the Mayor and City
Council by the end of the second quarter of FY/08. (Environmental Health)
      (6)   ECONOMIC VITALITY. Achieve a vital, diverse, and sustainable
economy in which businesses and residents have opportunities for success.
         OBJECTIVE 1. Continue marketing and complete activation of the Foreign
Trade Zone to promote international commerce and activity at the Sunport.
Submit a report to the Mayor and City Council by end of the fourth quarter, FY/
08. (Aviation)
         OBJECTIVE 2. Construct the Aerospace Training Center in the Aerospace
Technology Park at Double Eagle II and report to the Mayor and City Council on
progress by the end of FY/08. (Aviation)
         OBJECTIVE 3. Continue efforts to develop direct international flights
to Mexico and explore opportunities to develop direct international flights
with Canadian destinations. Develop and promulgate the business case for these
flights. Submit a progress report to the Mayor and City Council by the end of
the second quarter, FY/08. (Aviation and CAO)
         OBJECTIVE 4. Create a prototype program regarding development ready
certified sites at the Aerospace Technology Park at Double Eagle II and the
Foreign Trade Zone at the Sunport by the end of second quarter FY/08 and begin
an evaluation of the program in third and fourth quarter FY/08. Provide a
report to the Mayor and City Council on the evaluation by the end of FY/08.
(Aviation/ Mgt and Prof Support)
         OBJECTIVE 5. Develop a Sustainability Plan for the Airport System and
report status and results to the Mayor and City Council by the end of the first
quarter, FY/08. (Aviation/ Mgt and Prof Support)
         OBJECTIVE 6. Continue activities for air cargo marketing and include
the status in a report to the Mayor and City Council by end of FY/08.
(Aviation)
         OBJECTIVE 7. Develop a plan by the end of the first quarter, FY/08,
for creating an International Trade Center that would promote and facilitate
foreign relations and international trade between Albuquerque and foreign
countries. Submit a status report to the Mayor and City Council by the end of
the first quarter, FY/08. (Economic Development Department, International
Trade)
         OBJECTIVE 8. Develop a plan, identify space, and find funding for an
International Business Resource Center and the installation of computer
equipment, market research literature and meeting space at the Economic
Development Department by the end of the fourth quarter, FY/08. Report
pertinent performance measures in the Performance Plan. Submit a status report
to the Mayor and City Council by the end of the fourth quarter, FY/08.
(Economic Development Department, International Trade)
         OBJECTIVE 9. Increase the number of and attendance at Albuquerque film
festivals and premiers by the end of FY/08. Report pertinent performance
measures in the Performance Plan. Submit a status report to the Mayor and City
Council by the end of the fourth quarter, FY/08. (Economic Development
Department, Film Office)
         OBJECTIVE 10. Continue supporting the efforts of the Sirolli
Enterprise Facilitation economic development model in the Southeast Heights
area to provide one-on-one assistance to local entrepreneurs so that the
project is fully sustainable by end of FY/08. Submit status reports to the
Mayor and City Council at the end of the second and fourth quarters, FY/08.
(Economic Development Department, Economic Development)
         OBJECTIVE 11. Implement a Sustainable Economic Development Plan by the
end of the second quarter, FY/08. Submit a status report to the Mayor and City
Council by the end of the second quarter, FY/08. (Economic Development
Department, Economic Development)
         OBJECTIVE 12. Establish the Mayor’s Technology Advisory Council by the
end of the first quarter, FY/08, to support technology-based economic
development as recommended at the Mayor’s Technology Summit. Submit a status
report to the Mayor and City Council by the end of the first quarter, FY/08.
(Economic Development Department, Economic Development)
         OBJECTIVE 13. Work with the Mayor’s Small Business Advisory Council
and the Purchasing Division to modify the Purchasing Ordinance to allow for
small business incentives with the City. Create a Small Business Industrial
Revenue Bond product, and research and recommend any other incentives to
support the growth of local small businesses by the end of the second quarter,
FY/08. Submit a status report to the Mayor and City Council by the end of the
second quarter, FY/08. (Economic Development Department, Economic Development)
         OBJECTIVE 14. Based on the findings of the UNM BBER Arts & Culture
Industries Economic Impact Study, develop an Arts and Culture Industries
Economic Development Plan to address this small but growing and significant
segment of Albuquerque’s economy. Present the recommended plan to the Mayor and
City Council by the end of the third quarter, FY/08. (Economic Development
Department, Economic Development)
         OBJECTIVE 15. Utilize current City information system infrastructure
and/or new technology to develop a client management system for all Economic
Development divisions by the end of the second quarter, FY/08, that will enable
the Department to better track and maintain clients in order to provide a
constantly increasing and evolving level of customer service. Submit a status
report to the Mayor and City Council by the end of the second quarter, FY/08.
(Economic Development Department, Economic Development)
         OBJECTIVE 16. Enhance economic growth in the Albuquerque music
industry by creating educational opportunities for mentoring individuals and
businesses. Begin reporting pertinent performance measures in the FY/09
Performance Plan. (Economic Development Department, Economic Development)
         OBJECTIVE 17. Utilizing off-setting revenues from increased parking
citations, expand the hours and days for enforcement activities of on-street
and off-street parking to be implemented in the second quarter, FY/08. Report
on outputs and unit costs in the Performance Plan after implementation. (DMD/
Parking)
      (7)   COMMUNITY and CULTURAL ENGAGEMENT. Residents are fully and
effectively engaged in the life and decisions of the community to promote and
enhance our pride, cultural values, and resources and ensure that Albuquerque's
community institutions are effective, accountable, and responsive.
         OBJECTIVE 1. Continue to enhance the Historic Old Town Area with live
entertainment, improved cooperation and communication with community
stakeholders, and better services to visitors. Report results in the FY/08
Performance Plan. (CSD/Community Events).
         OBJECTIVE 2. Increase the programming, appeal and use of the Harry E.
Kinney Civic Plaza on certain business days, for special events and during
times of heavy downtown traffic. Report results in the FY/08 Performance Plan.
(CSD/Community Events).
         OBJECTIVE 3. Increase the number of volunteers providing service to
the Albuquerque community and seniors by 12% from 1,500 to 1,680 volunteers by
the end of FY/08. Submit a report by the end of FY/08 to the Mayor and the City
Council. Report appropriate measures in the Performance Plan. (Senior Affairs)
         OBJECTIVE 4. Develop and present the 2008 Albuquerque Progress Report
to the Mayor and City Council by the end of FY/08. (CAO/Budget and Performance
Management)
      (8)   GOVERNMENTAL EXCELLENCE and EFFECTIVENESS. Government is ethical
and accountable; every element of government contributes effectively to meeting
public needs.
         OBJECTIVE 1. Configure, test, and implement the following ERP modules
by the end of FY/08: Human Resources (employment, benefits, and payroll),
General Ledger, and Budget/Enterprise Performance Management. Provide a status
report to the Mayor and City Council by the end of FY/08. (DFAS/ISD)
         OBJECTIVE 2. Determine the feasibility and related costs of
establishing a single citywide dispatching function. Report to the Mayor and
City Council by the end of the third quarter, FY/08. (DFAS & APD)
         OBJECTIVE 3. Analyze all City franchises and identify opportunities
which will standardize or make more consistent franchise management,
enforcement, monitoring, and approaches to renewal. Submit the initial analysis
to the Mayor and City Council by the end of FY/08. (Legal/Legal Services)
         OBJECTIVE 4. Use all available administrative processes to advance PNM
funding of underground utilities. Report on progress to the Mayor and City
Council at the end of FY/08. (Legal/Legal Services)
         OBJECTIVE 5. Analyze FMLA data to identify categories, trends, and
patterns of absence, associated costs and intervention opportunities. Report to
the Mayor and City Council by the end of second quarter, FY/08. Report results
in the Performance Plan. (HR/Personnel Services)
         OBJECTIVE 6. Explore the feasibility and cost effectiveness of
outsourcing FMLA leave administration. Report findings to the Mayor and City
Council by the end of first quarter, FY/08. (HR/Personnel Services)
         OBJECTIVE 7. Develop a web page and on-line process specifically
designed to recruit and maintain a pool of applicants for high turnover
positions including Motor Coach and 911 Operators. Report to the Mayor and City
Council by the end of second quarter, FY/08. (HR/Personnel Services with ISD)
         OBJECTIVE 8. Research best practices for public safety testing and
adopt and utilize practices, as appropriate, to revise and update the APD
Entrance Exam by the end of second quarter, FY/08, and submit a report to the
Mayor and City Council. (HR/Personnel Services)
         OBJECTIVE 9. Design and pilot a tiered “Public Service / Customer
Service" curriculum for all employees. Report to Mayor and City Council by the
end of FY/08. (HR/Personnel Services)
         OBJECTIVE 10. By the first quarter of FY/08, identify the temporary
positions which should be appropriately transitioned to permanent positions and
develop a plan for departments to transition these positions by the second
quarter of FY/08. Report status to Mayor and City Council by the second
quarter, FY/08. (HR/Personnel Services)
         OBJECTIVE 11. Focus Human Resource department resources on the
development of a city-wide curriculum to educate and train employees on
workplace safety, technological enhancements, and computer skills training to
ensure safe environments and high employee productivity. Submit curriculum by
first quarter, FY/08, in order to begin training by third quarter, FY/08;
report to Mayor and City Council by the end of FY/08. (HR/Training)
         OBJECTIVE 12. Conduct a study to determine the feasibility of the city
becoming self-insured for sponsored benefits; report to the Mayor and City
Council by the end of second quarter, FY/08. (HR/Insurance)
         OBJECTIVE 13. Create a data-base of services available to the disabled
citizens of the metropolitan area and provide this data-base to 311 operators
in order to provide the best services available to disabled citizens. Report to
the Mayor and City Council on implementation progress by the end of the second
quarter of FY/08. (DFAS/Citizen Services)
         OBJECTIVE 14. Revise the appropriate rules and regulations in order to
implement the Policy of the City Council, the governing body of the City of
Albuquerque, to allow employees of the City and the Water Utility Authority to
move between the two organizations maintaining their accrued sick leave,
accrued vacation and seniority. Provide a report to the Mayor and City Council
by the end of the second quarter of FY/08. (Human Resources)
   (B)   That the Mayor shall submit a report by Goal to the City Council at
least semi-annually summarizing the progress made toward implementation of all
the one-year objectives and that any report called for in this resolution shall
be in the form of an Executive Communication from the Mayor to the City
Council, unless otherwise specifically noted.
(R-2007-062, passed 6-12-2007)
§ 4-7-4 ONE-YEAR OBJECTIVES FOR FISCAL YEAR 2009
   (A)   That the City of Albuquerque adopts the following one-year objectives
for FY/09, grouped under the eight five-year goals of the City.
   HUMAN AND FAMILY DEVELOPMENT GOAL: People of all ages have the opportunity
to participate in the community and economy and are well sheltered, safe,
healthy, and educated.
      OBJECTIVE 1. Utilizing existing or available grants, funding and
resources, complete Teen Center renovations and open the facility during the
second quarter of FY/09. Finalize specific organizational, operational,
business, programmatic, marketing and fund raising strategies including
performance goals by the end of the second quarter of FY/09. Hold 25 events by
end of fiscal year. Report to the Mayor and City Council at the end of the
second and fourth quarters of FY/09. (FCS/Plan and Coordinate)
      OBJECTIVE 2. Work with the Treasury Division of DFAS, Bond Counsel, the
Mayor and City Council to implement the designated restructuring option of the
portfolio of apartment complexes managed under the Apartment Fund 671 by end of
second quarter, FY/09, and complete restructuring by the end of FY/09. Report
to the Mayor and City Council by end of FY/09. (FCS/Plan and Coordinate)
      OBJECTIVE 3. Expand the Elementary/Middle School Initiative Program to 12
charter schools by the end of FY/09 serving an additional 650 school children.
Provide a status report to the Mayor and City Council by the end of third
quarter, FY/09, and update in the City’s Performance Plan with performance
measures of additional schools with students served. (FCS/Partner with Public
Education)
      OBJECTIVE 4. Ensure the effective start-up of the second ACT team and
enroll a minimum of 24 clients into program services by the end of the second
quarter of FY/09. (FCS/Provide Mental Health Services)
      OBJECTIVE 5. Implement the methamphetamine treatment program (Albuquerque
Recovery Program) at three City operated Health and Social Service Centers and
serve 75 patients by the end of the second quarter of FY/09. (FCS/Provide
Substance Abuse Treatment and Prevention)
      OBJECTIVE 6. Study the aging patterns in the Albuquerque Bernalillo
County community to establish a baseline or a series of measures to support the
concept of aging in place. Establish a study group composed of gerontologists,
social scientists, seniors and other community stakeholders to develop a report
and recommendations for senior social services which prevent premature
institutionalization and allow seniors to age in place. Submit the report to
the Mayor and City Council by the end of FY/09. (Senior Affairs/ Senior Social
Services)
      OBJECTIVE 7. As part of the ABC food inspection program proposed
legislation to be submitted to City Council for consideration by July 1, 2008,
include Consumer Health Protection food facility re-inspection fees. Upon
adoption of ABC program legislation and fees by the Administration and City
Council, implement the new program, using existing resources and additional
revenues developed through the program. Submit a status report by the end of
FY/09. Report results annually in the Performance Plan. (EHD/Consumer Health)
      OBJECTIVE 8. Rehabilitate the existing stock pond for Gambusia mosquito
fish to provide a non-chemical method for controlling mosquito breeding and
reduces the risk of transmission of West Nile virus and other mosquito-borne
diseases to the public. Submit a progress report to the Mayor and City Council
by the end of FY/09. (EHD /Vector Borne & Zoonotic Disease)
      OBJECTIVE 9. Select an architectural firm and construction company for
the expansion of the North Valley Senior Center by the end of FY/09. Provide a
status report to the Mayor and City Council by the end of FY/09. (DMD and
Senior Affairs)
      OBJECTIVE 10. Break ground on the first phase of the North Domingo Baca
Multigenerational Center by the end of FY/09. Provide a status report to the
Mayor and City Council by the end of FY/09. (DMD and Senior Affairs)
      OBJECTIVE 11. Develop a marketing plan for the Los Volcanes and Palo Duro
senior fitness centers; establish baseline customer use and track thereafter.
Report performance measures in the City's Performance Plan. Submit a report
assessing fitness center use and marketing plan effectiveness by the end of FY/
09. (Senior Affairs/ Senior Well Being)
      OBJECTIVE 12. Improve 17 City softball fields to include shade
structures, bleachers, irrigation systems, scoreboards, and fences. Complete
the improvements and submit a status report to the Mayor and City Council by
the end of the fourth quarter FY/09. (PRD/ Provide Quality Recreation)
      OBJECTIVE 13. Construct new outdoor racquetball and hand-ball courts to
replace the facilities removed from the Albuquerque Tennis Complex. Complete
the construction and submit a status report to the Mayor and City Council by
the end of the fourth quarter FY/09. (PRD /Provide Quality Recreation)
      OBJECTIVE 14. Renovate and resurface a minimum of 20 existing park tennis
courts, construct a new 12 court lighted NW tennis complex, and expand ADO and
Sierra Vista Tennis Complexes to include additional courts and lighting to meet
the recreational needs of both youth and adult tennis programs. Complete the
construction and submit a status report to the Mayor and City Council by the
end of the fourth quarter FY/09. (PRD /Provide Quality Recreation)
      OBJECTIVE 15. Develop operations, maintenance, safety, and risk
management standards and policies for the City's skate parks. Submit a status
report to the Mayor and City Council by the end of the second quarter FY/09.
(PRD/Provide Quality Recreation)
      OBJECTIVE 16. Implement an organic fertilizer/soil amendment program at
the Ladera Golf Course to reduce salts and water use. Report pertinent
performance measures of water use in the Performance Plan. Submit a status
report to the Mayor and City Council by the end of the fourth quarter FY/09.
(PRD/Affordable and Quality Golf)
      OBJECTIVE 17. Using existing resources, upgrade the current point-of-sale
system at the City’s public golf courses to a new system that will allow for
better accountability and marketing of the City’s courses. Submit a status
report to the Mayor and City Council by the end of FY/09. (PRD/Affordable and
Quality Golf)
      OBJECTIVE 18. Increase onsite student visitation by 5% from 3,700 to
3,890 in FY/09 at the Anderson/Abruzzo Albuquerque International Balloon
Museum. Report results annually in the City's Performance Plan. (Cultural
Services/Balloon Museum)
      OBJECTIVE 19. Work with APS, community groups, and mental health
professionals to develop sustainable programs to address student mental health
issues. Submit a report to the Mayor and City Council by the end of FY/09.
(FCS/Mental Health Services)
      OBJECTIVE 20. Utilizing existing resources, investigate the possibility
of expanding the existing Holiday Park Community Center into a
multigenerational center. Report back to the Mayor and City Council with
projected costs, a timeline, potential funding sources, and a phasing plan by
the end of FY/09. (Department of Senior Affairs/Senior Social Services)
      OBJECTIVE 21. Utilizing existing resources, locate a building to provide
day shelter services for homeless women. The building may be free standing or
attached to an existing homeless service provider, but if attached to an
existing service provider, the entrance to the women’s day shelter must be
secure and separate from the general population. Determine cost to operate the
day shelter. Report to the Mayor and City Council regarding possible locations
and estimated operating costs by the end of the second quarter of FY/09.
(’’FCS’/Provide Emergency Shelter Services)
      OBJECTIVE 22. Utilizing existing resources, create a data base of
services available to persons who are homeless and provide this data base to
311 operators in order to provide accurate and current information to persons
who are homeless and in need of services. Report to the Mayor and City Council
on implementation progress by the end of the second quarter of FY/09. (FCS/
Supportive Services to the Homeless)
   PUBLIC SAFETY GOAL: Citizens are safe, feel safe and secure, and have trust
and shared responsibility for maintaining a safe environment.
      OBJECTIVE 1. Reduce the backlog and increase the number of vehicle
forfeiture cases per year from approximately 350 to 650. Increase the number of
auctions from 6 to 8 per year. Report progress in the Performance Plan, include
vehicles seized, auctioned, and booted per year. Provide a report to the Mayor
and City Council by the end of FY/09. (Legal Department/ Safe City Strike
Force)
      OBJECTIVE 2. Complete construction and open Fire Station 22 at Mesa del
Sol by the third quarter of FY/09. Report progress to the Mayor and City
Council at the end of the third quarter, FY09. (Fire/Emergency Response)
      OBJECTIVE 3. Proceed with construction documents using the original
architect of the existing design and complete bidding on Fire Station 2 by the
end of the second quarter of FY/09; and with available funding and resources,
begin construction on Phase 1 of 2 by the second quarter of FY/09. Provide a
progress report to the Mayor and City Council by the end of the first quarter
of FY/09. (Fire/Emergency Response)
      OBJECTIVE 4. Develop a thorough in-house preventative maintenance program
with timelines and maintenance schedules to increase the cost efficiency of
maintaining the Department’s fleet and equipment. Compare long-term costs of
in-house maintenance versus outsourced maintenance of Fire Department vehicles
and equipment. Provide a copy of the preventative maintenance program and
comparison report outlining potential cost savings, next steps to take, and
funding required to implement the program to the Mayor and City Council by the
end of the third quarter of FY/09. (Fire/Logistics)
      OBJECTIVE 5. Create a multi-departmental team, including APD, DMD, AHO,
Legal, and OMB to oversee the implementation of the recommendations of the
Mayor's Study Group on Automated Enforcement. Continue to evaluate the
effectiveness of STOP. Submit reports to the Mayor and City Council at the end
of the second and fourth quarters, FY/09. (APD and CAO)
      OBJECTIVE 6. Increase live exits of adoptable animals at Animal Welfare,
as defined by the Animal Welfare Department classification system to 100% for
FY/09. Report results in the City’s Performance Plan and provide a report to
the Mayor and City Council by the end of FY/09. (Animal Welfare/Animal Welfare)
      OBJECTIVE 7. Complete the design and RFP by September 2008 and begin
construction phase by beginning of third quarter of FY/09 for the
reconstruction of East Side animal shelter facilities. Submit a status report
to the Mayor and City Council by the end of FY/09. (Animal Welfare/Animal
Welfare)
      OBJECTIVE 8. Modernize and update the workstation computers within APD's
Special Investigations division in order to ensure that the Investigations
Division has access to the new Comprehensive Information Systems Project, as
funds become available. Provide a report to the Mayor and City Council on the
acquisition and implementation of the computers by the end of FY/09. (APD/
Investigative Services)
      OBJECTIVE 9. Increase efforts to address crime and public safety issues
impacting Albuquerque's business community in partnership with the Greater
Albuquerque Chamber of Commerce, the Albuquerque Convention and Visitors
Bureau, and the Hispano Chamber of Commerce to include additional meetings and
coordination with local and big-box retailers, the creation of an interactive
website for the Retail Asset Protection Association, and continued
implementation of the Safe City program in Nob Hill and expansion of the
program model into other areas. Provide a report to the Mayor and City Council
on progress and success by the end of FY/09, report semi-annually in the
Performance Plan beginning in the fourth quarter, FY/09. (APD/Officer &
Department Support)
      OBJECTIVE 10. In conjunction with community services providers, increase
the effectiveness of intervention methods available to the APD to address the
needs of persons who are mentally ill, homeless, substance abusers, and AFAC
victims. Efforts currently include COAST team, CIT and FAC. Provide a report to
the Mayor and City Council on these collaborations by the end of FY/09. (APD/
Officer & Department Support)
      OBJECTIVE 11. Construct a 25,000 square foot community-based facility
located at Ellison and Cibola Loop NW to serve APD’s newly defined Sixth Area
command which encompasses most of northwest ’’’’Albuquerque’’. Construct the
facility to achieve a LEED-NC “Silver” certification. Submit a progress report
to the Mayor and City Council by the end of the second quarter, FY/09. (APD/
Officer & Department Support)
      OBJECTIVE 12. Design a facility to meet police and aviation needs at the
Double Eagle Airport to include space for law enforcement activities in
addition to a hangar for APD aircraft. Submit a design to the Mayor and City
Council by the end of FY/09. (APD/Officer & Department Support; Aviation)
      OBJECTIVE 13. Design a facility to meet APD law enforcement requirements
in the Mesa del Sol development. Submit a progress report to the Mayor and City
Council by the end of FY/09. (APD/Officer & Department Support)
      OBJECTIVE 14. Staff the Prisoner Transport Unit in order to expand
operational hours to at least 12 hours per day, seven days a week. Work with
the MDC to speed booking. Expand PTU functions to include transport from
substations and special events (i.e. concerts, DWI roadblocks, Party Patrol,
State Fair). Submit a progress report to the Mayor and City Council by the end
of the second quarter, FY/09, and report results in the Performance Plan,
beginning in the second quarter of FY/09. (APD/Prisoner Transport)
      OBJECTIVE 15. Acquire and implement a mobile data communications system
(MDCS) that will provide for secure wireless transfer over 25KHz channels in an
800 MHz frequency band, and access to Federal (NCIC/NMLETS), State and local
criminal information databases, as well as real time messaging, silent
dispatch, incident report uploading and AVL capabilities. Report results and
progress to the Mayor and City Council by the end of FY/09. (APD/
Communications)
      OBJECTIVE 16. Achieve and maintain a sworn staff of 1100 officers along
with the necessary support personnel, facilities and equipment to ensure the
proper utilization of sworn law enforcement. Report progress to the Mayor and
City Council by the end of 2nd quarter, FY/09, and report progress in the
City's performance plan. (APD/Neighborhood Policing)
      OBJECTIVE 17. Increase law enforcement effectiveness by assisting with
the regional expansion of the problem-solving model. Facilitate collaboration
with regional law enforcement agencies interested in the model's application to
reduce crime. Facilitate regional law enforcement stakeholder meetings at least
semi-annually, and investigate technological solutions to enable coordination
between participating agencies provide recommendations for implementation.
Provide a status report on efforts, implementation and success to the Mayor and
City Council by the end of FY/09; report regional activities in the Performance
Plan beginning in FY/09. (APD/Officer & Department Support)
      OBJECTIVE 18. Continue to improve CAPTURE Plus' ability to link crime
elements in order to solve crimes. Expand CAPTURE Plus functionality, user
interface and tracking of crimes beyond the current property crimes
application. Provide a status report to the Mayor and City Council by the end
of FY/09; report CAPTURE Plus results in the Performance Plan thereafter.
(Police/Investigative Services)
      OBJECTIVE 19. Continue responding to neighborhood complaints by operating
the Party Patrol; evaluate the effectiveness of the Party Patrol. Report
results in the performance plan and submit a evaluation to the Mayor and City
Council by the end of FY/09. (Police/Neighborhood Policing)
   PUBLIC INFRASTRUCTURE. Ensure that all existing communities are adequately
and efficiently served with well planned, coordinated, and maintained
infrastructure. Ensure that new development is efficiently integrated into
existing infrastructures and that the costs are balanced with the revenues
generated.
      OBJECTIVE 1. Reconstruct and rehabilitate the East Terminal apron by
third quarter of FY/09 and provide a report to the Mayor and City Council by
the end of FY/09. (Aviation/Operations and Maintenance)
      OBJECTIVE 2. Utilizing existing or available revenue or funding, develop
a phased timetable for land acquisition, bidding, contract award and proposed
construction contract for the development of a Central and Unser park and Ride
Southwest Transit Center. This facility will act as a major intermodal
interchange for several routes, provide private vehicle parking, and secure
bicycle storage. Report timetable, and achievement of land acquisition along
with other progress to the Mayor and City Council by the end of FY/09.
(Transit/ABQ Ride)
      OBJECTIVE 3. Utilizing available revenue or funding and in-house
resources and/or contracted services, complete citywide fixed-route Transit
system studies, to include the Westside Transit Improvements Study. Based on
the results of these studies, update/develop the System Short-Range and Long-
Range Plans accordingly to guide implementation of system improvements.
Considerations shall include route structures City-wide, including but not
limited to better service on high-ridership routes, replacement of other routes
with neighborhood circulators, and express routes to employment centers. The
Transit System Short-Range and Long-Range Strategic Plan will become the basis
for requests for capital funding from all sources. Submit the phased plan and
completed studies to the Mayor and City Council by the end of FY09. (Transit/
ABQ Ride)
      OBJECTIVE 4. Prioritize the declassification of vacant Transit Planner
positions in order to become more competitive in hiring at the national and
regional levels. Advertise in national professional journals to recruit
planners with experience in “Best Practices” including coordination with land
use planning and innovations from other transit systems. Report progress to the
Mayor and City Council by the end of the second quarter of FY/09.
      OBJECTIVE 5. Submit the City of Albuquerque's proposed MS4 (Municipal
Separate Storm Sewer System) Permit for renewal to EPA Region 6. Report results
to Mayor and City Council by the end of FY/09. (DMD/Design Recovered Storm)
      OBJECTIVE 6. Review bridge inspection reports provided by the NMDOT and
develop a priority listing for both Maintenance and Contract Projects. Report
progress to Mayor and City Council by the end of FY/09. (DMD/Street Services)
      OBJECTIVE 7. Using existing or available funding, begin implementation of
replacing existing mercury vapor residential street lights with high pressure
sodium street lights to improve energy efficiency. Report progress in the
Performance Plan, beginning second quarter of FY/09. (DMD/Street Services)
   SUSTAINABLE COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT. Guide growth to protect the environment
and the community's economic vitality and create a variety of livable,
sustainable communities throughout Albuquerque.
      OBJECTIVE 1. Using existing or available funding, complete phase 3 and 4
of Big I Landscaping and begin construction of Phase 5. Report progress to
Mayor and City Council by end, FY/09. (DMD/Strategic Support)
      OBJECTIVE 2. Complete the East Gateway Sector Development Plan by
collecting land use and traffic data, hosting workshops, analyzing issues and
opportunities, involving the public and the technical team, and refining
implementation strategies and design and zoning regulations. Produce and
present the final draft sector plan at public hearings and submit a status
report to the Mayor and City Council by the end of the second quarter, FY/09.
(Planning/Community Revitalization)
      OBJECTIVE 3. Using existing resources, develop a "Green Path/Building"
public education and outreach program for the development/building industry and
the general public and include the program on the City's web site. Begin
reporting web site utilization in the FY/10 Performance Plan. Complete the
program and submit a report to the Mayor and City Council by the end of the
first quarter, FY/09. (Planning/One Stop Shop)
      OBJECTIVE 4.  Using existing resources, develop the “City of Albuquerque
Green Path/Building” project certification process and procedures for building
high performance, environmentally responsible, and healthy facilities and
submit a report to the Mayor and City Council by the end of the second quarter
of FY/09. (Planning/One Stop Shop)
      OBJECTIVE 5. Using existing resources, develop a community Leadership in
Energy and Environmental Design (LEED) Neighborhood Development pilot project
by the end of the second quarter of FY/09. Submit the project plan to the Mayor
and City Council by the end of FY/09. (Planning/Community Revitalization)
      OBJECTIVE 6. Execute a contract through the Environmental Protection
Agency (EPA) Loan Fund to assist in cleanup of the former Atchison-Topeka-Santa
Fe Locomotive Shops with EPA brownfields remediation funds. Submit the project
plan to the Mayor and City Council by the end of FY/09. (Planning/Community
Revitalization)
      OBJECTIVE 7. Following the development and adoption of the West Downtown
Corridor Plan, designate the New York/Central Avenue area as a Metropolitan
Redevelopment Area. Adopt a metropolitan redevelopment revitalization/adaptive
reuse plan for the area and submit the plan to the Mayor and City Council by
the end of the third quarter of FY/09.
      OBJECTIVE 8.  Perform a cost/benefit analysis to determine the
feasibility of constructing a Park Maintenance Satellite Facility on the west
side of the Rio Grande. If the analysis is positive, develop a strategy to fund
and construct the facility. Complete the analysis, develop the strategy, and
submit a status report to the Mayor and City Council by the end of FY/09. (PRD/
Parks and Landscape Management)
      OBJECTIVE 9. Using existing resources, design, standardize, and install
new park information and regulation signs that are more informative, visible,
and attractive than current park signs. Complete the installation and submit a
status report to the Mayor and City Council by the end of FY/09. (PRD/Parks and
Landscape Management)
      OBJECTIVE 10. Using available or existing funding, develop 3 irrigated
recreation fields (approximately 9 acres) west of the river. Report progress to
the Mayor and City Council by the end of FY/09. (DMD/Design Recovered - Parks)
   ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION and ENHANCEMENT. Protect and enhance Albuquerque's
natural environments - its mountains, river, bosque, volcanoes, arroyos, air,
and water.
      OBJECTIVE 1. Incorporate the Integrated Management Waste Plan into SWMD
long range goals and objectives and provide a report with plan recommendations
to the Mayor and Council by the end of the second quarter, FY/09. (SWMD/
Administrative Support)
      OBJECTIVE 2. Upon completion and review of the Integrated Waste Plan,
provide a plan to institute regulatory reform, fee structure, and incentives
that are necessary or recommended in order to meet the goal of Zero Landfill by
2030. Submit a report to the Mayor and City Council by the end of FY/09. (SWMD/
Administrative Support)
      OBJECTIVE 3. Upon completion and review of the Integrated Waste Plan,
provide a plan to develop appropriate SWMD facilities which may include a new
recycling processing facility, a transfer station, and a construction and
demolition recycling facility. Submit a status report to the Mayor and City
Council by the end of the third quarter, FY/09. (SWMD/Recycling)
      OBJECTIVE 4. Implement the following elements of the Aviation Department
Sustainability Management System: convert cleaning supplies to all green
products; establish a peak energy consumption saving program; and establish an
airport wide recycling program. Provide a report on progress to the Mayor and
City Council by the end of FY/09. (Aviation/Management and Professional
Support)
      OBJECTIVE 5. Improve visitor experience in Open Space by providing
permanent waterless public restrooms at the Alameda River Trailhead/Paseo del
Bosque Trail Parking Area, Pueblo Montano River Trailhead Parking Area, and the
Los Poblanos Farms Open Space Preserve. Complete these improvements and submit
a status report to the Mayor and City Council by the end of FY/09. (PRD/Open
Space Management)
      OBJECTIVE 6. Complete a city-wide satellite data inventory of canopy
cover and pervious/impervious ground surfaces. Provide a report to the Mayor
and City Council by the end of the second quarter, FY/09. (PRD/Urban Forest
Management)
      OBJECTIVE 7. Complete and implement a Water Conservation Plan to reduce
water waste and the resulting fines and surcharges and bring City parks,
medians, and golf courses in compliance with water budgets through irrigation
system renovations, non-functional turf reduction, use of new technology, and
strict water management. Begin reporting pertinent performance measures of
water use and costs in the FY/09 Performance Plan. Complete the plan and submit
a status report to the Mayor and City Council by the end of FY/09. (PRD/Parks
and Landscape Management)
   ECONOMIC VITALITY. Achieve a vital, diverse, and sustainable economy in
which businesses and residents have opportunities for success.
      OBJECTIVE 1. Continue efforts to develop other direct international
flights to Mexico and explore opportunities to develop direct international
flights with Canadian destinations. Develop and promulgate the business case
for these flights. Submit a progress report to the Mayor and City Council by
the end of the third quarter, FY/09. (Aviation and CAO)
      OBJECTIVE 2. Create a prototype program regarding development ready
certified sites at the Aerospace Technology Park at Double Eagle II and the
Foreign Trade Zone at the Sunport by the end of second quarter FY/09 and begin
an evaluation of the program in third and fourth quarter FY/09. Provide a
report to the Mayor and City Council on the evaluation by the end of FY/09.
(Aviation/ Mgt and Prof Support)
      OBJECTIVE 3. Continue efforts to transition from aging single head
parking meters to pay and display stations to cover 68% of metered spaces.
Ensure meters and stations are accurate and functional at all times, minimize
downtime due to malfunctions, and maximize revenue collection, and enabling
citizens to utilize cash or credit cards to pay for metered parking. Report
results in FY/09 Performance Plan, beginning the second quarter of FY/09. (DMD/
Parking)
      OBJECTIVE 4. Working with the Technology Advisory Committee, identify
priority actions and strategies for the growth of high technology industry
clusters in the region and submit a report to the Mayor and City Council by the
end of FY/09. (Economic Development Department/Economic Development)
      OBJECTIVE 5. Develop strategies and activities to support the growth of
clean energy and green technology companies in conjunction with private and
public sector partners. Submit a report to the Mayor and City Council by the
end of FY/09. (Economic Development Department/ Economic Development)
      OBJECTIVE 6. In cooperation with private sector partners, recruit at
least one film post-production facility including animation, editing, or
digital media and submit a status report to the Mayor and City Council by the
end of FY/09. (Economic Development Department/Economic Development)
      OBJECTIVE 7. Establish an updated list of 100 Albuquerque technology
companies for assistance by the International Trade Division. Categorize the
companies by those that are currently exporting technology products or services
and those with exportable technology requiring basic export assistance.
Complete the list and provide a status report to the Mayor and City Council by
the end of FY/09. (Economic Development Department/International Trade)
      OBJECTIVE 8. Using existing resources, market Albuquerque as a technology
solutions market for industry and governments in Mexico, Canada, Argentina,
Brazil, Chile, and China. Begin tracking direct marketing contacts in the FY/10
Performance Plan and submit a status report to the Mayor and City Council by
the end of FY/09. (Economic Development Department/ International Trade)
      OBJECTIVE 9. Research and identify the best European investor targets to
whom Albuquerque can be promoted for investment and expansion. Identify
European investor targets and submit a status report to the Mayor and City
Council by the end of FY/09. (Economic Development Department, International
Trade)
      OBJECTIVE 10. Develop a small business support center in the Economic
Development Department to assist new, existing and expanding small businesses
in Albuquerque. (Economic Development Department/Economic Development)
   COMMUNITY and CULTURAL ENGAGEMENT. Residents are fully and effectively
engaged in the life and decisions of the community to promote and enhance our
pride, cultural values, and resources and ensure that Albuquerque's community
institutions are effective, accountable, and responsive.
      OBJECTIVE 1. Using existing resources, provide training or educational
opportunity for approved portal vendors in Old Town to enhance customer service
and experience. Report results annually in the City's Performance Plan
beginning in FY/09. (Cultural Services/Community Events)
      OBJECTIVE 2. Using existing resources, expand Summerfest programming to
Central Avenue and provide a report of results to the Mayor and City Council by
the end of third quarter, FY/09. (Cultural Services/Community Events)
      OBJECTIVE 3. Cooperate with the Albuquerque Convention and Visitors
Bureau in the implementation of a multi-venue, citywide, "cultural pass"
destination ticketing project which will be launched by December 31, 2008.
Submit a status report to the Mayor and City Council by the end of the second
quarter, FY/09. (Cultural Services/Strategic Support)
      OBJECTIVE 4. Using existing resources, increase attendance for Old Town
New Fun program by 10% from 200,000 in FY/08 to 220,000 by the end of FY/09,
and report results in the Performance Plan. (Cultural Services/Community
Events)
      OBJECTIVE 5. With approved bond resources, develop a business plan for
the revitalization of the history exhibit, including writing scripts for
exhibits, at the Albuquerque Museum by June 2009. Provide a report to the Mayor
and City Council by the end of FY/09. (Cultural Services/Museum)
      OBJECTIVE 6. Using existing resources, develop, publicize, and open the
exhibition Jamestown, Quebec and Santa Fe: Three American Beginnings between
October 25, 2008 and March 29, 2009 at the Albuquerque Museum. Submit a report
to the Mayor and City Council by the end of FY/09. (Cultural Services/Museum)
      OBJECTIVE 7. With approved state resources and within the existing scope,
complete Phase I construction of visitor center, vehicular access and parking,
and landscaping for Casa San Ysidro, by June 2009. Submit a report to the Mayor
and City Council by the end of FY/09. (Cultural Services/Museum)
      OBJECTIVE 8. Report on the usage of the Mayor’s stadium box at Isotopes
Park. Beginning with the end of the first quarter in FY/09 and commencing again
with the opening of baseball season in the third quarter of FY/09, report who
has used the box and their affiliation. (Department of Municipal Development)
   GOVERNMENTAL EXCELLENCE and EFFECTIVENESS. Government is ethical and
accountable; every element of government contributes effectively to meeting
public needs.
      OBJECTIVE 1. Configure, test, and implement the following Phase I ERP
modules by the second quarter of FY/09: Human Resources (payroll, time and
labor, benefits administration), General Ledger, Purchasing, Accounts Payable,
Project Costing and Commitment Control. Provide a status report to the Mayor
and City Council by the third quarter, FY/09. (DFAS/ISD)
      OBJECTIVE 2. Configure, test, and, if feasible, implement the following
Phase II ERP modules by the third quarter of FY/09: Budget Preparation, Fixed
Asset Management, Inventory, and eProcurement. Provide a status report to the
Mayor and City Council by the fourth quarter, FY/09. (DFAS/ISD)
      OBJECTIVE 3. Develop a plan for replacing the fuel tanks and extending
the service life of the Pino Yards Fuel Facility. Examine options to downsize
the Pino Yards Fuel Facility and add a West Side Fueling Station. Provide a
report to the Mayor and City Council by the end of first quarter, FY/09. (DFAS/
Fleet)
      OBJECTIVE 4. Utilizing the approved 2007 G.O. bonds, continue to identify
and implement renewable energy projects through the Albuquerque Energy
Conservation Council, in support of the 2030 resolution in order to continue
reducing carbon based energy use 10% every 5 years, becoming carbon neutral by
2030. Report completed projects and progress in Performance Plan, beginning in
the second quarter of FY/09. (DMD/City Buildings)
      OBJECTIVE 5. Using existing or available funding, develop a DMD customer
relations strategy to improve customer relations performance and train DMD
employees on strategy. Report progress to Mayor and City Council by end FY/09.
(DMD/Strategic Support)
      OBJECTIVE 6. Evaluate the current City Educational Tuition Assistance and
Educational Leave Program. Create more specific guidelines to determine
allocation of resources. Include in the evaluation and guidelines a
recommendation for a number of years of employment commitment to the City from
employees who receive tuition assistance. This commitment should be based on
the dollar value of the tuition assistance. (Human Resources) Submit evaluation
and recommendations to Mayor and City Council by the end of FY/09. (HR/
Personnel Services)
      OBJECTIVE 7. Organize a task force to analyze current recruitment
practices in City departments. Identify City best practices and develop a
proposal for a general City recruitment strategy by the end of FY/09. Submit a
report to the Mayor and City Council by the end of FY/09. (HR/Personnel
Services)
      OBJECTIVE 8. Identify available fund balances within the Operating Grants
Fund (Fund 265) and present a report to the Mayor and City Council by the end
of the first quarter of FY/09. (DFAS/Accounting)
   (B)   That the Mayor shall submit a report by Goal to the City Council at
least semi-annually summarizing the progress made toward implementation of all
the one-year objectives and that any report called for in this resolution shall
be in the form of an Executive Communication from the Mayor to the City
Council, unless otherwise specifically noted.
(R. 2008-072, approved 5-23-08)
§ 4-7-5 ONE-YEAR OBJECTIVES FOR FISCAL YEAR 2010
   (A)   The City of Albuquerque adopts the following one-year objectives for
FY/10, grouped under the eight five-year goals of the City.
   HUMAN AND FAMILY DEVELOPMENT GOAL: People of all ages have the opportunity
to participate in the community and economy and are well sheltered, safe,
healthy, and educated.
      OBJECTIVE 1. Using 2009 GO Bond funds, increase the Library’s digital
book collection by 5% from 3,100 digital books in FY/09 to 3,255 digital books
by the end of FY/10. Report results in the Performance Plan. (CSD/Library)
      OBJECTIVE 2. Develop a training program for Neighborhood Associations to
provide them with resources and information to assist elderly neighbors to
remain in their neighborhoods and Age in Place. The program will be piloted in
up to 5 Neighborhood Associations and results will be reported to the Mayor and
City Council by the end of FY/10. (DSA and Planning)
      OBJECTIVE 3. Utilizing the data collected from the 2008 Albuquerque
Progress Report, Indicator: 8.1, “Seniors Below the Poverty Level,” collaborate
with the COA/Budget Office to develop a community perception survey for the
Department of Senior Affairs. Assess city residents’ (50+) awareness of the
Department of Senior Affairs’ current services, satisfaction level and needs of
the community that are not being met. Based on the survey results, assess
program responsiveness; submit report detailing findings and recommendations to
the Mayor and City Council by the end of FY/10. (DSA, Senior Well Being)
      OBJECTIVE 4. Improve and upgrade the Department of Senior Affairs website
to include a systemized method to collect and maintain information; investigate
the feasibility of including on-line center membership and class registration
and utilization of credit cards. Implement new collection/maintenance system
and make recommendations regarding on-line registrations and credit cards to
the Mayor and City Council, by the end of second quarter, FY/10. (DSA, Senior
Well Being)
      OBJECTIVE 5. Monitor Department of Senior Affairs Capital Improvement
Projects to include breaking ground on Phase I renovation construction and
landscape of North Valley Senior Center to ensure project is on schedule and
within budget. Select architect to begin design development of building
improvements to the Barelas and Highland Senior Centers. Submit status report
to the Mayor and City Council by the end of FY/10. (DSA, Senior Well Being)
      OBJECTIVE 6. Begin construction on the John Marshall Senior Kitchen
Replacement in the summer of FY/10 with an estimated completion by summer FY/
11. Submit status report to the Mayor and City Council by the end of FY/10.
(DSA, Senior Well Being)
      OBJECTIVE 7. Implement the new ABC food inspection program, using
existing resources and additional revenues developed through the program.
Implementation will include training for health inspection staff & food
establishment owner/operators and hiring of additional health inspectors, as
revenues permit. Submit a report to the Mayor and City Council by the end of
FY/10. Report results annually in the Performance Plan. (EHD, Consumer Health)
      OBJECTIVE 8. Using existing CIP funds, replace the drains in all swimming
pools by the end of FY/10 to comply with the new federal act. Submit a status
report to the Mayor and City Council by the end of FY/10. (PRD, Aquatics)
      OBJECTIVE 9. Contingent on funds to be appropriated in the FY/10 General
Fund Budget, execute a contract with the Roadrunner Food Bank for operational
support. Provide a report to the Mayor and City Council by the end of the first
quarter of FY/10. The report shall include the status of the contract, how the
City funds will be used and how services will be improved or expanded. (DFCS,
Offer Health and Social Services)
   PUBLIC SAFETY GOAL: Citizens are safe, feel safe and secure, and have trust
and shared responsibility for maintaining a safe environment.
      OBJECTIVE 1. Develop a plan to achieve CALEA accreditation for APD's
Communications Division in order to reach administrative and operational goals,
as well as to provide direction to personnel. Provide a status report to the
Mayor and City Council by the end of the second and fourth quarters of FY/10.
(APD, Communications and Records)
      OBJECTIVE 2. Develop a Radio Frequency infrastructure project that will
provide police personnel with wireless access to City systems so that officers
can utilize police databases that are currently unavailable to their mobile
computers. Provide a status report to the Mayor and City Council by the end of
the second and fourth quarters of FY/10. (APD, Communications and Records)
      OBJECTIVE 3. Coordinate with the FBI to establish a digital forensics
laboratory where highly trained certified examiners conduct forensic
examinations of digital media. Provide a status report to the Mayor and City
Council by the end of the second and fourth quarters of FY/10. (APD,
Investigative Services)
      OBJECTIVE 4. Create a central database where all APD employee
accomplishments and advanced training certificates will be stored. Partner with
the Bernalillo County Sheriff's Office to identify a program to suit the
purpose and implement the process and program by the end of FY10. Provide a
status report to the Mayor and City Council by the end of FY/10. (APD,
Neighborhood Policing)
      OBJECTIVE 5. Increase participation of community/business partners
working with APD to address crime and public safety issues that impact the
City's business community. Provide a status report to the Mayor and City
Council by the end of FY/10. (APD, Officer and Department Support)
      OBJECTIVE 6. Construct an APD 6th Area Command facility on the northwest
corner of Ellison Road and Cibola Loop NW that meets Leadership in Energy and
Environmental Design (LEED) Green Building Rating System criteria. Provide a
status report to the Mayor and City Council by the end of the second and fourth
quarters of FY/10. (APD, Officer and Departmental Support)
      OBJECTIVE 7. Relocate APD’s Prisoner Transport Unit to a larger facility
in order to expand the services that the unit provides; to become a "one-stop
shop" for bookings and prisoner transportation. Expand service hours and
staffing as appropriate. Report pertinent performance measures in the
Performance Plan. Submit a status report to the Mayor and City Council by the
end of the second quarter FY/10. (APD, Officer and Departmental Support)
      OBJECTIVE 8. In order to identify and develop a solution for the high
number of calls for service and nuisance properties, create a database of
problem locations and develop strategies to address the problems within a
community policing framework. Submit a status report to the Mayor and City
Council by the end of the fourth quarter FY/10. (APD, Officer and Departmental
Support)
      OBJECTIVE 9. Complete the renovation and expansion of the East Side
Animal shelter facilities, including a veterinary clinic, an adoption-
processing area, and modernized animal displays and housing. Submit a report to
the Mayor and City Council by the end of the third quarter of FY/10. (AWD and
DMD)
      OBJECTIVE 10. Increase in-house spay/neuter surgeries by 95 percent from
5,000 in FY/09 to 9,750 in FY/10, then increase by 33 percent to 13,000 in FY/
11. Report the results in the City’s Performance Plan and provide status
reports to the Mayor and City Council at the end of FY/10 and FY/11. (AWD,
Animal Welfare)
      OBJECTIVE 11. Work with City Council to acquire land for the
reconstruction of Fire Station 7 at an alternate site. Fire Station 7, located
at 47th and Central NW, was originally built in 1951 to house a single engine
company; it was later expanded to include apparatus and living space for a
rescue company. The station has become one of the busiest in the city, and the
current property has no room for needed expansion. Report progress to the Mayor
and City Council by the end of fourth quarter FY/10.    (FIRE, Emergency
Response)
   PUBLIC INFRASTRUCTURE. Ensure that all existing communities are adequately
and efficiently served with well planned, coordinated, and maintained
infrastructure. Ensure that new development is efficiently integrated into
existing infrastructures and that the costs are balanced with the revenues
generated.
      OBJECTIVE 1. Continue construction of the Terminal Optimization project,
which includes reconstruction of food and beverage areas, enlarge and modernize
restrooms; enlarge passenger hold rooms; enhance special systems; and modify
communication center. Submit a status report to the Mayor and City Council by
the end of FY/10. (AVI, Airport Operations, Maintenance, Security)
      OBJECTIVE 2. Complete the reconstruction and rehabilitation of the East
Terminal Apron by second quarter of FY/10. Submit status reports to the Mayor
and City Council at the end of 3rd and 4th quarters of FY/10. (AVI, Airport
Operations, Maintenance, Security)
      OBJECTIVE 3. Begin reconstruction and rehabilitation of the South General
Aviation Ramp by end of FY/10. Submit a status report to the Mayor and City
Council by the end of FY/10. (AVI, Airport Operations, Maintenance, Security)
      OBJECTIVE 4. Begin the construction of the Bear Canyon Arroyo Pedestrian
Bridge over I-25. Report progress to the Mayor and City Council by the end of
fourth quarter FY/10. (DMD, Storm-Transport)
      OBJECTIVE 5. Begin the construction of the I-40 Pedestrian and Bicycle
Bridge over the Rio Grande. Report progress to the Mayor and City Council by
the end of fourth quarter FY/10. (DMD, Design Recovered Storm Drainage and
Transport)
      OBJECTIVE 6. Review FY/10 bridge inspection reports provided by the NMDOT
and develop a priority listing for both maintenance and contract projects.
Report progress to the Mayor and City Council by the end of fourth quarter FY/
10. (DMD, Street Services)
      OBJECTIVE 7. Utilizing Congestion Mitigation and Air-Quality (CMAQ)
funding, and other additional revenue, if available, extend Rapid Ride service
along Central Avenue east of Wyoming. Report progress to the Mayor and City
Council by the end of fourth quarter, FY10. (Transit, ABQ Ride)
      OBJECTIVE 8. Utilizing existing or available revenue or funding, develop
a phased timetable for land acquisition, bidding, contract award and proposed
construction contract for the development of a Central and Unser Park and Ride
Southwest Transit Center. This facility will act as a major intermodal
interchange for several routes, provide private vehicle parking, and secure
bicycle storage. Report timetable, and achievement of land acquisition along
with other progress to the Mayor and City Council by the end of FY10. (Transit,
ABQ Ride)
      OBJECTIVE 9. Develop a plan to improve Security at all park and ride
facilities, bus stops and bus routes, and implement the plan. Report
improvement in the Performance Plan. Report implementation of the plan and
progress to the Mayor and City Council by the end of second quarter, FY10.
(Transit, ABQ Ride)
      OBJECTIVE 10. Reduce the number of customer service complaints received
by 5% through better trained staff, increased security at park and rides, bus
stops and routes and more on time routes. Continue to make improvements to the
automated announcement systems, driver training programs and ADA compliance.
Report progress to the Mayor and City Council by the end of second quarter,
FY10, and in the Performance Plan, beginning second quarter FY/10. (Transit,
ABQ Ride)
   SUSTAINABLE COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT. Guide growth to protect the environment
and the community's economic vitality and create a variety of livable,
sustainable communities throughout Albuquerque.
      OBJECTIVE 1. Develop two new off-leash dog exercise areas. Report
progress to the Mayor and City Council by the end of fourth quarter FY/10.
(DMD, Design Recovered Parks and CIP)
      OBJECTIVE 2. Complete phase 4 (Segment D) of Big I Landscaping. Report
progress to the Mayor and City Council by the end of fourth quarter FY/10.
(DMD, Design Recovered Parks and CIP)
      OBJECTIVE 3. Using existing resources, manage the upgrade of the current
point-of-sale and scheduler system used by the Aquatics, Golf, Recreation
Services, and Strategic Support Divisions to improve financial management,
accountability, customer service, and marketing of the Department's services.
Complete the upgrade and submit a report to the Mayor and City Council by the
end of FY/10. (PRD, Strategic Support)
      OBJECTIVE 4.    With existing resources, amend the West Side Strategic
Plan and the Rio Bravo, Tower/Unser, and West Route 66 Sector Development Plans
to incorporate policies and regulations for developing Complete Neighborhoods
and Interconnected Transportation Systems, per the adopted Southwest
Albuquerque Strategic Action Plan. Submit the amended plans in a report to the
Mayor and City Council by the end of the 2nd quarter, FY/10. (Planning,
Community Revitalization)
      OBJECTIVE 5. Prepare amendments to the Comprehensive Plan to provide for
green and LEED development, Complete Neighborhoods, transit-oriented
development, and healthy environments. Submit the amendments in a report to the
Mayor and City Council by the end of FY/10. (Planning, Community
Revitalization)
      OBJECTIVE 6. Using existing resources, investigate methods of planning
and designing at the micro level which could include a process for developing
Activity Centers and Transit Corridors. Submit a report to the Mayor and City
Council by the end of the 2nd quarter, FY/10. (Planning, Community
Revitalization)
      OBJECTIVE 7. Develop a systematic process that includes regular
coordination with CIP staff to manage and implement CIP projects that are
adopted in various sector development plans. Submit a report to the Mayor and
City Council by the end of the 2nd quarter, FY/10. (Planning, Community
Revitalization)
   ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION and ENHANCEMENT. Protect and enhance Albuquerque's
natural environments - its mountains, river, bosque, volcanoes, arroyos, air,
and water.
      OBJECTIVE 1. Construct three solar projects in support of airport
sustainability management and renewable energy efforts. Projects will be
located within the Sunport vicinity and will include an electric car charging
system, solar collect HVAC and photovoltaic system for power generation. Submit
a report to the Mayor and City Council by the end of FY/10. (AVI, Airport
Operations, Maintenance, Security)
      OBJECTIVE 2. Implement the following elements of the Aviation Department
Sustainability Management System: convert cleaning supplies to all green
products, establish a peak energy consumption saving program; and establish an
airport wide recycling program. Provide a report on progress to the Mayor and
City Council by the end of FY/10. (AVI, Airport Operations, Maintenance,
Security)
      OBJECTIVE 3. Open Refugium Phase II for holding and rearing of Marine
species and native aquatic species for the purposes of education, conservation
and research by spring of 2010. Submit a report to the Mayor and City Council
by the end of third quarter, FY/10. (CSD, BioPark)
      OBJECTIVE 4. Develop and produce a 5-7 minute coral reef conservation
special effects movie to be shown in the Albuquerque Aquarium Theater by winter
of 2010. Submit a report to the Mayor and City Council by the end of third
quarter, FY/10. (CSD, BioPark)
      OBJECTIVE 5. Apply for reaccreditation by Association of Zoos and
Aquariums in March 2010 and prepare for Accreditation inspection. Accreditation
will be reviewed and submitted by AZA in Sept. 2010. Submit a report to the
Mayor and City Council by the end of third quarter, FY/10. (CSD, BioPark)
      OBJECTIVE 6. Create and construct environmentally sound garden to display
roses suitable for New Mexico climate. This garden will include education/
conservation learning area, which will feature the Guadalajara Sister City
sculpture by local artist Francisco “Sonny” Rivera. Open in fall 2009. Submit a
report to the Mayor and City Council by the end of second quarter, FY/10. (CSD,
BioPark)
      OBJECTIVE 7. Monitor Department of Senior Affairs vehicle fuel usage and
efficiency; facility electric, gas, and water consumption to track reduction
rates; measure quantity of recycled waste in support of the Mayor’s
Administrative Sustainability Priority. Utilize COGNOS and the Energy Star
Portfolio Manager software to track and report progress. Assess program
effectiveness at mid-year; submit report detailing findings and recommendations
to the Administration and City Council by end of fourth quarter, 2010. (DSA,
Strategic Support)
      OBJECTIVE 8. Using existing capital resources, by the end of FY/10,
develop and open for public use at least two new trailheads with parking areas,
4 miles of paved trail, and 5 miles of natural-surface trail. Submit a status
report to the Mayor and City Council by the end of FY/10. (PRD, Open Space
Management)
      OBJECTIVE 9. With existing resources, implement the Urban Forest
Initiative to conduct outreach and raise awareness about the benefits of trees.
Oversee and track the distribution and planting of 75,000 trees in Albuquerque
by government entities, local nurseries, and home and business owners by the
end of FY/11. Submit status reports to the Mayor and City Council at the end of
FY/10 and FY/11. (PRD, Urban Forest Management)
      OBJECTIVE 10. Develop a strategic plan for public education for both
Commercial and Residential customers regarding refuse ordinance requirements,
solid waste services, recycling, backyard composting and graffiti removal
services per the integrated waste plan by the second quarter FY/10. Submit a
report to the Mayor and City Council by the end of second quarter FY/10. (SWMD,
Administrative Services)
      OBJECTIVE 11. Implement Phase I & Phase II initiatives for the new CC&B
utility billing system in conjunction with the Water Utility Authority by the
end of FY/10. Provide a status report to the Mayor and City Council by the end
of FY/10. (SWMD, Administrative Services)
      OBJECTIVE 12. Release an RFP for a system wide solid waste rate analysis
by the first quarter FY/10. Submit a status report to the Mayor and City
Council by the end of second quarter FY/10. (SWMD, Administrative Services)
      OBJECTIVE 13. Conduct an analysis of potential sites for a transfer and
resource recovery park by the end of FY/10. Submit a report to the Mayor and
City Council by the end of FY/10. (SWMD, Administrative services)
   ECONOMIC VITALITY. Achieve a vital, diverse, and sustainable economy in
which businesses and residents have opportunities for success.
      OBJECTIVE 1. Create a prototype program regarding development ready
certified sites at the Aerospace Technology Park at Double Eagle II and the
Foreign Trade Zone at the Sunport by the end of second quarter FY/10 and begin
an evaluation of the program in third and fourth quarter FY/10. Provide a
report to the Mayor and City Council on the evaluation by the end of FY/10.
(AVI, Aviation Management and Professional Support)
      OBJECTIVE 2. Using existing resources, host a New Mexico Film and Music
Summit in the first quarter of FY/10 to promote more local music participation
in film production processes. Submit a report to the Mayor and City Council by
the end of the second quarter, FY/10. (EDD, Economic Development)
      OBJECTIVE 3. Using existing resources, host a Digital Media Summit to
highlight how the advanced computer and technology capacity of Sandia National
Laboratories and the University of New Mexico can be used to recruit more film
post-production business to Albuquerque. Host the summit and submit a report to
the Mayor and City Council by the end of the second quarter, FY/10. (EDD,
Economic Development)
      OBJECTIVE 4. In cooperation with community partners, research potential
strategies and incentives to grow research and development, and science and
technology parks and related employment. Complete the research and submit a
report to the Mayor and City Council by the end of the fourth quarter, FY/10.
(EDD, Economic Development)
      OBJECTIVE 5. With existing resources, create by the end of the fourth
quarter of FY/10, a targeted marketing campaign to renewable energy companies
seeking to relocate or expand to the southwest United States. Submit a report
to the Mayor and City Council by the end of the fourth quarter, FY/10. (EDD,
Economic Development)
   COMMUNITY and CULTURAL ENGAGEMENT. Residents are fully and effectively
engaged in the life and decisions of the community to promote and enhance our
pride, cultural values, and resources and ensure that Albuquerque's community
institutions are effective, accountable, and responsive.
      OBJECTIVE 1. Using existing resources, increase the attendance at the Old
Town Founder’s Day Fiestas by 10%. Report results in the FY/11 Performance
Plan. (CSD, Community Events)
   GOVERNMENTAL EXCELLENCE and EFFECTIVENESS. Government is ethical and
accountable; every element of government contributes effectively to meeting
public needs.
      OBJECTIVE 1. Conduct a study to determine the feasibility of centralizing
the administration of City of Albuquerque operating and federal grants in order
to improve oversight and accountability, for assisting accounting in monitoring
active grants, streamlining operations and assisting in the continued on-going
implementation of the ERP project costing/operating grants module. The study
will be completed by December 31, 2009 with existing resources. Submit a report
to the Mayor and Council by end of the second quarter, FY/10. (DFAS and OMB)
      OBJECTIVE 2. Implement the Automated Energy Reduction Control System in
partnership with the State of New Mexico and the University of New Mexico for
use in specific City owned buildings to respond to Demand Reduction requests
from the local utility. Begin implementation and report progress to the Mayor
and City Council by the end of fourth quarter FY/10. (DMD, City Buildings)
      OBJECTIVE 3. Provide training to City supervisors regarding changes to
the federal ADA regulations by the end of FY/10. (HRD, Personnel Services)
      OBJECTIVE 4. Develop the parameters for completing a comprehensive
inventory of City owned properties in two phases. Phase One will consist of
identifying the resources and locations of City property information and
assessing the data base requirements needed to input a comprehensive data base
as well as link properties with the City’s ’’GIS’ system. At a minimum, the
data base will include street address, ’’UPC’ code, type of property, size,
date purchased, Department holder, purchase price and most recent appraised
value. Other data elements may be added as deemed reasonable. Phase Two will
consist of implementing the data base, entering available data and researching
missing elements. (Legal, Real Property Services)
   (B)   That the Mayor shall submit a report by Goal to the City Council at
least semi-annually summarizing the progress made toward implementation of all
the one-year objectives and that any report called for in this resolution shall
be in the form of an Executive Communication from the Mayor to the City
Council, unless otherwise specifically noted.
(R-2009-077, approved 6-1-2009)
§ 4-7-6 ONE-YEAR OBJECTIVES FOR FISCAL YEAR 2011
   (A)   That the City of Albuquerque adopts the following one-year objectives
for FY/11, grouped under the eight five-year goals of the City.
   HUMAN AND FAMILY DEVELOPMENT GOAL: People of all ages have the opportunity
to participate in the community and economy and are well sheltered, safe,
healthy, and educated.
      OBJECTIVE 1. In collaboration with the Department of Municipal
Development, approve the final drawings, select a contractor, and begin work on
capital improvement projects at the Barelas and Highland Senior Centers by the
end of the first quarter, FY/11. Monitor construction to minimize the
disruption of services to seniors, and ensure the projects are complete and
within budget by the end of FY/11. Submit a status report to the Mayor and City
Council by the end of FY/11. (DSA/Senior Well Being.)
      OBJECTIVE 2. Complete the development of recreational, educational,
fitness, and volunteer programs for the North Domingo Baca Multigenerational
Center by end of the third quarter FY/11 in anticipation of the center opening
in the first quarter of FY/12. As funding permits, begin staffing the center
during the fourth quarter, FY/11. In collaboration with the Department of
Municipal Development, participate in architectural planning and construction
meetings to ensure the project is on schedule and within budget. Submit a
status report to the Mayor and City Council by the end of FY/11. (DSA/Senior
Well Being)
      OBJECTIVE 3. Using current resources and HUD funding, evaluate the Family
& Community Services Department / Community Development Division process and
opportunities for an electronic data system, including a quarterly reporting
system for agencies that contract with the division and a data system to
capture contract and performance data. Benefits include improvements to
reporting practices to the City and to HUD, timely and accurate data
collection, reduction of paper usage and increased staff productivity. Provide
a report detailing the cost and features of the system to the Mayor and City
Council by the end of FY11 (FCS/Plan & Coordinate).
      OBJECTIVE 4. Using current resources, define a HUD Action Plan
Implementation Process to carry out the activities defined in the Community
Development Division's HUD annual Action Plan. Provide a report to the Mayor
and City Council by the end of FY11 (FCS/Plan & Coordinate).
      OBJECTIVE 5. Using current resources and HUD funding, create a Community
Resource Information Board at the Downtown (Main) Library to include a map
showing homeless providers, with symbols of services available (shelter, jobs,
meals, etc.) and brochures in English and Spanish. The brochures and booklets
will be made available to branch libraries, Health & Social Service Centers,
and other agencies. Provide a report to the Mayor and City Council by the end
of FY11 (FCS/ Supportive Services to the Homeless).
      OBJECTIVE 6. Using existing staff resources, define the purposes of the
City of Albuquerque's Community Centers, and develop policies to govern the
placement of future Community Centers within the scope of the defined purpose,
including community and legislative input. Study Community Center cost cutting
measures, including the possibility of fees, and recommend policies. Submit
policies to City Council for approval, policies to be submitted by the end of
FY11 (FCS/Plan & Coordinate).
      OBJECTIVE 7. Using existing staff resources, study and determine the
needs of the East Side Health & Social Services Center clients and service
providers, and create a comprehensive needs-based strategic plan outlining
needed improvements. Consider utilizing available funding to renovate or expand
the Center in order to improve the quality and efficiency of service delivery.
Submit the strategic plan, proposed funding sources, and phased plan for
renovation to the Mayor and Council by the end of FY11. (FCS/Plan & Coordinate)
      OBJECTIVE 8. Study the current mix and utilization of funding for
affordable housing development for renters and homebuyers provided by the City
of Albuquerque, whether direct service provision or contracted service
provision, in order to ensure effective service delivery and efficient
utilization of existing funding, and to ensure that the City, vendors, and
contractors are providing meaningful, effective, and cost-efficient delivery of
housing services. Provide a report to the Mayor and Council by the end of FY11.
(FCS/Plan & Coordinate)
      OBJECTIVE 9. Study the current mix and utilization of funding for
homeless services, including emergency shelter, transitional housing and other
homeless services provided by the City of Albuquerque, whether direct service
provision or contracted service provision, in order to ensure effective service
delivery and efficient utilization of existing funding, and to ensure that the
City, vendors, and contractors are providing meaningful, effective, and cost-
efficient delivery of housing services. Provide a report to the Mayor and
Council by the end of FY11. (FCS/Plan & Coordinate)
      OBJECTIVE 10. Utilizing existing staff and available resources, and
partnering with outside agencies as appropriate, conduct a community needs
assessment to determine which social services currently provided or contracted
by the City are most essential, and which are appropriately provided by
municipal government. For each prioritized service, determine the desired
outcome of each program designed to address the essential need, and recommend
indicators to evaluate the impact of each program upon the desired outcome.
Report findings to the Mayor and Council by the end of the Second Quarter FY/
11. (FCS/Plan & Coordinate)
      OBJECTIVE 11. Study the current mix of service and utilization of funding
for Bernalillo County Seniors. Make recommendations to improve and ensure
effective service delivery and efficient utilization of existing funding,
coordinate with non-participating entities, and to ensure that the City,
vendors, and contractors are providing meaningful, effective, and cost-
effective delivery of senior services. Provide a report to the Mayor and
Council by the end of FY11 (FCS/Support Services to the Elderly)
      OBJECTIVE 12. With existing funds, establish a sustainable partnership by
the end of FY/11 with local, state and regional organizations to support the
Mondo Indoor Track and promote the benefits of track and field. Begin reporting
pertinent performance measures in the FY/12 Performance Plan. Submit a report
to the Mayor and City Council by the end of FY/11. (Parks and Recreation/
Provide Quality Recreation)
      OBJECTIVE 13. Conduct a feasibility study for the consolidation of meal
sites operated by the Department of Senior Affairs to minimize departmental
spending and raise efficiency in the delivery of congregate meals to
participants. Establish standards to define optimum operation levels and costs
of the meals program; establish systems to ensure participants are registered
in SAMS and that nutritional assessments are conducted on an annual basis.
Submit status report to the Mayor and City Council by the end of FY/11. (DSA/
Senior Well Being)
      OBJECTIVE 14. Examine the Department of Senior Affairs Transportation
program to assess its effectiveness and level of customer satisfaction. Explore
possibilities in automating program monitoring and tracking systems and
implementing a reservation process responsive to prospective participant needs
and allowing for confirmation more than 24 hours in advance. Submit status
report to the Mayor and City Council by the end of FY/11 (DSA/Senior Well
Being).
      OBJECTIVE 15. Develop an internal Department of Senior Affairs employee
training program that utilizes City/departmental resources on-site for annual
SAMS instruction and additional software programs such as: spreadsheets, and
graphics; workshops in conflict resolution, team building, customer relations,
resume writing, interviewing techniques, self-improvement (physical fitness)
and departmental cross-training opportunities. Develop a tracking process that
monitors employee participation. Submit status report to the Mayor and City
Council by end of the second quarter, FY/11 (DSA/Senior Well Being).
      OBJECTIVE 16. Revise current Food Sanitation Ordinance to adopt by
reference the FDA 2009 Food Code, provide a grading system based on a
percentage score, increase fees to cover costs reasonably incurred in
administering and enforcing the Food Sanitation Ordinance, and submit to City
Council for consideration. Upon adoption, implement the new Food Sanitation
Ordinance using existing resources, train health inspection staff and food
establishment owner/operators, and hire additional health inspectors, as
revenues permit. Submit a progress report to the Mayor and City Council by the
end of FY11. (EHD/Consumer Health)
   PUBLIC SAFETY GOAL: Citizens are safe, feel safe and secure, and have trust
and shared responsibility for maintaining a safe environment.
      OBJECTIVE 1. Evaluate various approaches to managing and operating animal
licensing. Compare Albuquerque fees and methods to other municipalities. Submit
a report with recommendations to the Mayor and City Council by the end of 2nd
quarter, FY11. (AWD/Animal Welfare)
      OBJECTIVE 2. Develop and implement a Department-wide Safety Training
Program. Provide a status report to the Mayor and City Council by the end of
FY/11. (AWD/Animal Welfare)
      OBJECTIVE 3. Utilizing existing and available funding complete the design
and construction documents for the reconstruction of Fire Station 2, by the end
of 2nd Quarter FY11. Provide a report to the Mayor and City Council by the end
of the first quarter of FY11. (AFD/AFD Headquarters)
      OBJECTIVE 4. Contingent on funding availability, complete the design and
construction documents for the reconstruction of Fire Station 7, by the end of
FY11. Provide a progress report to the Mayor and City Council by the end of
FY11. (AFD/AFD Headquarters)
      OBJECTIVE 5. Contingent on funding availability, implement a fully
functioning Advance Life Support Rescue at Station 8 by the end of the second
quarter of FY11. Provide a report to the Mayor and City Council by the end of
the second quarter FY11. (AFD/Fire and Emergency Response)
      OBJECTIVE 6. In partnership with the Federal Bureau of Investigations
(FBI), open the New Mexico Regional Computer Forensics Laboratory in June,
2010. Submit a status report to the Mayor and City Council by the end of the
first quarter of FY/11. (APD/Investigative Services)
      OBJECTIVE 7. Using existing or available funding, reduce the incidence of
property and violent crimes in Albuquerque by 3% by the end of FY11, using the
Mayor's plan to target property crime offenders and career burglars. Submit a
status report to the Mayor and City Council by the end of the second and fourth
quarters FY/11. (APD/Investigative Services)
      OBJECTIVE 8. Using existing or available funding, investigate national
best practices and determine methods for increasing the deployment of police
patrols in residential neighborhoods. Establish a process for tracking and
reporting the presence of field patrols in neighborhoods as compared to their
presence on commercial areas and corridors. Provide a report to the Mayor and
City Council by the end of the second quarter of FY11. (APD)
      OBJECTIVE 9. Using existing or available grant funding, staff and equip
the Crime Analysis Unit so that they can further develop the problem solving
model in order to identify and analyze crime patterns and trends. Submit a
report outlining the advances in the problem solving model and analysis to the
Mayor and City Council by the end of the fourth quarter FY/11. (APD/
Investigative Services)
      OBJECTIVE 10. Utilizing existing funding, create and implement a
Maintenance of Effort (MOE) curriculum that incorporates information about the
Commission on Accreditation for Law Enforcement Agencies (CALEA) in order for
APD officers to increase their familiarity with the program. Training will be
in place by the second quarter of FY11, submit a status report to the Mayor and
City Council by the end of the fourth quarter FY/11. (APD/ Neighborhood
Policing)
      OBJECTIVE 11. Utilizing existing staff resources, analyze the APD
Communications 911 Call Center workflow process in order to reduce the average
call handling time from call creation to call dispatch. Submit a report
detailing the workflow process and improvements to the Mayor and City Council
by the end of the fourth quarter FY/11. (APD/Communications and Records)
      OBJECTIVE 12. Using federal grant funding, improve APD's wireless network
capabilities to include a selected wireless corridor to improve the efficiency
of data transfer from APD mobile units, in order to increase the speed with
which records are available to the public. Submit a status report detailing the
corridor area and improvements to the Mayor and City Council by the end of FY/
11. (APD/Communications and Records)
      OBJECTIVE 13. Using existing staff resources and proper evidence handling
procedures, consolidate evidence, reduce needless inventory items and save
costs by closing APD's leased First Street Evidence Warehouse by the end of the
first quarter FY11. Submit a report detailing the inventory reduction and cost
savings to the Mayor and City Council by the end of the second quarter FY/11.
(APD/Investigative Services)
      OBJECTIVE 14. Using existing staff and resources, evaluate the
feasibility and advisability of AFD's participation and operations under the
False Alarm Ordinance. Determine whether the revenue generated would be
expected to exceed the costs of participation and program management, evaluate
issues including required changes to policies and procedures, the effect on
call-volume, potential liability, and expected compliance. Report results of
the study and recommendations to the Mayor and Council by the end of second
quarter FY11. (AFD/Headquarters)
      OBJECTIVE 15. Using existing resources, prepare a report that examines
the existing uses, potential improved uses, and potential sale of the Police
Mini Substations in Districts 3 and District 6. Include all relevant data
regarding number of visits, hours of operation, staffing, budgets, etc. Include
all relevant zoning and neighborhood issues with regard to alternative uses or
sale of the property. Work with City Real Property to include dollar value of
each property through a market analysis. Submit the report to the
Administration and Council by December 31, 2010. (APD/DFA-Real Property)
      OBJECTIVE 16. Using existing resources, conduct an analysis of the
current APD fuel usage, spending, current practices and policies to determine
if potential cost savings or efficiencies exist. Examine the locations of APD
utilized city fueling stations and travel time from APD Area Commands, vehicle
miles per gallon and vehicle maintenance, explore the possibility of using
fleet fueling cards at commercial fleet fueling stations for all APD vehicles,
and investigate actual fuel usage compared to reported usage. Address ongoing
monitoring and oversight of fuel data by vehicle/individual in an effort to
pinpoint trends, abuse, or other data that may be used to mitigate costs.
Report findings and recommendations for cost savings and efficiencies to the
Mayor and Council by the end of 2nd Quarter, FY11. (APD/Officer & Department
Support)
   PUBLIC INFRASTRUCTURE. Ensure that all existing communities are adequately
and efficiently served with well planned, coordinated, and maintained
infrastructure. Ensure that new development is efficiently integrated into
existing infrastructures and that the costs are balanced with the revenues
generated.
      OBJECTIVE 1. Begin installation of Phase I of the federally required
regulatory traffic sign upgrade program. Submit a report of the results and
status of the overall program to the Mayor and City Council by the end of the
4th quarter FY/11. (DMD/Street Services)
      OBJECTIVE 2. Complete Construction of the Fortuna Road Improvements
(Coors to 76th Street) by end of the fourth quarter FY11. (DMD/Design Recovered
Storm Drainage and Transportation)
      OBJECTIVE 3. Review the NMDOT provided bridge inspection reports and
reprioritize the 2009 Bond Program for Bridge Maintenance Program if needed.
Report progress to the Mayor and City Council by the end of FY/11. (DMD/Street
Services)
      OBJECTIVE 4. Utilizing Congestion Mitigation and Air-Quality (CMAQ)
funding, and other additional revenue, if available, install bus information
audio announcing systems at all Rapid Ride shelter locations and selected Park
& Ride locations. Submit progress reports to the Mayor and City Council by the
end of second and fourth quarters, FY11. (TRANSIT/ABQ Ride)
      OBJECTIVE 5. Utilizing existing or available revenue or funding, the
results of the Westside Transit Improvement Study, the Uptown Transit Oriented
Development Study, the CY 2009 and proposed CY 2011 Capital Implementation
Program, and inputs from the Mid Region council of Governments 2035
Metropolitan Transportation Plan, develop updated short and long-range transit
strategic plans. These plans will include program maintenance and management
plans showing the relationship of the various budget planning and
implementation phases, by plan year, to support the program. A phased approach
and updated short and long-range plans will be published in July 2010 based on
the study, 2009 CIP funding, proposed 2011 CIP requests, and FY11 budget
information. Submit progress reports to the Mayor and City Council by the end
of second and fourth quarters, FY11. (TRANSIT/ABQ Ride)
      OBJECTIVE 6. Evaluate technology solutions, direct human contact
solutions and other options to provide fixed-route information about routes and
bus position and arrival information to enhance transit passenger use. The
Transit Department and the Department of Finance and Administration will work
together to define and identify the most efficient and cost-effective solution
and provide a status report to the Mayor and City Council by the end of the 2nd
quarter of FY/11. (TRANSIT/ABQ Ride, DFAS/Citizen Services)
       OBJECTIVE 7. Reclassify the vacant Transit Planner position to a
Principal Planner position by the end of the first quarter FY/11.
Reclassification will require expertise above that of a Transit Planner
including knowledge of transit "Best Practices" in such areas as sustainable
communities, Transit Oriented Development (TOD), and working with local and
regional authorities on transit and land use planning coordination. Begin
advertising the position locally and in national transit trade media by the end
of the second quarter, FY/11. Submit a status report on the reclassification
and response to the advertisements to the Mayor and City Council by the end of
FY/11. (TRANSIT/Strategic Support)
      OBJECTIVE 8. Using existing resources, conduct a study to determine how
the salaries, benefits, and turnover and retention rates for Motorcoach
operators and Sunvan chauffeurs in Albuquerque compare with similar positions
in comparable cities throughout the southwest region and the country. Report
findings of the study to the Mayor and City Council by the end of 2nd Quarter,
FY11. (TRANSIT/ABQ Ride)
SUSTAINABLE COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT. Guide growth to protect the environment and
the community's economic vitality and create a variety of livable, sustainable
communities throughout Albuquerque.
      OBJECTIVE 1. Complete interstate landscaping along I-40 from Carlisle to
San Mateo. Report progress to the Mayor and City Council by the end of second
quarter FY/11. (Parks and Recreation/CIP Funded Employees)
      OBJECTIVE 2. Design, bid and complete construction of Phase 3 of Ventana
Ranch Community Park. Report progress to the Mayor and City Council by the end
of the fourth quarter FY11. (Parks and Recreation/CIP Funded Employees)
      OBJECTIVE 3. Complete construction of the Albuquerque Police Department
6th Area Command Center. Report progress to the Mayor and City Council by the
end of fourth quarter FY/11. (DMD/Design Recovered Parks and CIP)
      OBJECTIVE 4. With existing funds, develop a department-wide program to
recruit, recognize, and retain community volunteers to support a wide variety
of department programs. Begin reporting pertinent performance measures,
including the number of volunteers, hours of service, and incentives/
reimbursements provided, in the FY/12 Performance Plan. Establish the program
and submit a report to the Mayor and City Council by the end of FY/11. (Parks
and Recreation/Parks and Recreation Strategic Support)
      OBJECTIVE 5. Using dedicated CIP funds, implement the first phase of a
pilot Electronic Plan Review process to reduce the amount of paper used in the
application process, reduce travel to the department, and streamline the
comment resolution process for final plans. Complete Phase 1 and submit a
report to the Mayor and City Council by the end of FY/11. (Planning/One Stop
Shop)
      OBJECTIVE 6. Complete the Volcano Heights Sector Plan and submit it in a
report to the Mayor and City Council by the end of FY/11. (Planning/Community
Revitalization)
      OBJECTIVE 7. Complete the North 4th Street Sector Plan and submit it in a
report to the Mayor and City Council by the end of FY/11. (Planning/Community
Revitalization)
      OBJECTIVE 8. Revise the Downtown Neighborhoods Sector Plan and submit it
in a report to the Mayor and City Council by the end of FY/11. (Planning/
Community Revitalization)
      OBJECTIVE 9. Revise the Los Duranes Sector Plan and submit it in a report
to the Mayor and City Council by the end of FY/11. (Planning/Community
Revitalization)
   ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION and ENHANCEMENT. Protect and enhance Albuquerque's
natural environments - its mountains, river, bosque, volcanoes, arroyos, air,
and water.
      OBJECTIVE 1. In support of the Sunport's sustainability management and
renewable energy efforts, construct the capability for an additional 350
kilowatts at the Parking Structure canopies. Submit a report to the Mayor and
City Council by the end of FY/11. (Aviation/Aviation Operations, Maintenance,
and Security)
      OBJECTIVE 2. In support of the Sunport's sustainability management and
renewable energy efforts, begin a study on a possible five megawatt
photovoltaic array to be constructed on former South Yale landfill area on
Sunport property. Submit a report to the Mayor and City Council by the end of
FY/11. (Aviation/Aviation Operations, Maintenance, and Security)
      OBJECTIVE 3. Champion the expenditure of Energy Conservation Funds to
complete energy conservation projects at City owned facilities. Implement $2
Million in Energy Conservation funded projects by end of FY11. Report progress
to the Mayor and City Council by the end of FY/11. (DMD/City Buildings)
      OBJECTIVE 4. Develop and implement a Department wide Management and
Safety Training Program. Provide a status report to the Mayor and City Council
by the end of FY/11. (SWMD/Administrative Support)
      OBJECTIVE 5. Release an RFP for a public/private Materials Recovery
Facility (MRF) by the second quarter FY11. Submit a status report to the Mayor
and City Council by the end of third quarter FY/11. (SWMD/Recycling)
      OBJECTIVE 6. Using existing resources complete an analysis of potential
SWMD collection efficiencies and recommend ways of reducing the operational
costs associated with collection. The analysis should include a comprehensive
look at routing for the residential and commercial sectors and replacing the
weekly collection of residential recycling with every-other-week collection.
Submit the analysis and recommendations to the Mayor and City Council by the
end of the third quarter, FY/11.
   ECONOMIC VITALITY. Achieve a vital, diverse, and sustainable economy in
which businesses and residents have opportunities for success.
      OBJECTIVE 1. In collaboration with the Planning and Economic Development
Departments, create an action plan for the development of ready certified sites
at the Aerospace Technology Park at Double Eagle II and the Foreign Trade Zone
at the Sunport so that when the economy improves the plan can be activated with
minimal delay. Complete the action plan by the end of FY/11 and submit the plan
in a report to the Mayor and City Council by the end of FY/11. (Aviation/
Management & Professional Support)
      OBJECTIVE 2. Working with community partners, identify priority actions
and strategies for the growth of industry clusters in the region, including the
high technology cluster, and submit a report to the Mayor and City Council by
the end of third quarter, FY/11. (EDD/Economic Development)
      OBJECTIVE 3. Research strategies and incentives used nationally to grow
research and development, and science and technology parks and related
employment. Complete the research and submit a report to the Mayor and City
Council by the end of the second quarter, FY/11. (EDD/Economic Development)
   COMMUNITY and CULTURAL ENGAGEMENT. Residents are fully and effectively
engaged in the life and decisions of the community to promote and enhance our
pride, cultural values, and resources and ensure that Albuquerque's community
institutions are effective, accountable, and responsive.
      OBJECTIVE 1. Using existing or available resources increase overall
attendance at the KiMo Theatre by 15%. Report results in FY 11 Performance
Plan, and report the results to the Mayor and Council by the end of FY11. (CSD/
Community Events)
      OBJECTIVE 2. Using existing or available resources, establish a goal of
obtaining and exceeding 500 hours of volunteerism at the KiMo Theatre. Report
results in FY 11 Performance Plan, and report the results to the Mayor and
Council by the end of FY11. (CSD/Community Events)
      OBJECTIVE 3. Contingent on the availability of resources, establish,
schedule, and implement several new events in the community to include: 9 Arts
In The Parks events, 8 Wine Down Thursday Night events, and several Locally
Grown Music Events. Report results in FY 11 Performance Plan, and report the
results to the Mayor and Council by the end of second quarter FY11. (CSD/
Community Events)
      OBJECTIVE 4. With existing resources, implement three Albuquerque
Summerfest events in business corridors including Nob Hill, Up Town, and
Downtown Central Avenue. Report results, including community engagement, and
business participation in FY 11 Performance Plan and report the results to the
Mayor and Council by the end of second quarter FY11. (CSD/Community Events)
      OBJECTIVE 5. Using the New Mexico MainStreet Cultural Plan funding, in
partnership with the Downtown Action Team, and other organizations as needed,
to conduct a Downtown Arts & Cultural District Culture Plan, including needs/
gap assessment, and an economic development strategy relevant growing arts and
creative industries in Albuquerque. Expand the needs assessment and economic
development consideration city-wide if resources permit. Report to the Mayor
and Council by the end of FY11. (CSD/Public Art Urban Enhancement Program)
   GOVERNMENTAL EXCELLENCE and EFFECTIVENESS. Government is ethical and
accountable; every element of government contributes effectively to meeting
public needs.
      OBJECTIVE 1. Complete a review of all M and E series classifications to
ensure compliance with Fair labor Standards Act provisions regarding exempt and
nonexempt status. Provide a report to the Mayor and City Council by the end of
FY11 (HR/Personnel Services).
      OBJECTIVE 2. Within existing funds, prepare a comprehensive compensation
report that will give a complete review of the City's compensation program.
Compensation data will include benefits for City employees utilizing salary
surveys of both public and private sector. Submit a report to the mayor and
City Council by the end of FY11 (HR/Personnel Services).
      OBJECTIVE 3. Using existing resources, evaluate the opportunity for cost
savings by moving the City's health and dental insurances from a premium based
plan to self insured. A cost analysis and an implementation plan will be
completed and submitted to the Mayor and City Council by the end of the 3rd
quarter of FY11 (HR/Insurance and Benefits).
      OBJECTIVE 4. To ensure that the personnel practices of the city are
contained within the rules and regulations complete a review and revision of
the Personnel Rules and regulations to include public hearings. Submit a report
to the Mayor and City Council by the end of the 2nd quarter of FY11 (HR/
Personnel Services).
      OBJECTIVE 5. Examine maintenance operations for Family & Community
Services, Cultural Services, Transit, Parks & Recreation, Aviation and the
Department of Municipal Development to determine the most cost-effective and
efficient approach to maintaining all City of Albuquerque facilities. Submit a
report and recommendations to the Mayor and Council by the end of FY11. (DFAS/
OMB)
      OBJECTIVE 6. Develop an implementation plan for a new eProcurement system
to create a paperless environment with greater accessibility for vendors and
online bidding by local businesses. Submit a review and recommendations to the
Mayor and City Council by the 2nd quarter, FY11. (DFAS/Purchasing)
      OBJECTIVE 7. Evaluate ERP Implementation to date and recommend plan for
success to the Mayor and City Council by the end of 1st quarter FY11. (DFAS/
Information Services Division)
      OBJECTIVE 8. Using existing technological resources, ISD, Treasury, EHD,
and Accounting will work together to implement online payment capability for
business registrations, liquor licenses, and environmental health permits in
order to improve constituents' ability to make payments to the City and receive
required services. Submit a status report to the Mayor and City Council at the
end of the 2nd and 4th quarters of FY11. (DFAS/Treasury)
      OBJECTIVE 9. Develop a plan to change the hours of operation for the 311
Citizen Contact Center from a 24/7 schedule to 6 days a week 6am-8pm or 5 days
a week (closed holidays) open 6am-8pm. Submit a report to the Mayor and City
Council by the end of 1st quarter FY11. (DFAS/Citizen Services)
      OBJECTIVE 10. Evaluate the feasibility of replacing the existing Exchange
Environment with a hosted Email solution. Submit a review and recommendations
to the Mayor and City Council by the end of 2nd quarter, FY/11. (DFAS/
Information Services Division)
      OBJECTIVE 11. In support of the transparency (open-government) city
website, identify initial setup and ongoing staff resources needed to develop
this initiative. Submit a recommendation to the Mayor and City Council by the
1st quarter, FY/11. (DFAS/Strategic Support)
      OBJECTIVE 12. Conduct a feasibility study for outsourcing the inventory
and provide a report to the Mayor and CAO by the end of FY/11. (DFAS/Strategic
Support)
      OBJECTIVE 13. Improve the process or recording and reporting OSHA injury
statistics in order to educate City government about opportunities for employee
safety improvements and reduced costs. Make recommendations to the Mayor and
CAO by the end of FY/11. (DFAS/Safety, Loss Prevention)
      OBJECTIVE 14. Utilizing existing staff resources, partner with APD, the
Bernalillo County District Attorney and other appropriate resources to create a
work plan for efficient and effective prosecution of criminal cases
investigated by the Inspector General. Provide a report to the Mayor and
Council by the end of FY11. (OIAI/Inspector General)
      OBJECTIVE 15. Utilizing existing staff and available resources, conduct a
study to determine the advisability of contracting the internal audit function
to an outside vendor. Calculate any cost savings, conduct a risk assessment,
and examine Government Finance Officer Association (GFOA) best practices and
other governmental best practices as appropriate, including relevant academic
studies on this issue. Report the advantages and disadvantages of contracting
the internal audit function to a private sector auditing and accounting firm.
Report study results and recommendations to the Mayor and City Council by the
end of second quarter, FY/11. (DFAS/OMB)
      OBJECTIVE 16. Utilizing existing staff and available resources, prepare a
set of financial statements reflecting committed funds and fund balance for the
Metropolitan Redevelopment Fund (Fund 275) as of June 30, 2010. The financial
statements should include line item detail for each revenue source and
expenditures and encumbrances. Submit the financial statement to the Mayor and
City Council by the end of second quarter, FY/11 (DFAS/Planning)
   (B)   That the Mayor shall submit a report by Goal to the City Council at
least semi-annually summarizing the progress made toward implementation of all
the one-year objectives and that any report called for in this resolution shall
be in the form of an Executive Communication from the Mayor to the City
Council, unless otherwise specifically noted.
(R-2010-061, approved 6-18-2010)
§ 4-7-7 ONE-YEAR OBJECTIVES FOR FISCAL YEAR 2012.
   (A)   That the City of Albuquerque adopts the following one-year objectives
for FY/12, grouped under the eight five-year goals of the City.
   HUMAN AND FAMILY DEVELOPMENT GOAL: All residents have the opportunity to
participate in the community and economy, and are well sheltered, safe,
healthy, and educated.
      OBJECTIVE 1. Utilizing preliminary data collected in the 2010 Residential
Senior Survey and the 2009 Aging Well Albuquerque Report; develop a plan to
begin preparing for the increase of Albuquerque’s senior population.
Collaborate with Municipal Development, Cultural Services, Transit, Planning,
Family & Community Services, Parks & Recreation, Economic Development, APD,
AFD, and other outside organizations to develop a city-wide action plan. Submit
plan to the Mayor and City Council by the end of FY/12 (DSA/Senior Well Being).
      OBJECTIVE 2. Collaborate with COA/ISD to begin developing and
implementing on-line senior center registrations as Phase II of the Point-of-
Sale project begun in FY/11. Submit status report to the Mayor and City Council
by end of FY/12 (DSA/Senior Well Being).
      OBJECTIVE 3. Collaborate with the Department of Municipal Development to
select an architectural company, approve final drawings and select a
construction company to begin work on capital improvement projects at Bear
Canyon Senior Center. Ensure project is on schedule and within budget. Continue
to monitor work on the renovation of Highland Senior Center to ensure project
is on time and within budget. Submit status report to the Mayor and City
Council by end of FY/12 (DSA/Senior Well Being).
      OBJECTIVE 4. Collaborate with the Department of Municipal Development to
select a contractor and participate in architectural planning and construction
meetings with the project manager to monitor work of Phase II of North Domingo
Baca Multigenerational Center. Ensure project is on schedule, within budget,
and minimizes disruption of services to participants; estimated completion
date, summer 2012. Submit status report to the Mayor and City Council by end of
FY/12 (DSA/Senior Well Being).
      OBJECTIVE 5. Conduct a feasibility study for the consolidation of meal
sites operated by the Department of Senior Affairs to minimize departmental
spending and raise efficiency in the delivery of congregate meals to
participants. Establish standards to define optimum operation levels and costs
of the meals program; establish systems to ensure participants are registered
in SAMS and that nutritional assessments are conducted on an annual basis.
Submit status report to the Mayor and City Council by the end of the second
quarter FY/12 (DSA/Senior Well Being).
      OBJECTIVE 6. Using 2009 GO Bond funds, increase the circulation of
downloadable eBooks by 20% from 6,835 in FY/10 to 8,202 in FY/12. (CSD/
Library).
      OBJECTIVE 7. Using existing or available funding, work with Parks &
Recreation, Cultural Services and other stakeholders to produce a summer youth
guide brochure outlining available City of Albuquerque youth programming.
Collaborate with partners to plan and provide new programs for the youth who
attend City community centers. Study cost cutting and efficiency measures for
current funding and develop alternative or additional funding sources as
appropriate. Report to Mayor and City Council by the end of second quarter, FY/
12. (FCS/Community Recreation)
      OBJECTIVE 8. Utilizing the foundation of the Family & Community Services
Department (FCS) Core Values Assessment and Recommendations, create and
implement a pilot program of new Employee Work Plans (EWP) and Performance
Evaluation Guides (PEG) for FCS that is valued, fair, holds supervisors and
employees accountable and encourages and rewards exceptional performance. Train
FCS supervisors and employees in the new system and use the new EWP/PEG
evaluations for no less than one year. Partner with HR to evaluate the program
and consider its application for other City departments. Report results to the
Mayor and City Council by the end of FY/12. (FCS/Plan & Coordinate)
      OBJECTIVE 9. Utilizing existing or available funding, follow up and
implement recommendations made by POD Inc. to construct a computerized database
and other process improvements for Family & Community Services Community
Development, Behavioral Health and selected other divisions. Develop and
implement the project in phases as resources are available. Report progress to
the Mayor and City Council by the end of FY/12. (FCS/Plan & Coordinate)
      OBJECTIVE 10. Using existing resources and staff, conduct a study to
determine a minimum of two suitable locations that can be used by nonprofit and
community groups to provide meal services to the homeless and other needy
individuals. The study shall include a survey of other homeless service
providers within the neighborhoods, the days and hours of existing meal
services, the feasibility of using their facilities to provide meals on
weekends/holidays and any additional costs to keep the facilities open for
meals on the weekends/holidays, consultation with neighborhood residents,
neighborhood associations, as well as local businesses that may be impacted by
meals provided on weekends/holidays. Complete the study and submit a report to
the Mayor and the City Council by the end of the second quarter of FY/12.
      OBJECTIVE 11. Develop a pilot program to increase programming for youth
recreation and wellness to include collaboration between Parks and Recreation,
Family and Community Services and Cultural Services Departments. Submit a
status report to the Mayor and City Council by the end of FY/12. (Parks and
Recreation/Provide Quality Recreation)
      OBJECTIVE 12. Complete the strategic plan and market the new vision of
Balloon Fiesta Park to increase year round use and promote recreational and
cultural opportunities. Submit a status report to the Mayor and City Council by
the end of FY/12. (Parks and Recreation/Provide Quality Recreation)
   PUBLIC SAFETY GOAL: The public is safe and secure, and shares responsibility
for maintaining a safe environment.
      OBJECTIVE 1. In an effort to combat automobile theft, expand the APD bait
vehicle program by adding at least two more vehicles. A bait vehicle is a
vehicle equipped with a GPS tracking system that activates when the vehicle is
tampered with and/or stolen and contains equipment that alerts the dispatcher
to track and disable the vehicle upon request of responding patrol units.
Submit a status report to the Mayor and City Council by end of the second
quarter, FY/12. (APD/Investigative Services)
      OBJECTIVE 2. In order to increase the effectiveness of the Pawn Shop
Unit, increase technology available to the Unit including a new database that
will track pawned items, how many times the items have been pawned, and who
pawned it. Submit a status report to the Mayor and City Council by end of the
second quarter, FY/12. (APD/Investigative Services)
      OBJECTIVE 3. In order to increase APD’s proactive approach to potential
crime, evaluate predictive crime analysis programs/applications that are
currently used by other law enforcement agencies. Predictive analysis is a
technique that models historical data with assumptive future conditions to
predict outcomes or events. Predictive analysis is a valuable tool for
identifying when and where criminal activity will take place, allowing law
enforcement agencies to shift resources accordingly. Submit a status report to
the Mayor and City Council by end of the fourth quarter, FY/12. (APD/Officer
and Department Support)
      OBJECTIVE 4. Using existing resources, improve the clearance rate for the
White Collar Crimes Unit by 5% by implementing procedures that result in a
higher clearance rate for identity theft cases worked and a larger increase in
the amount of cases that get assigned to detectives. Submit a status report to
the Mayor and City Council by end of the fourth quarter, FY/12. (APD/
Investigative Services)
      OBJECTIVE 5. Increase alternative training methods to all APD staff by
fully implementing PowerDMS and other alternative training methods in order to
save money on travel and lodging costs; increase convenience for the trainee;
and provide additional capacity for both students and instructors. Submit a
status report to the Mayor and City Council by end of the second and fourth
quarters, FY/12. (APD/Officer and Department Support)
      OBJECTIVE 6. Using grant funding, increase the number of contacts of
victims of domestic violence and stalking cases by victim liaisons at the
Family Advocacy Center. Increasing the number of contacts comforts the victim
by providing a personal touch, as well as monitoring the case thoroughly.
Submit a status report to the Mayor and City Council by end of the fourth
quarter, FY/12. (APD/Officer and Department Support)
      OBJECTIVE 7. Using existing resources develop an active shooter education
program for civilians that will increase the chances those civilians will
respond in a manner that will allow APD to be more effective in an event. APD’s
Training Committee will develop a course in collaboration with the Tactical
Division that will provide a guide for responses to an active shooter event.
Submit a status report to the Mayor and City Council by end of the second and
fourth quarters, FY/12. (APD/Officer and Department Support)
      OBJECTIVE 8. Using existing resources develop a second contact program
for victims of burglaries by developing a standardized procedure where Crime
Prevention staff contact burglary victims by phone in order to provide crime
prevention information. A second-contact program will bring awareness to
burglary victims about APD crime prevention services and demonstrate that the
Department is responsive about following up on leads and reduce the chances
that they fall victim of similar crime in the future. Submit a status report to
the Mayor and City Council by end of the fourth quarter, FY/12. (APD/Officer
and Department Support)
      OBJECTIVE 9. Using existing or available funding, create, deploy and
manage an internet-based system to enhance public and law enforcement
communications to thwart criminal gang activity and related violence. Submit a
status report to the Mayor and Council by end of the fourth quarter, FY/12.
(APD/Officer and Department Support)
      OBJECTIVE 10. Initiate and develop an annual Station Inspection Program,
to include fire department facilities, grounds, apparatus, response equipment,
and personal protective equipment. Submit a status report to the Mayor and City
Council by the end of FY/12. (Fire/Logistics)
      OBJECTIVE 11. Initiate and develop a Premises Identification Program to
ensure that all commercial businesses in the City Of Albuquerque display
appropriate street address numbers posted on their buildings, in accordance
with International Fire Code. Submit a status report to the Mayor and City
Council by the end of FY/12. (Fire/Prevention)
      OBJECTIVE 12. E nter into an agreement with the Albuquerque Bernalillo
Water Utility Authority to ensure that fire hydrants within the City of
Albuquerque are annually inspected, flushed, and tested; that defective
hydrants are repaired in a timely manner. Submit a status report to the Mayor
and City Council by the end of FY/12. (Fire/Prevention)
      OBJECTIVE 13. Submit a request to City Council to update the existing
ordinance F/SO-04-82 to adopt the 2009 IFC (International Fire Code) by the 1st
quarter of FY12. (Fire/Prevention)
      OBJECTIVE 14. Design and construct a photovoltaic solar array at the
Albuquerque Fire Academy (AFA), to generate sufficient electrical power to
reduce net purchased power by 33%. Submit a status report to the Mayor and City
Council by the end of second quarter FY/12. (Fire/Logistics)
      OBJECTIVE 15. Re-negotiate the Inter-governmental Agreement between the
Albuquerque Fire Department and Bernalillo County, for the provision of fire
and EMS protection at former County Stations 7 and 9. Submit a status report to
the Mayor and City Council by the end of second quarter FY/12. (Fire/
Headquarters)
      OBJECTIVE 16. Enter into a service contract, based on on-going
negotiations, with the local Ambulance service to establish reliable response
time criteria, improve clinical performance, and establish reasonable rates for
cost recovery of durable and consumable goods. Submit a status report to the
Mayor and City Council by the end of second quarter FY/12. (Fire/Emergency
Response)
      OBJECTIVE 17. Enter into a collaborative agreement with key stakeholders
within the Metropolitan area to identify system overload issues caused by
frequent and excessive calls to public inebriates, including issues related to
quality care and treatment of the public inebriate. Submit Implementation to be
complete by the end of second quarter FY12. (Fire/Emergency Response)
PUBLIC INFRASTRUCTURE. Existing communities are adequately and efficiently
served with well planned, coordinated, and maintained infrastructure. New
development is efficiently integrated into existing infrastructures and that
the costs are balanced with the revenues generated.
      OBJECTIVE 1. Utilizing existing or available revenue or funding and in-
house resources, improve the dissemination of bus schedule and real-time bus
arrival information through the use of SMS (texting), e-mail, telephone (IVR),
smart phone, or other applicable applications. Submit progress reports to the
Mayor and City Council by the end of second (December 2011) and fourth (June
2012) quarters, FY/12 (Transit/Customer Service).
      OBJECTIVE 2. Utilizing existing or available revenue or funding and in-
house resources, expand the use of Bus Stop Manager Software to provide
information on each bus stop. Information such as location, type of stop, stop
amenities, will be used to track stop maintenance requirements, establish a
preventive maintenance schedule, and inputs to the yearly budget cycle. Submit
progress reports to the Mayor and City Council by the end of second (December
2011) and fourth (June 2012) quarters, FY/12 (Transit/Maintenance).
      OBJECTIVE 3. Utilizing existing or available revenue or funding and in-
house resources, implement Fuel Focus, an automated and integrated system for
measuring vehicle fuel and fluid consumption. Submit progress reports to the
Mayor and City Council by the end of second (December 2011) and fourth (June
2012) quarters, FY/12 (Transit/Maintenance).
      OBJECTIVE 4. Utilizing existing or available revenue or funding and in-
house resources, improve security at ABQ Ride’s three (3) main facilities, its
transit facilities, and on its vehicles through the: (a) Centralization of
management of access to doors at all transit facilities, (b) Installation of
security cameras at remote transit facilities and implementation of a process
to store and access that video and (c) Upgrade van onboard video system. Submit
progress reports to the Mayor and City Council by the end of second (December
2011) and fourth (June 2012) quarters, FY/12. (Transit/Security)
      OBJECTIVE 5. Utilizing existing or available revenue or funding and in-
house resources, upgrade Rapid Ride shelters having bus information audio
announcing systems to a system providing both English and Spanish verbal
announcements. Develop and implement a schedule to install the English and
Spanish system at the remaining Rapid Ride shelter locations. Submit progress
reports to the Mayor and City Council by the end of second (December 2011) and
fourth (June 2012) quarters, FY/12 (Transit/Planning, Marketing).
      OBJECTIVE 6. Utilizing existing or available revenue or funding and in-
house resources, review ABQ Ride’s Para-Transit application and certification
of prospective passengers. Based on the review, updated procedures, checklists,
staff training material and program will be developed for implementation by
July 2012. Submit progress reports to the Mayor and City Council by the end of
second (December 2011) and fourth (June 2012) quarters, FY/12 . (Transit/Sun
Van)
       OBJECTIVE 7. Begin design for Terminal Package II, which includes design
for rehabilitation aging HVAC infrastructure, enlarge and modernize landside
restrooms, and curbside improvements. Submit status report to the Mayor and
City Council by the end of FY/12. (Aviation/Operations, Management &
Professional Support)
      OBJECTIVE 8. Begin new pavement rating report used to evaluate Street
Maintenance Programs. Report progress to the Mayor and City Council by the end
of FY/12. (DMD/Street Services)
      OBJECTIVE 9. Complete construction of Lead and Coal Improvement Project.
Report progress to the Mayor and City Council by the end of FY/12. (DMD/Design
Recovered Storm Drainage and Transport)
      OBJECTIVE 10. Complete the update of the City’s Master Plan of Drainage
Projects. Report progress by the end of the third quarter of FY/12. (DMD/Design
Recovered Storm Drainage and Transport)
      OBJECTIVE 11. Complete inventory and implementation plan to comply with
federally required regulatory traffic sign upgrade program. Report progress to
the Mayor and City Council by the end of FY/12. (DMD/Street Services)
      OBJECTIVE 12. Utilizing existing resources, review Transit’s passenger
fare structure and sales with other southwest cities. The study is to include
product sale numbers, corresponding fare revenue, and the impact of reduced and
complimentary fares. This study will also identify potential uses of any
additional fare box revenue that may be generated if the prices of Transit’s
fare products are increased. Submit findings in a report to the Mayor and City
Council by the end of second quarter, FY/12. (Transit/Strategic Support)
   SUSTAINABLE COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT. Guide growth to protect the environment
and the community's economic vitality and create a variety of livable,
sustainable communities throughout Albuquerque.
      OBJECTIVE 1. Using existing resources, evaluate the use of mobile devices
by Planning Department field inspectors. Small pad and tablet size devices will
be tested to input and retrieve information to and from the KIVA permit
tracking system and the ePlan electronic review system. $20,000-$30,000 of
existing KIVA and ePlan CIP funds will be used to purchase hardware and
software. The evaluation will be conducted with existing staff . A report will
be submitted to the Mayor and City Council by the end of FY/12. (Planning/One
Stop)
      OBJECTIVE 2. Complete landscaping of the median on west I-40 between
Coors & Unser by end of the fourth quarter of FY12. Report progress by the end
of the third quarter of FY/12. (DMD/Design Recovered CIP)
      OBJECTIVE 3. Complete construction of the John Marshall Replacement
Kitchen by the end of the second quarter FY12. Report progress by the end of
the third quarter of FY/12. (DMD/Design Recovered CIP)
      OBJECTIVE 4. Complete design of Albuquerque Fire Department - Station 2
and Station 7 by end of the third quarter FY12. Report progress by the end of
the third quarter of FY/12. (DMD/Design Recovered CIP)
   ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION and ENHANCEMENT. Protect and enhance Albuquerque's
natural environments - its mountains, river, bosque, volcanoes, arroyos, air,
and water.
      OBJECTIVE 1. Because EHD foresees Albuquerque-Bernalillo County ozone
levels will exceed future revised U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA)
standards, following the EPA revising the ozone standard in 2011, EHD will
develop an attainment plan to comply with the revised regulation. The
attainment plan will document steps necessary to meet the ozone standard. This
plan may include a timeline for attainment, identifying regional collaboration
agencies and their involvement in the process, and the specific steps that will
be taken to reach compliance. The Department will provide this plan to the
Mayor and City Council by the end of 2nd Quarter, FY/12. (EHD/Air Quality
Operating Grant)
      OBJECTIVE 2. Expand automated Residential Curbside Recycling Program.
Submit a status report to the Mayor and City Council by the end of FY/12.
(Solid Waste/Collections)
      OBJECTIVE 3. Identify acreage suitable for final closure at the Cerro
Colorado Landfill. Design and implement construction. Submit a status report to
the Mayor and City Council by the end of FY/12. (Solid Waste/Disposal)
      OBJECTIVE 4. Review the green waste and glass processing operations at
Cerro Colorado Landfill for efficiencies and cost effectiveness. Evaluate the
potential of a public private partnership for processing. Submit a
recommendation to the Mayor and City Council by end of second quarter, FY/12.
(Solid Waste/Disposal)
      OBJECTIVE 5. Working within current funding levels, provide additional
entertainment opportunities for guests at the BioPark and raise Zoo Music and
Summer Nights by 22%. The progress and outcome will be reported in Performance
Plan. (Cultural Services, BioPark)
      OBJECTIVE 6. Implement $2 Million in Energy Conservation funded projects.
Report progress to the Mayor and City Council by the end of FY/12. (DMD/City
Buildings)
   ECONOMIC VITALITY. Achieve a vital, diverse, and sustainable economy in
which businesses and residents have opportunities for success.
      OBJECTIVE 1. Using existing resources combine the services of the former
Music Office with the Film Office by the end of the first quarter FY12.
Complete a report on the consolidation to the Mayor and City Council by the end
of the second quarter, FY/12 (Economic Development).
      OBJECTIVE 2. Increase utilization of the www.thriveABQ.com business
website through combined marketing efforts from community partners. Utilization
tracking is to include public usage, business profiles completed and overall
website metrics. Complete a status report to the Mayor and City Council by the
end of third quarter FY/12. (Economic Development)
      OBJECTIVE 3. Implement provisions of the Small Business Regulatory Relief
Act. This shall be completed the end of second quarter FY/12. Complete a status
report to the Mayor and City Council by the end of third quarter FY/12.
(Economic Development)
      OBJECTIVE 4. Develop a plan to increase the functionality of Civic Plaza
Parking Structure. Submit a status report to the Mayor and City Council by the
end of FY/12. (DMD/Parking Services)
   COMMUNITY and CULTURAL ENGAGEMENT. Residents participate in the life and
decisions of the community to promote and enhance our pride, cultural values,
and resources and ensure that Albuquerque's community institutions are
effective and responsive.
      OBJECTIVE 1. In FY/12, The Albuquerque Museum, with the support of the
Albuquerque Museum Foundation, will be instituting a “Night at the Museum,”
wherein the museum will be open one evening each month for public programming.
An evaluation will be done at the end of the year to determine the possible
long-term effectiveness and sustainability of the program. A final report will
be made to Council at the end of first quarter FY/13. (CSD/Museum)
      OBJECTIVE 2. In FY/12, the KiMo Theatre will implement a minimum of fifty
(50) “Cinema at the KiMo” events and four (4) “Live at the KiMo” musical
events. The outcome and attendance will be reported in Performance Plan by the
end of FY/12. (CSD/Community Events)
   GOVERNMENTAL EXCELLENCE and EFFECTIVENESS. Government is ethical,
transparent, and responsive to its citizens. Every element of government
contributes effectively to meeting public needs.
      OBJECTIVE 1. Implement Oracle’s Hyperion Public Sector Planning &
Budgeting (PSPB) application. The new application will interface with the
City’s PeopleSoft ERP financial system to permit budget preparation and budget
vs. results reporting. The expected project completion date is October, 2011.
Submit a report to the Mayor and City Council at the end of the second quarter,
FY/12. (DFAS/ERP)
      OBJECTIVE 2. As a result of the City’s recent review of ERP, remediate
the Payroll and Time & Labor functionality. The estimated completion date is
April, 2012. Submit a report to the Mayor and City Council at the end of the
fourth quarter, FY/12. (DFAS/ERP)
      OBJECTIVE 3. Using existing staff and available resources, conduct a
follow-up study to determine the advisability of contracting the internal audit
function to an outside vendor. Increase the number of cities to be surveyed to
a minimum of twenty. A minimum of 40% of the cities surveyed should use an
external auditor as a co-source or out-source for the city’s internal audit
function. Cities should be of similar population size and/or annual operating
budget as the City of Albuquerque. The follow-up survey should include, at a
minimum, per city: the number of audits specified in the annual audit plan and
the number completed; the average length of time it takes to complete an audit
from the date it is started to the date of publication of the audit report; the
average number of audits auditors are working on at a given point in time; and
the average cost of the audit. The office of Internal Audit shall have minimal
involvement with the study. Report study results and recommendations to the
Mayor and City Council by the end of second quarter, FY/12. (DFAS/OMB)
   (B)   That the Mayor shall submit a report by Goal to the City Council at
least semi-annually summarizing the progress made toward implementation of all
the one-year objectives and that any report called for in this resolution shall
be in the form of an Executive Communication from the Mayor to the City
Council, unless otherwise specifically noted.
(R-2011-041, passed 5-26-11)
§ 4-7-8 ONE-YEAR OBJECTIVES FOR FISCAL YEAR 2013.
   (A)   That the City of Albuquerque adopts the following one-year objectives
for FY/13, grouped under the eight five-year goals of the City.
   HUMAN AND FAMILY DEVELOPMENT GOAL: All residents have the opportunity to
participate in the community and economy, and are well sheltered, safe,
healthy, and educated.
      OBJECTIVE 1. Complete cost of service analysis for Golf Management
division and develop a rates and charges model for a self-sustaining operation.
Submit a status report to the Mayor and City Council by the end of FY/13. (P&R/
Affordable and Quality Golf)
      OBJECTIVE 2. Assess the Department of Senior Affairs’ website for
readability, accuracy, thoroughness and customer satisfaction to determine
improvements in updating and maintaining the site. Identify contractor to
design and implement changes that conform with ITSD standards and protocol.
Submit status report to the Mayor and City Council by the end of FY/13. (DSA/
Strategic Support)
      OBJECTIVE 3. Develop and produce a video commemorating the State’s
centennial and promoting the work of the Department of Senior Affairs. The
video will also feature the importance of the senior population and honor their
history and tell the ’’’’New Mexico’’ story. Identify contractor to assist with
theme development, including filming, casting and marketing tactics. Deliver
finished product by end of first quarter, FY/13, and submit status report to
the Mayor and City Council by end of the second quarter FY/13. (DSA/Well Being)
      OBJECTIVE 4. Coordinate and share resources between the Department of
Senior Affairs and Transit to expand transportation services to seniors and
maximize the use of the Transportation Division of Senior Affairs to reach more
customers and coordinate hours of service as well as driver routes with the
Transit Department. Submit a status report to the Mayor and City Council by the
end of FY/13. (DSA/Access to Basic Services)
      OBJECTIVE 5. Collaborate with the Albuquerque Public Schools (APS) to
create a volunteer partnership that will offer seniors an opportunity to
contribute their volunteer efforts with the students in our community. This
partnership will establish a broader range of volunteer opportunities to
individuals than what is currently available through our Foster Grandparent
Program (FGP). Submit a status report to the Mayor and City Council by the
second quarter of FY/13. (DSA/Access to Basic Services)
      OBJECTIVE 6. Collaborate with the Department of Parks and Recreation and
with the Veterans Memorial Foundation to develop and implement a plan for the
oversight and administration of the Veterans Memorial Museum and Conference
Center. Submit a status report to the Mayor and City Council by the end of FY/
13. (DSA/Well Being)
   PUBLIC SAFETY GOAL: The public is safe and secure, and shares responsibility
for maintaining a safe environment.
      OBJECTIVE 1. In order to engage citizens involved in Neighborhood Crime
Watches, collaborate with area command staff to deploy the Citizen Hot Sheet
area in the web-based CONNECT site in order to initiate more proactive crime-
fighting strategies. The CONNECT site’s purpose is to unite community partners
to law enforcement so that they can communicate more effectively about crime
and public safety issues. Submit a status report to the Mayor and City Council
by the end of FY/13. (’’APD’/Officer and Department Support)
      OBJECTIVE 2. In order to educate endangered populations and potentially
decrease the incidence of sexual assault, participate in quarterly
presentations and other outreach efforts at schools and other settings. The
presentation will include an overview of the services that APD can provide in
the event of an assault. Submit a status report to the Mayor and City Council
by the end of FY/13. (APD/Family Advocacy Center)
      OBJECTIVE 3. To better prepare cadets as police officers upon graduation,
enhance training at the Basic Training level to increase the cadet’s knowledge
and skill level. All lesson plans will be revised to solicit active cadet
participation and training blocks will be added to the curriculum that will
incorporate cadet-led instruction. Cadets will be required to research topics
and present them to their class, incorporating a collegiate-type atmosphere.
Submit a status report to the Mayor and City Council by the end of FY/13.
(’’APD’/Neighborhood Policing)
      OBJECTIVE 4. Reduce criminal activity and improve the quality of life in
the Southeast Area Command through the implementation of “Operation Hot Spot:
Phase 2” with existing funding. Operation Hot Spot includes specialized
enforcement and predictive analysis modeling to address problems of mutual
concern to law enforcement and the residents within the area command. Submit a
status report to the Mayor and City Council at the end of the second and fourth
quarters, FY/13. (APD/Neighborhood Policing)
      OBJECTIVE 5. In order to reduce crime, APD’s newly-formed Organized Crime
Unit (OCU) will investigate, develop intelligence on trends and inform private
sector partners and department personnel on local organized retail crime
activities. OCU will continue developing working relationships with private
sector partners and will identify, document and focus on repeat organized
retail crime offenders that commit crimes impacting Albuquerque’s business
community. Submit a status report to the Mayor and City Council by the end of
FY/13. (’’APD’/Investigative Services)
      OBJECTIVE 6. In order to achieve Commission on Accreditation for Law
Enforcement Agencies (CALEA) accreditation for APD’s Communication Division,
’’APD’ Communications staff will complete appropriate updates and changes to
the Communications Center policy book that are in line with CALEA guidelines.
Communication staff will attend CALEA training and will begin to collect proofs
of compliance for established standards, resulting in an eventual accredited
status. Submit a status report to the Mayor and City Council by the end of FY/
13. (’’APD’/Communications and Records)
      OBJECTIVE 7. In an effort to improve police data and voice
communications, collaborate with the State of New Mexico to build on the
regulatory framework of the 700 MHz public safety band to facilitate the
establishment of a nationwide, interoperable broadband communications network
for the benefit of state and local public safety users. Submit a status report
to the Mayor and City Council by the end of FY/13. (APD/Communications and
Records)
      OBJECTIVE 8. Develop and initiate a program to ensure maximum Insurance
Services Office credit for firefighter training. Program development and
implementation to be completed by the end of the second quarter of FY/13.
Submit a status report to the Mayor and City Council by the end of second
quarter of FY/13. (Fire/AFD Headquarters)
      OBJECTIVE 9. Implement a Document Management System. Submit a status
report to the Mayor and City Council by the end of the first quarter of FY/13.
(Fire/AFD Headquarters)
      OBJECTIVE 10. Develop and initiate a Medical Director response program to
major incidents within Albuquerque by the end of the second quarter of FY/13.
Submit a status report to the Mayor and City Council by the end of the second
quarter of FY/13. (Fire/Emergency Response)
      OBJECTIVE 11. Develop and implement an Ethics manual and associated
curriculum by the end of the second quarter of FY/13. Submit a report to the
Mayor and City Council by the third quarter of FY/13. (Fire/Headquarters)
      OBJECTIVE 12. Double the number of spay/neuter surgeries of public
animals (external to shelter) at the department’s in-house spay/neuter clinics
from the current rate of 2,000. Submit a status report to the Mayor and City
Council, including comparative statistics regarding in-house spay/neuter
surgeries, at the end FY/13. (AWD/Albuquerque Animal Welfare)
      OBJECTIVE 13. Develop and implement improvements in the quality of pet
adoptions, in addition to increasing the number of pet adoptions. Submit a
status report to the Mayor and the City Council at the end of the second
quarter of FY/13. (AWD/Albuquerque Animal Welfare)
   PUBLIC INFRASTRUCTURE. Existing communities are adequately and efficiently
served with well planned, coordinated, and maintained infrastructure. New
development is efficiently integrated into existing infrastructures and that
the costs are balanced with the revenues generated.
      OBJECTIVE 1. Complete Passenger Facility Charge (PFC) program #4 with the
Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) to ensure funding of capital projects by
the end of FY/13. (Aviation/Aviation Management and Professional Support)
      OBJECTIVE 2. Complete construction of Bear Canyon Arroyo Bridge over I-25
by the end of 4th quarter FY/13. (DMD/Construction)
      OBJECTIVE 3. Provide new Pavement Quality Index street ratings by end of
4th quarter FY/13. (DMD/Street Services)
      OBJECTIVE 4. Publish and implement the final version of the revised
guidelines for a New Traffic Management Program (NTMP) by the end of 4th
quarter FY/13. (DMD/Street Services)
      OBJECTIVE 5. Determine the annual cost for electricity and maintenance
both as a whole and by streetlight for the streetlights that are not included
in the PNM base rate and provide a tally of the estimated number of personnel
hours required to maintain these lights by the end of 3rd quarter FY/13. (DMD/
Traffic Engineering)
   SUSTAINABLE COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT. Guide growth to protect the environment
and the community's economic vitality and create a variety of livable,
sustainable communities throughout Albuquerque.
      OBJECTIVE 1. Complete construction of Albuquerque Fire Department -
Station 2 and Station 7 by end of the 4th quarter FY/13. (DMD/Construction)
      OBJECTIVE 2. Complete Median Landscaping on West I-40 Median by the end
of 2nd quarter FY/13 (DMD/Construction)
      OBJECTIVE 3. Complete cost of service analysis for Parks and Recreation
Department and develop recommended policies related to alternative funding
mechanisms and revenue development. Submit a status report to the Mayor and
City Council by the end of FY/13. (P&R/Parks Management)
      OBJECTIVE 4. Develop a functional program at the Veterans’ Memorial Park
and Visitor Center including special event programming, volunteer program
development and marketing (in partnership with Senior Affairs and Cultural
Services). Submit a status report to the Mayor and City Council by the end of
FY/13. (P&R/Parks Management)
      OBJECTIVE 5. Implement and evaluate the use of mobile devices by Planning
Department field inspectors utilizing iPads to input and retrieve information
to and from the KIVA permit tracking system and the ePlan electronic review
system. CIP funds will be used to purchase hardware and software. Submit a
status report to the Mayor and City Council by the end of FY/13. (Planning/
Planning Strategic Support and GIS)
      OBJECTIVE 6. Increase services in the FasTrax program to maintain the
initiative from FY/11 that allows expedited review of plans and building
permits for an additional fee. Permits issued in FY/13 will exceed 200 FasTrax
plan reviews by the end of FY/13. (Planning/One Stop Shop)
      OBJECTIVE 7. Enforce amended Zoning Code, subsections 14-6-1-5(B) and 14-
16-3-5(A), (B), (C) and (D) ROA 1994 to update the regulation of electronic
signs; adding restrictions to new off-premise electronic signs. Create the
process for annual review of the electronic signs, implementing new
regulations, assessing fees and overall compliance. A report will be submitted
to the Mayor and City Council by the end of FY/13. (Planning/Code Enforcement)
      OBJECTIVE 8. Complete a National Register of Historic Places nomination
for the “Locomotive Shops Historic District,” also known as the City-owned Rail
Yards property in Barelas. Concurrently, draft an application for City Landmark
designation of the “Locomotive Shops Historic District.” Submit a status update
to the Mayor and City Council by the end of the 3 rd quarter of FY/13.
(Planning/Historic Preservation)
   ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION and ENHANCEMENT. Protect and enhance Albuquerque's
natural environments - its mountains, river, bosque, volcanoes, arroyos, air,
and water.
      OBJECTIVE 1. In support of the Sunport's sustainability management and
renewable energy efforts, construct an approximate 350 kilowatt photovoltaic
array at the Rental Car Facility. Submit a report to the Mayor and City Council
by the end of FY/13. (Aviation/Aviation Operations, Maintenance, and Security)
      OBJECTIVE 2. Implement a preventative maintenance program and continue
the deferred maintenance program at the Bio Park. Submit a status report to the
Mayor and City Council by the end of FY/13. (CSD/Biological Park)
   ECONOMIC VITALITY. Achieve a vital, diverse, and sustainable economy in
which businesses and residents have opportunities for success.
      OBJECTIVE 1. Implement the certified sites process at the Aerospace
Technology Park at Double Eagle II and the Foreign Trade Zone at the Sunport as
test beds. Submit a report to the Mayor and City Council by the end of FY/13.
(Aviation/Aviation Management and Professional Support)
      OBJECTIVE 2. Fully implement the new retail program at the Sunport
including completion of all tenant improvements. Submit a report to the Mayor
and the City Council by the 2nd quarter of FY/13. (Aviation/Aviation Management
and Professional Support)
   COMMUNITY and CULTURAL ENGAGEMENT. Residents participate in the life and
decisions of the community to promote and enhance our pride, cultural values,
and resources and ensure that Albuquerque’s community institutions are
effective and responsive.
      OBJECTIVE 1. Provide greater access for the public to literary and
creative media via portable and/or digital technologies and devices. Submit a
status report to the Mayor and City Council by the end of FY/13. (CSD/Public
Library)
      OBJECTIVE 2. Increase diversity of cultural and creative offerings at the
KiMo Theatre. Submit a status report to the Mayor and City Council by the end
of FY/13. (CSD/Community Events/KiMo)
   GOVERNMENTAL EXCELLENCE and EFFECTIVENESS. Government is ethical,
transparent, and responsive to its citizens. Every element of government
contributes effectively to meeting public needs.
      OBJECTIVE 1. Evaluate, recommend, and implement a technology based
solution for the automation and enhancement of the City employment process
including recruitment, candidate screening and selection, applicant tracking
and reporting. Identify and assess available automated systems to streamline
the employment business process and provide necessary support for tracking,
recordkeeping, and compliance reporting. Submit a report to the Mayor and City
Council by the end of FY/13. (HR/Personnel Services)
      OBJECTIVE 2. Enhance City business applications through software upgrades
and implementations providing better on-line payment capability for various
city services, better management of leases of City properties and streamlining
the public financing of municipal elections. Submit a status report to the
Mayor and City Council by the end of FY/13. (DFAS/Strategic Support)
   (B)   That the Mayor shall submit a report by Goal to the City Council at
least semi-annually summarizing the progress made toward implementation of all
the one-year objectives and that any report called for in this resolution shall
be in the form of an Executive Communication from the Mayor to the City
Council, unless otherwise specifically noted.
(R-2012-042, approved 5-29-2012)
§ 4-7-9 ONE-YEAR OBJECTIVES FOR FISCAL YEAR 2014.
   (A)   That the City of Albuquerque adopts the following one-year objectives
for FY/14, grouped under the eight five-year goals of the City.
   HUMAN AND FAMILY DEVELOPMENT GOAL: All residents have the opportunity to
participate in the community and economy, and are well sheltered, safe,
healthy, and educated.
      OBJECTIVE 1. Collaborate with New Mexico Highlands and the Mayor's Office
of Volunteerism and Engagement (MOVE) to develop a sustainable, volunteer-based
grocery shopping program for the City of Albuquerque that will allow volunteers
to shop for individuals who are unable to shop for themselves. Submit a status
report to the Mayor and City Council by the end of FY/14. (DSA/Access to Basic
Services)
      OBJECTIVE 2. Implement and conduct fitness classes at a minimum of five
meal-sites in order to provide evidence based exercise opportunities to meal-
site participants. Submit a status report to the Mayor and City Council by the
end of FY/14. (DSA/Access to Basic Services)
      OBJECTIVE 3. Utilizing the "City of Albuquerque: Aging Well in 2030, The
Age Wave: The Realities, The Challenges, The Hopes, The Plans" and the DSA
Documentary: What One City Can Do host an Aging Summit the first quarter of FY/
14 in coordination with other City departments and community agencies to
discuss the issues that all communities will face as the senior population
grows exponentially as a result of the baby boomers retiring. Submit a status
report to the Mayor and City Council by the end of the second quarter of FY/14.
(DSA/Strategic Support)
      OBJECTIVE 4. Complete the senior central national accreditation with the
National Council on Aging that recognizes best practices, increases the level
of pride in staff and members, and serves as a mechanism for continuous quality
improvement and program evaluation. Submit a status report to the Mayor and
City Council by the end of FY/14. (DSA/Well Being)
      OBJECTIVE 5. Implement programming at the new Esperanza Community Bike
Shop, taking bike education into the community to encourage alternative
transportation. Hold 16 earn-a-bike programs, 150 open shop nights and have a
minimum of 10 bikes in the bike library at all times. In FY/14 determine
baseline data for number of participants. (Parks and Recreation/Provide Quality
Recreation)
      OBJECTIVE 6. Hold 4 "Splash and Dash" Triathlon training events and host
the Coyote Carrera Triathlon in partnership with Chasing 3, a local event
coordinator. This event has been selected by USA Triathlon (USAT) to be part of
their national race in April 2013/April 2014. (Parks and Recreation/Provide
Quality Recreation)
      OBJECTIVE 7. Complete Albuquerque Heading Home's goal of housing 205
medically vulnerable and chronically homeless people during the first three
years of the initiative and obtain funding for successful continuation of the
program, moving on to other vulnerable populations. Submit a report to the
Mayor and City Council by the end of FY/14.
      OBJECTIVE 8. Add three courses of study to the current three Running
Start for Careers courses by the end of 2nd Quarter, FY/14.
   PUBLIC SAFETY GOAL: The public is safe and secure, and shares responsibility
for maintaining a safe environment.
      OBJECTIVE 1. To improve City efficiencies at a reduced cost and to
increase functionality, select and acquire a larger DWI seizure lot. Coordinate
with realtors and the City's Real Property staff to determine appropriate size,
land use and location. Submit a status report to the Mayor and City Council by
the end of the second and fourth quarters, FY/14. (APD/Officer and Department
Support)
      OBJECTIVE 2. Utilizing Real Time Crime Center resources make analytics
available on a real-time basis for active calls for service. Identify data that
is useful to officers while they are responding to calls for service, and
implement a GIS platform to render the information. Submit a status report to
the Mayor and City Council by the end of the second and fourth quarters, FY/14.
(APD/Officer and Departmental Support)
      OBJECTIVE 3. In order to maintain consistency with current FEMA
standards, transition from an all-hazards based Emergency Operations Plan to an
Essential Support Functions-based plan. Submit a status report to the Mayor and
City Council by the end of the fourth quarter, FY/14. (APD/Office of Emergency
Management)
      OBJECTIVE 4. Partner with the United Way to expand the number and type of
services offered at the Albuquerque Family Advocacy Center. Develop a staffed
child care center; explore the feasibility of a child custody exchange; conduct
financial training/planning; expand services for Veterans. Submit a status
report to the Mayor and City Council by the end of the fourth quarter, FY/14.
(APD/Family Advocacy Center)
      OBJECTIVE 5. Increase and enhance methods of communication that are
accepted at the APD Communications Center. Explore technology-based alternative
communication methods to receive non-emergency general crime texts and/or
anonymous tips. Select a vendor to develop an application to provide the
service. Submit a status report to the Mayor and City Council by the end of the
second and fourth quarters, FY/14. (APD/Communication and Records)
      OBJECTIVE 6. Partner with regional law enforcement agencies and local
businesses to create a metal recycling task force to better address precious
metal theft. Develop a database that would detail licensed recyclers and track
all commercial copper thefts. Submit a status report to the Mayor and City
Council by the end of the fourth quarter, FY/14. (APD/Investigative Services)
      OBJECTIVE 7. Using existing resources, implement a comprehensive plan for
the deployment of new technology, electronic tracking systems and camera
systems used in the field area commands. Area Commanders will collaborate to
develop a pilot program that will maximize the Department's responses to
criminal activity. Submit a status report to the Mayor and City Council by the
end of the second and fourth quarters, FY/14. (APD/Neighborhood Policing)
      OBJECTIVE 8. Begin implementation of the plan for a comprehensive
treatment center in Albuquerque for opioid dependent youth. Submit a status
report to the Mayor and City Council by the end of FY/14.
   PUBLIC INFRASTRUCTURE. Existing communities are adequately and efficiently
served with well planned, coordinated, and maintained infrastructure. New
development is efficiently integrated into existing infrastructures and that
the costs are balanced with the revenues generated.
      OBJECTIVE 1. Begin construction for Terminal Improvement Program - Phase
I, which includes rehabilitating remaining terminal restrooms, emergency
operation center, and ramp corridors. Submit a report to the Mayor and City
Council by the end of FY/14. (Aviation/Aviation Management and Professional
Support)
      OBJECTIVE 2. Complete construction of the Albuquerque Convention Center
Phase I by end of 2nd Quarter, FY/14. (DMD/Construction)
      OBJECTIVE 3. Complete Alameda widening from San Pedro to Wyoming by the
end of 3rd Quarter, FY/14. (DMD/Construction)
      OBJECTIVE 4. Complete a bi-annual bridge maintenance report to prioritize
projects for bridge rehabilitation for the 2013 GO Bond Program by the end of
FY/14. (DMD/Street services)
   SUSTAINABLE COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT. Guide growth to protect the environment
and the community's economic vitality and create a variety of livable,
sustainable communities throughout Albuquerque.
      OBJECTIVE 1. Implement the YARDI work order system and develop a
preventative maintenance program. Submit a report to the Mayor and City Council
by the end of FY/14. (Parks and Recreation/Parks and Landscape Management)
   ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION and ENHANCEMENT. Protect and enhance Albuquerque's
natural environments - its mountains, river, bosque, volcanoes, arroyos, air,
and water.
      OBJECTIVE 1. In support of the Sunport's sustainability management and
renewable energy efforts, construct an approximate 1 megawatt photovoltaic
array at the Long Term Parking Lot. Submit a report to the Mayor and City
Council by the end of FY/14. (Aviation/Aviation Operations, Maintenance, and
Security)
      OBJECTIVE 2. The Albuquerque Biological Park will complete construction
on the following exhibits: Macaws, Gorilla Bachelor Pad and Alligator Cove, by
the end of FY/14. (Cultural Services/Biological Park)
      OBJECTIVE 3. The Albuquerque Biological Park will begin construction on
the Insectarium by the end of FY/14.
   ECONOMIC VITALITY. Achieve a vital, diverse, and sustainable economy in
which businesses and residents have opportunities for success.
      OBJECTIVE 1. In collaboration with the Planning and Economic Development
Departments, create an action plan for the development of ready certified sites
at the Aerospace Technology Park at Double Eagle II and the Foreign Trade Zone
at the Sunport so that when the economy improves the plan can be activated with
minimal delay. Complete the action plan by the first quarter of FY/14 and
submit a plan to the Mayor and City Council by the end of second quarter, FY/
14. (Aviation/Aviation Management and Professional Support)
      OBJECTIVE 2. Implement the certified sites process at the Aerospace
Technology Park at Double Eagle II and the Foreign Trade Zone at the Sunport as
test beds. Submit a report to the Mayor and City Council by the end of FY/14.
(Aviation/Aviation Management and Professional Support)
      OBJECTIVE 3. Implement a pilot program for smart parking technologies
(sensors, upgraded single head meters, automated self-park) at either an on
street, surface, or parking garage facility by end of the FY/14. (DMD/Parking
Services)
   COMMUNITY AND CULTURAL ENGAGEMENT. Residents participate in the life and
decisions of the community to promote and enhance our pride, cultural values,
and resources and ensure that Albuquerque's community institutions are
effective and responsive.
      OBJECTIVE 1. The Albuquerque Museum will organize and implement a new
9,338 square foot exhibit on the history of Albuquerque by the end of FY/14.
(Cultural Services/Museum)
   GOVERNMENTAL EXCELLENCE and EFFECTIVENESS. Government is ethical,
transparent, and responsive to its citizens. Every element of government
contributes effectively to meeting public needs.
      OBJECTIVE 1. Upgrade the City of Albuquerque's PeopleSoft Human Capital
Management (HCM) and Financial and Supply Chain Management (FSCM) application
from the current 9.0 version to the 9.2 release, by June 30, 2014 to enable the
City to take advantage of Oracle's planned roadmap for PeopleSoft applications
delivering valuable needed features as well as new application functionality.
Provide a report to the Mayor and City Council by 2nd Quarter, FY/14 (DFAS/
ERP).
      OBJECTIVE 2. Given the improved state of technology, the Human Resources
Employment Testing Division will computerize the existing Entry Level Police
Cadet Examination which was developed in-house. This will serve to streamline,
further ensure the security of, and improve upon the paper and pencil format
currently used by the Albuquerque Police Training Academy. This project will
require collaborative commitment from City Human Resources Testing, the APD
Training Academy, and DFA Information Technology. The Employment Testing
Division will submit a project summary to the Mayor and City Council by the end
of FY/14. (Human Resources/Personnel Services)
      OBJECTIVE 3. Evaluate, recommend, and implement a technology based
solution for the distribution of information to new hires before their first
day. This should include power points, policy documents, forms, and even videos
to be viewed and completed in scheduled intervals to include prior to first
day, first week, first month and going forward beyond the first year. Submit a
status report to the Mayor and City Council by the end of FY/14. (Human
Resources/Personnel Services)
   (B)   That the Mayor shall submit a report by Goal to the City Council at
least semi-annually summarizing the progress made toward implementation of all
the one-year objectives and that any report called for in this resolution shall
be in the form of an Executive Communication from the Mayor to the City
Council, unless otherwise specifically noted.
(R-2013-045, approved 5-31-2013)
§ 4-7-10 ONE-YEAR OBJECTIVES FOR FISCAL YEAR 2020.
   (A)   That the City of Albuquerque adopts the following one-year objectives
for FY/21, grouped under the eight five-year goals of the City.
HUMAN AND FAMILY DEVELOPMENT GOAL: People of all ages have the opportunity to
participate in the community and economy, and are well sheltered, safe,
healthy, and educated.
   OBJECTIVE 1. Connect Albuquerque's youth to opportunities for education,
enrichment, employment, physical activities and recreation to include options
for expanding youth programs on the East side. Submit a status report on
SharePoint by the fourth quarter FY/21. (Family & Community Services)
   OBJECTIVE 2. Develop new and preserve existing affordable housing; promote
homeownership; and provide fair housing services. Submit a status report on
SharePoint by end of FY/21. (Family & Community Services)
   OBJECTIVE 3. Create a marketing and volunteer recruitment strategy targeting
individuals 50 years of age or older, including recent retirees and low-income
seniors, to increase the number of volunteers in the Department for innovative
opportunities such as addressing senior challenges, promoting age-friendly
initiative and utilizing skills and specialized expertise to improve services
offered by the Department. Submit a status report on SharePoint by the fourth
quarter FY/21. (Senior Affairs)
   OBJECTIVE 4. Continue to work on the One Albuquerque: Age-Friendly plan by
focusing on the eight domains of livability and creating partnerships with a
variety of stakeholders, including internal City departments and external
businesses and organizations, to improve existing and/or create new age-
friendly initiatives. Submit a status report on SharePoint by the fourth
quarter FY/21. (Senior Affairs)
   OBJECTIVE 5. Provide monthly reports to the City Council regarding the
status of the distribution of Housing Vouchers. Reports should include
statistics on demographics, anticipated reversions for unused vouchers, and an
assessment of whether the removal of the $75,000 vendor maximums have improved
distribution of the vouchers. (Family & Community Services)
   OBJECTIVE 6. Complete a study on how the City is preparing and planning to
provide services for a growing aging population. As the population of the City
continues to get older, the City should have a long term plan on how it plans
to prioritize programs and services to provide for this segment of the
population. A report should be submitted to Council by the end of the 3rd
quarter of FY/21. (Senior Affairs)
   OBJECTIVE 7. Complete a feasibility study to determine whether a sobriety
tank or sobriety testing can be designated in the Crisis Triage and Medical
Facility. The study would help determine whether a sobriety area could be and
should be in the facility and if additional funding would be required. A report
should be submitted to Council by the end of the 3rd quarter of FY/21. (Family
and Community Services)
PUBLIC SAFETY GOAL: The public is safe and secure, and shares responsibility
for maintaining a safe environment.
   OBJECTIVE 1. Implement an internal mental health and wellness program that
addresses the needs of our firefighters. Update SharePoint with status by end
of FY/21. (Fire)
   OBJECTIVE 2. Improve the collection, analysis, and sharing of our data to
improve response and service to the public. Adding a more robust pre-incident
planning software and additional positions to improve our data tracking
capabilities will greatly improve our fire and EMS response to the community.
Update SharePointwith status by end of FY/21. (Fire)
   OBJECTIVE 3. Implement new positions to meet the growing demand of EMS in
the community. With additional staffing, our internal quality assurance process
for EMS will improve. Reorganizing the departments' fiscal division will expand
our ability to meet the increased demand to support our EMS operations. Update
SharePoint with status by end of FY/21. (Fire)
   OBJECTIVE 4. Improve the security of the 911 Communications Center. This is
an essential component of public safety in the City of Albuquerque. Update
SharePoint with status by end of FY/21. (Fire)
   OBJECTIVE 5. Encourage and inspire our community to become more disaster
prepared and resilient by providing preparedness education and outreach to
residents, neighborhoods, nonprofits, faith-based organizations, schools,
businesses and vulnerable populations, including individuals with disabilities
and access and functional needs. By enhancing the community preparedness and
strengthening the support for the traditionally overlooked and underserved
populations, It supports community-wide equity and inclusion priorities. Update
SharePoint with status by end of FY/21. (Fire/OEM)
   OBJECTIVE 6. Develop Community Emergency Response Teams (CERT) to augment
City resilience. The CERT program promotes community preparedness and is OEM's
most publicly-facing program with over 200 active volunteers that cover all
four quadrants of the City. CERT volunteers are actively used to supplement the
City's emergency response efforts. Priorities for this objective include 1)
developing, implementing and following consistent standards throughout
Albuquerque CERT; 2) expanding the number of trained and active CERTs in
Albuquerque to 400 (5-year goal); 3) developing and maintaining CERT skills;
and 4) increasing awareness of the value of CERT and ensuring continued funding
of the CERT program. Update SharePoint with status by end of FY/21. (Fire/OEM)
   OBJECTIVE 7. Continue to develop and maintain comprehensive emergency
management plans and documents. Through this goal, OEM will focus on
collaborative planning, participate in regional efforts, and use an equity
framework to inform resilience planning and prepare historically underserved
communities more effectively for disasters through neighborhood led efforts.
Priorities are to ensure that all plans are kept up-todate to conform to
relevant national standards and local priorities, concise, and actionable.
Update SharePolnt with status by end of FY/21. (Fire/OEM)
   OBJECTIVE 8. Advance Emergency Operations Center (EOC) readiness and
response by 1) investing in training and exercises that strengthen skills for
EOC personnel to respond to the needs of residents during disasters; 2)
enhancing the City's emergency management facilities, equipment, communication
and data systems and supplies to ensure the City is prepared to address the
needs of any natural or human-caused emergency or disaster; and 3)
strengthening Joint Information Center (JIC) and emergency public information
and warning capabilities so that the entire community has ample access to
emergency information and instructions. Update SharePoint with status by end of
FY/21. (Fire/OEM)
   OBJECTIVE 9. One hundred percent of all offense and incident reports will be
entered into the Records Management System within 60 days. Update SharePoint
with status by end of FY/21. (Police - Administrative Support)
   OBJECTIVE 10. Increase overall operational compliance rate with the
Department of Justice Court-Approved Settlement Agreement (CASA) to 68%. Update
SharePoint with status by end of FY/21. (Police - Professional Accountability)
   OBJECTIVE 11. APO Crime Lab will reduce its Violent Crimes and Property
Crimes Forensic Backlog by 35%. Update SharePoint with status by end of FY/21.
(Police-Investigative Services)
   OBJECTIVE 12. The RTCC will provide data driven policing visualization
tools/dashboards to all six area commands. Update SharePoint with status by end
of FY/21. (Police-Investigative Services)
   OBJECTIVE 13. By the end of FY/21, APO will recruit 100 sworn officers.
Update SharePoint with status by end of FY/21. (Police - Neighborhood Policing)
   OBJECTIVE 14. Work on the implementation of a Benchmark Management System,
an analytics-based law enforcement management and early intervention software
solution. By the end of FY/21, APO will finalize and incorporate the officer
performance evaluation dimension for all sworn ranks, within the Benchmark
system. APO will update the SharePoint site with a status report by the end of
FY/21.
   OBJECTIVE 15. By the end of FY/21, APO will reduce gun violence by
increasing its overall criminal clearance rate of shootings with injuries by
10% compared to the previous fiscal year. APO will update the SharePoint site
with a status report by the end of FY/21.
   OBJECTIVE 16. Using appropriated resources and staffing, develop a
comprehensive plan for a new department focused on coordinated non-law
enforcement street response to persons experiencing homelessness and/or
behavioral disorders ("New Department"), that includes a defined supervisory
hierarchy, employee training plan, and addresses the concerns of employees
covered under collective bargaining agreements. A Planning Committee shall be
established that includes the following members:
   1.   The Director of Council Services, or her designee (co-chair)
   2.   A member of the Mayor's executive team (co-chair)
   3.   A member from the Albuquerque Police Department
   4.   A member from the Albuquerque Fire & Rescue Department
   5.   The Director of Family & Community Services, or her designee
   6.   An officer/deputy/official of the City of Albuquerque ADAPT program
   7.   The Director of the New Department, or their designee
   8.   The City's Budget Officer, or his designee
   9.   A representative from Bernalillo County (advisory)
   10.   A representative from the State of New Mexico (advisory)
The Committee shall produce reports, delivered to the President of the City
Council and Mayor on a quarterly basis, detailing progress and interim
recommendations, and performance measures, as determined by the Committee.
Input and collaborative outreach to non-profit care providers of mental health
services to homeless populations must be reflected in reports. A clear
distinction should be drawn between mental health service needs and homeless
health service needs. Based on the information provided in these reports, the
City Council will release/approve use of funds contingent on need. Performance
Measures will weigh coordination efforts between the New Department and APD's
community policing programs. A public education campaign should disseminate
information on the services offered by the New Department after the report has
been reviewed and accepted by City Council in January 2021. Quarterly reports
from the Committee shall be presented to the Council in January 2021 and April
2021. The City Council will consider the new information provided in the
quarterly reports to approve use of the allocated funding for the New
Department as the plan is developed and implemented.
PUBLIC INFRASTRUCTURE. The community is adequately and efficiently served with
well planned, coordinated, and maintained infrastructure.
   OBJECTIVE 1. McMahon from Rockcliff to Kayenta under design by the second
quarter of FY/21. Update SharePoint with status by end of FY/21. (Municipal
Development - Engineering)
   OBJECTIVE 2. Develop a plan to address the backlog of median improvement
work, with consideration for equity among Council Districts, based on need as
reflected by the extent of backlog per district. Submit a report to the City
Council by December 31, 2020. (Solid Waste)
   OBJECTIVE 3. Establish a partnership with Bernalillo County, the NM
Department of Transportation, and other local agencies, for the development of
an encampment cleanup program for City streets and highways. The partnership
shall include input from City and County Behavioral Health staff. Submit a
status report on the effort to the City Council by the end of the third quarter
of FY/21. (Municipal Development)
   OBJECTIVE 4. Complete a salary study for City Planner positions to ensure
that City Wage rates and job classifications are comparable to other local
government agencies. The study should include recommendations for reducing
turnover and filling these positions. Submit a report to City Council by the
end of the 3rd Quarter of FY/21. (Human Resources)
SUSTAINABLE COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT. Communities throughout Albuquerque are
livable, sustainable and vital.
   OBJECTIVE 1. In coordination with Municipal Development (DMD), Cultural
Services will complete construction of the International District Library by
June 30, 2021. Update SharePoint with status by end of FY/21. (Cultural
Services - Library)
   OBJECTIVE 2. Complete the renovation of the indoor track to continue to host
world class track meets with athletes from around the world. Update SharePoint
with status by end of FY/21. (Parks)
   OBJECTIVE 3. Develop a nature play area and on-going programming. Update
SharePoint with status by end of FY/21. (Parks)
ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION. Protect Albuquerque's natural environments - its
mountains, river, bosque, volcanoes, arroyos, air and water.
   OBJECTIVE 1. Parks Forestry Crew will plant 225 trees to help improve
overall tree canopy in Albuquerque. Update SharePoint with status by end of FY/
21. (Parks)
   OBJECTIVE 2. Conduct a litter index survey in spring of 2020 as a follow up
to the fall 2019 study. The purpose of this survey is to show the impact the
Clean and Green Retail Ordinance has had on our City pre and post ordinance
implementation. Update SharePoint with a status report by end of FY/21. (Solid
Waste)
   OBJECTIVE 3. Work with The Recycling Partnership to reduce recycling
contamination at the Citywide drop off sites through the implementation of a
behavior change education campaign. Update SharePoint with status by end of FY/
21. (Solid Waste)
ECONOMIC VITALITY. The economy is vital, diverse, inclusive, equitable,
sustainable and works for all people.
   OBJECTIVE 1. Work in collaboration with Air Force Research Laboratory (AFRL)
and regional partners to develop and implement program to recruit Directed
Energy and Commercial Space companies to Albuquerque and the Sun port
Investment District. Update SharePoint with the status by the end of the fourth
quarter of FY/21. (Economic Development)
   OBJECTIVE 2. Develop and implement an ongoing calendar of events I
programming and office hours for various City Departments at the Small Business
Office to serve small, minority, and women-owned business enterprises. Update
SharePoint with the status by the end of the fourth quarter of FY/21. (Economic
Development)
COMMUNITY AND CULTURAL ENGAGEMENT. Residents are engaged in Albuquerque's
community and culture.
   OBJECTIVE 1. Albuquerque Museum will open the Frida and Diego traveling
exhibit to the public in February 2021. Update SharePoint with status by end of
FY/21. (Cultural Services - Museum)
   OBJECTIVE 2. In coordination with Municipal Development (DMD), Cultural
Services will complete construction of the Heritage Farm expansion by June
2021. Update SharePoint with status by end of FY/21. (Cultural Services -
BioPark)
   OBJECTIVE 3. The Balloon Museum will open a new, interactive exhibit by June
2021. Update SharePoint with status by end of FY/21. (Cultural Services-
Balloon Museum)
   OBJECTIVE 4. Complete a study of the options for creating a BioPark
admissions assistance program for low income families. Submit a report of
findings to the City Council by the end of the third quarter of FY/20.
(Cultural Services- BioPark)
   OBJECTIVE 5. Develop a planning document to create a program that formalizes
the Use of the Sunport's Landside Areas, both indoors and outdoors to utilize
the facility's status as the premier entrance into the City and the iconic
design of the Sunport Terminal as a venue to display the art, culture and human
and physical attributes of the City and community Initiatives underway in the
City. The plan could include an inventory of required capital improvements to
best utilize the facility for this purpose. Submit a status report and a
preliminary planning document to the City Council by the end of the fourth
quarter of FY/21. (Aviation Department)
GOVERNMENTAL EXCELLENCE AND EFFECTIVENESS. Government is ethical, transparent,
and responsive to its citizens. Every element of government contributes
effectively to meeting public needs.
   OBJECTIVE 1. Modernize the city RFP process to enable Departments to procure
needed products and services in a fair and transparent way that is fast and as
easy as possible for both vendors and Departments. Update SharePoint with
status by end of FY/21. (DFAS- Purchasing)
   OBJECTIVE 2. Loss Prevention will provide Safety Incentive Program
information along with the annual OSHA report to department directors. Update
SharePoint with status by end of FY/21. (Of AS-Risk)
   OBJECTIVE 3. Loss Prevention will implement new high tech video/interactive
classes for employee safety training. This would help with engaging employees
in safety training. Update SharePoint with status by end of FY/21. (DFAS -
Risk)
   OBJECTIVE 4. Install a system for managing Certificates of Insurance for
City contracts. Update SharePoint with status by end of FY/21. (DFAS - Risk)
   OBJECTIVE 5. Implement an electronic interface between Medcor and Origami to
have an electronic feed of incident information from Medcor to Origami, which
will reduce manual input and prevent input errors. Update SharePoint with
status by end of FY/21. (DFAS - Risk)
   OBJECTIVE 6. Relocate Employee Health Center (EHC) once Bernalillo County
and/or ABCWUA vacate City Hall. Look at moving EHC and bringing in services
like physical therapy that are now outsourced, adding more exam rooms. This
will help reduce WC claim costs and help employees meet their maximum medical
improvement more quickly enabling them to return to work timely. It will also
reduce the wait times for employees and improve the yearly physical process for
AFR and APO. Update SharePoint with
status by end of FY/21. (DFAS - Risk)
   OBJECTIVE 7. Complete projects that support sustainability goals. Projects
Include: exhaust system at Civic Plaza Parking and Southwest Broadway Cultural
center lighting retrofit. Update SharePoint with status by end of FY/21.
(Municipal Development- Facilities)
   OBJECTIVE 8. Begin planning capital improvements with Facility Condition
Assessments, develop practical plan to maintain and update facilities. Projects
include- Boiler replacement and air handling units at Isotopes Stadium, HVAC
improvements at Plaza Del Sol, chiller replacement at APO main, roofing
replacements, and work in conjunction with energy section to achieve both
facilities and energy conservation goals. Update SharePoint with status by end
of FY/21. (Municipal Development - Facilities)
   OBJECTIVE 9. Collaboration by the HR Employment Testing Division and AFR
Subject-Matter Experts (SMEs), selected by the AFR Chief, on the development
and validation of the Cadet Entrance Examination. Anticipated completion date
is March 2021. Update SharePoint with status by end of FY/21. (Human Resources)
   OBJECTIVE 10. Increase education, awareness and participation in Better
Health wellness programs such as Full Plate Living, Run for the Zoo, and
Diabetic Prevention Cooking classes. Once campaigns have completed, assess and
survey participants for areas of improvement. Update SharePoint with status by
end of FY/21. (Human Resources)
   OBJECTIVE 11. Ensure that the City complies with the provisions of
Inspection of Public Records Act and process requests In an efficient manner.
Update SharePoint with status by end of FY/21. (Office of the City Clerk)
   OBJECTIVE 12. Implement and manage a fair and inclusive public finance
program. Update SharePoint with status by end of FY/21. (Office of the City
Clerk)
   OBJECTIVE 13. Conduct hearings under various City Ordinances through its
Office of Administrative Hearings. Update SharePoint with status by end of FY/
21. (Office of the City Clerk)
   OBJECTIVE 14. Commission an update to the 2017 Golf Course Study that
includes an analysis of the related real estate development value of the
properties, in addition to revisiting the options for alternate management
models. Submit a report to the City Council by the end of the third quarter of
FY/21. (Parks)
   OBJECTIVE 15. Conduct a cost/benefit review for City Trainings to establish
how providing in-house standardized and centralized training for City Employees
compares in consistency and quality of services provided to City Departments to
trainings provided through an outside contractor. The mandated training
curriculum for Sworn Police Officers and Firefighters shall be excluded from
the plan. Submit the completed plan to the City Council by the end of the third
quarter of FY/21. (Human Resources)
   OBJECTIVE 16. To be useful for policy decisions and managing operations,
performance measures must be valid and reliable. The current performance
measures of the City do not accurately capture measures of service quality,
efficiency and effectiveness. The City shall complete a study of the current
performance measures and make recommendations for new measures that allow
decision makers to better evaluate service levels, program effectiveness, and
efficiency and accountability of the City. The performance measures should
include a mix of output, efficiency, outcome, and productivity measures. An
initial report should be submitted to City Council by the end of the 2nd
Quarter of FY/21. Final recommendations should be included in the FY/22 budget
proposal. (Finance and Administrative Services)
   OBJECTIVE 17. Complete a feasibility and cost analysis study for the
construction or acquisition of a City Materials Recovery Facility (MRF) for
processing and separation of recyclable materials. Submit a report of findings
to the City Council by the end of the third quarter of FY/20. (Solid Waste)
   (B)   That the Mayor shall submit a report by Goal to the City Council at
least semi-annually summarizing the progress made toward implementation of all
the one-year objectives and that any report called for in this resolution shall
be in the form of an Executive Communication from the Mayor to the City
Council, unless otherwise specifically noted.
(R-2020-109, approved 11-6-2020)
§ 4-7-11 ONE-YEAR OBJECTIVES FOR FISCAL YEAR 2021.
   (A)   That the City of Albuquerque adopts the following one-year objectives
for FY/22, grouped under the eight five-year goals of the City.
HUMAN AND FAMILY DEVELOPMENT GOAL: People of all ages have the opportunity to
participate in the community and economy, and are well sheltered, safe,
healthy, and educated.
   OBJECTIVE 1. Investigate a relationship with Uber Health to supplement
Transit's Sun Van Service and Senior Affair's Transportation Program to connect
older adults with centers, hospitals, doctor visits, etc. Submit a status
report on SharePoint by the fourth quarter FY/22. (Senior Affairs)
   OBJECTIVE 2. Create a DSA senior/multigenerational/sports & fitness center
link on the ABQ 311 app that will highlight location, hours, contact info and a
list of classes, activities, and events offered at each center. Submit a status
report on SharePoint by the fourth quarter FY/22. (Senior Affairs)
   OBJECTIVE 3. Expand the City's language interpretation resources and
prioritize the translation of all City notices to members of the public to be
responsive to City residents who have limited English proficiency. (Legal/OEI)
   OBJECTIVE 4. Provide quarterly updates to the City Council on the status of
the development of a strategic plan to enhance services to Seniors in the
community, based on the findings of the Aging Population Study. (Senior
Affairs)
PUBLIC SAFETY GOAL: The public is safe and secure, and shares responsibility
for maintaining a safe environment.
   OBJECTIVE 1. Animal Welfare Department's off site spay neuter clinic will
work to increase public safety by addressing the community's major issue with
pet overpopulation and contagious disease on our pets. The new Veterinary
Clinic will allow low income clientele to finally receive the affordable care
they need for their pets in a timely fashion. More sterilized and vaccinated
pets mean less strays filling the shelters, roaming, causing public safety
hazards, as well as less disease in our pet populations in the city. Update
SharePoint with status by end of FY/22. (Animal Welfare)
   OBJECTIVE 2. Continue to follow FY/21 Objective 1 in developing a
comprehensive plan for ACS focused on coordinated non-law enforcement response
to persons experiencing homelessness and/or behavioral disorders that includes
a defined supervisory hierarchy, employee training plan, and addresses the
concerns of employees covered under collective bargaining agreements. Update
SharePoint with status by end of FY/22. (Community Safety)
   OBJECTIVE 3. Continue to coordinate and strategize between City's public
safety departments, Bernalillo County, community non-profit organizations, and
other providers that provide an array of prevention and intervention services.
Update SharePoint with status by end of FY/22. (Community Safety)
   OBJECTIVE 4. Create and implement protocols and policies to include safety
protocols, training policies, when ACS will transport individuals, when and how
dispatch will refer to ACS, how connections and referrals will happen with
outside community organizations. Update SharePoint with status by end of FY/22.
(Community Safety)
   OBJECTIVE 5. Along with meeting regularly with the ACS planning committee
and additional stakeholders. ACS will increase trust and collaboration among
the public safety departments, and community stakeholders, with short and long-
term goals of providing effective, efficient and integrated service to the
community. Update SharePoint with status by end of FY/22. (Community Safety)
   OBJECTIVE 6. Create public education campaign strategy that will disseminate
information on the services offered by ACS. Update SharePoint with status by
end of FY/22. (Community Safety)
   OBJECTIVE 7. Explore new ways to generate new sources of revenue through
grants opportunities. Update SharePoint with status by end of FY/22. (Community
Safety)
   OBJECTIVE 8. Streamline EMS transport quality assurance for billing and the
billing process for AFR. The Records Management Division will have an
accounting assistant dedicated to billing functions for emergency medical
response transports. Update SharePoint with status by end of FY/22. (Fire)
   OBJECTIVE 9. AFR and APO will work together to provide advanced life support
functions at complex law enforcement scenes that do not impact frontline
services at these prolonged events. Update SharePoint with status by end of FY/
22. (Fire)
   OBJECTIVE 10. Conduct a significant portion of didactic training remotely
(decentralized) to comply with public health orders and maintain social
distancing during a pandemic. Keeping frontline units in their response areas
also conserves fuel, limits wear and tear on apparatus, and reduces large
gatherings during the pandemic. Update SharePoint with status by end of FY/22.
(Fire)
   OBJECTIVE 11. Analyze our response efficiency to the community and
redistribute several emergency services resources as needed. Update SharePoint
with status by end of FY/22. (Fire)
   OBJECTIVE 12. Implement Emergency Operations Center (EOC) Position
Development and Credentialing Program for all City EOC personnel. Update
SharePoint with status by end of FY/22. (Fire/OEM)
   OBJECTIVE 13. Develop emergency alert and notification plans/procedures.
Priorities for this objective include: 1) developing/updating plans and
protocols for use of the existing emergency notification system; 2) developing
outreach plans to educate the public about the existing emergency notification
system; and 3) adopting protocols to coordinate use of the existing emergency
notification system to instruct the public on proper protective action
measures, such as shelter-in-place and evacuation. Update SharePoint with
status by end of FY/22. (Fire/OEM)
   OBJECTIVE 14. Develop and maintain a comprehensive training and exercise
program to improve and reinforce the capabilities of all City departments and
agencies to prepare for, respond to, mitigate the impacts of, and recover from
all hazards. Priorities for this objective include: 1) expanding training and
exercise program to all City departments (including Disaster Service Worker
training), agencies, and partners (private sector, volunteer, NGO, other
regional agencies); 2) ensuring all personnel working in the City's EOC have
verifiable training and experience to perform their designated assignments; 3)
developing and maintaining a 5-year training and exercise plan; and 4)
developing a tracking tool for how the City's comprehensive emergency
management plans are trained, exercised, and updated. Update SharePoint with
status by end of FY/22. (Fire/OEM)
   OBJECTIVE 15. Increase recruitment applications by 20%, to include a 10%
increase in laterals and out of state applicants compared to the previous
fiscal year; while also making efforts to increase the officer retention rate
through existing or new incentive programs. Update the SharePoint site with a
status report by the end of FY/22. (Police)
   OBJECTIVE 16. Conduct a quarterly review of overtime expenditures. A
quarterly report with recommendations will be provided to the Chief of Police
that will result in a 5% decrease in overtime expenses and will identify
possible problems and/or fraud. Update the SharePoint site with a status report
by the end of FY/22. (Police-Fiscal)
   OBJECTIVE 17. The full deployment of the new Records Management system will
be completed. Update the SharePoint site with a status report by the end of FY/
22. (Police)
   OBJECTIVE 18. The full deployment of the new Radio System will be completed.
Update the SharePoint site with a status report by the end of FY/22. (Police)
   OBJECTIVE 19. Increase the number of Violence Intervention Program (VIP)
Custom Notifications by 10% compared to the previous fiscal year. Update the
SharePoint site with a status report by the end of FY/22. (Police)
   OBJECTIVE 20. Establish fifteen ongoing community partnerships with minority
groups through the Ambassador Program with intent to strengthen the
relationship between community and law enforcement. Update the SharePoint site
with a status report by the end of FY/22. (Police)
   OBJECTIVE 21. The Chief of Police will attend two monthly Community Policing
Council meetings per Area Command. Update the SharePoint site with a status
report by the end of FY/22. (Police)
   OBJECTIVE 22. The Chief of Police will submit monthly reports to City
Council. Update the SharePoint site with a status report by the end of FY/22.
(Police)
   OBJECTIVE 23. As APO endeavors to reach full and effective compliance with
its Department of Justice Court Approved Settlement Agreement (CASA), it will
strive to increase its overall operational compliance rate with the Department
of Justice CASA to 70%. Update the SharePoint site with a status report by the
end of FY/22. (Police)
   OBJECTIVE 24. Request to the Court for a minimum of thirty-three (33) or
approximately twelve (12%) of the two hundred seventy-six (276) measurable
paragraphs be moved into sustained or suspended monitoring, giving APO the
opportunity to prove that the department can monitor operations in several
areas of the CASA. Update the SharePoint site with a status report by the end
of FY/22. (Police)
   OBJECTIVE 25. Contribute to the reduction in gun violence by increasing its
overall criminal clearance rate of shootings with injuries by 10% compared to
the previous fiscal year. Update the SharePoint site with a status report by
the end of FY/22. (Police)
   OBJECTIVE 26. Increase the number of cases reviewed for federal prosecution
by a margin of 5% compared to the previous fiscal year. Update the SharePoint
with a status report by the end of FY/22. (Police)
   OBJECTIVE 27. Develop and maintain a comprehensive training program or plan
dedicated to improve, reinforce and maintain the capabilities of detectives in
specialized units related to investigative duties. (Police)
PUBLIC INFRASTRUCTURE. The community is adequately and efficiently served with
well planned, coordinated, and maintained infrastructure.
   OBJECTIVE 1. Construct a Recycling drop off site including drainage
improvements at Montessa Park Convenience Center by the end of FY/22. Update
SharePoint with status by end of FY/22. (Solid Waste)
SUSTAINABLE COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT. Communities throughout Albuquerque are
livable, sustainable and vital.
   OBJECTIVE 1. Complete construction on the Australia exhibit by June 2022.
Update SharePoint with status by end of FY/22. (Arts and Culture-BioPark)
   OBJECTIVE 2. Evaluate the Planning Department's permitting process to
determine opportunities for increased efficiency, and to establish targeted
timelines for issuance of each permit type. (Planning)
ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION. Protect Albuquerque's natural environments - its
mountains, river, bosque, volcanoes, arroyos, air and water.
   OBJECTIVE 1. Work with The Recycling Partnership to reduce recycling
contamination at the City drop off sites through the implementation of a
behavior change education campaign. This objective will be carried over due to
Covid-19 and Social Distancing practices. Update SharePoint with status by end
of FY/22. (Solid Waste)
ECONOMIC VITALITY. The economy is vital, diverse, inclusive, equitable,
sustainable and works for all people.
   OBJECTIVE 1. Assist in retention and expansion of business through
incentives by: determining qualification, processing applications, drafting
required paperwork, and present to approval committees. We will also act as the
fiscal agent when appropriate, deposit and release funds, and confirm project
compliance. Update SharePoint with status by end of FY/22. (Economic
Development)
   OBJECTIVE 2. Home For Life - promote Albuquerque as a healthy city and help
spur economic recovery as well as incentivize Individuals to relocate to
Albuquerque. Submit a status report on Share Point by the fourth quarter FY/22.
(Economic Development)
   OBJECTIVE 3. Increase the amount of production-support businesses,
especially in the areas of post-production, VR/AR, and emerging technologies to
support industry needs, locally. Update SharePolnt with status by end of FY/22.
(Economic Development)
COMMUNITY AND CULTURAL ENGAGEMENT. Residents are engaged in Albuquerque's
community and culture.
   OBJECTIVE 1. Open the International District Library to the public by
November 2021 and offer at least 6 days per week of services. Update SharePoint
with status by end of FY/22. (Arts and Culture-Library)
   OBJECTIVE 2. Open a new train experience for BloPark visitors at the
Heritage Farm by November 2021. Update SharePoint with status by end of FY/22.
(Arts and Culture-BioPark)
GOVERNMENTAL EXCELLENCE AND EFFECTIVENESS. Government is ethical, transparent,
and responsive to its citizens. Every element of government contributes
effectively to meeting public needs.
   OBJECTIVE 1. Prepare and implement a new structure for reimbursement for
tuition assistance with the requested increase for FY/22. An update will be
provided to SharePoint within the first quarter of FY/22. (Human Resources)
   OBJECTIVE 2. Prepare and implement a scanning process for the employee
personnel files with the requested one-time funds for FY/22. An update will be
provided to SharePoint by the end of FY/22. (Human Resources)
   OBJECTIVE 3. Develop and implement a two day Supervisor Refresher training
for all supervisors and managers in order to complete their mandatory 16 hours
of annual professional development. This course will be delivered in a face to
face and online format for all employees. An update will be provided to
SharePoint by the end of FY/22. (Human Resources)
   OBJECTIVE 4. Develop new routing efficiencies for collection of residential
refuse and recycling, including service day changes, for the entire City of
Albuquerque in order to utilize the new Westside facility by the end of FY/22.
Update SharePoint with status by end of FY/22. (Solid Waste)
   (B)   That the Mayor shall submit a report by Goal to the City Council at
least semi-annually summarizing the progress made toward implementation of all
the one-year objectives and that any report called for in this resolution shall
be in the form of an Executive Communication from the Mayor to the City
Council, unless otherwise specifically noted.
(R-2021-027, approved 6-2-2021)
CHAPTER 5: LICENSING
   Article
      
1.   ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES
ARTICLE 1: ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES
Section
General Provisions
   
5-1-1   Sale of alcohol near schools or churches; standards for waiver
   
5-1-2   Nuisance prevention agreement and issuance or transfer of liquor
licence
Liquor Dispenser Licenses
   
5-1-10   Walgreen's Payless Drugstores Inc.
   
5-1-11   Convention Center Complex
   
5-1-12   El Escondido Lounge
   
5-1-13   Captain Ahab's Seafood Restaurant
   
5-1-14   Marriott Corporation
   
5-1-15   Nunzio's Pizza Inc.
   
5-1-16   Posh Bagel Restaurant
   
5-1-17   Albuquerque Sports Stadium and The Distillery
   
5-1-18   Ray's Pizza
   
5-1-19   Albuquerque International Airport
   
5-1-20   Cavan Building
Restaurant Licenses
   
5-1-30   Pizza Paisano
   
5-1-31   Fiesta Restaurant
   
5-1-32   Mexican Kitchen
   
5-1-33   Harry's Place
   
5-1-34   Mannie's Family Restaurant, Inc.
   
5-1-35   Soup `R' Sub
   
5-1-36   Willie's Family Diner
   
5-1-37   Salad Bar Restaurant
   
5-1-38   Pauline's Mexican Foods
   
5-1-39   Gyros Diner
   
5-1-40   Cel's Pizza
   
5-1-41   El Patio
   
5-1-42   Pizza City Restaurant
   
5-1-43   Polly's Home Cooking
Club Liquor Licenses
   
5-1-50   Fleet Reserve Association
   
5-1-51   University of New Mexico Alumni Association
   
5-1-52   Tennis Club of Albuquerque Inc.
Cross-reference:
   
Alcohol Abuse Task Force, see § 2-4-7
   
Employee substance abuse; alcohol and drug testing, see § 3-3-15
   
Sale of alcohol near schools and churches, see § 5-1-1
   
Public areas where alcohol is permitted, see § 6-5-2
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 5-1-1 SALE OF ALCOHOL NEAR SCHOOLS OR CHURCHES; STANDARDS FOR WAIVER.
   (A)   Resolution 227, Enactment No. 59-1997, is hereby repealed, and the
Floor Substitute for Resolution 166, Enactment No. 151-1982, is hereby
superseded.
   (B)   (1)   The City Council will consider waivers of the 300 feet distance
requirement (set forth in 60-6B-10 NMSA 1978 of the State Liquor Control Act)
for Restaurant Licenses and for other types of licenses when the applicant can
demonstrate to the Council that exceptional circumstances exist and a waiver
may be appropriate to benefit the community or serve a City policy.
      (2)   Any waiver shall be subject to the zoning requirements in the
Integrated Development Ordinance.
(Res. 151-1982, approved 9-9-82; Am. Res. 59-1997, approved 7-1-97; Am. Res.
115-1998, approved 11-25-98; Am. Res. R-2005-091, approved 6-6-05; Res. 2017-
102, approved 11-13-17)
Cross-reference:
   Alcohol Abuse Task Force, see §
2-4-7
   Employee substance abuse; alcohol and drug testing, see §
3-3-15
   Sale of alcohol through drive-up windows; abatement, see §
4-6-15
   Public areas where alcohol is permitted, see §
6-5-2
   Zones where alcohol sales are permitted, see § 14-16-4
§ 5-1-2 NUISANCE PREVENTION AGREEMENT AND ISSUANCE OR TRANSFER OF LIQUOR
LICENSE.
   (A)   (1)   It shall be the policy of the city, for the protection of the
health, safety and welfare of the public and for the redevelopment of the
subject area to allow the issuance or transfer of a liquor license in the
subject area only after the owner of the proposed licensed premises enters into
a nuisance prevention agreement with the city. This policy shall remain in
effect for two years after the enactment of this section and may be renewed by
the Council.
      (2)   Subject areas include:
         (a)   The area located between the west side of San Pedro on the west,
the east side of Wyoming on the east, the south side of Copper on the north,
and north side of Zuni on the south (Res. 86-2004, approved 8-16-04); and
         (b)   The area located between the west side of 12th Street on the
west, the east side of Girard Boulevard on the east, the north side of Lomas
Boulevard on the north, and south side of Coal Street on the south (Res. R-
2005-060, approved 4-28-05).
   (B)   The nuisance prevention agreement shall, at a minimum, include the
following provisions that:
      (1)   Address and provide on-site security for the premises.
      (2)   Address and provide interior and exterior lighting for the
protection of the public.
      (3)   Set forth an inspection schedule to monitor compliance with
applicable city codes.
      (4)   Prohibit criminal activity on the premises.
      (5)   Require the owner and licensee to take all reasonable and available
steps to terminate any public nuisance activity on the premises.
      (6)   Require the owner to file appropriate reports with law enforcement
authorities and to cooperate with such authorities to enforce laws.
      (7)   Provide a description of the nature of the operation and an
agreement not to deviate from that description without prior written approval
by the City and the owner to amend the nuisance prevention agreement.
        (8)   Provide a description of the nature of the security measures to
be employed in the operation and an agreement not to deviate from that
description without prior written approval by the City and the owner to amend
the nuisance prevention agreement.
   (C)   The executed nuisance prevention agreement shall be presented to the
City Hearing Officer prior to his or her approval of any application for the
issuance or transfer of a license within the subject area.
(Res. 86-2004, approved 8-16-04; Res. R-2005-060, approved 4-28-05)
LIQUOR DISPENSER LICENSES
§ 5-1-10 WALGREEN'S PAYLESS DRUGSTORES INC.
   The transfer of Liquor Dispenser License #872 to Walgreen's Payless Drug
Stores, Inc., to be located at the Montgomery Plaza Shopping Center, is not
objectionable and the transfer of the license is approved of and consented to.
(Res. 24-1974, approved 10-21-74)
§ 5-1-11 CONVENTION CENTER COMPLEX.
   The issuance of a license by the New Mexico Director of the Department of
Alcoholic Beverage Control to the Convention Center Advisory Board as Agent of
the City of Albuquerque for operation at the Albuquerque Convention Center
Complex is hereby requested and the site approved.
(Res. 92-1975, approved 6-4-75)
§ 5-1-12 EL ESCONDIDO LOUNGE.
   The transfer of Liquor Dispenser License Number 1441 to the El Escondido
Lounge at 1916 and 1920 Central, S.W. is not objectionable and the transfer of
said license is consented to and approved.
(Res. 157-1978, approved 7-25-78)
§ 5-1-13 CAPTAIN AHAB'S SEAFOOD RESTAURANT.
   The transfer of a Liquor Dispenser License to the Captain Ahab's Seafood
Restaurant at 1001 Central, Northwest, is not objectionable and the transfer of
said license is approved and consented to; provided that no package liquor
sales are conducted under the authority of said dispenser license at that
address.
(Res. 42-1978, approved 2-8-78)
§ 5-1-14 MARRIOTT CORPORATION.
   The transfer of a dispenser liquor license to the Marriott Corporation at I-
40 and Louisiana Blvd., N.E., Albuquerque, New Mexico is not objectionable and
the transfer of said license is consented to and approved.
(Res. 103-1981, approved 5-27-81)
§ 5-1-15 NUNZIO'S PIZZA INC.
   The transfer of a dispenser's liquor license to Nunzio Pizza Inc., at 107
Cornell S.E., Albuquerque, New Mexico, is not objectionable and the transfer of
said license is consented to and approved.
(Res. 119-1981, approved 6-24-81)
§ 5-1-16 POSH BAGEL RESTAURANT.
   The dispensing of alcoholic liquors and/or beverages at the Posh Bagel
Restaurant at 2216 Central Ave., S.E., Albuquerque, New Mexico is not
objectionable and the dispensing of alcoholic liquor and/or beverages is
consented to and approved.
(Res. 120-1981, approved 6-24-81)
§ 5-1-17 ALBUQUERQUE SPORTS STADIUM AND THE DISTILLERY.
   The dispensing of alcoholic liquors and/or beverages at the Albuquerque
Sports Stadium and The Distillery at 1400 University Blvd., S.E., Albuquerque,
New Mexico, is not objectionable and the dispensing of alcoholic liquor and/or
beverages is consented to and approved.
(Res. 121-1981, approved 6-24-81)
§ 5-1-18 RAY'S PIZZA.
   The dispensing of alcoholic liquors and/or beverages at Ray's Pizza at 2004
Central S.E., Albuquerque, New Mexico is not objectionable and the dispensing
of alcoholic liquor and/or beverages is consented to and approved.
(Res. 131-1981, approved 6-30-81)
§ 5-1-19 ALBUQUERQUE INTERNATIONAL AIRPORT.
   The dispensing of alcoholic liquor and/or beverages at the Albuquerque
International Airport at Sunport Blvd., S.E., Albuquerque, New Mexico is not
objectionable and the dispensing of alcoholic liquor and/or beverages is
consented to and approved.
(Res. 135-1981, approved 6-30-81)
§ 5-1-20 CAVAN BUILDING.
   The dispensing of alcoholic liquors and/or beverages at Cavan Building, 15th
floor, 500 Marquette Avenue N.W., Albuquerque, New Mexico is not objectionable
and the dispensing of alcoholic liquor and/or beverages is consented to and
approved.
(Res. 111-1986, approved 7-29-86)
RESTAURANT LICENSES
§ 5-1-30 PIZZA PAISANO.
   The issuance of a restaurant license to serve beer and wine to the premises
known as Pizza Paisano at 1935 Eubank, N.E., Albuquerque, New Mexico is hereby
consented to and approved, provided that the following conditions are met:
   (A)   At least 60% of revenues from the establishment must be from food
service excluding the sale of alcoholic liquors.
   (B)   Upon application for annual license renewal to the state Department of
Alcoholic Beverage Control the license holder shall certify to the city that
not less than 60% of gross sales from the preceding 12 months operation of the
establishment is derived from food services. The license holder hall submit an
annual report prepared and signed by a Certified Public Accountant to the City
Treasurer on the sales of the establishment, containing the annual gross sales
figures, separating the gross sales figures into two categories:
      (1)   Food services sales; and
      (2)   Alcoholic liquors sales.
   (C)   Alcoholic liquor may be served and consumed only at a table or booth
in conjunction with ordering and consuming a full service meal. No consumption
of alcoholic liquors shall be allowed in any lounge or waiting area.
   (D)   No alcoholic liquor may be sold for consumption off the premises of
the licensed establishment.
   (E)   No alcoholic liquors shall be sold before 11:00 a.m. All sales of
alcoholic liquors shall cease at the time food sales and service in the
establishment cease, except that in no event shall alcoholic liquors be sold
after 11:00 p.m.
   (F)   The approval given by this section is not effective until the
applicant executes an agreement with the city to abide by the conditions
contained herein, which shall constitute a contractual agreement between the
applicant and the city enforceable in any court of competent jurisdiction.
Failure to abide by the terms and conditions of such agreement and this section
will be grounds for revocation by the City Council of the approval given by
this section.
(Res. 125-1981, approved 6-30-81)
§ 5-1-31 FIESTA RESTAURANT.
   The issuance of a restaurant license to serve beer and wine to the premises
known as Fiesta Restaurant at 6001 Menaul Boulevard, NE, Albuquerque, New
Mexico, is hereby consented to and approved, provided that the following
conditions are met:
   (A)   At least 60% of revenues from the establishment must be from food
service excluding the sale of alcoholic liquors.
   (B)   Upon application for annual license renewal to the state Department of
Alcoholic Beverage Control the license holder shall certify to the city that
not less than 60% of gross sales from the preceding 12 months operation of the
establishment is derived from food services. The license holder shall submit an
annual report prepared and signed by a Certified Public Accountant to the City
Treasurer on the sales of the establishment, containing the annual gross sales
figures, separating the gross sales figures into two categories:
      (1)   Food services sales; and
      (2)   Alcoholic liquors sales.
   (C)   Alcoholic liquor may be served and consumed only at a table or booth
in conjunction with ordering and consuming a full service meal. No consumption
of alcoholic liquors shall be allowed in any lounge or waiting area.
   (D)   No alcoholic liquor may be sold for consumption off the premises of
the licensed establishment.
   (E)   No alcoholic liquors shall be sold before 11:00 a.m. All sales of
alcoholic liquors shall cease at the time food sales and service in the
establishment cease, except that in no event shall alcoholic liquors be sold
after 11:00 p.m.
   (F)   The approval given by this section is not effective until the
applicant executes an agreement with the city to abide by the conditions
contained herein, which shall constitute a contractual agreement between the
applicant and the city enforceable in any court of competent jurisdiction.
Failure to abide by the terms and conditions of such agreement and this section
will be grounds for revocation by the City Council of the approval given by
this section.
(Res. 126-1981, approved 6-30-81)
§ 5-1-32 MEXICAN KITCHEN.
   The issuance of a restaurant license to serve beer and wine to the premises
known as the Mexican Kitchen at 4917 Fourth Street NW, Albuquerque, New Mexico,
is hereby consented to and approved, provided that the following conditions are
met:
   (A)   At least 60% of revenues from the establishment must be from food
service excluding the sale of alcoholic liquors.
   (B)   Upon application for annual license renewal to the state Department of
Alcoholic Beverage Control the license holder shall certify to the city that
not less than 60% of gross sales from the preceding 12 months operation of the
establishment is derived from food services. The license holder shall submit an
annual report prepared and signed by a Certified Public Accountant to the City
Treasurer on the sales of the establishment, containing the annual gross sales
figures, separating the gross sales figures into two categories:
      (1)   Food services sales; and
      (2)   Alcoholic liquors sales.
   (C)   Alcoholic liquor may be served and consumed only at a table or booth
in conjunction with ordering and consuming a full service meal. No consumption
of alcoholic liquors shall be allowed in any lounge or waiting area.
   (D)   No alcoholic liquor may be sold for consumption off the premises of
the licensed establishment.
   (E)   No alcoholic liquors shall be sold before 11:00 a.m. All sales of
alcoholic liquors shall cease at the time food sales and service in the
establishment cease, except that in no event shall alcoholic liquors be sold
after 11:00 p.m.
   (F)   The approval given by this section is not effective until the
applicant executes an agreement with the city to abide by the conditions
contained herein, which shall constitute a contractual agreement between the
applicant and the city enforceable in any court of competent jurisdiction.
Failure to abide by the terms and conditions of such agreement and this section
will be grounds for revocation by the City Council of the approval given by
this section.
(Res. 127-1981, approved 6-30-81)
§ 5-1-33 HARRY'S PLACE.
   The issuance of a restaurant license to serve beer and wine to the premises
known as Harry's Place at 2128 Central, S.E., Albuquerque, New Mexico, is
hereby consented to and approved, provided that the following conditions are
met:
   (A)   At least 60% of revenues from the establishment must be from food
service excluding the sale of alcoholic liquors.
   (B)   Upon application for annual license renewal to the state Department of
Alcoholic Beverage Control the license holder shall certify to the city that
not less than 60% of gross sales from the preceding 12 months operation of the
establishment is derived from food services. The license holder shall submit an
annual report prepared and signed by a Certified Public Accountant to the City
Treasurer on the sales of the establishment, containing the annual gross sales
figures, separating the gross sales figures into two categories:
      (1)   Food services sales; and
      (2)   Alcoholic liquors sales.
   (C)   Alcoholic liquor may be served and consumed only at a table or booth
in conjunction with ordering and consuming a full service meal. No consumption
of alcoholic liquors shall be allowed in any lounge or waiting area.
   (D)   No alcoholic liquor may be sold for consumption off the premises of
the licensed establishment.
   (E)   No alcoholic liquors shall be sold before 11:00 a.m. All sales of
alcoholic liquors shall cease at the time food sales and service in the
establishment cease, except that in no event shall alcoholic liquors be sold
after 11:00 p.m.
   (F)   The approval given by this section is not effective until the
applicant executes an agreement with the city to abide by the conditions
contained herein, which shall constitute a contractual agreement between the
applicant and the city enforceable in any court of competent jurisdiction.
Failure to abide by the terms and conditions of such agreement and this section
will be grounds for revocation by the City Council of the approval given by
this section.
(Res. 128-1981, approved 6-30-81)
§ 5-1-34 MANNIE'S FAMILY RESTAURANT, INC.
   The issuance of a restaurant license to serve beer and wine to the premises
known as Mannie's Family Restaurant, Inc., at 2900 Central Ave., S.E.,
Albuquerque, New Mexico, is hereby consented to and approved, provided that the
following conditions are met:
   (A)   At least 60% of revenues from the establishment must be from food
service excluding the sale of alcoholic liquors.
   (B)   Upon application for annual license renewal to the state Department of
Alcoholic Beverage Control the license holder shall certify to the city that
not less than 60% of gross sales from the preceding 12 months operation of the
establishment is derived from food services. The license holder shall submit an
annual report prepared and signed by a Certified Public Accountant to the City
Treasurer on the sales of the establishment, containing the annual gross sales
figures, separating the gross sales figures into two categories:
      (1)   Food services sales; and
      (2)   Alcoholic liquors sales.
   (C)   Alcoholic liquor may be served and consumed only at a table or booth
in conjunction with ordering and consuming a full service meal. No consumption
of alcoholic liquors shall be allowed in any lounge or waiting area.
   (D)   No alcoholic liquor may be sold for consumption off the premises of
the licensed establishment.
   (E)   No alcoholic liquors shall be sold before 11:00 a.m. All sales of
alcoholic liquors shall cease at the time food sales and service in the
establishment cease, except that in no event shall alcoholic liquors be sold
after 11:00 p.m.
   (F)   The approval given by this section is not effective until the
applicant executes an agreement with the city to abide by the conditions
contained herein, which shall constitute a contractual agreement between the
applicant and the city enforceable in any court of competent jurisdiction.
Failure to abide by the terms and conditions of such agreement and this section
will be grounds for revocation by the City Council of the approval even by this
section.
(Res. 129-1981, approved 6-30-81)
§ 5-1-35 SOUP `R' SUB.
   The issuance of a restaurant license to serve beer and wine to the premises
known as Soup `R' Sub, located as 2206 Central Avenue, Albuquerque, New Mexico,
is hereby consented to and approved, provided that the following conditions are
met:
   (A)   At least 60% of revenues from the establishment must be from food
service excluding the sale of alcoholic liquors.
   (B)   Upon application for annual license renewal to the state Department of
Alcoholic Beverage Control the license holder shall certify to the City that
not less than 60% of gross sales from the preceding 12 months operation of the
establishment is derived from food services. The license holder shall submit an
annual report prepared and signed by a Certified Public Accountant to the City
Treasurer on the sales of the establishment, containing the annual gross sales
figures, separating the gross sales figures into two categories:
      (1)   Food services sales; and
      (2)   Alcoholic liquors sales.
   (C)   Alcoholic liquor may be served and consumed only at a table or booth
in conjunction with ordering and consuming a full service meal. No consumption
of alcoholic liquors shall be allowed in any lounge or waiting area.
   (D)   No alcoholic liquor may be sold for consumption off the premises of
the licensed establishment.
   (E)   No alcoholic liquors shall be sold before 11:00 a.m. All sales of
alcoholic liquors shall cease at the time food sales and service in the
establishment cease, except that in no event shall alcoholic liquors be sold
after 11:00 p.m.
   (F)   The approval given by this section is not effective until the
applicant executes an agreement with the city to abide by the conditions
contained herein, which shall constitute a contractual agreement between the
applicant and the city enforceable in any court of competent jurisdiction.
Failure to abide by the terms and conditions of such agreement and this section
will be grounds for revocation by the City Council of the approval given by
this section.
(Res. 130-1981, approved 6-30-81)
§ 5-1-36 WILLIE'S FAMILY DINER.
   The issuance of a restaurant license to serve beer and wine to the premises
known as Willie's Family Diner at 918 Central Avenue, S.W., Albuquerque, New
Mexico, is hereby consented to and approved, provided that the following
conditions are met:
   (A)   At least 60% of revenues from the establishment must be from food
service excluding the sale of alcoholic liquors.
   (B)   Upon application for annual license renewal to the state Department of
Alcoholic Beverage Control the license holder shall certify to the city that
not less than 60% of gross sales from the preceding 12 months operation of the
establishment is derived from food services. The license holder shall submit an
annual report prepared and signed by a Certified Public Accountant to the City
Treasurer on the sales of the establishment, containing the annual gross sales
figures, separating the gross sales figures into two categories:
      (1)   Food services sales; and
      (2)   Alcoholic liquors sales.
   (C)   Alcoholic liquor may be served and consumed only at a table or booth
in conjunction with ordering and consuming a full service meal. No consumption
of alcoholic liquors shall be allowed in any lounge or waiting area.
   (D)   No alcoholic liquor may be sold for consumption off the premises of
the licensed establishment.
   (E)   No alcoholic liquors shall be sold before 11:00 a.m. All sales of
alcoholic liquors shall cease at the time food sales and service in the
establishment cease, except that in no event shall alcoholic liquors be sold
after 11:00 p.m.
   (F)   The approval given by this section is not effective until the
applicant executes an agreement with the city to abide by the conditions
contained herein, which shall constitute a contractual agreement between the
applicant and the city enforceable in any court of competent jurisdiction.
Failure to abide by the terms and conditions of such agreement and this section
will be grounds for revocation by the City Council of the approval given by
this section.
(Res. 132-1981, approved 6-30-81)
§ 5-1-37 SALAD BAR RESTAURANT.
   The issuance of a restaurant license to serve beer and wine to the premises
known as the Salad Bar Restaurant at Fourth and Silver S.W. in Alvarado Square,
Albuquerque, New Mexico, is hereby consented to and approved, provided that the
following conditions are met:
   (A)   At least 60% of revenues from the establishment must be from food
service excluding the sale of alcoholic liquors.
   (B)   Upon application for annual license renewal to the state Department of
Alcoholic Beverage Control the license holder shall certify to the city that
not less than 60% of gross sales from the preceding 12 months operation of the
establishment is derived from food services. The license holder shall submit an
annual report prepared and signed by a Certified Public Accountant to the City
Treasurer on the sales of the establishment, containing the annual gross sales
figures, separating the gross sales figures into two categories:
      (1)   Food services sales; and
      (2)   Alcoholic liquors sales.
   (C)   Alcoholic liquor may be served and consumed only at a table or booth
in conjunction with ordering and consuming a full service meal. No consumption
of alcoholic liquors shall be allowed in any lounge or waiting area.
   (D)   No alcoholic liquor may be sold for consumption off the premises of
the licensed establishment.
   (E)   No alcoholic liquors shall be sold before 11:00 a.m. All sales of
alcoholic liquors shall cease at the time food sales and service in the
establishment cease, except that in no event shall alcoholic liquors be sold
after 11:00 p.m.
   (F)   The approval given by this section is not effective until the
applicant executes an agreement with the city to abide by the conditions
contained herein, which shall constitute a contractual agreement between the
applicant and the city enforceable in any court of competent jurisdiction.
Failure to abide by the terms and conditions of such agreement and this section
will be grounds for revocation by the City Council of the approval given by
this section.
(Res. 133-1981, approved 6-30-81)
§ 5-1-38 PAULINE'S MEXICAN FOODS.
   The issuance of a restaurant license to serve beer and wine to the premises
known as Pauline's Mexican Foods at 3401 Fourth Street NW, Albuquerque, New
Mexico, is hereby consented to and approved, provided that the following
conditions are met:
   (A)   At least 60% of revenues from the establishment must be from food
service excluding the sale of alcoholic liquors.
   (B)   Upon application for annual license renewal to the state Department of
Alcoholic Beverage Control the license holder shall certify to the city that
not less than 60% of gross sales from the preceding 12 months operation of the
establishment is derived from food services. The license holder shall submit an
annual report prepared and signed by a Certified Public Accountant to the City
Treasurer on the sales of the establishment, containing the annual gross sales
figures, separating the gross sales figures into two categories:
      (1)   Food services sales; and
      (2)   Alcoholic liquors sales.
   (C)   Alcoholic liquor may be served and consumed only at a table or booth
in conjunction with ordering and consuming a full service meal. No consumption
of alcoholic liquors shall be allowed in any lounge or waiting area.
   (D)   No alcoholic liquor may be sold for consumption off the premises of
the licensed establishment.
   (E)   No alcoholic liquors shall be sold before 11:00 a.m. All sales of
alcoholic liquors shall cease at the time food sales and service in the
establishment cease, except that in no event shall alcoholic liquors be sold
after 11:00 p.m.
   (F)   The approval given by this section is not effective until the
applicant executes an agreement with the city to abide by the conditions
contained herein, which shall constitute a contractual agreement between the
applicant and the city enforceable in any court of competent jurisdiction.
Failure to abide by the terms and conditions of such agreement and this section
will be grounds for revocation by the City Council of the approval given by
this section.
(Res. 134-1981, approved 6-30-81)
§ 5-1-39 GYROS DINER.
   The issuance of a restaurant license to serve beer and wine to the premises
known as Gyros Diner at 106 Cornell, S.E., Albuquerque, New Mexico, is hereby
consented to and approved, provided that the following conditions are met:
   (A)   At least 60% of revenues from the establishment must be from food
service excluding the sale of alcoholic liquors.
   (B)   Upon application for annual license renewal to the state Department of
Alcoholic Beverage Control the license holder shall certify to the city that
not less than 60% of gross sales from the preceding 12 months operation of the
establishment is derived from food services. The license holder shall submit an
annual report prepared and signed by a Certified Public Accountant to the City
Treasurer on the sales of the establishment, containing the annual gross sales
figures, separating the gross sales figures into two categories:
      (1)   Food services sales; and
      (2)   Alcoholic liquors sales.
   (C)   Alcoholic liquor may be served and consumed only at a table or booth
in conjunction with ordering and consuming a full service meal. No consumption
of alcoholic liquors shall be allowed in any lounge or waiting area.
   (D)   No alcoholic liquor may be sold for consumption off the premises of
the licensed establishment.
   (E)   No alcoholic liquors shall be sold before 11:00 a.m. All sales of
alcoholic liquors shall cease at the time food sales and service in the
establishment cease, except that in no event shall alcoholic liquors be sold
after 11:00 p.m.
   (F)   The approval given by this section is not effective until the
applicant executes an agreement with the city to abide by the conditions
contained herein, which shall constitute a contractual agreement between the
applicant and the city enforceable in any court of competent jurisdiction.
Failure to abide by the terms and conditions of such agreement and this section
will be grounds for revocation by the City Council of the approval given by
this section.
(Res. 136-1981, approved 6-30-81)
§ 5-1-40 CEL'S PIZZA.
   The issuance of a restaurant license to serve beer and wine to the premises
known as Cel's Diner at 11032 Montgomery Blvd., N.E., Albuquerque, New Mexico,
is hereby consented to and approved, provided that the following conditions are
met:
   (A)   At least 60% of revenues from the establishment must be from food
service excluding the sale of alcoholic liquors.
   (B)   Upon application for annual license renewal to the state Department of
Alcoholic Beverage Control the license holder shall certify to the city that
not less than 60% of gross sales from the preceding 12 months operation of the
establishment is derived from food services. The license holder shall submit an
annual report prepared and signed by a Certified Public Accountant to the City
Treasurer on the sales of the establishment, containing the annual gross sales
figures, separating the gross sales figures into two categories:
      (1)   Food services sales; and
      (2)   Alcoholic liquors sales.
   (C)   Alcoholic liquor may be served and consumed only at a table or booth
in conjunction with ordering and consuming a full service meal. No consumption
of alcoholic liquors shall be allowed in any lounge or waiting area.
   (D)   No alcoholic liquor may be sold for consumption off the premises of
the licensed establishment.
   (E)   No alcoholic liquors shall be sold before 11:00 a.m. All sales of
alcoholic liquors shall cease at the time food sales and service in the
establishment cease, except that in no event shall alcoholic liquors be sold
after 11:00 p.m.
   (F)   The approval given by this section is not effective until the
applicant executes an agreement with the city to abide by the conditions
contained herein, which shall constitute a contractual agreement between the
applicant and the city enforceable in any court of competent jurisdiction.
Failure to abide by the terms and conditions of such agreement and this section
will be grounds for revocation by the City Council of the approval given by
this section.
(Res. 137-1981, approved 6-30-81)
§ 5-1-41 EL PATIO.
   The issuance of a restaurant license to serve beer and wine to the premises
known as El Patio at 142 Harvard, S.E., Albuquerque, New Mexico, is hereby
consented to and approved, provided that the following conditions are met:
   (A)   The zoning of the premises will allow the serving of beer and wine as
part of a restaurant within three years of the date of this section.
   (B)   At least 60% of revenues from the establishment must be from food
service excluding the sale of alcoholic liquors.
   (C)   Upon application for annual license renewal to the state Department of
Alcoholic Beverage Control the license holder shall certify to the City that
not less than 60% of gross sales from the preceding 12 months operation of the
establishment is derived from food services. The license holder shall submit an
annual report prepared and signed by a Certified Public Accountant to the City
Treasurer on the sales of the establishment, containing the annual gross sales
figures, separating the gross sales figures into two categories:
      (1)   Food services sales; and
      (2)   Alcoholic liquors sales.
   (D)   Alcoholic liquor may be served and consumed only at a table or booth
in conjunction with ordering and consuming a full service meal. No consumption
of alcoholic liquors shall be allowed in any lounge or waiting area.
   (E)   No alcoholic liquor may be sold for consumption off the premises of
the licensed establishment.
   (F)   No alcoholic liquors shall be sold before 11:00 a.m. All sales of
alcoholic liquors shall cease at the time food sales and service in the
establishment cease, except that in no event shall alcoholic liquors be sold
after 11:00 p.m.
   (G)   The approval given by this section is not effective until the
applicant executes an agreement with the city to abide by the conditions
contained herein, which shall constitute a contractual agreement between the
applicant and the city enforceable in any court of competent jurisdiction.
Failure to abide by the terms and conditions of such agreement and this section
will be grounds for revocation by the City Council of the approval given by
this section.
(Res. 138-1981, approved 6-30-81)
§ 5-1-42 PIZZA CITY RESTAURANT.
   The issuance of a restaurant license to serve beer and wine to the premises
known as the Pizza City Restaurant at 127 Harvard S.E., Albuquerque, New
Mexico, is hereby consented to and approved, provided that the following
conditions are met:
   (A)   The zoning of the premises will allow the serving of beer and wine as
part of a restaurant within three years of the date of this section.
   (B)   At least 60% of revenues from the establishment must be from food
service excluding the sale of alcoholic liquors.
   (C)   Upon application for annual license renewal to the state Department of
Alcoholic Beverage Control the license holder shall certify to the city that
not less than 60% of gross sales from the preceding 12 months operation of the
establishment is derived from food services. The license holder shall submit an
annual report prepared and signed by a Certified Public Accountant to the City
Treasurer on the sales of the establishment, containing the annual gross sales
figures, separating the gross sales figures into two categories:
      (1)   Food services sales; and
      (2)   Alcoholic liquors sales.
   (D)   Alcoholic liquor may be served and consumed only at a table or booth
in conjunction with ordering and consuming a full service meal. No consumption
of alcoholic liquors shall be allowed in any lounge or waiting area.
   (E)   No alcoholic liquor may be sold for consumption off the premises of
the licensed establishment.
   (F)   No alcoholic liquors shall be sold before 11:00 a.m. All sales of
alcoholic liquors shall cease at the time food sales and service in the
establishment cease, except that in no event shall alcoholic liquors be sold
after 11:00 p.m.
   (G)   The approval given by this section is not effective until the
applicant executes an agreement with the city to abide by the conditions
contained herein, which shall constitute a contractual agreement between the
applicant and the city enforceable in any court of competent jurisdiction.
Failure to abide by the terms and conditions of such agreement and this section
will be grounds for revocation by the City Council of the approval given by
this section.
(Res. 139-1981, approved 6-30-81)
§ 5-1-43 POLLY'S HOME COOKING.
   The issuance of a restaurant license to serve beer and wine to the premises
known as Polly's Home Cooking at 416 Aspen, N.W., Albuquerque, New Mexico, is
hereby consented to and approved, provided that the following conditions are
met:
   (A)   At least 60% of revenues from the establishment must be from food
service excluding the sale of alcoholic liquors.
   (B)   Upon application for annual license renewal to the state Department of
Alcoholic Beverage Control the license holder shall certify to the City that
not less than 60% of gross sales from the preceding 12 months operation of the
establishment is derived from food services. The license holder shall submit an
annual report prepared and signed by a Certified Public Accountant to the City
Treasurer on the sales of the establishment, containing the annual gross sales
figures, separating the gross sales figures into two categories:
      (1)   Food services sales; and
      (2)   Alcoholic liquors sales.
   (C)   Alcoholic liquor may be served and consumed only at a table or booth
in conjunction with ordering and consuming a full service meal. No consumption
of alcoholic liquors shall be allowed in any lounge or waiting area.
   (D)   No alcoholic liquor may be sold for consumption off the premises of
the licensed establishment.
   (E)   No alcoholic liquors shall be sold before 11:00 a.m. All sales of
alcoholic liquors shall cease at the time food sales and service in the
establishment cease, except that in no event shall alcoholic liquors be sold
after 11:00 p.m.
   (F)   The approval given by this section is not effective until the
applicant executes an agreement with the city to abide by the conditions
contained herein, which shall constitute a contractual agreement between the
applicant and the city enforceable in any court of competent jurisdiction.
Failure to abide by the terms and conditions of such agreement and this section
will be grounds for revocation by the City Council of the approval given by
this section.
(Res. 140-1981, approved 6-30-81)
CLUB LIQUOR LICENSES
§ 5-1-50 FLEET RESERVE ASSOCIATION.
   The issuance of the club liquor dispenser license to the Fleet Reserve
Association to be located at 207 San Pablo St., S.E. is not objectionable and
the issuance of said license is approved of and consented to.
(Res. 100-1977, approved 6-21-77)
§ 5-1-51 UNIVERSITY OF NEW MEXICO ALUMNI ASSOCIATION.
   The issuance of a new club license to the Alumni Association of the
University of New Mexico at Hodgin Hall, University and Central NE,
Albuquerque, New Mexico, is not objectionable and the issuance of said club
license is consented to and approved.
(Res. 78-1981, approved 4-9-81)
§ 5-1-52 TENNIS CLUB OF ALBUQUERQUE INC.
   The issuance of a club liquor license to the Tennis Club of Albuquerque
Inc., at 2901 Indian School Road, NE, Albuquerque, New Mexico is not
objectionable and the issuance of said license is consented to and approved.
(Res. 118-1981, approved 6-24-81)
CHAPTER 6: COUNCIL RECOMMENDATIONS
   Article
      
1.   GENERAL PROVISIONS
      
2.   ENDORSEMENTS
      
3.   AFFILIATIONS
      
4.   CITY LANDMARKS
      
5.   CITY PARKS AND FACILITIES
      
6.   ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT
      
7.   DEDICATIONS
      
8.   SPONSORSHIP
      
9.   CITY-SPONSORED EDUCATIONAL PROGRAMS
      
10.   COMMUNITY OUTREACH PROCESSES
ARTICLE 1: GENERAL PROVISIONS
Section
   
6-1-1   Street name changes
   
6-1-2   Founder's Day
   
6-1-3   Vision statement and five-year goals for the city
   
6-1-4   International District
   
6-1-5   City Website
§ 6-1-1 STREET NAME CHANGES.
   (A)   That portion of Los Angeles Drive, N.E., extending from the southerly
projection of the west property line of Lot 19, Block 35, Tract A, Unit B of
North Albuquerque Acres to the easterly right-of-way of Wyoming Boulevard,
N.E., and that portion of Los Angeles Drive, N.E., extending from the westerly
right-of-way of the North Diversion Channel to the easterly right-of-way of San
Pedro Boulevard, N.E., are both hereby renamed “Paseo Del Norte, N.E.”
   (B)   That portion of Corrales Road, N.W., extending from the easterly
right-of-way of Coors Boulevard, N.W., to the westerly right-of-way of the
Corrales Acequia is hereby renamed “Alameda Boulevard, N.W.”
   (C)   That portion of Richfield Avenue, N.E., extending from the westerly
right-of-way of the North Diversion Channel to the easterly right-of- way of
Interstate 25 is hereby renamed “Alameda Boulevard, N.E.”
   (D)   That portion of Atrisco Road, N.W., extending from the westerly
boundary of Section 35, T11N, R2E, (north of Western Trail) to the westerly
right-of-way of 81st Street, N.W., is hereby named “Unser Boulevard, N.W.”
   (E)   That portion of 81st Street, N.W., extending from the southwest right-
of-way of Atrisco Road, N.W., to the beginning of Kimmick Drive, N.W., is
hereby renamed “Unser Boulevard, N.W.”
   (F)   That portion of Kimmick Drive, N.W., extending from its beginning at
81st Street, N.W., to Avenida de Jaimito, N.W., is hereby renamed “Unser
Boulevard, N.W.”
(Res. 17-1985, approved 1-31-85)
   (G)   Kircher Boulevard N.E. and that portion of Singer Boulevard N.E.
between Kircher to Interstate 25 are renamed Jefferson Street N.E.
(Res. 64-1988, approved 4-26-88)
   (H)   The (unnamed) roadway being constructed as the Uptown Loop Road
Project from its intersection at Haines Avenue N.E. northerly on its projection
and then easterly on its present alignment to its intersection with Louisiana
Blvd., N.E., and together with the undeveloped portion known as “Proposed Loop
Road” east of Louisiana Blvd., N.E., shall now be named America's Parkway, N.E.
(Res. 91-1992, approved 7-9-92)
   (I)   (1)   Grand Avenue, N.E. between Broadway Boulevard, N.E. and
University Boulevard, N.E. is renamed Martin Luther King, Jr. Avenue, N.E.,
effective January 1, 1995.
      (2)   Martin Luther King, Jr. Avenue N.E. is, renamed Dr. Martin Luther
King, Jr. Avenue, N.E., effective January 1, 1995.
(Res. 68-1994, approved 8-9-94; Am. Res. 122-1994, approved 11-23-94)
   (J)   (1)   Stadium Boulevard from Yale to Fourth Street shall be renamed
Avenida Cesar Chavez.
      (2)   The existing Guadalupe Overpass from Broadway to Third Street shall
not be renamed.
(Res. 4-1997, approved 1-13-97)
   (K)   The name of Ladera Drive NW between Coors Boulevard NW and Atrisco
Drive NW is hereby changed to St. Joseph Drive NW.
(Res. 113-2000, approved 11-27-00)
   (L)    Squaw Road Northwest is renamed to Rosa Parks Road Northwest.
(Res. R-2005-184, approved 12-5-05)
   (M)   The segment of the old alignment of 98th Street between Unser
Boulevard and Tierra Pintada Street is renamed Tierra Pintada Boulevard.
(Res. R-2006-045, approved 5-15-06)
   (N)   Tierra Pintada Street is hereby renamed Tierra Pintada Boulevard.
(Res. R-2006-045, approved 5-15-06)
   (O)   The segment of 98 th Street between Interstate 40 and Ladera Boulevard
is renamed Arroyo Vista Boulevard.
(Res. R-2006-045, approved 5-15-06)
§ 6-1-2 FOUNDER'S DAY.
   April 23 is hereby declared as Founder's Day for the city of Albuquerque and
this date shall be known and celebrated as such in subsequent years.
(Res. 62-1988, approved 4-22-88)
§ 6-1-3 VISION STATEMENT AND FIVE-YEAR GOALS FOR THE CITY.
   (A)   The City of Albuquerque adopts the following vision statement:
Albuquerque is a thriving high desert community of distinctive cultures coming
together to create a sustainable future.
   (B)   The City of Albuquerque adopts the following five-year goals
commencing in Fiscal Year 2000:
      (1)   Sustainable community development. Guide growth to protect the
environment and create livable, sustainable communities throughout Albuquerque.
      (2)   Public infrastructure. Ensure that all existing communities are
adequately and efficiently served with well planned, coordinated, and
maintained sewer, storm, water and road systems and an integrated multi-modal
regional transportation system.
      (3)   Community building. Foster community identity, pride, and cohesion,
encourage involvement and responsibility for the well-being of the community
among citizens, and provide opportunities for everyone to learn about,
experience and appreciate diverse cultures.
      (4)   Economic vitality. Provide a vital economy in which businesses have
opportunities for growth and all Albuquerque residents have opportunities for
rising wealth and prosperity.
      (5)   Human and family development. Provide multiple sources of support
for human growth and development including quality education, recreation,
affordable housing, and programs for physical and mental health, to enable
people of all ages to fully participate in the economy and the community.
      (6)   Environmental protection and enhancement. Protect and enhance
Albuquerque's places and natural environment -- its mountains, river, bosque,
volcanoes, arroyos, clean air and underground water supply.
      (7)   Public safety. Achieve communities where citizens feel safe and
secure and there is a sense of trust and shared responsibility for maintaining
a safe environment.
      (8)   Organizational excellence. Provide high quality and efficient
service to the public and other city agencies.
   (C)   The Mayor and the Council, in accordance with Ordinance Enactment 39-
1997, shall jointly develop one-year objectives consistent with the five-year
goals, and the Council shall adopt the one-year objectives not later than
November 30, 1998. These objectives shall be specific and measurable efforts in
Fiscal Year 2000 to achieve the goals adopted herein. The goals and objectives
shall be integrated into the City's budgeting process.
(Res. 8-1991, approved 1-18-91; Am. Res. 36-1992, approved 3-20-92; Am. Res.
96-1998. approved 10-7-98)
§ 6-1-4 INTERNATIONAL DISTRICT
   (A)   The area in and around Louisiana between Central and Zuni, comprising
the communities of La Mesa, Trumbull, South San Pedro, Elder Homestead, Fair
West and surrounding areas, shall be collectively known as the "International
District."
   (B)   City employees are directed to reference the area as the
“International District” in all of their dealings with the area and the
Administration is directed to support efforts to promote the International
District as a unique area of the City where residents of the City and visitors
to the City should come to celebrate its unique international flavor.
(Am. Res. R-2009-030, approved 3-5-09)
§ 6-1-5 CITY WEBSITE.
   (A)   The Administration is directed to add the information listed below to
the City of Albuquerque website. The information shall include, but is not
limited to:
      (1)   A list of all current contracts with the City to include vendor
name, amount, term, and provided service or product;
      (2)   For all vendors that have a current contract with the City and have
employees that made a contribution to a City election campaign within the
preceding four years, a list of all current contracts with the City to include
vendor name, provided service, contract amount, term, and the following
contribution information; contribution amount, employee name, contribution
date, and subtotal of the contributions for all employees of that vendor by
recipient campaign within the four-year period;
      (3)   A list of all existing IRBs, TIDDs, PIDs to include a project
description, amount, and any fiscal or economic impact information submitted to
the City with the approved request;
      (4)   A report of all open capital outlay projects, including State
Grants, listed by project name/description, dollar amount appropriated,
expended, encumbered, and remaining;
      (5)   A list of all City employees and temp service employees who are
retired from the City of Albuquerque and drawing a pension from PERA. The list
shall include name, annual salary (or hourly rate), and job title;
      (6)   The Quarterly Budget to Actual Expense Report produced by the
Office of Management and Budget for all operating funds, including the year-end
report;
      (7)   An on-line template for the submission of public records requests.
This request template shall generate a receipt to the requestor’s email address
as submitted.
   (B)   This information shall be added April 1, 2010, and prominently located
on the home page of the City Website.
   (C)   Once the information is published, it shall be updated at least
quarterly beginning July 1, 2010 with data through the day prior to update
publication.
(R-2009-157, approved 10-15-09)
ARTICLE 2: ENDORSEMENTS
Section
   
6-2-1   Bicentennial Eagle Project
   
6-2-2   Open Space Alliance
§ 6-2-1 BICENTENNIAL EAGLE PROJECT.
   The City Council encourages and endorses the Bicentennial Eagle Project as a
significant contribution to the education, enjoyment and well being of this
community.
(Res. 212-1975, approved 12-9-75)
§ 6-2-2 OPEN SPACE ALLIANCE.
   (A)   The Council declares its intention of maintaining and improving the
Municipal Open Space asset, and recognizes that many people in the community
have a special interest in the preservation of this asset, and that some of
them have together formed a corporation called the “Open Space Alliance.”
   (B)   Membership in the Open Space Alliance is open to everyone and special
classifications have been prepared so that membership may be extended to
develop an interest and understanding of the purposes of the Alliance.
   (C)   The Council further finds that the purposes for which the Alliance is
formed are to promote public awareness and conservation of open space areas,
and to educate the public about the natural, historic, cultural, educational
and recreational aspects of open spaces. The Alliance will take its direction
from the Open Space Division of the Parks and General Services Department.
   (D)   The Council further finds that these purposes of the Open Space
Alliance are consistent and harmonious with the program for development and
preservation of the Open Space System, managed by the city, and that the public
will be served by coordinating and advancing these common purposes together.
   (E)   The Mayor is requested to utilize the services of the Alliance
consistent with the municipal purposes of the Open Space System, and to
cooperate with the Alliance in all lawful ways to achieve the maximum benefits
of such association.
   (F)   That the city recognizes the Open Space Alliance as the designated
volunteer organization to promote the appreciation, conservation, and
recreational values of open space.
   (G)   The Mayor is authorized to enter into those agreements that are deemed
necessary with the Alliance, defining the respective responsibilities and
privileges in order to make the efforts of both the Alliance and the city
effective.
(Res. 121-1996, approved 10-31-96)
ARTICLE 3: AFFILIATIONS
Section
   
6-3-1   Invitation to the city of Gijon, Spain to become a sister city
   
6-3-2   Accepting city of Hualien, Taiwan as a sister city
   
6-3-3   Requesting the city of Helmstedt, Germany to become a sister city
   
6-3-4   Requesting the city of Guadalajara, Mexico to become a sister city
   
6-3-5   Invitation to the city of Ashkhabad, Turkmenia, USSR to become a sister
city
   
6-3-6   Membership in the Cities for Climate Protection Campaign
   
6-3-7   Sister city relationship with the city of Lanzhou, China
   
6-3-8   Technical support relationship with Quetzaltenango, Guatemala
§ 6-3-1 EXTENDING AN INVITATION TO THE CITY OF GIJON, SPAIN TO BECOME A SISTER
CITY.
   (A)   The city hereby extends an invitation to the government and the people
of the city of Gijon, Spain to participate with Albuquerque in the “People to
People Program” as its Sister City for the purpose of creating mutual
understanding and international goodwill.
   (B)   The Mayor is hereby authorized to act as official representative of
the city to carry out the “People to People Program” and that copies of this
invitation shall be transmitted to the Mayor and City Council of the city of
Gijon, Spain, the Town Affiliation Association of the U.S., Inc., and the
Embassy of Spain.
(Res. 193-1976, approved 11-16-76)
§ 6-3-2 ACCEPTING CITY OF HUALIEN, TAIWAN AS A SISTER CITY.
   (A)   The city of Albuquerque hereby accepts an invitation by the government
and the people of the city of Hualien, Taiwan, Republic of China, to
participate with Albuquerque in the “People to People Program” as its Sister
City for the purpose of creating mutual understanding and international
goodwill.
   (B)   The Mayor is hereby authorized to act as official representative of
the city of Albuquerque to carry out the “People to People Program” and that
copies of this section shall be transmitted to the Mayor and City Council of
the city of Hualien, Taiwan, Republic of China, the Town Affiliation
Association of the United States, Inc., and the Embassy of the Republic of
China.
(Res. 153-1983, approved 8-29-83)
§ 6-3-3 REQUESTING THE CITY OF HELMSTEDT, GERMANY TO BECOME A SISTER CITY.
   The Town Affiliation Association is hereby requested to recommend Helmstedt,
Germany, which is similar to our community in population, culture and
commercial interests in affiliation as a Sister City of Albuquerque.
(Res. 228-1983, approved 12-27-83)
§ 6-3-4 REQUESTING THE CITY OF GUADALAJARA, MEXICO TO BECOME A SISTER CITY.
   The Town Affiliation Association is hereby requested to recommend
Guadalajara, Mexico, which is similar to our community in population, culture
and commercial interests in affiliation as a Sister City of Albuquerque.
(Res. 172-1984, approved 10-30-84)
§ 6-3-5 INVITATION TO THE CITY OF ASHKHABAD, TURKMENIA, USSR TO BECOME A SISTER
CITY.
   (A)   The city hereby extends an invitation to the government and the people
of the city of Ashkhabad, Turkmenia, USSR to participate with Albuquerque in
the “People to People Program” as its sister city for the purpose of creating
mutual understanding and international goodwill.
   (B)   The Mayor is hereby authorized to act as official representative of
the city of Albuquerque to carry out the “People to People Program” and that
copies of this section shall be transmitted to the Mayor and City Council of
the city of Ashkhabad, Turkmenia, USSR, and the Town Affiliation Association of
the U.S., Inc. and the embassy of the USSR.
(Res. 167-1989, approved 10-12-89)
§ 6-3-6 MEMBERSHIP IN THE CITIES FOR CLIMATE PROTECTION CAMPAIGN.
   (A)   The city pledges to join with cities from all over the world in the
Cities for Climate Protection Campaign.
   (B)   As a participant in the Cities for Climate Protection Campaign, the
city pledges to:
      (1)   Take a leadership role in increasing energy efficiency and reducing
greenhouse gas emissions from municipal operations.
      (2)   Strengthen support for the Energy Policy and Strategies to increase
energy efficiency and reduce greenhouse gas emissions throughout the community.
(Res. 7-1996, approved 1-12-96)
§ 6-3-7 SISTER CITY RELATIONSHIP WITH THE CITY OF LANZHOU, CHINA.
   (A)   The city hereby approves the establishment of a Sister City
affiliation with the city of Lanzhou, Gansu Province, China and extends an
invitation to the government and people of the city of Lanzhou to participate
with Albuquerque as a Sister City for the purpose of creating mutual
understanding and international good will.
   (B)   The Mayor hereby Is authorized to act as the official representative
of the city in establishing a Sister City relationship with Lanzhou and that
copies of this resolution shall be transmitted to the Mayor of the city of
Lanzhou, Gansu Province, China and other official parties as appropriate.
   (C)   The Council fully supports inviting the Mayor of the City of Lanzhou
and his delegation to the 1996 Albuquerque Founders Day celebration.
(Res. 21-1996, approved 1-30-96)
§ 6-3-8 TECHNICAL SUPPORT RELATIONSHIP WITH QUETZALTENANGO, GUATEMALA
   (A)   The city of Albuquerque hereby fully supports and approves the
establishment of an International Resource Cities relationship through ICMA
with Quetzaltenango, Guatemala and extends an invitation to the government and
people of the city of Quetzaltenango to participate with Albuquerque in this
worthwhile effort to transfer solutions between these jurisdictions.
   (B)   These Chief Administrative officer is authorized to act as the
official representative of the city of Albuquerque, pursuant to the
requirements of the program and that copies of this resolution shall be
transmitted to ICMA and USAID and other official parties as appropriate.
(Res. 45-1997, approved 5-28-97)
ARTICLE 4: CITY LANDMARKS
Section
   
6-4-1   Kimo Theatre
   
6-4-2   Old Albuquerque Airport
   
6-4-3   Whittlesy House
   
6-4-4   Old Main Library
   
6-4-5   Santa Fe Railroad Depot
   
6-4-6   Skinner Building
   
6-4-7   Rosenwald Building
   
6-4-8   Highland-Hudson Hotel
   
6-4-9   Las Mananitas
   
6-4-10   Old Albuquerque High School
   
6-4-11   La Posada de Albuquerque
   
6-4-12   El Camino Real
   
6-4-13   Rancho de Carnue
§ 6-4-1 KIMO THEATRE.
   The Kimo Theatre is hereby designated as a city landmark.
(Res. 105-1979, approved 8-1-79)
§ 6-4-2 OLD ALBUQUERQUE AIRPORT.
   The Old Albuquerque Airport is hereby designated as a city landmark.
(Res. 122-1979, approved 8-27-79)
§ 6-4-3 WHITTLESY HOUSE.
   The Whittlesy House is hereby designated as a city landmark.
(Res. 199-1979, approved 12-20-79)
§ 6-4-4 OLD MAIN LIBRARY.
   The Old Main Library is hereby designated as a city landmark.
(Res. 200-1979, approved 12-20-79)
§ 6-4-5 SANTA FE RAILROAD DEPOT.
   (A)   The Santa Fe Railroad Depot is designated as a city landmark.
   (B)   The guidelines governing the landmarked building shall be developed in
conjunction with the Santa Fe Railroad and the Landmarks and Urban Conservation
Commission.
(Res. 176-1980, approved 8-4-80)
§ 6-4-6 SKINNER BUILDING.
   The Skinner Building is designated as a city landmark.
(Res. 206-1980, approved 9-17-80)
§ 6-4-7 ROSENWALD BUILDING.
   The Rosenwald Building is designated as a city landmark.
(Res. 52-1980, approved 3-4-80)
§ 6-4-8 HIGHLAND-HUDSON HOTEL.
   The Highland-Hudson Hotel is designated as a city landmark.
(Res. 53-1980, approved 3-4-80)
§ 6-4-9 LAS MANANITAS.
   The “Las Mananitas” is hereby designated as a city landmark.
(Res. 128-1980, approved 6-16-80)
§ 6-4-10 OLD ALBUQUERQUE HIGH SCHOOL.
   The Old Albuquerque High School is designated as a city landmark.
(Res. 51-1980, approved 3-4-80)
§ 6-4-11 LA POSADA DE ALBUQUERQUE.
   (A)   La Posada de Albuquerque shall be declared a landmark of the city.
   (B)   Preservation guidelines for the structure should include retention of
the lobby features, and the Territorial detailing on the facade.
(Res. 92-1984, approved 6-20-84)
§ 6-4-12 EL CAMINO REAL.
   (A)   Portions of Fourth Street, Bridge and Isleta Boulevards are declared
an Historic Roadway of the city commemorating El Comino Real.
   (B)   All road maps of the city shall include the secondary designation of
"Commemorative El Camino Real" where applicable.
(Res. 46-2001, approved 4-2-01)
§ 6-4-13 RANCHO DE CARNUE.
   (A)   The archaeological site adjacent to the Singing Arrow Community
Center, known as Rancho de Carnue, is both historically and culturally
important to the community, and to designate the site worthy of additional
archeological investigations, preservation, and redevelopment for the citizens
of Albuquerque.
   (B)   Up to $75,000 is hereby designated within the City Council Projects
activity for the purpose of funding archeological investigations,
interpretation, site design, and related activities of Rancho de Carnue
adjacent to the Singing Arrow Community.
(R-2014-099, approved 12-3-2014)
ARTICLE 5: CITY PARKS AND FACILITIES
Section
   
6-5-1   Designating neighborhood parks (Repealed)
   
6-5-2   Public areas where drinking alcohol is permitted
   
6-5-3   Connection of city facilities to the automated energy management system
   
6-5-4   Albuquerque Museum; eliminating admission fee
   
6-5-5   Rio Grande Zoo; free admission on certain days and times
   
6-5-6   City swimming pools; free admission for school-aged children on certain
days and times
   
6-5-7   Merger of Explora Science Center and Albuquerque Children's Museum
   
6-5-8   Continuation of the Old Main Library as a free public library
   
6-5-9   Placement of Commemorative Memorials on Civic Plaza
Cross-reference:
   
Parks and Recreation; policies and procedures, see Ch. 3, Art. 6
   
Parks and Recreation; programs and plans, see Ch. 4, Art. 4
§ 6-5-1 DESIGNATING NEIGHBORHOOD PARKS. (Repealed)
   Repealed by R-2014-023, adopted 4-21-2014.
§ 6-5-2 PUBLIC AREAS WHERE DRINKING ALCOHOL IS PERMITTED.
   (A)   For the purposes of the provisions contained in the Criminal Code
relating to drinking in public, the consumption of alcohol liquors ("alcoholic
beverages"), as that term is defined in Section 13-2-2 ROA 1994, is prohibited
in all City parks except for the following public park and recreation areas
designated as those where the consumption of alcoholic beverages is permitted:
      (1)   Los Altos Park, but only between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 10:00
p.m., except that no consumption of alcoholic beverages will be allowed in the
swimming pool and skate park areas;
      (2)   U.S.S. Bullhead Park, but only between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and
10:00 p.m.;
      (3)   Balloon Fiesta Park;
      (4)   Isotopes Park;
      (5)   New Mexico Veterans Memorial;
      (6)   Los Altos Golf Course;
      (7)   Arroyo del Oso Golf Course;
      (8)   Ladera Golf Course;
      (9)   Puerto del Sol Golf Course;
      (10)   Jerry Cline Recreation and Tennis Center;
      (11)   Poblanos Field Open Space;
      (12)   Barelas Railroad Ballfields;
      (13)   Vietnam Veterans Memorial Park (no consumption of alcoholic
beverages will be allowed during school hours);
      (14)   Carolina Canyon Open Space;
      (15)   Elena Gallegos Open Space (reservation only); and
      (16)   Open Space Visitors Center.
   (B)   Notwithstanding the provisions of Subsection '(A)' above, alcoholic
beverages may be sold, served or consumed at any park, open space, or other
city recreation location, including but not limited to Civic Plaza or any park
hosting Summerfest, during special events if specifically permitted pursuant to
the terms of any special event permit, park use agreement, or other valid
permit issued by the City. Alcoholic beverages may be sold, served or consumed
at such other municipal facilities where the city in the future obtains
governmental liquor licenses, only in accordance with the laws applicable to
governmental liquor licenses, the terms of any lease agreements between the
city and its tenants or facility users and such others reasonable rules,
regulations, and policies regarding said faciiities as the city may adopt from
time to time.
   (C)   All other developed public parks and recreation areas not designated
in division (A) above will be posted as not permitting the drinking of
alcoholic beverages.
(Res. 67-1982, approved 3-3-82; Am. Res. 180-1983, approved 10-25-83; Am. Res.
112-1984, approved 7-26-84; Am. Res. 154-1984, approved 9-25-84; Am. Res. 120-
1985, approved 7-17-85; Am. Res. 22-1986, approved 2-5-86; Am. Res. 186-1986,
approved 1-20-87; Am. Res. 64-1987, approved 7-13-87; Am. Res. 92-1993,
approved 6-30-93; Am. Res. R-2014-023, approved 5-2-2014)
Cross-reference:
   
Alcohol Abuse Task Force, see § 2-4-7
   
Employee substance abuse; alcohol and drug testing, see § 3-3-15
   
Sale of alcohol through drive-up windows; abatement, see § 4-6-15
   
Alcoholic beverages; licensing, see Ch. 5, Art. 1
   
Sale of alcohol near schools and churches, see § 5-1-1
   
Municipal golf courses, policies to govern dispensing of alcoholic beverages,
see § 3-6-2
§ 6-5-3 CONNECTION OF CITY FACILITIES TO THE AUTOMATED ENERGY MANAGEMENT
SYSTEM.
   (A)   The city is hereby authorized to connect the Convention Center, Main
Library, and the existing City Hall to the energy management system of the new
City/County Building.
   (B)   The connection to the energy management system of the new City/County
Building, including installation and related matters affecting the building,
shall be coordinated with the City/County Intergovernmental Committee and the
Project Coordinator for the building.
(Res. 33-1985, approved 2-15-85)
§ 6-5-4 ALBUQUERQUE MUSEUM; ELIMINATING ADMISSION FEE.
   No admission fee shall be charged at the Albuquerque Museum. In its stead,
visitors are encouraged to make donations to the Museum.
(Res. 55-1989, approved 4-20-89)
§ 6-5-5 RIO GRANDE ZOO; FREE ADMISSION ON CERTAIN DAYS AND TIMES.
   (A)   The Rio Grande Zoo shall designate one day out of the week as a free
admission day to school-aged children from ages five to 18 years of age.
   (B)   The free admission day policy shall apply only to the first four hours
of the business day.
   (C)   The one free admission day out of each week from June 1 to August 15,
shall be the slowest business day of the week.
   (D)   Free admission shall be granted to high school age students only if
they can produce a valid school identification card.
   (E)   The Parks and Recreation Department shall engage a study on the
feasibility of increased access for school-aged children to city swimming
pools.
   (F)   No child or group of children shall be admitted on free admission days
unless accompanied by one adult per four children.
(Res. 86-1990, approved 6-4-90)
§ 6-5-6 CITY SWIMMING POOLS; FREE ADMISSION FOR SCHOOL-AGED CHILDREN ON CERTAIN
DAYS AND TIMES.
   (A)   The Albuquerque Parks and Recreation Department shall designate the
last two hours out of one day of the week through the period of June 1 to
August 15 each year as free admission to swimming pools for school-aged
children from ages 5 to 18 years.
   (B)   Free admission shall be granted to high school and middle school age
students only if they can produce a valid school identification card.
   (C)   When swimming pool capacity is reached, students will not be allowed
to enter until such time that the number is below capacity.
   (D)   Any student not following pool regulations will be asked to leave.
(Res. 82-1991, approved 5-31-91)
§ 6-5-7 MERGER OF EXPLORA SCIENCE CENTER AND ALBUQUERQUE CHILDREN'S MUSEUM.
   (A)   The city shall proceed with a merger between the Foundation for
Explora Science Center and the Albuquerque Children's Museum to be organized
and governed as a private non-for-profit board, with the Explora Science Center
to be operated by a non-profit contract agency.
   (B)   A detailed plan addressing the merger and governance issues be
submitted to the Council no later than 12 months prior to the opening of the
facility.
   (C)   The Administration shall prepare a five year budget for the combined
operations of the Explora Science Center and the Albuquerque Children's Museum
as soon as possible, and not longer than four months from the enactment date of
this legislation.
(Res. 143-1995, approved 11-15-95)
§ 6-5-8 CONTINUATION OF THE OLD MAIN LIBRARY AS A FREE PUBLIC LIBRARY.
   (A)   The Old Main Library will continue in public use as a free public
library for preserving and collecting written and printed material concerning
local history, Spanish heritage, and genealogy.
   (B)   This facility will be for use by the public for research, browsing and
educational exposure in areas relating to local history and culture.
   (C)   All written and printed material in storage or in use in the Old Main
Library shall be and will remain the property of the city.
(Res. 83-1975, approved 5-16-75)
§ 6-5-9 PLACEMENT OF COMMEMORATIVE MEMORIALS ON CIVIC PLAZA.
   (A)   The perimeter of Civic Plaza will be used to memorialize or honor
historic city and/or state events, individuals or groups. Such memorials will
conform to the concepts described in the Camino Real, Road of Life Heritage
Drive Plan. This plan provides a framework and outlines a process for the
development of artwork to commemorate individuals, groups and/or events of
significance to the history of the city and state. This policy shall apply only
to permanent artwork.
   (B)   The present Holocaust Memorial is the third such memorial placed on
Civic Plaza, each having replaced a previous version. This Holocaust Memorial
has been "grandfathered" into the interior of Civic Plaza.
(Res. 37-1998, approved 4-28-98)
ARTICLE 6: ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT
Section
   
6-6-1   Intent to support the efforts of minority entrepreneurs
   
6-6-2   Commitment to assist the NAACP in the development of employment
opportunities for the residents
   
6-6-3   Downtown development loan pool eligibility
   
6-6-4   Passenger facility charge at Albuquerque International Sunport
   
6-6-5   Minority business enterprise participation goals
   
6-6-6   Motion picture and television promotion
Cross-reference:
   
Boards and Commissions; economic development, see Ch. 2, Art. 2
§ 6-6-1 INTENT TO SUPPORT THE EFFORTS OF MINORITY ENTREPRENEURS.
   The city government hereby states its intent to support the efforts of
minority entrepreneurs, and actively seek technical assistance form the Office
of Minority Business Enterprise. The resources of the Mayor's Office, Office of
CETA and the City Council's office should collaborate with local agents and
entrepreneurs in a comprehensive effort to assist the minority entrepreneur.
(Res. 206-1975, approved 12-5-75)
Cross-reference:
   
Minority business enterprise program, see § 4-1-3
   
Minority business enterprise participation goals, see § 6-6-5
§ 6-6-2 COMMITMENT TO ASSIST THE NAACP IN THE DEVELOPMENT OF EMPLOYMENT
OPPORTUNITIES FOR THE RESIDENTS.
   (A)   The city is committed to assisting the Albuquerque branch of the
National Association for the Advancement of Colored People (NAACP) in the
development of employment opportunities in the public and private sectors for
the residents of Albuquerque regardless of race, color, creed, sex, age and
national origin, including the utilization of available resources within the
existing manpower programs, such as the jobs programs established under the
Office of the Comprehensive Employment Training Act of 1973 (OCETA), and the
Work Incentive Program (WIN).
   (B)   The city calls upon the New Mexico Congressional Delegation to insure
that the federal employment jobs programs, such as the Comprehensive Employment
Training Act of 1973 (OCETA) and the Work Incentive Program (WIN), be granted
priority as to continuous funding and availability.
   (C)   The city hereby supports efforts to minimize unemployment and to
attempt to develop programs which will provide employment opportunities for all
who seek them and that the New Mexico Congressional Delegation be apprised of
the action taken by the city.
(Res. 109-1976, approved 7-23-76)
§ 6-6-3 DOWNTOWN DEVELOPMENT LOAN POOL ELIGIBILITY.
   (A)   The area eligible for subsidized loans from the Downtown Development
Loan Pool is hereby expanded to cover an area of the Central corridor running
approximately from 19th Street to University Boulevard, the exact area of which
is defined by marked “Exhibit A,” the map which is attached to Resolution 132-
1982 and made a part hereof.
   (B)   The area eligible for subsidized loans from the Downtown Development
Loan Pool is hereby expanded to cover an area east of the Downtown Core bounded
by Gold Avenue on the north, Broadway Boulevard on the east, Coal Avenue on the
south and the railroad right-of-way on the west, the exact area of which is
defined by the map marked “Exhibit A” which is attached to Resolution No. 129-
1983 and made a part hereof.
   (C)   The area eligible for subsidized loans from the Downtown Development
Loan Pool is hereby expanded to cover an area north of the Downtown Core
bounded by Mountain Road on the north, the railroad right-of-way on the east,
Lomas Blvd. on the south and Sixth Street on the west, the exact are of which
is defined by the map marked “Exhibit A” which is attached to Resolution No.
13-1984 and made a part hereof.
(Res. 132-1982, approved 7-28-82; Am. Res. 129-1983, approved 8-3-83; Am. Res.
13-1984, approved 2-9-84)
§ 6-6-4 PASSENGER FACILITY CHARGE AT ALBUQUERQUE INTERNATIONAL SUNPORT.
   (A)   The Council recognizes that the reconstruction of Runway 8-26 is
necessary to ensure the safety and security of the traveling public at
Albuquerque International Sunport.
   (B)   The Mayor, acting by and through the Aviation Department, is hereby
authorized to continue a PFC of $3.00 at the Albuquerque International Sunport
in accordance with the Act and the regulations promulgated thereunder, for
reimbursement of the airport equity expenditures for the projects listed in
Section 1.
   (C)   Such PFC imposition and use shall coincide with the Runway 8-26
reconstruction project and outstanding debt service associated therewith.
   (D)   (1)   The Council recognizes that the following airport improvements,
for which PFC-reimbursement is sought, will be completed in order to enhance
the safety and security of the traveling public at the Albuquerque
International Sunport:
         (a)   Runway 3-21 Extension;
         (b)   Terminal Apron Rehabilitation;
         (c)   Communications Upgrades;
         (d)   Public Space Capacity Enhancements;
         (e)   Mechanical/Electrical/Fire Safety Upgrades;
         (f)   Customs/Federal Inspection Station;
         (g)   Passenger Screening Checkpoint Expansion;
         (h)   Refurbishment of Terminal Facilities;
         (i)   Spirit Drive Extension;
         (j)   University Boulevard Extension.
      (2)   Projects total approximately $69.0 million in non-grant, airport
equity expenditures, including consultant fees for PFC application development.
(Res. 4-1996, approved 1-12-96; Am. Res. R-2006-053; approved 6-14-06)
§ 6-6-5 MINORITY BUSINESS ENTERPRISE PARTICIPATION GOALS.
   (A)   The city sets an overall Minority and Women's Business Enterprise
Participation Goal of 10% of total public monies expended by the city for
purchases of goods and services for fiscal year 1988 and subsequent years.
   (B)   The city sets a Disadvantaged Business Enterprise (DBE) Goal of 15%
and a Women Business Enterprise (WBE) Goal of 3% for U.S. Department of
Transportation Funds for purchase of goods and services for fiscal year 1988
and subsequent years.
(Res. 27-1986, approved 2-27-86; Am. Res. 51-1987, approved 6-22-87)
Cross-reference:
   
Minority business enterprise program, see § 4-1-3
   
Intent to support the efforts of minority entrepreneurs, see § 6-6-1
§ 6-6-6 MOTION PICTURE AND TELEVISION PROMOTION.
   (A)   The city does hereby establish policy to actively encourage motion
picture and television production, including commercials, and other related
activities within the city and its environs. This shall be accomplished by:
      (1)   Providing potential developers and producers of motion pictures and
television programming by brochure or other informational packets information
regarding the benefits of such local production including inventories of
available support resources, inventory of places and scenery for various kinds
of filming, and other appropriate promotional information.
      (2)   Developing procedures to facilitate motion picture and television
production activities as they might involve city right-of-way, property,
personnel, and activities. Such procedures shall:
         (a)   Be governed by the general policy that city facilities shall be
made available at no charge unless added expenses are incurred, in which case
reimbursement shall be provided.
         (b)   Assure no undue interference or interruption to city operations;
and services to the public.
         (c)   Require all local and state laws and regulations be observed.
         (d)   Require producers to hold the city harmless and to provide
insurance to cover any potential risks with the city named as co-insured.
      (3)   Coordinating and cooperating with the state and other interested
entities in motion picture and television promotional activities.
   (B)   The position of City Coordinator of Motion Picture and Television
Promotion is hereby created and attached to the Mayor's office. The Coordinator
shall be employed by the Mayor with the advice and consent of the Council, and
shall have the job of implementing the policies and developing the procedures
mandated by this section.
(Res. 139-1983, approved 8-17-83)
ARTICLE 7: DEDICATIONS
Section
   
6-7-1   Dedication of the John Ramsey Memorial Trail
   
6-7-2   Naming of the Fran Hill Exhibit Hall
   
6-7-3   Naming the Cesar E. Chavez Community Center
   
6-7-4   Naming the Mel C. Aragon Exhibit Hall
   
6-7-5   Official designation of the community cultural festival and fine arts
festival
   
6-7-6   Naming the Albuquerque Law Enforcement Center after Jack Price
   
6-7-7   Naming City Hall after Frank L. Horan
   
6-7-8   Naming of the John Lewis Memorial Auditorium
   
6-7-9   Renaming the Albuquerque Civic Plaza as the Harry E. Kinney Civic Plaza
   
6-7-10   Naming the Children's Library of the West Mesa Community Center, the
John Elwell Children's Library
   
6-7-11   Renaming the ceramics room at the Barelas Community Center as The
Theresa Alarid Ceramics Room
   
6-7-12   Naming the sixteenth hole at the Ladera Golf Course the "Frank Maestas
Sixteenth Hole."
   
6-7-13   Naming the fitness center of Los Volcanes Senior Center, "Joe O.
Armijo Senior Fitness Center."
   
6-7-14   Naming The I-40 Trail Crossing Bridge At The Rio Grande The "Gail Ryba
Memorial Bridge."
   
6-7-15   Naming The North Diversion Channel Trail Underpass At Comanche
Boulevard The "Roy Sekreta Memorial Underpass."
   
6-7-16   Recognizing Charles Wells And Naming The Wells Park Community Center
Gymnasium The Johnny Tapia Gymnasium.
   
6-7-17   Renaming the Trails Park to the Hailey Ratliff Trails Park.
   
6-7-18   Renaming the existing Carlos Rey Park as Bennie Aragon Park.
   
6-7-19   Renaming the existing catch and release pond at Tingley Beach as the
Bob Gerding Catch and Release Pond.
   
6-7-20   Renaming Ouray Road between Unser Boulevard and Ladera Drive to Bob
McCannon Road.
   
6-7-21   Designating Albuquerque as a "Purple Heart City".
§ 6-7-1 DEDICATION THE JOHN RAMSEY MEMORIAL TRAIL.
   The Council hereby dedicates the trail on Tramway Boulevard in honor of, and
in memory of John Ramsey, and it shall hereby be known as the John Ramsey
Memorial Trail.
(Res. 94-1993, approved 6-30-93)
§ 6-7-2 NAMING OF THE FRAN HILL EXHIBIT HALL.
   The exhibit hall in the East Complex of the Albuquerque Convention Center
shall be named the “Fran Hill Exhibit Hall.”
(Res. 73-1995, approved 6-2-95)
§ 6-7-3 NAMING THE CESAR E. CHAVEZ COMMUNITY CENTER.
   (A)   The community center to be constructed in the Phil Chacon Regional
Park shall be named the “Cesar E. Chavez Community Center.”
   (B)   The city shall commission a statue in commemoration of Cesar E. Chavez
to be located in the vicinity of the Cesar E. Chavez Community Center. This
public art installation shall include information concerning the life and
contribution of this great American.
(Res. 45-1996, approved 4-19-96)
§ 6-7-4 NAMING THE MEL C. ARAGON EXHIBIT HALL.
   The south exhibit hall on the first floor in the west complex of the
Albuquerque Convention Center shall be named the “Mel C. Aragon Exhibit Hall.”
(Res. 46-1996, approved 4-19-96)
§ 6-7-5 OFFICIAL DESIGNATION OF THE COMMUNITY CULTURAL FESTIVAL AND FINE ARTS
FESTIVAL.
   (A)   The city hereby recognizes Magnifico! Albuquerque's Festival of the
Arts as the designated yearly festival of Albuquerque's diverse fine arts.
   (B)   The city hereby recognizes Albuquerque Founder's Day Inc. as the
designated festival celebrating the founding of Albuquerque.
   (C)   The Capital Implementation Program of the Mayor's office and its
Public Art/Cultural Projects Program which has coordinated numerous projects
with both of these designated organizations shall work with both organizations
to develop long-term development plans for each of the festivals.
(Res. 17-1997, approved 2-10-97)
§ 6-7-6 NAMING THE ALBUQUERQUE LAW ENFORCEMENT BUILDING AFTER JACK PRICE.
   It is a fitting tribute that the City's Law Enforcement Center be renamed
the John A. Price Law Enforcement Center to commemorate the immense
contribution of this individual to the community and its police officers.
(Res. 65-1998, approved 6-15-98)
§ 6-7-7 NAMING CITY HALL AFTER FRANK L. HORAN.
   It is a fitting tribute that the Old City Hall be renamed the Frank L. Horan
City Hall to commemorate the immense contribution of this individual on city
government and the community at large.
(Res. 123-1998, approved 11-25-98)
§ 6-7-8 NAMING OF THE JOHN LEWIS MEMORIAL AUDITORIUM.
   The auditorium at the South Broadway Cultural Center is hereby named the
John Lewis Memorial Auditorium.
(Res. 02-45, approved 4-23-02)
§ 6-7-9 RENAMING THE ALBUQUERQUE CIVIC PLAZA AS THE HARRY E. KINNEY CIVIC PLAZA
   (A)    The Albuquerque Civic Plaza be and hereby is renamed the Mayor Harry
E. Kinney Civic Plaza.
   (B)    Through its public arts programs, the city shall commission a statue
in commemoration of Harry E. Kinney to be located on the Harry E. Kinney Civic
Plaza. This public art installation shall include information concerning the
life and contribution of this great citizen of Albuquerque.
§ 6-7-10   NAMING THE CHILDREN’S LIBRARY OF THE WEST MESA COMMUNITY CENTER ,
THE “JOHN ELWELL CHILDREN’S LIBRARY.”
   That the children’s library at the West Mesa Community Center shall be named
the “John Elwell Children’s Library” to commemorate his dedication to the
citizens of his community and the City of Albuquerque.
(R-2007-043, passed 4-13-2007)
§ 6-7-11   RENAMING THE CERAMICS ROOM AT THE BARELAS COMMUNITY CENTER AS THE
THERESA ALARID CERAMICS ROOM
   That the Ceramics Room at the Barelas Community Center shall be named “The
Theresa Alarid Ceramics Room” in recognition of Theresa Alarid’s
accomplishments as director of the Barelas Community Center and the
contributions she made to the people of the City of Albuquerque during her
thirty years of service to the community.
(R-2007-065, passed 6-18-2007)
§ 6-7-12   NAMING THE SIXTEENTH HOLE AT THE LADERA GOLF COURSE THE “FRANK
MAESTAS SIXTEENTH HOLE.”
   That the sixteenth hole at the Ladera Golf Course shall be named the “Frank
Maestas Sixteenth Hole” to commemorate his dedication to New Mexico youth, the
sports that they played, and the fans that will always revere his remarkable
impact on the City of Albuquerque and the State of New Mexico.
(R-2007-075, approved 6-28-07)
§ 6-7-13 NAMING THE FITNESS CENTER OF LOS VOLCANES SENIOR CENTER, “JOE O.
ARMIJO SENIOR FITNESS CENTER.”
   (A)   That the Fitness Center at Los Volcanes Senior Center shall be named
the “Joe O. Armijo Senior Fitness Center” to commemorate his dedication to the
senior citizens of his community and the City of Albuquerque.
   (B)   That a plaque bearing the name “Joe O. Armijo Senior Fitness Center”
shall be prominently placed on the Fitness Center at Los Volcanes Senior
Center.
(R-2009-177, approved 11-30-09)
§ 6-7-14 NAMING THE I-40 TRAIL CROSSING BRIDGE AT THE RIO GRANDE THE "GAIL RYBA
MEMORIAL BRIDGE."
   That the I-40 trail crossing bridge at the Rio Grande is hereby named the
"Gail Ryba Memorial Bridge" to commemorate her contributions to the cycling
community and her dedication to bicycle transportation, education, and
advocacy.
(R-2010-079, approved 6-18-10)
§ 6-7-15 NAMING THE NORTH DIVERSION CHANNEL TRAIL UNDERPASS AT COMANCHE
BOULEVARD THE "ROY SEKRETA MEMORIAL UNDERPASS
   That the COMANCHE BOULEVARD UNDERPASS is hereby named the "Roy Sekreta
Memorial UNDERPASS" to commemorate his contributions to the cycling community
and his dedication to bicycle transportation, education, and advocacy.
(R-2012-093, approved 10-26-2012)
§ 6-7-16 RECOGNIZING CHARLES WELLS AND NAMING THE WELLS PARK COMMUNITY CENTER
GYMNASIUM THE JOHNNY TAPIA GYMNASIUM.
   That the Wells Park Community Center Gymnasium is hereby named the "Johnny
Tapia Gymnasium" to commemorate his many contributions to the boxing world and
the City of Albuquerque.
(R-2013-005, approved 1-18-2013)
§ 6-7-17 RENAMING THE TRAILS PARK TO THE HAILEY RATLIFF TRAILS PARK.
   The Trails Park is hereby named the "Hailey Ratliff Trails Park" to remember
Hailey Ratliff's life and remind everyone to drive carefully and watch for
children.
(R-2013-096, approved 11-1-2013)
§ 6-7-18 RENAMING THE EXISTING CARLOS REY PARK AS BENNIE ARAGON PARK.
   The existing Carlos Rey Park shall be renamed Bennie Aragon Park in honor of
his long and distinguished service to the West Gate community, the Southwest
Mesa, and the City of Albuquerque.
(R-2013-098, approved 11-1-2013)
§ 6-7-19 RENAMING THE EXISTING CATCH AND RELEASE POND AT TINGLEY BEACH AS THE
BOB GERDING CATCH AND RELEASE POND.
   The existing Catch and Release Pond at Tingley Beach shall be renamed the
Bob Gerding Catch and Release Pond in honor of his long and distinguished
legacy as a fishing and outdoor enthusiast and ambassador, and in particular as
a steward and advocate for fishing at Tingley Beach.
(R-2014-030, approved 6-13-2014)
§ 6-7-20 RENAMING OURAY ROAD BETWEEN UNSER BOULEVARD AND LADERA DRIVE TO BOB
MCCANNON ROAD.
   Ouray Road from Unser Boulevard to Ladera Boulevard be renamed Bob McCannon
Road.
(R-2014-060, approved 8-29-2014)
§ 6-7-21 DESIGNATING ALBUQUERQUE AS A "PURPLE HEART CITY".
   The City of Albuquerque is hereby designated to be a "Purple Heart City" in
recognition of the sacrifices and courage of Purple Heart recipients, and to
honor the service and sacrifice of our nation's men and women in uniform
wounded or killed by the enemy while serving to protect the freedoms enjoyed by
all Americans.
(R-2014-065, approved 9-30-2014)
ARTICLE 8: SPONSORSHIP
Section
   
6-8-1   International Balloon Fiesta
   
6-8-2   Lovelace Duke City Marathon
§ 6-8-1 INTERNATIONAL BALLOON FIESTA.
   (A)   The city shall support the Albuquerque International Balloon Fiesta in
its efforts to continue this international event which is held annually in
Albuquerque.
   (B)   The city shall provide in-kind services each year to the Albuquerque
International Balloon Fiesta for balloon flying events. These in-kind services
shall be limited to activities that the city can provide in the conduct of
ordinary business. These services shall include, traffic control to and from
the Balloon Fiesta Park for nine launch events -- four mass ascension events,
four balloon competition events, and one key grab event; fire protection-pumper
truck and rescue services; Balloon Fiesta Park dust control for launch events;
Sun Tran supervision costs, miscellaneous transportation expenses, and Sun Van
labor costs.
   (C)   The city shall provide other services to the Albuquerque International
Balloon Fiesta that cannot reasonably be obtained from private contractors; and
that these services be provided on a marginal cost recovery basis.
   (D)   The administration shall promulgate policy and cost recovery
guidelines for services provided under division (C) above.
   (E)   The city shall be recognized as an official sponsor of the Albuquerque
International Balloon Fiesta.
(Res. 124-1991, approved 8-26-91)
§ 6-8-2 LOVELACE DUKE CITY MARATHON.
   (A)   The city will evaluate annually the need to maintain an official
sponsorship of the Lovelace Duke City Marathon.
   (B)   As part of this sponsorship, the city shall commit necessary funding
to the Special Events Division in the Community Cultural Affairs Program
(2332000), to include, but not be limited to personnel and operational costs,
in return for the commensurate services provided by and benefits received from,
the Lovelace Duke City Marathon.
(Res. 32-1993, approved 3-23-93)
ARTICLE 9: CITY-SPONSORED EDUCATIONAL PROGRAMS
Section
   
6-9-1   Eligibilty of Homeschooled Children
§ 6-9-1 ELIGIBILITY OF HOMESCHOOLED CHILDREN
    (A)   Homeschooled children shall be given equal access to all City
sponsored educational programs at the City’s Biopark facilities and museums as
is enjoyed by public and private school children.
   (B)   Homeschooled children’s groups shall be eligible to participate in the
City’s educational programs at the City’s Biopark facilities and museums upon a
request submitted in the same form as is required of public and private school
programs by stating that the attendees are in homeschooling programs within the
city of Albuquerque and shall not be required to present proof of attendance in
such programs for each attendee.
(R-2007-121, approved 10-10-2007)
ARTICLE 10: COMMUNITY OUTREACH PROCESSES
Section
   
6-10-1   Police-Community Relations
§ 6-10-1 POLICE-COMMUNITY RELATIONS
   (A)   The Albuquerque Collaborative on Police-Community Relations community
outreach process, attached as Exhibit A, is hereby ratified.
   (B)   The stakeholders to be included in the Albuquerque Collaborative on
Police-Community Relations shall include, but not be limited to, the following:
      1. Grieving families
      2. Mental Health Community (Providers, Developmental disabilities and
mental illness)
         • St. Martins
         • Samaritan counseling
         • Other members of the committee working on mental health discussions
with the City
      3. First Responders
         • Albuquerque Police Department and their families
         • COAST/CIT
         • Albuquerque Fire Department
         • UNM Department of Emergency Medicine
         • Health Care for Homeless,
         • VA Hospital
      4. Faith Based Community
         • Pastors, Rabbis, Catholic Church representatives
         • Catholic Charities
      5. Business Community and Neighborhood Associations
         • Albuquerque Chamber of Commerce
         • Downtown Action Team
         • Various neighborhood associations
         • Media
      6. Access to Justice
         • Probation Officers
         • District Attorney's Office
         • Public Defender
         • ACLU
         • Bernalillo County Sheriff's Office
         • District and Metro Judges
      7. NonprofitlService Providers
         • Albuquerque Heading Home
         • (many in city)
      8. Underserved Community
         • LULAC
         • NAACP/NM Office of African American Affairs
         • African American Chamber of Commerce of New Mexico
         • Hispano Chamber of Commerce
         • Asian American Association of New Mexico
         • Indian Pueblo Cultural Center/American Indian Chamber of Commerce NM
         • NM Commission for the Blind
         • NM Commission for the Deaf and hard of hearing
         • Seniors
         • Veterans
         • Equality NM/LGBT
         • Youth
      9. Educational Community
         • Albuquerque Public Schools
         • University of New Mexico
         • Central New Mexico Community College
      10. Government
         • City councilors/staff
         • Mayor's office
         • County officials
         • Mexican Consulate
(R-2014-052, approved 6-27-2014)
INTEGRATED DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/b37713d5e40fc82694833f290401791f80be26ac/
IMAGES/0-0-0-6993.png]
City of Albuquerque Code of Ordinances
Chapter 14 – Zoning, Planning, and Building
Article 16
2025 IDO UPDATE – EFFECTIVE DOCUMENT
EFFECTIVE AS OF APRIL 21, 2025
OFFICE OF THE MAYOR/CAO
Timothy M. Keller, Mayor
Dr. Samantha Sengel, Chief Administrative Officer
Patrick Montoya, Chief Operations Officer
CITY COUNCIL
(26th Council)
 
Louie Sanchez, District 1 Nichole Rogers, District 6
Joaquín Baca, District 2 Tammy Fiebelkorn, District 7
Klarissa Peña, District 3Dan Champine, District 8
Brook Bassan, District 4  Renee Grout, District 9
Dan Lewis, District 5     Isaac Padilla, Director of Council Services
 
PLANNING DEPARTMENT
 
Alan Varela, Director
James Aranda, Deputy Director
Jeremy Keiser, Deputy Director
Robyn Rose, Associate Director
 
Planning Department, Plaza del Sol Building, 600 Second Street NW 87102
Main Reception Desk (3 rd Floor) Telephone: 505-924-3860 Fax: 505-924-3339
Zoning (5 th floor) Telephone: 505-924-3850 Fax: 505-924-3847
TTY users may call either phone number listed above via 771
WEBSITE: www.cabq.gov/planning
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
The Integrated Development Ordinance (IDO) was written in 2015-2018 with a
project team that included Long Range staff and several interns from the City
Planning Department’s Urban Design & Development Division, staff from City
Council Services’ Planning Section, and consultants with Clarion Associates,
Fregonese Associates, Dekker/Perich/Sabatini, Karpoff & Associates, and
Bohannan Huston.
Planning Staff worked on the 2019, 2020, 2021, 2022, and 2023 Annual Updates,
with help from Council Services, Neighborhood Associations, residents, design
professionals, members of the development community, and staff from many City
and County Departments and other Agencies.  3
The project team thanks everyone involved for their engagement and tireless
efforts to improve the IDO and ensure the best development outcomes and
protections for neighborhoods throughout the city.
 
Notes
  3 IDO Annual Update 2023 – Citywide Text Amendments – EPC REVIEW. EPC
3 Recommended Condition #1. Revised editorially to update information.
  [Spreadsheet Item #60]
ADOPTION AND AMENDMENTS
Adoption Date Effective Date Council Bill No. Enactment No. Description
                                                            Adoption of the IDO
11/13/2017    5/17/2018      O-17-49          O-2017-025    and repeal of the
                                                            Zoning Code
Adoption Effective Council Enactment
Date     Date      Bill    No.       Description
                   No.
11/13/   5/17/2018 O-17-49 O-2017-   Adoption of the IDO and repeal of the Zoning Code
2017                       025
4/2/2018 5/17/2018 O-18-11 O-2018-   Amendment of “6-month” changes to the IDO prior to the effective
                           009       date
5/7/2018 5/17/2018 O-18-15 O-2018-   Amendment of dimensional standards in low-density residential zones
                           010
8/5/2019 9/3/2019  R-19-   R-2019-   Interim regulations related to North 4th Street
                   162     061       [Replaced by O-20-09]
5/20/    5/24/2019 R-19-   R-2019-   Interim regulations related to the Development Review Board
2019               150     035       procedures
9/4/2019 1/31/2020 O-19-52 O-2019-   Interim regulations related to Old Town - HPO-6
                           023
9/16/    11/2/2020 O-20-10 O-2020-   Adoption of the 2019 Annual Update to the IDO
2020                       037
9/16/    11/2/2020 O-20-09 O-2020-   Establishment of a Character Protection Overlay Zone for the North 4
2020                       036       th Corridor
6/21/    8/1/2021  O-21-60 O-2021-   Adoption of the 2020 Annual Update to the IDO
2021                       018
         7/28/2022                   Adoption of the 2021 Annual Update to the IDO
6/6/2022           O-22-10 O-2022-   Changes other than DRB Replacement
         12/25/            022       Changes related to DRB Replacement
         2022
4/3/2023 07/27/    O-23-72 O-2023-   Amendment of the North 4th Character Protection Overlay zone
         2023              012
4/3/2023 07/27/    O-23-73 O-2023-   Amendment of the Northwest Mesa View Protection Overlay zone
         2023              013
4/3/2023 07/27/    O-23-76 O-2023-   Establishment of a Historic Protection Overlay zone for the East End
         2023              014       Addition
6/5/2023 07/27/    O-23-77 O-2023-   Adoption of the 2022 Annual Update to the IDO
         2023              023
6/21/    07/27/    O-22-54 O-2023-   Adoption of Housing Forward
2023     2023              024
6/17/    8/3/2024  O-24-13 O-2024-   Adoption of the 2023 Annual Update to the IDO
2024                       017
6/17/    8/3/2024  O-24-11 O-2024-   Amendment of the use-specific standard for drive-through use in
2024                       020       Volcano Heights Urban Center
6/17/    8/3/2024  O-24-12 O-2024-   Amendment of referrals to commenting agencies in the Northwest Mesa
2024                       019       Escarpment VPO-2 related to tribal engagement
6/17/                      O-2024-   Amendment of §
2024     8/3/2024  O-24-17 018       14-16-5-2 to add design standards for development adjacent to the
                                     Rail Trail
                           O-2025-   Amendments to §
1/6/2025 1/28/2025 O-24-69 004       14-16-6-4(U) appeals, §14-16-4 residential uses, and §
                                     14-16-5-5 parking
3/17/    4/21/2025 O-25-73 O-2025-   Amendment to §
2025                       011       14-16-6-4(U) appeal costs
 
List of Tables
Table I: Small Area Regulations
(in the order they appear in the IDO)
Table II: Small Areas Mapped in the IDO
(in alphabetical order)
Table III: IDO Provisions for ABC Comp Plan Centers and Corridor Areas
(in the order they appear in the IDO)
Table 2-2-1: Summary Table of Zone Districts
Table 2-3-1: R-A Zone District Dimensional Standards Summary
Table 2-3-2: Other Applicable IDO Sections
Table 2-3-3: R-1 Zone District Dimensional Standards Summary
Table 2-3-4: Other Applicable IDO Sections
Table 2-3-5: R-MC Zone District Dimensional Standards Summary
Table 2-3-6: Other Applicable IDO Sections
Table 2-3-7: R-T Zone District Dimensional Standards Summary
Table 2-3-8: Other Applicable IDO Sections
Table 2-3-9: R-ML Zone District Dimensional Standards Summary
Table 2-3-10: Other Applicable IDO Sections
Table 2-3-11: R-MH Zone District Dimensional Standards Summary
Table 2-3-12: Other Applicable IDO Sections
Table 2-4-1: MX-T Zone District Dimensional Standards Summary
Table 2-4-2: Other Applicable IDO Sections
Table 2-4-3: MX-L Zone District Dimensional Standards Summary
Table 2-4-4: Other Applicable IDO Sections
Table 2-4-5: MX-M Zone District Dimensional Standards Summary
Table 2-4-6: Other Applicable IDO Sections
Table 2-4-7: MX-H Zone District Dimensional Standards Summary
Table 2-4-8: Other Applicable IDO Sections
Table 2-4-9: Other Applicable IDO Sections
Table 2-4-10: Allowable and Prohibited Uses in the MX-FB Sub-zones
Table 2-4-11: Dimensional Standards in the MX-FB Sub-zones
Table 2-4-12: Primary Building Frontage Types in the MX-FB Sub-zones
Table 2-4-13: Off-street and Bicycle Parking in the MX-FB Sub-zones
Table 2-4-14: Minimum Landscape Area in the MX-FB Sub-zones
Table 2-4-15: IDO Lighting Designations for the MX-FB Sub-zones
Table 2-5-1: NR-C Zone District Dimensional Standards Summary
Table 2-5-2: Other Applicable IDO Sections
Table 2-5-3: NR-BP Zone District Dimensional Standards Summary
Table 2-5-4: Other Applicable IDO Sections
Table 2-5-5: NR-LM Zone District Dimensional Standards Summary
Table 2-5-6: Other Applicable IDO Sections
Table 2-5-7: NR-GM Zone District Dimensional Standards Summary
Table 2-5-8: Other Applicable IDO Sections
Table 2-5-9: Other Applicable IDO Sections
Table 2-5-10: Other Applicable IDO Sections
Table 2-6-1: Other Applicable IDO Sections
Table 2-6-2: Other Applicable IDO Sections
Table 3-2-1: Summary Table of Overlay Zones
Table 3-3-1: Permissive Uses within the 75 DNL Contour of the APO Noise Contour
Sub-area
Table 3-3-2: Permissive Uses between the 65 DNL and 75 DNL contours of the APO
Noise Contour Sub-area
Table 3-4-1: Allowable Garage Types and Minimum Setbacks[1]
Table 3-5-1: On-premises Signs in Old Town HPO-5
Table 4-2-1: Allowable Uses
Table 4-3-1: Soil Testing Standards
Table 5-1-1: Residential Zone District Dimensional Standards
Table 5-1-2: Mixed-use Zone District Dimensional Standards
Table 5-1-3: Non-residential Zone District Dimensional Standards
Table 5-1-4: Allowed Exceptions and Encroachments
Table 5-3-1: Required Walkway Width
Table 5-4-1: Summary of Block Lengths in the DPM
Table 5-5-1: Minimum Off-street Parking Requirements
Table 5-5-2: Minimum Off-street Parking Requirements for Amenity, Recreation,
and Entertainment Uses
Table 5-5-3: Shared Parking Reduction Factors
Table 5-5-4: Minimum Motorcycle Parking Requirements
Table 5-5-5: Minimum Bicycle Parking Requirements
Table 5-5-6: Maximum Front and Street Side Yard Parking Area
Table 5-5-7: Off-street Loading Space Requirements
Table 5-5-8: Required Stacking Spaces
Table 5-6-1: Minimum Plant Sizes
Table 5-6-2: Credits for Preserving Trees
Table 5-6-3: Minimum Planting Area by Tree Height at Maturity
Table 5-6-4: Edge Buffer - Development Type Summary[1]
Table 5-6-5: Edge Buffer - Development Area Summary[1]
Table 5-7-1: Maximum Wall Height
Table 5-7-2: Options for a Taller Front or Side Yard Wall[1]
Table 5-8-1: Maximum Height for Light Poles
Table 5-8-2: Lighting Designations by Zone District
Table 5-10-1: Solar Rights Maximum Building Heights
Table 5-12-1: On-premises Signs in Residential Zone Districts
Table 5-12-2: On-premises Signs in Mixed-use and Non-residential Zone Districts
Table 5-12-3: Portable Sign Standards
Table 5-12-4: Off-premises Signs in Mixed-use and Non-residential Zone
Districts
Table 5-12-5: Illumination Measurement Distance
Table 5-12-6: Temporary Sign Standards
Table 5-12-7: Construction Period Sign Standards
Table 5-12-8: Transit Shelter Sign Table
Table 6-1-1: Summary of Development Review Procedures
Table 6-4-1: Allowable Deviations
Table 6-4-2: Standing for Appeals Based on Proximity to Subject Property
Table 6-4-3: Permit and Approval Expirations
Table 6-4-4: Allowable Minor Amendments
Table 7-2-1: Acronyms and Abbreviations
Table I: Small Area Regulations (in the order they appear in the IDO)
This table is for reference purposes only to index small area provisions in
the IDO.
See TABLE II: Small Areas Mapped in the IDO (in alphabetical order).
Area Subsection
Table I: Small Area Regulations (in the order they appear in the IDO)
This table is for reference purposes only to index small area provisions in the
IDO.
See TABLE II: Small Areas Mapped in the IDO (in alphabetical order).
Area                                                           Subsection
Part 14-16-3: Overlay Zones
                                                               14-   Airport
Albuquerque International Sunport / Air Space Protection Sub-  16-3- Protection
area                                                           3(B)  Overlay
                                                               (1)   Zone
                                                               (a)
                                                               14-   Airport
                                                               16-3- Protection
Double Eagle II Airport / Air Space Protection Sub-area        3(B)  Overlay
                                                               (1)   Zone
                                                               (b)
                                                               14-   Airport
                                                               16-3- Protection
Albuquerque International Sunport / Runway Protection Sub-area 3(B)  Overlay
                                                               (2)   Zone
                                                               (a)
                                                               14-   Airport
                                                               16-3- Protection
Double Eagle II Airport / Runway Protection Sub-area           3(B)  Overlay
                                                               (2)   Zone
                                                               (b)
                                                               14-   Airport
                                                               16-3- Protection
Albuquerque International Sunport / Noise Contour Sub-area     3(B)  Overlay
                                                               (3)   Zone
                                                               (a)
                                                               14-   Airport
                                                               16-3- Protection
Double Eagle II Airport / Noise Contour Sub-area               3(B)  Overlay
                                                               (3)   Zone
                                                               (b)
                                                               14-   Character
Barelas – CPO-1                                              16-3- Protection
                                                               4(B)  Overlay
                                                                     Zones
                                                               14-   Character
Coors Boulevard – CPO-2                                      16-3- Protection
                                                               4(C)  Overlay
                                                                     Zones
                                                               14-   Character
Downtown Neighborhood Area – CPO-3                           16-3- Protection
                                                               4(D)  Overlay
                                                                     Zones
                                                               14-   Character
East Downtown – CPO-4                                        16-3- Protection
                                                               4(E)  Overlay
                                                                     Zones
                                                               14-   Character
High Desert – CPO-5                                          16-3- Protection
                                                               4(F)  Overlay
                                                                     Zones
                                                               14-   Character
Los Duranes – CPO-6                                          16-3- Protection
                                                               4(G)  Overlay
                                                                     Zones
                                                               14-   Character
Martineztown/Santa Barbara – CPO-7                           16-3- Protection
                                                               4(H)  Overlay
                                                                     Zones
                                                               14-   Character
Nob Hill/Highland – CPO-8                                    16-3- Protection
                                                               4(I)  Overlay
                                                                     Zones
                                                               14-   Character
                                                               16-3- Protection
Nob Hill/Highland – CPO-8 / Building Height Sub-area         4(I)  Overlay
                                                               (4)   Zones
                                                               (b)
                                                               14-   Character
                                                               16-3- Protection
Nob Hill/Highland – CPO-8 / Façade Design Sub-area          4(I)  Overlay
                                                               (5)   Zones
                                                               (b)
                                                               14-   Character
North 4th Corridor – CPO-9                                   16-3- Protection
                                                               4(J)  Overlay
                                                                     Zones
                                                               14-   Character
North I-25 – CPO-10                                          16-3- Protection
                                                               4(J)  Overlay
                                                                     Zones
                                                               14-   Character
                                                               16-3- Protection
North I-25 – CPO-10 / Alameda Boulevard Sub-area             4(K)  Overlay
                                                               (4)   Zones
                                                               (c)3
                                                               14-   Character
Rio Grande Boulevard – CPO-11                                16-3- Protection
                                                               4(L)  Overlay
                                                                     Zones
                                                               14-   Character
Sawmill/Wells Park – CPO-12                                  16-3- Protection
                                                               4(M)  Overlay
                                                                     Zones
                                                               14-   Character
Volcano Mesa – CPO-13                                        16-3- Protection
                                                               4(N)  Overlay
                                                                     Zones
                                                               14-   Historic
East Downtown – HPO-1                                        16-3- Protection
                                                               5(G)  Overlay
                                                                     Zones
                                                               14-   Historic
East End Addition - HPO-2                                      16-3- Protection
                                                               5(I)  Overlay
                                                                     Zones
                                                               14-   Historic
Eighth and Forrester – HPO-3                                 16-3- Protection
                                                               5(J)  Overlay
                                                                     Zones
                                                               14-   Historic
Fourth Ward – HPO-4                                          16-3- Protection
                                                               5(K)  Overlay
                                                                     Zones
                                                               14-   Historic
Huning Highland – HPO-5                                      16-3- Protection
                                                               5(L)  Overlay
                                                                     Zones
                                                               14-   Historic
Old Town – HPO-6                                             16-3- Protection
                                                               5(M)  Overlay
                                                                     Zones
                                                               14-   Historic
Silver Hill - HPO-7                                            16-3- Protection
                                                               5(N)  Overlay
                                                                     Zones
                                                               14-   View
Coors Boulevard – VPO-1                                      16-3- Protection
                                                               6(D)  Overlay
                                                                     Zones
                                                               14-   View
Northwest Mesa Escarpment – VPO-2                            16-3- Protection
                                                               6(E)  Overlay
                                                                     Zones
                                                               14-   View
Northwest Mesa Escarpment – VPO-2 / Height Restrictions Sub- 16-3- Protection
area                                                           6(E)  Overlay
                                                               (3)   Zones
 
Table I: Small Area Regulations (in the order they appear in the IDO)
This table is for reference purposes only to index small area provisions in
the IDO.
See TABLE II: Small Areas Mapped in the IDO (in alphabetical order).
Area Subsection
Table I: Small Area Regulations (in the order they appear in the IDO)
This table is for reference purposes only to index small area provisions in the
IDO.
See TABLE II: Small Areas Mapped in the IDO (in alphabetical order).
Area                               Subsection
                                                         Dwelling, Cluster
Los Duranes – CPO-6              14-16-4-3(B)(2)(c)    Development
                                                         (Number of Dwelling
                                                         Units)
                                                         Dwelling, Multi-family
North I-25 – CPO-10              14-16-4-3(B)(7)(f)    (No Ground-floor
                                                         Multi-family)
Railroad and Spur Small Area       14-16-4-3(D)          Commercial Uses
                                                         (various)
                                                         Bar, Nightclub,
Old Town - HPO-6                   14-16-4-3(D)(8)(f)    Restaurant, and Tap
                                                         Room
Downtown Neighborhood Area – CPO-14-16-4-3(D)(16)(f)1  Car Wash
                                                         (Prohibitions)
Sawmill/Wells Park – CPO-12      14-16-4-3(D)(16)(f)2  Car Wash
                                                         (Prohibitions)
                                                         Light Vehicle Fueling
Downtown Neighborhood Area – CPO-14-16-4-3(D)(18)(n)1  Station (Prohibitions/
                                                         Restrictions)
East Gateway Small Area            14-16-4-3(D)(18)(n)2  Light Vehicle Fueling
                                                         Station (Prohibitions)
Sawmill/Wells Park – CPO-12      14-16-4-3(D)(18)(n)4  Light Vehicle Fueling
                                                         Station (Prohibitions)
Downtown Neighborhood Area – CPO-14-16-4-3(D)(19)(g)   Light Vehicle Repair
                                                         (Prohibitions)
                                                         Light Vehicle Sales
Downtown Neighborhood Area – CPO-14-16-4-3(D)(20)(f)   and Rental
                                                         (Prohibitions)
                                                         Paid Parking Lot or
Barelas – CPO-1                  14-16-4-3(D)(22)(d)1  Parking Structure
                                                         (Prohibitions)
                                                         Paid Parking Lot or
Downtown Small Area                14-16-4-3(D)(22)(d)2  Parking Structure
                                                         (Prohibitions)
                                                         Paid Parking Lot or
Downtown Neighborhood Area – CPO-14-16-4-3(D)(22)(d)3  Parking Structure
                                                         (Prohibitions)
Huning Castle Raynolds Addition                          Paid Parking Lot or
Small Area                         14-16-4-3(D)(22)(d)4  Parking Structure
                                                         (Prohibitions)
                                                         Paid Parking Lot or
Los Duranes – CPO-6              14-16-4-3(D)(22)(d)5  Parking Structure
                                                         (Prohibitions)
                                                         Paid Parking Lot or
Martineztown/Santa Barbara – CPO-14-16-4-3(D)(22)(d)6  Parking Structure
                                                         (Prohibitions)
                                                         Paid Parking Lot or
McClellan Park Small Area          14-16-4-3(D)(22)(d)7  Parking Structure
                                                         (Prohibitions)
                                                         Paid Parking Lot or
Nob Hill/Highland Small Area       14-16-4-3(D)(22)(d)8  Parking Structure
                                                         (Prohibitions)
                                                         Paid Parking Lot or
South Broadway Small Area          14-16-4-3(D)(22)(d)9  Parking Structure
                                                         (Prohibitions)
                                                         Paid Parking Lot or
South Martineztown Small Area      14-16-4-3(D)(22)(d)10 Parking Structure
                                                         (Prohibitions)
Old Town - HPO-6                   14-16-4-3(D)(35)(k)   Cannabis Retail
                                                         (Prohibited)
Old Town - HPO-6                   14-16-4-3(D)(37)(d)   General Retail
                                                         (Allowances)
Downtown Neighborhood Area – CPO-14-16-4-3(D)(39)(e)1  Liquor Retail
                                                         (Restrictions)
East Downtown – CPO-4            14-16-4-3(D)(39)(e)2  Liquor Retail
                                                         (Restrictions)
East Downtown – HPO-1            14-16-4-3(D)(39)(e)3  Liquor Retail
                                                         (Restrictions)
La Cueva Small Area                14-16-4-3(D)(39)(e)4  Liquor Retail
                                                         (Restrictions)
North 4th Corridor – CPO-9       14-16-4-3(D)(39)(f)4  Liquor Retail
                                                         (Restrictions)
South Yale Small Area              14-16-4-3(D)(39)(e)6  Liquor Retail
                                                         (Restrictions)
Downtown Neighborhood Area – CPO-14-16-4-3(D)(39)(f)1  Liquor Retail
                                                         (Restrictions)
East Downtown – CPO-4            14-16-4-3(D)(39)(f)2  Liquor Retail
                                                         (Restrictions)
East Downtown – HPO-1            14-16-4-3(D)(39)(f)3  Liquor Retail
                                                         (Restrictions)
North 4th Corridor – CPO-9       14-16-4-3(D)(39)(f)4  Liquor Retail
                                                         (Restrictions)
South Yale Small Area              14-16-4-3(D)(39)(f)5  Liquor Retail
                                                         (Restrictions)
Nob Hill/Highland Small Area       14-16-4-3(D)(39)(g)   Liquor Retail
                                                         (Prohibitions)
University Neighborhoods Small     14-16-4-3(D)(39)(h)   Liquor Retail
Area                                                     (Restrictions)
Railroad and Spur Small Area       14-16-4-3(E)          Industrial Uses
                                                         (various)
Alameda Boulevard                  14-16-4-3(E)(12)(k)   WTF (Restrictions)
Central Avenue                     14-16-4-3(E)(12)(k)   WTF (Restrictions)
Coors Boulevard                    14-16-4-3(E)(12)(k)   WTF (Restrictions)
Griegos Road                       14-16-4-3(E)(12)(k)   WTF (Restrictions)
Interstate Highway 25              14-16-4-3(E)(12)(k)   WTF (Restrictions)
Interstate Highway 40              14-16-4-3(E)(12)(k)   WTF (Restrictions)
Paseo del Norte                    14-16-4-3(E)(12)(k)   WTF (Restrictions)
Rio Grande Boulevard               14-16-4-3(E)(12)(k)   WTF (Restrictions)
Sunport Boulevard                  14-16-4-3(E)(12)(k)   WTF (Restrictions)
Tramway Boulevard                  14-16-4-3(E)(12)(k)   WTF (Restrictions)
Unser Boulevard                    14-16-4-3(E)(12)(k)   WTF (Restrictions)
East Downtown – HPO-1            14-16-4-3(E)(12)(m)   WTF (Restrictions)
East End Addition - HPO-2          14-16-4-3(E)(12)(m)   WTF (Restrictions)
Eighth and Forrester – HPO-3     14-16-4-3(E)(12)(m)   WTF (Restrictions)
Fourth Ward – HPO-4              14-16-4-3(E)(12)(m)   WTF (Restrictions)
Huning Highland – HPO-5          14-16-4-3(E)(12)(m)   WTF (Restrictions)
Old Town – HPO-6                 14-16-4-3(E)(12)(m)   WTF (Prohibitions)
Silver Hill - HPO-7                14-16-4-3(E)(12)(m)   WTF (Restrictions)
South Yale Small Area              14-16-4-3(E)(12)(n)1  WTF (Restrictions)
Uptown Small Area                  14-16-4-3(E)(12)(n)2  WTF (Restrictions)
                                                         Drive-through or
Downtown Small Area                14-16-4-3(F)(4)(e)1   Drive-up Facility
                                                         (Prohibitions)
                                                         Drive-through or
Downtown Neighborhood Area – CPO-14-16-4-3(F)(4)(e)2   Drive-up Facility
                                                         (Prohibitions/
                                                         Restrictions)
                                                         Drive-through or
East Downtown – CPO-4            14-16-4-3(F)(4)(e)3   Drive-up Facility
                                                         (Prohibitions)
                                                         Drive-through or
East Downtown – HPO-1            14-16-4-3(F)(4)(e)4   Drive-up Facility
                                                         (Prohibitions)
                                                         Drive-through or
Nob Hill Small Area                14-16-4-3(F)(4)(e)5   Drive-up Facility
                                                         (Prohibitions)
                                                         Drive-through or
Sawmill/Wells Park – CPO-12      14-16-4-3(F)(4)(e)6   Drive-up Facility
                                                         (Prohibitions)
                                                         Drive-through or
South Yale Small Area              14-16-4-3(F)(4)(e)7   Drive-up Facility
                                                         (Prohibitions)
University Neighborhoods Small                           Drive-through or
Area                               14-16-4-3(F)(4)(e)8   Drive-up Facility
                                                         (Prohibitions)
                                                         Drive-through or
Uptown Small Area                  14-16-4-3(F)(4)(e)9   Drive-up Facility
                                                         (Restrictions)
                                                         Drive-through or
Volcano Mesa – CPO-13            14-16-4-3(F)(4)(e)11  Drive-up Facility
                                                         (Restrictions)
Barelas – CPO-1                  14-16-4-3(F)(5)(e)2   Dwelling Unit,
                                                         Accessory (C)
Downtown Neighborhood Area – CPO-14-16-4-3(F)(5)(e)3   Dwelling Unit,
                                                         Accessory (P)
High Desert Small Area             14-16-4-3(F)(5)(e)4   Dwelling Unit,
                                                         Accessory (P)
Huning Highland Small Area         14-16-4-3(F)(5)(e)5   Dwelling Unit,
                                                         Accessory (C)
Sawmill/Wells Park – CPO-12      14-16-4-3(F)(5)(e)6   Dwelling Unit,
                                                         Accessory (P)
South Broadway Small Area          14-16-4-3(F)(5)(e)7   Dwelling Unit,
                                                         Accessory (C)
University Neighborhoods Small     14-16-4-3(F)(5)(e)8   Dwelling Unit,
Area                                                     Accessory (C)
Volcano Mesa – CPO-13            14-16-4-3(F)(5)(e)9   Dwelling Unit,
                                                         Accessory (P)
Airport Protection Overlay Zone                          Hot Air Balloon
(APO)                              14-16-4-3(G)(11)      Takeoff and/or Landing
                                                         (Prohibitions)
 
Table I: Small Area Regulations (in the order they appear in the IDO)
This table is for reference purposes only to index small area provisions in
the IDO.
See TABLE II: Small Areas Mapped in the IDO (in alphabetical order).
Area Subsection
Part 14-16-5: Development Standards
Table I: Small Area Regulations (in the order they appear in the IDO)
This table is for reference purposes only to index small area provisions in
the IDO.
See TABLE II: Small Areas Mapped in the IDO (in alphabetical order).
Area                                           Subsection
Part 14-16-5: Development Standards
Railroad and Spur Small Area                   14-16-5-2(E)  Cumulative
                                                             Impacts
Valley Drainage Area                           14-16-5-2(F)  Site Design and
                                                             Sensitive Lands
                                                             Irrigation
Los Duranes Community Acequias                 14-16-5-2(G)  Facility
                                               (4)           (Acequia)
                                                             Standards
                                               14-16-1-1     Site Design and
                                                             Sensitive Lands
                                                             Driveways, Drive
University Neighborhoods Small Area            14-16-5-3(C)  Aisles, and
                                               (3)(c)        Access
                                                             (Restrictions)
                                               14-16-5-3(D)  Sidewalks in
Los Duranes – CPO-6                          (1)           Residential
                                                             Development
                                                             Parking and
Downtown Center                                14-16-5-5(B)  Loading
                                               (2)(a)1       (Exemptions and
                                                             Reductions)
                                                             Parking and
McClellan Park Small Area                      14-16-5-5(B)  Loading
                                               (2)(a)2       (Exemptions and
                                                             Reductions)
                                                             Parking and
Old Town – HPO-6                             14-16-5-5(B)  Loading
                                               (2)(a)3       (Exemptions and
                                                             Reductions)
                                                             Parking and
Barelas Small Area                             14-16-5-5(B)  Loading
                                               (2)(c)        (Exemptions and
                                                             Reductions)
                                                             Parking and
Nob Hill Small Area                            14-16-5-5(B)  Loading
                                               (2)(d)        (Exemptions and
                                                             Reductions)
Downtown Neighborhood Area – CPO-3           14-16-5-5(F)  Carports
                                               (2)(a)3.d.i   (Prohibitions)
Monte Vista and College View Historic District 14-16-5-5(F)  Carports
                                               (2)(a)3.d.ii  (Prohibitions))
                                                             Parking Location
                                               14-16-5-5(F)  and Design
East Downtown – HPO-1                        (4)(a)        (Historic
                                                             Protection
                                                             Overlay Zones)
                                                             Parking Location
                                               14-16-5-5(F)  and Design
Eighth and Forrester – HPO-3                 (4)(b)        (Historic
                                                             Protection
                                                             Overlay Zones)
                                                             Parking Location
                                               14-16-5-5(F)  and Design
Fourth Ward – HPO-4                          (4)(c)        (Historic
                                                             Protection
                                                             Overlay Zones)
                                                             Parking Location
                                               14-16-5-5(F)  and Design
Huning Highland – HPO-5                      (4)(d)        (Historic
                                                             Protection
                                                             Overlay Zones)
                                                             Parking Location
                                               14-16-5-5(F)  and Design
Old Town – HPO-6                             (4)(e)        (Historic
                                                             Protection
                                                             Overlay Zones)
                                                             Parking Location
                                               14-16-5-5(F)  and Design
Silver Hill - HPO-7                            (4)(f)        (Historic
                                                             Protection
                                                             Overlay Zones)
                                               14-16-5-7(D)  Maximum Wall
Downtown Neighborhood Area – CPO-3           (3)(a)3.a     Height
                                                             (Restrictions)
                                               14-16-5-7(D)  Maximum Wall
Monte Vista and College View Historic District (3)(a)3.b     Height
                                                             (Restrictions)
                                               14-16-5-8(D)  Outdoor Lighting
East Downtown – HPO-1                        (3)           (Height
                                                             Restrictions)
                                               14-16-5-8(D)  Outdoor Lighting
East End Addition - HPO-2                      (3)           (Height
                                                             Restrictions)
                                               14-16-5-8(D)  Outdoor Lighting
Eighth and Forrester – HPO-3                 (3)           (Height
                                                             Restrictions)
                                               14-16-5-8(D)  Outdoor Lighting
Fourth Ward – HPO-4                          (3)           (Height
                                                             Restrictions)
                                               14-16-5-8(D)  Outdoor Lighting
Huning Highland – HPO-5                      (3)           (Height
                                                             Restrictions)
                                               14-16-5-8(D)  Outdoor Lighting
Old Town – HPO-6                             (3)           (Height
                                                             Restrictions)
                                               14-16-5-8(D)  Outdoor Lighting
Silver Hill - HPO-7                            (3)           (Height
                                                             Restrictions)
Downtown Neighborhood Area – CPO-3           14-16-5-11(C) Primary Building
                                               (1)(a)        Stepback
Los Duranes – CPO-6                          14-16-5-11(C) Primary Building
                                               (1)(b)        Stepback
Nob Hill/Highland Small Area                   14-16-5-11(C) Primary Building
                                               (1)(c)        Stepback
Rio Grande Boulevard – CPO-11                14-16-5-11(C) Primary Building
                                               (1)(d)        Stepback
Sawmill/Wells Park – CPO-12                  5-11(C)(1)(e) Primary Building
                                                             Stepback
Downtown Small Area                            14-16-5-11(F) Historic Building
                                                             Façades
East Downtown – CPO-4                        14-16-5-12(E) Signs (Design and
                                               (4)(d)1       Construction)
East Downtown – HPO-1                        14-16-5-12(E) Signs (Design and
                                               (4)(d)2       Construction)
Nob Hill/Highland – CPO-8                    14-16-5-12(E) Signs (Design and
                                               (4)(d)4       Construction)
Uptown Small Area                              14-16-5-12(E) Signs (Design and
                                               (4)(d)5       Construction)
East Downtown – CPO-4                        14-16-5-12(F) On-premises Signs
                                               (3)(a)
East Downtown – HPO-1                        14-16-5-12(F) On-premises Signs
                                               (3)(b)
Downtown Small Area                            14-16-5-12(F) On-premises Signs
                                               (3)(c)
East Gateway Small Area                        14-16-5-12(F) On-premises Signs
                                               (3)(d)
La Cueva Small Area                            14-16-5-12(F) On-premises Signs
                                               (3)(e)
Sunport Boulevard Small Area                   14-16-5-12(F) On-premises Signs
                                               (3)(f)
Unser Boulevard Small Area                     14-16-5-12(F) On-premises Signs
                                               (3)(g)
                                               14-16-5-12(F) On-premises Signs
Central Avenue                                 (4)(a)        (Neon Signs along
                                                             Central Avenue)
Coors Boulevard – CPO-2                      14-16-5-12(F) Portable Signs
                                               (4)(b)2.a     (Prohibitions)
North I-25 – CPO-10 / Alameda Boulevard Sub- 14-16-5-12(F) Portable Signs
area                                           (4)(b)2.b     (Prohibitions)
                                               14-16-5-12(G) Off-premises
Interstate Highway 25                          (1)(d)        Signs
                                                             (Prohibitions)
                                               14-16-5-12(G) Off-premises
Interstate Highway 40                          (1)(d)        Signs
                                                             (Prohibitions)
                                               14-16-5-12(G) Off-premises
Coors Boulevard – CPO-2                      (1)(e)1       Signs
                                                             (Prohibitions)
                                               14-16-5-12(G) Off-premises
Downtown Small Area                            (1)(e)2       Signs
                                                             (Prohibitions)
                                               14-16-5-12(G) Off-premises
East Downtown – CPO-4                        (1)(e)3       Signs
                                                             (Prohibitions)
                                               14-16-5-12(G) Off-premises
East Downtown – HPO-1                        (1)(e)4       Signs
                                                             (Prohibitions)
                                               14-16-5-12(G) Off-premises
East Gateway Small Area                        (1)(e)5       Signs
                                                             (Prohibitions)
                                               14-16-5-12(G) Off-premises
La Cueva Small Area                            (1)(e)6       Signs
                                                             (Prohibitions)
                                               14-16-5-12(G) Off-premises
Los Candelarias Small Area                     (1)(e)7       Signs
                                                             (Prohibitions)
                                               14-16-5-12(G) Off-premises
Los Duranes – CPO-6                          (1)(e)8       Signs
                                                             (Prohibitions)
                                               14-16-5-12(G) Off-premises
Nob Hill/Highland – CPO-8                    (1)(e)9       Signs
                                                             (Prohibitions)
                                               14-16-5-12(G) Off-premises
North 4th Corridor – CPO-9                   (1)(e)10      Signs
                                                             (Prohibitions)
North I-25 – CPO-10 / Alameda Boulevard Sub- 14-16-5-12(G) Off-premises
area                                           (1)(e)11      Signs
                                                             (Prohibitions)
                                               14-16-5-12(G) Off-premises
Rio Grande Boulevard – CPO-11                (1)(e)12      Signs
                                                             (Prohibitions)
                                               14-16-5-12(G) Off-premises
South Yale Small Area                          (1)(e)13      Signs
                                                             (Prohibitions)
                                               14-16-5-12(G) Off-premises
Sunport Boulevard Small Area                   (1)(e)14      Signs
                                                             (Prohibitions)
                                               14-16-5-12(G) Off-premises
Unser Boulevard Small Area                     (1)(e)15      Signs
                                                             (Prohibitions)
                                               14-16-5-12(G) Off-premises
Uptown Small Area                              (1)(e)16      Signs
                                                             (Prohibitions)
                                               14-16-5-12(G) Off-premises
Volcano Mesa – CPO-13                        (1)(e)17      Signs
                                                             (Prohibitions)
East Downtown – HPO-1                        14-16-5-12(H) Electronic Signs
                                               (2)(a)        (Prohibitions)
East End Addition - HPO-2                      14-16-5-12(H) Electronic Signs
                                               (2)(a)        (Prohibitions)
Eighth and Forrester – HPO-3                 14-16-5-12(H) Electronic Signs
                                               (2)(a)        (Prohibitions)
Fourth Ward – HPO-4                          14-16-5-12(H) Electronic Signs
                                               (2)(a)        (Prohibitions)
Huning Highland – HPO-5                      14-16-5-12(H) Electronic Signs
                                               (2)(a)        (Prohibitions)
Old Town – HPO-6                             14-16-5-12(H) Electronic Signs
                                               (2)(a)        (Prohibitions)
Silver Hill - HPO-7                            14-16-5-12(H) Electronic Signs
                                               (2)(a)        (Prohibitions)
Alameda Boulevard                              14-16-5-12(H) Electronic Signs
                                               (2)(c)        (Prohibitions)
Griegos Road                                   14-16-5-12(H) Electronic Signs
                                               (2)(c)        (Prohibitions)
Rio Grande Boulevard                           14-16-5-12(H) Electronic Signs
                                               (2)(c)        (Prohibitions)
Tramway Boulevard                              14-16-5-12(H) Electronic Signs
                                               (2)(c)        (Prohibitions)
Unser Boulevard                                14-16-5-12(H) Electronic Signs
                                               (2)(c)        (Prohibitions)
Coors Boulevard                                14-16-5-12(H) Electronic Signs
                                               (2)(d)        (Prohibitions)
Downtown Neighborhood Area – CPO-3           14-16-5-12(H) Electronic Signs
                                               (2)(f)1       (Prohibitions)
East Gateway Small Area                        14-16-5-12(H) Electronic Signs
                                               (2)(f)2       (Prohibitions)
North 4th Corridor – CPO-9                   14-16-5-12(H) Electronic Signs
                                               (2)(f)3       (Prohibitions)
Sawmill/Wells Park – CPO-12                  14-16-5-12(H) Electronic Signs
                                               (2)(f)4       (Prohibitions)
                                               14-16-5-12(H) Electronic Signs
Interstate Highway 25                          (3)(b)        (Off-premises
                                                             Signs)
                                               14-16-5-12(H) Electronic Signs
Interstate Highway 40                          (3)(b)        (Off-premises
                                                             Signs)
 
Table I: Small Area Regulations (in the order they appear in the IDO)
This table is for reference purposes only to index small area provisions in
the IDO.
See TABLE II: Small Areas Mapped in the IDO (in alphabetical order).
Area Subsection
Part 14-16-6: Administration and Enforcement (Review and Approval Procedures)
Table I: Small Area Regulations (in the order they appear in the IDO)
This table is for reference purposes only to index small area provisions in the
IDO.
See TABLE II: Small Areas Mapped in the IDO (in alphabetical order).
Area                               Subsection
Part 14-16-6: Administration and Enforcement (Review and Approval Procedures)
                                   14-
Railroad and Spur Small Area       16- Cumulative Impacts Analysis Requirements
                                   6-4
                                   (H)
                                   14-
Airport Protection Overlay Zone    16-
(APO)                              6-4 Referrals to Commenting Agencies
                                   (J)
                                   (6)
                                   14-
Kirtland AFB Military Influence    16-
Area                               6-4 Referrals to Commenting Agencies
                                   (J)
                                   (7)
                                   14-
                                   16-
Northwest Mesa Escarpment – VPO-26-4 Referrals to Commenting Agencies
                                   (J)
                                   (8)
                                   14-
East Downtown – HPO-1            16- Historic Certificate of Appropriateness –
                                   6-5 Minor
                                   (B)
                                   14-
East End Addition - HPO-2          16- Historic Certificate of Appropriateness -
                                   6-5 Minor
                                   (B)
                                   14-
Eighth and Forrester – HPO-3     16- Historic Certificate of Appropriateness –
                                   6-5 Minor
                                   (B)
                                   14-
Fourth Ward – HPO-4              16- Historic Certificate of Appropriateness –
                                   6-5 Minor
                                   (B)
                                   14-
Huning Highland – HPO-5          16- Historic Certificate of Appropriateness –
                                   6-5 Minor
                                   (B)
                                   14-
Old Town – HPO-6                 16- Historic Certificate of Appropriateness –
                                   6-5 Minor
                                   (B)
                                   14-
Silver Hill - HPO-7                16- Historic Certificate of Appropriateness –
                                   6-5 Minor
                                   (B)
                                   14-
                                   16-
Central Avenue                     6-6 Demolition Outside of an HPO
                                   (B) (Neon Signs along Central Avenue)
                                   (1)
                                   (a)
                                   14-
                                   16-
Downtown Small Area                6-6 Demolition Outside of an HPO
                                   (B)
                                   (1)
                                   (b)
                                   14-
                                   16-
Downtown Neighborhood Area – CPO-6-6 Demolition Outside of an HPO
                                   (B)
                                   (1)
                                   (c)
                                   14-
                                   16-
East Downtown – CPO-4            6-6 Demolition Outside of an HPO
                                   (B)
                                   (1)
                                   (d)
                                   14-
                                   16-
Nob Hill/Highland Small Area       6-6 Demolition Outside of an HPO
                                   (B)
                                   (1)
                                   (e)
                                   14-
East Downtown – HPO-1            16- Historic Certificate of Appropriateness –
                                   6-6 Major
                                   (D)
                                   14-
East End Addition - HPO-2          16- Historic Certificate of Appropriateness -
                                   6-6 Major
                                   (D)
                                   14-
Eighth and Forrester – HPO-3     16- Historic Certificate of Appropriateness –
                                   6-6 Major
                                   (D)
                                   14-
Fourth Ward – HPO-4              16- Historic Certificate of Appropriateness –
                                   6-6 Major
                                   (D)
                                   14-
Huning Highland – HPO-5          16- Historic Certificate of Appropriateness –
                                   6-6 Major
                                   (D)
                                   14-
Old Town – HPO-6                 16- Historic Certificate of Appropriateness –
                                   6-6 Major
                                   (D)
                                   14-
Silver Hill - HPO-7                16- Historic Certificate of Appropriateness –
                                   6-6 Major
                                   (D)
                                   14-
Railroad and Spur Small Area       16- Site Plan – EPC
                                   6-6
                                   (J)
                                   14-
Coors Boulevard – VPO-1          16- Variance – EPC
                                   6-6
                                   (N)
                                   14-
Northwest Mesa Escarpment – VPO-216- Variance – EPC
                                   6-6
                                   (N)
                                   14-
                                   16-
Airport Protection Overlay Zone    6-6 Variance – ZHE / Variance in the APO Zone
                                   (O)
                                   (3)
                                   (b)
                                   14-
                                   16-
Airport Protection Overlay Zone    6-8 Nonconforming Structures
                                   (D)
                                   (9)
 
Table II: Small Areas Mapped in the IDO (in alphabetical order)
This table is for reference purposes only to index small area provisions in
the IDO.
See TABLE I: Small Area Regulations (in the order they appear in the IDO).
Area Part Subsection
Table II: Small Areas Mapped in the IDO (in alphabetical order)
This table is for reference purposes only to index small area provisions in the IDO.
See TABLE I: Small Area Regulations (in the order they appear in the IDO).
Area                                                           Part           Subsection
Airport Protection Overlay Zone                                Use            14-16-4-3 Hot Air Balloon Takeoff and/or Landing
                                                               Regulations    (G)(11)   (Prohibitions)
                                                               Administration 14-16-6-4
Airport Protection Overlay Zone                                and            (J)(4)    Referrals to Commenting Agencies
                                                               Enforcement
                                                               Administration 14-16-6-6
Airport Protection Overlay Zone                                and            (O)(3)(b) Variance – ZHE
                                                               Enforcement
                                                               Administration 14-16-6-8
Airport Protection Overlay Zone                                and            (D)(9)    Nonconforming Structures
                                                               Enforcement
                                                               Use            14-16-4-3
Alameda Boulevard                                              Regulations    (E)(12)   WTF (Restrictions)
                                                                              (k)
                                                               Development    14-16-5-
Alameda Boulevard                                              Standards      12(H)(2)  Electronic Signs (Prohibitions)
                                                                              (c)
Albuquerque International Sunport / Air Space Protection Sub-  Overlay Zones  14-16-3-3 Airport Protection Overlay Zone
area                                                                          (B)(1)(a)
Albuquerque International Sunport / Runway Protection Sub-area Overlay Zones  14-16-3-3 Airport Protection Overlay Zone
                                                                              (B)(2)(a)
Albuquerque International Sunport / Noise Contour Sub-area     Overlay Zones  14-16-3-3 Airport Protection Overlay Zone
                                                                              (B)(3)(a)
Barelas – CPO-1                                              Overlay Zones  14-16-3-4 Character Protection Overlay Zones
                                                                              (B)
                                                               Use            14-16-4-3 Paid Parking Lot or Parking Structure
Barelas – CPO-1                                              Regulations    (D)(22)   (Prohibitions)
                                                                              (d)1
Barelas Small Area                                             Development    14-16-5-5 Parking and Loading
                                                               Standards      (B)(2)(c) (Exemptions and Reductions)
                                                               Use            14-16-4-3
Central Avenue                                                 Regulations    (E)(12)   WTF (Restrictions)
                                                                              (k)
                                                               Development    14-16-5-  On-premises Signs
Central Avenue                                                 Standards      12(F)(4)  (Neon Signs along Central Avenue)
                                                                              (a)
                                                               Administration 14-16-6-6 Demolition Outside of an HPO
Central Avenue                                                 and            (B)(1)(a) (Neon Signs along Central Avenue)
                                                               Enforcement
Coors Boulevard – CPO-2                                      Overlay Zones  14-16-3-4 Character Protection Overlay Zones
                                                                              (C)
Coors Boulevard – VPO-1                                      Overlay Zones  14-16-3-6 View Protection Overlay Zones
                                                                              (D)
                                                               Use            14-16-4-3
Coors Boulevard                                                Regulations    (E)(12)   WTF (Restrictions)
                                                                              (k)
                                                               Development    14-16-5-
Coors Boulevard – CPO-2                                      Standards      12(F)(4)  Portable Signs (Prohibitions)
                                                                              (b)2.a
                                                               Development    14-16-5-
Coors Boulevard – CPO-2                                      Standards      12(G)(1)  Off-premises Signs (Prohibitions)
                                                                              (e)1
                                                               Development    14-16-5-
Coors Boulevard                                                Standards      12(H)(2)  Electronic Signs (Prohibitions)
                                                                              (d)
                                                               Administration 14-16-6-6
Coors Boulevard – VPO-1                                      and            (N)       Variance – EPC
                                                               Enforcement
Double Eagle II Airport / Air Space Protection Sub-area        Overlay Zones  14-16-3-3 Airport Protection Overlay Zone
                                                                              (B)(1)(b)
Double Eagle II Airport / Runway Protection Sub-area           Overlay Zones  14-16-3-3 Airport Protection Overlay Zone
                                                                              (B)(2)(b)
Double Eagle II Airport / Noise Contour Sub-area               Overlay Zones  14-16-3-3 Airport Protection Overlay Zone
                                                                              (B)(3)(b)
                                                               Use            14-16-4-3 Paid Parking Lot or Parking Structure
Downtown Small Area                                            Regulations    (D)(22)   (Prohibitions)
                                                                              (d)2
                                                               Use            14-16-4-3 Drive-through or Drive-up Facility
Downtown Small Area                                            Regulations    (F)(4)    (Prohibitions)
                                                                              (e)1
                                                               Development    14-16-5-5 Parking and Loading
Downtown Center                                                Standards      (B)(2)    (Exemptions and Reductions)
                                                                              (a)1
Downtown Small Area                                            Development    14-16-5-  Historic Building Façades
                                                               Standards      11(F)
                                                               Development    14-16-5-  Signs in Mixed-use and Non-residential Zone
Downtown Small Area                                            Standards      12(F)(3)  Districts
                                                                              (c)
                                                               Development    14-16-5-
Downtown Small Area                                            Standards      12(G)(1)  Off-premises Signs (Prohibitions)
                                                                              (e)2
                                                               Administration 14-16-6-6
Downtown Small Area                                            and            (B)(1)(b) Demolition Outside of an HPO
                                                               Enforcement
Downtown Neighborhood Area – CPO-3                           Overlay Zones  14-16-3-4 Character Protection Overlay Zones
                                                                              (D)
                                                               Use            14-16-4-3
Downtown Neighborhood Area – CPO-3                           Regulations    (D)(16)   Car Wash (Prohibitions)
                                                                              (f)1
                                                               Use            14-16-4-3 Light Vehicle Fueling Station
Downtown Neighborhood Area – CPO-3                           Regulations    (D)(18)   (Prohibitions)
                                                                              (n)1
                                                               Use            14-16-4-3
Downtown Neighborhood Area – CPO-3                           Regulations    (D)(19)   Light Vehicle Repair (Prohibitions)
                                                                              (g)
                                                               Use            14-16-4-3 Light Vehicle Sales and Rental
Downtown Neighborhood Area – CPO-3                           Regulations    (D)(20)   (Prohibitions)
                                                                              (f)
                                                               Use            14-16-4-3 Paid Parking Lot or Parking Structure
Downtown Neighborhood Area – CPO-3                           Regulations    (D)(22)   (Prohibitions)
                                                                              (d)3
                                                               Use            14-16-4-3
Downtown Neighborhood Area – CPO-3                           Regulations    (D)(39)   Liquor Retail (Restrictions)
                                                                              (e)1
                                                               Use            14-16-4-3
Downtown Neighborhood Area – CPO-3                           Regulations    (D)(39)   Liquor Retail (Restrictions)
                                                                              (f)1
                                                               Use            14-16-4-3 Drive-through or Drive-up Facility
Downtown Neighborhood Area – CPO-3                           Regulations    (F)(4)    (Prohibitions/Restrictions)
                                                                              (e)2
                                                               Use            14-16-4-3
Downtown Neighborhood Area – CPO-3                           Regulations    (F)(5)    Dwelling Unit, Accessory (P)
                                                                              (e)3
                                                               Development    14-16-5-5
Downtown Neighborhood Area – CPO-3                           Standards      (F)(2)    Carports (Prohibitions)
                                                                              (a)3.d.i
                                                               Development    14-16-5-7
Downtown Neighborhood Area – CPO-3                           Standards      (D)(3)    Maximum Wall Height (Restrictions)
                                                                              (a)3.a
                                                               Development    14-16-5-
Downtown Neighborhood Area – CPO-3                           Standards      11(C)(1)  Primary Building Stepback
                                                                              (a)
                                                               Development    14-16-5-
Downtown Neighborhood Area – CPO-3                           Standards      12(H)(2)  Electronic Signs (Prohibitions)
                                                                              (f)1
                                                               Administration 14-16-6-6
Downtown Neighborhood Area – CPO-3                           and            (B)(1)(c) Demolition Outside of an HPO
                                                               Enforcement
East Downtown – CPO-4                                        Overlay Zones  14-16-3-4 Character Protection Overlay Zones
                                                                              (E)
East Downtown – HPO-1                                        Overlay Zones  14-16-3-5 Historic Protection Overlay Zones
                                                                              (G)
                                                               Use            14-16-4-3
East Downtown – CPO-4                                        Regulations    (D)(39)   Liquor Retail (Restrictions)
                                                                              (e)2
                                                               Use            14-16-4-3
East Downtown – HPO-1                                        Regulations    (D)(39)   Liquor Retail (Restrictions)
                                                                              (e)3
                                                               Use            14-16-4-3
East Downtown – CPO-4                                        Regulations    (D)(39)   Liquor Retail (Restrictions)
                                                                              (f)2
                                                               Use            14-16-4-3
East Downtown – HPO-1                                        Regulations    (D)(39)   Liquor Retail (Restrictions)
                                                                              (f)3
                                                               Use            14-16-4-3
East Downtown – HPO-1                                        Regulations    (E)(12)   WTF (Restrictions)
                                                                              (m)
                                                               Use            14-16-4-3 Drive-through or Drive-up Facility
East Downtown – CPO-4                                        Regulations    (F)(4)    (Prohibitions)
                                                                              (e)3
                                                               Use            14-16-4-3 Drive-through or Drive-up Facility
East Downtown – HPO-1                                        Regulations    (F)(4)    (Prohibitions)
                                                                              (e)4
East Downtown – HPO-1                                        Development    14-16-5-5 Parking Location and Design (Historic
                                                               Standards      (F)(4)(a) Protection Overlay zones)
East Downtown – HPO-1                                        Development    14-16-5-8 Outdoor Lighting (Height Restrictions)
                                                               Standards      (D)(7)
                                                               Development    14-16-5-
East Downtown – CPO-4                                        Standards      12(E)(4)  Signs (Design and Construction)
                                                                              (d)1
                                                               Development    14-16-5-
East Downtown – HPO-1                                        Standards      12(E)(4)  Signs (Design and Construction)
                                                                              (d)2
                                                               Development    14-16-5-
East Downtown – CPO-4                                        Standards      12(F)(3)  On-premises Signs
                                                                              (a)
                                                               Development    14-16-5-
East Downtown – HPO-1                                        Standards      12(F)(3)  On-premises Signs
                                                                              (b)
                                                               Development    14-16-5-
East Downtown – CPO-4                                        Standards      12(G)(1)  Off-premises Signs (Prohibitions)
                                                                              (e)3
                                                               Development    14-16-5-
East Downtown – HPO-1                                        Standards      12(G)(1)  Off-premises Signs (Prohibitions)
                                                                              (e)4
                                                               Development    14-16-5-
East Downtown – HPO-1                                        Standards      12(H)(2)  Electronic Signs (Prohibitions)
                                                                              (a)
                                                               Administration 14-16-6-5 Historic Certificate of Appropriateness –
East Downtown – HPO-1                                        and            (B)       Minor
                                                               Enforcement
                                                               Administration 14-16-6-6
East Downtown – CPO-4                                        and            (B)(1)(d) Demolition Outside of an HPO
                                                               Enforcement
                                                               Administration 14-16-6-6 Historic Certificate of Appropriateness –
East Downtown – HPO-1                                        and            (D)       Major
                                                               Enforcement
East End Addition - HPO-2                                      Overlay Zones  14-16-3-5 Historic Protection Overlay Zones
                                                                              (H)
                                                               Use            14-16-4-3
East End Addition - HPO-2                                      Regulations    (E)(12)   WTF (Restrictions)
                                                                              (m)
                                                               Development    14-16-5-5 Parking Location and Design (Historic
East End Addition - HPO-2                                      Standards      (F)(4)    Protection Overlay zones)
                                                                              (a)4
East End Addition - HPO-2                                      Development    14-16-5-8 Outdoor Lighting (Height Restrictions)
                                                               Standards      (D)(3)
                                                               Development    14-16-5-
East End Addition - HPO-2                                      Standards      12(H)(2)  Electronic Signs (Prohibitions)
                                                                              (a)
                                                               Administration 14-16-6-5 Historic Certificate of Appropriateness -
East End Addition - HPO-2                                      and            (B)       Minor
                                                               Enforcement
                                                               Administration 14-16-6-6 Historic Certificate of Appropriateness -
East End Addition - HPO-2                                      and            (D)       Major
                                                               Enforcement
                                                               Use            14-16-4-3 Light Vehicle Fueling Station
East Gateway Small Area                                        Regulations    (D)(18)   (Prohibitions)
                                                                              (n)2
                                                               Development    14-16-5-
East Gateway Small Area                                        Standards      12(F)(3)  On-premises Signs
                                                                              (d)
                                                               Development    14-16-5-
East Gateway Small Area                                        Standards      12(G)(1)  Off-premises Signs (Prohibitions)
                                                                              (e)5
                                                               Development    14-16-5-
East Gateway Small Area                                        Standards      12(H)(2)  Electronic Signs (Prohibitions)
                                                                              (f)2
Eighth and Forrester – HPO-3                                 Overlay Zones  14-16-3-5 Historic Protection Overlay Zones
                                                                              (I)
                                                               Use            14-16-4-3
Eighth and Forrester – HPO-3                                 Regulations    (E)(12)   WTF (Restrictions)
                                                                              (m)
                                                               Development    14-16-5-5 Parking Location and Design (Historic
Eighth and Forrester – HPO-3                                 Standards      (F)(4)    Protection Overlay zones)
                                                                              (a)4
Eighth and Forrester – HPO-3                                 Development    14-16-5-8 Outdoor Lighting (Height Restrictions)
                                                               Standards      (D)(3)
                                                               Development    14-16-5-
Eighth and Forrester – HPO-3                                 Standards      12(H)(2)  Electronic Signs (Prohibitions)
                                                                              (a)
                                                               Administration 14-16-6-5 Historic Certificate of Appropriateness –
Eighth and Forrester – HPO-3                                 and            (B)       Minor
                                                               Enforcement
                                                               Administration 14-16-6-6 Historic Certificate of Appropriateness –
Eighth and Forrester – HPO-3                                 and            (D)       Major
                                                               Enforcement
Fourth Ward – HPO-4                                          Overlay Zones  14-16-3-5 Historic Protection Overlay Zones
                                                                              (J)
                                                               Use            14-16-4-3
Fourth Ward – HPO-4                                          Regulations    (E)(12)   WTF (Restrictions)
                                                                              (m)
Fourth Ward – HPO-4                                          Development    14-16-5-5 Parking Location and Design (Historic
                                                               Standards      (F)(4)(c) Protection Overlay zones)
Fourth Ward – HPO-4                                          Development    14-16-5-8 Outdoor Lighting (Height Restrictions)
                                                               Standards      (D)(3)
                                                               Development    14-16-5-  Electronic Signs
Fourth Ward – HPO-4                                          Standards      12(H)(2)  (Prohibited Areas)
                                                                              (a)
                                                               Administration 14-16-6-5 Historic Certificate of Appropriateness –
Fourth Ward – HPO-4                                          and            (B)       Minor
                                                               Enforcement
                                                               Administration 14-16-6-6 Historic Certificate of Appropriateness –
Fourth Ward – HPO-4                                          and            (D)       Major
                                                               Enforcement
                                                               Use            14-16-4-3
Griegos Road                                                   Regulations    (E)(12)   WTF (Restrictions)
                                                                              (k)
                                                               Development    14-16-5-
Griegos Road                                                   Standards      12(H)(2)  Electronic Signs (Prohibitions)
                                                                              (c)
High Desert – CPO-5                                          Overlay Zones  14-16-3-4 Character Protection Overlay Zones
                                                                              (F)
                                                               Use            14-16-4-3 Paid Parking Lot or Parking Structure
Huning Castle Raynolds Addition Small Area                     Regulations    (D)(22)   (Prohibitions)
                                                                              (d)4
Huning Highland – HPO-5                                      Overlay Zones  14-16-3-5 Historic Protection Overlay Zones
                                                                              (K)
                                                               Use            14-16-4-3
Huning Highland – HPO-5                                      Regulations    (E)(12)   WTF (Restrictions)
                                                                              (m)
Huning Highland – HPO-5                                      Development    14-16-5-5 Parking Location and Design (Historic
                                                               Standards      (F)(4)(d) Protection Overlay zones)
Huning Highland – HPO-5                                      Development    14-16-5-8 Outdoor Lighting (Height Restrictions)
                                                               Standards      (D)(3)
                                                               Development    14-16-5-  Electronic Signs
Huning Highland – HPO-5                                      Standards      12(H)(2)  (Prohibited Areas)
                                                                              (a)
                                                               Administration 14-16-6-5 Historic Certificate of Appropriateness –
Huning Highland – HPO-5                                      and            (B)       Minor
                                                               Enforcement
                                                               Administration 14-16-6-6 Historic Certificate of Appropriateness –
Huning Highland – HPO-5                                      and            (D)       Major
                                                               Enforcement
                                                               Use            14-16-4-3
Interstate Highway 25                                          Regulations    (E)(12)   WTF (Restrictions)
                                                                              (k)
                                                               Development    14-16-5-
Interstate Highway 25                                          Standards      12(G)(1)  Off-premises Signs (Prohibitions)
                                                                              (d)
                                                               Development    14-16-5-
Interstate Highway 25                                          Standards      12(H)(3)  Electronic Signs (Off-premises Signs)
                                                                              (b)
                                                               Use            14-16-4-3
Interstate Highway 40                                          Regulations    (E)(12)   WTF (Restrictions)
                                                                              (k)
                                                               Development    14-16-5-
Interstate Highway 40                                          Standards      12(G)(1)  Off-premises Signs (Prohibitions)
                                                                              (d)
                                                               Development    14-16-5-
Interstate Highway 40                                          Standards      12(H)(3)  Electronic Signs (Off-premises Signs)
                                                                              (b)
                                                               Administration 14-16-6-4
Kirtland AFB Military Influence Area                           and            (J)(4)    Referrals to Commenting Agencies
                                                               Enforcement
                                                               Use            14-16-4-3
La Cueva Small Area                                            Regulations    (D)(39)   Liquor Retail (Restrictions)
                                                                              (e)4
                                                               Development    14-16-5-
La Cueva Small Area                                            Standards      12(F)(3)  On-premises Signs
                                                                              (e)
                                                               Development    14-16-5-
La Cueva Small Area                                            Standards      12(G)(1)  Off-premises Signs (Prohibitions)
                                                                              (e)6
                                                               Development    14-16-5-
Los Candelarias Small Area                                     Standards      12(G)(1)  Off-premises Signs (Prohibitions)
                                                                              (e)7
Los Duranes – CPO-6                                          Overlay Zones  14-16-3-4 Character Protection Overlay Zones
                                                                              (G)
Los Duranes – CPO-6                                          Use            14-16-4-3 Dwelling, Cluster Development
                                                               Regulations    (B)(3)(c) (Number of Dwelling Units)
                                                               Use            14-16-4-3 Paid Parking Lot or Parking Structure
Los Duranes – CPO-6                                          Regulations    (D)(22)   (Prohibitions)
                                                                              (d)5
Los Duranes Community Acequias                                 Development    14-16-5-2 Irrigation Facility (Acequia) Standards
                                                               Standards      (G)(4)
Los Duranes CPO-6                                              Development    14-16-5-3 Sidewalks in Residential Development
                                                               Standards      (D)(1)
                                                               Development    14-16-5-
Los Duranes – CPO-6                                          Standards      11(C)(1)  Primary Building Stepback
                                                                              (b)
                                                               Development    14-16-5-
Los Duranes – CPO-6                                          Standards      12(G)(1)  Off-premises Signs (Prohibitions)
                                                                              (e)8
Martineztown/Santa Barbara – CPO-7                           Overlay Zones  14-16-3-4 Character Protection Overlay Zones
                                                                              (H)
                                                               Use            14-16-4-3 Paid Parking Lot or Parking Structure
Martineztown/Santa Barbara – CPO-7                           Regulations    (D)(22)   (Prohibitions)
                                                                              (d)6
                                                               Use            14-16-4-3 Paid Parking Lot or Parking Structure
McClellan Park Small Area                                      Regulations    (D)(22)   (Prohibitions)
                                                                              (d)7
                                                               Development    14-16-5-5 Parking and Loading
McClellan Park Small Area                                      Standards      (B)(2)    (Exemptions and Reductions)
                                                                              (a)2
                                                               Development    14-16-5-5
Monte Vista and College View Historic District                 Standards      (F)(2)    Carports (Prohibitions))
                                                                              (a)3.d.ii
                                                               Development    14-16-5-7
Monte Vista and College View Historic District                 Standards      (D)(3)    Maximum Wall Height (Restrictions)
                                                                              (a)3.b
Nob Hill/Highland – CPO-8                                    Overlay Zones  14-16-3-4 Character Protection Overlay Zones
                                                                              (I)
Nob Hill/Highland – CPO-8 / Building Height Sub-area         Overlay Zones  14-16-3-4 Character Protection Overlay Zones
                                                                              (I)(4)(b)
Nob Hill/Highland – CPO-8 / Façade Design Sub-area          Overlay Zones  14-16-3-4 Character Protection Overlay Zones
                                                                              (I)(5)(b)
                                                               Use            14-16-4-3 Paid Parking Lot or Parking Structure
Nob Hill/Highland Small Area                                   Regulations    (D)(22)   (Prohibitions)
                                                                              (d)8
                                                               Use            14-16-4-3
Nob Hill/Highland Small Area                                   Regulations    (D)(39)   Liquor Retail (Prohibitions)
                                                                              (g)
                                                               Use            14-16-4-3 Drive-through or Drive-up Facility
Nob Hill Small Area                                            Regulations    (F)(5)    (Prohibitions)
                                                                              (f)5
Nob Hill Small Area                                            Development    14-16-5-5 Parking and Loading
                                                               Standards      (B)(2)(d) (Exemptions and Reductions)
                                                               Development    14-16-5-
Nob Hill/Highland Small Area                                   Standards      11(C)(1)  Primary Building Stepback
                                                                              (c)
                                                               Development    14-16-5-
Nob Hill/Highland – CPO-8                                    Standards      12(E)(4)  Signs (Design and Construction)
                                                                              (d)4
                                                               Development    14-16-5-
Nob Hill/Highland – CPO-8                                    Standards      12(G)(1)  Off-premises Signs (Prohibitions)
                                                                              (e)9
                                                               Administration 14-16-6-6
Nob Hill/Highland Small Area                                   and            (B)(1)    Demolition Outside of an HPO
                                                               Enforcement    (c)5
North 4th Corridor – CPO-9                                   Overlay Zones  14-16-3-4 Character Protection Overlay Zones
                                                                              (J)
                                                               Use            14-16-4-3
North 4th Corridor – CPO-9                                   Regulations    (D)(39)   Liquor Retail (Restrictions)
                                                                              (f)4
North 4th Corridor – CPO-9                                   Development    5-12(G)   Off-premises Signs (Prohibitions)
                                                               Standards      (1)(e)10
                                                               Development    14-16-5-
North 4th Corridor – CPO-9                                   Standards      12(H)(2)  Electronic Signs (Prohibitions)
                                                                              (f)3
North I-25 – CPO-10                                          Overlay Zones  14-16-3-4 Character Protection Overlay Zones
                                                                              (K)
                                                                              14-16-3-4
North I-25 – CPO-10 / Alameda Boulevard Sub-area             Overlay Zones  (K)(4)    Character Protection Overlay Zones
                                                                              (c)3
North I-25 – CPO-10                                          Use            14-16-4-3 Dwelling, Multi-family (No Ground-floor
                                                               Regulations    (B)(8)(f) Multi-family)
                                                               Development    14-16-5-
North I-25 – CPO-10 / Alameda Boulevard Sub-area             Standards      12(F)(4)  Portable Signs (Prohibitions)
                                                                              (b)2.b
                                                               Development    14-16-5-
North I-25 – CPO-10 / Alameda Boulevard Sub-area             Standards      12(G)(1)  Off-premises Signs (Prohibitions)
                                                                              (e)11
Northwest Mesa Escarpment – VPO-2                            Overlay Zones  14-16-3-6 View Protection Overlay Zones
                                                                              (E)
Northwest Mesa Escarpment – VPO-2 / Height Restrictions Sub- Overlay Zones  14-16-3-6 View Protection Overlay Zones
area                                                                          (E)(3)
                                                               Administration 14-16-6-4
Northwest Mesa Escarpment – VPO-2                            and            (J)(8)    Referrals to Commenting Agencies
                                                               Enforcement
                                                               Administration 14-16-6-6
Northwest Mesa Escarpment – VPO-2                            and            (N)       Variance – EPC
                                                               Enforcement
Old Town – HPO-6                                             Overlay Zones  14-16-3-5 Historic Protection Overlay Zones
                                                                              (L)
Old Town – HPO-6                                             Use            14-16-4-3 Bar, Nightclub, Restaurant, and Tap Room
                                                               Regulations    (D)(8)(f)
                                                               Use            14-16-4-3
Old Town – HPO-6                                             Regulations    (D)(35)   Cannabis Retail (Prohibited)
                                                                              (k)
                                                               Use            14-16-4-3
Old Town – HPO-6                                             Regulations    (D)(37)   General Retail (Allowances)
                                                                              (d)2
                                                               Use            14-16-4-3
Old Town – HPO-6                                             Regulations    (E)(12)   WTF (Prohibitions)
                                                                              (m)
                                                               Development    14-16-5-5 Parking and Loading
Old Town – HPO-6                                             Standards      (B)(2)    (Exemptions and Reductions)
                                                                              (a)3
Old Town – HPO-6                                             Development    14-16-5-5 Parking Location and Design (Historic
                                                               Standards      (F)(4)(e) Protection Overlay zones)
Old Town – HPO-6                                             Development    14-16-5-8 Outdoor Lighting
                                                               Standards      (D)(3)    (Height Restrictions)
                                                               Development    14-16-5-  Electronic Signs
Old Town – HPO-6                                             Standards      12(H)(2)  (Prohibited Areas)
                                                                              (a)
                                                               Administration 14-16-6-5 Historic Certificate of Appropriateness –
Old Town – HPO-6                                             and            (B)       Minor
                                                               Enforcement
                                                               Administration 14-16-6-6 Historic Certificate of Appropriateness –
Old Town – HPO-6                                             and            (D)       Major
                                                               Enforcement
                                                               Use            14-16-4-3
Paseo del Norte                                                Regulations    (E)(12)   WTF (Restrictions)
                                                                              (k)
Railroad and Spur Small Area                                   Use            14-16-4-3 Commercial Uses (various)
                                                               Regulations    (D)
Railroad and Spur Small Area                                   Use            14-16-4-3 Industrial Uses (various)
                                                               Regulations    (E)
Railroad and Spur Small Area                                   Development    14-16-5-2 Cumulative Impacts
                                                               Standards      (E)
                                                               Administration 14-16-6-4
Railroad and Spur Small Area                                   and            (H)       Cumulative Impacts Analysis Requirements
                                                               Enforcement
                                                               Administration 14-16-6-6
Railroad and Spur Small Area                                   and            (J)       Site Plan – EPC
                                                               Enforcement
                                                               Development    14-16-1-1 Site Design and Sensitive Lands
                                                               Standards
Rio Grande Boulevard – CPO-11                                Overlay Zones  14-16-3-4 Character Protection Overlay Zones
                                                                              (L)
                                                               Use            14-16-4-3
Rio Grande Boulevard                                           Regulations    (E)(12)   WTF (Restrictions)
                                                                              (k)
                                                               Development    14-16-5-
Rio Grande Boulevard – CPO-11                                Standards      11(C)(1)  Primary Building Stepback
                                                                              (d)
                                                               Development    14-16-5-
Rio Grande Boulevard – CPO-11                                Standards      12(G)(1)  Off-premises Signs (Prohibitions)
                                                                              (e)12
                                                               Development    14-16-5-
Rio Grande Boulevard                                           Standards      12(H)(2)  Electronic Signs (Prohibitions)
                                                                              (c)
Sawmill/Wells Park – CPO-12                                  Overlay Zones  14-16-3-4 Character Protection Overlay Zones
                                                                              (M)
                                                               Use            14-16-4-3
Sawmill/Wells Park – CPO-12                                  Regulations    (D)(16)   Car Wash (Prohibitions)
                                                                              (h)2
                                                               Use            14-16-4-3 Light Vehicle Fueling Station
Sawmill/Wells Park – CPO-12                                  Regulations    (D)(18)   (Prohibitions)
                                                                              (n)4
                                                               Use            14-16-4-3 Drive-through or Drive-up Facility
Sawmill/Wells Park – CPO-12                                  Regulations    (F)(5)    (Prohibitions)
                                                                              (f)6
                                                               Use            14-16-4-3
Sawmill/Wells Park – CPO-12                                  Regulations    (F)(6)    Dwelling Unit, Accessory (P)
                                                                              (g)2
                                                               Development    14-16-5-
Sawmill/Wells Park – CPO-12                                  Standards      11(C)(1)  Primary Building Stepback
                                                                              (e)
                                                               Development    14-16-5-
Sawmill/Wells Park – CPO-12                                  Standards      12(H)(2)  Electronic Signs (Prohibitions)
                                                                              (f)4
Silver Hill - HPO-7                                            Overlay Zones  14-16-3-5 Historic Protection Overlay Zones
                                                                              (M)
                                                               Use            14-16-4-3
Silver Hill - HPO-7                                            Regulations    (E)(12)   WTF (Restrictions)
                                                                              (m)
Silver Hill - HPO-7                                            Development    14-16-5-5 Parking Location and Design (Historic
                                                               Standards      (F)(4)(f) Protection Overlay zones)
Silver Hill - HPO-7                                            Development    14-16-5-8 Outdoor Lighting (Height Restrictions)
                                                               Standards      (D)(7)
                                                               Development    14-16-5-  Electronic Signs
Silver Hill - HPO-7                                            Standards      12(H)(2)  (Prohibitions)
                                                                              (a)
                                                               Administration 14-16-6-5 Historic Certificate of Appropriateness –
Silver Hill - HPO-7                                            and            (B)       Minor
                                                               Enforcement
                                                               Administration 14-16-6-6 Historic Certificate of Appropriateness –
Silver Hill - HPO-7                                            and            (D)       Major
                                                               Enforcement
                                                               Use            14-16-4-3 Paid Parking Lot or Parking Structure
South Broadway Small Area                                      Regulations    (D)(22)   (Prohibitions)
                                                                              (d)9
                                                               Use            14-16-4-3 Paid Parking Lot or Parking Structure
South Martineztown Small Area                                  Regulations    (D)(22)   (Prohibitions)
                                                                              (d)10
                                                               Use            14-16-4-3
South Yale Small Area                                          Regulations    (D)(39)   Liquor Retail (Restrictions)
                                                                              (e)6
                                                               Use            14-16-4-3
South Yale Small Area                                          Regulations    (D)(39)   Liquor Retail (Restrictions)
                                                                              (f)5
                                                               Use            14-16-4-3
South Yale Small Area                                          Regulations    (E)(12)   WTF (Restrictions)
                                                                              (n)1
                                                               Use            14-16-4-3 Drive-through or Drive-up Facility
South Yale Small Area                                          Regulations    (F)(5)    (Prohibitions)
                                                                              (f)7
                                                               Development    14-16-5-
South Yale Small Area                                          Standards      12(G)(1)  Off-premises Signs (Prohibitions)
                                                                              (e)13
                                                               Use            14-16-4-3
Sunport Boulevard                                              Regulations    (E)(12)   WTF (Restrictions)
                                                                              (k)
                                                               Development    14-16-5-
Sunport Boulevard                                              Standards      12(F)(3)  On-premises Signs
                                                                              (f)
                                                               Development    14-16-5-
Sunport Boulevard                                              Standards      12(G)(1)  Off-premises Signs (Prohibitions)
                                                                              (e)14
                                                               Use            14-16-4-3
Tramway Boulevard                                              Regulations    (E)(12)   WTF (Restrictions)
                                                                              (k)
                                                               Development    14-16-5-
Tramway Boulevard                                              Standards      12(H)(2)  Electronic Signs (Prohibitions)
                                                                              (c)
                                                               Use            14-16-4-3
University Neighborhoods Small Area                            Regulations    (D)(39)   Liquor Retail (Restrictions)
                                                                              (h)
                                                               Use            14-16-4-3 Drive-through or Drive-up Facility
University Neighborhoods Small Area                            Regulations    (F)(5)    (Prohibitions)
                                                                              (f)8
University Neighborhoods Area                                  Development    14-16-5-3 Driveways, Drive Aisles, and Access
                                                               Standards      (C)(3)(c) (Restrictions)
                                                               Use            14-16-4-3
Unser Boulevard                                                Regulations    (E)(12)   WTF (Restrictions)
                                                                              (k)
                                                               Development    14-16-5-
Unser Boulevard Small Area                                     Standards      12(F)(3)  On-premises Signs
                                                                              (g)
                                                               Development    14-16-5-
Unser Boulevard Small Area                                     Standards      12(G)(1)  Off-premises Signs (Prohibitions)
                                                                              (e)15
                                                               Development    14-16-5-
Unser Boulevard                                                Standards      12(H)(2)  Electronic Signs (Prohibitions)
                                                                              (c)
                                                               Use            14-16-4-3
Uptown Small Area                                              Regulations    (E)(12)   WTF (Restrictions)
                                                                              (n)2
                                                               Use            14-16-4-3 Drive-through or Drive-up Facility
Uptown Small Area                                              Regulations    (F)(5)    (Restrictions)
                                                                              (f)9
                                                               Development    14-16-5-
Uptown Small Area                                              Standards      12(E)(4)  Signs (Design and Construction)
                                                                              (d)5
                                                               Development    14-16-5-
Uptown Small Area                                              Standards      12(G)(1)  Off-premises Signs (Prohibitions)
                                                                              (e)16
Valley Drainage Area                                           Development    14-16-5-2 Site Design and Sensitive Lands
                                                               Standards      (F)
                                                               Use
                                                               Regulations
Volcano Mesa – CPO-13                                        Overlay Zones  14-16-3-4 Character Protection Overlay Zones
                                                                              (N)
                                                               Use            14-16-4-3 Drive-through or Drive-up Facility
Volcano Mesa – CPO-13                                        Regulations    (F)(5)    (Restrictions)
                                                                              (f)11
                                                               Development    14-16-5-
Volcano Mesa – CPO-13                                        Standards      12(G)(1)  Off-premises Signs (Prohibitions)
                                                                              (e)17
 
Table III: IDO Provisions for ABC Comp Plan Centers and Corridor Areas
DT = Downtown UC = Urban Center AC = Activity Center EC = Employment
Center
MS = Main Street Area PT = Premium Transit Area MT = Major Transit Area
This table is for reference purposes only to index provisions for
Centers & Corridors in the IDO.
Subsection Header (Topic) Center or Corridor Area
                          DT UC AC EC MS PT MT
Table III: IDO Provisions for ABC Comp Plan Centers and Corridor Areas
DT = Downtown UC = Urban Center AC = Activity Center EC = Employment Center
MS = Main Street Area PT = Premium Transit Area MT = Major Transit Area
This table is for reference purposes only to index provisions for Centers &
Corridors in the IDO.
                                                              Center or Corridor
Subsection Header (Topic)                                     Area
                                                              DT UC AC EC MS PT MT
Part 14-16-2: Zone Districts
14-16-2-4  Form-based Sub-zones                               DT UC AC
(E)(3)(b)
14-16-2-4  Dimensional Standards                              DT UC AC    MS PT
(E)(3)(d)
Table 2-4- IDO Lighting Designations for the MX-FB Sub-zones    UC     MS PT MT
15
Part 14-16-4: Use Regulations
14-16-4-3  Dwelling, Cottage Development                         UC       MS PT
(B)(4)(b)2
14-16-4-3  Dwelling, Cottage Development (No Distance            UC       MS PT MT
(B)(4)(j)2 Separation)
14-16-4-3  Dwelling, Townhouse (Usable Open Space)               UC       MS PT
(B)(6)(a)4
14-16-4-3  Dwelling, Townhouse (Front Façade)                            MS PT
(B)(6)(d)
14-16-4-3  Dwelling, Townhouse (Ground Floor Commercial Uses)                PT MT
(B)(6)(e)
14-16-4-3  Dwelling, Multi-family (Usable Open Space)         DT UC       MS PT
(B)(8)(a)
14-16-4-3  Dwelling, Multi-family (Trees and Usable Open      DT UC     MS PT
(B)(8)(b)  Space)
14-16-4-3  Dwelling, Multi-family (Ground Floor Uses)                        PT MT
(B)(8)(f)
14-16-4-3  Dwelling, Multi-family (Ground Floor Conditional)  DT UC
(B)(8)(i)
14-16-4-3  Light Vehicle Fueling Station                         UC AC    MS PT MT
(D)(18)(l)
14-16-4-3  Light Vehicle Fueling Station                         UC       MS PT
(D)(18)(m)
14-16-4-3  Light Vehicle Sales and Rental                        UC       MS PT
(D)(20)(b)
14-16-4-3  Self-storage                                          UC AC   MS PT  
(D)(29)
14-16-4-3  Wholesaling and Distribution Center                  UC     MS PT  
(E)(19)
14-16-4-3  Drive-through or Drive-up Facility                    UC
(F)(4)
Part 14-16-5: Development Standards
14-16-5-1  Residential Zone Districts                            UC      MS PT  
(C)
14-16-5-1  Contextual Residential Development in Areas of     DT UC      MS PT
(C)(2)(b)2 Consistency (Lot Size)
14-16-5-1  Mixed-use Zone Districts                              UC      MS PT MT
(D)
14-16-5-1  Dimensional Standards                                 UC      MS PT
(D)(2)
14-16-5-1  Non-residential Zone Districts                        UC      MS PT  
(E)
14-16-5-1  Exceptions and Encroachments                          UC      MS PT
(G)
14-16-5-2                                                     DT          MS PT
(K)(5)(a)
14-16-5-4  Block Dimensions                                   DT UC AC EC MS    
(E)(3)
14-16-5-5  Minimum Off-street Parking Table                      UC AC   MS PT  
(C)(2)
14-16-5-5  Parking Reductions                                   UC AC EC MS    MT
(C)(5)
14-16-5-5  Parking Location and Design                        DT UC     MS PT  
(F)(1)(b)
14-16-5-5  Design, Access, and Circulation                    DT UC AC EC MS PT MT
(F)(2)(a)4
14-16-5-5  Centers, Main Street Areas, and Premium Transit
(G)(4)     Areas                                              DT UC AC EC MS PT
           (Parking Structure Design)
14-16-5-5  Drive-through or Drive-up Facility Design             UC       MS PT
(I)(2)
14-16-5-5  Vehicle Stacking Spaces                               UC       MS
(I)(1)
14-16-5-6  Minimum Landscape Area                             DT UC     MS PT  
(C)(2)(b)
14-16-5-6  Required Plant Materials and Site Amenities        DT UC     MS
(C)(4)(j)
14-16-5-6  Soil Condition and Planting Beds                   DT UC     MS
(C)(5)
14-16-5-6  Additional Frontage Landscaping                    DT UC     MS PT  
(D)(2)(b)
14-16-5-6  Development Next to Low-density Residential Zone   DT UC     MS    
(E)(2)(b)  Districts
14-16-5-6  Development Next to a Multi-family Residential     DT UC     MS PT  
(E)(3)(b)  Zone District
14-16-5-6  Industrial Development Adjacent to Non-industrial  DT UC     MS PT  
(E)(4)(c)  Development
14-16-5-6  Area of Change Next to Area of Consistency         DT UC       MS PT
(E)(5)
14-16-5-6  Parking Lot Edges                                  DT UC     MS    
(F)(1)(i)
14-16-5-6  Parking Lot Interior                               DT UC     MS PT  
(F)(2)(b)
Table 5-8- Lighting Designations by Zone District                UC       MS PT MT
2
14-16-5-8  Outdoor and Site Lighting (General Design and         UC     MS PT
(D)(11)(a) Illumination)
14-16-5-8  Decorative Outdoor Lighting                        DT UC    EC
(E)(2)(d)
           Multi-family Residential Development in UC-MS-PT
14-16-5-11 Areas and Mixed-use and Non-residential               UC     MS PT
(E)        Development in Mixed-use Zone Districts and NR-
           C or NR-BP Zone Districts
14-16-5-11 Ground Floor Clear Height                             UC       MS PT
(E)(1)
14-16-5-11 Façade Design (Mixed-use and Non-residential Zone    UC AC   MS PT  
(E)(2)(b)  Districts)
14-16-5-11 Outdoor Seating and Gathering Areas                   UC      MS PT  
(E)(3)(b)
Table 5-   On-premises Signs in Mixed-use and Non-residential DT
12-2       Zone Districts
14-16-5-12 Alternative Signage Plan                              UC
(F)(5)
Part 14-16-6: Administration and Enforcement
14-16-6-4  Minor Amendments                                   DT UC     MS PT  
(Y)(2)(a)5
14-16-6-5  Permit – Temporary Window Wrap                   DT UC AC   MS PT
(E)(1)
Part 14-16-7: Definitions, Acronyms
14-16-7-1  Activity Center                                        AC        
14-16-7-1  Downtown Center                                    DT            
14-16-7-1  Employment Center                                        EC      
14-16-7-1  Main Street Area                                           MS    
14-16-7-1  Major Transit Area                                             MT
14-16-7-1  Measurement, Corridor Area                                 MS PT MT
14-16-7-1  Premium Transit Area                                         PT  
14-16-7-1  Urban Center                                         UC          
 
Part 14-16-1   General Provisions
1-1   SHORT TITLE
This Article, the "Integrated Development Ordinance," may be cited as the "IDO"
and is referred to as either this "Article" or this "Ordinance."
1-2   AUTHORITY
This Article is created pursuant to authority granted in Article I of the
Charter of the City of Albuquerque, which was originally adopted at a special
election on June 29, 1971, pursuant to Article X, Section 6 of the Constitution
of the State of New Mexico. In enacting this IDO, the City intends to comply
with the provisions of existing State law on the same subject, and the
provisions of this IDO should be interpreted to achieve that goal.
1-3   PURPOSE
The purpose of this IDO is to:
1-3(A)   Implement the adopted Albuquerque/Bernalillo County Comprehensive Plan
(ABC Comp Plan), as amended.
1-3(B)   Ensure that all development in the City is consistent with the spirit
and intent of any other plans and policies adopted by City Council.
1-3(C)   Ensure the provision of adequate public facilities and services for
new development.
1-3(D)   Protect all communities, especially those that have been historically
underserved.
1-3(E)   Protect the quality and character of residential neighborhoods.
1-3(F)   Promote the economic development and fiscal sustainability of the
City.
1-3(G)   Promote small-scale, neighborhood-serving economic development
opportunities.
1-3(H)   Provide for the efficient administration of City land use and
development regulations.
1-3(I)   Protect the health, safety, and general welfare of the public.
1-3(J)   Provide for orderly and coordinated development patterns.
1-3(K)   Encourage the conservation and efficient use of water and other
natural resources.
1-3(L)   Protect the abundant natural resources that characterize Albuquerque,
including but not limited to Major Public Open Space, Sensitive Lands, the Rio
Grande, and the waterways that lead to the river.
1-3(M)   Implement a connected system of parks, trails, and open spaces to
promote improved outdoor activity and public health.
1-3(N)   Provide reasonable protection from possible nuisances and hazards and
to otherwise protect and improve public health.
1-3(O)   Encourage efficient and connected transportation and circulation
systems for motor vehicles, bicycles, and pedestrians.
1-3(P)   Encourage development in all areas of the city, especially where there
is an imbalance of housing to services.
1-3(Q)   Promote development in regions of the city that are not considered
infill areas.
1-3(R)   Provide processes for development decisions that balance the interests
of the City, property owners, residents, and developers and ensure
opportunities for input by affected parties.
1-4   APPLICABILITY
1-4(A)   This IDO applies to all private land in the City, and the owners and
occupants of all land in the City are required to comply with the regulations
of this IDO applicable to the zone district in which the property is located,
except as noted in this Section
14-16-1-4.
1-4(A)(1)   Development after the Effective Date of this IDO
All development after the effective date of this IDO is subject to IDO
standards.
1-4(A)(2)   Development prior to the Effective Date of this IDO
Development that existed prior to the IDO is subject to timeframes established
for compliance with IDO standards, including but not limited to standards for
nonconformance in Section
14-16-6-8 (Nonconformities), to be calculated from the effective date of this
IDO.
1-4(A)(3)   Approvals Granted prior to the IDO
See Section
14-16-1-10 (Transitions from Previous Regulations).
1-4(B)   This IDO is not applicable to federal activities or development on
federally-owned lands where either the federal government has retained from the
time of statehood or subsequently obtained the right to legislate in relation
to such lands or the State of New Mexico has ceded jurisdiction to legislate
back to the United States in relation to such lands. Private activities or
development for private purposes on such lands shall be subject to this IDO.
1-4(C)   This IDO is applicable to City activities or development on properties
owned or leased by the City, except that Section
14-16-6-4(U) shall not apply, and approvals of City activities or development
on properties owned or leased by the City are deemed final for appeal purposes.
1
1-4(D)   This IDO may not be applicable to state or governmental activities or
development on lands owned by a state or governmental or quasi-governmental
entity, to the extent the State of New Mexico has explicitly exempted them from
the operation of local land use regulations.
 
Notes
1 City Council, O-24-69, adopted January 6, 2025 and effective January 28,
  2025.
1-5   EFFECTIVE DATE
The effective date of this IDO shall be May 17, 2018.
1-6   OFFICIAL ZONING MAP
1-6(A)   The standards and regulations in this IDO applicable to specific zone
districts, Overlay zones, or designated City landmarks apply to the areas of
the city shown with those zone districts, Overlay zones, or City landmarks on
the Official Zoning Map.
1-6(B)   The Official Zoning Map of the City is incorporated herein, including
the zone districts and zone boundaries as established and shown on the Official
Zoning Map. The latest version of the Official Zoning Map as approved or
amended by City Council or the Environmental Planning Commission (EPC), to the
extent authorized by this IDO, is maintained in electronic form by the City
Planning Department.
1-7   COMPLIANCE REQUIRED
1-7(A)   GENERAL
1-7(A)(1)   No person shall develop or use any land, building, or structure
within the City in violation of this IDO, regulations authorized under this
IDO, including but not limited to those regulations in the Development Process
Manual (DPM), or the terms and conditions of permits or approvals issued under
this IDO.
1-7(A)(2)   Allowable uses conducted indoors shall be located within buildings
that meet the standards in Articles 14-1, 14-2, and 14-3 of ROA 1994 (Uniform
Administrative Code and Technical Codes, Fire Code, and Uniform Housing Code)
and other applicable technical codes adopted by the City. Allowable uses
conducted in buildings that are not in compliance with this requirement are a
violation of this IDO.
1-7(A)(3)   Other City regulations or State or federal laws may apply, even if
the IDO is silent on these other applicable laws or regulations. Violations of
these other applicable laws or regulations are not considered violations of
this IDO.
1-7(A)(4)   The Mayor is responsible for the promulgation of rules and
technical standards necessary to fulfill the intent of this IDO. Additional
rules and technical standards shall be published in the DPM. The terms and
provisions of the DPM, as amended, shall be enforceable to the same extent as
if incorporated into the text of this IDO.
1-7(B)   DEVELOPMENT ON APPROVED LOT REQUIRED
A building permit shall not be issued by the City unless the applicant presents
the following:
1-7(B)(1)   Evidence of a proper lot, constituted by 1 of the following:
1-7(B)(1)(a)   A print of the final subdivision plat as recorded with the
County Clerk and approved pursuant to this IDO or any predecessor ordinance
that applied at the time the lot was created, showing the subject property.
1-7(B)(1)(b)   Satisfactory evidence that this IDO is not applicable to the lot
upon which the building is to take place, either because the lot existed prior
to the enactment of this IDO or any predecessor ordinances or because the lot
is outside the jurisdiction of this IDO. If such evidence is provided,
exemption from the IDO regulations shall only apply to the establishment of the
lot and not any development on the lot.
1-7(B)(2)   Approval by the City Engineer that:
1-7(B)(2)(a)   The alteration of the natural topography, drainage pattern, and
perviousness of any lot resulting from the intended construction and prior or
planned site preparation complies with a previously submitted and approved
drainage report and/or plan, or that no drainage report or plan is required.
1-7(B)(2)(b)   The traffic flow and parking layout complies with a previously
submitted and approved Site Plan or Traffic Circulation Layout or that no Site
Plan or Traffic Circulation Layout is required.
1-7(B)(2)(c)   Adequate provision has been made for connection of the lot to
water and sanitary sewer lines if these are necessary for reasonable use of the
structure.
1-7(B)(2)(d)   Adequate easements and/or public right-of-way are in place for
infrastructure improvements required by the City Engineer.
1-7(B)(2)(e)   All infrastructure improvements, including but not limited to
sidewalks, curb and gutter, pavement, storm drain system, water and sewer, and
any other improvements required by the City Engineer, have been constructed
within easements or in the public right-of-way.
1-7(B)(3)   After approval and recording of a final subdivision plat with the
County Clerk and required improvements have been completed and accepted by the
City (where the construction of improvements was required), building permits
for structures within the subdivision may be issued. The Building Safety
Division of the City Planning Department may issue building permits prior to
completion of all improvements where sanitary sewer, water, and storm drainage
facilities have been completed and other improvements are to be commenced
within 6 months, but the City may require financial assurance for the
completion of those improvements pursuant to Subsection
14-16-6-4(P) (Required Improvements and Financial Assurance).
1-7(C)   COMPLETE APPLICATIONS
Applications shall be reviewed and decided based on conditions that exist and
requirements in effect when the application was accepted as complete by the
City Planning Department, including but not limited to any of the following:
1-7(C)(1)   Land uses that exist or have received a building permit on adjacent
properties.
1-7(C)(2)   Zoning in effect on properties adjacent to the subject property.
1-7(C)(3)   Any adopted standards or regulations that would apply to the
subject property.
1-7(C)(4)   Any relevant City processes or decision criteria that would apply
to the application.
1-7(D)   INCOMPLETE AND LATE APPLICATIONS
Any application that has not been accepted by the City Planning Department as
complete prior to the effective date of this IDO or any amendment to this IDO,
or that is submitted after that effective date, shall be processed, reviewed,
and decided based on the requirements of this IDO in effect when the
application is accepted as complete. See also Section
14-16-1-10 (Transitions from Previous Regulations).
1-8   RELATIONSHIP TO OTHER REGULATIONS
1-8(A)   Unless specified otherwise in this IDO, if two or more regulations in
this IDO conflict with each other, the more restrictive regulation shall
prevail, with the following exceptions.
1-8(A)(1)   When any regulation in
Part 14-16-3 (Overlay Zones) conflicts with any other regulation in this IDO,
the regulations of the Overlay zone prevail regardless of whether the Overlay
zone regulations are more or less restrictive than the other regulations. Where
Overlay zone regulations complement other IDO regulations, the Overlay zone
regulations apply in addition to the other IDO regulations unless specified
otherwise in this IDO. Where the Overlay zone is silent, other IDO regulations
apply.
1-8(A)(2)   When any regulation in Section
14-16-4-3 (Use-specific Standards) conflicts with any regulation in
Part 14-16-5 (Development Standards), the Use-specific Standard shall prevail
regardless of whether the Use-specific Standard is more or less restrictive
than the Development Standard. Where Use-specific Standards complement
Development Standards, the Use-specific Standards apply in addition to the
Development Standards unless specified otherwise in this IDO. Where Use-
specific Standards are silent, other Development Standards apply.
1-8(A)(3)   When any area-specific regulation (i.e., for Centers, Corridors, or
small areas) conflicts with any citywide regulation in
Part 14-16-2 (Zone Districts),
Part 14-16-4 (Use Regulations),
Part 14-16-5 (Development Standards), or
Part 14-16-6 (Administration and Enforcement), the area-specific regulations
prevail for development within the specified area regardless of whether the
area-specific regulation is more or less restrictive than the citywide
regulation. The area-specific regulations apply instead of, not in addition to,
the citywide regulations unless specified otherwise in this IDO. Where the
area-specific regulations are silent, the citywide regulations in
Part 14-16-4 (Use Regulations),
Part 14-16-5 (Development Standards), and
Part 14-16-6 (Administration and Enforcement) apply.
1-8(B)   If any regulation in this IDO refers to a regulation in another
section of this IDO, the applicability of the referencing section prevails over
the applicability in the referenced section unless specified otherwise in this
IDO.
1-8(C)   If any regulation in this IDO conflicts with Articles 14-1, 14-2, and
14-3 of ROA 1994 (Uniform Administrative Code and Technical Codes, Fire Code,
and Uniform Housing Code) or any other building safety codes, the provisions in
those codes shall prevail.
1-8(D)   If any regulation in this IDO conflicts with other applicable laws or
regulations of the City, or conflicts with applicable State or federal law, the
more restrictive provision shall prevail, unless the provisions of State or
federal law, as interpreted by the courts, prevent that result.
1-9   RELATIONSHIP TO PRIVATE AGREEMENTS AND COVENANTS
1-9(A)   This IDO applies to all land uses and development regardless of
whether it imposes a greater or lesser restriction on the development or use of
structures or land than a private agreement or restriction, but shall have no
impact on the applicability or enforceability of any private agreement or
restriction between the parties to that agreement or restriction, except as set
forth in Subsection (C) below.
1-9(B)   The City shall have no obligation to conform the terms or
applicability of this IDO to any private agreement or restriction. The City
shall have no obligation to enforce any private covenant or agreement unless it
is a party to the covenant or agreement; if the City is a party to the covenant
or agreement, enforcement shall be at the discretion of the City.
1-9(C)   The City may not approve any subdivision application for property on
which there are any deed restrictions, covenants, or binding agreements
prohibiting solar collectors from being installed on buildings or erected on
the project site.
1-10   TRANSITIONS FROM PREVIOUS REGULATIONS
1-10(A)   PRE-IDO APPROVALS
1-10(A)(1)   Any approvals granted prior to the effective date of this IDO
shall remain valid, subject to expiration pursuant to Subsection
14-16-6-4(W) (Expiration of Approvals) and to amendment pursuant to Subsection
14-16-6-4(X) (Amendments of Approvals) or
14-16-6-4(Y) (Amendments of Pre-IDO Approvals), as applicable, until they are
replaced with an approval subject to allowable uses and development standards
in this IDO pursuant to the procedures in
Part 14-16-6 (Administration and Enforcement).
1-10(A)(2)   Any use standards or development standards associated with any
pre-IDO approval or zoning designation establish rights and limitations and are
exclusive of and prevail over any other provision of this IDO. Where those
approvals are silent, provisions in this IDO shall apply, including but not
limited to the following:
1-10(A)(2)(a)   Subsection
14-16-4-1(E) (Previously Allowed Uses) for the continuity of conditional uses.
1-10(A)(2)(b)   Subsection
14-16-6-4(Y) (Amendments of Pre-IDO Approvals) for amending pre-IDO approvals.
1-10(A)(2)(c)   Section
14-16-6-8 (Nonconformities) for information about expansions when the use or
structure is nonconforming under this IDO.
1-10(A)(3)   Notwithstanding any process specified in the pre-IDO approval,
development is exclusively subject to the procedures and decision criteria
established in
Part 14-16-6 (Administration and Enforcement).
1-10(A)(4)   For former Special Use zones that were converted to the Planned
Development (PD) or Planned Community (PC) zone districts through adoption of
this IDO, any approval associated with the Special Use zone is considered the
required Site Plan - EPC or Framework Plan, respectively.
   1-10(A)(4)(a)   Any use standards or development standards associated with
pre-IDO approvals or zoning designations establish the rights and limitations
for the PD and PC zone districts and are exclusive of and prevail over any
other provision of this IDO.
   1-10(A)(4)(b)   For development standards and review and decision processes
governing Rank 3 Plans, see IDO Subsection
14-16-6-3(C) (Rank 3 Plans).
1-10(A)(5)   When referencing pre-IDO approvals, the most recent approval,
including any amendments, shall apply unless specified otherwise.
1-10(B)   REFERENCES IN PRE-IDO REGULATIONS AND APPROVALS
Any City regulations or approvals that refer to zone district designations that
existed prior to the effective date of this IDO will be deemed to refer to the
IDO zone district associated with the previous zone district as shown in
Table 2-2-1.
1-10(C)   PREVIOUS VIOLATIONS
Any violation of the City zoning, subdivision, or land development regulations
in effect prior to the effective date of this IDO will continue to be a
violation under this IDO, unless the development or other activity that was a
violation of the previous regulations is consistent with the requirements and
regulations of this IDO.
1-11   FIGURES AND ILLUSTRATIONS
Figures and illustrations in this IDO are for illustrative purposes only and
may not be to scale. In the event of a conflict between an illustration and the
text of this IDO, the text shall prevail.
1-12   DESIGNEES
When this IDO authorizes or requires an official or an appointed or elected
body of the City government to perform a task in the administration of this
IDO, the named official or appointed or elected body may designate another
individual or entity of the City, or an individual employed by the City and
under its control, to perform the task, unless the delegation of that task is
specifically prohibited by New Mexico law or the City Charter.
1-13   SEVERABILITY
If any section, division, sentence, clause, phrase, or part of this IDO is for
any reason declared unconstitutional or invalid, the validity of the remaining
portions of this IDO shall not be affected, since it is the express intent of
the City Council to pass each section, division, sentence, clause, phrase, and
every part of this Ordinance separately and independently of every other part.
Part 14-16-2   Zone Districts
2-1   ZONE DISTRICTS ESTABLISHED
2-1(A)   The zone districts listed in Sections
14-16-2-3 through
14-16-2-6 (Zone Districts) are hereby created. These zone districts shall have
the boundaries shown on the Official Zoning Map maintained in electronic form
by the City Planning Department and available on the City of Albuquerque
website. The zone districts are grouped into 4 types: Residential zone
districts, Mixed-use zone districts, Non-residential zone districts, and
Planned Development zone districts. In addition, Overlay zones are established
and defined in
Part 14-16-3.
2-1(B)   Portions of lots within the public right-of-way shall be designated as
Unclassified (UNCL) on the Official Zoning Map.
2-1(C)   See Subsection
14-16-1-10(B) for treatment of references to previous zone districts in other
documents.
2-2   ZONE DISTRICT SUMMARY TABLE
Table 2-2-1 shows the City of Albuquerque's previous zone districts
(established prior to May 17, 2018) in relation to IDO zone districts.
Table 2-2-1: Summary Table of Zone Districts
Previous Zone District IDO Zone District
Residential Zones      Residential Zone Districts
Table 2-2-1: Summary Table of Zone Districts
Previous Zone District                  IDO Zone District
Residential Zones                       Residential Zone Districts
RO-1     Rural Open                     Private land converted to R-A. City-
                                        owned Major Public Open Space converted
RO-20    Rural Open Agriculture         to NR-PO-B.

RA-1     Residential and Agricultural,
         semi-urban                     R-A      Residential Rural and
RA-2     Residential and Agricultural            Agricultural

R-1      Residential                             Residential Single-family
                                                 [Dimensions vary to protect
R-LT     Residential Limited Townhouses R-1      character]
                                                 R-LT converted to R-1A.

MH       Mobile Home Developments       R-MC     Residential Manufactured Home
                                                 Community
R-T      Residential Townhouses         R-T      Residential Townhouse
R-2      Residential Medium Density              Residential Multi-family Low
R-G      Residential Garden Apartment   R-ML     Density

R-3      Residential High Density       R-MH     Residential Multi-family High
                                                 Density
Office and Commercial Zones             Mixed-use Zone Districts
R-C      Residential/Commercial         MX-T     Mixed-use Transition
O-1      Office and Institutional
C-1      Neighborhood Commercial        MX-L     Mixed-use Low Intensity
                                                 Mixed-use Medium Intensity
                                                 East Side: all C-2.
                                        MX-M     West Side: PT areas, lots <5
                                                 acres, designated C-2 (SC)
C-2      Community Commercial                    shopping center sites.
                                                 Non-residential Commercial
                                                 West Side: outside of PT
                                        NR-C     areas, lots 5+ acres, not
                                                 designated C-2 (SC) shopping
                                                 center.
                                                 Mixed-use High Intensity
                                        MX-H     East Side: UC-AC-MS-PT-MT
                                                 areas.
C-3      Heavy Commercial                        West Side: PT areas.
                                                 Non-residential Commercial
                                        NR-C     All C-3 areas not listed above
                                                 (which converted to MX-H).
Form-based Zones                        Form-based Zone Districts and Sub-zones
                                                 Mixed-use Form-based Infill
                                        MX-FB-ID Development Sub-zone
         Downtown 2025 SDP Housing               Within Downtown Center.
         District                                Residential Multi-family High
                                        R-MH     Density
                                                 Outside of Downtown Center.
                                                 Mixed-use Form-based Flexible
         Downtown 2025 SDP Mixed-use    MX-FB-FX Development Sub-zone
         Corridor                                Within Downtown Center.
SU-3                                    MX-M     Mixed-use Medium Intensity
                                                 Outside of Downtown Center.
         Downtown 2025 SDP Arts &       MX-FB-UD Mixed-use Form-based Urban
         Entertainment                           Development Sub-zone
                                                 Mixed-use Form-based Urban
         Downtown 2025 SDP Government/  MX-FB-UD Development Sub-zone
         Financial/Hospitality District          Within Downtown Center.
                                        MX-H     Mixed-use High Intensity
                                                 Outside of Downtown Center.
         Downtown 2025 SDP Warehouse    MX-FB-UD Mixed-use Form-based Urban
         District                                Development Sub-zone
                                                 Mixed-use Form-based Zone
         Form-based Zones               MX-FB    District
                                                 Replaced SU-1 Form-based Zones
                                                 in the Zoning Code.
         Planned Neighborhood           MX-FB-ID Mixed-use Form-based Infill
         Development (PND)                       Development Sub-zone
SU-1     Mixed-use (MX)                 MX-FB-FX Mixed-use Form-based Flexible
                                                 Development Sub-zone
         Transit-oriented Development            Mixed-use Form-based Activity
         Community Activity Center      MX-FB-AC Center Sub-zone
         (TOD-COM)
         Transit-oriented Development            Mixed-use Form-based Urban
         Major Activity Center (TOD-    MX-FB-UD Development Sub-zone
         MAC)
Industrial Zones                        Non-residential Zone Districts
                                                 Mixed-use High Intensity
                                        MX-H     East Side: UC-AC-MS-PT-MT
                                                 areas.
C-3      Heavy Commercial                        West Side: PT areas.
                                                 Non-residential Commercial
                                        NR-C     All C-3 areas not listed above
                                                 (which converted to MX-H).
IP       Industrial Park                NR-BP    Non-residential Business Park
M-1      Light Manufacturing            NR-LM    Non-residential Light
                                                 Manufacturing
M-2      General Manufacturing          NR-GM    Non-residential General
                                                 Manufacturing
Special Use Zones                       Sensitive Use Zone Districts
                                                 Non-residential Sensitive Use
                                                 Zones converted to the closest
SU-1     Special Use                    NR-SU    match according to the highest
                                                 referenced zone or use in the
                                                 zone description or to PD.
SU-2     Special Neighborhood           SU-2 and SU-3 zones integrated into IDO
                                        zone districts, development standards,
                                        and procedures or as small areas in
                                        Overlay zones, Use-specific Standards,
                                        Development Standards, or
SU-3     Special Center                 Administration and Enforcement
         (other than Downtown)          standards. Zones converted to the
                                        closest match identified where Sector
                                        Development Plan referenced other
                                        zones.

P        Parking                        Converted to MX-L for paid parking lots
                                        or to match the zone of the primary use
P-R      Parking Reserve                the parking lot served.

                                                 Non-residential Parks & Open
                                                 Space
                                                 NR-PO-A City-owned or Managed
                                                 Parks
Various                                 NR-PO    NR-PO-B Major Public Open
                                                 Space
                                                 NR-PO-C Non-City Parks and
                                                 Open Space
                                                 NR-PO-D City BioPark
Planned Development Zones               Planned Development Zone Districts
SU-1 PRD Planned Residential
         Development                             Planned Development
                                                 If land use was clearly
                                        PD       identifiable as low-density
R-D      Residential & Related Uses              residential land use /
         Developing Area                         development pattern: R-1 or R-
                                                 T.

PC       Planned Community              PC       Planned Community
 
2-3   RESIDENTIAL ZONE DISTRICTS
2-3(A)   RESIDENTIAL - RURAL AND AGRICULTURAL ZONE DISTRICT (R-A)
2-3(A)(1)   Purpose
The purpose of the R-A zone district is to provide for lower density single-
family residential and limited agricultural uses, generally on lots of acre or
larger, as well as limited civic and institutional uses to serve the
surrounding residential area. Allowable uses are shown in
Table 4-2-1.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/b37713d5e40fc82694833f290401791f80be26ac/
IMAGES/0-0-0-6523.png]
2-3(A)(2)   Use and Development Standards
Table 2-3-1: R-A Zone District  Table 2-3-2: Other Applicable IDO Sections
Dimensional Standards Summary
See Table 5-1-1 for complete    Overlay Zones Part 14-16-3
Dimensional Standards
Table 2-3-1: R-A Zone District                   Table 2-3-2: Other Applicable
Dimensional Standards Summary                    IDO Sections
See Table 5-1-1 for complete                     Overlay Zones    Part 14-16-3
Dimensional Standards
Site Standards                                   Allowable Uses   14-16-4-2
A Lot size, minimum 10,890 sq. ft.               Use-specific     14-16-4-3
                                                 Standards
B Lot width,        75 ft.                       Dimensional      14-16-5-1
  minimum                                        Standards
C Usable open       N/A                          Site Design and  14-16-5-2
  space, minimum                                 Sensitive Lands
Setback Standards                                Access and       14-16-5-3
                                                 Connectivity
D Front, minimum    20 ft.                       Subdivision of   14-16-5-4
                                                 Land
E Side, minimum     10 ft.                       Parking and      14-16-5-5
                                                 Loading
                                                 Landscaping,
F Rear, minimum     25 ft.                       Buffering, and   14-16-5-6
                                                 Screening
Building Height                                  Walls and Fences 14-16-5-7
G Building height,  26 ft.                       Outdoor and Site 14-16-5-8
  maximum                                        Lighting
                                                 Neighborhood     14-16-5-9
                                                 Edges
                                                 Solar Access     14-16-5-10
                                                 Building Design  14-16-5-11
                                   Signs         14-16-5-12
                                   Operation and 14-16-5-13
                                   Maintenance
 
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/b37713d5e40fc82694833f290401791f80be26ac/
IMAGES/0-0-0-6525.png]
2-3(A)(3)   District Standards
None.
2-3(B)   RESIDENTIAL - SINGLE-FAMILY ZONE DISTRICT (R-1)
2-3(B)(1)   Purpose
The purpose of the R-1 zone district is to provide for neighborhoods of single-
family homes with a variety of lot sizes and dimensions. When applied in
developed areas, an additional purpose is to require that redevelopment
reinforce the established character of the existing neighborhood. Primary land
uses include single-family detached homes on individual lots, with limited
civic and institutional uses to serve the surrounding residential area.
Allowable uses are shown in
Table 4-2-1.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/b37713d5e40fc82694833f290401791f80be26ac/
IMAGES/0-0-0-6527.png]
2-3(B)(2)   Use and Development Standards
Table 2-3-3: R-1 Zone District  Table 2-3-4: Other Applicable IDO Sections
Dimensional Standards Summary
See Table 5-1-1 for complete    Overlay Zones Part 14-16-3
Dimensional Standards
Table 2-3-3: R-1 Zone District Dimensional Standards  Table 2-3-4: Other
Summary                                               Applicable IDO Sections
See Table 5-1-1 for complete Dimensional Standards    Overlay      Part 14-16-3
                                                      Zones
R-1 Sub-zone  A       B       C           D           Allowable    14-16-4-2
                                                      Uses
Site Standards                                        Use-specific 14-16-4-3
                                                      Standards
                                                      Dimensional  14-16-5-1
                                                      Standards
A Lot size,   3,500   5,000   7,000       10,000 sq.  Site Design
  minimum     sq. ft. sq. ft. sq. ft.     ft.         and          14-16-5-2
                                                      Sensitive
                                                      Lands
B Lot width,  25 ft.  35 ft.  50 ft.      70 ft.      Access and   14-16-5-3
  minimum                                             Connectivity
  Usable open                                         Subdivision
C space,      N/A     N/A     N/A         N/A         of Land      14-16-5-4
  minimum
Setback Standards                                     Parking and  14-16-5-5
                                                      Loading
D Front,      10 ft.  15 ft.              20 ft.
  minimum                                             Landscaping,
                                                      Buffering,   14-16-5-6
                                                      and
  Side,       Interior: 5 ft.                         Screening
E minimum     Street side of corner lots: 10 ft.
              10 ft.                                  Walls and
                                                      Fences       14-16-5-7

  Rear,                                               Outdoor and
F minimum     10 ft.  15 ft.                          Site         14-16-5-8
                                                      Lighting
Building Height                                       Neighborhood 14-16-5-9
                                                      Edges
  Building
G height,     26 ft.                                  Solar Access 14-16-5-10
  maximum
                                                      Building     14-16-5-11
                                                      Design
                                                      Signs        14-16-5-12
                                                      Operation
                                                      and          14-16-5-13
                                                      Maintenance
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/b37713d5e40fc82694833f290401791f80be26ac/
IMAGES/0-0-0-6529.png]
2-3(B)(3)   District Standards
None
2-3(C)   RESIDENTIAL - MANUFACTURED HOME COMMUNITY ZONE DISTRICT (R-MC)
2-3(C)(1)   Purpose
The purpose of the R-MC zone district is to accommodate manufactured home
communities and to require those communities to incorporate high-quality
planning and design. Allowable uses in the R-MC zone district are shown in
Table 4-2-1.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/b37713d5e40fc82694833f290401791f80be26ac/
IMAGES/0-0-0-6531.png]
2-3(C)(2)   Use and Development Standards
Table 2-3-5: R-MC Zone District  Table 2-3-6: Other Applicable IDO Sections
Dimensional Standards Summary
See Table 5-1-1 for complete     Overlay Zones Part 14-16-3
Dimensional Standards
Table 2-3-5: R-MC Zone District             Table 2-3-6: Other Applicable IDO
Dimensional Standards Summary               Sections
See Table 5-1-1 for complete Dimensional    Overlay Zones          Part 14-16-3
Standards
Site Standards                              Allowable Uses         14-16-4-2
A Lot size, minimum  2,500 sq. ft. / space  Use-specific Standards 14-16-4-3
B Lot width, minimum 40 ft. / space         Dimensional Standards  14-16-5-1
C Usable open space, 400 sq. ft. / space    Site Design and        14-16-5-2
  minimum                                   Sensitive Lands
Setback Standards                           Access and             14-16-5-3
                                            Connectivity
D Front, minimum     15 ft.                 Subdivision of Land    14-16-5-4
                     Interior: 5 ft.        Parking and Loading    14-16-5-5
E Side, minimum      Street side of corner  Landscaping,
                     lots:                  Buffering, and         14-16-5-6
                     10 ft.                 Screening
F Rear, minimum      10 ft.                 Walls and Fences       14-16-5-7
Building Height                             Outdoor and Site       14-16-5-8
                                            Lighting
G Building height,   26 ft.                 Neighborhood Edges     14-16-5-9
  maximum
                                            Solar Access           14-16-5-10
                                            Building Design        14-16-5-11
                                            Signs                  14-16-5-12
                                            Operation and          14-16-5-13
                                            Maintenance
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/b37713d5e40fc82694833f290401791f80be26ac/
IMAGES/0-0-0-6533.png]
2-3(C)(3)   District Standards
2-3(C)(3)(a)   Manufactured and mobile homes that are not installed on a
permanent foundation shall be skirted with materials similar in color, texture,
and appearance to the siding of the manufactured or mobile home.
2-3(C)(3)(b)   Anchorages and tie-downs constructed to comply with Articles 14-
1 and 14-3 of ROA 1994 (Uniform Administrative Code and Technical Codes and
Uniform Housing Code) shall be provided on each manufactured home space or lot
to prevent overturning or uplift of the manufactured home.
2-3(C)(3)(c)   Motor vehicles that are not parked inside a building shall be
operative and not partially or completely dismantled.
2-3(C)(3)(d)   Carports, patios, decks, and accessory buildings may be located
in side and rear setback areas of individual manufactured or mobile home sites.
In such development, accessory buildings may not be located in any setbacks,
usable open space, or landscape buffers required for the manufactured home
community.
2-3(C)(3)(e)   Storage sheds, accessory buildings, and carports shall be
constructed of suitable weather-resistant materials.
2-3(C)(3)(f)   All yard areas and other open spaces not otherwise paved or
occupied by structures shall be landscaped and maintained.
2-3(C)(3)(g)   In cases where the owner of a manufactured home community
intends to change the use or rezone the property to a zone district other than
R-MC, which will result in expiration or termination of resident occupancy, the
owner shall mail each resident written notice of their intent not less than 18
months prior to the rezoning of the property.
2-3(C)(3)(h)   See Subsection
14-16-6-8(C)(7) for nonconformity provisions for mobile home dwellings and
developments.?
2-3(D)   RESIDENTIAL - TOWNHOUSE ZONE DISTRICT (R-T)
2-3(D)(1)   Purpose
The purpose of the R-T zone district is to accommodate a mix of single-family,
two-family, and townhouse uses, as well as limited civic and institutional uses
to serve the surrounding residential area. Other allowable uses are shown in
Table 4-2-1.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/b37713d5e40fc82694833f290401791f80be26ac/
IMAGES/0-0-0-6535.png]
2-3(D)(2)   Use and Development Standards
Table 2-3-7: R-T Zone District Dimensional        Table 2-3-8: Other Applicable
Standards Summary                                 IDO Sections
See Table 5-1-1 for complete Dimensional          Overlay Zones  Part 14-16-3
Standards
                 Single- or Two- Townhouse or     Allowable Uses 14-16-4-2
Development Type family Detached Other Allowable
                                 Use
Table 2-3-7: R-T Zone District Dimensional         Table 2-3-8: Other
Standards Summary                                  Applicable IDO Sections
See Table 5-1-1 for complete Dimensional           Overlay Zones   Part 14-16-3
Standards
                                                   Allowable Uses  14-16-4-2
                  Single- or Two- Townhouse or     Use-specific    14-16-4-3
Development Type  family Detached Other Allowable  Standards
                                  Use              Dimensional     14-16-5-1
                                                   Standards
Site Standards                                     Site Design and 14-16-5-2
                                                   Sensitive Lands
A Lot size,       3,500 sq. ft.   2,200 sq. ft.    Access and      14-16-5-3
  minimum                                          Connectivity
B Lot width,      35 ft.          22 ft.           Subdivision of  14-16-5-4
  minimum                                          Land
                                                   Parking and     14-16-5-5
  Usable open                                      Loading
C space, minimum  N/A                              Landscaping,
                                                   Buffering, and  14-16-5-6
                                                   Screening
Setback Standards                                  Walls and       14-16-5-7
                                                   Fences
D Front, minimum  10 ft.                           Outdoor and     14-16-5-8
                                                   Site Lighting
                  Interior: 5 ft. / Street side    Neighborhood    14-16-5-9
E Side, minimum   of corner lots:                  Edges
                  10 ft.                           Solar Access    14-16-5-10
                  UC-MS-PT: 0 ft.
F Rear, minimum   15 ft.                           Building Design 14-16-5-11
Building Height                                    Signs           14-16-5-12
G Building        26 ft.                           Operation and   14-16-5-13
  height, maximum                                  Maintenance
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/b37713d5e40fc82694833f290401791f80be26ac/
IMAGES/0-0-0-6537.png]
2-3(D)(3)   District Standards
None.
2-3(E)   RESIDENTIAL - MULTI-FAMILY LOW DENSITY ZONE DISTRICT (R-ML)
2-3(E)(1)   Purpose
The purpose of the R-ML zone district is to provide for a variety of low- to
medium-density housing options. The primary land uses are townhouses and small-
scale multi-family development, as well as civic and institutional uses to
serve the surrounding residential area. Allowable uses are shown in
Table 4-2-1.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/b37713d5e40fc82694833f290401791f80be26ac/
IMAGES/0-0-0-6539.png]
2-3(E)(2)   Use and Development Standards
Table 2-3-9: R-ML Zone District Dimensional    Table 2-3-10: Other Applicable
Standards Summary                              IDO Sections
See Table 5-1-1 for complete Dimensional       Overlay Zones  Part 14-16-3
Standards
Development Single- or Townhouse or    Multi-  Allowable Uses 14-16-4-2
Type        Two-family other allowable family
            Detached   use
Table 2-3-9: R-ML Zone District Dimensional          Table 2-3-10: Other
Standards Summary                                    Applicable IDO Sections
See Table 5-1-1 for complete Dimensional Standards   Overlay Zones Part 14-16-3
                                                     Allowable     14-16-4-2
                                                     Uses
                         Townhouse or                Use-specific  14-16-4-3
Development   Single- or other        Multi-         Standards
Type          Two-family allowable    family         Dimensional   14-16-5-1
              Detached   use                         Standards
                                                     Site Design
                                                     and Sensitive 14-16-5-2
                                                     Lands
Site Standards                                       Access and    14-16-5-3
                                                     Connectivity
A Lot size,   3,500 sq.  2,200 sq.    5,000 sq. ft.  Subdivision   14-16-5-4
  minimum     ft.        ft.                         of Land
B Lot width,  35 ft.     22 ft.       50 ft.         Parking and   14-16-5-5
  minimum                                            Loading
               1 BR: 225 sq. ft. / unit             Landscaping,
  Usable open 2 BR:285 sq. ft. / unit                Buffering,    14-16-5-6
C space,       3 BR: 350 sq. ft. / unit             and Screening
  minimum     UC-MS-PT: 50% reduction                Walls and     14-16-5-7
                                                     Fences
Setback Standards                                    Outdoor and   14-16-5-8
                                                     Site Lighting
D Front,      15 ft.                                 Neighborhood  14-16-5-9
  minimum                                            Edges
  Side,       Interior: 5 ft. / Street side of       Solar Access  14-16-5-10
E minimum     corner lots:                           Building      14-16-5-11
              10 ft. / UC-MS-PT: 0 ft.               Design
F Rear,       15 ft.                                 Signs         14-16-5-12
  minimum
Building Height                                      Operation and 14-16-5-13
                                                     Maintenance
  Building
G height,     38 ft.
  maximum
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/b37713d5e40fc82694833f290401791f80be26ac/
IMAGES/0-0-0-6541.png]
2-3(E)(3)   District Standards
None.
2-3(F)   RESIDENTIAL - MULTI-FAMILY HIGH DENSITY ZONE DISTRICT (R-MH)
2-3(F)(1)   Purpose
The purpose of the R-MH zone district is to promote and encourage the
development of high-density attached and multi-family housing, with taller,
multi-story buildings encouraged in Centers and Corridors in areas close to
major streets and public transit facilities. The primary land use is multi-
family development, with limited civic and institutional uses to serve the
surrounding residential area. Other allowable uses are shown in
Table 4-2-1.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/b37713d5e40fc82694833f290401791f80be26ac/
IMAGES/0-0-0-6543.png]
2-3(F)(2)   Use and Development Standards
Table 2-3-11: R-MH Zone District     Table 2-3-12: Other Applicable IDO
Dimensional Standards Summary        Sections
See Table 5-1-1 for complete         Overlay Zones  Part 14-16-3
Dimensional Standards
Development General UC-MS-PT         Allowable Uses 14-16-4-2
Location
Table 2-3-11: R-MH Zone District Dimensional                 Table 2-3-12:
Standards Summary                                            Other Applicable
                                                             IDO Sections
See Table 5-1-1 for complete Dimensional                     Overlay      Part
Standards                                                    Zones        14-
                                                                          16-3
Development                                                  Allowable    14-
Location    General                    UC-MS-PT              Uses         16-4-
                                                                          2
                                                             Use-specific 14-
Site Standards                                               Standards    16-4-
                                                                          3
  Lot size,                                                  Dimensional  14-
A minimum   10,000 sq. ft.                                   Standards    16-5-
                                                                          1
  Lot                                                        Site Design  14-
B width,    150 ft.                    100 ft.               and          16-5-
  minimum                                                    Sensitive    2
                                                             Lands
                                                             Access and   14-
                                                             Connectivity 16-5-
  Usable                                                                  3
  open       1 BR: 225 sq. ft. / unit 50%                   Subdivision  14-
C space,    2 BR:285 sq. ft. / unit    reduction             of Land      16-5-
  minimum    3 BR: 350 sq. ft. / unit                                    4
                                                             Parking and  14-
                                                             Loading      16-5-
                                                                          5
Setback Standards                                            Landscaping,
                                                             Buffering,   14-
                                                             and          16-5-
  Front,                               0 ft. /               Screening    6
D minimum / 15 ft. / N/A               10 ft.
  maximum                                                    Walls and    14-
                                                             Fences       16-5-
                                                                          7
                                                             Outdoor and  14-
  Side,     Interior: 5 ft.; Street    0 ft. /               Site         16-5-
E minimum / side of corner lots: 10    Street                Lighting     8
  maximum   ft.                        side: 15              Neighborhood 14-
                                       ft.                   Edges        16-5-
                                                                          9
  Rear,                                                                   14-
F minimum   15 ft.                                           Solar Access 16-5-
                                                                          10
                                                             Building     14-
Building Height                                              Design       16-5-
                                                                          11
                                                                          14-
  Building  48 ft.                     65 ft.                Signs        16-5-
G height,                                                                 12
  maximum                                        Operation                14-
            >100 ft. from all lot lines: N/A     and                      16-5-
                                                 Maintenance              13
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/b37713d5e40fc82694833f290401791f80be26ac/
IMAGES/0-0-0-6545.png]
2-3(F)(3)   District Standards
Non-residential conditional uses are limited to types and amounts that are
justified to serve residents in the R-MH zone district.
 2-4   MIXED-USE ZONE DISTRICTS
2-4(A)   MIXED-USE - TRANSITION ZONE DISTRICT (MX-T)
2-4(A)(1)   Purpose
The purpose of the MX-T zone district is to provide a transition between
residential neighborhoods and more intense commercial areas. Primary land uses
include a range of low-density residential, small-scale multi-family, office,
institutional, and pedestrian-oriented commercial uses. Allowable uses are
shown in
Table 4-2-1.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/b37713d5e40fc82694833f290401791f80be26ac/
IMAGES/0-0-0-6547.png]
2-4(A)(2)   Use and Development Standards
Table 2-4-1: MX-T Zone District Dimensional  Table 2-4-2: Other Applicable IDO
Standards Summary                            Sections
See Table 5-1-2 for complete Dimensional     Overlay Zones  Part 14-16-3
Standards
Development Location General UC-MS-PT        Allowable Uses 14-16-4-2
Table 2-4-1: MX-T Zone District Dimensional          Table 2-4-2: Other
Standards Summary                                    Applicable IDO Sections
See Table 5-1-2 for complete Dimensional Standards   Overlay Zones Part 14-16-3
Development   General                  UC-MS-PT      Allowable     14-16-4-2
Location                                             Uses
Site Standards                                       Use-specific  14-16-4-3
                                                     Standards
                                                     Dimensional   14-16-5-1
                                                     Standards
  Usable open  1 BR: 225 sq. ft./unit 50%           Site Design
A space,      2 BR: 285 sq. ft./unit   reduction     and Sensitive 14-16-5-2
  minimum      3 BR: 350 sq. ft./unit               Lands
                                                     Access and    14-16-5-3
                                                     Connectivity
Setback Standards                                    Subdivision   14-16-5-4
                                                     of Land
  Front,                               0 ft. / 15    Parking and   14-16-5-5
B minimum /   5 ft. / N/A              ft.           Loading
  maximum                                            Landscaping,
                                                     Buffering,    14-16-5-6
  Side,                                0 ft. /       and Screening
C minimum /   Interior: 0 ft.;         Street side:
  maximum     Street side: 5 ft. / N/A 15 ft.        Walls and
                                                     Fences        14-16-5-7

D Rear,       15 ft.                   Street or     Outdoor and   14-16-5-8
  minimum                              alley: 0 ft.  Site Lighting
Building Height                                      Neighborhood  14-16-5-9
                                                     Edges
  Building                                           Solar Access  14-16-5-10
E height,     30 ft.                                 Building      14-16-5-11
  maximum                                            Design
                                                     Signs         14-16-5-12
                                                     Operation and 14-16-5-13
                                                     Maintenance
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/b37713d5e40fc82694833f290401791f80be26ac/
IMAGES/0-0-0-6549.png]
2-4(A)(3)   District Standards
None.
2-4(B)   MIXED-USE - LOW INTENSITY ZONE DISTRICT (MX-L)
2-4(B)(1)   Purpose
The purpose of the MX-L zone district is to provide for neighborhood-scale
convenience shopping needs, primarily at intersections of collector streets.
Primary land uses include non-destination retail and commercial uses, as well
as townhouses, low-density multi-family, and civic and institutional uses to
serve the surrounding area, with taller, multi-story buildings encouraged in
Centers and Corridors. Other allowable uses are shown in
Table 4-2-1.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/b37713d5e40fc82694833f290401791f80be26ac/
IMAGES/0-0-0-6553.png]
2-4(B)(2)   Use and Development Standards
Table 2-4-3: MX-L Zone District Dimensional  Table 2-4-4: Other Applicable IDO
Standards Summary                            Sections
See Table 5-1-2 for complete Dimensional     Overlay Zones  Part 14-16-3
Standards
Development Location General UC-MS-PT        Allowable Uses 14-16-4-2
Table 2-4-3: MX-L Zone District Dimensional          Table 2-4-4: Other
Standards Summary                                    Applicable IDO Sections
See Table 5-1-2 for complete Dimensional Standards   Overlay Zones Part 14-16-3
Development   General                  UC-MS-PT      Allowable     14-16-4-2
Location                                             Uses
Site Standards                                       Use-specific  14-16-4-3
                                                     Standards
                                                     Dimensional   14-16-5-1
                                                     Standards
  Usable open  1 BR: 225 sq. ft./unit 50%           Site Design
A space,      2 BR: 285 sq. ft./unit   reduction     and Sensitive 14-16-5-2
  minimum      3 BR: 350 sq. ft./unit               Lands
                                                     Access and    14-16-5-3
                                                     Connectivity
Setback Standards                                    Subdivision   14-16-5-4
                                                     of Land
  Front,                               0 ft. / 15    Parking and   14-16-5-5
B minimum /   5 ft. / N/A              ft.           Loading
  maximum                                            Landscaping,
                                                     Buffering,    14-16-5-6
  Side,                                0 ft. /       and Screening
C minimum /   Interior: 0 ft.;         Street side:
  maximum     Street side: 5 ft. / N/A 15 ft.        Walls and
                                                     Fences        14-16-5-7

D Rear,       15 ft.                   Street or     Outdoor and   14-16-5-8
  minimum                              alley: 0 ft.  Site Lighting
Building Height                                      Neighborhood  14-16-5-9
                                                     Edges
  Building                                           Solar Access  14-16-5-10
E height,     38 ft.                   55 ft.        Building      14-16-5-11
  maximum                                            Design
                                                     Signs         14-16-5-12
                                                     Operation and 14-16-5-13
                                                     Maintenance
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/b37713d5e40fc82694833f290401791f80be26ac/
IMAGES/0-0-0-6553.png]
2-4(B)(3)   District Standards
2-4(C)   MIXED-USE - MEDIUM INTENSITY ZONE DISTRICT (MX-M)
2-4(C)(1)   Purpose
The purpose of the MX-M zone district is to provide for a wide array of
moderate-intensity retail, commercial, institutional and moderate-density
residential uses, with taller, multi-story buildings encouraged in Centers and
Corridors. Allowable uses are shown in
Table 4-2-1.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/b37713d5e40fc82694833f290401791f80be26ac/
IMAGES/0-0-0-6555.png]
2-4(C)(2)   Use and Development Standards
Table 2-4-5: MX-M Zone District Dimensional  Table 2-4-6: Other Applicable IDO
Standards Summary                            Sections
See Table 5-1-2 for complete Dimensional     Overlay Zones  Part 14-16-3
Standards
Development Location General UC-MS-PT        Allowable Uses 14-16-4-2
Table 2-4-5: MX-M Zone District Dimensional             Table 2-4-6: Other
Standards Summary                                       Applicable IDO Sections
See Table 5-1-2 for complete Dimensional                Overlay      Part 14-
Standards                                               Zones        16-3
Development General                  UC-MS-PT           Allowable    14-16-4-2
Location                                                Uses
Site Standards                                          Use-specific 14-16-4-3
                                                        Standards
                                                        Dimensional  14-16-5-1
                                                        Standards
  Usable     1 BR: 225 sq. ft./unit                    Site Design
A open      2 BR: 285 sq. ft./unit   50%                and          14-16-5-2
  space,     3 BR: 350 sq. ft./unit reduction          Sensitive
  minimum                                               Lands
                                                        Access and   14-16-5-3
                                                        Connectivity
Setback Standards                                       Subdivision  14-16-5-4
                                                        of Land
  Front,                             0 ft. /            Parking and  14-16-5-5
B minimum / 5 ft. / N/A              15 ft.             Loading
  maximum                                               Landscaping,
                                                        Buffering,
                                                        and          14-16-5-6
  Side,                              0 ft. /            Screening
C minimum / Interior: 0 ft.;         Street
  maximum   Street side: 5 ft. / N/A side: 15
                                     ft.                Walls and    14-16-5-7
                                                        Fences

  Rear,                              Street or          Outdoor and
D minimum   15 ft.                   alley: 0           Site         14-16-5-8
                                     ft.                Lighting
Building Height                                         Neighborhood 14-16-5-9
                                                        Edges
  Building  48 ft.                   65 ft.             Solar Access 14-16-5-10
E height,   >100 ft. from all lot lines: N/A   Building              14-16-5-11
  maximum                                      Design
                                                        Signs        14-16-5-12
                                                        Operation
                                                        and          14-16-5-13
                                                        Maintenance
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/b37713d5e40fc82694833f290401791f80be26ac/
IMAGES/0-0-0-6557.png]
2-4(C)(3)   District Standards
None.
2-4(D)   MIXED-USE - HIGH INTENSITY ZONE DISTRICT (MX-H)
2-4(D)(1)   Purpose
The purpose of the MX-H zone district is to provide for large-scale destination
retail and high-intensity commercial, residential, light industrial, and
institutional uses, as well as high-density residential uses, particularly
along Transit Corridors and in Urban Centers. The MX-H zone district is
intended to allow higher-density infill development in appropriate locations.
Allowable uses are shown in
Table 4-2-1.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/b37713d5e40fc82694833f290401791f80be26ac/
IMAGES/0-0-0-6559.png]
2-4(D)(2)   Use and Development Standards
Table 2-4-7: MX-H Zone District Dimensional  Table 2-4-8: Other Applicable IDO
Standards Summary                            Sections
See Table 5-1-2 for complete Dimensional     Overlay Zones  Part 14-16-3
Standards
Development Location General UC-MS-PT        Allowable Uses 14-16-4-2
Table 2-4-7: MX-H Zone District Dimensional             Table 2-4-8: Other
Standards Summary                                       Applicable IDO Sections
See Table 5-1-2 for complete Dimensional                Overlay      Part 14-
Standards                                               Zones        16-3
Development General                  UC-MS-PT           Allowable    14-16-4-2
Location                                                Uses
Site Standards                                          Use-specific 14-16-4-3
                                                        Standards
                                                        Dimensional  14-16-5-1
                                                        Standards
  Usable     1 BR: 225 sq. ft./unit                    Site Design
A open      2 BR: 285 sq. ft./unit   50%                and          14-16-5-2
  space,     3 BR: 350 sq. ft./unit reduction          Sensitive
  minimum                                               Lands
                                                        Access and   14-16-5-3
                                                        Connectivity
Setback Standards                                       Subdivision  14-16-5-4
                                                        of Land
  Front,                             0 ft. /            Parking and  14-16-5-5
B minimum / 5 ft. / N/A              15 ft.             Loading
  maximum                                               Landscaping,
                                                        Buffering,
                                                        and          14-16-5-6
  Side,                              0 ft. /            Screening
C minimum / Interior: 0 ft.;         Street
  maximum   Street side: 5 ft. / N/A side: 15
                                     ft.                Walls and    14-16-5-7
                                                        Fences

  Rear,                              Street or          Outdoor and
D minimum   15 ft.                   alley: 0           Site         14-16-5-8
                                     ft.                Lighting
Building Height                                         Neighborhood 14-16-5-9
                                                        Edges
  Building  68 ft.                   75 ft.             Solar Access 14-16-5-10
E height,   >100 ft. from all lot lines: N/A   Building              14-16-5-11
  maximum                                      Design
                                                        Signs        14-16-5-12
                                                        Operation
                                                        and          14-16-5-13
                                                        Maintenance
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/b37713d5e40fc82694833f290401791f80be26ac/
IMAGES/0-0-0-6561.png]
2-4(D)(3)   District Standards
None.
2-4(E)   MIXED-USE - FORM-BASED ZONE DISTRICT (MX-FB)
2-4(E)(1)   Purpose
The purpose of the MX-FB zone district is to allow a wide range of residential,
commercial, and institutional uses subject to form-based zoning controls to
ensure that the buildings they occupy establish or reinforce a well-defined
urban character. Sub-zones within this zone district contain form-based
controls tailored to the distinct character of each area where the district is
applied. Allowable and prohibited uses are specified for each sub-zone in
Subsection
14-16-2-4(E)(3)(c).
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/b37713d5e40fc82694833f290401791f80be26ac/
IMAGES/0-0-0-6563.png]
2-4(E)(2)   Other Standards
Form-based controls in this Subsection
14-16-2-4(E) prevail over other IDO standards. Where this Subsection does not
specify a different standard, applicable IDO standards in other Sections apply.
Table 2-4-9: Other Applicable IDO Sections
Table 2-4-9: Other Applicable IDO Sections
Overlay Zones                         Part 14-16-3
Allowable Uses[1]                     14-16-4-2
Use-specific Standards                14-16-4-3
Dimensional Standards                 14-16-5-1
Site Design and Sensitive Lands       14-16-5-2
Access and Connectivity               14-16-5-3
Subdivision of Land                   14-16-5-4
Parking and Loading                   14-16-5-5
Landscaping, Buffering, and Screening 14-16-5-6
Walls and Fences                      14-16-5-7
Outdoor and Site Lighting             14-16-5-8
Neighborhood Edges                    14-16-5-9
Solar Access                          14-16-5-10
Building Design                       14-16-5-11
Signs                                 14-16-5-12
Operation and Maintenance             14-16-5-13
[1] Allowable Uses only apply in the FB-MX-ID sub-zone.
 
2-4(E)(3)   District Standards
2-4(E)(3)(a)   Eligibility for Rezoning to MX-FB
A Site Plan - EPC that specifies site and development standards shall be
reviewed and decided by the EPC in conjunction with review and decision of a
zone change request pursuant to Subsection
14-16-6-7(G) (Zoning Map Amendment - EPC) or Subsection
14-16-6-7(H) (Zoning Map Amendment - Council).
2-4(E)(3)(b)   Form-based Sub-zones
The MX-FB zone district includes the following 4 sub-zones, each of which has
uses and development standards specified in this Subsection
14-16-2-4(E)(3).
   1.   Form-based Infill Development (MX-FB-ID)
      The purpose of the MX-FB-ID sub-zone is to encourage context-sensitive
development on sites in developed areas along streets designated as collectors
or arterials. The MX-FB-ID sub-zone provides opportunities to introduce
neighborhood-scale uses to serve nearby residents.
   2.   Form-based Flexible Development (MX-FB-FX)
      The purpose of the MX-FB-FX sub-zone is to support pedestrian-scale
mixed-use development that is integral to an area designated as an Area of
Change in the ABC Comp Plan, as amended.
   3.   Form-based Activity Center (MX-FB-AC)
      The purpose of the MX-FB-AC sub-zone is to provide community-scale non-
residential and high-density residential development in areas designated as
Activity Centers in the ABC Comp Plan, as amended. Buildings are generally
smaller than in the MX-FB-UD sub-zone.
   4.   Form-based Urban Development (MX-FB-UD)
      The purpose of the MX-FB-UD sub-zone is to allow a mix of high-density
residential and high-intensity non-residential development in areas designated
as Downtown or Urban Center in the ABC Comp Plan, as amended. The MX-FB-UD sub-
zone is intended to create a compact, pedestrian-oriented urban form with uses
that are served by and support transit.
2-4(E)(3)(c)   Use Regulations
   1.   The allowable and prohibited land uses in each sub-zone are specified
in
Table 2-4-10.
   2.   All allowable uses shall be conducted within a fully enclosed portion
of a building, with the following exceptions:
      a.   Any use in the Telecommunications, Towers, and Utilities category in
Table 4-2-1.
      b.   Community garden.
      c.   Farmers' market.
      d.   Garden.
      e.   Mobile vending cart.
      f.   Mobile food truck.
      g.   Mobile food truck court.
      h.   Outdoor dining area.
   3.   All allowable uses must follow any other applicable Use-specific
Standards in Section
14-16-4-3.
Table 2-4-10: Allowable and Prohibited Uses in the MX-FB Sub-zones
 MX-FB-ID MX-FB-FX MX-FB-AC MX-FB-UD
Table 2-4-10: Allowable and Prohibited Uses in the MX-FB Sub-zones
                MX-FB-ID                   MX-FB-FX MX-FB-AC MX-FB-UD
                Per MX-T allowable uses in
Allowable Uses  Table 4-2-1, unless listed All uses unless listed as prohibited
                as prohibited
                Any use that requires NR-SU zoning
                Adult Entertainment
                Adult Retail
Prohibited Uses Paid Parking Lot
                Heavy Manufacturing
                Special Manufacturing
                Drive-through or drive-up facility
 
2-4(E)(3)(d)   Dimensional Standards
Table 2-4-11: Dimensional Standards in the MX-FB Sub-zones
Sub-zone MX-FB-ID MX-FB-FX MX-FB-AC MX-FB-UD
Table 2-4-11: Dimensional Standards in the MX-FB Sub-zones
Sub-zone MX-FB-ID                         MX-FB-FX                         MX-FB-AC                         MX-FB-UD
Site Standards
Usable   15%                              10%
open
space,   UC-MS-PT: 50% reduction                                           5%
minimum
[1][2]
Setback Standards
Front,   0 ft.
minimum
Front,   15 ft.                           10 ft.                           15 ft.                           10 ft.
maximum  60% of front property line width must be occupied by the primary building constructed within the required front setback area. On a
         corner lot, the required 60% must begin at the corner.
Side,    0 ft.
minimum
Side,    Interior: N/A                                                                                      Interior: N/A
maximum  Street side of corner lots: 15 ft.                                                                 Street side of corner lots: 10
                                                                                                            ft.
Rear,    15 ft.                           10 ft.                           5 ft.                            0 ft.
minimum  0 feet where rear lot line abuts a street or alley.
Building Height
Building
height,  N/A                                                                                                30 ft.
minimum
Ground
floor    8 ft., urban residential building frontage
height,  10 ft., all other building frontage types
minimum
         <20 ft. from front property      <20 ft. from front property line: 45 ft.
Building line: 35 ft.
height,                                    20 ft. from front lot line: 65  20 ft. from front lot line: 75  20 ft. from front lot line: N/A
maximum   20 ft. from front lot line: 55 ft.                              ft.
         ft.                              UC-MS-PT: 12 ft. Structured Parking Bonus[3]
                                          UC-MS-PT: 12 ft. Workforce Housing Bonus[3]
[1] For the MX-FB zone district only, usable open space is measured as a percentage of gross floor area of multi-family dwelling units.
[2] Usable open space is not required for properties located within 1,500 feet in any direction of any NR-PO-A or NR-PO-B sub-zone.
[3] This bonus does not apply within 20 ft. of the front lot line.
 
2-4(E)(3)(e)   Building Frontages
   1.   Building Frontage Types
      a.   Each ground floor street-facing fa ade shall have at least 1 primary
building frontage type pursuant to
Table 2-4-12.
      b.   All building frontage types may be combined.
      c.   Forecourts, arcades, and walled courts are frontage types allowed in
all sub-zones but only as accessory to a storefront, urban residential, or
warehouse building frontage.?
Table 2-4-12: Primary Building Frontage Types in the MX-FB Sub-zones
Sub-zone MX-FB-ID MX-FB-FX MX-FB-AC MX-FB-UD
Table 2-4-12: Primary Building Frontage Types in the MX-FB Sub-zones
Sub-zone          MX-FB-ID MX-FB-FX MX-FB-AC MX-FB-UD
Frontage Type
Porch             X        X
Storefront        X        X        X        X
Stoop             X        X        X        X
Urban residential X        X        X        X
Warehouse                           X        X
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/b37713d5e40fc82694833f290401791f80be26ac/
IMAGES/0-0-0-6565.png]
   2.   Porches and Stoops
      a.   A stoop shall be a minimum of 5 feet deep.
      b.   A porch shall be a minimum of 5 feet deep and 8 feet wide.
      c.   Ramps may be used in place of steps.
   3.   Arcades
      Arcades shall be a minimum of 8 feet wide and a minimum of 8 feet deep.
2-4(E)(3)(f)   Fa ade Design
All buildings in an MX-FB sub-zone must meet all of the relevant provisions in
this Subsection
14-16-2-4(E)(3)(f). These provisions are illustrated in the figure below.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/b37713d5e40fc82694833f290401791f80be26ac/
IMAGES/0-0-0-6567.png]
   1.   Fa ade Articulation
      a.   MX-FB-FX, MX-FB-AC, and MX-FB-UD Sub-zones
         i.   Each ground floor street-facing fa ade shall incorporate
variations in height, setback, or material at least every 20 to 50 feet of fa
ade length.
         ii.   Each second floor and higher street-facing fa ade shall
incorporate variations in height, setback, or material at least every 50 to 100
feet of fa ade length.
      b.   MX-ID Sub-zone
         i.   Each street-facing fa ade shall incorporate variations in height,
setback, or material at least every 20 to 50 feet of fa ade length.
   2.   Shading
      a.   Shading on street-facing fa ades is required in all MX-FB sub-zones,
except where an urban residential building frontage type is used.
      b.   Shading elements may be portales, awnings, canopies, or overhangs
and may project to within 2 feet of the curb with a minimum 8 foot vertical
clearance.
      c.   In the MX-FB-ID, MX-FB-FX, and MX-FB-AC sub-zones, the minimum
shading requirement shall be 75 percent of the building width.
      d.   In the MX-FB-UD sub-zone, the minimum shading requirement shall be
50 percent of the building width.
   3.   Windows and Doors
      a.   Ground Floor
         i.   For storefront building frontage types, any street-facing fa ade
shall contain a minimum of 60 percent of its surfaces in transparent windows
and/or doors with the lower edge of window sills no higher than 30 inches above
the finished floor.
         ii.   For porch, stoop, and urban residential building frontage types,
any street-facing fa ade shall contain a minimum of 25 percent of its surfaces
in transparent windows and/or doors.
         iii.   For warehouse building frontage types, any street-facing fa ade
shall contain a minimum of 40 percent of its surfaces in transparent windows
and/ or doors with the lower edge of window sills no higher than 30 inches
above the finished floor.
         iv.   All buildings shall have at least 1 pedestrian entrance from a
street-facing fa ade. This may be access to a lobby or walled court shared by
individual tenants.
         v.   Building entrances shall be recessed or extend a minimum of 1
foot from the front fa ade, except where a walled court building frontage type
is used.
         vi.   For buildings in which over 50 percent of the gross floor area
of the ground floor is vacant, a Permit - Temporary Window Wrap may be granted
pursuant to Subsection
14-16-6-5(E) for window wraps that meet the requirements of Subsection
14-16-5-11(E)(2)(b)2.c to temporarily obscure transparent windows and/or doors
with opaque window wrap.
      b.   Upper Floors
         Each second floor and higher fa ade facing a public street or alley
shall contain a minimum of 20 percent of its surface in transparent windows
and/or doors.
   4.   Side and Rear Fa ades
Each side or rear fa ade of a primary building adjacent to a Residential or
Mixed-use zone district shall have a similar level of fa ade articulation,
materials, and detailing as required in Subsections 1 through 3 above.
2-4(E)(3)(g)   Parking
   1.   Minimum Parking Requirements
      The minimum off-street and bicycle parking requirements and parking types
for the MX-FB sub-zones are specified in
Table 2-4-13, except where off-street parking requirements are modified by
Subsection
14-16-5-5(B)(2) (Exemptions and Reductions).
 
Table 2-4-13: Off-street and Bicycle Parking in the MX-FB Sub-zones
Sub-zone            MX-FB-ID MX-FB-FX           MX-FB-AC            MX-FB-UD
Off-street parking, 1 space / 1,000 sq. ft. GFA 1 space / 1,500 sq. N/A
minimum                                         ft. GFA
Bicycle parking,    5 spaces or 1 space / 2,000 sq. ft. GFA, whichever is
minimum             greater
 
   2.   Parking Lot Location and Design
      a.   Parking lots may have 1 or multiple drive aisles.
      b.   Parking lots shall be located behind or to the side of any primary
building on the site.
      c.   Parking lots with multiple drive aisles must be set back at least 10
feet from any property line abutting a street.
      d.   There is no required setback for parking lots with a single drive
aisle.
   3.   Parking Lot Edges
      a.   Parking lots shall have a wall at least 3 feet and no more than 4
feet high parallel to the street.
      b.   For parking lots with 2 or more drive aisles, all of the following
shall be incorporated into the setback area required by Subsection 2.c above.
         i.   The area must be landscaped pursuant to Subsection
14-16-5-6(F)(1)(i)2 (Side and Rear Lot Edges).
         ii.   The required wall must be set back at least 10 feet from any
property line abutting a street.
         iii.   At least 1 bench shall be provided for every 300 square feet of
parking lot setback area and shall be located near a required tree and between
the required street wall and the street.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/b37713d5e40fc82694833f290401791f80be26ac/
IMAGES/0-0-0-6569.png]
   4.   Structured and Wrapped Parking
      a.   The following parking types are allowed in any MX-FB sub-zone, with
requirements as noted. (See figure below.)
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/b37713d5e40fc82694833f290401791f80be26ac/
IMAGES/0-0-0-6571.png]
         i.   Parking structure with ground floor uses
         ii.   Wrapped parking
         iii.   Convertible parking structure
         iv.   Subterranean parking
      b.   In addition to the provisions in Subsection
14-16-5-5(G) (Parking Structure Design), parking structures in any MX-FB zone
district shall comply with all of the following requirements.
         i.   Any ground floor street-facing fa ade shall be constructed using
either a storefront or an urban residential building frontage type with
pedestrian entrances spaced no more than 25 feet apart.
         ii.   At street corners, at least 1 corner architectural element,
including but not limited to a corner entrance, signage, and windows, shall be
incorporated into the fa ade.
2-4(E)(3)(h)   Landscaping
   1.   The minimum landscape area for the MX-FB sub-zones are specified in
Table 2-4-14.
 
Table 2-4-14: Minimum Landscape Area in the MX-FB Sub-zones
Sub-zone                                MX-FB-ID MX-FB-FX MX-FB-AC MX-FB-UD
Percent (%) of the net lot area of each 15%      10%      5%
development
 
   2.   Street trees shall be provided pursuant to Subsection
14-16-5-6(D)(1) along all street frontages regardless of the street
classification.
   3.   If areas are required to be landscaped by 2 or more provisions of this
IDO, landscaping provided that meets the greater requirement shall count toward
fulfilling the overlapping requirements.
2-4(E)(3)(i)   Outdoor and Site Lighting
      
Table 2-4-15: IDO Lighting Designations for the MX-FB Sub-zones specifies the
allowable use for each sub-zone. Where multiple designations are specified for
a zone district, the note in the table identifies which designation shall be
used depending on context.
 
Table 2-4-15: IDO Lighting Designations for the MX-FB Sub-zones
Lz2 = ANSI/IES Light Zone 2 Lz3 = ANSI/IES Light Zone 2
IDO Lighting Designations MX-FB-ID MX-FB-FX MX-FB-AC MX-FB-UD
Lz2                       X        X        X        X
Lz3                                         X 1      X 1
Notes:
[1] Within UC-MS-PT-MT areas, a higher lighting designation is allowed
unless the subject property is adjacent to any Residential zone district.
 
2-5   NON-RESIDENTIAL ZONE DISTRICTS
2-5(A)   NON-RESIDENTIAL - COMMERCIAL ZONE DISTRICT (NR-C)
2-5(A)(1)   Purpose
The purpose of the NR-C zone district is to accommodate medium-scale retail,
office, commercial, and institutional uses, particularly where additional
residential development is not appropriate or not desired because of a deficit
of jobs or services in relation to housing units in the area. Primary land uses
include a wide spectrum of retail and commercial uses intended to serve both
neighborhood and area-wide needs, as well as some light industrial uses.
Allowable uses are shown in
Table 4-2-1.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/b37713d5e40fc82694833f290401791f80be26ac/
IMAGES/0-0-0-6573.png]
2-5(A)(2)   Use and Development Standards
Table 2-5-1: NR-C Zone District Dimensional  Table 2-5-2: Other Applicable IDO
Standards Summary                            Sections
See Table 5-1-3 for complete Dimensional     Overlay Zones  Part 14-16-3
Standards
Development Location General UC-MS-PT        Allowable Uses 14-16-4-2
Table 2-5-1: NR-C Zone District                     Table 2-5-2: Other
Dimensional Standards Summary                       Applicable IDO Sections
See Table 5-1-3 for complete Dimensional            Overlay Zones  Part 14-16-3
Standards
Development     General     UC-MS-PT                Allowable Uses 14-16-4-2
Location
Site Standards                                      Use-specific   14-16-4-3
                                                    Standards
A Lot width,    N/A                                 Dimensional    14-16-5-1
  minimum                                           Standards
                                                    Site Design
  Building                                          and Sensitive  14-16-5-2
B coverage,     N/A                                 Lands
  maximum                                           Access and     14-16-5-3
                                                    Connectivity
Setback Standards                                   Subdivision of 14-16-5-4
                                                    Land
  Front,                                            Parking and    14-16-5-5
C minimum /     5 ft. / N/A 0 ft. / 15 ft.          Loading
  maximum                                           Landscaping,
                                                    Buffering, and 14-16-5-6
                            0 ft. / N/              Screening
D Side, minimum O ft. / N/A A interior; 15
  / maximum                 ft. corner              Walls and
                                                    Fences         14-16-5-7

E Rear, minimum 0 ft.       15 ft.                  Outdoor and    14-16-5-8
                                                    Site Lighting
Building Height                                     Neighborhood   14-16-5-9
                                                    Edges
  Building      38 ft.      55 ft.                  Solar Access   14-16-5-10
F height,       >100 ft. from all lot      Building                14-16-5-11
  maximum       lines: N/A                 Design
                                                    Signs          14-16-5-12
                                                    Operation and  14-16-5-13
                                                    Maintenance
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/b37713d5e40fc82694833f290401791f80be26ac/
IMAGES/0-0-0-6575.png]
2-5(A)(3)   District Standards
None.
2-5(B)   NON-RESIDENTIAL - BUSINESS PARK ZONE DISTRICT (NR-BP)
2-5(B)(1)   Purpose
The purpose of the NR-BP zone district is to accommodate a wide range of non-
residential uses in campus-like settings to buffer potential impacts on
surrounding uses and adjacent areas. Allowable uses include a wide variety of
office, commercial, research, light industrial, distribution, showroom,
processing, and institutional uses. Allowable uses are shown in
Table 4-2-1.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/b37713d5e40fc82694833f290401791f80be26ac/
IMAGES/0-0-0-6577.png]
2-5(B)(2)   Use and Development Standards
Table 2-5-3: NR-BP Zone District  Table 2-5-4: Other Applicable IDO Sections
Dimensional Standards Summary
See Table 5-1-3 for complete      Overlay Zones Part 14-16-3
Dimensional Standards
Table 2-5-3: NR-BP Zone District          Table 2-5-4: Other Applicable IDO
Dimensional Standards Summary             Sections
See Table 5-1-3 for complete Dimensional  Overlay Zones           Part 14-16-3
Standards
Site Standards                            Allowable Uses          14-16-4-2
A Lot width, minimum 100 ft.              Use-specific Standards  14-16-4-3
  Building coverage,                      Dimensional Standards   14-16-5-1
B maximum            50%
                                          Site Design and         14-16-5-2
                                          Sensitive Lands
Setback Standards                         Access and Connectivity 14-16-5-3
C Front, minimum     20 ft.               Subdivision of Land     14-16-5-4
D Side, minimum      10 ft.               Parking and Loading     14-16-5-5
E Rear, minimum      10 ft.               Landscaping, Buffering, 14-16-5-6
                                          and Screening
Building Height                           Walls and Fences        14-16-5-7
                     65 ft.               Outdoor and Site        14-16-5-8
F Building height,                        Lighting
  maximum            >100 ft. from front  Neighborhood Edges      14-16-5-9
                     lot line: N/A
                                          Solar Access            14-16-5-10
                                          Building Design         14-16-5-11
                                          Signs                   14-16-5-12
                                          Operation and           14-16-5-13
                                          Maintenance
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/b37713d5e40fc82694833f290401791f80be26ac/
IMAGES/0-0-0-6579.png]
2-5(B)(3)   District Standards
2-5(B)(3)(a)   Eligibility for Rezoning to NR-BP
   1.   The minimum total contiguous area eligible for an NR-BP zone
designation is 20 acres.
   2.   Rezoning to the NR-BP zone district requires the approval of a Master
Development Plan that furthers and implements applicable goals and policies of
the ABC Comp Plan, as amended, and complies with all applicable requirements of
the DPM. The Master Development Plan shall be submitted at the same time as the
rezoning to the NR-BP zone district, and the requests shall be reviewed and
decided as described in Subsections
14-16-6-6(F) (Master Development Plan) and
14-16-6-7(H) (Zoning Map Amendment - Council).
2-5(B)(3)(b)   Allowable Uses
Allowable uses shall be per the NR-BP column in
Table 4-2-1. Use-specific standards may be specified in the Master Development
Plan as long they do not change the allowable uses in
Table 4-2-1 and do not reduce requirements of any related Use-specific
Standards in Section
14-16-4-3.
2-5(B)(3)(c)   Development Standards
   1.   The Master Development Plan may specify development standards that
apply to all lots and structures in the plan area in order to implement a
coordinated and cohesive design for the project.
   2.   The site-specific standards in the Master Development Plan shall not
conflict with or reduce other standards in this IDO, including those of any
Overlay zone that applies to the site. In particular, the standards in the
Master Development Plan may not reduce requirements in Section
14-16-5-9 (Neighborhood Edges) designed to protect abutting properties from
potential adverse impacts of development.
   3.   If the Master Development Plan does not specify development standards,
or if there is no Master Development Plan but development is allowed pursuant
to Subsection
14-16-2-5(B)(3)(e) below, standards in
Part 14-16-5 (Development Standards) apply. If Development Standards for the
NR-BP zone district are not specified or if an IDO standard specifies that it
is "per approved plan" in the NR-BP zone district, development shall meet the
Development Standards established for the NR-C zone district.
2-5(B)(3)(d)   Development on Properties with NR-BP Zoning and Master
Development Plans
All permits and approvals for property within a Master Development Plan area
shall be consistent with the Master Development Plan, as amended. Where the
Master Development Plan is silent, other IDO standards apply.
   1.   Once a Master Development Plan has been approved, development can be
approved through a Site Plan pursuant to the applicability, procedures, and
criteria in Subsection
14-16-6-5(G) (Site Plan – Administrative) or
14-16-6-6(I) (Site Plan – EPC), as applicable.
   2.   Master Development Plans are on file at the City Planning Department.
   3.   See also Subsection
14-16-6-4(W) (Expiration of Approvals).
2-5(B)(3)(e)   Development on Properties with NR-BP Zoning but without a Master
Development Plan
   1.   For properties zoned NR-BP that are less than 20 acres without a Master
Development Plan, unsubdivided lots can be subdivided pursuant to Subsection
14-16-6-6(K) (Subdivision of Land – Minor).
   2.   For properties zoned NR-BP that are less than 20 acres without a Master
Development Plan, development can be approved through a Site Plan pursuant to
the applicability, procedures, and criteria in Subsection
14-16-6-5(G) (Site Plan – Administrative) or
14-16-6-6(I) (Site Plan – EPC), as applicable.
   3.   For properties zoned NR-BP that are 20 acres or more, development
requires a Master Development Plan to be reviewed and approved by the
Environmental Planning Commission (EPC) pursuant to the procedures in
Subsection
14-16-6-6(F) (Master Development Plan).
2-5(B)(3)(f)   Master Development Plan Amendments
   1.   1.   Master Development Plans may be amended by the procedures in
Subsection 14-16-5-6-4(X) (Amendments of Approvals) or Subsection
14-16-6-4(Y) (Amendments of Pre-IDO Approvals), as applicable.
   2.   See also Section
14-16-6-8 for Nonconformities.
2-5(B)(3)(g)   Deviations, Variances, and Waivers from Master Development Plan
Standards
   1.   Deviations from Master Development Plan standards may be granted
pursuant to the same thresholds and procedures as established by Subsection
14-16-6-4(N) (Deviations).
   2.   Variances from Master Development Plan standards may be granted
pursuant to the same thresholds and procedures as established by
Table 6-1-1, Subsection
14-16-6-6(N) (Variance – EPC), and Subsection
14-16-6-6(O) (Variance – ZHE).
   3.   Waivers from Master Development Plan standards may be granted pursuant
to the same thresholds and procedures as established by
Table 6-1-1 and Subsection
14-16-6-6(P) (Waiver – DHO).
2-5(C)   NON-RESIDENTIAL - LIGHT MANUFACTURING ZONE DISTRICT (NR-LM)
2-5(C)(1)   Purpose
The purpose of the NR-LM zone district is to accommodate moderate-intensity
commercial, light assembly, fabrication, and light manufacturing uses, while
buffering adjacent lower-intensity, Residential and Mixed-use zone districts
from the traffic, noise, and other impacts of those uses. Allowable uses are
shown in
Table 4-2-1.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/b37713d5e40fc82694833f290401791f80be26ac/
IMAGES/0-0-0-6581.png]
2-5(C)(2)   Use and Development Standards
Table 2-5-5: NR-LM Zone District  Table 2-5-6: Other Applicable IDO Sections
Dimensional Standards Summary
See
Table 5-1-3 for complete          Overlay Zones Part 14-16-3
Dimensional Standards
Table 2-5-5: NR-LM Zone District          Table 2-5-6: Other Applicable IDO
Dimensional Standards Summary             Sections
See
Table 5-1-3 for complete Dimensional      Overlay Zones           Part 14-16-3
Standards
Site Standards                            Allowable Uses          14-16-4-2
A Lot width, minimum N/A                  Use-specific Standards  14-16-4-3
  Building coverage,                      Dimensional Standards   14-16-5-1
B maximum            N/A                  Site Design and         14-16-5-2
                                          Sensitive Lands
Setback Standards                         Access and Connectivity 14-16-5-3
C Front, minimum     5 ft.                Subdivision of Land     14-16-5-4
D Side, minimum      0 ft.                Parking and Loading     14-16-5-5
E Rear, minimum      0 ft.                Landscaping, Buffering, 14-16-5-6
                                          and Screening
Building Height                           Walls and Fences        14-16-5-7
                     65 ft.               Outdoor and Site        14-16-5-8
F Building height,                        Lighting
  maximum            >100 ft. from front  Neighborhood Edges      14-16-5-9
                     lot line: N/A
                                          Solar Access            14-16-5-10
                                          Building Design         14-16-5-11
                                          Signs                   14-16-5-12
                                          Operation and           14-16-5-13
                                          Maintenance
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/b37713d5e40fc82694833f290401791f80be26ac/
IMAGES/0-0-0-6583.png]
2-5(C)(3)   District Standards
None.
2-5(D)   NON-RESIDENTIAL - GENERAL MANUFACTURING ZONE DISTRICT (NR-GM)
2-5(D)(1)   Purpose
The purpose of the NR-GM zone district is to accommodate a wide variety of
industrial, manufacturing, and heavy commercial uses, particularly those with
noise, glare, or heavy traffic impacts, in areas separated from Residential and
Mixed-use areas and less intense, lighter impact businesses. Allowable uses are
shown in
Table 4-2-1.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/b37713d5e40fc82694833f290401791f80be26ac/
IMAGES/0-0-0-6585.png]
2-5(D)(2)   Use and Development Standards
Table 2-5-7: NR-GM Zone District  Table 2-5-8: Other Applicable IDO Sections
Dimensional Standards Summary
See
Table 5-1-3 for complete          Overlay Zones Part 14-16-3
Dimensional Standards
Table 2-5-7: NR-GM Zone District          Table 2-5-8: Other Applicable IDO
Dimensional Standards Summary             Sections
See
Table 5-1-3 for complete Dimensional      Overlay Zones           Part 14-16-3
Standards
Site Standards                            Allowable Uses          14-16-4-2
A Lot width, minimum N/A                  Use-specific Standards  14-16-4-3
  Building coverage,                      Dimensional Standards   14-16-5-1
B maximum            N/A                  Site Design and         14-16-5-2
                                          Sensitive Lands
Setback Standards                         Access and Connectivity 14-16-5-3
C Front, minimum     5 ft.                Subdivision of Land     14-16-5-4
D Side, minimum      0 ft.                Parking and Loading     14-16-5-5
E Rear, minimum      0 ft.                Landscaping, Buffering, 14-16-5-6
                                          and Screening
Building Height                           Walls and Fences        14-16-5-7
                     65 ft.               Outdoor and Site        14-16-5-8
F Building height,                        Lighting
  maximum            >100 ft. from front  Neighborhood Edges      14-16-5-9
                     lot line: N/A
                                          Solar Access            14-16-5-10
                                          Building Design         14-16-5-11
                                          Signs                   14-16-5-12
                                          Operation and           14-16-5-13
                                          Maintenance
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/b37713d5e40fc82694833f290401791f80be26ac/
IMAGES/0-0-0-6587.png]
2-5(D)(3)   District Standards
None.
2-5(E)   NON-RESIDENTIAL - SENSITIVE USE ZONE DISTRICT (NR-SU)
2-5(E)(1)   Purpose
The purpose of the NR-SU zone district is to accommodate highly specialized
public, civic, institutional, or natural resource-related uses that require
additional review of location, site design, and impact mitigation to protect
the safety and character of surrounding properties. Uses that require NR-SU
zoning are not allowed in zone districts and are shown in
Table 4-2-1.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/b37713d5e40fc82694833f290401791f80be26ac/
IMAGES/0-0-0-6589.png]
2-5(E)(2)   Use and Development Standards
The following uses require an NR-SU zone district:
2-5(E)(2)(a)   Airport
2-5(E)(2)(b)   Cemetery
2-5(E)(2)(c)   Correctional facility
2-5(E)(2)(d)   Crematorium
2-5(E)(2)(e)   Fairgrounds
2-5(E)(2)(g)   Natural resource extraction
2-5(E)(2)(h)   Solid waste convenience center
2-5(E)(2)(i)   Stadium or racetrack
2-5(E)(2)(j)   Waste and/or recycling transfer station
Table 2-5-9: Other Applicable IDO Sections[1]
Table 2-5-9: Other Applicable IDO Sections[1]
Overlay Zones                         Part 14-16-3
                                      As negotiated from among those listed in
Allowable Uses                        Section
                                      14-16-4-2
                                      Section
Use-specific Standards                14-16-4-3 unless varied in the NR-SU
                                      approval process
                                      As applicable to the most similar use or
Dimensional Standards Tables and      district as shown in Section
Exceptions                            14-16-5-1, unless different standards are
                                      approved in the NR-SU approval process
                                      Section
Site Design and Sensitive Lands       14-16-5-2 unless varied in the NR-SU
                                      approval process
                                      Section
Access and Connectivity               14-16-5-3 unless varied in the NR-SU
                                      approval process
                                      Section
Subdivision of Land                   14-16-5-4 unless varied in the NR-SU
                                      approval process
                                      Section
Parking and Loading                   14-16-5-5 unless varied in the NR-SU
                                      approval process
                                      Section
Landscaping, Buffering, and Screening 14-16-5-6 unless varied in the NR-SU
                                      approval process
                                      Section
Walls and Fences                      14-16-5-7 unless varied in the NR-SU
                                      approval process
                                      Section
Outdoor and Site Lighting             14-16-5-8 unless varied in the NR-SU
                                      approval process
                                      Section
Neighborhood Edges                    14-16-5-9 unless varied in the NR-SU
                                      approval process
                                      Section
Solar Access                          14-16-5-10 unless varied in the NR-SU
                                      approval process
                                      Section
Building Design                       14-16-5-11 unless varied in the NR-SU
                                      approval process
                                      Section
Signs                                 14-16-5-12 unless varied in the NR-SU
                                      approval process
                                      Section
Operation and Maintenance             14-16-5-13 unless varied in the NR-SU
                                      approval process
[1] Some of the general controls in these sections may not apply to specific
types of NR-SU zone districts or specific types of development if exempted by
other provisions of this IDO.
 
2-5(E)(3)   District Standards
2-5(E)(3)(a)   Eligibility for Rezoning to NR-SU
Rezoning to the NR-SU zone district requires a Site Plan - EPC to be submitted
that specifies uses, site standards, and development standards, reviewed and
decided by the EPC in conjunction with review and decision of the zone change
request pursuant to Subsection
14-16-6-7(G) (Zoning Map Amendment - EPC) or Subsection
14-16-6-7(H) (Zoning Map Amendment - Council), as applicable.
2-5(E)(3)(b)   Allowable Uses
   1.   Uses that require a Zoning Map Amendment for NR-SU are not allowed in
other zone districts. Allowable uses in the NR-SU zone district, including
accessory uses, are listed in
Table 4-2-1.
   2.   Additional uses may be approved as accessory uses if they are found to
be compatible with the proposed primary sensitive use, pursuant to Subsection
14-16-4-1(A)(4)(b).
2-5(E)(3)(c)   Development Standards
Where the Site Plan is silent on any standard, IDO standards apply.
2-5(E)(3)(d)   Provisions for Specific Areas
Approved Site Plans are on file at the City Planning Department.
2-5(F)   NON-RESIDENTIAL - PARK AND OPEN SPACE ZONE DISTRICT (NR-PO)
2-5(F)(1)   Purpose
The purpose of the NR-PO zone district is to protect the natural character of
designated private and public parks and open space for public recreation, use,
and enjoyment. Primary uses are open space and related recreation facilities,
picnic and other shelters, and service/maintenance facilities.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/b37713d5e40fc82694833f290401791f80be26ac/
IMAGES/0-0-0-6591.png]
2-5(F)(2)   Use and Development Standards
Dimensional standards in NR-PO sub-zones shall be determined in the approval of
a Master Plan, Resource Management Plan, standards specified by the
implementing Department, or standards specified in an approved Site Plan. Where
the Master Plan, Resource Management Plan, or Site Plan is silent, standards in
the following Subsections apply.
Table 2-5-10: Other Applicable IDO Sections[1]
Table 2-5-10: Other Applicable IDO Sections[1]
Allowable Uses                        14-16-4-2
Use-specific Standards                14-16-4-3
Dimensional Standards                 14-16-5-1
Site Design and Sensitive Lands       14-16-5-2
Access and Connectivity               14-16-5-3
Subdivision of Land                   14-16-5-4
Parking and Loading                   14-16-5-5
Landscaping, Buffering, and Screening 14-16-5-6
Walls and Fences                      14-16-5-7
Outdoor and Site Lighting             14-16-5-8
Neighborhood Edges                    14-16-5-9
Solar Access                          14-16-5-10
Building Design                       14-16-5-11
Signs                                 14-16-5-12
Operation and Maintenance             14-16-5-13
[1] Some standards may not apply to NR-PO zone districts if exempted by other
provisions of this IDO or as otherwise approved by the City Parks and
Recreation Department.
 
2-5(F)(3)   District Standards
The NR-PO zone district includes the following 4 sub-zones, each of which has
allowable uses and development standards specified in this IDO or a special
approval as noted below.
2-5(F)(3)(a)   Sub-zone A: City-owned or Managed Parks
   1.   Allowable uses other than those specified in
Table 4-2-1 shall be reviewed and decided pursuant to Subsection
14-16-6-6(I) (Site Plan – EPC).
   2.   Development standards specified in a Master Plan approved or amended by
the City Parks and Recreation Department for each facility prevail over IDO
standards and may be reflected in Site Plans approved pursuant to this IDO.
2-5(F)(3)(b)   Sub-zone B: Maor Public Open Space
   1.   Uses and development standards specified in a Resource Management Plan
or Master Plan approved or amended by the Open Space Division of the City Parks
and Recreation Department for each facility or in the Rank 2 Major Public Open
Space Facility Plan prevail over IDO standards and may be reflected in Site
Plans approved pursuant to this IDO.
   2.   For facilities without a Resource Management Plan or Master Plan,
allowable uses other than those specified in
Table 4-2-1 or the Major Public Open Space Facility Plan may be approved
pursuant to Subsection
14-16-6-6(I) (Site Plan – EPC).
   3.   Any facility that is not an Extraordinary Facility pursuant to the Rank
2 Major Public Open Space Facility Plan or renovations of a facility previously
approved as an Extraordinary Facility shall be reviewed and decided pursuant to
Subsection
14-16-6-5(G)(1)(f)13 (Site Plan – Administrative).
   4.   Otherwise, any Extraordinary Facility shall be reviewed and decided
pursuant to Subsection
14-16-6-6(I) (Site Plan – EPC).
2-5(F)(3)(c)   Sub-zone C: Non-City Parks and Open Space
Development standards may be specified in an approved Site Plan but may not
conflict with or reduce other standards in this IDO, including those of an
Overlay zone that applies to the site.
2-5(F)(3)(d)   Sub-zone D: City BioPark
Uses and development standards specified in the BioPark Master Plan as approved
or amended by the City Cultural Services Department apply.
2-6   PLANNED DEVELOPMENT ZONE DISTRICTS
2-6(A)   PLANNED DEVELOPMENT ZONE DISTRICT (PD)
2-6(A)(1)   Purpose
The purpose of the PD zone district is to accommodate small- and medium-scale
innovative projects that cannot be accommodated through the use of other zone
districts, provided that those projects are consistent with the Albuquerque/
Bernalillo County Comprehensive Plan (ABC Comp Plan), as amended and include
standards that would not otherwise be required of the applicant in order to
provide significant public, civic, or natural resource benefits. This zone
district is applied on a case-by-case basis to reflect a negotiated agreement
for uses and standards with the applicant. Allowable uses are negotiated on a
case-by-case basis but may not include any use that is not included in
Table 4-2-1.
2-6(A)(2)   Other Standards
Table 2-6-1: Other Applicable IDO Sections
Table 2-6-1: Other Applicable IDO Sections
Overlay Zones                         Part 14-16-3
                                      As negotiated from among those listed in
Allowable Uses                        Section
                                      14-16-4-2
                                      Section
Use-specific Standards                14-16-4-3 unless varied in the PD
                                      approval process
                                      As applicable to the most similar use or
Dimensional Standards Tables and      district as shown in Section
Exceptions                            14-16-5-1, unless different standards are
                                      approved in the PD approval process
                                      Section
Site Design and Sensitive Lands       14-16-5-2 unless varied in the PD
                                      approval process
                                      Section
Access and Connectivity               14-16-5-3 unless varied in the PD
                                      approval process
                                      Section
Subdivision of Land                   14-16-5-4 unless varied in the PD
                                      approval process
                                      Section
Parking and Loading                   14-16-5-5 unless varied in the PD
                                      approval process
                                      Section
Landscaping, Buffering, and Screening 14-16-5-6 unless varied in the PD
                                      approval process
                                      Section
Walls and Fences                      14-16-5-7 unless varied in the PD
                                      approval process
                                      Section
Outdoor and Site Lighting             14-16-5-8 unless varied in the PD
                                      approval process
                                      Section
Neighborhood Edges                    14-16-5-9 unless varied in the PD
                                      approval process
                                      Section
Solar Access                          14-16-5-10 unless varied in the PD
                                      approval process
                                      Section
Building Design                       14-16-5-11 unless varied in the PD
                                      approval process
                                      Section
Signs                                 14-16-5-12 unless varied in the PD
                                      approval process
                                      Section
Operation and Maintenance             14-16-5-13 unless varied in the PD
                                      approval process
 
2-6(A)(3)   Eligibility for Rezoning to PD
2-6(A)(3)(a)   A PD zone district must contain at least 2 but less than 20
contiguous acres of land.
2-6(A)(3)(b)   A Site Plan - EPC that specifies uses, site standards, and
development standards shall be reviewed and decided in conjunction with the
review and decision of the zone change request pursuant to Subsection
14-16-6-7(G) (Zoning Map Amendment - EPC) or Subsection
14-16-6-7(H) (Zoning Map Amendment - Council), as applicable.
2-6(A)(3)(c)   A PD zone district will not be accepted or approved for any
proposed development that could be achieved in substantially the same form
through the use of one or more zone districts and/or Overlay zones.
2-6(A)(4)   Allowable Uses
2-6(A)(4)(a)   A PD zone district may contain any combination of uses listed in
Table 4-2-1, except those that require NR-SU zoning, for all or part of the PD
zone district, provided that those uses do not create significant adverse
impacts on nearby existing neighborhoods, City parks or trails, or Major Public
Open Space.
2-6(A)(4)(b)   All allowable uses are subject to the Use-specific Standards
listed for that use in Section
14-16-4-3 unless modified by the Site Plan - EPC associated with the PD zone
district approval.
2-6(A)(4)(c)   Use-specific Standards in Section
14-16-4-3 that refer to Residential zone districts apply to PD zone districts
that meet the definition of a Residential zone district in Section
14-16-7-1.
2-6(A)(5)   Development and Form Standards
2-6(A)(5)(a)   All development in the PD zone district shall be subject to the
provisions of
Part 14-16-5 (Development Standards) for the type of use or structures in the
approved Planned Development, unless those standards are modified by the Site
Plan - EPC associated with the PD zone district approval.
2-6(A)(5)(b)   A PD zone district approval may not reduce requirements in
Section
14-16-5-9 (Neighborhood Edges) designed to protect abutting properties from
potential adverse impacts of development.
2-6(A)(5)(c)   A PD zone district approval may not reduce requirements in
Subsection
14-16-5-2(K) (Major Public Open Space Edges) designed to protect Major Public
Open Space properties from potential adverse impacts of development.
2-6(A)(6)   Provisions for Specific Areas
Specific provisions and regulations applicable to each approved PD zone
district are on file at the City Planning Department.
2-6(A)(7)   Procedure for Single-family Development
For PD zone districts that show a clear pattern of single-family residential
platting or land use based on a pre-IDO approval, the property owner may apply
for a Site Plan - Administrative pursuant to Subsection
14-16-6-5(G) for low-density residential development that maintains the pattern
of development in the surrounding subdivision.
2-6(B)   PLANNED COMMUNITY ZONE DISTRICT (PC)
2-6(B)(1)   Purpose
The purpose of the PC zone district is to accommodate innovative, very large-
scale residential or mixed-use communities that cannot be accommodated through
the use of other zone districts, provided that those projects are consistent
with the ABC Comp Plan, as amended, and include significant public benefits
that would not otherwise be required of the applicant. Because of their size,
projects in this zone district will include construction of new and expanded
transportation networks and infrastructure. This growth may require additional
analysis and resulting measures to mitigate impact on the surrounding
community. This zone district is applied on a case-by-case basis to reflect a
new or existing negotiated agreement with the applicant. Allowable uses are
negotiated on a case-by-case basis but may not include any use that is not
included in
Table 4-2-1.
2-6(B)(2)   Dimensional and Other Standards
Table 2-6-2: Other Applicable IDO Sections
Table 2-6-2: Other Applicable IDO Sections
Overlay Zones                         Part 14-16-3
                                      As negotiated from among those listed in
Allowable Uses                        Section
                                      14-16-4-2
                                      Section
Use-specific Standards                14-16-4-3 unless varied in the PC
                                      approval process
                                      As applicable to the most similar use or
Dimensional Standards Tables and      district as shown in Section
Exceptions                            14-16-5-1, unless different standards are
                                      approved in the PC approval process
                                      Section
Site Design and Sensitive Lands       14-16-5-2 unless varied in the PC
                                      approval process
                                      Section
Access and Connectivity               14-16-5-3 unless varied in the PC
                                      approval process
                                      Section
Subdivision of Land                   14-16-5-4 unless varied in the PC
                                      approval process
                                      Section
Parking and Loading                   14-16-5-5 unless varied in the PC
                                      approval process
                                      Section
Landscaping, Buffering, and Screening 14-16-5-6 unless varied in the PC
                                      approval process
                                      Section
Walls and Fences                      14-16-5-7 unless varied in the PC
                                      approval process
                                      Section
Outdoor and Site Lighting             14-16-5-8 unless varied in the PC
                                      approval process
                                      Section
Neighborhood Edges                    14-16-5-9 unless varied in the PC
                                      approval process
                                      Section
Solar Access                          14-16-5-10 unless varied in the PC
                                      approval process
                                      Section
Building Design                       14-16-5-11 unless varied in the PC
                                      approval process
                                      Section
Signs                                 14-16-5-12 unless varied in the PC
                                      approval process
                                      Section
Operation and Maintenance             14-16-5-13 unless varied in the PC
                                      approval process
 
2-6(B)(3)   Eligibility for Rezoning to PC
2-6(B)(3)(a)   Each PC zone district must contain at least 100 contiguous acres
of land or more than 500 single-family, two-family, or townhouse dwelling
units. Each proposed development meeting or exceeding these thresholds,
considering all proposed phases of development, shall be required to obtain
approval through the PC zone district process in Subsection
14-16-6-7(H)(1) (Zoning Map Amendment - Council).
2-6(B)(3)(b)   Rezoning to a PC zone district requires the preparation of a
Framework Plan that furthers and implements applicable goals and policies of
the ABC Comp Plan and complies with all applicable requirements of the DPM.
      1.   The Framework Plan shall specify proposed zoning on platted lots or
lots proposed to be platted or general proposed land uses and development
densities/intensities for subsequent phases where platting is yet to be
decided.
      2.   The Framework Plan shall specify general circulation and mobility
routes for various travel modes and general locations of open space.
      3.   The Framework Plan shall be submitted, reviewed, and decided at the
same time and via the same process as the rezoning to the PC zone district, as
described in Subsection
14-16-6-7(H)(1) (Zoning Map Amendment - Council). All later permits and
approvals for the property under this IDO shall be consistent with the approved
Framework Plan, as amended.
2-6(B)(3)(c)   The City Council may require a Development Agreement to outline
the phasing of development, to assign financial, operations, and management
responsibilities over time via infrastructure/service agreements, to identify
any public incentives or agreements between the City and the applicant/
developer, and to address any other items deemed appropriate to ensure an
efficient, self-sufficient community and to prevent net expense to the City.
2-6(B)(4)   Allowable Uses
2-6(B)(4)(a)   A PC zone may contain any of the uses listed in
Table 4-2-1, except those that require NR-SU zoning, for all or part of the PC
zone district, provided that those uses do not create significant adverse
impacts on nearby existing neighborhoods, City parks or trails, or Major Public
Open Space.
2-6(B)(4)(b)   All allowable uses in the PC zone district are subject to the
applicable Use-specific Standards listed for that use in Section
14-16-4-3 unless modified by the Framework Plan associated with the PC zone
district approval.
2-6(B)(5)   Development and Form Standards
2-6(B)(5)(a)   General
   1.   All development in the PC zone district is subject to the provisions of
Part 14-16-5 (Development Standards) for the type of use or structures in the
approved Planned Community, unless those standards are modified by the
Framework Plan associated with the PC zone district approval.
   2.   Subsection
14-16-1-10(A)(2) (Pre-IDO Approvals) applies to all properties that converted
from a Special Use zone to the PC zone district through the adoption of this
IDO.
2-6(B)(5)(b)   Avoidance of Sensitive Lands
   1.   Each Planned Community shall be organized to protect or enhance the
following types of natural resources and features, by including such areas in
common landscaped areas or dedicated open space or by mitigating the impacts of
construction on these features to the maximum extent feasible.
      a.   Drainage channels, arroyos, and streams (in addition to
floodplains).
      b.   Historic or archeological sites designated as significant by the
State.
      c.   Significant views of the Sandia Mountains or Petroglyph National
Monument from high points or public places.
      d.   Riparian wildlife habitat areas and corridors designated as
significant by the State.
      e.   Natural or geologic hazard areas or soil conditions, such as
unstable or potentially unstable slopes, faulting, landslides, rock falls, or
expansive soils.
   2.   Lands that show evidence of slope instability, landslides, avalanche,
flooding, or other natural or manmade hazards shall not be included in platted
lots.
   3.   New structures intended for human occupancy are prohibited within 100
feet in any direction of any perennial stream, public lake, reservoir, or
element of a public water supply system unless the City Engineer determines
that a smaller setback would adequately protect water quality and wildlife
habitat.
   4.   Natural features to be protected shall be identified in a site analysis
as part of a Framework Plan or with any Site Plan or plat when a Framework Plan
is not required.
2-6(B)(5)(c)   Adequate Water Supply
An application for a Planned Community shall not be processed unless
accompanied by written documentation from the Albuquerque Bernalillo County
Water Utility Authority (ABCWUA) that adequate water is available to serve the
development, based on known water supplies owned or controlled by the ABCWUA or
the applicant, without creating adverse impacts on the cost, quality, or
availability of water for existing residents of the city and the area served by
the ABCWUA.
2-6(B)(5)(d)   Mix of Uses and Housing Types
   1.   Each phase of a Planned Community shall include at least 10 percent of
the land area for non-residential uses.
   2.   No phase of a Planned Community may develop more than 80 percent of the
land area designated for residential or mixed-use development as single-family
detached dwellings.
   3.   Parks shall be provided at a rate of 2 acres of park land for every 500
dwelling units designated NR-PO-C, which requires parks to be built to City
standards and designed as acceptable to Parks and Recreation Department, or NR-
PO-A and dedicated to the City.
   4.   Major Public Open Space, open space, and trails shall be provided
consistent with the Rank 2 Major Public Open Space Facility Plan, the Rank 2
Facility Plan for Arroyos, and the Rank 2 Bikeways and Trails Facility Plan.
Any Major Public Open Space dedications must be acceptable to and are subject
to approval by the Open Space Division of the City Parks and Recreation
Department.
   5.   Any treatment for a major arroyo shall be designed per the standards in
the Rank 2 Facility Plan for Arroyos.
2-6(B)(5)(e)   Creation of Distinct Neighborhoods
No area of the Planned Community in which more than 70 percent of the lots are
occupied by a Household Living use as shown in
Table 4-2-1 shall contain more than 100 contiguous acres unless it is separated
from other adjacent residential development areas by a significant natural or
man-made feature, including any of the following:
   1.   Clearly visible bluffs, rock outcroppings, or landforms designated as
open space.
   2.   Major drainages, arroyos, or designated open spaces at least 100 feet
in width.
   3.   An arterial street.
   4.   A collector street with a median at least 14 feet in width.
   5.   Non-residential uses allowed per
Table 4-2-1.
2-6(B)(6)   Provisions for Specific Areas
Provisions and regulations applicable to each approved PC zone district are
specified in Framework Plans and associated Site Plans, on file at the City
Planning Department.
2-6(B)(7)   Development on Properties with PC Zoning and Framework Plans
Once a Framework Plan has been approved, development can be approved through a
Site Plan pursuant to the applicability, procedures, and criteria in Subsection
14-16-6-5(G) (Site Plan – Administrative) or
14-16-6-6(I) (Site Plan – EPC), as applicable.
2-6(B)(8)   Deviations, Variances, and Waivers from Framework Plan Standards
2-6(B)(8)(a)   Deviations from Framework Plan standards may be granted pursuant
to the same thresholds and procedures as established by IDO Subsection
14-16-6-4(N) (Deviations).
2-6(B)(8)(b)   Variances from Framework Plan standards may be granted pursuant
to the same thresholds and procedures as established by
Table 6-1-1, Subsection
14-16-6-6(N) (Variance – EPC), and Subsection
14-16-6-6(O) (Variance – ZHE).
2-6(B)(8)(c)   Waivers from Framework Plan standards may be granted pursuant to
the same thresholds and procedures as established by
Table 6-1-1 and Subsection
14-16-6-6(P) (Waiver – DHO).
Part 14-16-3   Overlay Zones
3-1   OVERLAY ZONES ESTABLISHED
3-1(A)   The Overlay zones listed in Sections
14-16-3-2 through
14-16-3-6 are hereby created. These Overlay zones shall have the boundaries
shown on the Official Zoning Map maintained in electronic form by the City
Planning Department and available on the City of Albuquerque website.
3-1(B)   These Overlay zones supplement, but do not replace, the underlying
zone districts listed in
Part 14-16-2 (Zone Districts). In the case of a conflict between the provisions
of a zone district and the provisions of an Overlay zone, the provisions of the
Overlay zone shall prevail. Where multiple Overlay zones apply to a property,
development must comply with all relevant provisions. Where an Overlay zone is
silent, IDO requirements apply.
3-1(C)   Building height bonuses in
Table 5-1-1: Residential Zone District Dimensional Standards or
Table 5-1-2: Mixed-use Zone District Dimensional Standards do not apply in any
Overlay zone.
3-1(D)   Deviations from Overlay zone standards are not allowed pursuant to
Subsection
14-16-6-4(O)(3)(e).
3-2   OVERLAY ZONE SUMMARY TABLE
Table 3-2-1 shows the City of Albuquerque's previous overlays in relation to
IDO Overlay zones.
Table 3-2-1: Summary Table of Overlay Zones
Previous Zone or Overlay IDO Overlay Zone
Table 3-2-1: Summary Table of Overlay Zones
Previous Zone or Overlay                    IDO Overlay Zone
Airport Protection                          Airport Protection Overlay Zones
AP-1 Airport Protection                     APO    Airport Protection Overlay
AP-2 Airport Protection
Design and Urban Conservation Overlay Zones Character Protection Overlay Zones
                                            CPO-1  Barelas
                                            CPO-2  Coors Boulevard
                                            CPO-3  Downtown Neighborhood Area
                                            CPO-4  East Downtown
DOZ  Design Overlay Zone                    CPO-5  High Desert
                                          CPO-6  Los Duranes
SDP  Sector Development Plan                CPO-7  Martineztown/Santa Barbara
                                          CPO-8  Nob Hill/Highland
UCOZ Urban Conservation Overlay Zone        CPO-9  North 4th
                                            CPO-10 North I-25
                                            CPO-11 Rio Grande Boulevard
                                            CPO-12 Sawmill/Wells Park
                                            CPO-13 Volcano Mesa
Historic Zones and Overlays                 Historic Protection Overlay Zones
H-1  Historic Old Town Zone                 HPO-6  Old Town
                                            HPO-1  East Downtown
                                            HPO-3  Eighth and Forrester
HOZ  Historic Overlay Zones                 HPO-4  Fourth Ward
                                            HPO-5  Huning Highland
                                            HPO-7  Silver Hill
View Protection Regulations                 View Protection Overlay Zones
DOZ  Design Overlay Zone                    VPO-1  Coors Boulevard
SDP  Sector Development Plan                VPO-2  Northwest Mesa Escarpment
 
3-3   AIRPORT PROTECTION OVERLAY ZONE
3-3(A)   PURPOSE
The purpose of the Airport Protection Overlay (APO) zone is to require that
land use and development at or around public airport facilities comply with the
regulations of the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) that protect the
public from noise, vibration, and hazard impacts of airport operations and that
protect the safety of aircraft operators.
3-3(B)   APPLICABILITY
The standards in this Section
14-16-3-3 apply to the Albuquerque International Sunport and Double Eagle II
Airport and other properties in all zone districts within the following sub-
areas of the APO zone, which are mapped and briefly described below. These sub-
areas correspond to FAA "zones" and/or "surfaces" and are detailed separately
by the FAA.
3-3(B)(1)   Air Space Protection Sub-area
This sub-area underlies a Horizontal Surface established at a height of 150
feet above the highest point of the usable landing area at each airport,
resulting in a Horizontal Surface at 5,504.9 feet in elevation for the
Albuquerque International Sunport and at 6,028.0 feet in elevation for the
Double Eagle II Airport.
3-3(B)(1)(a)   Albuquerque International Sunport
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/b37713d5e40fc82694833f290401791f80be26ac/
IMAGES/0-0-0-6593.png]
3-3(B)(1)(b)   Double Eagle II Airport
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/b37713d5e40fc82694833f290401791f80be26ac/
IMAGES/0-0-0-6595.png]
3-3(B)(2)   Runway Protection Sub-area
This sub-area includes the runways, adjacent Approach Surfaces, and trapezoidal
flares at the end of each runway.
3-3(B)(2)(a)   Albuquerque International Sunport
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/b37713d5e40fc82694833f290401791f80be26ac/
IMAGES/0-0-0-6597.png]
3-3(B)(2)(b)   Double Eagle II Airport
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/b37713d5e40fc82694833f290401791f80be26ac/
IMAGES/0-0-0-6599.png]
3-3(B)(3)   Noise Contour Sub-area
This irregularly shaped sub-area reflects the intermittent noise levels that
are expected in each airport area, based on averaged ambient conditions and
existing and projected aircraft operations (landings and takeoffs). The effect
of noise generated by any other specific land use is not reflected. The sub-
area is bounded by the 65 Day-night Noise Level (DNL) contour and includes the
75 DNL contour, as calculated by the FAA Integrated Noise Model.
3-3(B)(3)(a)   Albuquerque International Sunport
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/b37713d5e40fc82694833f290401791f80be26ac/
IMAGES/0-0-0-6601.png]
3-3(B)(3)(b)   Double Eagle II Airport
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/b37713d5e40fc82694833f290401791f80be26ac/
IMAGES/0-0-0-6603.png]
3-3(C)   USE REGULATIONS
3-3(C)(1)   Air Space and Runway Protection Sub-areas
The following uses and activities are prohibited within the Air Space and
Runway Protection Sub-areas:
3-3(C)(1)(a)   Rifle range, public or private. (See other outdoor entertainment
in
Table 4-2-1.)
3-3(C)(1)(b)   Private airport or helipad aircraft landing fields that would
interfere with the safe use by aircraft of the Double Eagle II Airport or
Albuquerque International Sunport as determined by the City Aviation
Department.
3-3(C)(1)(c)   Hot air balloon takeoff/landing. (See
Table 4-2-1.)
3-3(C)(1)(d)   Flying of kites.
3-3(C)(1)(e)   Any primary, accessory, or temporary use that creates electrical
interference with radio communication between the airport and aircraft, or that
creates any interference with radar transmissions or with reception between
aircraft and any radar installation or between any radar installation and the
airport, as determined by the City Aviation Department.
3-3(C)(1)(f)   Any primary, accessory, or temporary use that makes it difficult
for flyers to distinguish between airport lights and others, results in glare
in the eyes of flyers using the airport, impairs visibility in the vicinity of
the airport or otherwise endangers the landing, taking-off, or maneuvering of
aircraft as determined by the City Aviation Department.
3-3(C)(1)(g)   Any primary, accessory, or temporary use that produces smoke,
fumes, gasses, or odors that would interfere with the safe use by aircraft of
the Double Eagle II Airport or Albuquerque International Sunport, as determined
by the City Aviation Department.
3-3(C)(2)   Noise Contour Sub-area
3-3(C)(2)(a)   The permissive uses in the Noise Contour Sub-area are as listed
in
Table 3-3-1 and
Table 3-3-2, unless prohibited or more restricted in Subsection
14-16-3-3(C)(1) above or by the zone district.
   1.   75 DNL contour of the Noise Contour Sub-area
Table 3-3-1: Permissive Uses within the 75 DNL Contour of the APO Noise
Contour Sub-area
Uses APO Use-specific Standard[1]
Table 3-3-1: Permissive Uses within the 75 DNL Contour of the APO Noise
Contour Sub-area
Uses                              APO Use-specific Standard[1]
Primary Uses
General agriculture
Parks and open space              Open space only
Paid parking lot
Airport                           Private airport runways or taxiways only
Park-and-ride lot
Natural resource extraction       Mining only
Accessory Uses
Animal keeping
Temporary Uses
Park-and-ride facility, temporary
[1] In addition to any Use-specific Standards referenced in
Table 4-2-1.
 
   2.   65 DNL and 75 DNL contours of the Noise Contour Sub-area
Table 3-3-2: Permissive Uses between the 65 DNL and 75 DNL contours of the APO
Noise Contour Sub-area
Uses APO Use-specific Standard[1]
Table 3-3-2: Permissive Uses between the 65 DNL and 75 DNL contours of the APO
Noise Contour Sub-area
Uses                                    APO Use-specific Standard[1]
Primary Uses
Cemetery
Parks and open space                    Open space only
COMMERCIAL USES[2]
AGRICULTURE AND ANIMAL-RELATED[2]
FOOD, BEVERAGE AND INDOOR ENTERTAINMENT
[2]
                                        Construction shall provide 10 decibels
                                        extra noise reduction over the industry
Hotel or motel                          average for similar structures.
                                        The establishment shall have airport
                                        hazard insurance.
MOTOR VEHICLE-RELATED[2]
OFFICES AND SERVICES[3]
RETAIL SALES[2]
Airport                                 Private airport runways or taxiways
                                        only
Other TRANSPORTATION[2]
Natural Resource Extraction             Mining only
Other MANUFACTURING, FABRICATION, AND
ASSEMBLY[2]
TELECOMMUNICATIONS, TOWERS, AND         Solar energy generation subject to
UTILITIES                               Glint and Glare Study per FAA
WHOLESALING AND STORAGE[2]
Accessory Uses
Animal keeping
Temporary Uses
Park-ride-lot facility, temporary
[1] In addition to any Use-specific Standards referenced in
Table 4-2-1.
[2] All or Other (if stated in this table) uses in this category as listed in
Table 4-2-1.
[3] All uses in this category except Office as listed in
Table 4-2-1.
 
3-3(C)(2)(b)   The conditional uses in the Noise Contour Sub-area are the
permissive uses or conditional uses allowed by the zone district and not listed
as permissive in
Table 3-3-1 or
Table 3-3-2. Conditional Use Approval shall be pursuant to Subsection
14-16-6-6(A) and shall also be subject to the Zoning Hearing Examiner's (ZHE)
determination that, due to the particular nature of the use or the special
character of the enclosing structure, 1 of the following applies.
   1.   The use will not be adversely affected by noise expected to be
generated by operation of aircraft.
   2.   A small amount of adverse effect from the noise expected to be
generated by operation of aircraft is clearly outweighed by a special need for
the use.
3-3(D)   DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS
3-3(D)(1)   Height Standards
3-3(D)(1)(a)   The height standards in this section apply to any permanent
structure, temporary structure erected for however brief a period of time, and
to vegetation (typically trees) based on its expected height at maturity
located within the Air Space Protection Sub-area and Runway Protection Sub-
area.
3-3(D)(1)(b)   In the Air Space Protection Sub-area, maximum building height is
per the Dimensional Standards Tables in Section
14-16-5-1 for each zone district, but in no case may a building be higher than
the Horizontal Surface for each airport. Maximum height may therefore vary
based on the elevation of the land at the location of the proposed structure or
vegetation.
3-3(D)(1)(c)   Where an area is covered by more than one height limitation,
including standards in the zone district or an Overlay zone, the most
restrictive limitation shall prevail.
3-3(D)(1)(d)   Building height bonuses do not apply pursuant to Subsection
14-16-3-1(C).
3-3(D)(2)   Reflectivity
The exterior surfaces of structures shall not have a light reflective value
(LRV) that results in glare in the eyes of flyers using the airport, impairs
visibility in the vicinity of the airport, or otherwise endangers the landing,
taking-off, or maneuvering of aircraft as determined by the City Aviation
Department and per applicable FAA regulations.
3-3(E)   TRANSPORTATION ROUTES
Public and private streets and rail lines are allowed within the Noise Contour
Sub-area. See also Subsection
14-16-5-4(L) (Easements or Rights-of-way).
3-3(F)   HAZARD MARKING AND LIGHTING
The FAA or the City Aviation Department may require the owner of an existing
structure or landscaping or the applicant for a new structure or landscaping in
the APO zone at his/her own expense to install, operate, and maintain such
markers and lights as may be necessary to indicate to flyers the presence of an
airport hazard. Such markers and lights shall conform to all applicable federal
regulations and specifications and may require permitting through the City
Planning Department.
3-3(G)   CROSS-REFERENCES
3-3(G)(1)   Subsection
14-16-3-1(C) (Building Height Bonuses Not Allowed).
3-3(G)(2)   Subsection
14-16-5-8(B)(2) (Outdoor and Site Lighting).
3-3(G)(3)   Subsection 14-16-6-4(J) (Referrals to Commenting Agencies).
3-3(G)(4)   Subsection
14-16-6-4(O)(3)(e) (Deviations to Overlay Standards Not Allowed).
3-3(G)(5)   Subsection
14-16-6-6(O)(3)(b) (Variance in the APO Zone).
3-3(G)(6)   Subsection
14-16-6-8(B)(2)(c) (Nonconforming Use of Land or a Structure in the APO Zone).
3-3(G)(7)   Subsection
14-16-6-8(D)(9) (Airport Protection Overlay (APO) Zone).
3-4   CHARACTER PROTECTION OVERLAY ZONES
3-4(A)   PURPOSE
The purpose of the Character Protection Overlay (CPO) zone is to preserve areas
with distinctive characteristics that are worthy of conservation but are not
historical or may lack sufficient significance to qualify as Historic
Protection Overlay (HPO) zones. These areas meet 1 or more of the following
characteristics:
3-4(A)(1)   Have recognized neighborhood identity and character.
3-4(A)(2)   Have high architectural value.
3-4(A)(3)   Have a relationship to HPO zones that make the area's conservation
critical.
3-4(A)(4)   Have a relationship with cultural landscapes identified in the
Albuquerque/ Bernalillo County Comprehensive Plan (ABC Comp Plan), as amended.
3-4(B)   BARELAS - CPO-1
3-4(B)(1)   Applicability
The CPO-1 standards apply in the following mapped area. Where the CPO-
1 boundary crosses a lot line, the entire lot is subject to these standards.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/b37713d5e40fc82694833f290401791f80be26ac/
IMAGES/0-0-0-6605.png]
3-4(B)(2)   Site Standards
3-4(B)(2)(a)   Lot Size, Minimum
   1.   Single-family detached dwellings in the R-1, R-T, and R-ML zone
districts, minimum: 2,500 square feet.
   2.   Townhouse dwellings in the R-MH zone district: 2,500 square feet.
3-4(B)(2)(b)   Lot Width, Minimum
   1.   Single-family detached dwellings in the R-1, R-T, and R-ML zone
districts: 25 feet.
   2.   R-MH zone district: 60 feet, except for townhouse dwellings, which have
a minimum lot width of 25 feet.
3-4(B)(3)   Setback Standards
3-4(B)(3)(a)   Contextual Standards
In the R-1, R-T, and R-ML zone districts, contextual standards for front
setbacks in Subsection
14-16-5-1(C)(2)(c) shall apply regardless of development type or whether the
development is in an Area of Consistency or an Area of Change.
3-4(B)(3)(b)   R-1 Zone District
   1.   Front, minimum: 10 feet; garages must be set back at least 20 feet.
   2.   Side, minimum: 3 feet for lots less than 40 feet in width outside the
Main Street area, or the setback required for adequate spacing between
buildings as required by with Articles 14-1, 14-2, and 14-3 of ROA 1994
(Uniform Administrative Code and Technical Codes, Fire Code, and Uniform
Housing Code).
3-4(B)(3)(c)   R-T, R-ML, and R-MH Zone Districts
   1.   Front, minimum: 10 feet; garages must be set back at least 20 feet.
   2.   Side, minimum: 3 feet for lots less than 36 feet in width outside the
Main Street area with a single-family detached dwelling, or the setback
required for adequate spacing between buildings as required by with Articles
14-1, 14-2, and 14-3 of ROA 1994 (Uniform Administrative Code and Technical
Codes, Fire Code, and Uniform Housing Code).
3-4(B)(3)(d)   MX-H Zone District
   1.   Front, minimum: 0 feet.
   2.   Side, minimum: 0 feet.
   3.   Rear, minimum: 0 feet.
3-4(B)(3)(e)   Exceptions
A 5-foot side or rear setback is required where a site abuts any lot with a
residential use at any of the following addresses:
   1.   709 First Street SW.
   2.   713 First Street SW.
   3.   704 2nd Street SW.
3-4(B)(4)   Building Height
3-4(B)(4)(a)   Maximum Building Height
   1.   Maximum building height allowances associated with a Center or Corridor
designation do not apply.
   2.   Building height bonuses do not apply pursuant to Subsection
14-16-3-1(C).
3-4(B)(4)(b)   Neighborhood Edges
   1.   The General Requirement for Building Height Stepdown in the
Neighborhood Edges Subsection
14-16-5-9(C)(1) applies regardless of Center or Corridor designation.
   2.   In the MX-H zone district, any portion of a building within 20 feet of
any lot line is limited to 35 feet.
3-4(B)(5)   Other Development Standards
In the R-ML and R-MH zone districts, off-street parking shall be provided at
the rear of the lot. Where alleys exist, alley access is required.
3-4(B)(6)   Cross-references
3-4(B)(6)(a)   Subsection
14-16-3-1(C) (Building Height Bonuses Not Allowed).
3-4(B)(6)(b)   Subsection
14-16-4-3(D)(22) (Paid Parking Lots Prohibited).
3-4(B)(6)(c)   Subsection
14-16-5-5(B)(2)(c) (Parking Reduction).
3-4(B)(6)(d)   Subsection
14-16-6-4(O)(3)(e) (Deviations to Overlay Standards Not Allowed).
3-4(C)   COORS BOULEVARD - CPO-2
3-4(C)(1)   Applicability
The CPO-2 standards apply in the following mapped area. Where the CPO-
2 boundary crosses a lot line, the entire lot is subject to these standards.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/b37713d5e40fc82694833f290401791f80be26ac/
IMAGES/0-0-0-6607.png]
3-4(C)(2)   Site Standards
Lot size, width, and usable open space shall be provided according to the
applicable standards listed in Section
14-16-5-1 (Dimensional Standards).
3-4(C)(3)   Setback Standards
3-4(C)(3)(a)   Bosque Buffer Strip
A 100-foot-wide buffer strip shall be established west of the Corrales
Riverside Drain between the Calabacillas Arroyo and Namaste Road. The buffer
strip shall remain undeveloped or be landscaped with perennial plants native to
the Bosque.
3-4(C)(3)(b)   Setback from Coors Boulevard
   1.   Setback from the public right-of-way of Coors Boulevard between Central
Avenue and Western Trail or Namaste Road, minimum: 15 feet.
   2.   Setback from the public right-of-way of Coors Boulevard between Western
Trail or Namaste Road and NM 528 (Alameda Boulevard), minimum: 35 feet.
3-4(C)(4)   Building Height and Bulk
3-4(C)(4)(a)   Buildings and structures shall not exceed the height limitation
in the underlying zone.
3-4(C)(4)(b)   Building height bonuses do not apply pursuant to Subsection
14-16-3-1(C).
3-4(C)(4)(c)   Buildings and structures shall not exceed the height limitation
in the underlying zone. Buildings within the Coors Boulevard - VPO-1 shall
comply with the height, bulk, and massing regulations of that Subsection
14-16-3-6(D).
3-4(C)(5)   Other Development Standards
3-4(C)(5)(a)   Floodplain
All development shall comply with all adopted drainage policies, including
restrictions on development in the 100-year floodplain.
3-4(C)(5)(b)   Grading
Changes to natural topography shall be kept to a minimum. On slopes of 10
percent or greater, no grading plan shall be approved until a specific site
plan has been approved for construction. Grading, drainage, or paving
proposals; Master Development Plans; and Site Plans shall retain the sense of
the natural features and vegetation. Reconstruction and revegetation to a
natural setting shall be pursued to the maximum extent practicable.
3-4(C)(5)(c)   Landscaping in Setback along Coors Boulevard
All of the following shall be incorporated into the required setback along
Coors Boulevard.
   1.   Vegetative coverage is required for a minimum of 50 percent of the
required setback area.
   2.   A combination of walls or decorative fences and a vegetative screen
that visually screens vehicular circulation areas, parking lots, and parked
cars from Coors Boulevard.
3-4(C)(5)(d)   Outdoor Lighting
The mounting height of light fixtures in off-street parking, other vehicular
use areas, and/or outdoor storage areas shall be no higher than 20 feet above
finished grade.
3-4(C)(5)(e)   Architectural Design and Details
   1.   The use of colors that contrast with the predominant color of the
building is limited to 10 percent of each fa ade.
   2.   Parapet walls shall be treated as an integral part of the building
design. Such walls shall not appear as unrelated visual elements.
   3.   In all zone districts, mechanical equipment shall be screened from
public view from streets adjacent to the lot or from adjacent properties. The
design of mechanical equipment screening shall be compatible with, and be an
integral element of, the building structure. Location of such equipment within
the building or at ground level is preferable to roof-mounting, unless such
location would adversely affect the streetscape, pedestrian circulation, or
open space.
3-4(C)(5)(f)   Signs
   1.   Any sign type or design is prohibited that:
      a.   Consists of banners, pennants, ribbons, streamers, strings of light
bulbs, or spinners, except in cases where a business must close or temporarily
relocate due to fire, unavoidable casualty, force majeure, or similar
circumstance. In these cases, one temporary banner up to 3 feet by 6 feet may
be allowed for up to 90 calendar days, with approval pursuant to Subsection
14-16-6-5(D) (Permit - Temporary Use).
      b.   Is in any way animated (including twinkling or wind-activated
movable parts), emits smoke, visible vapors, particles or odor, or rotates or
moves in any manner.
      c.   Has flashing lights incorporated as part of its design and
performance.
      d.   Is located (painted, affixed, etc.) on a water tower, storage tank,
smoke stack, utility pole, or other similar structure.
      e.   Is a building-mounted sign that extends above the wall of the
building.
      f.   Overhangs any property line.
   2.   On-premises signs in Mixed-use and Non-residential zone districts shall
comply with all of the following standards.
      a.   Where 1 freestanding sign is allowed by the underlying zone
district, a second freestanding sign is allowed on sites 5 acres or larger on
any street frontage longer than 1,500 feet.
      b.   The size of freestanding and projecting signs shall comply with the
sign standards in
Table 5-12-2, but not exceed 75 square feet.
      c.   The height of freestanding signs in the area north of Western Trail/
Namaste Road shall comply with the sign standards in
Table 5-12-2, but not exceed 9 feet in height above grade.
      d.   The height of building-mounted signs shall comply with the sign
standards in
Table 5-12-2, but not exceed the height of the building.
      e.   No illuminated sign, or any illuminated element of any sign, shall
flash, blink, or change its brightness.
      f.   No sign shall be erected, relocated, or maintained in such a manner
as to cover or intrude upon any architectural features of a building such as
windows, columns, moldings, or any major decoration or structural feature.
3-4(C)(6)   Cross-references
3-4(C)(6)(a)   Subsection
14-16-3-1(C) (Building Height Bonuses Not Allowed).
3-4(C)(6)(b)   Subsection
14-16-3-6(D) (View Protection in Coors Boulevard - VPO-1).
3-4(C)(6)(c)   Subsection
14-16-5-12(F)(4)(a) (Neon Signs along Central Avenue).
3-4(C)(6)(d)   Subsection
14-16-5-12(G)(1)(e) (Off-premises Signs Prohibited).
3-4(C)(6)(e)   Subsection
14-16-5-12(F)(4)(b)2 (Portable Signs Prohibited).
3-4(C)(6)(f)   Subsection
14-16-5-12(H)(2)(d) (Electronic Signs Prohibited).
3-4(C)(6)(g)   Subsection
14-16-6-4(O)(3)(e) (Deviations to Overlay Standards Not Allowed).
3-4(D)   DOWNTOWN NEIGHBORHOOD AREA - CPO-3
3-4(D)(1)   Applicability
The CPO-3 standards apply in the following mapped area. Where the CPO-
3 boundary crosses a lot line, the entire lot is subject to these standards.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/b37713d5e40fc82694833f290401791f80be26ac/
IMAGES/0-0-0-6609.png]
3-4(D)(2)   Site Standards
3-4(D)(2)(a)   Lot Size, Minimum
   1.   R-T zone district: 2,000 square feet.
   2.   Townhouse dwellings in the R-ML zone district: 1,000 square feet.
3-4(D)(2)(b)   Required Usable Open Space
   1.   R-T and MX-T Zone Districts
      a.   360 square feet per dwelling unit.
      b.   Where there is no alley access for a garage: 500 square feet per
dwelling unit.
   2.   R-ML Zone District
      a.   Efficiency or 1 bedroom: 150 square feet per unit.
      b.   Two (2) or more bedrooms: 200 square feet per unit.
   3.   MX-L Zone District
      50 square feet per dwelling unit.
   4.   MX-M Zone District
      a.   Lots abutting Central Avenue or Lomas Boulevard: 100 square feet per
dwelling unit.
      b.   A minimum 10 percent of the site area shall be designated as usable
open space for non-residential development and may be satisfied through
features such as patios, plazas, exterior pedestrian walkways, balconies, roof
decks, or courtyards.
3-4(D)(3)   Setback Standards
3-4(D)(3)(a)   Contextual Standards
In the R-1, R-T, and R-ML zone districts, contextual standards for front
setbacks in Subsection
14-16-5-1(C)(2)(c) shall apply regardless of development type or whether the
development is in an Area of Consistency or an Area of Change.
3-4(D)(3)(b)   MX-T and R-ML Zone Districts
   1.   Side, minimum: 5 feet; 10 feet if adjacent to an R-1A, R-1B or R-T zone
district.
   2.   Rear: 15 feet.
3-4(D)(3)(c)   MX-L and MX-M Zone Districts Abutting Central Avenue
   1.   Front, maximum
      a.   10 feet.
      b.   If there is a front patio or dining space: 15 feet.
   2.   Side, minimum
      a.   Interior: 0 feet.
      b.   Street side of corner lots: 5 feet.
      c.   Abutting an R-1 or R-T zone district: 10 feet.
   3.   Rear, minimum
      a.   15 feet.
      b.   Abutting an R-1 or R-T zone district: 25 feet.
   4.   Off-street parking must be set back a minimum of 10 feet from any lot
line abutting a public street. There is no minimum setback for off-street
parking areas from any lot line abutting an alley.
   5.   A minimum of 50 percent of street frontage shall be building. The
remaining 50 percent may be courtyard, landscaping, seating for outdoor dining,
or a combination thereof.
3-4(D)(4)   Building Height
3-4(D)(4)(a)   R-1 and R-T Zone Districts
A detached accessory dwelling shall not exceed the height of the primary
dwelling or 18 feet, whichever is less.
3-4(D)(4)(b)   R-ML and MX-T Zone Districts
   1.   Maximum building height: 40 feet.
   2.   Portions of buildings over 30 feet shall incorporate a minimum stepback
of 6 feet from the front street-facing fa ade.
3-4(D)(4)(c)   MX-M Zone District
   1.   Additional building height associated with Main Street areas is not
applicable.
   2.   For lots abutting Central Avenue, building height over 30 feet shall
incorporate a minimum stepback of 6 feet from the front street-facing fa ade.
3-4(D)(4)(d)   Building Height Bonuses
Building height bonuses do not apply pursuant to Subsection
14-16-3-1(C).
3-4(D)(5)   Other Development Standards
3-4(D)(5)(a)   Parking Location and Design
   1.   Parking Location
      a.   Where alleys are available, garages and other off-street parking
areas shall be located at the rear of the property and accessed from the alley.
The minimum rear setback for attached or detached garages off an alley is 5
feet. The minimum rear setback for detached garages accessed off an alley is 0
feet.
      b.   Where alleys are not available, garages and other off-street parking
areas may be located on the side of the primary building.
      c.   A garage door facing the street shall be set back a minimum of an
additional 5 feet beyond the horizontal plane of the front fa ade, which
includes a porch fa ade.
      d.   No garage door facing a street shall be more than 9 feet wide.
   2.   Parking Access
      Primary vehicular access to and from properties facing Central Avenue
shall be provided as follows.
      a.   For properties east of 14th Street, primary vehicular access from
Central Avenue is prohibited.
      b.   For properties west 14th Street, primary vehicular access shall be
from Central Avenue. Access to non-residential development along Central from
15th Street, 16th Street, and Fruit Avenue is prohibited.
3-4(D)(5)(b)   Building Design
   1.   Residential Building Design
      a.   The primary pedestrian entrance to the building shall be oriented
toward the street.
      b.   Reflective or mirrored glass is prohibited on any ground floor fa
ade.
      c.   Front entry porches with a minimum depth of 5 feet at finished floor
elevation are required.
      d.   Regardless of residential building type, zone district, or Center or
Corridor designation, fa ades shall meet the standards for windows in
Subsection
14-16-5-11(D)(2).
      e.   Individual dwellings in the R-T zone district shall be distinguished
through articulation of building massing, roof forms, color, or material.
      f.   Balconies in the R-ML zone shall be designed and located to minimize
impacts on the privacy of adjacent residential properties. Planters or
trellises can be used to obstruct views while retaining the benefits of upper-
level outdoor spaces.
   2.   Non-residential and Mixed-use Development
      a.   Front doors must face the nearest street and be connected to the
public sidewalk by a walkway.
      b.   Each ground floor fa ade shall contain a minimum of 50 percent of
its surfaces in transparent windows and/or doors, with the lower edge of window
sills no higher than 30 inches above the finished floor.
      c.   Each second floor and higher fa ade shall contain a minimum of 30
percent of its surfaces in transparent windows and/or doors.
      d.   In the MX-T, MX-M, and MX-L zone districts, each street-facing fa
ade shall incorporate variations in height, setback, or material at least every
50 feet of fa ade length.
      e.   In the R-ML zone district, fa ades facing a public street shall
change a minimum of every 50 feet along the length of the fa ade in height,
setback, or material.
      f.   In the MX-L zone district, shading shall be provided along the front
fa ade using canopies, awnings, portals, or shade trees spaced 25 feet on
center.
3-4(D)(5)(c)   Signs
   1.   R-ML Zone District
      a.   Freestanding signs shall not exceed 4 feet in height and 16 square
feet per sign face.
      b.   Internally lit signs are prohibited.
   2.   MX-T Zone District
      a.   Wall and window signs combined shall not exceed 6 percent of the
area of the fa ade to which they are related.
      b.   Freestanding signs for office uses shall not exceed 4 feet in height
and 16 square feet per sign face.
      c.   Internally lit signs are prohibited.
   3.   MX-L and MX-M Zone Districts
      a.   Wall, window, and canopy signs are the only allowed sign types.
      b.   One (1) canopy sign per entrance or exit shall be allowed.
      c.   Wall and window signs combined shall not exceed 6 percent of the
area of the fa ade to which they are related.
      d.   Internally lit signs are prohibited.
      e.   Notwithstanding Subsections a and d above, neon signs facing Central
Avenue may be building-mounted or marquee signs and may be internally lit.
3-4(D)(6)   Cross-references
3-4(D)(6)(a)   Subsection
14-16-3-1(C) (Building Height Bonuses Not Allowed).
3-4(D)(6)(b)   Subsection
14-16-4-3(D)(22) (Paid Parking Lots Prohibited).
3-4(D)(6)(c)   Subsection
14-16-4-3(F)(4) (Drive-through or drive up facility prohibited).
3-4(D)(6)(d)   Subsection
14-16-4-3(F)(6)(g) (Dwelling Unit, Accessory).
3-4(D)(6)(e)   Subsection
14-16-5-1(C)(2) (Contextual Residential Development).
3-4(D)(6)(f)   Subsection
14-16-5-5(F)(2)(a)3 (Carports Prohibited).
3-4(D)(6)(g)   Subsection
14-16-5-7(D)(3)(h) (Front and Side Yard Walls).
3-4(D)(6)(h)   Subsection
14-16-5-11(C)(1) (Primary Building Stepback).
3-4(D)(6)(i)   Subsection
14-16-5-12(F)(4)(a) (Neon Signs along Central Avenue).
3-4(D)(6)(j)   Subsection
14-16-5-12(H)(2)(f) (Electronic Signs Prohibited).
3-4(D)(6)(k)   Subsection
14-16-6-4(P)(3)(e) (Deviations to Overlay Standards Not Allowed).
3-4(D)(6)(l)   Subsection
14-16-6-6(B) (Demolition Review).
3-4(E)   EAST DOWNTOWN - CPO-4
3-4(E)(1)   Applicability
The CPO-4 standards apply to the specific lots in the following mapped area.
Where the CPO-4 boundary crosses a lot line, the entire lot is subject to these
standards. The CPO-4 standards apply to construction of new structures within
the East Downtown - HPO-1.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/b37713d5e40fc82694833f290401791f80be26ac/
IMAGES/0-0-0-6611.png]
3-4(E)(2)   Site Standards
Lot size, width, and usable open space shall be provided according to the
applicable standards listed in Section
14-16-5-1 (Dimensional Standards).
3-4(E)(3)   Setback Standards
3-4(E)(3)(a)   Front
   1.   Minimum: 0 feet.
   2.   Maximum: 1 foot.
3-4(E)(3)(b)   Side, Minimum
   1.   Interior: 0 feet.
   2.   Street side of corner lots: 5 feet.
3-4(E)(3)(c)   Rear, Minimum
   5 foot.
3-4(E)(4)   Building Height Bonuses
Building height bonuses do not apply pursuant to Subsection 14-16-3-1(C).
3-4(E)(5)   Building Height Stepdown
3-4(E)(5)(a)   Any portion of a building within 35 feet in any direction of an
R-1 or R-T zone district shall be limited to 30 feet, in which case
Neighborhood Edge provisions for building height in Subsection
14-16-5-9(C) do not apply.
3-4(E)(5)(b)   The height limit of any portion of a structure within 15 feet in
any direction of a significant or contributing building or City landmark in the
HPO-1 or HPO-5 zone shall be no more than 3 stories higher than the
contributing building or the maximum height allowed by the zone district,
whichever is less.
3-4(E)(6)   Other Development Standards
3-4(E)(6)(a)   Parking Location and Design
   1.   Parking areas shall be set back as follows:
      a.   A minimum of 30 percent of the lot depth from the front lot line.
      b.   A minimum of 10 feet from other lot lines that abut a street.
      c.   A minimum of 5 feet from the rear lot line.
   2.   Vehicular access is allowed only from a side street or alley.
   3.   Parking structures shall have uses from
Table 4-2-1 on the ground floor along at least 50 percent of the street-facing
fa ade of the parking structure.
      a.   Where ground floor uses aren't provided, opaque walls at least 3
feet high or vegetative screens at least 3 feet high at the time of planting
shall be provided.
      b.   Walls provided pursuant to Subsection a. above may be part of the
building or may be a separate wall consructed between the building and the
sidewalk.
3-4(E)(6)(b)   Fa ade Design
   1.   Each ground floor fa ade facing Central Avenue between Arno and High
Streets shall place the primary pedestrian entrance at sidewalk grade at or
within 10 feet of the front or street-side lot line and shall contain a minimum
of 60 percent of its surfaces in transparent windows and/or doors, as measured
to include the first 12 feet of building height above the sidewalk, with the
lower edge of window sills no higher than 30 inches above the finished floor.
   2.   All other ground floor fa ades facing Central Avenue or Broadway
Boulevard shall contain a minimum of 40 percent of their surfaces in
transparent windows and/or doors, as measured to include the first 12 feet of
building height above the sidewalk, with the lower edge of window sills no
higher than 30 inches above the finished floor.
   3.   Wall openings shall not span vertically more than 1 story; double
height entryways are prohibited.
3-4(E)(6)(c)   Street Walls
   1.   The street wall shall be set back no more than 8 inches from any lot
line abutting a street or adjacent fa ade alignment.
   2.   An opaque vehicle entry gate, of a maximum 18 feet wide, and a
pedestrian entry gate, of a maximum 6 feet wide, are both allowed as limited
substitutions within any street wall length.
   3.   All street wall fa ades shall be as carefully designed as the building
fa ade, with the finished side facing the street.
   4.   Where clearly visible from the street, all of the following materials
are allowed:
      a.   Native/regional stone and equivalent imitation stone.
      b.   Metal (e.g. wrought iron, welded steel, and/or aluminum electro-
statically plated black).
      c.   Brick.
      d.   Stucco.
      e.   A combination of materials (e.g. stone piers with brick infill
panels).
   5.   Metal work may additionally be treated to imitate a wrought-iron or
copper patina.
   6.   Copings shall project between 1 inch and 4 inches from the face of the
wall.
3-4(E)(7)   Cross-references
3-4(E)(7)(a)   Subsection
14-16-3-1(C) (Building Height Bonuses Not Allowed).
3-4(E)(7)(b)   Subsection
14-16-3-5(G) (Historic Preservation in East Downtown - HPO-1).
3-4(E)(7)(c)   Subsection
14-16-4-3(F)(4) (Drive-through or drive up facility prohibited).
3-4(E)(7)(d)   Subsection
14-16-5-5(G) (Parking Structure Design).
3-4(E)(7)(e)   Subsection
14-16-5-12(F)(3) (Rooftop Signs Allowed).
3-4(E)(7)(f)   Subsection
14-16-5-12(F)(4)(a) (Neon Signs along Central Avenue).
3-4(E)(7)(g)   Subsection
14-16-5-12(G)(1)(e) (Off-premises Signs Prohibited).
3-4(E)(7)(h)   Subsection
14-16-6-4(P)(3)(e) (Deviations to Overlay Standards Not Allowed).
3-4(E)(7)(i)   Subsection
14-16-6-6(B) (Demolition Review).
3-4(F)   HIGH DESERT - CPO-5
3-4(F)(1)   Applicability
The CPO-5 standards apply in the following mapped area. Where the CPO-
5 boundary crosses a lot line, the entire lot is subject to these standards.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/b37713d5e40fc82694833f290401791f80be26ac/
IMAGES/0-0-0-6613.png]
3-4(F)(2)   Site Standards
The following standards apply only to portions of the CPO-5 that are not within
the Panhandle Sub-area.
3-4(F)(2)(a)   Lot Size, Minimum
   21,780 square feet ( acre).
3-4(F)(2)(b)   Lot Width, Minimum
   100 feet.
3-4(F)(2)(c)   Development Envelopes
All development on the lot must take place within an envelope that encloses no
more than 12,000 square feet of land. The development envelope must include all
buildings, structures, and landscaping other than native plant species on the
site.
3-4(F)(3)   Setback Standards
The following standards apply only to portions of the CPO-5 that are not within
the Panhandle Area.
3-4(F)(3)(a)   Development envelopes shall be set back as follows:
   1.   From lot lines, minimum: 10 feet.
   2.   From rights-of-way, minimum: 20 feet.
3-4(F)(3)(b)   Within the Highlands Sub-area, the minimum setback from the edge
of the CPO-5 shall be 100 feet, except that the minimum setback from the
western boundary of Simms Park is 360 feet.
3-4(F)(4)   Building Height
3-4(F)(4)(a)   Highlands Sub-area
   1.   From the highest point of natural grade abutting a building, the
building height (excluding chimneys) shall not exceed 19 feet. (See figure
below.)
   2.   From the lowest point of natural grade abutting any individual mass of
a building, the building height (excluding chimneys) shall not exceed 22 feet
in height. (See figure below.)
   3.   From the lowest point of natural grade abutting a building, the overall
building height (excluding chimneys) shall not exceed 26 feet. (See figure
below.)
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/b37713d5e40fc82694833f290401791f80be26ac/
IMAGES/0-0-0-6615.png]
   4.   Within 250 feet of the northern boundary of the CPO-5, no part of a
building or structure (exclusive of chimneys) shall be higher than any straight
line beginning 5 feet above the finished grade at the centerline of Simms Park
Road just north of the CPO-5 and extending through any point 16 feet over the
average natural grade along the north line of the platted building envelope in
order to minimize their visual impact on the approach of Simms Park.
3-4(F)(4)(b)   Panhandle Sub-area
Maximum building height: 26 feet.
3-4(F)(4)(c)   Building Height Bonuses
Building height bonuses do not apply pursuant to Subsection
14-16-3-1(C).
3-4(F)(5)   Other Development Standards
The following standards apply only in the Highlands Sub-area.
3-4(F)(5)(a)   Color
Exterior surfaces of buildings and structures, including but not limited to
roofs, mechanical devices, roof vents, and screening materials, shall be colors
with LRV of 40 percent or less.
   1.   Colors include the yellow ochres, browns, dull reds, and grey-greens
existing in the natural landscape of the mesa and in the foothills.
   2.   Trim materials on fa ades constituting less than 20 percent of the fa
ade's opaque surface may be any color.
3-4(F)(5)(b)   Reflectivity
Reflective or mirrored glass is prohibited.
3-4(F)(5)(c)   Roofs
Pitched roofs shall comply with all of the following requirements.
   1.   The maximum slope of the roof is 1:3.
   2.   No ridges or peaks may be silhouetted against the skyline. They must
abut a parapet or wall that is higher.
   3.   No metal roofs or asphalt shingles are allowed.
   4.   No mechanical equipment or skylights may be located on pitched roofs.
   5.   Tile roof materials must be 1 of the following type or characteristic:
      a.   Two-part molded.
      b.   Variegated colors darker than the building walls.
      c.   Non-reflective.
      d.   Mudded or grouted joints.
      e.   Serpentine in pattern.
3-4(F)(5)(d)   Massing and Articulation
   1.   Each building shall be composed of at least 3 building masses
perceivable in each building elevation and distinguished from one another by
both horizontal and vertical offsets of at least 2 feet. The height of each
mass shall be measured from its highest adjacent natural grade. While it is
anticipated that buildings will follow natural site contours, nothing in these
standards shall prohibit residences with a single floor level, provided that
the building height requirements previously described are otherwise met. The
floor or roof plan of each structure should clearly show the extent of each
building, with relevant information pertaining to its height above grade.
   2.   All doors and windows not protected by overhangs or portales shall be
recessed at least 4 inches as measured from the door surface or window sash to
the exterior face of the finished wall.
3-4(F)(5)(e)   Views
   1.   The development envelope, and buildings and outdoor lighting within the
development envelope, shall be sited to minimize impacts to views to and from
adjacent lots and views of development from adjacent public rights-of-way.
   2.   Within 250 feet of the northern boundary of the CPO-5, views of the
north line of any platted building envelope from Simms Park Road at its
centerline shall be blocked by topography and existing or planted native
vegetation that forms a vegetative screen at least 75 percent opaque at
maturity, either within the CPO-5 or the National Forest. Sightings shall be
taken from 90 degrees (perpendicular) from the centerline of Simms Park Road to
the centerline of the north line of each platted building envelope and then 45
degrees generally northwest from the centerline of the north line of the
platted building envelope back to the centerline of Simms Park Road.
3-4(F)(6)   Cross-references
3-4(F)(6)(a)   Subsection
14-16-3-1(C) (Building Height Bonuses Not Allowed).
3-4(F)(6)(b)   Subsection
14-16-6-4(P)(3)(e) (Deviations to Overlay Standards Not Allowed).
3-4(G)   LOS DURANES - CPO-6
3-4(G)(1)   Applicability
The CPO-6 standards apply in the following mapped area. Where the CPO-
6 boundary crosses a lot line, the entire lot is subject to these standards.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/b37713d5e40fc82694833f290401791f80be26ac/
IMAGES/0-0-0-6617.png]
3-4(G)(2)   Site Standards
In the R-A zone district, building coverage shall not exceed 50 percent of the
lot.
3-4(G)(3)   Setback Standards
3-4(G)(3)(a)   Front Setbacks
   1.   Single-family and two-family detached dwellings, minimum: 10 feet to
encourage staggered setbacks, compliant with 1 of the following, as applicable.
      a.   Front setbacks shall be within 5 feet of the average setback of
existing primary dwellings on properties with a front yard abutting the same
street as the subject property and within 330 feet of the subject property
along the length of the street the lot faces. This distance shall be measured
along the street from each corner of the subject property's lot line on the
same side of the street as the subject property. (See figure below for an
illustration of this measurement.)
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/b37713d5e40fc82694833f290401791f80be26ac/
IMAGES/0-0-0-6619.png]
      b.   In new developments of 5 or more single-family and/or two-family
detached dwellings, front setbacks shall be within 5 feet of the front setback
of 1 existing single-family or two-family detached dwelling located on an
abutting lot facing the same street as the subject property.
   2.   Multi-family residential development, minimum: 15 feet.
3-4(G)(3)(b)   Setbacks for Cluster Development Dwellings
   1.   Front, minimum
      a.   From public right-of-way: 15 feet.
      b.   From a private way: 10 feet.
   2.   Rear, minimum
   From cluster development boundary: 25 feet.
   3.   Side, minimum
   From cluster development boundary: 10 feet.
3-4(G)(4)   Building Height
3-4(G)(4)(a)   R-A, R-1, R-T, and R-ML Zone Districts
   1.   Building height, maximum: 26 feet.
   2.   Portions of buildings over 15 feet in height must meet 1 of the
following standards, as noted.
      a.   Single-family and Two-family Detached Dwellings
         Any portion of the building over 15 feet in height is limited to 65
percent of the building footprint.
      b.   Townhouse and Multi-family Dwellings
         Any portion of the building over 15 feet in height is limited to 75
percent of the building footprint.
3-4(G)(4)(b)   MX-M Zone District
Building height, maximum: 35 feet for buildings located more than 450 feet from
the right-of-way of Interstate Highway 40.
3-4(G)(4)(c)   Building Height Bonuses
Building height bonuses do not apply pursuant to Subsection
14-16-3-1(C).
3-4(G)(5)   Other Development Standards
3-4(G)(5)(a)   Common Open Space in Cluster Developments
   1.   If the project site abuts a ditch, lateral, or drain designated on the
Los Duranes Community Acequias map in Subsection
14-16-5-2(G) (Irrigation Facility (Acequia) Standards), at least of the common
open space shall be abutting and parallel to this facility. The common open
space may include an easement associated with a Los Duranes Community Acequia.
   2.   Common open space may be within a plazuela compound (i.e. bounded on 3
sides by detached or attached dwellings), provided that no street goes through
the common open space.
   3.   If a common open space abuts a Los Duranes Community Acequia or is in a
plazuela compound, it is not required to be partially visible from a public
right-of-way.
3-4(G)(5)(b)   Parking Access
Two-family detached dwellings and townhouses: 2 adjoining dwelling units with
vehicle access from the street are required to share a drive pad with a maximum
width of 16 feet.
3-4(G)(5)(c)   Drive-through Facilities
   1.   Drive-through service windows shall not be on any fa ade facing Rio
Grande Boulevard.
   2.   Drive-through service windows shall be oriented away from pedestrian
areas, including but not limited to sidewalks, plazas, Residential zone
districts, and other public streets, where practicable.
   3.   Drive-through lanes shall not be located parallel to Rio Grande
Boulevard, unless they are behind a building.
3-4(G)(5)(d)   Building Separation, Minimum
Townhouse and multi-family dwellings: 15 feet.
3-4(G)(5)(e)   Building Design
   1.   Single-family detached dwellings: The front fa ade shall not exceed 120
percent of the average width of existing primary buildings on properties with a
front yard abutting the same street as the subject property and within 330 feet
of the subject property along the length of the street the lot faces. This
distance shall be measured along the street from each corner of the subject
property's lot line on the same side of the street as the subject property.
(See figure below for an illustration of this measurement.)
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/b37713d5e40fc82694833f290401791f80be26ac/
IMAGES/0-0-0-6621.png]
   2.   Townhouse dwellings: Fa ades of townhouses on the same frontage shall
be articulated at least every 40 feet or every third dwelling unit with a
minimum change of 2 feet in setback.
   3.   Multi-family residential development in any Residential or Mixed-use
zone district shall comply with all of the following requirements.
      a.   Entrances to second floor units shall be internal to the building.
      b.   The maximum building length shall be 80 feet.
3-4(G)(6)   Cross-references
3-4(G)(6)(a)   Subsection
14-16-3-4(L) (Rio Grande Boulevard - CPO-11).
Where there is conflict between the Los Duranes - CPO-6 and the Rio Grande
Boulevard - CPO-11, the provisions of the Los Duranes - CPO-6 prevail, except
that the second story building stepback requirements in the Rio Grande
Boulevard - CPO-11 also apply.
3-4(G)(6)(b)   Subsection
14-16-3-1(C) (Building Height Bonuses Not Allowed).
3-4(G)(6)(c)   Subsection
14-16-4-3(B)(2) (Dwelling, Cluster Development).
3-4(G)(6)(d)   Subsection
14-16-4-3(D)(22)(d) (Paid Parking Lots Prohibited).
3-4(G)(6)(e)   Subsection
14-16-5-2(G)(4) (Acequia Setbacks).
3-4(G)(6)(f)   Subsection
14-16-5-3(D)(1) (Sidewalks in Residential Development).
3-4(G)(6)(g)   Subsection
14-16-5-11(C)(1) (Primary Building Stepback).
3-4(G)(6)(h)   Subsection
14-16-5-12(G)(1)(e) (Off-premises Signs Prohibited).
3-4(G)(6)(i)   Subsection
14-16-6-4(O)(3)(e) (Deviations to Overlay Standards Not Allowed).
3-4(H)   MARTINEZTOWN/SANTA BARBARA - CPO-7
3-4(H)(1)   Applicability
The CPO-7 standards apply in the following mapped area. Where the CPO-
7 boundary crosses a lot line, the entire lot is subject to these standards.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/b37713d5e40fc82694833f290401791f80be26ac/
IMAGES/0-0-0-6623.png]
3-4(H)(2)   Site Standards
3-4(H)(2)(a)   Lot Width, Minimum
Multi-family dwellings (where allowable): 60 feet.
3-4(H)(2)(b)   Usable Open Space, Minimum
Usable open space for multi-family dwellings is required as follows:
   1.   General
      a.   Efficiency or 1 bedroom: 300 square feet per unit.
      b.   Two (2) bedrooms: 350 square feet per unit.
      c.   Three (3) or more bedrooms: 400 square feet per unit.
   2.   MX-T Zone District
      500 square feet per unit.
3-4(H)(3)   Setback Standards
3-4(H)(3)(a)   Low-density Residential Development
   1.   Front, minimum: 10 feet.
   2.   Garages and carports, minimum: 20 feet.
3-4(H)(3)(b)   MX-L Zone District
Front, minimum: 10 feet.
3-4(H)(4)   Building Height
3-4(H)(4)(a)   In Residential and Mixed-use zone districts on project sites
less than 5 acres, the maximum building height is 26 feet.
3-4(H)(4)(b)   Building height bonuses do not apply pursuant to Subsection
14-16-3-1(C).
3-4(H)(5)   Signs
3-4(H)(5)(a)   MX-L Zone District
Signs are allowed pursuant to Subsection
14-16-5-12 (Signs) for the MX-T zone district.
3-4(H)(5)(b)   MX-M Zone District
   1.   Signs on lots abutting arterial or collector streets are allowed
pursuant to Subsection
14-16-5-12 (Signs) for the MX-M zone district.
   2.   Signs on lots in other locations are allowed pursuant to Subsection
14-16-5-12 (Signs) for the MX-L zone district.
3-4(H)(6)   Cross-references
3-4(H)(6)(a)   Subsection
14-16-3-1(C) (Building Height Bonuses Not Allowed).
3-4(H)(6)(b)   Subsection
14-16-4-3(D)(22) (Paid Parking Lots Prohibited).
3-4(H)(6)(c)   Subsection
14-16-6-4(O)(3)(e) (Deviations to Overlay Standards Not Allowed).
3-4(I)   NOB HILL/HIGHLAND - CPO-8
3-4(I)(1)   Applicability
The CPO-8 standards apply in the following mapped area. Where the CPO-
8 boundary crosses a lot line, the entire lot is subject to these standards.
 
3-4(I)(2)   Site Standards
Lot size, width, and usable open space shall be provided according to the
applicable standards listed in Section
14-16-5-1 (Dimensional Standards).
3-4(I)(3)   Setback Standards
3-4(I)(3)(a)   Side, Minimum
   0 feet.
3-4(I)(3)(b)   Rear, Minimum
   0 feet.
3-4(I)(3)(c)   Street Wall for Existing Setbacks
Where existing buildings are set back from the front lot line along Central
Avenue, the street wall shall be strengthened through vegetative screens or
walls no more than 3 feet high along a minimum of 50 percent of the length of
the building or lot along each street frontage.
3-4(I)(4)   Building Height
3-4(I)(4)(a)   Exception to Unlimited Building Height
The provision for unlimited building height over 100 feet from each lot line in
the Dimensional Standards Tables in Section
14-16-5-1 does not apply. Maximum building heights are pursuant to Subsection
14-16-3-4(I)(4)(d) below.
3-4(I)(4)(b)   Exception to Centers and Corridors Building Heights
Within the sub-areas within the Nob Hill/Highland - CPO-8 where the maximum
building height is pursuant to Subsection
14-16-3-4(I)(4)(d), building height allowances associated with a Center or
Corridor designation do not apply.
3-4(I)(4)(c)   Exception to Building Height Bonuses
Building height bonuses in
Table 5-1-1: Residential Zone District Dimensional Standards or
Table 5-1-2: Mixed-use Zone District Dimensional Standards do not apply in any
Overlay zone pursuant to Subsection
14-16-3-1(C). Within the Nob Hill/Highland – CPO-8, maximum building height,
including bonuses, is pursuant to Subsection
14-16-3-4(I)(4)(d) below.
3-4(I)(4)(d)   Maximum Building Height
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/b37713d5e40fc82694833f290401791f80be26ac/
IMAGES/0-0-0-6627.png]
   1.   In sub-area 1 mapped above, between Girard Boulevard and Aliso Drive,
building heights shall not exceed 30 feet (2 stories), except that 1 of the
bonuses in Subsection 5 below may be applied.
   2.   In sub-area 2 mapped above, generally between Aliso Drive and Graceland
Drive (north of Silver Avenue) or Washington Street (south of Silver Avenue),
building heights shall not exceed 45 feet (3 stories), except that 1 of the
bonuses in Subsection 5 below may be applied.
   3.   In sub-area 3 mapped above, generally between Graceland Drive and San
Mateo Boulevard, building heights shall not exceed 65 feet (5 stories), except
that up to 2 of the bonuses in Subsection 5 below may be applied.
   4.   In sub-area 4 mapped above, generally between Washington Street and
Jefferson Street south of Silver Avenue, building heights shall not exceed 55
feet (4 stories), except that 1 of the bonuses in Subsection 5 below may be
applied.
   5.   The following bonuses may be applied for an additional 12 feet (1
story) of building height each as noted in Subsections 1 through 4 above:
      a.   Workforce Housing Bonus
      b.   Structured Parking Bonus
      c.   Ground Floor Commercial Bonus
3-4(I)(4)(e)   Neighborhood Edges
   1.   The Building Height Stepdown for Neighborhood Edges in Subsection
14-16-5-9(C)(1) (General Requirement) applies regardless of Center or Corridor
designation.
   2.   For properties fronting the south side of Copper Avenue between
Graceland Drive and San Mateo Boulevard, the maximum building height shall be
as follows:
      a.   For any portion of a building within 50 feet of a lot line abutting
Copper Avenue: 45 feet.
      b.   For any portion of a building more than 50 feet and up to 100 feet
from a lot line abutting Copper Avenue: 65 feet.
3-4(I)(5)   Other Development Standards
3-4(I)(5)(a)   Vehicular Access
   1.   Vehicular access to the site shall be provided from the alley. Where it
is impractical, as determined by the Planning Director, parking ingress and
egress to the site may be provided in 1 of the following ways.
      a.   One (1) ingress location, no more than 12 feet in width, is allowed
from the side street.
      b.   One (1) ingress/egress location, no more than 30 feet in width, is
allowed from the side street if Subsection a is infeasible.
   2.   Alternate vehicular ingress/egress may be approved where pedestrian
access to establishments or residences is infeasible due to the adjacent
sidewalk grades as determined by the Planning Director.
3-4(I)(5)(b)   Fa ade Design
The following articulation standards apply to all properties within the sub-
area of Nob Hill/Highland - CPO-8 mapped below.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/b37713d5e40fc82694833f290401791f80be26ac/
IMAGES/0-0-0-6631.png]
   1.   Each ground floor fa ade facing Central Avenue shall do all of the
following:
      a.   Place the primary pedestrian entrance at sidewalk grade at or within
20 feet of the front or street-side lot line.
      b.   Contain a minimum of 60 percent of its surfaces in transparent
windows and/or doors, as measured to include the first 12 feet of building
height above the sidewalk, with the lower edge of window sills no higher than
30 inches above the finished floor.
   2.   On fa ades facing Central Avenue between Girard Boulevard and
Washington Street, openings shall occur every 25 feet, and building fa ades
shall change in height, setback, or material every 25 feet.
   3.   On fa ades facing Central Avenue between Washington Street and San
Mateo Boulevard, openings shall occur every 40 feet, and building fa ades shall
change in height, setback, or material every 40 feet.
   4.   On streets that intersect Central Avenue, each ground floor street-
facing fa ade within 150 feet of Central Avenue or to the first alley or street
beyond Central Avenue, whichever occurs first, shall do all of the following:
      a.   Have at least 1 entrance within 40 feet of Central Avenue.
      b.   Contain a minimum of 60 percent of its surfaces in transparent
windows and/or doors, as measured to include the first 12 feet of building
height above the sidewalk, with the lower edge of window sills no higher than
30 inches above the finished floor.
   5.   Each second floor and higher street-facing fa ade shall comply with the
following requirements, as applicable.
      a.   Non-residential and Mixed-use Development
      Each fa ade shall contain a minimum of 40 percent of its surfaces in
transparent windows and/or doors.
      b.   Residential Development
      Each fa ade shall contain a minimum of 20 percent of its surface in
transparent windows and/or doors.
      c.   All Development
      The lower edges of windows shall be located no more than 30 inches above
the finished floor.
   6.   Existing fa ades of buildings that are designated on State and National
Historic Registers, as City landmarks, or as characteristic buildings in the
map above, and that abut a public right-of-way, shall comply with all of the
following requirements.
      a.   Fa ade rehabilitation or remodeling shall maintain the historically
characteristic window and door proportion and character of the building.
      b.   Any new building materials shall be consistent with historically
employed materials on such fa ades.
      c.   Additions to characteristic buildings shall reflect the historic fa
ade demarcations (i.e., walls, pilasters, or similar elements).
      d.   Additions above characteristic buildings shall be vertically aligned
with the historic demising walls of the establishments below. (See figure
below.)
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/b37713d5e40fc82694833f290401791f80be26ac/
IMAGES/0-0-0-6635.png]
3-4(I)(5)(c)   Signs
   1.   Building-mounted signs shall not extend above the wall of the building
more than 5 feet.
   2.   Freestanding signs are prohibited, except for pole signs that meet the
provisions of Subsection
14-16-5-12(F)(4)(a) (Neon Signs along Central Avenue) and any other applicable
provisions of Section
14-16-5-12 (Signs).
3-4(I)(5)(d)   Street Cross Sections
Development within the Nob Hill/Highland - CPO-8 shall comply with all
requirements in the DPM related to transportation design standards, including
but not limited to street cross sections.
3-4(I)(6)   Cross-references
3-4(I)(6)(a)   Subsection
14-16-3-1(C) (Building Height Bonuses Not Allowed).
3-4(I)(6)(b)   Subsection
14-16-4-3(F)(4) (Drive-through or drive up facility prohibited).
3-4(I)(6)(c)   Subsection
14-16-5-5(B)(2) (Parking Exemptions).
3-4(I)(6)(d)   Subsection
14-16-5-5(F)(2) (Carports Prohibited).
3-4(I)(6)(e)   Section
14-16-5-7 (Walls and Fences).
3-4(I)(6)(f)   Subsection
14-16-5-11(C)(1) (Primary Building Stepback).
3-4(I)(6)(g)   Subsection
14-16-5-12(G)(1)(e) (Off-premises Signs Prohibited).
3-4(I)(6)(h)   Subsection
14-16-6-4(O)(3)(e) (Deviations to Overlay Standards Not Allowed).
3-4(I)(6)(i)   Subsection
14-16-6-6(B) (Demolition Review).
3-4(J)   NORTH 4TH CORRIDOR - CPO-9
3-4(J)(1)   Applicability
The CPO-9 standards apply in the following mapped area. Where the CPO-
9 boundary crosses a lot line, the entire lot is subject to these standards.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/b37713d5e40fc82694833f290401791f80be26ac/
IMAGES/0-0-0-6639.png]
3-4(J)(2)   Site and Setback Standards
Lot size, width, usable open space, and setbacks shall be provided according to
the applicable standards in Section
14-16-5-1 (Dimensional Standards), except for the following:
3-4(J)(2)(a)   Any setback from a lot line abutting 4th Street, minimum: 10
feet.
3-4(J)(2)(b)   Any setback from a lot line abutting 4th Street, maximum: 15
feet.
3-4(J)(3)   Building Height and Stepback
3-4(J)(3)(a)   Maximum Building Height
   1.   The maximum building height is 55 feet for properties zoned MX-M, MX-H,
NR-C, NR-BP, NR-LM, or NR-GM.
   2.   Building height bonuses do not apply pursuant to Subsection
14-16-3-1(C).
   3.   If more than 165 feet of frontage along 4th Street is being developed
or redeveloped, 1/3 of the new development, with any fractions rounded down to
the nearest foot, is limited to 45 feet in height.
3-4(J)(3)(b)   Building Stepback
Any portion of a building over 30 feet tall shall incorporate a minimum
stepback of 6 feet from any fa ade facing 4th Street.
3-4(J)(4)   Other Development Standards
3-4(J)(4)(a)   Building Design
Regardless of any Center or Corridor designation that applies to the subject
property, building fa ades shall meet the requirements in Subsection
14-16-5-11(E)(2)(b) (Urban Centers, Activity Centers, and Main Street and
Premium Transit Areas).
3-4(J)(4)(b)   Street Cross Sections
Development within the North 4th Corridor - CPO-9 shall comply with all
requirements in the DPM related to transportation design standards, including
but not limited to street cross sections.
3-4(J)(5)   Cross-references
3-4(J)(5)(a)   Subsection
14-16-3-1(C) (Building Height Bonuses Not Allowed).
3-4(J)(5)(b)   Subsection
14-16-4-3(D)(39) (Liquor Retail).
3-4(J)(5)(c)   Subsection
14-16-5-12(G)(1)(e)10 (Off-premises Signs Prohibited).
3-4(J)(5)(d)   Subsection
14-16-5-12(H)(2)(f)3 (Electronic Signs Prohibited).
3-4(J)(5)(e)   Subsection
14-16-6-4(O)(3)(e) (Deviations to Overlay Standards Not Allowed).
3-4(K)   NORTH I-25 - CPO-10
3-4(K)(1)   Applicability
The CPO-10 standards apply in the following mapped area. Where the CPO-10
boundary crosses a lot line, the entire lot is subject to these standards.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/b37713d5e40fc82694833f290401791f80be26ac/
IMAGES/0-0-0-6641.png]
3-4(K)(2)   Site and Setback Standards
Lot size, width, usable open space, and setbacks shall be provided according to
the applicable standards listed in Section
14-16-5-1 (Dimensional Standards).
3-4(K)(3)   Building Height
3-4(K)(3)(a)   Exception to Unlimited Building Height
The provision for unlimited building height over 100 feet from each lot line in
the Dimensional Standards Tables in Section
14-16-5-1 does not apply. Maximum building heights are pursuant to Subsection
14-16-3-4(K)(3)(b) below.
3-4(K)(3)(b)   Maximum Building Height
Maximum building height for each sub-area within the North I-25 - CPO-10 is
pursuant to this Subsection
14-16-3-4(K)(3)(b).
   1.   In sub-area 1: 26 feet.
   2.   In sub-area 2: 39 feet.
   3.   In sub-area 3: 52 feet.
   4.   In sub-area 4: 65 feet, except for hotel or motel uses, which are
limited to 120 feet (10 stories).
3-4(K)(3)(c)   Building Height Bonuses
Building height bonuses do not apply pursuant to Subsection
14-16-3-1(C).
3-4(K)(4)   Other Development Standards
3-4(K)(4)(a)   Outdoor Lighting
   1.   The height of light poles within 330 feet in any direction of Balloon
Fiesta Park as delineated on its approved Master Plan shall not exceed 20 feet.
   2.   Pedestrian-scale lighting for sidewalks and trails on properties
abutting Balloon Fiesta Park shall be limited to bollard lighting only.
3-4(K)(4)(b)   Building Design
All multi-family, mixed-use, and non-residential development shall comply with
the standards in Subsection
14-16-5-11(E) (Mixed-use and Non-residential Zone Districts), with the
following exceptions.
   1.   Notwithstanding the exclusion of the NR-LM and NR-GM zone districts in
Subsection
14-16-5-11(E) (Mixed-use and Non-residential Zone Districts), development in
these zone districts shall meet the standards in that Subsection.
   2.   Primary building fa ades that face a public street shall wrap around
the building at a distance of 1/3 the depth of the building or 20 feet,
whichever is greater.
   3.   Building materials and colors shall have a light reflective value (LRV)
ranging from 20 percent to 50 percent.
   4.   Reflective or mirrored glass is prohibited.
3-4(K)(4)(c)   On-premises Signs
Sign standards for the MX-M zone district in Subsection
14-16-5-12(F) (On-premises Signs) apply in the Mixed-use and Non-residential
zone districts of CPO-10 unless specified otherwise in this Subsection
14-16-3-4(K)(4)(c).
   1.   Projecting Signs
      a.   Maximum size: 2 feet in height and 4 feet in width.
      b.   A projecting sign on a multi-story building shall be located no
higher than the top of the ground floor.
   2.   Freestanding Signs
      a.   Pole signs are prohibited.
      b.   Monument signs shall be a maximum size of 50 square feet with a
maximum height of 13 feet, including a base with a height of at least 2 and no
more than 3 feet.
      c.   1 additional monument sign is allowed on a premises of 5 acres or
more.
   3.   Alameda Boulevard Sub-area
Additional standards in this Subsection
14-16-3-4(K)(4)(c)3 apply in the following mapped area along Alameda Boulevard.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/b37713d5e40fc82694833f290401791f80be26ac/
IMAGES/0-0-0-6643.png]
      a.   Wall signs shall not exceed 10 percent of the fa ade area, inclusive
of door and window openings.
      b.   Freestanding signs shall be monument signs only with a maximum
height of 8 feet.
      c.   No sign or any part of a sign shall rotate.
3-4(K)(5)   Cross-references
3-4(K)(5)(a)   Subsection
14-16-3-1(C) (Building Height Bonuses Not Allowed).
3-4(K)(5)(b)   Subsection 14-16-4-3(E)(12)(k) (Collocations, Public Utility
Collocations, and Architecturally Integrated WTFs)
3-4(K)(5)(c)   Subsection
14-16-5-2(H) (Landfill Buffers).
3-4(K)(5)(d)   Subsection
14-16-5-12(F)(4)(b)2 (Portable Signs Prohibited).
3-4(K)(5)(e)   Subsection
14-16-5-12(H)(2)(f) (Electronic Signs Prohibited).
3-4(K)(5)(f)   Subsection
14-16-5-12(G)(1)(e) (Off-premises Signs Prohibited).
3-4(K)(5)(g)   Subsection
14-16-6-4(O)(3)(e) (Deviations to Overlay Standards Not Allowed).
3-4(L)   RIO GRANDE BOULEVARD - CPO-11
3-4(L)(1)   Applicability
The CPO-11 standards apply in the following mapped area. Where the CPO-11
boundary crosses a lot line, the entire lot is subject to these standards.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/b37713d5e40fc82694833f290401791f80be26ac/
IMAGES/0-0-0-6645.png]
3-4(L)(2)   Site Standards
Lot size, width, and usable open space shall be provided according to the
applicable standards listed in Section
14-16-5-1 (Dimensional Standards).
3-4(L)(3)   Setback Standards
Setback from the right?of?way of Rio Grande Boulevard between Indian School
Road and Montano Road, minimum: 25 feet in the R?A zone and 20 feet in all
other zones.
3-4(L)(4)   Building Stepback
Portions of buildings over 1 story in height shall be stepped back a minimum of
6 feet from the fa ade of the preceding story on sides of the building abutting
a street or a lot containing any use in the Household Living category.
3-4(L)(5)   Other Development Standards
3-4(L)(5)(a)   Outdoor Storage and Display
   1.   All outdoor storage and display of construction equipment, materials,
or vehicles (other than as required for temporary construction projects) shall
meet the standards in Subsection
14-16-5-6(G) (Screening of Mechanical Equipment and Support Areas) and in
Subsection
14-16-4-3(D)(25) (Construction Contractor Facility and Yard).
   2.   Outdoor storage or display of construction equipment and materials
(other than as required for temporary construction projects) shall be located
at least 10 feet outside of the public right-of-way of Rio Grande Boulevard.
3-4(L)(5)(b)   Parking Lots
Parking lots shall be designed and landscaped to minimize glare and reflection
and reduce the visual impact of large numbers of cars and trucks. Parking and
buffering regulations shall be the same as Sections
14-16-5-5 (Parking and Loading) and
14-16-5-6 (Landscaping, Buffering, and Screening) with the following exceptions
and additions.
   1.   At least 15 percent of the parking lot area shall be landscaped.
Landscaping shall consist primarily of shade trees distributed throughout the
parking area.
   2.   Trees shall be planted so that no parking space is more than 50 feet in
any direction from a tree.
   3.   Parking lots for new mixed-use or non-residential development shall not
be located between buildings and the street. On lots less than 200 feet deep,
parking may be located behind or beside non-residential buildings.
3-4(L)(5)(c)   Lighting
Site lighting regulations shall be the same as Section
14-16-5-8 (Outdoor Lighting), except that the mounting height of lights in
vehicle and/or storage areas shall be no higher than the building height or 26
feet, whichever is lower.
3-4(L)(5)(d)   Building Design
   1.   Exposed concrete masonry unit (CMU) block and untreated metal are not
allowed as finish materials for buildings or walls.
   2.   Exterior mechanical and electrical equipment must be screened from
public view as required by Subsection
14-16-5-6(G) (Screening of Mechanical Equipment and Support Areas). Such
equipment shall be located at ground level unless such a location would
adversely affect the streetscape, pedestrian circulation, or open space.
   3.   Reflective or mirrored glass is prohibited on fa ades facing public
streets.
   4.   New non-residential development shall have windows, plazas, and porches
on the street-side of buildings.
   5.   Secondary entrances for new non-residential development shall be
oriented toward rear and side parking lots.
3-4(L)(6)   Cross-references
3-4(L)(6)(a)   Subsection
14-16-3-1(C) (Building Height Bonuses Not Allowed).
3-4(L)(6)(b)   Subsection
14-16-5-12(F)(4)(a) (Neon Signs along Central Avenue).
3-4(L)(6)(c)   Subsection
14-16-5-12(G)(1)(e) (Off-premises Signs Prohibited).
3-4(L)(6)(d)   Subsection
14-16-5-12(H)(2)(c) (Electronic Signs Prohibited).
3-4(L)(6)(e)   Subsection
14-16-6-4(O)(3)(e) (Deviations to Overlay Standards Not Allowed).
3-4(M)   SAWMILL/WELLS PARK - CPO-12
3-4(M)(1)   Applicability
The CPO-12 standards apply in the following mapped area. Where the CPO-12
boundary crosses a lot line, the entire lot is subject to these standards.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/b37713d5e40fc82694833f290401791f80be26ac/
IMAGES/0-0-0-6647.png]
3-4(M)(2)   Site Standards
3-4(M)(2)(a)   Lot Size
   1.   R-T, MX-T, and MX-L zone districts
      a.   Two-family detached dwellings on one lot, minimum 7,000 square feet.
      b.   Townhouse dwellings, minimum: 3,200 square feet per dwelling unit.
      c.   Lot size, maximum: 10,000 square feet.
   2.   R-ML zone district
      a.   Two-family detached dwellings on a lot, minimum: 2,700 square feet.
      b.   Townhouse dwellings, minimum: 2,400 square feet per dwelling unit.
      c.   Multi-family dwellings, minimum: 7,000 square feet.
3-4(M)(2)(b)   Lot Width, Minimum
   1.   R-T zone district
      Townhouse dwellings: 32 feet per dwelling unit.
   2.   R-ML zone district
      a.   Two-family detached dwellings on one lot: 24 feet.
      b.   Townhouse dwellings: 32 feet per dwelling.
      c.   Multi-family dwellings: 70 feet.
3-4(M)(2)(c)   Usable Open Space, Minimum
In the R-ML, MX-T, and MX-L zone districts, usable open space for multi-family
residential development is required as follows:
   1.   Efficiency or 1 bedroom: 400 square feet per unit.
   2.   Two (2) bedroom: 500 square feet per unit.
   3.   Three (3) or more bedrooms: 600 square feet per unit.
3-4(M)(3)   Setback Standards
3-4(M)(3)(a)   Low-density Residential Development in Any Zone District
   1.   Front, minimum
      a.   15 feet.
      b.   Garage: 25 feet from the lot line abutting a street.
   2.   Side, minimum
      a.   Interior: 0 feet.
      b.   Street side of corner lots: 10 feet.
      c.   Between a single-family detached dwelling and any other dwelling: 10
feet.
   3.   Rear, minimum: 15 feet.
3-4(M)(3)(b)   MX-L Zone District
Except as noted in Subsection (a) above for low-density residential
development, front setbacks are required as follows:
   1.   Minimum: 15 feet.
   2.   On lots abutting Mountain Road: 0 feet minimum; 15 feet maximum.
3-4(M)(3)(c)   NR-LM and NR-BP Zone Districts
Front, side, and rear, minimum: 10 feet, except 25 feet minimum adjacent to any
Residential zone district, a lot containing a residential use in any Mixed-use
zone district, or a designated trail.
3-4(M)(4)   Building Height
3-4(M)(4)(a)   R-ML and MX-L zone districts: 26 feet maximum.
3-4(M)(4)(b)   NR-BP zone district: 35 feet maximum.
3-4(M)(4)(c)   NR-LM zone district: 55 feet maximum.
3-4(M)(4)(d)   Building height bonuses do not apply pursuant to Subsection
14-16-3-1(C).
3-4(M)(5)   Other Development Standards
3-4(M)(5)(a)   Enclosures and Screening
   1.   Non-residential uses within or adjacent to any Residential zone
district shall be conducted within the fully enclosed portion of a building.
   2.   All non-residential outdoor activities, including but not limited to
storing materials, vehicle circulation, and parking adjacent to a lot in any
Residential zone district, a lot containing a residential use in any Mixed-use
zone district, or a lot containing a Civic and Institutional use in any zone
district, shall be visually screened with an opaque wall or fence at least 6
feet high and a landscaped buffer at least 10 feet wide with evergreen trees
and/or shrubs.
3-4(M)(5)(b)   Building Design for Residential Development
For all residential development, all of the following building design
regulations apply.
   1.   No portion of any building within 25 feet of the front lot line or
within 10 feet of any interior side lot line shall exceed 15 feet in height.
   2.   Building exterior materials, colors, window and door styles, and roof
slope and materials must be the same or similar on all parts of the building
and any detached dwellings on the lot.
   3.   Front doors must face the nearest street, except that in townhouse and
multi-family dwellings, only the dwelling unit(s) abutting the street must have
front doors facing the street.
   4.   Each street-facing fa ade shall contain 12.5 percent or more of its
surface in transparent windows and/or doors.
   5.   New windows must be recessed not less than 2 inches and/or shall be
surrounded by a window casing not less than 2 inches wide.
   6.   Exposed CMU block is not allowed as a finished material for buildings.
   7.   Reflective or mirrored glass is prohibited.
   8.   Street-facing fa ades on buildings must be designed to appear as a
collection of smaller buildings by incorporating variations in massing,
building height, or building material every 35 feet of fa ade length.
   9.   Half gables or shed roofs may only be used on lean-to portions of
buildings, on the first story only.
   10.   The slope of new roofs may not exceed a 45 degree angle.
   11.   The slope of roofs on new buildings over 15 feet high must be 30 to 45
degrees.
3-4(M)(5)(c)   Building Design for Mixed-use and Non-residential Development
In Mixed-use and Non-residential zone districts, all of the following building
design regulations apply.
   1.   No portion of any building within 25 feet of the front lot line shall
exceed 15 feet in height.
   2.   Front doors must face the nearest street.
   3.   Exposed CMU block is not allowed as a finished material for buildings.
   4.   Reflective or mirrored glass is prohibited.
   5.   For lots abutting Mountain Road east of Old Town Road, street-facing fa
ades shall be designed to appear as a collection of smaller buildings by
incorporating variations in massing, building height, or building material at
least every 35 feet of fa ade length.
3-4(M)(5)(d)   Windows / Doors in Mixed-use and Non Residential Zone Districts
For all development except residential and industrial development, each street-
facing fa ade shall contain 25 percent or more of its surface in transparent
windows and/or doors.
3-4(M)(6)   Cross-references
3-4(M)(6)(a)   Subsection
14-16-3-1(C) (Building Height Bonuses Not Allowed).
3-4(M)(6)(b)   Subsection
14-16-4-3(D)(16)(f)2 (Car Wash Prohibited).
3-4(M)(6)(c)   Subsection
14-16-4-3(D)(18)(n)4 (Light Vehicle Fueling Prohibited).
3-4(M)(6)(d)   Subsection 14-16-4-3(F)(4)(e)6 (Drive-through or Drive-up
Facility Prohibited).
3-4(M)(6)(e)   Subsection
14-16-4-3(F)(6)(g) (Dwelling Unit, Accessory).
3-4(M)(6)(f)   Subsection
14-16-5-11(C)(1) (Primary Building Stepback).
3-4(M)(6)(g)   Subsection
14-16-5-12(H)(2)(f) (Electronic Signs Prohibited).
3-4(M)(6)(h)   Subsection
14-16-6-4(O)(3)(e) (Deviations to Overlay Standards Not Allowed).
3-4(N)   VOLCANO MESA - CPO-13
3-4(N)(1)   Applicability
The CPO-13 standards apply to low-density residential development in the
following mapped area. Where the CPO-13 boundary crosses a lot line, the entire
lot is subject to these standards.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/b37713d5e40fc82694833f290401791f80be26ac/
IMAGES/0-0-0-6649.png]
3-4(N)(2)   Site Standards
Lot size, width, and usable open space shall be provided according to the
applicable standards listed in Section
14-16-5-1 (Dimensional Standards).
3-4(N)(3)   Setback Standards
For lots larger than 10,000 square feet, building setbacks shall be as follows:
3-4(N)(3)(a)   Front, minimum: 25 feet.
3-4(N)(3)(b)   Side, minimum: 15 feet.
3-4(N)(3)(c)   Rear, minimum: 15 feet.
3-4(N)(4)   Building Height
Standards in this Subsection
14-16-3-4(N)(4) apply only outside of the area specified in Subsection
14-16-3-6(E)(2) as the Northwest Mesa Escarpment - VPO-2 Height Restrictions
Sub-area.
3-4(N)(4)(a)   Building height, maximum: 18 feet.
3-4(N)(4)(b)   Building height may be increased to 26 feet on a maximum of 50
percent of the building footprint.
3-4(N)(4)(c)   Building height bonuses do not apply pursuant to Subsection
14-16-3-1(C).
3-4(N)(5)   Other Development Standards
3-4(N)(5)(a)   Fa ade Design
   1.   Each fa ade shall incorporate variations in material and/or a vertical
or horizontal offset of at least 24 inches at least every 60 feet of fa ade
length.
   2.   Each single-family detached dwelling shall address the street with 1 of
the options below:
      a.   A covered porch or stoop at least 5 feet in depth with a floor area
of at least 100 square feet and at least 6 feet clear in any direction.
      b.   A walled courtyard with an entry feature, including but not limited
to a gate, easily visible from the street. The entry feature must be a minimum
of 6 feet wide and at least 6 feet, 8 inches and no more than 8 feet high,
placed within the appropriate setback, connected to the dwelling by a courtyard
wall at least 4 feet and no more than 5 feet high, and both designed and
finished to complement the dwelling in color and architectural style.
Notwithstanding Subsection
14-16-5-7(D)(3)(a)2 (Exceptions to Maximum Wall Height), any wall or entry
feature provided to meet this standard shall not require a Permit - Wall or
Fence - Major.
      c.   A street-facing fa ade containing at least 25 percent of its
surfaces in transparent windows and/or doors, with the lower edge of window
sills no higher than 30 inches above the finished floor.
3-4(N)(5)(b)   Building Design Standards
   1.   Exterior Finishes
Wall finishes may be stucco, masonry, adobe, and/or native stacked stone (or
synthetic equivalent). Plain block, wood, and reflective panels shall not be
used as an exterior finish. Veneer materials shall extend around exterior
corners at least 1 foot. Brick coping and trims as per traditional New Mexico
architectural styles are encouraged. Steel and synthetic wood substitutes are
allowed for trim and detailing.
   2.   Roofs
      a.   Reflective roofs are prohibited.
      b.   Mansard roofs are prohibited.
      c.   Parapets shall hide flat roofs.
   3.   Gutters and Downspouts
Where a building is not setback from a lot line, gutters and downspouts shall
drain to the street or water harvesting area to avoid impact to abutting lots.
3-4(N)(5)(c)   Residential Garage Access
   1.   Where alleys are available, residential garages for detached dwellings
shall be accessed from the alley.
   2.   On streets designated as a local or collector, residential garages on
corner lots shall be accessed from the side or rear lot line or alley.
   3.   Townhouses shall use rear-loaded garages.
   4.   Garage types are limited by lot width, as described in
Table 3-4-1 and illustrated below.
   5.   Garage Types D and E may be accessed from either front or side.
   6.   Driveway access, including drive pad but exclusive of wings, is limited
to 20 feet wide for Garage Types B, C, D, and E, except where providing access
from alleys.
 
Table 3-4-1: Allowable Garage Types and Minimum Setbacks[1]
                           Front Garage    Side Garage        Rear Garage
          Allowable Garage Setback from    Setback from Lot   Setback from Lot
Lot Width Types            Front Fa ade    Line (side-        Line (rear-
                           (front-loaded), accessed), minimum loaded), minimum
                           minimum
< 40 ft.  A, D             10 ft.          5 ft.              2 ft.
  40 ft. A, B, C, D, E    5 ft.           5 ft.              2 ft.
[1] Garage setbacks are minimums only. The garage must first meet required
building setbacks. For lots 10,000 sq. ft. or more, required building setbacks
are in Subsection
14-16-3-4(N)(3) (Setback Standards); for lots less than 10,000 sq. ft,
building setbacks are in
Table 5-1-1 for the underlying zone district.
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/b37713d5e40fc82694833f290401791f80be26ac/
IMAGES/0-0-0-6651.png]
3-4(N)(5)(d)   Residential Garage Design
In addition to setback requirements in
Table 5-1-1 and garage design standards in Subsection
14-16-5-11(C)(2), the following provisions apply, as relevant.
   1.   Garages other than Type D shall be set back from the street-facing fa
ade of the dwelling. The street-facing fa ade shall share a common roof with
the dwelling and garage.
   2.   Three-car garages are only allowed on lots over 55 feet wide, and the
third garage shall be set back a minimum of 2 feet from the fa ade of the other
garages for any front-access garage. (See figure below.)
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/b37713d5e40fc82694833f290401791f80be26ac/
IMAGES/0-0-0-6653.png]
   3.   The color of garage doors shall blend with or complement the exterior
wall color in order to minimize the prominence of the garage door.
   4.   For garages built on a lot line, the requirements in Subsection
14-16-5-1(F) (Buildings Constructed on a Lot Line) apply.
3-4(N)(5)(e)   Street Cross Sections
Development within the Volcano Mesa - CPO-13 shall comply with all requirements
in the DPM related to transportation design standards, including but not
limited to street cross sections.
3-4(N)(6)   Cross-references
3-4(N)(6)(a)   Subsection
14-16-3-1(C) (Building Height Bonuses Not Allowed).
3-4(N)(6)(b)   Subsection
14-16-3-6(E)(4) (All development within the Volcano Mesa - CPO-13 is subject to
color limitations in Northwest Mesa Escarpment - VPO-2).
3-4(N)(6)(c)   Subsection
14-16-5-11(C)(3) (Garages).
3-4(N)(6)(d)   Subsection
14-16-5-12(G)(1)(e) (Off-premises Signs Prohibited).
3-4(N)(6)(e)   Subsection
14-16-6-4(O)(3)(e) (Deviations to Overlay Standards Not Allowed).
3-5   HISTORIC PROTECTION OVERLAY ZONES
3-5(A)   PURPOSE
The purpose of the Historic Preservation Overlay (HPO) zone is to preserve,
protect, enhance, perpetuate, and promote the use of structures and areas of
historical, cultural, architectural, engineering, archeological, or geographic
significance located in the city; to strengthen the city's economic base by
stimulating the tourist industry; to enhance the identity of the city by
protecting the city's heritage and prohibiting the unnecessary destruction or
defacement of its cultural assets; and to conserve existing urban developments
as viable economic and social entities. Properties in this district have 1 or
more of the following characteristics:
3-5(A)(1)   Embody the distinctive characteristics of a type, period, or method
of construction.
3-5(A)(2)   Portray the environment of a group of people in an era of history
characterized by a distinctive architectural type.
3-5(A)(3)   Have yielded, or are likely to yield, information important in
history or prehistory.
3-5(A)(4)   Possess high artistic value.
3-5(A)(5)   Have a relationship to designated landmarks or a registered
historic district that makes the area's preservation critical.
3-5(B)   DESIGNATED CITY LANDMARKS
3-5(B)(1)   Designated City landmarks are specified on the Official Zoning Map.
3-5(B)(2)   The standards and guidelines applicable to each City landmark are
available online: http://www.cabq.gov/planning/boards-commissions/landmarks-
urban-conservation-commission/_historic-landmarks.
3-5(B)(3)   Maintenance requirements for City landmarks can be found in
Subsection
14-16-5-13(B)(3).
3-5(C)   DESIGNATION OF HISTORIC PROTECTION OVERLAY ZONES AND CITY LANDMARKS
3-5(C)(1)   Landmark sites or structures and HPO Zones may be designated by the
City Council pursuant to Subsection
14-16-6-7(C) (Adoption or Amendment of Historic Designation).
3-5(C)(2)   Restrictions on and procedures for demolition of landmark
structures and structures in HPO zones are regulated pursuant to Subsection
14-16-6-6(D) (Historic Certificate of Appropriateness - Major).
3-5(D)   ADOPTION OR AMENDMENT OF LANDMARK OR HISTORIC PROTECTION OVERLAY ZONE
3-5(D)(1)   Amendments to the text of an HPO zone in this Section
14-16-3-5 or to any other standard in this IDO that applies specifically to an
HPO zone shall be reviewed and decided pursuant to Subsection
14-16-6-7(C) (Adoption or Amendment of Historic Designation).
3-5(D)(2)   Amendments to Design Standards and Guidelines for an HPO zone or
City Landmark shall be reviewed and decided pursuant to Subsection
14-16-6-6(E) (Historic Design Standards and Guidelines).
3-5(E)   CERTIFICATE OF APPROPRIATENESS REQUIRED
3-5(E)(1)   Within the boundaries of an HPO zone, the exterior appearance of
any structure, including but not limited to any sign, shall not be altered; new
structures shall not be constructed; and existing structures shall not be
demolished until a Certificate of Appropriateness is approved pursuant to
Subsection
14-16-6-5(B) (Historic Certificate of Appropriateness - Minor) or Subsection
14-16-6-6(D) (Historic Certificate of Appropriateness - Major).
3-5(E)(2)   On a City landmark, the appearance of any structure, including but
not limited to interior and exterior elements, landscaping, and signs, shall
not be altered; new structures shall not be constructed; and existing
structures shall not be demolished until a Certificate of Appropriateness is
approved pursuant to Subsection
14-16-6-5(B) (Historic Certificate of Appropriateness - Minor) or Subsection
14-16-6-6(D) (Historic Certificate of Appropriateness - Major).
3-5(F)   WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATIONS FACILITIES
Where allowed, Wireless Telecommunications Facilities (WTFs) located in a
designated HPO zone shall comply with the Use-specific Standards in Subsection
14-16-4-3(E)(12).
3-5(G)      CONTEXTUAL STANDARDS
3-5(H)   EAST DOWNTOWN - HPO-1
3-5(H)(1)   Applicability
The HPO-1 standards and guidelines apply to all buildings that have been
identified as significant and contributing to the relevant historic era and
City landmarks listed in the Huning Highland National District on the National
Register of Historic Places within the following mapped area. For City
landmarks, the Landmark Guidelines shall prevail over these standards and
guidelines. Construction of new structures within the HPO-1 shall comply with
the standards in Subsection
14-16-3-4(E) (East Downtown - CPO-4).
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/b37713d5e40fc82694833f290401791f80be26ac/
IMAGES/0-0-0-6655.png]
3-5(H)(2)   Setback Standards
Setbacks shall be maintained as is to preserve the pattern of building fronts
and setbacks from the street.
3-5(H)(3)   Building Height
3-5(H)(3)(a)   Building height shall be maintained as-is, and in the case of
additions, alterations, or new construction, not exceed neighboring building
heights.
3-5(H)(3)(b)   Building height bonuses do not apply pursuant to Subsection
14-16-3-1(C).
3-5(H)(4)   Other Development Standards
3-5(H)(4)(a)   Walls and Fences
   1.   New walls and fences shall be wood, stone, brick, adobe, or wrought
iron. Chain link is prohibited.
   2.   Exposed materials and features shall comply with the standards in
Subsection
14-16-3-4(E)(5)(c) (Street Walls in East Downtown - CPO-4).
3-5(H)(4)(b)   Building Design
   1.   Mass and scale shall be maintained as is or proportional to other
buildings on the block in the case of additions or alterations.
   2.   Profiles shall maintain the geometry created by similar shapes and
sizes (for example, by pitched roofs).
   3.   The patterns of existing walls, steps, and raised entrances shall be
maintained.
3-5(H)(4)(c)   Fa ade Design
   1.   Primary building entrances shall be oriented toward the sidewalk
abutting the fa ade of the building on the street with the highest vehicular
traffic volume.
   2.   If an addition or alteration is made to a historic building, all
materials shall be compatible with materials on that building.
   3.   Original exposed materials shall not be covered by other materials.
3-5(H)(4)(d)   Energy Efficient Design
Additions to existing structures to allow the use of solar energy to increase
energy efficiency are allowed. The design of such elements must be integrated
into the overall building pattern with particular emphasis on preserving fa
ades and roof slope and shape. Solar panels should not be visible from the
front street.
3-5(H)(4)(e)   Interiors
No interior elements are governed by these HPO-1 standards. However, if the
structure is a City landmark, interior guidelines may be applicable to that
structure only, according to the guidelines for that landmark.
3-5(H)(5)   Standards and Guidelines
Additional standards and guidelines adopted by the LC that apply in this HPO-
1 zone are found in the East Downtown Development Standards and Guidelines and
are available online: https://www.cabq.gov/planning/codes-policies-regulations/
historic-standards-and-guidelines.
3-5(H)(6)   Cross-references
3-5(H)(6)(a)   Subsection
14-16-3-1(C) (Building Height Bonuses Not Allowed).
3-5(H)(6)(b)   Subsection
14-16-5-5(F)(4) (Parking Location and Design in HPOs).
3-5(H)(6)(c)   Subsection
14-16-5-12(F)(4)(a) (Neon Signs along Central Avenue).
3-5(H)(6)(d)   Subsection
14-16-5-12(F)(3) (Rooftop Signs Allowed).
3-5(H)(6)(e)   Subsection
14-16-5-12(H)(2) (Electronic Signs Prohibited).
3-5(H)(6)(f)   Subsection
14-16-6-4(O)(3)(e) (Deviations to Overlay Standards Not Allowed).
3-5(H)(6)(g)   Subsection
14-16-6-5(F)(3) (Sign Review in HPOs).
3-5(I)   EAST END ADDITION - HPO-2
3-5(I)(1)   Applicability
The HPO-2 standards and guidelines apply in the following mapped area.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/b37713d5e40fc82694833f290401791f80be26ac/
IMAGES/0-0-0-9846.png]
3-5(I)(2)   Standards and Guidelines
The standards and guidelines applicable in this HPO-2 zone are found in the
East End Addition Neighborhood Handbook and Historic Protection Overlay Design
Guidelines, available online here: https://www.cabq.gov/planning/codes-
policies-regulations/historic-standards-and-guidelines.
3-5(I)(3)   Cross-references
3-5(I)(3)(a)   Subsection
14-16-3-1(C) (Building Height Bonuses Not Allowed).
3-5(I)(3)(b)   Subsection
14-16-5-12(H)(2)(a) (Electronic Signs Prohibited).
3-5(I)(3)(c)   Subsection
14-16-6-4(O)(3)(e) (Deviations to Overlay Standards Not Allowed).
3-5(I)(3)(d)   Subsection
14-16-6-5(F)(3) (Sign Review in HPOs).
3-5(J)   EIGHTH AND FORRESTER - HPO-3
3-5(J)(1)   Applicability
The HPO-3 standards and guidelines apply in the following mapped area.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/b37713d5e40fc82694833f290401791f80be26ac/
IMAGES/0-0-0-6657.png]
3-5(J)(2)   Standards and Guidelines
The standards and guidelines applicable in this HPO-3 zone are found in the New
Town Neighborhoods Development Guidelines and are available online: https://
www.cabq.gov/planning/codes-policies-regulations/historic-standards-and-
guidelines.
3-5(J)(3)   Cross-references
3-5(J)(3)(a)   Subsection
14-16-3-1(C) (Building Height Bonuses Not Allowed).
3-5(J)(3)(b)   Subsection
14-16-5-5(F)(4) (Parking Location and Design in HPOs).
3-5(J)(3)(c)   Subsection
14-16-5-12(H)(2) (Electronic Signs Prohibited).
3-5(J)(3)(d)   Subsection
14-16-6-4(O)(3)(e) (Deviations to Overlay Standards Not Allowed).
3-5(J)(3)(e)   Subsection
14-16-6-5(F)(3) (Sign Review in HPOs).
3-5(K)   FOURTH WARD - HPO-4
3-5(K)(1)   Applicability
The HPO-4 standards and guidelines apply in the following mapped area.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/b37713d5e40fc82694833f290401791f80be26ac/
IMAGES/0-0-0-6659.png]
3-5(K)(2)   Standards and Guidelines
The standards and guidelines applicable in this HPO-4 zone are found in the New
Town Neighborhoods Development Guidelines and are available online: https://
www.cabq.gov/planning/codes-policies-regulations/historic-standards-and-
guidelines.
3-5(K)(3)   Cross-references
3-5(K)(3)(a)   Subsection
14-16-3-1(C) (Building Height Bonuses Not Allowed).
3-5(K)(3)(b)   Subsection
14-16-5-5(F)(4) (Parking Location and Design in HPOs).
3-5(K)(3)(c)   Subsection
14-16-5-12(F)(4)(a) (Neon Signs along Central Avenue).
3-5(K)(3)(d)   Subsection
14-16-5-12(H)(2) (Electronic Signs Prohibited).
3-5(K)(3)(e)   Subsection
14-16-6-4(O)(3)(e) (Deviations to Overlay Standards Not Allowed).
3-5(K)(3)(f)   Subsection
14-16-6-5(F)(3) (Sign Review in HPOs).
3-5(L)   HUNING HIGHLAND - HPO-5
3-5(L)(1)   Applicability
The HPO-5 standards and guidelines apply in the following mapped area.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/b37713d5e40fc82694833f290401791f80be26ac/
IMAGES/0-0-0-6661.png]
3-5(L)(2)   Standards and Guidelines
The standards and guidelines applicable in this HPO-5 zone are found in the New
Town Neighborhoods Development Guidelines and are available online: https://
www.cabq.gov/planning/codes-policies-regulations/historic-standards-and-
guidelines.
3-5(L)(3)   Cross-references
3-5(L)(3)(a)   Subsection 14-16-3-1(C) (Building Height Bonuses Not Allowed).
3-5(L)(3)(b)   Subsection 14-16-5-5(F)(4) (Parking Location and Design in
HPOs).
3-5(L)(3)(c)   Subsection 14-16-5-12(F)(4)(a) (Neon Signs along Central
Avenue).
3-5(L)(3)(d)   Subsection 14-16-5-12(H)(2) (Electronic Signs Prohibited).
3-5(L)(3)(e)   Subsection 14-16-6-4(O)(3)(e) (Deviations to Overlay Standards
Not Allowed).
3-5(L)(3)(f)   Subsection 14-16-6-5(F)(3) (Sign Review in HPOs).
3-5(M)   OLD TOWN - HPO-6
3-5(M)(1)   Applicability
The HPO-6 standards and guidelines apply in the following mapped area.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/b37713d5e40fc82694833f290401791f80be26ac/
IMAGES/0-0-0-6663.png]
3-5(M)(2)   Building Height
3-5(M)(2)(a)   Building height, maximum: 26 feet, unless the Landmarks
Commission (LC) requires a lower height to protect the historic character of
the area.
3-5(M)(2)(b)   Building height bonuses do not apply pursuant to Subsection
14-16-3-1(C).
3-5(M)(3)   Other Development Standards
3-5(M)(3)(a)   Parking and Loading, Minimum
None, except that 1 off-street loading space that meets the requirements of the
DPM shall be provided for each property with primarily commercial uses if there
is ground floor space available on the lot to accommodate that loading space.
3-5(M)(3)(b)   Parking Lot Landscaping
The Rio Grande Boulevard - CPO-11 provisions in Subsection
14-16-3-4(L)(5)(b) (Parking Lots), shall apply within this HPO-6.
3-5(M)(3)(c)   Signs
   1.   Sign Sub-Area
      The following map illustrates the Sign Sub-area, which contains the area
within 150 feet in any direction of the Old Town Plaza Park. Where the Sign
Sub-area boundary crosses a lot line, sign standards in this Subsection
14-16-3-5(M)(3)(c) that reference the Sign Sub-area apply only to portions of
the lot that are within the Sign Sub-area.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/b37713d5e40fc82694833f290401791f80be26ac/
IMAGES/0-0-0-6665.png]
   2.   Prohibited Signs
      a.   Internally lit signs.
      b.   Signs that flash or blink or signs with visible bulbs, neon tubing,
luminous paint, or plastics (with the exception of vinyl lettering), except for
neon signs allowed pursuant to Subsection 14-16-3-5(L)(3)(c)4.b below.
      c.   Signs with wind-activated parts or signs that rotate or move in any
manner.
      d.   Signs or any part of any sign that changes its message or picture.
      e.   Signs displayed on railings.
      f.   Streamers.
   3.   Maximum Number of Signs
      A maximum of 2 signs that meet the type, dimension, and location
requirements in
Table 3-5-1 are allowed per establishment, with the following exceptions.
      a.   The following sign types do not count toward the maximum number of
signs that are allowed:
         i.   Window signs.
         ii.   Temporary signs displauyed on the day of an outdoor
demonstration of the creation of retail goods.
      b.   Additional signs are allowed as follows.
      c.   Restaurants are allowed 1 additional wall sign not to exceed 6
square feet.
         i.   Establishments that face 2 or more streets are allowed 1
additional sign.
         ii.   The LC may approve 1 additional sign per establishment where the
LC determines that there is not reasonable visibility of the establishment from
the public right-of-way or adjacent property without such an additional sign.
Such signs shall not exceed the maximum sign area in
Table 3-5-1 as relevant to the type and location of the sign.
         iii.   Premises with 2 or more establishments, at least 1 of which
does not face the public right-of-way, are allowed additional signs as follows.
            a.   Total sign area of any additional sign(s) allowed pursuant to
this Subsection iv. shall not exceed 25 square feet, not to exceed 2 square
feet per establishment.
            b.   Within the Sign Sub-Area, establishments are allowed 1
additional wall sign.
            c.   Establishments in other locations are allowed either 1
additional wall sign or 1 additional freestanding sign that shall not exceed a
height of 10 feet above finished grade.
         iv.   An additional wall or freestanding sign that meets the following
requirements is allowed no more than 20 feet in any direction from where the
edges of two public rights-of-way intersect or where the public right-of-way
intersects a parking lot with over 20 parking spaces.
            a.   The sign area shall not exceed 2 square feet per establishment
or 18 square feet total. Any freestanding sign allowed pursuant to Subsection
v. shall not exceed a height of 9 feet above finished grade.
            b.   The sign may advertise establishments on- or off-premises, as
determined by the property owner where the sign is located, but all
establishments advertised must be located within the Old Town – HPO-6 boundary.
            c.   Within the Sign Sub-area, where freestanding signs are not
allowed, any sign provided pursuant to this Subsection v. must be a wall sign.
   4.   On-premises Signs
      a.   Sign types are allowed pursuant to
Table 3-5-1.
Table 3-5-1: On-premises Signs in Old Town HPO-6
Sign Type All Zone Districts
          Sign Sub-area All Other Locations
Table 3-5-1: On-premises Signs in Old Town HPO-6
Sign Type        All Zone Districts
                 Sign Sub-area All Other Locations
Wall Sign
                 On a fa ade facing an arterial or collector street and that is
Area, maximum    wholly visible from an arterial street:
                 20 sq. ft.
                 Other locations: 10 sq. ft.
Window Sign
Area, maximum[1] 2 sq. ft.
Canopy Sign
Area, maximum    Ground floor: 4 sq. ft.
                 Other floors: 5 sq. ft.
Projecting Sign
Area, maximum    Prohibited    Ground floor: 4 sq. ft.
                               Other floors: 5 sq. ft.
Freestanding Sign
Area, maximum    Prohibited    4 sq. ft.
Temporary Sign on the Day of an Outdoor Demonstration of Retail Goods
Area, maximum    3 sq. ft. per sign
Portable Sign
Area, maximum    Per Subsection
                 14-16-5-12(F)(4)(b)
[1] For window signs, the maximum size in this table is the sign area allowed
per establishment and may be achieved through one or multiple signs.
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/b37713d5e40fc82694833f290401791f80be26ac/
IMAGES/0-0-0-6667.png]
      c.   Neon signs are allowed as window signs but shall not flash or blink.
      d.   No sign shall exceed the height of the fa ade, eaves, or fire wall
of a building, whichever is lower.
3-5(M)(3)(d)   Outdoor Display
   1.   Outdoor retail sales and related display of "handcrafted items" are
allowed on specified portions of the public sidewalk pursuant to Part 13-3-2 of
ROA 1994 (Old Town Solicitations).
   2.   The display of retail goods is allowed on private premises on tables,
cases, racks, kiosks, boards, or chairs, provided that all of the following
requirements are met.
      a.   The tables, cases, racks, kiosks, boards, or chairs shall be removed
outside of operating hours, unless they are allowed to be permanently affixed
to a structure as approved in a Historic Certificate of Appropriateness - Minor
pursuant to Subsection
14-16-6-5(B).
      b.   The display of retail goods on metal and/or plastic freestanding
racks is prohibited.
      c.   The display of retail goods on railings is prohibited.
      d.   The area of any one surface of an individual item or the total
(cumulative) surface area of more than one item displayed by any one
establishment shall not exceed 15 square feet.
   3.   The display of chile ristras is not restricted.
3-5(M)(3)(e)   Outdoor Demonstration
Outdoor demonstrations of the creation of retail goods that are for sale within
an associated establishment are allowed, provided that all of the following
requirements are met.
   1.   Only one demonstration is allowed at an establishment at any given
time.
   2.   The demonstration shall take place in an outdoor area on the same
premises as the establishment selling the item being demonstrated.
   3.   The demonstration is limited to any combination of the following
elements:
      a.   People demonstrating the creation of retail goods that are for sale
within the associated establishment.
      b.   Tables or other functional items associated with the demonstration.
      c.   The display of items created on the day of the demonstration.
      d.   Temporary signs, which can only be displayed on the day of the
demonstration and must be removed at the end of the demonstration.
   4.   The demonstration shall not be conducted within the public right-of-way
or in a location that obstructs the public right-of-way.
   5.   The demonstration shall not obstruct any entrance to an establishment
or access to any establishment.
   6.   All sales shall be conducted in the fully enclosed portion of the
building containing the associated establishment.
3-5(M)(4)   Additional Standards and Guidelines
Additional standards and guidelines adopted by the LC that apply in this HPO-
6 zone are available online: https://www.cabq.gov/planning/codes-policies-
regulations/historic-standards-and-guidelines.
3-5(M)(5)   Cross-references
3-5(M)(5)(a)   Subsection
14-16-3-1(C) (Building Height Bonuses Not Allowed).
3-5(M)(5)(b)   Subsection
14-16-3-4(L) (Rio Grande Boulevard - CPO-11).
3-5(M)(5)(c)   Subsection
14-16-4-3(D)(35)(k) (Cannabis Retail) prohibited.
3-5(M)(5)(d)   Subsection
14-16-4-3(D)(37)(a) (Outdoor Display or Storage).
3-5(M)(5)(e)   Subsection
14-16-4-3(D)(37)(d) (General Retail, Small Allowed in MX-T).
3-5(M)(5)(f)   Subsection
14-16-5-5(B)(2) (Parking and Loading Exemptions and Reductions).
3-5(M)(5)(g)   Subsection
14-16-5-5(F)(4) (Parking Location and Design in HPOs).
3-5(M)(5)(h)   Subsection
14-16-5-12(F)(4)(a) (Neon Signs along Central Avenue).
3-5(M)(5)(i)   Subsection
14-16-5-12(H)(2) (Electronic Signs Prohibited).
3-5(M)(5)(j)   Subsection
14-16-5-12(I) (Temporary Signs).
3-5(M)(5)(k)   Subsection
14-16-6-4(O)(3)(e) (Deviations to Overlay Standards Not Allowed).
3-5(M)(5)(l)   Subsection
14-16-6-5(C)(2)(a)2 (Sign Review in HPOs).
3-5(M)   SILVER HILL - HPO-7
3-5(N)(1)   Applicability
The HPO-7 standards and guidelines apply in the following mapped area.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/b37713d5e40fc82694833f290401791f80be26ac/
IMAGES/0-0-0-6669.png]
3-5(N)(2)   Standards and Guidelines
The standards and guidelines applicable in this HPO-7 zone are found in the
Early Automobile Suburbs Development Guidelines and are available online: http:
//www.cabq.gov/planning/documents/
SilverHillHistoricZoneDevelopmentGuidelines102010.pdf.
3-5(N)(3)   Cross-references
3-5(N)(3)(a)   Subsection
14-16-3-1(C) (Building Height Bonuses Not Allowed).
3-5(N)(3)(b)   Subsection
14-16-5-5(F)(4) (Parking Location and Design in HPOs).
3-5(N)(3)(c)   Subsection
14-16-5-12(H)(2) (Electronic Signs Prohibited).
3-5(N)(3)(d)   Subsection
14-16-6-4(O)(3)(e) (Deviations to Overlay Standards Not Allowed).
3-5(N)(3)(e)   Subsection
14-16-6-5(F)(3) (Sign Review in HPOs).
3-6   VIEW PROTECTION OVERLAY ZONES
3-6(A)   PURPOSE
The purpose of the View Protection Overlay (VPO) zone is to preserve areas with
unique and distinctive views that are worthy of conservation, such as those
from public rights-of-way to cultural landscapes identified in the ABC Comp
Plan, as amended.
3-6(B)   WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATIONS FACILITIES
Where allowed, WTFs located in a designated VPO zone or view corridor
identified in Subsection 14-16-4-3(E)(12)(k) shall comply with the standards in
that subsection, in addition to relevant Use-specific Standards in Subsection
14-16-4-3(E)(12).
3-6(C)   DEVIATIONS AND VARIANCES
3-6(C)(1)   Deviations from VPO zone standards are not allowed pursuant to
Subsection
14-16-6-4(O)(3)(e).
3-6(C)(2)   Variances from these standards are only available pursuant to
Subsection
14-16-6-6(O) (Variance - ZHE) or Subsection
14-16-6-6(N) (Variance - EPC), which require a public hearing.
3-6(D)   COORS BOULEVARD - VPO-1
3-6(D)(1)   Applicability
The VPO-1 standards apply to all development in the following mapped area.
Where the VPO-1 boundary crosses a lot line, the entire lot is subject to these
standards.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/b37713d5e40fc82694833f290401791f80be26ac/
IMAGES/0-0-0-6671.png]
3-6(D)(2)   Protected Views
Views protected by this VPO-1 are from Coors Boulevard, along the segment
between Western Trail/Namaste Road and Alameda Boulevard, looking toward the
Rio Grande Bosque and the ridgeline of the Sandia Mountains from each view
point.
3-6(D)(3)   Definitions
The terms defined and illustrated below are used in the standards of this VPO-
1.
3-6(D)(3)(a)   Sight Line
   1.   Lines that begin at each view point along Coors Boulevard, looking
toward the ridgeline of the Sandia Mountains at a 45 degree angle from the east
edge of the roadway.
   2.   Sight lines are required to intersect the highest point(s) of the
proposed building(s) on the site and, if the building is all the same height, a
sight line shall begin at a view point at the lowest elevation(s) of Coors
Boulevard abutting or nearest to the site that allows the sight line to pass
through the building.
   3.   The sight line is used as the perspective for the analysis in
Subsections
14-16-3-6(D)(5)(b) (Building and Structure Height (View Plane)) and
14-16-3-6(D)(5)(c) (Building and Structure Bulk (View Frame)). Multiple sight
lines may be required depending on the size of the site and shape of the
building(s). (See figure below.)
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/b37713d5e40fc82694833f290401791f80be26ac/
IMAGES/0-0-0-6673.png]
3-6(D)(3)(b)   View Frame
A vertical rectangular frame drawn perpendicular (i.e., 90 degrees) to a given
sight line. The top of the view frame is established by the highest visible
point of the Sandia ridgeline within the view frame. The bottom of the view
frame is the elevation of the public right-of-way of Coors Boulevard where the
sight line begins. The left and right edges of the view frame are an upward
projection of the property lines at the site boundary where the view frame
intersects the property lines. As many view frames as necessary to capture all
the sight lines on a site are required. (See figure below.)
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/b37713d5e40fc82694833f290401791f80be26ac/
IMAGES/0-0-0-6675.png]
3-6(D)(3)(c)   View Plane
A horizontal plane 4 feet above the elevation of the east edge of the east
driving lane on Coors Boulevard, based on the elevation of the view point for a
given sight line, and considering the perspective that would be seen along the
sight line. Mulitple view planes may be required if the elevation of Coors
Boulevard varies across the site. (See figure below.)
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/b37713d5e40fc82694833f290401791f80be26ac/
IMAGES/0-0-0-6677.png]
3-6(D)(3)(d)   View Point
The location that the views from Coors Boulevard are protected from,
representing the approximate position of a passenger in a vehicle traveling
north along Coors Boulevard. A view point is set at the east edge of the
eastern-most through lane on Coors Boulevard and is 4 feet above the elevation
of Coors Boulevard at that location. The view point is the starting point for
the sight line.
3-6(D)(4)   Setback Standards
Within this VPO-1, the setback standards in Subsection
14-16-3-4(C)(3)(b) (Setback from Coors Boulevard) shall apply for lots abutting
Coors Boulevard.
3-6(D)(5)   Building and Structure Height, Bulk, and Massing
All development within this VPO-1 shall meet all of the following requirements.
3-6(D)(5)(a)   Building Height (Zone District)
   1.   If the maximum building height allowed by the zone district is lower
than what would otherwise be allowed by the height, bulk, and massing
regulations, the maximum building height of the zone district shall apply.
   2.   Building height bonuses do not apply pursuant to Subsection
14-16-3-1(C).
3-6(D)(5)(b)   Building and Structure Height (View Plane)
No more than 1/3 of the height of buildings and structures (including building
parapets, mechanical equipment and associated screening, walls, and fences)
shall be allowed to penetrate above the view plane as seen along each sight
line and as shown in section diagram below, with the following exceptions.
   1.   For low-density residential development, a total height of 16 feet is
allowed for buildings and structures other than walls on a lot where, because
of site constraints, any portion of a building or structure is proposed in a
location where the natural grade (or finished grade, if infrastructure is
already installed) is less than or equal to 10 feet below the elevation of the
east edge of the public rightof-way of Coors Boulevard.
   2.   For development other than low-density residential development, a total
height of 20 feet is allowed for buildings or structures other than walls on a
lot where, because of site constraints, any portion of a building or structure
is proposed in a location where the natural grade (or finished grade, if
infrastructure is already installed) is less than or equal to 10 feet below the
elevation of the east edge of Coors Boulevard.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/b37713d5e40fc82694833f290401791f80be26ac/
IMAGES/0-0-0-6679.png]
3-6(D)(5)(c)   Building and Structure Bulk (View Frame)
Looking from the view point, no more than 50 percent of the area within any
view frame for a property shall be obscured by the bulk of the building(s) and/
or structure(s) (including walls and fences) placed on the property. No portion
of a building or structure shall extend above the ridgeline of the Sandia
Mountains that is visible within any view frame for a property. (See figure
below.)
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/b37713d5e40fc82694833f290401791f80be26ac/
IMAGES/0-0-0-6681.png]
3-6(D)(5)(d)   Building Massing (Site Layout)
Projects containing several buildings shall provide variety in building size
and massing. Lower, smaller buildings shall be located closer to Coors
Boulevard, with larger, taller buildings located farther back on the property.
(See figure below.)
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/b37713d5e40fc82694833f290401791f80be26ac/
IMAGES/0-0-0-6683.png]
3-6(D)(6)   Colors
The exterior surfaces of structures, including but not limited to mechanical
devices, roof vents, and screening materials, shall be colors with light
reflective value (LRV) ranging from 20 percent to 50 percent. This middle range
of reflectance is intended to avoid very light and very dark colors.
3-6(D)(6)(a)   Allowable colors include the browns and greens existing within
the Bosque.
3-6(D)(6)(b)   Trim materials on fa ades constituting less than 10 percent of
the fa ade's opaque surface may be any color.
3-6(D)(7)   Site Landscaping Within Coors Boulevard Setback
3-6(D)(7)(a)   Any private landscaping other than trees shall not be higher at
maturity than the view plane.
3-6(D)(7)(b)   Tree varieties shall be selected for small "see through" type
foliage texture and shall be planted singularly or in small groupings with
concern for enhancing, not blocking, views to the east.
3-6(D)(8)   Variances
Variances to standards for setback, structure height, or structure bulk and
massing in this Coors Boulevard - VPO-1 shall be reviewed and decided by the
Environmental Planning Commission (EPC) pursuant to Subsection
14-16-6-6(N) (Variance - EPC).
3-6(D)(9)   Parking Reductions
Parking reductions associated with proximity to Major Transit are not
applicable in the Coors Boulevard VPO-1.
3-6(D)(10)   Cross-references
3-6(D)(10)(a)   Subsection
14-16-3-1(C) (Building Height Bonuses Not Allowed).
3-6(D)(10)(b)   Subsection
14-16-3-4(C) (Coors Boulevard - CPO-2).
3-6(D)(10)(c)   Subsection
14-16-3-4(C)(3) (Coors Boulevard - CPO-2 Setback Standards).
3-6(D)(10)(d)   Subsection
14-16-5-12(G)(1)(e) (Off-premises Signs Prohibited).
3-6(D)(10)(e)   Subsection
14-16-6-4(O)(3)(e) (Deviations to Overlay Standards Not Allowed).
3-6(D)(10)(f)   Subsection
14-16-6-6(N) (Variance - EPC).
3-6(E)   NORTHWEST MESA ESCARPMENT - VPO-2
3-6(E)(1)   Applicability
The VPO-2 standards apply in the following mapped area. Where the VPO-
2 boundary crosses a lot line, the entire lot is subject to these standards,
unless otherwise specified.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/b37713d5e40fc82694833f290401791f80be26ac/
IMAGES/0-0-0-6685.png]
3-6(E)(2)   Protected Views
Views protected by this VPO-2 are looking to and from the Petroglyph National
Monument.
3-6(E)(3)   Building Height Bonuses in Overlay Zones
Building height bonuses do not apply pursuant to Subsection
14-16-3-1(C).
3-6(E)(4)   Building and Structure Height in VPO-2 Height Restrictions Sub-area
The following standards apply in the Height Restrictions Sub-area shown in the
map above. In Mixed-use and Non-residential zone districts, where the height-
restriction sub-area crosses a lot line, only the portion of the lot within the
sub-area boundary is subject to these standards.
3-6(E)(4)(a)   Building and/or structure height shall not exceed 15 feet, as
measured from natural grade. (See figures below.)
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/b37713d5e40fc82694833f290401791f80be26ac/
IMAGES/0-0-0-6687.png]
3-6(E)(4)(b)   For properties with undulating terrain that would require fill
as part of site grading, the resulting building shall not be taller than the
tallest building on any abutting lot located within the Height Restriction sub-
area and shall not block views to or from the escarpment, as shown in a view
analysis. (See figure below.)
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/b37713d5e40fc82694833f290401791f80be26ac/
IMAGES/0-0-0-6689.png]
3-6(E)(4)(c)   Additional height may be requested through a Variance - EPC
pursuant to Subsection
14-16-6-6(N). (See figures above.)
   1.   No building or structure shall exceed 19 feet in height from the
finished grade, inclusive of any Variance granted.
   2.   When a Variance is requested for building or structure height, the
visual impact of additional height on views to and from the escarpment shall be
minimized through at least 1 of the following techniques.
      a.   Height/Slope
         An increase in height in response to slope to produce a stepped-down
effect and a smooth transition in scale. For example, 1 foot of additional
structure height may be granted for every 4 foot difference between the ground
elevation and a base elevation established at the top of the escarpment for
lots on top of the mesa or at the base of the escarpment for lots below the
mesa. Buildings may also be depressed below the natural grade. (See figure
below.)
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/b37713d5e40fc82694833f290401791f80be26ac/
IMAGES/0-0-0-6691.png]
      b.   View Corridors
         Buildings and structures that are located and designed so that massing
maintains views to the escarpment at the perimeter of the site, or at the
nearest public road (whichever offers the predominant public views) and views
from the escarpment - primarily from public trails and access points. The
intent is to preserve the maximum amount of unobstructed lateral views to the
base of the escarpment. If the site is located above the escarpment, the views
will be to the top of the escarpment. (See figure below.)
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/b37713d5e40fc82694833f290401791f80be26ac/
IMAGES/0-0-0-6693.png]
      c.   Height/Slope/Setback
         Buildings and/or structures set back from major public views (i.e.,
views from the site perimeter, nearest public road, public trails, or access
points along the escarpment; views to the east, west, south, and north property
lines; or views to the escarpment) so that building height increases in
proportion to the size of the setback and the slope without increasing the
visual impact from a particular vantage point. (See figure below.)
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/b37713d5e40fc82694833f290401791f80be26ac/
IMAGES/0-0-0-6695.png]
3-6(E)(5)   Colors
The exterior surfaces of structures, including but not limited to mechanical
devices, roof vents, and screening materials, shall be colors with light
reflective value (LRV) ranging from 20 percent to 50 percent. This middle range
of reflectance is intended to avoid very light and very dark colors.
3-6(E)(5)(a)   Colors include the yellow ochers, browns, dull reds, and grey-
greens existing on the Northwest Mesa and escarpment, exclusive of the basalt.
3-6(E)(5)(b)   Trim materials on fa ades constituting less than 20 percent of
the fa ade's opaque surface may be any color.
3-6(E)(6)   Reflectivity
Reflective or mirrored glass is prohibited.
3-6(E)(7)   Roof-mounted Equipment
No exposed roof-mounted heating, ventilation, and air conditioning equipment
shall be allowed. Any such equipment shall be fully screened from view from the
nearest public streets and from the escarpment.
3-6(E)(8)   Cross-references
3-6(E)(8)(a)   Subsection
14-16-3-1(C) (Building Height Bonuses Not Allowed).
3-6(E)(8)(b)   Subsection 14-16-6-4(J)(8) (Development in the Northwest Mesa
Escarpment View Protection Overlay Zone (VPO-2)).
3-6(E)(8)(c)   Subsection
14-16-6-4(O)(3)(e) (Deviations to Overlay Standards Not Allowed).
3-6(E)(8)(d)   Subsection
14-16-6-6(N) (Variance - EPC).
Part 14-16-4   Use Regulations
4-1   GENERAL
4-1(A)   LISTED USES
Table 4-2-1 specifies allowable land uses in individual zone districts, with
abbreviations as described in Subsection
14-16-4-1(C). Use-specific standards in Section
14-16-4-3 establish restrictions, requirements, additional allowances, or
review procedures.
4-1(A)(1)   
Table 4-2-1 may specifiy that a use is allowed in a particular zone district,
while the Use-specific Standard may restrict that use in particular contexts or
in specified areas. For example, a use may be allowed citywide but not next to
residential uses, or a use may be allowed in a small area but not citywide in
the same zone district.
4-1(A)(2)   A blank cell in
Table 4-2-1 specifies that the use is not allowed in that zone district.
4-1(A)(3)   Definitions of each land use may allow another land use listed in
the table as incidental to the defined use.
4-1(A)(4)   Additional land uses or restrictions on the use of land in a
particular zone district may be contained in Sections
14-16-2-3 through
14-16-2-6 (Zone Districts) or in an Overlay zone applicable to the subject
property in
Part 14-16-3.
4-1(A)(4)(a)   Allowable uses in the MX-FB Zone District are pursuant to
Subsection
14-16-2-4(E)(3)(c) (Use Regulations).
4-1(A)(4)(b)   The NR-SU zone district allows primary uses not allowed in any
other zone district as specified in Subsection
14-16-2-5(E)(2) (Use and Development Standards).
   1.   Accessory uses listed as allowable in the NR-SU zone district in
Table 4-2-1 may be approved in conjunction with a primary NR-SU use if they are
found to be compatible with or complementary to the proposed primary use.
   2.   Additional uses not listed as allowable in the NR-SU zone district in
Table 4-2-1 may be approved as accessory to the proposed primary use if they
are found to be compatible with or complementary to the proposed primary uses.
   3.   Accessory uses approved in an NR-SU zone district shall be subject to
the relevant Use-specific Standards or any other standards deemed appropriate
and necessary by the relevant decision-making body.
   4.   Uses approved for each property and any related standards are
documented in the approved Site Plan for that property on file with the City
Planning Department.
4-1(A)(4)(c)   Uses are regulated in the NR-PO sub-zones as follows.
   1.   NR-PO-A: Uses may be specified in Master Plans or Site Plans beyond
those listed by
Table 4-2-1, as approved by the City Parks and Recreation Department pursuant
to Subsection
14-16-2-5(F)(3)(a) (Sub-zone A: City-owned or Managed Parks).
   2.   NR-PO-B: Uses may be specified in Master Plans, Resource Management
Plans, or Site Plans beyond those listed by
Table 4-2-1, as approved by the Open Space Division of the City Parks and
Recreation Department pursuant to Subsection
14-16-2-5(F)(3)(b) (Sub-zone B: Major Public Open Space).
   3.   NR-PO-C: Allowable uses are listed in
Table 4-2-1.
   4.   NR-PO-D: The BioPark is regulated by a Master Plan, which specifies
allowable uses associated with the ABQ BioPark Zoo, Aquarium, Botanic Gardens,
and Tingley Beach facilities, as approved by the City Cultural Services
Department.
4-1(A)(4)(d)   Allowable uses in the PD zone district are pursuant to
Subsection
14-16-2-6(A)(4) (Allowable Uses). Uses approved for each property and any
related standards are documented in the approved Site Plan for that property on
file with the City Planning Department.
4-1(A)(4)(e)   Allowable uses in the PC zone district are pursuant to
Subsection
14-16-2-6(B)(4) (Allowable Uses). Allowable uses and any related standards are
documented in the approved Framework Plan for the PC zone district on file with
the City Planning Department.
4-1(B)   UNLISTED USES
When a proposed land use is not explicitly listed in
Table 4-2-1, the Zoning Enforcement Officer (ZEO) shall determine whether or
not it is included in the definition of a listed use or is so consistent with
the size, scale, operating characteristics, and external impacts of a listed
use that it should be treated as the same use. In making this determination,
the ZEO shall consider the scale, character, traffic impacts, storm drainage
impacts, utility demands, and potential impacts of the proposed use on
surrounding properties. The ZEO's interpretation shall be made available to the
public on the City Planning Department website and shall be binding on future
decisions of the City until the ZEO makes a different interpretation or this
IDO is amended to treat the use differently.
4-1(C)   ABBREVIATIONS
4-1(C)(1)   A "P" in a cell of
Table 4-2-1 specifies that the use is Permissive Primary (i.e., a primary use
allowed by right in that zone district), subject to compliance with any Use-
specific Standards referenced in the right-hand column of that line of the
table.
4-1(C)(2)   A "C" in a cell of
Table 4-2-1 specifies that the use is Conditional Primary (i.e., a primary use
allowed only after the applicant obtains a Conditional Use Approval pursuant to
Subsection
14-16-6-6(A)) and subject to any Use-specific Standards referenced in the
right-hand column of that line of the table.
4-1(C)(3)   An "A" in a cell of
Table 4-2-1 specifies that the use is Permissive Accessory (i.e., allowed as an
accessory use compatible with a Permissive Primary or Conditional Primary use
on the lot), and is subject to any Use-specific Standards referenced in the
right-hand column of that line of the table.
4-1(C)(4)   A "CA" in a cell of
Table 4-2-1 specifies that the use is Conditional Accessory (i.e., an accessory
use allowed only after the applicant obtains a Conditional Use Approval
pursuant to Subsection
14-16-6-6(A)) and subject to any Use-specific Standards referenced in the
right-hand column of that line the table.
4-1(C)(5)   A "CV" in a cell of
Table 4-2-1 specifies that the use is allowed in a structure that has been
vacant for a period of 5 or more years, only after the applicant obtains a
Conditional Use Approval pursuant to Subsection
14-16-6-6(A) and subject to any Use-specific Standards referenced in the right-
hand column of that line of the table.
4-1(C)(6)   A "T" in a cell of
Table 4-2-1 specifies that the use is allowed as a temporary use, subject to
any Use-specific Standards referenced in the right-hand column of the table and
as permitted pursuant to Section
14-16-6-5(D) (Permit - Temporary Use).
4-1(D)   MULTIPLE USES
4-1(D)(1)   A development may include multiple primary uses, including a
combination of residential and non-residential uses, provided that each use is
listed as an allowable Permissive Primary use or a Conditional Primary use in
that zone district, that a Conditional Use Approval pursuant to Subsection
14-16-6-6(A)) is obtained for any Conditional Primary use, all Use-specific
Standards applicable to each use are met, and the development complies with all
applicable density, dimensional, impervious surface, development, and
performance standards in
Part 14-16-5 (Development Standards).
4-1(D)(2)   In Mixed-use and Non-residential zone districts, accessory uses may
be on a lot abutting the primary use.
4-1(E)   PREVIOUSLY ALLOWED USES
4-1(E)(1)   Each use that exists on the effective date of this IDO that is
required by this IDO to obtain a Conditional Use Approval, but that was a
permissive use or an approved conditional use prior to the effective date of
this IDO is deemed to have a Conditional Use Approval to continue operation in
structures and on land areas where the operation was conducted prior to the
effective date of this IDO and to expand operations without the need to obtain
a Conditional Use Approval, provided that the expansion complies with all Use-
specific Standards and other requirements of this IDO (other than the
requirement for a Conditional Use Approval).
4-1(E)(2)   Each use that exists on the effective date of this IDO that was a
permissive use or an approved conditional use prior to the effective date of
this IDO and that is not allowed in the IDO zone district where it is located
is a nonconforming use. See Section
14-16-6-8 (Nonconformities).
4-1(F)   REQUIRED LICENSES OR PERMITS
All uses required by the State of New Mexico or by another public or quasi-
public or regulatory agency to have an approval, license, or permit to operate
are required by the City of Albuquerque to have that approval, license, or
permit in effect at all times, and failure to do so constitutes a violation of
this IDO.
4-1(G)   SEPARATION OF USES
Where a specific use is required to be separated from a protected use by a
minimum distance, and the specific use complies with those standards, the later
arrival of a protected use located within the minimum spacing distance does not
make the specific use subject to the spacing requirement nonconforming, subject
to the discontinuance provisions of Subsection
14-16-6-8(C)(3) (Discontinuance of Nonconforming Use), and does not limit the
ability of the specific use to expand if such expansion would have been allowed
before the arrival of the protected use.
4-2   ALLOWABLE USES
Table 4-2-1: Allowable Uses
P = Permissive Primary C = Conditional Primary A = Permissive Accessory CA =
Conditional Accessory
CV = Conditional if Structure Vacant for 5+ years T = Temporary CT =
Conditional Temporary
Blank Cell = Not Allowed
Zone     Residential        Mixed-use       Non-residential
District                                                        NR-PO Use-
>>       R- R- R-     R- R- MX- MX- MX- MX- NR- NR- NR- NR- NR-       specific
        A  1  MC R-T ML MH T   L   M   H   C   BP  LM  GM  SU  A B C Standards
Land
Uses
Table 4-2-1: Allowable Uses
P = Permissive Primary C = Conditional Primary A = Permissive Accessory CA =
Conditional Accessory
CV = Conditional if Structure Vacant for 5+ years T = Temporary CT = Conditional
Temporary
Blank Cell = Not Allowed
Zone District   Residential       Mixed-use       Non-residential            Use-
>>              R- R- R- R- R- R- MX- MX- MX- MX- NR- NR- NR- NR- NR- NR-PO  specific
               A  1  MC T  ML MH T   L   M   H   C   BP  LM  GM  SU  A B C  Standards
Land Uses
PRIMARY USES THAT MAY BE ACCESSORY IN SOME ZONE DISTRICTS
RESIDENTIAL USES
Household Living
Dwelling,
single-family   P  P  P  P  P     P                                          4-3(B)(1)
detached
Dwelling,             P                                                      4-3(B)(2)
mobile home
Dwelling,
cluster         P  P     P  P     P                                          4-3(B)(3)
development
Dwelling,
cottage         P  P  P  P  P     P                                          4-3(B)(4)
development
Dwelling, two-
family detached P  P  P  P  P     P                                          4-3(B)(5)
(duplex) 2
Dwelling,       P  P  P  P  P  P  P   P   P   P                              4-3(B)(6)
townhouse
Dwelling, live-          C  C  P  P   P   P   P   CA  CA                     4-3(B)(7)
work 3
Dwelling,       P  P  P  P  P  P  P   P   P   P       CV                     4-3(B)(8)
multi-family 4
Group Living
Assisted living
facility or              C  P  P  P   P   P   P
nursing home
Community
residential     P  P     P  P  P  P   P   P   P                              4-3(B)(9)
facility, small
Community
residential                 P  P  P   P   P   P                              4-3(B)(9)
facility, large
Dormitory                      P  C   P   P   P
Group home,                 C  P  P   P   P                                  4-3(B)
small                                                                        (10)
Group home,                 C  C  C   P   P   P                              4-3(B)
medium                                                                       (10)
Group home,                    C          C   C                              4-3(B)
large                                                                        (10)
CIVIC AND INSTITUTIONAL USES
Adult or child
day care              C  C  C  P  P   P   P   P   P   P   A   A
facility
BioPark                                                               P (in  4-3(C)(7)
                                                                      D)
Cemetery                                                          P
Community
center or       C  P     P  P  P  P   P   P   P   C   C   C   C       P   C  4-3(C)(1)
library
Correctional                                                      P
facility
Elementary or   C  C     C  P  P  P   P   P   P   P   P   CV          P   C  4-3(C)(2)
middle school
Fire station or                           P   P   P   P   P   P
police station
High school     C  C     C  C  P  P   P   P   P   P   P   C           P      4-3(C)(3)
Hospital                                  P   P   P   P                      4-3(C)(4)
Museum                   CV CV C  P   P   P   P   P   P   P   P       P A    4-3(C)(5)
Overnight                                 C   C   C   C   C   C              4-3(C)(6)
shelter
Parks and open  P  P     P  P  P  P   P   P   P   P   P   C   C   A   P P P  4-3(C)(7)
space
Religious       P  P     P  P  P  P   P   P   P   P   P   CV  CV             4-3(C)(8)
institution
Sports field                      CV  C   P   P   P   P   P   C       P   C
University or                  CV CV  C   P   P   P   P   CV  CV
college
Vocational                     CV P   P   P   P   P   P   P   P
school
COMMERCIAL USES
Agriculture and Animal-related
Community       P  P  P  P  P  P  P   P   P   P   P   P   C   C       A A A  4-3(D)(1)
garden
Equestrian      P                                                       P C  4-3(D)(2)
facility
General         P                                     C   P   P         P A  4-3(D)(3)
agriculture
Kennel          C                     C   C       P   P   P   P              4-3(D)(4)
Nursery         P                         A       P   P   P   P       A A
Veterinary      C                 C   P   P   P   P   P   P   P              4-3(D)(5)
hospital
Other pet       C                 C   P   P   P   P   P   P   P
services
Food, Beverage, and Indoor Entertainment
Adult                                                 P   P   P              4-3(D)(6)
entertainment
Auditorium or                  A  A   A   P   P   P   P   P   P              4-3(D)(7)
theater
Bar                               C   C   P   P   P   P   P   P              4-3(D)(8)
Catering                                  P   P   P   P   P   P
service
Health club or        A     A  A  P   P   P   P   P   P   P   A              4-3(D)(9)
gym
Mobile food                       C   P   P   P   P   P   P   C              4-3(D)
truck court                                                                 (10)
Nightclub                                 P   P   P   P   P                  4-3(D)(8)
Residential                                                                  4-3(D)
community       P  P  P  P  P  P  P   P   P   P                           C  (11)
amenity, indoor
Restaurant                        C   P   P   P   P   P   P   P              4-3(D)(8)
Tap room or                       C   C   P   P   P   P   P   P              4-3(D)(8)
tasting room
Other indoor                      C   P   P   P   P   P   P   P       P   C  4-3(D)
entertainment                                                                (12)
Lodging
Bed and         A  CA    A  A  P  P                                          4-3(D)
breakfast                                                                    (13)
Campground or                                                                4-3(D)
recreational                              C       P   P                 A C  (14)
vehicle park
Hotel or motel                    P   P   P   P   P   P   P   P              4-3(D)
                                                                             (15)
Motor Vehicle-related
Car wash                              P   P   P   P   P   P   P              4-3(D)
                                                                             (16)
Heavy vehicle
and equipment                                                                4-3(D)
sales, rental,                                    P   C   P   P              (17)
fueling, and
repair
Light vehicle                         C   P   P   P   P   P   P              4-3(D)
fueling station                                                              (18)
Light vehicle                         P   P   P   P   P   P   P              4-3(D)
repair                                                                       (19)
Light vehicle                                                                4-3(D)
sales and                             C   P   P   P   P   P   P              (20)
rental
Outdoor vehicle                                   C   C   P   P         A    4-3(D)
storage                                                                      (21)
Paid parking          A     A  A  C   P   P   A   P   P   P   P   A   A A    4-3(D)
lot                                                                          (22)
Parking               A     A  A  CA  P   P   P   P   P   P   P   A          4-3(D)
structure                                                                    (22)
Offices and Services
Bank                              P   P   P   P   P   P   P   CV             4-3(D)
                                                                             (23)
Blood services                            C   C   C   P   P   P
facility
Club or event                     C   P   P   P   P   P   P   CV      P P C  4-3(D)
facility                                                                     (24)
Commercial                            P   P   P   P   P   P   P
services
Construction
contractor                                    C   P   P   P   P              4-3(D)
facility and                                                                 (25)
yard
Crematorium                                                       P
Medical or                        P   P   P   P   P   P   P   P              4-3(D)
dental clinic                                                                (26)
Mortuary                              C   P   P   P   P   C       A
Office                            P   P   P   P   P   P   P   P
Personal and                                                                 4-3(D)
business                          P   P   P   P   P   P   P   P              (27)
services, small
Personal and                                                                 4-3(D)
business                                  P   P   P   P   P   P              (27)
services, large
Research or                                                                  4-3(D)
testing                           P   P   P   P   P   P   P   P              (28)
facility
Self-storage                          C   C   P   P   P   P   P         A    4-3(D)
                                                                             (29)
Outdoor Recreation and Entertainment
Amphitheater                                  C   C   C   C   C   A   P A C
Balloon Fiesta                                                               4-3(D)
Park events and                                                       P      (30)
activities
Drive-in                                  C   C   C   C   C                  4-3(D)
theater                                                                      (31)
Fairgrounds                                                       P
Residential
community       P  P  P  P  P  P  P   P   P   P                           A
amenity,
outdoor
Stadium or                                                        P   P
racetrack
Other outdoor   CA CA CA CA CA CA A   A   A   A   P   P   P   A       P   P  4-3(D)
entertainment                                                                (32)
Retail Sales
Adult retail                                  P       P   P   P              4-3(D)(6)
Art gallery     CV CV C  P  P  P  P   P   P   P   P       P   A              4-3(D)
                                                                             (33)
Bakery goods or
confectionery                     C   P   P   P   P   P   P   P
shop
Building and
home                                      C   C   P   P   P   C              4-3(D)
improvement                                                                  (34)
materials store
Cannabis retail                       P   P   P   P   P   A   A              4-3(D)
                                                                             (35)
Farmers market  T     T  T  T  T  T   P   P   P   P   P   CV  CV      P A CA 4-3(D)
                                                                             (36)
General retail,       A        A  P   P   P   P   P   P   P   P              4-3(D)
small                                                                        (37)
General retail,                           P   P   P   C   C                  4-3(D)
medium                                                                       (37)
General retail,                           C   C   P   P                      4-3(D)
large                                                                        (37)
Grocery store                         P   P   P   P       P   P              4-3(D)
                                                                             (38)
Liquor retail                     C   A   C   C   C   C   C   C              4-3(D)
                                                                             (39)
Nicotine retail                   CA  A   C   C   C   C   C   C              4-3(D)
                                                                             (40)
Pawn shop                             C   P   P   P   P   P   P              4-3(D)
                                                                             (41)
Transportation
Airport                                                           P          4-3(D)
                                                                             (42)
Freight                                                                      4-3(D)
terminal or                                           C   P   P              (43)
dispatch center
Helipad                                   CA  CA  A   P   P   P   A          4-3(D)
                                                                             (44)
Park-and-ride                  C  C   C   P   C   C   P   C   C   A   A      4-3(D)
lot                                                                          (45)
Railroad yard                                         C   P   P              4-3(D)
                                                                             (46)
Transit                        C  C   C   P   P   P   P   P   P              4-3(D)
facility                                                                     (47)
INDUSTRIAL USES
Manufacturing, Fabrication, and Assembly
Artisan                           C   P   P   P   P   P   P   P              4-3(E)(1)
manufacturing
Cannabis                          C   P   P   P   P   P   P   P              4-3(E)(2)
cultivation
Cannabis-
derived                           C   P   P   P   P   P   P   P              4-3(E)(3)
products
manufacturing
Light                                         A   P   P   P   P              4-3(E)(4)
manufacturing
Heavy                                                         P              4-3(E)(5)
manufacturing
Natural
resource                                                          P          4-3(E)(6)
extraction
Special                                                       C              4-3(E)(7)
manufacturing
Telecommunications, Towers, and Utilities
Drainage        P  P  P  P  P  P  P   P   P   P   P   P   P   P   A   A A C
facility
Electric        P  P  P  P  P  P  P   P   P   P   P   P   P   P   A   A A A  4-3(E)(8)
utility
Energy Storage  P  P  P  P  P  P  P   P   P   P   P   P   P   P   A   A A A  4-3(E)(9)
System (ESS)
Geothermal                                                                   4-3(E)
energy          A  A  A  A  A  A  A   A   A   A   A   P   P   P       A A    (10)
generation
Major utility,  P  P  P  P  P  P  P   P   P   P   P   P   P   P   A   A A A
other
Solar energy    P  P  P  P  P  P  P   P   P   P   P   P   P   P   A   P P P  4-3(E)
generation                                                                   (11)
Wind energy                       A   A   A   A   A   A   A   C   A   A A    4-3(E)
generation                                                                   (12)
Wireless Telecommunications
Facility (WTF)
Architecturally A  A  A  A  A  A  A   A   A   A   A   A   A   A   A   A
integrated
Non-commercial
or broadcasting A  A  A  A  A  A  A   A   A   A   A   A   A   A   A   A
antenna
Collocation     A  A  A  A  A  A  A   A   A   A   A   A   A   A   A   A      4-3(E)
Freestanding                      P   P   P   P   P   P   P   P   A          (13)
Non-commercial
or broadcasting A  A  A  A  A  A  A   A   A   A   A   A   A   A   A   A
antenna
Public utility  A  A  A  A  A  A  A   A   A   A   A   A   A   A   A   A
collocation
Roof-mounted          A     A  A  A   A   A   A   A   A   A   A   A
Small cell      A  A  A  A  A  A  A   A   A   A   A   A   A   A   A   A A A
Waste and Recycling
Recycling drop-                                                              4-3(E)
off bin                        A  A   A   A   A   P   P   P   P              (14)
facility
Salvage yard                                          C   C   P              4-3(E)
                                                                             (15)
Solid waste                                                                  4-3(E)
convenience                                                       P          (16)
center
Waste and/or
recycling                                                         P          4-3(E)
transfer                                                                     (17)
station
Wholesaling and Storage
Above-ground
storage of                                                C   P
fuels or feed
Outdoor storage                       CA  C   C   C   A   P   P              4-3(E)
                                                                             (18)
Warehousing                               C   C   P   P   P   P              4-3(E)
                                                                             (19)
Wholesaling and                                                              4-3(E)
distribution                              C   C   P   P   P   P              (20)
center
ACCESSORY AND TEMPORARY USES
ACCESSORY USES                                                               4-3(F)(1)
Agriculture     A  A  A  A  A  A  A   A   A   A   A   A   CA  CA        A    4-3(F)(2)
sales stand
Animal keeping  A  A  A  A  A  A  A   A   A   A   A   A   A   A           CA 4-3(F)(3)
Automated
Teller Machine        A     A  A  A   A   A   A   A   A   A   A       T T
(ATM)
Clean Room                                            CA  A   A              4-3(F)(4)
Drive-through
or drive-up                           A   A   CA  A   A   A                  4-3(F)(5)
facility
Dwelling unit,  A  A     A  A  A  A   A   A       A   A   A   A   A     A    4-3(F)(6)
accessory
Family care     A  A  A  A  A  A  A   A   A   A                              4-3(F)(7)
facility
Family home day CA CA CA CA A  A  A                                          4-3(F)(8)
care
Garden          A  A  A  A  A  A  A   A   A   A   A   A   A             A
Hobby breeder   A  A  A  A                                                   4-3(F)(9)
Home occupation A  A  A  A  A  A  A   A   A   A                              4-3(F)
                                                                             (10)
Independent              A  A  A  A   A   A   A                              4-3(F)
living facility                                                              (11)
Mobile food     A  A  A  A  A  A  A   A   A   A   A   A   A   A   A   A      4-3(F)
truck                                                                        (12)
Mobile vending                    A   A   A   A   A   A   A   A       A   A  4-3(F)
cart                                                                         (13)
Outdoor animal  A                     CA  CA      CA      A   A              4-3(F)
run                                                                          (14)
Outdoor dining                    CA  A   A   A   A   A   A   A   A          4-3(F)
area                                                                         (15)
Second kitchen  A  A  A  A  A  A  A                                          4-3(F)
in a dwelling                                                                (16)
Other use
accessory to                      A   A   A   A   A   A   A   A   A       A  4-3(F)
non-residential                                                              (17)
primary use
Other use
accessory to    A  A  A  A  A  A  A   A   A   A                              4-3(F)
residential                                                                  (18)
primary use
TEMPORARY USES
Temporary Uses That Require A Permit
Circus                                    T       T   T   T                  4-3(G)(1)
Construction
staging area,   T  T  T  T  T  T  T   T   T   T   T   T   T   T   T   T T    4-3(G)(2)
trailer, or
office
Dwelling,       T  T  T  T  T  T  T   T   T   T   T   T   T   T   T   T T    4-3(G)(3)
temporary
Fair, festival,
or theatrical   T  T  T  T  T  T  T   T   T   T   T   T           T   T T    4-3(G)(4)
performance
Film production T  T  T  T  T  T  T   T   T   T   T   T   T   T       T      4-3(G)(5)
Open air market                   T   T   T   T   T                     T    4-3(G)(6)
Park-and-ride
facility,                      T  T   T   T   T   T   T   T   T   T     T    4-3(G)(7)
temporary
Real estate
office or model T  T  T  T  T  T  T   T   T   T   T   T   T   T   T          4-3(G)(8)
home
Safe outdoor                      CT  CT  CT  CT  T   T   T   T              4-3(G)(9)
space
Seasonal                          T   T   T   T   T   T   T   T              4-3(G)
outdoor sales                                                                (10)
Temporary use         T        T  T   T   T   T   T   T   T   T   T     T    4-3(G)
not listed                                                                   (11)
Temporary Uses That Do Not Require A Permit
Garage or yard  T  T  T  T  T  T  T                                          4-3(G)
sale                                                                         (12)
Hot air balloon T  T  T  T  T  T  T   T   T   T   T   T   T   T   T   T T T  4-3(G)
takeoff/landing                                                              (13)
 
 
Notes
2 City Council, O-24-69, adopted January 6, 2025 and effective January 28,
  2025.
3 City Council, O-24-69, adopted January 6, 2025 and effective January 28,
  2025.
4 City Council, O-24-69, adopted January 6, 2025 and effective January 28, 2025
4-3   USE-SPECIFIC STANDARDS
4-3(A)   GENERAL
4-3(A)(1)   Each activity required to have a license, permit, or approval to
operate from the State or federal government or any other governmental or
quasi-governmental entity, or required to have a City business license to
operate, shall maintain that license, permit, or approval in effect at all
times, and shall comply with the requirements of that license, permit, or
approval.
4-3(A)(2)   All uses shall comply with City ordinances regulating noise, odors,
vibration, glare, heat, and other nuisance conditions affecting other
properties, as well as the requirements of Section
14-16-5-13 (Operation and Maintenance) unless specifically exempted from one or
more of those requirements.
4-3(A)(3)   All uses and associated regulations approved through SU-1, PD, PC,
or a specific Site Plan processes prior to the effective date of this IDO shall
remain valid.
4-3(B)   RESIDENTIAL USES
4-3(B)(1)   Dwelling, Single-family Detached
4-3(B)(1)(a)   In the R-A and R-1 zone districts, only 1 single-family detached
dwelling is allowed per lot unless the units are part of a cottage development,
in which case the provisions of Subsection
14-16-4-3(B)(4) apply.
4-3(B)(1)(b)   If the single-family detached dwelling meets the definition of a
manufactured home, the manufactured home shall meet all of the following
standards, as applicable.
   1.   The applicant shall provide the title of the manufactured home to
demonstrate that it was constructed on or after June 15, 1976, the effective
date of the Federal Manufactured Housing Construction and Safety Standards Act
of 1974 (42 USC. Sec. 5401).
   2.   Each manufactured home shall have a certification plaque certifying
compliance with the Federal Manufactured Housing Construction and Safety
Standards Act of 1974. The applicant shall provide proof of the certification
plaque.
   3.   If the dwelling is located in an R-MC district, the provisions of
Subsection
14-16-2-3(C) (Residential - Manufactured Home Community Zone District (R-MC))
shall apply.
   4.   If the dwelling is not located in an R-MC zone district, the
manufactured home shall meet all of the following requirements.
      a.   When used as a residence, only 1 manufactured home may be located on
a lot.
      b.   Each manufactured home shall be installed on a permanent foundation
with an anchorage and tie-down constructed to meet the requirements of with
Articles 14-1 and 14-3 of ROA 1994 (Uniform Administrative Code and Technical
Codes and Uniform Housing Code) or the manufactured home installation code.
      c.   All Development Standards applicable to other single-family detached
dwellings in the zone district where the manufactured home is located shall
apply to this use.
      d.   For changes of use in or rezoning of a subject property that
includes 2 or more manufactured homes that will result in expiration or
termination of resident occupancy in any zone district, the standards in
Subsection
14-16-2-3(C)(3)(g) (R-MC Zone District Standards) apply.
4-3(B)(2)   Dwelling, Mobile Home
4-3(B)(2)(a)   If the mobile home dwelling is located in an R-MC district, the
provisions of Subsection
14-16-2-3(C) (Residential - Manufactured Home Community Zone District (R-MC))
apply. Changes of use in or rezoning of a subject property that will result in
expiration or termination of resident occupancy require notice pursuant to
Subsection
14-16-2-3(C)(3)(g) (R-MC Zone District Standards).
4-3(B)(2)(b)   If the mobile home dwelling is located in any other zone
district, the provisions of Subsection
14-16-6-8(C)(7) apply.
4-3(B)(3)   Dwelling, Cluster Development
4-3(B)(3)(a)   Minimum project size for this use is 1 acre.
4-3(B)(3)(b)   Zone district lot and setback requirements, including contextual
standards in Subsection
14-16-5-1(C)(2), shall apply to the project site as a whole, but not to
individual dwellings.
4-3(B)(3)(c)   The number of dwelling units is determined by dividing the area
of the project site by the minimum lot size allowed in the zone district,
rounded down to the nearest whole number.
   1.   Cluster developments comprised of more than 20 dwelling units shall be
comprised of cluster groups.
      a.   A cluster group shall not exceed 15 dwelling units.
      b.   Each cluster group shall be separated by common open space or usable
open space at least 50 feet in length and width.
   2.   In the Los Duranes - CPO-6, the number of dwelling units in a cluster
development shall not exceed 20.
4-3(B)(3)(d)   If the zone district allows two-family detached (duplex)
dwellings, a cluster development may include that dwelling type.
4-3(B)(3)(e)   The cluster development project site shall include common open
space set aside for agriculture, landscaping, on-site ponding, outdoor
recreation, or any combination thereof allowed in the zone district, and for
the use and enjoyment of the residents.
   1.   The common open space area shall be 30 percent of the gross area of the
project site or 100 percent of the area gained through lot size reductions,
whichever is greater.
   2.   No structure is allowed in any required common open space except shade
structures or structures necessary for operation and maintenance.
   3.   Any required common open space shall have a minimum length and width of
35 feet.
   4.   Required common open space may be walled or fenced but shall be
partially visible from a street through openings in, and/or with trees visible
above, the wall or fence.
   5.   Common open space may be dedicated to the City as Major Public Open
Space if accepted by the Open Space Division of the City Parks and Recreation
Department.
   6.   Maintenance for common open space areas is the responsibility of the
property owner, unless those areas are dedicated the City, pursuant to
Subsection
14-16-5-13(B) (Maintenance Standards).
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/b37713d5e40fc82694833f290401791f80be26ac/
IMAGES/0-0-0-6697.png]
4-3(B)(3)(f)   The cluster development shall be designated on a Site Plan and
plat with each dwelling on an individual subdivided lot, and any required
common open space shall be on separate subdivided lot(s) or easement(s).
4-3(B)(4)   Dwelling, Cottage Development
4-3(B)(4)(a)   The maximum project size for a cottage development is 3 acres.
4-3(B)(4)(b)   The minimum project size for a cottage development is as
follows:
   1.   General: 1 acre.
   2.   In or within 1,320 feet (¼ mile) of UC-MS-PT areas: 10,000 square feet.
   3.   More than 1,320 feet (¼ mile) of UC-MS-PT areas, if granted a
Conditional Use approval pursuant to Subsection
14-16-6-6(A): 10,000 square feet.
4-3(B)(4)(c)   Cottage developments shall be measured in square feet of
residential gross floor area rather than in the number of dwelling units.
   1.   In all zone districts, a cottage development shall have no more than
the total residential gross floor area that would be allowed on an equal size
property in the same zone district for single-family detached development. This
is calculated by first determining the number of lots that would be allowed in
that zone district, assuming the minimum lot size established in
Table 5-1-1.
      a.   That number, including whole numbers and any fractions of a lot, is
then multiplied by an assumed size of a typical single-family detached dwelling
to determine the maximum residential gross floor area.
         i.   In the R-1D subzone, the assumed size of a typical single-family
detached dwelling is 2,600 square feet.
         ii.   In all other zones where the use is allowed, the assumed size of
a typical single-family detached dwelling is 2,000 square feet.
      b.   In the R-T or R-ML zone districts, for which minimum lot sizes are
established for different residential uses, the calculation of the number of
lots that would be allowed shall be based on the minimum lot size for the
relevant low-density residential use (i.e., single-family or two-family
detached dwelling if the cottage development will consist of single-family or
two-family detached dwellings or townhouse dwelling if the cottage development
will consist of townhouse dwellings).
      c.   In the MX-T zone district, for which minimum lot sizes are not
established in
Table 5-1-2, the calculation of the number of lots that would be allowed shall
be based on the minimum lot sizes established for the R-ML zone district in
Table 5-1-1 for the relevant low-density residential use (i.e., single-family
or two-family detached dwelling if the cottage development will consist of
single-family or two-family detached dwellings or townhouse dwelling if the
cottage development will consist of townhouse dwellings).
   2.   Any combination of dwelling units of different sizes that total no more
than the maximum total residential gross floor area would be allowed on the
project site, with the following exceptions.
      a.   The maximum size of each dwelling unit is 1,200 square feet of gross
floor area.
      b.   In the R-A and R-1 zone districts, the minimum size of each dwelling
unit is 650 square feet of gross floor area.
Example:
On a 1 acre site in the R-A zone district, 4 lots would be allowed, given the
minimum lot size of 10,890 square feet (1/4 acre) in the R-A zone district.
Multiply the 4 lots allowed by 2,000 square feet. The site would be allowed
8,000 square feet of residential gross floor area. For example, 8 dwelling
units of 1,000 square feet each would be allowed.
4-3(B)(4)(d)   Zone district lot and setback requirements, including contextual
standards in Subsection
14-16-5-1(C)(2), shall apply to the project site as a whole, but not to
individual dwellings.
4-3(B)(4)(e)   The development may contain a shared indoor community space for
all residents in the development to use for activities, cooking, and/or dining.
If a such a space is provided, the building area is not included in the maximum
total residential gross floor area.
4-3(B)(4)(f)   If individual cottage dwelling units do not have kitchens, a
shared community space with a kitchen in a fully enclosed portion of a building
accessible to all residents shall be provided.
4-3(B)(4)(g)   Dwelling units shall have front porches.
4-3(B)(4)(h)   Homeowners association or other recorded documents shall require
that any the sale of individual dwelling units also include an associated
interest in shared or common lands, structures or facilities and shall require
the buyer's continued responsibility for its share of those responsibilities.
4-3(B)(4)(i)   Each project site shall maintain a landscape buffer at least 10
feet wide, meeting the requirements of Subsection
14-16-5-6(E) (Edge Buffer Landscaping) along each side and rear lot line, and
no portion of any primary or accessory structure may be located in that buffer
area except for a patio made of permeable material no larger than 175 square
feet per dwelling unit.
4-3(B)(4)(j)   Where accessed from a local street, this use is prohibited
within 330 feet of any other cottage development except for the following:
   1.   Up to 2 cottage development projects may be adjacent.
   2.   There is no distance separation required if the subject property is in
or within 1,320 feet (¼ mile) of UC-MS-PT-MT areas.
4-3(B)(4)(k)   In the R-A and R-1 zone districts, 30 percent of the gross area
of the project site shall be usable open space. Open balconies and rooftop
decks shall not count toward this requirement.
4-3(B)(4)(l)   If the zone district allows two-family detached (duplex) or
townhouse dwellings, a cottage development may include those dwelling types.
4-3(B)(4)(m)   In the R-1 zone district, dwelling units may be attached on one
side.
4-3(B)(5)   Dwelling, Two-family Detached (Duplex) 5
4-3(B)(5)(a)   Where this use is allowed and the 2 dwelling units are on
separate lots, interior side setbacks required by the zone district shall not
apply to any lot line where the 2 units share a common wall.
4-3(B)(5)(b)   This use is prohibited in the R-A, R-1, and R-MC zone districts,
except in either of the following circumstances:
   1.   In or within 1,320 feet (1/4 mile) of MS-PT areas.
   2.   Where 1 two-family detached dwelling is on 2 lots and the building
straddles the lot line, with each dwelling unit on a separate lot. (See figure
below.)
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/b37713d5e40fc82694833f290401791f80be26ac/
IMAGES/0-0-0-6699.png]
4-3(B)(6)   Dwelling, Townhouse 6
4-3(B)(6)(a)   For townhouse developments containing more than 6 dwelling
units, minimum usable open space shall be provided as follows:
   1.   Efficiency or 1 bedroom: 200 square feet per unit.
   2.   2 bedrooms: 250 square feet per unit.
   3.   3 or more bedrooms: 300 square feet per unit.
   4.   In UC-MS-PT areas, the minimum usable open space required shall be 50
percent of the requirements in Subsections 1 through 3 above.
4-3(B)(6)(b)   The required side setbacks required by
Part 14-16-5 (Development Standards) shall apply to the end units of each
townhouse dwelling, and shall not apply to interior side lot lines where
townhouse dwelling units share a common interior wall.
4-3(B)(6)(c)   Except in UC-MS-PT areas, each townhouse dwelling shall not
contain more than 3 dwelling units on properties with a rear or side lot line
that abuts an R-A or R-1 zone district or with a rear lot line that is across
an alley from an R-A or R-1 zone district.
4-3(B)(6)(d)   Except in or within 1,320 feet (1/4 mile) of MS-PT areas, this
use is prohibited in the R-A, R-1, and R-MC zone districts.
4-3(B)(6)(e)   In the MX-L, MX-M, and MX-H zone districts, on properties
abutting a Main Street (MS) corridor or on properties in a Premium Transit (PT)
area that abut a PT corridor, townhouses are prohibited unless the front façade
faces the MS or PT corridor.
4-3(B)(6)(f)   In any Mixed-use zone district west of the Rio Grande on
properties abutting the public right-of-way of a Major Transit (MT) or Premium
Transit (PT) Corridor, allowable uses in the Commercial category are required
along at least 50 percent of the ground floor of the façade facing the Major
Transit or Premium Transit Corridor.
4-3(B)(7)   Dwelling, Live-work
4-3(B)(7)(a)   The business operator must obtain and maintain in effect at all
times any City or State permit or license required for the operation of this
use, including a business registration permit from the City.
4-3(B)(7)(b)   The building and lot may be used for both a residence and a
business that does not qualify as a home occupation being conducted by a
resident of the building.
4-3(B)(7)(c)   The building and lot shall not be used for any of the following
uses identified in
Table 4-2-1:
   1.   Any use in the Agricultural or Animal-related category.
   2.   Any use in the Food, Beverage, and Indoor Entertainment category.
   3.   Any use in the Motor Vehicle-related category.
   4.   Any use in the Industrial Uses category except artisan manufacturing or
outdoor storage.
   5.   Commercial services.
   6.   Construction contractor facility and yard.
   7.   Crematorium.
   8.   Mortuary.
   9.   Adult retail.
   10.   Liquor retail.
4-3(B)(7)(d)   A wall sign is allowed that is no more than 8 square feet in
size or as allowed by the underlying zoning, whichever is lesser, and that is
located no higher than the top of the ground floor of the building.
4-3(B)(8)   Dwelling, Multi-family
4-3(B)(8)(a)   No more than 40 percent of required usable open space can be
private to a household or occur on upper stories of the project buildings
unless the site is located in a DT-UC-MS-PT area or is 660 feet or less in any
direction of an NR-PO zone district or Major Public Open Space.
4-3(B)(8)(b)   In DT-UC-MS-PT areas, this use shall provide somewhere on the
lot at least 1 tree per ground floor dwelling unit, in addition to meeting all
applicable standards in Section
14-16-5-6 (Landscaping, Buffering, and Screening).
4-3(B)(8)(c)   In other areas, this use shall meet all of the following
landscape standards, in addition to all applicable standards in Section
14-16-5-6 (Landscaping, Buffering, and Screening).
   1.   This use shall provide, somewhere on the lot, at least 1 tree per
ground floor dwelling unit and at least 1 tree per second floor dwelling unit;
no additional trees are required for additional dwelling units on the third or
higher floors.
   2.   Twenty-five (25) percent of the net lot area shall contain landscaping;
playgrounds, sports courts, swimming pools, or similar features may count up to
10 percent of net lot landscaping. Tree canopies and ground-level plants shall
cover a minimum of 75 percent of the total landscaped area, and the maximum a
tree canopy shall count toward this requirement is 600 square feet.
   3.   Cool season grasses are restricted to 20 percent of the landscape area.
Warm season grasses may cover up to an additional 70 percent of the landscape
area.
4-3(B)(8)(d)   At least 50 percent of the trees required by Subsection (b) or
(c) above shall be deciduous canopy-style shade trees or coniferous trees
capable of attaining a mature canopy diameter of at least 25 feet.
4-3(B)(8)(e)   This use is prohibited in the R-A, R-1, R-MC and R-T zone
districts except in or within 1,320 feet of MS-PT areas north of Central Avenue
and east of the Rio Grande.
4-3(B)(8)(f)   In Mixed-use zone districts, a conversion of existing non-
residential development to a residential use shall be exempt from the
definition of kitchen in IDO Section 14-16-7-1, if all of the following
requirements are met.
   1.   A separate kitchen and bathroom shall be provided in each dwelling
unit.
   2.   The kitchen shall include all of the following requirements:
      a.   A sink of adequate size and shape for washing dishes and food items
(as opposed to washing hands).
      b.   A refrigerator that includes a separate freezer compartment.
      c.   A countertop surface, a microwave, an additional appliance for
warming food (such as an induction cooktop), and at least 2 electrical outlets
that allow appliances to be plugged in safely.
   3.   Units shall have a maximum of 2 bedrooms, and occupancy shall be
limited as follows:
      a.   2 people per efficiency unit.
      b.   2 people per 1-bedroom unit.
      c.   4 people per 2-bedroom unit.
4-3(B)(8)(g)   In any Mixed-use zone district west of the Rio Grande on
properties abutting the public right-of-way of a Major Transit or Premium
Transit Corridor, allowable uses in the Commercial category are required along
at least 50 percent of the ground floor of the fa ade facing the Major Transit
or Premium Transit Corridor.
4-3(B)(8)(h)   In the MX-L and MX-M zone districts in the North I-25 - CPO-10,
this use is prohibited on the ground floor.
4-3(B)(8)(i)   In the NR-BP zone district, this use is allowed as conversions
from an existing non-residential development, pursuant to use-specific
standards in
14-16-4-3(B)(8)(e) above and shall require a Conditional Use Approval pursuant
to Subsection
14-16-6-6(A).
4-3(B)(8)(j)   This use shall require a Conditional Use Approval pursuant to
Subsection
14-16-6-6(A) if located on the ground floor of any building in the Downtown
Center in any zone district other than MX-FB-ID or in the Volcano Heights Urban
Center.
4-3(B)(9)   Community Residential Facility, Small or Large
4-3(B)(9)(a)   This use must comply with all applicable local, State, and
federal regulations.
4-3(B)(9)(b)   Each community residential facility occupying a structure
originally designed for a use in the Household Living category shall comply
with the Development Standards in
Part 14-16-5 applicable to the zone district in which it is located.
4-3(B)(10)   Group Home, Small, Medium, or Large
4-3(B)(10)(a)   This use must comply with all applicable local and State
regulations.
4-3(B)(10)(b)   This use is prohibited within 1,500 feet in any direction of a
lot containing any other group home.
4-3(B)(10)(c)   The total number of group homes shall not exceed 30 in each
City Council District.
 
Notes
5 City Council, O-24-69, adopted January 6, 2025 and effective January 28,
  2025. Revised editorially for clarity and consistency with the IDO.
6 City Council, O-24-69, adopted January 6, 2025 and effective January 28,
  2025. Revised editorially for clarity and consistency with the IDO.
4-3(C)   CIVIC AND INSTITUTIONAL USES
4-3(C)(1)   Community Center or Library
If
Table 4-2-1 specifies that this use is allowed in the R-A, R-1, R-T, or MX-
T zone districts, it shall be subject to the same size limits applicable to
religious institutions in that zone district, pursuant to Subsection
14-16-4-3(C)(8)(b) or
14-16-4-3(C)(8)(c).
4-3(C)(2)   Elementary or Middle School
If
Table 4-2-1 specifies that this use is allowed in the R-A, R-1, R-T, or MX-
T zone districts, it shall be subject to the same size limits applicable to
religious institutions in that zone district, pursuant to Subsection
14-16-4-3(C)(8)(b) or
14-16-4-3(C)(8)(c).
4-3(C)(3)   High School
If
Table 4-2-1 specifies that this use is allowed in the R-A, R-1, R-T, or MX-
T zone districts, it shall be subject to the same size limits applicable to
religious institutions in that zone district, pursuant to Subsection
14-16-4-3(C)(8)(b) or
14-16-4-3(C)(8)(c).
4-3(C)(4)   Hospital
In the MX-M zone district, this use is limited to no more than 20 overnight
beds and, if located within 330 feet of any Residential zone district, shall
require a Conditional Use approval, pursuant to Subsection
14-16-6-6(A).
4-3(C)(5)   Museum
In any Residential or MX-T zone district, this use shall not exceed 10,000
square feet of gross floor area.
4-3(C)(6)   Overnight Shelter
4-3(C)(6)(a)   This use is prohibited within 1,500 feet in any direction of a
lot containing any other overnight shelter.
4-3(C)(6)(b)   This use shall be conducted within fully enclosed portions of a
building.
4-3(C)(6)(c)   In the MX-M zone district, this use shall not exceed 25,000
square feet.
4-3(C)(7)   Parks and Open Space
4-3(C)(7)(a)   NR-PO-A or Other Zone District with a City-owned or City-
operated Park
   1.   Parks and recreational facilities, including associated community
buildings, lighting, parking areas, trails, play areas, playgrounds, exercise
stations, basketball courts, restrooms, drinking water facilities, picnic
shelters, storage sheds and enclosures, and any other structures or
improvements approved by the City Parks and Recreation Department are allowed.
   2.   Parks are prohibited in certain areas within the Airport Protection
Overlay Zone, pursuant to Section
14-16-3-3.
4-3(C)(7)(b)   NR-PO-B or Other Zone District with City-owned or City-operated
Major Public Open Space
Areas designated as Major Public Open Space must comply with standards in the
Rank 2 Major Public Open Space Facility Plan for the following types of
facilities:
   1.   Open Space Preserve
   2.   Protected Undeveloped Open Space
   3.   Open Space Facilities
   4.   Open Space Trails
   5.   Special Use Area
4-3(C)(7)(c)   NR-PO-C or Other Zone District with Parks or Open Spaces not
Owned or Operated by the City
   1.   Parks, multi-use trails, play areas, playgrounds, exercise stations,
basketball courts, restrooms, drinking water facilities, picnic shelters,
storage sheds/enclosures, and other facilities generally included in parks
(collectively referred to as "recreational facilities" for the purposes of this
Subsection
14-16-4-3(C)(7)(c) that are designed for routine use by the public (rather than
organized sports) and designated to accommodate no more than 25 persons per
acre of site area at any one time are allowed.
   2.   Ball fields, fields for organized sports, nighttime lighting
facilities, spectator bleachers or seating, parking areas for more than 25
cars, and any facility or improvement intended to be used by a group of more
than 25 people at any one time require a Conditional Use Approval pursuant to
Subsection
14-16-6-6(A).
   3.   Other facilities included in an approved Site Plan for the property are
allowed provided that the property owner complies with any conditions attached
to that approval.
   4.   Recreational facilities that are open for public use, including but not
limited to play areas, playgrounds, and basketball courts, shall be built to
City Parks and Recreation standards and subject to review and approval by City
Parks and Recreation Department for compliance.
   5.   Recreational facilities that are not open for public use, including but
not limited to play areas, playgrounds, and basketball courts, shall be built
to any ADA standards applicable to private recreational facilities. Such
facilities, particularly playgrounds, shall be enclosed with a wall or fence 5
feet or higher and accessed via a locked gate. Signage at the entrance of the
recreational area shall indicate the entity with ownership and maintenance
responsibilities, and lighting shall be provided so that the sign is visible
after dark. The facility shall comply with the standards in Section
14-16-5-7 (Walls and Fences) and Section
14-16-5-8 (Outdoor and Site Lighting).
   6.   Dog parks shall be subject to regulations in Article 14-5 of ROA 1994
(Flood Hazard and Drainage Control).
   7.   Trails built in the NR-PO-C sub-zone may be paved or unpaved, except
that multi-use trails must be paved. All trails shall be built to City
standards as required by the Development Process Manual (DPM). The trails shall
be maintained by the property owner or homeowners association. Signs shall be
posted every mile or at every intersection, whichever is closer, that indicate
ownership and/or management and current contact information.
   8.   Parks, but not open space, are prohibited in certain areas within the
Airport Protection Overlay Zone, pursuant to Section
14-16-3-3.
4-3(C)(7)(d)   NR-PO-D (BioPark)
Uses specified in the BioPark Master Plan as approved by the City Cultural
Services Department are allowed.
4-3(C)(8)   Religious Institution
4-3(C)(8)(a)   Incidental activities, including but not limited to recreational
activities, educational activities, overnight shelters, campgrounds, and safe
outdoor spaces are allowed, provided that all of the following requirements are
met.
   1.   All incidental activities must be operated by the religious
institution.
   2.   All incidental activities must comply with all applicable State
regulations and local regulations.
   3.   All incidental activities that are allowable uses listed in
Table 4-2-1 must comply with the relevant use-specific standard for those
allowable uses in Section
14-16-4-3, except as noted below.
      a.   If
Table 4-2-1 specifies an allowable use as a Conditional Use in the relevant
zone district, a Conditional Use Approval is not required.
      b.   If a use-specific standard in Section
14-16-4-3 specifies that a Conditonal Uses is required under a particular
context, then a Conditional Use Approval pursuant to Subsection
14-16-6-6(A) is required.
      c.   For safe outdoor spaces, the following provisions do not apply:
         i.   The required distance separation from R-A, R-1, or R-T zone
districts pursuant to Subsection
14-16-4-3(G)(9)(d).
         ii.   The Council District cap in Subsection
14-16-4-3(G)(9)(k).
4-3(C)(8)(b)   In the R-A, R-1, and R-T zone districts, this use is limited to
facilities with a total of 40,000 square feet of gross floor area or less.
4-3(C)(8)(c)   In the MX-T zone district, this use is limited to facilities
with a total of 60,000 square feet of gross floor area or less.
4-3(D)   COMMERCIAL USES
4-3(D)(1)   Community Garden
4-3(D)(1)(a)   The maximum size of this use is 3 contiguous acres.
4-3(D)(1)(b)   This use shall be limited to the propagation and cultivation of
plants.
4-3(D)(1)(c)   Accessory structures such as hoop houses, shade structures, and
storage sheds are allowed, but no such structure shall be more than 8 feet in
height or located closer than 10 feet to a property line, and the total area
covered by structures shall not exceed 25 percent of the site area.
4-3(D)(1)(d)   Operation of power equipment or generators shall not occur
between the hours of 10:00 P.M. and 7:00 A.M.
4-3(D)(1)(e)   The site drainage and maintenance must prevent water and
fertilizer from draining onto adjacent property that is not part of the
contiguous land in urban agricultural use.
4-3(D)(1)(f)   Food products may be grown in soil native to the site if a
composite sample of the native soil, consisting of no less than 5 individual
samples, has been tested for lead content and the lead content in the soil is
determined to be at or below the New Mexico direct-contact standards for lead;
and the applicant demonstrates any of the following:
   1.   That the site has only been put to residential or agricultural use in
the past through maps, deeds, prior permits, or a combination of those sources.
   2.   A composite sample of the native soil, consisting of no less than 5
individual samples, has been tested for metal content using the US EPA 3050B,
3051, or a comparable method and that the metals arsenic, cadmium, mercury,
molybdenum, nickel, selenium, and zinc are at or below the thresholds listed in
Table 4-3-1.
Table 4-3-1: Soil Testing Standards
Chemical Name CASRN Soil Exposure Direct Contact Residential Maximum (mg/kg)
Table 4-3-1: Soil Testing Standards
Chemical Name                        CASRN     Soil Exposure Direct Contact
                                               Residential Maximum (mg/kg)
Arsenic, Inorganic                   7440-38-2 5.5
Cadmium (Diet)                       7440-43-9 98
Mercuric Chloride (and other Mercury 7487-94-7 32
salts)
Lead and Compounds                   7439-92-1 400
Mercury (elemental)                  7439-97-6 3.1
Molybdenum                           7439-98-7 550
Nickel Soluble Salts                 7440-02-0 2100
Selenium                             7782-49-2 550
Zinc and Compounds                   7440-66-6 32000
 
4-3(D)(2)   Equestrian Facility
This use is prohibited within 300 feet in any direction of any Residential zone
district or lot containing a residential use in any Mixed-use zone district.
4-3(D)(3)   General Agriculture
Livestock and birds are allowed, provided that the lot has an area of at least
1 acre and that all of the following standards are met.
4-3(D)(3)(a)   The number of cattle or horse shall not exceed 1 for each 10,000
square feet of net lot area, and the number of sheep and goats does not exceed
1 sheep or goat for each 4,000 square feet of open lot area, or equivalent
combination.
   1.   Animals under 4 months old are not counted.
   2.   For cows and horses in Residential other than R-A and Mixed-use Zone
Districts, see Subsection 4-3(F)(3)(d).
4-3(D)(3)(b)   Animals shall be so controlled that they cannot graze on any
other premises.
4-3(D)(3)(c)   Any building, pen, or corral for agricultural animals or birds
is prohibited within 20 feet in any direction of any residential dwelling on
the subject property or any adjacent lot.
4-3(D)(4)   Kennel
4-3(D)(4)(a)   In the MX-L and MX-M zone districts, this use shall be conducted
within fully enclosed portions of a building.
4-3(D)(4)(b)   In the MX-L and MX-M zone districts, any building that contains
this use is prohibited within 25 feet in any direction of any Residential zone
district or lot containing a residential use in any Mixed-use zone district.
4-3(D)(4)(c)   In the NR-C, NR-LM and NR-GM zone districts:
   1.   This use shall be conducted within fully enclosed portions of a
building; within an area enclosed on all sides by a wall or fence at least 6
feet high, which must be opaque when it faces or abuts any zone district other
than NR-C, NR-LM, or NR-GM; or a combination of these 2 options.
   2.   Fully enclosed portions of a building containing this use are
prohibited within 25 feet in any direction of any Residential zone district or
lot containing a residential use in any Mixed-use zone district.
   3.   Any areas where activities associated with this use are conducted
outside of a fully enclosed portion of a building are prohibited within 50 feet
in any direction of any Residential zone district or lot containing a
residential use in any Mixed-use zone district.
4-3(D)(5)   Veterinary Hospital
4-3(D)(5)(a)   In the MX-T, MX-L, and MX-M zone districts, treatment of large
animals, including but not limited to cattle, horses, sheep, goats, or pigs
weighing over 100 pounds, is prohibited. Only treatment of dogs, cats, other
domestic pets, and small animals is allowed.
4-3(D)(5)(b)   In the MX-M and NR-C zone districts, outside exercise runs are
allowed, provided that they are enclosed with an opaque wall or fence at least
6 feet high. Outside areas for occupancy by animals overnight are prohibited.
4-3(D)(6)   Adult Entertainment or Adult Retail
These uses are prohibited in the following locations:
4-3(D)(6)(a)   Within 500 feet in any direction of any of the following:
   1.   Any Residential zone district.
   2.   Any lot containing any residential use in any Mixed-use zone district.
   3.   Any religious institution.
   4.   Any elementary, middle, or high school.
4-3(D)(6)(b)   Within 1,000 feet in any direction of another premises
containing an adult entertainment or adult retail use.
4-3(D)(7)   Auditorium or Theater
If
Table 4-2-1 specifies that this use is allowed in the R-A, R-1, R-T, or MX-
T zone districts, it shall be subject to the same size limits applicable to
religious institutions in that zone district, pursuant to Subsection
14-16-4-3(C)(8)(b) or
14-16-4-3(C)(8)(c).
4-3(D)(8)   Bar, Nightclub, Restaurant, and Tap Room or Tasting Room
4-3(D)(8)(a)   Alcohol sales for on-premises consumption is allowed, provided
that the establishment complies with all New Mexico State law requirements,
including but not limited to any required spacing from other uses or
facilities.
4-3(D)(8)(b)   These uses must comply with stormwater quality requirements
found in the DPM.
4-3(D)(8)(c)   These uses may include the retailing of related goods, such as
shirts, caps, recipe books, mugs, and glasses as an incidental activity.
4-3(D)(8)(d)   A restaurant use must comply with Part 9-10-1 of ROA 1994 (Solid
Waste Collection), in particular the City's minimum specifications for waste
enclosures for restaurant and food services to include a sanitary sewer drain.
4-3(D)(8)(e)   In the MX-T zone district, these uses are limited to 10,000
square feet of gross floor area.
4-3(D)(8)(f)   In the Old Town – HPO-6, the following standards apply.
   1.   Bars and nightclubs are prohibited.
   2.   Restaurants are permissive in any Mixed-use zone district regardless of
whether the use is permissive in the zone district citywide.
   3.   Where allowed, tap rooms or tasting rooms require a Conditional Use
Approval pursuant to Subsection
14-16-6-6(A), unless accessory to a restaurant.
4-3(D)(9)   Health Club or Gym
In the MX-T zone district, this use shall not exceed 10,000 square feet of
gross floor area.
4-3(D)(10)   Mobile Food Truck Court
4-3(D)(10)(a)   For purposes of this Subsection
14-16-4-3(D)(10), "operation" of a mobile food truck includes any activity
involved with food preparation or sales.
4-3(D)(10)(b)   The mobile food truck court operator must provide trash
receptacles and hand-wash stations.
4-3(D)(10)(c)   Mobile food trucks shall comply with all applicable City,
State, and federal requirements, including but not limited to Part 9-6-5 of ROA
1994 (Health, Safety & Sanitation Code) and Part 9-9-4 of ROA 1994 (General
Noise).
4-3(D)(10)(d)   The mobile food truck and any associated tables, chairs,
displays, umbrellas, or the like, do not physically occupy or obstruct access
to any parking stalls necessary to meet the minimum parking requirements for
any on-premises land uses, unless the mobile food truck is operating outside of
the business hours of on-premises uses.
4-3(D)(10)(e)   The mobile food truck and any associated tables, chairs,
displays, umbrellas, or the like, do not obstruct any designated ingress or
egress from the property, or any designated drive aisle.
4-3(D)(10)(f)   This use shall be located on a paved surface. Ingress and
egress areas shall be paved with an impermeable surface for a minimum length of
20 feet into the lot from the edge of the public right-of-way.
4-3(D)(10)(g)   The use of generators is prohibited.
4-3(D)(11)   Residential Community Amenity, Indoor
If
Table 4-2-1 specifies that this use is allowed in the R-A, R-1, R-T, or MX-
T zone districts, it shall be subject to the same size limits applicable to
religious institutions in that zone district, pursuant to Subsection
14-16-4-3(C)(8)(b) or
14-16-4-3(C)(8)(c).
4-3(D)(12)   Other Indoor Entertainment
If
Table 4-2-1 specifies that this use is allowed in the R-A, R-1, R-T, or MX-
T zone districts, it shall be subject to the same size limits applicable to
religious institutions in that zone district, pursuant to Subsection
14-16-4-3(C)(8)(b) or
14-16-4-3(C)(8)(c).
4-3(D)(13)   Bed and Breakfast
4-3(D)(13)(a)   Alcohol sales for on-premises consumption is allowed, provided
that the establishment complies with all New Mexico State law requirements,
including but not limited to any required spacing from other uses or
facilities.
4-3(D)(13)(b)   Guest stays are limited to a maximum of 30 calendar days.
4-3(D)(13)(c)   The use shall appear outwardly to be a single-family dwelling,
with no evidence of business use other than allowed signs.
4-3(D)(13)(d)   If allowed only as an accessory use, the owner of the Bed and
Breakfast shall reside on-site as their permanent residence.
4-3(D)(13)(e)   If this use is located in any Residential zone district, 1 non-
illuminated sign up to 8 square feet in area is allowed per premises.
4-3(D)(13)(f)   If located in any Residential zone district, only the following
persons may eat meals in the bed and breakfast:
   1.   The resident household and their personal guests.
   2.   Resident guests.
   3.   Guests of resident guests.
   4.   Guests participating in meetings or other private events hosted by the
facility when other overnight guests are not present, not to exceed the
approved seating capacity of the facility. Special events on the premises that
involve a total number of participants in excess of the approved dining area
seating capacity shall be limited to 6 days in any calendar year.
4-3(D)(14)   Campground or Recreational Vehicle Park
4-3(D)(14)(a)   Minimum project size for a campground or recreational vehicle
park is 1 acre.
4-3(D)(14)(b)   The maximum gross density within a campground shall be 25 camp
sites per acre. Land that is not accessible to campers shall not be included in
the calculation of gross density.
4-3(D)(14)(c)   All recreational vehicles or tents parked or attached to the
ground for use as an overnight accommodation shall be on a camp site.
4-3(D)(14)(d)   Each camp site shall provide parking spaces of adequate size to
accommodate the vehicles allowed at the site. Each parking space shall be
constructed so that no portion of the vehicle it is designed for shall extend
onto any drive aisle within the campground.
4-3(D)(14)(e)   Camp sites shall be set back a minimum of 20 feet from each
property line.
4-3(D)(14)(f)   Camp sites shall be screened on all sides by an opaque wall or
vegetative screen at least 6 feet high unless they are set back at least 100
feet from any property line abutting a street.
4-3(D)(14)(g)   This use shall be serviced by a private street system providing
safe and convenient access to all camp sites or RV spaces, which shall be paved
as required for off-street parking regulations in the DPM.
4-3(D)(14)(h)   Water-flush toilets and urinals shall be provided and shall not
be more than 300 feet in any direction of any camp site without an individual
sewer connection.
4-3(D)(14)(i)   Toilets and lavatories shall be provided as required by with
Articles 14-1 and 14-3 of ROA 1994 (Uniform Administrative Code and Technical
Codes and Uniform Housing Code).
4-3(D)(14)(j)   On any side of the premises adjacent to any Residential zone
district, an opaque wall or fence at least 6 feet high is required.
4-3(D)(14)(k)   A nonconforming campground and recreational vehicle park use
constructed prior to the effective date of this IDO is allowed as a permissive
primary use.
4-3(D)(15)   Hotel or Motel
4-3(D)(15)(a)   In the MX-T zone district, this use is limited to a maximum of
15 guest rooms.
4-3(D)(15)(b)   Additional standards in Subsection
14-16-3-3(C) (Airport Protection Overlay Zone Use Regulations) may apply.
4-3(D)(16)   Car Wash
4-3(D)(16)(a)   This use must comply with stormwater quality requirements found
in the DPM.
4-3(D)(16)(b)   A car wash building and any associated outdoor activities,
including but not limited to vacuum stations, drying or polishing stations, and
queuing lanes, are prohibited within 50 feet in any direction of any
Residential zone district or any lot containing a residential use in any Mixed-
use zone district.
4-3(D)(16)(c)   Queuing lanes associated with this use shall comply with the
requirements of Subsection
14-16-5-5(I)(2) (Drive-through or Drive-up Facility Design).
4-3(D)(16)(d)   Vacuum stations shall be located away from public streets, any
Residential zone districts, or any lot containing a residential use in any
Mixed-use zone district to the maximum extent practicable. If not practicable,
at least 1 tree at least 8 feet high at the time of planting shall be provided
for every 25 feet along the lot line in locations that would best screen the
vacuum stations from the public right-of-way or the adjacent properties, in
addition to all applicable standards in Section
14-16-5-6 (Landscaping, Buffering, and Screening).
4-3(D)(16)(e)   Within 330 feet in any direction of Major Public Open Space,
this use shall require a Conditional Use Approval pursuant to Subsection
14-16-6-6(A).
4-3(D)(16)(f)   Notwithstanding Subsection (e) above, this use is prohibited
adjacent to Major Public Open Space.
4-3(D)(16)(g)   A cumulative impacts analysis may be required at the time of
application submittal for projects within the Railroad and Spur Small Area,
pursuant to Subsections
14-16-5-2(E) (Cumulative Impacts) and
14-16-6-4(H) (Cumulative Impacts Analysis Requirements).
4-3(D)(16)(h)   This use is prohibited in the following small areas as noted.
   1.   Downtown Neighborhood Area - CPO-3
      This use is prohibited in all zone districts.
   2.   Sawmill/Wells Park - CPO-12
      This use is prohibited in the MX-L zone district.
4-3(D)(17)   Heavy Vehicle and Equipment Sales, Rental, Fueling, and Repair
4-3(D)(17)(a)   This use must comply with stormwater quality requirements found
in the DPM.
4-3(D)(17)(b)   The lot must be graded and surfaced pursuant to DPM standards
and shall be maintained in a level and serviceable condition.
4-3(D)(17)(c)   This use must be screened as required by Subsection
14-16-5-6(G)(4) (Outdoor Storage Areas for Vehicles, Equipment, and Materials).
The Planning Director may require a taller wall, fence, or vegetative screen to
provide an adequate buffer for an abutting Residential zone district or lot
containing a residential use in any Mixed-use zone district from the reasonably
anticipated visual or noise impacts of this use.
4-3(D)(17)(d)   For fueling station canopies, all under-canopy lighting shall
be recessed so that no light lens projects below the canopy ceiling. The canopy
fascia shall not be internally illuminated.
4-3(D)(17)(e)   Vehicle repair, servicing, and maintenance shall be conducted
within fully enclosed portions of a building.
4-3(D)(17)(f)   Any building that contains vehicle repair, servicing, and
maintenance is prohibited within 25 feet in any direction of any Residential
zone district or lot containing a residential use in any Mixed-use zone
district.
4-3(D)(17)(g)   If located within 330 feet of any Residential zone district,
this use shall require a Conditional Use Approval pursuant to Subsections
14-16-5-2(E) and
14-16-6-6(A).
4-3(D)(17)(h)   This use is prohibited within 330 feet in any direction of
Major Public Open Space.
4-3(D)(17)(i)   A cumulative impacts analysis may be required at the time of
application submittal for projects within the Railroad and Spur Small Area,
pursuant to Subsections
14-16-5-2(E) (Cumulative Impacts) and
14-16-6-4(H) (Cumulative Impacts Analysis Requirements).
4-3(D)(18)   Light Vehicle Fueling Station
4-3(D)(18)(a)   No inoperable vehicles shall be stored outside a building at
any time.
4-3(D)(18)(b)   This use must comply with stormwater quality requirements found
in the DPM.
4-3(D)(18)(c)   When this use is located on a corner lot with access from both
streets, it shall have no more than 1 access point per frontage. When this use
is located mid-block or with access from only one street, it shall have no more
than 2 access points from that street.
4-3(D)(18)(d)   Access points shall be located no closer than 20 feet from any
adjacent property that is not under common ownership.
4-3(D)(18)(e)   Site access from a paved alley connecting to a public street is
allowed provided that the access points from the site to the alley shall be a
minimum of 25 feet from the intersection of the alley and the street.
4-3(D)(18)(f)   For fueling station canopies, all under-canopy lighting shall
be recessed so that no light lens projects below the canopy ceiling. The canopy
fascia shall not be internally illuminated.
4-3(D)(18)(g)   If located adjacent to any Residential zone district, this use
shall require a Conditional Use Approval pursuant to Subsection
14-16-6-6(A).
4-3(D)(18)(h)   If located abutting or across an alley from any Residential
zone district or lot containing a residential use in any Mixed-use zone
district, an opaque wall, fence, or vegetative screen at least 6 feet high is
required.
4-3(D)(18)(i)   In the MX-L zone district, this use shall be located where
vehicular access is only from a street designated as a collector, arterial, or
interstate highway.
4-3(D)(18)(j)   In the MX-M and higher zone districts, if located on a local
street, this use is prohibited within 330 feet in any direction of a lot
containing a residential use in any Residential or Mixed-use zone district.
4-3(D)(18)(k)   This use is prohibited within 330 feet in any direction of
Major Public Open Space.
4-3(D)(18)(l)   In the MX-H zone district and/or in any zone district in UC-AC-
MS-PT-MT areas, the fully enclosed portion of any building containing a retail
use with 1,000 square feet or more of gross floor area shall have a maximum
front setback of 15 feet. A canopy attached to the building with a common roof
satisfies this standard. The requirements of Subsection
14-16-5-1(D)(2) do not apply to this use.
4-3(D)(18)(m)   In UC-MS-PT areas, an opaque wall or vegetative screen at least
3 feet high shall be provided along all street frontages.
4-3(D)(18)(n)   This use is regulated as noted in the following small areas.
   1.   Downtown Neighborhood Area - CPO-3
      a.   In the MX-M zone district, this use is prohibited.
      b.   In the MX-L zone district, this use requires a Conditional Use
Approval pursuant to Subsection
14-16-6-6(A).
   2.   East Gateway Small Area
      This use is prohibited in the following mapped small areas.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/b37713d5e40fc82694833f290401791f80be26ac/
IMAGES/0-0-0-6701.png]
   3.   Railroad and Spur Small Area
      A cumulative impacts analysis may be required at the time of application
submittal for projects within the Railroad and Spur Small Area pursuant to
Subsections
14-16-5-2(E) (Cumulative Impacts) and
14-16-6-4(H) (Cumulative Impacts Analysis Requirements).
   4.   Sawmill/Wells Park - CPO-12
      In the MX-L zone district, this use is prohibited.
4-3(D)(19)   Light Vehicle Repair
4-3(D)(19)(a)   Storage of inoperative vehicles outside of the fully enclosed
portions of a building is limited to 2 vehicles at any time, which may not be
parked for more than 14 calendar days in a 1-year period.
4-3(D)(19)(b)   This use must comply with stormwater quality requirements found
in the DPM.
4-3(D)(19)(c)   Painting and vehicle repair shall be conducted within fully
enclosed portions of a building.
4-3(D)(19)(d)   Any building that contains painting or vehicle repair is
prohibited within 25 feet in any direction of any Residential zone district or
lot containing a residential use in any Mixed-use zone district.
4-3(D)(19)(e)   In any Mixed-use zone district, vehicle service and maintenance
shall be conducted within fully enclosed portions of a building.
4-3(D)(19)(f)   This use is prohibited within 330 feet in any direction of
Major Public Open Space.
4-3(D)(19)(g)   A cumulative impacts analysis may be required at the time of
application submittal for projects within the Railroad and Spur Small Area
pursuant to Subsections
14-16-5-2(E) (Cumulative Impacts) and
14-16-6-4(H) (Cumulative Impacts Analysis Requirements).
4-3(D)(19)(h)   This use is prohibited in the MX-L zone district in the
Downtown Neighborhood Area - CPO-3.
4-3(D)(20)   Light Vehicle Sales and Rental
4-3(D)(20)(a)   Where allowed, incidental outdoor vehicle display, storage, or
service and maintenance areas must be screened from any Residential zone
district or residential use of any Mixed-use zone district located abutting or
across an alley from those activities as required by Section
14-16-5-6 (Landscaping, Buffering, and Screening).
4-3(D)(20)(b)   In the MX-H zone district in UC-MS-PT areas, outdoor display or
storage of vehicles is prohibited. Any outdoor display or storage of vehicles
is prohibited within 25 feet of any Residential zone district or lot containing
a residential use in any Mixed-use zone district.
4-3(D)(20)(c)   In other zone districts, outdoor display, storage, and sales
areas are prohibited within 50 feet in any direction of any Residential zone
district or lot containing a residential use in any Mixed-use zone district and
are prohibited within any required front setback area.
4-3(D)(20)(d)   In the MX-L zone district, this use is prohibited on lots that
are 21,780 square feet or less ( acre) and that are adjacent to low-density
residential development.
4-3(D)(20)(e)   In the MX-H zone district, incidental vehicle service and
maintenance must take place in fully enclosed portions of a building.
4-3(D)(20)(f)   For projects within the Railroad and Spur Small Area, a
cumulative impacts analysis may be required at the time of application
submittal, pursuant to Subsections
14-16-5-2(E) (Cumulative Impacts) and
14-16-6-4(H) (Cumulative Impacts Analysis Requirements).
4-3(D)(20)(g)   In the Downtown Neighborhood Area - CPO-3, this use is
prohibited in the MX-L zone district.
4-3(D)(21)   Outdoor Vehicle Storage
All areas where vehicles are stored outside of a fully enclosed building must
be screened from any adjacent Residential zone district or lot containing a
residential use in any Mixed-use zone district as required by Section
14-16-5-6 (Landscaping, Buffering, and Screening).
4-3(D)(22)   Paid Parking Lot or Parking Structure
4-3(D)(22)(a)   This use must comply with all standards in Section
14-16-5-5 (Parking and Loading).
4-3(D)(22)(b)   This use is limited to the parking of motor vehicles and any
allowable accessory or temporary use. No vehicle repair, vehicle sales, or
other uses are allowed on the property.
4-3(D)(22)(c)   Minor accessory structures, including but not limited to waste
container and dumpster enclosures, bike lockers, bike share facilities, and an
attendant/payment booth, are allowed on the property, but shall not be located
in any required setback area.
4-3(D)(22)(d)   Paid parking lots are regulated as noted in the following small
areas.
   1.   Barelas - CPO-1
      Paid parking lots are prohibited in the Barelas - CPO-1.
   2.   Downtown Small Area
      Paid parking lots are prohibited in the following mapped small area.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/b37713d5e40fc82694833f290401791f80be26ac/
IMAGES/0-0-0-6703.png]
   3.   Downtown Neighborhood Area - CPO-3
      Paid parking lots are prohibited in the Downtown Neighborhood Area - CPO-
3.
   4.   Huning Castle Raynolds Addition Small Area
      Paid parking lots are prohibited in any Mixed-use or Non-residential zone
district in the following mapped small area.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/b37713d5e40fc82694833f290401791f80be26ac/
IMAGES/0-0-0-6705.png]
   5.   Los Duranes - CPO-6
      Paid parking lots are prohibited in the Los Duranes - CPO-6.
   6.   Martineztown/Santa Barbara - CPO-7
      Paid parking lots are prohibited in the Martineztown/Santa Barbara - CPO-
7.
   7.   McClellan Park Small Area
      Paid parking lots require a Conditional Use Approval pursuant to
Subsection
14-16-6-6(A) in the following mapped small area.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/b37713d5e40fc82694833f290401791f80be26ac/
IMAGES/0-0-0-6707.png]
   8.   Nob Hill/Highland Small Area
      Paid parking lots are prohibited in the following mapped small area.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/b37713d5e40fc82694833f290401791f80be26ac/
IMAGES/0-0-0-6709.png]
   9.   South Broadway Small Area
      Paid parking lots are prohibited in the following mapped small area.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/b37713d5e40fc82694833f290401791f80be26ac/
IMAGES/0-0-0-6711.png]
   10.   South Martineztown Small Area
      Paid parking lots are prohibited in the following mapped small area.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/b37713d5e40fc82694833f290401791f80be26ac/
IMAGES/0-0-0-6713.png]
4-3(D)(23)   Bank
The following standards apply only to small loan businesses.
4-3(D)(23)(a)   Small loan businesses shall not be located within 1 mile in any
direction of any other premises containing a small loan business.
4-3(D)(23)(b)   If a small loan business is abandoned, discontinued, or ceases
operation for a period of 1 year, it shall not be reestablished at that
location if it is within 1 mile of any other small loan business.
4-3(D)(23)(c)   Small loan businesses shall maintain a valid license under the
New Mexico Small Loan Business Act from the New Mexico Regulations and
Licensing Department at all times. Small loan businesses shall submit to the
ZEO proof on an annual basis that they have renewed their license with the New
Mexico Regulations and Licensing Department.
4-3(D)(24)   Club or Event Facility
If
Table 4-2-1 specifies that this use is allowed in the R-A, R-1, R-T, or MX-
T zone districts, it shall be subject to the same size limits applicable to
religious institutions in that zone district, pursuant to Subsection
14-16-4-3(C)(8)(b) or
14-16-4-3(C)(8)(c).
4-3(D)(25)   Construction Contractor Facility and Yard
4-3(D)(25)(a)   This use may be conducted outside of a building.
4-3(D)(25)(b)   All areas outside of a completely enclosed building where
construction equipment or goods or vehicles are parked or stored or work is
conducted must comply with requirements in Section
14-16-5-6 (Landscaping, Buffering, and Screening).
4-3(D)(25)(c)   If located within 330 feet of any Residential zone district,
this use shall require a Conditional Use Approval pursuant to Subsection
14-16-6-6(A).
4-3(D)(26)   Medical or Dental Clinic
4-3(D)(26)(a)   Facilities that are considered methadone centers pursuant to
Article 13-11 of ROA 1994 (Methadone Centers) are allowed as part of this use,
but are prohibited in the following locations:
   1.   On lots within 330 feet in any direction of any other facility that
dispenses methadone as a primary activity.
   2.   On lots within 330 feet in any direction of a lot containing a
religious institution.
   3.   On lots within 500 feet in any direction of an R-1 zone district.
   4.   On lots within 500 feet in any direction of a lot containing an
elementary, middle, or high school.
4-3(D)(26)(b)   Facilities that are considered a syringe exchange facility
pursuant Article 9-15 of ROA 1994 (Syringe Exchange Facility Location) are
allowed as part of this use, but are prohibited in the following locations:
   1.   On lots within 500 feet in any direction of any other syringe exchange
facility.
   2.   On lots within 500 feet in any direction of a lot containing a
religious institution.
   3.   On lots within 500 feet in any direction of a Residential zone district
or a building containing a residential use in a Mixed-use zone district.
   4.   On lots within 1,000 feet in any direction of a lot containing an
elementary, middle, or high school.
4-3(D)(26)(c)   If located in an MX-T or MX-L zone district, this use shall not
exceed 10,000 square feet of gross floor area.
4-3(D)(27)   Personal and Business Services, Small or Large
4-3(D)(27)(a)   The following provisions apply only to bail bond businesses.
   1.   The lot shall not be accessed from a local street.
   2.   Bail bond businesses may not be located on the same lot as another bail
bond business.
   3.   Unless located within 500 feet in any direction of a lot containing a
courthouse, a bail bond business may not be located closer than 1 mile to any
other bail bond business.
   4.   If a bail bond business is abandoned, discontinued, or ceases
continuous operation for more than 1 year, it shall not be reestablished at
that location if it is within 1 mile in any direction of any other bail bond
business, unless it is located within 500 feet in any direction of a lot
containing a courthouse.
4-3(D)(27)(b)   The following provisions apply if the use includes dry cleaning
of clothes and is located in any Mixed-use zone district.
   1.   Only nonflammable or noncombustible materials may be used in the
cleaning process.
   2.   The portion of the structure in which any cleaning process is done must
be located at least 50 feet in any direction of any Residential zone district
or lot containing a residential use in any Mixed-use zone district.
4-3(D)(27)(c)   The following provisions apply only to massage businesses.
   1.   Massage businesses are allowed provided that the business complies with
all applicable federal, State, and City requirements.
   2.   It is the burden of the owner of the massage business to ensure that
the massage business is and remains continually in compliance with all
requirements in Sections 61-12C-1 through 61-12C-25 NMSA 1978 (Massage Therapy
Practice Act).
4-3(D)(28)   Research or Testing Facility
4-3(D)(28)(a)   Any facility using hazardous materials or procedures subject to
additional review, licensing, or approval by State or federal law, or emitting
electromagnetic radiation or other radiation, shall comply with all State and
federal requirements regarding the storage, handling, transfer, use, and safety
of those materials, procedures, or radiation, and shall require a Conditional
Use Approval pursuant to Subsection
14-16-6-6(A).
4-3(D)(28)(b)   Facilities that require Conditional Use Approval pursuant to
Subsection (a) above are prohibited in the MX-T or MX-L zone districts.
4-3(D)(28)(c)   If located in an MX-T or MX-L zone district, this use shall not
exceed 10,000 square feet of gross floor area.
4-3(D)(29)   Self-storage
4-3(D)(29)(a)   All storage shall be within fully enclosed portions of a
building.
4-3(D)(29)(b)   Security fencing shall not include razor wire or barbed wire.
4-3(D)(29)(c)   Abutting any Residential zone district or lot containing a
residential use in any Mixed-use zone district, an opaque wall or fence at
least 6 feet and no more than 8 feet high or a landscape buffer at least 50
feet wide shall be provided along the abutting lot line.
4-3(D)(29)(d)   Within 100 feet in any direction of any Residential zone
district or lot containing a residential use in any Mixed-use zone district,
public access to any storage units is prohibited between 10:00 P.M. and 7:00
A.M.
4-3(D)(29)(e)   Within 200 feet in any direction of any Residential zone
district, internal lighting that is visible from the property line shall not
exceed the maximum light trespass values listed in
Table 5-8-3 for lighting designation Lz1 during the outdoor lighting curfew.
4-3(D)(29)(f)   In the MX-L, MX-M, MX-H, and MX-FB zone districts, and on lots
in the NR-C zone district within a UC-AC-MS-PT area, access to individual
storage units shall be through interior corridors; direct access to individual
units from outdoor areas is not allowed.
4-3(D)(29)(g)   In the NR-C zone district outside of UC-AC-MS-PT areas,
exterior doors to individual storage units shall not face any abutting street
frontage, or, if the site is located on a corner lot, shall not face the
primary street frontage.
4-3(D)(30)   Balloon Fiesta Park Events and Activities
Uses and conditions on operations are governed by the Balloon Fiesta Master
Plan, as amended.
4-3(D)(31)   Drive-in Theater
4-3(D)(31)(a)   This use shall be enclosed with an opaque wall, fence, or
vegetative screen at least 6 feet and no more than 8 feet high.
4-3(D)(31)(b)   A screen located less than 500 feet from an arterial street or
interstate highway shall be located, oriented, or shielded so that the picture
surface cannot be seen from the arterial street or interstate highway.
4-3(D)(32)   Other Outdoor Entertainment
4-3(D)(32)(a)   This use shall include fencing or other measures meeting the
standards in Section
14-16-5-6 (Landscaping, Buffering, and Screening) and designed to prevent balls
or other objects from the activity from passing beyond the property line and
onto any surrounding properties not owned by the owner or operator of the use.
4-3(D)(32)(b)   Rifle range (public or private) and flying of kites are
prohibited in the Air Space and Runway Protection Sub-areas pursuant to
Subsection
14-16-3-3(C) (Airport Protection Overlay Zone Use Regulations).
4-3(D)(33)   Art Gallery
In any Residential or MX-T zone district, this use shall not exceed 10,000
square feet of gross floor area.
4-3(D)(34)   Building and Home Improvement Materials Store
4-3(D)(34)(a)   All storage, display, and sales areas outside of a fully
enclosed building must be screened from any adjacent Residential zone district
or lot containing a residential use in any Mixed-use zone district as required
by Section
14-16-5-6 (Landscaping, Buffering, and Screening).
4-3(D)(34)(b)   If this use also meets the definition of a large retail
facility, the Use-specific Standards in Subsection
14-16-4-3(D)(37) (General Retail) for large retail facilities also apply.
4-3(D)(35)   Cannabis Retail
4-3(D)(35)(a)   Cannabis retail is allowed, provided that the establishment
complies with all New Mexico State law requirements, including but not limited
to any required spacing from other uses or facilities. For the purposes of the
IDO, all measurements for this use shall be from the lot(s) that include the
cannabis retail establishment to be licensed by the State as a "licensed
premises" as defined by Sections 26-2C-1 to 26-2C-42 NMSA 1978.
4-3(D)(35)(b)   Establishments with a valid license from the State under the
medical cannabis program as of April 1, 2022 pursuant to Sections 26-2B-1 to
26-2B-10 NMSA 1978 (the Lynn and Erin Compassionate Use Act) are entitled to
continued and uninterrupted operations and are allowed permissively as a
cannabis retail use after issuance of a license(s) from the State under
Sections 26-2C-1 to 26-2C-42 NMSA 1978. These establishments are not subject to
the distance separation requirements in Subsection (c) or (d) below or the
prohibition in Subsection (h) below.
4-3(D)(35)(c)   This use is prohibited within 660 feet of another cannabis
retail location.
4-3(D)(35)(d)   This use is prohibited within 300 feet of any school or child
day care facility.
4-3(D)(35)(e)   This use shall not include a storage or display area outside of
fully enclosed portions of a building.
4-3(D)(35)(f)   Cannabis products or cannabis paraphernalia shall not be
displayed within 5 feet of a window or door.
4-3(D)(35)(g)   A locked vault or safe or other secured storage structure shall
be installed in the building, bolted to the floor or walls, to store cash and
cannabis products overnight.
4-3(D)(35)(h)   A drive-through or drive-up facility is prohibited as accessory
to cannabis retail, pursuant to IDO Subsection
14-16-4-3(F)(5).
4-3(D)(35)(i)   All of the following provisions are required for licensed on-
site cannabis consumption.
   1.   Notwithstanding other provisions in this Subsection
14-16-4-3(D)(35), this use requires a Conditional Use Approval pursuant to
Subsection
14-16-6-6(A) when proposed to include licensed on-site cannabis consumption,
which is licensed separately by the State under Sections 26-2C-1 to 26-2C-42
NMSA 1978.
   2.   If the cannabis retail establishment is licensed by the State for on-
site cannabis consumption, and smoking or vaporizing is proposed to occur on-
site, a cannabis odor control plan approved by the City is required pursuant to
Subsection
14-16-6-5(G) (Site Plan – Administrative) or Subsection
14-16-6-6(I) (Site Plan – EPC), as applicable.
   3.   Licensed on-site cannabis consumption areas that allow smoking or
vaporizing shall be conducted within fully enclosed portions of a building.
4-3(D)(35)(j)   This use is prohibited in the Old Town – HPO-6.
4-3(D)(36)   Farmers' Market
If
Table 4-2-1 specifies that this use is allowed in the R-A, R-1, R-T, or MX-
T zone districts, it shall be subject to the same size limits applicable to
religious institutions in that zone district, pursuant to Subsection
14-16-4-3(C)(8)(b) or
14-16-4-3(C)(8)(c).
4-3(D)(37)   General Retail
4-3(D)(37)(a)   Outdoor Display or Storage
Except in the NR-LM and NR-GM zone districts, this use may not include a
storage or display area outside of a fully enclosed building unless a
Conditional Use Approval is obtained pursuant to Subsection
14-16-6-6(A) and the use is screened from any adjacent Residential zone
district or lot containing a residential use in any Mixed-use zone district as
required by Section
14-16-5-6 (Landscaping, Buffering, and Screening), except where allowed in the
Old Town – HPO-6 pursuant to Subsection
14-16-3-5(K)(3)(d) (Outdoor Display).
4-3(D)(37)(b)   Large Retail Facilities
For general retail uses that meet the definition of a large retail facility,
all of the following standards apply.
   1.   General
      These standards address the build-out of a large site in order to guide
the transition over time from more auto-oriented "big box" type retail
development with large parking lots to finer-scaled, pedestrian-oriented,
mixed-use development.
   2.   Access
      a.   The City Engineer may require that the intersection of the primary
drive aisle be signalized, in which case the signal shall be provided at the
applicant's expense.
      b.   Large retail facilities shall meet 1 of the following requirements,
based on the size of the facility.
         i.   Large retail facilities containing over 50,000 square feet but no
more than 90,000 square feet of gross floor area shall be located abutting and
have primary and full access to a street designated as a collector, arterial,
or interstate highway with at least 2 through traffic lanes.
         ii.   Large retail facilities containing over 90,000 square feet but
no more than 125,000 square feet of gross floor area are required to be located
abutting and have primary and full access to a street designated as a
collector, arterial, or interstate highway with at least 4 through traffic
lanes.
         iii.   Large retail facilities containing over 125,000 square feet of
gross floor area are required to be located within 700 feet of the intersection
of 2 streets designated as collector, arterial, or interstate highway and shall
have full access to these roadways. One of these two streets must have at least
4 through traffic lanes and the other must have at least 6 through traffic
lanes or be designated as a limited access arterial in the Limited Access
Facilities in the AMPA map in the Mid-region Council of Governments (MRCOG)
Metropolitan Transportation Plan and have a minimum of 4 lanes.
   3.   Site Division
      The site shall be designed with internal block sizes that are walkable
and support land use changes over time, according to the following standards.
      a.   The entire site shall be planned or platted according to the block
dimensions established for Activity Centers in the DPM and summarized in
Subsection
14-16-5-4(E)(3) (Block Dimensions), except as provided in Subsections g and h
below.
      b.   Primary buildings shall be screened from adjacent streets by smaller
buildings, retail liner suites, or 20 foot wide landscape areas with a double
row of trees.
      c.   Primary and secondary drive aisles (or platted roadways) that
separate the blocks shall be at least 60 feet and no more than 85 feet wide and
shall include all of the following:
         i.   Two (2) 10-foot travel lanes.
         ii.   Two (2) 6-foot landscaped buffers with shade trees spaced
approximately 30 feet on center.
         iii.   Two (2) 8-foot pedestrian walkways constructed of material
other than asphalt.
         iv.   Pedestrian-scale lighting that is a maximum of 16 feet in
height.
         v.   Standup curb.
      d.   Two (2) parallel or angle parking rows or a combination of the 2 on
both sides of the drive aisle rights-of-way are allowed but not required.
      e.   Parking shall be distributed on the site to minimize visual impact
from the adjoining street. Parking shall be located on at least 2 sides of a
building and shall not dominate the building or street frontage.
      f.   Every third double row of parking shall have a minimum 10 feet wide
continuous walkway dividing the row that meets all of the following
requirements.
         i.   The walkway shall be either patterned or colored material other
than asphalt and may be at grade.
         ii.   Trees shall be provided along the walkway pursuant to Subsection
14-16-5-6(C)(4)(i). Tree wells, planters, or supports for shading devices may
encroach on the walkway up to 3 feet.
         iii.   In no case shall the walkway be diminished to less than 5 feet
at any point.
      g.   One (1) block can be expanded to approximately 800 feet by 400 feet
if a primary building (including retail suite liners) covers more than 80
percent of the gross floor area of the block.
      h.   If the site dimensions result in irregular block sizes, blocks of
different dimensions are allowed provided that all of the following
requirements are met.
         i.   The block sizes achieve the intent of this Subsection
14-16-4-3(D)(37)(b).
         ii.   The narrow side of the block abuts the street that provides the
primary access.
         iii.   The center of the long side has a major entrance, including a
forecourt.
   4.   Fa ade Design
      Large retail facilities shall meet all of the following requirements.
      a.   Fa ades that contain a primary pedestrian entrance and fa ades
facing a public street or plaza or an internal drive aisle shall contain retail
suite liners, display windows, or a recessed patio at a minimum depth of 20
feet, or a combination of all 3, along 50 percent of the length of the fa ade.
         i.   Where patios are provided, at least 1 of the recessed walls shall
contain a window for ease of surveillance and the patio shall contain shading
and seating.
         ii.   Where retail suite liners are provided, they shall be accessible
to the public from the outside.
      b.   Every 30,000 square feet of gross floor area shall be designed to
appear as a minimum of 1 distinct building mass with different expressions. The
varied building masses shall have a change in visible roof plane or parapet
height. Massing and articulation are required to be developed so that no more
than 100 feet of a wall may occur without a vertical offset of at least 24
inches.
   5.   Signage
      All signage shall be designed to be consistent with and complement the
materials, color, and architectural style of buildings on the site.
      a.   All freestanding signs shall be monument style, with a maximum
height of 15 feet.
      b.   Building-mounted signs shall consist of individual channel letters.
Illuminated plastic panel signs are prohibited.
4-3(D)(37)(c)   Size Limitations in Zone Districts
   1.   In the MX-T zone district, this use shall not exceed 10,000 square feet
of gross floor area.
   2.   In the MX-L zone district, this use is limited to establishments of no
more than 30,000 square feet of gross floor area.
4-3(D)(37)(d)   Allowances on Certain Streets
In the MX-T zone district, small general retail is allowed permissively on
streets classified as collector, arterial, or interstate highway and
conditionally on local streets, with the following exceptions.
   1.   If accessory to another primary use, the use is considered a permissive
accessory use regardless of street classification.
   2.   In the Old Town – HPO-6, the use is allowed permissively regardless of
street classification.
4-3(D)(38)   Grocery Store
4-3(D)(38)(a)   For grocery stores larger than 50,000 square feet of gross
floor area, the Use-specific Standards in Subsection
14-16-4-3(D)(37)(b) (Large Retail Facilities) also apply.
4-3(D)(38)(b)   In the MX-L zone district, this use is limited to
establishments of no more than 30,000 square feet of gross floor area.
4-3(D)(38)(c)   In the MX-M zone district, this use is limited to
establishments of no more than 70,000 square feet of gross floor area.
4-3(D)(39)   Liquor Retail
4-3(D)(39)(a)   Alcohol sales for off-premises consumption are allowed provided
that the establishment complies with all New Mexico State law requirements,
including but not limited to any required spacing from other uses or
facilities.
4-3(D)(39)(b)   Alcohol sales for on-premises consumption are also allowed as
an incidental activity provided that the establishment complies with all New
Mexico State law requirements.
4-3(D)(39)(c)   Notwithstanding other provisions in this Subsection
14-16-4-3(D)(39), this use requires a Conditional Use Approval pursuant to
Subsection
14-16-6-6(A) when proposed within 500 feet of any Residential or NR-PO zone
district or any group home use, as measured from the nearest edge of the
building containing the use to the nearest Residential or NR-PO zone district
or lot containing a group home.
4-3(D)(39)(d)   In the MX-T zone district, this use is limited to 10,000 square
feet of gross floor area.
4-3(D)(39)(e)   In the MX-L zone district, this use is prohibited, except in
the following small areas, where it is allowed as accessory to a grocery store:
   1.   Downtown Neighborhood Area - CPO-3
   2.   East Downtown - CPO-4
   3.   East Downtown - HPO-1
   4.   La Cueva Small Area
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/b37713d5e40fc82694833f290401791f80be26ac/
IMAGES/0-0-0-6715.png]
   5.   North 4th Corridor - CPO-9
   6.   South Yale Small Area
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/b37713d5e40fc82694833f290401791f80be26ac/
IMAGES/0-0-0-6717.png]
4-3(D)(39)(f)   In the MX-M, MX-H, and NR-C zone districts, this use requires a
Conditional Use Approval pursuant to Subsection
14-16-6-6(A) unless accessory to a grocery store, except in the following small
areas, where it is prohibited unless accessory to a grocery store as noted:
   1.   Downtown Neighborhood Area - CPO-3
   2.   East Downtown - CPO-4
   3.   East Downtown - HPO-1
   4.   North 4th Corridor - CPO-9
   5.   South Yale Small Area
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/b37713d5e40fc82694833f290401791f80be26ac/
IMAGES/0-0-0-6719.png]
4-3(D)(39)(g)   Nob Hill/Highland Small Area
This use is prohibited in the following mapped small area.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/b37713d5e40fc82694833f290401791f80be26ac/
IMAGES/0-0-0-6721.png]
4-3(D)(39)(h)   University Neighborhoods Small Area
This use is prohibited in the MX-M zone district in the following mapped small
area unless associated with a grocery store west of University Boulevard.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/b37713d5e40fc82694833f290401791f80be26ac/
IMAGES/0-0-0-6723.png]
4-3(D)(40)   Nicotine Retail
4-3(D)(40)(a)   Nicotine sales are allowed provided that the establishment
complies with all New Mexico State law requirements, including but not limited
to any required spacing from other uses or facilities.
4-3(D)(40)(b)   If allowed as a conditional primary use in
Table 4-2-1 (i.e., specified as “C” in the table), this use is considered a
primary use for the purposes of this IDO, regardless of the use, area, or
purpose of any other primary uses on the same premises and shall meet all of
the following requirements, except where it is allowed as a permissive
accessory use pursuant to IDO Subsection (c) below.
   1.   This use is prohibited within 1,000 feet in any direction of a lot
containing any other primary nicotine retail use.
   2.   If this use is within 500 feet in any direction of any Residential zone
district or lot containing a residential use in any Mixed-use zone district,
customer visits and deliveries are prohibited between 10:00 P.M. and 7:00 A.M.
4-3(D)(40)(c)   In the MX-M, MX-H, and NR-C zone districts, this use does not
require a Conditional Use Approval pursuant to Subsection
14-16-6-6(A) if accessory to general retail or a grocery store, in which case
it is allowed as a permissive accessory use.
4-3(D)(40)(d)   If allowed as an accessory use in
Table 4-2-1 (i.e., specified as either “A” or “CA” in the table), this use is
prohibited unless accessory to and part of the same establishment as a general
retail or grocery store use, in which case this use is limited to no more than
50 percent of the gross floor area.
4-3(D)(40)(e)   In the MX-T and MX-L zone districts, this use is limited to
10,000 square feet of gross floor area.
4-3(D)(41)   Pawn Shop
4-3(D)(41)(a)   This use shall not be located within 1 mile in any direction of
a lot containing any other pawn shop.
4-3(D)(41)(b)   If a pawn shop use is abandoned, discontinued, or ceases
continuous operation for more than 1 year, it shall not be reestablished at
that location if it is within a 1 mile in any direction of a lot containing any
other pawn shop.
4-3(D)(42)   Airport
4-3(D)(42)(a)   See Subsection
14-16-3-3(C) (Airport Protection Overlay Zone Use Regulations) for Use-specific
Standards for private airport aircraft landing fields, airport runways, and
taxiways.
4-3(D)(42)(b)   A cumulative impacts analysis may be required at the time of
application submittal for projects within the Railroad and Spur Small Area
pursuant to Subsections
14-16-5-2(E) (Cumulative Impacts) and
14-16-6-4(H) (Cumulative Impacts Analysis Requirements).
4-3(D)(43)   Freight Terminal or Dispatch Center
4-3(D)(43)(a)   If no building is provided on the premises, this use shall be
screened from any adjacent Residential zone district or lot containing a
residential use in any Mixed-use zone district as required by Section
14-16-5-6 (Landscaping, Buffering, and Screening).
4-3(D)(43)(b)   A cumulative impacts analysis may be required at the time of
application submittal for projects within the Railroad and Spur Small Area
pursuant to Subsections
14-16-5-2(E) (Cumulative Impacts) and
14-16-6-4(H) (Cumulative Impacts Analysis Requirements).
4-3(D)(44)   Helipad
4-3(D)(44)(a)   This use shall comply with all applicable State and federal
regulations regarding design, location, construction, and public safety.
4-3(D)(44)(b)   This use is prohibited within 500 feet in any direction of any
Residential zone district or lot containing a residential use in any Mixed-use
zone district.
4-3(D)(44)(c)   Helicopter landing and takeoff operations for all uses other
than emergency medical service or law enforcement are prohibited between 10:00
P.M. and 7:00 A.M.
4-3(D)(44)(d)   See Subsection
14-16-3-3(C) (Airport Protection Overlay Zone Use Regulations) for Use-specific
Standards for private helicopter landing fields.
4-3(D)(44)(e)   In any Non-residential zone district, this use is permissive
for emergency medical service or law enforcement.
4-3(D)(44)(f)   In any Non-residential zone district, all helipads for purposes
other than emergency medical service or law enforcement require a Conditional
Use Approval pursuant to Subsection
14-16-6-6(A).
4-3(D)(44)(g)   A cumulative impacts analysis may be required at the time of
application submittal for projects within the Railroad and Spur Small Area
pursuant to Subsections
14-16-5-2(E) (Cumulative Impacts) and
14-16-6-4(H) (Cumulative Impacts Analysis Requirements).
4-3(D)(45)   Park-and-Ride Lot
This use must comply with all standards in Section
14-16-5-5 (Parking and Loading).
4-3(D)(46)   Railroad Yard
4-3(D)(46)(a)   No portion of this use where railroad equipment or supporting
motor vehicles operate may be located within 100 feet of any Residential zone
district or lot containing a residential use in any Mixed-use zone district.
4-3(D)(46)(b)   A cumulative impacts analysis may be required at the time of
application submittal for projects within the Railroad and Spur Small Area
pursuant to Subsections
14-16-5-2(E) (Cumulative Impacts) and
14-16-6-4(H) (Cumulative Impacts Analysis Requirements).
4-3(D)(47)   Transit Facility
A cumulative impacts analysis may be required at the time of application
submittal for projects within the Railroad and Spur Small Area pursuant to
Subsections
14-16-5-2(E) (Cumulative Impacts) and
14-16-6-4(H) (Cumulative Impacts Analysis Requirements).
4-3(E)   INDUSTRIAL USES
4-3(E)(1)   Artisan Manufacturing
4-3(E)(1)(a)   This use shall be conducted within the fully enclosed portions
of a building.
4-3(E)(1)(b)   If located in any Mixed-use zone district, this use shall not
exceed 10,000 square feet of gross floor area.
4-3(E)(2)   Cannabis Cultivation
4-3(E)(2)(a)   Cannabis cultivation is allowed, provided that the establishment
complies with all New Mexico State law requirements, including but not limited
to any required spacing from other uses or facilities. For the purposes of the
IDO, all measurements for this use shall be from the lot(s) that include the
cannabis cultivation establishment to be licensed by the State as a "licensed
premises" as defined by Sections 26-2C-1 to 26-2C-42 NMSA 1978.
4-3(E)(2)(b)   Establishments with a valid license from the State under the
medical cannabis program as of April 1, 2022 pursuant to Sections 26-2B-1 to
26-2B-10 NMSA 1978 (the Lynn and Erin Compassionate Use Act) are entitled to
continued and uninterrupted operations and are allowed permissively or, where
allowed as a conditional use in
Table 4-2-1, as an approved conditional use, after issuance of a license(s)
from the State under Sections 26-2C-1 to 26-2C-42 NMSA 1978. These
establishments are not subject to the distance separation requirements in
Subsection (c) below.
4-3(E)(2)(c)   Within 300 feet of a school or child day care facility, this use
shall require a Conditional Use Approval pursuant to Subsection
14-16-6-6(A), except as specified in Subsection (b) above.
4-3(E)(2)(d)   This use shall be conducted within the fully enclosed portions
of a building, with the following exceptions.
   1.   In any Non-residential zone district, an incidental storage area is
allowed outside of the fully enclosed portions of a building but must be
screened from view from each property line as described in Subsection
14-16-5-6(G) (Screening of Mechanical Equipment and Support Areas).
   2.   In any Non-residential zone district, a Conditional Use Approval
pursuant to Subsection
14-16-6-6(A) is required in order to conduct any other specific activities
outside of the fully enclosed portions of a building.
4-3(E)(2)(e)   A cannabis odor control plan approved by the City is required
pursuant to Subsection
14-16-6-5(G) (Site Plan – Administrative) or Subsection
14-16-6-6(I) (Site Plan – EPC), as applicable.
4-3(E)(2)(f)   A Letter of Availability from the ABCWUA, including estimate of
volume of water to be used annually for operations, shall be provided with
application materials.
4-3(E)(2)(g)   In any Mixed-use zone district, this use shall not exceed 10,000
square feet of gross floor area.
4-3(E)(2)(h)   This use is prohibited in the Old Town – HPO-6.
4-3(E)(3)   Cannabis-derived Products Manufacturing
4-3(E)(3)(a)   Cannabis-derived products manufacturing is allowed, provided
that the establishment complies with all New Mexico State law requirements,
including but not limited to any required spacing from other uses or
facilities. For the purposes of the IDO, all measurements for this use shall be
from the premises that includes an establishment licensed by the State as a
"licensed premises" as defined by Sections 26-2C-1 to 26-2C-42 NMSA 1978.
4-3(E)(3)(b)   Establishments with a valid license from the State under the
medical cannabis program as of April 1, 2022 pursuant to Sections 26-2B-1 to
26-2B-10 NMSA 1978 (the Lynn and Erin Compassionate Use Act) are entitled to
continued and uninterrupted operations. After issuance of a license(s) from the
State under Sections 26-2C-1 to 26-2C-42 NMSA 1978, these establishments are
allowed permissively or, where allowed as a conditional use in
Table 4-2-1, as an approved conditional use. These establishments are not
subject to the distance separation requirements in Subsection (c) below.
4-3(E)(3)(c)   A Letter of Availability from the ABCWUA, including estimate of
volume of water to be used annually for operations, shall be provided with
application materials.
4-3(E)(3)(d)   Within 300 feet of a school or child day care facility, this use
shall require a Conditional Use Approval pursuant to Subsection
14-16-6-6(A), except as specified in Subsection (b) above.
4-3(E)(3)(e)   This use shall be conducted within the fully enclosed portions
of a building, with the following exceptions.
   1.   In any Non-residential zone district, an incidental storage area is
allowed outside of the fully enclosed portions of a building but must be
screened from view from each property line as described in Subsection
14-16-5-6(G) (Screening of Mechanical Equipment and Support Areas).
   2.   In any Non-residential zone district, a Conditional Use Approval
pursuant to Subsection
14-16-6-6(A) is required in order to conduct any other specific activities
outside of the fully enclosed portions of a building.
4-3(E)(3)(f)   A cannabis odor control plan approved by the City is required,
pursuant to Subsection
14-16-6-5(G) (Site Plan – Administrative) or Subsection
14-16-6-6(I) (Site Plan – EPC), as applicable, if any of the following
activities will be occurring on the property:
   1.   Oil activation.
   2.   Distillation.
   3.   Extraction.
4-3(E)(3)(g)   In any Mixed-use zone district, the following standards apply.
   1.   This use shall not exceed 10,000 square feet of gross floor area.
   2.   The use of hazardous materials as defined by federal regulations is
prohibited.
4-3(E)(3)(h)   This use is prohibited in the Old Town - HPO-6.
4-3(E)(4)   Light Manufacturing
4-3(E)(4)(a)   Except as specified in Subsection (b) below, this use shall be
conducted within the fully enclosed portions of a building unless a Conditional
Use Approval is obtained pursuant to Subsection
14-16-6-6(A) to conduct specific activities outside of the fully enclosed
portions of a building.
4-3(E)(4)(b)   An incidental storage area is allowed outside of the fully
enclosed portions of a building but must be screened from view from each
property line as described in Subsection
14-16-5-6(G) (Screening of Mechanical Equipment and Support Areas).
4-3(E)(4)(c)   This use may include a sales/display room for items manufactured
on the property.
4-3(E)(4)(d)   The property containing this use shall meet edge buffer
requirements in Subsection
14-16-5-6(E).
4-3(E)(4)(e)   If the property containing this use is located abutting an
arterial or collector street, the primary building on the site shall be placed
between the primary street frontage and any allowed outside storage, service,
or work areas.
4-3(E)(4)(f)   Within 330 feet of Major Public Open Space, this use shall
require a Conditional Use Approval pursuant to Subsection
14-16-6-6(A).
4-3(E)(4)(g)   A cumulative impacts analysis may be required at the time of
application submittal for projects within the Railroad and Spur Small Area
pursuant to Subsections
14-16-5-2(E) (Cumulative Impacts) and
14-16-6-4(H) (Cumulative Impacts Analysis Requirements).
4-3(E)(5)   Heavy Manufacturing
4-3(E)(5)(a)   This use must comply with air quality permitting requirements
found in Part 9-5 of ROA 1994 (Air Quality and Environmental Health Control).
4-3(E)(5)(b)   This use may be conducted outside of a building.
4-3(E)(5)(c)   This use may include a sales/display room for items manufactured
on the property.
4-3(E)(5)(d)   An incidental storage area is allowed outside of a fully
enclosed building, but must be screened from view from each property line as
described in Subsection
14-16-5-6(G) (Screening of Mechanical Equipment and Support Areas).
4-3(E)(5)(e)   This use is prohibited in the following locations:
   1.   Within 330 feet of Major Public Open Space.
   2.   Within 660 feet of a lot containing a religious institution or
elementary, middle, or high school.
   3.   Within 1,000 feet of a lot containing a residential use other than an
accessory dwelling unit used for a caretaker in a non-residential development.
4-3(E)(5)(f)   A cumulative impacts analysis may be required at the time of
application submittal for projects within the Railroad and Spur Small Area
pursuant to Subsections
14-16-5-2(E) (Cumulative Impacts) and
14-16-6-4(H) (Cumulative Impacts Analysis Requirements).
4-3(E)(6)   Natural Resource Extraction
4-3(E)(6)(a)   This use must obtain all applicable State and federal permits or
approvals for the activity and comply with the terms of those permits and
approvals throughout the duration of the activity.
4-3(E)(6)(b)   This use must comply with air quality permitting requirements
found in Part 9-5 of ROA 1994 (Air Quality and Environmental Health Control).
4-3(E)(6)(c)   Extraction working areas shall be set back at least 200 feet
from each property line of the site adjacent to any Residential zone district,
and at least 100 feet from each property line of the site with any other zone
district.
4-3(E)(6)(d)   This use is prohibited in the following locations:
   1.   Within 330 feet of Major Public Open Space.
   2.   Within 1,000 feet of a lot containing a religious institution;
elementary, middle, or high school; or residential use other than an accessory
dwelling unit used for a caretaker in a non-residential development.
4-3(E)(6)(e)   Within the Airport Protection Overlay Zone, mining only is
permissive in the Noise Contour Sub-area. See Subsection
14-16-3-3(C) (Airport Protection Overlay Zone Use Regulations).
4-3(E)(6)(f)   A cumulative impacts analysis may be required at the time of
application submittal for projects within the Railroad and Spur Small Area
pursuant to Subsections
14-16-5-2(E) (Cumulative Impacts) and
14-16-6-4(H) (Cumulative Impacts Analysis Requirements).
4-3(E)(7)   Special Manufacturing
4-3(E)(7)(a)   This use must obtain all applicable State and federal permits or
approvals for the activity and comply with the terms of those permits and
approvals throughout the duration of the activity.
4-3(E)(7)(b)   This use must comply with air quality permitting requirements
found in Part 9-5 of ROA 1994 (Air Quality and Environmental Health Control).
4-3(E)(7)(c)   This use shall also comply with the Use-specific Standards for
Heavy Manufacturing pursuant to in Subsection
14-16-4-3(E)(5).
4-3(E)(7)(d)   A cumulative impacts analysis may be required at the time of
application submittal for projects within the Railroad and Spur Small Area
pursuant to Subsections
14-16-5-2(E) (Cumulative Impacts) and
14-16-6-4(H) (Cumulative Impacts Analysis Requirements).
4-3(E)(8)   Electric Utility
4-3(E)(8)(a)   A substation shall be surrounded by an opaque perimeter wall a
minimum of 12 feet high set back a minimum of 10 feet from all property lines
to allow for a landscaped buffer area. The perimeter wall shall be a
combination of split face and smooth face blocks or cast-in-place walls with a
discernable pattern and/or shall provide pilasters at least every 20 feet along
the length of the wall.
4-3(E)(8)(b)   Outside of the perimeter wall, a substation shall be surrounded
by a landscaped buffer area at least 10 feet wide, consisting of shrubs and
other vegetation that complies with the safety and maintenance requirements for
substations.
4-3(E)(8)(d)   All existing substations that undergo expansion shall meet the
design standards for new substations.
4-3(E)(8)(e)   All uses and associated facilities shall be subject to the terms
and conditions in the Facility Plan for Electric System Transmission and
Generation, as amended, unless specified otherwise in this IDO, the DPM, or
other adopted City regulations.
4-3(E)(8)(f)   Utility-scale electric generation facilities, as defined in the
Facility Plan for Electric System Transmission and Generation, are large-scale
industrial developments and are only allowed in the NR-GM zone district, unless
specified otherwise in this IDO.
4-3(E)(8)(g)   If this use is located on the same premises as a geothermal
energy generation use, the premises must meet all Use-specific Standards in
this Subsection
14-16-4-3(E)(8) and in Subsection
14-16-4-3(E)(10) (Geothermal Energy Generation).
4-3(E)(8)(h)   If this use is located on the same premises as a solar energy
generation use, the premises must meet all Use-specific Standards in this
Subsection
14-16-4-3(E)(8) and in Subsection
14-16-4-3(E)(11)) (Solar Energy Generation).
4-3(E)(8)(i)   If this use is located on the same premises as a wind energy
generation use, the premises must meet all Use-specific Standards in this
Subsection
14-16-4-3(E)(8) and in Subsection
14-16-4-3(E)(12) (Wind Energy Generation).
4-3(E)(9)   Energy Storage System (ESS)
4-3(E)(9)(a)   This use shall be surrounded by an opaque perimeter wall at
least 8 feet and not more than 12 feet high set back to allow a landscaped
buffer area as specified in
4-3(E)(9)(b) below. The perimeter wall shall be a combination of split face and
smooth face blocks or cast-in-place walls with a discernable pattern and/or
shall provide pilasters at least every 20 feet along the length of the wall.
4-3(E)(9)(b)   Except where abutting industrial development, a landscaped
buffer area shall be provided outside of the perimeter wall that meets all of
the following requirements.
   1.   The required landscaped buffer shall contain at least 1 tree for every
25 feet along the lot line.
   2.   The landscaped buffer shall comply with the safety and maintenance
requirements for an ESS, in addition to all applicable standards in Section
14-16-5-5(I)(2)(g) (
   3.   Landscaping, Buffering, and Screening), including but not limited to
Subsection
14-16-5-6(C)(10) (Planting near Utilities).
   4.   In Residential zone districts, the landscaped buffer shall be at least
20 feet wide or the width of the setback if the required wall follows
contextual standards for front setbacks pursuant to Subsection
14-16-5-1(C)(2)(c), whichever is less.
   5.   In Non-residential and Mixed-use zone districts, the landscaped buffer
shall be at least 10 feet wide.
4-3(E)(9)(c)   All onsite utility lines and associated equipment shall be
placed underground or pad mounted, unless soil conditions, shape, or topography
of the site as verified by the City Engineer dictate above-ground installation,
with the exception of the main service connection at the utility right-of-way
and any new interconnection equipment, including without limitation any poles,
as allowed by the electric utility.
4-3(E)(9)(d)   All existing ESS facilities that undergo expansion beyond the
perimeter wall shall meet the design standards for new ESS facilities.
4-3(E)(9)(e)   All ESS facilities that are not in use for a period of 1 year
shall be removed by the owner within the following 6 months. Upon removal, the
site shall be revegetated to blend with the existing surrounding vegetation.
The owner shall notify the City when removal of the ESS occurs.
4-3(E)(9)(f)   If this use is located on the same premises as an electric
utility use, the premises must meet all use-specific standards in this
Subsection
14-16-4-3(E)(9) and in Subsection
14-16-4-3(E)(8) (Electric Utility). The uses may be located inside the same
perimeter wall.
4-3(E)(9)(g)   If this use is located on the same premises as a geothermal
energy generation use, the premises must meet all Use-specific Standards in
this Subsection
14-16-4-3(E)(8) and in Subsection
14-16-4-3(E)(10) (Geothermal Energy Generation).
4-3(E)(9)(h)   If this use is located on the same premises as a solar energy
generation use, the premises must meet all Use-specific Standards in this
Subsection
14-16-4-3(E)(8) and in Subsection
14-16-4-3(E)(11) (Solar Energy Generation).
4-3(E)(9)(i)   If this use is located on the same premises as a wind energy
generation use, the premises must meet all Use-specific Standards in this
Subsection
14-16-4-3(E)(9) and in Subsection
14-16-4-3(E)(12) (Wind Energy Generation).
4-3(E)(9)(j)   In Residential zone districts, the following requirements apply.
   1.   This use is limited to a maximum size of 1 acre, unless accessory to
another primary use or a Conditional Use Approval is obtained pursuant to
Subsection
14-16-6-6(A).
   2.   This use shall be concealed to be the least visually and physically
intrusive as possible and to have the least adverse visual effect on the
environment and its character and nearby residences by meeting all of the
following requirements.
      a.   This use shall be aesthetically integrated with the existing
buildings, structures and landscaping to blend in with the nature and character
of the built and natural environment in terms of height, color, architectural
style, massing, and materials.
      b.   This use shall be located to avoid a dominant silhouette on
escarpments and next to Major Public Open Space.
      c.   The perimeter wall shall use the same architectural materials (e.g.,
stucco, brick, concrete) as structures on lots within 330 feet of the subject
property.
      d.   Every 20 feet along the length of the perimeter wall shall include
architectural elements such as decorative grillwork, lintels, portals, windows
or doors, awning, or other external features to avoid visual monotony. A change
in color alone does not satisfy this requirement.
4-3(E)(10)   Geothermal Energy Generation
4-3(E)(10)(a)   This use must obtain all applicable State and federal permits
or approvals for the activity and comply with the terms of those permits and
approvals throughout the duration of the activity.
4-3(E)(10)(b)   All uses and facilities shall be shall be subject to those
terms and conditions in the Facility Plan for Electric System Transmission and
Generation, as amended.
4-3(E)(10)(c)   Underground geothermal energy devices may be located anywhere
on the property.
4-3(E)(10)(d)   Where this use is listed as Permissive Primary, it may include
utility-scale or private energy generation. Where this use is listed as
Permissive Accessory, it must be for private energy generation.
4-3(E)(10)(e)   If this use is located on the same premises as an electric
utility use, the premises must meet all Use-specific Standards in this
Subsection
14-16-4-3(E)(10) and in Subsection
14-16-4-3(E)(8) (Electric Utility).
4-3(E)(10)(f)   If this use is located on the same premises as a solar energy
generation use, the premises must meet all Use-specific Standards in this
Subsection
14-16-4-3(E)(9) and in Subsection
14-16-4-3(E)(11) (Solar Energy Generation).
4-3(E)(10)(g)   If this use is located on the same premises as a wind energy
generation use, the premises must meet all Use-specific Standards in this
Subsection
14-16-4-3(E)(9) and in Subsection
14-16-4-3(E)(12) (Wind Energy Generation).
4-3(E)(11)   Solar Energy Generation
4-3(E)(11)(a)   This use is allowed pursuant to Section 47-3-4 NMSA 1978. Other
State and federal rules may apply.
4-3(E)(11)(b)   If this use is located on the same premises as an electric
utility use, the premises must meet all Use-specific Standards in this
Subsection 14-16-4-3(E)(11) and in Subsection
14-16-4-3(E)(8) (Electric Utility).
4-3(E)(11)(c)   If this use is located on the same premises as a geothermal
energy generation use, the premises must meet all Use-specific Standards in
this Subsection 14-16-4-3(E)(10) and in Subsection
14-16-4-3(E)(10) (Geothermal Energy Generation).
4-3(E)(11)(d)   If this use is located on the same premises as a wind energy
generation use, the premises must meet all Use-specific Standards in this
Subsection 14-16-4-3(E)(10) and in Subsection
14-16-4-3(E)(12) (Wind Energy Generation).
4-3(E)(12)   Wind Energy Generation
4-3(E)(12)(a)   All wind energy devices shall be located at least as far from
each property line as the height of the device (including any tower on which it
is mounted).
4-3(E)(12)(b)   Rooftop-mounted wind energy devices shall only be allowed on
structures with a valid building permit.
4-3(E)(12)(c)   In any Mixed-use, NR-C, NR-BP, NR-SU, and NR-PO zone district,
this use may exceed the maximum building height in the zone district by no more
than 30 feet, unless a Variance is obtained under Subsections
14-16-6-6(O) (Variance - ZHE) or
14-16-6-6(N) (Variance - EPC).
4-3(E)(12)(d)   In the NR-LM and NR-GM zone districts, this use may exceed the
maximum building height by no more than 60 feet unless a Variance is obtained
under Subsections
14-16-6-6(O) (Variance - ZHE) or
14-16-6-6(N) (Variance - EPC).
4-3(E)(12)(e)   If this use is located on the same premises as an electric
utility use, the premises must meet all Use-specific Standards in this
Subsection
14-16-4-3(E)(11) and in Subsection
14-16-4-3(E)(8) (Electric Utility).
4-3(E)(12)(f)   If this use is located on the same premises as a geothermal
energy generation use, the premises must meet all Use-specific Standards in
this Subsection
14-16-4-3(E)(12) and in Subsection
14-16-4-3(E)(9) (Geothermal Energy Generation).
4-3(E)(12)(g)   If this use is located on the same premises as a solar energy
generation use, the premises must meet all Use-specific Standards in this
Subsection
14-16-4-3(E)(12) and in Subsection
14-16-4-3(E)(11) (Solar Energy Generation).
4-3(E)(13)   Wireless Telecommunications Facility (WTF)
The following regulations shall apply to all WTFs in any zone district unless
specified otherwise in this IDO.
4-3(E)(13)(a)   Collocations and Public Utility Collocation
   1.   Collocations and public utility collocations are encouraged.
Collocation on a concealed WTF shall maintain the concealed nature of the
facility. Otherwise, such collocations or public utility collocations are not
subject to the concealment requirements prescribed by Subsection (c) below, but
shall be done in the least visibly intrusive manner, to blend in with the
existing structure and its surroundings.
   2.   Unless specified otherwise in this IDO, public utility collocations are
allowed in any zone district except within the Old Town - HPO-6.
   3.   When mounted on a public utility structure, the equipment cabinet(s)
shall be not more than 3 feet by 4 feet by 18 inches deep, at least 10 feet and
no more than 20 feet high.
   4.   No new freestanding WTF shall be allowed unless the Planning Director
or his/her designee determines, upon the applicant's demonstration, that no
existing tower, structure, or public utility structure can be used in lieu of
new construction to accommodate the applicant's proposed WTF. Evidence that
demonstrates that collocation or public utility collocation cannot be used in
lieu of new construction to reasonably accommodate the proposed WTF shall
consist of an affidavit with supporting exhibits submitted by the applicant
addressing all of the following:
      a.   That no existing tower, structure, or public utility structure
within 2,640 feet (1/2 mile) in any direction meets the minimum engineering
requirements and/or has the space available to support the proposed WTF.
      b.   That collocation or public utility collocation of the proposed WTF
would cause unavoidable electromagnetic interference with the antenna(s) on the
existing towers, structures or public utility structures, or the antenna(s) on
the existing towers, structures, or public utility structures would cause
interference with the applicant's proposed WTF.
      c.   That there are other limiting factors that render existing towers,
structures, or public utility structures within the mile radius unsuitable.
      d.   That the owners of existing towers, structures, or public utility
structures within 2,640 feet (1/2 mile) in any direction will not allow the
applicant to place its WTF on that facility, or such owners are requiring
payments for such placement that substantially exceed commercially reasonable
prices.
4-3(E)(13)(b)   Small Cell WTFs
Small cell WTFs shall meet all requirements established by Article 5-10 of ROA
1994 (Small Wireless Facilities).
4-3(E)(13)(c)   Concealment Required
   1.   All proposed WTFs shall use concealed technology, with the following
exceptions:
      a.   Collocations of WTFs on existing unconcealed towers.
      b.   Collocations of small cell WTFs on public utility structures.
      c.   Public utility collocations for WTFs other than small cell WTFs.
   2.   The WTF shall be the least visually and physically intrusive as
possible and shall have the least adverse visual effect on the environment and
its character, existing vegetation, and nearby residences.
   3.   A WTF is considered concealed if the Planning Director determines that
the facility is:
      a.   Aesthetically integrated with existing buildings, structures, and
landscaping to blend in with the nature and character of the built and natural
environment, considering height, color, style, massing, placement, design, and
shape.
      b.   Located to avoid a dominant silhouette of the WTF on escarpments and
mesas and to preserve views within VPO zones.
      c.   Located on existing vertical structures, including utility poles and
public utility structures.
      d.   Located in areas where the existing topography, vegetation,
buildings, or other structures provide the greatest amount of screening of the
WTF.
      e.   Located so as not be a readily visible or identifiable as a WTF.
   4.   To minimize visibility, roof-mounted WTFs are prohibited in the R-A, R-
1, R-T, R-MC, and NR-PO-A zone districts.
   5.   Consistent with federal law, these concealment requirements shall not
be administered so as to have the effect of prohibiting the provision of
wireless telecommunications services.
4-3(E)(13)(d)   Maximum Height
   1.   Single-carrier WTFs: 65 feet.
   2.   Collocations on any existing unconcealed WTF tower or existing
structure: 75 feet.
4-3(E)(13)(e)   Setbacks and Separation
   1.   Freestanding WTFs are prohibited in the following locations:
      a.   Within 100 feet of any property line of any Residential zone
district.
      b.   Within 50 feet of an existing right of way.
      c.   Within any required setback.
   2.   This use is prohibited within 1,000 feet in any direction of any other
freestanding WTFs, as measured from the wall or fence of each freestanding WTF.
This requirement does not apply to freestanding small-cell WTFs.
4-3(E)(13)(f)   Landscaping and Screening
   1.   All freestanding WTFs shall be surrounded by an opaque wall or fence at
least 6 feet and not more than 10 feet high.
   2.   All freestanding WTFs shall include vegetation that is planted and
maintained to screen ground equipment facilities from public view, as shown on
a landscaping plan approved by the Planning Director.
   3.   Freestanding small-cell WTFs are not subject to the landscaping
requirements in Subsections 1 and 2 above, but must comply with the following
requirements.
      a.   Equipment shall be screened by a wall, fence, or other method,
including but not limited to a telco box, artificial rock, or decorative
feature that fully screens the equipment with opaque material.
      b.   Equipment and screening materials shall not block pedestrian
pathways and sidewalks.
4-3(E)(13)(g)   Lighting and Signage
   1.   Only security lighting or lighting required by a State and/or federal
agency is allowed, provided that all of the following requirements are met.
      a.   The location and cut-off angle of the light fixture shall be such
that it does not shine directly on any public right-of-way, private way, or any
lot containing a residential use.
      b.   Lighting shall not exceed maximum light trespass values in
Table 5-8-3 for the relevant lighting designation during outdoor lighting
curfew hours.
   2.   Only signage required by State or federal law is allowed.
4-3(E)(13)(h)   Abandonment
All WTFs that are not in use for a period of 3 months shall be removed by the
WTF owner within the following 3 months. Upon removal, the site shall be
revegetated to blend with the existing surrounding vegetation. If there is no
vegetation on a WTF site, the site shall be returned to its preconstruction
condition. The owner shall notify the City when removal of the WTF occurs.
4-3(E)(13)(i)   Interference
Every WTF shall meet the regulations of the Federal Communications Commission,
or any successor of that agency, regarding physical and electromagnetic
interference.
4-3(E)(13)(j)   Health Issues
Every WTF shall meet health and safety standards for electromagnetic field
emissions as established by the Federal Communications Commission or any
successor of that agency, and any other federal or State agency.
4-3(E)(13)(k)   Location near View Corridors
Only collocations, public utility collocations, and architecturally integrated
WTFs are allowed within 660 feet of either of the following:
   1.   Any easement or public right-of-way identified as part of an existing
or future trail system that is located on a major arroyo or other drainage
facility.
   2.   The centerline of the following streets:
      a.   Alameda Boulevard.
      b.   Central Avenue.
      c.   Coors Boulevard.
      d.   Griegos Road.
      e.   Interstate Highway 25.
      f.   Interstate Highway 40.
      g.   Paseo del Norte.
      h.   Rio Grande Boulevard.
      i.   Sunport Boulevard.
      j.   Tramway Boulevard.
      k.   Unser Boulevard.
4-3(E)(13)(l)   Location near Major Public Open Space
Within 1,320 feet ( mile) of the property line of any Major Public Open Space
or the Petroglyph National Monument, only the following WTFs are allowed:
   1.   Collocations.
   2.   Public utility collocations.
   3.   Architecturally integrated WTFs.
4-3(E)(13)(m)   Location in HPO zones and Historic Districts
   1.   Within 1,320 feet (¼ mile) of the property line of any Major Public
Open Space or the Petroglyph National Monument, only the following WTFs are
allowed:
   2.   Only architecturally integrated WTFs are allowed on properties listed
on the State Register of Cultural Properties or the Federal Register of
Historic Places.
4-3(E)(13)(n)   Location in Other Small Areas 
   1.   South Yale Small Area
      Freestanding WTFs are prohibited in the MX-M zone district in the
following mapped small area.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/b37713d5e40fc82694833f290401791f80be26ac/
IMAGES/0-0-0-6725.png]
   2.   Uptown Small Area
      Only architecturally integrated and small cell WTFs are allowed in the
following mapped small area.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/b37713d5e40fc82694833f290401791f80be26ac/
IMAGES/0-0-0-6727.png]
4-3(E)(14)   Recycling Drop-off Bin Facility
4-3(E)(14)(a)   This use is prohibited within 330 feet of Major Public Open
Space.
4-3(E)(13)(b)   A cumulative impacts analysis may be required at the time of
application submittal for projects within the Railroad and Spur Small Area
pursuant to Subsections
14-16-5-2(E) (Cumulative Impacts) and
14-16-6-4(H) (Cumulative Impacts Analysis Requirements).
4-3(E)(15)   Salvage Yard
4-3(E)(15)(a)   This use shall be conducted within the fully enclosed portions
of a building or within an area enclosed on all sides by an opaque wall, fence,
retaining wall, or vegetative screen at least 6 feet high. Additional
requirements in Section
14-16-5-6 (Landscaping, Buffering, and Screening) may apply.
4-3(E)(15)(b)   Inoperative light vehicles or heavy equipment may not extend
above the height of the opaque wall, fence, retaining wall, or vegetative
screen, unless those items are located at least 100 feet inside the required
wall, fence, or vegetative screen.
4-3(E)(15)(c)   A cumulative impacts analysis may be required at the time of
application submittal for projects within the Railroad and Spur Small Area
pursuant to Subsections
14-16-5-2(E) (Cumulative Impacts) and
14-16-6-4(H) (Cumulative Impacts Analysis Requirements).
4-3(E)(16)   Solid Waste Convenience Center
4-3(E)(16)(a)   This use is prohibited within 330 feet of Major Public Open
Space.
4-3(E)(16)(b)   A cumulative impacts analysis may be required at the time of
application submittal for projects within the Railroad and Spur Small Area
pursuant to Subsections
14-16-5-2(E) (Cumulative Impacts) and
14-16-6-4(H) (Cumulative Impacts Analysis Requirements).
4-3(E)(17)   Waste and/or Recycling Transfer Station
4-3(E)(17)(a)   This use is prohibited within 330 feet of Major Public Open
Space.
4-3(E)(17)(b)   A cumulative impacts analysis may be required at the time of
application submittal for projects within the Railroad and Spur Small Area
pursuant to Subsections
14-16-5-2(E) (Cumulative Impacts) and
14-16-6-4(H) (Cumulative Impacts Analysis Requirements).
4-3(E)(18)   Outdoor Storage
4-3(E)(18)(a)   This use shall comply with the provisions in Section
14-16-5-6 (Landscaping, Buffering, and Screening).
4-3(E)(18)(b)   In any zone district except for NR-GM, the height of any items
stored outside shall not exceed the height of any screening wall, fence, or
vegetation, unless the item is located at least 100 feet inside the screening
wall, fence, or vegetative screen.
4-3(E)(18)(c)   A cumulative impacts analysis may be required at the time of
application submittal for projects within the Railroad and Spur Small Area
pursuant to Subsections
14-16-5-2(E) (Cumulative Impacts) and
14-16-6-4(H) (Cumulative Impacts Analysis Requirements).
4-3(E)(19)   Warehousing
4-3(E)(19)(a)   Within 330 feet of Major Public Open Space, this use shall
require a Conditional Use Approval pursuant to Subsection
14-16-6-6(A).
4-3(E)(19)(b)   A cumulative impacts analysis may be required at the time of
application submittal for projects within the Railroad and Spur Small Area
pursuant to Subsections
14-16-5-2(E) (Cumulative Impacts) and
14-16-6-4(H) (Cumulative Impacts Analysis Requirements).
4-3(E)(20)   Wholesaling and Distribution Center
4-3(E)(20)(a)   This use is limited to 50,000 square feet of gross floor area
in the following locations:
   1.   The MX-M and MX-H zone districts.
   2.   The NR-C zone district within a UC-MS-PT area.
4-3(E)(20)(b)   Within 330 feet of Major Public Open Space, this use shall
require a Conditional Use Approval pursuant to Subsection
14-16-6-6(A).
4-3(E)(20)(c)   A cumulative impacts analysis may be required at the time of
application submittal for projects within the Railroad and Spur Small Area
pursuant to Subsections
14-16-5-2(E) (Cumulative Impacts) and
14-16-6-4(H) (Cumulative Impacts Analysis Requirements).
4-3(F)   ACCESSORY USES
4-3(F)(1)   General
4-3(F)(1)(a)   All accessory uses must operate within an enclosed structure
unless outside operation or features are inherent in the use or specified
otherwise in this IDO.
4-3(F)(1)(b)   Accessory uses and approved conditional accessory uses run with
the land, and are not personal to an operator.
4-3(F)(1)(c)   No accessory use may begin, and no structure for the accessory
use may be erected, before the primary use of the property is established. No
accessory use may continue after the primary use to which it is accessory ends.
4-3(F)(1)(d)   An approval for an accessory use may not be granted if there is
no evidence of a City building permit for a primary building on the site or
alternative evidence of a City business license for operation of a primary
building on the site.
4-3(F)(2)   Agriculture Sales Stand
4-3(F)(2)(a)   This use may be operated outside an enclosed structure.
4-3(F)(2)(b)   This use is limited to 1 per lot.
4-3(F)(2)(c)   In any zone district except R-A, this use must be located behind
the front fa ade of the primary building or residence.
4-3(F)(2)(d)   In any Residential zone district, 1 non-illuminated sign is
allowed, provided that it meets the requirements in Table 5-12-1.
4-3(F)(2)(e)   The sales area associated with this use may not exceed 400
square feet in the R-A zone district. In any other zone district where this use
is allowed, this use may not exceed 50 square feet, unless accessory to a
community garden, in which case this use may not exceed 100 square feet.
4-3(F)(3)   Animal Keeping
4-3(F)(3)(a)   The use shall comply with all applicable City, State, and
federal regulations related to animal care and protection.
4-3(F)(3)(b)   Animal species and number shall be regulated pursuant to Article
9-2 of ROA 1994 (Humane and Ethical Animal Rules and Treatment [HEART]),
enforced by the City Animal Welfare Department.
4-3(F)(3)(c)   All development applications that include this use shall require
review by a representative of the City Animal Welfare Department, pursuant to
Subsection 14-16-6-4(J) Referrals to Commenting Agencies.
4-3(F)(3)(d)   This use may be operated outside an enclosed structure. Animals
shall be contained on the property by a wall, fence, vegetated screen,
retaining wall, pen, or enclosure that complies with requirements in Section
14-16-5-7 (Walls and Fences).
4-3(F)(3)(e)   In Residential zone districts other than R-A or any Mixed-use
zone district, keeping cows and horses on a property shall require a
Conditional Use Approval pursuant to Subsection
14-16-6-6(A), provided that both of the following requirements are met.
   1.   The property contains at least acre of gross land area.
   2.   The number of animals does not exceed 1 cow or horse for each 10,000
square feet of net lot area, or equivalent combination. Animals under 4 months
old are not counted.
4-3(F)(3)(f)   Where general agriculture is allowed in the R-A zone district or
any Non-residential zone district, keeping cows and horses is allowed as
incidental to that use, pursuant to any Use-specific Standards in Subsection
14-16-4-3(D)(3).
4-3(F)(3)(g)   In the NR-C, NR-BP, NR-LM, and NR-GM zone districts, this use is
limited to the keeping of guard dogs, and is subject to an approved permit from
the City Animal Welfare Department.
4-3(F)(4)   Clean Room
4-3(F)(4)(a)   This use is only allowed when accessory to a use in the
Industrial Uses category pursuant to
Table 4-2-1.
4-3(F)(4)(b)   This use must obtain all applicable State and Federal permits
and/or approvals for this activity and comply with the terms of those permits
and approvals throughout the duration of the use.
4-3(F)(4)(c)   This use must comply with air quality permitting requirements
found in Part 9-5 of ROA 1994 (Air Quality and Environmental Health Control).
4-3(F)(4)(d)   This use shall comply with distance separations in the Use-
specific Standard for Heavy Manufacturing in Subsection
14-16-4-3(E)(5)(e).
4-3(F)(5)   Drive-through or Drive-up Facility
4-3(F)(5)(a)   Each stacking lane is limited to a maximum order board area of
50 square feet. The face of the order boards shall be oriented away from public
streets to the maximum extent practicable. If not practicable, at least 2
evergreen trees shall be planted in the landscape buffer area required by
Subsection
14-16-5-5(I)(2)(a) in locations that would best screen the order board from the
public right-of-way.
4-3(F)(5)(b)   This use shall comply with the provisions of Section
14-16-5-5 (Parking and Loading) and Section
14-16-5-9 (Neighborhood Edges).
4-3(F)(5)(c)   This use is prohibited accessory to cannabis retail.
4-3(F)(5)(d)   Within 330 feet of Major Public Open Space, this use shall
require a Conditional Use Approval pursuant to Subsection
14-16-6-6(A).
4-3(F)(5)(e)   Notwithstanding Subsection (d) above, this use is prohibited
adjacent to Major Public Open Space.
4-3(F)(5)(f)   This use is prohibited in the following small areas as noted.
   1.   Downtown Small Area
This use is prohibited in the following mapped small area.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/b37713d5e40fc82694833f290401791f80be26ac/
IMAGES/0-0-0-6729.png]
   2.   Downtown Neighborhood Area - CPO-3
      a.   This use is prohibited in the MX-L zone district unless accessory to
a use other than a restaurant or any use in the Retail Sales category.
      b.   This use is prohibited in the MX-M zone district.
   3.   East Downtown - CPO-4
This use is prohibited in the East Downtown - CPO-4.
   4.   East Downtown - HPO-1
This use is prohibited in the East Downtown - HPO-1.
   5.   Nob Hill Small Area
This use is prohibited in the following mapped small areas.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/b37713d5e40fc82694833f290401791f80be26ac/
IMAGES/0-0-0-6731.png]
   6.   Sawmill/Wells Park - CPO-12
This use is prohibited in the MX-L and NR-LM zone districts in the Sawmill/
Wells Park - CPO-12.
   7.   South Yale Small Area
This use is prohibited in the MX-L and MX-M zone districts in the following
mapped small area.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/b37713d5e40fc82694833f290401791f80be26ac/
IMAGES/0-0-0-6733.png]
   8.   University Neighborhoods Small Area
This use is prohibited in any Mixed-use zone district in the following mapped
small area.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/b37713d5e40fc82694833f290401791f80be26ac/
IMAGES/0-0-0-6735.png]
   9.   Uptown Small Area
Within 330 feet of Louisiana Boulevard right-of-way between I-40 and Indian
School Road, this use is conditional if accessory to a restaurant; otherwise,
this use is prohibited if accessory to a restaurant in the following mapped
small area (which includes all of the Uptown Urban Center as mapped in the ABC
Comp Plan, as amended).
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/b37713d5e40fc82694833f290401791f80be26ac/
IMAGES/0-0-0-6737.png]
 
   11.   Volcano Mesa - CPO-13
This use is prohibited, unless accessory to a use other than restaurant, in the
3 areas mapped below.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/b37713d5e40fc82694833f290401791f80be26ac/
IMAGES/0-0-0-6739.png]
 
4-3(F)(6)   Dwelling Unit, Accessory
4-3(F)(6)(a)   Where this use is allowed, only 1 accessory dwelling unit is
allowed per lot and is limited to 750 square feet of gross floor area. A garage
attached to the accessory dwelling unit shall not count toward this size limit.
   1.   Where added as accessory to a single-family or two-family detached
dwelling, this use must be provided as an accessory building.
      a.   A renovation to a single-family detached dwelling to create a second
unit with a kitchen, a separate entrance, and no shared spaces within the
original dwelling is regulated separately as a two-family detached dwelling in
Table 4-2-1.
      b.   A second kitchen within a single-family or two-family detached
dwelling is regulated separately as an allowable accessory use in
Table 4-2-1.
4-3(F)(6)(b)   A minimum 5-foot side or rear setback is required.
4-3(F)(6)(c)   An accessory dwelling unit shall be no taller than the primary
structure on the property.
4-3(F)(6)(d)   Building fa ades of an accessory dwelling unit shall be the same
or similar in color to that of the primary building on the lot.
4-3(F)(6)(e)   A detached accessory dwelling unit shall comply with any
applicable provisions of Subsection
14-16-5-11(C)(4) (Accessory Buildings).
4-3(F)(6)(f)   In any Residential or Mixed-use zone district, a detached
accessory dwelling unit shall be located behind the rear wall of a primary
building. On corner lots, the accessory dwelling unit shall have the same
minimum street side setback requirement as the primary building.
4-3(F)(6)(g)   The following small areas have special regulations for accessory
dwelling units in the R-1 zone district.
   1.   Downtown Neighborhood Area - CPO-3
      a.   An accessory dwelling unit shall not exceed 650 square feet of gross
floor area. A garage or shed attached to an accessory dwelling unit shall not
count toward this size limit.
      b.   A detached accessory dwelling unit shall not exceed the height of
the primary dwelling or 18 feet, whichever is less.
   2.   Sawmill/Wells Park - CPO-12
      Accessory dwelling units in the R-1 zone district are only allowed on
lots with a minimum of 7,000 square feet in the Sawmill/Wells Park - CPO-12.
4-3(F)(7)   Family Care Facility
4-3(F)(7)(a)   The operator of this use must obtain and maintain in effect at
all times any City or State permit or license required for the operation of
this use.
4-3(F)(7)(b)   Only members of the residing household may provide care.
4-3(F)(7)(c)   Any outdoor play area shall be enclosed by an opaque wall,
fence, or vegetative screen at least 6 feet in height.
4-3(F)(7)(d)   No sign is allowed.
4-3(F)(8)   Family Home Day Care
4-3(F)(8)(a)   The operator of this use must obtain and maintain in effect at
all times any City or State permit or license required for the operation of
this use.
4-3(F)(8)(b)   Only members of the residing household may provide care.
4-3(F)(8)(c)   Any outdoor play area shall be enclosed by an opaque wall,
fence, or vegetative screen at least 6 feet in height.
4-3(F)(8)(d)   Only a sign meeting the requirements for a home occupation is
allowed.
4-3(F)(9)   Hobby Breeder
4-3(F)(9)(a)   The operator of this use must comply with all applicable City,
State, and federal regulations and permitting procedures that govern the
breeding of animals, including Article 9-2 of ROA 1994 (HEART), enforced by the
City Animal Welfare Department.
4-3(F)(9)(b)   This use may be operated outside an enclosed structure.
4-3(F)(10)   Home Occupation
4-3(F)(10)(a)   The operator must obtain and maintain in effect at all times
any City or State permit or license required for the operation of this use,
including a business registration permit from the City.
4-3(F)(10)(b)   The following uses from
Table 4-2-1 and activities are prohibited as home occupations:
   1.   Any use in the Agricultural or Animal-related category.
   2.   Any use in the Food, Beverage, and Indoor Entertainment category,
except a catering service that meets the requirements of the state Homemade
Food Act and does not require a permit from the New Mexico Environment
Department.
   3.   Any use in the Motor Vehicle-related category.
   4.   Any use in the Industrial Uses category.
   5.   Commercial services.
   6.   Construction contractor facility and yard.
   7.   Crematorium.
   8.   Mortuary.
   9.   Adult retail.
   10.   Liquor retail.
   11.   Any use involving the storage or use of hazardous materials.
   12.   Cannabis retail.
   13.   Nicotine retail.
4-3(F)(10)(c)   No more than 25 percent of the floor area of the dwelling unit
where the operator of the home occupation(s) resides may be devoted to the home
occupation(s), except that in the MX-T district up to 50 percent of the floor
area of the dwelling unit may be devoted to home occupations. If more than one
home occupation is conducted in the dwelling, these limits shall apply to all
home occupations collectively, not individually.
4-3(F)(10)(d)   Only members of the residing family may be employed to work on-
site.
4-3(F)(10)(e)   Only goods and services created on the premises may be sold on
the premises.
4-3(F)(10)(f)   All business activities shall be conducted in the primary
building or an allowed accessory structure.
4-3(F)(10)(g)   The outside appearance of the dwelling or unit shall not show
evidence of the use, including but not limited to outside storage, noise, dust,
odors, noxious fumes, or other nuisances emitted from the premises, except that
1 non-illuminated sign is allowed. In any Residential zone district, the
maximum size of the sign is regulated by Table 5-12-1. In any Mixed-use zone
district, the sign may not exceed 2 square feet.
4-3(F)(10)(h)   All parking requirements in Section
14-16-5-5 (Parking and Loading) shall be met, including but not limited to
Subsection
14-16-5-5(F)(2)(a) and
Table 5-5-6 that limit front yard parking.
4-3(F)(10)(i)   The home occupation shall not regularly attract more than 2
individuals simultaneously and shall not generate significantly greater traffic
volume than would normally be expected in the residential area in which the
home occupation is conducted.
4-3(F)(10)(j)   Commercial vehicle visits to the property shall be limited to
no more than 10 per consecutive 7-day period.
4-3(F)(10)(k)   Customer visits and deliveries to the home occupation shall not
occur between 10:00 P.M. and 7:00 A.M.
4-3(F)(11)   Independent Living Facility
This use is only allowed when accessory to an assisted living facility or
nursing home.
4-3(F)(12)   Mobile Food Truck
4-3(F)(12)(a)   For purposes of this Subsection
14-16-4-3(F)(12), "operation" of a mobile food truck includes any activity
involved with food preparation or sales unless specified otherwise in this IDO.
4-3(F)(12)(b)   Mobile food trucks may remain in place for the following
periods of time:
   1.   Indefinitely, if they do not occupy any required off-street parking
spaces for the primary use on the subject property.
   2.   Up to 7 calendar days, if they do not occupy more than 10 percent of
the required off-street parking spaces for the primary use on the subject
property.
   3.   For the amount of time specified on an approved Temporary Use Permit,
if they occupy more than 10 percent of required off-street parking spaces for
the primary use on the subject property.
4-3(F)(12)(c)   The mobile food truck operator must provide trash receptacles
and remove them after use.
4-3(F)(12)(d)   To locate more than 5 mobile food trucks on one lot, a Site
Plan - Administrative demonstrating adequate public access and safety and
vehicle circulation must be reviewed and decided pursuant to Subsection
14-16-6-5(G).
4-3(F)(12)(e)   Mobile food trucks shall comply with all applicable City,
State, and federal requirements, including but not limited to Part 9-6-5 of ROA
1994 (Health, Safety & Sanitation Code) and Part 9-9-4 of ROA 1994 (General
Noise).
4-3(F)(12)(f)   Mobile food trucks in the public right-of-way shall comply with
Section 8-5-1-42 of ROA 1994 (Mobile Food Units on Public Streets).
4-3(F)(12)(g)   This use is allowed to operate on private property in any
Residential zone district, provided that:
   1.   The mobile food truck has written permission from the property owner
for use of the site and allowed location on the site, a copy of which shall be
kept in the Mobile food truck and made available for review by any City
inspector at all times during the operation of the mobile food truck at the
site.
   2.   The mobile food truck does not operate on the same residential property
more than 12 days in any calendar year.
4-3(F)(12)(h)   This use is allowed to operate on private property in any
Mixed-use or Non-residential zone district, provided that all of the following
requirements are met.
   1.   The mobile food truck and any associated tables, chairs, displays,
umbrellas, or the like, do not physically occupy or obstruct access to any
parking stalls necessary to meet the minimum parking requirements for any on-
premises land uses, unless the mobile food truck is operating outside of the
business hours of on-premises uses.
   2.   The mobile food truck and any associated tables, chairs, displays,
umbrellas, or the like, do not obstruct any designated ingress or egress from
the property, or any designated drive aisle.
   3.   The mobile food truck has written permission from the property owner
for use of the site and allowed location on the site, a copy of which shall be
kept in the mobile food truck and made available for review by any City
inspector at all times during operation of the mobile food truck at the site.
   4.   The use is located on a paved surface.
4-3(F)(12)(i)   In the NR-PO-A zone district, this use must have written
permission from the City Parks and Recreation Department, a copy of which shall
be kept in the mobile food truck and made available for review by any City
inspector at all times during operation of the mobile food truck in the NR-PO-
A zone district. Other sales or services may be allowed as approved by the City
Parks and Recreation Director.
4-3(F)(13)   Mobile Vending Cart
4-3(F)(13)(a)   All applicable Environmental Health and other City regulations
shall apply to the operation of Mobile vending carts.
4-3(F)(13)(b)   This use may be operated outside an enclosed structure.
4-3(F)(13)(c)   In the NR-PO-A zone district, this use must have written
permission from the City Parks and Recreation Department, a copy of which shall
be kept in the mobile vending cart and made available for review by any City
inspector at all times during operation of the mobile food truck in the NR-PO-
A zone district.
4-3(F)(14)   Outdoor Animal Run
4-3(F)(14)(a)   This use may be operated outside of fully enclosed portions of
a building.
4-3(F)(14)(b)   Where this use is allowed, the runs must be screened from any
adjacent property in any Residential zone district or any lot containing a
residential use in any Mixed-use zone district by an opaque wall, fence, or
vegetative screen at least 6 feet in height, made of materials similar in color
and materials to those used on the primary building.
4-3(F)(14)(c)   No animals shall be allowed to occupy the outdoor run between
10:00 P.M. and 7:00 A.M.
4-3(F)(15)   Outdoor Dining Area
4-3(F)(15)(a)   The outdoor dining area shall be accessory to the immediately
abutting primary use, and the items sold for consumption in the outdoor dining
area shall be sold in the immediately abutting primary use.
4-3(F)(15)(b)   The use shall not include any open flames or other safety or
health hazards, with the exception of tabletop candles.
4-3(F)(15)(c)   If the use is located on a public sidewalk, all of the
following requirements shall be met.
   1.   Any outdoor dining area must maintain a minimum clear path of 4 or 6
feet, depending on adjacent roadway classification, per Section 6-5-5-14 of ROA
1994 (Sidewalk Design and Construction Standards and Procedures), in order to
maintain use of the public sidewalk for all users.
   2.   The owner or operator of the immediately abutting primary use shall be
required to obtain a revocable permit from the City that establishes the
boundaries of the area permitted for this use.
   3.   Before and after the immediately abutting primary business's operating
hours, all furniture, equipment, and goods shall be removed from the sidewalk
area or otherwise secured to prevent movement by natural elements or by
unauthorized persons.
   4.   Outside of the operating hours of the immediately abutting primary
business, the sidewalk area shall be cleaned of all dining materials and waste.
4-3(F)(15)(d)   Outdoor dining areas where alcohol is consumed must meet all
applicable New Mexico State law requirements. If this results in the
construction of a wall, fence, or similar barrier around the perimeter and the
wall, fence, or similar barrier is located on the sidewalk, all of the
following requirements shall be met.
   1.   The owner or operator of the immediately abutting primary use shall be
required to obtain a revocable permit from the City.
   2.   A decorative wall, fence, or similar barrier shall be limited to
between 3 feet and 4 feet in height and shall be located at least 6 feet from
any building standpipe, hydrant, crosswalk, drive aisle, alleyway, access ramp,
parking meter, landscape bed, street tree, sign post, utility pole, or similar
obstacle.
   3.   The depth of the area enclosed by a wall, fence, or barrier shall not
be greater than 50 percent of the width of the sidewalk, measured from back of
curb to the building edge closest to the sidewalk, and shall leave a clear
pedestrian passage area at least 6 feet in width.
   4.   The area enclosed by a wall, fence, or barrier shall not contain any
utility vault.
4-3(F)(16)   Second Kitchen in a Dwelling
4-3(F)(16)(a)   This use must be accessory to a single-family or two-family
detached dwelling.
4-3(F)(16)(b)   The kitchen must be incidental to occupancy of the entire house
in common by members of 1 family, and 2 distinct dwelling units may not be
created.
4-3(F)(17)   Other Use Accessory to Non-residential Primary Use
4-3(F)(17)(a)   This use may be operated outside an enclosed structure.
4-3(F)(17)(b)   Unless accessory to a religious institution, the use must be
intended primarily for the use of occupants of the building.
4-3(F)(17)(c)   Unless accessory to a religious institution, the use is limited
to a maximum of 10 percent of the gross floor area of the primary building.
4-3(F)(17)(d)   In any Mixed-use zone district, this use must be accessory to a
non-residential use.
4-3(F)(18)   Other Use Accessory to Primary Residential Use
4-3(F)(18)(a)   The use must be intended for the exclusive use of residents of
the premises on which the accessory use is located, and their invited guests.
4-3(F)(18)(b)   This use may be operated outside an enclosed structure.
4-3(F)(18)(c)   In any Mixed-use zone district, this use must be accessory to a
primary residential use.
4-3(G)   TEMPORARY USES
Temporary uses require a Permit - Temporary Use pursuant to Subsection
14-16-6-5(D) unless specified otherwise in the Use-specific Standards below.
4-3(G)(1)   Circus
4-3(G)(1)(a)   This use may take place on a fairground, which requires a Site
Plan – EPC related to the NR-SU zone district pursuant to Subsection
14-16-6-6(I). Where this use is proposed in another zone district, a Site Plan
– Administrative demonstrating adequate parking, vehicle circulation, and
toilet facilities for anticipated employees and attendees is required to be
approved by the City pursuant to Subsection
14-16-6-5(F) prior to any activity related to the use.
4-3(G)(1)(b)   The tent and other facilities are required to be approved by the
Fire Marshall as having met the requirements of Article 14-2 of ROA 1994 (Fire
Code) prior to any activity related to the use.
4-3(G)(1)(c)   This use is allowed for a period not to exceed 10 days in any
calendar year, and operating hours (including erection and dismantling of
equipment) shall be restricted to between the hours of 7:30 A.M. and 10:30 P.M.
4-3(G)(1)(d)   One (1) temporary sign of not more than 100 square feet is
allowed from the time equipment erection begins until dismantling of equipment
ends.
4-3(G)(1)(e)   This use is prohibited within 300 feet in any direction of any
Residential zone district or any building containing a residential use in any
Mixed-use zone district.
4-3(G)(2)   Construction Staging Area, Trailer, or Office
4-3(G)(2)(a)   This use may not begin, and any structure for the use may not be
installed, more than 30 calendar days before site construction begins.
4-3(G)(2)(b)   This use may only be located on the lot for the following
timeframes:
   1.   If associated with a construction project, from 30 calendar days before
construction begins to 30 calendar days after issuance of a certificate of
occupancy for a structure, or 30 calendar days after construction finishes if
no certificate of occupancy is required.
   2.   If specified in a special event permit approved by the City, from 7
calendar days before to 7 calendar days after the approved event.
   3.   If neither Subsection 1 nor 2 above applies, then not longer than a
period of 30 calendar days.
4-3(G)(2)(c)   This use may not occur in any required front yard area or
between the front fa ade of a primary building and the street, but a trailer
may be parked anywhere on the site for a period of up to 3 calendar days for
active loading and unloading.
4-3(G)(2)(d)   The body of the trailer shall be set back at least 5 feet from
any lot line and 8 feet from the building or structure under construction.
4-3(G)(2)(e)   If work on the project has been dormant for a period of 6 or
more months, the trailer must be removed, unless an extension is granted by the
Planning Director based on an anticipated construction restart date.
4-3(G)(2)(f)   This use is allowed to operate on private property near the
subject property in any zone district, provided that the use has written
permission from the owner of the off-site private property specifying the
allowed use, the location of the subject property under construction, the
allowed location of the use on the off-site private property, and the location
of any agreed upon access point(s). A copy of this written permission shall be
kept on the construction staging area site and made available for review by any
City inspector at all times during the operation of the construction staging
area.
4-3(G)(2)(g)   Where temporary dwelling units are allowed, the construction
trailer or office may be used as a temporary dwelling unit provided that it
meets all applicable building and occupancy requirements for a temporary
dwelling unit.
4-3(G)(3)   Dwelling, Temporary
4-3(G)(3)(a)   This use must be associated with a permissive primary use,
approved conditional use, or allowed temporary use and located in a structure
on the same premises as the activity or construction that it serves.
4-3(G)(3)(b)   This use may only be located on the lot for the following
timeframes:
   1.   If associated with a construction project, from 30 calendar days before
construction begins to 30 calendar days after issuance of a certificate of
occupancy (for a structure) or 30 days after construction finishes (if no
certificate of occupancy is required).
   2.   If associated with a special event approved by the City or permitted
under this IDO, from 7 calendar days before to 7 calendar days after the event,
or as stated in any approval for the event approval issued by the City.
   3.   If neither Subsection 1 nor 2 above applies, then not longer than a
period of 30 calendar days.
4-3(G)(4)   Fair, Festival, or Theatrical Performance
This use may take place on a fairground, which requires a Site Plan – EPC
related to the NR-SU zone district pursuant to Subsection
14-16-6-6(I). Where this use is proposed in another zone district, this use is
limited to 7 calendar days and to 45 days in any calendar year unless a
Conditional Use Approval is obtained pursuant to Subsection
14-16-6-6(A).
4-3(G)(5)   Film Production
4-3(G)(5)(a)   This use is limited to five years.
4-3(G)(5)(b)   When this use occurs in the NR-PO-A zone district, approval from
the Parks and Recreation Department is required.
4-3(G)(5)(c)   This use requires a sketch plan.
4-3(G)(6)   Open Air Market
This use may only be operated for up to 60 calendar days.
4-3(G)(7)   Park-and-Ride Facility, Temporary
This use shall be limited to the time period specified in any agreement with
the property owner.
4-3(G)(8)   Real Estate Office or Model Home
4-3(G)(8)(a)   This use may not begin, and any structure containing the use may
not be installed, more than 30 calendar days before site construction begins.
4-3(G)(8)(b)   This use must terminate, and any structure containing the use
must be removed from the site, no later than 30 calendar days after issuance of
the certificate of occupancy for the last unit or portion of the development is
issued.
4-3(G)(8)(c)   If work on the project has been dormant for a period of 6 months
or more, the structure containing this use must be removed unless an extension
is granted by the Planning Director based on an anticipated construction
restart date.
4-3(G)(8)(d)   One (1) wall, window, or yard sign of up to 4 square feet is
allowed.
4-3(G)(8)(e)   Where temporary dwelling units are allowed, the structure
containing this use may also be used as a temporary dwelling unit provided that
it meets all applicable building and occupancy requirements for a temporary
dwelling unit.
4-3(G)(9)   Safe Outdoor Space
4-3(G)(9)(a)   This use is limited to 2 years, and the Permit – Temporary Use
may be extended for an additional 2 years. A new Permit – Temporary Use
pursuant to Subsection
14-16-6-5(D) shall not be approved within 6 months of the last date that the
use was allowed in a previous Permit – Temporary Use.
4-3(G)(9)(b)   The maximum number of designated spaces shall be 40 per safe
outdoor space development. One (1) tent, recreational vehicle, or light vehicle
is allowed per designated space. The maximum number of occupants per safe
outdoor space development is 50 people.
4-3(G)(9)(c)   Safe outdoor spaces with more than 10 designated spaces and 15
or more occupants are prohibited within 660 feet in any direction of a lot
containing any other safe outdoor space with more than 10 designated spaces and
15 or more occupants.
4-3(G)(9)(d)   Any portion of a lot in use as a safe outdoor space shall be at
least 330 feet in any direction from any property zoned R-A, R-1, R-MC, or R-
T that contains low-density residential development.
4-3(G)(9)(e)   Toilets, hand washing stations, and showers shall be provided as
follows.
   1.   Plumbed hand washing stations and water-flush or composting toilets
shall be provided within 2 years of the City approval of the safe outdoor
space.
      a.   One (1) water-flush or composting toilet shall be provided for every
8 designated spaces.
      b.   One (1) hand washing station shall be provided for every 10
designated spaces.
   2.   Prior to the installation of plumbed handwashing stations and water-
flush or composting toilets, portable toilets and hand washing stations may be
provided to meet this requirement.
      a.   Portable toilets and hand washing stations shall be provided at a
ratio of 1 each per 8 designated spaces.
      b.   Portable toilets and hand washing stations shall be serviced at
regular intervals.
   3.   Toilets and hand washing stations shall not be located more than 300
feet in any direction of any designated space.
   4.   One (1) shower shall be provided for every 10 designated spaces.
      a.   Portable showers may be provided to meet this requirement.
      b.   Showers are not required to be plumbed within 2 years of the City
approval of the safe outdoor space.
4-3(G)(9)(f)   Designated spaces, toilets, hand washing stations, and
lavatories (i.e., facilities with toilets, showers, and sinks) shall be set
back a minimum of 20 feet from each property line that abuts R-ML, R-MH, or any
Mixed-Use zone district and a minimum of 5 feet from any other property line.
4-3(G)(9)(g)   The area containing designated spaces for tents shall be secured
and screened on all sides by an opaque wall or fence or vegetative screen at
least 6 feet high. Other requirements in Section
14-16-5-6 Landscaping, Buffering, and Screening do not apply.
4-3(G)(9)(h)   Each safe outdoor space development shall include an operations
and management plan or security agreement to ensure the safety of individuals
occupying the designated spaces.
   1.   Proof of the plan or agreement shall be required with the application
for a safe outdoor space and shall be reviewed by the City's Department of
Family and Community Services.
   2.   The plan or agreement shall specify on-site support on a 24 hours a
day, 7 days a week basis.
   3.   The management plan shall, at a minimum, include the following
statement: "No person who is a registered sex offender shall be allowed to stay
in a Safe Outdoor Space."
4-3(G)(9)(i)   Each safe outdoor space shall offer social services and support
facilities to its occupants, including but not limited to showers, education
and job training, storage space for residents' belongings, recreational
services, and activities for use by occupants to provide comprehensive
livability options.
4-3(G)(9)(j)   This use is prohibited adjacent to Major Public Open Space.
4-3(G)(9)(k)   The total number of safe outdoor spaces shall not exceed 2 in
each City Council District.
4-3(G)(10)   Seasonal Outdoor Sales
This use is limited to a total of 45 days in any calendar year.
4-3(G)(11)   Temporary Use Not Listed
This use may be approved on a case-by-case basis if the City Planning
Department determines that the use has a demonstrable public purpose, will not
create material adverse impacts on surrounding area, and will not exceed 45
consecutive days in a calendar year. A traffic management plan may be required.
4-3(G)(12)   Garage or Yard Sale
4-3(G)(12)(a)   The duration of any sale shall not exceed 3 calendar days.
4-3(G)(12)(b)   For low-density residential development: no more than 2 sales
within a 1-year period.
4-3(G)(12)(c)   For multi-family residential development: no more than 4 sales
within a 1-year period.
4-3(G)(13)   Hot Air Balloon Takeoff and/or Landing
Hot air balloon takeoff and/or landing are prohibited in the Air Space and
Runway Protection Sub-areas of the Airport Overlay Zone. See also Section
14-16-3-3(C) (Airport Protection Overlay Zone Use Regulations).
Part 14-16-5   Development Standards
5-1   DIMENSIONAL STANDARDS
5-1(A)   PURPOSE
The regulations in this Section
14-16-5-1 are established to regulate the size, scale, and location of
development throughout the city to maintain appropriate scale and character for
each zone district. In particular, this Section
14-16-5-1 provides contextual standards to ensure that any new low-density
residential development reinforces the scale and character of residential areas
in Areas of Consistency designated in the Albuquerque/Bernalillo County
Comprehensive Plan (ABC Comp Plan), as amended.
5-1(B)   APPLICABILITY
5-1(B)(1)   The standards of this Section
14-16-5-1 apply in any zone district except MX-FB, where development size,
scale, location, and massing are regulated by Subsection
14-16-2-4(E) (Mixed-use - Form-based Zone District (MX-FB)).
5-1(B)(2)   
Part 14-16-3 (Overlay Zones) may contain maximum height, maximum or minimum
setback, or other dimensional standards that differ from those in this Section
14-16-5-1. In the case of a conflict between the dimensional standards, Overlay
zone standards shall prevail.
5-1(B)(3)   Section
14-16-5-9 (Neighborhood Edges) may contain maximum height, maximum or minimum
setback, or other dimensional standards that differ from those in this Section
14-16-5-1. In case of a conflict between the dimensional standards,
Neighborhood Edge standards shall prevail.
5-1(B)(4)   Notwithstanding any standard in this IDO, all development must meet
relevant setback standards in Article 14-2 of ROA 1994 (Fire Code).
5-1(C)   RESIDENTIAL ZONE DISTRICTS
5-1(C)(1)   Residential Zone District Table
All development in any Residential zone district shall comply with the
standards in
Table 5-1-1, except under any of the following circumstances, in which case
individual standards in the relevant sections prevail over conflicting
standards in
Table 5-1-1.
5-1(C)(1)(a)   The project is a residential development of primary buildings in
an Area of Consistency, in which case any relevant Contextual Residential
Standards in Section
14-16-5-1(C)(2) prevail.
5-1(C)(1)(b)   A different standard is stated in another section of this IDO,
such as an Overlay zone standard in
Part 14-16-3 (Overlay Zones) or a Use-specific Standard in Section
14-16-4-3, in which case that standard prevails.
Table 5-1-1: Residential Zone District Dimensional Standards
UC-MS-PT = Urban Centers, Main Street areas, and Premium Transit areas as
identified in the ABC Comp Plan
BR = bedroom DU = dwelling units.
Note: Any different dimensional standards in
Part 14-16-3 (Overlay Zones) and Section 14-16-5-9 (Neighborhood Edges)
applicable to the property shall prevail over the standards in this
table.
Zone District R-A[1] R-1[1] R-MC[2] R-T[1] R-ML R-MH
Table 5-1-1: Residential Zone District Dimensional Standards
UC-MS-PT = Urban Centers, Main Street areas, and Premium Transit areas as
identified in the ABC Comp Plan
BR = bedroom DU = dwelling units.
Note: Any different dimensional standards in
Part 14-16-3 (Overlay Zones) and Section 14-16-5-9 (Neighborhood Edges)
applicable to the property shall prevail over the standards in this table.
Zone       R-A[1]  R-1[1]     R-MC[2]      R-T[1]     R-ML       R-MH
District
Site Standards
                   R-1A:
                   3,500 sq.                          Single-
                   ft.                                family or
                   R-1B:                   Single-    two-family
                   5,000 sq.               family or  detached:
                   ft.                     two-family 3,500 sq.
                   R-1C:                   detached:  ft.
                   7,000 sq.  2,500 sq.    3,500 sq.  Townhouse
Lot size,  10,890  ft.        ft. /        ft.        or other   10,000 sq.
minimum[3] sq. ft.            manufactured Townhouse  allowable  ft.[4]
                              home space   or other   use:
                                           allowable  2,200 sq.
                   R-1D:                   use:       ft.
                   10,000 sq.              2,200 sq.  Multi-
                   ft.                     ft.        family:
                                                      5,000 sq.
                                                      ft.


Contextual See Subsection                             N/A
           14-16-5-1(C)(2)
                   R-1A: 25
                   ft.                                Single-
                   R-1B: 35                Single-    family or
                   ft.                     family or  two-family
                   R-1C:50                 two-family detached:
                   ft.                     detached:  35 ft.
Lot width,                    40 ft. /     35 ft.     Townhouse  150 ft.
minimum    75 ft.             manufactured Townhouse  or other   UC-MS-PT: 100
                              home space   or other   allowable  ft.
                   R-1D:70                 allowable  use: 22
                   ft.                     use: 22    ft.
                                           ft.        Multi-
                                                      family:
                                                      50 ft.

Contextual See Subsection                             N/A        N/A
           14-16-5-1(C)(2)
                                                      Efficiency or 1 BR:
Usable                        400 sq. ft.             225 sq. ft. / unit
open       N/A     N/A        /            N/A        2 BR:285 sq. ft. / unit
space,                        manufactured             3 BR: 350 sq. ft. /
minimum[5]                    home space              unit
                                                      UC-MS-PT: 50% reduction
Setback Standards[6][7][8][9]
                   R-1A: 10
                   ft.
Front,             R-1B, R-                                      15 ft.
minimum    20 ft.  1C:        15 ft.       10 ft.     15 ft.     UC-MS-PT: 0
                   15 ft.                                        ft.
                   R-1D: 20
                   ft.
                                                                 N/A
                                                                 UC-MS-PT:
Front,                                                           10 ft. along
maximum    N/A                                                   70% of
                                                                 primary
                                                                 street
                                                                 frontage
                   R-1A, R-
                   1B,
                   R-1C:
                   Interior:
                   5 ft.[11]
                   Street     Interior: 5
Side,              side of    ft.          Interior: 5 ft.
minimum    10 ft.  corner     Street side  Street side of corner lots: 10 ft.
[10]               lots:      of corner    UC-MS-PT: 0 ft.
                   10 ft.     lots:
                              10 ft.

                   R-1D: 10
                   ft.


                                                                 N/A
                                                                 UC-MS-PT:
Side,      N/A                                                   Street side
maximum                                                          of corner
                                                                 lots:
                                                                 15 ft.
                   R-1A: 10
                   ft.
Rear,      25 ft.  R-1B, R-   10 ft.       15 ft.
minimum    min     1C,
                   R-1D: 15
                   ft.
Building Height [9]
                                                                 48 ft.
                                                                 UC-MS-PT:
                                                                 65 ft.
Building                                                         12 ft.
height,                                                          Workforce
maximum    26 ft.                                     38 ft.     Housing Bonus
[12] 1                                                           No maximum
                                                                 for portions
                                                                 of building
                                                                 >100 ft. from
                                                                 all lot lines
[1] Residential development that qualifies for funding through Article 14-17
of ROA 1994 (Family Housing Developments) may be eligible for development
incentives specified in that Article.
[2] In the R-MC zone district, setback standards apply to the entire project
site, not to individual manufactured home spaces; however, the minimum
distance between dwellings is 10 ft. unless the applicant otherwise
demonstrates that the buildings comply with Article 14-2 of ROA 1994 (Fire
Code).
[3] Unless specified otherwise in this IDO, minimum lot size and width apply
to the lot, not to individual dwelling units.
[4] For lots in the R-MH zone district that do not meet this minimum lot size
requirement, development is allowed pursuant to Subsection
14-16-6-8(E)(3).
[5] Usable open space requirements for R-ML and R-MH are for multi-family
residential development only. Use-specific standards for some development
types require usable open space pursuant to Subsections
14-16-4-3(B)(3)(i) (Dwelling, Cottage Development) and
14-16-4-3(B)(5)(a) (Dwelling, Townhouse).
[6] At corners and junctions with driveways, drive aisles, or alleys,
additional clear sight triangle requirements in the DPM may apply.
[7] For all low-density residential development, any driveway on a front or
street side lot line must meet the standards in Subsection
14-16-5-3(C)(3)(b) (Driveways, Drive Aisles, and Access).
[8] For buildings constructed on a lot line abutting a privately owned lot
that is not under the same ownership as the subject property, Subsection
14-16-5-1(F) (Buildings Constructed on a Lot Line) applies.
[9] Greater setbacks and/or reduced heights may be required for compliance
with the National Electrical Safety Code (NESC) along lot lines that abut, are
adjacent to, or within properties
that contain overhead power lines and/or electric utility easements. Electric
service provision from the Public Service Company of New Mexico (PNM) will
also depend on adequate structure clearance requirements as outlined in the
PNM Electric Service Guide.
[10] The minimum side setback for two-family detached (duplex) and townhouse
dwellings may vary, pursuant to the Use-specific Standards for those uses in
Subsections
14-16-4-3(B)(4) and
14-16-4-3(B)(5), respectively.
[11] In the R-1A sub-zone, one internal side setback may be 0 ft. if the
opposite internal side setback is at least 10 ft.
[12] See
Table 5-1-4 for exceptions to building height limits for multi-family
dwellings in or within 1,320 feet (1/4 mile) from MS-PT areas.
 
5-1(C)(2)   Contextual Residential Development in Areas of Consistency
5-1(C)(2)(a)   Applicability
   1.   For the following residential development types, the contextual lot
size standards in Subsection (b) below do not apply, and the contextual setback
standards in Subsection (c) below apply to the entire project site, not to
individual lots or primary buildings:
      a.   Manufactured home communities in the R-MC zone district.
      b.   Cluster development.
      c.   Cottage development.
   2.   All other development in any Residential zone district on blocks where
lots have been platted and at least 1 primary building is constructed shall
comply with the standards in Subsections (b) and (c) below.
5-1(C)(2)(b)   Lot Size
In any Residential zone district in an Area of Consistency, the minimum and
maximum lot sizes for construction of new low-density residential development
shall be based on the size of the Bernalillo County Tax Assessor's lot, or a
combination of adjacent Tax Assessor's lots, on the portions of the blocks
fronting the same street as the lot where the new low-density residential
development is to be constructed, rather than on the size of the individual
subdivision lots shown on the existing subdivision plat. 
   1.   New low-density residential development shall not be constructed on a
Tax Assessor's lot, or combination of abutting Tax Assessor's lots, that is
smaller than 75 percent of the average of the size of the Tax Assessor's lots,
or combinations of adjacent Tax Assessor's lots, that contain a primary
building on those blocks.
   2.   Within UC-MS-PT areas or within 1,320 feet ( mile) of DT-UC-MS-PT
areas, new low-density residential development on a lot 10,000 square feet or
larger shall not be constructed on a Tax Assessor's lot, or combination of
abutting Tax Assessor's lots, that is smaller than 50 percent of the average of
the size of the Tax Assessor's lots, or combinations of adjacent Tax Assessor's
lots, that contain a primary building on those blocks.
   3.   New low-density residential development shall not be constructed on a
Tax Assessor's lot, or combination of abutting Tax Assessor's lots, that is
larger than 125 percent of the average of the size of the Tax Assessor's lots,
or combinations of adjacent Tax Assessor's lots, that contain a primary
building on those blocks. On lots that include sensitive lands or are adjacent
to sensitive lands or Major Public Open Space, the lot may be up to 150 percent
larger.
   4.   In making these calculations, the size of any Tax Assessor's lot or
combination of adjacent tax assessor's lots containing primary buildings on
that block that are not low-density residential development shall be ignored.
   5.   In making the calculations in Subsections 1 through 4 above, any lots
owned by the applicant with existing site features that are to be preserved,
including but not limited to areas of open space or existing structures, shall
not be considered in the contextual standards calculations for lot size.
5-1(C)(2)(c)   Front Setbacks
In any Residential zone district in an Area of Consistency, the front setback
for construction of new low-density residential development shall be based on
the existing front setbacks of primary buildings on adjacent lots:
   1.   If both of the abutting lots facing the same street are low-density
residential development, the front setback of any new dwellings shall be
between the closer and farther front setbacks of the 2 primary dwellings on the
abutting lots. (See illustration below).
   2.   If only 1 of the abutting lots facing the same street is a low-density
residential development, the front setback of any new dwellings shall be within
3 feet of the front setback of the existing primary dwelling on the abutting
lot or within the front setback required by
Table 5-1-1, whichever allows the new buildings to be closer to the street.
   3.   If both of the abutting lots are vacant, but at least 2 adjacent lots
facing the same street are low-density residential development, the front
setback of any new dwellings shall be between the closer and farther front
setbacks of the 2 primary dwellings on adjacent lots or within the front
setback required by
Table 5-1-1, whichever allows the new buildings to be closer to the street.
   4.   If both of the abutting lots are vacant, but only 1 adjacent lot facing
the same street is low-density residential development, the front setback of
any new dwellings shall be constructed pursuant to the standards in
Table 5-1-1.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/b37713d5e40fc82694833f290401791f80be26ac/
IMAGES/0-0-0-6749.png]
Contextual Residential Front Setbacks for Low-density Residential Development
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/b37713d5e40fc82694833f290401791f80be26ac/
IMAGES/0-0-0-6751.png]
Contextual Residential Front Setbacks for Cluster and Cottage Development
5-1(C)(2)(d)   Side Setbacks
In any Residential zone district in an Area of Consistency, the side setback
for construction of new low-density residential development may be based on the
minimum side setback in
Table 5-1-1 for the relevant zone district or the existing side setbacks of
primary buildings on adjacent lots with low-density residential development
facing the same street as the lot where the new low-density residential
development is to be constructed.
 
Notes
1 City Council, O-24-69, adopted January 6, 2025 and effective January 28,
  2025.
5-1(D)   MIXED-USE ZONE DISTRICTS
5-1(D)(1)   Mixed-use Zone District Table
All development in any Mixed-use zone district shall comply with the
dimensional standards in
Table 5-1-2, unless an exception or a different standard is stated in another
section of this IDO. Subsection
14-16-2-4(E) (Mixed-use - Form-based Zone District (MX-FB)) includes
dimensional standards for MX-FB sub-zones.
Table 5-1-2: Mixed-use Zone District Dimensional Standards
UC-MS-PT = Urban Centers, Main Streets, and Premium Transit areas as
identified in the ABC Comp Plan
BR = bedroom DU = dwelling units.
Note: Any different dimensional standards in
Part 14-16-3 (Overlay Zones) and Section
14-16-5-9 (Neighborhood Edges) applicable to the property shall supersede
the standards in this table.
Zone District MX-T[1] MX-L MX-M MX-H
Table 5-1-2: Mixed-use Zone District Dimensional Standards
UC-MS-PT = Urban Centers, Main Streets, and Premium Transit areas as identified
in the ABC Comp Plan
BR = bedroom DU = dwelling units.
Note: Any different dimensional standards in
Part 14-16-3 (Overlay Zones) and Section
14-16-5-9 (Neighborhood Edges) applicable to the property shall supersede the
standards in this table.
Zone District      MX-T[1] MX-L             MX-M             MX-H
Site Standards
                   Efficiency or 1 BR: 225 sq. ft./unit
Usable open space, 2 BR: 285 sq. ft./unit
minimum[2]         =3 BR: 350 sq. ft./unit
                   UC-MS-PT: 50% reduction
Setbacks[3][4][5][6]
Front, minimum     5 ft.
                   UC-MS-PT: 0 ft.[7]
Front, maximum     N/A
                   UC-MS-PT: 15 ft.
Side, minimum      Interior: 0 ft.; Street side of corner lots: 5 ft.
                   UC-MS-PT: 0 ft.
                   N/A
Side, maximum      UC-MS-PT: Interior: N/A; Street side of corner lots: 15 ft.
                   [7]
Rear, minimum      15 ft.
                   UC-MS-PT: 0 ft. where rear lot line abuts a street or alley
Rear, maximum      N/A
Building Height [6]
                                            48 ft.           68 ft.
                           38 ft.           UC-MS-PT: 65 ft. UC-MS-PT: 75 ft.
                           UC-MS-PT: 55 ft. No maximum for portions of building
Building height,   30 ft.                   >100 ft. from all lot lines
maximum                    UC-MS-PT-MT:                      UC-MS-PT-MT:
                           12 ft. Structured Parking Bonus   24 ft. Structured
                                                             Parking Bonus
                   UC-MS-PT-MT: 12 ft. Workforce Housing Bonus
[1] Residential development that qualifies for funding through Article 14-17 of
ROA 1994 (Family Housing Developments) may be eligible for development
incentives specified in that Article.
[2] Usable open space requirements specified in this table are for multi-family
residential development only. Additional usable open space requirements in
Subsections
14-16-4-3(B)(3)(i) (Dwelling, Cottage Development) and
14-16-4-3(B)(5)(a) (Dwelling, Townhouse) may apply to low-density residential
development in any Mixed-use zone district.
[3] At corners and junctions with driveways, drive aisles, or alleys,
additional clear sight triangle requirements in the DPM may apply.
[4] For all low-density residential development, any driveway on a front or
street side lot line must meet the standards in Subsection
14-16-5-3(C)(3)(b) (Driveways, Drive Aisles, and Access).
[5] For buildings constructed on a lot line abutting a privately owned lot that
is not under the same ownership as the subject property, Subsection
14-16-5-1(F) (Buildings Constructed on a Lot Line) applies.
[6] Greater setbacks and/or reduced heights may be required for compliance with
the National Electrical Safety Code (NESC) along lot lines that abut, are
adjacent to, or within properties that contain overhead power lines and/or
electric utility easements. Electric service provision from the Public Service
Company of New Mexico (PNM) will also depend on adequate structure clearance
requirements as outlined in the PNM Electric Service Guide.
[7] In UC-MS-PT areas, all development must meet the standards in Subsection
14-16-5-1(D)(2).
 
5-1(D)(2)   Urban Center, Main Street, and Premium Transit Areas
5-1(D)(2)(a)   Where sidewalks are less than 10 feet wide, the minimum front
setback shall be 10 feet.
5-1(D)(2)(b)   A minimum of 50 percent of front property line width must be
occupied by the primary building, outdoor seating and gathering area, or
outdoor dining area constructed within 15 ft. of the property line.
   1.   On a corner lot, the required minimum of 50 percent must begin at the
corner.
   2.   A 3-foot wall and trees spaced 20 feet on center shall be required
between any outdoor seating and gathering area or outdoor dining area and a
parking or loading area.
5-1(D)(2)(c)   For lots where there are 2 or more street side lot lines, the
maximum side setback applies only to one side.
5-1(E)   NON-RESIDENTIAL ZONE DISTRICTS
5-1(E)(1)   Non-residential Zone District Table
All development in any Non-residential zone district other than NR-PO or NR-SU
shall comply with the dimensional standards in
Table 5-1-3, unless an exception or a different standard is stated in another
Section of this IDO.
Table 5-1-3: Non-residential Zone District Dimensional Standards
UC-MS-PT = Urban Centers, Main Streets, and Premium Transit areas as
identified in the ABC Comp Plan
Note: Any different dimensional standards in
Part 14-16-3 (Overlay Zones) and Section
14-16-5-9 (Neighborhood Edges) applicable to the property shall supersede
the standards in this table.
Zone District NR-C NR-BP NR-LM NR-GM
Table 5-1-3: Non-residential Zone District Dimensional Standards
UC-MS-PT = Urban Centers, Main Streets, and Premium Transit areas as
identified in the ABC Comp Plan
Note: Any different dimensional standards in
Part 14-16-3 (Overlay Zones) and Section
14-16-5-9 (Neighborhood Edges) applicable to the property shall supersede the
standards in this table.
Zone District      NR-C                    NR-BP     NR-LM NR-GM
Site Standards
Lot width, minimum N/A                     100 ft.   N/A
Building coverage, N/A                     50%       N/A
maximum
Setback Standards[1][2]
Front, minimum     5 ft.                   20 ft.[3] 5 ft.
                   UC-MS-PT: 0 ft.
Front, maximum     N/A                     N/A
                   UC-MS-PT: 15 ft.
Side, minimum      0 ft.                   10 ft.[3] 0 ft.
                   N/A
                   UC-MS-PT:
Side, maximum      Interior: N/A           N/A
                   Street side of corner
                   lots: 15 ft.
Rear, minimum      0 ft.                   10 ft.[3] 0 ft.
                   UC-MS-PT: 15 ft.
Rear, maximum      N/A
Building Height [2]
                   38 ft.                  65 ft.
Building height,   UC-MS-PT: 55 ft.
maximum            No maximum for portions No maximum for portions of building
                   of building >100 ft.    >100 ft. from front lot line
                   from all lot lines
[1] At corners and junctions with driveways, drive aisles, or alleys,
additional clear sight triangle requirements in the DPM may apply.
[2] Greater setbacks and/or reduced heights may be required for compliance
with the National Electrical Safety Code (NESC) along lot lines that abut, are
adjacent to, or within properties
that contain overhead power lines and/or electric utility easements. Electric
service provision from the Public Service Company of New Mexico (PNM) will
also depend on adequate structure clearance requirements as outlined in the
PNM Electric Service Guide.
[3] No setback is required on sides abutting rail tracks or rail easements.
 
5-1(E)(2)   NR-PO and NR-SU Zone Districts
5-1(E)(2)(a)   NR-PO Zone District
Dimensional standards in NR-PO sub-zones shall be determined in the approval of
a Master Plan, Natural Resource Management Plan, standards specified by the
implementing Department, or standards appropriate to a Site Plan approval for a
park or open space owned or managed by an entity other than the City.
5-1(E)(2)(b)   NR-SU Zone District
Dimensional standards in NR-SU shall be determined in the approval of a Site
Plan - EPC as part of the approval of a Zoning Map Amendment to the NR-SU zone
district.
5-1(F)   BUILDINGS CONSTRUCTED ON A LOT LINE
If a building is constructed on a lot line abutting a privately owned lot that
is not under the same ownership as the subject property, the City may require
the owners of both properties to sign a maintenance easement prior to issuance
of a building permit to allow future maintenance or repairs of any portions of
the building constructed on the lot line.
5-1(G)   EXCEPTIONS AND ENCROACHMENTS
Building height limits apply to all portions of all structures on the property,
unless an exception is specified in
Table 5-1-4 or any other provision of this IDO.
Table 5-1-4 identifies exceptions to required building setback areas and
exceptions to building height limits that apply unless specified otherwise in
an Overlay zone. Required setback areas other than the exceptions allowed in
Table 5-1-4 shall be open and unobstructed from the ground upward.
Table 5-1-4: Allowed Exceptions and Encroachments
Structure or Feature Conditions or Limits
Table 5-1-4: Allowed Exceptions and Encroachments
Structure or Feature                    Conditions or Limits
Encroachments into Required Setback Areas
                                        May encroach any amount into a required
                                        side or rear setback, subject to the
Accessory building                      with Articles 14-1, 14-2, and 14-3 of
                                        ROA 1994 (Uniform Administrative Code
                                        and Technical Codes, Fire Code, and
                                        Uniform Housing Code).
Accessory ground-mounted wind energy    As specified in Subsection
system                                  14-16-4-3(E)(11) (Wind Energy
                                        Generation).
                                        May encroach up to 2 ft. into a
                                        required side or rear setback, but not
Architectural feature including awning, closer than 3 ft. from any lot line.
canopy, sill, chimney, belt course,     May encroach any amount into a required
cornice, and ornamental feature         front setback; encroachments into the
                                        public right-of-way require an approved
                                        revocable permit.
                                        May encroach any amount into a required
                                        front or street side setback;
Balcony or bay window                   encroachments into the public right-of-
                                        way require an approved revocable
                                        permit.
Carport                                 As specified in Subsection
                                        14-16-5-5(F)(2)(a)3 (Carports).
Dumpster enclosure                      May encroach any amount into a required
                                        side or rear setback.
Evaporative cooler                      May encroach up to 4 ft. into a
                                        required side or rear setback.
                                        May encroach into a required setback,
Freestanding sign                       but not closer than 3 ft. from any lot
                                        line.
Ground-mounted solar collector          Allowed per Section 47-3-4 NMSA 1978.
Open or lattice-enclosed fire escape,   May encroach up to 10 ft. into a
fireproof outside stairway, and balcony required rear setback.
opening upon smoke towers
                                        May encroach into a required setback,
                                        but not closer than 5 ft. from any lot
                                        line. May encroach up to the front lot
                                        line in Urban Center, Main Street, or
Porch                                   Premium Transit (UC-MS-PT) areas. Any
                                        portion that is over a driveway must
                                        meet regulations applicable to carports
                                        as specified in Subsection
                                        14-16-5-5(F)(2)(a)3 (Carports).
Site design element placed directly     May project into a required setback,
upon the average lot grade that is less except that decks, patios, and terraces
than 18 inches above the surrounding    above grade may not encroach closer
average lot grade, including deck,      than 3 ft. from any lot line.
walkway, step, patio, and terrace
                                        May encroach into a required side or
                                        rear setback, but not closer than 3 ft.
Shade structure for low-density         from any lot line.
residential development                 No more than 50% of rear yard may be
                                        covered by a roof.
                                        No wall to support the structure may be
                                        constructed in any setback area.
                                        May encroach into a required setback,
Swimming pool                           but in-ground swimming pools shall not
                                        be closer than 5 ft. from any lot line
                                        or building.
Wall or fence                           As specified in Section
                                        14-16-5-7 (Walls and Fences).
Exceptions to Building Height Height Maximums 10
Belfry, church spire or tower, flag
pole, flue, statue, ornamental tower or
spire, chimney, conveyor, cooling
tower, cupola or dome, elevator
housing, mechanical equipment and       Exempt from building height maximums.
related screening (not including any
parapet), observation tower or deck,
penthouse, smoke enclosure, smoke
stack, stage tower or scenery loft,
tank, and water tower
                                        Exempt from building height maximums on
Dwelling, Multi-family                  lots in and within 1,320 feet (1/
                                        4 mile) of MS-PT areas.
Non-commercial or broadcast antenna     May be up to 65 feet.
Rooftop solar collector                 Allowed per Section 47-3-4 NMSA 1978.
                                        In the R-A, R-1, R-T, R-ML, R-MH, and
Shade structure                         MX-T zone districts, may not exceed 12
                                        ft. in height.
                                        As specified in Subsection
Wind energy generation device           14-16-4-3(E)(11) (Wind Energy
                                        Generation).
Wireless Telecommunications Facility    As specified in Subsection 14-16-4-3(E)
(WTF)                                   (12)(d) (Wireless Telecommunications
                                        Facility Maximum Height).
 
 
Notes
10 City Council, O-24-69, adopted January 6, 2025 and effective January 28,
   2025. Revised editorially for clarity and consistency with the IDO.
5-1(H)   UTILITY CLEARANCE
Walls and fences that run parallel to and are contained within utility
easements are prohibited. In addition to the building setbacks and
encroachments in this Section
14-16-5-1, the Development Process Manual (DPM) or the Facility Plan for
Electric System Transmission and Generation, as amended, may have additional
requirements for development near utility facilities. See those documents for
details.
5-2   SITE DESIGN AND SENSITIVE LANDS
5-2(A)   PURPOSE
This Section
14-16-5-2 is intended to minimize the impacts of development on natural and
cultural resources, to protect public health and safety from potential hazards
on sensitive lands, to create more distinctive neighborhoods by connecting them
to surrounding natural features and amenities, and to improve building
performance and occupant wellness. Site design standards are intended to
enhance the visual appearance of non-residential development, make visual
connections to topographic features, promote street and neighborhood character,
and strengthen the pedestrian environment.
5-2(B)   APPLICABILITY
These standards apply to all site development and new subdivisions, unless
explicitly exempted elsewhere in this IDO. The design standards in this section
are minimum standards. The City may impose more restrictive standards if
necessary to comply with applicable engineering or design standards or other
standards in this IDO.
5-2(C)   SITE DESIGN TO AVOID SENSITIVE LANDS
5-2(C)(1)   Both the subdivision and site design processes shall begin with an
analysis of site constraints related to sensitive lands. The site analysis
shall be included with applications for Subdivision or Site Plan. The site
analysis shall be reviewed by relevant staff from Hydrology, Parks and
Recreation, Historic Preservation, the City Forrester, and/or the City
Archaeologist, depending on the type(s) of sensitive lands identified on the
site.
5-2(C)(2)   New subdivisions of land and site design shall avoid locating
development, except for open spaces and areas that will not be disturbed during
the development process, in the following types of sensitive lands:
5-2(C)(2)(a)   Arroyos.
5-2(C)(2)(b)   Floodplains and Special Flood Hazard Areas.
5-2(C)(2)(c)   Irrigation facilities (acequias).
5-2(C)(2)(d)   Large stands of mature trees.
5-2(C)(2)(e)   Riparian areas.
5-2(C)(2)(f)   Rock outcroppings.
5-2(C)(2)(g)   Significant archaeological sites.
5-2(C)(2)(h)   Steep slopes and escarpments.
5-2(C)(2)(i)   Wetlands.
5-2(C)(3)   Street crossings of sensitive lands shall be avoided.
5-2(C)(4)   If development cannot avoid sensitive lands pursuant to Subsections
(2) and (3) above, the project shall be processed as a Site Plan - EPC pursuant
to Subsection
14-16-6-6(I) and may require a Variance - EPC pursuant to Subsection
14-16-6-6(N).
5-2(C)(5)   Landscaping on lots abutting arroyos shall be pursuant to
Subsection
14-16-5-6(C)(4) (Required Plant Materials and Site Amenities).
5-2(C)(6)   For all development except cluster and cottage development, if
avoidance of sensitive lands, other than floodways and flood fringe areas
referenced in Article 14-5 of ROA 1994 (Flood Hazard and Drainage Control),
results in the subdivision containing fewer buildable lots than it would have
if sensitive lands were not avoided, the Planning Director may adjust the
minimum lot size or lot width dimensions by up to 25 percent to allow for
additional lots that would have otherwise been possible if sensitive lands had
not been avoided.
5-2(D)   ARCHAEOLOGICAL SITES
5-2(D)(1)   Applicability
This Subsection
14-16-5-2(D) applies when an applicant initiates the approval process for any
of the following:
5-2(D)(1)(a)   A preliminary plat for any subdivision that is 5 acres or more
in size.
5-2(D)(1)(b)   A Site Plan or Master Development Plan for a project that is 5
acres or more in size.
5-2(D)(2)   Additional Review Required
Prior to the approval of a Preliminary Plat, Site Plan, or Master Development
Plan, the applicant shall obtain either a Certificate of No Effect or a
Certificate of Approval, pursuant to review and decision procedures and
criteria in Subsection
14-16-6-5(A) (Archaeological Certificate).
5-2(D)(3)   Unexpected Archaeological Discovery
5-2(D)(3)(a)   In the event that an archaeological resource is unexpectedly
discovered in the city during any demolition, development, or land disturbance
activity on any property for which a Certificate of No Effect has been issued,
such activity in the immediate vicinity of the archaeological resource shall
immediately cease and the person or entity responsible for or overseeing the
demolition, development or land disturbance activity shall immediately notify
the Planning Director or City Archaeologist of the discovery. 
5-2(D)(3)(b)   Activity that ceases because of the unexpected discovery of an
archaeological resource may resume only after the City Archaeologist determines
that the resource is not significant or approves a treatment plan.
5-2(D)(3)(c)   If the City Archaeologist determines that the area containing
the archaeological resource can be separated from the project and the resource
protected until the treatment plan is completed, the demolition, development,
or land disturbance activity may resume.
5-2(D)(3)(d)   The failure to immediately cease demolition, development or land
disturbance activity upon the discovery of an archaeological resource is a
violation subject to the penalties in Part 1-1-99 of ROA 1994 (General
Penalty).
5-2(D)(4)   Human Remains
In the event that human remains or funerary artifacts are discovered on any
property in the city during demolition, development or land disturbance
activity, Section 18-6-11.2 of the New Mexico Cultural Properties Act shall
control.
5-2(E)   CUMULATIVE IMPACTS
5-2(E)(1)   Applicability
This Subsection
14-16-5-2(E) applies to development or redevelopment that meets all of the
following criteria.
5-2(E)(1)(a)   Any portion of the subject property is within the Railroad and
Spur Small Area (i.e., within 2,640 feet [1/2 mile] of the BNSF railroad or
1,320 feet [ mile] of the Sawmill Spur), as mapped below.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/b37713d5e40fc82694833f290401791f80be26ac/
IMAGES/0-0-0-6753.png]
5-2(E)(1)(b)   The subject property is within 1,320 feet ( mile) of a
Residential zone district or a lot containing a residential use in any Mixed-
use zone district.
5-2(E)(1)(c)   Any of the following uses identified in
Table 4-2-1 are proposed:
   1.   Car Wash.
   2.   Heavy Vehicle and equipment sales, rental, fueling, and repair.
   3.   Light vehicle fueling station.
   4.   Light vehicle repair.
   5.   Light vehicle sales and rental.
   6.   Airport.
   7.   Freight terminal or dispatch center.
   8.   Helipad.
   9.   Railroad yard.
   10.   Transit facility.
   11.   Light Manufacturing.
   12.   Heavy Manufacturing.
   13.   Natural resource extraction.
   14.   Special manufacturing.
   15.   All uses in the Waste and Recycling category.
   16.   All uses in the Wholesaling and Storage category.
5-2(E)(1)(d)   The subject property is within 660 feet of another use described
in Subsection (c) above.
5-2(E)(2)   Requirements
Development or redevelopment meeting all of the criteria of Subsection
14-16-5-2(E)(1) shall do all of the following:
5-2(E)(2)(a)   Mitigate any material negative cumulative impacts on surrounding
residential development through adequate and effective measures, including but
not limited to all of the following:
   1.   Locating and designing vehicle access, circulation, parking, and
loading to minimize impacts on residential uses within 660 feet in any
direction of the subject property.
   2.   Locating, designing, and orienting site lighting to be compatible with
residential uses within 660 feet in any direction of the subject property.
   3.   Locating the storage of hazardous materials, as defined by federal
regulation, to minimize impact on surrounding residential uses.
   4.   Locating outdoor storage of materials or equipment to minimize impact
on surrounding residential uses.
   5.   Locating activities on the site that generate noise to minimize impacts
on residential uses within 660 feet in any direction of the subject property.
5-2(E)(2)(b)   Provide a cumulative impact analysis to the EPC that addresses,
at a minimum, the items required in Subsection
14-16-6-4(H), which the EPC may use as the basis to require mitigation of
identified impacts through conditions of approval.
5-2(E)(2)(c)   Provide a traffic impact study pursuant to Article 7-5(D) of the
DPM, notwithstanding the thresholds or mitigation requirements in the DPM,
which the EPC may use as the basis to require mitigation of the traffic
generated by the use through conditions of approval.
5-2(E)(2)(d)   Be reviewed by the Environmental Planning Commission (EPC),
pursuant to Subsection 14-16-6-6(I).
5-2(E)(2)(e)   Have an approved Site Plan - EPC that meets conditions of
approval deemed necessary by the EPC to further compliance with the above
standards to minimize impact on the surrounding residential uses and maximize
compatibility of the proposed development prior to the submittal of any request
for platting on the property.
5-2(F)   DRAINAGE AREAS
All drainage improvements in the Valley Drainage Area mapped below shall comply
with applicable requirements of the DPM.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/b37713d5e40fc82694833f290401791f80be26ac/
IMAGES/0-0-0-6755.png]
5-2(G)   IRRIGATION FACILITY (ACEQUIA) STANDARDS
5-2(G)(1)   All subdivisions and site development shall comply with applicable
requirements of Article 14-5 of ROA 1994 (Flood Hazard and Drainage Control)
and the DPM.
5-2(G)(2)   These standards apply to development adjacent to all irrigation
facilities owned or maintained by the Middle Rio Grande Conservancy District
(MRGCD) or community acequia associations.
5-2(G)(3)   No primary or accessory structure, wall, fence, or impervious
surface shall be constructed within 5 feet of the toe of the slope of an
irrigation facility or of the associated easement boundary, whichever is
greater, without the approval of the authority or association with operations
and maintenance responsibility for the irrigation facility, except as noted in
Subsection (4) below.
5-2(G)(4)   Within the Los Duranes area as mapped below, all structures,
excluding walls and fences, must be set back a minimum of 15 feet from the
centerline of any ditch, lateral, or drain designated on the Los Duranes
Community Acequia System Map below.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/b37713d5e40fc82694833f290401791f80be26ac/
IMAGES/0-0-0-6757.png]
5-2(G)(5)   No vegetation within 5 feet of the toe of the slope of an
irrigation facility shall be removed, treated, or planted without coordination
with the authority or association responsible for operating and maintaining the
irrigation facility.
5-2(G)(6)   Where an acequia crosses a street, Subsection
14-16-5-2(C)(3) applies.
5-2(G)(7)   For cluster development and multi-family dwellings, locate at least
25 percent of common open space or ground-level usable open space to be
contiguous with the irrigation ditch/acequia. These areas shall be made
accessible from the remaining land via pedestrian walkways. Access to
irrigation ditches/acequias is only allowed if approved by the Middle Rio
Grande Conservancy District (MRGCD).
5-2(H)   LANDFILL BUFFERS
Sensitive lands include landfill gas buffer areas, which comprise closed or
operating landfills and the areas of potential landfill gas migration
surrounding them. Development within landfill gas buffer areas, as established
by Interim Guidelines for Development within City Designated Landfill Buffer
Zones of the City Environmental Health Department and as shown on the Official
Zoning Map, shall follow the Interim Guidelines to mitigate health hazards due
to methane and other byproduct gases. All development within a landfill gas
buffer requires a Landfill Gas Mitigation Approval pursuant to Subsection
14-16-6-4(S)(5) to ensure that potential health and safety impacts are
addressed.
5-2(I)   MAJOR ARROYO EDGES
5-2(I)(1)   Applicability
This Subsection
14-16-5-2(I) applies to development or redevelopment on lots abutting a major
arroyo.
5-2(I)(2)   Drainage
5-2(I)(2)(a)   All subdivisions and site development shall comply with all
applicable requirements of Article 14-5 of ROA 1994 (Flood Hazard and Drainage
Control), the DPM, and the Albuquerque Metropolitan Arroyo Flood Control
Authority (AMAFCA).
5-2(I)(2)(b)   Development will not be allowed to discharge stormwater runoff
into an arroyo, unless an engineering analysis can demonstrate that discharge
will have minimal impact on the treatment called for in the drainage management
plan for the arroyo and on existing detention basins.
5-2(I)(3)   Arroyos and Trails
5-2(I)(3)(a)   Accessory buildings shall be set back from any lot line abutting
an arroyo or trail 2 feet for each foot of building height in excess of 6 feet.
5-2(I)(3)(b)   Property owners shall dedicate public right-or-way as shown in
the Rank 2 Facility Plan for Arroyos for trails and/or arroyos. Public right-
of-way for a trail and landscaping adjacent to an arroyo shall average 20 feet
in width.
5-2(I)(3)(c)   Access to the trail system shall be provided at all roadway
intersections and adjacent public facilities, including parks, libraries,
community centers, and Major Public Open Space.
5-2(I)(3)(d)   For new subdivisions adjacent to existing arroyo corridors,
access to existing arroyo corridor trails shall be provided for residents of
the subdivision at an interval of 1,320 feet ( mile) for unpaved trails and
mile for paved trails. Access for the public may be provided at the applicant's
option or as required to comply with other provisions of this IDO, the DPM, or
other adopted City regulations.
5-2(I)(3)(e)   Land adjacent to barriers across the arroyo, such as dams,
roads, and culverts, shall be platted to allow space for a trail around the
barrier, providing for a continuous trail system.
5-2(I)(3)(f)   Access for wheelchair accessible trails in or along arroyos
shall comply with ADA standards.
5-2(I)(4)   Landscaping Adjacent to Arroyos
5-2(I)(4)(a)   Disturbance to slopes and vegetation and cut and fill shall be
minimized to the maximum extent practicable and balanced against the need to
provide for bikeways or other amenities within the arroyo easement and/or
public right-of-way.
5-2(I)(4)(b)   Disturbed areas shall be reseeded or planted with low-water,
low-maintenance, native, or naturalized plant materials and maintained for 3
years. After that time, the City will take over maintenance responsibility for
the planted area within the arroyo easement and/or public right-of-way.
5-2(I)(4)(c)   Development shall landscape usable open space along any lot line
abutting an arroyo easement or public right-of-way.
5-2(I)(4)(d)   Parking lots abutting major arroyos shall provide a buffer
pursuant to Subsection
14-16-5-6(F)(3).
5-2(I)(4)(e)   Landscaping on lots abutting arroyos shall be pursuant to
Subsection
14-16-5-6(C)(4) (Required Plant Materials and Site Amenities).
5-2(I)(5)   Walls and Fences
For properties adjacent to arroyos, all walls, fences, retaining walls, and
combinations of those site features facing the arroyo must comply with all
applicable standards in Subsections
14-16-5-7(E)(4) (Walls Adjacent to Major Arroyos or Major Public Open Space)
and
14-16-5-7(F) (Retaining Wall Standards) and in the DPM.
5-2(J)   MAJOR PUBLIC OPEN SPACE EDGES
5-2(J)(1)   Lots within 330 Feet of Major Public Open Space
The following standards apply to development within 330 feet in any direction
of Major Public Open Space in order to enhance and protect Major Public Open
Space. For additional standards regulating lots adjacent to major Public Open
Space, see Subsection
14-16-5-2(J)(2) below.
5-2(J)(1)(a)   Building Height Bonuses
Building height bonuses in
Table 5-1-1: Residential Zone District Dimensional Standards or
Table 5-1-2: Mixed-use Zone District Dimensional Standards are prohibited.
5-2(J)(1)(b)   Access and Connectivity
Pedestrian and bicycle access to the Major Public Open Space shall be provided
consistent with the Rank 2 Bikeways and Trails Facility Plan and as acceptable
to the Open Space Division of the City Parks and Recreation Department.
5-2(J)(1)(c)   Landscaping, Buffering, and Screening
Development shall:
   1.   Use native and/or naturalized vegetation for landscaping materials.
   2.   Screen mechanical equipment pursuant to Subsection
14-16-5-6(G) (Screening of Mechanical Equipment and Support Areas).
5-2(J)(1)(d)   Outdoor Lighting
Regardless of zone district, the lighting designation shall be no higher than
Lz1 and shall be subject to outdoor lighting curfew to protect natural
ecosystems and their biodiversity.
5-2(J)(1)(e)   Color
   1.   Development shall limit the colors of exterior surfaces of structures,
including but not limited to mechanical devices, roof vents, and screening
materials, to those with light reflective value (LRV) rating between 20 percent
and 50 percent.
   2.   Colors shall blend with the surrounding natural environment and
generally include yellow ochres, browns, dull reds, and grey greens.
   3.   Trim materials on fa ades constituting less than 20 percent of the fa
ade's opaque surface may be any color.
5-2(J)(1)(f)   Signs
   1.   Electronic signs are prohibited pursuant to Subsection
14-16-5-12(H)(2)(e).
   2.   Signage shall be located to minimize visibility from Major Public Open
Space and designed pursuant to Subsection
14-16-5-12(E)(5) (Illumination and Motion).
5-2(J)(2)   Lots Adjacent to Major Public Open Space
In addition to the standards that apply within 330 feet in any direction of
Major Public Open Space in Subsection
14-16-5-2(J)(1) above, the following standards apply to development on lots
adjacent to Major Public Open Space, except when the subject property and Major
Public Open Space are separated by a principal arterial or freeway, in which
case only the provisions of Subsection
14-16-5-2(J)(1) apply.
5-2(J)(2)(a)   Lots of Any Size
Development on lots of any size adjacent to Major Public Open Space shall:
   1.   Be platted and/or designed to incorporate a single-loaded street
between the Major Public Open Space and development, with access generally
prohibited unless approved by the Open Space Division of the City Parks and
Recreation Department. Where a single-loaded street is not desired by the Open
Space Division of the City Parks and Recreation Department, a landscape buffer
with a minimum width of 45 feet may be substituted as approved by the Open
Space Superintendent. Existing vegetation on the Official Albuquerque Plant
Palette may count toward satisfying the requirements of Subsection
14-16-5-6(C)(2) (Minimum Landscape Area) with approval from the Open Space
Superintendent. Plant selection and location is subject to approval by the Open
Space Superintendent.
   2.   For cluster development and multi-family dwellings, locate at least 25
percent of common open space or ground-level usable open space to be contiguous
with Major Public Open Space. These areas shall be made accessible from the
remaining land via trails or sidewalks. Access to Major Public Open Space is
only allowed if approved by the Open Space Division of the City Parks and
Recreation Department.
   3.   Locate lower densities and less intense uses abutting the Major Public
Open Space in any Mixed-use zone district.
   4.   Include a landscaped buffer area between off-street parking and the
Major Public Open Space with a minimum width of 6 feet that varies in width to
avoid the appearance of a hard, straight line. Plant selection shall include
sufficient shrubs or trees to provide a visual barrier.
   5.   Limit height of site lighting luminaires to 20 feet.
   6.   Incorporate Crime Prevention through Environmental Design (CPTED)
principles to deter crime and to facilitate security measures.
   7.   Manage stormwater per Subsection
14-16-5-4(H).
   8.   Design grading per Subsection
14-16-5-4(J).
   9.   Locate and design vehicle access, circulation, and parking per
Subsection
14-16-5-5(F) (Parking Location and Design) and Subsection
14-16-5-6(F) (Parking Lot Landscaping).
   10.   Locate and design all walls, fences, retaining walls, and combinations
of those site features facing the Major Public Open Space in compliance with
all applicable standards in Section
14-16-5-7(E)(4) (Walls Adjacent to Major Arroyos or Major Public Open Space).
   11.   Prevent and mitigate construction impact per the DPM.
5-2(J)(2)(b)   Lots 5 Acres or Greater
Development on lots 5 acres or greater adjacent to Major Public Open Space
shall:
   1.   Comply with the requirements of Subsection (a) above.
   2.   Not be located within 50 feet of the portions of Major Public Open
Space with a steep slope, escarpment, wetland, and/or riparian area, except for
any single-loaded street or landscaped buffer required pursuant to Subsection
14-16-5-2(J)(2)(a)1.
   3.   Not create any material negative environmental impacts on the visual,
recreational, or habitat values of the Major Public Open Space.
   4.   Locate and design vehicle access, circulation, and parking to minimize
impact to Major Public Open Space.
   5.   Design grading and manage stormwater to minimize impact to Major Public
Open Space.
   6.   Locate, design, and orient site lighting to be compatible with Major
Public Open Space, including consideration of periphery lighting and lighting
of any pedestrian access to Major Public Open Space that is acceptable to the
Open Space Division of the City Parks and Recreation Department.
   7.   Design walls to balance the following needs as appropriate on a case-
by-case basis:
      a.   Aesthetics that blend with the natural environment.
      b.   Safety and surveillance.
      c.   Screening and privacy.
   8.   Locate, design, and orient signage to minimize impact to the Major
Public Open Space.
   9.   Be reviewed by the Environmental Planning Commission (EPC), pursuant to
Subsection
14-16-6-6(I).
   10.   Have an approved Site Plan - EPC that meets conditions deemed
necessary by the EPC to further compliance with the above standards to minimize
impact on the Major Public Open Space and maximize compatibility of the
proposed development prior to the submittal of any request for platting on the
property.
5-2(J)(2)(c)   Lots Adjacent to the Petroglyph National Monument
Development on lots of any size adjacent to the Petroglyph National Monument
shall:
   1.   Comply with the requirements of Subsections
14-16-5-2(J)(1) (Lots within 330 feet of Major Public Open Space) and
14-16-5-2(J)(2) (Lots Adjacent to Major Public Open Space) above regardless of
the applicability of those provisions related to the location or size of the
premises.
   2.   Comply with the applicable standards in Section
14-16-3-6(E) (Northwest Mesa Escarpment - VPO-2).
   3.   Comply with the WTF concealment requirements in Section
14-16-4-3(E)(12)(a).
   4.   Comply with the applicable wall design and materials standards in
Section
14-16-5-7(E)(4) (Walls Adjacent to Major Arroyos or Major Public Open Space).
   5.   Comply with the applicable sign restrictions in Sections
14-16-5-12(G)(1)(e).
5-2(K)   RAIL TRAIL EDGES
5-2(K)(1)   Applicability
   This Subsection
14-16-1-1 applies to development or redevelopment on lots adjacent to the Rail
Trail.
5-2(K)(2)   Access and Connectivity
   On-site pedestrian walkways shall connect to the Rail Trail, as long as such
access is coordinated with and approved by the City Parks and Recreation
Department.
5-2(K)(3)   Edge Buffer Landscaping
   5-2(K)(3)(a)   All new multi-family residential development, mixed-use
development, or non-residential development other than industrial development
shall provide a landscaped buffer area at least 5 feet wide and plant at least
1 tree and 3 shrubs every 25 feet along the property line abutting the Rail
Trail.
   5-2(K)(3)(b)   All new industrial development shall provide a landscaped
buffer area at least 15 feet wide along the property line abutting the Rail
Trail, as specified in Subsection 14-16-5-6(E)(4)(b).
5-2(K)(4)   Wall and Fences
   5-2(K)(4)(a)   For multi-family residential development, mixed-use
development, and non-residential development other than industrial development,
walls in any side or rear yard abutting the Rail Trail shall meet the
requirements of Subsection
14-16-5-7(D)(3)(d).
   5-2(K)(4)(b)   For industrial development, chain link fencing (with or
without slats) shall not be allowed on any portion of a site visible from the
Rail Trail. Chain link fencing is allowed as temporary security fencing during
active construction.
5-2(K)(5)   Building Height Stepdown
   Any portion of a primary or accessory building within 20 feet in any
direction of the Rail Trail shall step down to a maximum height of 48 feet,
except in the following circumstances:
   5-2(K)(5)(a)   Properties in a DT-MS-PT area.
   5-2(K)(5)(b)   Properties where 100 percent of the outdoor seating and
gathering areas required by Subsection 14-16-5-11(E)(3) are located abutting
the Rail Trail.
   5-2(K)(5)(c)   Properties where there are 2 or more street frontages, not
including the Rail Trail.
5-2(K)(6)   Building Design
   5-2(K)(6)(a)   At least 50 percent of the outdoor seating and gathering
areas required by Subsection 14-16-5-11(E)(3) (Outdoor Seating and Gathering
Areas) shall be located adjacent to the Rail Trail.
   5-2(K)(6)(b)   In the NR-LM or NR-GM zone districts, any fa ade facing the
Rail Trail shall meet the requirements in Subsection
14-16-5-11(E)(2)(a)3.
5-2(L)   PREVENTING AND MITIGATING CONSTRUCTION IMPACT
   Construction on a lot abutting Major Public Open Space or on a lot with a
sensitive land shall prevent and mitigate potential negative impact. See the
DPM for additional standards.
   5-2(L)(1)   The property owner shall provide photographs of any sensitive
land indentified on the property and/or the property edge abutting Major Public
Open Space and a site plan with a keyed location of each photograph.
   5-2(L)(2)   The property owner's contractor shall hold a pre-construction
meeting with City Parks & Recreation staff about Major Public Open Space and
City Planning staff about sensitive lands to establish construction work
activities and any access points, if necessary, to the Major Public Open Space
or sensitive land.
   5-2(L)(3)   The property line abutting Major Public Open Space shall be
fenced and signed to disallow entry during construction.
   5-2(L)(4)   Grading plans must ensure that the sensitive land is not
compromised or damaged. Extensive fill adjacent to sensitive land shall be
avoided to the maximum extent practicable.
   5-2(L)(5)   Before a Certificate of Occupancy may be granted, a post-
construction meeting with Parks & Recreation or Planning staff, as relevant,
shall be held to verify that the Major Public Open Space or sensitive land has
been adequately protected during construction or that any damage has been
restored pursuant to the DPM or relevant City Standard Specifications.
5-3   ACCESS AND CONNECTIVITY
5-3(A)   PURPOSE
This Section
14-16-5-3 is intended to improve connectivity in existing and future
development areas by:
5-3(A)(1)   Encouraging transportation connections consistent with long-range
system maps.
5-3(A)(2)   Providing adequate street connectivity.
5-3(A)(3)   Supporting a multi-modal transportation network.
5-3(A)(4)   Ensuring convenient and efficient access to current and future
neighborhoods.
5-3(A)(5)   Mitigating the traffic impacts of new development.
5-3(A)(6)   Reducing vehicle miles traveled.
5-3(A)(7)   Increasing the effectiveness of local service delivery and reducing
emergency response times.
5-3(B)   APPLICABILITY
5-3(B)(1)   The design standards in this section are minimum standards. The
City may impose more restrictive standards if necessary to comply with
applicable engineering standards, design standards, DPM standards, or other
standards in this IDO.
5-3(B)(2)   Standards in Subsection
14-16-5-3(C) (General Access and Circulation) and Subsection
14-16-5-3(D) (Pedestrian Circulation) apply to all site development and new
subdivisions, unless explicitly exempted elsewhere in this IDO.
5-3(B)(3)   Standards in Section
14-16-5-3(E) (Subdivision Access and Circulation) apply to all new
subdivisions, unless explicitly exempted elsewhere in this IDO.
5-3(C)   GENERAL ACCESS AND CIRCULATION
5-3(C)(1)   Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA)
5-3(C)(1)(a)   All "places of public accommodation," as defined in the federal
Americans with Disabilities Act (42 USC 12101 et. seq.) shall comply with the
requirements of that Act concerning on-site circulation and access.
5-3(C)(1)(b)   All properties subject to the federal Americans with
Disabilities Act shall comply with applicable Public Right-of-way Guidelines
(PROWAG), as amended. Where PROWAG standards conflict with ADA standards, the
ADA standards shall prevail.
5-3(C)(2)   Complete Streets
Complete streets shall be designed to the specifications in the DPM, which
incorporates implementation of Part 6-5-6 of ROA 1994 (Complete Streets).
5-3(C)(3)   Driveways, Drive Aisles, and Access
5-3(C)(3)(a)   Development shall comply with the driveway, drive aisle, and
access standards in the DPM.
5-3(C)(3)(b)   For all low-density residential development, driveways accessed
from the front or street side of the property shall be at least 20 feet long,
exclusive of the sidewalk or drive pad.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/b37713d5e40fc82694833f290401791f80be26ac/
IMAGES/0-0-0-6759.png]
5-3(C)(3)(c)   No new curb cuts may be added in the following mapped small area
within the University Neighborhoods Area.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/b37713d5e40fc82694833f290401791f80be26ac/
IMAGES/0-0-0-6761.png]
5-3(C)(4)   Pedestrian Circulation
Development shall comply with the pedestrian circulation standards in
Subsection
14-16-5-3(D) (Pedestrian Circulation) and the DPM.
5-3(C)(5)   Bicycle Circulation
5-3(C)(5)(a)   New development involving more than 1 lot or sites over 5 acres
in size adjacent to existing bikeways shall provide at least 1 access point to
the bikeways to allow residents and users of the development to easily and
safely access those bikeways. Access location and design shall be coordinated
with City Parks and Recreation Department.
5-3(C)(5)(b)   Development shall comply with the bicycle circulation standards
in Section
14-16-5-3(E)(4) (Bicycle Facilities) and the DPM.
5-3(D)   PEDESTRIAN CIRCULATION
5-3(D)(1)   Sidewalks in Residential Development
5-3(D)(1)(a)   Perimeter sidewalks shall be provided in accordance with the
DPM, except as noted in Subsection (b) below.
5-3(D)(1)(b)   In the Los Duranes - CPO-6, a sidewalk at least 4 feet wide
shall be provided on at least 1 side of new public residential subdivision
streets or on residential private ways that have been dedicated as public
right-of-way. A sidewalk on such a street that serves 10 or fewer dwelling
units may be accommodated within the minimum required roadway width.
5-3(D)(2)   Sidewalks in Mixed-use and Non-residential Development
5-3(D)(2)(a)   Applicability
These standards apply to the following mixed-use and non-residential
development, except in the NR-SU and NR-PO zone districts unless specified
otherwise in this IDO:
   1.   Construction of a new building.
   2.   Expansion of an existing building that increases the existing square
footage by 25 percent.
5-3(D)(2)(b)   Sidewalks
Sidewalks meeting the standards of the DPM shall be provided along the entire
frontage of each lot.
5-3(D)(3)   On-site Pedestrian Connections
All multi-family residential, mixed-use, and non-residential development shall
comply with all of the following standards.
5-3(D)(3)(a)   General
   1.   For the purposes of this Subsection
14-16-5-3(D)(3), the building's overall footprint will be considered the area
for calculation of sidewalk width. A collection of smaller buildings linked by
common walls will be considered as 1 building.
   2.   Where primary pedestrian entrances are located adjacent to a public
sidewalk, the width of the public sidewalk may be included in the calculation.
   3.   Shade trees along required pedestrian walkways are required pursuant to
Subsection
14-16-5-6(C)(4)(i) (Required Plant Materials and Site Amenities).
5-3(D)(3)(b)   Network of Pedestrian Walkways
   1.   On-site pedestrian walkways that meet the minimum width required by the
DPM shall be provided between the pedestrian entrances of each primary building
on the site.
   2.   A 4-foot wide clear path shall be maintained along the pedestrian
walkway at all times. Site amenities, other uses of the sidewalk, the overhang
of parked cars, and landscaping may not encroach upon the 4-foot wide clear
path.
   3.   On-site pedestrian walkways shall connect to all of the following:
      a.   A sidewalk meeting the standards of the DPM along at least one lot
frontage.
      b.   Any abutting City park or trail, Major Public Open Space, or other
Civic or Institutional uses, as long as such access is coordinated with and
approved by the Parks and Recreation Department or the property owner of the
civic or institutional use.
      c.   Any abutting public transit facility.
   4.   Pedestrian walkways shall be installed along any street-facing fa ade
with a pedestrian entrance of a building containing any of the following
development:
      a.   Mixed-use or non-residential development in any Mixed-use zone
district.
      b.   Development of uses in the Civic and Institutional or Commercial
categories in
Table 4-2-1 in any Non-residential zone district.
      c.   Pedestrian walkways required by this Subsection shall meet the
standards of the DPM, except where
Table 5-3-1 requires a wider walkway.
Table 5-3-1: Required Walkway Width
Building Size (sq. ft.) Minimum Walkway Width (ft.)
Table 5-3-1: Required Walkway Width
Building Size (sq. ft.) Minimum Walkway Width (ft.)
 10,000                8
>10,000 and  50,000    10
>50,000 and  60,000    11
>60,000 and  70,000    12
>70,000 and  80,000    13
>80,000 and  90,000    14
>90,000                 15
 
      d.   The width of the required walkway may vary along the entire length
of the fa ade provided that the average required width is maintained and
provided that the width of the walkway along the fa ade is a minimum of 8 feet.
5-3(D)(3)(c)   Materials to Alert Motorists
On-site pedestrian walkways and crosswalks shall be identified to motorists and
pedestrians through the use of one or more of the following:
   1.   Changing material, patterns, or paving color (i.e., changing the color
of the paving itself, not painting the paving material).
   2.   Changing paving height.
   3.   Decorative bollards or planters.
   4.   Raised median walkways with landscaped buffers.
   5.   Stamped or stained concrete.
5-3(D)(4)   Trails
Trails shall be dedicated on alignments that connect to any planned or existing
trails on adjacent properties, as necessary to serve the residents, occupants,
and users of the proposed development, and shall be constructed pursuant to the
DPM.
5-3(E)   SUBDIVISION ACCESS AND CIRCULATION
5-3(E)(1)   Street Connectivity
5-3(E)(1)(a)   Level of Connectivity Required
The street network in new subdivisions shall be created through block standards
in Subsection
14-16-5-4(E) (Block Design and Layout). The connectivity and classification of
each street shall be consistent with the Mid-region Council of Governments
(MRCOG) Long Range Roadway System Map, the Long Range Transportation System
Guide of the Metropolitan Transportation Plan, and the DPM, intended to create
a hierarchy of street classifications for arterials, collectors, and local
streets spaced adequately for a complete network that provides circulation
throughout the city to accommodate various travel modes.
5-3(E)(1)(b)   Detailed Design
   1.   Detailed intersection spacing, geometry, and horizontal alignment for
streets shall meet all DPM standards.
   2.   Streets shall be designed to the standards of the DPM.
   3.   The character, extent, width, and location of all streets shall conform
to the MRCOG Long Range Roadway System Map, the Long Range Transportation
System Guide of the Metropolitan Transportation Plan, the DPM, and other
policies, plans, and ordinances adopted by the City and shall be consistent in
their relationship to existing and planned streets, topographic conditions,
public convenience, safety, and the proposed uses of the land to be served by
the streets.
5-3(E)(1)(c)   Roadway Dimensions
   1.   The design of each new subdivision street shall comply with the
dimensional ranges shown in the DPM.
   2.   Where an arterial or collector street is not shown in the MRCOG Long
Range Roadway System Map or the Long Range Transportation System Guide of the
Metropolitan Transportation Plan and there is no adopted future street line,
the arrangement of streets in a subdivision shall do 1 of the following:
      a.   Provide for the continuation of existing arterial and collector
streets in surrounding areas.
      b.   Conform to a plan approved by the City to address a particular
situation where topographic or other conditions make continuance of, or
conformance to, existing streets impractical.
      c.   Conform to spacing standards for various street classifications to
provide and enhance circulation for various travel modes as specified in the
DPM and best suited to provide appropriate access to the predominant land uses
allowable on abutting lands within mile.
5-3(E)(1)(d)   Stub Streets and Cul-de-sacs
Stub streets and cul-de-sacs that terminate the road are prohibited, with the
following exceptions.
   1.   Cul-de-sacs are allowed where necessary to avoid those types of
sensitive lands listed in Section
14-16-5-2(C), or where vehicular safety factors make a connection impractical,
including but not limited to size or shape or lots, topography, surrounding
development patterns, and physical characteristics.
   2.   Permanent stub streets are allowed only where a connection to an
existing street and a future road extension is not possible or feasible. Where
allowed, stub streets are limited to 150 feet in length.
   3.   Mid-block "bubble" cul-de-sacs without throats are allowed.
   4.   Whenever cul-de-sacs are created, 1 pedestrian access/public utility
easement that is a minimum of 20 feet wide shall be provided between the cul-
de-sac head or street turnaround and the sidewalk system of the closest
adjacent street or walkway, unless the City Engineer determines that public
access in that location is not practicable due to site or topography
constraints. Walls or fences are not allowed within the easement.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/b37713d5e40fc82694833f290401791f80be26ac/
IMAGES/0-0-0-6763.png]
5-3(E)(1)(e)   Street Signs and Lights
   1.   Street name signs and traffic control signs shall be required as
specified in the DPM.
   2.   Street lights on local streets are required to be installed at the
applicant's expense and provided as approved in the Infrastructure Improvements
Agreement (IIA) pursuant to Subsection
14-16-5-4(O).
5-3(E)(1)(f)   Private Ways
Private ways to provide access to subdivision lots shall be created only where
public right-of-way would not better serve public purposes and where private
ways can adequately serve all identified transportation, utility, and
stormwater handling requirements. Private ways shall be subject to all of the
following requirements.
   1.   Private ways may be platted only where the City Engineer determines
that such ways will clearly function as a local street.
   2.   The City Engineer may require private ways to include public or private
utility easements, including easements for stormwater drainage.
   3.   If a private way is approved, it shall clearly be identified as such on
the final plat, which shall also state the beneficiaries and maintenance
responsibilities of the private way. Any legal instrument intended to assure
future maintenance of such private way, such as an instrument creating a
homeowners association, shall be included in the subdivider's submittals to the
DHO pursuant to Subsections
14-16-6-6(K) (Subdivision of Land - Minor) and
14-16-6-6(L) (Subdivision of Land - Major).
   4.   All storm drain systems within private ways shall remain private unless
they receive water from public facilities and the runoff is drained downstream
to another public facility.
5-3(E)(2)   Connections to Adjacent Land
5-3(E)(2)(a)   Where land adjacent to a proposed subdivision has been platted
with stub streets, or with a street ending at a street between the new
subdivision and the adjacent land, the streets in the proposed subdivision
shall be designed to align with those streets to allow through circulation,
unless the City Engineer requires otherwise due to physical constraints,
natural features, or traffic safety concerns, pursuant to Subsection
14-16-1-7(B)(2).
5-3(E)(2)(b)   Where adjacent land has not been platted, subdivisions shall be
designed with stub street(s) intended as future through connection(s) to
adjacent land, pursuant to the block lengths in
Table 5-4-1, unless the City Engineer requires otherwise due to physical
constraints, natural features, or traffic safety concerns, pursuant to
Subsection
14-16-1-7(B)(2).
5-3(E)(3)   Driveways, Drive Aisles, and Access
5-3(E)(3)(a)   General
   1.   Every lot shall have sufficient access to afford a reasonable means of
ingress and egress for emergency vehicles, as well as for those needing to
access the property for its intended use.
   2.   Driveways, dive aisles, and access points shall be constructed to the
standards of the DPM.
   3.   Driveway and drive aisle entrances and other openings onto streets
shall be constructed so that:
      a.   Vehicles may safely enter and exit from the lot.
      b.   Interference with the free and convenient flow of traffic in
abutting or surrounding streets is minimized.
      c.   Shared driveways and drive aisles are established to minimize the
number of access points to streets.
5-3(E)(3)(b)   Residential Development
   1.   There shall be no direct driveway access from any low-density
residential development lots to any arterial street or interstate highway
unless no alternative access is feasible.
   2.   Multi-family residential development on sites greater than 5 acres
shall include a minimum of 2 through-access drives, unless deemed impracticable
by the City Engineer due to physical constraints or natural features.
5-3(E)(3)(c)   Mixed-use and Non-residential Development
   1.   Each property shall have no more than 2 access points on any one street
unless deemed necessary by the City Engineer to increase traffic safety or
avoid traffic congestion.
   2.   Drive aisles shall be located at least the minimum distance from street
intersections required by the DPM.
5-3(E)(4)   Bicycle Facilities along Streets
Each street designated in the Metropolitan Transportation Plan and/or the Rank
2 Bikeways and Trails Facility Plan as an existing or proposed route to
accommodate bicycles shall be incorporated into the development and shall be
designed to comply with the standards of the DPM. The DHO may increase the
public right-of-way and pavement widths for those streets up to 12 feet on
adopted bike routes and lanes based on considerations of bicycle, pedestrian,
and motor vehicle safety.
5-4   SUBDIVISION OF LAND
5-4(A)   PURPOSE
This Section
14-16-5-4 is intended to promote the public health, safety, and general welfare
of the current and future inhabitants of the City by ensuring that development
sites:
5-4(A)(1)   Are consistent with the land use planning objectives of the adopted
ABC Comp Plan, as amended, and other plans, policies, and ordinances adopted by
the City Council.
5-4(A)(2)   Are appropriately sized and shaped to meet the intended use of land
consistent with the zoning provisions and Development Standards in this IDO.
5-4(A)(3)   Accurately document the boundaries of each lot in the subdivision.
5-4(A)(4)   Avoid development of sensitive lands.
5-4(A)(5)   Are adequately served by a safe street and trail network that is
consistent with the City's adopted transportation plans, with convenient access
for motor vehicles, bicycles, and pedestrians.
5-4(A)(6)   Require the timely installation and dedication of public
improvements and utilities necessary to serve the development, while providing
economy for governmental purposes and efficiency in governmental operations.
5-4(B)   APPLICABILITY
5-4(B)(1)   The standards in this Section
14-16-5-4 apply to all subdivisions of land into 2 or more lots, building
sites, or tracts, or when 2 or more platted lots are consolidated into a larger
lot for development or redevelopment, unless expressly exempted elsewhere in
this IDO, in a development agreement, an approved Site Plan within the NR-SU or
PD zone districts, an approved Framework Plan within the PC zone district, or
an approved annexation plan.
5-4(B)(2)   The subdivision standards apply to all areas within the city unless
specifically exempted.
5-4(B)(3)   Land shall be subdivided only in accordance with the subdivision
approval procedures in Subsections
14-16-6-6(K) (Subdivision of Land - Minor) and
14-16-6-6(L) (Subdivision of Land - Major).
5-4(C)   COMPLIANCE WITH ZONING REQUIREMENTS
5-4(C)(1)   All lots created by a subdivision shall comply with applicable
standards in
Part 14-16-3 (Overlay Zones); Section
14-16-5-1 (Dimensional Standards), particularly Subsection
14-16-5-1(C)(2) (Contextual Residential Development in Areas of Consistency);
Section
14-16-5-3 (Access and Connectivity); and this Section
14-16-5-4.
5-4(C)(1)(a)   The City shall take into consideration prior zoning actions and
determinations of land use as decided by the appropriate zoning authority.
5-4(C)(1)(b)   Nonconforming lots may be replatted without requiring Variance
to lot size if the replat meaningfully decreases the degree of already existing
nonconformity.
5-4(C)(2)   No land shall be subdivided that is found to be unsuitable for
subdividing by reason of flooding, ponding, poor drainage, adverse soil
conditions, adverse geological formations, unsatisfactory topography,
limitations of water quantity, and/or quality, lack of access or restrictions
on accessibility, or other conditions likely to be harmful to the public
health, safety, or general welfare, unless such unsuitable conditions are
corrected or mitigated to the satisfaction of the City. The Development Hearing
Officer (DHO) is responsible for making determinations regarding unsuitability
of land for subdivision.
5-4(C)(3)   The availability of adequate access, fire protection, police
protection, refuse service, public schools, public parks and recreation
facilities, other elements of public infrastructure or private facilities, and
privately provided utilities shall all be weighed in considering proposed
subdivisions. They are not all necessarily required.
5-4(C)(4)   Each subdivision shall comply with the provisions of Subsection
14-16-5-2(C) (Site Design to Avoid Sensitive Lands) unless encroachment into
those sensitive lands is corrected or mitigated to the satisfaction of the
City.
5-4(C)(5)   The general layout of lots, roads, driveways, drive aisles,
utilities, drainage facilities, and other services within proposed subdivisions
shall be designed to avoid making compliance with the standards of the
applicable zone district difficult or infeasible.
5-4(C)(6)   In the PD and NR-SU zone districts, and for development in any zone
district on a site 5 acres or greater adjacent to Major Public Open Space, an
approved Site Plan - EPC is required prior to any platting action. In the PC
zone district, an approved Framework Plan is required prior to any platting
action. Subsequent platting must conform to the approved plans.
5-4(C)(7)   In the NR-BP zone district, a Master Development Plan is required
for lots 20 acres or more prior to platting action. For lots less than 20 acres
zoned NR-BP, a Site Plan is required prior to development, but the property may
be subdivided before or after a Site Plan is approved. Once a Master
Development Plan or Site Plan is approved, subsequent platting must conform to
the approved plan.
5-4(D)   EXISTING AGREEMENTS AND COVENANTS
Subdivision regulations do not repeal, annul, or in any way interfere with
existing private agreements or restrictive covenants applicable to a property.
However, subdivision approvals are not required to be consistent with those
private agreements or restrictive covenants. Where the standards in this
Section
14-16-5-4 impose a different standard than those imposed by a private agreement
or restrictive covenants, the standards in this Section
14-16-5-4 shall apply for purposes of City development approval and
enforcement. Enforcement of any private agreements or restrictive covenants
applicable to a property is the responsibility of the parties to that
agreement, and not the City. See Section
14-16-1-9 (Relationship to Private Agreements and Covenants).
5-4(E)   BLOCK DESIGN AND LAYOUT
5-4(E)(1)   Connectivity, Streets, and Alleys
5-4(E)(1)(a)   Street connectivity patterns shall comply with the provisions of
Section
14-16-5-3 (Access and Connectivity).
5-4(E)(1)(b)   Medians and pedestrian refuges shall be designed to the
specifications in the DPM. Medians and pedestrian refuges shall be designed to
integrate stormwater infiltration areas to the maximum extent practicable.
5-4(E)(1)(c)   In Areas of Consistency, alleys shall be included in subdivision
design in those areas of the city where surrounding areas are platted with
alleys and shall continue the alignments of those alleys.
5-4(E)(1)(d)   Construction of all streets and alleys shall comply with all
applicable standards in the DPM.
5-4(E)(2)   General Block Layout
5-4(E)(2)(a)   Blocks shall generally be square or rectangular but may vary in
shape to protect natural features or respond to site constraints.
5-4(E)(2)(b)   To the maximum extent practicable, streets and access lanes
shall be oriented to create block and lot configurations with their longest
dimension along an east-west access to facilitate solar access.
5-4(E)(3)   Block Dimensions
5-4(E)(3)(a)   Block Lengths
Block lengths shall meet the requirements and comply with standards in the DPM
associated with each Center and Corridor area and each street classification.
Table 5-4-1 is provided as a summary for reference only. In the case of
conflict, requirements in the DPM shall prevail.
5-4(E)(3)(b)   Pedestrian Crossings
Pedestrian crossings shall be provided and designed per the requirements in the
DPM, summarized in
Table 5-4-1.
Table 5-4-1: Summary of Block Lengths in the DPM
Location Block Length (ft.) Signalized Pedestrian Designated Pedestrian
                            Crossing (ft.)        Crossing (ft.)
Table 5-4-1: Summary of Block Lengths in the DPM
                                      Signalized           Designated
Location           Block Length (ft.) Pedestrian Crossing  Pedestrian Crossing
                                      (ft.)                (ft.)
Streets in Center & Corridor Areas
Downtown           200-400             660                 400
Urban Center       300-400             660                 400
Main Street Area   300-400             660                 400
Activity Center    400-600             1,320               600
Employment Center   800               2,640              As appropriate
Village Center     400-600             1,320               600
Streets in Other Areas
Collector,
Arterial, or       Per DPM            Per DPM              Per DPM
Interstate Highway
Local Street        600               2,640              As appropriate
 
5-4(F)   LOT DESIGN AND LAYOUT
5-4(F)(1)   Avoidance of Sensitive Lands
5-4(F)(1)(a)   Each subdivision shall comply with the provisions of Subsection
14-16-5-2(C) (Site Design to Avoid Sensitive Lands).
5-4(F)(1)(b)   Lots within floodplains or Special Flood Hazard Areas shall
comply with Article 14-5 of ROA 1994 (Flood Hazard and Drainage Control), the
DPM, and the requirements of the Albuquerque Metropolitan Arroyo Flood Control
Authority (AMAFCA). Grading in a Special Flood Hazard Area (i.e., flood zones
or FEMA's Zone A designation) requires an approved grading and drainage plan, a
Floodplain Development Permit, and applicable financial guarantees for
permanent public improvements, pursuant to the DPM.
5-4(F)(2)   Access to Public Streets
5-4(F)(2)(a)   All lots shall have frontage on a street unless deemed
impracticable due to topography or other constraints and a Waiver – DHO for an
alternative layout and access provisions is approved pursuant to Subsection
14-16-6-6(P).
5-4(F)(2)(b)   Residential lots shall avoid layouts where the rear lot line is
adjacent to a collector or arterial street. Local frontage roads may be used
within a subdivision to avoid locating residential rear yard walls along
collector and arterial streets.
5-4(F)(2)(c)   In the case of cluster or cottage development or manufactured
home communities in zone districts where those uses are allowed, the provisions
in Subsections (a) and (b) above apply to the entire project site, not to
individual lots within the project site.
5-4(F)(3)   Lot Dimensions
5-4(F)(3)(a)   Lot sizes shall comply with all applicable standards in this
IDO, including but not limited to Section
14-16-5-1 (Dimensional Standards).
5-4(F)(3)(b)   The Planning Director is authorized to make those adjustments to
required lot dimensions shown in Subsection
14-16-5-2(C) (Site Design to Avoid Sensitive Lands).
5-4(F)(3)(c)   Cluster developments shall be subdivided pursuant to the
standards in Section
14-16-5-1 (Dimensional Standards) and Subsection
14-16-4-3(B)(2) (Dwelling, Cluster Development) and the approval procedures in
Subsections
14-16-6-6(K) (Subdivision of Land - Minor) and
14-16-6-6(L) (Subdivision of Land - Major), as applicable.
5-4(F)(3)(d)   Tracts for open space, drainage, landscaping, or other communal
purposes shall have their use, beneficiaries, and maintenance responsibilities
clearly noted on the subdivision plat.
5-4(F)(4)   Remainder Lots Prohibited
No subdivision shall result in any remainder lot that does not meet the
standards of this IDO.
5-4(G)   WATER AND SANITARY SEWER SYSTEMS
5-4(G)(1)   The applicant shall install, at his/her own expense, necessary
infrastructure to connect all lots within a proposed subdivision to the
Albuquerque Bernalillo County Water Utility Authority's (ABCWUA's) water supply
and sanitary sewer systems.
5-4(G)(2)   Public water and sanitary sewer systems shall meet the standards of
the DPM and conform to any adopted facility plans and Section 7 of the ABCWUA
Legislation and Ordinances (Water and Wastewater System Expansion).
5-4(G)(3)   The ABCWUA determines whether water and sanitary sewer
infrastructure improvements are to be publicly or privately owned and
maintained, based on considerations of system capacity and public health,
safety, and welfare.
5-4(H)   STORMWATER MANAGEMENT
5-4(H)(1)   The applicant shall install, at his/her own expense, all site
features and infrastructure necessary to retain, detain, and/or infiltrate
stormwater to ensure that the new subdivision does not result in surface
flooding or unnecessary burden on the City's infrastructure. Stormwater
management for all subdivisions shall comply with all of the following:
5-4(H)(1)(a)   Applicable standards in the DPM.
5-4(H)(1)(b)   Applicable standards in Article 14-5 of ROA 1994 (Flood Hazard
and Drainage Control).
5-4(H)(1)(c)   The requirements of AMAFCA.
5-4(H)(2)   The developer shall incorporate best management practices for low-
impact development stormwater management to minimize stormwater runoff and
increase on-site infiltration as described in the DPM.
5-4(I)   ELECTRICAL AND COMMUNICATION LINES
5-4(I)(1)   Distribution Lines 12 Kilovolts or Less
New communications lines, new single-phase electrical distribution lines
carrying 12 kilovolts (kV) or less, and all other lower voltage electrical
lines shall be installed underground within subdivisions approved under this
IDO.
5-4(I)(2)   Distribution Lines between 12 Kilovolts and 40 Kilovolts
New electrical 3-phase distribution lines carrying above 12 kV, but less than
40 kV, shall be installed underground.
5-4(I)(3)   Distribution Lines Over 40 Kilovolts
Electrical lines that carry 40 kV or more are not regulated by this IDO. See
the Facility Plan for Electric System Transmission and Generation, as amended.
5-4(I)(4)   Safety Clearances from Buildings and Other Structures
Safety clearances are required by the National Electric Safety Code (NESC) to
ensure utility worker and public safety. Greater setbacks and/or reduced
heights may be required for compliance with the National Electrical Safety Code
(NESC) along lot lines that abut, are adjacent to, or within properties that
contain overhead power lines and/or electric utility easements. Electric
service provision from the Public Service Company of New Mexico (PNM) will also
depend on adequate structure clearance requirements as outlined in the PNM
Electric Service Guide.
5-4(J)   GRADING AND EROSION CONTROL
5-4(J)(1)   General
5-4(J)(1)(a)   Grading and erosion control practices shall comply with the DPM.
5-4(J)(1)(b)   New subdivisions shall blend development into the adjacent
environment with a minimum of grade change. Extensive fill that raises the
grade for proposed lots at the edge of a proposed subdivision above the grade
of nearby property shall be avoided. Significant cuts near the edges of a
proposed subdivision to lower the grade within the development shall be
avoided.
5-4(J)(2)   Slope Criteria
All final slopes shall comply with all applicable standards in the DPM.
5-4(J)(3)   Grading near the Property Line
Particular care shall be taken to ensure that existing foundations, retaining
walls, stable slopes, or other structures are not compromised and that the
adjacent property is not damaged or its use constrained due to grading at or
near the property line.
5-4(J)(4)   Grading in Floodplains
Grading in a Special Flood Hazard Area without an approved drainage report and
financial guarantees for the permanent improvements is prohibited.
5-4(K)   DEDICATION OF LAND FOR PUBLIC PURPOSES
5-4(K)(1)   General
Dedication of land for the following public uses may be required in accordance
with any of the following City policies or regulations:
5-4(K)(1)(a)   Streets and other access pursuant to the Metropolitan
Transportation Plan and DPM.
5-4(K)(1)(b)   Drainage facilities pursuant to the IDO, the DPM, or AMAFCA
standards.
5-4(K)(1)(c)   Other public facilities required in accordance with the DPM.
5-4(K)(2)   Dedication of Public Areas Designated in Adopted Plans
If a proposed public area shown on an adopted City or County plan is located in
whole or in part in the area being subdivided, an appropriate tract shall be
shown as reserved, deed restricted, or dedicated for public use on the plat
unless, after a written request from the subdivider, the appropriate
governmental body notifies the subdivider that it does not intend to either
acquire or accept the lot within 3 years from the date of the inquiry.
5-4(K)(3)   Acceptance of Dedications
The procedure for accepting dedications of public lands and improvements is
specified in Section
14-16-6-6(K) (Subdivision of Land - Minor) or Section
14-16-6-6(L) (Subdivision of Land - Major).
5-4(K)(4)   Drainage, Flood Control, or Erosion Control Facilities
5-4(K)(4)(a)   Whenever no beneficial use can be derived by an owner from
continued retention of land necessary for permanent drainage, flood control, or
erosion control facilities or when the facilities involve a major arroyo, the
land required for the operation and maintenance of the facilities must be
dedicated to AMAFCA or the City.
5-4(K)(4)(b)   Unless subject to Subsection (a) above, easements for drainage,
flood control, and erosion control facilities are acceptable as long as a
written agreement between the owner and the City exists that specifies uses
allowed on the lands covered by the easement, and as long as no permanent
facilities are constructed on those lands (including masonry fences and
retaining walls but excluding pavement).
5-4(K)(4)(c)   Rights-of-way and easements required for drainage, flood
control, and erosion control shall conform to the standards in the DPM.
5-4(K)(5)   Limits on Dedication
The City shall not require the dedication of land or payment of fees-in-lieu of
dedication of land in an amount beyond that necessary to serve the needs of the
proposed development or in an amount that is not roughly proportionate to the
impacts of that development on those public facilities listed in Subsection
14-16-5-4(K)(1) above.
5-4(L)   EASEMENTS OR RIGHTS-OF-WAY
5-4(L)(1)   The DHO may require easements public rights-of-way for public
infrastructure or private facilities. Public rights-of-way and easements shall
conform to the standards in the DPM.
5-4(L)(2)   Easements or public rights-of-way for public infrastructure shall
be granted or dedicated, respectively, in accordance with the minimum standards
and requirements set forth in the DPM.
5-4(L)(2)(a)   All easements or rights-of-way designated for public
infrastructure shall be granted or dedicated, respectively, for a specific
purpose.
5-4(L)(2)(b)   ABCWUA easements shall exclude other underground utilities,
unless specifically allowed and approved on a case-by-case basis by the ABCWUA.
5-4(L)(3)   Utility easements may be required along any lot line, with some
exceptions for water and sanitary sewer easements, or as specified in the DPM.
5-4(L)(4)   Development adjacent to electric utility easements and/or
distribution facilities must comply with safety clearance requirements in
Section
14-16-5-4(I)(4) (Safety Clearances from Buildings and Other Structures).
5-4(L)(5)   Easements may be jointly used for private facilities with approval
from the DHO as specified in the DPM and in Subsection
14-16-6-6(K) (Subdivision of Land - Minor) or Subsection
14-16-6-6(L (Subdivision of Land - Major).
5-4(M)   MONUMENTATION
All subdivisions shall provide monumentation of survey points as required by
the DPM.
5-4(N)   IMPROVEMENTS REQUIRED
5-4(N)(1)   The subdivider shall install and construct all improvements
required by this Subsection
14-16-5-4(N), Subsection
14-16-1-7(B)(2), and the DPM. Required improvements shall be installed and
constructed as shown on the approved preliminary plat and/or as specified in an
Infrastructure Improvements Agreement (IIA) between the subdivider and the
City. The City may accept commitments to provide improvements or services by
the County and/or by franchised and/or private utility systems where the City
Engineer determines that acceptance of such commitments will result in timely
provisions of required improvements or services needed to serve the subdivision
imposing burdens on surrounding properties or the city as a whole and will
adequately protect the public health, safety, and welfare.
5-4(N)(2)   The City Engineer determines the timing of construction of some or
all infrastructure for Bulk Land Subdivisions, where further subdivision or
Site Plan approval is required or expected and the required infrastructure will
be provided at that time.
5-4(O)   INFRASTRUCTURE IMPROVEMENTS AGREEMENT
Upon approval of a plat and/or Site Plan and prior to recording, the subdivider
shall execute an Infrastructure Impovements Agreement (IIA) to guarantee
completion of required improvements. The timing, format, and required contents
of the IIA shall comply with Subsection
14-16-6-4(Q), Subsection
14-16-6-6(K) (Subdivision of Land - Minor), and Subsection
14-16-6-6(L) (Subdivision of Land - Major), as applicable, and the DPM.
5-4(P)   ADDITIONAL DESIGN CRITERIA AND CONSTRUCTION STANDARDS
In addition to the standards set forth in this Section
14-16-5-4, the City shall maintain technical standards for infrastructure
improvements in the DPM, pursuant to Subsection
14-16-1-7(A)(4). Such technical standards for infrastructure improvements shall
contain the minimum acceptable design criteria and specifications for the
construction of such improvements. Such technical standards may be updated
periodically and may vary for improvements based on the classification of
streets or other improvements and the extent and characteristics of the area to
be served by the improvements. All subdivisions shall comply with additional
design criteria and construction standards applicable to the proposed
development.
5-5   PARKING AND LOADING
5-5(A)   PURPOSE
This Section
14-16-5-5 is intended to ensure that development provides adequate off-street
parking spaces for all modes of transport by establishing standards and
requirements that minimize traffic congestion, avoid increased parking on
neighborhood streets, allow flexibility in addressing parking demand, and
improve the visual appeal of the city by regulating the placement, layout, and
design of parking areas, parking structures, and garages.
5-5(B)   APPLICABILITY
Unless modified elsewhere in this IDO, the requirements of this Section
14-16-5-5 shall apply to all uses and development in any zone district. No
final development approval or building permit shall be issued unless the
parking requirements of this section are met or modified in accordance with the
applicable parking requirements of this IDO.
5-5(B)(1)   Activities that Trigger Parking Requirements
The following activities shall require compliance with the standards in this
Section
14-16-5-5:
5-5(B)(1)(a)   Construction of a new primary building.
5-5(B)(1)(b)   Expansion of the gross floor area of an existing primary
building by more than 25 percent or 2,500 square feet, whichever is less, from
the square footage originally approved, in which case the provisions of
Table 5-5-1 and
Table 5-5-2 shall apply to the expanded gross floor area of the building. All
relevant standards in this Section
14-16-5-5 shall apply to any new parking added to conform with this provision
and to any portions of the site affected by the expansion.
5-5(B)(1)(c)   A change in use of a primary building that complies with the
requirements of
Table 5-5-1 and
Table 5-5-2 before the change in use, and that increases the minimum off-street
parking requirements for the building by more than 25 percent. Changes in use
that result in a smaller increase in off-street parking spaces shall not be
required to provide additional parking.
5-5(B)(1)(d)   A change in use associated with a tenant improvement or
renovation of a primary building that does not comply with the requirements of
Table 5-5-1 and
Table 5-5-2 prior to the change in use. Additional parking shall be provided
toward fulfilling the required number of off-street parking spaces as follows.
   1.   The maximum number of parking spaces possible is provided in compliance
with the standards of Subsection
14-16-5-5(F) (Parking Location and Design) without the removal or partial
removal of a structure or required landscaping.
   2.   Any area resulting from the voluntary removal or partial removal of a
structure shall be used to provide additional parking toward fulfilling the
required number of off-street parking spaces for the new use(s) required by
Table 5-5-1 and
Table 5-5-2 as adjusted by Section
14-16-5-5(C)(4) (Parking Adjustments and Credits).
   3.   The amount of parking available for the new use is at least 80 percent
of the off-street parking spaces for the new use(s) required by
Table 5-5-1 and
Table 5-5-2, as adjusted by Section
14-16-5-5(C)(4) (Parking Adjustments and Credits).
5-5(B)(1)(e)   Construction of a new parking lot, including any off-street
parking required by
Table 5-5-1.
5-5(B)(2)   Exemptions and Exceptions
If parking is provided where it is otherwise exempt pursuant to this Subsection
14-16-5-5(B)(2), parking standards in the remainder of this Section
14-16-5-5 shall apply.
5-5(B)(2)(a)   Off-street Parking Exemption
The following areas are exempt from requirements in Subsections
14-16-2-4(E)(3)(g)1 (Minimum Parking Requirements in MX-FB),
14-16-5-5(C) (Off-street Parking), and
14-16-5-5(D) (Motorcycle Parking), except those required to satisfy the
Americans with Disabilities Act:
   1.   Downtown Center
   2.   McClellan Park Small Area
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/b37713d5e40fc82694833f290401791f80be26ac/
IMAGES/0-0-0-6765.png]
   3.   Old Town – HPO-6
5-5(B)(2)(b)   Pre-1965 Primary Buildings
Expansion of the gross floor area of an existing primary building constructed
prior to 1965 by less than 200 square feet does not trigger minimum off-street
parking requirements, except those required to satisfy the Americans with
Disabilities Act, with the following exceptions.
   1.   On lots greater than 10,000 square feet, if the expansion reduces the
number of existing parking spaces on the lot, then the off-street parking
requirements must be met pursuant to this Section
14-16-5-5.
   2.   On lots 10,000 square feet or less, if the number of existing parking
spaces on the lot is reduced by more than 20 percent, then additional parking
toward fulfilling the minimum number of off-street parking spaces required by
Table 5-5-1 and
Table 5-5-2 as adjusted by Subsection
14-16-5-5(C)(4) (Parking Adjustments and Credits) shall be provided pursuant to
Subsection
14-16-5-5(B)(1)(d), regardless of whether there is a change of use.
5-5(B)(2)(c)   Barelas Small Area
The minimum off-street parking requirement in the following mapped small area
in Barelas is 50 percent of any requirement in
Table 5-5-1. No additional parking adjustments or credits are allowed.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/b37713d5e40fc82694833f290401791f80be26ac/
IMAGES/0-0-0-6767.png]
5-5(B)(2)(d)   Nob Hill Small Area
Non-residential uses other than restaurants, bars, and nightclubs in
establishments of less than 3,000 square feet in the following mapped area do
not have to meet minimum off-street parking requirements, except those required
to satisfy the Americans with Disabilities Act.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/b37713d5e40fc82694833f290401791f80be26ac/
IMAGES/0-0-0-6769.png]
5-5(B)(3)   Existing Parking
Off-street parking or loading spaces provided prior to the effective date of
this IDO shall not be reduced or reconfigured in any way that would bring the
property or use out of compliance with this Section
14-16-5-5 or would increase the degree of any existing nonconformity with the
provisions of this Section
14-16-5-5.
5-5(B)(4)   Allowed Vehicles
The following vehicles are regulated and shall require compliance with the
standards in this Section
14-16-5-5:
5-5(B)(4)(a)   Parking of more than 2 truck tractors and 2 semitrailers for
more than 2 hours:
   1.   Allowed with the permission of the property owner on a premises with a
primary non-residential use allowed by
Table 4-2-1 in the MX-M, MX-H, NR-C, NR-BP, NR-LM, and NR-GM zone districts.
   2.   Allowed with the permission of the property owner on a premises with a
Temporary Use - Film Production permit.
5-5(B)(4)(b)   Parking of heavy vehicles for more than 2 hours:
   1.   Allowed with the permission of the property owner of a premises with a
primary non-residential use allowed by
Table 4-2-1 in the in the MX-L, MX-M, MX-H, or any Non-residential zone
district.
   2.   Allowed with the permission of the property owner on a premises with a
Temporary Use - Film Production permit.
5-5(B)(4)(c)   Parking of light vehicles for more than 2 hours: Allowed with
the permission of the property owner of a premises with a primary use allowed
by
Table 4-2-1 in any zone district.
5-5(B)(4)(d)   Parking of recreational vehicle, boat, and/or recreational
trailer for more than 2 hours:
   1.   Allowed with the permission of the property owner of a premises with a
primary residential use allowed by
Table 4-2-14 in any Residential zone district or MX-T zone district.
   2.   Allowed with the permission of the property owner of a premises with a
primary non-residential use allowed by
Table 4-2-1 in any MX or NR zone district.
   3.   The vehicle must be parked in 1 of the following areas:
      a.   Inside an enclosed structure.
      b.   Outside in a side or rear yard.
      d.   Outside in a front yard, with the unit perpendicular to the front
curb and the body of the recreational vehicle at least 11 feet from the face of
the curb.
   4.   No part of the vehicle may extend over any public sidewalk or into any
required clear sight triangle.
   5.   A vehicle may be parked anywhere on the premises during active loading
or unloading.
   6.   No parked vehicle may be used for dwelling purposes, except one
recreational vehicle may be used for dwelling purposes for a maximum of 14 days
in any calendar year on any lot.
   7.   Cooking is prohibited in any vehicle at any time.
   8.   Butane or propane fuel shall not be used in any vehicle at any time.
   9.   Use of electricity or propane fuel is allowed when necessary to prepare
a recreational vehicle for use.
   10.   A vehicle may not be permanently connected to sewer lines, water
lines, or electricity. A vehicle may be connected to electricity temporarily
for charging batteries and other purposes if the receptacle and the connection
from the recreational vehicle have been inspected and a permit issued by the
City as meeting the adopted electrical code. The individual taking out the
permit must call for an inspection of the electrical wiring when ready for
inspection, and standard inspection fees will be charged.
   11.   The vehicle may not be used for storage of goods, materials, or
equipment other than those items considered part of the unit or essential for
its immediate use.
5-5(C)   OFF-STREET PARKING
5-5(C)(1)   Calculation
Off-street parking spaces used to comply with the requirements of this Section
14-16-5-5 shall be calculated as follows.
5-5(C)(1)(a)   Parking requirements in
Table 5-5-1 are calculated as ratios to be multiplied by the gross floor area
or design capacity of the use.
5-5(C)(1)(b)   The required minimum off-street parking may be adjusted pursuant
to Subsection
14-16-5-5(C)(5) (Parking Reductions).
5-5(C)(1)(c)   When a calculation of required parking spaces results in a
fraction of a space, the number of required parking spaces shall be rounded
down to the nearest whole number.
5-5(C)(1)(d)   Calculations related to parking reductions that result in
fractions of a parking space shall be rounded to maximize the reduction and
minimize the required parking spaces.
      1.   When a calculation of a parking space reductions reduction provided
as a percentage (e.g. 30 percent transit reduction) results in a fraction of a
space, the number of parking spaces that can be reduced shall be rounded up to
the nearest whole number.
      2.   When a calculation of a parking space reduction provided as a factor
(e.g. 1.2 shared parking reduction factor) results in a fraction of a space,
the total number of required parking spaces shall be rounded down to the
nearest whole number."
5-5(C)(1)(e)   No space used for a required loading or stacking space may be
used to satisfy minimum off-street parking requirements.
5-5(C)(1)(f)   No space used for shopping corrals or for other uses that make
the space unavailable for vehicle parking may be used to satisfy minimum off-
street parking requirements.
5-5(C)(2)   Minimum Off-street Parking Table
5-5(C)(2)(a)   Unless specified otherwise in this IDO or modified by Sections
14-16-5-5(C)(3) (Amenity, Recreation, and Entertainment Uses) and
14-16-5-5(C)(5) (Parking Reductions), off-street parking spaces shall be
provided in accordance with
Table 5-5-1. For unlisted uses, required parking is determined by Planning
Director per Section
14-16-5-5(C)(4). If a conditional use is approved pursuant to Subsection
14-16-6-6(A) and the approval states a different parking requirement, then the
parking requirement in the Conditional Use Approval shall apply. See also
Subsection
14-16-5-5(C)(7) (Parking Maximums).
Table 5-5-1: Minimum Off-street Parking Requirements
UC = Urban Center; AC = Activity Center; MS = Main Street area; PT = Premium
Transit area
DU = Dwelling Unit BR = Bedroom GFA = Gross Floor Area
Design Capacity = Maximum occupancy per building or fire codes, whichever is
greater
Use IDO Parking Requirement
Table 5-5-1: Minimum Off-street Parking Requirements
UC = Urban Center; AC = Activity Center; MS = Main Street area; PT = Premium
Transit area
DU = Dwelling Unit BR = Bedroom GFA = Gross Floor Area
Design Capacity = Maximum occupancy per building or fire codes, whichever is
greater
Use                IDO Parking Requirement
PERMISSIVE PRIMARY USES
RESIDENTIAL
Household Living
Dwelling, single-  1 space / DU up to 2 BR
family detached    2 spaces / DU with 3 or more BR
Dwelling, mobile   2 spaces / mobile home
home
Dwelling, cluster  1 space / DU up to 2 BR
development        2 spaces / DU with 3 or more BR
Dwelling, cottage  1 space / DU
development        R-A and R-1: 2 additional spaces / project for visitors
Dwelling, two-
family detached    1 space / DU up to 2 BR
(duplex)           2 spaces / DU with 3 or more BR
Dwelling,
townhouse
Dwelling, live-    2 spaces / DU
work               UC-MS-PT: 1 space / DU
                   1 space / studio
Dwelling, multi-   1.2 spaces / DU with 1 BR
family             1.6 spaces / DU with 2 BR
                   1.8 spaces / DU with 3 or more BR
                   UC-MS-PT: 1 space / DU
Group Living
Assisted living    Assisted living facility: 1 space / 3 beds
facility or        Nursing home: 1 space / 5 residential care beds, but not less
nursing home       than 2 spaces
Community
residential        1 space / 4 persons design capacity
facility
Group home
Dormitory          1 space / 3 persons design capacity
CIVIC AND INSTITUTIONAL USES
Adult or child day 1 space / 400 sq. ft. GFA
care facility      UC-MS-PT: 1 space / 600 sq. ft. GFA
BioPark            Per BioPark Master Plan
Cemetery           No requirement
Community center   2 spaces / 1,000 sq. ft. GFA
or library
Correctional       3 spaces / 1,000 sq. ft. GFA
facility
Elementary or      2 spaces / classroom
middle school
Fire station or    2 spaces / 1,000 sq. ft. GFA
police station
High school        1 space / 4 seats in main auditorium or 3 spaces / classroom,
                   whichever is greater
Hospital           1 space / 3 patient beds or 4 spaces / 1,000 sq. ft. GFA,
                   whichever is greater
Museum or art      3 spaces / 1,000 sq. ft. GFA, but not less than 2 spaces
gallery            UC-MS-PT: 2 spaces / 1,000 sq. ft. GFA, but not less than 2
                   spaces
Overnight shelter
Parks and open     No requirement
space
                   1 space / 1,000 sq. ft. GFA or 1 space / 4 seats in main
Religious          assembly area, whichever is greater[1]
institution        UC-MS-PT: 1 space / 1,500 sq. ft. GFA or 1 space / 6 seats in
                   main assembly area, whichever is greater[1]
Sports field       4 spaces / 1,000 sq. ft. of site area where attendees circulate,
                   participate, or watch the recreation
University or      1 space / 500 sq. ft. GFA of office, research, and library area
college            plus 1 space / 200 sq. ft. GFA of largest auditorium space
Vocational school  3 spaces / 1,000 sq. ft. GFA
                   UC-MS-PT: 2 spaces / 1,000 sq. ft. GFA
COMMERCIAL USES
Agriculture and Animal-related
Community garden   No requirement
Equestrian         No requirement
facility
General            No requirement
agriculture
Kennel             2.5 spaces / 1,000 sq. ft. GFA
Nursery            2 spaces / 1,000 sq. ft. GFA
Veterinary
hospital           2.5 spaces / 1,000 sq. ft. GFA
Other pet services
Food, Beverage, and Indoor Entertainment
Adult
entertainment      1 space / 1,000 sq. ft. GFA or 1 space / 4 seats in main
                   assembly area, whichever is greater[1]
Auditorium or      UC-MS-PT: 1 space / 1,500 sq. ft. GFA or 1 space / 6 seats in
theater            main assembly area, whichever is greater[1]

Bar                8 spaces / 1,000 sq. ft. GFA
                   UC-MS-PT: 5 spaces / 1,000 sq. ft. GFA
Catering service   2 spaces / 1,000 sq. ft. GFA
Health club or gym 2.5 spaces / 1,000 sq. ft. GFA
Mobile food truck  5 or more mobile food trucks on-site: 2 parking spaces per
court              mobile food truck
Nightclub          5.6 spaces / 1,000 sq. ft. GFA
                   UC-MS-PT: 3.5 spaces / 1,000 sq. ft. GFA
Residential        3 spaces / 1,000 sq. ft. GFA plus requirements in
community amenity  Table 5-5-2 
Restaurant         5.6 spaces / 1,000 sq. ft. GFA
Tap room or        UC-MS-PT: 3.5 spaces / 1,000 sq. ft. GFA
tasting room
Other indoor       1 space / 3 persons design capacity, or per
entertainment      Table 5-5-2, whichever is greater
Lodging
Bed and breakfast  1 space for manager plus 1 space / guest room
Campground or
recreational       1 space / designated camping or RV spot
vehicle park
                   1 space / guest room or 1 space per 2 beds, whichever is greater
Hotel or motel     UC-MS-PT: 2 spaces / 3 guest rooms or 1 space per 4 beds,
                   whichever is greater
Motor Vehicle-related
Car wash           2 spaces / 1,000 sq. ft. GFA of retail, office, and waiting area
Heavy vehicle and
equipment sales,   1 space / 1,000 sq. ft. GFA
rental, fueling,
and repair
Light vehicle      4 spaces / 1,000 sq. ft. GFA
fueling station
Light vehicle      1 space / 1,000 sq. ft. GFA
repair
Light vehicle      2 spaces / 1,000 sq. ft. GFA
sales and rental
Outdoor vehicle
storage            No requirement
Paid parking lot
Parking structure
Offices and Services
Bank               3 spaces / 1,000 sq. ft. GFA
                   UC-MS-PT: 2 spaces / 1,000 sq. ft. GFA
Blood services     4 spaces / 1,000 sq. ft. GFA
facility           UC-MS-PT: 2.5 spaces / 1,000 sq. ft. GFA
                   1 space / 1,000 sq. ft. GFA or 1 space / 4 seats in main
Club or event      assembly area, whichever is greater[1]
facility           UC-MS-PT: 1 space / 1,500 sq. ft. GFA or 1 space / 6 seats in
                   main assembly area, whichever is greater[1]
Commercial         3 spaces / 1,000 sq. ft. GFA
services
Construction
contractor         No requirement
facility and yard
Crematorium        1 space / 1,000 sq. ft. GFA
Medical or dental  5 spaces / 1,000 sq. ft. GFA
clinic             UC-MS-PT: 3 spaces / 1,000 sq. ft. GFA
Mortuary           1 space / 1,000 sq. ft. GFA or 1 space / 4 seats in main
                   assembly area, whichever is greater[1]
Office             3.5 spaces / 1,000 sq. ft. GFA
                   UC-MS-PT: 2.5 spaces / 1,000 sq. ft. GFA
Personal and
business services,
small              4 spaces / 1,000 sq. ft. GFA
Personal and       UC-MS-PT: 2.5 spaces / 1,000 sq. ft. GFA
business services,
large
Research or        1.5 space / 1,000 sq. ft. GFA
testing facility
Self-storage       1 space / 3,000 sq. ft. GFA
Outdoor Recreation and Entertainment
Amphitheater       1 space / 4 seats in main assembly area[1]
Balloon Fiesta
Park events and    Per parking study or adopted Master Plan
activities
Drive-in theater   No requirement
Fairgrounds        4 spaces / 1,000 sq. ft. of site area where attendees circulate,
                   participate, or watch activities
Residential        3 spaces / 1,000 sq. ft. GFA plus requirements in
community amenity  Table 5-5-2
Stadium or         1 space / 4 seats in main assembly area[1]
racetrack
Other outdoor      3 spaces / 1,000 sq. ft. GFA plus requirements in
entertainment      Table 5-5-2
Retail Sales
Adult retail       4 spaces / 1,000 sq. ft. GFA
Bakery goods or    UC-MS-PT: 2.5 spaces / 1,000 sq. ft. GFA
confectionery shop
Building and home
improvement        2 spaces / 1,000 sq. ft. GFA
materials store
Cannabis retail    4 spaces / 1,000 sq. ft. GFA
                   UC-MS-PT: 2.5 spaces / 1,000 sq. ft. GFA
Farmers market     No requirement
General retail     Establishments   10,000 sq. ft. GFA: 3.5 spaces / 1,000 sq. ft.
                   GFA
                   Establishments > 10,000 sq. ft. - ?50,000 sq. ft. GFA: 3 spaces
                   / 1,000 sq. ft. GFA
Grocery store      Establishments > 50,000 sq. ft. GFA: 2.3 spaces / 1,000 sq. ft.
                   GFA
                   UC-MS-PT: 1.75 spaces / 1,000 sq. ft. GFA
Liquor retail      4 spaces / 1,000 sq. ft. GFA
Pawn shop          4 spaces / 1,000 sq. ft. GFA
Transportation
Airport            Determined by airport management
Freight terminal   No requirement
or dispatch center
Helipad            No requirement
Park-and-ride lot  No requirement
Railroad yard      No requirement
Transit facility   Determined by transportation authority
INDUSTRIAL USES
Manufacturing, Fabrication, and Assembly
Artisan            1 space / 1,000 sq. ft. GFA
manufacturing
Cannabis
cultivation
Cannabis-derived
products           1 space / 1,000 sq. ft. GFA
manufacturing
Light
manufacturing
Heavy              1 space / 5,000 sq. ft. GFA
manufacturing
Natural resource   No requirement
extraction
Special            1 space / 1,000 sq. ft. GFA
manufacturing
Telecommunications, Towers, and Utilities
Electric utility
Energy Storage
Systems (ESS)
Geothermal energy
generation
Major utility,
other              No requirement
Solar energy
generation
Wind energy
generation
Wireless
Telecommunications
Facility (WTF)
Waste and Recycling
Recycling drop-off
bin facility
Solid waste
convenience center No requirement
Salvage yard
Waste and/or
recycling transfer
station
Wholesaling and Storage
Above-ground
storage of fuels
or feed            No requirement
Outdoor storage
Warehousing
Wholesaling and
distribution       1 space / 2,000 sq. ft. GFA
center
ACCESSORY AND TEMPORARY USES
ACCESSORY USES
Agriculture sales
stand              No requirement
Animal keeping
Automated Teller   No requirement[2] 
Machine (ATM)
Drive-through or   No requirement[2]
drive-up facility
Dwelling unit,     1 space / accessory dwelling unit
accessory
Family care
facility
Family home day
care
Garden
Hobby breeder
Home occupation
Independent living 1 space / DU
facility
Mobile food truck
Mobile vending     No requirement
cart
Outdoor animal run
Outdoor dining     3 spaces / 1,000 sq. ft. GFA outdoor seating space
area               UC-AC-MS-PT: No requirement
Second kitchen in  1 additional space required
a dwelling
Other use
accessory to non-
residential
primary use        No requirement
Other use
accessory to
residential
primary use
TEMPORARY USES
Circus             4 spaces / 1,000 sq. ft. of site area where attendees circulate,
                   participate, or watch activities
Construction
staging area,      No requirement
trailer, or office
Dwelling,          1 space / DU
temporary
Fair, festival, or 4 spaces / 1,000 sq. ft. of site area where attendees circulate,
theatrical         participate, or watch activities
performance
Garage or yard
sale
Hot air balloon
takeoff/landing    No requirement
Open air market
Park-and-ride
facility,
temporary
Real estate office 2 spaces / 1,000 sq. ft. GFA of office
or model home
Safe outdoor space 2 spaces / project site
Seasonal outdoor   2 parking spaces per vendor stall
sales
[1] 30 in. pew or bench space = 1 seat. If the minimum off-street parking
requirement is for seats in a main assembly area, but the proposed main assembly
area will not have seats, then the measurement shall be 1 space / 3 persons design
capacity.
[2] Stacking space requirements in Subsection
14-16-5-5(I) apply if designed to be accessed from motor vehicles.
 
5-5(C)(3)   Amenity, Recreation, and Entertainment Uses
Uses in
Table 5-5-1 that reference
Table 5-5-2 shall provide the minimum number of off-street parking spaces
listed in
Table 5-5-2 below. If a site includes more than one use listed in
Table 5-5-1, the Planning Director may authorize a reduction in the combined
parking requirements for the individual uses based on anticipated joint use of
facilities as determined by the Planning Director.
Table 5-5-2: Minimum Off-street Parking Requirements for Amenity, Recreation,
and Entertainment Uses
Activity Number of Spaces Required
Table 5-5-2: Minimum Off-street Parking Requirements for Amenity, Recreation,
and Entertainment Uses
Activity           Number of Spaces Required
Miniature Golf     2 spaces / hole
Golf Driving Range 1 space / tee plus 1 space / 15 sq. ft. of hitting area
Golf Course        4 spaces / hole
Sports Court       3 spaces / court
Swimming Pool      1 space / 3 persons design capacity
Batting Cage       1 space / 2 batting spaces
Skate Facility     4 spaces / 1,000 sq. ft. of skating surface
Amusement Park     1 space / 300 sq. ft. GFA plus 1 space / 5,000 sq. ft. of
                   outdoor area
Unlisted Uses      As determined by Planning Director per Section
                   14-16-5-5(C)(4)
 
5-5(C)(4)   Unlisted Uses
For any use not expressly listed in
Table 5-5-1 and
Table 5-5-2, the Planning Director is authorized to do any of the following:
5-5(C)(4)(a)   Apply the minimum off-street parking space requirement specified
in Subsection
14-16-5-5(C) (Off-street Parking) for the listed use that the Planning Director
determines is most similar to the proposed use.
5-5(C)(4)(b)   Establish the minimum off-street parking space requirement by
reference to standard parking resources published by the National Parking
Association, the American Planning Association, or another recognized parking
reference resource.
5-5(C)(4)(c)   Establish the minimum off-street parking space requirement based
on local or national best practices.
5-5(C)(4)(d)   Establish the minimum off-street parking space requirement based
on a parking demand study prepared by the applicant that estimates parking
demand based on information provided by the of the National Parking
Association, the American Planning Association, or another recognized parking
reference resource, and/or the Institute of Transportation Engineers or another
recognized traffic reference resource.
5-5(C)(5)   Parking Reductions
The minimum amounts of off-street automobile parking required by
Table 5-5-1 and
Table 5-5-2 above shall be adjusted by the factors in this Subsection
14-16-5-5(C)(5). These factors may be applied individually or in combination,
with each reduction being calculated separately and subtracted from the parking
requirement calculated based on
Table 5-5-1 and
Table 5-5-2. The cumulative reduction shall not exceed 50 percent of the off-
street parking spaces required by
Table 5-5-1 and
Table 5-5-2 unless the applicant satisfies the requirements of Subsections
14-16-5-5(C)(5)(d) (Public Parking Reduction) or
14-16-5-5(C)(5)(e) (Parking Study Reduction).
5-5(C)(5)(a)   General Reductions for Centers and Corridor Areas 11
In UC-AC-EC-MS areas or in MT areas in Areas of Change, where
Table 5-5-1 and
Table 5-5-2 do not specify a different parking requirement for the relevant
Center or Corridor area, a 50 percent reduction in required off-street parking
spaces shall apply to properties in those areas.
5-5(C)(5)(b)   Shared Parking Reduction
   1.   Two (2) or more uses listed in
Table 4-2-1 may share one or more parking structures or parking lots located
pursuant to Subsection
14-16-5-5(F)(1)(a). The sharing of any required parking shall be guaranteed by
a legally binding agreement between the owner of the parking area and the owner
of the building or use that is located on a different lot and served by the
parking area. Such agreement shall address the issue of how parking will be
shared if the parties change their business hours and peak business periods.
   2.   The total off-street parking requirement for those uses may be reduced
by the factors shown in
Table 5-5-3. Off-street parking required shall be the sum of the 2 parking
requirements for the 2 uses divided by the factors for that combination of
uses. If more than 2 uses share a parking lot or structure, the required
parking shall be calculated by applying
Table 5-5-3 to the 2 uses with the largest parking requirements and then adding
the required parking for the additional uses.
Example:
Proposed project in a Main Street area includes 40 2-bedroom dwelling units,
15,000 square feet of gross floor area for retail, and 2,500 square feet of
gross floor area for a child day care facility.
Step 1: Identify basic parking requirements from
Table 5-5-1.
(40 dwelling units)*(1 space per DU) = 40 spaces.
(15,000 sq. ft.)*(2.5 spaces per 1,000 sq. ft.) = 37.5 spaces; rounded to 37.
(2,500 sq. ft.)*(1 space per 600 sq. ft.) = 4.17 spaces; rounded to 4.
Step 2: Add the 2 largest parking requirements.
40 (multi-family) + 37 (retail) = 77 spaces.
Step 3: Divide by the appropriate factor in
Table 5-5-3.
For multi-family residential and retail the factor is 1.2.
77 / 1.2 = 64.17 spaces; rounded to 64.
Step 4: Add other parking requirements without adjustment:
64 + 4 = 68 spaces, final adjusted parking requirement.?
 
Table 5-5-3: Shared Parking Reduction Factors
                                            Food, Beverage,
Use              Multi-family Civic or      and Indoor       Retail Other Non-
                 Residential  Institutional Entertainment or        residential
                                            Lodging
Multi-family     1.0
Residential
Civic or         1.1          1.0
Institutional
Food, Beverage,
and Indoor       1.1          1.2           1.0
Entertainment or
Lodging
Retail           1.2          1.3           1.3              1.0
Other Non-       1.3          1.5           1.7              1.2    1.0
residential
 
5-5(C)(5)(c)   Reduction for Proximity to a City Park or Trail
   The minimum number of off-street parking spaces required may be reduced by
10 percent if the proposed development is located within 330 feet in any
direction of any City park or trail.
5-5(C)(5)(d)   Reduction for Proximity to Transit 12
   1.   Where
Table 5-5-1 and
Table 5-5-2 do not specify a different parking requirement for PT areas, the
minimum number of off-street parking spaces required may be reduced by 60
percent if the proposed development is located within a PT area.
   2.   The minimum number of off-street parking spaces required may be reduced
by 30 percent if the proposed development is located within 1,320 feet (¼ mile)
in any direction of any transit stop or transit station with a peak service
frequency of 15 minutes or better.
   3.   The minimum number of off-street parking spaces required may be reduced
by 10 percent if the proposed development is located within 330 feet in any
direction of any transit stop or transit station with a peak service frequency
between 15 minutes and 45 minutes.
   4.   The minimum number of off-street parking spaces required for new
development or redevelopment may be reduced by 5 percent for projects that
include, at the applicant's expense, transit rider shelters of a type and
location acceptable to the City regardless of service frequency.
   5.   No development approved with any of these parking reductions shall be
considered nonconforming if the transit line, station, or stop is later
relocated or if peak service frequency decreases, resulting in a number of
parking spaces that does not meet the minimum requirements that would apply
without the Proximity to Transit reduction.
5-5(C)(5)(e)   Public Parking Reduction
The Planning Director may approve a reduction or elimination of parking
requirements if either of the following conditions applies.
   1.   The development is within and participates in a public parking district
in which individual property owners jointly provide shared parking for an area
of the city exceeding 5 acres in size.
   2.   The applicant can demonstrate that adequate spaces are available in a
nearby public parking lot or structure, and that the reduction or elimination
of parking requirements will not result in traffic congestion or on-street
parking in any nearby Residential zone district. For the purposes of this
provision, on-street parking spaces shall be considered nearby public parking
spaces.
5-5(C)(5)(f)   Parking Study Reduction
The Planning Director may approve a reduction of parking requirements if the
applicant provides a parking needs study, prepared by a consultant with
expertise in that area recognized by the City, and using parking generation
assumptions acceptable to the City, demonstrates that off-street parking at a
rate lower than that otherwise required by this Section
14-16-5-5, will adequately accommodate all anticipated demand for off-street
parking and will not result in either traffic congestion or parking congestion
in surrounding neighborhoods, and the Planning Director determines that the
parking study provides a more accurate measure of parking needs for the site
than application of the standards in this Section
14-16-5-5 that would otherwise apply.
5-5(C)(6)   Parking Credits
5-5(C)(6)(a)   Electric Vehicle Charging Station Credit
Each electric vehicle charging station with a rating of 240 volts or higher
installed in an off-street parking space shall count as 2 vehicle parking
spaces toward the satisfaction of minimum off-street parking requirements.
5-5(C)(6)(b)   Van and Car Pool Parking Credit
   1.   Each off-street parking space designated and signed for the exclusive
use of a shared carpool vehicle shall count as 4 spaces toward the satisfaction
of minimum off-street parking requirements.
   2.   Each off-street parking space designated and signed for the exclusive
use of a shared vanpool vehicle shall count as 7 spaces toward the satisfaction
of minimum off-street parking requirements.
5-5(C)(6)(c)   Shared Vehicle Program Credit
Each off-street parking space designated and signed for the exclusive use of an
existing car sharing program shall count as 4 spaces toward the satisfaction of
minimum off-street parking requirements.
5-5(C)(6)(d)   On-street Parking Credit
   1.   Any on-street parking space abutting the subject property may be
counted as 1 required off-street parking space if the street does not have
residential parking permit restrictions.
   2.   On-street parking spaces abutting the subject property shall be
considered as located on the same lot for the purposes of Subsection 5-5(F)(1)
(Location).
   3.   Each on-street parking space may only be counted once toward the
parking requirements of the abutting lot, regardless of the number of
individual buildings or tenants on the lot.
   4.   No development or use approved with an on-street parking credit shall
be considered nonconforming if the on-street parking is later removed by City
action and the remaining off-street parking does not meet the minimum off-
street parking requirements of this Section
14-16-5-5.
   5.   On-street parking spaces credited for a specific use shall not be
reserved for the exclusive use by customers, employees, or occupants of that
use, but shall be available for general public use at all times. No signage or
actions limiting general public use of on-street spaces shall be allowed.
5-5(C)(6)(e)   Off-site Parking Credit
   1.   The provision of required parking at an off-site parking area may be
counted toward required off-street parking spaces on a 1-for-1 basis and is
allowed for 100 percent of the required parking spaces, except that those
required to satisfy the Americans with Disabilities Act shall be provided on
the site of the building or use.
   2.   Off-site parking must meet the location standards in Subsection
14-16-5-5(F)(1)(a) and shall be guaranteed by a legally binding agreement
between the owner of the parking area and the owner of the building or use that
is located on a different lot and served by the parking area.
5-5(C)(7)   Parking Maximums
5-5(C)(7)(a)   In UC-MS-PT areas the maximum number of off-street parking
spaces provided shall be no more than 175 percent of the off-street parking
spaces required by
Table 2-4-13 or
Table 5-5-1, as applicable.
5-5(C)(7)(b)   In areas exempt from minimum required off-street parking spaces
pursuant to Subsection
14-16-5-5(B)(2)(a), the maximum number of off-street parking spaces provided
shall be no more than 175 percent of the off-street parking spaces that would
otherwise be required by
Table 2-4-13 or
Table 5-5-1, as applicable, for the proposed development.
5-5(C)(7)(c)   Parking maximums apply to parking lots, not to spaces provided
in parking structures, wrapped parking, or parking provided underground.
5-5(C)(7)(d)   Within 330 feet of a transit facility, excluding park-and-ride
lots and depots, the maximum number of off-street parking spaces provided shall
be no more than 100 percent of the off-street parking spaced required by
Table 2-4-13 or
Table 5-5-1, as applicable.
5-5(C)(8)   Accessible Parking
5-5(C)(8)(a)   Within the off-street parking requirements of
Table 5-5-1 and
Table 5-5-2, as adjusted by Section
14-16-5-5(C)(5) (Parking Reductions) - and not in addition to those
requirements - accessible parking shall be provided as required by the federal
Americans with Disabilities Act Accessibility Guidelines for Buildings and
Facilities (ADAAG), federal Fair Housing Act, and New Mexico Statutes
Annotated, as amended, except where off-street parking is only provided in a
residential driveway or garage.
5-5(C)(8)(b)   Accessible parking spaces shall be located, sized, and
constructed as required by the DPM.
5-5(C)(9)   Electric Vehicle Parking
5-5(C)(9)(a)   When more than 200 off-street parking spaces are constructed, at
least 5 percent of the vehicle parking spaces shall include electric vehicle
charging stations installed with a rating of 240 volts or higher.
5-5(C)(9)(b)   All new townhouse developments containing more than 6 dwelling
units shall provide all required off-street parking spaces as EV capable.
5-5(C)(9)(c)   All new multi-family residential developments containing more
than 100 dwelling units shall meet both of the following requirements.
   1.   At least 5 percent of the required off-street parking spaces shall have
electric vehicle (EV) charging stations installed with a rating of 240 volts or
higher.
   2.   At least 25 percent of the required off-street parking spaces shall be
provided as EV capable.
 
Notes
11 City Council, O-24-69, adopted January 6, 2025 and effective January 28,
   2025.
12 City Council, O-24-69, adopted January 6, 2025 and effective January 28,
   2025. Revised editorially for clarity and consistency with the IDO.
5-5(D)   MOTORCYCLE PARKING
5-5(D)(1)   In addition to parking spaces required by
Table 5-5-1, at least the minimum number of off-street parking spaces for
motorcycles, mopeds, and motor scooters listed in
Table 5-5-4 shall be provided on the site except where off-street parking is
only provided in a residential driveway or garage. The minimum number of
required motorcycle spaces shall be calculated based on the total number of
required off-street parking spaces, after any reductions, credits, and
allowances have been calculated.
Table 5-5-4: Minimum Motorcycle Parking Requirements
Required Off-street Vehicle Parking Spaces Number of Motorcycle Spaces Required
Table 5-5-4: Minimum Motorcycle Parking Requirements
Required Off-street Vehicle Parking Number of Motorcycle Spaces Required
Spaces
1-25                                1 space
26-50                               2 spaces
51-100                              3 spaces
101-150                             4 spaces
151-300                             5 spaces
301-500                             6 spaces
501-750                             7 spaces
751-1,000                           8 spaces
1,000 and above                     8 spaces plus 1 space per each additional
                                    500 spaces
 
5-5(D)(2)   All motorcycle parking areas shall be located in convenient, highly
visible, well-lighted areas that do not interfere with traffic and pedestrian
movements.
5-5(D)(3)   Motorcycle parking spaces shall be located, sized, and constructed
as required by the DPM.
5-5(E)   BICYCLE PARKING
5-5(E)(1)   Unless specified otherwise in this IDO, all development shall
provide on-site parking spaces for bicycles in accordance with
Table 5-5-5. Where the minimum bicycle parking requirement in
Table 5-5-5 is based on the number of off-street parking spaces, it shall be
calculated based on the total number of off-street parking spaces provided on
the site, regardless of the minimum requirement for off-street parking spaces.?
Table 5-5-5: Minimum Bicycle Parking Requirements
Use IDO Bicycle Parking Requirement
Table 5-5-5: Minimum Bicycle Parking Requirements
Use         IDO Bicycle Parking Requirement
Residential  5 multi-family or live-work dwelling units: 3 spaces or 10% of required off-
use         street parking spaces, whichever is greater
Dormitory   1 space / 3 persons design capacity
Elementary
or middle   5 spaces or 20% of required off-street parking spaces, whichever is greater
school
High school
Vocational  3 spaces / 1,000 sq. ft. GFA
school
Hotel or    2 spaces + 1 space / 6,000 sq. ft. GFA of conference, restaurant, bar, and
motel       banquet space
Grocery     1 space / 2,000 sq. ft. of GFA
store
Non-
residential
uses not    3 spaces or 10% of required off-street parking spaces, whichever is greater
listed in
this table
 
5-5(E)(2)   The required bicycle parking spaces in
Table 5-5-5 may be reduced by the Planning Director based on site-specific
conditions.
5-5(E)(3)   Bicycle parking spaces shall be located, sized, and constructed as
required by the DPM.
5-5(E)(4)   Bicycle parking facilities shall meet all of the following
standards.
5-5(E)(4)(a)   All bicycle parking areas shall be located in convenient, highly
visible, well-lighted areas that do not interfere with traffic and pedestrian
movements.
5-5(E)(4)(b)   Required bicycle parking spaces shall be located within 50 feet
in any direction of a primary pedestrian entrance. Sites with multiple primary
pedestrian entrances shall have distributed bicycle parking locations.
5-5(E)(4)(c)   Bicycle parking facilities shall be racks or lockers that are
installed and anchored to prevent removal except by authorized personnel.
5-5(E)(4)(d)   Racks shall be designed to support the bicycle in an upright
position and so that both wheels and 2 points of the frame may be locked
securely to it using a U-shaped lock or a chain/cable and lock.
5-5(E)(4)(e)   Where the primary use of the property includes 100 or more
dwelling units or 100,000 or more square feet of non-residential gross floor
area, at least 20 percent of required bicycle parking spaces shall be in
secured long-term storage lockers or areas.
5-5(F)   PARKING LOCATION AND DESIGN
5-5(F)(1)   Location
5-5(F)(1)(a)   All Areas
   1.   No portion of an off-street parking facility shall be located in a
public street, sidewalk, alley, or other public right-of-way.
   2.   If the total required parking exceeds 20 spaces, 25 percent of the
total required parking may be designed as compact parking spaces.
   3.   Where shopping carts are offered to customers, shopping cart corrals,
or similar cart storage facilities shall be provided and identified and cannot
occupy required parking spaces.
   4.   Except in the NR-LM and NR-GM zone districts, no required parking area
shall be used for the storage, repair, dismantling, or servicing of any
vehicles, equipment, materials, or supplies unless specified otherwise in this
IDO. The prohibition on vehicle storage does not apply to approved outdoor
storage and display related to light vehicle sales and rental or for heavy
vehicle and equipment sales, rental, fueling, and repair uses in the zone
districts where those uses are allowed.
   5.   Mixed-use and non-residential developments on lots with at least 200
feet of frontage on a public street may be designed with a small parking court
located between the front fa ade of the primary building and the front lot line
provided that:
      a.   No more than 30 percent of the total parking requirement is provided
in a parking court.
      b.   The parking court is surrounded on 2 sides by the development.
      c.   Parking courts accessed from a local street shall be no greater than
110 feet wide and 150 feet deep.
   6.   Parking in any Residential zone district or for low-density residential
development is prohibited on any portion of the front setback other than on a
driveway or drive aisle meeting the standards of this IDO and the DPM.
   7.   Required parking spaces for single-family detached dwellings, two-
family detached dwellings, and cluster development shall be located on the same
lot as the residential use they serve. On-street parking spaces abutting the
subject property shall be considered as located on the same lot for the
purposes of Subsection
14-16-5-5(C)(6)(d) (On-street Parking Credit).
   8.   Required parking spaces for townhouse or cottage development, in a
designated communal or shared parking area shall be located on a lot abutting
at least 1 of the lots served by such parking. On-street parking spaces
abutting the subject property shall be considered as located on the same lot
for the purposes of Subsection
14-16-5-5(C)(6)(d) (On-street Parking Credit).
   9.   Required parking spaces for any residential use other than those listed
in Subsections 7 and 8 above may be located in a designated communal or shared
parking area located on a lot adjacent to at least 1 of the lots served by such
parking. Shared parking is subject to requirements in Subsection
14-16-5-5(C)(5)(b) (Shared Parking Reduction). On-street parking spaces
abutting the subject property shall be considered as located on the same lot
for the purposes of Subsection
14-16-5-5(C)(6)(d) (On-street Parking Credit).
   10.   Required parking spaces for uses in the Civic and Institutional,
Commercial, and Industrial use categories may be located in a designated
parking area on a lot within 330 feet in any direction of the premises served
by such parking if they meet the standards in Subsection
14-16-5-5(C)(5)(b) (Shared Parking Reduction) or Subsection
14-16-5-5(C)(6)(e) (Off-site Parking ). (See figure below). On-street parking
spaces abutting the subject property shall be considered as located on the same
lot for the purposes of Subsection
14-16-5-5(C)(6)(d) (On-street Parking Credit).
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/b37713d5e40fc82694833f290401791f80be26ac/
IMAGES/0-0-0-6771.png]
5-5(F)(1)(b)   Downtown, Urban Centers, Main Street Areas, and Premium Transit
Areas
In addition to the provisions in Subsection (a) above, the following standards
apply in DT-UC-MS-PT areas.
   1.   Off-street parking and loading areas shall not be located between the
front fa ade of the primary building and the street unless allowed by another
provision of this IDO.
   2.   Required off-street parking spaces that are not required to comply with
the federal Americans with Disabilities Act may be located off-site in any
Mixed-use or Non-residential zone district provided that the property
containing the off-site parking is located within 660 feet in any direction of
the use for which the parking is provided (measured from the nearest points on
their lot lines), and the applicant provides documentation that the off-site
spaces will remain available to supply the required parking for the applicant's
property for a period of not less than 2 years. Off-site parking for a non-
residential use may not be provided in any Residential zone district.
   3.   Parking in the rear of a site may be accessed by alleys or by shared
access drives or easements along abutting side yards where alley access is not
feasible or alleys do not exist. Shared access easements shall not be more than
20 feet wide.
   4.   Parking shall be landscaped following the requirements in Subsection
14-16-5-6(F).
5-5(F)(2)   Design, Access, and Circulation
The following standards apply to driveways, drive aisles, carports, parking
lots, and parking structures unless specified otherwise in this IDO.
5-5(F)(2)(a)   Low-density Residential Development
The following standards apply to all low-density residential development in any
zone district except R-MC.
   1.   Driveways, parking areas, and curb cuts shall meet any applicable
requirements in Subsection
14-16-5-3(C)(3)(b) (Driveways, Drive Aisles, and Access) and the DPM.
   2.   The combined area of the front yard or street side yard that can be
improved for driveways and parking areas in the R-1, R-T, R-ML, and R-MH zone
districts shall be limited pursuant to
Table 5-5-6.
 
Table 5-5-6: Maximum Front and Street Side Yard Parking Area
Lot Size (sq. ft.) Maximum Front and Street Side Yard Parking Area
 2,200            400 sq. ft. or  85%, whichever is greater
>2,200 and <5,000  400 sq. ft. or  75%, whichever is greater
 5,000            400 sq. ft. or  60%, whichever is greater
 
   3.   Carports
      a.   Where carports are allowed pursuant to this Subsection 3, they shall
not extend into any required clear sight triangle.
      b.   In the R-A, R-1, R-T, R-ML, R-MH, and MX-T zone districts, no
carport wall may be built within the required front or side setback area unless
a Permit - Carport is approved pursuant to Subsection
14-16-6-6(G).
      c.   In the R-A, R-1, R-T, R-ML, R-MH, and MX-T zone districts, no
portion a carport structure may be located within 3 feet of a lot line.
      d.   Carports are prohibited within any front yard in the following small
areas:
         i.   Downtown Neighborhood Area - CPO-3
         ii.   Monte Vista and College View Historic District
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/b37713d5e40fc82694833f290401791f80be26ac/
IMAGES/0-0-0-6773.png]
   4.   In Centers and Corridor areas identified in the ABC Comp Plan, as
amended, tandem parking is allowed. A tandem parking space may be counted
toward off-street parking requirements provided that both spaces are leased to,
allocated to, or otherwise under the control of the same party.
5-5(F)(2)(b)   All Other Uses
   1.   Public parking areas shall be designed so that vehicles do not have to
back out of the parking area onto a public street.
   2.   The primary vehicular access to a parking area shall be from a side
street or alley, where alleys are platted and in use. If an alley is used for
parking area access, the alley area may be included in the calculation of
circulation and maneuvering areas.
   3.   Vehicular access to a primary non-residential use shall be located to
avoid the need for traffic from a collector or arterial street to use a local
street for more than 150 feet to access the lot containing the non-residential
use.
   4.   Vertically stacked tandem parking using lift equipment may be used to
meet minimum off-street parking requirements in any zone district provided that
the parking structure is attended with a lift operator at all times.
   5.   Fire and emergency access to and through parking areas shall comply
with Article 14-2 of ROA 1994 (Fire Code).
   6.   In the MX-H and MX-FB zone districts, no portion of a vehicle driving
lane shall be located in the area directly between the front fa ade of the
primary building and the front lot line.
   7.   Large Parking Lots
      a.   Parking areas, parking circulation, and access for a non-residential
development with more than 100,000 square feet of gross floor area shall be
designed based on a traffic study conducted at the applicant's expense,
covering anticipated traffic volumes, turning movements, trip generation, and
parking demand.
      b.   Each parking lot containing 100 or more parking spaces, any of which
are located more than 330 feet from the front fa ade of the building shall
contain walkways designed to allow pedestrians to access the front door of the
primary building without the need to walk through parking areas or cross
driving lanes, as required by the DPM.
      c.   Each parking lot containing 100 or more spaces shall divide the
parking lot into separate areas each containing less than 100 spaces that are
separated from each other by 1 or more of the following:
         i.   Landscaped swales or other landscaped features (which shall count
toward the amount of required site landscaping).
         ii.   Landscaped pedestrian paths not less than 20 feet wide.
         iii.   Driving lanes that do not contain parking spaces on either
side.
         iv.   Primary or accessory buildings.
         v.   A distance of at least 100 feet (measured between the closest
points in the 2 parking areas).
      d.   Each parking lot containing 200 or more spaces shall include bicycle
pathways designed to provide a clear and convenient connection across or
through vehicle circulation areas, as required by the DPM.
      e.   All parking lots shall meet the landscaping requirements in
Subsection
14-16-5-6(F) (Parking Lot Landscaping).
5-5(F)(3)   Technical Design Standards
5-5(F)(3)(a)   All parking facilities shall comply with all applicable
provisions in this IDO, including but not limited to those in Sections
14-16-5-3 (Access and Connectivity),
14-16-5-5(I) (Landscaping, Buffering, and Screening),
14-16-5-8 (Outdoor Lighting), and
14-16-5-9 (Neighborhood Edges), and applicable standards in the DPM.
5-5(F)(3)(b)   Design and construction of surface parking areas shall also
comply with all applicable standards in the DPM, including but not limited to
those standards addressing the following topics:
   1.   Grading and drainage of parking areas.
   2.   Parking surface materials, including the use of pervious paving
materials.
   3.   Allowed parking space overhangs of public rights-of-way, sidewalks,
pedestrian walkways, and landscaped areas, and the use and design of wheel
stops and barriers to prevent overhangs and damage.
   4.   Marking of parking spaces.
   5.   Parking space and aisle dimensions.
5-5(F)(4)   Historic Protection Overlay Zones
In the HPO zones, all off-street parking and loading areas and garages shall be
located toward the rear of the site to the maximum extent practicable, shall
comply with the standards in all other portions of this Subsection
14-16-5-5, and shall comply with the additional standards applicable to that
Historic Protection Overlay zone in this Subsection
14-16-5-5(F)(4). If there is a conflict between other parking standards in this
Section
14-16-5-5 and the standards in this Subsection
14-16-5-5(F)(4), the standards in this Subsection
14-16-5-5(F)(4) shall prevail.
5-5(F)(4)(a)   East Downtown - HPO-1
   1.   Parking areas shall not be located between buildings and the street.
   2.   Minimum parking lot setbacks:
      a.   From the front lot line: 30 percent of the lot depth.
      b.   From other street frontages: 10 feet.
      c.   From rear lot lines: 5 feet.
   3.   Vehicular access is allowed only from a side street or alley.
   4.   Parking structures shall have uses from Table 4?2?1 on the ground floor
along at least 50 percent of the street?facing fa ade of the parking structure.
      a.   Where ground floor uses aren't provided, opaque walls at least 3
feet high or vegetative screens at least 3 feet high at the time of planting
shall be provided.
      b.   Walls provided pursuant to Subsection a. above may be part of the
structure of the building or may be a separate wall constructed between the
building and the sidewalk.
5-5(F)(4)(b)   Eighth and Forrester - HPO-3
   1.   For single-family and two-family detached dwellings, circular driveways
are prohibited.
   2.   Tandem parking is allowed in driveways for single-family and two-family
detached dwellings provided that the tandem space is behind the required front
setback. The tandem space may be counted in the calculation of required on-site
parking driveways.
5-5(F)(4)(c)   Fourth Ward - HPO-4
   1.   Parking and loading areas shall be located to the back of the site.
   2.   Parking and loading areas shall be located to minimize visibility from
the street.
   3.   Parking on the street-facing side of corner buildings is prohibited.
5-5(F)(4)(d)   Huning Highland - HPO-5
   1.   All parking areas with 6 or more parking spaces shall be divided with
landscaped areas planted in accordance with Section
14-16-5-6 (Landscaping, Buffering, and Screening).
   2.   Parking areas shall be accessed primarily by alleys where physical
conditions permit.
   3.   Tandem parking is allowed in driveways provided that the tandem space
is behind the front setback. The tandem space may be counted in the calculation
of required on-site parking.
   4.   Automobile headlights shall be screened from adjacent lots and from the
street in accordance with Section
14-16-5-6 (Landscaping, Buffering, and Screening).
5-5(F)(4)(e)   Old Town - HPO-6
Off-street parking is not required, but any off-street parking shall comply
with all provisions of this Section
14-16-5-5, excluding those special provisions applicable to other HPO zones.
5-5(F)(4)(f)   Silver Hill - HPO-7
   1.   An alley shall serve as the primary access to parking and loading
areas.
   2.   Tandem parking is allowed in driveways provided that the tandem space
is behind the front setback. The tandem space may be counted in the calculation
of required on-site parking driveways.
   3.   Existing driveways shall not be widened or expanded, and paving in the
front setback other than for driveways is prohibited.
   4.   Parking areas with 6 or more vehicle parking spaces must include
landscaped areas internal to the parking area complying with Section
14-16-5-6 (Landscaping, Buffering, and Screening).
5-5(G)   PARKING STRUCTURE DESIGN
5-5(G)(1)   Crime Prevention Through Environmental Design (CPTED)
Above-ground parking structures or portions of structures occupied by
automobile parking shall be designed using the principles of CPTED so as to
deter crime and to facilitate security measures and shall meet all of the
following standards in addition to the other standards of this Section.
5-5(G)(2)   Parking Spaces and Circulation
Parking spaces and circulation shall meet technical standards in the DPM.
5-5(G)(3)   Building Design Standards
All parking structures that provide parking for multi-family residential
development, mixed-use development, and non-residential development shall
comply with the following standards. These standards do not apply to any garage
for low-density residential development.
5-5(G)(3)(a)   Minimum and maximum setbacks for the parking structure are the
same as those for the primary building.
5-5(G)(3)(b)   No horizontal length of any fa ade shall extend longer than 40
feet without the inclusion of architectural elements such as decorative
grillwork, louvers, translucent screens, alternating building materials,
projection of lintels, portals, and other external features to avoid visual
monotony. A change in color alone does not satisfy this requirement.
5-5(G)(3)(c)   Each street-facing fa ade shall be designed to screen all parked
vehicles to a height of 4 feet to conceal internal light sources when viewed
from the public street.
5-5(G)(3)(d)   The height of an accessory parking structure shall not exceed
the height of the primary building it serves.
5-5(G)(3)(e)   Where a parking structure is located beneath or within a primary
building, if loading docks are provided, they shall be integrated into the
parking structure.
5-5(G)(3)(f)   For parking structures that occupy 75 percent or more of the
street-facing fa ade of a building, any vehicular ingress/egress locations
shall include a planter.
5-5(G)(3)(g)   Where parking structures for multi-family residential
development abut a street, the street-facing wall shall contain at least one
opening of at least 5 feet in length for every 10 parking spaces on the ground
floor.
5-5(G)(4)   Centers, Main Street Areas, and Premium Transit Areas
In all Centers identified in the ABC Comp Plan, Main Street areas, and Premium
Transit areas, parking structures shall comply with the following standards in
addition to those listed in Subsections (1), (2), and (3) above.
5-5(G)(4)(a)   The ground floor street-facing fa ade of the parking structure
shall have a minimum ground floor clear height of 10 feet for a depth of at
least 30 feet from the property line abutting the street to allow for
conversion to a pedestrian-oriented use when the market supports that use.
5-5(G)(4)(b)   Parking structure ramps shall not be visible from any public
street.
5-5(H)   OFF-STREET LOADING
5-5(H)(1)   Number of Required Off-street Loading Spaces
All non-residential uses with 25,000 square feet or more of gross floor area
shall provide off-street loading spaces and related access and maneuvering
areas pursuant to
Table 5-5-7 and this Subsection
14-16-5-5(H).
 
Table 5-5-7: Off-street Loading Space Requirements
Zone District                         Required Loading Spaces
Non-residential Zone Districts
Uses in the Lodging, Offices and      Minimum: 1 space / 50,000 sq. ft. ground
Services, and Retail Sales categories floor GFA or part thereof
                                      Maximum: 3 spaces
                                      Minimum: 1 space / 50,000 sq. ft. ground
Other non-residential uses            floor GFA or part thereof
                                      Maximum: 2 spaces
All Other Zone Districts
All non-residential uses              Minimum: 1 space / building
 
5-5(H)(2)   Location of Off-street Loading Spaces
5-5(H)(2)(a)   Loading spaces shall be located on the same lot as the use it
serves, unless Subsection (b) below applies.
5-5(H)(2)(b)   Joint use of an off-street loading facility may be approved by
the Planning Director provided that the applicant provides documentation
demonstrating the adequacy of the facility to serve anticipated loading needs,
and an executed agreement among the owners of the buildings or uses sharing the
facility is submitted to and approved by the Planning Director.
5-5(H)(2)(c)   Where a single customer entrance to a building is provided,
customer loading areas shall not be located in front of the customer entrance
or within 15 feet in any direction of the entrance.
5-5(I)   VEHICLE STACKING AND DRIVE-THROUGH OR DRIVE-UP FACILITIES
The following standards apply to all uses that require vehicle stacking,
including but not limited to a drive-through or drive-up facility, fueling
station, or car wash, and to any facility or parking area where traffic flow is
controlled by an entry gate, ticket booth, or guard house.
5-5(I)(1)   Vehicle Stacking Spaces
5-5(I)(1)(a)   Vehicle stacking spaces shall be integrated into the site layout
and shall not interfere with site access points, access to parking or loading
spaces or areas, or internal circulation aisles and shall comply with stacking
space dimensions required by the DPM.
5-5(I)(1)(b)   Vehicle stacking spaces shall be provided pursuant to
Table 5-5-8 and other standards in this Subsection
14-16-5-5(I). Required stacking distances shall be measured from the end of the
queuing lane or property line to the point of service, as specified in
Table 5-5-8.
Table 5-5-8: Required Stacking Spaces
         Minimum Required
Activity Stacking Spaces, per Establishment[1] Measured from End of Queuing
         General UC-MS                         Lane To:
Table 5-5-8: Required Stacking Spaces
                         Minimum Required
                         Stacking Spaces, per Measured from End of
Activity                 Establishment[1]     Queuing Lane To:
                         General UC-MS

Bank or Automated Teller 4       3            Teller window / ATM
Machine (ATM)
Light Vehicle Fueling    1       1            End of fuel pump island
Station
Car Wash, Conveyor-      12      6            Outside of washing bay
operated
Car Wash, Self-service   3       2            Outside of washing bay
Restaurant               12      6            Pick-up window
Retail Store             4       3            Pick-up window
Other                    Determined by the City Engineer based on
                         anticipated demand
[1] Each stacking space shall be 20 ft. long unless specified
otherwise in the DPM or by the City Engineer.
 
5-5(I)(2)   Drive-through or Drive-up Facility Design
5-5(I)(2)(a)   Drive-through lanes adjacent to public rights-of-way shall be
screened by a landscape buffer area at least 6 feet wide containing a
vegetative screen or wall constructed of a material similar in texture,
appearance, and color to the street-facing fa ade of the primary building (but
excluding exposed concrete masonry unit (CMU) block) at least 3 but not more
than 4 feet tall. The landscape buffer area shall be provided on the public
street side.
5-5(I)(2)(b)   Audible electronic devices such as loudspeakers, automobile
service order devices, and similar instruments shall not be audible beyond the
property line of the site.
5-5(I)(2)(c)   Drive-through service windows shall be angled at least 45
degrees from parallel with any abutting lot line of a Residential zone district
so that it does not directly face the residential lot.
5-5(I)(2)(d)   In UC-MS-PT areas and the MX-H zone district, no drive-through
lanes shall be located between the front fa ade of the primary building and the
front lot line or within a required street side setback, except on lots that
meet at least 2 of the following criteria.
   1.   The lot is located on a corner.
   2.   The lot is 21,780 square feet (1/2 acre) or smaller.
   3.   The lot does not have vehicular access to the street that the front fa
ade of the primary building faces.
5-5(I)(2)(e)   In UC-MS-PT areas and the MX-H zone district, if a drive-through
lane is allowed pursuant to Subsection
14-16-5-5(I)(2)(d), the drive-through lane shall be screened pursuant to
Subsection
14-16-5-5(I)(2)(a), and enhanced pedestrian crossings, such as a raised
crosswalk, shall be required where the drive-through lane crosses a pedestrian
pathway to the primary entrance of the building.
5-5(I)(2)(f)   Drive-through service windows and any associated order board
shall be located at least 50 feet in any direction from any abutting
Residential zone district or lot containing a residential use in any Mixed-use
zone district.
5-5(I)(2)(g)   Where abutting any Residential zone district or lot containing a
residential use in any Mixed-use zone district, the edge buffering provisions
of Subsection
14-16-5-6(E) (Edge Buffer Landscaping) shall apply.
5-6   LANDSCAPING, BUFFERING, AND SCREENING
5-6(A)   PURPOSE
This Section
14-16-5-6 regulates landscaping to ensure visually attractive, sustainable
desert landscapes that aid in the creation of a quality public realm. The City
recognizes landscape as a visual component to quality environments that enhance
Albuquerque's overall appearance and provide other public benefit through:
5-6(A)(1)   Providing visual relief from urbanization.
5-6(A)(2)   Establishing a consistent, attractive streetscape that generates a
sense of continuity and a strong, positive city image.
5-6(A)(3)   Improving the aesthetic appearance of commercial, industrial, and
multi-family residential development to protect and enhance public and private
investments and property values.
5-6(A)(4)   Ensuring the use of native and/or adapted, low water-use, or xeric
species and regionally appropriate, sustainable design and maintenance
techniques to conserve water resources.
5-6(A)(5)   Contributing to the processes of air purification, oxygen
regeneration, groundwater recharge, and stormwater runoff retention. Landscape
should be designed to retain soil moisture, prevent erosion, encourage the
growth of abutting plantings, and mitigate urban heat-island effects, while
aiding in the abatement of air and water pollution, dust, noise, heat, and
glare.
5-6(A)(6)   Providing screening of some types of facilities, structures, and
equipment.
5-6(A)(7)   Providing shade and comfort for pedestrians and visually narrowing
streets, which has been shown to reduce vehicle speeding and accidents.
5-6(B)   APPLICABILITY
5-6(B)(1)   The provisions of this Section
14-16-5-6 shall apply to any of the following, unless specified otherwise this
IDO:
5-6(B)(1)(a)   Construction of a new building containing multi-family, mixed-
use, or non-residential development or an accessory parking structure.
5-6(B)(1)(b)   Construction of a new parking lot containing 20 or more spaces,
or expansion of an existing parking lot by 20 spaces or more.
5-6(B)(1)(c)   Expansion of the gross floor area of an existing building
containing multi-family, mixed-use, or non-residential development by 2,000
square feet or more, or 20 percent or more, whichever is less.
5-6(B)(1)(d)   Renovation or redevelopment of an existing building containing
multi-family, mixed-use, or non-residential development, including but not
limited to reconstruction after fire, flood, or other damage, where the value
of the renovation or redevelopment, specified by building permits, is $400,000
or more.
5-6(B)(2)   In the case of walls provided for buffering or screening
requirements with conflicting standards in this Section
14-16-5-6, Section
14-16-5-5 (Parking and Loading), and Section
14-16-5-9 (Neighborhood Edges), the highest specified wall height allowance
prevails.
5-6(B)(3)   Requirements for walls provided to meet buffering and screening
requirements prevail over maximum wall height regulations in Section
14-16-5-7 (Walls and Fences), but shall be subject to any other applicable
material and design requirements in Subsection
14-16-5-7(E) (Materials and Design).
5-6(C)   GENERAL LANDSCAPING STANDARDS
The following standards apply to all landscaping, screening, or buffering
required by this Section
14-16-5-6.
5-6(C)(1)   Landscape Plan Required
A landscape plan with designed landscaped areas shall be submitted as a part of
all development applications where landscaping, buffering, or screening is
required, unless the relevant decision-making body determines that compliance
with the provisions of this Section
14-16-5-6 can be demonstrated without the use of a landscape plan. A landscape
plan may be combined with other required application materials if compliance
with this Section
14-16-5-6 can be demonstrated in the combined materials. Landscaping shall be
maintained pursuant to the requirements of Subsection
14-16-5-13(B)(7) (Landscaping, Buffering, and Screening).
5-6(C)(2)   Minimum Landscape Area
5-6(C)(2)(a)   Except as noted in Subsection (b) below, a minimum of 15 percent
of the net lot area of each development shall contain landscaping. (See figure
below.)
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/b37713d5e40fc82694833f290401791f80be26ac/
IMAGES/0-0-0-6775.png]
5-6(C)(2)(b)   In DT-UC-MS-PT areas, a minimum of 10 percent of the net lot
area of each development shall contain landscaping. In these areas, landscaping
required to meet this requirement need not be at ground level. (See figure
below.)
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/b37713d5e40fc82694833f290401791f80be26ac/
IMAGES/0-0-0-6777.png]
5-6(C)(2)(c)   The mature realistic spread of trees and shrubs will be used to
calculate required vegetative coverage as follows.
   1.   Tree canopies and ground-level plants shall cover a minimum of 75
percent of the total landscape area as measured by canopy width or the area
beneath the dripline of the mature size of the actual vegetation. (See figure
below.)
   2.   Of the required vegetative coverage, a minimum of 25 percent shall be
provided as ground-level plants (shrubs, grasses, etc.) as measured of the
mature size of the actual vegetation. (See figure below.)
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/b37713d5e40fc82694833f290401791f80be26ac/
IMAGES/0-0-0-6779.png]
5-6(C)(2)(d)   See also Subsections
14-16-5-6(D) (Street Frontage Landscaping),
14-16-5-6(E) (Edge Buffer Landscaping), and
14-16-5-6(F) (Parking Lot Landscaping) for additional landscaping requirements.
5-6(C)(3)   Overlapping Requirements
5-6(C)(3)(a)   If areas required to be landscaped by 2 or more provisions of
this Section
14-16-5-6 overlap each other, the provision requiring the greater amount of
landscaping shall apply, and landscaping provided that meets the greater
requirement shall count toward fulfilling the overlapping requirements.
   1.   See Subsection
14-16-5-6(C)(12) (Existing Vegetation Credit).
   2.   See Subsection
14-16-5-6(C)(13) (Stormwater Management Features).
   3.   See Subsection
14-16-5-6(D) (Street Frontage Landscaping).
   4.   See Subsection
14-16-5-6(E) (Edge Buffer Landscaping).
   5.   See Subsection
14-16-5-6(F) (Parking Lot Landscaping).
5-6(C)(3)(b)   Landscaped areas may count toward satisfying usable open space
requirements specified for Residential zone districts in
Table 5-1-1 and for Mixed-use zone districts in
Table 5-1-2.
5-6(C)(3)(c)   Gardens and community gardens provided may count toward
satisfying the requirements of Subsection
14-16-5-6(C)(2) (Minimum Landscape Area).
5-6(C)(3)(d)   Any landscaping provided to meet requirements in Subsection
14-16-5-2(I) (Major Arroyo Edges) may count toward any required landscaping in
this Section
14-16-5-6 but shall be subject to Subsection
14-16-5-6(C) (General Landscaping Standards).
5-6(C)(3)(e)   Any covered or uncovered outdoor seating and gathering areas
provided to meet requirements in Subsection
14-16-5-11(E)(3) (Outdoor Seating and Gathering Areas) may count toward up to
1/3 of required landscaping in Section
14-16-5-6 but shall be subject to standards in Subsection
14-16-5-6(C) (General Landscaping Standards).
5-6(C)(4)   Required Plant Materials and Site Amenities
5-6(C)(4)(a)   A minimum of 10 species must be used in the landscaped area.
5-6(C)(4)(b)   Only trees and shrubs selected from the Official Albuquerque
Plant Palette of low water use, drought tolerant, or xeric species and shown on
a landscape plan can count toward the requirements of this Subsection
14-16-5-6(C) (General Landscaping Standards), except that, upon presentation of
evidence, the relevant decision-making body may authorize alternative species
or cultivars that meet all of the following requirements:
   1.   Meet the intended purpose of that type of landscaping.
   2.   Are not hazardous.
   3.   Are not identified as invasive on a City or State plant list.
   4.   Are not listed in the City's Weed Identification Handbook.
   5.   Are equally hardy to the New Mexico climate.
5-6(C)(4)(c)   Installation of any trees, shrubs, or other vegetation included
in a State list of prohibited or invasive species or listed as noxious weeds in
the City's Weed Identification Handbook is prohibited.
5-6(C)(4)(d)   No more than 10 percent of required landscape areas shall be
cool season grass species.
5-6(C)(4)(e)   Irrigated grass shall not be planted on slopes exceeding 1:
4 rise:run or planted in narrow or irregularly shaped areas (10 feet or less in
any dimension) in order to avoid water waste.
5-6(C)(4)(f)   Any new grass irrigated with sprinklers shall be installed at
least 3 feet in any direction from any impermeable hard surface. (A buffer
using organic mulch can be used when planting grass adjacent to impermeable
surface.)
5-6(C)(4)(g)   Landscaping abutting arroyos shall consist of native plants that
are included on the Official Albuquerque Plant Palette.
5-6(C)(4)(h)   Artificial turf/grass shall not be counted as living vegetative
material or to meet the requirements of this Subsection
14-16-5-6(C) (General Landscaping Standards).
5-6(C)(4)(i)   All vegetation shall comply with Article 9-12 and Parts 6-1-
1 and 6-6-2 of ROA 1994 (Pollen Control, Water Conservation Landscaping and
Water Waste, and Street Trees) and Section 4 of the Albuquerque Bernalillo
County Water Authority (ABCWUA) Legislation and Ordinances (Water Waste
Reduction Ordinance) as applicable.
5-6(C)(4)(j)   All required plant materials shall be free of disease and
insects and shall conform to the American Standard for Nursery Stock (ASNA) of
the American Nursery and Landscape Association.
5-6(C)(4)(k)   Shade trees planted approximately 25 feet on-center are required
along all required pedestrian walkways. If the walkway is less than 25 feet
long, at least one tree is required, or, where there is insufficient space for
a tree, a trellis of at least 8 feet high for at least 5 feet along the walkway
shall be provided.
5-6(C)(4)(l)   In DT-UC-MS areas, landscaped areas other than street frontage
shall include pedestrian furniture, pedestrian amenities, or trash receptacles
to encourage pedestrian use.
5-6(C)(4)(m)   See also Subsection
14-16-5-6(D) (Street Frontage Landscaping) for additional landscaping
requirements.
5-6(C)(5)   Soil Condition and Planting Beds
5-6(C)(5)(a)   All vegetated material required by this Section
14-16-5-6 shall be planted in uncompacted soil.
5-6(C)(5)(b)   If used, weed barriers shall be permeable to optimize stormwater
infiltration and prevent runoff.
5-6(C)(5)(c)   The use of gravel or crusher fines as ground cover is limited to
a maximum of 75 percent of any landscaped area, or 50 percent in DT-UC-MS
areas.
5-6(C)(5)(d)   A minimum depth of 3 inches of organic mulch, such as arborist
mulch or native mulch woodchips, is required in all planting areas. (See figure
below.) Decorative bark mulches, bark nuggets, and pecan shells are prohibited.
5-6(C)(5)(e)   Organic mulch is required as ground cover under trees, not
including street trees, within a 5-foot radius around the tree trunk, but not
directly against the trunk. In these areas, weed barrier fabric is prohibited.
(See figure below.)
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/b37713d5e40fc82694833f290401791f80be26ac/
IMAGES/0-0-0-6781.png]
5-6(C)(5)(f)   All landscaped areas shall be protected from vehicular
encroachment by curbs or wheel stops located 2 feet outside the landscaped
area, with openings to accommodate surface collection of stormwater runoff in
vegetated swales and stormwater infiltration areas.
5-6(C)(6)   Minimum Plant Sizes at Installation
All vegetation required by this Section
14-16-5-6 shall meet the minimum size requirements in
Table 5-6-1 unless specified otherwise in this IDO.
Table 5-6-1: Minimum Plant Sizes
Plant material type (ANSI types) Minimum size
Table 5-6-1: Minimum Plant Sizes
Plant material type (ANSI types) Minimum size
Deciduous Street Trees           2 in. caliper 6 in. above grade
Deciduous Accent Trees           1.5 in. caliper 6 in. above grade or 6 ft. in
                                 height
Evergreen Tree                   6 ft. in height
Multi-trunk Tree                 Minimum 2 trunks with a combined caliper of 2
                                 in.
Shrubs                           1 gallon container size
Ground cover and turf            Adequate to provide general ground cover
                                 within 1 growing season after planting
 
5-6(C)(7)   Plant Material Spacing
5-6(C)(7)(a)   Vegetation required by this Section
14-16-5-6 shall be located the following distances at least 3 feet in any
direction from any fire hydrants, valve vaults, hose bibs, manholes, hydrants,
and fire department connections:
   1.   Shrubs: 3 feet
   2.   Trees: 15 feet
5-6(C)(7)(b)   Where tree planting requirements are based on the length of the
street frontage, areas occupied by driveways and drive aisles shall be included
when calculating the number of trees required to be planted, and all trees that
would otherwise be required in driveways or drive aisles shall be planted in
other landscaped front yard areas.
5-6(C)(7)(c)   The Planning Director may authorize adjustments to any spacing
requirements when required due to topography, drainage, utilities or
obstructions, provided that the total amount of required landscaping is not
reduced.
5-6(C)(7)(d)   Shrubs, ornamental grasses, and groundcovers shall be spaced so
that no plant is within of the mature diameter of another plant.
5-6(C)(7)(e)   Trees shall be spaced so that no tree is within the mature
diameter of another tree.
5-6(C)(8)   Protecting Clear Sight Triangle
The clear sight triangle shall be maintained at all exits of parking areas and
street intersections.
5-6(C)(9)   Planting in or over the Public Right-of-way
5-6(C)(9)(a)   All planting of vegetated material or installation of any
landscaping, buffering, or screening material in the public right-of-way shall
require the prior approval of the City. The property owner shall be responsible
for the maintenance, repairs, or liability for all the landscaping placed in or
over the public right-of-way.
5-6(C)(9)(b)   Any trees that overhang a public sidewalk or Major Public Open
Space shall be trimmed to maintain an 8 foot clearance over the sidewalk. Any
trees that overhang a public street shall be trimmed to maintain a 9 foot
clearance over the street surface.
5-6(C)(9)(c)   Where landscaping is installed in the public right-of-way, the
applicant shall install an adequate irrigation system that meets the minimum
technical requirements In Article 6-6 of ROA 1994 (Trees, Vegetation and
Landscaping) and the DPM, with a separate meter for the landscape area in the
public right-of-way, or a separate valve(s) at the property line allowing
isolation of the irrigation to the landscape within the public right-of-way.
Drip irrigation systems and artificial turf shall not be allowed within the
public right-of-way.
5-6(C)(10)   Planting near Utilities
5-6(C)(10)(a)   Trees and shrubs shall not be planted in utility easements
unless there is no other practicable location on the lot where the landscaping
would achieve its intended purpose. The Planning Director may adjust the
location of required landscaping to avoid utility easements, provided that the
total amount of landscaping and buffering required is not reduced.
5-6(C)(10)(b)   Trees shall not be planted within 10 feet in any direction of
the centerline of a sewer or water line. (See figure below.)
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/b37713d5e40fc82694833f290401791f80be26ac/
IMAGES/0-0-0-6783.png]
5-6(C)(10)(c)   Trees or shrubs planted within utility easements shall comply
with the standards of the utility provider to minimize effects on facilities
maintenance and repair.
5-6(C)(10)(d)   If overhead distribution electric lines are present and large
trees cannot be planted due to potential interferences with the electric lines,
one ornamental tree with a mature height of 12 feet shall be planted per 20
feet of street frontage. New trees planted near electric transmission lines
shall be no taller than 25 feet in height at maturity to avoid conflicts with
existing electric facilities.
5-6(C)(10)(e)   All screening and vegetation surrounding ground-mounted
transformers and utility pads must allow 10 feet of clearance in any direction
for access and to ensure the safety of the work crews and public during
maintenance and repair.
5-6(C)(10)(f)   Trees shall not be planted near existing or proposed street
light poles.
5-6(C)(10)(g)   Standards in the DPM may apply to tree planting in or near
other utility easements, such as gas lines.
5-6(C)(11)   Parking on Landscaped Areas Prohibited
Parking of automobiles, trucks, trailers, boats, recreational vehicles, or
other motor vehicles is prohibited on any required landscape area or buffer
area.
5-6(C)(12)   Existing Vegetation Credit
5-6(C)(12)(a)   If existing non-prohibited vegetation meets the location
requirements and intent of landscaping, buffering, or screening required by
this Section
14-16-5-6, that existing vegetation may be credited toward the landscaping,
buffering, or screening materials required by this Section
14-16-5-6.
5-6(C)(12)(b)   All existing vegetation preserved and used for credit against
the requirements for new vegetation shall be protected during construction by a
fence erected one foot beyond the drip line of the vegetation.
5-6(C)(12)(c)   Trees may be credited only 1 time toward any one buffer,
screen, or other landscape requirement.
5-6(C)(12)(d)   Trees shall be credited in accordance with
Table 5-6-2.
Table 5-6-2: Credits for Preserving Trees
Table 5-6-2: Credits for Preserving Trees
Diameter at Breast Height (in.)      Number of Trees Credited
>25                                  8
>13 and <25                          6
>8 and <13                           4
>4 and <8                            2
<4                                   1
Prohibited trees 8 in. or greater[1] 1
[1] Prohibited trees are those that do not appear on the Official Albuquerque
Plant Palette and may appear on the City or State list of prohibited or
invasive species
 
5-6(C)(13)   Stormwater Management Features
5-6(C)(13)(a)   Required landscape area and buffer areas shall be designed to
serve as stormwater management areas to the maximum extent practicable and
consistent with their required locations and vegetation.
5-6(C)(13)(b)   Required landscape area and buffer areas shall be designed
pursuant to the DPM and the City Standard Specifications for Public Works
Construction.
5-6(C)(13)(c)   In the R-ML, R-MH, Mixed-use, and NR-SU zone districts, and on
lots containing multi-family dwellings or non-residential uses in the R-A, R-1,
R-MC, and R-T zone districts, surface runoff including runoff from roofs and
parking areas shall be directed into depressed water collection areas that are
located in landscape areas and that meet all applicable standards in the DPM.
5-6(C)(13)(d)   Areas created to meet stormwater management requirements of the
City or a governmental entity, and located in a required side or rear yard
buffer or in a parking lot, shall be counted toward required landscaping and
buffering in those areas, provided that the area includes vegetation required
by this Section
14-16-5-6.
5-6(C)(13)(e)   Where pedestrian walkways and multi-use trails cross required
landscape areas, permeable paving may be used and may count toward satisfying
the requirements of Subsection
14-16-5-6(C)(2) (Minimum Landscape Area).
5-6(C)(14)   Irrigation Systems
5-6(C)(14)(a)   Irrigation systems shall comply with Section 8 of the ABCWUA
Legislation and Ordinances (Cross Connection Prevention and Control Ordinance).
5-6(C)(14)(b)   All irrigation systems shall be designed to minimize the use of
water.
5-6(C)(14)(c)   All non-residential landscape irrigation shall have automatic
timers and/or programmable settings to avoid overwatering.
5-6(C)(14)(d)   The irrigation system shall not spray or irrigate impervious
surfaces, including sidewalks, driveways, drive aisles, hardscapes, or streets;
non-landscaped areas; adjacent property; or parking and loading areas.
5-6(C)(15)   Installation
5-6(C)(15)(a)   All landscaping material used to meet the requirements of this
Section
14-16-5-6 shall be installed in accordance with the planting procedures
established by the American Nursery and Landscape Association.
5-6(C)(15)(b)   All required landscaping, street trees, screening, and
buffering shall be installed prior to the issuance of a final certificate of
occupancy. If there is more than one primary building on the site, the
landscaping, screening, and buffering related to each building shall be
installed prior to the issuance of a final certificate of occupancy.
5-6(C)(15)(c)   Any damage to utility lines resulting from the negligence of
the abutting property owner or the property owner's agents or employees in the
installation and maintenance of any landscaping, screening, or buffering in a
public right-of-way, private way, or easement shall be the responsibility of
such property owner. Any damage to utility lines resulting from the growth of
plant materials that have been approved by the applicable public utility as
part of a plan for landscaping, screening, or buffering on the public right-of-
way shall be the responsibility of such public utility. If a public utility
disturbs landscaping, screening, or buffering in a public right-of-way, private
way, or easement , it shall make every reasonable effort to preserve the
landscaping materials and return them to their prior locations after the
utility work. If the plant materials die despite those efforts, it is the
obligation of the abutting property owner to replace the plant materials.
5-6(C)(15)(d)   Property owners acknowledge that approved landscaping and trees
installed and maintained in a public right-of-way, private way, or easement
abutting private properties are the property of the City, and that that the
City reserves the right to remove them if necessary for a transportation
project without compensation, but at no cost to the property owner. Landscaping
installed in an abutting public right-of-way, private way, or easement by
property owners and later removed by the City shall not impact previously
approved net lot area calculations for required landscaping.
5-6(C)(16)   Alternative Landscape Plans
The Planning Director may approve alternative landscape plans that do not meet
the specific requirements stated in this Section
14-16-5-6 if the Planning Director determines that the alternatives meet all of
the following criteria:
5-6(C)(16)(a)   Are consistent with the purposes of this Section
14-16-5-6.
5-6(C)(16)(b)   Do not include invasive vegetation included in a City or State
list of prohibited or invasive species or listed as a noxious weed in the
City's Weed Identification Handbook.
5-6(C)(16)(c)   Do not include a reduction of tree planting requirements.
5-6(C)(16)(d)   Provide equal or superior buffering of adjacent properties from
anticipated impacts of the proposed development.
5-6(C)(16)(e)   Provide equal or superior visual appearance of the property
when viewed from the street.
5-6(C)(16)(f)   Provide equal or superior carbon dioxide absorption and heat
island reductions.
5-6(D)   STREET FRONTAGE LANDSCAPING
5-6(D)(1)   Required Street Trees
5-6(D)(1)(a)   All development shall comply with Part 6-6-2 of ROA 1994 (Street
Trees) and any standards developed by the Parks and Recreation Department or
other City department to implement that Ordinance. Trees are generally required
along street frontages every 25 feet on center unless specified otherwise in
Part 6-6-2 of ROA 1994 (Street Trees). Along street frontages where street
trees are required, trees that are planted within 20 feet of the back of curb
of the abutting street may fulfill this requirement. (See figure below.)
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/b37713d5e40fc82694833f290401791f80be26ac/
IMAGES/0-0-0-6785.png]
5-6(D)(1)(b)   Only trees selected from the Official Albuquerque Plant Palette
of low water use, drought tolerant, or xeric species and shown on a landscape
plan can count toward the requirements of this Subsection
14-16-5-6(D) (Street Frontage Landscaping), except that existing trees that are
8 inch caliper or larger may count toward street tree requirements, regardless
of whether they appear on one of those lists.
5-6(D)(1)(c)   Planting areas necessary for trees in the street frontage shall
meet the minimum size requirements in
Table 5-6-3 unless specified otherwise in this IDO. Tree grates may be used in
constrained locations to accommodate pedestrian circulation, to allow the
required planting areas to have a walkable surface.
 
Table 5-6-3: Minimum Planting Area by Tree Height at Maturity
Tree Height at Maturity (ft.) Minimum Planting Area (ft.)
0-20                          4 x 4
>20-40                        5 x 5
>40                           6 x 6
 
5-6(D)(2)   Additional Frontage Landscaping
5-6(D)(2)(a)   General
For buildings with a footprint of more than 50,000 square feet in mixed-use or
non-residential development, at least 1 tree and 3 shrubs shall be planted
every 30 feet along the length of any fa ade facing a City park or trail, Major
Public Open Space, or major arroyo.
5-6(D)(2)(b)   Downtown, Urban Centers, and Main Street and Premium Transit
areas
Fifty (50) percent of any front setback area not used for pedestrian access to
the building or improved with pedestrian furniture and amenities shall be
landscaped, and no part of the front setback area surface shall be asphalt.
(See figure below.)
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/b37713d5e40fc82694833f290401791f80be26ac/
IMAGES/0-0-0-6787.png]
5-6(E)   EDGE BUFFER LANDSCAPING
5-6(E)(1)   General Requirements
5-6(E)(1)(a)   Landscaped edge buffers and/or edge buffer walls are required
between properties to mitigate the impacts of significant differences in
property use, size, or scale through standards specified in Subsections (2)
through (5) below.
5-6(E)(1)(b)   If a landscaped edge buffer is required and a wall is required
or will be provided, the wall shall be provided on the property line between
the two properties unless specified otherwise in this IDO.
5-6(E)(1)(c)   Required edge buffering is not required to be installed along
any portion of the lot line covered by an access easement between adjacent
lots, but an equivalent amount of landscaping shall be installed on remaining
portions of the side or rear lot line, as applicable.
5-6(E)(1)(d)   For the purposes of this Subsection
14-16-5-6(E), "industrial development" refers to the zone districts and uses
specified(Industrial Development Adjacent to Non-industrial Development).
5-6(E)(1)(e)   Additional buffering may be required for specific uses, pursuant
to any Use-specific Standards for those uses in Section
14-16-4-3 or Neighborhood Edge standards in Section
14-16-5-9.
 
Table 5-6-4: Edge Buffer Development Type Summary[1]
Development Development Specific  General Buffering           Buffering in
Type        Next to     Standards                             DT-UC-MS-PT
            Non-        14-16-5-6 Landscaped buffer area  25
Industrial  industrial  (E)(4)    ft.
            development
Multi-      Industrial  14-16-5-6
family      development (E)(4)
Mixed-use
or other    R-ML or R-  14-16-5-6 Landscaped buffer area  20 Wall, fence, or vegetative screen   6
non-        MH          (E)(3)    ft.                         ft.
residential
Multi-
family,     R-A, R-1,
mixed-use,  R-MC, R-T,  14-16-5-6 Landscaped buffer area  15
or other    or R-ML     (E)(2)    ft.
non-
residential
[1] See Subsections
14-16-5-6(E)(2),
14-16-5-6(E)(3), and
14-16-5-6(E)(4) for complete edge buffer standards.
 
5-6(E)(2)   Development Next to Low-density Residential Zone Districts
Where multi-family, mixed-use, or non-residential development other than
industrial development occurs on a lot abutting or across an alley from a lot
containing low-density residential development in an R-A, R-1, R-MC, R-T , or
R-ML zone district, a buffer shall be provided along the lot line, as specified
in
Table 5-6-4 and for the relevant area below.
5-6(E)(2)(a)   General
A landscaped edge buffer area shall be provided on the subject property along
the property line between the two properties.
   1.   If a wall at least 3 feet in height is provided or exists along the
property line between the 2 properties, 1 tree at least 8 feet high at the time
of planting shall be provided every for 15 feet along the wall, with spacing
designed to minimize sound and light impacts of the proposed development on the
adjacent property.
   2.   If no wall is provided or exists, 1 tree at least 6 feet tall at the
time of planting and at least 25 feet tall at maturity and 3 shrubs shall be
provided for every 25 feet along the lot line, with spacing designed to
minimize sound, light, and noise impacts.
5-6(E)(2)(b)   Downtown, Urban Centers, and Main Street and Premium Transit
Areas
   1.   A landscaped edge buffer area at least 6 feet wide shall be provided.
For buildings over 30 feet in height, the edge buffer area shall be at least 10
feet wide.
   2.   An opaque wall, fence, or vegetative screen at least 6 feet tall shall
be provided at the property line between the two properties, and all of the
following requirements shall be met.
      a.   One (1) tree at least 8 feet high at the time of planting shall be
provided every for 15 feet along the wall, with spacing designed to minimize
sound and light impacts of the proposed development on the adjacent property.
      b.   The side facing the low-density residential development shall be at
least as finished in appearance as the side facing the multi-family, mixed-use,
or non-residential development.
      c.   If there is an existing wall between the two properties, it may
count toward satisfying the requirements of Subsection
14-16-5-6(E)(2)(b)2 if it meets, or is improved to meet, the height and design
standards above.
5-6(E)(3)   Development Next to a Multi-family Residential Zone District
Where mixed-use or non-residential development other than industrial
development occurs on any lot abutting or across an alley from a lot in the R-
ML or R-MH zone districts with townhouse development or multi-family
residential development, a buffer shall be provided along the lot line, as
specified in
Table 5-6-4 and for the relevant area below.
5-6(E)(3)(a)   General
An edge buffer area shall be provided on the subject property along the
property line between the two properties.
   1.   If a wall at least 3 feet in height is provided or exists along the
property line between the two properties, 1 tree at least 8 feet high at the
time of planting shall be provided every for 15 feet along the wall, with
spacing designed to minimize sound and light impacts of the proposed
development on the adjacent property.
   2.   If no wall is provided or exists, 1 tree at least 6 feet tall at the
time of planting and at least 25 feet tall at maturity and 3 shrubs shall be
provided for every 25 feet along the lot line, with spacing designed to
minimize sound, light, and noise impacts.
5-6(E)(3)(b)   Downtown, Urban Centers, and Main Street and Premium Transit
Areas
   1.   An opaque wall, fence, or vegetative screen at least 6 feet tall shall
be provided at the property line between the two properties, and both of the
following requirements shall be met.
      a.   One (1) tree at least 8 feet high at the time of planting shall be
provided every for 15 feet along the wall, with spacing designed to minimize
sound and light impacts of the proposed development on the adjacent property.
      b.   The side facing the multi-family development shall be at least as
finished in appearance as the side facing the mixed-use, or non-residential
development.
   2.   If there is an existing wall between the two properties, it may count
toward satisfying the requirements of Subsection
14-16-5-6(E)(3)(b)1 if it meets, or is improved to meet, the height and design
standards above.
5-6(E)(4)   Industrial Development Adjacent to Non-industrial Development
5-6(E)(4)(a)   Applicability
An edge buffer shall be provided as specified in
Table 5-6-4 and for the relevant areas in Subsections (b) and (c) below in all
of the following locations:
   1.   Where a lot with industrial zoning or development is adjacent to a lot
with non-industrial zoning or development, including, but not limited to both
of the following locations:
      a.   Where any development in an NR-LM or NR-GM zone district is adjacent
to any lot that is not in an NR-LM or NR-GM zone district.
      b.   Where light manufacturing; heavy manufacturing; special
manufacturing; natural resource extraction; non-linear portions of an electric
utility, drainage facility, or other major utility; or any primary use in the
Waste and Recycling category in Table 4-2-1 is developed on a lot abutting a
vacant lot or a lot with a use other than one of these specified uses.
   2.   Where multi-family residential development is adjacent to a lot with
industrial development.
5-6(E)(4)(b)   General
A landscaped edge buffer area shall be provided on the subject property along
the property line between the two adjacent properties. For drainage facilities,
a landscaped edge buffer area at least 15 feet wide shall be provided on the
subject property along the property line between the two adjacent properties,
unless a smaller edge buffer area is approved by the City Engineer as necessary
on a particular lot.
   1.   If a wall at least 3 feet in height is provided or exists along the
landscaped edge buffer area, 1 of the following requirements shall be met.
      a.   If the wall is located on the property line, 1 tree at least 8 feet
high at the time of planting shall be provided every for 15 feet along the
wall, with spacing designed to minimize sound and light impacts of the proposed
development on the adjacent property.
      b.   Where the edge buffer area is across the street from the lot with
non-industrial zoning or development, the wall may be set back from the
property line if both of the following requirements are met.
         i.   Landscaping that meets the requirements in Subsection 2. below
shall be provided between the wall and the street.
         ii.   The landscaping shall be maintained by the owner of the subject
property.
   2.   If no wall is provided or exists, 1 tree at least 8 feet high at the
time of planting and 5 shrubs shall be provided for every 20 feet along the lot
line, with spacing designed to minimize sound and light impacts of the proposed
development on the adjacent property.
5-6(E)(4)(c)   Downtown, Urban Centers, and Main Street and Premium Transit
Areas
An opaque wall or fence at least 6 feet tall shall be provided on the subject
property along any lot line abutting or across an alley from the non-industrial
development.
   1.   One (1) tree at least 8 feet high at the time of planting shall be
provided every for 15 feet along the wall, with spacing designed to minimize
sound and light impacts of the proposed development on the adjacent property.
   2.   The side of the wall facing the non-industrial development shall be at
least as finished in appearance as the side facing the industrial use.
   3.   If there is an existing wall between the two properties, it may count
toward satisfying the requirements of Subsection
14-16-5-6(E)(4)(c) if it meets, or is improved to meet, the height and design
standards above.
5-6(E)(5)   Area of Change Next to Area of Consistenc
Except in DT-UC-MS-PT areas, where a premises partially or completely in an
Area of Change is abutting a premises partially or completely in an Area of
Consistency (per City Development Areas in the ABC Comp Plan, as amended), the
following standards shall apply on the lot(s) abutting the premises partially
or completely in the Area of Consistency, regardless of the proposed land use
on that lot or premises, unless specified otherwise in this IDO.
 
Table 5-6-5: Edge Buffer Development Area Summary[1]
Lot in Area of   Specific        General Buffering             Buffering in DT-
Change Next to   Standards                                     UC-MS-PT
Area of
Consistency in   14-16-5-6(E)(2)
R-A, R-1, R-MC,
or R-T
Area of                          Landscaped buffer area   15
Consistency in   14-16-5-6(E)(3) ft.                           Not required
R-ML or R-MH
Area of
Consistency in   14-16-5-6(E)(4)
Mixed-use, NR-C,
or NR-PO
[1] See subsections
14-16-5-6(E)(5)(a),
14-16-5-6(E)(5)(b), and
14-16-5-6(E)(5)(c) for the complete buffer standards for Development Areas.
 
5-6(E)(5)(a)   If the lot in the Area of Consistency is in an R-A, R-1, R-MC,
or R-T zone district, the requirements of Subsections
14-16-5-6(E)(1) and
14-16-5-6(E)(2) shall apply.
5-6(E)(5)(b)   If the lot in the Area of Consistency is in an R-ML or R-MH zone
district, the requirements of Subsections
14-16-5-6(E)(1) and
14-16-5-6(E)(3) shall apply.
5-6(E)(5)(c)   If the lot in the Area of Consistency is in any Mixed-use, NR-C,
or NR-PO zone district, the requirements of Subsections
14-16-5-6(E)(1) and
14-16-5-6(E)(4) shall apply.
5-6(F)   PARKING LOT LANDSCAPING
5-6(F)(1)   Parking Lot Edges
5-6(F)(1)(a)   Landscape buffer areas are required to separate off-street
parking and circulation areas from front, side, and rear boundaries of
premises.
5-6(F)(1)(b)   Where a parking lot is abutting an R-A, R-1, R-MC, or R-T zone
district, provisions related to parking area in Subsection
14-16-5-9(D) (Parking, Drive-through Or Drive-up Facilities, and Loading) shall
apply.
5-6(F)(1)(c)   Where development is coordinated on 2 or more abutting sites, or
where multiple parking areas are located on a single lot, or on planned
development areas controlled by Site Plans, these requirements shall be based
on the entire development area unless otherwise approved by the decision-making
body.
5-6(F)(1)(d)   Landscape buffers may be crossed by drive aisles connecting to
abutting land.
5-6(F)(1)(e)   No parking is allowed within a required landscape buffer area.
5-6(F)(1)(f)   Landscape approved within the abutting public right-of-way or
private way may be counted toward this requirement if there is no existing or
planned public sidewalk between such landscape and the premises, but in no case
shall the width of the on-site landscape buffer be less than 5 feet.
5-6(F)(1)(g)   The landscape area may be reduced by up to 25 percent if the
surface of the parking or vehicle circulation area is of a permeable material
with approval from the Planning Director.
5-6(F)(1)(h)   Where walls are required, they shall integrate with building
materials and colors.
5-6(F)(1)(i)   Landscape buffers are required in the following locations, with
minimum widths and design requirements as specified below.
   1.   Front Lot Edge
      a.   General
Any parking lot located within 30 feet of the front lot line shall be screened
from the street either by a masonry wall constructed of a material similar in
texture, appearance, and color to the street-facing fa ade of the primary
building (but excluding exposed CMU block) at least 3 but not more than 4 feet
in height, or by a landscape buffer at least 10 feet in width with a continuous
line of evergreen shrubbery 3 feet in height, or by other means that the
Planning Director determines provides equal or better screening of the
headlights of parked vehicles.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/b37713d5e40fc82694833f290401791f80be26ac/
IMAGES/0-0-0-6789.png]
      b.   Downtown, Urban Centers, and Main Street and Premium Transit Areas
         Any parking lot located within 30 feet of the front lot line shall be
screened from the street by a masonry wall as described in Subsection a above.
Openings in the masonry wall no more than 4 feet wide to allow passage of
bicycles and pedestrians from the street into the parking lot are allowed.
   2.   Side and Rear Lot Edges
      Where no side or rear lot line buffer is required by Subsection
14-16-5-6(E) above, the following standards apply where the side or rear lot
line abuts a public street.
      a.   General
         Any parking lot located within 20 feet of a side or rear lot line
shall be screened by a landscaped buffer area at least 6 feet wide containing
at least 2 trees and 6 shrubs per 25 feet of the parking lot edge closest to
the lot line, or by other means that the Planning Director determines provides
equal or better screening of the headlights of parked vehicles.
      b.   Downtown, Urban Centers, and Main Street and Premium Transit Areas
         Any parking lot located within 20 feet of a side or rear lot line
shall be screened by a landscaped buffer at least 5 feet wide containing one
tree and 3 shrubs per 25 feet of the parking lot edge closest to the lot line,
or by a masonry wall constructed of a material other than cement block, at
least 3 but not more than 4 feet tall.
5-6(F)(2)   Parking Lot Interior
5-6(F)(2)(a)   General
At least 10 percent of the parking lot area of lots containing 50 or fewer
spaces, and at least 15 percent of the parking lot area of lots containing 50
or more spaces, shall be landscaped.
5-6(F)(2)(b)   Downtown, Urban Centers, and Main Street and Premium Transit
Areas
At least 5 percent of the parking lot area of lots containing 50 or fewer
spaces, and at least 10 percent of the parking lot area of lots containing 50
or more spaces, shall be landscaped.
5-6(F)(2)(c)   Tree Requirements
   1.   One (1) tree is required per 10 parking spaces.
   2.   No parking space may be more than 100 feet in any direction from a tree
trunk.
   3.   At least 75 percent of the required parking area trees shall be
deciduous canopy-type shade trees, capable of achieving a mature canopy
diameter of at least 25 feet.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/b37713d5e40fc82694833f290401791f80be26ac/
IMAGES/0-0-0-6791.png]
5-6(F)(2)(d)   Location and Dimension of Landscaped Areas
   1.   The minimum size of tree planters within off-street parking areas shall
be 60 square feet per tree. This requirement may be reduced to 36 square feet
if the surface of a parking or vehicle circulation area abutting the tree
planter is of a permeable material and, combined with the tree planter area,
meets the 60 square foot per tree requirement.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/b37713d5e40fc82694833f290401791f80be26ac/
IMAGES/0-0-0-6793.png]
   2.   In parking areas of 100 spaces or more, the ends of parking aisles
shall be defined as landscaped islands no narrower than 8 feet in any
dimension.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/b37713d5e40fc82694833f290401791f80be26ac/
IMAGES/0-0-0-6795.png]
5-6(F)(3)   Abutting Arroyos or Major Public Open Space
When a parking lot is located abutting a major arroyo or any Major Public Open
Space, screening shall be provided via 1 of the following options:
5-6(F)(3)(a)   Walls or fencing a minimum of 6 feet high; fencing requires
landscaping with evergreen shrubs or vines to form a screen at least 75 percent
opaque.
5-6(F)(3)(b)   Shrubs and trees sufficient to act as a screen at least 4 feet
high and at least 75 percent opaque.
5-6(G)   SCREENING OF MECHANICAL EQUIPMENT AND SUPPORT AREAS
Site areas listed below shall comply with the following standards. In any case
where a decorative wall or fence is required or installed, chain link fencing
(with or without slats) shall not satisfy the requirement.
5-6(G)(1)   Roof-mounted Mechanical Equipment
5-6(G)(1)(a)   No screening is required for rooftop solar energy equipment.
5-6(G)(1)(b)   In any R-ML, R-MH, Mixed-use, NR-C, NR-BP, NR-SU, or NR-PO zone
district, roof-mounted mechanical equipment shall be screened by a parapet wall
or similar feature that is an integral part of the building's architectural
design. The parapet wall or similar feature shall be sufficient to screen the
mechanical equipment from all sides when viewed from 5 feet above ground level
at any property line abutting a City park or trail, Major Public Open Space,
major arroyo, or public street classified as a collector, arterial, or
interstate highway. (See figure below.)
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/b37713d5e40fc82694833f290401791f80be26ac/
IMAGES/0-0-0-6797.png]
5-6(G)(2)   Ground-mounted Mechanical Equipment
5-6(G)(2)(a)   R-ML, R-MH, and Mixed-use Zone Districts
Outdoor ground-mounted mechanical equipment shall be located where it is not
visible from streets, City parks or trails, Major Public Open Space, or major
arroyos adjacent to the lot or from adjacent properties to the maximum extent
practicable.
5-6(G)(2)(b)   NR-C, NR-BP, NR-SU, and NR-PO Zone Districts
Outdoor ground-mounted mechanical equipment shall be located where it is not
visible from streets, City parks or trails, Major Public Open Space, or major
arroyos adjacent to the lot or from adjacent properties with low-density
residential development to the maximum extent practicable.
5-6(G)(2)(c)   Screening
Where it is not practicable to locate ground-mounted mechanical equipment
pursuant to Subsections (a) and (b) above, such equipment shall be screened
from view by an opaque decorative wall or fence or a vegetative screen.
   1.   The wall or fence shall be of a height equal to or greater than the
height of the mechanical equipment being screened and shall incorporate at
least 1 of the primary materials and colors of the nearest wall of the primary
building (but excluding exposed CMU block).
   2.   The vegetative screen shall be planted along the full length of the
equipment to be screened and shall be of a height equal to or greater than the
height of the equipment to be screened at the time of planting.
   3.   No screening of ground-mounted solar energy equipment that would reduce
the efficiency or effectiveness of the solar energy equipment is required.
5-6(G)(2)(d)   Safety Exemption
Notwithstanding Subsections (a), (b), and (c) above, screening is not required
if it would violate any State or federal safety rules.
5-6(G)(3)   Loading, Service, and Refuse Areas
5-6(G)(3)(a)   Covering Waste Containers
All waste containers and dumpsters shall be in a roofed enclosure or be
equipped with and use a lid covering and shall be designed so that stormwater
runoff does not reach storm drain inlets.
5-6(G)(3)(b)   Development Abutting Low-density Residential
Where a lot is abutting low-density residential development or lots zoned R-1,
R-MC, or R-T, dumpsters for solid waste, but not for recycling, are prohibited
in any required setback or landscape buffer area that is contiguous with the
low-density residential development.
5-6(G)(3)(c)   R-ML, R-MH, and Mixed-use Zone Districts
Outdoor loading, service, and refuse areas shall be integrated into the
building design if possible, or shall be located where they are not visible
from streets, City parks or trails, Major Public Open Space, or major arroyos
adjacent to the lot or from adjacent properties to the maximum extent
practicable.
5-6(G)(3)(d)   NR-C, NR-BP, NR-SU, and NR-PO Zone Districts
Outdoor loading, service, and refuse areas shall be integrated into the
building design if possible, or shall be located where they are not visible
from streets, City parks, Major Public Open Space, trails, or major arroyos
adjacent to the lot or from adjacent properties with low-density residential
development to the maximum extent practicable. (See figure below.)
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/b37713d5e40fc82694833f290401791f80be26ac/
IMAGES/0-0-0-6799.png]
5-6(G)(3)(e)   Screening
Where it is not practicable to locate the loading, service, and refuse areas
pursuant to Subsections (c) and (d) above, they shall be screened from view by
an opaque decorative wall or fence at least 6 feet tall but not more than 8
feet tall that incorporates at least 1 of the primary materials and colors of
the nearest wall of the primary building (but excluding exposed CMU block) or a
vegetative screen planted along the full length of the area to be screened and
at least 8 feet high at the time of planting. (See figures below.)
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/b37713d5e40fc82694833f290401791f80be26ac/
IMAGES/0-0-0-6801.png]
5-6(G)(4)   Outdoor Storage Areas for Vehicles, Equipment, and Materials
Areas where motor vehicles, including but not limited to automobiles, trucks,
trailers, recreational vehicles, boats, equipment, and/or materials, are stored
outside and are typically not moved within a consecutive 7-day period, and that
are adjacent to any Residential zone district, a lot containing a residential
use in any Mixed-use zone district, a City park, Major Public Open Space,
public trail, or major arroyo, shall be screened from view by a vegetative
screen or by an opaque decorative wall or fence at least 7 feet and no more
than 8 feet high that incorporates at least 1 of the primary materials and
colors of the nearest wall of the primary building (but excluding exposed CMU
block).
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/b37713d5e40fc82694833f290401791f80be26ac/
IMAGES/0-0-0-6803.png]
5-6(G)(5)   Outdoor Activity
High-temperature processes (such as combustion or welding), shall be screened
from view by an opaque decorative wall or fence at least 6 feet tall but not
more than 8 feet tall that incorporates at least 1 of the primary materials and
colors of the nearest wall of the primary building (but excluding exposed CMU
block) or a vegetative screen planted along the full length of the area to be
screened and at least 8 feet high at the time of planting.
5-6(G)(6)   Satellite Dishes
For ground-mounted satellite dishes that are larger than 3 feet in diameter in
any Residential zone district, or that are larger than 6 feet in diameter in
any Mixed-use or Non-residential zone district, the base of the dish shall be
screened from view from a City park, Major Public Open Space, public trail, or
major arroyo by a vegetative screen or an opaque wall or fence constructed of 1
of the primary materials used on the nearest fa ade of the primary building on
the lot (but excluding exposed CMU block), to the maximum extent possible and
consistent with the effective operation of the satellite dish.
5-7   WALLS AND FENCES
5-7(A)   PURPOSE
This Section
14-16-5-7 regulates walls, fences, retaining walls, and vertical combinations
of those items (collectively referred to in this section as "the wall" or
"walls") in order to enhance the visual appearance of development in the city;
establish a consistent, attractive streetscape; ensure visual compatibility
with public spaces such as City parks and trails, major arroyos, and Major
Public Open Space; and promote street and neighborhood character.
5-7(B)   APPLICABILITY
5-7(B)(1)   The Standards in this Section
14-16-5-7 apply to new walls and replacement or repair of existing walls,
unless modified elsewhere in this IDO.
5-7(B)(2)   A wall shall be erected only after obtaining a permit, pursuant to
the provisions in Subsections
14-16-6-5(F) (Permit - Wall or Fence - Minor) or
14-16-6-6(H) (Permit - Wall or Fence - Major), as applicable.
5-7(B)(3)   Where wall requirements for buffering and screening purposes in
Section
14-16-5-5 (Parking and Loading), Subsection
14-16-5-6(E) (Edge Buffer Landscaping), Subsection
14-16-5-6(F) (Parking Lot Landscaping), Subsection
14-16-5-6(G) (Screening of Mechanical Equipment and Support Areas), or Section
14-16-5-9 (Neighborhood Edges) are higher than allowed by maximum wall heights
in Subsection
14-16-5-7(D), the taller screening wall requirement shall prevail, but the wall
shall be subject to any other applicable standards in this Section
14-16-5-7.
5-7(B)(4)   Walls adjacent to major arroyos and Major Public Open Space shall
be required to follow additional standards in this Section
14-16-5-7 as well as any applicable standards in Subsections
14-16-5-2(I) (Major Arroyo Standards),
14-16-5-2(G) (Irrigation Facility (Acequia) Standards), and
14-16-5-2(J) (Major Public Open Space Edges).
5-7(B)(5)   Retaining walls shall be required to follow standards in
Subsections
14-16-5-7(B)(8) and
14-16-5-7(F).
5-7(B)(6)   Access to bikeways shall be added pursuant to Section
14-16-5-3(C)(5) (Bicycle Circulation).
5-7(C)   WALL LOCATION
5-7(C)(1)   Walls may be constructed anywhere on a lot, including but not
limited to any front, side, or rear setback area, unless otherwise prohibited
by this IDO, by with Articles 14-1, 14-2, and 14-3 of ROA 1994 (Uniform
Administrative Code and Technical Codes, Fire Code, and Uniform Housing Code),
or by clear sight triangle requirements.
5-7(C)(2)   Walls may be constructed without any setback from a property line,
unless otherwise prohibited by this IDO, by Articles 14-1, 14-2, and 14-3 of
ROA 1994 (Uniform Administrative Code and Technical Codes, Fire Code, and
Uniform Housing Code), or by the DPM, including but not limited to, clear sight
triangle requirements or standards for alignments and easements. Walls may not
encroach into any public right-of-way without the prior written approval from
the City Engineer and may not encroach onto any adjacent property without prior
written approval of that property owner.
5-7(D)   MAXIMUM WALL HEIGHT
5-7(D)(1)   Maximum Wall Height Table
5-7(D)(1)(a)   Unless specified otherwise in Subsection
14-16-5-7(D)(3) (Exceptions to Maximum Wall Height) or elsewhere in this IDO,
walls shall comply with the height standards in
Table 5-7-1.
5-7(D)(1)(b)   Requests for walls taller than allowed by
Table 5-7-1 and Subsection
14-16-5-7(D)(3) (Exceptions to Maximum Wall Height) or elsewhere in this IDO
(i.e., requirements for buffering or screening purposes in Section
14-16-5-5 (Parking and Loading), Subsection
14-16-5-6(E) (Edge Buffer Landscaping), Subsection
14-16-5-6(F) (Parking Lot Landscaping), Subsection
14-16-5-6(G) (Screening of Mechanical Equipment and Support Areas), or Section
14-16-5-9 (Neighborhood Edges)) must obtain a Variance approval and shall meet
the additional requirements in Subsection
14-16-5-7(E)(2) (Articulation and Alignment).
   1.   A Variance to walls associated with a Site Plan - EPC are pursuant to
Subsection
14-16-6-6(H) (Variance - EPC).
   2.   All other Variance requests for wall standards are pursuant to
Subsection
14-16-6-6(O) (Variance - ZHE).
Table 5-7-1: Maximum Wall Height
Zone Category Residential Mixed-use Non-residential  Non-residential  See also:
                                    (NR-C, NR-BP)[1] (NR-LM, NR-GM)
Table 5-7-1: Maximum Wall Height
                                                                 Non-        Non-
Zone Category                           Residential Mixed-use    residential residential See
                                                                 (NR-C, NR-  (NR-LM, NR- also:
                                                                 BP)[1]      GM)
Standard Wall Height
Wall in the front yard or street side                                                    5-7
yard[2][3][4][5]                        3 ft.       3 ft.        3 ft.       6 ft.       (D)
                                                                                         (2)
Wall in other locations on the lot[6]                                                    5-7
[7]                                     8 ft.       8 ft.        8 ft.       10 ft.      (D)
                                                                                         (2)
Corner Lot Abutting Residential Zone District
Any portion of a wall in the rear yard abutting the front yard of a Residential zone district.
                                                                                         5-7
                                                                                         (D)
<10 ft. from the lot line abutting the                                                   (2)
street[2]                               3 ft.       3 ft.        3 ft.       6 ft.       5-7
                                                                                         (D)
                                                                                         (3)
                                                                                         (a)
                                                    8 ft.                                5-7
 10 ft. from the lot line abutting the 6 ft.       Low-density  8 ft.       8 ft.       (D)
street                                              residential:                         (2)
                                                    6 ft.
Walls Abutting Major Arroyos and Major Public Open Space
                                                                                         5-7
                                                                                         (D)
Wall in a rear or interior side yard    6 ft.       8 ft.        8 ft.       8 ft.       (2)
abutting a major arroyo                                                                  5-7
                                                                                         (E)
                                                                                         (4)
                                                                                         5-7
                                                                                         (D)
Wall in a rear or interior side yard    6 ft.       6 ft.        6 ft.       10 ft.      (2)
abutting Major Public Open Space                                                         5-7
                                                                                         (E)
                                                                                         (4)
[1] In the NR-BP zone district, wall heights shall be specified in the Master Development
Plan. If no Master Development Plan exists or if no wall heights are specified in the Master
Development Plan, then the wall height requirements in this table apply.
[2] Taller walls may be approved for low-density residential development pursuant to
Subsections
14-16-5-7(D)(3)(a).
[3] Taller walls may be approved for multi-family residential development pursuant to
Subsection
14-16-5-7(D)(3)(b).
[4] Taller walls may be approved in any Mixed-use zone district pursuant to Subsection
14-16-5-7(D)(3)(c).
[5] Taller walls may be approved in any NR-C or NR-BP zone district pursuant to Subsection
14-16-5-7(D)(3)(d).
[6] Portions of walls in the rear yard of a corner lot abutting the front yard of a
Residential zone district are treated differently, with provisions later in this table.
[7] Where the rear yard of a through lot abuts at least 1 lot with any residential development
that faces the second public street, the rear and side walls shall be subject to the same
height restrictions applicable within the required front setback of the abutting residential
property.
 
5-7(D)(2)   Wall Illustrations
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/b37713d5e40fc82694833f290401791f80be26ac/
IMAGES/0-0-0-6805.png]
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/b37713d5e40fc82694833f290401791f80be26ac/
IMAGES/0-0-0-6807.png]
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/b37713d5e40fc82694833f290401791f80be26ac/
IMAGES/0-0-0-6809.png]
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/b37713d5e40fc82694833f290401791f80be26ac/
IMAGES/0-0-0-6811.png]
5-7(D)(3)   Exceptions to Maximum Wall Height
5-7(D)(3)(a)   Low-density Residential Development
   1.   For low-density residential development, the maximum height of a wall
in the street side yard is 6 feet if that yard abuts a street classified as a
collector, arterial, or interstate highway and if the wall is set back at least
5 feet from the property line. (See figure below.)
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/b37713d5e40fc82694833f290401791f80be26ac/
IMAGES/0-0-0-6813.png]
   2.   For low-density residential development in or abutting a Residential
zone district where wall height in any front or street side yard is restricted
to 3 feet by
Table 5-7-1, a request for a taller wall that meets the height and location
standards in
Table 5-7-2 shall require Permit - Wall or Fence - Major pursuant to Subsection
14-16-6-6(H), except where a taller wall is prohibited pursuant to Subsection
(3) below.
Table 5-7-2: Options for a Taller Front or Side Yard Wall[1]
Wall Type and Location Maximum Wall Height Illustration
Table 5-7-2: Options for a Taller Front or Side Yard Wall[1]
                                                                              Maximum
Wall Type and Location                                                        Wall    Illustration
                                                                              Height
View Fencing
View fencing at most 50 percent opaque may be added above 3 ft. to increase the total height of
the wall as follows:
<10 ft. from lot line abutting the street                                     5 ft.   5-7(D)(3)
                                                                                      (a)2.a
 10 ft. from lot line abutting the street                                    6 ft.   5-7(D)(3)
                                                                                      (a)2.a
Courtyard Walls
 10 ft. from lot line abutting the street or edge of the sidewalk closest to 6 ft.   5-7(D)(3)
the primary building, whichever is more restrictive                                   (a)2.b
Corner Lots
On a corner lot where the rear yard abuts the front yard of a residentially zoned lot, a taller
wall enclosing the rear yard may be approved as follows:
<10 ft. from the lot line abutting the street                                 5 ft.   5-7(D)(2)
[1] The maximum wall heights in this table require an approval pursuant to the standards in
Subsections
14-16-5-7(D)(3)(a)
2 and
14-16-6-6(H) (Permit Wall or Fence Major).
 
      a.   Illustration for View Fencing
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/b37713d5e40fc82694833f290401791f80be26ac/
IMAGES/0-0-0-6815.png]
      b.   Illustration for Courtyard Wall
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/b37713d5e40fc82694833f290401791f80be26ac/
IMAGES/0-0-0-6817.png]
   3.   On lots with low-density residential development in the following small
areas, walls greater than 3 feet in height are prohibited in any front or
street side yard; no Permit - Wall or Fence - Major or Variance to this
provision is allowed in the following small areas:
      a.   Downtown Neighborhood Area - CPO-3
      b.   Monte Vista and College View Historic District
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/b37713d5e40fc82694833f290401791f80be26ac/
IMAGES/0-0-0-6819.png]
5-7(D)(3)(b)   Multi-family Residential Development in R-ML or R-MH Zone
Districts
For multi-family residential development in R-ML or R-MH zone districts, the
maximum height of walls in any front or street side yard is 6 feet if view
fencing is used for portions of a wall above 3 feet.
5-7(D)(3)(c)   Development in Mixed-use Zone Districts
For development in any Mixed-use zone district, the maximum height of walls in
any front or street side yard is 5 feet if all of the following requirements
are met, as applicable based on the type of development.
   1.   For all development, the wall shall be set back at least 10 feet from
the lot line abutting the street or edge of the sidewalk closest to the primary
building, whichever is more restrictive.
   2.   For all development, view fencing shall be used for portions of a wall
above 3 feet.
   3.   For mixed-use, multi-family residential, or non-residential
development, the area between the wall and the property line shall be
landscaped with at least 2 trees and 6 shrubs every 25 feet along the length of
the wall.
5-7(D)(3)(d)   Development in NR-C or NR-BP Zone Districts
For development in any NR-C or NR-BP zone district, the maximum height of walls
in any front or street side yard is 6 feet if the wall is set back at least 5
feet from the property line and if view fencing that is at most 50 percent
opaque to perpendicular view is used for portions of a wall above 3 feet.
5-7(D)(3)(e)   All Development in Any Zone District
   1.   Except where a Permit - Wall or Fence - Major is required pursuant to
Subsection
14-16-5-7(D)(3)(a)2 above or where prohibited pursuant to Subsection
14-16-5-7(D)(3)(a)3 above, the Zoning Enforcement Officer (ZEO) may make an
exception to the height standards in
Table 5-7-1 for critical infrastructure facilities due to security reasons,
specific site conditions, or related materials and facilities on the site,
pursuant to Subsection
14-16-6-5(F) (Permit - Wall or Fence - Minor).
   2.   Design elements may project vertically 2 feet above the maximum wall
height. Such elements shall have a maximum width of 5 feet and are allowed at
intervals of no less than 50 feet.
   3.   Retaining walls are subject to the height restrictions in Subsection
14-16-5-7(F)(1) (Maximum Height).
5-7(E)   MATERIALS AND DESIGN
5-7(E)(1)   Materials and Texture
5-7(E)(1)(a)   Unless specified otherwise in this IDO, walls may be opaque.
5-7(E)(1)(b)   Acceptable wall materials include, but are not limited to,
concrete masonry unit (CMU) blocks or other structural materials; stabilized
adobe; split face blocks; slump blocks; bricks; stone; glass blocks; curved
interlock blocks; wood; tubular steel; wrought iron bars; chain link fencing;
other grill work; or a combination of these materials, with the following
exceptions.
   1.   Exposed flat-faced CMU blocks shall not constitute more than 50 percent
of any wall facing a public street or City park or trail.
   2.   Except in the R-A, R-1, NR-LM, or NR-GM zone districts, chain link
fencing (with or without slats) shall not be allowed on any portion of a site
visible from a public street, City park or trail, Major Public Open Space, or
major arroyo. Chain link fencing is allowed as temporary security fencing
during active construction in any zone district.
5-7(E)(1)(c)   Barbed tape, razor wire, barbed wire, or similar materials are
regulated as follows.
   1.   In or adjacent to any Residential zone district, such materials are
prohibited, except that critical infrastructure facilities are exempt from this
regulation.
   2.   In or adjacent to any Mixed-use zone district, such materials are
prohibited, except that critical infrastructure facilities are exempt from this
regulation.
   3.   In Non-residential zone districts, such materials are allowed on
street-facing walls that meet all of the following criteria. (See figure
below.)
      a.   The wall is at least 6 feet in height.
      b.   The wall is set back at least 5 feet. If any portion of the sidewalk
is within the lot line, the setback shall be measured from the edge of the
sidewalk closest to the wall.
      c.   The wall is not adjacent to any Residential or Mixed-use zone
district, where Subsections 1 and 2 above apply.
      d.   The wall is not visible from a City park or trail.
      e.   The wall is not visible from Major Public Open Space.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/b37713d5e40fc82694833f290401791f80be26ac/
IMAGES/0-0-0-6821.png]
5-7(E)(2)   Articulation and Alignment
Portions of walls that obtain approval for a wall that exceeds the maximum
height limits in Subsection
14-16-5-7(D) (Maximum Wall Height) or are required to exceed those limits and
that face any public street, City park or trail, Major Public Open Space, or
major arroyo, shall incorporate at least 1 of the following features to break
up the massing of the wall. (See figure below for illustrations of each
option).
5-7(E)(2)(a)   Option 1
Vertical pilasters with a minimum projection of 2 inches from the public side
of the wall surface at intervals of no more than 20 feet in length.
5-7(E)(2)(b)   Option 2
Decorative features, such as columns with a minimum projection of 4 inches from
the public side of the wall surface at intervals of no more than 60 feet in
length.
5-7(E)(2)(c)   Option 3
Offset in wall alignment of at least 16 inches, spaced so that no more than 3
consecutive lots have the same wall alignment.
5-7(E)(2)(d)   Option 4
Curvilinear alignments with a minimum distance of 4 feet between the outer
surfaces of the wall. The outermost point of each curve shall have intervals no
greater than 80 feet.
5-7(E)(2)(e)   Option 5
Terracing of walls with a minimum horizontal distance of 4 feet separating the
vertical height segments.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/b37713d5e40fc82694833f290401791f80be26ac/
IMAGES/0-0-0-6823.png]
5-7(E)(3)   Wall Design
Any portions of a wall over 3 feet facing a public street, City park or trail,
Major Public Open Space, or major arroyo shall comply with at least 1 of the
following options. (See figure below for illustrations of each option).
5-7(E)(3)(a)   Option 1
Openings distributed throughout the length of the wall equal to at least 5
percent of the wall surface, constructed into the surface or created by using
see-through pattern blocks, tubular steel or wrought iron bars, wood, or other
grillwork.
5-7(E)(3)(b)   Option 2
Variation in wall height at intervals of at least every 20 feet along the
length of the wall. The normal stepping of the wall to accommodate grade change
does not satisfy this requirement.
5-7(E)(3)(c)   Option 3
Use of a second and visually contrasting material, texture, or color along the
length of the wall on at least 20 percent of its surface.
5-7(E)(3)(d)   Option 4
A continuous overhang cap along the length of the wall that projects at least 2
inches from the public side of the wall surface.
5-7(E)(3)(e)   Option 5
A variety of living shrubs, trees, and/or vines covering or overhanging at
least 1/3 of the length of the wall in conjunction with a streetscape/landscape
maintenance agreement between the City and the adjoining property owner and/or
community association as part of a subdivision approval.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/b37713d5e40fc82694833f290401791f80be26ac/
IMAGES/0-0-0-6825.png]
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/b37713d5e40fc82694833f290401791f80be26ac/
IMAGES/0-0-0-6827.png]
5-7(E)(4)   Walls Adjacent to Major Arroyos or Major Public Open Space
All walls other than retaining walls adjacent to a major arroyo or any Major
Public Open Space must comply with the following standards, in addition to all
other applicable standards in this Section
14-16-5-7. If any of the following standards conflict with another wall
standard in this IDO, the standard in this Subsection
14-16-5-7(E)(4) shall prevail.
5-7(E)(4)(a)   In any zone district adjacent to Major Public Open Space and in
any Mixed-use or Non-residential zone district adjacent to arroyos, only the
following wall types are allowed on the sides of the lot facing the Major
Public Open Space or arroyo:
   1.   View fencing of at most 50 percent opacity constructed of wood, painted
or coated pipe, wrought iron, or smooth wire pasture fence material. Where
allowed, chain-link fencing shall be accompanied by a vegetative screen with a
mature height at least as tall as the fence and with at most 75 percent
opacity, planted on the public side of the fence but within the lot line
containing the proposed development.
   2.   Opaque walls of 4 feet or less, combined with view fencing as described
in Subsection 1 above, with a combined height not to exceed the maximum wall
height in
Table 5-7-1.
   3.   Where allowed, opaque walls shall be constructed of wood, stucco over
CMU blocks, stained concrete block, stone, split-faced or fluted block, or
adobe. Exposed CMU block walls are prohibited. Predominant materials shall be
earth tone in color, with a Light Reflective Value (LRV) ranging from 20
percent to 50 percent. This middle range of reflectance is intended to avoid
very light and very dark colors.
5-7(E)(4)(b)   Where walls are allowed to be higher than 4 feet pursuant to
Table 5-7-1, the following standards apply.
   1.   Opaque walls over 4 feet in height are allowed adjacent to arroyos only
in any Residential zone district.
   2.   Opaque walls may be no more than 4 feet tall, combined with 1 of the
fencing types described in Subsection (a)1 above, with a combined height not to
exceed the maximum wall height in
Table 5-7-1.
   3.   Each wall over 4 feet tall shall include a horizontal offset of at
least 16 inches every 100 feet.
5-7(E)(4)(c)   On lots adjacent to the Petroglyph National Monument, perimeter
walls abutting the Petroglyph National Monument shall be view fencing, such as
post and wire, with a maximum of 10 percent opacity.
   1.   In any zone district, 1 screening wall with higher than 10 percent
opacity may be constructed parallel to the lot line abutting the Petroglyph
National Monument, subject to all of the following requirements.
      a.   The wall is not located within the minimum building setbacks
required by the zone district.
      b.   The wall is no more than 20 feet long or up to 50 percent of the lot
width, whichever is less.
      c.   Wall materials shall be the same as or complement the primary
building and shall be constructed of earth tone materials with an LRV ranging
from 20 percent to 50 percent. This middle range of reflectance is intended to
avoid very light and very dark colors.
   2.   In any Residential zone district, on lots greater than 10,000 square
feet, courtyard walls with higher than 10 percent opacity are allowed to be
constructed parallel to the lot line abutting the Petroglyph National Monument
that meet all of the following requirements.
      a.   Walls forming the courtyard are attached to the primary building.
      b.   Walls are not located within the minimum setbacks required by the
zone district.
      c.   Wall materials shall be the same or complement the primary building
and shall be constructed of earth-tone materials an LRV ranging from 20 percent
to 50 percent. This middle range of reflectance is intended to avoid very light
and very dark colors.
      d.   The total area of enclosed spaces on a lot (e.g. any combination of
patio, pool enclosure, or courtyard) shall be limited to 1,000 square feet or
up to 50 percent of the primary building square footage, whichever is greater,
up to a maximum of 2,000 square feet.
   3.   For single-family and two-family detached dwellings abutting a trail on
the Petroglyph National Monument, an opaque perimeter wall is allowed but may
only be constructed of stucco over CMU blocks, coyote fencing, or stone per
height requirements in Subsection
14-16-5-7(D) (Maximum Wall Height).
5-7(F)   RETAINING WALL STANDARDS
5-7(F)(1)   Maximum Height
5-7(F)(1)(a)   Retaining walls shall have a maximum height as specified in
Section
14-16-5-7(D) (Maximum Wall Height) unless a higher wall is approved by the City
Engineer as necessary on a particular lot.
5-7(F)(1)(b)   Retaining walls higher than 6 feet tall shall be terraced to
minimize visual impacts on residents, neighboring properties, and the public
realm. Terracing shall be limited to 3 tiers.
5-7(F)(2)   Terracing
5-7(F)(2)(a)   A terrace at least 4 feet wide, with a maximum slope of 1:3
(rise:run), shall be provided between each tier to create pockets for
landscaping. Reduced terrace depths may be administratively approved by the
City Engineer where site constraints limit the amount of space available to
accommodate the minimum required width.
5-7(F)(2)(b)   Terraces between retaining wall tiers shall be vegetated with
permanent landscaping to screen retaining walls and provide visual interest
unless soil conditions are determined by a licensed engineer to be unsuitable
due to geologic hazards.
5-7(F)(3)   Setback
Retaining walls must be set back so that the underground footing does not
encroach on any abutting public right-of-way.
5-8   OUTDOOR AND SITE LIGHTING
5-8(A)   PURPOSE
This Section
14-16-5-8 is intended to enhance the attractiveness and livability of the city,
protect the safety of its residents, reduce light trespass between private
properties, minimize disruption to natural ecosystems, and prevent the increase
of unnecessary sky glow that reduces the visibility of stars in the night sky.
5-8(B)   APPLICABILITY
All sources of light visible from the exterior of a property shall comply with
the standards of this Section
14-16-5-8, unless specified otherwise in this IDO. This includes the use of
outdoor lighting, hours of operation, and regulation of light trespass.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/b37713d5e40fc82694833f290401791f80be26ac/
IMAGES/0-0-0-6829.png]
5-8(B)(1)   Activities that Trigger Outdoor and Site Lighting Requirements
5-8(B)(1)(a)   Maintenance and One-for-one Replacement
      If an outdoor luminaire is not working or is damaged, the repair and/or
replacement shall conform with the requirements of this Section.
5-8(B)(1)(b)   Expansion, Renovation, and Redevelopment
      The following activities shall require compliance with the requirements
of this Section:
      1.   Expansion of the gross floor area by 25 percent or more.
      2.   Changes to the number of off-street parking spaces provided by 25
percent or more.
      3.   Changes to the number of luminaries by 25 percent or more.
      4.   Any change of land use to a different use category in
Table 4-2-1.
5-8(B)(1)(c)   New Development
      Development involving the construction of a new building or new parking
lot shall comform with the requirements of this Section.
5-8(B)(2)   Exemptions
The following types of lighting are not subject to the requirements of this
Section.
5-8(B)(2)(a)   Lighting that is requried by federal or state regulations that
conflicts with this Section, including:
      1.   Air-side facilities at the airport (runway, taxiway, and other
facilities located inside the security fence) as regulated by the Federal
Aviation Adminstration (FAA) for safety.
      2.   Building codes and other illumination for means of emergency egress
as regulated by the National Fire Protection Association (NFPA).
      3.   Temporary outdoor lighting necessary for worker safety at
construction sites.
      4.   Outdoor lighting necessary for worker safety at farms, ranches,
dairies, feedlots, or industrial, mining, or oil and gas facilities, as
determined by the EPC in a Site Plan - EPC pursuant to Subsection 14-16-6-6(I)
with an outdoor and site lighting performance analysis pursuant to Subsection
14-16-6-4(H)(3).
5-8(B)(2)(b)   Nightime illumination of the United States of America flag and
the New Mexico State flag that complies with one of the following illumination
requirements:
      1.   A luminaire mouted on top of the flagpole that only directs light
downward.
      2.   A maximum of 3 in-ground uplights, or 3 shielded spotlights that are
surface mounted at grade, that direct light upward. The maximum beam spread of
any individual light source shall be no more than 24 degrees. The maximum
output of any individual luminaire shall be no more than 100 lumens per foot of
flagpole height (e.g. 2,000 lumens for a 20-foot pole).
5-8(B)(2)(c)    Neon signs and all other illuminated signs that are regulated
pursuant to Section
14-16-5-12.
5-8(C)   PROHIBITED LIGHTING
5-8(C)(1)   Toxic and Energy Inefficient
5-8(C)(1)(a)   Mercury vapor lights are prohibited.
5-8(C)(1)(b)   Inefficient light sources (less than 45 lumens/watt) are
prohibited for outdoor use, excluding seasonal and festoon lighting.
5-8(C)(2)   Public Right-of-Way Interference
5-8(C)(2)(a)   Any intentionally blinking, flashing, moving, revolving, or
wavering lights that distract a motor vehicle operator in the public right-of-
way are prohibited.
5-8(C)(2)(b)   Any luminaire that may be confused as a traffic control device
is prohibited unless authorized by federal, state, or city government.
5-8(C)(3)   Obtrusive
5-8(C)(3)(a)   No luminaire specification shall exceed a Backlight, Uplight,
and Glare (BUG) rating of G2.
5-8(C)(3)(b)   Shielded spotlights and floodlights within 500 feet of any
boundary regulated by Division 30-VI-2 of the Bernalillo County Code of
Ordiances (North Albuquerque Acres and Sandia Heights Light Pollution
Ordinance) are only allowed when used to illuminate alleys, parking structures,
and maintenance areas.
5-8(C)(3)(c)   Beacons and searchlights are prohibited at night, except for
emergency use by authorized first responders.
5-8(D)   REQUIRED LIGHTING FACING AN ALLEY
If abutting an alley, non-residential development, multi-family residential
development, and mixed-use development shall illuminate the building fa ade
facing the alley, pursuant to Subsection
14-16-5-8(E)(4).
5-8(E)   GENERAL DESIGN AND ILLUMINATION STANDARDS
All sources of light visible from the exterior of a property subject to this
Section
14-16-5-8 shall meet the following standards.
5-8(E)(1)   Uplight Restrictions
5-8(E)(1)(a)   Unless specified otherwise in this IDO, luminaires shall be
fully shielded or have a U0 rating (i.e., a luminaire that emits zero lumens
above 90 degrees from nadir). Unshielded floodlights with articulated mounting
are prohibited.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/b37713d5e40fc82694833f290401791f80be26ac/
IMAGES/0-0-0-6831.png]
5-8(E)(1)(b)   Luminaires installed under canopies, porte cocheres, or beneath
similar structures shall meet all of the following requirements.
   1.   Luminaires shall be mounted to aim downward and installed flush-mounted
or recessed above the lowest edge of the canopy such that the lowest part of
the luminaire is shielded from view beyond the property line.
   2.   The vertical fascia shall not be internally illuminated.
   3.   All light emitted shall be substantially confined to the posts,
facades, and ground surface directly beneath the perimeter of the canopy or
similar structure.
5-8(E)(2)   Correlated Color Temperature (CCT) and Color Rendering Index (CRI)
5-8(E)(2)(a)   Unless specified elsewhere in this IDO, outdoor lighting shall
have a maximum CCT of 3000K. The minimum CRI for these light sources shall be
65.
5-8(E)(2)(b)   Light sources below 2700K with limited spectral emission and CRI
values below 65, such as low-pressure sodium or amber LED, are allowed within
NDZ or Lz0 lighting designations.
5-8(E)(3)   Light Poles
Table 5-8-1 specifies the maximum height of light poles, measured from the
finished grade to the top of the pole.
 
Table 5-8-1: Maximum Height for Light Poles
Location, Development Type, or Type of Light           Maximum Height, (ft.)
Bollard and pathway luminaires                         4 ft.
Residential zone districts and HPO zones               12 ft.
Within 100 feet of Residential zone districts          16 ft.
Mixed-use development or allowable uses in the Offices
and Services Sub-category of                           20 ft.
Table 4-2-1
Allowable uses in
Table 4-2-1 in the following categories:
Civic and Institutional Uses                           25 ft.
Commercial Uses other than the Offices and Services
Sub-category
Industrial Uses
 
5-8(E)(4)   Fa ade, Wall/Fence, Landscape Feature, or Sculpture Lighting
Lighting to illuminate vertical surfaces to help people navigate and detect
threats at night shall follow all the following requirements.
5-8(E)(4)(a)   Non-white colored lighting is allowed for lighting vertical
surfaces.
5-8(E)(4)(b)   Articulated lights emitting light above 90 degrees from the
nadir shall be shielded to contain light to their targeted surface/object.
Windows in a dwelling are not allowed to be a target.
5-8(E)(5)   Steps, Stairs, and Pedestrian Walkway Lighting
Lighting to illuminate trip and fall hazards such as stairs, curbs, and raised
pavement shall follow ANSI/RP-43 standards.
5-8(E)(6)   Deck and Outdoor Dining Lighting
5-8(E)(6)(a)   Lighting used to illuminate patios, decks, balconies, terraces,
gazebos, pergolas, or any other accessory structure, including festoon
lighting, is subject to an outdoor lighting curfew.
5-8(E)(6)(b)   Festoon lighting is exempt from the point light source
restriction in Subsection
14-16-5-8(E)(4)(a).
5-8(E)(7)   Security
Security lighting shall not be used continuously as a general deterrent during
outdoor lighting curfew. Lighting to boost illumination levels for security as
the primary objective, as described in IES G-1 Security Lighting, shall meet
all of the the following requirements.
5-8(E)(7)(a)   Security lighting controlled by a motion sensor shall turn off
or return to a dimmed level no more than 10 minutes after motion was detected.
5-8(E)(7)(b)   Security/surveillance cameras emitting infrared light are
allowed.
5-8(E)(7)(c)   Illumination different from ANSI/IES standards may be reviewed
and decided by requesting a Site Plan - EPC pursuant to Subsection
14-16-6-6(I) and providing an outdoor and site lighting peformance analysis
pursuant to Subsection
14-16-6-4(H)(3).
5-8(F)   LIGHTING DESIGNATION FOR ZONE DISTRICTS
Table 5-8-2: Lighting Designations by Zone District specifies the equivalent
llowed in each zone district based on allowable land uses. Where multiple
designations are specified for a zone district, the notes in the table identify
which designation shall be used depending on context.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/b37713d5e40fc82694833f290401791f80be26ac/
IMAGES/0-0-0-10222.png]
5-8(F)(1)   Planned Development Zone Districts
5-8(F)(1)(a)   Existing PD or PC zone districts that did not establish lighting
standards must come into compliance with the requirements of the lighting
designation that most closely matches their current land use and surrounding
contexts as established in
Table 5-8-2 pursuant to Subsection
14-16-6-8(G) (Nonconforming Site Features).
5-8(F)(1)(b)   Any new PD or PC zone districts shall establish the lighting
designation(s) that most closely matches the allowable uses of the zone
districts in
Table 5-8-2 and the lumen limits from Subsection
14-16-5-8(F) in the Site Plan - EPC, pursuant to Subsection
14-16-6-6(I), or Framework Plan, pursuant to Subsection 14-16-6-7(H), as
relevant, with an outdoor and site lighting performance analysis pursuant to
Subsection
14-16-6-4(H)(3).
5-8(F)(2)   Non-residential Sensitive Use (NR-SU) Zone District
5-8(F)(2)(a)   Existing NR-SU zone districts that did not previously establish
lighting standards must come into compliance with the requirements of the
lighting designation that most closely matches their current land use and
surrounding context as established in
Table 5-8-2 pursuant to Subsection
14-16-6-8(G) (Nonconforming Site Features).
5-8(F)(2)(b)   Any new NR-SU zone district shall establish the lighting
designation(s) that most closely matches the allowable uses of a zone district
in
Table 5-8-2 and the lumen limits from Subsection
14-16-5-8(F) in the Site Plan – EPC pursuant to Subsection
14-16-6-6(I) with an outdoor and site lighting performance analysis pursuant to
Subsection
14-16-6-4(H)(3).
5-8(F)(3)   Non-residential Parks and Open Space (NR-PO)
5-8(F)(3)(a)   City Parks & Recreation staff shall identify environmentally
sensitive areas that need protection from anthropogenic light and design
outdoor and site lighting based on the lowest possible lighting designation in
Table 5-8-2. Pedestrian walkways and bicycle paths in parking areas shall be
lit with pedestrian-scale lighting.
5-8(F)(3)(b)   City Parks & Recreation staff shall identify adjacent properties
and design outdoor and site lighting based on the appropriate lighting
designation in
Table 5-8-2.
5-8(F)(4)   Light Trespass
5-8(F)(4)(a)   Unless specified elsewhere in this IDO, all outdoor luminaires
shall be located or optically shielded such that the point light source is not
visible from adjacent property or public right-of-way.
5-8(F)(4)(b)   The total illumination from outdoor light sources and interior
light escaping from windows shall not exceed light trespass limits in Table 5-
8-3, as measured at any location along the property line in both of the
following ways:
   1.   Horizontally at finished grade with the light meter facing upward.
   2.   Vertically at 5 feet (1.5 meters) above finished grade with the light
meter aiming toward the subject property.
 
TABLE 5-8-3: LIGHT TRESPASS LIMITS BY LIGHTING DESIGNATION
                  NDZ  Lz0  Lz1 Lz2 Lz3
Foot Candles (fc) 0.02 0.05 0.1 0.3 0.8
Lux (lx)          0.2  0.5  1.0 3.0 8
Luminance (cd/m2) 0    1    20  40  80
 
5-8(F)(4)(c)   If the total illumination from outdoor light sources and
interior light escaping from windows exceeds light trespass limits in
Table 5-8-3 at any point along the property line, lighting must be re-aimed,
removed, turned off, or dimmed until compliance is reached.
5-8(G)   TOTAL LUMEN ALLOWANCE
All sources of light visible from the exterior of a property shall meet the
requirements of this Subsection
14-16-5-8. Only 20 percent of the total allowable site lumens in
Table 5-8-4 or
Table 5-8-5 is allowed to be uplight (i.e., light emitted above 90 degrees from
nadir).
5-8(G)(1)   Residential Uses
5-8(G)(1)(a)   Total Lumen Allowance
Table 5-8-4 specifies the total exterior lumens allowed for each dwelling on a
subject property.
Table 5-8-4: TOTAL LUMENS ALLOWED PER DWELLING
ZONE DISTRICTS Lz0 Lz1 Lz2 Lz3
Table 5-8-4: TOTAL LUMENS ALLOWED PER DWELLING
ZONE DISTRICTS Lz0    Lz1    Lz2    Lz3
R-A            3,000  5,000  -      -
R-1A           1,500  3,000  -      -
R-1B           2,500  4,500  -      -
R-1C           2,500  4,500  -      -
R-1D           3,000  5,000  -      -
R-T            12,000 20,000 -      -
R-MC           1,500  3,000  -      -
R-ML or MX-T   12,000 20,000 -      -
R-MH or MX-L   -      24,000 35,000 -
MX-M           -      24,000 35,000 49,000
MX-H           -      27,000 40,000 56,000
 
5-8(G)(1)(b)   Additional Lumen Allowance
   1.   An additional 1,500 lumens are allowed for an accessory dwelling unit
(ADU).
   2.   Outdoor walkways, outdoor stairs, and parking lots for multi-family
dwellings, assisted living facilities, or nursing homes are allowed additional
lumens pursuant to
Table 5-8-5.
5-8(G)(2)   Non-residential Development
Table 5-8-5 specifies the total lumens allowed from all outdoor light sources
on properties with an allowable non-residential use.
 
Table 5-8-5: TOTAL SITE LUMENS ALLOWED - NON-RESIDENTIAL DEVELOPMENT
Lighting Requirement                Unit      Lz0  Lz1  Lz2  Lz3
Tree, Landscape, and Sculpture Beds lm / s.f. 0.5  1    2    4
Walkways/St airs/Parking Lot        lm / s.f. 1.00 1.25 1.50 2.50
Outdoor Dining                      lm / s.f. n/a  2    2.5  3
 
5-8(H)   ADDITIONAL STANDARDS FOR SPECIFIC TYPES OF LIGHTING
5-8(H)(1)   Sport and Recreation
5-8(H)(1)(a)   General
   1.   Lighting for recreational areas and outdoor sports, such as baseball,
football, racquet sports, and similar sports, shall follow ANSI/IES RP-
6 standards. Illumination shall be confined to within 150 feet (or one pole
height, whichever is greater) of the play field, track, or bleacher.
   2.   Correct aiming, shielding, and/or internal louvers are required to
prevent light trespass, glare, and light emitted above 60 degrees from nadir.
   3.   When allowed by permit, underwater pool, spa, and pool deck lighting
shall not exceed ANSI/IES RP-6 standards.
5-8(H)(1)(b)   Residential Recreational Amenity and Private Parks
   1.   For small courts located on property with a Residential use or located
in private parks within the NR-PO-C sub-zone that serve fewer than 25 people, a
performance analysis is not required for lighting that meets the requirements
of Section 14-16-5-8(G), including the light pole heights in
Table 5-8-1.
   2.   Lighting on the field of play is not allowed in Lz0.
   3.   Up to 2 light poles are allowed. Illuminance levels on the field of
play shall not exceed any of the following, as relevant:
      a.   Lz2 or Lz3: 10 fc
      b.   Lz1: 5 fc
   4.   For additional lighting, or if 3 or more light poles are desired, a
performance analysis pursuant to Subsection
14-16-6-4(H)(3) and a Site Plan EPC pursuant to
14-16-6-6(I) are required.
5-8(H)(1)(c)   Collegiate, Professional, Stadium, or Outdoor Entertainment
Sports Facility
   1.   These facilities require a performance analysis pursuant to Subsection
14-16-6-4(H)(3) and a Site Plan EPC pursuant to
14-16-6-6(I).
   2.   Pole mounting heights shall be based on the playability of the sport,
photometric reports, and the player s glare zones per ANSI/IES RP-6.
   3.   Poles shall be anodized or otherwise coated to minimize glare from the
luminaire. Wooden poles are also acceptable.
   4.   For sports fields where games will regularly be filmed or televised, a
CCT of 4000K is allowed but not required.
   5.   Sports lighting luminaires shall have a CRI of at least 75.
   6.   Luminaires shall be extinguished 1 hour after the end of play.
   7.   Uplighting is allowed for aerial sports such as baseball and football.
Uplighting shall be controlled separately from other sports lighting.
5-8(H)(2)   Seasonal
5-8(H)(2)(a)   Seasonal lighting is not allowed in lighting designation NDZ.
5-8(H)(2)(b)   Seasonal lighting is allowed for up to 45 consecutive days up to
2 times per year.
5-8(H)(2)(c)   Seasonal lighting is exempt from the uplight, CCT, CRI, and
point light source restrictions in Subsections
14-16-5-8(D) and
14-16-5-8(E)(4)(a).
5-8(H)(3)   Historic Landmarks and HPO Zones
Outdoor or site lighting on a historic landmark or in HPO zones that does not
comply with the requirements in this Section but that are consistent with the
time period and character of the historic structure may be allowed by the
Landmarks Commission pursuant to a Historic Certificate of Appropriateness
Major pursuant to Subsection
14-16-6-6(D).
5-9   NEIGHBORHOOD EDGES
5-9(A)   PURPOSE
This Section
14-16-5-9 is intended to preserve the residential neighborhood character of
established low-density residential development in any Residential zone
district on lots adjacent to any Mixed-use or Non-residential zone district.
5-9(B)   APPLICABILITY
5-9(B)(1)   Protected Lots
The Neighborhood Edges provisions in this Section
14-16-5-9 are intended to protect lots in any R-A, R-1, R-MC, or R-T zone
district that contains low-density residential development.
5-9(B)(2)   Regulated Lots 13
Lots regulated by this Section
14-16-5-9 include all those in any Residential, Mixed-use, or Non-residential
zone district that are adjacent to a Protected Lot.
 
Notes
13 City Council, O-24-69, adopted January 6, 2025 and effective January 28,
   2025.
5-9(C)   BUILDING HEIGHT STEPDOWN
5-9(C)(1)   General Requirement
On Regulated Lots, any portion of a primary or accessory building within 100
feet of the nearest Protected Lot property line shall step down to a maximum
height of 30 feet. (See figure below.)
5-9(C)(2)   Urban Centers and Main Street and Premium Transit Areas
On Regulated Lots in UC-MS-PT areas, any portion of a primary or accessory
building within 50 feet in any direction of any lot line of a Protected Lot
shall step down to a maximum height of 30 feet. (See figure below.)
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/b37713d5e40fc82694833f290401791f80be26ac/
IMAGES/0-0-0-6833.png]
5-9(D)   PARKING, DRIVE-THROUGH OR DRIVE-UP FACILITIES, AND LOADING
5-9(D)(1)   Parking and Drive-through or Drive-up Facilities
5-9(D)(1)(a)   Where parking or vehicle circulation areas on a Regulated Lot
abut a Protected Lot, a minimum 6 foot high opaque wall or fence shall be
required to visually screen the parking or circulation area. Chain link fence
with slats shall not constitute acceptable screening.
5-9(D)(1)(b)   For Regulated Lots 10,000 square feet or larger, the following
requirements apply.
   1.   Lanes associated with a drive-through use shall be separated from any
abutting Protected Lot by a minimum of 50 feet. (See figure below.) For drive-
throughs, requirements in Subsection
14-16-5-5(I) apply.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/b37713d5e40fc82694833f290401791f80be26ac/
IMAGES/0-0-0-6835.png]
   2.   Parking areas shall be separated from any abutting Protected Lot by a
minimum of 15 feet, and edge buffer requirements in Subsection
14-16-5-6(E) apply. (See figure below.)
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/b37713d5e40fc82694833f290401791f80be26ac/
IMAGES/0-0-0-6837.png]
5-9(D)(2)   Truck Loading Areas
No truck loading area shall be located between a primary or accessory structure
on a Regulated Lot and any side or rear lot line abutting a Protected Lot.
5-10   SOLAR ACCESS
5-10(A)   PURPOSE
This Section
14-16-5-10 is intended to allow for development while ensuring continued access
to solar energy.
5-10(B)   APPLICABILITY
The standards in this Section
14-16-5-10 apply to development in any zone district unless specified otherwise
in this IDO.
5-10(C)   BUILDING HEIGHT
All development in the R-A, R-1, R-MC, R-T, and R-ML zone districts shall
comply with the standards in this Subsection
14-16-5-10(C).
5-10(C)(1)   The building height shall not exceed the relevant heights shown in
Table 5-10-1 or the maximum building height allowed by the zone district,
whichever is less. The building heights in the table were determined based on
the distance cardinally south from the northern property line and an angle
plane of 32 degrees angle that allows 1 hour of Winter Solstice sunlight to hit
at least 2 feet up on a southern-facing wall located 10 feet from the property
line. Distances from the northern property line that were not whole numbers
were rounded down, unless the decimal was .9 or more, in which case they were
rounded up.
Table 5-10-1: Solar Rights Maximum Building Heights
Distance from Northern Maximum Building Distance from Northern Maximum Building
Lot Line, ft.          Height, ft.      Lot Line, ft.          Height, ft.
Table 5-10-1: Solar Rights Maximum Building Heights
Distance from Northern Maximum Building Distance from Northern Maximum Building
Lot Line, ft.          Height, ft.      Lot Line, ft.          Height, ft.
0                      8                26                     24
1                      8                27                     25
2                      9                28                     25
3                      10               29                     26
4                      10               30                     27
5                      11               31                     27
6                      12               32                     28
7                      12               33                     28
8                      13               34                     29
9                      13               35                     30
10                     14               36                     30
11                     15               37                     31
12                     15               38                     32
13                     16               39                     32
14                     17               40                     33
15                     17               41                     33
16                     18               42                     34
17                     18               43                     35
18                     19               44                     35
19                     20               45                     36
20                     20               46                     37
21                     21               47                     37
22                     22               48                     38
23                     22               49                     38
24                     23               50                     39
25                     23
 
5-10(C)(2)   The ZEO shall waive or adjust the provisions of Subsection (1)
above if the ZEO finds that beneficial solar access can be protected for a lot
to the north without compliance with the provisions of Subsection (1) because:
5-10(C)(2)(a)   The lot(s) to the north are large enough or higher in elevation
than the lot to the south, so that there are many good locations for passive or
active solar collector that would not be blocked by proposed construction that
does not comply with the height restrictions of Subsection (1) above.
5-10(C)(2)(b)   The development on the lot(s) to the north is already served by
as much solar collector area as is likely to ever be needed for that lot, and
solar access to those collector surfaces will not be impaired by the proposed
construction.
5-10(C)(2)(c)   In the R-A, R-1, R-MC, or R-T zone districts, the owner or
builder proposing the height limit waiver has demonstrated that there will
clearly not be a primary building on the lot to the north within 35 feet north
of the proposed building.
5-10(C)(2)(d)   In the R-ML zone district, the owner or builder proposing the
height limit waiver has demonstrated that there will clearly not be a primary
building on the lot to the north within 45 feet north of the proposed building.
5-10(C)(2)(e)   The owner or builder proposing the height limit waiver is also
the owner of the lot to the north and has specified that no solar rights are
necessary.
5-10(C)(2)(f)   In the R-A, R-1, R-MC, or R-T zone districts, the owner or
building proposing the height limit waiver has demonstrated that there is
public right-of-way over 35 feet in width north of the proposed building.
5-10(C)(2)(g)   In the R-ML zone district, the owner or building proposing the
height limit waiver has demonstrated that there is public right-of-way over 45
feet in width north of the proposed building.
5-10(D)   PERMITS FOR SOLAR RIGHTS
Permits to protect solar rights may be requested pursuant to Part 14-11-7 of
ROA 1994 (Permits for Solar Rights) and any relevant standards in the DPM.
5-11   BUILDING DESIGN
5-11(A)   PURPOSE
This Section
14-16-5-11 is intended to enhance the visual appearance of development of the
city, to promote street and neighborhood character, and to strengthen the
pedestrian environment. Regulations for large-scale development are intended to
mitigate any negative visual impacts arising from the scale, bulk, and mass of
large commercial buildings.
5-11(B)   APPLICABILITY
The standards in this Section
14-16-5-11 shall apply to development in any zone district when any of the
following takes place:
5-11(B)(1)   Construction of a new building.
5-11(B)(2)   Expansion of the gross floor area of an existing building by 50
percent or more, or 15,000 square feet, whichever is less, in which case the
standards of this Section
14-16-5-11 apply to all portions of the building created by or reconstructed as
part of the expansion project.
5-11(B)(3)   Addition of a second story to an existing single-family or two-
family detached dwelling.
5-11(B)(4)   Expansions or renovations of existing buildings that are listed on
the National Register of Historic Places or the State Register of Cultural
Properties or that are determined to be eligible for listing by the appropriate
agency.
5-11(C)   LOW-DENSITY RESIDENTIAL DEVELOPMENT
All low-density residential development in any zone district shall comply with
all of the standards in this Subsection
14-16-5-11(C).
5-11(C)(1)   Primary Building Stepback
Second-story additions and portions of buildings over 15 feet in height shall
be stepped back a minimum of 6 feet from the front fa ade in the following
small areas, as noted. (See figure below.)
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/b37713d5e40fc82694833f290401791f80be26ac/
IMAGES/0-0-0-6841.png]
5-11(C)(1)(a)   Downtown Neighborhood Area - CPO-3
R-1 and R-T zone districts in the Downtown Neighborhood Area - CPO-3. When
there is an existing porch, the stepback is measured from the edge of the porch
closest to the street.
5-11(C)(1)(b)   Los Duranes - CPO-6
5-11(C)(1)(c)   Nob Hill/Highland Small Area
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/b37713d5e40fc82694833f290401791f80be26ac/
IMAGES/0-0-0-6839.png]
5-11(C)(1)(d)   Rio Grande Boulevard - CPO-11
See Subsection
14-16-3-4(L)(4) Building Stepback in the Rio Grande Boulevard – CPO-11 for a
building stepback that applies to all development in the CPO.
5-11(C)(1)(e)   Sawmill/Wells Park - CPO-12
R-1 and R-T zone districts in the Sawmill/Wells Park - CPO-12.
5-11(C)(2)   Windows
In new low-density residential development, windows shall be recessed not less
than 2 inches and/or shall be surrounded by a window casing not less than 2
inches wide.
5-11(C)(3)   Garages
5-11(C)(3)(a)   For any side-access garage, any street-facing fa ade of the
garage shall be articulated to resemble the fa ade of the primary building and
shall include at least 5 feet of windows along the length of the street-facing
fa ade of the garage. (See figure below.)
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/b37713d5e40fc82694833f290401791f80be26ac/
IMAGES/0-0-0-6843.png]
5-11(C)(3)(b)   Rear-loaded residential garages shall be set back a minimum of
3 feet from a property line abutting an alley or street.
5-11(C)(4)   Accessory Buildings
5-11(C)(4)(a)   Accessory buildings shall not be located in any required front
setback and shall not occupy over 25 percent of the side and rear yards
combined.
5-11(C)(4)(b)   An accessory building in any required setback shall not exceed
the height of the primary building and any applicable height limitations in
Subsection
14-16-5-10 (Solar Access) unless it is in a required street side setback, where
it shall not exceed the maximum height of a wall or fence allowed by Subsection
14-16-5-7(D).
5-11(C)(4)(c)   On a corner lot, the rear yard of which abuts the front yard of
a residentially-zoned lot, an accessory building shall comply with the same
street side setback as the primary building.
5-11(C)(4)(d)   Unless specified otherwise in this IDO, an accessory building
has no required setback from a lot line.
5-11(C)(4)(e)   No accessory building may extend across the width of the rear
or side yard unless a passage of at least 5 feet is provided at some point
along the width.
5-11(C)(4)(f)   An accessory building may be connected to the principal
building with a roof, provided that at least 2 sides of the connecting
structure are not enclosed with a material other than that necessary for roof
supports. The roof shall be located at least as far from any side lot line as
is the roof of the principal building.
5-11(C)(4)(g)   All accessory buildings must comply with the provisions in with
Articles 14-1, 14-2, and 14-3 of ROA 1994 (Uniform Administrative Code and
Technical Codes, Fire Code, and Uniform Housing Code).
5-11(D)   MULTI-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL DEVELOPMENT OUTSIDE OF UC-MS-PT AREAS
All multi-family residential development containing more than 25 dwelling units
in any Residential zone district or in any Mixed-use zone district outside of
UC-MS-PT areas shall comply with all of the standards in this Subsection
14-16-5-11(D), except that parking structures shall comply with the design
standards in Subsection
14-16-5-5(G) (Parking Structure Design).
5-11(D)(1)   Building Entrances
Primary pedestrian entrances to each primary building shall be emphasized and
provide weather protection through variations in the fa ade, porticos, roof
variations, recesses or projections, or other integral building forms.
5-11(D)(2)   Fa ade Design
Fa ades shall be designed to provide a sense of human scale. Building fa ades
shall meet all of the following requirements or provide justification that the
intent of this section is achieved by an alternative design approach.
5-11(D)(2)(a)   Windows
A fa ade shall have windows as a prominent feature.
   1.   The ground floor of each street-facing fa ade shall contain a minimum
of 20 percent of its surfaces in transparent windows and/or doors.
   2.   Windows on the upper floors shall be recessed or projected not less
than 2 inches and/or shall be surrounded by a window casing or frame not less
than 2 inches wide, except for portions of the fa ade that are storefront
window systems or curtain walls. Workforce housing is exempt from this
requirement.
   3.   Windows facing west shall use heat mitigation features.
5-11(D)(2)(b)   Articulation
Facades shall change in massing and form as specified below to visually break
up the building. Each front and side fa ade shall meet all of the following
requirements or provide justification that the intent of this section is
achieved by an alternative design approach.
   1.   The fa ade shall have at least one element that is recessed or
projected from the fa ade by at least 6 inches and that is 2 feet in width for
every 30 feet of facade length.
   2.   Each street-facing fa ade shall be designed with more than one building
finish material or color.
   3.   Art, such as murals or sculpture, that is privately-owned or
coordinated through the City Public Arts Program, may count toward requirements
in 1 or 2 above.
   4.   Balcony massing, material, or color shall vary to create visual
interest. Solid balconies shall not obscure the street-level view of required
transparent windows and/or doors.
   5.   For projects that use 75 percent or more of the ground floor as
parking, these standards apply to the stories above the parking level.
5-11(D)(3)   Roof Design
Rooflines longer than 60 horizontal feet shall include at least one vertical or
horizontal elevation change of at least 2 feet. Roofs with a pitch of less than
2:12 shall be screened by a parapet wall.
5-11(D)(4)   Parking Structures
See Subsection
14-16-5-5(G)(3) (Building Design Standards).
5-11(E)   MULTI-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL DEVELOPMENT IN UC-MS-PT AREAS AND MIXED-USE
AND NON-RESIDENTIAL DEVELOPMENT IN MIXED-USE ZONE DISTRICTS AND NR-C OR NR-BP
ZONE DISTRICTS
All mixed-use and non-residential development located in any Mixed-use zone
district except MX-FB or in the NR-C or NR-BP zone districts and multi-family
residential development of any size in any zone district in UC-MS-PT areas
shall comply with the standards in this Subsection 14-16-5-11(E), except that
Parking structures, including the portion of parking structures incorporated
into a building with allowable primary and/or accessory uses, shall comply with
the design standards in Subsection 14-16-5-5(G) (Parking Structure Design).
5-11(E)(1)   Ground Floor Clear Height
In any Mixed-use zone district in UC-MS-PT areas, the ground floor of primary
buildings shall have minimum clear height of 10 feet.
5-11(E)(2)   Fa ade Design
5-11(E)(2)(a)   General
   1.   Fa ades shall be designed to provide a sense of human scale at ground
level by providing a clear architectural distinction between ground floor
levels and all additional levels.
   2.   Each street-facing fa ade shall incorporate at least 2 of the following
features (illustrated below) along at least 30 percent of the length of the fa
ade, distributed along the fa ade so that at least 1 of the incorporated
features occurs every 40 feet:
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/b37713d5e40fc82694833f290401791f80be26ac/
IMAGES/0-0-0-6845.png]
      a.   Ground-floor transparent windows, with the lower edge of window
sills no higher than 30 inches above the finished floor.
      b.   Windows on upper floors.
      c.   Primary pedestrian entrances.
      d.   Portals, arcades, canopies, trellises, awnings over windows, or
other elements that provide shade or protection from the weather.
      e.   Sun shelves or other exterior building features designed to reflect
sunlight into the building and reduce the need for interior lighting.
      f.   Raised planters between 12 inches and 28 inches above grade with the
surface planted to achieve at least 75 percent vegetative cover at maturity.
   3.   Each street-facing fa ade longer than 100 feet shall incorporate at
least 1 of the following additional features (illustrated below):
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/b37713d5e40fc82694833f290401791f80be26ac/
IMAGES/0-0-0-6847.png]
      a.   Wall plane projections or recesses of at least 1 foot in depth at
least every 100 feet of fa ade length and extending for at least 25 percent of
the length of the fa ade.
      b.   A change in color, texture, or material at least every 50 feet of fa
ade length and extending at least 20 percent of the length of the fa ade.
      c.   An offset, reveal, pilaster, or projecting element no less than 2
feet in width, projecting from the fa ade by at least 6 inches, and repeating
at minimum intervals of 30 feet of fa ade length.
      d.   Three-dimensional cornice or base treatments.
      e.   A projecting gable, hip feature, or change in parapet height at
least every 100 feet of fa ade length.
      f.   Art such as murals or sculpture that is privately-owned or
coordinated through the City Public Arts Program.
   4.   All accessory buildings visible from a public street shall be similar
in color, material, distinctive rooflines, finishing details, and accent
features to the primary building.
5-11(E)(2)(b)   Urban Centers, Activity Centers, and Main Street and Premium
Transit Areas
   1.   In new residential and mixed-use development, windows on the upper
floors shall be recessed not less than 2 inches.
   2.   Each ground floor of a street-facing fa ade shall contain a minimum of
30 percent of its surfaces in transparent windows and/or doors.
      a.   No minimum window sill height is required.
      b.   For commercial or office uses, interior space must be visible to a
depth of 6 feet from the fa ade.
      c.   For buildings in which over 50 percent of the gross floor area of
the ground floor is vacant, a Permit - Temporary Window Wrap may be granted
pursuant to Subsection
14-16-6-5(E) to temporarily obscure transparent windows and/or doors with
opaque window wrap. (See figure below.)
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/b37713d5e40fc82694833f290401791f80be26ac/
IMAGES/0-0-0-6849.png]
         i.   Any window wrap shall be limited to the portion of the building
with a vacant tenant space.
         ii.   Any window wrap shall provide at least 1 opening that is 2-feet
wide and 1-foot tall between 4 feet and 6 feet above ground for every 20 feet
of fa ade length, or as acceptable to the City Fire Marshal and the Albuquerque
Police Department for security and surveillance into the building.
         iii.   Potential negative impacts of the temporary window wrap on
surrounding properties, as determined by the ZEO, shall be mitigated to the
maximum extent practicable.
         iv.   Any portion of the window wrap that meets the definition of a
sign in this IDO shall meet the requirements of Section
14-16-5-12 (Signs) and requires a Permit - Sign pursuant to Subsection
14-16-6-5(C).
   3.   Each street-facing fa ade shall incorporate at least 3 of the following
features (illustrated below) along at least 30 percent of the length of the fa
ade, distributed along the fa ade so that at least 1 of the incorporated
features occurs every 30 feet of fa ade length:
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/b37713d5e40fc82694833f290401791f80be26ac/
IMAGES/0-0-0-6851.png]
      a.   Transparent windows and/or doors that constitute a minimum of 50
percent of 1 ground floor street-facing fa ade, with the lower edge of window
sills no higher than 30 inches above the finished floor.
      b.   Windows on upper floors.
      c.   Primary pedestrian entrances.
      d.   Portals, arcades, canopies, trellises, awnings over windows, or
other elements that provide shade or protection from the weather.
      e.   Sun shelves or other exterior building features designed to reflect
sunlight into the building and reduce the need for interior lighting.
      f.   Raised planters between 12 inches and 28 inches above grade with the
surface planted to achieve at least 75 percent vegetative cover at maturity.
   4.   Each street-facing fa ade longer than 50 feet shall incorporate at
least 2 of the following additional features:
      a.   Wall plane projections or recesses of at least 1 foot in depth,
occurring at least every 50 feet of fa ade length and extending for at least 25
percent of the length of the fa ade.
      b.   A change in texture or material occurring every 25 feet of fa ade
length and extending for at least 20 percent of the length of the fa ade.
      c.   An offset, reveal, pilaster, or projecting element, no less than 2
feet in width, projecting at least 6 inches from the fa ade and repeating at
minimum intervals of 25 feet of fa ade length.
      d.   Three-dimensional cornice or base features that are different in
material from the primary fa ade and project at least 3 inches from the fa ade.
A base feature shall be no shorter than 18 inches, and a cornice feature shall
be no shorter than 12 inches.
      e.   A projecting gable, hip feature, or change in parapet height for
every 50 feet of fa ade length.
      f.   Art, such as murals or sculpture, that is privately owned or
coordinated through the City Public Arts Program.
   5.   All accessory buildings visible from a public street shall be similar
in color, material, distinctive rooflines, finishing details, and accent
features to the primary building.
5-11(E)(3)   Outdoor Seating and Gathering Areas
5-11(E)(3)(a)   General
   1.   For primary buildings containing a use from the Transportation
subcategory of Commercial Uses or from the Industrial Uses category in
Table 4-2-1, at least 1 outdoor seating and gathering area shall be provided
that is a minimum of 500 square feet.
   2.   For all other uses, each primary building containing more than 30,000
square feet of gross floor area shall provide at least 1 outdoor seating and
gathering area for every 30,000 square feet of building gross floor area,
meeting all of the following standards.
      a.   Each required seating and gathering area shall be at least 400
square feet in size for each 30,000 square feet of gross floor area.
      b.   At least 25 percent of the required seating and gathering areas
shall be shaded from the sun.
      c.   The seating and gathering area shall be provided with pedestrian-
scale lighting, street furniture or seating areas, and trash receptacles.
      d.   The required seating and gathering area shall be linked to the
primary entrance of the primary building and the public sidewalk or internal
drive aisle or located adjacent to or to maximize views to public or private
open space.
5-11(E)(3)(b)   Urban Centers, and Main Street and Premium Transit Areas
Each primary building containing more than 30,000 square feet of gross floor
area on the ground floor shall provide at least 1 outdoor seating and gathering
area for every 30,000 square feet of gross floor area on the ground floor,
meeting all of the following standards.
   1.   Each required seating and gathering area shall be at least 400 square
feet in size and shall be visible from a public street.
   2.   At least 25 percent of any required seating and gathering area shall be
shaded from the sun.
   3.   Any required seating and gathering area shall be provided with
pedestrian-scale lighting, street furniture or seating areas, and trash
receptacles.
5-11(E)(3)(c)   Large Retail Facilities and Large Developments
Each large retail facility site that includes a primary building 125,000 square
feet or greater or an aggregate of buildings 125,000 square feet or greater
shall provide seating and gathering areas in the amount of 400 square feet for
every 20,000 square feet of building space. A minimum of 50 percent of the
required public space shall be provided in the form of aggregate space that
encourages its use and that serves as the focal point for the development.
5-11(F)   NON-RESIDENTIAL DEVELOPMENT OTHER THAN INDUSTRIAL IN NR-LM OR NR-GM
ZONE DISTRICTS
5-11(F)(1)   All non-residential development other than industrial development
in the NR-LM or NR-GM zone districts shall comply with the standards in this
Subsection
14-16-5-11(F), except that parking structures, including the portion of parking
structures incorporated into a building with allowable primary and/or accessory
uses, shall comply with the design standards in
14-16-5-5(G) (Parking Structure Design).
5-11(F)(2)   Each street-facing fa ade shall incorporate at least 2 of the
following features along at least 20 percent of the length of the fa ade,
distributed along the fa ade so that at least 1 of the incorporated features
occurs every 50 feet:
5-11(F)(2)(a)   Ground floor transparent windows.
5-11(F)(2)(b)   Windows on upper flows.
5-11(F)(2)(c)   Primary pedestrian entrances.
5-11(F)(2)(d)   Sun shelves or other exterior building features designed to
reflect sunlight into the building and reduce the need for interior lighting.
5-11(F)(2)(e)   Raised planters between 12 inches and 28 inches above grade
with surface planted to achieve at least 75 percent vegetative cover at
maturity.
5-11(F)(2)(f)   Wall plane projections or recesses of at least 1 foot in depth
at least every 50 feet of fa ade length and extending at least 10 percent of
the length of the fa ade.
5-11(F)(2)(g)   A change in color, texture, or material at least every 50 feet
of fa ade length and extending at least 20 percent of the length of the fa ade.
5-11(F)(2)(h)   Art such as murals or sculpture that is privately-owned or
coordinated through the City Public Arts Program.
5-11(F)(2)(i)   Portals, arcades, canopies, trellises, awnings over windows, or
other elements that provide shade or protection from the weather.
5-11(G)   INDUSTRIAL DEVELOPMENT IN NR-LM OR NR-GM ANY ZONE DISTRICTS
All industrial development located in NR-LM or NR-GM zone districts shall
comply with the standards in this Subsection
14-16-5-11(G), except that Parking structures, including the portion of parking
structures incorporated into a building with allowable primary and/or accessory
uses, shall comply with the design standards in
14-16-5-5(G) (Parking Structure Design).
5-11(G)(1)   Each street-facing fa ade less than 150 feet in length shall
incorporate at least 1 of the following features along at least 15 percent of
the length of the fa ade, distributed along the fa ade so that at least 1 of
the incorporated features occurs every 50 feet:
5-11(G)(1)(a)   Transparent windows.
5-11(G)(1)(b)   Wall plane projections or recesses of at least 1 foot in depth
at least every 50 feet of fa ade length and extending at least 20 percent of
the length of the fa ade.
5-11(G)(1)(c)   A change in color, texture, or material at least every 50 feet
of fa ade length and extending at least 20 percent of the length of the fa ade.
5-11(G)(1)(d)   Art such as murals or sculpture that is privately-owned or
coordinated through the City Public Arts Program.
5-11(G)(1)(e)   Portals, arcades, canopies,trellises, awnings over windows, or
other elements that provide shade or protection from the weather.
5-11(G)(2)   Each street-facing fa ade shall incorporate at least 1 of the
following features along at least 10 percent of the length of the fa ade,
distributed along the fa ade so that at least 1 of the incorporated features
occurs every 150 feet:
5-11(G)(2)(a)   Transparent windows.
5-11(G)(2)(b)   Wall plane projections or recesses of at least 1 foot in depth
at least every 150 feet of fa ade length and extending at least 10 percent of
the length of the fa ade or 20 percent of the height of the fa ade.
5-11(G)(2)(c)   A change in color, texture, or material at least every 150 feet
of fa ade length and extending at least 20 percent of the length of the fa ade.
5-11(G)(2)(d)   Art such as murals or sculpture that is privately-owned or
coordinated through the City Public Arts Program.
5-11(G)(2)(e)   Portals, arcades, canopies, trellises, awnings over windows, or
other elements that provide shade or protection from the weather.
5-11(H)   HISTORIC BUILDING FA ADES
This Subsection
14-16-5-11(H) applies in the following mapped small area to buildings that are
listed on the National Register of Historic Places or the State Register of
Cultural Properties or that are determined to be eligible for listing by the
appropriate agency.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/b37713d5e40fc82694833f290401791f80be26ac/
IMAGES/0-0-0-6853.png]
5-11(H)(1)   Renovated buildings shall incorporate elements of the original fa
ade.
5-11(H)(2)   Existing original fa ade details shall not be covered with panels,
signs, or by painting them out.
5-11(H)(3)   The shape of existing original openings shall not be altered. If a
window must be blocked, maintain its original shape.
5-11(H)(4)   The original fa ade shall be restored, where possible, by removing
later additions of materials.
5-11(H)(5)   For demolition of historic buildings in certain mapped small
areas, see Subsection
14-16-6-6(B) (Demolition Outside of an HPO).
5-11(I)   PARKING STRUCTURES
Above-ground portions of buildings that contain parking structures shall meet
the design standards in Subsection
14-16-5-5(G) (Parking Structure Design) instead of the building design
standards in this Section
14-16-5-11. The remaining portion of the building shall meet the building
design standards in this Section
14-16-5-11.
5-12   SIGNS
5-12(A)   PURPOSE
This Section
14-16-5-12 is intended to promote and protect the public health, welfare, and
safety by regulating all types of existing and proposed signs. More
specifically, these regulations are intended to help implement adopted ABC Comp
Plan policies, protect property values, create a more attractive economic and
business climate, enhance and protect the physical appearance of the community,
preserve scenic and natural beauty, minimize sign clutter, reduce hazards that
may be caused by signs overhanging or projecting over public rights-of-way,
curb the deterioration of the community's appearance and attractiveness, comply
with all applicable federal and State laws regarding the First Amendment and
free speech, and avoid regulating signage based on content, viewpoint, or
message.
5-12(B)   APPLICABILITY
5-12(B)(1)   This Section
14-16-5-12 shall apply to the erection of all signs located outside of, or
located within but designed to be viewed from outside of, a structure in any
zone district, unless specifically exempted by this IDO.
5-12(B)(2)   
Part 14-16-3 (Overlay Zones) may include sign regulations, which prevail over
any other standards in this IDO.
5-12(B)(3)   Additional sign regulations listed in Section
14-16-4-3 (Use-specific Standards) may apply. In the case of conflict, the
stricter provision shall apply.
5-12(B)(4)   Notwithstanding Subsections (1), (2), and (3) above, the
provisions of this Section
14-16-5-12 shall not apply to any sign erected or required to be erected by any
State or federal governmental agency, or public utility provided that the size,
height, location, type and illumination of the sign comply with these
provisions to the maximum extent practicable, including compliance with the New
Mexico Night Sky Protection Act, as regulated by the State.
5-12(B)(5)   Any sign legally erected before the effective date of this IDO
that is no longer in compliance with the standards in this Section
14-16-5-12 may be retained in use, subject to the provisions of Subsection
14-16-6-8(F) (Nonconforming Signs).
5-12(B)(6)   For signs in the public right-of-way, see Section 8-2-2-1 of ROA
1994 (Traffic Control Devices, Signs Restricting Use of Streets) and the DPM.
5-12(C)   SIGNS PROHIBITED IN ALL ZONE DISTRICTS
The following signs are prohibited, and these types of signs shall be removed
or brought into conformance with this IDO and the DPM in accordance with
maintenance standards for signs in Subsection
14-16-5-13(B)(11) (Signs):
5-12(C)(1)   Any sign contributing to confusion of traffic control or
resembling traffic control lighting; unauthorized sign, signal, marking, or
device that purports to be or imitates official traffic control devices or
railroad signs or signals; unauthorized sign that attempts to control traffic
on any public right-of-way or private way; or sign that hides or interferes
with the effectiveness of any official traffic control devices or any railroad
signs or signals.
5-12(C)(2)   Any sign located in a clear sight triangle.
5-12(C)(3)   Any on-premises sign that advertises an activity, business,
product, or service no longer produced or conducted on the premises upon which
the sign is located for more than 30 calendar days after the vacancy or change
of business that causes the sign to become inaccurate.
5-12(C)(4)   Any rotating, pulsating, or oscillating beacon of light;
searchlight; or HID strobe light.
5-12(C)(5)   Any sign with an audible device.
5-12(D)   PERMITTING
In addition to complying with the applicable provisions for signs in this IDO,
a sign may require a Sign Permit as described in this Subsection
14-16-5-12(D) and in Subsection
14-16-6-5(C) (Permit - Sign).
5-12(D)(1)   Signs that Require a Sign Permit
5-12(D)(1)(a)   Unless exempted by Subsection
14-16-5-12(D)(2) (Activities That Do Not Require a Sign Permit), new signs that
meet any of the following criteria may not be erected until a Sign Permit is
obtained pursuant to Subsection
14-16-6-5(C) (Permit - Sign):
   1.   Signs with an area greater than 24 square feet.
   2.   Signs taller than 8 feet.
   3.   Illuminated signs.
   4.   Signs with moving elements.
   5.   Freestanding and projecting signs.
   6.   Portable signs.
   7.   Electronic signs, including changes to an existing sign that turn it
into an electronic sign and expansion of the electronic area of an electronic
sign.
5-12(D)(1)(b)   Electronic signs require an annual permit, pursuant to
Subsection
14-16-6-5(C) (Permit – Sign).
5-12(D)(2)   Activities That Do Not Require a Sign Permit
The following operations shall not require a sign permit provided that they
comply with the standards applicable to that type of sign in this IDO:
5-12(D)(2)(a)   Changing the advertising copy or message, including the
interchange of the sign face, on an approved painted or printed sign structure
or on a marquee or similar approved sign, provided that the size of the sign is
not changed.
5-12(D)(2)(b)   Painting, cleaning, and other normal maintenance and repair of
a sign or sign structure unless a structural change is made.
5-12(E)   STANDARDS APPLICABLE TO ALL SIGNS
5-12(E)(1)   Content
5-12(E)(1)(a)   The regulations in this Section
14-16-5-12 shall be administered and implemented without regard to sign content
or message, except as required to determine the applicability of and compliance
with Subsection
14-16-5-12(G) (Off-premises Signs).
5-12(E)(1)(b)   Any sign content or message may be substituted for different
sign content on any sign allowed under this Section
14-16-5-12, or on any sign that is a legal nonconforming sign under this IDO.
5-12(E)(2)   Location
5-12(E)(2)(a)   No sign or part of a sign shall be located on any property
without the consent of the owner, holder, lessee, agent, trustee, or other
party controlling the use of such property.
5-12(E)(2)(b)   Signs shall not be located within public waterline or sanitary
sewer easements.
5-12(E)(3)   Clearance
5-12(E)(3)(a)   Any part of a sign extending over a public right-of-way,
private way, or private walkway shall have a minimum vertical clearance of 8
feet above any sidewalk or walkway and a minimum vertical clearance of 12 feet
above any vehicle driving surface, unless it is a sign allowed by Subsection
14-16-5-12(F)(4)(b) (Portable Signs),
14-16-5-12(J) (Construction Period Sign), or
14-16-5-12(K) (Transit Shelter Signs).
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/b37713d5e40fc82694833f290401791f80be26ac/
IMAGES/0-0-0-6855.png]
5-12(E)(3)(b)   Approval from 1 of the following entities is required for any
part of any sign extending over a public right-of-way, private way, or private
walkway:
   1.   The City, for signs that extend over a public right-of-way.
   2.   The owner of the property containing the pedestrian traffic area, for
signs that extend over a private way or private walkway.
5-12(E)(4)   Design and Construction
5-12(E)(4)(a)   All signs shall be constructed of durable material and
maintained in good condition and repair, shall be securely anchored and
constructed to prevent lateral movement that would cause wear on supporting
connections, and shall be constructed to withstand expected wind loads
appropriate to design and installation.
5-12(E)(4)(b)   No sign may have overhead wiring to supply electric power,
except for a freestanding off-premises sign where underground power cannot be
accessed from the site.
5-12(E)(4)(c)   Sign supports for building-mounted signs other than allowed
rooftop signs shall be covered in a manner that integrates the sign with the
building design.
5-12(E)(4)(d)   Building-mounted signs, with the exception of wall signs, shall
not extend more than 2 feet above the wall of a building, except in the
following small areas, as noted.
   1.   East Downtown - CPO-4
Rooftop signs are allowed pursuant to Subsection
14-16-5-12(F)(3)(a) (Standards Applicable in Small Areas).
   2.   East Downtown - HPO-1
Rooftop signs are allowed pursuant to Subsection
14-16-5-12(F)(3)(b) (Standards Applicable in Small Areas).
   3.   Downtown Small Area
Rooftop signs in any Mixed?use or Non-residential zone district in or within
330 feet of the Downtown Center are allowed pursuant to Subsection
14-16-5-12(F)(3)(b) (Standards Applicable in Small Areas).
   4.   Nob Hill/Highland - CPO-8
Higher building-mounted signs are allowed pursuant to Subsection
14-16-3-4(I)(5)(c) (Signs).
   5.   Uptown Small Area
In the mapped small area below, signs may extend more than 2 feet above the
wall of the building if both of the following criteria are met.
      a.   The sign is a continuation of the plane where it is mounted.
      b.   No more than 25 percent of the sign height extends above the wall
where it is mounted.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/b37713d5e40fc82694833f290401791f80be26ac/
IMAGES/0-0-0-6857.png]
5-12(E)(4)(e)   Freestanding sign structures shall not use guy wires, bracing,
or external supports.
5-12(E)(5)   Illumination and Motion
5-12(E)(5)(a)   General
   1.   Signs may be internally or externally lit, provided that the light
source is not directly visible from the public right-of-way or from adjacent
properties unless specified otherwise in this IDO.
   2.   No white portion of an illuminated sign shall exceed the luminance
limits in
Table 5-12-1 during the hours of darkness.
 
TABLE 5-12-1: SIGN LUMINANCE LIMITS
ANSI/IES
Lighting Designation
Lighting Designation Maximum Luminance (Nits)
Lz1                  108
Lz2                  323
Lz3                  685
 
   3.   No sign or any part of any sign shall move or rotate at a rate of more
than once each 10 seconds, with the exception of wind devices, the motion of
which is not restricted.
   4.   No sign or any part of any sign shall change its message or picture at
a rate of more than once each 8 seconds.
5-12(E)(5)(b)   Residential Zone Districts
In any Residential zone district or within 50 feet in any direction of any
Residential zone district, both of the following requirements apply.
   1.   Illuminated signs are prohibited on lots with low-density residential
development.
   2.   No more than 1 sign per premises with multi-family, mixed-use, or non-
residential development shall be illuminated, apart from the general
illumination of the premises, between 11:00 PM and sunrise, unless Subsection
14-16-5-12(H)(4) (Illumination, Brightness, and Images) applies a more
restrictive standard.
5-12(E)(5)(c)   Mixed-use and Non-residential Zone Districts
An illuminated sign or illuminated element of a sign in any Mixed-use or Non-
residential zone district may turn on or off or change its brightness, provided
that all of the following requirements are met, unless Subsection
14-16-5-12(H)(4) (Illumination, Brightness, and Images) applies any more
restrictive standard or Subsection
14-16-5-12(F)(4)(a) (Neon Signs along Central Avenue) applies any less
restrictive standard to eligible signs.
   1.   The sign is not within 200 feet in any direction of any Residential
zone district and visible from that zone district.
   2.   The sign is not within 330 feet in any direction of Major Public Open
Space.
   3.   Change of illumination does not produce any apparent motion of the
visual image, including but not limited to illusion of moving objects, moving
patterns or bands of light, expanding or contracting shapes, or any similar
effect of animation except twinkling.
   4.   There is no continuous or sequential flashing in which more than 1/3 of
the lights are turned on or off at one time.
 
5-12(F)   ON-PREMISES SIGNS
5-12(F)(1)   Signs in Residential Zone Districts
5-12(F)(1)(a)   The provisions in this Subsection
14-16-5-12(F)(1) and
Table 5-12-1 apply to all signs in any Residential zone district unless
specified otherwise in this IDO.
5-12(F)(1)(b)   Notwithstanding the provisions in
Table 5-12-1, a Neighborhood Association representative on file with the Office
of Neighborhood Coordination (ONC) or the applicant for a subdivision is
allowed 1 monument or freestanding sign for every 5 acres of land within the
Neighborhood Association boundary or proposed subdivision area, up to a maximum
of 4 signs. If mounted on a perimeter wall, a letter of authorization from the
property owner must be submitted with the application.?
Table 5-12-2 On-premises Signs in Residential Zone Districts
Sign Type Zone District
          R-A R-MC R-1, R-T R-ML, R-MH
Table 5-12-2 On-premises Signs in Residential Zone Districts
Sign Type        Zone District
                 R-A                     R-MC R-1, R-T R-ML, R-MH
Residential Uses[1]
Wall Sign[2]
                 Low-density residential development: 1 / dwelling
Number, maximum  Multi-family residential development: 1 / building / street
                 frontage
                                                       Low-density residential:

Area, maximum[3] 4 sq. ft.               2 sq. ft.     2 sq. ft.
                                                       Multi-family
                                                       residential: 24 sq. ft.
                                                       Limited to signs not
Window Sign      Prohibited                            discernible from a
                                                       public right-of-way.
Yard Sign
                 1 / dwelling in lieu of
Number, maximum  wall sign if dwelling
                 is more than 30 ft.     Prohibited
                 from street
Area, maximum    2 sq. ft.
Monument Sign
                                                       Multi-family
Number, maximum                                        residential: 1 / street
                 Prohibited                            frontage
Area, maximum                                          24 sq. ft.
Height, maximum                                        4 ft.
Allowed and Nonconforming Non-residential Uses
Building-mounted or Freestanding Sign
Number, maximum  1 / street frontage
Area, maximum    24 sq. ft.
Height, maximum  Freestanding sign: 6 ft.
[1] This section of the table applies to residential uses and uses accessory to
the primary residential use, including but not limited to home occupation and
agricultural sales stand. For other non-residential uses, see the Allowed and
Nonconforming Non-residential Uses section of this table.
[2] For low-density residential development, wall signs are only allowed for a
use accessory to the primary residential use on the property.
[3] For wall signs, the maximum size in this table is the sign area allowed per
premises and may be achieved through one or multiple signs, as allowed by this
table.
 
5-12(F)(2)   Signs in Mixed-use and Non-residential Zone Districts
5-12(F)(2)(a)   General
The provisions in
Table 5-12-2 and this Subsection
14-16-5-12(F)(2) apply to all signs that are not located within any Residential
zone district unless specified otherwise in this IDO.
Table 5-12-3: On-premises Signs in Mixed-use and Non-residential Zone
Districts
          Zone District
Sign Type Mixed-use Zone Districts, NR-BP, NR-SU, NR-PO, PD, PC
          NR-C, NR-LM, NR-GM
Table 5-12-3: On-premises Signs in Mixed-use and Non-residential Zone
Districts
                    Zone District
Sign Type           Mixed-use Zone Districts,  NR-BP, NR-SU, NR-PO, PD,
                    NR-C, NR-LM, NR-GM         PC
Wall Sign
Number, maximum     N/A
                    Shall not exceed the
                    following percentages of
                    fa ade area, inclusive of
                    door and window openings:
Area, maximum       MX-T, MX-FB-ID: 5%
                    MX-L: 10%
                    MX-M, MX-H, MX-FB-FX, MX-
                    FB-AC, MX-FB-UD, NR-C: 15% Per approved plan[1]
                    NR-LM, NR-GM: 25%
                    Where there is no side
                    setback between 2
                    establishment frontages in
Location            the same or abutting
                    buildings, no wall sign
                    may extend closer than 2
                    feet to the shared edge of
                    the frontage.
                    No more than 15% of window and door areas may be
                    covered with signs.
Window Sign         On the ground floor, between 4 feet and 8 feet above
                    ground level, window signs shall be limited to 25% of
                    that area.
Canopy Sign
Number, maximum     1 / establishment frontage
                    MX-FB: 1 / entry/exit
                    50% of building frontage   Per approved plan[1]
Width, maximum      width
                    MX-FB-AC, MX-FB-UD: full
                    building frontage width
Height of message   Letters and images must be located on vertical
surface, maximum    surfaces,
                    which may not exceed 18 in. height.
Marquee Sign
                    A marquee sign is allowed
                    in lieu of not in addition
Number, maximum     to an allowable wall sign.
                    1 / theater or performance
                    venue frontage.            Per approved plan[1]
Area, maximum       Same as allowable maximum
                    area of wall sign.
Height of message   3 ft.
surface, maximum    MX-FB-AC, MX-FB-UD: 5 ft.
Projection, maximum 50% of the distance over any abutting sidewalk
                    or 10 ft. from the fa ade, whichever is less.
Projecting Sign
                    1 / establishment
Number, maximum[2]  MX-H and MX-FB: 1 /
                    establishment frontage     Per approved plan[1]
Area, maximum       Same as allowable maximum
                    size of freestanding sign.
                    30 in. from the fa ade
                    In the DT area and North 4th Corridor CPO-9, if the
Projection, maximum lower edge of sign is =12 ft. above sidewalk:
                    50% of the distance over any abutting sidewalk
                    75% of the distance over any abutting sidewalk on
                    Central Avenue between 1st and 8th Streets
Rooftop Sign
                    1 / building
                    Rooftop signs are only
                    allowed in small areas
Number, maximum     pursuant to Subsection
                    14-16-5-12(F)(3)
                    (Standards Applicable in   Per approved plan[1]
                    Small Areas).
Area, maximum       75 sq. ft.
                    15 ft. or 25% of the
Height, maximum     height of the building,
                    whichever is less.
Freestanding Sign
                    1 / premises / street
                    frontage. A freestanding
                    sign is allowed only where
                    there is at least 100 feet
Number, maximum[2]  of street frontage
                    or 1 / Joint Sign
                    Premises, pursuant to
                    Subsection
                    14-16-5-12(F)(2)(b).
                    MX-T, MX-FB-ID: 50 sq. ft.
                    MX-L: 100 sq. ft.
                    Any other Mixed-use zone
                    district, NR-C, NR-LM, NR-
                    GM:
                    100 sq. ft. at allowable
                    locations abutting a local Per approved plan[1]
                    or collector street.
Area, maximum       200 sq. ft. at allowable
                    locations abutting an
                    arterial street or
                    interstate highway.
                    300 sq. ft. at allowable
                    locations within 200 feet
                    of a through lane of an
                    interstate highway and
                    visible from the
                    interstate highway.
                    MX-T, MX-FB-ID: 9 ft.
                    MX-L: 18 ft.
Height, maximum[3]  Any other Mixed-use zone
                    district, NR-C, NR-LM, NR-
                    GM: 26 ft.
[1] Per approved NR-BP Master Development Plan; NR-SU, PD, or PC Site
Plan EPC; or NR-PO Master Plan as applicable. If no Master Development
Plan is approved or if the approved Master Development Plan does not
specify sign standards, see Subsection
14-16-2-5(B)(3)(c)3.
[2] For premises where freestanding signs are allowed, for each street
frontage, either a freestanding sign or projecting signs are allowed, not
both (i.e., projecting signs can be used on any street frontage where a
freestanding sign is not used).
[3] For any freestanding sign that is within 200 feet of a through lane
of an interstate highway, the maximum height is measured from the highway
road grade at the closest point from the premises.
 
5-12(F)(2)(b)   Joint Sign Premises
A Joint Sign Premises may be created by the owners of 2 or more abutting
premises who wish to cooperate in order to jointly obtain permission for 1
freestanding sign on the Joint Sign Premises. To qualify for a freestanding
sign, the Joint Sign Premises shall meet all of the following requirements.
   1.   The individual premises included in the Joint Sign Premises must each
have less than 100 feet of street frontage along the same street.
   2.   The combined premises shall have no less than 100 feet of frontage
along the same street.
   3.   The owners of the individual premises shall submit a joint agreement
with their application for a Sign Permit pursuant to Subsection
14-16-6-5(C).
5-12(F)(3)   Standards Applicable in Small Areas
In addition to other standards for on-premises signs, this Subsection
14-16-5-12(F)(3) applies as noted in the following small areas.
5-12(F)(3)(a)   East Downtown - CPO-4
Rooftop signs are allowed in any Mixed-use or Non-residential zone district in
the East Downtown - CPO-4 if they meet both of the following standards.
   1.   At least 70 percent of the sign area shall consist of open space,
through which the structural framework may be viewed.
   2.   The remaining portion of the sign area may consist of channel letters,
channel graphics, open lighting elements, or a solid panel.
5-12(F)(3)(b)   East Downtown - HPO-1
Rooftop signs are allowed in any Mixed-use or Non-residential zone district in
the East Downtown - HPO-1 if they meet both of the following standards.
   1.   At least 70 percent of the sign area shall consist of open space,
through which the structural framework may be viewed.
   2.   The remaining portion of the sign area may consist of channel letters,
channel graphics, open lighting elements, or a solid panel.
5-12(F)(3)(c)   Downtown Small Area
Rooftop signs are allowed in any Mixed?use or Non-residential zone district in
or within 330 feet of the Downtown Center if they meet both of the following
standards.
   1.   Only 30 percent of the sign area shall consist of channel letters,
channel graphics, open lighting elements, or a solid panel.
   2.   The structural framework of the sign shall be visible for the remaining
70 percent of the sign area.
5-12(F)(3)(d)   East Gateway Small Area
Projecting and freestanding signs shall be a maximum size of 75 square feet in
any Mixed-use zone district in the following mapped small area.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/b37713d5e40fc82694833f290401791f80be26ac/
IMAGES/0-0-0-6859.png]
5-12(F)(3)(e)   La Cueva Small Area
The following provisions apply in any Mixed-use or Non-residential zone
district in the following mapped small area.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/b37713d5e40fc82694833f290401791f80be26ac/
IMAGES/0-0-0-6861.png]
   1.   Wall signs are prohibited on fa ades that face abutting Residential
zone districts.
   2.   Freestanding signs shall be monument signs only and shall be a maximum
of 50 square feet with a maximum height of 8 feet.
5-12(F)(3)(f)   Sunport Boulevard Small Area
The following provisions apply in any Mixed-use or Non-residential zone
district in the following mapped small area.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/b37713d5e40fc82694833f290401791f80be26ac/
IMAGES/0-0-0-6863.png]
   1.   Only wall and freestanding signs are allowed.
   2.   Wall signs shall have a maximum size of 15 percent of the fa ade area,
inclusive of door and window openings.
   3.   Freestanding signs shall have a maximum size of 75 square feet and a
maximum height of 12 feet, except that properties over 5 acres may have 1
freestanding sign up to 26 feet in height within 200 feet of Sunport Boulevard.
   4.   The base of freestanding signs shall be surrounded by a landscaped area
of at least 36 square feet with a minimum of 75 percent vegetative cover.
   5.   No sign or any part of a sign shall rotate.
5-12(F)(3)(g)   Unser Boulevard Small Area
The following provisions apply in any Mixed-use or Non-residential zone
district in the following mapped small area.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/b37713d5e40fc82694833f290401791f80be26ac/
IMAGES/0-0-0-6865.png]
   1.   Only wall and freestanding signs are allowed.
   2.   Freestanding signs shall be a maximum size of 75 square feet with a
maximum height of 12 feet.
   3.   No sign or any part of a sign shall move or rotate.
5-12(F)(4)   Standards for Specific Types of Signs
5-12(F)(4)(a)   Neon Signs along Central Avenue
The provisions of this Subsection
14-16-5-12(F)(4)(a) provide size and height bonuses for qualifying neon on-
premises signs, allow animation, and provide incentives and flexibility from
otherwise applicable sign regulations in specific areas of the city. In case of
conflict between these standards and other sign standards applicable to the
same property, these standards shall prevail.
   1.   Applicability
The following additional regulations apply to:
      a.   Signs on all lots that abut or have direct frontage to Central
Avenue.
      b.   Signs on all lots located within 300 feet of the edge of the public
right-of-way of Central Avenue.
      c.   Signs located on lots located within 300 feet of an intersection of
Central Avenue and the following streets:
         i.   Tramway Boulevard.
         ii.   Juan Tabo Boulevard.
         iii.   Eubank Boulevard.
         iv.   Wyoming Boulevard.
         v.   Louisiana Boulevard.
         vi.   San Pedro Boulevard.
         vii.   San Mateo Boulevard.
         viii.   Yale Boulevard.
         ix.   University Boulevard.
         x.   I-25.
         xi.   Broadway Boulevard.
         xii.   Atrisco Drive.
         xiii.   Old Coors Drive.
         xiv.   Coors Boulevard.
         xv.   Unser Boulevard north of Central Avenue.
         xvi.   98th Street north of Central Avenue.
   2.   Eligibility for Incentives
In order to qualify for incentives in Subsection 3 below, the applicant must
comply with all of the following criteria.
      a.   Amount of Neon
Luminous neon shall comprise at least 50 percent of the sign face area and
include text and/or images.
      b.   Location
The sign shall not obscure portions of a building that contribute to
architectural character, including but not limited to doors and windows.
      c.   Lighting Technology
Signage that uses LED tubing or a similar alternative and has the appearance of
neon is allowed if it produces a continuous lit appearance similar to neon
lighting technology, and does not create darker and/or shadowy spaces between
individual LEDs that make the linear, illuminated image appear non-continuous.
Incandescent bulbs, another historic sign illumination type, or compact
fluorescent bulbs that appear to be incandescent bulbs shall comprise no more
than 50 percent of the sign face area.
      d.   Design Elements
The sign shall be consistent with at least 1 of the following design elements.
         i.   Sign Restoration
Restoration of a historic sign that includes neon and/or incandescent light
bulbs qualifies the applicant for the neon sign incentives in Subsection 3
below.
         ii.   Neon Design
The neon portion of the sign shall be intricate, creative, and expressive.
There shall be added text and/or imagery, preferably both, highlighted with
neon.
         iii.   Sign Design
If the sign is a rectangle or a square, the mounting structure shall have a
unique design that integrates with the sign.
         iv.   Illumination
One hundred (100) percent of the sign illumination shall consist of neon or
other historic forms of illumination, such as incandescent bulbs. Illumination
calculations exclude any portion of the sign that is backlit plastic panels
where sign content is painted or printed on the panel, instead of originating
from luminous tubing.
      e.   Compliance with National Electric Safety Code
All signs must be in compliance with the latest enforced clearance section of
the National Electric Safety Code, which governs minimum required clearance
distances for electric utilities. Electric overhead transmission lines are
located perpendicular and parallel to Central Ave. Electric overhead
distribution lines are frequently located in or overhanging the public ROW,
generally crossing or paralleling Central Avenue. All proposed neon
installations at these locations must be approved by PNM through the Sign
Permit process in Subsection
14-16-6-5(C) to ensure vertical and horizontal safety clearances.
   3.   Incentives and Flexibility
The following incentives and flexibility apply to signs that meet the
requirements of Subsections 1 and 2 above.
      a.   Sign area for a freestanding or projecting sign may be up to 50
percent larger than the sign area allowed in the underlying zone district, up
to a maximum of 250 square feet after the bonus is applied. Lettering is
allowed a proportionate size bonus.
      b.   Sign area for a building-mounted sign, except projecting signs, may
be up to 25 percent larger than the sign area allowed in the underlying zone
district. Lettering is allowed a proportionate size bonus.
      c.   The height of a freestanding sign shall not exceed 30 feet, except
that the height of a sign within 200 feet of a through lane of an interstate
highway shall not exceed 26 feet, as measured from the highway road grade at
the closest point from the premises.
      d.   The height of a building-mounted sign shall not exceed 110 percent
of the building height or 35 feet, whichever is less. Building-mounted signs
shall be located below the top edge of any non-residential portion of the
building to which it is attached, or shall otherwise be located so that the
illumination from the sign is shielded from any residential portion of the
building.
   4.   Animation
      a.   Flashing and physical movement of a sign and/or its elements are not
allowed and do not qualify as an animated sign.
      b.   Signs that meet the other standards of this Subsection
14-16-5-12(F)(4)(a) may be animated by changing the neon illumination in a
sequential or radial manner to produce apparent motion of the visual image.
5-12(F)(4)(b)   Portable Signs
   1.   Portable signs are only allowed for land uses in the Food, Beverage,
and Indoor Entertainment or Retail Sales categories in
Table 4-2-1, provided that they comply with the standards in
Table 5-12-3.
Table 5-12-4: Portable Sign Standards
Topic Standard
Table 5-12-4: Portable Sign Standards
Topic            Standard
Number, maximum  1 / establishment
Number of sides, 2
maximum
Size, maximum    6 sq. ft. / side
Width, maximum   2.5 ft.
Height, maximum  3 ft.
                 Must be located in front of the premises owned or occupied by the person or
                 entity placing the sign.
Location         May be located in the public right-of-way, on a private way, or on a walkway
                 but not within 2 feet of the curb, and not in areas that are required to be
                 clear for pedestrian movement next to any street furniture.
                 Must be constructed of wood, metal, or other durable materials in such
                 a manner as to resist movement by high winds. May consist of a
                 changeable writing board, chalkboard, or surface
                 that accommodates changeable letters. Paper signs, balloons, banners, and
Construction     wind-activated devices shall not be used or attached to a sign.
                 Must be constructed in a manner that incorporates a base from which
                 no supports or feet that may cause pedestrians to trip extend. No
                 external cables, brackets, wires, or props shall be allowed. No sign
                 that requires electricity or any other power source shall be allowed.
Pedestrian clear passage
Sidewalk <8 ft.   3 ft. wide shall be maintained at all times
wide
Sidewalk  8 ft.  6 ft. wide shall be maintained at all times
wide
                 Sign shall be removed outside of business hours and stored inside the
Removal of signs business and away from public view and shall be removed when weather
                 conditions create potentially hazardous conditions.
 
   2.   Portable signs and signs that are mounted on wheels or a movable
vehicle, or made easily movable in any manner, are prohibited in the following
small areas:
      a.   Coors Boulevard - CPO-2
      b.   The Alameda Boulevard Sub-area of the North I-25 - CPO-10.
5-12(F)(5)   Alternative Signage Plan
An Alternative Signage Plan is allowed pursuant to all of the provisions in
this Subsection
14-16-5-12(F)(5) and shall be reviewed and decided pursuant to Subsection
14-16-6-5(C)(2)(c) (Alternative Signage Plan).
5-12(F)(5)(a)   The subject property must be a minimum of 5 acres and located
in an Urban Center and in an MX-M, MX-H, MX-FB, NR-C, or NR-BP zone district.
5-12(F)(5)(b)   An Alternative Signage Plan may allow different sign types,
materials, location, means of projecting images, or forms of sign illumination
or motion, as well as greater individual sign area or height, than allowed by
other provisions in Subsection
14-16-5-12(F) (On-premises Signs) or
14-16-5-12(H) (Electronic Signs), subject to all of the following limitations.
   1.   No Alternative Signage Plan may allow a sign area greater than the
combined sign area that would be allowed by Subsection
14-16-5-12(F) (On-premises Signs) for all lots within the subject property.
   2.   No Alternative Signage Plan may allow a taller sign on a lot than would
otherwise be allowed by any Overlay zone regulating that lot.
   3.   No Alternative Signage Plan may allow an electronic sign in an area
where electronic signs are prohibited by Subsection
14-16-5-12(H) (Electronic Signs).
   4.   No Alternative Signage Plan may allow a change in sign illumination or
motion beyond that allowed by any part of Section
14-16-5-12 (Signs) for a property that is within 50 feet in any direction of
any Residential zone district or for a sign that is visible from any
Residential zone district.
5-12(G)   OFF-PREMISES SIGNS
5-12(G)(1)   Locations
5-12(G)(1)(a)   Off-premises signs are prohibited in any Residential zone
district.
5-12(G)(1)(b)   Off-premises signs are prohibited in the MX-T, MX-FB, and NR-PO
zone districts.
5-12(G)(1)(c)   Off-premises signs are only allowed in the NR-BP, NR-SU, PD, or
PC zone districts if the maximum number, size, height, and location of such
sign(s) are specifically authorized in the EPC or City Council decision
approving such zone district, including an associated Master Development Plan
or Site Plan.
5-12(G)(1)(d)   Off-premises signs are prohibited within 660 feet of Interstate
Highway 25 or Interstate Highway 40.
5-12(G)(1)(e)   Off-premises signs are prohibited in the following small areas:
   1.   Coors Boulevard - CPO-2
   2.   Downtown Small Area
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/b37713d5e40fc82694833f290401791f80be26ac/
IMAGES/0-0-0-6867.png]
   3.   East Downtown - CPO-4
   4.   East Downtown - HPO-1
   5.   East Gateway Small Area
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/b37713d5e40fc82694833f290401791f80be26ac/
IMAGES/0-0-0-6869.png]
   6.   La Cueva Small Area
Off-premises signs are prohibited in any Mixed-use zone district in the
following mapped area.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/b37713d5e40fc82694833f290401791f80be26ac/
IMAGES/0-0-0-6871.png]
   7.   Los Candelarias Small Area
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/b37713d5e40fc82694833f290401791f80be26ac/
IMAGES/0-0-0-6873.png]
   8.   Los Duranes - CPO-6
   9.   Nob Hill/Highland - CPO-8
   10.   North 4th Corridor - CPO-9
   11.   North I-25 - CPO-10, in the Alameda Boulevard Sub-area
   12.   Rio Grande Boulevard - CPO-11
   13.   South Yale Small Area
Off-premises signs are prohibited in any Mixed-use zone district in the
following mapped small area.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/b37713d5e40fc82694833f290401791f80be26ac/
IMAGES/0-0-0-6875.png]
   14.   Sunport Boulevard Small Area
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/b37713d5e40fc82694833f290401791f80be26ac/
IMAGES/0-0-0-6877.png]
   15.   Unser Boulevard Small Area
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/b37713d5e40fc82694833f290401791f80be26ac/
IMAGES/0-0-0-6879.png]
   16.   Uptown Small Area
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/b37713d5e40fc82694833f290401791f80be26ac/
IMAGES/0-0-0-6881.png]
   17.   Volcano Mesa - CPO-13
5-12(G)(2)   Standards
5-12(G)(2)(a)   Off-premises electronic signs must follow the regulations in
Section
14-16-5-12(H) (Electronic Signs).
5-12(G)(2)(b)   A new off-premises sign will be approved only upon removal of
an existing off-premises sign and support structure of equal or greater sign
area. The removed signs must be located on property of equivalent or less
intense zoning than the location of the proposed off-premises sign, as
determined by the Planning Director based on the maximum height and size of
development allowed in each zone district.
5-12(G)(2)(c)   Where allowed, off-premises signs shall comply with the
standards in
Table 5-12-4.
Table 5-12-5: Off-premises Signs in Mixed-use and Non-residential Zone
Districts
Topic Zone District
      MX-L MX-M, NR-C MX-H, NR-LM, NR-GM
Table 5-12-5: Off-premises Signs in Mixed-use and Non-residential Zone
Districts
Topic               Zone District
                    MX-L               MX-M, NR-C          MX-H, NR-LM, NR-GM
Type allowed
Area of Change      Freestanding or Wall
Area of Consistency Wall
                    New sign with removal of existing sign, pursuant to
Number, maximum     Subsections
                    14-16-5-12(G)(2)(b) and
                    14-16-5-12(H)(3)(b)
Separation, minimum[1]
From residential    150 ft.
use
From another off-   300 ft.
premises sign
From an existing
on-premises sign of
any type (for       100 ft.
freestanding signs
only)
Setback, minimum
From public right-  12 ft.             7 ft.
of-way
                                       Freestanding: 300   Freestanding: 672
                    72 sq. ft. plus 6  sq. ft. + 18 sq.    sq. ft. + 34 sq. ft.
Size, maximum       sq. ft. for add-on ft. for add-on sign for add-on sign
                    sign               Wall: Same as       Wall: Same as
                                       allowable on-       allowable on-
                                       premises sign       premises sign
Height, maximum     15 ft. plus 3 ft.  26 ft. plus 5 ft.   29 ft. plus 5 ft.
                    for add-on sign    for add-on sign     for add-on sign
Illumination        Prohibited         Same as allowable on-premises sign
Motion of sign or   Prohibited         Same as allowable on-premises sign
sign parts
[1] Separation distances do not apply to 2 sign faces of a V sign where only 1
sign face may be viewed at one time from any given lane of traffic, or signs
separated by a building or other obstruction so that only one sign is visible
at one time from the street.
 
5-12(H)   ELECTRONIC SIGNS
5-12(H)(1)   Applicability
5-12(H)(1)(a)   The standards in this Subsection
14-16-5-12(H), in addition to any other applicable standards in this Section
14-16-5-12 (Signs), apply to electronic signs, a specific type of illuminated
sign. In addition to a sign that is all electronic, the following also
constitute an electronic sign:
   1.   An existing sign that is modified to be partly or wholly electronic.
   2.   Any expansion of the electronic area of an electronic sign.
5-12(H)(1)(b)   Unless specified otherwise in this IDO, the standards in this
Subsection
14-16-5-12(H) apply to both on-premises and off-premises electronic signs.
5-12(H)(2)   Prohibited Areas
Electronic signs are prohibited in the following areas, as noted.
5-12(H)(2)(a)   Within any HPO zone or State or nationally registered historic
district.
5-12(H)(2)(b)   In residential development in any Residential zone district.
For other types of development in any Residential zone district, electronic
signs are limited to 25 percent of the total sign area.
5-12(H)(2)(c)   Within 660 feet of the outer edge of the public right-of-way of
the following streets:
   1.   Alameda Boulevard.
   2.   Griegos Road.
   3.   Rio Grande Boulevard.
   4.   Tramway Boulevard.
   5.   Unser Boulevard.
5-12(H)(2)(d)   Within 660 feet of the outer edge of the public right-of-way of
Coors Boulevard along the following 2 segments:
   1.   Between Calabacillas Arroyo and Saint Joseph Drive.
   2.   Between Central Avenue and the southern City limit.
5-12(H)(2)(e)   Within 1,320 feet ( mile) in any direction of Major Public Open
Space.
5-12(H)(2)(f)   In the following small areas as noted.
   1.   Downtown Neighborhood Area - CPO-3
Electronic signs are prohibited in the R-ML, MX-T, MX-L, and MX-M zone
districts in the Downtown Neighborhood Area - CPO-3.
   2.   East Gateway Small Area
Electronic signs are prohibited in Mixed-use zone districts in the following
mapped small area.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/b37713d5e40fc82694833f290401791f80be26ac/
IMAGES/0-0-0-6883.png]
   3.   North 4th Corridor - CPO-9
Electronic wall signs are prohibited in the following mapped area.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/b37713d5e40fc82694833f290401791f80be26ac/
IMAGES/0-0-0-6885.png]
   4.   Sawmill/Wells Park - CPO-12
Electronic signs are prohibited on any lot abutting Mountain Road in the
Sawmill/Wells Park - CPO-12.
   5.   Volcano Mesa - CPO-13
Electronic signs are prohibited in Volcano Mesa - CPO-13, except within the
Volcano Heights Urban Center as mapped in the ABC Comp Plan, as amended, where
they are allowed.
5-12(H)(3)   Type and Maximum Number of Electronic Signs
5-12(H)(3)(a)   On-premises Signs
   1.   If a premises meets the requirements for an electronic sign in this
Subsection
14-16-5-12(H), the premises shall not have more than 1 electronic sign.
   2.   The type of electronic sign is limited to a freestanding, wall, or
canopy sign and is also subject to provisions in
Table 5-12-1,
Table 5-12-2, and
Table 5-12-4.
5-12(H)(3)(b)   Off-premises Signs
   1.   The modification of an existing off-premises sign that makes the sign
an electronic sign shall constitute a new electronic sign. However, such
modification shall not cause an existing off-premises sign located in 1 of the
following areas to forfeit its status as a nonconforming sign only with respect
to its location along an interstate highway:
      a.   Within 660 feet of Interstate Highway 25.
      b.   Within 660 feet of Interstate Highway 40.
   2.   A new off-premises electronic sign may be allowed if the applicant can
demonstrate that existing off-premises signs and support structures containing
at least 3 times the advertising area of the proposed electronic sign will be
permanently removed.
   3.   The removed signs must be located on a property of equivalent or less
intense zoning than the location of the proposed off-premises electronic sign,
as determined by the Planning Director based on the maximum height and size of
development allowed in each zone district.
   4.   Off-premises signs that have been removed and not replaced may count as
removed advertising space for the purposes of permitting a new electronic off-
premises sign.
   5.   Subsections 2, 3, and 4 above shall not apply to the improvement,
upgrade, or replacement of an existing electronic sign so long as the
advertising space is not increased by such improvement, upgrade, or
replacement.
5-12(H)(4)   Illumination, Brightness, and Images
Electronic signs shall comply with all the following requirements, in addition
to any applicable and more restrictive requirements in Subsection
14-16-5-12(E)(5) (Illumination and Motion).
5-12(H)(4)(a)   Electronic signs shall have automatic dimming controls, with
either photocell (hardwired) or software settings.
5-12(H)(4)(b)   Electronic signs shall not exceed an illumination level of 0.3
foot candles above ambient light as measured from a distance specified in
Table 5-12-5 based on sign area, with the light meter held perpendicular to the
sign and targeting the color white.
Table 5-12-6: Illumination Measurement Distance
Area of Sign (sq. Measurement    Area of Sign (cont.) Measurement Distance
ft.)[1]           Distance (ft.) [1]                  (cont.)
Table 5-12-6: Illumination Measurement Distance
Area of Sign (sq. Measurement    Area of Sign (cont.) Measurement Distance
ft.)[1]           Distance (ft.) [1]                  (cont.)
10                32             65                   81
15                39             70                   84
20                45             75                   87
25                50             80                   89
30                55             85                   92
35                59             90                   95
40                63             95                   97
45                67             100                  100
50                71             300                  150
55                74             378                  200
60                77             672                  250
[1] For signs with an area other than those specifically listed in this
table, the measurement distance may be calculated with the following
formula: Measurement Distance (ft.) = square root of [Area of Electronic
Sign (sq. ft.) x 100].
 
5-12(H)(4)(c)   The luminance level shall also comply with any regulations for
illumination of on-premises or off-premises signs in Section
14-16-5-12 (Signs) as applicable.
5-12(H)(4)(d)   Electronic signs shall have only static messages and images.
5-12(H)(4)(e)   The message or image on an electronic sign shall not change
more often than once each 8 seconds.
5-12(H)(4)(f)   Transition between messages or images on an electronic sign
shall not exceed 1 second and shall not include any visual effects during that
time.
5-12(I)   TEMPORARY SIGNS
5-12(I)(1)   Standards
Temporary signs may be erected without obtaining a sign permit, provided that
they comply with the standards in
Table 5-12-7. They shall not count toward any maximum number of signs or sign
area allowed on a property.
Table 5-12-7: Temporary Sign Standards
Table 5-12-7: Temporary Sign Standards
Topic              Standard
Number, maximum    4 / premises
Size, maximum[1]   16 sq. ft.
                   4 ft. above the top of the highest wall on the lot where the
Height, maximum[1] sign is placed.
                   8 ft. if no walls exist on the lot where the sign is placed.
Illumination       Prohibited.
                   Prohibited on the wall of any building in a low-density
                   residential development.
Location           Prohibited in common areas, such as homeowner s association
                   areas and easements, unless approved by the owner of the
                   common area, or in the public right-of-way.
[1] Maximum size and height apply to the total sign area that may be used for
up to 4 signs.
 
5-12(I)(2)   Time Period
Temporary signs may be in place no longer than 15 calendar days, with the
following exceptions.
5-12(I)(2)(a)   One (1) temporary sign per street frontage may be displayed
during any time period that the property is actively listed for sale or for
rent.
5-12(I)(2)(b)   One (1) temporary sign per street frontage may be displayed
during any time period when the property is under construction allowed by a
valid building permit.
5-12(I)(2)(c)   One (1) temporary sign may be displayed for up to 60 calendar
days prior to and 10 calendar days after an election.
5-12(I)(2)(d)   Temporary signs associated with a Temporary Use must comply
with the standards in
Table 5-12-6 and may be displayed during the time period allowed pursuant to
any Use-specific Standards in Subsection
14-16-4-3(G) (Temporary Uses).
5-12(J)   CONSTRUCTION PERIOD SIGN
Signs during construction are allowable, provided that they comply with
Table 5-12-8 and the other provisions of this Subsection
14-16-5-12(J).
5-12(J)(1)   Requests to erect such a sign shall require approval from the
Planning Director.
5-12(J)(2)   Remediation or removal of substandard or improperly maintained
signs shall be in accordance with Subsection
14-16-5-13(B)(11) (Signs).
Table 5-12-8: Construction Period Sign Standards
Topic Standard
Table 5-12-8: Construction Period Sign Standards
Topic                   Standard
Number, maximum         4
Size, maximum[1]        20 sq. ft.
Height, maximum[1]      5 ft.
Height, individual sign Between 9.5 in. and 11 in.
Width, maximum[1]       5 ft.
Illumination            Prohibited
                        On private property or in the public right-of-way at a
Allowed locations       location approved by the City Department of Municipal
                        Development, but not within a median or at an
                        intersection.
                        Facing any low-density residential development.
                        On a local street.
Prohibited locations    Within 100 ft. of any Residential zone district on a
                        collector street.
                        Within 50 ft. of any residential use on an arterial
                        street.
[1] Unless referring to individual signs, maximum size, height, and width
apply to the total sign area that may be used for up to 4 signs.
 
5-12(K)   TRANSIT SHELTER SIGNS
Signs that are attached to or part of the structure of a transit shelter as
allowed in Section 6-5-5-18 of ROA 1994 (Sidewalks, Drive Pads, and Curb Ramp
Repair and Maintenance; Permitting Commercial Advertising on Transit Shelters)
shall comply with the provisions in
Table 5-12-9.
Table 5-12-9: Transit Shelter Sign Table
Table 5-12-9: Transit Shelter Sign Table
Topic                Standard
Number, maximum      1 / transit shelter
Size, maximum        24 sq. ft.
Height, Maximum      7 ft.
Illumination         Shall comply with all standards for a sign of that type
                     established in this IDO.
                     In the public right-of-way or on private property abutting
Allowed locations    the public right-of-way, with permission from the City
                     Transit Department.
                     Facing any low-density residential development.
                     On a local street.
Prohibited locations Within 100 ft. of any Residential zone district on a
                     collector street.
                     Within 50 ft. of any residential use on an arterial
                     street.
 
5-13   OPERATION AND MAINTENANCE
All properties in the city shall comply with the following standards for
operation and maintenance, as well as any standards for operations and
maintenance in the DPM, unless this IDO or another section of ROA 1994 provides
an exception or a different standard for operation or maintenance.
5-13(A)   OPERATING STANDARDS
All structures, uses, and activities in any zone district shall be used or
occupied to avoid creating any dangerous, injurious, noxious, or otherwise
objectionable condition that would create adverse impacts on the residents,
employees, or visitors on the property itself or on neighboring properties.
Uses and activities that operate in violation of applicable State or federal
statutes or this IDO are violations of this Section
14-16-5-13 and shall be subject to the penalties of Section
14-16-6-9 (Violations, Enforcement, and Penalties). Property owner
responsibilities under this Section include, but are not limited to, compliance
with the following standards.
5-13(A)(1)   Air Quality
All uses and activities shall be conducted in compliance with the requirements
of the Albuquerque-Bernalillo County Air Quality Control Board as set forth in
Chapter 20.11 of the New Mexico Administrative Code (NMAC) (Albuquerque-
Bernalillo County Air Quality Control Board).
5-13(A)(2)   Burning
5-13(A)(2)(a)   The burning of wood shall comply with Part 9-5-4 of ROA 1994
(Woodburning) and the standards and regulations established by the Albuquerque-
Bernalillo County Air Quality Control Board.
5-13(A)(2)(b)   No use or activity shall burn solid waste except as allowed
under Section 9-10-1-12 of ROA 1994 (Burning of Solid Waste) and in compliance
with the regulations established by the Albuquerque-Bernalillo County Air
Quality Control Board.
5-13(A)(3)   Electromagnetic Interference
Every Wireless Telecommunications Facility (WTF) shall meet health and safety
standards and electromagnetic interference regulations as established by the
Federal Communications Commission and any other federal or State agency with
authority to regulate electromagnetic emissions and interference.
5-13(A)(4)   Hazardous Materials
All uses and activities shall comply with all State and federal statutes and
regulations regarding the use, storage, handling, and transportation of
flammable liquids, liquefied petroleum, gases, explosives, hazardous materials,
hazardous wastes, toxic materials and solid wastes, as those terms are defined
by applicable statutes, rules, regulations, or ordinances.
5-13(A)(5)   Noise
All uses and activities shall comply with Article 9-9 of ROA 1994 (Noise
Control), as enforced by the City Environmental Health Department. Uses and
activities shall be conducted so as to avoid the creation of any noise that
would create a public nuisance or a nuisance interfering with the use and
enjoyment of adjacent properties.
5-13(A)(6)   Parking
All motor vehicles that are not parked inside a building must be operative and
shall not be partially or completely dismantled. Inoperative and dismantled
vehicles shall comply with the provisions of Article 8-5 of ROA 1994 (Stopping,
Standing, and Parking).
5-13(A)(7)   Vibration
All uses and activities shall be operated so that the ground vibration
inherently and recurrently generated is not perceptible, without instruments,
at any point on any property line of the site on which the use is located.
5-13(A)(8)   Waste and Recycled Materials
All waste and materials for recycling shall be managed to prevent fumes, dust,
fire hazard, leakage, drainage onto the ground, or rodent or insect
infestation, shall comply with Article 9-10 of ROA 1994 (Solid Waste Management
and Recycling), and shall be screened in accordance with Section
14-16-5-6(G) (Screening of Mechanical Equipment and Support Areas) of this IDO.
5-13(A)(9)   Weeds, Litter, and Snow
All properties shall be maintained free of waste, litter, and debris in
accordance with Article 9-8 of ROA 1994 (Weeds, Litter, and Snow).
5-13(B)   MAINTENANCE STANDARDS
All property, buildings, and structures shall be maintained in a clean and safe
condition and shall not create any public or private nuisance. When the
standards and procedures of this IDO or the conditions attached to any permit,
approval, or Variance require that any building or site feature be constructed
or installed, the property owner is responsible for maintaining those buildings
or site features in good repair as approved and for replacing required site
features if they are damaged or destroyed or, in the case of living materials,
if they become diseased or die after installation. Property owner obligations
include, but are not limited to, the following.
5-13(B)(1)   Alleys
All alleys shall be maintained by the abutting property owner.
5-13(B)(2)   Buildings and Structures
All primary and accessory buildings, structures, and site features shall be
maintained in good repair, whether occupied or vacant, and any damage or
destruction to any building or feature shall be repaired, replaced, or removed
within 90 calendar days after the City notifies the property owner of a
violation. In addition, all properties shall comply with the Articles of ROA
1994, as follows.
5-13(B)(2)(a)   All buildings shall be maintained to comply with Article 14-
2 of ROA 1994 (Fire Code).
5-13(B)(2)(b)   All residential buildings, as defined by the Uniform Housing
Code, shall be maintained to comply with Article 14-3 of ROA 1994 (Uniform
Housing Code).
5-13(B)(2)(c)   All commercial and industrial buildings, as defined by the
Uniform Administrative Code and Technical Codes, shall be maintained to comply
with all building and technical codes as adopted under Article 14-1 of ROA 1994
(Uniform Administrative Code and Technical Codes).
5-13(B)(3)   City Landmarks
5-13(B)(3)(a)   All landmarked structures shall receive reasonable maintenance
and security for the purposes of preserving those structures and carrying out
the intent of this Subsection
14-16-5-13(B)(3).
5-13(B)(3)(b)   Any occupied residential landmarked structure shall be
maintained to comply with Article 14-3 of ROA 1994 (Uniform Housing Code).
5-13(B)(3)(c)   The owner or any other person having legal custody or control
of a landmarked structure shall repair or stabilize the structure if it is
found to have any of the following defects:
   1.   A deteriorated or inadequate foundation.
   2.   Deteriorated, loose, or ineffective waterproofing and weatherproofing
of exterior walls, roofs, foundations, or floors, including broken windows or
doors.
   3.   Any fault in the building or structure that renders it structurally
unsafe or not properly watertight.
   4.   Parts that are inadequately attached that may fall and injure people or
damage property.
   5.   Significant architectural features, as described in the ordinance
designating the landmark, that are deteriorating or in need of stabilization to
insure their preservation.
   6.   Any other condition determined by appropriate City officials to cause
an immediate threat to public health, safety, or welfare.
5-13(B)(3)(d)   Any landmarked archeological site or vacant landmarked
structure shall be adequately secured against unauthorized entry.
5-13(B)(4)   Dilapidated Commercial Buildings and Properties
All non-residential buildings that meet the definition of a dilapidated
commercial building or property pursuant to Article 14-20 (Dilapidated
Commercial Buildings and Properties) shall be remediated as set forth in
Section 14-20-5.
5-13(B)(5)   Drainage and Stormwater Management Facilities
Maintenance shall be performed on a regular basis and follow the general
standards as established in the DPM.
5-13(B)(6)   Walls and Fences
Walls and fences shall be maintained in good repair.
5-13(B)(7)   Landscaping, Buffering, and Screening
5-13(B)(7)(a)   Landscaping, screening and buffering areas shall be maintained
in compliance with Articles 6-6 and 9-8 of ROA 1994 (Trees, Vegetation, and
Landscaping and Weeds, Litter, and Snow) and Section 4 of the Albuquerque
Bernalillo County Water Authority (ABCWUA) Legislation and Ordinances (Water
Waste Reduction Ordinance).
5-13(B)(7)(b)   All landscaped areas shall be maintained with a neat and
orderly appearance, which includes pruning, removal and replacement of dead or
diseased plants and trees, disposal of litter, repair of damaged walls and hard
surface areas, and upkeep of irrigation systems.
5-13(B)(7)(c)   Landscaped areas that become bare shall be re-vegetated to
avoid erosion.
5-13(B)(7)(d)   Where landscaping was installed pursuant to a Site Plan or
development approval, the landscaping shall be replaced according to any
landscaping and maintenance plan under that approval.
5-13(B)(7)(e)   Trees or plants that die shall be replaced by the owner as
expeditiously as possible, but in no case longer than 60 calendar days after
notice from the City. The replacement of dead vegetation is the responsibility
of the property owner.
5-13(B)(7)(f)   Street trees shall be maintained alive and healthy. Maintaining
and replacing street trees or other trees planted in the public right-of-way
are the responsibility of abutting property owners.
5-13(B)(8)   Parking, Circulation, and Loading Areas
5-13(B)(8)(a)   All drive-through lanes, loading areas, parking lots, and
structures, except driveways for single- and two-family dwellings, shall be
kept clean and maintained in good repair. These areas are subject to Article 9-
8 of ROA 1994 (Weeds, Litter, and Snow).
5-13(B)(8)(b)   Potholes, surface damage, and other hazardous conditions shall
be promptly repaired, and litter and debris shall be removed on a regular
basis.
5-13(B)(8)(c)   Within 24 hours of the end of a snowfall, the owner or operator
of each parking lot shall clear snow and ice from the parking area and the
sidewalks in front of such property.
5-13(B)(9)   Parks and Open Space
All City-owned or managed parks, trails, and Major Public Open Space shall be
maintained per City Parks and Recreation standards. Privately-owned parks,
trails, and/or open spaces shall be maintained by the property owner (often a
homeowner's association) to minimize safety hazards. These areas are subject to
Article 9-8 of ROA 1994 (Weeds, Litter, and Snow).
5-13(B)(10)   Sidewalks
All sidewalks shall be maintained by the abutting property owners, even if
separated by a rear wall.
5-13(B)(11)   Signs
All signs, including those that do not require a sign permit and those that do
not conform to the requirements of this IDO, shall comply with the following
standards. Any sign that is removed to comply with these standards shall be
replaced only if the replacement sign complies with the standards of Section
14-16-5-12 (Signs).
5-13(B)(11)(a)   All signs shall be maintained in good structural condition.
5-13(B)(11)(b)   Any sign, including any support structures, that is damaged,
inoperative, dilapidated, or dangerous shall be repaired or removed within 30
calendar days after notice from the City.
5-13(B)(11)(c)   Any sign that is chipped, peeled, or flaked to the extent that
it cannot be read in whole or in part shall be repainted or removed within 30
calendar days after notice from the City.
5-13(B)(11)(d)   Signs with missing letters, including signs with movable
letters, shall have missing letters replaced or be otherwise repaired in order
to be readable, within 30 calendar days after notice from the City.
5-13(B)(11)(e)   On-premises signs shall have content removed or be securely
covered within 60 calendar days of the termination of the use or business.
5-13(B)(11)(f)   Historic signs may be removed for restoration, repairs, and
maintenance if they are to be restored to original character as determined by
the Historic Preservation Planner through an approved Historic Certificate of
Appropriateness - Minor pursuant to Subsection
14-16-6-5(B). Historic signs shall be reinstalled in the same location within 1
year. After that period, a new sign permit shall be required, unless an
extension is granted by the Historic Preservation Planner.
5-13(B)(12)   Vacant Property
All vacant property shall be maintained in a clean condition, free of
nuisances, and in compliance with Articles 9-8 and 9-10 of ROA 1994 (Weeds,
Litter and Snow and Solid Waste Management and Recycling) and Section 14-3-5-14
of ROA 1994 (Vacant Building Maintenance).
Part 14-16-6   Administration and Enforcement
6-1   PROCEDURES SUMMARY TABLE
Table 6-1-1 lists the types of development applications regulated by this IDO.
For each type of application, the table specifies what type of notice is
required, whether pre-application meetings with Planning staff or Neighborhood
Associations are required, which City bodies review and make a decision on the
application, and in which cases a public hearing or quasi-judicial hearing is
required. At a public hearing, public testimony is allowed, and a record of the
proceeding is created. At a quasi-judicial hearing, the additional procedures
pursuant to Subsection
14-16-6-4(M)(3) are also followed.
Table 6-1-1
Table 6-1-1: Summary of Development Review Procedures
DHO = Development Hearing Officer EPC = Environmental Planning Commission LC = Landmarks Commission
ZHE = Zoning Hearing Examiner LUHO = Land Use Hearing Officer
X = Required [ ] = Public Hearing < > = Quasi-judicial Hearing
R = Review/Recommend D = Review and Decide AR = Appeal Review / Recommend AD = Appeal Review and Decide
            Mtgs                     Public Notice                         Review and Decision-making Bodies
                   6-4               6-4   6-4(K) 6-4(K)           6-4(K)  6-2   6-2 6-2 6-2 6-2 6-2
Subsection  6-4(B) (D)   6-4(L)      (K)   (3)    (4)    6-4(K)(5) (6)     (B)   (D) (E) (H) (J) (I)  6-2(A)  Specific
                                     (2)                                                                      Procedures
Application        City                           Posted           Web     City                       City
Type        Tribal Staff Facilitated Email Mailed Sign   Published Posting Staff DHO EPC LC  ZHE LUHO Council
                                                                           [1]                        [2]
Table 6-1-1: Summary of Development Review Procedures
DHO = Development Hearing Officer EPC = Environmental Planning Commission LC = Landmarks Commission
ZHE = Zoning Hearing Examiner LUHO = Land Use Hearing Officer
X = Required [ ] = Public Hearing < > = Quasi-judicial Hearing
R = Review/Recommend D = Review and Decide AR = Appeal Review / Recommend AD = Appeal Review and Decide
                                    Mtgs                     Public Notice                         Review and Decision-making Bodies
                                           6-4               6-4   6-4(K) 6-4(K)           6-4(K)  6-2   6-2 6-2 6-2  6-2 6-2
Subsection                          6-4(B) (D)   6-4(L)      (K)   (3)    (4)    6-4(K)(5) (6)     (B)   (D) (E) (H)  (J) (I)  6-2(A)  Specific
                                                             (2)                                                                       Procedures
                                           City                           Posted           Web     City                        City
Application Type                    Tribal Staff Facilitated Email Mailed Sign   Published Posting Staff DHO EPC LC   ZHE LUHO Council
                                                                                                   [1]                         [2]
Administrative Decisions
Archaeological Certificate[3]       X                        X     X                               D                      <AR> <AD>    6-5(A)
Historic Certificate of                    X                 X            X                        D             <AD>     <AR> <AD>    6-5(B)
Appropriateness Minor
Permit Sign
Permit                                                       X                             X       D                      <AR> <AD>    6-5(C)
Alternative Signage Plan                                     X            X                X       D                      <AR> <AD>    6-5(C)
Permit Temporary Use[4]                                            X                               D                      <AR> <AD>    6-5(D)
Permit Temporary Window Wrap[4]                                    X                               D                      <AR> <AD>    6-5(E)
Permit Wall or Fence Minor                                   X                             X       D                      <AR> <AD>    6-5(F)
Site Plan Administrative[5]                      X [6]       X            X                X       D                      <AR> <AD>    6-5(G)
Wireless Telecommunications                                  X     X                               D                      <AR> <AD>    6-5(H)
Facility Approval
Decisions Requiring a Public Hearing
Conditional Use Approval                         X           X     X      X      X         X       R                  <D> <AR> <AD>    6-6(A)
Demolition Outside of an HPO[7]                  X           X     X      X      X         X       R             <D>      <AR> <AD>    6-6(B)
Expansion of Nonconforming Use or                X           X     X      X                X       R                  <D> <AR> <AD>    6-6(C)
Structure
Historic Certificate of                    X                 X     X      X      X         X       R             <D>      <AR> <AD>    6-6(D)
Appropriateness Major
Historic Design Standards and                    X           X     X      X      X         X       R             <D>      <AR> <AD>    6-6(E)
Guidelines
Master Development Plan             X            X           X     X      X      X         X       R         <D>          <AR> <AD>    6-6(F)
Permit Carport                                               X     X      X                X                          <D> <AR> <AD>    6-6(G)
Permit Wall or Fence Major                                   X     X      X                X                          <D> <AR> <AD>    6-6(H)
Site Plan EPC                                                X     X      X      X         X       R         <D>          <AR> <AD>    6-6(I)
Subdivision of Land Bulk Land       X      X                 X     X      X      X         X       R     <D>              <AR> <AD>    6-6(J)
Subdivision of Land Minor           X                        X                             X       R     <D>              <AR> <AD>    6-6(K)
Subdivision of Land Major           X      X                 X     X      X      X         X       R     <D>              <AR> <AD>    6-6(L)
Vacation of Easement, Private Way, or Public Right-of-way
Vacation of Public or Private              X                                                       R     <D>              <AR> <AD>    6-6(M)
Easement or Private Way[8]
Vacation of Public Right-of-way – X      X     X           X     X      X      X         X       R     <D>              <AR> <AD>    6-6(M)
Council
Vacation of Public Right-of-way – X      X     X           X     X      X      X         X       R     <D>              <AR> <AD>    6-6(M)
DHO
Variance EPC                        X            X           X     X      X      X         X       R         <D>          <AR> <AD>    6-6(N)
Variance ZHE                        X            X           X     X      X      X         X       R                  <D> <AR> <AD>    6-6(O)
Waiver - DHO                        X            X           X                             X       R     <D>              <AR> <AD>    6-6(P)
Waiver Wireless Telecommunications                           X     X      X      X         X       R         <D>          <AR> <AD>    6-6(Q)
Facility
Policy Decisions
Adoption or Amendment of                                     X     X             X         X       R         [R]               [D]     6-7(A)
Comprehensive Plan
Adoption or Amendment of Facility                            X     X             X         X       R         [R]               [D]     6-7(B)
Plan
Adoption or Amendment of Historic          X     X           X     X      X      X         X       R             <R>           <D>     6-7(C)
Designation
Amendment to IDO Text Citywide                               X     X             X         X       R         [R]               [D]     6-7(D)
Amendment to IDO Text Small Area                             X     X             X         X       R         <R>               <D>     6-7(E)
Annexation of Land                                           X     X      X      X         X       R         <R>               <D>     6-7(F)
Zoning Map Amendment EPC            X            X           X     X      X      X         X       R         <D>          <AR> <AD>    6-7(G)
Zoning Map Amendment Council [9]    X                        X     X      X      X         X       R         <R>               <D>     6-7(H)
[1] May include Planning Department staff, Historic Preservation Planner, Impact Fee Administrator, Floodplain Administrator, City Engineer,
Parks and Recreation Department staff, or others, depending on the type of application involved and delegation of responsibilities granted.
[2] When a LUHO decision on an appeal is reviewed by City Council, the City Council will only hold a hearing if it does not uphold the LUHO
decision.
[3] Email and mail notice is only required to Indian Nations, Tribes, and Pueblos and tribal representatives pursuant to Subsection
14-16-6-4(K)(2)(f) and Subsection
14-16-6-4(K)(3)(e).
[4] Requires mailed notice to abutting property owners pursuant to Subsection
14-16-6-5(D)(2)(a)3.
[5] See Subsections
14-16-6-4(K)(2)(b) and
14-16-6-4(K)(4)(b) for exceptions to posted sign and electronic mail requirements for any Site Plan Administrative for low-density residential
development in that subdivision within 2 years after the approval for Subdivision of Land Major.
[6] Required for applications that meet thresholds established in Subsection
14-16-6-4(L)(1)(a)2.
[7] This procedure applies only if the Historic Preservation Planner determines, pursuant to Subsection
14-16-6-6(B)(2) (Demolition Outside of an HPO Procedure), that a hearing is necessary.
[8] This procedure is for easements on a plat only.
[9] Includes creation or amendment of text or map for APO, CPO, or VPO Zones.
 
6-2   REVIEW AND DECISION-MAKING BODIES
6-2(A)   CITY COUNCIL
The City Council is the zoning authority for the City of Albuquerque and has
authority to make decisions on those types of applications shown as City
Council responsibilities in
Table 6-1-1. The City Council has delegated some of its broad planning and
zoning authority to the Environmental Planning Commission (EPC) and Zoning
Hearing Examiner (ZHE) as authorized by law, and the effect of those
delegations is shown in this IDO. As the ultimate land use authority for the
City, appeals of decisions by any lower authority listed in this Section are
referred to the Land Use Hearing Officer (LUHO) for a hearing and
recommendation, and then reviewed or heard by the City Council for a final
determination.
6-2(B)   CITY STAFF
6-2(B)(1)   City Planning Department
The City Planning Department staff is responsible for day-to-day administration
of this IDO, unless this IDO states that another individual, department, or
body has a specific responsibility.
6-2(B)(1)(a)   City Archaeologist
   1.   The City Archaeologist is an employee or consultant of the City
Planning Department and has authority to approve or deny applications for a
Certificate of No Effect or for a Certificate of Approval of a proposed
treatment plan per Subsection
14-16-6-5(A) (Archaeological Certificate).
   2.   The City Archaeologist shall be a qualified archaeologist.
   3.   The City Archaeologist shall have the following responsibilities:
      a.   Consult the New Mexico Cultural Resources Information System and
other information sources to compile and maintain a digital database of
surveyed areas, site locations, site types, cultural time periods, and site
conditions that is compatible with the Albuquerque Geographic Information
System.
      b.   Determine whether an archaeological resource is of historic or pre-
historic significance.
      c.   Inspect ground-disturbing activities and/or archaeological
resources, as needed.
      d.   Coordinate with other departments and divisions as necessary to
ensure compliance with treatment plans.
      e.   Such other activities that will promote the public's understanding
and appreciation for the City of Albuquerque's archeology.
6-2(B)(1)(b)   Planning Director
The Planning Director has overall responsibility for the decisions of City
Planning Department staff and may delegate authority as necessary to any staff
member.
6-2(B)(1)(c)   Zoning Enforcement Officer
   1.   The Zoning Enforcement Officer (ZEO) is a member of the City Planning
Department staff and has authority to interpret this IDO pursuant to Subsection
14-16-6-4(A) (Interpretation).
   2.   The ZEO has responsibility for making formal determinations as to how
this IDO applies to specific situations, proposed development projects, and
lots.
   3.   The ZEO is the formal issuing authority for those permits, approvals,
licenses, or certificates that may be issued by the City Planning Department
without review or approval by a higher authority.
   4.   The ZEO has the authority determine whether violations of this IDO have
occurred and to determine which of the enforcement tools in Section
14-16-6-9 (Violations, Enforcement, and Penalties) will be used to enforce this
IDO, and in what order those tools will be used.
6-2(B)(1)(d)   Other City Planning Department Staff
The City Planning Department staff makes recommendations and decisions as
specified in
Table 6-1-1. Relevant City Planning Department staff members include the City
Engineer and his/her designee for hydrology and transportation, Historic
Preservation Planner, Impact Fee Administrator, Floodplain Administrator, and
others, depending on the type of application involved and delegation of
responsibilities granted.
6-2(B)(2)   Other City Department Staff
Other relevant City staff may include those from the Parks and Recreation
Department, Environmental Health Department, Department of Municipal
Development, or others, depending on the type of application involved and
delegation of responsibilities granted.
6-2(C)   DEVELOPMENT PROCESS MANUAL EXECUTIVE COMMITTEE
The Development Process Manual (DPM) Executive Committee is a group of 11
individuals appointed by the City to review and approve changes to the DPM.
6-2(C)(1)   Membership
The DPM Executive Committee membership includes:
6-2(C)(1)(a)   City Planning Department Director (Co-chair).
6-2(C)(1)(b)   City Department of Municipal Development Director or designated
representative (Co-chair).
6-2(C)(1)(c)   Manager or designated representative of Urban Design and
Development Division of the City Planning Department.
6-2(C)(1)(d)   City Engineer.
6-2(C)(1)(e)   City Attorney or designated representative.
6-2(C)(1)(f)   ABCWUA representative.
6-2(C)(1)(g)   Five (5) members who are actively involved in land development
activities either as developers, consultants, or planners or as representatives
of community organizations.
6-2(C)(2)   Responsibilities
The DPM Executive Committee is authorized to adopt changes to the DPM pursuant
to those procedures set forth in the DPM.
6-2(D)   DEVELOPMENT HEARING OFFICER
6-2(D)(1)   Membership and Qualifications
The Development Heairng Officer (DHO) shall have sufficient professional
experience in engineering, planning, and/or law to review comments provided by
staff from agencies, departments, stakeholders, and the public prior to final
decisions about private development and ensure that zoning and technical
standards, including but not limited to those regarding land use, zoning,
infrastructure, and transportation, have been met.
6-2(D)(2)   Appointment
The Mayor shall recommend candidate(s) for appointment with the advice and
consent of the City Council.
6-2(D)(3)   Responsibilities
The DHO conducts hearings and makes findings and final decisions on those types
of applications shown as a DHO decision in
Table 6-1-1.
6-2(E)   ENVIRONMENTAL PLANNING COMMISSION
The EPC is a 9-member board nominated by City Council members and appointed by
the Mayor with the advice and consent of the City Council. The EPC is the "City
Planning Commission" or the "Planning Commission" for the purposes of any other
law or policy that refers to such body.
6-2(E)(1)   Membership and Qualifications
6-2(E)(1)(a)   The EPC shall include a resident of each City Council District,
with experience in any of the following:
   1.   Community, urban, or natural resource planning.
   2.   Architecture.
   3.   Landscape architecture.
   4.   Urban design.
   5.   Real estate development.
   6.   Transportation.
   7.   Engineering.
   8.   Real estate and/or finance.
6-2(E)(1)(b)   Commissioners shall be subject to additional provisions,
including terms of office, in Article 2-6 of ROA 1994 (Public Boards,
Commissions, and Committees).
6-2(E)(2)   Appointments
6-2(E)(2)(a)   If an EPC member's term of office is ending, that member is
eligible for reappointment to the EPC, and the City Councilor in whose District
that member resides desires to reappoint the member, the City Councilor shall
so notify the City Council and the member shall be reappointed subject to the
advice and consent of the City Council.
6-2(E)(2)(b)   Prior to a vacancy on the EPC or upon the resignation of an EPC
member:
   1.   The Mayor shall notify a City Councilor in writing that his/her
District member's term will be expiring or that the position will be vacant,
and that the City Councilor shall have 60 calendar days to submit 2 recommended
appointments to fill that position. If the City Councilor fails to submit 2
names within 60 calendar days of notification, the Mayor shall have the right
to make the appointment subject to the advice and consent of the City Council.
   2.   The Mayor shall then recommend 1 of the 2 individuals recommended by
the City Councilor for appointment with the advice and consent of the City
Council.
   3.   The Mayor shall deliver to the City Council the Mayor's recommendation
from the 2 names submitted within 30 calendar days of delivery of the 2 names
to the Mayor. If the Mayor fails to timely make a recommendation from the 2
names submitted, the City Councilor who submitted the names may appoint one of
the 2 recommended members, subject to the advice and consent of the City
Council.
6-2(E)(3)   Responsibilities
The EPC has the responsibility to:
6-2(E)(3)(a)   Make recommendations or decisions on those application types
shown as EPC responsibilities in
Table 6-1-1.
6-2(E)(3)(b)   Review and decide Extraordinary Facilities in City Parks and
Open Space pursuant to Part 14-13-3 of ROA 1994 (Environmental Planning
Commission) and the Rank 2 Major Public Open Space Facility Plan.
6-2(E)(3)(c)   Make recommendations for programming of capital improvements for
the City pursuant to Article 2-12 of ROA 1994 (Capital Improvements) and the
resolution establishing priorities for each biannual capital improvement plan,
designation of land desirable and needed for public purposes, adoption of air
and water quality standards, and other appropriate matters.
6-2(E)(3)(d)   Review any recommendations, concerns, or comments provided by
commenting agencies, departments, stakeholders, and the public prior to final
decisions.
6-2(E)(3)(e)   Study urban and regional planning and means of protecting and
improving the environment and promote the understanding of planning and
environmental matters among public officials and residents of the city.
6-2(E)(3)(f)   Advise the Mayor, City Council, and City staff concerning the
development and revision of community goals, Community Planning Area
assessments, plans for urban development and protection of the environment,
policies on development and protection of the environment, ordinances
appropriate for affecting such plans and policies, and annexations to the City.
6-2(E)(3)(g)   Perform those duties and responsibilities and exercise those
powers that may be delegated to it by the City Council through this IDO or
independently of this IDO.
6-2(E)(3)(h)   Form standing committees or task forces from EPC members in
order to carry out the assigned duties, responsibilities, and powers of the
EPC.
6-2(F)   FLOODPLAIN ADMINISTRATOR
The Floodplain Administrator is the public official(s) designated by the City
Engineer to coordinate the community's participation in the National Flood
Insurance Program. The Floodplain Administrator is responsible for
administering and enforcing the provisions of Article 14-5 of ROA 1994 (Flood
Hazard and Drainage Control), which may affect the processing of applications
under this IDO for property in a Special Flood Hazard Area.
6-2(G)   IMPACT FEE ADMINISTRATOR
The Impact Fee Administrator is the public official(s) designated by the
Planning Director to interpret and enforce all provisions of Article 14-19 of
ROA 1994 (Impact Fees) and related rules and regulations in order to carry out
the general administration of all impact fees. The Impact Fee Administrator
shall have the responsibility to:
6-2(G)(1)   Establish a fee applicable to the most nearly equivalent land use
on the fee schedule when no equivalent type of land use is present in either
the impact fee schedule or in this IDO, or when a land use has been previously
determined to be a miscellaneous land use.
6-2(G)(2)   Establish the impact fee applicable to a particular development
using the procedures described in Article 14-19 of ROA 1994 (Impact Fees) and
related rules and regulations.
6-2(G)(3)   With respect to an independent fee determination described in more
detail in the DPM, the Impact Fee Administrator shall do all of the following:
6-2(G)(3)(a)   Conduct a pre-application meeting with the applicant and
representatives of appropriate departments of the City.
6-2(G)(3)(b)   In accordance with the requirements of Article 14-19 of ROA 1994
(Impact Fees), review the independent fee determination study for sufficiency,
methodology, technical accuracy, and findings.
6-2(G)(3)(c)   In accordance with the requirements of Article 14-19 of ROA 1994
(Impact Fees), establish the amount of the impact fee as a result of the
independent study based on the procedures described in Article 14-19 of ROA
1994 (Impact Fees) and any associated administrative rules.
6-2(G)(4)   Determine exemptions from the requirement to pay an impact fee or
reduction in the amount of the fee, based on this IDO, Article 14-19 of ROA
1994 (Impact Fees), and the DPM.
6-2(G)(5)   Determine the availability and the amount of any refund of an
impact fee.
6-2(G)(6)   Calculate the additional impact fee due in the event of a change of
use, redevelopment, or modifications of an existing use.
6-2(G)(7)   Calculate and grant credits for contributions, dedications, or
improvements that may be used to offset any impact fee otherwise due.
6-2(G)(8)   Maintain separate interest-bearing accounts clearly identifying the
payer and category of capital improvements within the service area in which the
fee was collected.
6-2(G)(9)   Ensure that a notice of impact fee assessment is included on the
final plat.
6-2(H)   LANDMARKS COMMISSION
The Landmarks Commission (LC) is a 7-member board appointed by the Mayor to
promote the preservation of Albuquerque's historic and architectural character
and to administer the development requirements for designated City historic
districts and landmarks pursuant to Section
14-16-3-5 (Historic Protection Overlay Zones) and Subsection
14-16-6-7(C) (Adoption or Amendment of Historic Designation).
6-2(H)(1)   Membership
The LC membership includes all of the following:
6-2(H)(1)(a)   Two (2) members who own property in an HPO zone.
6-2(H)(1)(b)   One (1) professional architect.
6-2(H)(1)(c)   One (1) licensed real estate agent.
6-2(H)(1)(d)   One (1) person knowledgeable in the area of historic
preservation.
6-2(H)(1)(e)   Two (2) additional members with demonstrated expertise in at
least 1 of the following areas:
   1.   Architecture.
   2.   Law.
   3.   Graphic arts.
   4.   Planning.
   5.   Real estate.
   6.   History.
   7.   Construction
   8.   Archaeology.
6-2(H)(2)   Qualifications, Terms, and Conduct
6-2(H)(2)(a)   Qualifications
All of the members shall have demonstrated, through previous experience or
training, an ability and interest relating to preservation of the historic and
architectural character of Albuquerque. Members may reside outside of the
boundaries of the City if they have special expertise.
6-2(H)(2)(b)   Terms of Office
The term of office for each member shall be 3 years, staggered so that
approximately one-third of the members' terms of office expire each year.
6-2(H)(2)(c)   Public Boards and Commissions
Except as provided in this Subsection
14-16-6-2(H), the qualifications, appointment, and conduct of the members of
the LC and its organizational structure shall be governed by Part 2-6-1 of ROA
1994 (Public Boards, Commissions, and Committees).
6-2(H)(3)   Responsibilities
The LC shall have the following powers:
6-2(H)(3)(a)   Conduct studies and programs designed to identify and evaluate
structures and areas worthy of historic conservation and to review the status
of structures and zones already designated.
6-2(H)(3)(b)   Recommend to the Mayor and City Council landmarks to be
designated by the City Council in accordance with the procedures established in
this article.
6-2(H)(3)(c)   Conduct public hearings on applications for Historic Protection
Overlay (HPO) zones or landmark structures or sites and make recommendations on
those applications to City Council.
6-2(H)(3)(d)   Prepare and adopt specific development guidelines for any
designated landmark or HPO zone.
6-2(H)(3)(e)   Make decisions on applications for Certificates of
Appropriateness - Major for alteration, new construction, or demolition in HPO
zones, in accordance with the procedures established in this IDO. The LC
delegates authority to make decisions on Certificates of Appropriateness -
Minor to the Historic Preservation Planner.
6-2(H)(3)(f)   Disseminate information to the public concerning historic
preservation and seek input from groups and individuals about these matters.
6-2(H)(3)(g)   Consider methods for encouraging and achieving historic
preservation and make recommendations to the Mayor and City Council.
6-2(H)(3)(h)   Advise the Mayor and City Council on any proposed public
improvements that impact the exterior appearance of historic landmarks or
significant structures in HPO zones.
6-2(H)(3)(i)   Review applications sent to the LC by the Historic Preservation
Planner for demolition of buildings 50 years or older in areas specified in
Subsection
14-16-6-6(B) (Demolition Outside of an HPO) that are outside of HPO zones to
determine whether there is a feasible alternative to demolition.
6-2(I)   LAND USE HEARING OFFICER
The Land Use Hearing Officer (LUHO) is an attorney designated by the City
Council to review and conduct hearings on land use appeals and to recommend
findings and determinations to the City Council on those matters shown as LUHO
responsibilities in
Table 6-1-1.
6-2(J)   ZONING HEARING EXAMINER
The Zoning Hearing Examiner (ZHE) conducts hearings and makes findings and
final decisions on those types of applications shown as ZHE decision
responsibilities in
Table 6-1-1. The ZHE shall have professional experience in both land use and
law.
6-3   THE PLANNING SYSTEM
The City of Albuquerque prepares and adopts Ranked City Plans to guide the
development and management of public facilities, as well as private development
within municipal boundaries. The City also analyzes development patterns and
makes recommendations through Community Planning Area Assessments to align
future private and public investments, policies, and regulations.
6-3(A)   RANK 1 COMPREHENSIVE PLAN
The Albuquerque/Bernalillo County Comprehensive Plan (ABC Comp Plan)
establishes a community vision for future development in the City of
Albuquerque and unincorporated areas of Bernalillo County to take place
primarily in Centers and Corridors and identifies long-range goals and policies
for community identity, land use, transportation, urban design, economic
development, housing, parks and open space, heritage conservation,
infrastructure, community facilities, services, and resilience and
sustainability, to realize that vision.
6-3(B)   RANK 2 FACILITY PLANS
Facility Plans provide policy guidance on a particular topic citywide to
relevant implementing departments. They normally cover only one type of natural
resource (such as Major Public Open Space) or one type of public facility or
utility (such as electricity transmission). These plans are required to be
consistent with the ABC Comp Plan, as amended, and to identify how they relate
to its vision, goals, and policies. In case of conflict, policies in the ABC
Comp Plan, as amended, shall prevail.
6-3(C)   RANK 3 PLANS
Rank 3 Plans provide policy guidance for a particular geographic area to
relevant implementing departments. Rank 3 Plans include Metropolitan
Redevelopment Area Plans, Master Plans, and Resource Management Plans. Rank 3
Metropolitan Redevelopment Area plans, adopted pursuant to Part 14-8-4 of ROA
1994 (Metropolitan Redevelopment Agency), contain strategies for catalytic
public investment and economic development. Rank 3 Master Plans or Resource
Management Plans developed and adopted by relevant implementing departments may
specify development standards, management policies, or multi-year programs of
capital improvements for particular public facilities or City-owned or managed
resources. Rank 3 Plans are not subject to the review and decision processes in
the IDO, but relevant implementing City departments may choose to have Rank 3
Plans reviewed by the EPC and/or accepted by the City Council when additional
input is desired.
6-3(D)   BIENNUAL UPDATES TO THE IDO
The Planning Department shall prepare amendments to the text of this IDO to be
submitted every other calendar year for an EPC hearing in October. Submittals
shall occur in odd-numbered years. These amendments shall be reviewed and
decided pursuant to Subsection
14-16-6-7(D) (Amendment to IDO Text Citywide) or Subsection
14-16-6-7(E) (Amendment to IDO Text Small Area), as applicable.
6-3(D)(1)   Anyone may submit recommended changes to the Planning Department
throughout the cycle, particularly during the CPA assessment process, as set
out in Subsection
14-16-6-3(E)(1) (Community Planning Area Assessments).
6-3(D)(2)   The Planning Department shall compile these recommendations,
perform analyses, revise recommendations as necessary, and submit proposed
amendments that further applicable goals and policies of the ABC Comp Plan, as
amended, as well as other City plans, and that protect the public health,
safety, and welfare. Each proposed amendment shall include all of the following
information:
6-3(D)(2)(a)   The page of the IDO that the amendment would revise.
6-3(D)(2)(b)   The section number and heading of the IDO that the amendment
would revise.
6-3(D)(2)(c)   A summary to explain the amendment's intent, origin, and need.
6-3(D)(3)   Changes recommended by a Community Planning Area (CPA) assessment
that has been accepted by City Council pursuant to Subsection
14-16-6-3(E)(7) shall be submitted for consideration at this time.
6-3(D)(4)   Notwithstanding the schedule for updates to the IDO in this
Subsection
14-16-6-3(D), the Planning Director may determine that an interim amendment to
the text of this IDO shall be submitted for review and decision to prevent a
significant threat to public health or safety.
6-3(D)(5)   Within 90 days of the effective date of each update, the Planning
Department shall provide presentations and/or trainings for relevant City
boards and commissions.
6-3(E)   COMMUNITY PLANNING AREA ASSESSMENTS
The City conducts analysis and long-range planning within each Community
Planning Area (CPA) established by the ABC Comp Plan. CPA assessments shall
inform updates and amendments to planning policies, zoning regulations,
technical standards for infrastructure, and capital improvement priorities.
These assessments are intended to recommend changes to Ranked City Plans on an
ongoing basis. Assessments are not part of the system of Ranked City Plans but
recommend changes to those plans on an ongoing basis.
6-3(E)(1)   The Planning Director shall create a regular, rotating schedule to
research, study, and analyze each CPA on an ongoing cycle.
6-3(E)(2)   The assessments shall analyze each CPA based on performance
measures established by the ABC Comp Plan, as amended, to reflect evolving
conditions, trends, and desired outcomes to reflect the unique status of each
CPA while also allowing comparison of objective data across the city.
6-3(E)(3)   The City Office of Neighborhood Coordination (ONC) shall be
involved in each assessment to ensure adequate notification, representation,
and participation of Neighborhood Associations.
6-3(E)(4)   Each assessment shall include visits and interactions with
residents, property owners, businesses, neighborhood associations, business
associations, and other stakeholders in each CPA.
6-3(E)(5)   Each assessment shall reflect the history, special places,
character, and capital needs of each CPA.
6-3(E)(6)   Based on the data, analyses, and findings of the assessments, the
Planning Director shall recommend updates and amendments as relevant and
necessary to the Rank 1 ABC Comp Plan, as amended; Rank 2 Facility Plans; Rank
3 Plans; the IDO; or the DPM. See also Subsection 14-16-6-4(D)(4) for the
annual IDO update process.
6-3(E)(7)   The Planning Director shall report the findings and recommendations
from each assessment to the EPC for review and recommendation to the City
Council. Assessments shall be forwarded to the City Council for review and
acceptance. Staff shall prepare resolutions and/or ordinances to accompany the
assessment that will implement the findings and recommendations of the
assessment for the consideration of the City Council. City Council shall review
for adoption any associated resolutions and/or ordinances.
6-3(F)   NEIGHBORHOOD ASSOCIATIONS
6-3(F)(1)   Recognized Neighborhood Associations and Coalitions
Neighborhood Associations and Coalitions may become Recognized Neighborhood
Associations and Coalitions pursuant to Part 14-8-2 of ROA 1994 (Neighborhood
Association Recognition Ordinance).
6-3(F)(2)   Responsibilities of the City
The City shall provide the following services:
6-3(F)(2)(a)   Provide an initial response within 7 business days of receipt of
any correspondence received from any Neighborhood Association that requests an
answer, definition, or status of any City project within their boundaries.
6-3(F)(2)(b)   Provide Neighborhood Associations with information about
appropriate City officials or agencies to contact for more information about
development projects, applications, public hearings, or review and processing
steps for applications of interest to any Neighborhood Association.
6-3(F)(2)(c)   Consult with Neighborhood Associations about current and
emerging trends or concerns in the neighborhoods, and about any changes to the
ABC Comp Plan, as amended, or this IDO desired by the Neighborhood Association,
as part of the City's CPA assessment process.
6-3(F)(2)(d)   Provide a City Leaders Academy on at least an annual basis to
inform Neighborhood Association members, officials, and other stakeholders
about the City's planning, zoning, subdivision, and development approval
processes.
6-3(F)(2)(e)   Adopt rules and guidelines as necessary to implement this
Subsection
14-16-6-3(F) (Neighborhood Associations).
6-4   GENERAL PROCEDURES
6-4(A)   INTERPRETATION
The ZEO has authority to interpret this IDO, including the authority to
determine its applicability to specific properties or situations and the
authority to interpret the boundaries of zone districts and Overlay zones on
the Official Zoning Map.
6-4(B)   PRE-SUBMITTAL TRIBAL MEETING
6-4(B)(1)   For applications meeting all of the following criteria, the
applicant shall offer at least 1 meeting to Indian Nations, Tribes, and Pueblos
no more than 1 calendar year before filing the application. In such cases,
project applications will not be accepted until a pre-submittal tribal meeting
has been held, or the requirements for a reasonable attempt in Subsection (3)
below have been met.
6-4(B)(1)(a)   
Table 6-1-1 requires a pre-submittal tribal meeting to be offered for that type
of application.
6-4(B)(1)(b)   The subject property is within 660 feet of Major Public Open
Space (including the Petroglyph National Monument) or tribal land.
6-4(B)(1)(c)   A pre-submittal tribal meeting was not offered for the same
subject property at a prior stage in the development process for the same
proposed project.
6-4(B)(2)   A meeting request shall be sent via email, if one is listed in the
contacts maintained by the Tribal Liaison with the City s Office of Native
American Affairs, or by Certified Mail, return receipt requested if no email is
listed, to both of the following:
6-4(B)(2)(a)   Indian Nations, Tribes, or Pueblos.
6-4(B)(2)(b)   Tribal Representatives.
      Either method constitutes a reasonable attempt to notify recipients of a
meeting request. The requirements of Subsection
14-16-6-4(J)(7) (Documentation of Good Faith Effort Required) also apply.
6-4(B)(3)   If any recipient of the request chooses to meet, he/she must
respond within 15 calendar days of the request (email or Certified Mail) being
sent. The meeting must be scheduled for a date within 30 calendar days but no
fewer than 15 calendar days after the recipient accepts the meeting request,
unless an earlier date is agreed upon. If no recipient responds within 15
calendar days of the request, the applicant may proceed pursuant to Subsection
(9) below.
6-4(B)(4)   The pre-submittal tribal meeting shall be facilitated by a neutral
third party designated by the City to facilitate land use discussions and
document the discussion in a meeting report. If a City-designated facilitator
is not available within the required timeframe, the applicant can facilitate
the meeting or arrange for another facilitator. A different facilitator may be
used if agreed to by the applicant and the tribal representative. Discussions
in these meetings and the meeting report have no legal binding. All other
requirements in this Subsection shall be met.
6-4(B)(5)   The facilitator shall email all recipients the scheduled meeting
date, time, and location.
6-4(B)(6)   At the pre-submittal tribal meeting, the applicant shall provide
information about the proposed project, including but not limited to the scope
of uses, approximate square footages for different uses, general site layout,
design guidelines, architectural style, conceptual elevations, and conceptual
landscaping plans.
6-4(B)(7)   The facilitator shall prepare and email a summary of the meeting to
the applicant, recipients who requested the meeting, and any other meeting
participants who signed in and provided an email address.
6-4(B)(8)   Where
Table 6-1-1 requires that a pre-submittal tribal meeting be offered, and a
meeting was held, the applicant shall provide all of the following as part of
the project application:
6-4(B)(8)(a)   proof that a meeting was offered.
6-4(B)(8)(b)   proof that the meeting occurred, including a sign-in sheet of
attendance.
6-4(B)(8)(c)   meeting location, date, and time.
6-4(B)(8)(d)   summary of discussion, including concerns raised, areas of
agreement and disagreement, and next steps identified, if any.
6-4(B)(8)(e)   identification of any design accommodations that may have been
made as a result of the meeting. If the concerns raised at the meeting have not
been accommodated, the applicant must identify the site or project constraints
that limit the ability to address those concerns.
6-4(B)(9)   Where
Table 6-1-1 requires that a pre-submittal tribal meeting be held, and a meeting
was not held, the requirement for a pre-submittal tribal meeting shall be
waived if the applicant can demonstrate that reasonable attempts were made to
notify tribal governments as required by Subsection (2) above, and no response
was received within 15 calendar days of the notice being sent.
6-4(C)   PRE-APPLICATION MEETING WITH CITY STAFF
6-4(C)(1)   The purpose of a pre-application meeting is to provide an
opportunity for an applicant and City staff to discuss applicable submittal
requirements and procedures; the scope, features, and potential impacts of the
proposed development on surrounding neighborhoods and infrastructure systems;
the consistency or inconsistency of the proposed application with the ABC Comp
Plan, as amended; applicable requirements and standards in this IDO; and
applicable requirements and standards in the DPM and to identify primary
contacts for the applicant and staff. For subdivision applications, this pre-
application meeting is referred to as a sketch plat.
6-4(C)(2)   A pre-application meeting with City staff is required for those
types of applications specified in
Table 6-1-1, and those types of applications will not be accepted until a pre-
application meeting is held
6-4(C)(3)   Potential applicants may request a meeting prior to submittal of
any application listed in Table 6-1-1. Complex projects, projects in small
areas with specific regulations and/or procedures, projects involving a subject
property included in a prior approval, and projects potentially involving
multiple applications may particularly benefit from a pre-application meeting
with City staff.
6-4(D)   WHO CAN SUBMIT AN APPLICATION
6-4(D)(1)   Unless specified otherwise in this IDO, an application under this
IDO related to a specific property or multiple properties may be submitted by:
6-4(D)(1)(a)   The owner of that property or an agent of the property owner
with the written consent of the property owner.
   1.   Where a property has more than one owner, all owners must consent in
writing to the filing of the application or show proof of legal authority to
act on behalf of the other owners. When the ownership status of some parties is
unclear (as shown on a title abstract or title insurance commitment), the owner
shall attest in writing that all of the property owners shown on a title
abstract or title insurance commitment have been notified of the application in
writing at their last known address as shown on the property tax records of
Bernalillo County.
   2.   Applications for zone map amendments are limited pursuant to
Subsections
14-16-6-7(G)(1)(b) and
14-16-6-7(H)(1)(c).
6-4(D)(1)(b)   The City.
When the City initiates action, it does so without predetermining the approval
or denial of the application.
6-4(D)(1)(c)   An entity with the authority to exercise the power of eminent
domain, provided that the approval of the application shall not be effective
until the entity has acquired an interest in the real property that is the
subject of the application.
6-4(D)(1)(d)   At least 51 percent of the property owners in a proposed small
area who agree in writing to the request to create a new small area with area-
specific regulation(s). This process does not apply to a new APO or HPO zone.
6-4(D)(1)(e)   The property owners in a proposed HPO zone.
6-4(D)(2)   An application to adopt or amend the ABC Comp Plan may be submitted
by the City or by any resident or property owner in the city.
6-4(D)(3)   An application to amend the text of this IDO may be submitted by
the City or any resident or property owner in the city. 14
6-4(D)(3)(a)   City Council may adopt amendments to the text of this IDO at any
time.
   1.   Such applications do not need to be submited to the EPC for review and
recommendation pursuant to
Part 14-16-6 (Administration and Enforcement) but may at the request of the
sponsoring City Councilor.
   2.   These amendments do not require consideration beyond what is required
for the City Council to adopt any ordinance.
   3.   A sponsoring City Councilor is not required to automatically recuse
themselves from applications they sponsor or sponsor by request.
6-4(D)(3)(b)   The Planning Department shall submit amendments to the text of
this IDO pursuant to Subsection
14-16-6-3(D) (Annual Updates to the IDO).
6-4(D)(4)   Annexation to the City may be accomplished by petition from 1 or
more property owners.
6-4(D)(4)(a)   A petition to annex land into the City must be signed by the
owners of a majority of the number of acres proposed to be annexed.
6-4(D)(4)(b)   If the land is located in the Middle Rio Grande Conservancy
District, the application must be signed by a majority of the owners of all
lands that are included in the territory to be annexed.
6-4(D)(4)(c)   Annexation may also be accomplished in any other manner provided
by New Mexico State law. If the provisions of this Subsection (5) conflict with
State law, the provisions of State law shall prevail.
 
Notes
14 City Council, O-24-69, adopted January 6, 2025 and effective January 28,
   2025. Revised editorially for clarity and consistency with the IDO.
6-4(E)   APPLICATION MATERIALS
6-4(E)(1)   Unless specified otherwise in this IDO, all applications shall be
submitted to the City Planning Department.
6-4(E)(2)   Each application shall include all forms and related information
required by the City for that type of application, as set forth in this IDO,
the DPM, any applicable Facility Plan, or on the City s website.
6-4(E)(3)   The applicant bears the burden of providing a sound justification
for the requested decision, based on substantial evidence.
6-4(E)(4)   The applicant bears the burden of showing compliance with required
standards through analysis, illustrations, or other exhibits as necessary.
6-4(F)   APPLICATION FEES
Each applicant shall pay any required application fee(s) established by the
City for the type of application(s) being submitted.
6-4(F)(1)   The City Planning Department shall maintain a fee schedule on the
City Planning Department website.
6-4(F)(2)   The Planning Director establishes application fees for all
applications listed in this IDO, as well as additional fees for research,
investigation, analysis, public notice, facilitated meetings, inspection,
enforcement, and issuance of official documents.
6-4(F)(3)   All fees shall be based on the estimated City time required to
review and process the application, as well as any other relevant costs,
including but not limited to required public notice.
6-4(F)(4)   No fee shall be required for an application submitted by the City.
6-4(G)   APPLICATION COMPLETENESS
6-4(G)(1)   On receiving a development application, the Planning Director shall
determine whether the application is complete. A complete application is one
that contains all information and application materials required by this IDO,
the DPM, and any administrative checklist for that type of development, in
sufficient detail and readability to evaluate the application for compliance
with applicable review standards in this IDO.
6-4(G)(2)   Incomplete applications shall be rejected.
6-4(G)(3)   If the Planning Director determines that an application is
incomplete, the Planning Director shall notify the applicant in writing of the
missing, incomplete, or unreadable materials within 5 business days after
receiving the application. The applicant may correct the deficiencies and
resubmit the application for a determination of completeness until the Planning
Director determines the application is complete. If the applicant fails to
resubmit an application with any additional or corrected materials necessary to
make the application complete within 60 calendar days after being notified of
submittal deficiencies, the application shall be considered abandoned, and any
application fees that have been paid and have not been expended during initial
review shall be refunded.
6-4(G)(4)   No development application shall be reviewed for compliance with
this IDO or scheduled for a public hearing by any decision-making body until it
is determined to be complete.
6-4(G)(5)   On determining that the application is complete, the Planning
Director shall accept the application for review in accordance with the
procedures and standards of this IDO.
6-4(H)   REQUIRED ANALYSES AND STUDIES
6-4(H)(1)   Cumulative Impacts Analysis
6-4(H)(1)(a)   A cumulative impacts analysis is required prior to approval of a
Site Plan EPC for any development in the Railroad and Spur Small Area that
meets the criteria in Subsection
14-16-5-2(E)(1). The cumulative impacts analysis shall be submitted as part of
the application materials and is subject to the application completeness
requirements of Subsection
14-16-6-4(G).
6-4(H)(1)(b)   The cumulative impacts analysis shall include all of the
following:
   1.   A list of other uses listed in Subsection
14-16-5-2(E)(1)(c) that are within 660 feet in any direction of the subject
property.
   2.   A Traffic Impact Study, pursuant to Subsection
14-16-5-2(E)(2)(c).
   3.   A list, estimated amount, and storage location of hazardous materials,
as defined by federal regulation, to be used for operations, including but not
limited to fuels.
   4.   A summary of sewer and storm water discharge, including volumes.
   5.   A Letter of Availability from the ABCWUA, including estimate of volume
of water to be used annually for operations.
   6.   The operating hours of the facility, including but not limited to times
when there may be delivery or movement of freight vehicles to and from the
property and activities that generate noise and occur outdoors.
   7.   A list of and copies of all permits required for the use.
6-4(H)(1)(c)   The cumulative impacts analysis shall identify any efforts to
avoid, minimize, or mitigate any impacts as outlined in Subsections
14-16-5-2(E)(2) and 14-16-6-4(H)(1)(b) and/or propose civic or environmental
benefits that outweigh the expected impacts.
6-4(H)(2)   Traffic Impact Study
6-4(H)(2)(a)   A traffic impact study may be required pursuant to standards in
the DPM or Subsection
14-16-5-2(E)(2)(c). The extent of the study or report will depend on the
location of the project, the amount of traffic generated from the development,
and the existing conditions in the project area.
6-4(H)(2)(b)   A scoping meeting with the City Engineer may be scheduled to
determine whether a traffic impact study is required.
6-4(H)(2)(c)   If a traffic impact study is required, it shall be submitted as
part of the application materials and is subject to the application
completeness requirements of Section
14-16-6-4(G).
6-4(H)(3)   Outdoor and Site Lighting Performance Analysis
6-4(H)(3)(a)   A cumulative impacts analysis is required prior to approval of a
Site Plan – EPC for any development in the Railroad and Spur Small Area that
meets the criteria in Subsection
14-16-5-2(E)(1). The cumulative impacts analysis shall be submitted as part of
the application materials and is subject to the application completeness
requirements of Subsection
14-16-6-4(G).
6-4(H)(3)(b)   The outdoor lighting plan shall include all of the following:
   1.   Luminaire locations, mounting heights, and aiming directions.
   2.   Illuminating Engineering Society (IES) photometric data.
   3.   Locations of buildings and structures.
   4.   Location of trees and shrubs above 4 feet high.
6-4(H)(3)(c)   An affidavit shall be submitted verifying that the lighting plan
meets both of the following:
   1.   ANSI/IES standards.
   2.   The requirements of Section
14-16-5-8 (Outdoor and Site Lighting).
6-4(H)(3)(d)   The lighting plan is subject to the application completeness
requirements of Subsection
14-16-6-4(G).
6-4(I)   REFERRALS TO COMMENTING AGENCIES
Following a determination that the application is complete, the Planning
Director, ZEO, or any City staff designated to review applications in
Table 6-1-1 shall refer applications for comment to the following departments
or agencies, as noted below. For administrative decisions in Table 6-1-1, any
comments received after such a referral and prior to the decision shall be
considered with the application materials in any further review and decision-
making procedures. For decisions that require a public hearing and policy
decisions in
Table 6-1-1, any comments received within 15 calendar days after such a
referral shall be considered with the application materials in any further
review and decision-making procedures.
6-4(I)(1)   General
City departments or agencies or other governmental or quasi-governmental
agencies whose services, properties, facilities, interests, or operations may
be affected.
6-4(I)(2)   Applications Involving Animal Keeping
For applications involving animal keeping, City Animal Welfare Department,
pursuant to Subsection
14-16-4-3(F)(3)(c).
6-4(I)(3)   Applications for Archaeological Certificate
For Certificate of No Effect or the Certificate of Approval pursuant to the
specific procedure in Subsection
14-16-6-5(A) Archaeological Certificate:
6-4(I)(3)(a)   Indian Nations, Tribes, or Pueblos.
6-4(I)(3)(b)   Tribal Representatives.
6-4(I)(4)   Applications for Variance ZHE
6-4(I)(4)(a)   Historic Preservation Planner for all applications in an HPO
zone or on a property or in a district listed on the State Register of Cultural
Properties or the National Register of Historic Places, pursuant to Subsection
14-16-6-5(B) (Historic Certificate of Appropriateness Minor) and Subsection
14-16-6-6(O)(2)(b).
6-4(I)(4)(b)   Parks and Recreation Open Space Superintendent for all
applications on a property adjacent to Major Public Open Space, pursuant to
Subsection
14-16-6-6(O)(2)(c).
6-4(I)(5)   Development Hearing Officer Applications
For Development Hearing Officer applications and, in the case of subdivisions,
signature on the final plat:
6-4(I)(5)(a)   ABCWUA.
6-4(I)(5)(b)   City Engineer designee for hydrology (who may also function as a
designee for AMAFCA).
6-4(I)(5)(c)   City Engineer designee for transportation.
6-4(I)(5)(d)   Parks and Recreation Department.
6-4(I)(5)(e)   Planning Director.
6-4(I)(5)(f)   Zoning Enforcement Officer.
6-4(I)(6)   Development in the Airport Protection Overlay Zone
City Aviation Department.
6-4(I)(7)   Development in the Kirtland Air Force Base Military Influence Area
6-4(I)(7)(a)   Kirtland Air Force Base staff.
6-4(I)(7)(b)   City Aviation Department staff.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/b37713d5e40fc82694833f290401791f80be26ac/
IMAGES/0-0-0-6887.png]
6-4(I)(8)   Development in the Northwest Mesa Escarpment View Protection
Overlay Zone (VPO-2)
6-4(I)(8)(a)   Indian Nations, Tribes, or Pueblos.
6-4(I)(8)(b)   Tribal Representatives.
6-4(I)(9)   Development within 660 feet of Major Public Open Space
6-4(I)(9)(a)   Indian Nations, Tribes, or Pueblos.
6-4(I)(9)(b)   Tribal Representatives.
6-4(I)(10)   Development within 660 feet of the Petroglyph National Monument
6-4(I)(10)(a)   Indian Nations, Tribes, or Pueblos.
6-4(I)(10)(b)   National Park Service.
6-4(I)(10)(c)   Open Space Division of the City Parks and Recreation
Department.
6-4(I)(10)(d)   Tribal Representatives.
6-4(I)(11)   Development within 660 feet of Tribal Land
6-4(I)(11)(a)   Indian Nations, Tribes, or Pueblos.
6-4(I)(11)(b)   Tribal Representatives.
6-4(I)(12)   Residential Development
Albuquerque Public Schools (APS). The City shall not approve any Subdivision
application that contains any residential use without providing APS an
opportunity to review and comment.
6-4(J)   PUBLIC NOTICE
Notice that is published, mailed, electronically mailed, posted by sign, or
posted on the City's website shall be required as shown in
Table 6-1-1 for different types of applications under this IDO, and shall
comply with the standards below. Notice shall also be provided pursuant to ONC
administrative instructions and the requirements of Part 14-8-2 of ROA 1994
(Neighborhood Association Recognition).
6-4(J)(1)   Content of the Notice
6-4(J)(1)(a)   All notice required by
Table 6-1-1 shall include, at a minimum, all of the following information:
   1.   The address of the property listed in the application.
   2.   The name of the property owner.
   3.   The name of the applicant (if different from the property owner).
   4.   A short summary of the approval being requested (e.g. Conditional Use
Approval to allow a particular use, Zoning Map Amendment from an existing zone
district to a specified district, a Site Plan - EPC for a particular project,
etc.).
   5.   Whether a public hearing will be required, and if so the date, time,
and place of the public hearing.
   6.   An address, telephone number, or website where additional information
about the application can be obtained.
6-4(J)(1)(b)   For mailed or electronic mail notice, the following additional
information, at a minimum, shall be included using the relevant notification
form provided by the Planning Department; information included as an attachment
or as a link to a website where such information is available is acceptable:
      1.   A Zone Atlas page specifying the subject property.
      2.   Architectural drawings, elevations of the proposed building(s), or
other illustrations of the proposed application, as relevant.
      3.   An explanation of any deviations, Variances, or Waivers being
requested, if any.
      4.   The summary of the pre-submittal neighborhood meeting, if one
occurred.
      5.   For notice associated with a Site Plan application, a site plan that
shows, at a minimum, the following information shall be included:
         a.   The location of proposed buildings and landscape areas.
         b.   Access and circulation for vehicles and pedestrians.
         c.   The maximum height of any proposed structures, with building
elevations.
         d.   For residential development: The maximum number of proposed
dwelling units.
         e.   For non-residential development: The total gross floor area of
the proposed project and the gross floor area for each proposed use.
6-4(J)(2)   Electronic Mail
Where
Table 6-1-1 requires email notice, the applicant shall send an electronic mail
notice to the e-mail addresses on file with the ONC for each Neighborhood
Association whose boundaries are within 660 feet of the subject property,
except as specified otherwise below.
6-4(J)(2)(a)   For applications where mailed notice to Neighborhood
Associations is also required pursuant to Subsection
14-16-6-4(J)(3)(b), electronic mail notice fulfills the mailed notice
requirement in that Subsection. If any Neighborhood Association representatives
do not have an email address on file with the ONC, mailed notice to those
representatives is required pursuant to Subsection
14-16-6-4(J)(3)(b) below.
6-4(J)(2)(b)   For a period of 2 years after a Subdivision of Land - Major is
approved, a Site Plan - Administrative for low-density residential development
within that subdivision is exempt from the electronic mail notice requirement.
After that time, electronic mail notice is required.
6-4(J)(2)(c)   Electronic mail notice is not required for appeals of those
decisions where Table 6-1-1 requires electronic mail notice of the initial
application.
6-4(J)(2)(d)   For applications related to a Wireless Telecommunications
Facility (WTF), electronic mail notice is required to any Neighborhood
Association within 1,320 feet ( mile) in any direction of the subject property.
6-4(J)(2)(e)   For applications related to a citywide Policy Decision,
electronic mail notice is required to all Neighborhood Associations.
6-4(J)(2)(f)   For applications for an Archaeological Certificate, electronic
mail notice is required to Indian Nations, Tribes, and Pueblos and to tribal
representatives pursuant to Subsection
14-16-6-5(A)(2)(a).
6-4(J)(3)   Mailed
6-4(J)(3)(a)   General Requirements
   1.   For the purposes of providing mailed notice, First-class Mail shall
constitute reasonable attempt to notify, with the following exceptions.
      a.   In the case of an application for a subject property less than 10
acres to request an Annexation of Land or Zoning Map Amendment, the letters to
property owners required pursuant to Subsection
14-16-6-4(J)(3)(c) must be sent by Certified Mail.
      b.   In the case of an application for a subject property 10 acres or
more to request an Annexation of Land or Zoning Map Amendment, if the notice by
First-class Mail to a property owner is returned undelivered, the City shall
attempt to discover that owner's most recent address, and the applicant shall
remit the notice by Certified Mail, return receipt requested, to that address.
   2.   Mailed notice shall be provided at the applicant's expense.
   3.   The applicant shall be required to provide evidence that required
notices have been mailed at least 3 calendar days before a weekly public
hearing or at least 15 calendar days before a monthly public hearing.
6-4(J)(3)(b)   Notice to Neighborhood Associations
Where
Table 6-1-1 requires mailed notice in addition to email notice, mailed notice
to Neighborhood Association representatives is only required if there is no
email address on file for that representative.
6-4(J)(3)(c)   Notice to Property Owners
Where
Table 6-1-1 requires mailed notice for Administrative Decisions, Decisions
Requiring a Public Hearing, Amendments to Zoning Map, Adoption or Amendment of
Historic Designation, or Annexation of Land, the applicant shall mail a notice
to all of the following:
   1.   Owner of any property listed in the application, if the property owner
is not the applicant.
   2.   All owners, as listed in the records of the Bernalillo County Assessor,
of property located partially or completely within 100 feet in any direction of
the subject property. Where the edge of that 100-foot buffer area falls within
any public right-of-way, adjacent properties shall be included.
6-4(J)(3)(d)   Notice for Amendment to IDO Text - Small Area
Where
Table 6-1-1 requires mailed notice for an application for an Amendment to IDO
Text – Small Area, the applicant shall mail a notice to all of the following,
in addition to Neighborhood Associations pursuant to Subsection
14-16-6-4(J)(3)(b):
   1.   The owners of the properties within the small area.
   2.   All owners, as listed in the records of the Bernalillo County Assessor,
of property located partially or completely within 100 feet in any direction of
the proposed small area. Where the edge of that 100-foot buffer area falls
within any public right-of-way, adjacent properties shall be included.
6-4(J)(3)(e)   Notice for Archaeological Certificate
Where
Table 6-1-1 requires mailed notice for an application for an Archaeological
Certificate, the applicant shall send notice via certified mail to Indian
Nations, Tribes, and Pueblos pursuant to Subsection
14-16-6-5(A)(2)(a).
6-4(J)(3)(f)   Notice for Appeals
Mailed notice is not required for appeals of those decisions where
Table 6-1-1 requires mailed notice of the initial application.
6-4(J)(3)(g)   Notice for Expiration or Termination of Resident Occupancy in
Mobile Home Dwellings or Manufactured Homes
Changes of use in or rezoning of subject property that will result in
expiration or termination of resident occupancy require notice pursuant to
Subsection
14-16-2-3(C)(3)(g) (R-MC Zone District Standards) for any of the following:
   1.   Changes of use in or rezoning of a subject property in the R-MC zone
district.
   2.   Pursuant to Subsection
14-16-6-8(C)(7)(d), changes of use in or rezoning of a subject property that
includes any mobile home dwelling in any zone district.
   3.   Pursuant to Subsection
14-16-4-3(B)(1)(b)4.d, changes of use in or rezoning of developments that
include 2 or more manufactured homes in any zone district.
6-4(J)(4)   Posted Sign
6-4(J)(4)(a)   Where
Table 6-1-1 requires posted sign notice, the applicant shall post at least 1
sign on each street abutting the property that is the subject of the
application, at a point clearly visible from that street.
6-4(J)(4)(b)   For administrative decisions in
Table 6-1-1, the sign shall be posted for at least 5 calendar days after
submitting the application and for the required appeal period after any final
decision, pursuant to Subsection
14-16-6-4(U)(3)(a)1.
6-4(J)(4)(c)   For decisions requiring a public hearing or policy decisions in
Table 6-1-1, the sign shall be posted for at least 15 calendar days before a
required public hearing and for the required appeal period following any final
decision, pursuant to Subsection
14-16-6-4(T) and Subsection
14-16-6-4(U)(3)(a)1.
6-4(J)(4)(d)   Signs shall be furnished by the City.
6-4(J)(4)(e)   For a period of 2 years after a Subdivision of Land – Major is
approved, required posted signs for any Site Plan – Administrative for low-
density residential development within that subdivision may be provided on
kiosks with weather protection, constructed at the applicant’s expense, where
signs can be posted for as long as construction is active, in lieu of posting
individual signs on each lot.
   1.   The kiosks must be located on private property at all entrances to the
subdivision.
   2.   The sign content required pursuant to Subsection
14-16-6-4(J)(1)(a) must be shown but can be consolidated if applicable to
multiple lots.
   3.   A map that clearly identifies the lots with applications for Site Plan
Administrative must be included.
6-4(J)(4)(f)   Posted sign notice is not required for appeals.
6-4(J)(5)   Published
Where
Table 6-1-1 requires published notice, the City shall publish a notice in a
newspaper of general circulation within the city at least 15 calendar days
before the public hearing. If initial notice of a public hearing has been
provided, additional notice shall not be required if the public hearing is
begun and then continued to a specific date, or for an appeal of the decision.
6-4(J)(6)   Web Posting
Where
Table 6-1-1 requires web posting notice, the City shall post a notice on the
City's website. The notice shall generally be in the form of a hearing agenda,
list of applications, or a Notice of Decision.
6-4(J)(7)   Documentation of Good Faith Effort Required
6-4(J)(7)(a)   In any case where an applicant is required to provide mailed,
posted, or electronic notice, the applicant shall be required to submit
evidence that timely notice has been made, including the dates on which notice
was provided, a copy of the text of the notice provided, and a list of those
addresses and e-mail addresses to which mailed and electronic notice has been
sent.
6-4(J)(7)(b)   In any case where mailed notice is returned to sender or email
notice is returned as undeliverable, the applicant shall request updated
information from the City and re-send any required notice to the updated
address, if different.
6-4(J)(7)(c)   Failure to provide evidence of timely mailing or electronic
notice of required notices to Neighborhood Associations shall result in
postponement of the public hearing unless the City receives written notice from
each Neighborhood Association required to receive mailed notice that it has
received notice and has no objection to the hearing proceeding as scheduled, or
unless Subsection (d) below applies.
6-4(J)(7)(d)   Failure to provide evidence of required mailed notice to any
individual other than a Neighborhood Association representative may result in
the postponement of further review of the application unless the City
determines that those parties required to receive mailed notice have received
notice of the public hearing or unless Subsection (e) below applies.
6-4(J)(7)(e)   If the applicant provides evidence that the required notices
were timely provided, then failure of a property owner or Neighborhood
Association to receive actual notice due to changes of address since the latest
update to the City or County real estate records, or due to changes of e-mail
addresses since those were last provided to the City, or due to errors in
postal delivery or newspaper publishing, or for other reasons beyond the
control of applicant or City, shall not be grounds for a delay of application
review or public hearings, or for appeal of the resulting decision.
6-4(K)   POST-SUBMITTAL FACILITATED MEETING
6-4(K)(1)   Requesting a Post-submittal Facilitated Meeting
6-4(K)(1)(a)   Once an application for a decision listed in
Table 6-1-1 is accepted as complete by the City Planning Department, property
owners within 330 feet and Neighborhood Associations within 660 feet in any
direction of the subject property may request a post-submittal facilitated
meeting in the following circumstances, as applicable:
   1.   Except for Site Plan - Administrative,
Table 6-1-1 specifies that a facilitated meeting is eligible for that
application type.
   2.   For a Site Plan - Administrative, the application proposes a new
building or multiple new buildings that include a total of any of the
following:
      a.   More than 100 multi-family residential dwelling units.
      b.   More than 50,000 square feet of non-residential development.
6-4(K)(1)(b)   Requests for a post-submittal facilitated meeting shall be
submitted to the Planning Director in writing and must include, at a minimum,
the following:
   1.   Why a post-submittal facilitated meeting is being requested.
   2.   What specific items are requested to be discussed.
   3.   What outcomes are wanted from the discussion.
   4.   A commitment to negotiating with the applicant in good faith about how
the proposed development could be changed to lessen anticipated negative
impacts on the surrounding area in ways that can reasonably be accommodated by
the proposed development.
6-4(K)(1)(c)   The Planning Director shall notify the applicant of a request
for a post-submittal facilitated meeting, if requested by a party other than
the applicant, within 2 business days.
6-4(K)(2)   Criteria for Delaying a Decision
The City will delay the decision on the application to allow a post-submittal
facilitated meeting as follows.
6-4(K)(2)(a)   Administrative Decisions
The following apply to all requests for a post-submittal facilitated meeting
associated with an Administrative Decision as shown in
Table 6-1-1 and pursuant to the criteria in
14-16-6-4(L)(1)(a)2.
   1.   One facilitated meeting can be requested and required.
   2.   A facilitated meeting shall be requested no more than 10 business days
after any public notice has been provided as required pursuant to
Table 6-1-1.
   3.   A final decision by City staff will not be made until after the post-
submittal facilitated meeting has taken place and the meeting summary has been
received and reviewed by City staff.
6-4(K)(2)(b)   Decisions Requiring a Public Hearing and Policy Decisions
The following apply to all requests for a post-submittal facilitated meeting
associated with a Decision Requiring a Public Hearing or a Policy Decision as
shown in
Table 6-1-1.
   1.   One post-submittal facilitated meeting can be requested and required.
If a development involves applications for decisions by multiple decision-
making bodies, one facilitated meeting can be requested and required per
decision-making body.
   2.   If the request is made at least 15 calendar days prior to the scheduled
hearing, the post-submittal facilitated meeting shall be required and completed
before the application can be heard by the decision-making body. The decision-
making body shall defer the case at the public hearing until the post-submittal
facilitated meeting has taken place and the meeting summary has been received
and reviewed by the decision-making body. No deferral fee is required.
   3.   If the request is made fewer than 15 calendar days before the scheduled
hearing, or at such a hearing, or if an additional post-submittal meeting is
requested, the applicant can agree to a post-submittal facilitated meeting and
ask for a deferral or continuance of the case at any time. A deferral fee will
be charged.
6-4(K)(3)   Timing of a Post-submittal Facilitated Meeting
6-4(K)(3)(a)   After the City has received a request for a post-submittal
facilitated meeting, the Planning Director shall notify the applicant and the
City shall assign a neutral third party to facilitated land use discussions and
document the discussion in a meeting report. A different facilitator may be
used if agreed to by the applicant and the requestor. The facilitator shall
schedule the post-submittal facilitated meeting to take place within 15
calendar days of the post-submittal meeting request. The facilitator shall
attempt to contact all Neighborhood Associations whose boundaries are within
660 feet of the subject property.
6-4(K)(3)(b)   If reasonable attempts have been made to accommodate the
schedules of the applicant, the Neighborhood Associations, and the requester
(if different), and no post-submittal facilitated meeting has occurred, the
application shall proceed in the relevant review/decision process. If no post-
submittal facilitated meeting occurs, the facilitator shall provide
documentation of the attempt to schedule the post-submittal facilitated meeting
and that no post-submittal facilitated meeting was scheduled within the time
allotted.
6-4(K)(3)(c)   If a post-submittal facilitated meeting occurs, the facilitator
shall submit a post-submittal facilitated meeting report, including but not
limited to the meeting location, date, and time; attendees; and a summary of
the discussion to the Planning Department within 7 calendar days of the post-
submittal facilitated meeting. Discussions in these meetings and the meeting
report have no legal binding.
6-4(L)   PUBLIC HEARINGS
6-4(L)(1)   Requirement
The DHO, EPC, LC, LUHO, ZHE, and City Council shall conduct public hearings as
necessary on those types of applications where
Table 6-1-1 requires a public hearing.
6-4(L)(2)   Procedures Governed by Administrative Rules
Each entity listed in Section
14-16-6-2 (Review and Decision-making Bodies) is authorized to create rules,
procedures, or practices governing its conduct of public hearings, but each
public hearing (other than appeal hearings) shall include an opportunity for
all parties to the hearing to be heard regarding the application. A record
shall be kept of each person asking questions or offering testimony about the
application.
6-4(L)(3)   Quasi-judicial Hearings
For decisions that would result in changes to property rights or entitlements
on a particular property or affecting a small area, or are otherwise not
considered legislative decisions involving policy or regulatory changes that
would apply citywide or to a large area, the decision-making body shall conduct
a quasi-judicial hearing to make a discretionary decision. Quasi-judicial
hearings shall be subject to the additional provisions in this Subsection
14-16-6-4(M)(3).
6-4(L)(3)(a)   Appearance of Record
An appearance of record in a hearing is made through a written statement of the
person's name and address, signed by the person or by his/her agent, and
submitted to the relevant decision-making body prior to the termination of
public comment on the case.
6-4(L)(3)(b)   Conduct
   1.   A party to the hearing shall be afforded an opportunity to present
evidence and argument and to question witnesses on all relevant issues, but the
decision-making body may impose reasonable limitations on the number of
witnesses heard, and on the nature and length of their testimony and
questioning.
   2.   The decision-making body may call witnesses and introduce papers of its
own volition during the public hearing.
   3.   All testimony at the hearing shall be under oath or affirmation.
   4.   Nothing in this IDO shall prohibit interested members of the public
from testifying at public hearings other than appeal hearings before the
decision-making body.
   5.   A full record of the hearing will be made by sound recording or
transcription; any person shall have the opportunity to listen to, copy, or
transcribe the recording during business hours.
   6.   A summary of actions taken shall be kept of all ZHE hearings, and they
shall be kept available for public inspection.
6-4(L)(3)(c)   Ex Parte Communications
Prior to making a decision at a quasi-judicial public hearing and until the
expiration of any applicable appeal period, the decision-making body shall not
do any of the following:
   1.   Communicate, directly or indirectly, with any party or party
representative in connection with the merits of any issue involved, except upon
advanced prior notice and opportunity for all parties to participate.
   2.   Use nor rely upon any communication, reports, staff memoranda, or other
materials prepared in connection with the particular case unless made a part of
the record.
   3.   Inspect the site with any party or his/her representative unless all
parties are given opportunity to be present.
6-4(L)(4)   Decisions
6-4(L)(4)(a)   The decision-making body, other than the City Council or the
LUHO, shall take any 1 of the following actions:
   1.   Approve or recommend approval of the application as presented.
   2.   Approve or recommend approval of the application with conditions.
   3.   Deny or recommend denial of the application.
   4.   Defer the matter to a date no more than 60 calendar days following its
first appearance on the agenda, unless a longer deferral is accepted by the
applicant.
   5.   Continue the matter to a date no more than 60 calendar days following
the opening of the public hearing, unless a longer continuance is requested by
the applicant.
6-4(L)(4)(b)   The City Council or LUHO shall affirm the decision on appeal,
reverse the lower decision-making body, or remand the application for
additional review by an entity. (See Subsection
14-16-6-4(U) for additional information on LUHO actions on appeals).
6-4(L)(5)   Written Decisions
6-4(L)(5)(a)   For decisions to continue or defer a public hearing, written
findings in support of the decision are not required.
6-4(L)(5)(b)   For final decisions, the decision-making body identified in
Table 6-1-1 shall provide a written decision with findings based on the review
criteria for that type of application that shall be made part of the record.
6-4(L)(5)(c)   Each finding shall be supported by substantial evidence.
6-4(L)(5)(d)   The ZHE and the LUHO shall make a decision and present findings
and recommendations about each application within 15 calendar days after the
close of the public hearing.
6-4(L)(5)(e)   The DHO, LC, and EPC shall make a decision at the public hearing
and shall issue a written decision with findings necessary to the decision
within 15 calendar days after the close of the public hearing.
6-4(L)(5)(f)   The City Council shall make a decision about each application at
a public hearing and shall adopt findings no later than its next scheduled
meeting.
6-4(L)(6)   Public Notice of Decision
6-4(L)(6)(a)   For Decisions Requiring a Public Hearing and Policy Decisions
(pursuant to
Table 6-1-1), a Notice of Decision, including a list of any conditions attached
to any permit or approval, shall be sent to each party to the matter and to any
other person who has entered an appearance and requested a copy of the
decision. The Notice of Decision shall be posted on the City website as soon as
practicable and not more than 3 business days after the final action on the
matter by any decision making officer or body other than the City Council.
Notices of decision by the City Council must be posted within 10 calendar days
of the final action.
6-4(L)(6)(b)   For decisions to continue or defer a hearing, the time and place
shall be announced at the hearing without the need for the applicant or the
City to provide additional notice.
6-4(M)   GENERAL CRITERIA FOR REVIEW AND DECISION
6-4(M)(1)   For all applications, the decision-making body identified in
Table 6-1-1 shall review the applicant's justification for the request and only
approve the request if it finds that the justification is sound based on
substantial evidence.
6-4(M)(2)   Where Sections
14-16-6-5 (Administrative Decisions),
14-16-6-6 (Decisions Requiring a Public Hearing), or
14-16-6-7 (Policy Decisions) list specific review and decision criteria for the
approval of an application, the decision-making body identified in
Table 6-1-1 shall only approve the application if it finds that those criteria
have been met.
6-4(M)(3)   Where this IDO does not list additional or more specific criteria
for the review and decision on applications, the application shall be
recommended for approval (or approval with conditions) or shall be approved (or
approved with conditions) if the review or decision-making body determines that
the application complies with all applicable standards in this IDO, other
adopted City regulations or policies that may be applicable, and any conditions
specifically applied to development of the property in a prior permit or
approval affecting the property.
6-4(M)(4)   Any application identified in
Table 6-1-1 may be denied to an applicant who meets any of the following
criteria:
6-4(M)(4)(a)   Has not complied with all applicable statutes of the State of
New Mexico, provisions of the Charter of the City of Albuquerque, or City
ordinance.
6-4(M)(4)(b)   Is in default or has defaulted on a written agreement with the
City.
6-4(M)(4)(c)   Has failed to pay fees, charges, taxes, special assessments, and
other debts or obligations that are due from the applicant and payable to the
City regarding any matter.
6-4(N)   DEVIATIONS
When an application is submitted, the applicant may request a deviation to IDO
Standards, up to the limits listed in
Table 6-4-1.
Table 6-4-1: Allowable Deviations
         Maximum Allowable Deviation (Cumulative of Earlier Approved Deviations)
Standard General Lot  10,000 sq. ft. in any Mixed-use or Non-residential zone district in an
                 Area of Change
Table 6-4-1: Allowable Deviations
              Maximum Allowable Deviation (Cumulative of Earlier Approved Deviations)
Standard      General Lot  10,000 sq. ft. in any Mixed-use or Non-residential zone district in an
                      Area of Change
Lot size,     10%
minimum
Lot width,    10%
minimum
Front
setback,      15%
minimum
Side setback, 15%     50%
minimum
Rear setback, 10%     50%
minimum
Building
height,       10%
maximum
Off-street
parking       5%      15%
spaces,
minimum
Wall and      6 in.
fence height
Any other
numerical     10%
standard
Any standard
cited in an
application
for
reasonable
accommodation
or reasonable The minimum deviation necessary to comply with the federal Fair Housing Act
modification
under the
federal Fair
Housing Act
Amendments of
1998 (or as
amended)
 
6-4(N)(1)   For standards in the following subsections, requests for deviations
beyond these thresholds or to standards not included in
Table 6-4-1 will be reviewed and decided as Waivers pursuant to the following:
6-4(N)(1)(a)   Subsection
14-16-6-6(P) (Waiver - DHO) for deviations from standards Section
14-16-5-3 (Access and Connectivity), Section
14-16-5-4 (Subdivision of Land), Section
14-16-5-5 (Parking and Loading), except for the following standards:
   1.   Subsection
14-16-5-5(F)(2)(a)3, which requires a Permit - Carport for carports in any
front or side setback pursuant to Subsection
14-16-6-6(G).
   2.   Standards related to front yard parking in Subsection
14-16-5-5(F)(1)(a)6, Subsection
14-16-5-5(F)(2)(a)2, or
Table 5-5-6, which require a Variance - ZHE pursuant to Subsection
14-16-6-6(O).
6-4(N)(1)(b)   Subsection
14-16-6-6(Q) (Waiver - Wireless Telecommunications Facility) for deviations
from IDO standards applicable to the erection or installation of a WTF.
6-4(N)(2)   For all other IDO standards, requests for exceptions beyond these
thresholds will be reviewed and decided as Variances pursuant to the following:
6-4(N)(2)(a)   Subsection
14-16-6-6(N) (Variance - EPC) for exceptions to all other IDO standards
associated with a Site Plan - EPC.
6-4(N)(2)(b)   Subsection
14-16-6-6(N) (Variance – EPC) for exceptions to the following VPO standards:
      1.   Coors Boulevard – VPO-1
      a.   Subsection
14-16-3-6(D)(4) (Setback Standards).
      b.   Subsection
14-16-3-6(D)(5)(b) (Building and Structure Height (View Plane)).
   2.   Northwest Mesa Escarpment – VPO-2 Subsection
14-16-3-6(E)(4) (Building and Structure Height in VPO-2 Height Restrictions
Sub-area).
6-4(N)(2)(c)   Subsection
14-16-6-6(O) (Variance - ZHE) for exceptions to all other IDO standards
associated with a Site Plan - Administrative.
6-4(N)(3)   The relevant decision-making body identified in Table 6-1-1 may
approve a requested deviation that is within the limits listed in
Table 6-4-1 if that decision-making body determines that all of the following
requirements are met.
6-4(N)(3)(a)   The applicant's site is subject to site constraints not
generally shared by surrounding properties or the site was platted or developed
in an unusual pattern when compared to abutting properties (e.g. the property
was developed with orientation or access facing a different street than
abutting lots) that would prevent the development of a permissive land use in a
type of structure generally found on sites of a similar size in the surrounding
area.
6-4(N)(3)(b)   The site constraints were not created by the actions of the
property owner or another interested party.
6-4(N)(3)(c)   The request is for a single site and is not part of a pattern of
similar requests for adjacent properties or for nearby sites by the same
property owner or within the same subdivision, Framework Plan area, or Master
Development Plan area.
6-4(N)(3)(d)   The approval of the requested deviations will not cause material
adverse impacts on surrounding properties.
6-4(N)(3)(e)   The requested deviation is not for an Overlay zone standard, and
the approval of any requested deviation will not result in a violation of any
Overlay zone standard.
6-4(N)(4)   In the case of a request for "reasonable accommodation" or
"reasonable modification" under the federal Fair Housing Act Amendments of 1998
(or as amended), the criteria in Subsections (a), (b), (c), (d), and (e) above
do not need to be met, and the relevant decision-making body shall approve any
deviation necessary to comply with the requirements of the federal Fair Housing
Act Amendments.
6-4(N)(5)   Any deviations granted that are associated with a Site Plan or
Subdivision Plat shall be noted on the approved Site Plan or Subdivision Plat.
6-4(O)   CONDITIONS ON APPROVALS
6-4(O)(1)   If
Table 6-1-1 or IDO Subsections
14-16-6-4(X) (Amendments of Approvals) or
14-16-6-4(Y) (Amendments of Pre-IDO Approvals) authorize City staff to make a
decision on an application, City staff may impose conditions necessary to bring
the application into compliance with the requirements of this IDO or other
adopted City regulations.
6-4(O)(2)   If
Table 6-1-1 or IDO Subsections
14-16-6-4(X) (Amendments of Approvals) or
14-16-6-4(Y) (Amendments of Pre-IDO Approvals) authorizes the ZHE, EPC, DHO,
LC, or City Council to make a decision on an application, the decision-making
body may impose conditions on the approval necessary to bring the application
into compliance with the requirements of this IDO, other adopted City
regulations, or the specific review criteria for that type of application,
provided that both of the following criteria are met.
6-4(O)(2)(a)   All conditions are reasonably related to the purposes of this
IDO or mitigating the negative impacts of the proposed development or land use
as determined by the reviewing entity.
6-4(O)(2)(b)   Where mitigation of the impacts of a proposed plan or
development requires an applicant to dedicate land or pay money to a public
entity in an amount that is not calculated according to a formula applicable to
a broad class of applicants, any conditions imposed are roughly proportional
both in nature and extent to the anticipated impacts of the proposed
development, as shown through an individualized determination of impacts.
6-4(O)(3)   Any conditions shall be listed in or attached to the permit or
approval document, and violation of any condition on a permit or approval shall
be a violation of this IDO.
6-4(O)(4)   Any conditions shall be met within 1 year of the approval, unless
stated otherwise in the approval. If any conditions are not met within that
time, the approval is void. The Planning Director may extend the time limit up
to an additional 1 year.
6-4(P)   REQUIRED IMPROVEMENTS AND FINANCIAL ASSURANCE
6-4(P)(1)   General
6-4(P)(1)(a)   Unless specified otherwise in this IDO, the DPM, or an IIA
approved by the City, or otherwise approved by the City, all applicants for
permits and approvals under this IDO are required to pay for and install all
public and private improvements necessary to address the impacts of their
proposed development or land use on surrounding neighborhoods and on the City's
infrastructure, transportation, drainage, or other systems and services, as
provided in the DPM.
6-4(P)(1)(b)   Notwithstanding Subsection 6-4(Q)(1) above, the City shall not
require an applicant to pay for or install that portion (if any) of a public or
private improvement that is being funded through the City's impact fee
requirements and for which the applicant has or will be required to pay an
impact fee.
6-4(P)(1)(c)   Unless specified otherwise in this IDO or the DPM, if the
applicant has not completed the installation of those public and private
improvements required by this IDO, the DPM, or any City-approved IIA or
Development Agreement by the time the first certificate of occupancy for the
property is issued, or by the time the first use of the property for a new
approved land use begins, the applicant may be required to provide financial
security to the City to ensure that the City will have adequate funds on hand
to complete the required public or private improvements prior to initial
occupancy or use of the property pursuant to an approval under this IDO.
Financial security will only be used by the City to complete required public
and private improvements if the applicant fails to provide those improvements
in a timely manner as required by this IDO, the DPM, or any City-approved IIA
or Development Agreement.
6-4(P)(1)(d)   The DPM contains specific requirements for the types of public
and private improvements required for different types of development
applications; the timing and phasing of those improvements; documents required
to be submitted for approval of those improvements; inspection of improvements;
financial security for completion of the improvements; required warranties on
the performance of the improvements; dedication and City acceptance of
improvements; provisions for release of financial security or performance
warranties; and other matters related to required public and private
improvements.
6-4(P)(2)   Infrastructure Improvements Agreement
Before a final plat may be approved, the applicant shall provide an
Infrastructure Improvements Agreement (IIA) based on the required
infrastructure that complies with the following standards and all applicable
standards in the DPM.
6-4(P)(2)(a)   The IIA shall specify the time period within which the
improvements necessary to provide required access, public services, and public
amenities required of the applicant are to be completed, which time period will
end not later than 2 years after execution of the IIA.
6-4(P)(2)(b)   An IIA for sidewalks that have received an adjustment for
temporary deferral of installation shall have a time period that will end 4
years after execution of the IIA.
6-4(P)(2)(c)   The City Engineer may extend the time periods listed in
Subsections
14-16-6-4(Q)(2)(a) and
14-16-6-4(Q)(2)(b) above for a period of less than 1 year.
6-4(P)(2)(d)   If a Preliminary Plat approval expires under the terms of this
IDO without a Final Plat having been approved, the IIA automatically lapses,
and no further improvements are required or approved.
6-4(P)(2)(e)   After execution of an IIA by the City, the applicant may proceed
with the construction of all required improvements.
6-4(P)(3)   Construction Plans
Before a final plat may be approved, the applicant shall present construction
plans and specifications for all required infrastructure (which shall conform
to the approved Preliminary Plat) to the City Engineer. Construction plans and
specifications shall meet all applicable requirements of the DPM or other
technical standards adopted by the City.
6-4(Q)   DEDICATIONS
6-4(Q)(1)   Dedication of public areas, as required by Subsection
14-16-5-4(K), or by other City requirements shall be free and clear of any
liens or encumbrances and be in fee simple unless 1 of the following applies.
6-4(Q)(1)(a)   The applicant demonstrates that fee simple dedication is legally
infeasible.
6-4(Q)(1)(b)   The City Engineer and the City Attorney find that a different
type of dedication better accomplishes City policy or is provided for by
specific ordinance.
6-4(Q)(2)   If dedication in other than fee simple is approved, the nature of
the property interest dedicated shall be clearly specified on the plat.
6-4(Q)(3)   When parks are dedicated, a deed to the land shall be delivered to
the governmental body with jurisdiction over that type of park, as determined
by the City.
6-4(R)   BUILDING AND CONSTRUCTION AND RELATED APPROVALS
6-4(R)(1)   Declaratory Ruling
6-4(R)(1)(a)   Upon request, the ZEO shall issue a written declaratory ruling
as to the applicability of the IDO to a proposed development or activity. In
determining whether a use not specifically allowed by this IDO can be
considered as allowable in a particular zone, the similarity to and
compatibility with other allowable uses in that zone shall be determining
factors.
6-4(R)(1)(b)   If the ZEO determines that the request for a declaratory ruling
is not applicable to a proposed development or activity, the ZEO is not
required to issue a declaratory ruling.
6-4(R)(1)(c)   Declaratory rulings may be appealed to City Council, with a
recommendation by the LUHO, pursuant to Subsection
14-16-6-4(U) (Appeals).
6-4(R)(2)   Impact Fees
6-4(R)(2)(a)   Each applicant shall comply with Article 14-19 of ROA 1994
(Impact Fees) and the DPM regarding the payment of impact fees for a proposed
development or land use.
6-4(R)(2)(b)   Impact fee assessments may be appealed pursuant to Subsection
14-16-6-4(U)(3)(c) (Environmental Planning Commission – Appeal of an Impact Fee
Assessment).
6-4(R)(3)   Fugitive Dust Control Construction Permit
6-4(R)(3)(a)   All development that will involve surface disturbance of an area
equal to or greater than 32,670 square feet ( -acre) requires review by the
City Environmental Health Department pursuant to the Air Quality Regulations
adopted by the Albuquerque-Bernalillo County Air Quality Control Board and
found in Part 20.11.20 of the NMAC (Fugitive Dust Control) and the DPM. In case
of a conflict with any standards in this IDO, those requirements prevail.
6-4(R)(3)(b)   In order to obtain a fugitive dust control construction permit,
the applicant must to do all of the following:
   1.   Discuss the project with a representative of the City Environmental
Health Department Air Quality Program to determine the need for a fugitive dust
control construction permit and appropriate site-specific dust control
measures.
   2.   Obtain required signatures from the permittee, owner, operator, and/or
responsible person. For surface disturbance equal to or less than 25 acres,
allow up to 10 business days for application review. For surface disturbance
greater than 25 acres, allow up to 20 business days for application review.
6-4(R)(4)   Grading, Drainage, and Paving Approvals
6-4(R)(4)(a)   All development that will involve site grading or paving shall
comply with Article 14-5 of ROA 1994 (Flood Hazard and Drainage Control), the
DPM, and any other relevant provisions of this IDO in order to address
potential soil erosion, storm drainage, and air quality impacts that may occur
from those activities. In case of a conflict with any standard in this IDO, the
standards and procedures in Article 14-5 of ROA 1994 (Flood Hazard and Drainage
Control) or the DPM shall prevail.
6-4(R)(4)(b)   The type of permit required for these activities depends on the
thresholds in Article 14-5 of ROA 1994 (Flood Hazard and Drainage Control)
related to size, extent, and location, summarized below.
   1.   Grading activities that involve disturbance of less than 1 acre of land
and/or relocation of less than 500 cubic yards and are not located adjacent to
a watercourse or within a Special Flood Hazard Area do not require a permit,
but may be reviewed by the City Engineer.
   2.   Grading activities that involve disturbance of one acre or more,
relocation of 500 cubic yards or more, and/or are located adjacent to a
watercourse or within a Special Flood Hazard Area require a sediment control
permit and a grading permit.
   3.   Paving of 10,000 square feet or more require a paving permit.
   4.   Resurfacing of previously paved areas that does not involve land
disturbance does not require a paving permit or review.
6-4(S)(4)(c)   Regardless of the size of a project, grading, paving, or staging
activities within a Special Flood Hazard Area requires a floodplain development
permit.
6-4(S)(4)(d)   Any building over 1,000 square feet requires a grading plan as
part of the application for building permit.
6-4(R)(5)   Landfill Gas Mitigation Approval
6-4(R)(5)(a)   Standards and procedures for obtaining a landfill gas mitigation
approval are generally governed by the City Environmental Health Department,
whose applicable standards and procedures, including any applicable federal,
State, and local laws, regulations, and policies, including but not limited to
Subsection 20.6.2.4103.A of the New Mexico Administrative Code (NMAC), prevail
over the IDO or DPM. In case of a conflict between the provisions of this
Subsection
14-16-6-4(R)(5) and the standards and procedures of the DPM, the DPM shall
prevail.
6-4(R)(5)(b)   This Subsection
14-16-6-4(R)(5) is not intended to affect planning or administrative processes
that are not associated with physical changes to the lot other than to raise
awareness of procedures related to landfill gases that must be undertaken prior
to development.
6-4(R)(5)(c)   A landfill gas mitigation approval is required for all of the
following types of permits or applications on any property within a landfill
gas buffer area pursuant to Subsection
14-16-5-2(H) (Landfill Buffers) in addition to any other applicable review and
approval requirements:
   1.   Grading, Drainage, and Paving Approvals or Fugitive Dust Control
Construction Permit.
   2.   Permit - Sign for new freestanding sign.
   3.   Permit - Wall or Fence - Minor.
   4.   Site Plan - Administrative.
   5.   Wireless Telecommunications Facility Approval for a new freestanding
facility.
   6.   Master Development Plan.
   7.   Site Plan - EPC.
   8.   Subdivision of Land - Minor.
   9.   Subdivision of Land - Major.
6-4(R)(5)(d)   In order to obtain a landfill gas mitigation approval, the
applicant must to do all of the following.
   1.   The applicant shall provide an assessment and report performed and
certified by a professional engineer with expertise in landfills and landfill
gas to determine if landfill gases exist on the lot and whether there is a
potential for the migration of landfill gases to impact the lot or other lots
in the future.
   2.   If the assessment determines that landfill gases exist on the lot or
there is a potential for the migration of landfill gases to impact the lot or
other lots in the future, the report shall identify landfill gas mitigation
measures that are adequate to address any existing or future risk in a landfill
gas mitigation plan that meets all of the following requirements.
      a.   The applicant shall submit copies of the assessment, report, and
landfill gas mitigation plan, approved by the City Environmental Health
Department, with any application(s) listed in Subsection
14-16-6-4(S)(5)(c) related to the property.
      b.   The applicant shall commit in writing to the landfill gas mitigation
plan as a condition of approval on all official documents, including but not
limited to plats, plans, and permits, filed at the City Planning Department in
relation to development of the property. In the case of a large corporation,
this letter of commitment shall be signed by a representative with the
authority to commit the corporation to implementing the landfill gas mitigation
plan.
      c.   The City Environmental Health Department shall acknowledge receipt
of the letter of commitment to the applicant and provide a copy to the City
Planning Department for filing.
      d.   The applicant shall include the following disclosure statement on
any official documents filed at the Planning Department in relation to
development of the property such as plats, plans, or permits:
"The subject property is located (near / on) a (closed / operating) landfill.
Due to the subject property being (near / on) a (closed / operating) landfill,
certain precautionary measures may need to be taken to ensure the health and
safety of the public. Recommendations made by a professional engineer with
expertise in landfills and landfill gas issues (as required by the most current
version of the Interim Guidelines for Development within City Designated
Landfill Buffer Zones of the City Environmental Health Department) shall be
consulted prior to development of the site."
      e.   The City Environmental Health Department shall refer any development
that appears to require regulation by the State due to removal of landfill
materials, such as for grading or required off?site infrastructure, to the New
Mexico Environment Department - Solid Waste Bureau.
   3.   If the assessment and report indicate that there is no landfill gas at
the property and there is no future risk from the migration of landfill gases,
the assessment and report shall state how such a determination was made and the
applicant shall do both of the following:
      a.   Submit copies of the assessment and report approved by the
Environmental Health Department with any application(s) listed in Subsection
14?16?6-4(S)(5)(c) related to the property.
      b.   Include the disclosure statement in Subsection 2.d above on any
official documents filed at the Planning Department in relation to the
development such as plats, plans, or permits.
   4.   The Environmental Services Division of the City Environmental Health
Department or its consultant shall review the assessment and report, and
landfill gas mitigation plan if applicable, and shall approve or reject them in
writing within 20 business days of its submission. If the documents are not
acceptable, the City Environment Health Department shall advise the applicant
of the changes needed and the applicant shall submit revised documents for
review and approval.
6-4(R)(5)(e)   Landfill gas mitigation approvals are on file at the City
Planning Department.
6-4(S)   TIMING OF DECISIONS
6-4(S)(1)   The City shall review and make decisions on applications under this
IDO as promptly as reasonably possible while complying with the requirements of
this IDO, any other requirements that may be provided by law, and as set forth
in more detail in the DPM.
6-4(S)(2)   In the case of an application for a permit or approval or an
amendment to a permit or approval for any land use involving rights protected
by the First Amendment to the U.S. Constitution or similar provisions in the
New Mexico Constitution, the City will make a final decision on a complete
application (and if the decision is subject to an appeal to the City Council,
will make a decision on the appeal) within any specific timeframes established
in this IDO or as necessary to avoid a chilling effect on the exercise of those
constitutional rights, as interpreted by applicable federal or State court
decisions.
6-4(S)(3)   In the case of an application where the City Council is the
decision-making body, except for Annexations, once the relevant decision-making
body has made a recommendation on the application, the Planning Director shall
prepare and transmit the full record of the application to the Clerk of the
City Council within 60 calendar days of the recommendation. The Clerk of the
City Council shall place the application on the Letter of Introduction for the
next regularly scheduled City Council meeting, provided that there is a
sponsoring City Councilor and provided that there are at least 3 business days
between when it was received and the next regular meeting.
6-4(S)(4)   In the case of an application for an approval or an amendment to an
approval for a WTF, the City shall make a decision on a complete application
(and if the decision is subject to appeal to the City Council, will make a
decision on the appeal) in accordance with timing established by federal
regulations.
6-4(S)(5)   In the case of an application for demolition of a City landmark,
the City shall make a decision within the timeframe established in Subsection
14-16-6-6(D) (Historic Certificate of Appropriateness - Major).
6-4(S)(6)   If a case is not heard by the relevant decision-making body within
6 months after the application is accepted as complete because of continued
requests for deferral by the applicant or because the applicant fails to appear
at the scheduled hearing date, the application is considered withdrawn, and a
new application that meets all requirements of this IDO must be submitted.
6-4(S)(7)   If any application has not been reviewed and decided within 3 years
after the application is accepted as complete, a new application must be
submitted and processed in compliance with all requirements of this IDO, unless
an extension is granted by the relevant decision-making body.
6-4(T)   FINALITY OF DECISIONS
6-4(T)(1)   A decision on any application type other than Subdivision of Land -
Major by any decision-making body shown in
Table 6-1-1 is final unless appealed, in which case it is not final until the
appeal has been decided by the last appeal body. For Subdivision of Land -
Major, only a Preliminary Plat decision may be appealed; a Sketch Plat or a
Final Plat is not subject to appeal.
6-4(T)(2)   A recommendation, deferral, continuance, or remand by any entity
shown in
Table 6-1-1 is not a final decision and cannot be appealed.
6-4(T)(3)   City Council decisions on quasi-judicial matters are final
decisions not subject to veto by the Mayor and are appealable only to a court
of competent jurisdiction as provided by law.
6-4(T)(4)   Any actions taken by an applicant or property owner after a final
decision has been made by the relevant decision-making body in
Table 6-1-1, but before the time for appeal of that decision has expired or
before any appeal has been decided by the last appeal body, are at the risk of
the applicant or property owner, and the City shall not be liable for any
damages incurred for actions taken during those times.
6-4(U)   APPEALS
6-4(U)(1)   Appeal Bodies
6-4(U)(1)(a)   Any decision by the Historic Preservation Planner on a Historic
Certificate of Appropriateness - Minor may be appealed to the LC.
6-4(U)(1)(b)   Any decision by City Planning Department staff on an Impact Fee
Assessment may be appealed to the EPC.
6-4(U)(1)(c)   The following approvals and decisions may be appealed to the
City Council through the LUHO:
   1.   All decisions for which the City Council has final decision-making
authority for appeals pursuant to
Table 6-1-1, including the LC's decision on an appeal of a Historic Certificate
of Appropriateness - Minor pursuant to Subsection (a) above.
   2.   The EPC's decision on an appeal of an impact fee assessment, pursuant
to Subsection (b) above.
   3.   The ZEO's decision on a declaratory ruling.
   4.   In an appeal to the City Council through the LUHO, the LUHO shall take
1 of the following actions:
      a.   Recommend a proposed disposition of the appeal to the City Council
with supporting analysis and findings. The LUHO may recommend that an appeal be
affirmed in whole or in part, reversed in whole or in part, and/or remanded in
whole or in part.
      b.   Directly remand an appeal for reconsideration or further review by
the lower decision-making body if a remand is necessary to clarify or
supplement the record or if remand would more expeditiously dispose of the
matter.
6-4(U)(1)(d)   Any decision related to compliance with Articles 14-1, 14-3, and
14-5 of ROA 1994 (Uniform Administrative Code and Technical Codes, Uniform
Housing Code, and Flood Hazard and Drainage Control) by City Planning
Department staff for a building permit or other construction approval may be
appealed pursuant to the applicable sections of those codes.
6-4(U)(2)   Who May Appeal
6-4(U)(2)(a)   Standing
Standing to appeal a final decision may be granted to any of the following
parties:
   1.   The owner of the property listed in the application.
   2.   A representative of any City department, City agency, or other
governmental or quasi-governmental agency whose services, properties,
facilities, interest, or operations may be affected by the application.
   3.   Any party appealing either of the following decisions:
      a.   Declaratory Ruling.
      b.   Adoption or Amendment of Albuquerque/Bernalillo County Comprehensive
Plan.
   4.   Any other person or organization that can demonstrate that his/her/its
property rights or other legal rights have been specially and adversely
affected by the decision, but in no circumstances shall a person’s use of
public lands constitute standing. Nothing in this section shall be construed to
change any rights or obligations related to Indian Nations, Tribes, or Pueblos
as established in this IDO, or to otherwise limit Tribal standing. 15
      a.   Such showing must be presented by the appellant as part of the
appeal, and the LUHO or City Council shall enter a finding or findings as to
whether this requirement has been met.
      b.   If it is found that the appellant cannot satisfy this standard, the
appeal shall be denied.
   5.   Property owners (other than the applicant) and Neighborhood
Associations on the basis of proximity for decisions as specified in
Table 6-4-2.
      a.   Distances noted in feet in
Table 6-4-2 are measured from the nearest lot line of the subject property.
      b.   Distances for Neighborhood Associations are based on the boundary on
file with the ONC at the time the application for decision related to the
subject property was accepted as complete. Additionally, for standing to
appeal, a Neighborhood Association must submit a petition in support of the
appeal, signed by a majority of all property owners or tenants located within
660 feet of the application site, inclusive of all rights-of-way. 16
      c.   For application types with no distance specified, the final decision
may be appealed pursuant to the Subsection specified in
Table 6-4-2.
Table 6-4-2: Standing for Appeals Based on Proximity to Subject Property
Application Type Property Owners within Distance Neighborhood Associations
                 Specified                       within Distance Specified
Table 6-4-2: Standing for Appeals Based on Proximity to Subject Property
Application Type               Property Owners within Neighborhood Associations
                               Distance Specified     within Distance Specified
Administrative Decisions
Archaeological Certificate     100 ft.                660 ft.
Declaratory Ruling             14-16-6-4(U)(2)(a)3.a
Historic Certificate of        100 ft.                660 ft.
Appropriateness Minor
Impact Fee Assessment          14-16-6-4(U)(2)(a)4
Permit Sign
Permit                         100 ft.                660 ft.
Alternative Signage Plan       330 ft.                660 ft.
Permit Temporary Use           100 ft.                660 ft.
Permit Wall or Fence Minor     100 ft.                660 ft.
Site Plan Administrative       100 ft.                660 ft.
Subdivision of Land Minor      100 ft.                660 ft.
Wireless Telecommunications    330 ft.                660 ft.
Facility Approval
Decisions Requiring a Public Hearing
Conditional Use Approval       330 ft.                660 ft.
Demolition Outside of an HPO   330 ft.                660 ft.
Expansion of Nonconforming Use 100 ft.                660 ft.
or Structure
Historic Certificate of        330 ft.                660 ft.
Appropriateness Major
Historic Design Standards and  330 ft.                660 ft.
Guidelines
Master Development Plan        330 ft.                660 ft.
Permit Carport                 100 ft.                660 ft.
Permit Wall or Fence Major     100 ft.                660 ft.
Site Plan EPC                  330 ft.                660 ft.
Subdivision of Land Major
Preliminary Plat               330 ft.                660 ft.
Bulk Land Subdivision          100 ft.                660 ft.
Final Plat[1]                  N/A                    N/A
Vacation of Easement, Private Way, or Public Right-of-way
Vacation of Public or Private  100 ft.                660 ft.
Easement
Vacation of Public Right-of-
way                            330 ft.                660 ft.
City Council
Vacation of Public Right-of-   100 ft.                660 ft.
way DHO 
Variance EPC                   330 ft.                660 ft.
Variance ZHE                   100 ft.                660 ft.
Waiver DHO                     100 ft.                660 ft.
Waiver Wireless                330 ft.                660 ft.
Telecommunications Facility
Policy Decisions
Adoption or Amendment of       14-16-6-4(U)(2)(a)3.b
Comprehensive Plan
Adoption or Amendment of       14-16-6-4(U)(2)(a)4
Facility Plan
Adoption or Amendment of       330 ft.                660 ft.
Historic Designation
Amendment to IDO Text Citywide 14-16-6-4(U)(2)(a)4
Amendment to IDO Text Small    330 ft.                660 ft.
Area
Annexation of Land             330 ft.                660 ft.
Zoning Map Amendment EPC       330 ft.                660 ft.
Zoning Map Amendment Council   330 ft.                660 ft.
[1] ] For Subdivision of Land - Major, only a Preliminary Plat decision may be
appealed; a Final Plat is not subject to appeal.
 
6-4(U)(2)(b)   Appearance of Record Required
   1.   For Decisions Requiring a Public Hearing and Policy Decisions (pursuant
to
Table 6-1-1), the appellant must have made an appearance of record to have
standing to appeal, except in cases where an appellant is alleging improper
notice.
   2.   An appearance of record can be made through any of the following:
      a.   The initial submittal of an application for a decision listed in
Table 6-1-1.
      b.   The submittal of written comments that include the eventual
appellant's name and contact information about the subject case submitted to
the relevant decision-making body during the review process within the deadline
for written comments prior to the decision.
      c.   Verbal comments made by the eventual appellant or appellant's agent
provided at a public hearing about the subject case during the review process
before the relevant decision-making body.
6-4(U)(3)   Procedure
6-4(U)(3)(a)   Filing an Appeal
   1.   An appeal must be filed with the Planning Director within 15 calendar
days, excluding holidays listed in Part 3-1-12 of ROA 1994 (Legal Holidays),
after the decision.
      a.   The date that the decision was made is not included in the 15-day
period for filing an appeal.
      b.   The Planning Director shall not accept appeals filed after the 15-
day deadline in Subsection a above has passed.
   2.   For Declaratory Rulings, there is no deadline for appealing the
decision.
   3.   The appeal shall specifically state the section of this IDO, City
regulation, or condition attached to a decision that has not been interpreted
or applied correctly.
6-4(U)(3)(b)   Landmarks Commission - Appeal of Historic Certificate of
Appropriateness - Minor
   1.   Once an appeal has been accepted by the Planning Director, the City
Planning Department staff (Historic Preservation planner) shall prepare and
transmit a record of the appeal together with all appeal material received from
the appellant the property owner and appellant(s) and to the LC. The LC shall
schedule a hearing on the matter within 45 calendar days of receipt. The
Historic Preservation Planner shall notify the parties. Appellants and parties
to the appeal may submit written arguments to the LC so long as the written
argument is received by LC staff at least 10 calendar days prior to the
hearing.
   2.   The LC may accept new evidence into the record if it appears that such
additional evidence is necessary for the proper disposition of the matter and
could not have been placed into the record during the previous decision-making
process. New evidence that clarifies evidence already in the record, that is
offered to contradict evidence in the record, or that is offered on a key
factual issue, may be allowed or may justify remand.
   3.   The LC may impose reasonable limitations on the number of witnesses
heard and on the nature and length of their testimony and cross-examination.
   4.   The LC shall make findings exclusively on the record of the decision
appealed, supplemented by any evidence allowed at the hearing.
   5.   The LC may affirm, reverse, or otherwise modify the lower decision to
bring it into compliance with the standards and criteria of this IDO,
applicable City regulations, and any prior approvals related to the subject
property.
   6.   If the LC determines that the matter should be remanded, the LC shall
set forth the reason(s) for the remand and the matters to be reconsidered and
may order such remand. The matter must be heard and decided by the original
decision-making body prior to any further appeal of the matter.
6-4(U)(3)(c)   Environmental Planning Commission - Appeal of an Impact Fee
Assessment
   1.   Once an appeal has been accepted by the Planning Director, the City
Planning Department staff shall prepare and transmit a record of the appeal
together with all appeal material received from the appellant to the property
owner and appellant(s) and to the EPC. The EPC shall schedule a hearing on the
matter within 45 calendar days of receipt. City Planning Department staff shall
notify the parties. Appellants and parties to the appeal may submit written
arguments to the EPC so long as the written argument is received by EPC staff
at least 10 calendar days prior to the hearing.
   2.   The EPC may accept new evidence into the record if it appears that such
additional evidence is necessary for the proper disposition of the matter and
could not have been placed into the record during the previous decision-making
process. New evidence that clarifies evidence already in the record, that is
offered to contradict evidence in the record, or that is offered on a key
factual issue, may be allowed or may justify remand.
   3.   The EPC may impose reasonable limitations on the number of witnesses
heard and on the nature and length of their testimony and cross-examination.
   4.   The EPC shall make findings exclusively on the record of the decision
appealed, supplemented by any evidence allowed at the hearing.
   5.   The EPC may affirm, reverse, or otherwise modify the lower decision to
bring it into compliance with the standards and criteria of this IDO,
applicable City regulations, and any prior approvals related to the subject
property.
   6.   If the EPC determines that the matter should be remanded, the EPC shall
set forth the reason(s) for the remand and the matters to be reconsidered and
may order such remand. The matter must be heard and decided by the original
decision-making body prior to any further appeal of the matter.
6-4(U)(3)(d)   Land Use Hearing Officer (LUHO)
   1.   Once an appeal has been accepted by the Planning Director, the Planning
Director shall prepare and transmit a record of the appeal together with all
appeal material received from the appellant to impacted parties and to the LUHO
through the Clerk of the City Council as soon as possible but within 30
calendar days. The official record shall be a recording of the underlying
hearing(s), but the Planning Director shall also include an unofficial
transcript with the appeal record transmission. The LUHO shall schedule a
hearing on the matter within 30 calendar days of receipt and notify the
parties. Appellants and parties to the appeal may submit written arguments to
the LUHO through the Clerk of the City Council so long as the written argument
is received by the Clerk of the City Council at least 10 calendar days prior to
the hearing. 17
   2.   The LUHO may accept new evidence into the record if it appears that
such additional evidence is necessary for the proper disposition of the matter
and could not have been placed into the record during the previous decision-
making process. New evidence that clarifies evidence already in the record,
that is offered to contradict evidence in the record, or that is offered on a
key factual issue, may be allowed or may justify remand.
   3.   The LUHO may impose reasonable limitations on the number of witnesses
heard and on the nature and length of their testimony and cross-examination.
   4.   The LUHO shall make findings exclusively on the record of the decision
appealed, supplemented by any evidence allowed at the hearing.
   5.   The LUHO may recommend that the City Council affirm, reverse, or
otherwise modify the lower decision to bring it into compliance with the
standards and criteria of this IDO, applicable City regulations, and any prior
approvals related to the subject property.
   6.   If the LUHO determines that the matter should be remanded, the LUHO
shall set forth the reason(s) for the remand and the matters to be reconsidered
and may order such remand without approval by the City Council. The LUHO shall
notify the parties and Planning Department staff of the remand.
   7.   Planning Department staff shall notify parties of the date and time of
the remand hearing. Public notice pursuant to
Table 6-1-1 for the original decision is not required. The decision at the
remand hearing is considered final unless one of the parties files a new
appeal.
6-4(U)(3)(e)   City Council
   1.   If the appeal is not directly remanded, the LUHO shall forward the
recommendation and findings and a transcription of the LUHO's public hearing to
City Council within 15 calendar days after the close of the hearing.
   2.   The City Council shall place the matter on the agenda of the next
regular City Council meeting at which land use, planning, and zoning matters
are heard following its receipt of the LUHO's recommendation, provided that
there is a period of at least 10 calendar days between the receipt of the
recommendation and the City Council meeting. The parties may submit written
comments to the City Council regarding the LUHO's recommendation and findings
provided that such comments are received by the Clerk of the City Council and
all other parties of record no later than 4 calendar days prior to the City
Council meeting.
   3.   At that meeting, the City Council shall vote whether to accept or
reject LUHO's recommendation and findings. A motion to accept or reject the
LUHO's recommendation and findings must be approved by a majority vote of the
entire membership of the City Council.
   4.   The City Council may accept a portion of the LUHO's recommendation and
findings and reject the remainder. If the LUHO's recommendation is rejected in
whole or in part, or if the City Council fails to either accept or reject the
recommendation, the City Council may take 1 of the following actions:
      a.   Remand the matter for reconsideration or further review by a lower
decision-making body if necessary to clarify or supplement the record, or if
remand would more expeditiously dispose of the matter.
      b.   Make a final determination on the appeal and adopt findings in
support of its determination based only on the record without any additional
hearings.
      c.   If the City Council determines that it cannot properly dispose of
the appeal without additional hearings on the matter, schedule a full hearing
on the matter no earlier than the next regular meeting at which land use
matters are heard.
   5.   If the City Council fails to accept or reject the LUHO's recommendation
and no other motions are made or approved, the appeal will be scheduled for a
full hearing on the matter at the next regular meeting of the City Council.
   6.   If the matter is scheduled for a hearing before the City Council, the
Clerk of the City Council shall notify the parties to the appeal. The parties
may present oral argument at the hearing pursuant to hearing procedures as
established by rule of the City Council. However, the City Council shall not
accept new evidence and shall make its final decision based solely on the
evidence in the record at the close of the LUHO's hearing and the oral
arguments of the parties. A vote of the City Council to reverse a lower
decision must be approved by a majority of the entire membership of the City
Council.
   7.   If the City Council conducts a public hearing on the appeal, the City
Council shall adopt written findings at the conclusion of that hearing or at
the next scheduled meeting of the City Council; however, a City Councilor who
did not participate in the action taken on the appeal may not participate in
the action to adopt the findings at a subsequent meeting.
6-4(U)(4)   Criteria for Decision 18  
6-4(U)(4)(a)   The criteria for review of an appeal shall be whether the
decision-making body or the prior appeal body made 1 of the following mistakes.
   1.   The decision-making body or the prior appeal body acted fraudulently,
arbitrarily, or capriciously.
   2.   The decision being appealed is not supported by substantial evidence.
   3.   The decision-making body or the prior appeal body erred in applying the
requirements of this IDO (or a plan, policy, or regulation referenced in the
review and decision-making criteria for the type of decision being appealed).
6-4(U)(4)(b)   An additional criterion for review of an appeal shall be if the
applicant failed to comply with mailed notice requirements for property owners
pursuant to Subsection
14-16-6-4(J)(3)(c). Failure to comply with email notice requirements for a
Neighborhood Association pursuant to Subsection
14-16-6-4(J)(2) is not sufficient grounds to uphold an appeal or remand a
decision for further consideration.
6-4(U)(5)   Appeal Costs 19 ,  20
6-4(U)(5)(a)   For an appeal to City Council related to an application that was
denied, all parties shall be responsible for their own costs.
6-4(U)(5)(b)   For an appeal to City Council related to an application that was
approved, if the appellant loses their appeal, they shall be responsible for
paying $1,000 for the costs and fees of the appellee.
   1.   A finding on costs and fees shall be made by the LUHO.
   2.   The LUHO may grant an exception to either of the following:
      a.   Any individual appellant that demonstrates hardhip, low income, or
indigent status.
      b.   Any entity appellant with a geographic boundary that includes more
than 50 percent of its area within an area that has an overall score of 50 or
greater on the City’s Social Vulnerability Index.
 
Notes
15 City Council, O-24-69, adopted January 6, 2025 and effective January 28,
   2025.
16 City Council, O-24-69, adopted January 6, 2025 and effective January 28,
   2025.
17 City Council, O-24-69, adopted January 6, 2025 and effective January 28,
   2025.
18 City Council, O-24-69, adopted January 6, 2025 and effective January 28,
   2025. Edited editorially for clarity and consistency with the IDO.
19 City Council, O-24-69, adopted January 6, 2025 and effective January 28,
   2025. Edited editorially for clarity and consistency with the IDO.
20 City Council, O-25-73, adopted March 17, 2025 and effective April 21, 2025.
   Edited editorially for clarity and consistency with the IDO.
6-4(V)   JUDICIAL REVIEW
A decision of the City Council is final but is subject to judicial review
pursuant to New Mexico law.
6-4(W)   EXPIRATION OF APPROVALS
6-4(W)(1)   Permits and Approvals Run with the Land
Unless specified otherwise on the permit or approval document for a specific
type of development approval, permits and approvals run with the land and are
not affected by changes in ownership or the form of ownership of the property.
6-4(W)(2)   Expiration or Repeal of Approvals
6-4(W)(2)(a)   Unless specified otherwise in this IDO, the DPM, an IIA, a
Development Agreement approved by the City, or the terms attached to a permit
or approval, each permit or approval shall be valid for the period of time
shown in
Table 6-4-3 and shall be of no force or effect after that time has passed,
unless a major amendment or a time extension is approved.
6-4(W)(2)(b)   For permits or approvals for which
Table 6-4-3 shows an expiration, the approval of a major amendment pursuant to
Subsection
14-16-6-4(X) (Amendments of Approvals) or Subsection
14-16-6-4(Y) (Amendments of Pre-IDO Approvals), as relevant, replaces the
original approval in terms of the period of validity.
6-4(W)(2)(c)   The period of validity is extended pursuant to Subsection
14-16-6-4(W)(4) (Extensions of Period of Validity) or another provision of this
IDO or the DPM.
6-4(W)(2)(d)   The applicant, property owner, or an agent of the applicant or
property owner has begun construction, use, or occupancy of the property within
the time shown in
Table 6-4-3 for the relevant type of permit or approval. For the purposes of
this Subsection
14-16-6-4(W)(2), construction does not include site grading, but does include
the installation of required infrastructure. For additional provisions specific
to Site Plans and Master Development Plans, see Subsection
14-16-6-4(W)(3)(a).
6-4(W)(2)(e)   On properties that have not been developed pursuant to
thresholds established in Subsection
14-16-6-4(W)(3)(a), the applicant, property owner, or an agent of the applicant
or property owner has applied to the decision-making body that originally
approved the site plan to accelerate the expiration and the decision-making
body has agreed to set an accelerated expiration date. The decision-making body
that approved the original site plan shall be the decision-making body to
repeal the site plan. The decision-making body may specify an expiration date
for the site plan as part of the repeal decision; otherwise, the hearing date
at which the decision to repeal was made is to be considered the expiration
date. For the purposes of this IDO, the repeal shall be pursuant to the Major
Amendment procedures in Subsection
14-16-6-4(X)(3).
Table 6-4-3: Permit and Approval Expirations
Type of Approval Period of Validity
Table 6-4-3: Permit and Approval Expirations
Type of Approval                        Period of Validity
Administrative Decisions
Archaeological Certificate              Expires with associated development
                                        approval
Building Permit                         1 year
                                        Does not expire, unless the section(s)
Declaratory Ruling                      of the IDO to which the ruling relates
                                        is amended
Development Agreement                   As stated in Development Agreement
Grading, Drainage, or Paving Approval   1 year
Historic Certificate of Appropriateness 1 year
Minor
Impact Fee Assessment                   4 years
Permit Sign / Alternative Signage Plan  1 year
Permit Temporary Use                    As stated in the Temporary Use Permit
                                        6 months, or until 50% or more of the
Permit Temporary Window Wrap            gross floor area of the ground floor is
                                        leased, whichever occurs sooner
Permit Wall or Fence Minor              1 year
Site Plan Administrative                7 years
Wireless Telecommunications Facility    5 years
Approval
Decisions Requiring a Public Hearing
                                        2 years after issuance if use is not
Conditional Use Approval                begun, or 2 years after use is
                                        discontinued or fails to operate
Demolition Outside of an HPO            N/A
Expansion of Nonconforming Use or       1 year
Structure
Historic Certificate of Appropriateness 1 year
Major
Historic Design Standards and           Does not expire
Guidelines
Master Development Plan                 7 years
Permit Carport                          1 year
Permit Wall or Fence Minor              1 year
Site Plan EPC                           7 years
Subdivision of Land Bulk Land           Does not expire once timely recorded
Subdivision of Land Minor               Does not expire once timely recorded
Subdivision of Land Major
Preliminary Plat                        1 year
Final Plat                              Does not expire once timely recorded
Vacation of Easement, Private Way, or   1 year, if not platted
Public Right-of-way
Variance EPC                            Expires with associated Site Plan
Variance ZHE                            1 year
Waiver – DHO                          1 year, if not platted /
                                        Expires with associated Site Plan
Waiver Wireless Telecommunications      Does not expire
Facility
Policy Decisions
Adoption or Amendment of Comprehensive  Does not expire
Plan
Adoption or Amendment of Facility Plan  Does not expire
Adoption or Amendment of Historic       Does not expire
Designation
Amendment to IDO Text Citywide          Does not expire
Amendment to IDO Text Small Area        Does not expire
Annexation of Land                      Does not expire
Zoning Map Amendment EPC                Does not expire
Zoning Map Amendment Council            Does not expire
 
6-4(W)(3)   Exceptions to Period of Validity
6-4(W)(3)(a)   If the type and amount of development on the subject property
meets the following thresholds, as applicable for the type of Site Plan or
Master Development Plan approved, the approved plan will not expire.
   1.   Site Plan - Administrative
If the Site Plan was approved for land on which on-site infrastructure did not
exist at the time of approval, then at least 50 percent of the site area or 50
percent of the approved gross floor area has been developed.
   2.   Site Plan - EPC or Master Development Plan
      a.   If the Site Plan or Master Development Plan was approved for land on
which on-site infrastructure did not exist at the time of approval, then at
least 75 percent of the required on-site drainage infrastructure for the
property, or if the Plan defines more than one phase of development, then for
the first defined phase, has been installed.
      b.   If the Site Plan or Master Development Plan was approved for land on
which at least 75 percent of required on-site drainage infrastructure was in
place at the time of approval, then at least 25 percent of the approved gross
floor area for primary buildings on the property, or if the Plan defines more
than one phase of development, then for the first defined phase, has been
constructed.
6-4(W)(3)(b)   Any permit or approval of a type listed in
Table 6-4-3 that was approved by the City before the effective date of this
IDO, shall expire on 1 of the following dates, whichever occurs sooner:
   1.   The date listed in that permit or approval or in any regulation of the
City establishing an expiration of the permit or approval that was applicable
before the effective date of this IDO.
   2.   The date on which that type of permit or approval would expire if it
were approved by the City on the effective date of this IDO.
6-4(W)(4)   Extensions of Period of Validity
6-4(W)(4)(a)   Permits or approvals for which
Table 6-4-3 shows an expiration may be granted 1 time extension not to exceed
the original period fo validity for that permit or approval by the ZEO, with
the following exceptions.
   1.   Impact fee assessments shall not be extended.
   2.   Any Permit – Sign for an electronic sign shall not be extended.
   3.   Additional extensions for Preliminary Plats may be granted, but the
Preliminary Plat may be required to come into compliance with any applicable
standards adopted since the orginal application was accepted as complete.
6-4(W)(4)(b)   The ZEO must determine whether the application for a time
extension meets both of the following requirements:
   1.   The applicant submitted a letter of justification for the requested
time extension before the expiration of the original permit or approval.
   2.   Circumstances beyond the control of the applicant have prevented
construction, use, or occupancy of the property pursuant to
14-16-6-4(W)(2)(d).
6-4(W)(4)(c)   An extension of a Site Plan – EPC may require an update of any
Traffic Impact Study (TIS) prepared for that Site Plan if the prior TIS is more
than 5 years old and the City Engineer determines that background or
anticipated traffic volumes or patterns in the surrounding area have changed
since the TIS was prepared.
6-4(X)   AMENDMENTS OF APPROVALS
After the City issues an approval under this IDO, the approval may be amended
as described in this Subsection
14-16-6-4(Y).
6-4(X)(1)   Applicability
6-4(X)(1)(a)   This Subsection
14-16-6-4(X) addresses applications for amendments to permits, approvals, or
plans that comply with all Use-specific Standards in Section
14-16-4-3, all Development Standards in
Part 14-16-5 (Development Standards), and all DPM standards applicable to the
development. If the applicant is requesting an amendment that would require a
Waiver or Variance from any of these standards, a separate request must be
submitted pursuant to the relevant procedure, as follows:
   1.   Subsection
14-16-6-6(P) (Waiver - DHO) for exceptions to any standards in Section
14-16-5-4 (Subdivision of Land), Section
14-16-5-3 (Access and Connectivity), Section
14-16-5-5 (Parking and Loading), except the following:
      a.   Standards in Subsection
14-16-5-5(F)(2)(a)3, which require a Permit - Carport for carports in any front
or side setback pursuant to Subsection
14-16-6-6(G).
      b.   Standards related to front yard parking in Subsection
14-16-5-5(F)(1)(a)6, Subsection
14-16-5-5(F)(2)(a)2, or
Table 5-5-6, which require a Variance - ZHE pursuant to Subsection
14-16-6-6(O).
   2.   Subsection
14-16-6-6(Q) (Waiver - Wireless Telecommunications Facility) for deviations
from IDO standards applicable to the erection or installation of a WTF.
   3.   Subsection
14-16-6-6(N) (Variance - EPC) for exceptions to any IDO standard other than
those listed in Subsections 1 and 2 above for approvals associated with a Site
Plan - EPC.
   4.   Subsection
14-16 6-6(O) (Variance - ZHE) for exceptions to any IDO standard other than
those listed in Subsection 1 and 2 above for any approval other than a Site
Plan - EPC.
6-4(X)(1)(b)   Amendments to Policy Decisions (as listed in
Table 6-1-1) shall be reviewed pursuant to the relevant requirements in Section
14-16-6-7.
6-4(X)(1)(c)   Approvals granted prior to the effective date of this IDO may be
amended by the procedures in Subsection
14-16-6-4(Y) (Amendments of Pre-IDO Approvals).
6-4(X)(2)   Minor Amendments
6-4(X)(2)(a)   A minor amendment must meet all of the following criteria.
   1.   The amendment is necessary because of site conditions or user
requirements that were not known, and could not reasonably have been known, at
the time the City approved the approval that is proposed to be amended, and
that were not created by the actions of the owner of the property.
   2.   The amendment does not increase or decrease the dimension of any
standard beyond the thresholds allowed as minor amendments pursuant to
Table 6-4-4 (cumulative of any earlier deviations or amendments).
   3.   The amendment does not decrease the total amount of open space in the
development and does not reduce the size of any open space abutting a lot
containing a residential use.
   4.   The amendment does not reduce any building setback adjacent to
development containing residential uses by any amount.
   5.   The amendment does not increase the maximum number of residential
dwelling units in the development from that shown in the existing permit,
approval, or plan. If the property is located in a DT-UC-MS-PT area, the
amendment does not decrease the required number of residential dwelling units
in the development from that shown in the existing permit, approval, or plan.
   6.   The amendment does not adjust a building design standard unless doing
so improves the perception of building quality, variety, durability, and
articulation when viewed from adjacent streets and abutting properties.
   7.   The amendment does not reduce the amount of total landscaping installed
on the subject property or the amount of screening or buffering required on
portions of the site abutting any property containing residential dwelling
units and does not waive or weaken any other landscaping or buffering
requirement unless the ZEO determines that alternative building design elements
included in the amendment improve the visual quality and screening and
buffering effect of landscaping as viewed from adjacent streets and public
areas.
   8.   The amendment does not increase the traffic accessing the subject
property from local streets and does not increase or decrease the number of
through streets, sidewalks, trails, or trail connections passing through the
property or connecting to or designed to connect to abutting properties.
   9.   The amendment does not require major public infrastructure, significant
changes to access to the subject property, or a traffic impact study, which
would warrant additional review by the original decision-making body.
   10.   The amendment does not change a specific condition attached by a
decision-making body listed in
Table 6-1-1 to a prior development permit, approval, or plan for or including
the subject property. For example, a specific condition attached to a prior
approval requiring additional buffering to mitigate development impacts shall
not be removed through a minor amendment process.
   11.   The amendment does not affect a property in an Overlay zone as
regulated pursuant to
Part 14-16-3, in which case amendments may be granted per the original approval
process for the Site Plan governing the site.
   12.   The amendment does not approve any land use that was not authorized by
the permit or approval or that is not allowed by right on the subject property.
   13.   The amendment does not expand a nonconformity as regulated per Section
14-16-6-8 (Nonconformities).
6-4(X)(2)(b)   If the Planning Director determines that an amendment warrants
review by the decision-making body that issued the permit or approval being
amended, the amendment shall be reviewed and approved pursuant to Subsection
14-16-6-4(X)(3) (Major Amendments).
6-4(X)(2)(c)   Requests to amend approvals shall be reviewed according to 1 of
the following procedures.
   1.   Applications to amend an Administrative Decision (as listed in
Table 6-1-1) may be approved by the same administrative body that made the
decision being modified, provided that the administrative body determines that
all of the criteria in Subsection
14-16-6-4(X)(2)(a) have been met.
   2.   Applications to amend a Decision Requiring a Public Hearing (as listed
in
Table 6-1-1) may be approved by the ZEO provided that the ZEO determines that
all of the criteria in Subsection
14-16-6-4(X)(2)(a) have been met.
   3.   Applications to amend an approved Site Plan - DRB may be approved by
the ZEO provided that the ZEO determines that all of the criteria in Subsection
14-16-6-4(X)(2)(a) have been met.
6-4(X)(2)(d)   An approved minor amendment does not affect the expiration of
the original approval. Time extensions must be requested pursuant to Subsection
14-16-6-4(W)(4) (Extensions of Period Validity), if needed.
Table 6-4-4: Allowable Minor Amendments
         Maximum Threshold (Cumulative of Earlier Approved Deviations and/or Amendments)
Standard General Lot  10,000 sq. ft. in any Mixed-use or Non-residential zone district in an
                 Area of Change
Table 6-4-4: Allowable Minor Amendments
               Maximum Threshold (Cumulative of Earlier Approved Deviations and/or Amendments)
Standard       General Lot  10,000 sq. ft. in any Mixed-use or Non-residential zone district in an
                       Area of Change
Building gross 10%
floor area
Front setback, 15%
minimum
Side setback,  15%     50%
minimum
Rear setback,  10%     50%
minimum
Building       Increase: 10%
height,        Decrease: any amount
maximum
Wall and fence 6 in.
height
Any other
numerical      10%
standard
Any addition
or revision
that would
otherwise be
decided as a   Any amount that meets requirements specified in the approved Permit or Site Plan or,
Permit Sign,   if the Permit or Site Plan is silent, the IDO
Permit Wall or
Fence Minor,
or Site Plan
Administrative
All rooftop
installations
and ground-
mounted        Any amount to accommodate the installation that does not affect the ability to meet
installations  requirements specified in the approved Site Plan or, if the Site Plan is silent, the
of solar or    IDO
wind energy
generation on
premises less
than 5 acres
All additions
or
modifications  Any amount to accommodate the addition that does not affect the ability to meet
of battery     requirements specified in the approved Site Plan or, if the Site Plan is silent, the
storage on     IDO
premises less
than 5 acres
Changing the
site layout of
an electric    Any amount to accommodate the change that does not affect the ability to meet
facility other requirements specified in the approved Site Plan or, if the Site Plan is silent, the
than an        IDO
electric
generation
facility
Any standard
cited in an
application
for reasonable
accommodation
or reasonable  The minimum deviation necessary to comply with the federal Fair Housing Act
modification   Amendments
under the
federal Fair
Housing Act
Amendments of
1998 (or as
amended)
 
6-4(X)(3)   Major Amendments
6-4(X)(3)(a)   All amendments to permits or approvals that do not qualify as
minor amendments under Subsection (2) above may only be approved by the
decision-making body that issued the permit or approval being amended,
following the same procedure (including the payment of a new application fee,
new process of staff referral, and any required public notice or public
hearing) used to issue the original permit or approval.
6-4(X)(3)(b)   Repeals are processed as major amendments for the purpose of
this IDO.
6-4(X)(3)(c)   For decisions made by the Development Review Board, the
procedures for the most closely equivalent decision in
Part 14-16-6 (Administration and Enforcement) shall be followed, including any
required application fee, public notice, referral to commenting agencies, and
public hearing.
   1.   Major amendments to a Site Plan – DRB shall be reviewed and decided by
City staff as a major amendment to a Site Plan – Administrative.
   2.   Major amendments to a Subdivision shall be reviewed and decided by the
DHO as a major amendment of a Subdivision of Land – Bulk Land, Subdivision of
Land – Minor, or Subdivision of Land – Major, as relevant.
6-4(X)(3)(d)   An approved major amendment replaces the original approval in
terms of expiration, if one applies pursuant to
Table 6-4-3: Permit and Approval Expirations.
6-4(Y)   AMENDMENTS OF PRE-IDO APPROVALS
Approvals granted prior to the effective date of this IDO may be amended as
described in this Subsection
14-16-6-4(Z).
6-4(Y)(1)   Site Development Plans
This Subsection
14-16-6-4(Z) addresses applications for amendments to site development plans
approved prior to the effective date of this IDO.
6-4(Y)(1)(a)   Minor Amendments
   1.   The Planning Director may grant minor amendments that meet all of the
following requirements.
      a.   The existing site development plan specifies the requirements in
place at the time of approval, and the requested change still meets the
original requirements.
      b.   The requested change is within the thresholds for minor amendments
established in
Table 6-4-4, cumulative of prior deviations or minor amendments.
      c.   The requested change does not require major public infrastructure,
significant changes to access to the subject property, or a traffic impact
study, which would warrant additional review by the original decision-making
body.
      d.   No deviations, Variances, or Waivers shall be granted for minor
amendments.
   2.   An approved minor amendment does not affect the expiration of the
original approval. Time extensions must be requested pursuant to Subsection
14-16-6-4(W)(4) (Extensions of Period of Validity).
6-4(Y)(1)(b)   Major Amendments
All requested amendments that do not qualify as minor amendments pursuant to
Subsection (a) above shall be subject to relevant IDO standards, unless a
different procedure described below applies.
   1.   Except as noted in Subsection 2 below, major amendments shall be
reviewed and decided by the decision-making body that issued the permit or
approval being amended, following the procedures for the most closely
equivalent decision in
Part 14-16-6 (Administration and Enforcement), including any required
application fee, public notice, referral to commenting agencies, and public
hearing.
   2.   For major amendments that involve any of the following, the relevant
IDO procedures shall be followed, including any required application fee,
public notice, referral to commenting agencies, and public hearing:
      a.   Any standard in the Site Development Plan that is covered by an IDO
standard in Section
14-16-5-3 (Access and Connectivity), Section
14-16-5-4 (Subdivision of Land), Section
14-16-5-5 (Parking and Loading), or any DPM standard.
      b.   Any change affecting an easement.
      c.   Any expansion of a nonconforming use or structure.
      d.   Any change affecting a nonconforming campground and recreational
vehicle park use.
   3.   An approved major amendment replaces the original approval in terms of
expiration, if one applies pusrsuant to
Table 6-4-3.
6-4(Y)(2)   Facility Plans
Facility Plans may be amended per the procedure described in Subsection
14-16-6-7(B) (Adoption or Amendment of Facility Plan).
6-4(Y)(3)   Master Plans or Resource Management Plans
6-4(Y)(3)(a)   Master Plans or Resource Management Plans for City facilities
may be amended per the procedures specified in the relevant plan or by the
relevant implementing City department. The implementing departments may request
review by the EPC and/or City Council where more input is desired.
6-4(Y)(3)(b)   Master Plans for private property must be amended as site
development plans pursuant to Subsection
14-16-6-4(Y)(1) above.
6-5   ADMINISTRATIVE DECISIONS
6-5(A)   ARCHAEOLOGICAL CERTIFICATE
All applicable provisions of Section
14-16-6-4 (General Procedures) apply unless specifically modified by the
provisions of this Subsection
14-16-6-5(A).
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/b37713d5e40fc82694833f290401791f80be26ac/
IMAGES/0-0-0-6889.png]
6-5(A)(1)   Applicability
This Subsection
14-16-6-5(A) requires an Archaeological Certificate of No Effect or Certificate
of Approval to be duly approved prior to approval of any preliminary plat, Site
Plan, or Master Development Plan for projects over 5 acres.
6-5(A)(2)   Procedure
6-5(A)(2)(a)   The applicant shall have all of the following responsibilities:
   1.   Provide notice of the application to Indian Nations, Tribes, or Pueblos
by certified mail and by email that specifies the subject property and the
proposed development.
   2.   Provide notice of the application to tribal representatives by email
that specifies the subject property and the proposed development.
   3.   Supply proof of notification to Indian nation, tribe, or pueblo and
tribal representatives with the application.
   4.   Provide the treatment plan, if required, by email to Indian Nations,
Tribes, or Pueblos and tribal representatives within 5 business days that it is
submitted to the City Archaeologist.
6-5(A)(2)(b)   An application for an Archaeological Certificate shall be
reviewed by the City Archaeologist to determine whether the proposed
development will have an adverse impact on any significant archaeological site.
6-5(A)(2)(c)   The City Archaeologist shall issue a Certificate of No Effect if
there is no adverse impact. The City Archaeologist shall send the Certificate
of No Effect to Indian Nations, Tribes, and Pueblos and Tribal Representatives
pursuant to
14-16-6-4(J)(3).
6-5(A)(2)(d)   If the application does not qualify for a Certificate of No
Effect, an application for a Certificate of Approval shall be required. The
applicant must submit a treatment plan prepared by a qualified archaeologist
that adequately mitigates any archaeological impacts of the development.
6-5(A)(2)(e)   The City Archaeologist shall review the treatment plan and shall
approve or deny the proposed plan within 15 calendar days of its submission. If
the plan is not approved as submitted, the City Archaeologist shall advise the
applicant of the changes needed in the plan for its approval. If the plan is
approved, the City Archaeologist shall issue a Certificate of Approval. The
City Archaeologist shall send the Certificate of Approval to Indian Nations,
Tribes, and Pueblos and Tribal Representatives pursuant to 
14-16-6-4(J)(3).
6-5(A)(2)(f)   The Planning Department shall maintain records of project areas
that received a Certificate of No Effect or Certificate of Approval.
6-5(A)(2)(g)   The Planning Director shall require that the treatment plan is
included on the applicable infrastructure lists of Preliminary Plats and Site
Plans.
6-5(A)(2)(h)   The Planning Director shall require that any necessary treatment
plan is referenced on the first sheet of the Site Plan or Master Development
Plan. Implementation of the necessary treatment plan shall be made a condition
of approval.
6-5(A)(3)   Review and Decision Criteria
6-5(A)(3)(a)   Certificate of No Effect
An application for a Certificate of No Effect shall be approved if it meets any
of the following criteria.
   1.   An archaeological investigation has been conducted on the property, and
based on a report prepared by a qualified archaeologist, it has been determined
that no significant archaeological site exists on the property. The factual
basis necessary to support this determination shall be met through the
presentation of an archaeological investigation report prepared in compliance
with federal or New Mexico State historic preservation laws and regulations
that used a comparable definition for a significant archaeological site.
Documentation specifying that the report was accepted by the relevant agency
shall accompany the report.
   2.   The property has been disturbed through previous land use or
development to such an extent that there is a substantial reduction in the
probability of the continuing existence of any significant archaeological site.
It shall be adequate evidence that the property was previously disturbed to
such an extent so as to meet this requirement if the property has been graded,
demolition has occurred on the property, or the project involves redevelopment
or rehabilitation of existing improvements.
   3.   The informational value of any significant archaeological sites located
on the property has been satisfactorily documented through previous
archaeological investigation.
6-5(A)(3)(b)   Certificate of Approval
   1.   A Certificate of Approval shall be issued if the proposed site-specific
treatment plan accomplishes all of the following:
      a.   Details strategies for the management of the affected archaeological
sites.
      b.   Includes standards for further testing, sampling, documentation,
data recovery, preservation and protection, analysis, and report preparation.
      c.   Outlines an effective preservation plan or data recovery and
documentation plan for those resources that the City Archaeologist has
determined to have significant research or other value.
      d.   Provides a schedule for the implementation of the treatment plan.
      e.   Provides a cost estimate for mitigation strategies, including
testing, data recovery, curation, and report preparation.
   2.   In making a decision on the plan, the City Archaeologist shall consider
methods to avoid, reduce, or mitigate effects on archaeological resources,
including the use of conservation easements, while taking into consideration
the needs of the property owner.
6-5(B)   HISTORIC CERTIFICATE OF APPROPRIATENESS - MINOR
All applicable provisions of Section
14-16-6-4 (General Procedures) apply unless specifically modified by the
provisions of this Subsection
14-16-6-5(B).
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/b37713d5e40fc82694833f290401791f80be26ac/
IMAGES/0-0-0-6891.png]
6-5(B)(1)   Applicability
6-5(B)(1)(a)   This Subsection
14-16-6-5(B) applies to any of the following activities within an HPO zone or a
City landmark site:
   1.   All alterations to the exterior appearance of any structure, including
any wall.
   2.   All alterations to any character-defining interior feature within a
City landmark.
   3.   All construction of new accessory structures, including walls.
   4.   All demolition of existing non-contributing accessory structures,
including walls.
   5.   Any alteration, construction, or demolition of a sign.
6-5(B)(1)(b)   This Subsection
14-16-6-5(B) does not apply to any of the following activities within an HPO
zone or a City landmark site:
   1.   Ordinary maintenance and repair where the purpose of the work is to
correct deterioration to the structure and restore it to its condition prior to
deterioration.
   2.   Any construction, alteration, or demolition that only affects the
interior of the structure unless the interior features which will be affected
were listed as worthy of preservation in the landmark's general preservation
guidelines or specific development guidelines.
   3.   Any construction, alteration, or demolition that is exempted from this
requirement by approved specific development guidelines.
   4.   Any alteration or demolition that is necessary to correct or abate a
condition which has been declared unsafe or requiring an emergency measure by
the appropriate City official after notification of the LC and consultation
with the LC Chairperson.
6-5(B)(1)(c)   This Subsection
14-16-6-5(B) requires a Historic Certificate of Appropriateness - Minor prior
to a historic sign anywhere in the city being taken down and then reinstalled
in the same location after being restored on-site or taken off-site for
restoration, repair, or maintenance.
6-5(B)(1)(d)   Any application deemed minor by the Historic Preservation
Planner shall be reviewed and decided pursuant to this Subsection
14-16-6-5(B). Those applications that include major changes that warrant
additional review by the LC at a public hearing shall be reviewed and decided
per Subsection
14-16-6-6(D) (Historic Certificate of Appropriateness - Major).
6-5(B)(2)   Procedure
The Historic Preservation Planner shall review the application and make a
decision on the Historic Certificate of Appropriateness - Minor.
6-5(B)(3)   Review and Decision Criteria
An application for a Historic Certificate of Appropriateness - Minor shall be
approved if it complies with all of the following criteria.
6-5(B)(3)(a)   The change is consistent with the designation ordinance and
specific development guidelines for the landmark or HPO zone.
6-5(B)(3)(b)   The architectural character, historical value, or archaeological
value of the structure or site itself or of any HPO zone in which it is located
will not be significantly impaired or diminished.
6-5(B)(3)(c)   The change qualifies as a "certified rehabilitation" pursuant to
the Tax Reform Act of 1976, if applicable.
6-5(B)(3)(d)   The structure or site's distinguished original qualities or
character will not be altered, where "original" means both those included at
the time of initial construction and those developed over the history of the
structure.
6-5(B)(3)(e)   Deteriorated architectural features shall be repaired rather
than replaced, to the maximum extent practicable. If replacement is necessary,
the new material shall match the original as closely as possible in like
material and design.
6-5(C)   PERMIT - SIGN
All applicable provisions of Section
14-16-6-4 (General Procedures) apply unless specifically modified by the
provisions of this Subsection
14-16-6-5(C).
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/b37713d5e40fc82694833f290401791f80be26ac/
IMAGES/0-0-0-6893.png]
6-5(C)(1)   Applicability
6-5(C)(1)(a)   This Subsection
14-16-6-5(C) applies to any sign that requires a Sign Permit pursuant to
Subsection
14-16-5-12(D)(1).
6-5(C)(1)(b)   This Subsection
14-16-6-5(C) applies to an application for an Alternative Signage Plan pursuant
to the provisions in Subsection
14-16-5-12(F)(5) (Alternative Signage Plan).
6-5(C)(1)(c)   This Subsection
14-16-6-5(C) applies to approving a sign for compliance with standards in the
IDO as part of an application for a Master Development Plan or Site Plan.
6-5(C)(2)   Procedure
6-5(C)(2)(a)   General
   1.   The ZEO shall review the application and make a decision on the Permit
- Sign.
   2.   All applications on properties in an HPO zone shall first be reviewed
by the Historic Preservation Planner pursuant to Subsection
14-16-6-5(B) (Historic Certificate of Appropriateness - Minor), and a
recommendation sent to the ZEO.
   3.   All applications in an area with a City-approved architectural or
design review body shall first be reviewed by that body and a recommendation
sent to the ZEO.
   4.   Where owners of abutting premises create a Joint Sign Premises to apply
for a sign that would not otherwise be allowed, the owners' signed agreement
shall be included in the application for the Sign Permit.
6-5(C)(2)(b)   Electronic Signs
In addition to the general requirements in this Subsection
14-16-6-5(C), all of the following requirements must be met for electronic
signs.
   1.   A Permit - Sign for an electronic sign is required annually. A permit
for a new electronic sign or the annual renewal of a permit for an existing
electronic sign shall expire 1 year after the date of issuance.
   2.   In an application to renew a Permit - Sign for an electronic sign, the
applicant shall state whether or not there have been changes to the sign in the
preceding year and shall specify any changes.
   3.   The ZEO shall review and make a decision on each annual application for
a Permit - Sign for an electronic sign.
6-5(C)(2)(c)   Alternative Signage Plan
   1.   The ZEO shall review the application and make a decision on the
Alternative Signage Plan.
   2.   If approved, the Alternative Signage Plan shall be binding on the
property for which the plan is approved until the Alternative Signage Plan is
amended or rescinded.
   3.   An approved Alternative Signage Plan may be amended or rescinded
through the same procedure used to approve the plan.
6-5(C)(3)   Review and Decision Criteria
6-5(C)(3)(a)   An application for a Permit - Sign shall be approved if it
complies with all applicable standards in this IDO, in particular Section
14-16-5-12 (Signs); the DPM; other adopted City regulations; and any terms and
conditions specifically applied to development of the property in a prior
permit or approval affecting the property.
6-5(C)(3)(b)   An application for an Alternative Sign Plan shall be approved if
it meets all of the requirements in Subsection
14-16-5-12(F)(5) (Alternative Signage Plan) and both of the following criteria.
   1.   It reflects a distribution of available sign area on the site that will
promote equal or greater public safety both on-site and when viewed from any
adjacent public rights-of-way, when compared to the location and distribution
of signs and sign area allowed under Section
14-16-5-12 (Signs).
   2.   It does not create levels of glare or adverse impacts on surrounding
properties greater than those that would occur from the location and
distribution of signs and sign area allowed under Section
14-16-5-12 (Signs).
6-5(D)   PERMIT - TEMPORARY USE
All applicable provisions of Section
14-16-6-4 (General Procedures) apply unless specifically modified by the
provisions of this Subsection
14-16-6-5(D).
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/b37713d5e40fc82694833f290401791f80be26ac/
IMAGES/0-0-0-6895.png]
6-5(D)(1)   Applicability
This Subsection
14-16-6-5(D) applies to uses that require a Permit - Temporary Use per
Table 4-2-1 and associated Use-specific Standards in Subsection
14-16-4-3(G) (Temporary Uses).
6-5(D)(2)   Procedure
   6-5(D)(2)(a)   The applicant shall have all of the following
responsibilities:
   1.   Specify the location, duration, and potential impacts of the temporary
use. A sketch plan or Site Plan may be required for the purposes of
understanding access, location of temporary lavatories or other temporary
provisions, and the location of any structures or signage.
   2.   Provide written permission from the owner of the subject property (if
different from the applicant) for the temporary use for the requested duration
of the use (e.g. number of days and/or operating hours).
   3.   Supply proof of notification of abutting property owners of the use and
intended duration of the use (e.g. number of days and/or operating hours).
   4.   Keep documentation of the Permit - Temporary Use available on-site for
the duration of the temporary use.
   6-5(D)(2)(b)   A Permit – Temporary Use may not be granted until after any
necessary Conditional Use Approvals are obtained pursuant to Subsection
14-16-6-6(A).
6-5(D)(3)   Review and Decision Criteria
An application for a Permit - Temporary Use shall be approved for a specified
duration if it complies with all applicable Use-specific Standards in
Subsection
14-16-4-3(G) (Temporary Uses) and adequately mitigates negative impacts on
surrounding properties for the duration of the use.
6-5(E)   PERMIT - TEMPORARY WINDOW WRAP
All applicable provisions of Section
14-16-6-4 (General Procedures) apply unless specifically modified by the
provisions of this Subsection
14-16-6-5(E).
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/b37713d5e40fc82694833f290401791f80be26ac/
IMAGES/0-0-0-6897.png]
6-5(E)(1)   Applicability
This Subsection
14-16-6-5(E) applies to requests for a Permit - Temporary Window Wrap in the
following areas:
6-5(E)(1)(a)   Any MX-FB zone district in the Downtown Center (DT), pursuant to
Subsection
14-16-2-4(E)(3)(f)3.a.vi.
6-5(E)(1)(b)   Any Mixed-use or Non-residential zone district in any UC-AC-MS-
PT area pursuant to Subsection
14-16-5-11(E)(2)(b)2.c.
6-5(E)(2)   Procedure
The applicant shall have all of the following responsibilities:
6-5(E)(2)(a)   Obtain written agreement from the City Fire Marshal and
Albuquerque Police Department that the temporary window wrap provides
appropriate visibility for security and emergency response.
6-5(E)(2)(b)   Provide documentation, as required by the ZEO, that includes, at
a minimum, all of the following:
   1.   A dimensioned ground floor footprint with vacant tenant spaces
specified.
   2.   Calculations of the total gross floor area of the ground floor, total
gross floor area of vacant tenant spaces, and the percentage of vacant tenant
spaces.
   3.   A dimensioned elevation detail of the ground floor fa ade illustrating
the proposed window wrap and open portions that provide visibility into the
building for health and safety purposes.
   4.   Mitigation measures for the potential negative impacts of the temporary
window wrap, as determined by the ZEO.
6-5(E)(2)(c)   Obtain a Permit - Sign pursuant to Subsection
14-16-6-5(C) if any portion of the temporary window wrap meets the definition
of sign in this IDO.
6-5(E)(2)(d)   Provide written permission from the property owner of the
subject property (if different than the applicant) for the Permit - Temporary
Window Wrap.
6-5(E)(2)(e)   If the permit is approved, complete mitigation measures no later
than the installation of the temporary window wrap.
6-5(E)(2)(f)   If the permit is approved, keep documentation of the Permit -
Temporary Window Wrap available onsite for the duration of the temporary
permit.
6-5(E)(2)(g)   Remove within 5 business days the temporary window wrap on any
portion of the ground floor where a vacant tenant space becomes occupied.
6-5(E)(2)(h)   Remove the temporary window wrap within 5 business days after
the ground floor becomes at least 50 percent occupied or the permit expires,
whichever occurs first.
6-5(E)(3)   Review and Decision Criteria
An application for a Permit - Temporary Window Wrap shall be approved if it
complies with all applicable standards in Subsections
14-16-2-4(E)(3)(f) and
14-16-5-11(E)(2)(b) (Urban Centers, Activity Centers, and Main Street and
Premium Transit Areas).
6-5(F)   PERMIT - WALL OR FENCE - MINOR
All applicable provisions of Section
14-16-6-4 (General Procedures) apply unless specifically modified by the
provisions of this Subsection
14-16-6-5(F).
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/b37713d5e40fc82694833f290401791f80be26ac/
IMAGES/0-0-0-6899.png]
6-5(F)(1)   Applicability
This Subsection
14-16-6-5(F) applies to all applications to build a wall or fence that meets
the standards in Section
14-16-5-7 (Walls and Fences), except for the following:
6-5(F)(1)(a)   Any wall that requires a Permit - Wall or Fence - Major pursuant
to Subsection
14-16-5-7(D)(3)(a)2 (Exceptions to Maximum Wall Height).
6-5(F)(1)(b)   Any wall that is taller than allowed by Subsection
14-16-5-7(D) and that does not require a Permit - Wall or Fence - Major
pursuant to Subsection
14-16-5-7(D)(3)(a)2 (Exceptions to Maximum Wall Height) requires a Variance,
pursuant to Subsection
14-16-6-6(N) (Variance - EPC) for walls or fences associated with a Site Plan -
EPC or Subsection
14-16-6-6(O) (Variance - ZHE) for walls or fences associated with any other
request.
6-5(F)(2)   Procedure
6-5(F)(2)(a)   All applications in an HPO zone or on properties or in districts
listed on the State Register of Cultural Properties or the National Register of
Historic Places shall first be reviewed by the Historic Preservation Planner
pursuant to Subsection
14-16-6-5(B) (Historic Certificate of Appropriateness - Minor), and the
Historic Preservation Planner shall send a recommendation to the ZEO.
6-5(F)(2)(b)   The ZEO shall review the application and make a decision on the
Permit - Wall or Fence - Minor.
6-5(F)(3)   Review and Approval Criteria
An application for a Wall or Fence Permit shall be approved if it complies with
all applicable standards in this IDO, the DPM, other adopted City regulations,
and any conditions specifically applied to development of the property in a
prior permit or approval affecting the property.
6-5(F)(3)(a)   The ZEO may approve a wall or fence that is taller than allowed
by Subsection
14-16-5-7(D)(1) pursuant to Subsection
14-16-5-7(D)(3)(e)1.
6-5(F)(3)(b)   A wall or fence shall not be approved unless the City Engineer
finds that the wall or fence would not be a hazard to traffic visibility (i.e.,
if the wall or fence is in a clear sight triangle).
6-5(F)(3)(c)   A wall or fence shall not be approved unless the City Engineer
finds that the wall or fence does not block drainage and/or adversely affect
adjoining, upstream or downstream properties.
6-5(F)(3)(d)   If the subject property is within an approved Master Development
Plan, the Site Plan shall meet any relevant standards in the Master Development
Plan in addition to any standards applicable in the zone district the subject
property is in.
6-5(G)   SITE PLAN - ADMINISTRATIVE
All applicable provisions of Section
14-16-6-4 (General Procedures) apply unless specifically modified by the
provisions of this Subsection
14-16-6-5(G).
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/b37713d5e40fc82694833f290401791f80be26ac/
IMAGES/0-0-0-6901.png]
6-5(G)(1)   Applicability
6-5(G)(1)(a)   A Site Plan - Administrative may only be approved for
development on legally platted or nonconforming lots and may not be approved
for unsubdivided property.
6-5(G)(1)(b)   A Site Plan - Administrative may be approved for property with a
prior-approved Site Plan, regardless of whether the prior-approved Site Plan is
still valid pursuant to Subsection
14-16-6-4(X), subject to allowable uses and development standards in this IDO.
If any portions of the proposed boundary overlap with a prior-approved Site
Plan that will remain in place, a Major Amendment shall be required as
described in Subsection
14-16-6-5(G)(2)(c) below.
6-5(G)(1)(c)   A Site Plan – Administrative may only be approved for
development that avoids sensitive lands identified in a sensitive lands
analysis as required pursuant to Subsection
14-16-5-2(C). Otherwise, a Site Plan – EPC is required pursuant to Subsection
14-16-6-6(I).
6-5(G)(1)(d)   In the Railroad and Spur Small Area, a Site Plan –
Administrative may only be approved for development that does not require a
cumulative impact analysis pursuant to Subsections
14-16-5-2(E) and
14-16-6-4(H), which requires a Site Plan – EPC pursuant to Subsection
14-16-6-6(I).
6-5(G)(1)(e)   Where adjacent to Major Public Open Space, a Site Plan –
Administrative may only be approved for a project site of no more than 5 acres.
Development on a project site over 5 acres and adjacent to Major Public Open
Space requires a Site Plan – EPC pursuant to Subsection
14-16-6-6(I).
6-5(G)(1)(f)   This Subsection
14-16-6-5(G) applies to any of the following developments on a lot or
continuous lots in any zone district other than NR-SU or PD, which require a
Site Plan – EPC pursuant to Subsection
14-16-6-6(I):
   1.   All new low-density residential development.
   2.   All new multi-family residential development.
   3.   All conversions of existing non-residential development to a
residential use.
   4.   All new non-residential development.
   5.   All new mixed-use development.
   6.   All increases in the number of residential dwelling units originally
approved on the subject property or increases to the gross floor area
originally approved beyond the threshold for Minor Amendment pursuant to
Subsection
14-16-6-4(X) (Amendments of Approvals) or
14-16-6-4(Y) (Amendments of Pre-IDO Approvals).
   7.   All development in the MX-FB zone district that is already mapped.
   8.   More than 5 mobile food trucks on 1 lot, pursuant to Subsection
14-16-4-3(F)(11)(d) (Mobile Food Truck), where mobile food trucks are accessory
to a primary use, and any number of mobile food trucks on a premises with no
other primary use, pursuant to Subsection
14-16-4-3(F)(11) (Mobile Food Truck).
   9.   A Permit – Temporary Use when a Site Plan is required pursuant to a
Use-specific Standard in Section
14-16-4-3.
   10.   All electric utilities.
   11.   All other major utility facilities with administrative approval
according to an approved Facility Plan.
   12.   All new, redeveloped, or renovated City-owned or managed parks less
than 10 acres, regardless of the zone district they are in, where all of the
following criteria apply. Park development over this threshold requires a Site
Plan – EPC pursuant to Subsection
14-16-6-6(I).
      a.   The project proposes only allowable uses as specified in
Table 4-2-1, except for any collocated City facility.
      b.   The project does not include lighting over 45 feet, illuminated
signs, amplified outdoor sound, or over 150 parking spaces.
   13.   Any City-owned or managed Major Public Open Space facility that is not
designated as an Extraordinary Facility pursuant to the Rank 2 Major Public
Open Space Facility Plan or that is a renovation of a facility previously
approved as an Extraordinary Facility, either of which requires a Site Plan –
EPC pursuant to Subsection
14-16-6-6(I).
   14.   Any property in the NR-PO-C zone district of any size that is not part
of a proposed development that would meet the applicability standards to be
processed as a Site Plan – EPC pursuant to Subsection
14-16-6-6(I).
   15.   All City BioPark facilities, which are regulated by the BioPark Master
Plan and managed by City Cultural Services.
6-5(G)(2)   Procedure
6-5(G)(2)(a)   The ZEO shall review the application and make a decision on the
Site Plan – Administrative.
   1.   An initial review with comments shall be completed within 10 business
days of the receipt of a complete application.
   2.   A Notice of Decision shall be sent to the applicant and to any other
person who has submitted written comments and/or requested a copy of the
decision.
   3.   The Notice of Decision shall be posted on the City website as soon as
practicable and not more than 3 business days after the final action.
6-5(G)(2)(b)   If the boundary of a proposed site plan includes only a portion
of the boundary of a prior-approved Site Plan that is still valid pursuant to
Subsection
14-16-6-4(W), the prior-approved Site Plan must be amended through a Major
Amendment pursuant to Subsection
14-16-6-4(X) (Amendments of Approvals) or
14-16-6-4(Y) (Amendments of Pre-IDO Approvals), as applicable, to remove the
overlapping area proposed in a new site plan before an application for a new
site plan that includes that overlapping area can be decided, because only one
site plan shall apply to any property.
6-5(G)(2)(c)   Site Plans shall be reviewed administratively for compliance
with conditions of approval and zoning standards prior to the issuance of a
building permit.
6-5(G)(2)(d)   The ZEO may grant deviations to IDO standards as part of this
approval within the thresholds established in Section
14-16-6-4(P) (Deviations). Beyond these thresholds, a Variance to IDO standards
(other than to standards in Sections
14-16-5-3,
14-16-5-4, or
14-16-5-5) requires review and approval by the ZHE per Subsection
14-16-6-6(O) (Variance – ZHE).
6-5(G)(2)(e)   Any request for a Waiver to IDO standards in Sections
14-16-5-3 (Access and Connectivity),
14-16-5-4 (Subdivision of Land), or
14-16-5-5 (Parking and Loading) requires review and approval by the DHO
pursuant to Subsection
14-16-6-6(P) (Waiver – DHO).
6-5(G)(2)(f)   A Site Plan – Administrative may not be approved until after any
necessary Variances or Waivers are obtained.
6-5(G)(2)(g)   Any Variances, Waivers, or deviations granted that are
associated with a Site Plan shall be noted on the approved Site Plan.
6-5(G)(2)(h)   If the Site Plan will replace a prior-approved Site Plan, the
project number, case number, site boundary, and date of the Notice of Decision
of the original approval shall be noted on the Site Plan.
6-5(G)(2)(i)   A Site Plan – Administrative may not be approved until after any
necessary Conditional Use Approvals are obtained pursuant to Subsection
14-16-6-6(A).
6-5(G)(2)(j)   For properties in the NR-PO zone district, the ZEO shall
coordinate the review with Parks and Recreation and/or Cultural Services staff,
as applicable.
6-5(G)(3)   Review and Decision Criteria
An application for Site Plan - Administrative shall be approved if it meets all
of the following criteria.
6-5(G)(3)(a)   The Site Plan complies with all applicable standards in this
IDO, the DPM, other adopted City regulations, and any conditions specifically
applied to development of the property in a prior permit or approval affecting
the property.
6-5(G)(3)(b)   The City's existing infrastructure and public improvements,
including but not limited to its street, trail, drainage, and sidewalk systems,
have adequate capacity to serve the proposed development or the applicant has
agreed to install required infrastructure and public improvements pursuant to
Subsection Subsection
14-16-1-7(B)(2) and
14-16-5-4(N) and/or a signed an Infrastructure Improvements Agreement (IIA)
pursuant to Subsection
14-16-5-4(O) to add adequate capacity.
6-5(G)(3)(c)   If the subject property is within an approved Master Development
Plan, the Site Plan shall meet any relevant standards in the Master Development
Plan in addition to any IDO standards applicable in the zone district the
subject property is in.
6-5(G)(3)(d)   If the subject property is within an approved Framework Plan,
the Site Plan shall meet any relevant standards in the Framework Plan in
addition to any IDO standards applicable to the type of development.
6-5(H)   WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATIONS FACILITY APPROVAL
All applicable provisions of Section
14-16-6-4 (General Procedures) apply unless specifically modified by the
provisions of this Subsection
14-16-6-5(H) or the DPM.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/b37713d5e40fc82694833f290401791f80be26ac/
IMAGES/0-0-0-6903.png]
6-5(H)(1)   Applicability
A Wireless Telecommunications Facility (WTF) Approval must be obtained for all
new WTFs located within the City limits, whether on private or public lands and
whether it is a primary or accessory use.
6-5(H)(1)(a)   This Subsection
14-16-6-5(H) applies to any of the following:
   1.   All new WTFs.
   2.   All collocations on public utilities.
   3.   All collocations on concealed WTFs.
   4.   All antenna collocations on unconcealed WTFs, which became
nonconforming upon adoption of the concealment requirement in 2008 (City
Council Bill No. O-06-40).
   5.   Like-for-like antenna swap outs, back-up generators, and other minor
site modifications to existing WTFs.
   6.   Upgrades to existing WTFs that would not result in a substantial change
(a term defined by federal law) to an existing WTF.
6-5(H)(1)(b)   Any unconcealed WTF erected prior to January 15, 1999 (City
Council Bill O- 54; Enactment O-9-1999), provided that a building permit was
issued for that antenna or tower, collocations of antennas on existing
unconcealed towers and public utility collocation are exempted from the
concealment provisions of Subsection
14-16-4-3(E)(12)(a) (Wireless Telecommunications Facility).
6-5(H)(2)   Procedure
6-5(H)(2)(a)   The Planning Director shall review the application and make a
decision on the WTF application. An administrative review shall be completed
within 60 calendar days of the receipt of a complete application. An incomplete
application shall be deemed withdrawn if the deficiencies are not corrected
within 60 calendar days of notice of the deficiencies.
6-5(H)(2)(b)   Variances to the standards in Section
14-16-4-3(E)(12) (Wireless Telecommunications Facility) are not allowed. Any
facility that cannot comply with these standards requires review and approval
of a Waiver by the EPC under Subsection
14-16-6-6(Q) (Waiver - Wireless Telecommunications Facility) before a WTF
Approval may be granted.
6-5(H)(2)(c)   Applications for upgrades to an existing WTF that that would
result in a substantial change (a term defined by federal law) to an existing
WTF requires review and approval of a Waiver by the EPC under Subsection
14-16-6-6(Q) (Waiver - Wireless Telecommunications Facility), before a WTF
approval may be granted.
6-5(H)(3)   Review and Decision Criteria
An application for a WTF Approval shall be approved if it meets the standards
of Subsection
14-16-4-3(E)(12) (Wireless Telecommunications Facility) and all applicable
standards in this IDO, the DPM, and federal law and regulations.
6-6   DECISIONS REQUIRING A PUBLIC HEARING
6-6(A)   CONDITIONAL USE APPROVAL
All applicable provisions of Section
14-16-6-4 (General Procedures) apply unless specifically modified by the
provisions of this Subsection
14-16-6-6(A) or the DPM.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/b37713d5e40fc82694833f290401791f80be26ac/
IMAGES/0-0-0-6905.png]
6-6(A)(1)   Applicability
6-6(A)(1)(a)   This Subsection
14-16-6-6(A) applies to all applications for a use listed as conditional (i.e.,
Conditional Primary, Conditional Accessory, Conditional Temporary, or
Conditional Vacant if the application is submitted after the primary building
on the property has been vacant for 5 years or more) in
Table 4-2-1. Conditional uses are only allowed if approved pursuant to this
Subsection
14-16-6-6(A).
6-6(A)(1)(b)   A Conditional Use Approval is only valid for the location stated
in the application and cannot be transferred to a new location.
6-6(A)(1)(c)   If an approved conditional use is discontinued for a period of 1
year, it may not be reestablished without a new Conditional Use Approval.
6-6(A)(2)   Procedure
6-6(A)(2)(a)   The City Planning Department staff shall review the application
and forward a recommendation to the ZHE.
6-6(A)(2)(b)   The ZHE shall conduct a public hearing on the application and
make a written decision on the application.
6-6(A)(2)(c)   An application for a Conditional Use Approval must be decided
before any Variance or Waiver for the subject property may be decided.
Applications for a Variance or Waiver may be submitted concurrently with an
application for a Conditional Use Approval.
   1.   If a Variance or Waiver is needed to comply with this IDO, the DPM, or
other adopted City regulations, the decision on the Conditional Use Approval
shall be conditioned on approval of any such necessary Variances or Waivers. If
the Conditional Use Approval is denied, any necessary Variances or Waivers
shall also be denied.
   2.   If any Variance or Waiver is required in order to make an approved
conditional use comply with this IDO, the DPM, or other adopted City
regulations and such Variance or Waiver is not approved, the Conditional Use
Approval is invalidated.
6-6(A)(3)   Review and Decision Criteria
An application for a Conditional Use Approval shall be approved if it meets all
of the following criteria.
6-6(A)(3)(a)   It is consistent with the adopted ABC Comp Plan, as amended.
6-6(A)(3)(b)   It complies with all applicable provisions of this IDO,
including but not limited to any Use-specific Standards applicable to the use
in Section
14-16-4-3; the DPM; other adopted City regulations; and any conditions
specifically applied to development of the property in a prior permit or
approval affecting the property, or there is a condition of approval that any
Variances or Waivers needed to comply with any of these provisions must be
approved or the Conditional Use Approval will be invalidated pursuant to
Subsection (2)(c)2 above.
6-6(A)(3)(c)   It will not create significant adverse impacts on adjacent
properties, the surrounding neighborhood, or the larger community.
6-6(A)(3)(d)   It will not create material adverse impacts on other land in the
surrounding area through increases in traffic congestion, parking congestion,
noise, or vibration without sufficient mitigation or civic or environmental
benefits that outweigh the expected impacts.
6-6(A)(3)(e)   On a project site with existing uses, it will not increase non-
residential activity within 300 feet in any direction of a lot in any
Residential zone district between the hours of 10:00 P.M. and 6:00 A.M.
6-6(A)(3)(f)   It will not negatively impact pedestrian or transit connectivity
without appropriate mitigation.
6-6(B)   DEMOLITION OUTSIDE OF AN HPO
All applicable provisions of Section
14-16-6-4 (General Procedures) apply unless specifically modified by the
provisions of this Subsection
14-16-6-6(B) or the DPM.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/b37713d5e40fc82694833f290401791f80be26ac/
IMAGES/0-0-0-6911.png]
6-6(B)(1)   Applicability
This Subsection
14-16-6-6(B) applies to applies to any of the following:
6-6(B)(1)(a)   Demolition of any structure that was constructed in or prior to
1945.
6-6(B)(1)(b)   Demolition of any structure listed on the State and/or national
historic register or that is a contributing structure in a State or national
registered historic district.
6-6(B)(1)(c)   Demolition of any structure that is at least 50 years old
located in the following small areas, regardless of whether they are registered
on a State or national historic register or are eligible for listing. If a
structure is of unknown age, it shall be presumed that it is over 50 years old
for the purposes of this Subsection
14-16-6-6(B).
   1.   Neon signs along Central Avenue in locations pursuant to Subsection
14-16-5-12(F)(4)(a) (Neon Signs along Central Avenue).
   2.   Downtown Small Area
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/b37713d5e40fc82694833f290401791f80be26ac/
IMAGES/0-0-0-6907.png]
   3.   Downtown Neighborhood Area - CPO-3
   4.   East Downtown - CPO-4
   5.   Nob Hill/Highland Small Area
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/b37713d5e40fc82694833f290401791f80be26ac/
IMAGES/0-0-0-6909.png]
6-6(B)(2)   Procedure
6-6(B)(2)(a)   The Historic Preservation Planner shall review the application
involving demolition within 5 days after receipt of the application in order to
determine whether to recommend review and decision by the Landmarks Commission
(LC).
6-6(B)(2)(b)   If the Historic Preservation Planner recommends demolition
review by the LC, the LC shall notify the applicant and the Chief Building
Official in writing within 5 days and conduct a public hearing at the next
possible hearing date to decide whether a 120-day review period shall be
invoked.
6-6(B)(2)(c)   After receiving notice of demolition review from the LC, the
applicant shall provide public notice and schedule any meetings required by
Table 6-1-1.
6-6(B)(2)(d)   Following a staff determination that the structure is subject to
demolition review, no application involving demolition may Be approved prior to
an LC hearing. If the Historic Preservation Planner does not notify the Chief
Building Official within 5 calendar days of receipt of the application that the
structure is subject to demolition review, the City may proceed to approve the
application involving demolition.
6-6(B)(2)(e)   The purpose of the public hearing is for the LC to decide
whether a 120-day demolition review period shall be invoked. In order to foster
discussion and possible resolution of issues between the City and the
applicant, the LC may postpone the issuance of its decision if agreed to in
writing by the applicant.
   1.   Upon a determination by the LC that the 120-day review period is to be
invoked, the LC shall notify the Chief Building Official and applicant in
writing. No permit for demolition, new construction, or alterations on the
premises shall be issued during the review period. If the LC does not notify
the Chief Building Official in writing within 21 calendar days of the public
hearing that the review period is to be invoked, the Chief Building Official
may approve the application involving demolition.
   2.   A "Determination of No Feasible Alternative" may be issued during the
public hearing if the LC finds that, for a structure that otherwise meets the
requirements for the 120-day demolition review period, there is no feasible
alternative to demolition.
   3.   If the LC determines that the 120-day review period is not to be
invoked, the LC shall so notify the Chief Building Official and applicant in
writing. The Chief Building Official may then approve the application involving
demolition.
6-6(B)(2)(f)   The Chief Building Official may approve the application
involving demolition upon expiration of the 120-day review period if a City
landmark designation has not been initiated or some other means of preserving
the structure intact has not been agreed to in writing by the LC and the
applicant; however, no permit for demolition of a structure subject to the 120-
day review period shall be granted, even after expiration of the review period,
until all plans for future use and development of the site have been submitted
to the Chief Building Official and have been found to comply with all laws
pertaining to the issuance of a building permit, or, if for a parking lot, a
certificate of occupancy for that site. All approvals necessary for the
issuance of such building permit or certificate of occupancy, including but not
limited to any necessary Variances, Waivers, or permits, must be granted, and
all appeals from the granting of such approvals must be concluded prior to the
approval of an application involving demolition under this Subsection
14-16-6-6(B).
6-6(B)(2)(g)   During the demolition review period, the City may take any
action that it deems necessary and consistent with this Subsection to preserve
the structure. During the review period, the LC shall provide for the
documentation of the structure.
6-6(B)(2)(h)   If after an inspection, the Chief Building Official finds that a
structure subject to the 120-day review period poses an immediate threat to
public health or safety due to its deteriorated condition and that there is no
reasonable alternative to the immediate demolition of the structure, then the
Chief Building Official may issue an emergency demolition permit to the owner
of the structure. The Chief Building Official shall then prepare a report
explaining the condition of the structure and the basis for his/her decision,
which shall be forwarded to the LC.
6-6(B)(3)   Review and Decision Criteria
6-6(B)(3)(a)   The Historic Preservation Planner shall review the application
involving demolition based on the following criteria:
   1.   The structure's historic, architectural, engineering, or cultural
significance.
   2.   The structure's potential to contribute to the city's economic
development or tourism industry.
   3.   The structure's potential to enhance the city's heritage and historical
identity.
   4.   Whether the structure is unique or one of the last remaining examples
of its kind in the neighborhood, the city, or the region.
   5.   The structure's condition.
6-6(B)(3)(b)   To invoke the 120-day review period, the LC must find that, in
considering the public interest, it is preferable that the structure be
preserved or rehabilitated rather than demolished and use the criteria in
Subsection (a) above and Subsection
14-16-6-7(C) (Adoption or Amendment of Historic Designation) in its evaluation.
6-6(B)(3)(c)   In determining whether the structure should be designated as a
landmark, the LC shall apply the criteria Subsection
14-16-6-7(C) (Adoption or Amendment of Historic Designation).
6-6(C)   EXPANSION OF NONCONFORMING USE OR STRUCTURE
All applicable provisions of Section
14-16-6-4 (General Procedures) apply unless specifically modified by the
provisions of this Subsection
14-16-6-6(C) or the DPM.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/b37713d5e40fc82694833f290401791f80be26ac/
IMAGES/0-0-0-6913.png]
6-6(C)(1)   Applicability
This Subsection
14-16-6-6(C) applies to all applications to expand a nonconforming use or
structure, as defined in Sections
14-16-6-8 (Nonconformities) and
14-16-7-1 (Definitions). Nonconforming site features may not be expanded. No
nonconforming use or structure may be expanded unless an approval under this
Subsection
14-16-6-6(C) is obtained by the property owner or applicant.
6-6(C)(2)   Procedure
6-6(C)(2)(a)   The City Planning Department staff shall review the application
and forward a recommendation to the ZHE.
6-6(C)(2)(b)   The ZHE shall conduct a public hearing on the application and
shall make a decision on the application.
6-6(C)(3)   Review and Decision Criteria
An application for an Expansion of Nonconforming Use or Structure shall be
approved if it meets all of the following criteria, as applicable.
6-6(C)(3)(a)   The expansion will not create material negative impacts on other
land in the surrounding area through increases in traffic congestion, parking
congestion, noise, or vibration without sufficient mitigation or civic or
environmental benefits that outweigh the expected impacts.
6-6(C)(3)(b)   The expansion will not increase non-residential activity within
300 feet in any direction of a lot in any Residential zone district between the
hours of 8:00 P.M. and 6:00 A.M.
6-6(C)(3)(c)   The expansion will not negatively impact pedestrian or transit
connectivity without appropriate mitigation.
6-6(C)(3)(d)   The expansion will not exceed 25 percent of the gross floor area
of the structure occupied by the nonconforming use, or 25 percent of the area
occupied by the nonconforming use at the time it became nonconforming.
6-6(C)(3)(e)   The expansion will not expand the gross floor area of a
nonconforming structure by more than 25 percent of the gross floor area
existing at the time the structure became nonconforming.
6-6(C)(3)(f)   The expansion will not increase an existing nonconformity more
than allowed by Subsection (d) or (e) above or create a new nonconformity.
6-6(D)   HISTORIC CERTIFICATE OF APPROPRIATENESS - MAJOR
All applicable provisions of Section
14-16-6-4 (General Procedures) apply unless specifically modified by the
provisions of this Subsection
14-16-6-6(D) or DPM.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/b37713d5e40fc82694833f290401791f80be26ac/
IMAGES/0-0-0-6915.png]
6-6(D)(1)   Applicability
This Subsection
14-16-6-6(D) applies to all development and modification of structures in any
HPO zone and to all development or modification of a landmark site that does
not meet the applicability standards for a Historic Certificate of
Appropriateness - Minor in Subsection
14-16-6-5(B).
6-6(D)(2)   Procedure
6-6(D)(2)(a)   Applicants shall review their proposed projects with the
Historic Preservation Planner before preparing final plans and submitting an
application. The purpose of this discussion is to determine the approval
procedure and create a project drawing checklist for the specific request.
6-6(D)(2)(b)   The Historic Preservation Planner shall review the application
and forward a recommendation to the LC.
6-6(D)(2)(c)   The LC shall conduct a public hearing on the application and
shall make a decision on the application.
6-6(D)(2)(d)   If the LC denies an application for a Historic Certificate of
Appropriateness - Major for demolition, there shall be a moratorium on
demolition for a period of 1 year, during which time the City shall make every
effort to find a means of preserving the structure. By the end of the 1-year
moratorium, if the City Council determines that the subject property is
incapable of producing a reasonable economic return as presently controlled and
that no means of preserving the structure has been found, pursuant to the
criteria in Subsection
14-16-6-6(D)(3)(g), the City Council shall issue a demolition permit.
6-6(D)(3)   Review and Decision Criteria
An application for a Historic Certificate of Appropriateness - Major shall be
approved if it complies with all of the following criteria.
6-6(D)(3)(a)   The change is consistent with Section
14-16-3-5 (Historic Protection Overlay Zones), the ordinance designating the
specific HPO zone where the property is located, and any specific development
guidelines for the landmark or the specific HPO zone where the property is
located.
6-6(D)(3)(b)   The architectural character, historical value, or archaeological
value of the structure or site itself or of any HPO zone in which it is located
will not be significantly impaired or diminished.
6-6(D)(3)(c)   The change qualifies as a "certified rehabilitation" pursuant to
the Tax Reform Act of 1976, if applicable.
6-6(D)(3)(d)   The structure or site's distinguished original qualities or
character will not be altered. For the purposes of Section
14-16-3-5 (Historic Protection Overlay Zones) and this Subsection
14-16-6-6(D), "original" shall mean as it was at the time of initial
construction or as it has developed over the course of the history of the
structure.
6-6(D)(3)(e)   Deteriorated architectural features shall be repaired rather
than replaced, if possible. If replacement is necessary, the new material shall
match the original as closely as possible in material and design.
6-6(D)(3)(f)   Additions to existing structures and new construction may be of
contemporary design if such design is compatible with its landmark status (if
any) or the HPO zone in which it is to be located.
6-6(D)(3)(g)   If the application is for a Historic Certificate of
Appropriateness - Major for demolition of a landmark or a contributing
structure in an HPO zone, demolition shall only be allowed if it is determined
that the property is incapable of producing a reasonable economic return as
presently controlled and that no means of preserving the structure has been
found. In making a determination regarding reasonable economic return, the LC
or City Council may consider the estimated market value of the building, land,
and any proposed replacement structures; financial details of the property,
including but not limited to income and expense statements, current mortgage
balances, and appraisals; the length of time that the property has been on the
market for sale or lease; potential return based on projected future market
conditions; the building's structural condition; and other items determined to
be relevant to the application.
6-6(E)   HISTORIC DESIGN STANDARDS AND GUIDELINES
All applicable provisions of Section
14-16-6-4 (General Procedures) apply unless specifically modified by the
provisions of this Subsection
14-16-6-6(E).
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/b37713d5e40fc82694833f290401791f80be26ac/
IMAGES/0-0-0-6917.png]
6-6(E)(1)   Applicability
This Subsection
14-16-6-6(E) applies to all applications to adopt or amend Design Standards and
Guidelines for an HPO zone or a City landmark.
6-6(E)(1)(a)   Applications to establish an HPO zone or to designate a City
landmark shall be processed pursuant to Subsection
14-16-6-7(C) (Adoption or Amendment of Historic Designation).
6-6(E)(1)(b)   Applications for alterations, construction, or demolition
involving historic designations or structures shall be processed pursuant to
Subsection
14-16-6-5(B) (Historic Certificate of Appropriateness - Minor), 14-16-6-6(B)
(Demolition Outside of an HPO), or 14-16-6-6(D) (Historic Certificate of
Appropriateness - Major).
6-6(E)(2)   Procedure
6-6(E)(2)(a)   The Historic Preservation Planner shall review the application
to adopt or amend Historic Design Standards and Guidelines and make a
recommendation to the LC.
6-6(E)(2)(b)   The LC shall conduct a public hearing and make a decision on the
application.
6-6(E)(3)   Review and Decision Criteria
An application to adopt or amend Design Standards and Guidelines shall be
approved if it complies with all of the following criteria.
6-6(E)(3)(a)   The Design Standards and Guidelines are consistent with the
criteria and findings for establishment of the HPO zone or designation of the
City landmark.
6-6(E)(3)(b)   The Design Standards and Guidelines are consistent with the U.S.
Secretary of the Interior's Standards for the Treatment of Historic Properties.
6-6(E)(3)(c)   The Design Standards and Guidelines are consistent with the
relevant criteria for registration on the New Mexico Register of Cultural
Properties or the National Register of Historic Places, as applicable.
6-6(E)(3)(d)   The Design Standards and Guidelines help distinguish and
establish the historic qualities, architectural character, or archaeological
value to be protected.
6-6(E)(3)(e)   The Design Standards and Guidelines will provide adequate and
appropriate guidance and protections to assess applications for alterations,
construction, and demolitions for the HPO zone or City landmark.
6-6(F)   MASTER DEVELOPMENT PLAN
All applicable provisions of Section
14-16-6-4 (General Procedures) apply unless specifically modified by the
provisions of this Subsection
14-16-6-6(F) or the DPM.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/b37713d5e40fc82694833f290401791f80be26ac/
IMAGES/0-0-0-6919.png]
6-6(F)(1)   Applicability
6-6(F)(1)(a)   A Master Development Plan may only be approved for a site 20
acres or greater in the NR-BP zone district.
6-6(F)(1)(b)   An application for a Master Development Plan may be for legally
platted lots, nonconforming lots, or unsubdivided land.
6-6(F)(2)   Procedure
6-6(F)(2)(a)   The City Planning Department staff shall review the application
and forward a recommendation to the EPC.
6-6(F)(2)(b)   The EPC shall conduct a public hearing on the application and
shall make a decision on the application.
6-6(F)(2)(c)   The EPC may grant a Variance to IDO standards as part of this
approval pursuant to Subsection
14-16-6-6(N) (Variance - EPC).
6-6(F)(2)(d)   If the Master Development Plan is associated with a zone change
to NR-BP, approval of the Master Development Plan is contingent on approval of
the zone change pursuant to Subsection
14-16-6-7(H) (Zoning Map Amendment - Council).
6-6(F)(2)(e)   Master Development Plans shall be reviewed administratively for
compliance with conditions of approval, zoning standards, and DPM standards
prior to the issuance of a building permit.
6-6(F)(3)   Review and Decision Criteria
An application for a Master Development Plan shall be approved if it meets all
of the following criteria.
6-6(F)(3)(a)   The Master Development Plan is consistent with the ABC Comp
Plan, as amended.
6-6(F)(3)(b)   The Master Development Plan complies with all applicable
provisions of the IDO, in particular those of the NR-BP zone district; the DPM;
and other adopted City regulations.
6-6(F)(3)(c)   The City's existing infrastructure and public improvements,
including but not limited to its street, trail, drainage, and sidewalk systems,
have adequate capacity to serve the proposed development, and any burdens on
those systems have been mitigated to the maximum extent practicable.
6-6(F)(3)(d)   The Master Development Plan mitigates any significant adverse
impacts on the surrounding area.
6-6(G)   PERMIT - CARPORT
All applicable provisions of Section
14-16-6-4 (General Procedures) apply unless specifically modified by the
provisions of this Subsection
14-16-6-6(G).
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/b37713d5e40fc82694833f290401791f80be26ac/
IMAGES/0-0-0-6921.png]
6-6(G)(1)   Applicability
This Subsection
14-16-6-6(G) applies to all applications for a carport in a required front or
side setback.
6-6(G)(2)   Procedure
6-6(G)(2)(a)   The City Planning Department staff shall review the application
and forward a recommendation to the ZHE pursuant to all applicable provisions
of Section
14-16-6-4 (General Procedures).
6-6(G)(2)(b)   The ZHE shall conduct a public hearing on the application and
make a written decision on the application pursuant to all applicable
provisions of Section
14-16-6-4 (General Procedures).
6-6(G)(3)   Review and Decision Criteria
An application for a Permit - Carport shall be approved if all of the following
criteria are met.
6-6(G)(3)(a)   The carport would strengthen or reinforce the architectural
character of the surrounding area.
6-6(G)(3)(b)   The carport would not be injurious to adjacent properties, the
surrounding neighborhood, or the larger community.
6-6(G)(3)(c)   The design of the carport complies with the provisions in
Subsection
14-16-5-5(F)(2)(a)3 (Carports).
6-6(G)(3)(d)   No carport wall is a hazard to traffic visibility, as determined
by the Traffic Engineer.
6-6(G)(3)(e)   The carport is not taller than the primary building on the lot.
6-6(H)   PERMIT - WALL OR FENCE - MAJOR
All applicable provisions of Section
14-16-6-4 (General Procedures) apply unless specifically modified by the
provisions of this Subsection
14-16-6-6(H).
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/b37713d5e40fc82694833f290401791f80be26ac/
IMAGES/0-0-0-6927.png]
6-6(H)(1)   Applicability
6-6(H)(1)(a)   This Subsection
14-16-6-6(H) applies to all applications for walls or fences that that require
a Permit - Wall or Fence - Major pursuant to Subsection
14-16-5-7(D)(3)(a)2 (Exceptions to Maximum Wall Height).
6-6(H)(1)(b)   Requests for walls taller than allowed as a Permit - Wall or
Fence - Major also require a Variance.
   1.   A Variance to walls associated with a Site Plan - EPC are pursuant to
Subsection
14-16-6-6(H) (Variance - EPC).
   2.   All other Variance requests for wall standards are pursuant to
Subsection
14-16-6-6(O) (Variance - ZHE).
6-6(H)(2)   Procedure
6-6(H)(2)(a)   All applications in an HPO zone or on properties or in districts
listed on the State Register of Cultural Properties or the National Register of
Historic Places shall first be reviewed by the Historic Preservation Planner
pursuant to Subsection
14-16-6-5(B) (Historic Certificate of Appropriateness - Minor), and the
Historic Preservation Planner shall send a recommendation to the ZHE.
6-6(H)(2)(b)   The City Planning Department staff shall review the application
and forward a recommendation to the ZHE.
6-6(H)(2)(c)   The ZHE shall conduct a public hearing on the application and
make a written decision on the application.
6-6(H)(3)   Review and Decision Criteria
An application for a Permit - Wall or Fence - Major for a wall in the front or
street side yard of a lot with low-density residential development in or
abutting any Residential zone district that meets the requirements in
Subsection
14-16-5-7(D)(3)(a)2 (Exceptions to Maximum Wall Height) and
Table 5-7-2 shall be approved if all of the following criteria are met.
6-6(H)(3)(a)   The wall is proposed on a lot that meets any of the following
criteria.
   1.   The lot is at least acre.
   2.   The lot fronts a street designated as a collector, arterial, or
interstate highway.
   3.   For a front yard wall taller than allowed in
Table 5-7-1, at least 20 percent of the properties with low-density residential
development with a front yard abutting the same street as the subject property
and within 330 feet of the subject property along the length of the street the
lot faces have a front yard wall or fence over 3 feet. This distance shall be
measured along the street from each corner of the subject property's lot line,
and the analysis shall include properties on both sides of the street. (See
figure below for an illustration of this measurement.)
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/b37713d5e40fc82694833f290401791f80be26ac/
IMAGES/0-0-0-6923.png]
   4.   For a street side yard wall taller than allowed in
Table 5-7-1, at least 20 percent of the properties with low-density residential
development with a side yard abutting the same street as the subject property
and within 330 feet of the subject property along the length of the street the
lot faces have a street side yard wall or fence over 3 feet. This distance
shall be measured along the street from each corner of the subject property's
lot line, and the analysis shall include properties on both sides of the
street. (See figure below for an illustration of this measurement.)
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/b37713d5e40fc82694833f290401791f80be26ac/
IMAGES/0-0-0-6925.png]
6-6(H)(3)(b)   The proposed wall would strengthen or reinforce the
architectural character of the surrounding area.
6-6(H)(3)(c)   The proposed wall would not be injurious to adjacent properties,
the surrounding neighborhood, or the larger community.
6-6(H)(3)(d)   The design of the wall complies with any applicable standards in
Section
14-16-5-7 (Walls and Fences), including but not limited to Subsection
14-16-5-7(E)(2) (Articulation and Alignment), Subsection
14-16-5-7(E)(3) (Wall Design), and both of the following criteria.
   1.   The wall or fence shall not block the view of any portion of any window
on the front fa ade of the primary building when viewed from 5 feet above
ground level at the centerline of the street in front of the house.
   2.   The design and materials proposed for the wall or fence shall reflect
the architectural character of the surrounding area.
6-6(I)   SITE PLAN - EPC
All applicable provisions of Section
14-16-6-4 (General Procedures) apply unless specifically modified by the
provisions of this Subsection
14-16-6-6(I) or the DPM.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/b37713d5e40fc82694833f290401791f80be26ac/
IMAGES/0-0-0-6929.png]
6-6(I)(1)   Applicability
6-6(I)(1)(a)   A Site Plan - EPC may only be approved for legally platted or
nonconforming lots, and may not be approved on unsubdivided property, except
for development in the PD or NR-SU zone districts and any development on a site
5 acres or greater adjacent to Major Public Open Space, in which case a Site
Plan approval is required prior to any platting action.
6-6(I)(1)(b)   A Site Plan - EPC may be approved for property with a prior-
approved Site Plan, regardless of whether the prior-approved Site Plan is still
valid pursuant to Subsection
14-16-6-4(X), subject to allowable uses and development standards in this IDO.
If any portions of the proposed boundary overlap with a prior-approved Site
Plan that will remain in place, a Major Amendment shall be required as
described in Subsection
14-16-6-6(I)(2)(d) below.
6-6(I)(1)(c)   This Subsection
14-16-6-6(I) applies to any of the following:
   1.   Any application within an NR-PO zone district that does not qualify for
consideration as a Site Plan - Administrative pursuant to Subsection
14-16-6-5(G).
   2.   Any application for development associated with a Zoning Map Amendment
application in a zone district that requires a Site Plan - EPC to be reviewed
and decided simultaneously, including but not limited to MX-FB, NR-SU, and PD.
   3.   Any application for development on a lot 5 acres or greater adjacent to
Major Public Open Space.
   4.   Any Subdivision or Site Plan application for development that has not
avoided sensitive lands identified in the sensitive lands analysis required
pursuant to Subsection
14-16-5-2(C).
   5.   Any application for development in the Railroad and Spur Small Area
requiring a cumulative impact analysis pursuant to Subsections
14-16-5-2(E) (Cumulative Impacts) and
14-16-6-4(H) (Cumulative Impacts Analysis Requirements).
   6.   Any application for development for which the applicant requests EPC
review, provided that the Planning Director concurs with that request.
   7.   Any application for an electric utility within any zone district where
EPC approval is required by the Facility Plan for Electric Transmission.
   8.   Any application involving a major utility as a primary use of the site
unless specified otherwise in an adopted Facility Plan.
   9.   Any application for development requesting an outdoor and site lighting
performance analysis to determine compliance with lighting requirements.
6-6(I)(2)   Procedure
6-6(I)(2)(a)   For Extraordinary Facilities in the NR-PO-B sub-zone, the Open
Space Advisory Board shall review the application and make a recommendation to
the EPC.
6-6(I)(2)(b)   The City Planning Department staff shall review the application
and forward a recommendation to the EPC.
6-6(I)(2)(c)   City Planning Department staff shall refer the application for
comment and forward any comments received from commenting agencies pursuant to
Subsection
14-16-6-4(J) to the EPC.
6-6(I)(2)(d)   If the boundary of a proposed site plan includes a portion of
the boundary of a prior-approved Site Plan that is still valid pursuant to
Subsection
14-16-6-4(W), the prior-approved Site Plan must be amended through a Major
Amendment pursuant to Subsection
14-16-6-4(X) (Amendments of Approvals) or
14-16-6-4(Y) (Amendments of Pre-IDO Approvals), as applicable, to remove the
overlapping area proposed in a new site plan before an application for a new
site plan that includes that overlapping area can be decided, because only one
site plan shall apply to any property.
6-6(I)(2)(e)   A Site Plan - EPC may not be approved until after any necessary
Conditional Use Approvals are obtained pursuant to Subsection
14-16-6-6(A).
6-6(I)(2)(f)   The EPC may grant deviations to IDO standards as part of this
approval within the thresholds established in Section
14-16-6-4(N) (Deviations).
6-6(I)(2)(g)   The EPC may grant a Variance to IDO standards (other than to
standards in Sections
14-16-5-3,
14-16-5-4, or
14-16-5-5) pursuant to Subsection
14-16-6-6(N) (Variance - EPC).
6-6(I)(2)(h)   Any request for a Waiver to IDO standards in Sections
14-16-5-3 (Access and Connectivity),
14-16-5-4 (Subdivision of Land), or
14-16-5-5 (Parking and Loading) requires review and approval by the DHO
pursuant to Subsection
14-16-6-6(P) (Waiver – DHO).
6-6(I)(2)(i)   A Site Plan - EPC may not be approved until after any necessary
Variances or Waivers are obtained.
6-6(I)(2)(j)   Any Variances, Waivers, or deviations granted that are
associated with a Site Plan shall be noted on the approved Site Plan.
6-6(I)(2)(k)   If the Site Plan will replace a prior-approved Site Plan, the
project number, case number, site boundary, and date of the Notice of Decision
of the original approval shall be noted on the site plan.
6-6(I)(2)(l)   The EPC shall conduct a public hearing on the application and
shall make a decision on the application.
6-6(I)(2)(m)   Site Plans shall be reviewed administratively for compliance
with conditions of approval, DPM standards, and zoning standards prior to the
issuance of a building permit.
6-6(I)(3)   Review and Decision Criteria
Any application for a Site Plan - EPC shall be approved if it meets all of the
following criteria.
6-6(I)(3)(a)   The Site Plan is consistent with the ABC Comp Plan, as amended.
6-6(I)(3)(b)   The Site Plan is consistent with any applicable terms and
conditions in any previously approved NR-SU or PD zoning covering the subject
property and any related development agreements and/or regulations.
6-6(I)(3)(c)   The Site Plan complies with all applicable provisions of this
IDO, the DPM, other adopted City regulations, and any terms and conditions
specifically applied to development of the property in a prior permit or
approval affecting the property.
6-6(I)(3)(d)   The City's existing infrastructure and public improvements,
including but not limited to its street, trail, drainage, and sidewalk systems,
have adequate capacity to serve the proposed development, and any burdens on
those systems have been mitigated to the maximum extent practicable.
6-6(I)(3)(e)   The application mitigates any significant adverse impacts on the
project site and the surrounding area to the maximum extent practicable.
6-6(I)(3)(f)   If the subject property is within an approved Master Development
Plan, the Site Plan meets any relevant standards in the Master Development Plan
in addition to any standards applicable in the zone district the subject
property is in.
6-6(I)(3)(g)   If a cumulative impact analysis is required in the Railroad and
Spur Small Area pursuant to Subsections
14-16-5-2(E) (Cumulative Impacts) and
14-16-6-4(H) (Cumulative Impacts Analysis Requirements), the Site Plan
incorporates mitigation for all identified cumulative impacts. The proposed
development will not create material adverse impacts on water quality or other
land in the surrounding area through increases in traffic congestion, parking
congestion, noise, vibration, light spillover, or other nuisances without
sufficient mitigation or civic or environmental benefits that outweigh the
expected impacts.
6-6(I)(3)(h)   If an outdoor or site lighting performance analysis is
requested, the proposed lighting design must prove it will not adversely affect
the lighting requirements of Section 14-16-5-2(E) without sufficient mitigation
and benefits that outweight the expected impacts.
6-6(J)   SUBDIVISION OF LAND - BULK LAND
All applicable provisions of Section
14-16-6-4 (General Procedures) apply unless specifically modified by the
provisions of this Subsection
14-16-6-6(J) or the DPM.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/b37713d5e40fc82694833f290401791f80be26ac/
IMAGES/0-0-0-6931.png]
6-6(J)(1)   Applicability
6-6(J)(1)(a)   This Subsection
14-16-6-6(J) applies to any application for a subdivision of land or
combination of previously subdivided lots that is not eligible to be processed
as a Subdivision of Land - Minor pursuant to Subsection
14-16-6-6(K) or a Subdivision of Land - Major pursuant to Subsection
14-16-6-6(L).
6-6(J)(1)(b)   This Subsection
14-16-6-6(J) applies to any application for a bulk land subdivision for either
of the following:
   1.   A single lot at least 5 acres or multiple contiguous lots that total at
least 5 acres; in an R-A, R-1, R-MC, R-T, or PC zone district; and designated
for residential development.
   2.   A single lot at least 20 acres or multiple contiguous lots that total
at least 20 acres; in an R-ML, R-MH, or PC zone district or any Mixed-use or
Non-residential zone district; and designated for mixed-use or non-residential
development.
6-6(J)(2)   Procedure
6-6(J)(2)(a)   The subject property will require further review during the
subsequent Subdivision or Site Plan review and decision process in order to use
the land for development and/or building purposes. Approval of a Bulk Land
Subdivision does not indicate that land within that subdivision complies with
applicable IDO Subdivision or Site Plan standards.
6-6(J)(2)(b)   The plat shall reflect the applicant's agreement that building
permits shall not be issued for any area within the Bulk Land Subdivision
before a Preliminary Plat and Final Plat have been approved and the Final Plat
for the subject property has been recorded.
6-6(J)(2)(c)   City Planning Department staff shall refer the application to
commenting agencies pursuant to Subsection 14-16-6-4(J).
6-6(J)(2)(d)   Required commenting agencies pursuant to Subsection 14-16-6-4(J)
shall review the application and forward any comments and a recommendation to
the DHO.
6-6(J)(2)(e)   The DHO shall conduct a public hearing and make a decision on
the application.
6-6(J)(2)(f)   The date of the DHO approval shall be recorded on the plat, and
verification of compliance with conditions of approval shall be dated and
verified by the signatures of the required commenting agencies pursuant to
Subsection
14-16-6-4(I)(5) (Development Hearing Officer Applications) and certifications
required by the DPM.
6-6(J)(2)(g)   The applicant shall then record it with the Bernalillo County
Clerk as soon as possible, but in no case more than 30 consecutive days from
the date of the last signature on the plat or the subdivision shall be voided.
   1.   A plat that is not recorded in a timely manner may not be used as the
basis for legal transfer of property where a subdivision is required.
   2.   The applicant shall bring the City a copy of the recorded plat.
6-6(J)(3)   Review and Decision Criteria
An application for a Subdivision of Land - Bulk Land shall be approved if it
meets all of the following criteria.
6-6(J)(3)(a)   An application for a Bulk Land Subdivision shall be approved if
it complies with all applicable provisions of this IDO, the DPM, other adopted
City regulations, and any conditions specifically applied to development of the
property in a prior permit or approval affecting the property.
6-6(J)(3)(b)   All lots created shall have a proportionate and reasonable share
of future required infrastructure improvements.
6-6(K)   SUBDIVISION OF LAND - MINOR
All applicable provisions of Section
14-16-6-4 (General Procedures) apply unless specifically modified by the
provisions of this Subsection
14-16-6-6(K) or the DPM.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/b37713d5e40fc82694833f290401791f80be26ac/
IMAGES/0-0-0-6933.png]
6-6(K)(1)   Applicability
This Subsection
14-16-6-6(K) applies to the review of an application for any of the following:
6-6(K)(1)(a)   Approval of a subdivision of land within the City that:
   1.   Creates 10 or fewer lots on any single lot that has been recorded as a
single lot for at least 3 years previously.
   2.   Does not require any new streets.
   3.   Does not require major public infrastructure.
   4.   Does not create any lots that do not front on a public or private
street previously approved by the City.
   5.   Is on land 5 acres or greater adjacent to Major Public Open Space with
a Site Plan - EPC.
   6.   Is on land zoned NR-SU or PD with a Site Plan - EPC.
   7.   Is on land zoned NR-BP with a Master Development Plan.
   8.   Is on land zoned PC with a Framework Plan.
6-6(K)(1)(b)   Approval of a combination of previously platted subdivision lots
and termination of some or all of the related easements, where all benefitted
and burdened parties agree to the lot combination and easement termination.
6-6(K)(2)   Procedure
6-6(K)(2)(a)   City Planning Department staff shall refer the application for
comment and forward any comments received from commenting agencies pursuant to
Subsection
14-16-6-4(I) to the DHO.
6-6(K)(2)(b)   City staff and commenting agencies shall review the application
and forward any comments and a recommendation to the DHO.
6-6(K)(2)(c)   If the subdivision will result in a lot line that does not
coincide with a zone district boundary (i.e., create a "floating zone line"),
the applicant shall obtain a Zoning Map Amendment - EPC or Zoning Map Amendment
- City Council, as applicable, to establish zone boundaries that coincide with
the lot line before a final plat can be approved.
6-6(K)(2)(d)   If the subdivision is associated with a Vacation Public Right-
of-Way pursuant to Subsection
14-16-6-6(M), the zone district boundary shall be extended to the new property
line created by platting the vacated public right-of-way into abutting
properties.
6-6(K)(2)(e)   The DHO may grant a Waiver to a DPM standard as part of this
approval pursuant to Subsection
14-16-6-6(P) (Waiver - DRB).
6-6(K)(2)(f)   The DHO may grant a deviation to a Development Standard in the
IDO as part of this approval per the thresholds in Section
14-16-6-4(P) (Deviations).
6-6(K)(2)(g)   Final plats shall include a list of any Vacations, Variances,
Waivers, and deviations granted as an exhibit or note.
6-6(K)(2)(h)   The DHO shall conduct a public hearing and make a decision on
the application.
6-6(K)(2)(i)   The applicant shall provide an IIA and construction plans and
specifications for all required infrastructure conforming to the plat, pursuant
to Subsection
14-16-6-4(P) (Required Improvements and Financial Assurance).
6-6(K)(2)(j)   Staff from required commenting agencies pursuant to Subsection
14-16-6-4(I)(5) (Development Hearing Officer Applications) shall review plats
administratively for compliance with conditions of approval, DPM standards, and
zoning standards.
6-6(K)(2)(k)   The date of the DHO approval shall be recorded on the original
drawing of the final plat, and verification of compliance with conditions of
approval shall be dated and verified by the signatures of the required
commenting agencies pursuant to Subsection
14-16-6-4(I)(5) (Development Hearing Officer Applications).
6-6(K)(2)(l)   The applicant shall record the final plat with the Bernalillo
County Clerk within 3 months after the date of the final signature on the plat,
or the subdivision shall be voided.
   1.   A plat that is not recorded in a timely manner may not be used as the
basis for legal transfer of property where a subdivision is required.
   2.   The applicant shall provide the City a digital copy of the recorded
plat.
6-6(K)(3)   Review and Decision Criteria
An application for a Subdivision of Land - Minor shall be approved if it
complies with all applicable provisions of this IDO, the DPM, other adopted
City regulations, and any conditions specifically applied to development of the
property in a prior permit or approval affecting the property.
6-6(L)   SUBDIVISION OF LAND - MAJOR
All applicable provisions of Section
14-16-6-4 (General Procedures) apply unless specifically modified by the
provisions of this Subsection
14-16-6-6(L) or the DPM.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/b37713d5e40fc82694833f290401791f80be26ac/
IMAGES/0-0-0-6935.png]
6-6(L)(1)   Applicability
This Subsection
14-16-6-6(L) applies to any application for a subdivision of land or
combination of previously subdivided lots that is not eligible to be processed
as a Subdivision of Land - Minor pursuant to Subsection
14-16-6-6(K) and that is not a Subdivision of Land - Bulk Land pursuant to
Subsection
14-16-6-6(J).
6-6(L)(2)   Procedure
6-6(L)(2)(a)   Deviations and Waivers
   1.   The DHO may grant a deviation to a Development Standard in the IDO as
part of this approval pursuant to the thresholds in Subsection
14-16-6-4(N) (Deviations).
   2.   The DHO may grant a Waiver to standards in Sections
14-16-5-3 (Access and Connectivity),
14-16-5-4 (Subdivision of Land), or
14-16-5-5 (Parking and Loading) pursuant to Subsection
14-16-6-6(P) (Waiver - DRB).
6-6(L)(2)(b)   Sketch Plat
   1.   The applicant shall submit a sketch plat that specifies the basic
layout of the proposed subdivision, including general layouts of streets,
drainage areas, open spaces, and buildable lots within the subdivision, and
other technical standards specified in the DPM.
   2.   City Planning Department staff shall refer the submittal to commenting
agencies pursuant to Subsection
14-16-6-4(I).
   3.   Required commenting agencies pursuant to Subsection 14-16-6-4(J) shall
review the submittal and forward any comments to City Planning Department
staff.
   4.   The City Planning Department staff shall review the sketch plat and
provide a letter of advice outlining the requirements and recommendations of
the meeting, which will address the suitability of the proposal for development
and for infrastructure improvements based on the intent of this IDO and the
DPM.
   5.   If the subdivision is associated with a Vacation Public Right-of-Way
pursuant to Subsection
14-16-6-6(M), the zone district boundary shall be extended to the new property
line created by platting the vacated public right-of-way into abutting
properties.
   6.   If a Preliminary Plat that meets all standards and requirements of this
IDO and the DPM is not submitted within 1 year, the applicant must submit an
updated sketch plat.
6-6(L)(2)(c)   Preliminary Plat
   1.   Any request for a Waiver from the Development Standards applicable to
the subdivision in Sections
14-16-5-3 (Access and Connectivity),
14-16-5-4 (Subdivision of Land), or
14-16-5-5 (Parking and Loading) shall be reviewed and decided pursuant to
Subsection
14-16-6-6(P) (Waiver – DHO), shown on the Preliminary Plat, and considered
simultaneously with the review and approval of the Preliminary Plat.
   2.   City Planning Department staff shall refer the submittal to commenting
agencies pursuant to Subsection
14-16-6-4(I).
   3.   Required commenting agencies pursuant to Subsection
14-16-6-4(I) shall review the submittal and forward any comments and a
recommendation to the DHO.
   4.   The DHO shall conduct a public hearing and make a decision on the
preliminary plat.
   5.   The applicant shall provide an IIA and construction plans and
specifications for all required improvements conforming to the Preliminary
Plat, pursuant to Subsection
14-16-6-4(P) (Required Improvements and Financial Assurance).
6-6(L)(2)(d)   Final Plat
   1.   Within 1 year after DHO approval, or approval with conditions, of a
Preliminary Plat, the applicant shall submit a Final Plat that includes all
changes, conditions, and requirements contained in the Preliminary Plat
approval.
   2.   City Planning Department staff shall refer the submittal to required
commenting agencies pursuant to Subsection
14-16-6-4(I).
   3.   Required commenting agencies pursuant to Subsection 14-16-6-4(J) shall
review the submittal and forward any comments and a recommendation to the DHO.
   4.   The DHO shall conduct a public hearing and make a decision on the
application.
   5.   Final Plats shall include a list of any Vacations, Variances, Waivers,
and deviations granted as an exhibit or note.
   6.   Staff from required commenting agencies pursuant to Subsection
14-16-6-4(I)(5) shall review final plats administratively for compliance with
conditions of approval, DPM standards, and zoning standards.
   7.   The date of the DHO approval shall be recorded on the final plat, and
verification of compliance with conditions of approval shall be dated and
verified by the signatures of the required commenting agencies pursuant to
Subsection
14-16-6-4(I)(5) and certifications required by the DPM.
   8.   The applicant shall then record the final plat with the Bernalillo
County Clerk as soon as possible, but in no case more than 30 consecutive days
from the date of the last signature on the final plat, or the subdivision shall
be voided.
      a.   A plat that is not recorded in a timely manner may not be used as
the basis for legal transfer of property where a subdivision is required.
      b.   The applicant shall provide the City a digital copy of the recorded
plat.
6-6(L)(3)   Review and Decision Criteria
An application for a Subdivision of Land - Major shall be approved if it meets
all of the following criteria.
6-6(L)(3)(a)   A Preliminary Plat shall be approved if it complies with all
applicable provisions of this IDO, the DPM, other adopted City regulations, and
any conditions specifically applied to development of the property in a prior
permit or approval affecting the property.
6-6(L)(3)(b)   A Final Plat shall be approved if it includes all changes,
conditions, and requirements contained in the Preliminary Plat approval.
6-6(M)   VACATION OF EASEMENT, PRIVATE WAY, OR PUBLIC RIGHT-OF-WAY
All applicable provisions of Section
14-16-6-4 (General Procedures) apply unless specifically modified by the
provisions of this Subsection
14-16-6-6(M) or the DPM.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/b37713d5e40fc82694833f290401791f80be26ac/
IMAGES/0-0-0-6937.png]
6-6(M)(1)   Applicability
This Subsection
14-16-6-6(M) applies to all applications for any of the following Vacations:
6-6(M)(1)(a)   Vacation of Public or Private Easement or Private Way
Any public or private easement or private way shown on a recorded plat.
6-6(M)(1)(b)   Vacation of Public Right-of-way - Council
Any public right-of-way that meets any of the following thresholds:
   1.   More than 500 square feet or the entire width of a platted alley.
   2.   More than 5,000 square feet or the entire width of a street, including
any or all of the right-of-way.
6-6(M)(1)(c)   Vacation of Public Right-of-way - DHO
Any public right-of-way that does not meet the thresholds in Subsection (b)
above.
6-6(M)(2)   Procedure
6-6(M)(2)(a)   The City may retain, use, or dispose of any vacated public
right-of-way in any manner that the City, in its discretion, deems appropriate.
6-6(M)(2)(b)   City Planning Department staff shall refer the application to
commenting agencies pursuant to Subsection
14-16-6-4(I).
6-6(M)(2)(c)   Required commenting agencies pursuant to Subsection
14-16-6-4(I) shall review the application and forward any comments and a
recommendation to the DHO.
6-6(M)(2)(d)   The DHO shall conduct a public hearing on the application.
6-6(M)(2)(e)   For a Vacation of Public or Private Easement or Private Way or
for a Vacation of Public Right-of-way - DHO, the DHO shall make a decision on
the application.
6-6(M)(2)(f)   For a Vacation of Public Right-of-way - Council, the DHO shall
make a recommendation and forward the application to City Council for inclusion
on the consent agenda for approval without first going to any City Council
committee.
6-6(M)(2)(g)   If an application for a Vacation of Public Right-of-way is
approved, all of the following requirements shall apply.
   1.   Within 7 days of the approval, the applicant shall coordinate with the
Real Property Division of the City Department of Municipal Development and send
notice of the approved vacation by First Class Mail to all abutting property
owners. The letter shall include the contact information for the Real Property
Division of the City Department of Municipal Development, as well as any other
information as directed by the Real Property Division of the City Department of
Municipal Development.
      a.   Abutting property owners have 30 days from the receipt of the notice
to notify the Real Property Division of the City Department of Municipal
Development of the intent to purchase the vacated right-of-way, or any portion
thereof, or possibly forfeit their right to do so.
      b.   Within 7 days of receipt of the notice of intent to purchase, the
Real Property Division of the City Department of Municipal Development will
provide the interested property owner with a purchase price for the desired
portion of the vacated public right-of-way.
   2.   Any property owner that purchases vacated public right-of-way shall
complete all of the following requirements within 1 year of the approval of the
Vacation or the Vacation shall be voided:
      a.   Obtain a Subdivision of Land - Minor or a Subdivision of Land -
Major, as applicable, in order to combine the vacated right-of-way with their
property.
         i.   The zone district boundary will be extended to the new lot lines
established by the subdivision.
         ii.   In the event that there are existing utility facilities (e.g.
water/sewer lines, electric lines, drainage facilities, etc.) situated on, in,
or under the vacated right-of-way, the purchasing property owner shall contact
any affected utility promptly following the approval of the vacation to
negotiate if and under what terms the property owner grants an easement for the
utilities and/or if, when, and how a relocation of the utility facilities is
required.
      a.   Where there is no duly recorded easement associated with the
existing utility facilities because the facilities were placed on the property
in accordance with a franchise agreement between the City and the utility, the
purchasing property owner, at his/her sole discretion, shall advise the utility
of 1 of the following:
   1.   That the property owner is willing to negotiate a grant of easement to
accommodate all or a portion of the existing utility facilities on the
property.
   2.   That all or a portion of the existing utility facilities on the
property will need to be removed and/or relocated.
      b.   Where there is a duly recorded, valid easement associated with the
existing utility facilities for the use and occupancy of the property, such
easement runs with the land pursuant to Subsection
14-16-6-4(W)(1).
   1.   In the event that the purchasing property owner wants to relocate any
utility facilities to accommodate new development, the purchasing property
owner shall contact the affected utility to request, coordinate, and negotiate
the relocation of the utility facilities, associated costs, and any new
easements that are needed.
   2.   Any existing easements or newly granted easements shall be reflected on
the Subdivision - Minor or Subdivision Major, as applicable, that is required
pursuant to Subsection
14-16-6-6(M)(2)(f)2.a., above.
      b.   Record the final plat with the Bernalillo County Assessor, pursuant
to Subsection 14-6-6(K)(2)(h) or
14-16-6-6(L)(2)(g)4, as applicable.
      c.   Present and execute a quitclaim deed in a form acceptable to the
City to effect the transfer of ownership after recording the final plat.
      d.   Record the executed quitclaim deed with the Bernalillo County
Assessor.
6-6(M)(3)   Review and Decision Criteria
An application for a Vacation of Easement, Private Way, or Public Right-of-way
shall be approved if it meets any of the following criteria.
6-6(M)(3)(a)   The public welfare does not require that the easement, private
way, or public right-of-way be retained.
6-6(M)(3)(b)   There is a net benefit to the public welfare because the
development made possible by the Vacation is clearly more beneficial to the
public welfare than the minor detriment resulting from the Vacation, and there
is no convincing evidence that any substantial property right is being abridged
against the will of the owner of the right.
6-6(N)   VARIANCE - EPC
All applicable provisions of Section
14-16-6-4 (General Procedures) apply unless specifically modified by the
provisions of this Subsection
14-16-6-6(N) or the DPM.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/b37713d5e40fc82694833f290401791f80be26ac/
IMAGES/0-0-0-6939.png]
6-6(N)(1)   Applicability
6-6(N)(1)(a)   This Subsection
14-16-6-6(N) applies to all requests for Variances from any Development
Standard in this IDO requested as part of a Site Plan - EPC application.
6-6(N)(1)(b)   This Subsection
14-16-6-6(N) applies to requests for Variances to standards in Subsections
14-16-3-6(D)(4) (Setback Standards) or
14-16-3-6(D)(5) (Building and Structure Height) in the Coors Boulevard - VPO-1.
6-6(N)(1)(c)   This Subsection
14-16-6-6(N) applies to requests for Variances to standards in Subsection
14-16-3-6(E)(3) (Building and Structure Height) of the Northwest Mesa
Escarpment - VPO-2 for 1 of the following exceptions to structure height:
   1.   A Variance to allow up to 4 feet of additional height for non-
residential structures to screen rooftop equipment.
   2.   A Variance to allow up to 19 feet above finished grade where grading
requirements necessitate a minimum amount of fill for proper drainage.
6-6(N)(2)   Procedure
6-6(N)(2)(a)   All applications in an HPO zone or on properties or in districts
listed on the State Register of Cultural Properties or the National Register of
Historic Places shall first be reviewed by the Historic Preservation Planner
pursuant to Subsection
14-16-6-5(B) (Historic Certificate of Appropriateness - Minor), and the
Historic Preservation Planner shall send a recommendation to the ZEO.
6-6(N)(2)(b)   The City Planning Department staff shall review the application
and forward a recommendation to the EPC.
6-6(N)(2)(c)   City Planning Department staff shall refer the application for
comment and forward any comments received from commenting agencies pursuant to
Subsection
14-16-6-4(I) to the EPC.
6-6(N)(2)(d)   The EPC shall conduct a public hearing and make a decision on
the application as part of the associated Site Plan - EPC review and decision.
6-6(N)(2)(e)   A Variance - EPC may not be granted until after any necessary
Conditional Use Approvals are obtained pursuant to Subsection
14-16-6-6(A).
6-6(N)(2)(f)   Any Variances granted that are associated with a Site Plan shall
be noted on the approved Site Plan.
6-6(N)(2)(g)   Requests for a Variance to structure height in Subsection
14-16-3-6(E) (Northwest Mesa Escarpment - VPO-2) shall at a minimum include all
of the following:
   1.   Site plans, site elevations, and site sections showing the location of
the major public views (i.e., views from the site perimeter or nearest public
road to the east, west, south, and north property lines and views to the
escarpment),
   2.   View analysis that illustrate the expected impact of structure height
on major public views given the relationship of slopes, building heights,
setbacks, escarpment height, and view corridors.
   3.   Analysis and demonstration of at least 1 of the techniques required by
Subsection
14-16-3-6(E)(3) (i.e., height/slope, view corridors, or height/slope/setback)
to minimize the impact of additional structure height on views to and from the
escarpment.
   4.   A Grading and Drainage Plan that has been approved by the City
Engineer.
6-6(N)(3)   Review and Decision Criteria
6-6(N)(3)(a)   General
An application for a Variance - EPC shall be approved if it meets all of the
following criteria.
   1.   There are special circumstances applicable to a single lot that are not
self-imposed and that do not apply generally to other property in the same zone
district and vicinity, including but not limited to size, shape, topography,
location, surroundings, physical characteristics, natural forces, or by
government actions for which no compensation was paid. Such special
circumstances of the lot either create an extraordinary hardship in the form of
a substantial and unjustified limitation on the reasonable use or economic
return on the property, or practical difficulties result from strict compliance
with the minimum standards.
   2.   The Variance will not be materially contrary to the public safety,
health, or welfare.
   3.   The Variance does not cause significant material adverse impacts on
surrounding properties or infrastructure improvements in the vicinity.
   4.   The Variance will not materially undermine the intent and purpose of
this IDO, the applicable zone district, or any applicable Overlay Zone.
   5.   The Variance approved is the minimum necessary to avoid extraordinary
hardship or practical difficulties.
6-6(N)(3)(b)   Coors Boulevard - VPO-1
An application for a Variance from the standards for setback, structure height,
or structure bulk and massing in Subsection
14-16-3-6(D) (Coors Boulevard - VPO-1) shall be approved if it meets the
criteria in Subsection (a) above and all of the following criteria.
   1.   The Variance will not materially undermine the protected views
described in Subsection
14-16-3-6(D)(2).
   2.   The intent of the view regulations in Subsection
14-16-3-6(D)(5) is met.
6-6(N)(3)(c)   Northwest Mesa Escarpment - VPO-2
An application for a Variance from the 15-foot structure height limit in the
Height Restriction Sub-area in Subsection
14-16-3-6(E)(3) (Northwest Mesa Escarpment - VPO-2) shall be approved if it
meets the criteria in Subsection (a) above and all of the following criteria.
   1.   Hardship
The intent of the view regulations in Section
14-16-3-6(E) (Northwest Mesa Escarpment - VPO-2) must be met. The burden is on
the applicant to demonstrate that strict adherence to VPO-2 building height
regulations would render the lot undevelopable because of physical and/or
engineering constraints (e.g. rock outcroppings, street grades, drainage
requirements, ADA compliance, utility design, etc.).
   2.   Visual Impact
The impact of the proposed development on views to and from the escarpment will
be the same as, or less than, the impact if the 15-foot height limit were met.
6-6(O)   VARIANCE - ZHE
All applicable provisions of Section
14-16-6-4 (General Procedures) apply unless specifically modified by the
provisions of this Subsection
14-16-6-6(O) or the DPM.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/b37713d5e40fc82694833f290401791f80be26ac/
IMAGES/0-0-0-6943.png]
6-6(O)(1)   Applicability
This Subsection
14-16-6-6(O) applies to all requests for Variances from an IDO standard except
the following:
6-6(O)(1)(a)   Variances to IDO standards requested in applications for a Site
Plan - EPC, which require a Variance - EPC pursuant to Subsection
14-16-6-6(N).
6-6(O)(1)(b)   Variances to standards in Subsections
14-16-3-6(D)(4) (Setback Standards) or
14-16-3-6(D)(5) (Building and Structure Height) in the Coors Boulevard - VPO-1,
which require a Variance - EPC pursuant to Subsection
14-16-6-6(N).
6-6(O)(1)(c)   Variances to standards in Subsection
14-16-3-6(E)(3) (Building and Structure Height) in the Northwest Mesa
Escarpment - VPO-2, which require a Variance - EPC pursuant to Subsection
14-16-6-6(N).
6-6(O)(2)   Procedure
6-6(O)(2)(a)   A Variance - ZHE may not be granted until after any necessary
Conditional Use Approvals are obtained pursuant to Subsection
14-16-6-6(A).
6-6(O)(2)(b)   All applications in an HPO zone or on a property or in a
district listed on the State Register of Cultural Properties or the National
Register of Historic Places shall be referred for review and comment by the
Historic Preservation Planner pursuant to Subsection
14-16-6-5(B) (Historic Certificate of Appropriateness - Minor).
6-6(O)(2)(c)   All appplications on a property adjacent to Major Public Open
Space shall be referred for review and comment by the Parks & Recreation Open
Space Superintendent.
6-6(O)(2)(d)   The City Planning Department staff shall review the application
and forward a recommendation to the ZHE.
6-6(O)(2)(e)   The ZHE shall conduct a public hearing and make a decision on
the application.
6-6(O)(2)(f)   Any Variances granted that are associated with a Site Plan or
other approval shall be noted on the approved Site Plan or other approval.
6-6(O)(3)   Review and Decision Criteria
6-6(O)(3)(a)   General
An application for a Variance - ZHE shall be approved if it meets all of the
following criteria.
   1.   There are special circumstances applicable to a single lot that are not
self-imposed and that do not apply generally to other property in the same zone
district and vicinity, including but not limited to size, shape, topography,
location, surroundings, physical characteristics, natural forces, or by
government actions for which no compensation was paid. Such special
circumstances of the lot either create an extraordinary hardship in the form of
a substantial and unjustified limitation on the reasonable use or economic
return on the property, or practical difficulties result from strict compliance
with the minimum standards.
   2.   The Variance will not be materially contrary to the public safety,
health, or welfare.
   3.   The Variance does not cause significant material adverse impacts on
surrounding properties or infrastructure improvements in the vicinity.
   4.   The Variance will not materially undermine the intent and purpose of
this IDO, the applicable zone district, or any applicable Overlay Zone.
   5.   The Variance approved is the minimum necessary to avoid extraordinary
hardship or practical difficulties.
6-6(O)(3)(b)   Variance in the APO Zone
An application for a Variance - ZHE from a standard in Section
14-16-3-3 (Airport Protection Overlay Zone) shall be approved for a structure
or vegetation within the Air Space Protection Sub-area, excluding the Runway
Protection Sub-area, if it meets the criteria in Subsection (a) above and all
of the following criteria.
      a.   The request meets the requirements of this Subsection
14-16-6-6(O).
      b.   The ZHE determines that the request will not cause an increase of
minimum requirements for instrument or night flying, or will not otherwise
cause or create a greater hazard to air navigation.
   2.   A Variance may be conditioned to require hazard marking and lighting
pursuant to Subsection
14-16-3-3(F).
6-6(O)(3)(c)   Variance for Front Yard Parking
A Variance - ZHE to the maximum front yard parking area requirements in
Subsection
14-16-5-5(F)(2)(a)2 shall be granted if it meets all of the criteria in
Subsection (a) above and if each lot with low-density residential development
within 330 feet of the subject property along the length of the street that
property faces has no more than 1 on-street parking space. (See figure below
for an illustration of this measurement.)
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/b37713d5e40fc82694833f290401791f80be26ac/
IMAGES/0-0-0-6941.png]
6-6(P)   WAIVER - DHO
All applicable provisions of Section
14-16-6-4 (General Procedures) apply unless specifically modified by the
provisions of this Subsection
14-16-6-6(P).
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/b37713d5e40fc82694833f290401791f80be26ac/
IMAGES/0-0-0-9532.png]
6-6(P)(1)   Applicability
This Subsection
14-16-6-6(P) applies to any application for a deviation from standards in
Sections
14-16-5-3 (Access and Connectivity),
14-16-5-4 (Subdivision of Land), or
14-16-5-5 (Parking and Loading) beyond the thresholds established by
Table 6-4-1, except the following:
6-6(P)(1)(a)   Standards in Subsection
14-16-5-5(F)(2)(a)3, which require a Permit - Carport for carports in any front
or side setback pursuant to Subsection
14-16-6-6(G).
6-6(P)(1)(b)   Standards related to front yard parking in Subsection
14-16-5-5(F)(1)(a)6, Subsection
14-16-5-5(F)(2)(a)2, or
Table 5-5-6, which require a Variance - ZHE pursuant to Subsection
14-16-6-6(O).
6-6(P)(2)   Procedure
6-6(P)(2)(a)   City staff and commenting agencies pursuant to Subsection 14-16-
6-4(J) shall review the application and forward any comments and a
recommendation to the DHO.
6-6(P)(2)(b)   The DHO shall conduct a public hearing and make a decision on
the application.
6-6(P)(2)(c)   A Waiver – DHO may not be granted until after any necessary
Conditional Use Approvals are obtained pursuant to Subsection
14-16-6-6(A).
6-6(P)(2)(d)   Any Waivers granted that are associated with a subdivision shall
be placed on the final plat and on a separately recorded document.
6-6(P)(2)(e)   Any Waivers granted that are associated with a Site Plan shall
be noted on the approved Site Plan.
6-6(P)(3)   Review and Decision Criteria
6-6(P)(3)(a)   General
An application for a Waiver - DHO shall be approved if it complies with all of
the following criteria.
   1.   Any of the following criteria applies.
      a.   There are pre-existing obstructions that cannot be easily or
economically relocated or should not be altered, such as grades, fills, water
courses, natural topographic features, man-made obstructions, or utility lines.
      b.   The area or site has been recognized as having historical,
archeological, and/or architectural significance by the City, State, or federal
government, and a Waiver is needed and appropriate to maintain such historical,
archeological, and/or architectural significance.
      c.   The established neighborhood character or landscaping on the site
would be damaged to a degree that outweighs the public interest in the City's
normal technical standards in that location.
      d.   Varying from the normal requirements and standards will encourage
flexibility, economy, effective use of open space, or ingenuity in design of a
subdivision, in accordance with accepted principles of site planning.
   2.   The Waiver will not be materially contrary to the public safety,
health, or welfare.
   3.   The Waiver does not cause significant material adverse impacts on
surrounding properties.
   4.   The Waiver will not hinder future planning, public right-of-way
acquisition, or the financing or building of public infrastructure
improvements.
   5.   The Waiver will not conflict significantly with the goals and
provisions of any City, County, or AMAFCA adopted plan or policy, this IDO, or
any other City code or ordinance.
   6.   The Waiver will not allow, encourage, or make possible undesired
development in the 100-year Floodplain.
   7.   The Waiver will not materially undermine the intent and purpose of this
IDO, the applicable zone district, or any applicable Overlay Zone.
   8.   The Waiver does not allow a lot or type of development that does not
meet the applicable Development Standards for the zone district where the lot
is located, unless a deviation to such standards is within the thresholds
established by Subsection
14-16-6-4(N) (Deviations) and is granted by the DHO as part of this approval.
   9.   The Waiver approved is the minimum necessary to provide redress without
being inconsistent with the provisions of this Subsection
14-16-6-6(P).
   10.   If the request is a for a Waiver to IDO sidewalk requirements, the
area is of low-intensity land use to an extent that the normal installation of
sidewalks will not contribute to the public welfare, and the absence of a
sidewalk will not create a gap in an existing sidewalk system extended to 1 or
more sides of the subject property.
6-6(P)(3)(b)   Underground Installation of Distribution Lines
An application for a Waiver - DHO pursuant to Subsection
14-16-5-4(I) shall be approved if the DHO determines that no significant public
purpose would be served by requiring the new construction to be placed
underground and that any of the following conditions exists, as relevant.
   1.   Distribution Lines 12 Kilovolts or Less
      a.   The lot is already served by an overhead distribution line.
      b.   All adjacent areas are already served by overhead distribution
facilities.
      c.   Subsurface conditions make underground lines economically
unreasonable.
   2.   Distribution Lines between 12 Kilovolts and 40 Kilovolts
      a.   The immediate or adjacent area is presently served by overhead
lines.
      b.   Subsurface conditions make underground lines economically
unreasonable.
6-6(Q)   WAIVER - WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATIONS FACILITY
All applicable provisions of Section
14-16-6-4 (General Procedures) apply unless specifically modified by the
provisions of this Subsection
14-16-6-6(Q).
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/b37713d5e40fc82694833f290401791f80be26ac/
IMAGES/0-0-0-6947.png]
6-6(Q)(1)   Applicability
This Subsection
14-16-6-6(Q) applies to all applications to deviate from the wireless
telecommunications regulations otherwise applicable to the erection or
installation of a Wireless Telecommunications Facility (WTF) under this IDO.
6-6(Q)(2)   Procedure
6-6(Q)(2)(a)   The City Planning Department staff shall review the application
for a Waiver and forward a recommendation to the EPC.
6-6(Q)(2)(b)   The EPC shall conduct a public hearing and make a decision on
the application for a Waiver and may grant a Waiver of those requirements over
which the EPC has review authority except for allowed maximum height, which
does not qualify for a Waiver.
6-6(Q)(3)   Review and Decision Criteria
6-6(Q)(3)(a)   An application for a WTF Waiver shall be approved if it meets
all of the following criteria.
   1.   It is in the best interest of the community as a whole.
   2.   It will expedite the approval of an antenna, tower, or tower
alternative.
   3.   It will not jeopardize public health, safety, and welfare.
   4.   It will ameliorate either the adverse impact of antenna and tower
proliferation or the adverse impact of requiring new construction of towers or
antennas.
   5.   It will better serve the stated purposes of the City's
telecommunications regulations.
   6.   It will not allow the WTF to be taller or higher from the ground than
would otherwise be allowed by this IDO.
6-6(Q)(3)(b)   The facts to be considered by the EPC in reaching its decision
include:
   1.   The height of the proposed tower.
   2.   The proximity of the tower antenna to any Residential zone district or
a dwelling in any other zone district.
   3.   The nature of uses on adjacent and nearby properties.
   4.   The surrounding topography.
   5.   The surrounding vegetation and foliage.
   6.   The design of the tower or antenna, with particular reference to design
characteristics that have the effect of reducing or eliminating any visual
obtrusiveness.
   7.   The proposed ingress and egress.
   8.   The availability of suitable existing towers or other structures.
6-7   POLICY DECISIONS
6-7(A)   ADOPTION OR AMENDMENT OF COMPREHENSIVE PLAN
All applicable provisions of Section
14-16-6-4 (General Procedures) apply unless specifically modified by the
provisions of this Subsection
14-16-6-7(A).
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/b37713d5e40fc82694833f290401791f80be26ac/
IMAGES/0-0-0-6949.png]
6-7(A)(1)   Applicability
This Subsection
14-16-6-7(A) applies to all applications to have the City adopt or amend the
Albuquerque/Bernalillo County Comprehensive Plan.
6-7(A)(2)   Procedure
6-7(A)(2)(a)   The City Planning Department staff shall review the application,
including any specific regulations applicable to a proposed adoption or
amendment of the Comprehensive Plan, and forward a recommendation to the EPC.
6-7(A)(2)(b)   The EPC shall conduct a public hearing on the application and
shall make a recommendation to the City Council.
6-7(A)(2)(c)   The City Council shall conduct a public hearing and shall make a
decision on the application.
6-7(A)(3)   Review and Decision Criteria
An application for Adoption or Amendment of the Comprehensive Plan shall be
approved if it meets all of the following criteria.
6-7(A)(3)(a)   Because of changed economic, social, environmental or other
conditions, the adoption or amendment is necessary to protect the public
health, safety, or welfare.
6-7(A)(3)(b)   The adoption or amendment will protect the public health,
safety, or welfare better than retention of the continued application of the
existing Comprehensive Plan.
6-7(A)(3)(c)   The adoption or amendment will result in general benefits to a
large portion of the residents or property owners in the city.
6-7(A)(3)(d)   If the adoption or amendment is being proposed by a small group
of residents or property owners, it would not create significant adverse
impacts on the remaining residents or property owners in the city.
6-7(B)   ADOPTION OR AMENDMENT OF FACILITY PLAN
Facility Plans may specify amendment procedures different from the provisions
in this IDO. Where a Facility Plan is silent or requires review by the EPC and
final decision by City Council, the provisions of this Subsection
14-16-6-7(B) apply. In such cases, all applicable provisions of Section
14-16-6-4 (General Procedures) apply unless specifically modified by the
provisions of this Subsection
14-16-6-7(B).
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/b37713d5e40fc82694833f290401791f80be26ac/
IMAGES/0-0-0-6951.png]
6-7(B)(1)   Applicability
This Subsection
14-16-6-7(B) applies to any application for adoption or amendment of a Facility
Plan.
6-7(B)(2)   Procedure
6-7(B)(2)(a)   The City Planning Department staff shall review the application
and forward a recommendation to the EPC.
6-7(B)(2)(b)   The EPC shall conduct a public hearing on the application and
shall make a recommendation to the City Council on the application.
6-7(B)(2)(c)   The City Council shall conduct a public hearing and shall make a
decision on the application.
6-7(B)(3)   Review and Decision Criteria
An application for Adoption or Amendment of a Facility Plan shall be approved
if it meets all of the following criteria.
6-7(B)(3)(a)   The proposed plan or amendment is consistent with the spirit and
intent of the ABC Comp Plan, as amended, and with other policies and plans
adopted by the City Council.
6-7(B)(3)(b)   The proposed plan or amendment promotes the efficient use or
administration of public or quasi-public facilities.
6-7(B)(3)(c)   The plan or amendment will promote public health, safety, and
general welfare.
6-7(C)   ADOPTION OR AMENDMENT OF HISTORIC DESIGNATION
All applicable provisions of Section
14-16-6-4 (General Procedures) apply unless specifically modified by the
provisions of this Subsection
14-16-6-7(C).
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/b37713d5e40fc82694833f290401791f80be26ac/
IMAGES/0-0-0-6953.png]
6-7(C)(1)   Applicability
This Subsection
14-16-6-7(C) applies to all applications to do the following:
6-7(C)(1)(a)   Designate an area of the City as an HPO zone.
6-7(C)(1)(b)   Amend the boundaries of an existing HPO zone, including removing
or adding property.
6-7(C)(1)(c)   Terminate an HPO zone.
6-7(C)(1)(d)   Designate a landmark site or structure.
6-7(C)(1)(e)   Remove the designation of a site or an area as a City landmark.
6-7(C)(1)(f)   Amend the text of an HPO zone or any standard in this IDO that
specifically applies to an HPO zone.
6-7(C)(2)   Procedure
6-7(C)(2)(a)   The Historic Preservation Planner shall forward a recommendation
to the LC.
6-7(C)(2)(b)   The LC shall conduct a public hearing and shall make a
recommendation to City Council.
6-7(C)(2)(c)   The City Council shall conduct a public hearing and shall make a
decision on the application.
6-7(C)(2)(d)   The LC shall adopt specific design standards and guidelines for
the HPO zone or City landmark within 60 calendar days following City Council
adoption pursuant to Subsection
14-16-6-6(E) (Historic Design Standards and Guidelines). Any amendments to such
standards and guidelines shall be reviewed pursuant to the same procedure.
6-7(C)(3)   Review and Decision Criteria
6-7(C)(3)(a)   Adoption or Amendment of an HPO Zone
An application for adoption or amendment of an HPO zone boundary shall be
approved if the area contains a significant concentration, linkage, or
continuity of sites, buildings, structures, or objects united by past events or
united aesthetically by plan or physical development. An HPO zone may also
comprise individual elements separated geographically but linked by association
or history, provided that any of the following criteria is met:
   1.   Embodies the distinctive characteristics of a type, period, or method
of construction.
   2.   Portrays the environment of a group of people in an era of history
characterized by a distinctive architectural type.
   3.   Has yielded, or is likely to yield, information important in history or
prehistory.
   4.   Possesses high artistic values.
   5.   Has a relationship to designated landmarks or HPO zone that makes the
area's preservation critical.
6-7(C)(3)(b)   Termination of an HPO Zone
An application to terminate an HPO zone shall be approved if the criteria used
in the designation of that HPO zone are no longer met due to changing
conditions in the HPO zone.
6-7(C)(3)(c)   Designation of a Landmark Site or Structure
An application for designation of a landmark site or structure shall be
approved if it is of particular historical, architectural, cultural, or
archaeological significance and meets any of the following criteria:
   1.   It is the site of a significant historic event.
   2.   It is identified with a person who significantly contributed to the
history of the city, State, or nation.
   3.   It portrays the environment of a group of people in an era of history
characterized by a distinctive architectural style.
   4.   It embodies the distinctive characteristics of a type, period, or
method of construction.
   5.   It possesses high architectural value.
   6.   It represents the work of an architect, designer, or master builder
whose individual work has influenced the development of the city.
   7.   It embodies elements of architectural design, detail, materials, or
craftsmanship which represent a significant architectural innovation.
   8.   Its preservation is critical because of its relationship to already-
designated landmarks or other real property which is simultaneously proposed as
a landmark.
   9.   It has yielded or is very likely to yield information important in
history or prehistory.
   10.   It is included in the National Register of Historic Places or the New
Mexico Cultural Properties Register.
6-7(C)(3)(d)   Termination of Landmark Status
An application to terminate the landmark designation of a site or structure
shall be approved if that site or structure no longer meets the criteria used
in the designation.
6-7(D)   AMENDMENT TO IDO TEXT - CITYWIDE
All applicable provisions of Section
14-16-6-4 (General Procedures) apply unless specifically modified by the
provisions of this Subsection
14-16-6-7(D).
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/b37713d5e40fc82694833f290401791f80be26ac/
IMAGES/0-0-0-6955.png]
6-7(D)(1)   Applicability
This Subsection
14-16-6-7(D) applies to all applications to amend the text of this IDO, except
for the following:
6-7(D)(1)(a)   Applications to create or amend an HPO zone boundary, the text
of an HPO zone, or any standard in this IDO that specifically applies to an HPO
zone, which are processed pursuant to Subsection
14-16-6-7(C) (Adoption or Amendment of Historic Designation).
6-7(D)(1)(b)   Applications to create or amend any other Overlay zone
established in
Part 14-16-3, which are processed pursuant to Subsection
14-16-6-7(E) (Amendment to IDO Text - Small Area).
6-7(D)(1)(c)   Applications to create or amend any small area established in
Section
14-16-4-3 (Use-specific Standards),
Part 14-16-5 (Development Standards), or
Part 14-16-6 (Administration and Enforcement), which are processed pursuant to
Subsection
14-16-6-7(E) (Amendment to IDO Text – Small Area).
6-7(D)(1)(d)   Applications to amend the IDO by City Council that are not
submitted to the EPC for review and recommendation by the sponsoring City
Councilor, which are processed pursuant to Subsection
14-16-6-4(D)(3)(a). 21
6-7(D)(2)   Procedure
6-7(D)(2)(a)   The City Planning Department staff shall review the application,
and forward a recommendation to the EPC.
6-7(D)(2)(b)   If the proposed amendment includes any change to the process of
designating HPO zones or landmark structures or sites (as opposed to an
amendment to the boundaries or standards applicable in a specific HPO zone),
the Historic Preservation Planner shall review and submit staff comments to the
EPC.
6-7(D)(2)(c)   The EPC shall conduct a public hearing on the application and
shall make a recommendation to the City Council.
6-7(D)(2)(d)   The City Council shall conduct a public hearing and shall make a
decision on the application.
6-7(D)(3)   Review and Decision Criteria
An application for an Amendment to IDO Text - Citywide may be approved if it
meets all of the following criteria.
6-7(D)(3)(a)   The proposed amendment is consistent with the spirit and intent
of the ABC Comp Plan, as amended (including the distinction between Areas of
Consistency and Areas of Change), and with other policies and plans adopted by
the City Council.
6-7(D)(3)(b)   The proposed amendment does not apply to only one lot or
development project.
6-7(D)(3)(c)   The proposed amendment promotes public health, safety, and
welfare.
 
Notes
21 City Council, O-24-69, adopted January 6, 2025 and effective January 28,
   2025. Revised editorially for consistency and clarity.
6-7(E)   AMENDMENT TO IDO TEXT - SMALL AREA
All applicable provisions of Section
14-16-6-4 (General Procedures) apply unless specifically modified by the
provisions of this Subsection
14-16-6-7(E).
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/b37713d5e40fc82694833f290401791f80be26ac/
IMAGES/0-0-0-6957.png]
6-7(E)(1)   Applicability
This Subsection
14-16-6-7(E) applies to all applications to amend the text of this IDO to adopt
or amend the boundaries of a small area, including any Overlay zone established
in
Part 14-16-3 or any small area established in Section
14-16-4-3 (Use-specific Standards),
Part 14-16-5 (Development Standards), or
Part 14-16-6 (Administration and Enforcement), and/or to adopt or amend
specific regulations that will apply in a small area, except for any of the
following:
6-7(E)(1)(a)   Applications to create or amend a Historic Protection Overlay
zone boundary, the text of an HPO zone, or any standard in this IDO that
specifically applies to an HPO zone, which are processed pursuant to Subsection
14-16-6-7(C).
6-7(E)(1)(b)   Applications to create or amend Historic Design Standards and
Guidelines, which are processed pursuant to Subsection
14-16-6-6(E).
6-7(E)(1)(c)   Applications to change the zone district of any properties in a
small area, which are processed pursuant to Subsection
14-16-6-7(G) (Zoning Map Amendment – EPC) or Subsection
14-16-6-7(H) (Zoning Map Amendment – Council), as applicable.
6-7(E)(1)(d)   Applications to amend the IDO by City Council that are not
submitted to the EPC for review and recommendation by the sponsoring City
Councilor, which are processed pursuant to Subsection
14-16-6-4(D)(3)(a). 22
6-7(E)(2)   Procedure
6-7(E)(2)(a)   The City Planning Department staff shall review the application,
including any specific regulations applicable to a proposed Overlay zone or
small area, and forward a recommendation to the EPC.
6-7(E)(2)(b)   If the proposed amendment includes any change to any IDO
regulation that applies within an HPO zone boundary (as opposed to an amendment
to the boundaries or Historic Design Standards and Guidelines applicable in a
specific HPO zone, which would be processed pursuant to Subsection
14-16-6-6(E)), the Historic Preservation Planner shall review and submit staff
comments to the EPC.
6-7(E)(2)(c)   The EPC shall conduct a public hearing on the application and
shall make a recommendation to the City Council.
6-7(E)(2)(d)   The City Council shall conduct a public hearing and shall make a
decision on the application.
6-7(E)(2)(e)   The Official Zoning Map shall be updated to reflect any adopted
or amended boundaries of a small area.
6-7(E)(3)   Review and Decision Criteria
An application for an Amendment to IDO Text - Small Area shall be approved if
it meets all of the following criteria.
6-7(E)(3)(a)   The proposed small area amendment is consistent with the health,
safety, and general welfare of the city as shown by furthering (and not being
in conflict with) a preponderance of applicable Goals and Policies in the ABC
Comp Plan, as amended, and other applicable plans adopted by the City.
6-7(E)(3)(b)   If the proposed small area amendment is located partially or
completely in an Area of Consistency (as shown in the ABC Comp Plan, as
amended), the applicant has demonstrated that the proposed amendment would
clearly reinforce or strengthen the established character of the surrounding
Area of Consistency and would not allow development that is significantly
different from that character. The applicant must also demonstrate that the
existing zoning regulations are inappropriate because they meet any of the
following criteria.
   1.   There has been a significant change in neighborhood or community
conditions affecting the small area.
   2.   The proposed zoning regulations are more advantageous to the community
as articulated by the ABC Comp Plan, as amended (including implementation of
patterns of land use, development density and intensity, and connectivity), and
other applicable adopted City plan(s).
6-7(E)(3)(c)   If the proposed small area amendment is located wholly in an
Area of Change (as shown in the ABC Comp Plan, as amended) and the applicant
has demonstrated that the existing zoning regulations are inappropriate because
they meet at least 1 of the following criteria.
   1.   There has been a significant change in neighborhood or community
conditions affecting the small area that justifies this request.
   2.   The proposed zoning regulations are more advantageous to the community
as articulated by the ABC Comp Plan, as amended (including implementation of
patterns of land use, development density and intensity, and connectivity), and
other applicable adopted City plan(s).
6-7(E)(3)(d)   If the proposed amendment changes allowable uses, the proposed
amendment does not allow permissive uses that would be harmful to adjacent
property, the neighborhood, or the community, unless the Use-specific Standards
in Section 16-16-4-3 associated with that use will adequately mitigate those
harmful impacts.
6-7(E)(3)(e)   The applicant's justification is not based completely or
predominantly on the cost of land or economic considerations.
 
Notes
22 City Council, O-24-69, adopted January 6, 2025 and effective January 28,
   2025. Revised editorially for consistency and clarity.
6-7(F)   ANNEXATION OF LAND
All applicable provisions of Section
14-16-6-4 (General Procedures) apply unless specifically modified by the
provisions of this Subsection
14-16-6-7(F).
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/b37713d5e40fc82694833f290401791f80be26ac/
IMAGES/0-0-0-6959.png]
6-7(F)(1)   Applicability
This Subsection
14-16-6-7(F) applies to all petitions to annex land into the municipal limits
of the City that have received approval from Bernalillo County.
6-7(F)(2)   Procedure
6-7(F)(2)(a)   Review and Decision
   1.   The City Planning Department staff shall review the application,
including any specific regulations applicable to a proposed annexation, and
forward a recommendation to the EPC.
   2.   The EPC shall conduct a public hearing on the application and shall
make a recommendation to the City Council.
   3.   The City Council Section
14-16-6-4 (General Procedures) shall conduct a public hearing and shall make a
decision on the application.
6-7(F)(2)(b)   Withdrawal of Petition
   1.   Persons who petition the City for annexation may withdraw their names
and their land from petitioner status at any time before the full City Council
votes on the annexation and simultaneous establishment of zoning, but they may
not withdraw after that time.
   2.   Withdrawal of persons or land from annexation petitions does not
prevent any person from again petitioning the City for annexation at any time
and also does not prevent the City from seeking to annex such land by any legal
method in subsequent proceedings.
6-7(F)(3)   Review and Decision Criteria
The City Council shall consider the following criteria and may approve an
application to annex land into the City at its legislative discretion.
6-7(F)(3)(a)   Annexation of areas designated in the ABC Comp Plan, as amended,
as Established Urban and/or Developing Urban will be approved when the
following criteria are met:
   1.   Compliance with City policy regarding land dedication for public
facilities is assured.
   2.   The applicant agrees in writing to at least 1 of the following criteria
for timing of capital expenditures for necessary major streets, water, sanitary
sewer, and stormwater-handling facilities:
      a.   The timing to be per a written City statement of intent as to when
it or another public body will be able to provide such capital facilities, such
City statement to be issued prior to annexation.
      b.   The timing to remain indefinite but a substantial number of years in
the future, based on a written City statement, made prior to annexation, that
it will provide the facilities but no timing can be assured.
      c.   A commitment by the property owner that he/she or his/her successors
in interest will, in a manner that satisfies City standards, install and pay
for such facilities or cause them to be installed and paid.
   3.   The anticipated delay in provision of City services is not so far into
the future as to be speculative and therefore an unreasonable basis to provide
for annexation.
   4.   The land annexed shall be to some extent contiguous to the City limits,
except land owned by the City may be annexed when it is not contiguous where
this is allowed by State statutes.
   5.   The land to be annexed shall have provision for convenient street
access to the City.
   6.   The land to be annexed shall have reasonable boundaries so that
providers of public services can easily determine where the City boundary is
located and so that public services can be delivered under appropriate service
extension policies at reasonable operating and capital cost to the City.
   7.   City boundaries shall be established along platted lines that clearly
define the City limits; annexation plats need not meet all requirements of a
subdivision plat as specified in the DPM.
6-7(F)(3)(b)   Areas that are designated in the ABC Comp Plan, as amended, as
Reserve Development Areas are appropriate for annexation if they create high-
quality, mixed-use, largely self-sufficient planned communities. Annexation of
such areas will be approved when the following criteria are met:
   1.   The criteria in Subsection (a) above.
   2.   Applications are accompanied or preceded by satisfactory plans for each
proposed community.
6-7(F)(3)(c)   Areas that are designated in the ABC Comp Plan, as amended, as
Semi-Urban and as Rural Development Areas are appropriate for annexation where
the Semi-urban and Rural Development Area policies in the ABC Comp Plan are
furthered or where the general public welfare clearly is better served by
annexation. Zoning appropriate for low-intensity uses shall be assigned.
Annexation of such areas will be approved when the following criteria are met:
   1.   The criteria in Subsection (a) above.
   2.   Since the eventual annexation of all these areas is unlikely, special
care shall be taken to maintain reasonable, compact boundaries in these areas.
To this end, the City will not annex such land unless it meets 1 of the
following criteria:
      a.   Has at least 10 percent of its boundary contiguous to the City
boundary.
      b.   Does not create an arm of the City's incorporated area that is at
any point less than 1,000 feet wide.
   3.   Barring exceptional conditions, the City will not annex land on one
side of a public street without also annexing the land on the other side of the
street.
   4.   The City will not annex land unless appropriate City zone districts are
available for regulation of development consistent with planned and appropriate
land development patterns.
6-7(F)(3)(d)   The City may annex land even though some or all of the above
policies are not met where the EPC and City Council find that at least 1 of the
following applies.
   1.   There is a particular hazard to the health of persons that would be
removed or materially alleviated by the City upon annexation, and that no other
adequate and timely remedy for the removal or material alleviation of such
hazard is available.
   2.   City-owned land used for a public purpose is being annexed to better
facilitate that use.
6-7(G)   ZONING MAP AMENDMENT - EPC
All applicable provisions of Section
14-16-6-4 (General Procedures) apply unless specifically modified by the
provisions of this Subsection
14-16-6-7(G).
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/b37713d5e40fc82694833f290401791f80be26ac/
IMAGES/0-0-0-6961.png]
6-7(G)(1)   Applicability
6-7(G)(1)(a)   This Subsection
14-16-6-7(G) applies to any application that would:
   1.   Amend the Official Zoning Map to change land to the NR-PO-B zone
district, regardless of the number of gross acres or designation of Area of
Change or Area of Consistency (as shown in the ABC Comp Plan, as amended).
   2.   Amend the Official Zoning Map to change less than 10 gross acres of
land located partially or completely in an Area of Consistency (as shown in the
ABC Comp Plan, as amended) to a zone district other than NR-PO-B.
   3.   Amend the Official Zoning Map to change less than 20 gross acres of
land located entirely in an Area of Change (as shown in the ABC Comp Plan, as
amended) to a zone district other than NR-PO-B.
   4.   Not create or amend any text or map of any small area, which is
processed pursuant to Subsection
14-16-6-7(E) (Amendment to IDO Text - Small Area), or Historic Protection
Overlay zone, which is processed pursuant to Subsection
14-16-6-7(C) (Adoption or Amendment of Historic Designation).
6-7(G)(1)(b)   An application to amend the Official Zoning Map by any entity
other than the City may not be submitted within 1 year after the date of final
action by the City denying or approving (with or without conditions) a prior
application to amend the Official Zoning Map with the same requested change.
6-7(G)(2)   Procedure
6-7(G)(2)(a)   The City Planning Department staff shall review the application
and forward a recommendation to the EPC.
6-7(G)(2)(b)   If the application is for a zone change to an MX-FB, NR-SU, or
PD zone district, the associated Site Plan – EPC shall be reviewed and decided
simultaneously pursuant to all applicable provisions of Subsection
14-16-6-6(I) (Site Plan – EPC). A denial of either requested action shall
result in the denial of all associated requests.
6-7(G)(2)(c)   The EPC shall conduct a public hearing on the application and
shall make a decision on the application.
6-7(G)(2)(d)   If the application is for a zone change from an NR-BP zone
district to another zone district, and the subject property is within an area
with an approved Master Development Plan, the applicant may amend the Master
Development Plan pursuant to Subsection
14-16-6-4(X)(3) (Major Amendments) concurrently to remove the subject property
from the Master Development Plan boundary or to add standards to the Master
Development Plan relating to the subject property.
   1.   The City may impose a condition for the applicant to amend the Master
Development Plan.
   2.   If no amendment to the Master Development Plan is made, the property
will continue to be subject to relevant standards in the Master Development
Plan in addition to any standards applicable to the new zone district.
6-7(G)(2)(e)   The City shall provide a zoning certificate to the applicant
that documents the new zone district designation after any City-level appeal
possibilities have been concluded and all conditions of approval have been met.
6-7(G)(2)(f)   If the Zoning Map Amendment will result in a zone boundary that
does not coincide with a lot line (i.e., create a floating zone line), the
applicant shall obtain a Subdivision of Land – Minor or a Subdivision of Land –
Major, as applicable, to establish lot lines that coincide with the zone
boundary before a zoning certificate will be issued.
6-7(G)(2)(g)   A final decision by EPC can be protested pursuant to Subsection
14-16-6-7(H)(1)(b), in which case, the application shall proceed through the
process set forth in Subsection
14-16-6-7(H)(2)(j).
6-7(G)(2)(h)   If the Zoning Map Amendment is approved, the applicant may
develop with an approved Site Plan, pursuant to the applicability, procedures,
and criteria in Subsections
14-16-6-5(G) (Site Plan – Administrative) or
14-16-6-6(I) (Site Plan – EPC) and the requirements for that zone district.
6-7(G)(3)   Review and Decision Criteria
An application for a Zoning Map Amendment shall be approved if it meets all of
the following criteria.
6-7(G)(3)(a)   The proposed zone change is consistent with the health, safety,
and general welfare of the City as shown by furthering (and not being in
conflict with) a preponderance of applicable Goals and Policies in the ABC Comp
Plan, as amended, and other applicable plans adopted by the City.
6-7(G)(3)(b)   If the subject property is located partially or completely in an
Area of Consistency (as shown in the ABC Comp Plan, as amended), the applicant
has demonstrated that the new zone would clearly reinforce or strengthen the
established character of the surrounding Area of Consistency and would not
permit development that is significantly different from that character. The
applicant must also demonstrate that the existing zoning is inappropriate
because it meets any of the following criteria.
   1.   There was a typographical or clerical error when the existing zone
district was applied to the property.
   2.   There has been a significant change in neighborhood or community
conditions affecting the site.
   3.   A different zone district is more advantageous to the community as
articulated by the ABC Comp Plan, as amended (including implementation of
patterns of land use, development density and intensity, and connectivity), and
other applicable adopted City plan(s).
6-7(G)(3)(c)   If the subject property is located wholly in an Area of Change
(as shown in the ABC Comp Plan, as amended) and the applicant has demonstrated
that the existing zoning is inappropriate because it meets any of the following
criteria.
   1.   There was a typographical or clerical error when the existing zone
district was applied to the property.
   2.   There has been a significant change in neighborhood or community
conditions affecting the site that justifies this request.
   3.   A different zone district is more advantageous to the community as
articulated by the ABC Comp Plan, as amended (including implementation of
patterns of land use, development density and intensity, and connectivity), and
other applicable adopted City plan(s).
6-7(G)(3)(d)   The requested zoning does not include permissive uses that would
be harmful to adjacent property, the neighborhood, or the community, unless the
Use-specific Standards in Section
14-16-4-3 associated with that use will adequately mitigate those harmful
impacts.
6-7(G)(3)(e)   The City's existing infrastructure and public improvements,
including but not limited to its street, trail, and sidewalk systems, meet any
of the following criteria:
   1.   Have adequate capacity to serve the development made possible by the
change of zone.
   2.   Will have adequate capacity based on improvements for which the City
has already approved and budgeted capital funds during the next calendar year.
   3.   Will have adequate capacity when the applicant fulfills its obligations
under the IDO, the DPM, and/or an Infrastructure Improvements Agreement (IIA).
   4.   Will have adequate capacity when the City and the applicant have
fulfilled their respective obligations under a City-approved Development
Agreement between the City and the applicant.
6-7(G)(3)(f)   The applicant's justification for the Zoning Map Amendment is
not completely based on the property's location on a major street.
6-7(G)(3)(g)   The applicant's justification is not based completely or
predominantly on the cost of land or economic considerations.
6-7(G)(3)(h)   The Zoning Map Amendment does not apply a zone district
different from surrounding zone districts to one small area or one premises
(i.e., create a "spot zone") or to a strip of land along a street (i.e., create
a "strip zone") unless the requested zoning will clearly facilitate
implementation of the ABC Comp Plan, as amended, and at least 1 of the
following applies.
   1.   The subject property is different from surrounding land because it can
function as a transition between adjacent zone districts.
   2.   The subject property is not suitable for the uses allowed in any
adjacent zone district due to topography, traffic, or special adverse land uses
nearby.
   3.   The nature of structures already on the subject property makes it
unsuitable for the uses allowed in any adjacent zone district.
6-7(H)   ZONING MAP AMENDMENT - COUNCIL
All applicable provisions of Section
14-16-6-4 (General Procedures) apply unless specifically modified by the
provisions of this Subsection
14-16-6-7(H).
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/b37713d5e40fc82694833f290401791f80be26ac/
IMAGES/0-0-0-6963.png]
6-7(H)(1)   Applicability
This Subsection
14-16-6-7(H) applies to any of the following:
6-7(H)(1)(a)   An application that would amend the Official Zoning Map to
change 10 gross acres of land or more located partially or completely in an
Area of Consistency (as shown in the ABC Comp Plan, as amended) or 20 gross
acres of land or more in any zone district located entirely in an Area of
Change (as shown in the ABC Comp Plan, as amended) to a zone district other
than NR-PO-B.
6-7(H)(1)(b)   Pursuant to Section 3-21-6 NMSA 1978, an application for a
Zoning Map Amendment - EPC for which a protest of the final action has been
received within 15 calendar days of the Notice of Decision that meets both of
the following criteria.
   1.   All of the equitable owners of land that comprises at least 20 percent
of the area proposed for change or 20 percent of the area within 100 feet in
any direction (excluding public right-of-way) of the area proposed for change
have protested in writing the proposed Zoning Map Amendment.
   2.   The persons filing the protest have shown that this Subsection
14-16-6-7(H)(1)(b) applies through clear and convincing evidence.
6-7(H)(1)(c)   An application to amend the Official Zoning Map by any entity
other than the City may not be submitted within 1 year after the date of final
action by the City denying or approving (with or without conditions) a prior
application to amend the Official Zoning Map with the same requested change.
6-7(H)(2)   Procedure
6-7(H)(2)(a)   City Planning Department staff shall review the application,
including any specific regulations applicable to a proposed Overlay zone, and
forward a recommendation to the EPC.
6-7(H)(2)(b)   The EPC shall conduct a public hearing on the application and
shall make a recommendation to the City Council.
6-7(H)(2)(c)   The City Council shall conduct a public hearing and make a
decision on the application.
6-7(H)(2)(d)   If the application is for a zone change to an MX-FB, NR-SU, or
PD zone district, the associated Site Plan – EPC shall be reviewed and decided
simultaneously pursuant to all applicable provisions of Section
14-16-6-6(I) (Site Plan – EPC). A denial of either requested action shall
result in the denial of all associated requests.
6-7(H)(2)(e)   If the application is for a zone change to the NR-BP zone
district, an associated Master Development Plan shall be reviewed and decided
simultaneously, pursuant to all applicable provisions of Subsection
14-16-6-6(F) (Master Development Plan). A denial of either requested action
shall result in denial of all associated requests.
6-7(H)(2)(f)   If the application is for a zone change to the PC zone district,
a Framework Plan shall be reviewed and decided simultaneously and the approved
Framework Plan shall be binding on future development on all property within
the PC zone district.
6-7(H)(2)(g)   If the application is for a zone change from an NR-BP zone
district to another zone district, and the subject property is within an area
with an approved Master Development Plan, the applicant may amend the Master
Development Plan pursuant to Subsection
14-16-6-4(X)(3) (Major Amendments) concurrently to remove the subject property
from the Master Development Plan boundary or to add standards to the Master
Development Plan relating to the subject property.
   1.   The City may impose a condition for the applicant to amend the Master
Development Plan.
   2.   If no amendment to the Master Development Plan is made, the property
will continue to be subject to relevant standards in the Master Development
Plan in addition to any standards applicable to the new zone district.
6-7(H)(2)(h)   If the Zoning Map Amendment will result in a zone boundary that
does not coincide with a lot line (i.e., create a floating zone line), the
applicant shall obtain a Subdivision of Land - Minor or a Subdivision of Land -
Major, as applicable, to establish lot lines that coincide with the zone
boundary before a zoning certificate will be issued.
6-7(H)(2)(i)   The City shall provide a zoning certificate to the applicant
that documents the new zone district designation after any conditions of
approval have been met.
6-7(H)(2)(j)   If a protest has been received pursuant to Subsection
14-16-6-7(H)(1)(b), the application shall be processed as a Zoning Map
Amendment - Council.
   1.   The final action of the EPC becomes the recommendation to City Council.
   2.   The application may only be approved if a majority of the membership of
the City Council vote to approve the request.
6-7(H)(2)(k)   If the Zoning Map Amendment is approved, the applicant may
develop with an approved Site Plan, pursuant to the applicability, procedures,
and criteria in Subsections 14-16-6-5(G) (Site Plan – Administrative) or
14-16-6-6(I) (Site Plan – EPC) and the requirements for that zone district.
6-7(H)(3)   Review and Decision Criteria
An application for a Zoning Map Amendment - Council shall be approved if it
meets all of the following criteria, as applicable:
6-7(H)(3)(a)   The criteria for approval of a Zoning Map Amendment - EPC in
Subsection
14-16-6-7(G)(3).
6-7(H)(3)(b)   If the application is for the creation or amendment of an NR-BP
zone district, all of the following criteria.
   1.   The NR-BP zone district and Master Development Plan will result in an
internally coordinated system of land uses, development intensities, and open
spaces that is more consistent with the adopted ABC Comp Plan, as amended, that
is visually more attractive to surrounding areas, and that promotes economic
development of the city better, than could be achieved without the NR-BP zone
district.
   2.   The NR-BP zone district and Master Development Plan will result in
street, circulation, open space, and storm drainage systems that connect and
integrate with the City's existing systems.
   3.   The City and other service providers have adequate infrastructure and
public service capacity to serve the proposed development without decreasing
service quality to existing City residents or increasing financial burdens on
existing City residents, or the applicant has made adequate financial
commitments to ensure this result.
6-7(H)(3)(c)   If the application is for the creation or amendment of a PC zone
district, all of the following criteria.
   1.   The proposed amendment and related Framework Plan meet any criteria for
approval for a Planned Community adopted by City Council.
   2.   The Framework Plan for the property will result in street, circulation,
open space, and storm drainage systems that connect and integrate with the
City's existing system.
   3.   The Framework Plan for the property accommodates reasonably anticipated
growth of the City in a manner that is more consistent with the ABC Comp Plan,
as amended, than the accommodation of such growth that could be achieved
without the PC zone district.
   4.   The City and other service providers have adequate infrastructure and
public service capacity to serve the proposed development without decreasing
service quality to existing City residents or increasing financial burdens on
existing City resident, or the applicant has made adequate financial
commitments to ensure this result.
6-8   NONCONFORMITIES
6-8(A)   PURPOSE
The purpose of this Section
14-16-6-8 is to regulate land uses, buildings, lots, signs, and site features
that were legally established, but that do not conform to the requirements of
this IDO due to some action of the government (collectively "nonconformities").
These regulations are intended to reduce or eliminate over time any
nonconformity that does not meet the regulatory standards of the IDO and/or the
goals of the ABC Comp Plan, as amended, and that creates adverse impacts on the
surrounding area or the city.
6-8(B)   APPLICABILITY
6-8(B)(1)   General Applicability
The regulations in this Section
14-16-6-8 apply to land uses, buildings, lots, signs, and site features,
including:
6-8(B)(1)(a)   Those that were legally established prior to the effective date
of this IDO but that become nonconforming due to the adoption of this IDO.
6-8(B)(1)(b)   Those that were legally established after the effective date of
this IDO but that become nonconforming due to the adoption of a future
amendment to this IDO.
6-8(B)(2)   Authority to Continue
6-8(B)(2)(a)   General Nonconformities
Nonconformities that in general do no harm to the surrounding area may be
allowed to continue or expand based on the regulations and criteria of this
Section
14-16-6-8 in order to preserve the integrity of a neighborhood and prevent
adverse impacts resulting from unused buildings or vacant lots.
6-8(B)(2)(b)   Timeframes for Compliance
Where the IDO establishes timeframes for compliance, the effective date of this
IDO shall mark the beginning of the timeframe unless specified otherwise in
this IDO or another adopted City Ordinance in ROA 1994.
6-8(B)(2)(c)   Nonconforming Use of Land or a Structure in the APO Zone
Notwithstanding Subsections (a) and (b) above, the City shall not grant any
permit or approval under this IDO that would allow a nonconforming use of a lot
or structure to become a greater hazard or obstruction to air navigation than
it was on the effective date of this IDO or any relevant amendments to this
IDO.
6-8(C)   NONCONFORMING USES
6-8(C)(1)   Authority to Continue
Unless specified otherwise in this Section
14-16-6-8 or elsewhere in this IDO, the nonconforming use of land or a
structure shall be allowed to continue regardless of any change in ownership or
occupancy of the use, until that use is discontinued or another provision of
this Section
14-16-6-8 requires the termination of the use.
6-8(C)(2)   Repair and Maintenance
A structure containing a nonconforming use may be maintained, repaired, or
altered, with limits on expansion pursuant to Subsection
14-16-6-8(C)(4) (Expansion of Nonconforming Use).
6-8(C)(3)   Discontinuance of Nonconforming Use
6-8(C)(3)(a)   Except as noted in Subsection (b) below, when a nonconforming
use of land or a structure is discontinued for a period of 2 years, any later
use shall only be an allowable use as specified in
Table 4-2-1 for the zone district in which the property is located.
6-8(C)(3)(b)   When a nonconforming residential use of a single-family detached
dwelling located in any Mixed-use or Non-residential zone district is
discontinued for 5 years, any later use shall only be an allowable use as
specified in
Table 4-2-1 for the zone district in which the property is located.
6-8(C)(3)(c)   Neither the intention of the owner nor that of anybody else to
use a lot or part of a lot for any nonconforming use, nor the fact that the lot
or part of a lot may have been used by a makeshift nonconforming use shall
prevent the ZEO from determining that the use has been discontinued for the
purposes of this Subsection
14-16-6-8(C)(3).
6-8(C)(4)   Expansion of Nonconforming Use
A nonconforming use of land or a structure shall not be expanded, except that
the portion of a structure or land containing a nonconforming use may be
expanded in size if approved by the ZHE pursuant to Subsection
14-16-6-6(C).
6-8(C)(5)   Change in Nonconforming Use
A nonconforming use of land or a structure may be changed to another use
equally or more restrictive than the immediately preceding nonconforming use,
as determined by the ZEO.
6-8(C)(6)   Helipads
A helipad shown on a Site Plan approved by the EPC prior to March 5, 2000,
shall be deemed conforming.
6-8(C)(7)   Mobile Home Dwellings
6-8(C)(7)(a)   A single mobile home dwelling on an individual lot outside of
the R-MC zone district is a nonconforming use and shall be removed.
6-8(C)(7)(b)   A nonconforming use of land and incidental structures consisting
of a mobile home development may remain for the life of the structures, which
shall never be more than 30 years, but only if all of the following provisions
apply.
   1.   This use does not cease operation for a period of 1 year.
   2.   Any private street system servicing the mobile home dwellings is paved
at least to a standard approved by the City Engineer according to the
applicable standards of this IDO and related DPM standards and criteria, even
though there may be no new subdivision.
   3.   Mobile home dwellings are skirted with materials similar in appearance
and durability to the siding of the mobile home, or the unit is situated at
ground level, within 2 years of the use becoming nonconforming.
6-8(C)(7)(c)   Any additional development on a lot that includes 1 or more
mobile home dwellings shall conform to the regulations in this IDO.
6-8(C)(7)(d)   For changes of use or rezoning of developments that include
mobile homes that will result in expiration or termination of resident
occupancy, the standards in Subsection
14-16-2-3(C)(3)(g) (R-MC Zone District Standards) apply, regardless of the zone
district the development is in.
6-8(D)   NONCONFORMING STRUCTURES
6-8(D)(1)   Authority to Continue
6-8(D)(1)(a)   Unless specified otherwise in this Section
14-16-6-8, a nonconforming structure shall be allowed to continue to be used,
regardless of any change in ownership or occupancy of the structure, unless
another provision of this Section
14-16-6-8 requires the termination of the use.
6-8(D)(1)(b)   Mobile home dwellings are subject to provisions in Subsection
14-16-6-8(C)(7) (Mobile Home Dwellings).
6-8(D)(1)(c)   Signs are subject to provisions in Subsection
14-16-6-8(F) (Nonconforming Signs).
6-8(D)(2)   Repair and Maintenance
A nonconforming structure may be maintained, repaired, or altered, but no
maintenance, repair, or alteration may increase the extent of nonconformance.
6-8(D)(3)   Height Nonconformance
A structure nonconforming as to height regulations cannot be added to or
enlarged unless the addition or enlargement conforms to all the regulations of
the zone district in which it is located.
6-8(D)(4)   Setback Nonconformance
A structure nonconforming as to setback regulations cannot be added to or
enlarged unless the addition conforms to all the regulations of the zone
district in which the structure is located.
6-8(D)(5)   Expansion of Nonconforming Structure
A nonconforming structure may be expanded in size, provided that the expansion
will not increase an existing nonconformity or create a new nonconformity, if
approved by the ZHE pursuant to Subsection
14-16-6-6(C).
6-8(D)(6)   Relocation of Nonconforming Structure
A nonconforming structure may be moved in whole or in part to another location
on the lot, provided that the moving will make it nonconforming to a lesser
extent.
6-8(D)(7)   Damage
A nonconforming structure that is damaged through natural or other causes may
be restored, provided that the restoration is started within 6 months of the
damage and is continued diligently to completion, unless the ZEO determines
that the continued use of the structure creates a significant threat to public
health or safety, even after repairs that meet the requirements in Articles 14-
1. 14-2, and 14-3 of ROA 1994 (Uniform Administrative Code and Technical Codes,
Fire Code, and Uniform Housing Code) are made.
6-8(D)(8)   Walls and Fences
6-8(D)(8)(a)   A nonconforming wall or fence may remain for the life of the
structure, except that a wall or fence nonconforming because it is in a clear
sight triangle may remain only if the City Engineer gives and does not withdraw
a written opinion that the wall or fence is not a traffic hazard.
6-8(D)(8)(b)   Walls or fences partially or completely constructed of barbed
tape, barbed wire, razor wire, or similar materials where these materials are
not allowed pursuant to Subsection
14-16-5-7(E)(1)(c) are considered illegal and shall be removed within the
following timeframes:
   1.   For Residential and Non-residential zone districts, as specified by the
Code Enforcement Division of the City Planning Department in notice provided to
the property owner.
   2.   For Mixed-use zone districts, by January 1st, 2028.
6-8(D)(9)   Airport Protection Overlay (APO) Zone
6-8(D)(9)(a)   Whenever the ZEO determines that a nonconforming structure
located in the APO has been abandoned or that more than 80 percent of the
structure has physically deteriorated, decayed, or demolished, such structure
or obstruction shall be discontinued, demolished, and removed by the owner.
6-8(D)(9)(b)   No permit shall be granted that would allow a permanent or
temporary nonconforming structure to exceed the applicable height limit or
otherwise deviate from standards in Section
14-16-3-3 (Airport Protection Overlay Zone) or any other applicable standards
of this IDO.
6-8(E)   NONCONFORMING LOTS
A lot that does not meet minimum lot size or width requirements for the zone
district where it is located, particularly Subsection
14-16-5-1(C)(2) (Contextual Residential Development in Areas of Consistency),
may be used without a Variance if the lot was legally created and placed on the
records of the County and the use of the property is permissive, has an
approved conditional use, or is legally nonconforming. At least 1 of the
following must also apply.
6-8(E)(1)   The existing structure(s) on the property is allowed or legally
nonconforming.
6-8(E)(2)   Any new structure or outdoor use proposed for the lot meets all of
the following provisions:
6-8(E)(2)(a)   Complies with the dimensional standards for the zone district
where the lot is located to the maximum extent practicable.
6-8(E)(2)(b)   Does not exceed the maximum building height allowed in the zone
district where the lot is located.
6-8(E)(2)(c)   Does not include any encroachments that would not be allowed
pursuant to
Table 5-1-4.
6-8(E)(3)   Lots legally nonconforming to minimum lot width or minimum lot size
requirements in the R-MH zone district shall be developed governed by the R-ML
zone district standards in all respects; no Variance is required for such
development.
6-8(F)   NONCONFORMING SIGNS
6-8(F)(1)   Authority to Continue
6-8(F)(1)(a)   A nonconforming sign shall be allowed to continue in use,
regardless of any change in ownership or occupancy of the structure, for the
life of the physical sign structure in the size, height, lighting/illumination
type, and configuration that existed at the time it became nonconforming,
unless Subsection (b) below applies.
6-8(F)(1)(b)   If 1 or more of the signatories to a Joint Sign Premises
agreement withdraws from the agreement, the sign automatically becomes illegal
and is subject to the provisions of Subsection
14-16-6-9(C) (Enforcement).
6-8(F)(2)   Repair and Maintenance
A nonconforming sign may be maintained, repaired, or altered, but no
maintenance, repair, or alteration may increase the extent of nonconformance.
6-8(F)(3)   Modification
6-8(F)(3)(a)   Any modification of size, height, lighting/illumination type, or
configuration or any replacement of the sign face shall conform to all
requirements of Section
14-16-5-12 (Signs) and all other applicable requirements of this IDO.
6-8(F)(3)(b)   Conversion of a non-electronic nonconforming sign to an
electronic sign is prohibited unless the erection of a new electronic sign with
the same size, height, and configuration as the nonconforming sign in that
location would be allowed under Subsection
14-16-5-12(H) (Electronic Signs).
6-8(G)   NONCONFORMING SITE FEATURES
6-8(G)(1)   Authority to Continue
Except for property acquired by government entities (addressed in Subsection
14-16-6-8(H)), a lot that does not comply with the standards of this IDO in
Sections
14-16-4-3 (Use-specific Standards);
14-16-5-3 (Access and Connectivity);
14-16-5-5 (Parking and Loading);
14-16-5-6 (Landscaping, Buffering, and Screening);
14-16-5-7 (Walls and Fences);
14-16-5-8 (Outdoor and Site Lighting); or
14-16-5-9 (Neighborhood Edges), except for the Building Height Stepdown
provision, may continue to be used and occupied, and uses may be changed or
expanded as allowed by other provisions of this Section
14-16-6-8, notwithstanding those nonconformities, unless and until the gross
floor area of the primary building on the lot is expanded pursuant to the
criteria in Subsection
14-16-6-6(C) (Expansion of Nonconforming Use or Structure), at which time any
portion of the lot affected by the expansion shall be brought into compliance
with any relevant standards in the Sections listed above in this provision,
unless specified otherwise in this IDO.
6-8(G)(2)   Front Yard Parking
Parking on areas other than allowed pursuant to Subsection
14-16-5-5(F)(1)(a)6 is illegal, and such parking shall be discontinued within
the timeframe specified by Code Enforcement in notice provided to the property
owner, with the following exceptions.
6-8(G)(2)(a)   Front Yard Parking Areas in Existence Prior to June 17, 2007
   1.   Front yard parking areas that do not satisfy the requirements of this
IDO that were improved for and specifically dedicated to use as a front yard
parking area prior to June 17, 2007 (when City Council adopted O-07-61, which
first regulated front yard parking), and that otherwise satisfied the
requirements of all applicable regulations in place at the time of their
installation, may continue to be used as front yard parking areas pursuant to
the provisions of this IDO governing nonconforming uses and structures.
      a.   For the purposes of this Subsection
14-16-6-8(G)(3), "improvements" include either impervious surfaces, such as
concrete or asphalt, or all-weather pervious surfaces, such as recycled
asphalt, compacted crusher fines, or compacted angular stone. In order to enjoy
nonconforming status under this Section
14-16-6-8, any such improvements must have been installed for and be suitable
for the specific purpose of front yard parking and maneuvering.
      b.   Where low-density residential development has an existing, improved
front yard parking area, parking on unimproved surfaces such as dirt, grass, or
landscape areas, or on surfaces that were improved for any purpose other than
front yard parking, including but not limited to decorative gravel areas,
patios, or pedestrian walkways, shall be discontinued regardless of the year of
development of the property or improvement.
   2.   Where any existing low-density residential development lacks an
improved front yard parking area, and improved front yard parking areas were
not required at the time of the unit's initial development, such residential
unit may continue to use a portion of the front yard for parking subject to the
size and area limitations in Subsection
14-16-5-5(F)(2)(a)1.
6-8(G)(2)(b)   Lawful Improvements Installed between June 17, 2007 and the
Effective Date of this IDO
Front yard parking areas that do not satisfy the requirements of this IDO but
that satisfied the requirements of all applicable regulations in place between
June 17, 2007 and the effective date of this IDO may continue to be used for
front yard parking pursuant to this Section
14-16-6-8.
6-8(G)(3)   Landscaping in the APO Zone
No native vegetation or landscaping in the APO zone shall be allowed to exceed
the applicable height limit or otherwise deviate from standards in Section
14-16-3-3 (Airport Protection Overlay Zone) or any other applicable standards
of this IDO.
6-8(G)(4)   Outdoor and Site Lighting
6-8(G)(4)(a)   Outdoor and site lighting that does not satisfy the requirements
of this IDO and that requires investment in electrical work or a new luminaire
shall be considered nonconforming until January 1, 2034.
6-8(G)(4)(b)   After January 1, 2034, unless otherwise specified in this IDO,
all outdoor luminaries that do not satisfy the requirements of this IDO must be
replaced or retrofitted to comply.
6-8(H)   PROPERTY ACQUISITION BY GOVERNMENT ENTITIES
No property shall be considered nonconforming solely because it fails to meet
applicable lot size or dimensional standards if the reason for those failures
is the acquisition of part of the property by an exercise of eminent domain or
a transfer to a governmental body as an alternative to an exercise of eminent
domain.
6-9   VIOLATIONS, ENFORCEMENT, AND PENALTIES
6-9(A)   PURPOSE
This Section
14-16-6-9 describes what is a violation of this IDO, how the standards and
requirements of this IDO will be enforced, and what penalties the City may
impose for different types of violations of this IDO.
6-9(B)   VIOLATIONS
The following activities and actions are a violation of this IDO and are
subject to the enforcement and penalty provisions of this IDO and Part 1-1-99
of ROA 1994 (General Penalty):
6-9(B)(1)   A building or structure erected, constructed, reconstructed,
altered, repaired, converted, or maintained in violation of this IDO.
6-9(B)(2)   Any building, structure, or land used in violation of this IDO.
6-9(B)(3)   Providing false or misleading information in an application for any
permit or approval.
6-9(B)(4)   Failure to comply with the terms or conditions attached to any
permit or approval issued pursuant to this IDO.
6-9(B)(5)   Dividing or re-dividing land within the city into lots for sale or
development without an approval required by this IDO or recording any plat that
has not been approved by the City pursuant to this IDO with the County Clerk.
6-9(B)(6)   Transferring or conveying a lot created by subdivision without the
approval of a final plat of such subdivision and recording that plat with the
County Clerk, unless the lot resulted from an exercise of eminent domain or
purchase under threat of an exercise of eminent domain. Public agencies shall
record plats reflecting acquisitions and transfer of property resulting from an
exercise of eminent domain or purchase under threat of an exercise of eminent
domain within 6 months of the decision by the court or the purchase, as
applicable.
6-9(B)(7)   Grading or other alteration of a site without meeting the following
requirements, as applicable:
6-9(B)(7)(a)   Approval of a preliminary plat, if the grading or site
alteration is related to a proposed subdivision.
6-9(B)(7)(b)   Approval of a drainage plan or report, or a determination by the
City Engineer that no such plan or report is required.
6-9(B)(7)(c)   Compliance with the provisions of a drainage plan or drainage
report or to the requirements of a preliminary or final plat, approved pursuant
to this IDO.
6-9(B)(7)(d)   Obtaining all required permits pursuant to Part 9-5-1 of ROA
1994 (Air Quality Control Board).
6-9(B)(8)   Failure to immediately cease demolition, development, or land
disturbance activity upon the discovery of an archaeological resource.
6-9(B)(9)   Failure to pay any required impact fees as specified by Article 14-
19 of ROA 1994 (Impact Fees) and any associated procedures in the DPM.
6-9(B)(10)   Removing or defacing any posted sign required for public notice
after it is posted until the required duration of the sign posting is complete.
6-9(C)   ENFORCEMENT
6-9(C)(1)   Authority to Enforce
6-9(C)(1)(a)   The ZEO has the authority and duty to enforce this IDO pursuant
to Subsection
14-16-6-2(B)(1)(c) (Zoning Enforcement Officer).
6-9(C)(1)(b)   A permit, license, or certificate issued in conflict with the
provisions of this IDO is void.
6-9(C)(1)(c)   In enforcing the requirements of this IDO the City may use any
enforcement powers allowed by the State of New Mexico, in any order. The choice
of one method of enforcement does not foreclose the City from pursuing others
later if the violation is not remedied.
6-9(C)(1)(d)   Without limiting the generality of Subsection (c) above, the
City may enforce this IDO through any of the following powers:
   1.   To institute proceedings to prevent the unlawful action.
   2.   To deny, delay, or withhold permits and approvals.
   3.   To revoke permits and approvals after giving the property owner or
applicant notice of intent to revoke the permit or approval.
   4.   To issue a stop work order requiring that all work on a property or
structure or operation of a use that is in violation of this IDO cease, or if a
violation is suspected but not known, then until the existence or absence of
the violation can be confirmed.
   5.   To require the immediate abatement of any use or the vacation or
removal of a structure that creates a threat to the public health and safety or
to the health and safety of those in or around the use or structure.
   6.   To order the removal of any sign or violating portion of a sign that is
erected or maintained in violation of this IDO.
      a.   At least 10 calendar days' notice in writing shall be given to the
owner of such sign, or of the structure or premises on which such sign is
located, to remove the sign or to bring it into compliance with this IDO.
      b.   Upon failure to remove the sign or to comply with this notice, the
ZEO shall have the sign removed.
      c.   Any cost of removal incurred by the City shall be assessed to the
owner of the property on which such sign is located and may be collected in the
manner of ordinary debt or in the manner of taxes, and such charge shall be a
lien on the property.
   7.   To terminate all or part of a Site Plan where the applicant has used
the property or constructed improvements in violation of the terms and
conditions attached to an approved Site Plan.
      a.   If an approved Site Plan has been partially developed, the
termination shall only apply to the undeveloped portion of the property, and
any termination of a part of the Site Plan shall not adversely affect or impose
additional requirements on the developed lots.
      b.   Termination of all or part of a Site Plan does not preclude approval
of a similar plan at a later date.
      c.   If a Site Plan is terminated, the City shall review applicable
Infrastructure Improvements Agreements (IIAs) or development agreements to
determine necessary amendments to such agreements and/or release of any
financial guarantee pursuant to Section
14-16-6-4(R) (Required Improvements and Financial Assurance).
   8.   To terminate all or part of a Master Development Plan where constructed
improvements are in violation of the terms and conditions attached to an
approved Master Development Plan, pursuant to provisions a through c in
Subsection
14-16-6-9(C)(1)(d)7 for a Site Plan above.
   9.   To impose civil and criminal penalties as allowed by New Mexico law.
6-9(C)(2)   Notice and Timing of Enforcement
6-9(C)(2)(a)   The City shall attempt to give the property owner, agent, or
occupant of a lot or a building that contains a violation of this IDO written
notice of the violation and a reasonable amount of time to cure the violation.
6-9(C)(2)(b)   The property owner, agent, or occupant may request additional
time (beyond that allowed by this IDO or the notice of violation) to cure a
violation, and the ZEO may approve additional time to cure for good cause
shown.
6-9(C)(3)   Inspectorial Searches by Consent
6-9(C)(3)(a)   Within the scope of his/her authority, the ZEO or authorized
zoning inspectors may conduct an inspectorial search, with the voluntary
consent of an occupant or custodian of the premises or vehicles to be
inspected, who reasonably appears to the ZEO or the inspector to be in control
of the places to be inspected or otherwise authorized to give such consent.
6-9(C)(3)(b)   Before requesting consent for an inspectorial search, the ZEO or
inspector shall inform the person to whom the request is directed of the
authority under and purposes for which the inspection is to be made and shall,
upon demand, exhibit an identification card or official City document
evidencing their authority to make such inspections.
6-9(C)(3)(c)   Inspections undertaken pursuant to this Subsection
14-16-6-9(C)(3) shall be carried out with due regard for the convenience and
privacy of the occupants, and during the daytime unless, because of the nature
of the premises, the convenience of the occupants, the nature of the possible
violation or other circumstances, there is a reasonable basis for carrying out
the inspection at night.
6-9(C)(3)(d)   Unless advance notice would be likely to cause the suspected
violation to be temporarily eliminated so as to frustrate enforcement, notice
of the purpose and approximate time of an inspectorial search of an area not
open to the general public shall be sent to the occupants or custodians of
premises or vehicles.
6-9(C)(4)   Inspectorial Searches without Consent
6-9(C)(4)(a)   Upon sufficient showing that required consent to an inspectorial
search has been refused or is otherwise unobtainable within a reasonable period
of time, the ZEO may make application to the district court for an inspection
order/search warrant. Such application shall be made to a district court having
jurisdiction over the premises or vehicle to be searched. Such application
shall set forth the following information:
   1.   The particular vehicle(s), premises, or portion of a vehicle or
premises sought to be inspected.
   2.   That the owner or occupant of the premises or vehicle(s), has refused
entry.
   3.   That inspection of the premises or vehicle(s) is necessary to determine
whether they comply with the requirements of this IDO.
   4.   Any other reason necessitating the inspection, including knowledge or
belief that a particular condition exists in the premises or vehicle(s) which
constitutes a violation of this IDO.
   5.   That the ZEO or inspector is authorized by the City to make the
inspection.
6-9(C)(4)(b)   The application shall be granted and the inspection order/search
warrant issued upon a sufficient showing that inspection in the area in which
the premises or vehicles in question are located, or inspection of the
particular premises or vehicles, is in accordance with reasonable legislative
or administrative standards, and that the circumstances of the particular
inspection for which application is made are otherwise reasonable. The district
court shall make and keep a record of the proceedings on the application and
enter thereon its finding in accordance with the requirements of this section.
6-9(C)(4)(c)   The ZEO or inspector executing the inspection order/search
warrant shall, if the premises or vehicle in question are unoccupied at the
time of execution, be authorized to use such force as is reasonably necessary
to enter and make the inspection.
6-9(C)(4)(d)   After execution of the order or after unsuccessful efforts to
execute the order, as the case may be, the ZEO shall return the order to the
district court with a sworn report of the circumstances of execution or failure
to execute the order.
6-9(C)(5)   Administrative Civil Enforcement
If the ZEO determines that a violation of the IDO has not been adequately cured
within a reasonable time after an initial notice has been issued pursuant to
Subsection
14-16-6-9(C)(2), the ZEO may pursue administrative civil enforcement pursuant
to this Subsection
14-16-6-9(C)(5). Such administrative civil enforcement does not preclude any
other enforcement action authorized by law.
6-9(C)(5)(a)   Notice of Administrative Civil Enforcement
If the ZEO chooses to pursue administrative civil enforcement, the ZEO shall
prepare and serve a written notice that includes all of the following
information:
   1.   The name and contact information of the individual(s) believed to be
responsible for the violation.
   2.   The physical address or legal description of the location where the
alleged violations have occurred or are occurring.
   3.   A description of the alleged violation(s), including citations to the
IDO Sections believed to have been violated and the facts indicating that such
Sections are being violated.
   4.   A description of the actions or penalties that are sought by the ZEO
for the alleged violation(s).
   5.   A statement that the notice will be immediately filed with the City
Office of Administrative Hearings within 3 business days and that a hearing on
the matter will be scheduled between 15 and 45 calendar days after the office
receives the notice.
   6.   The address, email, and telephone number to contact the ZEO or
appropriate City department for additional information and for delivery of any
responses to the allegations.
6-9(C)(5)(b)   Notice of Hearing
   1.   The City Office of Administrative Hearings shall schedule a hearing on
all matters for which it has received a notice of administrative civil
enforcement between 15 and 45 calendar days after the office receives the
notice pursuant to the Independent Hearing Office Ordinance (ROA 1994 Part 2-7-
8).
   2.   A notice of hearing may be served by any employee or agent of the City,
including the ZEO or any sworn officer of the Albuquerque Police Department.
   3.   The notice of hearing shall be served to all individuals listed on the
notice of administrative civil enforcement and the ZEO through any of the
following means:
      a.   Personal service upon the person(s) or their attorney or duly
authorized agent(s).
      b.   First class mail, return receipt requested.
      c.   Conspicuous posting within the frontage of the property where the
alleged violation has occurred for a period of at least 30 days. It is unlawful
for any person to remove or otherwise tamper with this posting, and any removal
or tampering of the notice is punishable pursuant to the criminal penalties of
Part 1-1-99 of ROA 1994 (General Penalty).
   4.   The notice of hearing shall include all of the following information:
      a.   The date, time, and location of the hearing; the name of the hearing
officer scheduled to preside of the matter; and contact information for the
City Office of Administrative Hearings where individuals may request additional
information.
      b.   A brief description of the nature and purpose of the hearing.
   5.   If a resolution is reached before a scheduled hearing, the ZEO shall
request, as soon as possible, that the hearing be cancelled. The City Office of
Administrative Hearings shall provide notice that the hearing has been
cancelled to all individuals listed on the notice of administrative civil
enforcement and any other parties to this matter by email or first class mail.
   6.   If the terms of the resolution are not met by the alleged violator(s)
to the satisfaction of the ZEO, the ZEO may request that the City Office of
Administrative Hearings reschedule and provide notice of the rescheduled
hearing pursuant to the procedures above.
6-9(C)(5)(c)   Response to Notice of Administrative Civil Enforcement
   1.   The alleged violator or their attorney or duly authorized agent may
request to meet with the ZEO prior to the hearing to attempt to resolve the
alleged violation(s) and avoid a hearing.
   2.   Once a hearing is scheduled, parties may submit a written response to
the City Office of Administrative Hearings no less than 5 business days before
the hearing. Any response submitted shall include proof that the response has
also been provided to any other parties listed on the notice of administrative
civil enforcement and the ZEO.
6-9(C)(5)(d)   Hearing
   1.   The hearing shall be conducted pursuant to the Independent Hearing
Office Ordinance (ROA 1994 Part 2-7-8).
   2.   If the hearing officer finds that a violation of the IDO occurred or is
occurring, the hearing officer may issue a civil penalty against any individual
(s) who was served notice of administrative civil enforcement pursuant to
Subsection
14-16-6-9(D)(3)(b) above, regardless of the presence of that individual(s) at
the hearing.
6-9(C)(5)(e)   Enforcement of Remedies and Penalties
   1.   Within 15 calendar days after the hearing, the hearing officer shall
send a written order of remedy or penalty to all parties by email, first class
mail, or facsimile.
   2.   The order of remedy or penalty shall state the determination of the
hearing officer regarding the alleged violations listed in the notice of
administrative civil enforcement and shall contain findings of fact and
conclusions of law.
   3.   If the hearing officer determines that no violation of this IDO is
being or has been committed, the order of remedy or penalty shall state that
the alleged violation is being dismissed
   4.   If the hearing officer determines that a violation of the IDO is being
or has been committed, the order of remedy or penalty shall state the remedies
or penalties to be imposed by the City. The remedies and penalties may include
any of the following:
      a.   An order to cease and desist violations of this IDO.
      b.   An order to bring the property in question into compliance with the
IDO.
      c.   An order to pay all of the City's costs for the associated
enforcement action and administrative hearing.
      d.   An order to pay a civil fine not to exceed $500 per violation per
day.
   5.   Any party aggrieved by a final decision of the hearing officer may
appeal the decision to the District Court within 30 days of the final order,
pursuant to the New Mexico Rules of Civil Procedure.
   6.   The Planning Department shall monitor compliance with the order of
remedy or penalty. If the Planning Department has reason to believe that any
individual subject to the order is not complying with the order, the Planning
Department may take one or more of the following actions:
      a.   Refer the matter to the City Attorney for the commencement of a
civil action.
      b.   Refer the matter to the City Attorney or the District Attorney for
the commencement of criminal proceedings.
      c.   Place a lien on the property in an amount equal to the outstanding
fines ordered pursuant to this ordinance until the owner has fully complied
with the order.
      d.   Commence a supplemental enforcement action as otherwise provided by
law, including but not limited to Part 1-1-99 of ROA 1994 (General Penalty).
6-9(C)(6)   Disclaimer
This IDO shall not be construed to hold the City or its authorized
representatives responsible for any damage to persons or property by reason of
the inspection or re-inspection authorized by this IDO, or failure to inspect
or re-inspect, or the issuance of a building permit authorized by this IDO, the
DPM, or other adopted City regulations.
6-9(D)   PENALTIES
6-9(D)(1)   Any person, firm, or corporation violating any provision of this
IDO, or any amendments to it, shall be subject to the penalty provisions set
forth in Part 1-1-99 of ROA 1994 (General Penalty) or in any resolution of City
Council establishing those penalties.
6-9(D)(2)   Each day this IDO is violated shall be considered a separate
offense.
6-9(D)(3)   The City may, in its discretion, waive financial penalties for
periods before violation is cured or may condition such waivers on prompt cure
of the violation. Any waiver of penalties shall be accompanied by a written
rationale for the waiver.
Part 14-16-7   Definitions, Acronyms, and Abbreviations
7-1   DEFINITIONS
The following definitions are provided for terms used in this IDO. Terms that
are not defined below follow common usage as defined in standard dictionaries.
For the convenience of the user, "See also" notes point to definitions of
related, but distinct, terms.
A
Abut
To touch or share a property line.
Access
A way or means of approach to provide vehicular or pedestrian physical entrance
to a property.
Accessory Building
A building detached from and, except in the case of agricultural support
buildings like barns in the R-A zone district, smaller than the primary
building on the same lot. The use of an accessory building shall be subordinate
and customarily incidental to the primary use of the lot. See also Building.
Accessory Dwelling Unit
See Dwelling Definitions and Measurement Definitions.
Accessory Use
See Use Definitions.
Accessory Structure
A structure detached from and located on the same lot as a primary building,
customarily used with and clearly incidental and subordinate to the primary
building or use. Accessory structures include but are not limited to shade
structures such as covered patios, gazeboes, pergolas, ramadas, or similar
roofed structures. Above-ground swimming pools are not considered accessory
structures for the purposes of this IDO. See also Building and Structure.
Acequia
An irrigation ditch operated and maintained by the MRGCD or a community acequia
association. See also Irrigation Facility.
Activity Center
See Center and Corridor Definitions.
Adjacent
Those properties that are abutting or separated only by a street, alley, trail,
or utility easement, whether public or private. Properties that are on opposite
of an intersection diagonally (e.g. "kitty corner" or "catty corner" or "caddy
corner") are not considered. See also Alley, Multi-use Trail, Private Way,
Right-of-way, and Street.
Adult or Child Day Care Facility
A facility other than an occupied residence that provides care for more than 12
individual adults or children during the day. For the purposes of this IDO, the
City regulates child care facilities that require a license from the state.
This use includes pre-schools. This use does not include overnight care. See
also Family Home Day Care, Family Care Facility, Community Residential
Facility, and Group Home.
Adult Entertainment
An establishment such as an auditorium, bar, cabaret, concert hall, nightclub,
restaurant, theater, or other commercial establishment, other than an adult
retail establishment, that provides amusement or entertainment featuring 1 or
more of the following:
   1.   A live performance, act, or escort service distinguished or
characterized by an emphasis on the depiction, description, exposure, or
representation of specified anatomical areas or the conduct or simulation of
specified sexual activities.
   2.   Audio or video displays, computer displays, films, motion pictures,
slides or other visual representations or recordings characterized or
distinguished by an emphasis on the depiction, description, exposure or
representation of specified anatomical areas or the conduct or simulation of
specified sexual activities.
For the purposes of this IDO, adult entertainment is considered a primary use,
regardless of the use, area, or purpose of any other primary uses on the same
premises. See also Adult Retail, Specified Anatomical Areas, and Specified
Sexual Activities.
Adult Retail
See Retail Definitions.
Agricultural Sales Stand
A structure for the retail sale of agricultural products raised on the same
premises. See also Building and Home Improvement Materials Store, Community
Garden, Farmers' Market, General Agriculture, Nursery, and Seasonal Outdoor
Sales.
Alteration
Where used associated with a Historic Protection Overlay Zone, see Historic
Protection Overlay (HPO) Zone Definitions.
Airport
The area of land used or intended to be used for the landing and takeoff of
aircraft, passenger and cargo loading areas, and related uses.
Albuquerque Metropolitan Arroyo Flood Control Authority (AMAFCA)
The political subdivision of the State of New Mexico established pursuant to
Article 72-16 NMSA 1978 with specific responsibility for flooding problems in
the greater Albuquerque area.
Alley
A public right-of-way or private way, or a part thereof, primarily devoted to
vehicular use and providing secondary access to abutting property or primary
vehicular access to residential properties, minimizing or eliminating the need
for driveway or drive aisle access to the street. For the purposes of access,
alleys are considered a type of street. See also Private Way, Right-of-way, and
Street.
Allowable Use
See Use Definitions.
Amendment
Any repeal, modification, or addition to a regulation; any new regulation; any
change in the number, shape, boundary, or area of any zone district or Overlay
zone; or any repeal or abolition of any map, part thereof, or addition thereto.
Amphitheater
A covered or uncovered open-air area or structure suitable for musical or
theatrical performances, performing arts, or sporting events with tiers of
seats, benches, or berms with seating capacity for less than 1,000 people. See
also Auditorium and Stadium.
Animal Keeping
The keeping of animals as allowed by Article 9-2 of ROA 1994 (Humane and
Ethical Animal Rules and Treatment [HEART]).
Animated Sign
See Sign Definitions.
ANSI/IES Standards
Standards developed by the American National Standards Institute (ANSI) and the
Illuminating Engineering Society (IES), a professional organization of
designers, architects, engineers, sales professionals, and researchers. For the
purposes of this IDO, ANSI/IES standards are referenced for in Section 14-16-5-
8 (Outdoor and Site Lighting).
Anthropogenic
Change of conditions caused or influenced by people.
Arcade
See Building Frontage Types.
Archaeological Definitions
Archaeological Resource
Material remains of past human activity and life that are of archaeological
interest, including but not limited to pottery, basketry, bottles, weapon
projectiles, tools, structures or portions of structures, pit houses, rock
paintings, rock carvings, intaglios, graves, human skeletal materials, or any
portion or piece of any of the foregoing items. Non-fossilized and fossilized
paleontological specimens, or any portion or piece thereof, shall not be
considered archaeological resources unless found in an archaeological context.
No item shall be treated as an archaeological resource unless such item is at
least 75 years old. Material remains that are structures may be considered for
further review and protection as a landmark site or structure.
Significant Archaeological Site
A geographic location that contains an archaeological resource likely, as
determined by the City Archaeologist, to yield information important to the
prehistory or history of the Albuquerque area.
Architecturally Integrated Wireless Telecommunications Facility (WTF)
See Wireless Telecommunications Facility Definitions.
Area of Change
An area designated as an Area of Change in the Albuquerque/Bernalillo County
Comprehensive Plan (ABC Comp Plan), as amended, where growth and development
are encouraged, primarily in Centers other than Old Town, Corridors other than
Commuter Corridors, Master Development Plan areas, planned communities, and
Metropolitan Redevelopment Areas.
Area of Consistency
An area designated as an Area of Consistency in the Albuquerque/Bernalillo
County Comprehensive Plan (ABC Comp Plan), as amended, where development must
reinforce the character and intensity of existing development.
Arroyo
See Sensitive Lands Definitions. See also Major Arroyo.
Arroyo, Major
See Major Arroyo.
Art Gallery
A building, room, or series of rooms where works of art are exhibited for
display or sale.
Arterial Street
See Street Definitions.
Artisan Manufacturing
See Manufacturing Definitions.
Assisted Living Facility
A facility designed to provide housing, supportive services, personalized
assistance, and health care services to respond to individuals who need help
with activities of daily living or memory care services, but not including
skilled nursing care. Such facilities may include separate bedrooms or living
quarters, a commercial or private kitchen, shared dining facilities, and
recreational activities. See also Nursing Home, Independent Living Facility,
and Other Use Accessory to a Residential Primary Use.
Auditorium
A hall or seating area, generally enclosed, where an audience views a musical
or theatrical performance, concert, sporting, or other entertainment event,
including but not limited to a conference center. See also Adult Entertainment.
Automated Teller Machine (ATM)
An electronically operated device used to conduct financial transactions on-
site by means of direct computerized access.
B
Bail Bond Business
Any business requiring licensure under Part 13.20.2 of the New Mexico
Administrative Code (NMAC) (Bail Bondsmen and Solicitors), including any
person, agency, or corporation that acts as a surety and pledges money or
property as bail for the appearance of persons accused in court. For the
purposes of this IDO, bail bond businesses are treated as a personal and
business services use. See also Personal and Business Services.
Bakery or Confectionary Shop
A facility for the production and sale of baked goods and confectioneries,
primarily for retail sales to customers of the facility. Accessory sales to
off-site customers is allowed. For uses with primary off-site sales, see
Manufacturing Definitions for Light Manufacturing. See also Catering Service
and General Retail.
Bank
An establishment that provides retail banking, mortgage lending, and financial
services to individuals and businesses, including check-cashing facilities. See
also Small Loan Business, which is considered a bank for the purposes of this
IDO.
Bar
An establishment having as its primary or predominant uses the serving of beer,
wine, or liquor for consumption on the premises or for takeout or delivery
service for off-site consumption, but that does not meet the definition for Tap
Room or Tasting Room.
Bed and Breakfast
A low-density residential development with no more than 8 guest rooms that are
rented for temporary sleeping accommodations at market rates with breakfast
served. Some or all guest rooms may be in accessory buildings. Provision of
alcoholic beverages is controlled by the New Mexico State statutes for "Bed and
breakfast" as governed by Section 60-6A-34 NMSA 1978. See also Hotel or Motel.
Bedroom
Any room in a dwelling that is partitioned by walls and doors, other than the
following: one kitchen, one room that may be designated as a living room, one
room that may be designated as a dining room or family room, and any number of
baths, foyers, corridors, and closets (all as defined Articles 14-1 and 14-3 of
ROA 1994 (Uniform Administrative Code and Technical Codes and Uniform Housing
Code). Rooms greater than 100 square feet may not be considered closets for the
purposes of this definition.
Bikeway
Any street or trail that is specifically designated for bicycle travel,
regardless of whether such facility is designated for the exclusive use of
bicycles or is to be shared with other transportation modes.
BioPark
City-owned facilities managed by Cultural Services and regulated by a Master
Plan, including the ABQ BioPark Zoo, Botanic Garden, Aquarium, and Tingley
Beach. Zoned NR-PO-D in the IDO.
Block
Where used to describe a city block or an area to be platted with lots and
streets, an area that is bounded but not crossed by streets, railroad rights-
of-way, waterways, unsubdivided areas, or other barriers. For the purposes of
the large retail facility provisions and development in the NR-LM and NR-GM
zone districts, drive aisles and private streets also qualify as block
boundaries. See also Measurement Definitions for Block Length.
Blood Services Facility
An establishment that collects whole blood for transfusion or further
processing; collects plasma for further processing; or uses plasmapheresis,
plateletpheresis, or leukapheresis processes for removal of blood from a donor.
This does not apply to hospitals for human beings, laboratories for collection
of personal blood samples, or temporary blood drives.
Boat
See Vehicle Definitions.
Bonus
See Building Height Bonus.
Buffer
See Landscape Buffer.
BUG (Backlight, Uplight, Glare) Rating
A rating system for the quantity of light within specific beam angles,
consisting of all of the following:
   Backlight
   A rating based on zonal lumens distributed behind a luminaire between 0 and
90 degrees from the vertical of nadir.
   Uplight
   A rating based on zonal lumens emitted above 90 degrees from the vertical of
nadir.
   Glare
   A rating based on the zonal lumens distributed between 60 and 90 degrees
from the vertical of nadir.
Building
An independent, fully enclosed structure with a roof supported by columns or
walls resting on its own foundations that is built and maintained for the
support, shelter or enclosure of persons, animals, or property of any kind.
Unless specified otherwise in this IDO, this term refers to anything within the
footprint of a common roof including, but not limited to, a porch, breezeway,
or carport. See also Accessory Building, Front Fa ade, Street-facing Fa ade,
Large Retail Facility, Primary Building, and Structure.
Building and Home Improvement Materials Store
An establishment having a gross floor area greater than 50,000 square feet
primarily engaged in retailing a general line of new home repair and
improvement materials and supplies, such as lumber, plumbing goods, electrical
goods, tools, house wares, hardware and lawn and garden supplies, with the
merchandise lines normally arranged in separate departments, with or without
central customer checkout. This use includes the sale of plants and garden
supplies in outdoor areas and incidental outdoor storage. See also General
Retail.
Building Coverage
See Measurement Definitions.
Building Frontage Types
The following definitions are specific to the Mixed-use Form-based Zone
District and sub-zones.
Arcade
A street-facing fa ade with an attached colonnade or overhang structure to
create a covered passageway. Balconies may overlap the sidewalk while the
ground floor remains set at the lot line. This type is ideal for retail use,
but only when the sidewalk is fully absorbed within the arcade so that a
pedestrian cannot bypass it. An easement for private use of the public right-
of-way is usually required.
Forecourt
Building frontage where the street-facing fa ade is aligned with the front lot
line, with a portion of the building set back. A fence or wall at the property
line may be used to define the private space of the court. Gardens and
vehicular drop-off areas are allowed within the forecourt.
Porch
Porches are common frontages associated with single-family houses where the
street-facing fa ade is set back at least 10 feet from the front lot line. A
wall or fence at the property line may be used to define the private space of
the yard. An encroaching porch may also be appended to the fa ade. A great
variety of porch and fence designs are possible, including a raised front yard
with a retaining wall at the property line with entry steps to the yard. This
term applies only in the MX-FB zone district. The term "porch," as defined
elsewhere in this IDO does not apply to this building frontage type. See also
Porch.
Stoop
Building frontage where the street-facing fa ade is placed close to the
frontage line with the ground story elevated from the sidewalk, securing
privacy for the windows. This type is suitable for ground floor residential
uses with short setbacks. This type may be interspersed with the storefront
building frontage type. A porch may also cover the stoop.
Storefront
Building frontage where the street-facing fa ade is placed at or close to the
front or street side lot line, with the entrance at sidewalk grade. This type
is conventional for retail frontage. It is commonly equipped with cantilevered
shed roof or awning. The absence of a raised ground floor story precludes
residential use on the ground floor facing the street, although this use is
appropriate behind and above.
Urban Residential
Building frontage where residential units are accessed from street-fronting
doors to a lobby, walled court, or to individual units. May be used in
combination with other building frontage types.
Walled Court
Building frontage that comprises enclosed gardens or terraces at the frontage
line that buffer residential dwellings, restaurants, or other uses from the
sidewalk, while removing the private yard from public encroachment.
Warehouse
Building frontage in which up to half of the required windows or doors may be
opaque. A warehouse frontage may not have loading docks fronting a street.
Building Height
See Measurement Definitions.
Building Height Bonus
A building height bonus provides an additional 12 feet of building height
unless specified otherwise in this IDO, in exchange for a certain type of
development that has a civic benefit. See also Measurement Definitions for
Building Height. The following bonuses are available as specified in this IDO.
Ground Floor Commercial Bonus
At least 50 percent of the ground floor street-facing fa ade must be uses in
the Commercial Uses category per
Table 4-2-1.
Structured Parking Bonus
The development must include structured, podium, or subterranean parking on the
same premises.
Workforce Housing Bonus
At least 30 percent of the dwelling units in the development must meet the
definition of workforce housing in the City's Workforce Housing Opportunity
regulations, pursuant to Part 14-9-1 of ROA 1994 (Workforce Housing Opportunity
Act).
Building Stepback
See Measurement Definitions.
Building-mounted Sign
See Sign Definitions.
Bulk Land Subdivision
See Subdivision Definitions.
Business
A legal entity operating an enterprise in a space separate from any other
enterprise.
Business Days
For deadlines, a period of days that does not include weekends or holidays
listed in Part 3-1-12 of ROA 1994 (Legal Holidays). See also Calendar Days
Business Hours
The published hours that an establishment is open to the public. See also
Operating Hours.
C
Calendar Days
A period of calendar days that includes business days, weekends, and holidays
listed in Part 3-1-12 of ROA 1994 (Legal Holidays) unless specified otherwise
in this IDO. For deadlines, if the final day falls on a weekend or a holiday,
the period ends on the following business day. Where this IDO refers to a
period of multiple months or a period of one or more years, the final day of
the period would fall on the corresponding date of the month in the future
(i.e., if the period starts on May 18, a 3 month period would end on August 18;
a 1-year period would end on May 18 of the following year.) See also Business
Days.
Campground or Recreational Vehicle Park
A lot developed or used to provide campsites for occupancy by tents and/or
recreational vehicles for temporary sleeping accommodations, typically at
market rates. A campground/recreational vehicle park may include recreational
services, facilities, and activities for use by the public and occupants. See
also Vehicle Definitions for Recreational Vehicle and Vehicle.
Cannabis Definitions
   Cannabis
   As defined in Sections 26-2C-1 to 26-2C-42 NMSA 1978. The IDO regulates
cannabis retail, cannabis cultivation, and cannabis-derived products
manufacturing only. The IDO shall not impede any personal allowances as
established by Sections 26-2C-1 to 26-2C-42 NMSA 1978. For the purposes of this
IDO, hemp is not regulated as cannabis. See also Hemp.
   Cannabis-derived Products
   A product, other than cannabis itself, that contains or is derived from
cannabis, as regulated by Sections 26-2C-1 to 26-2C-42 NMSA 1978. See also
Hemp.
   Cannabis Cultivation
   A facility licensed by the State to sell cannabis under Sections 26-2C-1 to
26-2C-42 NMSA 1978 in which cannabis is grown, harvested, dried, cured, or
trimmed.
   Cannabis-derived Products Manufacturing
   A facility licensed by the State to sell cannabis under Sections 26-2C-1 to
26-2C-42 NMSA 1978 for the processing, including but not limited to extraction,
refinement, isolation, or packaging of a product other than cannabis itself,
which contains or is derived from cannabis, including but not limited to
concentrates, cannabis infusions, edible products, ointments, and tinctures,
but excluding hemp. See also Hemp.
 
   Cannabis Odor Control Plan
   A written document, approved by a professional engineer or industrial
hygienist, explaining plans for reducing cannabis odors associated with
cultivation, manufacturing, or licensed on-site cannabis consumption, which
shall include, at a minimum, contact information, operating hours, a floor
plan, a description and schedule of odor-producing activities, administrative
controls such as employee training and maintenance, and engineering controls
such as carbon filtration.
   Cannabis Retail
   A retail sales establishment licensed by the State to sell cannabis under
Sections 26-2C-1 to 26-2C-42 NMSA 1978. Retail establishments selling cannabis
solely for consumption by users with a medical card issued by the State under
Sections 26-2B-1 to 26-2B-10 NMSA 1978 (the Lynn and Erin Compassionate Use
Act) are considered general retail and are not regulated by this definition.
On-site cannabis consumption licensed by the State is considered an incidental
activity of cannabis retail. See also General Retail and Commercial On-site
Consumption.
   Distillation
   The heating of dried cannabis or cannabis extract for the purposes of
separating one or more cannabinoids.
   Extraction
   The use of any solvent except water to separate one or more cannabinoids
from dried cannabis.
   Hemp
   As defined by 20-10-2-7 NMSA 1978. For the purposes of this IDO, hemp is not
regulated as cannabis. See also Cannabis.
   Oil activation
   The heating of dried cannabis or cannabis extract above 200 degrees
Fahrenheit during the manufacturing of cannabis products.
   On-site Cannabis Consumption
   The activity of smoking, vaporizing, and/or ingesting of cannabis or
cannabis products in a cannabis consumption area licensed by the State that is
in a fully enclosed portion of a building. On-site cannabis consumption is
considered an incidental activity of cannabis retail. See Cannabis Retail.
Canopy
A roof-like decorative feature projecting from the exterior of a building that
may serve as a shelter from the sun, rain, or wind. A tree canopy includes the
area beneath a tree's dripline. See also Sign Definitions for Canopy Sign.
Carport
See Parking Definitions.
Car Sharing Program
A self-service membership-based program that allows members to use a shared
motor vehicle owned by that program on a short-term basis. Companies or
programs that make motor vehicles available for rent where users enter into a
separate written agreement each time they rent the vehicle are not considered
car sharing programs.
Car Wash
A building, or portion of a building, containing facilities for the primary
purpose of washing automobiles using production line methods with a chain
conveyor, blower, steam cleaning device, or other mechanical devices or
providing space, water, equipment, or soap for the complete or partial hand-
washing of such automobiles, whether by operator or by customer.
Catering Service
An establishment whose primary business is to prepare food on-site, then to
transport and serve the food off-site. No retail sale of food or beverages for
consumption on the premises is allowed.
Center and Corridor Definitions
   Activity Center (AC)
   An area designated as an Activity Center in the ABC Comp Plan, as amended.
   Center
   An area designated as a Center in the ABC Comp Plan, as amended, excluding
Old Town. For the purposes of this IDO if any portion of a lot is within a
Center, Center regulations apply to the entire lot.
   Corridor
   A street and adjoining land designated in the ABC Comp Plan, as amended, as
one of 5 Corridor types designated based on travel modes and development
intensity, excluding Commuter Corridors. See also Measurement Definitions for
Corridor Area.
   Downtown Center (DT)
   The area designated as the Downtown Center in the ABC Comp Plan, as amended.
   Employment Center (EC)
   An area designated as an Employment Center in the ABC Comp Plan, as amended.
   Main Street (MS) Corridor
   A Corridor designation from the ABC Comp Plan. See also Measurement
Definitions for Corridor Area.
   Major Transit (MT) Corridor
   A Corridor designation from the ABC Comp Plan. See also Measurement
Definitions for Corridor Area.
   Premium Transit (PT) Corridor
   A Corridor designation from the ABC Comp Plan. See also Measurement
Definitions for Corridor Area.
   Urban Center (UC)
   An area designated as an Urban Center in the ABC Comp Plan, as amended.
Certificate of Appropriateness
See Historic Protection Overlay (HPO) Zone Definitions.
Characteristic Building
A building in the Nob Hill/Highland - CPO-8 that exemplifies historic
commercial architecture as identified on the map in Section
14-16-3-4(I).
Chief Building Official
A City employee in the City Planning Department responsible for enforcing
Articles 14-1 and 14-3 of ROA 1994 (Uniform Administrative Code and Technical
Codes and Uniform Housing Code) and managing the operations of the Building
Safety Division of the City Planning Department, including issuing building and
demolition permits, performing building inspections, and coordinating with
other divisions and departments to help maintain a safe and habitable built
environment.
Chile Ristra
A string or cord on which natural, unadorned chile peppers are threaded or tied
and hung for display.
Circus
A travelling enterprise that features feats of physical skill and daring, wild
animal acts, and performances by clowns.
City
Capitalized, this refers to the City of Albuquerque, New Mexico local
government, pursuant to the City Charter. Uncapitalized, this refers to the
geographic area defined by the City of Albuquerque municipal boundary.
City Archaeologist
A City employee, or person contracted by the City, who reviews sites for
archaeological significance, as described in Section
14-16-6-5(A) (Archaeological Certificate).
City Council
The governing body of the City and the land use and zoning authority empowered
by the State through home rule. The City Council makes discretionary, policy,
and regulatory decisions for City-owned property and private property within
the city's municipal boundaries.
City Engineer
A City employee who is a professional engineer registered by the State of New
Mexico and designated as the City Engineer, including his/her designee, who is
also a professional engineer registered by the State of New Mexico.
Civic or Environmental Benefit
A tangible or measurable benefit resulting from or provided in association with
a development project, either onsite or offsite, that serves the surrounding
community or environment, including but not limited to, improved public
transportation facilities; community facilities, services, and amenities;
affordable housing; open space or sensitive land preservation and/or
restoration; support for community cultural programs; or environmental
monitoring stations.
Clean Room
See Manufacturing Definitions.
Clear Sight Triangle
An area of unobstructed vision at street intersections at least 3 feet and no
more than 8 feet above the gutter line and within a triangular area at the
street corner, driveway, or drive aisle, as regulated by the DPM.
Club
An organization, including but not limited to a lodge, catering exclusively to
members and their guests for social, intellectual, recreational, or athletic
purposes that are not conducted for profit.
Club or Event Facility
A publicly or privately owned building devoted to the assembly of people for
social, professional, or recreational activities such as meetings, weddings, or
conferences. See also Community Center and Residential Community Amenity.
Cluster Development
See Dwelling Definitions.
Cluster Group
A grouping of low-density residential units located within a cluster
development where the outer boundary is defined by the rear lot lines of the
lots within the group. Each cluster group is distinct and separate from another
cluster group. See Dwelling Definitions for Cluster Development.
Collector
See Street Definitions.
Collocation
Where used for Wireless Telecommunications Facilities (WTFs), see Wireless
Telecommunications Facility Definitions.
Color Rendering Index (CRI)
A measurement on a scale of 0 to 100 to describe the ability of a light source
to render an object's colors as if it were being exposed to natural daylight. A
score close to 100 indicates that an anthropogenic light source is a close
match for natural light.
Commercial Services
Any activity involving the provision of services carried out for profit,
generally for a business customer and not an individual buyer, including but
not limited to upholstering, welding, laundry, printing, or publishing, that is
not listed separately as a distinct use in
Table 4-2-1.
Common Open Space
See Open Space Definitions.
Community Center
A public building or facility operated for meeting, social, cultural,
educational, or recreational purposes, including but not limited to
multigenerational and senior centers. See also Health Club/Gym and Residential
Community Amenity.
Community Garden
A private or public facility for cultivation of fruits, flowers, vegetables, or
ornamental plants by more than one person or family as a primary use of land.
Community Residential Facility
A facility that is designed to provide a residence and services for persons who
need personal assistance, personal services, personal care, and/or protective
care and who meet the definition of a handicapped person are protected against
housing discrimination under the federal Fair Housing Act Amendments of 1998
(or as amended) and court decisions interpreting that Act. This use does not
include 24-hour skilled nursing care, which is regulated as either hospital or
nursing home for the purposes of this IDO. This use does not include facilities
for persons currently using or addicted to alcohol or controlled substances who
are not in a recognized recovery program, facilites for persons or individuals
in the criminal justice system, or residential facilites to divert persons from
the criminal justice system, which are all regulated as group homes for the
purposes of this IDO. See also Family, Family Care Facility, Group Home, and
Nursing Home.
   Community Residential Facility is divided into 2 categories based on the
number of individuals residing in the facility (not the size of the structure).
   1.   Community Residential Facility, Small: A facility housing between 6 and
8 individuals receiving services, plus those providing services.
   2.   Community Residential Facility, Large: A facility housing between 9 and
18 individuals receiving services, plus those providing services.
Concealed Wireless Telecommunications Facility (WTF)
See Wireless Telecommunications Facility Definitions.
Conditional Use
See Use Definitions.
Construction
Where used associated with a Historic Protection Overlay Zone, see Historic
Protection Overlay (HPO) Zone Definitions.
Construction Contractor Facility and Yard
A building and any related outdoor areas used to store and maintain
construction equipment and materials, including but not limited to plumbing,
electrical, carpentry, roofing, landscaping, and facilities customarily
required in the building trade by a construction contractor. See also Building
and Home Improvement Materials Store.
Construction Staging Area, Trailer, or Office
A temporary building or structure used as a construction office or outdoor
storage area for equipment and materials for a project during its construction
and located on the same site or on a nearby site.
Convertible Parking Structure
See Parking Definitions.
Corner Lot
See Lot Definitions.
Correctional Facility
A facility to house persons awaiting trial or persons serving a sentence after
being found guilty of committing a crime. This use includes a prison, jail, and
adult or juvenile detention center.
Correlated Color Temperature (CCT)
The color appearance of light emitted by a lamp. The CCT rating for a lamp is a
measure of the "warmth" or "coolness" of its appearance and is measured in
Kelvin (K). Lower CCT (2200K) appears very warm or amber. Medium CCT (2700K -
3000K) appears "warm white." High CCT (4000K +) appears "cool white" or "blue."
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/b37713d5e40fc82694833f290401791f80be26ac/
IMAGES/0-0-0-10560.png]
Corridor
See Center and Corridor Definitions and Measurement Definitions for Corridor
Area.
Cottage Development
See Dwelling Definitions.
County
Bernalillo County, New Mexico, unless the context clearly indicates that
another county is intended.
Courtyard Wall
See Wall Definitions.
Crematorium
An establishment that burns dead bodies of humans and/or animals.
Critical Infrastructure
The physical or cyber assets that are so vital to the City that their
incapacity or destruction would have a debilitating impact on physical or
economic security or public health or safety. For the purposes of this IDO,
critical infrastructure includes electric, water, and gas services.
Cul-de-sac
A short street intersecting another street at one end and terminating at the
other end, normally with a vehicular turnaround.
Cumulative Impacts
The environmental and community health impacts that result from the incremental
effects of industrial and certain commercial developments when considered in
conjunction with other past and present development.
Curb Cut
Any break in a curb that facilitates access to or from a street, alley,
driveway, or drive aisle.
Curfew
See Outdoor Lighting Curfew.
D
Daycare
See Adult or Child Day Care Facility and Family Home Day Care.
Days
See Business Days and Calendar Days.
Demolition
Where used associated with a Historic Protection Overlay Zone, see Historic
Protection Overlay (HPO) Zone Definitions.
Demolition Permit
Where used associated with a Historic Protection Overlay Zone, see Historic
Protection Overlay (HPO) Zone Definitions.
Developer
Any individual, corporation, company, firm, partnership, joint venture, or
other entity responsible for land platting and/or construction or placement of
any structures or infrastructure within the boundaries of the city. If the
property owner has engaged a representative to act as his/her agent, the agent
must possess a legally binding agreement with the property owner in order to
act in the property owner's behalf with regard to the development of the
project.
Development Definitions
   Development
   Any activity that alters the ground or lot lines on a property. Development
may include subdivision of land; construction of buildings, structures, or
streets; installation of landscaping, infrastructure, utilities, or site
features; and/or activities to prepare land for such construction or
installation, such as grading. For the purposes of the IDO, this term includes
new development and redevelopment on existing lots.
   Industrial Development
   Properties with uses in the Industrial Uses category in
Table 4-2-1 unless specified otherwise in this IDO, including but not limited
to provisions related to Edge Buffer Landscaping.
   Infill Development
   Development or redevelopment on a property within the 1960 City limits or,
outside that boundary, development or redevelopment on no more than 20 acres of
land, that has a public water main and a public sewer main fronting the
property within the City right-of-way, and where at least 75 percent of the
adjacent lots are developed and contain existing primary buildings.
   Low-density Residential Development
   Properties with residential development of any allowable land use in the
Household Living category in
Table 4-2-1 other than multi-family dwellings. Properties with small community
residential facilities are also considered low-density residential development.
Properties that include other uses accessory to residential primary uses are
still considered low-density residential development for the purposes of this
IDO. See also Dwelling Definitions for Dwelling, Cluster Development; Dwelling,
Cottage Development; Dwelling, Live-work; Dwelling, Single-family Detached;
Dwelling, Townhouse; and Dwelling, Two-family Detached (Duplex); Manufactured
Home, and Other Uses Accessory to Residential Primary Uses.
   Mixed-use Development
   Properties with residential development and non-residential development on a
single lot or premises. For the purposes of this IDO, mixed-use development can
take place in the same building (i.e., vertical mixed-use) or separate
buildings on the same lot or premises (i.e., horizontal mixed-use).
   Multi-family Residential Development
   Residential development of multi-family dwellings or uses from the Group
Living category (except small community residential facilities) in zone
districts as allowed per
Table 4-2-1. Properties that include both multi-family dwellings and low-
density residential development are considered multi-family residential
development for the purposes of this IDO. Properties with other uses accessory
to residential primary uses allowed per
Table 4-2-1 are still considered multi-family residential development for the
purposes of this IDO. See also Other Uses Accessory to Residential Primary
Uses.
   Non-residential Development
   Development of allowable land uses on a property that includes no
residential development.
   Residential Development
   Development of any allowable land use from the Residential category in
Table 4-2-1 (i.e., any allowable combination of Household Living uses and Group
Living uses) that occurs on properties with no land use from another category,
with the following exceptions:
      1.   Property with both Household Living uses and parks and open space
are still considered residential development for the purposes of this IDO.
      2.   Properties that include other uses accessory to residential primary
uses allowed per
Table 4-2-1 are still considered residential development for the purposes of
this IDO.
      3.   A property that has an approved non-residential Temporary Use but
that otherwise meets this definition is still considered residential
development for the purposes of this IDO. See also Development Definitions for
Low-density Residential Development, Mixed-use Development, and Non-residential
Development and Other Uses Accessory to Residential Primary Uses.
   Townhouse Development
   Development with any number of townhouse dwellings pursuant to
Table 4-2-1. For the purposes of this IDO, townhouse development is considered
low-density residential development, whether the townhouses are platted on
separate lots or not. See also Dwelling Definitions for Dwelling, Townhouse and
Dwelling Unit.
Development Hearing Officer (DHO)
A person or firm on contract with the City who makes decisions about
subdivisions, vacations, and waivers based on zoning standards in the IDO and
technical standards in the DPM. The DHO replaced the Development Review Board
with the effective date of the 2021 IDO Annual Update.
Development Process Manual (DPM)
A compilation of City requirements related to design criteria, technical and
engineering standards, and procedures for the processing of development
proposals within the City's jurisdiction, particularly relating to public
rights-of-way.
Development Review Board (DRB)
A board made up of City and Agency staff that was replaced by the Development
Hearing Officer with the effective date of the 2021 IDO Annual Update. For the
purposes of this IDO, major amendments of an approved Site Plan - DRB may be
reviewed and decided pursuant to Subsection
14-16-6-4(Y)(2)(c)3.
Deviation
An exception to IDO standards that can be granted by the relevant decision-
making body within thresholds established by
Table 6-4-1 or based on criteria for a Waiver for standards in Sections
14-16-5-3 (Access and Connectivity),
14-16-5-4 (Subdivision of Land), or
14-16-5-5 (Parking and Loading) pursuant to Subsection
14-16-6-6(P) (Waiver - DHO) or for standards related to wireless
telecommunications facilities pursuant to Subsection
14-16-6-6(Q) (Waiver - Wireless Telecommunications Facility). See also Waiver.
Distance Separation
See Measurement Definitions for Separation of Uses.
Dispatch Center
A facility from which vehicles for couriers, deliveries, security, locksmiths,
taxis, senior services, meals-on-wheels, or similar services are dispatched.
Accessory uses may include, but are not limited to, administrative offices and
vehicle washing facilities.
Door
See Transparent Window or Door.
Dormitory
A residence hall providing rooms for individuals or groups, with common spaces
for living and cooking. Individual bedrooms may have a dedicated bathroom or
shared bathrooms. Dormitories are often established with a university or
college, vocational school, or sorority or fraternity. See also Club or Event
Facility, University or College, and Vocational School.
Downtown Center
See Center and Corridor Definitions.
Drainage Facility
The system of structures for collecting, conveying, and storing surface and
stormwater runoff. Drainage facilities are for surface and stormwater runoff
conveyance and containment. These include but are not limited to streams,
pipelines, channels, ditches, arroyos, acequias, wetlands, infiltration
facilities, retention/detention facilities, erosion/sedimentation control
facilities, and other drainage structures and appurtenances, both natural and
manmade. On-site drainage ponding areas that manage stormwater generated by
uses on the lot are not considered drainage facilities. See also Acequia, Major
Arroyo, and Major Utility.
Drainage Plan
See definition in the DPM.
Drainage Report
See definition in the DPM.
Drive Aisle
An accessway with a stabilized surface allowing vehicular access either to
individual buildings or to parking space(s) within parking lots in multi-
family, mixed-use, and non-residential development.
Drive Pad
See definition in DPM.
Drive-in Theater
An establishment including a large outdoor movie screen, a projection booth,
and a large parking area for automobiles from which films projected outdoors
may be seen. Accessory uses may include a concession stand.
Drive-through or Drive-up Facility
Facilities associated with a primary use, including but not limited to banks,
financial institutions, restaurants, dry cleaners, and drug stores, but not
including car washes or light vehicle fueling, to offer goods and services
directly to customers waiting in motor vehicles. See also Car Wash and Vehicle
Definitions for Light Vehicle Fueling.
Driveway
An unobstructed area for parking that is located between the sidewalk (or
drivepad if no sidewalk is required) and the garage or other allowed off-street
parking area in low-density residential development and that is paved per DPM
standards for pavement or alternative pavement. See the DPM for definition of
drive pad and for paving standards. See also Parking Definitions for Garage.
Dwelling Definitions
Dwelling, Cluster Development
A development type that concentrates single-family or two-family detached
dwellings on smaller lots than would otherwise be allowed in the zone district
in return for the preservation of common open space within the same site, on a
separate lot, or in an easement. A cluster development does not increase the
overall density of a development but rather allows dwellings to be clustered on
smaller lots. The intent of cluster development is to create an innovative
development pattern that is sensitive to natural features and topography and
creates more area for open space, recreation, and social interaction. See also
Open Space, Common.
Dwelling, Cottage Development
A shared-interest low-density residential community in which multiple small
individual dwellings are served by shared private ways or infrastructure, and
in which the development intensity is measured by the amount of gross floor
area in residential dwelling units rather than the number of residential
dwelling units. A cottage development may include a combination of dwelling
units with or without kitchens and with shared facilities, including but not
limited to open space, parking lots or carports, gardens, recreation areas,
community building(s) with facilities such as a kitchen and dining area,
meeting and activity spaces, and a maximum of 1 guest room.
Dwelling, Live-work
A residential dwelling unit that includes a dedicated work space accessible
from the living area, reserved for and regularly used by one or more residents
of the dwelling unit, and in which the type or size of the work performed is
larger or more extensive than that allowed as a home occupation. See also Home
Occupation.
Dwelling, Mobile Home
A transportable structure that does not meet the construction safety standards
of the federal Manufactured Housing Act of 1974. For the purposes of this IDO,
this definition includes transportable structures built prior to June 15, 1976,
when the Act went into effect.
Dwelling, Multi-family
A building, multiple buildings, or a portion of a building located on a single
lot, containing 3 or more dwelling units, each of which is designed for or
occupied by one family only, with separate housekeeping and cooking facilities
for each, and that does not meet the definition of a townhouse dwelling. Within
mixed-use development, a building containing 2 or more dwelling units is
considered multi-family. See also Development Definitions for Multi-family.
Dwelling, Single-family Detached
A residential building used for occupancy by 1 household that is not attached
to any other dwelling unit through shared side or rear walls, floors or
ceilings, or corner points. See also Manufactured Home and Development
Definitions for Low-density Residential.
Dwelling, Temporary
A portable dwelling, not attached to a permanent foundation, for use during
temporary events or construction periods. For the purposes of this IDO, tents
are not considered temporary dwellings. See also Campground or Recreational
Vehicle Park.
Dwelling, Townhouse
A building or multiple buildings with 3 or more dwelling units divided from
each other by vertical common walls, each having a separate entrance leading
directly to the outdoors at ground level. For the purposes of this IDO, this
use is considered a type of low-density residential development, whether the
townhouses are platted on separate lots or not. See also Development
Definitions for Low-density Residential.
Dwelling, Two-family Detached (Duplex)
A residential building containing 2 dwelling units, each of which is designed
for or occupied by 1 family only, with kitchens for each. Each unit in a two-
family dwelling is completely separated from the other by an unpierced wall
dividing the 2 units side-to-side or back-to-front or by an unpierced ceiling
and floor extending from exterior wall to exterior wall (over-under), except
for a stairwell exterior to 1 of the dwelling units. See also Development
Definitions for Low-density Residential.
Dwelling Unit
Unless specified otherwise in this IDO, one or more connected rooms and a
kitchen designed for and occupied by no more than one family for living and
sleeping purposes, permanently installed on a permanent foundation and meeting
the requirements of Articles 14-1 and 14-3 of ROA 1994 (Uniform Administrative
Code and Technical Codes and Uniform Housing Code), as of the date of the
unit's construction. See also Family and Kitchen.
Dwelling Unit, Accessory
A dwelling unit that is accessory to a primary single-family or two-family
detached dwelling or a non-residential primary use. A detached accessory
dwelling unit is also considered an accessory building. See also Dwelling
Definitions for Dwelling, Live/work; Dwelling, Single-family Detached; and
Dwelling, Two-family Detached (Duplex); Kitchen; and Measurement Definitions
for Accessory Dwelling Unit.
E
Easement
A legal right to use another's land for a specific, limited purpose, typically
within private ways. The purpose may include, but is not limited to, installing
and maintaining stormwater drainage, water and sanitary sewer lines, fire
hydrants, landscaping, and other infrastructure improvements. Easements may
also be granted for open space, view protection, or other specific uses. See
also Private Way.
Electric Utility
A facility used or designed to provide electricity services to the city or part
of the city that is regulated as a public utility by the New Mexico Public
Regulation Commission, but not including an Energy Storage System, which is
regulated as a separate use for the purposes of this IDO. Back-up generators
and back-up battery storage are incidental to this use. See also Energy Storage
System, Geothermal Energy Generation, Major Utility, Solar Energy Generation,
Utility-scale Electric Facility, and Wind Energy Generation.
Electric Vehicle Charging Station
See Parking Definitions.
Electromagnetic Interference
Disturbance caused by intruding signals or electrical current.
Electronic Sign
See Sign Definitions.
Employment Center
See Center and Corridor Definitions.
Energy Storage System (ESS)
A utility-scale electric facility that stores energy from the electrical grid
and then discharges it at a later time to provide power when needed. An ESS may
include electrochemical batteries and/or solid-state batteries (Battery Energy
Storage System), mechanical energy storage, and/or thermal energy storage. For
the purposes of this IDO, this use does not include charging equipment for
electric vehicles (EVs), batteries used in consumer products, or residential
energy storage systems. See also Electric Utility and Utility-scale Electric
Facility.
Entrance, Pedestrian
See Primary Pedestrian Entrance.
Environmental Planning Commission (EPC)
A 9-member commission appointed by the Mayor, as described in Section
14-16-6-2(E) (Environmental Planning Commission), that makes discretionary and
policy decisions and recommendations about land use in the city.
Equestrian Facility
A facility where horses, mules, or ponies are hired, bred, shown, or boarded
including accessory stables or exercise areas. Equestrian facilities are often
for the display of equestrian skills and the hosting of events, including but
not limited to show jumping, dressage, and similar events of other equestrian
disciplines.
Escarpment
See Sensitive Lands Definitions. See also Open Space Definitions for Major
Public Open Space.
Establishment
A place of business, industry, institutional, or philanthropic activity, with
its furnishings and staff. See also Business.
EV Capable
See Parking Definitions.
Event Facility
See Club or Event Facility.
Existing Vertical Structure
See Wireless Telecommunications Facility Definitions.
Extraordinary Facility
See Open Space Definitions.
Exterior Appearance
The visual character of all outside surfaces of a structure, including the kind
and texture of the signs, light fixtures, steps, or appurtenant elements.
F
Fa ade Definitions
   Front Fa ade
   The street-facing fa ade that is parallel to and closest to the front lot
line and that typically contains the front door or primary pedestrian entrance.
See also Measurement Definitions for Fa ade and Yard Definitions for Front
Yard.
   Side Fa ade
   Any fa ade that faces and is within 30 feet of a side lot line that abuts
another lot. (A fa ade that faces a side lot line that abuts a street is
considered a street-facing fa ade for the purposes of this IDO.) A building may
have more than one side facade. See also Measurement Definitions for Fa ade and
Lot Definitions for Side Lot Line.
   Street-facing Fa ade
   Any fa ade that faces and is visible from an abutting street, not including
alleys, unless specified otherwise in this IDO. A building may have more than
one street-facing fa ade. The phrase "fa ade facing a" that refers to a
specific street or to alleys is included in this definition as well. See also
Measurement Definitions for Fa ade.
Face-mounted Wireless Telecommunications Facility (WTF)
See Wireless Telecommunications Facility Definitions.
Facility Plan
Rank 2 plan that is specialized to cover only one type of utility or public
facility, such as electric facilities or Major Public Open Space, and specifies
important development standards, general site locations, and multi-year
programs for facility capital improvements. Such plans address the entire
metropolitan area or city, or at least a major part of it.
Fair, Festival, or Theatrical Performance
An organized event or set of events, including but not limited to musical
performances and plays, usually happening in one place for a designated period
of time with its own social activities, food, or ceremonies and accessory sales
of retail goods.
Fairgrounds
An area developed for the purpose of holding fairs, circuses, or exhibitions.
Family
Any of the following individuals or groups:
   1.   An individual.
   2.   Two (2) or more persons related by blood, marriage, legal guardianship,
or adoption, plus household staff.
   3.   Any group of not more than 5 unrelated persons living together in a
dwelling that do not meet the definition of group home. See also Group Home.
   4.   Any group of 5 persons or more that has a right to live together
pursuant to the federal Fair Housing Act Amendments of 1988 (or as amended), as
interpreted by the courts.
Family Care Facility
An occupied dwelling used for 24-hour care of 1 or 2 residents who are not
relatives of the resident family and not under court ordered guardianship of a
member of the resident family. This type of facility must be licensed as a
Family Care Home by the State and provide services as outlined for Adult
Residential Shelter Care or Board and Care Homes in New Mexico Health and
Environment Department regulations.
Family Home Day Care
An occupied dwelling in which a person provides, for remuneration, care for at
least 4 but not more than 12 children on a regular basis for less than 24 hours
per day. The resident provider's children who are age 6 or more shall not be
counted for this definition.
Farmers' Market
An occasional or periodic market held in a designated area where groups of
individual sellers offer for sale to the public items such as fresh produce,
seasonal fruits, fresh flowers, arts and crafts items, and food and beverages
dispensed from booths located on-site. See also Agricultural Sales Stand, Open
Air Market, and Seasonal Outdoor Sales.
Festoon Lighting
String lighting with individual bulbs suspended between 2 or more points and
capable of providing usable illuminance, subject to curfew. For the purposes of
this IDO, festoon lighting is not considered seasonal lighting. See also
Outdoor Lighting Curfew and Seasonal Lighting.
Film Production
For the purposes of this IDO, a temporary use that involves filming a movie,
television show, commercial, or other type of televised media as the primary
use of the property. Film production includes temporary structures, such as
sets, lighting rigs, sound stages, and the parking of large vehicles.
Finished Grade
   1.   The elevation of the approved ground level at all points along a wall
or fence.
   2.   The specified elevation on the grading plan approved by the City in
conjunction with an approved Subdivision or Site Plan. In the absence of such
approved plans, natural grade applies. See also Natural Grade and Measurement
Definitions for Grade.
Fire Station
A public facility where fire engines and other equipment are housed and from
which calls for emergency fire responses are handled.
Flood Definitions
The City's flood protection regulations are included in Article 14-5 of ROA
1994 (Flood Hazard and Drainage Control). If there is a conflict between these
general definitions and the definitions in Article 14-5, the definitions in
Article 14-5 shall prevail.
   Flood Fringe
   The area between the floodway and the boundary of the base flood (i.e., 100-
year flood).
   Floodplain
   Any land area that is subject to a one percent or greater change of flooding
in any given year (i.e., a base flood), as defined by the Federal Emergency
Management Agency and shown on National Flood Insurance Program maps, from any
source. The floodplain includes both the floodway and flood fringe. See also
Sensitive Lands Definitions.
   Floodway
   The channel of a river, arroyo, or other watercourse and the adjacent land
areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood.
   Special Flood Hazard Area
   The land area covered by the floodwaters of the base flood, as defined by
the Federal Emergency Management Agency and shown on National Flood Insurance
Program maps. See also Sensitive Lands Definitions.
Foot Candle
A unit of illumination measurement equal to 1 lumen per square foot (lm/s.f.)
of surface area.
 
Forecourt
See Building Frontage Types.
Framework Plan
A plan that accompanies applications for the creation of a PC zone district
that describes, in general terms and without engineering level detail, proposed
land uses (based on definitions in this IDO); proposed maximum and minimum
intensities of development for each development phase or area; and the
location, size, alignment, and connectivity of proposed automobile, bicycle,
and pedestrian circulation systems; open space and/or wildlife habitat systems;
and storm drainage systems and facilities.
Freestanding Sign
See Sign Definitions.
Freestanding Wireless Telecommunications Facility (WTF)
See Wireless Telecommunications Facility Definitions.
Freight Terminal
A property or building used primarily for the temporary parking of trucks of
common or contract carriers during loading or unloading and for receiving and
dispatch of freight vehicles, including necessary warehouse space for storage
of transitory freight. Incidental activities include, but are not limited to, a
truck wash and loading and unloading from rail spurs.
Front Fa ade
See Fa ade Definitions.
Front Lot Line
See Lot Definitions.
Fully Shielded Luminaire
Luminaires constructed and properly installed so that no light rays are
directly emitted at angles above the horizontal plane as certified by a
photometric test report and all light is effectively directed downward.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/b37713d5e40fc82694833f290401791f80be26ac/
IMAGES/0-0-0-10562.jpg]
 
G
Game Arcade
Any commercial building in which there are more than 3 amusement game machines
on the premises that are available to the public. An arcade may contain
commercial recreational machines or games otherwise allowed in the State of New
Mexico (beyond amusement game machines).
Garage
See Parking Definitions.
Garage or Yard Sale
The occasional sale of household goods from a residential premises to the
public, but not including the sale of new or used commercial goods not
previously used as household goods by the individuals conducting the sale or
goods purchased by the household specifically for resale.
Garden
An area of land managed and maintained as an accessory use of land to cultivate
fruits, flowers, vegetables, or ornamental plants for personal or group use,
consumption, or donation.
General Agriculture
Any use of land for the purposes of crops, grazing animals, orchards, trees or
forest lands, and any other use pertaining to farming or agricultural research,
including the raising of horses, cattle, sheep, goats, and other farm animals
for use or sale, and including all the types of structures normally associated
with these uses, such as storage bins, barns, sheds, tool houses, greenhouses,
garages, and any other use or facility ancillary to farming or open land. See
also Animal Keeping, Building and Home Improvement Materials Store, Community
Garden, and Nursery.
General Retail
See Retail Definitions.
Geothermal Energy Generation
The use of land area for equipment for the conversion of natural geothermal
energy into energy. Back-up generators and battery storage are incidental to
this use. See also Electric Utility, Major Utility, Solar Energy Generation,
and Wind Energy Generation.
Glare
The sensation produced by luminance within the visual field that is
sufficiently greater than the luminance to which the eyes are adapted to,
causing annoyance, discomfort, or loss of visual performance.
Golf Course
A tract of land laid out with a course for playing the game of golf, including
any accessory clubhouse, driving range, office, restaurant, concession stand,
picnic tables, pro shop, maintenance building, shelters, restroom facility, or
similar accessory use or structure. The facility may also include public trails
private trails, and golf cart paths.
Grade
See Measurement Definitions. See also Finished Grade and Natural Grade.
Grocery Store
An establishment that sells a wide variety of goods organized in departments,
including but not limited to fresh produce, meat and dairy, canned and packaged
food items, small household goods, and similar items, with more than 50 percent
of the gross floor area devoted to the sale of food products for home
preparation and consumption. See also General Retail.
Gross Floor Area
See Measurement Definitions.
Ground Floor Height
See Measurement Definitions.
Ground Floor Commercial Bonus
See Building Height Bonus Definitions.
Group Home
A facility that is designed to provide a residence and services for persons who
need personal assistance, personal services, personal care, and/or protective
care but do not meet the definition of a handicapped person or another person
protected against housing discrimination under the federal Fair Housing Act
Amendments of 1988 (as amended) and court decisions interpreting that Act. This
use does not include 24-hour skilled nursing care, which is regulated as either
hospital or nursing home for the purposes of this IDO. This use includes other
services as incidental activites if they comply with all local and state
licensing requirements, including any required license by the New Mexico
Department of Health. This use includes facilities for persons in the criminal
justice system or residential facilities to divert persons from the criminal
justice system. This use includes facilites for persons currently using or
addicted to alcohol or controlled substances who are not in a recognized
recovery program.
Group Home is divided into 3 categories based on the number of individuals
residing in the facility (not the size of the structure).
   1.   Group Home, Small: A facility housing no more than 8 unrelated
individuals receiving services, plus those providing services.
   2.   Group Home, Medium: A facility housing between 9 and 18 unrelated
individuals receiving services, plus those providing services.
   3.   Group Home, Large: A facility housing 19 or more unrelated individuals
receiving services, plus those providing services.
H
Health Club or Gym
A non-medical service establishment intended to maintain or improve the
physical condition of persons that contains exercise and game equipment and
facilities, steam baths and saunas, or similar equipment and facilities.
Heavy Manufacturing
See Manufacturing Definitions.
Heavy Vehicle and Equipment Sales, Rental, Fueling, and Repair
See Vehicle Definitions for Heavy Vehicle and Equipment Sales, Rental, Fueling,
and Repair.
Height
See Measurement Definitions for Building Height, Structure Height, and Sign
Height.
Helipad
An area of land or structural surface created for and used for the landing and
takeoff of helicopters or similar vertical lift aircraft, including but not
limited to medical and law-enforcement helipads.
Historic Sign
See Sign Definitions.
Historic Protection Overlay (HPO) Zone Definitions
For purposes of the HPO zone, the following definitions shall apply unless the
context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   Alteration
   Any construction, modification, addition, moving, or destruction which would
affect the exterior appearance of a structure that has been designated a
landmark or that is located in an HPO zone or that has been formally identified
as worthy of preservation or for which the City has received a preservation fa
ade easement.
   Certificate of Appropriateness
   Written authorization required for alteration, demolition, or new
construction pursuant to Subsections
14-16-6-5(B) (Historic Certificate of Appropriateness - Minor) or
14-16-6-6(D) (Historic Certificate of Appropriateness - Major).
   Exterior Appearance
   See Exterior Appearance.
   Historic Sign
   See Sign Definitions for Historic Sign.
   Landmark
   Any real property designated as a landmark structure or site pursuant to
Subsection
14-16-6-7(C) (Adoption or Amendment of Historic Designation).
   Landmarks Commission
   The City Landmarks Commission as created by Section
14-16-6-2(H) (Landmarks Commission) to review and recommend decisions about
potential historic zones or landmarks.
   Structure
   See Structure.
Home Occupation
An activity that is carried on for commercial or philanthropic purposes on the
same lot as a dwelling unit where the operator of the home occupation resides
and that is clearly secondary to that dwelling. See also Dwelling, Live-work.
Hospital
A facility designed to provide medical and health-related care for individuals.
Such facilities may provide diagnosis and treatment, both surgical and
nonsurgical, for patients who have any of a variety of medical conditions
through an organized medical staff and permanent facilities that include
inpatient beds, medical services, and continuous skilled nursing care. This use
includes any facility licensed by the State as a general, limited, or special
hospital.
Hotel or Motel
An establishment that provides guest rooms for temporary sleeping
accommodations within completely enclosed portions of a building for rental at
market rates. This use does not include Bed and Breakfast establishments, which
are regulated separately for the purposes of this IDO.
I
Indian Nations, Tribes, or Pueblos
For the purposes of this IDO, the designated chief executives (or their
designees) of a federally recognized Indian Nation, Tribe, or Pueblo located
wholly or partially in New Mexico. The Tribal Liaison with the City's Office of
Native American Affairs shall maintain an updated list of the names and contact
information.
Illuminance
A measurement for the amount of light falling onto a surface, commonly measured
in the horizontal and/or vertical planes in foot candles (Fc) or lux.
Illuminated Sign
See Sign Definitions.
Independent Living Facility
Multi-family residential development accessory to either an assisted living
facility or nursing home as part of a continuing care community that allows
residents to transfer to higher levels of care as needed. Independent living
units may be designed and constructed as part of a central building containing
multi-family dwelling units along with other levels of care or as attached or
detached units similar to low-density residential development. Such facilities
may include a central or private kitchen, dining, recreational, and other
residential accessory uses. See also Assisted Living Facility; Development,
Multi-family; Nursing Home; and Other Use Accessory to Residential Primary Use.
Industrial Development
See Development Definitions.
Infill Development
See Development Definitions.
Infrastructure
Streets, sidewalks, public or private utility facilities, sanitary sewer and
water system facilities, drainage and flood control facilities, street
lighting, and other improvements used by the public or used in common by owners
of lots within a subdivision. Includes both private (owned by a non-
governmental entity) and public (owned by a governmental entity) improvements.
Infrastructure Improvements Agreement (IIA)
See Subdivision Definitions.
Infrastructure, Major Public
See Major Public Infrastructure.
Interstate Highway
See Street Definitions.
Irrigation Facility
See Sensitive Lands Definitions. See also Acequia.
J
Joint Sign Premises
See Sign Definitions.
K
Kennel
A premises on which 5 or more dogs or cats or combinations of dogs and cats
over 3 months of age are kept, maintained, or boarded.
Kitchen
An area of a dwelling where there is a sink of adequate size and shape for
washing dishes and food items (as opposed to washing hands) and a cooking
stove, range, or oven. The presence of a sink and a hot plate or microwave does
not constitute a kitchen, unless specified otherwise in this IDO.
L
Land Use Hearing Officer (LUHO)
The individual(s) appointed and designated by the City Council as described in
Section
14-16-6-2(I) (Land Use Hearing Officer) to review and recommend decisions on
appeals to the City Council.
Landmark
See Historic Protection Overlay (HPO) Zone Definitions.
Landmarks Commission
See Historic Protection Overlay (HPO) Zone Definitions.
Landscaping Definitions
   Cool Season Grasses
   Grass types that grow exceptionally well between 65 and 75 degrees,
including but not limited to, Kentucky blue-grass, perennial ryegrass, and tall
fescue. These grasses are durable and require ample watering during high summer
temperatures.
   Landscape Area
   The area, optional or required, that is landscaped with living vegetative
materials, such as trees, grasses, vines, spreading shrubs, or flowers. In
addition, the landscape area may include natural and manufactured materials,
including but not limited to rocks, fountains, reflecting pools, works of art,
screens, walls, fences, benches, and other types of street furniture.
   Landscape Buffer
   A required piece of land in a specific location used to physically separate
or screen one land use or piece of property from another and landscaped with at
least the minimum requirements specified in this IDO.
   Landscaping
   The planting and maintenance of live plants including trees, shrubs, ground
cover, flowers, or other low-growing plants that are native or adaptable to the
climatic conditions of the Albuquerque area. Includes the provision of non-
vegetative materials as ornamental features to make an area more attractive.
See also Landscape Area and Measurement Definitions for Net Lot Area.
   Warm Season Grasses
   Grasses that thrive when temperatures are 75 degrees or higher, including
but not limited to, buffalo grass, blue grama, Indian rice grass, clover,
thyme, and sand dropseed grass. These grasses are native and drought tolerant
and have lower water requirements than cool season grasses.
Large Retail Facility
See Retail Definitions.
Large Stand of Mature Trees
See Sensitive Lands Definitions.
Library
A public facility for the use and loan, but not sale, of literary, musical,
artistic, or reference materials.
Lien
A statutory lien against land for the estimated cost of construction of
required infrastructure or improvements by the applicant, Developer, or
Subdivider, which is recorded and enforced in accordance with Article 3-36 NMSA
1978 or such other method prescribed by law.
Light Fixture
An assembly that holds the lamp (bulb) in a lighting system. It includes the
elements designed to give light output control, such as a reflector (mirror) or
refractor (lens), the ballast, housing, and the attachment parts.
Light Manufacturing
See Manufacturing Definitions.
Light Source
The element of a lighting fixture that is the point of origin of the lumens
emitted by the fixture.
Light Spillover
The shining of light produced by a light fixture beyond the boundaries of the
property on which it is located.
Light Trespass
Light traveling past property lines and illuminating properties without
approval.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/b37713d5e40fc82694833f290401791f80be26ac/
IMAGES/0-0-0-6977.png]
Light Vehicle Fueling Station
See Vehicle Definitions.
Light Vehicle Repair
See Vehicle Definitions.
Light Vehicle Sales and Rental
See Vehicle Definitions.
Lighting Designations
Lighting designations align with the ANSI/IES lighting zone definitions, which
serve as the basis for ANSI/IES lighting standards. For the purposes of this
IDO, the lighting zones are summarized below.
   Natural Dark Zone (NDZ)
   Natural areas where no anthropogenic lighting is allowed at night.
   Light Zone 0 (Lz0)
   Predominantly dark areas with limited built environment. Responsible
lighting techniques offer some environmental protection.
   Light Zone 1 (Lz1)
   Developed areas with quiet and dark character, commonly used for residential
and lower-volume areas.
   Light Zone 2 (Lz2)
   Developed areas for commerce and recreation with moderate volume. Lighting
and minimal signage inform people.
   Light Zone 3 (Lz3)
   Commercial signage and lighting are continuous as they compete to attract
and entertain people.
Liquor Retail
See Retail Definitions.
Live-work
See Dwelling Definitions.
Loading Area
An area where merchandise and/or supplies are delivered and unloaded or where
customers can receive goods for transport off the site.
Local Street
See Street Definitions.
Lot Definitions
   Corner Lot
   A lot located at the intersection of and having frontage on 2 or more
streets.
   Lot
   A tract or parcel of land, exclusive of public right-of-way, that meets any
of the following criteria:
   1.   Has been platted and placed on the Bernalillo County Clerk's record in
accordance with laws and ordinances applicable at the time.
   2.   Is described by metes and bounds held in separate ownership prior to
June 20, 1950 or October 2, 1950, as shown on the records of the Bernalillo
County Assessor.
   3.   Is a portion of one or more platted lots, which portion was placed on
the records of the Bernalillo County Assessor prior to November 16, 1973,
provided that such portion met all requirements of area and dimension of the
zone in which it was located when created.
   4.   Has been placed in the records of the Bernalillo County Assessor
pursuant to the laws of the State of New Mexico related to situations not
covered by the applicable subdivision regulations in effect at that time.
   Lot Line
   A boundary of a deeded lot (i.e., a lot recorded and mapped by the
Bernalillo County Assessor) or platted lot (i.e., a lot recorded by the
Bernalillo County Clerk and mapped by AGIS).
   Front Lot Line
   A legal boundary of a lot that abuts a street. On a corner lot, the side
with the street number address is the front lot line. For the purposes of
determining setback requirements on an interior lot that does not abut a
street, the lot is not considered to have a front lot line. In that case, all
lot lines would be considered side lot lines. For a through lot, the property
owner may designate which of the 2 lot lines is the front lot line. See also
Measurement Definitions for Setback.
   Rear Lot Line
   A legal boundary that is opposite and most distant from the front lot line.
In the case of an L-shaped or other irregularly shaped lot where 2 or more
lines are so located, all are considered rear lines, except those that are
within 50 feet of the front lot line. In the case of a lot that comes to a
point at the rear, the rear lot line (shown in the illustration below as the
horizontal line marked as "A") is established by connecting two points that are
10 feet from the rear point, measured along the side lot lines. See also
Measurement Definitions for Setback.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/b37713d5e40fc82694833f290401791f80be26ac/
IMAGES/0-0-0-6983.png]
   Side Lot Line
   A lot line that is not a front lot line or a rear lot line. This term
includes both interior side lot lines abutting another lot and street side lot
lines for corner lots, where the side lot line abuts a street. See also
Measurement Definitions for Setback.
   Net Lot Area
   See Measurement Definitions.
   Property Line
   A boundary formed by the exterior lot lines of all lots making up a premises
or project site. See also Premises, Project Site, and Subject Property.
   Through Lot
   A lot having frontage on 2 separate parallel or approximately parallel
dedicated public streets.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/b37713d5e40fc82694833f290401791f80be26ac/
IMAGES/0-0-0-6985.png]
Low-density Residential Development
See Development Definitions.
Lumen
A unit of measure to rate the quantity of light provided by a light source.
Luminance
The light source or surface brightness as it is perceived by the human eye,
measured in candela per meter squared (cd/m2).
Luminaire
The complete electrical light unit, including the light source, housing,
optics, and driver.
Lux
A unit used to measure illuminance. One (1) lux is equal to 1 lumen per square
meter (lm/m2).
M
Main Street
See Center and Corridor Definitions and Measurement Definitions for Corridor
Area.
Major Arroyo
An arroyo designated by the Rank 2 Facility Plan for Arroyos as a Major Open
Space Arroyo or Major Open Space Link. See also Sensitive Lands Definitions for
Arroyo.
Major Public Infrastructure
Although ultimately determined on a case-by-case basis, major public
infrastructure generally includes construction or significant redesign of a
street, drainage, or utility facility or similar public infrastructure that is
necessary for the subject property, and often nearby properties, to develop.
Major Public Open Space
See Open Space Definitions.
Major Subdivision
See Subdivision Definitions.
Major Transit
See Center and Corridor Definitions and Measurement Definitions for Corridor
Area.
Major Utility
A facility sized or designed to serve the entire city, or a wide area of the
city, and regulated as a public utility or common carrier by the State or other
relevant jurisdiction or agency, including but not limited to major telephone
facilities, natural gas facilities, water treatment plants, sewage treatment
plants, and similar public services, but not including mass transit or railroad
depots or terminals or any similar traffic generating activity, any facility
that provides wireless telecommunications services to the public, or any use
listed separately in
Table 4-2-1. See also Drainage Facility, Electric Utility, and Major Public
Infrastructure.
Manufactured Home
A structure transportable in one or more sections that is built on a permanent
chassis, is designed for use with or without a permanent foundation when
connected to the required utilities, and meets the construction safety
standards of the federal Manufactured Housing Act of 1974. Similar structures
that do not meet the construction safety standards of that Act are referred to
as mobile homes and are not allowed to be installed in the city. For the
purposes of this IDO, manufactured homes are considered single-family detached
dwellings. See also Dwelling Definitions for Dwelling, Mobile Home and
Dwelling, Single-family Detached.
Manufacturing Definitions
   Artisan Manufacturing
   Small-scale manufacturing and related processes or activities - including
but not limited to application, assembling, compounding, design, fabrication,
growing, making, packaging, processing, sculpting, teaching, treating of crafts
or products, or welding - often by an artist, artisan, or craftsperson working
with ceramic, clay, electronics, metal, paper, plastic, stone, textiles, wood,
or similar materials either by hand or with minimal automation or technology,
including but not limited to 3D printing. This use includes incidental storage,
wholesaling of products manufactured at the facility, and direct sales to
consumers. This use also includes the production of beer, wine, or spirits
associated with an approved Small Brewer's License as governed by Section 60-
6A-26.1 NMSA 1978, an approved Winegrower's License as governed by Section 60-
6A-11 NMSA 1978, or an approved Craft Distiller's License as governed by
Section 60-6A-6.1 NMSA 1978. Annual production shall be limited by State
statute. This use does not include alcohol sales. Alcohol sales associated with
brewing on-site is regulated pursuant to the tap room or tasting room use. See
Tap Room or Tasting Room and Cannabis Definitions for Cannabis-derived Products
Manufacturing and Cannabis Cultivation.
   Clean Room
   A facility to manufacture delicate and fragile components where processes
and components are protected from any outside environmental factors. Clean
rooms include working with chemicals, volatile materials, and sensitive
instruments. Other clean rooms that do not meet this definition are regulated
as incidental activities associated with primary uses in the Industrial and
Commercial use categories in
Table 4-2-1. See also Special Manufacturing.
   Heavy Manufacturing
   The assembly, fabrication, or processing of goods and materials using
processes that ordinarily have greater than average impacts on the environment
or that ordinarily have significant impacts on the use and enjoyment of other
properties in terms of noise, smoke, fumes, odors, glare, or health or safety
hazards. Loading and unloading from rail spurs and wholesaling of products
manufactured at the facility are incidental to this use. This use does not
include any activity that meets the definition of special manufacturing. See
also Clean Room, Special Manufacturing, and Cannabis Definitions for Cannabis-
derived Products Manufacturing and Cannabis Cultivation.
   Light Manufacturing
   The assembly, fabrication, or processing of goods and materials, including
machine shop and growing food or plants in fully enclosed portions of a
building, using processes that ordinarily do not create noise, smoke, fumes,
odors, glare, or health or safety hazards outside of the building or lot where
such assembly, fabrication, or processing takes place, where such processes are
housed primarily within the fully enclosed portions of a building. Loading and
unloading from rail spurs and wholesaling of products manufactured at the
facility are incidental to this use. This use does not include any use that
meets the definition of Heavy Manufacturing or Special Manufacturing. See also
Clean Room and Cannabis Definitions for Cannabis-derived Products Manufacturing
and Cannabis Cultivation
   Special Manufacturing
   An establishment or business that uses hazardous inputs or creates hazardous
by-products, as defined by federal regulation, in the course of manufacturing,
assembly, fabrication, or materials treatment, or that uses manufacturing,
assembly, fabrication, or treatment processes that create potentially hazardous
impacts, including but not limited to explosions or leakage of nuclear or
electromagnetic radiation into the environment or surrounding areas. Loading
and unloading from rail spurs and wholesaling of products manufactured at the
facility are incidental to this use. This use does not include any use that
meets the definition of Clean Room accessory to another use in the Industrial
use category pursuant to
Table 4-2-1.
Mapped area
See Small Area.
Marquee Sign
See Sign Definitions.
Massage Business
Any business offering massage therapy services pursuant to the State Therapy
Practice Act, 61-12C-1 to 61-12C-25 N.M.S.A. 1978. For the purposes of this
IDO, massage businesses are treated as personal and business services use. See
also Personal and Business Services.
Massing
The overall composition of the exterior of the major volumes of a building and
their relationship to each other in a sequence in the overall design of the
building or structure.
Master Development Plan
A plan created by an applicant and approved by the City to achieve a
coordinated private development, such as a business or industrial park, on
larger sites that comprise more than one lot and building. A Master Development
Plan may include standards that implement a cohesive design on the site.
Master Plan
A Rank 3 Plan developed and approved by an implementing City department to
guide the development, maintenance, and operation of individual public
resources or facilities. For the purposes of the State Constitution, the Master
Plan is a duly adopted plan or any of its parts for the development of an area
within the planning and platting jurisdiction of a municipality for the general
purpose of guiding and accomplishing coordinated, adjusted, and harmonious
development. In the case of the City and Bernalillo County, this Master Plan is
the ABC Comp Plan.
Maximum Extent Practicable
No feasible or prudent alternative exists, as determined by the relevant
decision-making body, after the applicant has taken all possible steps to
comply with the standards or regulations and to minimize potential harmful or
adverse impacts. Constraints to compliance that are self-imposed, such as
through a particular platting proposal when other options are feasible, shall
not be considered sufficient justification. Economic considerations may be
taken into account but shall not be the overriding factor.
Measurement Definitions
   Accessory Dwelling Unit
   If a maximum size for accessory dwelling units is specified, a garage or
shed attached to the accessory dwelling unit does not count toward the size.
See also Dwelling Definitions for Dwelling Unit, Accessory.
   Average
   Averages shall be calculated as an arithmetic mean.
   Block Length
   The distance from centerline to centerline of two intersections. In the
instance that a block is bounded by other obstructions, the measurement shall
be from the centerline of the street to the edge of the obstruction. See DPM
for additional explanation. See also Block.
   Building Coverage
   The percentage of a lot that is covered by building footprints. See also
Building.
   Building Height
   The vertical distance above the average finished grade, unless specified
otherwise in this IDO, at each fa ade of the building, considered separately,
to the top of the coping or parapet on a flat roof, whichever is higher; to the
deck line of a mansard roof; or to the average height between the plate and the
ridge of a hip, gable, shed, or gambrel roof. On a stepped or sloped project
site, the maximum height is to be measured above average finished grade of any
distinct segment of the building that constitutes at least 10 percent of the
gross floor area of the building, unless specified otherwise in this IDO. See
also Building, Building Height Bonus, Finished Grade, and Measurement
Definitions for Grade and Ground Floor Clear Height.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/b37713d5e40fc82694833f290401791f80be26ac/
IMAGES/0-0-0-6965.png]
   Building Stepback
   For the purposes of measuring a building stepback where required, each plane
of the fa ade should be independently considered to determine the relevant
stepback for that portion of the building. See also Front Fa ade and Street-
facing Fa ade.
   Corridor Area
   Where the specified distance crosses a lot line, the entire lot is included
in the Corridor Area. See also Centers and Corridors Definitions.
      Main Street (MS) Area
      Lots within 660 feet in any direction of the centerline of a Main Street
Corridor as designated by the ABC Comp Plan, as amended.
      Major Transit (MT) Area
      Lots within 660 feet in any direction of the centerline of a Major
Transit Corridor as designated by the ABC Comp Plan, as amended.
      Premium Transit (PT) Area
      Lots within 660 feet in any direction of a transit station with transit
service of 15 minute or greater frequency on a Premium Transit Corridor as
designated by the ABC Comp Plan, as amended. Development standards associated
with the Premium Transit designation apply once the station locations have been
identified and funding for the transit service and any associated streetscape
improvements has been secured.
   Days
   See Business Days and Calendar Days.
   Distance for Notice or Appeals
   Includes public rights-of-way unless specified otherwise in this IDO.
   Distance from a Linear Feature
   When this IDO refers to a distance from any linear feature, including but
not limited to a street, lot line, or fa ade, the measurement shall be made
perpendicular to the linear feature along the length of that linear feature.
   Distance Separations
   See Measurements for Separation of Uses.
   Distance to a Through Lane
   Distance to a through lane is measured to the closest striped edge.
   Fa ade
   When the IDO refers to a distance to a fa ade, the measurement shall be made
to the closest perpendicular plane of a primary building fa ade. See also
Garage and Fa ade Definitions.
   Garage
   When the IDO refers to a distance to a garage, the measurement shall be made
to the garage fa ade, not to the garage door. See also Fa ade, Driveway and
Parking Definitions for Garage.
   Grade
      1.   The average of the ground levels immediately adjacent to each fa ade
of a building, considered separately.
      2.   Where an earth embankment is placed against the side of a building
or a retaining wall supporting a terrace is placed close to a building, grade
shall be measured from the toe, or bottom, of the embankment or retaining wall;
the finished floor of the building is not to be considered.
   See also Finished Grade and Natural Grade.
   Gross Floor Area
   The total floor area, including basements, garages, mezzanines, and upper
floors, if any, expressed in square feet measured from the outside surface of
exterior walls.
   Ground Floor Clear Height
   The vertical distance of the interior of a ground floor, measured from the
slab or top of the sub-floor to the ceiling or the bottom of the exposed
support structure for the second floor. This may also be referred to as "floor-
to-ceiling height."
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/b37713d5e40fc82694833f290401791f80be26ac/
IMAGES/0-0-0-6973.png]
   Large Stand of Mature Trees
   See Sensitive Lands Definitions.
   Lot Width
   The length of a straight line between the mid-points of each of the side lot
lines. See Lot Definitions for Side Lot Line.
 
   Neighborhood Edge
   Any distance required by a standard in Section
14-16-5-9 (Neighborhood Edges) is measured from the nearest point on the
nearest lot line of the Protected Lot to the nearest point on the Regulated lot
that contains the feature being regulated.
   Net Lot Area
   For purposes of calculating landscaping requirements, the total area of the
lot minus the following:
      1.   The area of the lot covered by buildings.
      2.   The portions of the lot that are not required for off-street parking
or a parking lot and that are fully screened from view from any abutting
property or public right-of-way by an opaque wall or fence at least 6 feet
high, in which no landscape will be required except required buffer
landscaping; chain link fence with slats does not constitute acceptable full
screening.
      3.   The area of any approved landscape that the property owner installs
and maintains in the abutting public right-of-way, exclusive of the area of any
existing or planned public sidewalk.
   Parking Lot Area
   The area of a parking lot that includes parking spaces and drive aisles. See
the DPM for dimensional standards. See also Parking Definitions.
   Parking Space
   See the DPM for dimensional standards. See also Parking Definitions for
Parking Space.
   Required Off-street Parking Spaces
   If an existing parking lot area does not have parking spaces striped, the
number of existing parking spaces is to be measured by subtracting the area
that would be required to meet all setbacks and landscaping areas required by
the IDO and all drive aisles and circulation areas required by the DPM and
dividing the remaining existing paved area by the dimensions of a parking space
in the DPM.
   Separation of Uses
   In all instances where the IDO requires a separation of uses, zone
districts, lots, or buildings, such distance shall be measured in a
geometrically straight line using a scaled map, or a survey if necessary. Such
measurement shall be made without regard to any intervening structures,
objects, uses, the street grid, landforms, waterways, or any other
topographical features.
      1.   Unless specified otherwise in this IDO, this distance shall be
measured from the nearest point on the nearest lot line of the lot containing
the regulated use to the nearest point on the nearest lot line of the lot
containing the use, or in the zone district, from which the regulated use is
required to be separated.
      2.   If the IDO requires a separation between a building containing a
regulated use and a specified use or zone district, the distance shall be
measured from the nearest point on the building containing the regulated use to
the nearest point on the nearest lot line of the lot containing the specified
use or in the specified zone district.
   Setback
   The shortest distance between a structure and a lot line. Front setbacks are
measured from the front lot line. Rear setbacks are measured from the rear lot
line. Side setbacks are measured from side lot lines. In the case of a setback
from an irrigation facility, the measurement is taken from the toe of the slope
to the structure or from the lot line to the structure, whichever is greater.
See also Lot Definitions for Front Lot Line, Rear Lot Line, and Side Lot Line.
   Sign Area
      1.   Unless specified otherwise in this IDO or unless maximum sign area
is regulated as a percentage of fa ade area, maximum sign area is per allowed
sign, not per premises.
      2.   For freestanding and projecting signs, the area of 1 rectangle or of
2 contiguous rectangles in the same plane, drawn with horizontal and vertical
lines so as to include the entire sign except sign base or supports. The
maximum area of any double-sided or V-shaped sign shall be measured for the
larger sign face only.
      3.   For building-mounted signs, except canopy signs, the area enclosed
with a sign border or the sum of the areas of the minimum imaginary rectangles
enclosing each word or non-verbal symbol if there is no sign border.
      4.   For add-on signs to off-premises signs, the area of up to 2
rectangles in addition to the rectangle that defines the area of the basic
sign.
   Sign Height
   The vertical distance from finished grade to the highest point of the sign.
For rooftop signs, the vertical distance from the top of the highest parapet to
the top of the sign. See also Sign Definitions for Rooftop Sign.
   Small Area
   Where any small area boundary crosses a lot line, the entire lot is subject
to applicable small area standards unless specified otherwise in this IDO. See
also Small Area.
   Structure Height
   The vertical distance above finished grade of the highest point on a
structure that is not a building, but not including decorative or incidental
features that do not extend more than 10 percent of the length of any side of
the structure or occupy more than 10 percent of the ground coverage of the
structure. See also Structure and Measurement Definitions for Building Height.
   Wall Height
   For a perimeter wall along the front lot line, wall height shall be measured
from the finished grade on the public side of the wall. For other perimeter
walls along other lot lines or for walls between the front lot line and the
front fa ade of the primary building, wall height shall be measured from the
finished grade on the side of the wall that provides the taller wall height.
Wall height does not include decorative or incidental features, such as
pilasters or fence posts, that are allowed or required by this IDO. See also
Wall Definitions.
Medical or Dental Clinic
An establishment where patients who are not lodged overnight are admitted for
examination and treatment by a group of licensed health care practitioners,
dentists, or licensed health care practitioners and dentists in practice
together.
Metropolitan Redevelopment Area
An area that has been designated for targeted initiatives, incentives, or
public and/or private investment in order to promote the repurposing or
expansion of existing structures to accommodate new economic uses, or to
promote the demolition, remediation, and/or redevelopment of sites to
accommodate new economic uses.
Minor Subdivision
See Subdivision Definitions.
Mixed-use Development
See Development Definitions.
Mixed-use Zone District
See Zone Definitions.
Mobile Food Truck
Any wagon, truck, trailer, or other vehicle that is propelled by an engine or
motor vehicle and from which any person sells, offers for sale, or gives away
food or beverages. Other sales or services may be allowed as specified
elsewhere in this IDO. For the purposes of this IDO, mobile food trucks are
regulated as a mobile food truck use where accessory on a premises with any
other primary use, regardless of the use, area, or purpose of that other
primary use, but as a mobile food truck court where mobile food trucks are the
only primary use on a premises. See also Mobile Food Truck Court.
Mobile Food Truck Court
Any number of mobile food trucks as the only primary use on a premises. See
also Mobile Food Truck.
Mobile Home
See Dwelling Definitions.
Mobile Vending Cart
A vehicle without motive power that has functional wheels and at least one axle
and is used for the sale of goods, including but not limited to food,
beverages, raw produce, flowers, arts, and crafts.
Model Home
A dwelling or dwelling unit representative of other dwellings or units offered
for sale or lease or to be built in an area of residential development. A model
home may be used as a residential real estate sales office for the development
in which it is located before occupancy by a household.
Monument Sign
See Sign Definitions.
Mortuary
An establishment in which the dead are prepared for burial or cremation, the
body may be viewed, and funeral services are sometimes held.
Mounting Height
The vertical distance between the finished grade and the center of the apparent
light source of the luminaire.
Multi-family
See Development Definitions and Dwelling Definitions.
Multi-use Trail
A paved path physically separated from motorized vehicle traffic by an open
space or barrier and constructed within the public right-of-way, private way,
or an easement, including but not limited to utility and drainage easements
that permit more than one type of non-motorized use. See also Bikeway and
Public Right-of-way.
Museum
A facility open to the public, with or without charge, for the collection and
display of paintings, sculpture, textiles, antiquities, other works of art, or
similar items. See also Art Gallery.
N
Natural Grade
The average ground level based on the site contours of land that has never been
issued a grading permit, prior to any grading or addition or removal of earth.
See also Finished Grade and Measurement Definitions for Grade.
Natural Resource Extraction
The extraction and/or refining of dirt, minerals, sand, gravel, and ores, from
their natural occurrences on affected land and transportation of extracted
materials to locations off-site. Loading and unloading from rail spurs is
incidental to this use.
Neighborhood Association
When used in this IDO, this term refers to Recognized Neighborhood Associations
and Recognized Neighborhood Coalitions, as defined by of Part 14-8-2 of ROA
1994 (Neighborhood Association Recognition Ordinance).
Neon Sign
See Sign Definitions.
Net Lot Area
See Measurement Definitions.
Nicotine Retail
See Retail Definitions.
Nightclub
An establishment dispensing liquor in which music, dancing, or entertainment is
provided, but not including any adult entertainment use. See also Adult
Entertainment.
Non-commercial or Broadcasting Antenna
An antenna that transmits and/or receives signals or waves radiated or captured
for non-commercial or broadcasting purposes, including amateur radio station
operation/receive-only antenna if owned and operated by a federally licensed
amateur radio station operator or used exclusively for a receive-only antenna,
WTFs used exclusively for emergency services, any antenna used for AM, FM, or
TV broadcasting, or any other facility exempted from local regulation under the
federal Telecommunications Act of 1996, as amended and interpreted by the
courts and related regulations of the Federal Communications Commission. See
also Wireless Telecommunications Facility Definitions for Wireless
Telecommunications Facility.
Non-commercial Vehicle
See Vehicle Definitions.
Nonconformity Definitions
   Nonconforming Lot
   A lot that was lawfully created but does not conform to the lot size, lot
dimension, or other requirements of this IDO related to the lot.
   Nonconforming Structure
   A structure that does not conform to the IDO requirements for structures in
the zone district where it is located, for reasons other than the use of the
structure, but that did not violate those requirements at the time the
structure was constructed. By way of example: a nonconforming structure could
be one that violates height, setback, aesthetic, or form requirements.
   Nonconforming Use
   A use of a structure or land that does not conform to the IDO requirements
for land uses in the zone district where it is located, but that was an
approved use at the time the use began.
   Nonconformity
   A structure, use, lot, sign, or site feature that does not conform to
applicable zoning but that did conform to applicable zoning in effect at the
time it was built or developed.
Non-recognized Neighborhood
See Neighborhood Association.
Non-residential Development
See Development Definitions.
Non-residential Use
See Use Definitions.
Non-residential Zone District
See Zone Definitions.
Nursery
A primary use of land in which the predominant activity is the growing of
plants for wholesale or retail sales, which may take place outside or in
greenhouses. Outdoor sales of plants are allowed.
Nursing Home
A facility designed to provide a residence, meals, and medical- and health-
related care for individuals, including 24-hour skilled nursing care. This
definition includes facilities providing in-patient care for individuals
suffering from a terminal illness. Such facilities may include commercial
kitchens with shared dining facilities for residents; medical services with
personnel that provide assistance with medication, administration, dressing,
bathing, and social activities; activity rooms; indoor recreational amenities;
gift shops; hair salons; administrative offices; laundry services; worship
space; and overnight guest units for short-term visitors. See also Assisted
Living Facility, Independent Living Facility, and Other Use Accessory to
Residential Primary Use.
O
Off-premises Sign
See Sign Definitions.
Office
Establishments providing executive, management, administrative, professional
services, consulting, record keeping, or a headquarters of an enterprise or
organization, but not including the on-premises sale of retail goods, or any
use included in the definition of personal or business services. See also
Business and Establishment.
On-premises Sign
See Sign Definitions.
Open Air Market
Open air sales of new retail goods, produce, and/or handcrafts; incidental
sales of food and beverages is allowed. See also Farmers' Market and Seasonal
Outdoor Sales.
Open Space Definitions
   Common Open Space
   The area of undeveloped land and/or existing site features within a cluster
development that is set aside for the preservation, use, and enjoyment by the
owners and occupants of the dwellings in the development and includes historic
buildings or structures, sensitive lands, agriculture, landscaping, or outdoor
recreation uses. The common open space is a separate lot or easement on the
subdivision plat of the cluster development. For the purposes of the common
open space calculation in cluster development, parks and concrete or reinforced
arroyos do not count as common open space. See also Dwelling Definitions for
Dwelling, Cluster Development.
   Extraordinary Facility
   Facility within Major Public Open Space, not including trails, fencing,
signs, incidental parking lots, access roads, or infrastructure not visible on
the surface, that is primarily for facilitating recreation, relaxation, and
enjoyment of the outdoors and that requires additional review by the Open Space
Advisory Board and EPC pursuant to the Rank 2 Major Public Open Space Facility
Plan. Extraordinary Facilities may include utility structures, WTFs, or
buildings. See also Open Space Definitions for Major Public Open Space.
   Major Public Open Space
   City-owned or managed property that is zoned NR-PO-B or City-managed
property that is zoned NR-PO-C, including the Rio Grande State Park (i.e., the
Bosque), Petroglyph National Monument, and Sandia foothills. These are
typically greater than 5 acres and may include natural and cultural resources,
preserves, low-impact recreational facilities, dedicated lands, arroyos, or
trail corridors. The Rank 2 Major Public Open Space Facility Plan guides the
management of these areas. For the purposes of this IDO, Major Public Open
Space located outside the city municipal boundary that is mapped as Open Space
in the ABC Comp Plan still triggers Major Public Open Space Edge requirements
for properties within the city adjacent to or within the specified distance of
Major Public Open Space.
   Open Space
   In lowercase letters, a generic term for any outdoor space or amenity
intended to retain access to open air and sunlight, regardless of location,
ownership, or management responsibility. Open space is required through various
means in order to provide a psychological and physical respite from development
densities. Open space is intended to create healthy places that balance density
vs. openness and urban vs. natural environments. For City-owned open space, see
Open Space Definitions for Major Public Open Space.
   Usable Open Space
   Outdoor space to be preserved on-site and managed privately to help ensure
livable conditions on each site by providing light and air and meeting visual,
psychological, and recreational needs. These areas can be used for a variety of
purposes and are not required to be at ground level. Usable open space may
include, but is not limited to, lawns; community gardens; decorative and native
plantings; open balconies; rooftop decks; plazas; courtyards; covered patios
open on at least 2 sides; pedestrian walkways; landscaped medians, buffers, or
setbacks; active and passive recreational areas; fountains; swimming pools;
wooded areas; and water courses. Such space shall be available for entry and
use by users of the development. Required drainage facilities or land within an
easement for overhead utilities that are not landscaped shall not count toward
required usable open space. Usable open space does not include public right-of-
way, private ways, parking lots, off-street parking, driveways, drive aisles
other private vehicular surfaces, or buildings other than swimming pool rooms.
Operating Hours
The hours during which employees are scheduled to be working in an
establishment, which may extend beyond the business hours of the establishment.
See also Business Hours.
Other Indoor Entertainment
A facility providing entertainment or recreation activities where all
activities take place within enclosed structures, but not including a theater,
auditorium, or any other use listed separately in
Table 4-2-1. Examples include, but are not limited to, baseball batting cages,
bowling alleys, climbing walls, game arcades, laser tag centers, miniature golf
courses, paintball, skating rinks, shooting ranges, swimming pools, tennis
clubs, trampoline centers, and velodromes.
Other Outdoor Entertainment
An outdoor facility whose main purpose is to provide entertainment or
recreation, with or without charge, but not including auto or horse race
tracks, drive-in theaters, or any similar outdoor use not listed separately in
Table 4-2-1. Examples include, but are not limited to, amusement parks, batting
cages, go-cart tracks, golf courses and driving ranges, miniature golf,
skateboard parks, skating rinks, sports courts, swimming pools, target sport
ranges, and water parks.
Other Pet Services
A facility providing care and services for household pets, such as animal
grooming, training, or day care but which is not listed separately in
Table 4-2-1.
Other Use Accessory to a Non-residential Primary Use
A land use that is subordinate in use, area, or purpose to a primary non-
residential land use on the same lot, serving a purpose naturally and normally
incidental to such primary land use, and that is not listed separately in
Table 4-2-1. Examples include, but are not limited to, an employee exercise
room, employee caf /cafeteria, outdoor exercise area/track, employee nursery/
child care, small display/sales room for goods produced on the premises, and
storage of maintenance equipment used on the premises (e.g. lawn mowers).
Other Use Accessory to a Residential Primary Use
A land use that is subordinate in use, area, or purpose to a primary
residential land use on the same lot and serving a purpose naturally and
normally incidental to such primary land use and that is not listed separately
in
Table 4-2-1. For residential uses other than multi-family dwellings, this use
includes, but is not limited to, tennis courts, game rooms, patios, outdoor
kitchens, swimming pools, and accessory buildings for storage, recreation,
hobbies, and gardening for the use of the residents living in the dwellings on
the same lot as this use. For multi-family residential development, this use
includes, but is not limited to, sales of convenience items, personal service
shop, rental/management office, concierge/doorman services, and similar
activities provided for residents of the multi-family or group living uses. See
also Residential Community Amenity.
Outdoor Animal Run
An area for the temporary outdoor containment of animals associated with a
kennel, veterinary clinic, animal breeding facility, or other commercial
activity. For the purposes of this IDO, this use does not include an outdoor
animal run for personal pets.
Outdoor Dining Area
A covered or uncovered seating area where patrons of an establishment are
served food and/or beverages to be consumed on-premises.
Outdoor Display
The display of retail goods outside but on the same property as the primary
establishment. For the purposes of light vehicle sales and rental, outdoor
inventory is considered to be outdoor display and not outdoor vehicle storage.
Outdoor Lighting Curfew
For the purposes of this IDO, the time between 10 P.M. and 7 A.M. when outdoor
lighting and interior light escaping through windows must be reduced by at
least 50 percent of the normal illuminance. For establishments with business
hours later than 10 P.M., outdoor lighting curfew begins one hour after
closing. For establishments with business hours earlier than 7 A.M., outdoor
lighting curfew ends one hour before opening.
Outdoor Storage
The keeping of any goods, material, or merchandise outside of a building in the
same place for more than 24 hours, but not including any storage activity or
use of land listed separately in
Table 4-2-1. See also Building and Home Improvement Materials Store,
Contractors Facility and Yard, and Salvage Yard.
Outdoor Vehicle Storage
The keeping of motor vehicles or equipment not used for transportation purposes
on an active, regular, or continuing basis outside of a building, generally for
a period of 7 calendar days or more, whether or not the motor vehicle is
titled, licensed, or operable, either as a primary use or accessory use, but
not including a salvage yard. See also Salvage Yard and Vehicle Definitions for
Heavy Vehicle and Equipment Sales, Rental, Fueling, and Repair; Light Vehicle
Repair; and Light Vehicle Sales and Rental.
Overlay Zone
See Zone Definitions.
Overnight Shelter
A facility that provides temporary or transitional sleeping accommodations for
6 or more persons within completely enclosed portions of a building with no
charge or a charge substantially less than market rates. Such facilities may
provide meals, personal assistance, personal services, social services,
personal care and protective care. This use does not include 24-hour skilled
nursing care, which is regulated as either hospital or nursing home for the
purposes of this IDO. See also Campground or Recreational Vehicle Park, Hotel
or Motel, Nursing Home, and Safe Outdoor Space.
P
Park
Publicly or privately owned land that is maintained for active or passive
recreational use and for the use and enjoyment of the general public or the
residents or occupants of a development. This use includes areas consisting of
vegetative landscaping and/or areas improved for outdoor sports and recreation.
Structural improvements are generally limited to those that facilitate the use
of the land as a park. Incidental activities and structures include, but are
not limited to, playgrounds, maintenance facilities, swimming pools, restrooms
and dressing rooms, concessions, caretaker's quarters, and parking.
Parking Definitions
   Carport
   A roofed structure that is not enclosed on at least 2 sides, that is used
for parking vehicles, and that is located over a parking area and/or driveway.
For the purposes of this IDO, carports are subject to building height maximums
in the underlying zone district but are allowed to be in required setbacks
pursuant to
Table 5-1-4. See also Porch.
   Convertible Parking Structure
   A structure or part of a structure designed to accommodate motor vehicle
parking spaces that has a fully enclosed ground level with no ramping on any
ground floor street-facing fa ade so that the ground floor can be adapted to
commercial, residential, or office uses.
   Electric Vehicle Charging Station
   A facility or area where electric-powered or hybrid-powered motor vehicles
can obtain electrical current to recharge batteries and that is an incidental
activity of a primary use of the property.
   EV Capable
   Parking spaces with a capped cable or raceway connected to an installed
electric panel with dedicated branch circuit(s) to install the infrastructure
and equipment needed for a future electric vehicle (EV) charging station with a
rating of 240 volts or higher.
   Front-access Garage
   A garage in which the garage door is angled less than 45 degrees away from
the front lot line (i.e., typically the street that the primary residence
faces). See also Garage, Side-access Garage, and Rear-access Garage.
   Garage
   A single-story structure or part of a building in a low-density residential
development or a single-story structure in a multi-family residential
development designed to accommodate motor vehicle parking spaces that are
completely enclosed, but not including a parking structure. For the purposes of
this IDO, the terms two- or three-car garages refer to the garage width,
assuming side-by-side parking, not tandem parking. See also Front-accessed
Garage, Parking Structure, Rear-accessed Garage, and Side-accessed Garage and
Development Definitions for Residential Development.
   Off-street Parking Space
   A storage area for the parking of one motor vehicle that is located on a
lot, unless specified otherwise in this IDO. See the DPM for dimensional
standards. See also On-street Parking Space.
   On-street Parking Space
   An on-street storage area for the parking of one motor vehicle. For the
purposes of this IDO, an on-street parking space abutting a lot may be counted
as 1 off-street parking space for that lot if over the length of the space is
located between the imaginary extensions of the side lot lines into the street.
See the DPM for dimensional standards. See also Parking Space.
   Paid Parking Lot
   An area used to provide parking, as a commercial enterprise, for 4 or more
motor vehicles for a fee. The term does not include a commercial parking
structure that is a building primarily used for the provision of parking for a
fee. See the DPM for dimensional standards. See also Parking Lot and
Measurement Definitions for Parking Lot Area.
   Park-and-ride Lot
   An area or structure intended to accommodate parked motor vehicles where
commuters park and continue travel to another destination via public transit,
carpool, vanpool, walking, or bicycle. This use may be operated in a parking
area owned or operated by a third party with the consent of that party, but
spaces dedicated to this use may not be counted toward required off-street
parking spaces for any primary or accessory use operated by the third party.
   Park-and-ride Facility, Temporary
   The temporary provisions of parking for transit customers using service
provided by the municipal transit agency in conjunction with a temporary civic
use, including but not limited to the New Mexico State Fair and the
International Balloon Fiesta. The use may include a ticket booth, portable
restrooms, lighting, concession stand, and barriers contributing to traffic
management.
   Parking Lot
   Any off-street outdoor area for the parking of motor vehicles, including any
spaces and drive aisles necessary for the function of the parking lot or for
the convenience of patrons. See also Paid Parking Lot and Measurement
Definitions for Parking Lot Area.
   Parking Lot - Multiple Drive Aisles
   A parking lot that may have more than 1 drive aisle.
   Parking Lot - Single Drive Aisle
   A parking lot with only 1 drive aisle, which may be one-way or two-way. The
drive aisle may serve 1 or 2 rows of parking spaces.
   Parking Space
   An on- or off-street storage area for the parking of one motor vehicle. See
the DPM for dimensional standards. See also Off-street Parking Space and On-
street Parking Space.
   Parking Structure
   A multi-story structure or part of a multi-story building designed to
accommodate motor vehicle parking spaces that are partially or completely
enclosed, including podium parking, but not including a parking structure that
is located underground or within the outer building envelope of another
building. Parking structures are typically associated with Mixed-use and Non-
residential development. See also Garage and Development Definitions for Mixed-
use Development and Non-residential Development.
   Parking Structure with Ground Floor Uses
   A structure or part of a structure designed to accommodate motor vehicle
parking spaces that incorporates retail, office, or residential uses along at
least 50 percent of the ground floor street-facing fa ade.
   Rear-access Garage
   A garage accessed from the rear lot line. See also Garage, Front-accessed
Garage and Side-accessed Garage.
   Side-access Garage
   A garage in which the garage door is angled at least 45 degrees away from
the street that the primary residence faces. The access to this garage may be
from the front lot line (i.e., typically the street that the primary residence
faces) or a side lot line (i.e., from an abutting street in the case of a
corner lot). See also Garage, Front-accessed Garage, and Rear-accessed Garage.
   Stacking Space
   A term used in designing vehicle circulation areas for the queuing of motor
vehicles. See definition in the DPM.
   Tandem Parking
   Off-street parking area where 2 or more parking spaces arranged one behind
or above the other.
   Wrapped Parking
   A structure, part of a structure, or a parking lot designed to accommodate
motor vehicle parking spaces that is wrapped on all sides that abut a street by
buildings with residential, commercial, or office uses.
Paved, Pavement, or Paving
Paved per DPM standard for pavement or alternative pavement / paving. See
definition and related standards in the DPM.
Pavement Width
See definition and related standards in the DPM for pavement width, depth,
materials, and design.
Pawn Shop
Any establishment engaged in the business of lending money on the deposit or
pledge of personal property; the purchase of personal property with the
expressed or implied agreement or understanding to sell it back at a stipulated
price; or engaged in the business of purchasing items of gold, silver, platinum
or other precious metals or gems and reselling the product. See also General
Retail.
Peak Service Frequency
See Transit Definitions.
Pedestrian-oriented
Intended primarily to provide access, amenities, or space for services that
benefit people walking. Includes but is not limited to sidewalks,
pedestrian walkways, multi-use trails, transit stops, spaces for outdoor
seating or vending, plazas, parks, and public facilities associated with Major
Public Open Space.
Pedestrian-scale Lighting
Lighting in pedestrian areas not to exceed 16 feet in height that allows people
to see and be seen from a distance of 40 to 60 feet.
Perimeter Wall
See Wall Definitions.
Permissive Use
See Use Definitions.
Person
An individual, corporation, governmental agency, business trust, estate, trust,
partnership, association, 2 or more persons having a joint or common interest,
or any other legal entity.
Personal and Business Services
Establishments providing services to individuals or businesses, including but
not limited to bail bond providers, beauty and barber shops, shoe repair,
tailor/alterations shops, tattoo parlors, taxidermy services, electronic data
processing, and employment service; mailing, addressing, stenographic services;
and specialty business service such as travel bureau, news service, exporter,
importer, interpreter, appraiser, and film library. This use is divided into 2
categories based on the size of the establishment (not the size of the
structure):
   1.   Personal and Business Services, Small: An establishment with 10,000
square feet or less of gross floor area.
   2.   Personal and Business Services, Large: An establishment with more than
10,000 square feet of gross floor area.
See also Bail Bond Business and Massage Business.
Planning Director
The chief administrative officer of the City Planning Department or his/her
authorized representative or designee.
Plat
A graphic and written description of a lot or lots with survey reference ties
to permanent survey monuments related to the subdivision, resubdivision
(sometimes called a replat), or consolidation of land.
   Final Plat
   The completed subdivision plat in a form for approval and recordation.
   Preliminary Plat
   A tentative plat of a proposed subdivision prepared in accordance with the
specifications of this IDO and the DPM for presentation to the DHO for action.
   Sketch Plat
   A conceptual plat of a proposed subdivision used for discussion by the
applicant and Planning Department staff to determine suitability for
subdivision. A sketch plat typically shows general building and parking
locations and specifies design requirements for buildings, landscaping,
lighting, and signage.
Point Light Source
The exact place where illumination is produced (e.g. a light bulb filament or
LED package) even when behind a clear lens.
Pole Sign
See Sign Definitions.
Porch
A roofed structure that is not more than 50 percent enclosed (except for
removable screens, screen doors, storm sashes, or awnings) on at least 2 sides,
that projects from the exterior wall of a building, and that is used as an
outdoor living area. To be considered a porch, and not just part of the
building, the porch fa ade facing the street must not be more than 50 percent
enclosed (except for removable screens, screen doors, storm sashes, wrought
iron security fencing, or awnings). For the purposes of this IDO, any portion
of a roofed structure that is not enclosed on at least 2 sides that is over a
parking area or driveway is considered a carport. See also Building Frontage
Types and Parking Definitions for Carport.
Portable Sign
See Sign Definitions.
Premises
Any lot or combination of abutting or adjacent lots held in single ownership,
together with the development on that lot or lots; there may be multiple
occupancy.
Premium Transit
See Centers and Corridors Definitions and Measurement Definitions for Premium
Transit Area.
Primary Building
A building within which a primary use takes place. See also Building and Large
Retail Facility.
Primary Pedestrian Entrance
A public entrance to a primary building. If there is more than one, for the
purposes of this IDO, the entrance demarcated by more fa ade articulation,
signage, landscaping, site amenities, or other design treatments shall be
considered the primary pedestrian entrance. If all entrances are thus
demarcated, the applicant may choose which entrance shall be considered the
primary pedestrian entrance to satisfy any relevant requirements in this IDO.
Primary Use
See Use Definitions.
Private Way
A lot or easement that is not public right-of-way and that contains a street or
alley providing access between a public right-of-way and one or more lots. The
term may include easements for public and private infrastructure when such are
established through a suitable legal document, along with the access rights.
See also Public Right-of-way and Street.
Project Site
A lot or collection of lots shown on a Subdivision - Minor or Major or on a
Site Plan. This term refers to the largest geography specified in the earliest
request for decision on the first application related to a particular
development. For example, if a large lot is subdivided and submitted for
development in phases, any regulation referring to the project site would apply
to the entirety of the land in the original lot included in the Subdivision
application.
Projecting Sign
See Sign Definitions.
Property Line
See Lot Definitions.
Public Area
An area of land owned by or intended to be owned by a governmental entity or
over which a governmental entity enjoys an easement, whether deeded, dedicated,
or otherwise acquired, and that is generally, but not required, to be used to
serve the public with some service or benefit, including public infrastructure.
Public Hearing
A formal meeting open to the public in which a decision-making body makes a
discretionary decision.
Public Right-of-way
Land deeded, reserved or dedicated by plat, or otherwise acquired by any unit
of government for the purposes of movement of vehicles, bicycles, pedestrian
traffic, and/or for conveyance of public utility services and drainage. This
land generally does not have established zoning and is instead designated as
"unclassified" in the Official Zoning Map. See also Alley, Drainage Facility,
Private Way, Street, and Trail.
Public Utility Collocation
See Wireless Telecommunications Facility Definitions.
Public Utility Structure
A structure owned by a unit of government or by a public utility company that
is an electric switching station; electric substation operating at voltages
greater than 50 kilovolts (kV); gas transfer station or border station; lift
station, odor control (or chlorine) station, water well or pump station, or
water reservoir; traffic signal; public light poles; or any other public
utility structure controlled by a Facility Plan approved by the City.
Q
Quasi-judicial Hearing
A public hearing that follows the additional requirements of Subsection
14-16-6-4(M)(3), generally for decisions that would result in changes to
property rights or entitlements on a particular property or affecting a small
area.
R
Racetrack
An outdoor facility for sanctioned competition of racing vehicles (including
cars, trucks, motorcycles, and other vehicles designed for racing purposes) or
for horses or dogs, on a closed circuit. In addition to a racetrack, the
facility may include spectator seating (bleacher-type stands), a paddock area
for support crews and maintenance, racetrack operations offices, and spectator
services.
Railroad Yard
A primary use of land that includes an area and related facilities in which the
predominant activity is the assembly or disassembly and loading or unloading of
trains, including without limitation passenger or freight terminals, operations
and maintenance shacks, train sheds, and classification yards.
Rail Trail
The right-of-way and/or easements designated as the Albuquerque Rail Trail by
the Rank 3 Albuquerque Rail Trail Master Plan and mapped by AGIS. For the
purposes of this IDO, the Rail Trail corridor is considered both a City trail
and a street.
Real Estate Office
A facility or area used as a temporary office to sell or lease land or
buildings or interests in land or buildings within a specified area.
Rear Lot Line
See Lot Definitions.
Recognized Neighborhood Association
See Neighborhood Association.
Recreational Vehicle
See Vehicle Definitions.
Recycling Drop-off Bin Facility
An accessory use, structure, or enclosed area that serves as a neighborhood
drop-off point for temporary storage of recyclable materials, including but not
limited to paper, aluminum, glass, and plastic, but not including compost or
organic materials.
Reflective or Mirrored Glass
Glass with greater than 15 percent average daylight exterior reflectance as
published by the manufacturer.
Religious Institution
A structure or place where worship, ceremonies, rituals, and education
pertaining to a particular system of beliefs are held, together with its
accessory buildings, that is operated, maintained, and controlled under the
direction of a religious group. Incidental activities include, but are not
limited to, school and recreational facilities, parking, caretaker's housing,
religious leader's housing, philanthropic or humanitarian activities, and group
living facilities such as convents or monasteries.
Residential Community Amenity
A use provided for the comfort and convenience of residents of more than 1 unit
in a low-density or multi-family residential development, including but not
limited to a clubhouse, exercise room, swimming pool, tennis court, community
room, or laundry room.
Residential Development
See Development Definitions.
Residential Use
See Use Definitions.
Residential Zone District
See Zone Definitions.
Resource Management Plan
Rank 3 Plans developed by the Open Space Division of the City Parks and
Recreation Department to provide policy guidance on how to manage and protect
natural, historic, or cultural resources and/or scenic views for individual
City-owned or managed Major Public Open Space. Resource Management Plans also
guide visitor uses, budgeting, and decision making.
Restaurant
An establishment that serves food and beverages that are consumed on its
premises by customers seated at tables and/or counters either inside or outside
the building thereon and/or that may provide customers with take-out service of
food and/or beverages for off-site consumption. Sale of alcoholic beverages is
controlled by other provisions in this IDO and the New Mexico State statutes
regarding alcoholic drink sales. See also Bar and Taproom or Tasting Room.
Retail Definitions
   Adult Retail
   Any establishment where 25 percent or more of the gross floor area is used
to sell or rent adult material, including but not limited to books, magazines,
newspapers, films (video tapes and/or DVDs), slides, photographic or written
material, and other items or devices that are distinguished or characterized by
an emphasis on the depiction, description, exposure, or representation of
specified anatomical areas or the conduct or simulation of specified sexual
activities. For the purposes of this IDO, an adult retail establishment that
meets the definition above is considered a primary use, regardless of the use,
area, or purpose of any other primary uses on the same premises. See also
General Retail and Specified Anatomical Areas, Specified Sexual Activities.
   General Retail
   An establishment providing for the retail sale of general merchandise or
food to the general public for direct use and not for wholesale; including but
not limited to sale of general merchandise, clothing and other apparel, flowers
and household plants that are not grown on-site, dry goods, convenience and
specialty foods, hardware and similar consumer goods, cannabis for medical
consumption pursuant to Sections 26-2B-1 to 26-2B-10 NMSA 1978 (the Lynn and
Erin Compassionate Use Act), or other retail sales not listed as a separate use
in
Table 4-2-1. See also Adult Retail, Building and Home Improvement Materials
Store, Large Retail Facility, Liquor Retail, and Grocery Store.
   General retail is divided into 3 categories based on the size of the
establishment or use (not the size of the structure):
      1.   General Retail, Small: An establishment with no more than 25,000
square feet of gross floor area.
      2.   General Retail, Medium: An establishment of more than 25,000 square
feet of gross floor area and no more than 50,000 square feet of gross floor
area.
      3.   General Retail, Large: An establishment of more than 50,000 square
feet of gross floor area. See also Large Retail Facility.
   Cannabis Retail
   See Cannabis Definitions for Cannabis Retail.
   Large Retail Facility
   A single-tenant building with at least 50,000 square feet of gross floor
area for the purposes of retailing. A collection of establishments, each less
than 50,000 square feet, linked by common walls is not considered a large
retail facility. See also General Retail.
   Liquor Retail
   A retail sales establishment licensed by the State selling packaged
alcoholic liquors (including beer, wine, and spirituous liquors) for
consumption off-site. Establishments that operate under a Small Brewer's,
Winegrower's, or Craft Distiller's license are not considered Liquor Retail.
See also General Retail and Tap Room or Tasting Room.
   Nicotine Retail
   Any establishment licensed by the State to sell any tobacco product or
electronic nicotine delivery system as defined in Sections 61-37-1 to 61-37-25
NMSA 1978 (Tobacco Products Act), or nicotine paraphernalia, including but not
limited to, cigarette papers or wrappers, pipes, holders of smoking materials
of all types, cigarette rolling machines, electronic cigarette cartridges,
electronic cigarette liquids, and any other items designed for the preparation,
storing, consumption, or use of tobacco products or electronic smoking devices.
This use does not include the sale of cannabis. See also General Retail and
Cannabis Definitions for Cannabis Retail.
   Retaining Wall
   See Wall Definitions.
   Right-of-way
   See Public Right-of-way.
   Rock Outcropping
   See Sensitive Lands Definitions.
   Roof-mounted Wireless Telecommunications Facility (WTF)
   See Wireless Telecommunications Facility Definitions.
   Rooftop Sign
   See Sign Definitions.
S
Safe Outdoor Space
A lot, or a portion of a lot, developed to provide designated spaces for
occupancy by tents, recreational vehicles, and/or light vehicles. Designated
spaces are provided to occupants at no charge. A safe outdoor space offers
social services and support facilities. See also Campground and Recreational
Vehicle and Vehicle Definitions for Recreational Vehicle and Light Vehicle.
Salvage Yard
Any use involving storage and/or sale of inoperable, disused, dismantled or
wrecked vehicles, equipment, machinery, or goods, or the storage or processing
of scrap metal, wastepaper, rags, wastes, construction wastes, industrial
wastes or other scrap, salvage, waste, or junk materials.
School
An accredited public or private institution offering a course of education
recognized by the State as leading to a high school diploma or equivalent.
Accessory uses may include student sports fields or facilities, playgrounds,
gardens, and an accessory dwelling unit for a caretaker. This use is divided
into:
   1.   Elementary or middle school: An educational facility for grades
kindergarten through 8.
   2.   High school: An educational facility for grades 9 through 12.
See also University or College, Vocational School, and Measurement Definitions
for Separation of Uses.
Seasonal Lighting
Outdoor or site lighting that is portable, temporary, and decorative. This
includes but is not limited to string lighting, icicle lighting, outline
lighting, and lighted holiday inflatables that are not intended for general
illumination. See also Festoon Lighting.
Seasonal Outdoor Sales
The temporary outdoor display and sale of goods or products associated with the
season or a cultural event, such as the sale of fireworks, Christmas trees,
pumpkins, or seasonal produce, and typically occurring at a location not
devoted to such sales for the remainder of the year. See also Agricultural
Sales Stand, Farmers' Market, and Open Air Market.
Security Lighting
Distinct from outdoor lighting installed for safe passage during hours of
darkness, security lighting is installed to provide bright illumination for
security to protect people, property, and infrastructure from physical or
criminal threats.
Self-storage
A use consisting of 3 or more individual, small, self-contained, fully enclosed
units in building that are leased or owned for the storage of business and
household goods or contractors' supplies. Storage areas provided for renters of
residential dwellings on the same premises are not considered self-storage. See
also Other Use Accessory to a Residential Primary Use.
Sensitive Lands Definitions
   Arroyo
   A watercourse that conducts an intermittent or ephemeral flow, providing
primary drainage for an area of land, or a watercourse that would be expected
to flow in excess of 1,000 cubic feet per second as the result of a 100-year
storm event, as determined by the City Hydrologist.
   Escarpment
   Land with 9 percent slope or more, where development is discouraged. The
Northwest Mesa Escarpment is part of the Petroglyph National Monument, which is
also designated as Major Public Open Space. See also Open Space Definitions for
Major Public Open Space.
   Floodplains and Special Flood Hazard Areas
   See Flood Definitions.
   Irrigation Facility
   The system of water facilities within the MRGCD, including acequias,
ditches, laterals, canals, interior drains, riverside drains, and wasteways,
which convey water to irrigators or return unused irrigation water to the Rio
Grande. Some facilities may also convey stormwater. The irrigation facility
includes the canal that conveys the water, the maintenance road(s) along the
bank top, and the sloped banks that tie back to the surrounding land. These
facilities may or may not have a formal easement. See also Acequia.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/b37713d5e40fc82694833f290401791f80be26ac/
IMAGES/0-0-0-6975.png]
   Large Stand of Mature Trees
   At least 3 trees with trunks at least 8 inches in diameter at breast height
(DBH), as measured by the City Forester, on a subject property.
   Rock Outcropping
   Bedrock or other stratum a minimum of 4 feet high on its steepest side as
measured from the adjacent 10 percent slope line and in excess of 300 square
feet in surface area.
   Riparian Area
   Aquatic ecosystems and the transitional ecosystems surrounding them, as
shown on the map created and maintained by the City Parks and Recreation
Department and published by AGIS. The transitional riparian ecosystem is
characterized by distinctive vegetative communities and soils that are affected
by the presence of surface and groundwater and provides critical habitat for
endangered species and migratory birds, as well as other animals.
   Significant Archaeological Site
   See Archaeological Definitions.
   Steep Slope
   Land with 9 percent slope or more, where development is discouraged.
   Wetlands
   Areas that are inundated or saturated by surface or groundwater at a
frequency and duration sufficient to support, and that under normal
circumstances do support, a prevalence of vegetation typically adapted for life
in saturated soil conditions, as determined by the City Hydrologist. Wetlands
generally include swamps, marshes, bogs, and similar areas.
Separation of Uses
See Measurement Definitions.
Setback
   1.   A required distance between a structure and a lot line.
   2.   On an interior lot not abutting a street, side setbacks shall be
followed for all lot lines.
See also Lot Definitions for Front Lot Line, Rear Lot Line, and Side Lot Line
(Interior or Street Side) and Measurement Definitions for Setback.
Shielded Lighting
A floodlight with an accessory intended to block obtrusive light through either
an optical intervention and/or a physical shield or louver.
Side Fa ade
See Fa ade Definitions.
Side Lot Line
See Lot Definitions.
Sidewalk
A hard-surfaced walk or raised path and any curb ramps or blended transitions
along and generally paralleling the side of the streets for pedestrians.
Sidewalks do not include the curb or gutter structures.
Sight Lines
See Subsection
14-16-3-6(D)(3) (Coors Boulevard - VPO-1 Definitions).
Sign Definitions
   Building-mounted Sign
   A sign entirely supported by or through a building, including canopy sign,
marquee sign, projecting sign, rooftop sign, or wall sign. See also Sign
Definitions for Canopy Sign, Marquee Sign, Projecting Sign, Rooftop Sign, Wall
Sign, and Window Sign.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/b37713d5e40fc82694833f290401791f80be26ac/
IMAGES/0-0-0-6967.png]
   Canopy Sign
   A type of building-mounted sign mounted on or under a permanent canopy,
arcade, or portal. See Sign Definitions for Wall Sign for signs on a
freestanding roofed structure, such as a canopy for a vehicle fueling station.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/b37713d5e40fc82694833f290401791f80be26ac/
IMAGES/0-0-0-6969.png]
   Electronic Sign
   A sign that is internally lit to display messages and images that are
changed electronically. The lit sign area may be of various types, including
but not limited to flat screen, active display matrix, or a board with a single
or multiple lines of text or graphics. The light source may vary but is
typically Light Emitting Diodes (LED). Any sign that meets the definition of a
neon sign is not considered to be an electronic sign. See also Sign Definitions
for Neon Sign.
   Freestanding Sign
   A sign attached to or supported from the ground and not attached to a
building. Signs on walls or fences that are not an integral part of a building
are considered freestanding signs. Freestanding signs do not include portable
signs. See Sign Definitions for Monument Sign and Pole Sign for sign types that
are considered freestanding.
   Historic Sign
   A sign that is 50 years old or greater or listed or determined to be
eligible for listing in the New Mexico Register of Cultural Properties either
individually or as a contributing part of a property or a sign that contributes
to the historic character of a designated City landmark.
   Illuminated Sign
   Any sign that is directly lighted by any on-premises electrical light
source, internal or external, except light sources specifically and clearly
operated for the purposes of lighting the general area in which the sign is
located rather than upon the sign itself, including but not limited to luminous
tubing signs such as neon signs. All electronic signs are illuminated signs.
   Joint Sign Premises
   Two (2) or more abutting premises, each with less than 100 feet of street
frontage that are treated as 1 premises through an agreement between their
respective owners and the City in order to qualify for a freestanding sign that
would not be allowed on the individual premises.
   Marquee Sign
   A type of projecting sign mounted on a continuous structural band that forms
the more or less vertical edge of the marquee structure.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/b37713d5e40fc82694833f290401791f80be26ac/
IMAGES/0-0-0-6979.png]
   Monument Sign
   A type of freestanding sign with a maximum of 2 sign faces that is
integrated into a solid structure beginning at the ground and including a base
and/or up to 2 masonry or concealed supports. The total width of the support(s)
at the bottom of the sign shall be no less than 25 percent of the width at the
top of the sign. See also Freestanding Sign.
   Neon Sign
   A sign that uses neon, argon, or a similar gas to fill tubing, made of glass
or similar material, that is charged with electricity and used to create an
illuminated tubular sign or illuminated elements of a sign that includes, at a
minimum lettering and/or images. The tubing may contain an alternative
illumination technology, including but not limited to light-emitting diodes
(LEDs). Any non-gaseous illumination technology, such as LEDs, must produce
illumination that appears to be a continuous, uninterrupted line, similar to
illumination produced by gaseous illumination technology.
   Off-premises Sign
   A sign, the content of which does not refer to an establishment operating on
the premises where the sign is displayed.
   On-premises Sign
   A sign, the content of which relates to the premises on which it is located,
referring exclusively to the name, location, products, persons, accommodations,
services, or activities of or on those premises, or the sale, lease, or
construction of those premises.
   Pole Sign
   A type of freestanding sign attached to or supported from the ground by a
single pole or post and not attached to a building. See also Freestanding Sign.
   Portable Sign
   An A-frame or sandwich board sign. A portable sign shall rest on the ground
and shall not be supported by a person or animal.
   Projecting Sign
   A type of building-mounted sign, other than a wall sign or canopy sign, that
projects from and is supported by a wall of a building.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/b37713d5e40fc82694833f290401791f80be26ac/
IMAGES/0-0-0-6981.png]
   Rooftop Sign
   A building-mounted sign that is mounted on the roof of a building.
   Sign
   Any display to public view of letters, words, numerals, emblems, pictures,
or any parts or combinations thereof designed to inform or advertise or promote
merchandise, services, or activities except for the following:
      1.   Non-illuminated names of buildings, dates of erection, monument
citations, commemorative tablets and the like when carved into stone, concrete,
metal, or any other permanent type construction and made an integral part of a
permitted structure or made flush to the ground.
      2.   Signs required by law or signs of a duly-constituted governmental
body.
      3.   Signs placed by a public utility for the safety, welfare, or
convenience of the public, such as signs identifying high voltage, public
telephone, or underground cables.
      4.   Signs on a vehicle, provided that any such vehicle with a sign face
of over 2 square feet is not conspicuously parked so as to constitute a sign;
nothing herein prevents such a vehicle from being used for delivery or other
vehicular purposes.
      5.   Temporary holiday decorations.
   A back-to-back sign or V-shaped sign constitutes 1 sign if it employs a
common set of supports. A composite group of signs integrated into 1 framed
unit or compact structure constitutes 1 sign.
   Sign Area
   See Measurement Definitions.
   Sign Height
   See Measurement Definitions.
   Streamers
   A strand of pennants, triangular flags, or fringe made of any material other
than paper.
   Temporary Sign
   A public display of letters, words, numerals, figures, statues, devices,
emblems, pictures, etc. for a specified period of time that is installed in a
way that is easy to remove.
   Transit Shelter Sign
   A sign located on a City of Albuquerque Transit Department shelter.
   Wall Sign
   A sign flush to the exterior surface of a building, applied directly on the
building or a signboard attached flush to the building, projecting no more than
18 inches from the building surface and not projecting above the roof. However,
light sources aimed at the wall sign may extend farther. A sign on a
freestanding roofed structure, such as a canopy for a vehicle fueling station,
outdoor storage or display, or drive-up facility, is also considered a wall
sign.
   Window Sign
   A sign on a window or door, with its message or image discernible from the
exterior of the building. Window wraps and windows with messages or images are
considered window signs.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/b37713d5e40fc82694833f290401791f80be26ac/
IMAGES/0-0-0-6987.png]
   Yard Sign
   A type of free-standing sign that is relatively small and short, typically
supported by 1 or 2 wires or posts, and located in the front or street side
yard of a lot.
Single Room Occupancy
A type of residential development that provides dwelling units with separate
sleeping areas and some combination of shared bath or toilet facilities. The
building may or may not have separate or shared cooking facilities for the
residents. Each household unit generally occupies only a single room in the
facility for sleeping purposes (in addition to having the non-exclusive use of
shared spaces in the facility).
Site Development Plan
A term used prior to the effective date of the IDO for a scaled plan for
development on one or more lots that specifies at minimum the site, proposed
use(s), pedestrian and vehicular access, any internal circulation, maximum
building height, building setbacks, maximum total dwelling units, and/or
nonresidential floor area. A more detailed site development plan would also
specify the exact locations of structures, their elevations and dimensions, the
parking and loading areas, landscaping, and schedule of development. The
equivalent approval in the IDO will be determined based on the level of detail
provided in the prior approval.
Site Plan
An accurate plan that includes all information required for that type of
application, structure, or development.
Sketch Plat
See Plat Definitions.
Small Area
A mapped area established pursuant to IDO procedures where IDO regulations
specific to that area apply. Small areas adopted after May 18, 2018 shall be no
less than 5 acres, shall include no fewer than 25 lots, and shall include
properties owned by no fewer than 15 property owners. Overlay zones are
considered small areas but have a different minimum size threshold. See also
Measurement Definitions for Small Area and Zone Definitions for Overlay Zone.
Small Loan Business
Any business requiring licensure under the New Mexico Small Loan Business Act,
Article 58-15 NMSA 1978, including but not limited to businesses offering
Payday Loans, Title Loans, Installment Loans, or Refund Tax Anticipation Loans.
For the purposes of this IDO, small loan businesses are treated as a bank use.
See also Bank.
Small-cell Wireless Telecommunications Facility (WTF)
See Wireless Telecommunications Facility Definitions.
Solar Energy Generation
The use of land or buildings as locations for mounting of solar collectors or
other devices that rely on sunshine as an energy source and are capable of
collecting, distributing, or storing the sun's radiant energy. Back-up
generators and battery storage are incidental to this use. See also Electric
Utility, Geothermal Energy Generation, Major Utility, and Wind Energy
Generation.
Solid Waste Convenience Center
City-owned and operated locations for the drop-off of solid waste by residents
and small commercial haulers only.
Special Manufacturing
See Manufacturing Definitions.
Specified Anatomical Areas
Any of the following:
   1.   Less than completely and opaquely covered human genitals, pubic region,
buttocks, anus, or female breasts below a point immediately above the top of
the areolae.
   2.   Human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state, even if completely
and opaquely covered.
See also Adult Entertainment, Adult, Retail, and Specified Sexual Activities.
Specified Sexual Activities
Any of the following:
   1.   Human genitals in a state of sexual stimulation or arousal.
   2.   Acts of human masturbation, sexual intercourse or sodomy.
   3.   Fondling or other erotic touching of human genitals, pubic regions,
buttocks or female breasts.
   4.   Flagellation or torture in the context of a sexual relationship.
   5.   Masochism, erotic or sexually oriented torture, beating or the
infliction of pain.
   6.   Erotic touching, fondling or other such contact with an animal by a
human being.
   7.   Human excretion, urination, menstruation, vaginal, or anal irrigation
as a part of or in connection with any of the activities set forth in 1 through
6 above.
See also Adult Entertainment, Adult Retail, and Specified Anatomical Areas.
Sports Court
A recreational facility for sports played on courts at least 20 feet by 30
feet, including but not limited to basketball, volleyball, tennis, handball,
and racquetball, except facilities that meet the definition of stadium or
sports field. See also Sports Field and Stadium.
Sports Field
A facility designed for amateur or professional sporting events, exhibitions,
or shows. See also Sports Court and Stadium.
Stacking Space
See Parking Definitions.
Stadium
An outdoor, open-air area or structure suitable for sporting events or
performances with tiers of seats or benches and with seating capacity for 1,000
or more people. See also Sports Field and Stadium.
Steep Slopes
See Sensitive Lands Definitions.
Stoop
See Building Frontage Types.
Storefront
See Building Frontage Types.
Street Definitions
   Arterial
   A street designated on the Mid-region Council of Governments (MRCOG) Long
Range Roadway System Map in the Long Range Transportation System Guide of the
Metropolitan Transportation Plan or a logical geographic extension of that
street as determined by the City Engineer. An arterial street may be designated
as minor or principal arterial and serves large volumes of comparatively high-
speed traffic. Access to arterial streets is controlled. See the DPM.
   Collector
   A street designated on the Mid-region Council of Governments (MRCOG) Long
Range Roadway System Map in the Long Range Transportation System Guide of the
Metropolitan Transportation Plan or a logical geographic extension of that
street as determined by the City Engineer. A collector street may be designated
as a major or minor collector and carries substantial traffic from local
streets to arterial streets. See the DPM.
   Interstate Highway
   An access-controlled street that is part of the National Highway System. For
the purposes of this IDO, this term includes all public right-of-way owned or
controlled by NMDOT along Interstate Highway 25 and Interstate Highway 40
associated with the interstate highway, including but not limited to through
lanes, frontage roads, on- and off-ramps, and interchanges. See also Through
Lane.
   Local Street
   A street designated in the DPM that is primarily used to access abutting
properties. A local street may be designated as an access local, normal local,
or major local street and carries low traffic volumes. See the DPM.
   Main Street
   See Center and Corridor Definitions and Measurement Definitions for Corridor
Area.
   Side Street
   On a corner lot, the street abutting the side lot line of the lot. See also
Lot Definitions for Side Lot Line.
   Street
   The portion of a public right-of-way or private way, from curb to curb (or
from edge of paving to edge of paving if there is no curb, or from edge of
visible travel way to edge of visible travel way, if there is no paving), that
is primarily devoted to vehicular use.
   Street Frontage
   The boundary between a premises and a public right-of-way or private way,
whether or not direct access is allowed from the public right-of-way or private
way to the premises.
   Stub Street
   A non-permanent dead-end street intended to be extended in conjunction with
development on adjacent lots or sites. See also Adjacent.
   Through Lane
   A continuous travel lane, excluding any turn lanes or ramps that provide
access to or exit from travel lanes. See also Measurement Definitions for
Distance to a Through Lane.
Street Tree
A tree that meets the provisions of Part 6-6-2 of ROA 1994 (Street Trees).
Street Wall
A masonry wall that defines outdoor spaces and separates the sidewalk and the
street from the private realm (e.g. parking lots, trash cans, gardens, and
equipment).
Street-facing Fa ade
See Fa ade Definitions.
Structure
Anything constructed or erected above ground level that requires location on
the ground or attached to something having a location on the ground but not
including a tent, vehicle, vegetation, trash can, bench, picnic table, or
public utility pole or line. Swimming pools are considered structures, whether
above-ground or in-ground. See also Building, Wall Definitions, Wireless
Telecommunications Facility Definitions, and Sign Definitions.
Structure Height
See Measurement Definitions.
Structured Parking
See Building Height Bonus Definitions and Parking Definitions for Parking
Structure with Ground Floor Uses.
Stub Street
See Street Definitions.
Subdivision Definitions
   Bulk Land Subdivision
   Any subdivision of property that is primarily intended to facilitate
transfer to intermediate land holders, not to create lots available for
development without further subdivision or Site Plan approvals.
   Infrastructure Improvements Agreement (IIA)
   An agreement entered into between the City and a subdivider by which the
subdivider agrees to assure construction of required infrastructure
improvements.
   Minor Subdivision
   Any subdivision that meets the eligibility requirements for a Subdivision of
Land - Minor pursuant to Subsection
14-16-6-6(K).
   Major Subdivision
   Any subdivision not classified as minor.
   Subdivide
   To divide or re-divide (sometimes referred to as "replat") land into 2 or
more parts or to consolidate 2 or more lots by whatever means to facilitate the
present or future conveyance or other transfer of incidents of ownership or
use.
   Subdivider
   Any person who, by reason of his/her power, authority, and/or interest with
respect to a specific lot, effects, brings about, causes, or proposes the
subdivision of that lot.
   Subdivision
   1.   The process of subdividing land into 2 or more lots for the purpose of
sale or development.
   2.   The process of consolidating 2 or more lots for the purpose of sale or
development.
   3.   The subdivided lot.
Subject Property
A lot or collection of lots included in an application submitted pursuant to
this IDO. See also Premises, Project Site, and Lot Definitions.
Substantial Change
Where used associated with a WTF Approval, see Wireless Telecommunications
Facility Definitions.
Swimming Pool
See Structure.
T
Tandem Parking
See Parking Definitions.
Tap Room or Tasting Room
An establishment associated with a local brewery, winery, or distillery
operating under an approved Small Brewer's License as governed by Section 60-
6A-26.1 NMSA 1978, an approved Winegrower's License as governed by Section 60-
6A-11 NMSA 1978, or an approved Craft Distiller's License as governed by
Section 60-6A-6.1 NMSA 1978 where beer, wine, or spirits are available for
consumption on-site. Any production of alcohol as regulated by State law under
one of these licenses is considered artisan manufacturing. Any sale of alcohol
for off-premises consumption as regulated by State law under these licenses is
not considered liquor retail. See also Bar, Liquor Retail, and Manufacturing
Definitions for Artisan Manufacturing.
Temporary Sign
See Sign Definitions.
Theater
A facility with fixed seats for the viewing of movies or live presentations of
musicians or other performing artists.
Through Lane
See Measurement Definitions for Distance to a Through Lane and Street
Definitions for Interstate Highway and Through Lane.
Through Lot
See Lot Definitions.
Toe of Slope
The point where the irrigation facility bank meets natural grade. See
Irrigation Facility for diagram.
Townhouse
See Dwelling Definitions.
Tract
A portion of land identified on a plat, often for a purpose other than
development of a building, such as for drainage, transportation, open space, or
as a remainder lot that will not be sold as a lot.
Trail
See Multi-use Trail and Public Right-of-way.
Trailer
See Vehicle Definitions.
Transit Definitions
   Peak Service Frequency
   The transit route frequency during peak periods (7:00 A.M. to 9:00 A.M. and
3:00 P.M. to 6:00 P.M.), as calculated by the City Transit Department using
published transit schedules and mapped by AGIS. This frequency is generally
calculated for the most frequent route, or combination of paired routes that
act as one route, that stops at the transit stop or station in question and is
based on the average frequency of the route. See Transit Route Frequency.
   Transit Facility
   Land used for transit stations, terminals, depots, and transfer points,
which may include shelters, park-and-ride lots, and/or related facilities on
public or privately owned lots.
   Transit Route Frequency
   The average amount of time between buses arriving at transit stops or
stations calculated by the City Transit Department using published transit
schedules. This frequency is generally calculated for the most frequent route,
or combination of paired routes that act as one route. For routes with segments
that have frequencies with substantially different levels of service, different
transit route frequencies may be designated by segment of the route. See Peak
Service Frequency.
   Transit Shelter
   A shelter erected and maintained under the direction and control of ABQ RIDE
or other public transportation provider as part of a public transit system for
the use of transit patrons.
   Transit Shelter Sign
   See Sign Definitions.
   Transit Station
   A designated place where transit vehicles stop for passengers to board or
alight from the vehicles. Usually associated with a premium service such as bus
rapid transit or commuter rail, transit stations are distinguished from transit
stops by having level-boarding platforms and passenger amenities such as ticket
vending machines and real-time transit information, as well as common transit
stop amenities such as seating and/or shelters. See also Transit Facility and
Measurement Definitions for Premium Transit Area.
   Transit Stop
   A designated place where transit vehicles stop for passengers to board or
alight from a bus. Boarding and alighting are generally accomplished from the
street curb by means of steps or deployable ramps. The level of amenity at a
transit stop tends to reflect the level of usage. Stops at busy locations may
have shelters, seating and possible electronic passenger information systems;
less busy stops may use a simple pole and route sign to mark the location.
Transparent Window or Door
A window or door with windows rated with a Visible Transmittance of 70 percent
or greater or a combination of glass and coating or finish to satisfy the
equivalent standard. A transparent window or door on the ground floor permits
easy viewing into the building from the sidewalk from a minimum distance of 3
feet away from the building. Reflective or mirrored glass is not considered to
be transparent. Any portion of a door or window that is covered with a sign or
translucent window wrap is not considered to be transparent. See also
Reflective or Mirrored Glass.
Tribal Land
Land held in trust, fee land, or land owned by the tribal government of an
Indian Nation, Tribe, or Pueblo that the relevant tribal government requests in
writing to be mapped by AGIS for the purpose of referrals to the tribal
government as a commenting agency. See also Indian Nation, Tribe, or Pueblo.
Tribal Representative
A tribally appointed representative currently serving on the City of
Albuquerque Commission on American Indian/Alaska Native Affairs. The Tribal
Liaison with the City's Office of Native American Affairs shall maintain an
updated list of the names and contact information for members of the City of
Albuquerque Commission on American Indian/Alaska Native Affairs.
U
Unconcealed Wireless Telecommunications Facility
See Wireless Telecommunications Facility Definitions.
University or College
An institution, other than a vocational school, that provides full-time or
part-time education beyond high school. See also School, and Vocational School.
Upgrade
Where used associated with a WTF Approval, see Wireless Telecommunications
Facility Definitions for Upgrade.
Urban Center
See Center and Corridor Definitions.
Urban Residential
See Building Frontage Types.
Usable Open Space
See Open Space Definitions.
Use Definitions
   Accessory Use
   A land use that is subordinate in use, area, or purpose to a primary land
use on the same lot or, in any Mixed-use or Non-residential zone district, the
same premises. An accessory use may or may not be located in an accessory
structure. For the purposes of this IDO, accessory uses are listed in
Table 4-2-1, may have separate Use-specific Standards, or may be defined as
incidental to another primary use. See also Use Definitions for Primary Use.
   Allowable Use
   A land use allowed in a particular zone district by
Table 4-2-1 as a primary or accessory use, whether allowed permissively or
conditionally. See also Use Definitions for Permissive Use, Conditional use,
and Accessory Use.
   Conditional Use
   A land use that is allowable in a particular zone district subject to
conditional approval by the ZHE based on a review of the potential adverse
impacts of the use and any appropriate mitigations to minimize those impacts on
nearby properties.
Table 4-2-1 specifies whether a particular conditional use is primary (listed
as C) or accessory (listed as CA) or allowed conditionally in a primary
building that has been vacant for a specified amount of time (listed as CV).
   Non-residential Use
   Any primary use in
Table 4-2-1 not listed in the Residential Uses category. See also Residential
Use.
   Permissive Use
   A land use that is allowed by-right in a particular zone district, either as
a primary or accessory use. Permissive Primary uses are listed as P in
Table 4-2-1. Permissive Accessory uses are listed as A in
Table 4-2-1.
   Primary Use
   A land use that is a primary use of a property and allowable within a
particular zone district either permissively or conditionally. A primary use
may be combined with other primary or accessory uses allowable within that zone
district, subject to IDO standards.
   Residential Use
   Any primary use listed in the Residential Uses category in
Table 4-2-1. See also Non-residential Use.
   Temporary Use
   A land use that is allowed for a short period of time on a property and
allowable within a particular zone district permissively. Temporary uses are
listed as T in
Table 4-2-1. A temporary use may or may not require a permit from the Planning
Department. Any temporary activity or event not listed in
Table 4-2-1 is not considered a land use and therefore is not a temporary use
as regulated by this IDO. A temporary use may be allowed on vacant land or
combined with other primary or accessory uses allowable within a zone district,
subject to IDO standards.
Utility
See Drainage Facility, Electric Utility, Major Public Infrastructure, and Major
Utility.
Utility-scale Electric Facility
Facilities developed and/or used by an electric utility regulated by the New
Mexico Public Regulation Commission or a facility that is at least 1 megawatt
(MW) of net generation or storage capacity and owned by electric utilities or
independent power producers to provide grid support services to the bulk
electric system and those systems that transmit or distribute electricity with
voltages of 4.16 kilovolts (kV) or greater. See also Electric Utility and
Energy Storage System.
V
Vacation
The act that rescinds all or part of a recorded subdivision plat including
legal dedications and grants of easements.
Variance
Exceptions to dimensional standards or variations from the strict, literal
application of standards in this IDO or the DPM. Variances from IDO standards
are reviewed and decided by the ZHE or EPC, while Variances from technical
standards in the DPM or related to projects in public rights-of-way are decided
by the DHO. The allowable use of premises may never be changed via a Variance.
See also Waiver and Use Definitions for Allowable Use.
Vegetative Screen
See Wall and Fence Definitions.
Vehicle Definitions
   Boat
   A vehicle not exceeding 30 feet in body length, 8 feet in width, or 11 feet
in overall height, for traveling in or on water. Height includes the trailer if
the boat is mounted on a trailer. See also Trailer.
   Heavy Vehicle and Equipment Sales, Rental, Fueling, and Repair
   A facility that is engaged in the sales, fueling, rental, and/or vehicle
repair of heavy vehicles and equipment typically used in agricultural, transit,
commercial, or industrial operations. This use does not include any vehicle
that meets a definition for a distinct vehicle in this IDO, including but not
limited to Recreational Vehicle. Sales of parts, whether new or used, for heavy
vehicles and equipment, and incidental storage of heavy vehicles related to
sales, rental, fueling, repair, service, and maintenance are included in this
use. See also Vehicle Definitions for Heavy Vehicle.
   Light Vehicle Fueling Station
   An establishment primarily engaged in the retail dispensing or sale of light
vehicle fuels, including but not limited to gasoline, gas/oil mixtures, diesel
fuel, compressed natural gas, electricity, and hydrogen through fixed, approved
dispensing equipment. Incidental activities include, but are not limited to car
washes; vehicle service and maintenance; and the sale of convenience items,
food, beverages, household necessities, lubricants, and batteries. This use
does not include any facility meeting the definition of light vehicle repair
(except those incidental services listed above), light vehicle sales and
rental, outdoor vehicle storage, or any use in the Retail Sales sub-category in
Table 4-2-1 except incidental retail sales listed above. See also Liquor
Retail, Outdoor Vehicle Storage, and Vehicle Definitions for Light Vehicle
Repair, Light Vehicle Sales and Rental, Light Vehicle, Vehicle Repair, and
Vehicle Service and Maintenance.
   Light Vehicle Repair
   Any facility providing vehicle repair and vehicle service and maintenance of
light vehicles. See also Vehicle Definitions for Light Vehicle, Vehicle Repair,
and Vehicle Service and Maintenance.
   Light Vehicle Sales and Rental
   An establishment primarily engaged in the retail sale and/or rental of new
and used light vehicles, including incidental outdoor display, storage, and
vehicle service and maintenance. This use includes the retail sale/rental of
modular and manufactured homes, motor homes. This use does not include outdoor
vehicle storage as a primary use. See also Vehicle Definitions for Light
Vehicle and Vehicle Service and Maintenance.
   Recreational Vehicle
   A motor vehicle or trailer equipped with living space and amenities,
including but not limited to bus campers, camper trailers, pickup campers,
travel trailers, motor homes, park model trailers, and tiny houses. See also
Vehicle.
   Trailer
   A vehicle without motive power, designed so that it can be drawn by a motor
vehicle, to be used for the carrying of persons or property or as a human
habitation. A structure that meets the requirements of Articles 14-1 and 14-
3 of ROA 1994 (Uniform Administrative Code and Technical Codes and Uniform
Housing Code) in all ways, including foundation, is not a trailer, whether or
not it was once a vehicle.
   Vehicle
   A vehicle that meets the definition in Section 8-1-1-2 of ROA 1994 (Traffic
Code - Definitions).
      Light Vehicle
      A vehicle that has a gross vehicle weight rating of less than 10,000
pounds, including but not limited to automobiles, light trucks, sport utility
vehicles, vans, boats, recreational vehicles, trailers, motorcycles, mopeds,
scooters, and ATVs.
      Heavy vehicle
      A vehicle with a gross vehicle weight rating of 10,000 pounds or greater,
including but not limited to tractors, semi-trucks and/or trailers, buses,
harvesters, loaders, and all tracked vehicles.
   Vehicle Repair
   An incidental activity of light vehicle repair use and heavy vehicle and
equipment sales, rental, fueling, and repair use that includes vehicle repair
beyond vehicle service and maintenance. See Heavy Vehicle and Equipment Sales,
Rental, Fueling, and Repair, Light Vehicle Repair, and Vehicle Service and
Maintenance.
   Vehicle Service and Maintenance
   An incidental activity of light vehicle repair use; heavy vehicle and
equipment sales, rental, fueling, and repair use; and light vehicle sales and
rentals that includes services for a vehicle that are part of regular
maintenance, including but not limited to battery charging, tire repairs, and
oil and fluid changes. See Heavy Vehicle and Equipment Sales, Rental, Fueling,
and Repair, Light Vehicle Repair, and Vehicle Repair.
Veterinary Hospital
An establishment of licensed practitioners primarily rendering dentistry,
surgical, and medical treatment for animals that may provide overnight
accommodations to pets for a limited period before or after medical procedures.
Incidental activities include but are not limited to outdoor animal runs and
crematory facilities.
View Fencing
See Wall and Fence Definitions.
View Frame
See Subsection
14-16-3-6(D)(3) (Coors Boulevard - VPO-1 Definitions).
View Plane
See Subsection
14-16-3-6(D)(3) (Coors Boulevard - VPO-1 Definitions).
Vocational School
A public or private institution that provides specialized training and
education beyond the high school level, but that does not provide lodging or
dwelling units for students or faculty, and that has programs that typically
result in the awarding of a certificate. See also School and University or
College.
W
Waiver
A deviation beyond the thresholds established in
Table 6-4-1 or from standards not included in
Table 6-4-1. See also Deviation.
Walkway
A passage or path for walking located on private property, which often connects
the sidewalk to a building entrance or connects between different buildings on
a site.
Wall and Fence Definitions
   Courtyard Wall
   Walls that are not on the lot line that enclose an outdoor space to form an
outdoor courtyard.
   Opaque Wall or Fence
   A continuous non-transparent vertical surface used as part of a perimeter or
courtyard wall or fence. A fence with inserts or non-rigid or cloth-like
materials attached to the fence does not constitute an opaque wall or fence.
   Perimeter Wall
   A wall constructed on a lot line, typically to define a property boundary,
enclose a property, or provide privacy.
   Retaining Wall
   A wall designed and constructed to resist the lateral pressure of soil.
   Vegetative Screen
   A view screen created from evergreen plant material that is at least 75
percent opaque on average across the area to be screened at maturity. Plant
material can be trees, vines, or shrubs, as long as they otherwise meet
standards in this IDO.
   View Fencing
   A wall that is at most 25 percent opaque to perpendicular view unless
specified otherwise in this IDO, constructed of wood, painted or coated pipe,
wrought iron, or smooth wire pasture fence material. View fencing is intended
to provide a sense of openness and continuity, visual transparency, and passive
surveillance while still providing perimeter security.
   Wall
   A vertical structure of masonry (which includes stone, clay, brick, and
poured concrete), wood, plaster, or other material that defines or encloses an
area. Where the IDO provides standards about the wall of a building, the term
"fa ade" is used, except for signage on buildings, which uses the term "wall
sign." Unless specified otherwise in this IDO, this term includes walls,
fences, perimeter walls, courtyard walls, and retaining walls. A post that
supports a structure other than a wall, such as a sign or a carport, is not
considered a wall.
   Wall Height
   See Measurement Definitions.
Wall Sign
See Sign Definitions.
Walled Court
See Building Frontage Types.
Warehouse
See Building Frontage Types.
Warehousing
The use of a building primarily for the holding or storage of goods, including
cold storage, and merchandise for onward transportation or for distribution to
retailers, but not for sale to the general public, and not including self-
storage. Loading and unloading from rail spurs is incidental to this use. See
also Self-storage.
Waste and/or Recycling Transfer Station
A site or facility where materials to be recycled or reprocessed are unloaded
after collection and transferred onto transport vehicles, either immediately or
following a temporary storage period, aggregation, or sorting. The facility may
feature sorting, material crushing apparatus, and the storage of the material
until it is transported. Loading and unloading from rail spurs is incidental to
this use.
Water Harvesting
A water conservation method used to capture, divert, and/or store rainwater for
plant irrigation and other uses.
Wetlands
See Sensitive Lands Definitions.
Wholesaling and Distribution Center
A facility for the storage of products, supplies, and equipment offered for
wholesale distribution, and not for direct sale to the general public.
Wind Energy Generation
The use of land for the installation wind energy turbines, wind chargers,
windmills, battery banks, and related equipment to generate electrical power
from wind or the installation of such equipment or devices on a building. Back-
up generators and battery storage are incidental to this use. See also Electric
Utility, Geothermal Energy Generation, Major Utility, and Solar Energy
Generation.
Window
See Transparent Window or Door.
Window Sign
See Sign Definitions.
Wireless Telecommunications Facility (WTF) Definitions
   Architecturally Integrated WTF
   A WTF that is camouflaged into the structure on which it is located by means
of color, texturing, architectural treatment, massing, size, design, and/or
shape. An architecturally integrated WTF is a concealed facility.
   Collocation
   The location of more than one WTF at a single location and/or using the same
structure, not including a public utility structure, for mounting wireless
telecommunications antennas by more than one provider of wireless
telecommunications services. See also Public Utility Collocation.
   Concealed WTF
   As further prescribed in Subsection
14-16-4-3(E)(12)(a), a WTF that is aesthetically integrated or otherwise
consistent with surrounding existing buildings, structures, and landscaping,
including height, color, style, massing, placement, design, and shape, and that
does not visually stand out as a WTF. A face-mounted WTF that is painted to
match the fa ade, but has no other design elements that conceal the wireless
telecommunications antenna, remains readily visible to the naked eye and is not
considered a concealed WTF.
   Existing Vertical Structure
   Any tower or other vertical structure that was constructed in accordance
with a building permit.
   Face-mounted WTF
   A wireless telecommunications antenna attached to and covering a small
portion of the surface of a building. Face-mounted WTFs are considered
unconcealed and are prohibited. Existing face-mounted WTFs are regulated as
Nonconforming uses. See also Unconcealed WTF.
   Freestanding WTF
   A WTF, other than a public utility collocation, that consists of a
standalone support structure, antennas, and associated equipment. The support
structure may be a wooden pole, steel monopole, lattice tower, or similar
structure.
   Public Utility Collocation
   The location of one or more wireless telecommunications antennas on a public
utility structure, including transmission structures.
   Public Utility Structure
   See Public Utility Structure.
   Roof-mounted WTF
   A WTF placed on a rooftop through gravity mounts or other surface
attachments and integrated into the natural rooftop profile of the building so
as to resemble a permissible rooftop structure, such as a ventilator, cooling
equipment, solar equipment, water tank, chimney, or parapet.
   Small-cell WTF
   A WTF that is designed to act as a booster site to increase localized
network capacity. This use is defined and regulated as a small wireless
facility by Article 5-10 of ROA 1994 (Small Wireless Facilities).
   Substantial Change
   As defined and regulated by federal law.
   Unconcealed WTF
   A nonconforming WTF that is not designed as a concealed structure. These
include lattice towers with exposed wireless telecommunications antennas and
face-mounted wireless telecommunications antennas. New construction of this
type of facility is prohibited.
   Upgrade
   As defined and regulated by federal law, the replacement or addition of
wireless telecommunications antenna(s) or equipment, not including routine
maintenance.
   Wireless Telecommunications Antenna
   A component of a WTF. Any exterior transmitting or receiving device that may
be mounted on a tower, building, or structure and used in communications that
radiates or captures electromagnetic waves, digital signals, analog signals,
radio frequencies (excluding radar signals), or other commercial signals. It
includes, but is not limited to, directional antennas (such as panels,
microwave dishes, and satellite dishes) and omni-directional antennas (such as
whips), but not including non-commercial or broadcasting antennas. See also
Non-commercial or Broadcasting Antenna.
   Wireless Telecommunications Facility (WTF)
   A facility that transmits and/or receives signals or waves radiated or
captured by a wireless telecommunications antenna. It may include: antennas of
all kinds including microwave dishes, horns, and other types of equipment for
the transmission or reception of such signals, telecommunications tower or
similar structures supporting said equipment, equipment buildings or cabinets,
parking area, and/or other accessory development. Non-commercial or
broadcasting antennas are not considered to be WTFs. See also Non-commercial or
Broadcasting Antenna.
   Wireless Telecommunications Services
   The provision or offering for rent, sale, or lease, or in exchange for other
value received, of the transmittal of voice, data, image, graphic, and video
programming information between or among points excluding only cable services.
   Wireless Telecommunications Tower
   A component of a WTF. A structure intended to support wireless
telecommunications antennas. Examples of such structures include, but are not
limited to, freestanding poles (such as monopoles, masts, poles, or guyed
towers) and lattice construction steel towers.
Workforce Housing
Housing meeting the definition of the City's Workforce Housing Opportunity
regulations pursuant to Part 14-9-1 of ROA 1994 (Workforce Housing Opportunity
Act). See also Building Height Bonus Definitions.
Wrapped Parking
See Parking Definitions.
Y
Yard Definitions
   Front Yard
   The part of a lot from the front lot line to any front fa ade of the primary
building, extended to both side lot lines. If there is no primary building on
the lot, the part of a lot within the minimum setback in the zone district on
the side of the lot where the property will be addressed. See also Lot
Definitions.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/b37713d5e40fc82694833f290401791f80be26ac/
IMAGES/0-0-0-6971.png]
   Interior Side Yard
   The part of a lot from an interior side lot line to the side fa ade of the
primary building. See also Lot Definitions.
   Rear Yard
   The part of a lot from the rear lot line to any rear fa ade of the primary
building, extended to both side lot lines. See also Lot Definitions.
   Street Side Yard
   The part of a lot from a street side lot line the side fa ade of the primary
building. See also Lot Definitions.
Yard, Railroad
See Railroad Yard.
Yard Sign
See Sign Definitions.
Z
Zone Definitions
   Overlay Zone
   Regulations that prevail over other IDO regulations to ensure protection for
designated areas. Overlay zones include Airport Protection Overlay (APO),
Character Protection Overlay (CPO), Historic Protection Overlay (HPO), and View
Protection Overlay (VPO). Character Protection and View Protection Overlay
zones adopted after May 18, 2018 shall be no less than 10 acres, shall include
no fewer than 50 lots, and shall include properties owned by no fewer than 25
property owners. There is no minimum size for Airport Protections Overlay or
Historic Protection Overlay zones. See also Small Area.
   Zone Boundary
   The boundary of a zone district is a lot line unless clearly otherwise shown
on the Official Zoning Map, in which case, the boundary of a zone is determined
by use of the scale of measurement shown on the Official Zoning Map.
   Zone District
   One of the zone districts established by this IDO and the boundaries of such
zone districts shown on the Official Zoning Map. Zoning regulations include the
Use Regulations, Development Standards, and Administration and Enforcement
provisions of this IDO.
   Mixed-use Zone District
   Any zone district categorized as Mixed-use in
Part 14-16-2 of this IDO.
   Non-residential Zone District
   Any zone district categorized as Non-residential in    
Part 14-16-2 of this IDO.
   Residential Zone District
   Any zone district categorized as Residential in
Part 14-16-2 of this IDO. For the purposes of any Use-specific Standard in
Section
14-16-4-3, this includes any lot zoned Planned Development (PD) with a Site
Plan approved prior to the adoption of this IDO that allows one or more
residential uses and that is developed on lots with residential development
that make up at least 50 percent of the site plan area.
Zoning Enforcement Officer (ZEO)
A City Planning Department employee or his/her authorized representative who
interprets the provisions of this IDO, reviews applications for decisions
related to this IDO, and may make administrative decisions.
Zoning Hearing Examiner (ZHE)
A person or firm on contract with the City who reviews and decides applications
for Conditional Use Approvals, Expansions of Nonconforming Use or Structure,
Permit - Carport, Permit - Wall or Fence - Major, and Variances.
Zoo
A facility, indoor and/or outdoor, where animals are kept for viewing by the
public, and that may be accredited by the American Zoological Association.
Office, retail, and other commercial uses commonly established in such
facilities and related parking structures shall be allowed as accessory
appurtenances. This use does not include the ABQ BioPark, which is listed as a
separate use in this IDO and regulated per the BioPark Master Plan.
7-2   ACRONYMS AND ABBREVIATIONS
Table 7-2-1: Acronyms and Abbreviations
Table 7-2-1: Acronyms and Abbreviations
ABC Comp Plan Albuquerque/Bernalillo County Comprehensive Plan
ABCWUA        Albuquerque Bernalillo County Water Utility Authority
ABQ           Albuquerque
ABQ RIDE      City of Albuquerque Transit Department
AC            Activity Center (ABC Comp Plan Center)
ADA           Americans with Disabilities Act
ADR           City of Albuquerque Office of Alternative Dispute Resolution
AMAFCA        Albuquerque Metropolitan Arroyo Flood Control Authority
ANSI          American National Standards Institute
APO           Airport Protection Overlay (zone)
BR            Bedroom
CMU           Concrete Masonry Unit
BUG           Backlight, Uplight, Glare
CD            Candela
CCT           Correlated Color Temperature
CPA           Community Planning Area
CPO           Character Protection Overlay (zone)
CPTED         Crime Prevention Through Environmental Design
CRI           Color Rendering Index
DHO           Development Hearing Officer
DNL           Day-night Noise Level
DPM           Development Process Manual
DRB           Development Review Board
DRC           Design Review Committee
DT            Downtown (ABC Comp Plan Center)
EC            Employment Center (ABC Comp Plan Center)
EPA           United States Environmental Protection Agency
EPC           Environmental Planning Commission
ESS           Energy Storage System
FAA           Federal Aviation Administration
FA            Gross Floor Area
FC            Foot Candle
HEART         Humane and Ethical Animal Rules and Treatment
HID           High-intensity Discharge
HPO           Historic Preservation Overlay (zone)
IDO           Integrated Development Ordinance
IES           Illuminating Engineering Society
HUD           U.S. Department of Housing & Urban Development
IIA           Infrastructure Improvements Agreement
kV            Kilovolt
LC            Landmarks Commission
LED           Light-Emitting Diode
LRV           Light Reflective Value
LUHO          Land Use Hearing Officer
MRCOG         Mid-region Council of Governments
MRGCD         Middle Rio Grande Conservancy District
MS            Main Street (ABC Comp Plan Corridor)
MT            Major Transit (ABC Comp Plan Corridor)
MW            Megawatt
MX            Mixed-use (zone district)
MX-FB         Mixed-use Form-based (zone district)
MX-H          Mixed-use High Intensity (zone district)
MX-L          Mixed-use Low Intensity (zone district)
MX-M          Mixed-use Medium Intensity (zone district)
MX-T          Mixed-use Transition (zone district)
NMAC          New Mexico Administrative Code
NMSA          New Mexico Statutes Annotated
NR-BP         Non-residential Business Park (zone district)
NR-C          Non-residential Commercial (zone district)
NR-GM         Non-residential General Manufacturing (zone district)
NR-LM         Non-residential Light Manufacturing (zone district)
NR-PO         Non-residential Park and Open Space (zone district)
NR-SU         Non-residential Sensitive Use (zone district)
ONC           Office of Neighborhood Coordination
PC            Planned Community (zone district)
PD            Planned Development (zone district)
PNM           Public Service Company of New Mexico (electric utility service)
PROWAG        Public Right-of-way Accessibility Guidelines
PT            Premium Transit (ABC Comp Plan Corridor - 660 feet from transit
              stations)
R-1           Residential Single-family (zone district)
R-A           Rural and Agricultural (zone district)
R-MC          Residential Manufactured Home Community (zone district)
R-MH          Residential Multi-family High Density (zone district)
R-ML          Residential Multi-family Low Density (zone district)
R-T           Residential Townhouse (zone district)
ROA 1994      Revised Ordinances of Albuquerque 1994 (City of Albuquerque Code
              of Ordinances)
TIS           Traffic Impact Study
UC            Urban Center (ABC Comp Plan Center)
VPO           View Protection Overlay (zone)
WTF           Wireless Telecommunications Facility
ZEO           Zoning Enforcement Officer
ZHE           Zoning Hearing Examiner
 
 
INTRODUCTION
The City of Albuquerque’s Merit System Ordinance establishes the framework for
the administration of the City’s personnel system. Pursuant to the Merit System
Ordinance, these Personnel Rules and Regulations are hereby promulgated to
interpret and implement the Ordinance.
These Personnel Rules and Regulations establish the policies and practices
which will be followed by the City of Albuquerque in personnel administration.
They define a system based on merit and the principles which govern the
conditions of City employment. The Personnel Rules and Regulations shall be
distributed to all departments, divisions, sections, agencies and programs of
the City in order that an official copy is accessible to all employees during
working hours.
These Personnel Rules and Regulations should be interpreted as a whole rather
than interpreting individual sections or sentences in isolation and out of
context. Official interpretation of these Regulations shall be made by the
Human Resources Department. They have the force and effect of law for the
various departments, agencies and special programs of the City. The Personnel
Rules and Regulations shall be the only source and compilation of official
directives for personnel policies unless otherwise superceded by Administrative
Instructions or Collective Bargaining Agreements.
Individual department policies, rules, regulations and procedures can be
promulgated with the concurrence of the Human Resources Director and the
approval of the Chief Administrative Officer to ensure they are not in conflict
with the substance of the Merit System Ordinance and the Personnel Rules and
Regulations. These Regulations do not constitute an employment contract and may
be amended by the Human Resources Department, as necessary, with the approval
of the Chief Administrative Officer.
100.   APPLICATION PROCEDURES
Prior to considering any application for employment or application update for
transfer or promotion the Chief Administrative Officer must approve a Position
Release Form for all positions graded M15/I8 and above. The Human Resources
Director must approve a Position Release Form for all other positions.
101.   APPLICATION PROCEDURES FOR INITIAL EMPLOYMENT
Initial applications for employment may be submitted only for advertised
vacancies or positions for which the City maintains an applicant pool. No
person may be hired without completing an application for employment.
Applications that are part of an applicant pool will remain active for a period
of six (6) months.
101.1   Updating Applicant Information
Applicants that are part of an applicant pool must keep information current by
submitting an updated application to the Human Resources Department, which
includes name, address, skills, abilities and experience.
101.2   Applications Required
External applicants must submit a completed application for each position for
which they wish to be considered. Applicants requesting a reasonable
accommodation pursuant to the Americans with Disabilities Act must submit their
request at the time of initial application. The required form may be obtained
from the Human Resources Department.
101.3   Requirements for Employment
Applicants are responsible for furnishing job-related documentation, including,
but not limited to, a copy of educational transcripts, proof of the attainment
of licenses, certificates, permits, degrees and registrations, as required,
prior to an offer of employment.
All male applicants between the ages of eighteen (18) and twenty-five (25) will
be required to provide a copy of the registration card with the Federal
Selective Service to show proof of registration at the time of hire.
At the time of hire, applicants will be required to provide documentation in
accordance with the Immigration Reform and Control Act of 1986.
Applicants must be citizens of the United States or possess a valid resident
visa. Applicants may be required to pass employment tests, a medical
examination, drug/alcohol screening, and a psychological examination or health
history review.
101.4   Applicant Qualifications
Qualifications are the primary consideration in filling any position.
Experience, education, training, skills and other abilities, as well as
specific position requirements and the prior employment history of the
applicant will be considered in appraising individual qualifications.
101.5   Conditional Hire (March 5, 2005)
Conditional hires are generally discouraged. The Human Resources Director may
approve an offer of employment, conditional upon passing a physical
examination, drug/alcohol test and/or background check. The hiring department
is responsible for ensuring the applicant completes the required test(s) and
must coordinate such efforts with the Human Resources Department or Employee
Health Clinic as necessary.
A conditional hire may not exceed two pay periods.
101.6   Ineligibility for Employment (March 5, 2005)
Applicants are ineligible for City employment for reasons including, but not
limited to, the following:
A.   Any fraudulent or false statement on an application or failure to provide
information; or
B.   Any fraudulent conduct in connection with an examination; or
C.   Failure to pass a medical examination, alcohol/drug screening,
psychological examination and/or health history review as determined by the
Human Resources Department; or
D.   Failure to comply with the requirement to be fingerprinted and/or
photographed, as required by the Human Resources Department; or
E.   Failure to appear for processing or for work after receiving a notice of
appointment from the Human Resources Department; or
F.   Failure to provide all documentation required for processing including
direct deposit enrollment, as required by the Human Resources Department; or
G.   Prior conviction of a felony involving moral turpitude if the criminal
conviction relates to the position applied for by the applicant. Misdemeanor
convictions will be considered on a case-by-case basis, based on job-
relatedness; or
H.   Prior employment with the City resulted in termination for cause; or
I.   Inability to meet the requirements for a City Operator’s Permit for any
position where driving is necessary to perform an employee’s job.
102.   APPLICATION FOR TRANSFER OR PROMOTION
City employees may apply for a transfer or promotion to other advertised
positions by submitting an Application Update Form as required in the job
advertisement. Refer to collective bargaining agreements for procedures
relating to transfers and promotions into positions covered by such agreements.
102.1   Classified Positions
Vacant positions in the City will be filled with the best-qualified candidate
as determined by the selection committee or hiring supervisor. All classified
vacancies will be advertised to City employees, except probationary police and
fire, according to progression plans approved by Human Resources, as specified
in the collective bargaining agreements, or as provided in Sections 102.4 and
600. Applications from persons outside City employment may be considered at the
same time.
102.2   Applying for an Advertised Vacancy
A City employee may apply for an advertised vacancy and must comply with all
procedures on the advertisement, which includes submitting an Application
Update form for each position for which applied. The Human Resources Department
will also provide a Form allowing an employee to request a reasonable
accommodation, pursuant to the Americans with Disabilities Act, which must be
submitted at the time of applying for the position prior to the expiration date
of the advertisement.
102.3   Qualifications for Promotion
Selection for promotion and transfer is made on the basis of education,
experience, training, skills and other abilities. Related education and related
experience may be interchangeable on a year for year basis unless otherwise
specified. It is the employee’s responsibility to update their personnel file
and to provide a copy of educational transcripts, proof of the attainment of
licenses, certificates, permits, degrees and registrations, as required, at the
time of applying for a position. The personnel file/records of applicants will
be made available to the interviewing and hiring supervisor.
102.4   Employees Given Placement Preference
Subject to preferences required by law, preference will be given in filling a
vacant position of the same or lower grade to employees that meet minimum
qualifications and have the ability to perform the essential job functions with
or without accommodation.
Placement preference will be provided in the following order:
A.   Employees reinstated as a result of administrative board or judicial
order;
B.   Employees returning from active duty in the military;
C.   Employees transferred as the result of Chief Administrative Officer
action;
D.   Employees returning from a physical layoff;
E.   Employees returning from a layoff;
F.   Employees notified of layoff; and
G.   Employees returning from authorized absence from work without pay.
Such preference protections, except employees returning from active duty in the
military or reinstatement resulting from administrative or judicial action,
will be terminated one (1) year from the date the preference was created, with
the exception of layoff, the provision for which is two years.
102.5   Authority to Place Employees with Preference
The Human Resources Director, with the prior approval of the Chief
Administrative Officer, will have the sole authority to place employees who are
granted a placement preference in a position for which they qualify as provided
in this section.
102.6   Classified Employees Who Accept Unclassified Positions
Employees who have held a classified position with the City for more than ten
(10) years prior to serving in an unclassified position be allowed to return to
a vacant classified position. The Chief Administrative Officer will determine
the specific position to which the employee will be returned. The Human
Resources Director will present such offer to the employee.
102.7   Other Placements or Transfers
All placements and/or transfers initiated by other departments to which
preferences do not apply must be processed through the Human Resources
Director.
103.   APPLICATIONS FOR REINSTATEMENT OR REHIRE
103.1   Reinstatement after Active Military Service
Upon appropriate request following separation from military service, the City
will reinstate employees who have taken leave without pay for active military
service into the same or similarly classified position, or as otherwise
specified by Federal law, with no loss of seniority.
Employees will be placed at the step in the pay plan that they would have
reached if employment with the City had not been interrupted by military
service. Any unused, uncompensated leave accrued prior to entering military
service will be reinstated.
An employee seeking reinstatement must notify the Human Resources Director, in
writing, of their availability for employment as required by Federal law, but
in no event later than ninety (90) days of the date of separation and Employee
must supply a copy of the orders certifying they were honorably separated from
military duty.
Employees may be required to pass a medical examination, alcohol/drug
screening, psychological examination, and health history review, be
fingerprinted and/or photographed, as required by the Human Resources
Department.
All offers of reinstatement must be approved by the Chief Administrative
Officer and presented to the employee by the Human Resources Director.
103.2   Reinstatement after Layoff
Classified, non-probationary employees notified of, or on layoff status, will
be given placement preference for any vacant classified position for which they
are qualified, and which is equal to or lower in grade than the position from
which they were laid off. Acceptance of a position at a lower grade may require
a reduction in the rate of pay. Preference for reinstatement will cease:
A.   Two (2) years after the effective date of the layoff; or
B.   When the employee has refused to accept an offer of employment with the
City in a position for which they qualify and for which the grade is the same
or of comparable pay to that of the position from which they were laid off; or
C.   When the employee accepts another position with the City; or
D.   When the employee voluntarily resigns from City employment.
All offers of reinstatement must be approved by the Chief Administrative
Officer and presented to the employee by the Human Resources Director.
103.3   Reinstatement of Former Employees
Former employees who voluntarily resign may be reinstated if:
A.   They did not resign for the purpose of withdrawing PERA contributions; and
B.   Their applications are received and the reinstatement occurs no more than
thirty (30) days after the date of termination; and
C.   The department director approves the reinstatement request and submits the
recommendation to the Human Resources Department for approval, prior to
reinstatement; and
D.   There is a vacant position for which they are qualified, within the same
department and which is at the same or lower grade as the position held at the
time of termination.
104.   APPLICATION FOR REEMPLOYMENT
All former employees of the City of Albuquerque are required to complete
employment procedures in the same manner as other external applicants. The
interviewing or hiring supervisor may review the personnel records and
performance ratings of former employees who apply for rehire.
Employees terminated for cause will not be considered for rehire.
104.1   Reemployment of Sworn Police Personnel
A former police officer of the City of Albuquerque, eligible for reemployment,
may be rehired into the Police Department under the following conditions,
unless the reemployment is the result of judicial or administrative action:
A.   Written and oral entrance examinations may be required at the discretion
of the Chief of Police; and
B.   Physical requirements must be met; and
C.   Other current prerequisites may be required, including, but not limited
to, medical examinations, alcohol/drug screening, psychological examination,
fingerprinting and photographing; and
D.   The Chief of Police must approve the reemployment request and submit it
for approval to the Chief Administrative Officer; and
E.   If the break in continuous employment is more than thirty (30) calendar
days, a former officer may not be reemployed at a rank higher than P/O 1/C, at
the step previously held by the employee, regardless of grade. Service dates
will be adjusted in accordance with the collective bargaining agreement or
standard operating procedure; and
F.   All former police officers will be subject to a background investigation.
104.2   Reemployment of Sworn Firefighters
A former firefighter of the City of Albuquerque, eligible for reemployment, may
be rehired into the Fire Department under the following conditions, unless the
reemployment is the result of judicial or administrative action:
A.   Written and oral entrance examinations may be required at the discretion
of the Fire Chief; and
B.   Physical requirements must be met; and
C.   Other current prerequisites may be required, including, but not limited
to, medical examinations, alcohol/drug screening, psychological examination,
fingerprinting and photographing; and
D.   The Fire Chief must approve the reemployment request and submit it for
approval to the Chief Administrative Officer; and
E.   If the break in continuous employment is more than thirty (30) calendar
days, a former firefighter may not be reemployed in a position higher than a
Firefighter 1/C, at the step previously held by the employee, regardless of
grade. If required to retake recruit training, a former firefighter will be
paid at the rate for a Firefighter 2/C while in training. Service dates will be
adjusted in accordance with the collective bargaining agreement or standard
operating procedure; and
F.   All former firefighters will be subject to a background investigation.
200.   TESTING AND EXAMINATIONS
PART 1: General Testing and Examinations
Effective Date November 1, 2013
1.   ISSUING AGENCY: The Human Resources Department.
2.   SCOPE: These rules have general applicability to all prospective and
current employees, classified and unclassified, including but not limited to
interns, volunteers, and seasonal employees.
3.   STATUTORY AUTHORITY: Americans with Disabilities Act of 1990, Title I, 42
U.S.C. § 12111-12117 (2006); Americans with Disabilities Act of 1990, Title V
42 U.S.C. § 12201-12213 (2006); Title VII of the Civil Rights Act of 1964, 42
U.S.C. § 2000e (2006); Civil Rights Act of 991; EEOC Uniform Guidelines on
Employee Selection Procedures, 29 CFR pt. 1607, (1978);; Uniformed Services
Employment and Re-Employment Rights Act (USERRA), 38 U.S.C.A. § 4301 et seq.
4.   DURATION: Until revoked.
5.   EFFECTIVE DATE: November 1, 2013.
6.   OBJECTIVE/PURPOSE: This regulation will be the authority for administering
examinations. Examinations are used to determine whether an applicant or
candidate can demonstrate the required knowledge, skill, and ability as a
component of meeting the minimum qualifications for a position.
7.   RESPONSIBILITY FOR ADMINISTRATION: Director of Human Resources Department.
8.   DEFINITIONS:
   A.   Applicant  means an individual seeking employment with the City of
Albuquerque.
   B. Candidate  means an employee seeking promotion.
   C. City  means the City of Albuquerque, a municipal corporation.
   D. Director of Human Resources  means the administrative head of the Human
Resources Department or designee.
   E. Human Resources Department  means the Human Resources Department for the
City of Albuquerque.
   F. Knowledge, skill, and ability , in the testing context, means the body of
learned information which is used in and is a necessary prerequisite for
observable aspects of work behavior of the job.
   G. Performance and physical agility test  means a formal test designed to
measure agility, strength, coordination, general physical fitness and other
skills required for the position.
   H. Structured Oral Interview  means an interview to solicit answers to
questions presented to assist in determining whether the applicant or candidate
possesses knowledge, skills, and abilities as well as experience and judgment
required for the position.
   I. Scoring method  means the system used to calculate how an applicant or
candidate performed on an examination.
   J. Written examination  means a formal multiple choice test which measures
the knowledge, skills, and abilities required for the position.
9.   TYPES OF EXAMINATIONS.
   A. The Director of Human Resources, in coordination with the department
directors, will decide which of the following types of examinations will be
used in the selection process:
   B. Written examinations will be used to assess knowledge, ability, judgment,
aptitude, alertness, and other skills required for the position.
   C. Oral interviews will be used to evaluate training, experience, and
judgment as well as knowledge, skills, abilities, and other skills required for
the position.
   D. Performance and physical agility tests will be used to measure agility,
strength, coordination, general physical fitness and other skills required for
the position.
10. ADMINISTRATION OF EXAMINATIONS. The Human Resources Department is
responsible for the development, validation, and administration of all tests
developed by the City for employment purposes.
   A. Careful and reasonable measures will be taken to insure fair
administration of all examinations.
   B. Time limits will be explained to all applicants and candidates prior to
the examination.
   C. Applicants or candidates will not obtain assistance from any other person
or any unauthorized reference source during an examination unless such
assistance is required as a reasonable accommodation in accordance with the
Americans with Disabilities Act.
   D. Applicants or candidates who interfere or attempt to interfere with the
fair, equitable and orderly conduct of any part of the examination process will
be disqualified and removed from the process. The examination administrator
will determine if an applicant or candidate has interfered or attempted to
interfere with the fair, equitable and orderly conduct of any part of the
examination process.
   E. Prior to testing, the Human Resources Department will establish the
scoring method, which will be a percentage score, a pass/fail score, or other
scoring method.
   F. Official test scores will be maintained by the Human Resources
Department.
PART 2: Fire Rescue Promotional Procedures
Effective December 15, 2023
1.   ISSUING AGENCIES: The Human Resources Department and Albuquerque Fire
Rescue.
2.   SCOPE: This section will be the only source of authority for promotion of
sworn personnel.
3.   STATUTORY AUTHORITY: Americans with Disabilities Act of 1990, 42 U.S.C. §
12101 (2006); Title VII of the Civil Rights Act of 1964, 42 U.S.C. § 2000e
(2006); Civil Rights Act of 1991; EEOC Uniform Guidelines on Employee Selection
Procedures, 29 CFR pt. 1607, (1978); City of Albuquerque, NM. Code of
Ordinances, Ch. 3 art. 1, Merit System; N.M. Stat. Ann. § 66-5-54; 49 U.S.C.A.
§§ 31100-31161; Retention and Disposition Schedule for General Personnel
Records, 1.15.6 NMAC; Uniformed Services Employment and Re-Employment Rights
Act (USERRA), 38 U.S.C.A. § 4301 et seq.; Family and Medical Leave Act of 1993
(FMLA)
4.   DURATION: Until revoked.
5.   EFFECTIVE DATE: DECEMBER 15, 2023
6.   OBJECTIVE: The purpose of this Regulation is to establish the procedures
for promoting to the ranks of Driver, Lieutenant, Captain, Battalion Chief,
Shift Commander, and Deputy Fire Chief, those persons who are best qualified or
suited for advancement, as determined by the selection process. These
procedures are to assure that selection procedures are objective and free of
considerations such as race, color, religion, national origin or ancestry,
disability, age, gender, Vietnam Era or disabled veteran status, sexual
orientation, or medical condition.
7.   RESPONSIBILITY FOR ADMINISTRATION: The Fire Chief and the Director of
Human Resources Department are jointly responsible for the administration of
the Fire Rescue Promotional Procedures.
8.   DEFINITIONS: The definitions provided herein are specific to this rule and
the promotional process.
   A.   Activation date means the date a promotional list becomes official.
   B.   Albuquerque Fire Rescue (AFR) Battalion Chief Certification Course
means a course of study that includes strategic level responsibilities on the
fireground, City and department administration, which, upon successful
completion, indicates a minimum level of knowledge in the subject field.
   C.   Albuquerque Fire Rescue (AFR) Captain Certification Course means the
course of study that includes tactical level responsibilities on the
fireground, Incident Safety Officer roles and responsibilities and firehouse
leadership, management, and administration, which, upon successful completion,
indicates a minimum level of knowledge in the subject field.
   D.   Albuquerque Fire Rescue (AFR) Driver Certification Course means the
course of study that includes safe apparatus driving, apparatus inspection and
maintenance principles, engine company operations and ladder company
operations, which, upon successful completion, indicates a minimum level of
knowledge in the subject field.
   E.   Albuquerque Fire Academy Cadet Program means the course of study of
basic firefighter knowledge, fireground operation, to include EMS, HazMat,
Wildland, and Heavy Technical Rescue, which upon successful completion,
indicate a minimum knowledge to act as a firefighter according to NFPA 1001.
   F.   Albuquerque Fire Rescue (AFR) Lieutenant Certification Course means a
course of study that includes initial fireground command and decision making,
firehouse leadership, management, and administration, which, upon successful
completion, indicates a minimum level of knowledge in the subject field.
   G.   Assessment Center means a group of situational exercises that simulate
job related tasks and work activities designed to measure critical knowledge,
skills, abilities, behaviors, qualities, dimensions, and competencies that have
been identified through a job analysis as being required for successful
performance in the position.
   H.   Assessor means someone knowledgeable about the requirements of the
position being tested and is qualified to rate the performance of candidates.
   I.   Business day means a day in which the City’s administrative offices are
open, typically weekdays Monday-Friday, from 8:00 AM to 5:00 PM, except for
City holidays other days when the administrative offices are not open for
business. See also “Calendar Day” and “Day”.
   J.   Calendar day or “day” means a 24-hour period, from midnight to
midnight.
   K.   Calendar month means a period of time beginning on the 1st day of a
month on the calendar and ending on the last day of the month as designated on
the calendar; by contrast, “month” means a period from a specified day in any
one calendar month to the day numerically corresponding to that day in the
following calendar month, less one, typically regarded as 30 consecutive days.
By way of example: a calendar month is the month of June or the month of July;
a “month” is typically 30 days, such as from June 20 to July 19.
   L.   Candidate means an employee seeking promotion.
   M.   Chief Administrative Officer means the Chief Administrative Officer for
the City of Albuquerque or designee.
   N.   City means the City of Albuquerque, a municipal corporation.
   O.   Consultant means an independent contractor engaged by the city for a
specific project, typically, but not necessarily, selected through a
competitive process, to provide special expertise or independence not otherwise
available through City staff.
   P.   Current continuous employment means no break or interruption in the
employee’s assignment in current rank; a “break” or “interruption” includes a
demotion for any length of time and certain leaves of absences.
   Q.   Department means Albuquerque Fire Rescue, commonly abbreviated “AFR”.
   R.   Dimensions mean factors that represent a broad range of qualities,
knowledge, skills, competencies, or behavior a candidate should demonstrate to
be successful in that position.
   S.   Director of Human Resources means the administrative head of the Human
Resources Department or designee.
   T.   Disciplinary action means an action taken by the Chief Administrative
Officer, Department Director, or designated management representative in
response to a proven act of employee misconduct or uncorrected poor work
performance. Disciplinary actions include but are not limited to written
reprimands, suspension, demotion, and discharge.
   U.   Employment Testing Division means a division of the Human Resources
Department responsible for test development, validation, and administration.
   V.   Exhaustion, in the context of promotional lists, means all candidates
eligible for promotion have been promoted prior to expiration of the current
promotional list.
   W.   Expiration, in the context of promotional lists, means midnight of the
last date on which the promotional list is valid as provided herein; position
vacancies arising after expiration cannot be filled from an expired promotional
list.
   X.   Firefighter means a City employee who has been certified as meeting the
minimum level of qualifications as to perform firefighting and related public
safety duties as those are defined by the City’s rules and regulations. The
term also denotes the lowest official rank for certified employees of the
Albuquerque Fire Rescue.
   Y.   Fire Chief means the administrative Head of the Fire Rescue or
designee.
   Z.   Job means an official position within the City personnel system. For
example, “the job duties of a Firefighter include…”.
   AA.   Job analysis means a determination of the relative importance of the
various aspects of the job based on a detailed inventory of job tasks, duties,
and activities performed on the job, and the knowledge, skills, abilities, and
other characteristics required to perform the job.
   BB.   Key copy review means a process whereby a candidate may protest
questions on the written examination.
   CC.   Key means a copy of the written examination with the correct answers
provided.
   DD.   Knowledge, skill, and ability, in the promotional context, means the
body of learned information which is used in and is a necessary prerequisite
for observable aspects of work behavior of the job.
   EE.   NFPA means the National Fire Protection Association, established in
1896, a non-profit organization whose mission is to reduce the worldwide burden
of fire and other hazards on the quality of life by providing and advocating
consensus codes and standards, research, training, and education. The NFPA
develops, publishes, and disseminates consensus codes and standards intended to
minimize the possibility and effects of fire and other risks. References to
NFPA courses are not restricted to those in effect at the time of the adoption
of these rules but refer to the course version in current use from time to time
as they may be revised or superseded, and the most recent versions or editions
are adopted herein by reference.
   FF.   Position means an official job title accompanied by a specified set of
duties as set forth in the City personnel system. For example, Firefighter,
Driver, Paramedic, Lieutenant, Captain, Battalion Chief, Shift Commander,
Deputy Fire Chief, and Chief are positions within the Albuquerque Fire Rescue;
within the department, positions are often referred to as “ranks”.
   GG.   Position Task Book means a written record of the minimum required
training and experience necessary to qualify for temporary upgrade to the next
position or rank.
   HH.   Promotion means the advancement of an employee into a higher graded
position or rank within the department.
   II.   Promotional list means the Fire Rescue’s official list of those
candidates eligible to be promoted to a higher graded position or rank within
the department.    
   JJ.    Scoring benchmarks mean a set of specific behavioral examples
illustrating different levels of performance, used to rate a candidate’s
performance in an assessment center or oral interview.
   KK.   Scoring review means comparing candidate’s answer sheet against the
template of correct answers for accuracy.
   LL.   Situational exercise means an exercise, within the Assessment Center,
developed to assess a candidate’s ability to handle a hypothetical scenario
presented, and to assist in determining whether the candidate possesses the
knowledge, skills, and abilities required for the position.
   MM.   Source documents mean the recommended study materials listed in the
Fire Chief’s Directive that are viewed and updated approximately every two
years as the available books, materials, and information change.
   NN.   Structured oral interview means an interview to solicit answers to
questions presented to assist in determining whether the candidate possesses
knowledge, skills, and abilities as well as experience and judgment required
for the position.
   OO.   Subject-matter expert (SME) means an individual having a definitive
source of knowledge, technique, or expertise in a specific subject area.
   PP.   Temporary upgrade means non-permanent assignment to the next highest
rank as permitted by the City’s personnel rules and regulations.
   QQ.   Validation, in personnel psychology, means establishment of the
relationship between a test instrument or other selection procedure and
performance on the job.
   RR.   Written examination means a multiple-choice test that assists in
determining whether the candidate possesses the knowledge, skills, and
abilities required for the position.
9.   AUTHORITY HAVING JURISDICTION
   A.   Under the NFPA, the department is “the Authority Having Jurisdiction”
for establishing and enforcing standards and procedures pertaining to the
training, education and certification of its Firefighters, Drivers, and
Officers.
   B.   As “the Authority Having Jurisdiction”, the department requires all
those seeking promotion to have the requisite knowledge, skills, and abilities
and to meet the job performance requirements for the desired rank.
10.   PREPARATION AND ADMINISTRATION OF PROMOTIONAL PROCESS
   A.   At the request of the Fire Chief, the Director of Human Resources will
authorize the development and administration of the promotional process. The
use of a consultant to provide advice and assistance regarding the overall
promotion process, including but not limited to, proper methods for
administering tests and evaluating tests results, may be authorized by the
Director of Human Resources.
   B.   For the ranks of Suppression Driver, Suppression Lieutenant, and
Paramedic Lieutenant, the promotional process shall consist of a written
examination.
   A.   For the rank of Paramedic Driver, the promotional process shall consist
of a list of qualified Non-Probationary (FF 1/C) ranked in order of seniority
in the department.
   B.   For the ranks of Captain and Battalion Chief, the promotional process
shall consist of both a written examination and an assessment center.
   C.   A promotional list includes all candidates who have received a final
score or a final combined promotional score of seventy percent (70%) or greater
except for the Paramedic Driver Seniority Based List.
   D.   The date and location of the administration of the promotional
proceedings and identification of the source documents to be used in the
development of the written examination will be announced at least ninety (90)
calendar days in advance of the administration of the written examination.
   E.   Any rescheduling or relocation of examinations shall be announced in a
manner intended to give reasonable notice to all candidates scheduled to test.
   F.   In the event an examination is rescheduled, eligibility will be
determined by the originally announced written examination date.
11.   ELIGIBILITY TO PARTICIPATE IN A PROMOTIONAL PROCESS requires that a
candidate has:
   A.   Reached the requisite length of service in a rank on or before the
official examination date;
   B.   Not refused to upgrade to the next rank for the preceding twelve (12)
calendar months prior to the official examination date, and
   C.   Successfully completed the appropriate requirements for the rank for
which the candidate seeks to test. In addition to those specified herein, the
Fire Chief may identify additional core knowledge certifications in directives
issued by the Fire Chief from time to time.
12.   RANK-SPECIFIC REQUIREMENTS, listed from lowest to highest, are those
requirements that a candidate must meet to be eligible for promotion to a
specific rank. In addition to the rank-specific requirements, a candidate must
meet all the requirements of the lower ranks as well as those specified for the
rank to which promotion is sought.
   A.   Firefighter
      Firefighter 3rd Class is the entry level rank for the Albuquerque Fire
Rescue. This person has successfully completed all entry level written,
physical, structured oral interview, background investigation, and medical
exams to start the Albuquerque Fire Rescue Cadet Program.
      Firefighter 2nd Class is the probationary rank for a certified
firefighter of the Albuquerque Fire Rescue. This person has successfully
completed all necessary requirements of the Albuquerque Fire Academy Cadet
Program which include, but is not limited to, Firefighter I & II, HazMat A & O,
Heavy Technical Rescue, Swift Water Rescue, and Vehicle Extrication.
      Firefighter 1st Class is the non-probationary rank for a certified
firefighter. This person has successfully completed all necessary requirements
for the 11th Month Evaluation and has been signed off for approval to work as a
certified firefighter with the Albuquerque Fire Rescue by the assigned
Battalion Chief.
   B.   Driver
      (1)   Driver is the rank immediately above Firefighter and consists of
two types of Drivers-- Suppression and Paramedic.
      (2)   All Drivers must meet the Suppression Driver qualifications;
Paramedic Drivers must meet additional paramedic specific qualifications.
      (3)   Suppression Driver Candidates must:
         (a)   have successfully completed the appropriate core knowledge
certification process for this rank. The appropriate core knowledge
certification process is identified in Albuquerque Fire Rescue, Policy
Statement, Temporary Upgrade and Promotional Eligibility Requirements, as
issued from time to time.
         (b)   have served at least twenty-four (24) current consecutive
calendar months immediately preceding the examination date in a non-
probationary status as a firefighter, i.e. current continuous employment;
         (c)   possess a current New Mexico Class E driver’s license;
         (d)   possess a current City Operator’s permit; and the Firefighter
must have not refused to temporarily upgrade to the rank of Driver in the last
year.
      (4)   Rescue/Paramedic Driver Candidates must meet above 3(a), (c), (d)
and the additional Paramedic specific qualifications listed below:
         (a)    must be a Non—Probationary Firefighter (FF 1/C) who is
currently licensed by the State of New Mexico as an EMT-Paramedic.
         (b)    Non-Probationary Firefighters (FF 1/C) who meet the above
criteria shall be promoted to the rank of Rescue/Paramedic Driver from a
Seniority Based Promotional List, with the most senior Non-Probationary
Firefighter (FF 1/C) being promoted first.
      (5)   A candidate must appear on only one Driver promotional list, either
Suppression or Paramedic, at any one time.
      (6)   Rescue/Paramedic Drivers promoted under 4(b) of this document must
meet the above eligibility requirements; however, a Rescue/Paramedic Driver
will not be eligible to participate in the promotional process for Lieutenant
prior to completing sixty-four (64) months of consecutive service with the
Albuquerque Fire Rescue.
C.   Lieutenant
   (1)   Lieutenant is the rank immediately above Driver and consists of two
(2) types of Lieutenants-- Suppression and Paramedic.
   (2)   All Lieutenants must meet the Suppression Lieutenant qualifications;
Paramedic Lieutenants must meet additional paramedic specific qualifications.
   (3)    Lieutenant candidates must:
      (a)    have successfully completed the appropriate core knowledge
certification process for this rank. The appropriate core knowledge
certification process is identified in Albuquerque Fire Rescue, Policy
Statement, Temporary Upgrade and Promotional Eligibility Requirements, as
issued from time to time.
      (b)   have served at least twenty-four (24) consecutive calendar months
immediately preceding the examination date as a Suppression Driver or Paramedic
Driver, i.e., current continuous employment; except as otherwise provided
herein.
   (4)   have completed sixty-four (64) months of consecutive service with
Albuquerque Fire Rescue. To be eligible to test for the rank of Paramedic
Lieutenant, a candidate must be currently licensed by the State of New Mexico
as an Emergency Medical Technician (EMT)-Paramedic.
   (5)   Rescue/Paramedic Drivers may test for Suppression Lieutenant after
serving sixty (60) consecutive months as a promoted Paramedic Driver.
   (6)   A Suppression Driver or Paramedic Driver may appear on only one
Lieutenant promotional list, either Suppression or Paramedic Lieutenant, but
not both.
D.   Captain
   (1)   Promotional Examination Prerequisites: To be eligible to test for the
rank of Captain, a candidate must:
      (a)   have successfully completed the appropriate core knowledge
certification process for this rank. The appropriate core knowledge
certification process is identified in Albuquerque Fire Rescue, Policy
Statement, Temporary Upgrade and Promotional Eligibility Requirements, as
issued from time to time.
      (b)   have served at least twenty-four (24) consecutive calendar months
immediately preceding the examination date as a Lieutenant, i.e., current
continuous employment.
      (c)   possess an associate degree from an accredited educational
institution that is recognized by the Council for Higher Education, the
Department of Education, or a Regional Accreditation Agency. The department is
not obligated to fund this educational degree.
      (d)   If a candidate does not possess an associate degree, the candidate
is eligible to test for the rank of Captain if they meet one of the following
criteria:
         (i)   Four years or 48 continuous months of service as a promoted
Lieutenant
         (ii)   Achieved the rank of Noncommissioned Officer (NCO) in any
branch of the Armed Forces and served for a minimum of 12 continuous months in
this rank
         (iii)   Licensed by the State of New Mexico as an Emergency Medical
Technician (EMT)-Paramedic
E.   Battalion Chief
   (1)   Promotional Examination Prerequisites: To be eligible to test for the
rank of Battalion Chief, a candidate must:
      (a)   have successfully completed the appropriate core knowledge
certification process for this rank. The appropriate core knowledge
certification process is identified in Albuquerque Fire Rescue, Policy
Statement, Temporary Upgrade and Promotional Eligibility Requirements, as
issued from time to time.
      (b)   have served at least twenty-four (24) consecutive calendar months
immediately preceding the examination date as a Captain, i.e., current
continuous employment.
      (c)   possess a bachelor’s degree from an accredited educational
institution that is recognized by the Council for Higher Education, the
Department of Education, or a Regional Accreditation Agency. The department is
not obligated to fund this educational degree.
      (d)   If a candidate does not possess a bachelor’s degree, they are
eligible to test for the rank of Battalion Chief if they possess an associate
degree from an accredited educational institution that is recognized by the
Council for Higher Education, the Department of Education, or a Regional
Accreditation Agency and meet the following criteria:
         (i)   Six years or 72 continuous months of service as a promoted
Captain
F.   Shift Commander: To be eligible for promotion to the rank of Shift
Commander, a candidate must:
   (1)   currently hold the rank of Captain or Battalion Chief in Albuquerque
Fire Rescue.
   (2)   have successfully completed the appropriate core knowledge
certification process for the rank of Battalion Chief. The appropriate core
knowledge certification process is identified in Albuquerque Fire Rescue,
Policy Statement, Temporary Upgrade and Promotional Eligibility Requirements,
as issued from time to time.
G.   Deputy Fire Chief: To be eligible for promotion to the rank of Deputy Fire
Chief, a candidate must:
   (1)   currently hold the rank of Captain, Battalion Chief, or Shift
Commander in Albuquerque Fire Rescue.
   (2)   have successfully completed the appropriate core knowledge
certification process for the rank of Battalion Chief. The appropriate core
knowledge certification process is identified in Albuquerque Fire Rescue,
Policy Statement, Temporary Upgrade and Promotional Eligibility Requirements,
as issued from time to time.
13.   PROMOTIONAL EXAMINATIONS
   A.   Promotional examinations will be administered through the rank of
Battalion Chief at a minimum of once every twenty-four (24) calendar months.
   B.   Bi-annual examinations, in even-numbered years, will be given on the
same month of each year for the ranks as designated below unless business
necessity dictates otherwise:
      (1)   January: Suppression Driver Promotional Examination and Rescue/
Paramedic Driver Seniority Based Promotional List
      (2)   April: Lieutenant Promotional Examinations
      (3)   July: Captain Promotional Examination (Written Exam and Assessment
Center)
      (4)   October: Battalion Chief Promotional Examination (Written Exam and
Assessment Center)
   C.   If a promotional list is exhausted in less than twelve (12) calendar
months, the Fire Chief has the discretion to request an additional promotional
examination or additional Rescue/Paramedic Driver Seniority Based Promotional
List at the rank. Any such additional examination does not postpone or delay
the regularly scheduled bi-annual examination.
   D.   If multiple promotional lists occur at the same rank and in the same
division (by way of example, two overlapping lists for Lieutenant) due to
additional examinations, the second promotional list will become active upon
posting.
      (1)   The activation date of the second list is at the discretion of the
Fire Chief and does not have to wait until the exhaustion/expiration of the
first promotional list.
      (2)   Under no circumstance, will a candidate be promoted from the second
promotional list before either the exhaustion or expiration of the first
promotional list.
   E.   Promotional lists expire twenty-four (24) calendar months from the date
of activation and will be dated so that the list ends on the first calendar day
of a pay period.
   F.   Examinations for the ranks of Lieutenant will be administered
simultaneously for both Suppression and Paramedic Divisions on the same date
and at the same time.
   G.   Paramedics passing the Suppression Division Lieutenant exam will be
promoted into the Suppression Division only.
   H.   Rescue/Paramedic Driver Seniority Based Promotional Lists will be will
issued as described in 13.B and 13.C above.
14.    SUSTAINED SUSPENSION A DISQUALIFYING EVENT
Candidates having a sustained suspension within twelve (12) calendar months
immediately preceding the scheduled date of the written examination are
ineligible to participate in the promotional process.
   A.   The ineligible candidate may appeal the determination of ineligibility
to the Fire Chief, whose sole discretion is to determine whether the
calculation was correct and not whether ineligibility should be waived. The
Fire Chief’s determination is not subject to further appeal.
   B.   If a candidate’s disciplinary action resulting in suspension is under
appeal to the Personnel Board or on appeal from the Personnel Board to a higher
court, the candidate is permitted to participate in the promotional process
until such time as the last appeal is resolved.
      (1)   If the discipline is upheld, the candidate will be removed from the
promotional process.
      (2)   A candidate made ineligible by upheld disciplinary action shall be
removed from the promotional list or, if the promotion has been processed,
shall be demoted to the previously held rank; such demotion is in addition to
any disciplinary action.
15.   LEAVE OF ABSENCE AS A BREAK IN CURRENT CONTINUOUS EMPLOYMENT
Approved leaves of absence may be included in current continuous employment in
determining eligibility to participate in promotional proceedings, if the leave
of absence resulted in further enhancing the candidate’s qualifications, as
determined by the Fire Chief.
   A.   Any determination regarding the effect of the leave of absence must be
resolved prior to the candidate embarking on a leave of absence.
   B.   The candidate is responsible for initiating the request for
determination prior to the start of the leave of absence.
   C.   If a leave of absence is not approved as continuous employment, the
leave period will be deducted from the period of continuous employment.
   D.   Leave with or without pay under the Family and Medical Leave Act of
1993 (FMLA) will be counted as continuous employment for the sole purpose of
determining eligibility to participate in the promotional process.
16.   PARTICIPATION IN THE PROMOTIONAL PROCESS
   A.   A candidate shall indicate a desire to take a promotional examination
for which the candidate is eligible by signing a roster within the timeframe
announced prior to the examination date.
   B.   A candidate must appear at the examination site at the designated time.
      (1)   Failure to appear for any part of the scheduled promotional
proceedings will terminate the candidate’s eligibility to continue in the
promotional process.
      (2)   Travel or other expenses connected to the candidate’s attendance
shall not be paid by the City.
   C.   Exceptions for failing to appear are only made for a candidate who
cannot appear at the examination site at the designated time due to the
following:
      (1)   Approved military leave will be accommodated pursuant to Uniformed
Services Employment and Reemployment Rights Act (USERRA); and
      (2)   Extraordinary circumstances, including, but not limited to, work-
related assignments and on-the-job injuries, may warrant an accommodation which
shall be determined by the Fire Chief, in consultation with the Director of
Human Resources.
17.   SUBJECT MATTER OF PROMOTIONAL PROCESS
   A.   At the request of the Fire Chief, written test items for the
promotional examinations through the rank of Battalion Chief will be prepared
by, or under the direction of, the Human Resources Department from materials
recommended by the Fire Chief.
   B.   The subject area(s) and, as applicable, the source materials for each
promotional process will be specified in the announcement.
   C.   The Fire Chief shall designate Fire Rescue subject-matter experts to
work with the Human Resources Department in the preparation of written test
items and assessment center exercises. The Fire Chief or designee shall review
the job description for the rank being tested, the promotional process subject
areas, and the administration of the promotional process to ascertain
conformance to City and department rules and regulations, practices,
procedures, equipment, and training.
18.   PROMOTIONAL PROCESS FOR DRIVERS, LIEUTENANTS, CAPTAINS, AND BATTALION
CHIEFS
   A.   Driver and Lieutenant ranks:
      (1)   A candidate competing for promotion to the ranks of Suppression
Driver, Suppression Lieutenant, or Paramedic Lieutenant is required to take a
100-item written examination only.
      (2)   The promotional eligibility lists for the ranks of Driver and
Lieutenant shall consist of all candidates who have received a final
promotional score of 70 percent (70%) or greater on the written examination for
that rank.
      (3)   A candidate for promotion to the rank of Paramedic Driver will be
rank ordered based on seniority in the department. The Paramedic Driver’s
Promotional List will have a start and end date consistent with the Suppression
Driver’s Promotional List.
   B.   Captain and Battalion Chief ranks:
      (1)   A candidate seeking promotion to the ranks of Captain or Battalion
Chief is required to take first a 100-item written examination.
      (2)   The top forty (40) scoring candidates for the rank of Captain who
achieve a score of seventy percent (70%) or greater on the written examination
proceed to an assessment center. If tie scores occur at the seventy percent
(70%) score, all candidates with that score will proceed to the assessment
center.
      (3)   The top twenty (20) scoring candidates for the rank of Battalion
Chief who achieve a score of seventy percent (70%) or greater on the written
examination proceed to an assessment center. If tie scores occur at the seventy
percent (70%) score, all candidates with that score will proceed to the
assessment center.
      (4)   The promotional eligibility lists for the ranks of Captain and
Battalion Chief shall consist of all candidates who have received a final
combined promotional score of seventy percent (70%) or greater on both the
written examination and assessment center.
   C.   Each written examination will be developed based on measurable
knowledge areas identified in the job analysis for the respective ranks.
   D.   Each assessment center will be developed based on a review of the job
analysis and will be designed to measure critical knowledge, skills, abilities,
behaviors, qualities, dimensions, and competencies required for successful
performance in the position.
      (1)   An Assessment Center Candidate Orientation will be provided at
least ten (10) calendar days prior to the administration of the assessment
center.
      (2)   At the Assessment Center Candidate Orientation, the candidates will
be provided with dimension definitions, if applicable, and an explanation of
the assessment center scoring process.
      (3)   Scoring benchmarks will be designed in such a way that a score of
seventy percent (70%) or higher reflects a presumed level of proficiency
sufficient to succeed in the position at entry level.
   E.   The assessment center and the written examination will each be weighted
according to relative importance of critical knowledge, skills, abilities,
behaviors, qualities, dimensions, and competencies being measured in each
component.
19.   REVIEW PROCESS
   A.   Key Copy Review
      (1)   After the written examination, a candidate may request to review a
key copy of the examination by making an appointment with the Employment
Testing Division of the Human Resources Department. Only one appointment per
candidate is permitted.
      (2)   The key copy review will be the process whereby a candidate may
challenge or protest questions on the written examination.
      (3)   The key copy review period will begin on the first business day
immediately following the date the written examination was administered and
will continue for a total of five (5) business days.
      (4)   Should a candidate desire to protest a question, the candidates
must submit a written protest immediately at the conclusion of the two (2) hour
appointment provided to that candidate for the key copy review session.
      (5)   Taking notes is permitted during the key copy review; however, no
materials, including notes, may be removed from the room.
      (6)   All protests will be submitted in writing to the Director of Human
Resources or designee, who shall review and evaluate all information concerning
the challenge.
      (7)   The Director of Human Resources or designee, with the input of the
subject-matter experts, shall make the final decision for upholding or denying
the protest and will notify the candidate in writing of the decision.
      (8)   After all challenges for the written examination have been
addressed and resolved, the answer sheets will be scored, and each candidate
individually notified in writing of the candidate’s results.
   B.   Scoring Review
      (1)   After the written examination, a candidate may request to review
the candidate’s respective answer sheet for accuracy in scoring during a
scoring review period, by making an appointment with the Employment Testing
Division of the Human Resources Department. Only one appointment per candidate
is permitted.
         (a)   The scoring review period will begin on the first business day
immediately following the date the candidates were notified for their
individual scores and will continue for a total of five (5) business days.
         (b)   During the scoring review period, a candidate may compare the
candidate’s answer sheet with a template of the correct answers.
         (c)   The keyed copy of the exam will not be available for review
during the scoring review period.
      (2)   Post-Assessment Review: After the assessment center, a candidate
for the ranks of Captain or Battalion Chief may schedule a post-assessment
review by making an appointment with the Employment Testing Division of the
Human Resources Department. Only one appointment per candidate is permitted.
      (3)   Appeal of Scoring:
         (a)   A candidate may appeal any alleged math or scoring errors in the
computation of the final promotion examination score. Appeals alleging math or
scoring errors shall be submitted in writing to the Employment Testing Division
of the Human Resources Department no later than five (5) business days after
the date the candidates were notified of their individual scores.
         (b)   The Employment Testing Division of the Human Resources
Department shall investigate the alleged math or scoring error identified in
the appeal. In the event that a math/scoring error is determined to have
occurred, a correction will be applied equally to all candidates impacted by
the error. If any such corrected score would result in a change to the rank
order of the Eligibility List for Promotion, the Fire Chief will be notified,
and the Employment Testing Division of the Human Resources Department will
create a revised list based on the corrected scores.
         (c)   The Eligibility List for Promotion will not be considered final
until the five (5) business day appeal period is completed, and any confirmed
errors are corrected.
20.   ELIGIBILITY LISTS FOR PROMOTION
   A.   A promotional eligibility list in order of highest-attained scores will
be compiled by the Employment Testing Division of the Human Resources
Department for the ranks of Driver, Lieutenant, Captain, and Battalion Chief
and will be provided to the Fire Chief. For the rank of Paramedic Driver, these
lists will be compiled by AFR Human Resources and validated and distributed by
the Employment Testing Division of the Human Resources Department based on FF
1/C seniority in the department.
   B.   A serious disciplinary infraction is sufficient cause for the Fire
Chief to remove a candidate from a promotional list. In such instance, the
removal shall be an element of the originally imposed discipline and shall not
be deemed additional discipline.
   C.   A candidate, on an approved leave of absence without pay, may not be
promoted until the candidate’s return to regular duty, which may result in an
individual with a lower place on the promotional list being promoted earlier.
   D.   Ties for placement on all lists will be determined using the following
sequence or according to the current CBA between the City of Albuquerque and
the Albuquerque Area Fire Fighters Union IAFF Local 244.
      (1)   Promotion date of current rank – 14.2.3.1
      (2)   Lowest AFR man number – 14.2.3.1.1
21.   PROMOTIONAL PROCESS FOR SHIFT COMMANDER OR DEPUTY FIRE CHIEF
The Fire Chief shall make the selection of the Shift Commander or Deputy Fire
Chief with the concurrence of the Chief Administrative Officer.
22.   EVALUATION OF NEWLY PROMOTED DRIVERS, LIEUTENANTS, CAPTAINS, AND
BATTALION CHIEFS
   A.   Promotion to the rank of Driver, Lieutenant, Captain, and Battalion
Chief is contingent upon satisfactory performance during a six (6) calendar
month evaluation period.
   B.   All newly promoted Drivers, Lieutenants, Captains, and Battalion Chiefs
will be formally evaluated by their immediate supervisors for the first six (6)
calendar months. Failure to satisfactorily complete the evaluation period will
result in a return to the previous rank.
   C.   After satisfactorily completing the six (6) calendar month evaluation
period, the promotions will be considered permanent and subject to the usual
performance and disciplinary requirements.
23.   EVALUATION OF SHIFT COMMANDERS AND DEPUTY FIRE CHIEFS
   A.   The ranks of Shift Commanders and Deputy Fire Chiefs are unclassified
positions.
   B.   Shift Commanders and Deputy Fire Chiefs serve at the discretion of the
Chief Administrative Officer.
PART 3: Police Department Promotional Procedures
Effective January 31, 2019
1.   ISSUING AGENCIES: The Human Resources Department and the Albuquerque
Police Department.
2.   SCOPE: This section will be the only source of authority for promotion of
sworn personnel.
3.   STATUTORY AUTHORITY: Americans with Disabilities Act of 1990, 42 U.S.C. §
12101 (2006); Title VII of the Civil Rights Act of 1964, 42 U.S.C. § 2000e
(2006); Civil Rights Act of 991; EEOC Uniform Guidelines on Employee Selection
Procedures, 29 CFR pt. 1607, (1978); City of Albuquerque, NM. Code of
Ordinances, Ch. 3 art. 1, Merit System; N.M. Stat. Ann. § 6-5-54; 49 U.S.C.A.
§§ 31100-31161; Retention and Disposition Schedule for General Personnel
Records, 1.15.6 NMAC; Uniformed Services Employment and Re-Employment Rights
Act (USERRA), 38 U.S.C.A. § 4301 et seq.; Family and Medical Leave Act of 1993
(FMLA)
4.   DURATION: Until revoked.
5.   EFFECTIVE DATE: (insert date when passed)
6.   OBJECTIVE: The purpose of this Regulation is to establish the procedures
for promoting to the ranks of Sergeant and Lieutenant those persons who are
best qualified or suited for advancement, and the determination of placement on
a promotional eligibility list based on the selection process. These procedures
are to assure that selection procedures are objective and free of
considerations such as race, color, religion, national origin or ancestry,
disability, age, gender, Vietnam Era or disabled veteran status, sexual
orientation or medical condition. These promotional rules are intended to
prioritize effective, constitutional, and community-oriented policing as
criteria for promotions and to account for experience, protection of civil
rights, discipline history, and previous performance evaluations when
considering individuals for promotion. Criteria developed in this policy is to
ensure that promotions are based on knowledge, skills, and abilities that are
required to perform supervisory and management duties in core substantive
areas.
7.   RESPONSIBILITY FOR ADMINISTRATION: The Chief of Police and the Director of
the Human Resources Department are jointly responsible for the administration
of the Police Department Promotional Procedures.
8.   DEFINITIONS: The definitions provided herein are specific to this
regulation and the promotional process.
A.   Assessment Center  means a group of situational exercises that simulate
job related tasks and work activities designed to measure critical knowledge,
skills, abilities, behaviors, qualities, dimensions, and competencies that have
been identified through a job analysis as being required for successful
performance in the position.
B.   Activation Date  means the date a Promotional Eligibility List becomes
official.
C.   Assessor  means someone knowledgeable about the requirements of the
position being tested and is qualified to rate the performance of candidates.
D.   Business day  means a day in which the City’s administrative offices are
open, typically weekdays Monday-Friday, from 8:00 AM to 5:00 PM, except City
holidays and other days when the administrative offices are not open for
business. See also “Calendar day” and “Day”.
E.   Calendar day or “day”  means a 24-hour period, from midnight to midnight.
F.   Calendar month  means a period of time beginning on the 1st day of a month
on the calendar and ending on the last day of the month as designated on the
calendar; by contrast, “month” means a period from a specified day in any one
calendar month to the day numerically corresponding to that day in the
following calendar month, less one, typically regarded as 30 consecutive days.
By way of example: a calendar month is the month of June or the month of July;
a “month” is typically 30 days, such as from June 20 to July 19.
G.   Candidate  means an employee seeking promotion.
H.   Chief Administrative Officer  means the Chief Administrative Officer for
the City of Albuquerque or designee.
I.   Chief of Police  means the administrative head of the Police Department or
designee.
J.   City  means the City of Albuquerque, a municipal corporation.
K.   Community Policing  is the process of policing that focuses on building
and strengthening ties with the community through the creation of partnerships
with community groups, citizens, neighborhood associations, merchants, non-
profit community organizations and community service providers. The intent is
to promote collaboration and cooperation between law enforcement and the
community served, develop strategies to solve community problems, promote the
development of safe and secure neighborhoods, share information and increase
officer accountability to the community.
L.   Constitutional Policing  means that the policing function must be
conducted in accord with the US Constitution, state constitution and the
federal and state court decisions that define and explain rights and
responsibilities under law.
M.   Consultant  means an independent contractor engaged by the City for a
specific project, typically, but not necessarily, selected through a
competitive process, to provide special expertise or independence not otherwise
available through City staff.
N.   Current continuous employment  means no break or interruption in an
employee’s assignment in current rank; a “break” or “interruption” includes a
demotion for any length of time and certain leaves of absences.
O.   Department  means the Albuquerque Police Department, commonly abbreviated
“APD”.
P.   Dimensions  mean factors that represent a broad range of qualities,
knowledge, skills, competencies, or behaviors a candidate should demonstrate to
be successful in a position.
Q.   Director of Human Resources  means the administrative Head of the Human
Resources Department or designee.
R.   Discipline and Disciplinary Action  for the purposes of this policy means
an action taken by the Chief Administrative Officer, Department Director, or
designated management representative in response to a proven act of employee
misconduct or uncorrected poor work performance. Disciplinary actions include,
but are not limited to, written reprimands, suspension, demotion, or loss of
rank due to misconduct and discharge.
S.   Eligibility to Participate List  means the list of candidates who have
been deemed eligible to participate in a promotional process following the
Management Review conducted by the Promotions Committee and approved by the
Chief of Police.
T.   Employment Testing Division  means the division of the Human Resources
Department responsible for test development, validation, and administration.
U.   Exhaustion , in the context of promotional lists, means all candidates
eligible for promotion have been promoted prior to expiration of the current
promotional list.
V.   Expiration , in the context of promotional lists, means midnight of the
last date on which the promotional list is valid as provided herein; position
vacancies arising after expiration cannot be filled from an expired promotional
list.
W.   Job  means an official position within the City personnel system. For
example, “the job duties of a Sergeant include…”
X.   Job analysis  means a determination of the relative importance of the
various aspects of the job based on a detailed inventory of job tasks, duties,
and activities performed on the job, and the knowledge, skills, abilities, and
other characteristics required to perform the job.
Y.   Just cause,  for the sole purpose of Police Department Promotional
Procedures policy, shall mean only those disciplinary issues that normally
disqualify a candidate from promotion eligibility to a position sought, as
defined in Section 11 and 22 of the policy, including: 1) sustained discipline
for complaints of misconduct that have resulted in a penalty greater than a
written reprimand; 2) patterns of complaints; 3) a pending lawsuit alleging
specific acts of unconstitutional conduct by the promotional candidate where
the presumptive penalty is dismissal (e.g. conduct that may be classified as a
class 1 sanction); 4) or a judicial finding of unconstitutional conduct.
Disciplinary issues that do not normally disqualify a candidate from promotion
eligibility to a position sought shall not constitute just cause  for
disqualifying a candidate from promotion eligibility.
Z.   Key copy review  means a process whereby a candidate may protest questions
on the written examination.
AA.   Key  means a copy of the written examination with the correct answers
provided.
BB.   Knowledge, skill, and ability,  in the promotional context, mean the body
of learned information which is used in and is a necessary prerequisite for
observable aspects of work behavior of the job.
CC.   Lieutenant’s Promotional Packet  means a packet completed by a
prospective Lieutenant candidate. This packet includes the prospective
candidate’s department photo, last two years’ of approved Employee Work Plans
(EWPs), professional resume, letter of recommendation from the candidate’s
current Commander, and any other required documentation.
DD.   Management Review  means a formal review by the Promotions Committee of a
candidate’s submitted promotional packet.
EE.   On the Job Training  means newly promoted Sergeants and Lieutenants will
receive on the job training and will have to demonstrate proficiency in all
aspects of the newly promoted position.
FF.   Patterns of complaints  means that an employee has received three (3) or
more citizen complaints, filed with the Civilian Police Oversight Commission in
one year (e.g. disciplinary issues such as use of excessive force,
discrimination, unprofessionalism, disrespect, or misconduct as defined by the
Personnel Code of Conduct). This does not included instances for which the
charges were exonerated or the complaint was determined to be unfounded, as
defined by Internal Affairs policy.
GG.   Position  means an official job title accompanied by a specified set of
duties as set forth in the City personnel system.
HH.   Promotion  means the advancement of an employee into a higher graded
position or rank within the department.
II.   Promotional Eligibility List  means the Police Department’s official list
of those candidates eligible to be promoted to a higher graded position or rank
within the department.
JJ.   Promotions Committee  means a committee designated by the Chief of Police
consisting of three (3) Department lieutenants, one (1) Commander, the APD
Personnel/Payroll Coordinator, one (1) union representative, and one (1) Human
Resources Employment Testing Division representative as a non-voting observer.
The committee will prepare and make recommendations for the Police Chief’s
Directive.
KK.   Police Chief’s Directive  means the Department memorandum published by
the Promotions Committee for the Sergeant and Lieutenant promotional processes.
This directive establishes the study materials, resources, and other
requirements for promotional processes.
LL.   Scoring benchmarks  means a set of specific behavioral examples
illustrating different levels of performance, used to rate a candidate’s
performance in an assessment center or oral interview.
MM.   Scoring review  means a process whereby a candidate can compare his or
her answer sheet against the template of correct answers for accuracy.
NN.   Sergeant’s Promotional Packet  means a packet completed by a prospective
Sergeant candidate. This packet includes the prospective candidate’s department
photo, last two years’ of approved Employee Work Plans (EWPs), professional
resume, letter of recommendation from the candidate’s current Commander, and
any other required documentation.
OO.   Situational exercise  means an exercise, within the Assessment Center,
developed to assess a candidate’s ability to handle a hypothetical scenario
presented, and to assist in determining whether the candidate possesses the
knowledge, skills, and abilities required for the position.
PP.   Source documents  mean the required study materials listed in the
official announcement for a promotional process.
QQ.   Structured oral interview  means an interview to solicit answers to
questions presented to assist in determining whether a candidate possesses
knowledge, skills, and abilities as well as experience and judgment required
for the position.
RR.   Subject-matter expert (SME)  means an individual having a definitive
source of knowledge, technique, or expertise in a specific subject area.
SS.   Testing Committee  means a committee designated by the Chief of Police
consisting of Department Lieutenant and Commander subject-matter experts. This
committee is responsible for working with the Human Resources Department in the
development, validation, and administration of the promotional written exam,
assessment center exercises and/or structured oral interviews.
TT.   Under Investigation  means an investigation being conducted by APD
Internal Affairs, the CPOA, or any state or federal agency for alleged criminal
violations or violations of civil or Constitutional rights; or is under
investigation by the NMLEA.
UU.   Validation , in personnel psychology, means establishment of the
relationship between a test instrument or other selection procedure and
performance on the job.
VV.   Written examination  means a multiple-choice test that assists in
determining whether a candidate possesses the knowledge, skills, and abilities
required for the position.
9.   PREPARATION AND ADMINISTRATION OF PROMOTIONAL PROCESS
A.   Upon request of the Chief of Police, the Director of Human Resources will
authorize the development, validation, and administration of the promotional
process. The use of a consultant may be authorized by the Director of Human
Resources.
B.   The dates, locations of the administration of the promotional proceedings,
and the source documents to be used in the development of the written
examination will be announced at least thirty (30) calendar days in advance of
the administration of the written examination. Any rescheduling or relocation
must be announced in a timely manner.
10.   ELIGIBILITY TO PARTICIPATE IN A PROMOTIONAL PROCESS - GENERALLY
A.   The Promotions Committee, selected by the Chief of Police, consisting of
one (1) Deputy Chief three (3) Department Lieutenants, one (1) Commander, the
APD Personnel/Payroll Coordinator, one (1) union representative, and one (1)
Human Resources Employment Testing Division representative as a non-voting
observer, will determine if personnel who signed up for the written examination
are qualified to compete for promotion. The union representative’s role shall
be limited to observing, reviewing, and validating the candidates’ eligibility
to participate in a promotional process.
B.   A Management Review will be conducted by the Promotions Committee and
Chief to determine candidates’ eligibility to participate in a promotional
process.
(1)   Candidates must be in compliance with Employee Work Plan requirements;
(2)   have no disciplinary action as defined in Section 11.
The Promotions Committee will also consider the following factors when
assessing a candidate promotional eligibility:
(a)   Effective use of community-policing strategies;
(b)   Problem-solving skills and judgment;
(c)   Interpersonal skills;
(d)   Specialized training; and
(e)   Support for departmental integrity measures.
(3)   A candidate must have an overall rating of “3-Competent” or above on his
or her final annual performance evaluations for the two (2) years prior to
applying to participate in a promotional process. Any score less than an over
final annual rating of “3-Competent” will be an automatic disqualifier.
(4)   If the Management Review determines a candidate is ineligible to
participate in a promotional process due to disciplinary issues in Section 11,
the Chief of Police will be notified in writing of the findings. The Chief of
Police shall either concur or differ with the findings.
(5)   After the Promotions Committee has formally reviewed all candidates’
packets to determine eligibility to proceed in a promotional process, a list of
candidates who are eligible to participate in the written exam will be issued.
The Eligibility to Participate List must be approved by the Chief of Police.
(6)   Nothing shall prevent the Chief of Police from removing a candidate’s
name from the Eligibility to Participate List for just cause as described in
Section 11.
C.   Personnel who have been demoted (not permanently) and wish to participate
in a promotional process in order to obtain their original rank must submit a
letter to the Chief of Police for consideration of eligibility to participate
in the promotional process.
11.   ELIGIBILITY TO PARTICIPATE IN A PROMOTIONAL PROCESS - SUSTAINED
SUSPENSION OR A DISQUALIFYING EVENT
Disciplinary action may render a candidate ineligible to participate in the
promotional process. In each instance, the date on which the disciplinary
action occurred will be used to determine eligibility.
Ordinarily, candidates will not be considered ineligible for promotion based
upon conduct occurring prior to June 2, 2015. However, this limitation does not
apply in the circumstances described by sections B(4)-(7) below.
A.   Until March 31, 2019, the Chief of Police may at his discretion, render a
candidate ineligible for the following listed items. However, starting April 1,
2019, the following items will automatically render a candidate ineligible for
promotion:
1.   sustained disciplinary action, equal to or greater than a forty hour
suspension, within the twelve month period immediately preceding the written
examination;
2.   a pattern of complaints.
B.   The following will be considered and may, at the discretion of the Chief
of Police, render a candidate ineligible:
1.   Sustained disciplinary action, equal to or greater than a sixteen hour
suspension, within the twelve month period immediately preceding the written
examination;
2.   sustained disciplinary action, equal to or greater than a twenty hour
suspension, within the two year period immediately preceding the written
examination;
3.   any sustained disciplinary action, equal to or greater than an eighty hour
suspension, within the five year period immediately preceding the written
examination except as noted above regarding the application of the timeframe;
4.   a finding by a Court of competent jurisdiction that the candidate violated
the civil or constitutional rights of another;
5.   the candidate is named in a pending lawsuit alleging specific acts of
unconstitutional conduct where the presumptive penalty is dismissal (e.g. which
may be classified as a class 1 sanction);
6.   the candidate is under internal administrative investigation by the
Department;
7.   the candidate has been indicted or has received a probable cause
determination by a judicial officer that he or she likely committed a felony or
misdemeanor.
If the Chief of Police contemplates excluding a candidate from participating in
the promotional process for the items listed in 11(B) above , he or she will
notify the candidate, in writing, that he or she is contemplating suspending
the candidate from eligibility to participate in a promotional process. Such
notification shall contain a description of why the candidate may be excluded
from participating in a promotional process, with sufficient detail to allow
the candidate to respond. The candidate will be given the opportunity to rebut
the decision in writing within ten (10) calendar days from the date of
notification. The Chief of Police will provide a written response to the
candidate with a final determination within seven (7) calendar days from the
date the candidate submits a written rebuttal.
A.   If a sustained disciplinary action resulting in suspension is being
appealed under the Collective Bargaining Agreement or Albuquerque Merit System
Ordinance, the candidate will be permitted to participate in the promotional
process until such time as the appeal is decided.
(1)   If the discipline is upheld, the candidate will be removed from the
process.
(2)   If the appeal is not determined at the time the list of candidates
eligible to participate in the assessment center is published, and the
candidate has received a written exam score that would make the candidate
eligible to participate in the assessment center, the candidate will be
permitted to proceed to the assessment center. In that event, the number of
candidates eligible to participate will increase according to the number of
candidates currently involved in an appeal.
(3)   If the appeal is not determined at the time the promotional eligibility
list is published, and the candidate’s combined score from the written
examination and the assessment center totals at least seventy percent (70%),
the number of candidates placed on the promotional eligibility list will
increase according to the number of candidates currently involved an appeal.
(4)   As appeals are resolved, candidates made ineligible by their disciplinary
action being upheld will be removed from the list or demoted to the previously
held rank if the promotion has already been processed.
(5)   The Chief of Police may utilize the rule of three (3) in cases where an
appeal is pending.
12. RANK-SPECIFIC REQUIREMENTS, listed from lowest to highest, are those
requirements that a candidate must meet to be eligible for promotion to a
specific rank. In addition to the rank-specific requirements, a candidate must
meet all the requirements of the lower rank and currently be holding that rank
as well as those specified for the rank to which promotion is sought.
B.   Sergeant
To be eligible to participate in the Sergeant’s promotional process, sworn
personnel must have, as of the date of the written examination, six (6) years
of employment as a full-time certified APD Police Officer. An officer who has
laterally transferred to APD is eligible to participate in the Sergeant’s
promotional process after two (2) years of service with APD and have six (6)
years of prior experience with a New Mexico State certified law enforcement
agency, as of the date of the written examination.
C.   Lieutenant
To be eligible to participate in the Lieutenant’s promotional process, sworn
personnel must have, as of the date of the written examination, nine (9) years
of employment as a full-time certified APD Police Officer; three (3) years of
which must have been from the date of promotion to the permanent rank of
Sergeant with the APD and currently hold the rank of Sergeant. An officer who
has laterally transferred to APD is eligible to participate in the Lieutenant’s
promotional process after two (2) years of service with APD and have nine (9)
years of prior experience with a New Mexico state certified law enforcement
agency, three (3) years of which must have been from the date of promotion to
the permanent rank of Sergeant, as of the date of the written examination.
13.   PROMOTIONAL EXAMINATIONS
A.   Each Sergeant and Lieutenant promotional process will consist of a written
examination, an assessment center, and a rating of experience/education.
B.   Prior to the administration of the written examination and after
consultation with the Chief of Police, the Human Resources Department will
announce the number of candidates expected to advance from the written
examination to the assessment center and the final number of candidates to be
placed on the promotional list.
C.   The number of candidates to be placed on the promotional list will be
based on the existing and/or anticipated vacancies for the next twelve months
as determined by the Chief of Police in consultation with the Director of Human
Resources.
D.   Promotional lists expire two years from the activation date of the
promotional list and will be dated so the list ends on the first calendar day
of a pay period. Individuals on a promotional list who are not promoted by the
expiration date of the list must retest in a future promotional process to be
considered for promotion.
E.   If a promotional list is exhausted in two years or less, the Chief of
Police may request another promotional examination. Vacancies will be filled
from the existing list based upon APD’s operational needs.
14.   ELIGIBILITY TO CONTINUE PARTICIPATING IN A PROMOTIONAL PROCESS PENDING
THE OUTCOME OF AN ACTIVE INVESTIGATION
A.   A candidate who is participating in a promotional process and becomes the
subject of an administrative investigation, in which the underlying facts
implicate: 1) violations of department policies and/or the law; 2) disciplinary
action; 3) patterns of complaints, other than unfounded or exonerated, dating
back two (2) years from the date of the written examination; 4) patterns of
sustained IA complaints; or, 5) the candidate has a pending lawsuit alleging
specific acts of unconstitutional conduct by the promotional candidate or
judicial finding of unconstitutional conduct, will be conditionally allowed to
continue in the promotional process, pending the results or outcome of such
investigation or lawsuit at the discretion of the Chief.
B.   A candidate who is participating in a promotional process and becomes the
subject of an administrative investigation will be conditionally allowed to
continue in the promotional process pending the results or outcome of such
investigation, at the discretion of the Chief.
C.   The candidate will be notified in writing that he/she is the subject of
such an investigation and is being conditionally allowed to continue in the
promotional process, pending the results or outcome of the relevant
investigation or lawsuit.
D.   If an administrative investigation results in a sustained finding that the
candidate violated the civil or constitutional rights of another, the candidate
will be permanently removed from participation in the current promotional
process.
15.   LEAVE OF ABSENCE AS A BREAK IN CURRENT CONTINUOUS EMPLOYMENT
A.   An approved leave of absence of six (6) calendar weeks or more may be
counted as current continuous employment in determining eligibility to
participate in promotional proceedings, if the leave is determined by the Chief
of Police to have further advanced the candidate’s qualifications. Such
determination should be made prior to a candidate commencing the leave of
absence.
(1)   Candidates are responsible for initiating a request for determination
prior to the start of the leave of absence.
(2)   If a leave of absence is not approved by the Chief of Police as
continuous employment further enhancing the candidate’s qualifications, the
leave period will be deducted from the period of continuous employment.
B.   Leave with or without pay under the Family and Medical Leave Act of 1993
(FMLA) will be counted as continuous employment for the purpose of determining
eligibility to participate in the promotional process.
C.   Leaves of absence to campaign for public office as allowed under the Merit
System Ordinance of Personnel Rules and Regulations, to hold public office, or
to pursue other gainful employment will not be counted as continuous employment
in determining eligibility to participate in a promotional process. The period
during which leave is taken will be deducted from the period of continuous
employment.
16. PARTICIPATION IN THE PROMOTIONAL PROCESS
A.   Sworn eligible personnel who wish to participate in a promotional process
must sign a request roster posted in the APD Personnel/Payroll Office within
the time-frame announced.
(1)   Eligible personnel must appear at the examination site at the designated
time.
(2)   Failure to appear for any part of the scheduled promotion proceedings
will result in termination of the candidate’s continuation in the promotional
process.
B.   Sworn eligible personnel on approved leave at the time of the announcement
may submit a written request to the Chief of Police within the same time-frame
period.
C.   The Uniformed Services Employment and Reemployment Rights Act (USERRA)
will be followed for candidates unable to participate due to approved military
leave when called to active duty in emergencies declared by the Governor or
President.
D.   Travel expenses will not be paid by the City.
17.   SUBJECT MATTER OF PROMOTIONAL PROCESS
A.   Written test items for the promotional examinations for the ranks of
Sergeant and Lieutenant will be prepared by or under the direction of the Human
Resources Department from materials approved by the Chief of Police or
designee. The subject area and, where possible, the source materials for each
promotional process will be specified, but will include constitutional
policing, community oriented policing, and protection of civil rights.
B.   The Chief of Police shall designate Police Department subject-matter
experts to the Testing Committee to work with the Human Resources Department in
the preparation of written test items, assessment center exercises, and/or
structured oral interviews. The Testing Committee shall also complete an After
Action Report to be submitted to the Promotions Committee after a promotional
process has concluded.
C.   The Promotions Committee will be responsible for making recommendations
and reviewing all source materials for each promotional process. Source
materials will be listed in the Chief of Police’s Directive and are effective
for two promotional testing processes for the same rank. If source materials
are deemed in need of change, a new directive will be issued with a list of the
updated materials.
D.   The most recent version of source materials that are continually being
updated will be used for promotional processes whenever possible. These
materials may include, but are not limited to, Departmental Procedures, Special
Orders, and City of Albuquerque Rules and Regulations.
E.   The subject area(s) and, as applicable, the source materials for each
promotional process will be specified in the announcement.
F.   The Chief of Police or designee will review the job description for the
rank being tested, the structure and weights of the promotional process subject
areas, and the administration of the promotional process to ascertain
conformance to City and Police Department rules and regulations, practices,
procedures, equipment, and training.
18. PROMOTIONAL PROCESS FOR SERGEANT AND LIEUTENANT
A.   The final promotional score will consist of the written examination score,
assessment center score, and the experience/education rating score. Up to
thirty (30) points can be obtained on the written examination, up to sixty (60)
points on the assessment center, and up to ten (10) points on the experience/
education rating.
B.   Written Examination
(1)   The written examination for each rank will be developed based on the
knowledge, skills, and abilities identified in the job analysis.
(2)   To be eligible to participate in the assessment center, candidates must
achieve a minimum score of seventy percent (70%). However, a written score of
seventy (70%) does not guarantee eligibility to proceed to the assessment
center.
(3)   In accordance with the criteria set forth in Section 9 (Preparation and
Administration of the Promotional Process), the Human Resources Department will
prepare an official announcement listing the names of the candidates eligible
to proceed from the written exam to the assessment center based on the highest
attained written exam scores; provided, however, no candidate, with a score of
less than seventy percent (70%) of the total possible score, shall be permitted
to proceed to the assessment center. The number of candidates permitted to
advance to the assessment center shall be stated in the initial official
announcement issued by the Human Resources Department.
C.   Assessment Center
(1)   Candidates eligible for the assessment center process will be provided
information about the assessment center at least five (5) business days before
the assessment center begins.
(2)   Dimension definitions, if applicable, and an explanation of the
assessment center scoring process will be provided to candidates at the
Assessment Center Candidate Orientation prior to the administration of the
assessment center.
(3)   Scoring benchmarks will be designed in such a way that a score of seventy
percent (70%) or higher will reflect a level of proficiency sufficient to
succeed in the position at entry level.
(4)   A file containing a candidate’s resume and other documents will be one
component of the Assessment Center.
D.   Experience and Education
(1)   A rating for this score will be calculated from an approved resume form
submitted by each candidate.
(2)   The Promotions Committee will verify the information on the resume prior
to the assessment center.
(3)   Ratings will be calculated by the same committee that determines
eligibility to participate in the promotional process. The experience rating
score will be calculated as of the last day of the assessment center for time
in service.
(4)   The experience rating score for candidates for Sergeant is one-quarter
(0.25) of a point per year for service as a sworn APD police officer,
calculated from the date of graduation from the Albuquerque Police Academy, or
date of hire for lateral police officers.
a)   Credit is limited to twenty (20) years, for a maximum of five (5) points.
b)   No credit will be given for periods of Leave without Pay, exclusive of
FMLA, or disciplinary suspensions unless the Chief of Police determines in
writing that the infraction is not related to fitness for promotion.
(5)   The experience rating score for candidates for Lieutenant is one-eighth
(0.125) of a point per year for service as a sworn APD police officer,
calculated from the date of graduation from the Albuquerque Police Academy, or
date of hire for lateral police officers.
a)   Credit is limited to twenty (20) years, for a maximum of two and one-half
(2.5) points.
b)   In addition, candidates for Lieutenant will receive 0.1665 points per year
of service with APD at the rank of Sergeant. This credit is limited to fifteen
(15) years, for a maximum of two and one-half (2.5) points.
c)   No credit will be given for periods of Leave without Pay, exclusive of
FMLA, or disciplinary suspensions unless the Chief of Police determines in
writing that the infraction is not related to fitness for promotion.
(6)   The education rating score will be a maximum of five (5) points.
Candidates competing for the position of Sergeant or Lieutenant who have an
Associate’s degree from an accredited college or university shall receive two
(2) education rating points. Candidates who have a Bachelor’s degree, or
higher, from an accredited college or university shall receive five (5)
education rating points.
19.   REVIEW PROCESS
A.   Key Copy Review
(1)   After the written examination, candidates may review a keyed copy of the
exam by making one (1) appointment for a maximum of two (2) hours with the
Employment Testing Division of the Human Resources Department.
a)   This two (2) hour key copy review period represents the challenge process
whereby a candidate may protest questions on the examination.
b)   Key copy reviews will only be held for five (5) business days beginning on
the first business day immediately following the written examination.
(2)   Candidates participating in the key copy review process will be given a
total of two (2) hours to review the keyed copy of the exam and to prepare
written protests on-site.
(3)   If a candidate wishes to protest any of the test questions, he or she
must submit the protest of the test question in writing during the two (2) hour
review.
(4)   Taking notes is permitted during this period; however, no testing
materials, including notes, may be removed from the room.
(5)   All protests will be submitted in writing to the Director of Human
Resources, or designee, who must review and evaluate all information concerning
the challenge.
(6)   The Director of Human Resources, or designee, with the input of the
subject-matter experts, will make the final decision for upholding or denying
the protest and will notify the candidate in writing of the decision.
(7)   After all challenges for the written examination have been resolved,
answer sheets will be scored, and candidates will be individually notified in
writing of their results.
B.   Scoring Review
(1)   Candidates may review their answer sheets for scoring accuracy.
(2)   Candidates must make one (1) appointment with the Employment Testing
Division of the Human Resources Department and review the scoring within five
(5) business days following the official announcement of scores.
(3)   During the scoring review period, candidates may compare their answer
sheets with a template of the correct answers. The keyed copy of the exam will
not be available for review during the scoring review period.
(4)   Following the scoring review period, a list of those candidates eligible
to compete in the assessment center process, if applicable, will be posted.
C.   Post Assessment Review
Candidates may schedule one (1) post-assessment review by making an appointment
with the Employment Testing Division of the Human Resources Department.
D.   Appeal of Scoring
(1)   A candidate may appeal any alleged math or scoring errors in the
computation of the final promotional examination score. Appeals alleging math
or scoring errors shall be submitted in writing to the Employment Testing
Division of the Human Resources Department no later than five (5) business days
after the date the candidates were notified of their individual scores.
(2)   The Employment Testing Division of the Human Resources Department shall
investigate the alleged math or scoring error identified in the appeal. In the
event that a math or scoring error is determined to have occurred, a correction
will be applied equally to all candidates impacted by the error. If any such
corrected score would result in a change to the rank order of the promotional
eligibility list, the Chief of Police will be notified and the Employment
Testing Division of the Human Resources Department will create a revised list
based on the corrected scores.
(3)   The promotional eligibility list will not be considered final until the
five (5) business days appeal period is completed and any confirmed errors are
corrected.
20.   ISSUES NOT SUBJECT TO CITY APPEAL
The following issues cannot be appealed by a candidate with the City:
(1)   the minimum requirements for the job classification;
(2)   the prerequisites for entering the promotional process;
(3)   final scores from any components of the promotional process;
(4)   final combined scored promotional examination scores;
(5)   post-assessment review feedback from assessors cannot be used to appeal
assessment center scores or final combined promotional examination scores.
21. ELIGIBILITY LISTS FOR PROMOTION
A.   For placement on the promotional eligibility list a candidate must achieve
a final combined promotional score of seventy percent (70%) or greater.
(1)   Candidates who participated in a promotional process but did not attain a
final combined promotional score of seventy percent (70%) or greater must
retest in a future promotional process to be considered for promotion.
(2)   A final combined promotional score of seventy percent (70%) does not
guarantee automatic placement on the promotional eligibility list.
B.   A promotional eligibility list in order of highest-attained scores will be
compiled by the Human Resources Department and provided to the Chief of Police.
(1)   Seniority, as defined in the APD collective bargaining agreement, will be
used for list placement only in the event of a tie.
(2)   In accordance with the criteria set forth in Section 9 (Preparation and
Administration of the Promotional Process), based on the number of anticipated
vacancies and promotions for the rank being tested as stated in the initial
official announcement, the Human Resources Department will prepare a
promotional eligibility list consisting of the candidates in order of scoring,
which list shall include the candidates with the highest combined final scores,
provided that no candidates with a score of less than seventy percent (70%)
will be placed on the promotional eligibility list.
(3)   The Chief of Police will select candidates for promotion to Sergeant and
Lieutenant.
a)   In selecting candidates for promotion, the Chief of Police may apply the
"rule of three” to the promotional eligibility list.
i.   The Chief of Police may promote any candidate to the position of Sergeant
or Lieutenant who scores in the top three (3) slots of the respective
promotional eligibility list.
ii.   Once the selection has been made, the next rank-ordered name on the
promotional eligibility list will advance into the top three.
iii.   The top three (3) candidates will be considered each time a promotion is
made, regardless of their final scores.
iv.   Candidates on the list who may have been passed over by the application
of the “rule of three” will retain their relative positions on the list until
promoted or removed as a condition of a disciplinary action.
b)   Sworn personnel on an approved leave of absence without pay will not be
promoted until their return to regular duty.
22.   SUSPENSION OR REMOVAL FROM PROMOTIONAL ELIGIBILITY LIST
A.   A candidate who is currently on a Promotional Eligibility List and the
subject of an active criminal investigation, federal or state civil rights
investigation, is the subject of a formal administrative investigation, or is
named in a pending lawsuit alleging specific acts of unconstitutional conduct
by the promotional candidate he or she will be temporarily suspended from the
Promotional Eligibility List pending the results of such investigation or law
suit.
B.   The candidate shall be notified in writing that he/she is the subject of
such an investigation and of the temporary suspension from the Promotional
Eligibility List. The candidate’s eligibility shall only be temporarily
suspended until disposition of the case under investigation. Depending on the
disposition of the investigation, the candidate’s eligibility may be
permanently removed from the Promotional Eligibility List.
C.   Nothing shall prevent the Chief of Police from permanently removing a
candidate’s name from the current existing Promotional Eligibility List for
just cause, as defined below:
1.   Imposition of more than eighty hours of suspension, cumulative, within a 2
year time period of being considered eligible, including time held in abeyance;
2.   A sustained finding of gross insubordination;
3.   A sustained finding of untruthfulness;
4.   When a candidate for promotion has, incurred a judicial finding by a Court
of competent jurisdiction of a violation of the civil or Constitutional rights
of another; or
5.   When a candidate has been indicted or had a probable cause determination
by a judicial officer that he likely committed a felony or misdemeanor;
However, the Chief of Police will not consider conduct occurring prior to June
2, 2015, unless such conduct is implicated by subsections (4) or (5). If the
Chief of Police contemplates excluding a candidate from participating in the
promotional process for the items listed in 22(C) above, he or she will notify
the candidate, in writing, that he or she is contemplating removing the
candidate from the existing promotional list. Such notification shall contain a
description of why the candidate may be excluded from participating in a
promotional process, with sufficient detail to allow the candidate to respond.
The candidate will be given the opportunity to rebut the decision in writing
within ten (10) calendar days from the date of notification. The Chief of
Police will provide a written response to the candidate with a final
determination within seven (7) calendar days from the date the candidate
submits a written rebuttal.
D.   If any disciplinary action for just cause is imposed by a superior officer
other than the Chief of Police upon a candidate currently on a promotional
list, the superior officer will notify the Chief of Police of said disciplinary
action in writing. The Chief of Police shall review the disciplinary action to
determine if the candidate’s actions indicate just cause to be removed from the
promotional eligibility list.
E.   If a candidate is permanently removed from a current eligibility list the
candidate will receive notification in writing. Such notification shall contain
a description of why the candidate is being removed from the current list with
sufficient detail to allow the candidate to respond. The candidate will be
given the opportunity to rebut the decision in writing within ten (10) calendar
days from the date of notification. The Chief of Police will provide a written
response to the candidate with a final determination within seven (7) calendar
days from the date the candidate submits a written rebuttal.
23.   PROMOTIONAL PROCESS FOR POLICE COMMANDER
A.   The Chief of Police will use an evaluation process to select officers from
the rank of Lieutenant for promotion to Police Commander.
B.   The process may include a structured oral interview, a written
examination, an assessment center or other process as determined by the Chief
of Police and in concurrence with the Director of Human Resources prior to the
initiation of the process.
C.   Police Commanders are appointed by the Chief of Police with the
concurrence of the City’s Chief Administrative Officer.
24.   PROMOTIONAL PROCESS FOR DEPUTY CHIEF
A.   The Chief of Police will use an evaluation process to select officers from
the rank of Police Commander or Major for promotion to Deputy Chief.
B.   The process may include a structured oral interview, a written
examination, an assessment center or other process as determined by the Chief
of Police and in concurrence with the Director of Human Resources prior to the
initiation of the process.
C.   Deputy Chiefs are appointed by the Chief of Police with the concurrence of
the City’s Chief Administrative Officer.
25.   POST-PROMOTIONAL PROCESS REQUIREMENTS FOR SERGEANTS AND LIEUTENANTS
Candidates who are placed on a promotional list must complete and pass all
sections of the Post-Promotional Process Education Requirements.
A.   Candidates who are placed on a promotional list for Sergeant are required
to satisfactorily complete a mandatory supervisors’ course approved by the APD
Training Academy.
B.   Candidates who are placed on a promotional list for Lieutenant will
satisfactorily complete a department leadership course approved by the APD
Training Academy, as such appropriate courses become available.
C.   Promoted Sergeants and Lieutenants will enter the FTO and Evaluation
Program. These personnel will receive on-the-job training and must demonstrate
proficiency in all aspects of the duty position.
D.   Candidates who complete the required courses but are not promoted by the
expiration date of a promotional eligibility list do not have to complete the
courses again in the future if they choose to retest for promotion.
26.   EVALUATION OF NEWLY PROMOTED SERGEANTS AND LIEUTENANTS
A.   Promotions are contingent on satisfactory performance during a twelve (12)
month evaluation period.
B.   The twelve (12) month evaluation period is calculated from the date of
promotion.
C.   All newly promoted sworn personnel must be formally evaluated quarterly by
their supervisors during this evaluation period. Failure to perform with a
rating of “3-Competent” or above during the evaluation period may result in a
return to the previous rank, remedial training, or a continuation of the
probationary period as determined by the Chief of Police.
D.   After the Chief of Police, or designee, releases the newly promoted
Sergeant or Lieutenant from the twelve (12) month evaluation period, such
promotions will be considered permanent and subject to performance and
disciplinary requirements.
300.   CONDITIONS OF EMPLOYMENT
As a condition of employment, employees are required to comply with the
provisions of the City of Albuquerque Merit System Ordinance, Labor-Management
Relations Ordinance, Conflict of Interest Ordinance, Personnel Rules and
Regulations, Executive Orders and Administrative Instructions and all relevant
laws, statutes, ordinances, regulations and collective bargaining agreements
governing employment with the City of Albuquerque.
Pursuant to the Conflict of Interest Ordinance, Article 3 (R. O. 1994), the
Code of Conduct, Section
301, below, shall further govern the conduct of employees and if violated shall
be grounds for disciplinary action including, but not limited to, termination,
demotion, suspension or reprimand.
Additionally, department directors may promulgate, with the review by the Human
Resources Department and approval of the Chief Administrative Officer, Codes of
Conduct, rules, regulations and standard operating procedures for employees in
their departments, which prescribe standards peculiar and appropriate to the
function, and purpose for which the department was created and exists.
Departmental Codes of Conduct shall further govern the conduct of employees
and, if violated, shall be grounds for disciplinary action including, but not
limited to, termination, demotion, suspension or reprimand.
301.   CODE OF CONDUCT
301.1   Duty to the Public (March 5, 2005)
The City of Albuquerque is a public service institution. In carrying out their
assigned duties and responsibilities, employees must always remember their
first obligation is to the general public’s safety and well-being. This
obligation must be carried out within the framework of federal, state and local
laws.
Employees shall serve the public with respect, concern, courtesy and
responsiveness, recognizing service to the public is the reason for their
employment. Telephone calls, correspondence or other communications should be
answered promptly or referred to appropriate individuals for timely action.
It is recognized it is not always possible to fulfill all of the requests of
the general public, however, employees are required to handle all requests and
inquiries courteously, fairly, impartially, efficiently and effectively.
301.2   Professional Excellence
Employees are encouraged to strive for personal and professional excellence as
a means of keeping current on relevant issues and administering the public’s
business with professional competence, efficiency and effectiveness.
301.3   Standards of Conduct
Employees shall in all instances maintain their conduct at the highest personal
and professional standards in order to promote public confidence and trust in
the City and public institutions and in a manner that merits the respect and
cooperation of co-workers and the community.
Employees shall not use insulting, abusive or offensive language or actions
toward the public or co-workers. Ethnic or sexist jokes, slurs and other
comments or actions that might embarrass or offend others are prohibited.
Employees shall not harass others by making sexual advances or by creating an
intimidating or offensive working environment or by making false accusations
regarding such conduct. Display of visual materials that may be sexually or
racially offensive is also prohibited.
Employees shall not have in their possession during assigned work hours,
including lunch periods, in any facility, vehicle or work site, illegal drugs,
alcohol, drug paraphernalia, weapons or explosives, unless directly related to
their city responsibilities. Additionally, employees may not use any product
for other than its intended manufactured use.
Employees are responsible for notifying their immediate supervisor in writing
of a conviction, entry of a “no contest” plea or imposition of a sentence if
the infraction relates to the position held by the employee. Misdemeanor
convictions will be considered based on job relatedness.
301.4   Equal Employment Opportunity
Employees shall comply with the provisions of Title VII of the United States
Civil Rights Act of 1964, as amended, the State of New Mexico Human Rights Act,
as amended, the City of Albuquerque Human Rights Ordinance and the City of
Albuquerque Affirmative Action Plan. While not all inclusive, these laws and
the Affirmative Action Plan legitimize the concept of merit, qualifications and
performance in selection and career advancement and prohibit discrimination on
the basis of race, color, religion, sex, national origin or ancestry, age,
physical or mental disability and Vietnam Era or disabled veteran status,
sexual orientation and medical condition.
301.5   Violence in the Workplace
Workplace violence by employees is prohibited. Violent behavior directed toward
a City employee by a member of the general public shall not be tolerated.
Prohibited workplace behavior includes intimidation, verbal threats, physical
assault, vandalism, arson, sabotage, the unauthorized display, possession or
use of weapons in the workplace, jokes or comments regarding violent acts which
are reasonably perceived to be a threat, or any other behavior reasonably
perceived to be a threat of imminent harm against an employee or member of the
general public.
An employee who witnesses or is the subject of prohibited behaviors must report
the incident to their immediate supervisor unless the supervisor is the one
exhibiting the prohibited behavior, in which case the employee shall report the
behavior to the next highest person within the organization.
A supervisor receiving the complaint must conduct an investigation of the
incident and initiate appropriate action to eliminate the prohibited behavior.
The supervisor shall prepare a written response to the employee reporting the
incident. This response shall include an acknowledgment of the employee’s
complaint, a description of the investigation conducted, and the action that
was initiated to eliminate the prohibited behavior.
Employees engaging in any prohibited behavior may be subject to mandatory
referral for psychological/psychiatric evaluation, counseling or mediation,
arrest and prosecution, and/or disciplinary action up to and including
termination from City employment. Refer to applicable Administrative
Instructions for further guidance.
301.6    Report of Abuse (March 5, 2005)
During the course of business, employees may become aware of instances of abuse
of equipment, facilities, programs, city driving privileges, or other areas of
official City business. As employees become aware of these instances, they are
to report these events to their immediate supervisor or directly to their
department director.
If an employee fails to report such events and it is determined later through
an investigation that an employee had knowledge of the situation, the employee
may be subject to disciplinary action up to and including termination.
301.7   Weapons
It is strictly prohibited for any employee, other than sworn law enforcement
officers, to possess firearms (including handguns, regardless of any authorized
permit); explosives or dangerous weapons on City premises, in City property or
at City sponsored events. City premises include worksites and vehicles (owned,
rented or leased), parking garages and parking lots.
The City may conduct searches when there is a reason to believe that a person
is in possession of a firearm including handguns, (regardless of any authorized
permit), explosives or any other weapon, device, instrument or substance, which
in the manner it is used or intended to be used, is capable of producing death
or serious bodily injury.
Any violation of this policy, including a refusal to consent to a search, will
subject an employee to disciplinary action up to and including termination of
employment.
301.8   Safety (March 5, 2005)
Employees are responsible for performing assigned duties in the safest possible
manner, using all available safety measures and devices to prevent injury to
themselves, coworkers or the general public and to report unsafe equipment,
materials, or conditions to their supervisor and the Risk Management Division.
Because human dignity and the personal safety of each employee are of utmost
importance, dangerous practical jokes, horseplay, and roughhouse activities are
prohibited in the workplace.
301.9   False Statements/Fraud
No employee shall willfully make any false statement, certificate, mark, rating
or report in regard to any test, certification, appointment or investigation,
or in any manner commit any fraud, conceal any wrongdoing or knowingly withhold
information about wrongdoing in connection with employment with the City or in
connection with the work-related conduct of any City employee.
301.10   Bribery, Gifts and Donations
No individual seeking appointment to, or promotion in the service of the City
shall, either directly or indirectly, give, render or pay any money, service or
other valuable thing to any person for, or on account of, or in connection
with, a test, appointment, proposed appointment, promotion or any personnel
action. Payments to licensed employment agencies are exempted. No reward,
favor, gift, or other form of payment in addition to regular compensation and
employee benefits shall be received by any employee for the performance or
nonperformance of their duties from any vendor, contractor, individual or firm
doing business with the City or who can reasonably anticipate doing business
with the City in the future, or from any other source having or proposing to
have any relationship with the City of Albuquerque.
Nothing in this section shall be construed to prohibit an occasional,
nonpecuniary gift, insignificant in value; an award publicly presented in
recognition of public service, participation in community events, acts of
heroism or for solving of crimes; nor does it apply to a commercially
reasonable loan made in the ordinary course of business by an institution
authorized by the laws of the State to engage in the business of making loans.
301.11   City Funds
Employees are personally accountable for City money over which they have
possession or control. All employees who are in control of City funds must
maintain accurate and current records of all such funds. Employees must comply
with all policies, practices, and procedures promulgated by the Department of
Finance and Administrative Services and approved by the Chief Administrative
Officer and in accordance with Generally Accepted Accounting Principles
regarding the receipt, recording and disbursement of public monies.
301.12   City Property
Employees are responsible for preventing loss, damage, abuse, misuse or theft
of City property or property entrusted to the City including, but not limited
to: artifacts, vehicles, equipment, tools, supplies and City records. All City
property should be used only for City business. City property may not be used
for personal gain or profit.
Office furniture, fixtures, vehicles and equipment including lockers and
storage units are the property of the City or contain property of the City. The
City has the right of access to such items at any time as determined necessary
by the supervisor.
301.13   City Records and Accounting
All City records, including reports, vouchers, requisitions, payroll and
personnel records must be prepared factually and accurately.
It is the personal obligation of the employee completing such records as well
as the supervisor to ensure that such records are accurate and comply with
federal, state, and City record-keeping and accounting requirements.
301.14   Telephone Usage
City telephones are for official business use only and will be used in a
professional manner. Abusive, threatening or obscene phone calls are strictly
prohibited. Use of City telephones for personal calls during office hours is
discouraged. A supervisor may permit the employee to make occasional calls if
they do not interfere with the work duties and responsibilities of the
employee, departmental operations, performance or services to the public.
Personal use of City telephones for toll or long distance calls is strictly
prohibited unless the call is charged to the employee’s personal credit card or
home telephone.
Employees are responsible for ensuring that toll or long distance calls made
for legitimate business purposes are appropriately and accurately documented.
301.15   Automated Systems
All automated systems, including electronic mail; Internet usage, software and
hardware are for official City business. All users will conduct themselves in a
legal, professional and ethical manner. All automated systems are valuable and
must be protected from misappropriation, abuse, misuse, theft, fraud, loss and
unauthorized use or disposal. Misappropriation of computer time, hardware or
software includes, but is not limited to, using a computer to create or run
unauthorized jobs, operating a computer in an unauthorized mode or
intentionally causing any kind of operational malfunction or failure.
Employees are required to terminate processing from their terminals/PCs using
standard log-off procedures when not in use to prevent unauthorized use of such
equipment. Employees are required to report violations or suspected violations
to their department director or, if the computer is under the control of the
Information Systems Division (ISD), to the Chief Information Officer.
Employees shall not use City computer time, hardware or software for any
personal gain or profit. Employees are required to comply with all policies,
practices, and procedures promulgated by the Department of Finance and
Administrative Services and approved by the Chief Administrative Officer
regarding the use and security of automated systems.
As used in this section, automated system and/or computer shall mean the City’s
mainframe computer and peripheral equipment, any terminal or desktop computer,
which communicates with a computer, network or mainframe and any standalone
personal computers.
301.16   Privileged Information
Employees shall protect privileged information to which they have access in the
course of their official duties. Employees or former employees shall not
disclose or use confidential information acquired through their employment with
the City for the employees or another’s personal gain or profit.
301.17   Supervision of Employees (March 5, 2005)
Employees with supervisory duties or responsibilities shall, in all instances,
ensure that all supervisory actions comply with the provisions of the Merit
System Ordinance, Labor-Management Relations Ordinance, Personnel Rules and
Regulations, Administrative Instructions, City Operator’s Permit, Substance
Abuse Policy, applicable legislation, and relevant judicial/administrative
decisions.
301.18   Sales by Employees 
Employees are required to direct their attention to their duties and
responsibilities during work hours. No employee shall conduct or operate a
personal business, which includes promotion, sales, scheduling or any related
activity during work hours. This includes the sale of goods or services for
profit. Employees may be allowed to conduct limited sales for fund raising
activities during their lunch period or breaks.
301.19   Community Activities
As private citizens, employees may participate in public affairs and community
oriented projects as a means of enhancing City governments’ contribution to the
well being and quality of life of the citizens of Albuquerque. Employees are
responsible for complying with leave policies for activities that occur during
scheduled work hours.
301.20 Direct Deposit
All newly hired employees and reinstated employees are required to receive all
employment wages through direct deposit. An employee may not begin work prior
to complying with this requirement.
302.   REGULAR WORK HOURS
Employees will perform their work in a responsible manner, observing scheduled
work hours and complying with City policy governing paid and unpaid leave of
absence. Employees are further responsible for complying with City policy
concerning sick and vacation leave usage.
The department director shall specify the working time of their employees.
302.1   Lunch Periods/Breaks
Lunch periods are usually one (1) hour, and breaks, fifteen (15) minutes, one
(1) break period permitted in the first half of the day worked and one (1) in
the second half of the day worked.
Supervisors shall be responsible for scheduling and may limit breaks if, in
their opinion, continuous work is required because of an emergency or unusual
condition. An unpaid lunch break of at least thirty (30) minutes will be
provided. In the event a non-exempt employee is required to work during their
lunch period, this time will be compensated in accordance with the Fair Labor
Standards Act (FLSA). Lunch periods and breaks may not be accumulated and used
at other times or for other purposes.
302.2   Overtime Work
As a condition of employment, employees may be required to work overtime.
Overtime work for City employees is generally discouraged, however when
overtime is required for non-exempt employees, compensation must be in
accordance with the Fair Labor Standards Act (FLSA) and any applicable
collective bargaining agreement.
A non-exempt employee shall not work more than the regularly scheduled forty
(40) hour workweek without prior approval of the department director or
immediate supervisor as designated by the director. Working overtime without
prior approval is considered just cause for disciplinary action up to and
including termination.
In the absence of any collective bargaining agreement concerning method of
payment, payment may be in the form of cash or compensatory time, which is
limited to a maximum accrual of sixty (60) hours. All accrued compensatory time
must be utilized within 180 days of accrual. If not used the balance must be
paid to the employee on the next regularly scheduled payroll.
303.   WITNESSES/GRIEVANCE/ JUDICIAL PROCEEDINGS
As a condition of employment or continued employment, employees may be required
to appear as witnesses in grievance hearings and/or as witnesses for the City
in administrative or judicial proceedings as directed by City administrative
staff. This includes, but is not limited to, cooperating with City officials
and insurers of the City in any claim, whether for civil damages or other
relief, brought by or against the City.
Employees are required to cooperate in City investigations and in efforts to
recover damages, benefits, settlements or any court or administrative action
relating to injury time or Workers’ Compensation claims. Refusal to cooperate
is considered just cause for disciplinary action up to and including
termination.
Employees called as witnesses, related to their employment, during work hours
shall be paid at their regular rate. Employees will be required to return to
work when they are no longer needed as witnesses. All witness fees received by
employees must be remitted to the City if called as a witness during work
hours.
Employees who are parties to or called as witnesses in administrative or
judicial proceedings unrelated to their employment or official capacity with
the City must submit a Request for Leave of Absence form specifying vacation or
leave without pay to their immediate supervisor with a copy of the order to
appear. Under this condition, employees are not required to return witness fees
to the City.
304.   LIGHT DUTY/MODIFIED WORK
The Light Duty/Modified Work program applies only to on-the-job injuries.
When a work related injury has occurred and the Employee Health Clinic has
determined the employee is unable to perform all of the essential functions of
the job due to a work related injury the employee shall participate in the
Light Duty Program. Departments will be required to participate in the Light
Duty/Modified Work program as directed by Risk Management and the Human
Resources Director.
305.   PROBATIONARY PERIOD
As a condition of employment, classified employees must serve a probationary
period. An employee serving a probationary period does not have a legitimate
entitlement to continued employment and may be terminated for any or no reason.
A probationary period shall be utilized by the supervisor to closely evaluate
the employee’s work to provide guidance and direction to the employee to
achieve satisfactory performance in their new position.
For police officers, Fire Fighters, and correction officers, the probationary
period shall be twelve (12) months immediately following the original
appointment date or from the date of graduation from the police academy or fire
academy, whichever is later, whether or not such appointee has been previously
employed by the city.
The probationary period for all other classified employees shall be for a
period of six (6) months immediately following the original classified
appointment date. However, if a non-public safety employee that has completed
probation accepts a new position that requires the carrying of a weapon the
employee will be required to satisfactorily complete a twelve (12) month
evaluation period. If the employee does not successfully complete the
evaluation period the employee will be placed in a comparable position for
which they qualify.
At any time during the probationary period an employee may be dismissed for any
reason, which is not prohibited by law. The respective department director will
document the completion of the probationary period by submitting a personnel
action form and a performance evaluation. Failure to submit the personnel
action form shall constitute dismissal of the employee. Upon the supervisor’s
recommendation, the department director may extend the probationary period, one
time, for up to a maximum of sixty (60) days.
An employee serving in a probationary period is not entitled to certain rights
and benefits as provided for in other sections of the Personnel Rules and
Regulations.
306.   CATEGORIES OF EMPLOYMENT
306.1   Classified Employees
Classified employees are City employees who are entitled to all the rights and
benefits described in these Regulations and guaranteed by the Merit System
Ordinance and the Labor-Management Relations Ordinance.
306.2   Unclassified Employees
Unclassified employees are employees at will and serve at the discretion of the
Chief Administrative Officer, except for unclassified City Council staff. Such
employees have no property interest in continued employment and may be
terminated for any or no reason.
Unclassified employees shall be entitled to all of the rights and benefits to
which classified employees are entitled except for the rights of disciplinary
actions, the grievance resolution procedure, appeals and layoff.
The unclassified service shall be comprised of the following:
A.   The Chief Administrative Officer and Deputy Chief Administrative Officers,
assistants to the Chief Administrative Officer and the secretary to the Chief
Administrative Officer;
B.   Assistants to the Mayor and secretary to the Mayor;
C.   The City's Public Information Officer;
D.   The City Attorney, Assistant City Attorneys, City Hearing Officer, City
Clerk/Recorder, administrative heads of departments or special programs,
physicians, veterinarians, the Director of Internal Audit;
E.   Seasonal employees;
F.   Part-time employees working less than twenty (20) hours per week;
G.   Administrative heads of agencies or special programs sponsored by the City
under Federal or State programs and defined as unclassified by the Chief
Administrative Officer;
H.   The Director of Council Services and the Attorney for the Council; and
I.   Any position designated as unclassified by the Chief Administrative
Officer.
306.3   Temporary Employees
A temporary employee is one who is given a termination date at the time of
appointment and whose length of service may not exceed two (2) years. Temporary
employees shall be terminated two (2) years from the date of hire. Temporary
employees are not entitled to any of the rights and benefits under these rules
and regulations except for PERA membership.
306.4   Seasonal Employee
A seasonal employee is one who is hired to work no more than nine (9) months in
a twelve (12) consecutive month period.
Seasonal employees are not entitled to any of the rights and benefits of
employment to which other employees are entitled under these rules and
regulations.
306.5   Students
A student is one who is enrolled in a public or private high school or one who
is enrolled at an educational institution whose academic credits would be
accepted by a state educational institution and carrying at least twelve (12)
credit hours or full time student status during at least eight (8) months in
any calendar year.
306.6   Full-time Employee
A full-time employee is one who is hired to work at least forty (40) hours per
week. Employees in this status may be classified, unclassified, temporary or
seasonal and are entitled to the rights and benefits afforded the specific
category of employment as described above.
306.7   Part-time Employee
A part-time employee is one who normally works twenty (20) hours or more but
less than forty (40) hours per week. Employees in this status may be
classified, unclassified, temporary, seasonal or students and are entitled to
the rights and benefits afforded the specific category of employment as
described above. If applicable, benefits will be prorated accordingly.
A part-time schedule must be either half time (40 hours per pay period) or
three-quarter time (60 hours per pay period).
Exceptions to this schedule will only be allowed for part-time seasonal or
students.
Employees working less than twenty (20) hours per week are unclassified.
306.8   Elected Officials
The Mayor and City Councilors are not part of the classified service and thus
are not entitled to the rights afforded classified employees but are eligible
for insurance and retirement benefits.
306.9   Board and Commission Members
Members of boards, commissions and authorities are not employees of the City
and are not entitled to the rights and benefits afforded employees under these
rules and regulations.
307.   CHANGE IN EMPLOYMENT
307.1   Completion of Probation
Within fifteen (15) work days before an employee is due to complete the
probationary period the department director must submit to the Human Resources
Department a performance evaluation and a personnel action form, with an
effective date, indicating a change in status of the employee as follows:
A.   Satisfactory completion of the probationary period resulting in a change
from probationary to non-probationary; or
B.   Extension of the probationary period for a maximum of sixty (60) days,
such extension may only be requested one time; or
C.   Termination of the probationary employee.
307.2   Transfer or Promotion
Employee movement between pay plans, except movement into a management pay plan
(M and I series) will be considered a transfer. Employee advancement into
higher graded positions within the same pay plan and employee advancement into
management positions may be considered a promotion. An employee may initiate a
transfer or promotion by applying for a vacant position. A probationary
employee who accepts a transfer or promotion to a new position must complete a
full probationary period in the new position.
307.3   Position Reviews
The department director with the approval of the Chief Administrative Officer
may request the Human Resources Director review the classification of a
position.
If the review shows a significant change in the essential functions it will
result in the reclassification of the position. The Human Resources Department
will submit a recommendation to the Chief Administrative Officer on the
reclassification action. There will be no reorganizations or additional
permanent duties assigned to an employee, that would result in an upgrade,
until the position review has been finalized and approved by the Chief
Administrative Officer. The above procedures also apply to vacant positions.
Actions relating to the position review process are not grievable.
307.4   Administrative Transfers
Department directors may transfer an employee administratively to any position
within their department and within the same category of employment and grade
provided the employee is qualified for the position. The Chief Administrative
Officer may transfer an employee administratively to any position within the
City provided the employee is qualified.
307.5   Return to Previous Position
Employees who voluntarily transfer or are promoted to another City position may
be transferred back to their former position if:
A.   Their written request is received by the previous department director no
more than thirty (30) days after the date of transfer; and
B.   Their former position remains vacant; and
C.   The department director approves the return to the former position; and
D.   A personnel action form is submitted to the Human Resources Department.
Any compensation adjustments made as a result of a transfer or promotion will
be reversed upon the return to the previous position. Disapproval of a request
to return to a previous position is not grievable.
307.6   Layoff
Layoff is defined as the involuntary separation of classified, non-probationary
employees from the service of the City as a result of the abolishment of a
position, program elimination or lack of funds. Probationary, unclassified,
temporary, seasonal or students are not eligible for layoff privileges.
The Chief Administrative Officer and the Director of the Human Resources
Department are responsible for approving all layoffs and offering transfers or
placement offers to employees facing layoff. Employees in layoff status will be
terminated one (1) year from the effective date of layoff if they have not been
placed or upon refusal to accept an offer of placement into a position of equal
grade or comparable pay.
Prior to the layoff of a classified, non-probationary employee, temporary,
seasonal or students may be terminated. In the event a layoff is necessary, the
Chief Administrative Officer will issue an instructional memorandum outlining
the procedures for developing and implementing the layoff plan, which must be
based on seniority principles and collective bargaining agreements.
In this plan department directors are responsible for identifying positions for
elimination by job code.
When two (2) or more employees are in the same job code in the same department,
the determination as to layoff will be made in the following order:
A.   The employee with the shortest length of continuous, uninterrupted service
with the City;
B.   If this is equal, the employee with the shortest length of continuous,
uninterrupted service with the department;
C.   If this is equal, the employee with the shortest length of continuous,
uninterrupted service in the current job code;
D.   If this is equal, the affected employees shall draw lots.
When two (2) or more employees in layoff status are qualified for the same
position, offers of placement will be made on the basis of length of
continuous, uninterrupted service with the City. If this is equal, the last
person to be laid off will be the first person placed.
Layoff provisions in a collective bargaining agreement will supercede this
subsection.
Employees in layoff status placed in an equal position will be compensated in
accordance with Section
708. Employees in layoff status placed in a lower position will be compensated
in accordance with Section
706.
307.7   Physical Layoff (August 30, 2001)
Physical layoff is the separation of a classified, non-probationary employee
from the service of the City upon the certification of a licensed physician or
a licensed psychologist indicating the employee is physically or mentally
incapable of performing the duties of the position. An employee in physical
layoff may return to work within one year of the effective date of physical
layoff. The employee will be placed in a vacant position, for which they
qualify, and is of equal or lesser grade or comparable pay to the employee’s
previous position.
To be eligible for physical layoff, an employee must have twelve (12) months of
continuous uninterrupted active employment immediately prior to the effective
date of physical layoff. Unclassified, temporary, seasonal or students are not
eligible for physical layoff. Before transferring to physical layoff employees
must exhaust sick leave and will be paid accrued vacation or compensatory leave
in a lump sum.
Before an employee is transferred into physical layoff, the City will determine
whether the employee has a disability as defined by the American with
Disabilities Act (ADA). If so, the City will engage in an interactive process
with the employee to determine whether a reasonable accommodation can be made
in the employee’s existing position or transfer to another position.
Employees unable to return to work after exhausting sick and FMLA leave will be
transferred to physical layoff at the end of an FMLA leave without pay period.
However, the effective date of transfer will be the date the paid leave was
exhausted. When an employee is transferred to physical layoff, the City will
provide notice to the employee of his or her rights under this section as well
as the employee’s obligation to keep the City informed of his or her physical
or mental condition during the physical layoff period.
An employee in physical layoff initiates the return to work process by
notifying the Human Resources Department that his or her personal physician has
released him or her to return to work. A City doctor must also certify that the
employee has reached maximum medical improvement and may return to work. A City
doctor must also certify that the employee has reached minimum medical
improvement and any return to work. The Human Resources Department will then
attempt to locate a position of equal or lesser grade or comparable pay to the
employee’s previous position. If there is a question whether the employee is
physically or mentally able to perform the essential duties of an identified
position, a City doctor, after consultation with the employee’s personal
physician, must certify that the employee is able to perform all of the
essential functions of the position. If the physician determines that the
employee cannot perform the essential functions, the City’s ADA Coordinator
will determine if the employee is disabled. If it is determined that the
employee is disabled as defined by the ADA, the ADA Coordinator will engage in
an interactive process with the employee to determine if a reasonable
accommodation would enable the employee to perform the essential functions of
that position or another position.
Employees in physical layoff status placed in an equal position will be
compensated in accordance with Section
709. Employees in physical layoff status placed in a lower position will be
compensated in accordance with Section
706.
Employees on physical layoff status will be terminated one (1) year from the
effective date of physical layoff or upon refusal to accept an offer of
placement into a position of equal grade or comparable pay.
Employees in physical layoff are not eligible for donated leave or hardship
leave.
307.8   Underfill
An employee or applicant may be selected to underfill a position provided the
Human Resources Department and the hiring departments agree the most suitable
candidate was selected. Underfill means the candidate selected lacks a specific
requirement for the position.
The Human Resources Department will review the qualifications of an employee
who is being considered for underfill to determine the conditions of underfill
and the qualifications that must be met, time requirements, levels of
completion and compensation. The conditions of underfill must be specified in
writing by the Human Resources Department prior to the effective date and must
be provided to the hiring department and employee. The Human Resources Director
will submit a recommendation to the Chief Administrative Officer for approval
on a case-by-case basis.
Failure to comply with the conditions of underfill within the specified time
frame up to a six (6) month period is just cause for termination of employment.
307.9   Temporary Duplicate Positions
Temporary duplicate positions may be created for a period not to exceed six (6)
months only upon the written notification of resignation or retirement of an
employee. The department director must request approval from the Chief
Administrative Officer to create a temporary duplicate position to ensure
continuity of service.
The classified position held by the retiring/resigning employee will be
advertised and filled in accordance with City procedures.
308.   AMERICANS WITH DISABILITY ACT (ADA)
The ADA prohibits discrimination in all employment practices, including job
application procedures, hiring, firing, advancement, compensation, training,
and other terms, conditions, and privileges of employment.
Employment discrimination is prohibited against “qualified individuals with
disabilities.” A qualified individual with a disability is a person who meets
legitimate skill, experience, education, or other requirements of an employment
position and can perform the essential functions of the position with or
without reasonable accommodation.
The City of Albuquerque is only required to accommodate a “known” disability of
a qualified applicant or employee. An individual with a disability who desires
a reasonable accommodation should complete and submit a Request for
Accommodation form to the Human Resources Department.
309.   MEDICAL EVALUATIONS, EXAMINATIONS AND ALCOHOL/DRUG TESTS
309.1   Examinations (March 5, 2005)
As a condition of employment or continued employment, City employees or
applicants may be required to take a medical or psychological examination or an
alcohol/drug test. Refusal of the applicant or employee to complete the
examination/test as directed by the health care professional or to provide
medical records is just cause for withdrawing the employment offer or for
disciplinary action up to and including termination. The Human Resources
Director will determine employees/positions that will be subject to medical and
psychological examinations. The Human Resources Director in accordance with the
Substance Abuse Policy Manual will also determine required alcohol/drug tests.
Examinations or tests may be conducted for the following reasons:
A.   Prior to employment; or
B.   Prior to an employee being transferred or promoted from one position to
another; or
C.   When requested by the Fleet Safety Officer, Risk Manager, or department
director, who has reason to believe the employee is not physically or mentally
capable of performing essential job duties (in-service physical); or
D.   In the event of any injury, illness or surgical treatment of an employee;
or
E.   When an employee has been on leave with or without pay as a result of a
medical condition for more than five (5) days; or
F.   Any purpose deemed necessary by the Chief Administrative Officer or
Director of Human Resources.
309.2   Scheduling Examinations
All requests for medical or psychological examinations, except for Workers'
Compensation claims, must be coordinated between the employee/applicant, the
hiring department, Employee Health Clinic and the Human Resources Department.
The Employee Health Clinic will be responsible for scheduling drug/alcohol
testing.
309.3   Alcohol and Drug Testing
Applicants for City employment in safety-sensitive positions are subject to
pre-employment drug testing. Employees in safety-sensitive positions are
subject to random, return to duty, follow-up and post accident drug/alcohol
testing. Employees who are placed, transferred, or promoted to safety-sensitive
positions are subject to drug/alcohol testing. All employees are subject to
reasonable suspicion drug/alcohol testing. It shall be the responsibility of
the Human Resources Director to determine which positions are safety sensitive
and to notify the affected employees of their status.
There shall be five (5) pools of safety sensitive employees from which
employees can be randomly selected. Each pool shall be maintained separately
and no employee may be placed in more than one pool except as noted in letter D
below. The pools shall be designated as follows:
A.   Employees designated as safety-sensitive by Federal Transit Authority
regulations;
B.   Employees required to operate a commercial class vehicle (other than
Federal Transit Authority designated employees);
C.   Public safety employees;
D.   Police officers whose primary duty is the detection and suppression of
drug law violations, who shall be the only employees whose names appear in two
(2) pools; and
E.   All other employees whose position has been designated safety-sensitive by
the Human Resources Director.
Refer to the Substance Abuse Policy Manual for further guidance.
309.4   Medical or Psychological Examinations Due to Personal Injury/Illness
Should a medical or psychological exam reveal an employee is unable to perform
the essential functions of the job due to an off the job illness or injury the
employee will be placed on sick leave. Upon exhausting accrued sick leave, the
employee will be placed on physical layoff.
If the employee’s personal physician releases the employee with permanent
restrictions and the employee has a disability as defined by the Americans with
Disabilities Act (ADA) the employee may request an accommodation.
Prior to returning to work the employee is required to submit to the Human
Resources Department a release from their personal physician. The Human
Resources Department will also refer the employee to the City Employee Health
Clinic for a return to work clearance and certification that the employee is
able to perform the essential functions of the job.
If an employee is released by their personal physician with temporary
restrictions, that do not exceed two (2) weeks, the department director may
assign temporary alternate tasks if such are available. If such tasks are not
available the employee will not be allowed to return to work and will be placed
on sick leave if an accrued balance exists otherwise on Leave Without Pay.
Police officers and firefighters released to return to work by their personal
physician with temporary restrictions will be referred to their department
chief to determine if an alternate temporary assignment is available. Such
temporary assignment may not exceed three (3) months.
309.5   Appeal of Failure to Pass the Examination
The City will notify applicants or employees who fail the City's medical or
psychological examinations. Applicants or employees may appeal the failure of a
medical or psychological examination, except for drug and alcohol testing,
through the following procedures:
A.   The Human Resources Department shall provide applicants or employees with
the physical requirements (essential job functions) for the position in
question.
B.   Employees or applicants must seek a second medical opinion at their own
expense from a licensed physician of their choosing. The licensed physician
selected by the applicant or employee shall use the physical requirements
provided by the Human Resources Department to determine if the applicant or
employee meets the physical requirements of the job. This second medical
opinion will be presented in writing to the Director of Human Resources.
C.   In all instances where the City physician's report and the second medical
opinion are in conflict, the Human Resources Department shall seek a third
medical opinion from a physician selected by the City.
D.   After receipt of the third medical opinion, the Director of Human
Resources shall forward all documentation with a recommendation to the Chief
Administrative Officer who will make the final decision regarding employment.
E.   The Human Resources Director will notify the applicant or employee of the
final decision.
Failure to pass a medical or psychological examination is not grievable.
310.   EMPLOYMENT OUTSIDE THE CITY SERVICE
All employees must obtain the written permission of the department director and
concurrence of the Human Resources Director allowing them to engage in outside
employment. No employee who is receiving Workers' Compensation total disability
payments, hardship leave or donated leave shall engage in outside employment.
Employees who are unable to return to their current position or waiting to be
reassigned by the Human Resources Department may engage in outside employment
with the concurrence of the Human Resources Department.
310.1   Authorization Required for Outside Employment
The department director and the Human Resources Director will assure the
following provisions are met:
A.   The duties or services of the proposed outside employment will not create
a conflict of interest for the employee or assigned subordinates while serving
in an official capacity with the City; and
B.   There is no conflict between the employee's official duties with the City
and the proposed outside employment; and
C.   The proposed outside employment will not defame, embarrass or discredit
the City; and
D.   The employee has a satisfactory work record and there is a reasonable
assumption that it will continue if approved; and
E.   The employee's sick leave usage, excluding FMLA absences, does not reflect
abuse; and
F.   The Human Resources Director may authorize other provisions as necessary.
310.2   Approval of Outside Employment
Outside employment may be authorized for a period up to one (1) year and must
be approved on a year-to-year basis. Requests must be submitted prior to
engaging in outside employment and renewed in January of each year.
Employees approved for outside employment may not work more than a total of
sixty (60) hours per week for City service and outside employment combined.
City employees performing work for the City outside their normal duties may not
be considered an independent contractor and all such work shall be paid through
the normal payroll process.
310.3   Recision of Outside Employment Approval
The department director with the concurrence of the Human Resources Director
may rescind the authorization for outside employment if such employment has a
negative impact on the employee's job performance. This action is not subject
to a grievance.
310.4   Expert Witnesses/Trainers
Requests for a City employee to appear as an expert witness or serve as a
trainer, presenter, speaker or panelist must receive the written approval of
the department director or Chief Administrative Officer. Employees must conduct
themselves at the highest personal and professional standard as they are
representing the City of Albuquerque during these engagements.
If this service occurs on City time or at City expense, a request for leave
must be approved and will be charged to work off site. In this instance all
compensation paid to the employee must be remitted to the City Treasurer
through their department.
If the employee elects to utilize vacation time and assumes all related
expenses, the employee may retain any compensation/reimbursement.
311.   PROHIBITIONS
Violation of any of the following sections is considered just cause for
disciplinary action up to and including termination.
311.1   Alcohol/Drug Possession and Consumption
As a condition of employment, consumption, possession, sale, purchase and/or
transfer of illegal drugs or drug paraphernalia by City employees are strictly
prohibited. Consumption of alcohol by City employees is prohibited in any
facility, vehicle or work site (owned, leased or rented) during assigned work
hours including lunch periods and breaks.
A.   If an employee uses prescription drugs it must be as directed by their
physician while nonprescription drugs should be used in accordance with the
recommended dosage. All employees, especially safety sensitive, must advise
their supervisor if the use of such drugs may affect their ability to perform
work duties safely and effectively. In this instance employees shall be
required to provide proof of lawful prescription and/or a statement from the
employee’s personal physician indicating the employee’s ability to perform the
essential job functions while under the influence of the prescribed drug(s).
Observation by the supervisor of abnormal behavior may result in a reasonable
suspicion alcohol/drug test.
B.   Employees are responsible for notifying their immediate supervisor in
writing of a conviction, entry of a "no contest" plea or imposition of
sentence, including the loss of a driver’s license, for illegal drugs or
alcohol offenses.
C.   No employee will report to work, perform work, visit a City work site,
City office or City facility (owned, rented or leased) while under the
influence of alcohol or the presence of illegal drugs in the their system.
Employees suspected of being under the influence of alcohol or illegal drugs
during assigned work hours shall be subject to a reasonable suspicion alcohol/
drug test.
Violation of these provisions shall be grounds for denial, suspension or
revocation of any City-issued driver's permit to operate a motor vehicle or
hazardous machinery and is considered just cause for disciplinary action up to
and including termination. Refusal to undergo any test required under this
regulation or applicable City policy is considered a positive test and a direct
act of insubordination and will result in termination.
311.2   Employment of Relatives
City employees may not directly supervise, control or influence the work or
employment status of a relative or the affairs of the organizational unit in
which the relative is employed. The term "relative" includes spouse, child,
stepchild, mother, father, grandparents, grandchild, mother-in-law, father-in-
law, brother, sister, brother-in-law, sister-in-law, son-in-law and daughter-
in-law. The term also includes a domestic partner and the mother, father,
brother, sister, child, stepchild, grandparents or grandchild of the domestic
partner.
311.3   Political Activities
No person shall engage in political activity that diminishes the integrity,
efficiency or discipline of the City service. No employee will participate in
the following types of activity:
A.   Use of one’s position or status to influence the support of other
officials or employees of the City for or against any candidate or issue in any
election or use of political activity to influence the employee's position or
status within City government; provided, however, that nothing herein shall
deny the right of officials or employees of the City to express their views on
any issue.
B.   Be a candidate for or hold an elective office of the State of New Mexico
or any of its political subdivisions.
Employees should refer to applicable Administrative Instructions for additional
prohibited and permitted politically related activities.
311.4   Hatch Act Provisions
City employees whose principal employment is in connection with an activity
financed in whole or in part by federal loans or grants made by the UniCity
employees whose principal employment is in connection with an activity financed
in whole or in part by federal loans or grants made by the United States or a
Federal agency are required to comply with the provisions of the Hatch Act.
These employees may not:
A.   Use their official authority or influence for the purpose of interfering
with or affecting the result of an election or nomination for office;
B.   Directly or indirectly coerce, attempt to coerce, command or advise a
state or local officer or employee to pay, lend or contribute anything of value
to a party, committee, organization, agency or person for political purposes;
C.   Be a candidate for public elective office in a partisan election.Be a
candidate for public elective office in a partisan election.
311.5   Union Activity
Employees are free to choose any representative employee organization or union.
No employee shall be intimidated, coerced, threatened or pressured into joining
or not joining any organization or union. No union representative may interrupt
or interfere with the normal conduct of City business. Arrangements must be
made with the employee in advance to meet during lunch periods or breaks.
Formal requests for on-site visits must be cleared through the supervisor or
work site manager.
If the provisions of fair share are met as required in the City regulations,
employees covered by a collective bargaining agreement will be required to pay
an agency fee.
311.6   Sales Representatives
Because City employees must direct their attention to their work
responsibilities during work hours, no sales representatives shall solicit or
provide information to City employees on City property during work hours
concerning any product or service unconnected with the employee's work
responsibilities. No City employee shall make arrangements for or with sales
representatives to solicit or provide information to City employees as private
customers. No employee shall accept any gratuity from a sales representative or
make arrangements for or with a sales representative to solicit or provide
information to other City employees as private customers.
311.7   Conflict of Interest
No employee shall violate any provision of the City Conflict of Interest
Ordinance (3-3-5, R.O., 1994) or Code of Conduct promulgated pursuant to that
Ordinance, including, but not limited to, the following:
A.   Employees shall disqualify themselves from participating in any official
act directly affecting a business in which they have a financial interest.
Employees shall not acquire a financial interest at a time when they believe or
have reason to believe that it will be directly affected by their official act.
B.   All employees who have a financial interest which they believe, or have
reason to believe, may be affected by an official act taken within the scope of
their employment, shall disclose the precise nature and value of such interest.
The disclosures shall be made in writing to the City Clerk at the time the
conflict occurs and during the month of January every year thereafter.
Additionally, it shall be the duty of employees to inform their department
director of such financial interest at the time they acquire it. The
information on the disclosures, except for the valuations attributed to the
reported interests, shall be made available by the City Clerk for inspection to
any citizen of this State; provided, however, the valuation shall be
confidential. The filing of disclosures pursuant to this section is a condition
of entering upon and continuing in City employment.
C.   The City shall not enter into any contract with a business nor should the
contractor be allowed to subcontract with a business in which an employee has a
controlling interest, involving services or property of a value in excess of
$1,000 unless the contract is made after public notice and competitive bidding
or the Chief Administrative Officer has issued a written waiver of this
prohibition; provided that this subsection does not apply to a contract of
employment with the City.
D.   A purchase order or contract entered into by the City with a business in
which an employee of the City has a controlling interest is void if the
employee failed to comply with the provisions of this section prior to the City
entering into such contract or purchase order.
E.   A former employee shall not within one (1) year after the date of
termination from employment represent any person or business in connection with
a matter in which the former employee has performed an official act, unless the
Chief Administrative Officer consents to such representation. No person or
business with which the former employee is associated may knowingly undertake
or continue a private representation in such a matter unless:
1.   The former City employee is screened from participation in the matter and
is apportioned no part of the compensation therefrom; and
2.   Written notice is promptly given to the Chief Administrative Officer.
Nothing in this section shall prohibit a former employee from entering into a
contract to represent the City in any matter, however all such contracts must
be approved by the Chief Administrative Officer.
Violation of any of the provisions of the Conflict of Interest Ordinance by any
employee is grounds for disciplinary action, up to and including termination.
Violation of any of the provisions of the Conflict of Interest Ordinance by a
former employee is a misdemeanor, and, upon conviction the former employee may
be sentenced to imprisonment for not more than ninety (90) days or fined not
more than $500.00 or both such imprisonment and fine.
311.8   Occupying Two City Positions
City employees are prohibited from holding two (2) city positions
simultaneously.
312.   SPECIAL REQUIREMENTS FOR LICENSING AND CERTIFICATES
312.1   Required Licenses and Certificates (March 5, 2005)
Applicants/employees are responsible for meeting all job-related requirements
at the time of application, hire, transfer or promotion. This may include
licenses, certificates, City Operator’s Permit, other permits, degrees and
registrations. Employees are responsible for paying any fees in obtaining such
licenses, etc. The City will pay any fees necessary to maintain licenses
required for the job with the exception of a driver’s license.
312.2   Failure to Notify Supervisor of Loss of License/Certification
An employee who has lost a required license or certification is responsible
for:
A.   Immediately notifying both their immediate supervisor and their division
manager on the first day of employment after such a loss; and
B.   Not performing any work, or related function without the required
certification/license. Failure to fulfill these responsibilities by the
employee is considered just cause for disciplinary action up to and including
termination of employment with the City.
312.3   Failure to Maintain Required License/Certifications (March 5, 2005)
If an employee, due to their own actions, loses a required license, except as
otherwise provided for loss of a City Operator’s Permit, or fails to maintain a
required certification the following procedures will apply:
A.   The department director will advise the employee that they have up to
ninety (90) days from the date of loss to regain the license/certification. If
the license/certification is regained the employee will be allowed to return to
their former position.
B.   During the ninety (90) day period the department director may assign the
employee temporary alternate tasks if such are available for a period not to
exceed thirty (30) days. If such tasks are not available the employee will be
allowed to utilize their accrued compensatory or vacation balances, if this
balance is insufficient, the employee will be placed on Leave without Pay for
the remainder of the ninety (90) days.
C.   If at the end of the ninety (90) day period the employee has failed to
regain their license/certification, the employee will be transferred to Leave
without Pay and the Human Resources Department will attempt to place the
employee in a position of equal or lower grade or comparable pay for which they
qualify. If such position is not identified within thirty (30) days or upon
refusal of the employee to accept an offer of placement into a position of
equal or lower grade or comparable pay the employee will be terminated for
failure to maintain the required license/certification.
312.4 Loss of City Operator’s Permit (March 5, 2005)
If driving is necessary to perform an employee’s job, as determined by the
Human Resources Department, any driver who has lost their City Operator’s
Permit under the City Operator’s Permit Policy is subject to termination of
their employment.
313.   PERFORMANCE EVALUATIONS
A performance evaluation system will be used to evaluate the work performance
of City employees in the classified service. Performance evaluations are not
subject to the grievance procedure.
313.1   Purpose of Performance Evaluation
The purpose of the performance evaluation system is to:
A.   Set performance standards that to the maximum extent feasible permit the
accurate evaluation of job performance on the basis of objective criteria
related to the job of each employee and position in the classified system; and
B.   Communicate with each employee as to their performance standards and
critical elements of the position; and
C.   Provide an opportunity during a specific period of time for the employee
to demonstrate improvement in performance.
Employees who continue to demonstrate unacceptable performance may be subject
to disciplinary action up to and including termination.
313.2   Frequency of Performance Evaluations
Employees will be evaluated prior to the completion of their probationary
period. Immediate supervisors shall evaluate the work performance of an
employee annually or more often, as appropriate. Supervisors must also comply
with requirements as specified in any grant-funded program.
314.   REIMBURSEMENT OF TRAINING COSTS
If the City has expended $5,000 or more in providing job specific training to
an employee who voluntarily terminates during the probationary period or within
two (2) years of completing probation, the employee may be required to
reimburse the City a percentage of the training costs. The percentage
reimbursement will be prorated over the period of employment.
400.   BENEFITS
401.   LEAVE WITH PAY
As a benefit of employment with the City, leave with pay may be granted for the
following reasons, including but not limited to, birthday, authorized holidays,
vacation, illness, bereavement, jury duty, witness for the City, voting, annual
military service and education. Requests for leave will be submitted for
approval on the Request for Leave of Absence form.
Requests shall include any necessary documentation. If employees are absent
from duty without prior authorization, they must notify their immediate
supervisor explaining the circumstances of their absence no later than one (1)
hour after the regularly scheduled time to report to duty or as required by the
department. The proper forms must be completed as soon as possible upon
returning to work.
401.1   Birthday Leave
A.   Birthday Leave is granted to any employee in “active status” as of January
1st of the calendar year. Birthday leave is a personal holiday, which leave
must be used no later than midnight December 31st of the year accrued and,
absent exceptional circumstances (which may only be approved by the Chief
Administrative Officer), may not be carried over to the next calendar year.
Employees categorized as temporary, seasonal, student or part-time working less
than twenty (20) hours per week are not eligible for Birthday leave.
B.   The quantity of Birthday leave granted is based on the employee’s status
as full-time, three-quarter time (3/4) or half-time (1/2) as of January 1st, of
the calendar year and not as of the date the leave is taken.
(1)   An employee whose standard work week is full-time shall receive eight (8)
hours of Birthday leave;
(2)   An employee whose standard work week is three-quarter time (3/4) shall
receive six (6) hours of Birthday leave;
(3)   An employee whose standard work week is half-time (1/2) shall receive
four (4) hours of Birthday leave;
(4)   This allocation of Birthday leave may be modified only by the Chief
Administrative Officer in accordance with a valid Collective Bargaining
Agreement.
C.   The grant of Birthday leave is not accrued pro rata. If an employee is not
in “active status” on January 1st of the calendar year, the employee receives
no grant of Birthday leave during that calendar year.
D.   Transition provision: Employees with an outstanding balance of Birthday
leave or accruing Birthday leave during November and December of 2012 and have
a balance of Birthday leave as of December 31, 2012, may carry their 2012
Birthday leave balance over to 2013.
E.   Definitions: For the purpose of this Paragraph, the following definitions
apply:
Active Status means an employee who is working and being paid, is on paid time-
off (vacation, sick leave, etc.), is on an approved paid leave (military, FMLA,
etc.), is on an approved unpaid leave (military, FMLA, etc.), or is in an
unpaid disciplinary suspension of thirty (30) days or less. Active Status does
not include employees in “early retirement”, on layoff, in physical layoff or
terminated.
Paid status means that the employee is scheduled to receive pay for that day,
either for working or for approved paid leaves authorized by the City.
Employees on any form of unpaid leave or in lay-off status are not in “paid
status”.
Scheduled or standard work schedule, (scheduled or standard hours, standard
work week, usual work schedule, regular schedule or regular work schedule)
means the work hours budgeted for a particular employee in the employee’s job
description and in the payroll and accounting systems; this term recognizes
that an individual employee may actually work a different schedule in any
particular day, week or month due to a variety of situations; however, accrual
of benefits including leave is based on the employee’s scheduled or standard
hours and not on actual hours worked in a particular day, week or month.
Standard work week means a forty-hour (40) work week. Most employees are
scheduled and expected to work a forty-hour (40) work week.
Full-time employee is an employee whose standard or regular work schedule
contemplates a 40-hour or more work week.
Part-time employee is an employee whose standard or regular work schedule is
budgeted as 39 hours or less of work per week.
Three-quarter-time employee is an employee whose standard or regular work
schedule is budgeted as 30 hours of work per week.
Half-time employee is an employee whose regular work schedule is budgeted as 20
hours of work per week.
History: This paragraph is the successor version to 401.1 of the 2001 version
of the Personnel Rules and Regulations. It has been re-formatted and
substantially revised effective January 1, 2013.
401.2   Vacation Leave
Vacation leave will accrue on a biweekly basis from the date of current
employment. No vacation leave may be granted before it is accrued. Vacation
leave will accrue through December 31 each year and the excess of seventy-eight
(78) biweekly accruals will be dropped from the record at the end of the pay
period containing December 31 unless the employee is in Early Retirement or has
an effective retirement date of 1/1 of the following year. An employee
separating from city employment will be compensated for the balance of their
unused vacation computed to the date of separation. When a legal holiday, which
would have been a regular workday for the employee, occurs during vacation, it
shall not be charged as vacation leave but as a holiday.
In the event an employee exhausts their paid vacation leave during a pay period
the accruals must be prorated based on the number of paid hours during the pay
period.
Part-time employees, classified and unclassified, working twenty (20) hours or
more per week will receive vacation leave on a prorated basis.
Employees categorized as temporary, seasonal, student or part time working less
than twenty (20) hours per week are not eligible for vacation leave.
A.   Scheduling Vacation Leave
Vacation leave must be approved at least twenty-four (24) hours in advance of
the time it is taken unless specified otherwise by the department director in
order to accommodate the particular staffing needs of their departments.
B.   Vacation Accrual Rate
 
Continuous Service Regular Workweek Accrual Per Bi-weekly Accrual Per
                                                          Year
0 to 4             40 hours         3.85 hours            100 hours
years              56 hours         5.39 hours            140 hours
5 to 9             40 hours         4.62 hours            120 hours
years              56 hours         6.47 hours            168 hours
10 to 14 years     40 hours         5.54 hours            144 hours
                   56 hours         7.76 hours            201.60 hours
15 years and more  40 hours         6.16 hours            160 hours
                   56 hours         8.62 hours            224 hours
 
401.3   Holidays
The Chief Administrative Officer shall announce annually the legal holidays for
city employees. Employees must be in a pay status for the full workday
immediately before and the full workday immediately after the holiday in order
to be paid for the holiday.
With the written approval of their department director, employees may take any
holiday as a floating holiday within one (1) calendar year after the holiday.
The department director must first consider the affect on providing city
services before authorizing these requests. The number of hours will be based
on the employees’ actual schedule the date the holiday occurred. If the
employee requests to float the holiday compensation will be at straight time.
If the City requires the employee to work the holiday compensation will be in
accordance with FLSA.
If a designated legal holiday falls on a Saturday or an employee's first day
off, the holiday will be observed on the previous Friday or the previous
workday. If a designated legal holiday falls on a Sunday or an employee's last
day off, the holiday will be observed on the following Monday or the next
workday. For a four (4) day workweek, a holiday occurring on a day off will be
observed on the last workday or next workday as determined by the immediate
supervisor.
If an exempt employee is required to work on a legal holiday, the employee is
entitled to an alternate day within one (1) calendar year after the holiday.
The alternate day must be approved at least twenty-four (24) hours in advance
of the time it is taken.
401.4   Sick Leave
Classified and unclassified employees working a forty (40) hour workweek shall
accrue sick leave at the rate of 3.70 hours biweekly up to a maximum of 1,200
hours unless otherwise specified in a collective bargaining agreement. No sick
leave may be granted before it is accrued.
In the event an employee exhausts their paid sick leave during a pay period the
accruals must be prorated based on the number of paid hours during the pay
period.
Provided the employee has an accrued sick leave balance, sick leave may be
granted for absence from duty because of personal illness, illness of a spouse,
domestic partner, son, daughter, or parent as these terms are defined in
Section
401.11, L.
Personal illness is defined to include scheduled doctor's appointments for
health examination, evaluation and/or treatment. Doctor's appointments may
require documentation. Hours worked in addition to the regularly scheduled
workweek will not entitle the employee to additional sick leave benefits.
Part-time employees, classified and unclassified, working twenty (20) hours or
more per workweek will receive sick leave on a prorated basis.
Employees categorized as temporary, seasonal, student or part time working less
than twenty (20) hours per week are not eligible for sick leave.
A.   Certification of Sick Leave
Employees absent from work where such absence is chargeable to sick leave, may
be required to provide their supervisor with a doctor's statement certifying
the absence from work was due to illness or injury and the employee is now able
to perform the essential functions of the job.
Any employee taking sick leave shall, upon returning to work, complete a
Request for Leave form, indicating the type of sick leave claimed and the dates
of absence.
Employees who make a false claim for sick leave, sign a certificate/statement
containing a false statement, refuse to be examined by a doctor selected by the
City, or fails to cooperate in any investigation by the City of their claim for
sick leave shall not be entitled to any leave with pay for the time in dispute.
Such actions are considered just cause for disciplinary action up to and
including termination.
B.   Sick Leave Clearance
Employees returning after five (5) or more consecutive workdays of sick leave
must submit to the Human Resources Department a release from their personal
physician. The Human Resources Department will then refer the employee to the
City Clinic for a return to work clearance and certification that the employee
is able to perform the essential functions of the job. However, nothing will
prohibit a supervisor from requesting a sick leave clearance from employees
returning for a period of less than five (5) consecutive workdays of sick
leave.
C.   Sick Leave Conversion
The maximum sick leave accumulation for classified employees will be 1,200
hours for a forty (40) hour workweek or a prorated amount for a regular
workweek other than forty (40) hours unless otherwise specified by a collective
bargaining agreement. Employees who have reached the specified accumulation
levels listed below may exercise one of the available options. The option to
convert sick leave will be offered only in November of each year. Employees
electing to not convert sick leave will continue to accrue sick leave up to the
maximum of 1200 hours.
The following conversion formula will be used to convert accumulated sick leave
unless otherwise specified in a collective bargaining agreement:
Options
1.   Sick leave accumulation over 500 hours may be converted at:
a.   Three (3) hours of sick leave to one (1) hour of vacation, or
b.   Three (3) hours of sick leave to one (1) hour cash payment.
2.   Sick leave accumulation over 850 hours may be converted at:
a.   Two (2) hours of sick leave to one (1) hour of vacation, or
b.   Two (2) hours of sick leave to one (1) hour cash payment.
3.   Sick leave over 1,200 hours must be converted at:
a.   Three (3) hours of sick leave to two (2) hours of vacation, or
b.   Three (3) hours of sick leave to two (2) hours cash payment.
D.   Sick Leave Conversion at Retirement
An employee may convert 100% of accumulated sick leave to be applied to early
retirement leave immediately prior to the effective date of retirement. Refer
to Section
403.10 of these Regulations.
Employees may convert 100% of both sick and vacation leave accumulation to cash
payment at the time of retirement.
E.   Sick Leave Conversion at Termination
An employee who has an accumulation of sick leave of between 500 hours and the
maximum accrual will, upon termination from city employment, be allowed to
convert accumulated sick leave in excess of 500 hours on the basis of three (3)
hours of sick leave to one (1) hour of cash payment. This applies regardless of
the option the employee selects in November of each year.
This benefit does not apply to employees terminated for cause. Employees
terminated for cause will not be allowed to convert their accrued sick leave to
cash payment.
F.   Sick Leave Death Benefit
Upon the death of a City employee, the City will pay cash to the designated
beneficiary (as identified in the City's life insurance policy) for sick leave
accrued by the employee. The employee must be in an employment status that
authorizes the accrual of sick leave benefits.
G.   Sick Leave Incentive Leave
Employees must have been employed with the City for six (6) consecutive months
in order to participate in the sick leave incentive program as follows:
1.   Employees utilizing zero (0) hours of sick leave for six (6) consecutive
months will be awarded eight (8) hours of vacation leave.
2.   Employees utilizing less than or equal to 12.5 percent of accrued sick
leave over six (6) consecutive months will be awarded four (4) hours of
vacation leave.
3.   Part-time employees transferring to full-time positions within the
specified six (6) consecutive month period will receive sick leave incentive as
if they had been full-time employees for the entire six (6) month period.
4.   Departments will review sick leave usage twice a year for the periods,
July 1 through December 31 and January 1 through June 30.
5.   Employees on injury time are not eligible for incentive leave with the
exception of light duty and FMLA.
6.   Employees on suspension or administrative leave resulting from a
disciplinary action that is sustained through administrative or judicial
process will not be eligible for incentive leave.
7.   Employees utilizing donated leave will not be eligible for incentive leave
unless the donated leave was used for FMLA purposes.
8.   Part-time employees working twenty (20) hours or more per week, if
eligible, will receive incentive leave on a prorated basis.
This regulation shall be the only means of providing sick leave incentive for
City employees. Employees categorized as temporary, seasonal, student or part-
time working less than twenty (20) hours per week are not eligible to
participate in the sick leave incentive program.
401.5   Donation of Sick/Vacation Leave (September 24, 2004)
Donation of sick/vacation leave is designed to assist classified and
unclassified employees with a minimum of two (2) years continuous service who
have exhausted all accrued leave and who have no other paid leave options
available. This leave may be granted only in the event of a life threatening as
defined in 401.5A. Only an employee whose exceptional performance has been
certified by the department director is eligible to request leave donations
under this program.
A.   Eligibility for Donated Leave
1.   Serious illness of injury is defined as:
a.   A life threatening illness of, or injury to the employee, the employee’s
spouse, domestic partner, child or parent; or
b.   An illness of, or injury to the employee which renders the employee
incapable of performing the essential functions of their job as certified by a
medical determination; or,
c.   An illness or injury to the employee, the employee’s spouse, domestic
partner, child or parent which requires hospitalization, rehabilitation, or
hospice care.
d.   Serious illness or injury shall not include elective medical procedures,
or mental or emotional illness.
2.   Classified and unclassified employees with a minimum of two (2) years
service are eligible to request donated leave.
3.   To request donated leave, an employee must have exhausted all accrued
leave and have no other paid leave options available.
4.   Leave donations will be granted only in case of a serious illness or
injury as defined above.
5.   Employees must demonstrate exceptional performance.
6.   An employee must not have received donated leave, injury time or hardship
leave in the twelve (12) months preceding the request.
7.   If eligibility is at issue, the Chief Administrative Officer (CAO) may
find an employee eligible for reasons he deems medically compelling.
B.   Procedure for Donated Leave
1.   An eligible employee may request a donation of leave by submitting an
application to the department director which shall include the following:
a.   The name, social security number and rate of pay of the proposed leave
recipient;
b.   A description of the serious illness or injury which has prompted the
request for donation of sick/vacation leave to include a medical statement
including the diagnosis, prognosis, required treatment and anticipated return
to work date;
c.   The anticipated amount of donated leave the recipient will require; and
d.   Any other information, which may be required by the City to make a
determination regarding the request.
2.   The department director will review the request and determine whether the
requesting employee meets the eligibility criteria. If the department director
approves the request, the director will submit the application for leave
donation to the Human Resources Department for approval.
3.   The Human Resources Department will review the request and ensure the
request is supported with a medical determination regarding the serious illness
or injury. If approved, leave donations will first be solicited for a period of
two (2) weeks within the department of the affected employee. The Chief
Administrative Officer may choose to solicit from other Departments
simultaneously if sufficient cause warrants it.
4.   If insufficient leave is donated within the employee’s department, the
department director will request the Human Resources Department recommend to
the Chief Administrative Officer that donations be solicited citywide. If
approved by the Chief Administrative Officer, leave donations may be solicited
from other departments for a period of two (2) weeks.
5.   The department director will coordinate, with the Payroll Section of the
Department of Finance and Administrative Services, the transfer of donated
hours provided that employees donating vacation have a sufficient number of
accrued hours at the time of transfer. Donated sick leave will be converted in
accordance with the sick leave conversion formula provided for in Section
401.4 C of the regulations before transferring hours to the recipient.
C.   Conditions of Donated Leave
1.   Donated leave will be converted to a dollar value and then converted to
hours based on the recipient’s hourly rate.
2.   Donated leave must be charged to FMLA leave if the recipient has not
exhausted the twelve (12) weeks FMLA entitlement.
3.   Donated leave may be requested only one (1) time during a twelve (12)
month period.
4.   Recipients of donated leave are responsible for notifying their department
director and the City Payroll Section of any change in status requiring the
termination of donated leave status.
5.   The leave recipient will not accrue vacation or sick leave while on
donated leave status.
6.   No new enrollments or increases will be allowed to a deferred compensation
account while an employee is on donated leave.
7.   Once an employee returns to work from donated leave, either full time or
part-time, all remaining donated hours will be reinstated to the donating
employee(s) on a pro-rated basis.
8.   Departments are responsible for ensuring that all relevant auditing and
accounting procedures are followed.
9.   Provisions regarding the confidentiality of medical records and
information shall govern. Posted solicitation for donated leave will ensure the
privacy of medical information. Disclosure of such information may be made only
with the express written consent of the affected employee.
10.   Donated leave will not be granted as an extension of leave without pay of
more than two (2) weeks, injury time or hardship leave. Donation of sick/
vacation leave is strictly voluntary. Denial of a request to solicit donated
leave is not grievable.
401.6   Bereavement Leave
A maximum of three (3) days sick leave may be used in case of death in the
employee, spouse, or domestic partner’s immediate family. An additional day may
be granted for every 500 miles travel one-way from Albuquerque required to
attend funeral services. Leave will be charged to sick emergency and proof of
death may be required.
For purposes of this section immediate family is defined as spouse, child,
stepchild, parent, stepparent, mother-in-law, father-in-law, brother, sister,
grandparent, grandchild or any individual for whom the employee is a court
appointed legal guardian. It also includes a domestic partner and the child,
stepchild, parent, stepparent, brother, sister, grandparent or grandchild of
the domestic partner.
401.7   Hardship Leave
Department directors shall submit requests for hardship leave to the Human
Resources Department on behalf of their employees. The Director of Human
Resources will forward the request to the Chief Administrative Officer with a
recommendation regarding approval. Leave with pay may be granted for a period
not to exceed six (6) calendar months to classified and unclassified employees
having at least five (5) years of continuous service and twelve (12) calendar
months to classified and unclassified employees having at least ten (10) years
continuous service upon demonstration of extreme hardship due to a life
threatening personal injury or sickness of the employee. Part-time employees
working twenty (20) hours or more will receive benefits on a prorated basis.
Employees on hardship leave status will not accrue sick and vacation leave.
This leave may be granted only after all other paid leave has been exhausted
and only if the employee is not eligible for disability or retirement benefits
under PERA or Social Security. The employee must provide written documentation
from PERA or the Social Security Administration documenting the denial of
benefits.
Hardship leave must be reported as FMLA unless the twelve (12) week entitlement
has already been exhausted. The period of hardship leave ends when the employee
returns to work either full time or part-time. Any additional requests for
hardship leave must be submitted as a new request. Hardship leave may not be
granted as an extension of donated leave.
Only an employee whose exceptional performance has been certified by the
department director is eligible for this leave.
Denial of a request for hardship leave is not grievable.
401.8   Work Off Site
Employees who are elected to a board or committee whose primary purpose is to
enhance the goals or benefits of the city or its employees will be granted up
to eight (8) hours leave with pay per month, unless otherwise approved by the
CAO, to conduct official business upon approval of the department director.
This time may not be accumulated or used for other purposes.
Other employees may be granted time to attend job-related conferences, meetings
or seminars out of Albuquerque. Such time will be recorded as Work off Site.
The employee is required to obtain prior approval of the department director
through submittal of a Request for Leave form documenting all work off site.
401.9   Educational Leave
If an employee is participating in a program leading towards a degree or
certificate which is approved by the Training and Education Committee, the
department director may grant educational leave not to exceed three (3) hours
per week for full time employees in accordance with Section 502.2. Employees
will be required to submit a Request for Leave form documenting the educational
leave.
401.10   Injury Time
In addition to other employee benefits, employees are eligible to receive
injury time benefits subject to the limitations provided in this section.
Police, Fire and Correction cadets are required to successfully complete a
specific course of training prior to being retained as a classified
probationary employee. During this training period, cadets will not be eligible
for injury time but will be eligible for State Workers Compensation benefits.
A.   Employees who are injured or who suffer an occupational disease in the
performance of their duties are eligible for injury time payments the day after
the injury (which includes the seven (7) day waiting period required by the
Workers Compensation Act) and under all of the following conditions:
1.   The employee is receiving Workers' Compensation wage loss (temporary total
disability) benefits;
2.   The employee is receiving health care services (treatment) from the health
care provider selected by the City;
3.   The health care provider selected by the City certifies the employee is
unable to perform the essential functions of the job or that the employee can
perform tasks within the Light Duty program; and
4.   The employee has been temporarily assigned to a light duty function as a
result of sustaining a compensable job injury or illness.
Injury time payments shall not be paid after the death of an employee.
B.   Payments to the employee will include the Workers Compensation wage loss
benefit and the injury time payments provided by the City, which combined, may
not exceed the employee’s regular wages (gross less statutory deductions).
Injury time shall be used only as a supplement payment to Workers' Compensation
wage loss (temporary total disability) benefits or temporary light duty
assignments.
The Chief Administrative Officer may withhold injury time benefits to any
employee for good and sufficient reason.
C.   Injury time benefits will be allowed for any on-the-job injury including,
multiple injuries from the same accident, prior injury, recurrence or
aggravation of an injury or occupational disease.
Injury time benefits will be allowed for up to and including, but not to exceed
960 hours for the standard forty (40) hour workweek or 1,344 hours for a fifty-
six (56) hour workweek. Multiple injuries from the same accident will be
subject to a maximum of 960 hours. Initial and subsequent injuries to the same
body part or function will be subject to a maximum of 960 hours regardless of
the number of subsequent events.
A prior injury is any injury suffered by the employee as a result of a previous
accident, illness or injury to one or more body parts.
An employee shall be charged injury time on the basis of their current approved
schedule for each workday. Such time including light duty shall not exceed the
maximum hours in their regular workweek. If the employee has a regular workweek
of other than forty (40) hours, or a regular workday of other than eight (8)
hours, the injury time charged and the maximum hours of injury time shall be
prorated.
Upon exhaustion of injury time, sick leave may be used to supplement Workers'
Compensation wage loss (temporary total disability) benefits.
If sick leave is used to supplement Workers' Compensation wage loss (temporary
total disability) benefits, it shall be charged on the basis of the number of
hours in their current approved schedule for each workday, not to exceed forty
(40) hours in a workweek. If the employee's regular workweek is other than
forty (40) hours the sick leave charge shall be prorated.
Upon the denial or exhaustion of injury time and the exhaustion of sick leave,
all accrued vacation hours will be paid in a lump sum and the employee
transferred to physical layoff.
If an employee has a disability as defined by the Americans with Disabilities
Act (ADA) consideration will be given as to whether a reasonable accommodation
can be made prior to transferring to physical layoff.
D.   The receipt by the employee of injury time payments from the City shall
operate as an assignment to the City against any amount collected through a
settlement or court action by the employee against a third party causing the
injury or disease. The City may proceed against a third party in its own name
to collect reimbursement of injury time payments. The failure of any employee
to cooperate with the City in any legal or other action is considered just
cause for disciplinary action up to and including termination.
E.   Employees on a temporary Light Duty assignment working twenty (20) hours
or more per week will be eligible for sick and vacation accruals on a prorated
basis.
F.   Authorized absences for employees while on Light Duty will be charged to
the appropriate leave category. Such absences will not be charged to Light
Duty/Injury time.
G.   Employees on injury time, excluding Light Duty, will not earn service
credit towards retirement through PERA.
H.   Injury time, excluding Light Duty, will be charged to FMLA.
I.   Employees who are on injury time status for more than two full pay
periods, excluding light duty assignments of twenty (20) hours or more per
week, shall not accrue sick or vacation leave.
Employees categorized as temporary, seasonal, student or part-time working less
than twenty (20) hours per workweek, are not eligible for injury time benefits.
A decision to withhold injury time payments to any employee is not greivable.
401.11   Family and Medical Leave (Revised 02/25/08)
These rules and regulations are based on the provisions of the federal Family
and Medical Leave Act (FMLA) and will be administered consistent with that law,
federal regulations and the definitions included in this section.
Job-protected leave may be taken for up to a total of twelve (12) workweeks in
any twelve (12) month period because of 1) the birth of a child and to care for
the newborn child during the first year following birth, 2) the placement of a
child with the employee for adoption or foster care during the first year
following placement, 3) the employee’s need to care for a child, spouse,
domestic partner or parent with a serious health condition, or 4) the
employee’s inability to work because of a serious health condition.
The City may require documentation of any family relationship on which a leave
request is based. FMLA leave will be administered by either the Human Resources
Director or the Department Director as determined by the Chief Administrative
Officer. Directors may appoint a designee to assist with the Administration of
FMLA and this individual will be subject to the same requirements of
confidentiality.
(CFR 825.110)
A.   Eligibility
To be eligible for FMLA leave, an employee must have worked for the City a
total of twelve (12) months (or fifty-two 52 weeks if the work is intermittent)
and must have worked 1,250 hours in the twelve (12) months preceding the date
the FMLA leave will begin. FLSA-exempt employees who have worked for twelve
(12) months are presumed to meet the hourly requirement. Paid and unpaid
absences used in the twelve (12) months preceding the date the FMLA leave will
begin are not counted toward the 1,250 hour total.
Time spent on Military Leave is counted as hours worked for purposes of
calculating FMLA eligibility.
(CFR 825.220)
An employee’s conduct or performance has no bearing on their entitlement to
FLMA leave, pursuant to Federal Regulation.
B.   Types of FMLA
(CFR 825.201)
1.   Birth/Placement of a Child
An employee may take leave because of the birth or placement of a child with
the employee. The right to family leave expires twelve (12) months after the
birth or placement of a child with the employee.
2.   Serious Health Condition of the Employee
An employee may take medical leave for up to twelve (12) weeks for a medically
certified temporary period of incapacity, illness or injury that is a serious
health condition making the employee unable to work.
Medical leaves of absence for pregnancy, childbirth or related conditions are
subject to the same eligibility, terms, and conditions as are applicable to
leaves of absence for all other types of serious health conditions.
(CFR 825.116)
3.   Serious Health Condition of a Family Member
An employee may take medical leave for up to twelve (12) weeks if the
employee’s parent, spouse, domestic partner or child has a serious health
condition and the employee is needed to care for the family member. An employee
is "needed to care for" a family member when either physical or psychological
care is needed. It includes situations where, for example, because of a serious
health condition, the family member is unable to care for his or her own basic
medical, hygienic, or nutritional needs or safety, or is unable to transport
himself or herself to the doctor, etc. The term also includes providing
psychological comfort and reassurance, which would be beneficial to a child,
spouse, domestic partner or parent with a serious health condition that is
receiving in-patient or home care. The term also includes situations where the
employee may be needed to fill in for others who are caring for the family
member, or to make arrangements for changes in care, such as transfer to a
nursing home.
4.   Service member Family Leave
a)   Active Duty Family Leave - Employees with a spouse, parent, or child who
is on or has been called to active duty in the Armed Forces may take up to 12
weeks of FMLA leave when they experience a qualifying exigency as defined by
the US Department of Labor.
b)   Injured Service member Leave - Employees who are the spouse, parent,
child, or next of kin of a service member who incurred a serious injury or
illness on active duty in the Armed Forces may take up to a combined total of
26 weeks of leave in a 12-month period (including regular FMLA leave) to care
for the service member. The leave described in this paragraph shall only be
available during a single twelve-month period.
(CFR 825.117, 825.203)
C.   Intermittent Leave or Reduced Leave Schedule
1.   When medically necessary due to an employee’s own serious health condition
or to care for a seriously ill child, spouse, domestic partner or parent of the
employee, an employee is permitted an intermittent leave or a reduced leave
schedule. Intermittent leave is leave taken in separate blocks of time due to a
single illness or injury rather than for one continuous period of time.
When leave is taken on an intermittent or reduced leave schedule, the leave may
be measured in increments of less than one hour and may last up to several
weeks. A reduced leave schedule reduces an employee’s usual number of hours per
workweek and/or per workday. For intermittent leave or leave on a reduced leave
schedule, there must be a medical need for the leave (as distinguished from
voluntary treatments and procedures) and it must be that such medical need can
be best accommodated through an intermittent or reduced leave schedule.
2.   When FMLA leave is used for reasons where intermittent leave or reduced
leave schedules are not medically necessary, an employee may request such a
schedule. The department director has the discretion to approve or deny the
request.
3.   An employee must work with the department director to establish a mutually
satisfactory treatment schedule that does not unduly disrupt business and meets
the employee’s or the patient’s medical needs. If an employee fails to consult
with the department director, the employee may be requested to reschedule
treatments, subject to the approval of the health care provider.
4.   When intermittent leave is certified for a chronic condition or a serious
health condition that is episodic in nature, an employee is required to contact
their supervisor (as specified by department policy) to advise that their
unscheduled absence is related to the qualifying condition for which they have
provided a medical certification and have been approved for FMLA.
5.   An employee cannot be required to disclose additional medical information
or doctor’s notes outside of that provided in their original medical
certification or recertification or to disclose medical information to
personnel who are not charged with processing or administering requests for
Family and Medical Leave. If a supervisor suspects an abuse of intermittent
leave or observes a change in the frequency and/or duration of absences, he/she
should contact the designated FMLA Administrator/Coordinator to request a
clarification or recertification as permissible under the federal FMLA
regulations.
(CFR 825.204)
6.   When an employee is granted intermittent leave or reduced leave, the
employee may be required to accept a temporary transfer to an available
alternative position for which the employee is qualified and which better
accommodates recurring periods of leave than does the employee’s regular
position. Transfer to an alternative position may include altering an existing
job to better accommodate the employee’s need for intermittent or reduced
leave. The alternative position must have equivalent pay and benefits. It need
not have equivalent duties.
7.   Employees may take Injured Service member leave intermittently, but must
use it up within twelve months.
D.   Notice Requirements
(CFR 825.302, 825.303)
1.   Employee Notice of Leave
(CFR 825.304)
As with any type of leave, an employee must give advance notice requesting
leave and obtain approval, except in emergencies. An employee must give at
least thirty (30) days written notice before leave starts. If thirty (30) days
notice is not possible, notice is expected as soon as practical. "As soon as
practical" means at least verbal notice within two (2) business days of
learning of the need for leave followed by written confirmation. If an employee
fails to give thirty (30) days notice for foreseeable leave with no reasonable
excuse for the delay, the Human Resources Director (or Department Director, as
applicable) or designee may delay the taking of FMLA leave until at least
thirty (30) days after the date the employee provided notice.
(CFR 825.306)
Request for leave must be submitted on a Family Medical Leave Certification
Form. The Human Resources Director (or Department Director, as applicable) or
designee will determine if the leave qualifies for family/medical leave.
It is the employee’s responsibility to provide enough information, including
the reason for requesting leave, so that the Human Resources Director (or
Department Director, as applicable) or designee can make this determination.
Any FMLA-qualifying absence will be designated as FMLA leave by the Human
Resources Director (or Department Director, as applicable) or designee and will
be applied to the twelve (12) weeks entitlement, even if not requested by the
employee.
In any case in which the necessity for leave due to Active Duty of a Family
Member is foreseeable, whether because the spouse, or a son, daughter, or
parent of the employee is on active duty, or because of notification of an
impending call or order to active duty in support of a contingency operation,
the employee shall provide such notice to the employer as is reasonable and
practicable.
2.   City Notices to the Employee
The Human Resources Director (or Department Director, as applicable) or
designee will notify the employee within two (2) workdays, if feasible, of the
approval or disapproval of their FMLA request.
The Human Resources Director (or Department Director, as applicable) or
designee will also within two (2) workdays, if feasible, notify the employee of
the designation of the absence as FMLA even if the employee had not requested
such leave. If the Human Resources Director (or Department Director, as
applicable) or designee learns the absence is for an FMLA qualifying purpose
the Human Resources Director (or Department Director, as applicable) or
designee may retroactively designate the leave as FMLA leave. 
The Human Resources Director (or Department Director, as applicable) or
designee will give notice within two (2) workdays, if feasible, of learning the
reason for the leave.
The City may make a preliminary designation of leave as FMLA qualifying if
medical certification was not provided prior to the beginning of leave, or if
the employer is waiting for a second or third medical opinion.
The City may designate leave, which has already been taken.
E.   Required Certification
1.   Medical Certification
(CFR 825.302, 825.305)
An employee who requests leave for their own or an eligible family member’s
serious health condition must provide a medical certification from a health
care provider on a form supplied by the City. Where FMLA leave is foreseeable
and thirty (30) days notice has been provided, an employee must provide a
medical certification before leave begins. In other cases, the medical
certification must be provided within fifteen (15) days after the City requests
medical certification or the employee advised their supervisor of the need for
the FMLA absence. The employee is responsible for any expense connected with
the medical certificate. Failure to provide the required medical certificate(s)
may result in a delay or denial of family or medical leave.
(CFR 825.307)
If the City has reason to question the adequacy of a medical certification, a
health care provider representing the City may contact the employee’s health
care provider, with the employee’s permission, for purposes of clarification
and authenticity of the medical certification. The City has the right to
require, at its own expense, a second medical opinion and “is permitted to
designate the health care provider to furnish the second opinion, but the
selected health care provider may not be employed on a regular basis by the
employer” (City). If the second opinion and the original certificate conflict,
the City has the right to require a third opinion by a health care provider
upon whom the City and the employee agree. The third opinion is final and
binding.
If the City designates paid or unpaid leave as FMLA leave, without the
employee’s request for FMLA leave, the employee may dispute this designation by
supplying a medical certificate from the health care provider.
(CFR 825.308)
The City may request additional medical certification at reasonable intervals
during family medical leave, but not more often than every thirty (30) days,
unless the circumstances described by the previous certification have changed
significantly (e.g., the duration or frequency of absences, the severity of the
condition, complications) or the employer receives information that casts doubt
upon the employee’s stated reason for the absence.
2.   Certification Related to Active Duty or Call to Active Duty
An employer may require that a request for leave under Service member Family
Leave be supported by a certification issued at such time and in such manner as
the Secretary may be regulation prescribe.
F.   Restrictions
1.   If both the husband and wife or domestic partner work for the City, they
may take only a combined total of twelve (12) weeks in any twelve (12) month
period for the birth or placement of a child, or to care for a parent (not a
parent-in-law) who has a serious health condition.
2.   Family leave for the birth or placement of a child should be taken
consecutively unless other arrangements are made with the department director.
3.   If both the husband and wife or domestic partner work for the City, they
may take only a combined total of twenty-six (26) workweeks for service member
family leave.
G.   Substitution of Paid Leave
1.   Employees must use accrued sick leave, except as otherwise provided in a
City collective bargaining agreement. After accrued sick leave is exhausted,
the employee may request to use vacation, compensatory time or unpaid leave.
Donated leave, hardship leave, or injury time, excluding light duty, will be
charged to FMLA leave.
2.   City recognized holidays that occur during an employee’s FMLA leave will
be counted as FMLA leave.
H.   Rights and Responsibilities While on Leave
During paid FMLA leave, sick and vacation leave will continue to accrue and
will be prorated if appropriate. Sick and vacation leave will not accrue during
any unpaid FMLA leave.
The City will continue to pay its share of insurance premiums while the
employee is on paid leave; however the employee will be responsible for the
full payment of insurance premiums while on unpaid leave for a full pay period
or longer.
The City has the right to recover premiums it paid if the employee does not
return to work after the leave. Employees on unpaid FMLA leave will not pay
PERA for that period of unpaid leave nor will the employee receive service
credit during the unpaid leave for retirement purposes.
While on FMLA leave, an employee must contact the supervisor, by telephone, at
least every four (4) weeks to report on their status and intention to return to
work at the end of the leave. If the circumstances of the employee’s leave
changes and the employee is able to return to work earlier than anticipated,
the employee must notify the supervisor at least two (2) workdays before the
date the employee intends to report to work.
(CFR 825.216, 825.220)
The FMLA does not entitle any employee to any right, benefit or position of
employment other than any right, benefit or position of employment to which the
employee would have been entitled if the employee had not taken leave under the
FMLA. FMLA cannot be used as a shield to avoid legitimate discipline.
I.   Return to Work after FMLA
1.   Position
a.   An employee, except for a key employee, returning from FMLA, has the right
to return to their former position if the employee is able to perform the
essential functions of the job, or they may be placed in an equivalent position
with equivalent benefits, pay, and other terms and conditions of employment.
(CFR 825.217)
b.   The City reserves the right to deny reinstatement to key employees where
such denial is necessary to prevent substantial and grievous economic injury to
the City’s operations. The determination of whether an employee is a key
employee will be made at the time the employee gives notice of the need for
leave or at the time the City designates leave as FMLA leave.
Key employees will be notified of the City’s intention to deny reinstatement as
soon as a determination is made that injury would occur. In the event a key
employee decides not to return to work from unpaid leave, the employee will
remain on leave for the balance of the leave period and then be terminated.
2.   Benefits
(CFR 825.213)
If an employee does not return to work after the leave entitlement has expired,
the employee may be required to reimburse the City for any health insurance
premiums paid by the City during the period the employee was on family or
medical leave if the failure to return to work is not due to the continuation,
recurrence, or onset of a serious health condition entitling the employee to
leave or other circumstances beyond the employee's control. An employee shall
provide certification from the health care provider supporting a claim of
inability to return to work for health reasons.
3.   Release
Employees returning to work from a serious health condition must submit to the
Human Resources Department a release from their personal physician.
The Human Resources Department will refer the employee to the City Health
Clinic for a return to work clearance and certification that the employee is
able to perform the essential functions of the job with or without
accommodations. If an employee requires an accommodation under ADA a request
must be submitted in accordance with Section
308.
J.   Prohibitions and Enforcement
1.   FMLA makes it unlawful for an employer to:
a.   Interfere with, restrain, or deny the exercise of any right provided under
FMLA; and
b.   Discharge or discriminate against any person for opposing any practice
made unlawful by FMLA or for involvement in any proceeding under or relating to
FMLA.
2.   FMLA does not affect any Federal or State law prohibiting discrimination,
or supercede any State or local law or collective bargaining agreement that
provides greater family or medical leave rights.
(CFR 825.307)
3.   Request additional information from the employee’s health care provider if
the employee has already submitted a complete certification signed by a health
care provider.
4.   The US Department of Labor is authorized to investigate and resolve
complaints of violations of FMLA.
5.   An eligible employee may bring a civil action against an employer for
violation.
K.   Record Keeping Requirements
1.   The Human Resources Department (or Department, as applicable) is
responsible for providing written notice to the employee who is absent from
work for a serious health condition (to include Workers Compensation claims)
that their time away from work counts toward their FMLA entitlement.
2.   The Human Resources Department (or Department, as applicable) must keep
records of the dates and duration of leave taken under FMLA entitlement. FMLA
records, which contain medical information, such as FMLA certification, Request
for Leave forms, and written communications, must be maintained separately from
other personnel and payroll records.
L.   Definitions
1.   Spouse - husband or wife as defined or recognized under New Mexico law.
2.   Domestic Partner – an individual who lives in a long-term relationship of
indefinite duration who meets all criteria established by the City and has
filed an affidavit of domestic partnership with the Human Resources Department,
Insurance and Benefits Division.
3.   Son or Daughter - a biological, adopted or foster child, stepchild, a
legal ward, or a child for whom the employee has intentionally assumed the
obligations of the parental relationship, such as daily care and financial
support without going through the formalities of adoption, who is under the age
of eighteen (18), or who is eighteen (18) years of age or older and is
incapable of self-care because of a mental or physical disability.
4.   Parent - the biological parent of an employee or an individual who
intentionally assumed the obligations of the parental relationship, such as
daily care and financial support, without going through the formalities of
adoption when the employee was a child. This term does not include parents-in-
law.
5.   FMLA Leave - Paid or unpaid leave taken for a reason provided for by the
federal Family and Medical Leave Act.
6.   Health Care Provider
a.   Doctors of medicine or osteopathy; or
b.   Podiatrists, dentists, clinical psychologists, optometrists and
chiropractors (limited to subluxation correction); or
c.   Nurse practitioners, nurse-midwives and clinical social workers that are
performing within the scope of their practice as defined by state law; or
d.   Christian Science practitioners; or
e.   Any health care provider recognized by the City or its health care plans.
7.   Serious Health Condition - an illness, impairment, or physical or mental
condition that involves:
a.   In-patient care in a hospital, hospice or residential medical care
facility, or subsequent treatment in connection with inpatient care; or
b.   Incapacity for more than three (3) consecutive days, involving treatment
two (2) or more times by a health care provider, by a provider of health care
services (e.g., nurse, physicians assistant, physical therapist) under the
direction of a health care provider, and any subsequent incapacity or treatment
related to the same condition; or
c.   Incapacity for more than three (3) consecutive days, involving treatment
at least once by a health care provider which results in a regimen of
continuing treatment under supervision of a health care provider; or
d.   Pregnancy - any period of incapacity due to pregnancy or prenatal care; or
e.   A chronic condition that continues over an extended period of time, and
that may cause episodic rather than a continuing period of incapacity (e.g.,
asthma, diabetes, epilepsy, etc.), requiring periodic visits for treatment by a
health care provider, or by a nurse or physician's assistant under the
supervision of a health care provider; or
f.   A permanent or long-term period of incapacity due to a condition for which
treatment may be limited such as Alzheimer's disease, severe stroke, or the
terminal stages of a disease; or
g.   A period of absence to receive multiple treatments by a health care
provider (or to recover from treatment), or by a provider of health care
services, either for restorative surgery after an accident or injury, or for a
condition that would likely result in a period of incapacity of more than three
(3) consecutive calendar days in the absence of treatment such as chemotherapy,
radiation therapy, or dialysis.
h.   An injury or illness incurred by a member of the Armed Forces, including a
member of the National Guard or Reserves, incurred in the line of duty while on
active duty, that
i.   may render the member medically unfit to perform the duties of the
member’s office, grade, rank or rating.
8.   Family Leave - leave taken because of the birth or placement of a child
with the employee, or
Leave granted to an employee whose spouse, domestic partner, son, daughter, or
parent is a service member on active duty or who has been notified of an
impending call or order to active duty in the Armed Forces in support of a
contingency operation.
9.   Medical Leave - leave taken because of the employee’s own serious health
condition or to care for a spouse, domestic partner, child or parent if they
have a serious health condition
10.   Key Employee - a salaried FMLA-eligible employee who is among the highest
paid 10% of all the employees of the City.
11.   Twelve (12) month period - the twelve (12) months immediately preceding
the beginning of each new FMLA leave, or
A single twelve-month period during which an eligible employee who is the
spouse, son, daughter, parent, or next of kin of a covered service member is
entitled to a combined total of twenty-six (26) weeks of leave to care for the
service member. The leave shall only be available during a single twelve-month
period.
12.   Active Duty
Duty under a call or order to active duty, or retention on active duty of
members of the uniformed services, or under any other provision of law during a
war or during a national emergency declared by the President or Congress.
13.   Contingency Operation
Means a military operation that is designated by the Secretary of Defense as an
operation in which members of the armed forces are or may become involved in
military actions, operations or hostilities against an enemy of the United
States or against an opposing military force.
14.   Covered Service Member
A member of the Armed Forces, including a member of the National Guard or
Reserves, who is undergoing medical treatment, recuperation, or therapy, is
otherwise in an outpatient status, or is otherwise on the temporary disability
list for a serious injury or illness.
15.   Outpatient Status
The status of a member of the Armed Forces assigned to a military medical
treatment facility as an outpatient or a unit established for the purpose of
providing command and control of members of the Armed Forces receiving medical
care as outpatients.
16.   Next of Kin
The nearest blood relative of that individual.
17.   Rolling Calendar
A rolling twelve (12) month period measured backward from the date an employee
uses any FMLA leave. Each time an employee takes FMLA leave, the City will
compute the amount of leave taken and subtract it from the twelve (12) weeks of
available leave. The balance remaining is the amount the employee is entitled
to take at that time, provided the employee has met the eligibility
requirements for FMLA and submitted a completed FMLA certification form for
approval.
402.   OTHER LEAVE
402.1   Leave to Vote
Employees will be granted leave to vote in accordance with New Mexico law.
Department directors should schedule time taken to vote so that offices remain
open during normal working hours and the work of the department is affected as
little as possible.
Departments will not grant time off with pay to any employee whose normal
workday begins more than two (2) hours after the opening of the polls, or ends
more than three (3) hours prior to the closing of the polls. Time taken off for
voting can be used for no other purpose.
Department directors must grant this time off for voting if requested by
employees registered to vote. Proof of registration and eligibility may be
required.
Abuse of this time is considered just cause for disciplinary action up to and
including termination.
402.2   Military Leave
A.   Military Leave with Pay
The City grants military leave with pay to employees who are members of the
National Guard, Air National Guard or any organized reserve unit of the Armed
Forces of the United States, including the Public Health Service, to
participate in annual training. The City also grants military leave to
employees who are members of unorganized reserve components, as sanctioned by
the State of New Mexico or the Federal Government for the purpose of attending
organized courses of instruction or training.
Employees called to active duty in emergencies declared by the Governor or the
President will receive military leave with pay.
Military leave for these purposes will not exceed fifteen (15) workdays in each
federal fiscal year, October 1 - September 30. A workday is considered eight
(8) hours for purposes of military leave. This leave is in addition to other
authorized leave, when an employee is ordered to active duty training with such
units. Employees working part-time will receive military leave on a prorated
basis. Once the fifteen (15) workday period is used, the employee is on leave
without pay for the remainder of the absence.
Military leave is paid at the employee’s straight-time rate of pay for a forty
(40) hour workweek.
Time in active duty status with the military will not count toward completion
of probation.
B.   Military Leave without Pay
The City grants military leave of absence as required by Federal law to
employees who are required to serve on active duty as part of a Reserve or ROTC
obligation or who voluntarily enlist for military service. Military leave for
these purposes and any other purpose not specified in 402.2.A is leave without
pay. Military leave without pay is limited to a cumulative five (5) years
during the course of the employee’s employment. Any single period of leave is
limited to the period of the tour of duty plus the time allowed by law for the
employee to request reinstatement to employment. Employees may choose to use
accrued vacation for part of the leave.
C.   Request for Military Leave
To request a military leave of absence, the employee or his or her designated
representative must attach a copy of the orders to a written request for
military leave. In the event official orders are not issued the employee will
be required to provide verification of attendance from their commander. All
requests must be approved by the Human Resources Director.
402.3   Jury Duty
Employees who Employees who are called to serve on jury duty during normal work
hours shall be paid at their regular pay for the time served as a juror.
Employees shall reimburse the City for all compensation received for such
service performed during normal work hours.
Employees are responsible for notifying their supervisor of jury duty as soon
as possible.
Supervisors should adjust the employee’s work schedule to Monday through
Friday, 8:00 am to 5:00 pm, to accommodate the required jury duty.ld adjust the
employee’s work schedule to Monday through Friday, 8:00 am to 5:00 pm, to
accommodate the required jury duty.
402.4   Blood Donation (August 30, 2002)
Employees donating blood during an organized city sponsored blood drive will
receive two (2) hours of leave with pay. Employees are required to obtain prior
approval of the supervisor for the leave with pay through the submittal of a
Request for Leave form accompanied by a donation certification.
402.5   Unpaid Leave Status
A.   Leave of Absence
Classified non-probationary and unclassified employees may be granted an unpaid
leave of absence of up to six (6) months under certain conditions. To be
eligible for this benefit, an employee must have twelve (12) months of
continuous uninterrupted active employment immediately prior to the effective
date of the leave of absence. A leave of absence under this section will not be
granted for FMLA qualifying absences. The Chief Administrative Officer must
approve requests for a leave of absence for thirty (30) calendar days or more
but not exceeding six (6) months.
The position of an employee on an approved leave of absence will be held for
the employee until their return to work. Vacation and sick leave balances will
be held for the employee and will not be cashed out before or during the leave
of absence. Employees will not accrue additional sick leave or vacation leave,
or any other benefits while on a leave of absence. Employees must pay
contributory benefits directly when in an unpaid status. Employees may not
withdraw PERA contributions while on a leave of absence.
A leave of absence will only be granted if the department director certifies
the department can continue to provide the required services during the
employee’s absence.
Vacation, sick, donated leave or hardship leave may not be used to extend a
leave of absence.
Failure to return to work after an approved leave of absence will result in
termination. A Leave of Absence will not count as service credit for PERA
retirement purposes.
Employees categorized as temporary, seasonal, student or part-time employees
working less than twenty (20) hours per week are not eligible for a leave of
absence.
B.   Leave Without Pay
An employee may be granted leave without pay under certain conditions. Requests
for leave without pay of up to two (2) calendar weeks may be approved by the
department director. The Chief Administrative Officer must approve requests for
more than two (2) calendar weeks but not exceeding twelve (12) months.
Employees may be granted leave without pay due to sickness or disability when
certified by a qualified doctor of medicine, to attend school when it is
clearly demonstrated the subject matter is directly job related, for additional
vacation time or for good and sufficient reason which the Chief Administrative
Officer considers to be in the best interest of the City.
Except under unusual circumstances, voluntary separation to accept employment
outside the City service shall be considered insufficient reason for granting
leave without pay. Employees may not be granted leave without pay as an
extension of physical layoff. Employees must exhaust all accrued vacation and
other paid leave, with the exception of sick leave, prior to receiving approval
for leave without pay. If the request for leave without pay is related to a
health or medical condition then all accrued sick leave must also be exhausted
prior to receiving approval for leave without pay.
Positions will not be held open for employees that are granted leave without
pay for more than thirty (30) days. It will be the employee’s responsibility to
contact the Human Resources Department no later than thirty (30) days prior to
the end of the leave without pay period in order to allow sufficient time to
locate an equal or lesser position, if possible.
The Human Resources Department will attempt to locate a position of equal or
lesser grade or comparable pay to the employee’s previous position.
Employees on leave without pay for eight (8) hours or more per pay period will
not accrue sick or vacation leave or any other benefits.
Employees must directly pay full contributory benefits when in an unpaid status
for one (1) full pay period. Leave without pay will not count as service credit
for PERA retirement purposes.
Leave without pay granted to a probationary employee is limited to sixty (60)
calendar days and will result in the extension of the probationary period for
an equal period.
An employee who fails to contact the Human Resources Department no later than
thirty (30) days prior to the end of the leave without pay period or who
refuses to accept an offer of placement into a position of equal pay or
comparable grade will be terminated.
C.   Absence Without Authorized Leave
An employee who is absent from work without prior approval of the supervisor
will be considered absent without authorized leave. Such leave will be subject
to disciplinary action up to and including termination.
402.6   Administrative Leave
Chief Administrative Officer approval must be obtained prior to placing an
employee on administrative leave.
A.   Administrative leave with pay may be authorized for a loaned executive. A
written request for a loaned executive must be submitted to the Chief
Administrative Officer, which includes the period of time, direct benefit to
the City, and the specialty or expertise requested. The City will negotiate the
terms and conditions of the loaned executive including salaries, benefits and
operating expenses.
Requests for a loaned executive will be for a period not to exceed six (6)
months, however the Chief Administrative Officer may extend the term under
exceptional circumstances.
The loaned executive will prepare and submit a report of accomplishment to the
Chief Administrative Officer and department director upon completion of the
assignment.
B.   Administrative leave with pay may be authorized by the Chief
Administrative Officer for services or activities of employees outside the
scope of their employment, which can reasonably be anticipated, directly or
indirectly, to benefit the City. Such leave will not exceed eighty (80) hours.
C.   An employee may be placed in administrative leave status during the period
of an investigation. Such leave may be given with or without pay for good and
sufficient reason that the Chief Administrative Officer considers to be in the
best interest of the City service.
Administrative leave during an investigation shall be limited to thirty (30)
workdays. Administrative leave in excess of fifteen (15) workdays shall require
approval by a committee composed of the Director of the Human Resources
Department, the Director of the Office of Employee Relations and the City
Attorney or their designees. During this period of time, the Chief
Administrative Officer may assign the employee duties and responsibilities that
are of benefit to the City.
402.7 Managerial Leave
Employees who are exempt under FLSA are required to perform certain functions
regardless of the number of hours required to complete assigned tasks.
Departments are encouraged to use flexible work schedules, as appropriate.
However, there are unusual circumstances when an extra demand is placed on an
employee, which requires work involving a substantial number of hours that
cannot be accommodated through flexible work schedules. Managerial leave is
generally discouraged.
Managerial Leave is paid leave granted to FLSA exempt employees who may be
required to perform work in addition to or outside of their regular work
schedules at the discretion of department directors. Routine or periodic
meetings or assignments outside of the normal workday are not considered
justification for managerial leave.
Managerial leave may be granted only as the result of a pre-existing plan or
program authorized by the Chief Administrative Officer which provides specific
criteria, including the maximum award for such leave. Managerial leave is not
intended to compensate salaried employees on an hour-for-hour basis for work
performed in addition to and/or outside of their regular work schedules.
Departments are responsible for ensuring conformance with all applicable
documentation procedures for leaves of absence.
Managerial leave must be utilized within one rolling calendar year of the
award. A rolling calendar year is a continuous 12-month period that starts when
the leave is entered. Managerial leave hours not utilized during this period
will be dropped from the record at the end of the rolling calendar year.
Managerial leave may not be converted to cash payment under any circumstances.
Managerial leave is not intended to limit a department director's
responsibility for or discretion in specifying the working time of employees as
provided in Section
302 of these regulations
402.8 Paid Leave Other
a)   Paid Leave Other (PLO) is leave with pay for services or activities of an
employee outside the scope of their employment which can be reasonably
anticipated to directly or indirectly benefit the City. It may be granted for a
number of reasons including but not limited to incentive programs, to attend
work related functions such as blood drives, health fairs, to vote, or as
indicated by these rules or City Executive or Administrative Instruction. If
accrued, PLO must be used within one rolling calendar year of its award or it
will be discarded. PLO may not be converted to cash payment under any
circumstances. PLO may not be used in conjunction with early retirement or
retirement processes within the employees’ department, and any balances will be
lost when an employee transfers into early retirement or retirement status.
i.   If PLO is granted to more than one employee at a time for a specific event
or cause, then employees outside the scope of the grant or already on leave are
ineligible to receive that PLO. That is, if PLO is granted for early dismissal,
inclement weather, to vote, or other similar time-bound circumstances, then
only employees who meet the parameter of that particular grant of PLO are
eligible, and otherwise it will not be granted and in no case will it accrue
for future use.
ii.   Employees who are not actively employed (i.e. who are on a leave of
absence, physical layoff, or similar circumstances) are ineligible to earn PLO.
b)   Employees may request to use accrued PLO in place of Vacation or Sick
leave, following all attendant rules and requirements for whichever type of
leave they would substitute it for.
403.   INSURANCE AND RETIREMENT
Information on insurance and retirement benefits may be obtained from the Human
Resources Department, Insurance and Benefits Division.
403.1   Group Life Insurance
Employees hired into classified or unclassified positions working twenty (20)
hours or more per week, receive life insurance protection effective the date of
hire at no cost to the employee. The amount of protection is determined
according to the employee's basic annual earnings. Protection will be adjusted
annually, if necessary, to correspond to pay rate changes. Upon terminating the
group life insurance will cease on the last day of employment. Upon retirement
an employee will continue to be covered by the City’s plan at no cost to the
employee. Coverage will be one-half of the coverage reflected on the most
recent annual life insurance adjustment report immediately prior to retirement.
Employees categorized as temporary, seasonal, student or part-time working less
than twenty (20) hours per week are not eligible to participate in the Group
Life Insurance programs.
403.2   Optional Supplemental Life Insurance
Employees hired into classified or unclassified positions working twenty (20)
hours or more per week, their spouses and dependent children may participate in
supplemental life insurance program offered by the City. Spouse, domestic
partner and dependents are eligible to be included on the same date the
employee becomes insured, within thirty-one (31) days of the date the employee
acquires an eligible dependent, during the annual open enrollment period or
upon a qualifying event. Other enrollments or changes may be made at any time.
However they are subject to approval by the insurance company underwriter.
The total premium cost is the responsibility of the employee with no
contribution by the City.
Supplemental life insurance will continue through the end of the pay period in
which the employee terminated. Conversion may be made to an individual policy
when City employment ceases.
Employees categorized as temporary, seasonal, student or part-time working less
than twenty (20) hours per week are not eligible to participate in the
Supplemental Life Insurance programs.
403.3   Health and Dental Insurance
Employees in classified or unclassified positions working twenty (20) hours or
more per week, are eligible for health and dental insurance. Employees may
enroll without a medical examination within thirty-one (31) days of the date on
which employment begins or during the annual open enrollment period.
Coverage begins on the first day of the pay period immediately following
submittal of enrollment documents when enrollment forms are submitted within
the thirty-one (31) day eligibility period but after the first day at work. If
new hires elect to submit the enrollment forms before their first day of work,
coverage may then begin on the first day of work. Spouse, domestic partner and
dependents are eligible to be included on the same date the employee becomes
insured, within thirty-one (31) days of the date the employee acquires an
eligible dependent, during the annual open enrollment period or upon a
qualifying event. All information recorded by the insured on the City
enrollment form is subject to verification. The City and the employee share the
cost of contributory premiums. The City retains the right to modify the plan of
benefits or premium structure during annual renewal negotiations.
Employees are required to notify the City Insurance and Benefits Office of a
divorce, legal separation or changes in status of a dependent child within
thirty (30) days after the date of the event. Failure to provide notification
will result in cancellation of benefit coverage for dependents.
Under the Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act (HIPPA) an
employee may enroll within thirty-one (31) days of the date the employee
marries or acquires a child through birth or adoption.
Employees categorized as temporary, seasonal, student, intern, or part-time
working less than twenty (20) hours per week are not eligible to participate in
the Group Life Insurance programs.
403.4   Reinstated Employees
Employees reinstated, as the result of an administrative or judicial action
must contact the City's Insurance Office within thirty-one (31) days of
reinstatement to arrange for health care benefits if there was participation
prior to cancellation of benefits. Documentation authorizing the reinstatement
must be provided to the City’s Insurance Office at the time of enrollment.
403.5   Loss of Non-City Sponsored Health Care Coverage
Classified or unclassified employees working twenty (20) hours or more per week
and/or eligible dependents covered under a non-City sponsored health care plan
that is terminated through no fault of the insured may enroll under a City
health care plan within thirty-one (31) days of termination of prior coverage.
Employees must submit proof of prior coverage and proof of termination of
coverage.
403.6   Payment of Insurance During Leave Without Pay
Employees in an unpaid status for one (1) full pay period or longer must make
arrangements for direct payment of contributory insurance benefits. Failure by
employees to make direct payments will result in cancellation of optional
contributory insurance coverage. Employees will not be allowed to re-enroll
until the next open enrollment period.
403.7   Payment of Insurance While on Military Leave
The City will continue to contribute its share of insurance premiums for the
first thirty (30) days of military leave without pay. After that, an employee
may choose to continue City health insurance for up to eighteen (18) months by
making direct payments of the entire premium. Upon reinstatement after tour of
duty, employees are permitted to re-enroll.
403.8   Continuation of Health Insurance
The Consolidated Omnibus Budget Reconciliation Act (COBRA) of 1986 provides for
the continuation of health care coverage for a covered employee The
Consolidated Omnibus Budget Reconciliation Act (COBRA) of 1986 provides for the
continuation of health care coverage for a covered employee and covered
dependents due to a qualifying event that causes loss of health coverage.
To be eligible for COBRA coverage, the qualified beneficiary must be enrolled
in the City’s group health plan on the day before the qualifying event takes
place, or a child is born to or placed for adoption with a covered employee
during the COBRA coverage period.
A qualifying event is defined as termination of employment (other than for
gross misconduct) or reduction in hours of employment; death of a covered
employee, a divorce or legal separation of a spouse from a covered employee;
entitlement to Medicare of a covered employee; the child no longer satisfies
the plans definition of a dependent child.
COBRA continuation coverage may be available for eighteen (18) months in the
event of termination or thirty six (36) month in the event of death, divorce/
legal separation, entitlement to Medicare or loss in dependent status.
The covered employee or dependent is required to notify the City Human
Resources Department, Insurance and Benefits Office of a divorce, legal
separation, or change in the status of a dependent child within sixty (60) days
after the date of the event. If notification is not received within this time
period, COBRA continuation coverage will not be provided.
403.9   Public Employees' Retirement Association (PERA)
Eligible employees are required by State of New Mexico law to join the Public
Employees Retirement Association of New Mexico (PERA). State law regulates PERA
benefits.
A percentage of the employee’s gross pay will be deducted each pay period,
consistent with the plan currently in effect for the employee group. Injury
time, with the exception of Light Duty and other unpaid absences will not be
applied to the employee’s service credit for PERA purposes.
Employees leaving the City service may withdraw their portion of PERA
contributions or, if they have five (5) or more years of service, may choose
not to withdraw such contributions and draw retirement benefits when eligible.
Employees are encouraged to contact the Human Resources Department, Insurance
and Benefits Division for additional information.
Employees are eligible for a retirement pension as follows:
20 years, any age, Police and Fire
25 or more years of service, any age
20 or more years of service, age 60
17 or more years of service, age 61
14 or more years of service, age 62
11 or more years of service, age 63
8 or more years of service, age 64
5 or more years of service, age 65
403.10   Early Retirement
Immediately prior to retirement from active service with the City of
Albuquerque an employee may take leave with pay equivalent to the amount of
sick and vacation leave the employee has accumulated. Employees who are
eligible for retirement and are under the provisions of a collective bargaining
agreement will be governed by the provisions of that agreement.
Employees in Early Retirement are not entitled to salary increases afforded
other City employees.
Employees in Early Retirement are entitled to all benefits except vacation and
sick leave accruals, donated leave and hardship leave.
403.11   Retirement Benefits
Employees should plan to begin processing for retirement at least three (3)
months prior to the projected date of retirement. Potential retirees should
submit a memorandum to their department director advising them of their intent
to retire, which should include an effective date.
A copy of this memorandum and current confirmation from PERA confirming service
credit time must be submitted to the Human Resources Department Insurance and
Benefits Division for final processing and approval.
Retiring employees may convert their accrued vacation or sick balances to cash
payment within one (1) month of their retirement date by submitting a written
request to the Human Resources Department Insurance and Benefits Division for
review and approval by the Human Resources Director.
Retiring employees and eligible dependents may elect to transition into the
Retiree Health Insurance Plan offered by the State of New Mexico.
404.   EMPLOYEE INCENTIVE PROGRAM
The City of Albuquerque may develop methods of rewarding employees through a
reward, bonus, leave with pay or any other form of award or extra compensation,
in addition to the regular benefits entitled a classified or unclassified
employee, as long as all of the following conditions are met:
A.   The award results from a pre-existing plan or program authorized by the
Chief Administrative Officer which sets up a specific criteria for such extra
compensation; and
B.   Employees render service that is outside of and in addition to the normal
requirements and expectations of their employment; and
C.   The City reasonably anticipates some tangible or intangible benefit from
such service.
At the discretion of the director, departments choosing to implement an
employee incentive program shall present to the Chief Administrative Officer a
specific plan for approval. These plans shall include, but not be limited to,
the following:
A.   The method of selection of awardees, including the composition of
selection boards.
B.   The criteria under which employees will be nominated as well as ultimately
selected, as awardees.
C.   The suggested frequency with which it is proposed these awards will be
given.
D.   The anticipated number of employees who will be honored at a given
frequency.
E.   The amount of leave with pay to be granted by the department.
F.   The amount of cash award to be made available to awardees.
The amount of leave with pay and the amount of cash awarded may be up to three
(3) days of paid leave and up to $750 per employee. Programs may offer leave
with pay or cash awards or both. Department directors, assistant directors,
division and program heads, and others of similar rank are excluded from
departmental incentive award programs.
Upon approval of a department's incentive program, the Chief Administrative
Officer will recommend the amount of funds to be budgeted to the department for
implementation of the program. Award of any funds beyond the budgeted amount
will require the prior approval of the Chief Administrative Officer.
Department directors are responsible for administering these programs to
enhance operational performance and productivity.
This regulation does not govern programs sponsored by service clubs or similar
service groups and pertains solely to the use of City funds as incentives for
employees. Departments may grant each individual within a team or group an
award based on the above amounts.
Failure to receive an award under this Section is not grievable.
405.   Credit for Vacation and sick Leave Balances to Another Governmental
Entity (June 28, 2006)
When the operation of a facility, which is jointly administered and financed by
the City and another governmental entity, is transferred from the city to
another governmental entity, those city employees who are entitled to
compensation for vacation leave, as specified in Section
401.2 and for sick leave, as specified in section
401.4 E, will be compensated only if, and to the extent that, such vacation
leave and sick leave are not credited by the new governmental entity.
500.   EMPLOYEE DEVELOPMENT
(Effective Date November 1, 2013)
1.   ISSUING AGENCY: The Human Resources Department.
2.   SCOPE: These rules have general applicability to all prospective and
current employees, classified and unclassified, including but not limited to
interns, volunteers, and seasonal employees.
3.   STATUTORY AUTHORITY: City of Albuquerque, New Mexico Code of Ordinances,
Ch. 3 art. I, Merit System; Personnel Policy and art. II, Labor-Management
Relations Ordinance.
4.   DURATION: Until revoked.
5.   EFFECTIVE DATE: November 1, 2013.
6.   OBJECTIVE: To encourage employees to further their education for their
personal career success and for the benefit of the City.
7.   RESPONSIBILITY FOR ADMINISTRATION: Director of Human Resources Department.
8.   DEFINITIONS:
A.   Central New Mexico Community College  is commonly abbreviated as CNM as
was formerly known as Technical Vocational Institute or TVI.
B.   Chief Administrative Officer  shall mean the Chief Administrative Officer
for the City of Albuquerque or designee.
C.   City  means the City of Albuquerque, a municipal corporation.
D.   Department Director  means the director of a referenced City department;
references include that person’s designee.
E.   General Education Development Test  is commonly abbreviated herein as GED.
F.   Human Resources Department  means the City of Albuquerque Department of
Human Resources; Human Resources is commonly abbreviated HR.
G.   Human Resources Director  means the director of the Department of Human
Resources; references include that person’s designee.
H.   Learning Council  is an advisory council to the Director of Human
Resources on all employee development matters, including establishing policy
criteria of eligibility and financial awards under the Tuition Assistance
Program. The Learning Council recommends to the Chief Administrative Officer
approval or disapproval of all requests for tuition assistance.
I.   Non-probationary employee  means an employee of the City of Albuquerque
who has successfully completed the prescribed probationary period of his
employment.
J.   North Central Association of Colleges and Secondary Schools  means a
membership organization, consisting of colleges, universities, and schools that
provides accreditation of educational institutions
K.   Public Service University  is the division of the Department of Human
Resources responsible for training and employee development; abbreviated herein
as PSU.
L.   Tuition Assistance Program  means a program within the City that provides,
subject to the availability of funds, reimbursement of certain approved
educational expenses subject to the terms and conditions of the Personnel Rules
and Regulations and Tuition Assistance Guidelines.
M.   Unclassified employee  means a City employee who is at-will and serves at
the discretion of the Chief Administrative Officer, except for unclassified
City Council staff. Unclassified employees have no property interest in
continued employment and may be terminated for any or no reason. Unclassified
employees shall be entitled to all of the rights and benefits to which
classified employees are entitled except for the rights of disciplinary
actions, the grievance resolution procedure, appeals and layoffs.
N.   The University of New Mexico  is commonly abbreviated as UNM.
9.   CAREER COUNSELING AND GUIDANCE: Career counseling and guidance is
available to employees to encourage and assist them in planning their
education, career goals and occupational advancement as they relate to the
employee and to the City. Employees seeking career counseling may contact the
Human Resources Department, Public Service University (PSU).
10.   EDUCATIONAL LEAVE AND TUITION ASSISTANCE:
A.   Employees are encouraged to pursue their career interests in City
government through education and training. The City, subject to the
availability of funding, may provide financial assistance or paid or unpaid
leave to attend courses and other approved training programs.
B.   Educational Leave and Tuition Assistance Program are available to
classified non-probationary employees, unclassified employees with a minimum of
six (6) months of service and classified part-time employees working twenty
(20) hours or more per work week, to provide the opportunity to the employee to
pursue his career interest in City government through education and training.
The City may provide employees with financial assistance or paid or unpaid
leave to attend courses and other approved training programs. Consideration for
funding is based on the University of New Mexico (UNM) and Central New Mexico
Community College (CNM) regular semester cycle.
11.   CONDITIONS FOR TUITION ASSISTANCE:
A.   If a course or program is not a requirement of the City, an employee may
apply for financial assistance through the City's Tuition Assistance Program.
B.   In order to qualify for assistance through the City’s Tuition Assistance
Program, employees must meet the following criteria:
(1)   Courses must be for credit, with the exception of the GED exam at CNM;
(2)   The courses, training program or the type of degree being pursued must
enhance or create a skill that is related to the employee's profession, skill
or craft or career goals, and must demonstrate a benefit to the City;
(3)   Employees receiving assistance from other sources will inform the City of
the amount of this assistance when application is made with the Tuition
Assistance Program. Tuition Assistance may only be available up to the amount
of actual educational costs of up to six (6) credit hours for undergraduate
courses, or up to three (3) credit hours for graduate courses, less any other
assistance received by the employee;
(4)   Under the Tuition Assistance Program, the employee assumes responsibility
for course selection, scheduling and other matters that are traditionally the
responsibility of the student and the educational institution;
(5)   Employees requesting tuition assistance for the first time must complete
a tuition assistance orientation session with PSU prior to approval of the
employee’s first application.
(6)   If the demand for tuition assistance exceeds the availability of funds,
awards will be granted to employees in the following priority order:
(a)   Undergraduate courses, vocational courses, and the GED exam at CNM;
(b)   Graduate courses;
(c)   A second Associate’s, Bachelor’s, or Master’s degree.
(d)   The Learning Council may grant one-time exceptions to this priority order
during each semester funding cycle.
C.   If an employee is not awarded tuition assistance through the City's
Tuition Assistance Program, the employee’s department may provide financial
assistance to the employee up to the amount originally requested on the Tuition
Assistance application. In order to qualify for assistance through the
department, the employee must have an application for assistance on file with
PSU.
12.   CONDITIONS OF EDUCATIONAL LEAVE: Department directors shall approve or
disapprove leave for education and training as provided in detail in the Human
Resources Personnel Rules and Regulations, Part 4.
A.   The following criteria will be used to determine if an employee qualifies
for educational leave:
(1)   The employee must be working for the City of Albuquerque on a full-time
basis;
(2)   The courses are of benefit to the City as determined by the Learning
Council;
(3)   The employee has maintained a satisfactory academic record during any
previous period of tuition assistance and continues to maintain a satisfactory
academic record during the semester when the educational leave is exercised;
(4)   The employee has maintained satisfactory job performance within the
previous 365 days of employment and continues to maintain a satisfactory job
performance during the semester when the educational leave is exercised;
(5)   The course is not available outside the employee’s normal work schedule;
and
(6)   The educational institution offering the course must be regionally
recognized and certified as an accredited public institution of higher learning
by the North Central Association of Colleges and Secondary Schools or a
regional equivalent. The institution must have a physical campus within the
state unless the program of study is not offered by any regionally accredited
institution within the state.
B.   If the department director determines a course or seminar is needed for
the employee's current position, the employee will receive leave with pay to
attend and such time will be recorded as Work Off-Site.
C.   If an employee is enrolled in a course approved by the Learning Council
and meets all established criteria, the department director, may grant
educational leave not to exceed three (3) hours per week.
13.   APPROVED PROGRAMS OF STUDY:
A.   Courses, for which either educational leave or tuition assistance or both
which are to be taken by eligible City employees, shall be of mutual benefit to
the employee and the City, as determined by the Learning Council.
B.   The educational institution offering the course must be regionally
recognized and certified as an accredited public institution of higher learning
by the North Central Association of Colleges and Secondary Schools or a
regional equivalent. The institution must have a physical campus within the
state unless the program of study is not offered by any regionally accredited
institution within the state.
14.   REIMBURSEMENT FOR TUITION ASSISTANCE:
A.   The employee is solely responsible for payment of all tuition and related
expenses. Reimbursement will be made for the cost of approved courses only.
Proper documentation of such payment will be necessary in order to receive
reimbursement.
B.   Employees must agree to reimburse the City for any course(s) dropped or
not completed. Employees must further agree to reimburse the City if they do
not attain a satisfactory grade for a completed course(s), as follows:
(1)   Undergraduate   C or better
(2)   Graduate   B or better
(3)   Vocational Training   C or better or Certificate of Satisfactory
Completion
C.   Employees are required to submit original official documentation to verify
their grades to the PSU Division.
D.   Reimbursement will not be made for application fees (except for CNM non-
degree students), late registration fees, test requirements (except for the GED
exam at CNM), parking or transportation expenses, fines, laboratory fees,
lodging, typing fees, graduation fees, supplies, tools, equipment, books
(except for CNM non-degree students), auditing of courses, noncredit courses,
seminar or workshops, and other similar expenses.
15.   LEARNING COUNCIL (TRAINING AND EDUCATION COMMITTEE): From time to time,
the Human Resources Director will recommend individual employees to the Chief
Administrative Officer for approval to serve on the Learning Council. The
Learning Council is an advisory council to the Director of Human Resources on
all employee development matters, including establishing policy criteria of
eligibility and financial awards under the Tuition Assistance Program. The
Learning Council will confer with the Director of Human Resources on his
recommendations to the Chief Administrative Officer approval or disapproval of
all requests for tuition assistance.
16.   TRAINING FOR NEWLY APPOINTED SUPERVISORS: Department directors must
register all first-time City supervisors for the New Supervisor Development
Program within 30 days of the employee assuming the supervisory position. The
new supervisor must satisfactorily complete the program within twelve (12)
months of assuming the position.
17.   TRAINING CREDIT: Employees may accumulate a maximum of two (2) years of
training credit or two (2) years of work experience that can be used in
qualifying for specific positions through completion of nonacademic courses.
Nonacademic courses include both those courses or seminars that the City
sponsors or employees take on their own. In applying for training credit, the
accumulated credit must be applicable to the position in question. Upon
application by the employee, the Director of Human Resources shall make the
final decision regarding the grant of credit.
18.   SUPERVISORY SERVICE CREDIT: Eligible employees may receive two (2) years
of supervisory service credit by successfully completing the City of
Albuquerque Pre-Management Development Program. This credit will be recognized
as two (2) years of valid supervisory experience when applying for a City
position. Upon application by the employee, the Director of Human Resources
shall make the final decision regarding the grant of credit.
600.   THE CLASSIFICATION PLAN
The Human Resources Department will maintain a classification plan based on
duties, authority, responsibilities and required qualifications of classified
positions in the city service.
601.   POSITION REVIEWS
A position review is a critique of the duties, responsibilities and
qualifications of a position. It is not a review or evaluation of any person
holding the position being reviewed. As a result of a position review, a
position may be reclassified to a different classification and grade within the
existing classification plan.
The Human Resources Department may conduct position reviews under any of the
following circumstances with the approval of the Chief Administrative Officer:
A.   As part of a study of all positions in an organizational unit;
B.   As part of a study of all positions in a given occupation;
C.   Upon the request of a department director;
D.   At the discretion of the Human Resources Director, any position may be
evaluated with the approval of the Chief Administrative Officer.
602.   NEW POSITION
A request to create a new position must be made by the department director
through the submittal of a Position Control Form. All forms must be reviewed
and signed by the Budget Office and forwarded to the Chief Administrative
Officer for approval.
The Human Resources Department will evaluate the functions of the new position
and determine the classification of the position.
603.   RED CIRCLING
Red circling means that an employee's rate of pay is higher than the maximum
allowable rate for the classified pay grade. Red circling may occur as the
result of a job evaluation, classification study or other administrative
action. Refer to Section
700 of these Regulations for pay adjustments related to red circling.
700.   COMPENSATION
Revised January 2025
The Human Resources Department establishes and provides a compensation program
for City of Albuquerque employees with an equitable classification system that
will endorse a holistic view
at promoting fairness through equal pay for jobs that require
equal skill, effort and responsibility,
and that are performed under similar working conditions. In addition, compensation practices and
programs can be negotiated and established through the City’s collective
bargaining agreements, so long as they are legally compliant. Other forms of
compensation include, but are not limited to, fringe benefits such as
insurance, retirement, leave, and incentive plans.
701.   PAY DETERMINATION
701.1   New Hire Pay for Classified Positions
The set-
scale rate and probationary pay for classified positions will be maintained and established
by the Human Resources Department.
New hire start dates should correspond with the beginning of a pay period.
If unique labor market requirements exist, a new employee may be hired above the established set-
scale rate and will be reviewed by the Classification and Compensation Division
and subject to
CAO approval. Requests to hire new employees above the entry level must be requested in writing
by the Department Director justifying the exception to normal hiring procedure
and will require approval by the Human Resources Director and Chief
Administrative Officer.
701.2   New Hire Pay for Unclassified Appointed Positions
Pay for appointed new hires in unclassified positions will be established based
on external and internal market analysis and will be recommended by the Human
Resources Department and approved by the Chief Administrative Officer.
701.3   Pay for Completion of Probation
Upon successful completion of the probationary period, classified employees may
be eligible for an increase to the established non-probationary set-scale rate
for the position.
702.   TEMPORARY PAY PROGRAM
702.1   Temporary Upgrade
Temporary upgrades apply to employees in classified status filling classified
positions. Under certain circumstances, employees may be temporarily upgraded
to a position graded higher than
the one they currently occupy. Conditions for a temporary upgrade may include the absence of an
employee from regular duty or a position vacancy.
Requests for temporary payroll upgrades are reviewed and approved by the Human
Resources Director. Employees temporarily upgraded shall be compensated for
actual hours worked. The upgrade rate of pay shall not exceed the
established rate for the position to which the employee is being upgraded.
Temporary payroll upgrades should not be used for periods of less than eight
(8) hours per day (Exception: employees who are required to work less than 8
hours due to standard hours of operation).
Temporary payroll upgrades cease when the vacant position is filled or when the absent employee
returns, but no longer than ninety (90) days.
Temporary payroll upgrades will not be granted if other personnel of equal or
higher grades in a department are available to provide adequate coverage.
Only employees designated as safety sensitive may be temporarily upgraded to
safety sensitive positions.
Employees on probationary status can be temporarily upgraded if there are no
other non-
probationary employees available to assume the temporary upgrade. The
probationary period for the temporarily upgraded employee will be paused from
the time of the temporary upgrade and will resume once the temporary upgraded
has ended.
An FLSA non-exempt employee can be upgraded to an FLSA exempt position only if
an FLSA exempt position is not available to perform the duties of the position.
A non-exempt employee who is upgraded for less than 10 days will be
eligible for overtime compensation in the upgraded
position. An employee upgraded for more than 10 days will be eligible for overtime compensation
if the duties performed are considered to be non-exempt under the provisions of
the FLSA. The Human Resources Department will make the determination of the
FLSA status for an employee upgraded more than 10 days.
The duration for a full temporary upgrade is more than 10 days but shall
not exceed 90 days.
The duration for a partial temporary upgrade is more than 10 days but shall not exceed 90 days. If
the partial temporary upgrade exceeds 90 days due to unforeseen circumstances, the department is
required to submit an extension justification to the Human Resources Department
Director for review and approval.
702.2   Temporary Upgrades Under 10 Days
Temporary upgrades of 10 working days or less will be managed by the individual
department with approval of the Department Director.
Employees upgraded under this section will automatically cease performing the
duties of the upgraded position at the conclusion of the temporary upgrade or
upon the expiration of the 10 working days, whichever occurs first.
Pay for temporary upgrades under 10 days will be compensated at 10% of the
employee’s base
hourly rate but shall not exceed the maximum rate for the position to which the employee is being
upgraded.
Employees upgraded under this section can only be upgraded one time within the
same position and job code.
If the temporary upgrade must go beyond 10 days, the process for the full or partial
temporary upgrade should be followed as applicable.
If more than three consecutive or 30 days’ worth of temporary upgrades under
this rule would be needed to cover a particular vacancy or absence, then an
upgrade or assignment under Sections 702.3, .4, .6, or .7 as appropriate should
be considered. If these are impractical and a bargaining unit member would be
upgraded, then their bargaining representative must be notified unless
otherwise indicated by the applicable CBA.
702.3   Full Temporary Upgrade
Full temporary upgrades will be applied to employees that meet the job
description minimum requirements for the position being temporarily filled.
Pay for full temporary upgrades will be established at the non-probationary
rate of the position.
The duration for a full temporary upgrade is more than 10 days but shall not
exceed 90 days. If
the partial temporary upgrade exceeds 90 days due to unforeseen circumstances, the department is
required to submit an extension justification to the Human Resources Department
Director for review and approval.
702.4   Partial Temporary Upgrade
Partial temporary upgrades will be applied to employees that do not meet the
job description minimum requirements for the position being temporarily filled.
Pay for partial temporary upgrades will be established at the probationary rate of the position or at
5% less than the established non-probationary rate of the position.
The duration for a partial temporary upgrade is more than 10 days but shall not exceed 90 days. If
the partial temporary upgrade exceeds 90 days due to unforeseen circumstances, the department is
required to submit an extension justification to the Human Resources Department
Director for review and approval.
Once approved, pay for the partial temporary upgrade will be increased to the
established non- probationary rate of the position.
702.5   Temporary Upgrades Under Collective Bargaining Agreement
Employees covered under a collective bargaining agreement are eligible for
temporary upgrades
as stipulated in the respective union contract. Exceptions to a collective bargaining agreement may
be considered with the approval of the parties, which shall be reduced to
writing. The additional pay is in effect only for the time that the temporary
upgrade is in effect.
Refer to applicable union contract for specific details.
702.6   Temporary Appointment
Temporary appointments apply to non-bargaining classified or unclassified
employees filling an unclassified position. Conditions for a temporary
appointment may include the absence of an employee from regular duty or a
position vacancy.
702.7   Full Temporary Appointments
Full temporary appointments will be applied to employees that meet the job description minimum
requirements for the position being temporarily filled.
Pay for full temporary appointment will be set at the established rate of the
position.
The upgraded level of compensation remains in effect only as long as the temporary appointment
is in effect.
The upgrade rate of pay shall not exceed the maximum rate for the position to which the employee
is being upgraded.
702.8   Partial Temporary Appointment
A partial temporary appointment will be applied to employees that do not meet the job description
minimum requirements for the position being temporarily filled.
Pay for partial temporary appointments will be set
at 95% of the established rate of the position.
The upgrade rate of pay shall not exceed the maximum rate for the position to which the employee
is being upgraded.
The duration for a temporary appointment is more than 10 days but shall not
exceed 90 days. If
the partial temporary upgrade exceeds 90 days due to unforeseen circumstances, the department is
required to submit an extension justification to the Human Resources Department
Director for review and approval.
703.   PAY PLAN ADMINISTRATION
703.1   Red Circled
Employees whose rate of pay is higher than the maximum of the pay range for
their position are
“red circled.” An employee’s rate of pay may be red circled through administrative action, position
review, or a compensation review process and shall be handled as follows:
A.   
If the current rate of pay exceeds the maximum range allowable for the grade, there will be no
increase in the rate of pay; and
B.   
Future pay increases shall be suspended until the employee’s rate of pay conforms to the
maximum range for the assigned grade.
C.    City wide wage adjustments may be applied to all employees including
those who are “red circled” by the Chief Administrative Officer.
703.2   Green Circled
Employees whose rate of pay is below the minimum of the pay range for their positions are “green
circled.” Any green circled rates will be monitored and evaluated by the
Classification and Compensation Division and any proposed increases will be
subject to CAO approval.
704.   TRANSFER
A transfer occurs when an employee is reassigned to a
classification having the same or different job title within the same grade,
whether their pay increases or decreases according to the new position rate.
All transfers are effective
at the beginning of the pay period after the transfer has been approved.
A probationary employee who seeks and accepts a transfer will be compensated at the probationary
rate of the new position and must complete a full probationary period in the
new position.
704.1   Pay for Transfer
The pay will remain unchanged, unless the set scale rate between the old and
new job does not align. If this is the case, the employee will be established
at the position set scale rate.
704.2   Transfers into Public Safety, or Ranked Positions to Include J-Series:
Employees transferring from any other series into a public safety or ranked position, with no prior
experience, will be placed at the cadet rate of pay and must serve the required
probationary/evaluation period.
705.   PAY FOR POSITION UNDERFILL
The selected applicant for the underfill will be placed at the set-
scale rate assigned for the position.
706.   PROMOTION
A promotion occurs when an employee successfully bids into a higher grade and position of higher
responsibility.
All promotions are effective at the beginning of the pay period after the
promotion has been approved.
706.1   Pay for Promotion
Employees who are promoted into a position at a higher grade, will be placed at
the established set-scale rate for the position.
707.   DEMOTION OR VOLUNTARY DOWNGRADE
A demotion or a voluntary downgrade occurs when an employee moves into a lower
grade and a position of lesser responsibility.
All probationary employees demoted or voluntarily downgraded will receive the probationary rate
of the new position and must complete a full probationary period.
All demotions or voluntary downgrades are effective at the beginning of the pay
period after the transfer has been approved.
707.1   Pay for Demotion
Employees who are demoted into a position at a lower grade will be placed at
the set-scale rate assigned for the position.
708.   SALARY ADJUSTMENT REQUESTS
Requests to increase the pay for a filled or vacant position must be requested
in writing by the Department Director to the Human Resources Department
justifying the exception and must provide required budget documentation to
support the request.
The Classification and Compensation Division will conduct a review on all
salary adjustment requests to ensure equity and legal compliance. This
information will be provided to the Human Resources Director and CAO for
approval.
Any adjustments made to salaries must occur at the beginning of a pay period upon CAO
approval.
709.   UNCLASSIFIED TRANSFERS
Transfers into an unclassified position occurs when an employee bids or is
appointed into an unclassified job title.
709.1   Pay for Transfer into Unclassified Positions
Pay for unclassified positions will be established based on external and
internal market analysis and will be recommended by the Human Resources
Department to the Chief Administrative Officer.
709.2   Classified Employees Who Accept Unclassified Positions
Employees who have held a classified permanent position with the City for more
than ten (10)
consecutive years prior to serving in an unclassified position will be allowed to return to a vacant
classified permanent position. The Chief Administrative Officer will determine
the specific position to which the employee will be returned. Human Resources
will present such offer to the
employee. The employee’s salary shall be commensurate with the established set scale pay of the
respective position into which they are placed.
710.   ADDITIONAL PAY
Additional pay represents compensation that is not part of the base pay of the employee’s job. An
employee’s eligibility to receive additional pay may be dependent on their
position, employment status, and collective bargaining agreement.
710.1   Incentive Pays Programs
Incentive pay programs help address the challenges faced by the City in hiring
and retaining qualified candidates.
Administration of incentive pay is subject to and contingent upon approval of annual budget. The
CAO will exercise final authority regarding the implementation and
administration of all additional pay programs.
A.    Hiring Bonus Pay
Hiring bonus pay (recruitment incentive) is available for positions identified
by the Department
Director or by the Human Resources Department as being difficult to fill through HR metrics and
data.
All recruitment incentives, and the classifications to which they will apply,
must be approved in advance in writing by the Human Resources Director as
delegated by the Chief Administrative Officer 
(CAO) prior to discussion with any candidate or recruiting effort proposing to offer one or
more of these incentives. Recruitment incentives may be discontinued at any
time at the sole discretion of the CAO.
B.    Retention Pay
Retention payment
(s) may be available to unclassified and classified employees that are identified
by the Department Director or by the Human Resources Department as being
difficult to fill through HR metrics and data, despite extensive recruiting
efforts due to factors such as labor market shortages, aggressive growth in
compensation levels for particular positions or unique skillsets.
The retention payment is a lump sum payment outside of an employee’s base pay
to retain an
employee to remain in their current key position for a minimum of 12 months to meet critical and
priority business needs.
1.   Criteria: The following criteria must be met in order to qualify
for the retention payment:
a.    The employee must currently hold a position within City government as a
permanent, non- probationary employee, and the City must reasonably anticipate
some tangible or intangible benefit in retaining the employee.
b.    The employee’s position within City government must be one that is
critical to carry out essential governmental functions.
c.   The employee must possess exceptional skills, experience and/or
qualifications for the position and must have demonstrated exceptional job
performance as a City employee.
d.   
The employee must have received a bona fide offer of employment from an employer outside
of City government, and must be able to demonstrate that the outside employer
has offered compensation significantly greater than what the employee currently
earns, for a comparable position.
e.    A position will not be reclassified in order to offer a competitive
compensation adjustment unless the job duties of the position actually warrant
reclassification.
f.   
A lump sum compensation adjustment shall not exceed 10% of an employee’s annual
salary.
g.    An employee who accepts a lump sum compensation adjustment shall be
required to sign an agreement to repay the adjustment on a pro-
rated basis if they resign from City employment within one (1) year of
receiving the adjustment.
h.    A request for a compensation increase may only be made by the Department
Director of the individual for whom the increase is sought. The request must be
in writing, must include a copy of a written offer of employment to the
employee for whom the adjustment is sought, from an outside employer, and must
show justification for the increase in accordance with the criteria
established.
i.    The Chief Administrative Officer shall have the final authority to
determine whether or not to offer a compensation adjustment.
710.2   Certification Pay
Certification pay applies to employees that hold a certification that reflects
skills necessary to the job.
Certification pay shall cease if the employee transfers into another position where the certification
is not applicable.
710.3   Overtime Pay
Overtime will be paid in accordance with the Fair Labor Standards Act or as
provided per respective collective bargaining agreement.
A non-exempt employee shall not work more than the regularly scheduled forty
(40) hour
workweek without prior approval of the department director or immediate supervisor as designated
by the director. Working overtime without prior approval is considered just cause for disciplinary
action up to and including termination.
710.4   Compensatory Time
In the absence of any collective bargaining agreement concerning method of
payment, payment
may be in the form of cash or compensatory time, which is limited to a maximum accrual of
sixty
(60) hours. All accrued compensatory time must be utilized within 180 days of accrual. If not used
the balance must be paid to the employee on the next regularly scheduled
payroll.
710.5   Holiday Pay
Employees must be in
a pay status with the City the full normal workday immediately before and
the full normal workday immediately after the holiday in order to receive holiday pay.
Holiday
leave will be compensated at the employee’s regular rate of pay. The number of hours compensated
will be based on the employee’s actual schedule on the holiday. Employees scheduled to work on
the holiday who call out, or do not report for duty, will be coded sick leave
or absent without approval and forfeit the paid holiday leave benefit.
Classified and unclassified employees are eligible for holiday pay. Part-time
employees working twenty (20) hours or more per workweek are eligible for
holiday pay on a prorated basis.
Exception:
 Unclassified employees under the status of temporary, seasonal, students or interns are
not entitled to holiday pay. Part-time employees who work less than twenty (20)
hours are not entitled to holiday pay.
Refer to Section 
401.3
 of the City of Albuquerque Personnel Rules and Regulations for additional
information on holidays.
710.6   Longevity Pay
Longevity pay is identified by the City as “years of service”.
Longevity pay is not a component of base compensation and does not move with
the employee
who is transferring. Longevity is determined by the employee category (non-
bargaining classified or unclassified) or union into which the employee is
transferring.
Longevity is determined by collective bargaining agreement and does not remain
with the
employee during a transfer, promotion, or demotion into a different union or employee status. The
City shall report longevity as pay to PERA in accordance with PERA’s rules and
regulations.
Employees who are in an unclassified or classified-non-bargaining status[https:
//export.amlegal.com/media/015ecd2245ccd7aecbd5d365cd857e7d8df180cd/IMAGES/0-0-
0-1583_135x15.jpg]shall be granted longevity pay of $85.00 per pay period in
the first pay period when they reach 20 years of
continuous City service, excluding service in a temporary or seasonal position or any other position
identified as “non-benefited time”.
710.7   Standby Time
FLSA non-exempt employees that support a twenty-four (24) hour by seven (7) day
per week operation may be entitled to standby time if the employee is the one
that is actually required to report to the worksite in the case of an emergency
and resolve a problem.
See union contracts for compensation. Standby time may not be combined with any
other time such as overtime. Standby will be paid on a bi-weekly basis and may
not be accumulated.
Employees on standby time must keep the supervisor advised as to where they
may be reached.
710.8   On-Call Time
On-call time is provided to non-
exempt M, E and I series employee who are required to remain on worksite while
on call or required to report to the worksite in case of an emergency and/or to
resolve a problem.
On-
call time shall not be considered time worked for the purpose of computing overtime payment.
Compensation will be paid at time and a half for actual hours worked.
711.   PAYROLL DEDUCTIONS
Employee paychecks will reflect both statutory and voluntary deductions from
gross earnings.
Federal and State law mandates certain deductions while other deductions are made at the request
of the employee.
711.1   Federal and State Deductions
By law, Federal and State income tax are to be deducted from an
employee’s gross pay.
By Federal law, Social Security (FICA) and Medicare payments are to be deducted
from an employee’s gross pay.
New Mexico State law requires a quarterly Worker Compensation (W/C) assessment
fee payable by both the employer and employee.
The City of Albuquerque is a participant in the Public Employees Retirement
Plan (PERA) and Retiree Healthcare (RETHC) funds. Both require contributions by
all employees eligible to participate. The City also contributes to the fund on
behalf of employees. Seasonal, students and interns are not eligible to
participate in PERA.
711.2   Voluntary Deductions
City employees who are eligible may participate in the City’s deferred
compensation programs through the Human Resources Department.
City employees who are eligible and have chosen to enroll shall authorize the
deduction of insurance and benefits payments, United Way deductions, and other
voluntary deductions.
711.3   Miscellaneous Deductions
The City may authorize other deductions consistent with applicable federal,
state or local legislation or approved City policy.
712.   PAYROLL CORRECTIONS
The City strives for accuracy in the payroll process and in compensating
employees; however, employees are expected to review their bi-weekly payroll
statement and report any discrepancies to the City payroll office immediately.
In the event an employee receives compensation in error, the City will correct
the employee master file and collect any overpayment from the employee
regardless of the cause.
The overpayment will be deducted from future paychecks at the same rate and for
the same time period as the overpayment occurred. Exceptions to the repayment
rate may be granted by City payroll on a case-by-
case basis. Any amount that remains unpaid upon an employee’s resignation or
retirement will be deducted from the employee’s final check.
800.   TERMINATION OF EMPLOYMENT
801.   RESIGNATION
Resignation is the voluntary termination of employment, prior to retirement.
City employees who wish to resign in good standing shall submit a letter to
their immediate supervisor at least two (2) weeks before leaving employment.
The letter shall include the date the resignation will become effective. Once
the resigning employee’s Department has accepted their resignation, it may
initiate a requisition to advertise the position if applicable.
Written requests to rescind a resignation must be submitted directly to the
applicable department director prior to the effective date of resignation. The
department director has the authority to approve or disapprove the request.
Disapproval is not grievable.
Employees who resign before they are eligible for retirement may request a
refund of their PERA contributions by contacting the Human Resources
Department, Insurance and Benefits Division.
Department Directors with concurrence from the CAO or their designee may allow
non-bargaining employees at the Division Manager level or higher to use paid
leave (PLO) from the date they provide their letter of resignation until it is
effective, up to an amount equal to their accrued sick leave but in no event to
exceed 160 hours. If an employee requests to use leave in this way they waive
their right to ask to rescind their resignation, and they will not accrue
further vacation or sick leave during this time. This leave is not intended to
be combined with early retirement benefits.
Similarly, the CAO or their designee may place employees [at the Division
Manager level or higher] on administrative leave with pay from when they submit
their letter of resignation until it is effective.
802.   FAILURE TO RETURN FROM LEAVE WITHOUT PAY
An employee on leave without pay must contact the Human Resources Department no
later than thirty (30) days prior to the end of the leave without pay period to
make arrangements to return to work. If a vacant position for which the
employee qualifies is not found within thirty (30) days of the employee’s
approved date of return or if a vacant position for which the employee
qualifies is not found the employee will be terminated.
803.   AUTOMATIC RESIGNATION
Unauthorized absence from work for a period of three (3) consecutive regularly
scheduled work shifts or three (3) work days, whichever is greater may be
considered an automatic resignation.
Such an automatic resignation is not the subject of a grievance but shall be
subject to pre-disciplinary procedures.
804.   DISMISSAL
The Chief Administrative Officer, a department director or acting department
director may dismiss an employee for just cause. Refer to Section
902 of these regulations.
805.   TERMINATION OF SEASONAL EMPLOYEES
Temporary employees are hired for up to a two (2) year period. Seasonal
employees are hired for specific periods, up to nine (9) months in a twelve
(12) consecutive month period. Temporary and seasonal employees have no
entitlement to continued City employment and may be terminated at any time.
806.   RETIREMENT
The City of Albuquerque, as a public employer, is required by State law to
provide retirement benefits to its employees under the Public Employees
Retirement Association (PERA). The City also complies with federal, state and
local laws, regulations and guidelines regarding retirement policies and
practices.
806.1   Retirement Processing
To insure that retired employees receive a retirement pension, in accordance
with the requirements of the Public Employees' Retirement Association (PERA) of
New Mexico, retirement processing should begin at least three (3) months prior
to the retirement date. The employee must submit a memorandum that includes the
retirement date, to the department director and the Human Resources Department,
Insurance and Benefits Division.
806.2    Requests to Rescind Retirement
Written requests to rescind a retirement must be submitted to the department
director prior to the effective date of retirement. The department director has
the authority to approve or disapprove the request. Disapproval is not
grievable.
807.   CLEARANCE PROCESSING
On the last day of work employees must process out of City employment by
completing and submitting a Clearance Form to the appropriate offices as
instructed on the form. During this process the employee must return all
pagers, cellular phones, hand held computers, portable computers, equipment,
keys, supplies, card keys and all other City issued equipment. Employees
failing to return City issued equipment may have a reasonable replacement cost
withheld from their final check.
900.   MEDIATION/DISCIPLINARY ACTIONS/GRIEVANCE RESOLUTION AND APPEAL
This section of the Personnel Rules and Regulations includes the City policy
for the following programs: Mediation Program; Disciplinary Actions; Grievance
Resolution; and Appeal from Suspension, Demotion and Dismissal.
901.   MEDIATION PROGRAM
City employees and supervisors are encouraged to use the Employee Mediation
Program to address work place conflict, including conflict between employees
and conflict between an employee and a supervisor. Participation in the
mediation program is voluntary and will not affect access to other procedural
remedies for employees.
The Employee Mediation Program is established to:
A.   Encourage City employees to resolve work place conflicts early, informally
and with minimum intervention from the administration; and
B.   Address conflict in the work place constructively through communication
and collaboration whenever possible; and
C.   Aid direct communication and problem solving between individuals; and
D.   Provide neutral mediators to help informal, direct communication and
conflict resolution within each department of the City; and
E.   Provide a resource to each department to minimize the costs of conflict.
Any City employee or supervisor may initiate mediation by contacting the
Mediation Program Coordinator. Employees and supervisors should attempt to use
the mediation process at an early stage in their conflict resolution efforts
but may be initiated at any point.
The mediation will take place during business hours in a neutral site at a time
mutually acceptable to the participants and will be conducted in accordance
with the Employee Mediation Program guidelines. Any resolution resulting from
the mediation must comply with all applicable laws, policies, rules and
procedures.
902.   DISCIPLINARY ACTIONS
Employees may be disciplined by written reprimand, suspension, demotion or
dismissal. Just cause for discipline is any behavior significant or substantial
in nature relating to the employee’s work or conduct that is inconsistent with
the employee’s obligation to the City.
902.1   Reasons for Disciplinary Actions
Employees may be reprimanded, suspended, demoted or terminated for any
justifiable cause including, but not limited to:
A.   Violence or threats of violence on City premises or on City time. City
premises includes but is not limited to work sites, property or vehicles
(owned, rented or leased), parking garages and parking lots; or
B.   Commission of a felony or misdemeanor related to the position held by the
employee or conviction of a crime involving moral turpitude; or
C.   Incompetence, inefficiency or inadequate performance of an employee's
duties; or
D.   Deliberate falsification or omission of information on an employment
application, resume, timecard/record or other city documents; or
E.   Insubordination or uncooperative behavior; or
F.   Misappropriation or personal use of city funds, property, possessions or
resources or theft or fraud; or
G.   Misconduct; or
H.   Harassment or sexual harassment; or
I.   Violation of confidentiality or the release of confidential information;
or
J.   Being absent from duty without proper authorization, regardless of the
length of time; or
K.   Violation of the Substance Abuse Policy; or
L.   Violation of the Personnel Rules and Regulations or rules promulgated
pursuant to the Merit System Ordinance and/or the Conflict of Interest
Ordinance; or
M.   Other disciplinary reasons, including but not limited to conduct on or
off-duty, which may:
1.   Call into question the employee’s ability to perform assigned duties or
job functions; or
2.   Would harm public respect for City employees or confidence in the
operation of City services; or
3.   Would impair the operation or efficiency of any City department.
902.2   Disciplinary Procedures
Before discipline is imposed, the employee shall be notified of the reasons for
which discipline is contemplated, a summary of the evidence against the
employee, and the employee’s right to respond to the proposed action. After
giving the employee the notice of contemplated action and before the employee
makes any written or oral response, the supervisor contemplating the discipline
shall request review by the City Employee Mediation Program Coordinator of the
circumstances on which the contemplated action is based in an effort to avoid
the discipline. Mediation shall occur if it is deemed appropriate by the
Coordinator. After this review or if mediation is unsuccessful, the supervisor
may continue with the contemplated disciplinary procedure by giving the
employee the right to respond to the notice of contemplated action.
902.3   General Provisions
Suspensions shall not exceed ninety (90) calendar days for any offense. The
Chief Administrative Officer or designee or department director has the option,
on a suspension of five (5) days or less, to prohibit the employee from
attending the work place or to allow the employee to work through the
suspension with pay. Fair Labor Standard Act exempt employees may not be
suspended for less than one (1) workweek. Disciplinary actions, with the
exception of dismissals, may be held in abeyance for no more than six (6)
months.. The Chief Administrative Officer, or designee, a department director
or an acting director may impose any discipline. A division manager may issue a
reprimand and suspend an employee for five (5) days or less after informing the
department director. An employee's immediate supervisor may issue a reprimand
after informing the division manager or department director.
No person except the Chief Administrative Officer shall discipline department
directors or the Internal Auditor. The Chief Administrative Officer shall not
discipline the Internal Auditor without the concurrence of the Internal Audit
Committee. The Internal Auditor may discipline other employees of the Office of
Internal Audit. The Director of Council Services may discipline other employees
of the Department of Council Services.
All disciplinary actions shall be noted in the employee's personnel file.
Disciplinary actions held in abeyance will not be forwarded to the personnel
file until the disciplinary action is served.
903.   GRIEVANCE RESOLUTION
The Grievance Resolution Procedure provides a means for reconciling complaints
concerning minor disciplinary actions and working conditions or departmental
rules. The purpose of this grievance procedure is to promote harmonious
relations among employees, supervisors and managers; to encourage the
settlement of disagreements informally at the employee-supervisor level; to
provide an orderly procedure to handle grievances through the various
supervisory levels when necessary; to resolve grievances as quickly as
possible; and to discourage the filing of unfounded grievances.
Grievances are formal written complaints of an employee concerning letters of
reprimand, suspensions of five (5) days or less, or application of existing
rules or policies.
The grievance procedure applies to all classified employees who are not covered
by collective bargaining agreements. Employees who claim to be aggrieved by the
interpretation or application of a collective bargaining agreement shall be
referred to the Labor-Management Relations Board.
Employees categorized as unclassified, probationary, seasonal or temporary are
not entitled to the rights provided in this section.
903.1   Grievable/Non-Grievable Issues
A.   To be grievable an issue must:
1.   Concern matters of specific incidents that have occurred; and
2.   Result from an act or omission by management regarding aspects of
employee-employer relations over which the department director has control; and
3.   Arise out of a specific situation or act that has resulted in inequity or
damage to the employee.
B.   An issue is not grievable if it is a matter which:
1.   Is subject to management rights which are necessary to exercise control
and discretion over the organization and efficiency of the operations of the
City and include the following rights:
a.   To direct the work of its employees; and
b.   To hire, promote, evaluate, transfer and assign employees; and
c.   To reprimand, suspend, demote or discharge employees for just cause; and
d.   To determine staffing requirements; and
e.   To maintain the efficiency of City government and ensure the continuation
of normal management functions; and
f.   To take actions as may be necessary to carry out the mission of City
government in emergencies; and
g.   To manage and exercise judgment on all matters not specifically prohibited
by law or by a collective bargaining agreement in effect between the City and
an employee organization.
2.   Would require modification of a policy established by the City Council,
state or federal law; or
3.   Has been reviewed via another grievance procedure (as authorized in a
collective bargaining agreement); or
4.   Is subject to review under the Personnel Rules and Regulation or another
administrative procedure; or
5.   Is subject to the provisions of the Labor-Management Relations Ordinance.
903.2   General Provisions
A.   Grievances may be initiated only by the employee concerned and may not be
pursued without the affected employee’s consent.
B.   Once a grievance has been investigated and denied, repeated filing of
grievances on the same issue will not be permitted.
C.   While the grievant may designate a representative at any step of the
grievance procedure, labor unions do not have representation rights for
nonbargaining unit employees. A grievance committee is not required to
recognize more than one (1) representative for any grievance.
D.   If the grievance involves a group of employees or if several employees
file separate grievances on the same matter, the grievances may be handled as a
single grievance.
E.   Whenever possible, grievances will be handled during regularly scheduled
work hours of the parties involved.
F.   If the day on which an action is to be taken falls on a Saturday, Sunday
or holiday, the action must be taken on the next business day.
G.   Any grievance will be considered resolved at the completion of any step if
all parties are satisfied or if the employee concerned chooses not to present
the matter to the next step of the procedure within the prescribed period.
H.   If the grievant refuses to appear or participate in the grievance
resolution procedure at any stage the grievant forfeits the right to use the
grievance resolution procedure to resolve that grievance.
I.   The department director shall ensure the grievant experiences no
retaliation for having pursued the grievance.
J.   The entire grievance resolution process shall operate without
discrimination, restraint, coercion, or reprisal on the part of any supervisor
or employee.
K.   The filing of a grievance, or the intention to file, does not relieve any
employee in any way of his or her responsibility to perform any and all of his
or her assigned duties promptly, efficiently and completely.
903.3   Grievance Procedure
A.   The grievance procedures consists of three (3) steps:
1.   Review by the City Mediation Program.
2.   Review by the department director.
3.   Investigation and recommendation by the Grievance Resolution Committee if
the dispute is determined to be grievable.
If the employee fails to take action at any step within the allotted time, the
grievance procedure will be concluded.
B.   The Chief Administrative Officer will issue an Administrative Instruction
establishing detailed grievance resolution procedures.
C.   The Human Resources Director shall develop written guidelines for the
operation of the Grievance Resolution Committee, addressing such issues as
confidentiality of information revealed to the Committee and bias or interest
of Committee members, and operating procedures.
904.   APPEAL FROM SUSPENSION, DEMOTION AND DISMISSAL
The appeal procedures offer a process by which an employee may appeal certain
disciplinary actions. An appeal is an employee’s challenge to a suspension
without pay for more than five (5) days, demotion for disciplinary reasons or
for dismissal.
Employees categorized as unclassified, probationary, seasonal and temporary are
not entitled to the rights provided in this section
904.1   Appeal Procedure
A.   An employee may appeal a disciplinary action to the Personnel Board within
ten (10) calendar days of the disciplinary decision. Such appeal shall be
submitted, in writing, to the Chief Administrative Officer with a copy to the
employee’s department director.
The appeal shall identify:
1.   Employee’s name;
2.   Department name;
3.   Employee’s title;
4.   Employee’s immediate supervisor;
5.   Discipline imposed and a brief summary of the offense for which the
discipline was imposed; and
6.   The reason the employee disagrees with the discipline imposed.
B.   Processing of the appeal may be delayed if all of the above information is
not included.
C.   The Chief Administrative Officer shall promptly refer the appeal to the
Personnel Board for a hearing on the matter. The Personnel Board shall refer
the appeal to a Hearing Officer, who shall schedule a hearing on the merits
within ten (10) calendar days after receiving the written request, unless both
the City and the employee agree to an extension of time. The hearing shall
generally take place during normal work hours.
D.   As soon as possible but in any event within thirty (30) calendar days
after concluding a hearing, the Hearing Officer shall transmit a report
containing a summary of the evidence, proposed findings of fact and
recommendation to the Personnel Board, the Chief Administrative Officer or
designee and the subject employee. The Chief Administrative Officer or designee
may grant a time extension in the event it is not feasible for the Hearing
Officer to meet this time limit. The City and employee may submit exceptions to
the Hearing Officer’s report and written argument within the time allowed by
the Personnel Board’s procedural rules.
E.   As soon as possible after the Personnel Board has received the
recommendation, it shall act; such action shall normally be within thirty (30)
days of transmittal of the Hearing Officer’s report. When deliberating on an
appeal the Personnel Board shall be limited to consideration of findings and
recommendations of the Hearing Officer, written submissions by the parties,
and/or, at the request of the Board, oral argument by the parties concerning
the evidence admitted at the hearing. The Board shall not hear any testimony.
The burden of proof is measured by a preponderance of the evidence. A tie vote
on the decision upholds the recommendation of the Hearing Officer.
The Board may take one (1) of the following actions:
1.   Accept the recommendation of the Hearing Officer and enter conclusions of
law consistent with the findings; or
2.   Reverse or modify the recommendation of the Hearing Officer by making its
own findings of fact consistent with the evidence and entering conclusions of
law consistent with the findings; or
3.   Remand the matter to a Hearing Officer for further hearing.
F.   The employee or the City may appeal the decision of the Personnel Board to
District Court within thirty (30) days after the date of the decision. The
decision shall be affirmed unless the decision is found to be:
1.   Arbitrary or capricious and unsupported by substantial evidence; or
2.   In violation of applicable constitutional provisions or otherwise illegal;
or
3.   In excess of the statutory authority or jurisdiction of the Board.
G.   The Personnel Board shall promulgate the rules of procedure for hearings
before Personnel Board Hearing Officers and its own meetings.
904.2   Hearing Officer Authority
The Personnel Hearing Officer has the authority to administer oaths, subpoena
witnesses and compel submissions of documents pertinent to an appeal.
904.3   Failure to Appear/Participate
Failure or refusal to appear or participate in the appeal hearing at any formal
stage by an aggrieved employee shall result in forfeiture by that employee of
any further right to utilization of the appeal procedures to resolve that
grievance.
904.4   Administration of the Appeal Procedure
The entire appeal process shall operate without discrimination, restraint,
coercion or reprisal on the part of any supervisor or employee.
904.5   Aggrieved Employee's Responsibility
The filing of an appeal, or the intention to file, does not relieve any
employee in any way of his or her responsibility to perform any and all of his
or her assigned duties promptly, efficiently and completely.
1000.   PERSONNEL AND MEDICAL RECORDS
The personnel records maintained by the Human Resources Department will be
considered the official personnel record of city employees. Departments and
supervisors may maintain separate files of their employees, however caution and
discretion must be exercised regarding content and access to those records.
1001.   PERSONNEL RECORDS
The Human Resources Department is responsible for maintaining required
data in the employee’s personnel record. An additional responsibility of
the Human Resources Department includes ensuring compliance with the
Inspection of Public Records Act and allowing access only to “public” records.
Employee information that should be maintained in the employee’s personnel file
and be accessible to the public with the exception of the
confidential information contained therein:
A.   Employee's application for employment and resume;
B.   Personnel Action Forms;
C.   PERA membership application/documents;
D.   Certifications, degrees, permits, licenses and awards;
Employee information that should be maintained in the employee’s personnel file
and is confidential includes:
A.   Letters of reference or evaluation;
B.   Performance evaluations;
C.   Letters of commendation/recommendation;
D.   Records relating to disciplinary action;
E.   Employee social security number
F.   Employee home address
G.   Employee home telephone number
1002.   ACCESS TO PUBLIC PERSONNEL RECORDS
Any person wishing to inspect public records may submit an oral or
written request to the Human Resources Department. In the event of an oral
request, the Human Resources Department will obtain the following
information in order to respond to the request: name, address and
telephone number of the person seeking access to records/information.
In order to ensure proper access to records/information, the individual must
identify the specific record or data that is being requested.
No individual file, in its entirety, may be inspected since individual records
are likely to contain privileged, restricted or confidential information.
1003.   ACCESS TO NON-PUBLIC PERSONNEL RECORDS
Upon written request by the employee or upon application for transfer or
promotion, access to non-public records will be provided only to the
following individuals:
A.   The employee who will have access to his or her own personnel file;
B.   The employee's representative in a City administered grievance or appeal
procedure;
C.   The employee's immediate supervisor, division and department director;
D.   Members of the Human Resources Department, Employee Relations Office,
Legal Department and the Office of the Chief Administrative Officer, as
required in the performance of their duties;
E.   Hiring supervisor(s) or staff member(s) responsible for selection in the
event an employee applies for transfer, promotion, rehire or reinstatement;
F.   Other individuals as authorized by the Human Resources Director.
1004.   IMMIGRATION REFORM AND CONTROL ACT INFORMATION
In accordance with the Immigration Reform and Control Act of 1986, employees
will be required to provide proof of identity and employment
eligibility. Documents provided, as proof will be maintained in the
Records section of the Human Resources Department separate from the
employee personnel files.
A.   Acceptable documents for establishing both identity and
employment eligibility include:
1.   U.S. passport (expired or unexpired); or
2.   Alien Registration Receipt Card or Permanent Resident Card, Form I-551; or
3.   An unexpired foreign passport that contains a temporary I-551 stamp; or
4.   An unexpired Employment Authorization Document that
contains a photograph, Form I-766, Form I-688A or Form I-688B; or
5.   In the case of a nonimmigrant alien authorized to work for
a specific employer incident to status, an unexpired foreign passport with an
Arrival-Departure Record, Form I-94, bearing the same name as the passport and
containing an endorsement of the alien’s nonimmigrant status, so long as
the period of endorsement has not yet expired and the
proposed employment is not in conflict with any restrictions
or limitations identified on the Form I-94.
B.   Acceptable documents for establishing identity for individuals sixteen
(16) years of age or older include:
1.   A State issued driver’s license or identification card
containing a photograph, or identifying information including:
 name, address, date of birth, sex, height, and color of eyes; or
2.   A school identification card with photograph; or
3.   A voter registration card; or
4.   A U.S. military card or draft record; or
5.   An identification card issued by federal, state, or local
government agencies or entities; or
6.   A military dependent identification; or
7.   Native American tribal documents; or
8.   A driver’s license issued by a Canadian Governmentauthority; or
9.   A United States Coast Guard Merchant Marine Card.
C.   Acceptable documents to establish employment authorization include:
1.   A social security number card other than one which has printed on its face
“not valid for employment purposes;” or
2.   A Certification of Birth Abroad issued by the Department of State, Form
FS-545; or
3.   A Certification of Birth Abroad issued by the Department of State, Form
DS-1350; or
4.   An original or certified copy of a birth certificate issued by
a state, county, municipal authority or outlying possession of the United
States bearing an official seal; or
5.   Native American tribal document; or
6.   United States Citizen Identification Card, INS Form I-197; or
7.   Identification card for use of resident citizen in the United States, INS
Form I-179; or
8.   An unexpired employment authorization document issued by the Immigration
and Naturalization Service.
1005.   MEDICAL RECORDS
Medical records pertaining to physical or mental conditions or treatment are
confidential and are not public records. All such records are the
property of the City of Albuquerque and will be maintained by the City’s
Employee Health Clinic. Any medical documents at the department level must
be maintained in a separate file apart from personnel information.
Accordingly, these records may be released only to the following:
A.   The employee, when requested in writing by the employee; or
B.   The employee's representative when authorized in writing by the
employee; or
C.   To the appropriate party, when ordered by a court; or
D.   Other individuals as authorized by the Chief Administrative
E.   Officer or Legal Department when such release is associated with a
claim or cause of action taken by the City against an employee, or former
employee of the City.
1006.   UPDATING PERSONNEL FILES
Employees are responsible for keeping their personnel records updated.
This includes but is not limited to education, experience, address, phone
number and emergency notification information.
1007.   REMOVAL OF MATERIAL FROM THE PERSONNEL RECORD
Disciplinary actions, which are the only type of documents that will be
considered for removal, must remain in the employee’s personnel file for a
minimum of five (5) years.
Requests to remove disciplinary actions from an employee’s personnel file
must be submitted in writing to the department director that initiated the
action or the current department director. If approved by the department
director concurrence must also be obtained from the Human Resources
Department Director prior to removing documentation from the employee’s
personnel file.
1008.   RECORDKEEPING REQUIREMENTS
All other records having to do with hiring, promotion, demotion, transfer,
layoff, or termination, rates of pay or other terms of compensation, and
selection for training or apprenticeship shall be preserved by the City for a
period of three (3) years from the date of the making of the record or the
personnel action involved, whichever occurs later.
1100. HUMAN RESOURCES DEPARTMENT (Substance Abuse Policy)
(Effective date: September 1, 2025)
TITLE    PERSONNEL RULES AND REGULATIONS
CHAPTER   1100 - Substance Abuse Policy
PART 1   City-Wide Policy
1.   Issuing Agency: The Human Resources Department and the Department of
Finance and Administrative Services Division of Risk Management, Risk
Management Division.
2.   Scope: These rules have general applicability to all prospective and
current employees of the City of Albuquerque. This includes classified and
unclassified employees, interns, volunteers, temporary, and seasonal employees.
3.   Statutory Authority: ROA, 1994, § 2-15-1, et seq.; Council Resolutions 65-
1995 and 78-1995; 21 U.S.C. § 812; 41 U.S.C. § 701; 21 C.F.R. §§ 1300.11
through 1300.15; 49 C.F.R. §§ 40, 382 and 655; ROA, 1994, § 3-1-1; ROA, 1994, §
3-21, NMSA 1978 §§ 26-2B-1 through -10.
4.   Duration: Until revoked.
5.   Effective Date: September 1, 2025 unless a later date is specified at the
end of a section.
6.   OBJECTIVE: This policy provides a safer environment for all employees and
the public and establishes guidelines to maintain a drug and alcohol-free
workplace. Specifically:
   A.   The City has a vital interest in maintaining safe, healthy, and
efficient working conditions for its employees. Being under the influence of
alcohol, or the presence of certain drugs in the body system, may pose serious
safety and health risks not only to the user but to all those in contact with
the user.
   B.   The City Council adopted an employee substance abuse and drug and
alcohol testing resolution and charged the Chief Administrative Officer to
promulgate a policy to implement those directives. This policy is adopted by
the Chief Administrative Officer to provide a detailed explanation of the City
of Albuquerque substance abuse policy, prohibitions, and procedures.
   C.   It is intended that this Substance Abuse Policy will be interpreted and
implemented in a manner consistent with all applicable anti-discrimination
requirements, including the Americans with Disabilities Act. To that end, all
supervisors and managers are required to use and apply all aspects of this
policy in an unbiased and impartial manner. Any supervisor or manager who
knowingly disregards the requirements of this policy, or who is found to
deliberately misuse the policy in regard to subordinates, shall be subject to
disciplinary action, up to and including termination.
7.   Definitions:
   A.   Accident. An occurrence associated with the operation of City
equipment, machinery or vehicles, if: (1) an individual dies; (2) an individual
suffers a bodily injury and immediately receives medical treatment away from
the scene of the accident; or (3) one or more vehicles incurs disabling damage
(defined herein) as the result of the occurrence and is transported away from
the scene by a tow truck or other vehicle.
   B.   Adulterated Specimen. A specimen that has been altered, as evidenced by
test results showing either a substance that is not a normal constituent for
that type of specimen or showing an abnormal concentration of an internally
produced substance.
   C.   Alcohol. The intoxicating agent in beverage alcohol, ethyl alcohol, or
other low molecular weight alcohols, including but not limited to methyl or
isopropyl, contained in any beverage, mixture, mouthwash, candy, food,
preparation or medication.
   D.   Alcohol Concentration. The alcohol in a volume of breath expressed in
terms of grams of alcohol per 210 liters of breath as measured by an evidential
breath testing device.
   E.   Breath Alcohol Technician (BAT). A person who instructs and assists
employees in the alcohol testing process and operates an evidential breath
testing device.
   F.   Canceled Test. A drug or alcohol test that has a problem identified
that cannot be or has not been corrected, or which this part otherwise requires
to be canceled. A canceled test is neither positive nor negative.
   G.   Childcare Employee. Any employee in the Child and Family Development
Division within the Youth and Family Services Department.
   H.   Collection Site. A place selected by the employer where employees
present themselves for the purpose of providing a specimen for a drug test and
for the purpose of providing breath for an alcohol test.
   I.   Commercial Motor Vehicle. Any self-propelled or towed vehicle used when
the vehicle has a gross vehicle weight rating or gross combination weight
rating of 26,001 or more pounds, or the vehicle is designated to transport more
than 15 passengers including the driver, or the vehicle is used in the
transportation of hazardous materials in a quantity requiring placarding.
   J.   DOT. All Department of Transportation agencies, including, but not
limited to, the US Coast Guard (USCG), the Federal Aviation Administration
(FAA), the Federal Railroad Administration (FRA), the Federal Motor Carrier
Safety Administration (FMCSA), the Federal Transit Administration (FTA), the
National Highway Traffic Safety Administration (NHTSA), the Research and
Special Programs Administration (RSPA) and the Office of the Secretary (OST).
These terms include any designee of a DOT agency.
   K.   Designated Employer Representative (DER). An employee authorized by the
employer to take immediate action to remove employees from safety- sensitive
duties and to make required decisions in testing. The DER also receives test
results and other communication for the employer consistent with the
requirements of 49 CFR §§ 40, 382, and 655, as amended.
   L.   Dilute Specimen. A urine specimen with creatinine and specific gravity
values that are lower than expected for human urine.
   M.   Disabling Damage. Damage which precludes the departure of any vehicle
from the scene of an accident in its usual manner in daylight after simple
repairs. This includes damage to vehicles that could have been operated but
would have been further damaged by that operation. This does not include:
damage which can be temporarily remedied at the scene of an accident without
special tools or parts; tire disablement without other damage even if no spare
tire is available; or damage to headlights, taillights, turn signals, horn,
mirrors or windshield wipers that makes them inoperative.
   N.   Emergency Call. A call for service which is responded to by Albuquerque
Fire Rescue, Albuquerque Community Safety Department or Albuquerque Police
Department, including Aviation Police and Open Space Officers.
   O.   Evidential Breath Testing Device (EBT) is a device approved by the
NHTSA for the evidential testing of breath for an alcohol concentration of 0.02
and greater. Approved devices are listed on the National Highway Traffic Safety
Administration (NHTSA) conforming products list.
   P.   HHS. The United States Department of Health and Human Services, or any
designee of the Secretary of that Department.
   Q.   Invalid Drug Test. The result reported by an HHS-certified laboratory
in accordance with the criteria established by HHS Mandatory Guidelines when a
positive, negative, adulterated, or substituted result cannot be established
for a specific drug or specimen validity test.
   R.   Legally Prescribed Drug. A drug for which an individual has a
prescription or other written approval from a physician for the use of a drug
in the course of medical treatment. This prescription or written approval must
include the patient’s name, the name of the substance, quantity/amount to be
taken, and the period of authorization.
   S.   Medical Review Officer (MRO). A licensed physician (medical doctor or
doctor of osteopathy) who is responsible for receiving and reviewing laboratory
results generated by the City's drug testing program and evaluating medical
explanations for certain drug test results, in accordance with applicable
federal regulations.
   T.   Negative Dilute. A drug test result which is negative for drug or drug
metabolites but has a specific gravity value lower than expected for a human
sample.
   U.   Negative Drug Test Result. The result reported by an HHS-certified
laboratory to an MRO when a specimen contains less than the cutoff
concentration of drug metabolites for the specific drug or drug class. The
specimen must be a valid specimen to be considered a negative drug test result.
   V.   Negative Alcohol Test Result. The result from an EBT device when the
Alcohol Concentration is less than 0.02.
   W.   Non-negative Test Result. A test result found to be adulterated,
substituted, invalid, or positive for drug metabolites.
   X.   Observed Collections. Collection of a sample under direct observation
by a person of the same self-identified gender as the person providing the test
sample.
   Y.   Positive Alcohol Test Result. The result for an alcohol test that
identifies an alcohol concentration of 0.02 or greater.
   Z.   Positive Drug Test Result. The result reported by an HHS-certified
laboratory when a specimen contains a drug metabolite concentration equal to or
greater than the cutoff concentrations for the specific drug or drug class.
   AA.   Positive Test Result. A positive drug test result, a positive alcohol
test result, or both.
   AB.   Prohibited Drug or Substance. Illegally Used Controlled Substances or
Drugs under the Drug-Free Workplace Act of 1988 (41 U.S.C. § 701), any drug or
any substance identified in Schedule I through V of Section 202 of the
Controlled Substance Act (21 U.S.C. § 812), and as further defined by 21 C.F.R.
§§ 1300.11 through 1300.15. This includes, but is not limited to: marijuana,
amphetamines, opioids, phencyclidine (PCP), and cocaine, as well as any drug
not approved for medical use by the U.S. Drug Enforcement Administration or the
U.S. Food and Drug Administration and any drug cited in 49 C.F.R. § 40.85, as
amended. The status of marijuana as a substance prohibited under this policy
will not change based upon state laws affecting recreational use or possession.
Illegal use includes use of any illegal drug, misuse of legally prescribed
drugs, and use of illegally obtained prescription drugs. Anabolic androgenic
agents are prohibited drugs for sworn members of the Albuquerque Police
Department.
   AC.   Public Safety Employees. Sworn members of the Albuquerque Police
Department, Fire Department, Metro Security Division, and employees of the
Community Safety Department who respond to Emergency Calls.
   AD.   Refusal to Test. A refusal to test includes, but is not limited to,
any of the following circumstance s:
      • Failure to appear for any test (excluding pre-employment) within a
reasonable time as determined by the employer, after being directed to do so by
the employer.
      • Failure to remain at the collection/testing site until the testing
process is complete;
      • Failure to provide a specimen for any required drug or alcohol test;
      • In the case of an observed collection in a drug test, failure to permit
the observation;
      • Failure to provide a sufficient sample when directed, and it has been
determined, through a required medical evaluation, that there was no adequate
medical explanation for the failure;
      • Failure to take an additional test the employer or collector has
directed;
      • Failure to undergo a medical examination or evaluation, as directed by
the MRO, as part of the verification process, or as directed by the employer as
part of the “shy bladder” or “shy lung” procedures;
      • Failure to cooperate with any part of the testing process (e.g.,
refusal to empty pockets or wash hands when directed by the collector, behaving
in a confrontational way that disrupts the collection process, or deviating
from the collection process, in any way, once notified of collection);
      • Verbal or written refusal to provide a breath or other fluid specimen;
      • For an observed collection, failure to follow the observer’s
instructions to raise your clothing above the waist, lower clothing and
underpants, and to turn around to permit the observer to determine if you have
any type of prosthetic or other device that could be used to interfere with the
collection process;
      • Possessing or wearing a prosthetic or other device that could be used
to interfere with the collection process;
      • Admission to the collector or MRO that the specimen was adulterated or
substituted;
      • Providing an adulterated or substituted test result, as verified by the
MRO;
      • Failure or refusal to sign Step 2 of the alcohol testing form.
      • Failure to remain at the scene of an accident prior to submission to
drug/alcohol tests without a legitimate explanation;
      • Failure to refrain from consuming alcohol within eight (8) hours
following involvement in an accident without first having submitted to post
accident drug or alcohol tests; or
      • Providing false information in connection with a drug test.
   AE.   Safety-Sensitive Employee. A City employee who (i) is in a Safety-
Sensitive Position or performs the duties of a Safety-Sensitive Position as
their regular duties, as determined by the Director of the Human Resources
Department.
   AF.   Safety-Sensitive Position. A City position which the Director of the
Human Resources Department has determined should be classified as safety-
sensitive. At a minimum, under Part 1 of this policy all Public Safety
Employees, all Childcare Employees, and employees with access to Controlled
Substances will be classified in a Safety-Sensitive Position. The following
criteria shall be used as a guide for determining additional positions to be
classified as safety-sensitive; the extent to which the job responsibilities
impact upon the safety of the public; the extent to which the job
responsibilities expose the employee or co-worker to hazardous conditions; and,
the extent to which the job responsibilities require responsibility for the
physical safety of others.
   AG.   Substance Abuse Counselor (SAC). A licensed or certified physician
(medical doctor or doctor of osteopathy), licensed or certified psychologist,
social worker, employee assistance professional, or addiction counselor who may
or may not be qualified to act as a SAP under 49 CFR § 40 and to whom employees
who voluntarily seek treatment of a pending drug and/or alcohol abuse problem
before testing positive through the City’s testing program or under any one of
the tests listed and defined by this policy.
   AH.   Substance Abuse Professional (SAP). A licensed or certified physician
(medical doctor or doctor of osteopathy), psychologist, social worker, employee
assistance professional, or addiction counselor (certified by the National
Association of Alcoholism and Drug Abuse Counselors Certification Commission or
by the International Certification Reciprocity Consortium/Alcohol and other
Drug Abuse) with knowledge of and clinical experience in the diagnosis and
treatment of drug and alcohol related disorders and who is qualified to act as
a SAP under 49 C.F.R. § 40.
   AI.   Substituted Specimen. A verified specimen with creatinine and specific
gravity values that are so diminished or so divergent that they are not
consistent with a normal human sample.
   AJ.   Validity Testing. The evaluation of the specimen to determine if it is
consistent with a normal human sample.
   AK.   Verified Negative Result. A drug test result reviewed by a medical
review officer and determined not to contain prohibited drugs or their
metabolites at or above the cutoff levels specified in 49 C.F.R. § 40, as
amended or specified in Appendix A for Expanded Panel tests.
   AL.   Verified Positive Result. A drug test result reviewed by a medical
review officer and determined to contain prohibited drugs or their metabolites
at or above the cutoff levels specified in 49 C.F.R. § 40, as amended or
specified in Appendix A for Expanded Panel tests.
8.   Applicability
Part 1 of Chapter 1100 applies to public safety employees and all other
employees who have been designated safetysensitive pursuant to the City’s own
authority. Part 1 of Chapter 1100 also requires reasonable suspicion and post-
accident testing for all City employees.
9. EDUCATION AND TRAINING
   A.   This policy shall be provided to every City employee. Training and
education programs shall be made available.
   B.   Supervisors will receive a minimum of sixty minutes of drug and alcohol
specialized training designed to promote the necessary skills to:
      (1)   Inform employees of this policy;
      (2)   Enforce this policy;
      (3)   Identify the signs of drug and alcohol use,
      (4)   Intervene constructively, and
      (5)   Integrate an employee effectively back into his work group
following intervention and treatment.
   C.   Non-supervisory employees will receive a minimum of sixty minutes
training on the effects and consequences of prohibited drug and alcohol use on
personal health, safety, and the work environment.
10. Prohibitions
   A.   Prohibited Conduct
      (1)   Employees are prohibited from reporting for duty or remaining on
duty any time there is a quantifiable presence of a prohibited substance in the
body at or above the minimum thresholds defined in 49 C.F.R. § 40, as amended,
or defined in Appendix A for Expanded Panel tests unless subject to a below
defined exception.
      (2)   Employees are prohibited from misusing or abusing of prescription
and/or non- prescription drugs while performing City business.
      (3)   Employees are prohibited from using any Prohibited Drug or
Substance or beverages containing alcohol or substances containing alcohol
(e.g., mouthwash that contains alcohol, medication that contains alcohol, food
that contains alcohol, or candy that contains alcohol) while performing City
business.
      (4)   Employees are prohibited from consuming alcohol or any Prohibited
Drug or Substance while performing job functions or while on-call to perform
job functions. If an on-call employee has consumed alcohol, they must
acknowledge the use of alcohol at the time that they are called to report for
duty. The employee will subsequently be relieved of his on-call
responsibilities and may be subject to disciplinary action.
      (5)   Employees are prohibited from reporting to work or remaining on
duty while having an alcohol concentration of 0.02 or greater regardless of
when the alcohol was consumed.
      (6)   Employees are prohibited from consuming alcohol or any Prohibited
Drug or Substance for eight (8) hours following involvement in an accident or
until they submit to the post-accident drug and alcohol test, whichever occurs
first.
      (7)   Employees are prohibited from consuming alcohol or any Prohibited
Drug or Substance within four (4) hours prior to the performance of job
functions.
      (8)   Employees are prohibited from possessing any amount of alcohol or
any Prohibited Drug or Substance while on duty, unless the alcohol is
manifested and is being transported as part of a shipment.
      (9)   Employees are prohibited from consuming alcohol or any Prohibited
Drug or Substance during lunch periods, rest breaks, split shift breaks, or
anytime the employee is in uniform.
      (10)   Consistent with the Drug-free Workplace Act of 1988 (41 U.S.C. §
701) and the Personnel Rules and Regulations, employees are prohibited from
engaging in the unlawful manufacture, distribution, dispensing, possession, or
use of or any Prohibited Drug or Substance in the workplace including City
premises, City vehicles, while in uniform or while on City business.
      (11)   Supervisors are prohibited from permitting any employee to perform
or continue to perform their job functions if the supervisor has actual
knowledge that the employee is using or has used alcohol, has used a Prohibited
Drug or Substance, or has adulterated or substituted a test specimen for
alcohol or any Prohibited Drug or Substance.
   B.   Exceptions
      (1)   The appropriate use of legally prescribed drugs and non-
prescription medications is not prohibited. However, any prescription or non-
prescription substance which carries a warning label that indicates that mental
functioning, motor skills, or judgment may be adversely affected must be
reported to the Department Director or Departmental Designee, in accordance
with the Personnel Rules and Regulations. This report must be made within
seventy-two (72) hours of the prescription initially being filled or before the
employee begins utilizing the substance, whichever is sooner. If the employee
is able to perform their job functions while under the influence of it, they
are required to provide a written release from their personal physician
indicating that they can perform their job functions while under the influence
of the substance. This release must be provided before the employee begins
utilizing the substance or with seventy-two hours of the prescription being
initially filled, whichever is sooner. The release must be provided to the
Employee’s direct supervisor and the Employee’s Department Director or
designee. If an employee is unable to perform their job functions while under
the influence of the substance, the Department Director must contact human
resources to discuss potential reassignment or potential accommodation in
accordance with the Americans with Disabilities Act. An employee who does not
disclose the use of a substance that carries such a warning may be subject to
disciplinary action, up to and including termination.
11.   DRUG STATUTE CONVICTION
   Consistent with the Drug Free Workplace Act of 1988 (41 U.S.C. § 701), all
employees have a duty to notify their immediate supervisor or the Human
Resources Director of the City of any criminal drug statute conviction for a
violation occurring in the workplace within five days after such conviction.
Failure to comply with this provision shall result in disciplinary action, up
to and including termination.
12. Testing Requirements AND Procedures
   A.   Testing Requirements
      (1)   All employees may be tested for marijuana, cocaine, amphetamines,
opioids, or phencyclidine.
      (2)   In addition to the substances above, sworn members of Albuquerque
Police, Aviation Police and Open Space Officers may also be tested for
barbiturates, benzodiazepines, methadone, methaqualone, propoxyphene, and
anabolic androgenic agents.
   B.   Drug Testing Procedures.
      (1)   All drug and alcohol testing shall be conducted in a manner to
assure a high degree of accuracy and reliability. All City drug and alcohol
testing will be conducted using techniques, equipment, and laboratory
facilities which have been approved by HHS. All testing will be conducted
consistent with the procedures put forth in 49 C.F.R. § 40, as amended.
      (2)   Sworn members of the Albuquerque Police Department will be tested
consistent with the procedures in Appendix A.
      A single collection for both steroids and drugs of at least 60 mL will be
collected using the split specimen collection method. For tests involving
elevated testosterone levels, any positive samples will go through additional
carbon isotope testing to determine whether the levels are naturally occurring
before the positive results are reported to the Department.
      (3)   The procedures will be performed in a private, confidential manner
and every effort will be made to protect the employee, the integrity of the
drug testing procedure, and the validity of the test result.
      (4)   Consistent with 49 C.F.R. § 40, as amended, collection under direct
observation with no advance notice will occur if:
         (a)   the laboratory reports to the MRO that a specimen is invalid,
and the MRO reports to the employer that there was not an adequate medical
explanation for the result;
         (b)   the MRO reports to the employer that the original positive,
adulterated, or substituted test result had to be cancelled because the test of
the split specimen could not be performed;
         (c)   the collector observes materials brought to the collection site
or the employee’s conduct clearly indicates an attempt to tamper with a
specimen;
         (d)   the temperature on the original specimen was out of range;
         (e)   the MRO reports a negative-dilute result with a creatine
concentration greater than or equal to 2 mg/dL but less than or equal to 5mg/
dL; or
         (f) .
   C.   Alcohol Testing Procedures.
      (1)   Tests for breath alcohol concentration will be conducted utilizing
a National Highway Traffic Safety Administration (NHTSA)-approved Evidential
Breath Testing device (EBT) operated by a trained Breath Alcohol Technician
(BAT). If the initial test indicates an alcohol concentration of 0.02  or
greater, a second test will be performed to confirm the results of the initial
test. The confirmatory test must occur on an EBT. The confirmatory test will be
conducted at least fifteen minutes after the completion of the initial test.
The confirmatory test will be performed using a NHTSA-approved EBT operated by
a trained BAT. The EBT will identify each test by a unique sequential
identification number. This number, time, and unit identifier will be provided
on each EBT printout. The EBT printout along with an approved alcohol testing
form will be used to document the test, the subsequent results, and to
attribute the test to the correct employee. The test will be performed in a
private, confidential manner in accordance with 49 C.F.R. § 40, as amended. The
procedure will be followed as prescribed to protect the employee and to
maintain the integrity of the alcohol testing procedures and validity of the
test result.
      (2)   An employee who has a confirmed alcohol concentration of 0.02 or
greater will be considered a positive alcohol test and in violation of this
policy. The BAT will notify the Substance Abuse Program Manager.
      (3)   The city affirms the need to protect individual dignity, privacy,
and confidentiality throughout the testing process. If at any time the
integrity of the testing procedures or the validity of the test results is
compromised, the test will be canceled. Minor inconsistencies or procedural
flaws that do not impact the test result will not result in a cancelled test.
      (4)   In accordance with 49 C.F.R. § 40, as amended, the alcohol testing
form shall be used for all required testing. After an employee is made aware of
the requirement and consequences of failure to sign, failure to sign Step 2 of
the form will be considered a refusal to test.
13. Testing
   A.   Pre-Employment Testing.
      (1)   Applicants applying for Safety-Sensitive jobs and non-safety-
sensitive employees moving into a Safety-Sensitive Position, are required to
undergo pre-employment testing.
      (2)   All offers of employment for Safety-Sensitive Positions shall be
extended conditional upon the applicant passing a drug test. An applicant shall
not be hired into a Safety-Sensitive Position unless the applicant takes a drug
test with a verified negative result.
      (3)   A non-Safety-Sensitive employee shall not be placed, transferred or
promoted into a Safety-Sensitive Position until the employee takes a drug test
with a Verified Negative Result.
      (4)   If an applicant fails a pre-employment drug test, the conditional
offer of employment shall be rescinded. Failure of a pre-employment drug test
will disqualify an applicant for employment with the city for a period of one
year. Evidence of the absence of drug dependency from a Substance Abuse
Professional that meets with 49 C.F.R. § 40, as amended, and the approval of
the City and a pre-employment Verified Negative Result will be required prior
to further consideration for employment. The cost for the assessment and any
subsequent treatment will be the sole responsibility of the applicant.
      (5)   When an employee being placed, transferred, or promoted from a non-
Safety-Sensitive Position to a SafetySensitive Position submits a drug test
with a Verified Positive Result, the employee shall be subject to disciplinary
action in accordance with Section 14 of this Policy.
      (6)   If a pre-employment, pre-transfer, or promotion test is cancelled,
the city will require the applicant to take and pass another pre-employment
drug test.
      (7)   All applicants or employees being placed, transferred, or promoted
from a non-Safety-Sensitive Position to a Safety Sensitive Position are
required to execute an authorization form allowing the City to obtain past drug
and alcohol test results, including any refusals to test, from each company for
whom the employee worked for the previous two (2) years.
      (8)   In instances where a Safety-Sensitive Employee is on extended leave
for a period of ninety (90) days or more regardless of reason, the employee
will be required to take a drug test and have a negative test result prior to
the conduct of safety-sensitive job functions. A Verified Positive Result will
result in disciplinary action in accordance with Section 14 of this Policy.
   B.   Reasonable Suspicion Testing
      (1)   Any employee of the City shall be required to undergo a drug and
alcohol test if there is reasonable suspicion that the employee's alcohol or
drug use could impair job performance or safety or both.
      (2)   Reasonable suspicion shall mean that there is objective evidence,
based upon known specific, contemporaneous, articulable observations of the
employee's appearance, behavior, speech or body odor that would lead a
reasonable person to believe that the employee:
         (a)   is under the influence of alcohol or drugs while on duty; or,
         (b)   is in possession of or using, transferring, selling or
purchasing alcohol or drugs during work hours including lunch or break or while
on City property or in a city vehicle; or,
         (c)   is a Public Safety Employee who has recently illegally
possessed, transferred, used or sold a Prohibited Drug or Substance?
      (3)   An employee's admission of abuse of alcohol or use of a Prohibited
Drug or Substance to a supervisor in his chain of command, an EAP Counselor, or
a provider of medical services under contract to the City shall constitute
reasonable suspicion when the use or abuse could impair job performance, safety
or both and the employee is not already a participant in a drug, alcohol, or
drug and alcohol treatment program.
      (4)   The Department shall be responsible for transporting the employee
to the testing site. Supervisors are to avoid placing themselves or others into
situations which might endanger the physical safety of those present. The
impacted employee shall be placed on leave with pay status in accordance with
the Personnel Rules and Regulations. An employee who refuses an instruction to
submit to a drug, alcohol, or drug and alcohol test shall not be permitted to
finish his or her shift and shall immediately be placed on leave with pay
status pending disciplinary action in accordance with the Results and Appeals
section herein.
      (5)   When an employee reports to the Employee Health Center for
treatment or examination and the health care provider has a reasonable
suspicion that the employee is a substance abuser, the health care provider
shall refer the employee to the DER who shall refer the employee to the SAC for
substance abuse testing and assessment. The DER shall notify the appropriate
department director or his designee who shall place the employee on leave with
pay status in accordance with the Personnel Rules and Regulations. 
      (6)   An employee who submits a breath and/or other fluid sample for a
reasonable suspicion drug and alcohol test which is determined to be a Verified
Positive Result shall be subject to disciplinary action in accordance with
Section 14 of this policy.
      (7)   Any employee who refuses to submit to a breath and/or other fluid
sample for a reasonable suspicion drug and alcohol test shall be subject to
disciplinary action in accordance with Section 14 of this policy.
   C. Post-Accident Testing
      (1)   As soon as practicable following an accident as defined in these
regulations, the appropriate department director or designee shall cause the
drug and alcohol testing of any employee whose performance could have
contributed to the accident using the best information available at the time of
the decision.
      (2)   If, during the course of the accident investigation, the supervisor
has reasonable suspicion that the employee may be under the influence of
alcohol or drugs, the supervisor will ensure that a reasonable suspicion drug
and alcohol test is conducted as outlined in Section 13(B) of this policy. The
employee shall be placed on administrative leave with pay in accordance with
Personnel Rules and Regulations until the test result is available.
      (3)   The appropriate department director or designee shall ensure that
an employee required to be tested under this section is tested as soon as
practicable and within eight (8) hours of the accident. An employee who is
subject to postaccident testing who fails to remain readily available for such
testing, including notifying a supervisor of his or her location if he or she
leaves the scene of the accident prior to submission to such test, may be
deemed to have refused to submit to testing.
      (4)   Nothing in this section shall be construed to require the delay of
necessary medical attention for the injured following an accident or to
prohibit an employee from leaving the scene of an accident for the period
necessary to obtain assistance in responding to the accident or to obtain
necessary emergency medical care.
      (5)   In the rare event the city is unable to perform a city drug and
alcohol test (i.e., employee is unconscious, employee is detained by law
enforcement agency), the city may use drug and alcohol post-accident test
results administered by State or local law enforcement officials in lieu of the
city test. The State or local law enforcement officials must have independent
authority for the test and the employer must obtain the results in conformance
with state and local law.
   D. Random Testing
      (1)   Safety-Sensitive Employees are subject to random selection for drug
and alcohol testing with no more than two hours’ notice. The selection of
employees shall be made by a scientifically valid method of randomly generating
an employee identifier from the appropriate pool of Safety-Sensitive Employees
(as described below).
         (a)   The dates for administering unannounced testing of randomly-
selected employees shall be spread reasonably throughout the calendar year;
and,
         (b)   The number of Safety-Sensitive Employees randomly selected for
drug/alcohol testing during the calendar year shall be not less than twenty-
five (25) percent of the total number of employees in the pool.
      (2)   Each Safety-Sensitive Employee shall be in a pool from which random
selection is made. Each safety-sensitive employee in the pool shall have an
equal chance of selection and shall remain in the pool, whether or not the
employee has been previously tested. There is no discretion on part of
management in the selection and notification of the individuals who are to be
tested.
      (3)   There shall be five (5) pools of Safety-Sensitive Employees from
which employees can be randomly selected. Each pool shall be maintained
separately and no employee may be placed in more than one pool except as noted
below. The pools shall be designated as follows:
         (a)   Employees designated as safety-sensitive by Federal Transit
Authority regulations;
         (b)   Employees required to operate a commercial motor vehicle (other
than Federal Transit Authority designated employees);
         (c)   Public Safety Employees;
         (d)   Police officers whose primary duty is the detection and
suppression of drug law violations, who shall appear in two pools; and
         (e)   All other Safety-Sensitive Employees.
      (4)   An employee who submits to a breath and/or other fluid sample for a
random drug and alcohol test which is determined to be a verified positive test
result will be disciplined in accordance with Section 14 of this policy.
      (5)   An employee who refuses to submit to a random drug and alcohol test
will be disciplined in accordance with Section 14 of this policy.
      (6)   Employees are required to proceed immediately to the collection
site upon notification of their random selection, unless they are responding to
an emergency call as defined above. In such cases, an employee responding to an
emergency call who has been notified of his random selection must proceed to
the collection site as soon as possible, but in no cases beyond two hours of
notification. Should the two-hour time limit expire while an employee is
responding to an emergency call, the employee shall contact a supervisor as
soon as possible for further instruction.
   E.   Return-to-Duty Testing
   All Employees who previously tested positive on a drug or alcohol test must
test negative for drugs, alcohol (below 0.02 for alcohol), or both and be
evaluated and released by the SAP before returning to work. For an initial
positive drug test, a Return-to-Duty drug test is required and an alcohol test
is allowed. For an initial positive alcohol test, a Return-to-Duty alcohol test
is required and a drug test is allowed. Following the initial assessment, the
SAP will recommend a course of rehabilitation unique to the individual. The SAP
should schedule the Return-to-Duty test only when the employee is known to be
drug- and alcohol-free and there is no risk to public safety. An employee who
submits to a breath and/or other fluid sample for a Return to-Duty test which
is determined to be a positive test result or a refusal to test will be
disciplined in accordance with Section 14 of this policy. Return-to-Duty
testing is conducted when the employee is off duty.
   F.   Follow-up Testing
   All employees who test positive on a drug and/or alcohol test shall be
subject to disciplinary action in accordance with Section 14 of this policy. In
the event an employee returns to duty following a positive drug and/or alcohol
test, the provisions of this section apply. Such employees will be required to
undergo frequent, unannounced drug and alcohol testing following their Return-
to-Duty. The follow-up testing will be performed for a period of one to five
years with a minimum of six tests to be performed the first year. The frequency
and duration of the follow-up tests (beyond the minimums) will be determined by
the SAP reflecting the SAP’s assessment of the employee’s unique situation and
recovery progress. Followup testing should be frequent enough to deter and/or
detect a relapse. Follow-up testing is separate and in addition to random,
post-accident, reasonable suspicion, and return-to-duty testing. An employee
who submits a breath and/or other fluid sample for a follow-up drug/alcohol
test which is determined to be a positive test result or a refusal to test will
be disciplined in accordance with Section 14 of this policy.
14. RESULTS, DISCIPLINE, AND APPEALS
   A.   Result of Drug/Alcohol Test
      (1)   All testing results shall be reported to the Medical Review Officer
or designee. If the test results are negative, the Medical Review Officer or
designee will notify the appropriate parties.
      (2)   If the City's laboratory reports the results as non-negative, the
City’s Medical Review Officer shall determine the validity of the results and
provide the employee with the opportunity to discuss the test results. If the
Medical Review Officer finds a valid medical explanation (i.e., prescription,
medical treatment) for the non-negative test result, the MRO will verify and
report this test as negative and no action will be taken. If the MRO’s
assessment finds no valid medical explanation for the non-negative result, he
will verify the test as positive or refusal to test, and copies of the testing
records shall be provided to the Substance Abuse Program Manager and the
department director.
      (3)   Upon notice of a Verified Positive Result from a drug and/or
alcohol test, or a refusal to submit to a test, the Department Director or
designee shall place the employee on paid administrative leave and notify the
Director of Human Resources.
   B.   Discipline
      (1)   Refusal to Test – All Employees. Any employee who refuses a drug or
alcohol test ordered under this policy shall be subject to termination. Such a
refusal shall be deemed both a verified positive test result and a direct act
of insubordination.
      (2)   Public Safety Employees
         (a)   Unless subject to a defined exception below, the first instance
of a Verified Positive Result from a sample submitted by a Public Safety
Employee or Childcare Employee for a drug or alcohol test under this policy
shall result in termination from City Employment.
         (b)   Exceptions.
            (i)   Anabolic Androgenic Agents. If an employee of the Albuquerque
Police Department receives a first Verified Positive Result for anabolic
androgenic agents, that employee is eligible for the Second Chance program.
            (ii)   Alcohol Concentration between .02 and .04. If a Public
Safety Employee or Childcare Employee (i) receives a Verified Positive Result,
as a result of a random test for alcohol, with an alcohol concentration between
.02 and .039 and (ii) meets the eligibility criteria set forth below for the
Second Chance Program, the applicable department director, in their sole
discretion, may refer the employee to the Second Chance Program in lieu of
termination. A Public Safety Employee or Childcare Employee who receives a
Verified Positive Result with an alcohol concentration between .02 and .039 as
the result of a pre-employment test, reasonable suspicion test or a post-
accident test is not eligible for the Second Chance Program.
      (3)   All Other Employees
         (a)   Second Chance Eligibility. An employee is eligible for the
Second Chance Program for a Verified Positive Result from a sample submitted by
an employee for drug or alcohol test under this policy if all of the below
criteria are met:
            (i)   This is the first instance of a Verified Positive Result;
            (ii)   In the case of a non-Safety-Sensitive Employee, the Verified
Positive Result was obtained pursuant to a pre employment (transfer or
promotion), random, or reasonable suspicion drug and alcohol test;
            (iii)   The employee has been employed with the city for at least
two calendar years;
            (iv)   The employee has not received a suspension or suspensions
totaling six days or more in the preceding two years; and
            (v)   The employee has not received a suspension for tardiness or
absenteeism in the preceding year.
         (b)   If an employee is ineligible for or refuses the Second Chance
Program, a Verified Positive Result from a sample submitted by an employee for
a drug or alcohol test under this policy shall result in termination from City
Employment (e.g., an employee who tests positive in a post-accident test is
ineligible and subjection to termination).
      (4)   Second Chance Program. The Second Chance Program is comprised of
the following:
         (a)   The employee will be disciplined with twenty-eight (28) calendar
days leave without pay suspension, always to commence on the first Saturday
following issuance of the Notice of Final Action/Disciplinary Action.
         (b)   Mandatory referral to the City’s EAP Substance Abuse Counselor
(SAC) for admission into the City’s Substance Abuse Program (SAP). The SAC will
perform a substance use assessment, formulate a treatment plan, provide a
referral to an appropriate treatment provider, and communicate follow-up
recommendation to the SAP manager or designee.
            (i)   The SAP manager or designee will execute a Return-to-Duty
Agreement. An employee’s failure to sign and comply with a Return-to-Duty
agreement will result in termination from City employment.
            (ii)   DOT (FTA/FMCSA) Employees will be referred to the City’s
Contracted Substance Abuse Professional (SAP) for services related to
assessment, formulation of a treatment plan and referral to a substance use
provider.
         (c)   The employee must comply with the Return-to-Duty agreement by:
submitting to a drug/alcohol test immediately prior to returning to work with a
Verified Negative Result; cooperating with the SAC recommended treatment
program (as determined by the SAC); and agreeing to periodic unannounced
follow-up testing. The cost of any treatment or rehabilitation services will be
paid directly by the employee or their insurance provider. If the SAC has not
released the employee to return to-duty at the completion of the 28-day
suspension, the employee will be allowed to take accrued leave to participate
in the SAC prescribed treatment program. If no accrued leave time is available,
the employee shall be placed on leave without pay in accordance with the
Personnel Rules and Regulations. Any leave taken, either paid or unpaid, shall
be considered leave taken under the Family and Medical Leave Act.
   C.   Grievance and Appeal
      (1)   The determination by the Medical Review Officer that a drug test is
a Verified Positive Result or is a refusal to test is not a medical
determination that is subject to appeal under the Personnel Rules and
Regulations.
      (2)   An employee who is subject to termination or other disciplinary
action pursuant to this policy may grieve the termination or other disciplinary
action pursuant to the provisions of the Merit System Ordinance or applicable
collective bargaining agreement.
      (3)   Any employee who questions the results of a required drug test may
request that the split sample be tested. The split sample test must be
conducted at a second HHS-certified laboratory with no affiliation with the
laboratory that analyzed the primary specimen. The test must be conducted on
the split sample that was provided by the employee at the same time as the
primary sample. All costs for such testing are paid by the employee, unless the
result of the split sample test invalidates the result of the original test.
The method of collecting, storing, and testing the split sample will be
consistent with the procedures set forth in 49 C.F.R. § 40, as amended. The
employee’s request for a split sample test must be made to the Medical Review
Officer within 72 hours of notice of the original sample verified test result.
Requests after 72 hours will only be accepted at the discretion of the MRO was
beyond the control of the employee. The city will ensure that the cost of the
split specimen is covered in order for a timely analysis of the sample;
however, the city will seek reimbursement for the split sample test from the
employee.
      (4)   An employee who has reason to believe he was not properly
designated as a Safety-Sensitive Employee subject to drug and alcohol testing
shall appeal their safety-sensitive designation to the Director of the Human
Resources Department within thirty (30) calendar days of notification that his
position has been designated as safety-sensitive. The Director of the Human
Resources Department shall make an inquiry into the claim and forward the
determination along with the employee’s appeal to the City’s Hearing Officer.
Such an appeal shall not be available to police officers, transport officers,
security officers, animal services officers, firefighters, and those whose
positions which were designated safety-sensitive by Federal regulation. The
Hearing Officer shall provide a written decision to the Chief Administrative
Officer. This decision shall not be subject to further appeal.
15.   INFORMATION DISCLOSURE
   A.   Drug and alcohol testing records shall be maintained by the Substance
Abuse Program Manager and, except as provided below or by law, the results of
any drug or alcohol test shall not be disclosed without express consent of the
tested employee.
   B.   Records of a verified positive drug test result, positive alcohol test
result, or a refusal to test shall be released to the employee's department
director or designee, Substance Abuse Program Manager, and SAC.
   C.   Records of an employee's drug and alcohol tests shall be released to
the adjudicator in a grievance, lawsuit or other proceeding initiated by or on
behalf of the tested individual arising from the results of the drug and
alcohol test.
   D.   The employee, upon written request, is entitled to obtain copies of any
records pertaining to their use of prohibited drugs or misuse of alcohol
including and drug or alcohol testing records. Employees have the right to gain
access to any pertinent records such as equipment calibration records and
records of laboratory certifications. Employees may not have access to follow-
up testing plans. If so requested, the requesting Employee must pay the cost to
obtain these records.
16.   INCORPORATION AND ENFORCEABILITY
   A.   Incorporation. This policy incorporates by reference the cited federal
law and regulations as in effect at the time this policy is issued. This policy
shall be deemed automatically modified by any amendment or modification to such
federal laws and regulations. Employees shall be given notice of these changes.
   B.   Enforceability. The invalidity or unenforceability of any provision of
this policy shall not affect any other provision hereof, and the policy shall
be construed in all respects as if such invalid of unenforceable provision was
omitted. Should any part of this Agreement or any provision contained herein be
declared invalid by any tribunal of competent jurisdiction, the validity of the
remaining portions shall not be affected. Should this occur, the parties will
immediately meet to negotiate a suitable provision to replace the provision
held invalid.
History:
This Policy was adopted by the City of Albuquerque Chief Administrative Office,
pursuant to City Council Bill No. R-237, on April 17, 1995;
The City enacted a Substance Abuse Policy in 1999; revised February 6, 2006
(retroactive to January 1, 2006); the Second Judicial District Court
invalidated the discipline portions of the 2006 policy in New Mexico
Transportation Union v. City of Albuquerque, No. CV-2005-0129; Administrative
7-1-2) effective November 3, 2009 (2-8-11, 2-17-11). A revised version of this
policy was enacted on February 1, 2012, and disciplinary portions thereof, as
applied to certain bargaining unit members represented by the American
Federation of State, County, and Municipal Employees, were invalidated by the
City of Albuquerque Labor-Management Relations Board on September 24, 2018 (LB
12-02). A revised version of the policy was enacted on June 26, 2015,
provisions of which were affected by the subsequent ruling on the 2012 policy.
The City enacted a revision of this policy on May 15, 2024 to update the policy
and memorialize agreements with applicable labor unions.
Appendix A
Procedures for the expanded panel tests for sworn members of the Albuquerque
Police Department Positive Tests
1.   A licensed physician shall be responsible for receiving laboratory results
generated by the City’s expanded panel drug testing program who has knowledge
of substance abuse disorders and has appropriate medical training to interpret
and evaluate an individual’s positive test result together with his or her
medical history and any other relevant bio-medical information. The Medical
Review Officer (MRO) contracted by the City to review the positive expanded
panel drug tests shall be that licensed physician.
2.   All procedures for the collection and verification of positive results in
the expanded panel tests will follow the same procedures as in DOT 49 C.F.R. §
40, as amended with the addition of the following:
   A.   When a police officer has a positive test for any one of the drugs
listed below, the MRO will contact the employee and verify the test. A verified
positive test result will be delivered to Substance Abuse Program Manager, who
will notify the Chief of Police.
   B.   If the MRO verifies that the officer has a valid prescription for a
drug listed on the expanded panel, the test will be verified as negative, but
the MRO will discuss with the officer the requirement that the officer needs to
inform the department that a prescription medication covered under the expanded
panel testing program is being used.
   C.   The MRO will inform the officer that the Substance Abuse Program
Manager will be notified of the use of a listed medication and the possible
need to inform the Chief of Police or designee.
   D.   The MRO will inform the Substance Abuse Program Manager that a police
officer has been prescribed medication covered under this testing program. The
Substance Abuse Program Manager designee will contact the immediate supervisor.
   E.   If appropriate, the supervisor may ask for an in-service physical in
order to determine fitness for duty. Any one of the Employee Health Center’s
licensed physicians may conduct this physical. If necessary, the police officer
may be assigned alternative duty.
3.   Verification of positive results will be based on the levels in 49 C.F.R.
§ 40 unless the following cut off levels are more stringent than the federal
requirements:
Substance Abuse Forensic Evaluation (Expanded Panel/Non-DHHS)
Drug Screening Cut-offs GC/MS Confirmation Cut-offs
Drug                      Screening Cut-offs GC/MS Confirmation Cut-offs
Amphetamines              < 500 ng/mL        250 ng/mL
Barbiturates              < 200 ng/mL        200 ng/mL
Benzodiazepines           < 200 ng/mL        200 ng/mL
Cannabinoids (Marijuana)  < 50 ng/mL         15 ng/mL
Cocaine                   < 150 ng/mL        100 ng/mL
Methadone                 < 300 ng/mL        qualitative tests*
Methaqualone              < 300 ng/mL        qualitative tests*
Codeine/Morphine          < 2000 ng/mL       2000ng/mL
Hydrocodone/Hydromorphone < 300 ng/mL        100 ng/mL
Oxycodone/Oxymorphone     < 100 ng/mL        100 ng/mL
6-Acetylmorphine          < 10 ng/mL         10 ng/mL
Phencyclidine             < 25 ng/mL         25 ng/mL
Propoxyphene              < 300 ng/mL        qualitative tests*
 
*Presence only detected
4.   Verification of positive results for anabolic androgenic agents will
include any amount of the following agents, unless specified otherwise:
Anabolic Agent Screening Cut off, if applicable
Anabolic Agent                  Screening Cut off, if applicable
1-Androstendiol                  
1-Androstendione                 
Androstendiol                    
Androstendione                   
Bolasterone                      
Boldenone                        
Boldione                         
Calusterone                      
Clenbuterol                      
Clostebol                        
Danazol                          
Dehydrochloromethyltestosterone  
Dehydroepiandrotestosterone      
Desoxymethyltestosterone         
Dihydrotestosterone              
Drostanediol                     
Drostanolone
Epitestosterone                 < 200 ng/mL
Estra-4,9-dien-3,17-dione        
Ethylestrenol                    
Fluoxymesterone                  
Formebolone                      
Formestane                       
Furazabol                        
4-Hydroxytestosterone            
6a-Methylandrostendione          
Mestanolone                      
Mesterolone                      
Methandienone                    
Methasterone                     
Methenolone                      
Methandriol                      
Methylnortestosterone            
Methyl-1-testosterone            
Methyltestosterone               
Mibolerone                       
Nandrolone                      2 ng/mL
19-Norandrostendiol              
19-Norandrostendione             
Norclostebol                     
Norethandrolone                  
Oxabolone                        
Oxandrolone                      
Oxymesterone                     
Oxymetholone                     
Probenecid                       
Prostanozol                      
Quinbolone                       
Stanozolol                       
Stenbolone                       
Testolactone                     
1-Testosterone                   
Testosterone                    T/E ratio > 6
Trenbolone                       
 
Appendix B
SYSTEM CONTACTS
Any questions regarding this policy or any other aspect of the substance abuse
policy should be directed to the following individual(s). Names and contracted
vendors are as of the date of adoption and may change from time to time without
a formal amendment of the rule.
Substance Abuse Program:      City of Albuquerque FA Risk
Title:                        Manager of the Substance Abuse Program
Address:                      1 Civic Plaza NW, Suite 200 Albuquerque, NM 87103
Telephone Number:             (505) 768-3165
                              
Medical Review Office:        Workforce QA
Title:                        Medical Review Officer
Address:                      1430 S. Main St. #475, SaltLake City, UT 84115
Telephone Number:             (801) 486-5400
                              
Anabolic Androgenic Agents:   Workforce QA
Title:                        Medical Review Officer
Address:                      1430 South Main St. #475, Salt Lake City, UT
                              84115
Telephone Number:             (801) 486-5400
                              
Substance Abuse Professional:  
Name:                         The Solutions Group
Title:                        Substance Abuse Professional
Address:                      5801 Osuna NE, Suite A-105 Albuquerque, NM 87109
Telephone Number:             (505) 254-3555
                              
DHHS Certified Laboratory:    Primary Specimen
Name:                         Quest Diagnostics Incorporated
Corporate Address:            10101 Renner Blvd., Lenexa, KS 66219
 
PART 2   Commercial Driver’s License Policy
1.   ISSUING AGENCY: The Human Resources Department and the Division of Risk
Management, of the Department of Finance and Administrative Services.
2.   SCOPE: These rules have general applicability to all prospective and
current employees, classified and unclassified, who hold or will hold a
commercial driver’s license and perform or will perform safety-sensitive job
functions on any City commercial motor vehicle.
3.   STATUTORY AUTHORITY: ROA, 1994, § 2-15-1, et seq.; Council Resolutions 65-
1995 and 78-1995; 21 U.S.C. § 812;  41 U.S.C. § 701; 49 U.S.C. § 31,301; 21
C.F.R. §§ 1300.11 through 1300.15; 49 C.F.R. §§ 40, 382 and 655; ROA, 1994, §
3-1-1; ROA, 1994, § 3-2-1.
4.   DURATION: Until revoked.
5.   EFFECTIVE DATE: September 1, 2025, unless a later date is specified at the
end of a section.
6.   OBJECTIVE: This policy provides a safer environment for all employees and
the public and establishes guidelines to maintain a drug and alcohol-free
workplace. Specifically:
   A.   The City has a vital interest in maintaining safe, healthy, and
efficient working conditions for its employees. Being under the influence of
alcohol, or the presence of certain drugs in the body system, may pose serious
safety and health risks not only to the user but to all those in contact with
the user.
   B.   The City Council adopted an employee substance abuse and drug and
alcohol testing resolution and charged the Chief Administrative Officer to
promulgate a policy to implement those directives. This policy is adopted by
the Chief Administrative Officer to provide a detailed explanation of the City
of Albuquerque substance abuse policy, prohibitions, and procedures.
   C.   It is intended that this Substance Abuse Policy will be interpreted and
implemented in a manner consistent with all applicable anti-discrimination
requirements, including the Americans with Disabilities Act. To that end, all
supervisors and managers are required to use and apply all aspects of this
policy in an unbiased and impartial manner. Any supervisor or manager who
knowingly disregards the requirements of this policy, or who is found to
deliberately misuse the policy in regard to subordinates, shall be subject to
disciplinary action, up to and including termination.
7. DEFINITIONS
   A.   Accident. An occurrence associated with the operation of City
equipment, machinery or vehicles, if as a result (1) an individual dies; (2) an
individual suffers a bodily injury and immediately receives medical treatment
away from the scene of the accident; or (3) one or more vehicles incurs
Disabling Damage as the result of the occurrence and is transported away from
the scene by a tow truck or other vehicle.
   B.   Adulterated Specimen. A specimen that has been altered, as evidenced by
test results showing either a substance that is not a normal constituent for
that type of specimen or showing an abnormal concentration of an endogenous
substance.
   C.   Alcohol. The intoxicating agent in beverage alcohol, ethyl alcohol, or
other low molecular weight alcohols, including but not limited to methyl or
isopropyl, contained in any beverage, mixture, mouthwash, candy, food,
preparation or medication.
   D.   Alcohol Concentration. The alcohol in a volume of breath expressed in
terms of grams of alcohol per 210 liters of breath as measured by an evidential
breath testing device.
   E.   Breath Alcohol Technician (BAT). A person who instructs and assists
employees in the alcohol testing process and operates an evidential breath
testing device.
   F.   Canceled Test. A drug or alcohol test that has a problem identified
that cannot be or has not been corrected, or which this part otherwise requires
to be canceled. A canceled test is neither positive nor negative.
   G.   C.F.R. Any references herein to the Code of Federal Regulations
(C.F.R.) shall refer to the most recent enactment, as it shall be from time to
time.
   H.   Collection Site. A place selected by the employer where employees
present themselves for the purpose of providing a specimen for a drug test and
for the purpose of providing breath for an alcohol test.
   I.   Commercial Motor Vehicle. Any self-propelled or towed vehicle used when
the vehicle has a gross vehicle weight rating or gross combination weight
rating of 26,001 or more pounds, or the vehicle is designated to transport more
than 15 passengers including the driver, or the vehicle is used in the
transportation of hazardous materials in a quantity requiring placarding.
   J.   Covered Employee. A City employee who is required to hold a commercial
driver’s license and performs safetysensitive job functions on any City
commercial motor vehicle.
   K.   DOT. All Department of Transportation agencies, including, but not
limited to, the US Coast Guard (USCG), the Federal Aviation Administration
(FAA), the Federal Railroad Administration (FRA), the Federal Motor Carrier
Safety Administration (FMCSA), the Federal Transit Administration (FTA), the
National Highway Traffic Safety Administration (NHTSA), the Research and
Special Programs Administration (RSPA) and the Office of the Secretary (OST).
These terms include any designee of a DOT agency.
   L.   Designated Employer Representative (DER). An employee authorized by the
employer to take immediate action to remove employees from safety-sensitive
duties and to make required decisions in testing. The DER also receives test
results and other communication for the employer, consistent with the
requirements of 49 C.F.R. §§ 40, 382 and 655, as amended.
   M.   Dilute Specimen. A urine specimen with creatinine and specific gravity
values that are lower than expected for human urine.
   N.   Disabling Damage. Damage which precludes the departure of any vehicle
from the scene of the occurrence in its usual manner in daylight after simple
repairs, which includes damage to vehicles that could have been operated but
would have been further damaged if so operated, but does not include damage
which can be remedied temporarily at the scene of the occurrence without
special tools or parts, tire disablement without other damage even if no spare
tire is available, or damage to headlights, taillights, turn signals, horn,
mirrors or windshield wipers that makes them inoperative.
   O.   Evidential Breath Testing Device (EBT) is a device approved by the
NHTSA for the evidential testing of breath at the 0.02 and greater alcohol
concentrations. Approved devices are listed on the National Highway Traffic
Safety Administration (NHTSA) conforming products list.
   P.   HHS. The Department of Health and Human Services or any designee of the
Secretary, Department of Health and Human Services.
   Q.   Invalid Drug Test. The result reported by an HHS-certified laboratory
in accordance with the criteria established by HHS Mandatory Guidelines when a
positive, negative, adulterated, or substituted result cannot be established
for a specific drug or specimen validity test.
   R.   Legal Prescribed Drugs: A drug for which an individual has a
prescription or other written approval from a physician for the use of a drug
in the course of medical treatment. This prescription or written approval must
include the patient’s name, the name of the substance, quantity/amount to be
taken, and the period of authorization.
   S.   Medical Review Officer (MRO). A licensed physician (medical doctor or
doctor of osteopathy) who is responsible for receiving and reviewing laboratory
results generated by the City's drug testing program and evaluating medical
explanations for certain drug test results.
   T.   Negative Dilute. A drug test result which is negative for drug/drug
metabolites but has a specific gravity value lower than expected for a human
specimen.
   U.   Negative Drug Test Result. The result reported by an HHS-certified
laboratory to an MRO when a specimen contains no drug or the concentration of
the drug is less than the cutoff concentration for the drug or drug class and
the specimen is a valid specimen.
   V.   Negative Alcohol Test Result. The result from an EBT test when a Breath
Alcohol Concentration (BAC) of less than 0.02.
   V.   Non-negative Test Result. A test result found to be adulterated,
substituted, invalid, or positive for drug/drug metabolites.
   W.   Observed Collections. Consistent with 49 C.F.R. § 40, as amended,
collection under direct observation (by a person of the same gender) with no
advance notice will occur if (1)the laboratory reports to the MRO that a
specimen is invalid, and the MRO reports to the employer that there was not an
adequate medical explanation for the result; (2) the MRO reports to the
employer that the original positive, adulterated, or substituted test result
had to be canceled because the test of the split specimen could not be
performed; (3) the collector observes materials brought to the collection site
or the employee’s conduct clearly indicates an attempt to tamper with a
specimen; (4) the temperature on the original specimen was out of range; (5)
the MRO reports a negative-dilute result with a creatine concentration greater
than or equal to 2 mg/dL but less than or equal to 5mg/dL; or (6) The test is a
return-to-duty or follow-up test.
   X.   Positive Alcohol Test Result. The result for an alcohol test that
confirms an alcohol concentration of 0.02 BAC or greater
   Y.   Positive Drug Test Result. The result reported by an HHS-certified
laboratory when a specimen contains a drug or drug metabolite equal to or
greater than the cutoff concentrations.
   Z.   Positive Test Result. A positive drug test result, a positive alcohol
test result, or both.
   AA.   Prohibited Drug. Illegally Used Controlled Substances or Drugs under
the Drug-Free Workplace Act of 1988 (41 U.S.C. § 701), any drug or any
substance identified in Schedule I through V of Section 202 of the Controlled
Substance Act (21 U.S.C. § 812), and as further defined by 21 C.F.R. §§ 1300.11
through 1300.15. This includes, but is not limited to: marijuana, amphetamines,
opioids, phencyclidine (PCP), and cocaine, as well as any drug not approved for
medical use by the U.S. Drug Enforcement Administration or the U.S. Food and
Drug Administration and any drug cited in 49 C.F.R. § 655.21. The status of
marijuana as a substance prohibited under this policy will not change based
upon state laws affecting recreational use or possession. Illegal use includes
use of any illegal drug, misuse of legally prescribed drugs, and use of
illegally obtained prescription drugs. Federal Transit Administration drug
testing regulations (49 CFR § 655, as amended) require that all covered
employees be tested for Drugs including marijuana, cocaine, opioids,
amphetamines, or phencyclidine at levels at or above the minimum thresholds
specified in 49 C.F.R. § 40, as amended.
   AB.   Public Safety Employees. Sworn members of the Albuquerque Police and
Fire and Rescue Departments, members of the Aviation Police, Open Space
Rangers, animal services personnel, transport and security officers.
   AC.   Refusal to Test. A refusal to test includes, but is not limited to,
the following circumstances:
      • Failure to appear for any test (excluding pre-employment) within a
reasonable time, as determined by the employer, after being directed to do so
by the employer.
      • Failure to remain at the collection/testing site until the testing
process is complete;
      • Failure to provide a specimen for any drug or alcohol test required by
49 C.F.R. § 40, as amended or DOT agency regulations;
      • In the case of a directly observed or monitored collection in a drug
test, failure to permit the observation or monitoring of your provision of a
specimen;
      • Failure to provide a sufficient sample when directed, and it has been
determined, through a required medical evaluation, that there was no adequate
medical explanation for the failure;
      • Failure or decline to take  an additional  test the employer or
collector has directed you to take;
      • Failure to undergo a medical examination or evaluation, as directed by
the MRO as part of the verification process, or as directed by the employer as
part of the “shy bladder” or “shy lung” procedures;
      • Failure to cooperate with any part of the testing process (e.g.,
refusal to empty pockets when so directed by the collector, behaving in a
confrontational way that disrupts the collection process, failure to wash hands
as directed to do so by the collector, deviating from the collection process,
in any way, once notified of collection)
      • Verbal or written refusal to provide a breath or other fluid specimen;
      •[https://export.amlegal.com/media/
015ecd2245ccd7aecbd5d365cd857e7d8df180cd/IMAGES/0-0-0-1606.gif] For an observed
collection, failure to follow the observer’s instructions to raise your
clothing above the waist, lower clothing and underpants, and to turn around to
permit the observer to determine if you have any type of prosthetic or other
device that could be used to interfere with the collection process;
      •[https://export.amlegal.com/media/
015ecd2245ccd7aecbd5d365cd857e7d8df180cd/IMAGES/0-0-0-1608.gif] Possessing or
wearing a prosthetic or other device that could be used to interfere with the
collection process;
      •[https://export.amlegal.com/media/
015ecd2245ccd7aecbd5d365cd857e7d8df180cd/IMAGES/0-0-0-1610.gif] Admission to
the collector or MRO that the specimen was adulterated or substituted;
      • If the MRO reports that there is a verified adulterated or substituted
test result;
      • Failure or refusal to sign Step 2 of the alcohol testing form.
      • Failure to remain at the scene of an accident prior to submission to
drug/alcohol tests without a legitimate explanation;
      • Failure to refrain from consuming alcohol within eight (8) hours
following involvement in an accident without first having submitted to post
accident drug/alcohol tests;
      • Providing false information in connection with a drug test; and
      • Engaging in conduct that clearly obstructs the testing process.
   AD.   Revenue Service Vehicles. All transit vehicles that are used for
passenger transportation service or that require a CDL to operate, and include
all ancillary vehicles used in support of the transit system.
   AE.   Safety-Sensitive Employee. A City employee who performs the duties of
a safety-sensitive position as determined by the Director of the Human
Resources Department.
   AF.   "Safety-Sensitive Functions on a Commercial Motor Vehicle” include (a)
driving; (b) time spent waiting to be dispatched; (c) inspecting, servicing, or
conditioning equipment; (d) being in or on a commercial vehicle (except in a
sleeper berth); (e) loading or unloading, including supervising or assistance
in loading or unloading, attending a vehicle being loaded or unloaded,
remaining in readiness to operate the vehicle, giving or receiving receipts for
a shipment being loaded or unloaded; (f) repairing, obtaining assistance, or
attending a disabled vehicle.
   AG.   Substance Abuse Counselor (SAC). A licensed physician (medical doctor
or doctor of osteopathy) or licensed or certified psychologist, social worker,
employee assistance professional, or addiction counselor who may or may not
also be qualified to act as a SAP under 49 C.F.R. § 40 and to whom employees
who voluntarily seek treatment of a pending drug and/or alcohol abuse problem
before testing positive through the City’s testing program or under one of the
tests listed and defined in Numbered Section 13 of this Policy.
   AH.   Substance Abuse Professional (SAP). A licensed physician (medical
doctor or doctor of osteopathy) or licensed or certified psychologist, social
worker, employee assistance professional, or addiction counselor (certified by
the National Association of Alcoholism and Drug Abuse Counselors Certification
Commission or by the International Certification Reciprocity Consortium/Alcohol
and other Drug Abuse) with knowledge of and clinical experience in the
diagnosis and treatment of drug and alcohol related disorders and who is
qualified to act as a SAP under 49 C.F.R. § 40.
   AI.   Substituted Specimen. A verified specimen with creatinine and specific
gravity values that are so diminished or so divergent  that they are not
consistent with a normal human sample .
   AJ.   Validity Testing. The evaluation of the specimen to determine if it is
consistent with a normal human sample. The purpose of validity testing is to
determine whether certain adulterants or foreign substances were added to the
sample, if the sample was dilute, or if the sample was substituted.
   AK.   Verified Negative Test. A drug test result reviewed by a medical
review officer and determined not to contain prohibited drugs or their
metabolites at or above the cutoff levels specified in 49 C.F.R. § 40, as
amended.
   AL.   Verified Positive Test. A drug test result reviewed by a medical
review officer and determined to contain prohibited drugs or their metabolites
at or above the cutoff levels specified in 49 C.F.R. § 40, as amended.
8.   PURPOSE AND APPLICABILITY
   A.   Purpose
      (1)   The City of Albuquerque has adopted this policy to ensure that City
services requiring the use of a Commercial Driver’s License (CDL) are delivered
safely, efficiently, and effectively by establishing a drug and alcohol-free
work environment, and to ensure that the workplace remains free from the
effects of drugs and alcohol in order to promote the health and safety of
employees and the general public. Additionally, the City of Albuquerque
declares that the unlawful manufacturing, distributing, dispensing, possessing,
or using of controlled substances or misuse of alcohol is prohibited for
safety-sensitive employees.
      (2)   The purpose of this policy is to establish guidelines to maintain a
drug and alcohol-free workplace in compliance with the Drug-Free Workplace Act
of 1988 (41 U.S.C. § 701), and the Omnibus Transportation Employee Testing Act
of 1991 (49 U.S.C. § 31,301). Specifically, the Federal Motor Carrier Safety
Administration (FMCSA) of the U.S. Department of Transportation has published
49 C.F.R. § 382, as amended, that mandates drug testing and breath alcohol
testing for safety-sensitive positions and prohibits performance of safety-
sensitive functions when there is a positive test result. The U. S. Department
of Transportation (USDOT) has also published 49 C.F.R. § 40, as amended, that
sets standards for the collection and testing of drug and breath specimens.
      (3)   Any provisions set forth in this policy that are included under the
sole authority of the City and are not  provided under the authority of the
above-named Federal regulations are underlined.
   B.   Applicability
      (1)   This part of the City’s Substance Abuse Policy applies to all City
employees (full, part-time, or volunteers) who are required to hold a
Commercial Driver’s License (CDL), and who perform safety-sensitive functions
as defined by the FMCSA. CDL holders who work for the City Transit Department
are covered under Part 3 of the policy that covers Safety Sensitive employees
that fall under the authority of the Federal Transit Administration. Other City
employees that do not have CDLs are covered under Part 1 of the City’s
Substance Abuse Policy.
      (2)   All Safety-Sensitive employees returning to duty after a suspension
or termination, whether by decree or settlement, as well as any safety-
sensitive employee returning to the workplace after any absence of ninety (90)
days or more, will be required to take a drug test and have a negative result
prior to the performance of safety-sensitive job functions.
      (3)   A Safety-Sensitive function is any duty related to the safe
operation of a commercial vehicle including the following activities:
         (a)   All driving time,
         (b)   All times a CDL holder is waiting to be dispatched, unless the
driver has been relieved from duty by the employer. This includes being on-call
or available to work at a moment’s notice,
         (c)   Inspecting, servicing, or conditioning a commercial vehicle at
any time,
         (d)   All time being in or upon any commercial vehicle except time
spent in a sleeping berth,
         (e)   Loading or unloading, including supervising or assisting in
loading or unloading, attending a vehicle being loaded or unloaded, remaining
in readiness to operate the vehicle, giving or receiving receipts for a
shipment being loaded or unloaded,
         (f)   Repairing, obtaining assistance, or attending a disabled
vehicle.
9. EDUCATION AND TRAINING
   A.   The City of Albuquerque Commercial Driver’s License Substance Abuse
Policy will be made available to every covered employee who will also have
access to the corresponding federal regulations including 49 C.F.R. §§ 40 and
382, as amended. In addition, all covered employees will receive educational
materials explaining the DOT’s requirements and the City’s policies and
procedures to meet those requirements. In addition to this policy, the City
will provide covered employees with information concerning:
      (1)   the effects of drugs and alcohol on an individual’s health, work,
and personal life;
      (2)   the signs and symptoms of a drug or alcohol problem; and
      (3)   the available methods of intervention when a problem does exist.
   B.   Each covered employee is required to certify that he has been given a
copy of this policy and other drug and alcohol information by the City.
Applicants for employment are also required to execute the certification as a
condition of employment. Existing covered employees who refuse to execute this
required certification will be subject to discipline.
   C.   All supervisory personnel who are in a position to determine driver
reasonable suspicion fitness for duty will receive 60 minutes of reasonable
suspicion training on the physical, behavioral, and performance indicators of
probable drug use and 60 minutes of additional reasonable suspicion training on
the physical, behavioral, speech, and performance indicators of probable
alcohol misuse. Under the City’s own authority, supervisory personnel will also
be trained on how to intervene constructively, and how to effectively integrate
an employee back into his work group following intervention and treatment.
10. PROHIBITIONS
   A.   Prohibited Conduct
      (1)   Covered employees are prohibited from reporting for duty or
remaining on duty requiring the performance of safety sensitive functions any
time there is a quantifiable presence of a prohibited drug in the body above
the minimum thresholds defined in 49 C.F.R. § 40, as amended. Employees may
also, under City Authority, be tested for any drug or any substance identified
in Schedule 1 through V of Section 202 of the Controlled Substance Act (21
U.S.C. § 812), and as further defined in 21 C.F.R. §§ 1300.11 through 1300.15.
An exception is allowed when the use is pursuant to the instructions of a
licensed medical practitioner who has advised the driver that the substance
will not adversely affect the driver’s ability to drive.
      (2)   Covered employees are prohibited from consuming alcohol while
performing safety-sensitive job functions or while on-call to perform safety-
sensitive job functions. If an on-call employee has consumed alcohol, they must
acknowledge the use of alcohol at the time that they are called to report for
duty. The covered employee will subsequently be relieved of his on-call
responsibilities and may be subject to disciplinary action.
      (3)   The City shall not permit any covered employee to perform or
continue to perform safety-sensitive functions if it has actual knowledge that
the employee is using or has used alcohol, has used a controlled substance, or
has adulterated or substituted a test specimen for controlled substances.
      (4)   Covered employees are prohibited from reporting to work or
remaining on duty requiring the performance of safety sensitive functions while
having an alcohol concentration of 0.02  or greater regardless of when the
alcohol was consumed.
      (5)   Covered employees are prohibited from consuming alcohol for eight
(8) hours following involvement in an accident or until he submits to the post-
accident drug and alcohol test, whichever occurs first.
      (6)   No covered employee shall consume alcohol within four (4) hours
prior to the performance of safety-sensitive job functions.
      (7)   Covered employees are prohibited from possessing any amount of
alcohol while on duty requiring the performance of a safety-sensitive job
function, unless the alcohol is manifested and is being transported as part of
a shipment.
      (8)   The City under its own authority also prohibits the consumption of
alcohol during lunch periods, rest breaks, split shift breaks, or anytime the
employee is in uniform.
      (9)   Consistent with the Drug-free Workplace Act of 1988 (41 U.S.C. §
701) and Personnel Rules and Regulations, all covered employees are prohibited
from engaging in the unlawful manufacture, distribution, dispensing,
possession, or use of prohibited substances in the work place including City
premises, City vehicles, while in uniform or while on City business.
   B.   Exceptions
      (1)   Legal Drugs: The appropriate use of legally prescribed drugs and
non-prescription medications is not prohibited. Except for medication
containing alcohol, nothing in this Policy prohibits a driver’s use of a
medication legally prescribed by a licensed physician: (a) who is familiar with
the driver’s medical history and specific safety-sensitive duties, and (b) who
has advised the driver that the prescribed medication will not adversely affect
the driver’s ability to operate a motor vehicle.
         (a)   However, the use of any substance which carries a warning label
that indicates that mental functioning, motor skills, or judgment may be
adversely affected must be reported to supervisory personnel. This report must
be made within seventy-two (72) hours of the prescription initially being
filled or before the employee begins utilizing the substance, whichever is
sooner. In addition, the employee must obtain a written release from the
personal physician releasing the person to perform their duties any time they
obtain a performance-altering prescription.
11. DRUG STATUTE CONVICTION
   A.   Consistent with the Drug Free Workplace Act of 1988 (41 U.S.C. § 701),
all employees are required to notify their immediate supervisor or the Human
Resources Director of the City in writing of any criminal drug statute
conviction for a violation occurring in the workplace within five days after
such conviction. Failure to comply with this provision shall result in
disciplinary action, up to and including termination.
12. TESTING REQUIREMENTS AND PROCEDURES
   A. Testing Requirements
      (1)   Analytical drug testing and breath testing for alcohol will be
conducted as required by Federal regulations . All covered employees shall be
subject to testing prior to employment, for reasonable suspicion, following an
accident, and random as defined in the Testing rules of this policy. All
covered employees who have tested positive for drugs or alcohol on a random, or
reasonable suspicion will be tested prior to returning to duty after completion
of the Substance Abuse Professional's recommended treatment program and
subsequent release to duty. Follow-up testing will also be conducted following
return to duty for a period of one to five years, with at least six tests
performed during the first year. The duration and frequency of the following up
testing above the minimum requirements will be at the discretion of the
Substance Abuse Professional.
      (2)   A drug test can be performed any time a covered employee is on
duty. An alcohol test can be performed just before, during, or after the
performance of a safety-sensitive job function.  Under City authority, an
alcohol test can be performed any time a covered employee is on duty.
      (3)   All covered employees will be subject to drug testing and breath
alcohol testing as a condition of ongoing employment with the City. Any safety-
sensitive employee who refuses to comply with a request for testing shall be
removed from duty and subject to discipline as defined in the Results and
Appeals Section of this policy. A test refusal constitutes a positive test
result and a direct act of insubordination. Any covered employee who is
suspected of providing false information in connection with a drug test, or who
is suspected of falsifying test results through tampering, contamination,
adulteration, or substitution will be required to undergo an observed
collection. Verification of the above listed actions will be considered a test
refusal and will result in the employee’s removal from duty and discipline as
defined in  the Results and Appeals Section of  this policy. Additionally,
refer to the Definitions. for all circumstances that constitute a Refusal to
Test. The City of Albuquerque has a zero-tolerance policy for refusing to test.
   B. Drug Testing Procedures
      (1)   Testing shall be conducted in a manner to assure a high degree of
accuracy and reliability and using techniques, equipment, and laboratory
facilities which have been approved by the U.S. Department of Health and Human
Service (HHS). All testing will be conducted consistent with the procedures put
forth in 49 C.F.R. § 40, as amended. The procedures will be performed in a
private, confidential manner and every effort will be made to protect the
employee, the integrity of the drug testing procedure, and the validity of the
test result.
      (2)   The drugs that will be tested for include marijuana, cocaine,
opioids, amphetamines, and phencyclidine. After the identity of the donor is
checked using picture identification, a specimen will be collected using the
split specimen collection method described in 49 C.F.R. § 40 as amended. Each
specimen will be accompanied by a DOT Chain of Custody and Control Form and
identified using a unique identification number that attributes the specimen to
the correct individual. The specimen analysis will be conducted at a HHS
certified laboratory. An initial drug screen and validity test will be
conducted on the primary specimen. Specimen validity testing will be conducted
on all specimens provided for testing under FMCSA authority. Specimen validity
testing is the evaluation of the specimen to determine if it is consistent with
normal human sample. The purpose of the validity testing is to determine
whether certain adulterants or foreign substances were added to the specimen,
if the specimen was diluted, or if the specimen was substituted. For those
specimens that are not negative, a confirmatory Gas Chromatography/Mass
Spectrometry (GC/MS) test will be performed. The test will be considered
positive if the amounts of the drug(s) and/or its metabolites identified by the
GC/MS test are above the minimum thresholds established in 49 C.F.R. § 40, as
amended.
      (3)   The test results from the HHS certified laboratory will be reported
to a Medical Review Officer (MRO). A MRO is a licensed physician with detailed
knowledge of substance abuse disorders and drug testing. The MRO will review
the test results to ensure the scientific validity of the test and to determine
whether there is a legitimate medical explanation for a non-negative,
substituted, or adulterated test result. The MRO will attempt to contact the
employee to notify the employee of the non-negative laboratory result, and
provide the employee with an opportunity to explain the confirmed laboratory
test result. The MRO will subsequently review the employee’s medical history/
medical records as appropriate to determine whether there is a legitimate
medical explanation for a non-negative laboratory result. If no legitimate
medical explanation is found, the test will be verified positive or refusal to
test and reported to the Substance Abuse Program Manager and the Department
Program Coordinator. If a legitimate explanation is found, the MRO will report
the test result as negative, to the City, and no further action will be taken.
If a test is invalid without a medical explanation, a retest will be conducted
under direct observation. If a test is a negative-dilute, a retest will not be
conducted, the result of the original test will stand as the test of record.
      (4)   Any covered employee who questions the results of a required drug
test under Testing sections of this policy may request that the split sample be
tested. The split sample test must be conducted at a second HHS-certified
laboratory with no affiliation with the laboratory that analyzed the primary
specimen. The test must be conducted on the split sample that was provided by
the employee at the same time as the primary sample. All costs for such testing
are paid by the employee unless the result of the split sample test invalidates
the result of the original test. The method of collecting, storing, and testing
the split sample will be consistent with the procedures set forth in 49 C.F.R.
§ 40, as amended. The employee's request for a split sample test must be made
to the Medical Review Officer within 72 hours of notice of the original sample
verified test result. Requests after 72 hours will only be accepted at the
discretion of the MRO if the delay was due to documentable facts that were
beyond the control of the employee. Employees do not have access to a test of
their split specimen following an invalid result. The City will ensure that the
cost for the split specimen is covered in order for a timely analysis of the
sample; however, the City will seek reimbursement for the split sample test
from the employee.
      (5)   If the analysis of the split specimen fails to confirm the presence
of the drug(s) detected in the primary specimen; if the split specimen is not
able to be analyzed; or if the results of the split specimen are not
scientifically adequate; the MRO will declare the original test to be canceled
and will direct the employer to retest the employee under direct observation.
      (6)   The split specimen will be stored at the initial laboratory until
the analysis of the primary specimen is completed. If the primary specimen is
negative, the split will be discarded. If the primary is positive, the split
will be retained for testing if so requested by the employee through the
Medical Review Officer. If the primary specimen is positive, it will be
retained in frozen storage for one year and the split specimen will be retained
for one year.
      (7)   Observed Collections. Consistent with 49 C.F.R. § 40, as amended,
collection under direct observation (by a person of the same gender) with no
advance notice will occur if:
         (a)   The laboratory reports to the MRO that a specimen is invalid,
and the MRO reports to the employer that there was not an adequate medical
explanation for the result; or
         (b)   The MRO reports to the employer that the original positive,
adulterated, or substituted test result had to be canceled because the test of
the split specimen could not be performed; or
         (c)   The collector observes materials brought to the collection site
or the employee’s conduct clearly indicates an attempt to tamper with a
specimen; or
         (d)   The temperature on the original specimen was out of range; or
         (e)   The MRO reports a negative-dilute result with a creatine
concentration greater than or equal to 2 mg/dL but less than or equal to 5 mg/
dL; or
         (f)   The test is a return-to-duty or follow-up test.
   C.   Alcohol Testing Procedures
      Alcohol: The use of beverages containing alcohol or substances (including
any mouthwash, medication, food, candy) or any other substances such that
alcohol is present in the body while performing a safety-sensitive job
function. An alcohol test can be performed on a covered employee under 49
C.F.R. § 382 just before, during, or just after the performance of a safety-
sensitive job function.
      (1)   Under City authority, an alcohol test can be performed any time a
covered employee is on duty.
      (2)   Tests for breath alcohol concentration will be conducted utilizing
a National Highway Traffic Safety Administration (NHTSA)-approved Evidential
Breath Testing device (EBT) operated by a trained Breath Alcohol Technician
(BAT). If the initial test indicates an alcohol concentration of 0.02 or
greater, a second test will be performed to confirm the results of the initial
test. The confirmatory test must occur on an EBT. The confirmatory test will be
conducted at least fifteen minutes after the completion of the initial test.
The confirmatory test will be performed using a NHTSA-approved EBT operated by
a trained BAT. The EBT will identify each test by a unique sequential
identification number. This number, time, and unit identifier will be provided
on each EBT printout. The EBT printout along with an approved alcohol testing
form will be used to document the test, the subsequent results, and to
attribute the test to the correct employee. The test will be performed in a
private, confidential manner as required by 49 C.F.R. § 40, as amended. The
procedure will be followed as prescribed to protect the employee and to
maintain the integrity of the alcohol testing procedures and validity of the
test result.
      (2)   An employee who has a confirmed alcohol concentration of 0.02 or
greater  will be considered a positive alcohol test and in violation of this
policy. The BAT will notify the Substance Abuse Program Manager.
      (3)   The City affirms the need to protect individual dignity, privacy,
and confidentiality throughout the testing process. If at any time the
integrity of the testing procedures or the validity of the test results is
compromised, the test will be canceled. Minor inconsistencies or procedural
flaws that do not impact the test result will not result in a canceled test.
      (4)   The alcohol testing form (ATF) required by 49 C.F.R. § 40, as
amended, shall be used for all FMCSA required testing. Failure of an employee
to sign Step 2 of the ATF will be considered a refusal to test.
13. TESTING
   A.   Pre-Employment Testing.
      (1)   All applicants for city positions that require the performance of
safety-sensitive functions requiring CDLs shall undergo drug testing prior to
hire or transfer into a position requiring a CDL.
      (2)   All offers of employment for positions requiring CDLs shall be
extended conditional upon the applicant passing a drug test. An applicant shall
not be hired into a CDL position unless the applicant takes a drug test with a
verified negative result.
      (3)   A non-CDL employee shall not be placed, transferred or promoted
into a CDL position until the employee takes a drug test with a verified
negative result.
      (4)   If an applicant fails a pre-employment drug test, the conditional
offer of employment shall be rescinded. Failure of a pre-employment drug test
will disqualify an applicant for employment with the City for a period of one
(1) year. Evidence of the absence of drug dependency from a Substance Abuse
Professional that meets with 49 C.F.R. § 40, as amended, and the approval of
the City and a verified negative pre-employment drug test will be required
prior to further consideration for employment. The cost for the assessment and
any subsequent treatment will be the sole responsibility of the applicant.
      (5)   When an employee being placed, transferred or promoted from a non-
covered position to a covered position submits a drug test with a verified
positive result, the employee shall be subject to disciplinary action in
accordance with the applicable Part (1 or 3) that corresponds to the non-
covered position, Section 14.
      (6)   If a pre-employment or pre-transfer test is canceled, the City will
not use the canceled test for the purposes of a negative test result to
authorize the employee to perform safety-sensitive functions and will require
the applicant to take and pass another pre-employment drug test.
      (7)   When a covered employee or applicant has not performed a safety-
sensitive function for ninety (90) consecutive days regardless of the reason,
and the employee has not been in the employer’s random selection pool during
that time, the employer shall ensure that the employee takes a pre-employment
drug test with a verified negative result. A negative test result is required
prior to resuming safety-sensitive job functions. A verified positive test will
result in disciplinary action in accordance with Section 14, Results and
Appeals, of this Policy.
      (8)   All applicants or employees being placed, transferred, or promoted
from a non-covered position to a covered position are required to execute an
authorization form allowing the City to obtain past drug and alcohol test
results, including any refusals to test, from each company for whom the driver
worked for the previous three (3) years.
         (a)   In instances where a covered employee is on extended leave for a
period of ninety (90) days  or more regardless of reason, the employee will be
required to take a drug test and have a negative test result prior to the
conduct of Safety Sensitive job functions. A verified positive test result will
result termination from City employment.
   B.   Reasonable Suspicion Testing
      (1)   All covered employees will be subject to a reasonable suspicion
drug and alcohol test when there are reasons to believe that drug or alcohol
use is impacting job performance and safety. Reasonable suspicion shall mean
that there is objective evidence, based upon specific, contemporaneous,
articulable observations of the employee's appearance, behavior, speech or body
odor that are consistent with possible drug use, alcohol misuse or both.
Reasonable suspicion referrals must be made by one supervisor who is trained to
detect the signs and symptoms of drug and alcohol use and who reasonably
concludes that an employee may be adversely affected or impaired in his work
performance due to possible prohibited substance abuse or alcohol misuse. A
reasonable suspicion drug test can be performed any time a covered employee is
on duty. A reasonable suspicion alcohol test can only be conducted just before,
during, or just after the performance of a safety-sensitive job function.
However, under City authority, an alcohol test can be performed any time a
covered employee is on duty.  If the alcohol reasonable suspicion test is not
administered within 8 hours of the incident, the driver shall be placed out of
service for 24 hours.
      (2)   The City shall be responsible for transporting the employee to the
testing site. Supervisors should avoid placing themselves or others into a
situation which might endanger the physical safety of those present. The
impacted employee shall be placed on leave with pay status in accordance with
the Personnel Rules and Regulations. An employee who refuses an instruction to
submit to a drug or alcohol test or both shall not be permitted to finish his
shift and shall immediately be placed on leave with pay status pending
disciplinary action.
      (3)   When an employee reports to the Employee Health Center for
treatment or examination and the health care provider has a reasonable
suspicion that the employee has current drug or alcohol use or is a substance
abuser, the health care provider shall notify the DER who shall refer the
employee to the SAP for substance abuse testing and assessment. The DER shall
notify the employee’s department director or his designee who shall place the
employee on leave with pay status in accordance with the Personnel Rules and
Regulations. A test in this circumstance would be performed under the direct
authority of the City.
      (4)   When there are no specific, contemporaneous, articulable objective
facts that indicate current drug or alcohol use, but the employee (who is not
already a participant in a treatment program) admits the abuse of alcohol or
other substances to a supervisor in his chain of command, an Employee
Assistance Program (EAP) counselor, or a provider of medical services under
contract to the City, the employee shall be referred to the DER who shall refer
the employee to the Substance Abuse Program for substance abuse testing and
assessment. The DER shall notify the employee’s department director or his
designee who shall place the employee on leave with pay status in accordance
with the Personnel Rules and Regulations. A test in this circumstance would be
performed under the direct authority of the City.
      (5)   A written record of the observations which led to a drug and
alcohol test based on reasonable suspicion shall be prepared and signed by the
supervisor making the observation within 24 hours of the observation or prior
to the release of the test results, whichever is earliest. This written record
shall be submitted to the Substance Abuse Program Manager and the MRO and shall
be attached to the forms reporting the test results.
      (6)   An employee who submits a breath and/or other fluid sample for a
reasonable suspicion drug and alcohol test which is determined to be a verified
positive test result shall be subject to disciplinary action in accordance with
Section 14 Results and Appeals of this Policy.
      (7)   An employee who refuses to test will be terminated from City
employment.
   C. Post-Accident Testing
      (1)   All covered employees will be required to undergo a fluid and
breath testing if they are involved in an accident with a City vehicle
requiring a CDL, or other heavy equipment or machinery such as backhoes,
loaders, or graders that results in a fatality. In addition, a post-accident
test will be conducted whether or not the driver receives a citation for a
moving violation if the accident results in either (a) injuries requiring
immediate transportation to a medical treatment facility; or (b) one or more
vehicles incurs disabling damage.
         (a)   As soon as practicable following an accident as defined in this
policy, the employee’s supervisor investigating the accident will notify the
driver of the need for the test. The supervisor will make the determination
using the best information available at the time of the decision.
         (b)   The supervisor shall ensure that an employee required to be
tested under this section is tested as soon as practicable and within eight (8)
hours of the accident for alcohol and within 32 hours for drugs. If an alcohol
test is not performed within two hours of the accident, the supervisor will
document the reason(s) for the delay. If the alcohol test is not conducted
within eight hours, or the drug test within 32 hours, attempts to conduct the
test must cease and the reasons for the failure to test documented.
         (c)   Any covered employee involved in an accident must refrain from
alcohol use for eight (8) hours following the accident or until he undergoes a
post-accident alcohol test.
         (d)   An employee who is subject to post-accident testing who fails to
remain readily available for such testing, including notifying a supervisor of
his or her location, if he or she leaves the scene of the accident prior to
submission to such test, may be deemed to have refused to submit to testing.
         (e)   Nothing in this section shall be construed to require the delay
of necessary medical attention for the injured following an accident or to
prohibit an employee from leaving the scene of an accident for the period
necessary to obtain assistance in responding to the accident or to obtain
necessary emergency medical care.
         (f)   In the rare event the City is unable to perform an FMCSA drug
and alcohol test (e.g., employee is unconscious, employee is detained by law
enforcement agency), the City may use drug and alcohol post-accident test
results administered by State or local law enforcement officials in lieu of the
FMCSA test. The State or local law enforcement officials must have independent
authority for the test and the employer must obtain the results in conformance
with state and local law.
         (g)   An employee who submits a breath and/or other fluid sample for a
post-accident drug and alcohol test which is determined to be a verified
positive test result or a refusal to test will be terminated from City
employment.
   D. Random Testing
      (1)   All covered employees will be subjected to random, unannounced
testing. The selection of employees shall be made by a scientifically valid
method of randomly generating an employee identifier from the appropriate pool
of covered employees.
         (a)   The dates for administering unannounced testing of randomly-
selected employees shall be spread reasonably throughout the calendar year.
         (b)   The number of employees randomly selected for drug and alcohol
testing during the calendar year shall be notless than the percentage rates
established by Federal regulations for those safety-sensitive employees subject
to random testing by Federal regulations. The random test rate for drugs will
be the FMCSA annual minimum random testing rate as set in the Federal Register
as per 49 C.F.R. § 382.305(f), unless that rate is less than twenty-five
percent at which, under City Authority, the test rate will be twenty-five
percent of the number of covered employees in the pool. The random testing rate
for alcohol established by the City will equal the random test rate for drugs.
         (c)   Each covered employee shall be in a pool from which the random
selection is made. Each covered employee inthe pool shall have an equal chance
of selection each time the selections are made. Employees will remain in the
pool and subject to selection, whether or not the employee has been previously
tested. There is no discretion on the part of management in the selection and
notification of the individuals who are to be tested.
         (d)   Safety-sensitive employees covered by the Federal Motor Carrier
Safety Administration regulations will beincluded in one random pool maintained
separately from other testing pools within the City.
         (e)   Random tests can be conducted at any time during an employee’s
shift for drug testing. Alcohol random tests can be performed just before,
during, or just after the performance of a safety sensitive duty.  However,
under City authority, an alcohol test can be performed any time a covered
employee is on duty. Testing can occur during the beginning, middle, or end of
an employee’s shift.
         (f)   Employees are required to proceed immediately to the collection
site upon notification of their random selection.
         (g)   An employee who submits a breath and/or fluid sample for a
random drug and alcohol test which is determined to be a positive test result
shall be subject to disciplinary action in accordance with Section 14, Results
and Appeals, of this Policy. An employee who refuses to test will be terminated
from City employment.
   E. Return-to-Duty Testing
      (1)   All covered employees who test positive on a drug, alcohol, or drug
and alcohol test shall be subject to discipline in accordance with Section 14,
Results and Appeals, of this Policy. All covered employees who or refuse to
test as defined in this policy shall be terminated. However, in the event a
covered employee returns to duty the provisions of this section apply. All
covered employees who previously tested positive on a drug or alcohol test or
refused a test must test negative for drugs, alcohol (below 0.02 for alcohol)
or both and be evaluated and released by the Substance Abuse Professional
before returning to work. For an initial positive drug test, a Return to Duty
drug test is required and an alcohol test is allowed. For an initial positive
alcohol test a Return to Duty alcohol test is required and a drug test is
allowed. Following the initial assessment, the SAP will recommend a course of
rehabilitation unique to the individual. Before scheduling the return to duty
test, the SAP must assess the employee and determine if the required treatment
has been properly followed and the SAP has a reasonable level of assurance that
the individual will stay drug and alcohol free. The SAP should schedule the
return to-duty test only when the employee is known to be drug and alcohol-free
and there is no risk to public safety. An employee who submits a breath and/or
fluid sample for a return-to-duty drug and alcohol test which is determined to
be a positive test result or a refusal to test will be terminated from City
employment. Return-to-duty testing is conducted when an employee is off duty.
All return-to-duty testing will be conducted under direct observation.
   F. Follow-up Testing
      (1)   All covered employees who test positive on a drug and/or alcohol
test or refuse to test as defined in this policy shall subject to disciplinary
action in accordance with Section 14, Results and Appeals, of this policy. All
covered employees who refuse to test as defined in this policy will be
terminated. However, in the event a covered employee returns to duty, the
provisions of this section apply. Covered employees will be required to undergo
frequent, unannounced drug and alcohol testing following their return-to-duty.
The follow-up testing will be performed for a period of one to five years with
a minimum of six tests to be performed the first year. The frequency and
duration of the follow-up tests (beyond the minimums) will be determined by the
SAP reflecting the SAP’s assessment of the employee’s unique situation and
recovery progress. Follow up testing should be frequent enough to deter and/or
detect a relapse. Follow-up testing is separate and in addition to the
reasonable suspicion, post-Accident, random, and return-to-duty testing
program. An employee who submits a breath and/or other fluid sample for a
follow-up drug and alcohol test which is determined to be a positive test
result or a refusal to test will be terminated from City employment. All
follow-up testing will be conducted under direct observation.
14. RESULTS AND APPEALS
   A.   Result of Drug/Alcohol Test
      (1)   Any covered employee that refuses a test or has a positive drug
test result, or a positive alcohol test result will be removed from his safety-
sensitive position, informed of educational and rehabilitation programs
available, and referred to a Substance Abuse Professional (SAP) for assessment.
No employee will be allowed to return to duty requiring the performance of
safety-sensitive job functions without the approval of the SAP.
      (2)   A positive drug and/or alcohol test or a refusal to test will also
result in disciplinary action as specified herein.
         (a)   All testing results shall be reported by the City's HHS
certified laboratory to the Medical Review Officer or designee. If the test
results are negative, the Medical Review Officer or designee will notify the
appropriate parties to that effect.
         (b)   If the City's HHS certified laboratory reports the results as
non-negative, the City's Medical Review Officer shall determine the validity of
the results and provide the impacted employee with the opportunity to discuss
the test result. If the Medical Review Officer finds a valid medical
explanation (e.g., prescription, medical treatment) for the non-negative test
result, the MRO will verify and report this test to the Substance Abuse Program
Manager and the Department Program Coordinator as negative and no action will
be taken. If the Medical Review Officer's assessment finds no valid medical
explanation for the non-negative result, he will verify the test as positive or
refusal to test and copies of the testing records shall be provided to the
Substance Abuse Program Manager and the Department Program Coordinator.
         (c)   Upon notice of a positive drug and/or alcohol test result, or a
refusal to submit to a test, the Department Director or designee shall ensure
that the employee ceases performing any safety-sensitive function and shall
place the employee on paid administrative leave and notify the Director of
Human Resources.
         (d)   Refusal to test shall be considered a positive test result and a
direct act of insubordination and shall result in termination.
         (e)   The employee shall be immediately referred to a Substance Abuse
Professional for an assessment. The SAP will evaluate each employee to
determine what assistance the employee needs in resolving problems associated
with prohibited drug use or alcohol misuse. The cost of any treatment or
rehabilitation services will be paid directly by the employee or their
insurance provider.
         (f)   A Voluntary Referral or participation in the City Employee
Assistance  Program does not shield an employee from disciplinary action or
guarantee employment or reinstatement with the City.
         (g)   Failure of an employee to report in writing to their immediate
supervisor and the Human Resources Director within five days a criminal drug
statute conviction for a violation occurring in the workplace shall result in
disciplinary action, up to and including termination.
   B.   Discipline
      (1)   Refusal to Test. Any covered employee who refuses a drug or alcohol
test ordered under this policy shall be subject to termination.  Such a refusal
shall be deemed a verified positive test result and a direct act of
insubordination.
      (2)   Second Chance Eligibility. A covered employee is eligible for the
Second Chance Program for a Verified Positive Result from a sample submitted by
an employee for drug or alcohol test under this policy if all of the below
criteria are met:
         (a)   This is the first instance of a Verified Positive Result;
         (b)   The Verified Positive Result was obtained pursuant to a pre-
employment (transfer or promotion), random, or reasonable suspicion drug and
alcohol test;
         (c)   The employee has been employed with the City for at least two
calendar years;
         (d)   The employee has not received a suspension or suspensions
totaling six days or more in the preceding two years; and
         (e)   The employee has not received a suspension for tardiness or
absenteeism in the preceding year or, at the time of the positive test, has an
accumulated total of 39 points or above as provided in the applicable
Collective Bargaining Agreement.
      (3)   Second Chance Ineligibility. If an employee is ineligible for or
refuses the Second Chance Program, a Verified Positive Result from a sample
submitted by an employee for a drug or alcohol test under this policy shall
result in termination from City Employment.
      (4)   Post-Accident. An employee who submits a sample from a post-
accident drug/alcohol test which is determined to be a verified positive test
result will be terminated from City employment.
      (5)   Refusal to Test. Any covered employee who refuses a drug or alcohol
test ordered under this policy shall be subject to termination. Such a refusal
shall be deemed a verified positive test result and a direct act of
insubordination.
   C. Second Chance Program. The Second Chance Program is comprised of the
following:
      (1)   The covered employee will be disciplined with twenty-eight (28)
calendar days leave without pay suspension, always to commence on the first
Saturday following issuance of the Notice of Final Action/Disciplinary Action.
      (2)   Mandatory referral to the Substance Abuse Professional (SAP) for
assessment, formulation of a treatment plan and the execution of a return-to-
work agreement. An employee’s failure to execute or comply with a return-to-
work agreement will result in termination from City employment.  
      (3)   The covered employee must comply with the return-to-duty agreement
by: submitting to a drug/alcohol test immediately prior to returning to work
with a Verified Negative Result; cooperating with the SAP recommended treatment
program (as determined by the SAP); and agreeing to periodic unannounced
follow-up testing. The cost of any treatment or rehabilitation services will be
paid directly by the employee or their insurance provider. If the SAP has not
released the covered employee to return-to-duty at the completion of the 28-day
suspension, the employee will be allowed to take accrued leave to participate
in the SAP prescribed treatment program. If no accrued leave time is available,
the employee shall be placed on leave without pay in accordance with the
Personnel Rules and Regulations. Any leave taken, either paid or unpaid, shall
be considered leave taken under the Family and Medical Leave Act.  
   D. Grievance and Appeal
      (1)   The determination by the Medical Review Officer that a drug test is
a verified positive test or is a refusal to test is not a medical determination
that is subject to appeal under the Personnel Rules and Regulations.  
      (2)   An employee who is subject to termination or other disciplinary
action pursuant to this policy may grieve the termination or other disciplinary
action pursuant to the provisions of the Merit System Ordinance or applicable
collective bargaining agreements. The consequences specified by 49 C.F.R. §
382, as amended, for a positive test or test refusal are not subject to a
grievance. 
15. INFORMATION DISCLOSURE
   A.   Drug and alcohol testing records shall be maintained by the Substance
Abuse Program Manager or designee and, except as provided below or by law, the
results of any drug or alcohol test shall not be disclosed without express
consent of the tested employee.
   B.   The employee, upon written request, is entitled to obtain copies of any
records pertaining to their use of prohibited drugs or misuse of alcohol
including any drug or alcohol testing records. Covered employees have the right
to gain access to any pertinent records such as equipment calibration records,
and records of laboratory certifications. Employees may not have access to SAP
follow-up testing plans.
   C.   Records of a positive drug test result, positive alcohol test result,
or a refusal to test shall be released to the employee's department director or
designee.
   D.   Records will be released to a subsequent employer only upon receipt of
a written request from the employee.
   E.   Records of an employee's drug and alcohol tests shall be released to
the adjudicator in a grievance, lawsuit or other proceeding initiated by or on
behalf of the tested individual arising from the results of the drug and
alcohol test. The records will be released to the decision maker in the
proceeding. The information will only be released with binding stipulation that
the decision maker will make it available only to parties in the proceeding.
   F.   Records will be released to the National Transportation Safety Board
during an Accident investigation.
   G.   Records will be released to the DOT or any DOT State or local agency
with regulatory authority over the employer or any of its employees.
   H.   Records will be released if requested by a Federal, state or local
safety agency with regulatory authority over the City or the employee.
   I.   If a party seeks a court order to release a specimen or part of a
specimen contrary to any provision of 49 C.F.R. § 40, as amended, necessary
legal steps to contest the issuance of the order will be taken.
   J.   In cases of a contractor or sub-recipient of a state department of
transportation, records will be released when requested by such agencies that
must certify compliance with the regulation to the FMCSA.
17. INCORPORATION AND ENFORCEABILITY
   A.   Incorporation. This policy incorporated by reference the cited federal
law and regulations as in effect at the time this policy is issued and this
policy shall be deemed automatically modified by any amendment or modification
to the cited federal law and regulations. Employees shall be given notice of
the changes in the cited federal law and regulations.
   B.   Enforceability. The invalidity or unenforceability of any provision of
this policy shall not affect any other provision hereof, and the policy shall
be construed in all respects as if such invalid of unenforceable provision was
omitted.  Should any part of this Agreement or any provision contained herein
be declared invalid by any tribunal of competent jurisdiction, the validity of
the remaining portions shall not be affected. Should this occur, the parties
will immediately meet to negotiate a suitable provision to replace the
provision held invalid.
History:
This Policy was adopted by the City of Albuquerque Chief Administrative Officer
pursuant to City Council Bill R-237 on April 17, 1995.
The City enacted a Substance Abuse Policy in 1999; revised February 6, 2006
(retroactive to January 1, 2006); the Second Judicial District Court
invalidated the discipline portions of the 2006 policy in New Mexico
Transportation Union v. City of Albuquerque, No. CV-2005-0129; Administrative
7-1-2) effective November 3, 2009 (2-8-11, 2-17-11). A revised version of this
policy was enacted on February 1, 2012, and disciplinary portions thereof, as
applied to certain bargaining unit members represented by the American
Federation of State, County, and Municipal Employees, were invalidated by the
City of Albuquerque Labor-Management Relations Board on September 24, 2018 (LB
12-02). A revised version of the policy was enacted on June 26, 2015,
provisions of which were affected by the subsequent ruling on the 2012 policy.
The City enacted a revision of this policy on [DATE] to update the policy and,
memorialize agreements with applicable labor unions.
PART 2
Appendix A
SYSTEM CONTACTS
Any questions regarding this policy or any other aspect of the substance abuse
policy should be directed to the following individual(s). Names and contracted
vendors are as of the date of adoption and may change from time to time without
a formal amendment of the rule.
Substance Abuse Program:   City of Albuquerque FA Risk
Title:               Manager of the Substance Abuse Program
Address:            1 Civic Plaza NW, Suite 200 Albuquerque, NM 87103
Telephone Number:         (505) 768-3165
 
Medical Review Office:      Workforce QA
Title:               Medical Review Officer
Address:            1430 S. Main St. #475, Salt Lake City, UT 84115
Telephone Number:         (801) 486-5400
 
Anabolic Androgenic Agents:    Workforce QA
Title:                Medical Review Officer
Address:             1430 South Main St. #475, Salt Lake City, UT 84115
Telephone Number:       (801) 486-5400
 
Substance Abuse Professional:
Name:             The Solutions Group
Title:               Substance Abuse Professional
Address:            5801 Osuna NE, Suite A-105 Albuquerque, NM 87109
Telephone Number:         (505) 254-3555
 
DHHS Certified Laboratory:   Primary Specimen
Name:             Quest Diagnostics Incorporated
Corporate Address:         10101 Renner Blvd., Lenexa, KS 66219
 
PART 3   Transit Department Policy
1.   ISSUING AGENCY: The Human Resources Department and the Division of Risk
Management, of the Department of Finance and Administrative Services.
2.   SCOPE: These rules have general applicability to all prospective and
current employees, classified and unclassified, who hold or will hold a
commercial driver’s license and perform or will perform safety-sensitive job
functions on any City commercial motor vehicle.
3.   STATUTORY AUTHORITY: ROA, 1994, § 2-15-1, et seq.; Council Resolutions 65-
1995 and 78-1995; 21 U.S.C. § 812;  41 U.S.C. § 701; 49 U.S.C. § 31,301; 21
C.F.R. §§ 1300.11 through 1300.15; 49 C.F.R. §§ 40, 382 and 655; ROA, 1994, §
3-1-1; ROA, 1994, § 3-2-1.
4.   DURATION: Until revoked.
5.   EFFECTIVE DATE: September 1, 2025 unless a later date is specified at the
end of a section.
6.   OBJECTIVE: This policy provides a safer environment for all employees and
the public and establishes guidelines to maintain a drug and alcohol-free
workplace. Specifically:
   A.   The City has a vital interest in maintaining safe, healthy, and
efficient working conditions for its employees. Being under the influence of
alcohol, or the presence of certain drugs in the body system, may pose serious
safety and health risks not only to the user but to all those in contact with
the user.
   B.   The City Council adopted an employee substance abuse and drug and
alcohol testing resolution and charged the Chief Administrative Officer to
promulgate a policy to implement those directives. This policy is adopted by
the Chief Administrative Officer to provide a detailed explanation of the City
of Albuquerque substance abuse policy, prohibitions, and procedures.
   C.   It is intended that this Substance Abuse Policy will be interpreted and
implemented in a manner consistent with all applicable anti-discrimination
requirements, including the Americans with Disabilities Act. To that end, all
supervisors and managers are required to use and apply all aspects of this
policy in an unbiased and impartial manner. Any supervisor or manager who
knowingly disregards the requirements of this policy, or who is found to
deliberately misuse the policy in regard to subordinates, shall be subject to
disciplinary action, up to and including termination.
7.   DEFINITIONS
   A.   Accident. An occurrence associated with the operation of City
equipment, machinery or vehicles, if as a result (1) an individual dies; (2) an
individual suffers a bodily injury and immediately receives medical treatment
away from the scene of the accident; or (3) one or more vehicles incurs
Disabling Damage as the result of the occurrence and is transported away from
the scene by a tow truck or other vehicle.
   B.   Adulterated Specimen. A specimen that has been altered, as evidenced by
test results showing either a substance that is not a normal constituent for
that type of specimen or showing an abnormal concentration of an endogenous
substance.
   C.   Alcohol. The intoxicating agent in beverage alcohol, ethyl alcohol, or
other low molecular weight alcohols, including but not limited to methyl or
isopropyl, contained in any beverage, mixture, mouthwash, candy, food,
preparation or medication.
   D.   Alcohol Concentration. The alcohol in a volume of breath expressed in
terms of grams of alcohol per 210 liters of breath as measured by an evidential
breath testing device.
   E.   Breath Alcohol Technician (BAT). A person who instructs and assists
employees in the alcohol testing process and operates an evidential breath
testing device.
   F.   Canceled Test. A drug or alcohol test that has a problem identified
that cannot be or has not been corrected, or which this part otherwise requires
to be canceled. A canceled test is neither positive nor negative.
   G.   C.F.R. Any references herein to the Code of Federal Regulations
(C.F.R.) shall refer to the most recent enactment, as it shall be from time to
time.
   H.   Collection Site. A place selected by the employer where employees
present themselves for the purpose of providing a specimen for a drug test and
for the purpose of providing breath for an alcohol test.
   I.   Commercial Motor Vehicle. Any self-propelled or towed vehicle used when
the vehicle has a gross vehicle weight rating or gross combination weight
rating of 26,001 or more pounds, or the vehicle is designated to transport more
than 15 passengers including the driver, or the vehicle is used in the
transportation of hazardous materials in a quantity requiring placarding.
   J.   Covered Employee. A City employee who is required to hold a commercial
driver’s license and performs safety sensitive job functions on any City
commercial motor vehicle.
   K.   DOT. All Department of Transportation agencies, including, but not
limited to, the US Coast Guard (USCG), the Federal Aviation Administration
(FAA), the Federal Railroad Administration (FRA), the Federal Motor Carrier
Safety Administration (FMCSA), the Federal Transit Administration (FTA), the
National Highway Traffic Safety Administration  (NHTSA), the Research and
Special Programs Administration (RSPA) and the Office of the Secretary (OST).
These terms include any designee of a DOT agency.
   L.   Designated Employer Representative (DER). An employee authorized by the
employer to take immediate action to remove employees from safety-sensitive
duties and to make required decisions in testing. The DER also receives test
results and other communication for the employer, consistent with the
requirements of 49 C.F.R. §§ 40, 382 and 655, as amended.
   M.   Dilute Specimen. A urine specimen with creatinine and specific gravity
values that are lower than expected for human urine.
   N.   Disabling Damage. Damage which precludes the departure of any vehicle
from the scene of the occurrence in its usual manner in daylight after simple
repairs, which includes damage to vehicles that could have been operated but
would have been further damaged if so operated, but does not include damage
which can be remedied temporarily at the scene of the occurrence without
special tools or parts, tire disablement without other damage even if no spare
tire is available, or damage to headlights, taillights, turn signals, horn,
mirrors or windshield wipers that makes them inoperative.
   O.   Evidential Breath Testing Device (EBT) is a device approved by the
NHTSA for the evidential testing of breath at the 0.02 and greater alcohol
concentrations. Approved devices are listed on the National Highway Traffic
Safety Administration (NHTSA) conforming products list.
   P.   HHS. The Department of Health and Human Services or any designee of the
Secretary, Department of Health and Human Services.
   Q.   Invalid Drug Test. The result reported by an HHS-certified laboratory
in accordance with the criteria established by HHS Mandatory Guidelines when a
positive, negative, adulterated, or substituted result cannot be established
for a specific drug or specimen validity test.
   R.   Legal Prescribed Drugs: A drug for which an individual has a
prescription or other written approval from a physician for the use of a drug
in the course of medical treatment. This prescription or written approval must
include the patient’s name, the name of the substance, quantity/amount to be
taken, and the period of authorization.
   S.   Medical Review Officer (MRO). A licensed physician (medical doctor or
doctor of osteopathy) who is responsible for receiving and reviewing laboratory
results generated by the City's drug testing program and evaluating medical
explanations for certain drug test results.
   T.   Negative Dilute. A drug test result which is negative for drug/drug
metabolites but has a specific gravity value lower than expected for a human
specimen.
   U.   Negative Drug Test Result. The result reported by an HHS-certified
laboratory to an MRO when a specimen contains no drug or the concentration of
the drug is less than the cutoff concentration for the drug or drug class and
the specimen is a valid specimen.
   V.   Negative Alcohol Test Result. The result from an EBT test when a Breath
Alcohol Concentration (BAC) of less than 0.02.
   V.   Non-negative Test Result. A test result found to be adulterated,
substituted, invalid, or positive for drug/drug metabolites.
   W.   Observed Collections. Consistent with 49 C.F.R. § 40, as amended,
collection under direct observation (by a person of the same gender) with no
advance notice will occur if (1)the laboratory reports to the MRO that a
specimen is invalid, and the MRO reports to the employer that there was not an
adequate medical explanation for the result; (2) the MRO reports to the
employer that the original positive, adulterated, or substituted test result
had to be canceled because the test of the split specimen could not be
performed; (3) the collector observes materials brought to the collection site
or the employee’s conduct clearly indicates an attempt to tamper with a
specimen; (4) the temperature on the original specimen was out of range; (5)
the MRO reports a negative-dilute result with a creatine concentration greater
than or equal to 2 mg/dL but less than or equal to 5mg/dL; or (6) The test is a
return-to-duty or follow-up test.
   X.   Positive Alcohol Test Result. The result for an alcohol test that
confirms an alcohol concentration of 0.02 BAC or greater
   Y.   Positive Drug Test Result. The result reported by an HHS-certified
laboratory when a specimen contains a drug or drug metabolite equal to or
greater than the cutoff concentrations.
   Z.   Positive Test Result.  A positive drug test result, a positive alcohol
test result, or both.
   AA.   Prohibited Drug. Illegally Used Controlled Substances or Drugs under
the Drug-Free Workplace Act of 1988 (41 U.S.C. § 701), any drug or any
substance identified in Schedule I through V of Section 202 of the Controlled
Substance Act (21 U.S.C. § 812), and as further defined by 21 C.F.R. §§ 1300.11
through 1300.15. This includes, but is not limited to: marijuana, amphetamines,
opioids, phencyclidine (PCP), and cocaine, as well as any drug not approved for
medical use by the U.S. Drug Enforcement Administration or the U.S. Food and
Drug Administration and any drug cited in 49 C.F.R. § 655.21. The status of
marijuana as a substance prohibited under this policy will not change based
upon state laws affecting recreational use or possession. Illegal use includes
use of any illegal drug, misuse of legally prescribed drugs, and use of
illegally obtained prescription drugs. Federal Transit Administration drug
testing regulations (49 CFR § 655, as amended) require that all covered
employees be tested for Drugs including marijuana, cocaine, opioids,
amphetamines, or phencyclidine at levels at or above the minimum thresholds
specified in 49 C.F.R. § 40, as amended.
   AB.   Public Safety Employees. Sworn members of the Albuquerque Police and
Fire and Rescue Departments, members of the Aviation Police, Open Space
Rangers, animal services personnel, transport and security officers.
   AC.   Refusal to Test. A refusal to test includes, but is not limited to,
the following circumstances:
   • Failure to appear for any test (excluding pre-employment) within a
reasonable time, as determined by the employer, after being directed to do so
by the employer.
   • Failure to remain at the collection/testing site until the testing process
is complete;
   • Failure to provide a specimen for any drug or alcohol test required by 49
C.F.R. § 40, as amended or DOT agency regulations;
   • In the case of a directly observed or monitored collection in a drug test,
failure to permit the observation or monitoring of your provision of a
specimen;
   • Failure to provide a sufficient sample when directed, and it has been
determined, through a required medical evaluation, that there was no adequate
medical explanation for the failure;
   • Failure or decline to take an additional test the employer or collector
has directed you to take;
   • Failure to undergo a medical examination or evaluation, as directed by the
MRO as part of the verification process, or as directed by the employer as part
of the “shy bladder” or “shy lung” procedures;
   • Failure to cooperate with any part of the testing process (e.g., refusal
to empty pockets when so directed by the collector, behaving in a
confrontational way that disrupts the collection process, failure to wash hands
as directed to do so by the collector, deviating from the collection process,
in any way, once notified of collection)
   • Verbal or written refusal to provide a breath or other fluid specimen;
   •[https://export.amlegal.com/media/015ecd2245ccd7aecbd5d365cd857e7d8df180cd/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1614.gif] For an observed collection, failure to follow the
observer’s instructions to raise your clothing above the waist, lower clothing
and underpants, and to turn around to permit the observer to determine if you
have any type of prosthetic or other device that could be used to interfere
with the collection process;
   •[https://export.amlegal.com/media/015ecd2245ccd7aecbd5d365cd857e7d8df180cd/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1616.gif] Possessing or wearing a prosthetic or other device that
could be used to interfere with the collection process;
   •[https://export.amlegal.com/media/015ecd2245ccd7aecbd5d365cd857e7d8df180cd/
IMAGES/0-0-0-1618.gif] Admission to the collector or MRO that the specimen was
adulterated or substituted;
   • If the MRO reports that there is a verified adulterated or substituted
test result;
   • Failure or refusal to sign Step 2 of the alcohol testing form.
   • Failure to remain at the scene of an accident prior to submission to drug/
alcohol tests without a legitimate explanation;
   • Failure to refrain from consuming alcohol within eight (8) hours following
involvement in an accident without first having submitted to post accident
drug/alcohol tests;
   • Providing false information in connection with a drug test; and
   • Engaging in conduct that clearly obstructs the testing process.
   AD.   Revenue Service Vehicles. All transit vehicles that are used for
passenger transportation service or that require a CDL to operate, and include
all ancillary vehicles used in support of the transit system.
   AE.   Safety-Sensitive Employee. A City employee who performs the duties of
a safety-sensitive position as determined by the Director of the Human
Resources Department.
   AF.   "Safety-Sensitive Functions on a Commercial Motor Vehicle” include (a)
driving; (b) time spent waiting to be dispatched; (c) inspecting, servicing, or
conditioning equipment; (d) being in or on a commercial vehicle (except in a
sleeper berth); (e) loading or unloading, including supervising or assistance
in loading or unloading, attending a vehicle being loaded or unloaded,
remaining in readiness to operate the vehicle, giving or receiving receipts for
a shipment being loaded or unloaded; (f) repairing, obtaining assistance, or
attending a disabled vehicle.
   AG.   Substance Abuse Counselor (SAC). A licensed physician (medical doctor
or doctor of osteopathy) or licensed or certified psychologist, social worker,
employee assistance professional, or addiction counselor who may or may not
also be qualified to act as a SAP under 49 C.F.R. § 40 and to whom employees
who voluntarily seek treatment of a pending drug and/or alcohol abuse problem
before testing positive through the City’s testing program or under one of the
tests listed and defined in Numbered Section 13 of this Policy.
   AH.   Substance Abuse Professional (SAP). A licensed physician (medical
doctor or doctor of osteopathy) or licensed or certified psychologist, social
worker, employee assistance professional, or addiction counselor (certified by
the National Association of Alcoholism and Drug Abuse Counselors Certification
Commission or by the International Certification Reciprocity Consortium/Alcohol
and other Drug Abuse) with knowledge of and clinical experience in the
diagnosis and treatment of drug and alcohol related disorders and who is
qualified to act as a SAP under 49 C.F.R. § 40.
   AI.   Substituted Specimen. A verified specimen with creatinine and specific
gravity values that are so diminished or so divergent  that they are not
consistent with a normal human sample.
   AJ.   Validity Testing. The evaluation of the specimen to determine if it is
consistent with a normal human sample . The purpose of validity testing is to
determine whether certain adulterants or foreign substances were added to the
sample, if the sample was dilute, or if the sample was substituted.
   AK.   Verified Negative Test. A drug test result reviewed by a medical
review officer and determined not to contain prohibited drugs or their
metabolites at or above the cutoff levels specified in 49 C.F.R. § 40, as
amended.
   AL.   Verified Positive Test. A drug test result reviewed by a medical
review officer and determined to contain prohibited drugs or their metabolites
at or above the cutoff levels specified in 49 C.F.R. § 40, as amended.
8. PURPOSE AND APPLICABILITY
   A.   Purpose
      (1)   The City of Albuquerque has adopted this policy to ensure that City
services requiring the use of a Commercial Driver’s License (CDL) are delivered
safely, efficiently, and effectively by establishing a drug and alcohol-free
work environment, and to ensure that the workplace remains free from the
effects of drugs and alcohol in order to promote the health and safety of
employees and the general public. Additionally, the City of Albuquerque
declares that the unlawful manufacturing, distributing, dispensing, possessing,
or using of controlled substances or misuse of alcohol is prohibited for
safety-sensitive employees.
      (2)   The purpose of this policy is to establish guidelines to maintain a
drug and alcohol-free workplace in compliance with the Drug-Free Workplace Act
of 1988 (41 U.S.C. § 701), and the Omnibus Transportation Employee Testing Act
of 1991 (49 U.S.C. § 31,301). Specifically, the Federal Motor Carrier Safety
Administration (FMCSA) of the U.S. Department of Transportation has published
49 C.F.R. § 382, as amended, that mandates drug testing and breath alcohol
testing for safety sensitive positions and prohibits performance of safety-
sensitive functions when there is a positive test result. The U. S. Department
of Transportation (USDOT) has also published 49 C.F.R. § 40, as amended, that
sets standards for the collection and testing of and breath specimens
      (3)   Any provisions set forth in this policy that are included under the
sole authority of the City and are not provided under the authority of the
above-named Federal regulations are underlined
   B.   Applicability
      (1)   This part of the City’s Substance Abuse Policy applies to all City
employees (full, part-time, or volunteers) who are required to hold a
Commercial Driver’s License (CDL), and who perform safety-sensitive functions
as defined by the FTA . CDL holders who work for the City Transit Department
are covered under Part 3 of the policy that covers safety- sensitive employees
that fall under the authority of the Federal Transit Administration. Other City
employees that do not have CDLs are covered under Part 1 of the City’s
Substance Abuse Policy.
      (2)   All safety-sensitive employees returning to duty after a suspension
or termination, whether by decree or settlement, as well as any safety-
sensitive employee returning to the workplace after any absence of ninety (90)
days or more, will be required to take a drug test and have a negative result
prior to the performance of safety-sensitive job functions.
      (3)   A safety-sensitive function is any duty related to the safe
operation of a commercial vehicle including the following activities:
         (a)   All driving time,
         (b)   All times a CDL holder is waiting to be dispatched, unless the
driver has been relieved from duty by the employer. This includes being on-call
or available to work at a moment’s notice,
         (c)   Inspecting, servicing, or conditioning a commercial vehicle at
any time,
         (d)   All time being in or upon any commercial vehicle except time
spent in a sleeping berth,
         (e)   Loading or unloading, including supervising or assisting in
loading or unloading, attending a vehicle being loaded or unloaded, remaining
in readiness to operate the vehicle, giving or receiving receipts for a
shipment being loaded or unloaded,
         (f)   Repairing, obtaining assistance, or attending a disabled
vehicle.
9. EDUCATION AND TRAINING
   A.   The City of Albuquerque Commercial Driver’s License Substance Abuse
Policy will be made available to every covered employee who will also have
access to the corresponding federal regulations including 49 C.F.R. §§ 40 and
382, as amended. In addition, all covered employees will receive educational
materials explaining the DOT’s requirements and the City’s policies and
procedures to meet those requirements. In addition to this policy, the City
will provide covered employees with information concerning:
      (1)   the effects of drugs and alcohol on an individual’s health, work,
and personal life;
      (2)   the signs and symptoms of a drug or alcohol problem; and
      (3)   the available methods of intervention when a problem does exist.
   B.   Each covered employee is required to certify that he has been given a
copy of this policy and other drug and alcohol information by the City.
Applicants for employment are also required to execute the certification as a
condition of employment. Existing covered employees who refuse to execute this
required certification will be subject to discipline.
   C.   All supervisory personnel who are in a position to determine driver
reasonable suspicion fitness for duty will receive 60 minutes of reasonable
suspicion training on the physical, behavioral, and performance indicators of
probable drug use and 60 minutes of additional reasonable suspicion training on
the physical, behavioral, speech, and performance indicators of probable
alcohol misuse. Under the City’s own authority, supervisory personnel will also
be trained on how to intervene constructively, and how to effectively integrate
an employee back into his work group following intervention and treatment.
10. PROHIBITIONS
   A.   Prohibited Conduct
      (1)   Covered employees are prohibited from reporting for duty or
remaining on duty requiring the performance of safety sensitive functions any
time there is a quantifiable presence of a prohibited drug in the body above
the minimum thresholds defined in 49 C.F.R. § 40, as amended. Employees may
also, under City Authority, be tested for any drug or any substance identified
in Schedule 1 through V of Section 202 of the Controlled Substance Act (21
U.S.C. § 812), and as further defined in 21 C.F.R. §§ 1300.11 through 1300.15.
An exception is allowed when the use is pursuant to the instructions of a
licensed medical practitioner who has advised the driver that the substance
will not adversely affect the driver’s ability to drive.
      (2)   Covered employees are prohibited from consuming alcohol while
performing safety-sensitive job functions or while on-call to perform safety-
sensitive job functions. If an on-call employee has consumed alcohol, they must
acknowledge the use of alcohol at the time that they are called to report for
duty. The covered employee will subsequently be relieved of his on-call
responsibilities and may be subject to disciplinary action.
      (3)   The City shall not permit any covered employee to perform or
continue to perform safety-sensitive functions if it has actual knowledge that
the employee is using or has used alcohol, has used a controlled substance, or
has adulterated or substituted a test specimen for controlled substances.
      (4)   Covered employees are prohibited from reporting to work or
remaining on duty requiring the performance of safety sensitive functions while
having an alcohol concentration of 0.02  or greater regardless of when the
alcohol was consumed.
      (5)   Covered employees are prohibited from consuming alcohol for eight
(8) hours following involvement in an accident or until he submits to the post-
accident drug and alcohol test, whichever occurs first.
      (6)   No covered employee shall consume alcohol within four (4) hours
prior to the performance of safety-sensitive job functions.
      (7)   Covered employees are prohibited from possessing any amount of
alcohol while on duty requiring the performance of a safety-sensitive job
function, unless the alcohol is manifested and is being transported as part of
a shipment.
      (8)   The City under its own authority also prohibits the consumption of
alcohol during lunch periods, rest breaks, split shift breaks, or anytime the
employee is in uniform.
      (9)   Consistent with the Drug-free Workplace Act of 1988 (41 U.S.C. §
701) and Personnel Rules and Regulations, all covered employees are prohibited
from engaging in the unlawful manufacture, distribution, dispensing,
possession, or use of prohibited substances in the work place including City
premises, City vehicles, while in uniform or while on City business.
   B.   Exceptions
      (1)   Legal Drugs: The appropriate use of legally prescribed drugs and
non-prescription medications is not prohibited. Except for medication
containing alcohol, nothing in this Policy prohibits a driver’s use of a
medication legally prescribed by a licensed physician: (a) who is familiar with
the driver’s medical history and specific safety-sensitive duties, and (b) who
has advised the driver that the prescribed medication will not adversely affect
the driver’s ability to operate a motor vehicle.
         (a)   However, the use of any substance which carries a warning label
that indicates that mental functioning, motor skills, or judgment may be
adversely affected must be reported to supervisory personnel. This report must
be made within seventy-two (72) hours of the prescription initially being
filled or before the employee begins utilizing the substance, whichever is
sooner. In addition, the employee must obtain a written release from the
personal physician releasing the person to perform their duties any time they
obtain a performance-altering prescription.
11. DRUG STATUTE CONVICTION
   A.   Consistent with the Drug Free Workplace Act of 1988 (41 U.S.C. § 701),
all employees are required to notify their immediate supervisor or the Human
Resources Director of the City in writing of any criminal drug statute
conviction for a violation occurring in the workplace within five days after
such conviction. Failure to comply with this provision shall result in
disciplinary action, up to and including termination.
12. TESTING REQUIREMENTS AND PROCEDURES
   A.   Testing Requirements
      (1)   Analytical specimen drug testing and breath testing for alcohol
will be conducted as required by Federal regulations . All covered employees
shall be subject to testing prior to employment, for reasonable suspicion,
following an accident, and random as defined in the Testing rules of this
policy. All covered employees who have tested positive for drugs or alcohol on
a random, or reasonable suspicion will be tested prior to returning to duty
after completion of the Substance Abuse Professional's recommended treatment
program and subsequent release to duty. Follow-up testing will also be
conducted following return to duty for a period of one to five years, with at
least six tests performed during the first year. The duration and frequency of
the following up testing above the minimum requirements will be at the
discretion of the Substance Abuse Professional.
      (2)   A drug test can be performed any time a covered employee is on
duty. An alcohol test can be performed just before, during, or after the
performance of a safety-sensitive job function.  Under City authority, an
alcohol test can be performed any time a covered employee is on duty.
      (3)   All covered employees will be subject to drug testing and breath
alcohol testing as a condition of ongoing employment with the City. Any safety-
sensitive employee who refuses to comply with a request for testing shall be
removed from duty and subject to discipline as defined in the Results and
Appeals Section of this policy. A test refusal constitutes a positive test
result and a direct act of insubordination. Any covered employee who is
suspected of providing false information in connection with a drug test, or who
is suspected of falsifying test results through tampering, contamination,
adulteration, or substitution will be required to undergo an observed
collection. Verification of the above listed actions will be considered a test
refusal and will result in the employee’s removal from duty and discipline as
defined in  the Results and Appeals Section of  this policy.  Additionally,
refer to the Definitions. for all circumstances that constitute a Refusal to
Test. The City of Albuquerque has a zero-tolerance policy for refusing to test.
   B.   Drug Testing Procedures
      (1)   Testing shall be conducted in a manner to assure a high degree of
accuracy and reliability and using techniques, equipment, and laboratory
facilities which have been approved by the U.S. Department of Health and Human
Service (HHS). All testing will be conducted consistent with the procedures put
forth in 49 C.F.R. § 40, as amended. The procedures will be performed in a
private, confidential manner and every effort will be made to protect the
employee, the integrity of the drug testing procedure, and the validity of the
test result.
      (2)   The drugs that will be tested for include marijuana, cocaine,
opioids, amphetamines, and phencyclidine. After the identity of the donor is
checked using picture identification, a specimen will be collected using the
split specimen collection method described in 49 C.F.R. § 40 as amended. Each
specimen will be accompanied by a DOT Chain of Custody and Control Form and
identified using a unique identification number that attributes the specimen to
the correct individual. The specimen analysis will be conducted at a HHS
certified laboratory. An initial drug screen and validity test will be
conducted on the primary specimen. Specimen validity testing will be conducted
on all specimens provided for testing under FTA authority. Specimen validity
testing is the evaluation of the specimen to determine if it is consistent with
a normal human sample. The purpose of the validity testing is to determine
whether certain adulterants or foreign substances were added to the specimen,
if the specimen was diluted, or if the specimen was substituted. For those
specimens that are not negative, a confirmatory Gas Chromatography/Mass
Spectrometry (GC/MS) test will be performed. The test will be considered
positive if the amounts of the drug(s) and/or its metabolites identified by the
GC/MS test are above the minimum thresholds established in 49 C.F.R. § 40, as
amended.
      (3)   The test results from the HHS certified laboratory will be reported
to a Medical Review Officer (MRO). A MRO is a licensed physician with detailed
knowledge of substance abuse disorders and drug testing. The MRO will review
the test results to ensure the scientific validity of the test and to determine
whether there is a legitimate medical explanation for a non-negative,
substituted, or adulterated test result. The MRO will attempt to contact the
employee to notify the employee of the non-negative laboratory result, and
provide the employee with an opportunity to explain the confirmed laboratory
test result. The MRO will subsequently review the employee’s medical history/
medical records as appropriate to determine whether there is a legitimate
medical explanation for a non-negative laboratory result. If no legitimate
medical explanation is found, the test will be verified positive or refusal to
test and reported to the Substance Abuse Program Manager and the Department
Program Coordinator. If a legitimate explanation is found, the MRO will report
the test result as negative, to the City, and no further action will be taken.
If a test is invalid without a medical explanation, a retest will be conducted
under direct observation. If a test is a negative-dilute, a retest will not be
conducted, the result of the original test will stand as the test of record.
      (4)   Any covered employee who questions the results of a required drug
test under Testing sections of this policy may request that the split sample be
tested. The split sample test must be conducted at a second HHS-certified
laboratory with no affiliation with the laboratory that analyzed the primary
specimen. The test must be conducted on the split sample that was provided by
the employee at the same time as the primary sample. All costs for such testing
are paid by the employee unless the result of the split sample test invalidates
the result of the original test.  The method of collecting, storing, and
testing the split sample will be consistent with the procedures set forth in 49
C.F.R. § 40, as amended. The employee's request for a split sample test must be
made to the Medical Review Officer within 72 hours of notice of the original
sample verified test result. Requests after 72 hours will only be accepted at
the discretion of the MRO if the delay was due to documentable facts that were
beyond the control of the employee. Employees do not have access to a test of
their split specimen following an invalid result. The City will ensure that the
cost for the split specimen is covered in order for a timely analysis of the
sample; however, the City will seek reimbursement for the split sample test
from the employee.
      (5)   If the analysis of the split specimen fails to confirm the presence
of the drug(s) detected in the primary specimen; if the split specimen is not
able to be analyzed; or if the results of the split specimen are not
scientifically adequate; the MRO will declare the original test to be canceled
and will direct the employer to retest the employee under direct observation.
      (6)   The split specimen will be stored at the initial laboratory until
the analysis of the primary specimen is completed. If the primary specimen is
negative, the split will be discarded. If the primary is positive, the split
will be retained for testing if so requested by the employee through the
Medical Review Officer. If the primary specimen is positive, it will be
retained in frozen storage for one year and the split specimen will be retained
for one year.
      (7)   Observed Collections. Consistent with 49 C.F.R. § 40, as amended,
collection under direct observation (by a person of the same gender) with no
advance notice will occur if:
         (a)   The laboratory reports to the MRO that a specimen is invalid,
and the MRO reports to the employer that there was not an adequate medical
explanation for the result; or
         (b)   The MRO reports to the employer that the original positive,
adulterated, or substituted test result had to be canceled because the test of
the split specimen could not be performed; or
         (c)   The collector observes materials brought to the collection site
or the employee’s conduct clearly indicates an attempt to tamper with a
specimen; or
         (d)   The temperature on the original specimen was out of range; or
         (e)   The MRO reports a negative-dilute result with a creatine
concentration greater than or equal to 2 mg/dL but less than or equal to 5 mg/
dL; or
         (f)   The test is a return-to-duty or follow-up test.
   C.   Alcohol Testing Procedures
      Alcohol: The use of beverages containing alcohol or substances (including
any mouthwash, medication, food, candy) or any other substances such that
alcohol is present in the body while performing a safety-sensitive job
function. An alcohol test can be performed on a covered employee under 49
C.F.R. § 382 just before, during, or just after the performance of a safety-
sensitive job function.
      (1)   Under City authority, an alcohol test can be performed any time a
covered employee is on duty.
      (2)   Tests for breath alcohol concentration will be conducted utilizing
a National Highway Traffic Safety Administration (NHTSA)-approved Evidential
Breath Testing device (EBT) operated by a trained Breath Alcohol Technician
(BAT). If the initial test indicates an alcohol concentration of 0.02 or
greater, a second test will be performed to confirm the results of the initial
test. The confirmatory test must occur on an EBT. The confirmatory test will be
conducted at least fifteen minutes after the completion of the initial test.
The confirmatory test will be performed using a NHTSA-approved EBT operated by
a trained BAT. The EBT will identify each test by a unique sequential
identification number. This number, time, and unit identifier will be provided
on each EBT printout. The EBT printout along with an approved alcohol testing
form will be used to document the test, the subsequent results, and to
attribute the test to the correct employee. The test will be performed in a
private, confidential manner as required by 49 C.F.R. § 40, as amended. The
procedure will be followed as prescribed to protect the employee and to
maintain the integrity of the alcohol testing procedures and validity of the
test result.
      (2)   An employee who has a confirmed alcohol concentration of0.02 or
greater  will be considered a positive alcohol test and in violation of this
policy. The BAT will notify the Substance Abuse Program Manager.
      (3)   The City affirms the need to protect individual dignity, privacy,
and confidentiality throughout the testing process. If at any time the
integrity of the testing procedures or the validity of the test results is
compromised, the test will be canceled. Minor inconsistencies or procedural
flaws that do not impact the test result will not result in a canceled test.
      (4)   The alcohol testing form (ATF) required by 49 C.F.R. § 40, as
amended, shall be used for all FMCSA required testing. Failure of an employee
to sign Step 2 of the ATF will be considered a refusal to test.
13. TESTING
   A.   Pre-Employment Testing.
      (1)   All applicants for city positions that require the performance of
safety-sensitive functions requiring CDLs shall undergo drug testing prior to
hire or transfer into a position requiring a CDL.
      (2)   All offers of employment for positions requiring CDLs shall be
extended conditional upon the applicant passing a drug test. An applicant shall
not be hired into a CDL position unless the applicant takes a drug test with a
verified negative result.
      (3)   A non-CDL employee shall not be placed, transferred or promoted
into a CDL position until the employee takes a drug test with a verified
negative result.
      (4)   If an applicant fails a pre-employment drug test, the conditional
offer of employment shall be rescinded. Failure of a pre-employment drug test
will disqualify an applicant for employment with the City for a period of one
(1) year. Evidence of the absence of drug dependency from a Substance Abuse
Professional that meets with 49 C.F.R. § 40, as amended, and the approval of
the City and a verified negative pre-employment drug test will be required
prior to further consideration for employment. The cost for the assessment and
any subsequent treatment will be the sole responsibility of the applicant.
      (5)   When an employee being placed, transferred or promoted from a non-
covered position to a covered position submits a drug test with a verified
positive result, the employee shall be subject to disciplinary action in
accordance with the applicable Part (1 or 3) that corresponds to the non-
covered position, Section 14.
      (6)   If a pre-employment or pre-transfer test is canceled, the city will
not use the canceled test for the purposes of a negative test result to
authorize the employee to perform safety-sensitive functions and will require
the applicant to take and pass another pre-employment drug test.
      (7)   When a covered employee or applicant has not performed a safety-
sensitive function for ninety (90) consecutive days regardless of the reason,
and the employee has not been in the employer’s random selection pool during
that time, the employer shall ensure that the employee takes a pre-employment
drug test with a verified negative result. A negative test result is required
prior to resuming safety-sensitive job functions. A verified positive test will
result in disciplinary action in accordance with Section 14, Results and
Appeals, of this Policy.
      (8)   All applicants or employees being placed, transferred, or promoted
from a non-covered position to a covered position are required to execute an
authorization form allowing the City to obtain past drug and alcohol test
results, including any refusals to test, from each company for whom the driver
worked for the previous three (3) years.
         (a)   In instances where a covered employee is on extended leave for a
period of ninety (90) days  or more regardless of reason, the employee will be
required to take a drug test and have a negative test result prior to the
conduct of safetysensitive job functions. A verified positive test result will
result termination from City employment.
   B.    Reasonable Suspicion Testing
      (1)   All covered employees will be subject to a reasonable suspicion
drug and alcohol test when there are reasons to believe that drug or alcohol
use is impacting job performance and safety. Reasonable suspicion shall mean
that there is objective evidence, based upon specific, contemporaneous,
articulable observations of the employee's appearance, behavior, speech or body
odor that are consistent with possible drug use, alcohol misuse or both.
Reasonable suspicion referrals must be made by one supervisor who is trained to
detect the signs and symptoms of drug and alcohol use and who reasonably
concludes that an employee may be adversely affected or impaired in his work
performance due to possible prohibited substance abuse or alcohol misuse. A
reasonable suspicion drug test can be performed any time a covered employee is
on duty. A reasonable suspicion alcohol test can only be conducted just before,
during, or just after the performance of a safety-sensitive job function.
However, under City authority, an alcohol test can be performed any time a
covered employee is on duty.  If the alcohol reasonable suspicion test is not
administered within 8 hours of the incident, the driver shall be placed out of
service for 24 hours.
      (2)   The City shall be responsible for transporting the employee to the
testing site. Supervisors should avoid placing themselves or others into a
situation which might endanger the physical safety of those present. The
impacted employee shall be placed on leave with pay status in accordance with
the Personnel Rules and Regulations. An employee who refuses an instruction to
submit to a drug or alcohol test or both shall not be permitted to finish his
shift and shall immediately be placed on leave with pay status pending
disciplinary action.
      (3)   When an employee reports to the Employee Health Center for
treatment or examination and the health care provider has a reasonable
suspicion that the employee has current drug or alcohol use or is a substance
abuser, the health care provider shall notify the DER who shall refer the
employee to the SAP for substance abuse testing and assessment. The DER shall
notify the employee’s department director or his designee who shall place the
employee on leave with pay status in accordance with the Personnel Rules and
Regulations. A test in this circumstance would be performed under the direct
authority of the City.
      (4)   When there are no specific, contemporaneous, articulable objective
facts that indicate current drug or alcohol use, but the employee (who is not
already a participant in a treatment program) admits the abuse of alcohol or
other substances to a supervisor in his chain of command, an Employee
Assistance Program (EAP) counselor, or a provider of medical services under
contract to the City, the employee shall be referred to the DER who shall refer
the employee to the Substance Abuse Program for substance abuse testing and
assessment. The DER shall notify the employee’s department director or his
designee who shall place the employee on leave with pay status in accordance
with the Personnel Rules and Regulations. A test in this circumstance would be
performed under the direct authority of the City.
      (5)   A written record of the observations which led to a drug and
alcohol test based on reasonable suspicion shall be prepared and signed by the
supervisor making the observation within 24 hours of the observation or prior
to the release of the test results, whichever is earliest. This written record
shall be submitted to the Substance Abuse Program Manager and the MRO and shall
be attached to the forms reporting the test results.
      (6)   An employee who submits a breath and/or fluid sample for a
reasonable suspicion drug and alcohol test which is determined to be a verified
positive test result shall be subject to disciplinary action in accordance with
Section 14 Results and Appeals of this Policy.  
      (7)   An employee who refuses to test will be terminated from City
employment.
   C.   Post-Accident Testing
      (1)   All covered employees will be required to undergo a fluid and
breath testing if they are involved in an accident with a City vehicle
requiring a CDL, or other heavy equipment or machinery such as backhoes,
loaders, or graders that results in a fatality. In addition, a post-accident
test will be conducted whether or not the driver receives a citation for a
moving violation  if the accident results in either (a) injuries requiring
immediate transportation to a medical treatment facility; or (b) one or more
vehicles incurs disabling damage.
         (a)   As soon as practicable following an accident as defined in this
policy, the employee’s supervisor investigating the accident will notify the
driver of the need for the test. The supervisor will make the determination
using the best information available at the time of the decision.
         (b)   The supervisor shall ensure that an employee required to be
tested under this section is tested as soon as practicable and within eight (8)
hours of the accident for alcohol and within 32 hours for drugs. If an alcohol
test is not performed within two hours of the accident, the supervisor will
document the reason(s) for the delay. If the alcohol test is not conducted
within eight hours, or the drug test within 32 hours, attempts to conduct the
test must cease and the reasons for the failure to test documented.
         (c)   Any covered employee involved in an accident must refrain from
alcohol use for eight (8) hours following the accident or until he undergoes a
post-accident alcohol test.
         (d)   An employee who is subject to post-accident testing who fails to
remain readily available for such testing, including notifying a supervisor of
his or her location, if he or she leaves the scene of the accident prior to
submission to such test, may be deemed to have refused to submit to testing.
         (e)   Nothing in this section shall be construed to require the delay
of necessary medical attention for the injured following an accident or to
prohibit an employee from leaving the scene of an accident for the period
necessary to obtain assistance in responding to the accident or to obtain
necessary emergency medical care.
         (f)   In the rare event the City is unable to perform an FMCSA drug
and alcohol test (e.g., employee is unconscious, employee is detained by law
enforcement agency), the City may use drug and alcohol post-accident test
results administered by State or local law enforcement officials in lieu of the
FMCSA test. The State or local law enforcement officials must have independent
authority for the test and the employer must obtain the results in conformance
with state and local law.
         (g)   An employee who submits a breath and/or other fluid sample for a
post-accident drug and alcohol test which is determined to be a verified
positive test result or a refusal to test will be terminated from City
employment. 
   D.   Random Testing
      (1)   All covered employees will be subjected to random, unannounced
testing. The selection of employees shall be made by a scientifically valid
method of randomly generating an employee identifier from the appropriate pool
of covered employees.
         (a)   The dates for administering unannounced testing of randomly-
selected employees shall be spread reasonably throughout the calendar year.
         (b)   The number of employees randomly selected for drug and alcohol
testing during the calendar year shall be not less than the percentage rates
established by Federal regulations for those safety-sensitive employees subject
to random testing by Federal regulations. The random test rate for drugs will
be the FMCSA annual minimum random testing rate as set in the Federal Register
as per 49 C.F.R. § 382.305(f), unless that rate is less than twenty-five
percent at which, under City Authority, the test rate will be twenty-five
percent of the number of covered employees in the pool. The random testing rate
for alcohol established by the City will equal the random test rate for drugs.
         (c)   Each covered employee shall be in a pool from which the random
selection is made. Each covered employee in the pool shall have an equal chance
of selection each time the selections are made. Employees will remain in the
pool and subject to selection, whether or not the employee has been previously
tested. There is no discretion on the part of management in the selection and
notification of the individuals who are to be tested.
         (d)   Safety-sensitive employees covered by the Federal Motor Carrier
Safety Administration regulations will be included in one random pool
maintained separately from other testing pools within the City.
         (e)   Random tests can be conducted at any time during an employee’s
shift for drug testing. Alcohol random tests can be performed just before,
during, or just after the performance of a safety sensitive duty.  However,
under City authority, an alcohol test can be performed any time a covered
employee is on duty.  Testing can occur during the beginning, middle, or end of
an employee’s shift.
         (f)   Employees are required to proceed immediately to the collection
site upon notification of their random selection.
         (g)   An employee who submits a breath and/or fluid sample for a
random drug and alcohol test which is determined to be a positive test result
shall be subject to disciplinary action in accordance with Section 14, Results
and Appeals, of this Policy. An employee who refuses to test will be terminated
from City employment.
   E.   Return-to-Duty Testing
      (1)   All covered employees who test positive on a drug, alcohol, or drug
and alcohol test shall be subject to discipline in accordance with Section 14,
Results and Appeals, of this Policy. All covered employees who or refuse to
test as defined in this policy shall be terminated. However, in the event a
covered employee returns to duty the provisions of this section apply. All
covered employees who previously tested positive on a drug or alcohol test or
refused a test must test negative for drugs, alcohol (below 0.02 for alcohol)
or both and be evaluated and released by the Substance Abuse Professional
before returning to work. For an initial positive drug test, a Return to Duty
drug test is required and an alcohol test is allowed. For an initial positive
alcohol test a Return to Duty alcohol test is required and a drug test is
allowed. Following the initial assessment, the SAP will recommend a course of
rehabilitation unique to the individual. Before scheduling the return to duty
test, the SAP must assess the employee and determine if the required treatment
has been properly followed and the SAP has a reasonable level of assurance that
the individual will stay drug and alcohol free. The SAP should schedule the
return to-duty test only when the employee is known to be drug and alcohol-free
and there is no risk to public safety. An employee who submits a breath and/or
fluid sample for a return-to-duty drug and alcohol test which is determined to
be a positive test result or a refusal to test will be terminated from City
employment. Return-to-duty testing is conducted when an employee is off duty.
All return-to-duty testing will be conducted under direct observation.
   F.   Follow-up Testing
      (1)   All covered employees who test positive on a drug and/or alcohol
test or refuse to test as defined in this policy shall subject to disciplinary
action in accordance with Section 14, Results and Appeals, of this policy. All
covered employees who refuse to test as defined in this policy will be
terminated. However, in the event a covered employee returns to duty, the
provisions of this section apply. Covered employees will be required to undergo
frequent, unannounced drug and alcohol testing following their return-to-duty.
The follow-up testing will be performed for a period of one to five years with
a minimum of six tests to be performed the first year. The frequency and
duration of the follow-up tests (beyond the minimums) will be determined by the
SAP reflecting the SAP’s assessment of the employee’s unique situation and
recovery progress. Followup testing should be frequent enough to deter and/or
detect a relapse. Follow-up testing is separate and in addition to the
reasonable suspicion, post-Accident, random, and return-to-duty testing
program. An employee who submits a breath and/or other fluid sample for a
follow-up drug and alcohol test which is determined to be a positive test
result or a refusal to test will be terminated from City employment. All
follow-up testing will be conducted under direct observation.
14. RESULTS AND APPEALS
   A.   Result of Drug/Alcohol Test
      (1)   Any covered employee that refuses a test or has a positive drug
test result, or a positive alcohol test result will be removed from his safety-
sensitive position, informed of educational and rehabilitation programs
available, and referred to a Substance Abuse Professional (SAP) for assessment.
No employee will be allowed to return to duty requiring the performance of
safety-sensitive job functions without the approval of the SAP.
      (2)   A positive drug and/or alcohol test or a refusal to test will also
result in disciplinary action as specified herein.
         (a)   All testing results shall be reported by the City's HHS
certified laboratory to the Medical Review Officer or designee. If the test
results are negative, the Medical Review Officer or designee will notify the
appropriate parties to that effect.
         (b)   If the City's HHS certified laboratory reports the results as
non-negative, the City's Medical Review Officer shall determine the validity of
the results and provide the impacted employee with the opportunity to discuss
the test result. If the Medical Review Officer finds a valid medical
explanation (e.g., prescription, medical treatment) for the non-negative test
result, the MRO will verify and report this test to the Substance Abuse Program
Manager and the Department Program Coordinator as negative and no action will
be taken. If the Medical Review Officer's assessment finds no valid medical
explanation for the non-negative result, he will verify the test as positive or
refusal to test and copies of the testing records shall be provided to the
Substance Abuse Program Manager and the Department Program Coordinator.
         (c)   Upon notice of a positive drug and/or alcohol test result, or a
refusal to submit to a test, the Department Director or designee shall ensure
that the employee ceases performing any safety-sensitive function and shall
place the employee on paid administrative leave and notify the Director of
Human Resources.
         (d)   Refusal to test shall be considered a positive test result and a
direct act of insubordination and shall result in termination.
         (e)   The employee shall be immediately referred to a Substance Abuse
Professional for an assessment. The SAP will evaluate each employee to
determine what assistance the employee needs in resolving problems associated
with prohibited drug use or alcohol misuse. The cost of any treatment or
rehabilitation services will be paid directly by the employee or their
insurance provider.
         (f)   A Voluntary Referral or participation in the City Employee
Assistance Program does not shield an employee from disciplinary action or
guarantee employment or reinstatement with the City.
         (g)   Failure of an employee to report in writing to their immediate
supervisor and the Human Resources Director within five days a criminal drug
statute conviction for a violation occurring in the workplace shall result in
disciplinary action, up to and including termination.
   B.   Discipline
      (1)   Refusal to Test. Any covered employee who refuses a drug or alcohol
test ordered under this policy shall be subject to termination.  Such a refusal
shall be deemed a verified positive test result and a direct act of
insubordination.
      (2)   Second Chance Eligibility. A covered employee is eligible for the
Second Chance Program for a Verified Positive Result from a sample submitted by
an employee for drug or alcohol test under this policy if all of the below
criteria are met:
         (a)   This is the first instance of a Verified Positive Result;
         (b)   The Verified Positive Result was obtained pursuant to a pre-
employment (transfer or promotion), random, or reasonable suspicion drug and
alcohol test;
         (c)   The employee has been employed with the City for at least two
calendar years;
         (d)   The employee has not received a suspension or suspensions
totaling six days or more in the preceding two years; and
         (e)   The employee has not received a suspension for tardiness or
absenteeism in the preceding year or, at the time of the positive test, has an
accumulated total of 39 points or above as provided in the applicable
Collective Bargaining Agreement.
      (3)   Second Chance Ineligibility. If an employee is ineligible for or
refuses the Second Chance Program, a Verified Positive Result from a sample
submitted by an employee for a drug or alcohol test under this policy shall
result in termination from City Employment.
      (4)   Post-Accident. An employee who submits a sample from a post-
accident drug/alcohol test which is determined to be a verified positive test
result will be terminated from City employment.
      (5)   Refusal to Test. Any covered employee who refuses a drug or alcohol
test ordered under this policy shall be subject to termination.  Such a refusal
shall be deemed a verified positive test result and a direct act of
insubordination.
   C.   Second Chance Program. The Second Chance Program is comprised of the
following:
      (1)   The covered employee will be disciplined with twenty-eight (28)
calendar days leave without pay suspension, always to commence on the first
Saturday following issuance of the Notice of Final Action/Disciplinary
Action.  
      (2)   Mandatory referral to the Substance Abuse Professional (SAP) for
assessment, formulation of a treatment plan and the execution of a return-to-
work agreement. An employee’s failure to execute or comply with a return-to-
work agreement will result in termination from City employment.  
      (3)   The covered employee must comply with the Return to Duty agreement
by: submitting to a drug/alcohol test immediately prior to returning to work
with a Verified Negative Result; cooperating with the SAP recommended treatment
program (as determined by the SAP); and agreeing to periodic unannounced
follow-up testing. The cost of any treatment or rehabilitation services will be
paid directly by the employee or their insurance provider. If the SAP has not
released the covered employee to return-to-duty at the completion of the 28-day
suspension, the employee will be allowed to take accrued leave to participate
in the SAP prescribed treatment program. If no accrued leave time is available,
the employee shall be placed on leave without pay in accordance with the
Personnel Rules and Regulations. Any leave taken, either paid or unpaid, shall
be considered leave taken under the Family and Medical Leave Act.  
   D.   Grievance and Appeal
      (1)   The determination by the Medical Review Officer that a drug test is
a verified positive test or is a refusal to test is not a medical determination
that is subject to appeal under the Personnel Rules and Regulations.  
      (2)   An employee who is subject to termination or other disciplinary
action pursuant to this policy may grieve the termination or other disciplinary
action pursuant to the provisions of the Merit System Ordinance or applicable
collective bargaining agreements. The consequences specified by 49 C.F.R. §
382, as amended, for a positive test or test refusal are not subject to a
grievance. 
15. INFORMATION DISCLOSURE
   A.   Drug and alcohol testing records shall be maintained by the Substance
Abuse Program Manager or designee and, except as provided below or by law, the
results of any drug or alcohol test shall not be disclosed without express
consent of the tested employee.
   B.   The employee, upon written request, is entitled to obtain copies of any
records pertaining to their use of prohibited drugs or misuse of alcohol
including any drug or alcohol testing records. Covered employees have the right
to gain access to any pertinent records such as equipment calibration records,
and records of laboratory certifications. Employees may not have access to SAP
follow-up testing plans.
   C.   Records of a positive drug test result, positive alcohol test result,
or a refusal to test shall be released to the employee's department director or
designee.
   D.   Records will be released to a subsequent employer only upon receipt of
a written request from the employee.
   E.   Records of an employee's drug and alcohol tests shall be released to
the adjudicator in a grievance, lawsuit or other proceeding initiated by or on
behalf of the tested individual arising from the results of the drug and
alcohol test. The records will be released to the decision maker in the
proceeding. The information will only be released with binding stipulation that
the decision maker will make it available only to parties in the proceeding.
   F.   Records will be released to the National Transportation Safety Board
during an Accident investigation.
   G.   Records will be released to the DOT or any DOT State or local agency
with regulatory authority over the employer or any of its employees.
   H.   Records will be released if requested by a Federal, state or local
safety agency with regulatory authority over the City or the employee.
   I.   If a party seeks a court order to release a specimen or part of a
specimen contrary to any provision of 49 C.F.R. § 40, as amended, necessary
legal steps to contest the issuance of the order will be taken.
   J.   In cases of a contractor or sub-recipient of a state department of
transportation, records will be released when requested by such agencies that
must certify compliance with the regulation to the FMCSA.
17. INCORPORATION AND ENFORCEABILITY
   A.   Incorporation. This policy incorporated by reference the cited federal
law and regulations as in effect at the time this policy is issued and this
policy shall be deemed automatically modified by any amendment or modification
to the cited federal law and regulations. Employees shall be given notice of
the changes in the cited federal law and regulations.
   B.   Enforceability. The invalidity or unenforceability of any provision of
this policy shall not affect any other provision hereof, and the policy shall
be construed in all respects as if such invalid of unenforceable provision was
omitted.  Should any part of this Agreement or any provision contained herein
be declared invalid by any tribunal of competent jurisdiction, the validity of
the remaining portions shall not be affected. Should this occur, the parties
will immediately meet to negotiate a suitable provision to replace the
provision held invalid.
History:
This Policy was adopted by the City of Albuquerque Chief Administrative Officer
pursuant toCity Council Bill R-237 on April 17, 1995.
The City enacted a Substance Abuse Policy in 1999; revised February 6, 2006
(retroactive to January 1, 2006); the Second Judicial District Court
invalidated the discipline portions of the 2006 policy in New Mexico
Transportation Union v. City of Albuquerque, No. CV-2005-0129; Administrative
7-1-2) effective November 3, 2009 (2-8-11, 2-17-11). A revised version of this
policy was enacted on February 1, 2012, and disciplinary portions thereof, as
applied to certain bargaining unit members represented by the American
Federation of State, County, and Municipal Employees, were invalidated by the
City of Albuquerque Labor-Management Relations Board on September 24, 2018 (LB
12-02). A revised version of the policy was enacted on June 26, 2015,
provisions of which were affected by the subsequent ruling on the 2012 policy.
The City enacted a revision of this policy on [DATE] to update the policy and,
memorialize agreements with applicable labor unions.
Appendix A
SYSTEM CONTACTS
Any questions regarding this policy or any other aspect of the substance abuse
policy should be directed to the following individual(s). Names and contracted
vendors are as of the date of adoption and may change from time to time without
a formal amendment of the rule.
Substance Abuse Program:   City of Albuquerque FA Risk
Title:               Manager of the Substance Abuse Program
Address:            1 Civic Plaza NW, Suite 200 Albuquerque, NM 87103
Telephone Number:         (505) 768-3165
 
Medical Review Office:      Workforce QA
Title:               Medical Review Officer
Address:            1430 S. Main St. #475, Salt Lake City, UT 84115
Telephone Number:         (801) 486-5400
 
Anabolic Androgenic Agents:   Workforce QA
Title:               Medical Review Officer
Address:            1430 South Main St. #475, Salt Lake City, UT 84115
Telephone Number:         (801) 486-5400
 
Substance Abuse Professional
Name:               The Solutions Group
Title:               Substance Abuse Professional
Address:            5801 Osuna NE, Suite A-105 Albuquerque, NM 87109
Telephone Number:         (505) 254-3555
 
DHHS Certified Laboratory:   Primary Specimen
Name:               Quest Diagnostics Incorporated
Corporate Address:         10101 Renner Blvd., Lenexa, KS 66219
 
PART 4 Pipeline Safety Policy
1.   ISSUING AGENCY: The Human Resources Department and the Division of Risk
Management, of the Department of Finance and Administrative Services.
2.   SCOPE: These rules have general applicability to all prospective and
current employees, classified and unclassified, who perform or will perform
safety-sensitive job functions including but not limited to the operation,
maintenance or emergency response to the landfill pipeline.
3.   STATUTORY AUTHORITY: ROA, 1994, § 2-15-1, et seq.; Council Resolutions 65-
1995 and 78-1995; 21 U.S.C. § 812; 41 U.S.C. § 701; 49 U.S.C. § 31,301; 21
C.F.R. §§ 1300.11 through 1300.15; 49 C.F.R. §§ 40, 199; ROA, 1994, § 3-1-1;
ROA, 1994, § 3-2-1.
4.   DURATION: Until revoked.
5.   EFFECTIVE DATE: September 1, 2025
6.   OBJECTIVE: This policy provides a safer environment for all employees and
the public and establishes guidelines to maintain a drug and alcohol-free
workplace. Specifically:
   A.   The City has a vital interest in maintaining safe, healthy, and
efficient working conditions for its employees. Being under the influence of
alcohol, or the presence of certain drugs in the body system, may pose serious
safety and health risks not only to the user but to all those in contact with
the user.
   B.   The City Council adopted an employee substance abuse and drug and
alcohol testing resolution and charged the Chief Administrative Officer to
promulgate a policy to implement those directives. This policy is adopted by
the Chief Administrative Officer to provide a detailed explanation of the City
of Albuquerque substance abuse policy, prohibitions, and procedures.
   C.   It is intended that this Substance Abuse Policy will be interpreted and
implemented in a manner consistent with all applicable anti-discrimination
requirements, including the Americans with Disabilities Act. To that end, all
supervisors and managers are required to use and apply all aspects of this
policy in an unbiased and impartial manner. Any supervisor or manager who
knowingly disregards the requirements of this policy, or who is found to
deliberately misuse the policy in regard to subordinates, shall be subject to
disciplinary action, up to and including termination.
7.   DEFINITIONS
   A.   Accident (PHMSA). For purposes of post-accident testing of Pipeline &
Hazardous Materials Safety Administration (pipeline), means: (i) An event that
involves a release of gas from a pipeline, or of liquefied natural gas,
liquefied petroleum gas, refrigerant gas, or gas from an LNG facility, and that
results in one or more of the following consequences: (a) A death or personal
injury necessitating inpatient hospitalization; (b) Estimated property damage,
of $50,000 or more, including loss to City of Albuquerque and others, or both,
but excluding cost of gas lost; (c) Unintentional estimated gas loss of 3
million cubic feet or more; (ii) An event that results in an emergency shutdown
of an LNG facility. Activation of an emergency shutdown system for reasons
other than an actual emergency does not constitute an incident. (iii) An event
that is significant, in the judgment of City of Albuquerque, even though it did
not meet the criteria of paragraphs (i) or (ii) above.
   B.   Administrator. The Administrator of the Pipeline & Hazardous Materials
Safety Administration (PHMSA) or any person who has been delegated such
authority.
   C.   Adulterated specimen. A specimen that has been altered, as evidenced by
test results showing either a substance that is not a normal constituent for
that type of specimen or showing an abnormal concentration of an endogenous
substance.
   D.   Air Blank. A reading by an EBT of ambient air containing no alcohol.
   E.   Alcohol. The intoxicating agent in beverage alcohol, ethyl alcohol, or
other low molecular weight alcohol including methyl or isopropyl alcohol.
   F.   Alcohol Concentration or Content (AC). The alcohol in a volume of
breath expressed in terms of grams of alcohol per 210 liters of breath, as
indicated by an evidential breath test.
   G.   Alcohol confirmation test. A subsequent test using an evidential
breath-testing device (EBT) following a screening test with a result of 0.02 or
greater that provides quantitative data about the alcohol concentration.
   H.   Alcohol Use. The drinking or swallowing of any beverage, liquid
mixture, or preparation (including any medication) containing alcohol.
   I.   Aliquot. A fractional part of a specimen used for drug testing. It is
taken as a sample representing the whole specimen.
   J.   Breath Alcohol Technician (BAT). A service agent who instructs and
assists individuals in the alcohol testing process, operates an Evidentiary
Breath Testing (EBT) device, and follows the Quality Assurance Plan (QAP) for
the EBT in accordance with 40.233(c). Reports positive results directly to DER.
   K.   Cancelled test. A drug or alcohol test that has a problem identified
that cannot be or has not been corrected, or which Part 40 otherwise requires
to be cancelled. A cancelled test is neither a positive nor a negative test
result.
   L.   C.F.R. Any references herein to the Code of Federal Regulations
(C.F.R.) shall refer to the most recent enactment, as it shall be from time to
time.
   M.   Collection/Testing Site. A place that meets the requirements of C.F.R.
Part 40.41, and selected by the employer where individuals present themselves
for the purpose of providing a urine specimen for a drug test and for the
purpose of providing breath for an alcohol test.
   N.   Collector. A service agent who instructs and assists employees at a
collection site, who receives and makes an initial inspection of the specimen
provided by those employees, and who initiates and completes the CCF.
Responsible for maintaining personal control over each specimen and CCF
throughout the collection process, and to prevent unauthorized personnel from
entering any part of the site in which urine specimens are collected or stored.
The collector will not intentionally delay the transmission of drug and alcohol
testing documents for any reason and the collector does not require an employee
to sign a consent, release, waiver of liability, or indemnification agreement.
   O.   Confirmation or confirmatory Test. (A) In alcohol testing, a second
test, following a screening test with a result of 0.02 or greater, which
provides quantitative data of alcohol concentration; or (B) In drug testing, a
second analytical procedure performed on a different aliquot of the original
specimen to identify and quantify the presence of a specific drug or drug
metabolite.
   P.   Confirmatory validity test. A second test performed on a different
aliquot of the original specimen to further support a validity test result.
   Q.   Confirmed Drug Test. A confirmation test result received by an MRO from
a laboratory.
   R.   Covered Employee (PHMSA). A person who performs a covered function,
including persons employed by operators, contractors engaged by operators, and
persons employed by such contractors.
   S.   Covered Function. An operations, maintenance, or emergency-response
function regulated by Part 192, 193, or 195 of Pipeline Safety Regulations that
is performed on a pipeline or on an LNG facility.
   T.   Designated Employer Representative (DER). A City of Albuquerque
employee authorized by the employer to take immediate action(s) to remove
employees from safety- sensitive duties and to make required decisions in the
testing and evaluation processes. The DER also receives test results and other
communications for the employer, consistent with the requirements of Part 40
regulations. The DER is the main point of contact for any service agents
involved in drug and alcohol procedures and Substance Abuse Program related
information.
   U.   Dilute Specimen. A urine specimen with creatinine and specific gravity
values that are lower than expected for human urine.
   V.   DOT Agency. An agency (or operating administration) of the United
States Department of Transportation administering regulations requiring alcohol
or drug testing (49 CFR parts 199, 382 and 655).
   W.   Evidential Breath Testing Device (EBT). A device approved by the
National Highway Traffic Safety Administration (NHTSA) for the evidential
testing of breath for detection of alcohol and placed on NHTSA’S “Conforming
Products List of Evidential Breath Measurement Devices.” EBTs are the only
devices authorized to be used for City of Albuquerque alcohol tests.
   X.   HHS. The Department of Health and Human Services or any designee of the
Secretary of DHHS.
   Y.   Invalid Drug Test. The result reported by an HHS-certified laboratory
in accordance with the criteria established by HHS Mandatory Guidelines when a
positive, negative, adulterated, or substituted result cannot be established
for a specific drug or specimen validity test.
   Z.   Legally Prescribed Drug. A drug for which an individual has a
prescription or other written approval from a physician for the use of a drug
in the course of medical treatment. This prescription or written approval must
include the patient’s name, the name of the substance, quantity/amount to be
taken, and the period of authorization.
   AA.   Medical Review Officer (MRO). A service agent who is a licensed
physician and who is responsible for receiving and reviewing laboratory results
generated by an employer’s drug testing program, evaluating medical
explanations for certain drug test results, and providing a quality assurance
review of the drug testing process for all City tests.
   AB.   Negative Alcohol Test Result. The result from an EBT test when a
Breath Alcohol Concentration (BAC) is less than 0.02.
   AC.   Negative Drug Test Result. The result reported by an HHS-certified
laboratory to an MRO when a specimen contains no drug or the concentration of
the drug is less than the cutoff concentration for the drug or drug class and
the specimen is a valid specimen
   AD.   Non-negative Test Result. A test result that is found to be
adulterated, substituted, invalid, or positive (for drug(s) or drug metabolite
(s).
   AE.   Operator. A person who owns or operates pipeline facilities subject to
Part 192, 193, or 195.
   AF.   Observed Collection. Consistent with 49 C.F.R. § 40, as amended,
collection under direct observation (by a person of the same gender) with no
advance notice will occur if (1)the laboratory reports to the MRO that a
specimen is invalid, and the MRO reports to the employer that there was not an
adequate medical explanation for the result; (2)the MRO reports to the employer
that the original positive, adulterated, or substituted test result had to be
cancelled because the test of the split specimen could not be performed; (3)
the collector observes materials brought to the collection site or the
employee’s conduct clearly indicates an attempt to tamper with a specimen; (4)
the temperature on the original specimen was out of range; (5) the MRO reports
a negative-dilute result with a creatinine concentration greater than or equal
to 2 mg/dL but less than or equal to 5mg/dL; or (6) The test is a return-to-
duty or follow-up test.
   AG.   PHMSA. The Pipeline and Hazardous Materials Safety Administration.
   AH.   Pipeline. All parts of the physical facilities through which product
moves in transportation. This includes pipe, valves, and other appurtenances
attached to pipe, compressor units, metering stations, delivery stations,
holders, and fabricated assemblies.
   AI.   Pipeline Facilities. A pipeline, rights-of way, and equipment,
facility or building used in the transportation of products.
   AJ.   Positive Alcohol Test Result. The result for an alcohol test that
confirms an alcohol concentration of 0.02 BAC or greater.
   AK.   Positive Drug Test Result. The result reported by an HHS-certified
laboratory when a specimen contains a drug or drug metabolite equal to or
greater than the cutoff concentrations.
   AL.   Positive Test Result. A positive drug test result, a positive alcohol
test result, or both.
   AM.   Prohibited Drug. Illegally used controlled substances or drugs under
the Drug-Free Workplace Act of 1988 (41 U.S.C § 701), any drug or any substance
identified in Schedule I through V of Section 202 of the Controlled Substance
Act (21 U.S.C. § 812), and as further defined by 21 C.F.R. §§ 1300.11 through
1300.15. This includes, but is not limited to, marijuana, amphetamines,
opioids, phencyclidine (PCP), and cocaine, as well as any drug not approved for
medical use by the U.S. Drug Enforcement Administration or the U.S. Food and
Drug Administration and any drug cited in 49 C.F.R. § 40 as amended. The status
of marijuana as a substance prohibited under this policy will not change based
upon state laws affecting recreational use or possession. Illegal use includes
use of any illegal drug, misuse of legally prescribed drugs, and use of
illegally obtained prescription drugs. PHMSA drug testing regulations require
that all covered employees be tested for drugs including marijuana, cocaine,
opioids, amphetamines, or phencyclidine at levels at or above the minimum
thresholds specified in 49 C.F.R. § 40, as amended.
   AN.   Refusal to Test. A refusal to test includes, but is not limited to,
the following circumstances:
   •   Failure to appear for any test (excluding pre-employment) within a
reasonable time, as determined by the employer, after being directed to do so
by the employer.
   •   Failure to remain at the collection/testing site until the testing
process is complete;
   •   Failure to provide a urine or breath specimen for any drug or alcohol
test required by 49 C.F.R. § 40, as amended or DOT agency regulations;
   •   In the case of a directly observed or monitored collection in a drug
test, failure to permit the observation or monitoring of your provision of a
specimen;
   •   Failure to provide a sufficient amount of urine or breath when directed,
and it has been determined, through a required medical evaluation, that there
was no adequate medical explanation for the failure;
   •   Failure or decline to take an additional test the employer or collector
has directed you to take;
   •   Failure to undergo a medical examination or evaluation, as directed by
the MRO as part of the verification process, or as directed by the employer as
part of the “shy bladder” or “shy lung” procedures;
   •   Failure to cooperate with any part of the testing process (e.g. refusal
to empty pockets when so directed by the collector, behaving in a
confrontational way that disrupts the collection process, failure to wash hands
after being directed to do so by the collector)
   •   Verbal or written refusal to provide a breath/urine specimen;
   •   For an observed collection, failure to follow the observer’s
instructions to raise your clothing above the waist, lower clothing and
underpants, and to turn around to permit the observer to determine if you have
any type of prosthetic or other device that could be used to interfere with the
collection process;
   •   Possessing or wearing a prosthetic or other device that could be used to
interfere with the collection process;
   •   Admission to the collector or MRO that the specimen was adulterated or
substituted;
   •   If the MRO reports that there is a verified adulterated or substituted
test result;
   •   Failure or refusal to sign Step 2 of the alcohol testing form.
   •   Failure to remain at the scene of an accident prior to submission to
drug/alcohol tests without a legitimate explanation;
   •   Failure to refrain from consuming alcohol within eight (8) hours
following involvement in an accident without first having submitted to post
accident drug/alcohol tests;
   •   Providing false information in connection with a drug test; and
   •   Engaging in conduct that clearly obstructs the testing process.
   AO.   Safety-sensitive Employee. A City employee who performs the duties of
a safety- sensitive position as determined by the Director of the Human
Resources Department. Any position designated as safety-sensitive under this
Policy also shall be considered safety- sensitive under the Lynn and Erin
Compassionate Use Act.
   AP.   Service Agent is any person or entity, other than an employee of City
of Albuquerque, used to help implement drug and alcohol testing regulations and
collection. A service agent must adhere to DOT Rule 49 CFR Part 40 Section
40.355. City of Albuquerque contracts service agents for drug and alcohol
testing services, medical review officer services, a certified laboratory to
evaluate urine specimens submitted by collectors, and other services that may
be required for drug and alcohol compliance services. Information on Service
agents can be located in Appendix C.
   AQ.   Substance Abuse Counselor. A licensed physician (medical doctor or
doctor of osteopathy) or licensed or certified psychologist, social worker,
employee assistance professional, or addiction counselor who may or may not
also be qualified to act as a SAP under 49 C.F.R. § 40 and to whom employees
who voluntarily seek treatment of a pending drug and/or alcohol abuse problem
before testing positive through the City’s testing program or under one of the
tests listed and defined in Numbered Section 13 of this Policy. If the SAC is a
service agent, they must adhere to DOT Rule 49 CFR Part 40 Section 40.355.
   AR.   Substance Abuse Professional (SAP). A licensed physician (medical
doctor or doctor of osteopathy), or a licensed or certified psychologist,
social worker, employee assistance professional or addiction counselor
(certified by the National Association of Alcoholism and Drug Abuse Counselors
Certification Commission or by the International Certification Reciprocity
Consortium/Alcohol & Other Drug Abuse) with knowledge of and clinical
experience in the diagnosis/treatment of alcohol and controlled substance-
related abuse, addictions or disorders and who is qualified to act as a SAP
under 49 C.F.R. Part 40. If the SAP is a service agent, they must adhere to DOT
Rule 49 CFR Part 40 Section 40.355. The SAP reports updates directly to the DER
if the employee is participating in the Substance Abuse Program. Reports that
are provided by the SAP to the DER include compliance updates, substance abuse
treatment recommendations, follow-up drug testing recommendations, and return-
to-duty treatment plan.
   AS.   Substituted Specimen. A verified specimen with creatinine and specific
gravity values that are so diminished or so divergent that they are not
consistent with human urine.
   AT.   Testing Panels. The following drugs must be tested for in each urine
specimen: marijuana, cocaine, amphetamines, opioids, and phencyclidine and
other substances as identified in 49 C.F.R. § 40.85 as amended.
   AU.   Validity Testing. The evaluation of the specimen to determine if it is
consistent with normal human urine. The purpose of validity testing is to
determine whether certain adulterants or foreign substances were added to the
urine, if the urine was dilute, or if the specimen was substituted.
   AV.   Verified Negative Test. A drug test result reviewed by a medical
review officer and determined not to contain prohibited drugs or their
metabolites at or above the cutoff levels specified in 49 C.F.R. § 40, as
amended.
   AW.   Verified Positive Test. A drug test result reviewed by a medical
review officer and determined to contain prohibited drugs or their metabolites
at or above the cutoff levels specified in 49 C.F.R. § 40, as amended.
8.   PURPOSE AND APPLICABILITY
   A.   Purpose
      (1)   The City of Albuquerque provides safe delivery of landfill gas in
compliance with Department of Transportation Regulations to the Bernalillo
County Metropolitan Detention Center. Part of mission of the City of
Albuquerque is to ensure that this service is delivered safely, efficiently,
and effectively by establishing a drug and alcohol-free work environment, and
to ensure that the workplace remains free from the effects of drugs and alcohol
in order to promote the health and safety of employees and the general public.
In keeping with this mission, the City of Albuquerque declares that the
unlawful manufacturing, distributing, dispensing, possessing, or using of
controlled substances or misuse of alcohol is prohibited for safety-sensitive
employees.
      (2)   The purpose of this policy is to establish guidelines to maintain a
drug and alcohol- free workplace in compliance with the Drug-Free Workplace Act
of 1988 (41 U.S.C. § 701), and the Omnibus Transportation Employee Testing Act
of 1991 (49 U.S.C. § 31,301). This policy is intended to comply with all
applicable Federal regulations governing workplace anti-drug and alcohol
programs in the transit industry. Specifically, the Federal Pipeline and
Hazardous Materials Safety Administration (PHMSA) of the U.S. Department of
Transportation has published 49 C.F.R. § 199, as amended, that mandate urine
drug testing and breath alcohol testing for safety-sensitive positions, and
prohibit performance of safety-sensitive functions when there is a positive
test result. The U.S. Department of Transportation (USDOT) has also published
49 C.F.R. § 40, as amended, that sets standards for the collection and testing
of urine and breath specimens. Any provisions set forth in this policy that are
included under the sole authority of the City and are not provided under the
authority of the above named Federal regulations are underlined. If there is
any question, conflict, or discrepancy in this policy and DOT Regulations as
codified at 49 CFR Parts 40 and Part 199, the DOT Regulations will prevail.
   B. Applicability
      (1)   This Part of the City’s Substance Abuse Policy applies to all
safety-sensitive City of Albuquerque employees (full- or part-time) when
performing any pipeline-related business (covered employees). A safety-
sensitive function is any duty related to the operation, maintenance or
emergency-response on the pipeline.
9.   EDUCATION AND TRAINING
   A.   A copy of Part 4 of the City’s Substance Abuse Policy will be posted on
the City of Albuquerque e-web and corresponding federal regulations including
49 C.F.R. §§ 40 and 199, as amended are published by the U.S. Department of
Transportation, Pipeline and Hazardous Materials Safety Administration (PHMSA).
The City will provide a 1-hour training session to each new-hire employee who
performs covered functions. These sessions will be held periodically to address
all new employees on a timely and efficient basis. In addition, all covered
employees will receive educational materials explaining the DOT’s requirements
and the City’s policies and procedures to meet those requirements. In addition
to this policy, the City will provide covered employees with information
concerning:
      (1)   the effects of drugs and alcohol on an individual’s health, work,
and personal life;
      (2)   the signs and symptoms of a drug or alcohol problem; and
      (3)   the available methods of intervention when a problem does exist.
   B.   Each covered employee is required to certify that he has been given a
copy of this policy and other drug and alcohol information by the City.
Applicants for employment are also required to execute the certification as a
condition of employment. The signed document will be kept in the employee’s
personnel file. Existing covered employees who refuse to execute this required
certification will be subject to discipline.
   C.   The City will inform existing employee of any significant DOT
regulation changes to this policy using the same recordkeeping process as noted
in B. above. Minor policy changes will be distributed via the Human Resources
Department.
   D.   All supervisory personnel who are in a position to determine employee
reasonable suspicion fitness for duty will also receive 60 minutes of
reasonable suspicion training on the physical, behavioral, and performance
indicators of probable drug use and 60 minutes of additional reasonable
suspicion training on the physical, behavioral, speech, and performance
indicators of probable alcohol misuse. Under the City’s own authority,
supervisory personnel will also be trained on how to intervene constructively
and how to effectively integrate an employee back into his/her work group
following intervention and treatment.
   E.   The City will ensure that any collector who administers a drug or
alcohol test to a City Employee meets all of the training requirements set
forth in 40.33.
10.   PROHIBITIONS
   A.   Prohibited Conduct
      (1)   Covered employees are prohibited from reporting for duty or
remaining on duty any time there is a quantifiable presence of a prohibited
drug in the body at or above the minimum thresholds defined in 49 C.F.R. § 40,
as amended.
      (2)   Covered employees are prohibited from misusing or abusing
prescription and/or non-prescription drugs while performing City business.
      (3)   Covered employees are prohibited from using any Prohibited Drug or
Substance or beverages containing alcohol or substances containing alcohol
(e.g. mouthwash that contains alcohol, medication that contains alcohol, food
that contains alcohol, or candy that contains alcohol) while performing City
business.
      (4)   Covered employees are prohibited from consuming alcohol while
performing safety-sensitive job functions or while on-call to perform safety-
sensitive job functions. If an on-call employee has consumed alcohol, they must
acknowledge the use of alcohol at the time that they are called to report for
duty. The covered employee will subsequently be relieved of his on-call
responsibilities and may be subject to disciplinary action.
      (5)   Covered employees are prohibited from reporting to work or
remaining on duty requiring the performance of safety-sensitive functions while
having an alcohol concentration of 0.02 or greater regardless of when the
alcohol was consumed.
      (6)   Covered employees are prohibited from consuming alcohol for eight
(8) hours following involvement in an accident or until he submits to the post-
accident drug and alcohol test, whichever occurs first.
      (7)   No covered employee shall consume alcohol within four (4) hours
prior to the performance of safety-sensitive job functions.
      (8)   The City under its own authority also prohibits the consumption of
alcohol during lunch periods, rest breaks, split shift breaks, or anytime the
employee is in uniform.
      (9)   The City shall not permit any covered employee to perform or
continue to perform safety-sensitive functions if it has actual knowledge that
the employee is using alcohol, has used a controlled substance, or has
adulterated or substituted a test specimen for controlled substances.
      (10)   Employees who are not at work and not “on-call” duty, but who
could be called at any time to perform covered functions are subject to the 4-
hour pre-duty alcohol prohibition. An employee, who has been notified to report
for duty to respond to an emergency, may not use alcohol after being notified
to report. Additionally, the employee must notify management of any alcohol
consumption within the previous 4-hours. If the City determines that an
employee has used alcohol within the time period after the employee has been
notified to report for duty, the City shall not permit the covered employee to
perform or continue to perform covered functions.
      (11)   Consistent with the Drug-free Workplace Act of 1988 (41 U.S.C. §
701) and Personnel Rules and Regulations, all City employees are prohibited
from engaging in the unlawful manufacture, distribution, dispensing,
possession, or use of prohibited substances in the work place including City
premises, City vehicles, while in uniform or while on City business.
   B.   Exceptions
      (1)   Legal Drugs: The appropriate use of legally prescribed drugs and
non-prescription medications is not prohibited. However, the use of any
substance which carries a warning label that indicates that mental functioning,
motor skills, or judgment may be adversely affected must be reported to a
supervisor in accordance with the Personnel Rules and Regulations. This report
must be made within seventy-two (72) hours of the prescription initially being
filled or before the employee begins utilizing the substance, whichever is
sooner. The employee is required to provide a written release from his/her
doctor indicating that the employee can perform his/her job functions while
under the influence of the prescribed drugs. The misuse and/or abuse of
prescription and/or non-prescription drugs while performing City business is
prohibited. An employee who does not disclose the use of a substance that
carries such a warning may be subject to disciplinary action, up to and
including termination.
11.   DRUG STATUTE CONVICTION
   A.   Consistent with the Drug Free Workplace Act of 1988 (41 U.S.C. § 701),
all employees have a duty to notify their immediate supervisor or the Human
Resources Director in writing of any criminal drug statute conviction for a
violation occurring in the workplace within five days after such conviction.
Failure to comply with this provision shall result in disciplinary action, up
to and including termination.
12.   TESTING REQUIREMENTS AND PROCEDURES
   A.   Testing Requirements
      (1)   Analytical urine drug testing and breath testing for alcohol will
be conducted as required by Federal regulations. All covered employees shall be
subject to testing prior to employment, for reasonable suspicion, following an
accident, and random as defined in the Testing rules of this policy. All
covered employees who test positive for drugs or alcohol on a random or
reasonable suspicion test will be tested prior to returning to duty after
completion of the Substance Abuse Professional’s recommended treatment program
and subsequent release to duty. Follow-up testing will also be conducted
following return-to- duty for a period of one to five years, with at least six
tests performed during the first year. The duration and frequency of the
follow-up testing above the minimum requirements will be at the discretion of
the Substance Abuse Professional. Return-to-duty and follow-up testing will be
conducted under direct observation.
      (2)   A drug test can be performed any time a covered employee is on
duty. An alcohol test can be performed under post accident, reasonable
suspicion, return-to-duty and follow-up testing. Under City authority, an
alcohol test can be performed on a covered employee under random testing. Under
City authority, an alcohol test can be performed any time a covered employee is
on duty.
      (3)   All covered employees will be subject to urine drug testing and
breath alcohol testing as a condition of ongoing employment with the City. Any
safety-sensitive employee who refuses to comply with a request for testing
shall be removed from duty and subject to discipline as defined in the Results
and Appeals Section of this policy. Any covered employee who is suspected of
providing false information in connection with a drug test, or who is suspected
of falsifying test results through tampering, contamination, adulteration, or
substitution will be required to undergo an observed collection. Verification
of the above listed actions will be considered a test refusal and will result
in the employee’s removal from duty and disciplined as defined in the Results
and Appeals Section of this policy. Additionally, refer to the Definitions:
Refusal to Test for all circumstances that constitute a refusal to test. The
City of Albuquerque has a zero-tolerance policy for refusing to test.
   B.   Drug Testing Procedures
      (1)   DOT tests must be completely separate from non-DOT tests, and shall
be conducted and completed before a non-DOT test is begun. Testing shall be
conducted in a manner to assure a high degree of accuracy and reliability and
using techniques, equipment, and laboratory facilities which have been approved
by the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services (HHS). All collections will
be administered by an employee contracted by the City, and consistent with the
procedures put forth in 49 C.F.R. § 40, as amended. The procedures will be
performed in a private, confidential manner and every effort will be made to
protect the employee, the integrity of the drug testing procedure, and the
validity of the test result.
      (2)   The collector will explain the basic collection procedure to the
employee, in accordance with 40.61(e). The collector will take mandatory
precautions to ensure that unadulterated specimens are obtained and correctly
identified, to include:
      •   Bluing agents in toilet tank and all water sources have been secured
      •   Individual positively identified (photo ID, etc.)
      •   The donor shall remove any unnecessary outer garments. Purses or
briefcases shall remain with outer garments
      •   Donor shall wash and dry his/her hands.
      •   To the greatest extent possible, the collector must keep an
employee’s collection container within view of both himself/herself and the
employee between the time the employee has urinated and the specimen is sealed
      •   Any unusual behavior noted on CCF by the collector
      (3)   The drugs that will be tested for include marijuana, cocaine,
opioids, amphetamines, and phencyclidine. A urine specimen will be collected
using the split specimen collection method described in 49 C.F.R. § 40, as
amended. Each specimen will be checked in accordance with 40.65 for sufficiency
of specimen, temperature, and signs of tampering, and accompanied by a DOT
Chain of Custody and Control Form and identified using a unique identification
number that attributes the specimen to the correct individual. The specimen
analysis will be conducted at a HHS certified laboratory. An initial drug
screen and validity test will be conducted on the primary urine specimen.
Specimen validity testing will be conducted on all urine specimens provided for
testing under PHMSA authority. Specimen validity testing is the evaluation of
the specimen to determine if it is consistent with normal human urine. The
purpose of the validity testing is to determine whether certain adulterants or
foreign substances were added to the urine, if the urine was diluted, or if the
specimen was substituted. For those specimens that are not negative, a
confirmatory Gas Chromatography/Mass Spectrometry (GC/MS) test will be
performed. The test will be considered positive if the amounts of the drug(s)
and/or its metabolites identified by the GC/MS test are at or above the minimum
thresholds established in 49 C.F.R. § 40, as amended.
      (4)   The test results from the HHS certified laboratory will be reported
directly to a Medical Review Officer (MRO). A MRO is a licensed physician with
detailed knowledge of substance abuse disorders and drug testing. The MRO must
have the qualifications required by DOT procedures (49 C.F.R. § 40, as
amended). The MRO will review the test results to ensure the scientific
validity of the test and to determine whether there is a legitimate medical
explanation for a non-negative test result. The MRO will attempt to contact the
employee to notify the employee of the non-negative laboratory result, and
provide the employee with an opportunity to explain the confirmed laboratory
test result. The MRO will subsequently review the employee’s medical history/
medical records as appropriate to determine whether there is a legitimate
medical explanation for a non- negative laboratory result. If no legitimate
medical explanation is found, the test will be verified positive or refusal to
test and reported to the Substance Abuse Program Manager. If a legitimate
explanation is found, the MRO will report the test result as negative to the
Substance Abuse Program Manager and no further action will be taken. If a test
is invalid without a medical explanation, a retest will be conducted under
direct observation. If a test is negative dilute, a retest will not be
conducted, the result of the original test will stand as the test of record.
The MRO must report all drug test results to the DER in a confidential manner,
and must transmit a report of verified tests to the DER so that the DER
receives it within two (2) days of verification by the MRO.
      (5)   Any covered employee who questions the results of a required drug
test under the Testing sections of this policy may request that the split
sample be tested. The Medical Review Officer will notify the employee of his or
her right to have the split specimen test, and notify the employee of the
procedures for requesting a test of the split specimen. The split sample test
must be conducted at a second HHS-certified laboratory with no affiliation with
the laboratory that analyzed the primary specimen. The test must be conducted
on the split sample that was provided by the employee at the same time as the
primary sample. All costs for such testing are paid by the employee unless the
result of the split sample test invalidates the result of the original test.
The method of collecting, storing, and testing the split sample will be
consistent with the procedures set forth in 49 C.F.R. § 40, as amended. The
employee's request for a split sample test must be made to the Medical Review
Officer within 72 hours of notice of the original sample verified test result.
Requests after 72 hours will only be accepted at the discretion of the MRO if
the delay was due to documentable facts that were beyond the control of the
employee. When the employee makes a timely request for a test of the split
specimen, the MRO must immediately provide written notice to that laboratory
that tested the primary specimen, directing the laboratory to forward the split
specimen to a second HHS-certified laboratory. The MRO must document the date
and time of the employee’s request. Employees do not have access to a test of
their split specimen following an invalid result. The City will ensure that the
cost for the split specimen is covered in order for a timely analysis of the
sample; however, the City will seek reimbursement for the split sample test
from the employee.
      (6)   If the analysis of the split specimen fails to confirm the presence
of the drug(s) detected in the primary specimen, if the split specimen is not
able to be analyzed, or if the results of the split specimen are not
scientifically adequate, the MRO will declare the original test to be canceled
and will direct the employer to retest the employee under direct observation.
      (7)   The split specimen will be stored at the initial laboratory until
the analysis of the primary specimen is completed. If the primary specimen is
negative, the split will be discarded. If the primary is positive, the split
will be retained for testing if so requested by the employee through the
Medical Review Officer. If the primary specimen is positive, it will be
retained in frozen storage for one year and the split specimen will be retained
for one year.
      (8)   Observed Collections. Consistent with 49 C.F.R. § 40, as amended,
collection under direct observation (by a person of the same gender) with no
advance notice will occur if:
         (a)   The laboratory reports to the MRO that a specimen is invalid,
and the MRO reports to the employer that there was not an adequate medical
explanation for the result; or
         (b)   The MRO reports to the employer that the original positive,
adulterated, or substituted test result had to be cancelled because the test of
the split specimen could not be performed; or
         (c)   The collector observes materials brought to the collection site
or the employee’s conduct clearly indicates an attempt to tamper with a
specimen; or
         (d)   The temperature on the original specimen was out of range; or
         (e)   The MRO reports a negative-dilute result with a creatine
concentration greater than or equal to 2 mg/dL but less than or equal to 5mg/
dL; or
         (f)   The test is a return-to-duty or follow-up test.
      (9)   The CCF must be properly executed by authorized collection site
personnel upon receipt and transfer of a urine specimen.
      (10)   If an employee does not provide a sufficient amount of urine to
permit a drug test (i.e., 45mL of urine), procedures in accordance with 40.193
and 40.195 will be followed by all personnel.
   C.   Alcohol Testing Procedures
      (1)   DOT tests must be completely separate from non-DOT tests, and shall
be conducted and completed before a non-DOT test is begun. Steps for the
alcohol screening test will be conducted in accordance with 40.241 and 40.243.
After the identity of the donor is checked using picture identification, The
Breath Alcohol Technician (BAT) will explain the testing procedure to the
employee, to include showing the employee the instructions on the back of the
Alcohol Testing form (ATF). Tests for breath alcohol concentration will be
conducted utilizing a National Highway Traffic Safety Administration (NHTSA)-
approved Evidential Breath Testing device (EBT) operated by a BAT trained in
accordance with 40.213. Testing will be conducted in a secured testing site in
accordance with 40.221 and 40.223. If the initial test indicates an alcohol
concentration of 0.02 or greater, a second test will be performed to confirm
the results of the initial test. The confirmatory test must occur on an EBT,
and procedures must be conducted in accordance with 40.251, 40.253, and 40.255.
The confirmatory test will be conducted at least fifteen minutes after the
completion of the initial test. The confirmatory test will be performed using a
NHTSA-approved EBT operated by a trained BAT. The EBT will identify each test
by a unique sequential identification number. This number, time, and unit
identifier will be provided on each EBT printout. The EBT printout along with
an approved alcohol testing form will be used to document the test, the
subsequent results, and to attribute the test to the correct employee. The test
will be performed in a private, confidential manner as required by 49 C.F.R. §
40, as amended. The procedure will be followed as prescribed to protect the
employee and to maintain the integrity of the alcohol testing procedures and
validity of the test result. All collections will be administered by an
employee contracted by the City.
      (2)   Following a screening test result, all procedures will be followed
in accordance with 40.247. An employee who has a confirmed alcohol
concentration of 0.02 or greater will be considered a positive alcohol test and
in violation of this policy. The BAT will notify the Substance Abuse Program
Manager.
      (3)   The City affirms the need to protect individual dignity, privacy,
and confidentiality throughout the testing process. If at any time the
integrity of the testing procedures or the validity of the test results is
compromised, the test will be cancelled. Minor inconsistencies or procedural
flaws that do not impact the test result will not result in a cancelled test.
      (4)   The alcohol testing form (ATF) required by 49 C.F.R. § 40, as
amended, shall be used for all PHMSA required testing. Failure of an employee
to sign Step 2 of the ATF will be considered a refusal to test.
      (5)   If an employee does not provide a sufficient amount of breath to
permit a valid breath test, procedures in accordance with 40.265 will be
followed by all personnel.
      (6)   An alcohol test may be cancelled if any problems listed in 40.267
or 40.269 occur during the testing process. Collectors have a responsibility to
correct any problem with the alcohol test in accordance with 40.271 as soon as
possible.
13.   PROCEDURES APPLICABLE TO NATURAL GAS PIPELINE WORKERS UNDER DOT- PHMSA
AUTHORITY
   A.   Covered Employees
      (1)   This section of the policy applies to all PHMSA pipeline covered
employees as it details specific Drug and Alcohol testing requirements mandated
by DOT. Covered employees are those who perform any “covered functions” such as
operations, maintenance, or emergency-response function regulated by 49 CFR
§192, 193, or 195 which is performed on a pipeline or on an LNG facility.
Pipelines include all parts of the physical facilities through which natural
gas moves in transportation (gathering, transmission, distribution, or
storage), including pipes, valves, and other appurtenances attached to pipes,
compressor units, metering stations, regulator stations, holders and fabricated
assemblies. The term “covered employee” does not include clerical, truck
driving, accounting, or other functions not subject to PHMSA but does include
anyone who performs a covered function employed by the City, or be a contractor
engaged by the City, or be employed by such a contractor.
   B.   DOT Procedures Referenced By 199.5
      (1)   This anti-drug and alcohol program must be conducted according to
the requirements of part 199 and DOT Procedures as listed as 49 CFR Part 40.
      (2)   Part 199 terms and concepts have the same meaning as in DOT
Procedures.
      (3)   Violations of DOT Procedures with respect to anti-drug and alcohol
programs required by Part 199 are violations of Part 199.
      (4)   An employer must check on the drug and alcohol testing record of
applicants or employees it is intending to use to perform safety-sensitive
functions to comply with Part 199 and Part 40.25.
         (a)   The City must obtain specific written consent from the
prospective covered employee to inquire about the applicant’s previous
controlled substances and alcohol testing information.
         (b)   The City shall, pursuant to an applicant’s written consent,
request the following information from DOT-regulated employers who have
employed the employee (applicant) during any period before the date of the
employee's application or transfer. Testing information required includes:
            i.   Alcohol tests with a result of 0.04 or greater;
            ii.   Verified positive controlled substance test results;
            iii.   Refusals to be tested, including verified adulterated or
substituted drug test results;
            iv.   Other violations of DOT agency drug and alcohol testing
regulations;
            v.   With respect to any employee who violated a DOT drug and
alcohol regulation, documentation of the employee’s successful completion of
DOT return-to-duty requirements (including follow-up tests) the City must
complete the following:
               (1)   If the previous employer does not have information about
return-to-duty process, the City must seek to obtain this information from the
employee.
               (2)   The City will only request information from previous
employers regarding drug or alcohol test information that was obtained pursuant
to Part 199, or other applicable DOT agency regulations only. Non-DOT testing
results will not be considered by the City for compliance with Part 199.5.
         (c)   If feasible, this information must be obtained and reviewed
prior to the first time the applicant or employee performs a covered function.
If it is not feasible, the City must obtain and review the information as soon
as possible. However, the City must not permit an employee to perform covered
functions after 30 days from the date on which the employee first performed
covered functions without having made a good faith, documented effort to obtain
the information.
      (5)   The City shall not use a covered employee to perform covered
functions if the City obtains information on a DOT controlled substances or
alcohol prohibition, without first obtaining information on DOT compliance
(Return to Duty Process) per Part 40 Subpart O.
   C.   STAND-DOWN WAIVERS REFERENCED BY PART 199.7 AND PART 40.21
      (1)   In accordance with Part 40.21, the City may not stand-down any
employee unless the City obtains a specific waiver from the DOT agency with
authority over the employer and its employees. The City will not remove covered
employees from covered functions until the MRO has completed the verification
process and the City has received results from the MRO. The City will not apply
for such a waiver.
      (2)   The DOT stand-down procedure does not apply to situations where DOT
employees test positive and request the split sample to be tested or a request
by the employee to the MRO for a quantitative test result. The City MRO will
immediately notify the City when a DOT employee has a verified positive test
regardless of a split specimen being tested or not or if the employee requests
a quantitative result from the MRO. The City will immediately remove the DOT
employee from duty.
   D.   PREEMPTION OF STATE AND LOCAL LAWS AS REQUIRED BY 199.9
      (1)   Part 199, subpart B, The Alcohol Misuse Prevention Program, except
as provided in paragraph two (2) below, preempts any State or local law, rule,
regulation, or order to the extent that:
         (a)   Compliance with both the State or local requirements and
compliance is not possible; or
         (b)   Compliance with the State or local requirement is an obstacle to
the accomplishment and execution of any requirement of part 199 (b).
         (c)   The State or local requirement is a pipeline safety standard
applicable to interstate pipeline facilities.
      (2)   Part 199 subpart A shall not be construed to preempt provisions of
State criminal law that impose sanctions for reckless conduct leading to actual
loss of life, injury, or damage to property, whether the provisions apply
specifically to transportation employees or employers or to the general public.
   E.   ANTI-DRUG PLAN
      (1)   The City will maintain and follow a written anti-drug plan that
conforms to the requirements of this part and the DOT Procedures.
      (2)   The plan must be revised if requested by NM-PRC-Pipeline Safety
Bureau or the DOT Administrator in order to provide a reasonable level of
safety.
   F.   USE OF PERSONS WHO FAIL OR REFUSE A DRUG TEST AS REFERENCED BY PART
199.103
      (1)   The City may not knowingly use as a covered employee any person
who:
         (a)   Fails a required drug test and the MRO determines that there is
no legitimate medical explanation for the confirmed positive test result; or
         (b)   Refuses to take a required DOT drug test.
      (2)   All covered employees who test positive on a pre-employment
(transfer/promotion only), random, or reasonable suspicion drug, alcohol, or
drug and alcohol test shall be disciplined in accordance with Section 14. A
covered employee who tests positive on a post-accident drug and/or alcohol test
or refuses to test as defined in this policy shall be terminated. In the event
a covered employee returns to duty the City may only use such employees in
performing covered functions if the employee has:
         (a)   Been considered by the MRO in accordance with DOT Procedures and
been determined by a SAP to have successfully completed required education or
treatment;
         (b)   Passed a DOT Return-to-Duty test (result must be acceptable to
DOT and this policy); and
         (c)   Submit to DOT imposed follow-up testing including a minimum of 6
tests in the first 12 months, and not have failed any of those follow-up tests
required by Part 40 Subpart 0 after returning to duty.
      (3)   Per DOT Part 40.261(b) employees that refuse to take a DOT
controlled substances test will incur the same consequences specified under DOT
agency regulations for a violation of those DOT agency regulations.
      (4)   The City tests for prohibited drugs and the presence of
unacceptable levels of such drugs, constitutes a positive result.
   G.   DRUG TESTS REQUIRED BY 199.105
   The City shall conduct the following drug tests for the presence of
prohibited drugs:
      (1)   Pre-Employment Testing as required by 199.105(a)
         (a)   The City may not hire or contract for the use of any person as a
covered employee unless that person passes a DOT pre-employment drug test.
         (b)   All offers of employment for covered positions shall be extended
conditional upon the applicant passing a drug test. An applicant shall not be
hired into a covered position unless the applicant takes a DOT drug test with a
verified negative result.
         (c)   If an applicant fails or refuses to submit to a pre-employment
drug test, the conditional offer of employment shall be rescinded. Failure or
refusal of a pre-employment drug test will disqualify an applicant for
employment with the City for a period of one year. Evidence of the absence of
drug dependency from a Substance Abuse Professional that meets with 49 C.F.R. §
40, as amended, and the approval of the City and a negative pre- employment
drug test will be required prior to further consideration for employment. The
cost for the assessment and any subsequent treatment will be the sole
responsibility of the applicant.
         (d)   A non-covered employee shall not be placed, transferred or
promoted into a covered position until the employee takes a DOT drug test with
a verified negative result.
         (e)   All current employees applying for transfer from a non-DOT
position to a DOT covered position must consent to and successfully pass a DOT
pre-employment drug test prior to transfer.
         (f)   If a pre-employment or pre-transfer test is cancelled, the City
will require the applicant to take and pass another drug test.
         (g)   In instances where a covered employee is on extended leave for a
period of ninety (90) days or more regardless of reason, the employee will be
required to take a drug test and have a negative test result prior to the
conduct of safety-sensitive job functions. A verified positive test will result
in disciplinary action in accordance with Section 14, Results and Appeals, of
this Policy. A refusal to test will result in termination.from City employment.
         (h)   When an employee being placed, transferred, or promoted from a
non-covered position to a covered position submits a drug test with a verified
positive result, the employee shall be subject to disciplinary action in
accordance with Section 14 herein, or Section 14 of the applicable Part (1, 2,
or 3) that corresponds to the non-covered position
         (i)   All applicants or employees being placed, transferred, or
promoted from a non- covered position to a covered position are required to
execute an authorization form allowing the City to obtain past drug and alcohol
test results, including any refusals to test, from each company for whom the
applicant worked for the previous two years.
      (2)   Post-Accident Testing As Required By 199.105(b)
         (a)   As soon as possible, but no later than 32 hours after a PHMSA
accident, the City shall drug test each employee whose performance either
contributed to the accident or cannot be completely discounted as a
contributing factor to the accident. The investigating supervisor will notify
the employee(s) of the need to test. The supervisor will make the determination
using the best information available at the time of the decision. If the drug
test is not conducted within 32 hours, attempts to conduct the test must cease
and the reasons for the failure to test documented.
         (b)   An employee who is subject to post-accident testing who fails to
remain readily available for such testing, including notifying a supervisor of
his or her location if he or she leaves the scene of the accident prior to
submission to such test, may be deemed to have refused to submit to testing.
         (c)   The City may decide not to test under this requirement but must
document the decision (City post-accident form). Any decision not to test
following an accident must be based on the best information available
immediately after the accident that the employee’s performance could not have
contributed to the accident or that, because of the time between that
performance and the accident, it is not likely that a drug test would reveal
whether the performance was affected by drug use.
         (d)   Nothing in Part 199 (or this policy) will be construed to
require the delay of necessary medical attention for the injured following an
accident or prohibit a covered employee from leaving an accident scene for the
period necessary to obtain assistance in responding to the accident or to
obtain emergency medical care.
         (e)   It is the responsibility of the City supervisor to determine
whether the drug test is covered under DOT-PHMSA (gas operations), DOT-FMCSA
(CDL), or City policy. It is also the supervisor’s responsibility to inform the
collection facility as to which of the above categories the test falls under
and to confirm that the appropriate tests have been administered.
         (f)   In the rare event the City is unable to perform an PHMSA drug
and alcohol test (e.g., employee is unconscious, employee is detained by law
enforcement agency), the City may use drug post-accident test results
administered by State or local law enforcement officials in lieu of the PHMSA
test. The State or local law enforcement officials must have independent
authority for the test and the employer must obtain the results in conformance
with state and local law.
         (g)   An employee who submits a urine sample for a post-accident drug
test which is determined to be a verified positive test result will be
terminated from City employment. An employee who refuses to test will be
terminated from City employment.
      (3)   Random Testing As Required By 199.105(c)
         (a)   All covered employees will be subjected to random, unannounced
testing.
         (b)   The dates for administering unannounced testing of randomly
selected employees shall be spread reasonably throughout the calendar year.
         (c)   The number of employees randomly selected for drug testing
during the calendar year shall be not less than the percentage rates
established by Federal regulations for those safety-sensitive employees subject
to random testing by Federal regulations. The City of Albuquerque is subject to
more than one DOT Agency drug and alcohol testing rule namely FMCSA, PHMSA and
FTA. The City has elected to combine DOT safety-sensitive employees under FMCSA
and PHMSA into a single random pool. The City must test at or above the highest
minimum annual random testing rates as set forth in 49 C.F.R. § 382.305(b) and
§ 199.105(c).
         (d)   The selection of employees for random drug testing shall be made
by a scientifically valid method such as a compliant computer-based random
number generator that is matched with the employee’s ID number. Each covered
employee shall be in a pool from which the random selection is made. Each
covered employee in the pool shall have an equal chance of selection each time
the selections are made. Employees will remain in the pool and subject to
selection, whether or not the employee has been previously tested. There is no
discretion on the part of management in the selection and notification of the
individuals who are to be tested.
         (e)   Random tests can be conducted at any time during an employee’s
shift for drug testing. Testing can occur during the beginning, middle, or end
of an employee’s shift.
         (f)   Employees are required to proceed immediately to the collection
site upon notification of their random selection.
         (g)   An employee who submits a urine sample for a random drug test
which is determined to be a verified positive test result shall be subject to
disciplinary action in accordance with Section 14, Results and Appeals, of this
Policy. An employee who refuses to test will be terminated from City
employment.
         (h)   Dual DOT-FMCSA (CDL drivers)/PHMSA –gas pipeline employees) are
randomly selected for urine drug testing at an annual minimum ratio established
by federal regulations for urine drug testing.
      (4)   Reasonable Suspicion Testing As Required By 199.105(d)
         (a)   The City shall drug test each employee when there is reasonable
suspicion that the employee is using a prohibited drug. Note: An alcohol test
is also required as noted below in the PHMSA Alcohol Misuse section of this
policy.
         (b)   The decision to test must be based on a reasonable and
articulable belief that the employee is using a prohibited drug based on
specific, contemporaneous, physical, behavioral, or performance indicators of
probable drug use. Document the decision criteria on the Reasonable Suspicion –
Direct observation form. Reasonable suspicion referrals must be made by one
supervisor who is trained to detect the signs and symptoms of drug use, and who
reasonably concludes that an employee may be adversely affected or impaired in
his work performance due to possible prohibited substance abuse.
         (c)   A reasonable suspicion drug test can be performed any time the
covered employee is on duty.
         (d)   A supervisor shall be responsible for transporting the employee
to the testing site. Supervisors should avoid placing themselves or others into
a situation which might endanger the physical safety of those present. The
impacted employee shall be placed on leave with pay status in accordance with
the Personnel Rules and Regulations. An employee who refuses an instruction to
submit to a drug test shall not be permitted to finish his shift and shall
immediately be placed on leave with pay status pending disciplinary action.
         (e)   When an employee reports to the Employee Health Center for
treatment or examination and the health care provider has a reasonable
suspicion that the employee has current drug use or is a substance abuser, the
health care provider shall notify the DER who shall refer the employee to the
SAP for substance abuse testing and assessment. The DER shall notify the
Department director or the designee who shall place the employee on leave with
pay status in accordance with the Personnel Rules and Regulations. A test in
this circumstance would be performed under the direct authority of the City.
         (f)   When there are no specific, contemporaneous, articulable
objective facts that indicate current drug use, but the employee (who is not
already a participant in a treatment program) admits the abuse of alcohol or
other substances to a supervisor in his/her chain of command, an Employee
Assistance Program (EAP) counselor, or a provider of medical services under
contract to the City, the employee shall be referred to the DER who shall refer
the employee to the Substance Abuse Counselor for substance abuse testing and
assessment. The DER shall notify the Department designee who shall place the
employee on leave with pay status in accordance with the Personnel Rules and
Regulations. A test in this circumstance would be performed under the direct
authority of the City.
         (g)   A written record of the observations which led to a drug test
based on reasonable suspicion shall be prepared and signed by the supervisor
making the observation prior to the release of the test results. This written
record shall be submitted to the Substance Abuse Program Manager and the MRO
and shall be attached to the forms reporting the test results.
         (h)   An employee who submits a urine sample for a reasonable
suspicion drug test which is determined to be a verified positive test result
shall be subject to disciplinary action in accordance with Section 14, Results
and Appeals, of this Policy. An employee who refuses to test will be terminated
from City employment.
      (5)   Return to Duty Testing As Required By 199.105(e)
         (a)   All covered employees who test positive on a drug, alcohol, or
drug and alcohol test shall be subject to disciplinary action in accordance
with Section 14, Results and Appeals, of this Policy. All covered employees who
refuse to test as defined in this policy shall be terminated. However, in the
event a covered employee returns to duty, the provisions of this section apply.
            i.   A covered employee who previously refused to take or had a
positive drug test may not return to duty in a covered function until the
covered employee has complied with applicable provisions of DOT Procedures
concerning SAP’s and the return-to-duty process.
            ii.   All covered employees who previously tested positive on a
drug or alcohol test or refused a test, must test negative for drugs, alcohol
(below 0.02 for alcohol), or both and be evaluated and released by the
Substance Abuse Professional before returning to work. For an initial positive
drug test a Return-to-Duty drug test is required and an alcohol test is
allowed. For an initial positive alcohol test a Return-to-Duty alcohol test is
required and a drug test is allowed. Following the initial assessment, the SAP
will recommend a course of rehabilitation unique to the individual. The SAP
should schedule the return-to-duty test only when the employee is known to be
drug- and alcohol-free and there is no risk to public safety.
            iii.   Return-to-duty testing is conducted when the employee is off
duty.
            iv.   Per DOT Part 40.67 mandatory direct observation collection
procedures will be used for all DOT required Return-To-Duty tests.
            v.   An employee who submits to a urine sample for a return-to-duty
test which is determined to be a positive test result will be terminated from
City employment. An employee who refuses to test will be terminated from City
employment.
      (6)   Follow-Up Testing As Required By 199.105(f)
         (a)   All covered employees who test positive on a drug and/or alcohol
test shall be subject to disciplinary action in accordance with Section 14,
Results and Appeals, of this Policy. All covered employees who refuse to test
as defined in this policy shall be terminated. In the event a covered employee
returns to duty, the provisions of this section apply.
            i.   Following a positive drug test or a refusal to take a DOT drug
test, a covered employee will be required to undergo frequent, unannounced drug
testing as directed by the SAP, for a period of up to 60 months. The number and
frequency of such follow-up testing shall be determined by the SAP, but shall
consist of at least six tests in the first 12 months following the employee’s
return to duty. In addition, such follow-up testing may include testing for
alcohol as directed by the SAP in accordance with DOT Part 40.
            ii.   Follow-up testing shall be conducted just before, during, or
immediately after the employee is on duty.
            iii.   Per DOT Part 40.67 mandatory direct observation collection
procedures will be used for all DOT required Follow-Up tests.
            iv.   Follow-up testing is separate and in addition to random,
post-accident, reasonable suspicion, and return-to-duty testing.
            v.   An employee who submits a urine sample for a follow-up drug
test which is determined to be a positive test result will be terminated from
City employment. An employee who refuses to test will be terminated from City
employment.
   H.   Employee Assistance Program As Required By 199.113- The City shall
provide an employee assistance program (EAP) for its employees and supervisory
personnel. Reference Section 1100 Substance Abuse Part 4.
   I.   Contractor Employees Provisions As Required By 199.115- With respect to
those employees who are contractor or employed by a contractor, the City may
provide by contract that the drug testing, education, and training required by
Part 199 be carried out by the contractor provided:
      (1)   The City must remain responsible for ensuring that the requirements
of Part 199 are complied with regardless if the contractor administers the
program or City administers the program or a combination thereof; and
      (2)   The contractor must allow access to property and records by the
City, by the Administrator, and a representative of the state agency for the
purpose of monitoring the operator’s (City’s) compliance with the requirements
of Part 199.
   J.   Recordkeeping Provisions for Part 199 As Required By 199.117
      (1)   The City must keep the following records for the periods specified
as well as permit access to the records as noted in paragraph (2) below:
         (a)   Collection process records demonstrating compliance with part
199 for at least 3 years
         (b)   Records of employee drug tests that indicate a verified positive
result, documentation of refusals to take required drug tests (including
substituted or adulterated drug test results), all follow-up tests and
schedules for follow-up tests, records that demonstrate compliance with the
recommendations of a substance abuse professional, and MIS annual report data
shall be maintained for a minimum of 5 years.
         (c)   Records of employee drug test results that show employees passed
a drug test must be kept for at least 1 year.
         (d)   Records confirming that supervisors and employees have been
trained as required by part 199 must be kept for at least 3 years.
      (2)   Information regarding an individual’s drug testing results or
rehabilitation must be released upon the written consent of the individual and
as provided by DOT Procedures.
      (3)   Contracted laboratories must keep two (2) years of records
pertaining to each employee urine specimen.
      (4)   Contracted laboratories must keep two (2) years of employer-
specific data as required by 40.111. Laboratories must transmit an aggregate
statistical summary, by employer, of the data listed in 49 C.F.R Part 40
Appendix B to the employer on a semi- annual basis.
   K.   Reporting Of PHMSA Drug Testing Results As Required By Part 199.119
   The City shall prepare and submit an annual MIS report to PHMSA of its anti-
drug testing using the Management Information System (MIS) form and
instructions as required by 49 C.F.R. Part 40 and Part 199.119.
   L.   Alcohol Misuse Plan
      (1)   Requirement To Maintain An Alcohol Misuse Plan Per 199.202
         (a)   The City must maintain and follow a written alcohol misuse plan
that conforms to the requirements of part 199 and DOT Procedures concerning
alcohol-testing programs. Any covered employee who has engaged in conduct
prohibited by 199.215 through 199.223 shall be advised of the resources
available to the covered employee in evaluating and resolving problems
associated with the misuse of alcohol, to include names, addresses, and
telephone numbers of substance abuse professionals, counseling, and treatment
programs.
   M.   Other Requirements Imposed By Operators As Required By 199.209
      (1)   Except as expressly provided in Part 199, nothing in the alcohol
related Part 199 requirements shall be construed to affect the authority of the
City, or the rights of employees, with respect to the use or possession of
alcohol, including authority and rights with respect to alcohol testing and
rehabilitation.
      (2)   The City may, but is not required to, conduct pre-employment
alcohol testing under Part 199. If the City chooses to conduct pre-employment
alcohol tests, specific criteria must be met.
         (a)   The City will not conduct pre-employment alcohol tests of
covered employees.
   N.   Requirement for Notice Prior To Drug or Alcohol Testing As Required By
Part 199.211
      (1)   Before performing an alcohol test under this policy, the City shall
notify the covered employee that Part 199 requires the alcohol test. The City
cannot falsely represent that a test is administered under Part 199.
   O.   Alcohol Tests Required By 199.225- The City shall conduct the following
types of tests for the presence of alcohol:
      (1)   Post-accident As Required by 199.225(a):
         (a)   As soon as practicable following a PHMSA accident, the City
shall test each surviving covered employee for alcohol if that employee's
performance of a covered function either contributed to the PHMSA accident or
cannot be completely discounted as a contributing factor to the accident. The
decision not to administer a test under this part must be based on the City’s
determination, using the best available information at the time of the
determination that the covered employee's performance could not have
contributed to the accident.
         (b)   If a required post-accident test is not administered within 2
hours following the PHMSA accident, the City shall prepare and maintain on file
a record (post-accident summary form) stating the reasons the test was not
promptly administered. The City will continue attempting to administer an
alcohol test in this case for up to 8-hours. If a required test is not
administered within 8 hours following the accident, the City shall cease
attempts to administer an alcohol test and shall state in the record the
reasons for not administering the test.
         (c)   A covered employee who is subject to post-accident testing who
fails to remain readily available for such testing, including notifying the
City of his or her location if the employee leaves the scene of the accident
prior to submission to such test, may be deemed to have refused to submit to
testing.
         (d)   Nothing in Part 199 (or this policy) will be construed to
require the delay of necessary medical attention for the injured following an
accident or prohibit a covered employee from leaving an accident scene for the
period necessary to obtain assistance in responding to the accident or to
obtain emergency medical care.
         (e)   It is the responsibility of the supervisor to determine if the
alcohol test is covered under DOT-PHMSA (gas operations), DOT-FMCSA (CDL), or
City policy. It is also the supervisor’s responsibility to inform the
collection facility as to which of the above categories the test falls under
and to notify the collection facility which test to perform or not perform
(e.g., no alcohol test after 8-hours after the accident).
         (f)   In the rare event the City is unable to perform an PHMSA drug
and alcohol test (e.g., employee is unconscious, employee is detained by law
enforcement agency), the City may use alcohol post-accident test results
administered by State or local law enforcement officials in lieu of the PHMSA
test. The State or local law enforcement officials must have independent
authority for the test and the employer must obtain the results in conformance
with state and local law.
         (g)   An employee who submits a breath sample for a post-accident
alcohol test which is determined to be a verified positive test result will be
terminated from City employment. An employee who refuses to test will be
terminated from City employment.
      (2)   Random Testing:
         (a)   DOT-PHMSA does not authorize random alcohol tests. Under City
authority, however, all covered employees will be subject to random unannounced
alcohol testing. The selection of employees shall be made by a scientifically
valid method of randomly generating an employee identifier from the appropriate
pool of safety-sensitive employees.
            i.   The dates for administering unannounced testing of randomly
selected employees shall be spread reasonably throughout the calendar year.
            ii.   The number of employees randomly selected for alcohol testing
during the calendar year shall be not less than the percentage rates
established by Federal regulations for those safety-sensitive employees subject
to random drug testing by Federal regulations. The City of Albuquerque is
subject to more than one DOT Agency drug and alcohol testing rule namely FMCSA,
PHMSA and FTA. The City has elected to combine DOT safety-sensitive employees
under FMCSA and PHMSA into a single random pool. The random testing rate for
alcohol established by the City will equal the random test rate for drugs.
            iii.   The selection of employees for random alcohol testing shall
be made by a scientifically valid method such as a compliant computer-based
random number generator that is matched with the employee’s ID number. Each
covered employee shall be in a pool from which the random selection is made.
Each covered employee in the pool shall have an equal chance of selection each
time the selections are made. Employees will remain in the pool and subject to
selection, whether or not the employee has been previously tested. There is no
discretion on the part of management in the selection and notification of the
individuals who are to be tested.
            iv.   Under the City’s authority, a random alcohol test may be
performed any time the covered employee is on duty. Testing can occur during
the beginning, middle, or end of an employee’s shift.
            v.   Employees are required to proceed immediately to the
collection site upon notification of their random selection.
            vi.   An employee who submits a breath sample for a random alcohol
test which is determined to be a verified positive test result will be subject
to disciplinary action in accordance with Section 14, Results and Appeals, of
this Policy. An employee who refuses to test will be terminated from City
employment.
      (3)   Reasonable suspicion testing required by 199.225(b):
         (a)   The City shall require a covered employee to submit to an
alcohol test when the City has reasonable suspicion to believe that the
employee has violated the prohibitions of this policy.
         (b)   Reasonable suspicion referrals must be made by one supervisor
who is trained to detect the signs and symptoms of alcohol use, and who
reasonably concludes that an employee may be adversely affected or impaired in
his work performance due to possible prohibited alcohol misuse.
         (c)   The City’s determination that reasonable suspicion exists to
require the covered employee to undergo an alcohol test shall be based on
specific, contemporaneous, articulable observations concerning the appearance,
behavior, speech, or body odors of the employee. These reasons are to be
documented on the Reasonable Suspicion –Direct observation form.
         (d)   Alcohol testing is authorized by Part 199 (or this policy) only
if the observations required by this sub-part are made during, just preceding,
or just after the period of the workday that the employee is required to be in
compliance with this sub-part. Under DOT authority, a covered employee may be
directed by the City to undergo reasonable suspicion testing for alcohol only
while the employee is performing covered functions; just before the employee is
to perform covered functions; or just after the employee has ceased performing
covered functions. However, under City authority, a reasonable suspicion
alcohol test may be performed any time the covered employee is on duty.
         (e)   If a test required by this policy is not administered within 2
hours following the determination, the City shall prepare and maintain on file
a record stating the reasons the test was not promptly administered. The City
will continue attempting to administer an alcohol test in this case for up to
8-hours. If a required test is not administered within 8 hours following the
determination, the City shall cease attempts to administer an alcohol test and
shall state in the record the reasons for not administering the test. Records
shall be submitted to PHMSA upon request of the Administrator.
         (f)   Notwithstanding the absence of a reasonable suspicion alcohol
test under this provision, the City shall not permit a covered employee to
report for duty or remain on duty requiring the performance of covered
functions while the employee is under the influence of or impaired by alcohol,
as shown by the behavioral, speech, or performance indicators of alcohol
misuse, nor shall the City permit the covered employee to perform or continue
to perform covered functions, until:
            (i)   An alcohol test is administered and the employee’s alcohol
concentration measures less than 0.02; or
            (ii)   The start of the employee’s next regularly scheduled duty
period, but not less than 8 hours following the determination that there is
reasonable suspicion to believe that the employee has violated the prohibitions
in this subpart.
         (g)   Except as provided above, the City will not take any action
against a covered employee based solely on the employee’s behavior and
appearance in the absence of an alcohol test.
         (h)   The City shall be responsible for transporting the employee to
the testing site. Supervisors should avoid placing themselves or others into a
situation which might endanger the physical safety of those present. The
impacted employee shall be placed on leave with pay status in accordance with
the Personnel Rules and Regulations. An employee who refuses an instruction to
submit to an alcohol test shall not be permitted to finish his shift and shall
immediately be placed on leave with pay status pending disciplinary action.
         (i)   When an employee reports to the Employee Health Center for
treatment or examination and the health care provider has a reasonable
suspicion that the employee has current alcohol use, the health care provider
shall notify the DER who shall refer the employee to the SAP for substance
abuse testing and assessment. The DER shall notify the Department director or
the designee who shall place the employee on leave with pay status in
accordance with the Personnel Rules and Regulations. A test in this
circumstance would be performed under the direct authority of the City.
         (j)   When there are no specific, contemporaneous, articulable
objective facts that indicate current alcohol use, but the employee (who is not
already a participant in a treatment program) admits the abuse of alcohol to a
supervisor in his/her chain of command, an Employee Assistance Program (EAP)
counselor, or a provider of medical services under contract to the City, the
employee shall be referred to the DER who shall refer the employee to the
Substance Abuse Program for substance abuse testing and assessment. The DER
shall notify the Department designee who shall place the employee on leave with
pay status in accordance with the Personnel Rules and Regulations. A test in
this circumstance would be performed under the direct authority of the City.
         (k)   A written record of the observations which led to an alcohol
test based on reasonable suspicion shall be prepared and signed by the
supervisor making the observation prior to the release of the test results.
This written record shall be submitted to the Substance Abuse Program Manager
and the MRO and shall be attached to the forms reporting the test results.
         (l)   An employee who submits a breath sample for a reasonable
suspicion alcohol test which is determined to be a verified positive test
result shall be subject to disciplinary action in accordance with Section 14,
Results and Appeals, of this Policy. An employee who refuses to test will be
terminated from City employment.
      (4)   Return to Duty Testing As Required By 199.105(e):
         (a)   All covered employees who test positive on a drug, alcohol, or
drug and alcohol test shall be subject to discipline in accordance with Section
14, Results and Appeals, of this Policy. All covered employees who refuse to
test as defined in this policy will be terminated. However, in the event a
covered employee returns to duty the provisions of this section apply.
            i.   A covered employee who previously refused to take or had a
positive alcohol test may not return to duty in a covered function until the
covered employee has complied with applicable provisions of DOT Procedures
concerning SAP’s and the return-to-duty process.
            ii.   All covered employees who previously tested positive on a
drug or alcohol test or refused a test, must test negative for drugs, alcohol
(below 0.02 for alcohol), or both and be evaluated and released by the
Substance Abuse Professional before returning to work. For an initial positive
drug test a Return-to-Duty drug test is required and an alcohol test is
allowed. For an initial positive alcohol test a Return-to-Duty alcohol test is
required and a drug test is allowed. Following the initial assessment, the SAP
will recommend a course of rehabilitation unique to the individual. The SAP
should schedule the return-to-duty test only when the employee is known to be
drug- and alcohol-free and there is no risk to public safety.
            iii.   Return-to-duty testing is conducted when the employee is off
duty.
            iv.   Per DOT Part 40.67 mandatory direct observation collection
procedures will be used for all DOT required Return-To-Duty tests.
            v.   An employee who submits to a breath sample for a return-to-
duty test which is determined to be a positive test result will be terminated
from City employment. An employee who refuses to test will be terminated from
City employment.
      (5)   Follow-Up Testing As Required By 199.105(f):
         (a)   All covered employees who test positive on a drug and/or alcohol
test shall be subject to disciplinary action in accordance with Section 14,
Results and Appeals, of this policy. All covered employees who or refuse to
test as defined in this policy will be terminated. In the event a covered
employee returns to duty, the provisions of this section apply.
            i.   Following a positive alcohol test or a refusal to take a DOT
alcohol test, a covered employee will be required to undergo frequent,
unannounced drug testing as directed by the SAP, for a period of up to 60
months. The number and frequency of such follow-up testing shall be determined
by the SAP, but shall consist of at least six tests in the first 12 months
following the employee’s return to duty. In addition, such follow-up testing
may include testing for alcohol as directed by the SAP in accordance with DOT
Part 40.
            ii.   Follow-up testing shall be conducted just before, during, or
immediately after the employee is on duty.
            iii.   Per DOT Part 40.67 mandatory direct observation collection
procedures will be used for all DOT required Follow-Up tests.
            iv.   Follow-up testing is separate and in addition to random,
post-accident, reasonable suspicion, and return-to-duty testing.
            v.   An employee who submits a breath sample for a follow-up
alcohol test which is determined to be a positive test result will be
terminated from City employment. An employee who refuses to test will be
terminated from City employment.
   P.   Retention Of Records (199.227)
      (1)   The City will maintain records of its alcohol misuse and controlled
substances use prevention programs as required by Part 199. All records must be
maintained in a secure location with controlled access.
      (2)   Records shall be maintained by record type and for the following
duration:
         (a)   Records that must be kept for a five (5) year retention period
include:
            i.   Alcohol test results indicating an alcohol concentration of
0.02 or greater;
            ii.   Documentation of refusals to take required alcohol tests;
            iii.   SAP evaluation and referrals of the employee;
            iv.   All follow-up tests and schedules for all follow-up tests
            v.   A copy of each MIS annual report data as required by part
199.229; and
            vi.   Copies of calibration records
         (b)   Records that must be kept for a three (3) year retention period
include:
            i.   Information obtained from previous employers under 40.25
concerning alcohol test results of employees
         (c)   Records that must be kept for a two (2) year retention period
include:
            i.   EBT records of maintenance and inspections related to the
alcohol collection process (except calibration of EBT’s)
            ii.   Records related to training
         (d)   Records that must be kept for a one (1) year retention period
include:
            i.   Records of negative alcohol test results with a concentration
of less than 0.02
      (3)   The types of records that must be generated and maintained under
Part 199 and Part 40 are:
         (a)   Records related to the collection process
         (b)   Calibration documentation for evidential breath testing device
         (c)   Documentation of breath alcohol technician training
         (d)   Documents generated regarding decisions to test under reasonable
suspicion requirements
         (e)   Documents generated in connection with decisions on post-
accident tests
         (f)   Documents verifying existence of a medical explanation of the
inability of a covered employee to provide adequate breath for alcohol testing.
         (g)   Records related to a covered employee’s test results
         (h)   The employer’s copy of the alcohol test forms including the
results
         (i)   Documents related to the refusal of any covered employee to
submit to an alcohol test required by part 199.
         (j)   Documents presented by a covered employee to dispute the result
of a DOT Part 199-alcohol test.
         (k)   Documents generated in connection with verifications of prior
employers’ alcohol or controlled substances test results that the employer
obtains per part 40.25,
         (l)   Records related to other violations of part 199.
         (m)   Records relating to evaluations or treatment such as:
            i.   SAP determinations concerning a covered employee's need for
assistance;
            ii.   Records concerning a covered employee’s compliance with
recommendations of the SAP;
            iii.   Records related to the operator's MIS annual testing data;
            iv.   Materials on alcohol misuse awareness including a copy of the
employer’s policy on alcohol misuse;
            v.   Documentation of compliance with requirements of part 199.231;
            vi.   Documentation of training provided to supervisors for the
purpose of qualifying the supervisors to made reasonable suspicion
determinations;
            vii.   Certification that training conducted under this part
complies with requirements for such training.
   Q.   Reporting Of Alcohol Testing Results (199.229):
      (1)   The City shall prepare and submit an annual MIS report to PHMSA of
its anti-drug testing using the Management Information System (MIS) form and
instructions as required by 49 C.F.R. Part 40 and Part 199.119.
   R.   Contractor Employees Per Part 199.245
      (1)   The City may utilize contractors to perform covered functions and
administer their own drug and alcohol-testing program that complies with Part
199.
      (2)   The City, however, remains responsible for ensuring alcohol
testing; training and education required by Part 199 are complied with.
      (3)   The contractor must allow access to property and records by the
City, the Administrator, any DOT agency with regulatory authority over the City
or covered employee, and if the City is subject to the jurisdiction of a state
agency, a representative of the state agency for the purposes of monitoring the
City’s compliance with the requirements of Part 199 and Part 40.
14.   RESULTS AND APPEALS
   A.   Result of Drug/Alcohol Test
      (1)   Any covered employee that has a positive drug test result, positive
alcohol test result, or refuses to test will be removed from his safety-
sensitive position, informed of educational and rehabilitation programs
available, and referred to a Substance Abuse Professional (SAP) for assessment.
No employee will be allowed to return to duty requiring the performance of
safety-sensitive job functions without the approval of the SAP.
      (2)   A positive drug and/or alcohol test or a refusal to test will also
result in disciplinary action as specified herein.
         (a)   All testing results shall be reported by the City's HHS
certified laboratory directly to the Medical Review Officer or his/her
designee. If the test results are negative, the Medical Review Officer or
designee will review and report then notify the Substance Abuse Program
Manager.
         (b)   If the City's HHS certified laboratory reports the results as
non-negative, the City's Medical Review Officer shall determine the validity of
the results and provide the employee with the opportunity to discuss the test
results. If the MRO finds a valid medical explanation (i.e. prescription,
medical treatment) for the non-negative test result, the MRO will verify and
report the test as negative and no action will be taken. If the MRO’s
assessment finds no valid medical explanation for the non-negative result, he
will verify the test as positive or refusal to test, and copies of the testing
records shall be provided to the Substance Abuse Program Manager.
         (c)   Upon notice of a verified positive drug and/or alcohol test
result, or a refusal to submit to a test, the Department Director or designee
shall place the employee on paid administrative leave and notify the Director
of Human Resources.
         (d)   Refusal to test shall be considered a positive test result and a
direct act of insubordination and shall result in termination.
         (e)   The employee shall be immediately referred to a Substance Abuse
Professional for assessment. The SAP will evaluate each employee to determine
what assistance the employee needs in resolving problems associated with
prohibited drug use or alcohol misuse. The cost of any treatment or
rehabilitation services will be paid directly by the employee or their
insurance provider.
         (f)   A Voluntary Referral or participation in the City Employee
Assistance Program does not shield an employee from disciplinary action or
guarantee employment or reinstatement with the City.
         (g)   Failure of an employee to report in writing to their immediate
supervisor and the Human Resources Director within five days a criminal drug
statute conviction for a violation occurring in the workplace shall result in
disciplinary action, up to and including termination.
   B.   Discipline
      (1)   Refusal to Test. Any covered employee who refuses a drug or alcohol
test ordered under this policy shall be subject to termination. Such a refusal
shall be deemed a verified positive test result and a direct act of
insubordination.
      (2)   Second Chance Eligibility. A covered employee is eligible for the
Second Chance Program for a Verified Positive Result from a sample submitted by
an employee for drug or alcohol test under this policy if all of the below
criteria are met:
         (a)   This is the first instance of a Verified Positive Result;
         (b)   The Verified Positive Result was obtained pursuant to a pre-
employment (transfer or promotion) random, or reasonable suspicion drug and
alcohol test;
         (c)   The employee has been employed with the City for at least two
calendar years;
         (d)   The employee has not received a suspension or suspensions
totaling six days or more in the preceding two years; and
         (e)   The employee has not received a suspension for tardiness or
absenteeism in the preceding year.
      (3)   Second Chance Ineligibility. If an employee is ineligible for or
refuses the Second Chance Program, a Verified Positive Result from a sample
submitted by an employee for a drug or alcohol test under this policy shall
result in termination from City employment.
      (4)   Post-Accident. An employee who submits a sample from a post-
accident drug/alcohol test which is determined to be a verified positive test
result will be terminated from City employment
   C.   Second Chance Program. The Second Chance Program is comprised of the
following:
      (1)   The covered employee will be disciplined with a twenty-eight (28)
calendar days leave without pay suspension, always to commence on the first
Saturday following issuance of the Notice of Final Action/Disciplinary Action.
      (2)   Mandatory referral to the Substance Abuse Professional (SAP) for
assessment, formulation of a treatment plan, and the execution of a return-to-
work agreement. An employee’s failure to execute or comply with a return-to-
work agreement will result in termination from City employment
      (3)   The covered employee must comply with the return to work agreement
by: submitting to a drug/alcohol test immediately prior to returning to work
with a Verified Negative Result; cooperating with the SAP recommended treatment
program (as determined by the SAP); and agreeing to periodic unannounced
follow-up testing. The cost of any treatment or rehabilitation services will be
paid directly by the employee or their insurance provider. If the SAP has not
released the covered employee to return-to-duty at the completion of the 28—day
suspension, the employee will be allowed to take accrued leave to participate
in the SAP prescribed treatment program. If no accrued leave time is available,
the employee shall be placed on leave without pay in accordance with the
Personnel Rules and Regulations. Any leave taken, either paid or unpaid, shall
be considered leave taken under the Family and Medical Leave Act.
   D.   Grievance and Appeal
      (1)   The determination by the Medical Review Officer that a drug test is
a verified positive test result or is a refusal to test is not a medical
determination that is subject to appeal under the Personnel Rules and
Regulations.
      (2)   An employee who is subject to termination or other disciplinary
action pursuant to this policy may grieve the termination or other disciplinary
action pursuant to the provisions of the Merit System Ordinance or applicable
collective bargaining agreements. The consequences specified by 49 C.F.R. §
655, as amended, for a positive test or test refusal are not subject to a
grievance.
15.   PROPER APPLICATION OF THE POLICY
   A.   The City is dedicated to assuring fair and equitable application of
this substance abuse policy. Therefore, supervisors and managers are required
to use and apply all aspects of this policy in an unbiased and impartial
manner. Any supervisor or manager who knowingly disregards the requirements of
this policy, or who is found to deliberately misuse the policy in regard to
subordinates, shall be subject to disciplinary action, up to and including
termination.
16.   INFORMATION DISCLOSURE/ACCESS TO FACILITIES
   A.   Drug and alcohol testing records shall be maintained by the Substance
Abuse Program Manager or designee and, except as provided below, by law or
expressly authorized or required in Part 199, the results of any drug or
alcohol test shall not be disclosed without express consent of the tested
employee.
   B.   The employee, upon written request, is entitled to obtain copies of any
records pertaining to their use of prohibited drugs or misuse of alcohol
including any drug or alcohol testing records. Covered employees have the right
to gain access to any pertinent records such as equipment calibration records,
and records of laboratory certifications. Employees may not have access to
follow-up testing plans.
   C.   Records of a positive drug test result, positive alcohol test result,
or a refusal to test shall be released to the City’s Substance Abuse Program
Manager, Department Director, and Department Supervisor on a need to know
basis.
   D.   Records will be released to a subsequent employer only upon receipt of
a written request from the employee.
   E.   Records of an employee's drug and alcohol tests shall be released to
the adjudicator in a grievance, lawsuit, or other proceeding initiated by or on
behalf of the tested individual arising from the results of the drug and
alcohol test. The records will be released to the decision maker in the
preceding. The information will only be released with binding stipulation from
the decision maker will make it available only to parties in the preceding.
   F.   Records will be released to the National Transportation Safety Board
during an accident investigation.
   G.   Records will be released to the DOT or any DOT agency with regulatory
authority over the employer or any of its employees.
   H.   Records will be released if requested by a Federal, state or local
safety agency with regulatory authority over the City or the employee.
   I.   If a party seeks a court order to release a specimen or part of a
specimen contrary to any provision of 49 C.F.R. § 40, as amended, necessary
legal steps to contest the issuance of the order will be taken.
   J.   In cases of a contractor or sub-recipient of a state department of
transportation, records will be released when requested by such agencies that
must certify compliance with the regulation to the PHMSA.
   K.   The City shall permit access to all facilities utilized in complying
with the requirements of Part 199 to the Secretary of Transportation, any DOT
agency, or a representative of a state agency with regulatory authority over
the City.
17.   INCORPORATION AND ENFORCEABILITY
   A.   Incorporation. This policy incorporated by reference the cited federal
law and regulations as in effect at the time this policy is issued and this
policy shall be deemed automatically modified by any amendment or modification
to the cited federal law and regulations. Employees shall be given notice of
the changes in the cited federal law and regulations.
   B.   Enforceability. The invalidity or unenforceability of any provision of
this policy shall not affect any other provision hereof, and the policy shall
be construed in all respects as if such invalid of unenforceable provision was
omitted. Should any part of this Agreement or any provision contained herein be
declared invalid by any tribunal of competent jurisdiction, the validity of the
remaining portions shall not be affected. Should this occur, the parties will
immediately meet to negotiate a suitable provision to replace the provision
held invalid.
Appendix A
JOB TITLES UNDER THE JURISDICTION OF DOT-PHMSA DRUG AND ALCOHOL TESTING
REGULATIONS
GENERAL INSTRUCTIONS: List only job functions that
   •   Perform covered function work on natural gas pipelines, facilities, or
pipeline Right-of Way.
   •   Respond to natural gas leak emergencies or emergency response.
   •   Employee names are not required on this list.
 
Do not list job functions that do not
work on natural gas pipelines or the
Right-of Way of natural gas pipelines
including accounting, administration, or REASON FOR PHMSA D&A COVERAGE
other job duties that do not require
actual pipeline work or emergency
response duties. JOB TITLE
EXAMPLE # 1: BACKHOE OPERATOR            Conducts Actual Work On Natural Gas
                                         Pipelines
                                         
1. Environmental Compliance Coordinator  1. Works on pipelines + Emergency
                                        Response
                                          
2. Solid Waste Supervisor/Landfill       2. Works on pipelines + Emergency
                                        Response
                                          
                                         
 
Appendix B3
Attachment B
Alcohol Fact Sheet
   Alcohol is a socially acceptable drug that has been consumed throughout the
world for centuries. It is considered a recreational beverage when consumed in
moderation for enjoyment and relaxation during social gatherings. However, when
consumed primarily for its physical and mood-altering effects, it is a
substance of abuse. As a depressant, it slows down physical responses and
progressively impairs mental functions.
   Signs and Symptoms of Useand Symptoms of Use
   •   Dulled mental processes
   •   Lack of coordination
   •   Odor of alcohol on breath
   •   Possible constricted pupils
   •   Sleepy or stuporous condition
   •   Slowed reaction rate
   •   Slurred speech
(Note: Except for the odor, these are general signs and symptoms of any
depressant substance.)
Health Effects? Health Effects
   The chronic consumption of alcohol (average of three servings per day of
beer [12 ounces], whiskey [1 ounce], or wine [6 ounce glass]) over time may
result in the following health hazards:
   •   Decreased sexual functioning
   •   Dependency (up to 10 percent of all people who drink alcohol become
physically and/or mentally dependent on alcohol and can be termed an alcoholic)
   •   Fatal liver diseases
   •   Increased cancers of the mouth, tongue, pharynx, esophagus, rectum,
breast, and malignant melanoma
   •   Kidney disease
   •   Pancreatitis
   •   Spontaneous abortion and neonatal mortality
   •   Ulcers
   •   Birth defects (up to 54 percent of all birth defects are alcohol
related).
Social Issues? Social Issues
   •   Two-thirds of all homicides are committed by people who drink prior to
the crime.
   •   Two to three percent of the driving population is legally drunk at any
one time. This rate is doubled at night and on weekends.
   •   Two-thirds of all Americans will be involved in an alcohol-related
vehicle accident during their lifetimes.
   •   The rate of separation and divorce in families with alcohol dependency
problems is 7 times the average.
   •   Forty percent of family court cases are alcohol problem related.
   •   Alcoholics are 15 times more likely to commit suicide than are other
segments of the population.
   •   More than 60 percent of burns, 40 percent of falls, 69 percent of
boating accidents, and 76 percent of private aircraft accidents are alcohol
related.
The Annual Toll? The Annual Toll
   •   24,000 people will die on the highway due to the legally impaired
driver.
   •   12,000 more will die on the highway due to the alcohol-affected driver.
   •   15,800 will die in non-highway accidents.
   •   30,000 will die due to alcohol-caused liver disease.
   •   10,000 will die due to alcohol-induced brain disease or suicide.
   •   Up to another 125,000 will die due to alcohol-related conditions or
accidents.
Workplace Issues? Workplace Issues
   •   It takes one hour for the average person (150 pounds) to process one
serving of an alcoholic beverage from the body.
   •   Impairment in coordination and judgment can be objectively measured with
as little as two drinks in the body.
   •   A person who is legally intoxicated is 6 times more likely to have an
accident than a sober person.
Appendix C 
SYSTEM CONTACTS
Any questions regarding this policy or any other aspect of the substance abuse
policy should be directed to the following individual(s). Names and contracted
vendors are as of the date of adoption and may change from time to time without
a formal amendment of the rule.
 
Substance Abuse Program:   City of Albuquerque FA Risk
Title:               Manager of the Substance Abuse Program
Address:            1 Civic Plaza NW, Suite 200 Albuquerque, NM 87103
Telephone Number:         (505) 768-3165
 
Medical Review Office:      Workforce QA
Title:               Medical Review Officer
Address:            1430 S. Main St. #475, SaltLake City, UT 84115
Telephone Number:         (801) 486-5400
 
Anabolic Androgenic Agents:   Workforce QA
Title:               Medical Review Officer
Address:            1430 South Main St. #475, Salt Lake City, UT 84115
Telephone Number:         (801) 486-5400
 
Substance Abuse Professional
Name:               The Solutions Group
Title:               Substance Abuse Professional
Address:            5801 Osuna NE, Suite A-105 Albuquerque, NM 87109
Telephone Number:         (505) 254-3555
 
DHHS Certified Laboratory:   Primary Specimen
Name:               Quest Diagnostics Incorporated
 
PART 5 Employee Assistance
1.   Program ISSUING AGENCY: The Human Resources Department and the Division of
Risk Management, of the Department of Finance and Administrative Services.
2.   SCOPE: These rules have general applicability to all prospective and
current employees, classified and unclassified, including but not limited to
interns, volunteers, and seasonal employees.
3.   STATUTORY AUTHORITY: ROA, 1994, § 2-15-1, et seq.; Council Resolutions 65-
1995 and 78-1995; 49 C.F.R. § 40
4.   DURATION: Until revoked.
5.   EFFECTIVE DATE: September 1, 2025, unless a later date is specified at the
end of a section.
6.   OBJECTIVE: The City Council has instructed the Chief Administrative
Officer to “create a confidential program allowing and encouraging employees to
seek help for substance abuse related problems through the Employee Assistance
Program, Substance Abuse Program.” The purpose of this part of the Substance
Abuse Policy is to implement that instruction in a manner which provides for a
safer environment for all employees and the public.
7.    DEFINITIONS: Reserved.
8.   VOLUNTARY ASSISTANCE (SELF-REFERRAL)
   A.   The city encourages employees who believe or suspect they may be
abusing a substance to voluntarily refer themselves to the Employee Assistance
Program, Substance Abuse Program for assistance. The staff is prepared to
confidentially assist employees requesting their services. Employees may self-
refer at any time except within twenty-four (24) hours after an accident as
defined in this policy or after being notified that they must submit to a
random, reasonable suspicion, transfer or promotion drug and alcohol test under
Parts 1, 2, 3, or 4 of this Substance Abuse Policy. Except as otherwise
provided in this policy, employee contacts and services provided to employees
shall be kept confidential.
   B.   Employees who voluntarily seek assistance for substance abuse may
receive, without charge, brief counseling or admission into the City’s
Substance Abuse Program, which includes a substance use assessment, formulation
of a treatment plan, and referral to appropriate treatment provider. . All of
the City's group health insurance plans provide limited benefits to help defray
the cost of treatment. Employees should either refer to their schedule of
benefits or consult with SAP staff to determine the exact benefits available.
   C.   Employees who self-refer shall be placed on the appropriate leave
status until they are, in the opinion of the City Substance Abuse Counselor,
ready and able to return to their assigned job duties without endangering the
safety of themselves or others.
   D.   All employees who self-refer must consent to and submit to a baseline
alcohol and drug test within 24 hours of selfreferral and shall be compliant
with the City recommended treatment program no later than 90 calendar days
after selfreferral. Compliance with the City recommended treatment program
shall mean that the employee has submitted to a returnto-duty drug and alcohol
test; the result of that test is negative; the employee is cooperating with his
City recommended treatment program; the employee has provided the City with a
written Return-to-Duty agreement; and, the Substance Abuse Counselor has
determined that the employee can return to work.
   E.   The Return-to-Duty agreement shall require that the employee remain
compliant with his treatment program and state that non-compliance is grounds
for discipline. In addition, the Return-to-Duty agreement shall include an
agreement to submit to periodic and unannounced follow-up testing as determined
and required by the SAC.
   F.   During treatment the employee's leave status shall be as follows.
First, accrued leave shall be exhausted and, if insufficient, the employee
shall be placed on leave without pay in accordance with the Personnel Rules and
Regulations. Any leave taken, either paid or unpaid, shall be considered leave
taken under the Family and Medical Leave Act.
   G.   Employees who are not compliant with the City recommended treatment
program within 90 calendar days from the date of self-referral shall be
terminated.
   H.   Employees who refuse to submit to a periodic, unannounced follow-up
test administered pursuant to a Return -Duty agreement shall be terminated.
Refusal to test as defined in Parts 1, 2 and 3 of this policy shall be
considered both a positive test result and a direct act of insubordination and
shall result in termination.
   I.   The first time an employee has a positive test result during the
follow-up testing period, he will be removed from duty for a minimum of thirty
(30) calendar days and placed in appropriate leave status. Employees may only
again return to work upon the order of the Substance Abuse Counselor. Any
employee not returned to work by the Substance Abuse Counselor within 90
calendar days shall be terminated.
   J.   The second time an employee has a positive test result during the
follow-up testing period, the employee shall be terminated.
   K.   Follow-up testing is separate and in addition to any other testing
required by other provisions of this policy and appropriate discipline shall be
imposed for positive tests under those provisions without regard to an
employee's participation in the self-referral program.
9.   GRIEVANCE AND APPEAL
   A.   T he determination by the Medical Review Officer that a drug test is a
verified positive test or is a refusal to test is not a  medical determination
subject to appeal under the Personnel Rules and Regulations.
   B.   An employee who is subject to termination or other disciplinary action
pursuant to this policy may grieve the termination or other disciplinary action
pursuant to the provisions of the Merit System Ordinance.
   C.   Any employee who questions the results of a required drug test may
request that the split sample be tested. The split sample test must be
conducted at a second HHS-certified laboratory with no affiliation with the
laboratory that analyzed the primary specimen. The test must be conducted on
the split sample that was provided by the employee at the same time as the
primary sample. All costs for such testing are paid by the employee unless the
result of the split sample test invalidates the result of the original test.
The method of collecting, storing, and testing the split sample will be
consistent with the procedures set forth in 49 C.F.R. § 40, as amended. The
employee’s request for a split sample test must be made to the Medical Review
Officer within 72 hours of notice of the original sample verified test result.
Requests after 72 hours will only be accepted at the discretion of the MRO if
the delay was due to documentable facts that were beyond the control of the
employee. The City will ensure that the cost of the split specimen is covered
in order for a timely analysis of the sample; however, the City will seek
reimbursement for the split sample test from the employee.
10.   RECORDS RELEASE
   A.   Drug and alcohol testing records shall be maintained by the Substance
Abuse Program Manager and, except as provided below or by law, the results of
any drug and alcohol test shall not be disclosed without express consent of the
tested employee.
   B.   Records of positive tests or refusal to test in the follow-up period
shall be released to the employee's department director or designee and the
Substance Abuse Program Manager.
   C.   Records of an employee's drug and alcohol tests shall be released to
the adjudicator in a grievance, lawsuit or other proceeding initiated by or on
behalf of the tested individual arising from the results of the drug or alcohol
test.
   D.   The employee, upon written request, is entitled to obtain copies of any
records pertaining to their use of prohibited drugs or misuse of alcohol
including any drug or alcohol testing records. Employees have the right to gain
access to any pertinent records such as equipment calibration records and
records of laboratory certifications. Employees may not have access to follow-
up testing plans.
11.   ENFORCEABILITY: The invalidity or unenforceability of any provision of
this rule shall not affect any other provision hereof, and the rule shall be
construed in all respects as if such invalid of unenforceable provision was
omitted.  If this policy in its entirety or a material portion of it is
invalidated, then, and in that event only, the City’s Substance Abuse Policy
shall be as described in Administrative Instruction 7-1-2 as amended February
17, 2011.
History:
This Policy was adopted by the City of Albuquerque Chief Administrative Officer
pursuant to City Council Bill R-237 on April 17, 1995.
The City enacted a Substance Abuse Policy in 1999; revised February 6, 2006
(retroactive to January 1, 2006); the Second Judicial District Court
invalidated the discipline portions of the 2006 policy in New Mexico
Transportation Union v. City of Albuquerque, No. CV-2005-0129; Administrative
7-1-2) effective November 3, 2009 (2-8-11, 2-17-11).
 
1200. DEPARTMENT OF FINANCE ADMINISTRATION SERVICES
PART 1 City Operator Permit Policy
Effective date: February 1, 2012
1.   ISSUING AGENCY: Department of Finance and Administrative Services of the
City of Albuquerque
2.   SCOPE: Administrative Procedures governing City Operator Permits (COP).
3.   STATUTORY AUTHORITY: ROA, 1994, § 2-15-1, et. seq., and § 14-3-5-16, § 3-
1-1 et seq. (Merit System Ordinance), § 3-2-1 et seq. (Labor Management
Relations Ordinance); § 2-8-2-2 (City Risk Management Ordinance).
4.   DURATION: Permanent.
5.   EFFECTIVE DATE: February 1, 2012, unless a later date is specified at the
end of a section.
6.   OBJECTIVE: To provide rules and regulations for the issuance, renewal,
denial and revocation of City Operator Permits. The City Operator Permit Policy
contained in this rule governs the operation of both City owned and privately
owned vehicles when the vehicle is operated on official City business to
maximize the safety of drivers, passengers and the public and to limit the
City’s financial risk posed by unsafe drivers. This rule and the regulations
contained herein are not intended to cover the operation of other non-vehicular
equipment. These regulations define the minimum acceptable standards for all
City departments and all City Employees, Contractors and volunteers while
driving on official City business. The regulations apply to all drivers and
motor vehicles regardless of the type of vehicle driven or whether it is
operated on or off road, on public or private property or roadways. Driving for
the City is a privilege, not a right, and the City reserves the right to
suspend or revoke a COP of a driver, in the opinion of the Risk Manager, or
designee, poses an unacceptable insurance or safety risk. Nothing in these
regulations effects or interferes with drivers’ other obligations for state
licensing, Commercial Driver’s License requirements or the City’s Substance
Abuse Regulations.
7.   RESPONSIBILITY FOR ADMINISTRATION: The Division of Risk Management shall
be responsible for administering these rules and regulations.
8.   DEFINITIONS: as used in this Rule the following definitions apply:
A.   Accident (Vehicle Accident) is any collision of a vehicle while operated
on official City business involving another vehicle, stationary object, or
person that results in property damage or injury, including accidents involving
the failure to secure a parked vehicle or parking a vehicle in an unsafe
manner.
B.   Chief Administrative Officer (CAO) is the City’s Chief Administrative
Officer for the City of Albuquerque. References include that person’s designee.
C.   City is the City of Albuquerque, New Mexico, a municipal corporation.
D.   City Operator Permit (COP) is a permit, and proof of insurance for City
Owned Vehicles, issued by the Risk Management Division of the City’s Department
of Finance Administration permitting an individual, whether employee,
contractor or volunteer, to drive a City-owned motor vehicle or a privately
owned motor vehicle on City business.
E.   Department Director is the director of the City department which employs
or controls the work of a Operator or otherwise as the context of the paragraph
dictates. References include that person’s designee.
F.   Driver (see “Operator”) is the employee, contract employee or volunteer in
actual physical control of the operation of a vehicle or the employee or
volunteer who was last in physical control of a vehicle. This person is
sometimes called the “Operator” or the “Vehicle Operator”.
G.   Driver Training Certification is a certification issued by the City’s
Fleet Safety Officer evidencing that the individual to whom the certification
was issued has completed a Driver Safety Training course conducted by City
staff, contract staff or another driving course deemed acceptable to the Fleet
Safety Officer.
H.   Drugs are, in the broadest sense, any and all substances, including
alcohol and other substances that a person may take for medical, recreational
or other reasons regardless of whether the substance is manufactured or natural
chemical, legal or illegal, and regardless of whether prescribed by a physician
or medical person, if such substance could impair a person’s ability to drive
safely.
I.   Fleet Safety Officer is the City employee designated by the City of
Albuquerque Risk Manager to be responsible for managing the City Operator
Policy as expressed in this Rule. References include that person’s designee.
J.   Incident of Operator Misconduct is conduct observed by any supervisor in
the Operator’s chain of command, the Fleet Safety Officer, his designee or a
Safe Traffic Operations Program (STOP) device that, if observed by a law
enforcement officer, would constitute a violation of any state or City traffic
law.
K.   Manager (Risk Manager) is the Manager of the Risk Management Division of
the Department of Finance and Administrative Services, or its successor in the
City’s organizational chart, regardless of the name of such subdivision or
department of the City. References include that person’s designee.
L.   Motor Vehicle (Vehicle) is any City or privately owned motor vehicle,
recognized by state law as a motor vehicle, used for official City business.
M.   Official City Business is any on-duty action taken by a City employee,
contract employee or volunteer, on behalf of the City. Official City Business
does not include commuting to and from a work-site before and after work hours.
Additionally, employees who operate a take-home vehicle are subject to the COP
Policy though they may not be on official business while commuting.
N.   Operator is the employee, contract employee or volunteer in actual
physical control of the operation of a vehicle or the employee, contract
employee or volunteer who was last in physical control of a vehicle. This
person is sometimes called the “Driver” or the “Vehicle Operator”.
O.   Preventable Accident is any accident involving a vehicle being operated on
official City business which results in either property damage or personal
injury or both, regardless of who was injured, what property was damaged, to
what extent injury or damage occurred or where the accident occurred, in which
the Operator in question failed to exercise every reasonable precaution to
prevent the accident
P.   Revocation of a COP is the removal of a Operator’s COP for an indefinite
period or a definite period as determined by the Fleet Safety Officer to be
appropriate for the circumstances.
Q.   State is the State of New Mexico unless the context suggests states in
general.
R.   STOP is a Safe Traffic Operations Program (STOP) device.
S.   Suspension of a COP is the temporary removal of a Operator’s COP by the
Fleet Safety Officer pending a safety review or while awaiting adjudication of
a traffic violation.
9.   REQUIREMENT TO HAVE A CITY OPERATOR PERMIT: Any person operating a vehicle
on City business is required to possess a valid City Operator Permit.
10.   CITY OPERATOR PERMIT QUALIFICATIONS: To be eligible to be issued, retain,
renew or reinstate a City Operator Permit (COP), an individual must:
A.   Be an unclassified employee, classified employee, term employee, temporary
employee, seasonal employee, contract employee or volunteer of the City;
B.   Be at least eighteen years of age or older;
C.   Have at least two continuous years of driving experience;
D.   Have a valid, unexpired New Mexico driver’s license of the appropriate
classification and with the necessary endorsements for the vehicle(s) to be
driven;
E.   Have an Acceptable Driving Record as specified more fully as:
(1)   Have no revocation of the New Mexico Driver License or any other
government issued driver’s license within the immediate previous three (3)
years on record;
(2)   Have no current driver license restriction requiring an ignition
interlock device;
(3)   Have no pending charges for Homicide or Serious Bodily Injury by Vehicle,
Driving While Under the Influence of Alcohol or Drugs, or Reckless Driving or
comparable charges issued by the State of New Mexico or any law enforcement
agency either within or outside the State of New Mexico,
(4)   Possess a current Driver Training Certification as determined by the
Fleet Safety Officer;
(5)   Be capable of passing and pass, at any time, upon request by the Fleet
Safety Officer with or without cause, any required City of Albuquerque test or
exam, including but not limited to, any physical or mental exam, vision test
considered appropriate or reasonable by standards in the traffic safety
industry as well as drug and alcohol screening test as required by the
Substance Abuse Policy;
(6)   Be unimpaired by alcohol or other drugs;
(7)   Comply with any and all driver safety requirements established by the
Fleet Safety Officer from time to time;
(8)   Possess a valid State of New Mexico medical waiver as required by statute
for any medical condition that could impair a person’s ability to drive safely.
11.   SAFETY AND FINANCIAL RISK. Because the provisions of this Rule are
intended to minimize the liability of the City and the risk to the City, the
public and the City employees,
A.   The City reserves the right to refuse to issue, renew and to revoke a COP
held by any person who fails or refuses to take any or all of these required
examinations specified in this Rule.
B.   The City reserves the right to make its determination regarding an
Acceptable Driving Record by reference to the records maintained by the Motor
Vehicle Division of the New Mexico Department of Taxation and Revenue (MVD)
regarding citations and convictions of drivers licensed in the State of New
Mexico, the records of the City of Albuquerque Risk Management Division and the
records of any other applicable government entities. The records of such
agencies are not subject to appeal or dispute except as provided herein.
12.   RESPONSIBILITIES IN REGARDS TO THE CITY OPERATOR PERMIT RULE.
A.   The Risk Manager Shall:
(1)   Provide a Driver Safety Training Certification Program for City
Operators.
(2)   Maintain a City Operator’s Permit Program for all Operators of motor
vehicles while on official City business.
(3)   Maintain statistical data on vehicular accidents involving motor vehicles
while on official City business.
(4)   Designate and supervise a Fleet Safety Officer or himself perform the
duties of the Fleet Safety Officer.
B.   The Fleet Safety Officer Shall:
(1)   Implement and manage the City Operator Permit Policy on a day-to-day
basis under the supervision and direction of the Risk Manager.
(2)   Create the accident and incident reports, notices and other forms needed
by the Fleet Safety Officer and the departments for the implementation of the
City Operator Permit Policy.
(3)   Review and annually report to the Risk Manager and City Executive Safety
Committee on the effectiveness of the City Operator Permit Policy.
(4)   Create programs for training investigators or safety officers to
investigate accidents and driver misconduct and for training supervisors in
identifying and deterring driver misconduct.
(5)   Upon receipt from a department director of a City incident or accident
report, a report of state driver’s license suspension, revocation or listed
citation or other evidence of driver unfitness, determine if, in the interests
of safety, the Operator’s COP should be suspended or revoked or whether the
Operator can resume his driving responsibilities while the alleged incident is
pending investigation or resolution of charges.
(6)   Suspend the COP of any Operator who receives either an on or off-duty
citation or arrest for Homicide or Serious Bodily Injury by Vehicle, Driving
While Under the Influence of Alcohol or Drugs, or Reckless Driving or
comparable charges issued by the State of New Mexico or any law enforcement
agency either within or outside the State of New Mexico.
(7)   Issue, suspend or revoke a Operator’s COP and reinstate a COP when
appropriate.
(8)   Receive and investigate, when appropriate, citizen complaints of City
Operator misconduct and forward citizen complaints to the proper department for
investigation and appropriate action under the City’s Merit System Ordinance,
Personnel Rules and Regulations and Labor Management Relations Ordinance.
(9)   Implement a procedure and schedule for the review of all City Operators’
driving records that ensures:
(a)   All Operators have their current New Mexico driver’s license record from
MVD reviewed at least once every seven (7) days to identify licenses that are
“Revoked”, “Suspended” or otherwise invalidated or restricted by MVD.
(b)   All Operators use the exact name on their driver’s license as appears in
their personnel file and that the Human Resources Department is notified
regarding any discrepancies between the name in the personnel file and on the
driver’s license. The Fleet Safety Officer will not verify that a COP holder is
using the same name everywhere except as the issue arises with a particular
individual.
(10)   Carry out all other duties ascribed to the Fleet Safety Officer in this
Rule promptly, efficiently and fairly.
C.   The Department Directors Shall:
(1)   Require that none of the Operators employed within their respective
departments operate a vehicle in violation of City policy.
(2)   Submit their requests for the issuance, renewal and other actions
regarding COPs to the Fleet Safety Officer using the forms provided by the
Fleet Safety Officer.
(3)   Insure their respective departments’ compliance with the City Operator
Permit Policy and including but not limited to the periodic attendance at
driver safety training classes by their Operators.
(4)   Take appropriate action pursuant to the City’s Merit System Ordinance and
Personnel Rules and Regulations against employees and other authorized drivers
and supervisors who violate their obligations under the City Operator Permit
Policy.
(5)   Require that department vehicles are adequately maintained and inspected
for safe operation and unsafe vehicles are removed from service.
(6)   Designate one or more department accident investigators/safety officers,
and assure their training through the Fleet Safety Officer’s training program.
Assure that an investigator/safety officer investigates all vehicle accidents,
supervisor reports of driver misconduct or unfitness for driving, or citizen
complaints of erratic driving and assure that reports are submitted to the
Fleet Safety Officer.
(7)   Assure the training of their respective supervisors who supervise drivers
through the Fleet Safety Officer’s training program in identifying and
enforcing against driver misconduct.
(8)   Require that department records of all motor vehicle accidents and driver
misconduct are reported to the Fleet Safety Officer using the Fleet Safety
Officer approved accident reports and incident reports and maintained in the
department for the minimum time period required by the Fleet Safety Officer or
the appropriate records retention rule, whichever time period is greater.
(9)   Upon receipt of a report from a supervisor or another person of a
driver’s arrest for or receipt of a listed citation, state license revocation
or suspension, immediately notify the Fleet Safety Officer.
(10)   Insure that all City-owned vehicles, within the control of the
respective department, have affixed to the rear of the vehicle a sign
identifying whom to call to report driver conduct. (Police and Fire emergency
vehicles are not subject to this requirement).
(11)   With the approval of the Fleet Safety Officer and CAO, create “good
driver” incentive programs to encourage the safe operation of their drivers.
D.   All Supervisors Shall:
(1)   Require that drivers on official City business have in their possession a
valid State of New Mexico driver’s license and COP appropriate to the vehicle
operated and require drivers to display such permits when requested.
(2)   Assure that only authorized and qualified personnel are allowed to
operate vehicles on official City business.
(3)   Hold drivers accountable for unsafe driving practices and assure driving
safety by not allowing a driver to drive if the driver may present a danger to
himself, passengers or the public. A supervisor shall prevent a driver from
driving on official City business when:
(a)   Instructed to prohibit driving by the department director or the Fleet
Safety Officer;
(b)   The supervisor observes driver misconduct;
(c)   The driver reports to the supervisor the revocation, suspension or loss
of the New Mexico driver’s license or COP or the receipt of any on or off-duty
citation or arrest for Homicide or Serious Bodily Injury by Vehicle, Driving
While Under the Influence of Alcohol or Drugs, or Reckless Driving; or
(d)   The supervisor has a reasonable belief or “reasonable suspicion” that the
driver is physically or mentally unfit to drive or does not have a current and
valid medical waiver card, if required.
(4)   Submit an incident or accident report no later than the end of their
shift to the department director for incidents of driver misconduct, accidents,
a driver’s receipt of the above listed suspension, revocation or citations, or
driver unfitness.
(5)   Insure that a suspended or revoked driver is allowed to resume driving on
official City business when the Fleet Safety Officer removes the suspension or
revocation.
(6)   Periodically ride with or observe the driving of the drivers under their
respective supervision to assure an understanding of and compliance with
operating instructions and traffic regulations.
(7)   Remove unsafe City-owned vehicles from operation until safety
discrepancies have been corrected.
(8)   Recover the COP from terminated employees or other unauthorized drivers
and return the permit through their department to the Fleet Safety Officer.
(9)   Respond appropriately to reports of driver misconduct, citizen complaints
or preventable accidents by counseling, monitoring, correcting driver behavior
and directing drivers to attend formal training offered by the Fleet Safety
Officer.
(10)   The supervisor’s responsibilities under the City Operator Permit Policy
complement and are in addition to the requirements and duties under the City
Personnel Rules and Regulations and City’s Substance Abuse Policy.
E.   All Operators shall:
(1)   Inspect the vehicle to be driven for physical damage and perform a safety
check (brakes, lights, horn, mirrors, etc.) before driving the vehicle and not
drive any unsafe vehicle.
(2)   Immediately report damage or mechanical problems verbally to the
supervisor before driving the vehicle; any verbal report should be followed by
a written report within one work-day of the event.
(3)   Report to the supervisor all defects noted during usage. Vehicles
developing steering or braking defects while in use shall not be driven and
shall be immediately removed from the roadway and parked. The driver shall
contact his supervisor who shall make arrangements to have the vehicle towed or
repaired.
(4)   Properly secure a parked vehicle by utilizing door locking mechanisms,
parking brake, and chocks when deemed necessary.
(5)   Wear safety-belts and require that all passengers wear safety-belts while
operating a City vehicle or private vehicle on official City business.
(6)   Learn and follow all traffic and vehicle safety laws and regulations of
the state and City.
(7)   Immediately report in writing and submit within one workday to their
respective supervisors any change in the status of the driver’s New Mexico
Driver license.
(8)   Immediately report in writing and submit within one workday to the
respective supervisor of the revocation, suspension or loss of the Driver’s New
Mexico driver’s license or City operator’s permit or the receipt of any on or
off-duty citation or arrest for Homicide or Serious Bodily Injury by Vehicle,
Driving While Under the Influence of Alcohol or Drugs or Reckless Driving.
(Receipt of a citation for one of the above charges will result in automatic
suspension of the driver’s COP, as per administrative instruction 4-14. An
operator shall not drive a vehicle while on duty after receipt of the above
listed violations until authorized by their supervisor.)
(9)   Immediately report in writing and submit within one workday to their
respective supervisors information regarding any medical or other condition
affecting their ability to drive safely. All notifications shall be in writing
and submitted within one workday of such date as the driver receives
notification of citation, conviction, suspension, revocation, or cancellation.
(10)   In the event of an accident while on official City business, immediately
inform their respective supervisor and the police department by telephone or
other appropriate means; any verbal report should be followed by a written
report within one work-day of the event. .
(11)   Cooperate with the City and law enforcement agencies in the
investigation of any vehicular accident or incident in which the driver is
involved or is a witness.
(12)   No employee shall operate a vehicle on official City business without
the appropriate license and permit classification.
13.   CITY OPERATOR POINT SYSTEM (POINTS ASSESSMENT). The City shall utilize a
point system to monitor the acceptability of a COP holder’s driving record. All
Operators are shall be subject to a safety review under the City Operator Point
System.
A.   The Fleet Safety Officer shall administer and maintain the City Operator
Point System.
(1)   The Fleet Safety Officer shall assess points against a driver’s COP by
assigning points for violations of traffic laws in accordance with official
points assigned by New Mexico MVD.
(2)   In addition, The Fleet Safety Officer may assess City points against a
driver’s COP as follows:
(a)   Preventable accident, while driving on City of Albuquerque official
business:
(i)   Minor Preventable Accident………..minimum of 1 point
(ii)   Major Preventable Accident………..minimum of 2 points
(b)   For multiple Preventable Major Accidents within a 12 month period, the
base points are multiplied, as assigned in 2 above, by the number of
preventable accidents in that period.
(c)   For both Major and Minor accidents, the Fleet Safety Officer may assign
additional points when egregious violation of traffic laws or City policy have
occurred, e.g. seat belts not in use or a traffic violation that contributes to
the accident.
 
Accident          Base Point(s)
Non-Preventable   0
Minor Preventable 1 (or more)
Major Preventable 2 (or more)
 
(d)   Incident of Operator Misconduct: Use the New Mexico MVD point system for
the citation that could have been issued had the event been witnessed by law
enforcement.
(e)   All points are cumulative over the immediate preceding twelve (12) months
and are applied to the City Operator’s City driving record by the Fleet Safety
Officer when either the state proceeding on the infraction is final or after
the Fleet Safety Officer has assessed points upon completion of an accident or
incident review.
(3)   The Fleet Safety Officer shall revoke or suspend a Operator’s COP as
appropriate when the driver has accumulated twelve (12) or more points against
the driver’s COP under the City’s Point System during the immediate previous
twelve (12) month period.
(4)   The Fleet Safety Officer may, at his discretion, revoke or suspend a
Operator’s COP as appropriate when the driver has accumulated nine (9) or more
points against the driver’s COP under the City’s Point System during the
immediate previous twelve (12) month period.
(5)   If the driver receives a citation or charge of a criminal traffic
violation in the state process, the Fleet Safety Officer shall either:
(a)   Assign points to the driver’s record upon the assignment of points by the
state; or
(b)    Consider the state citation to be an incident of driver misconduct.
(6)   The Fleet Safety Officer may suspend the driver’s COP, prior to assessing
any points, pending final resolution of the state proceedings on a state
infraction or during the investigation of any accident or incident.
B.   Records of driver misconduct, license suspension or revocation or a
preventable accident will remain in a driver’s COP file and may be considered
when driving privileges are in question.
C.   The City Operator Point System described herein in no way negates the City
driver’s duty to inform his supervisor immediately upon receipt of any traffic
violation or of any change in the Operator’s license status.
14.   CITY OF ALBUQUERQUE ACCIDENT AND INCIDENT REVIEW PROCESS. All vehicle
accidents occurring on official City business will be reviewed to determine if
the accident was preventable or non-preventable. All incidents of driver
misconduct will be reviewed. The purpose of this policy is to establish
standard procedures for all City committees that review and classify vehicle
accidents and for the review of charges of driver misconduct by the Fleet
Safety Officer as described in this rule. The primary focus of such reviews
will be to reduce the frequency, severity and cost of accidents to the City.
A.   Department Accident Review Committees.
(1)   All departments shall establish accident review committees. The Fleet
Safety Officer shall certify all department accident review committees.
Departments with a small number of drivers will not be required to
independently create an accident review committee, but may combine with other
departments to form committees, as approved by the Fleet Safety Officer.
(2)   The Departments, with the exception of APD and AFD, shall determine who
reviews minor accidents. All Major accidents shall be reviewed by the Division
of Risk Management.
(3)   Departments shall investigate and classify all vehicle accidents
occurring on official City business as minor or major pursuant to this policy
as follows:
(a)   Minor accident: All vehicle accidents which do not meet the criteria of
“Major Accident” as defined in #2 below will be considered a “Minor Accident”.
(b)    Major accident: An occurrence associated with operation of a vehicle on
City business that results in any of the following:
(i)   An individual dies
(ii)   An individual suffers bodily injury and immediately receives medical
treatment away from the scene of the accident
(iii)   One or more vehicles suffer disabling damage as the result of the
occurrence and is transported away from the scene by a tow truck or other
vehicle. For purposes of this definition, disabling damage means damage which
precludes departure of any vehicle from the scene of the occurrence in its
usual manner in daylight after simple repairs. Disabling damage includes damage
to vehicles that could have been operated but would have been further damaged
if so operated.
(iv)   Disabling damage does not include damage which can be remedied
temporarily at the scene of the occurrence without special tools or parts, tire
disablement without other damage even if no spare tire is available, or damage
to headlights, taillights turn signals, horn, mirrors or windshield wipers that
makes them inoperative.
(4)   Every vehicle accident will be reviewed to determine whether it was
preventable or non-preventable on the part of the City driver. This
determination will be made using the ”National Safety Council Guidelines for
Determining Motor Vehicle Collision Preventability” (NSC Guidelines) and the
accident investigation report(s). This review process will be conducted as
follows:
(a)   Minor accidents are reviewed by the Departmental Accident Review
Committee.
(b)   Major accidents are reviewed by the Fleet Safety Officer. Departments
shall submit all major accident documentation, (i.e. investigation reports,
photographs, statements, etc.) to the Fleet Safety Officer. The Fleet Safety
Officer’s determination concerning preventability is reported to the department
director or his/her designee.
(i)   The APD Accident Review Committee will review all accidents involving APD
vehicles. The Fleet Safety Officer or his/her designee will serve as a voting
member of this Committee.
(ii)   All accidents involving APD or AFD vehicles that occur during emergency
code response will be reviewed by the respective department’s accident review
committee.
(iii)   The results of every departmental accident review committee
determination concerning preventability are reported to the Fleet Safety
Officer. The report to the Fleet Safety Officer will include the date of loss,
name and employee ID of the driver, the title of the applicable NSC Guideline,
and the determination of preventability.
(5)   Following the review process described above, all preventable accidents
may result in points being assigned against the driver’s COP as described in
this rule.
(6)   Incidents of suspected driver misconduct shall be investigated by the
department investigator/safety officer or the Fleet Safety Officer. At the
conclusion of the investigation the Fleet Safety Officer will determine whether
misconduct occurred and if the assessment of points is necessary. In review of
misconduct cases, the Fleet Safety Officer may review a driver’s complete
driving record in determining what, if any, points should be levied against the
driver. Incidents involving APD and AFD code responses will be handled as
described in this rule.
(7)   When a State traffic citation has been issued, the Fleet Safety Officer
may review the alleged violation and may either wait for a state adjudication
of the citation to assess points or may investigate the citation prior to a
State adjudication of the citation. The Fleet Safety Officer shall decide if
the citation should be considered an incident of misconduct. If the Fleet
Safety Officer chooses to wait for State adjudication, the matter may still be
reviewed as an incident of misconduct if the State dismisses the matter without
a decision of whether the alleged violation occurred. The same number of points
will be assessed for the State violation when reviewed as an incident of
misconduct as the State would assess on the State license, and points shall not
be assessed twice on the same incident.
(8)   A citizen report of improper or unsafe driving by a City driver shall not
constitute an instance of driver misconduct unless the conduct was witnessed by
a City supervisor, safety officer or accident investigator. The driver’s
supervisor shall review all citizen reports of improper or unsafe driving. All
drivers and their departments will be informed of the citizen report. The
department shall on each report determine if the report is supported by
reliable evidence of driver misconduct the department shall monitor the
driver’s driving to determine if the driver is a safety risk.
B.   Special provisions for the Police (APD) and Fire (AFD) Department Accident
Review Committees:
(1)   All accidents involving APD or AFD vehicles that occur during emergency
code response will be reviewed by the respective department’s accident review
committee.
(2)   The APD will review all of its vehicle accidents internally.
(3)   The Fleet Safety Officer or designee shall serve as a voting member of
the APD committee.
C.   Fleet Safety Officer Review. The Fleet Safety Officer shall review major
accidents and all incidents of driver misconduct.
(1)   When a state traffic citation has been issued, the Fleet Safety Officer
shall review the alleged violation and may either wait for a state adjudication
of the citation to assess points or may investigate the citation prior to a
state adjudication of the citation. The Fleet Safety Officer shall decide
whether event prompting the citation should be considered an incident of
misconduct. If the Fleet Safety Officer chooses to wait for state adjudication,
the matter may still be reviewed as an incident of misconduct if the state
dismisses the matter without a decision of whether the alleged violation
occurred. The same number of points will be assessed for the state violation
when reviewed as an incident of misconduct as the state would assess on the
state license, and points shall not be assessed twice on the same incident.
(2)   A citizen report of improper or unsafe driving by a City driver shall not
constitute an instance of driver misconduct unless the conduct was witnessed by
a City supervisor, safety officer or accident investigator. Upon receipt of the
citizen report citizen of improper or unsafe driving, the Fleet Safety Officer
shall inform the driver and supervisors involved of the citizen report of
improper or unsafe driving and the Fleet Safety Officer shall refer the report
to the driver’s supervisor for further review. The department shall on each
such citizen report determine whether the report is supported by reliable
evidence of driver misconduct the department shall monitor the driver’s driving
to determine if the driver is a safety risk and shall further report to the
Fleet Safety Officer as the department director and the Fleet Safety Officer
deem appropriate.
15.   CITY JOB APPLICANT DRIVING RECORD CHECK PROCEDURE. When any City of
Albuquerque position is being filled for which driving is necessary to perform
an essential element of the job duties, no applicant shall receive an offer of
employment if the applicant does not qualify for a COP. Prior to an offer of
employment, the driving record of the final applicants under consideration
shall be reviewed by the Fleet Safety Officer or the Human Resources
Department. This rule applies to full-time, contract, temporary and seasonal
employees and volunteers. The following procedure shall be implemented:
A.   All requirements for positions for which driving is necessary to perform
the job shall be identified prior to the job announcement;
B.   All applicants for such positions shall be notified on the job
announcements of the City’s standard driver requirements and policy;
C.   The Fleet Safety Officer shall evaluate the record, as described below,
and advise the Human Resources Department whether the applicant qualifies for a
COP:
(1)   The applicant will be evaluated per the qualifications in this document..
The Fleet Safety Officer shall compare the applicant’s driving history to the
City standards as set forth in this rule for the issuance of a COP to ensure
that the applicant meets that standard. If an applicant does not meet the COP
requirements, they will not be considered eligible for a job for which driving
is necessary to perform the job.
16.   DRIVER/OPERATOR TRAINING PROGRAM. A driver training program for new
employees or other authorized drivers who have applied for a COP and periodic
refresher training for existing employees holding a COP is mandatory. The
following shall be included in any such training:
A.   Orientation, description and purpose of the training;
B.   Social and economic costs of traffic accidents;
C.   Causes of traffic accidents;
D.   Physical, mental and emotional effects on reaction time and judgment;
E.   Mechanical limitation and vehicle inspections;
F.   Defensive driving techniques;
G.   Procedure to follow when involved in an accident and filing of accident
report form;
H.   Procedures for vehicle malfunctions or other emergencies, and
I.   The City Operator Permit Policy.
17.   VEHICLE/EQUIPMENT OPERATOR’S RECORD. The Risk Management Division shall
maintain a record on each driver which shall include: department assigned, date
of permit, date of most recent Operator Safety Course, employee or affiliate
identification number, physical limitations, accident history, class of license
and COP Request Form (COPR), and history of suspensions and revocations.
18.   VEHICLE ACCIDENT REPORTING PROCEDURE.
A.   Vehicle Accident Reporting Procedure – all drivers
(1)   Any driver involved in a motor vehicle accident, while operating a
vehicle on official City business, shall immediately call the police and the
driver’s supervisor or his department investigator to the scene.
(2)   The driver shall not leave the scene until the police have completed
their investigation. If the police do not investigate at the scene, the driver
should make a report at the police station or as directed by his supervisor.
(3)   The driver shall not discuss the accident with anyone except the police,
the supervisor, legal counsel or an adjuster or other investigator assigned by
the Risk Management Division.
(4)   The department investigator shall investigate the accident and report the
findings to the Fleet Safety Officer or department accident review committee in
compliance with this rule.
(5)   Department directors shall require that vehicle accident reports be
promptly submitted to the Fleet Safety Officer or department accident review
committee in compliance with this rule.
B.   Vehicle Accident Reporting Procedure – holder of Commercial Driver’s
License. In addition to the provisions in the section above, all holders of a
Commercial Driver’s License shall comply with any additional requirements of
the Federal Transit Administration and the Department of Transportation.
19.   COMMERCIAL DRIVER’S LICENSE REQUIREMENTS.
A.   The Federal Transit Administration, through the Department of
Transportation, issues regulations establishing uniform criteria and
classifications for obtaining commercial class motor vehicle operating licenses
(CDL). The State of New Mexico has adopted these criteria and operator license
classifications. Consequently, all shall to conform to these federal and state
requirements. This rule sets forth the procedure for obtaining and maintaining
a valid commercial class operator license as a condition to perform duties as
an employee of the City.
B.   If holding a CDL is necessary to perform essential job functions of a
driver’s position and the driver cannot qualify for a CDL, the Department
Director should refer the situation to the Human Resources Department for
appropriate resolution.
C.   Additional Responsibilities of the Supervisors of CDL Drivers, who shall:
(1)   Not permit or direct a City employee to operate a vehicle on official
City business without the appropriate commercial class operator’s license (CDL)
issued by the MVD as well as a City Operator’s Permit.
(2)   Whenever a supervisor has knowledge that a supervised Operator does not
have a current, valid and appropriate commercial class operator’s license
(CDL), shall immediately prohibit the CDL driver from operating any vehicle
requiring a CDL and shall notify the department director.
(3)   Upon notification that the CDL of an employee under his supervision is
expiring and requires renewal, shall contact the appropriate person in the
Human Resources Department to request and initiate an in-service physical
examination be scheduled and then notify the CDL Operator of the time and place
of the scheduled physical examination. Further, the supervisor shall adjust the
work schedule of the CDL Operator to accommodate sufficient time to permit the
CDL Operator to complete the required examination(s).
(4)   Shall require that the CDL Operator present his certification card
indicating that the CDL Operator has successfully completed the required
physical examination and substance abuse test, prior to authorizing the CDL
Operator to proceed to the MVD to take the written examination for renewal of
the commercial class operating license.
D.   Additional Responsibilities of a CDL Operator. In addition to all other
requirements of holders of COPs, a CDL Operator shall:
(1)   Assure that he has the valid class of driver’s license and the valid COP
appropriate to the vehicle being operated.
(2)   On or about the first working day of the month in which a CDL Operator’s
current commercial class operator license or endorsement is to expire, notify
his immediate supervisor of the necessity to renew the license and COP.
(3)   Upon notification by the supervisor, report to a facility selected by the
City and submit to a physical examination and substance abuse tests that shall
be administered in accordance with the applicable United States Department of
Transportation (DOT) regulations and requirements as specified in the Federal
Motor Carrier Safety Regulations, Part 391, Subpart E, as well as any other
applicable federal and state laws or regulations. (If the CDL Operator does not
successfully complete these examinations and tests, his supervisor will be
notified and the CDL Operator will be given further instructions pursuant to
the City’s personnel ordinance and rules and regulations).
(4)   After successfully completing all physical examinations and substance
abuse tests,
(a)   Follow his supervisor’s instruction to proceed to the MVD;
(b)    Upon successfully completing any required written examination, the CDL
Operator will be issued a commercial class license assuming all other criteria
established by MVD have been met.
(c)   On the next working day, present the license to his immediate supervisor
for verification that the CDL Operator has completed all requirements and has
obtained the appropriate commercial class operator’s license.
(5)   If the CDL Operator, in the opinion of the MVD, does not pass the written
examination, report this fact to the immediate supervisor for further
instructions regarding the required skills test administered by the MVD and any
corrective measures.
(6)   If, for any reason, the CDL Operator does not successfully obtain the
appropriate commercial class license within the renewal month, report this fact
to his immediate supervisor.
(7)   Notify, in writing, the CDL Operator’s immediate supervisor of any of the
following occurrences:
(a)   Any citation or arrest for violating, in any type of motor vehicle, a
state or local law relating to motor vehicle traffic control (other than a
parking violation);
(b)   Any expiration, suspension, revocation or cancellation of the commercial
class operator’s license.
(8)   Notify the MVD of all such occurrences outside the State of New Mexico.
(9)   Comply with all applicable DOT regulations whether or not those
regulations are enumerated in this policy including any requirements concerning
obtaining and keeping a current and valid medical card and the requirements
concerning performing and properly documenting pre and post-trip inspection
reports.
20.   USE OF PERSONAL VEHICLE FOR CITY BUSINESS.
A.   The use of an employee’s personal vehicle to conduct official City
business is discouraged when a City vehicle is available to the employee. A
personal vehicle may only be driven on City business when the driver holds a
valid COP in addition to a state License. If a driver loses his COP, the driver
may no longer drive on official City business.
B.   Employees who utilize their personal vehicle for City business will be
reimbursed for mileage upon submitting both a properly approved request for
reimbursement and a copy of proof of insurance for the vehicle driven. Proof of
insurance shall be a copy of either the declarations page of the insurance
policy or a copy of the insurance card carried in the vehicle.
C.   No personal vehicle shall be driven by an employee to conduct City
business unless the requirements regarding financial responsibility as set
forth by state statute are met.
(1)   For most employees, the requirement is fulfilled by carrying liability
insurance.
(2)   Employees are not required by statute to purchase insurance if they have
demonstrated to the state the capability of meeting the financial
responsibility requirements. However, the City will require that an employee
provide documentation from the state indicating that the requirement has been
met.
(3)   The City does not require a driver to purchase insurance beyond that
minimally required by the state. However, the City does not provide uninsured
or underinsured motorists, collision, towing, or comprehensive coverages for
the use of a personal vehicle by a driver conducting official City business.
D.   Employee’s Insurance Is Primary Insurer. The insurance carrier providing
liability coverage for the driver’s vehicle shall be the primary insurer for
any incident in which an employee drives his personal vehicle. Should the
limits of the policy be insufficient, the City, may if otherwise appropriate,
provide secondary coverage for liability to third parties.
E.   Employees who frequently drive their personal vehicle for City business
shall notify their insurance carrier of the business use of the vehicle and
secure the appropriate endorsement to the policy.
21.   SUSPENSION AND REVOCATION OF COP.
A.   Discretionary Suspension:
(1)   The Fleet Safety Officer may take the Operator’s entire record into
consideration when deciding whether to suspend a COP. The Fleet Safety Officer
may suspend a COP when:
(a)   The Fleet Safety Officer is reviewing a report of a state license
suspension, revocation, or listed citation from the State of New Mexico or
other jurisdiction;
(b)   A driver is being investigated for an accident or incident of driver
misconduct;
(c)   A driver is being tested for reasonable suspicion of drug or alcohol use
under the Substance Abuse Policy;
(d)   A driver is being examined for either his physical or mental fitness to
drive;
(e)   The Fleet Safety Officer has any reasonable belief that the safety of the
driver or the public is otherwise at risk if the person continues to drive.
(2)   Decisions made under this “Discretionary Suspension” section may be
appealed to the Chief Administrative Officer of the City.
B.   Mandatory Suspension:
(1)   The Fleet Safety Officer shall suspend the COP of any City Operator
immediately upon notification that the Operator has received a charge of
Homicide or Serious Bodily Injury by Vehicle, Driving While Under the Influence
of Alcohol or Drugs or Reckless Driving as per Administrative Instruction 4-14.
(2)   The suspension shall continue until the Fleet Safety Officer determines
that either the Operator’s COP should be restored or revoked.
(3)   The Operator has accumulated excessive points under the City’s point
system;
C.   Revocation: The Fleet Safety Officer shall revoke the COP of an Operator
when:
(1)   The Operator does not have a valid New Mexico license of the correct
type, with the necessary endorsements, to drive the vehicle intended for the
Operator’s use;
(2)   The Operator has been disqualified by the Fleet Safety Officer because of
a physical or mental condition making the Operator unfit to operate any vehicle
on official City business;
(3)   The Operator receives a restriction on the Operator’s state-issued driver
license which will require modification of the vehicle related to a DUI charge.
22.   REINSTATEMENT OF COP
A.   A City employee, contract employee or volunteer whose COP has been
suspended may, at the request of the department, have the COP reinstated if the
driver’s point total falls below ten (10) points or if the Fleet Safety Officer
determines that their COP should not be revoked.
B.   A City employee, contract employee or volunteer whose COP has been revoked
may, at the request of the department, have the COP reinstated if the
conditions of for the issuance or renewal of a COP are met.
C.   The Fleet Safety Officer will evaluate the employee’s or volunteer’s full
driving record, when making the decision of whether to restore the employee’s
driving privileges. Reinstatement of a COP shall be at the sole discretion of
the Fleet Safety Officer based on the driving record of the applicant and
physical or mental condition that may prevent them from driving for the City
again.
D.   If holding a COP is necessary to perform essential job functions of a
driver’s position and the driver cannot qualify for a COP, the Department
Director should refer the situation to the Human Resources Department for
appropriate resolution.
E.   If an employee believes that any information that has a bearing on the
denial of the issuance, renewal or revocation of a COP is inaccurate, by way of
example, but not limitation, that the MVD record pertains to another individual
and not to the applicant, the employee must submit a written notice of the
dispute with all relevant information to Fleet Safety Officer within five (5)
days of the date on the written denial. The Fleet Safety Officer shall review
the employee’s dispute and, as appropriate, investigate the information
provided by the employee within thirty (30) days of receiving the notice of
dispute. The Fleet Safety Officer shall then promptly notify the department
representative whether the information provided in the dispute notice changed
the Fleet Safety Officer’s decision regarding the issuance of the COP. If the
decision of the Fleet Safety Officer is not in favor of the employee’s
receiving a COP, the employee may request an informal meeting with the Fleet
Safety Officer and the Risk Manager or the CAO in an effort to demonstrate that
the requested COP should be issued, renewed, or not revoked based on the
information in the official records, so long as such request is within ten (10)
days of the Fleet Safety Officer’s decision. No further appeals are permitted.
Thereafter, the department director may submit an application for the employee
in the normal course of business, but may not re-apply for a COP more
frequently than once every six (6) calendar months beginning on the date of the
last written denial by the Fleet Safety Officer.
23.   APPLICABILITY OF THIS RULE
A.   Every City employee operating a motor vehicle during the course of his
employment, or supervising persons operating such motor vehicles, shall abide
by this rule pertaining to City Operator Permits. Failure of a vehicle operator
or supervisor to follow any aspect of this rule regarding the City Operator
Permit Policy is just cause for discipline, up to and including termination.
B.   Prior Policy. Individuals who had a City Operators Permit prior to the
enactment of this revised policy will have the points on their permit returned
to zero and not be subject to the revocation requirement in the Acceptable
Driving Record qualification. The City, however reserves the right to use prior
incidents to evaluate whether or not an individual should have a City Operators
Permit.
24.   FAILURE TO COMPLY WITH THIS RULE.
B.   Failure to comply with this Rule shall be referred by the Division of Risk
Management to the Department for appropriate action.
24.   SEVERABILITY.
The invalidity or unenforceability of any provision of this policy shall not
affect any other provision hereof, and the policy shall be construed in all
respects as if such invalid of unenforceable provision was omitted.
PART 2 Commercial Driver’s License
November 1, 2013
1.   ISSUING AGENCY: The Risk Management Division of the Finance and
Administration Services Department.
2.    SCOPE: This rule applies to all City employees whose position requires
the employee to possess a valid commercial driver’s license (CDL).
3.   STATUTORY AUTHORITY: City of Albuquerque, NM. Code of Ordinances, Ch. 3
art. 1, Merit System; N.M. Stat. Ann. § 66-5-54; 49 U.S.C.A. §§ 31100-31161;
The US Commercial Motor Vehicle Safety Act of 1986; 49 C.F.R. §§ 392.1-392.82;
City of Albuquerque Substance Abuse Policy (Personnel Rules and Regulations,
Section 1100, effective February 1, 2012); City of Albuquerque City Operator
Permit (Personnel Rules and Regulations, Section 1200, effective February 1,
2012).
4.   DURATION: Until revoked.
5.   EFFECTIVE DATE: November 1, 2013.
6.   OBJECTIVE: To assure that commercial drivers for the City of Albuquerque
meet the minimum medical requirements, as specified in 49 C.F.R. §§ 392.1-
392.82.
7.   RESPONSIBILITY FOR ADMINSTRATION: The City’s Risk Manager.
8.   DEFINITIONS:
A.   Business Day  means a day in which the City of Albuquerque’s
administrative offices are open, typically weekdays Monday-Friday, from 8:00 AM
to 5:00 PM, except for City holidays or other days when the administrative
offices are not open for business. See also “Day”.
B.   CDL Position  means a City job position which contains the requirement
that employee occupying that position possess and maintain a valid Commercial
Driver’s License (CDL) as a job requirement.
C.   Commercial driver’s license (CDL)  means a license issued by the State of
New Mexico, in accordance with the standards contained in 49 C.F.R. § 383.5,
which authorizes an individual to operate a class of commercial motor vehicle.
D.   CDL holder  means an employee who holds Commercial Driver’s License.
E.   City  means the City of Albuquerque, a New Mexico municipal corporation.
F.   City of Albuquerque Medical Certification Card  means the wallet-size card
signed and issued by a medical examiner of the City’s Employee Health Center as
provided in this rule. Once the card is counter-signed by the City’s Risk
Manager, it certifies that the CDL holder is medically certified to operate
CMVs.
G.   City Operator Permit (COP)  means a permit, and proof of insurance for
City-Owned Vehicles, issued by the Risk Management Division of the City’s
Department of Finance Administration permitting an individual, whether
employee, contractor or volunteer, to drive a City-owned motor vehicle or a
privately owned motor vehicle on City business.
H.   Commercial driver’s license (CDL) medical review committee decision  means
the form utilized by the CDL Medical Review Committee to capture pertinent
information about the referrals and record its final decision in a format
established by the committee from time to time.
I.   Commercial driver’s license (CDL) physical examination summary form  means
the form completed by the examining physician at the City’s Employee Health
Center and at the conclusion a DOT physical examination of an employee to
summarize his findings and provide follow-up instructions to the employee in a
format established by the Medical Director from time to time.
J.   Commercial Motor Vehicle (CMV)  means any self-propelled or towed vehicle
used when the vehicle has a gross vehicle weight rating or gross combination
weight (GCWR) rating of 26,001 or more pounds, or the vehicle is designated to
transport more than 15 passengers including the driver, or the vehicle is used
in the transportation of hazardous materials in a quantity requiring
placarding.
K.   Conviction  means an unvacated adjudication of guilt; a determination that
a person has violated or failed to comply with the law in a court of original
jurisdiction or an authorized administrative tribunal; an unvacated forfeiture
of bail or collateral deposited to secure the person's appearance in court; a
plea of guilty or nolo contendere accepted by the court; the payment of a fine
or court cost, or violation of a condition of release without bail, regardless
of whether or not the penalty is rebated, suspended, or probated. 49 C.F.R. §
383.5.
L.   Day  means a 24-hour period, from midnight to midnight. See also “Business
Day”.
M.   Department of Transportation (DOT)  means the United States Department of
Transportation and all the Department of Transportation agencies, including,
but not limited to, the US Coast Guard (USCG), the Federal Aviation
Administration (FAA), the Federal Railroad Administration (FRA), the Federal
Motor Carrier Safety Administration (FMCSA), the Federal Transit Administration
(FTA), the National Highway Traffic Safety Administration (NHTSA), the Research
and Special Programs Administration (RSPA) and the Office of the Secretary
(OST). This term includes any designee of a DOT agency.
N.   Driver  means the employee, contract employee or volunteer in actual
physical control of the operation of a vehicle or the employee or volunteer who
was last in physical control of a vehicle. This person is sometimes called the
“Operator” or the “Vehicle Operator”.
O.   Driver's license  means a license issued by the State of New Mexico, to an
individual, which authorizes the individual to operate a motor vehicle on the
highways.
P.   Endorsement means an authorization to an individual's driver’s license
required to permit the individual to operate certain types of commercial motor
vehicles (CMV).
Q.   Gross combination weight rating (GCWR) means the value specified by the
manufacturer as the loaded weight of a combination (articulated) vehicle. In
the absence of a value specified by the manufacturer, GCWR will be determined
by adding the GVWR of the power unit and the total weight of the towed unit and
any load thereon.
R.   Gross vehicle weight rating (GVWR) means the value specified by the
manufacturer as the loaded weight of a single vehicle.
S.   Hazardous Material (HAZMAT)  means a substance or material which has been
determined by the United States Department of Transportation to be capable of
posing an unreasonable risk to health, safety, and property when transported in
commerce, and which has been so designated.
T.   Medical Director  means the physician licensed by the New Mexico Medical
Board employed by or contracted by the City to provide medical oversight and
medical services to the City’s Employee Health Center.
U.   Medical examiner  means a physician or mid-level provider licensed by the
New Mexico Medical Board or the Nursing Board who is employed by or contracted
with the City to provide medical services including, but not limited to,
physical examinations pursuant to this rule to City employees and potential
employees.
V.   Prescribed Medication  means a medicine that has been authorized by a
licensed physician to a patient pursuant to the regulations of the Board of
Pharmacy.
W.   Motor vehicle means any City or privately owned motor vehicle, recognized
by state law as a motor vehicle, used for official City business.
X.   Official City Business means any on-duty action taken by a City employee,
contract employee or volunteer, on behalf of the City. Official City Business
does not include commuting to and from a worksite before and after work hours.
Provided further, employees who operate a take-home vehicle are subject to the
COP Policy even though they may not be on official business while commuting.
Y.   Over-the-Counter (OTC) Medication  means a legal medication or drug that
may be sold without a prescription.
Z.   Risk Manager means the manager of the City’s Risk Management Division.
AA.   State  means the State of New Mexico unless the context suggests states
in general.
BB.   Substance Abuse Policy  means the policy adopted by the City as it is now
or as it may be amended from time to time, as set forth in the City’s Human
Resources Department Personnel Rules and Regulations, Section
1100, effective February 1, 2012, pertaining substance abuse by City employees.
9.   DRIVING PREREQUISITES:
A.   City employees, who seek to operate a commercial motor vehicle for the
City of Albuquerque, must be in a job position which requires the possession of
a CDL (“CDL position”) and must possess a valid CDL from the State of New
Mexico. An employee in a CDL position must successfully meet the medical
requirements outlined in this policy.
B.   Employees will not be permitted to drive a commercial vehicle until a
valid CDL or CDL Learner’s Permit is issued or renewed by the State. It is the
employee’s responsibility to submit a renewal application to the New Mexico
Motor Vehicle Division before the current license’s expiration date.
10.   EMPLOYMENT PREREQUISITES:
A.   To be eligible for employment in a CDL Position, an applicant must meet
the following requirements. A current employee who wishes to promote into a CDL
position must also meet all of these requirements. The individual must:
(1)   Qualify for a City Operator Permit (COP) with the City’s CDL endorsement
and be issued such COP;
(2)   Be a resident of the State of New Mexico;
(3)   Be at least 18 years of age;
(4)   Possess a valid CDL from the State of New Mexico; and
(5)   Be certified as to physical qualifications by the City’s medical examiner
(“CDL Medical Certification”). The requirements for certification shall meet
the minimum physical requirements of the DOT as those requirements may be from
time to time, and shall include, but are not limited to:
(a)   No loss of limb that has not been waived;
(b)   No impairment of hand, finger, arm, foot, or leg that interferes with
driving;
(c)   No diabetes requiring insulin for control;
(d)   No heart problems which could impair or incapacitate the operator;
(e)   No high blood pressure which is defined as being greater than or equal to
140 systolic and/or 90 diastolic (defined as > 140/90);
(f)   No rheumatic, arthritic, orthopedic, muscular, neuromuscular, or vascular
problems that could affect vehicle control;
(g)   No epilepsy or other condition likely to cause loss of consciousness;
(h)   No mental, nervous, organic, or functional disease or psychiatric
disorder likely to interfere with vehicle control;
(i)   Vision 20/40 or better in each eye (with corrective lenses), not color
blind;
(j)   Ability to pass a hearing test; and
(k)   No drug or alcohol addiction(s).
11.   PHYSICAL EXAMINATIONS:
A.   The City’s Employee Health Center is the only agency authorized by the
City to administer DOT physical examinations for City employees or to issue the
CDL Medical Certification. The physical examination will be administered as
part of the hiring process for new hires or promotions and be required
periodically for the renewal of the CDL certification for all CDL drivers. Any
offer of employment into a CDL position shall be contingent upon the
applicant’s ability to satisfactorily complete the post-offer physical
examination within the time parameters established by City and the hiring
department.
B.   The medical examiner assigned to the City’s Employee Health Center will
report the fitness of an employee to operate a commercial vehicle as:
(1)   Qualified: meets all physical requirements.
(2)   Probationary: qualified on a short-term (less than 2 years), renewable
basis. The medical examiner regularly monitors a driver in this category and
will set renewal schedules which may be as frequent as the medical examiner
deems appropriate.
(3)   Disqualified: does not meet minimum physical requirements. Referral to
the medical review board is automatic.
(4)   Medical Hold: clinically does not meet requirements. More information is
needed to determine the final medical status which must be determined within
thirty (30) days or the employee will be certified as “Disqualified”.
C.   Once hired, an employee in a CDL position, with the exception of those in
a “probationary” status, must satisfactorily complete a physical examination at
least every two (2) years. (The examination requirement for personnel in a
probationary status is detailed elsewhere in this rule.) The medical examiner
will issue the employee who meets the requirements a City of Albuquerque
Medical Certification Card. The information on the card verifies that the
employee has met the minimum physical requirements to drive commercial motor
vehicles owned by the City or for City use within the geographic boundaries of
the State of New Mexico only unless the Risk Manager has issued a temporary
exception for out-of-state travel.
D.   An employee who is currently employed by the City and fails to comply with
the physical examination requirement or who fails to meet the minimum
requirements upon examination will not be certified to drive until if and when
he is certified as meeting the DOT medical examination requirements.
E.   An employee who is not able to meet the minimum physical requirements of
the DOT at the time of the examination will be categorized as “disqualified”.
(1)   A disqualified employee may be referred to the City’s Human Resources
Department for assistance in finding alternative placement within the City.
(2)   A disqualified employee will be counseled by the medical examiner and
options will be discussed. Options presented will include counseling available
through the City’s Wellness Program and the Employee Assistance Program.
(3)   In cases where the employee disagrees with the decision of the City’s
medical examiner, he may forward opinions and test results from a physician of
his choice to the City’s Employee Health Center for consideration.
Correspondence should be addressed to:
City of Albuquerque
Employee Health Center
400 Marquette NW
Albuquerque, NM 87103
(a)   Upon receipt, the medical examiner will, in turn, review such information
provided within ten (10) business days and contact the employee to discuss his
findings.
(b)   The City’s medical examiner may, if he deems appropriate and if the
employee executes a proper release, consult with the employee’s physician, to
determine whether the information supplied is sufficient to reverse his
decision.
(c)   If the medical examiner determines that no basis to change his initial
determination exists, he will advise the employee accordingly, and will proceed
to resume/initiate the recertification options listed above. If the information
submitted merits a change in decision, the City’s examining physician will
notify the employee in writing.
(d)   Any costs associated with consultations with or reports from the
employee’s personal health care provider will be at the employee’s expense.
(e)   Either the medical examiner or the employee may request a review by the
Medical Review Committee; however, if the employee requests such a review, the
request must be made in writing to the City’s Loss Prevention Manager within
five (5) business days of being advised by the medical examiner that the
medical examiner has found him “Disqualified”.
(f)   No other appeal of the medical examiner’s determination is permitted.
F.   An employee in the “medical hold” status means that the medical examiner
has determined that he requires additional medical tests results or other
documentation to derive a final medical status.
(1)   At the conclusion of the meeting with the medical examiner, the medical
examiner will explain this fact to the employee and describe the additional
medical tests or information required by the medical examiner to complete the
physical examination.
(2)   The employee will be directed to acknowledge receipt of the notification
of the requirement by signing the City of Albuquerque Commercial Driver Fitness
Determination Form.
(3)   The employee has thirty (30) days from the appointment in which the
employee was placed on “medical hold” to deliver the required medical test
results or other documents to the medical examiner.
(4)   If the employee provides the missing information and the medical examiner
is satisfied with the results of the physical examination, the medical examiner
will release the “medical hold” and issue the appropriate “Qualified”
certification.
(6)   If the employee fails to provide the additional information within the
time allowed, or, if the information provided does not satisfy the medical
examiner that the employee has met the physical requirements, the employee will
be “Disqualified”.
(7)   The medical examiner may refer problematic cases to the CDL Medical
Review Committee for discussion and a decision on disqualification.
G.   The full final results of the medical examiner’s physical examination will
be maintained in detail in the official CDL medical examination notes that will
be maintained by the medical examiner in the records of the Employee Health
Center. A summary of the examination results, memorialized on the Commercial
Driver’s License (CDL) Physical Examination Summary Form, shall be transmitted
to and maintained in the employee’s files within the City’s Human Resources
Department.
12.   CDL MEDICAL REVIEW COMMITTEE AN PROCESS:
A.   The CDL Medical Review Committee’s purpose is to review cases referred by
the Medical Director and provide advice as to whether the employee-driver can
safely operate a commercial vehicle.
B.   The CDL Medical Review Committee is comprised of three (3) members,
including the Medical Director of the Employee Health Center or his designee,
the City Loss Prevention Manager or his designee, and the Director of the Human
Resources Department or his designee. The chairman of the Committee is the Loss
Prevention Manager.
C.   During any review process, except as provided elsewhere in this rule in
regards to probationary CDL status, the employee is not deemed CDL qualified
and may not operate a CMV.
D.   The CDL Medical Review Committee will review the medical information
concerning the potential disqualifying health factor or factors referred by the
medical examiner, the information concerning those health factors provided by
the employee’s personal care physician (PCP), additional medical information,
if any, provided by the Medical Director of the Employee Health Center and the
employee’s driving history as furnished by the City’s Fleet Safety Officer and
affected department. After review and discussion the committee will make its
decision by consensus. A quorum is not required.
13.   RESPONSIBILITIES OF CDL HOLDERS: An employee in a CDL position, (a “CDL
holder”) has specific reporting responsibilities.
A.   Any Change In Ability To Drive: A CDL holder shall notify his immediate
supervisor, his division manager and any other appropriate management
immediately if his physical condition changes in a manner that could impact his
ability to operate CDL-required equipment safely.
B.   Use of Over-the-Counter Medication (OTC) or Prescribed Medication: A CDL
holder shall notify his immediate supervisor, his division manager and any
other appropriate management immediately when he is taking over the counter
medication or prescribed medication that he believes, that his physician warns
him or based on the manufacturer’s information distributed with the medication,
he knows or should have reason to know may cause dizziness, drowsiness or other
impairment potentially affecting ability to drive or operate heavy equipment.
C.   Notification of Driver’s License Suspension:  A CDL holder shall notify
his immediate supervisor, his division manager and any other appropriate
management immediately if his driver’s license or his state issued CDL license
is suspended, revoked, or canceled, or if he is disqualified from driving for
any reason.
D.   Notification of Conviction for Driving Violations:  A CDL holder shall
notify his immediate supervisor, his division manager and any other appropriate
management immediately of the receipt of citations for any criminal charges
including but not limited to moving traffic violations, charges, convictions
for such violations as well as any change in the status of a driver’s license.
14.   DISQUALIFICATION OF CDL HOLDERS:
A.   A CDL holder is disqualified from driving CMVs, if
1.   The COP is suspended or revoked for any reason;
2.   The CDL holder is convicted of operating a CMV with a blood alcohol
concentration (BAC) of 0.02% or more;
3.   CDL holder is found to be in violation of the Substance Abuse Policy;
4.   By judicial or administrative action or operation of law, the CDL holder’s
New Mexico driver’s license is suspended or revoked;
5.   Pursuant to the City’s rules and regulations, the CDL holder is forbidden
for any reason to operate a motor vehicle or CMV on City business.
B.   License Check: From time to time, the Risk Management Division
investigates the status of CDL ’holders’ New Mexico driver’s licenses and the
attendant CDL endorsement. The Risk Management Division will report invalid,
suspended or revoked driver’s licenses, CDL’s and COP’s to the CDL holder’s
department for appropriate action.
C.   Upon notification that a CDL holder has lost his New Mexico driver’s
license, his CDL endorsement, his COP or his City-issued CDL certification, the
employee’s supervisor or division manager shall immediately notify the
employee’s department Human Resources Coordinator. In accordance with City
rules and regulations, the department may elect to reassign the disqualified
employee internally or seek assistance from the City’s Human Resources
Department in reassigning the employee to another department.
15.   EMPLOYEE TRAINING:
A.   The various departments have the overall responsibility for the CDL
training program within the respective department so long as the department’s
program meets the minimum requirements of this rule.
B.   In addition to the tests and skills training required by the State and
other required training within the department, CDL holders must complete the
required training contained in this rule.
C.   The Risk Management Division shall maintain training records for defensive
driving. Defensive Driving Course records are accessible to the departments
through the Risk Manager or his designee. All training records will include
date of instruction, subject and instructor’s name. Records will be retained in
accordance with City’s document retention schedule.
D.   The training program for CDL holders shall include components as directed
from time to time by the Risk Manager and the Loss Prevention Manager.
1.   The program of instruction shall include the City’s CDL policy, Substance
Abuse Policy, and other training designed to ensure the employee is adequately
trained.
2.   The training program shall include of the COP Driver Safety Training as
specified, City Operator Permit Rules, Section
1200, and the following additional CDL specific training:
 
Training             Training Hours Frequency     Training References
Vehicle Inspection & 2              Every 3 years Local and State Guidelines
Maintenance
                                                  Guidance published
CDL Refresher        1              Annually      annually by the CDL
                                                  Administrative Board
Portable Fire        1              Annually      49 CFR 1910. 157
Extinguisher
 
E.   CDL position holders shall complete the training in all Employee Training
specified in this section within ninety (90) days of being hired or promoted to
the CDL position. Drivers who have not completed the initial training or annual
renewal training shall be suspended from driving until the training has been
completed.
F. The departments with CDL positions are expected to complete the following
training:
 
Training                  Hours Frequency
CDL Orientation (initial) 4 Upon appointment
CDL Refresher             1 Annually
 
G.   In addition to the above, departments shall administer a road test to each
new driver in accordance with that department’s policies and may do so
periodically in accordance with the respective department’s procedures.
16.   RECORD KEEPING: All CDL related recordkeeping shall be maintained in
accordance with Federal, State regulations and City of Albuquerque rules and
regulations.
17.   The Loss Prevention Manager shall review from time to time the training
and safety programs as well as record-keeping and other requirements imposed by
federal, state and local laws to determine that the various City departments
are in compliance with all applicable federal, state and local requirements.
Department directors shall cooperate with the Loss Prevention Manager to ensure
that any and all requested corrective actions occur promptly. Failure of a
department to promptly bring its actions in compliance as directed by Loss
Prevention Manager or a federal or state regulator may result in Risk
Management’s suspension of CDL certification for all employees within that
department until the department is in compliance to the satisfaction of the
Loss Prevention Manger.
18.   VIOLATIONS: Any violations of this rule by the CDL holder or others
obligated to enforce this rule may result in disciplinary action up to and
including termination.
